CHAPTER XIX

On the Midday Sandhyā

श्रीनारायण उवाच

अथातः श्रुवतां ब्रह्म संख्या माध्याक्रिकी शुभाम।

यदनुशानतोप्रवैं जायतेउन्यामं फलम् ॥ १ ॥

साविर्जी युवर्ती शेलतवणी चैव जिलोचनाम् ।

वरतं चाह्यमालाज्वां जिशूलभयद्रसत्काम् ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! Now I am speaking of the auspicious midday Sandhyā, the practice of which leads to the wonderfully excellent results. Listen. Here the Ācamana and other things are similar to those of the morning Sandhyā. Only in

Book XI Chapter XIX

meditation (Dhyānam) there is some difference. I will now speak of that. The name of the midday Gāyatri ś Saivītri. She is ever a youthful maiden, of white colour, three-eyed; She holds in Her one hand a rosary, in Her other hand a trident and with Her two other hands She makes signs to Her Bhaktas to dispel fear and to grant boons.

वृणारुकां वजुर्वेदसंहितां रुद्रवेतान् । तन्तो गृणवृत्तां चैव भुवलॉकव्यवित्यान् ॥ 3 ॥

आदिव्यामार्गसंचारकर्ची मायां नामायम्हम् ।

Riding on the bull, She recites the Yayur Vedas; She is the Rudra Śakti with Tāmo gunas and She resides in Brahmaloka, She daily traverses in the path of the Sun. She is Māyā Devi, beginningless; I bow down to Her.

आदिवेदीय प्यात्वाचमनादि च पूर्ववत् ॥ 4 ॥

अथ चाध्यप्रकरणं पृथ्याणि चिन्यानतः ।

तद्वापि विल्यपत्रजोधेन विभयेन्तः ॥ 5 ॥

क्रयंवी च सुयाधिमुखं दिष्पत् प्रति प्रधान्यदात् ।

प्रात:संध्यादिवत्सर्वेमुपसंहारपूर्वकम् ॥ 6 ॥

After meditating on the Ayda Devi Bhagavatī perform Ācamanas and other things as in the morning Sandhyā. Now, about the offering of Arghya (an offer of green grass, rice, etc., made in worshipping a God or Brāhmaṇa). Collect flowers for Arghya; in the absence of flowers, the Bel leaves and water will serve the purpose.

मध्याङ्के केविदिच्छिते साविर्ने तु तदित्यचून ।

असंप्रदायं तत्कर्म कार्यहीनित्यु जायते ॥ 7 ॥

कारणं संध्य्योश्रात्र मंद्रहानग राश्रासः ।

भक्षितुं सूर्वीमच्छां कारणं श्रुतिचोदितम् ॥ 8 ॥

Facing the Sun, and looking upwards, offer the Arghya to the Sun upwards. Then perform other acts as in the morning Sandhyā. In midday, some offer Arghya to the Sun, only with the recitation of the Gāyatrī mantra. But that is not approved of by the tradition and community; there is the likelihood of the whole work being thwarted or rendered fruitless. For, in the morning and evening Sandhyās, the Rāksasas named the Mandehās

become ready to devour the Sun. This is stated in the Śrutis.

अतस्तु काणणाद्रिः संख्या कुयात्यपलतः ।

संध्याभिच्यापीनिरं गायव्या प्रणवेन च ॥ 9 ॥

अंभस्तु प्रक्षिपनेन नान्यथा श्रुतिपातक: ।

आकृष्योनेत मंजण पुर्षवैर्विविभिशन् ॥ 10 ॥

Therefore the midday offering of the Arghya is not for the destruction of the Daityas but for the satisfaction of the Devi; so with the mantra “Akrṣnena, etc.,” the offering of Arghya can be effected; and the reciting of the infallible Gāyatrī mantra is only to create disturbance in the shape of thwarting the action. So in the morning and evening, the Brāhmana is to offer the Sūryārghya, repeating the Gāyatrī and Pranava; and in the midday to offer flowers and water with the mantra “Akrṣnena, rajasā etc.,” else it will go against the Śruti.

अलाभे बिल्वदुर्विद्यगोलतेने पूर्वकम् ।

अर्थं द्वात्यपत्ने संगं संधापकं लभेत् ॥ १ १ ॥

अत्रेय तर्पीयं वक्षेय श्रणु देवर्विसनम् ।

In the absence of flowers, the Durba grass, etc., can be offered carefully as the Arghya; and the full fruits of the Sandhyā will be secured. O Best of Devarsis! Now hear the important points in the Tarpanam (peace offerings). Thus:

भुव: पुन: पुरूर्षे तु तर्पायिम नमो नमः ॥ १२ ॥

यजुर्वैं तर्पायिम भंडले तर्पायिम च ।

हिरण्यार्भं च तर्थाततातानां तथैव च ॥ १३ ॥

साविका च ततो वेद्यातरं साकृतिं तथा ।

संधां तथैव यवृतीं रूर्णणीं नीपुजां तथा ॥ १४ ॥

सर्वार्थानां सिद्धिकर्ती सर्वभोत्रार्थसिद्धान् ।

भूर्भुक:स्व:पूर्भवं तु इति मध्यात्रवर्णम् ॥ १५ ॥

"Om Bhavah purusam tarpayāmi namo namah."

"Om Yajurvedam tarpayāmi namo namah."

"Om Maṇḍalam tarpayāmi namo namah."

"Om Hiranyagarhnam tarpayāmi namo namah."

"Om antarātmānam tarpayāmi namo namah."

"Om Śāvitrim tarpayāmi namo namah."

"Om Devamātaram tarpayāmi namo namah."

"Om Sämkrtim tarpayāmi namo namah."

"Om Yuvatīm sandhyām tarpayāmi namo namah."

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

"Om Rudrānīm tarpayāmi namo namah."

"Om Nimrijām tarpayāmi namo namah."

"Om Bhurbhuvaḥ Svah puruṣam tarpayāmi namo namah."

उदुर्विमिति सूर्फेन सूर्वोपस्थानेवेच च ।

चित्र देवानामिति च सूर्वोपस्थानमाचरेत् ॥ 16 ॥

ततो जपे प्रकुर्षिति मंत्रसाधानतरतः ।

जपत्थापि प्रक्रांत तु वक्ष्यामि ग्युण नात्र ॥ 17 ॥

Thus finish the midday Sandhyānga Tarpanaṃ. Now, with your hands raised high up towards the Sun, worship Him by the two mantras, praising thus: “Om Udutyam Jātavedasam, etc.,” “Om Citram Devānām, etc.” Next repeat the Gāyatrī.

कृतोतानी करी प्रातः सारं चाधः करी तथा ।

मध्याङ्के इद्यस्यी तु कृत्वा जपमुदीरयेत् ॥ 18 ॥

पर्वद्वयमानमिक्याः कानिषहादिकमेण तु ।

तर्जनीमूल्यपर्नतं कर्माला प्रकीर्तिता ॥ 19 ॥

Hear its method. In the morning, repeat the Gāyatrī at the proper moment with hands raised; in the evening time with hands lowered and in the midday with hands over the breast. Begin with the middle phalanx (joint) of the nameless finger, then the phalanx at its root, then the phalanx at the root of the little finger, its middle phalanx and its top, then the tops of the nameless, fore and ring fingers, then the middle and finally the root of the ring finger (in the direction of the hands of the watch; avoiding the middle and root phalanx of the middle finger). Thus ten times it is repeated.

नोच: विघ्नो माठनो धृष्णा गुस्तल्यः ।

बहास्वक्षेत्रहारी च यक्ष विधः सुरां पिवेत् ॥ 20 ॥

स गाययाः सह्वेशेण पृत्तो भवति मानवः ।

मानसं वार्षिकं पापं विषयेत्रिवसंगम् ॥ 21 ॥

In this way if the Gāyatrī be repeated one thousand times, the sins arising from killing a cow, father, mother, from causing abortions, going to the wife of one's Guru, stealing a Brāhmaṇa's property, a Brāhmaṇa's field, drinking wine, etc., all are destroyed. Also the sins acquired in three births by mind, word, or by the enjoyments of sensual objects are thereby then and there instantly destroyed. All the labours of him, who works hard in the study of the Vedas without knowing the Gāyatrī, are useless.

तत्क्तिष्वयं नाग्याति जीण जन्मानि मानवः ।

गायत्री यो न ज्ञानाति वृषा तस्य परिःमः ॥ 22 ॥

पठेवच घतुगो वेवेतृ नाययी वैकतो जयेत् ।

वेदानां चावुतैतनढ्रद्धायजीज उत्तमः ॥ 23 ॥

इति मध्याह्रसंध्याया: प्रकातः कीर्तिते मया ।

अतः परं प्रवक्ष्यामि बह्यामविधिकमम् ॥ 24 ॥

इति श्रीमद्देशीभागनते महापुराणे एकादशरकस्ये

एकानविशोर्यायाः ॥ 25 ॥ 

Therefore if you compare on the one hand the study of the four Vedas with the reciting of the Gāyatrī, then the Gāyatrī Japam stands higher. Thus I have spoken to you of the rules of the midday Sandhyā. Now I am speaking of Brahmā Yajñā. Hear.

Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the midday Sandhyā in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

