CHAPTER XLII

On The Stotram of Mahā Lakṣmi

नारद उवाच

हरेकल्वितीनं भत्र श्रुतं तज्जानमुत्तमम् ।

ईपितं लक्ष्यपाण्डयानं ध्यानं स्तोत्र वद प्रभो ॥ १ ॥

Nārada said: O Bhagavan! I have heard about the glories of Hari, about the Tattvajñānam (the True Knowledge) and the story of Lakṣmī. Now tell me Her Dhyānam (meditation) and Stotram (recitation of hymns) of Her.

नारद खाच

स्नाला तीर्थे पुरा शक्तो धृत्वा धौते च वाससी ।

चटं संस्थायि क्षीरोहे षड्वेलाव्यर्पिज्ञत् ॥ २ ॥

गणेशं च दिनेशं च वाईँ विश्वं जिश्व विश्वाम।

एतान् भवत्वा समभ्यन्त्यं पुष्प्याधिद्धिस्मतद ॥ ३ ॥

Nārāyana said: O Nārada! Indra then, bathed first in the Tirath (holy place) and, wearing a cleansed cloth, installed, first of all, an earthen jar (ghata) on the beach of the Kṣiroda Ocean. Then he worshipped with devotion Gangeśa, Sūrya, Fire,

Visnu, Śiva, and Śivā, the six deities with scents and flowers.

आवाहा च महात्कर्मी परमेध्रवंक्षिपिणीम् ।

पूजां चकार देवेशेगे बहाणा च पुरोधसा ॥ 4 ॥

पुर:स्थितेषु मुनिषु बहाणेपु गुरी हरी ।

देवादिषु सुदेशे च जानानंद शिवे मुने ॥ 5 ॥

Next Indra invoked Mahā Lakṣmī, of the nature of the highest powers and greatest prosperity, and began to worship Her as Brahmā, who was acting as an officiating priest in the presence of the Munis, Brāhmanas, Brūspati, Hari and the other Devas, had dictated him.

पारिज्ञानस्य पुचं च गृहीला चंदनोक्षितम् ।

ध्याना देखीं महाकृष्मी पुरवाघमास नारद ॥ 6 ॥

ध्यानं च सामवेदोक्ते यहतं बहणे पुरा ।

हरिणा तेन ध्यानेन तिबिधो वदायि ते ॥ ७ ॥

He first smeared one Pārijāta flower with sandal paste and reciting the meditation mantra of Mahā Lakṣmī offered it to Her feet. The meditation

Book IX Chapter XLII

mantra that was recited by Devendra, was what Bhagavān Hari first gave to Brahmā. I am now telling you that. Listen.

सहस्वल्पवास्यक्षिणाकावासीनें पराम् ।

गरसावैणकोटीदुर्भभागुधिकारं परम् ॥ 8 ॥

“O Mother! Thou residest on the thousand-petalled lotus. The beauty of Thy face excels the beauty of koti autumnal Full Moons. Thou art shining with Thy own splendour.

स्वतेजसा प्रज्वलंती सुखदुर्गयं मनोहाराम ।

प्रतपताकंचनिभगोर्भां मृतीत्मती सतीम ॥ 9 ॥

तनभूषणभूषाढ्यां शोभितां पौतावसास ।

ईपद्वार्यप्रसात्यां शश्वसुचित्यौवानाम ॥ 10 ॥

Thou art very beautiful and lovely Thy colour is like the burnished gold; Thou art with from, chaste, ornamented all over with jewel ornaments; Thou art wearing the yellow cloth and look! What beauty is coming out of it! Always a sweet smile reigns on Thy lips. Thy beauty is constant; Thou art the bestower of prosperity to all.

सर्वसंपर्यदार्िं च महात्मक्षी भजे शुभाम् ।

ध्यानेनोने तं ध्याला नानगुणसम्पित्तम् ॥ 11 ॥

संपूछ बढ़ावावल्येन चोपचाराणि योड्ग ।

दरीं भक्ल्या विधानेने प्रवेकें मंजपूर्वकम् ॥ १२ ॥

I Mahā Laksmī! I meditate on Thee." Thus meditating on Her endowed with various attributes with this mantra, Indra worshipped devotedly with sixteen upacāras (articles offered). Every upacāra (article) was offered with the repetition of mantra. All the things were very excellent, right and commendable.

प्रशतानि प्रकृतिने वताणि विवधानि च ।

अमूल्यत्सारं च निरिंतं विश्वकर्माणं ॥ 13 ॥

आसनं च विवित्रं च महालक्ष्म प्रग्रहात्मा ।

गुर्द्रें गंगोदकामिरे सर्ववैदितमीपित्नम् ॥ 14 ॥

“O Mahā Laksmī! Vīśvakarāmā has made this invaluable Āsana (a carpet seat) wonderfully decked with jewels; I am offering this Āsana to Thee. Accept. O Thou residing in the Lotus! This holy Ganges water is considered with great regard

and desired by all. This is like the fire to burn the fuel in the shape of the sins of the sinners.

पापव्यादिकृपं च गृहातां कमललये ।

पुष्यचंदनवृदारिद्धसुन्ते जाह्वीजलम् ॥ १ ५ ॥

गड़्गपंसिवतं स्वत्थं गृहातां पश्वासिनि ।

सुर्गधिष्युष्लेलं च सुगंधागलकीकलम् ॥ १ ६ ॥

O Thou! The Dweller in the Lotus! This Dūrba grass, flowers, this Arghya (offering) of the Ganges water perfumed with sandalpate, I am offering to Thee. Accept. O Beloved of Hari! This sweet scented flower oil and this sweet scented Āmalaki fruit lead to the beauty of the body; therefore I present this to Thee. Accept.

देहसैरंदर्वर्कीं च गृहातां शीहरेः प्रिये ।

कापसिंसं च कृमिंग वसनं देवि गृहात्म ॥ 17 ॥

रनस्वपशिकारं च देहुष्पापिवर्धनम् ।

गोभार्ये शीकरं रनं भूषणं देवि गृहात्म। ॥ 18 ॥

सर्वसौदर्यैजीत च सदा: गोभाकरं परम् ।

वृक्षनिवास्वरं च नग्यत्रव्याविसंयुतम् ॥ 19 ॥

O Devi! I am presenting this cloth made of silk to Thee; accept. O Devi! This excellent ornaments made of gold and jewels, which increases the beauty, I am presenting to Thee. Accept.

श्रीकृष्णकांते पूर्ण च पवित्र प्रतिग्रहताम् ।

सुर्पायुर्फे सुखदं चंदनं देय गृहताम् ॥ 20 ॥

जगचब्धुःस्वरूपं च पवित्रं तिमिरापहम् ।

प्रदीपं सुखल्पं च गृहतां च सुरेश्वति ॥ 21 ॥

नानोपहारकं च नानाससमवित्यम् ।

अतिस्वावुंकर चैव नैदेशं प्रतिगृहताम् ॥ 22 ॥

O Beloved of Kṛṣṇa! I am presenting this sweet scented holy Dhūpa prepared from various herbs and plants, exquisitely nice and the root of all beauty, to Thee. Accept. This sweet scented pleasant sandalpate I offer to Thee, O Devi! Accept. O Ruler of the Devas! I present this pleasing holy Dipa (lights) which is the eye of this world and by which all the darkness is vanished; accept. O Devi! I present to thee these very delicious offerings of fruits, etc., very juicy and of various kinds. Accept.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

अन्ने ब्रहास्वरूपं च प्राणारक्षणकारणम् ।

तृहिंदं पृहिंदं चैव देव्यन्तं प्रतिगृहात्मा ॥ 23 ॥

शाल्यन्तं सुपवचं च शक्रतान्यवसंयुतम् ।

स्वावुकुंचे महात्रिक्ष्म परमानं प्रगृहात्मा ॥ 24 ॥

D'evesî! This Anna (food) is Brahma and the chief means to preserve the life of living beings. By this the nourishment of the body and the mental satisfaction are effected. Therefore I am presenting this food to Thee. Accept. O Mahâ Laksmi! I am presenting this most delicious Paramânnna, which is prepared out of rice, milk and sugar, to Thee.

शर्कराग्यपर्वचं च सुस्वातु सुमनेतारूम ॥ 25 ॥

नानाविधानि रयायिण पवब्नातिन फलानि च ।

सुरपितरनसंल्यकं सुस्वातु सुमनेतारूम ॥ 26 ॥

Accept. O Devi! I am presenting this most delicious and pleasant svastika prepared of sugar and clarified butter to Thee; accept. O Beloved of Acyuta! I am presenting to Thee various beautiful Pakkānnas, ripe delicious fruits and clarified butter out of cow's milk; accept.

मत्यांगुतं सुगवयं च गृहातामध्यतप्रिये ।

सुस्वायुतसर्वनुभनिष्ठुब्बसपुब्बन ॥ 27 ॥

अरिनवस्वमतिस्वायु रुई च प्रतिगृहात्म।

घवानीयुभस्स्यानां चृषीरिभुभुद्रबन ॥ 28 ॥

O Devi! The sugarcane juice, when heated, yields a syrup which again heated yields very delicious and nice thing called Gur. I am presenting this Gur to Thee; accept. O Devi! I am presenting to Thee the sweetments prepared out of the flour of Yava and wheat and Gur and clarified butter; accept.

सुपवर्य गुड़ायाक्ते मिछानं देवि गुहात्मा ।

सत्यचूर्णोंद्वं पबर्व स्वतिकादिसम्पतिवत् ॥ 29 ॥

मया निविदितं भक्त्या नैवेघो प्रतिगृहात्मा ।

श्रीतावपुर्दं चैव दाहे च सुखदं परम् ॥ 30 ॥

I am presenting with devotion the offering made of Svastika and the flour of other grains; accept. O Kamale! I am presenting to Thee this fan and white cāmara, which blows cool air and is very pleasant when this body gets hot; accept.

कमले गृहातां चेदे व्यजनं श्वेतचामरम् ।

तांबूषे च वरं रयं कंपूराविसुवासितम् ॥ 31 ॥

जिह्ञाज्ञच्छेदकरं तांबूषे प्रतिगृहात् ।

सुवासितं सुगीतं च पियपानायाकारकान् ॥ 32 ॥

O Devi! I am presenting this betel scented with camphor by which the inertness of the tongue is removed; accept.

जगजजीवनरूपं च जीवनं देयि गृहात् ।

देवसौदर्यैजीजं च सदाशेषाविवधरन् ॥ 33 ॥

कापीसजं च कृमितं वसनं देयि गृहात् ।

रत्सरणविगकारं च देह्यूषाविवधरन् ॥ 34 ॥

O Devi! I am presenting this scented cool water, which will allay the thirst and which is known as the life of this world; accept. O Devi! I am presenting this cloth made of cotton and silk that increases the beauty and splendour of the body. Accept. O Devi! I am presenting to Thee, the ornaments made of gold and jewels which are the source of beauty and loveliness. Accept.

शोभाधरां शीकरं च भूषणं देवि गुहात्मान ।

नानाक्रतुतु निर्भाणं बहुशोषायं परम् ॥ 35 ॥

सुर्भपूर्णिर्य शुर्द्रं माल्यं देवि प्रगृहानम् ।

शुद्धिदं शुद्धकर्ण च सर्वमंगलमंगलम् ॥ 36 ॥

O Devi! I am presenting to Thee these pure garlands of flowers which blossom in different seasons, which look very beautiful and which give satisfaction to the Devas and to the kings. Accept.

गंधवस्तुद्रवं रभ्यं गंधे देवि प्रगृह्धान् ।

पुण्यतीर्थोंद्रं चैव विगूर्दं शुद्धिदं सदा ॥ 37 ॥

गृह्धातं कृष्णकान्ते तं पर्यमाचनानीयकम् ।

रत्सरातिदिनियांणं पुण्यचन्द्रन्धितम् ॥ 38 ॥

O Devi! I am presenting to Thee this nice scent, this very holy thing to Thee by which both the body and mind become pure, which is most auspicious and which is prepared of many fragrant herbs and plants; accept. O Beloved of the God Kṛṣṇa! I am presenting this Ācamaniya water to Thee for rinsing the mouth, pure and holy, and brought from holy places of pilgrimages; accept.

वस्बभूषणभूषात्मां सुतलं देयि गृहानाम् ।

यशदूर्व्यमपूर्वं च पृथिव्यामपि दुरुर्भम् ॥ 39 ॥

Book IX Chapter XLII

देवभूषहोभोग्यं च तदूरम्यं देयि गृहात्मा ।

ग्रहाययेतानि दत्ता च भूतेन देवपुंपाः ॥ 40 ॥

O Devi! I am presenting to Thee, this bed made of excellent gems and jewels and flowers, sandalpaste, clothings and ornaments; accept. O Devi! I am presenting to Thee all those things that are extraordinary, very rare in this earth and fit to be enjoyed by the Devas and worthy of their ornaments; accept.

मूलं जजाप भक्ल्या च दशलक्षं विधानतः ।

जपेन दारुलक्षेण मंत्रसिद्धिदंभूव ह ॥ 4 1 ॥

मंत्रछा बहाणा दन्तः कल्पवृक्षशु सर्वतः ।

लक्ष्मीमांग कामावाणी डें-ना कामलावसिति ॥ 4 2 ॥

D evarsj! Uttering those mantras, the Devendra offered those articles, with intense devotion according to the rules. He, then, made Japam of the Mūla Mantra (the Radical Seed Mantra) ten lakhs of times. Thus his Mantra revealed the Deity thereof and thus came to a successful issue. The lotus born Brahmā gave this Mantra ‘Śrim, Hrim Klim Aim Kamalavāsinyai Svāhā’ to the Devendra. This is like a Kalpavrksa (the tree in Indra’s garden yielding whatever may be desired).

धैटिको मंत्रलाओर्य प्रपित्द्र: स्वाहाया निवत: ।

कुबेरोनेन मंत्रेण पर्येष्रवर्मापादान् ॥ 4 3 ॥

राजराजेत्रवरी दक्ष: सावर्गिमंत्रुरेव च ।

मंगलोजनेन मंत्रेण सन्त्रीपेध्वनीरपतिः ॥ 4 4 ॥

This Vaidik mantra is the chief of the mantras. The world ‘Svāḥā’ is at the end of the mantra. By virtue of this Mantra, Kubera got his highest prosperity. By the power of this Mantra, the King-Emperor Dakṣa Śāvarni Manu and Maṅgala became the lords of the earth with seven islands.

प्रियत्रोतानपाटी केदारो नृप एव च ।

एते सिद्धाश्र राजेत्रा मंत्रेणानेन नाद ॥४५ ॥

सिद्धे मंत्रे महालक्षीः शकाय दर्शनं दहो ।

रत्नैरसारनिर्माणविमानस्था वरपदा ॥ ४६ ॥

Priyavrata, Uttānapāda, and Kedārārāja all these became Siddhas (were fructified with success) and became King-Emperors. O Nārada! When Indra

attained success in this Mantra, there appeared before him Mahā Lakṣmī, seated in the celestial car, decked; with excellent gems and jewels.

सप्तद्वीपवतीं पृथ्वीं छादयन्ती त्विषा च सा ।
श्वेतचम्पकवर्णाभा रत्नभूषणभूषिता ॥ ४७॥

ईषद्धास्यप्रसात्या भक्तानुपहकाता ।

विषयती रनमाला च कोदिष्च-हममप्रभाम् ॥ 48 ॥

The Great Halo, coming out of Her body made manifest the earth with seven islands. Her colour was white like the white campaka flower and Her whole body was decked with ornaments. Her face was always gracious and cheerful with sweet smiles. She was ever ready to shew Her kindness to the Bhaktas. On Her neck there was a garland of jewels and gems, bright as ten million Moons.

दृष्टा जागत्सूं श्राँतां तुहावैतां पुरंदरः ।

पुकक्राचितसर्वानः साक्षुनः: कृतज्ञलः ॥ 49 ॥

बहाणा च प्रदनेन स्तोत्रजाने संयुतः ।

सर्वभीष्टायेदेव वैदिकेनैव तत्र च ॥ 50 ॥

O Devarsī! No sooner did Indra saw that Wrold Mother Mahā Laksmī, of a peaceful appearance, than his body was filled with joy and the hairs of the body stood on ends. His eyes were filled with tears; and, with folded palms, he began to recite stotras to Her, the Vaidik stotras, yielding all desires, that was communicated to him by Brahmā.

पुरंद उवाच

नमः कमलावासिन्ये नारायण्ये नाने नमः ।

कृष्णप्रियारी सर्तं महालक्ष्ये नाने नमः ॥ 51 ॥

पदापत्रेशणारी च पदाखल्यारे नाने नमः ।

पदासनार्ये पधित्ये वैशण्ये च नाने नमः ॥ 52 ॥

Indra said: "O Thou, the Dweller in the lotus! O Nārāyaṇī! O Dear to Krṣna! O Padmāsane! O Mahā Lakṣmī! Obeisance to Thee! O Padmadalaksane! O Padmanibhānane! O Padmāsane! O Padme! O Vaiṣnavī!

सर्वसंपल्पकृपिये सर्वांगरधे नमो नमः ।

हरिभक्तिप्रदाये च हर्वंदाये नमो नमः ॥ 53 ॥

कृष्णवखःस्थितये च कृष्णशरी नमो नमः ।

चंद्रशोधास्वल्पाये रलपचो च शोभने ॥ 54 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Obeisance to Thee! Thou art the wealth of all; Thou art worshipped by all; Thou bestowest to all the bliss and devotion to Śri Hari. I bow down to Thee. O Devi! Thou always dwellest on the breast of Krṣṇa and exercisest Thy powers over Him. Thou art the beauty of the Moon; Thou takest Thy seat on the beautiful Jewel Lotus. Obeisance to Thee!

संपत्थध्रातुर्वेल्ये महावेल्ये नाम नमः ।

नमो वृद्धिस्वल्पाये वृद्धिद्वायै नमो नमः ॥ 55 ॥

O Devi! Thou art the Presiding Deity of the riches; Thou art the Great Devi; Thou increasest always Thy gifts and Thou art the bestower of increments. So I bow down to Thee.

वैकुण्ठे या महात्कुमीर्थ लक्षी: श्रीरागते ।

स्वांग्रहक्षीरिद्रोहे राजकुमिनीर्णले ॥ 56 ॥

गृहत्कुमश्रि गृहिता गेहे च गृहदेवता ।

सुरभि: सागरे जाता दक्षिणा यजकामिनि ॥ 57 ॥

अदितिर्देवमाता तं कमल कमलालया ।

स्वाहा तंच च हविन्दी कव्वदाने वस्या सुता ॥ 58 ॥

O Devi! Thou art the Mahā Lakṣmī of Vaikuntaha, the Lakṣmī of the Kṣiroda Ocean; Thou art Indra's Heavenly Lakṣmī; Thou art the Rāja Lakṣmī of the Kings; Thou art the Gṛha Lakṣmī of the hosheolders; Thou art the household Deity of them; Thou art the Surabhī, born of the Ocean; Thou art the Dakṣinā, the wife of the Sacrifices; Thou art Aditi, the Mother of the Devas; Thou art the Kamālā, always dwelling in the Lotus; Thou art the Svāhā, in the offerings with clarified butter in the sacrificial ceremonies; Thou art the Svadhā Mantra in the Kāvyas (an offering of food to deceased ancestors). So obeisance to Thee!

त्वं हि विद्युस्वरूपा च सर्वाधारा सर्वुंधरा ।

शुद्धसत्त्वस्वरूपा तं नारायणपारायणा ॥ ५९ ॥

कोधोहित्यार्वजिता च वरदा शारदा शुभा ।

परामार्थप्रदा तं च हरित्यस्प्रदा परा ॥ 60 ॥

O Mother! Thou art of the nature of Viṣṇu; Thou art the Earth that supports all; Thou art of pure Śuddha Sattva and Thou art devoted to Nārāyaṇa.

Thou art void of anger, jealousy. Rather Thou grantest boons to all. Thou art the auspicious Śarādā; Thou grantest the Highest Reality and the devotional service to Hari. Without Thee all the worlds are quite stale, to no purpose like ashes, always dead while existing.

यया विना जात्मत्वं भर्सीभूतमसारकम् ।

जीवन्मूतं च विश्वं च शगलसर्वे यथा विना ॥ 6 1 ॥

सर्वेषां च परा माता सर्वविंधल्विणी ।

धर्मार्थकाममोक्षाणां तं च कारणकृचिणी ॥ 6 2 ॥

Thou art the Chief Mother, the Chief Friend of all; thou art the source of Dharma, Artha, Kāma and Mokṣa! As a mother nourishes her infants with the milk of her breasts, so Thou nourishest all as their mother!

यथा माता सत्तार्थानां शिष्यानां शैगशे सदा ।

तथा त्वं सर्वदा माता सर्वेधां सर्वकतः ॥ 63 ॥

मातृहीतः सन्त्रायन्तु स च जीविते द्वतः ।

त्वया हीने जनः कोप्रि न जीवत्वेय निश्रितम् ॥ 64 ॥

A child that sucks the milk might be saved by the Daiva (Fate), when deprived of its mother, but men can never be saved, if they be bereft of Thee! O Mother! Thou art always gracious. Please be gracious unto me.

सुप्रसन्यकरणा तं मां प्रसना भवांविके ।

वैरिग्रस्तं च विषयं देहि महां सनातनी ॥ 65 ॥

अर्ह यावत्चया हीनी बंधुतीश्व भिशुकः ।

सर्वसंपद्धिहीनश तावदेव हरिग्रिये ॥ 66 ॥

O Eternal One! My possessions are now in the hands of the enemies. Be kind enough to restore my kingdoms to me from my enemies' hands. O Beloved of Hari! Since Thou hast forsaken me, I am wandering abroad, friendless, like a beggar, deprived of all prosperities.

ज्ञानं देहि च धर्म च सर्वसीभायसीयतम् ।

प्रभावं च प्रजायं च सर्वाधिकारमेव च ॥ 67 ॥

जयं पत्राकां मुके परमेश्वर्येव मेच ।

इत्युक्त्वा च महेन्द्रश्र सर्वे: सुरगणे: सह ॥ 68 ॥

O Devi! Give me Jñānam, Dharma, my desired fortune, power, influence and my possessions. O

Book IX Chapter XLIII

Nārada Indra and all the other Devas bowed down frequently to Mahā Laksmī with their eyes filled with tears.

प्रणनाम साधुनेगो मूटनों चैव पुनः पुनः ।

बह्मा च संकर्केशि शेणो धर्मेक्ष केलगः ॥ 6 9 ॥

सर्वे चकुः परीहारं सुरार्थे च पुनः पुनः ।

देवेध्यघ उर्व दत्ता पुष्पमालां मनोहाग्य ॥ 70 ॥

कैगवाय ददी ल्बमीः सन्तुहा सुरसंसरित ।

ययुदैवाङ्ग सन्तुहा: स्व स्व स्थानं च नारद ॥ 71 ॥

Brahmā, Śaṅkara, Ananta Deva, Dharma and Keśava all asked pardon again and again from Mahā Lakṣmī. Lakṣmī then granted boons to the Devas and before the assembly gladly gave the garland of flowers on the neck of Keśava. The Devas, satisfied, went back to their own places.

देवी ययी हरेः स्थानं घट्टा शीरोद्वागयिनः ।

ययुश्वि स्वगृहं बढ़ोगानी च नारद ॥ ७२ ॥

दत्ता शुभागिर्यां ती च देेवेध्यः प्रीतिपूर्वकम् ।

इंद स्तोयं महापुर्णयं सितंयं च पठेत्रः ॥ ७३ ॥

कुवेत्तुल्यः स भवेत्रज्ञाजेश्वरो महान् ।

पञलक्षजपैनेव स्तोत्रसिद्धभवैद्यगाम ॥ ७४ ॥

The Devi, Lakṣmī, too, becoming very glad went to Śrī Hari sleeping in the Kṣiroda Ocean. Brahmā and Maheśvara, both became very glad and, blessing the Devas, went respectively to their own abodes. Whoever recites this holy Stotra three times a day, becomes the King Emperor and gets prosperity and wealth like a God Kubera. Siddhi (success) comes to him who recites this stotra live lakhs of times.

सिद्धस्तोत्र यदि पेटनासमेकं तु सततम् ।

महासुखी च राजेज्ञे पथिव्यति न संग्रध: ॥ 75 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे नवमस्कन्धे

द्विचारिशीउधाय: 11 42 11

If anybody reads regularly and always this Siddha Stotra for one month, he becomes very happy and he turns out a Rājarājendra.

Here ends the Forty-second Chapter of the Ninth

Book on the Dhyānam and Stotra of Mahā

Lakṣmī in the Mahā Purānam

Śrimadevibhāgāvatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XLIII

