CHAPTER IV

On the Greatness of the Rudrāksam

नात्व उवाच

एर्वभूतानुभावोरं रहाशे घतताउन ।

वर्षितो महतां पुच्यः कारणं तत्र किं वद ॥ १ ॥

Nārada said: O Sinless one! The greatness of the Rudrāksa seed that you have described is verily such. Now I ask why is this Rudrāksam so much entitled to worship by the people. Please speak clearly on this point.

नातायण ज्ञान

एवमेव पुरा पृष्टो भगवान् निर्शिज्ञ: प्रशुः ।

यणयुळेन च कर्तूंं दयुबाच श्युष्य लत् ॥ २ ॥

Nārāyaṇa spoke: O Child! This is the very question that was asked once by Kārtika, the

sixfaced One, to Bhagavān Rudra, dwelling in Kailāśa. What He replied, I say now. Listen.

ईश्वर उवाच

श्रणु घणमुख तत्त्वेन कवयामि समासतः ।

निपुरो नाम दैत्यस्तु पुरास्त्रीसात्वदुर्जनः ॥ ३ ॥

हतास्तेन सुना: सर्वे ब्रहाविष्यवादिद्वेलातः ।

सर्वेस्तु कथित तस्मितस्तादुर्ज निपूरं प्रति ॥ ४ ॥

Rudra Deva spoke: “O Child Sādāmana. I will dwell briefly on the secret cause of the greatness of the Rudrāksa seed. Hear. In days of yore, there was a Daitya called Tripura who could not be conquered by any body. Brahmā, Viṣṇu and the other Devas were defeated by him. They then came to Me and requested Me to kill the Asura.

Book XI Chapter IV

अचित्यं महाशल्मयोराख्यं मनोहरम् ।

सर्वैदेवमय दिव्यं जलंते घोराक्य यत् ॥ ५ ॥

At their request, I called in my mind the Divine Great weapon, named Aghora, beautiful and terrible and containing the strength of all the Devas, to kill him. It was inconceivable and it was blazing with fire.

विपुरस्य वधार्थाय देवानां ताराणाय च ।

सर्वविद्योपगमनयोरासमचित्तयम् ॥ 6 ॥

दिव्यवर्षेसहंचे तु चक्रुभ्मीलितं मया ।

पशुतामाकुलाक्षिभ्य: पतिता जलविद्वः ॥ 7 ॥

For full divine one thousand years I remained awake with eyelids wide open in thinking of the Aghora weapon, the destroyer of all obstacles, whereby the killing of Tripurāsura might be effected and the troubles of the Devas be removed. Not for a moment my eyelids dropped. There by my eyes were affected and drops of water came out of any eyes.—Note here.

तत्राश्रविदुतो जाता महाऊराश्रक्षाकाः ।

ममात्राय महासेन सर्वेषां हितकाव्यय ।। 8 ॥।

बपुवुले च राश्राश आर्दिश्रापभेदतः ।

सूर्यनेसयुद्धभूताः कपिला द्वारा: स्मृतः ॥ 9 ॥

सोभनेशौल्पता: श्रीतासे पोडणीयितः क्रमात् ।

वहिनेजोद्धता: कृष्णा दर्पभेदो भविति ॥ 10 ॥

How enemies are to be killed. It requires great thought, great concentration, great yoga and great powers.) O Mahāsenā! From those drops of water coming out of my eyes, the great tree of Rudrāksam did spring from the welfare of all. This Rudrāksa seed is of thirty-eight varieties. From My Sūrya Netra. i.e., My right eye, symbolizing the Sun, twelve yellow coloured (Pingala colour) varities have come; and from my left eye representing the Moon, the Soma Netra, sixteen varieties of white colour and from my third eye on the top, representing Fire i.e. the Agni Netra, ten varieties of black colour have come out.

शेतबर्णीह क्रहज्ञो जातितो बाहा उच्छते ।

शाजी तक्त्वा मिजो वैश्य: कृष्णासु गुरुक: ॥ 11 ॥

Of these the white Rudrāksams are Brāhmins and they are used by Brāhmaṇas; the red coloured ones are the Kṣattriyas and should be used by the Kṣattriyas and the black ones are Śūdras and should be used by the Vaiśya and the Śūdras.

एकवक्सः शिवः साथादूबहाह्यां चयपोहिति ।

दिवक्नो देवदेव्यो स्यादिवर्ध नागरेवदम्म ॥ 12 ॥

One faced Rudrāksa seed is the Śiva Himself, made manifest and rendered vivid; even the sin incurred in killing a Brāhmana is destroyed thereby. Two faced or two headed Rudrāksam is like the Deva and Devi. Two sorts of sins are destroyed thereby.

विवक्सस्तलः साक्षास्त्रीहायां दहतिं शणान् ।

चतुर्वक्नः स्वयं बझा नरत्वां व्यापोहिति ॥ 13 ॥

पंचवक्नः स्वयं रंहः कालानिननियमानतः ।

अभव्यभक्षणोब्धुतैरगव्यागमानोद्धे: ॥ 14 ॥

मुच्यते सर्वोपास्यु पंचवक्नस्य धागत् ।

चड्वक्नः कांत्तिकेयसु स धार्याँ द्विष्णे कोर ॥ 15 ॥

The three faced Rudrāksam is like fire; the sin incurred in killing a woman is destroyed in a moment. The four faced Rudrāksa seed is like Brahmā and removes the sin of killing persons. The five faced Rudrāksam is verily an image of Rudra; all sorts of sins, e.g. eating prohibited food, going to the ungoables, etc., are destroyed thereby. The six faced Rudrāksam is Kartikeya. It is to be worn on the right hand.

ब्रह्मह्यापि: पार्थेपुंचते नात्र संशयः ।

सतवकको महाभागो हानंगो नाम नाततः ॥ 16 ॥

तद्वारणान्युच्यते हिं सर्गणैतसोद्धिताकैः ।

अर्धकको महासेन साक्षांहेवो विनायकः ॥ 17 ॥

One becomes freed of the Brahmahatyaś sin. There is no manner of doubt in this. The seven faced Rudrāksam is named Anāṅga. Holding this rees one from the sin of stealing gold, etc., O Mahāśena! The eight faced Rudrāksa is Vināyaka.

अत्रकूटं तूलकूटं स्वर्णकूटं तथैव च ।

सुधान्यसिंखं वाउं वंस्पूर्शंथ गुरुकिंस्वम् ॥ १८ ॥

एवमादीनि पापानि हौत सर्वाणि धारणात् ।

विधानासत्य प्रणर्शयिति याति चोते परं पदम् ॥ १९ ॥

Šrimaddevibbāgavatam

Holding this frees one from the sin of holding an illicit contact with a woman of a bad family and with the wife of one's Guru, etc., and other sins as well. It enables one to acquire heaps of food, cotton, and gold; and in the end the Highest Place is attained.

पर्वतवेते गृणाः सर्वे ह्राद्यकस्य प्राणात् ।

नवक्वजी भैरवसृ धारयेद्वामाबुढ़े ॥ 20 ॥

भृक्तिभृक्तिप्रद: प्रोक्तो मम तुल्यवलो भवेत् ।

भृणत्ह्यासुरक्षाण ब्रहाह्यताणातिन ॥ 21 ॥

सदा: गुलयमायांति नववक्स्थ्य धारणात् ।

The fruit of holding the eight faced Rudrāksa seed has been said. Now I will talk of the nine-faced Rudrāksam. It is verily the Bhairava made manifest. On the left hand it should be worn. By this, the people get both Bhoga (enjoyment) an Mokṣa (liberation) and they become powerful like Me and get themselves freed at once, without the least delay, of the sins incurred by committing thousands of abortions, hundreds of Brahmahatyās (killing the Brāhmanas).

दशवक्तसूत् देवेश: साक्षाहेदो जनादनः ॥ 22 ॥

प्रहाक्षेय प्रिणारावष्ठ वेलाला ब्रह्मासुतः ।

पत्रागाएचोपाम्यन्ति दशवकस्यय धरणात् ॥ 23 ॥

Holding the ten-faced Rudrāksa is verily wearing Janārdana, the Deva of the Devas. The holding of which pacifies the evils caused by planets, Piśācas, Vetālas Brahma Rāksasas, and Pannagas.

वक्रकैकाणरुद्राक्षो कर्त्रैकाणरक्षे स्मृत्यम् ।

शिखायां धारयेचो वै तस्य पुण्यफलं श्रुण् ॥ 24 ॥

अधमेधसहस्य वाजपेशयानस्य च ।

गवां शतसहस्व समयन्तस्य यत्कलम् ॥ 25 ॥

The eleven-faced Rudrāksam is like the Eleven Rudras. The fruits, the efficacy of which I now describe. Hear. The fruits obtained through the performance of one thousand horse sacrifices, one hundred Vājapeya sacrifices, and making gifts of one hundred thousand cows are obtained thereby.

तत्कलं लभसे गीधं वत्सैकादशायराणात् ।

इद्राशास्यस्य रज्ञास्यैव कर्णं तु धाराण्त् ॥ 26 ॥

आदिव्यात्पीतानि नित्यं ब्रद्धान्ये व्यवस्थिताः ।

गोपेधे चाधुभेधे च चक्रलं तद्वाप्नयुत् ॥ 27 ॥

If one wears the twelve-headed Rudrāksam on one's ear, the Ādityas get satisfied. The fruits of performing Gomedha and Āsvamedha sacrifices are obtained thereby.

श्रीणां शक्षिणां चैव व्यापादीनां भयं न हि ।

न च व्याधि भयं तस्य नैव चाधि: प्रद्योर्ति: ॥ 28 ॥

न च किंचिद्धूयं तस्य न च व्याधि: प्रवर्ते ।

न कृतरिच्छूयं तस्य सुखी चैवेक्यां भयते ॥ 29 ॥

हतस्यधूमभाजारिसम्पूषकदटुर्ति ।

खारोच ब्रशुभागलोर्ष हत्वा ब्रहुविधानपि ॥ 30 ॥

मुच्यते नात्र संदेहो वक्सद्वारूपधारणात् ।

No fear comes from horned buffaloes, armed enemies and wolves and tigers and other murderous animals. Also the several diseases of the body never come to him. The holder of the twelve-faced Rudrākṣa seeds feels always happy and he is the master of some kingdoms. He becomes freed of the sins incurred in killing elephants, horses, dear, cats, snakes, mice, frogs, asses, foxes and various other animals.

वक्रसत्रोद्गो वस्त क्रहाक्षो यदि ल्यपते ॥ 31 ॥

कांतिकेक्यसमो ऋवः सर्वकामार्थसिद्धिदः ।

रसो सत्यानं चैव तस्य सर्व प्रसिद्धति ॥ 32 ॥

O Child! The thirteen faced Rudrāksam is very rare; if anybody gets it, he becomes like Kārtikeya and gets all desires fulfilled; and the eight siddhis are under his grasp. He learns how to make gold, silver and other metals; he attains all sorts of enjoyments. There is no manner of doubt in this.

तस्यैव सर्वभोयानि नात्र कार्वा विचारणा ।

मातरं वितरं चैव प्रातरं वा निर्हिति नः ॥ 33 ॥

O Śadāmana! If anybody holds the thirteen faced Rudrāksam, he becomes freed from the sins incurred in killing mother, father and brothers.

मुच्यते सर्वायोपेधो धारणात्तस्य घणपुख ।

चतुरंशासो कृतश्रेथ यदि लभ्यते पुक्क ॥ 34 ॥

धारयेलस्ततं भूदिन तस्य पिंडः शिवस्य तु ।

किं मुने बहुनोकेन वर्णेनि पुनः पुनः ॥ 35 ॥

Book XI Chapter V

O Son! If one holds on one's head the fourteen faced Rudrāksam always, one becomes like Śiva. O Muni! What more shall I speak to you! the Devas pay their respects to one holding the fourteen faced Rudrāksas and he in the end attains the Highest Goal, the state of Śiva. His body becomes verily the body of Śiva.

पूजने संततं देतेः प्रायते च परा गति: ।

रुद्राक एकः शिरसा धार्यों बल्वया डिजोजनिः :। ३६ ।।

पहर्विशाद्धः शिरोमाला पंचाशपूर्व्यदेवेन तु ।

कलाशबहावूलये अक्राक्षीरपिबधनम् ॥ ३७ ॥

The Devas always worship the Rudrāksa seed; the highest goal is attained by wearing the Rudrāksam. The Brāhmaṇas should hold on their heads at least one Rudrāksam with devotion. A rosary of twenty-six Rudrāksams is to be made and tied on the head.

अशोत्तराशतोपि पंचाशवृधि: चडान ।

अथवा सपतिशल्या कृत्वा रुद्राक्षगलिकाम् ॥ 38 ॥

धारणाड़ा जपाड़ापि झूनंतं फलमस्तुते ।

Similarly a rosary of fifty seeds is to be worn

and suspended on the breast; sixteen each on each of the two arms; twenty-four Rudrāksams to be worn on the wrists, twelve on each. O Śaḍānana! If a rosary be made of one hundred and eight, fifty or twenty-seven Rudrāksams and if japam be done with that, immeasurable merits are obtained.

अष्टोतराशमौला राजक्षेधार्यिते यदि ॥39 ॥

क्षणो क्षणोकं प्रधेधस्य फलं प्राप्तोत एणपुख ।

त्रिःसपत्कुलमुद्धृत्य शिवलोके महीयते ॥40॥

इति श्रीमद्देशभागवते महापुराणे एकावशासकम्पे

वतुर्गोंडयाय: ॥41 ॥

If anybody wears a rosary of one hundred and eight seeds, he gets at every moment the fruit of performing the Asvamedha sacrifices and uplifts his twenty-one generations and finally he resides in the Śiva Loka."

Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the Greatness of the Rudrākṣam in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

