[Ch 4 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada said: O Sinless one! The greatness of the Rudrāksa seed that you have described is verily such. Now I ask why is this Rudrāksam so much entitled to worship by the people. Please speak clearly on this point.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- O Sinless one! The greatness of the Rudrākṣa seed that you have described is verily such. Now I ask why is this Rudrākṣam so much entitled to worship by the people. Please speak clearly on this point.

[Ch 4 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa spoke: O Child! This is the very question that was asked once by Kārtika, the sixfaced One, to Bhagavān Rudra, dwelling in Kailāśa. What He replied, I say now. Listen.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa spoke :-- O Child! This is the very question that was asked once by Kārtika, the sixfaced One, to Bhagavān Rudra, dwelling in Kailāśa. What He replied, I say now. Listen.

[Ch 4 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Rudra Deva spoke: “O Child Sādāmana. I will dwell briefly on the secret cause of the greatness of the Rudrāksa seed. Hear. In days of yore, there was a Daitya called Tripura who could not be conquered by any body. Brahmā, Viṣṇu and the other Devas were defeated by him. They then came to Me and requested Me to kill the Asura.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Rudra Deva spoke :-- O Child Ṣaḍānana. I will dwell briefly on the secret cause of the greatness of the Rudrākṣa seed. Hear. In days of yore, there was a Daitya called Tripurā who could not be conquered by any body. Brahmā, Viṣṇu and the other Devas were defeated by him. They then came to Me and requested Me to kill the Asura.

[Ch 4 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At their request, I called in my mind the Divine Great weapon, named Aghora, beautiful and terrible and containing the strength of all the Devas, to kill him. It was inconceivable and it was blazing with fire.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At their request, I called in my mind the Divine Great weapon, named Aghora, beautiful and terrible and containing the strength of all the Devas, to kill him. It was inconceivable and it was blazing with fire.

[Ch 4 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► For full divine one thousand years I remained awake with eyelids wide open in thinking of the Aghora weapon, the destroyer of all obstacles, whereby the killing of Tripurāsura might be effected and the troubles of the Devas be removed. Not for a moment my eyelids dropped. There by my eyes were affected and drops of water came out of any eyes.—Note here.
NEW CORR ENG ──► For full divine one thousand years I remained awake with eyelids wide open in thinking of the Aghora weapon, the destroyer of all obstacles, whereby the killing of Tripurāsura might be effected and the troubles of the Devas be removed. Not for a moment my eyelids dropped. There by my eyes were affected and drops of water came out of my eyes. Note here.

[Ch 4 Verse 8-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How enemies are to be killed. It requires great thought, great concentration, great yoga and great powers.) O Mahāsenā! From those drops of water coming out of my eyes, the great tree of Rudrāksam did spring from the welfare of all. This Rudrāksa seed is of thirty-eight varieties. From My Sūrya Netra. ॥.e., My right eye, symbolizing the Sun, twelve yellow coloured (Pingala colour) varities have come; and from my left eye representing the Moon, the Soma Netra, sixteen varieties of white colour and from my third eye on the top, representing Fire ॥.e. the Agni Netra, ten varieties of black colour have come out.
NEW CORR ENG ──► How enemies are to be killed. It requires great thought, great concentration, great yoga and great powers. O Mahāsena! From those drops of water coming out of my eyes, the great tree of Rudrākṣam did spring for the welfare of all. This Rudrākṣa seed is of thirty-eight varieties. From My Sūrya Netra, i.e., My right eye, symbolizing the Sun, twelve yellow coloured (Piṅgala colour) varieties have come; and from my left eye representing the Moon, the Soma Netra, sixteen varieties of white colour and from my third eye on the top, representing Fire, i.e., the Agni Netra, ten varieties of black colour have come out.

[Ch 4 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Of these the white Rudrāksams are Brāhmins and they are used by Brāhmaṇas; the red coloured ones are the Kṣattriyas and should be used by the Kṣattriyas and the black ones are Śūdras and should be used by the Vaiśya and the Śūdras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Of these the white Rudrākṣams are Brāhmins and they are used by the Brāhmaṇas; the red coloured ones are the Kṣattriyas and should be used by the Kṣattriyas and the

[Ch 4 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One faced Rudrāksa seed is the Śiva Himself, made manifest and rendered vivid; even the sin incurred in killing a Brāhmana is destroyed thereby. Two faced or two headed Rudrāksam is like the Deva and Devi. Two sorts of sins are destroyed thereby.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One faced Rudrākṣa seed is the Śiva Himself, made manifest and rendered vivid; even the sin iñcurred in killing a Brāhmaṇa is destroyed thereby. Two faced or two headed Rudrākṣam is like the Deva and the Devī. Two sorts of sins are destroyed thereby.

[Ch 4 Verse 13-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The three faced Rudrāksam is like fire; the sin incurred in killing a woman is destroyed in a moment. The four faced Rudrāksa seed is like Brahmā and removes the sin of killing persons. The five faced Rudrāksam is verily an image of Rudra; all sorts of sins, e.g. eating prohibited food, going to the ungoables, etc., are destroyed thereby. The six faced Rudrāksam is Kartikeya. It is to be worn on the right hand.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The three faced Rudrākṣam is like fire; the sin iñcurred in killing a woman is destroyed in a moment. The four faced Rudrākṣa seed is like Brahmā and removes the sin of killing persons. The five faced Rudrākṣam is verily an image of Rudra; all sorts of sins, e.g., eating prohibited food, going to the ungoables, etc., are destroyed thereby. The six faced Rudrākṣam is Kārtikeya. It is to be worn on the right hand.

[Ch 4 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One becomes freed of the Brahmahatyaś sin. There is no manner of doubt in this. The seven faced Rudrāksam is named Anāṅga. Holding this rees one from the sin of stealing gold, etc., O Mahāśena! The eight faced Rudrāksa is Vināyaka.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One becomes freed of the Brahmāhatyā sin. There is no manner of doubt in this. The seven faced Rudrākṣam is named Ananga. Holding this frees one from the sin of stealing gold, etc., O Mahāsena! The eight faced Rudrākṣa is Vināyaka.

[Ch 4 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Šrimaddevibbāgavatam Holding this frees one from the sin of holding an illicit contact with a woman of a bad family and with the wife of one's Guru, etc., and other sins as well. It enables one to acquire heaps of food, cotton, and gold; and in the end the Highest Place is attained.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Holding this frees one from the sin of holding an illicit contact with a woman of a bad family and with the wife of one’s Guru, etc., and other sins as well. It enables one to acquire heaps of food, cotton, and gold; and in the end the Highest Place is attained.

[Ch 4 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The fruit of holding the eight faced Rudrāksa seed has been said. Now I will talk of the nine-faced Rudrāksam. It is verily the Bhairava made manifest. On the left hand it should be worn. By this, the people get both Bhoga (enjoyment) an Mokṣa (liberation) and they become powerful like Me and get themselves freed at once, without the least delay, of the sins incurred by committing thousands of abortions, hundreds of Brahmahatyās (killing the Brāhmanas).
NEW CORR ENG ──► The fruit of holding the eight faced Rudrākṣa seed has been said. Now I will talk of the nine-faced Rudrākṣam. It is verily the Bhairava made manifest. On the left hand it should be worn. By this, the people get both Bhoga (enjoyment) and Mokṣa (liberation) and they become powerful like Me and get themselves freed at once, without the least delay, of the sins iñcurred by committing thousands of abortions, hundreds of Brahmāhattyās (killing the Brāhmaṇas).

[Ch 4 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Holding the ten-faced Rudrāksa is verily wearing Janārdana, the Deva of the Devas. The holding of which pacifies the evils caused by planets, Piśācas, Vetālas Brahma Rāksasas, and Pannagas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Holding the ten-faced Rudrākṣa is verily wearing Janārdana, the Deva of the Devas. The holding of which pacifies the evils caused by planets, Piśācas, Vetālas, Brahmā Rākṣasas, and Pannagas.

[Ch 4 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The eleven-faced Rudrāksam is like the Eleven Rudras. The fruits, the efficacy of which I now describe. Hear. The fruits obtained through the performance of one thousand horse sacrifices, one hundred Vājapeya sacrifices, and making gifts of one hundred thousand cows are obtained thereby.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The eleven-faced Rudrākṣam is like the Eleven Rudras. The fruits, the efficacy of which I now describe. Hear. The fruits obtained through the performance of one thousand horse sacrifices, one hundred Vājapeya sacrifices, and making gifts of one hundred thousand cows are obtained thereby.

[Ch 4 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If one wears the twelve-headed Rudrāksam on one's ear, the Ādityas get satisfied. The fruits of performing Gomedha and Āsvamedha sacrifices are obtained thereby.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If one wears the twelve-headed Rudrākṣam on one’s ear, the Ādityas get satisfied. The fruits of performing Gomedha and Aśvamedha sacrifices are obtained thereby.

[Ch 4 Verse 28-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No fear comes from horned buffaloes, armed enemies and wolves and tigers and other murderous animals. Also the several diseases of the body never come to him. The holder of the twelve-faced Rudrākṣa seeds feels always happy and he is the master of some kingdoms. He becomes freed of the sins incurred in killing elephants, horses, dear, cats, snakes, mice, frogs, asses, foxes and various other animals.
NEW CORR ENG ──► No fear comes from burned buffaloes, armed enemies and wolves and tigers and other murderous animals. Also the several diseases of the body never come to him. The holder of the twelve-faced Rudrākṣa seed feels always happy and he is the master of some kingdoms He becomes freed of the sins iñcurred in killing elephants, horses, deer, cats, snakes, mice, frogs, asses, foxes and various other animals.

[Ch 4 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Child! The thirteen faced Rudrāksam is very rare; if anybody gets it, he becomes like Kārtikeya and gets all desires fulfilled; and the eight siddhis are under his grasp. He learns how to make gold, silver and other metals; he attains all sorts of enjoyments. There is no manner of doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Child! The thirteen faced Rudrākṣam is very rare; if anybody gets it, he becomes like Kārti Keya and gets all desires fulfilled; and the eight siddhis are under his grasp. He learns how to make gold, silver and other metals; he attains all sorts of enjoyments. There is no manner of doubt in this.

[Ch 4 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Śadāmana! If anybody holds the thirteen faced Rudrāksam, he becomes freed from the sins incurred in killing mother, father and brothers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Saḍānana! If anybody holds the thirteen faced Rudrākṣam, he becomes freed from the sins iñcurred in killing mother, father and brothers.

[Ch 4 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Son! If one holds on one's head the fourteen faced Rudrāksam always, one becomes like Śiva. O Muni! What more shall I speak to you! the Devas pay their respects to one holding the fourteen faced Rudrāksas and he in the end attains the Highest Goal, the state of Śiva. His body becomes verily the body of Śiva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Son! If one holds on one’s head the fourteen faced Rudrākṣam always, one becomes like Śiva. O Muni! What more shall I speak to you! The Devas pay their respects to one holding the fourteen faced Rudrākṣas and he in the end attains the Highest Goal, the state of Śiva. His body becomes verily the body of Śiva.

[Ch 4 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas always worship the Rudrāksa seed; the highest goal is attained by wearing the Rudrāksam. The Brāhmaṇas should hold on their heads at least one Rudrāksam with devotion. A rosary of twenty-six Rudrāksams is to be made and tied on the head.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas always worship the Rudrākṣa seed; the highest goal is attained by wearing the Rudrākṣam. The Brāhmaṇas should hold on their heads at least one Rudrākṣam with devotion. A rosary of twenty-six Rudrākṣams is to be made and tied on the head.

[Ch 4 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Similarly a rosary of fifty seeds is to be worn and suspended on the breast; sixteen each on each of the two arms; twenty-four Rudrāksams to be worn on the wrists, twelve on each. O Śaḍānana! If a rosary be made of one hundred and eight, fifty or twenty-seven Rudrāksams and if japam be done with that, immeasurable merits are obtained.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Similarly a rosary of fifty seeds is to be worn and suspended on the breast; sixteen each on each of the two arms; twenty-four Rudrākṣams to be worn on the wrists, twelve on each. O Saḍānana! If a rosary be made of one hundred and eight, fifty or twenty-seven Rudrākṣams and if japam be done with that, immeasurable merits are obtained.

[Ch 4 Verse 39-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If anybody wears a rosary of one hundred and eight seeds, he gets at every moment the fruit of performing the Asvamedha sacrifices and uplifts his twenty-one generations and finally he resides in the Śiva Loka." Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the Greatness of the Rudrākṣam in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If anybody wears a rosary of one hundred and eight seeds, he gets at every moment the fruit of performing the Aśvamedha sacrifices and uplifts his twenty-one generations and finally he resides in the Śiva Loka. Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the Greatness of the Rudrākṣam in the Mahāpuraṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahārṣi Veda Vyāsa.
