CHAPTER VII

On the Dikṣā Vidhi or on the Rules of Initiation

नारद खाच

भुतं सहचनामाखे श्रीभायशः फलप्रदम् ।

स्तोत्रं महोजितकरं महाभायकरं परम् ॥ १ ॥

Nārada said: I have heard the one thousand names or nāma stotras equivalent in its fruits to Śrī Gāyatri, highly potent in making a good fortune and tending to a splendid increase of the wealth and prosperity.

अयुना श्रीतुमिच्छामि दीक्षालक्षणातुमम् ।

विना येन न सिधेते देवीमांे5सिकारिता ॥ 2 ॥

बाहुणानां क्षिवयाणां विशां क्षीणां तथैव च ।

सामान्यविधिता सर्वे विस्तरेण वद प्रभो ॥ 3 ॥

Now I want to hear about how initiations in Mantrams are performed, without which nobody, be he a Brāhmin, a Kṣattriya, a Vaïsya or a Śūdra,

is entitled to have the Devi Mantra. O Lord! Kindly describe the ordinary (Sāmnānya) and the special (Viśeṣa) rules thereof.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

शृणु त्रीशां प्रवस्थामि शिषाणां भाविततसनाम् ।

देवानिर्मुकपुजावधिकारो यथा भवेत् ॥ 4 ॥

दिख्यं ज्ञानं हिं या दद्यात्कुपयित्यापक्षयं तु या ।

सैव दीक्षिति संप्रोक्ता वैदतंर्गविशगरदेः ॥ 5 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Nārada! Listen. I am now telling you about the rules of initiation (Dikṣā) of the disciples, pure in heart. When they are initiated, they become entitled then and not before that, to worship the Devas, the Fire and the Guru. That method of instruction, and religious act and ceremony is called the Dikṣā (initiation) by which

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

the Divine Knowledge is imparted; and at once flashes in the heart and mind of the initiated that Knowledge and all his sins are then destroyed. So the Pandits of the Vedas and the Tantras, say.

अवश्यं सा तु कतैल्या यतो बड़ुकल माता ।

गृहीष्णवृष्णवाज्यापितिशुद्धावर्षितीति ॥ 6 ॥

गृह्मतु विधिवज्ञतः कृत्वं सर्व विधाय च ।

स्नानसंध्यातिकं सर्वे यावधिधि विधाय च ॥ 7 ॥

(The Divine Knowledge is like lightning, fire, arising and permeating the body, mind, and spirit.) This Dīksā ought to be taken by all means. This gives excellent merits and pure results. Both the Guru and the Śīṣya (disciple) ought to be very pure and true. (This is the first essential requisite. Then the results are instantaneous). First of all, the Guru is to perform all the morning duties, he is to take his bath and perform his Sandhyā Vandanams.

कमणवलुकृतो मौनी गृहं यायासरित्रतत ।

यागमणद्वमासाठ विशनैत्रासने वरे ॥ 8 ॥

आचाय प्राणानायय गंधपुष्पविमिश्रितम् ।

सत्वारास्बन्रोग जनं वारिषु साधयेत् ॥ 9 ॥

He is to return home from the banks of the river with his Kamandalu and observe maunam (silence). Then, in order to give Diksā, he is to enter into the assigned room (Yāga Maṇḍapa) and take his seat on an Āsana that is excellent and calculated to please all. He is to perform Āscamana and do Prāṇāyāma. Then he should take water in his Arghya vessel and putting scents and flowers in that, charge that water with Phatkāra mantra (that is, condense electricity Spirit in that).

वार्थित तेन मतिमानस्मयं समुचन्त् ।

प्रीक्ष्येद्वतमपिलहं ततः पूजां समावतेत् ॥ 10 ॥

क्रयंैईव्रके देवं गणनार्थ तथा शिवग्न ।

सरखर्ती नाममंत्रे: पूजवेयुरंधपुष्के: ॥ 11 ॥

Then uttering the Phat mantra, he is to sprinkle the water on the doorways of the worshiproom and begin his Pūjā. Firstly, on the top of the door at one end invoke the Deity Gananātha by His mantra, at the other end invoke Sarasvatī by Her mantra

and at the middle, invoke Lakṣmī Devī by Her mantra duly and worship them, with flowers.

हारदक्षिणशाखायां गंगां विद्भेगमचैयेत् ।

हारस्य वासगताखायां क्षेत्रगलं च सूर्यजगम् ॥ 12 ॥

देहल्यां पुजदेवहल्वेवाममधेजतः ।

सर्व देवीमयं दूर्यमिति संचित्य सर्वतः ॥ 13 ॥

Then, on the right side worship Gaṅgā and Vighneśa; and on the left side worship Kṣetrappāla and Yamunā, the daughter of the Sun. Similarly, on the bottom of the door, worship the Astra Devatā by the Phāt mantra. Then consider the whole Maṇḍapa as inspired with the presence of the Devi, and see the whole place as pervaded by Her through and through.

दिव्यानुसारयोद्धिनानस्मंत्रजपेन तु ।

अन्तरिक्षानात्विनतमावदावर्तैस्तु भूमिभान् ॥ 14 ॥

वामग्रातां सूग्ञन्धात्राविशेशिर्वाणिणा ।

प्रविष्य कुमं संस्थाय सामान्याध्व विधाय च ॥ 15 ॥

Then, repeat the Phat mantra and destroy the Celestial obstacles as well as those from the middle space (Antarīksa); strike the ground thrice with the left heel and thus destroy the Terrene obstacles. Then touching the left branch on the left side of the coukāt, put the right foot forward and enter into the Maṇḍapa.

तेन चाध्वंजलेनापि वैन्हंलां दर्शि पुबलेत् ।

वास्तुत्वां चच्योर्नि गंधपुथाक्षतादिभः ॥ 16 ॥

ततः कुयास्वुलायं तेन चाध्यदिकेन च ।

तेगणतर्भपार्यन्तं प्रोक्षेयेनषडं गुरुः ॥ 17 ॥

Then instal the Śanti Kumbha (the peace jar) and offer the ordinary Arghya (Sāmānyārgha). Next worship the Vāstunātha and Padmayoni with flowers and Ātapa rice and the Arghya water, on the south-west and then purify the Pañca Gayva. Next sprinkle all the Mandapa and the entrance gate with that Arghya water.

सर्वे द्वैमायं चेदं भावये-नसा किल ।

मूलार्गे जपन्बल्या प्रोक्षणं स्याच्छरणानु ॥ 18 ॥

गतरांत्रं समुच्चार्यं ताड्येनप्रडधूमान् ।

हूमन्त्रं तु समुच्चार्यं कुयादिष्युक्षणं ततः ॥ 19 ॥

Book XII Chapter VII

And, while sprinkling with Arghya water, consider the whole space right through as inspired with the presence of the Devi and repeat the Mūla Mantra with devotion and sprinkle with Phat mantra. The Kartā, then, uttering the mantra "Phat," is to drive away all the evils from the Mandapa and uttering the mantra "Hūm" sprinkle water, all around, thus pacifying the atmosphere and bringing peace into the hearts of all present.

पूयवेदेत्रं धृष्यैविक्तान्विक्तेन्तः ।

माज्यैतन्तु माज्ञ्या कुशान्यितया पुनः ॥ 20 ॥

ईशान्तिशि तत्पूंं कृत्वा संस्वायभेमुने ।

पुण्यात्वाचनं कृत्वा दीनानायांश्छ तोषयेत् ॥ 21 ॥

Then burn the Dhūpa incense inside and scatter Vikira (water, sandal-paste, yava, ashes, Durba grass with roots, and Ātapa rice). Then collect all these rice, etc., again with a broom made of Kuśa grass to the north east corner of the Maṇḍapa; making the Sankalpa and uttering Svasti vācana (invocation of good), distribute and satisfy the poor and orphans with feeding, clothing and money.

विशेमूढ्रासे पश्राममकूल गुरं निजम् ।

ग्रड्मुखोविविबढ्राणाला देयमेवस्य देवतान् ॥ 22 ॥

Then he should bow down to his own Guru and take his seat humbly on the soft Āsanam allotted to him with his face eastwards and meditate on the Deity (Iṣta Deva) of the mantra that is to be imparted to the disciple.

भूतशुद्ध्यादिकं कृत्वा पूर्वोक्तेनैव वर्त्मना ।
ऋष्यादिन्यासकं कुर्याद्देयमन्त्रस्य वै मुने ॥ २३॥

न्यसेन्मुनिं तु शिरसि मुखे छन्दः समीरितम् ।
देवतां हृदयाम्भोजे गुह्ये बीजं तु पादयोः ॥ २४॥

शक्तिं विन्यस्य पश्चात्तु तालत्रयरवात्ततः ।
दिग्बन्धं कारयेत्पश्चाच्छोटिकाभिस्त्रिभिर्नरः ॥ २५॥

After meditating thus, he is to do the Bhuta
suddhi (purification of elements) and perform
Nyāsa, etc., of the Deya mantra (the mantra that is
to be imparted to the disciple) according to the rules
stated below, i.e., the Rsi on the head; the chandas
in the mouth, the Ista Devata in the heart, Bija on
the anus and Sākti Nyāsa on the two legs. Then he is to make sound thrice by the clap of his palm and thus thwart off all the evils of the earth and the middle space and then make digbandhan (tieing up the quarters) by the mudrā chotikā three times (snapping the thumb and forefinger together).

प्राणायामां ततः कृत्वा मूलमंत्रमनुस्मर् ।

मातृकां विवेईते तत्प्रकारस्घोष्यते ॥ 26 ॥

उं०अं नम इति प्रोच्य नयेसीछ्जीमं मंत्रित् ।

एवमेव तु सर्वेषु न्यसेत्यक्षे नु पेने ॥ 27 ॥

Then perform the Prānāyāma with the Mūla mantra of the would-be-Śīṣa-Devatā and do the Mātrikā Nyāsa in one's own body, thus: Om Ām namah ś

वामपार्शवे नाधिदेशे दक्षपार्शवे तथा पुनः ।

नजादीक्षापि ज्ञानादीयर्षिक्तानेव विश्वसन्ति ॥ 33 ॥

O Nārada! Next consider within your body the seat of an auspicious Āśana (a seat) and make the Nyāsa of Dharma on the right side, Jñānam on the left side, of Vairāgyam (dispassion) on the left thigh, prosperity and wealth on the right thigh, of non-Dharma in the mouth and of Non-Jñānam on the left side,

पादा धर्मद्वर: प्रोक्ता: पीठस्य मुनिसत्तम ।

अधर्माधासुरा ग्राजाधिम्युतानि मुनिपुर्णतेः ॥ 34 ॥

मढेउर्जेह द्रहि स्थाने यवेस्नुबासने स्थले ।

प्रवछपर्यं विमल तत्स्म्यर्यैन्युपायकान् ॥ 35 ॥

Avairāgyam (passion) on the navel, and poverty on the right side. Then think of the feet of the Āsana (the body) as Dharma, etc., and all the limbs as Adharma (non-Dharma).

न्यसेल्कलयात्नार्मी संक्षेपाता वदाम्यहम् ।

भूर्यस्य द्वारा कलाशा इन्दोः घोड़ा स्थूता: ॥ 36 ॥

द्वग वहैः काल प्रोक्तासाधिर्योक्ति लात्मयेत् ।

सत्त्वं रजसमछीव न्यसेतेचामधारि ॥ 37 ॥

आत्मामंततारानं पर्यात्मानमेव च ।

ज्ञानात्मानं न्यसेद्ध्रानिथ तीवस्य कल्पना ॥ 38 ॥

अमुकासनाय नम इति नेणि साधकः ।

आमतं पूर्वायिता तु तमिन्यायेयनरायिकम् ॥ 39 ॥

In the middle of the Āśana (body), i.e., in the heart consider Ananta Deva as a gentle bed and on that a pure lotus representing this universe of five elements. Then make Nyāsa of the Sun, Moon, and Fire on this lotus and think the Sun as composed of twelve Kalās (digits) the Moon composed of sixteen Kalās (digits) and the Fire as composed of ten Kalās. Over this make Nyāsa of Satīva, Raja and Tamo Guṇas, Ātmā, Antarātmā, Paramātmā and Jñanātmā and then think of this as his Āṣta's altar where the devotec is to meditate on his Āṣta Devatā, the Highest Mother. Nyāsa-assignment of the various parts of the body to different deities which is usually accompanied with prayers and corresponding gesticulations.

कल्योक्तविधिना मन्त्री देव्यमंत्रय देवताम्।

मानसैसपार्षेष पूजयेन्तं यथाविधि ॥ 40 ॥

मुग्रा: प्रदर्शयेद्विक्त्योपता मोटकारिका: ।

याधिविर्चिताधिस्तु मोदो देयास्तु जायते ॥ 41 ॥

Next the devotee is to perform the mental worship of the Deya Mantra Devatā according to the rules of his own Kalpa; next he is to show all the Mudrās, stated in the Kalpa for the satisfaction of the Deva. The Devas become very pleased when all these Mudrās are shown to them.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

ततः स्ववामभाग्यो घट्कोगोपरि वर्तूलम् ।

चतुरस्वयुतं सम्यड्मध्ये मंडलमालिद्धेत् ॥ 42 ॥

मध्ये शिकाणे संलिख्य शंखमुर्द्रां प्रदर्शयेत् ।

पडंगानि च घट्कोगोष्चचंयेकुर्मामधिभः ॥ 43 ॥

O Nārada! Now, on one's left side, erect an hectagon; inside it a circular figure; inside this again a square and then draw within that square a triangle and over it show the Śaṅkha Mudrā. After finishing the Pūjā of the Six Deities at the six corners of the hectagon, Fire, etc., take the tripod of the Śaṅkha (conch-shell) and sprinkling it with Phat mantra, place it within the triangle.

अन्याविष्य तु कोणीय पडंगार्चनाएते।

आधारायमादाय संग्रख्य मुनिसमा ॥ 44 ॥

अस्मिंग संग्रख्य स्थायपेतन मपहले ।

मे वहामिंदलायोकवना ततो श्रकालामने ॥ 45 ॥

अमुकेंद्य आयधारस्थानाव नम इत्यपि ।

मंत्रीअपुक: संग्रख्यायाधारस्थापने बुधै: ॥ 46 ॥

Utter, then, the Mantra “Mam Vahniman dalāya Daśa Kalātmane Amuka Devyā Arghyapātrashānāya namah” and thus worshipping the Śāṅkhya vessel place it within the mandala. Then worship in the Śāṅkhā pātra, the ten Kalās of Fire, beginning from the East, then south-east and so on. Sprinkle the Śāṅkhā, conchshell, with the Mūla Mantra and meditating on it, place the Śāṅkhā (conch shell) on the tripod.

आधारे पूर्वमार्थ्य प्रदिशभाकमण तु ।

दूग वहिकलाः: पूज्या वहिमणडलसंस्थिता: ॥ 47 ॥

Book XII Chapter VII

ततो वै मूलमंत्रेण प्रोक्षितं शंखमुत्तमम् ।

स्थायेत्त्र चाधारे मूलम-त्रमनुस्तम् ॥ 48 ॥

अं सूर्यमंडलयोकत्वा ब्राद्यातों कलामनं ।

अमुकदेवव्यधैपात्राय नम इत्युच्चेततः ॥ 49 ॥

शं शंखाय पदं प्रोक्ष्य नम इतेन्तुच्चेत् ।

प्रोक्ष्येतेन तं शंखं तत्मन्द्रादग पूजयेत् ॥ 50 ॥

यूयेस्य ब्राद्य कलासतपिच्याहा यथाकामम् ।

विदोभागतृकां प्रीक्ष्य मूलमंत्रं विलोभाकम् ॥ 51 ॥

Repeating the mantra “Am Sūrya mandalāya Dvadaśakalātmame Anukodevyā Arghyapātrāya namah” worship in the Arghyapātra Śaṅkha, sprinkle water in the Śaṅkha with the Mantra “Sam Śaṅkhya namah.” Worship in due order the twelve Kalās of the Sun Tāpini, Tāpini, Dhūmrā, etc., utter the fifty syllables of the Mātṛkā in an inverse order (i.e., beginning, see the Sāradā Tilaka, with Kṣam, Ham, Sam, Sam, Śam, etc.,) and repeating the Mūla Mantra also in an inverse order, fill the Śaṅkha, three-fourths, with water.

जलैगपुर्येच्छंखं तत्र चेचेः कलं ग्यसेत् ।

अं ओमंडलायोक्नांते घोडगलकानमे ॥ 52 ॥

अमुकाध्यमुतायेति हन्मांजीत मनु: स्मृत: ।

पूजयेन्मुनान तेन जलं तु सुणिमुग्या ॥ 53 ॥

तीर्थान्वाहा त्रैवाय्यधुक्नो जपेनमुनम् ।

पडंगानि जले न्यस्य हृदोंसे पूजयेयः ॥ 54 ॥

अष्टकृचो जपेमूलं छावदेवन्यस्मयुग्रा ।

ततो दक्षिणादिष्यागो संख्या प्रोक्षणों न्यसेत् ॥ 55 ॥

गंखालु क्रिक्तिजित्रिण्य प्रोक्षयेने सर्वतः ।

प्रजाइयं निजात्मानं विसुचूं घावयेचतः ॥ 56 ॥

Next perform in it the Nyāsa of Candrakalā and uttering the Mantra “Um Soma maṇḍalāya Śoḍaśakalātmane Amukademtāyā Arghyā-mṛtāya namah,” worship in this conchshell. Next with Añkusha mudrā, invoke all the tīrthas there, repeating the Mantra “Gange Ca Yamune caiva, etc.,” and repeat eight times the Mūla Mantra (the basic Mantra). Then perform the Sadanga Nyāsa in the water and with the Mantra “Hṛdā namah, etc.,” worship and, repeating eight times the Mūla Mantra, cover it with Matsyamundrā.

Next place on the right side of the Śaṅkha, the Proksaṇī Pātra (the Kośā vessel from which water is taken for sprinkling) and put a little water in it. By this water sprinkle and purify all the articles of worship as well as one's own body and consider one's ātman as pure and holy.

श्रीनारायण खाचा

ततः स्वपुत्ते वेधां सर्वताभूदांकल् ।

संलिख कर्णिकामध्ये पूरयेच्छालितुर्नः ॥ 57 ॥

आस्तीर्थ दर्भास्त्रेव न्यसेकूर्चं सलक्षणम् ।

अधाराशक्तिभारभ्य पीठमन्वंतमचयैत् ॥ 58 ॥

निर्वर्णे कृभ्यादायामवस्तादूः श्रालितानरम् ।

तंतुना वेध्येचं तु जिसुणेनाकृणेन च ॥ 59 ॥

नवरत्नोदरं कृयैतुं गंधादिपुजितम् ।

स्वाययेतच पीठे तु तारामंत्रण देशिकः ॥ 60 ॥

After doing works thus far the until Viśeṣārghya is placed, the devotee should erect Sarvato bhadra mandala within the altar and put the Śāli rice within its pericarp. Next spread Kuśa grass on that Mandala and put on one Kūrca, looking well and auspicious within it, made of twenty-seven Kuśa grass knotted with Venyagra granthi. Worship here the Adhāra Śakti, Prakṛti, Kūrma, Śeṣa, Kṣamā, Sudhāsindhu, Manimāṃadala, Kalpavrksa and Iṣta devatā and the Pītha. (Gurgā Devī yoga pithāya namah). Then have an entire kumbha (water jar) having no defect, wash it inside with Phat mantra, and encircle it with the red thread thrice as symbolising the three Gunas. Place within this jar the Nava ratna (nine jewels) with Kūrca and worshipping it with scents and flowers put them in the jar repeating the Pranava, and place that on the Pitha (seat).

ऐक्यं कृष्मस्य पीठस्य पावयेत्पुर्यन्तः ।

मातृकां प्रतिलोमेन जपस्तीधोंदकैमुने ॥ 6 1 ॥

मूलारंच च संजय पूरयेहताधिया ।

अश्वथपनसामाणां कामैर्नेवपल्लेः ॥ 6 2 ॥

डाद्वेल्कुभवद्नं चषकं सफलक्षतम् ।

संस्थायपेत मतिमानस्त्वयुगेन वेधेर्त् ॥ 6 3 ॥

Next consider the Pītha and Kumbha (water jar)

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

as one and the same and pour waters from the Tirthas, repeating in an inverse order the Mātṛkā Vārṇas (from Kṣa to Ka) and fill it, thinking of the Iṣṭa Deva and repeating the basic mantra, put the new and fresh twigs (Pallavas) of Aśvattha, Panasa and mango trees, etc., in the jar and cover its mouth and place over it fruits, rice, and caṣaka (honey) and wrap it with two red cloths.

प्राणस्थापनमंत्रेण प्राणस्थापनभारतेत ।

आवाहानिद्वुर्जाभिर्मादिवेहतां पराम ॥ 64 ॥

ध्यायेता परमेणानी कल्पोकनेत प्रकारतः ।

स्वागतं कुशलप्रश्न देह्या अग्रे समुच्छरेत् ॥ 65 ॥

Then perform the Prāna-Pratisṭhā and invoke the Spirit of the Devi by the Prānasthāpana Mantra and show the Mudrās, Āvāhana, etc., and thus satisfy the Devi. Then do the Sodaśopacāra Pūjā of the Devi after me-dicating on the Paramesāvri according to the rules of the Kalpa.

पादं दृचात्तोप्रय्यं ततश्वामनीयकम् ।

मधुपके च साध्यंयं देखे स्नानं निवेदयेत् ॥ 66 ॥

वाससी च ततो द्व्यात्रके क्षीये सुनिनले ।

नानामिणाणाकीणानाकल्याव्यततः ॥ 67 ॥

मनुना पुटितैर्शैर्नितृकारा विधानतः ।

दैद्या अंगेषु विन्यस्य चंद्नाड़ीः समवैयते ॥ 68 ॥

First offer “welcome” in front of the Devi and then duly offer the Pādya, Arghya, Ācamanīya water, Madhuparka, and oils, etc., for the bath. Then offer nice red silken clothes and various jewels, ornaments; repeating the Mātṛkā syllables electrified with the Deya Mantra, worship the whole body of the Devi with scents and flowers.

गंध: कालागुभवक: कपूरीण समवित्त: ।

कापारीं चंद्रं चापि कसूरीसहितं मुने ॥ 6 9 ॥

कुंदपुर्णादिपुर्णायणि पदवेळे समपंवेत् ।

धूपोरुणकुस्जातोगीरचंदनगर्कतः ॥ 70 ॥

मधुमिशः स्मृता देखना: धृपात्मना सता ।

दीपाननेकान्दत्ताथ नैवेहो घापैवेतुर्धीः ॥ 71 ॥

Next offer to the Devi the sweet scent of Kalāguru mixed with camphor and the Kāśmiri sandalpaste mixed with Kastūrī and various nice

scented flowers, for example, the Kunda flowers, etc. Then offer the Dhūpa prepared from Aguru, Guggula, Uśīra, sandalpaste, sugar, and honey and know that the Dhūpa is very pleasing to the Devi. Next offer various lights and offerings of fruits, vegetables and fooding.

प्रतिह्वा जलं द्वाताश्रोगस्था न चान्यथा ।

ततः कुयादीपूर्जां कल्पोक्तावणानि च ॥ ७२ ॥

सांगां देवीमाध्याप्यद्व वैश्वेदें ततश्रुते ।

दक्षिणे स्थितिके कृला ततधाध्य हुताजनम् ॥ ७३ ॥

Be particular to sprinkle everything with the water of the Kosā, thus purifying, before it is offered to the Devi. Then complete the Anga Pūjā, and the Āvaraṇa-Pūjā of the Devi, then perform the duty of Vaiśvadeva. On the right side of the Devi erect an altar (sthāndila) six feet square and instal Agni (Fire) there.

मूर्तिश्वो देवतां ततवाहु सम्पूच च क्रमात् ।

तारव्यातिथिशूचा मूलभत्रेण वै ततः ॥ ७४ ॥

पढ़विंगतिरातं तु पायवेन सर्वपिंण ।

हुनेतशक्त्रावृतिथिनः पुनश अडुवानुने ॥  75 ॥

Invoke there the Deity, thinking of Her Form and worship Her with scents and flowers. Then with the Vyārthiti Mantra with Svāhā prefixed and Mūla (Deya) Mantra perform the Homa ceremony with oblations, caru and ghee, twenty five times. Next perform Homa again with Vyārthiti.

गंधाड़ीरचंविता च देवीं पीठे तु योजयेत ।

बाईं विसुस्य रूवियां पचिति विकिभूदिलम् ॥ 76 ॥

देवतायाः पापदैंच्या नान्यपुणादिरंसुतान् ।

Next worship the Devi with scents, etc., and consider the Devi and Pitha Devatā as one and the same. Then take leave of (visarjana) the Agni (Fire). Offer valis (sacrifices) all round to the Pārsvadas of the Devi with the remnant caru of the Homa.

पडीपवारान्दचाय तांतुलं छजघामरे ॥ 77 ॥

द्वाद्रेखे ततो मन्वं सहस्वावृत्तितो जयेत ।

जयं समर्थे शैरानि विकिते दिशि संस्थिते ॥ 78 ॥

कर्कैरी स्थापयेतस्या दुर्गामावाह्य पुजयेत ।

रक्ष रक्षेति चोच्चायं नालमुक्तेन वारिणा ॥ 79 ॥

Book XII Chapter VII

अल्पमन्त्रं जपन्नेशं सेचयेत्नु प्रदक्षिणम् ।

कर्करी स्वाययेत्थाने पुत्वेच्चास्वेदेतान् । 8 0 ॥

Now again worship the Devi with five offerings and offer betel, umbrella, câmara and others and repeat the Mûla mantra thousand times. After finishing the Japam, place Karkari (a water-jar with small holes at the bottom, as in a sieve) on the rice in the north-eastern corner and invoke the Devi there and worship Her. Uttering the mantra “Rakṣa Rakṣa” moisten the place with water coming out of Karkari, and repeat the Phat mantra.

पशुदानुक्स्तु शिष्येण सह भुंजीत वायतः ।

तस्यां रातौ नृ तेढ्यां नित्यं कुवांत्ययन्तः ॥ 81 ॥

After re-worshipping the Devi, place Karkari in due position. Thus the Guru finishes the Adhivāsa (foregoing) ceremony and takes his meals with the disciple and sleeps that night on that altar.

श्रीनाराया उवाच

ततः कुंडस्य संकर्ता स्थंडिलस्य च वा मुने ।

प्रवक्ष्यामि समासेने यथाविधि वियानतः ॥ 82 ॥

मूलमन्त्रं समुच्चार्यं वीक्षेयेदस्त्यन्तः ।

प्रीक्ष्येताउनं कुयातैनेव कवचेन तु ॥ 83 ॥

O Nārada! Now I am describing briefly about the Homa Kunḍa (a round hole in the ground consecrated to the Deity) and the Samskāra ceremony of the Sthandila (the sacrificial altar). Uttering, first, the Mūla Mantra, see, fix your gaze on the Kunda; then sprinkle it with water and the Phāt mantra and drive away the evil-spirits from there.

अध्यूषणं समृद्धिं तिर्वसित्वस्ततः परम् ।

प्राग्रा उदरग्राङ्ग लिखलेलुखा: समंततः ॥ 84 ॥

प्राणवेन समय्युव्य पीई देव्या: समचेयत् ।

आधारगर्फित्मारभ्य पीर्भगंत्रावासनकम् ॥ 85 ॥

तस्मिनीते समावाहु शिकी परमकारणी ।

गंधाडीरभरणेरि पूजेनेती समाहितः ॥ 86 ॥

Then with mantra “Hūm” again sprinkle it with water.

Then draw within it three lines Prāgāra and

Udagagra (on the eastern and northern sides). Sprinkling it with water and the Pranava, worship within the Piṭhas, uttering the mantras from Ādhāra Śaktaye namah to Amuka Devi Yoga Piṭhāya namah. Invoke, in that Piṭha, the Highest One, Who is Śiva Śivā with all one-ness of heart and worship Her with scents and offerings.

देर्वी ध्यावेद्रुस्नातां संसक्ता गंकेशन तु ।

कामातुरा तयो: क्रीडां किंचित्काल विषायद्धि ॥ 87 ॥

अथ वर्द्धि समादाय पात्रेण पुत्तो न्यसेत् ।

क्रव्यादांशं परित्यज पूर्वोक्तर्शिणादिधि: ॥ 88 ॥

संस्कृत्य वर्द्धि रंखीजमुच्यां तदन्तन्तम् ।

चैतन्यं योजरेनास्मिनणवैनाभिमंत्रयेत् ॥ 89 ॥

Then think for a moment the Devi as having taken bath and as one with Śaṅkara. Bring then fire in a vessel and taking a flaming piece thereof throw that in the south-west corner. Then purifying it by the gaze and quitting the portions of Krayvādaḥ, impart the Caítanya by “Ram,” the Vahanibija repeat “Om” over it seven times.

सप्तवारं तते धिनुग्जां संरश्वियनुकः ।

गरणे रहितं कृत्वा तनुत्रेणायतुंघत् ॥ 90 ॥

अर्धितं त्रि: परिधाय प्रादक्षिणेव सतमः ।

कृष्णधारि जप्सतरां जान्युर्ध्यमहातक: ॥ 91 ॥

शिवबीजीय देवा योगे वाई दिविभिंपते ।

आचामयेत्तो देव देवीं च जगद्धिकवम् ॥ 92 ॥

Shew, then, the Dhenumudrā and protect it by Phat Kāra and cover, veil, it with the mantra “Hūm.” Then turn the fire, thus worshipped with sandalpate, etc., thrice over the Kūndā and with both the knees on the ground and repeating the Pranava, consider the Agni as the Virya of Śiva and throw it on the yoni of the Devi in the Pitha. Then offer Ācamana, etc., to the Deva and the Devi and worship.

विधिर्याल हन दह पच युमां ततः परम् ।

सर्वज्ञापाय स्वाहा मनोउर्य वहिद्वीपेने ॥ 93 ॥

अर्गेन प्रजलितं वन्ने जानतेवे हूतागनम् ।

सुवर्णविभालं समिद्धे विश्वतीयुम् ॥ 94 ॥

Then light the flame with the mantra "Cit

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

Píngala Hana Hana Daha Daha Paca Paca Sarvajñā Jñāpaya Svāhā." Then utter the stotra to the Agni Deva with great love, repeating the mantra "Agnim Prajvalitam vande Jātavedam Hutāśanam suvarna varnamamalam samiddham Visvatomukham."

मन्थणाने तं वहिं स्तुवीत परमादरात् ।

ततो न्यद्राईहान्नं पडंगे देशिकोनामः ॥ 95 ॥

सहसाधि: स्वितपुर्ण उत्तिषुपर: स्मृत: ।

धूमव्यापी सप्तिज़ो धनुर्धे शुत क्रमात् ॥ 96 ॥

जातिपुता: पडींगा: स्यु: पूर्वस्यानेषु विन्यसते।

ध्याये वहिं हैसवर्णि जिनेयं पदास्थित्यान् ॥ 97 ॥

Then perform the Ṣadānganyāsa to the Agni Deva “Om Sahasrārcciṣe namah, Om Svasti Pūrnāya Svāhā,” “Om Uttisṭha puruṣāya vasa,” “Om Dhūma vyāpine Hūm Om Sapta Jihvāya vausat” “Om Dhanurdharāya Phat.” Repeating the above six mantras, perform the Nyāsa on the heart, etc., the six places.

इखणीक्स्वतिकाधिराकं मंगलं परम् ।

परिधिचेततः कुण्डं मेखलोपिर मंत्रवित् ॥ 98 ॥

दर्षे: परितलैत्यशार्विरीच्च-नयेयेv ।।

त्रिकोपावृतचट्कोणं साध्ययं सप्पुर्म् ॥ 99 ॥

Now meditate on the Agni as of a golden colour, three-eyed, seated on a lotus and holding in His four hands signs of granting boons, Sakti, Svastika and sign of “no fear,” also meditate on Agni, as the seat of the greatest auspiciousness. Then moisten the Kunḍa on the top of the belt (mekhalā) with water.

यन्द्र विषयवद्रहैः: पूर्वे वा संलिखेद्यः ।

तन्मध्ये पूर्णवेद्रहिं मंत्रेणानेन वे मुने ॥ 100 ॥

वैधानर ततो जातवेदः पश्रादित्वाह ।

लोहिताध्यपदं प्रोकत्ता सर्वकर्माणि साध्य ॥ 101 ॥

वहिकाज्यांतको मन्त्रनेन बहिं तु पूजयेत ।

मध्ये पद्टवयि कोणेषु हिरणय गानना तथा ॥ 102 ॥

रक्त कृष्णा सुप्रभा च बहुरूपातिरिक्तिका ।

पूजयेल्सपतिश्रुस्ता: कसरेचंधणपूजनम् ॥ 103 ॥

Next spread the Kuśa grass all around and draw the Agni yantra over it, i.e., triangle, hectagon, circle, eight-petalled figure and Bhūpura; rather

have this drawing before the Agnisthāpānā. Now meditate this only. Then, within the Yantra, recite “Vaiśvānara Jātaveda Lohitāksa sarvakarāmāni Sādhaya Svāhā” and worship Agni. Then worship in the centre and in the hectagon at the corners worship the Saptajihvā (seven tongues Hiranya, Gaganā, Raktā, Krṣnā, Suprabhā, Bahurūpā, Atiraktikā) and next worship within the pericarp of the lotus the Anga Devatās.

दल्ले पूर्वयेभूर्तीं: गणिक्यवितिक्याधिणीः।

जातवेदा: सप्तिज्ञो हव्यवाह्न एव च ॥ 104 ॥

अश्वितरसंज्ञो5व्य: पुनर्वैंधानराङ्गयः ।

कोमातेजा: स्याधिष्यमुखो देवमुखः स्मूतः ॥ 105 ॥

तात्रानये पदाङ्गा: स्युन्त्यन्ता विह्मूर्तयः ।

लेकापालांशुर्दिंबु वज्ञावायुधसंयुन्तन् ॥ 106 ॥

Then recite the following mantras within the Eight petals: “Om Agnaye Jātavedase namah,” “Om Agnaye Saptajihvāya namah,” “Om Agnaye Havyavāhanaña namah,” “Om Agnaye Asvodarajāya namah,” “Om Agnaye Vaiśvānarāya namah,” “Om Agnaye Kaumāra tejase namah,” “Om Agnaye Viśvamukhāya namah,” “Om Agnaye Devamukhāya namah” and considering the forms to hold Śakti and Svastik, worship them. Then consider Indra and the other Lokapālas (Regents of the several quarters) situated in the east, southeast, and so on together with their weapons, the thunderbolt and the other weapons, and thus worship them.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

ततः सुक्रसुवसंस्थानायावज्यसंकामा एव च ।

कृत्वा होमं ततः कुर्पाल्सृष्णावादय वे पृतम् ॥ 107 ॥

दक्षिणापद्धनपाणान्तु वद्द्रैर्दिक्षणलोचने ।

जुङ्गयादनये स्वाहोत्येवे वे वामातोद्ञानः ॥ 108 ॥

सोमाय स्वाहिति मध्याप्तुतमादाय सत्तम् ।

अनौषोभाप्यां स्वाहिति मध्यनेत्र हेजन्तः ॥ 109 ॥

O Nārada! Next purify the sacrificial ladles, etc., śruk, śruva, etc., and ghee; then, taking ghee by śruva, go on with the Homa ceremony. Divide the

Book XII Chapter VII

ghee of the Ajyasthālī (the vessel in which the ghee for the Homa purposes is kept) in three parts; take ghee from the right side and saying “Om Agnaye Svāhā” offer oblations on the right eye of the Agni; take ghee from the left side and saying “Om Somāye Svāhā” offer oblations on the left eye of the Agni; take ghee from the centre and saying, “Om Agnisomābhyām Svāhā,” offer oblations on the central eye of the Agni.

पुनर्वसिंहपाणागत् घृतमादाय वै मुखे ।

अनये विद्यकृतं सवाहत्यनैवेलं हुनेत्तः ॥ 110 ॥

सताराधिव्यहितिथपबुळुवाद्य साधकः ।

जुह्याद्यरिनमंत्रेण विजरांं तु ततः परम् ॥ 111 ॥

Take ghee again from the right side and saying "Om Agnaye Sviṣṭakṛte Svāḥa" offer oblations to the mouth of the Agni. Then the devotee is to repeat "Om Bhuh Svāḥa," "Om Bhuvah Svāḥa," "Om Svah Svāḥa" and offer thrice the oblations; next he is to offer oblations thrice with the Agni mantra.

ततस्तु प्रणवैनैवाप्यशवष्टी धृतावृतीः ।

गभधानादिसंस्काकृते तु जुड्याम्नु ॥ ११२ ॥

After this, O Muni! for impregnation and each of the ten Sarinskāras, natal-ceremony, tonsure, etc., he is to repeat the Pranava Mantra and offer the eight oblations of ghee on each occasion. Now hear of the tenfold Sarinskāras:

गभधानं पूसवनं सीमतोनयनं ततः ।

जातकर्म नामकर्मायुपनिष्क्रमणं तथा ॥ ११३ ॥

अश्राणत तथा चूढ़ा ततनंधतलथैव च ।

महानान्ये जतं पड़ाणतथोपनिवदं जतम् ॥ ११४ ॥

गोदानोहाद्रका: प्रोत्ता:संस्काना: श्रुतिघौदिता:।

ततः शिवं पार्वती च पूजयित्वा विसर्जयेत् ॥ 115 ॥

(1) Impregnation, (2) Purisavan (a ceremony performed as soon as a woman perceives the foetus to be quick), (3) Simantonnayana (a ceremony observed by women in the fourth, sixth or the eighth month of pregnancy), (4) Jāta Karma (ceremony at the birth of a child), (5) Nāmakarana, (naming the child), (6) Niškramāna (a ceremony performed when a new-born child is first taken out of the house

into the open air usually in the fourth month), (7) Annaprāsana (when the rice is put in the mouth of the child), (8) Cūdākaraṇa (the ceremony of the first tonsure), (9) Upanayana (holding the sacrificial thread; (10) Godāna and Udvāha (gift of cows and marriage). These are stated in the Vedas. Next worship Śiva Pārvatī, the Father and the Mother of Agni and take leave of them.

जुहुयात्यझ सभियो वहिमूझिश्य साधकः ।

पशुदावरणानां चाध्येकैकामागृति हुन्ते ॥ 116 ॥

भृतं सृष्णि समादाय चतुर्वर्णे सूवेण च ।

पिधाय तां तु तैसेव मुने तिहरिज्ञानसे ॥ 117 ॥

वीषडैतेन मनुना वहैस्तु जुहुआततः ।

महागणेशमान्येण जुहुदादाहृतौर्गेच ॥ 118 ॥

Next in the name of Agni, offer five Samidhas (fuel) soaked in ghee and offer one oblation of ghee to each of the Āvaraṇa Devatās.

Then take the ghee by the Śruk and covering it with the Śruva, offer ten oblations to Agni, and Mahā Ganeśa with mantras ending in Vauṣat, The Mahā Ganeśa mantras run as follows: (1) Om, Om Svāhā (2) Om Śrīm Svāhā, (3) Om Śrīm Hrim Svāhā, (4) Om Śrīm Hrim Klim Svāhā, (5) Om Śrīm Hrim Klim Glaum Svāhā, (6) Om Śrīm Hrim Klim Glaum Gaṃ Svāhā, (7) Om Śrīm Hrim Klim Glaum ityantaḥ Gaṃ Ganapataye Svāhā, (8) Om Vara Varada ityantaḥ Svāhā, (9) Sarvajanam me Vaśam ityanto Svāhā and (10) Ānaya Svāhā ityantaḥ.

वह्री पीठं समभ्यच्छं देयमंत्रस्य देयतम् ।

वह्री ध्याला तु तद्वरे पड्बिशितसंख्या ॥ 119 ॥

मूल्यानेण जुड्याद्रवैकीकरणाय च ।

वहिद्वेतनोरकंच भावयजात्मना सह ॥ 120 ॥

Next perform in the Agni the Piṭha Pūjā and meditate on the Deya Iṣtadeva and worship him. Next offer twenty-five oblations to his face, repeating the Mūla Mantra.

एकीभृतं भावयेतु ततसु साधकोतमः ।

घड़ां देवतानां च जुड्यादातृति: पृथक् ॥ 121 ॥

एकादशैव जुडुवादाहुतीर्णन्सितम ।

एनेन नाडीसंधानं बहिद्वेलावेणौने ॥ 122 ॥

Then think of that and Agni Deva as one and the same, and then again as one with Âtman. Then offer oblations to each of the Śaḍanga Devatās separately. Then search for the Nādis (veins) of Vahni and Āṣta Devatā and offer twenty one oblations.

एकैककमयोगेनायावृषीनीं तथैव च ।

एकैककमयोगेन घृतेन जुड्वायानुने ॥ 123 ॥

ततः कल्पोकन्न्यैस्तु जुड्वायद्वा तिलैः ।

देवतापुलभेजण गजातंकसहकर्ण ॥ 124 ॥

Then offer dolitons to each of the two Devatās separately. Next offer one thousand and eight oblations to the Iśta Deva with Til soaked in ghee or with the materials enumerated in the Kalpa.

एवं हुता ताते देवीं सन्तुहां भाववम्भुने ।

तथैवावृदितेबीँथ बढ़ायाएं देवत अघि ॥ 125 ॥

ततः शिष्यं च सुस्तां कृतसंध्यादिक्रियम् ।

वस्त्रव्यतुं स्वर्णाधरणेन सम्पतिजन् ॥ 126 ॥

O Muni! Thus finishing the Homa ceremony, consider that the Iṣta Deva (the Devi), Agni and the Āvaraṇa Deities are all satisfied. Then, by the command of the Guru, the disciple is to take his bath and perform his Sandhyā, etc., and put on new clothes (cloth and cādar) and golden ornaments.

कर्मडलु कर्णूद्यै कुष्डस्यांतिकामनयेत् ।

नमकृत्य ततः शिया गृह्नध्य समासदः ॥ 127 ॥

कुलदेवे नमकृत्य विश्तेनाव शिद्धे ।

He is to come then, to the Kunda with Kamandalu in his hand and with a pure heart. He is to bow down to the elders and superiors seated in the assembly and take his seat in his Āśana.

गुरुस्तस्तु तं तिथ्यं कृपादुख्य विलेकोंद् ॥ 128 ॥

तचैत्यं निजे देहे भावयेतसंगतं स्विति ।

ततः : शिष्यन्तुस्वानामध्यनां परिशोधनम् ॥ 1 2 9 ॥

कुवानु होमाते विद्धान्व्यवृष्यलोकान्त ।

येन जायेत शुक्रात्या योग्यो देवाद्युनुहे ॥ 130 ॥

शीनारायण उताच

तनौ ध्यायेतु शिष्यस्य घडधानः क्रमेण तु ।

Śrī Guru Deva then would look at the disciple

with kind eyes and think the Caitanya of the disciple within his own (the Guru's) body. Then the Guru Deva would perform the Homa and look at the disciple with a divine gaze, so that the disciple becomes pure-hearted and able to get the favours of the Devas. Thus the Guru must purify all the Adhvas (the passages) of the body of the disciple.

पादायमुं कलाधानमयी तत्त्वाकं पुनः ॥ 131 ॥

नाभी तु भुवताब्न वर्णाधानं तथा हृदि ।

पदाधावनं तथा भाले मंत्राधावनं तु मूधनि ॥ 132 ॥

शिष्यं युगंश्नि कुर्वन्ति लिलेत्याज्यपरितृष्टेः ।

गोधायाम्यमुधानं स्वाहिति मनुषुच्चन्त ॥ 133 ॥

तादाकों जुड्याद्ध्वारां प्रत्यधवेय नेह ।

पड्यदानस्ततांसु लीना-बहुपीण भावयेत् ॥ 134 ॥

Then the Guru is to touch respectively the feet, generative organ, navel, heart, forehead, and the head of the disciple with Kūrca (a bundle of Kuśa grass) and til soaked in ghee, in his left hand and offer at each touch eight oblations, repeating the mantra “Om adya Śiṣyasya Kalādhvānam Śodhayāmi Svāhā, etc.” Thus the Guru would purify Kalādhva (in the feet) Tattvādhva (in the generative organ), Bhūvanādhva (in the navel), Varnādhva (in the heart), Padādhva (in the forehead) and Mantrādhva (on the head), the six Adhvās and think these all to be dissolved in Brahmā (Brahmalīna).

पुनरूपाद्वेतस्ताम्यतृष्टिपातेथ वै गुरुः ।

आतमीक्षितं तद्येतान्यं पुनः तिष्ठे तु योजयेत् ॥ 135 ॥

पूर्णहिति ततो हुत्वा देवतां कलगे नयेत् ।

पुनव्यहितिभट्रूला वढ्रेशगहुतीतस्वा ॥ 136 ॥

Then, again, the Guru would think all these to be re-born from Brahmā and transfer the Caitanya of the disciple that was in him to the disciple. Then the Guru must offer Pūrnāhuti and consider the Īsta Devatā, placed in the fire by the visarjana mantra for the Homa purposes, as entered into the waterjar.

एकैकगो गुरुदेवा विसुञ्जद्धिमानयिन ।

ततः ऋष्यस्य नेत्रे तु बध्नीयाढ्राससा गुरुः ॥ 137 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

