[Ch 14 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya said: O Bhagavan! Maharsi Vasistha was the mind-born son of Brahma; how is it then that you have named him as Maitra Vārunī." Is it that he got this name by some action or by some Gunas? Kindly tell me the origin of this name, O Best of speakers!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya said :-- “O Bhagavān! Maharṣi Vaśiṣṭha was the mind-born son of Brahmā; how is it then that you have named him as Maitrā-Vāruṇī. Is it that he got this name by some action or by some Guṇas? Kindly tell me the origin of this name, O Best of speakers!”

[Ch 14 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! It is quite true that illustrious Vasiṣṭha was the noble son of Brahmā but he had to quit that body due to the curse of the King Nīmi and he had to take a second body from Mitrā Varunā; hence he is named in this world as Maitrā-Varunī. Śrimaddevīthāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! It is quite true that the illustrious Vaśiṣṭha was the noble son of Brahmā but he had to quit that body due to the curse of the King Nimi and he had to take a second body from Mitrā Varuṇa; hence he is named in this world as Maitrā-Vāruṇī.

[Ch 14 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King said: O Bhagavan! How was it that the religious Vasisṭṭha, the best of the Munis, the son of Brahmā was cursed by the King? Oh! The Munis have to suffer the dreadful curse of Kṣatriya kings! This seems very wonderful to me. O Knower of Dharma! Why did that king curse the innocent Muni? I am very curious to hear the cause of this; kindly tell me the cause of the curse.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King said :-- “O Bhagavān! How was it that the religious Vaśiṣṭha, the best of the Munis, the son of Brahmā was cursed by the King? Oh! The Munis have to suffer the dreadful curse of Kṣattriya kings! This seems very wonderful to me. O Knower of Dharma! Why did that king curse the innocent Muni? I am very curious to hear the cause of this; kindly tell me the

[Ch 14 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! I told you already in particular all the causes of these. This Sarisāra is pervaded by the three Gunas of Māyā, Sattva, Raja and Tama.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! I told you already in particular all the causes of these. This Samsāra is pervaded by the three Guṇas of Māyā, Sāttva, Rāja and Tāma.

[Ch 14 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whether the kings practise their Dharma or the ascetics practise their tapas all their actions are interpenctrated with these Gunas; therefore they can not shine so brightly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whether the kings practise their Dharma or the ascetics practise their tapas, all their actions are interpenetrated with these Guṇas; therefore they cannot shine so brightly.

[Ch 14 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Kings, Munis performed very severe penances and austerities under the influence of lust, anger, greed and Ahanikāra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Kings, Munis performed very severe penances and austerities under the influence of lust, anger, greed and Ahamkāra.

[Ch 14 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! All, whether they be the Ksatriyas or the Brāhmanas, who perform their sacrifices overpowered with this Rajo Guna, really, none of them performs these actions guided by Sattva Guna.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! All, whether they be the Kṣattriyas or the Brāhmaṇas, who perform their sacrifices overpowered with this Rājo Guṇa, really, none of them performs these actions guided by Sāttva Guṇa.

[Ch 14 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King Nimi; was cursed by the Rsi and the Rsi was cursed again by the King Nimi; thus they met with greater clamities and painful sufferings, the fruits from the hands of the powerful Fate.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King Nimi was cursed by the Ṛṣi and the Ṛṣi was cursed again by the King Nimi; thus they met with greater calamities and painful sufferings, the fruits from the hands of the powerful Fate.

[Ch 14 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! In this world of the three Gunas, it is very difficult for the beings to get the Dravya Śuddhi; Kriyā Śuddhi, and the pure effulgent Citta Śuddhi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! In this world of the three Guṇas, it is very difficult for the beings to get the Dravya Śuddhi, Kriyā Śuddhi, and the pure effulgent Chitta Śuddhi,

[Ch 14 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Know this as the influence wielded by the Highest Śakti, the Mother of this Universe. Nobody is able to overstep it; but he, whom She favours, can cross in a moment this world, bounded by the three Gunas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Know this as the influence wielded by the Highest Śakti, the Mother of this Universe. Nobody is able to overstep it; but he, whom She favours, can cross in a moment this world, bounded by the three Guṇas.

[Ch 14 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What more can be said than the fact that Hari, Hara, and Brahmā and the other Gods cannot free themselves without Her grace.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What more can be said than the fact that Hari, Hara, and Brahmā and the other Gods cannot free themselves without Her grace.

[Ch 14 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Moreover, the sinners like Satyavrata and others become free when Her Grace comes upon them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Moreover, the sinners like Satyavrata and others become free when Her Grace comes upon them.

[Ch 14 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nobody in these three worlds can know what reigns in Her mind; again, this is also a certain fact that She gets Herself bound by Her own will to Her devotees.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nobody in these three worlds can know what reigns in Her mind; again, this is also a certain fact that She gets Herself bound by Her own will to Her devotees.

[Ch 14 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore it is extremely desirable that one should have recourse to Sattvikī devotion for the complete removal of faults and sins.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore it is extremely desirable that one should have recourse to Sāttvikī devotion for the complete removal of faults and sins.

[Ch 14 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And as the devotion with attachment and vanity is always injurious to men, therefore it is highly beneficial to quit it; there is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And as the devotion with attachment and vanity is always injurious to men, therefore it is highly beneficial to quit it; there is no doubt in this.

[Ch 14 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! There was a king named Nimi, born of the family of Iksyaku. He was beautiful, well qualified, virtuous, truthful, charitable, endearing to his people, a sacrificer, of pure conduct and manners, ready to govern his subjects, intelligent and endowed with knowledge.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! There was a king named Nimi, born of the family of Ikṣāku. He was beautiful, well qualified, virtuous, truthful, charitable, endearing to his people, a sacrificer, of pure conduct and manners, ready to govern his subjects, intelligent and endowed with knowledge.

[Ch 14 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► For the benefit of the Brāhmaṇas, that high-souled king established a city named Jayantupur in close vicinity to their hermitage of Gautama.
NEW CORR ENG ──► For the benefit of the Brāhmaṇas, that high-souled king established a city named Jayantupur in close vicinity to the hermitage of Gautama.

[Ch 14 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus some time passed when this Rājasik idea arose in his mind that “I will perform a sacrifice extending for a good many years when I will give exhorbitant Dakṣinās (remunerations to the priests and Brāhmins).”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus some time passed when this Rājasik idea arose in his mind that “I will perform a sacrifice extending for a good many years when I will give exhorbitant Dakṣiṇās (remunerations to the priests and Brāhmins).”

[Ch 14 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Getting permission from his own father Iksyāku, he began to collect all the ingredients necessary for the sacrifice, as advised by the high-souled persons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Getting permission from his own father Ikṣāku, he began to collect all the ingredients necessary for the sacrifice, as advised by the high-souled persons.

[Ch 14 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He invited the all-knowing Munis and ascetics, versed in the Vedas and in conducting sacrifices, e.g., Bhrgu, Agirā, Vāmadeva, Gautama, Vasiṣṭha, Pulastya, Ricka, Pulaha, Kratu and others, all well-versed in the Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He invited the all-knowing Munis and ascetics, versed in the Vedas and in conducting sacrifices, e.g., Bhṛgu, Aṅgirā, Vāmadeva, Gautama, Vaśiṣṭha, Pulastya, Richika, Pulaha, Kratu and others, all well-versed in the Vedas.

[Ch 14 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then that religious King Nimi, collecting all the materials necessary for sacrifice worshipped his own Guru Vasistha and then spoke to him (the Guru) with great humility, O Best of Munis! I will perform a sacrifice; kindly perform this my sacrificial act; you are my Guru and therefore you know everything; so do this sacrifice for me. All the articles for this purpose are brought and cleansed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then that religious King Nimi, collecting all the materials necessary for sacrifice worshipped his own Guru Vaśiṣṭha and then spoke to him (the Guru) with great humility. O Best of Munis! I will perform a sacrifice; kindly perform this my sacrificial act; you are my Guru and therefore you know everything; so do this sacrifice for me. All the articles for this purpose are brought and cleansed.

[Ch 14 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Guru! Know that for five thousand years I mean to be engaged in this sacrifice, this is my Sankalpa (will). I will worship the Goddess Ambikā in this sacrifice and for Her satisfaction I am arranging for it according to the prescribed rules. Hearing the King Nimi's words, Vasistha said: "O Best of Kings! Indra, the King of the Devas, has already selected me for his sacrificial ceremony.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Guru! Know that for five thousand years I mean to be engaged in this sacrifice, this is my Saṅkalpa (will). I will worship the Goddess Ambikā in this sacrifice and for Her satisfaction I am arranging for it according to the prescribed rules. Hearing the King Nimi’s words, Vaśiṣṭha said :-- “O best of Kings! Indra, the King of the Devas, has already selected me for his sacrificial ceremony.

[Ch 14 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now Indra is ready to do the sacrifice for there propitiation of the Highest Śakti and I have initiated him for five hundred years.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now Indra is ready to do the sacrifice for the propitiation of the Highest Śakti and I have initiated him for five hundred years.

[Ch 14 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O King! You will have to wait till I complete the Indra's Yajña. After fully completing all his works, I will come here. Therefore, O King! Wait till then.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O King! You will have to wait till I complete the Indra’s Yajñā. After fully completing all his works, I will come here. Therefore, O King! Wait till then.”

[Ch 14 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King said: "O Best of Munis! I have already invited other Munis for this sacrifice and have collected all the materials; how, then can I wait for you? O Brāhmaṇa! You are the foremost of those versed in the Vedas and you are the family Guru of the noble Iksvāku.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King said :-- “O Best of Munis! I have already invited other Munis for this sacrifice and have collected all the materials; how, then, can I wait for you? O Brāhmaṇa! You are the foremost of those versed in the Vedas and you are the family Guru of the noble Ikṣāku.

[Ch 14 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How is it, then, avoiding my work you are ready to go elsewhere O Best of Brāhmins! Under the uncontrollable greed of wealth you have lost all senses and you are ready to go away without doing my work. This does not behave you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► How is it, then, avoiding my work you are ready to go elsewhere O Best of Brāhmins! Under the uncontrollable greed of wealth you have lost all senses and you are ready to go away without doing my work. This does not behove you.”

[Ch 14 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Though thus tempted by the King Nimi, the Rṣi Vasiṣṭha went to the Indra's sacrifice. The King, too, became absent minded and selected for the sacrifice the Rṣi Gautama.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Though thus tempted by the King Nimi, the Ṛṣi Vaśiṣṭha went to the Indra’s sacrifice. The King, too, became absent-minded and selected for the sacrifice the Ṛṣi Gautama.

[Ch 14 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He then commenced his sacrificial ceremony close to the ocean by the side of the Himalayan range and gave profusely the Dakṣinās.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He then commenced his sacrificial ceremony close to the ocean by the side of the Himālayān range and gave profusely the Dakṣiṇās.

[Ch 14 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King Nimi was engaged in this sacrificial act for five thousand years. In this the Rttvis (pricests) were worshipped with sufficient wealth and cows; they were extremely glad.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King Nimi was engaged in this sacrificial act for five thousand years. In this the Rittviks (priests) were worshipped with sufficient wealth and cows; they were extremely glad.

[Ch 14 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then, when the five hundred years extending sacrifice of Indra was completed, the Rsi Vasistha came to see the King Nimi's sacrifice and waited there to see the King.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then, when the five hundred years extending sacrifice of Indra was completed, the Ṛṣi Vaśiṣṭha came to see the King Nimi’s sacrifice and waited there

[Ch 14 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king was then asleep; so the servants did not awake him from his sleep; and the King did not come to the Rşi. Feeling insult at this, the Maharşi Vasiṣṭha became infuriated with rage.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king was then asleep; so the servants did not awake him from his sleep; and the King did not come to the Ṛṣi. Feeling insult at this, the Maharṣi Vaśiṣṭha became infuriated with rage.

[Ch 14 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Not seeing the King, he become very angry; and, subject to this, he cursed the King; when I am your lifelong Guru, especially when I prohibited you and you have forsaken me and selected another Guru and by your sheer force you are initiated, then be devoid of your body. Let your body fall off to-day.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Not seeing the King, he became very angry; and, subject to this, he cursed the King, When I am your lifelong Guru, especially when I prohibited you and you have forsaken me and selected another Guru and by your sheer force you are initiated, then be devoid of your body. Let your body fall off today.

[Ch 14 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: The King's attendants, hearing thus the curse given by Vasiṣṭha went to the King, instantly awoke him from his sleep and informed him that the Rṣi Vasiṣṭha not seeing him, became very angry. The King Nimi, quite sinless, went then to the angry Vasiṣṭha and humbly spoke to him the following reasonable words, pregnant with meaning.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- The King’s attendants, hearing thus the curse given by Vaśiṣṭha to the King, instantly awoke him from his sleep and informed him that the Ṛṣi Vaśiṣṭha not seeing you, became very angry. The King Nimi, quite sinless, went then to the angry Vaśiṣṭha and humbly spoke to him the following reasonable words, pregnant with meaning.

[Ch 14 Verse 44-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Knower of Dharma! I am your Yajamāna; though I repeatedly requested you to perform my sacrifice, yet you quitted me out of the covetuousness and went somewhere else. I cannot be charged with any fault. You are the foremost of Brāhmīns; and knowing that contentment is the substance of your Dharma, you did not feel ashamed to do this blameable act.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Knower of Dharma! I am your Yajamāna; though I repeatedly requested you to perform my sacrifice, yet you quitted me out of the covetousness and went somewhere else. I cannot be charged with any fault. You are the foremost of Brāhmins; and knowing that contentment is the substance of your Dharma, you did not feel ashamed to do this blameable act.

[Ch 14 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You are the son of Brahmā; and, being versed in the Vedas and Vedāṅgas, you are yet unaware of the subtle and very difficult nature of the Brāhminic religion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You are the son of Brahmā; and, being versed in the Vedas and Vedāṅgas, you are yet unaware of the subtle and very difficult nature of the Brāhminic religion.

[Ch 14 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now you want to cast your own fault on my shoulders and you are trying in vain to curse me. Anger is more to be blamed than Cāndāla!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now you want to cast your own fault on my shoulders and you are trying in vain to curse me. Anger is more to be blamed than Cāṇḍāla!

[Ch 14 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The wise men should overcome it by all means. When you, infuriated with rage, have been able to curse me for nothing, then I now curse you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The wise men should overcome it by all means. When you, infuriated with rage, have been able to curse me for nothing, then I now curse you,

[Ch 14 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Let your this body, inflamed with anger, drop off." O King! Thus the King cursed the Muni and the Muni cursed the King; and both of them were, therefore, very sorry.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “Let your this body, inflamed with anger, drop off.” O King! Thus the King cursed the Muni and the Muni cursed the King; and both of them were, therefore, very sorry.

[Ch 14 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vasisṭha then became troubled with cares and took shelter with Brahmā and informing him about the great curse given by the King Nimi said: "Father! The King has cursed me saying "Let your body fall off today. Now the great trouble due to the falling off of the body has arisen. What am I to do now?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vaśiṣṭha then became troubled with cares and took shelter with Brahmā and informing him about the great curse given by the King Nimi said :-- Father! The King has cursed me saying, “Let your body fall off today. Now the great trouble due to the falling off of the body has arisen. What am to do now?

[Ch 14 Verse 52-53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Father! Kindly tell me from whom shall I take my birth and take such means as I can get a body like what I have now.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Father! Kindly tell me from whom shall I take my birth and take such means as I can get a body like what I have now.

[Ch 14 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Also by Your unbounded power, do so that I can retain the knowledge in that body as I have at present; You are fully competent to do this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Also by Your unbounded power, do so that I can retain the knowledge in that body as I have at present; You are fully competent to do this.”

[Ch 14 Verse 55-57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Hearing thus the words of Vasisṭha, Brahmā spoke thus to dear son: Go and enter into the Tejas (essence) of Mitrā Varuna and remain contented; then you will get, in due time, a body not born of any womb and you will be again religious, truthful, knower of the Vedas, all-knowing and worshipped by all; there is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Hearing thus the words of Vaśiṣṭha, Brahmā spoke thus to his dear son :-- Go and enter into the Tejas (essence) of Mitrā Varuṇa and remain contented; then you will get, in due time, a body not born of any womb and you will be again religious, truthful, knower of the Vedas, all-knowing and worshipped by all; there is no doubt in this.

[Ch 14 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Brahmā said this, the Maharṣi Vasisṭha bowed down to the Grand Sirc and circumambulating him, went to the abode of Varuna.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Brahmā said this, the Maharṣi Vaśiṣṭha bowed down to the Grand Sire, and circumambulating him, went to the abode of Varuṇa.

[Ch 14 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the quitted his excellent body; and, with his subtle body, the part of his Jiva entered into the body of Mitrā Varuna.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then he quitted his excellent body; and, with his subtle body, the part of his Jīva, entered into the body of Mitrā Varuṇa.

[Ch 14 Verse 60-63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then once on a time Urvaśī, exquisitely beautiful and lovely, surrounded by her comrades, went wilfully into the abode of Varuna. Mitrā-Varuṇa, the two Devas became very passionate to see that Apsarā (the celestial nymph) endowed with youth and beauty and being enchanted with the arrows of cupid, and, being senseless, addressed to the Deva Kanyā Urvaśī, beautiful in all her parts, thus: "O Lovely One! Seeing you, we are very much troubled with the arrows of cupid; O Beautiful One! Select us and remain and enjoy here at your pleasure."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then once on a time Urvaśī, exquisitely beautiful and lovely, surrounded by her comrades, went wilfully into the abode of Varuṇa. Mitrā-Varuṇa, the two Devas became very passionate to see that Apsarā (the celestial nymph) endowed with youth and beauty and being enchanted with the arrows of cupid, and, being senseless, addressed to the Deva Kanyā Urvaśī, beautiful in all her parts, thus :-- “O Lovely One! Seeing you, we are very much troubled with the arrows of cupid; O Beautiful One! Select us and remain and enjoy here at your pleasure.”

[Ch 14 Verse 64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When they said thus, Urvaśi became attached to them; and, under their control, began to stay in the house of Mitrā Varuna.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When they said thus, Urvaśī became attached to them; and, under their control, began to stay in the house of Mitrā Varuṇa.

[Ch 14 Verse 65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Urvaśī began to remain there, strongly attached to them, the semen of Mitrā Varuna dropped in an uncovered jar.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Urvaśī began to remain there, strongly attached to them, the semen of Mitrā Varuṇa dropped in an uncovered jar.

[Ch 14 Verse 66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And the two beautiful sons of the Rāsis were born out of that; Agasti was the first child and Vasistha the second. Thus, out of the semen of Mitrā Varuna, the two ascetics were born.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And the two beautiful sons of the Ṛṣis were born out of that; Agasti was the first child and Vaśiṣṭha the second. Thus, out of the semen of Mitrā Varuṇa, the two ascetics were born.

[Ch 14 Verse 67]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The first Agasti turned out a great ascetic in his childhood and resorted to forest; Iksvāku the best of Kings, selected Vasisṭha as his family priest.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The first Agasti turned out a great ascetic in his childhood and resorted to forest; Ikṣāku the best of Kings, selected Vaśiṣṭha as his family priest.

[Ch 14 Verse 68]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Iksvāku, the best of Kings, nursed him for the welfare of his own line; the more so, because to know that he was the Muni Vasiṣṭha; and thus he was very pleased with him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Ikṣāku, the best of Kings, nursed him for the welfare of his own line; the more so, because to know that he was the Muni Vaśiṣṭha; and thus he was very pleased with him.

[Ch 14 Verse 69]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya! Thus I have described to you about the getting of another body by Vasistha, due to the curse of Nimi, and have also described his re-birth in Mitrā-Varuṇa's family. Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the birth of Vasistha from Mitrā Varuna in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya! Thus I have described to you about the getting of another body by Vaśiṣṭha, due to the curse of Nimi, and have also described his re-birth in Mitrā-Varuṇa’s family. Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the birth of Vaśiṣṭha from Mitrā Varuṇa in Śrī Mad Devi Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
