CHAPTER XIV

On the Birth of Vasisṭha from Mitrā Varuṇa

जनमेजय उवाच

मैत्रावक्षिणित्यूर्ते नाम तस्य मुने: कथम् ।


विशिष्य सहभागा ब्रह्मास्तनुजस्य ह ॥1 ॥

किमसौ कर्मतों नाम प्राप्तवान्युपालनस्तथा ।

ब्रृहि मे वदतां श्रेष्ठ कारणं तस्य नाममम् ॥ 2 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Bhagavan! Maharsi Vasistha was the mind-born son of Brahma; how is it then that you have named him as Maitra Vārunī." Is it that he got this name by some action or by some Gunas? Kindly tell me the origin of this name, O Best of speakers!

व्यास उवाच

निवोधे नृपतिश्रेष्ठ बसिष्ठो ब्रहण: सुतः ।

निश्रणापातनुं त्यकत्वा पुर्जनाती महावृत्ति: ॥ 3 ॥

मिंत्राकरणायोर्यमातन्यातनाय विश्रुतम् ।

मैत्राकरणिरित्यस्थितलोकें सर्वत्र पार्थिव ॥ 4 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! It is quite true that illustrious Vasiṣṭha was the noble son of Brahmā but he had to quit that body due to the curse of the King Nīmi and he had to take a second body from Mitrā Varunā; hence he is named in this world as Maitrā-Varunī.

Śrimaddevīthāgavatam

राजोबाच

क्रमाच्छयत: स ध्यांत्या राजा बढ्धात्माजो भूति:।

चिवप्रेमतभूर्नि लनगो राजा: शापो3तिदाक्ण: ॥ 5 ॥

अनागासं भूर्नि राजा किममती शणतवानुभे ।

कारणं ववं धर्मज तत्स शापस्य मुक्तत: ॥ 6 ॥

The King said: O Bhagavan! How was it that the religious Vasisṭṭha, the best of the Munis, the son of Brahmā was cursed by the King? Oh! The Munis have to suffer the dreadful curse of Kṣatriya kings! This seems very wonderful to me. O Knower of Dharma! Why did that king curse the innocent Muni? I am very curious to hear the cause of this; kindly tell me the cause of the curse.

ध्यास उवाच

कारणं तु मया प्रोक्त तव पूर्वं विनिश्छितम् ।

संसारोत्रं विभिन्धितो राजन्मायागृपे: किल । ७ ।।

Vyāsa said: O King! I told you already in particular all the causes of these. This Sarisāra is pervaded by the three Gunas of Māyā, Sattva, Raja and Tama.

धर्मं करोतु घपालछान्तु तापासतपः ।

सर्वेधां तु युणीर्विद्धे नोज्जलं तद्वदेविद्ध ।। 8 ॥

Whether the kings practise their Dharma or the ascetics practise their tapas all their actions are interpenctrated with these Gunas; therefore they can not shine so brightly.

कार्यक्रोधायिपभूताश्र राजानो भुभवत्शा ।

लोभात्कारसंयुक्तश्रान्ति दृशं तयः ॥ 9 ॥

The Kings, Munis performed very severe penances and austerities under the influence of lust, anger, greed and Ahanikāra.

भवन्ति क्षत्रिया राजऋजोगुपममावृता: ।

ब्राह्माणतु तथा राजऋ कोप्रि सचलसंयुतः ॥ 10 ॥

O King! All, whether they be the Ksatriyas or the Brāhmanas, who perform their sacrifices overpowered with this Rajo Guna, really, none of them performs these actions guided by Sattva Guna.

क्रधिणास्त्री सिंिः शणसतेन शणो मुनि: पुनः।

दुःखादुदुःखतरं प्राप्तावृषाबिप विधर्वेलात् ॥ ११ ॥

The King Nimi; was cursed by the Rsi and the Rsi was cursed again by the King Nimi; thus they met with greater clamities and painful sufferings, the fruits from the hands of the powerful Fate.

प्रत्यगुद्धिकः द्विकार्याद्धमैनसः शुद्धिकजल्ला ।

दुर्लैभा प्राणिनां धृप संसारे त्रिगुणात्मके ॥ 12 ॥

O King! In this world of the three Gunas, it is very difficult for the beings to get the Dravya Śuddhi; Kriyā Śuddhi, and the pure effulgent Citta Śuddhi.

परणाकिष्ठभावोर्धे नोल्लंधः केनचित्ववित्।

यस्यानुग्रहमिच्छेता मोचयलेवे तं क्षणात् ॥ 13 ॥

O King! Know this as the influence wielded by the Highest Śakti, the Mother of this Universe. Nobody is able to overstep it; but he, whom She favours, can cross in a moment this world, bounded by the three Gunas.

महान्तोपि न मुच्यते हरिच्छाहरादयः ।

पामता अर्पि मुच्यते यथा सत्यद्वितादयः ॥ 14 ॥

What more can be said than the fact that Hari, Hara, and Brahmā and the other Gods cannot free themselves without Her grace.

तस्यान्तु हृदयं कोर्पि न वैति भूवनये ।

तथापि भक्तव्येयं भवत्येव सुनिश्छान् ॥ 15 ॥

Moreover, the sinners like Satyavrata and others become free when Her Grace comes upon them.

तस्मात्तद्धिकासयेता दोषिन्मैलनाय च ।

रागदंभाविदृष्णा चेसा भक्तिन्त्रिणी भवेत् ॥ 16 ॥

Nobody in these three worlds can know what reigns in Her mind; again, this is also a certain fact that She gets Herself bound by Her own will to Her devotees.

इक्ष्वाकुकुलसभ्युते निमिनीय नराधियः ।

रूपवानुणसम्यजो धर्मजो लोकेंत्रकः ॥ 17 ॥

Therefore it is extremely desirable that one should have recourse to Sattvikī devotion for the complete removal of faults and sins.

सत्यवादी द्वापरी याजको ज्ञानवश्छूँचः ।

ब्राद्यासनयो धीमान्यजापालनतः ॥ 18 ॥

And as the devotion with attachment and vanity

Book VI Chapter XIV

is always injurious to men, therefore it is highly beneficial to quit it; there is no doubt in this.

पुरं निवेशगायास गौतमाश्रमसिद्धो ।

जयं तु पुरसंत्र च बाङ्पाणानां हिताय सः ॥ १९ ॥

बृद्धस्तस्य समुद्वधा यजेवमिति राजसी ।

यजेन बकुकालेन दक्षिणासंयुतेन च ॥ 20 ॥

O King! There was a king named Nimi, born of the family of Iksyaku. He was beautiful, well qualified, virtuous, truthful, charitable, endearing to his people, a sacrificer, of pure conduct and manners, ready to govern his subjects, intelligent and endowed with knowledge.

इक्ष्वकृतु चितरं दृष्ट्या वप्रकावयि पार्थिव ।

कारयामास सम्भार यथोहिह्म महात्माभि: ॥ 21 ॥

For the benefit of the Brāhmaṇas, that high-souled king established a city named Jayantupur in close vicinity to their hermitage of Gautama.

भूगुर्भगिरसं चैव घामदेवं च गौतमम् ।

वसिष्टं च पुलस्यं च ऋषीसीय पुलतं क्रतुम् ॥ 22 ॥

Thus some time passed when this Rājasik idea arose in his mind that “I will perform a sacrifice extending for a good many years when I will give exhorbitant Dakṣinās (remunerations to the priests and Brāhmins).”

मृनीनामन्यायमास सर्वत्रान्वेधारगान् ।

यजविद्याप्रिणीश्छा तापसान् वेदवित्मान् ॥ 23 ॥

Getting permission from his own father Iksyāku, he began to collect all the ingredients necessary for the sacrifice, as advised by the high-souled persons.

राजा सम्पृतसभापः संपुज्य गुभात्मन्तः ।

वरिषहं प्राह धर्मजी विवेचेन सम्पतिजः ॥ 24 ॥

He invited the all-knowing Munis and ascetics, versed in the Vedas and in conducting sacrifices, e.g., Bhrgu, Agirā, Vāmadeva, Gautama, Vasiṣṭha, Pulastya, Ricka, Pulaha, Kratu and others, all well-versed in the Vedas.

यजेयं मुनिशाष्टूल याजयस्य कृपानिधे ।

गुरुस्ते सर्वैतनासि कार्य मे कुरु समाप्ति ॥ 25 ॥

यजीपकरणं सर्वे समानीते सुरंस्कृतम् ।

पत्रवर्षेसहंत्रे तु दीक्षां कान्टी मतिष्ठ मे ॥ 26 ॥

Then that religious King Nimi, collecting all the materials necessary for sacrifice worshipped his own Guru Vasistha and then spoke to him (the Guru) with great humility, O Best of Munis! I will perform a sacrifice; kindly perform this my sacrificial act; you are my Guru and therefore you know everything; so do this sacrifice for me. All the articles for this purpose are brought and cleansed.

यास्मिन् चमे समाराध्या देवी श्रीजगद्यिका ।

तन्गीत्यर्थमहं चरं कारीय विधिपूर्वकम् ॥ 27 ॥

तच्छूलासी निमेबांक्यं वसिषः प्राह भूपतिम् ।

इउरेणाई चृत: पूर्वे यथार्थ नृपसत्तम ॥ 28 ॥

O Guru! Know that for five thousand years I mean to be engaged in this sacrifice, this is my Sankalpa (will). I will worship the Goddess Ambikā in this sacrifice and for Her satisfaction I am arranging for it according to the prescribed rules. Hearing the King Nimi's words, Vasistha said: "O Best of Kings! Indra, the King of the Devas, has already selected me for his sacrificial ceremony.

पशास्थिकमयं कर्तुभुच्छ: पाकाशासन: ।

स दीक्षां गमितो देवः पत्रवर्षशतामिकाम् ॥ 29 ॥

Now Indra is ready to do the sacrifice for there propitiation of the Highest Śakti and I have initiated him for five hundred years.

तस्माच्यन्तरं तावरूतितालय पराधिव ।

इन्द्रसेवे समाप्तेउकृताकार्यं दिव्यस्ते: ॥ 30 ॥

आगमिष्याम्यहं राजतंलावचं प्रतिपालय ।

Therefore, O King! You will have to wait till I complete the Indra's Yajña. After fully completing all his works, I will come here. Therefore, O King! Wait till then.

राजोवाच

मया निमन्त्रताश्रान्ये मृनयो यत्राकाणत् ॥ 31 ॥

सम्भाता सम्भुतः सर्वे पालयामि कर्थ गुरो ।

इक्ष्वाकृणं कुले बढ्यानुरुस्त्वं वेदवित्यमः ॥ 32 ॥

The King said: "O Best of Munis! I have already invited other Munis for this sacrifice and have

collected all the materials; how, then can I wait for you? O Brāhmaṇa! You are the foremost of those versed in the Vedas and you are the family Guru of the noble Iksvāku.

कथं तत्कलाउढ़ा मे कार्यमृघतो गन्नुमारु। वै।

न ते भूकें डिजश्रेष्ठ यदुत्सृज्य मडं मम ॥ 33 ॥

गतालीय धरलोभेन लोगकृतिलचेतनः ।

निवारितोरी राजा त जगामेमूरयं गृतः ॥ 34 ॥

How is it, then, avoiding my work you are ready to go elsewhere O Best of Brāhmins! Under the uncontrollable greed of wealth you have lost all senses and you are ready to go away without doing my work. This does not behave you.

राजाप्रिय विमान भूत्वा गौतमं प्रत्यपूजयत् ।

इयाज हिमवत्थई सागरस्य समीपतः ॥ 35 ॥

दिश्षणा बहुता दत्ता विधेधेभी पढ़कर्भिपि ।

निमिना पडशास्ही दीक्षा तक कृता नृप ॥ 36 ॥

O King! Though thus tempted by the King Nimi, the Rṣi Vasiṣṭha went to the Indra's sacrifice. The King, too, became absent minded and selected for the sacrifice the Rṣi Gautama.

क्रलिज: पृक्तिजः कामं घर्मोर्भिमूंदायुतः ।

गक्रवत्रे समापेत तु पडवर्षशतामके ॥ 37 ॥

He then commenced his sacrificial ceremony close to the ocean by the side of the Himalayan range and gave profusely the Dakṣinās.

आजगाम वसिष्ठस्तु राज्ञ: सर्वदिष्ठस्या ।

आगात्य संस्थितसन्त्र दर्शनार्थ नृत्यय च ॥ 38 ॥

तदा राजा प्रमुतन्त्र निद्रायोपहतें घृष्णम् ।

नासौ प्रवोधितो घृत्यैनांगतन्तु मुनि नृपः ॥ 39 ॥

The King Nimi was engaged in this sacrificial act for five thousand years. In this the Rttvis (pricests) were worshipped with sufficient wealth and cows; they were extremely glad.

वसिष्यस्य तनो मन्यः प्रादुर्भूतोउद्यमानतः ।

अर्शनानामिस्तर चुकोप मुनिसनामः ॥ 40 ॥

Then, when the five hundred years extending sacrifice of Indra was completed, the Rsi Vasistha came to see the King Nimi's sacrifice and waited there to see the King.

शपां च दत्तवांतसमै राते मन्युवर्ग शत: ।

यस्मात्चं मां गुर्भ त्यक्त्वास्यनुर्भामात्मनः ॥ 4 1 ॥

The king was then asleep; so the servants did not awake him from his sleep; and the King did not come to the Rşi. Feeling insult at this, the Maharşi Vasiṣṭha became infuriated with rage.

दीक्षितोंपत्र बतानंद मावमद्वारा याधिव ।

वारितोपि मया तमाप्रिदुर्भरूतच पशिव्यसि ॥ 4 2 ॥

पतिवेदं शरीरं ते विदेहो भव भूपते ।

Not seeing the King, he become very angry; and, subject to this, he cursed the King; when I am your lifelong Guru, especially when I prohibited you and you have forsaken me and selected another Guru and by your sheer force you are initiated, then be devoid of your body. Let your body fall off to-day.

व्यास उवाच

इति तद्धावहतं श्रुवा राजस्तु परिचारका: ॥ 4 3 ॥

सखः प्रबोधायामासुर्पिनामुः प्रकोपितम् ।

Vyāsa said: The King's attendants, hearing thus the curse given by Vasiṣṭha went to the King, instantly awoke him from his sleep and informed him that the Rṣi Vasiṣṭha not seeing him, became very angry. The King Nimi, quite sinless, went then to the angry Vasiṣṭha and humbly spoke to him the following reasonable words, pregnant with meaning.

कुपितं तं समायान्य तथा विगतकल्यप: ॥ 44 ॥

उवाच बचनं रलक्षणं हेतुतपर्षे च युक्तिमत् ।

मम दोषो न धर्मत्र नतस्त्वं तृष्णयाकुल: ॥ 45 ॥

हित्वा मां वयानां वे प्राधितोजीप मया भुगम् ।

न लज्जसे द्विजश्छ कुला कर्म जुगुयितम् ॥ 46 ॥

O Knower of Dharma! I am your Yajamāna; though I repeatedly requested you to perform my sacrifice, yet you quitted me out of the covetuousness and went somewhere else. I cannot be charged with any fault. You are the foremost of Brāhmīns; and knowing that contentment is the substance of your Dharma, you did not feel ashamed to do this blameable act.

Book VI Chapter XIV

संतीपे ब्राह्मणश्रेश जानन्यमंत्य निश्रयम् ।

पुत्रोजस ब्रहणः साक्षातृदेवदोर्गविसमः ॥ 47 ॥

You are the son of Brahmā; and, being versed in the Vedas and Vedāṅgas, you are yet unaware of the subtle and very difficult nature of the Brāhminic religion.

न वेल्स विग्रधार्यस्य गर्ति सूक्ष्मां दुरत्यव्यम् ।

आत्मदोषं यमे श्रात्या घृषा मां शणुपुचतः ॥ 4 8 ॥

Now you want to cast your own fault on my shoulders and you are trying in vain to curse me. Anger is more to be blamed than Cāndāla!

त्याज्यसु सुर्जनैः कोध्यश्रांतादिधिको यतः ।

वृथा कोधपरितेन मयि शपः प्रपातितः ॥ 49 ॥

The wise men should overcome it by all means. When you, infuriated with rage, have been able to curse me for nothing, then I now curse you.

त्वागि च पतत्वढ़ दैहे3यं क्रीभयंतुः ।

एवं शणे मुनी राजा राजा च मुनिना तथा ॥ 50 ॥

"Let your this body, inflamed with anger, drop off." O King! Thus the King cursed the Muni and the Muni cursed the King; and both of them were, therefore, very sorry.

परस्यं प्राय्य शगयं दुःशित्तौ तो बभूवतुः ।

वसिष्ठत्वतिचित्नातर्ते बढ़ापां शरणं गताः ॥ 51 ॥

निवेदयामास तथा शापं भपूकृत महत् ।

Vasisṭha then became troubled with cares and took shelter with Brahmā and informing him about the great curse given by the King Nimi said: "Father! The King has cursed me saying "Let your body fall off today. Now the great trouble due to the falling off of the body has arisen. What am I to do now?"

वसिष्ठ उवाच

राजा शणोप्रियम देशोउयं पतत्वच तवेते वे ॥ ५२ ॥

किं करोति चितः प्राप्त कई काव्यप्रापतजम् ।

अन्यदेहसुमुतपत्ते जनकं वद सांप्रतम् ॥ ५३ ॥

O Father! Kindly tell me from whom shall I take my birth and take such means as I can get a body like what I have now.

तथा मे देहसंयोगः पूर्वल्समपचताम् ।

यादूर्ग संगामेतिस्मदेहे तजास्तु तस्तितः ॥ ५४ ॥

Also by Your unbounded power, do so that I can retain the knowledge in that body as I have at present; You are fully competent to do this.

समर्पोर्सि महाताज प्रसादं कतुर्महींस ।

वसिष्य स्वचः शुवा बहा प्रोबाव तं सुनाम ॥ 55 ॥

भिजारक्षणयोतेजस्यं प्रविश्य स्थितो भव ।

तस्माद्योगिजः काले भविता त्वं न संगयः ॥ 56 ॥

पुनदेई समासाध धर्मपुन्तो भविष्यस ।

भूतात्मा वेदवित्कामं सर्वत्र सर्वपूजितः ॥ 57 ॥

O King! Hearing thus the words of Vasisṭha, Brahmā spoke thus to dear son: Go and enter into the Tejas (essence) of Mitrā Varuna and remain contented; then you will get, in due time, a body not born of any womb and you will be again religious, truthful, knower of the Vedas, all-knowing and worshipped by all; there is no doubt in this.

एवमुक्तस्तदा पिता प्रयये वक्तालयम् ।

कृत्वा प्रद्रिष्णं प्रीत्या प्रणय च पितामहम् ॥ 58 ॥

When Brahmā said this, the Maharṣi Vasisṭha bowed down to the Grand Sirc and circumambulating him, went to the abode of Varuna.

विवेश स तयोदैहि मित्रावरणयोः किल ।

जीवाशेषन वसिष्ठोर्ध त्यक्त्वा देहमनुतनम् ॥ 59 ॥

Then the quitted his excellent body; and, with his subtle body, the part of his Jiva entered into the body of Mitrā Varuna.

कदापितृसुंशी राजानगता वरणालयम् ।

यदुच्छया वरातोहा सर्वीगणसमावृता ॥ 60 ॥

दूर्धा तामपतरं दिव्यां रूपवीबनसंर्तुना ।

जातौ कामातुरी देवौ तदा तामूचतुर्पे ॥ 61 ॥

विवशी चाफसर्वाङ्गी देवकन्यां मनोरामम् ।

आवां त्यमनवधारी यद्यस्व मामकूली ॥ 62 ॥

विहरस्य यथाकामं स्थानेउभिव्यर्बिणिन ।

तथोक्ता सा ततो देवी ताथ्यां तत्र स्थितावरणा ॥ 63 ॥

Then once on a time Urvaśī, exquisitely beautiful and lovely, surrounded by her comrades,

went wilfully into the abode of Varuna. Mitrā-Varuṇa, the two Devas became very passionate to see that Apsarā (the celestial nymph) endowed with youth and beauty and being enchanted with the arrows of cupid, and, being senseless, addressed to the Deva Kanyā Urvaśī, beautiful in all her parts, thus: "O Lovely One! Seeing you, we are very much troubled with the arrows of cupid; O Beautiful One! Select us and remain and enjoy here at your pleasure."

कृत्वा भावं स्थितं देवी मिवाकरणायोरुं ।

सा गृहीता तयोभांवं संस्थिता चाक्टर्शनि ॥ 64 ॥

When they said thus, Urvaśi became attached to them; and, under their control, began to stay in the house of Mitrā Varuna.

तयोस्तु पत्तितं वीर्यं कुभेमे दैवादनाङ्गते ।

तस्माजातौ मुनी राजन्द्रावेलातिमन्तो ॥ 6 5 ॥

When Urvaśī began to remain there, strongly attached to them, the semen of Mitrā Varuna dropped in an uncovered jar.

अगस्ति: प्रधमस्तत्र वसिष्छुधापरस्खा ।

विग्रावकरणोवीर्णताप्याम्बुधिसन्ती ॥ 6 6 ॥

And the two beautiful sons of the Rāsis were born out of that; Agasti was the first child and Vasistha

the second. Thus, out of the semen of Mitrā Varuna, the two ascetics were born.

प्रथमस्तु वनं प्राणो वाल एव महातपाः ।

इर्ववाकुस्तु वसिष्ठं तं वालं बबे पुरोहितम् ॥ 67 ॥

The first Agasti turned out a great ascetic in his childhood and resorted to forest; Iksvāku the best of Kings, selected Vasisṭha as his family priest.

वंशस्याय सुखाखं तं पालयामाय पार्थित ।

विशेषणे युनि ज्ञाला प्रील्या युक्तो कंपूव ह ॥ 6 8 ॥

O King! Iksvāku, the best of Kings, nursed him for the welfare of his own line; the more so, because to know that he was the Muni Vasiṣṭha; and thus he was very pleased with him.

एत्ते सर्वमाख्यारं वसिष्ठस्य च कारणम् ।

गणाद्रौतरग्रामतिभ्रावकर्णयो: कुले ॥ 69 ॥

श्रित शीमद्वीभागवते महापुर्याचे भटकल्म्ये

चतुर्वी3क्यानः 11 14 11

Janamejaya! Thus I have described to you about the getting of another body by Vasistha, due to the curse of Nimi, and have also described his re-birth in Mitrā-Varuṇa's family.

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the birth of Vasistha from Mitrā Varuna in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

