CHAPTER III

On the Deva Defeat and on Vṛtrā's Tapasyā

ध्यास उवाच

कृतपरिस्त्ययनो चूजो ब्राह्मणैर्वेदारगरैः ।

निर्जगाम रथाठको हन्तु शर्मे महावल: ॥ १ । ॥

तदैव राक्षसाः कृगरा: पुरा देवपराधित्रिताः ।

समाजमूँश सेवार्थ वृत्रे ज्ञाला महावलम् ॥ 2 ॥

इन्द्रतास्तु तं दूर्व युद्धाय तु समागतम् ।

वेगादाग्य वृत्तान्ते शगशमुस्तस्य चौधितम् ॥ 3 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Having the Svastyayana

ceremony (a performance of rite to secure welfare or avert calamity) performed by the Brāhmaṇas versed in the Vedas, the powerful Vṛtra mounted on his chariot and started to kill Indra, the King of the Gods. The Dānavas that were previously defeated by the Devas now knowing Vṛtrāsura to be powerful, came up to him to serve his cause. The messengers of Indra, when they saw him ready for battle, hurriedly came to Indra and informed him all about his doings and other matters connected with it.

व्यास उवाच

स्वामिड्छीघमिड्याति चुत्रो नाम रिपुस्तव ।

बलावान्यंदने रूक्षत्स्वघु। चोल्यातिड़: किल ॥ 4 ॥

The messengers said: “O Lord! Vísvākarmā, having been very much grieved his son being slain, got very angry and by Abhicāra process (an incantation with a design to injure or magic spells or charms used for a malevolent purpose) has created a son in order to kill you.

अभिचारो नागार्थ तर क्रोधाचितेन वै ।

पुरवाताधितिजेत दुःसहो राक्षसैयुतेः ॥ 5 ॥

That indomitable Vṛtāsura is now your powerful enemy; mounting on his chariot he is coming here to fight with you, surrounded by other Asuras.

यत्नं कुम महाभाग शीघ्रमायाति साम्यतम् ।

मेकमन्दसङ्ग्राणी घोराष्ठप्रतिहाकण: ॥ 6 ॥

O highly Fortunate One! This enemy of yours is high as the mountain Meru; he is now coming hurriedly to you, making a terrible noise; guard yourself carefully."

तृतीयम्बन्तरे तत्र भीता देद्वाणा घृष्णम् ।

आगतावोषु: सुर्पतिे शुर्पवन्ते दूतभाषितम् ॥ 7 ॥

O King! While Indra was hearing the messengers, the Devas came there panic-stricken and terrified and said:

गणा कछुः

मथवन्द्रपितिमचाति भवन्ति श्रिद्धगालये ।

बहूनि भयशंसीनि पक्षिणां विस्तानि च ॥ 8 ॥

The Gāṇas said: O Lord of the Suras! Ominous signs are being seen in the houses of the Gods; the birds are making sounds, very inauspicious and foreboding a great calamity.

काकगूगास्तथा शेयनाः केकाढा दाफणा: खणा: ।

रूदन्ति विकृतः शब्दैरूकारैर्षवंनोरपि ॥ 9 ॥

Crows, vultures, herons, falcons, and other ugly inauspicious birds are crying and making hoarse sounds on the tops of houses.

चीचीकृधीति निर्वादातुळ्वित विहणा भुगम् ।

वाहानां च नेत्रेषो जलधारा: पतंत्यध: ॥ 10 ॥

Other birds are making incessantly harsh sounds like chichi kochy. The carriers of the several Devas are weeping and shedding tears always.

श्रूयतेजितमहाऊढ्वो कट्टितां निशगसु च ।

गक्षसीनां महाभाग भवनोपरि दाहणः ॥ 1 1 ॥

O highly Fortunate One! On the tops of houses are heard very loud and very dreadful sounds of the crying Rāksasīsī at dead of night.

प्रपतिति ध्वजास्तूर्ण विना वातेन मान्द ।

प्रभवतिन महोतात दिवि धूभ्यन्तरिक्षतः ॥ 1 2 ॥

O Giver of honour! The flags on the chariots are falling to the ground without any trace of wind. Thus ominous signs are being visible on earth and in the air.

कृष्णाम्बरधारा नार्यँ घमतिन च गृहे गृहे ।

यान्तु यान्तु गृहातपुणं कुर्सेचो विकृतानना: ॥ 13 ॥

O King of the Devas! The ugly faced women, wearing black clothes, are roaming from house to house and always repeating “Leave the house, and go away at once.”

राजी स्वत्पेषु कानानां सुतानां निजमन्दिरे ।

केशोल्छूनित राक्यसो भीवयन्यो भुणतुगा: ॥ 14 ॥

The Deva women while sleeping in their own temples are seeing in their dreams that terrible Rāksasīs, coming to them are cutting away their hair on their heads and are frightening them.

एर्वस्थितानि देवेशे भूक्रीणलाकायरस्तथा ।

गोमायवो रुदौतिम्न निशायां घबनांगणे ॥ १ ५ ॥

O Indra of the Devas! The inauspicious signs

Book VI Chapter III

like these and earthquakes and the falling of the meteors are taking place. The jackals come in the courtyard of houses at night and yell horrible heartrending sounds.

सराटानां च जालानि प्रभवन्ति गृहे गृहे ।

अज्ञप्रसूगरणादीनि दुर्विमितानि सर्वश: ॥ 16 ॥

Lizards are moving always in the rooms and the several limbs of our bodies are shaking and thus making very inauspicious signs.

व्यास उवाच

इति तेषां वचः शुत्वा चिन्ताभाग सुरोश्रः ।

बृहस्यति समाहुय पघछ च मनोगतम् ॥ 17 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing their words, Indra became very anxious and called Brūspathi, the Deva Guru, and asked him:

इन्न उवाच

ब्रह्मीकुमुत योगीण निमिन्तीन भवन्ति वे ।

वाताश्र दाराणा वाँन प्रपतैलुकता: खतः ॥ 18 ॥

Indra spoke: O Brāhmaṇa! Very inauspicious signs are being made visible; dreadful winds are blowing and stars are falling from the skies; what are all these?

सर्वेज्ञसि महाभाग समर्पे बिटनाशने ।

बुद्धिमाज्ञास्ततचज्ञो देवतानां गुरुस्तबा ॥ १९ ॥

O Intelligent One! You are very wise and versed in the Śāstras and the Guru of the Devas; you are omniscient and know very well how to remedy the evils.

कुरु शान्ति विधानज्ञ शत्रुळ्यविधधायिनीम् ।

यथा मे न भवेदुवुःखं तथा कार्यं विधीयतान् ॥ 20 ॥

Therefore perform the rites by which enemies can be killed; do such as our miseries be all averted.

बृह्म्यतिकावा

किं कारीम सहसाक्ष त्यवाउढ दुकृतं कृतम् ।

अनागसं मुनि हृता किं फलं समुपार्जित् ॥ 21 ॥

Bhaspati said: “O Thousand eyed! What shall I do? You have committed shortly a heinous crime; you killed that innocent Muni and so you have earned a very bad Kārmic effect.”

अत्युगं पुण्यपायानां फलं भवति सत्वम् ।

विद्यार्थ खतु कतल्वं कार्य तद्धृतिमिष्छत ॥ 22 ॥

Very violent sins and good deeds produce their effects very quickly. It is, therefore, highly incumbent on those that desire for their own welfare, to take up any work with great discretion.

परोतपातनं कर्म न कर्तव्यं कदाचन ।

न सुखं विदंते प्राणी परपीडापरायण: ॥ 23 ॥

It is never advisable to do any action that leads to the tormenting of others. Never do they find happiness who give pain to others.

मोहाल्लोभाद्बहावल्या कृता शक्र तव्याद्धपुना ।

तस्य पापस्य सहसा फलनेतनुपागतम् ॥ 24 ॥

O Indra! You have committed Brahmahatya, under the influence of greed and delusion; now suddenly has appeared the fruit of that act.

अवध्य: सर्वैद्यानां जातोउरी घुवसंज्ञकः ।

हंतुं त्वां स समायाति दानवैबहुभिवर्धतः ॥ 25 ॥

आयुधानि च सर्वाणि चजतुल्यानि सायल ।

त्वष्टा दत्तानि दिव्यानि गृहीता समुपचित्यतः ॥ 26 ॥

समागच्छति तुर्धौर्ष त्याहकः प्रतपावान् ।

देवेन्द्र प्रत्यं कुर्वेगाय मनुष्यंविष्यति ॥ 27 ॥

O King of the Suras! This Vītra Asura is born invulnerable to all the Devas. That powerful indomitable Asura chief is now coming, mounted on a chariot, to kill you, surrounded by the other Dānavas and taking with him the Viśvakarmāmade divine arms and weapons equal to thunderbolt. He is coming like a second Kāla, as it were to destroy the whole Universe. There is none in this Triloka, capable to kill him; and his death will not also take place.

कोलाहलसदा जातसदा बुवती वाक्यतो ।

गन्थवाँ: क्रिस्ता यक्षा मुनयक्षा तपोधानः ॥ 28 ॥

While Brhaşpati was thus speaking, a great tumultuous uproar rose at once. The Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Yakṣas, Munis and other Immortals began to fly away from their quarters.

सदानीय विद्यार्थवामाः सर्वे पलायिताः ।

तददूध्या महाद्यर्थ्यं शक्रश्रितापरायण: ॥ 29 ॥


आज्ञाप्यमास तदा सेनेचोगाय संवेकान् ।

आनयक्षे वसुसुझनाशित्री च दिवाकरम् ॥ 30 ॥

पूर्णं च भर्ग वार्तु कुवेरं वरणं यमम् ।

विनानेषु समाकृष्ठ सायुभतः ॥ 31 ॥

Indra seeing the Devas flying away became very anxious and gave orders at once that all subservient to him must be ready at once for battle; they must go and call the Vasus, the Rudras, the twin Aśvīns, the Ādītas, Pūsā, Bhaga, Vāyu, Kubera, Varūṇa, Yama and the other Devas to come there at once. The enemy is well nigh; so let all the Devas come on their Vimānas quickly there."

समागळन्तु तसा शुज्याती समाप्तम ।

इत्याज्य भुस्तितः समाक्रहा गजोतमम् ॥ 32 ॥

ब्रह्मस्तितं पुरीधाय निर्गतो निजमन्दितात् ।

तथैव विश्वश: सर्वे रखं रखं महामासिकता: ॥ 33 ॥

Thus ordering, Indra mounted on the Airāvata elephant and taking the Sura Guru in front started from his own temple. The other Devas mounted on their respective carriers and, firmly resolved to fight, started with all their arms and weapons.

युद्धाय कृतसंकल्पा निविद्युः शाखापाय: । यूत्रोध दानवैयुक्तः सम्प्राप्तो मानसोत्तम् ॥ 34 ॥

On the other hand, Vīrtāsura, surrounded by the Demons, came up to the beautiful mountain, adorned with trees, on the north side of the Mānasarovara Lake.

पर्वतं देहतावासं रयं पादपशोभित् ।

इन्द्रोपयाग्य संग्रामं चकार मानसोत्ते ॥ 35 ॥

Indra, too, came there with Brhaṣpati in front and attended by all the other Devas to that mountain, north of the Mānasa Lake and began to fight.

पर्वते देहतायुक्तो वाचस्मितपुर: सरः ।

तत्राभूद्राकर्ण युद्धे वृत्रवासवयोस्ता ॥ 36 ॥

A dreadful fight, then, ensued between Vṛtra and Indra with clubs, swords. Parighas, Pāśas, arrows, Šaktis, Parśus and other weapons.

गदासिपर्विः: पारुषैबिणीः शफित्मर्षधि: । मानुषेण प्रमाणेन संग्रामः शरादं शतम् ॥ 37 ॥

The terrible fight lasted for full one hundred human years, terrifying to the self-controlled Rsis and all the human beings.

बधुप दयदो नृगामुर्षीणं भावितात्मान् ।

वक्तानः प्रधारं भननस्ततो वायुगणः किल ॥ 38 ॥

Varuna first turned his back; then Vāyu, then Yama, the Sun and Moon and then Indra fled from the battlefield.

ततो विभावसुः शक्रः सर्वे ते निरांगा शणत् ।

पलायनपरान्दूर्वा देवानिंद्रयुगोगमान् ॥ 39 ॥

वृत्रोप्र चितरं प्रागादाशमस्यं मुदाद्वित्यम् ।

प्रणाय प्राष्त ल्यहारा चितृः कार्य मया कृतम् ॥ 40 ॥

देवा चिनिर्जिताः सर्वे संद्रा: समरसंश्विताः ।

विद्रुतासे गताः स्थानं यथा सिंहान्युग गताः ॥ 41 ॥

Seeing Indra and the other Devas flying away, Vṛtrāsura came to the hermitage and there bowed down to his father who looked very glad; and he said: "O Father! I have carried out your orders; Indra and all the other Devas are defeated in the battle; as elephants and deer fly away seeing a lion, so the Devas all fled away to their respective abodes.

इन्रः पदातिरामन्यायो3नीत गजोतमः ।

ऐरातकौउं भगवन्यूषण श्रिदोतमम् ॥ 42 ॥

I have taken the Airāvata, the best of elephants, away from Indra who fled away on foot. O Bhagavan! I have brought the elephant here. Kindly accept it.

न हताते मवा तसाद्युक्त भीतागरणम् ।

आज्ञापय पुनस्तत किं कंतीय तवैषितम् ॥ 43 ॥

O Father! It is not advisable to kill a man who is terrified, therefore I did not kill them. Now kindly order anything else that I may fulfil your desires.

निर्जर निर्भातः सर्वे भयभीताः क्षमातुाः ।

इंडोउधैरावतं लव्क्ता भयभीतः पलायितः ॥ 44 ॥

All the Devas fled away from the battle-field, very much tired and terrified; and what more to say than this that Indra, too, fled, leaving his elephant on the field."

Book VI Chapter III

व्यास उवाच

इति पुरवचः शुत्वा ल्यहा प्राह मुतावितः ।

पुरवानच्छ जातो5सि सफलं मम जीवितम् ॥ 45 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Visvākarmaī became very glad to hear his son's words and said: "To-day I can rightly say that I have got my son and that my life is successful."

त्वरात्रं पातितः पुर्र गतो मे मानसो जरः ।

निश्रलं से मनो जातं दूध्या दीर्थ तवाद्धुतम् ॥ 46 ॥

“O son! To-day you have sanctified me; my cares and worries are abated; my mind is also calm to see your wonderful prowess.

शृणु वक्ष्यामहं पुरा हिते तेउद निशामय ।

तपः कुरु महाभाग सावधानः स्थिरासनः ॥ 47 ॥

O Child! Now hear attentively what I say. O highly intelligent One! Now carefully sit in your steady posture (Sthirāsana) and practise Tapasyā.

विश्वासो वेर कलैकः कंभावित्याकासना: ।

शत्रुसे छलकर्ताउसिन नानाभेदिविशारादः ॥ 48 ॥

Never trust anybody; Indra is now your enemy, ever ready to find your faults and clever in sowing dissensions between you and your well-wishers.

तपसा प्रायते लक्ष्मीतपसा राज्यमुतमम् ।

तपसा बलवृष्टि: स्यासंग्रोम विजयसन्ता ॥ 49 ॥

O Son! Tapasyā is not an ordinary thing; Lakṣmī (prosperity) is obtained thereby; excellent kingdoms, increase of vigour, and victories in battles are obtained.

आराध्य दृष्टिणं देखे लब्ध्वा वरमनुतमम् ।

जहिं ग्रहं दुनारं ब्रहहत्यासमावृतम् ॥ 50 ॥

Therefore worship Hiranyagarbha and get excellent boons from him; then kill this vicious Indra, guilty of the sin Brahmahatyā.

साधान: स्थिती भूत्वा दात्तारं घत्र शंक्रम।

वात्रिजतं स वरं देद्यातस्तुण्ट्धतुरान्तः ॥ 51 ॥

Worship the auspicious Creator calmly and carefully. The four-faced Brahmā then will be pleased and grant you your desired boon.

तोषायिता विश्योर्नि ब्रह्णायामितीजासम् ।

अविनाशिल्यमासाठ जहि शकं कृतानगसम् ॥ 52 ॥

First please the Creator of indomitable prowess, from whose womb has sprung all this Universe, and get, then, immortality from Him. Then kill that guilty Indra, my enemy.

वैरं मनसि मे पुरा वर्तैत सुतधातजम् ।

न शान्तिमनुगच्छानि न स्वयासि सुखतेह ॥ 53 ॥

तापसो मे हत: पुजो निराग: पापन्य नय: ।

न विद्यामि सुखं घुर तं मामुद्धर दुःवितम् ॥ 54 ॥

O Son! My feeling of enmity due to the killing of my son reigns always in my mind; I cannot go to sleep peacefully nor do I get peace in any way. The vicious Indra killed my son; O Vṛtra! What more shall I say to you; I am merged in the ocean of sorrows; save me."

व्यास उवाच

तदाकर्णवं चितुर्वावस्यं वृत्रः क्रोयुत्नस्तदा ।

अज्ञामादाय च चितुर्जीगम तपसे मुदा ॥ 55 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus hearing his father's words, Vṛtṣāśura became inflamed with anger and, getting his permission, set out gladly to practise Tapasyā.

नस्यामदनमासाठ युण्यां देवधूनीं शुभाम् ।

सात्वा कुणासं कृता संसिंखतुं चित्यसानः ॥ 56 ॥

He then went to the Gandhamādāna mountain and performed his bath in the holy and auspicious river Mandākini, and, preparing a Sthirāsana, took his seat in the Kuśā grass, to practise the tapasyā.

त्वक्तात्रं वारिणां च योगाध्यापसपतयः ।

ध्यार्विश्वभुर्ज चित्र सेपोर्विष्टः स्थितयसे ॥ 57 ॥

He left off gradually taking his food, then subsisted on water only and remained engaged in Yoga; and, seated in Sthirāsana, meditated incessantly on Prajāpati, the Creator of this Universe.

मथवा तं तपस्वन्तं जात्या चितानुतेः छभुत् ।

गन्धर्वानीत्रयमास विदार्थं पाकगासनः ॥ 58 ॥

यक्षांश प्रवगान्सर्पणिक्रजरानमितीजसः ।

विद्याधरान्यसरो देवदूताननैकश:॥ 59 ॥

उपायासे: कृता: सम्यक्तपोद्धनाय माधिथि: ।

न चचाल तते ध्यानाच्छु: परमतापस: ॥ 60 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पश्छलक्ने तृतीयोअध्याय: ॥ 3 । ॥

Indra, on the other hand, knowing Vītrāsura engaged in tapasyā, became very anxious and sent to him Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Pannagas, Kinnaras, Vidyādharas, Apsarās and other Deva messengers, all of unbounded vigour to create obstacles in his austerities. These Gandharvas and other Devas Yonis, expert in exercising magical spells, tried

many ways and means and various gestures and postures to create disturbances in his penance; but that great ascetic Vītra, the son of Viśvakarmā, did not swerve a bit from his meditative state.

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Sixth Book on the defeat of the Deva army and on Vītra's tapasyā in the

Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

[Unreadable]

Šrimaddeviḥbhāgavatam

