[Ch 3 Verse 1-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Having the Svastyayana ceremony (a performance of rite to secure welfare or avert calamity) performed by the Brāhmaṇas versed in the Vedas, the powerful Vṛtra mounted on his chariot and started to kill Indra, the King of the Gods. The Dānavas that were previously defeated by the Devas now knowing Vṛtrāsura to be powerful, came up to him to serve his cause. The messengers of Indra, when they saw him ready for battle, hurriedly came to Indra and informed him all about his doings and other matters connected with it.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Having the Svastyayana ceremony (a performance of rite to secure welfare or avert calamity) performed by the Brāhmaṇas versed in the Vedas, the powerful Vṛtra mounted on his chariot and started to kill Indra, the King of the Gods. The Dānavas that were previously defeated by the Devas now knowing Vṛtrāsura to be powerful, came up to him to serve his cause. The messengers of Indra, when they saw him ready for battle, hurriedly came to Indra and informed him all about his doings and other matters connected with it.

[Ch 3 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The messengers said: “O Lord! Vísvākarmā, having been very much grieved his son being slain, got very angry and by Abhicāra process (an incantation with a design to injure or magic spells or charms used for a malevolent purpose) has created a son in order to kill you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The messengers said :-- O Lord! Viśvakarmā, having been very much grieved his son being slain, got very angry and by Abhicāra process (an incantation with a design to injure or magic spells or charms used for a malevolent purpose) has created a son in order to kill you.

[Ch 3 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That indomitable Vṛtāsura is now your powerful enemy; mounting on his chariot he is coming here to fight with you, surrounded by other Asuras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That indomitable Vṛtrāsura is now your powerful enemy; mounting on his chariot he is coming here to fight with you, surrounded by other Asuras.

[Ch 3 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O highly Fortunate One! This enemy of yours is high as the mountain Meru; he is now coming hurriedly to you, making a terrible noise; guard yourself carefully."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O highly Fortunate One! This enemy of yours is as high as the mountain Meru; he is now coming hurriedly to you, making a terrible noise; guard yourself carefully.

[Ch 3 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! While Indra was hearing the messengers, the Devas came there panic-stricken and terrified and said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! While Indra was hearing the messengers, the Devas came there panic-stricken and terrified and said :--

[Ch 3 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Gāṇas said: O Lord of the Suras! Ominous signs are being seen in the houses of the Gods; the birds are making sounds, very inauspicious and foreboding a great calamity.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Gaṇas said :-- O Lord of the Suras! Ominous signs are being seen in the houses of the Gods; the birds are making sounds, very inauspicious and foreboding a great calamity.

[Ch 3 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Crows, vultures, herons, falcons, and other ugly inauspicious birds are crying and making hoarse sounds on the tops of houses.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Crows, vultures, herons, falcons, and other ugly inauspicious birds are crying and making hoarse sounds on the tops of houses.

[Ch 3 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Other birds are making incessantly harsh sounds like chichi kochy. The carriers of the several Devas are weeping and shedding tears always.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Other birds are making incessantly harsh sounds like chichi koochy. The carriers of the several Devas are weeping and shedding tears always.

[Ch 3 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O highly Fortunate One! On the tops of houses are heard very loud and very dreadful sounds of the crying Rāksasīsī at dead of night.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O highly Fortunate One! On the tops of houses are heard very loud and very dreadful sounds of the crying Rākṣasīs at dead of night.

[Ch 3 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Giver of honour! The flags on the chariots are falling to the ground without any trace of wind. Thus ominous signs are being visible on earth and in the air.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Giver of honour! The flags on the chariots are falling to the ground without any trace of wind. Thus ominous signs are being visible on earth and in the air.

[Ch 3 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King of the Devas! The ugly faced women, wearing black clothes, are roaming from house to house and always repeating “Leave the house, and go away at once.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King of the Devas! The ugly faced women, wearing black clothes, are roaming from house to house and always repeating “Leave the house, and go away at once.”

[Ch 3 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Deva women while sleeping in their own temples are seeing in their dreams that terrible Rāksasīs, coming to them are cutting away their hair on their heads and are frightening them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Deva women while sleeping in their own temples are seeing in their dreams that terrible Rākṣasīs, coming to them are cutting away their hairs on their heads and are frightening them.

[Ch 3 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Indra of the Devas! The inauspicious signs like these and earthquakes and the falling of the meteors are taking place. The jackals come in the courtyard of houses at night and yell horrible heartrending sounds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Indra of the Devas! The inauspicious signs like these and earthquakes and the falling of the meteors are taking place. The jackals come in the courtyard of houses at night and yell horrible heartrending sounds.

[Ch 3 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Lizards are moving always in the rooms and the several limbs of our bodies are shaking and thus making very inauspicious signs.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Lizards are moving always in the rooms and the several limbs of our bodies are shaking and thus making very inauspicious signs.

[Ch 3 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing their words, Indra became very anxious and called Brūspathi, the Deva Guru, and asked him:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing their words, Indra became very anxious and called Brihaspati, the Deva Guru, and asked him :-

[Ch 3 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra spoke: O Brāhmaṇa! Very inauspicious signs are being made visible; dreadful winds are blowing and stars are falling from the skies; what are all these?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra spoke :-- O Brāhmaṇa! Very inauspicious signs are being visible; dreadful winds are blowing and stars are falling from the skies what are all these?

[Ch 3 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Intelligent One! You are very wise and versed in the Śāstras and the Guru of the Devas; you are omniscient and know very well how to remedy the evils.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Intelligent One! You are very wise and versed in the Śastras and the Guru of the Devas; you are omniscient and know very well how to remedy the evils.

[Ch 3 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore perform the rites by which enemies can be killed; do such as our miseries be all averted.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore perform the rites by which enemies can be killed; do such as our miseries be all averted.

[Ch 3 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhaspati said: “O Thousand eyed! What shall I do? You have committed shortly a heinous crime; you killed that innocent Muni and so you have earned a very bad Kārmic effect.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brihaspati said :-- “O Thousand-eyed! What shall I do? You have committed shortly a heinous crime; you killed that innocent Muni and so you have earned a very bad Karmic effect.

[Ch 3 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Very violent sins and good deeds produce their effects very quickly. It is, therefore, highly incumbent on those that desire for their own welfare, to take up any work with great discretion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Very violent sins and good deeds produce their effects very quickly. It is, therefore, highly iñcumbent on those that desire for their own welfare, to take up any work with great discretion.

[Ch 3 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is never advisable to do any action that leads to the tormenting of others. Never do they find happiness who give pain to others.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is never advisible to do any action that leads to the tormenting of others. Never do they find happiness who give pains to others.

[Ch 3 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Indra! You have committed Brahmahatya, under the influence of greed and delusion; now suddenly has appeared the fruit of that act.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Indra! You have committed Brahmahattyā under the influence of greed and delusion; now suddenly has appeared the fruit of that act.

[Ch 3 Verse 25-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King of the Suras! This Vītra Asura is born invulnerable to all the Devas. That powerful indomitable Asura chief is now coming, mounted on a chariot, to kill you, surrounded by the other Dānavas and taking with him the Viśvakarmāmade divine arms and weapons equal to thunderbolt. He is coming like a second Kāla, as it were to destroy the whole Universe. There is none in this Triloka, capable to kill him; and his death will not also take place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King of the Suras! This Vṛtra Asura is born invulnerable to all the Devas. That powerful indomitable Asura chief is now coming, mounted on a chariot, to kill you, surrounded by the other Dānavas and taking with him the Viśvakarmā-made divine arms and weapons equal to thunderbolt. He is coming like a second Kāla, as it were, to destroy the whole Universe. There is none in this Triloka, capable kill him; and his death will not also take place.

[Ch 3 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► While Brhaşpati was thus speaking, a great tumultuous uproar rose at once. The Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Yakṣas, Munis and other Immortals began to fly away from their quarters.
NEW CORR ENG ──► While Brihaspati was thus speaking, a great tumultuous uproar rose at once. The Gandharbas, Kinnaras, Yakṣas, Munis and other Immortals began to fly away from their quarters.

[Ch 3 Verse 29-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra seeing the Devas flying away became very anxious and gave orders at once that all subservient to him must be ready at once for battle; they must go and call the Vasus, the Rudras, the twin Aśvīns, the Ādītas, Pūsā, Bhaga, Vāyu, Kubera, Varūṇa, Yama and the other Devas to come there at once. The enemy is well nigh; so let all the Devas come on their Vimānas quickly there."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra seeing the Devas flying away became very anxious and gave orders at once that all subservient to him must be ready at once for battle; they must go and call the Vasus, the Rudras, the twin Aśvins, the Ādityas, Pūsā, Bhaga, Vāyu, Kuvera, Varuṇa, Yama and the other Devas to come there at once. The enemy is well nigh; so let all the Devas come on their Vimānas quickly there.”

[Ch 3 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus ordering, Indra mounted on the Airāvata elephant and taking the Sura Guru in front started from his own temple. The other Devas mounted on their respective carriers and, firmly resolved to fight, started with all their arms and weapons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus ordering, Indra mounted on the Airāvata elephant and taking the Sura Guru in front started from his own temple. The other Devas mounted on their respective carriers and, firmly resolved to fight, started with all their arms and weapons.

[Ch 3 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the other hand, Vīrtāsura, surrounded by the Demons, came up to the beautiful mountain, adorned with trees, on the north side of the Mānasarovara Lake.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the other hand, Vṛtrāsura surrounded by the Demons, came up to the beautiful mountain, adorned with trees, on the north side of the Mānasarovara Lake.

[Ch 3 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra, too, came there with Brhaṣpati in front and attended by all the other Devas to that mountain, north of the Mānasa Lake and began to fight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra, too, came there with Brihaspati in front and attended by all the other Devas to that mountain, north of the Mānasa Lake and began to fight.

[Ch 3 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► A dreadful fight, then, ensued between Vṛtra and Indra with clubs, swords. Parighas, Pāśas, arrows, Šaktis, Parśus and other weapons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► A dreadful fight, then, ensued between Vṛtra and Indra with clubs, swords, Parighas, Pāśas, arrows, Śaktis, Parsus and other weapons.

[Ch 3 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The terrible fight lasted for full one hundred human years, terrifying to the self-controlled Rsis and all the human beings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The terrible fight lasted for full one hundred human years, terrifying to the self-controlled Ṛṣis and all the human beings.

[Ch 3 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Varuna first turned his back; then Vāyu, then Yama, the Sun and Moon and then Indra fled from the battlefield.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Varuṇa first turned his back; then Vāyu, then Yama, the Sun and Moon and then Indra fled from the battle-field.

[Ch 3 Verse 39-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing Indra and the other Devas flying away, Vṛtrāsura came to the hermitage and there bowed down to his father who looked very glad; and he said: "O Father! I have carried out your orders; Indra and all the other Devas are defeated in the battle; as elephants and deer fly away seeing a lion, so the Devas all fled away to their respective abodes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing Indra and the other Devas flying away, Vṛtrāsura came to the hermitage and there bowed down to his father who looked very glad; and he said :-- O Father! I have carried out your orders; Indra and all the other Devas are defeated in the battle; as elephants and deer fly away seeing a lion, so the Devas all fled away to their respective abodes.

[Ch 3 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I have taken the Airāvata, the best of elephants, away from Indra who fled away on foot. O Bhagavan! I have brought the elephant here. Kindly accept it.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I have taken the Airāvata, the best of elephants, away from Indra who fled away on foot. O Bhagavan! I have brought the elephant here. Kindly accept it.

[Ch 3 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Father! It is not advisable to kill a man who is terrified, therefore I did not kill them. Now kindly order anything else that I may fulfil your desires.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Father! It is not advisable to kill a man who is terrified, therefore I did not kill them. Now kindly order anything else that I may fulfil your desires.

[Ch 3 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► All the Devas fled away from the battle-field, very much tired and terrified; and what more to say than this that Indra, too, fled, leaving his elephant on the field."
NEW CORR ENG ──► All the Devas fled away from the battle-field, very much tired and terrified; and what more to say than this that Indra, too, fled, leaving his elephant on the field.

[Ch 3 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Visvākarmaī became very glad to hear his son's words and said: "To-day I can rightly say that I have got my son and that my life is successful."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Viśvakarmā became very glad to hear his son’s words and said :-- “Today I can rightly say that I have got my son and that my life is successful.

[Ch 3 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O son! To-day you have sanctified me; my cares and worries are abated; my mind is also calm to see your wonderful prowess.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O son! To-day you have sanctified me; my cares and worries are abated; my mind is also calm to see your wonderful prowess.

[Ch 3 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Child! Now hear attentively what I say. O highly intelligent One! Now carefully sit in your steady posture (Sthirāsana) and practise Tapasyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Child! Now hear attentively what I say. O highly intelligent One! Now carefully sit in your steady posture (Sthirāsan) and practise Tapasyā.

[Ch 3 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Never trust anybody; Indra is now your enemy, ever ready to find your faults and clever in sowing dissensions between you and your well-wishers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Never trust anybody; Indra is now your enemy, ever ready to find your faults, and clever in sowing dissensions between you and your well-wishers.

[Ch 3 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Son! Tapasyā is not an ordinary thing; Lakṣmī (prosperity) is obtained thereby; excellent kingdoms, increase of vigour, and victories in battles are obtained.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Son! Tapasyā is not an ordinary thing; Lakṣmī (prosperity) is obtained thereby; excellent kingdoms, increase of vigour, and victories in battles are obtained.

[Ch 3 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore worship Hiranyagarbha and get excellent boons from him; then kill this vicious Indra, guilty of the sin Brahmahatyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore worship Hiraṇyagarbha and get excellent boons from him; then kill this vicious Indra, guilty of the sin Brahmahattyā.

[Ch 3 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Worship the auspicious Creator calmly and carefully. The four-faced Brahmā then will be pleased and grant you your desired boon.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Worship the auspicious Creator calmly and carefully. The four-faced Brahmā then will be pleased and grant you your desired boon.

[Ch 3 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► First please the Creator of indomitable prowess, from whose womb has sprung all this Universe, and get, then, immortality from Him. Then kill that guilty Indra, my enemy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► First please the Creator of indomitable prowess, from Whose womb has sprung all this Universe, and get, then, immortality from Him. Then kill that guilty Indra, my enemy.

[Ch 3 Verse 53-54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Son! My feeling of enmity due to the killing of my son reigns always in my mind; I cannot go to sleep peacefully nor do I get peace in any way. The vicious Indra killed my son; O Vṛtra! What more shall I say to you; I am merged in the ocean of sorrows; save me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Son! My feeling of enmity due to the killing of my son reigns always in my mind; I cannot go to sleep peacefully nor do I get peace in any way. The vicious Indra killed my son; O Vṛtra! What more shall I say to you; I am merged in the ocean of sorrows; save me.”

[Ch 3 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Thus hearing his father's words, Vṛtṣāśura became inflamed with anger and, getting his permission, set out gladly to practise Tapasyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Thus hearing his father’s words, Vṛtrāsura became inflamed with anger and, getting his permission, set out gladly to practise Tapasyā.

[Ch 3 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He then went to the Gandhamādāna mountain and performed his bath in the holy and auspicious river Mandākini, and, preparing a Sthirāsana, took his seat in the Kuśā grass, to practise the tapasyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He then went to the Gandhamādan mountain and performed his bath in the holy and auspicious river Mandā Kinī, and, preparing a Sthirāsan, took his seat in the Kuśā grass, to practise the tapasyā.

[Ch 3 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He left off gradually taking his food, then subsisted on water only and remained engaged in Yoga; and, seated in Sthirāsana, meditated incessantly on Prajāpati, the Creator of this Universe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He left off gradually taking his food, then subsisted on water only and remained engaged in Yoga; and, seated in Sthirāsan meditated incessantly on Prajāpati, the Creator of this Universe.

[Ch 3 Verse 58-60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra, on the other hand, knowing Vītrāsura engaged in tapasyā, became very anxious and sent to him Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Pannagas, Kinnaras, Vidyādharas, Apsarās and other Deva messengers, all of unbounded vigour to create obstacles in his austerities. These Gandharvas and other Devas Yonis, expert in exercising magical spells, tried many ways and means and various gestures and postures to create disturbances in his penance; but that great ascetic Vītra, the son of Viśvakarmā, did not swerve a bit from his meditative state. Here ends the Third Chapter of the Sixth Book on the defeat of the Deva army and on Vītra's tapasyā in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa. [Unreadable] Šrimaddeviḥbhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra, on the other hand, knowing Vṛtrāsura engaged in tapasyā became very anxious and sent to him Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Pannagas, Kinnaras, Vidyādharas, Apsarās and other Deva messengers, all of unbounded vigour to create obstacles in his austerities. These Gandharvas and other Deva Yonies, expert in exercising magical spells, tried many ways and means and various gestures and postures to create disturbances in his penance; but that great ascetic Vṛtra, the son of Viśvakarmā did not swerve a bit from his meditative state. Here ends the Third Chapter of the Sixth Book on the defeat of the Deva army and on Vṛtra’s tapasyā in the Mahāpurānam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
