[Ch 37 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Himalayas said: “O, Mother! Now describe your Bhakti Yoga, by which ordinary men who have no dispassion, get the knowledge of Brahma easily.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Himālayās said :-- "O Mother! Now describe your Bhaki Yoga, by which ordinary men who have no dispassion get the knowledge of Brahma easily.

[Ch 37 Verse 2-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi said: “O, Chief of Mountains! There are three paths, widely known, leading to the final liberation (Mokṣa). These are Karma Yoga, Jñāna Yoga and Bhakti Yoga. Of these three, Bhakti Yoga is the easiest in all respects; people can be do it very well without incurring any suffering to the body, and bringing the mind to a perfect concentration.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī said:--"O Chief of Mountains! There are three paths, widely known, leading to the final liberation (Mokṣa). These are Karma Yoga, Jñāna Yoga and Bhakti Yoga. Of these three, Bhakti Yoga is the easiest in all respects; people can do it very well without iñcurring any suffering to the body, and bringing the mind to a perfect concentration.

[Ch 37 Verse 4-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Bhakti (devotion) again is of three kinds as the Gunas are three. His Bhakti is Tāmasī who worships Me, to pain other, being filled with vanity and jealousy and anger. That Bhakti is Rājasic when one worships Me for one's own welfare and does not intend to do harm to others.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This Bhakti (devotion) again is of three kinds as the Guṇas are three. His Bhakti is Tāmasī who worships Me, to pain others, being filled with vanity and jealousy and anger. That Bhakti is Rājāsic, when one worships Me for one’s own welfare and does not intend to do harm to others.

[Ch 37 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He has got some desire or end in view, some fame or to attain some obects of enjoyments and ignorantly, and thinking himself different from Me, worships Me with greatest devotion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He has got some desire or end in view, some fame or to attain some objects of enjoyments and ignorantly, and thinking himself different from Me, worships Me with greatest devotion.

[Ch 37 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again that Bhakti is Sāttvik when anybody worships Me to purify his sins, and offers to Me the result of all his Karmas, thinking that Jīva and Īśvara are separate and knowing that this action of his is authorized in the Vedas and therefore must be observed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again that Bhakti is Sāttvikī when anybody worships Me to purify his sins, and offers to Me the result of all his Karmas, thinking that Jīva and Īśvara are separate and knowing that this action of his is authorized in the Vedas and therefore must be observed.
