CHAPTER XXXVII

On Self Realisation Spoken by the Devi

हिमालय उवाच

स्वीयां भर्तिकं बदस्यांव येन ज्ञानं सुखेन है ।

जायेते मनुजस्याय मध्यमस्याशिरोग: ॥ १ ॥

The Himalayas said: “O, Mother! Now describe your Bhakti Yoga, by which ordinary men who have no dispassion, get the knowledge of Brahma easily.”

श्रीद्वयाच

भागांखयो मे विख्याता मोक्षप्राप्ती नगाधिति ।

कर्मयोगो ज्ञानयोगो भक्तियोगश्र सत्तम ॥ २ ॥

त्रयाणामध्ये योग्य: कर्तु शक्योजस्ति सर्वथा ।

सुतभवान्यानसलाकायधिरनाधार्योजन्त ॥ 3 ॥

The Devi said: “O, Chief of Mountains! There are three paths, widely known, leading to the final liberation (Mokṣa). These are Karma Yoga, Jñāna Yoga and Bhakti Yoga. Of these three, Bhakti Yoga is the easiest in all respects; people can be do it very well without incurring any suffering to the body, and bringing the mind to a perfect concentration.

गुणधेत्यनमुख्यायां सा भक्तिक्षिव्या मता ।

परपीड़ा समुद्धियं दम्भं कृत्वा पुरःसम् ॥ 4 ॥

मात्सर्वीकोधयुक्तो सत्यस्य भक्तिस्तु तामसी ।

परपीड़ाविरहितः स्कल्हणायांमेव च ॥ ५ ॥

This Bhakti (devotion) again is of three kinds as the Gunas are three. His Bhakti is Tāmasī who worships Me, to pain other, being filled with vanity and jealousy and anger. That Bhakti is Rājasic when one worships Me for one's own welfare and does not intend to do harm to others.

नित्यं सकामो हृदयं यशोर्षी भोगलोलुप: ।

तत्कलसमावाद्ये मापुपासते-तिभक्तितः ॥ 6 ॥

He has got some desire or end in view, some fame or to attain some obects of enjoyments and ignorantly, and thinking himself different from Me, worships Me with greatest devotion.

भेदवुद्धता तु मां खस्माद्वां जानाति पागरः ।

तस्य भक्ति: सामाखाना नागराधि तु राजसी ॥ ७ ॥

परमेशपार्थणं कर्म पारवसंहानाय च ।

वेदोक्त्वाद्वयं तक्तलिंतुं तु मपाउनिगम् ॥ 8 ॥

Again that Bhakti is Sāttvik when anybody worships Me to purify his sins, and offers to Me the result of all his Karmas, thinking that Jīva and Īśvara are separate and knowing that this action of his is authorized in the Vedas and therefore must be observed.

Book VII Chapter XXXVII

