CHAPTER XXIX

On Nārada Again a Man

नारद उवाच

इत्युक्तोड़ं तदा तेन राजा ताताधउनेच च ।

विश्यग्य मनसाठल्यर्थ तमुवाच विशांपते ॥ १ ॥

राजत्राहं विज्ञानापि पूत्री कल्येति निश्रयम् ।

पित्तौ क्व च मे केन स्थापिता च सरोदरे ॥ 2 ॥

किं करोमि क्व नच्छामि कवं मे सुकृतं भवेत् ।

निरूपास्त्रसि राजेन्द्र चिंतनामि चिकीर्षितम् ॥ 3 ॥

Nārada said: “O Dvaipāyana! When the King Tāladhvaja asked me thus, I thought over earnestly and said thus: “I do not know whose daughter I am; nor do I know quite certainly where are my father and mother; one man placed me here on this tank and has gone away, whither I do not know.

दैवमेव वरं राजनास्त्रव प्रौर्भं मम ।

धर्मज्ञोंसि महीपाल यथेच्छसि तथा कुरु ॥ 4 ॥

तद्धीनाउमवहं भूप न मे कोयसित पालकः ।

न पिता न च माता च न स्थानं च बान्यवः ॥ 5 ॥

O King! I am now an helpless orphan; what shall I do now? Where to go? What to do by which I can have my welfare? I am all the while thinking on these. O King! The Destiny is powerful; I have not the least control over it; you know Dharma and you are a King. Do now as you like.

इत्युक्तेपरी मया राजा बधूव मदनातुरः ।

मां निरीक्ष्य विगालाहर्षी सेवकांनिव्युबारा हूं ॥ 6 ॥

नरायानमानयखे चतुबाँहुं मनोहर्म ।

आरोहणाधेमस्यन्तु कौशेगंबारवेहितम् ॥ 7 ॥

O King! Do nourish me; I have no father, no mother, nor any acquaintances and friends; there is no place for me also to stand on; therefore I am now your dependant."

मूढास्तरणावंयुक्ते मुक्ताजलविभूषितम् ।

चतुरयं विशालं च मुवर्णपित्ति शृभम् ॥ 8 ॥

तस्य तद्वानं श्रुत्वा भूत्या: सत्वरागयिनः ।

आनिन्यु: शिविकां दिव्यां मद्यं वस्त्ववेहितम् ॥ 9 ॥

आरूक्षोर्धृ तदा तस्यां तस्य प्रियचिक्तीयां ।

When I spoke thus, the King looked at my face and became love-stricken for me; he then tole his attendants to bring an excellent rectangular and spacious palanquin to be carried on four men's shoulders, gilt and adorned with jewels and pearls, where soft sheets were spread inside and covered all over with silken cloths. Instantly the servants went away and brought for me a beautiful palanquin.

मृदितोउसी गृहे नील्या मां तदा पृथिवीपति: ॥ 10 ॥

विद्वाहिविधाना राजा शुभे लगने शुभे दिते ।

उपयेमे च मां तत्र हुतभूवसाधिते ततः ॥ 11 ॥

I got on it to serve the best wishes of the King. The King also gladly took me home. In an auspicious day and in an auspicious moment he married me in accordance with due rites and ceremonies on the presence of the Holy Fire.

तस्याहं वल्लभा जाता प्राणेधोउपि गरीयती ।

सोभायम्युद्रतीर्वेवं नाम त्रकृतं मम ॥ 12 ॥

I became dearer to him than even his own life and the King, with great fondness, kept my name as Saubhāgya Sundarī.

त्यभागो मया सार्थं सुख्याप महीपति: ।

नानाभोगिवलासीः कामगलाश्ठोदिततंथा ॥ 13 ॥

The King then began to sport with me amorously according to the rules of the Kāma Śāstra in various ways and with great enjoyments and pleasures.

राजकायाणि संलब्ज क्रीक्षास्तो द्विविणम् ।

नासौ विवेद गछ्ठंत कारं कामकलारतः ॥ 14 ॥

उद्यानेषु च रधेषु वाणीषु च गृहेषु च ।

ह्यर्थेषु वर्गैलेषु दीर्घिकासु वासुर च ॥ 15 ॥

He then left all his kingly duties and state affairs and he began to remain day and night with me deeply immersed in amorous sports; so much his mind was merged in me in these plays that he could not notice the long time that passed away in the interval.

वारणीयदार्तोर्सी विह्र-कानने शुधे ।

विसुक्य सर्वकायिणि मदधीने बषूव ह ॥ १६ ॥

He used to drink the Vārunī wine and, forsaking all the state affairs, began to enjoy me in nice gardens, beautiful lakes, lovely palaces, beautiful houses, excellent mountains and enviable forests and became completely subservient to me.

व्यासाई तेने संसक्ता क्रीडास्वर्गीकृता ।

स्मृतावाम्बूर्वेदेह न पुंभावं मुनिनवम च ॥ १ ७ ॥

O Dvaipāyana! Being incessantly engaged with the King in amorous sports and remaining obedient to him, my previous body, male ideas, or the birth of Muni nothing whatsoever came in my memory.

मदीवार्य पतिर्वाँषाउं पत्नीषु चित्रा सती ।

पडुताङ्गी विलाससा सफलं जीवितं मम ॥ १ ८ ॥

इति चिंतयती तत्मन्येमवन्द्धा दिवानिगम् ।

क्रीडासत्ता सुखे लुक्यां त चैथता वरणवर्तिनि ॥ १ ९ ॥

I remained always attached to him, being obedient to him with a view to be happy and I constantly thought over “that this King is very much attached to me, I am his dearest wife to all others; always he thinks of me, I am his chief consort, capable to give him enjoyment.”

विस्मृतं बढ्धारिजानं बढ़ानानं च ग्राशन्तम् ।

धर्मग्रापरिज्ञानं तदासत्कामना: स्थिता ॥ 20 ॥

My mind became entirely his and I completely forgot the eternal Brahmanjāāna and the knowledge of the Dharma Śāstras.

एवं विहृतस्तत्र वर्षिण इतद्रौये तु ।

गतानि क्षणवक्तामकीडास्तस्मय मे मुने ॥ 21 ॥

O Muni! Thus engaged in various amorous sports, twelve years passed away as if a moment and I could not perceive that.

जाता भर्षेति चाहे मुद्रं प्राप नृपस्तदा ।

कारयामास विधितदर्भसंराकारमं च ॥ 22 ॥

Then I became pregnant; and the King became very glad and performed all the ceremonies pertaining to my impregnation and holding of the child in my womb.

अपूष्ठहोईर जाग प्रीणयमां पुनः पुनः ।

नाङुवं लज्जमानाउं नृपं प्रीतमना भृगण ॥ 23 ॥

In order to satisfy me, the King used to ask me always what things I liked; I used to be very much abashed; seeing this, the King used to be still more glad.

संपूर्णे द्वगमे मासि पुत्रो जातस्तती मम ।

गुधेउढ़ हान्द्रभलनन्तरावलान्विते ॥ 24 ॥

बभूव नृपतौहि पुत्रजनमहोत्सव: ।

राजा परमसन्तुषो बभूव सुतजनमतः ॥ 25 ॥

Ten months thus passed away and in an auspicious Lagna and when the asterism was favourably strong, I gave birth to a son; the King became very glad and great festivities were held on the birth ceremony of the child.

Book VI Chapter XXIX

सुतकाने सुतं वीक्ष्य राजा सुदमवाप्त है ।

अई भूमिपतेश्रासं प्रिया भार्यों परंतप ॥ 26 ॥

ततो वर्षद्धाते वै पुनर्भार्म मया धृत: ।

द्वितीयस्तु सुतो जातः सर्वलक्षणसंयुतः ॥ 27 ॥

O Dvaipāyana! When the period of the birth-impurity was over, the King saw the face of the child and was greatly delighted; I then became the dearest wife of the King. Two years after again I became impregnated; the second auspicious son was born.

सुध्येति सुतस्याय नाम चके नृपस्तदा ।

वीरवर्मिति ज्येषुस्य बाहागीः प्रेरितस्तवयम् ॥ 28 ॥

एवं द्वादण पुत्राध प्रमृत्ता भृतमंसता: ।

मोहितोई तदा तेषां प्रीत्या पालनलालने ॥ 29 ॥

The King gave the name Sudhanvā to the second son and on the authority of the Brāhmins, kept the name of the eldest son as Viravarmā. Thus I gave birth to twelve sons, in due course of time, to the King's great liking; and I was engaged in rearing up those children and thus I remained enchanted.

पुनरष्ट सुतः काले काले जाताः सुरूपिणः ।

गाईस्वयं मे ततः पूर्ण समवर्ष सुखसाधानम् ॥ 30 ॥

तेषां दारिक्रिया: कालं कृता राजा यथोतिथिता ।

सुर्पाधिश्र तथा पुरैः परिवारो महानभूत् ॥ 31 ॥

Again in due course, I gave birth to eight sons; thus my household was filled with happiness. The King performed the marriage ceremonies of all those children duly and befittingly; and our family became very large with sons and their wives.

ततः पौत्रादिस्म्प्रतालेश पिं कीतास्वातिवतः ।

आसबानासोपोरात मोहबुद्धिकरा भूर्णम ॥ 32 ॥

कदाचित्सुखमैष्यवं कदाचिदचुदुःखमद्धुतम् ।

पुत्रेषु रोगजित्ने देहसंतनायककामू ॥ 33 ॥

Then I had some grandsons and they increased my attachment and the consequent delusion with their all sorts of playful sports. Some times I felt happy and prosperous and sometimes I felt pain and sorrow when my sons fell ill.

परस्यें कदाचित् विरोधोःभृन्तुसहणः ।

पुत्राणां वा वधूनां च तेन सन्तापसम्भवः ॥ 34 ॥

Then my body and mind became very much troubled with sorrows. Again the quarrels amongst my sons and my daughters-in-law, brought terrible pain and remorse in my mind.

सुखदुःखात्मके घोरे मिथ्याचारकरे भृणग ।

संकल्पजिति क्रुंट मनोरड़ं मुनिसत्तम ॥ 35 ॥

विस्मूतं पूर्वविज्ञानं शास्त्रज्ञानं तथा गतम् ।

योषाभावे विलोनोरई गृहकार्येषु सर्वथा ॥ 36 ॥

O Best of Munis! Thus I was greatly immersed in the terrible ocean of these imaginary thoughts, sometimes happy and sometime painful, and I forgot my previous knowledge and the knowledge of the Śāstras. I was merged in the thought of myself being a woman and lost myself entirely in doing the household affairs.

अहंकारसु संजातो भूर्ण मोहविद्यकैः ।

एते के बलिनः पुत्रा: सूपायः सुकुलसभ्याः ॥ 37 ॥

एते पुत्रा: सुसन्धज्ञा: मौडौति मम वैश्मसु ।

ध्यार्यई खलु नारीणां संसोरोस्मिजों घृणम् ॥ 38 ॥

I began to think that “I have so many daughters-in-law; so many powerful sons of mine are playing together in my house; Oh! I am fortunate and full of merits, amongst women” and thus my egoistic pride increased.

नारदोर्भं भगवता वशितो मायया किल ।

न कदाचिन्यायोर्वे चिन्तितं मनसा किल ॥ 39 ॥

राजप्नौ शुभावारा बहुपुरा परितता ।

धन्यादर्भ किल संसारे कृषीर्वे मोहितस्तद्वर्भ ॥ 40 ॥

अथ काक्षिवृपः कामं तूरदेशाधिपो महान् ।

अरातिभावामपत्र: पतिता सह मान्द Ⅱ 41 ॥

Not for a moment even occurred the thought that I had been Nārada; the Bhagavān had deceived me by His Māyā. O Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana! I was deluded by Māyā and passed away my time in the thought “that I am the king’s wife, chaste and of good conduct, following good Ācāra; I have so many sons and grandsons; I am blessed in this Sarhsāra and that I am so happy and prosperous.”

कृत्वा सैन्यसमाधोगे रथेशु धागधौतुम् ।

आजगाम कान्यकुको पुरे युद्धमित्यत् ॥ 42 ॥


वेहितं नगर तेन राजा सैन्ययुतेन च ।

मम पुत्रश्र धौत्रश्र निर्मात नगरातच ॥ 4 3 ॥

One powerful king of a distant country turned out an inveterate enemy of my husband and came to the city of Kanauj to fight with my husband, accompanied by chariots, and elephants and the fourfold army.

संधामासुभुतस्तत्र कृततरीतेन पुत्रकैः ।

हता रणे सुता सर्वे वैरिणा कालवोगतः ॥ 44 ॥

राजा भगस्तु संग्रामावर्ताः स्वगृहं पुनः ।

शुतं मया मृततः पुत्रा: संग्रामे भृगदाकणे ॥ 45 ॥

That enemy besieged the city with his army; my sons and grandsons went out and fought valiantly with him but owing to the great Destiny, the enemies killed all my sons. The King retreated and returned to his palace.

स हत्वा मे सुतान्यौजान्तो राजा बलान्वितः ।

कंद्रमाना हईं तत्र नाता समरमण्डले ॥ 46 ॥

Next I heard that powerful King killed all my sons and grandsons and had gone back to his country with his army. I then hurriedly went to the battle-field, crying loudly.

दूर्धा तान्यतितान्यूग्राम्यौत्रांशु दुर्बपीडिता ।

विललापाहामायुष्मछोकसागरसंवेदो ॥ 47 ॥

हा पुका: क्व सात मेउदा हा हतामि दुरात्मा ।

दैवेनातिवलिछेन दुविरणातिपाधिन ॥ 48 ॥

O Long-lived One! Seeing my sons and grandsons lying on the ground, in that horrible and distressed state, I became merged in the ocean of sorrows and lamented and wept loudly and wildly "O my Sons! Where have you gone leaving me thus? Alas! The pernicious Fate is very dominant, and very panisgiving and indomitable.

एतस्मिन्ते तत्र भगवान्यभ्युद्नः ।

कृत्वा रूपं द्विजस्यागद्वुद्धः परमशोभनः ॥ 49 ॥

सुसासा वेविलकामं मतस्मीये समागतः ।

मामुचाचातिदीनों संकन्द्यानां रणाधिरे ॥ 50 ॥

It has killed me to-day." By this time, the Bhagavān Madhusūdana came to me there in the garb of a beautiful aged Brāhmīn. His dress was

sacred and lovely; it seemed he was versed in the Vedas. Seeing me weeping distressedly in the battle-field he said:

ब्राहण उवाच

किं विवीदासि तन्यांग घमोउंप्र फकटीकृतः ।

भोहेन कोकिलालाये परित्यज्ञहात्मके ॥ 51 ॥

“O Devi! O cuckoo-voiced One! It seems you are the mistress of a prosperous house and you have got husband and sons! O thin-bodied One! Why are you thus lamenting and feeling yourself distressed!

का लं कक्याः सुता: केज्यी चिंतयामालिं परम् ।

उत्तिष रोन्द नं कल्पा क्वस्पा भव सुलोचने ॥ 52 ॥

All this is simply illusion caused by Moha; think; who are you? whose sons are these? Now think of your best hereafter; Do'nt weep, get up and be comfortable, O Good-eyed one?

स्नानं च तिलदानं च युजाणं कुक कामिनि ।

पतलिकानातां च मयादारक्षणाय वै ॥ ५३ ॥

कर्तव्य सर्वेश तीर्थे स्नाते तु न गृहे कवचित् ।

मृतानां किल कब्नूतां धर्मशाखविनिणयः ॥ ५४ ॥

O Devi! To shew respect to your sons, etc., gone to the other worlds, offer them water and Til. The friends of the deceased ought to take their bath in a place of pilgrimage; never they should bathe in their houses. Know this as ordained by Dharma."

नात्व उवाच

इत्युकला तेन विशेषय कुद्रेन प्रतिवोधिता ।

उचिताउई नृपेणाय युक्ता बन्युभिपरावृतां ॥ 55 ॥

अग्रतो तिज़करणेण भगवान्भूतभावनः ।

चलिताऊँ तत्सनुर्ण तीर्थ परमपावनम् ॥ 56 ॥

Nārada said: O Dvaipāyana! When the old Brāhmin thus addressed me, I and the King and other friends got up. The Bhagavān Madhusūdana causing this creation, in the form of a Brāhmana, led the way and I followed him quickly to that sacred place of pilgrimage.

हरिमाँ कृपया तत्र पुंतीर्थ सरसि प्रपुः ।

नीलाउङ्ग भगवाविष्णाईजरूपी जनदांदः ॥ 57 ॥

Book VI Chapter XXX

स्नानं कुरु तडागोस्मिन्यावने नगगामिनि ।

त्वज शोके क्रियाकालः पुजागणं च निर्यकंम् ॥ 58 ॥

The Viṣṇu Bhagavān, the Lord Janārdana Hari, in the form of a Brāhmin, kindly took me to the tank named Puritīrtha (male tīrtha) and said: “O One going like an elephant! Better take your bath in this tank; forego your sorrows that are of no use; now the time has arrived to offer water to you sons.

कोटिगस्ते भूता: पुत्रा जन्यजनसमुद्धावः ।

पितर: पतयक्षेध भात्तो जामयस्तथा ॥ 59 ॥

Better think that you had millions of sons born to you in your previous births and for that your millions of sons and daughters lost their lives; you had millions of fathers, husbands, and brothers and you lost them again; O Devi! Now tell me for whom you will now grieve?

केवां दुःखं त्वया कार्यं म्रप्रेस्मिनानसोद्धवे ।

विवधे स्वप्नदूरुते तापदे देहिनामि ॥ 6 0 ॥

All these, then, are merely phenomena; this world is full of delusion, false like a mirage and dream-like; the embodied souls, simply get pains and sorrows and nothing else."

नारद उवाच

इति तस्य वचः श्रुत्वा तीर्थे पुरुषसंज्ञेक ।

प्रविष्टा सन्तुकामारई प्रेरिता तत्र विध्गुना ॥ 6 1 ॥

मज्जनादेव तीर्थेषु पुमाझातः क्षणाद्वि ।

हरीर्णीणां कें कृत्वा विश्वतसीरे स्वदेश्वान् ॥ 6 2 ॥

Nārada said: On hearing his words, I went to

bathe in that Punitritha, as ordered by him. Taking a dip, I found that, in an instant, I became a man; the Bhagavān Hari, in his own proper form, was standing on the edge with a lute in his hand."

उन्मज्ज च मया तीरे शूधः कमललोचनः ।

प्रत्यधिज्ञा तदा जाता मम चिते द्विजोतम ॥ 63 ॥

O Brāhmīn! When getting out of the water, I came to the bank and saw the lotus-eyed Kṛṣṇa, pure consciousness then flashed in my heart.

संचिंत्तितं मया तत्र नारदोःहमिहानतः ।

हरिणा सह क्षीभांवं प्राणो मायाविमोहितः ॥ 64 ॥

Then I thought that “I am Nārada; I have came to this place and being deluded by the Maÿā of Hari, I got the female form.”

इति चिन्तापश्रहं चवा जानसदा हरि: ।

मामाह नारतगघ्छ किं कारीष जले सिचत: ॥ 65 ॥

विस्मतेहं तदा स्यत्वा स्त्रीभावं द्वारभुं भुगम् ।

पुन: पुरुषायश्व समयः: केन हेतुना ॥ 66 ॥

ड्रौते श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे घटस्कचे

एकौनविशो3ध्याय: 11 29 11

When I was thinking thus, Hari exclaimed “O Nārada! Get up; what are you doing, standing in the water?” I was astonished; and, recollecting my feminine nature, very severe indeed, began to think why I was again transformed into a male form.

Here ends the Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the Nārada's getting again his male form in the Mahāpurāṇaṃ Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XXX

