CHAPTER XLIII

On Svåhä

नारद उवाच

नारायण महाभाग देवदेव मम प्रभो ।

रूपेणीय गुणनैव महसा तेजसा तिचषा ॥ १ ॥

त्वमेव ज्ञानिनां श्रैक्ष: सिद्धानां योगिनां मुने ।

तपस्विनां मुनिनां च परो वेददिवं वर: ॥ 2 ॥

महालूब्यया अगल्यानं विज्ञातं महद्धुतम् ।

अन्यतिकविष्टुपालयानं निगूई वव सप्रान्ते ॥ 3 ॥

अतीव गोपनीयं यदुपयुक्तं च सर्वतः ।

अग्रफाकर्यं पुराणेषु वेदोर्जतं धर्मसंयुतम् ॥ 4 ॥

Nārada said: O Rsī Nārāyaṇa! O Highly Fortunate One! O Lord! Thou art equal to Nārāyaṇa whether in beauty or in qualities, or in fame or in energy or in everything Thou art equal to Nārāyaṇa. Thou art the foremost of the Jñāniens; there cannot be found be found a second like Thee as a Siddha Yogi, the ascetics and the Munis. And Thou art the crest of the knowers of the Vedas. I have heard

the wonderful anecdote of Mahā Laksmi that Thou hast told me. Now tell me any other thing that is unknown, very good in everyway, in accordance with Dharma, in the Vedas, and that which is not as yet written in the Purāṇas.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

नानाप्रकारमाखणान्यप्रकार्य पुर्णातः ।

श्रुतं कतिविधं गृहमासते ब्रह्म-सुदुर्भम् ॥ 5 ॥

तेषु यत्सारभूतं च श्रोतुं किं वा रत्मिच्छसि ।

तन्मे बृहि महाभाग पश्राद्धस्याति तत्सून: ॥ 6 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: There are many wonderful hidden anecdotes that are not published as yet in the Purāṇas. What you have heard is very small in fact. Please mention me what you like to hear, what you think as best amongst them and I will describe that to you.

नारद उवाच

स्वाहा देखी हविदाने प्रशस्ता सर्वकंमु ।

चिन्ताने स्वधा शस्ता दक्षिणा सर्वतों वरा ॥ 7 ॥

गृलासां चरितं जनमफलं प्रधान्यमेव च ।

ओगुचिष्छायि स्वढ़क्नाड़वे देवैविदां वर ॥ 8 ॥

Nārada said: When clarified butter is poured as libations in all the sacrificial ceremonies to the gods, Svāhā is to be uttered everywhere as excellent, and commendable; so Svadhā is to be repeated in the offerings when the obations are offered to the Pitts, te deceased ancestors. Then, again, Dakṣinā (the sacrificial fee) is always to be paid as right and excellent. So, O Knower of the Vedas! I like to hear the account of Svadhā, and Dakṣinā and their merits. Please now tell me about them.

सूत उवाच

नारदस्य वचः शुत्वा ग्रहस्य मुनिसनम ।

क्यांं कविणुमारेषे पुराणोक्तां पुरातनीम् ॥ 9 ॥

Sūta said: Hearing the words of Nārada, Nārāyaṇa Rsi smiled and began to speak the very ancient words of the Purāṇas.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

सुःः प्रयन्तो देवा: स्वाहात्रार्थं वयुः पुरा ।

ब्रहुलोकं बहुसभ्यामाजमु: सुमनोहाग् ॥ १० ॥

गत्वा निवेदनं चकुर्गाहाहैतुर्क मुने ।

ब्रहा श्रुचा प्रतिज्ञा निवेचे श्रीहरिं परम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Nārāyana said: Before the creation, the Devas assembled in the beautiful Brahmā's Council to decide on their food question. They all brought to the notice of Brahmā the scarcity about their food. Brahmā promised to remove their food difficulties and began to chant hymns to Hari.

नारद उवाच

यज्ञपो हि भगवान्कलया च कमूव ह ।

ये० यच्छाद्विदंनं दर्न ते०यश्छा: ॥ 12 ॥

Nārada said: O Lord! Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa Himself incarnated in part as Sacrifice. Are not the Devas satisfied when the Brāhmaṇas pour oblations of ghee to the Devas in those sacrifices?

श्रीनारायण उवाच

हविद्वर्ति विप्राधु अन्ये ये क्षत्रियदाय: ।

सुरा नैव प्राप्नवर्ति तत्तून मुनिपुढ़ वि 13 ॥

देवा विषणणाले सर्वे तत्सभां च ययु: पुनः ।

गत्वा निवेदनं चक्रगहाराभगवाहेतुम् ॥ 14 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Muni! The Devas, in fact, did not get the offerings of the clarified butters that were poured in with devotion in sacrificial acts by the Brāhmaṇas and Kṣattriyas. So they were very much depressed and went again to the council of Brahmā and informed Him that they could not get any food for themselves.

ब्रहा श्रुत्वा तु ध्यानेन श्रीकृष्णा शरणं ययो ।

पूजां चकार प्रकृतेश्वानैव तद्वापा ॥ 15 ॥

प्रकृतेः कलया चैव सर्वगतिक्रस्वस्थिणी ।

अतीव सुन्दरी श्यामा सपणीया मनोहता ॥ 16 ॥

ईपद्व्यस्यप्रनात्या भत्नानुप्रकतात ।

उवारोति विघेरों घपयोगे वरं श्रणु ॥ 17 ॥

विधिसुद्वानं शुत्व संभामात्यमुवाच तम् ।

On hearing this, Brahmā at once meditated and took refuge of Śrī Krṣṇa; Krṣṇa advised them to worship Mūla Prakṛti. Brahmā then, by the command of Srī Krṣṇa, began to meditate on Prakṛti, worship Her and chant hymns to Her, Then from the part of Prakṛti, an all-powerful Devi appeared. She was very beautiful, Śyāmā (of a blue colour) and very lovely. This Devi was Svāhā. She looked always gracious with smile in Her face; it seemed that She was always ready to show favour towards the Bhaktas. She appeared before Brahmā and said: “O Lotus born! Want any boon you desire.”

प्रजानतिकवाच

त्यमनेद्रिका शक्तिर्भव याजतीय सुद्ती ॥ 18 ॥

दार्थुं न शक्तः प्रकृतीहुताश्रुं तया विना ।

त्वब्रामोच्चार्यं मंत्रिते यो दास्यति हविन्दैरः ॥ 19 ॥

सुरीयस्तत्यानुवन्ति सुरा: सानन्दपूर्वकम् ।

Hearing Her words, the Creator spoke reverentially: "O Devi! Let Thou be the burning power of Fire; without Thee Fire would not be able

Book IX Chapter XLIII

to burn anything. At the conclusion of any Mantra, whoever taking Thy name, will pour oblations in the Fire to the Gods, will cause those oblations to go to the Gods and reach them. And then they will be very glad.

अनः: संपत्स्वरूपा च श्रीरूपा सा गृहेक्षी ।। 20 ॥

देवानां पूजिता शक्रधरादीनां भर्वाधिके ।

ब्रहणधु बचः श्रुत्वा सा विष्णणा बचूव ह् ॥ 21 ॥

तमुवाच तते देवी स्वाधिप्रायं स्वयंभुवम् ।

O Mother! Let Thou be the wealth of Fire, the beauty and housewife of Fire; let Thou be incessantly worshipped in the regions of the Gods and amongst men and other beings." Hearing these words of Brahmā, Svāhā Devī became very sad and expressed Her own intentions: 'I will get Krṣṇa as my husband; let me perform Tapasyā as long as it takes. This is my object. All other things are false as dreams.

स्वाहोचाच

अर्ह कृष्ण भविष्यामि तपसा सुधिरेण च ॥ 22 ॥

ब्रह्मतदन्यं यत्किंघित्वपनवद्धभ्रमेव च ।

विधाता जानतत्वं च रंभपूर्ण्युज्ञेयो विध्युः ॥ 23 ॥

विचर्पि शेणे बोल्चंच व धर्मः साक्षी च दर्पिणाम् ।

सर्वाधुपूज्यो देवानां गणेषु च गणेष्वरः ॥ 24 ॥

I always meditate with devotion on the lotus-fect of Śrī Krṣṇa, serving Which You have become the Creator of this world, Śambhu has become the Conqueror of death, Ananta Deva is supporting this universe, Dharma is the Witness of the virtuous, Gangeśa is getting first of all, the first worship.

प्रकृति: सर्वेमुज्ञा यत्रमसात्यगुर्भवन्त।

त्रययो मुनयेधि पूजिता यतिबेया ॥ 25 ॥

तत्पादपं चित्रत भावेन चिंतयाम्यहम् ।

पशास्या पशामित्युक्त्वा पशनाभागुस्तार: ॥ 26 ॥

Prakrti Devi has become the adorable of all and the Munis and the Rsis respected by all. O Child! Heaving spoken thus to the Lotus-born, Padmā, with Her lotus-face, meditating incessantly on the Lotus-Feet of Śrī Krṣṇa, free from any disease, started to perform tapasyā for attaining Him.

जगमात तपसे देवी ध्याला कृष्ण निरामयम् ।

तपसलेये वर्षेलक्षेमकपादेन पशुजा ॥ 27 ॥

तदा द्वर्ग श्रीकृष्ण निरुर्णं प्रकृतेः परम् ।

अतीव कमनीयं च रूपं द्वृषा च रूपिणी ॥ 28 ॥

She, first of all, stood on one leg and practised austerities for one lakh years. Then She saw the Highest Puruṣa Śrī Krṣna, Who is beyond Prākṛti and Her attributes. The beautiful amorous Svāḥā, seeing the Lovely Form of the Lord of Love, fainted. मृच्छीं संग्राम काटेन कामोगस्य च कामुकी ।

विज्ञान तदधिपूर्गं सर्वेजस्तमायचर ह ॥ 29 ॥

समुत्थाय च तां क्रोडे क्षीणांगी तपसा चित्यम् ।

The omniscient Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa knowing Her intentions, took Her to His lap, reduced very much in body by long continued Tapasyā, and He said:

श्रीभगवानुचार

वाराहे वे त्वमंत्रेन मम पत्नी भविष्यसि ॥ 30 ॥

- नामा नार्यजिती कन्या कांले तन्यजितस्य च ।

अनुतान्नेनद्रिका तंच भवपत्नी च भामिनि ॥ 31 ॥

मन्यांगकला पूज्ञा च मतुससादान्द्रविष्यसि ।

वहिक्त्वां चितिफाबेने संपुज्ञ च गृहुर्वर्गिम ॥ 32 ॥

रामिधिति तवा सार्थं नायया रमणीयाव ।

O Devi! Thou shalt be My wife in the next Varāha Kalpa. Then Thou wilt be the daughter of Nagnajit and wilt be known by the name of Nāgnajiti. O Beloved! At present let Thou be the Energy of Fire and be His wife. By My boon Thou wilt be worshipped by all. Fire will make Thee the Lady of His house and take the utmost care of Thee. Thou wilt be able to enjoy easily with Him.

इत्युक्स्तांतदीये देवो देवौ संभाष्य नारद ॥ 33 ॥

तजाजगाम संस्करी वहिद्रक्षीदान्देशतः ।

सामवेदोक्त्यानेन ध्यात्वा तां जगदंविकाम् ॥ 34 ॥

सम्पूज परितुह वा पाणि जग्राह मंत्रतः ।

O Nārada! Thus saying to Svāhā, Bhagavān disappeared. On the other hand, Fire came in there by the command of Brahmā, with a doubtful mind and began to meditate on Her, the World Mother as per Sāma Veda and worshipped Her then pleased and married Her with mantrams, etc.

तदा दिख्यं वर्षशतं से रेमे रमया सह ॥ 35 ॥

अतिनि निजेने देशे संभोगासुखरे सदा ।

बभूव गार्भत्सया तु हताशस्य च तेजसा ॥ 36 ॥

तं दधारा च सा देहीं दिखं ह्रादशलतस्मर ।

ततः सुधाव पूरांश्च सपणीयामनोहरान् ॥ 37 ॥

दिश्षणानिरनाहर्यताहवनीयान् क्रमेण च ।

For one hundred divine years they enjoyed each other. In a very solitary place while they were enjoying each other, Svāhā Devi felt pregnant. For full twelve divine years She retained Her pregnancy.

Then She delivered gradually there sons

Daksināgni, Gārhapatyāgni, and Āhavanīyāgni.

ऋषयो मुनवर्षेवेब बाहाणा: क्षत्रियाद्व: ॥ 38 ॥

स्वाहांतं मंसपुच्चार्थे हृदिवर्धनं च चझित्रे ।

स्वाहायुक्तं च मंत्रं च चा यूहाति प्रशास्तकम् ॥ 39 ॥

सर्वसिद्धिपर्वित्तस्य मन्त्रद्विणाग्रातः ।

विश्रहीने वृथा सप्तं वैद्रहीने यथा द्वितः ॥ 40 ॥

पतिसेवार्वहीना स्ती विद्याहीनो यथा पुमान् ।

फलशाखाविहीनप्र यथा चूक्षो हि निंतिः : ॥ 41 ॥

स्वाहाहीनस्तथा मनो न हुतः फलदायकः ।

परितुहा दिज्ञा: सर्वे देवा: संप्रपुरातृषी: ॥ 42 ॥

The Rsis, Munis, Brāhmaṇas, Kṣattriyas poured oblations of clarified butter pronouncing the terminal mantra ‘Svāhā.’ He who pronounces this excellent terminal Mantra ‘Svāhā’ gets immediate success in his actions. Then all the mantras without ‘Svāhā’ the in teend became impotent as snakes become when void of poison, the Brāhmaṇas when they are devoid of the knowledge of the Vedas, the wife when she does not serve her husband, the men when they turn illiterate and the trees, when void of fruits and branches. O Child! The Brāhmaṇas then became satisfied. The Devas began to receive the oblations.

स्वाहितेनैव मन्तेण सफलं सर्वमेव च ।

क्रूवेवं क्रवितं सर्वे स्वाहोपाख्यानमुत्तमम् ॥ 43 ॥

सुखदं मोक्षं सारं किं घृभ्यः श्रोतुमिच्छसि ।

With the ‘Svāha’ mantra everything turned out fruitful. Thus I have described to you the anecdote of ‘Svāhā.’ One who hears t. is essential anecdote

gets his happiness enhanced and the Mokṣa in his hands. What more do you want to hear? Say.

नात्र उवाच

स्वाहापूजाविधानं च ध्यानं स्तोत्रं भूनीखर ॥ 44 ॥

संपूत्र्य बहिनुस्ताव येन तदूद मे प्रभो ।

Nārada said: I like to hear how Fire worshipped Svāhā and recited stotras (thymns of praise) to Her. Kindly tell me the method of worship, the Dhyānam and Stotra.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

ध्यानं च समावेदोर्वतं स्तोजपूरालयाकम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

वदाति प्रश्नतां बहुत्साटधानो भूनीश्व ।

सर्वेत्रानार्थकाले शाल्यामे घरेडथवा ॥ 4 6 ॥

स्वाहा संपूज्य यत्नेन यजं कुयार्थकलावये ।

स्वाहा मन्नांगयुक्तां च मन्त्रसिद्धावस्थितिपणि ॥ 47 ॥

सिद्धां च सिद्धिदां रुणा कर्मणां फलदां रुषाणम् ।

Nārāyaṇa said: O Best of Brāhmaṇas! I now tell you the meditation (Dhyānam) as per Sāma Veda, the method of worship and stotra. Listen attentively. At the commencement of any sacrificial stone or in an earthen jar (ghata), the Devi Svāhā and then commence the ceremony with the expectation of getting the desired fruit. The following is the Dhyānam (meditation) of Svāhā Devi: “O Devi Svāhā! Thou art embodied of the Mantras; Thou art the success of the Mantras; Thou art Thyself a Siddhā: Thou givest success and the the fruits of actions to men Thou dost good to all.

इति ध्याना च मूलेन दत्ता पादाधिकं नर: ॥ 48 ॥

सर्वसिद्धि लभेतलुना मूलमन्वं मुने शृणु ।

उं० ईँई वाङ्गजायधे देखे साहित्यनेन च ॥ 49 ॥

यः: पूजेषेच्च तां भवस्या सर्वेई संभवेद्युबम् ।

Thus meditating, one should offer Pādya (water for washing the feet), etc., uttering the basic Mantra; success then comes to him. Now hear about the Radical Seed Mantra. The said mantra (mūla mantra) is this: 'Om Hrim Śrim Vahnijāyāyai Devyai Svāhā.' If the Devi be worshipped with this Mantra, all the desires come to a successful issue.

Book IX Chapter XLIV

वहिक्वाच

स्वाहा वहिक्षिया बहिजाया संतीषाकारिणी ॥ 50 ॥

ग्रस्ति: क्रिया कालद्धारी परिपाककरी धुवा ।

गतिः सदा नराणां च दाहिका ददनक्रम ॥ 51 ॥

संसारासारूपा च घोरा संसारातिराणि ।

देवजीवनल्पा च देहूपोषणकारिणी ॥ 52 ॥

Fire recited the following stotra: “Thou art Svâhā, Thou art the Beloved of Fire, Thou art the wife of Fire; Thou pleasest all’ Thou art the Śakti, Thou art the action, Thou art the bestower of Kāla (time); Thou dost digest the food; Thou art the Dhruvā; Thou art the resort of men; Thou art the burning power; Thou canst burnt everything, Thou art the essence of this world; Thou art the deliverer from the terrible world; Thou art the life of the gods and Thou nourishest the Gods.”

घोड़शीतिन नामानि यः घरेट्रप्रदिससंयुतः ।

सर्वसिद्धिर्भवैतत्सय इह लोके परंब च ॥ 53 ॥

नांगहीनं घबेत्स्य सर्व कर्म सुणेशनम् ।

अपुत्रो लभते पुरं भार्याहीनो लभेसिद्याम् ॥

रमोपोपां खकांतिं च संग्राम्य सुखामपानुवात् ॥ 54 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमदेवीभागवते नवमस्कन्धे नारदनारायणसंवादे

स्वाहोपाख्याने निवचारिशोस्थायः ॥ 55 ॥

O Nārada! He who reads with devotion these sixteen names, gets success both in this world as well as in the next. None of his works become deficient in any way; rather all the works are performed successfully and with a successful issue. Reading this stotra, one who has no wife, gets wife. So much so that the man who recites the stotra gets for his wife equal to Rambhā, the heavenly nymph, and passes his time in greatest bliss.

Here ends the Forty-third Chapter of the Ninth Book on the history of Svāhā in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam,

the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XLIV

