CHAPTER XXIII

On the War Between Haihaya and Kālaketu

व्यास उवाच

तस्यास्तु वचनं श्रुत्वा रमापुत्र: प्रतपावान् ।

प्रकुल्ववदानीभोजरतामुावा विश्यामपे ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! That powerful son of Lakṣmī, Haihaya, became very glad to hear these words of Yāsovati and said:

राजोवाच

रामोह सर्वस्या पृष्टो वृत्तान्तो विशदाब्धर: ।

हेहयोर्दं चैकबौरिनामा सिन्धुसुतानुतः ॥ 2 ॥

“O One of beautiful thighs! Hear in reply to your query: I am Haihaya, the son of Laksmī, and I am known in this world by the name of Ekavīra.

मनो मे यच्च्या नूनं परतनंर कृताङ्कृते ।

किं कंरोमि क्व गच्छामि विरेशुणातिपीक्षितः ॥ 3 ॥

प्रथमं रूपमार्थातं सर्वैलोकातिरां त्वया ।

तेन मे विहृतं जातं कामबाणाहतं मनः ॥ 4 ॥

ततस्तस्या गुणा: प्रोक्तास्तैतु चित्तं हुतं पुनः ।

यत्व्योक्ते पुत्वाक्वयं तेन मे विम्वमोटभवत् ॥ 5 ॥

Now you have made my mind dependent. What am I to do now? where to go? Thus distressed with bereavement from your dear companion, my mind is struck with Cupid's arrows and is confounded with her extraordinary beauty that you just now described. Next your described her qualifications and my mind is ravished.

एकावल्या वचः प्रोक्ते दानवाठो मया वृतः ।

हैह्यसतं चिना नान्यं वृष्णोर्मीति विनिश्रयः ॥ 6 ॥

तेन वाक्येन तत्वांशि भूत्यो3हमधुना कृतः ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Again when you described before me what she uttered in the presence of the Rākṣasa, I am struck with great wonder. Your dear companion Ekāvali said before the vicious Dānava Kālaketu “I have already selected the King Haihaya. I will not select any other than him, this is my firm resolve.” These words have converted me into her slave.

त्यया तस्याः चुकेशान्ते बृह्ि विक करवाणि याम ॥ ७ ॥

स्थानं तस्य न जानामि राक्षसस्य दुरात्मनः ।

O sweet-haired One! Say now that service can I do to you both? I am not acquainted with that wicked demon's palace; never I went to his city. गतिमों नास्ति गमने पुरे ताकिम्युलोचने ॥ ८ ॥

वद मां तव शिलागलिश तत्र प्रापयितुं क्षमा ।

O Fair-eyed One! Say how I can go there; for you are the only one that can lead me there. Therefore take me quickly to that place where your beautiful dear companion is staying."

प्राययाणु सखी ते सा यत्र तिहिति सुन्दरी ॥ ९ ॥

हत्वा तं राक्षसं कूरं मोचविष्यामी संग्रतम् ।

विश्वशो गोकसन्तंला रावसुघौत तव प्रियम् ॥ १० ॥

Your dear companion, the daughter of the King is very much afflicted with sorrow; soon I free her, by destroying that cruel Rāksasa. There is no doubt in this. O Auspicious One! I will rescue your dear companion and bring her to the city of yours and hand her over to her father.

विषुक्तुःखां कृत्वास्तु प्रापियथामि ते पुम् ।

पिंचे चास्या: प्रदास्यामि कन्याभेकावतीमहम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Then that King, the enemy destoryer, will perform the marriage ceremony of his daughter. I think this is the desire of your heart.

पश्रादिवार्हे कतिजसी राजा पुत्रमा: परन्तः ।

एवं ते मनसः कामो मम चापि प्रियवेदे ॥ १२ ॥

O Sweet-speaking One! Know that that is also my desire. O Beautiful One! Now that desire will be fulfilled by your efforts.

भविष्यति स सम्पूर्णे: साधनेन तवायुना ।

उपशयु गुरुं तस्य पश्य मे तंखे पशक्रमम् ॥ १३ ॥

Show me quickly that place and see my prowess.

O One with a face beautiful like the Moon! It seems that you will be able to do my work.

यथा हनिम दुराचारं परदायराहाकम् ।

तथा कुरु प्रिंवं कर्तु शक्तिसि वरवर्षिनि ॥ 14 ।

मार्ग दर्शय तस्याद पुरस्य दुरांमस्य च ।

Soon do such as I can kill that wicked demon, who steals others wives. Now show me the way to the impassable city of that Rākṣasa.

व्यास उवाच

तत्रिश्णा प्रियं वावयं पुदिता च यशोक्ती ॥ १ ५ ॥

तमुबाव चमापुत्रं गमनोपायमात्रत ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the sweet words of the prince, Yásovati became very glad and gently began to speak out how he could go to the demon's city.

मद्रं गृहाण राजेन्द्र भगवतासु सिद्धिदम् ॥ 16 ॥

द्रास्थियाति सत्याप दुर्गे गछसपतिलनम् ।

“O King! Take the success-giving Mantra of Bhagavatī and I would then be able to show you today the city guarded by Rāksasas.

सज्जो भव महाभाग गमानय यमा सह ॥ 17 ॥

सैन्येन महता युक्तस्तय वृद्धे भविष्यति ।

कालकेनुर्महावीरो ग्रासैर्वतिभिश्रुतः ॥ 18 ॥

O King! Better arrange to take your vast army with you; for you will have to fight no sooner you go there. Kālaketu is personally a great warrior surrounded by Rākṣasas of great power and strength.

तस्मामन्तं गृहीत्वा तं बज तत्र मया सह ।

दूर्णशिवायामे ते माणे पुरस्यायव दुरातन्तः ॥ १९ ॥

Therefore be initiated in the Mantram of Śrī Bhagavatī and accompany me. So you will surely be successful. I will show you the way to the city of that Demon.

हत्वा तं पापकर्माणी मोचयागु च मे सखीम् ।

श्रुत्वा तद्वचनं वीरो मन्त्रप्रग्राह सत्यतः ॥ 20 ॥

द्नात्रयेहद्वयोगग्राप्ताज्ञानिवसाराख्यभात् ।

योगेश्वीमहाम्बनं जित्योकीतिलकाधियम् ॥ 21 ॥

तेन सर्वन्ता जाता सर्वान्तक्षारिता तथा ।

तया सह जगामायु पुरं तस्य सुदुर्मनम् ॥ 22 ॥

Book VI Chapter XXIII

Slay that vicious and vilest of the Rākṣasas and rescue my dear companion." Hearing thus, Haihaya was duly initiated into the great Mantram of Yogēsvari, named Trilokitilaka Mantra (Hrim Gauri Rudradayite Yogēsvari Hum Phat Svāhā is the Yogēsvari Mantra), by Maharṣi Dattātreya, accidentally come there (as if ordained by Fate), the chief of Jñāmins (the Gnostics), that is conducive to the welfare of the beings. Thus by the influence of the Mantram the King got the power of knowing all things and going everywhere with unobstructed speed.

रक्षितं राक्षसौधौर: पातालमिव पत्रगैः ।

यगोवत्वा च सैयेन मत्ता संसुत्तो युप: ॥ 23 ॥

Then the King Haihaya quickly went with Yaśvatī to the impassable city of the Rākṣasas, accompanied by a vast army.

तमायांतं समालोक्य दृतास्तव भयातुतः ।

क्रोगान्तोभिययु: पाशुं कालकेतोतस्त्रसिन ॥ 24 ॥

The city was surrounded by snakes and guarded by the terrible Raksasas like the city of Pātāla. The messengers of the Rāksasa, seeing the King coming, were struck with terror and crying aloud quickly went to Kālāketu.

तमुचु: सहसा गत्वा राक्षसं काममोहितम् ।

एकावलीसीपर्यक्ष कुर्बर्ते विव्यान्द्रह्न् ॥ 25 ॥

Kālāketu, struck with Cupid's arrows, was sitting beside Ekāvalī and was speaking many modest words when the messenger went there suddenly and said:

दूता क्युः

राजन् योगेवर्ती नारी कामिन्या: सड्घारिणी ।

आयाति सह सैन्येन राजपुत्रेण संयुता ॥ 26 ॥

“O King! The attendant of this lady Yasovatī is coming here with a prince and an army.

जयन्तो वा महाराज कार्तिकेयोदयवा नु किम् ।

आगच्छति बलोन्मन्तो वाहिणीसहितः किल ॥ 27 ॥

O King! We cannot tell exactly whether the prince is the son of Indra, named Jayanta or Kārikeya. After all, puffed up with the strength of his army, he is coming here.

संयतो भव राजेन्द्र संग्राम: समुपस्थितः ।

देवपुत्रेय युध्यस्य त्वज वा कमलेक्षणाम् ॥ 28 ॥

O King! The battle is imminent; now make your arrangements fully and carefully; fight with the son of a Deva or abandon this lotus-eyed Lady.

इतो दूरैं5ति सैन्यं तद्वीजनययाततः ।

सज्जो वब महीपाल दुर्बुधि घोषायगु चै ॥ 29 ॥

O King! At a distance of three Yojanas from this place, he is staying with his army. Now equip yourself and quickly declare the war by blowing the war trumps etc.

व्यास उवाच

तेषां तद्वचं भूत्वा राक्षसः क्रोभूम्त्रितुतः ।

राक्षसान्प्रेयामास सत्यान्त्यबलान्वडून् ।। ३० ॥

गच्छधं राक्षसा: सर्वे सम्युखा: गरक्षाणयः ।

तानाज्य कालकेतु: पूघछ प्रणायास्ति: ॥ 31 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the messenger's words, Kālāketu, the King of the Demons, became overwhelmed with anger and at once sent many powerful Rāksasas, holding all sorts of weapons and spoke out to them: "O Rāksasas! With weapons in your hands, go before them quickly."

एकावर्ती समीपत्थां विश्वगं भुगुत्:वितान् ।

कोउभयागित तत्वद्रिक्त पिता ते वापर: पुवान् ॥ 32 ॥

Ordering them thus, Kālāketu asked in sweet words Ekāvali who was in front and very distressed. O Thin-bellied One! Who is coming here? Is he your father or any other man coming with his army to release you. Speak this to me truly.

त्वदर्शे सैन्यसंयुक्तो बृहि सर्व कुशोवित् ।

पिता ते यदि सम्प्रायो नेतुं त्वां विरहातुः ॥ 33 ॥

जाला ते पित्तं सत्यबसंग्रामं न करोयहम् ।

आनस्तिया गृहे पुर्जा रनैवर्केक्षेईये: शुधे: ॥ 34 ॥

If your father comes here to take you back, being very much distressed with your bereavement, I will never fight with him, if I come to know this truly; rather I will bring him to my house and worship him with the excellent horses, gems and jewels and clothing. Really I will show my full hospitality duly to him when he comes here.

Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam

क्रौति तस्य चातिथ्यं गृहे प्राप्तस्य सर्वेथा ।

अन्येक्षोदि सम्पान्तलं हन्नि निशितः शरेः ॥ 35 ॥

And if any other person comes, then I will take his life by the sharpened arrows; there is no doubt in this. Know this as certain whoever comes here for your rescue is brought by the hand of Death to me.

आनीतः किकल काने परागया महात्मना ।

तस्माद्व विज्ञालाङ्कि कोउम्यागती मंदधीः ॥ ३६ ॥

अज़ाला मां दुराधर्ष काललर्भ महावल्न ।

Therefore, O Large-eyed One! Say who is this fool that is coming, not knowing me as the powerful and unconquerable Kāla (Death).”

एकावल्युवाच

न जानेड़ं महाभाग कोउयमायाति सत्वतः ॥ 37 ॥

न मेजिल विदितः कोर्पि सित्यात्यावत बच्चे ।

नयं पिता मे न प्राता कोउपयोगेस महावत: ॥ 38 ॥

किम्बधिमह घ्यातात नाहं वेद विनिश्रवम् ।

Ekāvali said: “O Highly Fortunate One! I do not know who is this coming to this side with a violent speed. O King! How can I know that when I am in this state of confinement in your house. This man is not my father nor my brother. Some other powerful man is coming here. I do not know exactly what for he is coming.

दैत्य उवाच

एव वदन्यमी दूता वयस्या ते यशोक्ति ॥ 39 ॥

समानीय च तं वीरामानतेित कृतोदाया ।

वव गता सा सखी कानते विद्यथा कार्यविशेषि ॥ 40 ॥

नान्यः कोउपि ममातिरीयं मे प्रतिवलो भवेत् ।

The Demon said: "My messengers say that your comrade Yaśovati has take with her that warrior and is coming to this side with great energy. Where has your clever companion gone now? O Lotus-eyed! There is no enemy in the three worlds strong enough to fight against me."

व्यास उवाच

तृलमिश्रजंते दृतास्तान्ये वै समानातः ॥ 4 1 ॥

ते हीबुल्साति शीता: कालकेतुं गृहे स्थितम् ।

किं सत्योर्जेसि महात्राज समीपे सैन्यमागतम् ॥ 4 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Just then other messengers hurriedly came there terrified and spoke to Kālāketu who had been staying in the house, thus: "O King! The army has come quite close to the city and how are you staying in the house, calm and quiet?

निरीच्छ नगरातूर्ण सैयेन महता वृतः ।

इति तेषां वचः श्रुत्वा कालकेतुर्महावलः ॥ ४३ ॥

Better march out of the city with your vast army as early as possible." The powerful Kālaketu, then, hearing their words, mounted on the chariot and quickly went out of his city.

यथामहु त्वत्ते निर्वीयं स्वपुराद्धि: ।

एकवीरोप्रि सहसा ह्यामकड़ः प्रतापवान् ॥ 44 ॥

The King Haihaya, on the other hand, suffering from the bereavements of his dear lady, suddenly came there mounted on horseback.

आगतस्तत कामी-या विशेषो समाकुलः ।

युढ़ं तवोर्भूतत्र चूत्रवासवयोरि ॥ 45 ॥

The terrible fight ensued then and there between the two and each one struck the other with sharpened weapons and the quarters all around blazed with their glitterings and clashings.

गस्तार्वेबंधा मुक्तैरादीपतिद्वानतम् ।

वर्तीमाने तदा युद्धे कातताणां भयावहे ॥ 46 ॥

When the terrible fight was going on, Haihaya, the son of Lakṣmī, struck Kālaketu, the King of the Daityas with a very powerful club (Gadā).

गदादा ताउवामास दैर्वं सिन्धुसुतासुतः ।

स गतासुः पतातेल्यां वज्ञात हजावलः ॥ 47 ॥

Thus struck by the Gadā, the Lord of the Daityas fellon the ground like a mountain, struck by lightning, and died.

पतातिवासा ततः सर्वे गछसा भयपीडिताः ।

यशोवर्ती ततो गत्वा वेगादेकावर्ती ततं ॥ 48 ॥

उवाच मभुतं वाणी विश्वितां पुदिता भुगम् ।

All the Rāksasas fled away on all sides, struck with terror. Yásovati went then very hurriedly with a gladdened heart to Ekāvali and began to speak to her in terms of surprise and in sweet words:

एष्ठाति नृपपुत्रेण दानवोरभौ निपातितः ॥ 49 ॥

एकबीर्ण धीरेण युद्धं कृत्वा सुदारुभणम् ।

Book VI Chapter XXIII

O Dear! O Dear! Come, Come; the great warrior, the prince Ekavīra has killed the Lord of the Daityas in a dreadful battle. That King in now waiting, tired in the midst of his soldiers.

स्कन्यावोरप्रयौरा रावा निश्तवधा क्षमातृः ॥ ५० ॥

दार्णं कांक्षागाले क्षुतकपगुषतव ।

पश्य तं कुटिलापाक्रि मनोभयवसம் नृमम् ॥ ५१ ॥

He has already heard from me about your beauty and qualities; and now he is expecting to see you. O One Looking askance! Now satisfy your eyes and mind by seeing that King who is like the Cupid.

कथिता तं वयं मपूर्व तस्याएे जाइक्रवीते ।

पूर्णीगुराः संज्ञानतेनासी विश्रातुाः ॥ ५२ ॥

यांक्षित तां चारुकर्ण उद्धू नृपतिनन्दनः ।

When I described to him before on the banks of the Ganges your beauty and qualifications, he got enamoured of you and now he is suffering from bereavement and wants to see you.

सा तस्य वचनं शुचा गमनाय मनो दरे ॥ ५३ ॥

तज्जमाता भृणं भीत्या कोभागं प्रादया तथा ।

Thus, hearing, Ekāvali determined to go to him and as she yet unmarried, she became abashed and afraid.

कां तत्थ मुचंघे ऋष्ये कुमारी ह्वारगा भृगणे ॥ 54 ॥

स मां गृहुति कामार्ते इंति चितातुकला सती ।

She thought how could she see the prince as she was unmarried. It might be that be being passionate would catch her by her arms.

यगोवत्या युता तत्र नर्यान्तित्या ययों ॥ 55 ॥

कन्यावारोत्तिनालेना मलिनावस्थापिति ।

Thus, troubled with thought, that daughter of the King, with a sad look, and wearing poor clothes, Ekāvali went with Yaśovatī on a palanquin, carried on men's shoulders.

तामागतं विशालास्थीं इद्वा राजसुतेप्रबवीत् ॥ 56 ॥

रूर्नं देहि तन्विंग तृविंचे नवेचे मभ ।

Seeing that large-eyed daughter of the King coming there, the prince said: "O Beautiful One! My two eyes are very thirsty to see you. Satisfy my eyes and mind by shewing yourself to me.

कामातुरं च तं बीक्ष्य तां च लज्ञाभरावुतामू ॥ 57 ॥

नीतिजा शिष्यभाज्ञा तनुवाच यथोवती ।

राजपुर विपात्ययस्यावेयंतं दातुपिच्छति ॥ 58 ॥

एपारपि लद्धगा नूनं घविता संगमस्तव ।

Seeing the prince passionate and the King's daughter very much abashed, Yásovati, who knew the rules of modesty, thus spoke to the prince: "O Prince! The father of my dear companion expressed a desire to betroth her to your hands. She is also obedient to you. Therefore your meeting will certainly take place.

कालं प्रतीक्ष्य राजेन्र नयैनी चितृरतिनकम् ॥ 59 ॥

स विदाक्रियिकी कृत्वा दास्यतीति विदिक्षयः ।

O King! Wait; take her to her father; and he will perform duly the marriage ceremony and betroth her to your hands. Know this to be quite certain."

स तस्या वचनं तध्यं मत्वा सैन्यसमित्वतः ॥ 60 ॥

समेते कामिनीभ्यां तु ययौ तत्सितृताश्रमम् ।

The King took her words to be quite just and true and taking those two ladies went with his army to the house of the father of Ekāvalī.

राजपूर्वी तथायातां शुत्वा प्रेमसमित्वतः ॥ 61 ॥

प्रययौ सम्युवल्पूर्णं सचिवः परिवेशितः ।

Ekāvali's father became very glad and cheerful to learn that his daughter was coming and, accompanied by his ministers, went hurriedly to her. बहुभिविर्वसैनैंद्य तृत्री सा महिनान्वारा ॥ 62 ॥

यगोवत्या तु चुत्तान: कथितो विस्तारतुना: ।

After a long time the King saw his daughter in poor clothings and became highly pleased. Yašovatī then described in detail all what happened before the King.

एकवीरं मिलित्वादसौ रूहमानीय चादगत् ॥ 63 ॥

पुण्येऋढ़ कारयामास विवाहं विधिपूर्वकम् ।

The King then with his minister brought with great love, courtesy and gentleness Ekavira to his house and on all auspicious day performed the marriage ceremony of him with Ekāvalī, in accordance with due ceremonies and rites.

पारिषहू ततो दत्त्वा संपुज्य विधित्वतदा ॥ 64 ॥

पूर्वी विसर्जयामास यथोवत्या समवितात् ।

Then the King gave away many clothings, ornaments, jewels, and articles for fitting a house and many other things and worshipped duly and sent his daughter together with Yaśovatī away with the King Haihaya.

एवं विवाहे संवृते रमापुत्रो मुद्रावित्तः ॥ 65 ॥

पूर्ण प्राय० बद्धन्योगत्बुभुजे प्रियवा समम् ।

Thus the marriage ceremony was performed and the son of Laksmī gladly returned to his house and began to enjoy many pleasures with his wife. Then,

in course of time, in the womb of Ekāvali the King Haishaya got a son named Kṛtavírya.

बभूत तत्या: पुरस्तु कृतवीयांमिथ: कित।

तत्सुतः कार्तवीयांसृ वंगोउयं कथितो मया ॥ 66 ॥

इति श्रीमदैशीभागते महापुराणे पश्चकन्चे जयोविरोगे उध्याः पितः 123।

The son of this Kṛtavīrya is known as Kārtavīrya. O King! Thus I have narrated to you the origin of the Haihaya dynasty.

Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter in the Sixth Book on the battle of Haihaya and Kalaketu in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

