[Ch 23 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! That powerful son of Lakṣmī, Haihaya, became very glad to hear these words of Yāsovati and said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! That powerful son of Lakṣmī, Haihaya, became very glad to hear these words of Yaśovatī and said :--

[Ch 23 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O One of beautiful thighs! Hear in reply to your query: I am Haihaya, the son of Laksmī, and I am known in this world by the name of Ekavīra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O One of beautiful thighs! Hear in reply to your query :-- I am Haihaya, the son of Lakṣmī, and I am known in this world by the name of Ekavīra.

[Ch 23 Verse 3-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now you have made my mind dependent. What am I to do now? where to go? Thus distressed with bereavement from your dear companion, my mind is struck with Cupid's arrows and is confounded with her extraordinary beauty that you just now described. Next your described her qualifications and my mind is ravished.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now you have made my mind dependent. What am I to do now? where to go? Thus distressed with bereavement from your dear companion, my mind is struck with Cupid’s arrows and is confounded with her extraordinary beauty that you just now described. Next you described her qualifications and my mind is ravished.

[Ch 23 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again when you described before me what she uttered in the presence of the Rākṣasa, I am struck with great wonder. Your dear companion Ekāvali said before the vicious Dānava Kālaketu “I have already selected the King Haihaya. I will not select any other than him, this is my firm resolve.” These words have converted me into her slave.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again when you described before me what she uttered in the presence of the Rākṣasa, I am struck with great wonder. Your dear companion Ekāvalī said before the vicious Dānava Kālaketu, “I have already selected the King Haihaya. I will not select any other than him, this is my firm resolve.” These words have converted me into her slave.

[Ch 23 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Fair-eyed One! Say how I can go there; for you are the only one that can lead me there. Therefore take me quickly to that place where your beautiful dear companion is staying."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Fair-eyed One! Say how I can go there; for you are the only one that can lead me there. Therefore take me quickly to that place where your beautiful clear companion is staying.

[Ch 23 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Your dear companion, the daughter of the King is very much afflicted with sorrow; soon I free her, by destroying that cruel Rāksasa. There is no doubt in this. O Auspicious One! I will rescue your dear companion and bring her to the city of yours and hand her over to her father.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Your dear companion, the daughter of the King is very much afflicted with sorrow; soon I will free her, by destroying that cruel Rākṣasa. There is no doubt in this. O Auspicious One! I will rescue your dear companion and bring her to the city of yours and hand her over to

[Ch 23 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then that King, the enemy destoryer, will perform the marriage ceremony of his daughter. I think this is the desire of your heart.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then that King, the enemy destroyer, will perform the marriage ceremony of his daugther. I think this is the desire of your heart.

[Ch 23 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sweet-speaking One! Know that that is also my desire. O Beautiful One! Now that desire will be fulfilled by your efforts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sweet-speaking One! Know that that is also my desire. O Beautiful One! Now that desire will be fulfilled by your efforts.

[Ch 23 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Show me quickly that place and see my prowess. O One with a face beautiful like the Moon! It seems that you will be able to do my work.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Show me quickly that place and see my prowess. O One with a face beautiful like the Moon! It seems that you will be able to do my work.

[Ch 23 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Soon do such as I can kill that wicked demon, who steals others wives. Now show me the way to the impassable city of that Rākṣasa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Soon do such as I can kill that wicked demon, who steals otherś wives. Now show me the way to the impassable city of that Rākṣasa.

[Ch 23 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the sweet words of the prince, Yásovati became very glad and gently began to speak out how he could go to the demon's city.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :--O King! Hearing the sweet words of the prince, Yaśovatī became very glad and gently began to speak out how he could go to the demon’s city.

[Ch 23 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O King! Take the success-giving Mantra of Bhagavatī and I would then be able to show you today the city guarded by Rāksasas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Take the success-giving Mantra of Bhagavatī and I would then be able to show you today the city guarded by the Rākṣasas.

[Ch 23 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Better arrange to take your vast army with you; for you will have to fight no sooner you go there. Kālaketu is personally a great warrior surrounded by Rākṣasas of great power and strength.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Better arrange to take your vast army with you; for you will have to fight no sooner you go there. Kālaketu is personally a great warrior surrounded by Rākṣasas of great power and strength.

[Ch 23 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore be initiated in the Mantram of Śrī Bhagavatī and accompany me. So you will surely be successful. I will show you the way to the city of that Demon.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore be initiated in the Mantram of Śrī Bhagavatī and accompany me. So you will surely be successful. I will show you the way to the city of that Demon.

[Ch 23 Verse 20-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Slay that vicious and vilest of the Rākṣasas and rescue my dear companion." Hearing thus, Haihaya was duly initiated into the great Mantram of Yogēsvari, named Trilokitilaka Mantra (Hrim Gauri Rudradayite Yogēsvari Hum Phat Svāhā is the Yogēsvari Mantra), by Maharṣi Dattātreya, accidentally come there (as if ordained by Fate), the chief of Jñāmins (the Gnostics), that is conducive to the welfare of the beings. Thus by the influence of the Mantram the King got the power of knowing all things and going everywhere with unobstructed speed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Slay that vicious and vilest of the Rākṣasas and rescue my dear companion. Hearing thus, Haihaya was duly initiated into the great Mantram of Yogeśvarī, named Trilokitilaka Mantra (Hrīm Gaurī Rudradayite Yoge Śvarī Hūm Phaṭ Svāhā is the Yogeśvarī Mantra), by Maharṣi Dattātreya, accidentally come there (as if ordained by Fate), the chief of Jñānins (the Gnostics), that is conducive to the welfare of the beings. Thus by the influence of the Mantram the King got the power of knowing all things and going everywhere with unobstructed speed.

[Ch 23 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the King Haihaya quickly went with Yaśvatī to the impassable city of the Rākṣasas, accompanied by a vast army.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the King Haihaya quickly went with Yaśovatī to the impassable city of the Rākṣasas, accompanied by a vast army.

[Ch 23 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The city was surrounded by snakes and guarded by the terrible Raksasas like the city of Pātāla. The messengers of the Rāksasa, seeing the King coming, were struck with terror and crying aloud quickly went to Kālāketu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The city was surrounded by snakes and guarded by the terrible Rākṣasas like the city of Pātāla. The messengers of the Rākṣasa, seeing the King coming, were struck with terror and crying aloud quickly went to Kālaketu.

[Ch 23 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kālāketu, struck with Cupid's arrows, was sitting beside Ekāvalī and was speaking many modest words when the messenger went there suddenly and said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kālaketu, struck with Cupid’s arrows, was sitting beside Ekāvalī and was speaking many modest words when the messenger went there suddenly and said :--

[Ch 23 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O King! The attendant of this lady Yasovatī is coming here with a prince and an army.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O King! The attendant of this lady Yaśovatī is coming here with a prince and an army.

[Ch 23 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! We cannot tell exactly whether the prince is the son of Indra, named Jayanta or Kārikeya. After all, puffed up with the strength of his army, he is coming here.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! We cannot tell exactly whether the prince is the son of Indra, named Jayanta or Kārtikeya. After all, puffed up with the strength of his army, he is coming here.

[Ch 23 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The battle is imminent; now make your arrangements fully and carefully; fight with the son of a Deva or abandon this lotus-eyed Lady.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The battle is imminent; now make your arrangements fully and carefully; fight with the son of a Deva or abandon this lotus-eyed Lady.

[Ch 23 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! At a distance of three Yojanas from this place, he is staying with his army. Now equip yourself and quickly declare the war by blowing the war trumps etc.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! At a distance of three Yojanas from this place, be is staying with his army. Now equip yourself and quickly declare the war by blowing the war trumpets.”

[Ch 23 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the messenger's words, Kālāketu, the King of the Demons, became overwhelmed with anger and at once sent many powerful Rāksasas, holding all sorts of weapons and spoke out to them: "O Rāksasas! With weapons in your hands, go before them quickly."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing the messenger’s words, Kālaketu, the King of the Demons, became overwhelmed with anger and at once sent many powerful Rākṣasas, holding all sorts of weapons and spoke out to them :-- “O Rākṣasas! With weapons in your hands, go before them quickly.”

[Ch 23 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Ordering them thus, Kālāketu asked in sweet words Ekāvali who was in front and very distressed. O Thin-bellied One! Who is coming here? Is he your father or any other man coming with his army to release you. Speak this to me truly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Ordering them thus, Kālaketu asked in sweet words Ekāvalī who was in front and very distressed. O Thin-bellied One! Who is coming here? Is he your father or any other man coming with his army to release you. Speak this to me truly.

[Ch 23 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If your father comes here to take you back, being very much distressed with your bereavement, I will never fight with him, if I come to know this truly; rather I will bring him to my house and worship him with the excellent horses, gems and jewels and clothing. Really I will show my full hospitality duly to him when he comes here. Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► If your father comes here to take you back, being very much distressed with your bereavement, I will never fight with him, if I come to know this truly; rather I will bring him to my house and worship him with the excellent horses, gems and jewels and clothings. Really I will show my full hospitality duly to him when he comes here.

[Ch 23 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And if any other person comes, then I will take his life by the sharpened arrows; there is no doubt in this. Know this as certain whoever comes here for your rescue is brought by the hand of Death to me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And if any other person comes, then I will take his life by the sharpened arrows; there is no doubt in this. Know this as certain whoever comes here for your rescue is brought by the hand of Death to me.

[Ch 23 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Large-eyed One! Say who is this fool that is coming, not knowing me as the powerful and unconquerable Kāla (Death).”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Large-eyed One! Say who is this fool that is coming, not knowing me as the powerful and unconquerable Kāla (Death).

[Ch 23 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Ekāvali said: “O Highly Fortunate One! I do not know who is this coming to this side with a violent speed. O King! How can I know that when I am in this state of confinement in your house. This man is not my father nor my brother. Some other powerful man is coming here. I do not know exactly what for he is coming.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Ekāvalī said :-- “O Highly Fortunate One! I do not know who is this body coming to this side with a violent speed. O King! How can I know that when I am in this state of confinement in your house. This man is not my father nor my brother. Some other powerful man is coming here. I do not know exactly what for he is coming.”

[Ch 23 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Demon said: "My messengers say that your comrade Yaśovati has take with her that warrior and is coming to this side with great energy. Where has your clever companion gone now? O Lotus-eyed! There is no enemy in the three worlds strong enough to fight against me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Demon said :-- My messengers say that your comrade Yaśovatī has taken with her that warrior and is coming to this side with great energy. Where has your clever companion gone now? O Lotus-eyed! There is no enemy in the three worlds strong enough to fight against me.

[Ch 23 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Just then other messengers hurriedly came there terrified and spoke to Kālāketu who had been staying in the house, thus: "O King! The army has come quite close to the city and how are you staying in the house, calm and quiet?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Just then other messengers hurriedly came there terrified and spoke to Kālaketu who had been staying in the house, thus :-- “O King! The army has come quite close to the city and how are you staying in the house, calm and quiet?

[Ch 23 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Better march out of the city with your vast army as early as possible." The powerful Kālaketu, then, hearing their words, mounted on the chariot and quickly went out of his city.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Better march out of the city with your vast army as early as possible.” The powerful Kālaketu, then, hearing their words, mounted on the chariot and quickly went out of his city.

[Ch 23 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King Haihaya, on the other hand, suffering from the bereavements of his dear lady, suddenly came there mounted on horseback.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King Haihaya, on the other hand, suffering from the bereavements of his dear lady, suddenly came there mounted on horseback.

[Ch 23 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The terrible fight ensued then and there between the two and each one struck the other with sharpened weapons and the quarters all around blazed with their glitterings and clashings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The terrible fight ensued then and there between the two and each one struck the other with sharpened weapons and the quarters all around blazed with their glitterings and clashings.

[Ch 23 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the terrible fight was going on, Haihaya, the son of Lakṣmī, struck Kālaketu, the King of the Daityas with a very powerful club (Gadā).
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the terrible fight was going on, Haihaya, the son of Lakṣmī, struck Kālaketu, the King of the Daityas with a very powerful club (Gadā).

[Ch 23 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus struck by the Gadā, the Lord of the Daityas fellon the ground like a mountain, struck by lightning, and died.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus struck by the Gadā, the Lord of the Daityas fell on the ground like a mountain, struck by lightning, and died.

[Ch 23 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► All the Rāksasas fled away on all sides, struck with terror. Yásovati went then very hurriedly with a gladdened heart to Ekāvali and began to speak to her in terms of surprise and in sweet words:
NEW CORR ENG ──► All the Rākṣasas fled away on all sides, struck with terror. Yaśovatī went then very hurriedly with a gladdened heart to Ekāvalī and began to speak to her in terms of surprise and in sweet words :--

[Ch 23 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Dear! O Dear! Come, Come; the great warrior, the prince Ekavīra has killed the Lord of the Daityas in a dreadful battle. That King in now waiting, tired in the midst of his soldiers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- O Dear! O Dear! Come, Come; the great warrior, the prince Ekavīra has killed the Lord of the Daityas in a dreadful battle. That King is now waiting, tired in the midst of his soldiers.

[Ch 23 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He has already heard from me about your beauty and qualities; and now he is expecting to see you. O One Looking askance! Now satisfy your eyes and mind by seeing that King who is like the Cupid.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He has already heard from me about your beauty and qualities; and now he is expecting to see you. O One Looking askance! Now satisfy your eyes and mind by seeing that King who is like the Cupid.

[Ch 23 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When I described to him before on the banks of the Ganges your beauty and qualifications, he got enamoured of you and now he is suffering from bereavement and wants to see you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When I described to him before on the banks of the Ganges your beauty and qualifications, he got enamoured of you and now he is suffering from bereavements and wants to see you.

[Ch 23 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus, hearing, Ekāvali determined to go to him and as she yet unmarried, she became abashed and afraid.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus, hearing, Ekāvalī determined to go to him and as she was yet unmarried, she became abashed and afraid.

[Ch 23 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She thought how could she see the prince as she was unmarried. It might be that be being passionate would catch her by her arms.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She thought how could she see the prince as she was unmarried. It might be that he being passionate would catch her by her arms.

[Ch 23 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus, troubled with thought, that daughter of the King, with a sad look, and wearing poor clothes, Ekāvali went with Yaśovatī on a palanquin, carried on men's shoulders.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus, troubled with thought, that daughter of the King, with a sad look, and wearing poor clothes, Ekāvalī went with Yaśovatī on a palanquin, carried on men’s shoulders.

[Ch 23 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing that large-eyed daughter of the King coming there, the prince said: "O Beautiful One! My two eyes are very thirsty to see you. Satisfy my eyes and mind by shewing yourself to me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing that large-eyed daughter of the King coming there, the prince said :-- “O Beautiful One! My two eyes are very thirsty to see you. Satisfy my eyes and mind by showing yourself to me.”

[Ch 23 Verse 57-58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the prince passionate and the King's daughter very much abashed, Yásovati, who knew the rules of modesty, thus spoke to the prince: "O Prince! The father of my dear companion expressed a desire to betroth her to your hands. She is also obedient to you. Therefore your meeting will certainly take place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the prince passionate and the King’s daughter very much abashed, Yaśovatī, who knew the rules of modesty, thus spoke to the prince :-- “ O Prince! The father of my dear companion expressed a desire to betroth her to your hands. She is also obedient to you. Therefore your meeting will certainly take place.

[Ch 23 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Wait; take her to her father; and he will perform duly the marriage ceremony and betroth her to your hands. Know this to be quite certain."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Wait; take her to her father; and he will perform duly the marriage ceremony and betroth her to your hands. Know this to be quite certain.”

[Ch 23 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King took her words to be quite just and true and taking those two ladies went with his army to the house of the father of Ekāvalī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King took her words to be quite just and true and taking those two ladies went with his army to the house of the father of Ekāvalī.

[Ch 23 Verse 61-62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After a long time the King saw his daughter in poor clothings and became highly pleased. Yašovatī then described in detail all what happened before the King.
NEW CORR ENG ──► After a long time the King saw his daughter in poor clothings and became highly pleased. Yaśovatī then described in detail all what happened before the King.

[Ch 23 Verse 63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King then with his minister brought with great love, courtesy and gentleness Ekavira to his house and on all auspicious day performed the marriage ceremony of him with Ekāvalī, in accordance with due ceremonies and rites.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King then with his minister brought with great love, courtesy and gentleness Ekavīra to his house and on an auspicious day performed the marriage ceremony of him with Ekāvalī, in accordance with due ceremonies and rites.

[Ch 23 Verse 64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the King gave away many clothings, ornaments, jewels, and articles for fitting a house and many other things and worshipped duly and sent his daughter together with Yaśovatī away with the King Haihaya.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the King gave away many clothings, ornaments, jewels, and articles for fitting a house and many other things and worshipped duly and sent his daughter together with Yaśovatī away with the King Haihaya.

[Ch 23 Verse 65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus the marriage ceremony was performed and the son of Laksmī gladly returned to his house and began to enjoy many pleasures with his wife. Then, in course of time, in the womb of Ekāvali the King Haishaya got a son named Kṛtavírya.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the marriage ceremony was performed and the son of Lakṣmī gladly returned to his house and began to enjoy many pleasures with his wife. Then, in course of time, in the womb of Ekāvalī the King Haihaya got a son named Kritavīrya.

[Ch 23 Verse 66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The son of this Kṛtavīrya is known as Kārtavīrya. O King! Thus I have narrated to you the origin of the Haihaya dynasty. Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter in the Sixth Book on the battle of Haihaya and Kalaketu in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The son of this Kritavīrya is known as Kārtavīrya. O King! Thus I have narrated to you the origin of the Haihaya dynasty. Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter in the Sixth Book on the battle of Haihaya and Kālaketu in the Mahā Purāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
