CHAPTER XI

On the Origin of the Gaṅgā

नारद उवाच

श्रुतं पृथिव्युपाख्यानमतीव सुमानोहरम् ।

गंगोपाख्यानमधुना वद वेदविदां वर ॥ १ ॥

भाते भारतीगायात्सा जगाम मुरेश्वी ।

विष्णुवक्त्या परमा स्वयं विष्णुपदोति च ॥ 2 ॥

कक्षे कुर्य युगे केन प्रार्थिता प्रेरिता पुरा ।

तत्कर्म श्रीतृमिच्छाम पापच्च पुणवद शूर्भम् ॥ 3 ॥

The Devarşi Nārada said: O Thou, the foremost of the knowers of the Vedas! I have heard the

excellent narration of Earth. Now I want to hear the anecdote of Gangā. I heard, are long, that Gangā, of the nature of Viṣṇu and appearing from the feet of Viṣṇu, the Āśvari of the Devas, appeared, due to the curse of Bhāratī, on Bhārata; why has she come to Bhārata; in which Yuga and asked by whom did she come to Bhārata? O Lord! Now describe to me this auspicious anecdote capable to destroy sins and yield religious merits.

शीनारायण उवाच

राजराजेश्वर: श्रीमान्मार: सूर्वंवर्जन: । तस्य भार्यां च वैद्यर्षि शैल्या चे त्म नोहरे ॥ 4 ॥ तत्पल्यामेकुपत्रऊ बधूव सुमनोहर: । उसमंत्र इति खात: शैल्यायां कुलवधिनः ॥ 5 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Child! In ancient days there was born a prosperous Emperor King of Kings, in the Solar dynasty. He had two beautiful wives; one was named Vaidarbhī, and the other was named Śaivyā. Śaivyā delivered a very lovely son; his name was Asamañjā.

अन्या चाराध्यायमास शंकरं पुत्रकामुकी ।

वधूव गर्भत्स्याछ हरस्य च वेरण है ॥ 6 ॥

गते शताद्धे पूर्णें च मासियिंढ़ं सुधाव सा ।

तदद्धुवा सा शिवं व्यात्वा श्रोतेचेधै: पुनः पुनः ॥ 7 ॥

On the other hand, the queen Vaidarbhi desirous of getting a son, worshipped Śaṅkara, the Lord of Bhūtas who became pleased and granted her request; and Vaidarbhi became pregnant. After one hundred years of pregnancy she gave birth to one mass of flesh. Seeing this, the queen became very afflicted and taking refuge of Mahādeva, began to cry loudly and very often.

शंभुबहिगाणकेषेण तत्समीपं जगाम ह ।

चकार संविभज्यैतिप्रंदं पहिसहस्य प्रा ॥ 8 ॥

सर्वे बभुवः पुत्राश महावलयातकामः ।

श्रीमथायात्रामातंखप्रभामुकलेवतः ॥ 9 ॥

Bhagavān Śaṅkara, then, appeared there in a Brāhmim form and cut that mass of flesh into thousand pieces. Those thousand pieces turned out into thousand very powerful sons. Their bodies looked more brilliant than the mid-day sun.

कपिलस्य मुने: शापात्रभूवुर्भस्मारच्च ते ।

राजा करोत तद्ध्यून जागम गहने वे ॥ 10 ॥

तपश्रकासमंजो गंगानयनकारणात् ।

लक्षवर्ष तपस्तवा ममार कालयोगतः ॥ 11 ॥

But they were all burnt to ashes by the curse of Kapila Muni. And the King began to lament bitterly and he entered into the forest. Asamānjā practised tapasyā to bring the Gaṅgā for one lakh years when

he quitted his body in course of time. His osn Arinśumān practised tapasyā for one lakh years to bring Gaṅgā unto Bhārata and he, too, died.

अंशुमांस्तस्य तन्यो गंगानयनकारणात् ।

तपः कृत्वा लक्षवर्ष ममार कालयोगतः ॥ 12 ॥

भगीरथस्तस्य पुत्रो महापभावतः सुर्धीः ।

वैल्याचे विद्यापक्रकष्ट शुणवाजजमरः ॥ 13 ॥

Then the son of Anísumān, the intelligent Bhagiratha, a great devotee of Viṣṇu, free of old age and death and the store of many qualifications, practised tapasyā for one lakh years to bring Gāngā on earth. At last he saw Śri Kṛṣṇa brilliant like ten millions of summer suns. He had two hands; there was a flute in his hand; be was full of youth in the dress of a cow-herd.

तपः कृत्वा लक्षवर्षे गंगायन्यकरणात् ।

ददर्ग कृष्ण ग्रीभ्यस्यं सूवंकीटमप्रमृष्म ॥ 14 ॥

दिमुर्जे मुरलीहतं क्रिशोरं गोपयेक्षिणम् ।

गोपालसूद्रौरिधं भक्तानुग्रहक्षिपण् ॥ 15 ॥

A sight of His ever ready to show grace on His devotees. He is Para Brahma, whose Substance is Will; he has no deficiencies. Brahma, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara and the other Devas and Munis, etc., all praise Him, who pervades everywhere.

सेवेष्ठायमं परं ब्रह्म परिपूर्णतां प्रपुम् ।

ब्रह्मविष्युशिवाहीघु स्तुतं मुनिणगोनुन्ति ॥ 16 ॥

निर्णिलं सांक्षुरूपं च निर्णी प्रकृतेः परम् ।

ईषद्धास्यप्रसात्यं भक्तानुग्रहकारणम् ॥ 17 ॥

He is not concerned with anything; yet He is the Witness of all. He is beyond the three gunas, higher than Prakṛti. A sweet smile is always in his face, which makes it the more lovely. There is none equal to him in showing Grace to the Bhaktas.

वहिष्ठुर्दीक्षृतभानं रत्नभूषणभूषितम् ।

तुहाव तद्धा नृपति: प्राण्य च पुनः पुनः ॥ 18 ॥

लील्या च वरं प्राप वांर्तितं वंशतापम् ।

कृत्वा च सत्वनं दिव्यं पुरुकांकितविधाः ॥ 19 ॥

His raiment is purified (uninflammable) by fire and he is decorated with gems, jewels and ornaments. The King Bhagiratha saw that

Book IX Chapter XI

unforeseen appearance, bowed down and began to praise over and over again. His whole body was filled ecstasy. Then he clearly told what he wanted for the deliverance of his family.

श्रीभगवानुवाच

भारतं भारतीशाणाद्रच्छ शीधे सुरेश्वरि ।

सारस्य सुतासवर्णपृताकुक ममाज्ञा ॥ 2 0 ॥

त्वस्यर्णिवायुना पुता यास्यति मम महाद्वरु ।

बिघ्रतो मम मूर्तीश दिव्यस्यन्दनागरिनः ॥ 2 1 ॥

Bhagavān Śrī Krṣṇa then, addressed Gaṅgā and said: “O Sureśvari! Go quickly and appear in Bhārata, under the curse of Bhāratī. By My command go quickly and purify the sons of Sagara. They will all be purified by the touch of the air in contact with the Ganges and rise up in divine aerial cars, assuming forms like Mine and they will come to My abode.

मत्यार्थर घबिख्यित सर्वाकारं तिरायायः ।

सुर्पिछ्छा कर्मशोगान्कृताउमनि जनमि ॥ 22 ॥

कोटिज्ञामित्रिते पारंप साते यकृतं नृभि: ।

गंगाया शतस्यर्जन नयतितीय श्रुतौ श्रुतम् ॥ 23 ॥

They will there remain always as My attendants and they will not be involved in the sins that they committed in their previous births." O Nārada! It is stated thus in the Vedas, that if the human souls, taking their births in Bhārata, commit sins for millions and millions of births, the sins will be completely destroyed if they touch once the air in contact with and carrying the particles of the Ganges.

स्पर्गान्दर्शनोद्धया: पुणवे द्राणुगां ततः ।

सीसल्सनानामाशेण सामान्यदिवसे नृगाम् ॥ 24 ॥

शनकोटिजन्यमार्गे नय्वतीति श्रुतो श्रुतम् ।

यानि कानि च पणानि ब्रह्मात्यादिकानि च ॥ 25 ॥

The sight of the Ganges and the touch of the Ganges water give religious merits ten times more than the touch with the air in contact with the Ganges water. People become freed of their sins then and there especially if they bathe in the Ganges.

जनमसंख्यार्षितान्येव कामतोउपि कृतानि च ।

ताति सर्वाणि गर्भविति मौसल्ल्यानतो नृणाम || 26 ||

पुण्याह्न्यानत: पुण्यं वेदा नैव वदन्ति च ।

किंच्छिद्धिन्ति ते विघ फत्मेव यथागमम् ॥ 27 ॥

It is heard in the Srutis that the bathing in the Ganges, if done according to rules, destroys all the sin e.g. the murder of a Brāhmin, etc., acquired in one thousand millions of births done consciously or unconsciously. The merits that are acquired by the bathing in the Ganges on a day of religious merit, cannot be described even by the Vedas. Whatever is mentioned in the Agamas is but a mere trifle.

ब्रहाविष्णुरिवाहाढ्य सर्वे नैव वर्दित च ।

सामान्यादिवसनानसंकल्पं शृणु सुदारि ॥ 28 ॥

पुर्णवं दारुणुं चैव मोसत्सनात: परम् ।

ततिक्षेत्रदारुणुं पुर्णवं परिवसंक्रमणे दिने ॥ 29 ॥

Even Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa cannot describe fully the merits of the bathing in the Ganges. O Brāhmī! Such is the glori of ordinary bathing. Now I will describe the effect of the Ganges bath done with a Śankalpa (resolve); hear. Ten times more the result is obtained when the Ganges bathing is done with a resolve (Śankalpa) than ordinary bath and if one bathes on the day when the sun passes from one sign to another (in the Zodiac), thirty times more religious merits accure.

अमायां चाधि ततुल्यं द्विगुणं दक्षिणायने ।

ततो द्विगुणं पुणयं नराणामुतारयणे ॥ 30 ॥

चातुमारियां घौर्णमायामन्तं पुणयेव च ।

अक्षामायां च ततुल्यं चैतड़ेदे निरूपितम् ॥ 31 ॥

On the new Moon (Amāvasyā) day, the Ganges bath gives the merits as above mentioned; but when the Sun is in his Southern course (Dakṣināyana) double the merits are obtained and when the sun is in his Northern course, ten times more religious merits are obtained. The Ganges bathing in the time of Cāturmāśya, full Moon day, Akṣayā Navamī or Akṣaya ‘trītyā yields merits that cannot be measured.

असंख्युप्यफलदयेतेषु स्नानदानकम् ।

सामान्यदिवसन्नानादानच्छतगुणं फलम् ॥ 32 ॥

मन्नतराधायां तिथी सुगाधायां तथैव च ।

माध्यस्य सितसतपन्थां बीभ्याछ्यां तथैव ॥ 33 ॥

अथायोगैकाह्यथां च नवन्यां च तथा हरे: ।

And if on the above Parva (particular periods of the year on which certain ceremonies are commanded) days both bathing, and making over gifts are done, there is no limit to the religious merits acquired; hundred times more than ordinary bath, religious merits are obtained. Great religious merits accrue from the Ganges bath on Manvantarā tithi, Yugādyā, Šuklā seventh day of the month of Māgha, Bhīsmāṣṭamī day, Aśokāṣṭamī day, and Śrī Rāma Navamī day.

ततोर्जी विश्रणु पुर्णयं नन्त्यायां नैव दुर्वेभम् ॥ 34 ॥

उश्राहतदायमां तु युग्यातिस्मयं फलम् ।

नन्त्यमं च कारभयं महनुर्षे चतुर्णेण ॥ 35 ॥

Again double the merits than those of the above arise from bathing in the Ganges during the Nanda ceremony. The Ganges bath in Daśaharā tanth gives merits equivalent to Yugādyā Snānam (bath). And if the bathing be done on Mahāndanā or in Mahāvārunj day, four times more religious merits accrue.

ततश्रुतर्णुणं पुण्यं द्विमहपूर्वकैं सति ।

पुणवं कोटिगुणं चैव सामान्यसनातो5पि यत् ॥ 36 ॥

चज्ञोरागसमये सूर्वे द्वागुणं ततः ।

पुणयमधाँद्वे काले ततः शनतपुणं फलम् ॥ 37 ॥

Ten million times more religious merits accure from the Ganges bathing on Mahā Mahā Vārunī day than ordinary bath. The Ganges bath in the Solar eclipse yields ten times more religious merits than in the Lunar eclipse. Again the Snānam in Ardhodaya Yoga yields hundred times more religious merits than that of the (solar) eclipse.

इन्वेवमुक्चला देवेशो विराता त्यतः पुः ।

तमुवाच तते गंगा भक्तिभात्मकंधरा ॥ 38 ॥

Thus saying to Gāngā before Bhagīrattha, the Lord of the Devas remained silent. The Devi Gāngā with her head bowed down with devotion, said:

गड़ोवाच

यामि चेद्वारतं नाव भारतीशापतः पुरा ।

तद्वाज्ञा च राजैद्र तपसा चैव संग्रतम् ॥ 39 ॥

दार्यतीत पाधियो महं प्रापाति याति काति च ।

ताति मे केन नर्यर्ति तनुपायं वद्ध प्रभो ॥ 40 ॥

Gaṅgā said: “If I am after all, to go to Bhārata as Thou commandest and under the curse given previously by Bhāratī, then tell me how I would be freed of the sins that the sinners will cast on me.

कति कालपरिभितं स्थितिमं तत्र भारते ।

कदा यास्यामि देवेश तिद्धणोः परमं पदम् ॥ 41 ॥

ममान्याङ्गितं यडास्वर्ज जानातिस सर्वैवित् ।

सर्वान्तरात्मसर्वैत्र तदुपायं वद प्रभो ॥ 42 ॥

How long will I have to remain there? When, O Lord! Shall I be able to return to the Highest place of Vishnu? O Thou, the Inner Self of all! O All Knowing! O Lord! Whatever else I desire, Thou knowest them all. So be pleased to instruct me on all these points."

श्रीभगवानुबाच

ज्ञानायि वार्षितं गंने तव सर्वे सुरेश्वरि ।

पतितसे द्रवरूपाया लवणोदो भविष्यति ॥ 43 ॥

स मगांगश्वरूपश्रू तवं च लक्ष्मीस्वरूपिधिं ।

विद्धपाया विद्योपे संगमो गुणवान्यपुढ़ि ॥ 44 ॥

Bhagavān Śrī Hari said: “O Sureśvarī! I know all that you desire; when you will assume the liquid form, the Salt Ocean will be your husband. He is My part and you are of the nature of Lakṣmī; so the union of the lover with the love stricken in the world will turn out a happy and qualified one.

वायत्व: संति नवछ्ध भारत्याद्धाङ्ध भारते ।

सीभाग्य तं च तास्वेल ल्वणोद्यस्य सीते ॥ 45 ॥

अद्धप्रपृति देवेशि कलः: पंचसहकवम् ।

वर्ष स्थितिते भारत्या: शापेन भारते भुचि ॥ 46 ॥

Of all the rivers Sarasvatī and others in Bhārata, that go to mix with the ocean, you will be the best and highly fortunate of them all. From today you will have to remain in Bhārata for a period of five thousand years, under the curse of Bhāratī.

Book IX Chapter XI

नित्यं त्वम्धिना सार्थ़ं कार्तियस रोर त्रिलम्।

त्वयेर रसिका देखि रसिकेजेण संयुत्न ॥ 47 ॥

त्वां स्तोष्यित च स्तोषण भपीरथ्छुतेन च ।

भातस्था जना: सर्वे पूजिथ्येति भक्ति: ॥ 48 ॥

You will be able to enjoy daily and always the pleasures with the Ocean. O Devi! As you are a clever lady, so He is also apt and expert. The inhabitants of Bhārata will praise Thee and worship Thee with great devotion by the stotra which Bhagiratha has composed.

कण्वग्योक्त्यानेन ध्यावा तां पूजिथ्येति ।

यः स्तौति प्रणमेघित्यं सो5श्मेधफलं लभेत् ॥ 49 ॥

गंगा गंगेति यो बूयाघोजनानां श्रौतरि ।

मुच्यते सर्वोपेध्यो विद्युलोकं स गच्छिति ॥ 50 ॥

He will derive the fruit of one horse-sacrifice who will meditate on Thee as per Kāṇvaśākhā and worship, praise and bow down to Thee daily. Even if one utter ‘Gaṅgā,’ ‘Gaṅgā,’ though one is one hundred Yojanas away from the Ganges, one will be freed of all sins and go to Viṣṇu-loka.

सहस्वापिति स्नानाधावणे ते भविष्यति ।

प्रकृतैर्भन्संस्पश्रद्धि तिह्व विलेक्षति. ॥ 51 ॥

पापिनां तु सहसाणां शवस्यर्नि वयत्वि ।

तन्योगपाकस्नानान्तदं च विनंक्ष्यति ॥ 52 ॥

Whatever sins will be cast in Thee by thousand sinners bathing in Thee will be destroyed by the touch of the devotees of Prakrti Devi. Even if thousands and thousands of sinners touch the dead bodies an bathe in Thee, all those will be destroyed when the Devi Bhaktas, the worshippers of Bhuvaneśvari and Māyā Bīja, will come and touch Thee.

तत्रैव त्वमधिछानं क्रियस्ययमोचनम् ।

सार्य सरित्द्रः श्रेष्ठधि: सरस्वत्यादिधि: शुणे ॥ 53 ॥

तन्तु तीर्थे घतेसघाएं यत्र त्वरुणाकौतिनम् ।

त्वेत्रपुण्यर्भागेण तृती भवति पातकी ॥ 54 ॥

रैणुप्राणवर्ष च देवीलोकेक वसेद्युवम् ।

O Auspicious One! Thou wilt wash away the sins of the sinners, by Thy stay in Bhārata with other best rivers Sarasvatī and others. That will be at once a sacred place of pilgrimage where Thy

glories will be chanted. By the touch of the dust of Thine, the sinner will be at once purified and he will dwell in the Devi-loka (Manj Dvīpa) for as many years as will be the dust there.

जानेन तथिति मे भक्क्या मग्राम्याप्रतुर्षकम् ॥ 55 ॥

समुत्सृजित प्राणांशु ते गच्छिति हरे: पदम् ।

पार्वेद्वारस्ते च भविष्यितं हरेश्रिम् ॥ 56 ॥

लयं प्राकृतिके ते च इव्यन्ति चार्यल्यकम् ।

मृत्यव बहुगुप्येन तच्छवं लयि विज्यन्ते ॥ 57 ॥

प्रयाति स च वैकुंट यावढ़ः स्थितितस्ययि ।

All Hail to the Devi Bhuvaneśvari! He who will leave his body on Thy lap with full consciousness and remembering My name, will certainly go to My abode and will remain, as My chief attendant for an infinite period. He will see countless Prākrtik Layas (dissolutions of the Universe). Unless a man has collected hordes of religious merits, he cannot die in the Ganges; and if he dies on the Ganges he goes to Vaikuntha as long as the Sun rises in this world.

कार्यव्यूहं ततः कृत्वा भोजयित्वा स्वकर्मकम् ॥ 58 ॥

तस्मै दद्वामि सारूपं कारोमि तं च पारंद्वम् ।

अज्ञानी चत्वजल्यगर्हादि प्राणानमसुवृजेत् ॥ 59 ॥

तस्मै दद्वामि सारूपं कारोमि तं च पारंद्वम् ।

I get many bodies for him where he can enjoy the fruits of his Karma and I then give him My Sārūpya (From resembling Mine) and make him My attendant. If any ignorant man, void of any Jñānam, quits his body by touching merely Thy water, I give him Sālokya (place in My region) and make him My attendant.

अन्यत्र ता व्यतेत्राणांत्वनामम्यतुपुर्कम् ॥ 60 ॥

तस्पै द्वादिम सालोकयं यावड़े झडणो बयः ।

अन्यत्र ता चलेनत्राणांत्वनाम्यतुपुर्णम् ॥ 61 ॥

तस्पै द्वादिम सात्क्यमलंखं प्राकृतं लवम् ।

रत्नेद्रसातिमर्गागयानेन सह पार्वदैः ॥ 62 ॥

सखः प्रयाति गोलेकां मम तुल्यो भवेद्युवम् ।

Even if one quits one's body in a far off place, uttering Thy Name, I give him place in My region for one life time of Brahmā And if he remembers Thee with devotion, and quits his mortal coil at an

other place, I give him Sārūpya (Form resembling Mine) for a period of endless Prākṛtīk Layas. He instantly gets on an aerial car made of jewels and goes with My attendants to the region of Goloka and gets form like Me. Those that worship daily My Mantra, that pass their days, eating the remnant of the food offered to Me, they need not have any distinction whether they die in Tirath or not. They themselves can easily purify the three worlds. Getting on the excellent and best aerial car built of jewels, they go to the region of Goloka.

नौर्रिज्यतीं मरणे विशेषो नास्ति कक्षान ॥ ६३  ॥

मन्नोरोपककानां तु नित्यं नैवैषे घोफिनान् ।

पूर्तं कर्तुं सगत्को हिं लीलाया घुवनजयम् ॥ ६४ ॥

रत्नेत्रसारायने नोगलेकं संप्रवर्ति च ।

मद्धक्ता बांधाव येषां तैरे पश्रादयो5पि हि ॥ 6 5 ॥

प्रवर्ति रत्वायने नोगलेकं चातितुल्बनम् ।

यत्र तत्र स्मृताते च ज्ञानेन ज्ञानिनः सति ॥ 6 6 ॥

जीवमृक्ताश्र ते पूता मद्धतैः संविधानतः ।

O Chaste One! Even if the friends of My devotees, be born in animal births, they also will be purified by the devotion shewn towards Me and getting on a jewelled aerial car will be able to go to Goloka, so difficult of access. Wherever the Bhaktas may be, if they simply remember Me with devotion, they will become liberated while living by the power of My Bhakti.

इलुकुत्वा श्रीहरितां च प्रत्युवाच भगीरम्ब। 6 7 ॥

सूक्षि गंगामिमां भक्त्या पूजां च कुक संग्राम् ।

भगीर्यस्तां तुहाव पूजामायाम भक्ति: ॥ 6 8 ॥

कौशुयोकेन ध्यानेन स्तोजणीपुः पुनः ।

प्रणानाम च श्रीकृष्णं परमात्मानीश्वरम् ॥ 6 9 ॥

भगीर्यश्व गंगा च सेठान्तर्न चकार ह ।

Thus saying to Gaṅgā, Bhagavān Śrī Hari addressed Bhagīrathā: O Child! Now worship Gaṅgā Devī with devotion and chant hymns to Her. The pure Bhagiratha meditated with devotion as per Kauthuma Śākhā and worshipped the Devi and praised Her repeatedly. Then Gaṅgā and Bhagiratha bowed down to Śrī Krṣṇa and He disappeared at once from their sight.

नाद खाच

केन ध्यानेन स्तोत्रेण केन पूजाक्रोग च ॥ ७० ॥

पूजां चकार नृपतिर्वं वेद्विद्वां वर ।

The Devarṣī Nārada said: O Thou the foremost of the Knowers of the Vedas! How, by what Kuthuma Śākhā, the noble King Bhagiratha meditated on the Devi Gāngā; what storia did he recite and what was the method with which he worshipped the Gānges.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

स्नावा निवाक्रिया कृत्वा धृत्य धौते च वाससी ॥ 71 ॥

संपूर्ण देववद्के च संयतो भक्तिपूर्वकम् ।

गणोंचे च दिनोंचे च वाई विज़णुं शिव हिंवामुं ॥ 72 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Nārada! One should first take one's bath, and putting on a clean washed clothing should perform one's daily duties. Then one should control oneself and with devotion worship the six Devatās Gaṇeśa, Sun, Fire, Viṣṇu, Śiva and Śiva.

संपूच्य देवर्धकृचे च संगोद्धिकारी च पूजने ।

गणेणं विच्छनाशय आरोग्याय दिवाकर्म। ॥ 73 ॥

वाईं ग्रीचाय विश्युं च लध्य्यर्षे पूजवेधरः ।

शिवं ज्ञानाय जानेणे शिवां च मुक्तिसिद्धरे ॥ 74 ॥

Thus one becomes entitled to worship. First worship is to be given to Gangaśa for the destruction of obstacles; the Sun is to be next worshipped for health; Fire, for purification; Viṣṇu is then worshipped for getting wealth and power; Śiva is worshipped for knowledge and Śivānī is worshipped for Mukti.

संपूर्वैताल्लेषयज्ञो विपतितमतोज्ञस्या ।

दध्याबनेने ध्यानेन तद्धानां श्रणु नाद् ॥ 75 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे नवमकरभे चकाशोरधाया: 111 ।

When these Devatās are worshipped, one is entitled to worship the Deity. Otherwise contrary become the effects. Now I am saying what Dhyānam (meditation) did Bhagiratha practise towards the Devi Gaṅgā.

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Ninth Book on the origin of the Ganges in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XII

