CHAPTER X

On the Curse on Viṣṇu by Bhṛgu

जनमेव उवाच

सन्देशेउं महानत्र परागरं कथानके ।

नरनारायणी शान्तो वैषणावांगी तपोधीपं ॥ १ ॥

तीबीधमी सत्त्वमुक्तो वन्याशनपरी सदा ।

धर्मपुत्री महात्मानी तापसी सत्यसंस्थित्यो ॥ 2 ॥

कर्थ रासमासयुक्ती जाती युढ़े परस्यम् ।

संग्रामं चक्रतः कस्माचल्वता तपिमपुत्तभाम् ॥ 3 ॥

प्रहादेन समं पूर्णं दिव्यवर्षगतं किल ।

हिल्या शान्तिसुखं युढ़ं कुलवन्ती कधं मुनी ॥ 4 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Son of Parāśara! There has arisen a great doubt in my mind on hearing just now your words. These Nara Nārāyana are the two sons of Dharma; they are ascetics, calm and quiet, the Anīśas of Viṣṇu; they reside in a holy place of pilgrimage! They are filled with the sāttivic qualities, subsisting always on roots and fruits of the forest, the highsouled hermits and truthful. How were they addicted to such warfare? Why had they left their invaluable asceticisms? And with what object were they fighting for full one thousand Deva years with Prahlāda.

कथं ती चक्रतुरुंद्र प्रहादोर समं पुनी ।

कथयस्व महानाग काण्य विग्रहस्य वै ॥5 ॥

What was the end, O Muni, of their fight with

Prahlāda? Kindly explain to me in detail the cause of this warfare.

काभिनी कनकं कार्य काण्य विग्रहस्य वै ।

युब्द्वुरुद्धः कथं जाता तयोक्ष नहित्रकतिः ॥ ६ ॥

Women, wealth or any other worldly object can be the cause of any quarrel or fight amongst any persons; but, in this case, the two ascetics had none of these; how then this idea of fight sprung within their minds.

तथाधिं तपस्ततं ताथ्यां च केन हेतुना ।

मोहाशं सुखफोगार्थं स्वर्गांथे वा परन्तप ।

कृतमत्युक्तटं ताथ्यां तप संक्षेफलप्रदम् ॥ 7 ॥

युनियं शान्तिचिताथ्या प्राप्तिकं फलमद्धूनम् ।

And why did they practise such severe austerities? Was it that they had to overpower others, or enjoy pleasures themselves or to reach Heaven that they practised tapasyā? What fruits did they eventually obtain from such penances?

तपसा पीक्षितो देहः संग्रामेण पुनः पुनः ॥ ८ ॥

दिव्यवर्षगतं पूर्ण श्रमेण परीक्षिति ।

न राज्यार्थ धने वार्थिन न दारेषु गृहेषु च ॥ ९ ॥

क्रियर्थ तु कृतं युद्धं ताथ्यां तेन महात्मना ।

They became very lean and thin through their asceticism; still how could they fight full one thousand Deva years without getting fatigued.

Book IV Chapter X

निरीह: पुरुषः कस्मात्यकुयाँधुद्धमीरुषण् ॥ 10 ॥

दुःखदं सर्वेथा देहे जानन्यमं सनातनम् ।

They were not entangled in this fight for kingdom, or wealth or for women or for any other worldly object; then why did they fight with the highsouled Prahlāda?

सुबुद्धि: सुखदानीह कर्मणि कृते सदा ॥ १ १ ॥

न दुःखदानि धर्मत्र स्थितिरेवा सन्तानी ।

Having no attachment for any worldly object nor any desire to gain any thing therefrom, why did they engage themselves so thoroughly, in such pains giving battle?

धर्मपुत्री हरेर्शी सर्वजी सर्वभूषिति ॥ १ २ ॥

कृतवंती कर्थ युद्ध दुःखं धर्मविनाशकम् ।

Intelligent persons always do works leading to bliss; they never do painful works; this is the long standing rule of the world.

त्यक्तवता तः समानीतं सुखागमं महत्कनम् ॥ १३ ॥

संयुगं दारणं कृष्ण नैव मुखॉपि वाक्छति ।

The two sons of Dharma were the Arishas of Hari, all knowing and adorned with all qualities; why did they fight, subversive of religion? (13)

शुती मया ययातिस्तुं चतुतः स्वर्गान्महीपति: ॥ १४ ॥

अहंकारभवतायायतातिः पृथिवीतिः ।

O Maharṣi! Even the dull and stupid persons in the world won't go to these deadly battles leaving asceticism and samādhi, leading to the purification of all desires.

यनकृहानकर्ता च धार्मिकः पृथिवीपिति: ॥ 15 ॥

ग्वदोचारणामत्रेण पातिते वज्ञपाणिना ।

I have heard that Yayāti, the Lord of the earth was dropped from Heaven to this world, owing to his Aharṅkāra, though he was a virtuous king devoted to charities and sacrifices.

अङड़ाग्भुते युद्धे न भवलेवे निश्रयः ॥ १६ ॥

किं फलबास्य युद्धस्य मुने: पुराविनाशगम ।

No sooner Yayāti, said the king: did Aśvamedha sacrifice, etc., with Ahankāra, egoism, he was dropped by Indra with thunderbolt in his hands. So one can see that, without Ahankāra no fight

can occur. The ascetics had no bodily strength; therefore if they had to fight, it is through the waste of their Tapasya that they could do so.

व्यास उवाच

राजन्संसारमूलं हि विशियं परिक्षितितम् ॥ 17 ॥

अहूबारसु सर्वेभूमिनिधभूमिनिशुवे ।

Vyāsa said: O king! The all knowing sages that have realised the truth or Dharma declare the threefold Aharīkāra arising out the Sāttvic, Rājasic and Tāmasic qualities respectively to be the cause of this world.

स कर्थ मुनिनाल्युक्ते योग्यो देहभृतां किल ॥ 18 ॥

कारणेन विना कार्यं न भवल्येन निश्रयः ।

How, then, can these two Munis being embodied forego their Aharinkāras? Without any cause, no actions follow; this is quite certain.

तपो दानं तथा यज्ञा: सात्चिकात्यभवतिने ते ॥ 19 ॥

राजसाढ़ा महाभाग तामासात्कहस्तथा ।

Tapas, charities, sacrifices all originate from the Sāttvic qualities. And quarrels arise from the Rājasic or Tāmasic qualities.

डिया स्वलापीय राजेन्द्र नाड़कृति विना कवचिं ॥ 20 ॥

शुभा वाज्यपुर्णा वाज्य प्रभवत्य विभुयः ।

All arise from Aharikkāra, whether good or bad; this is quite certain.

अहूक्रात्रांधकारी नान्योदस्ति जगतीतले ॥ 21 ॥

येनैदं रचितं विश्वं कर्थं तर्हितं भवेत् ।

There is no other thing that enchains a soul than this Aharikāra. It is out of Aharikāra that this Universe is created; how can it be then free from it?

बहा मूर्तस्या विज्यारुहंकार्युतास्वमी ॥ 22 ॥

अन्येचं चैव का वातां मुनीति वसुधाधित्य ।

O King! Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśha, even these are with Aharikāras. Then how can you expect other ordinary Munis to be free from it?

अहंकारावृतं विश्वं घ्रमनोदं चराचरम् ॥ 23 ॥

पुनर्जन मुनेपूतुः सर्वे कर्मविशानुम् ।

Encased with Aharikāra, this Universe is rolling. Births and deaths occur respectively through this Karma.

देवतिर्वंडमनुध्याणां संसारोर्सिन्महीपते ॥ 24 ॥

रथांगवदसवर्वर्ण भ्रमणं सर्वदा स्मृत्तम् ।

विषाणोरथवताराणां संख्यां जानाति कः पुभान् ॥ 25 ॥

O Lord of the earth. The Devas, birds and men are revolving in this world like the wheel of a chariot.

विततेर्स्मितुं संसार उत्तमाधमयोगिनु ।

नारायणो हरि: साक्षान्मात्यं वरुपचाश्रितः ॥ 26 ॥

In this wide world who can count how many Avatāras Viṣṇu had to take in all sorts of wombs, good or low.

कामदं सीकरं चैव नारसिंहं च वामनम् ।

युगे युगे जगाढ्यो वासुदेवो जनार्दनः ॥ 27 ॥

Ordained by the Lord of the Universe, Nārāyaṇa Himself had to take the Fish, Tortoise, Boar, Man-Lion and the Dwarf incarnations.

अततानासंख्यातान्करोति विधाधिनतः ।

वैवस्वते महाराज सचने भगवान् द्वरि: ॥ 28 ॥

Vāsudeva Janārdana the Lord, had to undertake countless Avatāras births in this world.

मन्दोरंदवतारान्ये चके ताज्युण तच्चतः ।

भ्रुगुशापान्यहाराज विद्युद्विवर: प्रभुः ॥ 29 ॥

In the Vaivasvata manvantara, the Avatāras of Bhagavān Hari are being mentioned to you. Hear!

अवतारान्नेकांतु कृतावनाखिलेशः ।

The all-pervading Lord of the world, the God of the Gods, had to take several incarnations in this world, owing to the curses inflicted by Bhgru.

राजोवाच

सन्देहो3यं महाभाग हृदये मम जायते ॥ 30 ॥

भृगुण भगवात्विणुः कथं शप्तः चिनात्मः ।

The king said: There has now again arisen another fresh doubt, why was Visnu cursed by Bhgru Muni?

हरिणा च मुनेतस्य विधियं किं कृतं मुने ॥ 31 ॥

यद्रीषाद्धपुणा शप्तो विष्णुद्विनमस्कृत: ।

O Muni! What injury did Hari commit to that Muni, and whereof the Muni Bhgru cursed him.

व्यास उवाच

श्रणु राजन्यव्यायी भुगौः शापस्य कारणम् ॥ 32 ॥

पुरा कृषयव्यायाटे हिरण्यकशिपुर्नूपः ।

यदा तदा सुरैः सार्य कृतं संख्या परस्पतम् ॥ 33 ॥

कृते संखो जगत्सर्व व्याकृतं समजायत ।

Vyāsa said: Hear, O king! the cause of the curse; I will narrate to you. In days of yore, the king Hiranyakaśipu, the son of Kaśyapa often quarrelled with the Devas'; owing to this incessant warfare, the whole universe was much alarmed and perplexed.

हते तत्स्विपे राजा प्रहादः समजायते ॥ 34 ॥

देवान्स पीडयामास प्रहादः शुक्रभर्षणः ।

And when Hiranyakasipu was slain by the Man-Lion incarnation, Prahlāda, the tormentor of the foes, continued his enmity towards the Devas and began to annoy them.

संग्रामो कृषवद्धोरः शक्रप्रहाद्योरस्ता ॥ 35 ॥

पूर्ण वर्षेगतं राजेन्लोकाविस्मयाकराम् ।

Thus one hundred years dreadful battle occurred between the Devas and Prahlāda, to the astonishment of all.

देवेयूंद्धं कृतं चोर्ध प्रहादस्तु पशातिः ॥ 36 ॥

निर्वेदे परम प्रातो ज्ञाला धर्मे सनातनम् ।

विश्चान्सुतं राज्य प्रतिहाय्य बलिं नृप ॥ 37 ॥

जगाम स तपस्तनुं पवैते गन्धभादने ।

O king! The Devas fought very hard and were victorious. Prahlāda was defeated and was sorely grieved. Hearing that the Eternal Religion is the best, he handed his kingdom over to his son Bali and went to the Gandhamādan hill to practise tapasyā.

प्रायः राज्यं बलि: श्रीमानुर्शेरींर चकार ह ॥ ३ ८ ॥ ॥

ततः परमयं सुर्द्धे जातं परमदारभम् ।

ततः सुरैर्जितं दैया इन्जगामितंतेजसा ॥ ३ ९ ॥

The prosperous Bali, too, on gaining his kingdom, began to quarrel with the Devas and the war thus went on. Ultimately the powerful Indra and the Devas defeated the Asuras.

विष्णुना च सहायेन राज्यश्रहा: कृतान् ।

तत परपित्ता दैर्याः काव्यस्य शरणं गताः ॥ 40 ॥

किं त्वं न कुक्पे ब्रह्न् साहाय्यं नः प्रतपावान् ।

Book IV Chapter XI

स्थानुं न शुकुंगे ह्रत्र प्रविशगोर साततलम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

यदि लं व न सहावोरिस ज्ञानुं मन्त्रविदुन्तमः ।

O king! Indra, of unequalled prowess, with the aid of Viṣṇu, deprived the Daityas of their kingdom. The defeated Daityas took refuge of their family spiritual guide Śukrācārya and addressed him thus, O Brāhmaṇa! You are endowed with your fiery strength of Tapasyā and you are now powerful; why are you not lending your helping hands to your Daitya followers. O foremost of the councillors. If you do not help us and save us, we will not be able to stay on this earth and will soon have to go down to Pātāla.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तः सोउत्रबीहैत्यानाकायः कारणिको भूनि: Ⅱ 4 2 Ⅱ

मा भैष्ट धारायथामि तेजसा स्थेन भौः सुरा: ।

मन्सेनसीधेधिपिध्धा साहायथ नः सर्वेह हि ॥ 4 3 ॥

कारीथामि कृतोत्साहा भवन्तु विगतज्ञरा: ।

Vyāsa said: Thus addressed by the Daityas, the very kind hearted Šukrācārya said, O Daityas! Do not be afraid; I will protect you by my fire of strength and vigour; and help you with sound counsels and medicines. Be brave and energetic and cast aside your mental agony and sorrow.

यास उवाच

ततसेत निर्भय जाता दैया: काव्यस्य संश्यात् ॥ 44 ॥

दैंः: शुतस्तु वृत्तानः: सर्वशास्युवातिकल ।

तन संमन्य ते देवा: शंकेना च पर्ययम् ॥ 45 ॥

मन्चे चकु: सुसंविना: काव्यमन्यप्रभावतः ।

योदूं नख्यामहे तृर्णं यावत्र च्यावयन्ति वे ॥ 46 ॥

प्रसह हत्वा शिक्षांस्तु पातालं प्राययामहे ।

Vyāsa said: O king! The Daityas became fearless

under the patronage of Śukrācārya. The Devas had their spies and knew all about these. They held councils with Indra and settled that before the Daityas had time to dislodge us from our Heaven with the mantra of Śukrācārya, we will speedily go and attack them. Thus attacked all on a sudden, they will all be slain by us and we will drive them down to the Patāla.

दैत्याङ्गमुस्ततो देवा: संस्हा: शाखपाणय: ॥ 47 ॥

जगमुस्तानिष्यमुस्तिता दानवा हरिणोदिततः ।

Thus forming their resolves, with fully equipped arms and weapons, they went out of rage to fight with the Daityas and ordered by Indra and aided by Visnu, they began to kill the Demons.

वध्यमानासु ते दैवा: संसन्ता भयपीघिताः ॥ 48 ॥

काव्यस्य गरणं जग्यु तश्येति चाबुबन् ।

When the Devas were thus slaying the Demons, they got very much terrified and exclaimed ‘O Lord! Protect us! Protect us!’ and took the refuge of Šukra.

ताज्युकः पीडितान्यूद्या देर्वैर्व्यान्महावलान् ॥ 49 ॥

मा थेहेति वचः प्रात् मन्त्राथिवलादिषुः ।

यूद्वा काव्य सुरा: सर्वे त्यक्ता नायययुः किक्त ॥ 50 ॥

इति शीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणो वतुर्षकन्धे दर्भगोउवायः। 10 ॥

Śukrācārya, seeing the Daityas very much perplexed and distracted, at once cried aloud out of the influence of his Mantra “No fear, no fear,” Then the Devas on seeing Śukrācārya left the Daityas and fled away to their ov:n places.

Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Fourth Book of the Mahā Purānam, Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa on the curse on Viṣṇu by Bhrgu.

Book IV Chapter XI

