CHAPTER XIV

On the Killing of Tāmra and Ciksura

व्यास उवाच

दूरपुरं निर्त हंभात महिष: क्रोधभूषितः ।

उवाच दानवान्सर्वान्कि जातमिति चास्यकृत् ॥ । ॥

निर्हती दानवीं गृत्री रणो दुरुपुंखाक्कली ।

तन्या तत्परामाशयं पश्यंतु देखचेष्टितम् ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing the death news of

Book V Chapter XIV

Durmukha, Mahisāsura became blind with anger and began to utter repeatedly to the Dānavas “O! What is this? What is this?” Alas! That delicate woman has slain in battle the two heroes Durmukha and Bāskala! Lo! Now look at the wonderful workings of the Daiva (Fate).

कालो हि बलवान्क्ता सततं सुखदुःखये ।

नरणां परन्त्याणां पुण्यपापानुयोगतः ॥ 3 ॥

It is the acts virtuous, or otherwise that make men dependent; and the powerful Time awards pleasure or pain accordingly.

निर्ती दानवश्रेष्ठी किं कतल्यमतः परम् ।

ब्रुवंतु मिलिताः सर्वे यदुक्तं कार्यसूब्द्धे ॥ ४ ॥

The two powerful Demons are killed; what are we to do now? You all judge and say what is reasonable at this critical juncture.

एवं बुवर्ति राजेन्द्र महिषे5तिजलात्पिते ।

चिक्षुगाखस्तु सेनानीसमुजाच महारवः ॥ ५ ॥

Vyāsa said: When the powerful Mahisa said thus, his general Cikṣura, the great warrior spoke as follows:

राजर्श हनियाभि का चिन्ता क्षीविहिंसने ।

इत्युक्ता स्वबलैयुक्तः प्रययौ राथसंवृत्तः ॥ 6 ॥

“O King! Why are you so anxious as to take away the life of a delicate woman? I will kill Her, thus saying he departed for battle, mounted on his chariot and accompanied by his own army.

द्वितीयं पाणिगाई तु कृत्वा ताथं महावलम् ।

महता सैन्याधेण प्र्ययनगनं द्विगः ॥ ७ ॥

The powerful Tāmra accompanied him as his attendant; the sky and all the quarters became filled with the clamour of their vast army.

नागारछंतमालोक्य देवी भगवती शिजा ।

चकार शड़ज्याधोष घटानादं महाद्रतुम् ॥ 8 ॥

तत्रमुस्तेन शब्देन ते च सर्वे सुरारयः ।

किमेतेदिति भाषेतो दुबुकुर्षयकामिता: ॥ 9 ॥

The auspicious Devi Bhagavati saw them before Her and She made an extraordinarily wonderful sound with Her conchshell, with Her bow string and with Her great bell. The Asuras

heard that and trembled and fled, speaking amongst each other “What is this?”

चिश्रास्यस्तु तान्टूद्वा पलाययपरायणान् ।

उवाचातीव संकुढ़ः किं भयं चः समापतनम् ॥ 10 ॥

The Cikşurākṣa seeing them turning their backs, told them very angrily “O Dānavas! What fear has now overcome you?

अष्टीवाई सृत्यिषय पालीर्जालां मदोजताम् ।

तिश्छतव भयं त्यक्त्वा दैत्या: समरमूर्धीन ॥ 1 1 ॥

I will slay today this vain woman in the battle with arrows; so you should quit your fear and remain steady in battle.

श्रुत्यक्त्या दानवश्रेक्षायपाणिकार्लानित्यः ।

आपात्य संगरे देदीमित्युबान सातध्यः ॥ 1 2 ॥

Thus saying, the Dānava Chieftain Cikṣura came fearlessly before the Devi with bows and arrows in his hands and, accompanied by his army, angrily spoke thus:

किं गर्जसि विशालासिंध भीयवन्तीताश्रान् ।

नाहं विषीम तत्वांगि शुवा तेउडा विवेष्टितम् ॥ 13 ॥

सीयोदे दूषणं जाला तवैवाकीर्तिसभ्यम् ।

उपेक्षां कुन्ते विचर्भ मदीयं यामतोचने ॥ 14 ॥

"O Thou of large and broad eyes! Why are you roaring to terrify the weak persons! O the Soft-limbed One! I have heard all about your deeds but I am not a bit afraid of You." O One of beautiful eyes! It is a matter of disgrace, rather sin, to kill a woman; knowing this my heart wants to pass over this act, (does not like to do it, if my purpose be served without it).

क्रीणां युद्धं कताईशु तथा हावैशु सुन्दरि ।

न सशैर्विवहितं क्वापि त्वापुरीना कदाचन ॥ 15 ॥

O Beautiful One! The women fight with their side glances and amorous gestures, but I have never heard a woman like your coming to fight with arms and weapons.

पुर्येरपि न योद्धव्यं किं पुनर्निंशिणीतः शरैः ।

भवापुरीनां देहेषु दुर्जोग मातनीतदन् ॥ 16 ॥

Even the delicate flowers, Malati, etc., cause pain on the bodies of beautiful women like you;

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

so it is not advisable to fight against you with flowers even; what to speak of sharpened arrows!

धित्रजन मानुषे लोक क्षात्यभानुजीविनाम् ।

लतितोतः पिंयो देहः कुन्नीभः शितः शैः: ॥ 17 ॥

Fie on those who spend their lives according to the Kṣatriya Dharma! Oh! Who can praise that Dharma which allows this dear body of ours to be pierced by sharpened arrows?

तैल्यभ्यौ: पुथवातैल्णा मिहाङ्गभोजनैः ।

पोषितोज्यं प्रियो देहो घानतीय: पोर्षुभि: ॥ 18 ॥

This dear body is nourished by sweet food, by being smeared with oil, and by smelling the scents of beautiful flowers.

देईं हित्वाजिस्याराभिर्धनभुज्याते नर: ।

प्रिधानं दुःखदं पूर्वै पश्रातिक सुखदं भवेत् ॥ 19 ॥

Ought, then, one to destroy it by arrows from an enemy? Men get their bodies pierced by arrows and then become rich. Now is it possible for the riches to give pleasure afterwards when they caused such pains in the beginning?

स्वभयत्रैव सामोके युद्धमाकांक्षे सये :।

सुखं संभोगैतं व्यक्त्वा के गुणं वैलिसे संगरे ॥ 20 ॥

Even if this be so, fie on those riches! O Beautiful One! It seems you are not intelligent; why have you desired to fight instead of to enjoy sexual pleasure. O beautiful! What merits have you found in the battle that you have chosen this. खद्यात गदायाते भेदं च शिलीमुखैः ।

प्रगान्ते तु संस्कारो गोपायमुपखकर्णम् ॥ 21 ॥

Where you see the action of the axes and spears, striking each other with clubs, and hurling of sharpened arrows and weapons and where, when death comes, jackals come and feed upon the dead bodies, what merits have you been able to trace out in these things!

तस्यैव कविभियूर्ि: कृतं चारीव शंसनम् ।

रगे मृतानां स्व:गतिरत्यक्षितदोस्ति केलतः ॥ 22 ॥

It is only those cunning poets that praise these; they say that those who die in battle go to heaven! O Beautiful! Those sayings are, no doubt, mere flatteries.

तस्मादगच्छ वरातोहे यत्र ने रामते मनः ।

भज वा भूपतिं नारं हवारि सुरमदन् ॥ 23 ॥

Therefore, O Excellent One! Go away anywhere else you like; or accept this king Mahisa, the tormentor of the Devas, as your husband.

एवं बुबाणं ते दैत्यं प्रोवाच जगद्धिका ।

किं भूग भावसे मुंह बुद्दिमानिय चपिछ्तः ॥ 24 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Dānava Cikṣura speaking thus, the Divine Mother addressed him thus: O Stupid! Why are you speaking false words, having no significance, like a literary man giving out mere words only?

नौतिशास्वं न जानासे विद्यां चावीक्षकों तथा ।

न सेवितात्मव्या वृद्धा न धर्मे मतिरित्त ते ॥ 25 ॥

मूढ़ीसेवापरो यस्मात्ममान्चं मूर्षे एल हि ।

राजधर्म न जानासि किं ब्रवीषि समात्रतः ॥ 26 ॥

You do not know anything of politics, ethics, metaphysics; you serve illiterate and stupid; therefore, you are also a first class illiterate; you do not know what are the royal duties; then what are you speaking before me?

संग्रामे महिषे हत्ता कृत्वा कधिरकर्दमम् ।

यश:सत्मयं स्थिंरं कृत्वा गतिय्यामि यवासुखम् ॥ 27 ॥

देवानां दुःखदातारं दानवं मदगवितम् ।

हनिष्येड़ं दुराचारं युद्धे कृम स्थिते भव ॥ 28 ॥

I will kill that Mahisāsura in battle, make the soil muddy with his blood, thus establish firmly My pillar or Fame and then go happily to My abode. Surely will I slay that vain vicious demon, the tormentor of the Devas. Better fight steadily.

जीवितेच्छाजित चेन्मुद महिष्य तथा तत्व ।

तदा गच्छेतु पातालं दानवाः सर्वे एव ते ॥ 29 ॥

मुभूर्ण यदि यक्षिते युद्धं कुर्वर्ति सत्वतः ।

सर्वानेव वधिष्यामि निशयोःयं माभ्यान् ॥ 30 ॥

O Stupid! Better go to Patāla with all the Dānavas, if you and Mahisa desire to live any longer. And if you like to go unto death, then be ready fight without any delay; I will slay you all; this is My firm resolve.

Book V Chapter XIV

यास उवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य दान्वो बलदार्यितः ।

भुभोच वाणवृष्टि तां घनवृष्टिमिवापगम् ॥ 31 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing the Devi's words, the Dānava, proud of his own strength, began to hurl instantly on Her showers of arrows, as if another shower of rain burst upon Her.

चिच्छेट तस्य सा बाणान्वबाणर्पिशितेतत ।

ज्यान तं तथा घोरोराशिवसदीः शरैः ॥ ३२ ॥

The Devi cut off those arrows into pieces by Her sharp arrows and shot at him dreadful arrows like poisonous snakes,

युद्धे परमर्भ तत्र बभूव विस्मयप्रदम ।

गदया घातयामास तं रथाजगदीविका ॥ ३३ ॥

Then their fight became astounding to the public; the Divine Mother, then, struck him with Her club so much that he fell down from his chariot.

मूर्षे प्राप स दुहाया गद्याउभित्तो भूग्ग ।

मुह्त्रदयमात्रं तु रथोपस्य ईवाचलः ॥ 34 ॥

That vicious demon, thus struck by the club, remained senseless near to his chariot for two muhūrtas, fixed like a mountain.

तं तथा मृक्तिं दृष्ट्या तापः परवलातः ।

आजगाम रणे योद्धं चीढ़कां प्रति चापलत ॥ 35 ॥

आगच्छंतु तु तं वीक्ष्य हसनी प्राप चीढ़का ।

एषहीि दानवश्रेष्ठ यमलोकं नयाम्यहम् ॥ 36 ॥

Tāmra, the tormentor of the foes, seeing him thus, could not remain steady and came forward to fight with Candjikā. The Devi, seeing him laughed and said “O Dānava! Come, Come, I will instantly send you unto death.”

किं भवपिद्रुः समावातैरबलैषुः गतायुषेः ।

महिषः किं गृहे घुकः करोति जीवनोषधम् ॥ 37 ॥

Or, what is the use of your coming? You are so weak that you can be called lifeless. What is that stupid Mahisa doing now? Is he thinking out the way to save his life?

किं भवद्धिद्रतैर्यैर्मानपि विफकलः शमः ।

अत्ते महेषे घाये सुरुगजी दुरात्मिन ॥ 38 ॥

You all are too weak; no use in killing you, all my arrows will go in vain, if that wicked Mahisa, the enemy of the gods, be not slain.

तस्मायुं गृहं नाला महिंक्षे प्रेयचित्व ।

पश्येनां सोडपि मन्त्यात यादुर्गी ततुर्गी सिंहात्म। ॥ ३९ ॥

Therefore, do you go to your home and send here your king Mahiṣa. I am staying here in that form in which that wicked one likes very much to see Me.

तापस्तद्धनं शुत्वा बाणवृष्टि चकार है ।

चिडकां प्रति कोपेने कर्णाक्हणसानः ॥ ४ ० ॥

Hearing Her words, Tāmra became very angry and drawing his bow up to his ear, began to hurl arrows after arrows on Candjā Devī.

भगवत्य पितामक्षी समाकृष्य शासनम् ।

बाणानुभोच तरसा हन्तुकामा सुरावित् ॥ 4 1 ॥

The Bhagavatī, too, had her eyes reddened with anger and drawing Her bow began to shoot arrowing quickly at the demon, wishing to kill, as early as possible, the enemy of the gods.

चिद्याग्राओंपि बलवान्मूर्ण तयक्नोचित्य: पुनः।

गृहीत्वा सगरं चापं तस्थी ततस्ममुखः क्षणात् ॥ 4 2 ॥

In the meanwhile, Cikṣura regained his senses, and taking up again his bow in an instant, came before the Devi.

चिद्यात्यस्थ तामस्थ द्वाव्यतिवलोक्तटी ।

युयुधते महावीरी सह देया रणारिणे ॥ 4 3 ॥

Then Cikṣura and Tāmra, the two valiant warriors, began to fight dreadfully with the Devi.

कुविता च महामाया ववर्ष गरसांतिन् ।

चक्रात दानवान्सर्वानाण्डस्ततुच्छदान् ॥ 4 4 ॥

Mahā Māyā then, became very angry and began to hurl arrows after arrows so incessantly that all the armour of all the Dānavas became pierced and were cut down to pieces.

असुरा: क्रीयसम्मुजा बम्बुरु: शरताडिता: ।

चिश्विपुः शरजालानि देर्वी प्रति रुचपात्वि: ॥ 4 5 ॥

The Asuras, thus pierced by arrows, became infuriated with anger and hurled angrily a network of arrows upon the Devi.

बभूते राक्षसास्त्र किंगुका इव पुष्पिणः ।

शिलीमुखक्षतः सर्वे वसते च वने गे ॥ 46 ॥

The Dānavas, thus struck with sharp arrows and filled with cuts and wounds looked like the red Kīmśuka flowers in the spring.

बभूव तुमुलं युद्धं ताप्रेण सह संयुगे ।

विस्मयं परमं जमुदैवा ये प्रेक्षकाः स्थिताः ॥ 47 ॥

The fight then grew so severe between Tāmra and Bhagavati that the seers, the Devas, were all struck with wonder.

तापी मुसलमादाय लोहजं दारुणं दुबम् ।

जघान मस्तके सिंहं जहास च नददं च ॥ 48 ॥

नद्मानं नदा तं तु दूर्ध्वा देवी भ्वाप्तिज्ञा ।

खद्वेगेन शिलाधोग्य शिर्धिश्छेदे सदसा ॥ 49 ॥

Tāmra struck on the head of the lion with his dreadful hard Mūsala (club) made of iron, and laughed and shouted aloud. Seeing him thus vociferating, the Devi became angry and cut off his head by her sharp axes in no time.

छिडे शिरसि तामस्तु विशीर्षो मुसली बली ।

वधाम क्षणमात्रं तु परात तरणमस्तेक ॥ ५० ॥

The head being thus severed from the body, Tāmra, though headless, for a moment turned round his Mūsala and then fell down on the ground. परितत तामपातोल्क्य चिक्षुराख्यो महावलः ।

खडूरामादाय तस्या दुत्राव चण्डिकां प्रति ॥ 51 ॥

भगवत्यपि ते दूद्वा खडूरापाणिभुपगतात् ।

दानयं पश्चभिवर्गीर्जान तस्या रणे ॥ 52 ॥

The powerful Cikṣura, seeing Tāmra thus falling down, instantly took up his axe and ran

after Candikā. Seeing Cikṣura with axe in his hand, the Bhagavatī quickly shot at him five arrows.

एकेन पत्तितं खडूगं द्वितीयेन तु तत्कर: ।

कणठाच्य मनकं ततय कृतिनतं चापरै: སྐོད་ ། ། ། ། ། ། ། ། ། ། ། ། ། ། ། ། ། །

With one arrow, his axe was cut down, with the second arrow his hands were cut and with the remaining ones his head was severed from his body.

एवं तौ निर्तही कृरौ राक्षसौ रणदुपंदौ ।

भन मैन्ध तयोत्पूर्ण दिश्वु संरसलमानसम् ॥ 54 ॥

Thus when the two cruel! warriors were slain, their soldiers soon fled away in terror in all directions.

देवाधु मृत्रितः सर्वे दृष्टवा तो निर्तीत रोगे ।

पुष्पवृष्टि मुदा चक्रज्वगस्त्वं नभः स्थिताः ॥ 55 ॥

The Devas were exceedingly glad at their downfall and showered gladly flowers from the sky and uttered shouts of Victory to the Devi.

क्रश्यो देयान्यर्वां वैलातः सिद्धाराणाः ।

कचुसे जय देविति चाधिकेति पुनः पुनः ॥ 56 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पड़ामकरभ्रे

वन्द्रदीशोक्षायः ॥ 57 ॥

The Rşis, Gandharvas, the Vetālas, the Siddhas and Čāranas were all very glad and began to utter repeatedly “O Goddess! Victory, victory be Yours.”

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Fifth Skandha on the killing of Tāmra and Ciksura in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsā.

[Unreadable]

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

