[Ch 14 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Hearing the death news of Durmukha, Mahisāsura became blind with anger and began to utter repeatedly to the Dānavas “O! What is this? What is this?” Alas! That delicate woman has slain in battle the two heroes Durmukha and Bāskala! Lo! Now look at the wonderful workings of the Daiva (Fate).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsā said :-- Hearing the death news of Durmukha, Mahisāṣura became blind with anger and began to utter repeatedly to the Dānavas, “O! What is this? What is this? Alas! That delicate woman has slain in battle the two heroes Durmukha and Vāskala! Lo! Now look at the wonderful workings of the Daiva (Fate).

[Ch 14 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is the acts virtuous, or otherwise that make men dependent; and the powerful Time awards pleasure or pain accordingly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is the acts virtuous, or otherwise that make men dependent; and the powerful Time awards pleasure or pain accordingly.

[Ch 14 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The two powerful Demons are killed; what are we to do now? You all judge and say what is reasonable at this critical juncture.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The two powerful Demons are killed; what are we to do hereafter? You all judge and say what is reasonable at this critical juncture.”

[Ch 14 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: When the powerful Mahisa said thus, his general Cikṣura, the great warrior spoke as follows:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- When the powerful Mahiṣa said thus, his general Cikṣura, the great warrior spoke as follows :--

[Ch 14 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O King! Why are you so anxious as to take away the life of a delicate woman? I will kill Her, thus saying he departed for battle, mounted on his chariot and accompanied by his own army.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O King! Why are you so anxious as to take away the life of a delicate woman? I will kill Her;” thus saying he departed for battle, mounted on his chariot and accompanied by his own army.

[Ch 14 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The powerful Tāmra accompanied him as his attendant; the sky and all the quarters became filled with the clamour of their vast army.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The powerful Tāmra accompanied him as his attendant; the sky and all the quarters became filled with the clamour of their vast army.

[Ch 14 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The auspicious Devi Bhagavati saw them before Her and She made an extraordinarily wonderful sound with Her conchshell, with Her bow string and with Her great bell. The Asuras heard that and trembled and fled, speaking amongst each other “What is this?”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The auspicious Devī Bhagavatī saw them before Her and She made an extraordinary wonderful sound with Her conchshell, with Her bow string and with Her great bell. The Asuras heard that and trembled and fled, speaking amongst each other, “What is this?”

[Ch 14 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Cikşurākṣa seeing them turning their backs, told them very angrily “O Dānavas! What fear has now overcome you?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Cikṣurākṣa seeing them turning their backs, told them very angrily, “O Dānavas! What fear has now overcome you?

[Ch 14 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I will slay today this vain woman in the battle with arrows; so you should quit your fear and remain steady in battle.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will slay today this vain woman in the battle with arrows; so you should quit your fear and remain steady in battle.”

[Ch 14 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, the Dānava Chieftain Cikṣura came fearlessly before the Devi with bows and arrows in his hands and, accompanied by his army, angrily spoke thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, the Dānava Chieftain Cikṣura came fearlessly before the Devī with bows and arrows in his hands and, accompanied by his army, angrily spoke thus :--

[Ch 14 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O Thou of large and broad eyes! Why are you roaring to terrify the weak persons! O the Soft-limbed One! I have heard all about your deeds but I am not a bit afraid of You." O One of beautiful eyes! It is a matter of disgrace, rather sin, to kill a woman; knowing this my heart wants to pass over this act, (does not like to do it, if my purpose be served without it).
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Thou of large and broad eyes! Why are you roaring to terrify the weak persons! O the Soft limbed One! I have heard all about your deeds but I am not a bit afraid of You. O One of beautiful eyes! It is a matter of disgrace, rather sin, to kill a woman; knowing this my heart wants to pass over this act (does not like to do it, if my purpose be served without it).

[Ch 14 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Beautiful One! The women fight with their side glances and amorous gestures, but I have never heard a woman like your coming to fight with arms and weapons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Beautiful One! The women fight with their side glances and amorous gestures; but I have never heard a woman like you coming to fight with arms and weapons.

[Ch 14 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Even the delicate flowers, Malati, etc., cause pain on the bodies of beautiful women like you; so it is not advisable to fight against you with flowers even; what to speak of sharpened arrows!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Even the delicate flowers, Mālati, etc., cause pain on the bodies of beautiful women like you; so it is not advisable to fight against you with flowers even; what to speak of sharpened arrows!

[Ch 14 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Fie on those who spend their lives according to the Kṣatriya Dharma! Oh! Who can praise that Dharma which allows this dear body of ours to be pierced by sharpened arrows?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Fie on those who spend their lives according to the Kṣatriya Dharma! Oh! Who can praise that Dharma which allows this dear body of ours to be pierced by sharpened arrows?

[Ch 14 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This dear body is nourished by sweet food, by being smeared with oil, and by smelling the scents of beautiful flowers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This dear body is nourished by sweet food, by being smeared with oil, and by smelling the scents of beautiful flowers.

[Ch 14 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Ought, then, one to destroy it by arrows from an enemy? Men get their bodies pierced by arrows and then become rich. Now is it possible for the riches to give pleasure afterwards when they caused such pains in the beginning?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Ought, then, one to destroy it by arrows from an enemy? Men get their bodies pierced by arrows and then become rich. Now is it possible for the riches to give pleasure afterwards when they caused such pains in the beginning?

[Ch 14 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Where you see the action of the axes and spears, striking each other with clubs, and hurling of sharpened arrows and weapons and where, when death comes, jackals come and feed upon the dead bodies, what merits have you been able to trace out in these things!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Where you see the action of the axes and spears, striking each other with clubs, and hurling of sharpened arrows and weapons and where, when death comes, jackals come and feed upon the dead bodies, what merits have you been able to trace out in these things!

[Ch 14 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is only those cunning poets that praise these; they say that those who die in battle go to heaven! O Beautiful! Those sayings are, no doubt, mere flatteries.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is only those cunning poets that praise these; they say that those who die in battle go to heaven! O Beautiful! Those sayings are, no doubt, mere flatteries.

[Ch 14 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Excellent One! Go away anywhere else you like; or accept this king Mahisa, the tormentor of the Devas, as your husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Excellent One! Go away anywhere else you like; or accept this king Mahiṣa, the tormentor of the Devas, as your husband.”

[Ch 14 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! The Dānava Cikṣura speaking thus, the Divine Mother addressed him thus: O Stupid! Why are you speaking false words, having no significance, like a literary man giving out mere words only?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! The Dānava Cikṣura speaking thus, the Divine Mother addressed him thus :-- O Stupid! Why are you speaking false words, having no significance, like a literary man giving out mere words only?

[Ch 14 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You do not know anything of politics, ethics, metaphysics; you serve illiterate and stupid; therefore, you are also a first class illiterate; you do not know what are the royal duties; then what are you speaking before me?
NEW CORR ENG ──► You do not know anything of politics, ethics, metaphysics; you serve the illiterate and stupid; therefore, you are also a first class illiterate; you do not know what are the royal duties; then what are you speaking before me?

[Ch 14 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I will kill that Mahisāsura in battle, make the soil muddy with his blood, thus establish firmly My pillar or Fame and then go happily to My abode. Surely will I slay that vain vicious demon, the tormentor of the Devas. Better fight steadily.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will kill that Mahiṣāsura in battle make the soil muddy with his blood, thus establish firmly My pillar of Fame and then go happily to My abode. Surely will I slay that vain vicious demon, the tormentor of the Devas. Better fight steadily.

[Ch 14 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Stupid! Better go to Patāla with all the Dānavas, if you and Mahisa desire to live any longer. And if you like to go unto death, then be ready fight without any delay; I will slay you all; this is My firm resolve.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Stupid! Better go to Pātāla with all the Dānavas, if you and Mahiṣa desire to live any longer. And if you like to go unto death, then be ready and fight without any delay; I will slay you all; this is My firm resolve.

[Ch 14 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing the Devi's words, the Dānava, proud of his own strength, began to hurl instantly on Her showers of arrows, as if another shower of rain burst upon Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing the Devī’s words, the Dānava, proud of his own strength, began to hurl instantly on Her showers of arrows, as if another shower of rain burst upon Her.

[Ch 14 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi cut off those arrows into pieces by Her sharp arrows and shot at him dreadful arrows like poisonous snakes,
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī cut off those arrows into pieces by Her sharp arrows and shot at him dreadful arrows like poisonous snakes.

[Ch 14 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then their fight became astounding to the public; the Divine Mother, then, struck him with Her club so much that he fell down from his chariot.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then their fight became astounding to the public; the Divine Mother, then, struck him with Her club so much that he fell down from his chariot.

[Ch 14 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That vicious demon, thus struck by the club, remained senseless near to his chariot for two muhūrtas, fixed like a mountain.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That vicious demon, thus struck by the club, remained senseless near to his chariot for two muhūrtas, fixed like a mountain.

[Ch 14 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Tāmra, the tormentor of the foes, seeing him thus, could not remain steady and came forward to fight with Candjikā. The Devi, seeing him laughed and said “O Dānava! Come, Come, I will instantly send you unto death.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Tāmra, the tormentor of the foes, seeing him thus, could not remain steady and came forward to fight with Caṇḍikā. The Devī seeing him laughed and said, “O Dānava! Come, Come, I will instantly send you unto death.

[Ch 14 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Or, what is the use of your coming? You are so weak that you can be called lifeless. What is that stupid Mahisa doing now? Is he thinking out the way to save his life?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Or, what is the use of your coming? You are so weak that you can be called lifeless. What is that stupid Mahiṣa doing now? Is he thinking out the way to save his life?

[Ch 14 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You all are too weak; no use in killing you, all my arrows will go in vain, if that wicked Mahisa, the enemy of the gods, be not slain.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You all are too weak; no use in killing you, all my labours will go in vain, if that wicked Mahiṣa, the enemy of the gods, be not slain.

[Ch 14 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, do you go to your home and send here your king Mahiṣa. I am staying here in that form in which that wicked one likes very much to see Me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, do you go to your home and send here your king Mahiṣa. I am staying here in that form in which that wicked one likes very much to see Me.”

[Ch 14 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing Her words, Tāmra became very angry and drawing his bow up to his ear, began to hurl arrows after arrows on Candjā Devī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing Her words, Tāmra became very angry and drawing his bow up to his ear, began to hurl arrows after arrows on Caṇḍikā Devī.

[Ch 14 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Bhagavatī, too, had her eyes reddened with anger and drawing Her bow began to shoot arrowing quickly at the demon, wishing to kill, as early as possible, the enemy of the gods.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Bhagavatī, too, had her eyes reddened with anger and drawing Her bow began to shoot arrows quickly at the demon, wishing to kill, as early as possible, the enemy of the gods.

[Ch 14 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the meanwhile, Cikṣura regained his senses, and taking up again his bow in an instant, came before the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the meanwhile, Cikṣura regained his senses, and taking up again his bow in an instant, came before the Devī.

[Ch 14 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Cikṣura and Tāmra, the two valiant warriors, began to fight dreadfully with the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Cikṣura and Tāmra, the two valiant warriors, began to fight dreadfully with the Devī.

[Ch 14 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mahā Māyā then, became very angry and began to hurl arrows after arrows so incessantly that all the armour of all the Dānavas became pierced and were cut down to pieces.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mahā Māyā then, became very angry and began to hurl arrows after arrows so incessantly that all the armours of all the Dānavas became pierced and were cut down to pieces.

[Ch 14 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Asuras, thus pierced by arrows, became infuriated with anger and hurled angrily a network of arrows upon the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Asuras, thus pierced by arrows, became infuriated with anger and hurled angrily a network of arrows upon the Devī.

[Ch 14 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Dānavas, thus struck with sharp arrows and filled with cuts and wounds looked like the red Kīmśuka flowers in the spring.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Dānavas, thus struck with sharp arrows and filled with cuts and wounds looked like the red Kiṃśuka flowers in the spring.

[Ch 14 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The fight then grew so severe between Tāmra and Bhagavati that the seers, the Devas, were all struck with wonder.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The fight then grew so severe between Tāmra and Bhagavatī that the seers, the Devas, were all struck with wonder.

[Ch 14 Verse 48-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Tāmra struck on the head of the lion with his dreadful hard Mūsala (club) made of iron, and laughed and shouted aloud. Seeing him thus vociferating, the Devi became angry and cut off his head by her sharp axes in no time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Tāmra struck on the head of the lion with his dreadful hard Muṣala (club), made of iron, and laughed and shouted aloud. Seeing him thus vociferating, the Devī became angry and cut off his head by her sharp axes in no time.

[Ch 14 Verse 50-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The powerful Cikṣura, seeing Tāmra thus falling down, instantly took up his axe and ran after Candikā. Seeing Cikṣura with axe in his hand, the Bhagavatī quickly shot at him five arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The powerful Cikṣura, seeing Tāmra thus falling down, instantly took up his axe and ran after Caṇḍikā. Seeing Cikṣura with axe in his hand, the Bhagavatī quickly shot at him five arrows.

[Ch 14 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► With one arrow, his axe was cut down, with the second arrow his hands were cut and with the remaining ones his head was severed from his body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► With one arrow, his axe was cut down, with the second arrow his hands were cut and with the remaining ones his head was severed from his body.

[Ch 14 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus when the two cruel! warriors were slain, their soldiers soon fled away in terror in all directions.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus when the two cruel warriors were slain, their soldiers soon fled away in terror in all directions.

[Ch 14 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas were exceedingly glad at their downfall and showered gladly flowers from the sky and uttered shouts of Victory to the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas were exceedingly glad at their downfall and showered gladly flowers from the sky and uttered shouts of Victory to the Devī.

[Ch 14 Verse 56-57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rşis, Gandharvas, the Vetālas, the Siddhas and Čāranas were all very glad and began to utter repeatedly “O Goddess! Victory, victory be Yours.” Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Fifth Skandha on the killing of Tāmra and Ciksura in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsā. [Unreadable]
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣis, Gandarbhas, the Vetālas, the Siddhas and Cāraṇas were all very glad and began to utter repeated, “O Goddess! Victory, victory be Yours.” Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Fifth Skandha on the killing of Tāmra and Cikṣura in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
