[Ch 29 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyana said: Yama got thunderstruck at these queries of Sāvitri. He then began to describe, with a smiling countenance, the fruition of the several works of the Jivas. Śrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- Yama got thunderstruck at these queries of Sāvitrī. He then began to describe, with a smiling countenance, the fruition of the several works of the Jīvas. 2-

[Ch 29 Verse 2-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Dharma said: O Child! You are now a daughter only twelve years old. But you speak of wisdom like the Highest Jñāniš and Yogis, Sanaka and others. O Child! By virtue of the boon granted by Śāvitrī, you have become incarnate of Her in part. The King Āsvapati got you before by performing severe penances.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He said :-- “O Child! You are now a daughter only twelve years old. But you speak of wisdom like the Highest Jñānins and Yogis, Sanaka and others. O Child! By virtue of the boon granted by Sāvitrī, you have become incarnate of Her in part. The King Aśvapati got you before by performing severe penances.

[Ch 29 Verse 4-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As Laksmi is dear and fortunate with regard to Viṣṇu, as Mahādevī is to Mahādeva, Aditi to Kaśyapa, Ahalyā to Gautama, so you are to Satyavāna in respect of affection and good-luck and other best qualities.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As Lakṣmī is dear and fortunate with regard to Viṣṇu, as Mahādevi is to Mahādeva, Aditi to Kaśyapa, Ahalyā to Gautama, so you are to Satyavāna in respect of affection and good-luck and other best qualities.

[Ch 29 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As Śacī is to Mahendra, as Rohinī is to Moon, as Rati is to Kāma, as Svāhā is to Fire, as Svadhā is to the Pitrs, as Sanjñā is to the Sun, as Varunāni is to Varuna, as Daksinā is to Yajña, as Earth is to Varāha, as Devasenā is to Kārtika, so you are fortunate and blessed with respect to Satyavāna.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As Śacī is to Mahendra, as Rohiṇī is to Moon, as Rati is to Kāma, as Svāhā is to Fire, as Svadhā is to the Pitris, as Sañjñā is to the Sun, as Varuṇānī is to Varuṇa, as Dakṣiṇā is to Yajñā, as Earth is to Varāha, as Devasenā is to Kārtika, so you are fortunate and blessed with respect to Satyavāna.

[Ch 29 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Śāvitrī! I myself grant you this boon of my own accord. Now ask other boons. O highly fortunate One! I will fulfil all your desires.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sāvitrī! I myself grant you this boon of my own accord. Now ask other boons. O highly fortunate One! I will fulfil all your desires.”

[Ch 29 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sāvritī said: “O Noble One! Let there be one hundred sons of mine by Satyavāna. This is the boon that I want. Let there be one hundred sons of my Father as well; let my Father-in-law get back his (lost) eyesight and may he get back his lost kingdom. This is another boon that I want.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sāvitrī said :-- “O Noble One! Let there be one hundred sons of mine by Satyavāna. This is the boon that I want. Let there be one hundred sons of my Father as well; let my Father-in-law get back his (lost) eyesight and may he get back his lost kingdom. This is another boon that I want.

[Ch 29 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou art the Lord of the world. So grant me this boon, too, that I may have this my very body for a lākh years when I may go to Vaikuntha with Satyavāna. Now I am eager to hear the various fruitions of Karmas of several Jivas. Kindly narrate them and oblige.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thou art the Lord of the world. So grant me this boon, too, that I may have this my very body for a lakh years when I may go to Vaikuṇṭha with Satyavāna. Now I am eager to hear the various fruitions of Karmas of several Jīvas. Kindly narrate them and oblige.”

[Ch 29 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Dharma said: "You are very chaste. So what you have thought will verily come to pass. Now I describe the fruition of Karmas of the Jivas. Listen. Excepting this holy land of Bhārata, nowhere do the people enjoy wholly the fruition of their twofold Karmas, good and bad.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Dharma said :-- You are very chaste. So what you have thought will verily come to pass. Now I describe the fruition of Karmas of the Jīvas. Listen. Excepting this holy land of Bhārata, nowhere do the people enjoy wholly the fruition of their two-fold Karmas, good and bad.

[Ch 29 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is only the Suras, Daityas, Dānavas, Gandharvas, Rāksasas, and men that do Karmas. The beasts and the other Jivas do not do Karmas. The special Jivas e.g. men, etc., experience the fruition of their Karmas in Heavens, hells and in all the other Yonis (wombs).
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is only the Suras, Daityas, Dānavas, Gandharvas, Rākṣasas, and men that do Karmas. The beasts and the other Jīvas do not do Karmas. The special Jīvas, e.g., men, etc., experience the fruition of their Karmas in Heavens, hells and in all the other Yonis (wombs).

[Ch 29 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Specially, as the Jivas roam in all the different Yonis, they enjoy their Karmas, good or bad, as the case may be, carved in their previous births. The good works get fructified in Heavens; and the bad works lead the Jivas to hells.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Specially, as the Jīvas roam in all the different Yonis, they enjoy their Karmas, good or bad, as the case may be, carved in their previous births. The good works get fructified in Heavens; and the bad works lead the Jīvas to hells.

[Ch 29 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Karma can be got rid of by Bhakti. This Bhakti is of two kinds: (1) Nirgunā of the nature of Nirvāṇa; and (2) towards Prakṛti, of the nature of Brahma, and with Māyā inherent. Diseases come as the result of bad and ignorant actions; and healthiness come from good and certain scientific Karmas. Similar are the remarks for short and long lives for happiness and pain.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This Karma can be got rid of by Bhakti. This Bhakti is of two kinds :-- (1) Nirguṇā of the nature of Nirvāṇa; and (2) towards Prakriti, of the astute of Brahmā, and with Māyā inherent. Diseases come as the result of bad and ignorant actions and healthiness comes from good and certain scientific Karmas. Similar are the remarks for short and long lives for happiness and pain.

[Ch 29 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► By bad works, one becomes blind or deformed in body. So by doing excellent Karmas, one acquires Siddhis, etc. These are spoken generally. I will now speak in detail; listen. This is very secret even in Purāṇas and Smṛtis.
NEW CORR ENG ──► By bad works, one becomes blind or deformed in body. So by doing excellent Karmas, one acquires Siddhis, etc.. These are spoken generally. I will now speak in detail; listen. This is very secret even in Purāṇas and Smritis.

[Ch 29 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In this Bhāratavarsa, men are the best of all the various classes of beings. The Brāhmānas are the best of men and are best in all Kinds of Karmas. They are responsible, too, for their actions.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In this Bhāratavarṣa men are the best of all the various classes of beings. The Brāhmaṇs are the best of men and are best in all Kinds of Karmas. They are responsible, too, for their actions.

[Ch 29 Verse 24-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Chaste One! Of the Brāhmins, again, those that are attached to the Brāhmanas are the best. The Brāhmanas are of two kinds as they are Sakāma (with desires) or Niṣkāma (without desires). The Niṣkāmī Brāhmanas are superior to the Sakāmī Brāhmanas. For the Sakāmīs are to enjoy the fruits of their Karmas, while the Niṣkāmī Brāhmānas are perfectly free from any such disturbances (they have not to come back to these field of Karma). The Niṣkāma Bhaktas, after they quit their bodies, go to a place free from sickness or disease, pure and perfect. From there they do not come back.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Chaste One! Of the Brāhmins, again, those that are attached to the Brāhmaṇas are the best. The Brāhmaṇas are of two kinds as they are Sakāma (with desires) or Niṣkāma (without desires). The Niṣkāmī Brāhmaṇas are superior to the Sakāmī Brāhmaṇas. For the Sakāmīs are to enjoy the fruits of their Karmas, while the Niṣkāmī Brāhmaṇas are perfectly free from any such disturbances (they have not to come back to this field of Karma). The Niṣkāma Bhakta after they quit their bodies, go to a place free from sickness or disease, pure and perfect. From there they do not come back.

[Ch 29 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Niskāma Bhaktas assuming the divine forms go to the Goloka and worship the Highest God, the Highest Self, the two-armed Kṛṣṇa. The Sakāmi Vaīṣṇavas go to Vaikuntha; but they come back in Bhārata and get into the wombs of the twice-born.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Niṣkāma Bhaktas assuming the divine forms go to the Goloka and worship the Highest God, the Highest Self, the two-armed Kṛṣṇa. The Sakāmī Vaiṣṇavas go to Vaikuṇṭha; but they come back in Bhārata and get into the wombs of the twice-born.

[Ch 29 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► By degress they also become Niṣkāma when they certainly acquire pure undefiled Bhakti. The Brāhmanas and Vaiṣṇavas that are Sakāmis in all their births, never get that pure undefiled intellect and never get the devotion to Viṣṇu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► By degrees they also become Niṣkāma when they certainly acquire pure undefiled Bhakti. The Brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas that are Sakāmīs in all the births, never get that pure undefiled intellect and never get the devotion to Viṣṇu.

[Ch 29 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmanas, living in the Tirthas (sacred places of pilgrimages); they again come down to Bhārata. Those that are devotedly attached to their own Dharma (religion) and reside in places other than Tirthas, go to Satyaloka and again come to Bhārata.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmaṇas, living in the Tīrthas (sacred places of pilgrimages) and attached to Tapas go to Brahmaloka (the region of Brahmā); they again come down to Bhārata. Those that are devotedly attached to their own Dharma (religion) and reside in places other than Tīrthas, go to Satyaloka and again come to Bhārata.

[Ch 29 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmaṇas, following their own Dharma and devoted to the Sun go to the world of the Sun and again come to Bhārata. And those who are devoted to Mūla Prakṛti and devoted to Niṣkāma Dharma go to Maṇi Dvīpa and have not to come back from thither.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmaṇas, following their own Dharma and devoted to the Sun go to the world of the Sun and again come to Bhārata. And those who are devoted to Mūla Prakriti and devoted to Niṣkāma Dharma go to Maṇi Dvīpa and have not to come back from thither.

[Ch 29 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Bhaktas of Śiva, Śakti, and Gangeśa, and attached to their own Dharma respectively go to the Śiva Loka and return from thence. Those Brāhmaṇas that worship the other Devas and attached to their own Dharmas go to those regions of theirs respectively and again come to Bhārata.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Bhaktas of Śiva, Śakti, and Gane’sa, and attached to their own Dharmas respectively go to the Śiva Loka and return from thence. Those Brāhmaṇas that worship the other Devas and attached to their own Dharmas go to those regions of theirs respectively and again come to Bhārata.

[Ch 29 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Attached to their own Dharmas, the Niskāmi, Bhaktais of Hari go by their Bhakti step by step to the region of Śri Hari. Those that are not attached to their own Dharma and do not worship the Devas and always bent on doing things as they like without any regard to their Acāras go certainly to hells. No doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Attached to their own Dharmas, the Niṣkāmī Bhaktas of Hari go by their Bhakti step by step to the region of Śrī Hari. Those that are not attached to their own Dharmas and do not worship the Devas and always bent on doing things as they like without any regard to their Ācāras go certainly to hells. No doubt in this.

[Ch 29 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmanas and the other three Varnas, attached to their own Dharmas all enjoy the fruits of their good works. But those who do not do their Svadharma, go verily down into hells. They do not come to Bhārata for their rebirth, they enjoy their fruits of Karmas in hells!
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmaṇas and the other three Varṇas, attached to their own Dharmas all enjoy the fruits of their good works. But those who do not do their Svadharma, go verily down into hells. They do not came to Bhārata for their rebirth, they enjoy their fruits of Karmas in hells!

[Ch 29 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore the four Varnas ought to follow their own Dharmas of the Brāhmanas, they are to remain attached to their own Dharmas and give their daughters in marriage to the similarly qualified Brāhmanas. They then go to the Candraloka (the region of the Moon). There they remain for the life periods of the fourteen Indras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore the four Varṇas ought to follow their own Dharmas of the Brāhmaṇas, they are to remain attached to their own Dharmas and give their daughters in marriage to the similarly qualified Brāhmaṇas. They then go to the Candraloka (the region of the Moon). There they remain for the life periods of the fourteen Indras.

[Ch 29 Verse 43-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And if the girl be given, with ornaments, the results obtained would be twice. If the girl be given with a desire in view, then that world is obtained; but if the girl be given without any desire but to fulfil the God's will and God's satisfaction only, then one would not have to go to that world. They go to Visnu Loka, bereft of the fruits of all Karmas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And if the girl be given, with ornaments, the results obtained would be twice. If the girl be given with a desire in view, then that world is obtained; but if the girl be given without any desire but to fulfil the God’s will and God’s satisfaction only, then one would not have to go to that world. They go to Viṣṇu Loka, bereft of the fruits of all Karmas.

[Ch 29 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those that give to the Brāhmaṇas pasture ground and cattle, silver, gold, garment, fruits and water, go to the Candrałoka and live there for one Manvantra. They live long in those regions by virtue of that merit.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those that give to the Brāhmaṇas pasture ground and cattle, silver, gold, garment, fruits and water, go to the Candraloka and live there for one Manvantara. They live long in those regions by virtue of that merit.

[Ch 29 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again those that give gold, cows, copper, etc., to the holy Brāhmaṇas, go to the Sūrya Loka (the region of the Sun) and live there for one Ayuta years (10,000 years), free from diseases, etc, for a long time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again those that give gold, cows, copper, etc., to the holy Brāhmaṇas, go to the Sūrya Loka (the region of the Sun) and live there for one Ayuta years (10,000 years), free from diseases, etc., for a long time.

[Ch 29 Verse 48-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those that give lands and lots of wealth to the Brāhmins, go to the Viṣṇu Loka and to the beautiful Śvetā Dvīpa (one of the eighteen minor divisions of the known continents). And there live as long as the Sun and Moon exist. O Muni! The meritorious persons live long in that wide region. Note: Śvetā Dvīpa may mean Vaikuntha, where Viṣnu resides.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those that give lands and lots of wealth to the Brāhmins, go to the Viṣṇu Loka and to the beautiful Śveta Dvīpa (one of the eighteen minor divisions of the known continents). And there they live as long as the Sun and Moon exist. O Muni! The meritorious persons live long in that wide region. Note :-- Śveta Dvīpa may mean Vaikuṇṭha, where Viṣṇu resides.

[Ch 29 Verse 50-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who give with devotion dwelling places to the Brāhmanas, go to the happy Viṣṇu Loka. And there, in that great Viṣṇu Loka, they live for years equal to the number of molecules in that house. He who offers a dwelling house in honour of any Devas, goes to the region of that Deva and remains there for a number of years equivalent to the number of particles in that house.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who give with devotion dwelling places to the Brāhmaṇas, go to the happy Viṣṇu Loka. And there, in that great Viṣṇu Loka, they live for years equal to the number of molecules, in that house. He who offers a dwelling house in honour of any Deva, goes to the region of that Deva and remains there for a number of years equivalent to the number of particles in that house.

[Ch 29 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The lotus-born Brahmā said that it one offers a royal palace, one obtains a result four times and if one offers a country, one gets the result one hundred times that; again if one offers an excellent country, twice as much merit one acquires.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The lotus-born Brahmā said that if one offers a royal palace, one obtains a result four times and if one offers a country, one gets the result one hundred times that; again if one offers an excellent country, twice as much merit one acquires.

[Ch 29 Verse 54-56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One who dedicates a tank fer the expiation of all one's sins, one lives in Janar Loka (one of the pious regions) for a period equivalent to the number of particles therein). If any man offers a Vāpi (a well) in preference to other gifts, one gets ten fold fruits thereby. If one offers seven Vāpis, one acquires the fruits of offering one tank.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One who dedicates a tank for the expiation of all one’s sins, one lives in Janar Loka (one of the pious regions) for a period equivalent to the number of particles therein). If any man offers a Vāpī (a well) in preference to other gifts, one gets ten fold fruits thereby. If one offers seven Vāpīs, one acquires the fruits of offering one tank.

[Ch 29 Verse 57-58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► A Vāpī is one which is four thousand Dhanus long and which is as which wide or less Note: Dhanu equals a measure of four hastas. If offered to a good bridegroom, then the giving of a daughter in marriage is equivalent to a dedication of ten Vāpis. And if the girl be offered with ornaments, twice the merits accure. The same merit accrues in clearing the bed of the mud of a pond as in digging it. So for the Vāpi (well).
NEW CORR ENG ──► A Vāpī is one which is four thousand Dhanus long and which is as much wide or less (Note :-- Dhanu equals a measure of four hastas). If offered to a good bridegroom, then the giving of a daughter in marriage is equivalent to a dedication of ten Vāpīs. And if the girl be offered with ornaments, twice the merits accrue. The same merit accrues in clearing the bed of the mud of a pond as in digging it. So for the Vāpī (well).

[Ch 29 Verse 59-60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Chaste One! He who plants an Aśvattha tree and dedicates it to a godly purpose, lives for one Ayuta years in Tapar Loka. O Śāvitrī! He who dedicates a flower garden for the acquirement of all sorts of good, lives for one Ayuta years in Dhruva Loka.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Chaste One! He who plants an Aśvattha tree and dedicates it to a godly purpose, lives for one Ayuta years in Tapar Loka. O Sāvitrī! He who dedicates a flower garden for the acquirement of all sorts of good, lives for one Ayuta years in Dhruva Loka.

[Ch 29 Verse 61-62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Chaste One! He who gives a Vimāṇa (any sort of excellent carriage) in honour of Viṣṇu, in this Hindus thān, lives for one Manvantara in Viṣṇuloka. And if one gives a Vimāṇa of variegated colours and workmanship, four times the result accrues. And one who gives a palanquin, acquires half the fruits.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Chaste One! He who gives a Vīmāna (any sort of excellent carriage) in honour of Viṣṇu, in this Hindoosthān, lives for one Manvantara in Visnuloka. And if one gives a Vīmāna of variegated colours and workmanship, four times the result accrues. And one who gives a palanquin, acquires half the fruits.

[Ch 29 Verse 63-64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again if anybody gives, out of devotion, a swinging temple (the Dol Mandir) to Bhagavān Śrī Hari, lives for one hundred Manvantaras, in the region of Viṣṇu. O Chaste One! He who makes a gift of a royal road, decorated with palacial buildings on either side, lives with great honour and love in that Indraloka for one Ayuta years.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again if anybody gives, out of devotion, a swinging temple (the Dol Mandir) to Bhagavān Śrī Hari, lives for one hundred Manvantras, in the region of Viṣṇu. O Chaste One! He who makes a gift of a royal road, decorated with palatial buildings on either side, lives with great honour and love in that Indraloka for one Ayuta years.

[Ch 29 Verse 65-66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Equal results follow whether the above things are offered to the Gods or to the Brāhmanas. He enjoy that which he gives. No giving, No enjoying. After enjoying the heavenly pleasures, etc., the virtuous person takes birth in Bhārata as a Brāhman or in other good families, in due order, and ultimately in the Brāhmaṇa families.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Equal results follow whether the above things are offered to the Gods or to the Brāhmaṇas. He enjoys that which he gives. No giving, no enjoying. After enjoying the heavenly pleasures, etc., the virtuous person takes birth in Bhārata as a Brāhmin or in other good families, in due order, and ultimately in the Brāhmaṇa families.

[Ch 29 Verse 67-68]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The virtuous Brāhmaṇa, after he has enjoyed the heavenly pleasures, takes his birth again in Bhārata in Brāhmaṇa, Kṣattriya or in Vaiśya families. A Kṣattriya or a Vaiśya can never obtain Brāhmaṇahood, even if he performs asceticism for one Koti Kalpas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The virtuous Brāhmaṇa, after he has enjoyed the heavenly pleasures, takes his birth again in Bhārata in Brāhmaṇa, Kṣattriya or in Vaiśya families. A Kṣattriya or a Vaiśya can never obtain Brāhmaṇahood, even if he performs asceticism for one Koṭi Kalpas.

[Ch 29 Verse 69-71]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This is stated in the Srutis. Without enjoying the fruits, no Karma can be exhausted even in one hundred Koti Kalpas. So the fruits of the Karmas must be enjoyed, whether they be auspicious or inauspicious. By the help of seeing the Devas and seeing the Tirthas again and again, purity is acquired. O Śavītri! So now I have told you something. What more do you want to hear? Say." Here ends the Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the anecdote of Śavītri on the fruits of making gifts and on the effects of Karmas in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This is stated in the Śrutis. Without enjoying the fruits, no Karma can be exhausted even in one hundred Koṭi Kalpas. So the fruits of the Karmas must be enjoyed, whether they be auspicious or inauspicious. By the help of seeing the Devas and seeing the Tīrthas again and again, purity is acquired. O Sāvitrī! So now I have told you something. What more d o you want to hear? Say. Here ends the Twenty-Ninth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the anecdote of Sāvitrī on the fruits of making gifts and on the effects of Karmas in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
