CHAPTER XXIX

On Sāvitri, on Gifts, and on Karmas

शीनतायण उवाच

साविशैचचरं शुत्वा जागा विस्तयं यमः ।

प्रस्थ वतुभागरेचे कर्मपांकं तु जीवितान् ॥ १ ॥

Nārāyana said: Yama got thunderstruck at these queries of Sāvitri. He then began to describe, with a smiling countenance, the fruition of the several works of the Jivas.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

धर्म उवाच

कन्या द्वारभार्यंचा वसले त्वं वससा5धना ।

ज्ञानं ते पूर्वविद्यां ज्ञानिनां योगिनां परम् ॥ २ ॥

साविक्षिवादानेन तं स्वाविक्री कला सती ।

प्राप्ता पुरा ध्युभृता च तपसा तत्समा सुते ॥ ३ ॥

Dharma said: O Child! You are now a daughter only twelve years old. But you speak of wisdom like the Highest Jñāniš and Yogis, Sanaka and others. O Child! By virtue of the boon granted by Śāvitrī, you have become incarnate of Her in part. The King Āsvapati got you before by performing severe penances.

यथा श्रीः शीपतेः कोउेे भवानी च भवोरासि ।

यथार्तिदितः कयये च यथार्डल्या च गौतने ॥ 4 ॥

यथा शची महेन्रे च यथा चन्रे च रोहिणी ।

यथा राति: कामदेवे यथा स्वाहा हुतानगे ॥ 5 ॥

As Laksmi is dear and fortunate with regard to Viṣṇu, as Mahādevī is to Mahādeva, Aditi to Kaśyapa, Ahalyā to Gautama, so you are to Satyavāna in respect of affection and good-luck and other best qualities.

यथा स्वधा च विरुतु यथा संध्या दिवाकरे ।

वक्तानी च वक्तो यजे च दक्षिणा यथा ॥ 6 ॥

यथा वारहे पूर्वविं हेवसेना च कार्तिक ।

सौभाग्यासु प्रिया त्वं च तथा सत्यन्तः प्रिये ॥ 7 ॥

As Śacī is to Mahendra, as Rohinī is to Moon, as Rati is to Kāma, as Svāhā is to Fire, as Svadhā is to the Pitrs, as Sanjñā is to the Sun, as Varunāni is to Varuna, as Daksinā is to Yajña, as Earth is to Varāha, as Devasenā is to Kārtika, so you are fortunate and blessed with respect to Satyavāna.

अयं तुर्थे वरो द्नो3प्यपरं च यथेपत्नम् ।

यूणु देयि महाभागो ददामि सकलेषितम् ॥ 8 ॥

O Śāvitrī! I myself grant you this boon of my own accord. Now ask other boons. O highly fortunate One! I will fulfil all your desires.

साधिव्याच

सत्यवत औरसानां पुजाणां शतकं मम ।

भविष्यिति महाभाग वरमेतन्यदीक्षिति ॥ 9 ॥

मयितुः पुत्रशतकं धशुगस्य च चक्षुषी ।

राजलाभो भववेदे वरमेतन्मदीक्षितम ॥ 10 ॥

Sāvritī said: “O Noble One! Let there be one hundred sons of mine by Satyavāna. This is the boon that I want. Let there be one hundred sons of my Father as well; let my Father-in-law get back his (lost) eyesight and may he get back his lost kingdom. This is another boon that I want.

अंते सत्यवता सार्थं यास्यामि हरिसिंदितम् ।

समातीते लक्षवर्षे देहीदं मे जगतृषधो ॥ 11 ॥

जीवकर्मिवणकं च श्रोतुं करोतुहरं मम् ।

विश्वनितार्जीजं च तन्मे व्याख्यातुमुईसि ॥ 12 ॥

Thou art the Lord of the world. So grant me this boon, too, that I may have this my very body for a lākh years when I may go to Vaikuntha with Satyavāna. Now I am eager to hear the various fruitions of Karmas of several Jivas. Kindly narrate them and oblige.”

धर्मरत खाच

भविष्यित महासार्थि सर्वे मानसिकं ततः ।

जीवकर्मविषयकं च कथयामि निशामय ॥ 13 ॥

गुभानामूभानां च कर्माणं जन्म भारते ।

पुण्यक्षेत्रे च नान्यत्र सर्वे च भूजते जनाः ॥ 14 ॥

Dharma said: "You are very chaste. So what you have thought will verily come to pass. Now I describe the fruition of Karmas of the Jivas. Listen. Excepting this holy land of Bhārata, nowhere do the people enjoy wholly the fruition of their twofold Karmas, good and bad.

सुरा दैत्या दानवाङ्ग गान्यां राक्षसाद्यः ।

नराधु सर्वेजनक न सर्वे जीविनः सति ॥ 15 ॥

विशिष्टीकिनः कर्म पुंजते सर्वेभिनिषु ।

शुभागृधे च सर्वेत्र सर्वगैयु नरकेषु च ॥ 16 ॥

It is only the Suras, Daityas, Dānavas, Gandharvas, Rāksasas, and men that do Karmas. The beasts and the other Jivas do not do Karmas. The special Jivas e.g. men, etc., experience the fruition of their Karmas in Heavens, hells and in all the other Yonis (wombs).

विशेषते तीव्रिन्घ ध्रमंते सर्वोवितुम् ।

गुभाग्यर्णं भुजते च कर्म पूर्वार्थितं परम् ॥ 17 ॥

Book IX Chapter XXIX

शुभेन कर्माणा याति स्वलोकादिक्रमेव च ।

कर्माणा चाणुभेनैव प्रभाति नरकेषु च ॥ 18 ॥

Specially, as the Jivas roam in all the different Yonis, they enjoy their Karmas, good or bad, as the case may be, carved in their previous births. The good works get fructified in Heavens; and the bad works lead the Jivas to hells.

कर्मिनीयने भक्ति: सा चोक्ता दिविया सति ।

निर्वाणस्पा भक्तिश्छ ब्रह्मणः प्रक्रतेत्रि ॥ १९ ॥

रोरी कुमकर्ण जीवक्षारोगी रुष्मकर्ण ।

दौर्भेजीची च क्षीणातुः सुखी दुःखी च कर्मण ॥ २० ॥

This Karma can be got rid of by Bhakti. This Bhakti is of two kinds: (1) Nirgunā of the nature of Nirvāṇa; and (2) towards Prakṛti, of the nature of Brahma, and with Māyā inherent. Diseases come as the result of bad and ignorant actions; and healthiness come from good and certain scientific Karmas. Similar are the remarks for short and long lives for happiness and pain.

अन्यादयश्रोगहीना: कर्मण कृसितेन च ।

सिद्वादिकमवाप्नोति सर्वोकृष्टि कर्मण ॥ 21 ॥

सामान्यं क्रियां देवि विशेषं शृणु सुंदरी ।

सुर्दर्भेयं सुगोयं च पुराणेषु स्मृतीखपि ॥ 22 ॥

By bad works, one becomes blind or deformed in body. So by doing excellent Karmas, one acquires Siddhis, etc. These are spoken generally. I will now speak in detail; listen. This is very secret even in Purāṇas and Smṛtis.

दुर्लभा मानुषी जातिः सर्वजातिषु भगते ।

सर्वेष्यो बाहाण: श्रेष: प्रशास्तः सर्वकर्मिषु ॥ 23 ॥

In this Bhāratavarsa, men are the best of all the various classes of beings. The Brāhmānas are the best of men and are best in all Kinds of Karmas. They are responsible, too, for their actions.

ब्रह्मिणे हिक्रील गरीवान् भारते सति ।

निष्कामश सकामश ब्राह्मणो हिक्रियः सति ॥ 24 ॥

सकामाच्छ प्रधान्यात् निष्कामो भक्त एव च ।

कर्मभोगी सकामाश निष्कामो निशपत्रः ॥ 25 ॥

स याति देहं व्यक्त्वा च पदं वत्निरामयम् ।

पुनरागमनं नास्ति तेषां निष्कामिनां सत्ति ॥ 26 ॥

O Chaste One! Of the Brāhmins, again, those that are attached to the Brāhmanas are the best. The Brāhmanas are of two kinds as they are Sakāma (with desires) or Niṣkāma (without desires). The Niṣkāmī Brāhmanas are superior to the Sakāmī Brāhmanas. For the Sakāmīs are to enjoy the fruits of their Karmas, while the Niṣkāmī Brāhmānas are perfectly free from any such disturbances (they have not to come back to these field of Karma). The Niṣkāma Bhaktas, after they quit their bodies, go to a place free from sickness or disease, pure and perfect. From there they do not come back.

सेवोते दिषुपं कृष्णं परमात्मानमीधास् ।

गोलोकं प्रति ते पत्ना दिव्यस्पधियारिणः ॥ 27 ॥

सकामिनो वैभाणाङ्ग गत्वा वैकुण्ठमेव च ।

भारतं पुतरायांति तेषां जन्म द्विजातिलु ॥ 28 ॥

The Niskāma Bhaktas assuming the divine forms go to the Goloka and worship the Highest God, the Highest Self, the two-armed Kṛṣṇa. The Sakāmi Vaīṣṇavas go to Vaikuntha; but they come back in Bhārata and get into the wombs of the twice-born.

काले गते च निकामा भवेनैव क्रमेण च ।

भर्चि च निर्मलों तेन्यो दास्यामि निश्रितं पुन: ॥ 29 ॥

ब्राह्मण वैणवाठीव सकामा: सर्वेजनसु ।

न तेषां मैन्मल वृष्द्विथ्युभक्तिविवर्जिता ॥ 30 ॥

By degress they also become Niṣkāma when they certainly acquire pure undefiled Bhakti. The Brāhmanas and Vaiṣṇavas that are Sakāmis in all their births, never get that pure undefiled intellect and never get the devotion to Viṣṇu.

नीर्थाशिता हिता ये च तयस्यानिततः सति ।

ते यांति बहूलोकं च पुनरायांति भारते ॥ 31 ॥

स्वधर्मानिता ये च ये च तीर्थीनावासिनः ।

ब्रजति ते सत्यलोक पुनरायांति भारते ॥ 32 ॥

The Brāhmanas, living in the Tirthas (sacred places of pilgrimages); they again come down to Bhārata. Those that are devotedly attached to their own Dharma (religion) and reside in places other than Tirthas, go to Satyaloka and again come to Bhārata.

स्वाधर्पितता विग्रा: सूर्वैभक्ताक्ष भाते ।

ज्जति ते सूर्वैलोकं पुरतायांति भाते ॥ ३३ ॥

मूलप्रकृतिभक्ता ये निक्कामा धर्मचारिण: ।

मणिद्धीयं प्रयोग्येव पुनराष्ट्रिनर्वक्तिन् ॥ ३४ ॥

The Brāhmaṇas, following their own Dharma and devoted to the Sun go to the world of the Sun and again come to Bhārata. And those who are devoted to Mūla Prakṛti and devoted to Niṣkāma Dharma go to Maṇi Dvīpa and have not to come back from thither.

स्वयंति निता भक्ताः शैया: शाकाश्रा गाणण: ।

ते यांति शिवलोकं च पुनरायांति भारते ॥ 35 ॥

वे विधा अन्यदेवेज्ञा: स्वधर्मपितरा: सति ।

ते यांति सपैलोंकं च पुनरायांति भारते ॥ 36 ॥

The Bhaktas of Śiva, Śakti, and Gangeśa, and attached to their own Dharma respectively go to the Śiva Loka and return from thence. Those Brāhmaṇas that worship the other Devas and attached to their own Dharmas go to those regions of theirs respectively and again come to Bhārata.

हरिभनाङ्ग विमकामाः स्वधर्मपित्ता द्विजाः ।

ते यांति च होलेकिं कम्पादनिकलादरे ॥ 37 ॥

स्वधर्मरिता विज्ञा देवान्यसेवना: सदा ।

घटाचारात्र कामात्र ते गांति नरकं घुवम् ॥ 38 ॥

Attached to their own Dharmas, the Niskāmi, Bhaktais of Hari go by their Bhakti step by step to the region of Śri Hari. Those that are not attached to their own Dharma and do not worship the Devas and always bent on doing things as they like without any regard to their Acāras go certainly to hells. No doubt in this.

स्वधर्पनिता एव वर्णाधुस्वारा एव च ।

पर्वतैल वृग्भ्यसैव कर्मण: फलभोगिनः ॥ 39 ॥

स्वकर्मरित्ता ये च नरके यांति ते धूवम् ।

भारतै न पर्वतैल्व कर्मण: फलभोगिनः ॥ 40 ॥

The Brāhmanas and the other three Varnas, attached to their own Dharmas all enjoy the fruits of their good works. But those who do not do their Svadharma, go verily down into hells. They do not come to Bhārata for their rebirth, they enjoy their fruits of Karmas in hells!

स्वधर्पितता एव वर्णाश्रवार एव च ।

स्वधर्पितता विज्ञा: स्वधर्पितताय च ॥ 41 ॥

कन्यां द्वति विज्ञाप चंत्रलेका प्रवर्तीत ने ।

वसांति तन ते साधिय यावद्रिंश्रतुरैंग नि । 42 ॥

Therefore the four Varnas ought to follow their own Dharmas of the Brāhmanas, they are to remain attached to their own Dharmas and give their daughters in marriage to the similarly qualified Brāhmanas. They then go to the Candraloka (the region of the Moon). There they remain for the life periods of the fourteen Indras.

सालकृताया इनेन द्विणुणं फलमुच्यते ।

सकामा यांति तल्लोकै न निकामामु साययः ॥ 43 ॥

ते प्रयांति विष्णुलोकै फलसंयावर्जिताः ।

गव्यं च रजतं स्वर्णं वस्नं सर्पि: फलं जलम् ॥ 44 ॥

And if the girl be given, with ornaments, the results obtained would be twice. If the girl be given with a desire in view, then that world is obtained; but if the girl be given without any desire but to fulfil the God's will and God's satisfaction only, then one would not have to go to that world. They go to Visnu Loka, bereft of the fruits of all Karmas.

ये दूर्त्वेव विष्ण्यध्रुतरोके प्रयाति ते ।

वर्सति ते च तत्कोके वायवमन्वंतरं सति ॥ 45 ॥

सुचिरात्युचिरं वासं कुर्वित तेन ते जनाः ।

Those that give to the Brāhmaṇas pasture ground and cattle, silver, gold, garment, fruits and water, go to the Candrałoka and live there for one Manvantra. They live long in those regions by virtue of that merit.

ये द्वर्ति सुवर्णशीष त्रास्ताप्रिक्ति सिति ॥ 46 ॥

ते यांति सुवर्णेकेच ह सृषये ब्राह्माणाय च ।

वसिति ते तत लकेके वर्षाणाममुतं सिति ॥ 47 ॥

विपुले सुधितं वासं कुर्बीत च तिरमायाः ।

Again those that give gold, cows, copper, etc., to the holy Brāhmaṇas, go to the Sūrya Loka (the region of the Sun) and live there for one Ayuta years (10,000 years), free from diseases, etc, for a long time.

द्वाति भूमि विरेषो ध्वानि विपुलिन च ॥ 48 ॥

स याति विष्णुलोकं च श्वेतद्वीधं मनोहम् ।

Book IX Chapter XXIX

तत्रैव निवसत्येव यावच्चंद्रदिवाकरी ॥ 49 ॥

Those that give lands and lots of wealth to the Brāhmins, go to the Viṣṇu Loka and to the beautiful Śvetā Dvīpa (one of the eighteen minor divisions of the known continents). And there live as long as the Sun and Moon exist. O Muni! The meritorious persons live long in that wide region.

Note: Śvetā Dvīpa may mean Vaikuntha, where Viṣnu resides.

विषुले विपुलं वासं क्रौति पुण्यवान्मुने ।

गृहं द्विति विप्राय ये जना भक्ति पूर्वेकम् ॥ 50 ॥

ते याति विष्णुलोकं च सुचिरं सुखदायकम् ।

गृहोरुपमाणं च विणुलोकें महनं ॥ 51 ॥ विषुले विपुलं वासं कुर्वैन्ति मानवा: सति ।

यस्मै यस्मै च देवाय यो द्वाति गृहं नः ॥ 52 ॥

Those who give with devotion dwelling places to the Brāhmanas, go to the happy Viṣṇu Loka. And there, in that great Viṣṇu Loka, they live for years equal to the number of molecules in that house. He who offers a dwelling house in honour of any Devas, goes to the region of that Deva and remains there for a number of years equivalent to the number of particles in that house.

स याति तस्य लोकं च रेणुमानाद्वमेव च ।

सीये चतुरुर्ण पुणवं देशे शतगुर्ण फलम् ॥ 53 ॥

प्रकृष्टे द्विणुर्ण तस्मादित्याह कमलोद्वतः ।

The lotus-born Brahmā said that it one offers a royal palace, one obtains a result four times and if one offers a country, one gets the result one hundred times that; again if one offers an excellent country, twice as much merit one acquires.

यो द्वाति तडागं च सर्वेभायापनुतये ॥ ५४ ॥

स याति जनलोकं च रेणुमानाद्वमेव च ।

वायां फलं श्रणगुणं प्राप्नोति मानवः सदा ॥ 55 ॥

स तु वाणीप्रदानेन तडागस्य फलं लभेत् ।

धनुश्रुतःसहरेण दैर्श्यमानेन निश्रितम् ॥ 56 ॥

न्यना वा ताराती प्रख्ये सा वाणी परिकीर्तिता ।

One who dedicates a tank fer the expiation of all one's sins, one lives in Janar Loka (one of the pious regions) for a period equivalent to the number

of particles therein). If any man offers a Vāpi (a well) in preference to other gifts, one gets ten fold fruits thereby. If one offers seven Vāpis, one acquires the fruits of offering one tank.

दशगवीस्मा कन्या यदि पाते प्रदीयते ॥ 57 ॥

फलं द्वाति द्विगुर्णं यदि साउलंकृता भवेत् ।

यकलं च तडाणे च तदुद्वीर च तकलम् ॥ 58 ॥

वायाथा यंकोद्वरणे वार्थीतुल्यकलं लभेत ।

A Vāpī is one which is four thousand Dhanus long and which is as which wide or less

Note: Dhanu equals a measure of four hastas.

If offered to a good bridegroom, then the giving of a daughter in marriage is equivalent to a dedication of ten Vāpis. And if the girl be offered with ornaments, twice the merits accure. The same merit accrues in clearing the bed of the mud of a pond as in digging it. So for the Vāpi (well).

अश्वायदुबमातीय प्रतिष्ठा च: करोत्ति च ॥ 59 ॥

स प्रयाति तपोलोके वर्षाणामयुत सति ।

पुधोघानं यो द्वाति सावित्रि सर्वभृतते ॥ 60 ॥

स वसेद्युवलोके च वर्षाणामयुतं धुवम् ।

O Chaste One! He who plants an Aśvattha tree and dedicates it to a godly purpose, lives for one Ayuta years in Tapar Loka. O Śāvitrī! He who dedicates a flower garden for the acquirement of all sorts of good, lives for one Ayuta years in Dhruva Loka.

घो द्वाति विमानं च विणाघे भारते सति ॥ 6 1 ॥

विषयुर्लोक वसेतोर्सि यावन्यन्तंतं परम् ।

चित्रयुक्ते च विधुरे फर्लं तस्य चतुर्णुगम् ॥ 6 2 ॥

तस्याएं शिविकादानं फल्मेव लभेद्युवम् ।

O Chaste One! He who gives a Vimāṇa (any sort of excellent carriage) in honour of Viṣṇu, in this Hindus thān, lives for one Manvantara in Viṣṇuloka. And if one gives a Vimāṇa of variegated colours and workmanship, four times the result accrues. And one who gives a palanquin, acquires half the fruits.

यो द्विति मफित्युन्तो हरये दोलमन्दिरम् ॥ 63 ॥

विषाणुलोक वसेतसोर्पि यावम्बन्वन्तं शगत् ।

राजमार्ग सीध्युक्तं चः क्रोति पतितते ॥ 64 ॥

वर्षिणामुतं सोउपि शक्रलोके महीयते ।

Again if anybody gives, out of devotion, a swinging temple (the Dol Mandir) to Bhagavān Śrī Hari, lives for one hundred Manvantaras, in the region of Viṣṇu. O Chaste One! He who makes a gift of a royal road, decorated with palacial buildings on either side, lives with great honour and love in that Indraloka for one Ayuta years.

बाहाणेघोअयं वेतेयो दाने समकर्त लभेत् ॥ 65 ॥

यद्ध दत्तं च तद्बुले न दत्तं नयोतिष्ठते ।

भुक्त्वा स्वागिर्दिं सोखं पुणवाञ्जन्म भाते ॥ 66 ॥

लभोढ़िपुकुलेचेक क्रमेणीवभातिपु ।

Equal results follow whether the above things are offered to the Gods or to the Brāhmanas. He enjoy that which he gives. No giving, No enjoying. After enjoying the heavenly pleasures, etc., the virtuous person takes birth in Bhārata as a Brāhman or in other good families, in due order, and ultimately in the Brāhmaṇa families.

भारते पुरवत्थिज्ञो भुतत्वा स्वगीदिकं फलम् ॥ 67 ॥

पुन: सोउपि भवेडिप्रद्रोवे च श्रवियादय: ।

श्रिवयो वाथ वैश्यो वा कल्यकोंदितशने च ॥ 68 ॥

The virtuous Brāhmaṇa, after he has enjoyed the heavenly pleasures, takes his birth again in Bhārata in Brāhmaṇa, Kṣattriya or in Vaiśya families. A Kṣattriya or a Vaiśya can never obtain Brāhmaṇahood, even if he performs asceticism for one Koti Kalpas.

तस्या बाहुपाल्चं च न प्राप्नोत श्रुते श्रुतम् ।

नापूचतं क्षीयते कर्म कल्याकोटितरोरि ॥ 69 ॥

एतते कथितं किंचिरिकं भूयः श्रोतुमिच्छसि ॥ 70 ॥

ड्री श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणं नवमस्कन्चे नारदनारायणसंवादे

साविष्युपखाने एकोनर्शितोश्वायः ॥ 71 ॥

This is stated in the Srutis. Without enjoying the fruits, no Karma can be exhausted even in one hundred Koti Kalpas. So the fruits of the Karmas must be enjoyed, whether they be auspicious or inauspicious. By the help of seeing the Devas and seeing the Tirthas again and again, purity is acquired. O Śavītri! So now I have told you something. What more do you want to hear? Say."

Here ends the Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the anecdote of Śavītri on the fruits of making gifts and on the effects of Karmas in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

