CHAPTER XXXVI

On Having No Fear of Yama for those Who are the Pančopāšakas

साविश्यबाच

धर्मराज महाभाग वेदवेदाङ्गपारा ।

नानापुराणेतिहासे यत्सरां तत्पदर्शेय ॥ १ ॥

सर्वेषु सारभूतं यत्सर्वेहं सर्वसैमतम् ।

कर्मच्छेद्वीजरूपं प्रगरसं सुखदें नृणाम् ॥ 2 ॥

Sāvitri said: O Dharmarājan! O Highly Fortunate One! O Thou! Expert in the Vedas and the Ángas thereof! Now kindly describe that which is the essence of the various Purānas and Itihāsas, which is the quintessence, which is dear to all, approved of by all, which is the seed by which the Karmic ties are cut asunder, which is high, noble and happy is this life.

सर्वप्रदं च सर्वेभां सर्वांभेलाकारम् ।

भयं दुःखं न पश्यति येन वै सर्वांभानाः ॥ 3 ॥

कुंकाति ने न पश्यति तेषु नैव पतन्ति च ।

न भवेढ़ोन जन्मादि तत्कर्मं वदा संप्रातम् ॥ 4 ॥

Kindly describe the above by which man can acquire all his desires, and what is the only source of all the good and auspicious is things. And by knowing which man has not to face any dangers or troubles, nor has he to go to the dreadful hells that thou hast severally just now described and that by which men can be freed of those various wombs.

किमाकाराणि कुंडानि नाति वा निर्मितानि च।

के च केनैव रूपेण तत्र त्रिष्टिं पापिन: ॥ ५ ॥

स्वदेई भमसादभूमते याति लोकांतरं नरः ।

केन देहेन वा भोगं करोति च शुणग्रुष्म। ॥ ७ ॥

सुचिरं कलेशफोगेन कथं देहो न नश्यति ।

देहो वा किंविधो ब्रडासनेव व्याख्यातुमहिंस ॥ ७ ॥

Kindly now describe all these. O Bhagavan! What is the size of the several kundas or hells that Thou hast just now enumerated? How do the sinners dwell there? When hast just now

enumerated? How do the sinners dwell there? When a man departs, his body is reduced to ashes. Then of what sort is that other body by which the sinners enjoy the effects of their Karmas? and why do not those bodies get destroyed when they suffer so much pains for so long a time? What sort of body is that? Kindly describe all these to me.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

साविश्विवचनं श्रुत्वा धर्मोजी हरिं स्मरन् ।

कथां कथितुमारेचे कर्मव्यान्थितृन्तीम् ॥ 8 ॥

Nārāyana spoke: Hearing the questions put forward by Sāvitrī, Dharmarāja remembered Śri Hari and began to speak on subjects that sever the bonds of Karmas:

धर्मोज जवा

वत्से चतुर्षु वेदेषु धर्मेषु संहितासु च ।

पुराणीक्षितितासे पोचरात्रदिकेषु च ॥ ९ ॥

अन्येषु धर्मोग्रावेषु वेदांगेषु च सुझते ।

सर्वेहं सारभृतं च पढ़देवानुसंवन् ॥ 10 ॥

जन्ममृनुजारामाधिशोकसंतापनाशनम् ।

सर्वमूलकूपं च परमानंदकरणम् ॥ 11 ॥

कारणं सर्वसिद्धीनां नरकाणंवताराणम् ।

भक्तिद्धक्षितृकर्तं कर्मद्वधनिकृतनम् ॥ 12 ॥

“O Child! O One of good vows! In the four Vedas, in all the books on Dharma, (Smrtis) in all the Sanhiñtās, all the Ithāsas, all the Purānas in the Nārada Pañcarāram, in the other Dharma Śāstras and in the Vedāngas, it is definitely stated that the worship of the Pañca Devatās (the five Devatās) Śiva, Śakti, Viṣṇu, Ganeśa, and Sūrya is the best, the highest, the destroyer of the old age, disease, evils and sorrows, the most auspicious and leading to the highest bliss. In fact, the worship of these Pañca Devatās is the source of acquiring all the Siddhis (the success) and saves one from going to the hells. From their worship springs the Bhaktic Tree and then and then only the Root of the Tree of all Kārmic bonds is severed for ever and ever.

विमोक्षसोपानमिद्यनिवाणपर्वे स्मृतम् ।

सालोक्यसाहिंसाकल्यसामीथाविद्धरं शुणम् ॥ 13 ॥

कुंडाउन यमदूतैश्र शक्तानिस सदा शुणे ।

न हिं पश्यांति स्वपे च पड्ड्वेवार्चंका नगः ॥ 14 ॥

This is the step to Mukti (final liberation) and is the indestructible state. By this one can get Sālokya, Sārṣṭi, Sārūpya, and Sāmīpya, th different state of beatitudes in which the soul (1) resides in the same world with the Deity, (2) possesses the same station, condition, or rank, or equality with the Supreme Being in power and all the Divine attributes (the last of the four grades of Mukti, (3) possesses the sameness of form or gets assimilated to the Deity or (4) gets intimately united, identified or absorbed into the Deity,

देयीभक्तिहितीना ये ते एप्यर्ति मामलयम् ।

याति वे हृत्तियां वा अयती हरितावसम् ॥ 15 ॥

प्रणाति हरिं नित्यं हरिंची कल्पयति च ।

न यांति तेति पीयांं च मम संयमनि पुरीम् ॥ 16 ॥

O Auspicious One! The worshipper of these five Devatās has never to see any of the hells, watched by My messengers. Those who are devoid of the devotion to the Devi see My abode; but those who go to the Tirthas of Hari, who hold Harivāsaras (festivities on the days of Hari) who bow down at the feet of Hari and worship Hari, never come to My abode named Samyamaana.

विसंधितृता विग्राक्ष शुद्धाचासम्वित्ता: ।

निषूर्ति नैव लव्यति देवीसेवां विम नरा: ॥ 17 ॥

स्वधर्मित्ताचारा: स्वधर्मित्तालया ।

गच्छंते मृत्युलोकं च दुर्दुशा मम विकारा: ॥ 18 ॥

Those Brāhmaanas that are purified by their performing the three Sandhyās and by their following the pure Ācāras (customs and observances), those that find no pleasure until they worship the Devi, those that are attached to their own Dharmas and their own Ācāras, never come to My abode.

भीता: शिवोपासकेकधो वैनेतयादिवेगा ।

स्वतूतं पाशहस्तं च गच्छंतं वारयाम्यहम् ॥ 19 ॥

Book IX Chapter XXXVI

यास्यति ते च पर्वत्र हरिदासाश्रयं विना ।

कृष्णमान्योपासकाच्च वैनतयादिवारोगाः ॥ २० ॥

My terrible messengers, seeing the devotees of Śiva, run away out of terror as snakes run away terrified by Garuda I also order My messengers with nooses in their hands never to go to them. My messengers go mostly to other persons than the servants of Hari. No sooner do My Messengers see the worshippers of the Krṣna Mantra, than they run away as snakes get terrified at the sight of Garuda.

देवीमन्नोघासकानां नानां चैव निकृतानम् ।

क्रोति नखलेखन्या चित्रगुतक्ष भीतवत् ॥ 21 ॥

मधुपकर्षिके तेषां कुलेते च पुनः पुनः ।

विलेय ब्रह्मलोकं च लोक गच्छिति ते सीत ॥ 22 ॥

Citragupta, too, one of the beings in Yama's world, recording the vices and virtues of mankind), strike off the names of the Devi worshippers, out of fear and prepare Madhuparka, etc., for them (a mixture of honey; respectful offering made to a guest or to the bridegroom on his arrival at the door of the father of the bride).

दुरितानि च नर्यांति वेधां संसरणैमात्र ।

ते महाभायवंतीे हि सहस्वकुलपावना: ॥ 23 ॥

They rise higher than the Brahma Lokas and go to the Devi's abode, i.e., to Manjdivpa. Those that are the worshippers of the Śakti Mantra and are highly fortunate, whose contact removes the sins of others, they deliver the thousand generations (from the downward course).

यथा च प्रजलढ़ाई शुक्रानि च तृणानि च ।

प्राप्नोते महः संभोते तांश द्वृषा च भीतवत् ॥ 24 ॥

कामश कामिनं यालि लोगक्रोधी ततः सति ।

मृत्यु: प्रलीयते रोगे जरा शोकों भयं तथा ॥ 25 ॥

As bundles and bundles of dry grasses become burnt to ashes, no sooner they are thrown into fire, so the delusion at once becomes itself deluded at the sight of the forms of those devotees. At their sight, lust, anger, greed, disease, sorrow, old age, death, fear, Kāla (time that takes away the life of persons), the good and bad karmas, pleasures and enjoyments drop off to a great distance.

कालः शुभागुर्भ कर्म हर्षों भोगतस्थैव च ।

ये चे न्यांति तो पीडी कथितात्मे मय सति ॥ 26 ॥

शृणु देहिवरणं कथयामि यथागमम् ।

पृथिवीवायुराकाशलेजस्तोयमिति सुकटम् ॥ 27 ॥

O Fair One! Now I have described to you the states of those persons that are not under the control of Kāla, good and bad karmas, pleasures and enjoyments etc., and those that do not suffer those pains. Now I am speaking of this visible body. Listen. Earth, water, fire, air, and ether are the five Mahā Bhūtas (the great elements); these are the seeds of this visible body of the person and are the chief factors in the work of creation.

देहिनां देहबीजं च स्वरूपहिविधेपी परम् ।

पृथिव्यादिपंचभूतीयं देहो निर्मितो भवेत् ॥ 28 ॥

स कृत्रिमो नज्ञश भवमसाच भवेदेहि ।

बढ़ोड़कुष्माणश यो जीवः पुरुषः कृतः ॥ 29 ॥

The body that is made up of earth and other elements is transient and artificial i.e., that body becomes burnt to ashes. Within this visible body, bound, is there a Puruṣa of the size of a thumb; that is called Jīva Puruṣa; the subtle Jīva assumes those subtle bodies for enjoying the effects of karmas.

विषभित सूक्ष्मं देहं तं तनुयं भोगहितवे ।

स देहो न भवेद्रूम्य जल्द्वर्नी मामालये ॥ 30 ॥

जलेन नष्टो देही वा प्रहारे सुचिरं कृते ।

न शक्रेशन न वाउजेश सुतीक्षाकंटके तथा ॥ 31 ॥

In My world, that subtle body is not burnt by the burning fire. If that subtle body be immersed in water, if that be beaten incessantly or if it be struck by a weapon or pierced by a sharp thorn, that body is not destroyed.

तत्तद्धे ततलोहे तत्पाषाण एव च भ्रततप्रतिमासलेये यत्पूर्वतने3पि च ॥ 32 ॥

न दर्पयो न च भग्नः स भुक्ते संतापयेच च ।

कथितो देहृषृतांतः कारणं च यथागमम् ॥ 33 ॥

कृष्णतानं लक्षणं सर्वे बोधाय कवयामि ते ।

डीत श्रीमदेवीभागवते माहापुराणे नवस्कनघे

भद्रप्रिंगोद्याय: 1136 11

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

That body is not burnt nor broken by the burning hot and molten material, by the red hot iron, by hot stones by embracing a hot image or by falling into a burning cauldron. That body has to suffer incessant pains. O Fair One! Thus I have dwelt on the subject of the several bodies and the causes

thereof according to the Šāstras. Now I will describe to you the characters of all the other Kundas. Listen."

Here ends the Thrity-sixth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the destruction of the fear of the Yama of those who are the worshippers of the Five Devatās, in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

