CHAPTER XVII

On Mandorari's Accounts

यास उवाच

इति श्रुत्वा वचस्तस्य देवी पण्ड्छ दानवम् ।

का सा मन्दोदी नारी कॉसौ सत्चो नृसत्चा ॥ १ ॥

गरः को वा गुपः पशुताने वृहि कक्षानकम् ।

वित्तरोग यथा प्राणत दुःखं विनताय पुनः ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus, the Devi asked the Dānava “Who is that Mandodari? Who is that king who was not first taken by her? And who is that king whom she married afterwards? And how did she repent afterwards? Describe all these in detail to me.

महिष उवाच

सिंहले नाम ईशोर्स्त विद्यातः पृथिवतले ।

घनपादवर्षयुक्तो धनधान्यस्पूद्धिनान् ॥ 3 ॥

Thus asked by the Devi, Mahisa began to say: "O Devi! There is a place, named Simhala, noted in this earth and decorated with various trees and prosperous with wealth and grain.

चन्द्रसेनाप्रधस्त जाग धर्मपरावणः ।

न्यायवण्डधर: शानतः प्रजायणतन्ततः ॥ 4 ॥

सत्यवादी मुदुः शूरस्तितक्ष्नान्तिसागाः ।

गगस्त्रवित्वसंधर्मौ छनुवेदेस्तिनिष्ठितः ॥ 5 ॥

A virtuous king, named Candrasena, used to reign there; he was calm, peaceful, truthful, heroic charitable, steady, forbearing, well versed in politics, ethics and morals vast as a wide ocean, learned in Sāstras, knowing all forms of religions and much skilled in archery. He was mindful in governing his subjects and he used to punish according to the laws of Justice.

तस्य भार्यां वरातोहा सुन्दरी सुभगा गृधा ।

सदाचारात्रसिपुयुची पतिभक्तिपरायणा ॥ 6 ॥

The king had a beautiful well-qualified wife, very handsome and broad-hipped. She was very much devoted to his husband and always engaged in religious acts and of good conduct.

नाना गुणवती कान्ता सर्वलक्षणसंयुता ।

सुप्रुवे प्रथमे गर्भे पूर्वी सा चातिसुन्दरीम् ॥ 7 ॥

This wife, endowed with all auspicious signs, gave birth to a beautiful daughter in her first delivery.

पिता चातीव सन्तुषः पुर्जी प्राय्य मनोरामम् ।

मन्दोर्धर्तिन मानास्या: पिता चक्रे मुद्रावितः ॥ 8 ॥

The King Candrasena, the father, was very pleased to have this beautiful daughter and gladly called her by the name of Mandodari.

इन्टोः कलैल चात्यर्थ बढ़ये सा दिति दिति ।

द्रशवर्षं यदा जाता कन्या चातिमनोहरा ॥ 9 ॥

This daughter began to grow daily like the phases of the Moon. When she grew ten years old, she became very handsome.

वारर्थं नृपतिभ्रन्तमावग च दिति दिति ।

मढ्रेलाप्राधि: शूर: सुधनाना पापाधिव: ॥ 10 ॥

तस्य पुत्रोतिभेधारी कंकुर्णीशोतिविषयुतः ।

बाहणी: कवितो गोरे संकुतोज्ञाय रा: शुभः ॥ 11 ॥

सर्वलक्षापमप्र: सर्वविद्धायधारण: ।

राज दृष्टा तदा राजी नाना गुणकती विद्या ॥ 12 ॥

The King now became anxious to have suitable bridegroom and used to think of it everyday. The Brāhmins then told the king that there was a prince named Kambugriva, the intelligent son of the powerful king Sudhanvā of Madra; this prince was endowed with all kingly qualifications and versed in all knowledge and was therefore a fit match for your daughter.

कंडुगीयार कन्यां खरा व्याजीय वरविणीम् ।

सा तु पत्युर्वचः शुचा पूर्णी पण्ड्छ सादरम् ॥ 13 ॥

विवाहं ते पिता कर्तुं कंडुगीयेण वाज्छति ।

The king then asked his dear qualified wife that he would like to marry his daughter to Kambugriva. The queen, hearing this, asked her daughter Mandodari that her father was desiring to marry her to Kambugriva, the son of the king of Madra.

Book V Chapter XVII

तच्छुला मातारं प्राह वाक्यं मन्तोदरी तदा ॥ 14 ॥

नाहं पाँति कर्णिषामि नेच्छा मेउति परिश्रेह ।

कोभारं ज्ञनास्थाय कालं नेच्यामि सर्वथा ॥ 15 ॥

Hearing her mother's words, Mandodari spoke thus: "O Mother! I have got no desire to marry; I will not accept any husband; I will take the vow of leading a chaste virgin life and thus pass the rest of my life."

स्वातन्येण चरिध्यामि तपस्तीत्र सदैव हि ।

पारतन्ये परं: दुःखे मात: संसारसाररे ॥ 16 ॥

स्वातन्यानोक्षामिन्याहु: पशिडताः शाखकोंविद्धाः ।

तस्मामुक्ता भविष्यामि पतया मे न प्रयोजनम् ॥ 17 ॥

O Mother! There is nothing more miserable in this ocean of world than dependence; I therefore prefer to lead incessantly a life of severe asceticism. The Pandits versed in the Śāstras say that taking up the vow of separateness and independence leads to salvation; I will thus be liberated; I have no need for a husband.

विवाहे वर्तमाने तु पाककस्य च सविर्धो ।

वक्त्यं वचनं सम्यक्त्वदीपान्त्रिस मर्वदा ॥ 18 ॥

श्रूद्रदेवरवाणीं दारीस्तं श्रूग्रात ।

पतिचितान्तप्रवर्तिलं दुःखादुःखातरं सुतम् ॥ 19 ॥

क्वाचित्वतिन्यां का कामिनीं च भवेचादि ।

At the time of marriage ceremony, one has to say before the consecrated Fire that one will remain always a dependent to one's husband in every way; besides in a father-in-law's house, one has to pass one's time as a slave, as it were, to one's mother-in-law and to husband's (younger) brothers; again one will have to think oneself as happy when one's husband is happy and as unhappy when one's husband is unhappy; this is the worst of all miseries.

तदा महतरं दुःखं सरपनीसम्पयं भवेत् ॥ 20 ॥

तदेधां जावते पत्पी क्लेशशापि भवेदय ।

Again if the husband marries again another woman, then this misery of having a co-wife is extreme. O Mother! Jealousy arises then towards even one's own husband and therefore suffering is endless.

संसारे क्व सुखं मातर्नीर्णी च विशेषतः ॥ 21 ॥

स्वभावात्परन्त्राणां संसारे स्वध्नर्धिणि ।

Therefore what happiness can there be in this dream-like worlds; especially with women who are made dependent by Nature?

शुतं मया पुरा मातरुक्तानंरणाग्यज: ॥ २२ ॥

उत्तमः सर्वभर्मों धुवाद्वरजो नृपः ।

O Mother! I heard that in days of yore the religious son of Uttānapāda, Uttama was younger than Dhruva; and yet he became King.

पत्नी धर्मपंरा साखी पति भक्तिपरायणम् ॥ 23 ॥

अपराधं विज्ञा कान्तां तचक्ताजिचिते प्रियाणम् ।

And the King Uttānapāda banished his dear wife, solely devoted to her husband, without any cause, to the forest.

एर्वेश्वरायन दुःखानि विद्यामने तु भर्ति ॥ 24 ॥

कालयोगामुते तमिश्रायी स्यादुःखणाजनम् ।

वैधघ्यं परमं दुःखं शोकसंतपाकारकम् ॥ 25 ॥

Therefore women have to suffer such diverse pains while their husbands are living; and if by chance the husband dies, then women get interminable pains; the widowhood becomes the only source of grief and sorrow.

परोषितपतिलेअर पिं: दुःखं स्यादधिकं गृहे ।

मदानास्थिविद्यायाः किं सुखं पतिसंगजम् ॥ 26 ॥

तस्मात्यतिनं कर्तेल्यः सर्वेक्षेति मतिभिंम ।

Again if the husband be in foreign lands, women become subjected to the fire of Cupid, and then the house becomes an object of more agony. Thus whether the husband lives or dies, there is no happiness at any time. Thus, according to my opinion, I ought never to accept any husband.

एवं प्रोक्ता त्वा माता पर्यत ग्रह युगनामजा ॥ 27 ॥

न च खांक्षित भार्तरं कौभागरज्ञाधारिणी ।

The Mother then told her husband all about what the daughter had said. Mandodari would accept the vow of a life-long virgin; she had no desire to marry.

त्रतजाध्ययरा निर्वलं संसाराधिमुखी सदा ॥ 28 ॥

न क्रांक्षिति पति कर्तु बहुदोषविचविष्ण ।

Srimaddevibhagavatam

She had brought forward many faults in worldly life and thus would perform vows and Japams and pass her time alone. She did not yearn after a husband.

भार्यामा आमितं श्रुत्वा तथेव संस्थितो नृप: ॥ 29 ॥

विकाहो न कृतः पुथ्या ज्ञाला भावविजितात्म। ।

The King, hearing thus, came to know, that his daughter had no intention to marry and so began to pass his time without giving away his daughter in marriage.

वर्तमाना गृहेचेव पिता माता न रहिता ॥ 30 ॥

यीवनस्यांकुरा जाता नारीणां कामदीपकाः ।

Thus the daughter lived in family protected by her father and mother; by that time signs of puberty were seen in the body of the daughter.

तथापि सा वयस्यापि: प्रेरितापि पुनः पुनः ॥ 31 ॥

घकमे न पति कर्तुं ज्ञानार्थिवद्यापिणी ।

Her comrades requested her repeatedly to select a bridegroom; but she spoke many words of wisdom and did not show any inclination for marriage.

एकदोधान्देशं स वित्तुं बहुपादपे ॥ 32 ॥

जगाम सुमुखी प्रेणा सैरंधीगपासेविता ।

Once, on an occasion, that beautiful faced woman went out with her female attendants on a pleasure trip to a garden, beautified with various trees.

रेम कुशोदरी ततायपल्कुसुमिता लता: ॥ 33 ॥

पुथागि चित्ती रया वयस्थापि: समातृता ।

There the slender bodied one began to play enjoy with her comrades in picking up various flowers and beautiful flowering creepers.

कोशलापिपतिलत मार्गे दैवलगात्ता ॥ 34 ॥

आजगाम महीबीरी वीरतेनो5तिविश्रुतः ।

एकाकी रथमारूकः: कतिचित्सेवकैकुंतः ॥ 35 ॥

सैन्यं च पुह्नतस्य समायाति शनैः शनैः ।

Just at that time, the famous King of Kosala, the powerful Virasena came there accidentally. Alone he was on his chariot, attended by a few soldiers; his large army and retinue were coming slowly behind him at some distance.

दृषस्तस्य बवस्याधिरूततः पार्थिवस्ताद ॥ 36 ॥

मन्दोदर्यै तथा प्रोक्ते समाप्ताति नर: पथि ।

रथाड़ो महावाहू. रूपवात्मदनोउपर: ॥ 37 ॥

Her comrades, then, looking at that King from a distance, told Mandodari “O friend! See! Some body, strong and beautiful, like a second God of Love is coming towards us, mounted on a chariot.

मन्येड़ नृपाति: क्रांक्षाप्राणे भाग्यवशाद्धि ।

एवं बुवल्यां ततासौ कोशलेन्द्र: समाताः।। 38 ॥

I think some King he will be and we are very lucky that he has come here. While thus talking the King arrived there.

दृष्टवा तासिस्तार्थर्गी विस्मयं प्राप भूपति: ।

उत्तीर्थ स स्थातूर्णं पप्रच्छ परिचारिकाम् ॥ 39 ॥

केनं बाला विशागताकी कसव पुत्री बलूगु मे ।

एवं भृषा तु सैरस्थी तमुवाच सुश्विस्मता ॥ 40 ॥

प्रथमं बूहि मे वीर पृच्छामि त्वां सुतोचन ।

कोसि सर्व किमिदायात: किं कार्य वद सोजन ॥ 41 ॥

The King, looking on that blue coloured woman with beautiful eyes became surprised and getting down from the chariot, asked the maidservant, "O Gentle one! Who is this woman with large eyes! Who is her father? Tell me this without any delay." The attendant smiling, told him thus: O Beautiful-eyed One! Pray speak first who are you? What for have you come here? What do you want to do here?

इति पृष्टस्तु सैरंध्या तापुवाच महीपति: ।

कोशाले नाम देशोर्जिति पुथिखां परमाङ्ग: ॥ 42 ॥

तस्य पालयिता चाहं वीरसेनाधिधः प्रिये ।

The female attendant thus asking him, the King replied: There is a very beautiful country named Kosala, in this earth; I am the King of that place; my name is Virasena.

वाहिती पृष्ठतः कामं समयाति चतुर्विधा ॥ 43 ॥

मारीभ्रमादिषु प्राप्त विद्धि मां कोशलाधिपम् ।

My fourfold army is coming at my will at my back. I have lost my way and have come here. Know me as the King of the country Kosala.

Book V Chapter XVII

सैरक्ष्यवाच

चन्द्रसेन्मुता राजसाना मन्दोररी किल ।। 44 ।।

उद्याने न्तुकामेयं प्राप्ता कमललोचना ।

The female attendant said: "O King! This lotus-eyed one is the daughter of the King Candrasena; her name is Mandodari.

शुवा तद्वापितं राजा प्रत्युवाय प्रसाधिकाम ।। 45 ।

सैरपि चतुरासि त्वं राजपूर्णि प्रबोधय ।

She has come here in this garden for sporting. Hearing thus the attendant's words, the King replied: "O Sairandhri! You appear to be smart; therefore make the King's daughter understand my following words clearly!"

ककृत्यवंशजशहं राजास्त्रि चाक्लोचने ॥ 46 ॥

गाधवेंण विवाहेन परिमां मंकु कामिनि ।

“O Sweet-eyed one! I am the King descended from the Kakutsha line; O fair woman! Marry me according to the rules of Gandharva marriage.*

Note: Gandharva marriage-one of the eight forms of marriage; this form of marriage proceeds entirely from love or the mutual inclination of a youth and maiden without ceremonies and without consulting relatives

न मे भार्योसित सुशोणि वयसोढुतरीवान ॥ 47 ॥

वांधारि रूपसंपेखां सुकुलां कामिनी किल ।

O broad hipped One! I have no other wife; you are a beautiful woman, of a good family and of a marriageable age; I therefore like to marry you?

अथवा ने चिता महुं विधिना दातुमहिति ॥ 48 ॥

अनुकूलपतिशई भविष्यापि न संभावः ।

Or your father may marry you to me according to rules and ceremonies; if so, I will no doubt be your husband as you desire."

महिष उवाच

इत्याकर्णं वचस्तस्य सैरंधी प्राह तां तदा ॥ 49 ॥

प्रहस्य मधुरं वाक्यं कामशास्त्रविशार्ता ।

Mahisa said: “O Devi! The female attendant, expert in the science of love, hearing the King’s words, spoke to the daughter smilingly and in sweet words.”

मन्दोदरि नृप: प्राप्त: सूर्यवंशसमुद्धव: ॥ 50 ॥

रूपवान्तवाक्नो तवेया तत्सम: पुनः ।

प्रीतिमाघुपतिजान्तसत्त्वयि सुन्दारि सर्वथा ॥ 51 ॥

O Mandodari! A very good-looking beautiful King of the solar dynasty has come here; he is very pretty, powerful, and of your age; O Beautiful! The King is entirely devoted to you and loves you very much."

विताउपि ने शिजगलाईि परित्यति सर्वथा ।

विवाहकाले ने ज्ञाला तां च वैशरायसंयुताम् ॥ 52 ॥

O Large-eyed One! Your time of marriage has come and yet you have not married; rather you are against it. Your father is, therefore, always very sorry and remorseful.

इत्याहासमान्य नृपतिर्विंतः श्रय पुनः पुनः ।

पूर्वी प्रबोधयंत्रेता सैरंध्यः सेवेन रता:॥ 53 ॥

वक्तुं शक्ता बयं न त्वा हुद्धभर्ता पुनः ।

See! How many a time your father sighed and told us “O attendants! Always serve my daughter and awaken her to this. But you are engaged in penances and austerities, in Haṭha Dharma; therefore we cannot request you on this matter.” भर्तुं: शुष्पणं क्लिंणं परो धर्मपंड्वीमानुः ॥ 54 ॥

भर्तों सेवमाना वे नारी स्वर्गमावान्यात् ।

तस्मालुक विशालाथि विवाहं विधिपुर्कम् ॥ 55 ॥

The Munis have said: To serve the husband is the highest virtue of a woman." O Large-eyed! Women get Heaven if they serve their husband; therefore you better marry according to rules and ceremonies.

मन्दोर्वुवाच

नाहं पर्ि कंकिथामि चरिष्ये तप अबुतम् ।

निवार्य नृपं बाले किं मां पश्यति निक्षः ॥ 56 ॥

Mandoārī said: “I am not going to marry; better that I should perform an extraordinary tapasyā (asceticism); O Girls! You go and ask the King desist in his request; why is he shamelessly looking at me.”

सैरध्याव

दुर्जयो देवि कामोउरी कालोउरी दुरितकमः ।

तत्साम्ने वचनं पध्यं कतुर्महसि सु-वृद्धि ॥ 57 ॥


अन्यथा व्यसनं नृनमापतेहिति निश्रयः ।

The female attendant then said, “O Devi! Passion is very hard to conquer; time is also surmountable with difficulty; so know my advise as the medical and keep my request. “And if you do not keep it, surely danger will befall you.”

इति तस्य वच: शुवा कन्योवाचावर्ती सद्यो् । ५ १ १ ॥

यद्धद्वेनेपृद्वत् दैवयोगादसंगयम् ।

न विद्याई कारियेउर्द सर्वथा परिचारिके ॥ ५ ९ ॥

Hearing this, Mandodari replied “O attendant! I know whatever is ordained by Fate will inevitably come to pass; for the present, I am not going to marry at all.”

महिष्य उवाच

इति तस्यातु निर्विधं जात्या प्राह नृपं पुन: ।

गच्छ राजन्यथाकामं नैयमिच्छति सस्तपतम् ॥ 60 ॥

Mahisa said: “The female attendant, knowing this her obstinate view, told the King: “O King! This woman likes not a good husband; you would better go wherever you like.

नृपस्तु तद्धचः श्रुत्वा निरितः सह सेनया ।

कोशलाधिम्ना धृत्वा कामिनीं प्रति निःसूचः ॥ 6 1 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणो पक्षमकर्ये

सतदशो3थायः ॥ 62 ॥

"The King heard and did not want to marry that woman any more; and, being sad and broken-hearted, went back with his army to Kosala.

Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on Mandodari's accounts in the Mahāpurānam, Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

