[Ch 17 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus, the Devi asked the Dānava “Who is that Mandodari? Who is that king who was not first taken by her? And who is that king whom she married afterwards? And how did she repent afterwards? Describe all these in detail to me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus, the Devī asked the Dānava, “Who is that Mandodarī? Who is that king who was not first taken by her? And who is that king whom she married afterwards? And how did she repent afterwards? Describe all these in detail to me.”

[Ch 17 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus asked by the Devi, Mahisa began to say: "O Devi! There is a place, named Simhala, noted in this earth and decorated with various trees and prosperous with wealth and grain.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus asked by the Devī, Mahiṣa began to say :-- “O Devī! There is a place, named Simhala, noted in this earth and decorated with various trees and prosperous with wealth and grains.

[Ch 17 Verse 4-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► A virtuous king, named Candrasena, used to reign there; he was calm, peaceful, truthful, heroic charitable, steady, forbearing, well versed in politics, ethics and morals vast as a wide ocean, learned in Sāstras, knowing all forms of religions and much skilled in archery. He was mindful in governing his subjects and he used to punish according to the laws of Justice.
NEW CORR ENG ──► A virtuous king, named Candrasena, used to reign there; he was calm, peaceful, truthful, heroic, charitable, steady, forbearing, well versed in polities, ethics and morals vast as a wide ocean, learned in Śāstras, knowing all forms of religions and much skilled in archery. He was mindful in governing his subjects and he used to punish according to the laws of Justice.

[Ch 17 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king had a beautiful well-qualified wife, very handsome and broad-hipped. She was very much devoted to his husband and always engaged in religious acts and of good conduct.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king had a beautiful well-qualified wife, very handsome and broad-hipped. She was very much devoted to her husband and always engaged in religious acts and of good conduct.

[Ch 17 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This wife, endowed with all auspicious signs, gave birth to a beautiful daughter in her first delivery.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This wife, endowed with all auspicious signs, gave birth to a beautiful daughter in her first delivery.

[Ch 17 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King Candrasena, the father, was very pleased to have this beautiful daughter and gladly called her by the name of Mandodari.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King Candrasena, the father, was very pleased to have this beautiful daughter and gladly called her by the name of Mandodarī.

[Ch 17 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This daughter began to grow daily like the phases of the Moon. When she grew ten years old, she became very handsome.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This daughter began to grow daily like the phases of the Moon. When she grew ten years old, she became very handsome.

[Ch 17 Verse 10-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King now became anxious to have suitable bridegroom and used to think of it everyday. The Brāhmins then told the king that there was a prince named Kambugriva, the intelligent son of the powerful king Sudhanvā of Madra; this prince was endowed with all kingly qualifications and versed in all knowledge and was therefore a fit match for your daughter.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King now became anxious to have a suitable bridegroom and used to think of it everyday. The Brāhmins then told the king that there was a prince named Kambugrīva, the intelligent son of the powerful king Sudhanvā of Madra; this prince was endowed, with all kingly qualifications and versed in all knowledge and was therefore a fit match for your daughter.

[Ch 17 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king then asked his dear qualified wife that he would like to marry his daughter to Kambugriva. The queen, hearing this, asked her daughter Mandodari that her father was desiring to marry her to Kambugriva, the son of the king of Madra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king then asked his dear qualified wife that he would like to marry his daughter to Kambugrīva. The queen, hearing this, asked her daughter Mandodarī that her father was desiring to marry her to Kambugrīva, the son of the king of Madra.

[Ch 17 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing her mother's words, Mandodari spoke thus: "O Mother! I have got no desire to marry; I will not accept any husband; I will take the vow of leading a chaste virgin life and thus pass the rest of my life."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing her mother’s words, Mandodarī spoke thus :-- “O Mother! I have got no desire to marry; I will not accept any husband; I will take the vow of leading a chaste virgin life and thus pass the rest of my life.

[Ch 17 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! There is nothing more miserable in this ocean of world than dependence; I therefore prefer to lead incessantly a life of severe asceticism. The Pandits versed in the Śāstras say that taking up the vow of separateness and independence leads to salvation; I will thus be liberated; I have no need for a husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! There is nothing more miserable in this ocean of world than dependence; I therefore prefer to lead incessantly a life of severe asceticism. The Pundits versed in the Śāstras say that taking up the vow of separateness and independence leads to salvation; I will thus be liberated; I have no need for a husband.

[Ch 17 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At the time of marriage ceremony, one has to say before the consecrated Fire that one will remain always a dependent to one's husband in every way; besides in a father-in-law's house, one has to pass one's time as a slave, as it were, to one's mother-in-law and to husband's (younger) brothers; again one will have to think oneself as happy when one's husband is happy and as unhappy when one's husband is unhappy; this is the worst of all miseries.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At the time of marriage ceremony, one has to say before the consecrated Fire that one will remain always a dependent to one’s husband in every way; besides in a father-in-law’s house, one has to pass one’s time as a slave, as it were, to one’s mother-in-law and to husband’s (younger) brothers; again one will have to think oneself as happy when one’s husband is happy and as unhappy when one’s husband is unhappy; this is the worst of all miseries.

[Ch 17 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again if the husband marries again another woman, then this misery of having a co-wife is extreme. O Mother! Jealousy arises then towards even one's own husband and therefore suffering is endless.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again if the husband marries again another woman, then this misery of having a co-wife is extreme. O Mother! Jealousy arises then towards even one’s own husband and therefore suffering is endless.

[Ch 17 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore what happiness can there be in this dream-like worlds; especially with women who are made dependent by Nature?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore what happiness can there be in this dream-like worlds; especially with women who are made dependent by Nature?

[Ch 17 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! I heard that in days of yore the religious son of Uttānapāda, Uttama was younger than Dhruva; and yet he became King.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! I heard that in days of yore the religious son of Uttānapāda, Uttama was younger than Dhruva; and yet he became King.

[Ch 17 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And the King Uttānapāda banished his dear wife, solely devoted to her husband, without any cause, to the forest.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And the King Uttānapāda banished his dear wife, solely devoted to her husband, without any cause, to the forest.

[Ch 17 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore women have to suffer such diverse pains while their husbands are living; and if by chance the husband dies, then women get interminable pains; the widowhood becomes the only source of grief and sorrow.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore women have to suffer such diverse pains while their husbands are living; and if by chance the husband dies, then women get interminable pains; the widowhood becomes the only source of grief and sorrow.

[Ch 17 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again if the husband be in foreign lands, women become subjected to the fire of Cupid, and then the house becomes an object of more agony. Thus whether the husband lives or dies, there is no happiness at any time. Thus, according to my opinion, I ought never to accept any husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again if the husband be in foreign lands, women become subjected to the fire of Cupid, and then the house becomes an object of more agony. Thus whether the husband lives or dies, there is no happiness at any time. Thus, according to my opinion, I ought never to accept any husband.”

[Ch 17 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Mother then told her husband all about what the daughter had said. Mandodari would accept the vow of a life-long virgin; she had no desire to marry.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Mother then told her husband all about what the daughter had said. Mandodarī would accept the vow of a life-long virgin; she had no desire to marry.

[Ch 17 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She had brought forward many faults in worldly life and thus would perform vows and Japams and pass her time alone. She did not yearn after a husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She had brought forward many faults in a worldly life and thus would perform vows and Japams and pass her time alone. She did not yearn after a husband.

[Ch 17 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King, hearing thus, came to know, that his daughter had no intention to marry and so began to pass his time without giving away his daughter in marriage.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King, hearing thus, came to know, that his daughter had no intention to marry and so began to pass his time without giving away his daughter in marriage.

[Ch 17 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus the daughter lived in family protected by her father and mother; by that time signs of puberty were seen in the body of the daughter.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the daughter lived in family protected by her father and mother; by that time signs of puberty were seen in the body of the daughter.

[Ch 17 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her comrades requested her repeatedly to select a bridegroom; but she spoke many words of wisdom and did not show any inclination for marriage.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her comrades requested her repeatedly to select a bridegroom; but she spoke many words of wisdom and did not show any inclination for marriage.

[Ch 17 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once, on an occasion, that beautiful faced woman went out with her female attendants on a pleasure trip to a garden, beautified with various trees.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once, on an occasion, that beautiful faced woman went out with her female attendants on a pleasure trip to a garden, beautified with various trees.

[Ch 17 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There the slender bodied one began to play enjoy with her comrades in picking up various flowers and beautiful flowering creepers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There the slender bodied one began to play and enjoy with her comrades in picking up various flowers and beautiful flowering creepers.

[Ch 17 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Just at that time, the famous King of Kosala, the powerful Virasena came there accidentally. Alone he was on his chariot, attended by a few soldiers; his large army and retinue were coming slowly behind him at some distance.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Just at that time, the famous King of Kosala, the powerful Vīrasena came there accidentally. Alone he was on his chariot, attended by a few soldiers; his large army and retinue were coming slowly behind him at some distance.

[Ch 17 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her comrades, then, looking at that King from a distance, told Mandodari “O friend! See! Some body, strong and beautiful, like a second God of Love is coming towards us, mounted on a chariot.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her comrades, then, looking at that King from a distance, told Mandodarī, “O friend! See! Somebody, strong and beautiful, like a second God of Love is coming towards us, mounted on a chariot.

[Ch 17 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I think some King he will be and we are very lucky that he has come here. While thus talking the King arrived there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I think some King he will be and we are very lucky that he has come here.” While thus talking, the King arrived there.

[Ch 17 Verse 39-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King, looking on that blue coloured woman with beautiful eyes became surprised and getting down from the chariot, asked the maidservant, "O Gentle one! Who is this woman with large eyes! Who is her father? Tell me this without any delay." The attendant smiling, told him thus: O Beautiful-eyed One! Pray speak first who are you? What for have you come here? What do you want to do here?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King, looking on that blue coloured woman with beautiful eyes became surprised and getting down from the chariot, asked the maidservant, “O Gentle one! Who is this woman with large eyes! Who is her father? Tell me this without any delay.” The attendant smiling, told him thus :-- O Beautiful-eyed One! Pray speak first who are you? What for have you come here? What do you want to do here?

[Ch 17 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The female attendant thus asking him, the King replied: There is a very beautiful country named Kosala, in this earth; I am the King of that place; my name is Virasena.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The female attendant thus asking him, the King replied :-- There is a very beautiful country named Kosala, in this earth; I am the King of that place; my name is Vīrasena.

[Ch 17 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My fourfold army is coming at my will at my back. I have lost my way and have come here. Know me as the King of the country Kosala.
NEW CORR ENG ──► My fourfold army is coming at my will at my back. I have lost my way and have come here. Know me as the King of the country Kosala.

[Ch 17 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The female attendant said: "O King! This lotus-eyed one is the daughter of the King Candrasena; her name is Mandodari.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The female attendant said :-- “O King! This lotus-eyed one is the daughter of the King Candrasena; her name is Mandodarī.

[Ch 17 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She has come here in this garden for sporting. Hearing thus the attendant's words, the King replied: "O Sairandhri! You appear to be smart; therefore make the King's daughter understand my following words clearly!"
NEW CORR ENG ──► She has come here in this garden for sporting.” Hearing thus the attendant’s words, the King replied :-- “O Sairandhri! You appear to be smart; therefore make the King’s daughter understand my following words clearly!

[Ch 17 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Sweet-eyed one! I am the King descended from the Kakutsha line; O fair woman! Marry me according to the rules of Gandharva marriage.* Note: Gandharva marriage-one of the eight forms of marriage; this form of marriage proceeds entirely from love or the mutual inclination of a youth and maiden without ceremonies and without consulting relatives
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sweet-eyed one! I am the King descended from the Kakutstha line; O fair woman! Marry me according to the rules of Gandarbha marriage.” Note :-- Gandharva marriage: one of the eight forms of marriage; this form of marriage proceeds entirely from love or the mutual inclination of a youth and maiden without ceremonies and without consulting relatives.

[Ch 17 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O broad hipped One! I have no other wife; you are a beautiful woman, of a good family and of a marriageable age; I therefore like to marry you?
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O broad hipped One! I have no other wife; you are a beautiful woman, of a good family and of a marriageable age; I therefore like to marry you?

[Ch 17 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Or your father may marry you to me according to rules and ceremonies; if so, I will no doubt be your husband as you desire."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Or your father may marry you to me according to rules and ceremonies; if so, I will no doubt be your husband as you desire.”

[Ch 17 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mahisa said: “O Devi! The female attendant, expert in the science of love, hearing the King’s words, spoke to the daughter smilingly and in sweet words.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mahiṣa said :-- O Devī! The female attendant, expert in the science of love, hearing the King’s words, spoke to the daughter smilingly and in sweet words.

[Ch 17 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mandodari! A very good-looking beautiful King of the solar dynasty has come here; he is very pretty, powerful, and of your age; O Beautiful! The King is entirely devoted to you and loves you very much."
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Mandodarī! A very good-looking beautiful King of the solar dynasty has come here; he is very pretty, powerful, and of your age; O Beautiful! The King is entirely devoted to you and loves you very much.

[Ch 17 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Large-eyed One! Your time of marriage has come and yet you have not married; rather you are against it. Your father is, therefore, always very sorry and remorseful.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Large-eyed One! Your time of marriage has come and yet you have not married; rather you are against it. Your father is, therefore, always very sorry and remorseful.

[Ch 17 Verse 53-55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Munis have said: To serve the husband is the highest virtue of a woman." O Large-eyed! Women get Heaven if they serve their husband; therefore you better marry according to rules and ceremonies.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Munis have said :-- To serve the husband is the highest virtue of a woman. O Large-eyed! Women get Heaven if they serve their husband; therefore you better marry according to rules and ceremonies.”

[Ch 17 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mandoārī said: “I am not going to marry; better that I should perform an extraordinary tapasyā (asceticism); O Girls! You go and ask the King desist in his request; why is he shamelessly looking at me.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mandodarī said :-- I am not going to marry; better that I should perform an extraordinary tapasyā (asceticism); O Girls! You go and ask the King desist in his request; why is he shamelessly looking at me.

[Ch 17 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The female attendant then said, “O Devi! Passion is very hard to conquer; time is also surmountable with difficulty; so know my advise as the medical and keep my request. “And if you do not keep it, surely danger will befall you.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The female attendant then said, “O Devī! Passion is very hard to conquer; time is also surmountable with difficulty; so know my advice as the medicinal diet and keep my request. And if you do not keep it, surely danger will befall you.”

[Ch 17 Verse 58-59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, Mandodari replied “O attendant! I know whatever is ordained by Fate will inevitably come to pass; for the present, I am not going to marry at all.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, Mandodarī replied, “O attendant! I know whatever is ordained by Fate will inevitably come to pass; for the present, I am not going to marry at all.”

[Ch 17 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mahisa said: “The female attendant, knowing this her obstinate view, told the King: “O King! This woman likes not a good husband; you would better go wherever you like.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mahiṣa said :-- The female attendant, knowing this her obstinate view, told the King :-- “O King! This woman likes not a good husband; you would better go wherever you like.”

[Ch 17 Verse 61-62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "The King heard and did not want to marry that woman any more; and, being sad and broken-hearted, went back with his army to Kosala. Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on Mandodari's accounts in the Mahāpurānam, Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa. Šrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King heard and did not want to marry that woman any more; and, being sad and broken-hearted, went back with his army to Kosala. Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Fifth Skandha on Mandodarī’s accounts in the Mahāpurāṇam, Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
