[Ch 9 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: After performing duly his religious rites there, the son of Hiranya Kaśipu saw before him an unbrageous peçal tree.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- After performing duly his religious rites there, the son of Hiranya Kaśipu saw before him an unbrageous peepul tree.

[Ch 9 Verse 2-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There he saw along with the feathers of vultures, the terrible, sharpened under a stone, various glittering arrows, arrayed in due order; and he was surprised to think who could have kept such arrows, well guarded in this very holy hermitage of Rṣis.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There he saw along with the feathers of vultures, the terrible, sharpened under a stone, various glittering arrows, arrayed in due order; and he was surprised to think who could have kept such arrows, well guarded in this very holy hermitage of the Ṛṣis.

[Ch 9 Verse 4-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► While Prahlāda was thus meditating in his mind, he saw before him, wearing the skin of a black antelope, the two sons of Dharma, the two Munis Nara Nārāyaṇa, loaded on their heads with high clots of hairs. Before them were placed the two white bows named Śārīngam and Ājagavam, (Pināka) the bows of Viṣṇu and Śiva respectively, bearing their qualified marks, as well as their two inexhaustible big quivers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► While Prahlāda was thus meditating in his mind, he saw before him, wearing the skin of a black antelope, the two sons of Dharma, the two Munis Nara Nārāyaṇa, loaded on their heads with high clots of hairs. Before them were placed the two white bows named Śārṅgam and Ājagavam, (Pināka) the bows of Viṣṇu and Śiva respectively, bearing their qualified marks, as well as their two inexhaustible big quivers.

[Ch 9 Verse 6-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Lord of the Daitya, then, saw those two blessed ones, the two Rṣis Nara Nārāyaṇa, the two sons of Dharma, deeply absorbed in meditation. Seeing this, he became very much enraged, his eyes became red, and he began to address them thus: O two Ascetics! Has vain arrogance possessed your mind to destroy religion? It is never seen nor even heard, that the practice of severe asceticism and the holding of the bows and arrows, were carried into effect simultaneously by one man in any of the Four Ages. These two are contradictory things. That may be worthy in the Kali Yuga? This asceticism is fit for the Brāhmaṇas; why, then are the bows and arrows held by you? There is an irreconcilable difference between the holding of clotted hairs on the head and the holding in the hand of the bows and arrows. Therefore, do you practise religious rites, with feelings befitting your divine positions!
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Lord of the Daityas, then, saw those two blessed ones, the two Ṛṣis Nara Nārāyaṇa, the two sons of Dharma, deeply absorbed in meditation. Seeing this, he became very much enraged, his eyes became red, and he began to address them thus :-- O two Ascetics! Has vain arrogance possessed your mind to destroy religion? It is never seen nor even heard, that the practice of severe asceticism and the holding of the bows and arrows, were carried into effect simultaneously by one man in any of the Four Ages. These two are contradictory things. That may be worthy in the Kali Yuga? This asceticism is fit for the Brāhmaṇas; why, then are the bows and arrows held by you? There is an irreconcilable difference between the holding of clotted hairs on the head and the holding in the hand of the bows and arrows. Therefore, do you practise religious rites, with feelings befitting your divine positions!

[Ch 9 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O Descendant of Bharata! On hearing thus the Prahlāda's words, the Nara Rsi said: O Lord of the Daityas! What matters it to you? Why do you, for nothing, trouble yourself with our tapasyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O Descendant of Bharata! On hearing thus the Prahlāda’s words, the Nara Ṛṣi said :-- O Lord of the Daityas! What matters it to you? Why do you, for nothing, trouble yourself with our tapasyā.

[Ch 9 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► An able man can accomplish any thing. It is widely known in the three worlds, that we are able to accomplish these two things contemporaneously. O thou of weak understanding!
NEW CORR ENG ──► An able man can accomplish any thing. It is widely known in the three worlds, that we are able to accomplish these two things contemporaneously. O thou of weak understanding!

[Ch 9 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the battlefield as well as in asceticism, we can shew our prowess. What have you got to do with us in these matters? The road before you is unobstructed, you can go wherever you like; why do you brag of your own merits?
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the battle field as well as in asceticism, we can shew our prowess. What have you got to do with us in these matters? The road before you is unobstructed, you can go wherever you like; why do you brag of your own merits?

[Ch 9 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You are very dull and stupid; what can you understand of Brahmanic glory that is very rare and attained with great difficulty? Those that want happiness need not meddle with the Brāhmanas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You are very dull and stupid; what can you understand of a Brāhmaṇic glory that is very rare and attained with great difficulty? Those that want happiness need not meddle with the Brāhmaṇas.

[Ch 9 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Prahlāda said: Blunt headed and vain braggarts are you! When I am present in this Tirtha, I who am the upholder of Dharma, I won't allow you to practise any irreligious things here! O Ascetics! Better show me your skill in fight to-day.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Prahlāda said :-- Blunt headed and vain braggarts are you! When I am present in this Tīrtha, I who am the upholder of Dharma, I won`t allow you to practise any irreligious things here! O Ascetics! Better show me your skill in fight to-day.

[Ch 9 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! The Rṣī Nara on hearing his words replied: Give us battle if you are so desirous. O wretched amongst the Asuras! In today's battle, I will knock you head down, and then you shall never in future desire to fight with any body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! The Ṛṣi Nara on hearing his words replied :-- Give us battle if you are so desirous. O wretched amongst the Asuras! In to-day’s battle, I will knock your head down, and then you shall never in future desire to fight with any body.

[Ch 9 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: On hearing these words, the chief of the Daityas was very much angry and promised to conquer these two self controlled Rṣī ascetics, Nara Nārāyana by any means whatsoever.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- On hearing these words, the chief of the Daityas was very much angry and promised to conquer these two self controlled Ṛṣi ascetics, Nara Nārāyaṇa by any means whatsoever.

[Ch 9 Verse 20-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Thus saying, the Daitya; took up his bow and quickly stretched it with arrow and the bow string made a terrible noise. Then Nara, too, took up with anger his bows and began to shoot arrows at Prahālda lots of sharpened arrows and weapons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Thus saying, the Daitya took up his bow and quickly stretched it with arrow and the bow string made a terrible noise. Then Nara, too, too up with anger his bows and began to shoot arrows at Prahlāda lots of sharpened arrows and weapons.

[Ch 9 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The lord of the Daityas quickly selected the arrows, glittering like gold, and with them tore asunder the arrows thrown by Nara. Nara, seeing his arrows, cut asunder, became infuriated with anger and began to hurl as quickly lots of other arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The lord of the Daityas quickly selected the arrows, glittering like gold, and with them tore asunder the arrows thrown by Nara. Nara, seeing his arrows, cut asunder, became infuriated with anger and began to hurl as quickly lots of other arrows.

[Ch 9 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Prahalāda then cut asunder with arrows, of quick velocity, the Nara's weapons and struck violently on the breast of Nara. Nara, too, with anger pierced the arms of Prahlāda with five quick arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Prahlāda then cut asunder with arrows, of quick velocity, the Nara’s weapons and struck violently on the breast of Nara. Nara, too, with anger pierced the arms of Prahlāda with five quick arrows.

[Ch 9 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra and the other Devas came on their respective acroplanes to see their fight and began to give cheers sometimes to Nara and sometimes to Prahlāda from above the skies.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra and the other Devas came on their respective aeroplanes to see their fight and began to give cheers sometimes to Nara and sometime to Prahlāda from above the skies.

[Ch 9 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Lord of the Daityas taking up his bow, began out of furious anger, to hurl various weapons on Nara as incessantly as clouds give rain over the mountain peaks. The Nara Muni now became very much exhausted and weary, being struck with Prahlāda's arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Lord of the Daityas taking up his bow, began out of furious anger to hurl various weapons on Nara as incessantly as clouds give rain over the mountain peaks. The Nara Muni now became very much exhausted and weary, being struck with Prahlāda’s arrows.

[Ch 9 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa then seeing Nara exhausted, became very much amazed and holding his unequalled Śārīga bow, began to quit arrows, shining with with golden lustre.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa then seeing Nara exhausted, became very much amazed and bolding his unequalled Śārṅga bow, began to quit arrows, shining with with golden lustre.

[Ch 9 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the earth! Then Nārāyaṇa and Prahlāda both were desirous to win the victory, and a terrible fight ensued. The Devas gladly poured forth flowers on their heads from the skies.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the earth! Then Narāyaṇa and Prahlāda both were desirous to win the victory, and a terrible fight ensued. The Devas gladly poured forth flowers on their heads from the skies.

[Ch 9 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king of the Daityas got very much enraged and began to hurl arrows with tremendous quickness. Nārāyaṇa, the son of Dharma, immediately cut asunder those weapons with his very sharp arrows. Nārāyaṇa too, threw arrows sharpend under stones with high velocity and very much troubled the lord of the Daityas, who now became very much restless.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king of the Daityas got very much enraged and began to hurl arrows with tremendous quickness. Nārāyaṇa, the son of Dharma, immediately cut asunder those weapons with his very sharp arrow. 30-32. Nārāyaṇa too, threw arrows sharpened under stones with high velocity and very much troubled the lord of the Daityas, who now became very much restless.

[Ch 9 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The sky was covered over with arrows and arrows from both the parties and the day looked like the night. Then the Devas and the Daityas were very much astonished and told each other. “We never saw before a terrible fight like this.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The sky was covered over with arrows and arrows from both the parties and the day looked like the night. Then the Devas and the Daityas were very much astonished and told each other, “We never saw before a terrible fight like this.”

[Ch 9 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the Devarşis, Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Kinnaras, Pannagas, Vidyādharas and Cāranas were all very much confounded.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the Devarṣis, Gandarbhas, Yakṣas, Kinnaras, Pannagas, Vidyādharas and Cāraṇas were all very much confounded.

[Ch 9 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The two Rsis Nārada and Parvata came also to witness their fight; the Devarsi Nārada told the Parvata Rsi he never saw before such a dreadful fight. There were awful battles with Tārakāsura and Vṛtrāsura and also the battle between Hari and Madhu-Kaitabha; but they were all inferior and cannot stand in comparison.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The two Ṛṣis Nārada and Parvata came also to witness their fight; the Devarṣi Nārada told the Parvata Ṛṣi he never saw before such a dreadful fight. There were awful battles with Tārakāsura and Vritrāsūra and also the battle between Hari and Madhukaiṭava; but they were all inferior and cannot stand in comparison.

[Ch 9 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It seemed that Prahlāda was very powerful; otherwise how could an equal fight last so long a time with such an accomplished person, perfect with all the supernatural powers and of such heroic deeds as Nārāyaṇa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It seemed that Prahlāda was very powerful; otherwise how could an equal fight last so long a time with such an accomplished person, perfect with all the supernatural powers and of such heroic deeds as Nārāyaṇa.

[Ch 9 Verse 37-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus, then, when all the bows of Prahlāda were destroyed, the Daitya Rājā took up Parigha (iron club), became enraged and threw it on Nārāyaṇa's arm. The powerful Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa, seeing the dreadful iron club, cut it asunder with nine arrows and pierced Prahlāda with ten arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus, then, when all the bows of Prahlāda were destroyed, the Daitya Rājā took up Parigha (iron club), became enraged and threw it on Nārāyana’s arm. The powerful Bhagavān Nārāyana, seeing the dreadful iron club, cut it asunder with nine arrows and pierced Prahlāda with ten arrows.

[Ch 9 Verse 44-45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Prahlāda, enraged, threw the iron gadā on Nārāyaṇa's thighs. The exceedingly powerful Dharma's son was not at all agitated and stood firm like a rock and taking up arrows quickly cut asunder the iron gadā of the Daitya. Then the visitors were much startled.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Prahlāda, enraged, threw the iron gadā on Nārāyaṇa’s thighs. The exceedingly powerful Dharma’s son was not at all agitated and stood firm like a rock and taking up arrows quickly cut asunder the iron gadā of the Daitya. Then the visitors were much startled.

[Ch 9 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Prahlāda, intent on killing his enemy, became very much angry and threw the Śakti darts, spears and missiles instantly on Nārāyaṇa's thighs with great velocity. Nārāyaṇa with one arrow cut that easily into seven parts and with seven arrows pierced Prahlāda.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Prahlāda, intent on killing his enemy, became very much angry and threw the Śakti darts, spears and missiles instantly on Nārāyaṇa’s thighs with great velocity. Nārāyaṇa with one arrow cut that easily into seven parts and with seven arrows pierced Prāhladā.

[Ch 9 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus for one thousand Deva years the terrible fight lasted between Prahlāda and Nārāyaṇa in that hermitage; and the whole universe was struck with surprise.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus for one thousand Deva years the terrible fight lasted between Prahlāda and Nārāyaṇa in that hermitage; and the whole universe was struck with surprise.

[Ch 9 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Gaddâhara with yellow robes and four hands quickly came there and called Prahlâda. The son of Hrianya Kaşipu, Prahlâda, seeing the Lord of Lakṣmī, four armed, Nārāyaṇa with lotus and disc in His hands come there, bowed low, and, with folded hands, began to speak to him with great devotion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Gadādhara with yellow robes and four hands quickly came there and called Prahlāda. The son of Hiraṇya Kaśipoo, Prahlāda, seeing the Lord of Lakṣmi, four armed, Nārāyaṇa with lotus and disc in His hands come there, bowed low, and, with folded hands, began to speak to him with great devotion.

[Ch 9 Verse 51-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Deva of the Devas! You are the Lord of the universe and devoted to your devotees. O Mādhava! I have taught for full one hundred Deva years, still I have not not been able to defeat these ascetics. I do not know why. I am surprised at it.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Deva of the Devas! You are the Lord of the universe and devoted to your devotees. O Mādhava! I have fought for full one hundred Deva years; still I have not not been able to defeat these ascetics. I do not know why. I am surprised at it.
