CHAPTER IX

On the Fight between the Rşis and Prahlāda

व्यास उवाच

कुर्वैस्तीर्विविधं तत्र हिरण्यकशिपो: सुतः ।

न्योधों सुमहच्छायमप्रथतुस्ततदा ॥ १  ॥

Vyāsa said: After performing duly his religious rites there, the son of Hiranya Kaśipu saw before him an unbrageous peçal tree.

ददर्गे बाणानपराशानाजातीयकांस्तदा ।

पृथपक्षुवृतांस्तीताडिलाधौताम्होज्ज्वलान् ॥ 2 ॥

चित्तयामास मनसा यस्येमे विश्रखातिर्वल् ।

ऋषीणामाङ्गमे पुणे तीर्थे परमपावेन ॥ 3 ॥

There he saw along with the feathers of vultures, the terrible, sharpened under a stone, various glittering arrows, arrayed in due order; and he was surprised to think who could have kept such arrows, well guarded in this very holy hermitage of Rṣis.

एवं विश्वतान्नेने कृष्णाजिनधरौ मृनी ।

सभुज्जतवाभाती दृष्टी धर्मसुतो तत ॥ 4 ॥

तयोरो्ये घृते शुषे धनुषी लक्षणान्विते ।

शाङ्गैमाजवं चैव तथाउक्ष्ययो मेहपुषी ॥ 5 ॥

While Prahlāda was thus meditating in his mind, he saw before him, wearing the skin of a black antelope, the two sons of Dharma, the two Munis Nara Nārāyaṇa, loaded on their heads with high clots of hairs. Before them were placed the two white bows named Śārīngam and Ājagavam, (Pināka) the bows of Viṣṇu and Śiva respectively, bearing their qualified marks, as well as their two inexhaustible big quivers.

ध्यानस्थौ तौ महाभागौ नत्नारायणाव्यौ ।

दूद्या धर्मैतृत्ति तत्र दैत्यानामधिप्सतदा ॥ 6 ॥

कोधरात्कक्षास्तौ तु प्रोवासूरुपालकः ।

किं भवद्धुांं समारक्छो दूभपो धर्मविनारणः ॥ 7 ॥

न श्रुतं नैव दूरं हि संसारेउस्मिन्कदापि हि ।

तपसडुरणं तीव्रं तथा चापय धारणम् ॥ 8 ॥

वितोधोरयं दुये चाह कथं वुक्त कलिरियम् ।

बाहाणपर्य तयो वृक्त तर किं चापधरणम् ॥ 9 ॥

कव जटाधारणं देहे कवेयुंण न विडवनो ।

धर्म्याचरणं वुक्ते युवयादिंव्यभावयोः ॥ 10 ॥

The Lord of the Daitya, then, saw those two blessed ones, the two Rṣis Nara Nārāyaṇa, the two sons of Dharma, deeply absorbed in meditation. Seeing this, he became very much enraged, his eyes became red, and he began to address them thus: O two Ascetics! Has vain arrogance possessed your mind to destroy religion? It is never seen nor even heard, that the practice of severe asceticism and the holding of the bows and arrows, were carried into effect simultaneously by one man in any of the Four Ages. These two are contradictory things. That may be worthy in the Kali Yuga? This asceticism is fit for the Brāhmaṇas; why, then are the bows and arrows held by you? There is an irreconcilable difference between the holding of clotted hairs on the head and the holding in the hand of the bows and arrows. Therefore, do you practise religious rites, with feelings befitting your divine positions!

यस उवाच

इति तस्य चचः श्रुत्वा नरः प्रोवाच भारत ।

क्राते चित्रात्रदैत्यैद्य वृथा तपसि चावयोः ॥ ११ ॥

Vyāsa said: O Descendant of Bharata! On hearing thus the Prahlāda's words, the Nara Rsi said: O Lord of the Daityas! What matters it to you? Why do you, for nothing, trouble yourself with our tapasyā.

Book IV Chapter IX

सामर्थ सति यत्कुयोत्तसंपद्रोत तस्य हि ।

आवां कार्यद्ये मन्द समर्थी लोकविश्रुती ॥ १२ ॥

An able man can accomplish any thing. It is widely known in the three worlds, that we are able to accomplish these two things contemporaneously. O thou of weak understanding!

युद्धे तपरिस सामर्थ्य त्वं पुनः किं कार्यस्य।

गच्छ मार्गे यथाकामं कस्मादर विकल्पसे ॥ १३ ॥

In the battlefield as well as in asceticism, we can shew our prowess. What have you got to do with us in these matters? The road before you is unobstructed, you can go wherever you like; why do you brag of your own merits?

ब्रहतोजौ दुराराधं न त्वे देव विमोहितः ।

विद्यचर्चा न कतैव्या प्राणिधि: सुखमीयुधि: ॥ 14 ॥

You are very dull and stupid; what can you understand of Brahmanic glory that is very rare and attained with great difficulty? Those that want happiness need not meddle with the Brāhmanas.

प्रहाद उवाच

तापसौ मन्दखूनी स्वी मृषा वा गर्नोमहितो ।

मयि तिष्ठिति दैने०नै धर्मसैतुरवर्केन ।। १५ ॥।

न युक्मतेतर्हीर्जस्मिक्र धर्मार्णगं पुनः ।

का शक्तिस्तव युद्धेजस्ति दर्शयाएं तपोधन ॥ १६ ॥

Prahlāda said: Blunt headed and vain braggarts are you! When I am present in this Tirtha, I who am the upholder of Dharma, I won't allow you to practise any irreligious things here! O Ascetics! Better show me your skill in fight to-day.

व्यास उवाच

तदाक्षर्यं वचस्तस्य नरसं प्रत्युवाच रु ।

युध्यस्वादा मया सार्थे यदि ते मतिरीघुर्गी ॥ 17 ॥

अदा ते स्मोटीवियामी भूर्पानममुताथा ।

"युढ़े प्रद्वा न ते पशु.द्वीक्षयित कार्वन ॥"

Vyāsa said: O king! The Rṣī Nara on hearing his words replied: Give us battle if you are so desirous. O wretched amongst the Asuras! In today's battle, I will knock you head down, and then you shall never in future desire to fight with any body.

व्यास उवाच

तश्रिणय वचस्तस्य टैर्येउः: कुपितस्तद् ॥ 18 ॥

प्रहादो बलवानत्र प्रतिजामागरोह सः ।

येन केनाव्यपायेन जेषायाम तावुभावपि ॥ 19 ॥

नन्नारायणी दान्तायुंी तत्पिम्बित्ती ।

Vyāsa said: On hearing these words, the chief of the Daityas was very much angry and promised to conquer these two self controlled Rṣī ascetics, Nara Nārāyana by any means whatsoever.

वास उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा चचनं दैत्य: प्रतिगृहा शासनम् ॥ 20 ॥

आकृष्य तसा चाघं ज्याणबं च चकार है ।

नोउपि धनुरादाय शरांस्तीवाज्छ्छतशितान् ॥ 21 ॥

मुभोच बहुगः क्रोधायाज्ञादोपरि पार्थिव ॥ 22 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus saying, the Daitya; took up his bow and quickly stretched it with arrow and the bow string made a terrible noise. Then Nara, too, took up with anger his bows and began to shoot arrows at Prahālda lots of sharpened arrows and weapons.

तादैत्याजसतपनीय-

पुर्वैशिक्छेद्व आणीत्सरा समेत्य ।

समीक्ष्य डिक्रांश नः स्वयुर्जान

न्यानुमोगाणु क्षावित्तो वै ॥ 23 ॥

The lord of the Daityas quickly selected the arrows, glittering like gold, and with them tore asunder the arrows thrown by Nara. Nara, seeing his arrows, cut asunder, became infuriated with anger and began to hurl as quickly lots of other arrows.

दैत्याधिपसानापि तीब्रवेगशिष्ठचा

ज्चानोरितं तं मुनी-ह्मू ।

नरोडीप तं पछ्धिभाग्रौशु

कृद्वो3हन्हैल्यपांति बाहुदेशे ॥ 24 ॥

Prahalāda then cut asunder with arrows, of quick velocity, the Nara's weapons and struck violently on the breast of Nara. Nara, too, with anger pierced the arms of Prahlāda with five quick arrows.

सेंग्रा: सुरास्त्रत त्योर्ही युद्धे

श्रूं घिमारैर्नैगनाश्चिताशा ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

नरस्य वीर्यं सुधि संस्थितस्य ते

तृटुर्बुदैवपलेशं भृभ्य: 11 25 II

Indra and the other Devas came on their respective acroplanes to see their fight and began to give cheers sometimes to Nara and sometimes to Prahlāda from above the skies.

ववर्षे दैत्याधिति आतचापः

शिलीमुखानंबुधरो यथापः ।

आदाय शान्हं धनुतुममेवं

मुभोच बाणाधिजहोमपुंखान् ॥ 26 ॥

The Lord of the Daityas taking up his bow, began out of furious anger, to hurl various weapons on Nara as incessantly as clouds give rain over the mountain peaks. The Nara Muni now became very much exhausted and weary, being struck with Prahlāda's arrows.

बभूव युद्धे तुमुलं तयोस्तु

जयैविणपे। पार्थिवदेदैव्यपे।

ववर्षुगकारुपाये श्वित्ताने

पूथाणि दिव्यानि प्रहृधितना: ॥ 27 ॥

Nārāyaṇa then seeing Nara exhausted, became very much amazed and holding his unequalled Śārīga bow, began to quit arrows, shining with with golden lustre.

चुकोन दैत्याप्रितर्शरी स

मुगोच बाणानितितीत्रवेगान् ।

चिच्छेद तान्यमैतुतः सृतीक्षी

ध्रुविमुक्तैर्विशिजीस्ताद३गु ॥ 28 ॥

O Lord of the earth! Then Nārāyaṇa and Prahlāda both were desirous to win the victory, and a terrible fight ensued. The Devas gladly poured forth flowers on their heads from the skies.

ततो नारायण बाणोः प्रहाद्वशातिकर्षितः ।

ववर्षं सुस्तितं वीरं धर्मपूत्रं सन्तानम् ।

नारायणोप्रि तं वेगान्युर्स्कौर्णीः शिलाशितिः ॥ 29 ॥

तुरोतातीव पुरतो द्वैलानामधिरं पश्वतम् ।

सप्रियातोउबरे तत्र द्विद्धूर्णा बन्यूव ह ॥ 30 ॥

The king of the Daityas got very much enraged and began to hurl arrows with tremendous quickness. Nārāyaṇa, the son of Dharma,

immediately cut asunder those weapons with his very sharp arrows.

Nārāyaṇa too, threw arrows sharpend under stones with high velocity and very much troubled the lord of the Daityas, who now became very much restless.

देवानां दानवानां च कुर्वर्ता जयकोषणम् ।

उभयोः शरबर्षण छादिते गानवे यदा ॥ 31 ॥

दिवास्थि रासिसरुं बधूव तितिरं महत ।

कचुः परस्यं देव दैत्याश्रतीव विमसता: ॥ 32 ॥

अदृषपूर्वे युद्धे वे वर्तेउष सुदारुणम् ।

The sky was covered over with arrows and arrows from both the parties and the day looked like the night. Then the Devas and the Daityas were very much astonished and told each other. “We never saw before a terrible fight like this.”

देवर्वधोउ नाभ्वां यक्षिक्रसपरानः ॥ 33 ॥

विद्याध्यार्थागणांश विस्तयं परं ययु: ।

Then the Devarşis, Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Kinnaras, Pannagas, Vidyādharas and Cāranas were all very much confounded.

नारदः परंतक्षित्र प्रेशणार्थ स्थिती मुनी ॥ 34 ॥

नारदः परंतें प्राह नेतुर्णं चाघवतुरा ।

ताराकासुर्युद्धं च तथा बुजासुर्य च ॥ 35 ॥

मधुकैटभयंसुंद्रहं हौरणे चेयुंगं कृतम् ।

The two Rsis Nārada and Parvata came also to witness their fight; the Devarsi Nārada told the Parvata Rsi he never saw before such a dreadful fight. There were awful battles with Tārakāsura and Vṛtrāsura and also the battle between Hari and Madhu-Kaitabha; but they were all inferior and cannot stand in comparison.

प्रहादः प्रबलः शूरीे यस्मात्रायाणेन च ।। ३६ ॥।

क्रोतैत सर्गुं युद्धे सिद्धेनादुतकर्णे ।

It seemed that Prahlāda was very powerful; otherwise how could an equal fight last so long a time with such an accomplished person, perfect with all the supernatural powers and of such heroic deeds as Nārāyaṇa.

Book IV Chapter IX

 उवाच

दिने दिने तथा रात्रौ कृत्वा कृत्वा पुनः पुनः ॥ 37 ॥

चक्रतुः परमं युद्धं तौ तदा दैत्यतापसौ |

नारायणस्तु चिच्छेद प्रह्लादस्य शरासनम्‌ । 38 ॥

तरसैकैन बाणेन स चान्यद्धनुराददे ।

नारायणस्तु तरसा मुक्त्वान्यं च शिलीमुखम्‌ ॥ 39 ॥

तदैव मध्यतरश्चापं चिच्छेद लघुहस्तकः |

छिन्नं छिन्नं पुनर्दैत्यो धनुरन्यत्समाददे ॥ 40 ॥

नारायणस्तु चिच्छेद विशिखैराशु कोपितः ।

छिन्ने धनुषि दैत्येंद्र परिघं तु समाददे ॥ 41 ॥

ज्यान धर्मजे तृर्णं बाहीभेयेडितिकोपः ।

तमायांतं स वलवान्मार्गीर्नविभूर्निः : ॥ 42 ॥

चिच्छेट परिधं घोरं दराधिस्तमातडयत् ।

गदामादाय देत्यैंदः सर्वायसमर्थीं द्वृतम् ॥ 43 ॥

Thus, then, when all the bows of Prahlāda were destroyed, the Daitya Rājā took up Parigha (iron club), became enraged and threw it on Nārāyaṇa's arm. The powerful Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa, seeing the dreadful iron club, cut it asunder with nine arrows and pierced Prahlāda with ten arrows.

जानुवेगे जयानागु एवे नारायणं रथा ।

गद्या चापि पिशित्बल्स्थितः शिव्यमानसः ॥ 4 4 ॥

धर्मगुनीतिबलावामुभोचणु शिलीमुखान् ।

गदा चित्येल ये भावांस्तदा दैत्यवपेतुंघान् ॥ 4 5 ॥

विस्मयं परंजे जगुः प्रेशक्षा गगाने स्थिताः ।

Then Prahlāda, enraged, threw the iron gadā on Nārāyaṇa's thighs. The exceedingly powerful Dharma's son was not at all agitated and stood firm like a rock and taking up arrows quickly cut asunder the iron gadā of the Daitya. Then the visitors were much startled.

स तु शफिंक समादाय प्रहादः परवीरहा ॥ 46 ॥

चिश्रप तस्मा कुछ्वी बलानागयागरोस ।

तामापतर्ती संवीक्ष्य बाणोनेक्न लीलाया ॥ 47 ॥

सत्यध कृतवानगु सत्यधितं जयान ह ।

Then Prahlāda, intent on killing his enemy, became very much angry and threw the Śakti darts, spears and missiles instantly on Nārāyaṇa's thighs with great velocity. Nārāyaṇa with one arrow cut that easily into seven parts and with seven arrows pierced Prahlāda.

दिव्यवर्मसहनं तु तद्धूदं परमं तयोः ॥ 48 ॥

जातं विस्मवदं राजनसर्विं तत चाधमे ।

Thus for one thousand Deva years the terrible fight lasted between Prahlāda and Nārāyaṇa in that hermitage; and the whole universe was struck with surprise.

तद्वाजगम तस्मा पीतवासाश्रतुर्षुः ॥ ४९ ॥

प्रहादास्थाम तत्र जगाद च गदाधरः ।

चतुर्षुजो समाकानो रथाणदरपथभूत ॥ ५० ॥

दूधता तमागतं तत्र हिरण्यकशिपोः सुतः ।

प्रणाय्य परया भक्त्वा प्रजलिः: प्रत्युबाव ह ।

Then Gaddâhara with yellow robes and four hands quickly came there and called Prahlâda. The son of Hrianya Kaşipu, Prahlâda, seeing the Lord of Lakṣmī, four armed, Nārāyaṇa with lotus and disc in His hands come there, bowed low, and, with folded hands, began to speak to him with great devotion.

प्रहाद उवाच

देवदेव जगत्राय भनकतसल माधव ॥ 51 ॥

कर्थं न तिजरानावाजद्वहिते तपथ्स्विते ।

संग्रामसृ मया देव कृत: पूर्णा शर्त समा: ॥ 52 ॥

सुराणां न तिक्ती कस्मादिति मे विक्रमयो महान् ।

O Deva of the Devas! You are the Lord of the universe and devoted to your devotees. O Mādhava! I have taught for full one hundred Deva years, still I have not not been able to defeat these ascetics. I do not know why. I am surprised at it.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

<table><tr><td>विष्युकावाच</td></tr><tr><td>सिद्धाविंमी मदंडुंगी च विस्मयः कॉत्र मारिय १ ५३ १</td></tr><tr><td>तापसी न जितात्मानी ज्नरातायणी जितो १</td></tr><tr><td>गच्छ त्वं वित्तं राजनुक भर्फिंक ममाचतामू १ ५४ १</td></tr><tr><td>ताप्यां कुक विरोधें त्वं तापसाध्यां महामते १</td></tr><tr><td>Visnu said: O Forgiving One! These two Rsis</td></tr><tr><td>Nara Nārāyaṇa are the perfect ascetics, self controlled and born of my Arnisas. Therefore you have not been able to defeat them. What wonder is there! O king! Better go now to your Pātāla and keep your steadfast devotion on me. O Intelligent one! Do not quarrel any more with these two ascetics.</td></tr></table>

ध्यास उवाच

<table><tr><td>इत्याज्ञ्तो दैत्यसगो निर्यायसुरैः सह ।</td></tr><tr><td>नरनारायणी भूयस्तपोयुक्ती बभूवतुः ॥ 5 5 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>Vyāsa said: O king! The Daitya king Prahlāda then advised by Viṣṇu went out of that place with his Asura followers; and the two Nara Nārāyaṇas began again to practise their Tapasyās.</td></tr><tr><td>इति श्रीमदैबीभागते महापुराणे वतुर्धैककः नवमो3ध्याय: ॥ 9 ॥ Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Fourth Book of Srimaddevibhagavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses, on the fight between the Rsis and Prahlāda by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.</td></tr></table>

