CHAPTER XXIII

On the Tapta Krchra Vrata and Others

श्रीनारायण उवाच

अम्पतिप्रायानमिवेबमुच्चार्य साधकोतमः ।

उक्तिष्ठभान्यः पाजारं द्वादुवंते विष्ण्वणः ॥ १ ॥

वे के चाममकुले जाता दासदास्योउजकक्षिणः ।

ते सर्वे तृत्यिमायांतु मया दत्तेन भृत्ते ॥ २ ॥

Nārāyana said: The best Sādhaka, then uttering after his meals, the mantra “Aṃrtāpidhānamasi.” (O Water-nectar! Let Thou be the covering to the food that I have taken), should make Ācamana (sip one Gandusa water) and distribute the remnant food (the leavings) to those who take the leavings.

नौरोदुपप्यमिलये पदाब्बुदैनिवासिनाम् ।

अधिनामुदर्क दत्तमध्य्युपतिछतु ॥ 3 ॥

पवित्रप्राध्यमूलुच्य मंडले भृवि निशिपेत् ।

पात्रे तु निशिपेवस्तु स विध्य: पोन्हदुषकः ॥ 4 ॥

"Let the servants and maid-servants of our family that expect the leavings of food be satisfied with what leavings I give to them." "Let those inhabitants of the Raurava hell or other unholy places who have remained there for a Padma or Arbuda years and want to drink water, be satisfied with this water that I offer to them and let this water bring unending happiness to them." Repeating the above two mantras let the house-holder distribute the leavings of food to the servants and the water to those who want water respectively. Then

Book XI Chapter XXIII

opening the knot of the Pavitra (a ring of Kuśa grass worn on the fourth finger on certain religious occasions), let him throw this on the square mandalam or the ground.

प्रकिष्ठसेन संस्पूषः शुना ग्रुहेन च द्विजः ।

उपोष्य रजनीमोंचों पंचागयेन शुध्यति ॥ 5 ॥

अनुष्ठिक्न संस्पूषः स्नानये विधीयते ।

एकाहुतिप्रदानेन कोटियप्रफलं लभेत् ॥ 6 ॥

The Brāhmaṇa that throws this Kuśa grass on the vessel (Pātra) is said to defile the vow of Brāhmaṇas, taking their food. The Brāhmaṇa that has not yet washed his face after taking the food, or touching another such Brāhmaṇa or a dog, or a Śūdra, should fast one day and then drink Pañcagavya and thus purify himself.

पंचिधि: पंचकोटीनां तदनंतकलं स्मृतम् ।

प्राणानिज्ञेचे वेत्रे यो हान्तदानं करोति च ॥ 7 ॥

द्रतुर्श्वैव तु वत्पुर्णं भोक्तृश्वैव तु वत्कलम् ।

प्रानुतस्ती तदेव झावुभी तो स्वर्गोपामिनि ॥ 8 ॥

And in case the Ucchiṣṭa Brāhmīn (who has not washed his mouth and hands after meals) be touched by another Brāhmīn, who is not Ucchiṣṭa, then simply bathing will purify him. By offering this Ekāhuti (oblation once) according to rules mentioned above, one obtains the fruit of performing ten million sacrifices; and by offering this oblation five times one gets the endless fruit, of performing fifty million sacrifices, and if one feeds such a man who knows well how to do this Prānāgnihoma, then he as well as he whom he feeds both derive full benefits and they ultimately go to heaven.

सपविक्रकरी भूक्ते यस्तु विज्ञो विधानतः ।

ग्रासे ग्रासे फलं तस्य पंचाग्वस्यमं भवेत् ॥ 9 ॥

पूजाकालग्वे नित्यं जपस्तपोपाये च ।

होगो ब्राह्मणभूतिरूष पुरुरचरणमुचते ॥ 10 ॥

The Brāhmaṇa acquires while taking each of his mouthful of food the fruit of eating Pañcagavya, who takes his food duly with the holy Pavitra Kuśa grass tied on his finger. During the three times of

worship, the devotee is to do his daily Japam, Tarpañam and Homa and he should feed the Brāhmins. Thus the five limbed Purāscarāṇa is completely done.

अधःश्रावानो धर्मात्मा जितक्रोधी जितेन्द्रयः ।

लघुमिष्ठहिताशी च विनीतः शान्तोवता ॥ १ १ ॥

नित्य विश्वशनानी नित्यं स सुभभाषणः ।

स्लीगूरूपतिताव्यानासिकाकीच्छद्धपाणम् ॥ १ २ ॥

चाण्डलभाषणं चैव न कुर्बान्युनिसतम् ।

नत्वा नैव च भारेत जपहोमार्चनात्व्य ॥ १ ३ ॥

The religious man should sleep on a low bedding (lie on the ground); he is to control his senses and anger; he is to eat moderately, the things that are light, sweet and good; he is to be humble, peaceful and calm. He is to bathe thrice daily and not to hold any unholy conversation with any woman, a Śūdra, one who is fallen, without any initiation, and who is an atheist; as well he should not speak in a language spoken by the cāndālas. One is to bow down before him who is in the act of performing the Japam, Homa and worship, etc; one is not to talk with him.

मैबुन्थ स तथालयं तद्गोष्टीमपि वर्जयेत् ।

कर्मण मनसा वाचा सर्वांवस्थासु सर्वैदा ॥ 14 ॥

सर्वत्र मैबुन्नवागो ब्रह्मचर्य प्रवस्त्रे ।

गाज्ञचेव गृहस्थस्य ब्रह्मचर्यमुदाहतम् ॥ 15 ॥

ब्रहुत्नातिषु दारेषु संगतिविं शिवधानतः ।

संस्कृतायां सर्वाणायामुतुं दृष्टा प्रधतन्तः ॥ 16 ॥

Never by deed, mind or word, on all occasions never speak about sexual intercourses; nor hold any contact with such people. For the relinquishment of this subject is called Brahmacaryam (continence) of the kings as well as of the house-holders. But one should go to one's legal wife during the night time after her menstruation duly according to the rules of the Śāstras; the Brahmacaryam is not thereby destroyed.

रात्री तु गामन कार्य ब्रह्मचर्य हेरेच तत् ।

क्रणत्रयमसंगीछ्य त्वनुताथा सुतानपि ॥ 17 ॥

तथा सुज्ञानिनुचा च मोक्षीमिछ्छब्जान्धतः ॥

अजागलस्य यज्ञन्म तज्जन्म श्रुतिचोदितम् ॥ 18 ॥

अतः कार्य तु विश्रेन्र ऋषण्रयविशोधनम् ।

ते देवानामुवीर्णां च विवृणामुणिनस्तथा ॥ १९ ॥

Man cannot repay the three-fold debts and he cannot aspire for mokṣa without procreating sons or without doing the duties of the house-holders, as prescribed by the Śāstras. An attempt to do so becomes entirely fruitless like the breast on the neck of a goat. Rather it drags one downward. So the Śrutis say. So let yourself be free first from the debts due to the Devas, the debts due to the Rṣis and the debts due to the Pitṛs. Make sacrifices first and then be free from the Devas' debt.

महिष्यो ब्रह्मर्येण पितृष्यन्तु तिलोकढ़ेः ।

मुचेयुज्ञेन देवेध्यः: स्वास्थம் धर्मभारते; ॥ 20 ॥

Hold Brahmacaryam and be free from the Rsis' debt. Offer til and water; that is, do Śrāddhas and tarpanams and be free from the debt due to the Pitrs. Then do readily practise your own Varnāśrama Dharma.

क्षीराही फल्गी वा शाकाणी वा हविष्यभूक ।

विश्वाशी वा जोविद्वान्कृष्योराग्यविद्धकृति ॥ 21 ॥

ल्वर्षा क्षारमस्टे च गृजनं कांस्यभोजनम् ।

तांबूलं च दिष्युक्तं च दुह्यासः प्रमतनम् ॥ 22 ॥

शुतिस्पतिविरोधे च अपं रात्री विजयंजेयते ।

वृथान न कालं गगयेद्वुतालसीवायावताः ॥ 23 ॥

One is to practise Krcchra cāndrāyaṇa Vrata and to take for his food, milk, fruits, roots and vegetables, Havisyannam and food obtained by begging so that one may become sinless. One is to make japan for Puraścaranam. One is to avoid salt, salty or alkaline substances, acid, garlic, turnips, eating in Kāmsa vessels, chewing betels, eating twice, putting on impure clothings, the intoxicating things and the unsastric nocturnal japan; also one is not to waste one's time over blaming and trying to find faults with the relatives, playing at dice, or talking at random with one's wife (so that evil effects may arise).

भायेयेवतापुजास्तोजागमविलोकर्भे: ।

भूग्याबब्राचारित्चं मौनचर्यां तदैय च ॥ 24 ॥

नित्यं त्रिषयणस्नां गुरूकर्मविवर्जनम् ।

नित्यपूजा नित्यदानमानंदस्तुतिकौतैनम् ॥ 2 5 ॥

One is to spend one's time in worshipping the Devas, reciting the hymns of praise, and studying the Śāstras. One is to sleep on the ground, practise Brahmacaryam, and the vow of silence, bathe thrice, not practise anything which befits the Śūdras only.

नैमितिकार्वनं चैव विश्यासो गुरुदेवयो: ।

जपनिस्त्रय धर्मा ये झाद्धोते सुसिद्धिद्वः ॥ 26 ॥

नित्यं सूर्यमुपस्थाय तस्य चामिमुखो जपेत् ।

देवताप्रतिमादौ वा वह्वी वासभ्यर्ते नमुखः ॥ 27 ॥

One is to worship everyday, make charities duly and be always happy, recite stotras daily, do occasional Deva worships, have faith in one's Guru and Deva. These twelve rules are to ensure success to the devotee who does Puraścaranam. One is to daily praise the Sun, with one's face turned towards Him, do japan before Him; or one is to worship one's own Deity in front of fire or the image of any god, and do japan simultaneously.

स्नापजाजाध्यान्योत्मतपततर: ।।

निष्कामो देवतायां च सर्वकर्मनिवेदकः ॥ 28 ॥

एवमादीक्षि निवमान्युरचरापुक्छ्चरेत् ।

तस्मादूद्धिजः प्रस्नानाता ज्याहीमपरायण: ॥ 29 ॥

तपस्यध्ययने युक्तो भवेब्धूतानुकंपक: ।

The devotee who practises Puraścaranam is to bathe, worship, do Japam, meditate, practise Homa, Tarpanam, is to have no desires and to surrender all fruits to one's own desired Deity, etc. These are necessarily to be observed by him. Therefore while doing Japam, Homa, etc., the devotee's mind is to remain always pleasant and satisfied. One should be ready to practise tapasyā, to see the Śāstras and be merciful to all the beings.

तपसा स्वर्गमानोति तपसा द्विद्धे महत् ॥ 30 ॥

तपोयुक्तस्य सिद्ध्यानि कमाणि नियतात्मनः ।

विद्वेचणं संहरणं मारणं रोगनारमन् ॥ 31 ॥

As asceticism leads one to to heaven and to the attainment of one's desires, therefore know this

Book XI Chapter XXIII

that all the powers come to an ascetic. An ascetic can cause another's death (mārana); he can injure others, cure diseases and kill all.

येन चेनाय ऋषिणा यदर्थे देतातः सुतः ।

स सकामः समुद्धोत तैषां तैषां तथा तथा ॥ 32 ॥

तानि कर्मणि वक्ष्यामि विधानानि च कर्मणम् ।

पुरुषचरणमाटी च कर्मणि सिद्धिकारकम् ॥ 33 ॥

Whatever the several Rṣis wanted from the Devi Gāyatrī and to that end made Puraścaranam and worshipped Her, they obtained from Her all those things. O Nārada! I will speak of Śānti Karmas etc., in a future chapter. Here I will speak of those rules, etc., that are to be observed in Puraścaranam in as much as they play the principal part to success.

स्वाधायाभ्यसन्यादौ प्राणाल्यचेरदूद्धिजः ।

कैश्राम्ब्रुतोनस्वजाने वापयित्वा ततः शुचिः ॥ 34 ॥

तिङ्टद्विन राजा तु शुचिरासीत वाययतः ।

सत्यवादी पवित्राणि जयेद्वाहतस्वस्था ॥ 35 ॥

First of all shave yourself and have your hairs and nails, etc., cut off and bathe and be pure. Then perform the Prājāpatya prāyaścitta for one's peace and purification and next do the puraścaranam of the Gāyatrī. Do not speak the whole day and night. Keep your thoughts pure. If words are to be spoken, speak only what you take as true.

अंक्राताखतु ता जल्चा सावित्री च तदिपुचतम् ।

आपोहित्रिति सूर्फ च परिवर्षे पापनाशनम् ॥ ३६ ॥

पुनंचः स्वसितमत्यघच पावामान्यस्तथेव च ।

सर्वैतन्त्रयोक्त्यमादावंते च कर्मणम् ॥ ३७ ॥

First recite Mahāvyārthiti and then the Śāvitrī mantra with Pranava prefixed. Then recite the sin-destroying mantra “Apohiṣṭhā, etc.,” and Svastimati Sūkta and “Pāvamānī Sūkta.” In every action, in its beginning and at its end one is to understand the necessity of doing the Japam, why and what for one is doing that.

आसहस्वादगताढ्यादसाधावय । जयेत् ।

अंकतं व्याहृतितिसतः सावित्यभवासुरुम् ॥ 38 ॥

तपीयत्वाद्विरायावानुपरिड्डंसिि सेवता: ।

अनार्येन न भाषेत शूर्रेणापि न गहिंतः ॥ 39 ॥

One is to repeat the Pranava, the three Vyārthitis and Śāvitrī ayuta times or one thousand times or one hundred times or ten times. Then offer with water, the peace offerings (tarpanam) to the Ācārya, Rṣi, Chandas, and the Devas. Being engaged in action, do not speak any impure language of the Mlechas or talk with any Śūdra or any bad person. नापि चोदस्यया बधा पतितेनी-त्यक्षैनिः : न

न देवबाङ्गणिष्ट्रैनांचार्युक्तनिद्रकै: ॥ 40 ॥

न पातुपितिविद्धैर्नियम्येत कछन ।

कृष्णगाये सर्वेथां विधितक्तो3नुपूर्वशः ॥ 41 ॥

Do not talk with wife in the period of menstruation, with one who has fallen, with the low-class person, with any hater of the Devas and the Brāhmaṇas, Ācāryas and Gurus, with those who blame the fathers and mothers; nor show any disrespect to anybody.

प्राजापत्यस्य कैन्छ्यस्य तथा सतापनस्य च ।

पाकस्य च कृष्छ्यस्य विधिश्छांत्रप्रायस्य च ॥ 42 ॥

Thus I have spoken in due order about all the rules of Kṛchra vrata. Now I will speak of the rules of the Prājāpatya Kṛcchra, Śāntapana, Parāka Krcchra and Cāndrāyana.

पंचिधि: पातकैः सर्वैद्धृकृतेक्षा प्रमुच्यते ।

ततकृष्छेषा सर्विणि पापानि दहित क्षणान् ॥ 43 ॥

त्रिभिश्रात्रयणै: पृत्तो ब्रहातोकं समप्रतुते ।

अर्धधिवेदिता: साक्षात्यप्रतेयत वरतास्तदा ॥ 44 ॥

One becomes freed of all the sins, if one performs the above five Cāndrāyanas. By the performance of the Tapta Krccrha, all sins are burnt off in an instant. By the performance of the three Cāndrāyanas the people get purified and go to the Brahma Loka. By doing eight Cāndrāyanas, one sees face to face one's Devatā, ready to grant boons.

छंदांसि द्रशभिज्ञाला सर्वन्कामानस्मरुने ।

उर्हे प्रातन्यहं सायं न्यहमादायाचितम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

उर्हे परं च नार्णीयात्रजापत्यं चेद्दिक्रजः ।

गोपूरं नोगयं क्षीरद्विसर्पि: कुणोर्कमम् ॥ 46 ॥

With ten Cāndrāyanas, one gets the knowledge of the Vedas and one acquires all what one wants.

Šrimaddevthāgāvatam

In the observance of the Krcchra Prājāpatya Vrata, one has to take food once in midday for three days, once in the evening for three days, and for the next three days whatever one gets without asking anything from anybody. For the next three days one is not to take any thing at all and go on with one's work. These twelve day's work constitutes the Prājāpatya Vrata.

एकतागोपवासँது कृष्छे सांतपन स्मृतम् ।

एकैक ऋपासम्पनीवाद्वाहिन जीर्ण पूर्वेल् ।। 47 ।।

Now about the rules of the Śantapana Vrata. On the preceding day one has got to eat food consisting of the mixture of cow urine, cow-dung milk, curd, ghee and the water of the Kuśa grass; the day following he is to fast. These two days' work constitutes the Śantapana Vrata.

यहं घोपवेस्टिव्यमितिकृष्छुं चेरदूहिजः ।

एवमेव विभियुक्त महासतिनचं स्मृतः ॥ 48 ॥

Now about the Ati Krcchra vrata. For the first three days, one is to eat one mouthful of food a day and for the next three days one is to fast. This is the Ati Krcchra vrata. This vrata repeated three times is called Mahā Śantapana vrata.

Note: According to the opinion of Yama, the fifteen days' work constitutes Mahā Śantapana. For the three days' one has to eat cow-urine; for the next three days, cow-dung, for the next three days, curd, for the next three days milk; and for the next three days one has to take ghee. Then one becomes pure. This is called the all sin-destroying Mahā Śantapana Vrata. Now I am speaking of the nature of the Tapta Krcchra Vrata.

तपकृष्टु चार्विणी जलक्षीरपुतानिलन् ।

प्रतिचर्हि चिवेदुणान्सकृतल्पायी समाहितः ॥ 4 9 ॥

नियतस्तु चिवेदुयाप: प्राजाणत्यविधि: सून: ।

यतातनोउप्रमतस्य द्वाराहामभोजनम् ॥ 5 C ॥

The Tapta Krcchra vrata is carried out for the twelve days. For the first three days, one has to drink hot water; for the next three days, hot milk; for the next three days, the hot ghee and for the next three days, air only. Everyday one has to bathe once only under the above rules, and remain self-

controlled. If one drinks water simply everyday under the above conditions, that is called the Prājāpatya vrata.

पराको नाम कृच्छ्छोउयं सर्वोपायुगोदनः ।

एकैकं तु ग्रसैलिंदं कृष्णे गुस्ले २ घ स्यदिये ॥ 51 ॥

To remain without any food for twelve days according to rules is called the Parāka Krcchra vrata. By this vrata, all sins are destroyed.

अमावास्यां न भुजीत एवं चोत्रायण विधितः ।

उपस्पृश्य त्रिवर्षणमेतच्छोत्रायणं स्मृतः ॥ 52 ॥

चतुरः प्रातरश्रीवाहित्रः पिंडान्त्वाहिकः ।

Now about the rules of taking food in the Cāndrāyana vrata. In the dark fortnight one will have to decrease one mouthful of food every day and in the bright fortnight one will have to increase one mouthful every day and one has to fast completely on the Amāvasyā (new moon) day. One has to bathe thrice daily during every Sandhyā time. This is known as the Cāndrāyana Vrata.

चतुरो3स्तमिति सूर्वे शिशुचांत्रायणं स्मृत्ति ॥ 53 ॥

अश्वाही सम्पनीवार्तिबान्यं दिति स्थिते ।

नियतात्मा हविष्यस्य यतिचांत्रायणं ब्रतम् ॥ 54 ॥

In the Śiśu Cāndrāyaṇa Vrata one will have to take four mouthfuls of food in the midday and four mouthfuls in the evening. In the Yati Cāndrāyaṇa one has to take eight mouthfuls in the midday and to control his passions.

एतुह्रात्रसाधित्वा वसवघु चरिति हि ।

सर्वे कुशलिनो देवा मन्तक्ष धुवा सह ॥ 55 ॥

These abovementioned vratas are observed by the Rudras, Ādityas, Vasus, and Maruts; and they are enjoying thereby their full safety.

ऐकेंके सतरात्रोण पुर्नाति विधिकावकृतम् ।

ल्याग्युविश्रिताखीनि मेदोमज्जावसासाधा ॥ 56 ॥

ऐकेंके सतरात्रोण शुद्धूतवेय न संशयः ।

एपिंबर्तेर्विपुताता कर्म कुर्वीत निवर्शः ॥ 57 ॥

Each of the above vratas purifies the seven Dhātus of the body in seven nights simply! First skin, then blood, then flesh, bones, sinews, marrows and semen are purified. There is no doubt

Book XI Chapter XXIV

in this. Thus purifying the  \( \overline{A} \) tman by the above vratas, one is to do religious actions. The work done by such a purified man is sure to be met with success.

एवं शूद्रस्य कर्माणि सिद्धान्येव न संशयः ।

शुद्धात्मा कर्म कुर्वीत सत्यवादी जितेन्द्रिया: || 58 ||

इष्टाकामासिततः सर्वासंभापोनिति न संशयः ।

शिराभेवोपावसर्धेत्तः सर्वकंभाणि ॥ ५९ ॥

First control the senses, be pure and do good actions. Then all your desires will be undoubtedly fructified. Fast for three nights, without doing any actions and see the result. (You will not do anything and you want self control! Is this a child's play?)

ग्रीण न्चानि वा क्यांततः कर्म सामारभेत् ।

एवं विधानं कथितं पुरुष्यांफलप्रदम् ॥ 60 ॥

गायत्राश्र पुरुष्यां सर्वकामप्रदायिनि ।

क्रविता तव देवर्ष महापायविनाशिनी ॥ 6 1 ॥

Perform for three days the nocturnal vratas. Then proceed with your desired duties. If one works

according to these methods, one gets the fruits of Puraścaranam. O Nārada! By the Puraścaranam of Śrī Gāyatrī Devī all desires are fulfilled and all sins are destroyed.

आदौ कुयाद्वत मन्ये देहणीधनकारकम् ।

पुरुष्यां ततः कुयास्मसत्कलभाषयन्ते ॥ 62 ॥

इति ते कथितं गृह्धु पुरुष्यायिधानकम् ।

एततयमै नो वाच्छं श्रुतिसारं यत: स्मृतम् ॥ 63 ॥

श्री श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे एकादशककम्पे

याचोविशो3.यणाः ॥ 64 ॥

Before doing Purāścarānam purify your body by performing the above vratas. Then you will get all your desires completely fulfilled. O Nārada! Thus I have spoken to you of the secret rules of Purāścarānam. Never disclose this to any other body. For it is recognised equivalent to the Vedas. Herc ends the Twenty-third Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the Tapta Krcchra Vrata and others in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

Book XI Chapter XXIV

