CHAPTER XXII

On Praising the Devi

व्यास उवाच

पराजिता: सुरा: सर्वे राज्यं रुष्मः शशास ह ।

एवं वर्षेसूरसं तु जगाम नृपसत्तम ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! When the Devas were all defeated, Śumbha began to govern all their kingdoms; thus one thousand years passed away.

प्रशताय्नास्तातो देवाश्रित्नामापु: सुदुस्तगम् ।

गुरुं दु:खातुराते तु पप्रब्धुरिवदाना: ॥ 2 ॥

The Devas, on the other hand, deprived of their kingdoms, were all drowned in an ocean of cares and anxieties; at last they began to feel very much and were greatly afflicted.

किं कतैल्यं गुरो बहि सर्वजस्तं महापुनि: ।

उपायो5त्त महाभाग दुःख्यायि निवृत्तचे ॥ ३ ॥

They asked with reverence their own Guru Brhaşpati, “O Guru! What are we to do now? O All knowing! You are the Great Muni; kindly say unto us if there be any means by which we can get rid of this our present crisis.”

उपचारपर नूनं वेदमन्नाः सहक्षणः ।

वार्षित्तार्थकरा नूनं सूद्रेः संलक्षिताः किल ॥ 4 ॥

There are thousands of Vedic Mantrams which yield the desired results, if they are worshipped with due rites and ceremonies and if all the rules be observed thereof.

इट्यो विधियाः प्रोक्ताः: सर्वेकामफलप्रदाः ।

ताः कुरुच युने नूनं तं जनासि च तलिकायः ॥ 5 ॥

O best of Munis! Many Yajñas are mentioned in the Vedas that yield all the desired results; you know them all; so kindly perform those Yajñas.

विधि: शरुविनाशाय यथोहिष्टः सतामे ।

तं कुरुबघाट विधियद्धया नो दुःखसंक्षयः ॥ 6 ॥

भवेदीगिरसाठैव तथा तं कतुर्महीस ।

दानवानां विनाशाय अभिवारं यथामति ॥ 7 ॥

Do all those ceremonies duly that are ordained in the Vedas for the killing of enemies; O Descendant of Śāngirasa! You ought to perform as early as possible those sacrifices for magical purposes to destroy the Dānavas so that all our miseries come to an end.

ब्रह्मसतिकाव

सर्वे मन्त्राशु वेदोक्ता दैवाधीपनताशु ते ।

न स्वतःना: सुगाधीग तथैकान्तफलप्रदा: ॥ 8 ॥

प्रभातपती asid: “O Lord of the Suras! All the mantras mentioned in the Vedas yield the desired results, but subservient to the Great Destiny only; they do not give result of themselves but do so in obedience to the laws ordained by Nature.

मन्त्राणां देवता यूयं ते तु दुःखैकभाजनम् ।

जाता: स्म कालयोगेन किं करोमि प्रसाधनम् ॥ 9 ॥

You all are the presiding Deities of the Vedic Mantras: but, now, by the strange irony of Time, you are put to difficulties and troubles; what can I do now in this case?

इन्यानिवरणातीलं वतनं यजकमैसु ।

ते यूयं विषदं प्राता: कार्च्यन्ति किमिष्य: ॥ 10 ॥

See! Indra, Agni, Varuna, and other gods are invoked in sacrifices; how, then, can sacrificial ceremonies do good when you are put to so great difficulties.

अत्यर्थपायिभावानां प्रतीकारो न विहते ।

उपायस्त्वय कर्तव्य इति शिष्यानुगासनम् ॥ 11 ॥

Therefore there is no remedy to those which will take place unavoidably; but those who are wise declare that in such cases means are to be adopted.

दैवं दैव बलवक्तिव्यवदानि नर्पिधिण: ।

उपयवादित्वे दैवं प्रवदन्ति निर्यकम् ॥ 12 ॥

Some sages say that Fate is strong but those who advocate the cause of taking remedial means say that Fate is powerless; remedies or manly exertions lead to all success.

दैवं चैवायुपायश्ध ह्रावेवाधिमती नृगाम् ।

कैवलं दैवमार्थिन्य न स्वातन्त्यं कदाचन ॥ 13 ॥

But, O King of the Devas! The embodied souls ought to resort to both Fate and Remedies; it is never advisable to depend solely on Fate.

उपायः सर्वेयं कावीं विवार्य स्थिताय पुनः ।

तस्मादुब्बीय: वः सर्वन्सिवचार्य पुनः : ॥ 14 ॥

Therefore, it is advisable to think out again and again as far as one's own intellect goes, the best remedies. O Devas! I have thought over again and again on this subject and say to you my opinion, Hear.

पुण भगवती तुहा जघान महिषासुरम् ।

युभाधिस्तु स्तुता देयी वरदानं ददावय ॥ 15 ॥

आपदं नाशिययायीसं सूत्या वा सदैव है ।

यदा यदा वो देवेश आपदो देवसभ्याः ॥ 16 ॥

In days of yore, the Bhagavatī, being appeased, killed Mahisāsura; and when you all praised and

chanted hymns to Her, She gave you this boon that She will remove all your sorrows and troubles no sooner you remember Her, and She told that you all must remember Her whenever any difficulty would arise to you out of this Great Destiny.

प्रभवित तदा कामं सर्सल्यासड़ं सुरैः सदा ।

स्मृताङ्गे नागशिष्यामि युभाकं परमापदः ॥ 17 ॥

तस्माद्विमाघले गत्वा पर्वते सुमनोहरे ।

आराधनं चण्डिकाकानः कुरूप्वे प्रेमपूर्वकम् ॥ 18 ॥

She would, then, free you all of your ocean of great difficulties. Thefore do you all now go to the highly sacred and exquisitely beautiful Himālayan mountains and worship the most worshipful Caṇḍikā Devi with your love and devotion.

मायावीजीविधानज्ञानसुख्राणे ततः ।

जानाम्बई योगवालाम्बसभा सा पधिषयिति ॥ १९ ॥

Know all the rules of the Seedmantra of Māyā and be engaged in taking Her name accompanied with burnt offerings. [ have come to know, by Yogic power, that She will be pleased with You."] I see that today your difficulties will come to an end; there is not the least doubt in this.

दुःखस्योतोष्ठ युभाके रूपशते नात्र शेभायः ।

तस्मिड्लेने सदा देवी तिःक्षौति मया भुत्तम् ॥ 20 ॥

स्तुला सम्पूक्तिता सही वांतिज्ञानीश्रव्याति ।

निद्धां घरमं कृत्वा गब्धुर्धं वे हैत्यालयम् ॥ 21 ॥

सुतः सर्वाणि कार्याणि सा दः कार्म विधाप्यति ।

I have heard that the Devi resides always in the Himācala; if you worship and praise and chant hymns to Her, She will certainly grant you your desired boons. Therefore fully decide on this thing and go the Himālayas. O Devas! She will fulfill all your desires and carry out all your intentions.

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः श्रुत्वा देवतसे प्रव्युपिंगिणि || 22 ॥

हिमालयं महाराज देवीधानपरायणा ।

मायाकीजं हृदा नितयं जपन्तः सर्व एच हि || 23 ||

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus his words,

Book V Chapter XXII

the Devas departed to the Himālayas and they became all merged in the devotional worship of the Supreme Goddess and began to meditate constantly in their hearts the Seedmantra of Māyā. (Hrim.)

नमश्रकुमहायायां घबतानामभयप्रदाम् ।

गुरुधुः स्तोजमदेश्व भवत्वा ययातुः ॥ 24 ॥

They bowed down to the Goddess Mahā Māyā, the Discarder of all the fears of Her Bhaktas and began to chant hymns to Her with perfect devotion. नगे देवि विश्रेष्ठशी प्राणनाथे

सदानन्द्रके सुरानन्ददे ते ।

नगे दानवान्तप्रदे मानवानाम-

नेकाध्वे भक्तिभायमखरके ॥ 25 ॥

O Goddess! Salutation to Thee! O Thou, the Lord of the Universe! the Lord of our hearts! Thou art the Everlasting Bliss and the Giver of bliss to the Devas! Salutation to Thee! Thou art the Destroyer of the Dānavas and Thou art the Giver of all desires of human beings.

न ते नामसंख्या न ते रूपमीदृक्तया

कोप्रिय वेदादिदेवादिद्वेषो ।

त्वमेवासि सर्वेषु शक्तिस्वरूपा

प्रवास्धिसंहारकानले सदैव ॥ 26 ॥

स्पतिरलं धृतिरलयं त्वमेवासि

ब्रुद्धिजीर पृष्टिषुर्धी धृति: कान्तिनशान्ती ।

सुविधा सुलुक्ष्मीर्गति: कीतिंमेधे

त्वमेवाति विश्वस्य बीजे पुराणम् ॥ 27 ॥

Thou canst be approached with devotion. Salutation to Thee! O Thou, the Incarnate of all the Devas! Thy names are endless; Thy forms are endless; none can count them. Thou residest always as the Force Incarnate in all the actions, in the Creation, Preservation and Dissolution of Beings, O Goddess! Thou art the Memory, Constancy, Intelligence, Old Age. Thou art the nourishment, contentment; Thou upholdest all; Thou art the beauty, peace, good knowledge, prosperity and happiness, Thou art the Goal, fame, and intellect and Thou art the Eternal Seed unmanifested.

यदा यै: स्वक्षे: क्रोसौह कार्य

सुगणां च तेभ्यो नगामोउष शार्ये ।

भूमा योगनिर्द्रा दया त्व विश्वासा

स्विता सर्वभूतेषु शस्तैः स्वक्षे: ॥ 28 ॥

कृतं कार्यमोदी त्वया यत्सुगणां

हतोउसी महातिर्यांदोहा हयाति: ।

दया ते सदा सर्वदेवेषु दोव

प्रसिद्धा पुराणेषु वेदेषु गीता ॥ 29 ॥

We now bow down to those forms of Thine through which Thou dost serve the purpose of the Devas in this world as we are now in need of peace. Thou art forgiveness and I mecy; Thou art the Yoga Nidrā (a state between sleep and wakefulness); Thou art the kindness and Thou residest in all the beings in so many forms, great and grand, and so very celebrated; O Goddess! Thou hadst already served the cause of the gods in killing our great enemy Mahisāsura, puffed up with vanity. Therefore Thy mercy is well known amongst the gods; what more, Thy mercy is known, since very ancient times and it is narrated in the Vedas.

किम्यास्ति चित्र यद्याचा सुतं

स्वं मुदा पालयेल्योषयेसम्येगे ।

यतस्त्वं जनिजी सुगणां महापा

कुर्वैकचित्ने कायं समगम् ॥ 30 ॥

न वा ते गुणानामिघनां स्वकर्णे

वयं देवि जानीमहे विश्वबन्धो ।

कृपाणत्रमित्येव मत्वा तथा-

उसमान्पेधः स्वा पाहि पातुं समर्थ ॥ 31 ॥

What wonder is there that a mother nourishes gladly her own sons and preserves them carefully! For Thou art the Mother of the Devas; Thou art the great source of help to them; therefore dost Thou fulfill all their desires with Thine whole heart. O Devi! We do not know the limit of Thy qualities nor of Thy forms; O Goddess! Thou art worshipped by the whole Universe. Thou art fully competent to save all from dangers; we are objects of Thy pity; dost Thou save us from our present troubles!

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

<table><tr><td>विना बाणपातीलैंना पृथित्यातैविनाशूलखड्गैशिग शफित्वणे.:।</td></tr><tr><td>रिपूर्हनुभवासि शक्ता विनोदानधापीईलोकोपकाया लीला || 32 ||</td></tr><tr><td>दूरं शाशत नैव जानन्ति मृछान कार्य विना कारणं सम्पयेढ़ा ।</td></tr><tr><td>वयं तकैयामोउनुगानं प्रमाणं</td></tr><tr><td>त्यवेयासि कतोउस्य विश्वधर्य चेति || 33 ||</td></tr></table>

Thou art capable to kill enemies without shooting any arrows, without striking any blows, without hurling any trident, axes, Saktis, clubs, or any other weapons; merely by Thy mere will Thou canst kill; still for sport and for the good of all beings Thou incarnates and fightest for the sake of Lilā. The ignorant persons know such things as birth, death, etc., that this world is not eternal; that no actions can be without any cause; we, therefore, ascertain by reasoning and inference that Thou art the Supreme Cause of this whole Universe.

अत्र: सुधित्ती मुकुन्दोस्तितयं

होर नाशकृदा पुर्णो प्रसिद्धः ।

न किं त्वत्पुस्ताख्यन्ते युगादौ

त्वमेवासि सर्वस्य तैनैव माता ॥ 34 ॥

Brahmā is the Creator, Viṣṇu is the Preserver, and Maheśa is the Destroyer; so it is related in the Purāṇas. Thou again hast given birth to these three Gods in the respective cycles; therefore Thou art the Mother of all; there is no doubt in this.

विभिन्त्वं पुरातिधता देयि दत्ता

त्वया शक्तिज्ञा च तेयः समप्रा ।

त्वया संयुतासे प्रकृवीत

कार्मं जतायालनोत्यनिसंहारमेव ॥ 35 ॥

O Devi! In days of yore, these three Devas worshipped Thee; Thou wert pleased and gavest them all the best powers. Beings thus endowed with Thy powers, they have been able to create, preserve and destroy this Universe beautifully.

ते किं न मन्दयतो यतयो विमुळास्तवं

ये न विश्वजनर्गी समुपाश्यन्ति ।

विद्यां परां सकलकामफलप्रद्यां तां

मुक्तिप्रदां विबुधर्वंदुस्वंदिवांधि. || 3 6 ||

Art they not foolish, though they do Yatis (persons of self-controlled nature), who do not worship the Universal Mother, the Consciousness Incarnate, the Giver of liberation, or Whose feet are worshipped by the Devas, and worshipping Whom, one gets the fruits of all one's desires?

दे बैल्याना: यागपुराना क्षेरा

द्यभास्त एव प्रतिभाति नूनम् ।

ध्यायन्ति न त्वां कमलां च लज्जां

कान्ति स्थिति कौतिंमथापि पुहिष् ॥ 37 ॥

Certainly those Vaṣṇavas, Sauras (worshippers of the Sun) and Pāśupatas (worshippers of Śiva) are foolish braggarts who do not meditate Thee as the embodiment of Kamalā (prosperity), modesty, beauty, continuancy, Fame, nourishment.

हरित्रादिभयथ सैविता

त्वमिदं देववर्तेर्युर्तेल्या ।

भुवि भजन्ति न येडल्यिधो नरा

जननि ते विधिना खलु वर्जिताः ॥ 38 ॥

O Mother! The Ausras, Hari, Hara and other great Devas worship Thee in this world; therefore those mortals are certainly deceived by their Creator that do not worship Thee on the surface of this earth.

जलिङापादपंकजरझनं

जतुरसेन क्रांति ही: स्वयम् ।

त्रिनयनोत्रि भगधरजाधि-

पहूजपरागविद्यालयातयर: ॥ 39॥s

O Devi! Hari himself serves the lotus feet of Lakṣmī by colouring them (toes and other fingers of the feet) red with lac juice; Hara is very anxious to serve the lotus feet and take the dust thereof of Pārvatī; Lakṣmī and Pārvatī are but Thy part manifestations; therefore to serve them is, in other words to serve Thee.

किमपरस्य नरस्य कवानकैस्तव

पदान्वयुगं न वर्जान्ति के ।

विपततगगगृहाशं द्वां क्षमां

कृताधिया मुनवोर्धि भवन्ति ते ॥ 40 ॥

What to speak of other persons, even those who

Book V Chapter XXII

can discriminate between real and unreal and those who have left their worldly homes and have become dispassionate towards worldly objects, even those Munis worship forgiveness and mercy, that are but Thy parts; therefore who is there in this world that does not serve Thy lotus-feet!

दैव त्वद्धिभवने न जना रता

ये संसारकुपपतिताः पतिताः किलामी ।

ते कुशुस्पलिश्राअधितुयात भवन्ति

दारिद्वदै-यसहिता रहिताः सुखौधेः ॥ 41 ॥

O Devi! Those human begins plunge into the dreadful wells of this Samsāra, the round of birth and death, and are deprived of all pleasures, who do not serve Thy lotus feet. What more can be said than the fact that those fallen beings suffer terribly from poverty, humility, leprosy, headache, and the chronic enlargement of spleen.

वे काषभारहने यवसावहारे

कार्य भवन्ति निपुणा धनवहारीनाः ।

जानीमहुंल्यमतिभभिवर्तीयसेवा

पूर्वे भवे जननि तैनं कृता कदारुषि ॥ 4 2 ॥

O Mother! Those persons are void of any wealth and wife; they are the carriers of loads of wood and collect grass and leaves and show their skill in such acts; they are of little understanding and never they served in their previous births Thy lotus-feet. This we have to know very well within our heart of hearts.

व्यास उवाच

एवं स्तुता सुरैः सर्वैरिक्वा करणार्विता ।

प्रावृद्धिपूव तससा रूपयीवनसर्वुता ॥43 ॥

Vyāsa said: "O King! When all the Devas thus eulogised, instantly the Devi Ambikā, full of youth and beauty appeared there out of mercy.

दिव्यांवराय तेवी दिव्यभूषणभूषिता ।

दिव्यमाल्यसमायुक्ता दिव्यचन्दनचरिता ॥ 44 ॥

जगनोहनतावणया सर्वतक्षणालक्षिता ।

अहितीयवरूपा सा देवानां दर्शनं नता ॥ 45 ॥

जाछ्वयं नतुकामा सा निर्णता निरिश्याद्रात् ।

दिव्यरूपधरा देवी विश्यमोहनमोहनी ॥ 46 ॥

That extraordinary beautiful Bhagavatī, endowed with all auspicious signs, and adorned with the Divine clothing, ornaments, and garlands and sandal paste, etc., appeared before the Devas. Before Whom, even the world enchanter Cupid bows down; with such beautiful, Divine appearance, the Devi emerged from the mountain cave in order to take Her ablutions in the Ganges.

देवान्मृतीपरानाह मेघगम्भीर्या शिरा ।

प्रेमपूर्व सिमतं कृत्वा कोक्रिकलमंजुबातिवि ॥ 47 ॥

That Devi, sweet-voiced like a cuckoo, gladly smiling began to say to the Devas, singing hymns to Her, in a voice deep like that of a rumbling cloud.

देव्यवाच

भो भो: सुवरा: काऊ भविद्धः सुगते भूणम् ।

किमर्थ बूत वः कार्य चिंताविष्ठा: कुतः पुनः ॥ 48 ॥

The Devi said: O Best of Suras! Whom are you praising constantly in this place? What do you want? Why are you so anxious and seem to be so much careworn? Do please tell all this to Me in detail.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छूला भाषितं तस्य मोहिता रूपसम्पदा ।

प्रेमपूर्व हदुल्साहास्तमचुः सुस्सत्तमः ॥ ४९ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Devas were first enchanted by Her beauty and softness; then, being encouraged by Her sweet words, began to speak with great joy.

देश ऊचुः

देवि सुमस्त्वां विश्रेष्ठि प्रणातःस कृपाणवे ।

पाहि नः सर्वदुःखेष्यः संविन्यान्दैत्यातपितान् ॥ 50 ॥

पुरा त्वया महोद्वी निर्हत्यासुरकेटकम् ।

महिषं नो वरो दन्तः स्मर्तैम्बाई सदापदि ॥ 51 ॥

O Devi! We pray to Thee, O Lord of this Universe! We bow down to Thee. O Thou, the Ocean of mercy! Protect us from all the troubles; we are very much care-worn and tormented by the Daityas. O Great Goddess! In ancient times

Thou didst kill Mahisāsura, the source of troubles to all and then told us to remember Thee whenever any difficultly would arise.

सरगाहैत्वर्जा पौढ़ा नागाधिष्णायमंशगयम् ।

तेन त्वं संस्मृता देवि नृनमस्मामित्रियपि ॥ 5 2 ॥

Then Thou wouldst undoubtedly remove all the troubles arising from the Daityas no sooner we remember Thee. O Devi! We have now remembered Thee for that very reason.

अध: शुभ्भिशुभ्भी द्वावसुरी चोरदर्शनी ।

द्वभजी विनकर्तारिहन-यी पुर्षेः किल ।। 5 3 ।।

At present the two dreadful Asuras Sumbha and Niśumbha have sprung up and are creating great disturbances; and they cannot be killed by any male beings.

रक्तबीजघ्छ बलवांघंडमुपईी तथाज़मृती ।

पूर्तेपट्रीघ देवानां हृत राजयं महावलरेः ॥ 54 ॥

The powerful Raktabrija and Caṇḍa Mūnda and other Asuras united have dispossessed the Devas of their Heavens. Thou alone art our goal and refuge; without Thee there is none other to save us.

गतिरात्य न चास्मार्कं त्वमेवास महावले ।

कुरु कार्य सुराणां वे दुःस्तितानां सुमध्यमे ॥ 55 ॥

Therefore, O Beautiful One! Thou dost do this work for the Devas who are extremely troubled and distressed.

देवास्त्वद्धिष्णजेन निरातः सदैव

ते दानवैरित्वलैर्विषयं सुनिताः ।

तां देवि दु:खराहितां कुक भक्तिपुक्तां

मातत्स्वेव सरणं भव दु:खितानाम् ॥ 56 ॥

O Powerful Devi! The Devas are always at the services of Thy lotus feet; still the very powerful Dānavas are throwing them into dangers; O Mother! Thou art the Preserver of the distressed; therefore dost Thou preserve the Devas, devoted to Thee.

सकलपुवनरशा देवे कावां लवासा प्र

स्वकृतमिति विदित्वा विश्यमेततुयातो ।

जननि जगति पीडां दानवा दपयुक्ता:

स्वकलमदस्मितासे प्रकुर्बनित मातः ॥ 57 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे पश्रमकल्भे

द्वाविंशो3थायः ॥ 58 ॥

O Mother! The Dānavas, being very much emboldened by their powers, are creating many havocs on the surface of the Earth; now remembering that, in the beginning of the Yugas, Thou didst create all this Universe, Thou dost now ought to protect all this Universe."

Here ends the Twenty second Chapter of the Fifth Book on the eulogising of the Devi by the Devas in

Śrimaddevībhāgāvatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevibbāgavatam

