CHAPTER XVIII

On the Origin of the Haithayas

जनमेजय उवाच

इति शला भगवता सिस्युजा कोयोगतः ।

कर्थ सा वडवा जाता रवेतेन च किं कुम्न ।। १ ।।

कस्मिन्नोर्जधिजा देयी बडवास्तणयिरणी ।

संस्थितेकाकिनी बाला परोशिवतिका यथा ॥ 2 ॥

Janamejaya said: How did the Goddess Lakṣmī, the daughter of the ocean, come to be born as a mare, when cursed by the Bhagavān in His moment of anger, and what did Revanta do at that time? In what country was the Devi born as a mare and how did She pass Her time alone like one whose husband had gone abroad."

कालं किंवांतायुष्पित्युक्ता पतिना राम ।

संस्थिता विननेउपये किं कृतं च तथा पुनः ॥ ३ ॥

O Muni! How long and in what forest unfrequented by persons did she pass her time, thus deprived of the companion of her husband and what did she do at that time?

समागमं कदा प्राप्ता वासुदेवस्य सिंधुजा ।

पुत्रः कंक्ष तथा प्राप्तो नारायणविशुक्त्या ॥ 4 ॥

एतद्वक्तताम्यैश कवयस्य सविस्तरण ।

श्रोतकामोदासि विघ्रें कवाण्ड्यानमनुतम् ॥ 5 ॥

When was she reconciled with her husband Vāsudeva? and how did she get a son, when she lived in a state of separation from her husband. O best of Āryas! I am very curious to hear this excellent story. So describe this in full details to me.

सूत उवाच

इति पृथस्तदा व्यासः परीक्षितनयेन वै ।

कथयामास भो विधा: कथामोतां सुविस्तग्न ॥ 6 ॥

Sūta said: “O Rṣis! Thus questioned by Janamejaya, the Dvaipāyana Muni began to recite the story in its full details.”

त्यास उवाच

शूणु राजप्रव्यक्षामि कक्षा पौराणिकीं शुभाम् ।

पावर्ती सुखदां कर्णें शिशदास्वसंयुतान् ॥ 7 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! I will now describe to you the pleasing story of the Purāṇas in a clear distinct language; hear.

रेर्वतस्तु रमां चूद्वा शणतं देवेन कामिनीम् ।

भयत: प्रयती इतात्रणय ज्ञानां पतिन् ॥ 8 ॥

Revanta, the son of the Sun, became terrified to see Vāsudeva, the Deva of the Devas cursing the Lakṣmī Devi and, after bowing down to Janārdana, the Lord of the world, went off.

चितुः सकाशं त्वरितो वीक्ष्य कोपं जगत्यतः ।

निवेद्यामास कर्णां भापकताव स शपाजम् ॥ 9 ॥

Seeing the anger of Viṣṇu, the Lord of the world, he went quickly to his father and informed him of the curse delivered by Nārāyaṇa to the Goddess Lakṣmī.

यु:वित्ता सा रमा देही प्रणाय जगदीशून् ।

आज्ञापा मानुषं लोकं प्रापता कमललोचना ॥ 10 ॥

And the Lakṣmī Devi, the lotus-eyed, thus cursed, got the permission of Nārāyaṇa and with a grieved heart bowed down to him and came down to the world of mortals.

सूर्यपन्न्या तपस्तवं चत्र पूर्वे सुदारुभणम् ।

त्रैव सा ययावाग्यु बढ़ावरूपधारिणी ॥  १ १ ॥

She took the form of a mare and went to the spot where the wife of the Sun (named Chāyā) practised her asceticism in ancient times.

कालिंदीतमासांगे सुपाणांक्ष्य चोते ।

सर्वकामप्रदे स्थाने सुप्रत्यवनमणिकते ॥ १२ ॥

The place was the confluence of the river Kālindī and the Tamasā, and decorated with lovely forests and trees situated north of the mountain named Suparṇāksa, yielding all desires.

तत्र स्थिता महादेवे शक्रुंर वार्धिश्वतम् ।

दूधौ चैकेन मनसा शुलिनं चन्द्रश्रेखम् ॥ १३ ॥

पद्धानं दार्णवुं गरीद्रद्धधारिणम् ।

कर्षूरीगैदहाभं नीलकर्णे जिलोचनम् ॥ १४ ॥

व्याजिनर्धे देयं गजचर्भतृयिकम् ।

कपालमालाकर्तितं नाग्यज्ञोपवीर्तिनम् ॥ 15 ॥

There she meditated with her whole heart the auspicious Mahādeva Śānkara, the Giver of all desires, thus: That Mahādeva is holding the Triśūla (the trident) on his arms; His forehead is adorned with beautiful cooling semi-Moon; He has five faces, each face having three eyes; His throat is coloured blue; He has ten arms; His body is white like camphor; He wears a tiger's skin; His upper garment is of elephant's skin; and snakes are his holy thread; He is holding the one-half of the body of Gauri and his neck is adorned with garlands of human skulls.

सागरस्य सुता कृत्वा हरीकंप मनोहारम् ।

तस्मिन्तीर्ण रामदोयी चकार दुखंर तपः ॥ 16 ॥

The Goddess Lakṣmī, the daughter of the ocean assuming the form of a mare, thus practised severe asceticism in that place of pilgrimage.

ध्यायमाना परं देवे दैवार्यं समुपार्थिता ।

दिव्यं वर्षेहरहं तु गतं तत्र महीपते ॥ 17 ॥

O King! With a feeling of intense dispassion (Vairāgyam) towards the worldly things, She spent the divine one thousand years in the meditation of Mahādeva, the God of the Gods.

ततस्तृषी महोदेवो व्यापकाहिकलोचनः ।

प्रत्यक्षो3 पृमहेशानः पावर्तीसहितः प्रभुः ॥ 18 ॥

After that period, the Highest Lord Mahādeva, mounting on His bull, came there with His consort Pārvatī and appeared before the Lakṣmī Devi perceptible by his eyes.

तत्रैल सभण: शम्भुस्तामाह हरिवल्पभाम् ।

तप्यस्तीं महाभागामधिजीरूपधारिणीम् ॥ 19 ॥

किं तप्यसी कल्याणि जग्मातरंद्वय से ।

सर्वार्थद: पतिरसंज्ञिति सर्वलोकाधियायक: ॥ 20 ॥

हूरं त्वल्वाजघ मो कम्पतलीषि देखे जगतयितम् ।

वायुरुदेवे जगताथं धुक्तिपुक्तिप्रदायकम् ॥ 21 ॥

Appearing thus with His host of His own persons, He then spoke to Lakṣmī, dear to Hari, now practising asceticism in the form of a mare,

“O Auspicious One! You are the Mother of this whole Universe and your Husband is the Creator of these worlds and is capable to give all desires. Why are You, then, practising asceticism, when He is present? What is the cause of this? O Devi! Why are You praising hymns to me, instead of to Vāsudeva Śrī Hari, Who is capable to yield enjoyments and final liberation, and Who is the Preserver and the Lord of this world.

वेदोर्भेच्चनं कार्य नानीर्णं देऊत पति: ।

नान्यस्मर्वेधा भावः कर्तेयः कहिधित्वस्त्रिध् । २२ ॥

O Devi! Work should be done according to the authority of the Vedas; it is stated in the Vedas that the husband is the lord of a woman; therefore it is never advisable to fix one's mind entirely on another person.

पतिगुभुवर्षा क्रौणां धर्म एव सन्तानतः ।

यादुशस्तादुश: सेव्यः सर्वथा शुभकाम्या ॥ 23 ॥

The eternal Dharma of women is to serve their husbands; whether the husband be a saint or a sinner, the woman, desirous of her welfare, should serve her husband in every way.

नारायणसु सर्वेंभां सेव्यो योग्य: सर्वेहि ।

तं व्यक्त्वा देवेदेशेंण किं मां ध्यायसि सिंगुषे ॥ 24 ॥

O Daughter of the Ocean! Your husband Nārāyana is fit to be served by all and He is capable to yield all desire. Why are you then worshipping Me, and leaving the Lord of the Goloka, the Deva of the Devas."

लक्ष्मीत्वाच

आगुतीय मेहशान शताप्ताई पतिना शिव ।

मां समुद्धूर देवेश शगाद्यमहाविनधि ॥ 25 ॥

Lakṣmī said: “O Deva of the Devas! O Seat of Auspiciousness! I know that You are soon pleased with Your servant. My husband has cursed me. O Ocean of mercy! Kindly save me from this curse.

तदोर्भे हरिण शम्भो शगानुग्रहकारणम् ।

विज्ञाने मया कामं दयावुक्तेन विश्याना ॥ 26 ॥

यदा ते भविता पुत्रस्तदा शगप्य मोक्षाणम् ।

भविष्यति च वैकुण्ठवाससे कमलालये ॥ 27 ॥

Book VI Chapter XVIII

O Śambhu! When I informed my husband of my mental agonies, graciously and mercifully He then pointed out how I might be freed of this curse thus: “O Kamale! When Your son will be born, then You will be freed of this curse and will, no doubt, come back and live in this Heaven of Vaikuntha.”

इत्युक्ताड़ं तपस्तपुभागताउसि तपोवेने ।

आराधितो मया देख लें सर्वांधीप्रदायकः ॥ 28 ॥

Thus spoken, I have come in this hermitage to make tapas and to worship Thee, knowing that Thou art the Bhagavān, the Lord of Bhavānī, the Lord of all and the Giver of all desires.

पतिसंगं विना पूयं देवेदेल लपे कथम् ।

स तु तिष्ठित तैकुपते तवल्का वामामानासम् ॥ 29 ॥

O Lord of the Devas! How can I get a son without the intercourse of My husband? Though I am guiltless, my husband has forsaken me and is living in Vaikuntha.

वरं मे दिहे देवेश यदि तुहोस शक्रूर ।

तब तस्य द्विधा भावो नास्ति नूनं कवाचन ॥ ३० ॥

O Maheśvara! Thou art doing good to all persons; and if Thou art pleased with me, then grant me a boon.

मयेतद्विराजाकान्त ज्ञातं पत्यु: पुरो हर ।

यत्सं घोजसी पुनर्वेंगसी स तं नालस्य संशयः ॥ ३१ ॥

O Lord! I know full well that there is no distinction between Him and Thee. O Lord of Girijā! This truth I have come to learn from my husband. O Hara! You are the same thing that He is and what is He is the same as You; there is not the least doubt in this.

एकलं च मवा सात्वा मवा ते स्मरणं कृतम् ।

अन्यथा मम दोषसत्वामाश्रंत्या भवेचित्ध्वि ॥ ३२ ॥

O Thou, full of auspiciousness! Recognising the Sameness without any distinction between Him and Thee, I am meditating on Thee. Had it been otherwise, then I would certainly have been guilty when I take Thy refuge and meditate on Thee.

शिव उवाच

कर्थ प्रान्तस्यार्य देवि यम तस्य च सुन्दारि ।

ऐक्यपाठो हरेनूने सत्यं मे वद सिंधुजे ॥ 33 ॥

śaṅkara said: “O Devi, the daughter of the Ocean! Tell truly before me how you have been able to realise the identity between Him and Me.

एकलं च न जानीन देवाशु मुनवस्था ।

ज्ञानिनो वेदतचत्ज्ञा: कृतकर्णिकृता: किति ॥ 34 ॥

The Devas, Munis and the Maharsis, versed in the Vedas, get their understandings baffled by wrong argumentations and never realise the identity without any difference between us.

मद्रुता वासुदेवस्य निवंका बह्वरसता ।

विष्णुभक्तासु बह्वो मम निद्वापरायणा: ॥ 35 ॥

Almost everywhere you will perceive that many of my devotees blame me. Specially in this Kali Yuga due to the influence of Time, this happens to a very great extent in many cases.

भवन्ति कालपेदेन कली देय विशेषतः ।

कर्थं जातस्वया भरे दुर्जीय हुकृततामिधः ॥ 36 ॥

सर्वेथा तैव्यभावसु हेरमेन च दुर्णंभः ।

O Auspicious One! Let that go! How have you come to know this matter, which is difficult even for the liberal-minded persons to comprehend. Know that this perception of the identity between me and Hari is very rare."

व्यास उवाच

इति सा शपभुना पृष्ठा तुईन हरिवल्णा ॥ 37 ॥

चुत्तां तत्य विज्ञां प्रवत्कुपचक्रमे ।

शिवं प्रति तमा तन प्रसवब्रदना भृगम् ॥ 38 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When Mahādeva asked thus with great pleasure, the Devi Kamalā, the darling of Hari, gladly replied the essence of the matter to Mahādeva.

लक्ष्मीकावा

एकदा देवदेवेश विष्णुधानंपरो रहः ।

दृष्टो मया तपः कुर्वेम्यासनगते यदा ॥ 39 ॥

Lakṣmī said: “O Deva of the Devas! One day Bhagavān Viṣṇu, seated in the Padmāsana posture, was immersed in deep meditation.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

तदारूई विस्मिता देखें तमपृष्छं परिते किल ।

प्रबुद्धे सुप्रसई च जाला विस्तयपूर्वकम् ॥ 40 ॥

देवदेव जगाओय यदारूई निर्णिताजणवाला ।

मध्यमानातुरैदैर्वै: सर्वैक्षेहाविद्धि: प्रभो ॥ 41 ॥

वैशिक्तादा मया सर्वे पत्तिकामनया तदा ।

वृतसर्वे सर्वेदेशेषः श्रेडोर्सीति विलिश्रयात् ॥ 42 ॥

I was very much astonished at this. When His meditation was over and when He was in a pleasant mood, I asked Him with great humility, O Deva of the Devas! I know that You are the Lord of the world and Master of this whole Universe; when Brahmā and the other Devas were united and churned the great ocean, I came out of the waters and looked all around to know who is the superior one whom I can select as my husband and then, thinking You as the superior to all the Devas, I accepted You as my husband. Now whose meditation You are doing again?

तं कं ध्यायसि सर्वैण संग्रोधोर्ग महाम्म।

प्रियोसि कैटभारे मे कवयस्व मनोगतम् ॥ 43 ॥

A great doubt has thus occurred in my mind. O Lord! You are my most Beloved; now disclose to me your innermost desire and thought.

विष्णुकाव

शृणु कान्ते प्रवक्ष्यायि यं ध्यायामि सुरोतमम् ।

आगुतोंचे महैजानं निरिज्ञाल्वलर्भ हृदि ॥ 44 ॥

Visnu said: “O Beloved! Hear now, whom I am meditating. I am meditating in the lotus of My heart that Mahādeva Maheśvara, the Highest of all the Devas.

क्रताविर्वेदेवेलो मां ध्यायल्यमितविक्रमः ।

ध्यायामर्ह च देवेशं शुक्रूरं विमुगन्तकम् ॥ 45 ॥

Mahādeva, the Deva of the Devas of indomitable prowess, sometimes meditates on Me and sometimes I meditate on the Lord of the Deva, Śaṅkara, the Destroyer of Tripurā.

शिवस्थादि प्रियः प्राणः शकुर्भरुत् तथा मम् ।

उभयोरंतं नास्ति सिधः संसक्तचेतसोः ॥ 46 ॥

I am dear to Śiva as his life is dear to him and Śankara is similarly dear to me. The hearts of us

both are attached to each other in the most secret way possible; therefore there is not the least difference betwixt us both.

नरकं याति ने नूनं ये दिषिति महेश्वम् ।

भक्ता मय विशालाहिंस सत्यमेतदुबीयमह्म। ॥ 47 ॥

O large eyed One! Those men who being my devotees hate Śankara, certainly go to hell. I speak this very truly unto you."

इत्युक्ते देवदेवेन विद्यानु प्रभविष्यानु ।

एकाने कित पृष्ठेन मया शैलसुताधिप्र १। ४ 8 ॥

O Maheśvara! When I asked him this question when he was all alone, that Deva of the Devas, the Highest Viṣṇu thus said to me.

तस्पाचां वत्लभं विधोज्ञेता ध्यातवती हुहम् ।

तथा कुर्म मेहैगान यथा मे प्रियर्समः ॥ ४९ ॥

Therefore I am meditating on You, knowing that You are His beloved. O Maheśa! Now find out means by which I can mix with My husband."

व्यास उवाच

इति श्रियो वचः श्रुत्वा प्रत्युवाच महेश्वः ।

तामाश्रय द्रिवैर्वल्वैर्वेधार्थं वायवक्रोविद्ध: ॥ 50 ॥

स्वस्था भव पृथुशीणि तुर्जोड़ं तरास तत ।

समागमते पतिना भविष्यिति न संशयः ॥ 51 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Mahādeva, skilled in speech, hearing thus the words of Lakṣmī, consoled Her with sweet and said: "O Beautiful; I am pleased with Your tapasyā; soon You will come in contact with Your tapasyā; soon You will come in contact with Your husband.

अत्रैव ह्यक्सेषण भगवाङ्गुरीश्र: ।

आगमिष्यित ते कामं पूर्ण कर्तुं मयेरितः ॥ 52 ॥

There is not the least doubt in this. When I will send the Bhagavān, the Lord of the world, He will come before you in the shape of a horse, to satisfy your desires.

तत्याई प्रेरिय्यामि तं देवं मधुसुदनम् ।

यथास्त्री हयरूकोण त्यामेघित मदातुः ॥ 53 ॥

I will send the Madhusūdana, the Deva of the Devas, in such a manner, as he will come in the form of a horse, passionately attached to you.

Book VI Chapter XIX

पुत्रसे भविता सुभ्रु नारायणसमः श्रित्ति ।

भविष्यति स भूपालः सर्वलोकनामस्कृतः ॥ 54 ॥

O One of good eye brows! Thus you will get a son equivalent to Nārāyaṇa; and the son will be the King on this earth and will be undoubtedly worshipped by all.

सुतं प्राय महाभागे चं तेन पतिना सह ।

ग्नानाति देवि वैकृतं प्रिया तस्य भविष्यसि ॥ 55 ॥

O fortunate One! After you get your son, you will go to Vaikuntha with Nārāyaṇa and will reside there as His Beloved.

एकवीरित नानाउसी ख्यातिं यास्यिते ते सुतः ।

तस्मातु हैहयो वंशो भृवि विस्तारमेयिति ॥ ५६ ॥

Your son will be famed by the name of Ekavíra; and from him will propagate the Haihaya dynasty on the earth. O Kamale! You were blind by prosperity, and, becoming passionate, you forgot the Devi Paramesvári, residing in your heart.

पन्तु विस्मृतासि त्व हृदित्यां परभेवुभीम् ।

मदीधा मन्तिचना च तेन ते फलमीडृष्णम् ॥ 57 ॥

Therefore you have experienced such a result. Therefore, to expiate that sin, take Her refuge by all means.

अतस्तदोषगतिवर्ध हृदित्यां परदेवताम् ।

ग्रणं याहि सर्वात्माघवेन जलधेः सुते ॥ 58 ॥

अन्यथा तव चित्तं तु कर्थं गच्छेद्वयोगे ।

O Devi! If your heart remained attached to the

Highest Devi the blissful Bhagavatī, your heart would never have got attached to the Ucceāisravā horse."

व्यास उवाच

इति दत्त्वा वरं देख्ये भगवाऊळलजायति: ॥ 59 ॥

अंतधार्न गतः साक्षानुद्यम सहितः शिवः ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus granting boons to Lakṣmī Devī, He with his consort Umā vanishes away in her presence.

सापि तत्रैव चार्वेड़ी संसित्या कमलासना ॥ 60 ॥

ध्यान्ती चरणाम्पोजे देखा: परमशोभन् ।

देवासुरशिरोलनिधूर्धनखमपडलन् ॥ 61 ॥

प्रेमगहद्वा वाचा तुहाव च पुरुभुर्दुः ।

प्रतीक्षामाणा भतरिंं द्वरूक्षपरं हरिम् ॥ 62 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे

फरककन्नेडाश्वगर्भाश्वा: ॥ 1 7 8 ॥

Kamalā Devi, lovely in all respects, whose toe nails are always rubbed by the gems on the coronets of the Devas, began to meditate on the lotus-feet of Ambikā and in expectation of his beloved Hari, in the shape of a horse, praised and chanted hymns frequently to the Highest Goddess, in words choked with feelings of intense love.

Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Sixth Book

on the origin of the Haihaya Dynasty in the

Mahapurānam Śrimaddevivbhāgavatam of

18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XIX

