[Ch 18 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya said: How did the Goddess Lakṣmī, the daughter of the ocean, come to be born as a mare, when cursed by the Bhagavān in His moment of anger, and what did Revanta do at that time? In what country was the Devi born as a mare and how did She pass Her time alone like one whose husband had gone abroad."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya said :-- How did the Goddess Lakṣmī, the daughter of the ocean, come to be born as a mare, when cursed by the Bhagavān in His moment of anger, and what did Revanta do at that time? In what country was the Devī born as a mare and how did She pass Her time alone like one whose husband had gone abroad.

[Ch 18 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! How long and in what forest unfrequented by persons did she pass her time, thus deprived of the companion of her husband and what did she do at that time?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! How long and in what forest unfrequented by persons did she pass her time, thus deprived of the companion of her husband and what did she do at that time?

[Ch 18 Verse 4-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When was she reconciled with her husband Vāsudeva? and how did she get a son, when she lived in a state of separation from her husband. O best of Āryas! I am very curious to hear this excellent story. So describe this in full details to me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When was she reconciled with her husband Vāsudeva? and how did she get a son, when she lived in a state of separation from her husband. O best of Āryas! I am very curious to hear this excellent story. So describe this in full details to me.

[Ch 18 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: “O Rṣis! Thus questioned by Janamejaya, the Dvaipāyana Muni began to recite the story in its full details.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- O Ṛṣis! Thus questioned by Janamejaya, the Dvaipāyan Muni began to recite the story in its full details.

[Ch 18 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! I will now describe to you the pleasing story of the Purāṇas in a clear distinct language; hear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :--O King! I will now describe to you the pleasing story of the Purāṇas in a clear distinct language; hear.

[Ch 18 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Revanta, the son of the Sun, became terrified to see Vāsudeva, the Deva of the Devas cursing the Lakṣmī Devi and, after bowing down to Janārdana, the Lord of the world, went off.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Revanta, the son of the Sun, became terrified to see Vāsudeva, the Deva of the Devas cursing the Lakṣmī Devī and, after bowing down to Janārdan, the Lord of the world, went off.

[Ch 18 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the anger of Viṣṇu, the Lord of the world, he went quickly to his father and informed him of the curse delivered by Nārāyaṇa to the Goddess Lakṣmī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the anger of Viṣṇu, the Lord of the world, he went quickly to his father and informed him of the curse delivered by Nārāyaṇa to the Goddess Lakṣmī.

[Ch 18 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And the Lakṣmī Devi, the lotus-eyed, thus cursed, got the permission of Nārāyaṇa and with a grieved heart bowed down to him and came down to the world of mortals.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And the Lakṣmī Devī, the lotus-eyed, thus cursed, got the permission of Nārāyaṇa and with a grieved heart bowed down to him and came down to the world of mortals.

[Ch 18 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She took the form of a mare and went to the spot where the wife of the Sun (named Chāyā) practised her asceticism in ancient times.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She took the form of a mare and went to the spot where the wife of the Sun (named Ccāyā) practised her asceticism in ancient times.

[Ch 18 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The place was the confluence of the river Kālindī and the Tamasā, and decorated with lovely forests and trees situated north of the mountain named Suparṇāksa, yielding all desires.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The place was the confluence of the river Kālindi and the Tamasā, and decorated with lovely forests and trees situated north of the mountain named Suparṇākṣa, yielding all desires.

[Ch 18 Verse 13-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There she meditated with her whole heart the auspicious Mahādeva Śānkara, the Giver of all desires, thus: That Mahādeva is holding the Triśūla (the trident) on his arms; His forehead is adorned with beautiful cooling semi-Moon; He has five faces, each face having three eyes; His throat is coloured blue; He has ten arms; His body is white like camphor; He wears a tiger's skin; His upper garment is of elephant's skin; and snakes are his holy thread; He is holding the one-half of the body of Gauri and his neck is adorned with garlands of human skulls.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There she meditated with her whole heart the auspicious Mahādeva Śaṅkara, the Giver of all desires, thus :-- That Mahādeva is holding the Triśūla (the trident) on his arms; His forehead is adorned with beautiful cooling semi-Moon; He has five faces, each face having three eyes; His throat is coloured blue; He has ten arms; His body is white like camphor; He wears a tiger’s skin; His upper garment is of elephant’s skin; and snakes are his holy thread; He is holding the one-half of the body of Gaurī and his neck is adorned with garlands of human skulls.

[Ch 18 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Goddess Lakṣmī, the daughter of the ocean assuming the form of a mare, thus practised severe asceticism in that place of pilgrimage.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Goddess Lakṣmī, the daughter of the ocean, assuming the form of a mare, thus practised severe asceticism in that place of pilgrimage.

[Ch 18 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! With a feeling of intense dispassion (Vairāgyam) towards the worldly things, She spent the divine one thousand years in the meditation of Mahādeva, the God of the Gods.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! With a feeling of intense dispassion (Vairāgyam) towards the worldly things, She spent the divine one thousand years in the meditation of Mahādeva, the God of the Gods.

[Ch 18 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After that period, the Highest Lord Mahādeva, mounting on His bull, came there with His consort Pārvatī and appeared before the Lakṣmī Devi perceptible by his eyes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► After that period, the Highest Lord Mahādeva, mounting on His bull, came there with His consort Pārvatī and appeared before the Lakṣmī Devī, perceptible by his eyes.

[Ch 18 Verse 19-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Appearing thus with His host of His own persons, He then spoke to Lakṣmī, dear to Hari, now practising asceticism in the form of a mare, “O Auspicious One! You are the Mother of this whole Universe and your Husband is the Creator of these worlds and is capable to give all desires. Why are You, then, practising asceticism, when He is present? What is the cause of this? O Devi! Why are You praising hymns to me, instead of to Vāsudeva Śrī Hari, Who is capable to yield enjoyments and final liberation, and Who is the Preserver and the Lord of this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Appearing thus with His host of His own persons, He then spoke to Lakṣmī, dear to Hari, now practising ascetism in the form of a mare, “O Auspicious One! You are the Mother of this whole Universe and your Husband is the Creator of these worlds and is capable to give all desires. Why are You, then, practising asceticism, when He is present? What is the cause of this? O Devī! Why are You praising hymns to me, instead of to Vāsudeva Śrī Hari, Who is capable to yield enjoyments and final liberation, and Who is the Preserver and the Lord of this world.

[Ch 18 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devi! Work should be done according to the authority of the Vedas; it is stated in the Vedas that the husband is the lord of a woman; therefore it is never advisable to fix one's mind entirely on another person.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devī! Work should be done according to the authority of the Vedas; it is stated in the Vedas that the husband is the lord of a woman; therefore it is never advisable to fix one’s mind entirely on another person.

[Ch 18 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The eternal Dharma of women is to serve their husbands; whether the husband be a saint or a sinner, the woman, desirous of her welfare, should serve her husband in every way.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The eternal Dharma of women is to serve their husbands; whether the husband be a saint or a sinner, the woman, desirous of her welfare, should serve her husband in every way.

[Ch 18 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Daughter of the Ocean! Your husband Nārāyana is fit to be served by all and He is capable to yield all desire. Why are you then worshipping Me, and leaving the Lord of the Goloka, the Deva of the Devas."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Daughter of the Ocean! Your husband Nārāyaṇa is fit to be served by all and He is capable to yield all desires. Why are you then worshipping Me, and leaving the Lord of the Goloka, the Deva of the Devas.”

[Ch 18 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Lakṣmī said: “O Deva of the Devas! O Seat of Auspiciousness! I know that You are soon pleased with Your servant. My husband has cursed me. O Ocean of mercy! Kindly save me from this curse.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Lakṣmī said :-- O Deva of the Devas! O Seat of Auspiciousness! I know that You are soon pleased with Your servant. My husband has cursed me. O Ocean of mercy! Kindly save me from this curse.

[Ch 18 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Śambhu! When I informed my husband of my mental agonies, graciously and mercifully He then pointed out how I might be freed of this curse thus: “O Kamale! When Your son will be born, then You will be freed of this curse and will, no doubt, come back and live in this Heaven of Vaikuntha.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Śambhu! When I informed my husband of my mental agonies, graciously and mercifully He then pointed out how I might be freed of this curse thus :-- “O Kamale! When Your son will be born, then You will be freed of this curse and will, no doubt, come back and live in this Heaven of Vaikuntha.”

[Ch 18 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus spoken, I have come in this hermitage to make tapas and to worship Thee, knowing that Thou art the Bhagavān, the Lord of Bhavānī, the Lord of all and the Giver of all desires.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus spoken, I have come in this hermitage to make tapas and to worship Thee, knowing that Thou art the Bhagavān, the Lord of Bhavanī, the Lord of all and the Giver of all desires.

[Ch 18 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the Devas! How can I get a son without the intercourse of My husband? Though I am guiltless, my husband has forsaken me and is living in Vaikuntha.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the Devas! How can I get a son without the intercourse of My husband? Though I am guiltless, my husband has forsaken me and is living in Vaikuṇṭha.

[Ch 18 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Maheśvara! Thou art doing good to all persons; and if Thou art pleased with me, then grant me a boon.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Maheśvara! Thou art doing good to all persons; and if Thou art pleased with me, then grant me a boon.

[Ch 18 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord! I know full well that there is no distinction between Him and Thee. O Lord of Girijā! This truth I have come to learn from my husband. O Hara! You are the same thing that He is and what is He is the same as You; there is not the least doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord! I know full well that there is no distinction between Him and Thee. O Lord of Girījā! This truth I have come to learn from my husband. O Hara! You are the same thing that He is and what is He is the same as You; there is not the least doubt in this.

[Ch 18 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Thou, full of auspiciousness! Recognising the Sameness without any distinction between Him and Thee, I am meditating on Thee. Had it been otherwise, then I would certainly have been guilty when I take Thy refuge and meditate on Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Thou, full of auspiciousness! Recognising the Sameness without any distinction between Him and Thee, I am meditating on Thee. Had it been otherwise, then I would certainly have been guilty when I take Thy refuge and meditate on Thee.

[Ch 18 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► śaṅkara said: “O Devi, the daughter of the Ocean! Tell truly before me how you have been able to realise the identity between Him and Me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śaṅkara said :-- “O Devī, the daughter of the Ocean! Tell truly before me how you have been able to realise the identity between Him and Me.

[Ch 18 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas, Munis and the Maharsis, versed in the Vedas, get their understandings baffled by wrong argumentations and never realise the identity without any difference between us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas, Munis and the Maharṣis, versed in the Vedas, get their understandings baffled by wrong argumentations and never realise the identity without any difference between us.

[Ch 18 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Almost everywhere you will perceive that many of my devotees blame me. Specially in this Kali Yuga due to the influence of Time, this happens to a very great extent in many cases.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Almost everywhere you will perceive that many of my devotees blame me. Specially in this Kālī Yuga due to the influence of Time, this happens to a very great extent in many cases.

[Ch 18 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Auspicious One! Let that go! How have you come to know this matter, which is difficult even for the liberal-minded persons to comprehend. Know that this perception of the identity between me and Hari is very rare."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Auspicious One! Let that go! How have you come to know this matter, which is difficult even for the liberal-minded persons to comprehend. Know that this perception of the identity between me and Hari is very rare.”

[Ch 18 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! When Mahādeva asked thus with great pleasure, the Devi Kamalā, the darling of Hari, gladly replied the essence of the matter to Mahādeva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! When Mahādeva asked thus with great pleasure, the Devī Kamalā, the darling of Hari, gladly replied the essence of the matter to Mahādeva.

[Ch 18 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Lakṣmī said: “O Deva of the Devas! One day Bhagavān Viṣṇu, seated in the Padmāsana posture, was immersed in deep meditation.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Lakṣmī said :-- “O Deva of the Devas! One day Bhagavān Viṣṇu, seated in the Padmāsana posture, was immersed in deep meditation.

[Ch 18 Verse 40-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I was very much astonished at this. When His meditation was over and when He was in a pleasant mood, I asked Him with great humility, O Deva of the Devas! I know that You are the Lord of the world and Master of this whole Universe; when Brahmā and the other Devas were united and churned the great ocean, I came out of the waters and looked all around to know who is the superior one whom I can select as my husband and then, thinking You as the superior to all the Devas, I accepted You as my husband. Now whose meditation You are doing again?
NEW CORR ENG ──► I was very much astonished at this. When His meditation was over and when He was in a pleasant mood, I asked Him with great humility, O Deva of the Devas! I know that You are the Lord of the world and Master of this whole Universe; when Brahmā and the other Devas were united and churned the great ocean, I came out of the waters and looked all around to know who is the superior one whom I can select as my husband and then, thinking You as the superior to all the Devas, I accepted You as my husband. Now whose meditation You are doing again?

[Ch 18 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► A great doubt has thus occurred in my mind. O Lord! You are my most Beloved; now disclose to me your innermost desire and thought.
NEW CORR ENG ──► A great doubt has thus occurred in my mind. O Lord! You are my most Beloved; now disclose to me your innermost desire and thought.”

[Ch 18 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Visnu said: “O Beloved! Hear now, whom I am meditating. I am meditating in the lotus of My heart that Mahādeva Maheśvara, the Highest of all the Devas. Mahādeva, the Deva of the Devas of indomitable prowess, sometimes meditates on Me and sometimes I meditate on the Lord of the Deva, Śaṅkara, the Destroyer of Tripurā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viṣṇu said :-- “O Beloved! Hear now, whom I am meditating. I am meditating in the lotus of My heart that Mahādeva Maheśvara, the Highest of all the Devas. Mahādeva, the Deva of the Devas, of indomitable prowess, sometimes meditates on Me and sometimes I meditate on the Lord of the Deva, Śaṅkara, the Destroyer of Tripurā.

[Ch 18 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I am dear to Śiva as his life is dear to him and Śankara is similarly dear to me. The hearts of us both are attached to each other in the most secret way possible; therefore there is not the least difference betwixt us both.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I am dear to Śiva as his life is dear to him and Śaṅkara is similarly dear to me. The hearts of us both are attached to each other in the most secret way possible; therefore there is not the least difference betwixt us both.

[Ch 18 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O large eyed One! Those men who being my devotees hate Śankara, certainly go to hell. I speak this very truly unto you."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O large-eyed One! Those men who being my devotees hate Śaṅkara, certainly go to hell. I speak this very truly unto you.”

[Ch 18 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Maheśvara! When I asked him this question when he was all alone, that Deva of the Devas, the Highest Viṣṇu thus said to me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Maheśvara! When I asked him this question when he was all alone, that Deva of the Devas, the Highest Viṣṇu thus said to me.

[Ch 18 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore I am meditating on You, knowing that You are His beloved. O Maheśa! Now find out means by which I can mix with My husband."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore I am meditating on You, knowing that You are His beloved. O Maheśa! Now find out means by which I can mix with My husband.

[Ch 18 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Mahādeva, skilled in speech, hearing thus the words of Lakṣmī, consoled Her with sweet and said: "O Beautiful; I am pleased with Your tapasyā; soon You will come in contact with Your tapasyā; soon You will come in contact with Your husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Mahādeva, skilled in speech, hearing thus the words of Lakṣmī, consoled Her with sweet words and said :-- “O Beautiful! Be peaceful; I am pleased with Your tapasyā; soon You will come in contact with Your husband.

[Ch 18 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There is not the least doubt in this. When I will send the Bhagavān, the Lord of the world, He will come before you in the shape of a horse, to satisfy your desires.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There is not the least doubt in this. When I will send the Bhagavān, the Lord of the world, He will come before you in the shape of a horse, to satisfy your desires.

[Ch 18 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I will send the Madhusūdana, the Deva of the Devas, in such a manner, as he will come in the form of a horse, passionately attached to you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will send the Madhusūdana, the Deva of the Devas, in such a manner, as he will come in the form of a horse, passionately attached to you.

[Ch 18 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O One of good eye brows! Thus you will get a son equivalent to Nārāyaṇa; and the son will be the King on this earth and will be undoubtedly worshipped by all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O One of good eye brows! Thus you will get a son equivalent to Nārāyaṇa; and the son will be the King on this earth and will be undoubtedly worshipped by all.

[Ch 18 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O fortunate One! After you get your son, you will go to Vaikuntha with Nārāyaṇa and will reside there as His Beloved.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O fortunate One! After you get your son, you will go to Vaikuṇṭha with Nārāyaṇa and will reside there as His Beloved.

[Ch 18 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Your son will be famed by the name of Ekavíra; and from him will propagate the Haihaya dynasty on the earth. O Kamale! You were blind by prosperity, and, becoming passionate, you forgot the Devi Paramesvári, residing in your heart.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Your son will be famed by the name of Ekavīra; and from him will propagate the Haihaya dynasty on the earth. O Kamale! You were blind by prosperity, and, becoming passionate, you forgot the Devī Parameśvarī, residing in your heart.

[Ch 18 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore you have experienced such a result. Therefore, to expiate that sin, take Her refuge by all means.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore you have experienced such a result. Therefore, to expiate that sin, take Her refuge by all means.

[Ch 18 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devi! If your heart remained attached to the Highest Devi the blissful Bhagavatī, your heart would never have got attached to the Ucceāisravā horse."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devī! If your heart remained attached to the Highest Devī the blissful Bhagavatī, your heart would never have got

[Ch 18 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Thus granting boons to Lakṣmī Devī, He with his consort Umā vanishes away in her presence.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Thus granting boons to Lakṣmī Devī, He with his consort Umā vanished away in her presence.

[Ch 18 Verse 60-178]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kamalā Devi, lovely in all respects, whose toe nails are always rubbed by the gems on the coronets of the Devas, began to meditate on the lotus-feet of Ambikā and in expectation of his beloved Hari, in the shape of a horse, praised and chanted hymns frequently to the Highest Goddess, in words choked with feelings of intense love. Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the origin of the Haihaya Dynasty in the Mahapurānam Śrimaddevivbhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kamalā Devī, lovely in all respects, whose toe nails are always rubbed by the gems on the coronets of the Devas, began to meditate on the lotus-feet of Ambikā and in expectation of his beloved Hari, in the shape of a horse, praised and chanted hymns frequently to the Highest Goddess, in words choked with feelings of intense love. Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the origin of the Haihaya Dynasty in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
