CHAPTER III

On the description of the family of Manu


श्रीनारायण उवाच ।
महीं देवः प्रतिष्ठाप्य यथास्थाने च नारद ।
वैकुण्ठलोकमगमद् ब्रह्मोवाच स्वमात्मजम् ॥ १॥

स्वायम्भूव महाबाहो पुत्र तेजस्विनांवर ।
स्थाने महीमये तिष्ठ प्रजाः सृज यथोचितम् ॥ २॥

Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Nārada! When the Bhagavān went away to Vaikuṇṭha, establishing the Earth in due position and equilibrium, Brahmā spoke thus to his son :-- “O Powerful Son of mine, O Svāyamhhuva! The best of those that are filled with Teja (energy) and Tapas! Now go on with your work of creation, as you think proper, on this earth, the Upholdress of all the Jīvas.

देशकालविभागेन यज्ञेशं पुरुषं यज ।
उच्चावचपदार्थैश्च यज्ञसाधनकैर्विभो ॥ ३॥

And worship the Puruṣa, the Lord of Sacrifices, according to the division of place and time, and with all the necessary materials of various kinds, high and low, and those that will be useful in performing your sacrifices.



धर्ममाचर शास्त्रोक्तं वर्णाश्रमनिबन्धनम् ।
एतेन क्रमयोगेन प्रजावृद्धिर्भविष्यति ॥ ४॥

Do Dharma according to the Sāstras, and according to the Varna (the different castes) and Āśrama (Brahmacariya, etc.); thus by/gradually going on step by step in the path of Yogya, your progeny will be multiplied.

पुत्रानुत्पाद्य गुणतः कीर्त्या कान्त्यात्मरूपिणः ।
विद्याविनयसम्पन्नान् सदाचारवतां वरान् ॥ ५॥

कन्याश्च दत्त्वा गुणवद्यशोवद्भ्यः समाहितः ।
मनः सम्यक् समाधाय प्रधानपुरुषे परे ॥ ६॥

Beget lovely sons and daughters, of good fame, culture, modesty and ornamented with various other good qualifications, like yourself; then marry your daughters when they will come to the marriageable age, to proper persons of good qualifications and then fix your mind thoroughly on the Excellent Puruṣa that is the very Best.

भक्तिसाधनयोगेन भगवत्परिचर्यया ।
गतिमिष्टां सदा वन्द्यां योगिनां गमिता भवान् ॥ ७॥

इत्याश्वास्य मनुं पुत्र पद्मयोनिः प्रजापतिः ।
प्रजासर्गे नियम्यामुं स्वधाम प्रत्यपद्यत ॥ ८॥

O Child! Now go and serve the Bhagavān with devotion as I have advised you; and you will certainly attain that which is difficult to be worshipped and obtained. Advising thus his son Svāyambhuva Manu, and starting him in his work; of creation, the Lotus-born, the Lord of all the subjects, Brahmā went away to His own abode.

प्रजाः सृजत पुत्रेति पितुराज्ञां समादधत् ।
स्वायम्भुवः प्रजासर्गमकरोत्पृथिवीपतिः ॥ ९॥

प्रियव्रतोत्तानपादौ मनुपुत्रौ महौजसौ ।
कन्यास्तिस्रः प्रसूताश्च तासां नामानि मे शृणु ॥ १० ॥

When Brahmañ went away, having ordered his son to create progeny and subjects, Manu, took that seriously in his heart and began to do that work. In due time, he had two powerful sons named Priyavrata and Uttanapāda and three lovely beautiful daughters endowed with various good qualities.

आकूतिः प्रथमा कन्या द्वितीया देवहूतिका ।
तृतीया च प्रसूतिर्हि विख्याता लोकपावनी ॥ ११ ॥
आकूतिं रुचये प्रादात्कर्दमाय च मध्यमाम् ।
दक्षायादात्प्रसूतिं च यासां लोक इमाः प्रजाः ॥ १२ ॥

Hear the names of the three daughters. The first daughter, the purifier of the world, was named Akūti; the second was named Devahūti and the third was Praṣūti. The first daughter Akūti was married to the Maharṣī Ruci; the second was married to the Prajāpali Kardamā, and the third was married to the Prajapati Dakṣa.

रुचेः प्रजज्ञे भगवान् यज्ञो नामादिपूरुषः ।
आकूत्यां देवहूत्यां च कपिलोऽसौ च कर्दमात् ॥ १३॥
साङ्ख्याचार्यः सर्वलोके विख्यातः कपिलो विभुः ।
दक्षात्प्रसूत्यां कन्याश्च बहुशो जज्ञिरे प्रजाः ॥ १४॥
यासां सन्तानसम्भूता देवतिर्यङ्नरादयः ।
प्रसूता लोकविख्याता सर्वे सर्गप्रवर्तकाः ॥ १५॥

And know, that all the beings in this world had their origin from this last daughter, Now hear the progeny of these three daughters and the Maharsis respectively: By Maharsi Ruci was born one son named Yajña, in the womb of Akūti; he is the part of, the Bhagavān Adi Puruṣa Viṣṇu; by Maharsi Karddama, in the womb of Devahūti was born the Bhagavān Kapila, Devya, the famous author of the Sānkhyā Śāstra; and in the womb of Prasūti, by the Prajāpati Dakṣa were born some daughters only: know that the Devas, men, beasts and birds were all created by this Prajāpati Dakṣa.

यज्ञ शय भगवान्यार्थंघुवम्यन्ते तिष्यः ।

मनु रख छोक्ये०... याव्यदैवंगणैत् ॥ १६ ॥

कनिवलोपि महावोणी भगवान्याक्ये सिद्धतः ।

देवहूर्ये परं ज्ञानं सर्वाविद्यानिवतकम् ॥ १७ ॥

सविशेषं ध्यानयोगमध्यात्मज्ञाननिश्रध्यम् ।

काविंण शाख्यमाङ्गत सर्वाज्ञानविनाशनम् ॥ १८ ॥

अपदिष्य महाओगी स वयी पुलहाभ्यम् ।

अत्याचि वतीते देवः सोखावाची महायश्णः ॥ १९ ॥

These offsprings were the first promulgators in the work of creation. In the Svāyambhuva Manvantara, the powerful Bhagavān Yajña, by the help of the Deva named Yāma, saved his mother’s Father Manu from the attacks of the Rakṣasas; and the great Lord of the Yogis, the Bhagavān Kapila, remained for a while in his Āsrama and gave spiritual instructions to his mother Devahūti, by which Avidyā could be at once destroyed, and disclosed his Śāṅkhya Śāstra, the great work on the Spiritual Philosophy and the special Dhyāna Yoga in all its details and finally went for Samādhi to the Āsrama of Pulaha where the great Deva Sāmkhyā cārya lives up to today.

यजामसरणेनापि, साख्योगकृ शिकंद्राति.।

तं वेदे कार्वितं योगाचार्यई. सर्वरप्रदमू ॥ 20 ॥

एवपुक्ते, मनो: कन्यारंश्वर्णन्मतुमम् ।

पठतां शुभ्वतां चापि सर्वेभावितानगतम् ॥ 21 ॥

Oh! I bow down to the great Yogacārya, the Bhagavān Kapila Deva, the Fructifier of all dešires, the mere remembrance of Whose Name makes easily the Yogi realise the meaning of the Sānkhya Jñāna. The sins are immediately destroyed to those that hear or read the holy anecdote of the progeny of the daughters of Manu.

अतः परं प्रवह्यापि मन्तुपावयं शुभम् ।

यद्राकरणानिषेण 'परं पदावधान्युंयत ॥ 22 ॥

श्रीवार्षसग्रद्धिव्यस्था वसुर्जेः कृतः। २३ ॥

व्यवहारूपसिद्धार्थी 'सर्वभूतसुखालयते ॥ 23 ॥

शीत श्रीमदेवीभागाते महापुराणोड्यलकंभे युवनकोशो गाम ।

जृतीयोउधाय: ॥ 24 ॥

O Child! Now I describe to Yoú the 'progeny of the sons of Sväyambhuvā Manā: Hśarī attentively. The hearing of which will enable one to enter into the highest place. Now is being described: the history about the progeny of those who formed those. Dvīpas (islands) Varsas (countries), and oceans, for the welfare and happiness of all the creation and for the use of them. Hear.

Here, ends the Third Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description of the family of Manu in Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book VIII Chapter IV.

