CHAPTER XIV

On the Lokāloka

श्रीनारायण उवाच

ततः परस्तादचले लोकाकोलेत नामकः ।

अंतराले च लोकाकोलकोंयाँ: परिक्षित्वः ॥ १ ॥

यावदस्ति च देवर्षे हितांत मानसोत्तत ।

सुमेरोलावती शुद्धा काँचनी भूमिरस्ति हि ॥ २ ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: Next to the ocean of pure water, is the mountain, called Lokāloka. It marks the sphere between the two countries Loka and Aloka. O Devarsi! There is a land, all of pure gold (beyond this ocean of pure water) for a space equal to the distance between Mānasottara and Meru.

दरपोंदितरुल्या सा सर्वग्रीणिवर्षिता ।

यस्यां पदार्थः प्रहितो न किंचित्यतुर्वीयते ॥ 3 ॥

उत्तर: सर्वग्रीणिसंधरहिता सा च नारद ।

लोकाकोल इति व्याख्या यद्रत परिक्तित्या ॥ 4 ॥

This land is like a mirror; there are no beings here; the reason is, any substance placed on it would at once be converted into gold and nothing can be obtained out of it. O Nārada! No living beings can live there and therefore it is named Lokāloka. This is established always between the Loka and Aloka.

लोकालोकांतरे चास्य वर्तैते सर्वंदा स्थिति: ।

ईंड्रोण स लोकानां त्रयाणामंतग: कृत: ॥ 5 ॥

सूयार्थीनां धुवांतानां रणभयो यद्वगाद्धि ।

अर्बीभीम्र श्रिलोकानातनावाना: कदापि हि ॥ 6 ॥

The God Himself has made this as the boundary of the three Lokas. The rays of the Sun, the Polar Star and all the planets are confined to this sphere; rather passing through its middle, the luminaries shed their lustre on the three Lokas.

पराधीनतवभाजो हि न भवन्ति च नार्तं ।

तावदुङ्गहनायाम: पर्वतेत्रे महोदय: ॥ 7 ॥

एतावार्लोकविध्यानोउयं संस्थामानलक्षणे: ।

कविधि: स तु पड़ाशणकौटिविभगीतिस्त्र च ॥ ८ ॥ ।

भूगोलस्य चतुर्धशीले लोकालोकाचलो मुने ।

तत्यपोरि चतुर्दिश्व्छ ब्रह्माणा चात्यपोनिना ॥ 9 ॥

O Nārada! This great mountain is so lofty and capacious that the rays of the luminaries can never go out of it. The learned men say, that the size, form, and indications of this mountain are such as this is the one-fourth of five hundred times the size of the earth on its summit. The self-born Brahmā has placed very big elephants on all sides of it.

Book VIII Chapter XIV

निवेशिता दिमगजा ये तलामानि निवोधित ।

ऋषभ: पुष्पयुडोध यामानो3थापराजितः ॥ 10 ॥

एते समस्तलोकस्य श्वित्तित्व इरितः ।

तेषां च स्वविष्युतानां बहुवीयोपवैकुर्णम् ॥ 11 ॥

Hear their names. These are Rṣabha, Puspacūda, Vāmana, and Aparājita. These four elephants are said to hold all the Lokas in their respective positions. The Bhagavān Hari gives strength to these elephants and to Indra and others who are reckoned to be His Vibhūtis (powers).

वियुदास्तचं चैश्वयं वर्धयम्यावाद्धरि: ।

आते सिद्वार्यकोपेते विष्वसेनादिश्वेतुः ॥ 12 ॥

He manifesting His Śuddha Sattva and super-extraordinary powers, and united with Ajmā, Laghimā, etc., the eight Siddhis, is reigning there surrounded by His Pārīṣadas Visyāksena and

others.

निजापुधे: परितृते भुजद्धई: समन्तः ।

आस्ते सकललोकस्य स्वस्तये परमेश्धः ॥ 13 ॥

आकल्पयेवं वेधं स गतो विज्यु: सनात्नः ।

स्वायामारचितस्याय योगीधायात्मसाधनः ॥ 14 ॥

He is the one God of all; He is without a second. For the welfare of all, He is holding Sudarśana and His various other weapons; and the powers of His arms are great. He is His own Cause and at all times He pervades all in and through. He is Eternal. योउन्तर्षितार एतेन हृताकोपस्थिणाकम् ।

व्याख्यातं यद्धिलॉकालोकाचल इतीरणात् ॥ 15 ॥

This Universe is upheld by His extraordinary power Māyā for its preservation, He remains in this form till the end of a Kalpa. The inner width described above, determines the width of Śloka. For it is situated outside the above Loka.

ततः परस्ताघोगेशगर्ति शुर्जा बदन्ति है ।

अपहमध्यगत: सूर्यों हाथाप्याययोंदन्तम् ॥ १६ ॥

सूर्णिणुलोलोभीधे कोटयः स्यः पत्रश्रिंगतः ।

युतेष्ठ एवं एतसिमझातो मार्तिष्डगब्दभाक् ॥ 17 ॥

Beyond the mountain Lokāloka, is said to lie the pure path leading to Yogésvara within the egg-shaped ellipsoid formed by the Heaven and Earth.

The inner dimension of this ellipsoid is twenty-five Koti Yojanas. When this egg becomes unconscious (lifeless), the Sun enters within it in the form of Vairāja, Hence the Sun is called Mārtanda.

हिर्यायर्ष इति यद्धिप्रणंडासमुद्धव: ।

सूर्पेन हि विभज्ञने दिशः खं दीभौर्हिप्वा ॥ 18 ॥

स्वागपिबर्गी नरका रसौकांसि च सर्वेगः ।

देवतिर्यंडसुनुचाणां सरीपुसवीक्षाम् ॥ 19 ॥

He is Hiranyagarbha, when He is born from this Golden Egg. It is the Sun that ordains the quarters, Ākāśa, Heaven and Earth, etc., in their proper spheres and divisions. This Sun is the Ātmā of Svarga and Mokṣa, hell and other lower regions, of the Devas, men, birds, reptiles, trees and all other living beings; and He is the Presiding Deity of their sight.

सर्वेर्वीनिकायानां सूर्यं आसा दग्धिषः ।

एतावान्यमूषलस्य सत्रिशेज उदाहतः ॥ 20 ॥

एतेन हि दिवो मानं वर्णयन्ति च तिद्धः ।

दिवतानां च निष्यावादीनां च दलयोर्धया ॥ 21 ॥

O Nārada! Its width is Pañcāsāt Koti Yojanas and its height or depth is twenty-five Koti Yojanas. If as the two halves of a gram are of the same size, so the Earth and Heaven are of equal size.

अन्तरेण तयोरन्तरिंक्षं ततुष्यवस्थितम् ।

यन्यम्यग्रष्ठ भयान्यानुर्व तपतं चर: ॥ 22 ॥

आतपेन प्रिलोकी च प्रतपत्येव भासवम् ।

उत्तरायणासाहा गतिमांह विहन्ते ॥ 23 ॥

The space enclosed between them is called Antarikṣa; the Sun God, the foremost of the planets, being situated in the middle, gives light and illumines and heats the three Lokas. He goes by the path of Uttarāyana and therefore His motion becomes slow (His motion becomes Mandagati).

आरोहणस्थानमसौ गतलाशे ईर्थमाचरेत् ।

दक्षिणायनमासाठ शनीरोभयं वितन्ते ॥ 24 ॥

अवरोहणस्थानमसी गछ्छ-हृल्यं दिंवं चरेत् ।

विषुवलसंगमसाठ गतिसाभ्यं वितन्ते ॥ 25 ॥

The Sun then getting up higher prolongs the day time. Similarly when the Sun follows the path of

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

Daksināyana, He gets Śīghra-gati and not going up so high, shortens the day time.

समस्थानमथासाङ्ध दिनसाध्यं कांतीत च ।

यदा च मेषतुलयो: संचोरिद्धि दिवाकर: ॥ 26 ॥

समानानि लहोरायणयानतोति जयीमयः ।

चुपारिदंपसु यदा राशिष्वकों दिरोचले ॥ 27 ॥

तदारुशनि च वर्धैत राज्योर्थि हृसंति च ।

चृछिक्राविषु सूर्यों हिं यदा सघुतरं रैचः ॥ 28 ॥

तदारुप्रीमान्यहोराजाणि भवन्ति विषयर्यात् ॥ 29 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमदैनीभागतं महापुराणो5धमकन्ने

चतुर्वीणेआयाः ॥ 30 ॥ 

Again when He comes at the Equator, He

maintains an even position and the day and night become equal. When the Sun is in the signs Aries (Meṣa) and Libra (Tulā), then the day and night become equal. When the Sun traverses the five signs Taurus, Gemini, etc., the day becomes longer and when the Sun traverses the five signs Scorpio and others, the day becomes shorter and the night becomes longer.

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description of the Lokāloka space in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

