CHAPTER IV

On the Gāyatrī Hṛdayam

नारद उवाच

भगवद्वेदवेदेश भूतभव्यजगतृष्भो ।

कवचं न श्रुतं दिव्यं गायकीमन्त्रविग्रहम् ॥ १ ॥

अधुना श्रोतृष्णीम गायकीहदयं परम् ।

यद्वारणाद्विलपुर्णं गायकीजपतेर्जितम् ॥ 2 ॥

Nārada said : O Bhagavan! I have heard from you all about the Kavaca and the Mantra of Śrī Gāyatrī. O Deva Deva! O Thou, the Knower of the present, the past, and the future! Now tell about the Hṛdaya, the highest, the interior or esoteric Essence of the Gāyatrī, holding which, if one repeats the Gāyatrī, he acquires all the punyam (merits), I am desirous to hear this.

श्रीनारायण उताच

देव्याक्ष हदयं प्रोक्ते नारदायंलो सुकृदम् ।

तदेवाहं प्रवक्ष्यामि रहस्यातिरहस्यकम् ॥ ३ ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! This subject on the Hrdaya of Gāyatrī is explicitly written in the Atharva Veda. Now I will speak on that, the great secret, in detail. Listen.

विराङ्करां महावेदों गायत्री वेद्यात्मम् ।

ध्याता तथास्तवधोगेषु ध्यायेदेताश्रु देखता: ॥ 4 ॥

First, consider the Gāyatrī, the Devi, the Mother of the Vedas as of a Cosmic Form (Virātrūpā) and meditate all the Devas as residing on Her Body.

पिंडबझाड्योगैरबाम्बादायेवेलतनी तथा ।

देवीरूपे निजे द्रेे तन्मयत्वाय साधकः ॥ 5 ॥

नावोर्सेप्रचंघोद्वेसिति वेदिविदा विदु: ।

ततोअंचेयत कायो स्वे भावयेदेता इमा: ॥ 6 ॥

Now in as much as the Piñḍa and Brahmāṇḍa

are similar, consider yourself as of the form of the Devi and meditate within yourself on the Devatās, thus: The Paṇdits, the Knowers of the Vedas, say this: He is not yet fit to worship the Deva and he is not an Adhikārī as yet who has not been able to make himself a Deva; therefore to establish the knowledge of the oneness of the Deva and himself, he is to meditate the Devas within his body, thus:

अथ तत्संप्रव्यानि तन्यवल्यमो घबेत ।

गायकीहद्यस्यास्यायह्मेव ऋषि: स्युत: ॥ 7 ॥

गायकीच्छन्द उद्धिई देवता परमेधी ।

पूर्वोत्तेन प्रकारेण कुयदंरानि पद् क्रमात् ॥

आसने विजने द्रेथे ध्यायेनेक्रामानसः ॥ 8 ॥

O Nārada! Now I will speak on the Hrdaya of Gāyatrī, knowing which every man becomes able to become all the Devas. Listen. The Rṣi of this Gāyatrī Hrdaya is Nārāyana; the Chandas is Gāyatrī ; and Śrī Parameśvarī Gāyatrī is the Devatā. Perform the Nyāsa of this as mentioned before and taking your seat in a lonely place, meditate intently on the Devi with your heart and head well collected.

अथार्थ-यास: ॥ छौर्णर्हिन देवतम् ॥ दतंपक्राविशुनी ॥ उपे संधे चौषी ॥ मुख्यमानि: ॥ जिहुा सरस्वती ॥ प्रीवायां तु बृह्यस्ति: ॥ सतन्योर्वस्वोर्धो ॥ वाह्योमतन्तः। हदये पर्जनः ॥ आकाशमुद्रम् ॥ नाभावतंरिष्टम्। कट्योर्हिनी॥ जघने विज्ञानघः प्रजापति: ॥ कैलासमणे करू ॥ विश्वेशेव जावोः ॥ जंचायां कौशिकः ॥ गुह्यमयने ॥ करू पित्तः ॥ पदौ पुर्विथी ॥ वनत्यतयोगुलेषु ॥ ऋषयो रोभाणि। नखानि मुद्रतिंनि ॥

Book XII Chapter IV

<table><tr><td>अश्विष्य पृहा: ॥ असुक्रासमुतः ॥ संवसरा वैनिविषम् ॥ अहोरायाविद्यश्रान्मा: ॥ प्रवरा दिव्यांगायबी सहस्वनेत्रां शरणमहं प्रपहे । ३न्तस्वित्वजीरपायनम्: ॥ ३ं तन्युवर्जायनम् नमः ॥ तत्प्रारातिव्यानम् नमः ॥ प्रात्रातिव्यप्रतिषाढ्याने नमः ॥ प्रात्रधीयानो राजिकृतं पारं नायगयति ॥ सायमधीयानो दिवस्कृतं पारं नागशति ॥ सायंप्रतरधीयानः अपापो भवति ॥ सतीधौधु स्नातो भवति ॥ सर्वैद्वैज्ञानो भवति ॥ अवाध्यवचनान्तुपे भवति ॥ अपथद्यम्ब्षणान्तुपे भवति ॥ अनेक्यभोजनान्तुपे भवति ॥ अचोध्यबोधणानुपे भवति ॥ असाध्यसाधनान्तुपे भवति ॥ ज्युपतिग्रहणसहस्वान्तुपे भवति सर्वेगतिग्रहणानुपे भवति ॥ पैत्क्द्वर्णानुपे भवति ॥ अमृतवचनान्तुपे भवति ॥ अथावह्वायारी ब्रह्मारी भवति ॥ अनेन हृदयेनापतीने क्रतुसह्वेशेणें भवति ॥ पश्रिणस्तसह्मागयन्या जयानि फलानि भवति ॥ अष्टी ब्राहणानन्यमग्रहदेते ॥ तस्य सिंद्धिर्भवति ॥ ये इंद नित्यधारीयानो ब्राहण: प्रात: शृष्टि: सर्वेपार्थ: प्रमुच्छत इति ॥ ब्रह्मलोके महीयते ॥ इत्यह भयाना श्रीनारायण: ॥

इति श्रीद्वैभाग्याने महापुराणो द्वारशंकन्ये गायकीहृदयं नाम

चतुर्षो5याया: 11 4 11

Now I am speaking of the Arthanyāsa. Hear. Meditate on the Devatā Dyau on your head; the twin Aśvīns on the rows of the teeth; the two Sandhyās on your upper and lower lips; the Agni, Fire, within your mouth; Sarasvatī, on the tongue; Brhaṣpati on the neck; the eight Vasus on the two breasts; the Vāyus, on the two arms; the Parjanya Deva on the heart; Ākāśa, on the belly; Antariksam (the middle space) on the navel; Indra and Agni, on the loins; Prajāpati, the condensed form, as it were, of Vijñāna, on the hip joints; the Kailāsa and the Malaya mountains on the two thighs; the Viśvedevās on the two knees; Viśvāmitra on the shanks; the Sun's northern and southern paths, the Uttarāyana and Daksināyana on the anus; the Pitrs on the thighs; the Earth on the legs; the Vanaspati on the fingers and toes; the Rśis on the hairs of the body; the Muhūrtas on the nails; the planets on the bones; the Rīus (seasons) on the blood and flesh; the Samvatsaras on the Nimisa (twinkling of eye)

the Sun and the Moon on the day and night respectively. Thinking thus, repeat “I take refuge of the Divine Holy Gāyatī, the Chief and most Excellent One, the Thousand eyed and I take refuge wholly unto Her.”

Then repeat “I bow down to Tat savitur varenyam,” “I bow down to the Rising Sun on the East,” “I bow down to the Morning Āditya,” “I bow down to the Gāyatrī, residing in the Morning Sun” and “I bow down to all.” O Nārada! Whoever recites this Gāyatrī Hrdaya in the morning finds all the sins committed in the night all destroyed! Whoever recites this in the evening gets his sins of the day all destroyed! Whoever recites this in the evening and in the morning can rest assured to have become free of sins; he gets the fruits of all the Tirthas; he is acquainted with all the Devas; he is saved if he has spoken anything that ought not to have been spoken; if he has eaten anything that is not fit to be eaten; if he has chewn and sucked anything that ought not to have been chewn and sucked; if he has done anything that ought not to have been done and if he has accepted hundreds and thousands of gifts that ought never to have been accepted.

The sins incurred by eating with the others in a line cannot touch him. If he speaks lies, he will not be touched by the sins thereof; even if a non-Brahmacārī recites this, he will become a Brahmacārī. O Nārada! What more shall I say to you of the results of Gāyatrī Hrdaya than this: that whoever will study this will acquire the fruits of performing thousand sacrifices and repeating the Gāyatrī sixty thousand times. In fact, he will get Siddhi by this. The Brāhmana, who daily reads this in the morning will be freed of all the sins and go upwards to the Brahma (Loka) and is glorified there. This has been uttered by Bhagavān Nārāyana Himself.

Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on Gāyatrī Hrdayam in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgāvatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
