CHAPTER XVI

On the Haihaya and the Bhārgavas

जनमेव जय वाच

कुले कस्य समुत्यजः क्षत्रिया हैह्याश्रु ते ।

ब्रहाहत्ययमनतुच्य निजकनुर्पार्शंशय ते ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: In whose family were born those Ksatriya Haihayas that killed in ancient times the Bhārgavas, regardless of the sin incurred in killing a Brāhmīn?

वैरस्य कारणं तेषां किं मे वृष्टि पितामह ।

निमितेन विना कोर्धं कर्वं कुर्वीत सत्तमाः ॥ 2 ॥

O Grandsire! Never do the good persons become angry without a serious cause; therefore kindly state why they got angry.

वैरं पुरोहितः सार्थ कम्यातेभवमाजवत ।

तान्यहेतोहाँ तईत्रं क्षत्रियाणां भविष्यति ॥ 3 ॥

How was the enmity caused between them and the priests? As far as I can think, the cause is not so simple a one as led to this enmity between the Kṣatriyas and the priests.

अन्यथा बाह्याणान्यूचान्कं जन्तुनासास: ।

बाहुजा बलवन्तोषि पापभीता: कबं न ते ॥ ४ ॥

Otherwise why then would they slay the offenseless Brāhmins, fit to be worshipped; and how was it that the Kṣatriyas, though they were so very powerful, did not fear to commit a sin.

स्वल्येपराधे को हृन्याइडावन्धसिवर्षभः ।

सन्देहो मे मुनिश्रेष्ठ कारणं वतुभूर्मिंस ॥ ५ ॥

O Muni! Can any Kṣatriya Chief kill a Brāhmín, worthy of the highest respect, merely on a trifling cause! Describe to me, then, how this happen. A great doubt has thus arisen in my mind.

सूत उवाच

इति पृष्टस्तदा तेन राजा सत्यवतीसुतः ।

उवाच परमप्रीतः कथां संम्युच चेतसा ॥ 6 ॥

Sūta said: “O Rṣis! Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati, became very pleased when he was asked this question by Janamejaya, and, recollecting the

whole course of events regarding the Haihayas, began to narrate it.

व्यास उवाच

श्रृणु पारीक्षिते वार्ता क्षत्रियाणां पुरातनीम् ।

आश्रयंकीर्णी सम्पविदितां च पुत मा ॥ 7 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O son of Parikṣit! I will now narrate that wonderful story of old that I know fully; now hear this very attentively.

कार्लीवीयिति नामानप्रकृद्वयः पृथिवीपिति: ।

सहस्वावहुबलेवानर्जुने धर्मतत्पर: ॥ 8 ॥

In ancient times there was a King named Kārtavīryārjuna of the family of Haihaya. He was of thousand hands, powerful, and always ready to observe religious duties.

दत्तायेम्य शिष्योरूपद्धतातो हेरिति ।

सिद्ध: सर्वांदि: शातकी घपुर्णा याज्य एव सः ॥ 9 ॥

He was the incarnation of Hari, and the disciple of Maharṣī Dattātreya and the worshipper of the Supreme Force (Ādyā Śakti.) He was well known as a perfect adept in the Yoga practices and of a very charitable disposition.

यज्ञा परमधिभुः सदादानपरायणः ।

ददै वितं भूगुयोत्री कृत्वा यज्ञानेकश: ।। 10 ।।

But this King was the client of the Brāhmins of the Bhārgava clan. He was always devoted to performing sacrifices, exceedingly religious, and always engaged in making gifts.

धनिनस्ते द्विजा जाता धृगवो नृदा दन्तः ।

हयारत्समुद्धाकावा: सञ्ञातः प्रथिता भृति ॥ 11 ॥

So many a time did he perform the great sacrifices and gave a profuse quantities of wealth to the Bhārgavas.

स्वयंते नृपशर्भेते कातवीयार्थुने पुनः ।

हैहया निर्भाना जाताः कालेन महता नृप ॥ १२ ॥

Due to the gifts and presents of Kārtavīrya, the Bhārgava priests became possessed of many horses, and gems and jewels and so become wealthy and prosperous on the surface of this earth.

धनकार्य समुचर्य हैह्यानां कदाचन ।

याचिष्णावोर्धिभिजमुस्तान्यभूग्रते हैहया नृप ॥ १३ ॥

O King! When Kārtavīryāryuna, the best of Kings, left the mortal coil and got up to Heavens his descendants become entirely void of any wealth by the indomitable influence of Time.

विनरं कंशिथाः कृत्वास्पयाचंतः चंन बहु ।

न दुसुलेस्तिलोषानां नासिन नारसीलाविदाः: ॥ 14 ॥

Now, on a certain occasion, the Haihayas had to perform certain actions which necessitated a vast sum of money; they came to the Bhārgavas and humbly prayed for a very large amount of wealth.

भूमी च निवधुः कौचिद्युभावो धनुभतम् ।

दुः कौचिद्विज्ञाने जाला क्षयितयो भवम् ॥ 15 ॥

कृत्वा स्वानोरंर उव्यं ब्राह्मणा भयविद्धताः ।

त्वक्वासउसबामव्यु:सर्वैभूगवत्सृणायास्टिनाः ॥ 16 ॥

But the Brāhmins, out of their greed of money, replied they had no money and thus they did not give any money whatsoever. Rather the Bhārgavas thought that the Haihyavas would perforce take their wealth, and, fearing thus, some of them buried all their valuables underneath the ground; and others gave as charities to the Brāhmanas.

याज्ञांश दुःस्तानन्धुर्वा न द्रवुर्णभेमिततः ।

पतयित्वा गतः सर्वे निरितुर्गानुप्राशितः ॥ 17 ॥

The greedy Bhārgavas, bewildered with fear, thus transferred all their properties elsewhere, quitted their homes and fled away to mountains and other places.

ततसे हेययास्तात दुःखिता: कार्यांगीराल् ।

भृगुणामाघमाजामुर्द्रैवाथी झनियर्षिभः ॥ 18 ॥

The greedy Brāhmins did not give any wealth to their Yajamānas (their clients) though they saw them very much distressed; but they fled a away out of fear to mountains and fastnesses where they found shelter.

भूग्रूलु निर्मातानीश्य शूर्यास्यक्ता गृहान्य ।

चखतुभूर्तलं तत्र उद्यार्थं हैहाया भुगग् ॥ 19 ॥

At last the Haihayas, the best of the Kṣatriyas, became very sorry till, at last, for the sake of their good actions, they went to the Bhārgavas' houses for the sake of money and found they had quitted

Book VI Chapter XVI

their homes and fled away; their houses were all vacant.

खनताधिगतं वित्तं केनचिद्भृगुवेश्मनि ।
ददृशुः क्षत्रियाः सर्वे तद्वित्तं श्रमकर्शिताः ॥ २०॥

Then they began to dig underneath their houses for money and some got the money thus. Then the Kṣatriyas began to labour hard and got hordes of money from underneath the ground.

यत्र तत्र समुत्पत्रं भृत्रि रुद्धं महीतलात् ।

तदा ते पार्थभागस्वबाहाणनां गृहागययि ॥ 21 ॥

Next they raided upon other Brāhmanas houses and dug and excavated and searched for more money.

निर्भीघ हेत्या उल्यं द्रवुरूपं नतिल्यस्या ।

जाढ़ाणाशुकुसु: सर्वे भीताङ्ग शरणं गताः ॥ 22 ॥

The Brāhmins were helpless and, crying, all took their refuge, out of fear, under the Bhārgavas.

अतिथिन्त्यु विग्राणं भवनात्रियूतं बहु ।

निजनुस्ताङ्गे: कोयाइडावाऊरणगातान् ॥ 23 ॥

The Kṣatriyas made an exhaustive search of the Brāhmanas' houses and got lots of money. They then charged the Brāhmanas as having had spoken falsehood and they became very angry, and killed

the Brāhmaṇas with arrows who took their refuge.

ययुस्ते निरितुर्गोषु घन वै भुगवः स्थिताः ।

आभार्वितुक्ततंशश्छीव महीयमात् ॥ 24 ॥

O King! The Haihayas were so very angry at that time that they went wherever the Bhārgavas to their shelter and cut asunder the foetus in the wombs of their Bhārgavas' wives and thus they roamed all over on the surface of the earth.

प्राप्तान्याप्तान्यभूम्नसार्थिन्धन्निशितः शरेः ।

आशालयुद्धानपरानबमन च पातकम् ॥ 25 ॥

Wherever they saw any Bhārgava, be he a minor, or a youth or a old man, at once they killed him with sharp arrows, disregarding the sin Brahmahatyā.

एवमुग्वायद्यमानेषु भागविष्य वास्ततः ।

हनु-यार्थश्र नारीणां गृहीत्वा हेत्वा भृश्म. ॥ 26 ॥

When the Bhārgavas were thus all killed, then

they caught hold of their wives that were pregnant and destroyed their wombs.

रूकुस्ताः त्रिवः कामं कुर्वं इव दुः प्रिद्धता ।

गर्भाई कृत्तित यासां क्षत्रियः पापनिश्छये: ॥ 27 ॥

When the vicious Ksatriyas thus destroyed the lives in their wombs, the helpless women began to cry like the awe-stricken ewe.

अन्येयातुङ्ग तान्द्रतानुभगवतीथैवांतिनः ।

मुंचंतुं क्षत्रिया: क्रोधं ब्राह्मणेषु भयावहान् ॥ 28 ॥

Then the other Munis, the inhabitants of the sacred places of pilgrimages, seeing the Haihaya Kṣatriyas inflamed with anger, said: "O Kṣatriyas! Quit your terrible anger towards the Brāhmins."

अयुक्तभेतदारखं भवद्धिः: कर्म गहितम् ।

यदृगभीन्युग्रत्नीना निन्हनुः क्षितयर्षभः ॥ 29 ॥

"Being the best of the Kṣatriyas, you are killing the foetus in the wombs of the pregnant Brāhmana ladies! you are doing, no doubt, a very vicious and unjustifiable act!

अत्यमुपययपानानामैहैव फलमाठ्यगुत ।

तस्माज्जनुपितं कर्म तत्कन्धं भूतिधिक्छत ॥ 30 ॥

You should know that an act, very bad or very good, bears fruit in the life; therefore those that seek their welfare should entirely omit this exceedingly hateful and vicious act."

तानादूर्दैह्वा: कुन्द्दा मुनीनय द्वारपान् ।

भवतः साध्यः सर्वे नार्थज्ञ: पापकर्मणम् ॥ 31 ॥

Then the exceedingly angry Haihayas told the merciful ascetics: "You all are saints; therefore you do not know the real import of what are called vicious acts.

एभिद्धौं धनं सर्वे पूर्वजानां महात्यनाम् ।

वड्यित्वा छतापिभूमर्भां पाटच्छरैरिव ॥ 32 ॥

Those Bhārgavas, thoroughly dexterous in cunning pursuits, deceived our largehearted forefathers and stole away all their goods and jewels, as thieves do with a passerby on a road. एते प्रतात्का दंभातसूज्ञा बक्कुचनम् ।

उत्पत्रे च महाकार्य प्राणायित विनयेन ने ॥ 33 ॥



न दुः प्रार्थित विज्ञा: पादवुद्ध्यापि याचिता: ।

नार्नीलविद्धि: सत्या दु:वितान्ति बैक्ष्य याजकान् ॥ 34 ॥

These Bhārgavas are cheats, vain persons and their persuasions are like herons. A great act had to be done by us and we wanted money at 25 per cent interest with all the becoming humility; yet they did not give us the money; rather seeing on their face their clients distressed and sorrowful they spoke that they had no money, and then they remained silent.

धन प्राणं कृतारीयांत्रक्षितं केन हेतुना ।

न कृता: क्रतव: किं सैतर्दं चाधिषु भूरिणः ॥ 35 ॥

True, they got all their money from Kārtavirya; but it may be questioned why they stored it? Why did not they perform sacrifices with that? Why did not they give sufficient money to the other priests (Yāyakas) that did the sacrifices.

न सडितलयं विश्रभु एयं ब्वायि कदाचन ।

यट्वयं विधियद्वेयं भोक्त्वं च घयासुखम् ॥ ३६ ॥

इव्ये चौराभयं प्रोक्त तथा राजभयं दिज्ञा: ।

वेहैर्भयं महाचोरं तथा धृतिमयं महत् ॥ 37 ॥

Never should any Brāhimin hoard his money; he should give that in charity and enjoy at his pleasure. O Twice-born! In amassing wealth, there exist three fears: Fear from the thieves and robbers, fear from the King, fear from dreadful fire accidents, and especially great terrible fear from the cheats. This is the nature of wealth; it leaves its preserve. See, moreover, when a hoarder of money dies, he certainly has to quit it.

येन केनायुपायेन धनं त्यजति श्रक्षणम् ।

अथवाउसी मृती याति उन्ये त्यस्वना हासूनिम् ॥ 38 ॥

If a wealthy man, before dying, performs sacrifices and other good pious acts by his earned money, then he gets certainly good states in future; otherwise, he quite his wealth, to no purpose and earns a bad state in his future life; there is no doubt in this.

पादवूढ़णा तयासमाधि: प्राणितं विनावादितः ।

त्यापि तोभर्वतिद्योईं दर्ज नः पुरोहितः ॥ ३ ९ ॥

We humbly wanted to pay a quarter interest and

asked money for the performance of a great act; yet they, the greedy ones, were doubtful about our promise; and though our priests, they did not give us the money.

दानं भोगसता शानगो धान्य गतिरीटुर्गी ।

दानभोगी कृतीनां च नाश: पाणत्मनां किल ॥ 40 ॥

O Maharsis! Gifts, enjoyment and destruction, these are the three courses which any wealth has to pass through; those persons that have done good deeds, enjoy their wealth and give as charities and thus they make a good and real use of their money; and of those that are vicious, their wealth goes away in ruin and to no purpose.

न दाता न च यो भोका कृपणो गृणिततसरः ।

राज्ञानी सर्वेथा दण्डो वंचको झुःखण्डरूतः ॥ 41 ॥

He who does not enjoy wealth goes away in ruin and to no purpose. He who does not enjoy nor give in charities but is only clever in hoarding and who is miser, the Kings punish him by all means, that man who cheats himself and who suffers only pains and miseries.

तस्माद्धर गृह्नेतान्यंचकान्बहणाध्यान् ।

हन्तुं समुद्धाता: सर्वे न क्रोद्ध्यं महात्मिथि: ॥ 42 ॥

For that reason, we are now ready to kill those Brāhmins, the vilest of men, the cheats, though they are our Gurus. O Maharjs! You are great persons; therefore you do not be angry after you have come to know all these."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा हेतुमद्धावर्थ नताश्रास्य मुनीनव ।

विवेरूछ्छ विधिन्याना भ्युग्रातरानेकर: ॥ 43 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus consoling the Munis, with reasonable words, the Haihayas began to roam about, in search of the wives of the Bhārgavas.

भयातां भृगुपत्यन्तु हिमवन्तं धाराध्यम् ।

प्रभिरेते इत्थश्छ वेपमाना: कृगा भृगम् ॥ 44 ॥

एवं ते हैहैर्यैधिधा: पीडिता धनकामकै: ।

निह्ताश्व यथाकामं संरब्धे पापकर्मिभः ॥ 45 ॥

The Bhārgava wives very much distressed with fear and became very lean and thin. They fled away

Book VI Chapter XVII

to the Himālayan Mountain weeping, and crying, and trembling with fear.

लोभ एवं मनुष्याणां देइसंस्थो महापितुः ।

सर्वे:खाकाः: प्रोनोः दुःखदः प्राणनाशकाः ॥ 46 ॥

Thus the Bhārgavas were being killed by those vicious greedy Haibayas, infuriated with anger, and as they liked.

सर्वेभायस्य मूलं हि सर्वेत् तृषायान्यितः ।

वितोभकृतिकवर्णानां सर्वातैः कारणं तथा ॥ 47 ॥

O King! This greed is the greatest enemy of a man, residing in his own body; this greed is the root of all evils, of all sins. Life is in danger due to this covetousness.

लोभाच्चतिन्त धर्म वै कुलभर्म तवैव ति ।

मातरं घातरं हाँति चितरं बाँधवं तथा ॥48 ॥

It is due to this greed that quarrels ensue amongst the several castes, the Brāhmins, etc., and that the human beings are very much troubled with thirst after wordily enjoyments.

गृहं मित्रं तथा भार्यां पुरं च भपितीं तथा ।

लोपायिहो न कि कुयादुक्ल्यं पायपोहितः ॥ 4 9 ॥

कोधात्कामादंकाराल्लोभ एव महापुरिः ।

प्रणोत्यखाति लोभेन किं पुनः: स्यादावृताम् ॥ 50 ॥

This greed makes a man forsake all his religious rites and long existing customs and observances of his family; and it is due to this avarice of gold that men kill their fathers, mothers, brothers, friends, Gurus, sons, acquaintances, sisters, and sisters-in-law and others.

पूर्वज्ञाने महाराज धर्मज्ञा: सत्यथे स्थिता ।

पाण्डवा: कौरावार्थवे लोपेने निधनं गता: । ५ १ । ॥

Really when a man is bent on avarice, nothing heinous remains to him that can not be done by him. This greed is a more powerful enemy than anger, lust and egoism.

यत्र भीमाश्र प्रोगाश्र कृपः कर्णश्र बाहिकः ।

भीमसेनो धर्मपुत्रसत्येवाजुनकेशजी ॥ 52 ॥

O King! Men abandon their lives for their greed; what more can be said than this? So one should be always alert on this.

तथापि युद्धमतुग्रं कृतं तैक्ष प्रत्यमम् ।

कुटुब्बकदतं भूरि कृतं लोपानुर्गैरह ॥ 53 ॥

O King! Your forefathers, the Pāndavas and Kauravas, were all religious and they followed the path of virtue and goodness. Yet they all were ruined simply for this greed.

हते प्रोणो हते भीमत्थेव पांडवात्मना: ।

भातर: पितर: पुत्रा: सर्वे वै नित्ता रणे ॥ 54 ॥

See! The dreadful fight and separation amongst the relatives took place where there were the high-souled persons like Bhīsma, Droṇa, Krpācārya, Karna, Bahlika, Bhimasena, Yudhishira, Arjuna, and Keśava, only through the avaricious feelings. In this battle Bhīsma, Droṇa and the sons of Pāndavas were all slain; the brothers and fathers were all slain in battle.

तत्सालोपाभिभूषानु कि न कुयोरितः किल ।

हैर्दैर्निंहता: सर्वे भुगव: पापवृद्धिभि: ॥ 55 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागते महापुराणे पठरकन्ये

पोडणोउथायः ॥ 56 ॥

Thus what improper acts and mischiefs can there be that cannot be committed when the human minds are overpowered by this greed? O King! The vicious Haihayas slew the Bhārgavas all through this avarice.

Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the incidents preliminary to the Haihaya and Bhārgava affairs in the Mahāpurānam Srimaddevībhāgāvatam by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XVII

