[Ch 16 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya said: In whose family were born those Ksatriya Haihayas that killed in ancient times the Bhārgavas, regardless of the sin incurred in killing a Brāhmīn?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya said :-- In whose family were born those Kṣattriya Haihayas that killed in ancient times the Bhārgavas, disregardless of the sin iñcurred in killing a Brāhmin?

[Ch 16 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Grandsire! Never do the good persons become angry without a serious cause; therefore kindly state why they got angry.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Grandsire! Never do the good persons become angry without a serious cause; therefore kindly state why they got angry.

[Ch 16 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How was the enmity caused between them and the priests? As far as I can think, the cause is not so simple a one as led to this enmity between the Kṣatriyas and the priests.
NEW CORR ENG ──► How was the enmity caused between them and the priests? As far as I can think, the cause is not so simple a one as led to this enmity between the Kṣattriyas and the priests.

[Ch 16 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Otherwise why then would they slay the offenseless Brāhmins, fit to be worshipped; and how was it that the Kṣatriyas, though they were so very powerful, did not fear to commit a sin.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Otherwise why then would they slay the offenseless Brāhmins, fit to be worshipped; and how was it that the Kṣattriyas, though they were so very powerful, did not fear to commit a sin.

[Ch 16 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! Can any Kṣatriya Chief kill a Brāhmín, worthy of the highest respect, merely on a trifling cause! Describe to me, then, how this happen. A great doubt has thus arisen in my mind.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! Can any Kṣattriya Chief kill a Brāhmin, worthy of the highest respect, merely on a trifling cause! Describe to me, then, how this happened. A great doubt has thus arisen in my mind.

[Ch 16 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: “O Rṣis! Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati, became very pleased when he was asked this question by Janamejaya, and, recollecting the whole course of events regarding the Haihayas, began to narrate it.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- O Ṛṣis! Vyāsa, the son of Satyavatī, became very pleased when he was asked this question by Janamejaya, and, recollecting the whole course of events regarding the Haihayas, began to narrate it.

[Ch 16 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O son of Parikṣit! I will now narrate that wonderful story of old that I know fully; now hear this very attentively.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O son of Pariksit! I will now narrate that wonderful story of old that I know fully; now hear this very attentively.

[Ch 16 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In ancient times there was a King named Kārtavīryārjuna of the family of Haihaya. He was of thousand hands, powerful, and always ready to observe religious duties.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In ancient times there was a King named Kārtavīryārjuna of the family of Haihaya. He was of thousand hands, powerful, and always ready to observe religious duties.

[Ch 16 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He was the incarnation of Hari, and the disciple of Maharṣī Dattātreya and the worshipper of the Supreme Force (Ādyā Śakti.) He was well known as a perfect adept in the Yoga practices and of a very charitable disposition.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He was the incarnation of Hari, and the disciple of Maharṣi Dattātreya and the worshipper of the Supreme Force (Ādyā Śakti). He was well known as a perfect adept in the Yoga practices and of a very charitable disposition.

[Ch 16 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But this King was the client of the Brāhmins of the Bhārgava clan. He was always devoted to performing sacrifices, exceedingly religious, and always engaged in making gifts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But this King was the client of the Brāhmins of the Bhārgava clan. He was always devoted to performing sacrifices, exceedingly religious, and always engaged in making gifts.

[Ch 16 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So many a time did he perform the great sacrifices and gave a profuse quantities of wealth to the Bhārgavas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So many a time did he perform the great sacrifices and gave a profuse quantity of wealth to the Bhārgavas.

[Ch 16 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Due to the gifts and presents of Kārtavīrya, the Bhārgava priests became possessed of many horses, and gems and jewels and so become wealthy and prosperous on the surface of this earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Due to the gifts and presents of Kārta Vīrya, the Bhārgava priests became possessed of many horses, and gems and jewels and so became wealthy and prosperous on the surface of this earth.

[Ch 16 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! When Kārtavīryāryuna, the best of Kings, left the mortal coil and got up to Heavens his descendants become entirely void of any wealth by the indomitable influence of Time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! When Kārtavīryārjuna, the best of Kings, left the mortal coil and got up to Heavens, his descendants became entirely void of any wealth by the indomitable influence of Time.

[Ch 16 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now, on a certain occasion, the Haihayas had to perform certain actions which necessitated a vast sum of money; they came to the Bhārgavas and humbly prayed for a very large amount of wealth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now, on a certain occasion, the Haihayas had to perform certain actions which necessitated a vast sum of money; they came to the Bhārgavas and humbly prayed for a very large amount of wealth.

[Ch 16 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But the Brāhmins, out of their greed of money, replied they had no money and thus they did not give any money whatsoever. Rather the Bhārgavas thought that the Haihyavas would perforce take their wealth, and, fearing thus, some of them buried all their valuables underneath the ground; and others gave as charities to the Brāhmanas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But the Brāhmins, out of their greed of money, replied they had no money and thus they did not give any money whatsoever. Rather the Bhārgavas thought that the Haihayas would perforce take their wealth, and, fearing thus, some of them buried all their valuables underneath the ground; and others gave as charities to the Brāhmaṇas.

[Ch 16 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The greedy Bhārgavas, bewildered with fear, thus transferred all their properties elsewhere, quitted their homes and fled away to mountains and other places.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The greedy Bhārgavas, bewildered with fear, thus transferred all their properties elsewhere, quitted their homes and fled away to mountains and other places.

[Ch 16 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The greedy Brāhmins did not give any wealth to their Yajamānas (their clients) though they saw them very much distressed; but they fled a away out of fear to mountains and fastnesses where they found shelter.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The greedy Brāhmins did not give any wealth to their Yajamānas (their clients) though they saw them very much distressed; but they fled away out of fear to mountains and fastnesses where they found shelter.

[Ch 16 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At last the Haihayas, the best of the Kṣatriyas, became very sorry till, at last, for the sake of their good actions, they went to the Bhārgavas' houses for the sake of money and found they had quitted their homes and fled away; their houses were all vacant.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At last the Haihayas, the best of the Kṣattriyas, became very sorry till, at last, for the sake of their good actions, they went to the Bhārgavaś houses for the sake of money and found they had quitted their homes and fled away; their homes were all vacant.

[Ch 16 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then they began to dig underneath their houses for money and some got the money thus. Then the Kṣatriyas began to labour hard and got hordes of money from underneath the ground.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then they began to dig underneath their houses for money and some got the money thus. Then the Kṣattriyas began to labour hard and got hordes of money from underneath the ground.

[Ch 16 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next they raided upon other Brāhmanas houses and dug and excavated and searched for more money.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next they raided upon other Brāhmaṇaś houses and dug and excavated and searched for more money.

[Ch 16 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmins were helpless and, crying, all took their refuge, out of fear, under the Bhārgavas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmins were helpless and, crying, all took their refuge, out of fear, under the Bhārgavas.

[Ch 16 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Kṣatriyas made an exhaustive search of the Brāhmanas' houses and got lots of money. They then charged the Brāhmanas as having had spoken falsehood and they became very angry, and killed the Brāhmaṇas with arrows who took their refuge.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Kṣattriyas made an exhaustive search of the Brāhmaṇaś houses and got lots of money. They then charged the Brāhmaṇas as having had spoken falsehood and they became very angry, and killed the Brāhmaṇas with arrows who took their refuge.

[Ch 16 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The Haihayas were so very angry at that time that they went wherever the Bhārgavas to their shelter and cut asunder the foetus in the wombs of their Bhārgavas' wives and thus they roamed all over on the surface of the earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The Haihayas were so very angry at that time that they went wherever the Bhārgavas took their shelter and cut asunder the foetus in the wombs of their Bhārgavaś wives and thus they roamed all over on the surface of the earth.

[Ch 16 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Wherever they saw any Bhārgava, be he a minor, or a youth or a old man, at once they killed him with sharp arrows, disregarding the sin Brahmahatyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Wherever they saw any Bhārgava, be he a minor, or a youth or a old man, at once they killed him with sharp arrows, disregarding the sin Brahmahattyā.

[Ch 16 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the Bhārgavas were thus all killed, then they caught hold of their wives that were pregnant and destroyed their wombs.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the Bhārgavas were thus all killed, then they caught hold of their wives that were pregnant and destroyed their wombs.

[Ch 16 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the vicious Ksatriyas thus destroyed the lives in their wombs, the helpless women began to cry like the awe-stricken ewe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the vicious Kṣattriyas thus destroyed the lives in their wombs, the helpless women began to cry like the awe-stricken ewe.

[Ch 16 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the other Munis, the inhabitants of the sacred places of pilgrimages, seeing the Haihaya Kṣatriyas inflamed with anger, said: "O Kṣatriyas! Quit your terrible anger towards the Brāhmins."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the other Munis, the inhabitants of the sacred places of pilgrimages, seeing the Haihaya Kṣattriyas inflamed with anger, said :-- “O Kṣattriyas! Quit your terrible anger towards the Brāhmins.

[Ch 16 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Being the best of the Kṣatriyas, you are killing the foetus in the wombs of the pregnant Brāhmana ladies! you are doing, no doubt, a very vicious and unjustifiable act!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Being the best of the Kṣattriyas, you are killing the foetus in the wombs of the pregnant Brāhmaṇa ladies! You are doing, no doubt, a very vicious and unjustifiable act!

[Ch 16 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You should know that an act, very bad or very good, bears fruit in the life; therefore those that seek their welfare should entirely omit this exceedingly hateful and vicious act."
NEW CORR ENG ──► You should know that an act, very bad or very good, bears fruit in this life; therefore those that seek their welfare should entirely omit this exceedingly hateful and vicious act.”

[Ch 16 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the exceedingly angry Haihayas told the merciful ascetics: "You all are saints; therefore you do not know the real import of what are called vicious acts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the exceedingly angry Haihayas told the merciful ascetics :-- You all are saints; therefore you do not know the real import of what are called vicious acts.

[Ch 16 Verse 32-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► These Bhārgavas are cheats, vain persons and their persuasions are like herons. A great act had to be done by us and we wanted money at 25 per cent interest with all the becoming humility; yet they did not give us the money; rather seeing on their face their clients distressed and sorrowful they spoke that they had no money, and then they remained silent.
NEW CORR ENG ──► These Bhārgavas are cheats, vain persons and their persuasions are like herons. A great act had to be done by us and we wanted money at 25 per cent interest with all the becoming humility; yet they did not give us the money; rather seeing on their face their clients distressed and sorrowful they spoke that they had no money, no money and then they remained silent.

[Ch 16 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► True, they got all their money from Kārtavirya; but it may be questioned why they stored it? Why did not they perform sacrifices with that? Why did not they give sufficient money to the other priests (Yāyakas) that did the sacrifices.
NEW CORR ENG ──► True, they got all their money from Kārtavīrya; but it may be questioned why they stored it? Why did not they perform sacrifices with that? Why did not they give sufficient money to the other priests (Yāyakas) that did the sacrifices.

[Ch 16 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Never should any Brāhimin hoard his money; he should give that in charity and enjoy at his pleasure. O Twice-born! In amassing wealth, there exist three fears: Fear from the thieves and robbers, fear from the King, fear from dreadful fire accidents, and especially great terrible fear from the cheats. This is the nature of wealth; it leaves its preserve. See, moreover, when a hoarder of money dies, he certainly has to quit it.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Never should any Brāhmin hoard his money; he should give that in charity and enjoy at his pleasure. O Twice-born! In amassing wealth, there exist three fears :-- Fear from the thieves and robbers, fear from the King, fear from dreadful fire accidents, and especially great terrible fear from the cheats. This is the nature of wealth; it leaves its preserver. See, moreover, when a hoarder of money dies, he certainly has to quit it.

[Ch 16 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If a wealthy man, before dying, performs sacrifices and other good pious acts by his earned money, then he gets certainly good states in future; otherwise, he quite his wealth, to no purpose and earns a bad state in his future life; there is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If a wealthy man, before dying, performs sacrifices and other good pious acts by his earned money, then he gets certainly good states in future; otherwise, he quits his wealth, to no purpose and earns a bad state in his future life; there is no doubt in this.

[Ch 16 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We humbly wanted to pay a quarter interest and asked money for the performance of a great act; yet they, the greedy ones, were doubtful about our promise; and though our priests, they did not give us the money.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We humbly wanted to pay a quarter interest and asked money for the performance of a great act; yet they, the greedy ones, were doubtful about our promise; and though our priests, they did not give us the money.

[Ch 16 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Maharsis! Gifts, enjoyment and destruction, these are the three courses which any wealth has to pass through; those persons that have done good deeds, enjoy their wealth and give as charities and thus they make a good and real use of their money; and of those that are vicious, their wealth goes away in ruin and to no purpose.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Maharṣis! Gift, enjoyment and destruction, these are the three courses which any wealth has to pass through; those persons that have done good deeds, enjoy their wealth and give as charities and thus they make a good and real use of their money; and of those that are vicious, their wealth goes away in ruin and to no purpose.

[Ch 16 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He who does not enjoy wealth goes away in ruin and to no purpose. He who does not enjoy nor give in charities but is only clever in hoarding and who is miser, the Kings punish him by all means, that man who cheats himself and who suffers only pains and miseries.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He who does not enjoy nor give in charities but is only clever in hoarding and who is a miser, the Kings punish him by all means, that man who cheats himself and who suffers only pains and miseries.

[Ch 16 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► For that reason, we are now ready to kill those Brāhmins, the vilest of men, the cheats, though they are our Gurus. O Maharjs! You are great persons; therefore you do not be angry after you have come to know all these."
NEW CORR ENG ──► For that reason, we are now ready to kill those Brāhmins, the vilest of men, the cheats, though they are our Gurus. O Maharṣis! You are great persons; therefore you do not be angry after you have come to know all these.

[Ch 16 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Thus consoling the Munis, with reasonable words, the Haihayas began to roam about, in search of the wives of the Bhārgavas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Thus consoling the Munis, with reasonable words, the Haihayas began to roam about, in search of the wives of the Bhārgavas.

[Ch 16 Verse 44-45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Bhārgava wives very much distressed with fear and became very lean and thin. They fled away to the Himālayan Mountain weeping, and crying, and trembling with fear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Bhārgava wives were very much distressed with fear and became very lean and thin. They fled away to the Himālayān Mountain weeping, and crying, and trembling with fear.

[Ch 16 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus the Bhārgavas were being killed by those vicious greedy Haibayas, infuriated with anger, and as they liked.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the Bhārgavas were being killed by those vicious greedy Haihayas, infuriated with anger, and as they liked.

[Ch 16 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! This greed is the greatest enemy of a man, residing in his own body; this greed is the root of all evils, of all sins. Life is in danger due to this covetousness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! This greed is the greatest enemy of a man, residing in his own body; this greed is the root of all evils, of all sins. Life is in danger due to this covetousness.

[Ch 16 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is due to this greed that quarrels ensue amongst the several castes, the Brāhmins, etc., and that the human beings are very much troubled with thirst after wordily enjoyments.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is due to this greed that quarrels ensue amongst the several castes, the Brāhmins, etc., and that the human beings are very much troubled with thirst after worldly enjoyments.

[Ch 16 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This greed makes a man forsake all his religious rites and long existing customs and observances of his family; and it is due to this avarice of gold that men kill their fathers, mothers, brothers, friends, Gurus, sons, acquaintances, sisters, and sisters-in-law and others.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This greed makes a man forsake all his religious rites and long existing customs and observances of his family; and it is due to this avarice of gold that men kill their fathers, mothers, brothers, friends, Gurus, sons, acquaintances, sisters, and sisters-in-law and others.

[Ch 16 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Really when a man is bent on avarice, nothing heinous remains to him that can not be done by him. This greed is a more powerful enemy than anger, lust and egoism.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Really when a man is bent on avarice, nothing heinous remains to him that cannot be done by him. This greed is a more powerful enemy than anger, lust and egoism.

[Ch 16 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Men abandon their lives for their greed; what more can be said than this? So one should be always alert on this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Men abandon their lives for their greed; what more can be said than this? So one should be always alert on this.

[Ch 16 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Your forefathers, the Pāndavas and Kauravas, were all religious and they followed the path of virtue and goodness. Yet they all were ruined simply for this greed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Your forefathers, the Pāṇḍavas and Kauravas, were all religious and they followed the path of virtue and goodness. Yet they all were ruined simply for this greed.

[Ch 16 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See! The dreadful fight and separation amongst the relatives took place where there were the high-souled persons like Bhīsma, Droṇa, Krpācārya, Karna, Bahlika, Bhimasena, Yudhishira, Arjuna, and Keśava, only through the avaricious feelings. In this battle Bhīsma, Droṇa and the sons of Pāndavas were all slain; the brothers and fathers were all slain in battle.
NEW CORR ENG ──► See! The dreadful fight and separation amongst the relatives took place where there were the high-souled persons like Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Kripācārya, Karṇa, Vahlika, Bhīmasena, Yudhiṣṭhira, Arjuṇa, and Keśava, only through the avaricious feelings. In this battle Bhīṣma, Droṇa and the sons of Pāṇḍavas were all slain; the brothers and fathers

[Ch 16 Verse 55-56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus what improper acts and mischiefs can there be that cannot be committed when the human minds are overpowered by this greed? O King! The vicious Haihayas slew the Bhārgavas all through this avarice. Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the incidents preliminary to the Haihaya and Bhārgava affairs in the Mahāpurānam Srimaddevībhāgāvatam by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus what improper acts and mischiefs can there be that cannot be committed when the human minds are overpowered by this greed? O King! The vicious Haihayas slew the Bhārgavas all through this avarice. Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the incidents preliminary to the Haihaya and Bhārgava affairs in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
