CHAPTER VII

On Showing the Departed Ones

सूत उवाच

पड़ानां त्रिपटी भावरां सा मान्या सा पतित्रता ।

पंछा पुत्रास्तु तत्थाः: स्युर्भनुष्योउतीव सुन्दारा ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: “The chaste Draupadi was the common wife of all the five very beautiful! sons of Kunti; and she bore five sons, one to every husband.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

अनुंन्य ता भार्यं कृष्णस्य भर्मनी शुभा ।

सुभग्रा या हता पूर्वं जिण्यृता हरिसमाते ॥ 2 ॥

Arjuna had one wife more; she was Subhadrā, the sister of Śri Kṛṣṇā. By the order of Śri Kṛṣṇā, Arjuna stole her away (took her by force).

तस्यां जातो महावीते निहतोजरी राजाजे ।

अभिन्यटुहित्र श्रीपहाछ सुतः किन्त ॥ 3 ॥

The great hero Abhimanyu was born of Subhadrā. This Abhimanyu and the five sons of Draupadī were killed in battle.

अभिम्योर्वारा भाषां वैराटी चातिसुन्दारी ।

कुलाने सुवेषे पुत्रं मृतीं वाणारिनना शिशुः ॥ ४ ॥

Abhumanyu's wife Uttarā was the charming daughter of king Virāt. She gave birth to one dead child, after all the boys, the descendants of the family were extinct.

जीवितः स तु कृष्णेन भापीनयसुतः खयम् ।

ग्रीभाणापनिरिदंधः प्राणेनामुळेन च ॥ ५ ॥

The above child died of the arrows of Asvatthāmā. The extraordinarily powerful Śrī Kṛṣna Himself made alive again his sister's dead grandson.

पत्रक्षीणेयुं बंगेषु जातो यस्माद्र: सुतः ।

तस्मार्तीक्षितो नाम विज्ञातः पृथिवीतते ॥ 6 ॥

As this son was born after family had become extinct, he became known in the world by the name of Parikşit.

निततेषु च पुरेषु धतराष्ट्रीस्तु:खितः ।

तस्थौ पाण्डवराज्ये च भीमवाराणपीक्षितः ॥ 7 ॥

When the sons were all destroyed, Dhrtarāstra became very sorry, and , tormented by the arrow-like words of Bhima, remained in the kingdom of the Pāndavas.

गाध्वारी च त्वास्तिच्छ्युत्रोकातुरा भृगम् ।

सेवां त्रवीद्वारातं चकातारतां वृष्टिश्र: ॥ 8 ॥

Gandhārī, too, exceedingly distressed on the bereavement of the sons, remained there also. Yudhīsthira, day and night, served Dhrtarāstra and Gāndhāri.

विद्योरूपयितिध्यांना प्रज्ञानेयमोधायत ।

यृधिष्रियस्यानुमते भ्रातृपार्थी व्यतिहत ॥ 9 ॥

The greatly religious Vidura always used to console, by the advice of Yudhiṣthira, his brother Dhrāraśtra, who possessed the eye of wisdom and he remained by his brother's side.

धर्मपूजोपरि धर्मात्मा चकार सेवनं पितुः ।

पुत्रजीकोद्वं दुःखं तस्य विस्मारवादिन ॥ 10 ॥

Dharma's son Yudthśhira used to serve his uncle Dīhtarāstra in such a way as he might forget the pain of the death of his sons.

यथा श्रणोति वृद्धोजरी तथा भीमोजितेशितः ।

वायबाणेनाहन्तं तु आयवसंस्थिताङ्गनान् ॥ १ १ ॥

But Bhima used to pierce his heart by his arrow-like words that he pronounced so loud as to reach the ears of the old king Dhrātaśrātra.

मया पुत्रा हताः सर्वे दुर्व्याध्यय ते ११ ।

दुःशासनस्य सर्पिरं पीर्ण हृद्ध तथा भ्रूमग् ॥ १ २ ॥

Bhima used to say: “In the battlefield I killed all the sons, of the wicked blind king (Dhrtarāstra) and it was I that sucked well and drunk, full to the brim, the blood of the heart of Duhśāsana.

भुर्निक्त पिच्छर्मोटिंग मवा दूर्त नगतवः ।

ध्रांब्धवादु शवच्चापि युवा जीवत्यसी जनः ॥ 13 ॥

Now this blind king eats shamelessly like a crow and a dog, the mass of food (Piṇḍa) given by me, and thus is bearing uselessly the burden of life."

एवंधितानि स्क्षणिं शावयल्पुवासरम् ।

आशासवित धर्माता मूर्खोंर्यमिति च बुबन् ॥ 14 ॥

Daily Bhima used to tell, thus, harsh words to him; whereas the religious Yudhṣthira used to console him saying “Bhima is a quite illiterate brute” and so forth.

अश्रादीर वर्षानि स्थला तत्रेव दुःखितः ।

धूतराष्टो चने यानं प्रार्थयामास धर्मन् ॥ १ ५ ॥

अयाचत धर्मपुं छिताग्ये महीपति: ।

पूत्रयोर्द द्वान्याद निवर्गे विधपूर्वकम् ॥ १ ६ ॥

King Dhrātaśrāta remained there with a grieved heart for eighteen years; one day he proposed to the Dharma's son Yudhṣithra about his intention to dwell in forest thus: "To-day I wish to perform Tarpāṇas in the names of my sons.

खकोदोरण संर्वेंभं कृतमत्रीध्वंदीढ़िकम् ।

न कृतं मम पुत्राणां पूर्ववैरमनुस्मन् ॥ 17 ॥

True it is, that Bhima performed the funeral obseques of them all; but, having in view of the former enmity, he did not do anything for my sons.

द्वातिसे चेद्वनं महं कृत्वा चैवीध्वेदितिकम् ।

गमिष्ठप्रं वनं तपुं तप: स्वर्पभलप्रदम् ॥ 18 ॥

If you give me some money, I will, then, perform the funeral obsequies of my sons and then retire to the forest to perform tapasyā so that I can go to Heaven."

एकाने विदुरंगोक्तो राजा धर्मसुतः शुचि: ।

धरं वर्तुं मनछोहे धृतराष्य चाधिंये ॥ 19 ॥

Vidura also asked Yudhiṣṭhira privately to pay to Dhrātrāṣtra the sum that he wanted; Yudhiṣṭira also intended to pay the required money.

समाहुव निजान्सर्वानुवाच पृथिवीपति: ।

धन दायरे महाभागाः पिबे निवार्षकामिने ॥ 20 ॥

Then Yudhiṣṭhira, the lord of the world called his younger brothers and addressed them as follows: “O highly fortunate ones! Our revered uncle is desirous to perform the funeral obsequies of his sons; so we will have to give him some money for the purpose.”

तद्युत्वा वचनं धातुर्अँधुस्यामिततेजसः ।

संप्रडेल्य महावाहामूर्तितः: कुपितोउबचीत् ॥ 21 ॥

Hearing these words of his elder brother of indomitable valour, Pavana's son, the mighty armed Bhima became very angry and spoke out as follows:

धनं देयं महाभाग दुयौधन्त्रिताय किम ।

अन्योपि सुखाम्पानीत मुर्स्तैव किमतः परम् ॥ 22 ॥

“O highly lucky one! Is it that we will have to give wealth for the spiritual benefit of Duryodhana and others? What a great stupidity can there be than the fact that such a malevolent blind king is deriving so great happiness at your hands?

तव दुम्पित्रनेताथ दुःख प्राप्ता वने वसम् ।

त्रीयदी च महाभाग समानीत दुरात्मना ॥ 23 ॥

O Ārya! It is by your bad counsel that we

suffered endless troubles in the forest; and the extremely good Draupadī was brought before the public in the hall by Duhśāsana.

विराटभवने वास: प्रसादानस सुवत ।

दास्तर्व च कृतं सर्वमैनस्य्यामितिकमर्पि: ॥ 24 ॥

O one of good vows! It is for your satisfaction alone that we, though we were very mighty, had to remain in the house of Matsya Rāja Virāt as servants.

देविता त्वं न चेज्येछः प्रभवेतक्षयः कथम् ।

सूपकारो विराट्यस्य हत्वासभूवं तु मागधम् ॥ 25 ॥

Had you not been our elder brother and not been addicted to the gambling, would it have been possible that I, who killed Rajasandha, would have been a cook to Virāt Rajā! Never we had been put to so great a trouble?

ब्रह्मला कर्थ जिण्युभवेद्वलत्थ नतर्कः ।

कृत्वा वेयं महावादुयोगाय तास्वतावनः ॥ 26 ॥

Never would the mighty armed Arjuna, the Vāsava's son, have acted the part of an actress (a dancer), dressing himself in a female garb, under the name Vrhannalā.

गाण्डीवाणीभर्ती हस्तौ कृतो कक्रणणोभिति ।

मानुषं च वयुः प्रायः किं दुःखं स्यातयः परम् ॥ 27 ॥

दूर्या वेणीं कृतां मूर्टि कजलं लोचने तथा ।

असि गृहीता तसा डेभ्यई नान्यथा सुखम् ॥ 28 ॥

Alas! What more painful could there be by assuming a human birth, that the hands of Arjuna, that wielded always the Gānḍiva bow, would have worn bracelets befitting a woman? I would have been happy then had I, seeing the braid of hair on Arjuna's head and the collyrium in his eyes, cut off the head of Dhṛtaraśstra?

अपूर्वा च महीपालं निश्रितोर्भिनियां गृहे ।

दगुकामप्र यापनाम निर्देशेपोर्से पुरोजनः ॥ 29 ॥

O Lord of the earth! 'Without you, I set fire on the house, named Jautgṛha (a lac-house, as built by Duryodhana in order to burn up the Pāndavas) and, therefore, the vicious Virocana, who wanted to burn us, was himself burnt up.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

कौचका निहताः सर्वे त्वामपूर्वा जनाधिप।

न तथा निहताः सर्वे सभायां घृतारुकाः ॥ 30 ॥

Again, O Lord of men! similarly, without asking you, I slew Kicaka; this is now the one thing I regret that I could not have killed in the same way the sons of Dhrtarāstra before the public hall.

मृत्वील तव राजेन्द्र नयवैधव्य भोभिताः ।

दुर्धीधनादय: कामं शत्रवो निराकीतृतः ॥ 31 ॥

O king of kings! It was simply your stupidity that you liberated Duryodhana and other sons, the great enemies of the Gandharvas, when they had been imprisoned by them.

दुर्धीधनतितायाछ धर्ने तृत्वमिष्ठसि ।

नाहं ददे महीपाल सर्वथा प्रेरितस्वया ॥ 32 ॥

Again today you are willing to give wealth for the spiritual benefit of those Duryodhana and others! But, O Lord of the earth, I would never give wealth, even if you request me specially to do this.

इत्युक्चना निर्णतं भीमे विभि: परिवर्तां नृपः ।

ददौ वित्तं सुवहुलें धृतताश्य धर्मजः ॥ 33 ॥

Thus saying, Bhima went away. Dharma's son Yudhisthra then consulted with the other three brothers and gave abundance of wealth to Dhratarāstra.

कार्यायमास विधित्यनुजाणं चौधदैविकम् ।

दूदी दानानि विधेष्यो धृतगृछोप्रविकासुस्तः ॥ 34 ॥

With this sum, the Ambikā's son Dhrāraśstra duly performed the Śrāddha ceremony of his sons and gave away lots of things to the Brāhmins.

कृत्यीध्वैदिके सर्वे गान्यारीसहितो नृप: ।

प्रविशेष शनं तृर्ण कुंल्या च विद्येणा च ॥ 35 ॥

King Dhrāraśtra, thus performing all the funeral obsequies, became ready to go early to the forest with Gāndhāri, Kuntī and Vidura.

संसंयेन परित्रातो निर्नोतोजसी महामाति: ।

पूरिनिर्वार्यमाणोप्रिय शूरसेनसुता गता ॥ 36 ॥

वित्तवभामसोनोप्रि तायान्ये चापि कौराव: ।

गज्ञातीरात्यवास्य ययु: सर्वे गजाड्यम् ॥ 37 ॥

By the help of Sañjaya, the highly intelligent

Dhrtarāstra became informed of the roads of the forest, and then went out of the house. Śūrasena's daughter Kunti, though stopped by her sons, followed them. Bhīma and other Kauravas went along with them weeping up to the banks of the Ganges and thence returned to Hastināpura.

ते गत्वा जाइबीतीरै शतयुपायमं शुभम् ।

कृत्वा तृणै: कुर्दी तत्र तपसेतुः समाहिता: ॥ 38 ॥

The ascetics went to the auspicious Śatayūpa hermitage on the banks of the Ganges and building a hut practised tapasyā with their hearts concentrated.

गतान्यद्वानि वट् तेशं यदा याता हि तापसाः ।

युधधिसृत विरहान्नुजानिदमबजीत ॥ 39 ॥

Thus six year elapsed when Yudhiştihra, troubled by their bereavements said to his younger brothers:

स्वने दृष्टा मया कुनी तुदैला वनसंश्चिता ।

मनो मे जायते उहुं मातरं पित्ती तथा ॥ 40 ॥

विदुरं च महात्मानं सुखयं च महामितिम् ।

गेरोचे यदि वः सर्वान्जाम इति मे पति: ॥ 41 ॥

ततसे भाततः सर्वे सुभग्रा त्रीयती तथा ।

वैराटी च महाभागा तथा नागरिकों जनः ॥ 42 ॥

प्राणता: सर्वेजनैः सार्थ पाण्ड्वा दर्शनोलुकाः ।

गतपूयाश्रभ प्रायय द्वरुगुः सर्वे एव ते ॥ 43 ॥

विदुरो न यदा दृष्टो धर्मेनं पृष्टवांस्तदा ।

क्वालते स विदुरो धीमावत्सुवारचिकवासुतः ॥ 44 ॥

"I dreamt that our mother Kunti got very lean and thin. Now my mind wants bitterly to see mother, uncle, aunt, the high-souled Vidura and the highly intelligent Sañjaya. If you approve, I want to go to there." Then the five brothers, Pāndu's sons, became desirous to see Kunti, and taking with them Draupadi, Subhadrā, Uttarā, and other persons went to the Śatayūpa hermitage and saw the persons there; but not seeing Vidura, Yudhṣithra asked: "Where is Vidura?" Hearing this Dhāratṣāra said:

विरक्तश्रुते सन्ति निरीहो निर्यश्रिक: ।

कुतोउपेकान्तसंवासी धायार्वेतः सनातनम् ॥ 45 ॥

"Vidura has taken up Vairāgyam (dispassion) and has gone alone to a solitary place and is meditating in his heart the eternal Brahma.

गड़ां गच्छिन्तीयेर्द्रि वने राजा युधित्रः ।

ददर्श विदुरं क्षामं तमसा शासितबतम् ॥ 46 ॥

Next day while king Yudhiṣṭhira was walking along the banks of the Ganges, he saw in the forest Vidura, engaged in his vow and become lean and thin by his tapasyā; he then exclaimed:

दूर्ववोबाय महीपालो वन्देहं त्वां युधितुः ।

तस्वी शुना च विदुरः स्वाणपून्त इवान्यः ॥ 47 ॥

"I am King Yudhisthira; I am saluting you." Holy Vidura heard and remained motionless like a log of wood.

क्षणेन विदुर्यस्यात्रिसूर्ते तेन अद्धुतम् ।

सीनं युवित्रिस्याये धर्पशाल्यास्यम् ॥ 48 ॥

Within an instant a wonderful halo came out of Vidura's face and entered the mouth of Yudhishira, both of them being Dharma's parts.

क्षता जही तदा प्राणाखुशोचातियुधितः ।

दाराष्टी तस्य देहस्य कृतलानुधमं नृपः ॥ 49 ॥

गृवतस्तु तदा राजो वाणुवाचागरीरिणी ।

वित्तोघंयं न दाहाही यथेथं चष्ठ पूर्णे ॥ 50 ॥

Vidura then died; Yudhishira expressed great sorrow. When Vidura's body was going to be set on fire, a celestial voice was heard: "O king! He was very wise; so he ought not to be burnt; you can go away as you like."

शुत्वा ते भातः: सर्वे सस्नुर्गड़जलेंमले ।

गत्वा निवेदयामासुर्भूतिग्याय विस्तारना ।। 51 ॥

Hearing this, Yudhiṣhira bathed in the pure Ganges and returned to the Āśrama and informed everything in detail to Dhrāraśstra.

स्थितास्ताओंमसे सर्वे पाण्डवा नागरैः सह ।

तत्र सत्यवतीमतुर्नरिंख्छु समाप्ताः ।। ५२ ॥

मुर्नयोन्मे महात्मान्धागतात धर्मनन्दनम् ।

कृनी प्रात्र तदा व्यासे संश्वर्ते शुभदर्शनम् । ५३ ॥

While the Pāṇḍavas were staying in the hermitage with the other inhabitants of the city, Veda Vyāsa, Nārada, and other high-souled Munis came there to Yudhishira. Kuntī then spoke to the auspicious Vyāsa:

कृष्ण कर्णस्तु पुत्रो मे जतनामान्तु वीक्षितः ।

मनो मे तप्यतेत्यर्थे दर्शयस्य तपोधन ॥ ५४ ॥

“O, Kṛṣṇa! I saw my son Kārṇa, only just when

he was born; my mind is being very much tormented for him; so, O great ascetic! Shew him once to me. O highly fortunate One! You alone can do this; so O Lord! Satisfy my heart's desire."

नार्यावृत्राच

समर्पोसि महापाग कुरु ने वाज्छितं प्रभो ।

दुर्भोधिनो रणेपाछ्छतीक्षिति न मया मुने ॥ 55 ॥

Gāndhāri said: “O Muni! I did not see while Duryodhana went to battle; so, O Muni! Show me Duryodhana with his younger brothers.”

सुभग्रोधाच

तं दर्शय मुनिश्रिषु पुत्रे मे त्वं सहानुम् ।

अधिमन्युं महावीरं प्राणाद्यधिकं प्रियम् ॥ 56 ॥

ग्रहुकामासि सर्वैत द्रशैवा तथोन ।

Subhadrā said: O Omniscient one! I want very much to see the great hero Abhimanyu, dearer to me than my life even; O great ascetic! Show him once to me."

एर्वेशियानि वाक्यानि शुत्वा सत्यवतीसुतः ॥ 57 ॥

प्राणायामं तत कृत्वा द्यथी देर्वीं सनातनीम् ।

संध्याकातेउव सम्पाने गडुतायां मुनिसनमः ॥ 58 ॥

सर्वस्तांश समाद्य युधिष्युरोग्यमान् ।

तृत्वा विश्वजननी स्नाता पुण्यसरिज्जले ॥ 59 ॥

प्रकृति पुरुषारामां सगुणां निर्पुर्ण तथा ।

देवदेवीं ब्रह्मल्पं मणिद्धोपाधिवासीनिभ ॥ 60 ॥

यदा न वेधा न च विद्युर्धितृयो

न वासवो नैव जलाधिपतथा ॥

न तिचपो नैव यमध पावकस्तदार्सि

देवि त्वमहं नमाया ॥ 6 1 ॥

Sūta said: Satyavati's son Vyāsa Deva, hearing their words, held Prānāyāma (deep breathing exercise) and meditated on the eternal Devi, the force of Brahma. When the evening time came, the Muni invited Yudhisthira and all others to the banks of the Ganges. He then bathed in the Ganges and began to chant hymns in praise of the Devi Brahmamayī Prakṛti, resting on the Puruṣa, the

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

Dweller in the Maṇi Dvīpa, with attributes, at the same time transcending them, thus: “O Devi! When Brahmā was not, Viṣṇu was not, Maheśvara was not, nor when existing Indra, Varuna, Kubera, Yama, and Agni, Thou alone existed then; my salutation to Thee.

जरंने न वायुर्नं धरा न चाम्बरं

गुणा न तेषां च न चैद्रियायवह्म।

मनो न बुद्धिनं च तिमगुः शगी

तत्प्रसि देयि त्वमहं नामयि मात् ॥ 6 2 ॥

When there existed not water, Vāyu, ether, earth and their Gunas, taste, smell etc., when there were no senses, mind, Buddhi, Ahariṅkāra; when there existed no Sun, Moon nor anything, Thou alone existed then; so, O Devi! I bow down again and again to Thee.

इमं जीवलोकं समाधाय चित्ते

गुणीतिजुकोशं च नीत्वा समाधौ ।

स्थता कल्पकालं न यस्यात्मतना

न कोउपस्थित सेना विवेक तांती5पि ॥ 63 ॥

O Mother! Thou holdest all these visible Jiva lokas in the cosmic Hiranyagarbha; again Thou bringest this Hiranyagarbha, the sum-total of Linga Šarīras (the subtle bodies), with the Gunas Sattva, Rajas and Tamas to a state of equilibrium named Sāmyāvasthā and remainest quite independent and apart for a Kalpa period. At that time even those that are possessed of the power of great discrimination and dispassion cannot fathom Thy nature.

प्रार्थयेच्पि पां लोको मृतानां एर्णंन पुनः ।

नाईक्ष्मोरिस्ममातरत्वंदशयगुजानम्युतन्ति ॥ 64 ॥

O Mother! These persons are praying to me to

see their dead once; but I am quite incapable to do that. So kindly shew them their departed ones early."

सूत जाच

एवं सुताता तदा देवी माया शीभुवनेश्वी ।

स्वगांदाइय सर्वान् व उर्धियामास पार्थिवान् ॥ 65 ॥

While Vyāsa praised thus the Devi, the Devi Mahāmāyā, the Lady of the Universe, of the nature of Universal Consciousness called all the departed ones from the Heavens and shewed them to their relatives.

दूर्वा कुन्ती च गान्धारी सुभग्रा च विगराठा ।

पाण्डवा मुगुः सर्वे बीक्ष्य प्रत्यागतान्यक्तान् ॥ 66 ॥

Then Kunti, Gāndhāri, Subhadrā, Uttarā, and the Pāndavas became very glad to see their relatives come to them again.

पुनर्विसर्पितान्तेन व्यासेनामिततेजसा ।

सूचता द्वौं महामायामिद्रजतलमिवोद्धान्म।। 67 ॥

Vyāsa, of indomitable valour, again remembering Mahāmāyā, bade good bye to the departed ones; it seemed then, a great magic had occurred.

तदा पृष्टया ययुः सर्वे पाण्डवा मुनयस्तथा ।

राजा नानाभूरं प्राप: कुर्वेन्य व्यासकां पाँधि ॥ 68 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणो द्वितीयकन्ने

सत्तमोउध्याः 117 11

The Pāndavas and the Munis bade good bye to each other and went to their respective places. King Yudhiṣṭhira talked on the way about Vyāsa and ultimately came to Hastinā.

Thus ends the Seventh Chapter of the Second Book on shewing the departed ones in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

