[Ch 7 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: “The chaste Draupadi was the common wife of all the five very beautiful! sons of Kunti; and she bore five sons, one to every husband. Śrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- The chaste Draupadi was the common wife of all the five very beautiful sons of Kunti; and she bore five sons, one to every husband.

[Ch 7 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Arjuna had one wife more; she was Subhadrā, the sister of Śri Kṛṣṇā. By the order of Śri Kṛṣṇā, Arjuna stole her away (took her by force).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Arjuna had one wife more; she was Subhadrā, the sister of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. By the order of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna stole her away (took her by force).

[Ch 7 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The great hero Abhimanyu was born of Subhadrā. This Abhimanyu and the five sons of Draupadī were killed in battle.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The great hero Abhimanyu was born of Subhadrā. This Abhimanyu and the five sons of Draupadi were killed in battle.

[Ch 7 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Abhumanyu's wife Uttarā was the charming daughter of king Virāt. She gave birth to one dead child, after all the boys, the descendants of the family were extinct.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Abhimanyu’s wife Uttarā was the charming daughter of the king Virāṭ. She gave birth to one dead child, after all the boys, the descendants of the family were extinct.

[Ch 7 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The above child died of the arrows of Asvatthāmā. The extraordinarily powerful Śrī Kṛṣna Himself made alive again his sister's dead grandson.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The above child died out of the arrows of Aśvatthāmā. The extraordinarily powerful Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself made alive again this his sister’s dead grandson.

[Ch 7 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As this son was born after family had become extinct, he became known in the world by the name of Parikşit.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As this son was born after the family had become extinct, he became known in the world by the name of Parīksit.

[Ch 7 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the sons were all destroyed, Dhrtarāstra became very sorry, and , tormented by the arrow-like words of Bhima, remained in the kingdom of the Pāndavas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the sons were all destroyed, Dhritarāstra became very sorry, and, tormented by the arrow-like words of Bhīma, remained in the kingdom of the Pāṇḍavas.

[Ch 7 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Gandhārī, too, exceedingly distressed on the bereavement of the sons, remained there also. Yudhīsthira, day and night, served Dhrtarāstra and Gāndhāri.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Gāndharī, too, exceedingly distressed on the bereavement of the sons, remained there also. Yudhisthira, day and night, served Dhritarāstra and Gāndhāri.

[Ch 7 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The greatly religious Vidura always used to console, by the advice of Yudhiṣthira, his brother Dhrāraśtra, who possessed the eye of wisdom and he remained by his brother's side.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The greatly religious Vidura always used to console, by the advice of Yudhisthira, his brother Dhritarāstra, who possessed the eye of wisdom and he remained by his brother’s side.

[Ch 7 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Dharma's son Yudthśhira used to serve his uncle Dīhtarāstra in such a way as he might forget the pain of the death of his sons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Dharma`s son Yudhisthira used to serve his uncle Dhritarāstra in such a way as he might forget the pain of the death of his sons.

[Ch 7 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But Bhima used to pierce his heart by his arrow-like words that he pronounced so loud as to reach the ears of the old king Dhrātaśrātra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But Bhīma used to pierce his heart by his arrow-like words that he pronounced so loud as to reach the ears of the old king Dhritarāstra.

[Ch 7 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhima used to say: “In the battlefield I killed all the sons, of the wicked blind king (Dhrtarāstra) and it was I that sucked well and drunk, full to the brim, the blood of the heart of Duhśāsana.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bhīma used to-say :-- “In the battle field I killed all the sons, of the wicked blind king (Dhritarāstra) and it was I that sucked well and drunk, full to the brim, the blood of the heart of Duhśāsana.

[Ch 7 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now this blind king eats shamelessly like a crow and a dog, the mass of food (Piṇḍa) given by me, and thus is bearing uselessly the burden of life."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now this blind king eats shamelessly like a crow and a dog, the mass of food (Piṇḍa) given by me, and thus is bearing uselessly the burden of life.

[Ch 7 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Daily Bhima used to tell, thus, harsh words to him; whereas the religious Yudhṣthira used to console him saying “Bhima is a quite illiterate brute” and so forth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Daily Bhīma used to tell, thus, harsh words to him; whereas the religious Yudhīsthira used to console him, saying “Bhīma is a quite illiterate brute” and so forth.

[Ch 7 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► King Dhrātaśrāta remained there with a grieved heart for eighteen years; one day he proposed to the Dharma's son Yudhṣithra about his intention to dwell in forest thus: "To-day I wish to perform Tarpāṇas in the names of my sons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► king Dhritarāstra remained there with a grieved heart for eighteen years; the one day he proposed to the Dharma’s son Yudhīsthira about his intention to dwell in forest thus :-- “To-day I wish to perform Tarpaṇas in the names my sons.

[Ch 7 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► True it is, that Bhima performed the funeral obseques of them all; but, having in view of the former enmity, he did not do anything for my sons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► True it is, that Bhīma performed the funeral obsequies of them all; but, having in view of the former enmity, he did not do anything for my sons.

[Ch 7 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If you give me some money, I will, then, perform the funeral obsequies of my sons and then retire to the forest to perform tapasyā so that I can go to Heaven."
NEW CORR ENG ──► If you give me some money, I will, then, perform the funeral obsequies of my sons and then retire to the forest to perform tapasyā that I can go to Heaven.”

[Ch 7 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vidura also asked Yudhiṣṭhira privately to pay to Dhrātrāṣtra the sum that he wanted; Yudhiṣṭira also intended to pay the required money.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vidura also asked Yudhīsthira privately pay to Dhritarāshtra the sum that he wanted; Yudhīsthira also intended to pay the required money.

[Ch 7 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Yudhiṣṭhira, the lord of the world called his younger brothers and addressed them as follows: “O highly fortunate ones! Our revered uncle is desirous to perform the funeral obsequies of his sons; so we will have to give him some money for the purpose.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Yudhīsthira, the lord of the world call his younger brothers and addressed them as follows :-- “O highly fortunate ones! Our revered uncle is desirous to perform the funeral obsequies of his sons; so we will have to give him some money for the purpose.”

[Ch 7 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words of his elder brother of indomitable valour, Pavana's son, the mighty armed Bhima became very angry and spoke out as follows:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these words of his elder brother of indomitable valour, Pavana’s son, the mighty armed Bhīma became very angry and spoke out follows :--

[Ch 7 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O highly lucky one! Is it that we will have to give wealth for the spiritual benefit of Duryodhana and others? What a great stupidity can there be than the fact that such a malevolent blind king is deriving so great happiness at your hands?
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O highly lucky one! Is it that we will have to give wealth for the spiritual benefit of Duryodhana and others? What a great stupidity can there be than the fact that such a malevolent blind king is deriving so great happiness at your hands?

[Ch 7 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Ārya! It is by your bad counsel that we suffered endless troubles in the forest; and the extremely good Draupadī was brought before the public in the hall by Duhśāsana.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Ārya! It is by your bad counsel that we suffered endless troubles in the forest and the extremely good Draupadi was brought before the public in the hall by Duhśāsana.

[Ch 7 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O one of good vows! It is for your satisfaction alone that we, though we were very mighty, had to remain in the house of Matsya Rāja Virāt as servants.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O one of good vows! It is for your satisfaction alone that we, though we were very mighty, had to remain in the house of Matsya Rāj Virāt as servants.

[Ch 7 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Had you not been our elder brother and not been addicted to the gambling, would it have been possible that I, who killed Rajasandha, would have been a cook to Virāt Rajā! Never we had been put to so great a trouble?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Had you not been our elder brother and not been addicted to the gambling, would it have been possible I, who killed Jarāsandha, would have been a cook to Virāt Rāj! Never we had been put to so great a trouble!

[Ch 7 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Never would the mighty armed Arjuna, the Vāsava's son, have acted the part of an actress (a dancer), dressing himself in a female garb, under the name Vrhannalā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Never would the mighty armed Arjuna, the Vāsava’s son, have acted the part of an actress (a dancer), dressing himself in a female garb, under the name Vrihannalā.

[Ch 7 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Alas! What more painful could there be by assuming a human birth, that the hands of Arjuna, that wielded always the Gānḍiva bow, would have worn bracelets befitting a woman? I would have been happy then had I, seeing the braid of hair on Arjuna's head and the collyrium in his eyes, cut off the head of Dhṛtaraśstra?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Alas! What more painful could there be by assuming a human birth that the hands of Arjuna, that wielded always the Gāndīva bow, would have worn bracelets befitting a woman? I would have been happy then had I, seeing the braid of hair on Arjuna’s head and the collyrium in his eyes, cut off the head of

[Ch 7 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the earth! 'Without you, I set fire on the house, named Jautgṛha (a lac-house, as built by Duryodhana in order to burn up the Pāndavas) and, therefore, the vicious Virocana, who wanted to burn us, was himself burnt up. Śrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the earth! Without asking you, I set fire on the house, named Jatugriha (a lac-house, as built by Duryodhana in order to burn up the Pāṇḍavas) and therefore the vicious Virocana, who wanted to burn us, was himself burnt up. Again,

[Ch 7 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again, O Lord of men! similarly, without asking you, I slew Kicaka; this is now the one thing I regret that I could not have killed in the same way the sons of Dhrtarāstra before the public hall.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of men! similarly, without asking you, I slew Kichaka; this is now the one thing I regret that I could not have killed in the same way the sons of Dhritarāstra before the public hall.

[Ch 7 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king of kings! It was simply your stupidity that you liberated Duryodhana and other sons, the great enemies of the Gandharvas, when they had been imprisoned by them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king of kings! It was simply your stupidity that you liberated Duryodhana and other sons, the great enemies of the Gandarbhas, when they had been imprisoned by them.

[Ch 7 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again today you are willing to give wealth for the spiritual benefit of those Duryodhana and others! But, O Lord of the earth, I would never give wealth, even if you request me specially to do this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again to-day you are willing to give wealth for the spiritual benefit of those Duryodhana and others! But, O Lord of the earth, I would never give wealth, even if you request me specially to do this.

[Ch 7 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, Bhima went away. Dharma's son Yudhisthra then consulted with the other three brothers and gave abundance of wealth to Dhratarāstra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, Bhīma went away. Dharma’s son Yudhisthira then consulted with the other three brothers and gave abundance of wealth to Dhritarāstra.

[Ch 7 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► With this sum, the Ambikā's son Dhrāraśstra duly performed the Śrāddha ceremony of his sons and gave away lots of things to the Brāhmins.
NEW CORR ENG ──► With this sum, the Ambikā’s son Dhritarāstra duly performed the Srādh ceremony of his sons and gave away lots of things to the Brāhmaṇas.

[Ch 7 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► King Dhrāraśtra, thus performing all the funeral obsequies, became ready to go early to the forest with Gāndhāri, Kuntī and Vidura.
NEW CORR ENG ──► king Dhritarāstra, thus performing all the funeral obsequies, became ready to go early to the forest with Gāndhārī, Kunti and Vidura.

[Ch 7 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► By the help of Sañjaya, the highly intelligent Dhrtarāstra became informed of the roads of the forest, and then went out of the house. Śūrasena's daughter Kunti, though stopped by her sons, followed them. Bhīma and other Kauravas went along with them weeping up to the banks of the Ganges and thence returned to Hastināpura.
NEW CORR ENG ──► By the help of Sañjaya, the highly intelligent Dhritarāstra became informed of the roads of the forest, and then went out of the house. Sūrasena’s daughter Kunti, though stopped by her sons, followed them. Bhīma and other Kauravas went along with them weeping up to the banks of the Ganges and thence returned to Hastināpura.

[Ch 7 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The ascetics went to the auspicious Śatayūpa hermitage on the banks of the Ganges and building a hut practised tapasyā with their hearts concentrated.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The ascetics went to the auspicious Śatayūpa hermitage on the banks of the Ganges and building a hut practised tapasyā with their hearts concentrated.

[Ch 7 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus six year elapsed when Yudhiştihra, troubled by their bereavements said to his younger brothers:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus six years elapsed when Yudhisthira, troubled by their bereavements, said to his younger brothers :--

[Ch 7 Verse 40-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "I dreamt that our mother Kunti got very lean and thin. Now my mind wants bitterly to see mother, uncle, aunt, the high-souled Vidura and the highly intelligent Sañjaya. If you approve, I want to go to there." Then the five brothers, Pāndu's sons, became desirous to see Kunti, and taking with them Draupadi, Subhadrā, Uttarā, and other persons went to the Śatayūpa hermitage and saw the persons there; but not seeing Vidura, Yudhṣithra asked: "Where is Vidura?" Hearing this Dhāratṣāra said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► “ I dreamt that our mother Kunti got very lean and thin. Now my mind wants bitterly to see mother, uncle, aunt, the high souled Vidura and the highly intelligent Sañjaya. If you approve, I want to go to there.” Then the five brothers, Pānḍu’s sons, became desirous to see Kunti, and taking with them Draupadī, Subhadrā, Uttarā, and other persons went to the Satayūpa hermitage and saw the persons there; but not seeing Vidura, Yudhisthira asked :-- “Where is Vidura?” Hearing this Dhritarāstra said :--

[Ch 7 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Vidura has taken up Vairāgyam (dispassion) and has gone alone to a solitary place and is meditating in his heart the eternal Brahma.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “Vidura has taken up Vairāgyam (dispassion) and has gone alone to a solitary place and is meditating in his heart the eternal Brahmā.”

[Ch 7 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next day while king Yudhiṣṭhira was walking along the banks of the Ganges, he saw in the forest Vidura, engaged in his vow and become lean and thin by his tapasyā; he then exclaimed:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next day while the king Yudhisthira was walking along the banks of the Ganges, he saw in the forest Vidura, engaged in his vow and become lean and thin by his tapasyā; he then exclaimed :--

[Ch 7 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "I am King Yudhisthira; I am saluting you." Holy Vidura heard and remained motionless like a log of wood.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “I am the king Yudhisthira; I am saluting you.” The holy Vidura heard and remained motionless like a log of wood.

[Ch 7 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Within an instant a wonderful halo came out of Vidura's face and entered the mouth of Yudhishira, both of them being Dharma's parts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Within an instant a wonderful halo came out of Vidura’s face and entered the mouth of Yudhisthira, both of them being Dharma’s parts.

[Ch 7 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vidura then died; Yudhishira expressed great sorrow. When Vidura's body was going to be set on fire, a celestial voice was heard: "O king! He was very wise; so he ought not to be burnt; you can go away as you like."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vidura then died; Yudhisthira expressed great sorrow. When the Vidura’s body was going to be set on fire, a celestial voice was heard :--“O king! He was very wise; so he ought not to be burnt; you can go away as you like.”

[Ch 7 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, Yudhiṣhira bathed in the pure Ganges and returned to the Āśrama and informed everything in detail to Dhrāraśstra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, Yudhisthira bathed in the pure Ganges and returned to the Aśrama and informed everything in detail to Dhritarāstra.

[Ch 7 Verse 52-53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► While the Pāṇḍavas were staying in the hermitage with the other inhabitants of the city, Veda Vyāsa, Nārada, and other high-souled Munis came there to Yudhishira. Kuntī then spoke to the auspicious Vyāsa:
NEW CORR ENG ──► While the Pāṇḍavas were staying in the hermitage with the other inhabitants of the city, Vedavyāsa, Nārada, and other high-souled Munis came there to Yudhisthira. Kunti then spoke to the auspicious Vyāsa :--

[Ch 7 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O, Kṛṣṇa! I saw my son Kārṇa, only just when he was born; my mind is being very much tormented for him; so, O great ascetic! Shew him once to me. O highly fortunate One! You alone can do this; so O Lord! Satisfy my heart's desire."
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “O Krisna! I saw my son Karna, only just when he was born; my mind is being very much tormented for him; so, O great ascetic! Show him once to me. O highly fortunate One! You alone can do this; so O Lord! Satisfy my heart’s desire.”

[Ch 7 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Gāndhāri said: “O Muni! I did not see while Duryodhana went to battle; so, O Muni! Show me Duryodhana with his younger brothers.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Gāndhārī said :-- “O Muni! I did not see while Duryodhan went to battle; so, O Muni! Show me Duryodhana with his younger brothers.”

[Ch 7 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Subhadrā said: O Omniscient one! I want very much to see the great hero Abhimanyu, dearer to me than my life even; O great ascetic! Show him once to me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Subhadrā said :-- “O Omniscient one! I want very much to see the great hero Abhimanyu, dearer to me than my life even; O great ascetic! Show him once to me.”

[Ch 7 Verse 57-61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: Satyavati's son Vyāsa Deva, hearing their words, held Prānāyāma (deep breathing exercise) and meditated on the eternal Devi, the force of Brahma. When the evening time came, the Muni invited Yudhisthira and all others to the banks of the Ganges. He then bathed in the Ganges and began to chant hymns in praise of the Devi Brahmamayī Prakṛti, resting on the Puruṣa, the Śrimaddevībhāgavatam Dweller in the Maṇi Dvīpa, with attributes, at the same time transcending them, thus: “O Devi! When Brahmā was not, Viṣṇu was not, Maheśvara was not, nor when existing Indra, Varuna, Kubera, Yama, and Agni, Thou alone existed then; my salutation to Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Satyavatī’s son Vyāsa Deva, hearing their words, held Prānāyama (deep breathing exercise) and meditated on the eternal Devī, the force of Brahmā. When the evening time came, the Muni invited Yudhisthira and all others to the banks of the Ganges. He then bathed in the Ganges and began to chant hymns in praise of the Devī Brahmāmayī Prakriti, resting on the Puruṣa, the Dweller in the Mani Dvīpa, with attributes, at the same time transcending them, thus :-- “O Devī! When Brahmā was not, Viṣṇu was not, Maheśvara was not, nor when existing lndra, Varuna, Kuvera, Yama, and Agnī, Thou alone existed then; my salutation to Thee.

[Ch 7 Verse 62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When there existed not water, Vāyu, ether, earth and their Gunas, taste, smell etc., when there were no senses, mind, Buddhi, Ahariṅkāra; when there existed no Sun, Moon nor anything, Thou alone existed then; so, O Devi! I bow down again and again to Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When there existed not water, Vāyu, ether, earth and their Guṇas, taste, smell, etc., when there were no senses, mind, Buddhi, Ahamkāra; when there existed no Sun, Moon nor anything, Thou alone existed then; so, O Devī! I bow down again and again to Thee.

[Ch 7 Verse 63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! Thou holdest all these visible Jiva lokas in the cosmic Hiranyagarbha; again Thou bringest this Hiranyagarbha, the sum-total of Linga Šarīras (the subtle bodies), with the Gunas Sattva, Rajas and Tamas to a state of equilibrium named Sāmyāvasthā and remainest quite independent and apart for a Kalpa period. At that time even those that are possessed of the power of great discrimination and dispassion cannot fathom Thy nature.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! Thou holdest all these visible Jīva lokas in the cosmic Hiraṇyagarbha; again Thou bringest this Hiraṇyagarbha, the sum-total of Liṅga Sarīras (the subtle bodies), with the Guṇas Sattva, Rajas and Tamas to a state of equilibrium named Sāmyāvasthā and remainest quite independent and apart for a Kalpa period. At that time even those that are possessed of the power of great discrimination and dispassion cannot fathom Thy nature.

[Ch 7 Verse 64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! These persons are praying to me to see their dead once; but I am quite incapable to do that. So kindly shew them their departed ones early."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! These persons are praying to me to see their dead ones; but I am quite incapable to do that. So kindly shew them their departed ones early.”

[Ch 7 Verse 65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► While Vyāsa praised thus the Devi, the Devi Mahāmāyā, the Lady of the Universe, of the nature of Universal Consciousness called all the departed ones from the Heavens and shewed them to their relatives.
NEW CORR ENG ──► While Vyāsa praised thus the Devī, the Devī Mahāmāyā, the Lady of the Universe, of the nature of Universal Consciousness called all the departed ones from the Heavens and showed them to their relatives.

[Ch 7 Verse 66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Kunti, Gāndhāri, Subhadrā, Uttarā, and the Pāndavas became very glad to see their relatives come to them again.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Kunti, Gāndhārī, Subhadrā, Uttarā, and the Paṇḍavas became very glad to see their relatives come to them again.

[Ch 7 Verse 67]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa, of indomitable valour, again remembering Mahāmāyā, bade good bye to the departed ones; it seemed then, a great magic had occurred.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa, of indomitable valour, again remembering Mahāmāyā, bade good bye to the departed ones; it seemed then, a great magic had occurred.

[Ch 7 Verse 68]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Pāndavas and the Munis bade good bye to each other and went to their respective places. King Yudhiṣṭhira talked on the way about Vyāsa and ultimately came to Hastinā. Thus ends the Seventh Chapter of the Second Book on shewing the departed ones in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses. Śrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Paṇḍavas and the Munis bade good bye to each other and went to their respective places. The king Yudhisthira talked on the way about Vyāsa and ultimately came to Hastinā. (58-68.) Thus ends the seventh chapter of the Second Skandha on shewing the departed ones in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.
