CHAPTER VI

On the Greatness of Rudrāksam

ईश्वर उवाच

महासेन कुशप्राध्यपूत्राजीवादय: परे ।

क्रशक्षस्य तु नैको5पि कलामहिति पोडशीम् ॥ १ ॥

पुरुभाग्यां यथा विद्याप्रद्विणां च यथा रखि: ।

नदीनीं तु यथा गंगा मुपनीनीं कशयो यथा ॥ २ ॥

उच्चै: श्रवा यासंधानं सेवानामीशो यथा ।

देबीनीं तु यथा गौरी तद्व्येष्टिमं घवेत् ॥ ३ ॥

Iśvara said: O Kārtikeya! Kuśagranthi, Jīvapattrī and other rosaries cannot compare to one-sixteenth part of the Rudrāksa rosary. As Viṣnu is the best of all the Puruṣas, the Gaṅgā is the best of all the rivers, Kaśyapa, amongst the Munis, Ucchaishrāvā amongst the horses, Mahā Deva amongst the Devas, Bhagavati amongst the Devīs, so the Rudrāksam rosary is the Best of all the rosaries.

नात: परतरं स्तोत्रे नात: परतरं ब्रतम् ।

अक्ष्येषु च दानेषु रूक्षस्तु विशिष्यते ॥ ४ ॥

शिषयभक्ताय शांताय दद्याद्वाक्षमुतनम् ।

तस्य पुण्यकल्यांतं न चाहं वकुभुत्मधे ॥ ५ ॥

All the furtis that occur by reading the stotras and holding all the Vratas, are obtained by wearing the Rudrāksam bead. At the time of making the Aksaya gift, the Rudrāksam bead is capable of giving high merits. The merit that accrues by giving Rudrāksam to a peaceful devotee of Śiva, cannot be expressed in words.

भुतराश्रक्षकदाय सरस्वसं संप्रयच्छिति ।

त्रिःसपत्कुलमुद्धून सूरहोकं स गच्छिति ॥ 6 ॥

यस्य भाले विभूतितं नागो रहाश्रधारणम् ।

न ग्रीभोधैवने पूता स प्रियः श्वचाधायः ॥ 7 ॥

If anybody gives food to a man holding the Rudrāksam rosary, his twenty one generations are uplifted and he ultimately becomes able to live in

the Rudra Loka. He who does not apply ashes on his forehead and who does not hold Rudrāksam and is averse to the worship of Śiva is inferior to a cāndāla.

खाद्यमांसं विद्यमघं संगच्छनंत्यजापिनि ।

पातक्रेध्यो विम्युन्तेरा हन्रशे शिरसि स्थिते ॥ 8 ॥

सर्वेत्रज्ञपोदानवेदभ्यासेरच यत्कलम् ।

तत्कलं लभते सहो रूहास्त्रस्य तु धाराणत् ॥ 9 ॥

If Rudrāksam be placed on the head then the flesh-eaters, drunkards, and the associates with the vicious become freed of their sins. Whatever fruits are obtained by performing various sacrifices, asceticism and the study of the Vedas are easily attained by simply holding the Rudrāksam rosary.

वैदेश्वतुर्षियंतुर्णये पुराणपठनेन च ।

यत्तीर्वसेवनेत्र सर्विवहाधिर्भितना ॥ १ ० ॥

तत्पुर्णं लभते सहो हन्राक्षस्य तु धाणत् ।

प्रयाणकाले हर्रक्षं बंधीयत्वा प्रिवेदीद् ॥ १ १ ॥

स हर्वतमवाप्नोति पुजनंन न विहते ।

Whatever merits are obtained by reading the four Vedas and all the Purāṇas and bathing in all the Tirthas an the results that are obtained by immense practise in learning all are, obtained by wearing Rudrāksam. If at the time of death, one wears Rudrāksam and dies, one attains Rudrahood. One has not to take again one's birth.

रूत्राक्षं धार्यल्केने बाढ़ोंां विषयो यदि ॥ 12 ॥

कुलैकविंगमुन्त्रायं रूत्रोके वसेत्रः ।

ब्राणणो वाथि चंडालो निर्गुणः सगुणीच च ॥ 13 ॥

भस्मक्रहधान्थी च: स देवल्यं शिवं जत्रेत् ।

शुचिवर्ण्यशिवर्षीत त्यातभप्रत्यस्य भक्रकः ॥ 14 ॥

मल्लो वाय्य चांडालो युतो वा संपोतकः ।

रहब्राक्षधाणदेव स रहो नात्र संशयः ॥ 15 ॥

Book XI Chapter VI

If anybody dies by holding Rudraksam on his neck or one his two arms, he uplifts his twenty-one generations and lives in the Rudra Loka. Be he a Brāhmaṇa or a Cāndāla, be he with qualities or without qualities, if he applies ashes to his body and holds Rudraksam, he surely attains Śivahood. Be he pure or impure; whether he eats uneatables or be he a Mleccha or a Cāndāla or a Great Sinner, any body if he holds Rudraksam is surely equal to Rudra. There is no doubt in this.

शिरसा धारिते कोटि: कर्णयोदrial कोटय: ।

शतकाटिरौले बढ़ो मूर्दि कोटिसहकवम् ॥ १६ ॥

अयुतं चोपवीते तु लक्षकोटिभुंचे स्थिते ।

मणिबब्धे तु हज्ञो मोक्षसाधनकः पय: ॥ १७ ॥

If any body holds Rudrāksam on his head he gets Kotī times the fruits; on his ears ten Kotī times the fruit, on his neck, one hundred Kotī times the fruit; on his thread, ayuta times the fruit; on his arm, one lākh Kotī times the fruit and if one wears Rudrāksam on one's wrist, one attains Mokṣa.

क्रशक्ष्यापको भूत्वा यत्क्रविष्कर्मे वैदिकम् ।

कुर्वीविप्र: सदा भवस्या महदानोति तत्कृष्म् ॥ 18 ॥

क्रशक्ष्मालिकां कपटे धारयेद्धान्विति: ।

पापकर्मा तु यो तिनव से मुक्तः सर्वक्रवभात् ॥ 19 ॥

Whatever acts, motioned in the Vedas be performed with Rudrāksam on, the fruits obtained are unbounded. Even if a man be without any Bhakti and if he wears on his neck the Rudrāksa rosary though he does always vicious acts, he becomes freed of the bondage of this world.

रहाखर्षितचेता यो रहक्षस्तेन वै पृतः ।

उसौ माहेश्यो लोके नमयः स् तु लिग्वत् ॥ २० ॥

अविदो वा सविदो वा रहाश्य सु पाणगत् ।

शिललोक प्रपतेत कीकटे गर्दीये यथा ॥ 21 ॥

Even if a man does not hold Rudrāksa but if he be always full of devotion towards the Rudrāksam, he attains the fruit that is got by wearing the Rudrāksam and he attains the Śiva Loka and is honoured like Śiva. As in the county of Kikata, an ash which used to carry Rudrāksam seed got Śivahood after his death, so any man, whether he

be a Jānāi (wise) or Ajñāni (unwise), gets Śivahood if he holds Rudrāksam. There is no doubt in this."

स्कन्द उवाच

रूत्राक्षान्स्वद्धे देव गर्दभः केन हेतुना ।

कीकटे केन वा दत्तस्वदूषि परमेश्वा ॥ 22 ॥

Skanda said: “O God! How is it that in the county of Kikata (Bihar), an ass had to carry Rudrāksa; who gave him the Rudrāksams! And what for did he hold that?”

श्रीभरावानुवाच

शृणु पुरु पुरावृतं गर्दीभे जिव्यपवर्ते ।

धत्ते रूहाक्षभारं तु वाहितः पर्यकेतन तु ॥ 23 ॥

श्रातोरसमयर्तमूतरं वोबुं पतितवान्यविं ।

प्राणीस्पत्क्तिबन्नस्तु शूल्याणिर्महेश्वर: ॥ 24 ॥

Bhagavān Iśvara said: “O Son! Now hear the history of the case. In the Vindhya mountain one ass used to carry the load of Rudrāksam of a traveller. Once the ass felt tired and became unable to carry the load and fell down on the road and died.

मत्स्यादामहासेन मदन्तिकमुपगतः ।

यावद्वतारास्यसंख्यानं रजाणाङ्गा सुतुलंभम् ॥ 25 ॥

तावयुगासहसानि शिवलोके महीयते ।

स्वाशिष्यभसु वर्भलयं नाशिष्येभः कदाचन ॥ 26 ॥

After his death the ass came to Me by My Grace, becoming Maheśvara with trident in his hand and with three eyes. O Kārtikeya! As many faces as there are in the Rudrāksam, for so many thousand Yugas the holder resides with honour in the Śiva Loka.

अभक्तेयोर्पि मूर्षेयः क्वात्वित्र प्रकाशयेत् ।

अभक्तो वास्तु भक्तो वा नीयो नीचतलेप्रिय व ॥ 27 ॥

रहाखान्यायेहतु मुच्यते सर्वपातकैः ।

रहाखान्याणं पुण्यं केन वा सरुर्ग भवेत् ॥ 28 ॥

One should declare the greatness of Rudrāksam to one's own disciple never to disclose its glories to one who is not a disciple nor a devotee of Rudrāksam nor to him who is an illiterate brute. Be he Bhakta or not a Bhakta, be he low or very low, if he holds Rudrāksam, then he is freed from

all sins. No equal can be to the merit of him who holds the Rudrākṣams.

महाबनिर्दं प्रगुर्भन्यस्तचद्शिनः ।

सहर्ष धारयेघस्तु कराश्राणां धृतन्तः ॥ 29 ॥

The Munis, the Seers of truth, describe this holding on of Rudrāksam as a very great vow. He who makes a vow to hold one thousand Rudrāksam, becomes like Rudra; the Devas bow down before him.

तं नमिति सुरा: सर्वे यथा रूक्तलैव स: ।

अभावे तु सहस्य बाह्योः घोडण योडण ॥ ३० ॥

एक शिलायां करयोद्रिंण झाद्वीश् झाद्वीश् तु ।

ब्रात्रिशल्कंदेशे तु चत्वारिशच्च मलले ॥ ३१ ॥

एकैकं कर्णोय: घट् घट् वक्षस्य्योतरं शतम् ।

यो धारयति रूझाङ्गन्हरवल्स तु पूच्यते ॥ ३२ ॥

If thousand Rudrāksams be not obtained, one should hold at least sixteen Rudrāksams on each arm, one Rudrāksam on the cow hair; on the two hands, twelve on each; thirty-two on the neck; forty on the head; six on each ear and one hundred and eight Rudrāksams on the breast; and then he becomes entitled to worship like Rudra.

सुक्ताप्रवालस्फटिकीणयेड्वैयाकाङ्गे: ।

समतान्यारयेद्धन्तु हनक्षान्स शिको भवेत् ॥ 33 ॥

कैल्लानपि हनक्षान्यद्याल्याद्धर्षिति वः ।

तं न सूर्गोति पापानि तमांसीव विषावसुम् ॥ 34 ॥

If any body holds Rudrāksam together with pearls, Prabāla, crystal, silver, gold and gem (lapis lazuli) he becomes a manifestation of Śiva. If a body, through laziness even, holds Rudrāksam, the sin cannot touch him as darkness cannot come near light.

हज्रास्यालया मनो जणो5नतफलप्रद: ।

यस्यांे नासि हज्राक एको0पि बहुप्रयव: ॥ 35 ॥

तस्य जन निरर्थं स्यातिपुण्डूरितं यथा ।

हज्राई मसतेक धूला शिर:स्नानं करोति वः ॥ 36 ॥

If any body makes makes Japam of a mantram with a Rudrāksa rosary, he gets unbounded results. Such a merit giving Rudrāksam, if one such Rudrāksam be not found in any one's body, his life becomes useless, like a man who is void of

Tripunḍraka (three curved horizontal marks made on the forehead by the worshippers or Śiva).

गड़ान्तानफल तस्य जायते नास संगस्य: ।

एकवकंत्र: पड़बकंत्र एकादगुसुखा: बरे ॥ 37 ॥

चतुर्वीरमुखाः केचिद्रुढास्ण लोकपूर्विताः ।

भक्त्या संपूज्यते नित्यं रुद्राश्रः शंकारात्मकः ॥ 38 ॥

If any body simply washes his head all over with Rudrāksam on, he gets the fruit of bathing in the eleven faced and fourteen faced Rudrāksam is Śankara made manifest; so it entitled to worship by all. The Rudrāksam is Śankara made manifest; so it is always worshipped with devotion.

दरिंदं वायि पुरुषं राजानं कुकते भुषि ।

अत्र ते कार्यविधिया पुराणं मन्तुतमम् ॥ ३९ ॥

The greatness of Rudrāksam is such as it can make a king out of a poor man. On this point, I will tell you an excellent Purānic anecdote.

कोसलेषु बिजः ककिष्रित्रिनाश इति श्रुतः ।

महाभनी च धर्मात्मा वेददेवंगपारगः ॥ ४० ॥

यजकृदीक्षिततस्य तनयः सुन्दारकृति: ।

नानागुपानिधि: ख्याततरूण: कामसुन्दरः ॥ 4 1 ॥

There was a Brāhimin, named Girinātha in the country of Kosala. He was proficient in the Vedas and Vedāngas, religious and very rich He used to perform sacrifices. He had a beautiful son named Gunanidhi. The son gradually entered into his youth and looked beautiful like Kandarpa, the God of Love.

गुरो: सुधिषणस्याय पर्नी मुक्तावलीमाय ।

मोहयामास रूपेण यौवेनेन मदेन च ॥ 4 2 ॥

संगतनु तया सार्थ किशऊकालं ततो भिया ।

विधं ददी च गुरावे येये पश्चानु निर्भये: ॥ 4 3 ॥

यदा माता पिता कर्म किशिज्ञानाति यक्षणे ।

मातरं पितरं चापि मारयामास तद्धिषण् ॥ 4 4 ॥

While he was studying at his Guru Suddhisana's house, he, by his beauty and youth captivated the mind of his Guru's wife named Muktāvali. The Guru's wife became so much enchanted by his extraordinary beauty that she, being unable to control herself, mixed with him and for some time remained with him in secret enjoyment. Then

feeling inconveniences, due to the fear of his Guru, to enjoy her freely, used poison to the Guru, killed him and then he began to live freely with her. Next when his father, mother came to know about this, he put to death instantly his father and mother, administering poison to them.

नानाविलसमोर्गेश चाते ऋल्यये ततः ।

बाहाणानां गृहे चौर्यं चकार स तदा खलः ॥ 4 5 ॥

सुरायामवोमनस्तदा ज्ञातिवहिकृतः ।

ग्रामाविक्यासितः सर्वैस्तदा सो०भूद्धोचरः ॥ 4 6 ॥

मुक्तावल्य तया सार्थं जगाना गहनं वनम् ।

मार्ग सिचतो ह्वललोभाज्ञान ब्राह्मणावृद्धि ॥ 47 ॥

एवं बहुगते काले ममार स तद्धधमः ।

He became addicted to various pleasures and his wealth was exhausted gradually. He began to steal in Brāhmanas' houses and became addicted very much to drinking. His relatives outcasted him from the society for his bad behaviour and banished him outside the town. He then went into a dense forest with Muktāvalī; and he began to kill the Brāhmins for their wealth. Thus a long time passed away; when at last he fell into the jaws of death.

नेतुं तं ययमृताश्व समामगमुः सहसर्शः ॥ 48 ॥

शिलाकोकाधिविज्ञापतश्वे च समागतः ।

तयोः परस्यं वाटो बध्व पिंरिजासुतः ॥ 49 ॥

ययमृतासदा प्रोषु: पुणयमस्य किमसि हि ।

ब्रुवतु सेवकाः शंभोपेर्धिने नेतृमिच्छय ॥ 50 ॥

शिवद्धृतासदा प्रोषुयं यस्मिन्थले मृतः ।

द्रशहस्ताद्यो भूमे मृक्षास्तत्र चास्ति हि ॥ 51 ॥

Then to take him to the region of Death, thousands of the Yama's messengers came; at the same time the Śiva's messengers came from Śiva-Loka. O Kārtikeya! A quarrel then ensued between both the parties of Yama and Śiva, The Yama's messengers, then, said: "O Servers of Śambhu! What are the merits of this man that you have come to take him? First speak to us of his merits." Śiva's messengers — "Fifteen feet below the ground where this man died, there exists the Rudrāksam. ततृष्यावेन हे तृता नेधाम: शिवसिश्रिय् । ततो विमानाकृष्टि दिव्यक्रधरो द्विजः ॥ 52 ॥ गतो गुणविधिर्वैतै: सहितः शंकारलयम् । इति क्रह्माहात्मकं कथितं तत सुजत ॥ 53 ॥

O Yamā's messengers! By the influence of that Rudrāksam, all his sins are destroyed; and we have come to take him to Śiva." Then the Brahmin Gunaridhi assumed a divine form and, getting on an aerial car went with Śiva's messengers before Śiva.

एवं क्रह्मामहिमा समासात्कथितो मया ।

सर्वपार्थक्यकतो महापुणप्रकल्पदः ॥ ५४ ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीयागवते महापुराणे एकादशस्कन्धे

फर्टीउध्वाय: ॥ 55 ॥

O One of good vows! Thus I have described briefly to you the greatness of Rudrāksam. This is capable to remove all sorts of sins and yield great merits.

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the Greatness of Rudrāksams in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevithāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

