[Ch 6 Verse 1-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Iśvara said: O Kārtikeya! Kuśagranthi, Jīvapattrī and other rosaries cannot compare to one-sixteenth part of the Rudrāksa rosary. As Viṣnu is the best of all the Puruṣas, the Gaṅgā is the best of all the rivers, Kaśyapa, amongst the Munis, Ucchaishrāvā amongst the horses, Mahā Deva amongst the Devas, Bhagavati amongst the Devīs, so the Rudrāksam rosary is the Best of all the rosaries.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Īśvara said :-- O Kārtikeya! Kuśagranthi, Jīvapattrī and other rosaries cannot compare to one-sixteenth part of the Rudrākṣa rosary. As Viṣṇu is the best of all the Puruṣas, the Gaṅgā is the best of all the rivers, Kaśyapa, amongst the Munis, Uccaiḥsravā amongst the horses, Mahā Deva amongst the Devas, Bhagavatī amongst the Devīs, so the Rudrākṣam rosary is the best of all the rosaries.

[Ch 6 Verse 4-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► All the furtis that occur by reading the stotras and holding all the Vratas, are obtained by wearing the Rudrāksam bead. At the time of making the Aksaya gift, the Rudrāksam bead is capable of giving high merits. The merit that accrues by giving Rudrāksam to a peaceful devotee of Śiva, cannot be expressed in words.
NEW CORR ENG ──► All the fruits that occur by reading the stotras and holding all the Vratas, are obtained by wearing the Rudrākṣam bead. At the time of making the Akṣaya gift, the Rudrākṣam bead is capable of giving high merits. The merit that accrues by giving Rudrākṣam to a peaceful devotee of Śiva, cannot be expressed in words.

[Ch 6 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If anybody gives food to a man holding the Rudrāksam rosary, his twenty one generations are uplifted and he ultimately becomes able to live in the Rudra Loka. He who does not apply ashes on his forehead and who does not hold Rudrāksam and is averse to the worship of Śiva is inferior to a cāndāla.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If anybody gives food to a man holding the Rudrākṣam rosary, his twenty one generations are uplifted and he ultimately becomes able to live in the Rudrā Loka. He who does not apply ashes on his forehead and who does not hold Rudrākṣam and is averse to the worship of Śiva is inferior to a cāṇḍāla.

[Ch 6 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If Rudrāksam be placed on the head then the flesh-eaters, drunkards, and the associates with the vicious become freed of their sins. Whatever fruits are obtained by performing various sacrifices, asceticism and the study of the Vedas are easily attained by simply holding the Rudrāksam rosary.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If Rudrākṣam be placed on the head then the flesh-eaters, drunkards, and the associates with the vicious become freed of their sins. Whatever fruits are obtained by performing various sacrifices, asceticism and the study of the Vedas are easily attained by simply holding the Rudrākṣam rosary.

[Ch 6 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whatever merits are obtained by reading the four Vedas and all the Purāṇas and bathing in all the Tirthas an the results that are obtained by immense practise in learning all are, obtained by wearing Rudrāksam. If at the time of death, one wears Rudrāksam and dies, one attains Rudrahood. One has not to take again one's birth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whatever merits are obtained by reading the four Vedas and all the Purāṇas and bathing in all the Tīrthas and the results that are obtained by immense practice in learning all are obtained by wearing Rudrākṣam. If at the time of death, one wears Rudrākṣam and dies, one attains Rudrahood. One has not to take again one’s birth.

[Ch 6 Verse 12-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If anybody dies by holding Rudraksam on his neck or one his two arms, he uplifts his twenty-one generations and lives in the Rudra Loka. Be he a Brāhmaṇa or a Cāndāla, be he with qualities or without qualities, if he applies ashes to his body and holds Rudraksam, he surely attains Śivahood. Be he pure or impure; whether he eats uneatables or be he a Mleccha or a Cāndāla or a Great Sinner, any body if he holds Rudraksam is surely equal to Rudra. There is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If anybody dies by holding Rudrākṣam on his neck or on his two arms, he uplifts his twenty-one generations and lives in the Rudra Loka. Be he a Brāhmaṇ or a Cāṇḍāla, be he with qualities or without qualities, if he applies ashes to his body and holds Rudrākṣam he surely attains Śivahood. Be he pure or impure; whether he eats uneatables or be he a Mlecha or a Cāṇḍāla or a Great Sinner, any body if he holds Rudrākṣam is surely equal to Rudra. There is no doubt in this.

[Ch 6 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If any body holds Rudrāksam on his head he gets Kotī times the fruits; on his ears ten Kotī times the fruit, on his neck, one hundred Kotī times the fruit; on his thread, ayuta times the fruit; on his arm, one lākh Kotī times the fruit and if one wears Rudrāksam on one's wrist, one attains Mokṣa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If any body holds Rudrākṣam on his head he gets Koṭi times the fruit; on his ears, ten Koṭi times the fruit, on his neck, one hundred Koṭi times the fruit; on his holy thread, ayuta times the fruit; on his arm, one lākh Koṭi times the fruit and if one wears Rudrākṣam on one’s wrist, one attains Mokṣa.

[Ch 6 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whatever acts, motioned in the Vedas be performed with Rudrāksam on, the fruits obtained are unbounded. Even if a man be without any Bhakti and if he wears on his neck the Rudrāksa rosary though he does always vicious acts, he becomes freed of the bondage of this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whatever acts, mentioned in the Vedas be performed with Rudrākṣam on, the fruits obtained are unbounded. Even if a man be without any Bhakti and if he wears on his neck the Rudrākṣa rosary though he does always vicious acts, he becomes freed of the bondage of this world.

[Ch 6 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Even if a man does not hold Rudrāksa but if he be always full of devotion towards the Rudrāksam, he attains the fruit that is got by wearing the Rudrāksam and he attains the Śiva Loka and is honoured like Śiva. As in the county of Kikata, an ash which used to carry Rudrāksam seed got Śivahood after his death, so any man, whether he be a Jānāi (wise) or Ajñāni (unwise), gets Śivahood if he holds Rudrāksam. There is no doubt in this."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Even if a man does not hold Rudrākṣa but if he be always full of devotion towards the Rudrākṣam, he attains the fruit that is got by wearing the Rudrākṣam and he attains the Śiva Loka and is honoured like Śiva. As in the country of Kīkata, an ass which used to carry Rudrākṣam seed got Śivahood after his death, so any man, whether he be a Jñani (wise) or Ajñāni (unwise), gets Śivahood if he holds Rudrākṣam. There is no doubt in this.

[Ch 6 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Skanda said: “O God! How is it that in the county of Kikata (Bihar), an ass had to carry Rudrāksa; who gave him the Rudrāksams! And what for did he hold that?”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Skanda said :-- “O God! How is it that in the country of Kīkaṭa (Bihar), an ass had to carry Rudrākṣa; who gave him the Rudrākṣams! And what for did he hold that?”

[Ch 6 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhagavān Iśvara said: “O Son! Now hear the history of the case. In the Vindhya mountain one ass used to carry the load of Rudrāksam of a traveller. Once the ass felt tired and became unable to carry the load and fell down on the road and died.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bhagavān Īśvara said :-- O Son! Now hear the history of the case. In the Bindhya mountain one ass used to carry the load of Rudrākṣam of a traveller. Once the ass felt tired and became unable to carry the load and fell down on the road and died.

[Ch 6 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After his death the ass came to Me by My Grace, becoming Maheśvara with trident in his hand and with three eyes. O Kārtikeya! As many faces as there are in the Rudrāksam, for so many thousand Yugas the holder resides with honour in the Śiva Loka.
NEW CORR ENG ──► After his death the ass came to Me by My Grace, becoming Maheśvara with trident in his hand and with three eyes. O Kārtikeya! As many faces as there are in the Rudrākṣam, for so many thousand Yugas the holder resides with honour in the Śiva Loka.

[Ch 6 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One should declare the greatness of Rudrāksam to one's own disciple never to disclose its glories to one who is not a disciple nor a devotee of Rudrāksam nor to him who is an illiterate brute. Be he Bhakta or not a Bhakta, be he low or very low, if he holds Rudrāksam, then he is freed from all sins. No equal can be to the merit of him who holds the Rudrākṣams.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One should declare the greatness of Rudrākṣam to one’s own disciple; never to disclose its glories to one who is not a disciple nor a devotee of Rudrākṣam nor to him who is an illiterate brute. Be he a Bhakta or not a Bhakta, be be low or very low, if he holds Rudrākṣam then he is freed from all sins. No equal can be to the merit of him who holds the Rudrākṣams.

[Ch 6 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Munis, the Seers of truth, describe this holding on of Rudrāksam as a very great vow. He who makes a vow to hold one thousand Rudrāksam, becomes like Rudra; the Devas bow down before him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Munis, the Seers of truth, describe this holding on of Rudrākṣam as a very great vow. He who makes a vow to hold one thousand Rudrākṣams, becomes like Rudra; the Devas bow down before him.

[Ch 6 Verse 30-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If thousand Rudrāksams be not obtained, one should hold at least sixteen Rudrāksams on each arm, one Rudrāksam on the cow hair; on the two hands, twelve on each; thirty-two on the neck; forty on the head; six on each ear and one hundred and eight Rudrāksams on the breast; and then he becomes entitled to worship like Rudra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If thousand Rudrākṣams be not obtained, one should hold at least sixteen Rudrākṣams on each arm, one Rudrākṣam on the crown hair; on the two hands, twelve on each; thirty-two on the neck; forty on the head; six on each ear and one hundred and eight Rudrākṣams on the breast; and then he becomes entitled to worship like Rudra.

[Ch 6 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If any body holds Rudrāksam together with pearls, Prabāla, crystal, silver, gold and gem (lapis lazuli) he becomes a manifestation of Śiva. If a body, through laziness even, holds Rudrāksam, the sin cannot touch him as darkness cannot come near light.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If any body holds Rudrākṣam together with pearls, Prabāla, crystal, silver, gold and gem (lapis lazuli), he becomes a manifestation of Śiva. If a body, through laziness even, holds Rudrākṣam, the sin cannot touch him as darkness cannot come near light.

[Ch 6 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If any body makes makes Japam of a mantram with a Rudrāksa rosary, he gets unbounded results. Such a merit giving Rudrāksam, if one such Rudrāksam be not found in any one's body, his life becomes useless, like a man who is void of Tripunḍraka (three curved horizontal marks made on the forehead by the worshippers or Śiva).
NEW CORR ENG ──► If any body makes japam of a mantram with a Rudrākṣa rosary, he gets unbounded results. Such a merit giving Rudrākṣam, if one such Rudrākṣam be not found in any one’s body, his life becomes useless, like a man who is void of Tripuṇḍrak (three curved horizontal marks made on the forehead by the worshippers of Śiva).

[Ch 6 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If any body simply washes his head all over with Rudrāksam on, he gets the fruit of bathing in the eleven faced and fourteen faced Rudrāksam is Śankara made manifest; so it entitled to worship by all. The Rudrāksam is Śankara made manifest; so it is always worshipped with devotion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If any body simply washes his head all over with Rudrākṣam on, he gets the fruit of bathing in the Ganges. There is no doubt in this. One faced Rudrākṣam, the five faced, eleven faced and fourteen faced Rudrākṣams are highly meritorious and entitled to worship by all. The Rudrākṣam is Śaṅkara made manifest; so it is always worshipped with devotion.

[Ch 6 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The greatness of Rudrāksam is such as it can make a king out of a poor man. On this point, I will tell you an excellent Purānic anecdote.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The greatness of Rudrākṣam is such as it can make a king out of a poor man. On this point, I will tell you an excellent Purānic anecdote.

[Ch 6 Verse 40-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There was a Brāhimin, named Girinātha in the country of Kosala. He was proficient in the Vedas and Vedāngas, religious and very rich He used to perform sacrifices. He had a beautiful son named Gunanidhi. The son gradually entered into his youth and looked beautiful like Kandarpa, the God of Love.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There was a Brāhmin, named Girinātha in the country of Kosala. He was proficient in the Vedas and Vedāmgas, religious and very rich. He used to perform sacrifices. He had a beautiful son named Guṇanidhi. The son gradually entered into his youth and looked beautiful like Kandarpa, the God of Love.

[Ch 6 Verse 42-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► While he was studying at his Guru Suddhisana's house, he, by his beauty and youth captivated the mind of his Guru's wife named Muktāvali. The Guru's wife became so much enchanted by his extraordinary beauty that she, being unable to control herself, mixed with him and for some time remained with him in secret enjoyment. Then feeling inconveniences, due to the fear of his Guru, to enjoy her freely, used poison to the Guru, killed him and then he began to live freely with her. Next when his father, mother came to know about this, he put to death instantly his father and mother, administering poison to them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► While he was studying at his Guru Sudhiṣaṇa’s house, he, by his beauty and youth captivated the mind of his Guru’s wife named Muktāvalī. The Guru’s wife became so much enchanted by his extraordinary beauty that she, being unable to control herself, mixed with him and for some time remained with him in secret enjoyment. Then feeling inconveniences, due to the fear of. his Guru, to enjoy her freely, used poison to the Guru, killed him and then he began to live freely with her. Next when his father, mother came to know about this, he put to death instantly his father and mother, administering poison to them.

[Ch 6 Verse 45-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He became addicted to various pleasures and his wealth was exhausted gradually. He began to steal in Brāhmanas' houses and became addicted very much to drinking. His relatives outcasted him from the society for his bad behaviour and banished him outside the town. He then went into a dense forest with Muktāvalī; and he began to kill the Brāhmins for their wealth. Thus a long time passed away; when at last he fell into the jaws of death.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He became addicted to various pleasures and his wealth was exhausted gradually. He began to steal in Brāhmaṇś houses and became addicted very much to drinking. His relatives outcasted him from the society for his bad behaviour and banished him outside the town. He then went into a dense forest with Muktāvalī; and he began to kill the Brāhmins for their wealth. Thus a long time passed away; when at last he fell into the jaws of death.

[Ch 6 Verse 48-53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Yamā's messengers! By the influence of that Rudrāksam, all his sins are destroyed; and we have come to take him to Śiva." Then the Brahmin Gunaridhi assumed a divine form and, getting on an aerial car went with Śiva's messengers before Śiva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Yama’s messengers! By the influence of that Rudrākṣam, all his sins are destroyed; and we have come to take him to Śiva.” Then the Brāhmin Guṇanidhi assumed a divine form and, getting on an aerial car went with Śiva’s messengers before Śiva.

[Ch 6 Verse 54-55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O One of good vows! Thus I have described briefly to you the greatness of Rudrāksam. This is capable to remove all sorts of sins and yield great merits. Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the Greatness of Rudrāksams in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevithāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O One of good vows! Thus I have described briefly to you the greatness of Rudrākṣam. This is capable to remove all sorts of sins and yield great merits. Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the Greatness of Rudrākṣams in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahārṣi Veda Vyāsa.
