[Ch 19 Verse 1-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brahma! I am Visnu, I am Brahmā, I am Rudra, thus our I-ness Aharikāra has blinded our eyesight; and we are made unable to recognise That Eternal Highest Self.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brahmā! I am Viṣṇu, I am Brahmā, I am Rudra, thus our I-ness ahamkāra has blinded our eyesight; and we are made unable to recognise That Eternal Highest Self.

[Ch 19 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As the wooden dolls dance according to the will of the player, the magician, I also am similarly fascinated by the Māyā and am thus incessantly rolling about like a dependent man.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As the wooden dolls dance according to the will of the player, the magician, I also am similarly fascinated by the Māyā and am thus incessantly rolling about like a dependent man.

[Ch 19 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brahma! In the beginning of the Kalpa, Maheśvara, You and I saw the wonderful unspeakable form and glory of that Highest Self at the time of Rāsamandala in the Māni Dvipa where there was the Mandāra Tree and the Devas assembled. Then I also saw that wonderful thing a second time in the Sudh\( ^{2} \):nava ocean of nectar, and the most wonderful of it is this: that until we were able to See that Form, we did not hear anything of Her before!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brahmā :-- In the beginning of the Kalpa, Maheśvara, You and I saw the wonderful unspeakable form and glory of that Highest Self at the time of Rāsamandala in the Māni Dvīpa where there was the Mandāra Tree and the Devas assembled. Then I also saw that wonderful thing a second time in the Sudhārnava ocean of nectar, and the most wonderful of it is this, that until we were able to See that Form, we did not hear anything of Her before!

[Ch 19 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Devas! To-day do you all remember that Prime Force, the Highest Self, that all beneficent Force that yields all good and auspicious things; That Very Force will fulfill now all your desires.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Devas! Today do you all remember that Prime Force, the Highest Self, that all beneficent Force that yields all good and auspicious things; That Very Force will fulfill now all your desires.

[Ch 19 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! No sooner the Bhagavān Hari addressed thus, Brahmā and the other Devas at once mentally began to meditate on that Eternal Yoga Māyā, the Goddess of the Universe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! No sooner the Bhagavān Hari addressed thus, Brahmā and the other Devas at once mentally began to meditate on that Eternal Yoga Māyā, the Goddess of the Universe.

[Ch 19 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Being thus meditated, at once appeared before their eyesight the Devi, the Goddess of the Universe, whose colours were like the blood red Java flower, holding in two of Her hands noose, hook, or goad, while the third hand indicated favour and the fourth hand bade all discard every sort of fear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Being thus meditated, at once appeared before their eyesight the Devī, the Goddess of the Universe, whose colours were like the blood red Javā flower, holding in two of Her hands noose, hook, or goad, while the third hand indicated favour and the fourth hand bade all discard every sort of fear.

[Ch 19 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As the web comes out of a spider of fire and sparks come out, so this whole Universe comes out of that Goddess. We all bow down before Her with our humble hearts, full of devotion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As the web comes out of a spider and sparks come out of fire, so this whole Universe comes out of that Goddess. We all bow down before Her with our humble hearts, full of devotion.

[Ch 19 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We all salute to that Goddess of the Universe, Bhuvanesvari, under Whose Māyīc force this whole Universe, moving and unmoving, is recreated; Who is All-Intelligence and the Ocean of Mercy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We all salute to that Goddess of the Universe, Bhuvaneśvarī, under Whose Māyic force this whole Universe, moving and unmoving, is created; Who is All-Intelligence and the Ocean of Mercy.

[Ch 19 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This world appears real to him who is unable to realise Her Real Essence; and the world drops off as unreal no sooner he realises Her Presence. We all meditate on that All Intelligent Goddess and we all pray to Her that She may grant unto us more strength to meditate Her and Her alone so.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This world appears real to him who is unable to realise Her Real Essence; and the world drops off as unreal no sooner he realises Her Presence. We all meditate on that All Intelligent Goddess and we all pray to Her that She may grant unto us more strength to meditate Her and Her alone so.

[Ch 19 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We all want to know Mahā Lakṣmī, we all meditate on the Omnipotent; May the Goddess grant unto us strength to meditate on Her so.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We all want to know Mahā Lakṣmī, we all meditate on the Omnipotent; May the Goddess grant unto us strength to meditate on Her so.

[Ch 19 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Thou, the Remover of the world's afflictions! Best pleased unto us; O Thou, kind hearted! Do this work for us and promote our good. O Thou, Lord of the Earth! Dost Thou relieve the burden of the earth by killing these Asuras and bring on our welfare.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Thou, the Remover of the world’s afflictions! Best Thou pleased unto us; O Thou, kind hearted! Do this work for us and promote our good. O Thou, Lord of the Earth! Dost Thou relieve the burden of the earth by killing these Asuras and bring on our welfare.

[Ch 19 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Thou, Lotus-Eyed! If Thou dost not show Thy mercy towards the gods, they will never be able to strike their enemies with their weapons in the battlefield. O Goddess! Thou didst verify the truth of this before, when Thou didst assume the appearance of a Yakṣa and utter the following sentences “O Fire! You burn this blade of grass” etc. (in the Kena Talavakāra Upaniṣad).
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Thou, Lotus-Eyed! If Thou dost not show Thy mercy towards the gods, they will never be able to strike their enemies with their weapons in the battlefield. O Goddess! Thou didst verify the truth of this before, when Thou didst assume the appearance of a Yakṣa and utter the following sentences “O Fire! You burn this blade of grass,” etc. (in the Kena Talavakāra Upanīṣada.)

[Ch 19 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! Kañsa, Bhauma, Kālayavana, Keśī, Jarāsandha, the son of Brhadratha, Vaka, Pūtanā, Khara, Śalva and other vicious kings respectively are dwelling on the earth. Dost Thou better kill them and relieve the burden of the Earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! Kaṃsa, Bhauma, Kālayavana, Keśī, Jarāsandha, the son of Brihadratha, Vaka, Pūtanā, Khara, Śālva and other vicious kings respectively are dwelling on the earth. Dost Thou better kill them and relieve the burden of the Earth.

[Ch 19 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lotus-Eyed! Thou hadst killed those Asuras without any effort that were not slain by Viṣṇu or Maheśvara and they ended their lives, while they were beholding Thy pleasing countenance.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lotus-Eyed! Thou hadst killed those Asuras without any effort that were not slain by Viṣṇu or Maheśvara and they ended their lives, while they were beholding Thy pleasing countenance.

[Ch 19 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Goddess! Holding Moon on Her forehead! These Hari, Hara, Brahmā and the other gods are unable to move a step without the help of Force; nothing to speak any further, the thousand headed King of Serpents is unable to hold this earth even for a moment, were he not provided with the Śakti of upholding this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Goddess! Holding Moon on Her forehead! These Hari, Hara, Brahmā and the other gods are unable to move a step without the help of Force; nothing to speak any further, the thousand headed King of Serpents is unable to hold this earth even for a moment, were he not provided with the Śakti of upholding this world.

[Ch 19 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra said: O Bhagavati! Would Brahmā be ever able to create this world without the aid of Sarasvatī! Would Viṣṇu, the Deva of the Devas, be ever able to preserve it without the aid of Laksmī or would Mahesvara be ever able to destroy this world without the help of His Umā; no, never! These Devas, the Trinity, are able to take their respective parts in the keeping up of the world simply because they are united with the forces, incarnate in Sarasvatī, etc., who are again parts of Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra said :-- O Bhagavatī! Would Brahmā be ever able to create this world without the aid of Sarasvatī! Would Viṣṇu, the Deva of the Devas, be ever able to preserve it without the aid of Lakṣmī or would Maheśvara be ever able, to destroy this world without the help of His Umā; no, never! These Devas, the Trinity, are able to take their respective parts in the keeping up of the world simply because they are united with the forces, incarnate in Sarasvatī, etc., who are again parts of Thee.

[Ch 19 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Visṇu said: O Vimale! Were we deprived of Thy Force, the Creator would never have been able to create the world, I would never have been able to preserve it and Maheśvara would never have been able to destroy Therefore O Devi! Thou alone art reigning as the Supreme Goddess amidst all the glories in the creation, preservation, and destruction of this Universe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viṣṇu said :-- O Vimale! Were we deprived of Thy Force, the Creator would never have been able to create the world, I would never have been able to preserve it and Maheśvara would never have been able to destroy. Therefore O Devī! Thou alone art reigning as the Supreme Goddess amidst all the glories in the creation, preservation, and destruction of this Universe.

[Ch 19 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! Thus praised by the Gods, the Goddess then addressed them: O Devas! Let all anxities leave you all; I will do what the Devas have desired, even if be very difficult to do in this world; now explain what is troubling the Goddess Earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! Thus praised by the Gods, the Goddess then addressed them :-- O Devas! Let all anxieties leave you all; I will do what the Devas have desired, even if it be very difficult to do in this world; now explain what is troubling the Goddess Earth.

[Ch 19 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas replied: The wicked kings are troubling very much this Earth. She cannot any longer bear their burden; therefore She came crying unto us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas replied :-- The wicked kings are troubling very much this Earth. She cannot any longer bear their burden; therefore She came crying unto us.

[Ch 19 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Bhuvaneśvari! Now it is Your duty to remove this load of earth. O Auspicious One! Know this, the desire of the gods.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Bhuvaneśvarī! Now it is Your duty to remove this load of earth. O Auspicious One! Know this, the desire of the gods.

[Ch 19 Verse 25-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! In days of yore, You have killed the most powerful Dānava named Mahiṣa, attended by lacs and lacs of Dānavas and Daityas; What to speak! You have slain Śumbha, Niśumbha, Raktabīja, the very powerful Canda Mungda, Dhūmralocana, Durmukha, Duhsaha, the strong Karāla and many other cruel Dānavas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! In days of yore, You have killed the most powerful Dānava named Mahiṣa, attended by lakhs and lakhs of Dānavas and Daityas; What to speak! You have slain Śumbha, Niśumbha, Raktavīja, the very powerful Caṇḍa Munḍa, Dhumralocana, Durmukha, Duhsana, the strong Karāla and many other cruel Dānavas.

[Ch 19 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now, similarly kill the wicked kings, the enemies of the Gods and save the Earth from their heavy loads.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now, similarly kill the wicked kings, the enemies of the Gods and save the Earth from their heavy loads.

[Ch 19 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Thus addressed by the Devas, the Most Auspicious One, the Devi, whose colour was black and who looked askance, said smiling in a tone, grave and deep, like that of the rumbling of a raincloud.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Thus addressed by the Devas, the Most Auspicious One, the Devī, whose colour was black and who looked askance, said smiling in a tone, grave and deep, like that of the rumbling of a raincloud.

[Ch 19 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Suras! I have already thought over how the burden of those wicked kings, the parts incarnate of Asuras, can be removed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Suras! I have already thought over how the burden of those wicked kings, the parts incarnate of Asuras, can be removed.

[Ch 19 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I will, by My own power, rob them of their powers, of that highly prosperous and affluent Jārāsandha, the king of Magadha, and others, the parts incarnate of the wicked Asuras, that are now shining on the Earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will, by My own power, rob them of their powers, of that highly prosperous and affluent Jārasandha, the king of Magadha, and others, the parts incarnate of the wicked Asuras, that are now shining on the Earth.

[Ch 19 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devas! You would all better go down and incarnate yourselves as part incarnations, impregnated with My power, and help thus in the removal of the load of this earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devas! You would all better go down and incarnate yourselves as part incarnations, impregnated with My power, and help thus in the removal of the load of this earth.

[Ch 19 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Deva Prajāpati Maharṣi Kaśyapa would first of all go with his his wife and incarnate as Ānaka Dundubhi Vasudeva, in the race of Yadu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Deva Prajāpati Maharṣi Kaśyapa would first of all go with his his wife and incarnate as Ānaka Dundubhi Vasudeva, in the race of Yadu.

[Ch 19 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Imperishable Bhagavān Viṣṇu will also incarnate as part, owing to the curse of Bhṛgu, as the son of Vasudeva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Imperishable Bhagavān Viṣṇu will also incarnate as part, owing to the curse of Bhṛgu, as the son of Vasudeva.

[Ch 19 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devas! I will be born, then, in the womb of Yaśodā, in Gokula and will accomplish all the ends of the Gods.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devas! I will be born, then, in the womb of Yaśodā, in Gokula and will accomplish all the ends of the Gods.

[Ch 19 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I Will send Viṣṇu from the prison to the Gokula; also I will transfer Ananta from the womb of Devaki to the womb of Rohin?
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will send Viṣṇu from the prison to the Gokula; also I will transfer Anāntā Deva from the womb of Devakī to the

[Ch 19 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They two will grow, day by day, by My Force and at the end of the Dvāpara Yuga, will no doubt kill the wicked kings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They two will grow, day by day, by My Force and at the end of the Dvāpara Yuga, will no doubt kill the wicked kings.

[Ch 19 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Arjuna too, the part incarnate of Indra, will destroy the armies of those kings. Yudhishira, the part incarnate of Dharma, Bhimseña, that of of Vāyu, Nakula and Sahadeva the incarnate of the two Aśvins, and Bhismā, the incarnate of Vasu as the son of the Gangā, will take their respective births and exhaust their armies.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Arjuṇa too, the part incarnate of Indra, will destroy the armies of those kings. Yudhiṣṭhira, the part incarnate of Dharma, Bhīmsena, that of of Vāyu, Nakula and Sahadeva the incarnate of the two A’svins, and Bhīsma, the incarnate of Vasu as the son of the Gaṅgā, will take their respective births and exhaust their armies.

[Ch 19 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devas! Now be calm and quiet and go. Let the Earth be also calm and quiet; be confident that I will certainly remove the load of this earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devas! Now be calm and quiet and go. Let the Earth be also calm and quiet; be confident that I will certainly remove the load of this earth.

[Ch 19 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I will make the above mentioned Gods as my instruments merely and I will destroy, by My own force, the Ksatryas in the battlefield of Kurukşetra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will make the above mentioned Gods as my instruments merely and I will destroy, by My own force, the Kṣatriyas in the battlefield of Kurukṣettra.

[Ch 19 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Malice, jealousy, foul intention, desire, attachment, vanity, covetuousness, desire for victory, lust, and fascination are the vices that will destroy the Yádavas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Malice, jealousy, foul intention, desire, attachment, vanity, covetousness, desire for victory, lust, and fascination are the vices that will destroy the Yādavas.

[Ch 19 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The race of Yadu will end owing to the curse of a Brāhmaṇa. The Bhagavān also will leave His mortal coil due to a curse.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The race of Yadu will end owing to the curse of a Brāhmaṇa. The Bhagavān also will leave His mortal coil due to a curse.

[Ch 19 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now go and incarnate in your respective parts, with your wives, in Gokula and Mathurā, and be helpers in the work of the Lord.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now go and incarnate in your respective parts, with your wives, in Gokula and Mathurā, and be helpers in the work of the Lord.

[Ch 19 Verse 44-45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Saying thus, the Devi the Goddess of the Universe, the Māyā incarnate of the Highest Self disappeared. The Devas and the Earth went to their respective places. O king Janamejaya! the Goddess Earth was pleased with the Devi's words, and being quiet, remained surrounded with various medicinal plants and creepers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Saying thus, the Devī the Goddess of the Universe, the Māyā Incarnate of the Highest Self disappeared. The Devas and the Earth went to their respective places. O king Janamejaya! the Goddess Earth was pleased with the Devī’s words, and being quiet, remained surrounded with various medicinal plants and creepers.

[Ch 19 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the subjects felt peace and pleasure, the Brāhmaṇas also grew stronger in happiness and porrseity, and the Munis became glad and began to perform their religious acts with fresh zeal and alacrity. Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, the Mahā Purānam, on chanting the hymns to the Devi by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the subjects felt peace and pleasure, the Brāhmaṇs also grew stronger in happiness and prosperity, and the Munis became glad and began to perform their religious acts with fresh zeal and alacrity. Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, the Mahā Purāṇam, on chanting the hymns to the Devī by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
