CHAPTER XIX

On Chanting the Hunns to the Devi

ཕམ་ཟམས:

སྟོལྟུལ་ཀྱི་སྟོལ་ཀྱི་སྟོལ་ཀྱི་སྟོལ་ཀྱི་སྟོལ་ཀྲི་སྟོལ་ཀྱི་སྟོལ་ཀྱི་སྟོལ་ཀྱི་སྟའི་སྟའི་སྟའི་སྟའི་སྟའི་སྟའི་སྟའི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཁྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་བྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་གྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་

We, too, are fascinated by that Māyā; and hence we also, being blinded by that, do not at all remember. That Highest Eternal Purusa, calm and quiet, the World-Teacher, the Highest Self, of the nature of Pure Existence, Intelligence and Bliss.

अर्ह विद्यारूई बढ़ा शिवोड़मिति मोहिताः ।

न जानीमो वयं धातः परं वस्तु सनातनम् ॥ 3 ॥

O Brahma! I am Visnu, I am Brahmā, I am Rudra, thus our I-ness Aharikāra has blinded our eyesight; and we are made unable to recognise That Eternal Highest Self.

यन्यामाघौहित्राई सदा वर्ते परात्मनः ।

परवान् दारभाङ्गती माधिकस्य यथा यरे ॥ 4 ॥

As the wooden dolls dance according to the will of the player, the magician, I also am similarly fascinated by the Māyā and am thus incessantly rolling about like a dependent man.

भवताउपि तथा दूषा विभूतितस्य चाढ़ुता ।

करणादी भवयुक्तेन मयापि च सुधाणें ॥ 5 ॥

मिण्हाप्रेय 8 मन्त्राविद्ये रासमण्डले ।

समाजे तत्र सा दृष्टा श्रुता न वचसाधि च ॥ 6 ॥

O Brahma! In the beginning of the Kalpa, Maheśvara, You and I saw the wonderful unspeakable form and glory of that Highest Self at the time of Rāsamandala in the Māni Dvipa where there was the Mandāra Tree and the Devas assembled. Then I also saw that wonderful thing a second time in the Sudh\( ^{2} \):nava ocean of nectar,

and the most wonderful of it is this: that until we were able to See that Form, we did not hear anything of Her before!

तस्माता परमां गर्फिंक सर्वेनवघ सुरा: शिवगम् ।

सर्वकामप्रदो मायामाठी शर्फिंक परावमाः ॥ ७ ॥

Therefore, O Devas! To-day do you all remember that Prime Force, the Highest Self, that all beneficent Force that yields all good and auspicious things; That Very Force will fulfill now all your desires.

व्यास उवाच

इतुक्ता हरिणा देना बढ़ाठा भुवनेश्वीम् ।

सस्मर्नसा देहीं योगमायांं सनातनीम् ॥ ८ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! No sooner the Bhagavān Hari addressed thus, Brahmā and the other Devas at once mentally began to meditate on that Eternal Yoga Māyā, the Goddess of the Universe.

स्मृतमात्रा तदा देही प्रत्यक्षं दर्जनं दही ।

पाणाङ्गशरापीतिप्रा देहो जगराणा ।

इद्धया प्रमुदिता देहान्तुडुवर्ता सुर्दर्गना ॥ 9 ॥

Being thus meditated, at once appeared before their eyesight the Devi, the Goddess of the Universe, whose colours were like the blood red Java flower, holding in two of Her hands noose, hook, or goad, while the third hand indicated favour and the fourth hand bade all discard every sort of fear.

देवा ऊचुः

कर्णनाघाढ्या तन्त्रविस्कृतीयां विषावसोः ।

तथा जगद्धतेस्या निर्मतं तां नत्ता बयम् ॥ 10 ॥

As the web comes out of a spider of fire and sparks come out, so this whole Universe comes out of that Goddess. We all bow down before Her with our humble hearts, full of devotion.

यन्मायाशक्तिसंकल्पं जानसर्वे चराचम् ।

तां चितं धुवनाधीशां सरमाः कर्णाणिधा ॥ 11 ॥

Book IV Chapter XIX

We all salute to that Goddess of the Universe, Bhuvanesvari, under Whose Māyīc force this whole Universe, moving and unmoving, is recreated; Who is All-Intelligence and the Ocean of Mercy.

यद्धानाद्वोत्थितिर्वज्ञानाद्ववनाशनम् ।

संविद्धुपं च तं दौंदी स्मारमः सा प्रधोद्यात् ॥ 12 ॥

This world appears real to him who is unable to realise Her Real Essence; and the world drops off as unreal no sooner he realises Her Presence. We all meditate on that All Intelligent Goddess and we all pray to Her that She may grant unto us more strength to meditate Her and Her alone so.

मातलस्थे च विवाईं चर्यशक्न्चे च धीमाहि ।

तनो देवी प्रचोदयात् ॥ १३ ॥

We all want to know Mahā Lakṣmī, we all meditate on the Omnipotent; May the Goddess grant unto us strength to meditate on Her so.

भारन्तनैः स्म भुवनानिरंतरं प्रसीद

गं नो विधिके कुरु कार्यमिद्ध द्वयरं ।

भारं हरव विवित्रव सुरारिवर्ग महा

महेश्वर सतां कुरु गं भवानि ॥ 14 ॥

O Thou, the Remover of the world's afflictions! Best pleased unto us; O Thou, kind hearted! Do this work for us and promote our good. O Thou, Lord of the Earth! Dost Thou relieve the burden of the earth by killing these Asuras and bring on our welfare.

यद्वेबुबालिध दयसे न सुरान्कदाचिक्ति ने

क्षमा रणमुपुडे सिरशरे: ग्रहरुम् ।

एतचवैय गदितं ननु यक्षल्पं

धूला तृणं दह इतागपदाधिक्षणैः ॥ 1 5 ॥

O Thou, Lotus-Eyed! If Thou dost not show Thy mercy towards the gods, they will never be able to strike their enemies with their weapons in the battlefield. O Goddess! Thou didst verify the truth of this before, when Thou didst assume the appearance of a Yakṣa and utter the following sentences “O Fire! You burn this blade of grass” etc. (in the Kena Talavakāra Upaniṣad).

कंस: कुजोर्श यवनेन्सुतश केर्शी

वाईरूशो बकबकीखशाल्यमुख्या: ।

येउ-ये तथा नृपतयो भूथि सन्ति तांस्वं

हत्वा हरस्व जगतो भरमाशु मातः ॥ 16 ॥

O Mother! Kañsa, Bhauma, Kālayavana, Keśī, Jarāsandha, the son of Brhadratha, Vaka, Pūtanā, Khara, Śalva and other vicious kings respectively are dwelling on the earth. Dost Thou better kill them and relieve the burden of the Earth.

वे विद्यान्ना न निहाना: किल शक्रेशण

वे वा विश्रहा जलजाशिक पुरन्देशे।।

ते ते पुरुखं सुरुखकंरं सुमीक्षमाणाः।

संख्ये शर्यिविन्हता निजलौतया ते ॥ 17 ॥

O Lotus-Eyed! Thou hadst killed those Asuras without any effort that were not slain by Viṣṇu or Maheśvara and they ended their lives, while they were beholding Thy pleasing countenance.

शर्फिकं विना हरित्वगुखा: सुराङ

नैवेक्षा विचितन्तु तत देवदेवेल ।

किं धारणाविरहितः प्रपूर्णवन्तो

धर्तु धरां च रजनीशकलावतंसे ॥ 18 ॥

O Goddess! Holding Moon on Her forehead! These Hari, Hara, Brahmā and the other gods are unable to move a step without the help of Force; nothing to speak any further, the thousand headed King of Serpents is unable to hold this earth even for a moment, were he not provided with the Śakti of upholding this world.

इन्र उवाच

वाचा विना विधिरलं भवतीह विध्ध

कर्तृ हरि: किमु स्मारहितोध पातुम् ।

संहर्तुभीग उभ्योजितून ईशः किं ते

ताभिरेव सहिता: प्रभव: प्रजेशः ॥ १९ ॥

Indra said: O Bhagavati! Would Brahmā be ever able to create this world without the aid of Sarasvatī! Would Viṣṇu, the Deva of the Devas, be ever able to preserve it without the aid of Laksmī or would Mahesvara be ever able to destroy this world without the help of His Umā; no, never! These Devas, the Trinity, are able to take their

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

respective parts in the keeping up of the world simply because they are united with the forces, incarnate in Sarasvatī, etc., who are again parts of Thee.

विष्णुर्वाच

कर्तु प्रभुने ईहिणो न कदाचनाहं

नाथीश्रस्तव कतारहितक्षिलोक्या: ।

कर्तु प्रभुचमनयोउत्र तथा विहर्तु त्वं

वै समस्तविषयेक्षिरे भासि नूनम् ॥ 20 ॥

Visṇu said: O Vimale! Were we deprived of Thy Force, the Creator would never have been able to create the world, I would never have been able to preserve it and Maheśvara would never have been able to destroy Therefore O Devi! Thou alone art reigning as the Supreme Goddess amidst all the glories in the creation, preservation, and destruction of this Universe.

व्यास उवाच

एवं सुत्वा तदा देवी तानाह विबुधेश्वान् ।

कि तत्कार्यं वदल्वच कंपिभ विगतलयतः ॥ 21 ॥

असाध्यमपि लोकेश्मितलकोमीय सुरीमतान् ।

शंसन्तु भवतां दुःखं धरायाङ्य सुरोतमाः ॥ 22 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Thus praised by the Gods, the Goddess then addressed them: O Devas! Let all anxities leave you all; I will do what the Devas have desired, even if be very difficult to do in this world; now explain what is troubling the Goddess Earth.

देवा कचुः

वसुधैवं भयाकान्ता सम्पात विबुधान्यति ।

रूदती वेयपाना च पीडिता दृष्यपुर्जेः ॥ 23 ॥

The Devas replied: The wicked kings are troubling very much this Earth. She cannot any longer bear their burden; therefore She came crying unto us.

भागपहर्णं चायया: कतिथं घुवनेश्वी ।

देवानामीमितं कार्यमेतदेवापुना शिशे ॥ 24 ॥

O Bhuvaneśvari! Now it is Your duty to remove this load of earth. O Auspicious One! Know this, the desire of the gods.

घातितसु पुरा मातस्वया महिषरूपभृत ।

दानवोर्गतिवलाकान्तसत्सहायांश्छीदिगः ॥ 25 ॥

तथा शुभ्यो निशुभ्यश रत्कौजास्तधापरः ।

चणदमुपडी महावीर्याँ तवेय धूपतोचनः ॥ 26 ॥

दुर्मुखो दुःसह्छैव कारलश्रातीलयैवान् ।

अन्ये च बहवः क्रारास्तव्यैव च निपातितः ॥ 27 ॥

O Mother! In days of yore, You have killed the most powerful Dānava named Mahiṣa, attended by lacs and lacs of Dānavas and Daityas; What to speak! You have slain Śumbha, Niśumbha, Raktabīja, the very powerful Canda Mungda, Dhūmralocana, Durmukha, Duhsaha, the strong Karāla and many other cruel Dānavas.

तथैव च सुरार्थि जहि सर्वान्हीशान्न ।

“ भारं हर धान्याश्र उदुरं दुषुधुजाम् ॥”

Now, similarly kill the wicked kings, the enemies of the Gods and save the Earth from their heavy loads.

व्यास उवाच

इतुक्ता सा तदा देवे दोवानाहीयका शिवा ॥ 28 ॥

समूहस्यासितापाङ्गी मेघमाधीराय शिता ।

Vyāsa said: Thus addressed by the Devas, the Most Auspicious One, the Devi, whose colour was black and who looked askance, said smiling in a tone, grave and deep, like that of the rumbling of a raincloud.

श्रीदेख्याच

मयंदे चिन्तितं पूर्वमैशालत्रणं सुरा: ॥ 29 ॥

भारावतरणं चैव वथा स्यादुपुर्णपुर्णम् ।

O Suras! I have already thought over how the burden of those wicked kings, the parts incarnate of Asuras, can be removed.

मया सर्वे निर्तेल्या दैत्येणा ये महीभुजाः ॥ 30 ॥

मागधाडा महाभागा: स्वशक्त्या मंदतेजसः।

I will, by My own power, rob them of their powers, of that highly prosperous and affluent Jārāsandha, the king of Magadha, and others, the parts incarnate of the wicked Asuras, that are now shining on the Earth.

Book IV Chapter XIX

भविद्वारि वंरैगीरवतीयं धरातले ॥ 31 ॥

मच्छफिन्नेः कतव्यं भारावतरणं सुरा: ।

O Devas! You would all better go down and incarnate yourselves as part incarnations, impregnated with My power, and help thus in the removal of the load of this earth.

क्यपयो भारया सार्य दिविनानां प्रजापनि: ॥ 32 ॥

यादवानां कुले पूर्वं भविताने उनककुदुपि: ।

The Deva Prajāpati Maharṣi Kaśyapa would first of all go with his his wife and incarnate as Ānaka Dundubhi Vasudeva, in the race of Yadu.

तथैव भृगुगायाड़े भगवाल्विष्णुव्यय: ॥ 33 ॥

अंगेन भविता तत्र वसुदेवसुत्तो हरि: ।

The Imperishable Bhagavān Viṣṇu will also incarnate as part, owing to the curse of Bhṛgu, as the son of Vasudeva.

त्वारुई प्रभविष्यामि यग्रोतायां च गोकुले ।। 34 ॥

कार्य सर्वे कार्यमिम सुणां सुरसन्तमाः ।

O Devas! I will be born, then, in the womb of Yaśodā, in Gokula and will accomplish all the ends of the Gods.

कारागारे गत विष्णु प्रापयिष्यामि गोकुले ॥ 35 ॥

शेपं च देवक्रीगभित्रापयिष्यामि रेहिणीम् ।

I Will send Viṣṇu from the prison to the Gokula; also I will transfer Ananta from the womb of Devaki to the womb of Rohin?

मच्छकरणोघचिती ती च कततीं दुरसंक्षयम् ॥ 36 ॥

दुरानां भूषुजां कामं द्वापराने सुनिश्छितम् ।

They two will grow, day by day, by My Force and at the end of the Dvāpara Yuga, will no doubt kill the wicked kings.

इंत्रणो5यज्ञनः साक्षात्क्रियित वलक्षायम् ॥ 37 ॥

धर्मारी3पि महाराजो भाविष्यित युधिष्ठि: ।

वाय्वेगो भीमसेन्नाशिक्यंगी च यमावपि ॥ 38 ॥

वसोरोंगे5य गोगेयः क्रियिति वलक्षायम् ।

Arjuna too, the part incarnate of Indra, will destroy the armies of those kings. Yudhishira, the part incarnate of Dharma, Bhimseña, that of of Vāyu, Nakula and Sahadeva the incarnate of the two Aśvins, and Bhismā, the incarnate of Vasu as

the son of the Gangā, will take their respective births and exhaust their armies.

जजत् च भवन्तोड्य धाग भवतु सुस्धिता ॥ 39 ॥

भागवतलर्ग नूनं कारिणीम सुरोत्तमाः ।

O Devas! Now be calm and quiet and go. Let the Earth be also calm and quiet; be confident that I will certainly remove the load of this earth.

कृत्वा निमिणासांतान्यराजलगड़र नं संशया:। ४० ॥

कृकक्षेत्र कारिष्यामि क्षत्रियाणां च संक्षयम् ।

I will make the above mentioned Gods as my instruments merely and I will destroy, by My own force, the Ksatryas in the battlefield of Kurukşetra.

असुर्येधां मतिसनृष्णा ममताधिमाता सुहा ॥ 41 ॥

जिगीषा मदनो मोहो दोर्भेनैश्वन्ति याद्वाः ।

Malice, jealousy, foul intention, desire, attachment, vanity, covetuousness, desire for victory, lust, and fascination are the vices that will destroy the Yádavas.

बाहाणस्य च शापेन वंशाणो भविष्यति ॥ 42 ॥

भगवानपि शापेन त्वक्ष्यतैतक्लेवम् ।

The race of Yadu will end owing to the curse of a Brāhmaṇa. The Bhagavān also will leave His mortal coil due to a curse.

भवन्तोर्पि निजांगीश सहाया: शार्ड्धिन्वनः ॥ 4 3 ॥

प्रभन्तु सनारीका मधुरायां च गोकुले ।

Now go and incarnate in your respective parts, with your wives, in Gokula and Mathurā, and be helpers in the work of the Lord.

व्यास उवाच

इन्युक्चलांदईये देही योगायामा परातमः ॥ 44 ॥

सधारा वे सुरा: सर्वे जनयु: स्वान्यालयानि च ।

धराशि सुविधा ज्ञान तस्य बावनेने तीचिति ॥ 45 ॥

Vyāsa said: Saying thus, the Devi the Goddess of the Universe, the Māyā incarnate of the Highest Self disappeared. The Devas and the Earth went to their respective places. O king Janamejaya! the Goddess Earth was pleased with the Devi's words, and being quiet, remained surrounded with various medicinal plants and creepers.

<table><tr><td>अोषधीवीरूघोपेतात बभूव जनमेव 1प्रजाश्र सुस्तिने जाता द्विजाश्रामुसंहोदयम्।सन्तुहा मुनयः सर्वे बभूवुर्धर्मततपरा: ॥ 46 ॥इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे चतुर्वकन्न्येएकॉनिवीरोस्थाय: ॥ 19 ॥</td></tr></table>

Then the subjects felt peace and pleasure, the Brāhmaṇas also grew stronger in happiness and

porrseity, and the Munis became glad and began to perform their religious acts with fresh zeal and alacrity.

Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, the Mahā Purānam, on chanting the hymns to the Devi by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

