CHAPTER XII

On the War Between Âṭi and Baka

राजोवाच

तीर्थिनं भृति युणयानि बृहि मे भुनिसतम ।

गम्यानि मानवैदैक्षेः क्षेत्राणि सरितस्तथा ॥ 1 ॥

फलं च यावुर्ण यत्र तीर्थेयुं स्नानदानतः ।

विधिं तु तीर्थयात्रायां नियमाशु विशेषतः ॥ 2 ॥

The King said: O Best of Munis! Tell me the names of the holy places of pilgrimage on the surface of this earth, the holy Kṣetras and the holy rivers; what are the fruits acquired in bathing there and in making charitable gifts as well; also what are the rules the journeys and acts there are to be conducted?

व्यास उवाच

यगु गजप्रवह्यायि तीबीति विधिधानि च ।

येषु तीर्थेषु दैवीनां प्रगस्तान्यायानि च ॥ ३ ॥

Vyāsa said: Hear, I am describing to you various Tirthas or places of pilgrimage as well as those that are highly extolled as the best places favourite to the Devi.

नदीना जाख्वी श्रेष्ठा ययुना च सरस्वती ।

नंम्दा गण्डकी सिंधुर्गोंमती तमसा तथा ॥ 4 ॥

कावेरी चन्द्रभाग च पुण्या वेत्रवती गृभा ।

चर्पवर्ती च सरसूतापी साधमती तथा ॥ 5 ॥

एताक्ष कथिता राजन्याक्ष शताश: पुनः ।

तासां समुहानः पुण्या: स्वल्पपुण्या हानिक्षाः ॥ 6 ॥

Amongst the rivers the following are reckoned as chief and holy: The Ganges, Yamunā, Sarasvatī, Narmadā, Gaṇḍaki, Sindhu, Gomaṭī, Tamasā, Cavery, Candrabhāgā, Vetravaṭi, Carmanvatī, Sarayu, Tāpi, and Sābhramatī. Besides these, there are hundreds of rivers on the surface of this earth; of them, those that fall into the ocean, they are holier and those that heve not reached the ocean, are less holy.

सपूत्रागतां तः पुराया: सर्वद्वीधवास्तु आः ।

मास्यद्वं श्रावणादौ ताक्ष सर्वा जरकल्पः ॥ ७ ॥

Of those rivers that fall into the ocean, those

that always flow with great current, they are comparatively lower; but in the two months Śrāvana and Bhādra (15th july—15th September) all the rivers are considered as if they are during their menstruation periods; at this time also some rivers carry water to the rains just sufficient to supply the villagers with water.

भवन्ति वृद्धियोगेन प्रायवात्रिहास्तथा ।

पुक्जरं च कुरूक्षेत्र धर्मपरंयं सुपावनम् ॥ ८ ॥

प्रभासं च प्रयागं च नैमिभारणयमेव च ।

विश्रुतं चाबुंतारणयं शैलाक्ष पावनासला ॥ ९ ॥

श्रीशैलक्ष सुमेकक्ष पवंती गन्धमादनः ।

सारोसि चैव पुणवानि मानसं सर्वविश्रुतम् ॥ १० ॥

तथा विद्युसरः श्रेष्यम्बोरं नापा वापनम् ।

आश्रमातृ तथा पुणया मुनीनां भावितातमान् ॥ १ १ ॥

विश्रुतनु सदा पुणयः ख्वातो बदकौतक्रशमः ।

ननारायणी चय नेपाते ती भुनी तपः ॥ १ २ ॥

O King! The following are the famous places of pilgrimages calculated to bestow merits: Puškara, Kuruksëttra, the holy Dharmānarya, Prabhāsa, Naimisāranya, and Arbudāranya. O King! Of the mountains, the following are considered as sacred: Śrīśaila, Sumeru, Gandhamādana; of the lakes, the following are very holy and very famous: Mānasarovara. Bindusarovara, and Akṣoda; these are the chief lakes. To those Munis that meditate on their Ātman, all the hermitages are sacred; still the hermitage of Badri is always considered very sacred and the most celebrated; here Nara and Nārāyaṇa, the two famous Munis, practised their asceticism.

वामनाओम आखाता: शतव्याश्रमस्ता ।

येन वयं तपस्ततं तस्य नानान्तिविष्ठुते ॥ 13 ॥

The Vāmanāśrama and Śatayūpāśrama are also well known; thus every hermitage is named after the Muni that practised asceticism there.

एवं पुरयाति स्थानाति हुसंख्यातानि भूतले ।

मुनिभि: परितीतानि पवानाति महीपते ॥ 14 ॥

Book VI Chapter XII

Thus innumerable holy places on the surface of the earth are mentioned by the Munis as tending to sanctify the hearts of the persons.

ययु स्थानेषु सर्वेत्र देवीस्थानानि भूपते ।

दर्शनात्यापहात्रिणि वसंति निययेन च ॥ 15 ॥

At all these holy places, the Devi is worshiped in special sites consecrated to Her. All the sins are destroyed by their mere sight.

कथायिभि तान्यो प्रसंगेन च कानिधित् ।

तैशीति नृप द्यानि त्रतानि च मखालया ॥ 16 ॥

The devotees of the Devi stay there, with rules obeyed. I will mention after words some of these places in the course of my narrations. O Best of kings! Going to these holy places, charity, vow, sacrifices, asceticism and good acts all depend on one another.

तपोसि पुण्यकर्माणि साधेष्ठाणि महीपते ।

इत्यगृद्धि क्रियागृद्धि मन:गृद्धिमपेक्ष्य च ॥ १ ७ ॥

The holy places of pilgrimages, asceticism, and observance of vows depend on the purity of the articles (Dravya Śuddhi), on the purity and one pointedness of actions (Kriyā Śuddhi) and on the purity of the heart (Citta Śuddhi).

पावनानि हि तीर्थानि तपांसि च ज्ञानि च ।

क्वाचिद्व्यशुद्धिः: स्यातिक्याशुद्धिः क्वाचन ॥ 18 ॥

दुर्लीभा मतस: शुद्धि: सर्वैंगा सर्वैरा नृप ।

मतसृ उच्छलं राजन्नेकविषयाशितम् ॥ 19 ॥

कर्ण शुद्ध भवेत्राज्ञानाभावस्माशितम् ।

Some may attain, at times, the Dravya Śuddhi and Kriyā Śuddhi; but every one finds it very difficult and, indeed, rarely get the Citta Śuddhi. O King! This mind always tries to seek shelter with various objects and is, therefore, always restless. How, then, can the purity of mind be effected with ease, when it is occupied with all sorts of thoughts on various objects.

कामक्रोधौ तथा लोपो ह्राईकांगे मदस्तथा ॥ 20 ॥

सर्वोदिकारा होते तपस्तीध्वतेषु च ।

अहिंहा सात्यमतरेयं श्रीचर्मिद्विनिषादः ॥ 21 ॥

स्वधोपायलंन राजसर्वतीर्थेलमप्रयम् ।

नित्यकर्मपरित्याणान्मार्गे संसर्गदोषतः ॥ 22 ॥

Cupidity, anger, greed, pride, and egoism, these bring about all sorts of obstacles in the holy places of pilgrimages, in practising tapasyā and in observing vows. O King! Non-injury, truthfulness, non-stealing, chastity and purity, controlling of sense, and observing one's own religion, all these bring about the fruits of the labour in visiting all tirthas. They bestow fruits that can be obtained by visiting all the tirthas. During one's pilgrimage, one forsakes one's Nitya Karma (daily duties) and one has to come in contact with various persons.

व्यर्थ तीर्थोपगर्न पापमेवावशिष्यते ।

क्षालयनि हि तैशानि सर्वथा देह्जे मलम् ॥ 23 ॥

मानसं क्षालितुं तानि न सम्बानि वे नृप ।

गक्तानि यदि चेतानि गंगातीरित्वासिनः ॥ 24 ॥

Hence one's journey becomes fruitless; rather it becomes a source of sin. The waters of the sacred places can only wash the outside dirts and the impurities of the physical bodies; they can never wash the impurities of their inner minds. Were it the fact that the waters of the tirthas could purify their minds, why was it, then, that the Munis, residing on the banks of the Ganges, and devoted to God, ever indulged themselves with feelings of jealousy and enmity against each other.

मुनीयो ग्रोहसंयुक्ताः कथं सूभभवितेशुशः ।

वसिष्ठसूचग्र: प्रहूा विश्वामित्रयः किल ॥25 ॥

रागोष्यरतः सर्वे कामकोधाकुतः सदा ।

चितगृद्धिमयं तीर्थे गंगादिष्योस्तिषावनम् ॥ 26 ॥

The humble Munis like Vasistha, and the Rsis like Visvāmitra were always entangled in love and hatred and they were over impatient with anger. Therefore it is evident that the internal purification, the purification of heart, the bathing in the Jñāna Gangā flowing within, no doubt removes more the dirt than the Ganges and other places of pilgrimages.

यदि स्थावैयोगेन क्षालय्वतीतांर मतम् ।

विशेषेण तु सर्वसंगे ज्ञानसिद्धस्य भृपते ॥ 27 ॥

O King! No doubt this fact must be admitted

on all hands that one's impurity of mind is washed away if by the strange combination of Fate, one comes in intimate contact with a man possessed of the Divine Knowledge.

न वेदा न च शाखाणि न रतानि तपांसि न ।

न मखा न च दानानि चित्युढ्रेस्तु कारणम् ॥ 28 ॥

O King! The Vedas or Śāstras, vows or austerties, sacrifices or gifts none can purify the heart.

वसिष्ठो बहाणः पुत्रो वेदविद्धाविशारदः ।

रागद्वीपालिजः कामं गड़्गातीसमाधिकः ॥ 29 ॥

See! Vasisṭha, the son of Brahmā, though versed in the Vedas and residing on the banks of the Ganges, was under the control of love, hatred and other infirmities.

आडीबकं महायुद्धे विश्वाधिमत्रविश्छयो: ।

जाते निरर्थकं द्विषहेवानां विस्मयप्रदम् ॥ 30 ॥

Out of the enmity of Viśvamitra and Vasiṣṭha, arose the great battle named Ādi Bāka, astonishing even to the Gods.

विश्वाधिमेजे बकस्तत्र जातः परमातमासः ।

शप्तः स तु वसिष्ठेन हरीशंद्रस्य काणगण् । ३१ । ॥

क्रीणिकेन वसिष्ठोषि शप्तवो5डीहैमाफकृतः।

शापादाडीबाकी जाती ती मुनी विश्वद्धभी ॥ ३२ ॥

निवासं प्रपतुस्तीत तापसी धर्मतसरी ।

चक्रतुदीर्गणे युद्ध नखचघुगताङ्गे: ॥ ३३ ॥

In this, the ascetic Visvāmitra was cursed by Visistha, on account of some curse in connection with the king Harisācandra and had to take his birth as a crane (Baka). The Rṣi Vasistha was cursed also by Visvāmitra and was born as a bird named Śarāli.

वर्षाणामयुतं यावतावृषी रोषसंयुतो ।

युयुधाते मदोवनारी सिंहास्थि परस्यम् ॥ 34 ॥

Thus the two powerful Rṣis were born as Āḍi Baka and lived years (ayuta) terribly, out of anger, they faught with their nails and beaks like two maddened lions.

राजोवाच

कथं ती मुनीशादूर्ती तापसी धर्मतन्तरी ।

परस्यरं वैरपरी संजातों केन हेतुना ॥ 35 ॥

शपं परस्यरं केन कारणेन महामती ।

दत्तवंती मिथ: वलेशकाकारके दुःखदो नृणाम् ॥ 36 ॥

The King asked: O Muni! Why were the two Maharsis, the two great ascetics and devoted to religion, involved in enmity with each other? Both of them were intelligent; how was it that they knowing the act of cursing to be a source of pain to men, cursed each other so painfully?

व्यास उवाच

हरिंशंत्री नृपश्रेष्ठसिंग्कृतनयः पुरा: ।

वधूव रविवर्शीयो रामचन्द्रस्य पूर्वंज: ॥ 37 ॥

Vyāsa said : O King! In former times, there was born in the solar dynasty a king Harisācandra, the son of Trisānku; he was the best of the kings and reigned before Rāmcandra.

अनपत्य: स रार्जविंकर्णाय महात्कानु ।

प्रतियतः पुरकामो नरभेधं दुरासवम् ॥ 38 ॥

That King had no issue and therefore promised to Varuna! “O Lord of water and ocean! If I get a son born to me, I will perform a sacrifice, called Naramedha, where I will sacrifice my son for your propitiation.”

वर्णास्तस्य सन्तुषो वत्रस्य तियमे कृते ।

दधारा गर्भ न्रास्तु घायां परममुदरी ॥ 39 ॥

Varuna was very pleased with the king when he made such a vow; and the exquisitely beautiful queen held the foetus in the womb.

राज बधूव सन्तुषो इद्वा घाथां सदोहाद् ।

चकार विधिवक्तमं गर्भसंक्राकारकम् ॥ 40 ॥

Seeing his wife in the family way, the king was very pleased and performed all the purificatory ceremonies pertaining to the foetus in the womb.

सुवृते तनयं नारी सर्वतक्षणसंयुतम् ।

मूदं प्राप नृपस्तत्र पुत्रे जाते विश्रापोते ॥ 41 ॥

कृतवाझातकर्मादि संक्रताविधिमुत्तमम् ।

ददौ हिरण्यं गा दोर्धीब्राहीणेधो विश्रतः ॥ 42 ॥

O King! When the queen was delivered of a son endowed with all auspicious signs, the king Hariścandra was very glad and performed duly all the Jāta Karma (natal) ceremonies and distributed

Book VI Chapter XII

as charity big sums of gold and many cows giving good quantities of milk.

जन्मोत्सर्वेस्तिवंसूते गेहे वै यादरां पति: ।

आजगम महाराज विग्रवेषधरस्तथा ॥ 4 3 ॥

When the festivities on the birth of the child were celebrated in the palace on a grand scale, Varuna, the Lord of Waters, assuming the form of a Brāhmin, came up there.

पृत्रित: पार्थिवेनाय दत्ता विधिवदासनम् ।

कार्य पृष्टेउक्रवीतुवयं वकणोउस्मिति भूपनिम् ॥ 44 ॥

कुर्य नई सुर्त कृत्ता पशुं परमपावनम् ।

सत्यवाप्यर चार्जे संकल्यस्तु तस्य क्रा: ॥ 4 5 ॥

तच्छुत्वा वचनं राजा विह्नोतिन्यथाकृतः ।

संसन्याधिं नृपः प्राह वकर्णं सकृतांजलिः ॥ 4 6 ॥

The King, too, honoured him duly with seat and worshipped him regularly and asked him about his purpose, when Varuna spoke to him: "O King! I am Varuna, the Lord of Waters; you promised before that you would perform Naramedha sacrifice where you would sacrifice your son; now do those things and keep your words true." The King became very much confused and was very much pained at heart. He then checked his mental feelings of pain and spoke to the Deva Varuna, with folded hands:

स्वामिकारीय ते परं सर्वेश विधिपूर्वकम् ।

भया ते यद्धितिज्ञां भवामि सत्यवागम् ॥ 47 ॥

पूर्णं मासे विगुक्छेते धर्मपन्ती सुरोतम् ।

वियुक्छायां तु भायायां कतंव्य: सपुर्णसुंवः ॥ 48 ॥

“O Lord! I will do the sacrifice duly and fulfil the promise that I made before you and keep my word. But, O Best of the Devas! My legal wife will be pure from her Sūtikā Śaucaka after one month, when I will perform the Narendraah sacrifice.”

इतूनेके वचने राजा वक्षण: स्वगृहं गतः ।

राजा बभूव संनुह: क्षितिधिश्तानुसत्यना ॥ 49 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of the king Hariścandra, Varuna returned to his own abode; the King also became glad, but he was somewhat anxious for fear of the destruction of the child.

पूर्णे मासि पुनः पाशीं परीक्षार्थं नृपालये ।

आजगमा द्विजो भूत्वा सुवेचः सुवुभपाकः ॥ 50 ॥

When one month was complete, the sweet-speaking Varuna, the holder of the noose, assuming the form of a very pure Brāhmīn, again came there to the palace of the king to examine him.

कृताहीं गुखावीसीने भृपतिस्ते सुरोतमम् ।

उवाच चिनयोपेते हेतुभपं चचस्तदा ॥ ५१ ॥

असंस्कृत सुर्त स्वामिन् यूपे बधभाति तं कवम् ।

The King worshipped him duly and gave him the seat to sit and spoke, with humility, the following reasonable words: "O Lord! My son is not yet purified; how can he be tied to the sacrifice post for being immolated?

संस्कृत्य क्षत्रियं कृत्वा पत्रे3र्हे यज्नुपतम् ॥ 52 ॥

द्वसे यदि देय त्वं ज्ञाला दीनं स्वसेवकम् ।

असंस्कृतस्य बालस्य नाधिकारोर्सित कुक्षित्च ॥ 53 ॥

Therefore I will perform that sacrifice when the boy becomes cleansed after a purificatory rite and becomes a Ksatriya. O Deva! If you know me as your humble servant, have mercy on me; I will then consider myself as blessed. See! The children, not passed through purificatory rites, are not entitled to any act; therefore wait for some time longer."

वरूण उवाच

प्रतायसि राजेन्द्र कृत्वा समयम्भातः ।

दुर्वयजस्तव जानामि सुत्नेवेहो ह्युप्रिणः ॥ 54 ॥

Varuna said: “O King! You are deceiving me and putting off the time longer and longer; I now see that you were issueless before and now that you have got a son, you are bound up in an indissoluble tie of affection for a son.

गृहं मन्त्रामे धृपाल वचनातव कोमालत् ।

क्रियल्कालं प्रतीक्ष्यात्मगामियमाति ने गृहम् ॥ 55 ॥

Whatever, it be, I now go back to my home at your pitiful request; I will wait for some time longer and I will come again.

भवित्यं तथा तत तदा सत्यवचो3स्तितम् ।

अन्यथा त्वयि मुंचामि कोयं ग्रासमन्त्रितम् ॥ 56 ॥

O child! Let you then be true to your words; if it be otherwise, I will surely curse you and thus give vent to my angry feelings."

राजोबाच

समावर्तनकर्मान्ते सर्वथा यादासम्पते ।

कृत्वा पूवप्पुं युउे यजिष्ये विधिपूर्वकम् ॥ 57 ॥

The King said: “O Lord of the Waters! After the completion of the Samāvartan ceremony (a pupil’s return home after finishing his holy study). I will duly sacrifice my son at the great Naremadha sacrifice; there is no doubt.”

व्यास उवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं राजो सरणः प्रीतमानसः ।

तथेयुक्त्वा ययौ तूर्णं गुप्सतु सुश्वितोप्रभव् ॥ 58 ॥

Vyāsa said: Varuna was very pleased at the King's words and quickly went back saying "Let it be so." The king also became comforted.

रोहिताख्य झील ख्यातः सुततस्य विवृद्धिमान् ।

संजातश्रुतः सर्वविद्यानां च विगारादः ॥ 59 ॥

On the one hand, the king Harisācandra's son became widely known by the name of Rohita; and as he got older, he became gradually versed in all the science and became very clever and intelligent.

यजस्य कारणं तेन ज्ञातं सर्व सवितस्तम् ।

भयंभीतस्ततः सोर्पि मत्वा मरण्यामतमः ॥ 60 ॥

कृत्वा पतावर्न वीरो गतोउसी गिरिपह्नं ।

अगाध्ये नृपतिस्थाने स्थितस्तत भयातुः ॥ 6 1 ॥

That boy then came to know by degrees the cause of the sacrifice in full detail; and knowing that his death is quite certain, became very afraid and quickly fled away from the King and went and stayed in caves of mountains with a fearful heart.

प्राप्ते कातेय शरणो यजार्थी नृपतैगृहम् ।

गत्या तमाह भूयालं कुक्र चर्म शिग्यांते ॥ 62 ॥

प्रश्नाववदो रजा तमाह व्यथित्रियः ।

किं कौरीय नतः क्वापि सुतो मे सुसतम्भा ॥ 63 ॥

Then, when the proper time came, Varuna came up there to the royal palace, desirous to have the sacrifice and spoke to the King thus: "O King!

Now the prescribed time has come; therefore perform the sacrifice that you have resolved to celebrate." The King was very much pained to hear this and spoke with a very sad appearance: "O Best of the Devas! What can I do now? My son has fled away out of the fear of his life; I do not know his whereabouts."

श्रुत्वा तद्धवर्न राजः कुपितो यादसांपति: ।

ग्रणारा तं नृयं कोपादस्वलवादिन्दं भुगम् ॥ 64 ॥

जतोदारभिधो व्याधिर्देह भवतु ते नृप ।

यतः प्रतानिराश्रहं कृत्वा कपटयपिहत ॥ 65 ॥

Varuna became very angry at these words and cursed him thus: "O Lair! You are an hypocrite pundit; therefore you deceived my frequently. Let therefore the disease dropsy come and attack your body."

इति शप्ता ययी धाम यकं पाणधान्ता ।

राज चिन्तानुस्तस्थी भवने व्याधिपीक्षितः ॥ 66 ॥

Varuna, the Holder of the noose, cursing thus, went back to his own abode. The King was attacked with that disease, remained in his own residence, afflicted with cares and anxieties.

यद्धान्तिव्यापीते राजा रोगेण शापजेन ह ।

तदा शुश्राव पुत्रोरि पितरं व्याधियोंहितम् ॥ 67 ॥

Rohita, the son of the king Harisācandra, heard about the severe illness of his father when he was very much tormented with that disease, as the curse of Varuna.

पाधिकः प्राह पुत्रं हि पिता ते भृगुर्ज:खितः ।

जतोदरविकरणे शापजेने नृपातज ॥ ६ ८ ॥

विनहं जीविते तेउदा व्याजातस्य दुर्पते ।

यच्यत्वा पितरं दुःखं प्राप्तोरसि पिरिगाढूम ॥ 69 ॥

One day a traveller told him: "O son of the King! Your father is very ill with dropsy, due to the curse, and is very sorry. Certainly your brain has turned wrong; vain is your coming in this world; you have passed your life to no purpose, for you are staying still in this mountain cave, abandoning your sorrowful father. Certainly you are a bad disobedient son; what use is there in your keeping up this body?

Book VI Chapter XIII

क्रमनेन शरीरण प्राप्ते ते जम्नः फलम् ।

देहदं दुःखितं कृत्वा स्थितोउर्यव सृताधम ॥ ७ ० ॥

प्राणास्त्यान्य: पितुः कार्यं सत्यझोपेति निश्रधाः।

त्वदर्थे दुःखितो राजा क्रंदति व्याधिरपीडतः ॥ ७ १ ॥

What purpose will be served by your both? When you have got this body, you have abandoned that father and are staying in this solitary cave. Know this as certain that to sacrifice one's life is the duty of a good and obedient son; therefore what more shall I say now than this that your father the king Hariśchandra ailing from a severe illness is very sorry for you and is always weeping.

व्यास उवाच

तदाकर्णे वचस्तध्यं पांथिकादूमरंयुतम् ।

यदा चक्रे मनो गन्तुं युई तातं व्यथातुम् ॥ 7 2 ॥

तदा विश्रवपुर्णूंत्या वासावस्तमुपागमत् ।

रहः प्राह हितं वास्यं दयावानिव भारत ॥ 7 3 ॥

मूर्डोर्स सजपुरु तं यमानय मर्ति वृथा ।

कोरोष चितरं सद्ध न जानासि व्यथायुम् ॥ 7 4 ॥

इति शीमद्वीघागवतो महापुराणी पशलकम्ये

ब्रादशोस्थाय: 11 12 11

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing from the passerby these good words, the prince Rohita wanted to go to his sorrowful father attacked with disease when Indra assuming a Brāhmin form came up to him and began to speak to him when he was alone like one who was filled with mercy. O Son of a King! You are a fool; are you not positively acquainted with the fact that your father is in trouble; why then do you intend in vain to go there?"

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter on the cause of the war between Āḍi and Baka in the Sixth Book of the Mahāpurānam of Śrimaddevīthāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XIII

