[Ch 12 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King said: O Best of Munis! Tell me the names of the holy places of pilgrimage on the surface of this earth, the holy Kṣetras and the holy rivers; what are the fruits acquired in bathing there and in making charitable gifts as well; also what are the rules the journeys and acts there are to be conducted?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King said :-- “O Best of Munis! Tell me the names of the holy places of pilgrimage on the surface of this earth, the holy Kṣetras and the holy rivers; what are the fruits acquired in bathing there and in making charitable gifts as well; also what are the rules of the journeys and acts there are to be conducted?”

[Ch 12 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Hear, I am describing to you various Tirthas or places of pilgrimage as well as those that are highly extolled as the best places favourite to the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Hear; I am describing to you various Tīrthas or places of pilgrimage as well as those that are highly extolled as the best places favourite to the Devī.

[Ch 12 Verse 4-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Amongst the rivers the following are reckoned as chief and holy: The Ganges, Yamunā, Sarasvatī, Narmadā, Gaṇḍaki, Sindhu, Gomaṭī, Tamasā, Cavery, Candrabhāgā, Vetravaṭi, Carmanvatī, Sarayu, Tāpi, and Sābhramatī. Besides these, there are hundreds of rivers on the surface of this earth; of them, those that fall into the ocean, they are holier and those that heve not reached the ocean, are less holy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Amongst the rivers the following are reckoned as chief and holy :-- The Ganges, Jumnā, Sarasvatī, Narmaddā, Ganḍakī, Sindhu, Gomatī, Tamasā, Cavery, Candrahāgā, Vetravatī, Carmanvatī, Saraju, Tāpī, and Sāvramatī. Besides these, there are hundreds of rivers on the surface of this earth; of them, those that fall into the ocean, they are holier and those that have not reached the ocean are less holy.

[Ch 12 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Of those rivers that fall into the ocean, those that always flow with great current, they are comparatively lower; but in the two months Śrāvana and Bhādra (15th july—15th September) all the rivers are considered as if they are during their menstruation periods; at this time also some rivers carry water to the rains just sufficient to supply the villagers with water.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Of those rivers that fall into the ocean, those that always flow with great current, they are comparatively holier; but in the two months Śrāvan and Bhādra (15th July - 15th September) all the rivers are considered as if they are during their menstruation periods; at this time also some rivers carry water of the rains just sufficient to supply the villagers with water.

[Ch 12 Verse 8-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The following are the famous places of pilgrimages calculated to bestow merits: Puškara, Kuruksëttra, the holy Dharmānarya, Prabhāsa, Naimisāranya, and Arbudāranya. O King! Of the mountains, the following are considered as sacred: Śrīśaila, Sumeru, Gandhamādana; of the lakes, the following are very holy and very famous: Mānasarovara. Bindusarovara, and Akṣoda; these are the chief lakes. To those Munis that meditate on their Ātman, all the hermitages are sacred; still the hermitage of Badri is always considered very sacred and the most celebrated; here Nara and Nārāyaṇa, the two famous Munis, practised their asceticism.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The following are the famous places of pilgrimages calculated to bestow merits:-- Puṣkara, Kurukṣettra, the holy Dharmāraṇya, Pravāsa, Prayāga, Naimiṣāraṇya, and Arbudāraṇya. O King! Of the mountains, the following are considered as sacred :-- Śrīśaila, Sumeru, Gandhamādana; of the lakes, the following are very holy and very famous :-- Mānasarovara, Viṇdusarovara and Akṣoda; these are the chief lakes. To those Munis that meditate on their Ātman, all the hermitages are sacred; still the hermitage of Badri is always considered very sacred and the most celebrated; here Nara and Nārāyaṇa, the two famous Munis, practised their asceticism.

[Ch 12 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Vāmanāśrama and Śatayūpāśrama are also well known; thus every hermitage is named after the Muni that practised asceticism there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Vāmanāśrama and Śatayūpāśrama are also well known; thus every hermitage is named after the Muni that practised asceticism there.

[Ch 12 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus innumerable holy places on the surface of the earth are mentioned by the Munis as tending to sanctify the hearts of the persons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus innumerable holy places on the surface of the earth are mentioned by the Munis as tending to sanctify the hearts of the persons.

[Ch 12 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At all these holy places, the Devi is worshiped in special sites consecrated to Her. All the sins are destroyed by their mere sight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At all these holy places, the Devī is worshipped in special sites consecrated to Her. All the sins are destroyed by their mere sight.

[Ch 12 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The devotees of the Devi stay there, with rules obeyed. I will mention after words some of these places in the course of my narrations. O Best of kings! Going to these holy places, charity, vow, sacrifices, asceticism and good acts all depend on one another.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The devotees of the Devī stay there, with rules obeyed. I will mention afterwards some of these places in the course of my narrations. O Best of kings! Going to these holy places, charity, vow, sacrifices, asceticism and good acts all depend on one another.

[Ch 12 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The holy places of pilgrimages, asceticism, and observance of vows depend on the purity of the articles (Dravya Śuddhi), on the purity and one pointedness of actions (Kriyā Śuddhi) and on the purity of the heart (Citta Śuddhi).
NEW CORR ENG ──► The holy places of pilgrimages, asceticism, and observance of vows depend on the purity of the articles (Dravya Śuddhi), on the purity and one pointedness of actions (Kriyā Śuddhi) and on the purity

[Ch 12 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Some may attain, at times, the Dravya Śuddhi and Kriyā Śuddhi; but every one finds it very difficult and, indeed, rarely get the Citta Śuddhi. O King! This mind always tries to seek shelter with various objects and is, therefore, always restless. How, then, can the purity of mind be effected with ease, when it is occupied with all sorts of thoughts on various objects.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Some may attain, at times, the Dravya Śuddhi and Kriyā Śuddhi; but every one finds it very difficult and, indeed, rarely get the Chitta Śuddhi. O King! This mind always tries to seek shelter with various objects and is, therefore, always restless. How, then, can the purity of mind be effected, with ease, when it is occupied with all sorts of thoughts on various objects.

[Ch 12 Verse 20-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Cupidity, anger, greed, pride, and egoism, these bring about all sorts of obstacles in the holy places of pilgrimages, in practising tapasyā and in observing vows. O King! Non-injury, truthfulness, non-stealing, chastity and purity, controlling of sense, and observing one's own religion, all these bring about the fruits of the labour in visiting all tirthas. They bestow fruits that can be obtained by visiting all the tirthas. During one's pilgrimage, one forsakes one's Nitya Karma (daily duties) and one has to come in contact with various persons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Cupidity, anger, greed, pride, and egoism, these bring about all sorts of obstacles in the holy places of pilgrimages, in practising tapasyā and in observing vows. O King! Non-injury, truthfulness, non-stealing, chastity and purity, controlling of senses, and observing one’s own religion, all these bring about the fruits of the labour in visiting all tīrthas. They bestow fruits that can be obtained by visiting all the tīrthas. During one’s pilgrimage, one forsakes one’s Nitya Karma (daily duties) and one has to come in contact with various persons.

[Ch 12 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hence one's journey becomes fruitless; rather it becomes a source of sin. The waters of the sacred places can only wash the outside dirts and the impurities of the physical bodies; they can never wash the impurities of their inner minds. Were it the fact that the waters of the tirthas could purify their minds, why was it, then, that the Munis, residing on the banks of the Ganges, and devoted to God, ever indulged themselves with feelings of jealousy and enmity against each other.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hence one’s journey becomes fruitless; rather it becomes a source of sin. The waters of the sacred places can only wash the outside dirts and the impurities of the physical bodies; they can never wash the impurities of their inner minds. Were it the fact that the waters of the tīrthas could purify their minds, why was it, then, that the Munis, residing on the banks of the Ganges, and devoted to God, ever indulged themselves with feelings of jealousy and enmity against each other.

[Ch 12 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The humble Munis like Vasistha, and the Rsis like Visvāmitra were always entangled in love and hatred and they were over impatient with anger. Therefore it is evident that the internal purification, the purification of heart, the bathing in the Jñāna Gangā flowing within, no doubt removes more the dirt than the Ganges and other places of pilgrimages.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The humble Munis like Vaśiṣṭha, and the Ṛṣis like Viśvāmitra were always entangled in love and hatred and they were ever impatient with anger. Therefore it is evident that the internal purification, the purification of heart, the bathing in the Gñān Gaṅgā flowing within, no doubt removes more the dirt than the Ganges and other places of pilgrimages.

[Ch 12 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! No doubt this fact must be admitted on all hands that one's impurity of mind is washed away if by the strange combination of Fate, one comes in intimate contact with a man possessed of the Divine Knowledge.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! No doubt this fact must be admitted on all hands that one’s impurity of mind is washed away if by the strange combination of Fate, one comes in intimate contact with a man possessed of the Divine Knowledge.

[Ch 12 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The Vedas or Śāstras, vows or austerties, sacrifices or gifts none can purify the heart.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The Vedas or Śāstras, vows or austerities, sacrifices or gifts none can purify the heart.

[Ch 12 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See! Vasisṭha, the son of Brahmā, though versed in the Vedas and residing on the banks of the Ganges, was under the control of love, hatred and other infirmities.
NEW CORR ENG ──► See! Vaśiṣṭha, the son of Brahmā, though versed in the Vedas and residing on the banks of the Ganges, was under the control of love, hatred and other infirmities.

[Ch 12 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Out of the enmity of Viśvamitra and Vasiṣṭha, arose the great battle named Ādi Bāka, astonishing even to the Gods.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Out of the enmity of Viśvāmitra and Vaśiṣṭha, arose the great battle named Āḍi Baka, astonishing even to the Gods.

[Ch 12 Verse 31-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In this, the ascetic Visvāmitra was cursed by Visistha, on account of some curse in connection with the king Harisācandra and had to take his birth as a crane (Baka). The Rṣi Vasistha was cursed also by Visvāmitra and was born as a bird named Śarāli.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In this, the ascetic Viśvāmitra was cursed by Vaśiṣṭha, on account of some curse in connection with the king Hariścandra and had to take his birth as a crane (Baka). The Ṛṣi Vaśiṣṭha was cursed also by Viśvāmitra and was born as a bird named

[Ch 12 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus the two powerful Rṣis were born as Āḍi Baka and lived years (ayuta) terribly, out of anger, they faught with their nails and beaks like two maddened lions.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the two powerful Ṛṣis were born as Āḍi Baka and lived on the banks of the Mānasarovara and they fought for full ten thousand years (ajuta) terribly, out of anger, with their nails and beaks like two maddened lions.

[Ch 12 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King asked: O Muni! Why were the two Maharsis, the two great ascetics and devoted to religion, involved in enmity with each other? Both of them were intelligent; how was it that they knowing the act of cursing to be a source of pain to men, cursed each other so painfully?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King asked :-- “O Muni! Why were the two Maharsis, the two great ascetics and devoted to religion, involved in enmity with each other? Both of them were intelligent; how was it that they knowing the act of cursing to be a source of pain to men, cursed each other so painfully?”

[Ch 12 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said : O King! In former times, there was born in the solar dynasty a king Harisācandra, the son of Trisānku; he was the best of the kings and reigned before Rāmcandra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! In former times, there was born in the solar dynasty a king Hariścandra, the son of Triśaṅku; he was the best of the kings and reigned before Rāmcandra.

[Ch 12 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That King had no issue and therefore promised to Varuna! “O Lord of water and ocean! If I get a son born to me, I will perform a sacrifice, called Naramedha, where I will sacrifice my son for your propitiation.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► That King had no issue and therefore promised to Varuṇa, “O Lord of water and ocean! If I get a son born to me, I will perform a sacrifice, called Naramedha, where I will sacrifice my son for your propitiation.”

[Ch 12 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Varuna was very pleased with the king when he made such a vow; and the exquisitely beautiful queen held the foetus in the womb.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Varuṇa was very pleased with the king when he made such a vow; and the exquisitely beautiful queen held the foetus in the womb.

[Ch 12 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing his wife in the family way, the king was very pleased and performed all the purificatory ceremonies pertaining to the foetus in the womb.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing his wife in the family way, the king was very pleased and performed all the purificatory ceremonies pertaining to the foetus in the womb.

[Ch 12 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! When the queen was delivered of a son endowed with all auspicious signs, the king Hariścandra was very glad and performed duly all the Jāta Karma (natal) ceremonies and distributed as charity big sums of gold and many cows giving good quantities of milk.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! When the queen was delivered of a son endowed with all auspicious signs, the king Hariścandra was very glad and performed duly all the Jāta Karma (natal) ceremonies and distributed as charity big sums of gold and many cows giving good quantities of milk.

[Ch 12 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the festivities on the birth of the child were celebrated in the palace on a grand scale, Varuna, the Lord of Waters, assuming the form of a Brāhmin, came up there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the festivities on the birth of the child were celebrated in the palace on a grand scale, Varuṇa, the Lord of Waters, assuming the form of a Brāhmin, came up there.

[Ch 12 Verse 44-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King, too, honoured him duly with seat and worshipped him regularly and asked him about his purpose, when Varuna spoke to him: "O King! I am Varuna, the Lord of Waters; you promised before that you would perform Naramedha sacrifice where you would sacrifice your son; now do those things and keep your words true." The King became very much confused and was very much pained at heart. He then checked his mental feelings of pain and spoke to the Deva Varuna, with folded hands:
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King, too, honoured him duly with seat and worshipped him regularly and asked him about his purpose, when Varuṇa spoke to him :-- “O King! I am Varuṇa, the Lord of Waters; you promised before that you would perform Naramedha sacrifice where you would sacrifice your son; now do those things and keep your words true.” The King became very much confused and was very much pained at heart. He then checked his mental feelings of pain and spoke to the Deva Varuṇa, with folded hands :--

[Ch 12 Verse 47-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Lord! I will do the sacrifice duly and fulfil the promise that I made before you and keep my word. But, O Best of the Devas! My legal wife will be pure from her Sūtikā Śaucaka after one month, when I will perform the Narendraah sacrifice.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “O Lord! I will do the sacrifice duly and fulfil the promise that I made before you and keep my word. But, O Best of the Devas! My legal wife will be pure from her Sūtikā-Śaucak after one month, when I will perform the Naramedha sacrifice.”

[Ch 12 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of the king Hariścandra, Varuna returned to his own abode; the King also became glad, but he was somewhat anxious for fear of the destruction of the child.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the words of the king Hariścandra, Varuṇa returned to his own abode; the King also became glad, but he was somewhat anxious for fear of the destruction of the child.

[Ch 12 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When one month was complete, the sweet-speaking Varuna, the holder of the noose, assuming the form of a very pure Brāhmīn, again came there to the palace of the king to examine him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When one month was complete, the sweet-speaking Varuṇa, the holder of the noose, assuming the form of a very pure Brāhmin, again came there to the palace of the king to examine him.

[Ch 12 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King worshipped him duly and gave him the seat to sit and spoke, with humility, the following reasonable words: "O Lord! My son is not yet purified; how can he be tied to the sacrifice post for being immolated?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King worshipped him duly and gave him the seat to sit and spoke, with humility, the following reasonable words :-- “O Lord! My son is not yet purified; how can he be tied to the sacrificial post for being immolated?

[Ch 12 Verse 52-53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore I will perform that sacrifice when the boy becomes cleansed after a purificatory rite and becomes a Ksatriya. O Deva! If you know me as your humble servant, have mercy on me; I will then consider myself as blessed. See! The children, not passed through purificatory rites, are not entitled to any act; therefore wait for some time longer."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore I will perform that sacrifice when the boy becomes cleansed after a purificatory rite and becomes a Kṣattriya. O Deva! If you know me as your humble servant, have mercy on me; I will then consider myself as blessed. See! The children, not passed through purificatory rites, are not entitled to any act; therefore wait for some time longer.”

[Ch 12 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Varuna said: “O King! You are deceiving me and putting off the time longer and longer; I now see that you were issueless before and now that you have got a son, you are bound up in an indissoluble tie of affection for a son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Varuṇa said :-- “O King! You are deceiving me and putting off the time longer and longer; I now see that you were issueless before and now that you have got a son, you are bound up in an indissoluble tie of affection for a son.

[Ch 12 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whatever, it be, I now go back to my home at your pitiful request; I will wait for some time longer and I will come again.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whatever it be, I now go back to my home at your pitiful request; I will wait for some time longer and I will come again.

[Ch 12 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O child! Let you then be true to your words; if it be otherwise, I will surely curse you and thus give vent to my angry feelings."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O child! Let you then be true to your words; if it be otherwise, I will surely curse you and thus give vent to my angry feelings.”

[Ch 12 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King said: “O Lord of the Waters! After the completion of the Samāvartan ceremony (a pupil’s return home after finishing his holy study). I will duly sacrifice my son at the great Naremadha sacrifice; there is no doubt.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King said :-- O Lord of the Waters! After the completion of the Samāvartan ceremony (a pupil’s return home after finishing his holy study), I will duly sacrifice my son at the great Naramedha sacrifice; there is no doubt.

[Ch 12 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Varuna was very pleased at the King's words and quickly went back saying "Let it be so." The king also became comforted.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Varuṇa was very pleased at the King’s words and quickly went back saying “Let it be so.” The king also became comforted.

[Ch 12 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the one hand, the king Harisācandra's son became widely known by the name of Rohita; and as he got older, he became gradually versed in all the science and became very clever and intelligent.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the one hand, the king Hariścandra’s son became widely known by the name of Rohita; and as he got older, he became gradually versed in all the sciences and became very clever and intelligent.

[Ch 12 Verse 60-61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That boy then came to know by degrees the cause of the sacrifice in full detail; and knowing that his death is quite certain, became very afraid and quickly fled away from the King and went and stayed in caves of mountains with a fearful heart.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That boy then came to know by degrees the cause of the sacrifice in full detail; and knowing that his death is quite certain, became very afraid and quickly fled away from the King and went and stayed in caves of mountains with a fearful heart.

[Ch 12 Verse 62-63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then, when the proper time came, Varuna came up there to the royal palace, desirous to have the sacrifice and spoke to the King thus: "O King! Now the prescribed time has come; therefore perform the sacrifice that you have resolved to celebrate." The King was very much pained to hear this and spoke with a very sad appearance: "O Best of the Devas! What can I do now? My son has fled away out of the fear of his life; I do not know his whereabouts."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then, when the proper time came, Varuṇa came up there to the royal palace, desirous to have the sacrifice and spoke to the King thus :-- “O King! Now the prescribed time has come; therefore perform the sacrifice that you have resolved to celebrate.” The King was very much pained to hear this and spoke with a very sad appearance :-- “O Best of the Devas! What can I do now? My son has fled away out of the fear of his life; I do not know his whereabouts.”

[Ch 12 Verse 64-65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Varuna became very angry at these words and cursed him thus: "O Lair! You are an hypocrite pundit; therefore you deceived my frequently. Let therefore the disease dropsy come and attack your body."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Varuṇa became very angry at these words and cursed him thus :-- “O Liar! You are an hypocrite pundit; therefore you deceived me frequently. Let therefore the disease dropsy come and attack your body.”

[Ch 12 Verse 66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Varuna, the Holder of the noose, cursing thus, went back to his own abode. The King was attacked with that disease, remained in his own residence, afflicted with cares and anxieties.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Varuṇa, the Holder of the noose, cursing thus, went back to his own abode. The King was attacked with that disease, remained in his own residence, afflicted with cares and anxieties.

[Ch 12 Verse 67]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Rohita, the son of the king Harisācandra, heard about the severe illness of his father when he was very much tormented with that disease, as the curse of Varuna.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Rohita, the son of the king Hariścandra, heard about the severe illness of his father when he was very much tormented with that disease, as the curse of Varuṇa.

[Ch 12 Verse 68-69]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One day a traveller told him: "O son of the King! Your father is very ill with dropsy, due to the curse, and is very sorry. Certainly your brain has turned wrong; vain is your coming in this world; you have passed your life to no purpose, for you are staying still in this mountain cave, abandoning your sorrowful father. Certainly you are a bad disobedient son; what use is there in your keeping up this body?
NEW CORR ENG ──► One day a traveller told him :-- “O son of the King! Your father is very ill with dropsy, due to the curse, and is very sorry. Certainly your brain has turned wrong; vain is your coming in this world; you have passed your life to no purpose, for you are staying still in this mountain cave, abandoning your sorrowful father. Certainly you are a bad disobedient son; what use is there in your keeping up this body?

[Ch 12 Verse 70-71]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What purpose will be served by your both? When you have got this body, you have abandoned that father and are staying in this solitary cave. Know this as certain that to sacrifice one's life is the duty of a good and obedient son; therefore what more shall I say now than this that your father the king Hariśchandra ailing from a severe illness is very sorry for you and is always weeping.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What purpose will be served by your birth? When you have got this body, you have abandoned that father and are staying in this solitary cave. Know this as certain that to sacrifice one’s life is the duty of a good and obedient son; therefore what more shall I say now than this that your father the king Hariścandra ailing from a severe illness is very sorry for you and is always weeping.”

[Ch 12 Verse 72-74]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing from the passerby these good words, the prince Rohita wanted to go to his sorrowful father attacked with disease when Indra assuming a Brāhmin form came up to him and began to speak to him when he was alone like one who was filled with mercy. O Son of a King! You are a fool; are you not positively acquainted with the fact that your father is in trouble; why then do you intend in vain to go there?" Here ends the Twelfth Chapter on the cause of the war between Āḍi and Baka in the Sixth Book of the Mahāpurānam of Śrimaddevīthāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing from the passerby these good words, the prince Rohita wanted to go to his sorrowful father attacked with disease when Indra assuming a Brāhmin form came up to him and began to speak to him when he was alone like one who was filled with mercy. O Son of a King! You are a fool; are you not positively acquainted with the fact that your father is in trouble; why then do you intend in vain to go there? Here ends the Twelfth Chapter on the cause of the war between Ādi and Baka in the Sixth Book of the Mahāpurāṇam of Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
