CHAPTER XXI

On the Conquest of the Heavens by Śumbha and Niśumbha

व्यास उवाच

शृणु राजन्यवश्यामि देल्याशितमुत्तमम् ।

सुखदे सर्वेजन्तूनां सर्वेपापणज्ञानम् ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsā said: O king! I am describing to you that excellent pure life and doings of the Devī that destroy all the sins of all the beings and make them happy.

Book V Chapter XXI

यथा शुभ्यो निशुभ्यश्छ प्रातारी बलवतरो ।

बभूवतुमहावीरीं आयधौे पुनर्षे: किल 112 ||

बहुसेनावृतौ शृती देवानां दुःखदी सव ।

दुराषारी मदोलिस्त्री बहुदानवसंयुती ॥ 3 ॥

In days of yore, there were two very powerful demons Šumbha and Niśumbha; they were two brothers, strong heroes and invulnerable by the male persons. Those two wicked Asuras were surrounded with numerable Dānavas; they tormented always the Devas.

हताविथिकया ती तु संधामे उतीव दारुण ।

देवानां च हिताधाय सर्वै: परिचरैः सह ॥ ४ ॥

वशप्रमुक्ती महाबाहु तत्कवीजोस्तिदारूणः ।

पूमतोचननामा च निद्रासते रपाणेणे ॥ ५ ॥

Then the Goddess Ambikā, for the good of the Devas, killed Śumbha and Niśumbha with all their attendants in a very dreadful battle. In the battlefield the Devi killed their main assistants Caṇḍa Mundā and the exceedingly terrible Rakta Bīja and Dhūmralocana.

तश्रिल्य सुराणों सा जहार भयमुत्मम् ।

सुता सम्पजिता देवेंगिरी हेमावलें सुभे ॥ 6 ॥

When the Devi destroyed those Dānavas, the Devas became fearless; the Devas then went to the beautiful Sumeru mountain and praised Her and chanted hymns to Her.

राजोवाच

कथितावसुरावाटी कर्थ ती बलिनां वरी ।

केन संस्थापिति चेह्छीवध्यलं कुतो गती ॥ 7 ॥

Hearing about the names of Śumbha and Niśumbha, Janamejaya asked: O best of Munis! Who were those two Asuras? How came they to be most powerful? Who put them here? Why were they vulnerable to women only?

तपसा वरदानेन कस्य जाती महाकलो ।

कर्थं न नित्ती सर्वं कथयस्य सवितस्तम् ॥ 8 ॥

Under whose tapasyā and under whose boon did they become so strong? And why did that great Devi kill them? Describe all these to me in detail.

व्यास उवाच

शूण्र राजन्कथां दिव्यां संर्विपण्णाशिनीम् ।

देव्याश्रितसंयुक्तो सर्वार्थफिलयं शुभम् ॥ 9 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King: I am describing to you that beautiful anecdote where the Devi's holy deeds are involved Hear. This incident full of all that is good, destroys the hearer's all sins and grants them all their desired ends.

पुरा सुभनिरुभी द्वावसुरी भूमिमण्डले ।

पातालनाड्य सम्पानी भारती सुभन्दर्शनी ॥ 10 ॥

In days of yore, Sumbha and Niśumbha, the two fair and good looking brothers came out of Pātāla to this earth.

तौ प्राप्तवीच्चे चैव चोर्तुस्तप उतमम् ।

अम्रेकं परित्यज्य पुक्रले लोकपावने ॥ 1 1 ॥

These two Asuras, when they grew to their manhood, performed severe asceticism in Puskara, the holy place of pilgrimage, the most purifying place in this world and they refused to eat rice and water.

वर्षणाममूर्त यावह्योगविद्यापरायणी ।

एकत्रैवासनं कृत्वा तेपते पर्भं तपः ॥  12 ॥

They became so very skilled in their Yoga practices that they passed away in their one posture and seat one Ayuta (10,000) years. Thus they performed very difficult tapasyā.

तयोस्तुईपन्द वर्जा सर्वेलोकपितामहः ।

तत्रागतश भगवानाकृ वरदायितम् ॥ 13 ॥

Then God Brahmā, the Grandsire of all, became pleased with their asceticism and appeared before them, riding on His vehicle, the Swan.

तावृषी च जानलक्षा दृष्टवा ध्यानपरी स्थिति ।

उत्तिष्ठत महापानी तुहोर्ह तपसा किल ॥ 14 ॥

The Creator, seeing them thus deeply merged in meditation, asked them to get up from that state and told them thus: "I have become pleased with your asceticism.

व्यास उवाच

वाक्षित्नं वा वरं कामं द्वादिष बुवतामिह ।

कामवोद्रं समायातो दृष्ट्वा वां तपासे बलम् ॥ 15 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

I fulfil the desires of all the Lokas; I have now come to you, pleased to see you so very strong in your ascetic practices; better ask your desired boons from me; I will grant them to you."

इति श्रुत्वा वचस्तस्य प्रपूब्दी तौ स्माहित्ति ।

प्रदक्षिणकिं कृत्वा प्राणामं चक्रतुस्तद् ॥ १ ६ ॥

Vyāsa said: “O king! Hearing thus the Grandsire’s words, Śumbha and Niśumbha got up from their meditation; concentrating their attention towards Him, circumambulated Him and bowed down to Him with their hearts full of reverence.

द्पड्वतृष्णिपाणतं च कृत्वा ती दुबैलाकृती ।

क्रवतुर्भूगं वाचं दौनौ गद्धद्या गिरा ॥ 17 ॥

देवदेव द्वासिन्यो भक्तानामययद ।

अमरतं च नी बढ़ादेहि तुहो3स चेढिभो ॥ 18 ॥

The two Asuras were very weak, lean and thin by their tapasāy and they looked very humble. They fell down before Him like a piece of wood and began to speak in a sweet voice, choked by intense feelings. O Brahman! O Deva of the Devas! O Thou, the Ocean of Mercy! O Destroyer of fear of the devotees! O Lord! If Thou art pleased then dost Thou grant us immortality.

सरणादरं किक्रिद्धरं नास्ति धरातले ।

तस्माद्वारच्च संसर्ती युधाकं ग्ररण गतो ॥ 19 ॥

There is nothing in this world more fearful then death; we two have taken refuge unto Thee, being afraid of this death.

श्राङ् तवे देवदेवेश जगकर्तेः क्षामिधे ।

परिस्मोटय विश्वानस्वो मरणबं भवम् ॥ 20 ॥

O Thou, Ocean of mercy! O Creator of the world! O Lord of the Devas! O Universal Soul! Protect us from this fear due to the terrible Death.

बह्योवाच

किमिद प्रार्थनीयं वो विपरितं तु सर्वथा ।

ओदेवं सर्वथा सर्वैंः सर्वैभ्यो भुवनत्रये ॥ 21 ॥

Brahmā said: Is this the boon that you ask? This is in every way, against the Law of Nature; for no one, in these three Lokas, can grant this boon to anybody.

जातस्य हि घुवो मृत्युधूवं जन्म मृतस्य च ।

मयंदा विहिता लोके पूर्व विश्रकृता किल ॥ 2 2 ॥

When one becomes born, one must die; and when one dies, one must be born again. This Law is ordained in this world by the Supreme Creator of this Universe, from time immemorial.

मतैर्व सर्वाय सर्वैः प्राणिभिनान्ने संशयः ।

अन्य प्राधिवतं कामं द्वादिम यच्च वाजिडलम् ॥ 23 ॥

Therefore all the beings must die; there is no doubt in this. Better ask any other boon that you desire; I will grant that to you.

व्यास उवाच

तदाकर्णं ववस्तस्य सुविमृष्य च दानवी ।

क्रन्तुः प्राणियलाय बह्वाणां पुतः स्थितम् ॥ 24 ॥

पुरुविर्यगईय मानवैर्मुपाधिषिः ।

अवध्यतं कृपासिंधो देहै ने वाज्छितं वम् ॥ 25 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! Hearing thus the words of Brahmā, the two Dānavas pondered over the matter and bowed down to the Prajāpati, the Lord of the Creation and said: O Merciful One! Grant us then so that we shall be invulnerable to any of the male of the Immortal Devas down to human beings and birds and deers; this is the boon that we ask.

नारी बल्वती क्रास्तित या नी नार्गं कार्विति ।

न विभीव: सिक्य: कामं जैतोलये सचारचरे ॥ 26 ॥

Where exists the woman so powerful as to kill us? We never fear any woman in all the three Lokas.

अवस्थी प्रात्ती स्यातां नोन्यः पडूजोद्व ।

भयं न रहीजनेभ्यश्व सभाबाद्वला हि स ॥ 27 ॥

O Lotus-born! We, the two brothers, want not to be killed by any male; the females are naturally weak; therefore we need not fear them.

व्यास उवाच

इति श्रुत्वा तयोर्वांयं प्रद्वी वांक्षितं वरम् ।

बह्मा प्रसमन्सता जगगाय श्वयालयम् ॥ 28 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! Hearing their words, the Grandsire Brahmā gladly granted them their desired boon and returned to His own abode.

Book V Chapter XXI

गतेउथ भवने तस्मिन्नवनी स्वगृहं गतो ।

घुंगु पुरोहित कृत्वा चक्रतुः पूजनं तदा ॥ 29 ॥

गुषे दिने सुन्वशे जातकलपयं शुभम् ।

कृत्वा सिंहासनं दिव्यं राज्यार्थ प्रददौ सुनि: ॥ 30 ॥

On Brahman going away, the two Dānavas, too, returned to their own places. They then appointed the Muni Bhrgu as their priest and began to worship him. Bhrgu, the best of the Munis, then, on an auspicious day and when the star was benign, got a beautiful golden throne built and gave it to the king.

नुभाय जेषषुभृत्य ददी रज्ञासनं शुभम् ।

सेवनार्थ तदेवायुं सम्पाता दानवोतनाः ॥ 31 ॥

Šumbha, being the eldest, was then installed on the auspicious throne as the king; the other brave and excellent demons began to assemble there quickly for serving him.

चण्डपुण्डी महावीशे भ्रातरी बतदार्थिति ।

सग्रामती सैन्यसंयुक्ती रथवाजिजाजानिवती ॥ 32 ॥

The two great warriors Caṇḍa and Munḍa, proud on account of their great strength came there with their large armies, chariots, horses, and elephants.

धूपतेणीचनामा च तदुपश्णविक्रमः ।

गृधं च धृपतिं श्रुत्वा तद्धग्राहुलसंयुतः ॥ 33 ॥

Similarly the valiant warriors Dhūmralocana, hearing the Śumbha had become their King, came there with his own army.

रत्कबीजलथा शूरो वरदानबलाधिकः ।

अश्वौहिणीभयं संयुक्तस्तदैवागत्य संतः ॥ 34 ॥

There came up also at that time the great warrior Rakta Bija, more powerful on account of his getting a boon, attended by his army of two Aksauhini soldiers.

तस्यैकं कारणं राजन्संग्रामे युध्यते: सदा ।

देहाद्धीयसमाप्तसत्य शस्त्रहातस्य च ।। ३५ ।।

जायते च यदा भूमावुल्यघ्ने ह्मनेकश: ।

तातृषा: पुरुषा: कृरा बह्वः शक्रपाणयः ॥ ३६ ॥

O King! Hear why this Rakta Bija became so very unconquerable; whenever this Asura was

wounded by any weapons, if one drop of blood fell on the ground, at once would be created so many innumerable Asuras, resembling his wicked nature and with similar weapons in their hands.

सभ्यचित्त तदाकास्तद्वुपास्तत्यास्कमाः ।

युद्धे पुनस्ते कुवंति पुरुषा रक्तस्मध्याः ॥ 37 ॥

The Asuras born of this blood would have similar appearances and would be similar in strength and ready to fight at once when they were born.

अतः सोर्धि महावीर्यः संगामेतीव दुर्बयः ।

अवध्यः सर्वभूताना रक्तकीजो महासुरः ॥ 38 ॥

That great warrior, the great Demon Rakta Bija was unconquerable in battle for this very reason and no being could now kill him.

अन्ये च बह्वः श्रास्त्रानुकुममित्यतः ।

गुर्णं च नूपति मत्वा बभुस्तस्य सेवकाः ॥ 39 ॥

The other Asuras, when they heard that Śumbha had become their king, came up there with their armies consisting of four division of elephants, chariots, cavalry and infantry and began to serve him.

असंख्यात तदा जाता सेना गुभ्यनिरूपम्बयोः ।

पृथिव्या: सकलं राज्यं गृहीतं बलतवता ॥ 40 ॥

The army of Śumbha and Niśumbha thus became countless; and they forcibly conquered and got possession of all the kingdoms that existed then on the surface of the earth.

सेनायोगं तदा कृवा निरुभंः परवीरा ।

जगाम तसा स्वर्ग सचीपतिजायय च ॥ 4 1 ॥

Then Niśumbha, the destroyer of enemies, collected his army and marched up to the Heavens without any delay to conquer Indra, the Lord of Śacī.

चकासासी महायुद्धं लोकपातैः समन्ततः ।

ब्रुगहा बघपानेत ताउदयामास वक्षासि ॥ 42 ॥

He fought very hard with all the Lokapālas on all sides when Indra struck him on his breast with His thunderbolt.

स बज्ञाधिकृत्तो भूमी परपात दानवानुजः ।

भरने बलं तदा तस्य निर्गुभंस्य महात्मनः ॥ 43 ॥

Nisūmbha fell unconscious on the ground with that blow when his soldiers, defeated in the battle, fled away on all sides.

भातरं मृद्धितं श्रुला शुंभः परवलादीनः ।

तथागत्य सुरानस्विताउदयामास सायकैः ॥ 4 4 ॥

Sümbha, the destroyer of the enemy forces, hearing the unconscious state of the younger brother, came up at once on the field and shot at the Devas with multitudes of arrows.

कृतं युद्धे महनेन रुभेनाविलक्षकर्भण ।

निर्जितस्तु सुरा: सर्वे संद्रा: पालाशु सर्वेण: ॥ 4 5 ॥

The untiring Šumbha fought so violently that Indra and the other Devas and Lokapālas were defeated.

ऐन्हे पदं तदा तेन गृहीतं बलवतया ।

कल्यादावसंयुक्ते कामधेयुसमावित्यम् ॥ 4 6 ॥

Šumbha then took away, perforce, the position of Indra and he occupied the Celestial Tree and Heavenly milching cow that yielded all desires and other excellent things over which Indra used to reign.

त्रैलोक्यं व्यभागाश्र हातलनेन महात्मना ।

नन्दनं च वनं प्रायय मुविता5भूम्हाहसुरः ॥ 47 ॥

सुयायाश्वे पानेन सुखमाप महासुरः ।

कुबेरं स च निविलेन तस्य राज्यं चकार ॥ 48 ॥

In fact, that high-souled Asura got the dominion of the three Lokas and took away all those that were offered at the sacrifices. He became highly glad on getting the Nandana Garden and was extremely delighted when he drank the celestial nectar. He then defeated in battle Kubera, the god of wealth and occupied his kingdom.

अधिकारं तथा भानो: शशिनऊ चकार है ।

यमे चैव विनिर्जित्व जग्राह तत्वद तथा ॥ 49 ॥

He defeated the Moon, Sun, and Yama, the God of Death and occupied their positions.

वर्णस्य तथा राज्यं चक्रात बहिकमं च ।

वायोः कार्य निरुभष्ठ चक्रा स्वबान्धित्वः ॥ 50 ॥

Surrounded by his army, Niśumbha dispossessed Varuna, Fire, and Air of their kingdoms and began to reign in their stead.

ततो देवा विनिर्मूता हृतराज्या हताश्रियः ।

संत्वज्ञ नन्दनं सर्वे निर्वंषुर्गिरगुढ़े ॥ 51 ॥

Thus deprived of their kingdoms, prosperity and wealth, the Devas left the Nandana Garden and fled, out of terror, to the caves of hills and mountains.

हताधिकाराले सर्वे बधमुष्विंजने वने ।

निरालबा निराधाग निरलेजका निरगुधाः ॥ 52 ॥

Thus deprived of all their rights, the Devas without any weapons, without any lustre, with out any home, and without anywhere to go, began to wander in lonely forests.

विदेश्रमर: सर्वे पर्वतानां गृहासु च ।

उद्यानेषु च शून्येषु नदीनां गह्रेशु च ॥ 53 ॥

न प्रापुले सुखं स्वायीय स्थानप्रध विवेस्तः ।

लोकमाला महाराज देवाधीनं सुखं किल ॥ 54 ॥

O King! All the Immortals began to knock about in lonely gardens, mountain caves and rivers; and nowhere they found happiness; for happiness depends entirely unto the hands of Fate.

बलवन्तो महाभागा बहुजा धनसंयुतः ।

काले कुःखं तथा दैन्यमानुवक्ति नाराधि ॥ 55 ॥

चिग्मेतनमहाराज कालस्येव विचेहितम् ।

यः कोरिते नरं तावराजानं चिथ्युंक ततः ॥ 56 ॥

दातारं याचकं चैव बलन्तवं तथावजलम् ।

पिछतं विकलं कामं गूरं चातीव कातम् ॥ 57 ॥

O Lord of men! Even those fortunate souls, who are powerful, and wealthy and wise, meet at times with distress and poverty. O King! How marvellous are the ways and manners of Time! It makes kings and donors beggars; it renders the powerful, weak; literates, illiterates; and it makes great warriors into terrible cowards.

मखानां च शर्त कृत्वा प्रायेत्रासनुतमम् ।

पुनईःखं परं प्राप्त कालस्य गतिरीदुर्गी ॥ 58 ॥

O King! Vāsava performed one hundred horse-sacrifices and got the excellent Indra's position; but again he fell into extreme difficulties; thus runs the wheel of Time.

कालः कारोति धर्मिईं पुरुषं ज्ञानसंयुक्तम् ।

तमेवातीय पाधिष्ठं ज्ञानलैशविवर्जितम् ॥ ५ ९ ॥

Book V Chapter XXII

It is Time that bestows the gem of knowledge to a person and it is Time again that deprives that very same man of his wisdom and makes him a great sinner.

न विस्मयोउर कतैव्यः सर्वथा कालचेहिते ।

ब्रहाविष्युहरातीनापपीद्रककष्टचेहितम् ॥ 6 0 ॥

विष्यूजनन्यानपोनि सूकाराविष्यु योनिषु ।

इरः कपाली सघातः कालेनैव बलौरियस ॥ 6 1 ॥

इति शीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे पश्मस्कन्थे

भगवतीमाहामनये एकविशोउध्याय: ॥ 21 ॥ ||

The Bhagavān Viṣṇu takes incarnations, under the control of Time, in several lower wombs as boar, etc., and Mahā Deva carries on His body the human skulls, that are not even fit to be touched. When Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa and others suffer such painful things, then one need not wonder at the workings of the Great inscrutable Time.

Here ends the Twenty-first Chapter of the Fifth Book on the conquest of the Heavens by Śumbha and Niśumbha in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter XXI

