CHAPTER VIII

On Going to the Tirthas

सूत उवाच

शृति पृष्टस्ताव विगो रज्ञा पारीक्षितेत ने ।

उवाच वित्तरात्सर्वे व्यास: सत्यवतीसुतः ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: Thus asked! by the son of Parikṣit, the king Janamejaya, the best of the Brāhmaṇas, the son of Satyavati, Vyāsa spoke, in detail, the following:

जन्मेज्ञो9वि धर्मात्मा निर्वेदं परमं गतः ।

चितं दुर्गति मत्ता वैराटीतनस्यव ते ॥ २ ॥

The virtuous Janamejaya became very much sorry and despondent when he heard in detail the improper acts of his own father Parikşit, the son of Uttarā.

तस्यैदोड़राणार्थीय चकार सत्तं मन: ।

विप्रावमानपपेने यमलोकं गतस्य दै ॥ ३ ॥

Owing to insulting the Brāhmin boy, his father had to go to hell; and he was constantly thinking how to release his father.

पुत्रामतकाधास्मात्यते पितरं स्वकम् ।

पुत्रेति नाम सार्थ स्वातेन तस्य मुनीक्षाः ॥ ४ ॥

The son is called “Putra” for he releases his father from the hell, named “Put”. He is the true son that can do so.

सर्पदृष्टे नृपं श्रुला ह्यायपित मृते तथा ।

विप्राणायात्तेरेयं स्नानदानविवर्जितम् ॥ ५ ॥

वितुर्पर्तिं निश्यामती निर्वेदं नरावाक्षः ।

पारीक्षितो महाभागः सन्तपो भयविद्धलः ॥ ६ ॥

Book IV Chapter VIII

The fortunate son of Parikṣit became very much tormented and bewildered with fear when he heard what was the fate of his father, who died bitten by a serpent on the top of a palace, due to the curse of a Brāhmin, void of any bathing, charities, and the purificatory acts.

परम्छय मुनि व्यासं गृहातमनिर्विति: ।

नरनारायणस्येमां कक्षो परमवित्तात्मा ॥ 7 ॥

When Vyāsa returned home, Janamejaya asked him, the whole course of events of Nara Nārāyaṇa.

व्यास उवाच

स यदा नित्तो रौद्रो हिरण्यकशिपुरंग ।

अभियक्तिस्तदार राज्य प्रहादो नाम ततुतः ॥ 8 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When the terrible Hiranyakāśipu was slain, his son Prahlāda was installed on the throne.

तम्मिछासति देत्येटे देवहाहाणुजके ।

महैभूंयो नृपतयो चजतः श्रद्धायित्नतः ॥ 9 ॥

During the government of Prahlāda, the chief of the Daityas, the worshipper of the Brāhmanaş and Devas, the kings on earth began with faith to do many sacrifices for the satisfaction of the Devas.

ब्राहणाशु तपोधर्मतीर्थयात्रा कुर्वेते ।

श्रेयाशु खस्ववृत्तिस्वा: शुत्रा: शुधूषणे ततः ॥ 10 ॥

The Brāhmanas were engaged in their Tapasyā, Dharma, and in frequenting the places of pilgrimages; the Vaishyas, in their trade; and the Śūdras, in serving the other three classes.

गृसिंहिन च पातले स्थापितः मोक्ष देवात्यः ।

राज्यं चकार तत्रैव प्रजापातन्तरतः ॥ ११ ॥

The incarnation of Hari, the Nrsinha (Man-Lion) made Prahlāda, the king of the Daityas in the Pātāla (Nether regions); and Prahlāda, engaged there, spent his time in the preservation and welfare of his subjects.

क्रतिविद्युपुत्रोय च्यवनाखो महातपा: ।

जगाम नर्मदों सन्तु तीर्थे बे न्याद्तीक्षण् ॥ 12 ॥

Once, upon a time, the great ascetic Cyavana Muni, the son of Bhrgu went on his way to bathing

in the river Narmadā, at the place of pilgrimage, called Vyāhrtiśvara.

रेबां महानर्दी दृष्ट्वा ततस्तस्यावतात् ।

उत्तरन्ते प्रजग्रह नागी विषयमढ़रः ॥ 13 ॥

गृहीतो भवभीतस्तु पाताले भूमितसभः ।

सस्मार मनसा विद्युं देदवेदं जनादन्म् ॥ 14 ॥

There he saw the great river Revā and, while he was descending in the river, a dreadful snake caught hold of him and carried him to the Pātāla. The Muni was greatly terrified and began to think of the Deva of the Devas, Janārdana Viṣṇu.

संस्मूते पुरुषतीकाके निर्विकोःपन्न्योरगः ।

न प्राप चलवनो दुःखं तीयमानो रासततम् ॥ 15 ॥

On remembering the lotus eyed. Viṣṇu, the serpent lost his poison, and Cyavana Muni did not find any trouble, though carried to the Pāṭāla.

ढिजिछून मुनिस्वत्तो निरिणेणानतिषोक्ता ।

मां शपेत मुनिः कुंद्रस्तपासोयं महानिति ॥ 16 ॥

Then the serpent, coming to know of the power of the Muni, left him for fear that the Muni might curse him; the snake afterwards repented very much.

चचार नागकन्याथि: पुजितो मुनिसत्तम: ।

विदेशान्यथ नानानां दानवानां महलुम् ॥ 17 ॥

Cyavana, the best of the Munis, worshipped by the daughters of the serpents, roamed there and entered once into a beautiful palace of the Nāgas and the Dānavas.

कदाधिवर्षपुरुषुं तं विचरन्तं पुरोतमे ।

द्वर्धें दैत्यराजोउरी प्रहावो धर्मवस्तकः ॥ 18 ॥

While he was walking, he was seen by the religious king of the Daityas, the Prahāda.

दूर्ध्वा तं पूजयामास मुनिं देत्यपतित्वा ।

पप्रष्ठ कारणं किं ते पातालामाने वद ॥ 19 ॥

The lord of the Daityas on seeing him worshipped him and enquired of him the cause of his coming there.

प्रेयितोत्र सि किमिश्रेण सर्व बृहि हिकोणम ।

दैत्यविद्धिपुक्तेन मम राज्यदिषुक्षया ॥ 20 ॥

Are you sent here by Indra? Speak truly, O best

of the Brāhmaṇas. Is it to pry into my kingdom out of the enmity between the Devas and the Daityas?

च्यवन उवाच

किं मे भयवता राजन् यदई प्रेयितः पुनः ।

तृतकार्यं प्रकुर्णिणः प्राप्तवापरते तव ॥ 21 ॥

Cyavana said: What have I to do with Indra? That I might be sent by him, as his spy, messenger, to your city!

विद्धि मां भृगुगुरं तं स्वनोयं धर्मततयम् ।

मा शकूंं कुरू दैत्येंत्र वासवप्रेषितस्य वै ॥ 22 ॥

O Chief of the Daityas! Know me as Cyavana, the son of Bhrugu, prompt in religious duties and whose eye is illumined by knowledge. Do not fear that I am sent here by Indra.

स्नानार्थ नमंदां प्रात: पुण्यतीर्थे नृपोतम ।

नघामेवावतीर्णोंई गृहीतघ महाविना ॥ 2 3 ॥

When I went to bathe in a place of pilgrimage, in the holy Narmadā and dropped into the river, a poisonous snake caught hold of me (and carried me here).

जातोउसी निविधः सपों विणोः संस्मरणादिव ।

भुक्तोड़ं तेन नागेन प्रभावात्स्मारमय ते ॥ 24 ॥

I took the name of Viṣṇu; and the serpent, hearing the Viṣṇu's name, became void of poison, and left me here as you see.

अगाताने राजेन्द्र मयान3प्रत तव हर्जन् ।

विष्णुभक्तों दैवेन्द्र तद्धक्ते मां विधित्वान । 25 ॥

O king! coming here, I see you. You are a devotee of Viṣṇu; know me, too, a devotee of the same Viṣṇu.

व्यास उवाच

तिश्याम वचः रूल्थां हिरण्यकशिपोः सुतः ।

प्रपछ्च परया प्रीत्या तीक्षिति विविधाति च ॥ २ ६ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Prahlāda, the son of Hiranya Kaśipu, on hearing his sweet words, gladly asked him about the various places of pilgrimages.

प्रहाद उवाच

पृथिव्यां कानि तीक्षिति पुण्याति मुनिस्तम ।

पाताले च तथा2प्रकाशे तानि नो वद विस्तारात् ॥ 27 ॥

Prahlāda said: O Best of Munis! Kindly describe to me, in detail, which are the places of pilgrimages on the earth, Pātāla, and in the Heavens, that verily lead to holiness.

छवन उवाच

मानोवाक्कायशुक्रानां राजस्नीथे पदे चे ।

तथा मलिनचितानां गुत्रापि कीकाटिधिका ॥ 28 ॥

Cyavana said: O King! He whose body, words, and mind have grown pure, to him, his every footstep is a place of pilgrimage; he, whose heart is impure and defiled, to him the holy Ganges even is a thing more hated and worse than the Kikata country (the name of Bihar).

प्रथमे चेन्मनः शूद्रं जातं पायाविजितम् ।

तदा तीर्थिति सर्वांशि पाचवानि भविति चे ॥ 29 ॥

Every holy place will impart holiness to him whose mind is first pure and deprived of sin.

गड़ातीरे हि सर्वेत्र वसन्ति नगराशि च ।

त्रजाशैवकारा प्रामाः सर्वे छेटास्तधापरे ॥ 30 ॥

निपादानां निवासाशु कैकतन्तां तथापरे ।

हूणवंगखानां च भलेच्छानां दैत्यसत्तम ॥ 31 ॥

O Best of the Daityas! On the banks of the Ganges, are situated good many cities, towns, villages, places to assemble, mines, small villages, the living places of the aborigins, the Cāndālas, and Kaivartas, the Hūnas, Baṅgas, the Khasas and the other Mlechcas.

पिबित्ति सर्वदा गार्ड़े जलं ब्रहोणमं सदा ।

स्नानं कुर्विति दैस्टैंत्र विकालं स्थेच्छ्या जना: ॥ 32 ॥

The inhabitants of the above places drink at their will the holy Ganges water, equivalent to Brahma, and bathe therein and do other works.

तत्रैको3पि विश्रुद्धातना न भवत्येव मारिये ।

किं फल नर्ति तीर्थस्य विषयोपहातामसु ॥ 33 ॥

O King! There not even a single soul becomes pure. What use is a holy place to him, whose heart becomes attached to the sensual objects and who can therefore be called the lost souls.

कारणं मन एवात्र नान्यत्राजन्विचित्रत ।

मनःशुद्धिः प्रकर्तेम्या सततं शुद्धिमिच्छता ॥ 34 ॥

Book IV Chapter VIII

Know, O king! the mind as the principal factor in any religious act or in any holy place. He who wants purity, let him first make his own mind pure.

तीर्वासी महापापो घरेत्त्रात्मवर्यचनात् ।

तदैवार्चितं पघामन्तंत्य प्रकल्पते ॥ 3 5 ॥

The residents in any holy place deceive others and thus incur great sin. The sins committed in a place of pilgrimage can never be removed; they become unending and inexhaustible.

वयंद्रवाकर्ण पबवं मिथे वैभोपजायते ।

भावद्रुस्तथा तीर्थे कोटिस्तानो न शुथ्यति ॥ 36 ॥

As the fruit, Indraváruna, is never sweet though fully ripe, so whose heart is defiled, he can never be pure though he bathes hundreds and thousands of times in the Tirtha water.

प्रथमं मनसः शुद्धि: कर्तेल्या शुभमिच्छता ।

शुढ़े मनसि र्वस्य पृथिवर्षिति नायया ॥ 37 ॥

He who wants welfare of his own and others, he should first make his mind pure; when his mind becomes pure, then, the purity of material things and the purity of conduct can have any effects; then and then only resorting to places of pilgrimages becomes efficacious.

तर्वेवाराग्याद्धि: स्याततस्तीर्थ प्रसिध्यति ।

अन्यथा तु कृतं सर्व व्यर्थ भवति तल्यणात् ॥ 38 ॥

“हीनवर्णीय संसर्ग तीर्थ नाला सदा चयजेत ।”

भूतानुकंपनं चैव कल्लिं कंर्णण विधा ।

यदि पृष्ठसि राजेत्र तीर्थ वक्ष्यायन्तुनामय ॥ 39 ॥

Always avoid company with the lowest class of persons in the holy places; it is far better to shew one's good will and compassion to all the souls (jivas) by one's intellect and by one's acts. You have asked me about the holy places of pilgrimages; I will now tell you those that are the best.

प्रधर्म वैभियं पुर्णयं चक्रतीर्थ च पुक्रमम् ।

अन्येषां चैव तीर्थानां संख्या नासित महीत्ते ॥ 40 ॥

पावानानि च स्थानानि बहुति नृपसतम् ।

O king! The holy Naimisāranya is the first, next Cakratirha; next Puskaratirtha; there are many

others besides these that cannot be counted. O Best of kings! There are lots of other holy places in this world.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छूला वचनं राजा वैभियं गन्तुमुक्ता: ॥ 41 ॥

नोदयामास दैत्यान्वे हर्षिनिर्यमासनः ।

प्रहार उवाच

उत्तिष्ठु महाप्रयाग गमिष्यामोउत वैभियम् ॥ 42 ॥

ऋथाम: पुण्डरीकाक्षं चौतवाससमच्छुतम् ।

Vyāsa said: O king! Prahlāda, the king of the Daityas, on hearing the Muni's words, became ready to go Naimisāranya and, with very much gladness, exclaimed to his followers, the Daityas: O Good Ones! Get up; to-day we will go to Naimisāranya and we will see the lotus eyed, yellow robed Śrī Acyutam, the Viṣṇu.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्ता विद्यापनैतन सर्वे ते दानावास्तदा ॥ 43 ॥

तेनैव सह पातातार्धिर्युः परया मुदा ।

Vyāsa said: O King! When thus addressed by Prahlāda, the Demons were exceedingly glad; and they all marched out of Patāla.

ते समेत्य च देतैया दानावाङ्ग मढ़ावताः ॥ 44 ॥

नैमिपारण्यमासाठा स्नां चक्रभूंदाचिताः ।

The Daityas, and Demons all united went to Naimisāranyam and filled with much pleasure, they all bathed on reaching that holy place.

प्रक्रादस्तत तीर्थेषु चर-दैवैः साम्वितः ॥ 45 ॥

सरस्वती महापुण्यां द्वर्गे विमतोदकाम ।

There, accompanied by the Daityas, Prahlāda roamed about the sacred places and saw the holy Sarasvati river and Her pure.clean water.

तीर्थ त्रन युधेष्छ प्रहादस्य महात्मनः ॥ 46 ॥

मनः प्रसर्ध संज्ञानं स्नाला सारस्वते जले ।

The high souled Prahlāda bathed in the Sarasvatī river and his mind was satisfied.

विधिवस्त्र देर्येंत्रः स्नानदानादिक शुभे ।

चकारायि प्रसज्ञात्या तीर्थे परमपावने ॥ 47 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वैभागवते महापुराणे चतुर्धिकन्योड्गभोउध्यायः ॥ 8 ॥ 11

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

The king of the Daityas was very much pleased and he performed ablutions and charities according to due rites in that most auspicious sacred place pilgrimage.

Here ends the Eighth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa on going to the Tirthas.

