[Ch 8 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: Thus asked! by the son of Parikṣit, the king Janamejaya, the best of the Brāhmaṇas, the son of Satyavati, Vyāsa spoke, in detail, the following:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Thus asked by the son of Parīkṣit, the king Janamejaya, the best of the Brāhmaṇas, the son of Satyavatī, Vyāsa spoke, in detail, the following :--

[Ch 8 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The virtuous Janamejaya became very much sorry and despondent when he heard in detail the improper acts of his own father Parikşit, the son of Uttarā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The virtuous Janamejaya became very much sorry and despondent when he heard in detail the improper acts of his own father Parīkṣit, the son of Uttarā.

[Ch 8 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Owing to insulting the Brāhmin boy, his father had to go to hell; and he was constantly thinking how to release his father.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Owing to insulting the Brāhmin boy, his father had to go to hell; and he was constantly thinking how to release his father.

[Ch 8 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The son is called “Putra” for he releases his father from the hell, named “Put”. He is the true son that can do so.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The son is called “Puttra” for he releases his father from the hell, named “Put”. He is the true son that can do so.

[Ch 8 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The fortunate son of Parikṣit became very much tormented and bewildered with fear when he heard what was the fate of his father, who died bitten by a serpent on the top of a palace, due to the curse of a Brāhmin, void of any bathing, charities, and the purificatory acts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The fortunate son of Parīkṣit became very much tormented and bewildered with fear when he heard what was the fate of his father, who died bitten by a serpent on the top of a palace, due to the curse of a Brāhmin, void of any bathing, charities, and the purificatory acts.

[Ch 8 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Vyāsa returned home, Janamejaya asked him, the whole course of events of Nara Nārāyaṇa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Vyāsa returned home, Janamejaya asked him, the whole course of events of Nara Nārāyaṇa.

[Ch 8 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! When the terrible Hiranyakāśipu was slain, his son Prahlāda was installed on the throne.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! When the terrible Hiraṇya Kaśipoo was slain, his son Prahlāda was installed on his throne.

[Ch 8 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► During the government of Prahlāda, the chief of the Daityas, the worshipper of the Brāhmanaş and Devas, the kings on earth began with faith to do many sacrifices for the satisfaction of the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► During the government of Prahlāda, the chief of the Daityas, the worshipper of the Brāhmaṇas and Devas, the kings on earth began with faith to do many sacrifices for the satisfaction of the Devas.

[Ch 8 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmanas were engaged in their Tapasyā, Dharma, and in frequenting the places of pilgrimages; the Vaishyas, in their trade; and the Śūdras, in serving the other three classes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmaṇas were engaged in their Tapasyā, Dharma, and in frequenting the places of pilgrimages; the Vaiśyas, in their trade; and the Śūdras, in serving the other three classes.

[Ch 8 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The incarnation of Hari, the Nrsinha (Man-Lion) made Prahlāda, the king of the Daityas in the Pātāla (Nether regions); and Prahlāda, engaged there, spent his time in the preservation and welfare of his subjects.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The incarnation of Hari, the Nri Simha (Man-Lion) made Prahlāda, the king of the Daityas in the Pātāla (Nether regions); and Prahlāda, engaged there, spent his time in the preservation and welfare of his subjects.

[Ch 8 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once, upon a time, the great ascetic Cyavana Muni, the son of Bhrgu went on his way to bathing in the river Narmadā, at the place of pilgrimage, called Vyāhrtiśvara.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once, on a time, the great ascetics Cyavana Muni, the son of Bhṛgu went on his way to bathing in the river Narmada, at the place of pilgrimage, called Vyārhitīśvara.

[Ch 8 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There he saw the great river Revā and, while he was descending in the river, a dreadful snake caught hold of him and carried him to the Pātāla. The Muni was greatly terrified and began to think of the Deva of the Devas, Janārdana Viṣṇu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There he saw the great river Revā and, while he was descending in the river, a dreadful snake caught hold of him and carried him to the Pātāla. The Muni was greatly terrified and began to think of the Deva of the Devas, Janārdana Viṣṇu.

[Ch 8 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On remembering the lotus eyed. Viṣṇu, the serpent lost his poison, and Cyavana Muni did not find any trouble, though carried to the Pāṭāla.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On remembering the lotus eyed Viṣṇu, the serpent lost his poison, and Cyavana Muni did not find any trouble, though carried to the Pātāla.

[Ch 8 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the serpent, coming to know of the power of the Muni, left him for fear that the Muni might curse him; the snake afterwards repented very much.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the serpent, coming to know of the power of the Muni, left him for fear that the Muni might curse him; the snake afterwards repented very much.

[Ch 8 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Cyavana, the best of the Munis, worshipped by the daughters of the serpents, roamed there and entered once into a beautiful palace of the Nāgas and the Dānavas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Cyavana, the best of the Munis, worshipped by the daughters of the serpents, roamed there and entered once into a beautiful palace of the Nāgas and the Dānavas.

[Ch 8 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► While he was walking, he was seen by the religious king of the Daityas, the Prahāda.
NEW CORR ENG ──► While he was walking, he was seen by the religious king of the Daityas, the Prahlāda.

[Ch 8 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The lord of the Daityas on seeing him worshipped him and enquired of him the cause of his coming there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The lord of the Daityas on seeing him worshipped him and enquired of him the cause of his coming there.

[Ch 8 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Are you sent here by Indra? Speak truly, O best of the Brāhmaṇas. Is it to pry into my kingdom out of the enmity between the Devas and the Daityas?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Are you sent here by Indra? Speak truly, O best of the Brāhmaṇas. Is it to pry into my kingdom out of the enmity between the Devas and the Daityas?

[Ch 8 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Cyavana said: What have I to do with Indra? That I might be sent by him, as his spy, messenger, to your city!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Cyavana said :-- What have I to do with Indra? That I might be sent by him, as his spy, messenger, to your city!

[Ch 8 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Chief of the Daityas! Know me as Cyavana, the son of Bhrugu, prompt in religious duties and whose eye is illumined by knowledge. Do not fear that I am sent here by Indra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Chief of the Daityas! Know me as Cyavana, the son of Bhṛgu, prompt in religious duties and whose eye is illumined by knowledge. Do not fear that I am sent here by Indra.

[Ch 8 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When I went to bathe in a place of pilgrimage, in the holy Narmadā and dropped into the river, a poisonous snake caught hold of me (and carried me here).
NEW CORR ENG ──► When I went to bathe in a place of pilgrimage, in the holy Narmadā, and dropped into the river, a poisonous snake caught hold of me (and carried me here).

[Ch 8 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I took the name of Viṣṇu; and the serpent, hearing the Viṣṇu's name, became void of poison, and left me here as you see.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I took the name of Viṣṇu; and the serpent, hearing the Viṣṇu’s name, became void of poison, and left me here as you see.

[Ch 8 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! coming here, I see you. You are a devotee of Viṣṇu; know me, too, a devotee of the same Viṣṇu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Coming here, I see you. You are a devotee of Viṣṇu; know me, too, a devotee of the same Viṣṇu.

[Ch 8 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! Prahlāda, the son of Hiranya Kaśipu, on hearing his sweet words, gladly asked him about the various places of pilgrimages.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! Prahlāda, the son of Hiraṇya Kaśipu, on hearing his sweet words, gladly asked him about the various places of pilgrimages.

[Ch 8 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Prahlāda said: O Best of Munis! Kindly describe to me, in detail, which are the places of pilgrimages on the earth, Pātāla, and in the Heavens, that verily lead to holiness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Prahlāda said :-- O Best of Munis! Kindly describe to me, in detail, which are the places of pilgrimages on the earth, Pātāla, and in the Heavens, that verily lead to holiness.

[Ch 8 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Cyavana said: O King! He whose body, words, and mind have grown pure, to him, his every footstep is a place of pilgrimage; he, whose heart is impure and defiled, to him the holy Ganges even is a thing more hated and worse than the Kikata country (the name of Bihar).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Cyavana said :-- O King! He whose body, words, and mind have grown pure, to him, his every footstep is a place of pilgrimage; he, whose heart is impure and defiled, to him the holy Ganges even is a thing more hated and worse than the Kīkaṭa country (the name of Behār).

[Ch 8 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Every holy place will impart holiness to him whose mind is first pure and deprived of sin.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Every holy place will impart holiness to him whose mind is first pure and deprived of sin.

[Ch 8 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Best of the Daityas! On the banks of the Ganges, are situated good many cities, towns, villages, places to assemble, mines, small villages, the living places of the aborigins, the Cāndālas, and Kaivartas, the Hūnas, Baṅgas, the Khasas and the other Mlechcas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Best of the Daityas! On the banks of the Ganges, are situated good many cities, towns, villages, places to assemble, mines, small villages, the living places of the aborigines, the cāndālas, and kaivartas, the Hūṇas, Baṅgas, the Khasas and the other Mleccas.

[Ch 8 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The inhabitants of the above places drink at their will the holy Ganges water, equivalent to Brahma, and bathe therein and do other works.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The inhabitants of the above places drink at their will the holy Ganges water, equivalent to Brāhma, and bathe therein and do other works.

[Ch 8 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! There not even a single soul becomes pure. What use is a holy place to him, whose heart becomes attached to the sensual objects and who can therefore be called the lost souls.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! There not even a single soul becomes pure. What use is a holy place to him, whose heart becomes attached to the sensual objects and who can therefore be called the lost souls.

[Ch 8 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Know, O king! the mind as the principal factor in any religious act or in any holy place. He who wants purity, let him first make his own mind pure.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Know, O king! the mind as the principal factor in any religious act or in any holy place. He who wants purity, let him first make his own mind pure.

[Ch 8 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The residents in any holy place deceive others and thus incur great sin. The sins committed in a place of pilgrimage can never be removed; they become unending and inexhaustible.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The residents in any holy place deceive others and thus iñcur great sins. The sins committed in a place of pilgrimage can never be removed; they become unending and inexhaustible.

[Ch 8 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As the fruit, Indraváruna, is never sweet though fully ripe, so whose heart is defiled, he can never be pure though he bathes hundreds and thousands of times in the Tirtha water.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As the fruit, Indravāruṇā, is never sweet though fully ripe, so whose heart is defiled, he can never be pure though he bathes hundreds and thousands of times in the Tīrtha water.

[Ch 8 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He who wants welfare of his own and others, he should first make his mind pure; when his mind becomes pure, then, the purity of material things and the purity of conduct can have any effects; then and then only resorting to places of pilgrimages becomes efficacious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He who wants welfare of his own and others, he should first make his mind pure; when his mind becomes pure, then, the purity of material things and the purity of conduct can have any effect; then and then only resorting to places of pilgrimages becomes efficacious.

[Ch 8 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Always avoid company with the lowest class of persons in the holy places; it is far better to shew one's good will and compassion to all the souls (jivas) by one's intellect and by one's acts. You have asked me about the holy places of pilgrimages; I will now tell you those that are the best.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Always avoid company with the lowest class of persons in the holy places; it is far better to shew one’s good will and compassion to all the souls (jīvas) by one’s intellect and by one’s acts. You have asked me about the holy places of pilgrimages; I will now tell you those that are the best.

[Ch 8 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! The holy Naimisāranya is the first, next Cakratirha; next Puskaratirtha; there are many others besides these that cannot be counted. O Best of kings! There are lots of other holy places in this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! The holy Naimiśāraṇya is the first, next Cakratīrtha; next Puskaratīrtha; there are many others besides these that cannot be counted. O Best of kings! There are lots of other holy places in this world.

[Ch 8 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! Prahlāda, the king of the Daityas, on hearing the Muni's words, became ready to go Naimisāranya and, with very much gladness, exclaimed to his followers, the Daityas: O Good Ones! Get up; to-day we will go to Naimisāranya and we will see the lotus eyed, yellow robed Śrī Acyutam, the Viṣṇu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! Prahlāda, the king of the Daityas, on hearing the Muni’s words, became ready to go Naimiśraṇya and, with very much gladness, exclaimed to his followers, the Daityas :-- O Good Ones! Get up; today we will go to Naimiśāraṇya and we will see the lotus eyed, yellow robed Śrī Achyutam, the Viṣṇu.

[Ch 8 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! When thus addressed by Prahlāda, the Demons were exceedingly glad; and they all marched out of Patāla.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! When thus addressed by Prahlāda, the Demons were exceedingly glad; and they all marched out of Pātāla.

[Ch 8 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Daityas, and Demons all united went to Naimisāranyam and filled with much pleasure, they all bathed on reaching that holy place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Daityas, and Demons all united went to Naimiśāraṇyam and filled with much pleasure, they all bathed on reaching that holy place.

[Ch 8 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There, accompanied by the Daityas, Prahlāda roamed about the sacred places and saw the holy Sarasvati river and Her pure.clean water.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There, accompanied by the Daityas, Prahlāda roamed about the sacred places and saw the holy Sarasvatī river and Her pure clean water.

[Ch 8 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The high souled Prahlāda bathed in the Sarasvatī river and his mind was satisfied.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The highsouled Prahlāda bathed in the Sarasvatī river and his mind was satisfied.

[Ch 8 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king of the Daityas was very much pleased and he performed ablutions and charities according to due rites in that most auspicious sacred place pilgrimage. Here ends the Eighth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa on going to the Tirthas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king of the Daityas was very much pleased and he perform ablutions and charities according to due rites in that most auspicious sacred place of pilgrimage. Here ends the Eighth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa on going to the Tīrthas.
