[Ch 13 Verse 1-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King spoke: “O Grandfather! How did Visnu, the Powerful, the Cause of the world, perform the Devi Yajña? Whose help did he receive and what priests with their knowledge of the Vedas did he engage, kindly tell all these to me in special details. I will very attentively hear first this Devi Yajña, performed by Visnu; and then I will make arrangements to do that myself accordingly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King spoke :-- O Grandfather! How did Viṣṇu, the Powerful, the Cause of the world, perform the Devī Yajña? Whose help did he receive and what priests with their knowledge of the Vedas did he engage, kindly tell all these to me in special details. I will very attentively hear first this Devī Yajña, performed by Viṣṇu; and then I will make arrangements to do that myself accordingly.

[Ch 13 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O noble one! Hear in detail that very wonderful thing, how Viṣṇu celebrated the Devi Yajña conformably to the rules laid down in the Śāstras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O noble one! Hear in detail that very wonderful thing, how Viṣṇu celebrated the Devī Yajña comformably to the rules laid down in the Śāstras.

[Ch 13 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa were each given powers by the Devī, the Goddess of the Universe, and when they parted, these three Devas became free of their womanhood, while they were coming back in their aerial cars and turned out men, as they were before.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa were each given powers by the Devī, the Goddess of the Universe, and when they parted, these three Devas became free from their womanhood, while they were coming back in their aerial cars and turned out men, as they were before.

[Ch 13 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► These three Devas, found the great ocean before them. They brought out world from it; and built, in that world, dwelling abodes; and they themselves began to live in some of them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► These three Devas, found the great ocean before them. They brought out world from it; and built, in that world, dwelling abodes; and they themselves began to live in some of them.

[Ch 13 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That world became fixed, steady and the supporter of all beings when the Goddess imparted the power of fixture, steadiness, and the power of supporting to the world. The earth, filled marrow, then, became fixed and the great supporter by Her power.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That world became fixed, steady and the supporter of all beings when the Goddess imparted the power of fixture, steadiness, and the power of supporting to the world. The earth, filled with marrow, then, became fixed and the great supporter by Her power.

[Ch 13 Verse 8-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The name of this earth is Medinit, since it was made out of the marrow of the two Asuras, Madhu and Kaitabha. This earth is termed Dharā because it supports all; is termed Prthvī because it is very capacious; and it is called Mahī because it is great, since it supports so many beings. O King! the Ananta serpent is holding it on her thousand hoods. To make the earth remain solid and compact, Brahmā built at places mountains. An iron nails in a log of wood, so these hills and mountains within this earth made it fixed. Therefore, the Pundits call these mountains “Mahīdhara” holder of the earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The name of this earth is Medinī, since it was made out of the marrow of the two Asuras Madhu and Kaiṭabha. This earth is termed Dharā because it supports all; is termed Prithvī because it is very capacious; and it is called Mahī because it is great, since it supports so many beings. O King! the Ananta serpent is holding it on her thousand-hoods. To make the earth remain solid and compact, Brahmā built at places mountains. As iron nails in a log of wood, so these hills and mountains within this earth made it fixed. Therefore the Pundits call these mountains “Mahīdhara,” holder of the earth.

[Ch 13 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Thus the golden Meru, the great mountain, many Yojanas wide, adorned with many golden mountain peaks was created.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Thus the golden Meru, the great mountain, many Yojanas wide, adorned with many golden mountain peaks was created.

[Ch 13 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next Marici, Nārada, Atri, Pulastya, Kratu, Dakṣa, and Vasiṣtha were created by Brahmā; these are the Brahmā's mental sons (sons created by the sheer power of mind).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next Marīci, Nārada, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Dakṣa, and Vaśiṣṭha were created by Brahmā; these are the Brahmā’s mental sons (sons created by the sheer power of mind).

[Ch 13 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The son Kaśyapa was born to Marīci and thirteen daughters were born of Dakṣa. From these daughters and out of the seed of Kaśyapa, various Devas and Daityas were born.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The son Kaśyapa was born to Marīci and thirteen daughters were born of Dakṣa. From these daughters and out of the seed of Kaśyapa, various Devas and Daityas were born.

[Ch 13 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then human beings, animals, serpents and many other classes were created. This is called the Kāśyapī Srisṭi or the Kāśyapa's creation.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then human beings, animals, serpents and many other classes were created. This is called the Kāsyapī Śrīṣṭi or the Kaśyapa’s creation.

[Ch 13 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next Svāyambhu Manu sprang from the lower half of Brahma; and the daughter named Śatarūpā came out of the left hand side of the Brahma's body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next Svāyambhava Manu sprang from the lower half of Brahmā; and the daughter named Śatarūpā came out of the left hand side of the Brahmā’s body.

[Ch 13 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Two sons Priyavrata and Uttānapāda were born of Manu in the womb of Śatarūpā and the three daughters, very beautiful and fair complexioned, were also born of him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► two sons Priyavrata and Uttānapāda were born of Manu in the womb of Śatarūpā and the three daughters, very beautiful and fair complexioned, were also born of him.

[Ch 13 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Creating then, the Bhagavān, the lotus born Brahmā built the beautiful Brahma-loka, on the top of the Meru mountain.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Creating then, the Bhagavān, the lotus born Brahmā built the beautiful Brahma-loka, on the top of the Meru mountain.

[Ch 13 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Bhagavān Viṣṇu built the Vaikuntha city on the top of all the lokas or worlds to dwell with his consort Lakṣmī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the Bhagavān Viṣṇu built the Vaikuṇṭha city on the top of all the lokas or worlds to dwell with his consort Lakṣmī.

[Ch 13 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mahādeva, too, built the exceedingly beautiful Kailāśa and stayed there with his Bhūtas and played with them at his will.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mahādeva, too, built the exceedingly beautiful Kailāśa and stayed there with his Bhūtas and played with them at his will.

[Ch 13 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The third Loka termed Heaven was built on the top of Meru, decorated with various precious gems and jewels and stones. It was fixed as the abode of Indra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The third Loka termed Heaven was built on the top of Meru, decorated with various precious gems and jewels and stones. It was fixed as the abode of Indra.

[Ch 13 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the great ocean was churned, Pārijāta, the best of all the trees, the elephant Airāvata with four tusks, the Heavenly cow yielding the milk of all desires, the Uccaihśravā horse and Apsarās, Rambhā and others, arose and were taken by Indra. These became the ornaments of Heaven.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the great ocean was churned, Pārijāta, the best of all the trees, the elephant Airāvata with four tusks, the Heavenly cow yielding the milk of all desires, the Uccaiśravā horse and Apsarās, Rambhā and others, arose and were taken by Indra. These became the ornaments of Heaven.

[Ch 13 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Moon and Dhanvantari, the great physician also came out of the churning of the ocean. These surrounded with many other members began to shine, being situated above the Heaven.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Moon and Dhanvantarī, the great phyisician also came out of the churning of the ocean. These surrounded with many other members began to shine, being situated above the Heavens.

[Ch 13 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Thus the three varieties, human beings, Devas, and Tiryakas (birds, etc.) and their great subvarieties sprang up.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Thus the three varieties, human beings, Devas, and Tiryakas (birds, etc.) and their great subvarieties sprang up.

[Ch 13 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The four classes of Jivas, Andaja (born from the eggs) Svedaja (born out of sweats) Udbhija (plants etc.) and Jarāyuja (men etc.) were created, being endowed with the fruits of their past auspicious or inauspicious Karmas, as the case may be.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The four classes of Jīvas, Aṇḍaja (born from the eggs), Svedaja (born out of sweats), Udbhija (plants, etc.) and Jarāyujā (men, etc.) were created, being endowed with the fruits of their past auspicious or inauspicious Karmas, as the case may be.

[Ch 13 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa began to play and walk about at their leisures in their respective spheres, after they finished all their creations.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa began to play and walk about at their leisures in their respective spheres, after they finished all their creations.

[Ch 13 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus the wheel of creation being started, the Great God Bhagavān Viṣṇu Acyuta remained in sport with Mahā Lakṣmi in His own sphere Vaikuntha.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the wheel of creation being started, the Great God Bhagavān Viṣṇu Achyuta remained in sport with Mahā Lakṣmī in His own sphere Vaikuṇṭha.

[Ch 13 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Bhagavān Viṣṇu, while sitting one day in Vaikunṭha, got in his mind the memory of that beautiful island, called Manj Dvipa, adorned with precious stones, gems and jewels.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Bhagavān Viṣṇu, while sitting one day in Vaikuṇṭha, got in his mind the memory of that beautiful island, called Maṇi Dvīpa, adorned with precious stones, gems and jewels.

[Ch 13 Verse 29-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! In this Mani Dvipa, the Bhagavān Viṣṇu got the vision of the Mahā Māyā and the auspicious mantra. He now thought to celebrate a Yajñā in honour of the Devi, when he recollected the highest Energy, the Great Goddess. He then went out of his abode and invited Brahmā, Maheśvara, Kubera, Indra, Varuṇa, Fire, Yama, Vasiṣṭha, Kaśyapa, Dakṣa, Vāmadeva, Brhaspati and others and began to collect lots of materials necessary for the Devi sacrifice. Selecting a site Sāttvik, beautiful, and possessing great spiritual powers, Viṣṇu erected, with the help of the great artists and engineers, a wide capacious sacrificial Šrimaddevībhāgavatam hall, and for the due celebration and fulfilment of it, appointed twenty seven priests; who pledged a solemn view to complete it duly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! In this Maṇi Dvīpa, the Bhagavān Viṣṇu got the vision of the Mahā Māyā and the auspicious mantra. He now thought to celebrate a Yajña in honour of the Devī, when he recollected the highest Energy, the Great Goddess. He then went out of his abode and invited Brahmā, Maheśvara, Kuvera, Indra, Varuṇa, Fire, Yama, Vaśiṣṭha, Kaśyapa, Dakṣa, Vāmadeva, Brihaspati and others and began to collect lots of materials necessary for the Devī sacrifice. Selecting a site Sāttvik, beautiful, and possessing great spiritual powers, Viṣṇu erected, with the help of the great artists and engineers, a wide capacious sacrificial hall, and for the due celebration and fulfilment of it, appointed twenty seven priests; who pledged a solemn vow to complete it duly.

[Ch 13 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the big altar and chiti (pile of wood for burning). (Stack of sacrificial bricks) were finished, the Brāhmaṇas began to recite, slowly the Devi mantrams with their root mantrams. Note: Citi, lit, pile of wood for burning, is perhaps the Mulādhāra, the sacral plexus, where the fire called Kundalinī is first kindled by processes of Yoga.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the big altar and chiti (pile of wood for burning, stack of sacrificial bricks) were finished, the Brāhmaṇas began to recite slowly the Devī mantrams with their root mantrams. Note :-- Chiti, lit pile of wood for burning, is perhaps the Mūlādhāra, the sacral plexus, where the fire called Kundalinī is first kindled by processes of Yoga.

[Ch 13 Verse 35-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the profuse quantities of ghee were offered as oblations to the Sacred Fire. Thus when the Homa (offering oblations of ghee to the fire) ceremony was finished elaborately and conforming to the rules of the Sāstras, the sweet and melodious Heavenly voice was heard in the air, addressing Visnu Bhagavān, thus: "O Visnu! Let You be the supreme amongst the gods; honour and worship shall be Thine first; and you would be the most powerful of the Devas. Indra together with Brahmā and the other Devas, all will worship You.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the profuse quantities of ghee were offered as oblations to to the Sacred Fire. Thus when the Homa, (offering oblations of ghee to the fire) ceremony was finished elaborately and conforming to the rules of the Śāstras, the sweet and melodious Heavenly voice was heard in the air, addressing Viṣṇu Bhagavān, thus :-- O Viṣṇu! Let You be the supreme amongst the gods; honour and worship shall be Thine first; and you would be the most powerful of the Devas. Indra together with Brahmā, and the other Devas, all will worship You.

[Ch 13 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Acyuta! (O Infallible One!) Those men on the earth that will be devoted to you, will certainly be endowed with power and you shall be the bestower of boons and all their desires. O Viṣṇu! you will be the Supreme of the Devas and you will be the God of the gods; you will be the first and foremost in all the sacrifices and you will be worshipped by the sacrificers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Achyuta! (O Infallible One!) Those men on the earth that will be devoted to you, will certainly be endowed with power and you shall be the bestower of boons and all their desires. O Viṣṇu! you will be the Supreme of the Devas and you will be the God of the gods; you will be the first and foremost in all the sacrifices and you will be worshipped by the sacrificers.

[Ch 13 Verse 40-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► People will worship you; and you will favor them with the boons. O best of the Puruṣas! When the Devas will be troubled by the Asuras, they will come and take refuge in Thee. You will be the Protector of all, there is no doubt in this. In all the Purūṇas and all this vast Vedas, You will be first worshipped.
NEW CORR ENG ──► People will worship you; and you will favour them with the boons. O best of the Puruṣas! When the Devas will be troubled by the Asuras, they will come and take refuge in Thee. You will be the Protector of all, there is no doubt in this. In all the Purāṇas and all this vast Vedas, You will be first worshipped.

[Ch 13 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Késava! Wherever there will be decay and decline in religion, You will incarnate in your parts and preserve the religion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Keśava! Wherever there will be decay and decline in religion, You will incarnate in your parts and preserve the religion.

[Ch 13 Verse 43-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mādhava! Avatāras, renowned in all the worlds, will come down on earth as Your part incarnations in all sorts of wombs, in due order, and will be respected by all the high souled personages. O Madhusūdana! Those Avatāras and will be famous in all the Lokas, the worlds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mādhava! Avatāras, renowned in all the worlds, will come down on earth as Your part incarnations in all sorts of wombs, in due order, and will be respected by all the high souled personages. O Madhusūdana! Those Avatāras

[Ch 13 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In all your Avatāras, you will get your attendants, the Śaktiis (females) drawing their energies from My parts; and they will serve all your purposes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In all your Avatāras, you will get your attendants, the Śaktis (females) drawing their energies from My parts; and they will serve your purposes.

[Ch 13 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Varāhi, Nārasinhī, etc. and various other Saktis of auspicious appearances, endowed with various weapons and decked with all the ornaments will serve as your attendants; no doubt in this. O Viṣṇu! Always with their help and under the influence of My favour, you will no doubt be quite competent to serve the purpose of the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vārāhī, Nārasimhī, etc., and various other Śaktis of auspicious appearances, endowed with various weapons and decked with all the ornaments will serve as your attendants; no doubt in this. O Viṣṇu! Always with their help and under the influence of My favour, you will no doubt be quite competent to serve the purposes of the Devas.

[Ch 13 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You should respect and worship all those powers by all means and with very great attention; never shew the slightest trace of pride to them; never do you thus insult them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You should respect and worship all those powers by all means and with very great attention; never shew the slightest trace of pride to them; never do you thus insult them.

[Ch 13 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► These Śaktis, capable of bestowing all the desires, will be worshipped in Pratimās (images of clay, etc.) in the whole of India.
NEW CORR ENG ──► These Śaktis, capable of bestowing all the desires, will be worshipped in Pratimās (images of clay, etc.) in the whole of India.

[Ch 13 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Deva of the Devas! The fame of all these Saktis, as well as of You will be spread in the seven worlds and in the whole Universe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Deva of the Devas! The fame of all these Śaktis, as well as of You will be spread in the seven worlds and in the whole Universe.

[Ch 13 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Hari! Human beings on this earth will constantly worship with selfish ends these powers and you, for the fructification of their desires.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Hari! The human beings on this earth will constantly worship with selfish ends these powers and you, for the fructification of their desires.

[Ch 13 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Having various desires, men will, in your worship, present various offerings, recite the Veda mantrams, and repeat the names of you and the powers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Having various desires, men will, in your worship, present various offerings, recite the Veda mantrams, and repeat the names of you and the powers.

[Ch 13 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Viṣṇu! You will be the God of the Immortals and your glory will be enhanced by worship offered by the human beings in the world as well as in the heavens.'
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Viṣṇu! You will be the God of the Immortals and your glory will be enhanced by the worship offered by the human beings in the world as well as in the heavens.

[Ch 13 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O King! The heavenly voice, thus, bestowing boons on Viṣṇu, ceased. Viṣṇu Bhagavān became very glad to hear this.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! The heavenly voice, thus, bestowing boons on Viṣṇu, ceased. Viṣṇu Bhagavān became very glad to hear this.

[Ch 13 Verse 55-58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Hari, the God of Gods, completed duly the sacrifice and dismissed the Devas and the Munis, the sons of Brahmā. Then ascending on Garuda, (His Vāhana), He went up to Vaikuntha with his followers. The Devas also went to their own respective places. The Munis also retired gladly to their own hermitages, all thounderstruck to see these things, conversing with each about this sacrifice”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Hari, the God of Gods, completed duly the sacrifice and dismissed the Devas and the Munis, the sons of Brahmā. Then ascending on Garuḍa, (His Vāhana), He went up to Vaikuṇṭha with his followers. The Devas also went to their own respective places. The Munis also retired gladly to their own hermitages, all thunderstruck to see these things, conversing with each other about this sacrifice.

[Ch 13 Verse 59-60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! All were filled with best devotion towards the Supreme Force, on hearing this clear beautiful, sonorous heavenly voice; then the Dvijas, the Munis, and Munindras began to worship with devotion, according to the Vedas, that Highest Force, the Supreme Goddess, giving all desired objects profusely in all the details. Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter on the Devi Yajña by Śri Visnu in the Third Book in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses composed by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! All were filled with best devotion towards the Supreme Force, on hearing this clear beautiful, sonorous heavenly voice; then the Dvījas, the Munis, and Munīndras began to worship with devotion, according to the Vedas, that Highest Force, the Supreme Goddess, giving all desired objects profusely in all the details. Here ends the thirteenth chapter on the Devī Yajña by Śrī Viṣṇu in the third Adhyaya in Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam; the Mahā Purāṇam by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
