CHAPTER XIII

On the Devi Yajñā

राजोवाच

ह्रौिणा तु कर्थ यजः कृतः पूर्वे पितामह ।

जगलकारणस्पेण विज्ञाना प्रभाविज्ञाना ॥ १ ॥

के सहायास्तु तथासन्माहापा: के महामते ।

ऋलिवजो वेदतत्त्रजास्तमे बूहि परन्तव ॥ 2 ॥

पशुल्कारोग्यहं यजं विधिपृटेन कर्मण ।।

शूला विद्याकृते यागमंबिकवाग: सभाहिति ॥ 3 ॥

The King spoke: “O Grandfather! How did Visnu, the Powerful, the Cause of the world, perform the Devi Yajña? Whose help did he receive and what priests with their knowledge of the Vedas did he engage, kindly tell all these to me in special

details. I will very attentively hear first this Devi Yajña, performed by Visnu; and then I will make arrangements to do that myself accordingly.

व्यास उवाच

राजऋषुण महाभाग विस्तरं परमाद्धुतम् ।

यथा भगवता यजः कृतश्र विधिपूर्वकः ॥ 4 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O noble one! Hear in detail that very wonderful thing, how Viṣṇu celebrated the Devi Yajña conformably to the rules laid down in the Śāstras.

विसर्जिता यदा देया दत्ता शन्नीक्षा ताक्यः ।

काजेश: पुरुषा जाता विमानवरमाधिश्वतः ॥ 5 ॥

When Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa were each given powers by the Devī, the Goddess of the Universe, and when they parted, these three Devas became free of their womanhood, while they were coming back in their aerial cars and turned out men, as they were before.

प्राता महापर्वे घोरं ग्रवते विबुचोतमाः ।

चुकः स्नानानि वासार्थं स्मुतायाद्ध भयं स्थितः ॥ 6 ॥

These three Devas, found the great ocean before them. They brought out world from it; and built, in that world, dwelling abodes; and they themselves began to live in some of them.

आधारशक्तिरचाल मुक्ता देख्या स्वयं ततः ।

तद्धाया स्थिता जाता धरा मेदः सम्पित्ता ॥ 7 ॥

That world became fixed, steady and the supporter of all beings when the Goddess imparted the power of fixture, steadiness, and the power of supporting to the world. The earth, filled marrow, then, became fixed and the great supporter by Her power.

मधुकैदभयोंदैर्स:संयोगामेदैति स्मृता ।

धाणाच्च घरा प्रोका पृथ्वी विस्तारयोगतः ॥ 8 ॥

मही चापि महीयस्वाद्धृता सा शेभमस्तेक ।

गैरयक्ष कृताः सर्वे धारणार्थ प्रविस्ताः ॥ 9 ॥

सोड़कौलं यथा काफे तथा ते गिरयः कृतः ।

महीधरो महाराज प्रोच्छते विबुधैर्नैर्नैः ॥ 10 ॥

O King! The name of this earth is Medinit, since it was made out of the marrow of the two Asuras, Madhu and Kaitabha. This earth is termed Dharā because it supports all; is termed Prthvī because it is very capacious; and it is called Mahī because it is great, since it supports so many beings. O King! the Ananta serpent is holding it on her thousand hoods. To make the earth remain solid and compact, Brahmā built at places mountains. An iron nails in a log of wood, so these hills and mountains within this earth made it fixed. Therefore, the Pundits call these mountains “Mahīdhara” holder of the earth.

जातक्रपयो मेकईयुवोजनवित्रतः ।

कृती मणियमधे: श्रौर: शोभितः परमाढुतः ॥ 1 1 ॥

O King! Thus the golden Meru, the great mountain, many Yojanas wide, adorned with many golden mountain peaks was created.

मरीचिनारैदोत्रिश्र पुलस्वः पुलहः क्रतुः ।

दस्वो वसिष इन्येने बह्वण: प्रशितः सुतः ॥ 1 2 ॥

Next Marici, Nārada, Atri, Pulastya, Kratu, Dakṣa, and Vasiṣtha were created by Brahmā; these are the Brahmā's mental sons (sons created by the sheer power of mind).

मरीचेः कार्यपो जातो द्वाकन्याखयोद्वा ।

ताथ्यो देहाशु दैत्याशु समुर्पत्रा हुनेकश: ॥ 13 ॥

The son Kaśyapa was born to Marīci and thirteen daughters were born of Dakṣa. From these daughters and out of the seed of Kaśyapa, various Devas and Daityas were born.

तस्तु कार्यपी सृष्टि: प्रश्ना चातिविस्ता ।

मनुष्ययुग्यपीद्वाजातिभेदैतैकथा ॥ 14 ॥

Then human beings, animals, serpents and many other classes were created. This is called the Kāśyapī Srisṭi or the Kāśyapa's creation.

ब्रह्माध्याधिद्वितु मनु: स्वायंभुतोप्रभन्त ।

गतत्कप तथा नारी संजाता वामभगतः ॥ 15 ॥

Next Svāyambhu Manu sprang from the lower half of Brahma; and the daughter named Śatarūpā came out of the left hand side of the Brahma's body.

प्रियतत्तेनापदी सुती तत्या बभूवतुः ।

तिज्ञः कन्या वारगोहा हुभवग्रसिसुन्दरीः ॥ १ ६ ॥

Two sons Priyavrata and Uttānapāda were born of Manu in the womb of Śatarūpā and the three daughters, very beautiful and fair complexioned, were also born of him.

एवं सृष्टि समुताह भगवान्मलो:द्वः ।

चकार बहलोकं च मेकश्री मनोहर्म ॥ १७ ॥

Creating then, the Bhagavān, the lotus born Brahmā built the beautiful Brahma-loka, on the top of the Meru mountain.

वैकुण्डं भगवान्विणु रामारगामुचम् ।

क्रीडास्थानं सुगयं च सर्वैलोकोपरि विधतम् ॥ 18 ॥

Then Bhagavān Viṣṇu built the Vaikuntha city on the top of all the lokas or worlds to dwell with his consort Lakṣmī.

Book III Chapter XIII

शिवोर्पि परसं स्थानं कैतासाखं चकार ह ।

समासाठ चृतरणं विज्ञात्र यथास्थिति ॥ १९ ॥

Mahādeva, too, built the exceedingly beautiful Kailāśa and stayed there with his Bhūtas and played with them at his will.

स्वाशिशिष्टे मेकशिज्ञापरिकरिता: ।

तच्च स्थानं सुरेन्द्रस्य नानारलविशितज्ञ। ॥ २० ॥

The third Loka termed Heaven was built on the top of Meru, decorated with various precious gems and jewels and stones. It was fixed as the abode of Indra.

समुद्रमथनात्याप: पारिजातस्तरुक्तम: ।

चतुर्दैनतश नाग: कामधेनुश कामत ॥ २१ ॥

उच्चे: श्वासताशःशो वैं रोगाध्यमसतशा ।

इंज्ञोपात्मखिलं जाते वै स्वर्गभूषणम् ॥ २२ ॥

When the great ocean was churned, Pārijāta, the best of all the trees, the elephant Airāvata with four tusks, the Heavenly cow yielding the milk of all desires, the Uccaihśravā horse and Apsarās, Rambhā and others, arose and were taken by Indra. These became the ornaments of Heaven.

धर्वंतीर्घान्त्रमाशु सागराच्छ समुद्धभी ।

स्वर्पशित्ती विराजते देवी ब्रुणीर्णैती ॥ 23 ॥

Moon and Dhanvantari, the great physician also came out of the churning of the ocean. These surrounded with many other members began to shine, being situated above the Heaven.

एवं सृष्टि: समुद्वा जिविधा नृपसत्ता ।

देवतियंड्नमुव्याधिवेदिंविधक्लिनता ॥ 24 ॥

O King! Thus the three varieties, human beings, Devas, and Tiryakas (birds, etc.) and their great subvarieties sprang up.

अंडजा: सेद्वजाड्री चोद्विज्ञान शयुवजा: ।

चतुर्षिंदै: समुपत्न जीवा: कर्मवृता: किल ॥ 2 5 ॥

The four classes of Jivas, Andaja (born from the eggs) Svedaja (born out of sweats) Udbhija (plants etc.) and Jarāyuja (men etc.) were created, being endowed with the fruits of their past auspicious or inauspicious Karmas, as the case may be.

एवं सृष्टि समासादा ब्रहाविष्णमृद्धश्रा: ।

विद्धारं सेव्य स्थानेषु चक़ः सर्वे यथेपित्न् ॥ 26 ॥

Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa began to play and walk about at their leisures in their respective spheres, after they finished all their creations.

एवं प्रवर्तिते सर्गे भगवान्यभूरन्तुः ।

महात्वल्यम सம் तत सित्राकोष पुवने सक्षे ॥ 27 ॥

Thus the wheel of creation being started, the Great God Bhagavān Viṣṇu Acyuta remained in sport with Mahā Lakṣmi in His own sphere Vaikuntha.

एकसिनस्यये विज्युर्वैकृणठे संश्रितः पुग ।

सुधांसीभृत्यितं झीपं समात मिणमिडितुम् ॥ 28 ॥

Then Bhagavān Viṣṇu, while sitting one day in Vaikunṭha, got in his mind the memory of that beautiful island, called Manj Dvipa, adorned with precious stones, gems and jewels.

यत्र युद्धा महामावां मन्त्रधार्याति रुषः ।

सुखा तो परभा शर्कि कृषिभावं गमितो यथा ॥ 29 ॥

यजं कर्तु मन्त्रधेक अरिकवाया रपापतिः ।

उत्तीर्व भुवन्तास्वात्माकृय महेशुभ्य ॥ 30 ॥

ब्रह्नाणं वर्णं शकं कुवरे पावकं यम् ।

वसिषं कशययं देवं वामदेवं बृह्म्यतिम् ॥ 31 ॥

संभारं कल्यमास यजायं चातिविस्तम् ।

महाधिघचसंयुक्ते सान्चिकं च मनोह्म् ॥ 32 ॥

मण्डर्वे वित्तं तप कार्यमास शिथित्यिभः ।

त्रतीवजी वरयामास सन्तविशेति सुजान् ॥ 33 ॥

O King! In this Mani Dvipa, the Bhagavān Viṣṇu got the vision of the Mahā Māyā and the auspicious mantra. He now thought to celebrate a Yajñā in honour of the Devi, when he recollected the highest Energy, the Great Goddess. He then went out of his abode and invited Brahmā, Maheśvara, Kubera, Indra, Varuṇa, Fire, Yama, Vasiṣṭha, Kaśyapa, Dakṣa, Vāmadeva, Brhaspati and others and began to collect lots of materials necessary for the Devi sacrifice. Selecting a site Sāttvik, beautiful, and possessing great spiritual powers, Viṣṇu erected, with the help of the great artists and engineers, a wide capacious sacrificial

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

hall, and for the due celebration and fulfilment of it, appointed twenty seven priests; who pledged a solemn view to complete it duly.

पित्ति च कारायामास वैदीक्षेय सुवितस्तः ।

प्रजेदुबाहुणा मज्ञान्येय बीजसप्तितान् । ३ ४ ॥

When the big altar and chiti (pile of wood for burning). (Stack of sacrificial bricks) were finished, the Brāhmaṇas began to recite, slowly the Devi mantrams with their root mantrams.

Note: Citi, lit, pile of wood for burning, is perhaps the Mulādhāra, the sacral plexus, where the fire called Kundalinī is first kindled by processes of Yoga.

डुडुसून तैयः कामं विधित्यरिक्तरणे ।

कृते तु वित्ते होमे वागुवाराशरीर्णी ॥ 35 ॥

विष्णु तदा समाभीय सुस्वरा मधुराश्रत ।

विष्णो तं भव देवानां हरे श्रेष्ठतमः सदा ॥ 36 ॥

मान्यघ पुवनीयघ समर्थश सुरेषिति ।

सर्वे त्वामर्चियथिन्त बढ़ाढाडा सुवसना ॥ 37 ॥

Then the profuse quantities of ghee were offered as oblations to the Sacred Fire. Thus when the Homa (offering oblations of ghee to the fire) ceremony was finished elaborately and conforming to the rules of the Sāstras, the sweet and melodious Heavenly voice was heard in the air, addressing Visnu Bhagavān, thus: "O Visnu! Let You be the supreme amongst the gods; honour and worship shall be Thine first; and you would be the most powerful of the Devas. Indra together with Brahmā and the other Devas, all will worship You.

प्रभविष्यिति भो भत्का मानवा भृवि सर्वतः ।

वरद्रस्तं च सर्वेयं भविता मानवेषु वै ॥ 38 ॥

कामद: सर्वदेवानं परम: परमेश्वर: ।

सर्वयेजु सुखलयं पूज्यः सर्वेथ प्रातिकः ॥ 39 ॥

O Acyuta! (O Infallible One!) Those men on the earth that will be devoted to you, will certainly be endowed with power and you shall be the bestower of boons and all their desires. O Viṣṇu! you will be the Supreme of the Devas and you will be the God of the gods; you will be the first and foremost in all the sacrifices and you will be worshipped by the sacrificers.

त्वां जाना पूजायिष्यन्ति वरदस्तं भविष्यसि ।

श्रयिष्यन्ति च देवास्त्वां दानवैरितपीक्षिताः ॥ ४० ॥

शरणास्त्वं च सर्वेर्वां भविता पुरुषोतम ।

पुराणेषु च सर्वेषु वेवेषु वितन्तेषु च ॥ ४१ ॥ ११

त्वं चे पूच्यतः कामं कौतिलस्तव भयिष्यति ।

People will worship you; and you will favor them with the boons. O best of the Puruṣas! When the Devas will be troubled by the Asuras, they will come and take refuge in Thee. You will be the Protector of all, there is no doubt in this. In all the Purūṇas and all this vast Vedas, You will be first worshipped.

यदा यदा हि धर्मस्य रत्नानिभविति भृतते ॥ 42 ॥

तदोशनावतिर्यागु कतव्यं धरप्रेणम् ।

O Késava! Wherever there will be decay and decline in religion, You will incarnate in your parts and preserve the religion.

अवतारा: सुविक्षताः: पृथिव्यां तां भागतः ॥ 43 ॥

भविष्यन्ति धराथां वे माननीया महात्मानम् ।

अवतारीयु सर्वैनु नानायोनिषु माधव ॥ 44 ॥

विषयाता: सर्वतोकेषु भविता मधुसूदन ।

O Mādhava! Avatāras, renowned in all the worlds, will come down on earth as Your part incarnations in all sorts of wombs, in due order, and will be respected by all the high souled personages. O Madhusūdana! Those Avatāras and will be famous in all the Lokas, the worlds.

अवतारेषु सर्वेषु शफिस्ते सईचारिणी ॥ 4 5 ॥

भविष्यिति मगशेन सर्वकार्यप्रसाधिति ।

In all your Avatāras, you will get your attendants, the Śaktiis (females) drawing their energies from My parts; and they will serve all your purposes.

वाराही नारसिंही च नानाभेदैरनेक्या ॥ 46 ॥

नानायुधा: शुभाकाता: सर्वभरणमणिततः ।

ताधिष्ट्र: सदा विश्यो सुरकाव्यिणि माध्यय ॥ 47 ॥

साध्रविष्यस तत्सर्वे महत्त्वदानतः ।

Varāhi, Nārasinhī, etc. and various other Saktis of auspicious appearances, endowed with various weapons and decked with all the ornaments will

Book III Chapter XIII

serve as your attendants; no doubt in this. O Viṣṇu! Always with their help and under the influence of My favour, you will no doubt be quite competent to serve the purpose of the Devas.

तात्स्या नावमन्त्याः सर्वेशा गर्वेलगतः ॥ 48 ॥

पूजनीयाः प्रयनेलेन माननीयाशु सर्वेल।

You should respect and worship all those powers by all means and with very great attention; never shew the slightest trace of pride to them; never do you thus insult them.

नूनं ता भारते खण्डे शतन्धः सर्वकामदा: ॥ ४९ ॥

भविष्यिति मनुभाणां पूर्तिता: प्रतिमासु च ।

These Śaktis, capable of bestowing all the desires, will be worshipped in Pratimās (images of clay, etc.) in the whole of India.

तासा तत च देवेश कीर्ति: स्याद्यिलेषधि ॥ ५० ॥

डीयेषु सतस्वयि च विस्त्यात भुवि मण्डले ।

O Deva of the Devas! The fame of all these Saktis, as well as of You will be spread in the seven worlds and in the whole Universe.

ताछा त्वां वे महापाम मानवा भुवि मण्डले ।। ५१ ।।

अर्धियथिति वाज्छाखीं सकामाः सत्तं हरे ।

O Hari! Human beings on this earth will constantly worship with selfish ends these powers and you, for the fructification of their desires.

अर्चिंसु चोपहाईथु नानाभावसमित्वितः ॥ ५२ ॥

पूर्वियस्थिति वेदोकैर्दैर्निपिजरैस्तथा ।

Having various desires, men will, in your worship, present various offerings, recite the Veda mantrams, and repeat the names of you and the powers.

महिमा तव भूतोंके स्वर्गं च मधुसुदन ॥ ५३ ॥

पूजनाहेदवेदेश वृद्धिमेधिति मानवै: ।

O Viṣṇu! You will be the God of the Immortals and your glory will be enhanced by worship offered by the human beings in the world as well as in the heavens.'

व्यास उवाच

इति दत्त्वा वरान्वाणी विरताम खसभ्वा ॥ 54 ॥

भगवानप्रि प्रीताता इभवबछ्छ्वणादिव ।

Vyāsa said: “O King! The heavenly voice, thus, bestowing boons on Viṣṇu, ceased. Viṣṇu Bhagavān became very glad to hear this.”

समाय विविधात्रं भगवान्टिरीधरः ॥ 55 ॥

विसर्विता तान्देवान्बहापुत्राम्पूनीनि ।

जगागमानुचेः सार्थ वैकुण्डं गकडधजः ॥ 56 ॥

स्वामि स्वामि चि भिण्यापि पुनः सर्वे सुगस्ततः ।

मुनयो वित्सिता वार्ता कुर्वित्ते परस्परम् ॥ 57 ॥

ययु: प्रभृदिता: कामं स्वाभ्यान्यावनानय ॥ 58 ॥

Then Hari, the God of Gods, completed duly the sacrifice and dismissed the Devas and the Munis, the sons of Brahmā. Then ascending on Garuda, (His Vāhana), He went up to Vaikuntha with his followers. The Devas also went to their own respective places. The Munis also retired gladly to their own hermitages, all thounderstruck to see these things, conversing with each about this sacrifice”

श्रुत्वा वाणीं परमिविशरांं ध्योमजां शोजरमयं

सर्वेधी वे प्रकृतिविषये वफिक्वशु जातः ।

चकुः सर्वे द्विजमुनिणगाः पूजनं भक्तिकुक्तासत्या:

कामां निविलफलर्त चागमातेम् मुनीद्राः ॥ 59 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयकन्क्ये

रगदोद्योस्थगः  ॥ 60 ॥

O King! All were filled with best devotion towards the Supreme Force, on hearing this clear beautiful, sonorous heavenly voice; then the Dvijas, the Munis, and Munindras began to worship with devotion, according to the Vedas, that Highest Force, the Supreme Goddess, giving all desired objects profusely in all the details.

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter on the

Devi Yajña by Śri Visnu in the Third Book

in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of

18,000 verses composed by Maharṣi

Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

