CHAPTER I

On the Birth of Matsyagandhā

त्रश्य उवाच

आठ्ययंकरमेतते वचनं गर्भहैतुकम् ।

सन्दोईज समुच्यतः सर्वैंना नत्नपरिवनम् ॥ १ ॥

माता व्यासस्य मेधाविज्ञाना सत्यवतीति च ।

विवाहिता पुरा राजा शन्तनुना यथा ॥ २ ॥

The Rsis said: O Sūta! Your words sound wonderful to us indeed! but you have not as yet definitely spoken to us the original events in detail; so a great doubt has arisen in our minds. We know that king Śantanu married Vyāsa's mother, Satyavatī.

तस्या: पुत्र: कवं व्यास: सती स्वपत्रे स्थिता ।

ईईगी सा कयं राजा पुनः शनन्तून वृता ॥ 3 ॥

तस्वां पुत्रावृषी जाती तत्त्वं कवय सुठत ।

वित्तरेण महाभाग कवां परमपावनीम ॥ 4 ॥

Now say, in detail in how Vyāsa became her son? How such a chaste woman Satyavati, remaining in her own house, came to be married again by Śantanu? and how the two sons came to be born of Śantanu's sperm and Satyavati's ovum? Now, O highly fortunate Suvrata? Kindly describe in detail this highly sanctifying historical fact.

उत्तर्षिते वेद्यासस्य सत्यव्यात्सता युनः ।

श्रोतुकामाः युना: सर्वे ऋषयः संशिज्ञानतः ॥ 5 ॥

These Rşis, who are observing vows, are desirous to hear of the birth of Veda Vyāsa and Satyavati.

सूत उवाच

प्रणाय्य परमां शक्ति चतुर्वर्णिद्धातिनीम् ।

आदिगर्भक्ति तिख्यामि कवां घोपाणिकीं शुभाम् ॥ 6 ॥

यस्योचारणाभोगेन सिद्धिपर्विति शाश्रां ।

व्याजेनापि हि बीजस्य वाभवस्य विशेषतः ॥ 7 ॥

Sūta said: I bow down with devotion to the Highest Primordial Force, the bestower of the fourfold aims of existence of human life, who grants to all, their desires when so prayed by the help of the Vāgbhava Bījamantra with their heart and soul, for the success of all their desires.

सत्यक्सर्वान्ताना सर्वैं सर्वेकानार्थसिद्धये ।

स्मत्थव सर्वेधा देवी वांतिज्ञाप्रदायिति ॥ 8 ॥

राजोपरिचरो नाम धार्मिकः सत्यसंगरः ।

चेद्रिद्वेणपति श्रीमान्वयूत विज्जपकः ॥ 9 ॥

The above bīja is so potent in its effect that even pronounced very lightly, even under a pretext, it grants all siddhis. So, the Devi should be remembered by all means; and, now saluting Her, I begin my narration of the auspicious Purānic events. In days gone by there reigned a king, named Uparicara; he ruled over the Cedi country and respected the Brāhmins; he was truthful and very religious.

तपसा तस्य तुईने विमानं स्माटिकं शुभम् ।

दतनिम्देशनतत्मसै सुन्तं चिवकाव्यथा ॥ 10 ॥

Indra, the lord of the Devas, became very

pleased by his asceticism and presented him an auspicious celestial car (going in the air) made of pearls and crystals, helping him in doing what he liked best.

तेनारूढसून सर्वत्र याति दिख्येन भूपाति: ।

न भूपानुपरिस्थो5सो तेनोपरिचरो सु: ।। 11 ।। ॥

विद्यालतः सर्वलोकेषु धर्मानिव: स भूपाति: ।

तस्य भावां वरारोहा निरिकानाम सुन्दरी ॥ 12 ॥

Mounting on that divine chariot, that religious king used to go everywhere; he never remained on earth; he used to remain always in the atmosphere and, therefore, he had his name as “Uparicara Vasu” (moving in the upper regions). He had a very beautiful wife, named Girikā; and five powerful sons, of indomitable vigour, were born to him.

पुत्राश्रस्य महावीर्याः पछासम्रमितौजसः ।

पृथावंशेषु राजानः स्थापितासेनेच भ्युजा ॥ 13 ॥

वसोसु पत्नी मिका कामान्काले न्यवेदयत् ।

ऋतुकालमनुपायता स्नात पुंसवने शुचिः ॥ 14 ॥

तदह चितरक्षीनुचुर्जिंट मृगानिति ।

The king give separate kingdoms to each of his son and made them kings. Once on an occasion, Girikā, the wife of the Uparicara Vasu, after her bath after the menstruation and becoming pure came to the king and informed him of her desire to get a son; but that very day his Pitjs (ancestors) requested him also to kill deer, etc., for their Śrāddha solemn obséquies performed in honour of the manes of deceased ancestors)

तच्छुत्वा चित्यामास भावायितुमतीं तथा ॥ 15 ॥

पितृवावयं गुर्गे मन्ता कंत्यमिति निश्छितम् ।

चचार मृगायां रात्रा गिरिकां मनसा समर्प ॥ 16 ॥

वने तिथितः स राजर्षिश्छिते सम्मार भामिनीम् ।

अतीवाकृपस्ममजां साक्षात्ध्वयिवावगारम् ॥ 17 ॥

तस्य ततः प्रवर्कैद स्मरतलां च कामिनीम् ।

वदपत्रे तु तद्धजा स्कक्रमातं समाक्षिपत् ॥ 18 ॥

इंदं वृषा परिक्कनं तेजे वै न घबेकधारम् ।

ऋतुकालं च विज्ञाय मेति चक्रे नुपस्तद् ॥ 19 ॥

Hearing the Pitps, the king of Cedi became

somewhat anxious for his menstruous wife; but thinking his Pitps words more powerful and more worthy to be obeyed, went out on an hunting expedition to kill deer and other animals, with the thought of his wife Girikā in his breast.

अमोघे सर्वेथा वीर्यं मय चैतन संशय: ।

प्रियाये प्रेयायामेत्यिति वुद्धिमकल्यवत् ॥ 20 ॥

Then while he was in the forest, he remembered his Girikā, who was equal in her beauty and loveliness to Kamalā, and the emission of semen virile took place.

शुक्रप्रस्थापने काले महिष्या प्रसमीक्ष्य सः ।

अभियन्त्याय त्रौष्यैं वटपर्णपुटे कृत्तम् ॥ 21 ॥

He kept this semen on the leaf of a banyan tree and thought “How the above semen be not futile; my semen cannot remain unfruitful; my wife has just now passed her menstruous condition; I will send this semen to my dear wife.”

पाछ्रीस्थं श्रेनमाभाथ्य राजोबार चित्र प्रति ।

गृहाणें महाभाग नच्छ शीर्भ गृहं मम ॥ 22 ॥

Thus thinking the time ripe, he closed the semen under the leaves of the banyan tree and charging it with the mantra power (some power) addressed a falcon close by thus: "O highly fortunate one! Take this my semen virile and go to my palace.

महीत्यर्थिमितं सौम्य गृहीत्या त्व गृहं नय ।

निराकार्य प्रच्छाशु तस्यास्वतर्षमवरु चै ॥ 23 ॥

O Beautiful one! Do this my work: take this semen virile and go quick to my palace and hand it over to my wife Girikā, for today is her menstruation period."

सूत उवाच

इत्युक्ला प्रदूती पर्णे श्येनाय नृपसतमः ।

स गृहीतोत्यपातागु गर्गनं गतिविधिमः ॥ 24 ॥

Sūta said: “O Rūsi! Thus, saying, the king gave that leaf with the virile therein to the falcon, who is capable of going quick in the air, took it and immediately rose high up in the air.

गछ्छां गर्गाने श्रवें धृष्णा चंचुपुटे पुद्य ।

तमपश्वद्धायानां त्वांग श्येनस्तधाउपर: ॥ 25 ॥

अभियंत्र से तु विक्राय शीघ्रमध्यद्रवल्गगम् ।

तुष्तयुद्धमायाकगो तातृषी सम्प्रचक्रतः ॥ 26 ॥

Another falcon, seeing this one flying in the air with leaf in his beak, considered it to be some piece of flesh and fell upon him. Immediately, a gallant fighting ensued between the two birds with their beaks.

युद्धातीयपत्रद्रैतस्तचापि यमुर्नाथसि ।

खगौ तौ निर्वर्ती कामं पुटके चतिते तदा ॥ 27 ॥

While the fighting was going on, that leaf with semen virile fell down from their beaks on the waters of the Yamunā river. Then the two falcons flew away as they liked.

एतसिम्नसमये काधिदद्धिका नाम चायसरः ।

बाहणों समगुगर्ग सन्यावन्दन्ततयम् ॥ 28 ॥

O Rsis! While the two falcons were fighting with each other, one Apsarā (celestial nymph) named Adriāk came to a Brāhmin, who was performing his Sandhyā Vandanam on the banks of the Yamunā.

कृतीत जलकौल सा जले ननना चचार सा ।

जग्राह चरणं नारी द्विजस्य वरवर्धिनी ॥ 29 ॥

That beautiful woman began to bathe in the waters and took a plunge for playing sports and caught hold of the feet of the Brāhmin.

प्राणायामपर: सोअ शूद्वा तां कामचारिणीम् ।

श्रागा भव मत्थी त्वं धान विदकांति : ॥ 30 ॥

The Dvija, engaged in Prānāyāma (deep breathing exercise), saw that the woman had amorous intentions, and cursed her, saying:

सा श्राता विगमुखेन बभूव ययुनाचरी ।

श्रभरी रूपसम्पत्रा ह्याद्रिका च वरणसभः ॥ 31 ॥

"As you have interrupted me in my meditation, so be a fish."

Adrikā, one of the best Apsarās, thus cursed, assumed the form of a fish Safari and spent her days in the Yamunā waters.

श्रवेपाद्वरिष्टं तच्छुक्रमथ वासखी ।

जग्रह तसासंध्येत्य साजत्रिका मत्यरूकिपणी ॥ 32 ॥

When the semen virile of Uparicara Vasu fell

from the beak of the falcon, that fish Adriká came quickly and ate that and became pregnant.

अथ कालेन क्रियता मत्स्यों तां मत्स्यजीवतः ।

संग्रपते एरमो मासि बबंध तां मानोरामा ॥ 33 ॥

When ten months passed, a fisherman came there and caught in his net that fish Adriká.

उदरं विद्वराग्यु स तस्या मत्स्यजीवतः ।

युग्यं विनि:सृतं तत्समुदुरामानुपाकृति ॥ 34 ॥

When the fish's belly was torn asunder, two human beings instantly came out of the womb.

बाल: कुमार: सुभगस्तथा कन्या शुभानना ।

नूद्वारो ५४शीविंद सेो ५४ विसयं घरमे नतः ॥ 35 ॥

One was a lovely boy and the other a beautiful girl. The fisherman was greatly astonished to see this.

राजे निवेद्यामास पुरो बौं तु इमोद्वली ।

राजापि विस्माधिक: सुर्त जग्राह ते शुभम् ॥ 36 ॥

He went and informed the king of that place who was Uparicara Vasu that the boy and the girl were born of the womb of a fish. The king also was greatly surprised and accepted the boy who was auspicious.

स मल्यो नाम राजारसी धार्मिकः सत्यसंगः ।

वसुपुत्रो महतोलातः पित्रा तुल्यपताकमः ॥ 37 ॥

This Vasu's son was highly energetic and powerful, truthful and religious like his father and became famous by the name of Matsyarāja.

कालिका बसुना दत्ता तरसा जलजीविने ।

नाना कालीति विद्याता तथा मलयोदरीति च ॥ 38 ॥

Uparicara Vasu gave away the girl to the fisherman. This girl was named Kāli and she gave away the girl to the fisherman. This girl was named Kāli and she became famous by the name of Matsyodarī.

मत्स्यान्धोति नाना वे गुणेन समाजायत ।

विबर्पीमाना दासस्य गृहे सा वाससी रुषा ॥ 39 ॥

The smell of the fish came out of her body and she was named also Matsyagandhā. Thus, the auspicious Vasu's daughter remained and grew in that fisherman's house.

སྟོགས་ཆུན:

अद्विका मुनिना शगता मत्थी जाता वराप्यसा: ।

विद्यारिता च दारोगे मृता च भक्षिता पुनः ॥ 40 ॥

The Rsis said: “The beautiful Apsarā, cursed by the Muni, turned into fish; she was afterwards cut asunder and eaten up by the fisherman.

किं बभूव पुनस्तया अपसराया बदख सत् ।

शापस्यांतं कर्व सूत कर्वं स्वर्गमवाप स ॥ 4 1 ॥

Very well! What happened afterwards to that Apsarā? How was she freed of that curse? and how did she go back to the Heavens?

सूत उवाच

शला यदा स मुनिना विमिता सवम्पूव है ।

स्तूति चकार विषयस्य दीनेव कृत्ती तदा ॥ 42 ॥

Thus questioned by the Rsis, Sūta spoke as follows: “When the Apsarā was first cursed by the Muni, she was greatly astonished; she began to weep and cry like one greatly distressed and afterwards began to praise him.”

दयावान्बाहुप: प्राह तां तदा कृत्ती स्थितम् ।

मा शोकं कुक कल्याणि शापांतं ते वदायम्छूम ॥ ४३ ॥

The Brāhmīn, seeing her weeping, took pity on her and said: "O good one! Don't weep; I am telling you how your curse will expire.

मतकोधापाव्योगेन मतस्योर्नि गता शुभे ।

मानुषी जनसित्या तंख शामपोक्षमवाप्यसि ॥ 44 ॥

As an effect of having incurred my wrath, you will be born as a fish and when you will give birth

to two human children, you will be freed of your curse."

इसुकृता तेन सा प्राप मत्यवहेंहं नटीजले ।

बालकौ जनचित्वा सा मृता मुक्ता च शापतः ॥ 4 5 ॥

The Brāhmín having spoken thus, Adrikā got a fish-body in the waters of the Yamunā.

संत्यजरू रूपं मत्यस्य दिष्छलपयाव्य च ।

जगामामर्यार्च च शापांते वरवर्णिनी ॥ 4 6 ॥

Afterwards she gave birth to two human children and became freed of the curse when she, quitting the fish form, assumed the divine form and went up to the Heavens.

एवं जाता वरा पुत्री मत्थनांधा वरानना ।

पुत्री च पात्यमाना सा दाशगेहे व्यबधेत् ॥ 47 ॥

O Rşis! The beautiful girl Matsyagandhā thus took her birth and was nourished in the fisherman's house and grew up there.

मत्थनाथा तदा जाता किशोरी चातिसुप्रधा ।

तस्य कार्याणि कुर्वाणि वासवी चातिसुप्रभा ॥ 48 ॥

इति शीघैदोषीगगवते द्वितीयकन्ये मत्थनाभ्योचितीमा

प्रभानोउपधा: 11 1 11

When the extraordinarily lovely girl of Vasu, Matsyagandhā attained her youth, she continued to do all the household duties of the fisherman and remained there.

Thus ends the First Chapter of the Second Book on the birth of Matsyagandhā in the Mahāpurāna

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

