[Ch 1 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rsis said: O Sūta! Your words sound wonderful to us indeed! but you have not as yet definitely spoken to us the original events in detail; so a great doubt has arisen in our minds. We know that king Śantanu married Vyāsa's mother, Satyavatī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣis said :-- “O Sūta! Your words sound wonderful to us indeed! but you have not as yet definitely spoken to us the original events in detail; so a great doubt has arisen in our minds. We know that the king Śantanu married Vyāsa’s mother, Satyavatī.

[Ch 1 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now say, in detail in how Vyāsa became her son? How such a chaste woman Satyavati, remaining in her own house, came to be married again by Śantanu? and how the two sons came to be born of Śantanu's sperm and Satyavati's ovum? Now, O highly fortunate Suvrata? Kindly describe in detail this highly sanctifying historical fact.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now say, in detail in how Vyāsa became her son? How such a chaste woman Satyavatī, remaining in her own house, came to be married again by Śantanu? and how the two sons came to be born of Śantanu’s sperm and Satyavatī’ś ovum? Now O highly fortunate Suvrata? Kindly describe in detail this highly sanctifying historical fact.

[Ch 1 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► These Rşis, who are observing vows, are desirous to hear of the birth of Veda Vyāsa and Satyavati.
NEW CORR ENG ──► These Ṛṣis, who are observing vows, are desirous to hear of the birth of Veda Vyāsa and Satyavatī.”

[Ch 1 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: I bow down with devotion to the Highest Primordial Force, the bestower of the fourfold aims of existence of human life, who grants to all, their desires when so prayed by the help of the Vāgbhava Bījamantra with their heart and soul, for the success of all their desires.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- I bow down with devotion to the Highest Primordial Force, the bestower of the four fold aims of existence of human life, who grants to all, their desires when so prayed by the help of the Vāgbhava Vījamantra with their heart and soul, for the success of all their desires.

[Ch 1 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The above bīja is so potent in its effect that even pronounced very lightly, even under a pretext, it grants all siddhis. So, the Devi should be remembered by all means; and, now saluting Her, I begin my narration of the auspicious Purānic events. In days gone by there reigned a king, named Uparicara; he ruled over the Cedi country and respected the Brāhmins; he was truthful and very religious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The above vīja is so potent in its effect that even pronounced very lightly, even under a pretext, it grants all siddhis. So the Devī should be remembered by all means; and now saluting Her, I begin my narration of the auspicious Purāṇic events. In days gone by there reigned a king, named Uparicara; he ruled over the Chedi country and respected the Brāhmins; he was truthful and very religious.

[Ch 1 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra, the lord of the Devas, became very pleased by his asceticism and presented him an auspicious celestial car (going in the air) made of pearls and crystals, helping him in doing what he liked best.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra, the lord of the Devas, became very pleased by his asceticism and presented him an auspicious celestial car (going in the air) made of pearls, and crystals, helping him in doing what he liked best.

[Ch 1 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mounting on that divine chariot, that religious king used to go everywhere; he never remained on earth; he used to remain always in the atmosphere and, therefore, he had his name as “Uparicara Vasu” (moving in the upper regions). He had a very beautiful wife, named Girikā; and five powerful sons, of indomitable vigour, were born to him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mounting on that divine chariot, that religious king used to go everywhere; he never remained on earth; he used to remain always in the atmosphere and therefore be had his name as “Uparicara Vasu” (moving in the upper regions). He had a very beautiful wife, named Girikā; and five powerful sons, of indomitable vigour, were born to him.

[Ch 1 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king give separate kingdoms to each of his son and made them kings. Once on an occasion, Girikā, the wife of the Uparicara Vasu, after her bath after the menstruation and becoming pure came to the king and informed him of her desire to get a son; but that very day his Pitjs (ancestors) requested him also to kill deer, etc., for their Śrāddha solemn obséquies performed in honour of the manes of deceased ancestors)
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king give separate kingdoms to each of his sons and made them kings. Once on an occasion, Girikā, the wife of the Uparicara Vasu, after her bath after the menstruation and becoming pure came to the king and informed him of her desire to get a son; but that very day his Pitris (ancestors) requested him also to kill deer, etc., for their Srāddha (solemn obsequies performed in honour of the manes of deceased ancestors).

[Ch 1 Verse 15-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing the Pitps, the king of Cedi became somewhat anxious for his menstruous wife; but thinking his Pitps words more powerful and more worthy to be obeyed, went out on an hunting expedition to kill deer and other animals, with the thought of his wife Girikā in his breast.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing the Pitris, the king of Chedi became somewhat anxious for his menstruous wife; but thinking his Pitris words more powerful and more worthy to be obeyed, went out on an hunting expedition to kill deer and other animals, with the thought of his wife Girikā in his breast.

[Ch 1 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then while he was in the forest, he remembered his Girikā, who was equal in her beauty and loveliness to Kamalā, and the emission of semen virile took place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then while he was in the forest, he remembered his Girikā, who was equal in her beauty and loveliness to Kamalā, and the emission of semen virile took place.

[Ch 1 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He kept this semen on the leaf of a banyan tree and thought “How the above semen be not futile; my semen cannot remain unfruitful; my wife has just now passed her menstruous condition; I will send this semen to my dear wife.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► He kept this semen on the leaf of a banyan tree and thought “How the above semen be not futile; my semen cannot remain unfruitful; my wife has just now passed her menstruous condition; I will send this semen to my dear wife.”

[Ch 1 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus thinking the time ripe, he closed the semen under the leaves of the banyan tree and charging it with the mantra power (some power) addressed a falcon close by thus: "O highly fortunate one! Take this my semen virile and go to my palace.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus thinking the time ripe, he closed the semen under the leaves of the banyan tree and charging it with the mantra power (some power) addressed a falcon close by thus :-- “O highly fortunate one! Take this my semen virile and go to my palace.

[Ch 1 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Beautiful one! Do this my work: take this semen virile and go quick to my palace and hand it over to my wife Girikā, for today is her menstruation period."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Beautiful one! Do this my work: take this semen virile and go quick to my palace and hand it over to my wife Girikā for to-day is her menstruation period.”

[Ch 1 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: “O Rūsi! Thus, saying, the king gave that leaf with the virile therein to the falcon, who is capable of going quick in the air, took it and immediately rose high up in the air.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- “O Ṛṣis! Thus saying, the king gave that leaf with the virile therein to the falcon, who is capable of going quick in the air, took it and immediately rose high up

[Ch 1 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Another falcon, seeing this one flying in the air with leaf in his beak, considered it to be some piece of flesh and fell upon him. Immediately, a gallant fighting ensued between the two birds with their beaks.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Another falcon, seeing this one flying in the air with leaf in his beak, considered it to be some piece of flesh and fell upon him. Immediately a gallant fighting ensued between the two birds with their beaks.

[Ch 1 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► While the fighting was going on, that leaf with semen virile fell down from their beaks on the waters of the Yamunā river. Then the two falcons flew away as they liked.
NEW CORR ENG ──► While the fighting was going on, that leaf with semen virile fell down from their beaks on the waters of the Jumnā river. Then the two faIcons flew away as they liked.

[Ch 1 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Rsis! While the two falcons were fighting with each other, one Apsarā (celestial nymph) named Adriāk came to a Brāhmin, who was performing his Sandhyā Vandanam on the banks of the Yamunā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Ṛṣis! While the two falcons were fighting with each other, one Apsarā (celestial nymph) named Adrikā came to a Brāhmin, who was performing his Sandhyā Bandanam on the banks of the Jumnā.

[Ch 1 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That beautiful woman began to bathe in the waters and took a plunge for playing sports and caught hold of the feet of the Brāhmin.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That beautiful woman began to bathe in the waters and took a plunge for playing sports and caught hold of the feet of the Brāhmaṇa.

[Ch 1 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Dvija, engaged in Prānāyāma (deep breathing exercise), saw that the woman had amorous intentions, and cursed her, saying:
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Dvija, engaged in Prāṇāyāma (deep breathing exercise), saw that the woman had amorous intentions, and cursed her, saying :--

[Ch 1 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "As you have interrupted me in my meditation, so be a fish." Adrikā, one of the best Apsarās, thus cursed, assumed the form of a fish Safari and spent her days in the Yamunā waters.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “As you have interrupted me in my meditation, so be a fish.” Adrikā, one of the best Apsarās, thus cursed, assumed the form of a fish Safari and spent her days in the Jumnā waters.

[Ch 1 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the semen virile of Uparicara Vasu fell from the beak of the falcon, that fish Adriká came quickly and ate that and became pregnant.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the semen virile of Uparicara Vasu fell from the beak of the falcon, that fish Adrikā came quickly and ate that and became pregnant.

[Ch 1 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When ten months passed, a fisherman came there and caught in his net that fish Adriká.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When ten months passed, a fisherman came there and caught in a net that fish Adrikā.

[Ch 1 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the fish's belly was torn asunder, two human beings instantly came out of the womb.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the fish’s belly was torn asunder, two human beings instantly came out the the womb.

[Ch 1 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One was a lovely boy and the other a beautiful girl. The fisherman was greatly astonished to see this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One was a lovely boy and the other a beautiful girl. The fisherman was greatly astonished to see this.

[Ch 1 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He went and informed the king of that place who was Uparicara Vasu that the boy and the girl were born of the womb of a fish. The king also was greatly surprised and accepted the boy who was auspicious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He went and informed the king of that place who was Uparicara Vasu that the boy and the girl were born of the womb of a fish. The king also was greatly surprised and accepted the boy who seemed auspicious.

[Ch 1 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Vasu's son was highly energetic and powerful, truthful and religious like his father and became famous by the name of Matsyarāja.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This Vasu’s son was highly energetic and powerful, truthful and religious like his father and became famous by the name of the king Matsyarāj.

[Ch 1 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Uparicara Vasu gave away the girl to the fisherman. This girl was named Kāli and she gave away the girl to the fisherman. This girl was named Kāli and she became famous by the name of Matsyodarī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Uparicara Vasu gave away the girl to the fisherman. This girl was named Kāli and she became famous by the name of Matsyodarī.

[Ch 1 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The smell of the fish came out of her body and she was named also Matsyagandhā. Thus, the auspicious Vasu's daughter remained and grew in that fisherman's house. སྟོགས་ཆུན:
NEW CORR ENG ──► The smell of the fish came out of her body and she was named also Matsyagandhā. Thus the auspicious Vasu’s daughter remained and grew in that fisherman’s house.

[Ch 1 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rsis said: “The beautiful Apsarā, cursed by the Muni, turned into fish; she was afterwards cut asunder and eaten up by the fisherman.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣis said :-- The beautiful Apsarā, cursed by the Muni, turned into fish; she was afterwards cut asunder and eaten up by the fisherman.

[Ch 1 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Very well! What happened afterwards to that Apsarā? How was she freed of that curse? and how did she go back to the Heavens?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Very well! What happened afterwards to that Apsarā? How was she freed of that curse? and how did she go back to the Heavens?

[Ch 1 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus questioned by the Rsis, Sūta spoke as follows: “When the Apsarā was first cursed by the Muni, she was greatly astonished; she began to weep and cry like one greatly distressed and afterwards began to praise him.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus questioned by the Ṛṣis, Sūta spoke as follows :-- When the Apsarā was first cursed by the Muni, she was greatly astonished; she began to weep and cry like one greatly distressed and afterwards began to praise him.

[Ch 1 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmīn, seeing her weeping, took pity on her and said: "O good one! Don't weep; I am telling you how your curse will expire.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmin, seeing her weeping, took pity on her and said :-- “O good one! Don’t weep; I am telling you how your curse will expire.

[Ch 1 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As an effect of having incurred my wrath, you will be born as a fish and when you will give birth to two human children, you will be freed of your curse."
NEW CORR ENG ──► As an effect of having iñcurred my wrath, you will be born as a fish and when you will give birth to two human children, you will be freed of your curse.”

[Ch 1 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmín having spoken thus, Adrikā got a fish-body in the waters of the Yamunā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmin having spoken thus, Adrikā got a fish-body in the waters of the Jumnā.

[Ch 1 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Afterwards she gave birth to two human children and became freed of the curse when she, quitting the fish form, assumed the divine form and went up to the Heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Afterwards she gave birth to two human children and became freed of the curse when she, quitting the fish form assumed the divine form and went up to the Heavens.

[Ch 1 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Rşis! The beautiful girl Matsyagandhā thus took her birth and was nourished in the fisherman's house and grew up there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Ṛṣis! The beautiful girl Matsyagandhā thus took her birth and was nourished in the fisherman’s house and grew up there.

[Ch 1 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the extraordinarily lovely girl of Vasu, Matsyagandhā attained her youth, she continued to do all the household duties of the fisherman and remained there. Thus ends the First Chapter of the Second Book on the birth of Matsyagandhā in the Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the extraordinarily lovely girl of Vasu, Matsyagandhā attained her youth, she continued to do all the household duties of the fisherman and remained there. Thus ends the first chapter of the Second Skandha on the birth of Matsyagandhā in the Mahāpurāṇa Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
