CHAPTER V

On the Gāyatri Stotram

नारद खाच

भक्तानुकर्पित्यर्ज्ञ हुदयं पापनाशनम् ।

गायत्रयः काधितं तस्मात्रायस्तः स्तोभगिरय ॥ १ ॥

Nārada said: O All knowing One! Thou showest Thy grace to Thy devotees! Thou hast described this sin-destroying Gāyatrī Hrdaya. Now describe Her Stava (hymn of praise).

श्रीताराया उवाच

आदिष्नके जगन्मातर्भक्तानुग्रहकारिणि ।

सर्वेत्र व्यापिकेजनते श्रीसंधे ते नामो3लु ते ॥ 2 ॥

त्वेयं संध्या गायत्री साविजी च सरस्वती ।

ब्राही च वैष्णवी रौही रक्ता श्वेतात सिततार ॥ 3 ॥

प्रातबाल च मध्यात्रे यौवनस्या भवेत्पुनः ।

बहा सार्य भगवती चित्यते मुनिभः सदा ॥ 4 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O World-Mother! O Thou, favouring Thy devotees! O Thou, the Prime Force, O Omnipresent! Infinite! Śrī Sandhye! I bow down to Thee. Thou art the Sandhya; Thou art the Gāyatrī, Śāvitrī and Sarasvatī; Thou art Brāhmī, Vaiṣṇavī and Raudrī and Thou art red, white, and black (the colours of Gāyatrī, Śāvitrī and Sarasvatī) that Thou assumest respectively. O Bhagavatī! Thou art always meditated by the Munis as young in the morning, full of youth in the mid-day, and aged in the evening. I bow down to Thee.

हंसस्था गरुडारूढा तथा वृषभवाहिनी ।
ऋग्वेदाध्यायिनी भूमौ दृश्यते या तपस्विभिः ॥ ५॥

Thou art seen by the Tapasvīs (ascetics) as Brahmānī, riding on Hamsa (swan), Sarasvatī riding on Garuda, and Savitri riding on Bull.

वजूर्वैंदं पटती च अन्तरिषे विशजते ।

सा सामगारी सर्वेषु धायमयाण तथा धपुि ॥ 6 ॥

रूत्रोके गता तवं हि विद्युलोकनिवासिने ।

त्वमेव ब्रहणो लोकेप्रत्यानुग्रहकारिणी ॥ 7 ॥

Thou art seen within by the ascetics as manifesting the Rgveda (in the form of Śāvitrī) in this world, as manifesting Yayurveda in the middle

space (antariksam) and as manifesting Sāmaveda everywhere in the Rudra loka, thus roaming in the three worlds. I bow down to Thee. O Devi! Thou art Rudrānī in the Rudra loka, Vaiṣṇavī in the Viṣṇu loka, and Brahmānī in the Brahmā loka; thus Thou shewest Thy favour to the Immortals.

सप्तविंग्नितिजननी माया बहुवरप्रदा ।

शिवयो: करनेजीया हृषुस्येवसमुद्धना ॥ 8 ॥

O Devi! Thou art the Mother delighting the seven Rsis (of the Great Bear); Thou art Máyā. Thou grantest great many boons to Thy Bhaktas. Thou art sprung from the eyes and hands, tears and perspiration of Śiva and Śivā.

अनन्द्रजन्नी तुर्गा इत्या परिपघते ।

वेपया वरदा चैव वरिष्ठा वरवर्णिनी ॥ 9 ॥

गरिष्ठा च वराहं च वरगेहा च सदमी ।

नीलगूत्रा तथा संध्या सर्वदो भागमोक्षदा ॥ 10 ॥

भागीरथी मवल्लोके पाताले भोगवत्पति ।

त्रिलोकबाहिती देवी स्थानरथिनवासिति ॥ 11 ॥

भूलोकक्षा तवेमावासि घरिजी लोकधारिणी ।

भुवोलेके वायुषणिकः स्वलोक तेजसां निधिः ॥ 12 ॥

महलोक महासिद्धिज्ञनलोके जनत्येषि ।

तपथित्वी ततोषोके सत्यलोके तु सत्यवाक्य ॥ 13 ॥

Thou art the Mother of delights, Durgā Devi, recited by the following ten names: Varenyā, Varadā, Variṣṭhā, Varavarnīṇī, Gariṣṭhā, Varāhā, Varārohā, Nīlaganāgā, Sandhyā and Bhoga Moksāda. Thou art the Bhāgirathī (the river Ganges) in this world; the Bhogavaṇī in the Pātāla; and the Mandākinī (the milky way) in the Heavens. Thou art in this world (Bhur loka) the all-enduring Prthvī (earth); Thou art the Vāyu Śakti (air power) in the middle space (Bhuvar Loka); Thou art the energy (the ocean of Tejas) in the Heavens (Svar loka); Thou art the Great Siddhi in the Mahar loka; Thou art Janā in the Janar Loka; Thou art Tapasvinī in the Tapar loka; Thou art Truth (True Speech) in the Satya lokam.

Book XII Chapter V

कमला विष्णुलोके च गायत्री बहालोकता ।

रूतेलोके स्थिता गौरी हूराधंड़निवासिति ॥ १४ ॥

अहमो महात्रीव प्रकृतिस्तवे हैं गीयते ।

साम्यावस्थामिका वर्ल हैं शबलबह्राकुपिणी ॥ १५ ॥

ततः परा परागक्ति: परमा त्वं है गीयते ।

इच्छागक्ति: क्रियागवित्त्रानिगक्तिशिणक्तिता ॥ १६ ॥

Thou art Kamalā in Viṣṇu Ioka; Gāyatrī in Brahma Ioka; and the other half of Hara as Gaurī in the Rudra loka. O Devi ! Thou art sung as Prakṛti—“Aham” “Om-Mahat” tattva and beyond that the Highest Sarva Brahmaruḥpini and Sāmyāvasthā Prakṛti. Thou art the Parā Śakti; Thou art the Paramā Śakti; O Devi ! Thou art the Tri-Śakti: the Icchā Śakti (the will power), the Kriyā Śakti (power of action) and the Jñāna Śakti (the force of knowledge).

गड़ा च यमुना चैव विवाणा च सरस्वती ।

सर्युद्विका सियुर्मंदैरवात्त तथा ॥ 17 ॥

गोवारी शगतुक्ष कावेरी देवलोकगा ।

कोशिकी चन्द्रभागा च वित्तता च सरस्वती ॥ 18 ॥

गणडकी तापिनी तोया गोमती वेत्रवल्यापि ।

इड़ा च पिंगला चैव सुयुप्राना च तृतीक्या ॥ 19 ॥

गांधारी हस्तिजिहा च पूषाउपूषा तथैव च ।

अलन्युसा कुहृक्षेश गर्जिनी प्राणवाहिनी ॥ 20 ॥

नाडी च नवं गरीसर्या गीयसे प्राक्निर्वैयुः ।

द्वतवास्या प्राणशक्ति: कपटस्या स्वपनाविका ॥ 21 ॥

तालुस्था नवं सदायात्य विद्युका विद्युपालिकि ।

Thou art the Gaṅgā, Yamunā, Vipāśā, Sarasvatī, Sarayu, Devikā, Sindhu; Narmadā, Īrāvatī, Godāvarī, Śatadru; Kāveri, Kauśikī, Candra Bhāgā, Vitastā, Gaṇḍakī, Tapinī, Karatoyā, Gomatī, and Vetravatī and other rivers; Thou art the Iḍā, Pingalā, and Susumnā nerves; Thou art Gāndhārī, Hastajihvā, Pūṣā, Apūṣā, Alambuśā, Kuhū, Śankhini, Prānavahini and other nerves in the body; O Devi! Thou art the vital power in the lotus of the heart; Thou art Svapnanāyikā in the throat; Thou art Sadādhārā in the palate; and Thou art the Bindumālini Śakti in the pituitary space between the eyebrows.

मूले तु कुंडलीशक्तियपिंनी केगमूलगा ॥ 22 ॥

शिखामध्यासना तं हे हिं शिखाटो दु नोमन्तेन।

बिमन्यद्धुनेक्तेन यत्किचिकजगतीये ॥ 23 ॥

तत्सर्वे तं महादेवि विश्ये संधे यनोमतु ते ।

इतीरं कॉर्तितं स्तोत्रं संध्यायां बडुपयदम् ॥ 24 ॥

Thou art the Kundalini in the Muldādhāra (sacral plexus), the Vyāpinī extending upto the roots of the hairs; Thou art Madhyāsanā on the crown of the head, and Thou art Manonmanī in the Brahmarandhra. O Devi! What need there is in stating these? Suffice it to say that whatever there is seen in this universe, all Art Thou; therefore, O Śrī Sandhyā Devi! I bow down to Thee. O Nārada! Thus I have spoken to you about the Gāyatrī-Stotra that gives all successes, destroys all sins, and yields all merits.

महापायप्रामनं महासिंहाद्वियायकम् ।

इर्वं कार्तवैस्तोत्रे संधकाकले समाहितः ॥ 25 ॥

अपुत्र: प्रापुवायातुत्र धनावीं धन्यापनुवात् ।

सर्वतीथितपोदानयत्रयोगकलं लभेत् ॥ 26 ॥

He who reads this in the Sandhyā times, with all attention, will get sons if he has no sons, will get wealth if he has no wealth. There is no doubt in this. Whoever reads this Stotra gets the fruits of all Tirathas, all Tapasyās, all gifts, all sacrifices and all Yogas.

भोगम्बुलया चिरं काल्मन्ते मोक्षमावपान्यात् ।

तपस्विध: कृतं सेतोयं सनाकले तु यः पदेत् ॥ 27 ॥

यत्र कुर्र जले मानः संध्यामज्जनर्क फलम् ।

लभते नात्र संदेहः सन्तं सर्वं च नारत् ॥ 28 ॥

शुणुवाडीपि तद्धक्या स तु पाणतमुभ्यते ।

पीयूपसनुर्णं वाक्यं संप्रोक्ते नारदौरितम् ॥ 29 ॥

इति श्रीदैनीगानवे गतुगुणगे द्वारशकन्ने गयावीसीनों

नाम पंचमोअयायः ॥ 30 ॥

He enjoys happiness in this world and finally gets the Mokṣa. The Munis who are engaged in Tapasyās read this Stotra. While bathing, if one reads this, merged under water, acquires the fruits of his being merged in the Sandhyā. O Nārada! I speak this verily, verily, verily, unto you that there

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

is no trace of any doubt in this statement. Whoever will hear with devotion this Sandhyā stotra, the nectar-like thing, will be freed from all sins.

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the Gāyatrī Stotra in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

