CHAPTER X

On the Anecdote of Satyavrata

जनमेव उवाच

को उसी सत्यजतो नाय बाहुपणो डिजसत्तमः ।

कसिम्बेउने समुपतयः कीपुरुषः वद्त्वय मे ॥ १ ॥ ॥

Janamejaya said: "O Maharṣi! Who was

Satyavrata, the Brāhim whose name you have just taken? In what country was he born? Of what nature was he? Please describe all these to me and satisfy my curiosity?

Book III Chapter X

कथं तेन श्रुतः शब्दः कक्षमूच्चातितः पुनः ।

सिद्धिक्ष कौजुरी जाता तस्य विष्यस्य तक्षणात् ॥ 2 ॥

How did he hear that sound “Ai”; how did he repeat that word? How came out the success to him, illiterate Brāhman, at that very instant?

कर्थ तुषा भवानी सा सर्वज्ञा सर्वसंस्थिता ।

वित्तरेण वद्यवाहा कवभातें मनोरामम् ॥ ३ ॥

And how is it that the Great Goddess, who is omniscient and omnipresent, was pleased with him, kindly describe this interesting incident in detail".

सूत उवाच

इति पृथस्तवा ग्राा व्यास: सत्यवतीसुत ।

उवाच परमोदारं वचन रसवद्छुचि ॥ 4 ॥

Sūta said: “Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati, thus asked by the king, addressed in the following pure, sweet, and highly liberal words.”

व्यास उवाच

शृणु राजप्रवक्ष्यामि कवां पौराणिकीं शृणाम।

श्रुत मुनिसमाजेषु मया पूर्व कुरूद्रह ॥ ५ ॥

Vyāsa said: “Hear, O King! You are the best and foremost in the Kuru clan; what I before heard in the assembly of the Munis, I am now relating that ancient story, highly beneficial to you.

एकदारई कुर्वेश्रे कुर्वेसीधार्ने शूणि ।

सम्प्रापो नैमिपार्णवं पावनं मुनिसेवितम् ॥ 6 ॥

O best of the Kurus! Once in my peregrinations in the holy places of pilgrimages, I came to the Naimisāranya forest, that highly sacred place frequented by the Munis.

प्रणम्यां मुनी-सर्वान् स्थितस्तर वराधमे ।

विधिपुत्रास्तु यथासुजीवन्युक्ता महाततः ॥ 7 ॥

कक्षाप्रसंग एवासीरत विग्रसमागमे ।

जमदर्गिनस्तु पप्रच्छ मुनीरेवं सभाधित्धतः ॥ 8 ॥

जमद्विनरकार

सन्देहो5ति महाभाग मम चेतसि तापसा: ।

समाजेषु भूनीर्गा वै नि:सन्देहो भवायमहूम ॥ 9 ॥

That time there were staying Sanaka, Sanātana and the other sons of Brahmā who were liberated while living. I went there and bowed down to the

Munis and took my seat. Then the religious conversations ensued there in the assembly, when the great sage Maharsī Jamadagni began to question the Munis in following terms:

“O highminded excellent ascetics and Munis! There has arisen a great doubt in my mind; I am desirous to have that doubt solved in this assembly of the Maharsis.

ब्रह्माधिष्युतशा रुहे मघवा बरूणोउलः ।

कुबेर: पवनस्त्वश सेनानीक्ष गणाधिपः ॥ १ ० ॥

सूर्योर्भिश्री भगः शूरा सिगानाथो ग्रहासला ।

आरापनीयतमः कोउत्र वार्छितार्थ कलपदः ॥ १ १ ॥

सुखलेम्यक्ष सततं चागुतोषश मानतः ।

ब्रुवन्तु मुन्य शीर्धं सर्वज्ञा: संग्रितालतः ॥ १ २ ॥

O all-knowing Maharsis that have fulfilled your vows! O Givers of one's honour! Now, my question is this: "Of the following Devas Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Indra, Varuna, Fire, Kubera, Wind, Viśvakarmā, Kārtikeya, Gapeśa, the Sun, the two Aśvins, Bhaga, Pūṣā, Moon, and the other planets, who is the first and best to be worshipped, that can easily be served; who is very quickly satisfied and grants the desired boons; kindly tell me this as early as possible."

एवं प्रपेने कृते तत्र लोपागे शावयमब्रवीत् ।

जमदाने शपुष्यैतदात्यूरं वै त्वयासुभृता ॥ 13 ॥

Thus questioned by Muni Jamadagni, Maharṣi Lomāsa, one in the assembly, spoke: “O Jamadagni! Hear in reply to your question.

सेवनीयतम शफि: सर्वेषां शुभमित्यन्ता ।

परा प्रकृतिराडा च सर्वाना सर्वेदा शिका ॥ 14 ॥

देवानां जननी सेव बढ़ादौनीं महात्मानम् ।

आदिपुकतिनूले सा संसारापदायय वे ॥ 15 ॥

The Goddess of Energy is the best the Devas, most excellent and highest to be worshipped. Those who want welfare, they ought to worship this Supreme Force. She is the Parā Prakrti, the Highest Nature, the Brahma, conditioned by Māyā (Time, space, and causation). She grants all the desires, does good to all, pervades everywhere, and is the

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Mother of B.ahmā and the other high souled Devas. She is the First Prakṛti, and is the Root of this gigantic Tree of Universe.

सूता चोच्यातिरि देवी द्वाति किन वाशिकनम् ।

सर्वदेवार्थिचिता सा वरदानाय सेतिहा ॥ १ ६ ॥

If any one calls the Devi in remembrance or distinctly utters Her Name, She fulfills all the desires of the human beings. If anybody worships Her, she is at once filled with mercy and becomes ready to grant boons.

इतिहासं प्रविश्यामि शुचंतु मुनयः शुभम् ।

अश्लोच्चारणादेच यथा प्रात् द्विजेन वै ॥ १७ ॥

O Munis! How, once upon a time, a Brāhmin, uttering one letter of Her mystical mantra, obtained Her Grace, I am now describing that most auspicious history before you. Be pleased to hear. कौसलेनु द्विजः काईह्येद्वतेनैत विश्रुतः ।

अनपत्यशुकारौंट पुत्राव विधिपूर्वकम् ॥ 18 ॥

Once upon a time, there lived in the country of Kosala*, a famous Brāhmin, named Deva Datta. He had no issues and therefore started duly according to the prescribed rules a sacrifice called Puttreşti for the sake of obtaining children.

*Note: Kosala is a country situated, according to Rāmāyana, along the banks of the Sarayū (or Gogrā). It was divided into “Uttara-Kosala” and “Dakshina Kosala.” The former is also called “Ganda” and it must have therefore signified the country, north of Ayodhyā comprising Gonda and Bahraich. Aja and Dāsaratha, etc, are said to have ruled over the province. At the time of Rāma’s death, his two sons Kuśa and Lava reigned respectively at Kuśāvatī in Southern Kosala in the defiles of the Vindhyas and at Śrāvastī in northern Kosala.

तमसातीरामध्याय कृत्वा मणडयमुतमम् ।

द्विज्ञानाद्य वैद्वानास्वकर्मविशणराद्न् ॥ १९ ॥

कृत्वा वैद्वी विधानेन स्थापयित्वा विधायासून् ।

पुत्रौंह विधित्चत चकार जिजसत्तमः ॥ 20 ॥

On the banks of the Tamasā river, the Brāhmin erected a temporary building (or an open shade) for performing the ceremony, and there built an altar and invited the Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas,

and clever in performing sacrificial rites. There he placed the fire and began to perform according to the strict rules, the Puttreṣti sacrifice.

ब्रहाणं कल्यामास सुहोत्रं गुप्तिसनाम् ।

अध्वरुं याजरल्प्यं च होतारं च बृह्यमिति ॥ 21 ॥

प्रस्तोतरं तथा चैतमुद्गतातरं च गोषितम् ।

सभ्यान-यामुनी-कृत्वा विधित्यद्रवौ सयु ॥ 22 ॥

In that sacrifice, Suhotra, the best of the Munis acted the part of Brahmā (1); Yājñyavalkya acted the part of Adhvaryu (2); Bhraspati, that of Hotā (3); Paila, that of Prastotā (4); Govila, that of Udgatā (5); and the other Munis acted as assistants. These all were duly paid their remuneration.

उद्गाता सामगः श्रेषः सदस्वरसम्पत्थत् ।

रथतनमागयत् स्वरितेन सम्पत्थित् ॥ 23 ॥

तद्धान्य स्वारभूज्ञे प्रभूकृते शासे मुकुषुम् ।

देवदत्तशुक्राणगु गौभिंत प्रयुवाच ह ॥ 24 ॥

(1) One of the four priests employed at a Same sacrifice as a superintendent.

(2) Any officiating priest technically distinguished from Hotri, Udgātri and Brāhmaṇa. His duty was “to measure the ground, build the altar, prepare sacrificial vessels, to fetch wood and water, light the fire, bring the animal and immolate it and while doing this to repeat the Yajurveda.

(3) A sacrificing priest who offers the oblations. Or one who recites the prayers of the Rg Veda at a sacrifice.

(4) One of the four principal priests at a sacrifice, one who chants the hymns of the Sāmaveda.

The Hotā Govila, the excellent reciter of the Sāma hymns, began to sing in accented tones called svarita (the accents are three Udātta, Anudātta and Svarita) and the Rathanara Sāma in 7 tunes.

Then he began to draw breath frequently; and consequently there was a break in time in the accent of Govila. Seeing this, Deva Datta was angry and immediately said to Govila.

मूर्खोंसि मुनियुखाया स्वारभूत्स्वया कृतः ।

कार्यकर्मणि संजाते पुरावर्य वजतक्ष मे ॥ 25 ॥

Book III Chapter X

Well, Govila, you are the foremost of the Munis and still you are doing your work like a quite illiterate man. I fear obstacles may arise in the getting of my son in this my sacrifice of Puttresti.

भोभिस्तु तदोवाच देवदर्तं सुकांपितः ।

मुखैंते भविता पुत्र: शठः शब्दविवर्षितः ॥ 26 ॥

सर्वप्राणिशरिते तु धानोच्छ्वासः सुदुर्दिः ।

न मेत्र दूर्ण किंक्षित्वल्यपत्रे महामते ॥ 27 ॥

Govila then became much enraged and told Deva Datta “your son will be illiterate, hypocrite, and dumb.”

Behold! Every being is subject to breathing and respiring; it is very hard to control them; there is no fault of mine in the accents of my songs beings thus broken; it is strange that you, being intelligent, cannot understand this.

तद्धुत्वा घवनं तस्य गोभितस्य महात्मन: ।

शापाद्रौती तेवदतस्तमुवाचातिरु:खितः ॥ 28 ॥

Afraid of the curse from Govila, Deva Datta became very sorry and said “O Muni! I have done no serious offence; why are you so offended without any cause. See! the munis are void of anger and they always give delight to others.”

कयं कृद्धो3स विघ्रिंद्र यथा मधि निरागाति ।

अकोभना हि मुनयो भवन्ति सुखदा: सदा ॥ 29 ॥

स्वलेनप्रपाधि विघ्रें कयं शणतस्वया हहम् ।

अपूजोई सुतान: प्रात्मापयुक्तः पुनः कृतः ॥ 30 ॥

O best of Brāhmaṇas! My offence is very trifling; why have you inflicted on me so severe a curse? I was already under the mental agony, since I had no issues; and now you have made me suffer more pain.

मूर्वपुरावसुपुत्वं वरं वेदविदो विद्युः ।

तथापि बाङ्गणो मूर्तेः सर्वेषां निश्च एव हि । ३ १ । ॥

For the Vedic Pundits declare that it is better not to have any son than to have an illiterate son; the more so, when a Brāhmīn's son is illiterate, he is blamed by one and all.

प्रणुवच्छुद्रवच्चेव न योग्यः सर्वकर्मिषु ।

किं कारोमीह मुर्जीण पुत्रेण दिजसत्तम ॥ 3 2 ॥

An illiterate son is like a Śūdra or a beast; he is unfit for any action. O Brāhmīn! What shall I do with an illiterate son?

यथा गृहस्तया मुर्जी बाहाणो नास संशयः ।

न पूजाहीं न दानाहीं निश्छा सर्वकंमसु ॥ ३३ ॥

An illiterate Brāhmin is like Śūdra; consequently not an object to be engaged in any act of worship or of gifts, he is not deserving to do any action.

देशे वै वस्मानछ श्राढ्गाणो बेवदार्फितः ।

करदः: शूरवन्देव मंतव्यः स च भूभुजा ॥ 34 ॥

A Brāhmaṇa, bereft of the knowledge of the Vedas, lying in a country is treated as a Śūdra by the king of the place and is liable to pay taxes.

नासने पितृकार्थपुं देवकार्येषु स हिजः ।

मूरुः समुपवेश्यक्ष कार्यक्ष फलमिष्ठन्ति ॥ 35 ॥

Whoever wants to have any fruit in any action will never invite an illiterate Brāhmin to take his seat in the ceremony relating to the Pitṣ or the Devas.

राजा शूरसमो जेयो न योज्यः सर्वकर्मेपु ।

कर्षेकस्तु द्विः कायों ब्राह्मणो वेदवर्कितः ॥ 36 ॥

The king will consider in illiterate Brāhmīn as if a Śūdra and will never engage him in any religious ceremony but will order him to do the work of a farmer in cultivating fields.

विना विग्रंण कर्नेथ श्राबू कुशबटेन वै ।

न तु विश्रण मुर्षीण श्राबूं कार्य कार्वचन् ॥ 37 ॥

Rather to perform the funeral ceremonies by erecting a Kuśacata than to engage an illiterate Brāhmin for the purpose.

आहारादधिकं चात्रं न दात्यमपधिजे ।

दाता नकमापानोत प्रहीता तु विशेषतः ॥ 38 ॥

One should give food to an illiterate Brāhmīn just sufficient to fill his belly and no more. If he does not do that, the giver and especially the receiver are subject to go down to hell.

धियाज्चं तस्य राज्ञो वै यस्य देतेगुवघा जना: ।

पूर्जन्ते ब्राह्मणा मूर्खा दानमानादिकर्षि ॥ 39 ॥

Fie to a kingdom where honour is shewn to the illiterate stupid Brāhmānas.

आसने पूजने दाने यत्र भेदो न चाणवपि ।

मूर्खपिछतलोभेची ज्ञातल्या विबुघेन वे ॥ 40 ॥

Where no difference is observed when seats, worship and gifts are given to various person, sages should draw their inference how the literate and illiterate persons are treated there.

मूखा यत्र सुगविष्ठा दानामनारियईः ।

तम्मिच्छेने न वस्तस्यं पण्डितेन कथंचन ॥ 41 ॥

When the illiterate fools become haughty, when they are paid honors and gifts, the literary persons should never dwell there.

असतामुपकाराय दुर्जनानां विभूतयः ।

चिपुबम्बः फलाडोप्री काकौकौयोपुच्छते ॥ 42 ॥

The wealth of the wicked goes to the enjoyments of the bad persons; for the Nim trees, though abounding richly in fruits, are enjoyed only by crows.

भुक्तनाशं वेदविद्धिप्रो वेदाध्यासं करोति है ।

क्रीक्षिति पूर्वजातस्य व्यर्ग प्रमुदिता: कित्त ॥ 4 3 ॥

Again, on the other hand, if the Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas, study the Vedas even after they have taken their food, still his father and forefathers are happy and play cheerfully in their heavens.

गोभिताः किमुक्ति के त्वया वेदविद्युत्तम ।

संसारे मुखुपत्रयं मरणादितिभाद्धिन् ॥ 44 ॥

Therefore, O Gobhila! You being the foremost of the Brāhmins, who are versed in the Vedas, what have you said just now? See in this world, death is better than to have an illiterate son.

कृषा कुक महाभाग शापस्यानुर्हं प्रति ।

दीनोद्वारणशक्तोसि यतामि तव पादोचे ॥ 45 ॥

How is it, then, that you have cursed me that I would get an illiterate son, when you are the best one, highly qualified with knowledge. O high minded one! You are capable to relieve the distressed; I am bowing down to your feet; shew your mercy and re-consider your curse."

लोगश उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा देवदत्तसु पतिततस्य पादयोः ।

सुवन्दीन्हदत्यर्थं कृपणः साशुलोचनः ॥ 46 ॥

Lomaśa said: O Munis! Devadatta, saying these words, fell prostrate at his feet and began to eulogise him in very pitiful words, being very much grieved and with tears in his eyes.

गोषीमलसु तदा तन युद्धवा तं दीपनेतस्म ।

क्षणकोंमा महान्तो वे पाणिष्ठा: कल्यकोपना: ॥ 47 ॥

Seeing him thus distressed, Govila was moved with pity. The persons that are noble their anger satiated after a short while; the anger is of the ignoble lasts for a long time.

जलं स्वभावतः शीर्गे पायकततपयोगतः ।

उष्णं भवति तच्छीधं तिहान शिजिरं भवेत् ॥ 48 ॥

The water is naturally cool; but it gets hot in contact with fire or heat; and no sooner the heat is drawn away, water gets again cooled quickly. (

दयावान्तोभिलस्त्वादे देववर्तं सुब:वित्यान् ।

मुखों भृत्वा सुत्तते वे विद्वानीय भविष्यति ॥ 49 ॥

The merciful Govila then addressed the distressed Devadatta “your son, though at first illiterate, will afterwards be very learned.”

इति दन्वरः सोअ धुवितोर्भयूद्विजर्भेः ।

इर्हिं समाय यिग्यानै विससर्जे यथाविधि ॥ 50 ॥

Brāhmin Deva Datta was very glad on getting this boon; then completing the sacrifice, rewarded the Brāhmins with their due dakshinās and dismissed them.

कालेन किवता तस्य भार्यां रूपमती सती ।

गर्भ द्वारा काले सा गौहिणो गौहिणीसामा ॥ 51 ॥

In due course of time, his fair chaste wife Rohinī, like the asterism Rohinī became pregnant.

गर्भधानादिकं कर्म चक्रा विधिवद्धिज्ञः ।

पुसंवन्धिवधान च शूत्राकरणं तथा ॥ 52 ॥

Deva Datta performed the Garbhādhāna (1) and Pūnsavana (2) ceremonies and other purificatory (3) rites duly.

सीमंतेत्रजनं चैव कृतं वेदविधानतः ।

ददौ दानाति मुहितो मत्लौं सकलां तथा ॥ 53 ॥

He performed the Simantonnayana ceremony according to rules and considered his Puttvresṭi sacrifice successful and made various offerings to Brāhmins.'

Book III Chapter X

Note: (1) One of the Samskāras, purificatory ceremonies, performed after menstruation to ensure or facilitate conception (this ceremony legalises in a religions sense the consummation of marriage).

(2) It is a ceremony performed on a woman's perceiving the first signs of a living conception, with a view to the birth of a son.

(3) “Parting of the hair” one of the twelve Samskāras or purificatory rites observed by woman in the fourth, sixth, or eighth month of their pregnancy.

གྱབ་ཉིན་མུབྱུང་བྱུར་ཀྱིན་གྱི་གྱིན།

दिन लगने शुभेत्यर्ष जातकर्मं चकार सः ॥ 54 ॥

पुर्वर्णिकं कृत्वा नामकर्म चक्रार च ।

उतध्य इति पुरस्य कृतं नाम पुराविद्ध ॥ 55 ॥

In the auspicious lagna when Rohinī asterism was present and in the auspicious day, his wife Rohinī gave birth to a male child. Devadatta performed the nativities of the new born child and saw its face. Next that knower of the Purānas, Devadatta kept the name of the child as Utathya.

स चार्ये तथा वर्ये गुधे वे गुधवासरे ।

तस्योपनयनं कर्म चकार विधिवित्यिता ॥ ५६ ॥

When the son was eight years old, Devadatta performed the Upanayana (thread) ceremony duly.

वेदमध्यायामास मुरन्त से बते स्थितम् ।

नोच्चार तथोत्यतः संस्थितो मुध्यतन्ता ॥ ५७ ॥

बहुधा पातितः पिता न द्वारा मर्ति गड़ः ।

मृद्वस्तिष्ठतेर्वर्ष तं शुशोच पिता तद ॥ ५८ ॥

Next the child was made to accept the vow of Brahmacāri; and Devadatta made him study the Vedas; but the child could not pronounce a single word and used to sit simply like a stupid boy. Though he tried in various ways to read and write, that wicked boy never paid the slightest attention, simply sat idly. Seeing this, his father was very sorry and much grieved.

एवं कुर्वैनसदोःययंसे जातो द्वादुशार्थिकः ।

न वेद विधित्वकनुं संधावन्दनं किं विधिं ॥ 59 ॥

Thus twelve years passed. Yet the boy could not learn how to perform his Sandhyā Vandana duly.

मूर्डोंप्रदूतितोकेषु गता वातोंजितिवस्तरा ।

ब्राहणेषु च सर्वेषु तापसेश्वितेषु च ॥ 6 0 ॥

Rumour went abroad that Uttatlya, the son of Devadatta turned out very illiterate. All the Brāhmanas, ascetics, and other persons came to learn this fact.

जहास लोकस्तं प्रं यत्र तत्र गतं मुने ।

पिता माता निर्विद्धा मूर्खं तमतिभत्संयन् ॥ 6 1 ॥

Wherever Uttahya used to go in any forest on hermitage, people used to laugh at him, ridiculed his father and mother and began to chide that illiterate son.

निर्वितोर्ध अजै: का पितृध्यमय बांधवेः ।

वैराययमगाडिप्रो जगाम वनमध्यसौ ॥ 62 ॥

Thus blamed by father, mother and all other persons, dispassion occupied the heart of Utathya.

अंधो वरसला यंगुन मुकैंसु वर: सुस्तः ।

इत्सुक्तोजी सिंतृष्यां वे विवेय काननं प्रति ॥ 63 ॥

‘Once when rebuked by his father and mother that it was better to have a blind and lame son instead of an illiterate brute, Uttahya took recourse to renunciation and went to a dense forest.

गड़गातीर गुधे स्थाने कृत्याटेजन्मुत्ताम् ।

वन्यां वृत्ति च सुकूल्य स्थिततस समाहितः ॥ 64 ॥

नियमं च परं कृत्वा नास्तयं प्रव्रीयघ्न् ।

स्थिततसजाये मय बहाव्यवंत्रते हि सः ॥ 65 ॥

ड्रित श्रीदेवीभागवते महापुरुषो हृतीयकल्भ्रे

वर्षामो३थाव: 11 10 11

On the banks of the Gangs in a beautiful spot free obstacles, he built a beautiful hut and began to subsist on the roots and fruits of the forest and with collected mind. Having made the excellent vow “I will never speak untruth” and holding the vow of celibacy, he lived in that beautiful hermitage.

Thus ends the Tenth Chapter in the Third Book

of Śrimaddevvibhāgavatam of 1,8000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa relating to the

story of Satyavrata.

