[Ch 10 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya said: "O Maharṣi! Who was Satyavrata, the Brāhim whose name you have just taken? In what country was he born? Of what nature was he? Please describe all these to me and satisfy my curiosity?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya said :-- O Maharṣi! Who was Satyavrata, the Brāhmin whose name you have just taken? In what country was he born? Of what nature was he? Please describe all these to me and satisfy my curiosity?

[Ch 10 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How did he hear that sound “Ai”; how did he repeat that word? How came out the success to him, illiterate Brāhman, at that very instant?
NEW CORR ENG ──► How did he hear that sound “Ai”; how did he repeat that word? How came out the success to him, that illiterate Brāhmaṇ, at that very instant?

[Ch 10 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And how is it that the Great Goddess, who is omniscient and omnipresent, was pleased with him, kindly describe this interesting incident in detail".
NEW CORR ENG ──► And how is it that that Great Goddess, who is omniscient and omnipresent, was pleased with him, kindly describe this interesting incident in detail.

[Ch 10 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: “Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati, thus asked by the king, addressed in the following pure, sweet, and highly liberal words.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Vyāsa, the son of Satyavatī, thus asked by the king, addressed in the following pure, sweet, and highly liberal words.

[Ch 10 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “Hear, O King! You are the best and foremost in the Kuru clan; what I before heard in the assembly of the Munis, I am now relating that ancient story, highly beneficial to you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Hear, O king! You are the best and foremost in the Kuru clan; what I before heard in the assembly of the Munis, I am now relating that ancient story, highly beneficial to you.

[Ch 10 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O best of the Kurus! Once in my peregrinations in the holy places of pilgrimages, I came to the Naimisāranya forest, that highly sacred place frequented by the Munis.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O best of the Kurus! Once in my peregrinations in the holy places of pilgrimages, I came to the Naimisāranya forest, that highly sacred place frequented by the Munis.

[Ch 10 Verse 7-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That time there were staying Sanaka, Sanātana and the other sons of Brahmā who were liberated while living. I went there and bowed down to the Munis and took my seat. Then the religious conversations ensued there in the assembly, when the great sage Maharsī Jamadagni began to question the Munis in following terms: “O highminded excellent ascetics and Munis! There has arisen a great doubt in my mind; I am desirous to have that doubt solved in this assembly of the Maharsis.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That time there were staying Sanaka, Sanātana and the other sons of Brāhma who were liberated while living. I went there and bowed down to the Munis and took my seat. Then the religious conversations ensued there in the assembly, when the great sage Maharṣi Jamadagni began to question the Munis in the following terms :-- 9. O high-minded excellent ascetics and Munis! There has arisen a great doubt in my mind; I am desirous to have that doubt solved in this assembly of the Maharṣis.

[Ch 10 Verse 10-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O all-knowing Maharsis that have fulfilled your vows! O Givers of one's honour! Now, my question is this: "Of the following Devas Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Indra, Varuna, Fire, Kubera, Wind, Viśvakarmā, Kārtikeya, Gapeśa, the Sun, the two Aśvins, Bhaga, Pūṣā, Moon, and the other planets, who is the first and best to be worshipped, that can easily be served; who is very quickly satisfied and grants the desired boons; kindly tell me this as early as possible."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O all-knowing Maharṣis that have fulfilled your vows! O Givers of one’s honour! Now my question is this :-- Of the following Devas Brāhma, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Indra, Varuṇa, Fire, Kuvera, Wind, Visvakarmā, Kārtikeya, Ganesa, the Sun, the two Aśvins, Bhaga, Pūsā, Moon, and the other planets, who is the first and best to be worshipped, that can easily be served; who is very quickly satisfied and grants the desired boons; kindly tell me this as early as possible.

[Ch 10 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus questioned by Muni Jamadagni, Maharṣi Lomāsa, one in the assembly, spoke: “O Jamadagni! Hear in reply to your question.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus questioned by the Muni Jamadagni, Maharṣi Lomaśa, one in the assembly, spoke :-- O Jamadagni! Hear in reply to your question.

[Ch 10 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Goddess of Energy is the best the Devas, most excellent and highest to be worshipped. Those who want welfare, they ought to worship this Supreme Force. She is the Parā Prakrti, the Highest Nature, the Brahma, conditioned by Māyā (Time, space, and causation). She grants all the desires, does good to all, pervades everywhere, and is the Mother of B.ahmā and the other high souled Devas. She is the First Prakṛti, and is the Root of this gigantic Tree of Universe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Goddess of Energy is the best of the Devas, most excellent and highest to be worshipped. Those who want welfare, they ought to worship this Supreme Force. She is the Parā Prakriti, the Highest Nature, the Brāhma, conditioned by Māyā (Time, space, and causation). She grants all the desires, does good to all, pervades everywhere, and is the Mother of Brāhma and the other high souled Devas. She is the First Prakriti, and is the Root of this gigantic Tree of Universe.

[Ch 10 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If any one calls the Devi in remembrance or distinctly utters Her Name, She fulfills all the desires of the human beings. If anybody worships Her, she is at once filled with mercy and becomes ready to grant boons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If any one calls the Devī in remembrance or distinctly utters Her Name, She fulfills all the desires of the human beings. If anybody worships Her, She is at once filled with mercy and becomes ready to grant boons.

[Ch 10 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once upon a time, there lived in the country of Kosala*, a famous Brāhmin, named Deva Datta. He had no issues and therefore started duly according to the prescribed rules a sacrifice called Puttreşti for the sake of obtaining children. *Note: Kosala is a country situated, according to Rāmāyana, along the banks of the Sarayū (or Gogrā). It was divided into “Uttara-Kosala” and “Dakshina Kosala.” The former is also called “Ganda” and it must have therefore signified the country, north of Ayodhyā comprising Gonda and Bahraich. Aja and Dāsaratha, etc, are said to have ruled over the province. At the time of Rāma’s death, his two sons Kuśa and Lava reigned respectively at Kuśāvatī in Southern Kosala in the defiles of the Vindhyas and at Śrāvastī in northern Kosala.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once on a time, there lived in the country of Kosala,* a famous Brāhmin, named Deva Datta. He had no issues and therefore started duly according to the prescribed rules a sacrifice called Puttreṣṭi for the sake of obtaining children. *Kosala is a country situated, according to Rāmāyaṇa, along the banks of the Sarayū (or Gogrā). It was divided into Uttara-Kosala and Dakshina Kosala. The former is also called Ganda and it must have therefore signified the country, north of Ayodhyā comprising Gonda and Bahraich. Aja and Dasaratha, etc., are said to have ruled over the province. At the time of Rāma’s death, his two sons Kusa and Lava reigned respectively at Kusāvati in Southern Kosala in the defiles of the Vindhyas and at Srāvasti in northern Kosala.

[Ch 10 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the banks of the Tamasā river, the Brāhmin erected a temporary building (or an open shade) for performing the ceremony, and there built an altar and invited the Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas, and clever in performing sacrificial rites. There he placed the fire and began to perform according to the strict rules, the Puttreṣti sacrifice.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the banks of the Tamasā river, the Brāhmin erected a temporary building (or an open shade) for performing the ceremony, and there built an altar and invited the Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas, and clever in performing sacrificial rites. There he placed the fire and began to perform according to the strict rules, the Puttreṣṭi sacrifice.

[Ch 10 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In that sacrifice, Suhotra, the best of the Munis acted the part of Brahmā (1); Yājñyavalkya acted the part of Adhvaryu (2); Bhraspati, that of Hotā (3); Paila, that of Prastotā (4); Govila, that of Udgatā (5); and the other Munis acted as assistants. These all were duly paid their remuneration.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In that sacrifice, Suhotra, the best of the Munis acted the part of Brāhma (1); Yājñyavalkya acted the part of Adhvaryu (2); Brihaspati, that of Hotā (3); Paila, that of Prastotā (4); Govila, that of Udgātā (6); and the other Munis acted as assistants. These all were duly paid their remunerations.

[Ch 10 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► (1) One of the four priests employed at a Same sacrifice as a superintendent. (2) Any officiating priest technically distinguished from Hotri, Udgātri and Brāhmaṇa. His duty was “to measure the ground, build the altar, prepare sacrificial vessels, to fetch wood and water, light the fire, bring the animal and immolate it and while doing this to repeat the Yajurveda. (3) A sacrificing priest who offers the oblations. Or one who recites the prayers of the Rg Veda at a sacrifice. (4) One of the four principal priests at a sacrifice, one who chants the hymns of the Sāmaveda. The Hotā Govila, the excellent reciter of the Sāma hymns, began to sing in accented tones called svarita (the accents are three Udātta, Anudātta and Svarita) and the Rathanara Sāma in 7 tunes. Then he began to draw breath frequently; and consequently there was a break in time in the accent of Govila. Seeing this, Deva Datta was angry and immediately said to Govila.
NEW CORR ENG ──► (1) One of the four priests employed at a Soma sacrifice as a superintendent. (2) Any officiating priest technically distinguished from Hotri, Udgātri and Brāhmaṇ. His duty was to measure the ground, build the altar, prepare sacrificial vessels, to fetch wood and water, light the fire, bring the animal and immolate it and while doing this to repeat the Yajurveda. (3) A sacrificing priest who offers the oblations. Or one who recites the prayers of the Rigveda at a sacrifice. (5) One of the four principal priests at a sacrifice, one who chants the hymns of the Sāmaveda. 23-24. The Hotā Govila, the excellent reciter of the Sāma hymns, began to sing in accented tones called svarita (the accents are three Udātta, Anudātta and Svarita) and the Rathantara Sāma in 7 tunes. Then he began to draw breath frequently; and consequently there was a break in time in the accent of Govila. Seeing this, Deva Datta was angry and immediately said to Govila.

[Ch 10 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Well, Govila, you are the foremost of the Munis and still you are doing your work like a quite illiterate man. I fear obstacles may arise in the getting of my son in this my sacrifice of Puttresti.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Well, Govila, you are the foremost of the Munis and still you are doing your work like a quite illiterate man. I fear obstacles may arise in the getting of my son in this my sacrifice of Puttreṣṭi.

[Ch 10 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Govila then became much enraged and told Deva Datta “your son will be illiterate, hypocrite, and dumb.” Behold! Every being is subject to breathing and respiring; it is very hard to control them; there is no fault of mine in the accents of my songs beings thus broken; it is strange that you, being intelligent, cannot understand this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Govila then became much enraged and told Deva Datta “your son will be illiterate, hypocrite, and dumb.” 27. Behold! Every being is subject to breathing and respiring; it is very hard to control them; there is no fault of mine in the accents of my songs being thus broken; it is strange that you, being intelligent, cannot understand this.

[Ch 10 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Afraid of the curse from Govila, Deva Datta became very sorry and said “O Muni! I have done no serious offence; why are you so offended without any cause. See! the munis are void of anger and they always give delight to others.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► afraid to hear the curse from Govila, Deva Datta became very sorry and said “O Muni! I have done no serious offence; why are you so offended without any cause. See! The Munis are void of anger and they always give delight to others.”

[Ch 10 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O best of Brāhmaṇas! My offence is very trifling; why have you inflicted on me so severe a curse? I was already under the mental agony, since I had no issues; and now you have made me suffer more pain.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O best of Brāhmans! My offence is very trifling; why have you inflicted on me so severe a curse? I was already under the mental agony, since I had no issues; and now you have made me suffer move pain.

[Ch 10 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► For the Vedic Pundits declare that it is better not to have any son than to have an illiterate son; the more so, when a Brāhmīn's son is illiterate, he is blamed by one and all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► For the Vedic Pundits declare that it is better not to have any son than to have an illiterate stupid son; the more so, when a Brāhmin’s son is illiterate, he is blamed by one and all.

[Ch 10 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► An illiterate son is like a Śūdra or a beast; he is unfit for any action. O Brāhmīn! What shall I do with an illiterate son?
NEW CORR ENG ──► An illiterate son is like a Śūdra or a beast; he is unfit for any action. O Brāhmin! What shall I do with an illiterate son?

[Ch 10 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► An illiterate Brāhmin is like Śūdra; consequently not an object to be engaged in any act of worship or of gifts, he is not deserving to do any action.
NEW CORR ENG ──► An illiterate Brāhmin is like a Śūdra; consequently not an object to be engaged in any act of worship or of gifts, he is not deserving to do any action.

[Ch 10 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► A Brāhmaṇa, bereft of the knowledge of the Vedas, lying in a country is treated as a Śūdra by the king of the place and is liable to pay taxes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► A Brāhmaṇ, bereft of the knowledge of the Vedas, living in a country is treated as a Śūdra by the king of the place and is liable to pay taxes.

[Ch 10 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whoever wants to have any fruit in any action will never invite an illiterate Brāhmin to take his seat in the ceremony relating to the Pitṣ or the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whoever wants to have any fruit in any action will never invite an illiterate Brāhmin to take his seat in the ceremony relating to the Pitris or the Devas.

[Ch 10 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king will consider in illiterate Brāhmīn as if a Śūdra and will never engage him in any religious ceremony but will order him to do the work of a farmer in cultivating fields.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king will consider an illiterate Brāhmin as if a Śūdra and will never engage him in any religious ceremony but will order him to do the work of a farmer in cultivating fields.

[Ch 10 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Rather to perform the funeral ceremonies by erecting a Kuśacata than to engage an illiterate Brāhmin for the purpose.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Rather to perform the funeral ceremonies by erecting a Kuśabaṭa than to engage an illiterate Brāhmin for the purpose.

[Ch 10 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One should give food to an illiterate Brāhmīn just sufficient to fill his belly and no more. If he does not do that, the giver and especially the receiver are subject to go down to hell.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One should give food to an illiterate Brāhmin just sufficient to fill his belly and no more. If he does not do that, the giver and especially the receiver are subject to go down to hell.

[Ch 10 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Fie to a kingdom where honour is shewn to the illiterate stupid Brāhmānas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Fie to a kingdom where honour is shown to the illiterate stupid Brāhmaṇas.

[Ch 10 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Where no difference is observed when seats, worship and gifts are given to various person, sages should draw their inference how the literate and illiterate persons are treated there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Where no difference is observed when seats, worship and gift are given to various persons, sages should draw their inference how the literate and illiterate persons are treated there.

[Ch 10 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the illiterate fools become haughty, when they are paid honors and gifts, the literary persons should never dwell there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the illiterate fools become haughty, when they are paid honours and gifts, the literary persons should never dwell there.

[Ch 10 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The wealth of the wicked goes to the enjoyments of the bad persons; for the Nim trees, though abounding richly in fruits, are enjoyed only by crows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The wealth of the wicked goes to the enjoyments of the bad persons; for the Nim trees, though abounding richly in fruits, are enjoyed only by crows.

[Ch 10 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again, on the other hand, if the Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas, study the Vedas even after they have taken their food, still his father and forefathers are happy and play cheerfully in their heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again, on the other hand, if the Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas, study the Vedas even after they have taken their food, still his father and forefathers are happy and play cheerfully in their heavens.

[Ch 10 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Gobhila! You being the foremost of the Brāhmins, who are versed in the Vedas, what have you said just now? See in this world, death is better than to have an illiterate son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore O Govīla! You being the foremost of the Brāhmin who are versed in the Vedas, what have you said just now? See in this world, death is rather to be preferred then to have an illiterate son.

[Ch 10 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How is it, then, that you have cursed me that I would get an illiterate son, when you are the best one, highly qualified with knowledge. O high minded one! You are capable to relieve the distressed; I am bowing down to your feet; shew your mercy and re-consider your curse."
NEW CORR ENG ──► How is it, then, that you have cursed me that I would get an illiterate son, when you are the best one, highly qualified with knowledge. 45. O high minded one! You are capable to relieve the distressed; I am bowing down to your feet; shew your mercy and re-consider your curse.

[Ch 10 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Lomaśa said: O Munis! Devadatta, saying these words, fell prostrate at his feet and began to eulogise him in very pitiful words, being very much grieved and with tears in his eyes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Lomaśa said :-- O Munis! Devadatta, saying these words, fell prostrate at his feet and began to eulogise him in very pitiful words, being very much grieved and with tears in his eyes.

[Ch 10 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing him thus distressed, Govila was moved with pity. The persons that are noble their anger satiated after a short while; the anger is of the ignoble lasts for a long time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing him thus distressed, Govila was moved with pity. The persons that are noble have their anger satiated after a short while; the anger of the ignoble lasts for a long time.

[Ch 10 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The water is naturally cool; but it gets hot in contact with fire or heat; and no sooner the heat is drawn away, water gets again cooled quickly. (
NEW CORR ENG ──► The water is naturally cool; but it gets hot in contact with fire heat; and no sooner the heat is drawn away, water gets again cooled quickly.

[Ch 10 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The merciful Govila then addressed the distressed Devadatta “your son, though at first illiterate, will afterwards be very learned.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The merciful Govila then addressed the distressed Devadatta “your son though at first illiterate, will afterwards be very learned.”

[Ch 10 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brāhmin Deva Datta was very glad on getting this boon; then completing the sacrifice, rewarded the Brāhmins with their due dakshinās and dismissed them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brāhmin Devadatta was very glad on getting this boon; then completing the sacrifice, rewarded the Brāhmins with their due dakshiṇās and dismissed them.

[Ch 10 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In due course of time, his fair chaste wife Rohinī, like the asterism Rohinī became pregnant.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In due course of time, his fair chaste wife Rohiṇī, like the asterism Rohiṇī became pregnant.

[Ch 10 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Deva Datta performed the Garbhādhāna (1) and Pūnsavana (2) ceremonies and other purificatory (3) rites duly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Devadatta performed the Garbhādhān (1) and Pumsavan (2) ceremonies and other purificatory rites duly.

[Ch 10 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He performed the Simantonnayana ceremony according to rules and considered his Puttvresṭi sacrifice successful and made various offerings to Brāhmins.' Note: (1) One of the Samskāras, purificatory ceremonies, performed after menstruation to ensure or facilitate conception (this ceremony legalises in a religions sense the consummation of marriage). (2) It is a ceremony performed on a woman's perceiving the first signs of a living conception, with a view to the birth of a son. (3) “Parting of the hair” one of the twelve Samskāras or purificatory rites observed by woman in the fourth, sixth, or eighth month of their pregnancy. གྱབ་ཉིན་མུབྱུང་བྱུར་ཀྱིན་གྱི་གྱིན།
NEW CORR ENG ──► He performed the Sīmantonnayana ceremony according to rules and considered his Puttrveṣṭi sacrifice successful and made various offerings to the Brāhmins. N. B. -- (1) One of the Samskāras, purificatory ceremonies, performed after menstruation to ensure or facilitate conception (this ceremony legalises in a religious sense the consummation of marriage). (2) It is a ceremony performed on a woman’s perceiving the first signs of a living conception, with a view to the birth of a son. (3) “Parting of the hair” one of the twelve Samskāras or purificatory rites observed by women in the fourth, sixth, or eighth month of their pregnancy.

[Ch 10 Verse 54-55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the auspicious lagna when Rohinī asterism was present and in the auspicious day, his wife Rohinī gave birth to a male child. Devadatta performed the nativities of the new born child and saw its face. Next that knower of the Purānas, Devadatta kept the name of the child as Utathya.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the auspicious lagna when Rohiṇī asterism was present and in the auspicious day, his wife Rohiṇī gave birth to a male child. Devadatta performed the nativities of the new born child and saw its face. Next that knower of the Purāṇas, Devadatta kept the name of the child as Utathya.

[Ch 10 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the son was eight years old, Devadatta performed the Upanayana (thread) ceremony duly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the son was eight years old, Devadatta performed the Upanayana (thread) ceremony duly.

[Ch 10 Verse 57-58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next the child was made to accept the vow of Brahmacāri; and Devadatta made him study the Vedas; but the child could not pronounce a single word and used to sit simply like a stupid boy. Though he tried in various ways to read and write, that wicked boy never paid the slightest attention, simply sat idly. Seeing this, his father was very sorry and much grieved.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next the child was made to accept the vow of Brāhmacāri; and Devadatta made him study the Vedas; but the child could not pronounce a single word and used to sit simply like a stupid boy. Though tried in various ways to read and write, that wicked boy never paid the slightest attention, simply sat idly. Seeing this, his father was very sorry and much grieved.

[Ch 10 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus twelve years passed. Yet the boy could not learn how to perform his Sandhyā Vandana duly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus twelve years passed. Yet the boy could not learn how to perform his Sandhyā Bandanā duly.

[Ch 10 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Rumour went abroad that Uttatlya, the son of Devadatta turned out very illiterate. All the Brāhmanas, ascetics, and other persons came to learn this fact.
NEW CORR ENG ──► rumour went abroad that Utathya, the son of Devadatta turned out very illiterate. All the Brāhmaṇas, ascetics, and other persons came to learn this fact.

[Ch 10 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Wherever Uttahya used to go in any forest on hermitage, people used to laugh at him, ridiculed his father and mother and began to chide that illiterate son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Wherever Utathya used to go in any forest on hermitage, the people used to laugh at him, ridiculed his father and mother and began to chide that illiterate son.

[Ch 10 Verse 62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus blamed by father, mother and all other persons, dispassion occupied the heart of Utathya.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus blamed by father, mother and all other persons, dispassion occupied the heart of Utathya.

[Ch 10 Verse 63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► ‘Once when rebuked by his father and mother that it was better to have a blind and lame son instead of an illiterate brute, Uttahya took recourse to renunciation and went to a dense forest.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once when rebuked by his father and mother that it was better to have a blind and lame son instead of an illiterate brute, Utathya took recourse to renunciation and went to a dense forest.

[Ch 10 Verse 64-65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the banks of the Gangs in a beautiful spot free obstacles, he built a beautiful hut and began to subsist on the roots and fruits of the forest and with collected mind. Having made the excellent vow “I will never speak untruth” and holding the vow of celibacy, he lived in that beautiful hermitage. Thus ends the Tenth Chapter in the Third Book of Śrimaddevvibhāgavatam of 1,8000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa relating to the story of Satyavrata.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the banks of the Ganges in a beautiful spot free from obstacles, he built a beautiful hut and began to subsist on the roots and fruits of the forest and with collected mind. Having made the excellent vow “I will never speak untruth” and holding the vow of celibacy, he lived in that beautiful hermitage. Thus ends the 10th chapter in the 3rd Skandha of Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa relating to the story of Satyavrata.
