CHAPTER XXX

On the Birth of Gauri and Śiva's Distraction

व्यास उवाच

ततस्ते तु वनोद्रेगे हिमाचलतटाश्रयाः ।

मायावीजजपासक्तासप्रधोकः समाहिताः ॥ १ ॥

ध्यायतां परमां शफिंक लक्षवर्षिण्यभूष्ट्रुण ।

ततः प्रसज्ञ देवी सा प्रत्यक्षं दर्जनं ददौ ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! They went to the forest and fixed their seats on the slopt of the Himālayan mountain and engaged themselves in repeating silently the seed Mantra of Mahā Māyā and thus practised their austerities. O King! One hundred thousand years passed in the meditation of the Parā Śakti. The Devi pleased became visible to them.

पाणोङ्गप्रायपीतिचतुबाईस्लोचना । कंकणासस्पूर्णां सचिव्दानन्दस्तिपिणी । ३ ।।

दूर्धा तां सर्वेंजननी तुड्युपुर्णनेयोमता: । नम्मते विश्वरूपायै वैब्ञानस्पूर्णतेये ।। ४ ।।

Her form was three-eyed, and of the form of Existence, Intelligence and Bliss (Saccidānanda); She was filled with mercy. In Her one hand there was the noose, in another hand, goad; in another hand there was the sign bidding her devotees

discard all fear, and in the other hand She was ready to offer boons.

नमतेजसहपायै सुत्रात्मवपुषे नमः ।

यमिम्बसर्वे लिंगवेह्ञा ओतग्रोता व्यवस्थिताः ॥ 5 ॥

नमः प्राजस्वलपायै नमोअ्याकृतमुपर्ने ।

नमः प्रत्यक्स्वलपायै नमसे ब्रह्मुपर्ने ॥ 6 ॥

नमसे सर्वकपायै सर्वलक्ष्यातमूर्ते ।

३ति सुत्वा जगद्धाजीं चफित्काराद्वया तिरा ॥ 7 ॥

The good-natured Munis, seeing this Form of the World Mother began to praise Her. “O Devi! Thou art existing separately in every gross body; we bow down to Thee. Thou art existing wholly (cosmically) in all the gross bodies; we bow down to Thee. O Parameśvari! Thou art existing separately in every subtle body; we bow down to Thee; Thou art existing universally in all the subtle bodies; we bow down to Thee, Thou art existing separately in all the causal bodies wherein all the Liṅga Dehas (subtle bodies) are interwoven; we bow down to Thee. Thou art existing universally in all the causal bodies; we bow down to Thee.

Book VII Chapter XXX

Thou art of the nature of the unchangeable Brahma, the receptacle of all the Jivas and thus resident in all the bodies; so we bow down to Thee. Thou art of the nature of Atman, the Goal of all the beings; we bow again and again to Thee."

प्रणेमुश्राणांभोजं दशाभा मुनयोप्रलतः ।

ततः प्रसजा सा देवी प्रोबाच चिकभाधिणी ॥ ८ ॥

वरं बृत महाभागा वरतादई सदा माता ।

Thus the pure-natured Dakṣa and the other Munis praised Her with voice, choked with feelings of intense devotion and bowed down to Her feet. Then the Devi, pleased, spoke to them in a cuckoo voice. "O Highly Fortunate Ones! I am ever ready to grant boons; so ask what you desire."

तस्यासु वचनं श्रुत्वा हृतिविष्णोस्तनोः समम् ॥ 9 ॥

तयोस्तछ्णिकलाभं च वक्षेरे नृपसतम ।

दक्षोरध वृत्त्याहु जन्म देखि कुले मम ॥ 10 ॥

O King! Hearing thus, they asked that Hari and Hara both regain their natural states and be united respectively with their Sāktis, Lakṣmī and Gaurī. Dakṣa again asked: "O Devi! Let your birth be in my family.

भवेतचाव्य वैनाहं कृतकृत्यो भवे इति ।

जयं ध्यान तथा पूजा स्थानानि विविधानि च ॥ ११ ॥

वदे मे परमेशानि रसमुखैवेव केवलम् ।

O Mother! I will, no doubt, consider myself as having then realised the fulfilment of my life. So, O Paramesāvari! Speak by Thy own mouth how Thy worship, Japam, meditation will be conducted as well the various fit places where they would be performed."

देव्युवाच

मच्छक्नोरयमानाच्य जाताजस्या तयोईयोः ॥ 12 ॥

सैताडुगः प्रकर्तीये मेप्रपातः कदाचन ।

अनुग्न मत्कृपालोगच्छरीर स्वस्थता तयोः ॥ 13 ॥

भविष्यति च ते शक्ती त्वदूगे क्षीरसागरे ।

जनित्यतस्तत ताभ्यां प्राप्यस्तः प्रेरिते मया ॥ 14 ॥

The Devi said: “The insult shewn towards my Śaktis has led to this calamitious state of Hari and Hara. So they should not repeat such crime. Now,

by My favour, they will regain their health and of the two Śaktis, one will be born in your family and the other will take Her birth in the Kṣiroda Sāgara, the ocean of milk. Hari and Hara will get back their Śaktis, when I will send them the chief Mantra.

मायावीर्जे हि मन्त्रो मे पुरुष चित्रकर: सदा ।

ध्यान विरासुर्वरो मेधवा त्वतुगतः स्थितम् ॥ १५ ॥

सचिवानन्दनरूपं वा स्थानं सर्व जान्यम् ।

युषामीय सर्वदो चाहं पूज्य धोया च सर्वदो ॥ १६ ॥

The chief Mantra of Mine is the said Mantra of Māyā; this is always sweet to Me; so worship this Mantra and make japam of this. The Form that you are seeing before you, this is My Bhuvanesvarī form (that of the Goddess of the Universe), or worship My Virāt (cosmic) form; or Saccidānanda form. The whole world is my place of worship; so you can meditate on Me and worship Me always and in all places."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्नवांतद्वीये देवी यगिणीयाधिवासिनि ।

दक्षात्या मुनवः सर्वे बह्चाणं पुनरावयुः ॥ 17 ॥

बह्वाणे सर्वेकृतांतं कथयामासुरावतत् ।

हरो हरिश्र खरवथी तौ सर्यकतार्वक्षमौ गृप ॥ 18 ॥

Vyāsa said: When the Bhuaneśvari Devī living in the Mani Dvīpa thus giving Her reply, went away, Dakṣa and other Munis all went to Brahmā and informed him with great earnestness of everything that happened. O King! Thus Hari and Hara both became devoid of their haughtiness and got back their previous natures by the Grace of the Supreme Deity and were thus enabled to perform their functions as before.

जाती परांवाकृपया गर्वेण रहिती तदा ।

कदाचिद्वय काले तु महः शागकमावतान् ॥ १९ ॥

दक्षगेह महाताज नैतोकंयेयुत्सवोप्रवत् ।

देवा: प्रमुहिता: सर्वे पुष्पवृहिं च चिक्रे ॥ २० ॥

Then, on a certain time, the Devi Bhagavati, the Fiery Nature of the Parā Sākti, took Her birth in the house of the Prajāpati Dakṣa. O King! Everywhere in the Trilokas, great festivities were

held. All the Devas became glad and showed flowers.

नैदुर्द्रुभयः स्वर्ग करकोणाहता नृप ।

मनश्वासम्यसनि साधुनाममलात्मनम् ॥ 21 ॥

सितो मार्गवाहित्यः सुप्रभोःपूर्विषाक: ।

मंगलायां तु जातायां जातं सर्वेत्र मझूलम् ॥ 22 ॥

The Dundubhis of the Devas were sounded by the hands and made very grave sounds. The pure-minded saints were gladdened; the Sun's rays looked purer and cleaner; the rivers were elated with joy and began to flow in their channels. When the World-auspicious Devi, the Destroyer of the birth and death of the Jivas, took Her birth, everything looked propitious.

तत्या नाम सर्ती चक्रे सत्यत्वात्यरसंविदः ।

द्वी पुनः शिवायाथ तस्य शनिस्तुं याभभन्त् ॥ 23 ॥

सा पुनज्जलेने दरधा दैवयोगानमनोरैन् ।

The wise Munis named Her ‘Sati’ as She was of the nature of Para Brahma and Truth Herself. The Prajāpati Dakṣa handed over the Devi, who was before the Śakti of Mahādeva, to that Deva of the Devas, Mahādeva. Due to the misfortune of Dakṣa, the daughter of Dakṣa burnt Herself in a blazing fire.

जनमेव जयवा

अनर्थक्रमेते श्रावितं वचनं मुने ॥ 24 ॥

एतावूर्ण महद्रसु कर्थ दरथं हुतागने ।

यत्रामसरणाणुणां संसारानिभयं न हि ॥ 25 ॥

केन कर्मविषाकेन मनोदर्यं तदेव हि ।

Janamejaya said: O Munis! You have made me now hear a very inauspicious word. How can such a great thing of the nature of the Highest Intelligence come to be burnt up in a fire! The mere recollecting of Whose Name dispels the terrible danger of the burning up by the fire of Sarinsāra, how can She be burnt up by fire, I am extremely eager to hear; kindly describe that to me in detail.

व्यास उवाच

शूणु राजानुया वृतं सतीदास्य कारणम् ॥ 26 ॥

कदाचिद्धय दुवीया गतो जाम्बूनदेश्यीम् ।

ददर्श देवीं ततासौ मायाकीजं जजाय सः ॥ 27 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hear. I am describing to you the ancient history of the burning of Satī. Once on a time, the famous Rṣi Durvāsā went to the bank of the river Jambū and saw the Devī there. There he remained with his senses controlled and began to repeat silently the root Mantra of Māyā.

ततः प्रसाता देवेर्शी निजकाण्ठगतां स्वजम् ।

धमद्धधमरसंस्तां मकरंदमदाकुलाम् ॥ 28 ॥

ददौ प्रसादभृतां तां जग्राह शिरसा मुनि: ।

ततो निर्गल्य तरसा व्योममार्गे तापस: ॥ 29 ॥

आजगाम स यत्राते दक्षः साक्षात्सतीपिता ।

संदर्शनार्थभमखाया ननगा च सतीपदे ॥ 30 ॥

Then the Goddess of the Immortals, ide Bhagavatī was pleased and gave the Muni a beautiful garland as Her Prasāda that was on Her neck, that emitted the sweet fragrance of Makaranda (juice of flowers; Jasamine). Whereon the bees were about to cluster. The Maharṣi took it quikly and placed it on his head. He then hurriedly went to see the Mother to the place where Sati's Father, the Prajāpati Dakṣa was staying and bowed down to the feet of the Sati.

पृष्ठे दक्षेण स पुनिमाला कस्यास्यलौकिकी ।

कर्थ लघ्या त्वया नाव दुर्भिभ भुवि मानदः ॥ 31 ॥

तच्छृता वचनं नत्य प्रोवाचाश्रयुतक्षणः ।

देव्या: प्रसादमतुलं प्रेमगर्दितान्ततः ॥ 32 ॥

The Prajāpati then asked him: O Lord! Whose extraordinary garland is this? How have you got this enchanting garland, rare to the mortals on this earth! The eloquent Maharṣi Durvāsā then spoke to him with tears of love flowing from his eyes: "O Prajāpati! I have got this beautiful garland that has no equal, as the Prasāda) favour of the Devi.

प्रार्थयामास तां मालां तं मुनिं स सतीयिता ।

अदेवं शक्तित्वाय नास्ति तैनेतक्यमण्डलें ॥ 33 ॥

इति बुद्धवा तु तां मालां मनवे स समर्थवत् ।

गृहीता शिरसा माला मनुना निजमन्दिरे ॥ 34 ॥

स्थापिता शयनं यव दयन्योरसिभुद्वरम् ।

The Prajāpati asked that garland then from him. He, too, thinking that there was nothing in the three

Book VII Chapter XXX

worlds that cannot be given to the devotee of the Śakti, gave that garland to the Prajāpati. He took that on his head; then placed it on the nice bed that was prepared in the bed-room of the couple.

पशुकर्मतीत राजी मालानायेने मोतिटः ॥ 35 ॥

अभवस्त महीपालसेन पायेन शड़े ।

शिशे द्वेभालिजातीत देव्यां सल्यां तथा नृन ॥ 36 ॥

राजसेनापारघेन तज्जन्यो देह एव च ।

Being excited by the sweet fragrant smell of that garland in the night, the Prajāpati engaged in a sexual intercourse! O King! Due to that animal action, the bitter enmity arose in his mind towards Śaṅkara and His Saṭi. He then began to abuse Śiva.

सत्या योगानिना दस्यः सतीधार्यिद्धुस्या ॥ 37 ॥

पुनश्छ हिमवलुघे प्रजुगसीतु तमहः ।

O King! For that offence, the Saṭi resolved to quit her body that was born of Dakṣa, to preserve the prestige of the Sanātan Darma of devotion to Her Husband and burnt Her body by the fire arising out of Yoga.

जन्मेव जय आच

दह्यामने सतीढ़े जाते किमकारोच्छ्वः ॥ 38 ॥

प्राणाधिकासरी यस्य तद्धियोग्न काततः ।

Janamejaya said: O Muni! What did Mahā Deva do, thus pained by the bereavement from His consort dearer than His life, when the Sati's body was thus consumed.

ध्यास उवाच

ततः परं तु यज्जतं मया वर्भू न शक्यते ॥ ३९ ॥

त्रैलोक्यप्रलयो जातः शिककोपापिन्ना नृप ।

Vyāsa said: O King! I am unable to describe what happened afterwards. O King! Out of the fire of anger of Śiva, the Pralaya seemed to threaten the three worlds.

वीरभूद: समुत्पनो भूरकातीलगणान्यितः ॥ 40 ॥

त्रैलोक्यनाशनोतृष्णो वीरभूदो यदारप्रथन्त ।

Virabhadra came into existence with hosts of Bhadra Kālis, ready to destroy the three worlds. Brahmā and the other Devas took refuge to Śankara.

बहादायस्तदा देवाः शकूरं शरणं ययुः ॥ 41 ॥

जाते सर्वस्वनाशेप्रि करणानिर्धिरीश्वः ।

अभयं तत्तारंत्येच्यो बस्तवबेज्यां तं मनुम् ॥ 42 ॥

अजीवयन्महात्मास्ते ततः विज्ञो महेश्वः ।

यज्ञातदमुपागम्य करोद शुगदुःवित्तः ॥ 43 ॥

Though Mahādeva lost everything on Sati's departure, He, the Ocean of Mercy, destroyed the sacrifice of Dakṣa, cut off his head and instead placed the head of a goat, brought him back to life and thus made the Gods free from all fears. He, the Deva of the Devas, then became very much distressed and going to the place of sacrifice, began to weep in great sorrow.

अपश्यां सती वडी द्वामानां तु चित्कालम् ।

स्कन्धेउपाधोपायामास हा सतीति वदम्भुः ॥ 44 ॥

He saw that the body of the Intelligent Satī was being burnt in the fire of the Cittā. He cried aloud; Oh My Satī! Oh My Satī!

बधाम ध्रात्चितः सज्ञानदोशुं शंकरः ।

तदा बढ़ावदो देवाश्रितामापुन्तमाम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

विष्णुस्तु त्वर्या तत्र धनुकाध्य मार्गीणे: ।

चिच्छेदावयवानस्यासतततस्थानेषु तेजपतन ॥ 4 6 ॥

And taking Her body on His neck, began to roam in different countries, like a mad man. Seeing that, Brahmā and the other Devas became very anxious and Bhagavān Viṣṇu cut off the body to pieces by His arrows.

तततस्थानेषु ततसीत्रानामूर्तिपशे हरः ।

उवाच च ततो देवानस्थानवेक्षेण यो शिखाम ॥ 47 ॥

भर्जिति परया भकत्या तेषां किंचित्र दुलैभम् ।

नित्यं सरिश्रिता यत्र निजांगेषु पराधिक्वा ॥ 48 ॥

स्थानेचेक्षेतु ये भर्ता: पुरुषशरणकर्षिणः ।

तेषां मनः प्रसिद्धानि मायाकीत्र विशेषतः ॥ 49 ॥

"Wherever the parts fell, Śankara remained there in so many different forms. He then said to the Devas: "Whoever will worship, with deep devotion in these places, the Bhagavatī, will have nothing left unattained. The Highest Mother will remain close to them there. The persons that will make Purāścarana (the repetition) of the Mantrams,

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

especially the Māyā Bija (the root Mantra of Māyā), their Mantrams will become, no doubt, fructified and become incarnate."

इत्युक्ला शंकरसैलु स्थानेषु विरहानुरः ।

कालं निच्ये नृपश्रैढ़ जयध्यानसभाधिधि: ॥ 50 ॥

O King! Thus saying, the Mahādeva, being very much distressed for Sati's departure, passed His time in those places, making Japam, Dhyānam and taking to Samādhi.

जनमेव जय अवध

कानि स्थानीत तानि स्थु: सिद्धप्रीक्षित चानि ।

कर्ति संख्या नामानि कानि तेषां च मे वद ॥ 5 1 ॥

तत्र स्थितानां देवीनां नामानि च कृपाकार ।

कृताधौड़ं भवे येन तद्वादगु महामुने ॥ 52 ॥

Janamejaya said: Where, in what places the several parts of the Satī fell? What are the names of those Siddhapīthas? And what is their number? Kindly describe these in detail; O Great Muni! No doubt I will highly consider myself blessed by hearing these words from your blessed mouth.

व्यास उवाच

श्रणु राज्यवध्यामि देवीपीदामि साम्यतम् ।

येरां श्वणमाजेण पाषहीनो भवेत्रः ॥ 53 ॥

येय येय एय च पीदेषुपायेयं सिंद्धिकांक्षिभः ।

भूतिकामैरिभध्येया तानि वक्ष्यामि तचलतः ॥ 54 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! I will now describe those Pithas (Sacred places) the mere hearing of which destroys all the sins of men. Hear. I describe dully those places where the persons desiring to get lordly power and to attain success ought to worship and meditate on the Devi.

वाराणस्यां विशालाक्षी गौरीमुखविनासिति ।

झेरे बे नैमिवारणये प्रोक्ता सा लिंगधारिणी ॥ 55 ॥

प्रयोग ललिता प्रोक्ता कामुकी नस्यादने ।

मानसे कुमुदा प्रोक्त दक्षिणो चोनरे तथा ॥ 56 ॥

विश्वभाग भगवती विश्वकामयूरणी ।

गोनन्ते गोगती देवी मन्दरे कामवारिणी ॥ 57 ॥

O Mahārāja! The face of Gauri fell in Kāśi; She is well known there by the name Viśālakṣī; that

which fell in Naimsāranya became known by the name of Linga Dhārijni. This Mahā Māyā is known in Prayāga (Allahabad) by the name of Lalitā Devī; in Gandha Mādana, by the name of Kāmukī; in the southern Mānasa, by Kumudā; in the northern Mānasa, by Viśvakāmā, the Yielder of all desires; in Gomanta, by Gomati and in the mountain of Mandra, She became known by the name of Kāmacārijni.

मदोक्टा चैअरथे जयन्ती हस्तिनापुरे ।

गौरी प्रोका कान्यकुबे रम्पा तु मलयावाले ॥ 58 ॥

एकाप्रधोते सम्पोक्ता देवी सा कांतिंमत्यिषि ।

विश्वे विश्वेश्वीं ग्राहु: पुरुहतां च पुरुके ॥ 59 ॥

The Devi is known in Caitraratha, by the name of of Madotkatā; in Hastināpura, by Jayanti; in Kānyakubjā by the name of Gaurī; in the Malaya Mountain, by Rambhā; in the Ekāmrapītha, by Kiritmatī, in Viśva, by the name of Viśveśvarī; in Puşkara, by the name of Puruhūtā.

केद्वारपीडे सम्प्रोक्ता देही सम्पार्थादियिने ।

मन्दा हिमवतः पृड़े गोकर्णे भूरकर्णिका ॥ 60 ॥

स्वानेक्षी घवानी तु विल्वके विल्वपत्रिका ।

श्रीगैले माध्वी प्रोक्ता भद्रा भन्द्रेश्ये तथा ॥ 61 ॥

She is known as Sanmārga Dāyini in the Kedāra Pitha; as Mandā, in the top of the Himālayas; and as Bhadrakarnikā in Gokarna. She is known as Bhavānī in Sthaneśvara, as Vilvapatrikā in Vilvaka; as Mādhavī in Śrīśaila; as Bhadrā in Bhadreśvara. वाराह्रगैले तु जया कमला कमलालये ।

रूत्राणी रूककोटायां तु काली कलर्जे तथा ॥ 6 2 ॥

गलायामे महदोषे शिखलिंगे जलप्रिया ।

महालिंगे तु कविपता माकोटे मुकुटेश्री ॥ 6 3 ॥

She is known as Jará in Varāha Śaila; as Kamalā in Kamalālaya; as Rudrānī in Rudra Kotī; as Kālī in Kālānjara; She is known as Mahā Devī in Śalagrāma, as Jalapriyā in Śivalíngam; as Kapilā in Mahālíngam, as Mukuteśvari in Mākota.

मावापुर्वी कुमारी यक्षासन्ताने ललितायिका ।

नायायां मंगलार प्रोक्ता दिवसारा युक्रोतमे ॥ 64 ॥

As Kumarí in Mayāpurí, as Lalitāmbikā in

Book VII Chapter XXX

Santānā; as Mahgalā in Gayā Kṣetra, as Vimalā in Puruṣottama.

उत्सालाशी सहसाक्षे हिरण्याक्षे महोत्पाल ।

वियाणायाममोयाशी पाडल पुंकुवर्धे ॥65 ॥

As Utpalāksī in Sahasrāksa; as Mahotpalā in Hiranyāksa; as Amonghāksī in the Vipāśā river; as Pātalā in Paṇdra Vardhana.

नारायणी सुपार्थुं त्रिकूटे रूसुन्त्री ।

विपुले विपुला देवी कल्याणी मलयाचले ॥ 6 6 ॥

As Nārāyaṇī in Supārśva, as Rudra Sundari in Trikūṭa, as Vipulā Devī in Vipula; as Kalyāṇī in Malayācala.

सहाग्रावेकवीरा तु हरिश्रने तु चन्द्रिका ।

नगण रामतीर्थ तु यमुनायां भृगावती ॥ 67 ॥

As Ekavīrā in Sahyādrī; as Candrikā in Harīscandra; as Ramanā in Rāma Tīrtha; as Mrgāvatī in the Yamunā.

कोटवी कोटतीर्थ तु सुगन्धा माधवे वने ।

गोदायर्वा सिसन्त्य तु गज्ञात्रोर रतिग्यम ॥ 68 ॥

As Koṭivī in Koṭatīrha; as Sugandhā in Mādhavavana; as Trisandhyā in the Godāvarī; as Ratipriyā in Gaṅgādvāra.

शिवकृष्णं शुभानन्त्य नन्दिनी देविकातते ।

रमिमणी द्वारवलां नु राथा बृच्चावने च । ६ ९ ॥

As Šubhāṇandā n Śiva Kundam; as Nandinī n Devikātaḥa; as Rukminī n Dīvaravati; as Rādhā n Vrndāvana.

देवकी मधुरायां नु पाताले परमेधी ।

चिवकृते तथा सीत चिन्ये विभ्यापितासिनि ॥ 70 ॥

As Devaki in Mathurā; as Parameśvari in Patāla; as Sitā in Citrakutā; as Vindhyādhavisāni in the Vindhyā range.

कर्यरी महात्वर्शीमा देरी विनायक ।

अतोराया वैद्यायं तु महात्काले मेढ्धधि ॥ ७ १  ॥

O, King! As Mahālakṣmī in the sacred place of Karavīra, as Umā Devi in Vinayaka; as Ārogyā in Vaidyānātha; as Maheśvarī in Mahākāla.

अभयेत्यूणतीर्थि नित्याव सिययदेने ।

मांडवे मण्डती नाम स्वाहा माहेश्रीपुरे ॥  72 ॥

As Abhayā in all the Usṇa tīrthas, as Nitambā

in the Vindhya mountain; as Mānḍavī in Mānḍavya; as Svāhā in Māheśvaripūra.

छगलघे प्रवघा तु चपिड़कामरकण्डे ।

सोमेश्रे वरारोहा प्रभासे पुरुकरावर्ते ॥ 73 ॥

As Pracandā in Chagalanda; as Candiākā in Amarakaṭṭaka; as Vāraḥaḥ in Somesāvara; as Puṣkarāvatī in Prabhāsa.

देवमाता सरकल्पां पारावासाते म्यृता ।

महालये महाभागा यद्योष्यां पिंपलेश्धी ॥ 74 ॥

As Devamātā in Sarasvatī; as Pārāvārā in Samudratta; as Mahābhāgā in Mahālayā; as Píngalesāvri in Payoṣnī.

सिंहिका कृतशीये नु कार्तिके वलितांकारी ।

उसलावकर्ते लोल सुभघा गोणवमुझे ॥ 75 ॥

As Sirinhikā in Krtaśauca; as Atisānākāri in Kārtika; as Lolā in Utpalāvartaka; as Subhadrā in Śona Saṅgam.

माता सिद्धवने लक्ष्मीरनांना भरताश्रये ।

जालन्योर विश्वमुपुती तापा किष्किन्यपर्वे ॥ 76 ॥ 

As the Mother Lakṣmī in Siddhavana; as Anaṅgā in Bhāratāśrama; as Viśvamukhī in

Jālandhara; as Tārā in the Kīskindhya mountain.

देवदारुकवे पुरिद्धिम कामगीरमण्डले ।

भीमा देही हिमाजी तु तुर्हिविंशेध्वी तथा ॥ 77 ॥

As Puṣṭi in Devaḍāru Vana; as Medhā in Kāśmirāmandaalam; as Bhimā in Himadri; as Tuṣṭi Viśvesvara Kṣetra.

कपालमोचने शुद्धुमांत कायावरोहणे ।

गंखोद्धारे धराना युक्ति: पिचाड़ाते तथा ॥ 78 ॥

कला तु चन्द्रभाग्यामच्छोदे शिवधारिणि ।

वेणायामयुता नाम बदवीमूर्वरी तथा ॥ 79 ॥

As Śuddhi in Kapālamoćana; as Mātā in Kāyāvarohana; as Dharā in Śaṅkhoddhāra; as Dhṛti in Piṇḍāraka; as Kalā in Candrabhāgā river; as Śivadhārīni in Acchoda; as Amṛtā in Venā; as Urvaśi in Vedari.

अधियधीतरकृी कृणत्रीय कृणरेका ।

मन्यथा हेममूटे तु कुमुदे सत्यवादिति ॥ ८० ॥

As medicines in Uttara Kuru; as Kuśodakā in Kuśadvipa; as Manmathā in Hemakūta; as Satyavadini in Kumuda.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

अश्रवे वन्द्वीया तु निर्धर्वैश्वणालये ।

गायत्री वेदव्ववेने पार्वौरी शिवसशिप्रधी ॥ 8 1 ॥

As Vandanīyā in Aśvattha; as Nidhi in the Vaiśravanālaya; as Gāyatrī in the mouth of the Vedas; as Pārvatī near to Śiva.

देवलोके तर्देशणी बह्यास्येषु सरस्कृति ।

सूर्यविंबे प्रभा नाम मानुणां बैणवी घतां ॥ 82 ॥

As Indrāni in the Devalokas; as Sarasvatī in the face of Brahmā; as Prabhā (lustre) in the Solar disc; as Vaisnavī with the Mārṭkās.

अन्यन्ती सतीनां तु रामासु च तिलोतनाः।

चित्ते ब्रह्माला नाम शक्ति: सर्वशरीरिणाम् ॥ 83 ॥

She is celebrated as Arundhati amongst the Satis, the chaste women and as Tilottamā in the midst of the Rāmās. Again this Mahādevī of the nature of the Great Intelligence (Samvid) is always existent in the form of Śakti named Brahmakalā in the hearts of all the embodied beings.

इमान्यश्रतानि स्यु: पीक्षिति जनमेव ज ।

ततसंख्याकासदीशान्यो देयक्ष प्रपिकीर्तिति: ॥ 84 ॥

O Janamejaya! Thus I have mentioned to you the one hundred and eight pithas (sacred places or seats of the Deity) and as many Devís.

सर्तोद्यंलग्मृतानि पीक्षिति कक्षितिनि च ।

अन्यान्यप्र प्रसंगेन याति मुख्याति भृत्ते ल ॥ 85 ॥

यः स्मोर्चृष्ण्याढापि नामाश्रतमुत्तमम् ।

सर्वेयाप्रवितिन्मुक्ति देवीलोकं परं बजेत् ॥ 86 ॥

Thus are mentioned all the seats of the Devis and along with that, chief places in India (the world). He who hears these excellent one hundred and eight names of the Devi as well as Her seats, gets himself freed from all sins goes to the Loka of the Devi.

एतैषु सर्वीधेयु गछेश्वात्रायितानः ।

सनपरैवच चिपाठीऋषुक्षाद्वीति चिपाय च ॥ 87 ॥

कुर्पाच्छ महती पूजां भगवल्या चियानतः ।

क्षमापयेजजम्द्वारी जगद्यबां मुहुभुईः ॥ 88 ॥

O Janamejaya! His heart gets purified and is rendered blessed, no doubt, who duly makes yārā (sojourn) to all these seats of the Deity, performs

Śrāddhas, offers peace-offerings to the Pitṣ and worships with the highest devotion the Goddess and asks frequently the pardon of the World Mother.

कृतकृत्यं स्वामातानं जानीयाज्जनमेजच ।

भध्यभोज्यादिप्रिध: सर्वान्द्वाणामोजयेततः ॥ 89 ॥

सुवासितीः कुमारीध्र बदुकाईलिंदया नृव ।

तम्मिछोत्रे विद्यान ये तु चाण्डालगाडा आपि प्रभो ॥ 90 ॥

देवौकूपा: स्मृता: सर्वे पूजनीयास्तोहि ति ।

प्रतिश्रादिके सर्वे तेपु क्षेत्रेषु जर्वेति ॥ 91 ॥

O King! After worship, one should feed the Brāhmaṇas, well dressed virgins (Kumāris) and Vaṇukas with good eatables. All the tribes whether they be Cāndālas, know them all to be of the nature of the Devi and therefore they should be worshipped. Never one is to accept any donation or gifts (Pratigrahas) in these seats of the Devi.

यथाशक्ति पुरुथर्षी कुर्भान्यस्य सत्तमः ।

मायावीजेन देवेशा तत्नरीठाधिवासिनीम् ॥ 92 ॥

पूजवेदिनिगं राजन्युध्राणकूद्वेत् ।

वित्तगाङ्नं न कुर्जित देवीभक्तिणे नरः ॥ 93 ॥

The saintly persons should make Purasčaranas (repeat the names of their own deities, attended with burnt offerings, oblations, etc.) of their own Mantrams with all their might in all these places and should never be miserly in their expenses on this account.

य एवं कुक्ते यातां श्रेदिया: प्रीतमानस: ।

सहसकल्पपर्यतं बहुतोके महत्ते ॥  ९ ४ ॥

वसंति पितरस्तस्य सोर्जि देवीपुरे तथा ।

अने तक्यात परं ज्ञान भवेनुभो भवांबुघेः ॥ ९ ५ ॥

He who starts to these places, with devoted hearts filled with love, finds his Pitrs in the higher and greater Brahma Loka for one thousand Kalpas and gets the highest knowledge, crosses the ocean of the world and becomes free. Many a people have attained success by repeating these one hundred and eight names of the Deity.

नामाश्रताजानेव बह्वः सिद्धातं गताः ।

यत्रैतिलिखितं साक्षान्युस्तके वापि तिष्ठिति ॥ 96 ॥

Book VII Chapter XXXI

प्रद्यारीभियाद्यीन तत्र नैव भवन्ति हि ।

संभायं वर्धेते नित्यं यथा पर्वीण वारितिः : ॥ 97 ॥

Any place wherein are kept those names, embodied in a book, becomes free from such dangers as plague, cholera or any misapprehensions from planetary Deities and so forth. Nothing remains to be attained by these persons who repeat these one hundred and eight names.

न तस्य तुर्वर्भ किंक्षिच्रामागृशतानपिःः ।

कृतकृष्यो भवेनूनं देवीभक्तिपरायण: ॥ 98 ॥

नामिति देवतालतं वै देवौकलो हि स स्यूनः ।

सर्वथा पूज्यते देवैः किं पुर्नमंजुतोनपिः ॥ 99 ॥

That man, devoted to the Devi, certainly attains blessedness. That saintly person becomes of the nature of the Devi. The Devas bow down and worship him when they behold him! What then need be said that the saints would worship him!

श्रद्धकालो पठेदेत्रामाणतानुतमम् ।

नृपतसतीवतः सर्वे प्रयाति परमां गणित् ॥ 100 ॥

भूमानि मुक्तिक्रशणि साक्षात्संविद्यमयाति च ।

सिद्धपीठिति राजेन्द्र संश्रयेमतिभारः ॥ 101 ॥

The Pitrs become pleased and get their good ends when these one hundred and eight names are read with devotion. These places are, as it were,

Intelligence personified (Cinnaya) and places ready to yield freedom from bondage. Therefore, O, King! Intelligent men should take their shelter in these places.

पूरुं चतत्त्वया राजन्नुक्ते सर्वे महेशितुः ।

रहस्यातिरहस्यं च किं भृपः श्रौतुपिच्छतिस ॥ 102 ॥

श्रौत श्रीमद्वीभागवोत महापुरुषो सतमक्कभे

प्रिशोउधयाः ॥ 130 ॥

O King! Whatever secrets and other deeper secrets about the Great Goddess you asked to know from me, I described to you. What more do you want to hear. Say.

Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the birth of Gauri, the seats of the Deity, and the distraction of Śiva in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharaj Veda Vyāsa.

Note: The number one hundred and eight is a holy number, got by taking the half of 216,000, the number of breaths inhaled by a child in the womb who promises to take the name of God at his every breath or by taking one-eighth of 864,000, the number of seconds in a day. The two zeros are then dropped. Thus the number signifies the one who fulfils one's promise.

Book VII Chapter XXXI

