[Ch 30 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! They went to the forest and fixed their seats on the slopt of the Himālayan mountain and engaged themselves in repeating silently the seed Mantra of Mahā Māyā and thus practised their austerities. O King! One hundred thousand years passed in the meditation of the Parā Śakti. The Devi pleased became visible to them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :--O King! They went to the forest and fixed their seats on the slope of the Himālayān mountain and engaged themselves in repeating silently the seed Mantra of Mahā Māyā and thus practised their austerities. O King! One hundred thousand years passed in the meditation of the Parā Śakti. The Devī, pleased, became visible to them.

[Ch 30 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her form was three-eyed, and of the form of Existence, Intelligence and Bliss (Saccidānanda); She was filled with mercy. In Her one hand there was the noose, in another hand, goad; in another hand there was the sign bidding her devotees discard all fear, and in the other hand She was ready to offer boons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her form was three-eyed, and of the form of Existence, Intelligence and Bliss (Sacidānanda); She was filled with mercy. In Her one hand there was the noose, in another hand, goad; in another hand there was the sign bidding her devotees discard all fear, and in the other hand She was ready to offer boons.

[Ch 30 Verse 5-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The good-natured Munis, seeing this Form of the World Mother began to praise Her. “O Devi! Thou art existing separately in every gross body; we bow down to Thee. Thou art existing wholly (cosmically) in all the gross bodies; we bow down to Thee. O Parameśvari! Thou art existing separately in every subtle body; we bow down to Thee; Thou art existing universally in all the subtle bodies; we bow down to Thee, Thou art existing separately in all the causal bodies wherein all the Liṅga Dehas (subtle bodies) are interwoven; we bow down to Thee. Thou art existing universally in all the causal bodies; we bow down to Thee. Thou art of the nature of the unchangeable Brahma, the receptacle of all the Jivas and thus resident in all the bodies; so we bow down to Thee. Thou art of the nature of Atman, the Goal of all the beings; we bow again and again to Thee."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The good-natured Munis, seeing this Form of the World Mother began to praise Her. “O Devī! Thou art existing separately in every gross body; we bow down to Thee. Thou art existing wholly (cosmically) in all the gross bodies; we bow down to Thee. O Parameśvarī! Thou art existing separately in every subtle body; we bow down to Thee; Thou art existing universally in all the subtle bodies; we bow down to Thee, Thou art existing separately in all the causal bodies wherein all the Liṅga Dehas (subtle bodies) are interwoven; we bow down to Thee. Thou art existing universally in all the causal bodies; we bow down to Thee. Thou art of the nature of the unchangeable Brahmā, the receptacle of all the Jīvas and thus residest in all the bodies; so we bow down to Thee. Thou art of the nature of Ātman, the Goal of all the beings; we bow again and spin to Thee.”

[Ch 30 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus the pure-natured Dakṣa and the other Munis praised Her with voice, choked with feelings of intense devotion and bowed down to Her feet. Then the Devi, pleased, spoke to them in a cuckoo voice. "O Highly Fortunate Ones! I am ever ready to grant boons; so ask what you desire."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the pure-natured Dakṣa and the other Munis praised Her with voice, choked with feelings of intense devotion and bowed down to Her feet. Then the Devī, pleased, spoke to them in a cuckoo voice. “O Highly Fortunate Ones! I am ever ready to grant boons; so ask what you desire.”

[Ch 30 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Hearing thus, they asked that Hari and Hara both regain their natural states and be united respectively with their Sāktis, Lakṣmī and Gaurī. Dakṣa again asked: "O Devi! Let your birth be in my family.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Hearing thus, they asked that Hari and Hara both regain their former natural states and be united respectively with their Śaktis, Lakṣmī and Gaurī. Dakṣa again asked :-- “O Devī! Let your birth be in my family.

[Ch 30 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! I will, no doubt, consider myself as having then realised the fulfilment of my life. So, O Paramesāvari! Speak by Thy own mouth how Thy worship, Japam, meditation will be conducted as well the various fit places where they would be performed."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! I will, no doubt, consider myself as having then realised the fulfilment of my life. So, O Parameśvarī! Speak by Thy own mouth how Thy worship, Japam, meditation will be conducted as well the various fit places where they would be performed.”

[Ch 30 Verse 12-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi said: “The insult shewn towards my Śaktis has led to this calamitious state of Hari and Hara. So they should not repeat such crime. Now, by My favour, they will regain their health and of the two Śaktis, one will be born in your family and the other will take Her birth in the Kṣiroda Sāgara, the ocean of milk. Hari and Hara will get back their Śaktis, when I will send them the chief Mantra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī said :-- “The insult shown towards my Śaktis has led to this calamitous state of Hari and Hara. So they should not repeat such crime. Now, by My favour, they will regain their health and, of the two Śaktis, one will be born in your family and the other will take Her birth in the Kṣiroda Sāgara, the ocean of milk. Hari and Hara will get back their Śaktis, when I will send them the chief Mantra.

[Ch 30 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The chief Mantra of Mine is the said Mantra of Māyā; this is always sweet to Me; so worship this Mantra and make japam of this. The Form that you are seeing before you, this is My Bhuvanesvarī form (that of the Goddess of the Universe), or worship My Virāt (cosmic) form; or Saccidānanda form. The whole world is my place of worship; so you can meditate on Me and worship Me always and in all places."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The chief Mantra of Mine is the said Mantra of Māyā; this is always sweet to Me; so worship this Mantra and make Japam of this. The Form that you are seeing before you, this is My Bhuvaneśvarī form (that of the Goddess of the Universe), or worship My Virāṭ (cosmic) form; or Saccidānanda form. The whole world is my place of worship; so you can meditate on Me and worship Me always and in all places.”

[Ch 30 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: When the Bhuaneśvari Devī living in the Mani Dvīpa thus giving Her reply, went away, Dakṣa and other Munis all went to Brahmā and informed him with great earnestness of everything that happened. O King! Thus Hari and Hara both became devoid of their haughtiness and got back their previous natures by the Grace of the Supreme Deity and were thus enabled to perform their functions as before.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- When the Bhuvaneśvarī Devī living in the Maṇi Dvīpa thus giving Her reply, went away, Dakṣa and other Munis all went to Brahmā and informed him with great earnestness of everything that happened. O King! Thus Hari and Hara both became devoid of their haughtiness and got back their previous natures by the Grace of the Supreme Deity and were thus enabled to perform their functions as before.

[Ch 30 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then, on a certain time, the Devi Bhagavati, the Fiery Nature of the Parā Sākti, took Her birth in the house of the Prajāpati Dakṣa. O King! Everywhere in the Trilokas, great festivities were held. All the Devas became glad and showed flowers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then, on a certain time, the Devī Bhagavatī, the Fiery Nature of the Parā Śakti, took Her birth in the house of the Prajāpati Dakṣa. O King! Everywhere in the Trilokas, great festivities were held. All the Devas became glad and showered flowers.

[Ch 30 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Dundubhis of the Devas were sounded by the hands and made very grave sounds. The pure-minded saints were gladdened; the Sun's rays looked purer and cleaner; the rivers were elated with joy and began to flow in their channels. When the World-auspicious Devi, the Destroyer of the birth and death of the Jivas, took Her birth, everything looked propitious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Dundubhis of the Devas were sounded by the hands and made very grave sounds. The pure-minded saints were gladdened; the Sun’s rays looked purer and cleaner; the rivers were elated with joy and began to flow in their channels. When the World-auspicious Devī, the Destroyer of the birth and death of the Jīvas took Her birth, everything looked propitious.

[Ch 30 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The wise Munis named Her ‘Sati’ as She was of the nature of Para Brahma and Truth Herself. The Prajāpati Dakṣa handed over the Devi, who was before the Śakti of Mahādeva, to that Deva of the Devas, Mahādeva. Due to the misfortune of Dakṣa, the daughter of Dakṣa burnt Herself in a blazing fire.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The wise Munis named Her “Satī” as She was of the nature of Parā Brahmā and Truth Herself. The Prajāpati Dakṣa handed over the Devī, who was before the Śakti of Mahādeva, to that Deva of the Devas, Mahādeva. Due to the misfortune of Dakṣa, the daughter of Dakṣa burnt Herself in a blazing fire.

[Ch 30 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya said: O Munis! You have made me now hear a very inauspicious word. How can such a great thing of the nature of the Highest Intelligence come to be burnt up in a fire! The mere recollecting of Whose Name dispels the terrible danger of the burning up by the fire of Sarinsāra, how can She be burnt up by fire, I am extremely eager to hear; kindly describe that to me in detail.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya said :-- “O Munis! You have made me now hear a very inauspicious word. How can such a great thing of the nature of the Highest Intelligence come to be burnt up in a fire! The mere recollecting of Whose Name dispels the terrible danger of the burning up by the fire of Samsāra, how can She be burnt up by fire, I am extremely eager to hear; kindly describe that to me in detail.”

[Ch 30 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hear. I am describing to you the ancient history of the burning of Satī. Once on a time, the famous Rṣi Durvāsā went to the bank of the river Jambū and saw the Devī there. There he remained with his senses controlled and began to repeat silently the root Mantra of Māyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hear. I am describing to you the ancient history of the burning of Satī. Once on a time, the famous Ṛṣi Durvāsā went to the bank of the river Jambū and saw the Devī there. There he remained with his senses controlled and began to repeat silently the root Mantra of Māyā.

[Ch 30 Verse 28-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the Goddess of the Immortals, ide Bhagavatī was pleased and gave the Muni a beautiful garland as Her Prasāda that was on Her neck, that emitted the sweet fragrance of Makaranda (juice of flowers; Jasamine). Whereon the bees were about to cluster. The Maharṣi took it quikly and placed it on his head. He then hurriedly went to see the Mother to the place where Sati's Father, the Prajāpati Dakṣa was staying and bowed down to the feet of the Sati.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the Goddess of the Immortals, the Bhagavatī was pleased and gave the Muni a beautiful garland as Her Prasāda that was on Her neck, that emitted the sweet fragrance of Makaranda (juice of flowers; Jasamine). Whereon the bees were about to cluster. The Maharṣi took it quickly and placed it on his head. He then hurriedly went to see the Mother to the place where Satī’s Father, the Prajāpati Dakṣa was staying and bowed down to the feet of the Satī.

[Ch 30 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Prajāpati then asked him: O Lord! Whose extraordinary garland is this? How have you got this enchanting garland, rare to the mortals on this earth! The eloquent Maharṣi Durvāsā then spoke to him with tears of love flowing from his eyes: "O Prajāpati! I have got this beautiful garland that has no equal, as the Prasāda) favour of the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Prajāpati then asked him :-- “O Lord! Whose extraordinary garland is this? How have you got this enchanting garland, rare to the mortals on this earth!” The eloquent Maharṣi Durvāsā then spoke to him with tears of love flowing from his eyes :-- “O Prajāpati! I have got this beautiful garland that has no equal, as the Prasāda (favour) of the Devī.”

[Ch 30 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Prajāpati asked that garland then from him. He, too, thinking that there was nothing in the three worlds that cannot be given to the devotee of the Śakti, gave that garland to the Prajāpati. He took that on his head; then placed it on the nice bed that was prepared in the bed-room of the couple.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Prajāpati asked that garland then from him. He, too, thinking that there was nothing in the three worlds that cannot be given to the devotee of the Śakti, gave that garland to the Prajāpati. He took that on his head; then placed it on the nice bed that was prepared in the bed-room of the couple.

[Ch 30 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Being excited by the sweet fragrant smell of that garland in the night, the Prajāpati engaged in a sexual intercourse! O King! Due to that animal action, the bitter enmity arose in his mind towards Śaṅkara and His Saṭi. He then began to abuse Śiva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Being excited by the sweet fragrant smell of that garland in the night, the Prajāpati engaged in a sexual intercourse! O King! Due to that animal action, the bitter enmity arose in his mind towards Śaṅkara and His Satī. He then began to abuse Śiva.

[Ch 30 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! For that offence, the Saṭi resolved to quit her body that was born of Dakṣa, to preserve the prestige of the Sanātan Darma of devotion to Her Husband and burnt Her body by the fire arising out of Yoga.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! For that offence, the Satī resolved to quit her body that was born of Dakṣa, to preserve the prestige of the Sanātan Darma of devotion to Her Husband and burnt Her body by the fire arising out of Yoga.

[Ch 30 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya said: O Muni! What did Mahā Deva do, thus pained by the bereavement from His consort dearer than His life, when the Sati's body was thus consumed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya said :-- “O Muni! What did Mahā Deva do, thus pained by the bereavement from His consort dearer than His life, when the Satī’s body was thus consumed.”

[Ch 30 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! I am unable to describe what happened afterwards. O King! Out of the fire of anger of Śiva, the Pralaya seemed to threaten the three worlds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! I am unable to describe what happened afterwards. O King! Out of the fire of anger of Śiva, the Pralaya seemed to threaten the three worlds.

[Ch 30 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Virabhadra came into existence with hosts of Bhadra Kālis, ready to destroy the three worlds. Brahmā and the other Devas took refuge to Śankara.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vīrabhadra came into existence with hosts of Bhadra Kālīs, ready to destroy the three worlds. Brahmā and the other Devas took refuge to Śaṅkara.

[Ch 30 Verse 41-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Though Mahādeva lost everything on Sati's departure, He, the Ocean of Mercy, destroyed the sacrifice of Dakṣa, cut off his head and instead placed the head of a goat, brought him back to life and thus made the Gods free from all fears. He, the Deva of the Devas, then became very much distressed and going to the place of sacrifice, began to weep in great sorrow.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Though Mahādeva lost everything on Satī’s departure, He, the Ocean of Mercy, destroyed the sacrifice of Dakṣa, cut off his head and instead placed the head of a goat, brought him back to life and thus made the Gods free from all fears. He, the Deva of the Devas, then became very much distressed and going to the place of sacrifice, began to weep in great sorrow.

[Ch 30 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He saw that the body of the Intelligent Satī was being burnt in the fire of the Cittā. He cried aloud; Oh My Satī! Oh My Satī!
NEW CORR ENG ──► He saw that the body of the Intelligent Satī was being burnt in the fire of the Citā. He cried aloud :-- Oh my Satī!

[Ch 30 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And taking Her body on His neck, began to roam in different countries, like a mad man. Seeing that, Brahmā and the other Devas became very anxious and Bhagavān Viṣṇu cut off the body to pieces by His arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And taking Her body on His neck, began to roam in different countries, like a mad man. Seeing that, Brahmā and the other Devas became very anxious and Bhagavān Viṣṇu cut off the body to pieces by His arrows.

[Ch 30 Verse 47-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Wherever the parts fell, Śankara remained there in so many different forms. He then said to the Devas: "Whoever will worship, with deep devotion in these places, the Bhagavatī, will have nothing left unattained. The Highest Mother will remain close to them there. The persons that will make Purāścarana (the repetition) of the Mantrams, especially the Māyā Bija (the root Mantra of Māyā), their Mantrams will become, no doubt, fructified and become incarnate."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Wherever the parts fell, Śaṅkara remained there in so many different forms. He then said to the Devas :-- Whoever will worship, with deep devotion in these places, the Bhagavatī, will have nothing left unattained. The Highest Mother will remain close to them there. The persons that will make Puraścaraṇa (the repetition) of the Mantrams, especially the Māyā Vīja (the root Mantra of Māyā), their Mantrams will become, no doubt, fructified and become incarnate.

[Ch 30 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Thus saying, the Mahādeva, being very much distressed for Sati's departure, passed His time in those places, making Japam, Dhyānam and taking to Samādhi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Thus saying, the Mahādeva, being very much distressed for Satī’s departure, passed His time in those places, making Japam, Dhyānam and taking to Samādhi.

[Ch 30 Verse 51-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya said: Where, in what places the several parts of the Satī fell? What are the names of those Siddhapīthas? And what is their number? Kindly describe these in detail; O Great Muni! No doubt I will highly consider myself blessed by hearing these words from your blessed mouth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya said :-- Where, in what places the several parts of the Satī fell? What are the names of those Siddhapīṭhas? And what is their number? Kindly describe these in detail, O Great Muni! No doubt I will highly consider myself blessed by hearing these words from your blessed mouth.

[Ch 30 Verse 53-54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! I will now describe those Pithas (Sacred places) the mere hearing of which destroys all the sins of men. Hear. I describe dully those places where the persons desiring to get lordly power and to attain success ought to worship and meditate on the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! I will now describe those Pīthas (Sacred places), the mere hearing of which destroys all the sins of men. Hear. I describe duly those places where the persons desiring to get lordly powers and to attain success ought to worship and meditate on the Devī.

[Ch 30 Verse 55-57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mahārāja! The face of Gauri fell in Kāśi; She is well known there by the name Viśālakṣī; that which fell in Naimsāranya became known by the name of Linga Dhārijni. This Mahā Māyā is known in Prayāga (Allahabad) by the name of Lalitā Devī; in Gandha Mādana, by the name of Kāmukī; in the southern Mānasa, by Kumudā; in the northern Mānasa, by Viśvakāmā, the Yielder of all desires; in Gomanta, by Gomati and in the mountain of Mandra, She became known by the name of Kāmacārijni.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mahārāja! The face of Gaurī fell in Kāśī; She is well known there by the name Viśālāksī; that which fell in Naimiṣāraṇya became known by the name of Liṅga Dhāriṇī. This Mahā Māyā is known in Prayāg (Allahabad) by the name of Lalitā Devī; in Gandha Mādan, by the name of Kāmukī; in the southern Mānasa, by Kumudā; in the northern Mānasa, by Visvakāmā, the Yielder of all desires; in Gomanta, by Gomatī and in the mountain of Mandara, She became known by the name of Kāmacārinī.

[Ch 30 Verse 58-59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi is known in Caitraratha, by the name of of Madotkatā; in Hastināpura, by Jayanti; in Kānyakubjā by the name of Gaurī; in the Malaya Mountain, by Rambhā; in the Ekāmrapītha, by Kiritmatī, in Viśva, by the name of Viśveśvarī; in Puşkara, by the name of Puruhūtā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī is known in Caitraratha, by the name of of Madotkaṭā; in Hastināpura, by Jayantī; in Kānyakubja by the name of Gaurī; in the Malaya Mountain, by Rambhā; in the Ekāmrapīṭha, by Kīrtimatī, in Viśve, by the name of Viśveśvarī; in Puṣkara,

[Ch 30 Verse 60-63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She is known as Jará in Varāha Śaila; as Kamalā in Kamalālaya; as Rudrānī in Rudra Kotī; as Kālī in Kālānjara; She is known as Mahā Devī in Śalagrāma, as Jalapriyā in Śivalíngam; as Kapilā in Mahālíngam, as Mukuteśvari in Mākota.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She is known as Jarā in Varāha Śaila; as Kamalā in Kamalālaya; as Rudraṇī in Rudra Koṭī; as Kālī in Kālañjara; She is known as Mahā Devī in Śālagrāma, as Jalapriyā in Śivaliṅgam; as Kapilā in Mahāliṅgam, as Mukuṭeśvarī in Mākoṭa.

[Ch 30 Verse 64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As Kumarí in Mayāpurí, as Lalitāmbikā in Santānā; as Mahgalā in Gayā Kṣetra, as Vimalā in Puruṣottama.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As Kumarī in Māyāpurī, as Lalitāmbikā in Santānā; as Mangalā in Gayā Kṣetra, as Vimalā in Puruṣottama.

[Ch 30 Verse 65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As Utpalāksī in Sahasrāksa; as Mahotpalā in Hiranyāksa; as Amonghāksī in the Vipāśā river; as Pātalā in Paṇdra Vardhana.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As Utpalākṣī in Sahasrākṣa; as Mahotpalā in Hiranyākṣa; as Amoghāksī in the Vipāsā river; as Pāṭalā in Pundra Vardhana.

[Ch 30 Verse 66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As Nārāyaṇī in Supārśva, as Rudra Sundari in Trikūṭa, as Vipulā Devī in Vipula; as Kalyāṇī in Malayācala.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As Nārāyaṇī in Supārśva, as Rudra Sundarī in Trikūṭa; as Vipulā Devī in Vipulā; as Kalyānī in Malayācala.

[Ch 30 Verse 67]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As Ekavīrā in Sahyādrī; as Candrikā in Harīscandra; as Ramanā in Rāma Tīrtha; as Mrgāvatī in the Yamunā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As Ekavīrā, in Sahyādri; as Candrikā in Hariścandra; as Ramaṇā in Rāma Tīrtha; as Mrigāvatī in the Yamunā.

[Ch 30 Verse 68]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As Koṭivī in Koṭatīrha; as Sugandhā in Mādhavavana; as Trisandhyā in the Godāvarī; as Ratipriyā in Gaṅgādvāra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As Koṭivī in Koṭatīrtha; as Sugandhā in Mādhavavana; as Trisandhyā in the Godāvarī; as Ratipriyā in Gaṅgādvāra.

[Ch 30 Verse 69]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As Šubhāṇandā n Śiva Kundam; as Nandinī n Devikātaḥa; as Rukminī n Dīvaravati; as Rādhā n Vrndāvana.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As Śubhānandā in Śiva Kuṇdam, as Nandinī in Devīkātaṭa; as Rukmiṇī in Dvāravatī; as Rādhā in Brindāvana.

[Ch 30 Verse 70]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As Devaki in Mathurā; as Parameśvari in Patāla; as Sitā in Citrakutā; as Vindhyādhavisāni in the Vindhyā range.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As Devakī in Mathurā; as Parameśvarī in Pātāla; as Sītā in Citrakuṭa; as Vindhyādhivāsinī in the Vindhyā range.

[Ch 30 Verse 71]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O, King! As Mahālakṣmī in the sacred place of Karavīra, as Umā Devi in Vinayaka; as Ārogyā in Vaidyānātha; as Maheśvarī in Mahākāla.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! As Mahālakṣmī in the sacred place of Karavīra, as Umā Devī in Vināyaka; as Ārogyā in Vaidyānātha; as Maheśvarī in Mahākāla.

[Ch 30 Verse 72]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As Abhayā in all the Usṇa tīrthas, as Nitambā in the Vindhya mountain; as Mānḍavī in Mānḍavya; as Svāhā in Māheśvaripūra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As Abhayā in all the Uṣṇa tīrthas, as Nitambā in the Vindhyā mountain; as Māṇḍavī in Māṇḍavya; as Svāhā in Māheśvarīpūra.

[Ch 30 Verse 73]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As Pracandā in Chagalanda; as Candiākā in Amarakaṭṭaka; as Vāraḥaḥ in Somesāvara; as Puṣkarāvatī in Prabhāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As Pracaṇḍā in Cagalanḍa, as Caṇḍikā in Amarakanṭaka; as Varārohā in Someśvara; as Puskarāvatī in Prabhāsa.

[Ch 30 Verse 74]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As Devamātā in Sarasvatī; as Pārāvārā in Samudratta; as Mahābhāgā in Mahālayā; as Píngalesāvri in Payoṣnī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As Devamātā in Sarasvatī; as Parāvārā in Samudrtaṭa; as Mahābhāgā in Mahālayā, as Piṅgaleśvarī in Payoṣṇī.

[Ch 30 Verse 75]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As Sirinhikā in Krtaśauca; as Atisānākāri in Kārtika; as Lolā in Utpalāvartaka; as Subhadrā in Śona Saṅgam.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As Simhikā in Kritaśauca; as Atiśāṅkārī in Kārtika; as Lolā in Utpalāvartaka; as Subhadrā in Śoṇa Sangam.

[Ch 30 Verse 76]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As the Mother Lakṣmī in Siddhavana; as Anaṅgā in Bhāratāśrama; as Viśvamukhī in Jālandhara; as Tārā in the Kīskindhya mountain.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As the Mother Lakṣmī in Siddhavana; as Anaṅgā in Bhāratāśrama; as Viśvamukhī in Jālandhara; as Tārā in the Kiṣkindhya mountain.

[Ch 30 Verse 77]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As Puṣṭi in Devaḍāru Vana; as Medhā in Kāśmirāmandaalam; as Bhimā in Himadri; as Tuṣṭi Viśvesvara Kṣetra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As Puṣṭī in Devadāru Vana; as Medhā in Kāśmīramaṇḍalam; as Bhīmā in Himādri; as Tuṣṭīi in Viśveśvara Kṣetra.

[Ch 30 Verse 78-79]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As Śuddhi in Kapālamoćana; as Mātā in Kāyāvarohana; as Dharā in Śaṅkhoddhāra; as Dhṛti in Piṇḍāraka; as Kalā in Candrabhāgā river; as Śivadhārīni in Acchoda; as Amṛtā in Venā; as Urvaśi in Vedari.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As Śuddhī in Kapālamocana; as Mātā in Kāyāvarohaṇa; as Dharā in Śaṅkhoddhāra; as Dhritī in Piṇḍāraka; as Kalā in Candrabhāgā river; as Śivadhāriṇī in Accoda; as Amritā in Venā; as Urvaśī in Vadarī.

[Ch 30 Verse 80]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As medicines in Uttara Kuru; as Kuśodakā in Kuśadvipa; as Manmathā in Hemakūta; as Satyavadini in Kumuda.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As medicines in Uttara Kuru; as Kuśodakā in Kuśadvīpa; as Manmathā in Hemakūṭa; as Satyavādinī in Kumuda.

[Ch 30 Verse 81]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As Vandanīyā in Aśvattha; as Nidhi in the Vaiśravanālaya; as Gāyatrī in the mouth of the Vedas; as Pārvatī near to Śiva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As Vandanīyā in Aśvattha; as Nidhi in the Vaiśravaṇālaya; as Gāyatrī in the mouth of the Vedas; as Pārvatī near to Śiva.

[Ch 30 Verse 82]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As Indrāni in the Devalokas; as Sarasvatī in the face of Brahmā; as Prabhā (lustre) in the Solar disc; as Vaisnavī with the Mārṭkās.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As Indrāṇi in the Devalokas; as Sarasvatī in the face of Brahmā; as Prabhā (lustre) in the Solar disc; as Vaiṣṇavī with the Mātrikās.

[Ch 30 Verse 83]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She is celebrated as Arundhati amongst the Satis, the chaste women and as Tilottamā in the midst of the Rāmās. Again this Mahādevī of the nature of the Great Intelligence (Samvid) is always existent in the form of Śakti named Brahmakalā in the hearts of all the embodied beings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She is celebrated as Aruṇdhatī amongst the Satīs, the chaste women and as Tilottamā in the midst of the Rāmās. Again this Mahādevī of the nature of the Great Intelligence (Samvid) is always existent in the form of Śakti named Brahmakalā in the hearts of all the embodied beings.

[Ch 30 Verse 84]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Janamejaya! Thus I have mentioned to you the one hundred and eight pithas (sacred places or seats of the Deity) and as many Devís.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Janamejaya! Thus I have mentioned to you the one hundred and eight pīthas (sacred places or seats of the Deity) and as many Devīs.

[Ch 30 Verse 85-86]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus are mentioned all the seats of the Devis and along with that, chief places in India (the world). He who hears these excellent one hundred and eight names of the Devi as well as Her seats, gets himself freed from all sins goes to the Loka of the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus are mentioned all the seats of the Devīs and along with that, the chief places in India (the world). He who hears these excellent one hundred and eight names of the Devī as well as Her seats, gets himself freed from all sins and goes to the Loka

[Ch 30 Verse 87-88]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Janamejaya! His heart gets purified and is rendered blessed, no doubt, who duly makes yārā (sojourn) to all these seats of the Deity, performs Śrāddhas, offers peace-offerings to the Pitṣ and worships with the highest devotion the Goddess and asks frequently the pardon of the World Mother.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Janamejaya! His heart gets purified and is rendered blessed, no doubt, who duly makes jātrā (sojourn) to all these seats of the Deity, performs Śrāddhas, offers peace-offerings to the Pitris and worships with the highest devotion the Goddess and asks frequently the pardon of the World Mother.

[Ch 30 Verse 89-91]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! After worship, one should feed the Brāhmaṇas, well dressed virgins (Kumāris) and Vaṇukas with good eatables. All the tribes whether they be Cāndālas, know them all to be of the nature of the Devi and therefore they should be worshipped. Never one is to accept any donation or gifts (Pratigrahas) in these seats of the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! After worship, one should feed the Brāhmaṇas, well dressed virgins (Kumārīs) and Vaṭukas with good eatables. All the tribes whether they be Cāṇḍālas, know them all to be of the nature of the Devī and therefore they should be worshipped. Never one is to accept any donation or gifts (Pratigrahas) in these seats of the Devī.

[Ch 30 Verse 92-93]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The saintly persons should make Purasčaranas (repeat the names of their own deities, attended with burnt offerings, oblations, etc.) of their own Mantrams with all their might in all these places and should never be miserly in their expenses on this account.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The saintly persons should make Puraṣcaraṇas (repeat the names of their own deities, attended with burnt offerings, oblations, etc.) of their own Mantrams with all their might in all these places and should never be miserly in their expenses on this account.

[Ch 30 Verse 94-95]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He who starts to these places, with devoted hearts filled with love, finds his Pitrs in the higher and greater Brahma Loka for one thousand Kalpas and gets the highest knowledge, crosses the ocean of the world and becomes free. Many a people have attained success by repeating these one hundred and eight names of the Deity.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He who starts to these sacred places, with devoted hearts filled with love, finds his Pitris in the higher and greater Brahmā Loka for one thousand Kalpas and he gets the highest knowledge, crosses the ocean of the world and becomes free. Many a people have attained success by repeating these one hundred and eight names of the Deity.

[Ch 30 Verse 96-97]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Any place wherein are kept those names, embodied in a book, becomes free from such dangers as plague, cholera or any misapprehensions from planetary Deities and so forth. Nothing remains to be attained by these persons who repeat these one hundred and eight names.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Any place wherein are kept those names, embodied in a book, becomes free from such dangers as plague, cholera or any misapprehensions from planetary Deities and so forth. Nothing remains to be attained by these persons who repeat these one hundred and eight names.

[Ch 30 Verse 98-99]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That man, devoted to the Devi, certainly attains blessedness. That saintly person becomes of the nature of the Devi. The Devas bow down and worship him when they behold him! What then need be said that the saints would worship him!
NEW CORR ENG ──► That man, devoted to the Devī, certainly attains blessedness. That saintly person becomes of the nature of the Devī. The Devas bow down and worship him when they behold him! What then need be said that the saints would worship him!

[Ch 30 Verse 100-101]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Pitrs become pleased and get their good ends when these one hundred and eight names are read with devotion. These places are, as it were, Intelligence personified (Cinnaya) and places ready to yield freedom from bondage. Therefore, O, King! Intelligent men should take their shelter in these places.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Pitris become pleased and get their good ends when these one hundred and eight names are read with devotion. These places are, as it were, Intelligence personified (Chinmaya) and places ready to yield freedom from bondage. Therefore, O King! Intelligent men should take their shelter in these places.

[Ch 30 Verse 102-130]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Whatever secrets and other deeper secrets about the Great Goddess you asked to know from me, I described to you. What more do you want to hear. Say. Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the birth of Gauri, the seats of the Deity, and the distraction of Śiva in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharaj Veda Vyāsa. Note: The number one hundred and eight is a holy number, got by taking the half of 216,000, the number of breaths inhaled by a child in the womb who promises to take the name of God at his every breath or by taking one-eighth of 864,000, the number of seconds in a day. The two zeros are then dropped. Thus the number signifies the one who fulfils one's promise.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Whatever secrets and other deeper secrets about the Great Goddess you asked to know from me, I described to you. What more do you want to hear. Say. Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the birth of Gaurī, the seats of the Deity, and the distraction of Śiva in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa. Note :-- The number one hundred and eight is a holy number, got by taking the half of 216,000, the number of breaths inhaled by a child in the womb who promises to take the name of God at his every breath or by taking one-eighth of 864,000, the number of seconds in a day. The two zeros are then dropped. Thus the number signifies the one who fulfils one’s promise.
