CHAPTER XVIII

On the Quarrel between Harisćandra and Visvānitra

व्यास उवाच

क्वालिन्न् ह्रैश्डनो मुगायांवं चयं गयो ।

अपश्युद्वतीं बालां सुन्दरीं चाठलोचनाम् ॥ १ ॥

तामपृष्छन्महात्राः कामिनीं कर्णापारः ।

पदाप्रविश्रालाश्रि किं रोदिषि वरानने ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Once on a time Haricācanda went out to the forest on an hunting excursion; and, while roaming to and fro, he saw that a very beautiful lady was crying. The King, seeing this, took pity on her and asked: "O Fear One! Why are you in this forest crying alone? O Large-eyed One! Has some one pained you?

कैनसि यीद्धितास्पर्व किं के तुःखं वदाणु मे ।

का च त्व विन्ने घोरे कसने भाती विलाउवा ॥ 3 ॥

न बापते च राज्ये मे ग्रासोर्पि परिगमान् ।

तं ह्मि तरसा कान्ते यस्लां सुदरी कापते ॥ 4 ॥

What is the cause of your sorrow? Express this quickly before me. Why have you come here in this dreadful lonely forest? What are the names of your husband and your father? O Beautiful One! In my kingdom, no demon can give any trouble to another's lady; I will immediately kill him who has given you this trouble.

ब्रहि दुःखं वरातोः स्वस्था भव कृशोदिर ।

विषये मम पापात्या न तिष्ठति सूपधमे ॥ ५ ॥

इति तस्य वचः शूला नारी तं चावकीशूनम् ।

प्रमुखाश्थीय वदान्द्वरिष्ठान्त्रं नृपोतमम् ॥ ६ ॥

O thin-bellied One! Be comfortable; do not weep; tell me why you are in this sorrowful state; know that no sinner can remain within my territory." Hearing the words of the King, the lady wiped out her tears by her hand and began to say:

नारुंवाच

राजन्मां बाधतेःत्यर्थ विश्वामिनो महापुनि: ।

तपः क्रोति यद्योरं मदर्धे कौशिको वने ॥ 7 ॥

तेनाहं दुःलिता राजनिवेषने तव सुझत ।

लिद्धि मां कामनां कान्ता पीडितां गुनिना भूषण् ॥ 8 ॥

"O King! I am Siddharūpini, of the nature of success; to get me, Viśvāmitra is practising terrible austerities. So these troubles have arisen from him, the son of Kuśika. O King! For this reason I am sorry in Your kingdom. O One of good vows! I am a gentle lovely Lady; still that Muni is giving me so much trouble."

राजोवाच

स्वस्था भव शिराणालाङ्ग न ते दुःखं घचिष्यति ।

तमहं वारियधामि मुनिं तापयपरायण् ॥ 9 ॥

इत्याश्रास स्विंशं राजा तस्मा मुनिनिशिधी ।

नत्वा प्रणाय शिरास तमुवाच मृतीपति: ॥ 10 ॥

The King said: “O Large-eyed One! No longer you will have to suffer any more pains. Be patient. I will go and make the Muni desist from his tapasyā.” Thus comforting the lady, the King went hurriedly to the Muni Viśvāmitra and, bowing down to him said with clasped palms: “O Maharṣi! Why are you ailing your body by this terrible severe austerity?

स्वामिक क्रियतेर्न्यर्ष तपसा देहरीबान् ।

क्रिर्भई ते समाप्तम्भे बृहि सत्यं महामते ॥ १ १ ॥

वार्षिक्त तव गाधये क्रौमि सक्लं क्रिक्त ।

उत्तिष्ठिति तस्या तपसाउलमतः परम् ॥  १ २ ॥

O Highly intelligent One! For what great noble cause, are you practising this hard tapasyā; speak truly to me. O Son of Gādhi! I will fulfil your desires; there is no need of your practising this severe penance; please get out of it immediately.

विषये मम सर्वेन्र न कर्तव्य सुदारुणम् ।

लोकपीडाकरं घोरं तयः केनापि काहिंघित् ॥ 13 ॥

इर्थं निषिध्य तं राजा विश्वाधिमं गृहं यये।

मनसा कौभयाधाय गतोउसी कौशिको युनि: ॥ 14 ॥

Book VII Chapter XVIII

O Maharṣi! You know everything; so what shall I say anything further? See! If ought not anyone to practise this extremely dreadful tapasyā, causing troubles to the people within my territory." Thus prohibited by the King Hariścandra, the Muni became very angry at his heart and went towards his own hermitage.

स गत्वा चिन्तयामास नृपकृत्यमसाम्यन्तम् ।

वसिष्ठस्य च सम्वादं तपसः प्रतिधेघनम् ॥ 15 ॥

The King, too, went back to his palace. The Muni on his arrival at his hermitage, began to cogitate in his mind “Why has the King unjustly desisted me from my tapasyā and also discussions that took place between him and Vasistha.

कोभाविद्धेन मनसा प्रतीकारमथाकरोत् ।

विश्वित्य बहुधा चिते दानवे घोरियहमूम् ॥ 16 ॥

Vísvāmitra became very angry at his heart and ready to take the vengeance of this. He thought over on many points and created a terrible demon of a dreadful appearance in the form of a boar and sent it to the territory of the King Harścandra.

प्रेयायामास तेहंगं विधाय सूकताकृतीम् ।

सोस्तिकायो महाकाल: कुवैजादं सुदारुकणम् ॥ 17 ॥

That terrible boar, of huge body, entered into the kingdom, raising a dreadful sound. The guards became afraid at his terrible noise.

राजश्रीपवने प्रापत्बासवर्षक्रान्तवत ।

मालतीनां च खण्डानि करनकारां तवैव च ॥ 18 ॥

यृधिकानां च चंदानि कंपर्यंश पुरुषुरुः ।

दन्तेन विलिखन्यमिं समनुमलयते हुमान् ॥ 19 ॥

Entering into the forest, that boar began to whirl round and round and destroy the Málati forest, at another place the Kadamba forest, and at others the Yūthikā forest.

चम्याक्रतैकरीषणद्रामिलकानां च पादपान् ।

करवीरानुर्गीरांश निवर्जान शुभामूदून् ॥ 20 ॥

मुचुकुन्द्रानशोकांश बकुलांसितलकांसला ।

उन्यूल कवतं तत्र चकत मुको वने ॥ 21 ॥

At other places he began to dig up the earth by his tusks and root out the Campaka, Ketakī, Mallikā

and various other trees. At other places again, he rooted out nice gentle Uśira, Karavīra, Mucukunda, Aśoka, Vakula, Tilaka and other trees and so massacred the nice gardens and forests. The forest guards, then, taking their weapons, rushed forward on that boar.

वाटिकारश्काः: सर्वे दुडुषः गश्जपाणयः ।

हाहेति चुकुशुस्तत्र माताकावा भुशतुगतः ॥ 2 2 ॥

Those that were making garlands and the florists became very distressed and uttered uproars of consternation.

बाणैः संताङ्कामानोप्रिय यदा जस्तो न वै भृगः ।

सृकान्यापीट्यामास कोलः कालसम्बृति: ॥ 2 3 ॥

ते तदास्तिपश्याकान्ता राजानं शरणं ययुः ।

तमूचुस्ताई जाहीति वेप्याना भयंकुलाः ॥ 2 4 ॥

That boar, as if an incarnation of Death, though routed out with flights of arrows, could not be terrified; rather when he began to harass the guards very much, they became very much afraid and being very distressed took the refuge of the King and, trembling, said: "O King! Protect us. Protect us." And they cried piteously.

तानगातान्सामलोक्य भयाततो-भूयपतितस्तदा ।

पप्रष्ठ किं भयं कस्मागां चुवंतु समगाताः ॥ 25 ॥

नाहं विभोयि देवध्यो राक्षसेप्यघ्र स्ककाः ।

कस्माद्वयं समुपतं तद्ववृंत् ममाप्राताः ॥ 26 ॥

Seeing the guards terrified and distressed, the King asked them: "Whom do you fear so much and why you are so distressed? Speak truly before me. O Guards! I do not fear the Deva nor the Demons; so tell me who has created this panic amongst you.

हमि चैकेन झाणेन तं शग्रु दुर्भंग किल ।

यो मेउराति: ससुर्यसे लोके पायपति: खलः ॥ 27 ॥

देवो वा दानवो वापि ते नित्रिन शरैः शितैः ।

क्व तिहिति कियद्धूप: कियद्धलसमपित्तः ॥ 28 ॥

I, no doubt, will send that vicious cheat unto the door of Death by this arrow, who has come against me in this world. What sort of enemy is that? What is his form? What is his power and

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

where is he residing now; speak this quickly to me. Be that enemy a Deva or a Dānava, I will slay him immediately by the multitude of arrows."

मालाकारा कचुः

न देवो न च दैत्योर्शित न यक्षो न च क्रिरः ।

क्रीश्रकोले माहाकायो राजर्सिद्धति कानने ॥ 29 ॥

पुष्पब्रान्तिमुद्धून्नोनामूलवाय्यसी ।

विद्यौणं तदूनं सर्वं सूकरेणातिरेहसा ॥ 30 ॥

विशिष्टीलाडितोउमापिर्वैषूद्वलैकुटैतवा ।

न विधपेति महाराज इनुमम्यानुपाद्वत् ॥ 31 ॥

The Mālākāras said: “The enemy is not a Deva, nor a Dānava, Yaksā nor a Kinnara; it is a boar of a huge body that has entered into the forest. Very powerful, he is uprooting by his teeth all the beautiful flower trees; in fact, he is ruining all the gardens and forests. O King! We shot arrows on him, struck him with cudgels and hurled stones at him so much; yet he did not get a bit afraid; rather he turned back to kill us.

व्यास उवाच

इत्याकपर्थे वचस्तेघा राजा कोयसमाकुलः ।

अश्वमार्छा तरसा जगामोपवर्त प्रति ॥ 32 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing these words, the King's fury knew no bounds and, immediately getting on horseback, he went towards the garden and forest.

सै-येन महता युक्तो गजाक्षरथसंयुतः ।

पदातिवृद्धसहितः प्रययौ वनमुतमम् ॥ 33 ॥

ततापष्यन्महाकाले घुयुर्नतं भयानकम् ।

वनं भर्न च संवीक्ष्य राजा कोधयुतोरभवत् ॥ 34 ॥

Then the horsemen, elephant drivers, charioteers and infantry, all followed him. When the King went there, he saw the terrible boar, of a huge body, whirling round and round and making the peculiar sound in the forest; and he witnessed also the destroyed condition of the forest and became very angry.

चार्ये बाणों समारोय विकृष्य च शरासनम् ।

तं इन्तुं सूकरं पायं तरसा समुपामकम् ॥ ३ ५ ॥

समातोक्य च राजानं चापहस्तं रक्षाकुलम् ।

सम्पुखो3प्यद्वत्नर्णं कुर्बेछ्छवं सुराकाणम् ॥ ३ ६ ॥

He then drew his bow and arrows and fell down on him to take away his life. Seeing the King coming angrily towards him with bow and arrows in his hands, the boar began to sound more terribly and ran forward before him. The King saw that boar coming towards him with his mouth wide opened and began to shower arrows upon him to kill him.

तमायानां समालोक्य यराहं विकृतानानम् ।

मुभोच विशिष्टां तमिन्तुकामो महीपति: ॥ 37 ॥

वंचयित्वास्य तद्वाणं सूक्रमस्तसा बलात् ।

निजांगाम महावोगातमूलंच्च नृयं तदा ॥ 38 ॥

The boar immediately made those arrows useless, and very violently and quickly jumped and passed away, over the King. When the boar passed away, the King angrily drew his bow with great care and shot sharpened arrows at him.

गच्छन्तं तं समालोक्य राजा कोयसमन्वितः ।

मुभोच विशिष्ठास्तैष्णांशापाकृष्य यन्तः ॥ 39 ॥

क्षणं दृष्टियर्थ गड़ः क्षणं चादर्शनं गतः ।

कुर्वे-बहुविधायांर सूकरः समुपारन्ति ॥ 40 ॥

One moment the boar came in the King's sight; and at another moment he vanished away; thus the boar began to flee, uttering all sorts of sounds. The King Harisācandra then became very angry and drawing his bow purposed him, mounting on a horse, swift like the wind.

हरिछ्छ्छोरितिकुपिति मुभ्यमानुजगम ह ।

अश्वेन वाप्यवेगेन विकृष्य च शरासनम् ॥ 41 ॥

इतस्ततस्ततः सैन्यमानच्च वनान्तम् ।

एकाकी नृपति: कोलं हजन्तं समुग्रदात् ॥ 42 ॥

The soldiers then entered the forest and scattered hither and thither; the King alone pursued the boar. The sun entered unto the meridian; and the King came to be alone in a lonely forest.

मध्याहूसमये राजा सम्पातो विजने वने ।

तृषितः कृषितोत्थर्थे बधूव श्रांताबानः ॥ 4 3 ॥

सुक्रोद्वर्शन प्राप्तो राजा चिन्तानुरोभवत् ।

मार्गश्छोउतिविधिने दारुको दीनवलिख्यतः ॥ 4 4 ॥

Book VII Chapter XVIII

His horse was fatigued, and he, too, was tired of hunger and thirst. The boar went away out of sight. The King also missed his way in that dense jungle and became greatly absorbed with intense cares and anxieties.

फंक काटीम ब्व गच्छामि न सह्योर्स्ति मे बने ।

अज्ञात्स्वयः कुत्र जजामीति व्यान्चिनत् ॥ 4 5 ॥

एवं चिन्तयतस्तत विधिने जनवर्जिते ।

राजा चिन्तानुरोउपयत्रदौं सुविमलोदकम् ॥ 4 6 ॥

He then began to think. “Where shall I now go? There is none to help me in this dense jungle. Especially I don’t know the right path.” While he was thus thinking, he saw, all on a sudden, a river with clear water in that lonely forest.

वीक्ष्य तां मुवितो राजा पायवित्या तुर्जकम् ।

अश्वान्तीयं विमर्तं पपी पानीयपुतमम् ॥ 47 ॥

जलं पीता नृपतत्र सुखायय मदीयितः ।

इवेप नारं गन्तुं विद्यभेणातिमोहितः ॥ 48 ॥

He became much delighted to see the flowing river and, alighting from horseback, he drank that water and made the horse also drink it.

विश्वामित्रतु सम्पातो बुद्धबाहुपाल्यपूछ ।

ननाम वीक्ष्य राजा तं प्रीतिपूर्वे द्विजोतमम् ॥ 49 ॥

He became much relieved by drinking; and though he was much bewildered not to find the right track, he wanted now to go to his own city.

तमुवाच गाधिरावाः प्रणमन्तं नृपोतमम् ।

स्वस्ति तेउन्मु महाराज किमर्षयिभूष चागतः ॥ 50 ॥

At this moment Viśāmitra came up there in an old Brāhmīn form; the King also looking at him bowed down to the Brāhmīn garbed Viśvāmitra, who then spoke to the King:

एकाकी विजने राजन्कि चिकीर्षितमत्र ते ।

ब्रहि सर्वे स्थिते घृत्वा कारणं नृपस्तम ॥ ५ १ ॥

"O King! Welfare be unto you! What for have you come here? O King! What object have you got in view in this lonely forest? Be calm and quiet and speak everything before me."

राजीवाच

सुक्रोडितमहाकायो बलवायुधकाननम् ।

समुपैल्य ममदांगु कोभतान्युषयाद्वान् ॥ 52 ॥

तं निवारयितुं दुर्ध के कृत्वा च कामुकम् ।

ससै-योर्ड स्वनगराशिणीत मुनिस्तम ॥ 53 ॥

The King said: “O Brāhmīn! One powerful boar of a huge body entered into my garden and spoilt altogether all the gentle flower trees there. To desist that boar, I pursued him with bow in hand and went out of the city.

गतोउसी दूब्यात्यापो मायावी स्वापि वेशवान् ।

पृष्ठतोउदमपि प्रात: सैन्य स्वापि गतं मम ॥ 54 ॥

क्षृषितस्तृषितश्रहं सैन्यश्रत्सिद्वातगतः ।

न जाने पुरामर्ग च तथा सैन्यातिं मुने ॥ 55 ॥

That powerful boar, very swift and, as it were a magician, has escaped my sight and gone away where I do not know. I pursued him and have come now to this place and I do not know where my soldiers have gone. O Muni! Now I am deprived of my men, I am hungry and thirsty.

पंचानं दूर्णय विभो जजामि नगरं प्रति ।

ममात्र भाययोनेन प्राप्तस्त्वं विजने वने ॥ 56 ॥

अयोध्यापिपतिईहां हरिंछन्नोउतिचित्रभूतः ।

राजगुर्यस्य कर्ता च वार्जित्धार्थप्र: सदा ॥ 57 ॥

I do not know which is the road to my city; nor do I know where my soldiers have gone. O Dear Lord! It is to my great fortune that you have come in this lonely forest. Now I want to return to my home; kindly shew me the way. I have completed my Rājasūya sacrifice. I always give everyone whatever he wants. This is known to everybody.

धनेच्छा यदि ते बह्वाय्नाशं द्विजस्तम ।

आगत-त्यव्ययोत्यावां दास्यामि विसुले धनम् ॥ 58 ॥

शी शीर्द्रैषीभागवते महापुराणे सामकक्योडगहरो3शयाः । 181

O Dvija! If you want money for your sacrifice, then come with me to Ayodhyā and I will give you abundance of wealth. I am Hariścandra, the famous King of Ayodhyā.

Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the origin of the quarrel between

Hariścandra and Viśvāmitra in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by

Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

