CHAPTER IV

On the Devas' Going to Mahā Deva

सूत उवाच

ततः सर्वे सुराणा महै-त्रप्रमुखास्तत ।

पदायोर्नि पुरस्कृत्य रूत्रं शरणामव्युः ॥ १ ॥

उपलब्यु: प्रगतिधि: स्तोत्रेश्वासिपृत्तिधि: ।

देवदेवं निरिणं शशिल्लतिजांवम् ॥ २ ॥

Sūta said: O Rṣis! Then Indra and all the other Devas, taking Brahmā along with them and placing Him at the front, went to Mahādeva and took His refuge. They bowed down to Him and chanted sweet and great hymns to Him, Who holds Moon on His forehead, the Deva of the Devas, thus:

देवा ऊचुः

जय देव गणाधक्ष उमालिलनपछ्ज ।

अष्टसिद्धविष्यतीना द्वीय भक्तज्ञान ते ॥ ३ ॥

"O Thou, the Leader of the host of Gods! Victory to Thee! O Thou, Whose lotus feet are served by Umā, Victory to Thee! O Thou, the Giver of the eight Siddhis and Vibhūtis (extraordinary powers) to Thy devotees, Victory to Thee!

महामावालिलसितस्थानाय पवनामने ।

वृबांकायामरोगश नैकलास्थितिशालिने ॥ 4 ॥

अहिबुघ्ट्याय मान्याय मनवे मानदायिने ।

अजाय बहुक्षाय स्वातमाताय शंभहे ॥ 5 ॥

O Thou, the Background of this Great Theatrical Dances of this Insurmountable Māyā! Thou art the Supreme Spirit in Thy True Nature! Thou ridest on Thy vehicle, the Bull, and resistet in Kailāśa; yet Thou art the Lord of all the Devas. O Thou, Whose ornament is snakes, Who art the Honoured and the Giver of honours to persons! O Thou! the Unborn, yet comprising all forms, O Thou Sāmbbu! That findest pleasure in this Thy Own Self! Victory to Thee!

मानायाधाय देवाय गिरिशाय नमो3सुत ते ।

महाधिष्टिताएं ते महाविष्णुस्तुत्वा च ॥ ६ ॥

विष्णुहकंजवासाय महायोगताय च ।

योगमध्याय योगाय योगिनां पतये नमः ॥ 7 ॥

योगीशाय नमस्तुभ्यं योगानां फलदायिने ।

दीन्द्वानपरायाथि दयासागमतुमैने ॥ 8 ॥

O Thou, the Lord of Thy attendants! O Thou, Giríśa! The Giver of the great powers, praised by Mahā Viṣṇu! O Thou, That livest in the heart lotus of Viṣṇu, and deeply absorbed in Mahā Yoga! Obeisance to Thee! O Thou that can’t be known through Yoga, and nothing but the Yoga itself; Thou, the Lord of the Yoga! We bow down to Thee. Thou awardest the fruits of yoga to the Yogins. O Thou, the Lord of the helpless! The Incarnate of the ocean of mercy! The Relief of the diseased and the most powerful! O Thou, whose forms are the three gunas, Sattva, Rajo, Tamas!

आतिग्रहमानयोद्योवीय तृणमुक्ते ।

वृष्यधजाय कालाय कालकालाय ते नमः ॥ 9 ॥

O Thou! Whose Emblem (carrier) is the Bull (Dharma); Thou art verily the Great Kāla; yet Thou art the Lord of Kāla! Obeisance to Thee! (The Bull represents the Dharma or Speech).

सूत उवाच

एवं सुत: स देवेशेये यज्ञुभिभियुंध्वज: ।

ग्राह गंभीर्या वाचा ग्रहस्निवडुपंभन् ॥ 10 ॥

Thus praised by the Devas, who take the offerings in sacrifices the Lord of the Devas, whose emblem is Bull, smilingly told the Devas in a deep voice:

श्रीभगवानुबाच

प्रसजोड़ं हिविध्वर: स्तोत्रेशोत्सम्पुर्षा: ।

मनोरंधं पूर्यामि सर्वेधां देखतर्षभाः ॥  १ १ ॥

O Thou, the excellent Devas! The residents of the Heavens! I am pleased with the praises that you have sung of Me. I will fulfil the desires of you, all the Devas.

देवा ऊचुः

सर्वदेवेश गिरिग शिशगीतिल्वारजित ।

आर्तानां शक्रस्वलं चु श वियेघिं महाबल ॥ १ २ ॥

पर्वतों विंध्यनामास्ति मेनहेद्रा महोजतः ।

भानुभार्ग निरीढ़ा हि सर्वेषां दुःखदोउपच ॥ १ ३ ॥

तद्वृद्धिंद्र स्तंभयेशान सर्वकल्याणकूद्व ।

भानुसंचारोरोधे कार्लजानं कर्थ भवेत् ॥ १४ ॥

नटे स्वाहास्पताकार लोके कः: शरणं भवेत् ।

असमकं च भयतातीं भवानेव हि दृष्यते ॥ 15 ॥

दुःखनाशकरो देव प्रसीत गिरिजापते ।

The Devas said: O Lord of all the Devas! O, Girisa! O, Thou whose forehead is adorned with Moon! O, Thou, the Doer of good to the distressed. O, Thou, the Powerful! Dost Thou do good to us. O, Thou, the Sinless One! The Vindhya Mountain has become jéalous of the Sumeru Mountain, and has risen very high up in the Heavens and he has obstructed the Sun's course, thereby causing great troubles to all. O, Thou, the Doer of good to all! O Iśāna! Dost Thon check the mountain's abnormal rise. How can we fix time it the Sun's course be obstructed! And when there is no knowledge, what is now the time, the sacrifices to the Devas and the offerings to the Pitrs are now almost dead and gone. O Deva! Who will now protect us? We see Thee as the Destroyer of the fear of us and of those who are terrified. O Deva! O Lord of Giriśa! Be pleased with us.

शिव उवाच

नासाकं शक्तिस्त्रीह तद्वृद्धित्तधेन सुरा: ॥ 16 ॥

इमपेयं वदिष्यामो भपत्यतं रापाधयम् ।

सोउमाकं प्रपुराता च पुचः: कारणकाध्यूम् ॥ १ ७ ॥

गोर्धिदो भपार्विष्यु: सर्वकारणकारण: ।

तं गया कवधिष्यामः स दुःख्योतो भधियलि ॥ १ ८ ॥

Śrī Bhagavān said: “O Devas! I have no power to curb the Vindhya Mountain. Let us go to the Lord of Ramā and pay our respects to Him. He is our Lord, fit to be worshipped. He is Govinda, Bhagavān Viṣṇu, the Cause of all causes. We will go to Him and tell Him all our sorrows. He will remove them.

इत्येवामाकर्णं निरीशभाषितं

देवाङ्ग सेन्द्रा: सप्यतोसंपवा:।

रूद्रं पुरस्कृष्य च वेयपाना

वैकुपठलोकं प्रतिनम्पुरंसा ॥ 19 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे दर्भामकल्ये चतुषोध्याय: 14 ।

Hearing thus the words of Girīśa, Indra and the other Devas with Brahmā placed Mahādeva at their front and went to the region of Vaikuntha, trembling with fear.

Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the going of the Devas to Mahādeva in the Mahāpurānam Srimaddevirbhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

