[Ch 4 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: O Rṣis! Then Indra and all the other Devas, taking Brahmā along with them and placing Him at the front, went to Mahādeva and took His refuge. They bowed down to Him and chanted sweet and great hymns to Him, Who holds Moon on His forehead, the Deva of the Devas, thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- O Ṛṣis! Then Indra and all the other Devas taking Brahmā along with them and placing Him at the front, went to Mahādeva and took His refuge. They bowed down to Him and chanted sweet and great hymns to Him, Who holds Moon on His forehead, Deva of the Devas, thus :--

[Ch 4 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O Thou, the Leader of the host of Gods! Victory to Thee! O Thou, Whose lotus feet are served by Umā, Victory to Thee! O Thou, the Giver of the eight Siddhis and Vibhūtis (extraordinary powers) to Thy devotees, Victory to Thee!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Thou, the Leader of the host of Gods! Victory to Thee! O Thou, Whose lotus feet are served by Umā, Victory to Thee! O Thou, the Giver of the eight Siddhis and Vibhūtis (extraordinary powers) to Thy devotees, Victory to Thee!

[Ch 4 Verse 4-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Thou, the Background of this Great Theatrical Dances of this Insurmountable Māyā! Thou art the Supreme Spirit in Thy True Nature! Thou ridest on Thy vehicle, the Bull, and resistet in Kailāśa; yet Thou art the Lord of all the Devas. O Thou, Whose ornament is snakes, Who art the Honoured and the Giver of honours to persons! O Thou! the Unborn, yet comprising all forms, O Thou Sāmbbu! That findest pleasure in this Thy Own Self! Victory to Thee!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Thou, the Background of this Great Theatrical Dance of this Insurmountable Māyā! Thou art the Supreme Spirit in Thy True Nature! Thou ridest on Thy vehicle, the Bull, and residest in Kāilāśa; yet Thou art the Lord of all the Devas. O Thou, Whose ornament is snakes, Who art the Honoured and the Giver of honours to persons! O Thou! the Unborn, yet comprising all forms, O Thou Śambhu! That findest pleasure in this Thy Own Self! Victory toThee!

[Ch 4 Verse 6-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Thou, the Lord of Thy attendants! O Thou, Giríśa! The Giver of the great powers, praised by Mahā Viṣṇu! O Thou, That livest in the heart lotus of Viṣṇu, and deeply absorbed in Mahā Yoga! Obeisance to Thee! O Thou that can’t be known through Yoga, and nothing but the Yoga itself; Thou, the Lord of the Yoga! We bow down to Thee. Thou awardest the fruits of yoga to the Yogins. O Thou, the Lord of the helpless! The Incarnate of the ocean of mercy! The Relief of the diseased and the most powerful! O Thou, whose forms are the three gunas, Sattva, Rajo, Tamas!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Thou, the Lord of Thy attendants! O Thou, Giriśa! The Giver of the great powers, praised by Mahā Viṣṇu! O Thou, That livest in the heart lotus of Viṣṇu, and deeply absorbed in Mahā Yoga! Obeisance to Thee! O Thou that can’st be known through Yoga, and nothing but the Yoga itself; Thou, the Lord of the Yoga! We bow down to Thee. Thou awardest the fruits of yoga to the Yogins. O Thou, the Lord of the helpless! The Incarnate of the ocean of mercy! The Relief of the diseased and the most powerful! O Thou, whose forms are the three guṇas, Sattva, Rajo, Tamas!

[Ch 4 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Thou! Whose Emblem (carrier) is the Bull (Dharma); Thou art verily the Great Kāla; yet Thou art the Lord of Kāla! Obeisance to Thee! (The Bull represents the Dharma or Speech).
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Thou! Whose Emblem (carrier) is the Bull (Dharma); Thou art verily the Great Kāla; yet Thou art the Lord of Kāla! Obeisance to Thee! (The Bull represents the Dharma or Speech).

[Ch 4 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus praised by the Devas, who take the offerings in sacrifices the Lord of the Devas, whose emblem is Bull, smilingly told the Devas in a deep voice:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus praised by the Devas, who take the offerings in sacrifices the Lord of the Devas, whose emblem is Bull, smilingly told the Devas in a deep voice :--

[Ch 4 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Thou, the excellent Devas! The residents of the Heavens! I am pleased with the praises that you have sung of Me. I will fulfil the desires of you, all the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Thou, the excellent Devas! The residents of the Heavens! I am pleased with the praises that you have sung of Me. I will fulfil the desires of you, all the Devas.

[Ch 4 Verse 12-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas said: O Lord of all the Devas! O, Girisa! O, Thou whose forehead is adorned with Moon! O, Thou, the Doer of good to the distressed. O, Thou, the Powerful! Dost Thou do good to us. O, Thou, the Sinless One! The Vindhya Mountain has become jéalous of the Sumeru Mountain, and has risen very high up in the Heavens and he has obstructed the Sun's course, thereby causing great troubles to all. O, Thou, the Doer of good to all! O Iśāna! Dost Thon check the mountain's abnormal rise. How can we fix time it the Sun's course be obstructed! And when there is no knowledge, what is now the time, the sacrifices to the Devas and the offerings to the Pitrs are now almost dead and gone. O Deva! Who will now protect us? We see Thee as the Destroyer of the fear of us and of those who are terrified. O Deva! O Lord of Giriśa! Be pleased with us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas said :-- O Lord of all the Devas! O Giriśa! Thou whose forehead is adorned with Moon! O Thou, the Doer of good to the distressed. O Thou, the Powerful! Dost Thou do good to us. O Thou, the Sinless One! The Bindhya Mountain has become jealous of the Sumeru Mountain, and has risen very high up in the Heavens and he has obstructed the Sun’s course, thereby causing great troubles to all. O Thou, the Doer of good to all! O Īśāna! Dost Thou check the mountain’s abnormal rise. How can we fix time if the Sun’s course be obstructed! And when there is no knowledge, what is now the time, the sacrifices to the Devas and the offerings to the Pitris are now almost dead and gone. O Deva! Who will now protect us? We see Thee as the Destroyer of the fear of us and of those who are terrified. O Deva! O Lord of Giriśā! Be pleased with us.

[Ch 4 Verse 16-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śrī Bhagavān said: “O Devas! I have no power to curb the Vindhya Mountain. Let us go to the Lord of Ramā and pay our respects to Him. He is our Lord, fit to be worshipped. He is Govinda, Bhagavān Viṣṇu, the Cause of all causes. We will go to Him and tell Him all our sorrows. He will remove them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śrī Bhagavān said :-- O Devas! I have no power to curb the Bindhya Mountain. Let us go to the Lord of Ramā and pay our respects to Him. He is our Lord, fit to be worshipped. He is Gobinda, Bhagavān Viṣṇu, the Cause of all causes. We will go to Him and tell Him all our sorrows. He will remove them.

[Ch 4 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing thus the words of Girīśa, Indra and the other Devas with Brahmā placed Mahādeva at their front and went to the region of Vaikuntha, trembling with fear. Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the going of the Devas to Mahādeva in the Mahāpurānam Srimaddevirbhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing thus the words of Girīśa, Indra and the other Devas with Brahmā placed Mahādeva at their front and went to the region of Vaikuṇṭha, trembling with fear. Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the going of the Devas to Mahādeva in the Mahā Purāṇam Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahārṣi Veda Vyāsa.
