CHAPTER IX

On the Anecdote of Satyavrata

नार द्वाच

गुणानां लक्षणां तात भवता कथितं किल ।

नरुणो5स्मि पिबविमर्धे त्वन्युखात्रच्छुतं रसम् ॥ 1 ॥

गुणानां तु परिज्ञानं यथावदनुवर्णये ।

येनाहं परमां शान्तिमधियान्छामि चेतसि ॥ 2 ॥

Book III Chapter IX

Nārada said: “Father! You have described to me the characteristics of the three qualities; though I have drunk the sweet juice from your lotus like mouth, still I am not quite satisfied. Kindly describe to me, in detail, in due order, how I can recognise clearly the three qualities, so that I can get the highest peace of mind.”

व्यास उवाच

इति पृथस्तु पुत्रेण नारदेन महात्मना ।

उवाच न जागक्त्ति रजोगुणसमुद्धवः ॥ 3 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! The Creator of the world, Brahmā, originated from the Rajo Guṇa, asked by his minded son Nārada, began to speak in the following terms.”

ब्रह्मोवाच

न्यू जातद वक्ष्यामि गुणानां परिवर्णनम् ।

स्मयड् नाहं विज्ञानायि यथामितं वदामि ते ॥ 4 ॥

“O Nārada! I myself do not possess fully the complete knowledge of the three qualities; but, as far as I know, I am telling that to you.

सत्वं तु केवलं नैव कृतापि परिलक्ष्यते ।

मिश्रीगावतु तेषां वै मिश्रलं प्रतिभाति वे ॥ ५ ॥

The pure Sattva quality is not found alone to exist anywhere; it manifests itself always, in mixed condition, in combination with the other qualities.

यथा कार्विडार नारी सर्वभूषणभूषिता ।

हावभावयुना कामां भर्तुः प्रीतिकारी भवेत् ॥ 6 ॥

मातापीत्रोस्तथा सेव बन्धुवर्गस्य प्रीतिता ।

दुःखं मोहं सप्तनिषु जनत्यपि सेव हि ॥ 7 ॥

एवं सच्चेन तेनैव क्लौल्यमापादितेन च ।

रजसस्तमसडीव जनिता वृत्तिरन्यथा ॥ 8 ॥

रजसा क्लिकृतेनैव तमसा च तथा पुनः ।

अन्योन्यस्य समायोगादन्यथा प्रीतिभाति ॥ 9 ॥

As a beautiful woman, well decorated with ornaments and endowed with amorous gestures, gives delight, on the one hand, to her husband, father, mother and friends; and, on the other hand, becomes a source of pain and delusion to her rival wives, so the Sattva quality, personified as a

beautiful woman, engenders the Sättvik happiness of the mind to some individual, at one time, and at another time becomes as source of pain to the same individual (or at one and the same time becomes a source of happiness to one and a source of pain to another). Thus the Rajas or the Tamas quality, personified respectively as a beautiful woman becomes a source of pain or delusion to an individual at one time, and at another time, a source of a happiness to the same man. So, it is easily seen that one quality cannot remain single; it remains in union with the other qualities.

Note: It is very possible that a man, possessing the Sättvik quality at any time, can be said not to possess only the Sättvik quality but also the Rajas and the Tamas to a certain degree. At any subsequent time the Rajas might get preponderance, and that man may be in circumstances requiring money or so forth; but, due to his Sattva quality before hand he did not collect money and therefore he feels pain afterwards. So, with the Rajas. Or it may be thus: Suppose an earning member is Sättvik. He earns just sufficient to meet his wants. But his family members require more money, for they are Räjasik. Therefore the earning member is happy for his Sättvik quality; but the other members are unhappy for his Sättvik quality. A man is, as it were, wedded to the three wives, Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas.

अवस्थानात्वधावेषु न ने जात्यतत्तीय च ।

लक्ष्येते विव्यतितिन योगात्राद कुजिच्त् ।। 10 ॥

O Nārada! When the three qualities remain each in their own real natures, then the effects produced by them also remains always the same; no changes are perceived owing to the difference of time or person. But when they get combined, then each of them produces effects sometimes counter to their nature.

यथा रूपवती नारी यौवेनन विभूषिता ।

लज्जामादुप्यैतृता च तथा विव्यस्मुता ॥ १ १ ॥

कामगाखिविज्ञा च धर्मगार्डप्रि सम्मता ।

भूर्तु: प्रीतिकरी भूत्वा सपर्नीनीं च दुःखदा ॥ १ २ ॥

मोहादु:खस्याबास्था सत्त्वशेत्युळयते जनैः ।

तथा सत्त्वं विकुबर्णीमन्यभावं विषधाति च ॥ १ ३ ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

A young beautiful woman, shy, modest and of sweet qualities, well versed in her religious learning, and full of good behaviour, skilled in love practices and full of sweet sentiments becomes a source of loving delight to her beloved and also a source of pain to her rival wives so each of the three qualities assume no doubt, different aspects according to the differences in time and in the nature of the person.

O Nārada! As one woman gives pain and delusion to her rival wives and gives pleasure to her husband and friends, so the Sattva quality, when perverted, gives pain and delusion to the person.

चौरभ्युद्धानां हि साधूनां सुखदो घबेत् ।

दुःखा मृहा च दस्यूनां सैव सेना तथाणुपि ॥ 14 ॥

विपरीतप्रतीति वे वर्जयित्न स्थभावत ।

यथा च दुर्विंत जातं महामेधयनवतून् ॥ 15 ॥

विद्युस्ततितस्तंयुक्ति तिमिरेणावगुपितन्तम् ।

सिऋढ़ूर्वि प्रवर्षेते तमोल्यपुराद्वारम् ॥ 16 ॥

यदेतत्कर्षकाणां वे तदेवातीवदुर्दिनम् ।

बीजोप्यकस्त्युक्तानां सुखदं प्रभववतुम् ॥ 17 ॥

अप्रच्छघ्रगुणों च दुर्भागां विशेषतः ।

तृणाकाक्षगृहीतानां दुःखदं गृहमेधिनाम् ॥ 18 ॥

प्रोषितभक्तुंकाणां वे मोहंद प्रवल्वपि ।

स्वभावस्या गुणा: सर्वे विपरीत विषांति वे ॥ 19 ॥

As the police, sepoys and constables are, on the one hand, delighting to the saints, troubled by thieves, and, on the other hand, sources of pain and confusion to the thieves and robbers; again as the heavy shower of rain in a pitch dark night, in the rainy season, when the sky is over clouded, and when there are flashes of lightning and thunder, is on the one hand, a source of highest delight to a farmer, who has all the seeds and necessary things and implements, and, on the other hand, is a source of pain to the unfortunate householder, whose house is not yet completely thatched with grass or who has not been able to collect his beams and grass for necessary roofing, and a source of utter bewildering confusion to the young woman, whose husband is abroad and expected back at that time,

so the three Gunas produce contrary results, when perverted by contact with the remaining Gunas, instead of what they would have produced, had they not been perverted so.

लक्षणानि पुनस्तेभां शृणु पुत्र ब्वीयाम्न ।

लयुप्राकाशकं सत्त्वं निर्मलं विश्वरं सदा ॥ 20 ॥

यदाउज्ञानि लघ्न्येन येनात्नीर्तिर्याणि च ।

निर्मलं च तथा चेतेग्यहाति विषयात्रान्ति ॥ 21 ॥

तदा सत्त्वं शरितै वे मन्तव्य च समुकटम् ।

जूभां सतम्पं च तन्त्रं च चलं चैव रत: पुनः ॥ 22 ॥

यदा ततुकटं जाते हेरे यस्य च कस्यित् ।

कालिं भुगवते कर्तु गन्तु प्रामान्तरं तथा ॥ 23 ॥

चलिभनस्य सेोउवर्थ विवादे चोठानस्तया ।

गृह्मावरणों कामं तमो भवति तद्धाद ॥ 24 ॥

तदाउङ्गानि गुलुपय्य,गु प्रपवंत्यातानि च ।

इन्ट्रियाणि मनः शूर्य नित्रों नैवाधिच्याछति ॥ 25 ॥

गुणानां लक्षणान्येवं विशेयानीह नारत ॥

O Child! Again I speak to you of the characteristics of the three Gunas. The Sattva gunas is pure, clear, illuminating, light (not heavy) and white. When the senses, eyes, etc., and the limbs are felt very light (without any heaviness) and the heart and brain clear, and when there is dispassion towards the Räjasic and the Tāmasic enjoyments, know then that the Sattva quality has grown in preponderance in a body. When there is a tendency to yawn, when there is rigidity and suppression of the functions of faculties and when one feels drowsiness, consider that the Räjasic quality has gone to excess. Again, when one seeks after quarrels and goes to another village, when one is always restless and ready to fight, when one feels heaviness in one's body, as if wrapped by a very heavy darkness, when one's limbs and senses are heavy and obscure, when one's mind is vacant, and when one does not like to go to sleep, know that the Tamas has increased too much, Nārada!"

नारद उवाच

विधिप्रतक्षणा: प्रोक्ता: पितामह गुणात्बय: ॥ 26 ॥

कथमेकत्र संस्थाने कार्य कुर्यत्न शाशत्न्।

Book III Chapter IX

Narada said: "O Father! You have described the different characteristics of the three Gunas; but I cannot understand how they act all in conjunction?

परस्यं मितिल्वा हिं विभिना: शनवः किलि ॥ 27 ॥

एकत्रल्या: कर्व कार्यं कुर्वतीति वदस्य मे ।

As those who are enemies to one another do not work united, so these Gunas, of opposite characteristics, are enemies, as it were, to one another; how can, then, they act in unison? Kindly explain this to me".

बहोवाच

शूणु पुर प्रवक्ष्यामि गुणासते दीयवृत्तयः ॥ 28 ॥

प्रदीपश्र यथा कार्य प्रक्रोत्यधर्शनम् ।

वर्तिलैलं यथार्थिंश विक्रद्धाश परस्यम् ॥ 29 ॥

विक्रद्ध हि तथा तैल्यपिन्ना सह संगतम् ।

तैलं वर्तिलिंत्रोध्ये वापकोंदपि परस्यम् ॥ 30 ॥

एकरम्बा: पदार्थानां प्रकृतीति प्रदर्शनम् ।

Brahmā said: “O, Nārada! The three Gunas may be likened to a lamp. As a lamp manifests a certain object, so these three qualities united do manifest or reveal a certain thing. See the wick, oil, and flame are all of different characteristics; though the oil goes against fire, still it unites with the fire. The oil, wick and fire though running against each other, all these united, serve the one common purpose of illuming, revealing a certain object.

So, O Nārada! All the three qualities, though of contrary nature, go to prove the same thing."

नारद उवाच

एवं प्रकृतिजा: प्रोक्ता गुणा: सत्यवतीसुत ॥ 31 ॥

विश्वस्य कारणं ते वै मया पूर्वं यथा श्रुन्तम् ।

Nārada said: O Son of Satyavati! The lotus born Brahmā thus described the three qualities, as born of Prakṛti; and they are the causes of this Universe. What I heard of you about the nature of Prakṛti, I have now described before you."

व्यास खाचा

इत्युक्ति नारेदेनाथ मम सर्वे सविस्तम्प ।। ३२ ॥

गुणानां लक्षणं सर्वे कार्यं चैव विभागगः ।

Vyāsa said: “O King! What you asked me, I asked the same before of Nārada and he described thus (as I told you above) to me about the characteristics and the effects of the three Gunas in regular order and in detail.

आताधा परम शक्तियां सर्विमंद ततम् ॥ 33 ॥

सरुणा निर्गुणा चैव कावधेचे सदैव हि ।

अकर्ता पुरुकः पूर्णं निरीतः परमोज्ययः ॥ 34 ॥

कोरोयभा महामाया विश्वं सदसदात्मकम् ।

O King! Wherever in the Śāstras whatever is said, the essence of all that is this—that the Highest Energy, the Supreme Force, the Great Goddess who is pervading the Universe, is always with qualities and without qualities, according to the differences in the manifestation. This Supreme Force is to be worshipped with the highest devotion.

The Brahman, the Purusa (the Supporter, the Ultimate substratum), the Highest Energy considered as the Male Principle) though It is Undecaying, Supreme and Full, is still without any desires or emotions. It is not able to accomplish any action (without the help of its inherent force); this Mahāmāyā, the Supreme Force is doing all the junctions, real and unreal, of the universe.

बहुना विद्युतशा कहः सुर्योत्रः ज्ञपिति: ॥ 35 ॥

अधिजी वसवस्त्यहा कुबेरो यादासां पति: ॥

वाद्रिवंगुतन्या पूया सेनानीक्षा विद्यानकः ॥ 36 ॥

सर्वे शफित्युतः शक्तः कर्तु कार्याणि स्वानि च ।

अन्यथा तेउध्यशक्ता वे प्रस्यांवैतुर्मनीक्षारः ॥ 37 ॥

सा चैव कारणं राजझुगतः परधेश्वी ।

Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, the Sun, Moon. Indra, the twin Aśvīns, the Vasus, Viśvakarmā, . Kubera, Varuna, Fire, Air, Pūsā, the Sadānana, and Ganesa all are united with Śakti and can do their respective functions; else they are unable to move themselves. Therefore, O king! Know that Supreme Goddess Mahāmāyā as the cause of this Universe.

समापाधय तां भूप कुरु चज्चताधय: ॥ 38 ॥

पूजनं परया भक्न्या तत्या एव विधानतः ।

O Lord of men! You worship this Goddess,

Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam

perform sacrifices in honour of Her and worship Her with the highest devotion.

महातक्ष्मी महाकाती तथा महासरस्ती ॥ 39 ॥

ईक्षीत सर्वभृतानां सर्वकाणाकाणम् ।

O King! That Mahāmāyā is Mahā Lakṣmī, She is Mahā Kāli, She is Mahā Sarasvatī; She is the Goddess of all the bhūtas and She is the Cause of all causes.

सर्वकामार्थदा शान्ता सुखसेल्या द्वावित्ता ॥ 40 ॥

नानोचारणामत्रेण वांक्षितार्यफलपत्र ।

That all peaceful, easily worshipped and the ocean of mercy, when worshipped, fulfills all the desires of Her devotees; what to say, the mere utterance of Her name is sufficient for the granting of desires.

देवेशरापिता पूर्वे ब्रह्मातिथ्यामुईधरेः ॥ 41 ॥

मोक्षकामैअघ विविधेरत्नापेसिंबित्ततापिथि: ।

In days of yore, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara and all the Devas and many other self controlled ascetics worshipped Her to attain liberation.

अस्पत्थपि यजाम प्रसंगेनापि भाधितम् ॥ 42 ॥

द्वाति वार्त्रिज्ञतायनंतृर्निभापनि सर्वथा ।

O King! What shall I speak now about Her more than this: If one takes Her name even with indistinctness, She grants the desired purposes, even if they are quite unattainable.

ऐरे इति भगताने दूर्वा व्यापादिकं वने ॥ 4 3 ॥

विद्धुरीनमपीत्यूर्ते वाजित्छां प्रद्वाति वे ।

In the midst of forest, on the sight of tigers and other ferocious animals, if one becoming afraid, cries aloud Her seed mantra (twice) “Ai, Ai,” without the Bindu (incorrectly) instead of “Aim, Aim” She grants immediately his desires.

तत्र सत्यातत्येव द्वृतःनो नृपसतम ॥ 44 ॥

प्रत्यक्ष एव चासामकं मुनिनो भावितात्मानम् ।

बाहुपाणांना समाजेषु तस्योदाहरणं बुधे: ॥ 45 ॥

कव्यमानं मया राजछ्छुतं सर्वे सवितस्तम् ।

O Best of Kings! There is an example of Satyavrata on this point. That the mere utterance of the name of Bhagavatí gives unforeseen results, has been witnessed by us and other high-minded Munis. Also in the assembly of the Brāhmanas I have heard fully many sages quoting in detail many instances on the above points.

अनसूरो महामुर्खों नामा सत्यन्ते तिज्ञः ॥ 46 ॥

श्रुवासड़र्कं कोलमुखात्समुच्चार्य स्वयं सतः ।

बिन्दुर्जीने प्रसंगेन जातोउसी विद्योतमः ॥ 47 ॥

O King! There was a Brāhman, named Satyavrata, illiterate, a thorough blo 'e-head. Once he heard the letter "Ai" "Ai" being uttered by a pig; and in course of a talk he himself uttered incidentally that letter and thereby became one of the best Pundits.

Note: "Aim" is the seed mantra of Sarasvatī, the Goddess of learning.

ऐक्रात्रोचरणाहेदी तुषा भयावती तत् ।।

चकार कविराजं तं द्याङ्गं परमेश्वी ॥ 48 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते मातुपुर्णते तृतीयकचे

नवमो5ध्याः 11 9 11

The Goddess Devi, the Ocean of mercy, hearing the letter “Ai” being pronounced by that Brāhmīn, became very glad and made him the best of the poets.”

Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Third Book on the characteristics of the Guṇas in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahāpurānam of 1,8000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

