CHAPTER XXIV

On the Glory of Tulasi

नारद उवाच

नारायणश्रु भपाखानीयांधानं चकार ह ।

तुलस्यां केन रूपेण तन्मे व्याख्यानुमहींस ॥ 1 ॥

Nārada said: How did Nārāyaṇa impregnate Tulasi? Kindly describe all that in detail.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

नारायणश्व भगवान्देवानां साधनेषु च ।

गंखचूडस्य कवचं गृहीत्वा विद्यामायया ॥ २ ॥

पूर्वविधाय तरूपं जगाम तस्सौगृहम् ।

पातित्रत्यस्य नाशेन शकुषचूडजिघांसया ॥ ३ ॥

Nārāyana said: For accomplishing the ends of the Devas, Bhagavān Hari assumed the Vaisnavi Māyā, took the Kavaca from Śaṅkhcūḍa and assuming his form, went to the house of Tulasi. Dundubhis (celestial drums) were sounded at Her door, shouts of victory were proclaimed and Tulasi was informed.

दुर्उपिं बाद्यामास तुलसीद्वारसिद्धी ।

वयशद्धं च तद्धूतर वीध्यामास सुन्दीम् ॥ 4 ॥

तच्छूत्वा च रथं साखी परमानन्दसयुता ।

राजमार्ग गवाङ्गण दर्शण परमात्रत् ॥ 5 ॥

ब्राहिणीभयो धर्न दत्ता कारयामास मंगलम् ।

वंत्येष्यो मिबुक्रोन्पश्व वाचिष्यशु धर्न ददी ॥ 6 ॥

The chaste Tulasi, hearing that sound very gladly looked out on on the royal road from the window. Then for auspicious observances, She offered riches to the Brāhmins; then She gave wealth to the panegyrists (or bards attached to the courts of princess), to the beggars, and the other chants of hymns.

अक्रकृत श्यादेयो देल्याध भवनं ययी ।

अमूल्यरत्निरिभंगि सुन्दरं सुमनोहरम् ॥ 7 ॥

द्वृषा च पुरतः कानत सा तं कानं मुद्धात्विता ।

तत्वादं क्षालयामास ननाम च रोदे च ॥ 8 ॥

That time Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa alighted from His chariot and went to the house of the Devi Tulasī, built of invaluable gems, looking exceedingly artistic and beautiful. Seeing her dear husband before her, She became very glad and washed his feet and shed tears of joy and bowed down to Him.

तलसिंहासने रथे वासयामास कामुकी ।

तांतूलं च ददी तस्मै कर्णारिवसुवासितम् ॥ ९ ॥

उद्य मे सफलं जन्य जीवनं च बभूव ह ।

रोगे गतं च प्राणोशं एपयंल्याङ्ग पुनगृहे ॥ १० ॥

Then She, impelled by love, made him take his

seat on the beautiful jewel throne and giving him sweet scented betels with camphor, began to say: "To-day my life has been crowned with success. For I am seeing again my lord returned from the battle."

ससिता सकटार्णे च सकामा पुलकाक्षिकृता ।

पप्रळ तणवृत्तांं कान्तं मधुर्या मिंगा ॥ ११ ॥

Then she cast smiling glances askance at him and with her body filled with rapturous joy lovingly asked him the eyes news of the war in sweet words:

तुलस्वयाच

असंख्यविश्रसहांं साधैमाजी तव प्रभो ।

कर्थं कम्पूव विजयसन्तमे बूहिं कृपानिधे ॥ १ २  ॥

तुलसीवचनं श्रुना प्रक्ष्य कमलापति: ।

गंखद्धुरस्य रूपेण तामुवाचामृतं वचः ॥ १ ३ ॥

"O Thou, the Ocean of mercy! Now tell me of your heroic valour, how you have come out victorious in war with Mahādeva who destroys countless universes." Hearing Tulasi's word, the Lord of Lakṣmī, in the guise of Śankhacūda, spoke these nectar-like words with a smiling countenance.

श्रीभगवानुवाच

आवयो: समर: कान्ते पूर्णमिद्ध बभूव ह ।

नागो बभूव सर्वैषां दानवानां च कामिनि ॥ 14 ॥

प्रीति च कारयामास बहा च स्वयमावयो: ।

देवानामधिकारश प्रदत्तो ब्राहुणाज्ञा ॥ 15 ॥

मयाउंसत्त स्वभवर्ग शिवलोक शिवगे गतः ।

इत्युक्त्वा जगतां नाश: शयनं च चकार ह ॥ 16 ॥

O Dear! Full one Samvatsara the war lasted betwixt us. All the Daityas were killed. Then Brahma Himself came and mediated. Peace, then, was brought about and by the command of Brahma. I gave over to the Devas their rights.

रेसे सपातिस्तत्र रायमा सह नारद ।

सा साध्यों सुखसंभोगातकर्णथ्यतिक्रमान् ॥ 17 ॥

सर्व वितकंयामास करल्येवेल्यावस सा ।

When I returned to my home, Śiva went back to His Śivaloka. Thus saying! Hari, the Lord of the world, slept and then engaged in sexual intercourse

Book IX Chapter XXIV

with her. But the chaste Tulasi, finding this time her experience quite different from what She used to enjoy before, argued all the time within herself and at last questioned him:

तुलस्यवाच

को या तं वं दर मायेय भुक्ताउं मायया तथा ॥ १८ ॥

दूरीकृतं मसतीत्वं यदतस्तंश पशामि है ।

तुलसीवचनं शुत्वा हरि: शापभयेन च ॥ 19 ॥

दधार लीलया बढ़ान्मूर्ति सुमनोहराम ।

दर्शं पुतते देदी देवदेवं सनातनम् ॥ 20 ॥

नवीननीरद्यमां शतलढ़जलोचनम् ।

कोटिकन्दपरीलोभयं रत्नभूषणभूषितम् ॥ 21 ॥

"Who are you? O Magician! By spreading your magic, you have enjoyed me. As you have taken my chastity, I will curse you. Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa, hearing Tulasi's words and being afraid of the curse, assumed His real beautiful figure. The Devi then saw the Eternal Lord of the Devas before her. He was of a deep blue colour like fresh rain-clouds and with eyes like autumnal lotuses and with playful Liliās equivalent to tens and tens of millions of Love personified and adorned with jewels and ornaments.

ईपद्धार्य प्रस्नार्य संग्रिंत पौतावासम्म।

तं द्रष्टा कामिनी कामं मृच्छीं संग्राम लीलाया। ॥ 22 ॥

पुनश्छे चेतनां प्रायय पुनः सा तमुवाच ह ।

His face was smiling and gracious; and he were his yellow-coloured robe. The love-stricken Tulasī, seeing That Lovely Form of Vāsudeva, immediately fell senseless; and at the next moment, regaining consciousness, she began to speak.

तुल्यवाच

है नाथ ते दया नास्ति पाषाणसदृशस्य च ॥ २३ ॥

छलेन धर्मभंगेगेन मम स्वामी तवा हतः ।

पाषाणहृदयस्तं हि दयाहीनो नयः प्रभे ॥ २४ ॥

O Lord! Thou art like a stone. Thou hast no mercy. By hypocrisy Thou hast destroyed my chastity, my virtue and for that reason didst kill my husband. O Lord! Thou hast no mercy; Thy

heart is like a stone. So Let Thee be turned into a stone.

तस्मायाघणाकृपस्वं भवे देव भवाधुना ।

ये वदन्ति च साधुं त्वां ते भ्राता हि न संशयः ॥ 25 ॥

भक्तो विनापराधेन परार्थे च कवं हतः ।

भूर्णं रौद्ध सोकातां विल्लाग युद्धुरुंः ॥ 26 ॥

ततक्षि कर्णां द्धा कर्णागरससागरः ।

नयेन तां बोधीयतुमुबाव कमालपतिः ॥ 27 ॥

Those who declare Thee as a saint, are no doubt mistaken. Why didst Thou for the sake of others, kill without any fault, another Bhakta of Thine. Thus speaking Tulasi overpowered with grief and sorrow, cried aloud and repeatedly gave went to lamentations. Seeing her thus very distressed, Nārāyaṇa, the Ocean of Mercy, spoke to her to cheer her up according to the rules of Dharma.

श्रीभगवान्वाच

तपस्मवां कृतं भरे मदर्थे भारते चितम् ।

त्वदर्थे शंखदूढ़छ चकार सुविंतं तपः ॥ 28 ॥

कृत्वा त्वां कामिनी सोर्जि विजहार्च च तत्क्षणात् ।

अधुना दातुमुचितं तर्वेत तपसः फलम् ॥ 29 ॥

O Honoured One! For a long time you performed tapasyā in this Bhārata, to get me. Śaṅkhacūḍa, too, performed tapasyā for a long time to get you. By that tapas, Śaṅkhacūḍa got you as wife. Now it is highly incumbent to award you also with the fruit that you asked for.

इंदं शरीरं त्यकत्वा च हिव्यदेहं चिधाया च ।

तामे पर मया सार्थ तर्व सामसूर्णी भव ॥ ३० ॥

इयं तनुनींटीषा गंडकीति च विश्रुता ।

पूता सुपुण्यदा नृणां पुणे भवतु भाते ॥ ३१ ॥

Therefore, I have done this. Now quit your this terrestrial body and assume a Divine Body and marry Me. O Rame! Be like Lakṣmī. This body of yours will be known by the name of Gaṇḍakī, a very virtuous, pure and pciuicid stream in this holy land of Bhārata.

तव केशसमूढ़ः पुण्यवृझे पशिव्यति ।

तुलसीकेशसंभृता तुलसीति च विश्रुता ॥ 32 ॥


प्रियु लोकेकु पुर्णाणां पत्राणां देवपूजने ।

प्रधानरूपा तुलसी भविष्यति वरानने ॥ 33 ॥

Your hairs will be turned into sacred trees and as they will be born of you, you will be known by the name of Tulasi. All the three worlds will perform their Pūjas with the leaves and flowers of this Tulasi.

स्वर्ग मत्वैं च पाताले गोलोके मम सन्धिशे ।

भव तं तुलसी वृक्षवरा पुथेषु सुदारी ॥ 34 ॥

गोलेक शिवजातीर रासे वृद्धावने वने ।

भांडीरे चम्यकवने रम्ये चन्दनकानने ॥ 35 ॥

माध्यवीकेतकीकुन्द्मल्लकामालतीबने ।

Therefore, O Fair-faced One! This Tulasi will be reckoned as the chief amongst all flowers and leaves, In Heavens, earth, and the nether regions, and before Me, O Fair One, you will reign as the chief amongst trees and flowers. In the region of Goloka, on the banks of the river Virajā, in the Rāsa circle (the celestial ball dance), where all amorous sentiments are played in Vrndāvana forest, in Bhāndīra forest, in Campaka forest, in the beautiful Candana (Sandal) Forests and in the groves of Mādhavī, Ketakti, Kunda, Mallikā, and Mālati, in the sacred places you will live and bestow the highest religious merits.

वाससोर्जेव भवतु पुण्यस्थानेपु पुण्यद: ॥ 36 ॥

तुलसीतमूलेश पुण्यदेशेषु पुण्यदम् ।

अधिष्ठानं च तीर्थानं सर्वेषां च भविष्यति ॥ 37 ॥

तत्र च सर्वेदेवानां ममाधिष्ठानये च ।

तुलसीपरपतन्नायये च वरानने ॥ 38 ॥

All the Tirthas will reside at the bottom of the Tulasi tree and so religious merits will accrue to all. O Fair-faced One! There I and all the Devas will wait in expectation of the falling of a Tulasi leaf.

स स्नातः सर्वतीर्थु सर्वयत्रेषु दीक्षितः ।

तुलसीपत्रातेय नोर्सभवेकं समाचरेत् ॥ ३९ ॥

सूपाध्यतसहसाणां या तुहितुं भवेद्यरेः ।

सा च तुहिभवैनूनं तुलसीपत्रव्रतानः ॥ ४० ॥

Any-body who will be initiated and installed

with the Tulasī leaves water, will get all the fruits of being initiated in all the sacrifices. Whatever pleasure Hari gets when thousands and thousands of jars filled with water are offered to him, the same pleasure He will get when one Tulasī leaf will be offered to Him.

गवायमुतदानेन यकर्षत तरकर्ष भवेत् ।

तुलसीपत्रदानेन तरकर्त कार्षिके सती ॥ 41 ॥

तुलसीपत्रतोयं च मृत्युकाले च यो क्षेपत् ।

मुच्यते सर्वयोपयो० विद्यणोके महीयते ॥ 42 ॥

Whatever fruits are acquired by giving Ayuta cows as presents, those will be also acquired by giving Tulasi Leaves. Especially if one gives. Tulasi leaves in the month of Kārtika, one gets the fruits same as above mentioned.

नित्यं यस्तुलसीतयं घुंके कवचा च मानवः ।

लक्षाक्षभोत्रं पुर्णे संग्रान्ताति स मानवः ॥ 4 3 ॥

तुलसी स्वकरे कृत्वा धृत्वा देहे च मानवः ।

प्राणास्त्वजित तीर्थेषु विष्णुलोकं स गच्छति ॥ 4 4 ॥

If one drinks or gets the Tulasī leaf water at the momentous Time of Death, one becomes freed of all sins and is worshipped in the Viṣṇu Loka. He who drinks daily the Tulasī leaf water certainly gets the fruit of one lakh horse sacrifices. He who plucks or culls the Tulasī leaf by his hand and holding it on his body, quits his life in a Tirath, goes to Viṣṇu Loka.

तुलकीमहाठनिर्यामाला गृहाति यो नरः ।

पदे पटेःधमेयस्य लभते निश्रितं फलम् ॥ 45 ॥

तुलसी स्वकरे कृत्वा स्वीकारों यो न सक्षिति ।

स याति कालसूत्रं च यावच्छर्दिवाकरी ॥ 46 ॥

Whoever holds in his neck the garland made up of Tulasi wood, gets certainly the fruit of horse sacrifices at every step. He who does not keep his word, holding the Tulasi leaf in his hand, goes to the Kālasutra Hell as long as the Sun and Moon last.

करीति मिथ्याणपर्व तुलस्यां गोउत्र मानवः ।

स याति कुंभीपाकं च यावद्रिंडाश्रुटिंग १। ४७ ॥

तुलसीतीयकाणिका मृत्युकाले च यो लभेत ।

रत्नयानं समाक्रहु वैकुंड प्राप्येत ध्रुवम् ॥ ४८ ॥

Book IX Chapter XXIV

He who gives false evidence in the presence of the Tulasi leaf, goes to the Kumbhipāka Hell for the life-periods of fourteen Indras. He who drinks or gets a bit of the Tulasi leaf water at the time of death, certainly goes to Vaikuntha, ascending on a car made up of jewels.

पूर्णिवायाममायां च द्वाद्यां राविसंकमे ।

तैलाथयंं च कृत्वा च माध्याङ्गे निरिं शंययतेः ॥ ४ ९ ॥

अशौचे3-शुचिकाले ये राजिवासोनिता नगः ।

तुलसीं ये विक्रियन्ति ते छिदांति हरे: शिरः ॥ 5 ०  ॥

Those who pluck or call the Tulasi leaves in the Full Moon night, on the twelfth lunar day, on the passing of the sun from one sign to another, the mid-day, or on the twilights, on the night, while applying oil on their bodies, on the impurity periods, and while putting on night dresses, verily cut off the Nārāyaṇa's head.

त्रिरातं तुलसीपत्रं गुर्द्धे पर्युक्ति सति ।

श्राढ़े जते च दाने च प्रतिष्ठायां सुराचे ॥ ५१ ॥

भूगतं तोयपतितं यदृतं विष्णवे सति ।

गुर्द्धे च तुलसीपत्रं क्षलानाद्यकर्मिण ॥ ५२ ॥

O Chaste One! The Tulasi leaf kept in the night, is considered sacred. It is considered good in Śrāddha, vow, ceremony, in the making over of any gift, in the installation of any image or in worshipping any Deva. Again, the Tulasi leaf fallen on the ground or fallen in water or offered to Viṣṇu, if washed out can be used in holy and other purposes.

वृक्षाधिष्ठानुदेवी या गोलोके च निरामाये ।

कृष्णेन सार्थ नित्यं च नित्यक्रीडां कार्तियासि ॥ ५३ ॥

नद्धिष्ठानुदेवी या गोलोके सा सुपुण्यत ।

ल्वणोद्य सा परनी मद्राश्य च भविष्यति ॥ ५४ ॥

Thus, O Good One! You will remain as trec in this earth and will remain in Goloka as the Presiding Deity thereof and will enjoy daily the sport with Kṛṣna. And also you will be the Presiding Deity of the river Gāndakī and thus bestow religious merits in Bhārata; you will be the wife of the Salt Ocean, which is My part You are very chaste; in Vaikuntha you will enjoy me as Ramā lives with Me.

तवे च स्वयं महासाध्यी वैकुण्ठे मम सन्धिणी ।

रासाममा च रामा च भविष्यसि न संग्रवः ॥ 55 ॥

अई च शैल्कणेण गडकीतीरसिद्धियों ।

अधिष्ठानं कतिष्यामि भागते तव शगपतः ॥ 56 ॥

कोदिसंख्यास्तत्र कौदारीसीशपादुंचारपुरुषुः ।

यच्छलाकुहरं चकं कारियांत मदीयकम् ॥ 57 ॥

And as for Me, I will be turned into stone by your curse; I will remain in India close to the bank of the river Gandakī. Millions and millions of insects with their sharp teeth will make ring, (the convolutions in the Śālagrāma or sacred stones), on the cavities of the mountains there, representing Me.

एकहारं चतुर्छकं नवीनीरोघमम् ।

नवीनीरोहाकारं लक्ष्मीनारायणाधिमम् ॥ 58 ॥

एकहारं चतुर्छकं नवीनीरोघम् ।

लक्ष्मीजनादौने जेशो रहितो बनमालया ॥ 59 ॥

Of these stones, those that have one door (entrance hole), four convolutions, adorned by the garland of wild flowers (having a mark like this) and which look like fresh rain-cloud, are called Laksmī Nārāyaṇa Mūrtis (forms). And those that have one door, four convolutions and look like fresh rain-clouds but no garlands are called Laksmī Janārdana Cakras (discus).

हारदये चतुर्कडे गोष्येने वित्यजितम् ।

सूचनाथिधे जेयं रहितं वनमाला ॥ 60 ॥

अतिछुरुं द्विचकं च गोष्येने वित्यजितम् ।

तद्वामनिधिं जेयं रहितं वनमाला ॥ 61 ॥

Those that have two doors, four convolutions, and decked with mark like cow's hoof and void of the garland mark are called Raghunātha Cakras. Those that are very small in size, with two Cakras and look like fresh rainclouds and void of garland marks are named Vāmana Cakras.

अतिछूरं द्विचकं च नवीनजलद्धपम् ।

विज्ञेयं शीधरं रूपं शीधरं गृहिणां सदा ॥ 6 2 ॥

स्वूलं च वर्तुलाकारं गृहितं वनमालया ।

द्विचकं सृष्टमत्यन्तं ज्ञे द्यामोदाराधिमम् ॥ 6 3 ॥

Those that that are very small in size, with two Cakras and the garland mark added, know then to

be the Sridhara Cakras. These always bring in prosperity to the household. Those that are big, circular, void of garland mark, with two circular Cakras, are known as Dāmodara forms.

मध्यमं सतचकं च छकृष्णभूषितम् ।

रागरामाधियं जेवं शरतुणसम्बित्यम् ॥ 64 ॥

मध्यमं सतचकं च छजतामभूषितम् ।

राजराजेशं जैयं राजसपददं नृणाम् ॥ 65 ॥

Those that are mediocre in size, with two Cakras and marked as if struck by an arrow, having marks of arrows and bow-cases are known as Rana-Rāmas. Those that are middling, with seven Cakras, having marks of an umbrella and ornaments, are called Rājarājeśvaras. They bestow the royal Lakṣmī to persons.

ढिसप्तचकं स्थूलं च नवनीरदुग्रप्रभम् ।

अनंताखं च विद्रेयं चतुर्वीफलप्रद्यम् ॥ 66 ॥

चकाकारं द्विचकं च सश्रीकं जलद्वमम् ।

सगोष्टं मध्यमं च विजरें मधुसूनम् ॥ 67 ॥

Those that have twice seven Cakras, and are big, looking like fresh rain-clouds are named Anantas. They bestow four fold (Dharma, wealth, desire and liberation). Those that are in their forms like a ring, with two Cakras, beautiful, looking like rain-clouds, having cow-hoof marks and of mediocre size, are named Madhusūdanas. Those that have one Cakra are called Sudarśanas.

सुदर्शनं चैकचकं गुप्तचकं गद्धार्यम् ।

द्विद्राके ह्वववक्याएं ह्वयीद्रा प्रकर्पितरिंम् ॥ 6 8 ॥

अंतीव विस्तृतायं च द्विक्रां किंकटं सति ।

नरसिंहं सुविज्ञेयं सदो चैरायदं नृणाम् ॥ 6 9 ॥

Those that have their Cakras hidden are called Gādādharas. Those that have two Cakras, looking horse-faced, are known as Hayagrivas. O Chaste One! Those that have their mouths very wide and extended, with two Cakras, and very terrible, are known as Narasinhas. They excite Vairāgyas to all who serve them.

ढिकं क्षितुतार्यं च वन्मालासमन्यितम् ।

लक्ष्मीनृसिंहं विजेयं गृहिणां च सुखप्रदम् ॥ ७० ॥

ब्रार्तेशे डिक्चे च सश्रीक च सभं स्कुटम् ।

वासुदेवं तु विज्ञेसं सर्वकामकलप्रदम् ॥ ७१ ॥

Those that have two Cakras, mouths extended and with garland marks (elliptical marks) are called Laksmī Nrsimhas. They always bless the householders who worship them. Those that have two Cakras near their doors (faces), that look even and beautiful, and with marks manifested are known as Vāsudevas. They yield all sorts of fruits.

प्रधृतं सूक्षभचं च नवीननिरादूषम् ।

सृष्विच्छिद्बहुले गृहिणं च सुखप्रदम् ॥ 72 ॥

है चके चैकल्लेन च पृछं यत्र तु पुकलम् ।

संकर्षणं सुविजेयं सुखदं गृहिणं सदा ॥ 73 ॥

Those that have their Cakras fine and their forms like fresh rain-clouds and have many fine hole marks within their wide gaping facets are called Pradyumna. They yield happiness to every householder. Those that have their faces of two Cakras stuck together and their backs capacious, are known as Saṅkarṣanas. They always bring in happiness to the householders.

अनिक्तद्रं तु पीताभं वर्तुंलं चातिरोभनम् ।

सुखाद्धं गृहस्थानां प्रवद्ति मनीषिणः ॥ 74 ॥

गाल्यामिला यत तत सभितितो हरि: ।

तत्रैव लक्ष्मीवंसिति सर्वतीर्थंसम्पित्ता ॥ 75 ॥

Those that look yellow, round and very beautiful are Aniruddhas. The sages say, they give happiness to the householders, Where there is the Śālagrāma stone there exists Śrī Hari Himself; and where there is Hari, Lakṣmī and all the Tirthas dwell there. Worshipping Śālagrāma Śilā, destroys the Brahmahatya (killing a Brāhmim) and any other sin whatsoever.

यानि कानि च पायानि ब्रह्मत्यादिकानि च ।

तानि सर्वाणि नर्यंति शाल्यामशिलाबनन्ति ॥ 76 ॥

छात्राकारे भवेत्राज्यं वर्तुरे च महाधियः ।

दुःखं च शकटाकारे शूलाघे मरणं धुवम् ॥ 77 ॥

In worshipping the Śālāgramā stone looking like an umbrella, kingdoms are obtained; in worshipping circular Śilās, great prosperity is obtained; in

Book IX Chapter XXIV

worshipping cart-shaped stones, miseries arise; and in worshipping stones, whose ends look like spears (Šūlas, death inevitably follows.

विकृतासे च दारिंह्वो चिंगले हानिरेव च ।

भन्चके भवेद्व्याधिर्विंदीगे मरणं धूवम् ॥ 78 ॥

जतं स्नानं प्रतिष्ठां च शाब्दं च देवपूजनम् ।

शाग्यामय साधिश्यानुशनतं तद्वेक्षिति ॥ 79 ॥

Those whose facets are distorted, bring in poverty; and yellow stones bring in various evils and afflictions. Those whose Cakras look broken, bring in diseases; and those whose Cakras are rent asunder bring in death certainly. Observing vows, making gifts, installing images, doing Śrāddhas, worshipping the Devas, all these become highly exalted, if done before the Śalāgrāma Śīlā.

स स्नातः सर्वतीयेषु सर्वयेजूये दीक्षितः ।

सर्वयेजूये तीर्थेयुं बतौयुं च तपःसु च ॥ 80 ॥

पाटे चतुर्णा वेदानां तपसां करणे सति ।

तत्पुर्ण क्षणते नूनं शाल्यामाशिलाबन्ना ॥ 81 ॥

One acquires the merits of bathing in all the Tirthas and in being initiated in all the sacrifices, if one worships the Śalāgramāa Sīlā. What more than this, that the merits acquired by all the sacrifices, all the Tirthas, all vows, all austerities and reading all the Vedas are all acquired by duly worshipping by the holy Śalāgramāa Sīlā.

"शलामाशिलातौर्यैंद्रिभवेकं सदासउचेत्।

सर्वदानेषु यत्पुर्ण प्रदक्षिणं भुवो यथा ।।"

शलामाशिलातोयं नित्यं भुक्ति च यो नतः ।

सुरैपितं प्रसादं च रूपते नात्र संशयः ॥ 82 ॥

He who performs his Abhiṣeka ceremony always with Śālagrāma water (being sprinkled with Śālagrāma water at the initiation and installation ceremonies), acquires the religious merits of performing all sorts of gifts and circumambulating the whole earth. All the Devas are, no doubt, pleased with him who who thus worships daily the Śālagrāma.

यस्य सर्शे चार्वड़ती तीर्थीन निश्छिन्ति च ।

जीवन्नुक्तो महापुतोउघन्ते याति होः पदम् ॥ 83 ॥

तत्रैव ह्रिणा साध्मसंखं प्राकृतं लवम् ।

यास्येवेह हिं दासेच व निवृष्तो दास्यकर्मिणि ॥ 84 ॥

What more than this, that all the Tirthas want to have his touch. He becomes a Jīvannukta (liberated while living) and becomes very holy; ultimately he goes to the region of Śrī Hari and reains in Hari's service there and dwells with him for countless Prākritic dissolutions.

यानि कानि च पापानि बहुहत्यासमानि च ।

तं चूद्रा च पलायते वैनतेवादिवेरागः ॥ 85 ॥

तत्पादराजम देवी सह्य:पुता वसुंधरा ।

पुंसां लक्षं तत्पिनुणां निस्तेत्तस्थ जन्मतः ॥ 86 ॥

Every sin, like Brahma Hatyā, files away from him as serpents do at the sight of Garuda. The Devi Vasundharā (the Earth) becomes purified by the touch of the dust of his feet. At his birth, all his predecessors (a lakh in number) are saved.

गणासामगिलातोमं घृम्युकले च चो लभेन ।

सर्वेपार्वितिपूर्णी तिथणुलोक से गच्छिति ॥ 87 ॥

निर्वाणपूर्ति क्षयते कर्मभोगारमुच्छत ।

विष्णोः पदे प्रलिध्ध भविष्यति न संशयः ॥ 88 ॥

He who gets the Sâlagrâma Śilâ water during the time of his death, he is freed of all his sins and goes to the Viṣṇu Loka and gets Nirvāna; he becomes freed entirely from the effects of Karma and he gets, no doubt, dissolved and diluted for ever in (the feet of) Viṣṇu.

शाल्यामशिलां भूत्वा मिथ्यावाक्यं बंदेतु चः ।

स याति कृम्भीपाके च गवाड़े ब्रहणणे वयः ॥ 89 ॥

शाल्यामशिलां धृत्वा सीकारों यो न पालयेत् ।

स प्रायात्यसिपयं च लक्षम-वंततराधि ॥ 90 ॥

He who tells lies, holding Śālāgramā in his hands, goes to the Kumbhipāka Hell for the life-period of Brahmā. If one does not keep his word, uttered with the Śālāgramā stone in his hand, one goes to the Asipatra Hell for one lakh manvantaras.

तुलसीपत्रविद्ध्छें शाल्यामे क्रौति यः ।

तस्य जमांते कांते क्षीविष्ठदो भविष्यति ॥ 91 ॥

गलायामां च तुलसीं ग्रंखं यो हि कौतरी च ।

भार्यांतीने भवेलसोप्र पैगी च सपतजमसु ॥ 92 ॥

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

He who worships the Śālāgrāma stone without offering Tulasi leaves on it or separates the Tulasi leaves from the stone, will have to suffer separation from his wife in his next birth. So if one does not offer the Tulasi leaves in the conchshell, for seven births he remains without his wife and he becomes diseased.

गालामां च तुलसीं गंखं चैकत्र एव च ।

यो स्थिति महान्तानी स भवेच्छीहरे: प्रियः ॥ 93 ॥

सकुदेव हि यो यस्वां वीर्यायनं करोति च ।

तद्धिच्छे तस्य दुःखं भवेदेव एनस्प्यम् ॥ 94 ॥

त्वं प्रिया शकुच्छस्य चैकमन्वंतराविध ।

गर्येतो सार्यं त्वद्धेदः केवलं दुःखद्रसना ॥ 9 5 ॥

He who preserves the Śālagrāma stone, the Tulasi and the conchshell, in one place, becomes very learned and becomes dear to Nārāyaṇa. Look! He who casts his semen once in his wife, suffers intense pain, no doubt, at each other's separation So you become dear to Śaṅkhacūḍa for one Manvantara. Now, what wonder! That you will suffer pain, at his bereavement.

इत्युक्वा श्रीहरितां च विरताया च नारत ।

सा च देई परित्यज दिव्यरूपं विधाय च ॥ 96 ॥

यथा श्रीध तथा सा चाय्यास हरिवक्षिति ।

स जगाम तया साधे कैकुणं कमलापितः ॥ 97 ॥

लक्ष्मी: सरस्वती गंगा तुलसी चापि नारद ।

O Nārada! Thus saying, Śrī Hari desisted. Tulasi quitted her mortal coil and assumed a divine form, began to remain in the breast of Śrī Hari like Śrī

Lakṣmī Devī. Hari also went with her to Vaikuntha Thus Lakṣmī, Sarasvati, Gaṅgā, and Tulasī, all the four came so very dear to Hari and are recognised as Íśvaris.

हरेः प्रियाश्तसघ्र बभूवृतीश्रस्य च ॥ 98 ॥

सघतस्तेहजाता च बभूव गंडकी नदी ।

ईक्षर: सोर्धिष शैलक्ष तत्तीर पुणवदो रुणगा ॥ 99 ॥

On the other hand, the mortal coil of Tulasi, no sooner quitted by Tulasi, became transformed into the river Gandaki. Bhagavān Hari, too, became also converted into a holy mountain, on the banks thereof, yielding religious merits to the people.

कुर्वित तक कौटाङ्ग शिलां बहुविधां मुने ।

जले पतित या याङ्ग फलदास्ताङ्ग निश्रितम् ॥ 100 ॥

स्थलस्था: पर्यिला जेन्याश्रीपतापाद्रसेरिति ।

इन्वेचं कथितं सर्व किं भृपः श्रीतुमिच्छसि ॥ 101 ॥

शी शीमदैवीभागतो महापुरुषो नस्मकच्चे नारायण गारवसंवादे

चतुर्विरोगेश्वण: 11 24 11

The insects cut and fashion many pieces out of that mountain. Of them, that fall into the river, yield fruits undoubtedly. And those pieces that fall on the ground become yellow coloured; they are not at all for worship. O Nārada! Thus I have spoken to you everything. What more do you want to hear now? Say.

Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the glory of Tulasī in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

