CHAPTER XVIII

On the Rähu

श्रीनारायण उवाच

अधस्तास्थितुः प्रोक्तमयुतं राहुलमणडलम् ।

नक्षत्रबच्चरित च सैहिकोणउतदहुः : ॥ १ ॥

सूर्याचन्द्रमासोरे मदनः सिंहिकासुतः ।

अगरत्वं च खेतलं लेभे यो विश्वयनुग्राहुत् ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Devarsī! The Sphere of Rāhu (the ascending node) is situated one Ayuta Yojanas below the Sun. Rāhu, the son of Sirinhikā is moving there like a Nakṣaṭtra. This Rāhu swallows up both the Sun and the Moon and He has got immortality and capability to travel in the sky.

यददस्तपोक्षिबं तपतो योजनायतुम् ।

तच्छालकोडुगो जैयोउपकैमाहस्वितमम् ॥ 3 ॥

त्रयोदासहलं तु सोमम्याच्छादको ग्रहः ।

यः पर्वसमये वैरानुबन्धो छादकोभवत् ॥ 4 ॥

The Sun's rays go up to one Ayuta Yojanas. The Asura Rāhu thus covers his rays. So the sphere of the Moon extends up to the twelve thousand Yojanas. Rāhu covers the field of the thirteen thousand Yojanas. So he covers both the Sun and the Moon. Desire to take the vengeance of the previous enmity, he covers them during the time of Parva (the festivals).

सूर्याचन्द्रमसोईरूपाद्वेष्छादनकारकाः ।

ततिश्रणाधभयवादि विध्नुना प्रेरितं स्वकम् ॥ ५ ॥

चक्रं सुरुर्शनं नाम ज्वालमालातिभीषणम् ।

ततैजसा दुःसहेन समंतात्यरिवारितम् ॥ 6 ॥

मुहृतों विज्ञानस्तु दूराच्यकितमानसः ।

आरात्रिवतंते सोउयमुपगत इनीव ह ॥ 7 ॥

This planet wants to cover them from a distance. Hearing this, the Bhagavān Viṣṇu hurls His Sudārsana Cakra against Rāhu. This Carka (disc) is encircled with the fiery flames and is very terrible. When all the quarters were filled with its violent flames, Rāhu became instantly alarmed and fled away from the distance.

उच्यते लोकमध्ये तु देवर्ष अवलुध्यात्म ।

ततो3धरस्तासमाख्याता लोका: परपयावनाः ॥ 8 ॥

सिद्धानां चाराणानां च विद्याधाणां च सतम् ।

योजनायतुविख्याता लोका: पुण्य विषयेति: ॥ 9 ॥

O Devarşi! This is known as the eclipse known amongst the mortals. Below the sphere of Rāhu, there are the other pure Lokas situated. O Sattama! The Siddhas, Cāranas, and Vidyādharas live in those Lokas. Their dimensions are one Ayuta Yojanas.

ततोप्रध्यस्तादेवर्षे चक्षाणां च सरक्षासाम् ।

चिशाणचेप्रभृतानां विहृताराज्यमुतम् ॥ 10 ॥

O Devarsj! Below them live the Yakṣas. Rākṣasas, Piśācas, Pretas and Bhūtas with their excellent Vihāras (residences).

अन्तरिंशं चलतोकृते यावहायुः प्रवाति हि ।

यावन्मोयासंशोधिति तगोकर्त ज्ञानकोविदः ॥ १ १ ॥

ततो3.धरतशोजनानां शर्त यावद्धिज्ञोनम् ।

पूथिवी परिसंख्याता सुपर्णिश्नेयसारासः ॥ १ २ ॥

Book VIII Chapter XVIII

The learned people call this Antarikṣa. It extends up to where the wind blows violently and where the clouds appear. O Best of the twice-born! Below this Antarikṣa is this earth, measuring one hundred Yojanas.

हंसादयः प्रीत्यर्तिति पार्थिवा: पृथिवीभावः ।

भूस्निवेशावस्थानं यथावरुचपशिणम् ॥ 13 ॥

अधस्ताद्वयेः सप्त देवर्षे विवारः स्मृतः ।

एकैककगो योजनानामायामोच्छ्यातः पुनः ॥ 14 ॥

All the articles and things of the earth are found here: birds herons, cranes and ducks all fly over the earth. The earth extends upto this. Now is described the con figuration of the earth. O Devarsi! At the lower part of this earth there are seven places (caves or nether regions).

अयुतातरविख्याताः सर्वतैमुखदायकाः ।

अतलं प्रथम प्रोक्त दितियं वित्तलं तथा ॥ १५ ॥

तृतीयं सुतलं प्रोक्त चतुर्ध वै तलातलम् ।

महातलं पछमं च घड़े प्रोक्ते सताललम् ॥ १६ ॥

Their diameter is one Ayuta Yojanas. In all the seasons, all sorts of enjoyments can be had at those places. The first is Atala; the second is Vitala. Next come in order: Sutala, Talātala, Mahātala, Rasātala, and lastly (the seventh) the Pātāla. O Vipra! Thus the seven holes or regions are reckoned.

सप्तमं विषं पातालं सप्त ते विवरा स्मृता: ।

रूतेषु बिलत्सर्वगु दिवोउपधिकमेव च ॥ 17 ॥

कामभौगेश्वसुखसमुद्धपुवनेषु च ।

नित्योदानविहारेषु सुखाख्वादः प्रवर्ते ॥ 18 ॥

These are termed the Bila-Svargas and they yield the happinesses, greater than those of the Heavens. These are all filled with lovely amorous enjoyments, prosperity and happiness. They are crowded with gardens and Vihāras (the places of enjoyments).

दैत्याक्र कार्वेवार्थ दानवा बलणालिनः ।

निव्यमुक्ति तकाः कलापायवस्थानः ॥ 19 ॥

सूद्धद्विनुजीबाठी: संगुताङ्ग गृहेधानः ।

ईशराप्रतिजतकामामाविनऊ ते ॥ 20 ॥

And these Vihāras are all decorated tastefully

so as to furnish especial tastes of enjoyments. The powerful Daityas, Dānavas, and Snakes enjoy here great happiness incessantly, united lovingly with their sons, wives and friends. The householders also pass their time in ease and enjoyments, surrounded by their friends and attendants.

निवसिति सदा हृद्धा: सर्वर्तैसुखसयन्ता: ।

मयेन मायाविभान्ना येषु येषु च निर्मितः ॥ 21 ॥

पुरः प्रक्रमाशे भक्ता मणिप्रवशालिनः ।

विश्चिन्यबनाढुला गोपुगदा: सहचरुषः ॥ 22 ॥

They are all Māyāvis (Magicians) and their resolves are not thwarted; they are more than God in this respect and they are filled with desires. They all live with joy and in enjoyments and they find pleasure in all the seasons. Maya, the Lord of Māyā had built separate cities, as he liked, in those nether regions. Besides he has created thousands of dwelling-houses, palaces, and town-gates, studded with gems and jewels.

सभाचत्वरबैत्यादिगोभाऊा: सुरुतुर्भा: ।

नागासुराणां मिवूर्भे: सपारावतसारिके: ॥ 23 ॥

कौणंकुत्रिमभूमिश्र विवेरणगृहोतमे: ।

अलड्कृताश्रकासन्ति उद्यानानि महांति च ॥ 24 ॥

The assembly halls, Catvaras, and Caityas are elaborately decorated and rare even to the Suras. The Nāgas and Asuras live in those houses with their consorts; doves and pigeons and female Mayinā birds are hovering there. In those places many plots marked out artificially and excellent rows of palatial buildings of the Lords of those Vivaras adorn there. Very big gardens also exist there.

मनःप्रसत्रकातिण फलपुर्णविशालिनिः ।

ललनानां विलासाहैस्थानैः गोभिनचपाडि च ॥ 25 ॥

All these cheer the minds; and, to add to their beauty, many places of fruits and flowers are close by, fit for the comfort and enjoyments of the ladies.

नानाविहैगमातसंयुक्तजलाराशिभः ।

स्वच्छाणै: पूरितद्वे: पाठीनसमलङ्कृतः ॥ 26 ॥

जलजंतुक्ष्छ्यतीनारीजातैनेकानः ।

कुमुदोयलकढ़ारनीलरक्तोत्यलैस्तथा ॥ 27 ॥

Šrimaddeivbhāgavatam

The tanks and pools of water are crowded with various birds; the lakes are filled with clear waters and the Pāthina fishes abound there. The aquatic animals move in the waters, violently agitating them. Various kinds of lotuses, Kumud, Utpala, Kahlāra, blue lotus, red lotus, are fully blown in these lakes or reservirs of water.

सु कृतपिकेतानां विहारेः संकुलानि च ।

ब्रन्द्रियोलसवकारैश तबैव विविधेः सर्बः।। 28 ॥

अमराणां च परमां श्रियं चातिर्यानित च ।

यत्र नैव मयं क्राणि कालात्रैईदित्याभिः ॥ 29 ॥

The gardens there are all overcrowded with the Vihāras of the inhabitants there and echoed with the sweet melodious music, pleasing to the senses. For there, these places seem to vie with Heavens. No fear is there, whether during the day or during the night.

यत्राहिप्रवराणं च शिरसर्धैमशिरभिभः ।

नित्यं तमः प्रवाधेयं सेवा प्रसूरुकतानिधः ॥ ३० ॥

न च एतेषु वस्तां द्विद्योपधिरासयनैः ।

साङ्गवान्सनानाङ्गैनीयोगे न च व्याधयः ॥ ३१ ॥

The gems on the crest of snakes constantly illumine the environments and there is no darkness

there at any time. The food there is prepared with the divine medicines and they drink and bathe with these medicinal plants; so no disease attacks them.

वर्तीपतितर्जीर्णवैवेपयंस्वेदगन्यतः ।

अनुसाहवयोउद्धवा न बाधने कदाचन ॥ 32 ॥

कल्याणानां सदा तेवां न च गृत्युषयं कुतः ।

Old age, fever, indigestion, paleness, sweats, bad smells, or loss of energy or any other source of trouble cannot them. The people are always happy and good.

भगवतेजसीय्य चक्राच्छेव सुदर्जान्त् ॥ 33 ॥

यस्मिन्बिटे दैत्यवधूनं गर्भराययः ।

प्रायो भयास्तन्येव स्थवित ब्रह्मुपक भ । 34 ॥

इति श्रीमदैर्षिगारने महापुराणोउद्यमस्कन्येडण-

दर्शो5ध्याय: 11 18 11

Only they fear the Teja of the Bhagavān and His Sudarśana disc; and they fear nothing else. When the Teja of the Bhagavān enters, the women's abortions take place.

Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the

Eighth Book on the narrative of Rāhu

Mandalam in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses,

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

