CHAPTER XXIX

On the Devi's Birth in the Dakşa's House

ह्यास उवाच

कृत्येवं सूर्वेक्ष्यन्तां राज्ञां चरितमुतभम् ।

सोमवंशोद्धानां च वर्णीनिंय मया क्रिकत् ॥ १ ॥

पराशीक्रप्रसादेन महत्तं प्रतियेदेते ।

राज-सुनिश्रितं विद्धि परशक्तिभ्रप्रसातृः ॥ २ ॥

Vāyasa said: O King! Thus I have described the glory of the Devi. Now I will narrate, as far as I can, the excellent lives of the kings of the the Solar and the Lunar dynasties respectively. They all attained their excellent glories, simply because they were favoured by the Grace of the Highest Śakti; they were all the great devotees of the Supreme Deity. व्याडिषुभितमत्स्त्वं श्रीमूर्जितमेव वा । तन्तेवावगघ्छ त्वं पराशकल्यंगसम्भवम् ॥ 3 ॥ एते चान्ये च राजान: पराशकेन्धसाका: ।

संसारातकुमूलस्य कुटारा अभवगुव ॥ 4 ॥

All their prowess, bravery, prosperity and all their glory, know that those all were derived from the mere parts of hte Parā Sākti. O King! Those Kings and others as well were able to cut off the Tree of this World by the Axe of their Knowledge, simply because they were the devotees of the Parā Śakti.

तस्मासर्वप्रयतेने संसेल्या घुवतेश्री ।

पतताप्रिय धान्यार्थी रतजेदन्यमोषतः ॥ 5 ॥

आमध्य येदुर्गुधार्थिं प्रातरं त्वरं माया पृण ।

पाशगतिभवादीभोर्ज कृतकूलोउम्यद ततः ॥ 6 ॥

So with all the care possible, the Lady of the Universe is to be worshipped and served. Men should avoid worshipping any other gods, as people avoid the husk to get the grain inside. O King! By churning the ocean of the Vedas, I have got the jewel as the lotus-feet of the Parā Sāktī; and I think that I have discharged all my duties and think myself satisfied and successful.

पंचब्रह्माता रूडा नरस्यन्य क्रापि देखता ।

तत एव महादेवा पशुब्रह्मासनं कृतम् ॥ ७ ॥

पशुध्यस्त्रधिकं वस्तु वेदेड्यन्त्रमितीरीते ।

यास्मितोरं च प्रोतं च सेव शीघुचनेश्वी ॥ ८ ॥

Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, and Iśvara are the four feet and Sadā Śiva is the plank over head; thus these five form the seat on which the Devi is seated. There is no other deity superior to Her. To shew this (to the ordinary ignorant people) the Mahā Devi has taken seat composed of the five Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Iśvara and Sudā Śiva.

तामवित्राय राजेन्द्र नैव मुक्तो भवेश्रः ।

यदा चर्मद्वराकर्णे वेहियथिनि मानवाः ॥ 9 ॥

Superior to these five, what is stated in the Vedas as Vyaktam and in which all this Universe in sewn, as it were, crosswise and lengthwise, lying in and through, that is Bhuvanesvari, the Goddess of the Universe.

Note: Brahmā, Viṣnu, Rudra, Iśvara and Sadā Śiva are the Regents or the presiding Deities of carth, water, fire, air and Ākāsa.

तदा शिवामिवास्य दुःख्यांतो भविष्यति ।

अतप्य श्रुतौ प्राषुः श्रोक्षात्रशाशिजः ॥ १० ॥

ते ध्यानयोगानुगत आपयन्दैवाल-

शक्ति स्वगुणीनीगुबाम ।

तस्मात् सर्वप्रयतेने जन्मसाक्पल्हतेसे ॥ १ १ ॥

No man can be free unless he until the Goddess. When men will be able to encircle the Aśāśa, of the fourth dimension, as if it were an antelope skin, then they will be able to root out the miseries of the world, without knowing the nature of the Devi (i.e., impossible). Thus the Śvetāśvataropanjaśad says: “Those that were engaged in meditation, Dhyāna Yoga, they saw the Devi covered by the Gunas Sattva, Rajas and Tamas and the forces incarnate respectively of the several Devas.”

लज्जया वा भयेनापि भवस्या वा प्रमुकृत्या ।

सर्वेर्गं पत्थित्य मनो हदि निरूप्य च ॥ १२ ॥

तत्रिष्ठतपरो भूयादिति वेत्नतर्दिक्षम: ।

येन केन विभेषाणीय स्वर्पतिष्ठ-जजरप्रिय ॥ 13 ॥

So to make the human birth a success, first avoid all companies, be it out of shame, of fear, or devotion, or out of love; then bring the mind and keep it steady in your heart and then be devoted to Her and consider Her as the Supreme. This is the Vedānta Dīndima (the declaration of the Vedānta). क्रौरपैतस्ततं देर्वीं स चै मुच्येतं बझ्यात्। तस्मात्सर्वप्रयतेन भव जराजमहेश्वरिणे ॥ 14 ॥

Whoever takes the name of the Devi, either in sleeping, going or resting or in any other condition, he is certainly freed from the bondage of the world, no doubt. O King! So worship the Māheśvari with all the care that you can.

विद्यारूपं सूत्रकणं तथांतयादमित्यरूपिणम् ।

सोपानक्रमतः पूर्व ततः शुब्दे तु चेतसि ॥ 15 ॥

Go on step by step; first worship Her Virāt Rūpa (cosmic form); then Sūksma Rūpa (subtle form) and then her Antaryāmi Rūpa (inner form, ruling within). Thus when your heart is purified, worship the Parā Śakti, of the nature of Brahma, beyond this Māyā, this Prapañca Ullāsa, of the nature of Existence, Intelligence and Bliss.

सच्चिदानन्दल्यार्थकंपतां बह्राक्षीयिणि ।

आराध्य परां शक्ति प्रपंचोल्लासवर्जितान् ॥ १ ६ ॥

तस्पां चिन्तयो यः स तस्य आराधनं स्युतम् ।

राजत्रातं परशक्तिभफतानां चरितं मवा ॥ १७ ॥

When the Citta (heart) melts in Parā Śakti, then comes the real Ārādhānā (the real worship). So dilute your heart in Her. O, King! Thus I have described to you the sanctifying deeds of the extremely devoted kings of the Parā Śakti, who were noble minded and religious.

धार्मिकाणां सूर्वसोमवर्गजानां मनस्विनम् ।

पावनं कीतिंदं धर्मबुद्धिटं सद्गतिगदम् ॥ 18 ॥

One who will hear this will acquire fame, Dharma, intelligence, good end, and merits that have no equal. Now that else do you like to hear?

क्रवितं पुण्यदं पश्रातिकम-न्यच्छौतुमिच्छशि ।

गौरीलक्ष्मीसरत्यको दत्ता: पूर्वे परांबया ॥ १९ ॥

हराय हूये तद्व्राभिपचो.द्वावा च ।

तुर्गारोड्ध द्वस्या गौरी कन्दोते विश्रुतम् ॥ 20 ॥

क्षीरोद्योघ क्व्वोते महालक्ष्मीरिति मयूनम् ।

भूलदेयु.द्वावानां च कथं कन्यालमन्ययो: ॥ 21 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Bhagavan! In olden times, the World-mother Parā Sākti handed over Gauri to Hara, Lakṣmī to Hari, and Sarasvatī to Brahmā, born of the lotus from the navel of Hari. Now I hear that Gauri is the daughter of Himālaya as well of Dakṣa; and Mahā Lakṣmī is the daughter of the Kṣiroda ocean (ocean of milk). They were all origi: -ted from the Prime Devi; how, then, Gauri and Lakṣmī came to be the daughters of others?

असंभावमिद्ध पाति संगायोउर महापुने ।

छिधि ज्ञानाभिता न तं च संगायच्छेदततरः ॥ 22 ॥

O great Muni! This is next to impossible; so my doubt arises. O Bhagavan! You are quite competent to cut off all my doubts; so by your axe of knowledge, cut off my present doubt.

व्यास उवाच

शृणु राजनप्रवक्ष्यामि रहस्यं परमाद्धुम् ।

देवीभनकस्य ते किंचिद्वतायं न हि विधचो ॥ 23 ॥

देवीभयं यदा देवययायादारपरिका ।

तदाप्रभृति ते देवा: सुहिकायाणि चक्रिके ॥ 24 ॥

Veda Vyāsa said: O King! Hear. I am telling you this wonderful sect. You are greatly devoted to the Devi, so nothing there can be that I cannot disclose to you. Since the time the Great Mother gave over to Hara, and Brahmā, Gaurī, Lakṣmī and and Sarasvatī, respectively, these three Devas, Hara, etc. were performing their task, preserving, etc.

कर्मियांशसमये राज-देव्या हालाहलाधिधाः ।

महापराक्रमा जाताखैलोयंत्रे तैर्हिंक्षणान् ॥ 25 ॥

बहुर्णो वरदानेन दर्पिता राजताचनम् ।

क्रधुर्निंजसेनाधिसतया वैकुण्डपेवे च ॥ 26 ॥

O King! Once on a time, certain Dānavas, named Halāhalas were born. In time, they became very powerful and in a short time conquered the three worlds. What more then this, that they being elated

Book VII Chapter XXIX

with the boon granted to them by Brahmā, took their forces and invested the Mount Kailāsa and the Vaikuntha regions!

कामारि: कैटभारिष्ठ युब्दोशोगं च चक्नुः ।

पटिवर्षसहसायामपथुचूद मोहलकाद्य ॥ 27 ॥

हाहाकारो महानासीदेवदानवसेनयो: ।

महाताश प्रमलेन ताथ्यां ते दानावा हता: ॥ 28 ॥

Seeing this, Mahā Deva and Viṣṇu both made preparations for war. A terrible fight ensued between both the parties. For sixty thousand years the battle lasted incessantly but the result was stalemate. Gradually there was a great cry of consternation in the two parties.

स्वस्यथानेयु गत्वा ताविभागनं च चक्रतः ।

स्वशक्ल्वोर्निकटे राजन्यद्वगादेव ते हताः ॥ 29 ॥

अभिभानं तयोजीत्वा छल्हास्यं चक्रतः ।

महात्वमीधी गौरी च हास्यं दृष्ट्वा तयोस्तु तो ॥ 30 ॥

When Śiva and Viṣṇu with great effort destroyed the Dānavas. O King! Śiva and Viṣṇu then returned to their own houses and began to brag of their powers before their own Śaktis Gaurī and Lakṣmī; whereas the Demons were killed on account of the Śaktis of Gaurī and Lakṣmī. Seeing them boast, Gaurī and Lakṣmī laughed not sincerely whereon the two gods were very much angry.

देवावतीव संकुब्दी मोहितावादिमायया ।

दुरन्तरं च द्वदुतृयमानपुरःसम् ॥ 31 ॥

ततसे देवते तिथम्बुणो त्यक्ता तु ती पुनः ।

अन्तहिंत चाघवतां हाहाकारस्तदा छभून् ॥ 32 ॥

They under the magic spell of the Prime Māyā insulted them and even used offensive languages. Gaurī and Lakṣmī quitted them and disappeared. A great uproar then arose in the worlds. Both Hari and Hara became lustreless due to their insulting the two Śaktis.

नितेत्रस्की च निर्ःगती विशिष्यी च विचेतानी ।

अयमानातयो: शक्यज्ञोजीह हरितृते तथा ॥ 33 ॥

ब्रहा चिन्तातुरो जातः किमेतसामुपस्थित्यम् ।

प्रधानी देवतामध्ये कर्ण कार्याक्षमावग् ॥ 34 ॥

They become powerless and unconscious and

turned out mad. Seeing this Brahmā became very anxious. Hari and Hara are the two chief Deities; how then these two have be come unable to perform the actions of the world! What is the cause?

अकाण्डे किं निमिनेन संकटं समुपथित्यम् ।

प्रलयो भविता किं वा जगतोरभ्य निरागसः ॥ 35 ॥

निमितं नैव जानेड़ं कर्णे बालांग प्रतिक्रिया ।

इति चिन्तागुरोजस्यं दस्यो मीतिलतोवनः ॥ 36 ॥

Why this calamity has sprung up out of season? Will there be a Pralaya (a general dissolution) of the world out of some offence, when no actions are being done! I know nothing about this. So how can I find a remedy! Being thus very distressed, he began to meditate with his eyes closed in the fourth dimensional space in the heart.

परागक्तिभ्याकाणु जागमेतिहिति स्म ह ।

जानंतदा सावधानः पद्यजोप्रवृष्योत्पन ॥ 37 ॥

ततस्तयोश व्यक्यां स्वयमेवाकृतात् ।

स्वगतकेतु प्रभावेण कियकालांत लेपनिधि: ॥ 38 ॥

O King! The Lotus born Brahmā then found out by his meditation that this calamity was brought about by the great wrath of the Parā Śakti. He then tried to find out the remedy until Hari and Hara did not regain their former natural position. Brahmā began by his own Śakti to carry on the functions of them both, viz., that of preservation and destruction for some time.

तततलयोसु स्वस्थर्व भवादी-नस्युस्तानय ।

अग्रह्यामास धर्मात्मा सनकादीई सत्यतः ॥ 39 ॥

उवाच चवनं तेभ्यः सञ्नेभ्यस्तपोनिधि: ॥

कार्यास्तोउदम्यानुतः कनुं न च क्षमः ॥ 40 ॥

The religious-minded Prajāpati quickly called his son Manu and Sanaka, etc., the Rṣis, for bringing peace on the two great Gods! When they came to him, the great ascetic four-faced Brahmā told them: "I am now busy with many more works; so I am unable to carry on my tapasyā?

पराग्रतेक्सु तोषार्थ जन्मादारयुतो अस्थमू ।

शिवविष्यु च विशिष्यो पराग्रतिःप्रकोपत: ॥ 4 1 ॥

By the wrath of the Highest Force, Hari and Hara

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

have become somewhat distracted; so for the satisfaction of the Parā Śakti I am performing the three functions, i.e., those of Creation, Preservation and Destruction.

तस्मातां परमां शर्ति यूयं सन्तोयर्वत्व ।

अत्यघुतं तपः कृत्वा भवक्या परमया युतः ॥ 4 2 ॥

यथा तो पूर्ववृत्ती च स्थतां शवित्युतावरि ।

तथा कृतत मनुका यशोबृद्धिभेदित्र बः ॥ 4 3 ॥

So you both practise this hard tapasyā with the greatest devotion and bring about Her satisfaction. O my sons! Do such as Hari and Hara gain their former states and then be united with their own Śaktis respectively. Your fame will increase thereby, no doubt.

कुले यस्य घबेजकम त्योः शक्योस्तु ततूलम् ।

पावयेजगातीं सर्वा कृतकृत्यं स्वयं भवेत् ॥ 4 4 ॥

Rather that family where the two Śaktis will take their birth, will purify the whole world and that man himself be crowned with success."

व्यास उवाच

यितामह्वचः शुत्वा गता: सर्वे वनांते ।

रिशाधियवः सर्वे दृक्षात्या विमन्तानतः ॥ 4 5 ॥

शीत श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणी सतमस्कल्ये

एकान्तिश्रणीयवा: ॥ 46॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The pure-hearted Dakṣa and other mind-born sons of Brahmā, hearing the words of the Grandsire, expressed their desire to worship the Parā Śakti and went to the forest.

Here ends the Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the birth of the Bhagavatī in the house of Dakṣa in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddeviḥhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

प्रधानान्ति

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

