[Ch 29 Verse 1-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► All their prowess, bravery, prosperity and all their glory, know that those all were derived from the mere parts of hte Parā Sākti. O King! Those Kings and others as well were able to cut off the Tree of this World by the Axe of their Knowledge, simply because they were the devotees of the Parā Śakti.
NEW CORR ENG ──► All their prowess, bravery, prosperity and all their glory, know that those all were derived from the mere parts of the Parā Śakti. O King! Those Kings and others as well were able to out off the Tree of this World by the Axe of their Knowledge, simply because they were the devotees of the Parā Śakti.

[Ch 29 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So with all the care possible, the Lady of the Universe is to be worshipped and served. Men should avoid worshipping any other gods, as people avoid the husk to get the grain inside. O King! By churning the ocean of the Vedas, I have got the jewel as the lotus-feet of the Parā Sāktī; and I think that I have discharged all my duties and think myself satisfied and successful.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So with all the care possible, the Lady of the Universe is to be worshipped and served. Men should avoid worshipping any other gods, as people avoid the husk to get the grain inside. O King! By churning the ocean of the Vedas, I have got the jewel as the lotus-feet of the Parā Śakti; and I think that I have discharged all my duties and think myself satisfied and successful.

[Ch 29 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, and Iśvara are the four feet and Sadā Śiva is the plank over head; thus these five form the seat on which the Devi is seated. There is no other deity superior to Her. To shew this (to the ordinary ignorant people) the Mahā Devi has taken seat composed of the five Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Iśvara and Sudā Śiva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā, Viṣṇu Rudra, and Iśvara are the four feet and Sadā Śiva is the plank overhead; thus these five form the seat on which the Devī is seated. There is no other deity superior to Her. To show this (to the ordinary ignorant people) the Mahā Devī has taken this seat composed of the five Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Iśvara and Sadā Śiva.

[Ch 29 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Superior to these five, what is stated in the Vedas as Vyaktam and in which all this Universe in sewn, as it were, crosswise and lengthwise, lying in and through, that is Bhuvanesvari, the Goddess of the Universe. Note: Brahmā, Viṣnu, Rudra, Iśvara and Sadā Śiva are the Regents or the presiding Deities of carth, water, fire, air and Ākāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Superior to these five, what is stated in the Vedas as Vyaktam and in which all this Universe is sewn, as it were, crosswise and lengthwise, lying in and through, that is Bhuvaneśvarī, the Goddess of the Universe. [Note: Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Iśvara and Sadā Śiva are the Regents or the presiding Deities of earth, water, fire, air and Ākāśa].

[Ch 29 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No man can be free unless he until the Goddess. When men will be able to encircle the Aśāśa, of the fourth dimension, as if it were an antelope skin, then they will be able to root out the miseries of the world, without knowing the nature of the Devi (i.e., impossible). Thus the Śvetāśvataropanjaśad says: “Those that were engaged in meditation, Dhyāna Yoga, they saw the Devi covered by the Gunas Sattva, Rajas and Tamas and the forces incarnate respectively of the several Devas.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► No man can be free unless he until the Goddess. When men will be able to encircle the Ākāśa, of the fourth dimension, as if it were an antelope skin, then they will be able to root out the miseries of the world, without knowing the nature of the Devī (i.e., impossible). Thus the Śvetāśvataropaniṣada says :-- “Those that were engaged in meditation, Dhyāna Yoga, they saw the Devī covered by the Guṇas Sāttva, Rājas and Tāmas and the forces incarnate respectively of the several Devas.”

[Ch 29 Verse 12-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whoever takes the name of the Devi, either in sleeping, going or resting or in any other condition, he is certainly freed from the bondage of the world, no doubt. O King! So worship the Māheśvari with all the care that you can.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whoever takes the name of the Devī, either in sleeping, going or resting or in any other condition, he is certainly freed from the bondage of the world, no doubt. O King! So worship the Māheśvarī with all the care that you can.

[Ch 29 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Go on step by step; first worship Her Virāt Rūpa (cosmic form); then Sūksma Rūpa (subtle form) and then her Antaryāmi Rūpa (inner form, ruling within). Thus when your heart is purified, worship the Parā Śakti, of the nature of Brahma, beyond this Māyā, this Prapañca Ullāsa, of the nature of Existence, Intelligence and Bliss.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Go on step by step; first worship Her Virāṭ Rūpa (cosmic form); then Sūkṣma Rūpa (subtle form) and then her Antaryāmī Rūpa (inner form, ruling within). Thus when your heart is purified, worship the Parā Śakti, of the nature of Brahmā, beyond this Māyā, this Prapañca Ullāsa, of the nature of Existence, Intelligence and Bliss.

[Ch 29 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the Citta (heart) melts in Parā Śakti, then comes the real Ārādhānā (the real worship). So dilute your heart in Her. O, King! Thus I have described to you the sanctifying deeds of the extremely devoted kings of the Parā Śakti, who were noble minded and religious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the Chitta (heart) melts in Parā Śakti, then comes the real Ārādhanā (the real worship). So dilute your heart in Her. O King! Thus I have described to you the sanctifying deeds of the extremely devoted kings of the Parā Śakti, who were noble minded and religious.

[Ch 29 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One who will hear this will acquire fame, Dharma, intelligence, good end, and merits that have no equal. Now that else do you like to hear?
NEW CORR ENG ──► One who will hear this will acquire fame, dharma, intelligence, good end, and merits that have no equal. Now what else do you like to hear?

[Ch 29 Verse 19-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya said: O Bhagavan! In olden times, the World-mother Parā Sākti handed over Gauri to Hara, Lakṣmī to Hari, and Sarasvatī to Brahmā, born of the lotus from the navel of Hari. Now I hear that Gauri is the daughter of Himālaya as well of Dakṣa; and Mahā Lakṣmī is the daughter of the Kṣiroda ocean (ocean of milk). They were all origi: -ted from the Prime Devi; how, then, Gauri and Lakṣmī came to be the daughters of others?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya said :-- “O Bhagavān! In olden times, the World mother Parā Śakti handed over Gaurī to Hara, Lakṣmī to Hari, and Sarasvatī to Brahmā, born of the lotus from the navel of Hari. Now I hear that Gaurī is the daughter of Himālayā as well of Dakṣa; and Mahā Lakṣmī is the daughter of the Kṣiroda ocean (ocean of milk). They were all originated from the Prime Devī; how, then, Gaurī and Lakṣmī came to be the daughters of others?

[Ch 29 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O great Muni! This is next to impossible; so my doubt arises. O Bhagavan! You are quite competent to cut off all my doubts; so by your axe of knowledge, cut off my present doubt.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O great Muni! This is next to impossible; so my doubt arises. O Bhagavān! You are quite competent to cut off all my doubts; so by your axe of knowledge, cut off my present doubt.”

[Ch 29 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Veda Vyāsa said: O King! Hear. I am telling you this wonderful sect. You are greatly devoted to the Devi, so nothing there can be that I cannot disclose to you. Since the time the Great Mother gave over to Hara, and Brahmā, Gaurī, Lakṣmī and and Sarasvatī, respectively, these three Devas, Hara, etc. were performing their task, preserving, etc.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Veda Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hear. I am telling you this wonderful secret. You are greatly devoted to the Devī; so nothing there can be that I cannot disclose to you. Since the time the Great Mother gave over to Hara, Hari and Brahmā, Gaurī, Lakṣmī and and Sarasvatī, respectively, these three Devas, Hara, etc. were performing their tasks, preserving, etc.

[Ch 29 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Once on a time, certain Dānavas, named Halāhalas were born. In time, they became very powerful and in a short time conquered the three worlds. What more then this, that they being elated with the boon granted to them by Brahmā, took their forces and invested the Mount Kailāsa and the Vaikuntha regions!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Once on a time, certain Dānavas, named Halāhalas were born. In time, they became very powerful and in a short time conquered the three worlds. What more than this, that they being elated with the boon granted to them by Brahmā, took their forces and invested the Mount Kailāśa and the Vaikuṇṭha regions!

[Ch 29 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing this, Mahā Deva and Viṣṇu both made preparations for war. A terrible fight ensued between both the parties. For sixty thousand years the battle lasted incessantly but the result was stalemate. Gradually there was a great cry of consternation in the two parties.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing this, Mahā Deva and Viṣṇu both made preparations for war. A terrible fight ensued between both the parties. For sixty thousand years the battle lasted incessantly but the result was stalemate. Gradually there was a great cry of consternation in the two parties.

[Ch 29 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Śiva and Viṣṇu with great effort destroyed the Dānavas. O King! Śiva and Viṣṇu then returned to their own houses and began to brag of their powers before their own Śaktis Gaurī and Lakṣmī; whereas the Demons were killed on account of the Śaktis of Gaurī and Lakṣmī. Seeing them boast, Gaurī and Lakṣmī laughed not sincerely whereon the two gods were very much angry.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Śiva and Viṣṇu with great effort destroyed the Dānavas. O King! Śiva and Viṣṇu then returned to their own houses and began to brag of their powers before their own Śaktis Gaurī and Lakṣmī; whereas the Demons were killed on account of the Śaktis of Gaurī and Lakṣmī. Seeing them boast, Gaurī and Lakṣmī laughed not sincerely whereon the two gods were very much angry.

[Ch 29 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They under the magic spell of the Prime Māyā insulted them and even used offensive languages. Gaurī and Lakṣmī quitted them and disappeared. A great uproar then arose in the worlds. Both Hari and Hara became lustreless due to their insulting the two Śaktis.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They under the magic spell of the Prime Māyā insulted them and even used offensive languages. Gaurī and Lakṣmī quitted them and disappeared. A great uproar then arose in the worlds. Both Hari and Hara became lustreless due to their insulting the two Śaktis.

[Ch 29 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They become powerless and unconscious and turned out mad. Seeing this Brahmā became very anxious. Hari and Hara are the two chief Deities; how then these two have be come unable to perform the actions of the world! What is the cause?
NEW CORR ENG ──► They become powerless and unconscious and turned out mad. Seeing this Brahmā became very anxious. Hari and Hara are the two chief Deities; how then these two have become unable to perform the actions of the world! What is the cause?

[Ch 29 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Why this calamity has sprung up out of season? Will there be a Pralaya (a general dissolution) of the world out of some offence, when no actions are being done! I know nothing about this. So how can I find a remedy! Being thus very distressed, he began to meditate with his eyes closed in the fourth dimensional space in the heart.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Why this calamity has sprung up out of season? Will there be a Pralaya (a general dissolution) of the world out of some offence, when no actions are being done! I know nothing about this. So how can I find a remedy! Being thus very distressed, he began to meditate with his eyes closed in the fourth dimensional space in the heart.

[Ch 29 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The Lotus born Brahmā then found out by his meditation that this calamity was brought about by the great wrath of the Parā Śakti. He then tried to find out the remedy until Hari and Hara did not regain their former natural position. Brahmā began by his own Śakti to carry on the functions of them both, viz., that of preservation and destruction for some time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The Lotus born Brahmā then found out by his meditation that this calamity was brought about by the great wrath of the Parā Śakti. He then tried to find out the remedy until Hari and Hara did not regain the former natural position. Brahmā began by his own Śakti to carry on the functions of them both, viz., that of preservation and destruction for some time.

[Ch 29 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The religious-minded Prajāpati quickly called his son Manu and Sanaka, etc., the Rṣis, for bringing peace on the two great Gods! When they came to him, the great ascetic four-faced Brahmā told them: "I am now busy with many more works; so I am unable to carry on my tapasyā?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The religious-minded Prajāpati quickly called his son Manu and Sanaka, etc. , the Ṛṣis, for bringing peace on the two great Gods! When they came to him, the great ascetic four-faced Brahmā told them :-- “I am now busy with many more works; so I am unable carry on my tapasyā?

[Ch 29 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► By the wrath of the Highest Force, Hari and Hara Śrimaddevībhāgavatam have become somewhat distracted; so for the satisfaction of the Parā Śakti I am performing the three functions, ॥.e., those of Creation, Preservation and Destruction.
NEW CORR ENG ──► By the wrath of the Highest Force, Hari and Hara have become somewhat distracted; so for the satisfaction of the Parā Śakti I am performing the three functions, i.e., those of Creation, Preservation and Destruction.

[Ch 29 Verse 42-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So you both practise this hard tapasyā with the greatest devotion and bring about Her satisfaction. O my sons! Do such as Hari and Hara gain their former states and then be united with their own Śaktis respectively. Your fame will increase thereby, no doubt.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So you both practise this hard tapasyā with the greatest devotion and bring about Her satisfaction. O sons! Do such as Hari and Hara gain their former states and then be united with their own Śaktis respectively. Your fame will increase thereby, no doubt.

[Ch 29 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Rather that family where the two Śaktis will take their birth, will purify the whole world and that man himself be crowned with success."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Rather that family where the two Śaktis will take their birth, will purify the whole world and that man himself will be crowned with success.”

[Ch 29 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! The pure-hearted Dakṣa and other mind-born sons of Brahmā, hearing the words of the Grandsire, expressed their desire to worship the Parā Śakti and went to the forest. Here ends the Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the birth of the Bhagavatī in the house of Dakṣa in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddeviḥhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! The pure-hearted Dakṣa and other mind-born sons of Brahmā, hearing the words of the Grandsire expressed their desire to worship the Parā Śakti and went to the forest. Here ends the Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Seventh Book on birth of the Bhagavatī in the house of Dakṣa in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

[Ch 29 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Šrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► 45. Vyāsa said :--
