CHAPTER XXII

On the Fight Between the Devas and Śaṅkhacūḍa

श्रीनासाय जवाच

शिवं प्राण्य शिरसा दानवेऊः प्रतपाचन् ।

समाकरोह यानं च सहामात्यैः स सत्वः ॥ १ ॥

शिवः स्वसैन्यं देखाशु प्रेरयामास सत्वम् ।

दानवेँदः ससैन्यश्र युद्धारभे बभूव ह ॥ 2 ॥

Śrī Nārāyaṇa spoke: Then the King of the Dānavas, very powerful, bowed down to Mahādeva and ascended on the chariot with his ministers. Mahādeva gave orders to His army to be ready at once. So Śaṅkhacūda did.

स्वयं महेन्द्रो युवुघे सार्थे घुवपर्वेणा ।

भार्कारो युवुघे विग्रचितिना सह सत्य: ॥ 3 ॥

दोभेन सह चंद्रश चकार परयं रणम् ।

कालस्येण कालश्र गोकर्जन हुताशनः ॥ 4 ॥

कुवेः कालकेवेन विश्वकर्मा मयेन च ।

भयक्रुण मृत्युश संहारेण यमतस्वा ॥ 5 ॥

विककर्णे वरणश्छचलेन समीरणः ।

ब्रुधघ चृतपुहेन रक्ताक्षेण शनैधः ॥ 6 ॥

जयंती रत्त्वसारेण वसवो वर्चांग गणैः ।

अश्विनी च द्वीतिमता धूपेण नलकूबः ॥ 7 ॥

धृधेण धर्मे उषाक्षेण च मंगलः ।

गोभाकरोण वै भानु: विद्रोण च ममधः ॥ 8 ॥

गोधामुखेन चृणेन खड्वोन च धळजेन च ।

कांचीयुक्ति चिंडेन धूमेश सह नंदिता ॥ 9 ॥

विश्वेन च पलाशेनाविद्याचा युवघुः परे ।

एकादश च रुत्र वै एकादृष भयंकरेः ॥ 10 ॥

महामारी च युवुः चोप्रचंडादिधि: सह ।

नन्टीश्वराद्यः सर्वे दानवानां गपेः सह ॥ 11 ॥

Terrible fight then ensued between Mahendra and Vṛṣaparvā, Bhāskara and Vīpracitti, Niśākara and Dambha, between Kāla and Kāleśvara, between Fire and Gokarṇa, Kubera and Kālakeya between Viśvakarmā and Maya, between Mrtyu and Bhayankar between Yama and Sarīhāra, between Varunā and Vikamka, between Budha and Dhrtaprṣtha, between Śani and Raktāksa, Jayant and Ratnasāra, between the Vasus and Varcasas,

between the two Aśvin Kumāras and Diptimān, between Nalakūbara and Dhūmra, between Dharma and Dhurandhara, between Maṅgala and Uṣāksa, Bhānut and Śovākara, between Kandarpa ad Pithara, between the eleven Ādityas and Godhāmukha, Cūrṇa and Khadgadhvaja, Kañcimukha and Piṇḍa Dhūmra and Nandī, between Viśva and Palāśa, between the eleven Rudras and the eleven Bhayañkaras, between Ugracaṇḍā and the other Mahāmāris and Nandiśvara and the other Dānavas.

युयुधुं महायुंद प्रलयेप्रि भयंकरे ।

वदमुले च रंगभूषु तस्थी काल्याः सुतेन च ॥ 12 ॥

सर्वे च युयुधुः सैयनमूग्रः सत्ते मुने ।

रत्नसिंहासने रये कोटिभिदानंबले सह ॥ 13 ॥

उवास शबुचूच्छुं रत्नभूषणभूषितः ।

शक्रृत्य च ये थोधा दानवैधु पयाजितः ॥ 14 ॥

देवाथा शुदुयुः सर्वे भीताशु क्षतविश्रादुः ।

The battlefield, then, assumed a grim aspect, as if the time of Dissolution had come. Bhagavān Mahādeva sat under the Vata (peepul) tree with Kārtikeya and Bhadrakālī. Śankhacūḍa, decked with his jewel ornaments, sat on the jewel throne, surrounded by kotis and kotis of Dānavas.

चकार कोपं कंदहघं देयेम्ब्रभाघरं ददी ॥ 15 ॥

बलं च स्वाणानां च वर्धयामास तेसला ।

सोउयमेकछ्युयुघे दानवानां गणैः सह ॥ 16 ॥

अक्षौहिणीणां रोगकं समरे च जघान सः ।

The Śaṅkara's army got defeated at the hands of the Dānavas. The Devas, with cuts and wounds on their bodies, fled from the battlefield, terrified. Kārtikeya gave words "Do'nt fear' to the Devas and excited them. Only Skanda resisted the Dānava forces In one moment he slew one hundred Aksauhīnī Dānava forces.

असुरायात्यामास काली कमललोचना ॥ 17 ॥

पपौ रकतं दानवानामितकुळ्धा ततः परम् ।

द्रगलक्ष्मणजैद्राणां शतलक्ष्म च कोदीक्ष: ॥ 18 ॥

The lotus eyed Kālī also engaged in killing the Asuras. She became very angry and no sooner did She slay the Asura forces, than She began to drink their blood. She easily slew with Her one hand and at every time put into Her mouth ten lakhs, and hundred lakhs and Kotis and Kotis of elephants.

समादावैकहत्ने मुखे चिवेशे लील्या ।

कदंबानां सहलं च नन्तरं समरे मुने ॥ 19 ॥

स्कंदस्य शराजलेन दानवाः क्षतविश्राः ।

भीताश्र दुबुतुः सर्वे महारणपराक्रमः ॥ 20 ॥

Thousands and thousands of headless bodies (Kavandhas) came to be witnessed in the filled. The bodies of the Dānavas were all cut and wounded by the arrows of Kārtikeya. They were all terrified and fled away.

वूपपर्व विश्वितिरंधभ्याशि विककर्णः ।

कंदेट सार्थं व्युयुक्ते सर्वे विक्रमेण च ॥ 21 ॥

महामारी च व्युप्ये न बभूव पराव्युक्ती ।

बभूवृत्ते च संक्षुक्या: स्कन्दस्य शक्तिपीक्षिताः ॥ 22 ॥

Only Vṛṣaparvā, Vipracitti, Dambha, and Vikamkana remained fighting with Skanda with an heroic valour. Mahāmārī, too, did not shew his back and he fought out vigorously. By and by they all became very much confused and distressed; but they did not turn their backs.

न दुकुर्ष्याल्वर्ये पुण्यवृद्धिभूव है ।

स्कंदस्य समरं सूघा महारोरे समूल्वणम् ॥ 23 ॥

दानवानां क्षयकरं यथा प्राकृतिको लय: ।

राज विभागमात्का चकार बाणवर्षणम् ॥ 24 ॥

Seeing this terrible fight of Skanda, the Devas began to shower flowers. The killing of the Dānavas looked like a Prākṛtik Dissolution. Śankhacūda, then, began to shoot arrows from his chariot.

नृपस्य श्रावृष्ठि धनस्य वर्षणं यथा ।

महधोरधाकार्य बह्वुत्यानं बभूव च ॥ 25 ॥

देवा: प्रदुबुः सर्वेप्रध्ये नंदीध्रादयः ।

एक एव कान्तिकेयस्तथी सममूर्पिंप ॥२६ ॥

The shooting of arrows by the king seemed as if rains were being poured in clouds. Everything

became pitch dark. Fires only were seen emitting their golden tongues. The Devas, Nandiśvara and others, fled away, terrified.

पर्वतानां च सर्पाणां शिलानां शाखनां तथा ।

नृपशक्तार बूँँचे च दुवाँगं च भयंकीर्म ॥ 27 ॥

नृपस्य शरवृष्णा च प्रहितः शिवनन्दनः ।

नौहारेण च साठ्रेण प्रदितो भास्कमो यथा ॥ 28 ॥

Only Kārtikeya remained in the battlefield. Then Śaṅkhacūda began to throw terrible showers and showers of mountains, snakes, stones, and trees. So much so, that Kārtikeya was covered by them as the Sun becomes obscured by fog.

धनुश्रश्छेल्कन्दच्य दूर्वहं च भयड़ूः ।

बर्भज च रथं दिव्यं चित्ब्छेद रथपीठकान् ॥ 29 ॥

मयूरं जर्जीभृतं दिव्यानेश चकार सः ।

शक्ति विश्वेय सुवाँधा तस्य यसूस्य चातितीम् ॥ 30 ॥

क्षणं मूढ्छी च संग्राप बभूव होतनः पुनः ।

गृहीत्वा तद्धनुद्विं यदतं विष्णुना पुरा ॥ 31 ॥

The Demon King cut off the weighty quiver and the pedestal of Skanda broke His chariot. By the divine weapons of the Dānava, the peacock (the vehicle) of Kārtikeya became exhausted. Kārtikeya threw one Śakti (weapon) on the breast of the Dānava; but before it fell, the Dānva cut off that, lustrous like the Sun and, in return, darted his Śakti.

रत्ने-हसारनिर्माणायानामहनु कार्तिकः ।

गस्तावं च गृहीत्या स चकार रणमूल्वणम् ॥ 32 ॥

सपांष्ण यदांतश्रीव बूर्णांहु प्रस्तरांशला ।

सर्वाश्छेद्धे कोपेन दिव्यानेषण शिवात्मजः ॥ 33 ॥

By that stroke, Kārtikeya became stunned for a moment; but he immediately regained his consciousness. He then took up the quiver that Bhagavān Vīṣṇu gave him before and many other weapons; and ascending on another chariot, built of jewels, began to fight out violently and valiantly.

लढ़े, निविर्यमास पार्ज-येन प्रतपावान् ।

रथं धनुष्य चित्रदेड संगखचुडस्य लील्या ॥ 34 ॥

सत्राहे सारथि चेव क्रिरोट मुकुटीज्ञल्लम् ।

विशेषे शणिक सुरुकलाभां दानवेत्रस्य बक्षसि ॥ 35 ॥

Getting angry, he resisted all those showers of

Book IX Chapter XXII

snakes, mountains and trees by his divine weapons. He resisted fire by his watery (Pāryannya) weapon. Then He cut off easily Ṣaṅkhacūḍa’s chariot, bow, armour, charioteer, and his bright crown and he threw on his breast one blazing Ṣakti of white colour.

भृच्छी संग्राय राजा चेतनघ्र बघूव है ।

आतरोह यानन्यन्द्रजुर्जार स्तवरः ॥ ३६ ॥

चक्कार शराजलं च मायया मायिनां वर: ।

गृहं चच्छाद् समे शराजलेन नातर ॥ 37 ॥

The Dānavendra fell unconscious; but, at the next moment, he regained his consciousness quickly, mounted on another chariot and took a fresh quiver. The Dānava was the foremost in his magic powers, He, by his power of Māyā, made a shower of arrows so much so that Kārtikeya became completely covered by that multitude of arrows.

प्रग्राह शक्तिमव्याजा शतसुर्यसमप्रभम् ।

प्रत्यामिनिशाखणப் विद्याधोते जसावुतम् ॥ 38 ॥

चिश्रेय तां च कोनेम महावेगेन कांतिके ।

पपात शक्तिस्तत्रोये वहितारिगिरोज्जलम् ॥ 39 ॥

मुर्णी संग्राप शकल्या च कांतिकेयो महावलः ।

काली गृहीत्व तं झोडे निजाय शिवसक्रियो ॥ 40 ॥

Then the Dānava took one invincible Śakti, lustrous like one hundred Suns. It seemed that flames of fire were licking high as if the Disolution Time had come aright. Inflamed by anger, the Dānava threw that Śakti on Kārtikeya. It seemed, then, that a burning mass of fire fell on him. The powerful Kārtikeya became senseless.

शिवसंतं चापि ज्ञानेन जीवयामास लीलया ।

ददौ बल्मनंतं च समुन्त्रथी प्रतपावान् ॥ 41 ॥

कालो जगाम समरं रक्षितुं कान्तिकस्य या ।

वीरास्तमनुजम्युं ते च नंदीक्षारावः ॥ 42 ॥

सर्वे देवाङ्ग शंघर्यां व्यसारक्षसिक्रगः ।

वाठ्याभंडाङ्ग बहुगः शतगों मधुवाहकाः ॥ 43 ॥

Bhadrakālī immediately took Him on Her lap and carried him before Śiva easily restored him to his life by his knowledge-power and gave him the

indomitable strength. He then got up in full vigour. Bhadrakālī went to the field to see the Kārtikeya's forces. Nandiśvara and other heroes, the Devas, Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Rāksasas and Kinnaras followed Her. Hundreds of war drums were sounded and hundreds of persons carried Madhu (wine).

सा च गत्वास सोमां सिंहनादं चकार च ।

देव्याश्र सिंहनादेन प्रापुर्मूष्छा च दानवाः ॥ 44 ॥

अयुहुहासमाश्व चकार च पुनः पुनः ।

द्वाु पपौ च माध्यौकं नन्तरं रणपूर्णिति ॥ 45 ॥

उद्यद्वुः चोर्धादं कोटकी च पपौ मधु ।

योगिनीडाकिनीनां च गणा: सुरगणाद्यः ॥ 46 ॥

Going to the battle-ground, She gave a war-cry. The Dānava forces got fainted by that cry. Bhadrakālī shouted aloud inauspicious peals after peals of laughter, Then She drank Madhu and danced in the battlefield. Ugra Damṣtrā, Urgacandā, Kotavi, the Yoginīs, Dākinīs, and the Devas all drank Madhu (wine).

द्रष्टा काली शब्दुचुः शीघ्रमाजी समाययी ।

द्रानवाक्य भयं प्रापू राजा तेभ्योभयं द्वंदो ॥ 47 ॥

काली विश्वेप वाई्च प्रत्यावनिरिष्योपमम् ।

राजा निर्वियामास पार्ज्येन च लील्या ॥ 48 ॥

Seeing Kālī in the battlefield, Śaṅkhacūḍa came up again and imparted the spirit of Fearlessness to the Daityas, trembling with fear. Bhadrakālī projected, then, the Fire weapon, flaming like the Great Disolution Fire; but the king quickly put out that by the Watery weapon.

चिश्रधे वाक्णां सा च तीबं च महद्धद्धुतम् ।

गाधवैण च चितच्छेद दानवैर्ध्छ लील्या ॥ ४९ ॥

माहैर्वरं प्रचिश्व केण ली बहिंशिजोपमम् ।

राज जाबान ते शीर्धे वैश्याने च लील्या ॥ ५० ॥

Kālī then projected the very violent and wonderful Varunāstra. The Dānava cut off that easily with Gandharvāstra. Kālī then threw the flame-like Mâheśvarāstra. The king made it futile by the Vaiṣṇavāstra.

नारायणासं सा देवी चिश्वेप मंजपूर्वकम् ।

राजा ननाम तदूद्धुा चावकघु तथावसी ॥ 51 ॥



क्रधैं जगाम तच्चारं प्रल्यामिनिशखोपमम् ।

पाता शंखचुरूढ़ भकत्या तं देडवढ़वि ॥ 52 ॥

Then the Devi purifying the Nārāyanāstra with the mantra, threw it on the king. At this the king instantly alighted from his chariot and bowed down to it. The Nārāyanāstra rose high up like the Dissolution Fire. Śankhacūḍla fell prostrate on the ground with devotion.

ब्रह्मासे सा च स्थिपय यन्तते मेजपूर्वकम् ।

ब्रह्मायेग महाराजो निर्विधें चकार सः ॥ 53 ॥

तदा सिक्षेप दिव्यास्व सा देवी मेजपूर्वकम् ।

राजा दिव्यास्जाजलेन तत्रिवर्णं चकार च ॥ 54 ॥

The Devi threw, then, the Brahmāstra, purifying it with Mantra. But it was rendered futile by the Dānava's Brahmāstra. The Devi again shot the divine weapons purifying them with mantras; but they also were nullified by the divine weapons of the Dānava.

देवी विश्वेण गर्नि च वयन्तो योजनायताम् ।

राज दिव्याखजालेन शतखंडों च चकार ह ॥ 55 ॥

Then Bhadrakālī threw one Sākti extending to one Yojana. The Daitya cut it to pieces by his divine weapon.

जग्राह मंजपूर्त च देवी पाणुपर्नं सभा ।

निक्षेपणं निरीघूं च वाराक्यूवासरीरिणी ॥ ५६ ॥

मृत्यु: पाणुपं नारित नृत्यच म हात्मतः ।

यावदिति च मंत्रस्य कवचं च होरिति ॥ ५७ ॥

The Devi, then, being very much enraged, became ready to throw Pāśupata Astra, when the Incorporeal Voice was heard from the Heavens, prohibiting Her, and saying “O Devi! The high-souled Dānava would not be killed by the Pāśupata weapon.

यावस्ततीत्यमस्नेव सल्याक्ष नवयोषितः ।

तावदस्य जगमृतुर्नार्मतीति ब्रहणीय चचः ॥ 58 ॥

इत्याकर्ण्यं घरकाली न तिच्छक्षेप शाखकम् ।

शतलक्षं दानवानां जगास लील्या क्षुधा ॥ 59 ॥

For Brahmā granted him this boon that until the Viṣṇu's Kavaca will remain on his neck and until his wife's chastity be violated, old age and death

will not be able to touch him." Hearing this Celestial Voice, the Devi at once desisted. But She out of hunger, devoured hundreds and lakhs of Dānavas.

प्रस्तुं जगाम चेनेन शंखच्छं भयंकी ।

दिव्यासेण सुतीक्षेणेन वारयामास दानवः ॥ 60 ॥

खड्गं चिक्षेप सा देकी प्रीम्यमूयीमां नंथा ।

दिव्यासेण दानदेश: शतखंचे चकार सः ॥ 61 ॥

The terrible Devi Kālī, then, went with great speed to devour Śaṅkhacūḍa but the Dānava resisted Her by his sharp divine weapons. The Devi then threw on him a powerful axe, lustrous like a summer Sun; but the Dānava cut it to pieces by his divine weapon.

पुर्णस्मैतं महाद्वीये बेगेन च जगाम तम् ।

सर्वसिद्धश्र: श्रीमान्ववृधे दानवेश्वः ॥ 62 ॥

वेगेन मुहिना काली कपेयुक्ता भयंकरी ।

बर्भजे च रर्थ तस्य जयान साराखिं सती ॥ 63 ॥

The Devi seeing this, became very angry and proceeded to devour him; but the Dānava King, the Lord of all Siddhis, expanded his body. At this, Kālī became violently angry and assuming a terrific appearance, went quickly and with the blow of one first, broke his chariot and dropped down the charioteer.

सा स शुले च चिश्विप प्रल्यार्पिनिशोयामम् ।

यामहसने जग्राह शुबुचुः: स्वलील्या ॥ 64 ॥

मुखा जयान तं देईी महाकोपेय वेगतः ।

बधाम च तया दैवः क्षणं मृच्छीमवाय च ॥ 65 ॥

Then she hurled on the Asura one Śula weapon, blazing like a Pralaya Fire. Śankhacūḍa easily held that by his left hand. The Devi became angry and struck the Dānava with Her first; the Daitya's head reeled, and, rolling, he fell unconscious for a moment.

क्षणेचे चेतनां प्राय्य मसुन्तस्यी प्रतपायन् ।

न चकार बाहुयुद्धे त्वया सह ननाम तात् ॥ 66 ॥

देव्याश्रासे स चिष्ठेद्व जगह् च स्वतेजसा ।

नासं चिष्ठेतां भानो मातृभकत्या तु वैधणाः ॥ 67 ॥

Next moment regaining his consciousness he got

Book IX Chapter XXIII

up. But he did not fight hand to hand with the Devi. Rather he bowed down to Her. The weapons that the Devi threw afterwards were partly cut down by the Dānava and partly taken up by him and absorbed in him and thus rendered futile.

गृहीता दानवं देवी घामवित्या पुन: पुनः ।

ऊर्ध्यं च प्रायमास महावेनेन कोशिति ॥ 6 8 ॥

ऊर्ध्यविपात वेनेन शुकृषुः प्रतपवान् ।

निपत्य च समुतस्यी प्रणाय भग्रकालिकाम् ॥ 6 9 ॥

Then Bhadrakālī caught hold of the Dānava and whirling him round and round threw him aloft. Then the powerful Śaṅkhacūḍa fell down on the ground from high with great force; he immediately got up and bowed down to Her.

रत्नेस्रारिनिमांण विमानं सुमनोहरम् ।

आरनोह हर्षेयुक्तो न विश्रांतो महारणे ॥ 70 ॥

दानवानां च क्षतजं सा देवी च पपी क्षया ।

पीता भुत्वा भुस्ताली जगाम रंगक्रौतिकम् ॥ 71 ॥

He then ascended on his beautiful chariot, built of excellent jewels. He did not feel any fatigue with the war and went on fighting. Then the Devi Bhadrakālī, feeling hungry began to drink the blood of the Dānavas and ate the fat and flesh,

उवाच रणावृतांत पौर्वार्यं यथाक्रमम् ।

शुत्वा जहास शंभुश दानवानां विनाशनम् ॥ 7 2 ॥

लक्षं च दानवंर्णामवशिषं रणेस्पुना ।

भुज्ञन्या निरितं वक्यात्तव्यं भुक्तमीक्षा ॥ 7 3 ॥

She came before Mahādeva and described to Him the whole history of the warfare from beginning to end. Hearing the killing of the Dānavas, Mahādeva began to laugh. She went on saying “The Dānavas that get out of my mouth while I was chewing then, are the only ones that are living. This number will be about one Iakh.

संग्रामे दानवेईेच च हेतुं पाणुपाने वे ।

अवध्यस्त व जतेत्र वावम्बूवागरीिणी ॥ 74 ॥

राजईश महान्ती महावल्यरात्मभः ।

न च चिक्षेप मध्यस्ते चित्यदेव मम सायकम् ॥ 75 ॥

इति शीमद्वैशीभागवते महापुराणे नवमरकन्चे नारदनारायणसंवेद

ड्राविशोअव्याः ॥ 76 ॥

And when I took up the Pāśupata weapon to kill Dānava, the Incorporeal Celestial Voice spoke: 'He is invulnerable by you.' But the very powerful Dānava did no more fling any weapon on Me. He simply cut to pieces those that I threw on him."

Here ends the Twenty-second Chapter in the Ninth

Book on the fight between the Devas

and Śaṅkhacūda in the Mahāpurāṇam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXIII

