[Ch 27 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! Those Kumāris, who are defective in limbs, who are lepers, who are filled with sores and ulcers over their bodies, whose bodies emit offensive smell or whose bodies are polluted, or those who are of a bad family are never to be accepted for worship in the Navarātra ceremony festival.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! Those Kumārīs, who are defective in limbs, who are lepers, who are filled with sores and ulcers over their bodies, whose bodies emit offensive smell or whose bodies are polluted, or those who are of a bad family are never to be accepted for worship in the Navarātra ceremony festival.

[Ch 27 Verse 2-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who are born blind, who are squint-eyed, who are blind of one eye, of disgraceful appearance, whose bodies are overgrown with hairs, or who are diseased, or who are in their menstruation or in any other signs, indicating thus their passionate youthful tendencies, or those who are very lean and thin, or born of widows, or of women unmarried are always to be avoided in this Pūjā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who are born blind, who are squint-eyed, who are blind of one eye, of disgraceful appearance, whose bodies are overgrown with hairs, or who are diseased or who are in their menstruation or in any other signs, indicating thus their passionate youthful tendencies, or those who are very lean and thin, or born of widows, or of women unmarried are always to be avoided in this Pūjā.

[Ch 27 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! It is only the healthy, graceful, beautiful, without any ulcers, and who are not bastards, those virgins are to be selected for the “Kumārī” Pūjā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! It is only the healthy, graceful, beautiful, without any ulcers, and who are not bastards, those virgins are to be selected for the Kumārī Pūjā.

[Ch 27 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In all the cases, the Kumāris, born of the Brāhmīn families, can be taken; when victory is desired, the “Kumāris” of the Kṣattriya families are preferred; when profit is wanted, the Vaiśya Kumāris and, when general welfare is wanted, the Śūdra Kumāris are to be taken.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In all the cases, the Kumārīs, born of the Brāhmin families, can be taken; when victory is desired, the Kumārīs of the Kṣattriya families are preferred; when profit is wanted, the Vaiśya Kumārīs and, when general welfare is wanted, the Śūdra Kumārīs are to be taken.

[Ch 27 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! In the Navarāti Pūjā, the Brāhmins should select for worship the Brāhmin Kumāris; Kṣattriyas, Brāhmin or Kṣattriya; the Vaiśya worshippers can select for worship Brāhmin, Kṣattriya, or Vaiśya Kumāris. And the Śudra worshippers can select, for worship, any of the four classes. But artists and artisans should select for worship the Kumāris from their own families and tribes respectively.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! In the Navarātri Pūjā, the Brāhmins should select for worship the Brāhmin Kumārīs; Kṣattriyas, Brāhmin or Kṣattriya; the Vaiśya worshippers can select for worship Brāhmin, Kṣattriya, or Vaiśya Kumārīs. And the Śūdra worshippers can select, for worship, any of the four classes. But artists and artisans should select for worship the Kumārīs from their own families and tribes respectively.

[Ch 27 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If persons become unable to worship on all the days, then it is advised that they should perform the special worship on the eighth day (Aṣṭamī tīthī).
NEW CORR ENG ──► If persons become unable to worship on all the days, then it is advised that they should perform the special worship on the eighth day (Astamī tithi).

[Ch 27 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In ancient times, on the eighth day, Bhadra Kali Goddess, the destroyer of the sacrifice, started by Dakṣa, appeared on that day in hideous forms, surrounded by hundreds and lakhs of Yoginis (one of a class of sixty goddesses or female attendants on Kali). Therefore one should worship in particular on the eighth day with scents, garlands, and pastes and various offerings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In ancient times, on the eighth day, Bhadra Kāli Goddess, the destroyer of the sacrifice, started by Dakṣa, appeared on that day in hideous forms, surrounded by hundreds and lakhs of Yoginīs (one of a class of sixty goddesses or female attendants on Kāli). Therefore one should worship in particular on the eighth day with scents, garlands, and pastes and various offerings.

[Ch 27 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On this day, Pāyasa (a food prepared of rice, milk and sugar), and flesh, fish are to be specially offered to the Deity. The Homa ceremonies, feasting of the Brāhmaṇas, and the worship of the Mother Goddess are done with various offerings, the fruits and flowers, and in good quantities. (11)
NEW CORR ENG ──► On this day, Pāyasa (a food prepared of rice, milk and sugar), and fresh fish are to be specially offered to the Deity. The Homa ceremonies, feasting of the Brāhmaṇs, and the worship of the Mother Goddess are done with various offerings, the fruits and flowers, and in good quantities.

[Ch 27 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Those who are unable to observe the fasting in this Navarātra Pūjā, will reap the same fruits, if they observe fasting for the three days only the Saptamī, the Aṣṭamī, and the Navamī tithis.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Those who are unable to observe the fasting in this Navarātra Pūjā, will reap the same fruits, if they observe fasting for the three days only the Saptamī, the Aṣṭamī, and the Navamī tithis.

[Ch 27 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the seventh, eighth, and ninth days, in these three tithis (lunar days) if one worships with devotion, one will acquire all the merits.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the seventh, eighth, and ninth days, in these three tithis (lunar days) if one worships with devotion, one will acquire all the merits.

[Ch 27 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the Devi's worship, Homa, Kumārī worship and the feasting of the Brāhmaṇas, all these are done, know that the Navarātri Pūjā is completed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the Devī’s worship, Homa, Kumārī worship and the feasting of the Brāhmaṇas, all these are done, know that the Navarātri Pūjā is completed.

[Ch 27 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Janamejaya! No worship or vow or charitable gifts extant in this world, can be compared, as regards their meritorious effects, with this Navarātra Pūjā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Janamejaya! No worship or vow or charitable gifts extant in this world, can be compared, as regards their meritorious effects, with this Navarātra Pūjā.

[Ch 27 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On observing this Navarātram Vrata, one gets riches, crops, sons and grandsons, prosperity and happiness, longevity, health and heaven and even the final beatitude.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On observing this Navarātram Vrata, one gets riches, crops, sons and grandsons, prosperity and happiness, longevity, health and heaven and even the final beatitude.

[Ch 27 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who are desirous of learning, riches, or sons will get them all, if they perform this most auspicious Navarātra ceremony, able to confer fortunes on the devotees.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who are desirous of learning, riches, or sons will get them all if they perform this most auspicious Navarātra ceremony, able to confer fortunes on the devotees.

[Ch 27 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the performance of this sacrifice, those who want learning get all the learning; and he, who is deprived of his kingdom will get back all his kingdom.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the performance of this sacrifice, those who want learning get all the learning; and he, who is deprived of his kingdom will get back all his kingdoms.

[Ch 27 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who did not, in their previous births, perform this meritorious vow, they become diseased, poor and devoid of sons in their present births.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who did not, in their previous births, perform this meritorious vow, they become diseased, poor and devoid of sons in their present births.

[Ch 27 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those women that are barren, or widows or devoid of sons, infer that they never, in their previous births, performed this sacrifice.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those women that are barren, or widows or devoid of sons, infer that they never, in their previous births, performed this sacrifice.

[Ch 27 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śrimaddevībhāgavatam Those who have not performed the Navarātra ceremony, how can they acquire riches in this world and acquire happiness and peace in the next?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who have not performed the Navarātra ceremony, how can they acquire riches in this world and acquire happiness and peace in the next?

[Ch 27 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He who has worshipped the Goddess Bhagavati Bhavānī Devi with young leaves of the Bel tree, besmeared with red sandal paste, it is he that will undoubtedly become the king in this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He who has worshipped the Goddess Bhagavatī Bhavānī Devī with young leaves of the Bel tree, besmeared with red sandal paste, it is he that will undoubtedly become the king in this world.

[Ch 27 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That man who has failed to worship the Goddess of the whole universe, Who fructifies all the pursuit of human life, Who destroys all the troubles, pains and miseries, Who is all auspicious Bhagavati Bhavāni, that fellow is sure to pass his days in this world, wretched, impoverished, and surrounded by his enemies on all sides.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That man who has failed to worship the Goddess of the whole universe, Who fructifies all the pursuits of human life, Who destroys all the troubles, pains and miseries, Who is all suspicious Bhagavatī Bhavānī, that fellow is sure to pass his days in this world, wretched, impoverished, and surrounded by his enemies on all sides.

[Ch 27 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Hari, Hara, Brahmā, Indra, Fire, Varuṇa, Kubera, and the Sun when all these possessing all the wealth and powers and filled with the highest felicities, when they meditate constantly the Goddess of this universe, Who is All Existence Intelligence, and Bliss, then what to speak of the human beings! How is it that persons do not worship that Cangīdā Devi, the One that leads all human pursuits to success!
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Hari, Hara, Brahmā, Indra, Fire, Varuṇa, Kuvera, and the Sun when all these possessing all the wealth and powers and filled with the highest felicities, when they meditate constantly the Goddess of the universe, Who is All Existence Intelligence, and Bliss, then what to speak of the human beings! How is it that persons do not worship that Candikā Devī, the One that leads all human pursuits to success!

[Ch 27 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Why should not the people worship the Goddess Bhavānī, the bestower of all happiness, whose other names are Svāhā and Svadhā, the mantrams under whose intrinsic energies the Devas and the Piṭs always get satisfied, and which are recited by all the Munis when they chant in every sacrifice the Vedic mantrams? Under Whose Will power, Brahmā the Creator, creates all this Universe? Under Whose energy, the Viṣṇu Janāradana, the Devas, incarnates in this earth in various forms and preserves this world, and under Whose power, Śaṅkara destroys this whole Universe?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Why should not the people worship the Goddess Bhavānī, the bestower of all happiness, whose other names are Svahā and Svadhā, the mantrams under whose intrinsic energies the Devas and the Pitris always get satisfied, and which are recited by all the Munis when they chant in every sacrifice the Vedic mantrams? Under Whose Will power Brahmā the Creator, creates all this Universe? Under Whose energy, the Viṣṇu Janāradan, the Deva of the Devas, incarnates in this earth in various forms and preserves this world, and under Whose power, Śaṅkara destroys this whole Universe?

[Ch 27 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No body, in this whole universe, can have his existence without having recourse to that Prakrit Devi, the Śakti incarnate; he be a Devā, a human being or a bird, or a serpent, Gandharva, Rāksasa, without the help of this Force.
NEW CORR ENG ──► No body, in this whole universe, can have his existence without having recourse to that Prakriti Devī, the Śakti incarnate; be he a Devī, a human being or a bird, or a serpent, Gandharva,

[Ch 27 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, why should not any body worship that Caṇḍikā Devī, the Award of all desires and wealth? And how is it, that a man desiring one of the 4 objects of human pursuits, Dharma, wealth, desires, and the final beatitude, observes not the vow regarding that Deity.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, why should not anybody worship that Candikā Devī, the Awarder of all desires and wealth? And how is it, that a man desiring one of the 4 objects of human pursuits, Dharma, wealth, desires, and the final beatitude, observes not the vow regarding that Deity.

[Ch 27 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So much so, that even a man who has committed a heinous offence (five such are enumerated viz. (1) killing a Brāhmaṇa, (2) drinking liquor, (3) stealing gold, (4) adultery with the wife of a spiritual guide (5) associating with any such person), if he performs the Navarātī vow, he will be absolved entirely from all such sins; there is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So much so, that even a man who has committed a heinous offence, five such are enumerated, viz. (1) killing a Brāhmaṇ, (2) drinking liquor, (3) stealing gold, (4) adultery with the wife of a spiritual guide (5) associating with any such person, if he performs the Navarātra vow, he will be absolved entirely from all such sins; there is no doubt in this.

[Ch 27 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Once upon a time there lived in the country of Kosala, a trader, poor and miserable, having under him many relations and dependants in his family, whose provisions he had to provide.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Once on a time there lived in the country of Kosala, a trader, poor and miserable, having under him many relations and dependants in his family, whose provisions he had to provide.

[Ch 27 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He had many sons and daughters; when they were very hungry and distressed, then they used to get a little food and that in the evening, only once in twenty-four hours.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He had many sons and daughters; when they were very hungry and distressed, then they used to get a little food and that in the evening, only once in twenty-four hours.

[Ch 27 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That trader, too, worked under another, the whole day; and when it was evening, he used also to take his meals. Thus, being very much anxious and distressed, he maintained some how or other his family members (that are to be maintained).
NEW CORR ENG ──► That trader, too, worked under another, the whole day; and when it was evening, he used also to take his meals. Thus, being very much anxious and distressed, he maintained somehow or other his family members (that are to be maintained).

[Ch 27 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The trader was of a quiet temper, of a good conduct, truthful, always ready to act religiously, devoid of anger, steady and contented, void of vanity and jealousy; daily he used to worship the Devas, Pitrs, and the guests and used to take his meals after all his family members had taken their meals.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This trader was of a quiet temper, of a good conduct, truthful, always ready to act religiously, devoid of anger, steady and contented, void of vanity and jealousy; daily he used to worship the Devas, Pitris, and the guests and used to take his meals after all his family members had taken their meals.

[Ch 27 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus many days passed away when that good trader, named Suśila, being very much perplexed with poverty and hunger, asked a quiet tempered Brāhmin “O Bhūdeva! (deva incarnate on the earth)! kindly tell me positively how this state of poverty can be got rid off!”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus many days passed away when that good trader, named Suśīla, being very much perplexed with poverty and hunger, asked a quiet tempered Brāhmin “O Bhūdeva! (deva incarnate on the earth) kindly tell me positively how this state of poverty can be got rid off!

[Ch 27 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O noble minded! Kindly advise me such as preserves my honour; I do not want wealth, nor do I like to be a rich man; O Brāhmīn! I want just enough to meet with the expenses incurred in maintaining my family; please advise so that I may be able to earn this much only.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O holy minded! Kindly advise me such as preserves my honour; I do not want wealth, nor do I like to be a rich man; O Brāhmin! I want just enough to meet with the expenses, iñcurred in maintaining my family; please advise so that I may be able to earn this much only.

[Ch 27 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I have many sons; I have not got any food, sufficient enough to give them even a handful of rice.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I have many sons; I have not got any food, sufficient enough to give them even a handful of rice.

[Ch 27 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Alas! My youngest son was crying today for food; I have driven him out of the house by chastising him. O Brāhmī! What am I do? I have got no wealth; my heart is burning with grief and sorrow; my baby has gone out of the house, weeping and hungry.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Alas! My youngest son was crying today for food; I have driven him out of the house by chastising him. O Brāhmin! What am I do? I have got no wealth; my heart is burning with grief and sorrow; my baby has gone out of the house, weeping and hungry.

[Ch 27 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My daughter has come to a marriageable age; I have no money. Her age has exceeded ten years; the marriageable age limit has been exceeded. Alas! What am I to do?
NEW CORR ENG ──► My daughter has come to a marriageable age; I have no money. Her age has exceeded ten years; the marriageable age limit has been exceeded. Alas! What am I to do?

[Ch 27 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brāhmīn! I am expressing my sorrow for all that. You are merciful, and all knowing; tell me any means, be it asceticism, gifts, vow, or the reciting of any mantrams by which I can maintain my family; I want wealth just sufficient for that purpose and nothing more.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brāhmin! I am expressing my sorrow for all that. You are merciful, and all-knowing; tell me any means, be it asceticism, gifts, vow, or the reciting of any mantrams by which I can maintain my family; I want wealth just sufficient for that purpose and nothing more.

[Ch 27 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O high minded one! Kindly devise and tell me Śrimaddevībhāgavatam some means by which my family members become happy in this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O high minded one! Kindly devise and tell me some means by which my family members become happy in this world.”

[Ch 27 Verse 44-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: The Brāhmin that used to practice vows when thus asked by the trader told him gladly: "O trader! Do now the Navarātri vow, the most auspicious, and worship the Bhagavati, perform Homa, and feast the Brāhmins. Have the Vedas and Purāṇas recited and recite then slowly the Śakti mantram and try, as much as you can, to do other concomitant ceremonies; and your desires will thus be undoubtedly fulfilled.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- The Brāhmin that used to practice vows when thus asked by the trader told him gladly “O trader! Do now the Navarātri vow, the most auspicious, and worship the Bhagavatī, perform Homa, and feast the Brāhmins. Have the Vedas and Purāṇas recited and recite then slowly the Śakti mantram and try, as much as you can, to do other concomitant ceremonies; and your desires will thus be undoubtedly fulfilled.

[Ch 27 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There is no other vow superior to this in this world; this vow is very holy and will bring unto you happiness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There is no other vow superior to this in this world; this vow is very holy and will bring unto you happiness.

[Ch 27 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This vow leads to wisdom and liberation; destroys enemies and increases posterity and prosperity.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This vow leads to wisdom and liberation; destroys enemies and increases posterity and prosperity.

[Ch 27 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In former days, Śrī Rāma Candra suffered very much owing to his being deprived of his kingdom; and, then, on account of his wife being stolen away. Subsequently he performed this Navarātra vow in Kiskindhā, his heart being heavily laden with grief."
NEW CORR ENG ──► In former days, Śrī Rāma Candra suffered very much owing to his being deprived of his kingdom; and, then on account of his wife being stolen away. Subsequently he performed this Navarātra vow in Kiskindhyā, his heart being heavily laden with grief.

[Ch 27 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Though troubled very much, on account of the bereavement of Sītā, still Rāma Candra observed this Vow of Navarātra and worshipped the Goddess according to the prescribed rules and rites.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Though troubled very much, on account of the bereavement of Sītā, still Rāma Candra observed the Vow of Navarātra and worshipped the Goddess according to the prescribed rules and rites.

[Ch 27 Verse 51-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As a fruit of this worship he was able to bridge the great ocean and kill the giant Kumbha Karna, Meghanāda, the Rāvaṇa's son, and Rāvaṇa, the king of Laṅkā; and subsequently he was able to recover his Sītā. He installed Vibhiṣaṇa on the throne of Laṅkā (Śri Laṅkā) and at last returned to Ayodhyā and reigned there without any enemies.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As a fruit of this worship he was able to bridge the great ocean and kill the giant Kumbha Karṇa, Meghanāda, the Rāvaṇa’s son, and Rāvaṇa, the king of Lanka; and subsequently he was able to recover his Sītā. He installed Vibhīṣaṇa on the throne of Lanka (Ceylon) and at last returned to Ayodhyā and reigned there without any enemies.

[Ch 27 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O best of the Vaiśyas! Rāma Candra, of incomparable prowess, was able to obtain happiness in this world on account of the influence of this Navarātra ceremony.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O best of the Vaiśyas! Rāma Candra, of incomparable prowess, was able to obtain happiness in this world on account of the influence of this Navarātra ceremony.

[Ch 27 Verse 54-58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O king! That Vaiśya, hearing thus the Brāhmīn’s words, made him his Guru, was initiated by him in the seed mantra of Māyā and ceaselessly, without any laziness, recited slowly the mantram for nine nights and worshipped the Devi, with great caution and with various offerings. Thus for nine consecutive years he devoted himself to the Japam (reciting slowly) of the seed mantra of Māyā till, at last, when the ninth year was completed, the Great Goddess appeared distinctly before his eyes on the night of the great Aṣṭamī tithi (the eighth day of the bright half) and gave him various boons and delivered the Vaiśya from poverty and bestowed on him wealth and his other desired things. Here ends the Twenty seventh Chapter on the virgins fit to be worshipped and the Glory of the Devi in the Mahā Puranām Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa in the Third Book.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! That Vaiśya, hearing thus the Brāhmin’s words, made him his Guru, was initiated by him in the seed mantra of Māyā and ceaselessly, without any laziness, recited slowly the mantram for nine nights and worshipped the Devī, with great caution and with various offerings. Thus for nine consecutive years he devoted himself to the Japam (reciting slowly) of the seed mantra of Māyā till, at last, when the ninth year was completed, the Great Goddess appeared distinctly before his eyes on the night of the great Astamī tithi (the eighth day of the bright half) and gave him various boons and delivered the Vaiśya from poverty and bestowed on him wealth and his other desired things. Here ends the 27th Chapter on the virgins fit to be worshipped and the Glory of the Devī in the Mahā Purāṇam Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa in the Third
