CHAPTER XXVII

On Worshipping the Virgins

व्यास उवाच

द्वीनारी वर्जेल्कन्यां कुश्युक्ता प्राणिकताम् ।

गत्यमूर्तितौनारी विशालकुलसभ्यवान् ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Those Kumāris, who are defective in limbs, who are lepers, who are filled with sores and ulcers over their bodies, whose bodies emit offensive smell or whose bodies are polluted, or those who are of a bad family are never to be accepted for worship in the Navarātra ceremony festival.

जात्यंधी केकारी काणां कुरूपां बहुगेभगाम् ।

संस्पर्नेगीर्णी कर्मां रत्नपुथादितांकिताम् ॥ 2 ॥

शामां गर्भस्युद्धृतां गोलकां कन्यको.द्ववाम् ।

वर्जनीयाः सदा चैताः सर्वेपुजादिकमपु ॥ 3 ॥

Those who are born blind, who are squint-eyed, who are blind of one eye, of disgraceful appearance, whose bodies are overgrown with hairs, or who are diseased, or who are in their menstruation or in any other signs, indicating thus their passionate youthful tendencies, or those who are very lean and thin, or born of widows, or of women unmarried are always to be avoided in this Pūjā.

अरोशिणी सुरूपार्णी सुन्दरी जपावर्जिताम् ।

एकवंशसमुद्धातं कन्यां सम्यक्पूजतेन् ॥ 4 ॥

O king! It is only the healthy, graceful, beautiful, without any ulcers, and who are not bastards, those virgins are to be selected for the “Kumārī” Pūjā.

ब्राह्मणी सर्वकायैषु जायधें नुपर्यशगत ।

लाभार्थे वैश्यवंशोराया मता वा शूर्यक्रगान ।। 5 ॥

In all the cases, the Kumāris, born of the Brāhmīn families, can be taken; when victory is desired, the “Kumāris” of the Kṣattriya families are preferred; when profit is wanted, the Vaiśya Kumāris and, when general welfare is wanted, the Śūdra Kumāris are to be taken.

बाहायीर्द्धाताः पुरा राज-वैक्षहायशाः।

वैश्यतिबर्जाना: पूर्ण्याशतस: पादसभ्बेः ॥ 6 ॥

कासभिश्र वंशोत्या यथायोग्यं प्रपुजयेत् ।

नवराविधायने भक्तपूर्व सदैव हि ॥ ७ ॥

O king! In the Navarāti Pūjā, the Brāhmins should select for worship the Brāhmin Kumāris; Kṣattriyas, Brāhmin or Kṣattriya; the Vaiśya worshippers can select for worship Brāhmin, Kṣattriya, or Vaiśya Kumāris. And the Śudra worshippers can select, for worship, any of the four classes. But artists and artisans should select for worship the Kumāris from their own families and tribes respectively.

Book III Chapter XXVII

अशक्तो निवतं पूजां कर्तुं चेत्रवराजके ।

अध्यायं च विशोधेण कत्वं पूजनं सदा ॥ 8 ॥

If persons become unable to worship on all the days, then it is advised that they should perform the special worship on the eighth day (Aṣṭamī tīthī).

पुरासुध्यं भघ्रकाली दक्षयज्ञविनाशिनी ।

प्रापुर्भूता महापोरा योगिनी कोर्टिधि: सह ॥ 9 ॥

अतो3ध्यां विगोषण केतंव्य पूजनं सहा ।

नानाविधोपहरैंष नस्यमाल्यानुतेपर्ने: ॥ 10 ॥

In ancient times, on the eighth day, Bhadra Kali Goddess, the destroyer of the sacrifice, started by Dakṣa, appeared on that day in hideous forms, surrounded by hundreds and lakhs of Yoginis (one of a class of sixty goddesses or female attendants on Kali). Therefore one should worship in particular on the eighth day with scents, garlands, and pastes and various offerings.

पार्वसरीविर्थेर्हिंबाहुणानां च भोजनैः ।

फलपुष्योपहर्ते तोपयेज्ञगद्विकवमा ॥ 1 1 ॥

On this day, Pāyasa (a food prepared of rice, milk and sugar), and flesh, fish are to be specially offered to the Deity. The Homa ceremonies, feasting of the Brāhmaṇas, and the worship of the Mother Goddess are done with various offerings, the fruits and flowers, and in good quantities. (11)

उपवासे ह्रणतानां नवराजते पुनः ।

उपोषणयंत्र प्रोक्ते यथोक्तफलदं पुनः ॥ 12 ॥

O king! Those who are unable to observe the fasting in this Navarātra Pūjā, will reap the same fruits, if they observe fasting for the three days only the Saptamī, the Aṣṭamī, and the Navamī tithis.

सत्यायं च तवासुस्यां नव्ययं भक्तिभावतः ।

त्रिचारकरणात्सर्व फलं भवति पुजानत् ॥ 13 ॥

On the seventh, eighth, and ninth days, in these three tithis (lunar days) if one worships with devotion, one will acquire all the merits.

पूजाधिश्रयो होमैष्छ कुमारीपुजन्सेनथा ।

स्मपूर्ण तद्वतं प्रोक्त विज्ञाणों चैव भोजनैः ॥ 14 ॥

When the Devi's worship, Homa, Kumārī

worship and the feasting of the Brāhmaṇas, all these are done, know that the Navarātri Pūjā is completed.

त्रतिनि याति चान्याति दानानि विधधानि च ।

नवरात्रवत्थास्य नैव तुल्यानि भृतले ॥ 15 ॥

O Janamejaya! No worship or vow or charitable gifts extant in this world, can be compared, as regards their meritorious effects, with this Navarātra Pūjā.

धन्यात्याद्रं नित्यं सुखसंतानवृष्टिद् ।

आयुरातेयदं चैव स्वर्गदं मोक्षदं तथा ॥ 16 ॥

On observing this Navarātram Vrata, one gets riches, crops, sons and grandsons, prosperity and happiness, longevity, health and heaven and even the final beatitude.

विद्यार्थी व धार्थार्थी वा युजार्थी वा यवेत्रः ।

तदैनं विधिवकायं हतं सीभाग्यदं शिजम् ॥ 17 ॥

Those who are desirous of learning, riches, or sons will get them all, if they perform this most auspicious Navarātra ceremony, able to confer fortunes on the devotees.

विद्यार्थी सर्वेश्वां वै प्राप्नोति हतसाधान् ।

राजश्रधो नृपो राज्यं समवाप्नोति सर्वदा ॥ 18 ॥

On the performance of this sacrifice, those who want learning get all the learning; and he, who is deprived of his kingdom will get back all his kingdom.

पूर्वेजन्यिने वैनुर्ने न कृतं ब्रतमुत्तमम् ।

ते व्याधियो दरिष्रध भवन्ति पुरवर्जिताः ॥ 19 ॥

Those who did not, in their previous births, perform this meritorious vow, they become diseased, poor and devoid of sons in their present births.

वंधा च या भवेत्राती विध्धा धनवर्जिता ।

अनुभा तर कतंत्या नेयं कृतवर्ती जनम् ॥ 20 ॥

Those women that are barren, or widows or devoid of sons, infer that they never, in their previous births, performed this sacrifice.

नवरावत्रत प्रोक्त न कृतं वेय भृतले ।

स कथं विभयं प्राप्य मोदते च तथा विद्धि ॥ 21 ॥

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

Those who have not performed the Navarātra ceremony, how can they acquire riches in this world and acquire happiness and peace in the next?

तच्चदानसामिश्र: कोमलैर्विल्वपत्रकः ।

भवानी पुजिता येन स भवेकुपति: क्षिति ॥ 22 ॥

He who has worshipped the Goddess Bhagavati Bhavānī Devi with young leaves of the Bel tree, besmeared with red sandal paste, it is he that will undoubtedly become the king in this world.

नारात्रिता येन शिजा सनातनी

दुःखातिंहा सिद्धिकृति जगद्वा ।

दुःखावृत: शत्रुघुगक्ष भृपते

नूनं दरिडो भवतीही मानवः ॥ 23 ॥

That man who has failed to worship the Goddess of the whole universe, Who fructifies all the pursuit of human life, Who destroys all the troubles, pains and miseries, Who is all auspicious Bhagavati Bhavāni, that fellow is sure to pass his days in this world, wretched, impoverished, and surrounded by his enemies on all sides.

वां विद्यूरिडी हरपदार्जी तथा

वाईः कुबेरो वक्षणो दिवाकरः ।

ध्यार्यिति सर्वार्थसामितनंदितास्तां

कि मनुच्या न भजिते चण्डिकाम् ॥ 24 ॥

When Hari, Hara, Brahmā, Indra, Fire, Varuṇa, Kubera, and the Sun when all these possessing all the wealth and powers and filled with the highest felicities, when they meditate constantly the Goddess of this universe, Who is All Existence Intelligence, and Bliss, then what to speak of the human beings! How is it that persons do not worship that Cangīdā Devi, the One that leads all human pursuits to success!

स्वाहा स्वधा नाम मनुप्रभावै-

स्वयन्ति देवा: पितरस्तर्वेल ।

यजेषु सर्वेषु मुवा हरित

यवाम युगम्बुतिपिभूर्गित्रा: ॥ 25 ॥

यस्येच्छया सुवाति विश्वामिदं प्रजेशो

नानावतारकलंन कुक्ते हरिश ।

नूनं क्रोतिं जगतः किल भस्म

गम्भूतां गर्दिं न भजते नु कर्थ मनुष्य: ॥ 26 ॥

Why should not the people worship the Goddess Bhavānī, the bestower of all happiness, whose other names are Svāhā and Svadhā, the mantrams under whose intrinsic energies the Devas and the Piṭs always get satisfied, and which are recited by all the Munis when they chant in every sacrifice the Vedic mantrams? Under Whose Will power, Brahmā the Creator, creates all this Universe? Under Whose energy, the Viṣṇu Janāradana, the Devas, incarnates in this earth in various forms and preserves this world, and under Whose power, Śaṅkara destroys this whole Universe?

नैकोंस्ति सर्वभुवनेयु तया विहितो

देवो नरोध विहारा: किलपत्रजी वा ।

गन्धर्वोक्षसपिणाङ्गनगेय नृतं

यः स्पवितुं भवति शक्तिपुतो यवेध्छम् ॥ 27 ॥

No body, in this whole universe, can have his existence without having recourse to that Prakrit Devi, the Śakti incarnate; he be a Devā, a human being or a bird, or a serpent, Gandharva, Rāksasa, without the help of this Force.

तां न सेवेत क्रधर्तीं सर्वकामार्थं तिवाम् ।

त्रतं तस्या न कः कुयांढ्राक्षधरतुष्यम् ॥ 28 ॥

Therefore, why should not any body worship that Caṇḍikā Devī, the Award of all desires and wealth? And how is it, that a man desiring one of the 4 objects of human pursuits, Dharma, wealth, desires, and the final beatitude, observes not the vow regarding that Deity.

महापातकसंयुक्तो नवराजतं चोरेत् ।

मुच्यते सर्वोपायेचो नात्र कार्यां विचाराणा ॥ 29 ॥

So much so, that even a man who has committed a heinous offence (five such are enumerated viz. (1) killing a Brāhmaṇa, (2) drinking liquor, (3) stealing gold, (4) adultery with the wife of a spiritual guide (5) associating with any such person), if he performs the Navarātī vow, he will be absolved entirely from all such sins; there is no doubt in this.

Book III Chapter XXVII

पुरा कक्षिड़ापिर्यानो धनहीनः सुचु:खितः ।

कुर्वी चापवलकशिकासोल से नुपसत्ता ॥ 30 ॥

O king! Once upon a time there lived in the country of Kosala, a trader, poor and miserable, having under him many relations and dependants in his family, whose provisions he had to provide.

अपत्यानि बहू-त्यस्याघवल्बुर्णीक्षितानि च ।

भव्यं किंक्षितु सायाहे प्रापुस्तस्य च चालकाः ॥ ३१ ॥

He had many sons and daughters; when they were very hungry and distressed, then they used to get a little food and that in the evening, only once in twenty-four hours.

भुंक्सा कार्यकर्ताओं परस्याश्व बुभूषिताः ।

कुरुंबभरणं तत्र चकारातिनाराकृलः ॥ 32 ॥

That trader, too, worked under another, the whole day; and when it was evening, he used also to take his meals. Thus, being very much anxious and distressed, he maintained some how or other his family members (that are to be maintained).

सदा धर्मतः शान्त सदाचाराश्र सत्यवाक् ।

अक्रोधनश्र धृतिमार्थिन्डास्युरकः ॥ 33 ॥

सम्यूच देवता नित्यं पितुन्यतिशीरला ।

भुंजाने पोच्यर्सेश कृतवान्योजन वधिक् ॥ 34 ॥

The trader was of a quiet temper, of a good conduct, truthful, always ready to act religiously, devoid of anger, steady and contented, void of vanity and jealousy; daily he used to worship the Devas, Pitrs, and the guests and used to take his meals after all his family members had taken their meals.

एवं गच्छित कावे है सुर्गोलो नामतो गृणो:

दारिद्वाताते जिंह जानतं पप्रच्छातिवृषुश्रितः ॥ 35 ॥

सुशील जवाच

भो भूदेव कृपां कृत्वा वदस्यादा महामते ।

कयं दारिद्वानगः स्यादिति मे निश्छेयने वै ॥ 36 ॥

Thus many days passed away when that good trader, named Suśila, being very much perplexed with poverty and hunger, asked a quiet tempered Brāhmin “O Bhūdeva! (deva incarnate on the earth)! kindly tell me positively how this state of poverty can be got rid off!”

धनैषणा मे नैवाति धनी स्यामिति मान्द।

कुरुबेधरणार्थ वै पृष्ठधामि त्वां दिजोत्तम ॥ 37 ॥

O noble minded! Kindly advise me such as preserves my honour; I do not want wealth, nor do I like to be a rich man; O Brāhmīn! I want just enough to meet with the expenses incurred in maintaining my family; please advise so that I may be able to earn this much only.

पुत्री सुत्तनु मे बालो भक्षार्थी रोतेदं भृगम् ।

तावन्मात्र गृहे नात्रं मुह्येकां ददान्यमूम् ॥ 38 ॥

I have many sons; I have not got any food, sufficient enough to give them even a handful of rice.

विसर्कितो यतो गेहात्रतो वालो रुदन्यथा ।

अतो मे दहातेस्वर्थ किं कसौमि धर्म विना ॥ 39 ॥

Alas! My youngest son was crying today for food; I have driven him out of the house by chastising him. O Brāhmī! What am I do? I have got no wealth; my heart is burning with grief and sorrow; my baby has gone out of the house, weeping and hungry.

विद्याड़ीस्त सुताया मे नासिल वित्तं करोपि किम् ।

द्रशवर्धाधिकायासु दानकालोर्धि याचलम् ॥ 40 ॥

My daughter has come to a marriageable age; I have no money. Her age has exceeded ten years; the marriageable age limit has been exceeded. Alas! What am I to do?

तेन शोचापि विघ्रस्वज्ञोस द्वायित्ये ।

तपो दानं हत किंछिद्वृहिं मन्ऋजं तथा ॥ 41 ॥

येनाहं पोथवर्गस्य कारीम द्विज घोपणम् ।

तावये स्याद्नप्राणितनर्धिक प्राध्येय किल ॥ 42 ॥

O Brāhmīn! I am expressing my sorrow for all that. You are merciful, and all knowing; tell me any means, be it asceticism, gifts, vow, or the reciting of any mantrams by which I can maintain my family; I want wealth just sufficient for that purpose and nothing more.

त्वत्प्रसादाकुर्दुबं मे सुरित्वं प्रभवेरित् ।

तत्कृष्ण महाभाग जानेन परिधित्व च ॥ 43 ॥

O high minded one! Kindly devise and tell me

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

some means by which my family members become happy in this world.

व्यास उवाच

इति पृष्टस्वथा तेन ब्राह्मण: संगितगतः ।

उवाच परमप्रीतस्तं वैर्यं नृपसभा ॥44 ॥

पूर्जनं भयावताश्र हवर्ने भोजनं तथा ॥45 ॥

वेदयारायणं शफिकजपहोमादिकं तथा ।

कल्प्याद्य वधागर्फि तत कार्यं भविष्यति ॥ 46 ॥

Vyāsa said: The Brāhmin that used to practice vows when thus asked by the trader told him gladly: "O trader! Do now the Navarātri vow, the most auspicious, and worship the Bhagavati, perform Homa, and feast the Brāhmins. Have the Vedas and Purāṇas recited and recite then slowly the Śakti mantram and try, as much as you can, to do other concomitant ceremonies; and your desires will thus be undoubtedly fulfilled.

तृतसमादरं किंछिद्धृद नतं नारिति धारतले ।

नवराग्राभियं वैश्य पाचनं सुखदं तथा ॥ 47 ॥

There is no other vow superior to this in this world; this vow is very holy and will bring unto you happiness.

ज्ञानं मोक्षंदं चैव सुखसंतानवर्धनम् ।

श्रनुभागकं कामं नवरात्रवतं सदा ॥ 48 ।

This vow leads to wisdom and liberation; destroys enemies and increases posterity and prosperity.

राज्यधाटेन रामेण सीताविरहितेन च ।

किंक्षिप्यांतं वर्ते चेत्कृतुं दुःखातुर्णते चे ॥ 49 ॥

In former days, Śrī Rāma Candra suffered very much owing to his being deprived of his kingdom; and, then, on account of his wife being stolen away. Subsequently he performed this Navarātra vow in Kiskindhā, his heart being heavily laden with grief."

प्रत्पेनापि रामेण सीताविरहाविहिना ।

विधित्वानुक्ति देवी नवरात्रवतेन वै ॥ ५० ॥

Though troubled very much, on account of the bereavement of Sītā, still Rāma Candra observed this Vow of Navarātra and worshipped the Goddess

according to the prescribed rules and rites.

तेन प्राप्ताउथ वैदेही कृत्वा सेतुं महापहिं ।

हत्वा मन्दोदीनाथं कृम्भकर्ण महाबलम् ॥ 51 ॥

मेघनादं सुर्ज हेत्वा कृत्वा घृप्त विश्रीषणम् ।

पशुतादयोघ्यामागत्य प्राप्तं राज्यमकंटकम् ॥ 52 ॥

As a fruit of this worship he was able to bridge the great ocean and kill the giant Kumbha Karna, Meghanāda, the Rāvaṇa's son, and Rāvaṇa, the king of Laṅkā; and subsequently he was able to recover his Sītā. He installed Vibhiṣaṇa on the throne of Laṅkā (Śri Laṅkā) and at last returned to Ayodhyā and reigned there without any enemies.

नवरात्रवत्थाय प्रभावेण विश्रांवर ।

सुखं भूमितते प्राणं प्रोणमिततेजसा ॥ 53 ॥

O best of the Vaiśyas! Rāma Candra, of incomparable prowess, was able to obtain happiness in this world on account of the influence of this Navarātra ceremony.

व्यास उवाच

इति विष्वचः शुत्वा स वैश्यस्तं द्विजं गुभम् ।

कृत्वा जग्राह समन्तं मायाबीजाधिंश पूर् ॥ 54 ॥

जजाप परया भक्ल्या नवरात्मनंत्रिता ।

नानावियोष्टार्थे पुज्यामास सादम् ॥ 55 ॥

नवसंत्सं चैव मायाबीजपरायण ।

नवमे सल्सराते तु महाध्यां महेश्वी ॥ 56 ॥

अधीराते तु सड़ाते पत्थर्वं दर्शनं द्वौ ।

नानावरप्रदानैश्छ कृतकुल्च चक्रात तम् ॥ 57 ॥

इति श्रीदैवीभागगते महापुराणे तृतीयकल्पे

सत्विषोर्शधायः ॥ 58 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O king! That Vaiśya, hearing thus the Brāhmīn’s words, made him his Guru, was initiated by him in the seed mantra of Māyā and ceaselessly, without any laziness, recited slowly the mantram for nine nights and worshipped the Devi, with great caution and with various offerings. Thus for nine consecutive years he devoted himself to the Japam (reciting slowly) of the seed mantra of Māyā till, at last, when the ninth year was completed, the Great Goddess appeared distinctly before his eyes on the night of the great Aṣṭamī

Book III Chapter XXVIII

tithi (the eighth day of the bright half) and gave him various boons and delivered the Vaiśya from poverty and bestowed on him wealth and his other desired things.

Here ends the Twenty seventh Chapter on the virgins fit to be worshipped and the Glory of the Devi in the Mahā Puranām Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa in the Third Book.

Book III Chapter XXVIII

