CHAPTER XIII

On Bhrāmari Devi

श्रीनारायण जवाच

अयता: श्रवता रोषमन्नां चिंचमुद्वामु ।

यस्य स्मरणाग्रियेण देवीभक्ति: प्रजायते ॥ १ ॥

Śrī Nārāyaṇaumbo: O Child Nārada! Hear now the wonderful anecdotes of the births of the remaining other Manus.

आस-वैवर्यस्तमनो: पुत्रा: पत्र् विमलेदाया: ।

कल्पश्र पृथपश्र नाभागो दिष्ट एव च ॥ 2 ॥

ग्रग्रांतिश्र प्रिगंकुश सर्वे एर महावलाः ।

ततः पद्रे वे ताना कार्तिहास्तीमुतमम् ॥ 3 ॥

निराहाग्रात्रिक्षास: पूजां चकुस्ततः स्थिताः ।

देव्या महीमर्षी भूर्ति विव्रिपर्व युव्वयूव्धः ॥ 4 ॥

The mere remembrance of these birth anecdotes causes Bhakti to grow and well up towards the Devi. Vaivasvata Manu had six sons: viz., Karusa, Prṣadhra, Nābhāga, Diṣṭa, Śaryāti, and Triśaniku. All of them were stout and strong. Once they all united went to the excellent banks of the Yamunā and began to practise Prānāyāma without taking any food and became engaged in worshipping the Devi.

विविधीरूपचारितां पूजयामासुरादृता: ।।

ततश्व सर्वे एवैते तप:सारा महावलाः ॥ 5 ॥

जीर्णपर्णोरना वायुभक्षणात्मीयजीयान: ।

धूपपाना रश्मयाना: क्रमगश्व बहुभ्रमा: ॥ 6 ॥

ततत्सेमामादरेणाराधनं कुर्वर्ते सदा ।

विमला मतिरूपया सर्वोमेहाविनाशिनी ॥ ७ ॥ ७ ॥

Each of them built separately an earthen image of the Devi and worshipped Her with devotion and with various offerings. In the beginning they took the dry leaves of the trees that dropped of themselves for their food; then they drank water only, then breathed air only; then the smoke from the fire of the Homa; then they depended on the Solar Rays. Thus they practised tapasyā with great difficulties.

वध्मुपंनुपुत्रासते देवीपादैकविन्तनाः ।

मत्या विमलया तेषामात्म-वेयास्थित जन्ति ॥ ८ ॥

दर्शनं संजगामाशु तद्बुतमिवाघन्त ।

एवं द्वादशवर्षित तपसा जगदीक्षी ॥ ९ ॥

The continual worship of the Devi with the greatest devotion made them conscious of their clear intellect, destructive of all sorts of vanities and delusions, and the Manu's sons thought only of the Hallowed Feet of the Devi; their intellects were purified and they were greatly wondered to see within their Self the whole Universe.

प्रादुषैभूव देवेशी महशाकसमघृति: ।

तां दृष्ट्वा विमलात्मानो राजपुत्रा घडेवे ते ॥ १० ॥

तुखुर्षीक्तिज्ञांत:करणा भावसंयुतः ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Thus they practised their Tapasyā full twelve years when Bhagavati, the Ruling Principle of this Universe resplendent with the brilliance of the thousand Suns, appeared before them. The princes with their intelligence thus purified saw Her, bowed downt and, with their lowly hearts, began to chant hymns to Her with greates devotion.

राजपुरा कयुः

महेश्वी जयेशानि परमे कलापालये ॥ 11 ॥

वाभवाराधनप्रीते वाभवप्रपतिपाते ।

“O Iśānī! O Merciful! Thou art the Devi presiding over all. Thou art the Best. So Victory to Thee! Thou art known by the Vāgbhava Mantra. Thou gettest pleased when the Vāgbhava Mantra is repeated.

क्लौकासीयिछे देवि क्लौकासीपतिविधि ॥ 12 ॥

कामपाजनमोभेदाद्विभीक्ष्रतोक्षिणि ।।

महामाये मोदपे महासापाज्यद्विधि ॥ 13 ॥

विष्यकर्कैरग्रकामादिवस्वणे पोगार्थदिति ।

एवं स्तुना भपावती राजपुत्रैमहातपिधि: ॥ 14 ॥

प्रसादसुपुखी देवी प्रीवाच बचनं शुभम् ।

O Devi! Thou art of the nature of Klim Kāra (of the form of Klim). Thou gettest pleased with the repetition of Klim Mantra. O Thou, that gladdenest the Lord! Thou bestowest joy and pleasure in the heart of the King of Kāma. O Mahā Māyā! When Thou art pleased, Thou givest that Unequalled Kingdom. O Thou that increaset the enjoyments! Thou art Viṣṇu, Sūrya, Hara, Indra and the other Devas. When the high-souled princes praised Her thus, Bhagavati became pleased and spoke to them the following sweet words:

श्रीव्यवाच

राजपुरा महात्मानो भवतत्परमा युतः ॥ 15 ॥

निकल्मया: शूर्याधियो जाता वै मदुपासन्ता ।

वरं मनेगतं सर्वं याचध्यमविलंक्षितम् ॥ 16 ॥

प्रसाउर्ई प्रत्यसानि युभाकं मनसि स्थितम् ।

“O High-souled Princes! You all have worshipped Me and practised, in need, very hard

tapasyās and thus you have become sinless and your intellects and hearts have become thoroughly purged and thus purified. Now ask boons that you desires. I will grant them are long to you.

राजपुत्रा कचुः

देवि निष्कंटक राज्यं संततिश्रजीविनी ॥ 17 ॥

भोगा अव्याहताः कामं यशसतेजो मतिश्र ह ।

अकुणितत्वं संर्वेमावे व वरो हितः ॥ 18 ॥

The Princes said: "O Devi! We want unrivalled Kingdoms, many sons of long longevity, continual enjoyment of pleasures, fame, energy, freedom in all actions, and as well the good and keen intelligence. These will be beneficial to us.

श्रेत्यबुधाच

एवामस्तु च सर्वेषां घबतां यव्मनीगतम् ।

अथान्यदि मे वाकयं श्रतातामादरिद्धम् ॥ 19 ॥

भवन्तः सर्व एतेत मवन्तसपतीश्वाः ।

संतता दीर्घया भोगैनेक्रिंग सभाः ॥ 20 ॥

अखक्ततबत क्षर्यं यशस्तेजीविष्यतः ।

भवितारो मत्सादात्राज्याः क्रमेण तु ॥ 21 ॥

The Devi said: Whatever you have desired, I grant them to you all. Besides I give you another boon. Listen attentively. By My Grace you all will be the Lords of the Manvantaras and acquire strength that will experience no defeat, and you will get prosperity, fame, energy, powers, and a continual line of descent and abundant full enjoyments."

श्रीनारायण उवाच

एवं तेभ्यो वरान्त्वा भागरी जगद्धिका ।

अन्तर्पर्न जगगामाएं भवचा तै: संस्तुता सती ॥ 22 ॥

ते राजपुत्रा: सर्वेक्षि तस्मिज्ञान्यन्तुम् ।

राज्यं महीरात्मभोगान्युभुज्छ महीजसः ॥ 23 ॥

Nārāyana said: After the World Mother Bhramari Devi granted them these boons, the princes chanted hymns to Her and then She instantly vanished. The very energetic princes acquired in that birth excellent kingdoms and abundance of wealth.

Book X Chapter XIII

संतर्टि चाखडितां ते समुवाघ महीत्ते ।

वेश संस्थाय सर्वेशि मनुतां पतयोभवन् ॥ 24 ॥

They all had sons and thus established their families, and became the Lords of Manvantara in their next births.

भवान्तरे क्रमेणैव साविणीयदभागिनः ।

प्रथमो दक्षसाविणीर्वमो मनुरितरः ॥ 25 ॥

अव्यात्तवलो देवोः प्रसादादभविद्धुः ।

द्वितीयो मेकसाविणिंगमो मनुरेव च ॥ 26 ॥

वर्षव मवन्तरपो मतादेवीप्रसादातः ।

तृतीयो मनुराल्यातः सुर्यसाविणामकः ॥ 27 ॥

एकादणो महोत्सहास्तपसा खेन पाबिताः ।

चतुर्धेक्ष्रसाविणीर्दुरोग मनुराङ् विषुः ॥ 28 ॥

देवीसमाराधने न जातो मन्तन्ते ध्वः ।

घंचमो रूसाविणिक्वोग्य मनु: स्मृतः ॥ 29 ॥

महावाले महास्त्वो बधून जगदीधः ।

मष्ठछ विणुसाविणीघुतुरंगमनु: कृति ॥ 30 ॥

बधूव देवीकरणते जगतां प्रथितः प्रधुः ।

चतुर्वैति मनवो महातेजावलैयुक्ता: ॥ 31 ॥

देवायाराधन्तः पूज्य बंदा लोकेकु पिन्हणः ।

महाप्रातपिनः सर्वे भ्राम्यन्त्र प्रसादतः ॥ 32 ॥

By the Grace of the Devi, the first of the princes Karusa became the Ninth Manu, the exceedingly powerful Dakṣa Sāvarpi; the second prince Prṣadhra became the Tenth Manu, named Meru Sāvarni; the third prince, the highly enthusiastic Nābhāga became the Eleventh Manu, named Sūrya Sāvarni; the fourth prince Diṣta became the Twelfth Manu, named Candra Sāvarni; the powerful fifth prince Śaryāti became the Thirteenth Manu named Rudra Sāvarni and the sixth prince Trisanku became the Fourteenth Manu named Viṣṇu Sāvarni and became the celebrated Lord of the world.

नारद खाच

केवं सा धामरी देवी कर्थ जाता किमामिका ।

तदाखानं वद प्रात्र विविधं शोकनाशकम् ॥ 33 ॥

न तुदमधिभान्छामि पिब-देवीकाथातूनम् ।

अमृतं पिचातं ग्रनुलनाय शवणतो यतः ॥ 34 ॥

Nārada questioned: O Wise One! Who is that Bhārami Devi? What is Her Nature? What for She

takes birth? Kindly describe all this beautiful and pain destroying anecdotes to me. I am not satiated with the drinking of the nectar of the Glories of the Devi; my desire to hear further more is as strong as ever. As the drink of the nectar takes away death, so the drink of this anecdote of the Devi takes away the fear of death.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

श्रणु नारद वक्ष्यामि जगन्मातुविंचेधितम् ।

अधिन्यावन्क्तपाया विविचर मोक्ष्यायकम् ॥ 35 ॥

यशच्चरित्र श्रीद्व्यास्तत्सर्व लोकहोतवे ।

निध्यांजया करणाया पुरे मातुर्यंथा तथा ॥ 36 ॥

Nārāyana said: “O, Nārada! I will now narrate the wonderful glories of that unthinkable, unmanifested World-Mother, leading to Mukti. Hear, as a Mother behaves towards Her child kindly and without any hypocrisy, so the World-Mother in all Her lives manifests Her merciful sincere dealings for the welfare of the humanity.

पूर्व दैत्यो महानासीदरणाखो महावलः ।

पतालते दैत्यसंस्थाने देवद्रेणी महाखलः ॥ 37 ॥

स देवावङ्गेतुकामश्च कारकर परमं तपः ।

पदासंभवमुहिक्य स नस्ताना भविष्यति ॥ 38 ॥

In days gone by, in the nether regions, in the city of the Daityas, there lived a powerful Daitya named Aruna. He was a furious Deva Hater and a pākkā hyprocrite.

गत्वा हिमवत पार्थं गड़्गाजलसुगीतले ।

पकवरणाणितो योगी संनिरूप्य मक्रद्वाण ॥ 39 ॥

गायत्रीजपसंसक्तः सकामस्तमसा युतः ।

द्वागवर्मसूद्राणि ततो वारिकाणानः ॥ 40 ॥

With a view to conquer the Devas, he went to the banks fo the Ganges in the Himālayas, practised a very hard Tapasyā, to Brahmā, taking Him to be the Protector of the Daityas. First influenced by Tamo Guṇa, he withheld in his body the five Vāyus and partook only the dry leaves and repeated the Gāyatrī Mantra and practised austerities.

द्वगवर्षसहस्राणि ततः पवनभोजनः ।

द्वगवर्षसहस्राणि निराहारो5पचततः ॥ 41 ॥

Thus he practised for full ten thousand years. Then for another ten thousand years the Daitya lived drinking some drops of water only; then for another ten thousand years he remained by inhaling air only; and then for another ten thousand years he did not take any thing and thus practised he his wornderful Tapasyā.

एवं तप्यतस्तस्य शरीरातुल्यधोउन्तः ।

ददाह जगतीं सर्वां तद्द्वतमिवाभवत् ॥ 4 2 ॥

किमितं किमितं चेति देवाः: सर्वे चकमित्रे ।

संसस्तः सकल लोका बझाणं शरणं वयुः ॥ 4 3 ॥

Thus practising his Tapasyā, a sort of wanderful halo of light emitted from his body and began to burn the whole world. This thing then appeared a great wonder. All the Devas then exclaimed. "Oh! What is this! Oh! What is this! And they trembled. All were very much terrified and took refuge of Brahmā.

विद्यापितं देववरैः शुचला तत्र चतुर्मुंखः ।

गायत्रीसहिते हंससमारूढो ययौ मुदा ॥ 44 ॥

प्राणमाराविरिष्ठं तं धमनीशरसंकुलम् ।

गुणकोदों क्षमगारां ध्यामपीलितलोचनम् ॥ 45 ॥

Hearing all the news from the Devas, the four-faced Bhagavān rode on His vehicle, the Swan, and with the Gāyatrī went very gladly to where the Daityas was practising his austerities and saw that the Daitya was immersed in meditation with his eyes closed; and he looked, as it were, blazing with fire, as if a second Fire himself.

दर्शर्गे तेनसा दीर्णे तिहीयमिव पावकम् ।

वरं वरय भई ने लतय यन्मतिस स्थितम् ॥ 46 ॥

श्रुतमात्रेण सेतोषकारकं वाक्यम्चिवान् ।

श्रुवा ब्रह्मुखात्राणि सूपधात्रात्मिकाण: ॥ 47 ॥

His belly had become dried up, body withered and the nerves of the bodics, too, became almost visible; only the life breath was lingering there. Brahmā then spoke to him: "O Child! Auspices to you! Now ask the boon that you desire." Hearing these gladdening nectar-like words from the mouth of Brahmā, Aruna, the chief of the Daityas opened his eyes and saw Brahmā in his front.

उभीलिभाक्ष: पुत्तो ददर्गं जलजोढ्मवम् ।

गायसीमहितं देवं चतुर्वद्समपित्तम् ॥ 48 ॥

अक्षरवकुर्जिकाहतं जपन्तं बहा शगछतम् ।

द्रष्टीयाय ननामाय स्तुला च विविधे: सर्वे: ॥ 49 ॥

Seeing Brahmā before him with a rosary of beads and Kamandalu in his hand and attended by Gāyatri and the four Vedas, muttering the name of the Eternal Brahma, the Daitya rose up and bowed down to Him and sang to Him various Stotras.

वरं चसे स्वबुद्धस्यो मा भवेन्मनुर्यित्यपि ।

शुत्वा.5रणवचो रड्वा बोधायामास साद्यम् ॥ 50 ॥

बह्राविष्यामूदेशगाघा मृत्युना कवलीकृता: ।

तदास्त्रयेचं तु का वाता मरणे दानवोतम ॥ 51 ॥

Then the intelligent Daitya asked from Brahmā the following boon that “I shall not die. Grants this.” Brahmā then gently explained to him: “O Best of the Dānavas! See that Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara and others are not free from this limitation of death! What to speak then for others! वरं योययं तते बृहि द्रतुं यः शक्यते मया । नाजार्यं प्रकृपिति बुद्धिमन्तो ज्ञानः कवित्ति ॥ 52 ॥

I cannot grant you a boon that is an impossibility. Ask what is possible and just. The intelligent persons never show an eagerness to an impossibility."

इति इहावचः शुत्वा पुनः प्रोवाच सादाम् ।

न युद्दे न च शताक्षात्र पुंच्यो नापि योधितः ॥ 53 ॥

द्विपाद्येय वा चतुणाद्येयो नोभयाकातरतया ।

भवेने मृत्युस्तिव्य देव देहि वरं प्रपो ॥ 54 ॥

बलं च विमुले देहि येन देवजयो भवेत् ।

Hearing the above words of Brahmā, Aruṇa again said with devotion: "O Deva! If Thou art unwilling to grant me the above boon, then, O Lord! Grant me such a boon, as is practicable, that my death shall not be caused by any war, nor by any arms or weapons, nor by any man or any woman, by any biped or quadruped or any combinations of two and grant me such a boon, such a large army as I can conquer the Devas."

इति तस्य वचः शुत्वा तत्थास्विति वचोउदबीत् ॥ 55 ॥

Book X Chapter XIII

दत्त्वा वरं जगामागु घपत्र: स्वं निकेतनम् ।

ततोरकणाण्डो देवसुत पाताललत्यावश्यविलान्ति ५६ ॥

Hearing the words of the Daitya, Brahmā said "Let that be so" and went back instantly to His own abode. Then, Puffed up with that boom, the Daitya Aruṇa called on all the other Daityas that lived in the nether regions.

दैत्यानाकारयामास ब्रहाणो वरदार्थितः ।

आगत्य तेउसुरा: सर्वे दैत्येणं तं प्रचिक्रे ॥ 5 7 ॥

दूर्त च प्रव्यामासुरुद्धार्यमरावतरीम ।

दूतवाययं तदा शुत्वा देवराष्ट्र भयकमित्यः ॥ 5 8 ॥

The Daityas, that were under his shelter, came and saluted him, as their king and, by his command, they sent messengers to the Heavens to fight with the Devas. Hearing from the messenger that the Daityas were willing to fight with the Devas, Indra trembled with fear and went instantly with the Devas to the abode of Brahmā.

देवे: साधं जगामागु इब्रण: सदनं प्रति ।

ब्रहाविष्णु: पुरस्कृत्य जगमुले रॉकारालयम् ॥ 59 ॥

Taking Brahmā, too, along with them from there, they went to the Viṣṇu Loka and took Viṣṇu with them and all went to the Śiva Loka.

विद्वारं चक्रिते तन वधार्थे ते सुरुद्धान् ।

एतस्मिन्त्रमये तन देत्यनेतमापनयुतः ॥ 60 ॥

अरुणाख्यो देत्यताजो जगामागृ त्रिविष्टपम् ।

सूर्येन्दुमयबहीनामधिकारान्यथक, पृथयू. ॥ 6 1 ॥

There they all held a conference how to kill the Daitya, the enemy of the Gods. While, on the other hand, Aruna, the king of the Daityas surrounded by his army, went ere long to the Heavens.

स्वयं चकार तपसा नानारूपघरे मुने ।

स्ववस्थानच्छूता: सर्वे जम्भुः केतमसामूक्तम् ॥ 6 2 ॥

गर्जसु: शंकरं देवा: स्वस्वतुःखं पृथकं पृथकं ।

महान्विचारतत्रासीत्ककतंत्यमतः परम् ॥ 6 3 ॥

O Muni! The Daitya, then, through the power of his Tapas, assumed various forms and seized the rights and possessions of the Moon, the Sun Yama, Agni and all the others.

न युद्धेन च शकास्वैर्न पुंच्यो नायि योषितः ।

द्विपाद्ययो वा चतुषाद्ययो नोषयाकातोप्रये च ॥ 64 ॥

मृत्युभंवैदिति बढ़ा प्रोवाच चचनं यतः ।

इति चिंतातुरः सर्वे कर्ण किंत्रिच च भ्रमः ॥ 6 5 ॥

All the Devas, then, dislodged from their stations went to the region of Kailāśa and represented to Śaṅkara about their own troubles and dangers respectively. Then, what was to be done on this subject, on this, great discussions cropped up. When Brahmā said, that the death of the Daitya would not ensue from any fight, with any arms or weapons, from any man or woman, biped, quadruped or from any combination of the above two.

एतमिन्मयमे तत्र वागभूद्गशीरिणी ।

भजक्षं भुवनेगातीं सा वः कार्य विधायसि ॥ 66 ॥

गायत्रीजपसंसन्तो दैत्याज्ञदि तां लयेत् ।

मृत्युयोग्यस्तदा भृयादित्युचैस्तोषकातिरिणी ॥ 67 ॥

Then the Devas became all anxious and could not find out any solution at that instant, when the Incorporeal Voice was clearly heard in the Heavens: Let you all worship the Queen of the Universe. She will carry out your work to success.

शूला देर्वीं तथा वाणीं मन्ययामासुरपुन्तः ।

ब्रह्म्यति समाहूय वचनं ग्रह देवराट् ॥ 68 ॥

गुगो गच्छ सुराणां तु कावार्वीधमसुरं प्रति ।

यथा भवेच्च गायत्रीयागतस्तय तथा कृते ॥ 69 ॥

If the king of the Daityas, always engaged in muttering the Gāyatrī, forsakes the Gāyatrī any how, then his death will occur. Hearing this gladdening Celestial Voice, the Devas held the council with great caution. When it was settled what ought to be done, Indra asked Brhaşpati and said:

अस्माधिः परपेणानी सेव्येत ध्यानयोगतः ।

प्रसता सा भगवती साहाय्यं ते कौरिधिति ॥ 70 ॥

“O Guru Deva! You would better go to the Daitya for carrying out of the Devas’ ends and do so that he forsakes the Devi Gāyattri Paramesāvri. We will all now go and meditate on Her. When She will be pleased, She will help us.

इत्यादिष्य गुरु सर्वे जगुर्जपूर्वदेश्वरि ।

सामान्दोत्थभयत्रसात्प्राणियन्ति शोभना ॥ 71 ॥

तत्र गत्वा तप्धार्य चक्र: सर्वे सुविधिताः ।

मायावीजजजपास्ता देवीमखपरायण: ॥ ७२ ॥

Thus commanding Bràspati and thinking that the beautiful Protectress of Jambū Nada would protect them the Devas all started to worship Her and, going there, began the Devi Yajñāa and with great devotion muttered the Māyā Bijā and practised asceticism.

ब्रृह्यतितिदा शीर्षं जगामासुरसिद्धी ।

अगातं मुनिवर्षं तं पप्रच्छाय स दैत्याद् ॥ ७३ ॥

मुने कुजागमः कस्मातिमद्यपिति मे वद ।

नाहं युष्मतक्ष्याती प्रत्युतारातितेच च ॥ ७४ ॥

On the other hand, Brhaspati went ere long in the garb of a Muni to the Daitya Aruna. The king of the Daityas then asked him: "O Best of Munis! Whence and why have you come here. Say, O Muni! Where have you come? I am not one of your party. Rather I am your enemy.

इति तस्य वयंः शुचा प्रोवाय मुनिनायकः ।

असमेल्या च या देवी सा तथा पूजतेत्रिण्म।॥ 75 ॥

तस्मादास्त्यक्षपाती न भवेल्वं कंथं वह ।

इति तस्य वचः शुचा मोहितो देयामयाय ॥ 76 ॥

तत्वाज परमं मन्त्रभिमानेन सत्ता ।

गायजीत्यागते दैवो नितनेजको कंपूर्व है ॥ 77 ॥

Hearing the above words, Brhaspati said: When you are worshipping incessantly the Devi whom we too worship, then say how you are not a one on our side! “O Saint! The vicious Daitya, hearing the above words and deluded by the Māyā of the Devas, forsook the Gāyatrī Mantra out of vanity and therefore he became weak, bereft of the Holy Fire.

कृतकायों गुरुस्तमात्स्थानार्थिनतायानृतः ।

ततो वृत्तानियडल कंकयायास वडिज्ञो ॥ 78 ॥

संतुहास्ते सुरा: सर्वे भोजरे परमेश्वीम् ।

Then Brhaspati, having succeeded in his work there, went to the Heavens and saw Indra and told him everything in detail. The Devas became satisfied and worshipped the Highest Deity.

एवं बहुगते काले कॉर्मिश्रासमये मुने ॥ 79 ॥

प्रादुरासीजगन्माता जगन्मंगलकारिणे ।

कोटिसूर्यप्रतीकाणा कोटिकन्दपैसुन्दरा ॥ 80 ॥

चित्रानुलेनया देथी चित्रवासोयुगान्धिता ।

विधित्रमान्याभरणा चित्रभ्रमयुक्ति ॥ 81 ॥

O, Muni! Thus a long interval passed, when one day the World Mother, the Auspicious Devi appeared before them She was resplended with the brilliance of ten million suns and looked beautiful like ten millions of Kandarpas (Gods of love). Her body was anointed with variegated colours, etc.; She wore a pair of clothings; a wonderful garland suspended from Her neck; Her body was decked with various ornaments and in the fists of Her hands there were wonderful rows of hornets (large black bees).

वराभघकारा श्रांता करणामुतसागरा ।

नानाघमतस्वीतृकृष्यमालाविराजिता ॥ 82 ॥

श्रमार्थिधिविधिराभिरसंख्याभिः समातृता ।

घ्रमैरगीयामैनछ हॉंकामनुपनबहम् ॥ 83 ॥

समन्ततः परिवृता कोटिकोटिपरिबिका ।

सर्वेगृगारेवाथवा सर्वेविद्रप्रासिता ॥ 84 ॥

सर्वात्मिका सर्वमीयी सर्वंगलरूषिपी ।

सर्वत्रा सर्वजन्ती सर्वां संखंशी शिका ॥ 85 ॥

Her one hand was ready to grant boons and Her other hand was ready to hold out “no fear.” On the neck of Bhagavatī, the Ocean of Mercy, and peaceful, were seen the variegated garlands with large black bees all round. Those male and female bees singing incessantly all round Her the Hrīnkāra Mantra (the First Vibration of Force), kotis of black bees surrounded Her. The Allauspicious Bhagavatī, praised by all the Vedas, Who is all in all, composed of all, Who is all good, the Mother of all, Omniscient, the Protectress of all, was adorned fully with dress.”

द्वृहा तां ततलात्मने देवा बहुपुगेनामः ।

तुडुबुद्धिमनसे विहरप्रवसं शिवाम् ॥ 86 ॥

Seeing suddenly the Devi, in their front Brahmā and the other Devas became surprised and by and by they got relieved and gladly began to chant hymns of praise to Bhagavati, Whose Glories have been written in the Vedas.

Book X Chapter XIII

देश कबुः

नमो देयि महाविदो सृधिथित्यंतकारिणि ।

नमः कमलपत्रास्थि सर्वाधोगे नोजेस्तु ते ॥ 87 ॥

सविश्वतैसाप्राजसिवरसूत्रप्रात्मिके नमः ।

नमो व्याकृतल्पायौ कृत्यथायै नमोनाः ॥ 88 ॥

The Devas said: “O Devi! Obeisance to Thee! Thou art the Highest Knowledge and the Creatrix, Preservrix and the Destructix of the Universe. O Thou, the Lotus-eyed! Thou art the Refuge of all! So we bow down to Thee. O Devi! Thou art collectively and individually Viśva, Taijasa, Prājña, Virāt and Sūtrātmā. O Bhagavatī. Thou art differentiated and undifferentiated; Thou art the Kūtastha Caitanya (the Unmoveable, Unchangeable Consciousness).

दुर्गं समाधिरहिते दुर्गसंरोधानों ।

निरनीघुमेमापे भर्षे देथि नापोस्तु २ ॥ ८९ ॥

So we bow down to Thee. O Durge! Thou art unconcerned with the creation, preservation and destruction; yet Thou punishest the wicked and art easily available by the sincere devotion of Thy Bhaktas.

नमः श्रीकालिके मातानंगे नीलसरवति ।

उप्रातरे महोघे ते नित्यमेव नगे नमः ॥ ९० ॥

नम: पीतांबरे देख नमलिपुगसुन्दि ।

नमो भैरवि मातिंग धूमावति नमे नमः ॥ ९१ ॥

O Devi! Thou scorchest and destroyest the ignorance and sin of the embodied souls. Hence Thou art named Bhargā. So we bow down to Thee. O Mother! Thou art Kalikā, Nila Sarasvati, Ugra Tārā. Mahoggrā; Thou assumest many other forms. So we always bow down to Thee. O Devi! Thou art Tripura Sundarī, Bhairavi, Mātāngi, Dhūmāvatī, Chinnamastā, Śākambhari and Rakta Dantikā.

छिमसते नमतेउन सु श्रीसागरकम्बे ।

नम: शाकम्परि शिवे नमसे त्क्तदितके ॥ 92 ॥

निरुभ्यमूभमदलन तक्थीजविनाशिनि ।

धूमलोचनिरणाशि चूगसुरपिबर्हिंण ॥ 93 ॥

चगडुपुण्डमाधिन तानवांतक्ने । शिव ।

नमसे विजये गंगे शारदे विकचानने ॥ 94 ॥

Obeisance to Thee! O Bhagavatī! It is Thou that didst appear as Lakṣmī out of the milk ocean (Ksīra Samudra). Thou hadst destroyed Vṛtrāsura, Caṇḍa, Muṇḍa, Dhūmralocana, Rakta Bīja, Śumbha, Niśumbha and the Exterminator of the Dānavas and thus, Thou didst do great favours to the Devas. पृथ्वीकृपे द्वराकृते तैजीकरो नमो नमः ।

प्राणकृले महाकृले भूतकृले नमोउक्ते तै ॥ 95 ॥

विश्यमूर्ते द्वयमूर्ते धर्ममूर्ते नमः नमः ।

देवमूर्ते ज्योतिमूर्ते ज्ञानमूर्ते नमोउक्ते तै ॥ 96 ॥

So, O Gracious Countenced! Thou art Vijayā and Gaṅgā; O, Śārade! We bow down to Thee. O Devi! Thou art the earth, fire, Prāna and other Vāyus and other substances. O Merciful! Thou art of the form of this Universe; the Deva from, and the Moon, Sun and other Luminous forms and of the Knowledge Form.

गायत्रि बरदे दैव सावित्रि च सर्वती।

नमः स्वाहे स्वधे मातदक्षिणे ते नो नमः ॥ 97 ॥

नेति नैतैति वाक्यवीं बोधोये सकलगमे: ।

सर्वे प्रत्यवस्करणां तां भजाम: परदेवताम् ॥ 98 ॥

O Devi! Thou art Sāvitrī; Thou art Gāyatrī; Thou art Sarasvatī; Thou art Svadhā, Svāhā, and Dakṣinā So we bow down to Thee. Thou art, in the Vedas, the Agamas, “Not this” “Not this” Thou art what is left after the negation of all this. This all the Vedas declare of Thy True Nature Thus as the Absolute Consciousness in all. Thus Thou art the Highest Deity So we worship Thee.

धर्मरैंहिता यस्मादुधामी सा ततः स्मृता ।

तस्ये देख्ये नमो नित्यं नित्यमेव नमो नमः ॥ 99 ॥

नमसे पाष्यर्वीः पुछे नमसे पुत्तीबिक्स ।

नम ऊर्ध्ये नमध्यः सर्वैत्र नमो नमः ॥ 100 ॥

As Thou art surrounding by large black bees, Thou art named Brhamari. We always make obeisance to Thee! Obeisance to Thee! Obeisance to Thy sides! Obeisance to Thy front! O Mother! Obeisance to Thy above! Obeisance to Thy below!

कृषं कुरु महादेवीय मिणिप्रधायिकासिन ।

अनन्तकोदिब्राद्धोदनायके जगदायिके ॥ 101 ॥

जय देिय जग्न्मातर्जय देिय परात्यरे ।

जय श्रीभुवेग्रानि जय सर्वोपनामे ति  ॥ 102 ॥

Obeisance to everywhere round of Thee! O Thou, the Dweller in Mani Dvipa! O, Mahā Devi! Thou art the Guide of the innumerable Brahmāṇḍas! O world Mother! Let Thou be merciful to us. O Devi! Thou art higher than the highest. O World Mother! Victory be to Thee! All Hai! O Goddess of the universe!

कल्याणगुणत्नानामाकरे पुवनेश्वरि ।

प्रसीत परेयोगनि प्रसीत जतनोरेण ॥ 103 ॥

Thou art the Best in the whole universe; Victory to Thee! O Lady of the world! Thou art the mine of all the gems of qualities. O Parameśvari! O World Mother! Let Thou be pleased unto us."

नारायण उवाच

इति देवेचचः शुत्वा प्रगल्पं मधुरं वचः ।

उवाच जगद्यवा सा मतकोकिलेकणाधिणी ॥ 104 ॥

Nārāyana said: Hearing those sweet, ready and confident words of the Devas, the World Mother said in the sweet tone of a Mad Cuckoo:

देत्युवाच

प्रसत्राङ़ सदा देवा वरदेशिणखामणि: ।

बुवंतु विद्युधा: सर्वे यदेव स्याचिर्बकीर्णितम् ॥ 105 ॥

देवीवावयं सुरा: शुना प्रोवुढ़ी:ख्यव कारणम् ।

दुर्दैत्यवच सरितं जगद्धाधाकरं परम् ॥ 106 ॥

"O Devas! As far as granting boons to others is concerned, I am ever ready. I am always pleased with you. So, O Devas! Say what you want." Hefearing the words of the Devi, the Devas began to express the cause of their sorrows.

देवबाढापावेदानां हेलनं नागरनं तथा ।

स्थानप्रशंत्री सुराणं च कवयामासुरानुतः ॥ 107 ॥

ब्रहाणो बरदानं च यथावते स्मृत्रि ।

शुत्वा देवमुखात्वाणों महाभगवती तदा ॥ 108 ॥

They informed Her of the wicked nature of the vicious Daitya, the neglect of the Devas, the Brāhmanas and the Vedas and the ruins thereof, and the dispossession of the Devas of their abodes and the receiving by the Daitya of the boon from

Brahmā; in fact, everything what they had to say, duly and vigorously.

प्रेयामास हस्तस्थान्यमरान्यमारी तत ।

पार्थस्थाननभागस्थानानकलधारांस्तदा ॥ 109 ॥

Then the Bhagavati Bhāramī Devi sent out all sorts of black bees, hornets, etc., from Her sides, front and forepart.

जनयामास बहुगो दैथ्यांतं भुवनत्रयम् ।

मटचीयुधतेषां समुदायस्तु निरपत: ॥ 110 ॥

तद्रांतिरिक्षे तैत्यालीपंधाकर: क्षितावभूत ।

तिदि पवतंगरीगु दुगेषु विपिनेचयि ॥ 111 ॥

Innumerable lines of black bees then were generated and they joined themselves with those that got out of the Devi's hands and thus they covered the whole earth. Thus countless bees began to emit from all sides like locusts. The sky was overcast with the bees; and the earth was covered with darkness.

प्रभग त्व संजातातस्तद्धृतमिभावत् ।

ते सर्वे दैत्यवक्षांसि द्वारयामासुकृद्गता: ॥ 112 ॥

नरं मभुहरं यद्वमधिकानः कोयसंपुतः ।

उपयोगे च न रूषत्णां तथाउक्ताणां तद्धपवत् ॥ 113 ॥

The sky, mountain peaks, trees, forests all became filled with bees and the spectacle presented a grant dismal sight. Then the black bees began to tear asunder the breasts of the Daityas as the bees bite those who destroy their beehives.

न युद्धे न च संभाया केकलं मरणं खलु ।

यस्म्यस्मित्यस्थले ये ये स्थित्त दैया यथा यथा ॥ 114 ॥

तत्रैव च तथा सर्वे मरणं प्रापुकल्पया:

परमरं समाचारो न कस्यापयचत्ता ॥ 115 ॥

Thus the Daityas could not use their weapons nor could they fight nor exchange any words. Nothing they could do; they had no help but to die. The Daityas remained in the same state where they were and in that state they wondered and died. No one could talk with another.

क्षणमायोग ते सर्वे विस्हा दैत्यर्भावा: ।

कृत्वेधं घ्रमा: कार्वे दैवीनिकटमाययुः ॥ 1 1 6 ॥

आश्रयमेदातश्रादीमित लोका: सभूचिते ।

कि चित्रं जगद्वबाया यस्या माययमीघुरी ॥ 117 ॥

Book X Chapter XIII

Thus the principal Daityas died within an instant. Thus completing their destruction, the bees came back to the Devi. All the people then spoke to one another “Oh! What a wonder!” “Oh! What a wonder!” Or like this:

तते देवाणा: सर्वे बहावियाणुरोगाना: ।

निमाना हर्षलक्षी पूजयामासुरीविकाम् ।। 118 ॥

नानोचारीरिविधिनीनोपायपणायाः ।

जयग्वर्ध प्रकुर्णणा मुचुचुः सुमानंसि च ॥ 119 ॥

दिवि दुंदुपयो नेतृन्नेतुधास्परोगणाः ।

पेतुर्देवानुभिश्रिक्षा नियंबांहा जगूनस्या ॥ १२० ॥

"Whose Māyā is this! What a wonder that She will do like this!" Thus Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa became merged in the ocean of joy and worshipped the Devi Bhagavatī with various offerings and shoutings of chants "Victory to the Devi" and showered flowers all around. The Munis began to recite the Vedas. The Gandharvas began to sing.

पूर्वमानुस्वाजीणाकक्षकासाम्नि: स्ववे: ।

पंटार्शखनिवादैष व्यावमात्रीज्ञगतत्यम् ॥ 121 ॥

नानास्तोकैस्ता सुत्वा मूर्ण्यधार्यावर्जसिंस्ता ।

जय मातर्जेशगीनीत्येवं सर्वे ममृषिते ॥ 122 ॥

The various musical instruments. Mrdaṅgas, Murajas, the Indian lutes, Dhakkās, Damarus, Śankhas, bells, etc., all sounded and the three worlds were filled with their echoes. All with folded palms chanted various hymns of praise to the Devi and said “O Mother! Isānī! Victory to Thee!”

ततस्तुहा महादेवी वरान्दत्ता पृथक्ययुक्त ।

स्वसिष्ठ विवृलो भक्ति प्राधिता तैद्वैदी च तम् १ 1 2 3 ||

पश्यतामेव देवानामेत्थनं गता ततः ।

इति ते सर्वमाख्यातं घामार्थाशितरं महत् ॥ 1 2 4 ॥

The Mahā Devi became glad and gave to each separate boons and when they asked “for unshakeable devotion to Thy lotus feet,” She granted them that also and disappeared before them. Thus, I have described to you the glorious character of the Bhāramī Devi.

पठतां शृण्वतां चैव सर्वोपपरणाशनम् ।

श्रुतमाश्रयंजकं संसाराण्वताकम् ॥ 125 ॥

एवं मनूनां सर्वैषां चरितं पापनाशनम् ।

देवीमाहात्मवसंयुक्ते पठऊशृषवशुभप्रदम् ॥ 126 ॥

यश्रितवदते निव्यं शपुण्याधोनिरं नः ।

सर्वेपार्थिविन्दिभृतो देवीसायुव्यमाप्नुवत् ॥ 127 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराण्ये उपमलकंधे

श्वोदशोअध्वाः ॥ 128 ॥ 

सार्थस्के: पंचरात (5111) श्लोकैद्यासिकृतेः शुर्षेः ।

देवीभागवतस्य द्वामकन्धः श्रैताः ॥ 129 ॥

सप्तालोर्ध वरामः कन्धः ।

If anybody hears this very wonderful anecdote, he crosses at once this ocean of the world. Along with the glories and greatness of the Devi, if one hears the accounts of Manus, then all auspiciousness comes to him. He who hears or recites daily this Greatness of the Devi, becomes freed from all his sins and he gets himself absorbed in the thoughts of the Devi (Sājaya).

Note: The Mantra is here not merely the Seed, the Spiritual Password, but it connotes, besides the idea of the password, the Adi First vibration and it exhibits the First Spiritual Form, endowed with the highest feelings of Faith, Wisdom, Bliss and Joy, displayed with the grandest colours, startling thrills, rapt enchanting signs, gestures, and postures, the shooting forth of all powers, the sources of Siddhis, that cannot be ordinarily conceived in the worldly concerns. Their faint echoes govern this mighty world. The Mantras are seated in the six cakras or plexuses or the six Laya centres in the spinal cord. Within these cakras, the transformations of the Tattvas take place. Some vanish. Some appear and so on. Remarks: In this chapter we find clearly the mention of the several names of the ten Daśa Mahā Vidyās.

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Tenth Book of the account of Bhramari Devi in the

Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevirbhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa and here ends as well the Tenth Book.

***