CHAPTER II

On the Conversation Between Nārada and the Vindhya Mountain

श्रीवैख्यावच

भूमिपाल महाबाहो सर्वेनेऊद्विष्यति ।

यत्स्वा प्रार्थितं तते द्वादिम मनुजाधित्य ॥ १ ॥

अई प्रसन्ना देलेन्द्रजागताभोपोर्विकमा ।

वारभवस्य जपेनेव तपसा ते सुनिश्रितम् ॥ २ ॥

The Devi said: “O King! O, Mightyarmed One! All these I grant unto you. Whatever you have asked for, I give them to you. I am very much pleased with your hard Tapasyā and with your Japam of the Vāgbhava Mantra. Know Me that My power is infallible in killing the Lords of the Daityas.

राज्यं निष्कटकं तेउस्तु पुत्रा बंशकार आयि ।

मयि चिन्हिद्वा वस्म श्रोजिते मदये घबेत् ॥ 3 ॥

एवं वराम्यादौदी तस्मै दत्ता महात्मने ।

पश्यतस्तु मनोरेव जगाम तिथयपर्वतम् ॥ 4 ॥

O, Child! Let your kingdom be free from enemies and let your prosperity be increased. Let your devotion be fixed on Me and in the end you will verily get Nirvāna Mukti. O Nārada! Thus granting the boon to the highscolded Manu, the Great Devi disappeared before and went to the Vindhya Range.

योस्ती तिथ्याचलो रुद्रः कुभोद्वमहर्भिणा ।

भानुभागविरोधार्थ प्रवृत्तो गगानं स्युशन् ॥ 5 ॥

सा तिथ्यवासिनी तिथ्योत्नुजा वरदेधरी ।

वयूव पूचा लोकानां संर्वेधो भूनिसनम ॥ 6 ॥

O Devarsī! This Vindhya mountain increased in height so much so that it was well nigh on the way to prevent the course of the Sun when it was arrested by Maharṣi Agastya, born of a kumbha (water jar). The younger sister of Viṣṇu, Varadeśvari, is staying here as Vindhyavāsinī. O Best of the Munis! This Devi is an object of worship of all.

ऋषय कनु:

को3सी विध्याचल: सूत किमर्थ गर्न नसूशन् ।

भानुभागविरोधे च किमर्थ कृतावनसी ॥ 7 ॥

कर्थ च मैत्रावक्तिण: पर्वतं तं महोनन्तम् ।

प्रकृतिस्थं चकारीत सर्वे विस्तरतो वर्द ॥ 8 ॥

Śaunaka and the other Rşis said: O Sūta! Who is that Vindhya Mountain? And why did He intend to soar high up to the Heavens to resist the Sun's course? And why was it that Agastya, the son of Mitrāvaruṇa quietened that rising mountain? Kindly describe all these in detail.

न हि तृण्यामहे साधो स्वत्यसगलितामुन्तम् ।

देत्याश्रिस्तपाख्यं पौला तृणा प्रवधौं ॥ 9 ॥

आसीद्धिन्याचलो नाम मान्यः सर्वेधारभुन्तम् ।

महावनस्मुहाबो महापादपसंकृत: ॥ 10 ॥

O Saint! We are not as yet satisfied with hearing the Glories of the Devi, the ambrosial nectar, that have come out of your mouth. Rather our thirst has been increased. Sūta said: "O Rṣis! There was the Vindhya Mountain, highly honoured and reckoned as the chief of the mountains on the earth.

सुपुथित्रनेकैक्षु लतानुक्मैस्तु संवृत: ।

भुगा वराहा महिषा व्यापा: शार्डैनृलका अपि ॥ ११ ॥

वानरा: शगला क्रश्म: शुगलाक्ष समंततः ।

विचरांत सदा ह्हा पुहा एव महोद्याम: ॥ १२ ॥

It was covered with big forests and big trees. Creeping plants and shrubs flowered these and it looked very beautiful. On it were roaming deer, wild boars, buffaloes, monkeys hares, foxes, tigers and bears, stout and cheerful, with full vigour and all very merrily.

नदीन्द्वलाक्षांतते देवानंधर्विकितरै: ।

अयसोपिधः किंपुरुशे: सर्वकामफलकुर्षे: ॥ 13 ॥

एताङुगे किंध्यगे कदाचित्यवर्धटसहीम् ।

देवक्षि: परमप्रीते जगाम सेच्छया पुनिः ॥ 14 ॥

The Devas, Gandharvas, Apsarás, and Kinnaras come here and bathe in its rivers; all sorts of fruit trees can be seen here. On such a beautiful Vindhya Mountain, came there one day the ever joyful Devarsi Nārada on his voluntary tour round the world.

तं दृष्टा स नगो मेक्षु तृर्णमुत्थाय संभ्रमात् ।

पाधामर्थ तथा दत्ता वारासननधारपर्यत् ॥ 15 ॥

सुखोपविष्टे देविष प्रसत्रं नग ऊधिचवान् ।

Seeing the Maharṣi Nārada, the Vindhya Mountain got up and worshipped him with pādya and arghya and gave him a very good Āśana to sit. When the Muni took his seat and found himself happy, the Mountain began to speak.

विश्य उवाच

देवर्ष कव्यातं जात आगमः कुत उतमः ॥ १ ६ ॥

तवागमन्तो जातमन्त्यं मम मंदितम् ।

तव चंक्रमणं देवाभ्याद्धि हि यथा रवेः ॥ १७ ॥

अपूर्वं यवमनोयुक्तं तद्वृहि मम नातर ।

Vindhya said: “O Devarsi! Now be pleased to say whence you are coming; your coming here is so very auspicious! My house is sanctified today by your coming. O Deva! Your wandering is, like the Sun, the cause of inspiring the beings with freedom from fear. So, O Nārada! Kindly give out your intention as to your coming here which seems rather wonderful.

नातर उवाच

ममागामनिमीजर जातं स्वपीनिरस्त्य ॥ 18 ॥

तत्र दृष्टा मया लोकाः शक्तानियमपातिजनम् ।

सर्वेषां लोकपालानां भवनानि समंततः ॥ 19 ॥

मया दृष्टानि विध्याग नानाधोगप्रदानि च ।

Nārada said! “O Vindhya! O Enemy of Indra! (Once the mountain had a very great influence. Indra cut off their wings and so destroyed their influence. Hence the mountains are enemies of and so destroyed their influence. Hence the mountains are enemies of Indra). I am coming from the Sumeru Mountain. There I saw the nice abodes of Indra, Agni, Yama, and Varuna. There I saw the houses of these Dikpālas (the Regents of the several quarters), which abound in objects of all sorts of enjoyments.”

इति चोकत्वा ब्रहयोयिन: पुनरुच्छ्वासमायियन् ॥ 20 ॥

उच्छ्वसर्ते मुनि द्वूषा पुनः: पप्रच्छ शैलाद् ।

उच्छ्वासकारणं कि तद्वृष्टि देवध्ये भम ॥ 21 ॥

Thus saying, Nārada gave out a heavy sigh Vindhya, the king of mountains, seeing the Muni heaving a long sigh, asked him again with great eagerness. "O Devars! Why have you heaved such a long sigh? Kindly say."

इत्थाकरणं नग्यशोक्ते देवर्षिमितबुतिः ।

अद्वीक्ष्युतां वाल सभोच्छ्वासस्य काराणम् ॥ 22 ॥

गौरीगुरुस्तु हिमवाड्छिवस्य श्रुगुरुः किल ।

संबंधित्वालयगुपेतः पूज्य असील्माभुपतान् ॥ 23 ॥

Hearing this, Nārada said: “O, Child! Hear the cause why I sighted. See! The Himālaya Mountain is the father of Gaurī and the father-in-law of Mahādeva; therefore he is the most worshipped of all the mountains.

एवमेव च केलासः शिवय्वायसधः प्रधुः ।

पूज्यः पृथ्वीभुतां जातो लोके पाणीवराणः ॥ 24 ॥

निषधः पर्वतो नीलो शंभामदान एव च ।

पूज्यः स्वस्थानमासाठ सर्व एव क्षमाभूतः ॥ 25 ॥

The Kailāśa Mountain again, is the residence of Mahādeva; hence that is also worshipped and chanted as capable of destroying all the sins. So the Nisadha, Nīla, and Gandhamādana and other mountains are worshipped at their own places.

यं पर्वेति च विधात्या सहचनाकित्का: सद्यात् ।

सप्रहक्षिणोपतेः सोउयं कनकपर्वतः ॥ 26 ॥

आत्मानं मनुते श्रेष्ठ वरिष्ठ च धरापुतान् ।

सर्वेधामहोवारुशो नास्ति लोकेषु मत्समः ॥ 27 ॥

What more than this, that the Sumeru Mountain, round whom the thousandraved Sun, the Soul of the universe, circumambulates along with the planets and stars, thinks himself the supreme and greatest amongst the mountains "I am the supreme; there is none like me in the three worlds."

एवं मानाभिमानं तं सुचोद्ध्वासो मयोडिज्ञतः ।

असनु नैतावता कृत्वं तपोवललतां नग ।

प्रसंगतो मयोक्ते ते गिधियामि निजं गृहम् ॥ 28 ॥

गृति श्रीमहैबीभागवते महापुराणे दशमस्कंधे द्वितीयोउषाय: 12 ।

Remembering this self-conceit of Sumeru, I sighed so heavily. O Vindhya! We are ascetics and though we have no need to discuss these things, yet by way of conversation I have told this to you. Now I go to my own abode."

Here ends the Second Chapter of the Tenth Book on the conversation between Nārada and the Vindhya Mountain in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book X Chapter III

