CHAPTER XXXV

On the Yoga and Mantra Siddhi

हिमालय जवाच

घोंगा वद महेशानि सांग संविज्ञदायकम् ।

कृतेन चैन योग्योई भवेवे तच्चदर्शने ॥ १ ॥

Himālaya said: “O Maheśvari! Now tell me the Yoga with all its Añgas (limbs) giving the knowledge of the Supreme Consciousness so that, I may realise my Self, when I practise according to those instructions.”

श्रीव्यवाच

न योगो नभसः पृष्ठे न भूमौ न रसातले ।

ऐक्यं जीवात्मनोराष्ट्रियां गोयाविशपादः ॥ 2 ॥

तत्प्यूषा: घडाख्याता योगविष्यकरान्य ।

कामक्रोधौ लोभयोही मद्यातस्यर्यंज्ञकौ ॥ 3 ॥

Śrī Deviś said: “The Yoga does not exist in the Heavens; nor does it exist on earth or in the nether regions (Pātāla). Those who are skilled in the Yogas say that the realisation of the identity between the Jīvātmā and the Paramātmā is ‘Yoga.’

योगोंरिव विच्चा तान्योगिनो योगमानुपु: ।

यमं नियममासनप्राणायामी ततः पतम् ॥ 4 ॥

प्रत्याहारं धारणाखं ध्यानं सार्थं समाधिता ।

अर्धांगान्याङ्गेताति योगिनां योगासामधे ॥ 5 ॥

अहिंसा सत्यमतेयं जहाचर्यं द्वा।४जवम् ।

भूमा धृतिमिताहारः शोर्धे चैति यमा द्वा ॥ 6 ॥

तय: संनोष आसितक्यं द्वां देक्य पुजनम् ।

सिद्धांत श्रवणं चैव ह्रौमितिश्र जयो भूतम् ॥ 7 ॥

O Sinless One! The enemies to this Yoga are six; and they are lust, anger, greed ignorance, vanity and jealousy. The Yogis attain the Yoga when they become able to destroy these six enemies by practising the accompaniments to Yoga. Yama, Niyama, Śasana, Prānāyāma, Pratyāhāra, Dhāranā, Dhyāna, and Samādhi, these are the eight limbs of Yoga. Yama includes Ahirīsā (non-injuring; non-killing); truthfulness; Asteyam (non-stealing by

mind or deed); Brahmacarya (continence); Dayā (mercy to all beings); Uprightness; forgiveness, steadiness; eating frugally, restrictedly and cleanliness (external and internal).

दर्शेते निवमा: प्रोक्तां मया पर्वतनायक ।

पदासनं स्वस्तिकं च भई वज्ञासनं तथा ॥ ८ ॥

वीरासमिति प्रोक्ते कमातासनचछकम् ।

क्रवौक्षिति विन्यस्य सम्यम्वातले शुषे ॥ ९ ॥

अंगुही च निवल्योवाद्सतायां खुक्रमाततः ।

पचासनमिति प्रोकर्ते योजिनां हृदयजूम् ॥ १ ० ॥

These are ten in number. Niyama includes also ten qualities: (1) Tapasyā (austerities and penances); (2) Contentment; (3) Āstikya (faith in the God and the Vedas, Devas, Dharma and Adharma); (4) Charity (in good causes); worship of God; hearing the Siddhāntas (established saying) of the Vedas; Hri or modesty (not to do any irreligious or blameable acts); Śraddhā (faith to go do good works that are sanctioned); (9) Japam (uttering silently the mantrams, Gāyatrīs or saying of Purāṇas) and (10) Homam (offering oblations daily to the Sacred Fire. There are five kinds of Āsanas (Postures) that are commendable: Padmāśana, Svastikāśana, Bhadrāsana. Vajrāsana and Virāsana. Padmāśana consists in crossing the legs and placing the feet on the opposite thighs (the right foot on the left thigh and the left foot on the right thigh) and catching by the right hand brought round the back, the toes of the right foot and catching by the left hand brought round the back the toes of the left foot; sitting then straight and with ease. This is recommended by the Yogis (and by this one can raise oneself in the air).

Note: The hands, according to some, need not be carried round the back; both the hands are crossed and placed similarly on the thighs.

Book VII Chapter XXXV

जानुवर्त्नरे सम्वक्कृता पादतले शुभे ।

ऋतुकावो विशेषोभी स्वतिराकं तत्प्रवक्षते ॥ 11 ।।

सीवल्या: पार्थोवोर्य्य गृल्कमुंगं सुनिश्छिनम् ।

दूषणाश: पादपाण्णी पाणिण्यां परिवर्धयेत् ॥ १२ ॥

भूत्रसन्मिति प्रोक्तं योगिभि: परिपूजितम् ।

ऊर्जी: पादी क्रमायस्य जानोः प्रवड्युप्रावुगत् ॥ १ ३ ॥

Place the soles of the feet completely under the thighs, keep the body straight, and sit at ease. This is called the Svastikāsana. Bhadrāsana consists in placing well the two heels on the two sides of the two nerves of the testicles near the anus an catching by the two hands the two heels at her lower part of the testicles then sitting at ease. This is very much liked by the Yogis.

कर्ती विद्याधारखातं वज्ञासनमुत्तमम् ।

एक पादपधः: कृत्वा विद्यस्योक नक्षोत्ते ॥ 14 ॥

ऋजुकायो विशेषोधी वीरासनमितीरितम् ।

Vajrāšana (diamond seat) consists in placing the feet on the two thighs respectively and placing the fingers below the thighs with the hands also there, and then sitting at ease. Virāśana consists in sitting cross on the hams in placing the right foot under the right thigh and the left foot under the left thigh and sitting at ease with body straight.

इडवासं कर्मविद्यां जाह्यो घोजगायाना ॥ १५ ॥

धायवेयुक्ति योगी चतु:पड्या तु मायना ।

सुपुर्णमाध्यंगं सम्यग्रासीशनायाना शनैः ॥ १६ ॥

नाड्गा विहूलया चैव रेचेघोभाविना: ।

Taking in the breath by the Iḍā (the left nostril) so long as we count ‘Om’ sixteen, retaining it in the Susumnā so long as we count ‘Om’ sixty-four times and then exhaling it slowly by the Pinglālā nādī (the right nostril) as long as we count ‘Om’ thirty-two times. (The first process is called Pūraka, the second is called Kumbhaka, and the third is called Reacaka).

प्राणायामिमं प्रार्थगीगाखविगारादः ॥ 17 ॥

भूयो भूयः कमातस्य बाह्याये समावरेत् ।

भाग्वाप्रद्धिकमोषेल सम्यग्रदारा पोडणे ॥ 18 ॥

This is called one Prānāyāma by those versed

in the Yogas. Thus one should go on again with his Prānāyāma. At the very beginning, try with the number twelve, i.e., as we count ‘Om’ twelve times and then increase the number gradually, to sixteen and so on.

जपध्यानादिधि: सार्थ सार्थर्न ते विदुर्वीधा:।

तद्वरेते विगर्भ च प्राणायामं परे तदु: ॥ 19 ॥

Prāṇāyāma is of two kinds: Sagarbha and Vigarbha. It is called Sagarbha when Prāṇāyāma is performed with repeating the Iṣta Mantra and Japam and meditation. It is called Vigarbha Prāṇāyāma when ‘Om’ is simply counted and no other Mantram.

क्रमादध्ययतः पुंगो देहे रेवोदोग्रोपधमः ।

मध्यमः कंपर्युक्तो भूमिव्यागः परे मतः ॥ 20 ॥

उत्तमय युणावातिविच्छीलनमिध्यते ।

When this Prāṇāyāma is practised repeatedly, perspiration comes first when it is called of the lowest order; when the body begins to tremble, it is called middling; and when one rises up in the air, leaving the ground, it is called the best Prāṇāyāma. (Therefore one who practises Prāṇāyāma ought to continue it till he becomes able to rise in the air).

इन्द्रियाणं विचरतां विषयेषु निरालम् ॥ २१ ॥

बलादाहरणं तेषः प्रयाहारोप्रधीयते ।

Now comes Pratyāhāra. The senses travel spontaneously towards their objects, as if they are without anyone to check. To curb them perforce and to make them turn backwards from those objects is called ‘Pratyāhāra.’

अङ्गुर्णुल्कजानुमूलाधार्तिरंगभिष्य 11 22 ||

हदुरीवाकणदडेशेषु लपिक्वायां ततो नस ।

भूमध्ये मस्तके भूर्टिन द्वाद्गाने यथाविधि ॥ 23 ॥

धारणं प्राणमक्तो धरणेति निद्धते ।

To hold the Prāna Vāyu on toes, heels, knees, thighs, scrum, genital organs, navel, heart, neck, throat, the soft palate, nose, between the eyebrows, and on the top of the head, at these twelve places respectively is called the ‘Dhāranā.’

<table><tr><td>समाहितेन</td><td>मनसा</td><td>चैत-यांतरत्वर्दिना</td><td>II 24 II</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">आम-यभीष्टिद्वानां धायां ध्यानिमीछोचते ।</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">समत्थाब्वान नियं जीवात्मयमात्मानो: II 25 II</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">समाधिमामुर्भुनय: प्रोक्तम्यंगलक्षणम् ।</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">इदानीं कवये तेर्भे मज्योपामनुतनम् ॥ 26 ॥</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">विश्रं शरीरियतृर्न फछभूतात्मकं नग ।</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">चन्द्रम्यपीनितेनोपिजीविद्धबीक्यस्पकम् ॥ 27 ॥</td></tr></table>

Concentrate the mind on the consciousness inside and then meditate the Iṣta Devatā within the Jivātmā. This is the Dhyāna. Samādhi is identifying always the Jivātmā and Paramātmā. Thus the sages say. (Samādhi is of two kinds (1) Samprajñāta, or Savikalpak and (2) Nirvikalpak. When the ideas the Knower, Knowledge and the Thing Known, remain separate in the consciousness and yet the mind feels the one Akhañda Saccidāmandā Brahma and his heart remains, there, that is called Samprajñāta Samādhi; and when those three vanish away and the one Brahma remains, it is called Asamprajñāta Samādhi). Thus I have described to you the Yoga with its eight limbs. O, Mountain! This body composed of the five elements, and with Jiva endowed with the essence of the Sun the Moon, and the Fire and Brahma in it as one and the same, is denominated by the term ‘Viśva.’

तिचः कोट्यस्तदर्पन शरीर नाडयो मता: ।

तापु मुखा द्वा प्रोक्तास्पन्सित्वो व्यवस्थिताः ॥ 28 ॥

There are the 350,000 nādis in this body of man; of these, the principal are ten. Out of the ten again, the three are most prominent.

प्रधाना मेकदण्डेउत्र चन्द्रम्यापिनक्षिपि ।

इज्ञा वामे स्थिता नाडी शृधा तु चन्द्रक्षिपि ॥ २ ९ ॥

शफिक्ता तु सा नाडी साश्रादमुतविश्रहा ।

दक्षिणे वा सिंगतालखा पुरूचा सूर्येशिणा ॥ ३० ॥

The foremost and first of these three is Susumnā, of the nature of the Moon, Sun, and Fire, situated in the centre of the spinal cord (it extends from the sacral plexus below to the Brahmarandhra in the head at the top where it looks like a blown Dhustūra

flower). On the left of this Susumnā is the Iḍā Nāḍī white and looking like Moon; this Nāḍī is of the nature of Force, nectar-like. On the right side of the Susumnā is the Pingalā Nāḍī of the nature of a male; it represents the Sun.

सर्वतेजोमयी सा तु सुयुना वहिकृपिणी ।

तया मध्ये विकित्वाखे इच्छान्तिकायात्मकम् ॥ 31 ॥

मध्ये स्वयं भृर्तिंनं तु कोटिर्यर्मसप्रमम् ।

तदूर्धें मायाकीजं तु हताता विद्नुतादकम् ॥ 32 ॥

The Suşumnā comprises the nature of the all the Tejas (fires) and it represents Fire. The inmost of Suşumnā is Victirā or Citrinī Bhūlīngam nādī (of the form of a cobweb) in the middle of which resides the Icchā (will), Jñāna (knowledge) and Kriyā (action) Śaktis, and resplendent like the Millions of Suns.

तद्यूँदं नु शिवाकाता कुण्डली राकविश्यात ।

देव्यानिका नु सा प्रोक्ता मद्धिभ्रा नगाधिरि ॥ 33 ॥

तद्वाहों हेमस्कापं वादिवसंतनतुदैनम् ।

द्रुतहैमसमप्रखं पर्चां त्रत विधिनन्तेम् ॥ 34 ॥

ततूर्धे च्नतगुरखं घड्वलं हीरकप्रमम् ।

वादितलतच्द्वर्णेन स्वाधिछानानुत्तमम् ॥ 35 ॥

Above Him is situated Hrim, the Māyā Bija Harātmā with 'Ha' and Candra Bindu representing the Sound (Nāda). Above this is the Flame, Kula Kunḍalini (the Serpent Fire) of a red colour, and as it were, intoxicated. Outside Her is the Śādhāra Lotus of a yellow colour having a dimension of four digits and comprising the four letters 'va', 'ša', 'ša'. The Yogis meditate on this. In its centre is the hexāgonal space (Pitham).

भूलमाधारच्छोर्ण भूतापारं ततो विदुः ।

स्वगछेन परं लिंगं स्वाधिष्ठानं तते विदु: ॥ 36 ॥

तदूर्यँ नाभिदेशे तु मणिपूरं महाप्रभम् ।

मेघाभं विदुढामं च बहुतेजोमयं ततः ॥ 37 ॥

This is called the Mūlādhāra for it is the base and it supports all the six lotuses. Above its is the Svādhiṣṭhāna Cakra, fiery and emitting lustre like diamonds and with six petals representing the six letters 'ba', 'bha', 'ma', 'ya', 'ra', 'la'. The word

Book VII Chapter XXXV

'Sva' means 'Param Liingam' (superior Male Symbol). Therefore the sages the sages call this 'Svādhisthān' Cakram.

मिफवाद्विज्ञ तत्पच मिफपचं तथोच्छते ।

दूरभिष्य द्रतैयुक्ते जादिष्नातिप्रान्तिन् ॥ 38 ॥

विष्णुज्ञप्रतिष्ठि पर्च विष्णवातोकनाकरणम् ।

तदूर्धेनात्त पवमुचादात्मवसान्धिनम् ॥ 39 ॥

Above it is situated the ‘Manipura Cakram’ of the colour of lightning on clouds and very fiery; it comprises the ten petals, comprising the 10 letters da, dha, na, ta, tha, da, dha, na, pa, pha. The lotus resembles a full blown pearl; hence it is ‘Manipadma.’ Viṣṇu dwells here.

काटिवंततर्वैक पत्रेक्षा मपहित्धिता ।

तन्मये बाणार्पिनं तु सूर्यातुसामममम॥ ४ १ ॥

गब्बद्वहामयं गब्बनाहत तन दूषयते ।

अनाहताख्यं ततवघं मुनिधि: परिकीर्तितम् ॥ ४ १ ॥

Meditation here leads to the sight of Viṣṇu. Above it is ‘Anātata’ Padma with the twelve petals representing the twelve letters ka, kha, ga, gha, ña, (ca), (cha), (Ja), (Jha,) ña, ta and tha. In the middles is Bānālingam, resplendent like the Sun. This lotus emits the sound Śabda Brahma, without being struck; therefore it is called the Anāhata Lotus. This is the source of joy. Here dwells Rudra, the Highest Person.’

आनन्दसदं ततु पुरुधाधिष्ठितं परम् ।

ततूर्धैतु विशूघ्राखं दलं पोडआणब्धुजम् । ४२ ॥

स्वरैः पोडआधिपूर्तै कृध्रवर्णं महाप्रभम् ।

विशूघं ततुते यस्माजीवस्य हंसलोकान् । ४३ ॥

Above it is situated the Viśuddha Chakra of the sixteen petals, comprising the sixteen letters a, ä, i, ü, ü, r, ŷ, li, lr, e, ai, o, ar, am, ah. This of a smoky colour, highly lustrous, and is situated in the throat. The Jīvātmā sees the Paramātmā (the Highest Self) here and it is purified; hence it is called Viśuddha. This wonderful lotus is termed Ākāśa.

विषूद्धे पदामाख्यातमाकाशाखं महाद्रतम् ।

आज्ञाचंक तद्धर्ये तु आत्मानाजिधितं परम् ॥ 44 ॥

आज्ञासंकमणं तत्र तेनाजेति प्रक्रीर्तितम् ।

ब्रिदलं हक्षसंयुक्ते पर्धं तत्सुमनोहम् ॥ 45 ॥

Above that is situated between the eyebrows the exceedingly beautiful Ajñā Cakra with two petals comprising the two letters 'Ha' and Kṣa. The Self resides in this lotus. When persons are stationed here, they can see everything and know of the present, past and future There one gets the commands from the Highest Deity (e.g. now this is for you to do and so on); therefore it is called the Ajñā Cakra.

कैतासाखं तरुद्धं तु रोधिनी तु तरुद्धतः ।

एवं त्वाधारचकाणि प्रोक्तानि तव सूत्रत ॥ 46 ॥

सहात्यगृतं विन्त्यानं ततूधेमीरितम् ।

इन्येतत्क्रवितं सर्वे योगमार्गन्यतनम् ॥ 47 ॥

Above that is the Kailāśa Cakra; over it is the Rodhīnī Cakra. O, One of good vows! Thus I have described to you all about the Ādhāra Cakras. The prominent Yogis say that above that again, is the Bindu Śthān, the seat of the Supreme Deity with thousand petals. O Best of Mountains! Thus I declare the best of the paths leading to Yoga.

आदौ प्रक्रोधोगेनायायते योजयेन्नः ।

गुदम्बुक्तेर सक्तिज्ञामकुष्ठय प्रजाधयेत् ॥ 48 ॥

Now hear what is the next thing to do. First by the ‘Pūraka’ Prānāyāma, fix the mind on the Mulādhāra Lotus. Then contract and arouse the Kula Kunḍalini Śakti there, between the anus and the genital organs, by that Vāyu.

लिङ्गभैकदमेपीव विस्फचकं च प्राययेत् ।

गम्बुना तां परां शक्तिमेकीभृतां विविधतयेत् ॥ 49 ॥

Pierce, then, the Lingams (the lustrous Svayambhu Ādi Lingam) in the several Cakras above-mentioned and transfer along with it the heart united with the Śakti to the Sahasrāra (the Thousand petalled Louts). Then meditate the Śakti united with Śambhu there.

तत्रोषित्यातुं यतुं द्रुतलाश्रासोपम् ।

पायविता तु तां गर्फिं मायाख्यां योगसिद्धिद्वा ॥ 50 ।

पट्चमळेवताल्त्रत्र संतयाणैतपाधाया ।

आनयेनेन मारोग मूलाधारं ततः सुधीः ॥ 51 ॥

There is produced in the Bindu Chakra, out of the intercourse of Śiva and Śakti, a kind of nectar-juice, resembling a sort of red-dye (lac). With that Nectar of Joy, the wise Yogis make the Māyā Śakti, yielding successes in Yoga, drink; then pleasing all the Devas in the six Cakras with the offerings of that Nectar, the Yogi brings the Śakti : down again on the Mūládhāra Lotus.

पृहममध्यायाद्यन्त्रहिन निश्रितम् ।

पूर्वोक्तूषिता मन्त्रा: सर्वे सिद्धान्ति नानया ॥ 52 ॥

Thus by daily practising this, all the above mantras will no doubt, be made to come to complete success.

जरामरणुःखाहीमुंचते भवबन्यान्त ।

ये गुणा: सन्ति तेल्या मे जनामागृदीय तथा ॥ 53 ॥

ते गुणा: साधकवरे भवन्चेव न चानाया ।

इत्येके बकितं तात वायुधाराणुतमम् ॥ 54 ॥

And one will be free from this Sarīsāra, filled with old age and death, etc. O Lord of Mountains! I am the World Mother; My devotee will get all My qualities; there is no doubt in this. O Child! I have thus described to you the excellent Yoga, holding the Vāyu (Pavana Dhāraṇa Yoga).

इदानीं धरणायलं तु शृष्यावलहिते मा ।

दिव्यालात्यनविक्छनदेख्यां तते विधाय च ॥ 55 ॥

Now hear from Me the Dhārānā Yoga. To fix thoroughly one's heart on the Supremely Lustrous Forces of Mine, pervading all the quarters, countries, and all time leads soon to the union of the Jiva and the Brahma.

तन्यमो भवति हिंद्रं जीवब्रह्मैक्ययोजनात् ।

अथवा समलं चेते यदि हिंत्रं न शुद्धाति ॥ ५६ ॥

त्वाद्वयवयोगेन योगी योगासमाध्यसेत् ।

मदीयहस्तपादात्यावेने तु मधुरे नग ॥ ५७ ॥

चितं संस्थापयेन्मनी स्थानं स्थानजयातृनः ।

विशुर्द्विचितः सर्वसिन्मलो संस्थापयेन्मनः ॥ ५८ ॥ ॥

If one does not quickly do this, owing to impurities of heart, then the Yogī ought to adopt

what is called the ‘Avayava Yoga.’ O Chief of Mountains! The Sādhaka should fix his heart on my gentle hands, feet and other limbs one by one and try to conquer each of these places. Thereby his heart would be purified. Then he should fix that purified heart on My Whole Body.

यावबन्नो तर्ष याति देख्नां संविदि पर्वत ।

तावदिष्मनुं मन्ती जगहोंमे: सम्यभयेत् ॥ 59 ॥

मन्त्राभ्यासेन योगेन जेयुज्ञानाय करूपते ।

न योगेन विता मन्त्रो न मन्त्रेश विता है सः ॥ 60 ॥

The practiser must practise with Japam and Homam the Mantram till his mind be not dissolved in Me, My Consciousness. By the practise of meditating on the Mantra, the thing to be known (Brahma) is transformed into knowledge. Known this as certain, that the Mantra is futile without Yoga and the Yoga is futile without the Mantra.

इयोरभ्यासयोगे ही बहुसमित्धिकारणम् ।

तमःपरिवृते गेहे घटो दौपेन दूरघते ॥ 6 1 ॥

एवं मायावृत्तो हाताम मनुना गोरधीकृततः ।

इति योगविधि: कुन्न: सांग: प्रोक्तो मायाधुना ।

गुरूपदेगुतो जेगो नान्वथा शासकोटिधिभः ॥ 62 ॥

इति श्रीमेद्वीभागवते महापुराणी सतमस्कन्ये

पढ़िशीघोअवयः ॥ 135 ॥

The Mantra and the Yoga are the two infallible means to realise Brahma. As the jar in a dark room is visible by a lamp, so this Jivātmā, surrounded by Māyā is visible by means of Mantra to the Paramātmā (the Highest Self). Of Best of Mountains! Thus I have described to you the Yogas with their Aṅgas (limbs). You should receive instructions about these from the mouth of a Guru; else millions of Śāstras will never be able to give you ° rue realisation of the meanings of the Yogas."

Here ends the Thirty-fifth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the Yoga and the Mantra Siddhi in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XXXVI

