CHAPTER II

On the Supremacy of the Effects of Karma

सूत उवाच

एवं पृथः पुराणजो सत्यवतीसुतः ।

परीक्षितसुतं शान्तं ततो वै जनगेजवम् ॥ १ ॥

उवाच संगशच्छेनु वावयं वाव्यविशपातः ।

Sūta said: The learned Vyāsa, the son of Satyavatī, and the knower of the Purānas, when thus asked by Janamejaya, the son of Pariksit, whose heart had become calm, replied in the following words, capable to remove all his doubts.

व्यास उवाच

राजकिमेत्त्रकल्यं कर्मणो गहना गति: ॥ 2 ॥

दुँत्रया किल देवानां मानवानां च का कथा ।

Vyāsa said: O king! You would better know, that in this Universe the course of Karma is not easily comprehensible; even the Devas are not capable to comprehend the wonderful effects of actions; what to speak of men!

वदा समुवित्ते चैनद्वहाण्डे नियुगणात्मकम् ॥ 3 ॥

कर्मणैव समुवत्ति: सर्वेधां नात्र संशय: ।

When this Universe composed of the three Guṇas arose, it was through Karma, that everything had its origin

अनाविंहिन्ना जीवाः कर्मवीजसमुद्धवः ॥ 4 ॥

नानायोगैनु जायते प्रियते च पुनः पुनः ।

कर्मण रहिते देहरभोगो न कहाचन ॥ 5 ॥

It was the seed of Karma whence the Jivas (the individual embodied souls) arose with neither any beginning nor any end. Those Jivas go on often and often incarnating in numberless varieties of wombs and then go to dissolution. When this Karma ceases, the Jivas then are never to have any more connection with any other body.

शुभागुभैरसा मिश्रीः कर्मिभवैहितं तिवसून।

त्रिविधानि हि तान्याहुर्धोर्धास्तत्वविद्धये चे ।। ६ ।।

The Karmas done by Jivas are of three kinds: auspicious, inauspicious and mixed (partly

auspicious and partly inauspicious); of which the auspicious is the Sättvik Karma, the inauspicious is the Tāmasik Karma and the mixed, is the Rājasic Karma. Thus has been said by the Sages.

संचितानि भविष्यन्ति प्रार्थानि तथा जुप: ।

वर्तमानानि देहेउस्मखेलियं कर्माणं किल ॥ ७ ॥

These three again are subdivided into three. They are Sañcita (accumulated), Bhavisya (impending in future) and Prārabdha (commenced.) All these Karmas are in dwelling always with the body.

बहाद्यीनां च संर्वेयं त्रुतगचं नराधिप ।

सुखं दुःखं जगाम्युवृषीणंकादयस्तथा ॥ 8 ॥

कामाकोधी च लोभशु सर्वे देहगता गुणाः ।

दैवाधीनाशु सर्वेयं प्रभवन्ति नराधिप ॥ 9 ॥

O king! Everybody, even Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa all are under the influence of this Karma! And they experience pleasure, pain, old age, disease and death, joy and sorrow, lust, anger, greed and other bodily qualities, out of the effects of this Karma, which are call ordinarily Fate.

रागद्धिवधो भावा: स्वर्गर्षि प्रभवति हि ।

देवानां मानवानां च तिराशं च तथा वपः ॥ 10 ॥

विकारा: सर्व एवैते दैहेन सह संगताः ।

पूर्वैतरानुयोगेन सैत्ययोगेन वै पुनः ॥ 11 ॥

Therefore love, hatred and other bodily qualities all predominate equally in all bodies Anger, jealousy, hatred, and other similar qualities arise in the Devas, men, and birds owing to some sort of dislikes on previous occasions; and love, compassion, pity etc. arise out of some sort of likings, existing already.

उत्पत्ति: सर्वर्वेन्तृना विना कर्म न विहते ।

कर्माण भ्रमने सूर्य: शगताकः क्षयरोगान् ॥ १ २ ॥

कपाली च तथा रूदः कर्मपौल न संशयः ।

अनाविदिन्यं चैलकाणं कर्म विहते ॥ १ ३ ॥

O king! No individual can arise without some

sort of action or other. It is through Karma that the Sun traverses in the sky; it is through Karma that the Moon was attacked with consumption disease; and it is through Karma that the Rudra holds the disc of skull bone. This Karma, therefore, has no beginning nor end (till Mokṣa); now that this Karma is the sole cause in the production of this Universe.

तेन्हे शाश्रतं सर्वे जनत्यावरर्जगमम् ।

निवातिनिविचारोरत्र निममना मुग्न: सदा ॥ 14 ॥

न जान्ति किमेत्तैई नियं वाज्ञिनियमेव च ।

मायायां विद्यानायां जगत्रित्यं प्रतीयते ॥ 15 ॥

कार्याधिका: कवं याच्य: कारणे सति सर्वेया ।

माया नित्या कारणं च सर्वेषां सर्वेदा किल ॥ 16 ॥

For this reason, this whole Universe, moveable and immovable, is real; but Munis are deeply absorbed in meditation to ascertain about its reality or unreality. They cannot definitely know it for certain whether this world is real or unreal; for where Māyā is prevalent, the universe is there. Where there is the cause fully existing in all respects, there is no effect, how can we say? The Māyā is eternal and always acts as the Prime Cause of all.

कर्मवीजं ततो नित्यं चित्तनीयं सा बुधैः ।

भ्रमवेल जागतर्वा राजकर्मनियन्त्रितम् ॥ 17 ॥

Therefore, O king! the sages declare that the seed of Karma is eternal. This whole universe changes incessantly, being controlled by this karma.

नान्योतिभू गरजेन्र नानाधर्मयेषु च ।

इच्छया च भवेज्ञनय विण्योरिततेजसः ॥ 18 ॥

O king of kings! They say, it is through the will of Viṣṇu, or unbounded energy and splendour, that all this universe enters, again and again, into all sorts of wombs, whether good or evil.

Now, if the birth of Viṣṇu, of infinite prowess, takes place according to His will, then why is that He travels through many impious births? Why is it that Bhagavān Viṣṇu goes, in different Yugas, to take His births in low, vile origins?

युगयुगेचनेकासु नीचयोगितु लत्कवम् ।

त्यक्त्वा वैकुपतर्पावसंग सुख्योगाननेकश: ॥ 19 ॥

Where is that self dependent man, who, leaving his abode Vaikuntha and all sorts of pleasures and happiness, desires to live in this mortal temple, filled with urine, faeces and other filthy matters.

विष्णुप्रमिद्धिर वासं संसरतः कोप्रभावज्ञति।

पुष्यावचलाता च जलकेंति: सुखासनम् ॥ 20 ॥

No intelligent man will leave comfortable resting places and amorous sports and gathering flowers for the sake of dwelling in this uterus in the womb?

त्यक्त्वा गर्भगृहे वासं कोर्षभावज्ञति बुद्धिमान् ।

तुलिकां मुडुसंयुक्ता दिखा गया विनिर्मितम् ॥ 21 ॥

Who likes to live with his face downwards in the womb, when he can enjoy fine heavenly soft downs, puffed up with cotton or silk.

त्यकत्वाधोगुखवासं च कोर्भिधाव्छिति पिड़तः ।

गीतं नृत्वं च वाढं च नानाभावसमन्वितम् ॥ 2 2 ॥

Who will abandon singing, dancing and music, where all sorts of love feelings are being manifested, and think of coming down to this veritable Hell?

मुत्वा को नरके वासं मनसापि वित्तितेयते ।

सिंधुजोब्दुभावानां रां सत्यत्वा सुदुस्यजम् ॥ 2 3 ॥

Who will abandon the wonderful ambrosial nectar and prosperity given by Lakṣmī, that cannot be easily renounced, and then like to taste this urine faeces.

विष्यमूरसपानं च क इक्छेमातिमाशरः ।

गर्भवासात्परो नास्ति नरको धुवनये ॥ 24 ॥

There is no hell more aggravating in the three worlds than this existence in the wombs. The Munis, afraid of these, perform difficult asceticisms in this wondrous world.

तद्वीताश्र प्रकृर्विति मुग्वो दुस्तं तयः ।

हिला थोगं च राज्यं च बने याति मनस्विनः ॥ 25 ॥

Wise, intelligent persons renounce their kingdoms and enjoyments and resort to forests. Who is there so stupid as to enter willingly in the various wombs?

Book IV Chapter VI

तद्वीतस्तु विम्युतात्मा कस्तं सेवितुमिच्छिति ।

गर्भे तुदन्ति कृमयो जठरागिनस्तपतवधः ॥ 26 ॥

Worms and insects torment the Jivas in the womb; the digestive fire of the stomach heats it from below, whereas it is always fearfully tied down on all sides by the flesh, enclosing its fat or marrow. O King; Not a trace of happiness is visible there.

वपासेवेधनं कूरं किं सुखं तत्र भुपते ।

वरं कारागृहे वासो बन्यनं निगईवैर्म्य ।। 27 ॥

It is far better to live in a prison house, fettered by hard iron chains. Whereas it is not desirable to live for a moment in the womb.

अत्यमात्रं कृष्णं नैव गर्भावासः स्वचिच्छृषः ।

गर्भावसे महदुदुःखं द्रामासनिवसनम् ॥ 28 ॥

It is very hard and painful to be in the womb for ten months. To come out of the hard and terrible womb is extremely troublesome.

तथा निःसरणे दुःखं योपिन्यन्नेजिद्वारणे ।

बालभावे सदा दुःखं मृकाङ्पाबवंसुतम् ॥ 29 ॥

Jivas get trouble in their childhood; they cannot speak, and they do not know what to say, when they are hungry or thirsty; they depend entirely on others and they are grieved.

श्रुचा वेदनाशकः पतन्त्रोक्ताकातः ।

श्रीधेते र्विदे वाले माता चिन्तुरा तथा ॥ 30 ॥

When the child becomes hungry and cries, the mother becomes anxious. When the child is afflicted with diseases and cries, the mother then knows and administers medicines.

नानाविधानि दुःखानि बालभावे भवन्ति वे ॥ 31 ॥

Thus many troubles arise in childhood. Sages do not therefore find any happiness and do not desire, of their own accord, to come here.

किं सुखं विबुधा युद्धा जन्म बाख्छिन चेच्छया ।

संगामामरैः सार्थे सुखं त्यक्त्वा निरन्तरम् ॥ 32 ॥

O king, no sane man would leave incessant heavenly pleasures and prefer before the Devas to this toilsome and painful state of being born in the womb.

कर्तूमिच्छेच्च को मुंहः श्रमदं सुखनाशनम् ।

सर्वेवैल नृपश्रेष्ठ सर्वे बज्हादयः सुतः ॥ 33 ॥

O king of kings! All the Devas, Brahmā and others have to enjoy full the effects of their Karmas done, whether they are pleasant or painful.

कृतकर्मविषयेनक न्रापनुवन्ति सुखासुरुते ।

अवश्यमेव भोक्त्वयं कृतं कर्म शुभाशुभम् ।

देहवादिन्द्रभिवेदीनिर्यभिश्र नृपोतम ॥ 34 ॥

O best of kings! The fruits of karma must have to be experienced, whether auspicious or inauspicious, be he a Deva, or human being or an animal; any one who has embodied himself in fine or gross bodies!

तपसा दानवनैश्छ मानवश्छेत्रतां वजेत् ।

क्षीणे पुण्येध शक्तोर्धि पतत्येव न संपश्यः ॥ 35 ॥

Human beings, by dint of their practise of penance, religious austerities, alms givings and sacrifices, rise to Indrahood. Indra, in his turn, when the effects of his good actions cease, comes down to inferior births! there is no doubt of it.

रामावतारयोगेन देवा वान्तरां नातः ।

तथा कृष्णसहायार्थ देवा यावतरां नातः ॥ 36 ॥

·In the Rāma incarnation, the Devas had to incarnate themselves as monkeys; and in the Krṣna incarnation, the Devas had to incarnate themselves as human beings, Cowherds (Gopas) and Yādavas. एवं युगे युगे विष्णुर्वतारान्नेकानः ।

क्रौति धर्मेश्वार्य बहाणा प्रेरितो भूगण् ॥ 37 ॥

Thus being urged on by Brahmā, Viṣṇu Bhagavān incarnates Himself many times, yugas after yugas, no preserve the religion.

युन: पुरुरैरेरे नानायोनिषु पार्थिव ।

अवतारा भवेन्य्ये रथचक्रवद्धुतः ॥ 38 ॥

O king of mortals! Thus, like a carwheel, Bhagavān Hari incarnated Himself in various wombs successively in a wonderful manner.

दैत्यानां इननं कर्म कतव्य हरिणा स्ववम् ।

अशोगोगे पृथिव्यां वै कृत्वा जन्म महात्मना ॥ 39 ॥

The destruction of the Daityas was done by Hari in His many secondary incarnations.

तदहं संप्रवक्ष्यामि कृष्णजन्मकक्षां शुभाम् ।

स एव भगवातिश्युग्रवतीगों यदो: कृते ॥ 40 ॥

Now I will narrate to you the auspicious facts of the birth of Kṛṣṇa, Who incarnated Himself in the family of Yadu (Yadu Kula).

कथयस्य मुनेरेगो वसुदेवः प्रतापवान् ।

गोयुक्तिरयवत्राजान्युरीणानुभावतः ॥ 4 1 ॥

O king! The illustrious Vāsudeva, born of the part of the Muni Kaśyapa, had to take his birth again as a human being due to his previous curse and had to maintain his livelihood by tending cows.

कथयस्य च द्रे पल्यौ गाणादत्र महीपते ।

अदिति: सुरसा चैवमासु: पृथिवीपते ॥ 42 ॥

देवकी रोहिणी चोभे भगिन्यो भतरर्भि ।

वकणेने महात्रषाणे दान: कोपादिति श्रुतम् ॥ 43 ॥

O best of kings! And the two wives of Kaśyapa, Aditi and Surasā, had to take their births as the two sisters, and Rohini, on account of the curses cast on them. O Descendant of Bharata! We have thus heard that they were greatly cursed at one time by Varuna, the water deity, who got very much angry. The king said.

राजोवाच

किं कृतं कश्यपेनागो येन शगलो महानुषि: ।

सभावं: स कर्षे जातसद्वद्वर्य महामते ॥ 44 ॥

कर्च च भवावीक्ष्यासुरत जातो5तिगोकले ।

वासी वैकुण्डनिलये रमापितरखणितः ॥ 45 ॥

निदेशालक्य यभावात्वरते प्रभृत्यव्य ।

नारायण: सुरश्रेष्ठो युगादि: सर्वधारकः ॥ 46 ॥

स कधं सदनं त्यक्त्वा कर्मवानिव मानुपे ।

करीति जननं कस्मादर मे संगयो महान् ॥ 47 ॥

What fault was committed by Kaśyapa that he had to take his birth along with his wife as cowherds. And why was it that the Everlasing uninterrupted Ātman Viṣṇu Nārāyaṇa had to take his birth in Gokula, He whose abode is Vaikuntha, who is the Lord of Ramā! who is Bhagavān and the Supreme amongst the gods, who is the upholder of the universe and the yugas! Under Whose order can such a being abandon his abode and take his birth in the world like an ordinary mortal? there is this grave doubt, then, of mine on this point.

प्रायः मानुषदेहं तु कांति च विड्वनम् ।

भावारानाविधांतरत मानुषे दुर्जान्यनि ॥ 48 ॥

कामः क्रोधोपर्शोगकी वरं प्रोतश कर्हिंचित् ।

सुखं दुःखं भयं नृणां दैन्यमाजेवमेव च ॥ 49 ॥

दुकृतं सुकृतं चैव वचनं ह्ननं तथा ।

पोषणं चलनं तापो विमर्शश्व विकलबन् ॥ 50 ॥

लोषो दंभस्तथा मोहः कपटः गोचनं तथा ।

एते चान्ये तथा भावा मानुष्ये सभ्यवन्ति हि ॥ 51 ॥

Obtaining this depraved human coil, one is always perplexed with various thoughts, sometimes with lust, anger, jealousy, intoleration, sorrow enmity sometimes with pleasurable feelings, happiness, fear, sufferings, penury, sometimes with straight-forwardness, good or bad deeds, faithfulness, treachery, unsteadiness, supporting others; sometimes with remorse, hesitation, bragging, greed, vain boasting, delusion, or hypocrisy and sometimes with remorse; these different feelings exist in men.

स कर्ष भाषाविण्युलसक्वा सुखमवश्यम्।

करीति मानुर्ष जन्म भावैस्तैस्तैरिधुतम् ॥ 52 ॥

How then can Viṣṇu Bhagavān abandon His eternal pleasures and have recourse to this human birth, full of many perplexing thoughts.

कि सुखं मानुर्ष प्रायः भृति जन मृनीश्र ।

कि निमितं हरि: साक्षतप्रभवां कांति है ॥ 53 ॥

O best of Munis! What peculiar happiness is there in the pleasures of human births, that Śrī Bhagavān Hari has to undertake the burden of dwelling thus in the human wombs?

गर्भेयुःखं जमन्दुःखं बालपाटे तथा पुनः ।

यीवने कामाजं दुःखं गाईल्येउगिमहुत्तम् ॥ 54 ॥

दु:खान्येतान्यवाप्नोति मानुषे द्विजस्तम ।

कर्थं स भावान्विष्युवतानान्यून: पुनः ॥ 55 ॥

O Munindra! The sufferings that are experienced, while in the womb, the pain during the time of delivery, the misfortunes in the early childhood, the troubles of passionate lust in youth, the greater sorrows and difficulties in the householder's life, all these are existent there; how

Book IV Chapter III

then Bhagavān Viṣnu incarnate Himself often in these various human births.

प्राय यमावतार्ति हि हरिणा बह्वायोनिता ।

दुःखं महतरं प्राणं वनवासेस्तिदाक्णो ॥ 56 ॥

सीताविरहर्ने दुःखं संगमश्र पुनः पुनः ।

कान्ताचागो3प्यनैवमनुभृतो महात्मना ॥ 57 ॥

What an amount of enormous difficulties had Brahma-born Hari to undertake in His Rāma incarnation! That high souled One had to suffer for his exile in forest, for the stealing away of his wife Sitā, for the frequent wars, for the final separation from his wife Sitā.

तथा कृष्णावतारोपि जन्म ईशग्रहु पुनः ।

गोकुले गमनं चैव गवां चरणमित्युत ॥ ५८ ॥

कैसय श्नं कष्टद्वाराकागमनं पुनः ।

नानासंसादुःखानि भूक्तवाभ्याकान्धम् ॥ ५९ ॥

Likewise in the Kṛṣṇa Avatāra, the birth in a

prison, the departure to Gokula, tending cows, the killing of Kaṇsa, departure to Dwārkā with great difficulty and all sorts of household difficulties were there. Why had He to suffer all these?

सेवेच्छया कः प्रतीक्षेत चुक्तो कुःखानि ज्ञानवान् ।

संशयं छिपि सर्वत्र मम चित्तप्रजान्तये ॥ 60 ॥

शी शीमद्वीभागवते मातपुराणे चतुर्विक्तचे

घितीयोउपयः ॥ 61 ॥

Who amongst the wise and the emancipated, of his own accord condescends to take on his shoulders so many hard sufferings? This is the grave doubt in my mind; be graciously pleased to remove my this grave doubt and make my mind tranquil.

Here ends the Second Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevībhagāvatam of the Mahā Purānam of 18000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IV Chapter III

