CHAPTER XVII

On Śuka's Self-control

सूत उवाच

इत्युक्चा पितरं पुत्र: पायदो: पतितः शुकः ।

बद्धार्जिलस्वाचेदं गन्तुकामो महामना: ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: Thus speaking to his father about his intention to go to Mithilā, the high-souled Šuka Deva fell prostrate at his feet and with folded palms said:

आपृष्ठे त्वां महाभाग प्राहुं ते वचनं मया ।

विद्वेहान्त्रदूमिच्छामि पालिताङ्गनकेन तु ॥ २ ॥

बिना दार्इं केयं राज्यं करीते जनकः किल ।

धर्मे न वर्तते लोको दरड़शेज भवेढ़ादि ॥ ३ ॥

"O highly fortunate one! Your word must be obeyed by me; now I desire to see, as you say, the

kingdom of Janaka; kindly give me permission. O father! Again the doubt is coming within me how the king Janaka is governing his kingdom without sentencing anybody? And if there be no punishment within his kingdom, no one will remain in the path of virtue.

धार्मेय कारणं एण्डो मन्त्रविद्धितः सदा ।

स कर्व वर्तैत तात संशयोर्जं महान्मय ॥ ४ ॥

It is for the sake of preserving religion that Manu and the other sages have always prescribed for punishment; how, then, religion can be preserved without inflicting punishment?

Book I Chapter XVII

मम माता तिवयं वंध्या तद्ध्वाति विचौढ़ितम् ।

पृच्छामि त्वां महाभाग गच्छामि च परंतय ॥ 5 ॥

O Mahābhāga! What you have spoken to me appears to me true like the sentence “My mother is barren.” So, O destroyer of foes! Permit and I will start for Mithilā.”

सूत उवाच

तं दूध्या गन्तुकामं च शुकं सत्यवतीसुतः।

आलिंसयोबाच पुत्रं तं ज्ञानिं नि:सूद्धे दूढम् ॥ 6 ॥

Seeing the greatly wise son Śuka, void of any desires, earnestly anxious to go to Mithilā, gave him a cordial embrace and said:

व्यास उचाच

स्वस्त्यस्तु शुक दीर्घिंपर्व पुर महामते ।

सत्यां वायो प्रदत्ता मे गछ्छ तात यथासुखम् ॥ 7 ॥

O highly intelligent son Śuka! Peace be on you! Have a long life. O child! Speak truly before me and go.

आगतल्यं पुनर्गंता ममाश्रममन्तुम् ।

न कुत्राचि च गतल्यं ल्या पुत्र कथघन ॥ 8 ॥

O son! Say that after going to Mithilā you will come back again to this Śārama; never that you will go anywhere else.

सुखं जीवामि पुत्राईं दूध्वा ते मुखपढ़ज्ञम् ।

अपश्यन्तु:खमाप्तोम प्राणतस्वमसि मे सुत ॥ 9 ॥

O son! Seeing the lotus face of yours, I am passing my days happily; if I do not see you, I will suffer extreme pain. What more than this, that your are my life and soul.

दूद्या तं जनकं पुत्र सन्देईं विनिवलयं च ।

अत्रागत्व सुखं तिष्ठ वेटाध्ययनतत्पर: ॥ 10 ॥

I am saying, therefore, after seeing Janaka and clearing your doubts come here again and remain at peace, and study the Vedas.

सूत उवाच

इत्युक्तः सोअभिवाघार्य कृत्वा चैव प्रदक्षिणाम् ।

चलितसतसाउतोव धनुर्भक्तः शगे तथा ॥ १ १ ॥

Vyāsa having spoken thus, Šuka bowed down and circumambulated his most worshipful father,

and went out; he began to walk very fast like an arrow, leaving the bow, and when it has left the bow.

समप्रयविधित्योर्शूलोकांश्व विज्ञानिणः ।

वनानि पादपांश्वि क्षेत्राणि फलितानि च ॥ १ २ ॥

तापसांस्त्यमानांश्य याजकान्दीक्षयान्वितान्।

योगाभ्यासरातान् योगिवानुप्रस्थान्यकिनसः ॥ १ ३ ॥

गैरावागुणतांक्षेय सीराळक्ताक्षेय शेथानान् ।

वीक्ष्य नानाविधान्याभुगवामातिसम्यानुयिनः ॥ १ ४ ॥

On his journey he saw various countries, various classes of persons, earning money, various gardens and forests, various trees; in some places he saw fields with green grains and grains standing on them; at others, he saw ascetics practising asceticism, and initiated Yājñiks (performing yajñas or sacrifices); in some places he saw yogis practising yoga, the high souled Vānaprasthis (in the third stage of life) residing in the forest, and at others he saw devotees of Śiva, Śakti, Gangeśa, Sūrya and Viṣṇu and many others. Thus he went on in his journey, in great wonder, towards his destination.

वर्धेद्वेने मेहं च समुल्ल्य महामतिः ।

हिमाचलं च वर्षेण जगाम स्थिधलां प्रति ॥ १ ५ ॥

In his passage he crossed Meru in two years and the Mount Himālayas in one year and then reached the city of Mithilā.

प्रविष्टो मथिता मध्ये पश्य-सर्वोद्धतुत्तमाम् ।

प्रजात्र सुखिता: सर्वा: सदाचारा: सुर्मस्थिता: ॥ 16 ॥

Going there he found the place full of wealth, corn, grain, etc. and all prosperities and the people were all very happy and they observed the rules of conduct as in the Śāstras.

भूजा निवारितसत्र कस्मयन सभागतः ।

किं ते कार्य बद्यक्तेति पृहस्नेन न चाबवीत् ॥ 17 ॥

निःसूच नगरात्रास्थितः स्थाणुरिवारलः ।

विसितोतिशंसन्सथी वचो नोवार किछ्ठान ॥ 18 ॥

When he was about to enter into the city, the guard in front of the gate stopped him, asking “who are you? Sir.” “What for are you come here?”

When the guard asked him thus, he replied nothing and went away to a distance and with great wonder could not help laughing in his mind and remained motionless like a statue.

प्रतीहार उवाच

शूति मुकोर्सि कि बह्वानिकमर्थ लल्हिगताः ।

चलनं च विना कार्य न भवेदिति मे मति: ॥ १९ ॥

At this the guard said: “O Brāhmīn! Why have you remained silent? Kindly say what for you have come here? I know this well that no body goes anywhere without having something to do?

राजात्रया प्रवेष्ट्यं नारोस्तम्स्वा हित्र ।

अज्ञात्कुलशीलस्य प्रवेशेगे नात्र सर्वथा ॥ 20 ॥

The king has forbidden strangers whose parentage and character are unknown. Therefore, O, Brāhmin! Every one has to take the king's permission before he goes into the city.

तेजस्वी भासि नो नृनं ब्राह्मणो वेदद्वितम् ।

कुलं कार्य च मे वृहि ययेथे गछ्ठ माटन ॥ 21 ॥

It seems that you are a very energetic Brāhmīn and that you know the Vedas; so O giver of honour! speak out to me your object-in-view and go into the city as you like."

युक उवाच

यद्यमातोउस्यत्र ततूषांतं वचनात्व ।

विद्रैत्नारं रईु प्रदेशोय चत्र तुरुर्भः ॥ 22 ॥

मोहोरयं मम दुर्दुँदः: समूलल्य मितिद्वम् ।

राजनं रडुकामोर्डं पर्यटन्सपुयाततः ॥ 2 3 ॥

Hearing these words of the guard, Šuka Deva began to say: “I have come to see the city of Videha Janaka; but now I see that persons like me find great difficulty to enter here; so O Gatekeeper! I have got the answer from you. I was a great fool that I was so much deluded that to see the king I crossed many countries and over topped the two mountains and have come here.

वशितोई स्वयं पित्रा दूषणं कस्य दीयते ।

शामितोई महाभाग कर्मणा या महीते। ॥24 ॥

O Mahābhāga! What blame can I put on others?

It is my father that has deluded me; or my karma done in my previous birth is now making me wander about.

धनाग पुरुषस्ये परिघमणकारणम् ।

सा में नास्ति तथायत्र सम्राणतीम्य भ्रमातिल्ल ॥ २ ५ ॥

Alas! In this world greed for money is the sole cause to make a man knock about; but I have not got that even; my erroneous idea brought me so far.

निरागस्य सुखं नित्यं यदि मोहे न मज्जति ।

निरागोर्भं महाभागा मानोर्धिम्यमोहासगारे ॥ 26 ॥

I now realise that a man, having no desires, gets constant happiness if he be not plunged in the net of delusion; else he cannot have any such. O Mahābhāga! Though I have no desire of anything, yet I am plunged in the sea of Moha.

क्व मेर्स्थिति कवेयं पटुवां च समुपगत ।

परिश्रमकर्त किं के चँक्षितो विधिता किल ॥ 27 ॥

Alas! Where is Meru? and where is Mithilā (a great distance intervenes) I have walked so great a distance on foot; alas! this is this the result of my so long a journey!

प्रार्थकिं कित बोत्कर्युंशं वाय्यवासरुष्णम् ।

उषामसतुओं नित्यं कारायलेव सर्वथा ॥ 28 ॥

Therefore I am thoroughly convinced that the Creator has deceived me. One must have to suffer for his Prärabdha karma, be it auspicious or inauspicious. One must make one's effort, being always under the control of this Law of Karma always puts a man into different actions.

न तीर्थे न च वेदोउत्र यद्यमिभू मे शमः ।

अप्रवेश: पुरे जातो विद्वेते नाम भृपति: ॥ 29 ॥

This place is not a Tiratha (holy place) nor there are the Vedas personified here, that I have taken so much pains and trouble to come here--only there is one thing here and that is the king Janaka; but there is no chance to see him even; for I have not been able to enter even within his kingdom."

इत्युकत्वा विरायामारु मौनीभूत इव स्थितः ।

ज्ञातो हि प्रतिहारेण जानी कांश्वाद्धिजोतम: ॥ 30 ॥

Book I Chapter XVII

सामपूर्वमुवाचासी तं क्षता संस्थितं मुनिन् ।

गच्छ भो यत्र ते कार्य यथेहं डिवजस्तान ॥ 31 ॥

अपराधो मम बह्यान्यिवारितावानहम् ।

तल्हतनंच महाभाग विमुफतानां क्षमावलम् ॥ 32 ॥

Thus saying, Šuka remained silent and began to stay as one who has taken the vow to remain silent. The guard then took him to be a very wise Brāhmin and spoke in sweet words: “O Brāhmin! Go to the place, as you like, where you have got your work. O Brāhmin! I stopped you; so please excuse me for any offence incurred by me. Free persons like you have mercy alone as their greatest strength.”

शुक उवाच

के तेस दूषणं क्षत: परतनोरित सर्वेला ।

प्रभुकार्य प्रकर्तेचं सेवकेन यथोचितम् ॥ 33 ॥

भूमदूषणं चात्र यदहं रक्षितस्त्वया ।

चोराशुपरितानं कर्तव्यं सर्वेबा बुद्धेः ॥ 34 ॥

Hearing this Šukā Deva said: “What is your fault? you are dependent on another; the servant ought to obey the words of his master and serve him by all means; and there is no fault of the king, too, in your not allowing me to enter; for the wise persons ought to ascertain by all means, whether the newcomers are enemies or thieves?

मदैव सर्वेबा दोषो वर्दं सुमुपानतः ।

गानं परपौहे वल्यतुतायश्छ कारणम् ॥ 35 ॥

Hence when I am quite a stranger suddenly come to this place, that the fault is wholly mine. Every person knows that it is lowering oneself to go to another's house."

प्रतीहार उवाच

किं सुर्ख डिज किं दुःखं किं कार्ये रुषमिच्छता ।

कः: श्रवृहितकर्तों को बूहि सर्वे ममादा वै ॥ ३६ ॥

The guard then said: “O great Brāhmīn! What is happiness? and what is pain? what ought to be done to by your well-wisher? who is your enemy? and who is your benefactor? Now advise me on all these points.”

शुक उवाच

द्वैविध्यं सर्वलोकेषु सर्वत्र विद्धियो जनः ।

रागी चैव विरागी च तद्योक्ष्ता दिषा पुत्र :। ३७ ॥

Hearing this Šuka Deva said: “Everywhere men are divided, as far as their internal natures are concerned, into two classes; they are called attached or unattached, And the minds of these two classes are again of two kinds.

विरागी विधितः कामं ज्ञातोज्ञात्व मध्यमः ।

रागी च दिविविधः प्रोक्तो मूर्तखं चतुरस्तथा ॥ 38 ॥

The “attached” man is stupid and cunning and the “unattached” is sub-divided into three classes knowing, unknowing and middling.

चातुर्वं दिविध प्रोक्त शास्त्रज मतिंतं तथा ।

मतिस्तु दिविधा लोक युक्तायुक्तिति सर्वथा ॥ 39 ॥

The cunning man is divided again into two classes: Whether his cunningness is according to the dictates of Śāstras or arising from his intellect. Again intellect is sub-divided into two whether it is Yukta (one-pointed) or Ayukta (Diverted).

प्रतीहार उवाच

यदुक्ते भवता विद्वार्थजोर्हे हिज्ञोतम ।

तत्सर्वे विस्तेणाएँ यथार्थं वद सतम ॥ 40 ॥

The guard spoke: “O Learned one! I cannot understand what you say; so explain them to me what they mean.”

शुक उवाच

रागो यथासिति संसारे स रागीत्युच्छे धुवम् ।

दुःखं बहुविधिं तस्य सुखं च विधिं पुनः ॥ 41 ॥

Šuka Deva said: “Those who are attached to this world are said to be “attached” persons. These attached persons feel frequently various pleasures and pains.

धनं प्राय्य सुतान्दारामानं च विवयं तथा ।

तद्वायय महदुःखं भवलेवय इणे झणे ॥ 4 2 ॥

When they get wives, sons, wealth, honour, rise, etc., they get pleasure; and if they do not get any of these they feel at every moment intense pain.

कार्य तस्य सुखोपायः कर्तव्ये सुखसाधनम् ।

तस्यातीतः स विज्ञेयः सुखविषर्ने क्रौतिं चः ॥ 43 ॥

Now the attached person sought to take such means as will secure them the pleasure of this world; so whoever acts against those means are denominated as breakers of their happiness and so they are enemies; and whoever, sides in their acquiring pleasures are denominated as their friends.

सुखोर्यादिता मित्र रागयुक्त्य सर्वथा ।

चतुरो नैव मुहोत मूढ़ो: सर्वेन मुहाति: ॥ 44 ॥

Of these, the attached but at the same time cunning man does not get confounded and bewildered by them; whereas stupid attached man gets always bewildered everywhere.

वित्कन्यात्मरक्य सुखोकानलेवनम् ।

आत्मानुचितनं चैव वेतान्तस्य च चिन्तनम् ॥ 45 ॥

The man that is dispassionate and engaged in determining the “self” dwells in a solitary place, meditates on “self”, finds pleasure in studying the Vedānta Śāstras and feels pain in all the topics on worldly affairs.

दुःखं तदेततसर्व हि संसारकधनादिकम् ।

शत्रवो बह्वस्तस्य विज्ञस्य शुभमिच्छतः ॥ 46 ॥

कामः क्रीधः प्रमाद्धु श्रवो विधिधः स्मृतः ।

बज्यु: सन्तोष एवायन नानो5स्ति घुवनत्रये ॥ 47 ॥

The wise man that wants his real welfare and is averse to the worldly enjoyments finds that he has many enemies: lust, anger, palaces, etc., are his so many enemies. Contentment is his only friend in the three lokas and so one is his real self."

सूत उवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य मत्ता तं ज्ञानिं दिजम् ।

क्षता प्रवेश्यामास कक्षां चातिमनोरामम् ॥ 4 8 ॥

Hearing these words of Šuka Deva, the watchman considered Šuka Deva a very wise man and soon led him to a very beautiful compartment.

नगरं बीक्षामण: संस्वैविध्यजनसंकुलम् ।

नानाविषिग्रद्याखों क्रविक्रक्याकराम्क। ॥ 4 9 ॥

Šuka Deva then began to see that the town was

full of three sorts of men, good, middling, and bad; and the shops were filled with various articles of merchandise.

रागदेष्युतं कामालोभमोहाकुतं तथा ।

विवदसुजनाकर्णि वसुपुर्ण महतम् ॥ 50 ॥

The many things were being incessantly purchased and sold there. Whithin that town, filled with many men, money and all sorts of wealth and prosperities, almost everywhere were seen instances of attachment, hatred, lust, anger, greed, vanity and delusion; at some parts there were seen persons quarrelling with each other.

पश्यन्स त्रिविंशल्लोकान्यासरत्राजमन्दिरम् ।

प्रात: परमतेजस्वी द्वितीय इव भास्कर: ॥ 51 ॥

निवारितश तत्र प्रतीत्रिण काहवत् ।

तत्रैव च श्विता द्वारि मोक्षेमवानुचित्यम् ॥ 52 ॥

Seeing thus the three sorts of persons, the highly energetic Śuka, blazing like a second Sun, went to the royal palace when the gateman stopped him. He stood there like a log of wood and began to meditate on “Mokṣa” (Liberation).

छायायामाते चैव सम्वर्गी महातपाः ।

ध्यानं कृता तथैकान्तै स्थितः स्थाणुरिवाचणः ॥ 53 ॥

तं मुहुतौदुगाम्पत राज्ञोमात्य: कृतांजस्ति: ।

प्रावेशपत्ततः कक्षां द्वितीयां राजवेग्नभः ॥ 54 ॥

He began to think the light and darkness as same; the greatly ascetic Sūka became merged in Dhyāna (meditation) and remained at one place motionless. In an instant, a royal minister came out and saluting him with folded hands, took him to a second compartment. Here the minister showed him beautiful divine gardens. adorned nicely with rows of divine trees bearing fruits and gave him a good reception and took him to a very beautiful palace.

तत्र दिख्यं मनोरयं पुष्पितं दिव्यापदाप् ।

तद्रने दर्शियला तु कृत्वा चातिधिस्तिकम्प। ५ ५ ॥

वारमुख्यः सिक्यसन्त्र राजसेवापरायणः ।

गीतवादिकुशला: कामशाखियारादः ॥ ५ ६ ॥

ता आदिष्य च सेवार्य शुक्रस्य मन्रिस्तमतः ।

सितां: सदानात्समाङ्गासपुरः स्थितस्तदा ॥ 57 ॥

Book 1 Chapter XVIII

पुस्ति: परया भत्त्या ताधिभः स्तीभियंधाविति ।

इंगकालोपयपने नानाञेनातितोषित: ॥ 58 ॥

The minister next ordered the public women, in royal service, expert in music and playing with instruments, and skilled in Kāma-Śāstra (the science of amorous dealings) to attend on Śuka Deva and went out of the palace. Śuka, the son of Vyāsa, remained there Those prostitutes then prepared various dishes, suited to the time and place, and sought the satisfaction of Śuka and then worshipped him duly with greatest devotion.

ततो3न्त:पुर्वासियस्तथात:पुरकाननम् ।

रमं सन्दर्शयामासुरुज्ञना: काममोहिताः ॥ 5 9 ॥

Those ladies, then, residing within the four walls, became enamoured to see the beauty of Śuka Deva and showed him the gardens that existed in the inner compound.

स युवा रूपवाक्यांती मुंघाषी मनोरम: ।

यूद्या ता मुणुः सर्वार्ते च कामविवरणम् ॥ 60 ॥

Śuka was young and beautiful; over this he was extremely lovely, of nice limbs; his speech was soft and gentle; so he looked like a second Cupid (the god of love); all the ladies, struck with Cupid's arrows, lost their consciousness.

तितौंदियं मुनि मत्ता सर्वा: पर्यवंतरन्त।

आणयेस्तु शुक्राता मातुभाव्यमकल्पयत् ॥ 6 1 ॥

Then recovering, they considered Šuka Deva to be the great controller of passions and began to serve him with great care. The pure minded Šuka, born of Arani, looked on them like his mother.

आत्मारामो तितक्रोधो न हृद्यति न तथ्यति ।

पर्यंस्तासां विकारांशं स्वस्थ एवं स तिथ्यवान् ॥ 62 ॥

Šuka, finding pleasure in self and the controller of anger was not pleased or displeased with anything; so though he saw that the ladies were disturbed with amorous feelings, he remained quite undisturbed, calm and quiet.

तस्यै शय्यां सुर्यायं च द्वनुर्पंयै: सुरसंकृताम् ।

पराध्यांस्तरणोपेतां नानोपस्कारसंवृतःम् ॥ 63 ॥

The ladies, then prepared a very nice bed whereon Šuka Deva would sleep; it was spread over with nice clean bed sheet; many nice pillows were placed.

स कृत्वा पादशैर्चं च कुशपाणिरतर्दितः ।

उपाय्य पशिषा सन्थां ध्यानमेवान्पयत ॥ 64 ॥

He, then, washed his feet and with vigilance, put on his finger the ring prepared of Kuśa grass, and completing his evening Sandhyā, became merged in Dhyāna.

यामकें स्थितो ध्याने सूचाय पतदन्तरम् ।

सुत्वा यामद्वयं तत्र ओदलितन्तः शुकः ॥ 65 ॥

Meditating on Supreme Brahma for three hours (one Prahara), slept for 6 hours of the night.

पाछात्यं यामिनीयामं ध्यानमेवाव्यपत् ।

स्नाता प्रात:क्रिया: कृत्वा पुनरास्ते समाहितः ॥ 66 ॥

ड्रति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे प्रवासक्यचे

स्नतद्गोउध्याः :// 17 // /

Then at the Brāhma muhūrta (one hour preceding the sunrise) he took his bath and completing his morning duties, became immersed in Samādhi (inner enlightenment) and sat at ease.

Thus ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the First Book on Suka's displaying his self-control amidst the

women of the palace of Mithilā in the Mahāpurāna

Śrimaddevirbhāgavatam by Veda Vyāsa.

Book 1 Chapter XVIII

