CHAPTER XXVIII

On the Glory of Śaṅkṣi Devi

जनमेजय उवाच

विश्वभिमदामाख्यानं हरिश्रान्य कीर्तिनम् ।

शताक्षीपादधनकस्य राजर्षिधिकस्य च ॥ १ ॥

शताक्षी सा कृतो जाता देवी भगवती शिवा ।

तत्कारणं वद मुने सायंकं जन्म मे कुक ॥ २ ॥

Janamejaya said: Rsi! Wonderful is the story of the religious Rājarsi Hariścandra that you have described, the great Bhakta of Śatāksī Devī! Why is that auspicious Śivā, the wife of Śiva, called Śatāksī? Explain to me, the cause of it, O Muni! And thus make my birth full of use and success.

को हिं देहना शणान्व्यंस्वृतीयं भायसीत शुद्धापीः ।

पदे पदेउधोपतय स्तलमध्यमपुन्ते ॥ 3 ॥

Who is there amongst the clear minded that gets fully satisfied, when he hears the good deeds of the Devi? Each sentence, describing the good deeds of the Devi, gives the undecaying fruits of Asvamedha Sacrifice.

व्यास उवाच

शृणु राजन्यक्ष्यायि शताश्रीसम्पयं शुभम् ।

तत्वावाच्छं न मे किंचिद्वीभानस्य विद्यते ॥ 4 ॥

Vyāsa said: O, King. Hear; I am describing the story of Śatāksī Devī. You are the great devotee of the Devī; so I have nothing that I cannot say to you.

दुर्गमाख्यो महादैन्यः पूर्वे परमदाफणः ।

हिरण्यश्राव्ये जातो रुभगुजो महाखणः ॥ 5 ॥

देवानां तु चलं वेदो नाशे तस्य सुना अपि ।

नंक्ष्यंत्येव न सन्देहो विधेयं तावदेव तत् ॥ 6 ॥

In olden times, there was a great Dānava named Durgama; he was very cruel. He, the son of Ruru, was born in the family of Hiranyāksa. [Once he thought within himself thus: 'The Munis offer oblations by Mantras as ordained in the Vedas.

विपुर्यतैतपश्यां गत: कर्तूं हिमालये ।

ब्रहाणं मनसा ध्याना वायुभक्षो व्यतिष्ठा ॥ 7 ॥

सहस्वर्वपर्यन्ते चकार परमं तपः ।

तेजसा तस्य लोकान्तु संतन्तः ससुगासुराः ॥ 8 ॥

And the Devas, eating the clarified butter (ghee) of these oblatios, get nurtured and strengthened.] The Vedas is the strength of the Devas; if the Vedas be destroyed, the Devas also would be destroyed. Thus it is advisable to destroy the Vedas. (There is no other easy way.) Thus thinking, he went to the Himālayas to perform tapasyā. He began to meditate Brahmā in the space of his heart, and, taking air only, passed away his time.

ततः प्रसोः भगवान्सीमाकडतुभुतुः ।

ययौ तस्ये वरं तुतुं प्रसमुपख्याजुकः ॥ 9 ॥

सामाधियं मीतिलाङ्ग सूट्यमह चतुर्मुखः ।

वरं वरय भई ते यसे मनसि वर्तते ॥ 10 ॥

[Mark here that all the Devas reside in space, a magnitude of the Fourth Dimension.] He practised hard tapaysā for one thousand years and the Devas and the Asuras and all the Lokas were agitated by the power of his Tejas (fiery lustre). Then the Bhagavān, the four-faced Brahmā, became pleased with him and mounting on his carrier, the Swan came up there to grant him the boon. Brahmā told clearly the Demon, sitting in Samādhi with his eyes closed, 'Let all be well with you; now ask what you desire?'

तत्वा तपसा तुहो वरदोगो3हमागतः ।

श्रृत्वा ब्रह्मुपुवादाणी व्य्थितः स सामधितः ॥ 11 ॥

पूजयित्वा वरं बेबे वेदाद्वेहि सुरेश्वर ।

त्रिषु लोकेषु ये मन्ना ब्राह्माणेषु सुरेष्यि ॥ 12 ॥

"Satisified with your tapasyā, I have come to grant you the boon." Hearing thus, the Demon got up from his Samādhi and worshipping Him duly, said: "O, Lord of the Devas! Give me all the Vedas.

विद्याने ते तु साधिष्ये मम सन्तु मेहश्र ।

बलं च देहि वेने स्याहेवानां च पराजयः ॥ 13 ॥

O, Maheśvara! Let all the Vedic Mantrams, that

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

are found in the three worlds, with the Brāhmaṇas and the Devas, come to me and give me such strength as would enable me to conquer the Devas."

इतं तस्य वचः शुवा तवास्त्रिन्ति वचो वव्न् ।

जगाम सत्यलोकं तु चतुर्वेदेश्वर: परः ॥ 14 ॥

ततःप्रभुति विश्रैस्तु विस्मृत्ता वेदराशयः ।

स्नानसंध्यानित्यहोममबाद्यज्ञजायादः ॥ 15 ॥

Hearing this, the God Brahmā, the author of the four Vedas, replied “Let it be as you wish.” and went away. Form that time, the Brāhmaṇas forgot all about the Vedas. So bathing, Sandhyā, daily Homas, Śrāddha, sacrifice, and Japam and other rites and performances, all became extinct.

वितुला धरणीषुते हाहाकारो महानभूत ।

किमिदं किमिदं चेति विश्रा ऊनुः परमस्पम् ॥ 16 ॥

Then a cry of universal distress arose on the surface of this wide earth; the Brāhmins began to say to each other: "How has this happened! How has this come to pass! Now what are we to do? Where the Vedas have disappeared.

वेदभावान्तदसामभि: कर्तेल्यं किमतः परम् ।

इति भूमौ महानर्षे जाते परमदारणे ॥ 17 ॥

निजरी: सजरा जाता हविभंगागघपावत: ।

रोधेय स तदा दैत्यो नगरीममवारतीम् ॥ 18 ॥

अशक्तसन्ते ते योद्धु वज़दोहासुर्ण च ।

Thus when great calamities befell on the earth, the Devas became gradually weaker and weaker, not getting their share of the sacrifice Havis. At this time, that Demon invested the city of Amarāvati. And the Devas, not being able to fight with the Asura, of a thunder-like body fled to various directions.

पलायनं नदा कृत्वा निरिता निरजीरः क्रचित् ॥ १९ ॥

नितयं निरितुर्वीष्ट्र रत्ससानुगृहासु च ।

संस्थितः परमां शक्ति ध्यानंतसे पराधिकाम् ॥ २० ॥

अनौ होमाद्याभवानुं चूयत्थायोउव्यभूवृय ।

They took refuge in the caves of the mountain Sumeru and the inaccessible passes of the mountain and began to meditate on the Highest Force, the Great Goddess. O King! When oblations of

clarified butter are offered to the Fire, those get transferred to the Sun (Sūryaloka) and get transformed as rains.

वृडेशभावे संगृक्के निर्जलं चापि भृततम् ॥ 21 ॥

कृपवापीतडागास सरितः शुक्रतां गता: ।

अनावृष्टिरितं राजनभूच्छ शतावर्णिकी ॥ 22 ॥

भृताः प्रजाक्ष बहुधा गोगहिष्यादसतः ।

So when the Homa ceremonies disappeared, there was the scarcity of rain. The earth became quite dry and not a drop of water was found anywhere. The wells, tanks, pools, rivers all were dried up. And this sate of ‘no rains’ lasted one hundred years. Countless people, hundreds and thousands of cows, buffaloes and other beasts went to the jaws of death.

गृहे गृहे मनुष्याणामवच्छवसंग्रहः ॥ 23 ॥

अनर्धे त्वेयमूद्धते बाहापानः शीतोवनासः ।

गत्वा हिमवतः पार्थे सिराधियेष्वः शिवाम् ॥ 24 ॥

The dead bodies of persons remained in heaps in every house; persons would not be found to perform their burning ceremonies. When such calamities were seen, the calm and quiet body of the Brāhmaṇa, in their earnestness to worship the Supreme Goddess, went to the Hīmalayas.

समाधिध्यानुपर्णिधर्वेत्री त्रुडुत्-वढम् ।

निरहास्तसदासक्तास्तापेव शरणं वयुः ॥ 25 ॥

दरां कुरु महेषागिन पागयेषु जनेषु है ।

सर्वपराययुक्तेषु नैनच्छलायं लविडिके ॥ 26 ॥

They with their whole heart and without taking any food began to worship the Devi daily with their Samādhi, meditation and worship. “O Mahesāni! Shew mercy on us. O Mother! It’s not praisworthy to Thee to manifest Thy such anger on us, the low persons and guilty of all sins.

कोपं संहरं देवेशि सर्वातिर्यामिर्विधि ।

त्वया यथाप्रयेतैउयं क्रांति स तथा जनः ॥ 27 ॥

So, O Devesvari! Forgive us. If Thou art angry on us for our faults, even then we may be excused, for Thou art the Internal Ruler within us all and we do whatever. Thou impellest us to do. (The other

Book VII Chapter XXVIII

Devas become pleased and give fruits when they are worshipped by Japam, and other Homa ceremonies; but that is not even possible due to the disappearance of the Vedic Mantrams from amongst us. But You are kind as mothers are towards their children whenever they remember.)

नाया गतिजनस्याय कि पश्यसि पुनः पुनः ।

यचेछस तथा कर्तूं समर्थांसि मेछोशि ।। २ ८ ॥

समुद्र महेशानि संकटावरमोत्थितान् ।

जीवनेन वितारमकां कवं स्वातिर्वतिर्विके ।। २ ९ ॥

प्रसीद त्वं महेशानि प्रसीद जगद्धिके ।

अन्नतकोटिद्ब्राण्डवनायिके ते नगो नमः ॥ 30 ॥

So without Thee, there is no other rescue for these people. O Maheśvari! Whatever Thou willest, Thou canst do that; so what art Thou seeing again and again? O Maheśāni! How can we live without Water, what is called the Life. Now rescue us from this great difficulty. O Mother of the Worlds! O Maheśvari! Be pleased. Oh the Ruler of the endless crores of Brahmāṇḍas! Obeisance to Thee! We bow down to Thee, the Unchangeable, of the nature of Intelligent.

नम: कृत्यस्काप्ये चिद्युपायो नमे नमः ।

नमो वेदान्तवैद्यार्थे भुवनेत्रये नमे नमः ।। ३१ ।।

नेति नेतीति वाक्यैयां बोध्येते सकलापतेः ।

तां सर्वकारणां देढ़ी सर्वभावोन सन्ततः ॥ ३२ ॥

इति संग्रामिति देयी भुवनेगी महेश्वी ।

अनंताहिमयं क्वे दर्शनायाम पार्वती ॥ ३३ ॥

We again and again make obeisance to Thee, the Lady of the Universe and realisable by the Vedānta words (not this, not this). All the sayings of the Vedānta declare Thee, by negating (not this, not this) other transient objects as the Cause of all this Universe. We with all our hearts bow down to the Devi." When the body of the Brāhmaṇas thus praised and chanted the hymns of Maheśvari, She created innumerable eyes within Her body and became visible.

नीलांजनसमप्रद्यां नीलपचायतेक्षणम् ।

सुककौशसोतृझ्वृत्तपीचनवस्तम् ॥ 34 ॥

बाणसृष्टि च कमलं पुष्पपललयमूलकान् ।

शांकादी-कलसिंयुक्तनन्तराससंयुतान् ॥ 35 ॥

क्षूरूडजरापहान्स्तैर्विंघती च महाद्वतुः ।

सर्वसौद्यैसरं तदूयं लावणयोगचितम् ॥ 36 ॥

Her colour was dark-blue (colour of the fourth dimension, space) like heaps of collyrium (eye-paint); eyes like the blue lotuses and expanded; breasts hard, regularly elevated round and so fleshy that they touched each other; four handed; with Her right hand, holding arrows; on the under hand holding lotus; on the upper left hand holding a great bow and on the lower hand, carrying vegetables, fruits, flower and roots with abundance of juice, destroying hunger, thirst and fever.

कोटिरूप्यंप्रतीकांग करणारससागरम् ।

दूर्शियला जगद्धाठी सार्पत्नायनोद्धला ॥ 37 ॥

मोच्यामास लोकयु वारियारा: सहसशः ।

नवरात्रं महावृष्टिरभूत्रेजोद्धवैर्जैं: ॥ 38 ॥

She was the Essence of all Beauty, lovely, luminous like the thousand Suns, and the ocean of mercy. That Upholder of the Universe, showed—Her form and began to shed waters from Her eyes. For nine nights continuously, the heavy rains poured down out of the waters flowing from Her eyes.

दुःरित्तानीक्ष्य सकलाधोजाश्रण विमुच्छाति ।

तर्पितानंतरे ते लोका ओषध्यः सकलात आपि ॥ 39 ॥

नदीनप्रदणाहार्जैर्नैर्नै: सभपबद्युप ॥

नितीय संस्थिता: पूर्व सुरास्ते निरिता बहि: ॥ 40 ॥

मिलिला ससुरा विधा देहों समधिगुदुकुः ।

नमो वेदान्तवेहे ते नमो ब्रह्मस्वरूपिणि ॥ 41 ॥

Seeing the misery of all the people, out of pity, She showered incessantly tears from Her eyes; and all the people and medicines were satisfied. What more than this, out of those tears, the rivers began to flow. The Devas that remained hidden in the mountain caves, now came out. Then the Brāhmins, united with the Devas, began to praise and sing hymns to the Devi. Thou art known by the Vedānta Mahāvākyas. We bow down to Thee.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

स्वामाया सर्वजगढ्धिधार्थे ते नोम नमः ।

भक्रकल्युद्वे देखे भक्तार्थे देहधारिणी ॥ 4 2 ॥

नियचूणे निरूपणे घुवनेश्वर ते नमः ।

अस्मच्छान्यधीमुले लोचनानां महस्वकम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

Thou ordainest everything to all the worlds by Thy Māyā; so again and again we bow down to Thee. Our Obeisance to Thee! Who art a Kalpa tree to the Bhaktas yielding all their desires! Thou assumest the body for the Bhaktas! Thou art always satisfied; without any equal; the Lord of the Universe! We bow dewn to Thee.

त्वया यतीे धृतं देयि शताक्षी त्वं ततो भव ।

बुधया भीडिता मातः सतींु शफिन्चं चासित नः ॥ 4 4 ॥

कृपं कृक महेशानि वेदानप्रकाराधिके ।

As Thou, O Devi! hast innumerable eyes only for our welfare and peace, therefore Thou wilt be called henceforth by the name ‘Śatākṣī.’ O Mother! We are very much hungry; so we have no power to chant hymns to Thee; therefore, O Maheśāni? Shew mercy on us and deliver to us our Vedas.”

व्यास उवाच

इति तेषां वच: शुत्वा शाकान्वक्सरसंश्वितान् ॥ 4 5 ॥

स्वातूनि फलमूलाति भक्षणार्थ द्वटी शिका ।

नानाविधानि चाङ्रानि पणुभोज्यानि वाथि च ॥ 46 ॥

काम्यानन्तरसैयुक्तान्यानवीनोदूयं दटी ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing these words of The Devas and the Brāhmins, the Auspicious One gave them the vegetables, delicious fruits and roots to them that were on Her Hand, for their eating. After She was prayed, She gave to men sufficient quantity of various articles of juice food and to the beasts, grass, etc., until new crops came out.

शाकंभरीति नामपि तद्विनात्मभयूघ ॥ 47 ॥

ततः कोलाहले जाते तृत्वावेयने वाँधिताः ।

सर्वेन्यः सापुधो योद्धुं दुर्गमाखो3पुते ययो ॥ 48 ॥

O King, from that day She became famous by the name of Śākambhari (because She nourished all by vegetables, etc.) Great tumult arose and the Demon Durgama heard all from the emissaries and started out to fight with his weapons and army.

सहसाक्षीहिणीयुक्तः शगन्युंचेस्त्वात्थितः ।

कौधे देवसैम्यं तद्धेच्ये प्रिश्वं पुरा ॥ 49 ॥

तथा विग्राणं चैव रोध्यामास सर्वतः ।

ततः किलकिलाशब्दः समभूदेवमण्डले ॥ 50 ॥

ग्राहि ग्राहीति वाक्यानि प्रेषुः सर्वैं द्विजासभः ।

ततस्तेजोमयं चकं देवानां परितः शिवा ॥ 51 ॥

He took one thousand Akṣauhīnī armies with him (one Akṣauhīnī army equals large army consisting of 21,870 chariots, as many elephants, 65,610 horses, and 109,350 foot) and, shooting arrows, he came quickly before the Devi and invested Her and the Devas army and the Brāhmins. At this, a great tumultuous uproar arose and the Devas and the Brāhmins united exclaimed: 'O Devi! Save us; save us.'

चकार सक्षणायी स्वयं तस्माद्वहि: स्थिता ।

ततः समभवशुद्धे देया दैत्यस्य चोभयोः ॥ 52 ॥

गरवर्षसमाव्छत्रं सूर्यमण्डलमद्धुतम् ।

परमसशगतोर्दर्भसगुद्धतानिसुपुभम् ॥ 53 ॥

The Auspicious Devi, then, for the safety of the Devas and the Dvijas created round them a luminous circle and She Herself remained outside. The terrible fight, then, ensued between the Devi and the Dānavas. The Sun was covered with their incessant hurling of arrows; and the shooters could not shoot accurately on account of the darkness that then prevailed. Then by the collision of the arrows of both the parties, the arrows caught fire and the battlefield again became filled with light.

कठोरस्थापणकावधिरीकृदितकन्दम् ।

ततो देवीशगरीतु निर्गतास्तीवशफकः ॥ 54 ॥

कालिका तारिणी बाला विसुपा भैर्यी स्या ।

बगला चैव मातर्गी तथा जिपुस्पतुर्ची ॥ 55 ॥

कामाकी तुलना देवी जाँभीगो मोहिनी तथा ।

छिज्मसता गुहाकांली दशमाहसबाहुका ॥ 56 ॥

The quarters on all sides resounded with harsh bow sounds and nothing could be heard. At this moment, came, out of the body of the Devi, the principal Śaktis (forces incarnate) Kālīkā, Tārīnī,

Book VII Chapter XXVIII

Šodaši, Tripurā, Bhairavi, Kamalā, Bagalā, Mātangi, Tripura Sundari, Kāmākṣī, Tulajā Devi, Jambhini, Mohini, Chinnamastā, and ten thousand armed Guhya Kālīs and others.

प्रतिश्छच्छयान्याङ्गयानु: शद्धिमिता: परा: ।

असंख्यातास्तो देख्य: समुद्धात्सु सायुधाः ॥ 57 ॥

मुदंगपांखवीणादिनादितं संगरस्थलम् ।

गतिक्रिपिद्वसी-ये तु नागिरेक्षीद्विगीगति ॥ 58 ॥

अप्रेसर: समभवदुर्गो माहिनीपति: ।

गतिक्रिप: सह युद्धे च चकार प्रथमं रिपुः ॥ 59 ॥

Thirty-two Śaktis, sixty-four Śaktis, and then innumerable Śaktis, all armed, came out of the Devi successively. When the Śaktis destroyed one hundred Akṣauhinī forces, Mrḍanigas, conch-shells, Lutes and other musical instruments were sounded in the battle-field. At this time, the enemy of the Devas, Durgama, came in front and first fought with the Śaktis.

महधूद्धे समभवद्याभूद्रत्कावाहिनी ।

अश्वहीप्रियन्तु ता: सर्वा विन्हा द्याणिधर्दैः ॥ 60 ॥

तत एकादशे प्रापते दिनोपरमदाकणे ।

तकमाल्यांबधरो तरकार्यानुलोपन: ॥ 6 1 ॥

कृत्वोत्सवं महान्तं तु युद्धाय रथसंस्थितः ।

संसंभोधेच महता शक्तीः सर्वा विज्ञित्य च ॥ 6 2 ॥

महादेवीरायो तु स्वरयं संन्यवेशयत् ।

ततो5भवन्महुख्दे देया दैत्यस्य चोभयतेः ॥ 6 3 ॥

प्रहतृवयपर्वी हृदयत्रासाकारम् ।

ततः पड्डशाल्युप्रवाणान्देवीमुमोचे ॥ 6 4 ॥

The fight grew to such a terrible extent that, within ten days, all the Akṣauhinī troops were destroyed. So much so as the blood of the dead soldiers began to flow in torrents like rivers. When the fatal eleventh day arrived the Dānava, wearing red clothes on his waist, red garlands on his neck and anointing his body all over with red sandal paste, celebrated a very grand festivity and mounted on his chariot and went out to fight. With the strenuous effort, he defeated all the Śaktis and placed his chariot before the Devi. Then a terrible fight ensued for two Praharas (six hours). The

hearts of all shivered with horror. At this time, the Devi shot fifteen very awful arrows at the Dānava.

चतुर्भिश्रुतो वाहान्जोगेनैक सारथिम।

ब्राभ्यां नेरे भुजी झाभ्यां धजयेकेन पत्रिण ॥ 65 ॥

पड़ाधिर्द्वरं नस्य विद्याध ज्ञादयिका ।

ततो वमन्स कधिरं ममार पुर इंशितुः ॥ 66 ॥

His four horses (Vāhanas) were pierced by Her four arrows; the charioteer was pierced by one arrow; his two eyes were pierced by two arrows; his arms by two arrows, his flag by one arrow and his heart was pierced by five arrows. He then left his body before the Devi, vomiting blood. The vital spirit, the luminous counterpart, emitting from his body, merged in the space like body of the Devi.

तस्य तेनजस्त्र निर्गल्य देवीकरणे विवेत्र है ।

हते ततिम्मत्रावीर्य शान्तामासीज्ञात्यम् ॥ 67 ॥

ततो बढ़ाव्यः सर्वे तुड्युर्जभदैविकाम् ।

पुरस्कृत्व हरीशानी भवत्या नदस्या गिरा ॥ 68 ॥

The three worlds, then, assumed a peaceful appearance when that greatly powerful Dānava was killed. Then Hari, Hara, Brahmā and the other Devas began to praise and chant hymns to the World Mother with great devotion and in voices, choked with feelings.

देवा ऊचुः

जगद्धप्रभाविसर्किकारणे परमेश्वी ।

नमः शाकंभरि शिवे नमसे शगतलोचने ॥ 69 ॥

सर्वीपनिषदुपुरुते दुर्गामुस्नानाशिन ।

नमो महेश्वी शिवे पऊकोशान्तसिधे ॥ 70 ॥

The Devas said: “O Auspicious One! Thou art the only Cause of this Illusions of this world, presenting an ureal appearance (while Brahma is the Only Reality). So Thou art the Lady of all the beings (otherwise why it would be that Thou hast nourised all the beings with vegetables, etc.) So, Obeisance to Thee, the Śakambhari! Hundred-eyed! O Auspicious One! Thou art sung in all the Upaniṣads! The Destroyer of the Durgama Asura! We bow down to Thee, the Lord of Māyā, the Dweller in the five sheaths Anna, Rasa, etc.

येतसा निर्विकल्पेन यां ध्यायिति मुनीश्राः ।

प्रणावार्यकल्पा तां भजामो भुवंनश्रीम ॥ 71 ॥

अतन्तकोदिक्वाण्डजननीं दिव्यायिश्राम् ।

ब्रहायिष्यादिजननीं सर्वभावैनंता वयम् ॥ 72 ॥

We meditate upon Thee, the Lady of the universe, as demonstrated by Pranava Aum, whom the chief Munis meditate with their Nirvikalpa hearts (hearts free from any Vikalpa, doubts or ignorance). Thou art the Mother of the endless crores of universe! Thou assumest the Divine Bodies at times for our welfare! Thou art the Mother of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and others; we bow down to Thee with all our heart.

कः कुयात्यमरान्धूवा रोदनं सकलेक्षाः ।

सदचां परमेशानीं शताक्षीं मार्तं वित्ता ॥ 73 ॥

Thou art the Mother of all; so out of mercy, Thou hast shed tears from the hundred eyes, to remove the miseries of the low humble persons. Thou art the Ruler of all!"

व्यास उवाच

इति स्तुता सुरैर्वी बढ़ाविष्यादिधिपशैः ।

पूजिता विविधिर्वेल्यै: संतुहाभुच्छ तक्षणे ॥ 74 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus when Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Hara and the other Devas praised and chanted various hymns to the Devi and worshipped Her with various excellent articles, She became instantly pleased.

प्रसाता सा तदादौदी वेदनात्वरु सा ददौ ।

बाङ्गोप्यो विशेषेण प्रोवार पिक्षभाविषी ॥ 75 ॥

मायंवं तनुकल्हा पालनीया विशेषतः ।

यथा विनाउनवं एव जातो तुढो3पुर्नैव ॥ 76 ॥

Then the Devi, graciously pleased, handed over the Vedas to the Brāhmaṇas. At last, She, the Cukoo-voiced, made a special address to them. "These Vedas are the excellent parts of My body. So preserve these with your greatest care. The more so when you all have seen with your own eyes what a great calamity befell on you taken these Vedas went away out of your hands!

पूर्णासूई सर्वदा सेव्या युषामाथि सर्वदैव है ।

नात परतरं किंचित्कल्याणायोयपदिष्यते ॥ 77 ॥

पठनीयं मेमतिद्ध माहात्ययं सर्वदौतमम् ।

तेन सुहा यथिष्यामि हरिष्यामि ताव३.सदः ॥ 78 ॥

You should all worship and serve Me (the Controller of the Space) always; there is no other thing higher than this I can advise you for your welfare. Read always these My excellent glorious deeds I will be pleased thereby and will destroy all your bad calamities and misfortunes.

दुर्गमासुरहीनावदारुर्गिति मन नाम यः ।

गृह्वीत च शताक्षिति मायां भिन्चा जजलस्पी ॥ 79 ॥

किमुकनेनात्र बहुना सारं बह्यामि तचन्तः ।

संसेव्याड़ं सदा देया सर्वेत्ति सुगनुर्भेः ॥ 80 ॥

My name is Durgā, because I have killed this demon Durgama; so he, who will take My name Durgā and Śatakṣī, he will be able to unveil my Māyā and walk freely. No use in telling more than this, that I tell you now, O Devas, the Essence of all essences: 'Both the Suras and the Asuras would always serve Me and Me, alone.'

यास उवाच

इत्युक्त्वर्तिहिता देवी देवानां चैव पर्यताम् ।

सन्तोषं जनयंत्रेयंवं सचिष्यदानन्द्रकर्णिणि ॥ 81 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus giving pleasures to the Devas by these words, the Devi of the nature of Existence, Intelligence and Bliss disappeared before them.

एतते सर्वमाख्यातं रहस्यं परमं महत् ।

गोपानीय प्रयतेन सर्वकल्याणकारकम् ॥ 82 ॥

O King! This Grand Mystery I have described to you in detail; but this is the source of good to all; so keep it secret with every care.

य झमं शृणुयाजित्यमध्यायं भक्तित्यतः ।

सर्व-कामानवान्योति देवीतोंके महीयते ॥ 83 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे सत्यमकक्य-

उष्धिशोभायतः ॥ 84 ॥

The person that hears daily with great devotion this Chapter, gets all that he wants and at last gets the worship in the Devi Loka.

Here ends the Twenty-eighth Chapter of the Seventh

Book on the glory of the Sātāksī Devi in the

Mahāpurānam Śrīmaddevithāgavatam, of 18,000

verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XXIX

