CHAPTER XXX

On the Conversation Between Sāvitri and Yama

साविश्यवाच

प्रवाति स्वर्गमवं च येपैव कर्मणा यम ।

मानवा: पुण्यवंस्थ तन्ये व्याख्यातुमहंसि ॥ 1 ॥

Sāvitrī said: “O Dharmarājan! Kindly tell me in detail about those works that lead the meritorious persons to the Heavens and various other spheres.”

धर्मार्ग जयाच

अत्रदानं च विषाय यः क्रोतीत च भारते ।

अत्रप्रमाणवर्षे च शिवलोके महीयते ॥ 2 ॥

अत्रदानं महादानमन्येष्ठोप्रि कोरिते यः ।

अत्रदानप्रमाणं च शिवलोके महीयते ॥ 3 ॥

Dharmarāja said: “O Child! He who gives rice and food to the Brāhmaṇas in India, goes to the

Śivaloka where he dwells with great respect for years equivalent to the measure of that food. This ‘Anna-dāna’ (the giving of boiled rice and other eatables) is a great dāna (charity) and this can be done not only to the Brāhmaṇas but to the other castes also, where similar results also follow.

अज्दानात्यरं दानं न भूतं न भविष्यति ।

नात्र पावरशीहा स्थान्र कालिनियमः स्वचित् ॥ 4 ॥

देवेध्यो ब्रह्माण्यो वा द्वाति चासनं यदि ।

महीयते विद्य्युलेको वर्षाणाममुतं सति ॥ 5 ॥

There is, or will be, no other charity superior to this charity of anna (rice, boiled it may be and other eatables). For here no distinction is made as to what

Book IX Chapter XXX

caste will get it or not, nor the discrimination of time, when to give such a charity. O Child! Seats (Āšanas) given to the Devas and the Brāhmaṇas, carry the donor to the Viṣṇu Loka, where he dwells for Ayuta years with great respect and love.

यो द्वाति च विघ्राय दिह्वां धेनुं पर्यस्तिन् ।

तल्लोममानवर्ष च विष्णुलोक महीयते ॥ 6 ॥

चतुर्णीं पुण्यद्विते तीर्थें शतगुर्णं फलम् ।

दानं नारायणक्षेत्र फलं कोटिपुर्णं भवेत् ॥ 7 ॥

Giving excellent cows yielding milk to Brāhmanas take the donor to Visṇuloka, where he is glorified and remains for years equivalent to the number of pores in that cow or those cows. And if cows be given on a meritorious day, four times the merits accure, and if given in a sacred place of pilgrimage, hundred times the result occurs; and if given in a tīrtha, where Nārāyaṇa is worshipped, kojti times the results accrue.

गां यो द्विति विषाय भारते भक्तिपूर्वकम् ।

वर्षाणामयुतं चैव चन्द्रलेके महीयते ॥ 8 ॥

यशीभयमुखीदानं करोति बहागाया च ।

तल्लोमानवर्ष च विद्युलोके महीयते ॥ 9 ॥

He who gives with devotion, cows to the Brāhmaṇas in Bhārata, remains in the Candraloka for one Ayuta years and is glorified. He who gives a two-mouthed cow to a Brāhmaṇa goes to Visnuloka and remains there for as many years as there exist the numbers of hairs on the body of that cow and is glorified.

यो द्वाति ब्राह्माणय श्रेतच्छत्रं मनोहरम् ।

वर्षाणामवृतं सेटिपि मोदते वक्रणालये ॥ १ ० ॥

विज्ञाय पीडितानाय वस्वयुम् द्वाति च ।

महीयते वायुलेकि वर्षाणामवृत सति ॥ १ १ ॥

A gift of a beautiful white umbrella to a Brāhmaṇa makes one go to Varunāloka for Ayuta years where he remains with great pleasure. Giving garments to the diseased Brāhmaṇas make one fit to remain with glory in Vāyuloka for one ayuta years.

यो द्वर्तीत बाहाणाय शाल्यामं सवस्तकम् ।

महीयते स बैकुंटे यावच्छंद्रिवाकरी ॥ १ २ ॥

यो द्वर्तीत बाहाणाय दिथ्वां शय्यां मनोहाम् ।

महीयते चन्द्रलोके यावच्छंद्रिवाकरी ॥ १ ३ ॥

Giving to a Brāhmana the Śālāgrāma with garments makes one remain with glory in Vaikuntha as long as there exist the Sun and Moon. Giving a beautiful bedding to a Brāhmana, glorifies a man in the Candraloka as long as there exist the Sun and Moon.

यो ददाति प्रदीपं च देवेध्यो बाहाणाय च ।

यावन्मवन्तरं सेठिपि वहिलके महीयते ॥ 14 ॥

क्रौति गजदानं च यदि विधाय भारते ।

यावदिंद्रो नरस्तावदिंद्रस्याधांसने वसेत् ॥ 15 ॥

To give lights to the Devas and Brāhmaṇa glorifies a man in Agniloka (the region of Fire) for one Manvantara. To give elephants to the Brāhmaṇas in Bhārata, makes one sit in the same throne with Indra for his life period.

भारते यो3शुदानं च करौते ब्राह्मणाय च ।

मोदते वासणे लोके यावन्मन्तरं सति ॥ १ ६ ॥

प्रकृते शिविकां यो हिद्धत विहाणाय च ।

मोदते वासणे लोके वावद्विद्रश्रतुर्है ॥ १ ७ ॥

Giving horses to the Brāhmaṇas makes one remain in Varunāloka for fourteen Indras life periods. Giving a good palanquin to a Brāhmaṇa make one remain in the Varunaloka for fourteen Indras life-periods.

प्रकृही वार्तिकां यो हि द्वर्तित ब्राह्माणाय च ।

महीयते वायुलोके यावन्मन्तरं सति ॥ १८ ॥

यो द्वाति च विप्राय व्यजनं श्रेतचामग् ।

महीयते वायुलोके वर्षाणामयुतं घुमम् ॥ १९ ॥

Giving a good site or a good orchard to a Brāhmana leads one to the Vāyuloka where he remains with glory for one Manvantara. Giving a white cāmara and fan to a Brāhmana, leads the donor to the Vāyuloka where he remains for one ayuta years.

धान्यं रत्वं यो द्वाति चिरंत्रीही भवेत्सुधीः ।

द्राता ग्रहीता ती ही च धुवं वैकुणतामिनि ॥ 20 ॥

Giving grains and jewels make one long-lived and both the donors and receivers go certainly to Vaikuntha.

सततं श्रीहर्नीम भाते यो जयेघरः ।

स एव चित्रजीची च ततो मृत्युः पलाऊरे ॥ 2 1 ॥

यो नरो भाते वर्षे दोलनं कायदेसुधीः ।

पूर्णिमाजरजीशे जीवन्मुन्तो भवेराः ॥ 2 2 ॥

इह लोके सुखं भुक्ल्या याव्ये विज्युमादित्यम् ।

निश्छतं निवसेत्त्र शतमवन्तरावधि ॥ 2 3 ॥

He who always recites the name of Śrī Hari, lives for ever and Death goes far far away from him. The intelligent man that celebrates the Swinging Festival (Dol Yātā) in the last quarter of the Full Moon night in this land of Bhārata, becomes liberated while living, enjoying pleasures in this world, goes in the end to Viṣṇuloka, where he remains for one hundred Manvantaras; there is no doubt in this.

फलभुतफलपुर्ण्यां ततो5पि दिषुणां भवेत् ।

करण्योत्नीय स भवेदित्याहु कमलोद्वः ॥ 24 ॥

तिटवानं बाहाणाय यः करोति च भारत ।

तिलगमाणवर्ष च मोदते शिवमन्दिरे ॥ 25 ॥

If the Swinging Festival be performed under the influence of the asterism Uttara Phālguni then the fruits become doubled; this is the saying of Brahmā Himself The performer lives to the end of a Kalpa. To give til (Sesamum) to a Brāhmaṇa, leads one to Śiva Loka, where one enjoys for a number of years equal to the number of til.

ततः सुयोर्न संग्राम विरजीबी भवेल्सुखी ।

तापपात्रस्य दानेन द्रिणुणं च कलं लभेत् ॥ 26 ॥

सालोक्तां च भोगं च सरखां सुदर्धि प्रियाण।

यो द्वाति ब्राह्माणय भाते च पतितमात् ॥ 27 ॥

महीयते चंद्रलोके यावदिदंश्छतुर्दें ।

तत्र स्वर्वेयया सार्यं मोदते च दिवानिणम् ॥ 28 ॥

Then one is born in a good yoni and becomes longlived and happy. To give a copper plate yields double the effect. To give in India a chaste wife the garments and ornaments to a Brāhmana (and then to purchase her with an equivalent in gold) leads one to Candra Loka where one remains for fourteen Indra's life periods and enjoys day and night the celestial Apsarās.

ततो गंधर्वलोके च वर्षाणामयुतं धुवम् ।

दिवापितर्ग कांतुकेन चोवंश्या सह मोदते ॥ 29 ॥

ततो जनमहसहं च प्राप्नोति सुदार्ति प्रियाम् ।

सर्ती सीभाग्ययुक्ता च कोमलो प्रियवादिदीम् ॥ 30 ॥

Thence the donor goes to the Gandharva Loka for one ayuta years and day and night enjoys Urvaši. Then he gets for thousand births chaste, fortunate, wealthy, gentle and sweet-speaking, beautiful wives.

प्रद्वाति फलं चाफ ब्राह्मणाय च यो नरः ।

फलप्रमाणवर्षे च शकलोके महीयते ॥ 31 ॥

पुनः सुयोर्नि संप्राण्य सुतमुत्तमम् ।

He who gives nice and delicious fruits to the Brāhmapas, remains with glory in the Indra Loka for a number of years equivalent to the fruits. He gets again a good Yoni (birth) and gets excellent sons.

सफलनां च वृक्षाणां सहचं च प्रश्रसितम् ॥ 32 ॥

केवलं फलदानं वा बाहाणाय द्वताति च ।

सुचिरं स्वर्गावासं च कृत्वा याति स भारते ॥ 33 ॥

नानाद्वयस्मायुक्ते नानास्यस्मार्वित्नम् ।

द्वाति यश्र त्रियाय भारते वियुले गृहम् ॥ 34 ॥

सुरलेके वसेतसो5पि यावन्यन्तरं शतम् ।

To give thousand trees while there are fruits on them, or nice fruits only to the Brāhmanas, makes one enjoy the Heavens for a long, long time and he then comes back to Bhārata. To give various things and good edifices with grains, etc., to the Brāhmaṇas leads once to the regions of the Devas where he remains for one hundred Manvantaras.

ततः सुवोर्ग संग्राय स महाप्रधनात्यभवेत् ॥ 35 ॥

यो नरः सरमवंगुक्तां भूमिं च कौघां सति ।

द्वाति भकला विग्राय पुण्यघ्रेत्रे च भारते ॥ 36 ॥

महीयते च वैकुणे मन्वन्तशगतं घुवम् ।

पुनः सुयोनिं संग्राम्य महांश्र भृमिभो भवेत् ॥ 37 ॥

Then he gets a very good birth and becomes the master of abundant wealth. He who gives with devotion to the Brāhmanas lands certainly goes for one hundred Manvantaras and remains there in glory for one hundred Manvantaras; and, coming

Book IX Chapter XXX

again to be born in good wombs, they become Kings.

तं न तयजाति भूमिश्र जन्मनां शतकं परम् ।

शीमांश्छ धनवांश्रिय पुत्रवांश्र प्रजेश्रः ॥ 38 ॥

यो त्रजं च प्रकूर्ं च ग्रामं दद्याधिज्ञाय च ।

लुभमवन्तरं चैव वैकुण्ठे स महीयते ॥ 39 ॥

The earth does not leave him for hundred births. He becomes prosperous, wealthy and possesses many sons and becomes the lord of his subjects. He who gives a good village with pasture land and cows, dwells with glory in Vaikuntja for one lakh manvantaras.

युन: सुयोर्नि संग्राम यामलक्षस्मावित्तम् ।

न जहाति च तं पृथ्वी जन्मनां लक्ष्मेव च ॥ ४० ॥

Then he gets a good birth (becomes born in a high caste family) and obtain a lakh villages. The earth quits him not even if he be born a lakh times. (This is very bad then, to one who does not like to be born again).

सुप्रजं च प्रकूटं च पक्वसत्यसामन्वित्तम् ।

नानापुक्रिरीषुक्षणकलल्लीसमावित्तम् ॥ 41 ॥

नारं यक्ष विष्याय द्वाति भारते भवैत ।।

महीयते स केलासे शललक्षेत्रकालकम् ॥ 42 ॥

He who gives a village inhabited by good and obedient subjects with ripe excellent grains, various tanks, trees and adorned with fruits and leaves dwells in Kailāśa with great glory for ten lakh Indra's life periods.

पुन: सुवोर्गे संप्रायण राजेन्द्र भारते भवेत् ।

ननाराणां च नित्युं स लभेशत्र संशयः ॥ 43 ॥

धरा तं न जहाव्यैव जन्मनामयुतं धूवम् ।

परमेश्वर्यंसुक्तो भवेदेव महीतले ॥ 44 ॥

Getting again born in high family, he becomes Rājadhīrāja in Bhārata and obtains Niyuta towns. There is no doubt in this. The earth quits him not, even if he be born āyuta times. Really he gets the highest prosperity in this earth.

नरागरांचे शनकं देईंगो हि हिकज्ञाने ।

सुप्रकृह्टे मध्यकृष्टे प्रजापुक्ते द्वताति च ॥ 4 5 ॥

व्यापीतडागसंयुक्ते नानावृक्षसम्पित्तम ।

महीयते स वैकुणंठे कोटिमव्नतारविध ॥ 46 ॥

He who gives to a Brāhmaṇa one hundred towns and countries, inhabited by good or mediocre subjects, with wells, tanks, and, various trees, remains with glory in Vaikunṭha for one Koti manvantaras.

पुनः सुयोर्नि संग्राम्य जंबूढीपवितभंत्रेत ।

पारमैधर्वसंयुक्तो यथा शक्रस्वथा भृति ॥ 47 ॥

मही तं न जहावेल वन्मानां कोटिदेव च ।

कल्पांतकीवी स भवेत्रज्ञाजेश्रो महान् ॥ 48 ॥

Then he becomes born in this earth in a high caste family, becomes the Lord of Jambudvīpa and attains in this earth great prosperity like Indra. The earth quits him not even if he comes here Koṭi times; in reality he is a Mahātmā (a great-sould man), Rājrājeśvara (the Lord of Kings) and lives upto the end of a Kalpa.

स्वाधिकारं समयं च यो द्वाति द्विज्ञानले ।

चतुर्णी फलं चाते भवेतस्य न संशयः ॥ 49 ॥

जंबुद्वीयं यो द्वाति बाहाणाय तपिथने ।

फलं शतगुर्ण चोते भवेतस्य न संशयः ॥ 50 ॥

He who gives his whole property to a Brāhmīna, gets in the end four times that; there is no doubt in this. He who gives Jambu Dvīpa to an ascetic Brāhmana, gets undoubtedly in the end one hundred times the fruit.

जंबुढीपमहीदातु: सर्वतीर्थानि सेवितु: ।

सर्वेधां तपसां कर्तु: सर्वेधां वासकारिणः ॥ 51 ॥

सर्वेनासप्रतुत श्वसीस्थेधारस्य च ।

अस्वये पुनरावृतिंन भन्तस्य महोशितुः ॥ 52 ॥

असंख्यब्रद्धाणां पात पर्यन्ति भुवनेशितुः ।

निवसंति यमिष्ठीये श्रीद्वया: परये पदे ॥ 53 ॥

If you give away Jambu Dvipa, the whole earth; if you travel all the Tirthas, if you perform all sorts of asceticisms, if you give shelter to all, if you make gifts of all sorts, know that you will have to come again to be reborn in this earth; but if you become a devotee of Mūla Prakṛti, then be sure that you won't have to come here and be reborn. The devotees of Mūla Prakṛti go to Mani Dvipa, the

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Highest place of Śrī Bhuvaneśari Śrī and remain there and they see the fall of innumerable Brahmās.

देवीमन्नोयासकाय शिवाय मानवीं तनुम् ।

विषूर्ति दिव्यास्पर्प च जन्ममतुजरात्राम । ५४ ॥

लक्ष्या देयायु सात्वयं देवीसेवां च कुवंते ।

पश्यन्ति ते मणिहीपे सखंडे लोकसंक्षयम् ॥ ५५ ॥

The worshippers of the Devi Mantra when they quit their mortal coils, assume divine appearances endowed with Vibhūtis (manifestations of powers) and free from birth, death and old age, assume the Sārūpya (the same form) of the Devi and remain in Her Service. They reside in Mānidvīpa and see the part Pralayas.

नश्यति देता: सिद्धाश विहाय मानवी तनुम् ।

विष्यति दिव्यल्पां च जम्मयतुल्यगत् ॥ 56 ॥

कांतिके तुलसीदानं कांतीत हरयं च यः ।

युगवयप्रमाणं च मोते हरिचन्दिरे ॥ 57 ॥

The Devas die, the Siddhas die, the whole universe vanishes; but the Devi Bhaktas never die and they remain free from birth, death, and old age. He who offers Tulasi leaf to Bhagavān Hari in the month of Kārtika resides for three yugas in the temple of Hari.

पुनः सुयोर्नि संग्राम हरिचर्निक लभेद्यूवम् ।

वित्तप्रियाणां प्रवर: स भवेद्धारते पूर्वि ॥ 58 ॥

मध्ये यः: स्नाति गंगायामकणोयकालतः ।

यगवधिसहस्राणि मोदते हरिपिन्दे ॥ 59 ॥

Getting again a good birth, he acquires the devotion to Śrī Hari and becomes the Foremost of those who restrain their senses. He who bathes in the Ganges early before the rising of the Sun remains in enjoyment in the temple of Hari for sixty thousand yugas.

पुनः सुवोर्नि संग्राम यिण्यांगं लभेद्युवम् ।

स्वक्ला च मानुषं दैई पुनर्विति हरेः पदम् ॥ 6 0 ॥

Getting again a good birth, he gets the Viṣṇu Mantra, and, quitting his mortal coil, becomes united with the Feet of Śri Hari.

नास्ति तत्पुनग्नितिक्षेकुऊच महीतले ।

क्रोगीत हिरादायं च तथा साक्ष्यमेव च ॥ 6 1 ॥

नित्यस्नायी च गंगायां स पुतः सुर्येवद्धुवि ।

पदे पोदःशभोयस्य लभते निश्छितं फलम् ॥ 6 2 ॥

He has not to come back from Vaikuntha to this earth. He remains in Hari's Service and gets the same form of Hari. He who bathes daily in the Ganges, becomes purified like the Sun and gets the result of performing the Horse-sacrifice at every step.

तस्यैव पाद्रजसा सदा:पुता वसु-धूरा ।

मोदते स च वैकुण्टे यावच्छन्धदिवाकारी ॥ 63 ॥

पुनः सुयोगेन संग्रण्य हरिभर्फिक लभेद्युवम् ।

जीवन्युक्तो5तितंजस्वी तपोर्वप्रवगे घबेत् ॥ 64 ॥

The earth, becomes purified by the dust of his feet and he enjoys in Vaikuntha as long as the Sun and Moon exist. Then again he becomes born in a good and beautiful womb, and is liberated by acquiring the devotion to Hari. He becomes very energetic and the formost of the ascetics, pure, religious, learned, and self-restrained.

स्वधर्मान्तर: शुख्दो विद्वांश स जितेन्द्रिया: ।

मीनककटवोभीये गाढ़ तपति भास्कर: ॥ 65 ॥

भातते यो द्वाल्येव जलमेव सुवासितम् ।

स मोदते च केलसो यावदिद्वाशुतुर्देग ॥ 66 ॥

When the Sun comes midway between Pisces and Cancer and heats intensely the earth, the man who in Bhārata gives cool water to drink to the people, resides in happiness in Kailāśa for fourteen Indra's life periods.

पुनः सुचीन संग्रव्य रूपवांश सुखी भवेत् ।

शिवभनछ्छ शेतखी वेदवेदंगागराः ॥ 67 ॥

वैशाखे सन्तुदानं च यः करोति द्विजारावे ।

सक्नुर्णुप्रमागाद्ध मोदते शिवमन्त्रि ॥ 68 ॥

Getting again a good birth here, he becomes beautiful, happy, devoted to Śiva, energetic and expert in the Vedas, and the Vedāṅgas. He who gives to a Brāhmana the Śaktu (sattu) in the month of Vaiśākha enjoys in the Śiva temple for as many years as there are number of particles in that quantity of sattu (powders in parched oat).

क्रोतीत भाते यो हि कृष्णज्ञान्यहीज्ञान् ।

शतजन्मकृतं पार्थ मुच्यते नात्र संशय: ॥ 69 ॥

Book IX Chapter XXX

वैकुंठे मोदते सोअपि वार्विद्राश्रतुर्दै ।

पुनः सुयोर्नि संग्राय कृष्णे भक्ति लभेद् धुवम् ॥ 70 ॥

He who performs the Krṣna Janmāṣṭamī vow in this Bhārata, is freed from the sins incurred in his hundred births; there is no doubt in this. The observer of the vow remains in great enjoyment in Vaikuntha for fourteen Indra's gets again a good birth here and acquires Hari Bhakti.

ईहि भातरे वर्षे शिवारत्रिं क्रांतीत यः ।

मोतेते शिवलोके स सतमन्वन्तरावधि ॥ 71 ॥

शिवाय शिवारत्री च बिल्वपत्रं द्वताति यः ।

पत्रमानयुगं तत्र मोदते शिवमिन्द्रे ॥ 72 ॥

He who performs the Śivārātri vow in this Bhārata Varsa, resides with great joy in Śiva Loka for seven manvantaras. He who offers the Bel leaves to Śiva in Śivārātri time, resides with great joy in Śiva's Abode for as many yugas as there are number of leaves.

पुनः सुवर्तीं संग्राम शिवभक्ति लंभद्रुबण् ।

विद्यान्पुरवाजघ्रीमान्यजावन्यप्रियामभवेत् ॥ 73 ॥

चैवमासे ३६वा माघे शंकरं योउचैवद्यत् ।

क्रोति नर्तनं भस्त्या वेयपाणिर्दिवानिशणम् ॥ 74 ॥

मासं वाउव्यमांसं वा द्वा सप्त दिवानि च ।

दिवमानयुगं सोप्रि शिकलोके महीयते ॥ 75 ॥

Getting again a good birth here, he acquires the devotion to Śiva and becomes learned, prosperous and possesses sons, subjects and lands. He who performs vow and worships Śankara in the month of Caitra or Māgha and who, with a branch of a tree in hand, dances day and night for one month, or half a month, or half a month, for ten days or for seven days, dwells in Śiva Loka for as many yugas as the number of days he dances.

श्रीरामनवर्मी यो हिं करोति भारते पुभान् ।

संरमन-वन्तरं यावमोदते विज्यामन्दितं ॥ 76 ॥

पुनः सुवोर्नि संग्राम्य रामधार्वित लभेद्युवम् ।

जितेन्द्रियाणां प्रवरो महांश्छ धनवान्यन्ते ॥ 77 ॥

He who performs the vow of Śri Rāma Navamī, lives in the abode of Viṣṇu for seven Manvantaras in great joy. Getting again a good birth, he

becomes devoted to Śri Rāma, the foremost of those who have self restraint and he becomes very wealthy.

गाराद्वीरां महापूजां प्रकृतेर्ः क्रोतित च ।

महिषेश्ठगारलमैय: शड़ैर्भकादिधिः सति ॥ 78 ॥

नैवेटीभवहातैश धुपद्वीपादिभनस्था ।

नृत्यगीतादिभिविधीनांनाकोतुकर्मगलम् ॥ 79 ॥

शिवलोके वसेतलोप्रि समतान्वतारविध ।

He who performs the Sāradyā Pūjā' (the great Durgā Pūjā in the month of autumn) of the Mūla Prakṛti with incense, lights, offerings of food, and animal sacrifices of buffaloes, goats, sheep, rhinoceros, frogs or other animals, together with dancing, music, and various other auspicious things, resides in the Śiva Loka for seven Manvantaras.

पुनः सुयोर्नि संग्राम्य नरो बुद्धि च निर्मलम् ॥ 80 ॥

अन्तुलं त्रियमाप्तोति पुर्णवैगविद्धर्मीम् ।

महाप्रभावयुक्तशु गजाज्ञिसम्यित्वः ॥ 81 ॥

राजराजेश्वर: सोअपि भवेदेव न संशयः ।

Getting an excellent birth, and a pure understanding, he gets unbounded prosperity, sons and, no doubt, grandsons and he becomes a very powerful sovereign possessing many horses and elephants. There is no doubt in this.

ततः शुक्लाम्धीं प्राय महाप्रक्षीं चो उपोर्वेत् ॥ 82 ॥

नित्यं भतन्त्रा पशुमेकं पुण्यश्रेचे च भारते ।

दत्ता तस्य प्रकृतीच चोपचाराणि घोड़ग ॥ 83 ॥

गोलोके च वसेत्सोरिपि यावदिन्द्राशुतुरैण ।

पुनेः सुयोर्नि संग्रणय राज्ञानेश्वरो भवेत् ॥ 84 ॥

Again he who worships daily with devotion for a fortnight beginning from the eighth day of the bright fortnight the Mahā Devi Lakṣmī, remains in the region of Goloka for fourteen Indra's life periods. Then, obtaining an excellent birth, he becomes a sovereign.

कार्तिकीयुर्णियायां च कृत्वा तु रासमण्डलम् ।

गोपानां शतकं कृत्वा गोपीनीं शतकं तथा ॥ 85 ॥

शिलायां प्रतिमायां च श्रीकृष्णा राघया सह ।

भारते पूजयेद्वल्या चोपचाराणि घोड़ा ॥ 86 ॥

Šrimaddevibhagavatam

गोतोके वसते सोर्सि यावड़े ब्रह्मणो वयः ।

भारतं पुनरागत्य कृष्णो भक्ति लभेद्युवम् ॥ 87 ॥

He who in the full moon night in the month of Kārtika prepares a Rāsa maṇḍala with one hundred Gopas and Gopis and worship Śrī Krṣna and Rādhā in Śālagrama or in images with sixteen varieties of offerings remains in Goloka for Brahmā's life-time and coming again to Bhārata acquires an unflinching devotion to Śrī Krṣna.

क्रमेण सुवृद्धां वर्फिक लव्यम मंत्र हरेहो ।

देहं त्यक्त्वा च गोलोकं पुनरेव प्रयाति सः ॥ 88 ॥

ततः कृष्णस्य साक्ष्यं पार्वद्धवरो भवेत् ।

पुनस्तलन्तं नास्ति जगम्यतुरहो भवेत् ॥ 89 ॥

And when this Bhakti becomes greatly intensified, he gets initiated into Śrī Hari mantra and after quitting his mortal coil, he goes to the Goloka. Then he gets the Sārūpya (the same form) of Kṛṣṇa and becomes the chief Pārisad (attendant of Kṛṣṇa) and, becoming free from old age, he has no fear to fall again down to this earth.

शुक्लं वाज्यदयाला कृष्णां कारोल्येकादूर्गि च रः ।

वैकुंटे मोदते सोर्पि यावड़े ब्रह्मणो वयः ॥ ९० ॥

भारतं पुत्रगत्य कृष्णभक्ति लभेद् धूवम् ।

क्रमेण भर्फि सुदुर्गं कारोलेकां हरोहो ॥ ९१ ॥

देहं त्यक्त्वा च गोलोकं पुनेवे प्रयाति सः ।

ततः कृष्णस्य साक्ष्यं संग्राम्य पार्वैंट भवेत् ॥ ९२ ॥

He who observes the Ekādaśi day, remains fasting and performing penances in the bright or dark eleventh day, remains in Vaikunjha in great enjoyment and comfort. Then, again coming into this Bhārata he becomes a devotee of Hari. And when that Bhakti is intensified he becomes solely devoted to Hari and quitting his mortal coil, goes again to the Goloka and gets the Sārūpya of Kṛṣṇa and becomes His Pārisada (attendant).

पुनस्ततन्तं नान्ति जगाम्यूल्हो घबेत् ।

भारे च गुरुक्छोदार्यं वः शक्र पूजयेघरः ॥ 93 ॥

पहिवर्षसहस्राणि शक्रतके महीयते ।

रविवारे च संक्रांत्यां सप्तमयं शुक्रलपक्षेक ॥ 94 ॥

संपूजकाँ हविष्यार्थ वः क्रांति च भारते ।

महीयते सोड़कलेके यावर्तेग्रश्रुतुर्श ॥ 95 ॥

Then, freed of old age and death, he does not fall. He who worships Indra in the month of Bhâdra in the twelfth day of the white fortnight is worshipped in the regions of Indra for sixty thousand years. He who performs in Bhârata the worship of the Sun on Sunday Saṅkrānti (when the Sun goes from one sign to another) and the bright seventh Tithi, according to due rules and ceremonies and eats the food called Havisyānna (rice boiled in ghee), dwells in the Sūryaloka for fourteen Indra's life periods.

भारतं पुर्नगतस्य चारोगी श्रीयुतो भवेत् ।

ज्येष्ठकृष्णावतुरैर्यां साविर्यों यो हि पूर्वयते् ॥ 96 ॥

महीयते ब्रह्मलोके सदामन्त्रतावधि ।

पुर्नम्हीं समागत्य श्रीमानतुलविक्रमः ॥ 97 ॥

Then coming to Bhārata, he becomes free from all diseases and becomes prosperous. He who worships Sāvitrī on the fourteenth day of the black fortnight dwells in region of Brahmā for seven Manvantaras with great eclat and glory.

धिरंजीती घतेलोरोपि नानावान्संपदायुतः ।

माधस्य शुक्रलपंचम्पा पूर्वदेशः सरस्वतीम् ॥ 98 ॥

संयते भक्तिे दत्ता चोपचाराणि घोडग ।

महीयते मिणहीयो यावदूबहा दिवानिपन् ॥ 99 ॥

Coming again to Bhārata he enjoys beauty, unequalled valour, long life, knowledge and prosperity. He who worships on the fifth day of the bright fortnight in the month of Māgha, with his senses controlled and full of devotion, the Devi Sarasvatī with sixteen articles of food, resides in Mani Dvipa for one day and one night of Brahmā.

संग्राय च पुनर्जन्म स भवेकाक्रविष्ठितः ।

गां सुवर्णफिंक वे हो ब्राह्माणा ददाति च ॥ 100 ॥

नित्यं जीवनपर्यर्ते चनिक्षुक्तिश प्राते ।

गवां लोमप्रमाणाद्ध द्विगुण विद्यमूर्तिदे ॥ 101 ॥

On getting re-birth, he becomes a poet and a learned man. He who daily gives with devotion for his whole life, cow and gold to a Brāhmaṇa dwells in Viṣṇu Loka for twice as many years as there are the numbers of hairs on the bodies of these

Book IX Chapter XXX

cows and plays and jests with Viṣṇu and doing auspicious things he finds pleasure.

मोतेह हरिणा सार्थ म्रीडाकोतुकर्मानं: ।

तदन्ते पुनरागाल्य राजराजेश्वी भवेते ॥ 102 ॥

श्रीमांधु पुर्वातिवझाज्ञानावास्तरितः सुखी ।

In the end he comes again to this Bhārata and becomes the King of Kings, He becomes fortunate, prosperous, possesses many sons, becomes learned, full of knowledge and happy in every way.

भोपेचेधोपि मिहाङ्ग ब्राह्मणेच्छा भाते ॥ 103 ॥

विश्रमोममगणादं मोदते विद्यामंद्रे ।

ततः पुनिर्हागत्य सुखी च धनवान्यभवेत् ॥ 104 ॥

विद्यानुचिरतौरी च श्रीभानतुलविक्रमः ।

He who feeds a Brāhmaṇa here with sweetmeats goes to Viṣṇu Loka and enjoys there for as many as there are hairs on the body of the Brāhmaṇa. In the end he comes again to Bhārata and becomes happy, wealthy, learned, long lived, fortunate and very powerful.

यो वर्षिका वा द्वाल्येव हरेनामिन भागते ॥ 105 ॥

युगं नाममप्राणं च विद्युलोके महीयते ।

ततः पुनरिहाग्य स सुखी धनवान्यभेत् ॥ 106 ॥

यदि नात्यपाण्ड्रेत्र फलं कोटिटुणां भवेत् ।

नानां कोटि हरेवाँ हि हक्षे नारायणे जयेत ॥ 107 ॥

सर्वभाविविनुक्तो जीवनुक्तो भवेद्युव्यम् ।

न लभेस्त पुनर्जन्म बैकुंठे स महीयते ॥ 108 ॥

He who utters the name of Hari or gives the name (i.e. the mantra) of Hari to others, is worshipped in Viṣṇu loka for as many yugas as the number of times, the name or mantra was uttered. Coming again he Bhārata, he becomes happy and wealthy. And if such things be done in Nārāyaṇa Kṣettra, koṭi times the above results ensue. He who repeats the name of Hari koṭi times in Nārāyaṇa Kṣettra, becomes, no doubt, freed of all sins and liberated while living and he will not get rebirth. He lives always in Vaikuntha.

लभेघिषाणोश साक्तव्यं न तस्य पतनं भवेत् ।

विष्णुभक्ति क्षेभेस्तोप्र विष्णुसाक्तव्यमापनुयात् ॥ 109 ॥

शिवं वः: पूर्ववैत्रित्वं कृत्वा लिंगं च पार्थिविम।

यावज्जीविनपर्षतं स याति शिवर्गविंदग्य् ॥ 110 ॥

मूदो रेणुप्रमाणादं शिवलोके महीयते ।

He gets the Sālokya (the same region) of Viṣṇu, is not liable to fall, becomes a Bhakta of Viṣṇu. He who daily worships the earthen phallic symbol (after making it daily) for his whole life, goes to the Śiva Loka and dwells there for as many years as there are the number of particles of earth.

ततः पुनरित्रान्य राजत्रे भारते भवेत् ॥ 111 ॥

शिला च पुवद्रवित्र्य शिलातयो च भक्षित ।

महीयते च वैकुणटे यावढ़े ब्रह्मणः शतम् ॥ 112 ॥

Getting rebirth he becomes the King of Kings. He who worships daily the Śālagrāma stone and eats the water (after bathing it) is glorified in Vaikuntha for one hundred Brahmā's lives and becomes bron again.

ततो लक्ष्या पुर्जन्मे हरिभक्ति च दुर्वीभाम् ।

महीयाते विष्णुलोके न तस्य पतनं घबेत् ॥ 113 ॥

तपोसि चैव सर्वाणि ब्रतानि निविल्यानि च ।

कृत्वा निष्ठति वैकुणेट यावदिंद्राश्रुदर्य ॥ 114 ॥

When he acquires the rare Hari Bhakti and quitting his mortal coil goes to Viṣṇu Loka, whence he is not to return. He who performs all the Tapasyās (asceticism) and observes all the vratas (vows), dwells in Vaikuntha for fourteen Indra's life periods.

ततो लक्ष्या पुर्जन्म राजेडो भारते घवेत् ।

ततो सुन्तो घबेत्याश्रानुर्जन्म न विश्ठते ॥ 115 ॥

यः स्नात्वा सर्वतीर्थेयु घवः कुला प्रदिष्टिणगम् ।

स तु निवर्गानां याति न तज्जन भवेद्वुवि ॥ 116 ॥

पुण्यक्षेत्रे भारते च योअभधेः करोति च ।

अश्ठलीभिताङ्चं च श्रातस्याधिंसनं भन्ते ॥ 117 ॥

Getting rebirth in Bhārata he becomes the King of Kings and then he becomes liberated. He is not to return any more. He who bathes in all the Tirthas and makes a journey round the whole world, gets Nirvāna. He is not reborn. He who performs the Horse-Sacrifice in this holy land Bhārata enjoys half the Indraship for as many years as there are hairs on the body of the horse.

चतुर्णी राजसूयदकलापानीते मानवः ।

सर्वेधोप्रिय मढ्रेध्यो हिं पारो देवीमयडः स्मृत: ॥ 118 ॥



विष्याना च कृतः पूर्वे ब्रह्माणा च वरानने ।

शक्ररेण महैनेन विपुरासुरनागने ॥ 1 1 9 ॥

He who performs a Rājasūya Sacrifice, gets four times the above result. Of all the sacrifices, the Devi Yajña, or the Sacrifice before the Devi is the Best. O Fair One! Of old, Viṣṇu, Brahmā, Indra and when Tripurāsura was killed, Mahā Deva did such a sacrifice.

शफ्चिज्ञः प्रधानघ सर्ववेग्रेषु सुन्दरि ।

नानेन ससूगो यज्ञसिषु लोकेषु विद्यते ॥ 120 ॥

द्वेण च कृत: पूर्व महान्संभासंयुतः ।

O Beautiful One! This sacrifices before the Sakti is the highest and best of all the sacrifices. There is nothing like this in the three worlds. This Great Sacrifice was done of yore by Dakṣa when he collected abundant sacrifice materials of all sorts.

वभ्यू वक्लो स्य दक्षशंकरयाः सति ॥ 121 ॥

शेषुश निद्धि विज्ञा नीदी विद्यांक कोपतः ।

यद्योतैर्वक्षयं च वर्भन चन्द्रशेखरः ॥ 122 ॥

And a quarrel ensued on this account between Dakṣa and Śaṅkara. The Brāhmins conducting the sacrifice cursed the Nandi and others. And Nandi cursed the Brāhmaṇas. Mahādeva, therefore, disallowed the going on of sacrifice and brought it to a dead stop.

चकार देवीयूयं स पुरा दक्षः प्रजापति: ।

धर्मश्र क्रयपश्छीय पशेश्यापि च कदमे: ॥ 123 ॥

स्वायंभुचो मनुष्ठीय तत्पुरक्षा प्रियन्तः ।

शिव: सनत्कुमारक्ष कपिलक्ष पुवत्सना ॥ 124 ॥

Of yore the Prajāpati Dakṣa did this Devi Yajñā; it was done also by Dharma, Kaśyapa; Ananta, Kardama, Svāyambhuva Manu, his son Priyravrata, Śiva, Sanat Kumāra, Kapila and Dhruva.

राजसूयसह्वाणं फलमानोति निश्रातम् ।

देवीयात्रासपो यजो नासि वेदे फलप्रद: ॥ 125 ॥

वर्षाणं शतजीवी च जीवन्मुक्तो भवेद्युवम् ।

ज्ञानेन तेजसा चैव विष्णुतुल्यो भवेदिह् ॥ 126 ॥

The performance of this sacrifice brings fruits equal to performing thousands and thousands of Rājasūya sacrifices. Therefore there is no other

sacrifice greater than this Devi Yajña. One becomes surely endowed with a long life of one hundred years and is liberated while living. He becomes equal to Viṣṇu in knowledge, energy, strength, and asceticism. This is as true as anything.

देवतां च यथा विष्णुर्विणातनं च नारः ।

गस्त्राणां च यथा देवां वर्णांतां ब्राहणो यथा ॥ १२७ ॥

तीर्थानां च यथा गंगा पवित्राणां जिथो यथा ।

एकादशी प्रतानां च पुर्णाणां तुलसी यथा ॥ 1 2 8 ॥

नक्षत्राणां यथा चंत्रः पक्षिणां गरकडी यथा ।

यथा क्लींणां च पूर्णी तथा वाणी वर्भूधा ॥ 1 2 9 ॥

श्रीप्राणां चौद्रियाणां चे चंचलानां मनो यथा ।

प्रजापनीतां बढ़ा च प्रजानां च प्रजापनीः ॥ 1 3 0 ॥

ब्रन्दावनं वनानां च वर्षाणां भारतं यथा ।

श्रीमतां च यथा श्रीश विदुषां च सरस्वती ॥ 1 3 1 ॥

पतित्रानां दुगां च सौभाग्यानां च राधिका ।

देवीयान्तरालं चलैस सर्ववेजुपं घामिनि ॥ 1 3 2 ॥

अश्रमेधान्तेनैव शक्तवं च लभेद्युवम् ।

सहलेश विद्युपदं सैप्रानः पुयुर्वे च ॥ 1 3 3 ॥

O Child! This Devi Yajñā is the best and highest of all the sacrifices as Viṣṇu is the highest amongst the Devas; Nārada, amongst the Vaiṣṇavas; the Vedas, amongst all the Śāstras; the Brāhmaṇas amongst all the castes; the Ganges amongst the sacred places of pilgrimages, Śiva amongst the Holy of Holies, the Ekādaśi vow amongst all the Vratas; Tulasi, amongst all the flowers; the Moon, amongst the asterisms; Garuda, amongst the birds; Prakṛti, Rādhā, Sarasvatī and Earth amongst the females; the mind, amongst the quick-going and restless senses; Brahmā, amongst the Prajāpatis; Brahmā, amongst all the subjects; Vrndrāvana, amongst all the forests; Bhārata Varsa, amongst all the Varsas; Lakṣmī, amongst the prosperous; Sarasvatī, amongst the learned; Durgā, amongst the chaste; Radhikā, amongst the fortunate. If one hundred horse sacrifices are performed, Indrahood is sure to be obtained.

स्नानं च सर्वतीर्थानां सर्वद्वेषु दीक्षणम् ।

सर्वेषां च रात्नां च तपसां फलमेव च ॥ 134 ॥

Book IX Chapter XXXI

पाठे चतुर्ण वैदानां प्रादक्षिपणं घुवस्तथा ।

फलभूतिरिवं सर्वं भूतिक्तं शक्तिसेवनम् ॥ 135 ॥

It is by the influence of bathing in all the Tirthas, performing all the sacrifices, observing all the Vratas, practising all the austerities, studying all the Vedas circumambulating the whole earth, that this Highest Śakti's service is obtained and this service of Śakti is the direct cause of Mukti (liberation).

पुराणेषु च वेदेषु चेत्तिहासेषु सर्वतः ।

निस्किप्त सारभृतं देवीपादिद्बुजारंनम् ॥ 136 ॥

तद्वर्णनं च तद्वानं तत्रामगुणकीर्तनम् ।

तस्तोत्रमसरणं चैव यंदनं जयमेव च ॥ 137 ॥

तत्यादिदकर्नेवेध पब्जणं नित्यमेव च ।

सर्वसम्पतिमत्वेयं सर्वैस्तमतिधरं सति ॥ 138 ॥

To worship the lotus-feet of the Devi is the best and highest, is stated in all the Purāṇas, in all the Vedas, and in all the Itihāsas. To sing the glories of Mūla Prakṛti, to meditate on Her, to chant Her Name and attributes, to remember Her stratos, now down before Her, to repeat Her Name, and to drink daily Her Pādodaka (water after washing Her feet)

and the offerings already offered to Her, these are approved of by all; and everyone desires this.

भज नित्यं परं बहा निर्णुंगं प्रकृति परम् ।

गृहाण स्वामिनं वत्से सुखं वस च मंदिते ॥ 139 ॥

अयं ते क्रिकतः कर्मविषयाको गंगलो नृणगम् ।

सर्वैपित्तः सर्वमतस्तच्ज्ञानप्रदः परः ॥ 140 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमदेवीभागवतो गतगुर्णणे नवमकन्चे

प्रिंशोस्थावः ।। 141 ॥।

So worship, worship this Mūla Prakṛti, Who is of the nature of Brahmā, and, lo! Who is again endowed with Māyā. O Child! Take your husband and live happily with him in your home. O Child! Thus I have described to you the fruition of the Karmas. This is auspicious to every human being, desired by all and approved of by all. The Real Knowledge from this. There is no doubt in this."

Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the conversation between Sāvitrī and Yama and on the fruition of Karmas in the Great Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXXI

