CHAPTER XXII

On Stealing away Ekāvali

यगोकल्याच

प्रातरूथाय नत्वंची चलिता च सखीयुता ।

चामरैंकीयमाना सा रक्षिता बहुरक्षिभि: ॥ 1 ॥

Yasovati spoke: “O King! One day Ekāvali got up early in the morning and went to the banks of the Ganges, accompanied by her companions; they began to fan her with a chowrie.

सायुघ्रोतिसन्द्रैः सहिता वरविणी ।

क्रीडार्थयन्र राजेन्द्र संग्रता नतिनीं शुभाम् ॥ 2 ॥

The armed guards accompanied her. Slowly she went where there were the lotuses in order to sport with them.

अहमध्यना सार्यें गंगातीरे समागता ।

अस्पोरिभः स्रोता च कमतेः क्रीकामाना ॥ 3 ॥

I, too, went with her playing with the lotuses to the banks of the Ganges and both of us began to play with lotuses with the Apsarās.

एकावली तथा चाहें जाते क्रीकापर यदा ।

सहसैय तद्धउद्यातो दानवो बलसयुंतः ॥ 4 ॥

कालकेनृतीति छात्रो राक्षसैर्वहुभियुंत: ।

परिचासिन्याचावपाणातोमरयाणिधा: ॥ 5 ॥

When both of us were deeply engaged in the play, then one powerful Dānava, named Kālāketu, came up there suddenly with many Rāksasas armed with parighas, swords, clubs, bows, arrows and tomaras and many other weapons.

इद्य चैकावली तेन रूपयीवनशणितिने ।

द्वितीया कामपत्नीव क्रीऊमाना सुपंकजैः ॥ 6 ॥

Ekāvali was playing with the best lotuses when Kalaketu saw her in that state, blooming with beauty and youth as if like Rati, the Goddess of Love.

मयोकैकावली राजकॉर्ज दैत्व: सम्पाततः ।

गछचोः रक्षपालानां मध्ये पढ़जलोचने ॥ ७ ॥

O King! I then spoke to Ekāvali: "Look! Who is this Daitya that has come here unexpectedly; O Lotus-eyed One! Let us go into the central part of our armed guards.

विमुर्षवें सडी चाऊँ त्वरवेग नते भयात् ।

मध्ये वे सैनिकानां तु सायुधानां गुणतयज ॥ ८ ॥

कालकेतुतु तां द्ववा गोहिनीं मदन्तुतः ।

गदां गुर्गी गृहीना तु धायमानः समगतः ॥ ९ ॥

रक्षकानूतः कृत्वा जग्राहुंबलोचनम् ।

त्रसां वेयुवंसुक्तां कैद्यानां कृणोदरीम् ॥ 10 ॥

O King! My companion and myself consulting thus, went out of fear immediately into the centre of the armed guards. Kālaketu was seized with the arrows of Cupid, and no sooner he looked at that beautiful young lady than he, with a very big club in his hand, hurriedly came to us, drove away the guards, and took away my lotus eyed companion, of thin waist. Then the young lady, helpless began to tremble and cried aloud.

लकेनो मां गृहाणैते मा चोक्तोर्धि दानवः ।

न मां जग्राह कामार्तैरां गृहीत्वा विनि:सुतः ॥ 11 ॥

Seeing this, I spoke to the Dānava: Leave her and take me. The passionate Dānava did not take me but he went away, taking my companion.

तिउ तितिउे घामोने रक्षकासां महाबलम् ।

प्रतिथध्य तु संग्रामं चकुर्गविस्यकाकरम् ॥ 12 ॥

The guards exclaimed: “Wait, wait; do’t fly away with the girl; we are giving you a good lesson.” Thus saying, they made the powerful Dānavas stop and both the parties engaged in a very terrible conflict, astounding to all.

त्ययापि राक्षसा: कृतः सर्वतः राक्षयापायः ।

युयुधू रक्षैकः सार्थं स्वामिकार्यं कृतोदायः ॥ 13 ॥

The followers of the Dānavas, more cruel and all fully armed began at once to fight with great enthusiasm for their Master's cause.

संग्रामस्तु तदा जातः कारणकेतोस्ताय गे।

निह्त्य रक्षकानसर्वानृहीत्वेनां महावलः ॥ 14 ॥ ॥

Kälaketu himself began to fight afterwards terribly and killed the guards. He, then, with his followers, carried away my companion towards his own city.

युक्तो राक्षससैयेन निर्जनाय पुरं प्रति ।

वीध्य तां कर्तीं बालां गृहीतां दानवेत नु ॥ 15 ॥

I, too, followed my companion, when I saw her thus carried away by the Dānava and crying out of fear.

पृछतोई गत तत यत्र नीता सखी माम ।

विकोर्गिती यथा सा मां पश्येतिि घतदानुगा ॥ 16 ॥

I also walked crying aloud by those tracks as would enable my Sakhi to see me. She, too, seeing me, became somewhat consoled.

साथी मागलां तीक्ष्य विक्रीलस्याध्यन्ता ।

गताउई तत्सयीपे तु तामाभाष्य पुन: पुनः ॥ 17 ॥

सा मां प्रायातितुःखात्तं सत्मयवेदसामुकूला ।

कप्टे गृहीत्वा मां भूप करोद भृपुगःश्रिता ॥ 18 ॥

Crying out repeatedly I approached her. She was already very distressed and when she saw me, she clasped me closely around my neck, perspiring and stunned and, becoming more distressed, cried aloud.

स मामाह कालकेतुः प्रीतिपूर्वमिदं वचः ।

समाधासय भीर्तं वं सहीं चझललोचन्त्य। ॥ १९ ॥

Kālaketu then shewed his liking for me and told that my quick-eyed companion was very afraid and that I might comfort her.

प्राप्तं ममाह नगरं देर्वलोकसमं प्रिये ।

दासोस्मि तब तथा हि कस्माकत्टसि कातग ।। २० ।।

कवयैनों सखी तेउघ सत्यथा भव सुलोचने ।

He told me thus: “O Dear! My city is like the Deva’s abodes; you vill soon be able to go there. From today I become your slave, bound by love. Do not cry thus distressedly; be comforted.” In these words he told me to comfort my dear companion.

इत्युक्क्वा मां सखी पार्थे सामायेप्य यथोत्तमे ॥ 21 ॥

जगाम तरसा दुह: पुरे स्वस्य मनोहरे ।

सै-येन महता युक्तः प्रफुल्वद्वनोबुकः ॥ 22 ॥

Thus speaking, that villain made both of us mount on the beautiful chariot and making us sit by his sides went gladly and quickly to his own beautiful palaces, followed by his army.

एकावली तथा मां च संस्थाध्य धवले गुहे ।

राक्षसानुहरक्षार्थी कल्यामास कोदिगः ॥ 23 ॥

That Demon placed both of us in a beautiful house white washed and mirror-like and kept hundreds and thousands of Rāksasas to watch and protect us.

दितीये दिवसे सेठ्य मनुपदाच रहो नृप ।

प्रबोधय सखी वालां गोचेंती विहातुगन् ॥ 24 ॥

On the second day he called me in private: “Your companion is very much distressed on the bereavement from her father and mother and is lamenting; make her understand and console her.” पत्नी मे भव सुशोणि सुखं भूंख्य वथेयितम् ।

राज्यं तद्वीर्यं चन्द्राये सेवकोंड़ं सदा तव ॥ 25 ॥

राज्यं तद्वीर्यं चन्द्राये सेवकोंड़ं सदा तव ॥ 25 ॥

He told me to speak the following words to my companion: "O One of beautiful hips! Be my wife and enjoy as you like. O One with a face beautiful like the Moon! This kingdom is yours; ever I am your obedient slave."

पुनरुक्ते मया वाय्वं श्रुवा तद्धारितं खतम् ।

नाहं क्षतप्रद्धि वक्तु त्वमेना कथय प्रभो ॥ 26 ॥

Hearing his unbearable harsh words I said: "O Lord! I will not be able to speak her these words, disagreeable to her. You better speak this yourself."

इतुक्ते चचने दुष्टो मदतक्षतामतमतः ।

उवाच विनयादोंत सर्वी क्षामोदरिं पित्रायू ॥ 27 ॥

क्रूगोदरी त्वया मन्यो निश्रिनोति तमोभारि ।

तेन मे दूरवं कानते हतं ते वर्गतां गतम् ॥ 28 ॥

तेनाहं तव दासोउदा कृतोउस्मीति विनिश्रयः ।

भज मां कामबाणेन पीषितं विवर्गं भृगम् ॥ 29 ॥

When I spoke thus, that wicked Dānava struck by the arrows of Cupid began to speak gently to my dear companion of thin belly, thus: "O Dear One! To day you have successfully cast on me the Vaśikarana Mantra (one of the Tāntrik processes by which a lover is made to come under subjection); O Beloved! Therefore it is that my heart is stolen and so much brought under your subjection; this has converted me into a veritable slave of yours; then know this as certain that I am your slave; O

Book VI Chapter XXII

Sweet One! I am very much troubled by the Cupid's arrows and I am semi-unconscious; therefore O Lean-bellied One! Worship me.

यौवनं याति रंभोच चछ्जलं दुर्णपं तथा ।

सफलं कुरु कल्याणि पर्निं मां परिस्पष्य च। ३० ॥

O One of beautiful thighs! This youth is a very rare and transient thing; O Auspicious One! Now embrace me as your husband and make your youth a veritable success."

एकावल्युवाच

पित्राड़ं कल्पिता पूर्व दातुं गरासुताय वै ।

हैहयस्टु महाभागः स मया मनसा सुत: ॥ 31 ॥

Ekāvali said: “O Fortunate One! My father wanted to hand me over to a prince named Haihaya; I also mentally adopted him as my husband.

क्यमन्यं भवे कान्तं लव्क्वा धर्मे सनातनम् ।

कन्यामर्ग विहाराव बेलिस शास्त्रविन्दिशुम् ॥ 32 ॥

You are certainly aware of the Śāstras; how can I now abandon the eternal religion and the virtue of a woman and take up another husband.

यस्मै द्वापिता कामं कन्या ते पतिमानुयात् ।

परन्ताना सदा कन्या न स्वतन्त्र कदाचन ॥ 33 ॥

The girl must accept him to whom the father betrothes. The girl is under every circumstances dependant.

इत्युक्तोप्रि तथा पापी विराराम न मोहितः ।

न मुमोच विशालाईं मां च पार्थित्यांत तथा ॥ 34 ॥

Never do they get any independence." Though Ekāvalī said thus, the vicious Daityas struck by Cupid's arrows, did not desist and did not leave me and that larged-eyed companion.

पातालविदः तस्य पुरं परमसूक्टे ।

तशसे रक्षितं दुर्गं मफित्तं परिषदायून् ॥ 35 ॥

His city lies in Pātāla and is a very dangerous place; always it is guarded by Rāksasas and surrounded by a moat; inside is built a beautiful and strong fort.

तत्र तिहिति दुःखातां सखी मे प्राणवल्लभा ।

तेनाहं विरोहाना रारतीमि सुखूःत्रिका ।। ३६ ॥।

Now my dear companion, the queen of my heart,

is staying there with a grievous heart and I am here wandering hither and thither very much troubled on account of her bereavements."

एकरीर तवाच

कर्थ ल्यम संप्राणा पुरातस्य तुरामनः ।

विस्ययो मे महान्न तत्वं बृहि वरानने ॥ 37 ॥

Ekavīra said: “O Beautiful-faced One! How have you been able to get away from the city of that wicked demon and how have you been able to come here? I am perfectly at my wit’s end.

त्वया च कथितं वाक्यं सदित्यं भाति भाविने ।

हैहयाथें कलित्या सा प्रियेति मन साम्यान् ॥ 38 ॥

Say quickly all these. O Proud One! I doubt your words; the father of your dear companion resolved to give his daughter to Haihaya in marriage; now I am that Haihaya.

हैहयो नाम राजार्जं नान्योर्जित पृथिवीपितः ।

मद्यं कथिता सा किं सखी तव सुलोचना ॥ 39 ॥

I am the King by that name, on this earth; there is no other King by the name of Haihaya. Is it that your dear companion is meant for me?

एतन्ये संगयं सुचु छेतुभाईस भाधिनि ।

अहं तानानिध्यामि तं हत्या राक्षसाधमम् ॥ 40 ॥

O Bhāminī (passionate woman)! Remove my doubts; I will kill that villain Rāksasa and bring just now your dear companion; there is no doubt in this.

स्वयं दर्शय मे नस्य यदि ज्ञानासि सुझते ।

राङे निवेदितं किं वा तत्विचे चातितुःखिता ॥ 4 1 ॥

O One of good vows! Shew me that place, if it be known to you. Has any body informed her father that She is suffering from so many troubles?

यस्यैष बल्लभ पुत्री न किं ज्ञानिते तां हेत्म।

नोष्टाम: किं कृतसेनैत ततो मोर्चहतेलें ॥ 42 ॥

Has her father come to know that her daughter has been stolen and carried away? And has he made my effort to rescue her from the hands of that villain Rāksasa?

वन्दीकृता सुर्गा ज्ञाला कयं तिहित सुखितः ।

असमर्थां नृप: किं वा कारणं बृहि सत्वम् ॥ 43 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Is it that the King is calm and quiet, knowing that his daughter has been kept in prison? Or is it that he is unable to free her from bondage? Say quickly all these things before me.

स्वया प्रेपहतं चेते गुणानुक्नवा हामानुपान् ।

सख्या: पडूकपगक्षिक कृत: कामवशो भूषण् ॥ 44 ॥

O Lotus-eyed One! You have captivated my mind by describing the extraordinary qualities of your dear companion and have made me passionate too.

कटा पश्यामि तां कान्तां मोचवित्वाजित्सुक्रटत् ।

इति मे इदयं चाढ़ करोत्पतिमनोरध्य् ॥ 45 ॥

Alas! When will it be that I will free my beautiful beloved from the greatest perilous situation and shall see her face and her eyes, beaming with joy.

ब्रह्मे न पमानोपायं पुरे तस्मातितुर्णे ।

कर्थं त्वमाता तस्मात्स्कृटादर तद्धर ॥ 46 ॥

O Sweet speaking One! Say, by what means I can go to that impassable city. How have you been able to come from there?"

यशोत्पल्यबाच

बालभावान्यमा मज्नो भगवत्वा विशां पते ।

प्राणोस्तित ब्राह्मणातिस्स्द्यासकीज्यान्यपूर्विके ॥ ४७ ॥

Yasovatī said: “O King! In my early age I got the Mantram of the Devi Bhagavatī with its seed Mantram (mystic syllable involving in it the power connoted by the Devi) and how to meditate it.

तत्वास्थितया रात्रनयाय चित्ते विचारितम् ।

आराध्यायी सत्तं चपिडकां चचडविक्रमम् ॥ 48 ॥

While I was in the Dānava's place I thought out that juncture I would worship the powerful Caṇdikā who gives instantaneously one's own desires.

सा देही सेविता कामं बन्यमोक्षं कार्तियत ।

भक्तानुकाम्पी नार्फ्ति: समथाँ सर्वसाधने ॥ 49 ॥

If I worship that Śakti, That fructifies all desires, That is all mercy to Her Bhaktas, certainly She will free my dear companion from this her bondage.

या विश्व सुचने शक्या पालत्यवैल सा पुनः ।

कल्याने संहृत्येव सिनाकारा निराश्रया ॥ 50 ॥

Though She is really without form, yet She, without anybody's help, by Her own force, She is creating, preserving, and at the end of the Kalpa, destroying this Universe.

इति सझित्य मनसा देखी विश्रेष्ठशी शिवाय।।

ध्याता रक्ताध्वरों सौम्यां सुरुकन्यन्तां हुदि ॥ 51 ॥

संस्मृत्य मनसा रूपे मन्त्रजाययात्राभवम् ।

उपासिता मया देही मासमेकं स्माधित्य ॥ 52 ॥

Oh! She is very wonderful indeed! Thus thinking I began to meditate that auspicious red-robed and red-eyed Devi, the Lady of the Universe, and recollected mentally Her form and repeated silently Her Bijā Mantram.

स्वनेप मम समायात भक्तिभावेन तेणिता ।

भाग्रहभृता याचा किं सुताउसीति चिण्डका ॥ 53 ॥

उत्तिष याहि तरसा गज्ञातिरं मनोहाम् ।

आगमिष्यति ततासी हैहयो नृपयुगवः ॥ 54 ॥

When I meditated thus for merely one month. Candikā Devi became, through my devotion, manifest to me in my dreams and began to speak in sweet nectar-like words: "You are now asleep; go quickly to the beautiful banks of the Ganges.

एकबीरी महाबाहु: सर्वेशुविद्यदिनः ।

दत्तावेशेण मन्यनो महाविद्धाभियः परः ॥ 55 ॥

दन्तोदसैसोदी सततं मापुणसोडेनिषिततः ।

मध्यासक्तमितिंनंव मप पूजापरायण: ॥ 56 ॥

The enemy destroyer, the powerful Ekavira, the greatest of all the kings, will come there. Dattātreya, the Great Lord of the Munis, has given him my Mantra named Mahāvidyā; the King also constantly worships me devotedly with that.

माथेव सर्वभूतेषु ध्यायज्ञते च मत्यतः ।

स ते दुःखविनारां वै करीस्थिति महापतिः ॥ 57 ॥

मासुतो विहरंतत तव जाता भविष्यते ।

हत्वा तं ग्रासं घोरो भोविष्यति मानिनिथि ॥ 58 ॥

His mind is constantly attached to Me and he constantly worships Me. What more to say then this fact that the king, extremely to Me, meditates on Me as the internal controller of all beings. That intelligent son of Lakṣmī will come for sport to

Book VI Chapter XXIII

the banks of the Ganges and will remove all your sorrows.

एकावलमेकवरी: सर्वशाखविशारदः ।

पशुतार्वे पति: कार्यस्विया राजसुतः शुभः ॥ 59 ॥

इत्युक्चलांतदीये देवी प्रबुद्धार्ज तदेव हिं ।

क्रायितं स्वपन्तुत्तनं देल्याशूनार्यन्त तथा ॥ 60 ॥

That king Ekavira, versed in all the Sāstras will kill the Rāksasas in a dreadful battle and will rescue Ekāvali. So now you pay heed to my word. Lastly, She told me that her companion should marry that beautiful King, endowed with all auspicious qualifications." Thus saying, She disappeared and I instantly woke up.

प्रसत्रदान जाता श्रुत्वा सा कमलेक्षण।

विशेषेण च सन्तुहा मामुवाच शुचिस्ता ॥ 6 1 ॥

Then I informed my lotus-eyed dear Sakhi all the details of my dream as well my worshipping the Devi; hearing this, her lotus-face beamed with joy and gladness.

गच्छ तन त्यारयुना कुरु कार्य मम प्रिये ।

सत्यावल्या भगवती साउंवों मोक्षे विधायस्ति ॥ 62 ॥

That sweet-smiling Ekāvalī very gladly told me "O dear Companion! Go at once for our success."

That truth-speaking Bhagavatī Ambikā Devi will release us from our bondage.

इत्पाज्ञात तथा चाहे सख्या वे प्रेमयुक्त्या ।

मत्वोसरणं घुक्ते तस्मात्स्थानताद नृप ॥ 63 ॥

O King! When my dear companion ordered me thus, I thought it proper, as also dictated to me in my dream, to go out and soon I did it.

चालिताड़ः ततः शीर्घ माहतेवीप्रसादतः ।

भाग्रानं शीर्घगतिमघा प्राप्ता नृपात्मज ॥ 64 ॥

O King! Due to the grace of the Great Devi, I came to know the way and I also got the quick motion.

इत्येलक्रवितं सर्वे कारणं मम दुःखजम् ।

कसलं कस्य सुतश्रौति वद् वीर यद्य तथा ॥ 65 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पशत्कम्बे

श्राविशोश्याः ॥ 66 ॥

Thus I have described to you the cause of my sorrow. O Hero! Who are you, whose son are you? Speak truly to me.

Here ends the Twenty-second Chapter in the Sixth Book on the narration to Haihaya the stealing away of Ekavali in Srimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XXIII

