CHAPTER III

On the Description of the Kavaca of Śri Gāyatrī Devi

नारद उवाच

स्वामिन्सर्वगगताय संगगोःस्त मम प्रशो ।

चतु:थधिकलमिप्र जातकाधोगयाद्वर ॥ १ ॥

मृद्येत केन पुणयेन ब्रह्मरूप: कर्थ भवेत् ।

दैहछ्छ देवतलोपो मन्त्रलो पिशेणतः ॥ २ ॥

Nārada spoke : O Bhagavān! Thou art the Lord of this world; Thou canst shew favour and disfavour both; Thou art specially versed in the sixty-four Kalās (arts of learning); Thou art the chief of the Yogis. I therefore ask Thee to solve a doubt of mine. By what Punyam a man can become free from all his sins and limitations and he can realise and become of the nature of Brahmā.

कर्म तच्छुतुपिच्छामि न्यासं च विधिपूर्वकम्।

ऋपिश्छेदोर्धिदेवं च ध्यानं च चिविद्वतप्रभो ॥ 3 ॥

O Lord! And what are duly the Rsis, Chandas, Devatās, Dhyāna, and Nyāsa, etc., of this meritorious act? I want to hear.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

अस्प्येकं परमं गृहुं गायरीकावचं तथा । पदनाब्धारणान्यचं: सर्वपाँप: प्रमुच्यते ॥ 4 ॥ सर्वान्कामानवाणोति देवीकरण्ड जायते । गायत्रीकावचन्यायन ब्रहाविष्णुमहेश्वरा: ॥ 5 ॥ ब्रहययो ऋरपत्रु:सामाथवर्षेड्यांति नारत् । ब्रहास्पा देवतोक्ता गायत्री परमा कला ॥ 6 ॥ तद्वीजं भर्गा इत्येषा शक्तिरन्ता मनीविधि: । कौलकं च चित्यः प्रोक्ते मोक्षार्थं विविनयोजनम् ॥ 7 ॥

चतुर्मिहंदयं प्रोक्तं विभिवर्शणै: शिर: स्मृतम्।

चतुर्मिः: स्याचिद्धाय पश्रातिविभ्यतु कवचं स्मृनम् ॥ 8 ॥

चतुर्मिजनगृद्धिहुं चतुर्मिः: स्यानतद्बकम् ।

अथ ध्यानं प्रवश्यामी साधकाभीष्टाद्यकम् ॥ 9 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Narendra! There is but one and the only one way to this and though that is very secret, I will disclose that to you. It is the Gāyatrī-Kavaca. It can destroy all sins. Therefore to recite or to hold it on one's body enables the man to become free from all his sins and to get all his desires fulfilled and he gets the Sāyuna Mukti with the Devi (be merged in the Devi-Body). Now hear the Rsis, Chandas, etc., of this Kavaca: Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara are the Rsis; the Rk, Yajus, Sāma and Atharva Vedas are the Chandas; the Paramā Kalā Gāyatrī of the nature of Brahmā is the Devatā; "Tat" in Gāyatrī is the Bīja; "Bharga" is the Śakti; and "Dhi yah" is the Kilaka; and its viniyoga (application) is in getting the Mokṣa (liberation). With the first four syllables touch the heart; with the next three letters touch the head; with the next four letters touch the tuft on the crown of the head; with the next three letters on the Kavaca; with the next four letters on the eyes and with the last four letters make the Nyāsa, all over the body repeating "Astrāya Phat," O Nārada! Hear now the Dhyānam of Gāyatrī, that grants all desires.

Book XII Chapter III

मुत्ताविदुमहेन्मीलधवलच्छायैमूंखैसीक्षणै-

सुंत्तामिबुनिवब्द्रतनमुकुटां तत्तावेथणातिकाम।

गायर्ची वदराघमबोकुशकगाः तुधुं कपालं गुणां

शंखं चक्रमथारविद्वगुलं हस्तैर्वहंतीं भजे ॥ 10 ॥

The Gāyatrī Devī has five faces; one of which is of white colour; and the other four is of pearl, Vidruma, golden, and Nilakāntamani colour respectively. Each face has got three eyes; on the head there is a crown of jewels and the digit of the Moon is shining there. Her body is composed of the twenty-four tattvas. She has ten hands: On the top right and left hands there are two lotuses; lower down, there are disc and conch shell; lower down, there are rope and skull; lower down, there are noose and goad; and on the bottom hands right and left she is making signs of “No fear” and “ready to grant boons.”

गायकी पूर्वतः पातु साविकी पातु दक्षिण।

ब्रह्मरंध्या तु मे पश्रातुतरयं सरवती ॥ ११ ॥

पार्वती मे दिगं रक्षेल्यावकी जलशायिति ।

यातुधानी दिगं रक्षेहातुधानभयंकरी ॥ 12 ॥

पायमानी दिगं रक्षेल्यमानलिलमिति ।

दिगं रौत्री च मे पातु म्हणी म्हरूषिणी ॥ १३ ॥

क्रर्ष ब्रह्माणि मे सक्षेत्यस्त्रौषणांती तथा ।

एवं दण दिगो रक्षेसर्वार्थी घूतनेक्षी ॥ १४ ॥

तत्वदं पातु मे पाटो जोयं मे सवितुः पदम् ।

वेरेपं कटिदेवे तु नाथि भगतैवधेच च ॥ १५ ॥

देवस्य मे तद्वद्यं धीमहिति च गल्यलोः ।

धित्य: पदं च मे नेये च: पदं मे ललाटकम् ॥ १६ ॥

न: पातु मे पदं मृद्धिन शिखायां मे प्रयोद्यात् ।

Thus meditating on Śrī Gāyatrī, one is to recite the Kavaca thus : Let the Gāyatrī Devi protect my front; Sāvitrī Devi protect my right; the Sandhyā Devi, my back and the Devi Sarasvatī, my left. Let my Mother Pārvatī Devi protect my quarters. Let Jalaśāyinī protect the southeast; Yātudhāna Bhayankari protect my South-west; Pavamānavilāsini my north-west; Rudrarūpini Rudrāṇi protect my north-east. Let Brahmāni protect my top and Vaiṣnavi protect my nether

regions. Let the word “Tat” in the Gāyatrī protect my legs; “Savituh” protect my Knees; “Varenyam,” protect my loins; “Bhargah,” my navel. Let “Devasya” protect my heart; “Dhī mahī” protect my neck; “Dhi yah,” protect my eyes; “Yah,” protect my forehead; “Nah” protect my head; and “Pracodayāt” protect the tuft on the crown of my head.

तत्वदे पातु मूधर्नं सकारः पातु भालकम् ॥ 17 ॥

चक्षुषी तु विकाराणंसुकारस्तु कपोलयोः ।

नासापुरं वकाराणों रेकास्तरु मुखे तथा ॥ 18 ॥

णिकारं क्रवैमांगेते तु वकारास्त्वधोरोहकम् ।

आस्यमध्ये भकाराणों गौकारश्रुवुके तथा ॥ 19 ॥

देवकारः कपवडेगे तु वकारः स्वक्येरोहकम् ।

स्यकारो दक्षिणं हस्तं धीकारो वामहस्तकम् ॥ 20 ॥

मकारो ह्वयं रक्षेद्रिकार उदरे तथा ।

घिकारो नाभिद्वेते तु योकारस्तु कर्दिं तथा ॥ 21 ॥

गुहां रक्षुत योकार कऊ ही नः पदावक्षम् ।

प्रकारो जानुनी रक्षेचोकारो जंचेदोहकम् ॥ 22 ॥

दकारां गुरुक्छेते तु यकारः पदव्यमकम् ।

तकारो व्यंजन चैव सर्वानि मे सदारजघु ॥ 23 ॥

Again let the “Tat” of the twenty-four syllabled Gāyatrī protect my head; “Sa,” protect my forehead; “Vi” protect my eyes; “Tu” my cheeks; “Va,” protect my nostrils; “Re,” my mouth; “ni” protect my upper lip; “Yah” protect my lower lip; “Bha” within my face; “rgo,” protect my cheeks; “De,” my throat; “Va” my shoulders; “Sya” my right hand; “Dhi” my navel; “ma,” my heart, “Hi,” my belly; “Dhi,” my navel; “Yo” my loins; “Yo”, my anus; “nah,” my thighs, “Pra,” my Knees; “Co” my shanks “Da” my heels; “Ya” my legs; and let “at” protect all my sides.

इर्वे तु कचचं दिव्यं बाधाशतविनाशनम् ।

चतु:पहिकलाविद्वादावकं मोक्षाकारकम् ॥ 24 ॥

O Nārada! This divine Kavaca of the Devi Gāyatri can baffle hundreds and thousands of obstructions and evils; can grant sixty-four Kalās and liberation.

मुच्यते सर्वोपेध्यः परं बह्वाधिपच्छति ।

पठनाच्छवाणात्रापि गोसहसफलं लभेत् ॥ 25 ॥

इति शीदैवीभागवते महापुर्णो द्वारसकन्ने गायकीमनककवं नाम

तृतीयोरक्षया: ॥ 26 ॥

By the glory of this Kavaca, man can become free from all evils and can attain the state of Brahmā. Moreover whoever reads or hears this

acquires the fruits of making a gift of a thousand cows.

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the description of the Kavaca of Śri Gāyatri Devi in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddeviḥbhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

