CHAPTER XII

On the Description of Maṇi Dvipa

व्यास उवाच ।
तदेव देवीसदनं मध्यभागे विराजते ।
सहस्रस्तम्भसंयुक्ताश्चत्वारस्तेषु मण्डपाः ॥ १॥

शृङ्गारमण्डपश्चैको मुक्तिमण्डप एव च ।
ज्ञानमण्डपसंज्ञस्तु तृतीयः परिकीर्तितः ॥ २॥

एकान्तमण्डपश्चैव चतुर्थः परिकीर्तितः ।
नानावितानसंयुक्ता नानाधूपैस्तु धूपिताः ॥ ३॥

Vyāsa said: O King Janamejaya! The Ratnagrha, above mentioned, is the Central, the Chief and the Crowning Place of Mūla Prakṛti. [The nine jewels are: (1) Muktā, (2) Māniyka, (3) Vaidūrya, (4) Gcomeda, (5) Vajra, (6) Vidruma, (7) Padmarāga, (8) Marakata, and (9) Nīla.] This is situated in the centre of all the enclosures. Within this there are the four Maṇḍapas, i.e., halls built of one thousand (i.e., innumerable) pillars. These are the Śrīgāra Maṇḍapa, Mukti Maṇḍapa, Jñāna Maṇḍapa and Ekānta Maṇḍapa; on the top there are canopies of various colours; within are many scented articles scented by the Dhūpas, etc.

कोटिद्युर्मसा: कात्या ध्राजते मंदापा: शृभा:।

तन्मण्डपानां परित: कामपीरविका स्मृता ॥ 4 ॥

मल्लकाकुंद्वविका यत्र पुकलका: स्थिता: ।

असख्याता भृगमदे: पूर्तितास्त्रवा नृप ॥ 5 ॥

The brilliance of each of these is like that of one Koti Suns. On all sides of these four Maṇḍapas there are nice groups of gardens of Kaśmira, Mallikā, and Kunda flowers. Various scents, and scented articles, for example, of musk, etc., are fully arranged in due order.

महाप्रयाटवी तद्धन्सोपानिर्मिता । 
सुधारसेन सम्पूर्ण गुज्जनतमधुठाता ॥ 6 ॥

हंसकास्पतवाकाणी न्यापूर्तितद्वितता ।

वनिकानां सुर्गंधैस्तु मणिद्धीयं सुवासितम् ॥ 7 ॥

There is a very big lotus tank here; the steps leading to it are built of jewels. Its water is nectar, on it are innumerable full-blown lotuses and the bees are humming always over them. Many birds, swans, Kāraṇḍavas, etc., are swimming to and fro. The sweet scents of lotuses are playing all round. In fact, the whole Manidvīpa is perfumed with various scented things.

श्रूग्रापणदे देये गार्थित विविधे: खरैः ।

सभासदो देवरा मध्ये श्रीजगद्धिका ॥ 8 ॥

मुक्तिंदपमध्ये तु मोचयत्निरंग शिवा ।

ज्ञानपेदर्ग कृते तृतीये नृप मपदो ॥ 9 ॥

चतुर्धिंदो चैव जगद्धात्रविधन्तम् ।

मन्थणीसहिता नित्यं करोति जगद्धिक्वा ॥ 10 ॥

Within the Śrīngāra Mandapa, the Devi Bhagavatī is situated in the centre on an Śasana (seat) and She hears the songs sung in tune by the other Devīs along with the other Devas. Similarly sitting on the Mukti Mandapa, She frees the Jivas from the bondages of the world. Sitting on the Jāna Mandapa, She gives instructions on Jāna, and sitting on the fourth Ekānta Mandapa, She consults with Her ministers, the Sakhīs, Anānga Kusuma, etc., on the creation, preservation, etc., of the universe.

विनतामिणहुः राजब्धितितचातकैः परेः ।

सोपानदैर्शभियन्ती मंचको3यधिरातते ॥ 11 ॥

ब्रह्मा विद्युपरा रूपरच इंग्रवरच स्वाधिराशः ।

एते पड़ खुरा: प्रोक्ता: फलकस्तु स्वाधिराशः ॥ 12 ॥

O King! Now I shall describe about the main, Khāsa, room of Śri Devi. Listen. The Khāsa Mahāla palace of the Devi Bhagavatī is named Śri Cintāmani Grha. Within this is placed the raised platform, the dais and sofa whereon the Devi taketh Her honourable seat. The ten Śakti-tattvas form the staircases. The four legs are (1) Brahmā, (2) Viṣṇu, (3) Rudra, and (4) Maheśvara. Sadāśiva forms the upper covering plank.

तस्योरि महदोषी भुवनेगी शिवाजते ।

या देही निजिलीलाई द्विभूषात् बघूच है ॥ 13 ॥

सुख्यादौ तु स एवासं तद्धिज्ञो महेश्वरः ।

कन्दपैर्वनोगोश्चाकोटिकन्दपैमुचरः ॥ 14 ॥

Over this Śrī Bhuvanesvara Mahā Deva or the Supreme Architect of the Universe is reigning. Now hear something about this Bhuvanesvara. Before creation while intending to sport, the Devi Bhagavatī divided Her Body into two parts and from the right part created Bhuvanesvara. He has five faces and each face has three eyes.

पंचवकस्विनेत्रश्र प्रमिष्णपषाणषित: ।

हरिणाधीनतिपर्यूवरं च निजाबहुषिः ॥ १५ ॥

द्यानः घोडगायदोसी देवः सर्वेश्वरो महान् ।

कोटिपूर्ववीकासागसत्रकोंटिपुशिलः ॥ १६ ॥

गृद्धस्कर्दिकसंकाशस्थिनेत्रः शीतल्युति: ।

व्यामोंके सत्रियणगत्थ देवी श्रीभूयतेशरी ॥ १७ ॥

He has four hands and He is holding in each hand spear, signs indicating do not fear, axe, and signs granting boons. He looks sixteen years old. The lustre of of His Body is more beautiful then Koti Kandarpas and more fiery than thousand Suns; and at the same time cool like Koti Suns. His colour is crystal white, and on His left lap Śri Bhuvaneśvari Devi is always sitting.

नवरलनगाणाकीर्णकांदीद्यामविराजित ।।

ततकांचनसघद्वैवूर्याजूद्वभूषणा ॥ १ ८ ॥

कन च्छीयक्रातटकविदंकवदनावुजा ।

ललाटकांतिधिभविविजातांभुधाकरा ॥ १९ ॥

On the hip of Śrī Bhuvaneśvarī, is shining the girdle with small tinkling bells, built of various jewels; the ornaments on the arms are made of burnished gold studded with Vaidūryamapis; the Tātanka ornaments on Her ears are very beautiful like Śrī cakra and they enhance very much the beauty of Her lotus face. The beauty of Her forehead vies with, or defies the Moon of the eighth bright lunar day.

विबकांतितिरस्कारिदच्छद्विराजिता ।

लसत्कुकमकसूरीतिरेकोद्वारासिताना ॥ 20 ॥

विद्यच्छाभियमाकराचच्छरकूर्मवका ।

उडाकविममवरच्छतानामरणभावसुरा ॥ 21 ॥

चिताकलिंवितवच्छमुक्ताणच्छविविता ।

पाटीपंककपूरैकुभालोकृततसनी ॥ 22 ॥

Her lips challenge the fully ripened Bimba fruits. Her face is shining with the Tilaka mark made of musk and saffron. The divine crown on Her head is beautified with the Sun and Moon made of jewels; the nose ornaments are like the star Venus and built of transparent gems, looking exceedingly beautiful and shedding charming lustre all around.

विविचविविधाकरण काकुसंकागक्षेधग ।

दाडिमीफलकौणाभद्रंपर्निक्वितिता ॥ 23 ॥

अनधरान्वादिन्यमुळादिचितमसका ।

मत्तिलेमालाविलसदलकाठमुपाखुगुज ॥ 24 ॥

The neck is decorated with necklaces built of gems and jewels. Her breasts are nicely decorated with camphor and saffron. Her neck is shining like a conchshell decorated with artistic designs. Her teeth look like fully ripe pomegranate fruits.

कलेककायधिनिभू त्राणरचन्द्रनिभान्ना ।

जाह्वीसिलणवर्तीभिन्तभिधिक्षिपिधि ॥ 25 ॥

माणिव्यगकलाबदुपुर्किगृष्णिक्षिपिधि ।

पुष्टीकटलाकानवनप्रवस्पूर्ती ॥ 26 ॥


On Her head is shining the jewel crown. Her lotus face is beautified with alakā as if these are mad bees. Her navel is beautiful like the whirls in the river Bhāgirathi; Her fingers are decorated with jewel rings; She has three eyes like lotus leaves; the lustre of Her body is bright like Padmarāgamani cut and carved and sharpened on stone.

कल्यातच्छमहात्यापद्यागोज्जलग्र ।
रत्नविक्रीकाणिक्युत्करनंककरणोंपिता ॥ 27 ॥

मणिमुक्तासरापारलसत्पदकसन्ततिः ।
रत्नाङ्गुलिप्रविततप्रभाजाललसत्करा ॥ २८॥

कञ्चुकीगुम्फितापारनानारत्नततिद्युतिः ।
मल्लिकामोदिधम्मिल्लमल्लिकालिसरावृता ॥ २९॥


The bracelets are adorned with jewel tinkling bells; Her neck ornaments and medals are studded with gems and jewels. Her hands are resplendent with the lustre of the jewels on the fingers; the braid of hair on Her head is wreathed with a garland of Mallikā flowers; Her bodice (short jacket) is studded with various jewels.

सुवर्तनिवडोतुजूकुभारालमा शिवा ।
वरणाशंकुशाभीतिलसढ़ाहुतुध्या ॥३० ॥

सर्वेशुक्रारवेधाठा सुकुमारांगवल्हरी ।
सौद्यधारासर्वस्वा निव्याजकरणामयी ॥३१ ॥

O King! Śrī Devi is slightly bent down with the weight of Her very high hard breasts. She has four hands and She is holding noose, goad and signs granting boons and “do not fear.” The all beautiful all merciful Devi is full of love gestures and beauties.

निजसंलापमाधुर्यविनिर्भर्त्सितकच्छपी ।
कोटिकोटिरवीन्दूनां कान्तिं या बिभ्रती परा ॥ ३२॥

नानासखीभिर्दासीभिस्तथा देवाङ्गनादिभिः ।
सर्वाभिर्देवताभिस्तु समन्तात्परिवेष्टिता ॥ ३३॥

Her voice is sweeter than that of lute; the lustre of Her body is like Kotis and Kotis of Suns and Moons if they rise simultaneously on the sky. The Sakhis, attendants, the Devas and the Devis surround Her on all sides.

इच्छागक्या ज्ञानगक्या क्रियागक्न्या सम्वितानी

लज्जा लुहित्यथा पुहि: कीरिं: कांति क्षमा दया ॥ 34 ॥

बुद्धिमीया सुत्तिल्बीमूर्तिमल्योड़ना: सूताः ।

जया च विजया चेवाय्यजिता चापारजिता ॥ 35 ॥

नित्या विलोलिनो दोषी त्वोरा मंगला नवा ।

पीठगत्कन एतासु सेवेते यां परांकिमम् ॥ 36 ॥

Icchā Śakti, Jñāna Śakti, and Kriyā Śakti all are present always before the Devī. Lajjā, Tuṣṭi, Puṣṭi, Kirti, Kānti, Kṣamā, Dayā, Buddhi, Medhā, Smṛti, and Lakṣmī are always seen here incarnate in their due Forms. The nine Piṭha Śaktis, Jayā, Vijayā, Ajitā, Aparājitā, Nityā, Vilāsini, Dogdhri, Aghorā, and Mangalā reside here always and are in the service of the Devi Bhuvaneśvari.

यस्यासु पाश्बीगते स्ति निधौ तै ग्रंखपवको ।

नवरल्बहा नदशल्य वै कांवनल्बा: ॥ 37 ॥

सदाप्रावृहा नदी निर्धिच्यां तु विनिर्भातः ।

सुधासित्यैतनागिन्यन्तः सर्वं नृपसत्ति ॥ 38 ॥

On the side of the Devi are the two oceans of treasures; from these streams of Navaratna, gold, and seven Dhātus (elements) go out and assume the forms of rivers and fall into the ocean Sudhā Sindhu.

सा देवी भुवनेगानी तद्यामोंके विराजते ।

सर्वशलं मेड़गस्य यत्सांगायेत नान्यथा ॥ 39 ॥

चित्तमणिगृहस्यास्य प्रमाणं शूणु भूमिप ।

Because such a Devi Bhuvaneśvari, resplendent with all powers and prosperities, sits on the left lap of Bhuvaneśvara, that He has, no doubt acquired His omnipotence. O King! Now I will describe the dimensions of the Cintāmaṇi Grha.

सहस्योजनायां महांतस्तद्यघते ॥ 40 ॥

तदुत्तरे महाशाला: पूर्वेमादूद्विणा: स्मृतः ।

अन्तरिंग्रतं त्वेत्निनाराधां विज्ञाते ॥ 41 ॥

संकोचच विकास्य उवातेस्य नितन्तम् ।

पटवक्तायंवरतः प्रत्ये सर्जे तथा ॥ 42 ॥

Listen. It is one thousand Yojanas wide; its centre is very big; the rooms situated further and further are twice those preceding them. It lies in Antarikşa (the intervening space) without any support. At the times of dissolution and creation it contracts and expands like a cloth.

गालानां चैव सर्वेषां सर्वकान्तिपरावधि ।

चिन्तामिगुरं प्रोक्ते यत्र देयी महोपाये ॥ 43 ॥

ये ये उपायकाः सन्ति प्रतिबह्वाद्वतिनः ।

देवेषु नागलोक्षेषु मनुध्योथितेषु च ॥ 44 ॥

श्रीद्वयास्ते च सर्वेपि ब्रजंवयेच भूमिप ।

देवीक्षेत्रे ये त्वजन्ति प्राणान्देवचरेन ततः ॥ 45 ॥

ते सर्वे यांति तत्रैव यत्र देवी महात्मव ।

The lustre of this Cintāmani Grha is comparatively far more bright and beautiful than that

of other enclosure walls. Śrī Devi Bhagavatī dwells always in this place. O King! All the great Bhaktas of the Devi in every Brahmānda, in the Devaloka, in Nāgaloka, in the world of men or in any other loka, all those that were engaged in the meditation of the Devi in the sacred places of the Devi and died there, they all come here and reside with the Devi in great joy and festivity.

घृतकुल्या दुधकुल्या दधिकुल्या मधुरवा: ॥ 46 ॥

स्यन्तिन सरितः सर्वान्त्यागनुबहा: परा: ।

प्रशासवहा: काशिचजबमूरसवहा: परा: ॥ 47 ॥

आधक्षुरसवाहिन्यो नशतान्तु सहसशः ।

On all sides rivers are flowing; some of ghee, some of milk, curd, honey, nectar, pomegranate juice, jambu juice, and some of mango juice, sugarcane juices are flowing on all sides.

मनोराधकला वृक्षा वाय्मः कृपतिश्वेच च ॥ 48 ॥

यथेएथानफलल न - नूर्न रिक्तिवर्सित हि ।

न रोगपिल्लत वाएपे जरा वाएपे कदाचन ॥ 49 ॥

न चिताना न च मात्सर्वं कामक्रोधादिकं तथा ।

The trees here yield fruits according to one's desires and the wells and tanks yield water also as people desire. Never is there any want felt here of anything. Never are seen here diseases, sorrow, old age, decrepitude, anxiety, anger, jealousy, and envy and other lower ideas.

सर्वे युवानः सस्तीका: सहसाधित्ववर्षतः ॥ 50 ॥

भजति सत्तं देर्वी तत श्रीभुवनेश्वीय ।

कैविसलोकतापनाः: कैविस्तमीपतां ता: ॥ 51 ॥

सहपतां गता: कैविस्तारीदं तां च परे गता: ।

या यासु देवतातस्त प्रतिह्नाण्डवर्तिन्न ॥ 52 ॥

All the inhabitants of this place are full of youth and look like one thousand Suns. All enjoy with their wives and they worship Śrī Bhuvaneśvarī. Some have attained Sālokya, some Sāmpiya, some Sārūpya and some have attained Sārṣṭi and pass their days in highest comfort. The Devas that are in every Brahmāṇḍa all live here and worship Śrī Devī.

समध्य: स्थितास्तमु वेवेते जगदीश्वरीम् ।

सप्तकौटिमहामन्या मृतिंमन्त उपासते ॥ 53 ॥

महाविद्याश्र सकला: सामावस्थापित्मकां शिणाम् ।

कारणबहुरूपां तां मायागवलिविमहाम् ॥ 54 ॥

इन्थं राजनमय प्रोक्तं मिणीधौं महत्नम् ।

न सूर्यचेत्री नो विद्युक्तोद्योर्जिनस्तबेव च ॥ 55 ॥

The seven Koti Mahā Mantras and Mahā Vidyās here assume forms and worship the Mahā Māyā Śrī Bhagavatī, Who is of the nature of Brahmā. O King! Thus I have described to you all about this Manidvīpa. The lustre of Sun, Moon and Kotis and Kotis of lightnings cannot be one Kotīeth of one Koti part of Its lustre.

एतस्य भाषा कोटोंशकोटोर्शनाथि ते सभाः ।

क्वचिद्धिदुकुमसेंकांगे क्वचिन्मारकतछ्चि ॥ 56 ॥

विशुद्धानुसमछाचं मध्यमूर्वसां क्वचित् ।

विशुक्रोदिमहाप्रधाग साकांतिततं क्वचित् ॥ 57 ॥

At some places the lustre is like Vidrumamani; some places as are illumined like the lustre of Marakata Mani; some, like Sūryakāntamani and some places are rendered brilliant like Koṭis and Koṭis of lightnings.

कवचिस्वितूरनीते-ह्रमाणिकवसरुषाण्डवि ।

हीरसारमहागर्भभगद्धगिरितद्धन्ति ॥ 58 ॥

कांया दावानलमां ततकांचनसानिभम् ।

कवचिच्छंत्रोपलोहांरं सूर्वोहांरं च कुजरित् ॥ 59 ॥

The light at some places is like Sindūra; at some places like Indranilamani; at some places, like Mānikya, and at some places like diamond. Some places are blazing like the conflagration of fire; and some places look like molten gold; some places seem filled with the lustre of Candrakāntamani, and some places look brilliant like Sūryakāntamani.

रत्न्युगीत्सामयुक्तं रत्न्याकारागुंपुम् ।

रत्नयत्रे रत्नफेकुँबैश्च परिमंडितम् ॥ 6 0 ॥

नृत्यन्यपूरसंदैध कपोतरपिताज्ञलम् ।

कोकिलाकाकलीलोशे: शुकलाधिश्र शोभितम् ॥ 6 1 ॥

The mountains here are all built of gems and jewels; the entrance gates and enclosures are built of gems and jewels; the trees and their leaves all

Book XII Chapter XII

are of gems; in fact all that exist here are all of gems and jewels. At some places numbers of peacocks are dancing; at some places cuckoos are captivating the minds of persons by cooing in the fifth tune and at others doves and pigeons and parrots are making sweet cackling sounds.

सुर्यमयमीयाबुल्बालाधिसारोतुम् ।

तन्यधभागविलसद्रिकधरूनपड़्जै: ॥ 6 2 ॥

सुगन्धिभ: समन्ता वासितं शतयोजनम् ।

मद्भात्रसधिचन्चलदुममसामूकुलम् ॥ 6 3 ॥

Lakhs and lakhs of tanks are there with their pure crystal-like waters. The Red lotuses have blown fully and enhanced the beauty of the place. The captivating sets of these lotuses extend to a distance one hundred Yojanas all round and gladden the minds of people. The leaves are rustling with gentle breeze.

वित्तामशिसमुतानं ज्योतिषा वित्तात्यम् ।

रत्नप्रभाधिरभितो धगद्धगितिदिकटम् ॥ 64 ॥

वृक्षात्महानभ्यवातातसुपुरितम् ।

धूपधुपार्थितं राजनभिधौरिपाञ्जैजलम् ॥ 65 ॥

The whole sky overhead is radiant with the lustre of Cintāmani gems and jewels. All the sides are illuminated with the brilliancy of the gems and jewels. O King! These jewels act like lamps. And the sweet scented trees emit their fragrance and it is transmitted by breeze all around.

महिकालकसहित्छरतलोदकातिनिधः ।

दिद्योहनकं चैततर्धीणोरसंयुन्त ।। 66 ॥

ऐश्वर्यस्य समप्रम्य श्रुत्रास्याक्षितस्य च ।

Thus these trees serve the purpose of dhūpa (scent). The rays of these gems pierce through the openings of the jewel screens on the houses and fall on the mirrors inside, thus causing a nice brilliant appearance that captivates the mind and causes confusion.

सर्वज्ञातया: स्वायास्नेजस्याशिललस्य च । 67 ।।

पराकमस्य सर्वस्य सर्वोत्मगुणस्य च ।

सकलया दयायाशु सभापित्रि भृपते ॥ 68 ॥

राज आनन्दमारध्य बहुतोकांतभूमिषु ।

आनंदा ये स्थिता: सर्वे तेत्रवेतारभंविति ॥ 69 ॥

O King! And what shall I say of this place, more than this, that all the powers, and wealth, all the love sentiments, all the dress suited to amorous interviews, all the splendours, fire, energy, beauty and brilliance, the omniscience, the indomitable strength, all the excellent qualities and all mercy and kindness are present here! The All Comprehending Bliss and the Brahmānanda can always be witnessed here!

इति ते वर्णितः राजन्मिषीयं महत्त्रम् ।

महदेध्य: परं स्थानं सर्वलोकोनमोतमम् ॥ 70 ॥

लृत्य स्मरणात्मखः सर्वपां विन्यगति ।

प्राणोकतमामास्टी तु स्युवा तत्रैव गच्छति ॥ 71 ॥

O King! Thus I have described to you about the Manjdivipa, the most exalted place of the Devi Bhagavati. At Her remembrance all the sins are instantly destroyed. The more so, if a man remembers the Devi and 'about this place at the time of death, He surely goes there.

अध्यायपत्रकं लेततपदेशित्यं समाहितः ।

भूतप्रतिपश्ञाचाद्विधा तत्र भवेत्र हि ॥72 ॥

नवीनगृहामिणी वासुयोगे तथैव च ।

पतितव्य प्रयनेन कल्याणं तेन जातये ॥ 73 ॥

इति श्रीदैवीभगवते महापुराणे द्वारशकस्ये

ब्रदारोअधाय: ॥ 74 ॥

O King! He who daily reads the five Chapters, i.e., from the eighth to this twelfth chapter, is surely untouched by any obstacles due to the Bhūtas, Pretas and Piśācas. Especially the recitation of this at the time of building a new house and at the time of Vāstuyāga ensures all good and auspiciousness.

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the description of Mani Dvipa in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

