[Ch 12 Verse 1-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King Janamejaya! The Ratnagrha, above mentioned, is the Central, the Chief and the Crowning Place of Mūla Prakṛti. [The nine jewels are: (1) Muktā, (2) Māniyka, (3) Vaidūrya, (4) Gcomeda, (5) Vajra, (6) Vidruma, (7) Padmarāga, (8) Marakata, and (9) Nīla.] This is situated in the centre of all the enclosures. Within this there are the four Maṇḍapas, ॥.e., halls built of one thousand (i.e., innumerable) pillars. These are the Śrīgāra Maṇḍapa, Mukti Maṇḍapa, Jñāna Maṇḍapa and Ekānta Maṇḍapa; on the top there are canopies of various colours; within are many scented articles scented by the Dhūpas, etc.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King Janamejaya! The Ratnagriha, above mentioned, is the Central, the Chief and the Crowning Place of Mūla Prakriti. [The nine jewels are :-- (1) Muktā, (2) Māṇikya, (3) Vaidūrya, (4) Gomeda, (5) Vajra, (6) Vidruma, (7) Padmarāga, (8) Marakata, and (9) Nīla.] This is situated in the centre of all the enclosures. Within this there are the four Maṇḍapas, i.e., halls built of one thousand (i.e., innumerable) pillars. These are the Śriṅgāra Maṇḍapa, Mukti Maṇḍapa, Jñāna Maṇḍapa and Ekānta Maṇḍapa; on the top there are canopies of various colours; within are many scented articles scented by the Dhūpas, etc.

[Ch 12 Verse 4-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The brilliance of each of these is like that of one Koti Suns. On all sides of these four Maṇḍapas there are nice groups of gardens of Kaśmira, Mallikā, and Kunda flowers. Various scents, and scented articles, for example, of musk, etc., are fully arranged in due order.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The brilliance of each of these is like that of one Koṭi Suns. On all sides of these four Maṇḍapas there are nice groups of gardens of Kaśmīra, Mallikā, and Kuṇḍa flowers. Various scents, and scented articles, for example, of musk, etc., are fully arranged in due order.

[Ch 12 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There is a very big lotus tank here; the steps leading to it are built of jewels. Its water is nectar, on it are innumerable full-blown lotuses and the bees are humming always over them. Many birds, swans, Kāraṇḍavas, etc., are swimming to and fro. The sweet scents of lotuses are playing all round. In fact, the whole Manidvīpa is perfumed with various scented things.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There is a very big lotus tank here; the steps leading to it are built of jewels. Its water is nectar, on it are innumerable full-blown lotuses and the bees are humming always over them. Many birds, swans, Kāraṇḍavas, etc., are swimming to and fro. The sweet scents of lotuses are playing all round. In fact, the whole Maṇidvīpa is perfumed with various scented things.

[Ch 12 Verse 8-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Within the Śrīngāra Mandapa, the Devi Bhagavatī is situated in the centre on an Śasana (seat) and She hears the songs sung in tune by the other Devīs along with the other Devas. Similarly sitting on the Mukti Mandapa, She frees the Jivas from the bondages of the world. Sitting on the Jāna Mandapa, She gives instructions on Jāna, and sitting on the fourth Ekānta Mandapa, She consults with Her ministers, the Sakhīs, Anānga Kusuma, etc., on the creation, preservation, etc., of the universe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Within the Śriṅgāra Maṇḍapa, the Devī Bhagavatī is situated in the centre on an Āsana (seat) and She hears the songs sung in tune by the other Devīs along with the other Devas. Similarly sitting on the Mukti Maṇḍapa, She frees the Jīvas from the bondages of the world. Sitting on the Jñāna Maṇḍapa, She gives instructions on Jñāna, and sitting on the fourth Ekānta Maṇḍapa, She consults with Her ministers, the Sakhīs, Ananga Kusuma, etc., on the creation, preservation, etc., of the universe.

[Ch 12 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Now I shall describe about the main, Khāsa, room of Śri Devi. Listen. The Khāsa Mahāla palace of the Devi Bhagavatī is named Śri Cintāmani Grha. Within this is placed the raised platform, the dais and sofa whereon the Devi taketh Her honourable seat. The ten Śakti-tattvas form the staircases. The four legs are (1) Brahmā, (2) Viṣṇu, (3) Rudra, and (4) Maheśvara. Sadāśiva forms the upper covering plank.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Now I shall describe about the main, Khās, room of Śrī Devī. Listen. The Khās Mahāl palace of the Devī Bhagavatī is named Śrī Cintāmaṇi Griha. Within this is placed the raised platform, the dais and sofa whereon the Devī taketh Her honourable seat. The ten Śakti-tattvas form the staircases. The four legs are (1) Brahmā, (2) Viṣṇu, (3) Rudra, and (4) Maheśvara. Sadāśiva forms the upper covering plank.

[Ch 12 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Over this Śrī Bhuvanesvara Mahā Deva or the Supreme Architect of the Universe is reigning. Now hear something about this Bhuvanesvara. Before creation while intending to sport, the Devi Bhagavatī divided Her Body into two parts and from the right part created Bhuvanesvara. He has five faces and each face has three eyes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Over this Śrī Bhuvaneśvara Mahā Deva or the Supreme Architect of the Universe is reigning. Now hear something about this Bhuvaneśvara. Before creation while intending to sport, the Devī Bhagavatī divided Her Body into two parts and from the right part created Bhuvaneśvara. He has five faces and each face has three eyes.

[Ch 12 Verse 15-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He has four hands and He is holding in each hand spear, signs indicating do not fear, axe, and signs granting boons. He looks sixteen years old. The lustre of of His Body is more beautiful then Koti Kandarpas and more fiery than thousand Suns; and at the same time cool like Koti Suns. His colour is crystal white, and on His left lap Śri Bhuvaneśvari Devi is always sitting.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He has four hands and He is holding in each hand speer, signs indicating do not fear, axe, and signs granting boons. He looks sixteen years old. The lustre of of His Body is more beautiful then Koṭi Kandarpas and more fiery than thousand Suns; and at the same time cool like Koṭi Suns. His colour is crystal white, and on His left lap Śrī Bhuvaneśvarī Devī is always sitting.

[Ch 12 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the hip of Śrī Bhuvaneśvarī, is shining the girdle with small tinkling bells, built of various jewels; the ornaments on the arms are made of burnished gold studded with Vaidūryamapis; the Tātanka ornaments on Her ears are very beautiful like Śrī cakra and they enhance very much the beauty of Her lotus face. The beauty of Her forehead vies with, or defies the Moon of the eighth bright lunar day.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the hip of Śrī Bhuvaneśvarī, is shining the girdle with small tinkling bells, built of various jewels; the ornaments on the arms are made of burnished gold studded with Vaidūryamaṇis; the Tāṭaṅka ornaments on Her ears are very beautiful like Śrīcakra and they enhance very much the beauty of Her lotus face. The beauty of Her forehead vies with, or defies the Moon of the eighth bright lunar day.

[Ch 12 Verse 20-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her lips challenge the fully ripened Bimba fruits. Her face is shining with the Tilaka mark made of musk and saffron. The divine crown on Her head is beautified with the Sun and Moon made of jewels; the nose ornaments are like the star Venus and built of transparent gems, looking exceedingly beautiful and shedding charming lustre all around.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her lips challenge the fully ripened Bimba fruits. Her face is shining with the Tilaka mark made of musk and saffron. The divine crown on Her head is beautified with the Sun and Moon made of jewels; the nose ornaments are like the star Venus and built of transparent gems, looking exceedingly beautiful and shedding charming lustre all around.

[Ch 12 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The neck is decorated with necklaces built of gems and jewels. Her breasts are nicely decorated with camphor and saffron. Her neck is shining like a conchshell decorated with artistic designs. Her teeth look like fully ripe pomegranate fruits.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The neck is decorated with necklaces built of gems and jewels. Her breasts are nicely decorated with camphor and saffron. Her neck is shining like a conchshell decorated with artistic designs. Her teeth look like fully ripe pomegranate fruits.

[Ch 12 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On Her head is shining the jewel crown. Her lotus face is beautified with alakā as if these are mad bees. Her navel is beautiful like the whirls in the river Bhāgirathi; Her fingers are decorated with jewel rings; She has three eyes like lotus leaves; the lustre of Her body is bright like Padmarāgamani cut and carved and sharpened on stone.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On Her head is shining the jewel crown. Her lotus face is beautified with alakā as if these are mad bees. Her navel is beautiful like the whirls in the river Bhāgirathī; Her fingers are decorated with jewel rings; She has three eyes like lotus leaves; the lustre of Her body is bright like Padmarāgamaṇi cut and carved and sharpened on stone.

[Ch 12 Verse 27-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The bracelets are adorned with jewel tinkling bells; Her neck ornaments and medals are studded with gems and jewels. Her hands are resplendent with the lustre of the jewels on the fingers; the braid of hair on Her head is wreathed with a garland of Mallikā flowers; Her bodice (short jacket) is studded with various jewels.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The bracelets are adorned with jewel tinkling bells; Her neck ornaments and medals are studded with gems and jewels. Her hands are resplendent with the lustre of the jewels on the fingers; the braid of hair on Her head is wreathed with a garland of Mallikā flowers; Her bodice (short jacket) is studded with various jewels.

[Ch 12 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Śrī Devi is slightly bent down with the weight of Her very high hard breasts. She has four hands and She is holding noose, goad and signs granting boons and “do not fear.” The all beautiful all merciful Devi is full of love gestures and beauties.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Śrī Devī is slightly bent down with the weight of Her very high hard breasts. She has four hands and She is holding noose, goad and signs granting boons and “do not fear.” The all beautiful all merciful Devī is full of love gestures and beauties.

[Ch 12 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her voice is sweeter than that of lute; the lustre of Her body is like Kotis and Kotis of Suns and Moons if they rise simultaneously on the sky. The Sakhis, attendants, the Devas and the Devis surround Her on all sides.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her voice is sweeter than that of lute; the lustre of Her body is like Koṭis and Koṭis of Suns and Moons if they rise simultaneously on the sky. The Sakhīs, attendants, the Devas and the Devīs surround Her on all sides.

[Ch 12 Verse 34-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Icchā Śakti, Jñāna Śakti, and Kriyā Śakti all are present always before the Devī. Lajjā, Tuṣṭi, Puṣṭi, Kirti, Kānti, Kṣamā, Dayā, Buddhi, Medhā, Smṛti, and Lakṣmī are always seen here incarnate in their due Forms. The nine Piṭha Śaktis, Jayā, Vijayā, Ajitā, Aparājitā, Nityā, Vilāsini, Dogdhri, Aghorā, and Mangalā reside here always and are in the service of the Devi Bhuvaneśvari.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Iccā Śakti, Jñāna Śakti, and Kriya Śakti all are present always before the Devī. Lajjā, Tuṣṭi, Puṣṭi, Kīrti, Kānti, Kṣamā, Dayā, Buddhi, Medhā, Smriti, and Lakṣmī are always seen here incarnate in their due Forms. The nine Pīṭha Śaktis, Jayā, Vijayā, Ajitā, Aparājitā, Nityā, Vilāsinī, Dogdhrī, Aghorā, and Mangalā reside here always and are in the service of the Devī Bhuvaneśvarī.

[Ch 12 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the side of the Devi are the two oceans of treasures; from these streams of Navaratna, gold, and seven Dhātus (elements) go out and assume the forms of rivers and fall into the ocean Sudhā Sindhu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the side of the Devī are the two oceans of treasures; from these streams of Navaratna, gold, and seven Dhātus (elements) go out and assume the forms of rivers and fall into the ocean Sudhā Sindhu.

[Ch 12 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Because such a Devi Bhuvaneśvari, resplendent with all powers and prosperities, sits on the left lap of Bhuvaneśvara, that He has, no doubt acquired His omnipotence. O King! Now I will describe the dimensions of the Cintāmaṇi Grha.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Because such a Devī Bhuvaneśvarī, resplendent with all powers and prosperities, sits on the left lap of Bhuvaneśvara, that He has, no doubt acquired His omnipotence. O King! Now I will describe the dimensions of the Cintāmaṇi Griha.

[Ch 12 Verse 40-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Listen. It is one thousand Yojanas wide; its centre is very big; the rooms situated further and further are twice those preceding them. It lies in Antarikşa (the intervening space) without any support. At the times of dissolution and creation it contracts and expands like a cloth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Listen. It is one thousand Yojanas wide; its centre is very big; the rooms situated further and further are twice those preceding them. It lies in Antarīkṣa (the intervening space) without any support. At the times of dissolution and creation it contracts and expands like a cloth.

[Ch 12 Verse 43-45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The lustre of this Cintāmani Grha is comparatively far more bright and beautiful than that of other enclosure walls. Śrī Devi Bhagavatī dwells always in this place. O King! All the great Bhaktas of the Devi in every Brahmānda, in the Devaloka, in Nāgaloka, in the world of men or in any other loka, all those that were engaged in the meditation of the Devi in the sacred places of the Devi and died there, they all come here and reside with the Devi in great joy and festivity.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The lustre of this Cintāmaṇi Griha is comparatively far more bright and beautiful than that of other enclosure walls. Śrī Devī Bhagavatī dwells always in this place. O King! All the great Bhaktas of the Devī in every Brahmāṇḍa, in the Devaloka, in Nāgaloka, in the world of men or in any other loka, all those that were engaged in the meditation of the Devī in the sacred places of the Devī and died there, they all come here and reside with the Devī in great joy and festivity.

[Ch 12 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On all sides rivers are flowing; some of ghee, some of milk, curd, honey, nectar, pomegranate juice, jambu juice, and some of mango juice, sugarcane juices are flowing on all sides.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On all sides rivers are flowing; some of ghee, some of milk, curd, honey, nectar, pomegranate juice, jambu juice, and some of mango juice, sugarcane juices are flowing on all sides.

[Ch 12 Verse 48-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The trees here yield fruits according to one's desires and the wells and tanks yield water also as people desire. Never is there any want felt here of anything. Never are seen here diseases, sorrow, old age, decrepitude, anxiety, anger, jealousy, and envy and other lower ideas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The trees here yield fruits according to one’s desires and the wells and tanks yield water also as people desire. Never is there any want felt here of anything. Never are seen here diseases, sorrow, old age, decrepitude, anxiety, anger, jealousy, and envy and other lower ideas.

[Ch 12 Verse 50-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► All the inhabitants of this place are full of youth and look like one thousand Suns. All enjoy with their wives and they worship Śrī Bhuvaneśvarī. Some have attained Sālokya, some Sāmpiya, some Sārūpya and some have attained Sārṣṭi and pass their days in highest comfort. The Devas that are in every Brahmāṇḍa all live here and worship Śrī Devī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► All the inhabitants of this place are full of youth and look like one thousand Suns. All enjoy with their wives and they worship Śrī Bhuvaneśvarī. Some have attained Sālokya, some Sāmīpya, some Sārūpya and some have attained Sārṣṭi and pass their days in highest comfort. The Devas that are in every Brahmāṇḍa all live here and worship Śrī Devī.

[Ch 12 Verse 53-55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The seven Koti Mahā Mantras and Mahā Vidyās here assume forms and worship the Mahā Māyā Śrī Bhagavatī, Who is of the nature of Brahmā. O King! Thus I have described to you all about this Manidvīpa. The lustre of Sun, Moon and Kotis and Kotis of lightnings cannot be one Kotīeth of one Koti part of Its lustre.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The seven Koṭi Mahā Mantras and Mahā Vidyās here assume forms and worship the Mahā Māyā Śrī Bhagavatī, Who is of the nature of Brahmā. O King! Thus I have described to you all about this Maṇidvīpa. The lustre of Sun, Moon and Koṭis and Koṭis of lightnings cannot be one Koṭieth of one Koṭi part of Its lustre.

[Ch 12 Verse 56-57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At some places the lustre is like Vidrumamani; some places as are illumined like the lustre of Marakata Mani; some, like Sūryakāntamani and some places are rendered brilliant like Koṭis and Koṭis of lightnings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At some places the lustre is like Vidrumamaṇi; some places as are illumined like the lustre of Marakata Maṇi; some, like Sūrya Kānta maṇi and some places are rendered brilliant like Koṭis and Koṭis of lightnings.

[Ch 12 Verse 58-59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The light at some places is like Sindūra; at some places like Indranilamani; at some places, like Mānikya, and at some places like diamond. Some places are blazing like the conflagration of fire; and some places look like molten gold; some places seem filled with the lustre of Candrakāntamani, and some places look brilliant like Sūryakāntamani.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The light at some places is like Sindūra; at some places like Indranīlamaṇi; at some places, like Māṇikya, and at some places like diamond. Some places are blazing like the conflagration of fire; and some places look like molten gold; some places seem filled with the lustre of Candrakāntamaṇi, and some places look brilliant like Sūryakāntamaṇi.

[Ch 12 Verse 60-61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The mountains here are all built of gems and jewels; the entrance gates and enclosures are built of gems and jewels; the trees and their leaves all are of gems; in fact all that exist here are all of gems and jewels. At some places numbers of peacocks are dancing; at some places cuckoos are captivating the minds of persons by cooing in the fifth tune and at others doves and pigeons and parrots are making sweet cackling sounds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The mountains here are all built of gems and jewels; the entrance gates and enclosures are built of gems and jewels; the trees and their leaves all are of gems; in fact all that exist here are all of gems and jewels. At some places numbers of peacocks are dancing; at some places cuckoos are captivating the minds of persons by cooing in the fifth tune and at others doves and pigeons and parrots are making sweet cackling sounds.

[Ch 12 Verse 62-63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Lakhs and lakhs of tanks are there with their pure crystal-like waters. The Red lotuses have blown fully and enhanced the beauty of the place. The captivating sets of these lotuses extend to a distance one hundred Yojanas all round and gladden the minds of people. The leaves are rustling with gentle breeze.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Lakhs and lakhs of tanks are there with their pure crystal-like waters. The Red lotuses have blown fully and enhanced the beauty of the place. The captivating scents of these lotuses extend to a distance one hundred Yojanas all round and gladden the minds of people. The leaves are rustling with gentle breeze.

[Ch 12 Verse 64-65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The whole sky overhead is radiant with the lustre of Cintāmani gems and jewels. All the sides are illuminated with the brilliancy of the gems and jewels. O King! These jewels act like lamps. And the sweet scented trees emit their fragrance and it is transmitted by breeze all around.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The whole sky overhead is radiant with the lustre of Cintāmaṇi gems and jewels. All the sides are illuminated with the brilliancy of the gems and jewels. O King! These jewels act like lamps. And the sweet scented trees emit their flagrance and it is transmitted by breeze all around.

[Ch 12 Verse 66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus these trees serve the purpose of dhūpa (scent). The rays of these gems pierce through the openings of the jewel screens on the houses and fall on the mirrors inside, thus causing a nice brilliant appearance that captivates the mind and causes confusion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus these trees serve the purpose of dhūp (scent). The rays of these gems pierce through the openings of the jewel screens on the houses and fall on the mirrors inside, thus causing a nice brilliant appearance that captivates the mind and causes confusion.

[Ch 12 Verse 67-69]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! And what shall I say of this place, more than this, that all the powers, and wealth, all the love sentiments, all the dress suited to amorous interviews, all the splendours, fire, energy, beauty and brilliance, the omniscience, the indomitable strength, all the excellent qualities and all mercy and kindness are present here! The All Comprehending Bliss and the Brahmānanda can always be witnessed here!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! And what shall I say of this place, more than this, that all the powers, and wealth, all the love sentiments, all the dress suited to amorous interviews, all the splendours, fire, energy, beauty and brilliance, the omniscience, the indomitable strength, all the excellent qualities and all mercy and kindness are present here! The All Comprehending Bliss and the Brahmānaṇḍa can always be witnessed here!

[Ch 12 Verse 70-71]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Thus I have described to you about the Manjdivipa, the most exalted place of the Devi Bhagavati. At Her remembrance all the sins are instantly destroyed. The more so, if a man remembers the Devi and 'about this place at the time of death, He surely goes there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Thus I have described to you about the Maṇidvīpa, the most exalted place of the Devī Bhagavatī. At Her remembrance all the sins are instantly destroyed. The more so, if a man remembers the Devī and about this place at the time of death, He surely goes there.

[Ch 12 Verse 72-74]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! He who daily reads the five Chapters, ॥.e., from the eighth to this twelfth chapter, is surely untouched by any obstacles due to the Bhūtas, Pretas and Piśācas. Especially the recitation of this at the time of building a new house and at the time of Vāstuyāga ensures all good and auspiciousness. Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the description of Mani Dvipa in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa. Šrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! He who daily reads the five Chapters, i.e., from the eighth to this twelfth chapter, is surely untouched by any obstacles due to the Bhūtas, Pretas and Piśācas. Especially the recitation of this at the time of building a new house and at the time of Vāstuyāga ensures all good and auspiciousness. Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the description of Maṇi Dvīpa in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
