CHAPTER IV

On the Excellency of the Devi

སྐབས་ཆུང་

सीय व्यासस्य भार्यायां कस्यां जातः सुतः शुकः ।

कर्थ वा कीद्वगो येन पतिरेतं सुसंहिति ॥ १ ॥

The Rsis said: O Šaunaka! How was Šuka Deva born? Who studied these Purāna Sarhītās; by which wife of Vyāsa Deva? and How?

अयोनिजस्यवा प्रोकतस्तवा चारिज्ञ: शुकः ।

संदेहोरस्ति मात्रानत कवयाए महामते ॥ २ ॥

O highly Intelligent one! You have just spoken that Šuka Deva was not born from womb, in the natural way; he was born of the dry pieces of wood for Homa sacrifice.

गर्भयोगी श्रुत: पूर्व शुको नाम महाताप ।

कयं च पहितं तेन पुराणं बहुवित्तम् ॥ 3 ॥

But we heard before that the great ascetic was Yogi even in his mother's womb, so a great doubt comes to our minds. You better remove that today; how he studied also these Purāṇas, as vast in their nature; say this.

सूत उवाच

पुरा सरस्वतीरीय व्यास: सचवतीसुतः ।

आये कलिकों तु दृष्ट्या विस्मयमानाः ॥ 4 ॥

Sūta said: In long— past days Satyavati's son Veda Vyāsa, while in his own hermitage on the banks of the river Sarasvatī, was greatly surprised to see a pair of Cūtakas (sparrows).

जात्मात्र शिष्ट्रा नीडे मुक्तण्डे मनोह्म ।

तामायं शुभसर्वाई पिच्छांकुरविज्ञान ॥ 5 ॥

He saw the pair putting frequently, the food into the beak of their young one, just born of the egg, of beautiful body, red mouth, and greasy body.

तो तु भव्यार्थीमतंरं तती शयपरायणी ।

शिगोश्रशुटे भव्यं शिपर्नो च पुन: पुन: ॥ 6 ॥

They did not care at all for their own hunger and toil; all they were caring for is to nurture their young one.

अंगेनांगानि बालस्य घर्षेती मुदावित्यो ।

चुंबंती च मुखं प्रेणा कलविको शिकारीः शुभम् ॥ 7 ॥

He said also that the pair are rubbing their bodies over the young one's body and kiss lovingly its mouth feeling the highest pleasure.

वीक्ष्य प्रेमान्दुतं तत वाले चटकयोलता ।

व्यासहिंतातूनः कामं मनसा समवित्यन्ति ॥ 8 ॥

Seeing this wonderful affection of the two sparrows towards their young, Veda Vyāsa became very anxious and thought over the following in his mind.

तिराभापि वरोम पुत्रे समभिलक्षते ।

किं चित्रं यमनुवाणां सेवाकलमभीयात्मा ॥ 9 ॥

Oh! What wonder is there, when the birds have so much filial affection towards their child, that men, who want services from their sons, would show their affection towards their sons!

किमेती चटको भाय्य विवाहं सुखधान् ।

वित्रय सुवित्री स्यातां द्रुह्वा वधा मुखं शुभम् । १० ॥

अथवा वाधेक प्राने परिवर्ग कार्यिति ।

पुत्र: परमधिनिषुः पुणवार्थ कलविकेयो: ॥ १ १ ॥

This pair of sparrows will not perform the happy marriage of their young one and will not see the face of their son's wife; nor when they will grow old, that their child would become very religious and serve them to attain great merits in Heaven.

Book 1 Chapter IV

अर्जीयताउधवा जूवं पितरी तर्पियन्ति ।

अथवा प्रेतकायाणी कार्यिति यथाविधि ॥ 12 ॥

Nor do they expect that their child would earn money and satisfy them; nor the child would perform Śrāddha when they would be in the next world; nothing of all these.

अथवा किं गयाङ्राद्र गत्वा संवितार्थिति ।

नीतोलसगं च विधिव्युक्रविधिति वालकः ॥ 13 ॥

संसारोत्र समास्यालां सुव्रानामुन्तां सुखम् ।

पुरगायधिरियों लालनं न विशेषतः ॥ 14 ॥

Nor will the child perform the Śrāddha ceremony at Gayā; nor will the child offer the oblation of a blue bull on the day of offering the sacrifice to its ancestor (the bull is then let loose and held sacred); yet the pair of sparrows have so much affection towards their yung one! Oh! in this world to touch the body of the son, especially to nurture the sons, is the highest happiness in life.

अपूत्रस्य गतिन्तस्ति स्यर्गों नैव च नैव च ।

पुराद्व-त्यतराशित परलोकस्य साधनम् ॥ 15 ॥

"There is no prospect in the birth of the sonless; never, never will Heaven be his. Without son, there is none other who can be of help in the next world.

म्वात्रिभिश्र पुनिनिधार्मभोगस्लेषु पाणितम् ।

पुरावल्यर्गमाणोति नापुजसु कंधच्न ॥ १ ६ ॥

Thus in the Dharma Śāstras, Manu and other Munis declare that the man who has sons goes to Heaven and the sonless one can never go to Heaven.

दूरयतेत्र समक्षं ततानुभानेन साधयते ।

पुरवान्युच्छे पाणाद्वादावक्यं च शाशून् ॥ 17 ॥

The man possessing a son is entitled to the Heavenly pleasures can be vividly seen, rather than imagined. The man with son is freed from sins; this is the word of the Vedas.

आतुरो मृत्युकालेपि भूमिश्यागतो नरः ।

करीति मनसा चिंतां दुरिक्ष: पुर्वबित्रः ॥ 18 ॥

The sonless man becomes very much distressed even at the time of death and while lying on bed that is ground at that time, mournfully thinks:

धर्न मे विपुलं गेहे प्याजीण विविधानि ।

माँद्रं सुवर्धे चैतकोंस्य स्यामी भविष्यति ॥ 19 ॥

'This all my vast wealth, various things, this my beautiful house, who will enjoy all these'?

मृत्युकाले मनसत्य वुःखेन भ्रमते यतः ।

अतोउस्य दुर्गतिन्नं भ्रातिचितस्य सर्वथा ॥ 20 ॥

एवं बहुविधां चिन्तां कृत्वा सत्यवतीमुतः ।

निःश्य बहुधा चोणं विमानः सवम्पवृह ॥ 21 ॥

"When the sonless man is thus perplexed in his mind at the time of his death and becomes restless, then it is sure that his future career is full of misfortunes; unless one's mind is calm and serene at the time of death, he can never attain a good goal.

विषार्वं मनसात्वर्थ कृत्व मनसि निश्रयम् ।

जगाम च तपस्तनुं मेभवर्तसित्रधी ॥ 22 ॥

Thus, thinking variously, Satyavati's son Veda Vyāsa sighed heavily and became unmindful.

मनसा चिन्तयामास के देवं समुपास्महे ।

वरप्रदानिजपुं वार्त्छतार्धेदं तथा ॥ 23 ॥

He thought of various plans and at last, coming to a definite conclusion, went to the Sumeru mountain to perform tapasyā. On reaching there, he thought which Deva he will worship!

विष्णुं रई सुरेन्द्र वा बढ़ाणं वा दिवाकरम् ।

गयोगें कार्तिकेंचं च पाबकं वाक्णं तथा ॥ 24 ॥

Visnu, Śiva, Indra, Brahmā, Sūrya, Gaṇeśa, Kārtikeya, Agni, or Varuna? 'Who will grant him boon quickly and thus satisfy his desires.

एवं चित्तयतस्तस्य नारदो मुनिसतमः ।

यज्छया सामयातो वीणाणिण: समाहितः ॥ 25 ॥

While thus cogitating in his mind, came there the Muni Nārada, of one mind with lute in hand, accidentally in his course of travels.

नं दूर्वा परमप्रीति व्यासः सत्यवतीसुतः ।

कृत्वाउ्यमासनं त्वाप प्रपछ्छ कुगलं मुनिम् ॥ 26 ॥

श्रूतायक्ष कुगलप्रधर्ने पपछ्छ मुनिसतमः ।

विंतानुर्गोसि क्रमाच्चं द्वैपायन बदस्य मे ॥ 27 ॥

Seeing Nārada, the Satyavati's son Veda Vyāsa gave him a hearty welcome, with great gladness,

offering his Arghya and  \( \overline{A}san \)  (seat) and asked about his welfare. Hearing this question of welfare, then  \( \overline{Narada} \)  Muni spoke: “O Dvaipāyana! Why do you look so care worn! First speak this out to me”.

व्यास उवाच

अपूत्रस्य गतिनोंसित न सुखं मानसे ततः ।

तदर्थं दुःखितश्राईं चिंतयामि पुनः पुनः ॥ 2 8 ॥

Veda Vyāsa said: The sonless man has no goal; therefore there is no happiness in my mind; I am always anxious to get a son and therefore, I am very sorry.

तपसा तोषायमध्य ढ के देवं वांतित्थर्वम् ।

इति सितातुरो3मध्य त्वामहं शरणं गत: ॥ 29 ॥

Today my mind is sorely troubled with one idea, which Deva I may satisfy by my tapasyā, who will grant me my desires; now I take your refuge.

सर्वेज्ञीस महर्षे त्वं कथायाणु कृपानिधे ।

के देवे शरणं याथि यो मे पुत्र प्रदास्यति ॥ 30 ॥

O merciful Maharsī! You are omniscient; say this quickly; which Deva I will take for my refuge, who will grant me a son.

सूत उवाच

इति व्यासेन पृष्टस्तु नारदो वेवलिन्युति: ।

उवाच परया प्रीत्या कृष्ण प्रति महानानः ॥ 31 ॥

Sūta said: Thus questioned by Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Veda Vyāsa, the high souled Nārada Muni, well versed in the Vedas, became very glad and spoke thus:

नात्र उवाच

पाराशयं महाभाग यचं पृष्ठसि मामिह ।

तेनावर्थ पुगा पृष्टः पिजा मे मधुसूदनः ॥ 32 ॥

O highly fortunate Parāśara's son. The question that you have asked me today was formerly asked by my father to Nārāyaṇa.

ध्यानचंच च हरिं दृष्टवा पिता मे विस्मयं गतः ।

पर्येष्छत देवेशं शीनार्थ जगतः पतिम् ॥ 33 ॥

कोस्तुभोद्धासितं दिव्यं शंखचकमादाधरम् ।

पीतायरं चतुर्वाई श्रीवत्सांकितवक्षस्मम् ॥ 34 ॥

कारणं सर्वतैकानां देवेदेवं जगढुभम् ।

वासुदेवं जगत्राशं तत्यमानं महत्नः ॥ 35 ॥

Nārāyana Vāsudeva, the Deva of the Devas, the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of the Universe, the husband of Lakṣmī, the four-armed, wearing yellow garment, holding conchshell, discus, club and with the mark Śrivatsa (a mark or curl of hair on the heart of Viṣṇu) adorning His breast and decorated with Kaustubham, the Divinity Himself, became merged in great Yoga.

ब्रहोवाच

देवदेव जगत्राध भृतःधयधवतूभो ।

तस्थारसि कस्मार्चं किं ध्यासि जनंदन ॥ 36 ॥

विसयोउं प्रं मापत्थर्व तं स्वडजगतां प्रभुः ।

ध्यानयुक्तोसि देवेश किंछ चित्रमतः परम् ॥ 37 ॥

At this my Father became greatly surprised and said: 'O Janārdana! Thou art the Deva of the Devas; the Lord of the Present, the Past and the Future, the Lord of this Universe; why art thou meditating in Yoga? And what is it that Thou art meditating? O best of the Devas! Thou art the Lord of the entire Universe and yet Thou art now merged in deep meditation. At this I am greatly surprised (my surprise is not without foundation; Thou canst Thyself see). What more wonderful than this can happen?'

त्वप्राधिकमलाज्ञतः कर्तीडमप्रिललय ह ।

त्वतः को:प्रधिको:प्रलयत तं देवें बूहि मापते ॥ 38 ॥

O Lord of Rama! I am sprung from the lotus from thy navel and have become the Lord of this whole universe; who is there in this universe that is superior to Thee; kindly say this to me.

जात्यामहं जगत्राश त्यामादि: सर्वकारमण।

कर्ता पालयिता हर्ता सभधः सर्वकार्यकृत् ॥ 39 ॥

O Lord of the world! Thou art the Origin of all, the Cause of all causes, the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer and the capable Doer of all actions.

इच्छया ते महाराज सुजाम्यहमिंदं जगत् ।

हर: संहरते काले सोप्रि ते चवने सदा ॥ 40 ॥

O Mahārāja! at Thy will, I create this whole

Book 1 Chapter IV

universe and Rudra destroys in due time this world. He is always under Thy command.

सूर्यं घमिति चाकाशे वायुवाँति शुभाशुभ: ।

अन्निस्तपति पर्जन्यो वर्षतीश ल्वाड़गया ॥ 4 1 ॥

O Lord! By Thy command the Sun roams in the sky; the wind blows in various auspicious or inauspicious ways and the fire is giving heat and the cloud showers rain. I don't see in the three Lokas any one superior to Thee.

तं तु ध्यायसि के देवे संग्रोधोयं महान्मा ।

तन्तः परं न पश्यामि देखे वे भुवनत्रये ॥ 4 2 ॥

कृपा कृत्वा वद्वसाड़ा भन्नोश्म तत सूत्रात ।

महता नैव गोष्ये हिं प्रापः किःत्रिविति सूति: ॥ 4 3 ॥

Then whom art Thou .meditating while being questioned by his very intelligent son Śuka Deva! not born in the usual way from womb, Dvaipāyana expounded all the secret excellent meanings of the Purāna and, thereby, I also came to know them also. O saintly persons! Thus Śuka Deva, sincerely earnest to cross this endless bottomless ocean of Sarīsāra, tasted of the wonderful fruits of the Veda, the Kalpa tree, this Śrīnad Bhāgavata with its numerous stories and anecdotes with great eagerness and intense pleasure. Oh! Who is there in this world that is not freed from this terror of Kali, after he has heard this Bhāgavata. Even if the greatest sinner, void of the right ways of living and Ācāra as ordained in the Vedas, hears on a pretence this excellent Devi Bhāgavaa, the chief of the Purāṇas, he enjoys all the great enjoyments of this world and in the end attains the eternal place occupied by Yogis. She who is rare, in Her Nirguna aspect, to even Hari and Hara, who is very dear as Tattva Vidyā to the Jñānins, whose real nature can be realised only in Samādhi, She resides always in the cavity of the heart of the hearers of the Bhāgavata Purāṇa. He who getting the all-qualified human birth and getting the reciter of this Purāṇa, the boat to cross, as it were, this world, does not hear this blissful Purāṇa, he is certainly deprived

by the Creator. How is it! That the wayward dull-headed persons, getting the vicious ears, can hear always the faults and calumnies of others, that are entirely useless, and can not hear this pure Purāṇa that contains the four Vargas: Dharma, Artha, Kāma, and Mokṣa?

Returning to Nārada's dialogue with Dunipaar Sūta continued: This is my main point of doubt. O One of good vows! I am thy devotee; be merciful to me and speak this to me. There is almost nothing that is secret to Mahāpurūyas; this is a well-known fact, said.

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य हरित्राह प्रजापतिम् ।

ग्रणयुधेकमाना बह्यास्वां बलीमि मनोगानम् ॥ 44 ॥

Recolying to Brahmā, Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa spoke: “O Brāhman! I now speak out my mind to you; listen carefully.

यद्यि त्वा शिरां मां च श्वस्तिषुर्धोत्काराणम् ।

ते जानंति जना: सर्वे सदेवासुभामनुपा: ॥ 4 5 ॥

स्पष्टा त्व पालकश्राईहःश्र: संहाराकारः ।

कृता: शक्येति संतकैः क्रियते वेदपारगैः ॥ 46 ॥

Though the Devas, Dānavas and men and all the lokas know that You are the Creator, I am the Preserver and Rudra is the Destroyer, yet it is to be known that the saints, versed in the Vedas, have come to this conclusion by inference from the Vedas that the creation, preservation and destruction are performed by the creative force, preservative force and destructive force.

जगत्सुकनं शफिस्त्रविय तिष्ठत राजसी ।

साचिकी मयि रूद्र च तामसी परिकीर्तिता ॥ 47 ॥

तया विरहितस्तव न तत्कर्मकरणे प्रभु: ।

नाहं पातयित्थुं शक्तः संहर्तुं नासि शंकतः ॥ 48 ॥

The Räjasik creative force residing in you, the Sättvik preservative force residing in me, and the Tāmasik destructive force residing in Rudra are the all-in-all. When these Saktis become absent, you become inert and incapable to create, I to preserve and Rudra, to destroy.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

तद्धीना वयं संवै वतांभः सततं विभो ।

प्रत्यक्षे च चपोक्षे च वृद्धांतं श्युगु सुहत ॥ 49 ॥

ग्रेथे स्वविधि पर्यंके पतन्तो न संशय: ।

तद्धीनः सदोत्तिषे काले कालवर्ग गतः ॥ 50 ॥

O intelligent Suvrata! We all are always under that Force directly or indirectly; hear instances that you can see and infer. At the time of Pralaya, I lie down on the bed of Ananta, subservient to that Force; again I wake up in the time of creation duly under the influence of Time.

तस्थात्रासितं तद्धीनो5स्पर्वं सदा ।

कदाचित्सह लक्ष्या च विहर्तीय यथासुखम् ॥ 51 ॥

कदाचिषदानंः सादूं संगमं प्रक्रोधयहम् ।

दारणं देहदामं सर्वलोकाभयंकर्म ॥ 52 ॥

I am always subservient to that Mahā Śakti; (under Her command) I am engaged in Tapasyā for a long time; (By Her command) sometime I enjoy with Laksmī; some time I fight battles, terrible to all the Lokas, with the Dānavas, involving great bodily troubles.

प्रत्यक्षे तव धर्मे तस्मिचेकार्वीवे पुरा ।

पश्वबर्महस्राणि बाबुघुळ्द मया कृतम् ॥ 5 3 ॥

तौ कर्णमलजी दुष्टी दानवो मदगविली ।

देव देव्या: प्रसादेन निह्ती मधुकैकरी ॥ 5 4 ॥

O Knower of Dharma! It was before Your presence that I fought hand to hand for five thousand years, before Your sight on that one great ocean in long-past days with the two demons Madhu and Kaitabha, sprung form the wax of my ear, maddened with pride; and by the grace of the Devi, successfully killed the two Dānavas.

तदा तथा वान न क्रि जातं कारणं तु परायरम् ।

शक्तिकंच महाभाग किं पृष्ठसि पुनः पुनः ॥ 55 ॥

‘O highly fortunate one! you realised then the great Śakti, higher than the highest and the cause of all causes; then why are you asking again and again that question.

यदिष्ठ पुस्तो भूत्वा विचरायी महागघे ।

कच्छपः कोलसिंहशु वामनश्र युगे युगे ॥ 56 ॥

By the will of that Śakti, I have got this idea of man and roam on the great ocean; yuga after yuga,

I assume by Her will, the Tortoise, Boar, Man-Lion, and Dwarf incarnations.

न कस्यापि प्रियो लोके तिरयोग्योनु संचवः ।

नाभवं संच्छया वामवसाहाधिपु योगिनु ॥ 57 ॥

No one likes to take birth in the womb of inferior animals (especially birds). Do you think that I willingly take unpleasant births as in the womb of boars, tortoise, i.e., certainly not.

विद्यार लक्ष्या सह संविद्धारं

को याति मल्यापितु हीनयोगिनु ।

गर्धयां च मुक्चना गरुडासनस्थ:

कोरीय युद्ध विपुलं स्वतंत्रः ॥ 58 ॥

What independent man is there who abandons the pleasurable enjoyment with Laksmī and takes birth in inferior animals as fish, etc. or leaves his seat on the seat of Gaduda and becomes engaged in great war conflicts.

पुरा पुरस्पेज शिरो मदीयं

गतं धनुत्वमेखलान्त्वच चारि ।

त्वया तदा वार्जिशिरो गृहीत्या

संयोजितं शिल्यवरणं भूय: ॥ 59 ॥

O Svaayambhu! In ancient days you saw before your eyes that my head was cut off when the bowstring suddenly gave way; and then you, brought a horse's head and by that help, the divine artist Viśvakarmā, stuck that on to my headless body.

ह्याननेँर्भे परिकीर्तितश

प्रत्यक्ष्मेतनत लोककर्तै।

विडंदनेयं किल लोकमध्ये

कर्थ भवेदात्यपरो यदि स्यत् ॥ 60 ॥

O Brahma! Since then I am known amongst men by the name of “Hayagriva”. This is well-known to you. Now say, were I independent, would such ignominy have happened to me?

तस्मातई स्वतोज्ञासि शकल्यधीनीजासि सर्वथा ।

तामेव शक्ति सन्तं छायायाम च निरंतनम् ॥ 6 1 ॥

नात: परर्ते किंचिरज्ञानामि कमलोद्धव ।

Never. Therefore, I am not independent; I am in every way under that Sakti. O Lotus-born!

Book 1 Chapter V

I always meditate on that Šakti; and I do not know any other than this Šakti.

नारद उवाच

इल्युक्ते विष्णुना तेन पदायोनेस्तु सक्रियो ॥ 62 ॥

तेन चाध्यहमुक्तोप्रिम तदेव मुनिपुंगाव ।

तस्माच्चमपि कल्याण पुरुषाध्यापितहतेते ॥ 63 ॥

अर्शगर्भ द्वर्भोजे भज वैदीपादिबुजम् ।

सर्वे दास्यति सा देवी यद्योद्धं भवेत्ति ॥ 64 ॥

Narada said: Thus spoke Viṣnu to Brahmā. O muni Veda vyāsa! Brahmā spoke these to me. So you too, better mediate in the lotus feet of Bhagavatī calmly in the lotus of your heart for the

success of your idea. That Devi will give you all that you wish.

सूत उवाच

नारदैनैवमुक्तसु व्यास: सत्ववतीसुतः ।

देवीपादाङ्कनिष्णाततसपरे प्रवयी गिरी ॥ 65 ॥

इति शीमद्दैभागवते महापुराणे शयमकल्भं चतुवर्धीयायः ॥ 4 ॥ 11

Sūta said: At these words of Nārada, Satyavati's son Veda Vyāsa went out to the hills for tapasyā, trusting the lotus feet of the Devi as the all-in-all in this world."

Thus ends the Fourth Chapter of the First Book on the excellency of the Devi in the Mahapurāna Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.

Book 1 Chapter V

