[Ch 4 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rsis said: O Šaunaka! How was Šuka Deva born? Who studied these Purāna Sarhītās; by which wife of Vyāsa Deva? and How?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣis said :-- O Saumya! How was Śuka Deva born? Who studied these Purāna Samhitās; by which wife of Vyāsa Deva? And How?

[Ch 4 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O highly Intelligent one! You have just spoken that Šuka Deva was not born from womb, in the natural way; he was born of the dry pieces of wood for Homa sacrifice.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O highly intelligent one! You have just spoken that Śuka Deva was not born from womb, in the natural way; he was born of the dry pieces of wood for Homa sacrifice.

[Ch 4 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But we heard before that the great ascetic was Yogi even in his mother's womb, so a great doubt comes to our minds. You better remove that today; how he studied also these Purāṇas, as vast in their nature; say this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But we heard before that the great ascetic was Yogi even in his mother’s womb, so a great doubt comes to our minds. You better remove that to-day; how he studied also these Purānas, as vast in their nature; say this.

[Ch 4 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: In long— past days Satyavati's son Veda Vyāsa, while in his own hermitage on the banks of the river Sarasvatī, was greatly surprised to see a pair of Cūtakas (sparrows).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- In long-past days, Satyavati’s son Vedas Vyās, while in his own hermitage on the banks of the river Sarasvati, was greatly wondered to see a pair of Cātakas (Sparrows).

[Ch 4 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He saw the pair putting frequently, the food into the beak of their young one, just born of the egg, of beautiful body, red mouth, and greasy body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He saw the pair putting frequently, the food into the beak of their young one, just born of the egg, of beautiful body, red mouth, and greasy body.

[Ch 4 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They did not care at all for their own hunger and toil; all they were caring for is to nurture their young one.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They do not care at all for their own hunger and toil; all they are caring for is to nurture their young one.

[Ch 4 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He said also that the pair are rubbing their bodies over the young one's body and kiss lovingly its mouth feeling the highest pleasure.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He said also that the pair are rubbing their bodies over the body and kissing lovingly the mouth of the young one and feeling the highest pleasure.

[Ch 4 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing this wonderful affection of the two sparrows towards their young, Veda Vyāsa became very anxious and thought over the following in his mind.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing this wonderful affection of the two sparrows towards their young, Veda Vyās became very anxious and thought over the following in his mind.

[Ch 4 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Oh! What wonder is there, when the birds have so much filial affection towards their child, that men, who want services from their sons, would show their affection towards their sons!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Oh! What wonder is there, when the birds have so much filial affection towards their child, that men, who want services from their sons, would show their

[Ch 4 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This pair of sparrows will not perform the happy marriage of their young one and will not see the face of their son's wife; nor when they will grow old, that their child would become very religious and serve them to attain great merits in Heaven.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This pair of sparrows will not perform the happy marriage of their young one and will not see the face of their son’s wife; nor when they will grow old, that their child would become very religious and serve them to attain great merits in Heaven.

[Ch 4 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nor do they expect that their child would earn money and satisfy them; nor the child would perform Śrāddha when they would be in the next world; nothing of all these.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nor do they expect that their child would earn money and satisfy them nor the child would perform when they die, their funeral

[Ch 4 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nor will the child perform the Śrāddha ceremony at Gayā; nor will the child offer the oblation of a blue bull on the day of offering the sacrifice to its ancestor (the bull is then let loose and held sacred); yet the pair of sparrows have so much affection towards their yung one! Oh! in this world to touch the body of the son, especially to nurture the sons, is the highest happiness in life.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nor will the child perform the Śrādh ceremony at Gayā; nor will the child offer the oblation of a blue bull on the day of offering the sacrifice to its ancestor (the bull is then let loose and held sacred); yet the pair of sparrows have so much affection towards their young one! Oh! in this world to touch the body of the son, especially to nurture the sons, is the highest happiness in life.

[Ch 4 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "There is no prospect in the birth of the sonless; never, never will Heaven be his. Without son, there is none other who can be of help in the next world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There is no prospect in the after birth of the sonless; never, never will Heaven be his. Without son, there is none other who can be of help in the next world.

[Ch 4 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus in the Dharma Śāstras, Manu and other Munis declare that the man who has sons goes to Heaven and the sonless one can never go to Heaven.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus in the Dharma Śāstras, Manu and other Munis declare that the man who has sons goes to Heaven and the sonless one can never go to Heaven.

[Ch 4 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The man possessing a son is entitled to the Heavenly pleasures can be vividly seen, rather than imagined. The man with son is freed from sins; this is the word of the Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The man possessing a son is entitled to the Heavenly pleasures can be vividly seen, rather than imagined. The man with son is freed from sins; this is the word of the Vedas.

[Ch 4 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The sonless man becomes very much distressed even at the time of death and while lying on bed that is ground at that time, mournfully thinks:
NEW CORR ENG ──► The sonless man becomes very much distressed even at the time of death and while lying on bed that is ground at that time, mournfully thinks.

[Ch 4 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► 'This all my vast wealth, various things, this my beautiful house, who will enjoy all these'?
NEW CORR ENG ──► “This all my vast wealth, various things, this my beautiful house, who will enjoy all these?”

[Ch 4 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "When the sonless man is thus perplexed in his mind at the time of his death and becomes restless, then it is sure that his future career is full of misfortunes; unless one's mind is calm and serene at the time of death, he can never attain a good goal.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the sonless man is thus perplexed in his mind at the time of his death and becomes restless, then it is sure that his future career is full misfortunes; unless one’s mind is calm and serene at the time of death, can never attain a good goal.

[Ch 4 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus, thinking variously, Satyavati's son Veda Vyāsa sighed heavily and became unmindful.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus thinking variously, the Satyavati’s son Veda Vyās sighed heavily and became unmindful.

[Ch 4 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He thought of various plans and at last, coming to a definite conclusion, went to the Sumeru mountain to perform tapasyā. On reaching there, he thought which Deva he will worship!
NEW CORR ENG ──► He thought of various plans and at last, coming to a definite conclusion, went to the Sumeru mountain to perform Tapasyā. On reaching there, he thought which Deva he will worship!

[Ch 4 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Visnu, Śiva, Indra, Brahmā, Sūrya, Gaṇeśa, Kārtikeya, Agni, or Varuna? 'Who will grant him boon quickly and thus satisfy his desires.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viṣṇu, Śiva, Indra, Brahmā, Surya, Ganeśa, Kārtikeya, Agni, or Varuṇa? Who will grant him boon quickly and thus satisfy his desires.

[Ch 4 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► While thus cogitating in his mind, came there the Muni Nārada, of one mind with lute in hand, accidentally in his course of travels.
NEW CORR ENG ──► While thus cogitating in his mind, came there the Muni Nārada, of one mind with lute in hamd, accidentally in his course of travels.

[Ch 4 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing Nārada, the Satyavati's son Veda Vyāsa gave him a hearty welcome, with great gladness, offering his Arghya and \( \overline{A}san \) (seat) and asked about his welfare. Hearing this question of welfare, then \( \overline{Narada} \) Muni spoke: “O Dvaipāyana! Why do you look so care worn! First speak this out to me”.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing Nārada, the Satyavati’s son Veda Vyāsa gave him a hearty welcome, with great gladness, offering him Arghya and Āsan (seat) and asked about his welfare. Hearing this question of welfare, Nārada Muni spoke :-- “O Dvaipāyan! Why do you look so care worn! First speak this out to me”.

[Ch 4 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Veda Vyāsa said: The sonless man has no goal; therefore there is no happiness in my mind; I am always anxious to get a son and therefore, I am very sorry.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Veda Vyāsa said :-- “ The sonless man has no goal; therefore there is no happiness in my mind; I am always anxious to get a son and therefore I am very sorry.

[Ch 4 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Today my mind is sorely troubled with one idea, which Deva I may satisfy by my tapasyā, who will grant me my desires; now I take your refuge.
NEW CORR ENG ──► To-day my mind is sorely troubled with the one idea, which Deva I may satisfy by my tapasyā, who will grant me my desires; now I take your refuge.

[Ch 4 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O merciful Maharsī! You are omniscient; say this quickly; which Deva I will take for my refuge, who will grant me a son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O merciful Maharṣi! You are omniscient; say this quickly; which Deva I will take for my refuge, who will grant me a son”.

[Ch 4 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: Thus questioned by Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Veda Vyāsa, the high souled Nārada Muni, well versed in the Vedas, became very glad and spoke thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Thus questioned by Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyan Veda Vyāsa, the high souled Nārada Muni, well versed in the Vedas, became very glad and spoke thus :--

[Ch 4 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O highly fortunate Parāśara's son. The question that you have asked me today was formerly asked by my father to Nārāyaṇa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O highly fortunate Parāśarā’s son. The question that you have asked me to-day was formerly asked by my father to Nārāyana.

[Ch 4 Verse 33-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyana Vāsudeva, the Deva of the Devas, the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of the Universe, the husband of Lakṣmī, the four-armed, wearing yellow garment, holding conchshell, discus, club and with the mark Śrivatsa (a mark or curl of hair on the heart of Viṣṇu) adorning His breast and decorated with Kaustubham, the Divinity Himself, became merged in great Yoga.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyana Vasudeva, the Deva of the Devas, the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of the Universe, the husband of Lakṣmī, the four armed, wearing yellow garment, holding conchshell, discus, club and with the mark Śrīvatsa (a mark or curl of hair on the heart of Viṣṇu) adorning His breast and decorated with Kaustuvagem, the Divinity Himself, became merged in great Yoga;

[Ch 4 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this my Father became greatly surprised and said: 'O Janārdana! Thou art the Deva of the Devas; the Lord of the Present, the Past and the Future, the Lord of this Universe; why art thou meditating in Yoga? And what is it that Thou art meditating? O best of the Devas! Thou art the Lord of the entire Universe and yet Thou art now merged in deep meditation. At this I am greatly surprised (my surprise is not without foundation; Thou canst Thyself see). What more wonderful than this can happen?'
NEW CORR ENG ──► at this my Father became greatly surprised and said :-- “O Janārdana! Thou art the Deva of the Devas; the Lord of the Present, the Past and the Future, the Lord of this Universe; why art thou meditating in Yoga? And what is it that Thou art meditating? O best of the Devas! Thou art the Lord of the entire Universe and yet Thou art now merged in deep meditation. At this I am greatly surprised (my surprise is not without foundation; Thou canst Thyself see). What more wonderful than this can happen?

[Ch 4 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of Rama! I am sprung from the lotus from thy navel and have become the Lord of this whole universe; who is there in this universe that is superior to Thee; kindly say this to me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of Rama! I am sprung from the lotus from thy navel and have become the Lord of this whole universe; who is there in this universe that is superior to Thee; kindly say this to me.

[Ch 4 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the world! Thou art the Origin of all, the Cause of all causes, the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer and the capable Doer of all actions.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the world? Thou art the Origin of all, the Cause of all causes, the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer and the capable Doer of all actions.

[Ch 4 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mahārāja! at Thy will, I create this whole universe and Rudra destroys in due time this world. He is always under Thy command.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Maharaja! at Thy will, I create this whole universe and Rudra destroys iu due time this world. He is always under Thy command.

[Ch 4 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord! By Thy command the Sun roams in the sky; the wind blows in various auspicious or inauspicious ways and the fire is giving heat and the cloud showers rain. I don't see in the three Lokas any one superior to Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord! By Thy command the Sun roams in the sky; the wind blows in various auspicious or inauspicious ways and the fire is giving heat and the cloud showers rain. I don’t see in the three Lokas any one superior to Thee.

[Ch 4 Verse 42-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then whom art Thou .meditating while being questioned by his very intelligent son Śuka Deva! not born in the usual way from womb, Dvaipāyana expounded all the secret excellent meanings of the Purāna and, thereby, I also came to know them also. O saintly persons! Thus Śuka Deva, sincerely earnest to cross this endless bottomless ocean of Sarīsāra, tasted of the wonderful fruits of the Veda, the Kalpa tree, this Śrīnad Bhāgavata with its numerous stories and anecdotes with great eagerness and intense pleasure. Oh! Who is there in this world that is not freed from this terror of Kali, after he has heard this Bhāgavata. Even if the greatest sinner, void of the right ways of living and Ācāra as ordained in the Vedas, hears on a pretence this excellent Devi Bhāgavaa, the chief of the Purāṇas, he enjoys all the great enjoyments of this world and in the end attains the eternal place occupied by Yogis. She who is rare, in Her Nirguna aspect, to even Hari and Hara, who is very dear as Tattva Vidyā to the Jñānins, whose real nature can be realised only in Samādhi, She resides always in the cavity of the heart of the hearers of the Bhāgavata Purāṇa. He who getting the all-qualified human birth and getting the reciter of this Purāṇa, the boat to cross, as it were, this world, does not hear this blissful Purāṇa, he is certainly deprived by the Creator. How is it! That the wayward dull-headed persons, getting the vicious ears, can hear always the faults and calumnies of others, that are entirely useless, and can not hear this pure Purāṇa that contains the four Vargas: Dharma, Artha, Kāma, and Mokṣa? Returning to Nārada's dialogue with Dunipaar Sūta continued: This is my main point of doubt. O One of good vows! I am thy devotee; be merciful to me and speak this to me. There is almost nothing that is secret to Mahāpurūyas; this is a well-known fact, said.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then whom art Thou meditating while being questioned by his very intelligent son Śuka Deva! not born in the usual way from womb, Dvaipāyana expounded all the secret excellent meanings of the Purāṇa and thereby I also came to know them also. O saintly persons! Thus Śuka Deva, sincerely earnest to cross this endless bottomless ocean of Śamsara, tasted of the wonderful traits of the Veda, the Kalpa tree, this Śrimad Bhāgavata with its numerous stories and anecdotes with great eagerness and intense pleasure. 38-43. Oh! Who is there in this world that is not freed from this terror of Kali, after he has heard this Bhāgavata. Even if the greatest sinner, void of the right ways of living and Acara as ordained in the Vedas, hears on a pretence this excellent Devī Bhāgavata, the chief of the Purāṇas, he enjoys all the great enjoyments of this world and in the end attains the eternal place occupied by the Yogis. She who is rare, in Her Nirguna aspect, to even Hari and Hara, who is very dear as Tattva Vidya to the Jñanins whose real nature can be realised only in Samādhi, She resides always in the cavity of the heart of the hearers of the Bhāgavata Purāṇa. He who getting the all qualified human birth and getting the reciter of this Purāṇa, the boat to cross, as it were, this world, does not hear this blissful Purāna, he is certainly deprived by the Creator. How is it that the way-ward dull-headed persons, getting the vicious ears, can hear always the faults and calumnies of others, that are entirely useless, and cannot hear this pure Purāṇa that contains the four Vargas :-- Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Mokhṣa? This is my main point of doubt. O One of good vows! I am Thy devotee; be merciful to me and speak this to me. There is almost nothing that is secret to Mahāpuruṣas; this is a well-known fact”.

[Ch 4 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Recolying to Brahmā, Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa spoke: “O Brāhman! I now speak out my mind to you; listen carefully.
NEW CORR ENG ──► hearing Brahmā’s words, Bhagavan Nārāyana spoke :-- “O Brahmān! I now speak out my mind to you; listen carefully.

[Ch 4 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Though the Devas, Dānavas and men and all the lokas know that You are the Creator, I am the Preserver and Rudra is the Destroyer, yet it is to be known that the saints, versed in the Vedas, have come to this conclusion by inference from the Vedas that the creation, preservation and destruction are performed by the creative force, preservative force and destructive force.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Though the Devas, Dānavas and men and all the Lokas know that You are the Creator, I am the Preserver and Rudra is the Destroyer, yet it is to be known that the saints, versed in the Vedas, have come to this conclusion by inference from the Vedas that the creation, preservation, and destruction are performed by the creative force, preservative force and destructive force.

[Ch 4 Verse 47-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Räjasik creative force residing in you, the Sättvik preservative force residing in me, and the Tāmasik destructive force residing in Rudra are the all-in-all. When these Saktis become absent, you become inert and incapable to create, I to preserve and Rudra, to destroy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Rajasik creative force residing in you, the Sattvik preservative force residing in me, and the Tamasik destructive force residing in Rudra are the all-in-all. When these Saktis become absent, you become inert and incapable to create, I to preserve and Rudra to destroy.

[Ch 4 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O intelligent Suvrata! We all are always under that Force directly or indirectly; hear instances that you can see and infer. At the time of Pralaya, I lie down on the bed of Ananta, subservient to that Force; again I wake up in the time of creation duly under the influence of Time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O intelligent Suvrata! We all are always under that Force directly or indirectly; hear instances that you can see and infer. At the time of Pralaya, I lie down on the bed of Ananta, subservient to that Force; again I wake up in the time of creation duly under the influence of Time.

[Ch 4 Verse 51-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I am always subservient to that Mahā Śakti; (under Her command) I am engaged in Tapasyā for a long time; (By Her command) sometime I enjoy with Laksmī; some time I fight battles, terrible to all the Lokas, with the Dānavas, involving great bodily troubles.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I am always subservient to that Maha Śakti; (under Her command) I am engaged in Tapasyā for a long time; (By Her command) some time I enjoy with Lakṣmī; some time I fight battles, terrible to all the Lokas, with the Dānavas, involving great bodily troubles.

[Ch 4 Verse 53-54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Knower of Dharma! It was before Your presence that I fought hand to hand for five thousand years, before Your sight on that one great ocean in long-past days with the two demons Madhu and Kaitabha, sprung form the wax of my ear, maddened with pride; and by the grace of the Devi, successfully killed the two Dānavas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Know of Dharma! It was before Your presence that I fought hand to hand fight for five thousand years before Your sight on that one great ocean in long-past days with the two demons Madhu and Kaitabha, sprung from the wax of my ear, maddened with pride; and by the grace of the Devī, successfully killed the two Dānavas.

[Ch 4 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► ‘O highly fortunate one! you realised then the great Śakti, higher than the highest and the cause of all causes; then why are you asking again and again that question.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O highly fortunate one! you realised then the great Śakti, higher than the highest and the cause of all causes; then why are you asking again and again that question.

[Ch 4 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► By the will of that Śakti, I have got this idea of man and roam on the great ocean; yuga after yuga, I assume by Her will, the Tortoise, Boar, Man-Lion, and Dwarf incarnations.
NEW CORR ENG ──► By the will of that Śakti, I have got this idea of man and roam on the great ocean; in yuga after yuga, I assume by Her will, the Tortoise, Boar, Man-Lion, and Dwarf incarnations.

[Ch 4 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No one likes to take birth in the womb of inferior animals (especially birds). Do you think that I willingly take unpleasant births as in the womb of boars, tortoise, ॥.e., certainly not.
NEW CORR ENG ──► No one likes to take birth in the womb of inferior animals (especially birds). Do you think that I willingly take unpleasant births as in the womb of boars, tortoise, i.e., certainly not.

[Ch 4 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What independent man is there who abandons the pleasurable enjoyment with Laksmī and takes birth in inferior animals as fish, etc. or leaves his seat on the seat of Gaduda and becomes engaged in great war conflicts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What independent man is there who abandons the pleasurable enjoyment with Lakṣmi and takes birth in inferior animals as fish, etc. or leaves his seat on the seat of Gaḍuḍa and becomes engaged in great war-conflicts.

[Ch 4 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Svaayambhu! In ancient days you saw before your eyes that my head was cut off when the bowstring suddenly gave way; and then you, brought a horse's head and by that help, the divine artist Viśvakarmā, stuck that on to my headless body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Svayambhu! In ancient days you saw before your eyes that my head was cut off when the bowstring suddenly gave way; and then you, brought a horse’s head and by that help, the divine artist Visvakarma, stuck that on to my headless body.

[Ch 4 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brahma! Since then I am known amongst men by the name of “Hayagriva”. This is well-known to you. Now say, were I independent, would such ignominy have happened to me?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brahmā! Since then I am known amongst men by the name of “Hayagrīva”. This is well-known to you. Now say, were I independent, would such an ignominy have happened to me?

[Ch 4 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Never. Therefore, I am not independent; I am in every way under that Sakti. O Lotus-born! I always meditate on that Šakti; and I do not know any other than this Šakti.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Never. Therefore I am not independent; I am in every way under that Śakti. O Lotus-born! I always meditate on that Śakti; and I do not know any other than this Śakti”.

[Ch 4 Verse 62-64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Narada said: Thus spoke Viṣnu to Brahmā. O muni Veda vyāsa! Brahmā spoke these to me. So you too, better mediate in the lotus feet of Bhagavatī calmly in the lotus of your heart for the success of your idea. That Devi will give you all that you wish.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- Thus spoke Viṣṇu to Brahmā. O Muni Vedavyās! Brahmā spoke these to me. So you, too, better meditate the lotus feet of Bhāgavati calmly in the lotus of your heart for the success of your idea. That Devī will give you all that you wish.

[Ch 4 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: At these words of Nārada, Satyavati's son Veda Vyāsa went out to the hills for tapasyā, trusting the lotus feet of the Devi as the all-in-all in this world." Thus ends the Fourth Chapter of the First Book on the excellency of the Devi in the Mahapurāna Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- At these words of Nārada, Satyavati’s son Veda Vyāsa went out to the hills for Tapasyā, trusting the lotus feet of the Devī as the all-in-all in this world. Thus ends the fourth chapter of the first Skandha on the excellency of the Devī in the Mahapurāna Śrimad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.
