CHAPTER XIV

On the Recitation of the Fruits of this Purāṇam

सूत उवाच

अध्रिलोकात्मकं चतु देवीवेकत्राब्निरर्गतम् ।

श्रीमद्धगतं नाम वेदसिद्धानलोधकम् ॥ १ ॥

उपदिष्ट विश्वावे यद्वटपत्रनिवासिने ।

शतकोटिप्रविस्तीणं तत्कृतं ब्रह्माणा पुरा ॥ 2 ॥

Sūta said: “O Rsis! In days of yore, from the Lotus Face of the Devi Bhāgavata came out Śri Madbhāgavatam in the form of half a Śloka, as the decided conclusion of the Vedas. About what She gave instructions to Viṣṇu, sleeping on a leaf of a Banyan tree, that same thing, the seed of the Śri Madbhāgavata, Brahmā Himself expanded into one hundred Koti Ślokas.

तत्सायमेकतः कृत्वा व्यासेन शुक्रहेतवे ।

अष्टादासहस्वे तु द्वारणस्कंधसंयुतम् ॥ ३ ॥

देवीभागवतं नाम पुराणं प्राधितं पुरा ।

अधापि देवलोके तद्वृध्वितीर्णमिति हि ॥ ४ ॥

Then, Veda Vyāsa, in order to teach his own son Śuka Deva, condensed them into eighteen thousand ślokas, in Twelve Books and named it Śrī maddevibhāgavatam, the present volume. That voluminous book comprising one hundred Kotī ślokas compiled by Brahmā are still extant in the Deva loka.

नानेन सूर्णं पुर्णयं परिवं पापनाशनम् ।

पदे पदे३ग्रंधेयस्य फलमाणोति मानवः ॥ 5 ॥

पौराणिकं पूजयित्वा वस्वाधारभणादिधि: ।

व्यासबुद्धा तन्मुखानु शुत्वैतस्पुर्णेति: ॥ 6 ॥

There is no Purāna like the Devi Bhāgavatam, so merit-giving, holy and capable to destroy all

the sins. The reading of every line yields the fruits of performing many Asvamedha sacrifices. Human beings addicted to worldly affairs will get the merit of giving lands to the Brāhmaṇas and they will enjoy also all the pleasures of the world and in the end will go to the region of the Devi, if they can hear, after they have fasted and controlled their passions, the recitation of this Purānam from the mouth of a Paurānik Brāhmaṇa, who has been worshipped and given clothings and ornaments and is considered as a second Veda Vyāsa.

लिखित्वा निजूरत्नेल लेखकेनाथवा मुने ।

प्रीष्टपदां पौर्णमार्यां हेममिसहमन्यित् ॥ 7 ॥

द्वाणीरपीणिकायाव द्विष्णां च पव्यसिनीप ।

सालोंकृतां वसलां च कपिलां हेमामिलिनीम् ॥ 8 ॥

भोजवेदब्रह्माणनोंरेप्रध्यायपरिसंमितान् ।

सुवासिनीस्तावतीश्छ कुमारीबंदूकैः सह ॥ 9 ॥

देवीबुद्धा पुवेचोनावसनाभरणादिधि: ।

पायसावरणपरि गंधवस्कुसुमादिषि: ॥ 10 ॥

पुरणादानैतेने भूतान्यर कलं लभेत् ।

इह लोके सुखी घूलासघते देवीपुरं बजेत् ॥ 1 1 ॥

Or, if anybody writes the whole of the Devi Bhāgavatam with his own hand or gets it written by a writer from the beginning to the end and gives to a Paurānik Brāhimn the book placed in a box of the form of a lion made up of gold and a cow yielding milk with her calf with gold as his sacrificial fee; or if he feeds as many Brāhmaṇas as there are the number of chapters of the Devi Bhāgavatam and worship as many Kumāris (virgin

Book XII Chapter XIV

girls) with saffron, sandalpaste and ornaments and feeds them with Pāysānna, he gets the merits of giving lands and enjoys all the pleasures of the world and goes in the end to the region of the Devi.

नित्यं यः शुण्याद्वल्पा देवीभागवतं परम् ।

न तस्य तुर्वर्ण किंचित्क्वाचिचलविचिति हि ॥ १२ ॥

अगुजी रूपते पुत्रान्याभर्षी धनमानुपात् ।

विद्यार्थी प्रापुवाडित्या क्रौतिमंचितभूततः ॥ १३ ॥

He has no want of anything who daily hears with rapt devotion this Devi Bhāgavatam. One who has no wealth gets abundance of wealth, those who are students get knowledge, one who has no sons, gets sons if one hears this Devi Bhāgavatam with true devotion.

वंध्या वा काककंध्या वा मृतकंधा च यांगना ।

श्वणाद्धस्य ततोषाग्रिवर्चेत न संशयः ॥ 14 ॥

वद्योहे पुरुसकं चैतत्पूजितं यदि तिष्ठिति ।

तद्योहं न त्योजित्यं रमा चैव सरस्वती ॥ 15 ॥

A barren woman, or one who bears still-born children or whose offsprings never live long or who bears only a single child, gets all her defects removed, if she hears this Devi Bhāgavatam with a steadfast devotion. The house where this Purāna is worshipped, Lakṣmī and Sarasvatī dwell there, leaving their animosities towards each other.

नैक्षेते तत्र वेतालडाकिनाराक्षसादयः ।

ज्वरिते तु नरं स्थूद्वा पदेतेतस्मातहितः ॥ १ ६ ॥

मंडलाजागमापोनिते ज्वरो दाहस्मात्यतः ।

शतावृष्णास्य स्पठानक्षयोगे त्रिवन्यति ॥ १ ७ ॥

By the influence of this Devi Bhāgavatam the Dākinis, Vetālas, Rākṣasas, and other ghosts cannot cast a glance even on its devotee. If anybody gets fever and if the Śri Devi Bhāgavatam be read touching him with a concentrated attention, all the complaints disappear. By reading this Bhāgavatam, one hundred times even more difficult than the severe disease pthisis is cured.

प्रतिसंध्यं पठेदशसु संध्यां कृत्वा समाहितः ।

एकैकमस्य चाधाययं स नौं ज्ञानवान्यवेत् ॥ १८ ॥

गकुनांश्वैव वीक्षेत कार्याकार्येषु चैव हि ।

तत्यकारः पुरस्तानु कवितोर्जित मया मुने ॥ १९ ॥

नवराते पदोज्चरं शरदीये तिभधिकतः ।

तत्यांविका संतुहा ददतीळाधिकं फलम् ॥ 20 ॥

If after performing the Sandhyā, one reads only one chapter of this Bhāgavatam with a collected mind, he soon acquires the Real Knowledge. O Muni Śaunaka! While going to read this Bhāgavatam, first examine omens and then read. I have spoken already on this subject. If during the Śarādīya Pūjā (the autumnal Durgā Pūjā), at the Navarātra period, one reads with devotion this Bhāgavatam, the Devi Bhagavatī becomes greatly pleased and awards him results more than his desires.

वैष्णोर्वेषचे गैवैक्ष्य रामोमा प्रीयते सहा ।

सौरैंग याणपत्यैक्ष स्वेहैक्रं तुह्ये ॥ 21 ॥

पदितव्यं प्रयन्तेन नवतारमवनुतये ।

वैदिकर्भिनगायिग्रीतये निव्यगो मुने ॥ 22 ॥

During the Navarātri period all can read well this book for the satisfaction of his Iṣṭa Deva (his own deity) whether he be a Vaṣṇava, Śaiva, Saura, Gānapatya or a Śakta. All can read this for the satisfaction of Laksmī, Umā and other Śaktis. The Vaidik Brāhmaṇas are to recite this daily for the satisfaction of the Devī Gāyatrī.

पतिवल्य प्रत्यनेन विरोधी नात्र कस्यधित् ।

उपासना तु सर्वेषां शक्तियुक्तान्ति सर्वदा ॥ 23 ॥

तच्छतर्जेरे तोषार्थे पतिवल्यं सदा द्विजैः ।

स्वीगुहो न पठेदेतक्वाएि च विमोहितः ॥ 24 ॥

This Purānam is not contradictory to any sectarian belief. The reason of this being that to whatever deity he pays his worship, he must worship some Śakti or other, this is stated everywhere. So for the satisfaction of one's own Śakti, all can read this, without contradicting each other. Never any woman nor any Śudra, is to read this herself or himself, even out of ignorance; rather they should hear this from the mouth of a Brāhmaṇa.

शृष्याद्विज्ञवक्तानु निव्यवेति च स्थिति: ।

कि पुनर्वहुनीतेन्न सारं वक्ष्यामि तत्त्वा: ॥ 25 ॥



वेदसारमिदं पुणवं पुराणं डिजसत्तमाः ।

वेदपाठसमं पाठे श्रवणे च तवेल दि ॥ 26 ॥

This is the rule of the Śāstras. (The vibrations and the consequent results would be truer then.) O Rṣis! What more to say on this book than this, that this Purānam is the most excellent of all and yields great merits. It is the essence of the Vedas. This I tell you with great certainty. There is not the least doubt in this. Reading or hearing this yields results equivalent to reading or hearing the Vedas.

सच्चिदान्दिक्ता तां गायकीप्रतिपदितान् ।

नामीय ईमतीं देखीं धिया यो नः प्रयोद्यात् ॥ 27 ॥

इति सुत्वचः श्रुत्वा नैमियोशतपोधानः ।

पूजयामासुरुच्चे: सूर्ते पौराणिकोनम् ॥ 28 ॥

प्रसहदाद्य: सर्वे देवीपादावुजार्चंकाः ।

निर्वर्ति परमां प्राता: पुराणस्य प्रभावतः ॥ 29 ॥

I now bow to the Devi of the nature of Hrim and established by Gāyatrī, of the nature of Everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss, Who stimulates our activities to the understanding of various subjects. Thus hearing the excellent words of Sūta, the great Paurānīk, all the Munis of Naimisāranya worshipped him specially and as the result of hearing this Purānam glady became the servants of the Lotus Feet of the Devi and they attained the Highest Rest.

नमश्रकः पुनः सृतं क्षमाय च मुकुषुंुः ।

संसाराविरधेस्तात एलवोउसाकं त्वमेव हि ॥ ३० ॥

इति स मुनिवराणाम्यतः शावयित्वा

सकलिनामगुर्धो द्वीमोतनुराणम् ।

नतमथ मुनिसंधं वर्द्यित्वास उशिणाबार-

चरणकमलभूर्णे निजनामाव सूतः ॥ 31 ॥

इति श्रीदैविभागवते महापुराणोर्धादशसाहक्यां संहितायां

ब्रादास्ककन्थे चतुर्वीशाययः ॥ 32 ॥

रामपर्ने (963) संख्याते: पदीव्यासुकते: शुणे: ।

देवीभागवतस्याय द्वारास्कधे शैरितः ॥ 33 ॥

The Munis expressed their humility and gratitude to Sūta frequently and bowed down to him again and again. And they said: "O Sūta! It is you that have saved us from this ocean of world." Thus (the great Bhāgavata) Sūta, the bee drinking the honey of the Lotus Feet of the Devi, recited before the assemblage of the best of the Munis this Purānam from the beginning to the end, the Secret of all the Nigamas and full of the Glories of the Devi Bhagavatī. After this the Rṣis bowed down to him and he blessed and honoured them.

Then he went away to his desired place. Here the Devi Bhāgavatam ends and is fully completed.

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the recitation of the fruits of this Purānam in

the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Here ends as well the Full Treatise, Śrimaddevibhāgavatam.

Om. Om. Om. Om. Om Tat Sat. Om Hari Om.

***

The End