CHAPTER III

On the Curse on the River Gangiā

ऋष्य कचुः

उत्पत्तिस्तु त्वया प्रोक्ता व्यासस्यामिततेजसः ।

सत्यवत्यास्तवा सूत चित्तरेण त्यबाउपच ॥ 1 ॥

तथायेकस्तु सन्तेशिश्तेउसाकों सुसंस्थितः ।

न निवर्तित धर्मत्र कथितेन त्यबाउपच ॥ 2 ॥

The Rşis said: “O sinless Sūta! You have described to us in detail the birth of Vyāsa, of unrivalled fire, and of Satyavati; but we have one great doubt in our minds though. O knower of Dharma! which is not being removed by your words.

माताव्यासस्यायाजीघानामासत्यवतीशुभा ।

सा कर्थं नृपति प्राणता शनन्तुं धर्मवित्तमम् ॥ ३ ॥

निषायदूग्रीं स कर्थं वृत्तावृषपति: स्थयम् ।

धर्मिषु: पौरों जरा कुलहीनामसंवर्तमम् ॥ ४ ॥

O Sinless one! First, as regards the mother of Vyāsa, the all-auspicious Satyavati, we have this doubt how she came to be united to the virtuous Śantanu? The king Śantanu, of the family of Puru is a greatly religious man; how could he have; married Satyavati knowing her to be a fisherman's daughter and born of a low family?

ग्रान्तोः प्रथमा पत्ती का हृष्णकथायानुः।

भीम पुत्रोल्प भेमावी वसोरंगः कर्व पुनः ॥ 5 ॥

Now say who was the first wife of Śantanu and how Bhisma the intelligent son of Śantanu came to be born of the parts of Vasu?

त्वया प्रोर्फ पुग सूत राजा चिन्तागदः कृतः ।

सत्यव्यतः सुता वीरी यीधेपागितितनेजस ॥ 6 ॥

चित्रागदे हृते वीर कृतसदतुजस्तथा ।

विचित्रवीर्यानाउसी सत्यव्यतः सुता नृप: ॥ 7 ॥

O Sūta! You told before that Bhīsma, of indomitable valour, made Satyavati's son, the brave Citrāngada, king; and subsequent to his death made his younger brother Vicitravirya king.

व्योषे शीभे स्थिते पूर्वे धर्मिषे रूपवत्यिष ।

कृतवान्य कयं राज्यं स्थापितरन्तेन जानता ॥ 8 ॥

But when the elder brother Bhīṣma, the greatly religious and beautiful was present, how was it that Citrāngada and Victiravīrya having been installed by Bhīśma himself could have reigned.

मृत विव्रवार्यैं तु सर्ववत्यतिबृ:खिता ।

व्यूध्यां गोतकां पुत्री जलयामास सा कर्ण ॥ 9 ॥

Again on the demise of Victiravīrya. Satyavatī became very much grieved and got two sons born of her two son's wives by Veda Vyāsa?

कर्थ राज्यं न भीषाय ददौ सा वरविंगिनी ।

न कृतस्तु कर्थ तेन वीरिण दारसंग्रहः ॥ 10 ॥

अधार्मितु कृत: कर्माङ्गावसंगनामिततजास ।

ज्येछेन धातुधार्यां युजाव्यादिताविति ॥ 11 ॥

How can we explain this fact? Why did she do this? Why did she not give to Bhisma the kingdom? Why did Bhisma not marry? And how was it that the elder brother Vyāsa Deva, of indomitable valour, did such an irreligious act as to beget two (Goloka) sons from the wives of the brothers?

पुराणकर्ता धर्मात्मा स कधं कृतावानूनि: ।

सेवनं परदाराणां घातुईव विशेषतः ॥ 12 ॥

Vyāsa composed the Purāṇas and knew everything of religion; how then did he go to other's wives, especially, of his brother's wives?

जूगुष्मतिभंद कर्म से कर्थ कृतावानुपि: ।

शिष्टाचारः कर्थ सूत वेदानुपिमितकासः ॥ 13 ॥

O Sūta! Why did Vyāsa Deva do such a hateful act, in spite of his being a Muni? The actions of Vedas are inferred from their subsequent good conducts; how can this act of Vyāsa be calculated as one amongst them?

व्यासशिष्योसि सेधायिनस्तद्हे छेतुर्महींस ।

श्रौतुकामा वयं संखे धर्मक्षेत्र कृतक्षणाः ॥ 14 ॥

O Intelligent one! You are the disciple of Vyāsa; therefore, you are the best man to solve our doubts. We all of this Dharmaksetra Naimisāranya are very eager to hear this.”

सूत खाच

इश्राकुलशप्रभवो महाधिष्य इति स्मृतः ।

सत्वावन्यमंगीतश्व चक्रवर्ती गृणोतमः ॥ 15 ॥

At this Sūta said: “In ancient days, there reigned a king named Mahābhiṣa, in the family of Āksvāku endowed with all the qualities of a great king; he was the foremost of all the kings, truthful and religious.

अश्वमेधसहेषण वाजपेयगतेन च ।

तोषयामास देेवेन्द्र स्वर्ग प्राप महामाति: ॥ 16 ॥

That highly intelligent king performed thousand-horse-sacrifices (Aśvamedhas) one hundred Vājapeya sacrifices and thereby satisfied Indra, the king of the Devas and went to Heavens.

एकादा बहासदन्त गती राजा महाधिभः ।

सुरा: सर्वे समाजपु: सेवनार्थ प्रजापतिम् ॥ 17 ॥

Once, on an occasion, that king went to the abode of Brahmā; the other gods also went there to serve Prajāpati.

गंगा महान्दी तत संश्रिता सेवितु विभुम् ।

तत्या वास: समुद्धुर्भत मारतेन तरिश्वा ॥ 18 ॥

अधोगुखा: सुरा: सर्वे न विलोबयैव तां स्थितः ।

राजा महापिचतां तु नि:शंक समपरवत ॥ 19 ॥

The great river, Ganga Devi, too, assuming the feminine form, went to Brahmā to serve him. Now, in the interval, violent winds arose and the clothing of Ganga Devi went off; at this the Devas did not

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

look at her; rather kept their faces downwards; but the king Mahābhiṣa continued gazing at her.

साउपि ते प्रमेयंतुं नृपं त्रातवती नृते ।

दूर्वा ती प्रेमयंतुंची निरंतर्जी कामाभोहिति ॥ 20 ॥

Gaṅgā also came to know the king and that he had become attached to her.

बहा चुकोप ती तृणं शणाय च क्वाप्तित ।

मत्पलोकेषु भृपाल जन्म प्राय पुर्निद्वम् ॥ 21 ॥

Brahmā, seeing that both of them are love-stricken and are shameless, became angry and cursed them immediately: "O king! you better take your birth again in the human world and practise great meritorious deeds and come again to this Heaven.

पुर्णेय महातविष्टस्वमाव्यप्सि सर्वथा ।

गड़ां नशोक्तान्बहा यौक्ष्य प्रेमवर्ती नृपे ॥ 22 ॥

Thus saying, Brahmā looked at Ganga, who was attached to the king, and addressed her: "You too better go to the human world and become his wife."

विमनस्कौ तु ती तूर्ण नि:सृती ब्रहणोउत्नतम् ।

स नृपांश्रितयित्वाउध भृत्पौंके धर्मतत्त्वग्न ॥ 23 ॥

Both of them, the king as well as Gāngā, came out of Brahmā's abode, very much grieved in their hearts.

प्रतीयं चित्तयामास पितरं पुर्वंशजम् ।

तृतिस्तमवरे चाही वसवः क्षीसमित्वतः ॥ 24 ॥

विश्वस्यामां प्राता रममाणा वरुच्छ्या ।

पृथ्वादीनां वसूनां च मध्ये को3पि वसूनमः ॥ 25 ॥

King Mahābhisa thought of coming to this world and reflected on the kings thereof and settled to make the king Pratipa of Puru's family his father. At this time the eight Vasus with their wives wandering in various places and enjoying as they liked came to the hermitage of Vasiṣṭha.

धीनीमा तस्य भार्यांश नन्दिनीं गां ददर्श ह ।

इद्वा पति सा पण्ड्छ कस्येयं धेनुकत्ता ॥ 26 ॥

Amongst the aforesaid eight Vasus Prthu and others, one Vasu Dyau's wife seeing Nandinī, the sacrificial cow (Kāmadehneu) of Vasiṣṭha asked her husband:

धौतमामह बसिष्ठस्य गौरिंशं शृणु सुन्दरि ।

दुर्धयमस्या: पिवेदासून नारी वा रुपकोंड या चि 27 चि

अयुतायुभंवेकूनं सदेवागतत्योवनः ।।

तच्छूचा सुसृदी प्राह पुरुतुलोके.जित से सखी ॥ 28 ॥

“Whose is this excellent cow that I see?” Vasu then replied as follows: “O Beautiful one! This is Vasistha’s cow. Whoever, be he a man or woman drinks her milk gets his longevity extended to 10,000 years and his youth never ends.” Hearing this, Vasu’s wife said:

उशीनरस्य राजर्षे: पुत्री परमर्शोभना ।

तस्या हेतोमहाभाग सवसां गो पवसिवसीम् ॥ 29 ॥

आनायास्धाम श्रेष्ठ नन्दिनं कामदां शुभाणम् ।

यावदस्या: पय: पीला सखी मम सदैव हिं ॥ 30 ॥

मानुषेषु भवेदेका जरगतोगविवर्जिता ।

"There is a very beautiful comrade (Sakhī) of mine, the daughter of the Rājarsī-Usīnīsa in the world, of auspicious qualities. O Mahābhāga! Kindly bring to me from Vasiṣṭha's hermitage that auspicious sacrificial milch cow Nandinī together with her calf that yields all desires; my Sakhī will then drink her milk and be thereby get free from disease, old age and become the chief amongst all mankind."

तद्धुत्वा वचनं तत्या दीर्जहार च नंदितून् ॥ 31 ॥

अवमान्य मुनिं वानां पृथ्वाठीः सहितोउपः ।

हतायाथ शन्निव्यां वसिष्ठसून महातपाः ॥ 32 ॥

आजगामाभ्रमपर्थ फलान्यावय सत्वाः ।

Hearing thus, his wife's word, the Vasu Dyau, though sinless, stole together with Prthu and the other Vasus the cow Nandini in utter defiance to the self-controlled Muni Vasistha. When the cow Nandini had been stolen, the great ascetic Vasistha came quickly to the hermitage with abundance of fruits.

नापयश्व यदो धेनुं सवस्तां स्वाध्रभे भूति: ॥ 33 ॥

भृगयामास तेजस्वी गहाशेषु वनेश्धिं ।

नासाडिता यदा धेनुशुकोपातिरूपां भूति: ॥ 34 ॥

वाकगीश्वाधि विज्ञाय ध्यानेन वसुभिर्भतुम् ।

वसुधिमं हता धेनुर्मेसामापमन्य वै ॥ 35 ॥

Muni Vasiṣṭha, not finding, in his hermitage,

his cow with her calf, searched for her in many forests and caves; but he, the son of Varuna, could not find out his cow even after prolonged searches; he, then, took recourse to meditation and came to know that the Vasus had stolen the cow and became angry.

तस्मासर्वे जनिथ्यिति मानुषेपु न संशय: ।

एवं शशाण धार्मिता वर्मुस्तान्याकिणि: स्वयम् ॥ 36 ॥

He expressed: “When the Vasus have stolen this my cow in utter defiance to my self, they must be born amongst men.”

भुत्वा विमनसः सर्वे प्रयतुर्द्विताश्र से ।

शला: स्म इति ज्ञानं त्रश्र पितुप्रचन्न: ॥ 37 ॥

When religious Varuna's son Vasistha thus cursed the Vasus, they became very sorry and absent-minded; all of them went to Vasistha's hermitage and saw him there; they began to supplicate him as much as they could; and took refuge under him.

प्रसाद्यंतस्पृधि वस्वः शरणं गता: ।

पृमित्सानाह धर्माता वसू-दीनानुर्प: स्थितान् ॥ 38 ॥

अनुसंविर्तरं सर्वे शपायोक्षमवाय्यः ।

येनेयं विह्नत धेनुर्निद्ती मम वस्तला ॥ 39 ॥

तस्माह्रीभानुर्भे दैहे दीर्धकालं वशिष्यिति ।

Seeing the Vasus standing before him in an extremely distressed condition, the virtuous Muni Vasistha said: "You all will be free from the curse within one year; but Vasu Dyau will dwell amongst men for a long, long period as he had stolen direct my Nandini with her calf."

ते शगत: पथि गच्छन्ती गड़ांं दृष्ट्वा सरिद्वाग् । 40 ॥

क्रभुतां प्रणातः सर्वे शगतां चितातुतां नदीम् ।

While the Vasus, thus cursed, were returning, they saw on the way the chief river Gaṅgā Devi also cursed and therefore distressed; all of them bowed down to her simultaneously and said:

भविष्यामो वयं देँवि कर्वं देँवा: सुधाशना: ॥ 4 1 ॥

मानुषाणों च जठरे चिन्तेय महती हि नः ।

तस्मार्वं मानुषी भूत्वा जनयास्मावसिद्धे ।। 4 2 ॥

"O Devi! A serious thought is troubling our

minds, how can we, who live on nectar, take our birth in human wombs; so, O best river! You better be a woman and give birth to us.

शंतनुर्म सारास्सितस्य भार्यां भवानघे ।

जाताझाताझुले चास्यासि:क्षिपस्य सुपारपे ॥ 4 3 ॥

एवं शपवितिमर्शे घविता नात्र संशयः ।

O Sinless one! You better be the wife of the sage King Śantanu and no sooner we be born of your womb, kindly throw us in river Ganga (your water). If you do thus, O Ganga, we will certainly be freed of our curse."

तथेयुक्ताश्रि से वर्षे अनुर्लॉक्स स्वक्ष पुनः ॥ 44 ॥

गड़ान्सि निर्माल होदी चिंतयमाना पुनः पुनः ।

महापिघों पुंगे जातः प्रतीपस्य सुततदा ॥ 45 ॥

Gangā Devi replied “Well; that will be.” Thus spoken, the Vasus went to their respective places; and Gangā Devi, too, thinking on the subject again and again, went out of that place. At this time Mahābhiṣa became born as a son of the king Pratipa and became known as Śantanu.

गंतनुर्नाम ग्राजर्षिमांना सत्यसङ्गः ।

प्रतीपस्तु स्तुति चढ़े सुर्येयामिततेजसः ॥ 4 6 ॥

तदा च सलितात्यमात्रिःसूता वरवर्धिनि ।

दक्षिणं शालसंकाशमूदे भेजे शुभानना ॥ 47 ॥

He was exceedingly religious and true to his promise. One day while King Pratipa was praising the Sūrya Deva (the sun) of unequalled energy, Gaṅgā Devi assumed an extraordinarily beautiful feminine form and came out of the waters and sat on the right thigh, resembling like a sāl tree, of the king Pratipa.

अङ्ग्रे स्थिति सिद्धयं चाहा मांगुवहाकि वयरानने ।

मभोगवासियतासि सर्व तिकमर्थ दक्षिणो गुर्जे ॥ 48 ॥

The sage king Pratipa spoke out to the lady sitting on his right thigh, thus: "O beautiful faced one! Why, unasked, have you sat on my auspicious right thigh?"

सा तमाह वरारोहा यदर्थ राजसत्तम् ।

सिद्धानास्येके कुकश्रेघ कामयानां भजस्य मम् ॥ 49 ॥

The lovely Gaṅgā then replied: "Hear why I

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

have sat here. O best of Kurus! O king! Becoming attached to you, I have sat on your thigh; so please accept me."

तमाचोच्छंयो राजा रूपयीवनशालिनीम् ।

नाट परस्धित्य कामाद्रास्छेयं वरवर्धिनीम् ॥ ५० ॥

At this, king Pratipa spoke to the beautiful lady, full of youth and beauty, “I never go, simply out of passion to another’s wife.

स्थिता दक्षिणमूर्ने मे त्वामफिल्प्य च भापिनि ।

अपल्यानां सुचाणों च स्थानं विद्धि शुचिसितं ॥ ५१ ॥

There is another point; you have sat on my right thigh; that is the seat of sons and son's wives; so, when my desired son will be born, you will then, be my son's wife.

सुना मे भव कल्याणि जाते पुत्रे5त्तिवाड्छते ।

भविष्यति च मे पुत्रस्तव पुण्यात्र संशयः ॥ ५२ ॥

And certainly, by your good will, my son will be born." The lady of divine form, said, 'Well; that will be done! and went away.'

तवेल्युक्त्वा गता सा वै कामिनी दिव्यर्शनि ।

राजा चापि गृहं प्रापतिश्रित्यंसिं तिवयं पुनः ॥ ५३ ॥

ततः कालेन क्रियता जाते पुत्रे पयस्त्विनि ।

वनं जिलापिषू राजा पुत्रे वृत्तांतमूचिबान् ॥ ५४ ॥

पुत्तांतं कथयित्वा तु पुनरूचे निवं सुतम् ।

यदि प्रयाति सा बाला त्वं वने चाह्हातिसिनि ॥ ५५ ॥

The king returned to his palace, thinking of the lady. After some time, he had a son born to him and when the son attained his teens, the king desired to lead a forest life and communicated this matter to his son. He said also, if the aforesaid beautifully

smiling girl comes to you to marry, then marry her.

कामयाना वरागेहा तां भवेधा मनोरामम् ।

न प्रवृत्या तवया कासि मघिवोगाराशिपि ॥ 56 ॥

धार्मिन्ती च तां कृत्वा भविता त्वं सुखी किल ।

And I am also ordering you not to question her anything “who are you” and so forth. If you take her as your legal wife, you will certainly be happy.”

सूत उवाच

एवं संदिष्य तं पुंत्रे भूपति: प्रीतमानसः ॥ 57 ॥

दन्ता राज्याक्रियं सर्वा वनं राजा विवेश ह ।

तत्रापि च तत्परत्वा समागध्य पार्थिवकम् ॥ 58 ॥

जगाम स्वर्ग राज्ञसरी देई त्यक्त्वा स्वतेजसा ।

राज्य प्राव्य महातेजाः शन्तुः सावधीभिकम् ॥ 59 ॥

प्रजा वे पालयामास धर्मदूषको महीपति: ॥ 60 ॥

इति शीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे द्वितीयकन्धे

तृतीयोउध्याय: 11 3 11

Thus saying to son, king Pratipa handed over all his kingdom to his son and gladly retired into the forest. The king practised tapasyā in the forest and worshipped Ambikā; on quitting his mortal coil, he went by his sheer merit to the Heavens. The highly energetic king Śantanu, on getting his kingdom, bagan to administer justice according to the laws of Dharma and governed his subjects.

Thus ends the Third Chapter of the Second Book on the description of the curse on Ganga, Mahabhijsa

and Vasus in the Mahapurānam

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.

CHADVED IV

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

