[Ch 3 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rşis said: “O sinless Sūta! You have described to us in detail the birth of Vyāsa, of unrivalled fire, and of Satyavati; but we have one great doubt in our minds though. O knower of Dharma! which is not being removed by your words.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣis said :-- “O Sinless Sūta! You have described to us in detail the birth of Vyāsa, of unrivalled fire, and of Satyavatī; but we have one great doubt in our minds though, O Knower of Dharma! which is not being removed by your words.

[Ch 3 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sinless one! First, as regards the mother of Vyāsa, the all-auspicious Satyavati, we have this doubt how she came to be united to the virtuous Śantanu? The king Śantanu, of the family of Puru is a greatly religious man; how could he have; married Satyavati knowing her to be a fisherman's daughter and born of a low family?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sinless one! First, as regards the mother of Vyāsa, the all auspicious Satyavatī, we have this doubt how she came to be united to the virtuous Śantanu? The king Śantanu, of the family of Puru is a greatly religious man; how could he have married Satyavatī knowing her to be a fisherman’s daughter and born of a low family?

[Ch 3 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now say who was the first wife of Śantanu and how Bhisma the intelligent son of Śantanu came to be born of the parts of Vasu?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now say who was the first wife of Śantanu and how Bhīsma, the intelligent son of Śantanu came to be born of the parts of Vasu?

[Ch 3 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sūta! You told before that Bhīsma, of indomitable valour, made Satyavati's son, the brave Citrāngada, king; and subsequent to his death made his younger brother Vicitravirya king.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sūta! You have told before that Bhīsma, of indomitable valour, made the Satyavatī’s son, the brave Citrāṅgada, king; and subsequent to his death made his younger brother Vicītravīrya king.

[Ch 3 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But when the elder brother Bhīṣma, the greatly religious and beautiful was present, how was it that Citrāngada and Victiravīrya having been installed by Bhīśma himself could have reigned.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But when the elder brother Bhīsma, the greatly religious and beautiful was present, how was it that Citrāṅgada and Vicītravīrya having been installed by Bhīsma himself could have reigned.”

[Ch 3 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again on the demise of Victiravīrya. Satyavatī became very much grieved and got two sons born of her two son's wives by Veda Vyāsa?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again on the demise of Vicītravīrya, Satyavatī became very much grieved and got two sons born of her two son’s wives by Vedavyāsa?

[Ch 3 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How can we explain this fact? Why did she do this? Why did she not give to Bhisma the kingdom? Why did Bhisma not marry? And how was it that the elder brother Vyāsa Deva, of indomitable valour, did such an irreligious act as to beget two (Goloka) sons from the wives of the brothers?
NEW CORR ENG ──► How can we explain this fact? Why did she do this? Why did she not give to Bhīsma the kingdom? Why did Bhīsma not marry? And how was it that the elder brother Vyāsa Deva, of indomitable valour, did such an irreligious act as to beget two (Goloka) sons from the wives of the brothers?

[Ch 3 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa composed the Purāṇas and knew everything of religion; how then did he go to other's wives, especially, of his brother's wives?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa composed the Purāṇas and knew everything of religion; how then did he go to other’s wives, especially, of his brother’s wives?

[Ch 3 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sūta! Why did Vyāsa Deva do such a hateful act, in spite of his being a Muni? The actions of Vedas are inferred from their subsequent good conducts; how can this act of Vyāsa be calculated as one amongst them?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sūta! Why did Vyāsa Deva do such a hateful act, in spite of his being a Muni? The actions of Vedas are inferred from their subsequent good conducts; how can this act of Vyāsa be calculated as one amongst them?

[Ch 3 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Intelligent one! You are the disciple of Vyāsa; therefore, you are the best man to solve our doubts. We all of this Dharmaksetra Naimisāranya are very eager to hear this.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Intelligent one! You are the disciple of Vyāsa; therefore you are the best man to solve our doubts. We all of this Dharmakshettra Naimiṣāraṇya are very eager to hear this.

[Ch 3 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this Sūta said: “In ancient days, there reigned a king named Mahābhiṣa, in the family of Āksvāku endowed with all the qualities of a great king; he was the foremost of all the kings, truthful and religious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this Sūta said :-- In ancient days there reigned a king named Mahābhiṣa, in the family of Ikṣāku endowed with all the qualities of a great king; he was the foremost of all the kings, truthful and religious.

[Ch 3 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That highly intelligent king performed thousand-horse-sacrifices (Aśvamedhas) one hundred Vājapeya sacrifices and thereby satisfied Indra, the king of the Devas and went to Heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That highly intelligent king performed thousand horse-sacrifices (Asva medhas) one hundred Vājapeya sacrifices and thereby satisfied Indra, the king of the Devas and went to Heavens.

[Ch 3 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once, on an occasion, that king went to the abode of Brahmā; the other gods also went there to serve Prajāpati.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once, on an occasion, that king went to the abode of Brahmā; the other gods also went there to serve Prajāpati.

[Ch 3 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The great river, Ganga Devi, too, assuming the feminine form, went to Brahmā to serve him. Now, in the interval, violent winds arose and the clothing of Ganga Devi went off; at this the Devas did not Šrimaddevībhāgavatam look at her; rather kept their faces downwards; but the king Mahābhiṣa continued gazing at her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The great river, Gaṅgā Devī, too, assuming the feminine form, went to Brahmā to serve him. Now, in the interval, violent winds arose and the clothing of Gaṅgā Devī went off; at this the Devas did not look at her; rather kept their faces downwards; but the king Mahābhiṣa continued gazing at her.

[Ch 3 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Gaṅgā also came to know the king and that he had become attached to her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Gaṅgā also came to know the king and that he had become attached to her.

[Ch 3 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā, seeing that both of them are love-stricken and are shameless, became angry and cursed them immediately: "O king! you better take your birth again in the human world and practise great meritorious deeds and come again to this Heaven.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā, seeing that both of them are love-stricken and are shameless, became angry and cursed them immediately :-- O king! you better take your birth again in the human world and practise great meritorious deeds and come again to this Heaven.

[Ch 3 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, Brahmā looked at Ganga, who was attached to the king, and addressed her: "You too better go to the human world and become his wife."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, Brahmā looked at Gaṅgā, who was attached to the king, and addressed her :-- “You too better go to the human world and become his wife.”

[Ch 3 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Both of them, the king as well as Gāngā, came out of Brahmā's abode, very much grieved in their hearts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Both of them, the king as well as Gaṅgā, came out of Brahmā’s abode, very much grieved in their hearts.

[Ch 3 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► King Mahābhisa thought of coming to this world and reflected on the kings thereof and settled to make the king Pratipa of Puru's family his father. At this time the eight Vasus with their wives wandering in various places and enjoying as they liked came to the hermitage of Vasiṣṭha.
NEW CORR ENG ──► king Mahābhiṣa thought of coming to this world and reflected on the kings thereof and settled to make the king Pratīpa of Puru’s family his father. At this time the eight Vasus with their wives wandering in various places and enjoying as they liked came to the hermitage of Vaśiṣṭha.

[Ch 3 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Amongst the aforesaid eight Vasus Prthu and others, one Vasu Dyau's wife seeing Nandinī, the sacrificial cow (Kāmadehneu) of Vasiṣṭha asked her husband:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Amongst the aforesaid eight Vasus Prithu and others, one Vasu Dyau’s wife seeing Nandini, the sacrificial cow (Kāmadhenu) of Vaśiṣṭha asked her husband :--

[Ch 3 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “Whose is this excellent cow that I see?” Vasu then replied as follows: “O Beautiful one! This is Vasistha’s cow. Whoever, be he a man or woman drinks her milk gets his longevity extended to 10,000 years and his youth never ends.” Hearing this, Vasu’s wife said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► “Whose is this excellent cow that I see? Vasu then replied as follows :-- “ O Beautiful one! This is Vaśiṣṭha’s cow. Whoever, be he a man or woman drinks her milk gets his longevity extended to ten thousand years and his youth never ends.” Hearing this, the Vasu’s wife said :--

[Ch 3 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "There is a very beautiful comrade (Sakhī) of mine, the daughter of the Rājarsī-Usīnīsa in the world, of auspicious qualities. O Mahābhāga! Kindly bring to me from Vasiṣṭha's hermitage that auspicious sacrificial milch cow Nandinī together with her calf that yields all desires; my Sakhī will then drink her milk and be thereby get free from disease, old age and become the chief amongst all mankind."
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “There is a very beautiful comrade (Sakhī) of mine, the daughter of the Rajarsī-Uśīna in the world, of auspicious qualities. O Mahābhāga! Kindly bring to me from Vaśiṣṭha’s hermitage that auspicious sacrificial milch cow Nandini together with her calf that yields all desires; my Sakhī will then drink her milk and be thereby free from disease, old age and become the chief amongst all mankind.

[Ch 3 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing thus, his wife's word, the Vasu Dyau, though sinless, stole together with Prthu and the other Vasus the cow Nandini in utter defiance to the self-controlled Muni Vasistha. When the cow Nandini had been stolen, the great ascetic Vasistha came quickly to the hermitage with abundance of fruits.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing thus, his wife’s word, the Vasu Dyau, though sinless, stole away together with Prithu and the other Vasus the cow Nandini in utter defiance to the self-controlled Muni Vaśiṣṭha. When the cow Nandini had been stolen, the great ascetic Vaśisṭha came quickly to the hermitage with abundance of fruits.

[Ch 3 Verse 33-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Muni Vasiṣṭha, not finding, in his hermitage, his cow with her calf, searched for her in many forests and caves; but he, the son of Varuna, could not find out his cow even after prolonged searches; he, then, took recourse to meditation and came to know that the Vasus had stolen the cow and became angry.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Muni Vaśiṣṭha, not finding, in his hermitage, his cow with her calf, searched for her in many forests and caves; but he, the son of Varuṇa, could not find out his cow even after prolonged searches; he, then, took recourse to meditation and came to know that the Vasus had stolen the cow and became angry.

[Ch 3 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He expressed: “When the Vasus have stolen this my cow in utter defiance to my self, they must be born amongst men.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► He expressed :-- “When the Vasus have stolen this my cow in utter defiance to my self, they must be born amongst men.”

[Ch 3 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When religious Varuna's son Vasistha thus cursed the Vasus, they became very sorry and absent-minded; all of them went to Vasistha's hermitage and saw him there; they began to supplicate him as much as they could; and took refuge under him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the religious Varuṇa’s son Vaśiṣṭha thus cursed the Vasus, they became very sorry and absent-minded; all of them went to Vaśiṣṭha’s hermitage and saw him there; they began to supplicate him as much as they could; and took refuge under him.

[Ch 3 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the Vasus standing before him in an extremely distressed condition, the virtuous Muni Vasistha said: "You all will be free from the curse within one year; but Vasu Dyau will dwell amongst men for a long, long period as he had stolen direct my Nandini with her calf."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the Vasus standing before him in an extremely distressed condition, the virtuous Muni Vaśiṣṭha said :-- “You all will be free from the curse within one year; but the Vasu Dyau will dwell amongst men for a long, long period as he had stolen direct my Nandini with her calf.”

[Ch 3 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► While the Vasus, thus cursed, were returning, they saw on the way the chief river Gaṅgā Devi also cursed and therefore distressed; all of them bowed down to her simultaneously and said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► While the Vasus, thus cursed, were returning, they saw on the way the chief river Gaṅgā Devī also cursed and therefore distressed; all of them bowed down to her simultaneously and said:

[Ch 3 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O Devi! A serious thought is troubling our minds, how can we, who live on nectar, take our birth in human wombs; so, O best river! You better be a woman and give birth to us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Devī! A serious thought is troubling our minds, how can we, who live on nectar, take our birth in human wombs; so, O best river! You better be a woman and give birth to us.

[Ch 3 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sinless one! You better be the wife of the sage King Śantanu and no sooner we be born of your womb, kindly throw us in river Ganga (your water). If you do thus, O Ganga, we will certainly be freed of our curse."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sinless one! You better be the wife of the sage King Śantanu and no sooner we be born of your womb, kindly throw us in the river Gaṅgā (your water). If you do thus, O Gaṅgā we will certainly be freed of our curse.”

[Ch 3 Verse 44-45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Gangā Devi replied “Well; that will be.” Thus spoken, the Vasus went to their respective places; and Gangā Devi, too, thinking on the subject again and again, went out of that place. At this time Mahābhiṣa became born as a son of the king Pratipa and became known as Śantanu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Gaṅgā Devī replied “Well; that will be.” Thus spoken, the Vasus went to their respective places; and Gaṅgā Devī, too, thinking on the subject again and again, went out of that place. At this time Mahābhiṣa became born as a son of the king Pratīpa and became known as Śantanu.

[Ch 3 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He was exceedingly religious and true to his promise. One day while King Pratipa was praising the Sūrya Deva (the sun) of unequalled energy, Gaṅgā Devi assumed an extraordinarily beautiful feminine form and came out of the waters and sat on the right thigh, resembling like a sāl tree, of the king Pratipa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He was exceedingly religious and true to his promise. One day while the King Pratīpa was praising the Sūrya Devī (the sun) of unequalled energy, Gaṅgā Devī assumed an extraordinarily beautiful feminine form and came out of the waters and sat on the right thigh, resembling like a sāl tree, of the king Pratīpa.

[Ch 3 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The sage king Pratipa spoke out to the lady sitting on his right thigh, thus: "O beautiful faced one! Why, unasked, have you sat on my auspicious right thigh?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► The sage king Pratīp spoke out to the lady sitting on his right thigh, thus :-- “O beautiful faced one! Why, unasked, have you sat on my auspicious right thigh?”

[Ch 3 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The lovely Gaṅgā then replied: "Hear why I Šrimaddevībhāgavatam have sat here. O best of Kurus! O king! Becoming attached to you, I have sat on your thigh; so please accept me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The lovely Gaṅgā then replied :-- “Hear why I have sat here. O best of Kurus! O king! Becoming attached to you, I have sat on your thigh; so please accept me.”

[Ch 3 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this, king Pratipa spoke to the beautiful lady, full of youth and beauty, “I never go, simply out of passion to another’s wife.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this the king Pratīpa spoke to the beautiful lady, full of youth and beauty, “I never go, simply out of passion to another’s wife.

[Ch 3 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There is another point; you have sat on my right thigh; that is the seat of sons and son's wives; so, when my desired son will be born, you will then, be my son's wife.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There is another point; you have sat on my right thigh; that is the seat of sons and son’s wives; so, when my desired son will be born, you will then, be my son’s wife.

[Ch 3 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And certainly, by your good will, my son will be born." The lady of divine form, said, 'Well; that will be done! and went away.'
NEW CORR ENG ──► And certainly, by your good will, my son will be born.” The lady, of divine form, said, Well; that will be done! and went away.

[Ch 3 Verse 53-55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king returned to his palace, thinking of the lady. After some time, he had a son born to him and when the son attained his teens, the king desired to lead a forest life and communicated this matter to his son. He said also, if the aforesaid beautifully smiling girl comes to you to marry, then marry her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king returned to his palace, thinking of the lady. After some time, he had a son born to him and when the son attained his teens, the king desired to lead a forest life and communicated this matter to his son. He said also, if the aforesaid beautifully smiling girl comes to you to marry, then marry her.

[Ch 3 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And I am also ordering you not to question her anything “who are you” and so forth. If you take her as your legal wife, you will certainly be happy.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► And I am also ordering you not to question her anything “who are you” and so forth. If you take her as your legal wife, you will certainly be happy.

[Ch 3 Verse 57-60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying to son, king Pratipa handed over all his kingdom to his son and gladly retired into the forest. The king practised tapasyā in the forest and worshipped Ambikā; on quitting his mortal coil, he went by his sheer merit to the Heavens. The highly energetic king Śantanu, on getting his kingdom, bagan to administer justice according to the laws of Dharma and governed his subjects. Thus ends the Third Chapter of the Second Book on the description of the curse on Ganga, Mahabhijsa and Vasus in the Mahapurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses. CHADVED IV Šrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying to his son, the king Pratīpa handed over all his kingdom to his son and gladly retired into the forest. The king practised tapasyā in the forest and worshipped Ambikā; on quitting his mortal coil, he went by his sheer merit to the Heavens. The highly energetic king Śantanu, on getting his kingdom, began to administer justice according to the laws of Dharma and governed his subjects. Thus ends the third Chapter of the Second Skandha on the description of the curse on Gaṅgā, Mahābhiṣa and Vasus in the Māhapurāṇam
