CHAPTER XI

On Tämräs Fight with the Devi

व्यास उवाच |

इति तस्य वचः श्रुत्वा महिषो मदविह्ृलः । |
मन्त्रिवृद्धान्‌ समाहूघ राजा चचनमब्रचीत्‌ ॥ 1 ॥

Vyasa said: The King Mahisasura, maddened
with pride, heard the messenger’s words and called
the aged and experienced ministers and said thus:

कार्येऽस्मिन्निपुणा यूयमुयायेषु विचक्षणाः ।

सामादिषु च कर्तव्यं विश्रब्धं बरूत मा चिरम्‌ ॥ 2 ॥

O Ministers! What am I to do now? Better judge
you all well, and speak out definitely to my. Is it
that this Devi has been created by the Devas like
the Maya of Sambarasura and thus has appeared
before us?

आगता देवविहिता मायेसं शांबरीव किम्‌ ।

सामादिषु च कर्तव्यः कोऽत्र मह्यं Gad च ॥ 3 ॥

You are all dexterous and know where to apply
the four means of success; viz., conciliation, gift

|

or bribery, sowing dissensions, and war, and |.

therefore you would better tell me which one of
the above four, I am to adopt now.
मन्त्रिण ऊचुः

सत्यं सदैव वक्तव्यं प्रियं न नृपसत्तम ।

कार्य हितकरं नूनं विचार्य विबुधैः किल ॥ 4 ॥

The ministers said: O King! One should always
speak true and at the same time pleasant; the wise
ones should then select only those which are
beneficial and apply them.

सत्यं च हितकृद्राजन्त्रियं चाहितकृद्भवेत्‌ ।

यथौषधं नृणां लोके ह्यप्रियं रोगनाशनम्‌ ॥ 5 ॥

O King! As a medicine, though bitter, cures

diseases, so true words, though appearing unpleasant, lead to beneficial results. Those that are simply pleasant, are generally injurious as to their effects.

सत्यस्य श्रोता मन्ता च तुरंभ पृथिवीयते ।

वक्ताउपि तुरंभ: कामं बह्वश्रतुभाषका: ॥ 6 ॥

O Lord of the Earth! The bearers and approvers of truth both are very rare; truth speakers also are very difficult to be seen; laudatory sycophancy is found in a great measure in this world.

कथं बुभोउत्र नृपते विवारे गहने तिहह ।

गुर्णे बाउपयुर्णे बार्थि को बेथिं घुवनजये ॥ 7 ॥

O King! Nobody in the three worlds knows what will be good or what will lead to inauspicious results? How can we then definitely pronounce our judgment in this difficult matter?

राजोवाच

त्यव्यमान्नुसारेण बुवंलब्धा पुथक्यथक् ।

येवां हि याङ्गो यावस्तच्छूता चिन्तयायमूम् ॥ 8 ॥

The King said: Let each of you say separately, according to his own intellect, what is his opinion; I will hear them all consider for myself.

बहूतां मतमात्राय विवार्यं च पुनः पुनः ।

यच्छेयस्तद्धि कर्तव्यं कार्यविचक्षणैः ॥ 9 ॥

Clever persons should hear the opinions of several persons, then judge for himself what is the best and then adopt that as what is to be done.

व्यास उवाच

तर्यैवं वच्नं शुत्वा विक्सप्यो महावलः ।

उवाच तरसा वाक्यं रंजवम्पृथिवीपतिम् ॥ 10 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing his words, the powerful Virūpāka same out foremost of all and began to say pleasant words to the King.

विकल्पा उवाच

राज्ञरी वराकीय सा बृते मदार्विता ।

विभीषकामाजिरिंदं जातल्यं वचनं तथा ॥ 11 ॥

Virūpāka said: O King! Please take for certain, what has been spoken by that ordinary woman, swelled with vanity, as words simply to scare you.

को विभोत सिक्यो वास्यैटुकेनै: रणतुर्दैः ।

अन्ततं साहरं चेति जानराशिविधेत्ति ॥ 12 ॥

The efforts and courage of a woman are known to all; who will be afraid therefore, to hear abusive language from a woman, praising her ownself in matters of warfare?

त्रिला विभुवनं राजत्रढा कान्तापघेन वै ।

दीनतेउदयशे नूनं वीरस्य घुवने भवेत् ॥ 13 ॥

O King! You have conquered the three worlds by your own heroic valour; now if you acknowledge your inferiority, out of fear to a woman, you would be subject to very much disgrace in this world.

तस्माधायमेकाकी युद्वाय चपिड़ां प्रति ।

हनिये तो महाराज निर्भयी घव साम्यतम् ॥ 14 ॥

Therefore, O King! I will go alone to fight with Candikā and I will kill Her. You can stay here now without any fear.

सेनावृतोर्ध नाला तां शलालीस्विविधः किल ।

निपुर्दयामि दुर्मर्गे चाधिकांப் चाप्रदिक्रमम् ॥ 15 ॥

बट्टा सर्मवै: पाशैरानायिधे त्वांतिकम् ।

वशगता तु सदा ते सत्यस्य राजन्बलं मय ॥ 16 ॥

O King! Seemy prowess now; I am just now going with my army and I will kill that violent Candikā, maddened with pride, or I will tie Her down by a coil of snakes and bring Her before you; then that Lady, seeing Herself helpless, will become quite submissive to you; there is no doubt in this.

व्यास उवाच

विरूपाधावच: श्रुत्वा दुर्भीयो वाक्यमब्रवीत् ।

सत्यमुक्ते वचो राजन्विरूपाधेशण धीमता ॥ 17 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing these words of Virūpākṣa. Durdhara said: O King! Virūpākṣa is very intelligent; what he has said just now is all reasonable and true.

मापसी घचनं रूक्षण श्रोतल्यं धीमता रव्या ।

कामातुरैया सुदृती लक्ष्यतेउ्यनुमानतः ॥ 18 ॥

O King! You are intelligent; hear my words full of truth also. As far as I think, I consider that woman with beautiful teeth as passionate.

भवत्येवयिता कामं नायिका रूपर्पति ।

भीषयिता वराहात् तां वशे कर्णैयच्छति ॥ 19 ॥

For that woman of broad hips has expressed a desire to bring you under control by making you fearful; the mistresses, proud of their beauty generally use such words when they become passionate.

हावोर्ध मानिनितां वे ते वेति रसवितान: ।

वक्रोत्केश कामिन्या: प्रियं प्रत पशवाणम् ॥ 20 ॥

When they behave in this way, people call these amorous gestures. These crooked words of mistresses are the chief causes in attracting dear persons unto them.

वेति को3पि नरः कामं कामशास्त्रविध्वणः ।

यदुर्फे नाम बालीस्वां वधिष्ये रणामूर्पिति ॥ 21 ॥

Those who are skilled in the art of love affair, some of them can know these things thoroughly well. O King! That woman has said, "I will pierce and kill you by arrows, face to face, in the battlefield."

हैतुणर्भिर्यं वाययं जातव्यं हेतुवितपेः ।

बाणासु पानीनीयं वे कटाङ्गा एव विश्रुतः ॥ 22 ॥

The sense of this is different. The wise persons that are clever and experienced in the art of finding out the cause, declare that the above sentence is pregnant with deep and esoteric meaning.

पुर्णाजलियायाश्रान्ये व्यंयाति वचनाति च ।

का शफिन्तन्यबाणांां प्रेणे लविय पार्थिव ॥ 23 ॥

You can easily see that the handsome women have no other arrows with them; their side-glances are their arrows. And their words carry their hidden

Book V Chapter XI

meanings, and, expressing their desires, are their flowers.

तातुशीना न सा शफित्बंड्वविष्णुराविष्यु ।

ययोक्ते नेत्रबाणीस्वां हनिषेय मन्द पार्थिव्यम ॥ 24 ॥

O King! Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa even have no powers to shoot arrows at you; how can, then, that helpless woman, who appears so passionate, dart real arrows at you? O King! That lady said: "O Stupid! I will kill your King by my arrow-like eye-sight.

विरपरितं परित्ञतं तेनारसिवहा किल ।

पतार्थिच्यापि श्याच्यां रणमयां पत्ति तब ॥ 25 ॥

विपरिततितकीआभाषणं जेमेवत तत् ।

"But the messenger was wanting in that power to appreciate; so he, no doubt, understood her words in their contrary sense." The saying of that lady "I will lay your lord in the death-bed in the battlefields" is to be taken in the light of inverted sexual intercourse, where woman is above the man.

कीचेय विमाताणं यतुकं कचनं तथा ॥ 26 ॥

वीर्य प्राण इति प्रोकं तद्धिहीनं न चान्यथा ।

Her utterance “I will take away the vitality (life) of your lord is also significant.” The semen virile is known as the vitality (life). Therefore the above expression means that she will make you devoid of your virility. There can be no other meaning.

वंयायधिखेन वावकेन वरवत्यनाम गृध ॥ 27 ॥

तदे विचाराते जेयं रसप्राथविशक्षणैः ।

O King! Those women that are excellent shew by too much of their covert expressions (inuedos) that they select and like very much their beloved. The experts only in these amorous affairs will be able to appreciate these things.

इति जाता महाराज कतव्य रससंयुतम् ॥ 28 ॥

सामदानवृदं तथा नान्योपायोरिति घृपते ।

Knowing thus, dealings ought to be made with Her so that the harmony in amorous sentiments be not broken. O King! Sāma (conciliation) and

Dāna (gifts) are the two means to be adopted; there is no other way.

रुहा या गविला वासि यशमा मानिनी भवेत् ॥ 29 ॥

तादूर्शीपूरेवावैर्येनाविष्ये त्वान्तिकम् ।

किं बढ़ूक्तेन मे राजकर्ताया यशपार्तिनी ॥ 30 ॥

गत्वा मवाउघुनैवयं किंककीय सदैव ते ।

By these two, that Lady, whether she be proud or angry, is sure to be brought under control; I will go not and bring Her before you by such sweet words. O king! What is the use of my talking too much? I will make Her submissive to you like a slave girl.

व्यास उवाच

इर्थे निशम्य तुढालयं तास्तस्त्वविश्वण: ॥ 31 ॥

उवाच चवनं राजक्षिगामय मयोदितम् ।

हेतुपद्वर्मसहितं रसयुक्ते नवान्यितम् ॥ 32 ॥

नैषा कामातुरा बाला नानुर्जक विश्वक्षण ।

व्यंभाविन नैव वाक्यानि त्योक्तानि तु मान्द ॥ 33 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing those words of Durdhara, the Dānava Tāmra, who was very experienced in finding out the real nature, said: 'I am telling you what is sanctioned by virtue and is at the same time full of sweet amorous feelings pregnant with deep meanings. "O Giver of honour! This intelligent woman is not at all passionate nor devoted to you; nor has that woman used any covert expressions to you."

चित्रमत्र महावाहो यदेका वरर्गिनी ।

निरलाव्बा समायाति चित्रकरा मनोहरा ॥ 34 ॥

“O Great Hero! This is strange indeed that a Lady, beautiful, handsome, and of strange feature, at the same time alone and helpless, has come here to fight.

अशदारभुजा नारी न शुता न च वीक्षिता ।

केनापि विश्र लोकेषु पराक्रमवतीं शृणा ॥ 35 ॥

आयुधान्यपि तावर्ते घृतानि बलवित्ति च ।

विपरीतिंमदं मन्ये सर्वं कालकृतं नृप ॥ 36 ॥

A good-looking woman, powerful, and having eighteen hands is never heard of, nor ever seen by me in these three worlds. She is holding in each

Šrimaddevibhagavatam

of Her hands powerful weapons. O king! All these seem to be the contrary actions of Time.

स्वपानि वुर्निमितानि मग रूषानि वे निशि ।

तेन जाताम्यहं नृते वैशसं समुपगानम् ॥ 37 ॥

O King! I saw ominous dreams during the night; and I conclude, therefore, that great dangers are over our heads.

कृष्णावरधरा नारी रूटती च गृहांगे ।

दृष्टवा स्वपेयुष:काले विंतितल्यस्तदायः ॥ 38 ॥

Early in the morning twilight, I saw in my dream that a woman, wearing a black raiment, was weeping in the inner courtyard; that some inauspicious events are forthcoming can be easily judged from the above.

विकृता: पक्षिणो राजी रोकवन्ति गृहे गृहे ।

उरपाता विविधा राजम्पभविति गृहे गृहे ॥ 39 ॥

तेन जानाभरहं नूनं कारणं किकिष्ठदेव हि ।

यत्वां प्रार्थयेत बाला युद्धाय कृतनिश्राय ॥ 40 ॥

O King! The birds were screaming hoarsely in every house and various calamitous events were seen in various houses; at this time that woman, firmly resolved, was challenging you to fight; it, therefore, seems to me that there is something very serious in this matter.

नैवान्त्रित मनुषी नो वा गाधर्वीं न तथायुरी ।

देवै: कृतेय ज्ञात्मा यामाभोहकरी विभो ॥ 4 1 ॥

O Lord! This woman is neither human, nor a Gāntharvī, nor the wife of any Asura. Only to cause delusion to us, she, this wondrous Māyā has been created by the gods.

काततत्वं न कतवेंय मेपित्तमतिपयल्यम् ।

कर्तैवं सर्वथा युद्धं यद्धानं तद्धविषयित् ॥ 4 2 ॥

O King! In no case, weakness is to be resorted; it is wise by all means to fight as best as possible; what is inevitable will come to pass; this is my opinion.

को बेद देवक्तियं शुभं वास्यगुभं तथा ।

अरतल्य घिया दीर्घ स्थानतयं वै: विश्वभौः ॥ 43 ॥

No one is able to unriddle the doings of the Devas, whether they would be auspicious or

inauspicious. Therefore intelligent ones should weigh pros and cons carefully and remain patient and steady.

जीवित मरणं पुंसां दैवधीर्न नराधिप ।

कोर्पि नैवान्यथा कर्तु समर्थं घृतनगरे ॥ 44 ॥

O King! Life or death is at the hands of destiny; Nobody, therefore, can do it otherwise."

गच्छ ताप महाभाग युद्धाय कृतनिश्रयः ।

ताभानय वरगोहां जिल्या धर्मेण मानिनीम् ॥ 45 ॥

Hearing this, Mahisāsura said: "O Highly fortunate Tāmra! Better, then, stand for fight, fully resolved and go that Lady, beautiful, and conquer Her according to rules of justice and bring Her before me.

न भवेद्रागा नारी संग्रामे यदि सा तव ।

हन्तवा नान्यथा कामं माननीया प्रधत्नतः ॥ 46 ॥

"In case She does not come under your control in fight, kill Her; but if She comes round, then shew Her honour; do not kill Her.

वीरस्वमसि सर्वत्र कामगशाखिशापादः ।

येन केनाव्युपायेन जेतक्यो वरवर्शिणी ॥ 47 ॥

O All knowing! You are a great hero and at the same thoroughly conversant with Kāma Śāstra (science of love); therefore conquer that Fair One by any means you can.

त्वरन् वीर महाबाहो सैन्येन महता वृत: ।

तत्र नगला त्वया झेय विचार्यं च पुनः पुनः ॥ 48 ॥

O valiant Tāmra, of mighty prowess! Go then with a mighty force and ponder over again and again and find out Her intention.

किमर्थयाता चेयं तात्यां तिद्धि कारणम् ।

कामात्रा वैरभावाच्च माया कर्येवियातृम् ॥ 49 ॥

Is She prompted by passion or by real inimical feeling or by any other motive? Try to find out whose Māyā is this?

आदौ तक्रिश्रयं कृत्वा जातवयं तिच्चाकीर्भिन् ।

पश्रातुघूं प्रकर्तेल्यं यथायोग्यं यथाबतम् ॥ 50 ॥

Know all these beforehand; then find out the remedy; next fight with Her according to your strength and prowess.

Book V Chapter XI

क्रातरखे न कतिथ्य निद्रेयलं तथा न च ।

याजूर्ग हि मनस्तस्या: कतिथं ताजूर्ण तथा || 51 ||

Weakness should not be shown nor merciless behaviour is to be resorted; you should behave with Her according to the bent of Her mind.

व्यास उवाच

इति तद्धाविं शृत्वा तायः कालवर्ग नतः ।

निर्भात: सैन्यसंयुक्तः प्रणाय्य महिष्चं नृपम् ॥ 52 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Thus hearing the King's words, Tāmra coming as if under the sway of Death, saluted the king Mahiṣa and marched away with his army.

गच्छमार्गे दुरावास्तीशकुनावीश्य दरभान्न ।

विव्यवं च भयं प्राप यमभागप्रदर्शकान् ॥ 53 ॥

That wicked Dānava, who on his way, began to see all the fearful inauspicious signs, indicative of Death, became surprised and was caught with fear.

स पत्ता तां सामालीक्य देवीं सिंशोषी स्थितान् ।

सूद्यमानां सुरै: सर्वे: सर्वायुधविष्णवितान् ॥ 54 ॥

When he arrived at the spot he saw the Devi standing on a lion, while She was decorated with all the weapons and instruments, and all the Devas chanting hymns to Her.

तात्याच विमिता: सन् वाक्यं मधुरया सिता ।

सामभावं समाश्रित्य विनयावन्तः स्थितः ॥ 55 ॥

Tāma, then bowed down before Her with humility and modesty and addressed Her with sweet words, according to the rules of the policy of conciliation.

देवि दैतेवधरः श्रुंगी त्वद्वपुणामोहितः ।

सूष्ठां कोतित महिषस्त्वाणिश्रद्धाया च ॥ 56 ॥

“O Devi! Mahiṣa, the lord of the Daityas, has become enchanted on hearing Your beauty and qualifications and has become desirous to marry You.”

भार्यं कृक विशालास्थि तत्सम्रमरतुर्णे ।

पाति तं प्रायय मृदुर्गिन नन्दने विहराद्धते ॥ 57 ॥

O Beautiful One! You would better be graciously pleased with that conqueror of the Immor-

tals, the Mahisāsura; O Thou of delicate limbs! Make him your husband and enjoy all the exquisite pleasures of the Nandana garden as best as you can.

सर्वागसूनरं देई प्राय सर्वसुखास्यद् ।

सुखं सर्वसेन्या ग्राहं दुःखं हेयमिति स्थिति: ॥ 58 ॥

The end and aim of attaining this human form, beautiful in every respect and the abode of all bliss, is to enjoy, in every way, all the pleasure of human existence and to avoid the sources of all troubles. This is the rule.

करभोक किमर्थे ते गृहीतान्यायुधान्यम् ।

पुष्पकन्दुकीयागते कारा: कमलकौमतः ॥ 59 ॥

O Thou of beautiful thighs like those of the young of an elephant! Your soft and delicate lotus-like hands are fit to play only with nice balls of flowers; why then are You holding in Your hands all the weapons and arrows?

ब्रुचाये विद्यानेपर विधृया किं प्रजोजनम् ।

कटाक्षा विशिष्ठा: सन्ति कि वाणीनैण्यवोनैः ॥ 60 ॥

What is the use of holding ordinary arrows, when those two eyebrows like bows, are existing with You?

संसारे कुःखदं युद्धे न कतकैलं विज्ञानता ।

लोभासक्ता: प्रकृतीत संग्रामं च परस्पत् ॥ 61 ॥

What need have you to take ordinary arrows when you are graced with that piercing eyesights, your arrows.

पृष्येपि न योद्धल्यं किं पुनर्निरिति: शरैः ।

घेदनं निजगगाणां कस्य तज्जायते पुंदे ॥ 62 ॥

War is exceedingly painful in this world; those who know thus ought never to fight. It is only those human beings that are prompted by greed, that fight with each other.

तस्मात्मपरि तर्वयि प्रसादं कतुर्महसि ।

भतरं भज मे नाथं देवदानवपूजितम् ॥ 6 3 ॥

What to speak of those sharpened arrows, one ought not to fight with flowers even; O Devi! You can well say who is that feels pleasure, when one's own body is pierced?

Śrimaddevibhaigavatam

स तेउर वाछित्त सर्व कारित्यति मनोराथ।

तं पुभुमिकी राज: सर्वथा नात्र संपर: ॥ 64 ॥

Therefore, O Delicate One! Gladly you can worship Mahiṣa, the lord of the world and the object of worship of the Devas and Dānavas. Then he will satisfy all your desires. What more to say, you will no doubt be his queen-consort.

वचनं कुक मे देखि प्राययसे सुखमुत्तमम् ।

संग्रामे जयसेंटुः कहं प्राय न संग्रशः ॥ 6 5 ॥

O Devi! If one tries one's best, it is doubtful whether one would be crowned with success; therefore keep my this request; you will surely get all the best pleasures.

ज्ञानासि राजनीति लं यथावदुर्वर्णिनि ।

भूव्र राज्यसुखं पूर्णे वर्षाणामयुतायुतम् ॥ 6 6 ॥

"O Beautiful! You are well acquainted with

all the politics; therefore you better enjoy thoroughly the pleasure of the kingdom for full many years.

पुत्रसे घसिता क्रांत: सोअपि राजा भविष्यिति ।

योजने क्रीष्टिवान्ते वार्विये सुखाग्यस्विं ति 67 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे पक्षमकन्धे

एकावरशोउकायः 11 ११ 11

"And if you marry Mahisa you will have beautiful sons and those sons again will be kings; and enjoying the pleasures of your full grown womanhood, you will no doubt, be happy in your old age."

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Fifth Book on the appearing of the Dānava Tāmsra before the Devi in Śrimaddevibhagāvatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

