[Ch 11 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyasa said: The King Mahisasura, maddened with pride, heard the messenger’s words and called the aged and experienced ministers and said thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- The King Mahiṣāsura, maddened with pride, heard the messenger’s words and called the aged and experienced ministers and said thus :--

[Ch 11 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Ministers! What am I to do now? Better judge you all well, and speak out definitely to my. Is it that this Devi has been created by the Devas like the Maya of Sambarasura and thus has appeared before us?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Ministers! What am I to do now? Better judge you all well, and speak out definitely to me. Is it that this Devī has been created by the Devas like the Māyā of Sambarāsura and thus has appeared before us?

[Ch 11 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You are all dexterous and know where to apply the four means of success; viz., conciliation, gift  or bribery, sowing dissensions, and war, and . therefore you would better tell me which one of the above four, I am to adopt now.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You are all dexterous and know where to apply the four means of success, viz., conciliation, gift or bribery, sowing dissensions, and war; and therefore you would better tell me which one of the above four, I am to adopt now.

[Ch 11 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The ministers said: O King! One should always speak true and at the same time pleasant; the wise ones should then select only those which are beneficial and apply them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The ministers said :-- O King! One should always speak true and at the same time pleasant; the wise ones should then select only those which are beneficial and apply them.

[Ch 11 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! As a medicine, though bitter, cures diseases, so true words, though appearing unpleasant, lead to beneficial results. Those that are simply pleasant, are generally injurious as to their effects.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! As a medicine, though bitter, cures diseases, so true words, though appearing unpleasant, lead to beneficial results. Those that are simply pleasant, are generally injurious as to their effects.

[Ch 11 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the Earth! The bearers and approvers of truth both are very rare; truth speakers also are very difficult to be seen; laudatory sycophancy is found in a great measure in this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the Earth! The bearers and approvers of truth both are very rare; truth speakers also are very difficult to be seen; laudatory sycophancy is found in a great measure in this world.

[Ch 11 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Nobody in the three worlds knows what will be good or what will lead to inauspicious results? How can we then definitely pronounce our judgment in this difficult matter?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Nobody in the three worlds knows what will be good or what will lead to inauspicious results? How can we then definitely pronounce our judgment in this difficult matter?

[Ch 11 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King said: Let each of you say separately, according to his own intellect, what is his opinion; I will hear them all consider for myself.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King said :-- Let each of you say separately, according to his own intellect, what is his opinion; I will hear them all and consider for myself.

[Ch 11 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Clever persons should hear the opinions of several persons, then judge for himself what is the best and then adopt that as what is to be done.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Clever persons should hear the opinions of several persons, then judge for himself what is the best and then adopt that as what is to be done.

[Ch 11 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Hearing his words, the powerful Virūpāka same out foremost of all and began to say pleasant words to the King.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Hearing his words, the powerful Virūpākṣa came out foremost of all and began to say pleasant words to the King.

[Ch 11 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Virūpāka said: O King! Please take for certain, what has been spoken by that ordinary woman, swelled with vanity, as words simply to scare you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Please take for certain, what has been spoken by that ordinary woman, swelled with vanity, as words simply to scare you.

[Ch 11 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The efforts and courage of a woman are known to all; who will be afraid therefore, to hear abusive language from a woman, praising her ownself in matters of warfare?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The efforts and courage of a woman are known to all; who will be afraid therefore, to hear abusive language from a woman, praising her ownself in matters of warfare?

[Ch 11 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! You have conquered the three worlds by your own heroic valour; now if you acknowledge your inferiority, out of fear to a woman, you would be subject to very much disgrace in this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! You have conquered the three worlds by your own heroic valour; now if you acknowledge your inferiority, out of fear to a woman, you would be subject to very much disgrace in this world.

[Ch 11 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O King! I will go alone to fight with Candikā and I will kill Her. You can stay here now without any fear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O King! I will go alone to fight with Caṇḍikā and I will kill Her. You can stay here now without any fear.

[Ch 11 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Seemy prowess now; I am just now going with my army and I will kill that violent Candikā, maddened with pride, or I will tie Her down by a coil of snakes and bring Her before you; then that Lady, seeing Herself helpless, will become quite submissive to you; there is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! See my prowess now; I am just now going with my army and I will kill that violent Caṇḍikā, maddened with pride, or I will tie Her down by a coil of snakes and bring Her before you; then that Lady, seeing Herself helpless, will become quite submissive to you; there is no doubt in this.

[Ch 11 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Hearing these words of Virūpākṣa. Durdhara said: O King! Virūpākṣa is very intelligent; what he has said just now is all reasonable and true.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Hearing these words of Virūpākṣa, Durdhara said :-- O King! Virūpākṣa is very intelligent; what he has said just now is all reasonable and true.

[Ch 11 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! You are intelligent; hear my words full of truth also. As far as I think, I consider that woman with beautiful teeth as passionate.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! You are intelligent; hear my words full of truth also. As far as I think, I consider that woman with beautiful teeth as passionate.

[Ch 11 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► For that woman of broad hips has expressed a desire to bring you under control by making you fearful; the mistresses, proud of their beauty generally use such words when they become passionate.
NEW CORR ENG ──► For that woman of broad hips has expressed a desire to bring you under control by making you fearful; the mistresses, proud of their beauty generally use such words when they become passionate.

[Ch 11 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When they behave in this way, people call these amorous gestures. These crooked words of mistresses are the chief causes in attracting dear persons unto them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When they behave in this way, people call these amorous gestures. These crooked words of mistresses are the chief causes in attracting dear persons unto them.

[Ch 11 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who are skilled in the art of love affair, some of them can know these things thoroughly well. O King! That woman has said, "I will pierce and kill you by arrows, face to face, in the battlefield."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who are skilled in the art of love affair, some of them can know these things thoroughly well. O King! That woman has said, “I will pierce and kill you by arrows, face to face, in the battlefield.”

[Ch 11 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The sense of this is different. The wise persons that are clever and experienced in the art of finding out the cause, declare that the above sentence is pregnant with deep and esoteric meaning.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The sense of this is different. The wise persons that are clever and experienced in the art of finding out the cause, declare that the above sentence is pregnant with deep and esoteric meaning.

[Ch 11 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You can easily see that the handsome women have no other arrows with them; their side-glances are their arrows. And their words carry their hidden meanings, and, expressing their desires, are their flowers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You can easily see that the handsome women have no other arrows with them; their side-glances are their arrows. And their words carry their hidden meanings, and, expressing their desires, are their flowers.

[Ch 11 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa even have no powers to shoot arrows at you; how can, then, that helpless woman, who appears so passionate, dart real arrows at you? O King! That lady said: "O Stupid! I will kill your King by my arrow-like eye-sight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa even have no powers to shoot arrows at you; how can, then, that helpless woman, who appears so passionate, dart real arrows at you? O King! That lady said :-- “O Stupid! I will kill your King by my arrow-like eye-sight.”

[Ch 11 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "But the messenger was wanting in that power to appreciate; so he, no doubt, understood her words in their contrary sense." The saying of that lady "I will lay your lord in the death-bed in the battlefields" is to be taken in the light of inverted sexual intercourse, where woman is above the man.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But the messenger was wanting in that power to appreciate; so he, no doubt, understood her words in their contrary sense. The saying of that lady, “I will lay your lord in the death-bed in the battle-field” is to be taken in the light of inverted sexual intercourse, where woman is above the man.

[Ch 11 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her utterance “I will take away the vitality (life) of your lord is also significant.” The semen virile is known as the vitality (life). Therefore the above expression means that she will make you devoid of your virility. There can be no other meaning.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her utterance, “I will take away the vitality (life) of your lord” is also significant. The semen virile is known as the vitality (life). Therefore the above expression means that she will make you devoid of your virility. There can be no other meaning.

[Ch 11 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Those women that are excellent shew by too much of their covert expressions (inuedos) that they select and like very much their beloved. The experts only in these amorous affairs will be able to appreciate these things.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Those women that are excellent shew by too much of their covert expressions (innuendos) that they select and like very much their beloved. The experts only in these amorous affairs will be able to appreciate these things.

[Ch 11 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Knowing thus, dealings ought to be made with Her so that the harmony in amorous sentiments be not broken. O King! Sāma (conciliation) and Dāna (gifts) are the two means to be adopted; there is no other way.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Knowing thus, dealings ought to be made with Her so that the harmony in amorous sentiments be not broken. O King! Sāma (conciliation) and Dāna (gifts) are the two means to be adopted; there is no other way.

[Ch 11 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► By these two, that Lady, whether she be proud or angry, is sure to be brought under control; I will go not and bring Her before you by such sweet words. O king! What is the use of my talking too much? I will make Her submissive to you like a slave girl.
NEW CORR ENG ──► By these two, that Lady, whether she be proud or angry, is sure to have brought under control; I will go now and bring Her before you by such sweet words. O King! What is the use of my talking too much? I will make Her submissive to you like a slave girl.

[Ch 11 Verse 31-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Hearing those words of Durdhara, the Dānava Tāmra, who was very experienced in finding out the real nature, said: 'I am telling you what is sanctioned by virtue and is at the same time full of sweet amorous feelings pregnant with deep meanings. "O Giver of honour! This intelligent woman is not at all passionate nor devoted to you; nor has that woman used any covert expressions to you."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Hearing those words of Durdhara, the Dānava Tāmra, who was very experienced in finding out the real nature, said :-- “I am telling you what is sanctioned by virtue and is at the same time full of sweet amorous feelings, pregnant with deep meanings. Kindly hear; O Giver of honour! This intelligent woman is not at all passionate nor devoted to you; nor has that woman used any covert expressions to you.

[Ch 11 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Great Hero! This is strange indeed that a Lady, beautiful, handsome, and of strange feature, at the same time alone and helpless, has come here to fight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Great Hero! This is strange indeed that a Lady, beautiful, handsome, and of strange features, at the same time alone and helpless, has come here to fight.

[Ch 11 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► A good-looking woman, powerful, and having eighteen hands is never heard of, nor ever seen by me in these three worlds. She is holding in each of Her hands powerful weapons. O king! All these seem to be the contrary actions of Time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► A good-looking woman, powerful, and having eighteen hands is never heard of, nor ever seen by me in these three worlds. She is holding in each of Her hands powerful weapons. O king! All these seem to be the contrary actions of Time.

[Ch 11 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! I saw ominous dreams during the night; and I conclude, therefore, that great dangers are over our heads.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! I saw ominous dreams during the night; and I conclude, therefore, that great dangers are over our heads.

[Ch 11 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Early in the morning twilight, I saw in my dream that a woman, wearing a black raiment, was weeping in the inner courtyard; that some inauspicious events are forthcoming can be easily judged from the above.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Early in the morning twilight, I saw in my dream that a woman, wearing a black raiment, was weeping in the inner courtyard; that some inauspicious events are forthcoming can be easily judged from the above.

[Ch 11 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The birds were screaming hoarsely in every house and various calamitous events were seen in various houses; at this time that woman, firmly resolved, was challenging you to fight; it, therefore, seems to me that there is something very serious in this matter.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The birds were screaming hoarsely in every house and various calamitous events were seen in various houses; at this time that woman, firmly resolved, was challenging you to fight; it, therefore seems to me that there is something very serious in this matter.

[Ch 11 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord! This woman is neither human, nor a Gāntharvī, nor the wife of any Asura. Only to cause delusion to us, she, this wondrous Māyā has been created by the gods.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord! This woman is neither human, nor a Gandharvī, nor the wife of any Asura. Only to cause delusion to us, she, this wondrous Māyā has been created by the gods.

[Ch 11 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! In no case, weakness is to be resorted; it is wise by all means to fight as best as possible; what is inevitable will come to pass; this is my opinion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! In no case, weakness is to be resorted; it is wise by all means to fight as best as possible; what is inevitable will come to pass; this is my opinion.

[Ch 11 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No one is able to unriddle the doings of the Devas, whether they would be auspicious or inauspicious. Therefore intelligent ones should weigh pros and cons carefully and remain patient and steady.
NEW CORR ENG ──► No one is able to unriddle the doings of the Devas, whether they would be auspicious or inauspicious. Therefore intelligent ones should weigh pros and cons carefully and remain patient and steady.

[Ch 11 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Life or death is at the hands of destiny; Nobody, therefore, can do it otherwise."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Life or death is at the hands of Destiny; Nobody, therefore, can do it otherwise.”

[Ch 11 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, Mahisāsura said: "O Highly fortunate Tāmra! Better, then, stand for fight, fully resolved and go that Lady, beautiful, and conquer Her according to rules of justice and bring Her before me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, Mahiṣāsura said :-- “O Highly fortunate Tāmra! Better, then, stand for fight, fully resolved and go to that Lady, beautiful, and conquer Her according to rules of justice and bring Her before me.

[Ch 11 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "In case She does not come under your control in fight, kill Her; but if She comes round, then shew Her honour; do not kill Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In case She does not come under your control in fight, kill Her; but if She comes round, then show Her honour; do not kill Her.

[Ch 11 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O All knowing! You are a great hero and at the same thoroughly conversant with Kāma Śāstra (science of love); therefore conquer that Fair One by any means you can.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O All-knowing! You are a great hero and at the same thoroughly conversant with Kāma Śāstra (science of love); therefore conquer that Fair One by any means you can.

[Ch 11 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O valiant Tāmra, of mighty prowess! Go then with a mighty force and ponder over again and again and find out Her intention.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O valiant Tāmra, of mighty prowess! Go then with a mighty force and ponder over again and again and find out Her intention.

[Ch 11 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Is She prompted by passion or by real inimical feeling or by any other motive? Try to find out whose Māyā is this?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Is She prompted by passion or by real inimical feeling or by any other motive? Try to find out whose Māyā is this?

[Ch 11 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Know all these beforehand; then find out the remedy; next fight with Her according to your strength and prowess.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Know all these beforehand; then find out the remedy; next fight with Her according to your strength and prowess.

[Ch 11 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Weakness should not be shown nor merciless behaviour is to be resorted; you should behave with Her according to the bent of Her mind.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Weakness should not be shown nor merciless behaviour is to be resorted; you should behave with Her according to the bent of Her mind.”

[Ch 11 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! Thus hearing the King's words, Tāmra coming as if under the sway of Death, saluted the king Mahiṣa and marched away with his army.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! Thus hearing the King’s words, Tāmra coming as if under the sway of Death, saluted the king Mahiṣa and marched away with his army.

[Ch 11 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That wicked Dānava, who on his way, began to see all the fearful inauspicious signs, indicative of Death, became surprised and was caught with fear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That wicked Dānava, who, on his way, began to see all the fearful inauspicious signs, indicative of Death, became surprised and was caught with fear.

[Ch 11 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When he arrived at the spot he saw the Devi standing on a lion, while She was decorated with all the weapons and instruments, and all the Devas chanting hymns to Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When he arrived at the spot, he saw the Devī standing on a lion, while She was decorated with all the weapons and instruments, and all the Devas were chanting hymns to Her.

[Ch 11 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Tāma, then bowed down before Her with humility and modesty and addressed Her with sweet words, according to the rules of the policy of conciliation.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Tāmra, then bowed down before Her with humility and modesty and addressed Her with sweet words, according to the rules of the policy of conciliation.

[Ch 11 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Devi! Mahiṣa, the lord of the Daityas, has become enchanted on hearing Your beauty and qualifications and has become desirous to marry You.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Devī! Mahiṣa, the lord of the Daityas, has become enchanted on hearing Your beauty and qualifications and has become desirous to marry You.

[Ch 11 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Beautiful One! You would better be graciously pleased with that conqueror of the Immor- tals, the Mahisāsura; O Thou of delicate limbs! Make him your husband and enjoy all the exquisite pleasures of the Nandana garden as best as you can.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Beautiful One! You would better be graciously pleased with that conqueror of the Immortals, the Mahiṣāsura; O Thou of delicate limbs! Make him your husband and enjoy all the exquisite pleasures of the Nandana garden as best as you can.

[Ch 11 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The end and aim of attaining this human form, beautiful in every respect and the abode of all bliss, is to enjoy, in every way, all the pleasure of human existence and to avoid the sources of all troubles. This is the rule.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The end and aim of attaining this human form, beautiful in every respect and the abode of all bliss, is to enjoy, in every way, all the pleasures of human existence and to avoid the sources of all troubles. This is the rule.

[Ch 11 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Thou of beautiful thighs like those of the young of an elephant! Your soft and delicate lotus-like hands are fit to play only with nice balls of flowers; why then are You holding in Your hands all the weapons and arrows?
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Thou of beautiful thighs like those of the young of an elephant! Your soft and delicate lotus-like hands are fit to play only with nice balls of flowers; why then are You holding in Your hands all the weapons and arrows?

[Ch 11 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What is the use of holding ordinary arrows, when those two eyebrows like bows, are existing with You?
NEW CORR ENG ──► What is the use of holding ordinary arrows, when those two eye-brows like bows, are existing with You?

[Ch 11 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What need have you to take ordinary arrows when you are graced with that piercing eyesights, your arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What need have you to take ordinary arrows when you are graced with those piercing eye sights, your arrows.

[Ch 11 Verse 62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► War is exceedingly painful in this world; those who know thus ought never to fight. It is only those human beings that are prompted by greed, that fight with each other.
NEW CORR ENG ──► war is exceedingly painful in this world; those who know thus ought never to fight. It is only those human beings that are prompted by greed that fight with each other.

[Ch 11 Verse 63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What to speak of those sharpened arrows, one ought not to fight with flowers even; O Devi! You can well say who is that feels pleasure, when one's own body is pierced? Śrimaddevibhaigavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► What to speak of those sharpened arrows, one ought not to fight with flowers even; O Devī! You can well say who is it that feels pleasure, when one’s own body is pierced?

[Ch 11 Verse 64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Delicate One! Gladly you can worship Mahiṣa, the lord of the world and the object of worship of the Devas and Dānavas. Then he will satisfy all your desires. What more to say, you will no doubt be his queen-consort.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Delicate One! Gladly you can worship Mahiṣa, the lord of the world and the object of worship of the Devas and Dānavas. Then he will satisfy all your desires. What more to say, you will no doubt be his queen-consort.

[Ch 11 Verse 65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devi! If one tries one's best, it is doubtful whether one would be crowned with success; therefore keep my this request; you will surely get all the best pleasures.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devī! If one tries one’s best, it is doubtful whether one would be crowned with success; therefore keep my this request; you will surely get all the best pleasures.

[Ch 11 Verse 66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O Beautiful! You are well acquainted with all the politics; therefore you better enjoy thoroughly the pleasure of the kingdom for full many years.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Beautiful! You are well acquainted with all the politics; therefore you better enjoy thoroughly the pleasures of the kingdom for full many years.

[Ch 11 Verse 67-111111]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "And if you marry Mahisa you will have beautiful sons and those sons again will be kings; and enjoying the pleasures of your full grown womanhood, you will no doubt, be happy in your old age." Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Fifth Book on the appearing of the Dānava Tāmsra before the Devi in Śrimaddevibhagāvatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And if you marry Mahiṣa you will have beautiful sons and those sons again will be kings; and enjoying the pleasures of your full grown womanhood, you will no doubt, be happy in your old age.” Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Fifth Book on the appearing of the Dānava Tāmra before the Devī in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
