CHAPTER XXVII

On Nārada's Marriage

नारद उवाच

तत्पूर्यां वचनं श्रुच्या राजा धार्मीमुखाततः ।

भार्यां प्रीवाच कैकैकीं समीपरथ्यां सुलोचनाम् ॥ १ ॥

राजोबाच

यदुक्ते वचनं कानते धाय्या तत्पुं त्वया श्रुतम् ।

दृतोर्ज नारदः कामं मुनिवर्नारवक्रवभाक् ॥ २ ॥

Nārada said: On hearing these words of her daughter from her nurse, the King addressed the queen Kaikeyī, of lovely eyes, standing close by, thus: “Have you heard what the nurse has said? Damayantī has mentally chosen the monkey-faced Nārada as her husband.

किसिदं दितितं पुर्या बुद्धिद्वीन विवेष्टितम् ।

कथमस्मै मया देरा कन्या हरिमुखाय सा ॥ ३ ॥

व्यासौ चिक्षुः कुरूपः कव दायवनी मामताया ।

विपरीतिमंद कार्य न विधेयं कदाचन ॥ ४ ॥

What has she thought? Whatever it be, it is no doubt, an act of great foolishness. His face is monkey-like; how can I betroth my daughter to him? Where is an ugly beggar Nārada? And where is my daughter Damayanti? The marriage between them is quite unjust; never it should take place.

तामेकाने सुकेशाने निवारय हदासुतान् ।

युक्ना युनिरतां मुभ्यां शास्त्रवृद्धानुसारया ॥ 5 ॥

O Beautiful One of good hairs! Better call her before you in private and shew her reasons approved of the Śāstras and of the aged persons and make her desist from such a rash course."

इति भनुरंचः शुत्वा जननी तामधावयित् ।

वन ते रूपं मुनि: वक्तावी नावतस्यो5धन: पुनः ॥६ ॥

कर्मे गोहमवालाओंसि चिशुक्रे चतुग पुनः ।

On hearing her husband's words, the mother of Damayanti called her in private and said: "O Child! Where is your this beautiful face? And where is the monkey-like face of Nārada? You are smart

and quick; how have you been, then, deluded by such a Moha?

लताकोमलदोहा त्वं भयस्कक्षतनुस्थयम् ॥ 7 ॥

वातां वानरवक्रेण कर्थं युक्ता तत्वानघे ।

का प्रीति: कुलिते पुंस भविष्यति शृचिभिते ॥ 8 ॥

O Child! You are the daughter of a king! Your body is gentle like a creeper. And Nārada always besmears his body with ashes; so his body is very rough.

वरस्ते राजपुओंस्तु मा कुरू त्वं घावा हुवम् ।

चिता ते दुःख्यामोति श्रुता धार्मीयुखाद्धचः ॥ 9 ॥

O Spotless One! How will you change your words with him? Why do you shew your attachment to an ugly person? What pleasure do you feel thereby?

लनां बबूलचुळेण कोमालां मालतीलाताम ।

दूर्वा कथम मनः खेदं चतुरस्य न पच्छति ॥ 10 ॥

You would be married to a beautiful prince; never follow this rash course; your father is very sorry to hear these from your nurse.

दारसेंकाय ताम्बुतीदालानि कोमालानि कः ।

ददाति भ्रभणाधय मूर्खोंपि धरणीतले ॥ 11 ॥

O One of soft body! Judge this yourself, what intelligent man is there that is not sorry at the soft Málatí creeper entwining a thorny tree? Even a stupid silly man would never feed a camel, that likes thorns, with soft betel-leaves.

बीक्ष्य त्वां कारसंलनां नारदस्य समीपतः ।

विवाहे वर्तमाने तु क्य चेते न द्वहिति ॥ १२ ॥

कुमुळेउ समं वातां न रचिं जनयन्ततः ।

आमरणातु कंब कालाः शपित्वल्यलाजमुना ॥ 13 ॥

When your marriage time arrives, say yourself, who will not be sorry to see you going to Nārada and embracing him by his arms! Nobody likes to speak with an ugly-faced one; how will you be able to spend your time with him till you death!"

<table><tr><td>नारद उवाच</td></tr><tr><td>इति मातुर्विः: शुत्वा दयवन्ती भुशातुगा ।</td></tr><tr><td>मार्गे प्राह तन्त्र्वीं माय सा कृतनिद्धया ॥ 14 ॥</td></tr></table>

Nārada said: On hearing the mother's words, the gentle Damayanti, with her mind intently fixed on me, spoke to her mother, very much depressed in her spirits.

किं मुखेन च रूपेण मूर्दीय च धनेन किम ।

किं राज्येनाविदध्यस्य रसमागचिदोउस्य च ॥ 15 ॥

“O Mother! What good face and beautiful form will avail, who is not in the path of love and who is quite ignorant of amorous feelings and sentiments! हरिण्योउपि वने ध्या या नोदेन विमोहिताः ।

मात: प्राणान्यच्छिन विध्यूर्षानुपाशुवि ॥ 16 ॥

And what will the wealth and kingdoms of that unskilled illiterate person avail! The deer, that roam in the forest, getting enchanted by the Nāda (sound) Rasa, give up their lives even to the singers. So they are fortunate.

नात्यो वैनि यां विधां मातः सत्यवशतिकाम् ।

तृतीयः कोर्जीय नो वेह ऐशिवान्यः पुण्याक्लि ॥ 17 ॥

But fie to the persons who are illiterate and void of feelings of love! O Mother! Nārada Rsi is well conversant with the science of music with seven Svaras. No other man save Mahā Deva knows this.

भूद्रीय सह संबासो मरणं तल्बणे क्षणे ।

रूपवास्यनवांसत्याचे गुणतीने नर: सदा ॥ 18 ॥

Living with an illiterate person is courting death at every moment. One devoid of qualifications should be always avoided, by all means, though he be wealthy and of a beautiful form.

धिकृदीकी मूर्ख भृपाले वृथा गर्वसम्पन्नित ।

गुणजे भिशुके श्रेष्ठा बचनात्सुखदायिनी ॥ १९ ॥

Fie on the friendship with kings that are illiterate and puffed up with vain arrogance! A well-qualified man, be he even a beggar, is fare better to be cultivated friendship with. Leaving other circumstances out of account, even to change words with such a well qualified man, makes one highly delighted.

स्वत्जो प्राभवित्कामं भूर्भान्जानभेदभाव् ।

दुर्लंभः पुरुषश्राद्धासजो दुर्बतोर्जीय चै ॥ २० ॥

The man is very rare in this world, though he be weak, if he be well versed in the science of music and if he knows Svara, Grāma, Mūrchanā and be skilled in eight sentiments of love.

Note: Svara-Šadaja, Rṣabha, Gāndhāra, Madhyama, Pañcama, Dhaviata and Nīṣada. Grāma□the gradual increase and decrease in Svaras. Mūrchanā—the rising of sounds, an intonation; a duly regulated rise and fall of sounds conducting the air and the harmony through the keys in a pleasing manner; changing the key or passing from one key to another; modulation; melody.

यथा न्याति कैतलासं गड़ा चैव सरस्वती ।

तथा न्याति कैतलासं स्वराजानविशारादः ॥ 21 ॥

The man versed in the knowledge of Svara leads one to the Heaven of Kailāśa as the rivers Ganges and Sarasvatī by their own merits lead one to Kailāśa.

स्वरामाने तु यो बेद से द्वेो मानुषोर्षि सन् ।

सतधेदे न यो बेद से यजु सुराखधि ॥ 22 ॥

There is not the least doubt in this. He is a Deva in his human body who knows the Svara measure; and he who does not know the Svara and its seven grades is a beast though he has a human form—he who finds no delight when he hears the tune regulated by Mūrchanā and the seven Svaras.

मूर्भानातामागतं तु शुवा मोदं न याति यः ।

स पशु: सर्वेधा जेयो हरिणा: पशुचो न हि ॥ 23 ॥

Do not consider the deer as beasts for they get enchanted when they hear the musical notes. The venomous snakes, though they have no ears, get delighted to hear the enchanting Svara Nāda by their eyes.

वरं विषधरः सर्वः शुचा नादं मनोहर्म् ।

अश्रोजोरपि मूदे याति चिक्सकाण्ड्धि मानवान् ॥ 24 ॥

They even are to be praised; but fie on those human beings who have ears but who do not find any delight when they hear the Nāda!

बालोर्धि सुस्वयं गेयं श्रुत्वा मुदितमानसः ।

Book VI Chapter XXVII

जायते किन्तु ते वृद्धा न जानन्ति धिनस्तु तान् ॥ 2 5 ॥

The little children feel intense pleasure to hear the music, but fie, on those elders who are void of this musical sentiments!

विता में किं न जानाति नारदस्य गुणान्बृद्न ।

डितीय: सामगो नासि तिथु लोकेषु ततस्म: ॥ 26 ॥

Does not my father know that Nārada Rsi is ornamented with many qualifications? Who is there in the three worlds like him in singing the Sāma songs!

तस्मादसौ मया नूनं वृत: पूर्वं समागमात् ।

पशुच्छापवशाज्जातो वानारस्यो युणाकर: ॥ 27 ॥

For this very reason, indeed! I have already selected him as my husband; afterwards, due to a curse, the Muni, the ocean of qualifications, got his face changed into that of a monkey. The Kinnaras, skilled in the science of music, have their faces horse-like; but are they not dear to all?

किंसरा न प्रिया: कस्य भर्वित तुरागना: ।

गानविद्धासमायुक्ता: किं मुखेने वरेण है ॥ 28 ॥

चितरं बृहि ये मातर्कृतीयं मुनिसनमः ।

तस्माचसप्राङ्ट लयक्वा देवैत तस्मै च मां मुता ॥ 29 ॥

What business have they to get good faces? They enchant the Devas even by their sweet ravishing songs. O Mother! Kindly tell my father I have already chosen Nārada as my husband. Therefore let him deliver me to his hands, without making any further requests in this matter."

नारद जवाच

इति पुत्रा: वच श्रुत्वा राजी रोजे न्यवेदयत् ।

आग्रहं सुदरी ज्ञाला सुताया नारदे मुने । ३० ॥

विवाहं कुरु राजेन्द्र दयवन्त्या: शुभे दिवे ।

मुनिना स च सर्वजी वृत्तोउसी मनसाउनया ॥ ३१ ॥

Nārada said: On hearing the words of her daughter Damayanti, that unblamable pure queen knowing her attachment deep towards me, spoke to the King thus: "O King! Now celebrate in an auspicious day and on an auspicious moment the auspicious marriage of Damayanti; the daughter

has said that she has already selected Nārada as her bridegroom and it cannot be otherwise."

नारद जवाच

इति संचोदिति राज्या संजय पुरिवधीपति: ।

चकार विधित्यवस्त्वं विधिं वेबाहिकं ततः ॥ 32 ॥

Thus prompted by the queen, the King Sañjaya performed the marriage ceremony of her daughter in accordance with due rites and customs and in an exceedingly becoming manner.

एवं दारगई कृत्वा वानरास्यः परंतप ।

स्वितस्तत्रैव मनसा दहामानेन चान्यम् ॥ 33 ॥

O Rsj! Thus I entered into the married life and remained there though my heart constantly burned with the thought of my monkey-face.

यद्यान्छद्धज्ञानुसं सेवार्यं मम सत्रिषी ।

अभयं दुखसन्तादस्ताद३हं वानानानः ॥ 34 ॥

दयमन्ती तु मां बीक्ष्य प्रकृललवदानीबुजा ।

शाकं वानरवकल्याज चकार कवाचन ॥ 35 ॥

Whenever the princess used to come to me for my service, I used to get tormented with the remembrance of my monkey-face; but her face beamed with gladness whenever she saw me; never she became sorry nor dejected, even for a moment, to see my face monkey-like.' Thus time passed on.

एवं गच्छति काले तु सहसा पर्बती सुविः ।

कुर्वेस्तीधान्येकानि उर्दुं मा समुपगातः ॥ 36 ॥

मयातिमानिनः प्रेणा पूर्तक्रष्ण यवाबिधि ।

आसीन आसने दिव्ये वीक्ष्य मां कु:क्षितो छभूत् ॥ 37 ॥

One day the Muni Parvata suddenly came there, after making his sojourn to many places of pilgrimages. I showed him a great respect and gladly loved him and greeted him duly; he got himself seated in an excellent Asana and became very sorry to see me. I am his uncle and have entered into a married life; my face has become monkey like.

कृतदारं वानरास्यं दीनं द्वितानुं घृभग् ।

दयावाम्पायुचेदं पर्वती मातुलं कृपग् ॥ 38 ॥

Therefore I am very much depressed in spirits and worried with the sad thought and has become lean and thin.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

मया नारद कोपान्चें शप्तोउसि मुनिसत्तम ।

निष्कृति तस्य शापस्य क्रोपेमद्ध निशममा ॥ 39 ॥

Seeing this he was over whelmed with pity. He then said: "O Muni! The curse that I cast on you before out of my anger, I now withdraw.

भव तं चाफछदनो मम पुष्पेन नारत ।

दूद्वा रावसुतां चिते कृमा जाता माभुना ॥ 40 ॥

“Hear. O Maharṣi! Let your face be by my merits, again as good as it was before; I now feel pity for the daughter of the King.”

नारद उवाच

मथाउपि प्रवर्ण चित्रं कृत्वा शुवाउस्य भाषितम् ।

अनुप्रहः कृतः सघतस्तस्य शापस्य तत्बणात् ॥ 41 ॥

भाषीमेव तवायस्तु गमनं सुरस्वयिन ।

शापस्यानुग्रहः कामं कृतोउयं पर्वताभुना ॥ 42 ॥

Hearing thus, my heart also became gentle and instantly with a view to free him of my curse, I said: "Let your journey to the Heavens be re-established. I now make this special favour on you as regards my curse on you before."

नारद उवाच

जातोड़ं चाक्वद्वी वचनात्तस्य यप्यतः ।

राजपूर्णी तुं संतुहा मातरं प्राह सत्वम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

मातले सुयुखी जातो जामाता च महावृत्ति: ।

वचनावलवल्याह युक्तशापो युनेरपृत् ॥ 4 4 ॥

O Dvaipāyana! At his word, before our sight, my face became exceedingly handsome as it was before. The princess Damayanti became very glad and instantly she went to the mother and said: "O Mother! At the words of Parvata, the great Muni, the curse of your son-in-law has been removed and his face his become handsome as before and the lustre of his body has also increased.

तच्छुला वचनं राश्या कथितं ततृ राजनि ।

ययौ उहुं मुनि तन संवयः प्रीतिमांस्तदा ॥ 45 ॥

धनं समार्थितं राजा सन्तुँरेन तदा महत ।

महं च पागिजीयाय पारिहर्द महात्मना ॥ 46 ॥

The queen was very much filled with ecstasy and joy at Damayanti's words and went hurriedly and informed the King. The King Sañjaya gladly

went at once to see the Muni. The great King became very glad and gave lots of wealth, gems and jewels to me and my nephew Parvata as a dowry.

एत्ते सर्वमार्थात यत्नं यत्पुरातनम् ।

मायाया बलमाहान्यं ह्यनुभृतं यथा मया ॥ 47 ॥

O Dvaipāyana! Thus I have described to you my old story how I felt the strong influence of Māyā.

संसारोप्रिम्नमहाभाग मायागुणकृतेंउन्ते ।

तनुष्येसुखी नासिन न भूतो न घधिष्यति ॥ 48 ॥

O Fortunate One! Owing to the illusory nature of the Gunas, like a magic, no embodied being in this world could have been happy before, or he is happy now or he will be happy hereafter.

कामकोधी तथा लोभो मतसरो ममता तथा ।

अहंकारो मदः केन जिताः सर्वे महावलाः ॥ 49 ॥

Lust, anger, greed, jealousy, attachment, egoism, and vanity, each one of these is very powerful; nobody is able to conquer these.

सत्वं जलतमहीशे गुणाल्य शुभे किल ।

कारणं प्राणिज्ञां देहसंभवे सर्वेधा मुने ॥ 50 ॥

O Muni! The three Gunas Sattva, Rajas and Tamas are the entire causes of the coming into this bodily existence of every being.

कर्मिश्रित्यमये यास वनेई विष्णाना सह ।

गछ्छान्यविनोदेन सभीभां गमितः क्षणात् ॥ 51 ॥

O Dvaipāyana! Once I was passing with Bhagavān Viṣṇu, laughing and joking, making merriments through a forest, when suddenly I was transformed into a woman.

राजवनील्यापत्रो मायावलियोगेहितः ।

पुत्र: प्रभुता बढ़ोो गेहे तस्य पुरस्य ह ॥ 52 ॥

Next I became the wife of a king enchanted by Māyā, I remained in his house and gave birth to many children.

यास उवाच

संशयोदयं महान्याधो श्रुत्वा ते वचनं किल ।

कर्थ नारील्यमापत्रलं सुने ज्ञानवान्यूगम् ॥ 53 ॥

Vyāsa said: "O Devarsi! A great doubt has now

Book VI Chapter XXVIII

arisen in my mind at your word. O Muni! You are very wise; how then did you get womanhood; how again did you regain your manhood?

कथं च पुरुषो जातो बृहि सर्वमेणैषतः ।

कर्थ पुत्रात्पदाय जाताः कस्य राजो गृहेउज्ञान । ५४ ।।

Who was the king at whose house you stayed and how did you give birth to children; describe fully and satisfy my curiosity.

एतदाखहि चरितं मायावहमहद्धुतम् ।

मोहितं च यथा सर्विमिदं स्थावरर्गेनम् ॥ ५५ ॥

Describe to me, now the nature of Māyā, extremely wonderful, by which this entire universe, moving and non-moving, all are enchanted.

न तृषिमधिमछामि शुर्बंस्तव कथामतम् ।

सर्वीम्थान्योत्चं च सर्वसैर्यवनारानम् ॥ ५६ ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवतो महापुराणे घरेरकन्चे

सत्त्विंशोभ्ययः ॥ 57 ॥

O Muni! Though I have heard your nectar-like words, capable to remove all the doubts, embodying the essence of all the Śāstras, yet I am not fully satiated.

Here ends the Twenty-seventh Chapter of the Sixth Book on the marriage of Nārada and his face getting transformed into that of a monkey in Śrimaddevi-bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

CHADTED VVUIII

Book VI Chapter XXVIII

