CHAPTER XXII

On the Sins

नारद उवाच

कर्मभेदा: कारविधा: सनातनामुने मम ।

श्रोतवं सर्वेधैवेये यातनाग्यापिभूमयः ॥ १ ॥

Nārada said: O Everlasting one! O Muni! Now describe the various actions that lead to these tormenting hells. I like to hear about them in detail.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

यो वै परस्य विश्वानि दारायल्यानि वैव है ।

हृते स हि दुहात्या यमानुचरणोचर: ॥ 2 ॥

कालपाणेन सम्बद्धो याथ्यरितिष्यानकै: ।

तामिस्वानीप नरके पाचयते यातनास्यद ॥ 3 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Devarṣi! He who steals other's sons, wives, and riches, the wicked fellow is taken to Yama by His messengers. Tied down hard and fast by the terrible messengers of Yama, by the Kāla rope (rope of time), he is taken to the Tāmisra hell, the place of many torments.

ताड़नं दूघनं चैव सन्तर्जनमतः परम् ।

यायाः: कुर्वैल्प पाणाङ्गाः: कामलं याति चैव हि ॥ 4

मृच्छीयाति विवशो नारकी पदधूपूत ।

यः पतिं वंचवित्वा तु द्वारदीयुपभूजति ॥ 5 ॥

अन्यतामिश्रवनके पायलते यमकिंकरः ।

पात्यमानोय जन्तुवैद्वनापरवान्यन्ते ॥ 6 ॥

There the Yama's attendants punish him, beat him and threaten him; and he becomes stupefied, and feels himself very weak, distressed and ultimately faints. He who deceives another's husband and enjoys his wives; the Yama's servants drag him down to Andhra Tāmisra hell. There he suffer many amount of pain and suffering. He loses instantly his eyesight and his brain gets upset.

नटृष्टिन्हैरभतिरीभत्येवाविलघकतः ।

वनस्पतिभैल्यानमृतो यद्धूबेवेहि ॥ 7 ॥

तस्माव्यंधात्माविस्तानाना प्रोक्तः पुराततः ।

तृतन्मामाहिति यो भूतत्रोहण केवलम् ॥ 8 ॥

पूणाति प्रत्यर्धे स्वीयं कुटुर्ब्व कार्वर्णपटः।

एतद्विहाय चार्वेर स्वायुषंने पतिद्ध ॥ 9 ॥

His state resembles that of a tree when its trunk is broken. For this reason the ancient sages called this Andha Tāmisra. He who being subject to 'My' and Mine quarrels with others and being very much attached, maintains his family, leaves his families here and goes with his bad tendencies to the Raurava hell, very horrible to all.

रौरेव नाम नरके सर्वसच्चभयावहे ।

इह लोके3पुना ये तु हिंसित जांतवे: पुरा ॥ 10 ॥

त एव कर्तो भूत्वा परत्र पीडवर्धित नम् ।

तस्मात्रीवमिवाहु: पुराणज्ञ मनीविण: ॥ 11 ॥

रूकः सपर्दित्कूरो जंतुन्कः पुरातनैः ।

एवं महारीवाख्यो नरकोी यत्र पुरुषः ॥ 12 ॥

The animals whom he injured and killed before in this world, assume the form of Ruru animal and torment him in the next. For this reason, the intelligent knowers of Purāna, call this Raurava. The ancients says, that Ruru is more cruel and ferocious than snakes. These animals live in that hell; hence it is termed Mahāraurava.

यातनां प्रायमाणे हि यः परं देहसम्भवः ।

कल्यादा नाम हरवर्त कल्ये प्रायातयन्च च ॥ 13 ॥

य उद्य: पुरुषः कृतः यपुर्षिकाणानपि ।

उपरंधयते मुखो याच्यान्तं रोयतयन च ॥ 14 ॥

कुंभीपाके तत्पतैते उपयाँच च नारद ।

यावर्ति यगुरोगमाणि तावद्वर्भसहकम् ॥ 15 ॥

He who torments others, goes to this hell and these Rurus, the flesh-eaters, spring on his body and bite and eat his flesh. he who cooks other animals and birds, that cruel ferocious, thus deluded, is cooked in return on the hot oil in the Kumbhhipāka hell by the Yama Dūtas for thousand years.

वितृविद्रवाहाण्युकलामुसे स नारके ।

अन्यकर्णियां त्वयमाने नारकी विविवेत्ति: ॥ 16 ॥

श्रुतिपयासादुबानोनं-त:गरीरतशा बाहैः ।

आसते शोते चेषते चावितछित च धावति ॥ 17 ॥

Book VIII Chapter XXII

He who quarrels with his Piths and the Brāhmaṇas, is taken by the Yama Dūtas to the Kālasūtra hell and there be burnt by the fire and Sun. There that hellish person, being troubled very much, inside and outside by hunger and thirst, sometimes sits, sometimes sleeps, sometimes walks, and sometimes runs hither and thither.

निजलेवदायाटो वै पाखण्डं चोपयाति च ।

अनापटापि देवर्षे तं पांपं पुरुकं भटा: ॥ १ ८ ॥

असिपत्रवंन नाम रात्के वेग्यन्ति च ।

O Devarsi! He who transgresses the path of the Vedas in times other than those of calamity and danger and follows other paths even to a trifling distance, that sinner is taken by Yamadūtas to Asipatra Kānana and there whipped severely.

काया प्रहरैलवे नारकी तहत्स्तवा ॥ 19 ॥

इतस्तो धायाना उत्तामतिवेति: ।

असिपत्रशिष्टद्यान अन भयर च धारणि: ॥ 20 ॥

संख्याद्यानसर्वांगी हा हृतोरमीति भूख्छतः ।

वेदनां परमां प्रापत: पतलेव पदे पदे ॥ 21 ॥

स्वधार्मुन्ता भूक्ते पाखणदफलमध्यपि: ।

Not being able to bear that, he runs wildly to and fro and is pierced by the sharpedged Asi leaves on both his sides. His whole body being cut asunder, he cries 'Oh! I am killed!' and faints away. Then feeling himself pained very much, he tumbles down at every step. Thus the sinner suffers for violating the path of the Vedas.

यो राजा राजपुर्णो दण्डवेहै त्वधर्मतः ॥ 22 ॥

द्विजे शरीरदर्श च पापीयाग्रारकी च सः ।

नरके सूकमपुं पालते यमकिंकरैः ॥ 23 ॥

विनिष्यावयवको बलविद्धसल्धेबुत् ।

The King or that royal personage who gives orders of punishment, not approved by Dharma, and hurts or punishes the body of a Brāhmana, the Yama's servants throw him down into the Śūkaramukha Hell and grind down his body with great force as a sugarcane is ground down.

आतस्वीरण सवन्यमूर्दितः कर्णमलं गतः ॥ 24 ॥

स पीड्यामानो बहुधा वेदनां याल्सतीय है ।

विविक्तपर्योडो योउ्यविविक्तपर्यबथाम ॥ 25 ॥

ईश्रांकितवृतीनां व्यायाचारते स्वयम् ।

स चांधकुपे पतति तद्धिग्रहेश्विते ॥ 26 ॥

He then crises aloud bitterly, he gets fainted and becomes stupefied. He is crushed by them and suffers all sorts of pains and miseries. Again he who knows the feelings of others when they are tormented, pains those insects who live on other's blood as bugs, etc., and who does not realise other's pains, goes, as a punishment for that fault to the Andhakūpa Hell.

तत्रासौ जंतुिभः कृतेः पगृभिभूगपाकिभः ।

सरीसुरीयश्व मगकैयुंकामत्कुणजातिभः ॥ 27 ॥

There he is pained by the beasts, birds, deers, reptiles, mosquitoes, bugs, louses, flies and Dandaśūkas and various other cruel animals.

मक्रिभाक्षि तमस दंदुरक्रीक्ष पीड्जते ।

परित्यमिति चैवात्र कुर्गरीर च जंततून ॥ 28 ॥

यस्तु संविक्षिते: पड्वयजैः काकेक्षि संस्तुतः ।

अशगति चासविभज्य यत्किंचिपुवणते ॥ 29 ॥

स पापपुक्नः कुरैयांमेक्षु कृमिभोजने ।

नरकाधमके दृष्टकर्मण परिपायते ॥ 30 ॥

There he lives in his ugly body and roams like a beast. The man who, getting even a trifling wealth and food-stuff, does not perform the five Mahā Yajñas and gives not a share of that to the Devas and feeds his own belly with that like a crow, is taken by the ferocious Yamadūtas to the worst Krmibhojana Naraka for his sinful deeds.

लक्ष्योजनविर्तीर्णं कृमिकुषं भयूकृते ।

कृमिरूपं समासाघ भव्यमाणशु तः स्वयम् ॥ 31 ॥

अप्राना प्रज्ञातृतो यः पात्मानोति तत्र वै ।

यस्तु तसेयेन च बलाद्धरणं रलमेव च ॥ 32 ॥

This hell is one lakh Yojanas wide and is the reservoir of worms. It causes terror to the inhabitants of the hell. That sinner assumes the form of an insect and is eaten up on return by the insects and thus passes his time there.

ब्राह्मणस्याप्त्रत अन्यस्यापि च कस्यचित् ।

अनापदि च देवेषं तमयुर यमानुगाः ॥ 33 ॥

अयमस्यैरनिरपिंईः सरुर्गैनिकृष्वितं च ।

योउगम्यां योषितं गच्छेदागम्यं पुरुचं च चा ॥ 34 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

तावपुत्रायि कशया ताण्डवन्तो यमानुगा: ।

तिभवा लोहमध्या च सूम्यराज्यतिनियन्ति तम् ॥ 35 ॥

When a man does not give any share to the Atithis or the guests and does not offer oblations to the Fire and eats his food, he, too, goes to the above hell. When a man in times other than that of great danger and distress, follows the livelihood of a thief and robs gold and jewels forcibly of a Brahmin or any other person, he is taken to this hell and the Yama's servants pierce and cut off his skin by a fiery hot iron cutter.

तं चापि योक्षितं सूयार्पे उल्सियन्ति यमानुगाः ।

यस्तु सर्वाधिभानमः पुरुषः पापसंचयी ॥३६ ॥

निरयेप्रमुत तं याया: शाल्मतीं रोषयिति तम् ।

वज़कपटकसंयुक्तां शाल्मली तामयस्ययीम् ॥ 37 ॥

When a man goes for an illicit cohabitation to one who is not fit to be approached and when a woman goes initially to an unapproachable man, both of them are taken, being whipped, to this hell by the servants of Yama! Where the man is obliged to embrace a fiery hot iron figure of woman and vice versa. When a man goes to all sorts of wombs for unnatural crimes, he is taken to Vajra Kantaka Naraka and placed on the top of an iron Sālmali wood.

राज्ञा राजपुस्ति ये वा पाखंडवर्तिनः ।

धर्मसैतुं विधिंदन्ति ते परेल्य नातः नरा: ॥ 38 ॥

वैतरण्वां पत्नेय वै भिनमर्पविदानतः ।

नहां निरिवरुगंत्य परित्याचां च नारद ॥ 39 ॥

When a King or any royal personage, subject to the Pāṣanḍa Dharma (i.e., the unrighteous path) breaks the boundary of a law, he for that sin goes to Vaitaranī, the ditch round that hell.

वायोरणीः सर्मतानु भक्यमाणा इस्ततः ।

नात्मना विवुर्जलेवे वासुभिश्रामी नारद ॥ 40 ॥

स्वीयेन कर्मपाकेनोयतपन्ति च सर्वतः ।

विणमूज्यप्रक्रीष्ठ केशार्थिन्यत्बामर्शतः ॥ 41 ॥

There the aquatic animals eat his body all around. O Nārada! Yet neither his life nor his body parts with him. He is thrown, for his Karma, into the rivers filled with faeces, urine, puss, blood,

hairs, bones, nails, flesh, marrow, fat, etc., and he becomes very much troubled.

मेदोदासासंयुतायां नशामुपपर्तिते ते ।

वृषतीपतायो वे च नशरीचा नतापयः ॥ 42 ॥

आशार्तिवर्षेस्वक्ताः: पशुचर्यारयणाः ।

तेजानुकृतयात्वे विमूत्रलेष्मरक्तकः ॥ 43 ॥

रूपेमवमलमामूर्णे निपलिते दुराग्रहाः ।

तदेव खाद्यन्तेत्यमानुसंयर्गकाः ॥ 44 ॥

Those who are the husbands of Vṛṣalis (girls under twelve years of age, who have attained menstruation; or the barren women), void of any Śauca (cleanliness) or shame and without any Ācāra Vyavahāra (the following of one's natural customs and rites) and those who follow Paśvācāra (like beasts), they meet with a very hard fate and are thrown into this hell filled with faeces, urine, cough, blood and other impurities and when they feel hungry, are forced to eat the above things.

ये धानवर्धभादीनां परवों वे डिज्ञानतः ।

मृगवारसिका नियमातीर्थे मृगावातकाः ॥ 45 ॥

परोतंसान्यमभटा त्वल्यीभूतताराधामन्त ।

इषुभिश्र विधिंदिति तांस्तानुवर्णयगान्त ॥ 46 ॥

When those persons that are twice born, maintain dogs and asses, etc, and when they are addicted to hunting, and kill daily, for nothing, beasts, birds and dear, those evil-doers are specially watched by the servants of Yama and when they retire, they tear them asunder by shooting bows at them.

ये दभ्या दस्भयत्रेषु पशून्यंति नराधमाः ।

तानयुषिष्यो नरके वैशसे तदा ॥ 47 ॥

निपाल्य चीडयंत्रेयक कशाणातैरुंगसदैः ।

यो भाव्याँ च सवाणाँ वे द्विजो मदनमितिः ॥ 48 ॥

He who kills animals, engaged vainly in a sacrifice and addicted to haughty tempers and habits, is thrown into this hell by the Yama's servants and whipped very severely. The twice-born that co-pulates blindly with a savarnā wife, is taken by the Yama's messengers into the hell filled with semen and he is made to drink that.

Book VIII Chapter XXIII

रेतः पाययति मूढोऽमुत्र तं यमकिङ्कराः ।
रेतःकुण्डे पातयन्ति रेतः सम्पाययन्ति च ॥ ४९॥

ये दस्यवोऽग्निदाश्चैव गरदा सार्थघातकाः ।
ग्रामान्सार्थान्विलुम्पन्ति राजानो राजपूरुषाः ॥ ५०॥

Those who are addicted to robbery, who put fire to other's houses, who make others drink poison, those that are treacherous, and who destroy the interest of the villagers and other persons, those kings or the royal personages are taken after their death by the Yamadūtas to the Sārameyādana hell.

तान्परेतान्यमभटा नयन्ति श्वानकादनम् ।
विंशत्यथिकसङ्ख्याताः सारमेया महाद्भुताः ॥ ५१॥

सप्तशत्या समाख्याता रभसं खादयन्ति ते ।
सारमेयादनं नाम नरकं दारुणं मुने ।
अतः परं प्रवक्ष्यामि अवीचिप्रभुखान्मुने ॥ ५२॥

इति श्रीमद्देवीभागवते महापुराणेऽष्टादशसाहस्र्यां संहितायामष्टमस्कन्धे
नरकप्रदपातकवर्णनं नाम द्वाविंशोऽध्यायः ॥ ८.२२॥

There seven hundred and twenty dogs, very wonderful to behold, come furiously and with great force and energy, over them and feed on them. O Nārada! This hell is denominated as Sārameyādana Naraka and it is very horrible. Now I will describe to you the other hells AVīci and others.

Here ends the Twenty-second Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narrative of the sins leading to hells in the Mahāpurānam Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book VIII Chapter XXIII

