[Ch 8 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Saunaka said: O Sūta! You have described the beautiful narrative of the first Manu Svāyambhuvā. Now kindly described to us the narratives of other highly energetic Deva-like Manus.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Saunaka said :-- “O Sūta! You have described the beautiful narrative of the first Manu Svāyambhuva. Now kindly describe to us the narratives of other highly energetic Deva-like Manus.”

[Ch 8 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: O Rṣis! The very wise Nārada, well versed in the knowledge of Śrī Devi, hearing the glorious character of the first Sväyambhuva Manu, became desirous to hear of the other Manus and asked the Eternal Nārāyana:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- “O Ṛṣis! The very wise Nārada, well versed in the knowledge of Śrī Devī, hearing the glorious character of the first Svāyambhuva Manu, became desirous to hear of the other Manus and asked the Eternal Nārāyaṇa :--

[Ch 8 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Deva! Now favour me by reciting the origins and narratives of the other Manus.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Deva! Now favour me by reciting the origin and narratives of the other Manus.”

[Ch 8 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: O Devarsj! I have already spoken to you everything regarding the first Manu. He had worshipped the Devi Bhagavatī, and thus he got his foeless kingdom. You know that then.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Devarṣi! I have already spoken to you everything regarding the first Manu. He had worshipped the Devī Bhagavatī, and thus he got his foeless kingdom. You know that then.

[Ch 8 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Manu had two sons of great prowess, Priyavrata and Uttānapāda. They governed their kingdoms with fame. The son of this Priyavrata, of indomitable valour, is known by the wise as the second Svärocisa Manu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Manu had two sons of great prowess, Priyavrata and Uttānapāda. They governed their kingdoms with fame. The son of this Priyavrata, of indomitable valour, is known by the wise as the second Svārociṣa Manu.

[Ch 8 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Dear to all the beings, this Svärocisa Manu built his hermitage near the banks of the Kālindi (the Yamunā) and there making an earthen image of the Devi Bhagavatī, worshipped the Devi with devotion, subsisting on dry leaves and thus practised a severe austerities.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Dear to all the beings, this Svārociṣa Manu built his hermitage near the banks of the Kālindī (the Jumnā) and there making an earthen image of the Devī Bhagavatī, worshipped the Devī with devotion, subsisting on dry leaves and thus practised severe austerities.

[Ch 8 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus he passed his twelve years in that forest; when, at last, the Devi Bhagavati, resplendent with brilliance of the thousand Suns, became visible to him. She got very much pleased with his devotional stotrams.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus he passed his twelve years in that forest; when, at last, the Devī Bhagavatī, resplendent with brilliance of the thousand Suns, became visible to him. She got very much pleased with his devotional stotrams.

[Ch 8 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi, the Saviour of the Devas, and Who was of good vows, granted to him the sovereignty for one Manvantara. Thus the Devi became famous by the name Tārīnī Jagaddhātrī. O Nārada! Thus, by worshipping the Devi Tārīnī, Svārocisa obtained safely the fooless kingdom. Then establishing the Dharma duly, he enjoyed his kingdom with his sons; and, when the period of his manvantara expired, he went to the Heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī, the Saviour of the Devas, and Who was of good vows, granted to him the sovereignty for one Manvantara. Thus the Devī became famous by the name Tāriṇī Jagaddhātrī. O Nārada! Thus, by worshipping the Devī Tāriṇī, Svārociṣa obtained safely the foeless kingdom. Then establishing the Dharma duly, he enjoyed his kingdom with his sons; and, when the period of his manvantara expired, he went to the Heavens.

[Ch 8 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Priyavrata's sons named Uttama became the third Manu. On the banks of the Ganges he practised tapasyā and repeated the Bīja Mantra of Vāgbhava, in a solitary place for three years and became blessed with the favour of the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Priyavrata’s son named Uttama became the third Manu. On the banks of the Ganges, be practised tapasyā and repeated the Vīja Mantra of Vāgbhava, in a solitary place for three years and became blessed with the favour of the Devī.

[Ch 8 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► With rapt devotion he sang hymns wholly to the Devi with his mind full; and, by Her boon, got the foeless kingdom and a continual succession of sons and grandsons. Thus, enjoying the pleasures of his kingdom an the gifts of the Yuga Dharma, got in the end, the excellent place, obtained by the best Rajarsis.
NEW CORR ENG ──► With rapt devotion he sang hymns wholly to the Devī with his mind full; and, by Her boon, got the foeless kingdom and a continual succession of sons and grandsons. Thus, enjoying the pleasures of his kingdom and the gifts of the Yuga Dharma, got in the end, the excellent place, obtained by the best Rājarṣis.

[Ch 8 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► A very happy result. Priyavarata's another son named Tāmasa became the fourth Manu. He practised austerities and repeated the Kāma Bīja Mantra, the Spiritual Password of Kāma on the southern banks of the Narmadā river and worshipped the World Mother. In the spring and in the autumn he observed the nine night's vow (the Navarātri) and worshipped the excellent lotus eyed Deveśī and pleased Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► A very happy result. Priyavarata’s another son named Tāmasa became the fourth Manu. He practised austerities and repeated the Kāma Vīja Mantra, the Spiritual Password of Kāma on the southern banks of the Narmadā river and worshipped the World Mother. In the spring and in the autumn he observed the nine nightś vow ( the Navarātri) and worshipped the excellent lotus eyed Deveśī and pleased Her.

[Ch 8 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O obtaining the Devi's favour, he chanted excellent hymns to Her and made prañāmas. There he enjoyed the extensive kingdom without any fear from any foe or from any other source of danger. He generated, in the womb of his wife, ten sons, all very powerful and mighty, and then he departed to the excellent region in the Heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On obtaining the Devī’s favour, he chanted excellent hymns to Her and made pranāms. There he enjoyed the extensive kingdom without any fear from any foe or from any other source of danger. He generated, in the womb of his wife, ten sons, all very powerful and mighty, and then he departed, to the excellent region in the Heavens.

[Ch 8 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The young brother of Tāmasa, Raivata became the Fifth Manu and practised austerities on the banks of the Kālindī (the Yamunā) and repeated the Kāma Bija Mantra, the spiritual password of Kāma, the resort of the Sādhakas, capable to give the highest power of speech and to yield all the Siddhis, and thus he worshipped the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The young brother of Tāmasa, Raivata became the Fifth Manu and practised austerities on the banks of the Kālindī (the Jumnā) and repeated the Kāma Vīja Mantra, the spiritual password of Kāma, the resort of the Sādhakas, capable to give the highest power of speech and to yield all the Siddhis, and thus he worshipped the Devī.

[Ch 8 Verse 23-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He obtained excellent heavens, in domitable power, unhampered and capable of all success and a continual line of sons, grandsons, etc. Then the unrivalled excellent hero Raivata Manu established the several divisions of Dharma and enjoying all the worldly pleasures, went to the excellent region of Indra. Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the origin of Manu in the Mahāpurānam Śrīmadavebīghatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He obtained excellent heavens, indomitable power, unhampered and capable of all success and a continual line of sons, grandsons, etc. Then the unrivalled excellent hero Raivata Manu established the several divisions of Dharma and enjoying all the worldly pleasures, went to the excellent region of Indra. Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the origin of Manu in the Mahāpuraṇam Śri Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
