CHAPTER VIII

On the Origin of Manu

शौनक उवाच

आटी मन्वन्तः प्रोक्तो भयता चायमुतमः ।

अन्येयामुद्रवं वृष्टि मनूनां दिव्यतेजसाम् ॥ १ ॥

Saunaka said: O Sūta! You have described the beautiful narrative of the first Manu Svāyambhuvā. Now kindly described to us the narratives of other highly energetic Deva-like Manus.

सूत उवाच

एवमाधस्य चोत्पर्णि श्रुत्वा स्वायंभुवस्य हिं ।

अन्येषां क्रमाग्रतोपों संभूर्ति परिभूच्छति ॥ २ ॥

नारदः परमो ज्ञानी देवीतत्त्वार्थकीविदः ।

Sūta said: O Rṣis! The very wise Nārada, well versed in the knowledge of Śrī Devi, hearing the glorious character of the first Sväyambhuva Manu,

Book X Chapter VIII

became desirous to hear of the other Manus and asked the Eternal Nārāyana:

नारद उवाच

मनूनां मे समाख्याहि सूचपतिं च सनातन ॥ 3 ॥

O Deva! Now favour me by reciting the origins and narratives of the other Manus.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

प्रथमो3यं मनु: स्वायंभुव उनको महामुने ।

देव्यायघनोते वेन प्रापतं राज्यमकंटकम् ॥ 4 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Devarsj! I have already spoken to you everything regarding the first Manu. He had worshipped the Devi Bhagavatī, and thus he got his foeless kingdom. You know that then.

प्रियततोनपादी मनुपुत्री महौजसी ।

राज्यपालनकर्तौरि विज्ञातो वरुपालते ॥ 5 ॥

द्वितीयघ मनु: ख्यापोरिध उन्हो मनीषिधि: ।

प्रियतनसुतः श्रीमानप्रेमयराकमः ॥ 6 ॥

Manu had two sons of great prowess, Priyavrata and Uttānapāda. They governed their kingdoms with fame. The son of this Priyavrata, of indomitable valour, is known by the wise as the second Svärocisa Manu.

स स्वारोपिध्वनामपि कालिदौकुलतो मनुः ।

निवासं कल्याभास सर्वसचाधियंकः ॥ ७ ॥

जीर्षपत्राजानो भूत्वा तपः कनुर्मन्त्रतः ।

देव्या मृति मृमवी च पूजवामास भक्तिः ॥ ८ ॥

Dear to all the beings, this Svärocisa Manu built his hermitage near the banks of the Kālindi (the Yamunā) and there making an earthen image of the Devi Bhagavatī, worshipped the Devi with devotion, subsisting on dry leaves and thus practised a severe austerities.

एवं द्वारण वर्षाणि वनस्थस्य तपस्यतः ।

देवी प्रातुर्भूत्ता सहचाकंसमवृदितः ॥ 9 ॥

ततः प्रस्वा देयेगी रुतवारजेन सुवता ।

द्वौ स्वातीचार्यैव सर्वमंचताश्रवय् ॥ 10 ॥

Thus he passed his twelve years in that forest; when, at last, the Devi Bhagavati, resplendent with brilliance of the thousand Suns, became visible to

him. She got very much pleased with his devotional stotrams.

आधिपयंं जगद्धाती ताल्णीति प्रशामगात् ।

एवं स्वारोचिमयनुस्तापिणराधायनाततः ॥ १ १ ॥

आधिपयंचं च लेचे स सर्वांगतिविज्ञित् ।

धर्मं संस्थाय वित्थिद्वात्रयं पुंशै: स्मां विधुः ॥ १ २ ॥

The Devi, the Saviour of the Devas, and Who was of good vows, granted to him the sovereignty for one Manvantara. Thus the Devi became famous by the name Tārīnī Jagaddhātrī. O Nārada! Thus, by worshipping the Devi Tārīnī, Svārocisa obtained safely the fooless kingdom. Then establishing the Dharma duly, he enjoyed his kingdom with his sons; and, when the period of his manvantara expired, he went to the Heavens.

भुक्ल्वा जगाय लल्लोक निजम्बन्नताशयात् ।

तृतीय उनमो नाम धिवातसुती मनु: ॥ 13 ॥

गंगाकुले नास्तत्वा वाग्भवं संजप्रहः ।

वर्षिणि शीणयुवसन्देव्यनुग्रहमाशित् ॥ 14 ॥

Priyavrata's sons named Uttama became the third Manu. On the banks of the Ganges he practised tapasyā and repeated the Bīja Mantra of Vāgbhava, in a solitary place for three years and became blessed with the favour of the Devi.

सतुत्वा देवी सतीवर्षेपक्तिभाषवितानासः ।

राज्य निष्कटकं लेभे संतर्नि विराकलिकीम् ॥ 15 ॥

राज्योल्यानि सोक्षायिन पुक्वा प्रधान्यस्य च ।

सोउधाजगाम पद्वी राजर्षिवर्षाधितिध् ॥ 16 ॥

With rapt devotion he sang hymns wholly to the Devi with his mind full; and, by Her boon, got the foeless kingdom and a continual succession of sons and grandsons. Thus, enjoying the pleasures of his kingdom an the gifts of the Yuga Dharma, got in the end, the excellent place, obtained by the best Rajarsis.

चतुर्धर्तमासो नाम प्रियदातसुतो मनु: ।

नर्मदादक्षिणे कृले समाराध्य जान्यकरिणु ॥ 17 ॥

महेशर्षी कामराजकूटजायपरायण: ।

वासते शगाटे काले नवरात्रसपर्यया ॥ 18 ॥

तोषयामास देवेश्जी जलजाशीमनूर्णमाय।

A very happy result. Priyavarata's another son named Tāmasa became the fourth Manu. He practised austerities and repeated the Kāma Bīja Mantra, the Spiritual Password of Kāma on the southern banks of the Narmadā river and worshipped the World Mother. In the spring and in the autumn he observed the nine night's vow (the Navarātri) and worshipped the excellent lotus eyed Deveśī and pleased Her.

तत्या: प्रसाद्यमासाठ नत्वा रसोत्रैन्तमः ॥ १९ ॥

अकंटक महद्राज्यं बुधुजे गतासाध्वस: ।

पुत्रान्लोढ्धतावृष्यान्द्य शीर्विन्केतनान् ॥ 20 ॥

उत्पाद निजाभायीया जगामावस्थानुम् ।

O obtaining the Devi's favour, he chanted excellent hymns to Her and made prañāmas. There he enjoyed the extensive kingdom without any fear from any foe or from any other source of danger. He generated, in the womb of his wife, ten sons, all very powerful and mighty, and then he departed to the excellent region in the Heavens.

पंचमो मनुराखातो रैवततामानुज: ॥ 21 ॥

कालिदीकुलमाश्रित्य जजाप कामसंजकम् ।

शौंज परमवार्यद्वार्यक साधकाश्रयम् ॥ 22 ॥

गृतवाराधावाद्य स्वाताखिद्मनुतमाम् ।

The young brother of Tāmasa, Raivata became the Fifth Manu and practised austerities on the banks of the Kālindī (the Yamunā) and repeated the Kāma Bija Mantra, the spiritual password of Kāma, the resort of the Sādhakas, capable to give the highest power of speech and to yield all the Siddhis, and thus he worshipped the Devi.

बलमप्रहतं लोके सर्वसिद्धिवधायकम् ॥ 23 ॥

संतर्टित चिराक्लीनां पुरुषौत्रमयीं शुभाम् ।

धार्मन्वस्य व्यवस्थाय विष्यानुपभुज च ।

जगायामात्रितमः शुगो महैद्रालयमुत्तमम् ॥ 24 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमदैवीभागतं महापुराणे

दशमरकन्ने उद्धगोस्थाय: ।। 25 ।।

He obtained excellent heavens, in domitable power, unhampered and capable of all success and a continual line of sons, grandsons, etc. Then the unrivalled excellent hero Raivata Manu established the several divisions of Dharma and enjoying all the worldly pleasures, went to the excellent region of Indra.

Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the origin of Manu in the Mahāpurānam Śrīmadavebīghatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

