[Ch 7 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: Hearing the words of the Devas, Agastya, the Best of the Brāhmins promised that he would carry out their works. O Rsis! All the Devas then became very glad when the Muni, born of the water jar, promised thus.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Hearing the words of the Devas, Agastya, the Best of the Brāhmins promised that he would carry out their works. O Ṛṣis! All the Devas then became very glad when the Muni, born of the water jar, promised thus.

[Ch 7 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They then bade good-bye to him and went back gladly to their own abodes. The Muni then spoke to his wife thus: "O daughter of the King! The Vindhya Mountain has baffled the progress of the Sun's course and has thus caused a great mischief. What the Munis, the Seers of truths said before referring to Kaśī, all are now coming to my mind when I am thinking why this disturbance has overtaken me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They then bade good-bye to him and went back gladly to their own abodes. The Muni then spoke to his wife thus :-- “O daughter of the King! The Bindhya Mountain has baffled the progress of the Sun’s course and has thus caused a great mischief. What the Munis, the Seers of truths said before referring to Kāśī, all are now coming to my mind when I am thinking why this disturbance has overtaken me.

[Ch 7 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They said that various hindrances would come to him at every step, who is a Sādhu intending to settle at Kāśī. Let him who wants Mukti, never quit Kāśī, the Avimukta place, in any case.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They said that various hindrances would come to him at every step, who is a Sādhu intending to settle at Kāśī. Let him who wants Mukti, never quit Kāśī, the Avimukta place in any case.

[Ch 7 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But, O Dear! To-day I have got one hindrance during my stay at Kāśī." Thus talking with much regret on various subjects with his wife, the Muni bathed in the Manjkarṇikā ghāt, saw the Lord Viśeśvara worshipped Dandapānjī and went to the Kāla Bhairava. He said in the following terms:
NEW CORR ENG ──► But, O Dear! Today I have got one hindrance during my stay at Kāśī.” Thus talking with much regret on various subjects with his wife, the Muni bathed in the Maṇikarṇikā ghāt, saw the Lord Viśveśvara worshipped Danḍapānī and went to the Kāla Bhairava. He said in the following terms :--

[Ch 7 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O Mighty armed Kālabhaivara! Thou destroyest the fear of the Bhaktas; Thou art the God of this Kāśī City. Then why art Thou driving me away from this Kāśīdhāma. O Lord! Thou removest all the obstacles of the devotees and Thou preservest them. Then why, O Destroyer of the sorrows of the Bhaktas! Art Thou removing me from here?
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “O Mighty armed Kālabhairava! Thou destroyest the fear of the Bhaktas; Thou art the God of this Kāśī City. Then why art Thou driving me away from this Kāśīdhām. O Lord! Thou removest all the obstacles of the devotees and Thou preservest them. Then why, O Destroyer of the sorrows of the Bhaktas! art Thou removing me from here?

[Ch 7 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Never I blamed others; nor did I practise any hypocrisy with any person nor did I lie; then under what sin, Thou art driving me away from Kāśī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Never I blamed others; nor did I practise any hypocrisy with any person nor did I lie; then under what sin, Thou art driving me away from Kāśī.”

[Ch 7 Verse 12-13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Rsis! Thus praying to Kāla Bhairava, the Muni Agastya, born of water jar and the husband of Lopāmdurā, went to Sāksī Gāneśa, the Destroyer of all evils and seeing and worshipping Him, went out of Kāśī and proceeded to the south.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Ṛṣis! Thus praying to Kāla Bhairava, the Muni Agastya, born of water jar and the husband of Lopāmudrā, went to Sākṣi Gaṇeśa, the Destroyer of all evils and seeing and worshipping Him, went out of Kāśī and proceeded to the south.

[Ch 7 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Muni, the ocean of great fortune, left Kāśī; but he become very much distressed to leave it and he remembered it always. He began to march on with his wife. As if riding on his car of asceticism he arrived at the Vindhya mountain in the tiwnkling of an eye and saw that the Mountain had risen very high and obstructed the passage of the Sun in the Heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Muni, the ocean of great fortune, left Kāśī; but he became very much distressed to leave it and he remembered it always. He began to march on with his wife. As if riding on his car of asceticism he arrived at the Bindhya mountain in the twinkling of an eye and saw that the Mountain had risen very high and obstructed the passage of the Sun in the Heavens.

[Ch 7 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Vindhya Mountain, seeing the Muni Agastya in front, began to tremble and as if desirous to speak something to the earth in a whisper became low and dwarfish and bowed down to the Muni and fell down with devotion in ssāṭṭāngas with devotion just like a stick dropped flat on the ground before the Muni.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Bindhya Mountain, seeing the Muni Agastya in front, began to tremble and as if desirous to speak something to the earth in a whisper became low and dwarfish and bowed down to the Muni and fell down with devotion in sāṣṭāṅgas with devotion just like a stick dropped flat on the ground before the Muni.

[Ch 7 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the Vindhya thus low, the Muni Agastya became pleased and spoke with a gracious look: "O Child! Better remain in this state until I come back. For, O Child! I am quite unable to ascend to your lofty heights.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the Bindhya thus low, the Muni Agastya became pleased and spoke with a gracious look :-- “O Child! Better remain in this state until I come back. For, O Child! I am quite unable to ascend to your lofty heights.”

[Ch 7 Verse 19-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, the Muni became cager to go to the south; and, crossing the peaks of the Vindhya, alighted gradually again to the plains. He went on further to the south and saw the Śrī Śaila Mountain and at last went to the Malayācala and there, building his Śāśrama (hermitage) settled himself. O Śaunaka! The Devi Bhagavatī, worshipped by the Muni went to the Vindhya Mountain and settled there and became known, in the three worlds, by the name of Vindhyavāsinī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, the Muni became eager to go to the south; and, crossing the peaks of the Bindhya, alighted gradually again to the plains. He went on further to the south and saw the Śrī Śaila Mountain and at last went to the Malayācala and there, building his Āśrama (hermitage), settled himself. O Saunaka! The Devī Bhagavatī, worshipped by the Muni went to the Bindhya Mountain and settled there and became known, in the three worlds, by the name of Bindhyavāsinī.

[Ch 7 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: Any body who hears this highly pure narrative of the Muni Agastya and Vindhya, becomes freed of all his sins. All his enemies are destroyed in no time. This hearing gives knowledge to the Brāhmanas, victory to the Kṣattriyas, wealth and corn to the Vaiśyas and happiness to the Śūdras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Anybody who hears this highly pure narrative of the Muni Agastya and Bindhya, becomes freed of all his sins. All his enemies are destroyed in no time. This hearing gives knowledge to the Brāhmaṇas, victory to the Kṣattriyas, wealth and corn to the Vaiśyas and happiness to the Śūdras.

[Ch 7 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If any body once hears this narrative, he gets Dharma if he wants Dharma, gets unbounded wealth if he wants wealth and gets all desires if he wants his desires fulfilled.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If anybody once hears this narrative, he gets Dharma if he want Dharma, gets unbounded wealth if he wants wealth and gets all desires if he wants his desires fulfilled.

[Ch 7 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In ancient times Sväyambhuva Manu worshipped this Devi with devotion and got his kindom for his own Manvantara period. O Śaunaka! Thus I have described to you the holy character of the Devi in this Manvantara. What more shall I say? Mention please. Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Tenth Book on the checking of the rise of the Vindhya Range in the Mahā Purānam Śrimadevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In ancient times Svāyambhuva Manu worshipped this Devī with devotion and got his kingdom for his own Manvantara period. O Saunaka! Thus I have described to you the holy character of the Devī in this Manvantara. What more shall I say? Mention please. Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Tenth Book on the checking of the rise of the Bindhya Range in the Mahā Purāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
