CHAPTER VII

On the Checking of the Rise of the Vindhya

सूत उवाच

इति वायकं समाकरणं विबुधानां द्विजोतमः ।

कार्थे काययेनेतई प्रत्युवाच ततो मुनि: ॥ १ ॥

अंगीकृतं तदा कार्यं मुनिना कृभपजन्मना ।

देवा: प्रमुदिता: सर्वे वचपूर्विक्रजस्तमाः ॥ २ ॥

Sūta said: Hearing the words of the Devas,

Book X Chapter VII

Agastya, the Best of the Brāhmins promised that he would carry out their works. O Rsis! All the Devas then became very glad when the Muni, born of the water jar, promised thus.

ते देवा: स्वानि शिष्यानि भेत्रेर मुनिवाक्यतः ।

पत्नीं मुनिवर: श्रीमनुवार नृपकन्यकम् ॥ 3 ॥

अयं नृपमुते प्राणो विरानेअर्थ्य कारकः ।

भानुगर्भिनिरोधेन कृती वैक्ष्यमहीभृता ॥ 4 ॥

They then bade good-bye to him and went back gladly to their own abodes. The Muni then spoke to his wife thus: "O daughter of the King! The Vindhya Mountain has baffled the progress of the Sun's course and has thus caused a great mischief. What the Munis, the Seers of truths said before referring to Kaśī, all are now coming to my mind when I am thinking why this disturbance has overtaken me.

आ जातं कारणं तच्च स्मृतं वावयं पुरातनम् ।

कारीषूद्विश्य यद्यौतं सुनिशितस्त्वर्दिशिधः ॥ 5 ॥

अविष्युक्त न मोक्त्वं सर्वेधेव मुपुळ्धुधिः ।

किन्तु चिदा भविष्यति कार्णं निवसतां सताम् ॥ 6 ॥

They said that various hindrances would come to him at every step, who is a Sādhu intending to settle at Kāśī. Let him who wants Mukti, never quit Kāśī, the Avimukta place, in any case.

सोउनाचो यम प्राप्तः कार्णां निवसता हिये ।

इत्येवमुक्ता भार्यां तां मुनि: परमतापनः ॥ ७ ॥

मणिकार्यां समालुस्य द्वृषा विव्येश्वं विवृम् ।

दंद्वपाणि समभ्यच्छे कालारजं समागतः ॥ ८ ॥

But, O Dear! To-day I have got one hindrance during my stay at Kāśī." Thus talking with much regret on various subjects with his wife, the Muni bathed in the Manjkarṇikā ghāt, saw the Lord Viśeśvara worshipped Dandapānjī and went to the Kāla Bhairava. He said in the following terms:

कालगल महाबाहो घक्तानां भयहारक ।

कर्व दूरयसे पुवां: काशीपुवांस्त्वमीक्ष्र: ॥ 9 ॥

त्वं काशीशाविद्भानां नागको भक्तश्रकाः ।

मां किं दूरयसे स्वामिन् भक्तातिंविनावारक ॥ 10 ॥

"O Mighty armed Kālabhaivara! Thou

destroyest the fear of the Bhaktas; Thou art the God of this Kāśī City. Then why art Thou driving me away from this Kāśīdhāma. O Lord! Thou removest all the obstacles of the devotees and Thou preservest them. Then why, O Destroyer of the sorrows of the Bhaktas! Art Thou removing me from here?

परापवादो नोत्को मे न धैरुम्० न चानुतम् ।

केन कर्मविषयकेन कारणा दूरं कारोषि मान् ॥ १ १ ॥

Never I blamed others; nor did I practise any hypocrisy with any person nor did I lie; then under what sin, Thou art driving me away from Kāśī.

एवं प्राथ्यं च तं कालनायं कृम्योद्वो सुनि: ।

जगाम साक्षिविन्नें सर्वैविन्निवारणम् ॥ 12 ॥

तं चूवा०प्रथ्यं संग्रथां ततः पूर्यं विनिरन्तः ।

लोपामुग्रपति: श्रीमानगस्त्यो दक्षिणां दिष्णम् ॥ 13 ॥

O Rsis! Thus praying to Kāla Bhairava, the Muni Agastya, born of water jar and the husband of Lopāmdurā, went to Sāksī Gāneśa, the Destroyer of all evils and seeing and worshipping Him, went out of Kāśī and proceeded to the south.

काशिविरहसुंततो महाभायविनिधासुंपि: ।

संस्यत्यानुक्षणं काशीं जगाम सह भायांय ॥ १ ४ ॥

तपोयानमिवाहनु निविष्यानि वे सुपि: ।

अउे द्वर्षं तं विंध्यं क्रद्धांवरमधो-ननम् ॥ १ ५ ॥

The Muni, the ocean of great fortune, left Kāśī; but he become very much distressed to leave it and he remembered it always. He began to march on with his wife. As if riding on his car of asceticism he arrived at the Vindhya mountain in the tiwnkling of an eye and saw that the Mountain had risen very high and obstructed the passage of the Sun in the Heavens.

चक्रेपे चाचलनुर्णं रुईवाए त्रिश्वतं पुनिम् ।

गिरि: खद्वतरे भूत्वा विव्युत्यनिधि ॥ 16 ॥

दंडवत्पिततो भूमौ साहांगं भक्तिभावतः ।

तं शुधा न्यशिखां विंधां नाम महातिगित् ॥ 17 ॥

The Vindhya Mountain, seeing the Muni Agastya in front, began to tremble and as if desirous to speak something to the earth in a whisper became

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

low and dwarfish and bowed down to the Muni and fell down with devotion in ssāṭṭāngas with devotion just like a stick dropped flat on the ground before the Muni.

प्रस्ववदानोगत्पलो मुनिविध्यमधावबीत् ।

वत्सैवं तिषु तात्चं यावदाग्यमते यम ॥ १ ८ ॥

अशक्तीजई नांखैशलारोष्टी तव पुत्रक ।

Seeing the Vindhya thus low, the Muni Agastya became pleased and spoke with a gracious look: "O Child! Better remain in this state until I come back. For, O Child! I am quite unable to ascend to your lofty heights.

एवमुक्त्वा मुनिविध्मविद्रां प्रति गोपोत्सुकः ॥ १९ ॥

आकाषु तस्य शिल्डापयवाहकदुत्कमात् ।

गतो याघ्यदिरां चापि शीरीलें प्रेक्ष्य वर्चनि ॥ 20 ॥

मलयाचलमासाड् तताश्रयपरोभवत् ।

सापि देही तत तिथ्यमागता मनुपजिता ॥ 21 ॥

लेकिंपु प्रयिता विर्यवासिनीति च शौनक ।

Thus saying, the Muni became cager to go to the south; and, crossing the peaks of the Vindhya, alighted gradually again to the plains. He went on further to the south and saw the Śrī Śaila Mountain and at last went to the Malayācala and there, building his Śāśrama (hermitage) settled himself. O Śaunaka! The Devi Bhagavatī, worshipped by the Muni went to the Vindhya Mountain and settled there and became known, in the three worlds, by the name of Vindhyavāsinī.

सूत उवाच

एतच्छात्रिं परमं शुकुनाशनमुतमम् ॥ 2 2 ॥

अगस्त्वलिध्यनगयोराखानं पायनाशनम् ।

राजां विजवदं तच्च द्विजानां ज्ञानवधैनम् ॥ 23 ॥

वैश्यानां धान्यधनं शृज्ञाणं सुखदं तथा ।

Sūta said: Any body who hears this highly pure narrative of the Muni Agastya and Vindhya, becomes freed of all his sins. All his enemies are destroyed in no time. This hearing gives knowledge to the Brāhmanas, victory to the Kṣattriyas, wealth and corn to the Vaiśyas and happiness to the Śūdras.

धर्मार्थी धर्ममानोते धनार्थी धनमान्यात् ॥ 24 ॥

कामानवानुवाकमी भकला चाय सकृष्छ्वाला ।

If any body once hears this narrative, he gets Dharma if he wants Dharma, gets unbounded wealth if he wants wealth and gets all desires if he wants his desires fulfilled.

एवं स्वायंभुवमनुदैवीमात्राय भक्तितः ॥ 25 ॥

लेभे राज्यं धरायासु निजमन्यन्ताशप्रमम् ।

इन्येतद्वर्णितं सीय मया मन्त्रताशिनम् ॥

आई चरित्र श्रीद्वया: किं पुन: कवयामि ते ॥ 26 ॥

डीत श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे दशमस्कन्चे

सप्तमोउधाय: 117 11

In ancient times Sväyambhuva Manu worshipped this Devi with devotion and got his kindom for his own Manvantara period. O Śaunaka! Thus I have described to you the holy character of the Devi in this Manvantara. What more shall I say? Mention please.

Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Tenth Book on the checking of the rise of the Vindhya Range in the

Mahā Purānam Śrimadevībhāgavatam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

