CHAPTER I

On the Morning Duties

नारंद उवाच

भगवान् भूतभव्येग रानारायण सनातन ।

आज्यातं परमाश्रयं देेवीचारिसमुतनम् ॥ १ ॥

ग्रातुभाँव: परो मातु: कार्यार्थमसुतुझाम ।

अधिकाराविरिक्ताकाउन देवीपूर्णकृपावशगत् ॥ 2 ॥

Nārada said: O Bhagavan! O Thou, the Eternal One! O Nārāyaṇa! O Lord of the past and the future! Thou art the Creator and the Lord of all the beings that lived in the past and that will come into existence in the future. Thou hast described to me the highly wonderful and excellent anecdote of the Exalted Devi. How She did assume the forms of Mahākālī, Mahā Läksmī, Mahā Sarasvatī and Bhāramī, for the fulfilment of the Devas' purposes and how the Devas got back their possessions by the Grace of the Devi. All you have described.

अधुना श्रौतुमिच्छामि येन प्रीणाति सर्वदा ।

स्वभक्तान्यरिषुणाति तमावारं वद प्रभो ॥ 3 ॥

O Lord! Now I want to hear the rules of Sadācāra (right way of living), the due observation of which by the devotees pleases the World-Mother. Kindly describe them.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

शृषु नारद तत्वूत्र सदाचारविधिक्रमम् ।

यदनुहानामाजेश देवी प्रीणाति सर्वंदा ॥ 4 ॥

प्रातरल्याय कत्वेयं यद्धिजेन दिते दिते ।

तदईं संप्रवक्ष्यामि द्विजानामुपकारकम् ॥ 5 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Knower of Truth! Now I am telling you those rules of the right way of living, which rightly observed, always please Bhagavī. Listen first, I will talk of the Brāhmins, how their welfare is secured, what the Brāhmaṇas ought to do on getting up early in the morning from their bed.

उदयास्तमयं यावद्धिज्ञः सरकमेकुन्द्वेते ।

नित्यनैमितिकेक्रुंकः काम्येधान्यैरागहितैः ॥ 6 ॥

आत्मनश सहायार्थ पिता माता न तिश्ठित ।

न पुरवारा न जातिर्धर्मितिश्छित केवलम् ॥ 7 ॥

From the sunrise to the sunset the Brāhmaṇas should do all daily and occasional duties (Nitya and Naimittik Karmas) and they are to perform the optional works for some particular object such as Putreṣṭi Yajñā and other good works (not acts of black magic as killing, causing pain and inconveniences to others, etc. It is the Self alone and not the Father, Mother, etc., nor any other body that helps us on our way to that happiness in the next world. Father, Mother, wife, sons and others are helps merely to our happiness in this world. None of them are helpful to us in bettering our states in the next world.

तस्पाद्मूं सहायार्थ नित्यं संचितु साधनैः ।

धर्मपैल सहायातु तमस्तरति दुस्तम्प् ॥ 8 ॥

आचारः प्रयोग धर्मः श्रुन्तुः स्मात् एच च ।

तस्पाद्यिम्मस्मायुक्तो नित्यं स्यादात्मनो दिकाः ॥ 9 ॥

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

Deliverance of one's Self depends verily on his own Self. Therefore one should always earn and store dharma (religion) and observe always there the right conduct to help one in the next world. If Dharma be on our side, this endless sea of troubles can be safely crossed. The rules of right living as ordained by the Manu in Śrutis and Manu Smṛtis are the principal Dharmas. The Brāhmanas should always be observent to their Dharma as ordained in the Śāstras, Śruti and Smṛti.

आचारलक्षणते चारुपुराचारलक्षणते प्रजा: ।

आचाराद्वमश्यम्याचारो हाँति पातकम् ॥ 10 ॥

आचार: परभो धर्मो नृणां कल्याणाकारक: ।

इह लोके सुखी भृत्वा परघ लभते सुखम् ॥ 11 ॥

Follow the right conduct and then you will get life, posterity and increase of happiness easily destroyed; the right conduct is the auspicious principal Dharma of men. Persons of right living enjoy happiness in this world as well as in the next.

अज्ञानीयजनानां तु मोहितैभ्रमितात्मनम् ।

धर्मकृपो महदीपो भूक्तमागदूरफंक: ॥ 12 ॥

आचाराख्यावते श्रेष्ठमाचारात्कर्म लभ्यते ।

कर्मणो जायते ज्ञानपित वाव्यं मनो: स्मृत्तम् ॥ 13 ॥

Those, who are veiled in darkness by Ignorance and thus wildly enchanted, can verily see their way to Mukti if they follow the Great Light revealed to them by Dharma and the right conduct. It is by Sadācāra, that superiority is attained. Men of right conduct always do good deeds. From good deeds, knowledge comes. This is the advice of Manu.

सर्वेधर्मविरीडोस्याचारः परमं तपः ।

तदेव ज्ञानपुरिद्धे तेन सर्वे प्रसाधये ॥ 14 ॥

यस्चावाराविहीनेजर वर्तेते द्विस्तमत ।

स गुरुद्वहिक्यांची यथा गुरूतस्यैव सः ॥ 15 ॥

Right way of living is the best of all the Dharmas and is a great Tapasyā (asceticism). The knowledge comes from this Right Living. Everything is attained thereby. He who is devoid of Sadācāra, is like a Śudra, even if he comes of a Brāhmin family. There is no distinction whatsoever between him and a Śudra. Right conduct is of two kinds:

आचारो द्विषिधः प्रोक्तः शाखीयो लोकिकतस्वा ।

उभावपि प्रक्रतव्ये न त्याच्यौ शुभमिच्छता ॥ 16 ॥

ग्रामधर्मां जातिधर्मां देशधर्मां: कुलोढ़्वावः ।

परिष्राहा नृभि: सर्वैर्नि ताल्ल्येवेयुने ॥ 17 ॥

(1) as dictated by the Śāstras, (2) as dictated by the popular custom, Laukika). Both these methods should be observed by him who wants welfare for his Self. He is not to forsake one of them. O Muni! The village Dharma, the Dharma of one's own caste, the Dharma of one's own family, and the Dharma of one's own country all should be observed by men.

दुराचारी हि पुरुषो लोके भवति निंदितः ।

दुःखभागी च सततं व्याधिन्य आयण एच च ॥ 18 ॥

परित्यजेदर्धकामी यो स्यातां धर्मविंजती ।

धर्मायमुखोदर्धके लोकविक्रिद्धयेव च ॥ 19 ॥

Never, Never he is to do anything otherwise. With great loving devotion that is to be preserved. Men who practise wrong ways of living, are censured by the public; they always suffer from diseases. Avoid wealth and desires that have no Dharma in them. Why? If in the name of Dharma, painful acts (e.g. killing animals in sacrifices) are to be committed, those are blamed by the people; so never commit them. Avoid them by all means.

नात्र उवाच

बहुताविह शाखाणां निश्रवः स्याकर्थ मुने ।

क्रिस्तम्भाणं तद्बृहि धर्मार्थिविरिणंथम् ॥ 20 ॥

Nārada said: “O Muni! The Sāstras are not one, they are many and they lay down different rules and contradictory opinions, How then Dharma is to be followed? And according to what Dharma Śāstra?

शीनारायण उवाच

श्रुतिसूती उभे नेत्रे पुराणं हृदयं स्मृतः ।

एततयोक्त एव स्याद्धों नान्य कुजस्त्रि ॥ 21 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: Śruti and Smṛti are the two eyes of God; the Purāṇam is His Heart. Whatever is stated in the Śruti, the Smṛti and the Purāṇams is

Book XI Chapter I

Dharma; whatever else is written in other Śāstras is not Dharma. Where you will find differences between Śruti, Smṛti and Purāṇas, accept the words of the Śruits as final proofs. Wherever Smṛti disagrees with the Purāṇas, know the Smṛtis more authoritative.

विरोधी यत्र तु भलेतयाणां च परयम्य।

श्रतिस्तत्र प्राणगं स्याद्वादौद्धीं स्मृतिवर्गे ॥ 22 ॥

श्रतिद्धीं भवेढ़ात्र तर धार्विष्यौ स्मृता ।

स्मृतिद्धीं तु यत्र स्याधिष्यः कल्यवां पृथक् ॥ 23 ॥

पूर्णोषुं क्वचिर्चेव तनरुं यथात्यम् ।

धार्म वर्दिति तं धर्म गृहीयारक कंर्वचन ॥ 24 ॥

And where differences will crop up in the Śrutis themselves, know that Dharma, too, is of two kinds. And where the differences will crop up in the Smṛtis themselves, consider, then, that different things are aimed at. In some Purāṇas, the Dharma of the Tantras is duly described; but of these, which go against the Vedas, they are not to be accepted by any means.

वेदारिवीरिधि चेनेचं तनुमाणं न संशयः ।

प्रत्यक्षगुतितऋं चतत्प्रमाणं भवेत्र च ॥ 25 ॥

सर्वथा वेद एवासी धर्माग्रिभ्रमणाकः ।

तेनाविक्त्वं वर्लिक्तिचनतमाणं न चान्यथा ॥ 26 ॥

Tantra is accepted as the authoritative proof then and then only when it contradicts not the Vedas. Whatever goes clearly against the Vedas can in no way be accepted as a proof. In matters concerning Dharma, the Vedas is the Sole Proof, Therefore that which is not against the Vedas can be taken as proof; otherwise not.

यो वेद्यभर्मुक्त्य वर्तो5-न्यप्रमाणतः ।

कृपाड़ानि तस्य शिक्षार्थं चमतोके वसंति हि ॥ 27 ॥

तत्मास्वग्रयतेन वेदोक्तं धर्माशयेत् ।

स्मृति: पुर्णामन्त्यात्र तांवा शास्त्रमेव च ॥ 28 ॥

तन्मूलसे प्रमाणं स्याजान्याया तु कदाचन ।

Whoever acts Dharma according to other proofs than what is ordained in the Vedas, goes to the hell in the abode of Yama to get his lesson. So the Dharma that is by all means to be accepted as such,

is what is stated in the Vedas. The Smṛtis, the Purāṇas, or the Tantra Śāstras can be taken also as authoritative when they are not conflicting to Vedas. Any other Śāstras can be taken as authoritative when it is fundamentally coincident with the Vedas. Else it can never be accepted.

ये कुग्रास्धियोगेन वर्तवेर्हीह मानवान् ॥ 29 ॥

अधीमुखोर्धयादासे यास्यति नरकाणंवम् ।

कामचारा: पाणुपातास्वा वे लिंगधारिणः ॥ 30 ॥

तलपुत्रीकता ये च वैखानसमतानुगतः ।

ते सर्वे निरयं यांति वेदमापार्विकृकृता: ॥ 31 ॥

Those who do injury to others even by the blade of a Kuśa grass used as a weapon, go to hell with their heads downwards and their feet upwards. Those that follow their own sweet free will, that take up any sort of dress (c.g. Bauddhas), those that follow the philosophical doctrines called Pāśupatas, and the other hermits and saints and persons that take up other vows contrary to the religions of the Vedas, for example, the Vaikhānasa followers, those who brand their bodies by the hot Mudrās, at the places of pilgrimages, e.g. Dvārakā, etc., they go to hell with their bodis scorched by red hot brands (Tapta Mudrās).

वेदोक्तमेव सद्मर्ग तस्माकुर्बानरः सदा ।

उत्थायोत्थाय बोद्योद्य किं मायाउढ़ा कृतं कृतम् ॥ 32 ॥

दर्तं वा दार्वितं वार्थि वाक्येनार्थि च भार्थितम् ।

उपयापेषु सर्वेषु पातकेषु महत्वयि ॥ 33 ॥

So persons should act according to the excellent religions commanded by the Vedas. Everyday he should get up from his bed early in the morning and think thus: "What good acts have I done, what have I given as charities? Or what I advised others to do charities what greater sins (Mahāpātakas) and what smaller sins have I committed?"

अवाथ एव सतीयामं बढ़ाध्यानं समाचरेत् ।

ऊनस्थोतानचरण: सच्चे घोरौ तथोतगम् ॥ 34 ॥

उत्तरानं किंचिदुर्जानां मुख्यावरुष्य योरसा ।

निर्मालिहासः सन्चस्थो दर्नैदौतात संम्युगेत् ॥ 35 ॥

At the last quarter of the night he should think

of Para Brahma. He should place his right leg on his left thigh and his left on his right thigh crosswise keeping his head straight up and touching the breast with his chin, and closing his eyes, he should sit steadily so that the upper teeth should not touch the lower jaw.

तालुस्थालणबिह्ज़ा संवृताय: सुनिश्रलः ।

सहिकन्द्रिद्विघामो नातिनिम्नस्थितासन: ॥ ३६ ॥

द्विणं जिनुणं विनुणं वायि प्राणायाममुपक्रमेत् ।

तते। धेयः स्थितो योजी हद्ये दीयवज्यम् ॥ ३७ ॥

He should join his tongue with his palate and he should sit quiet, restraining as his senses. He should be Śuddha Sattva. His seat should not be very low. First of all he should practise Prānāyāma twice or thrice; and within his heart he should meditate the Self of the shape of the Holy Flame or the Holy Light. (Om Mani Padmi Hum.)

धारपेचन चातानां धारणां धारयेद्धुः ।

सभूमयश विधामुसच सभार्थचायपांकः ॥ 38 ॥

सल्बश्चायल्बल्बश्र प्राणायामसु पड्विधः ।

प्राणायामसमो योगः प्राणायाम इतीरितः ॥ 39 ॥

He should fix his heart for a certain time to that Luminous Self whose Eyes are everywhere. So the intelligent man should practise Dhāranā. Prānāyāma is of six kinds: (1) Sadhūma (when the breaths are not steady), (2) Nirdhūma (better than the Sadhūma), (3) Sagarbha (when united with one's mantra), (4) Agarbha (when the practise is without the thought of any mantra), (5) Salaksya (when the heart is fixed on one's Deity) and (6) Alaksya (when the heart is not fixed on one's Deity). No yoga can be compared with Prānāyāma. This is equal to itself. Nothing can be its equal.

प्राणायाम इति प्रोक्तो रेवापुरककुभ्यकै: ।

वर्णत्रयात्मका होते रेवापुरककुभ्यकाः ॥ 40 ॥

स एल प्रणवः प्रोक्तः प्राणायामप्रच तमवः ।

इडया वायुमारोध्य पूरियैचोद्रे त्रिशत् ॥ 41 ॥

शर्नेः पोड्गामात्रिभरन्यया तं विश्चयेत् ।

एवं सभूपः प्राणात्मायामाः कथिता मुने ॥ 42 ॥

This Prānāyāna is of three kinds, called Recaka, Pūraka and Kumbhāka. The Prānāyāma consists of three letters, A, U, M, i.e., of the nature of “Om”. Or, in other words the letter A, of the Pranava Om indicates Pūraka, the letter “U” denotes Kumbhaka and the letter “M” denotes Recaka. By the Iḍā Nādī (by the left nostril) inhale as long as you count “A” (Visṇu) thirty-two times; then without breath, i.e., do Kumbhaka as long as you count “U” (Šiva) sixtyfour times and by the Pīngalā Nādī (the right nostril) do the Recaka, i.e., exhale the breath as long as you count “M” (Brahmā) for sixteen times. O Muni! Thus I have spoken to you of the Sadhūma Prāṇāyāma.

आधारेलिङ्गनाभिप्रकटितहृदये तालुमूले ललाटे
द्वे पत्रे षोडशारे द्विदशदशदलद्वादशार्धे चतुष्के ।
वासान्ते बालमध्ये डफकतसहिते कण्ठदेशे स्वराणां
हङ्क्षन्तत्त्वार्थयुक्तं सकलदलगतं वर्णरूपं नमामि ॥ ४३॥

अरुणकमलसंस्था तद्रजःपुञ्जवर्णा
हरनियमितचिह्ना पद्मतन्तुस्वरूपा ।
रविहुतवहराकानायकास्यस्तनाढ्या
सकृदपि यदि चित्ते संवसेत्स्यात्स भुक्तः ॥ ४४॥

स्थिति: सेवगतिवांग मतिभिंशता सुतिवर्धच: ।

अईं सर्वान्मको देय: स्तुति: सर्वै त्वदर्भनम् ॥ 45 ॥

अईं द्वैनी न चान्योभिम ब्रहैवाई न गोकभान् ।

सचिवदानन्दरणोर्जे स्वात्यानमिति दिवर्दे ॥ 46 ॥

प्रकाशमानां प्रव्य प्रयाणे प्रतिप्रयाणे.प्रयतुतायमानाम् ।

अंत:पट्वल्यामुसंचरौमानंद्रल्पामबलों प्रपहे ॥ 47 ॥

After doing the Prānāyāma as stated above, pierce the Six Cakras (i.e., plexuses) (called Satcakra bheda) and carry the Kula Kundalini to the Brahma Randhra, the brain aperture, or to the thousand petalled lotus in the head and meditate in the heart the Self like a Steady Flame. (The Nādis are not those which are known to the Vaidya or the Medical Śāstras. The latter are the gross physical nerves. The Nādis here are the Yoga Nādis, the subtle channels (Vivaras) along which the Prānik currents flow. Now the process of piercing the six Cakras (or nerve centres or centres of moving Prānik forces) is being described. Within

Book XI Chapter I

this body, the six nerve centres called Padmas (Lotuses) exist. They are respectively situated at the (1) Mūlādhāra (half way between Anus and Liṅga Mūla), called the Sacral Plexus; (2) Liṅga Mūla (the root of the genital organs),; called postatic plexus; (this is also called Svādhiṣthāna) (3) Navel, the Solar Plexus (4) Heart, the cardiac Plexus, (5) Throat (6) Forehead, between the eye brows there-the lotus in the forehead, called the cavernous plexus (Ājñā Cakra) has two petals; in these two petals, the two letters “Ham” “Kṣam” exist in the right hand direction (with the hands of the watch; going round from left of right keeping the right towards one circumambulated as a mark of respect). I bow down to these which are the two-lettered Brahma. The lotus that exists in the throat laryngeal or pharyngeal plexus has sixteen petals (viśuddhā cakra); in these are in due order in right hand direction the sixteen letters (vowels) a, ā, i, ī, u, ū, rī, r, lī, lī, e, ai, o, au, am, ah; I bow down to these which are the sixteen lettered Brahma. The lotus that exists in the heart, the cardiac plexus (anāhata cakra), has twelve petals; wherein are the twelve letters k, kh, g, gh, ñ, c, ch, j, jh, ñ, t, th; I bow to these twelve lettered Brahma. The Solar plexus forms the Great Junction of the Right and Left sympathetic chains Iḍā and Piṅgālā with the Cerebro spinal Axis. The lotus that exists in the navel, called the Solar Plexus, or Epigastric plexus (Manipura Cakra) has ten petals wherein are the ten letters d, dh, ñ, t, th, d, dh, n, p, ph, counting in the right hand direction (that is clockwise) (and the action of this clock’s vertical in the plane of the spinal cord; also it may be horizontal). The lotus that exists at the root the genital organ, the genital plexus or postatic plexus has six petals. The petals are the configurations made by the position of Nādis at any particular centre. Svādhisthāna cakra or Swayambhu Linga, wherein are situated the six letters, b, bh, m, y, r, l; I bow down to this six-

lettered Brahma. (These are the Laya Centres). The lotus that exists in the Mūladhāra, called the sacral or sacrooccoygeal plexus has four petals, wherein are the four letters v, ś, ʂ, s. I bow down to these four-lettered Brahma. In the above six nerve centres or Laya Centres, or lotuses, all the letters are situated in the right hand direction (clockwise).

Note: All the nerves of the body combine themselves in these six nerve centres or Laya Centres. Each of these centres is spheroidal and is of the Fourth Dimension. At each centre many transitions take place, many visions take place, many forces are perceived and wonderful varieties of knowledge are experienced. These are called the Laya Centres. For many things vanish into non-existence and many new Tattvas are experienced.)

Thus meditating on the Six Cakras or plexuses, meditate on the Kula Kungdāni, the Serpent Fire. She resides on the four petalled lotus (Centre of Śakti) called Mūlādhāra Cakra (Coccygeal plexus); She is of Rajo Guna; She is of a blood red colour, and She is expressed by the mantra “Hrīm,” which is the Māyābjja; she is subtle as the thread of the fibrous stock of the water lily. The Sun of Her face; Fire is Her breasts; he attains Jīvan mukti (liberation while living) within whose heart such a Kula Kungdāni arises an awakens even once. Thus meditating on Kula Kungdāni, one should pray to Her: Her sitting, coming, going, remaining, the thought on Her, the realisation of Her and chanting hymns to Her, etc., all are Mine, Who is of the nature of all in all; I am that Bhagavatī; O Bhagavatī! All my acts are Thy worship; I am the Devi; I am Brahma, I am free from sorrow. I am of the nature of Everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss. Thus one should meditate of one’s ownself.

ततो निजबुद्धो ध्यायते गुतमीधगत् ।

उच्चार्मिनसैशु जुवनेनं च्यादायि ॥ 4 8 ॥

I take refuge of that kula Kundalini, who appears like lightning and who holds the current thereof, when going to Brahmarandhra, in the brain, who appears like nectar when coming back from the

brain to the Mūlādhāra and who travels in the Susumnā Nādī in the spinal cord.

सुनीताअनेन मंत्रण साधको निवतात्मबान् ।

गुरुर्ज्हा गुरुर्जिथ्यगुरुर्नैवों महेश्वरः ॥

गुरोयं परं बहा तस्मै श्रीगुरेव नमः ॥ 49 ॥

श्री श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे एकावश्यकन्ये

मात्रक्षिताने नाम प्रभवोरभ्याः: ॥50 ॥

Then one is to meditate on one's own Guru, who is thought of as one with God, as seated in one's

brain and then worship Him mentally. Then the Sādhaka, controlling himself is to recite the following Mantra “The Guru is Brahmā, the Guru is Viṣṇu, it is the Guru again that is the Deva Maheśvara; it is Guru that is Para Brahma. I bow down to that Śrī Guru.

Here ends the First Chapter of the Eleventh Book on what is to be thought of in the morning in the Mahā Purānam Śrīmadēvibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.


