CHAPTER XIX

On the Going of the Devas to Vaikuntha after Tulasi's Marriage with Śaṅkhacūḍa

नारद उवाच

विविधमिदमाख्यानं भवता समुदाहतम् ।

शुनेन वेने मे तुरिन्दनं कदापि हि जायते ॥ १ ॥

ततः परं तु यज्जातं तत्वं वद महामते ।

Nārada said: O Bhagavan! Wonderful is the story that has been now recited by you. My ears are not satisfied. So tell me what happened afterwards.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

इत्येवमाणिरं दन्त्वा स्वालयंं च ययौ विधिः: ॥ 2 ॥

गान्धर्वेण विवाहेन जगृहे तां च दानवः ।

स्वर्गे दुंदुपिवाहं च पुष्पवृटिवंभूव ह ॥ 3 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! The Creator Brahmā, blessing them, departed to His own abode. The Dānava married Tulasi under the Gandharva method. The celestial drums sounded and the flowers were showed. In the beautiful lovely house the Dānaverdra, remained in perfect enjoyment.

स तेभे रामवा साई वासोगोईे मनोरोमे ।

मृच्छीं सा प्राप्त तुलसी नवसंगमसंगता ॥ ४ ॥


निम्नाने निर्जैल साध्यी संभोगसुखसागरे ।

चतु: ब्रहिकलामांन चतु: ब्रहिकथे मुख्यम् ॥ 5 ॥

Tulasī, too, being busy with fresh intercourses, became almost mad after them. The chaste Tulasī and Śaṅkhacūda both became deeply immersed in the ocean of bliss in their sexual union and began to enjoy sixty-four sorts of amorous sports.

कामगाशे यत्रिकस्तं रसिकानां यथेधित्यम् ।

अंगघृतवंगसंउल्यपूर्वकं क्षीमनोहरम् ॥ 6 ॥

तत्सर्वे सरयुक्तं चकारा रसिकेक्षरः ।

अंतिति सप्देशेचे च सर्वेन्तुविवर्षिते ॥ 7 ॥

In the Śāstras on love affairs, all the connections of limbs with limbs that are described, as the lover and the loved desire, they both enjoyed those with perfect freedom and pleasure. The place was solitary; to add to it, the scenery was grand and lovely; so nothing remained untasted of the several tastes of amorous pleasures.

पुष्पचन्दितनघे च पुष्पचन्दवायुना ।

पुष्पोद्याने नदीतीरे पुष्पचन्दनचर्धिते ॥ 8 ॥

गृहीत्वा रसिको रासे पुष्पचन्दनचर्धितम् ।

भूषितो भूषणेत्रे रत्नभूषणभूषिताम् ॥ 9 ॥

सुरते विरतिनंसित तयोः सुरतिबिजयोः ।

On the banks of the river, in flower-gardens, they slept on the flower-beds smeared with sandal-paste, and enjoyed the amorous pleasures. Both were adorned with jewel ornaments; both were skilled in amorous practices; so no one desisted.

जहार मानसे भर्तुलैलया लीलया सती ॥ 10 ॥

चेलनां रसिकावाश्र जहार रसभाविति ।

वक्षसईचंत राजस्तिलकं विजहार सा ॥ 11 ॥

The chaste Tulasi out of her nimbleness due to young age, easily stole into the heart of her husband. Śaṅkhacūḍa, too, a great expert in knowing other's amorous sentiments, attracted with heart of Tulasi.

जहार स च तस्याक्ष सिंसूरं विदुपत्रकम् ।

स तद्वक्षस्युरोचे च नखरेखां ददौ मुदा ॥ 12 ॥

सा ददौ ततुषपार्थे कर्णभूषणलक्षणम् ।

राजा तदोषुरुके ददौ रदनंदर्शनम् ॥ 13 ॥

Tulasi obliterated the sandal marks from the breast of the King and the sign of tilak from his nose. The King also wiped away the dot of Sindūra and Alakā (vermillion) marks from Tulasi's forehead and put marks of nails on her round plump breasts.

ततूरांडपुगले सा च प्रदृती तच्छतुर्णम् ।

आल्लानं चुच्यन्तं च जंधातिवर्दनं तथा ॥ 14 ॥

एवं परस्यं मौड़ां चक्रानुस्ती विजानतो ।

सुतेरे विलते तौ च समुत्थाय परस्यम् ॥ 15 ॥

सुवेयं चक्रानुस्ततय यद्याननसि वांशितम् ।

Tulasi also hurt the King's left side by her bracelets. Then the King bit the lips of Tulasi. Thus each one embraced the other, kissed each other and each one began to champoo the thighs, legs, etc. When both of them thus spent their time in amorous sports, they got up and began to dress themselves as they desired.

चंद्रंः कुंकुमारकैः सा तस्य तिलकं ददो ॥ १ ६ ॥

सर्विग मुन्दरे रमे चकार चानुलेयनम् ।

सुबासं चैव तांतुतं वर्हिजुके च वासमी ॥ १ ७ ॥

पारिज्ञातस्य कुर्मुं जरात्रोहरं परम् ।

अमूत्यरत्निनियांणंगुलीयकमुतनम् ॥ १ ८ ॥

सुंदरं च मणिर्वरं त्रिषु लोकेषु उतृर्णम् ।

दासी तत्वाहिमदेवं समुच्चायं पुनः पुनः ॥ १९ ॥

Tulasi smeared Śaṅkhacūḍa's nose with red sandal-paste mixed with Kumkum (saffron), smeared his body with sweet-scented sandal-paste, offered sweet-scented betels in his mouth, mad him put on celestial garments (fireproof; brought from Fire) put unto his neck the wonderful garland of Pārijāta flowers, destructive of disease and old age, invaluable jewel rings on his hand, and offering him excellent gems, rare in the three worlds, said: "O Lord! I am your maidservant" and uttering this repeatedly bowed down to the feet of her husband with devotion.

नानाय परशा भक्ल्या स्वामिनं गुणाशीलनम् ।

ससिता तन्मुखाधोयं लोचनाधयां पुनः पुनः ॥ 20 ॥

निमेभरहिताध्यां चाययप्यत्कामसुद्वम् ।

Book IX Chapter XIX

<table><tr><td>स च तां च समाकृष्य चकार वक्षसि प्रियाम् ॥ 21 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>सीमनां वाससाछछं दर्शगं मुखधकजम् ।</td></tr><tr><td>चुच्यक कठिने गंडे विवोष्टी पुनरेव च ॥ 22 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>ददी तन्ये वक्षतूमां वक्षगादाहतं च यत् ।</td></tr><tr><td>तदाहतां रत्नमालां श्रिषु लोकेषु दुलैभाम् ॥ 23 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>ददी मंत्रीत्युम् च सहायाम आहतं च यत् ।</td></tr><tr><td>केन्यरूपம் छायाया रोहिण्याश्रेय कुण्डलम् ॥ 24 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>अंगुलीयकल्पाति रत्नाश्र कर्णपाणम् ।</td></tr><tr><td>गजूं च रचिर्च विंत्रं यहर्ति विश्वकर्भण ॥ 25 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>विविचयपत्रक्रशेणी शय्चां चापि सुतुर्वीभम् ।</td></tr><tr><td>भूषणानि च दत्ता च भूपो होहां चकार है ॥ 26 ॥</td></tr></table>

She then got up and with smiling countenance began to look on his face with a steadfast gaze. The king Śankhacūda then attracted his dear Tulasi to his breast and took off the veil fully from her face and began to look on that, next moments he kissed on her cheek and lips and gave her a pair of garments brought from the Varuna's house, a necklace of jewels, hard to get in the three worlds, the tinklets of Svāhā, th wife of Agni, the Keyūra (armlets) of the Sun's wife Chāyā, the two earrings of Rohinī, the wife of the Moon, the finger rings of Rati, the wife of Kāmadeva, and the wonderfully beautiful conch, given by Viśva Karmā, excellent bedding studded with pearls and jewels and various ornaments; and when he gave her all these things, he smiled.

निर्मेमे कवरीभारे तस्या मांगल्यपूर्णण ।

सुचित्र पत्रक नंडयंडलै3स्या: सयं तथा ॥ 27 ॥

चंत्रलेखाधिक्रियर्तेच्चन्देन सुगाधित्रा ।

परितं परितक्षित्रैः सार्थं कुकुमविक्रपिं: ॥ 28 ॥

ज्वलतद्वीपाकारं च सिंदूरतिलकं ददी ।

तत्वादयव्यगुरो स्थलपत्यविरिभिंदि ॥ 29 ॥

चित्रालक्कारां च नख्रेषु ददी मुदा ।

स्ववक्षसि मुळ्न्यैस्य सरागं चरणांबुजम् ॥ 30 ॥

The king then put garlands on Tulasi's braid of hair, nicely variegated Alakās on her cheek, three crescent lines of sweet-scented sandal paste within the Alakās, dots of saffron all around that, the brilliant Sindūra mark looking like a flame, and

red Alkā on the feet and toes; he then placed feet on his breast and uttered repeatedly:

हे देवि तब दासोउदमित्युच्चार्य पुंन: पुनः ।

रतभूषितहसेन तां च कुला स्वक्षसि । 31 । ॥

तपोवर्ष परिस्त्य सरा स्थानांतरं ययो ।

मलये देविनलये शैले शैले तपोवर्धे ॥ 32 ॥

स्थाने स्थाने3तिरये च पूर्णयोहाने च निजिन ।

कन्दे कन्दे सिंधुतिंरे चैवातिसुन्दो ॥ 33 ॥

पुष्पभूजनदीतीर नीरातमानोहरे ।

पुलिने पुलिने निचे नचां नचां नदे नदे ॥ 34 ॥

मधी मधुकारणां च मधुराव्यनिताविले ।

विस्यंदने सुरसने नन्दने गन्यमादने ॥ 35 ॥

"I am your servant" and then held her on his breast. They then left the hermitage, in that state and began to travel in various places. In the Malaya mountain, in mountains after mountains, in solitary flower gardens, in the mountain caves, in beautiful sea-beaches, on the banks of the Puspabhadrā river, cool with watery breeze, in various rivers and riversides, in Vispandana forest with sweet songs of the birds of the vernal season.

देवेहोराने नदने च चित्रचंदनकामने ।

चंपकानां केतकीनां माध्यवीनां वरे ने ॥ 36 ॥

कैदानां मालतीनां च कुमुदोभोजकानने ।

कल्पवृक्षे कल्पवृक्षे पारिजातवने वने ॥ 37 ॥

They then went from Vispandana forest of the Surasana forest, from the Surasana, forest to the Nandana forest, from the Nandana forest to the nice Candana forests, from Candana forest to Campaka, Ketaki; Mâdhavi Kunda, Mâlati, and Kumuda and lotus forests; thence they went to the forest of desire gratifying trees (Kalpavrksa forest,) and Pârijâta trees.

निर्जनै कांचेन स्थाने ध्यये कांचनपर्वे ।

कांचीवने किंजलके कंचुके कांचनाकरे ॥ 38 ॥

पुष्यचन्दतलये पुंकाकिलकलशुत ।

पुष्यचन्दसयुक्तः पुष्यचन्दवायुगा ॥ 39 ॥

कामुक्यव कामुकः कामालसे रेगे रामया सह ।

They then went to the solitary place Kāñcana, thence to the Kāncī (forest) they then went to the

Śrinaddevibhāgavatam

Kījjalaka forest, thence to the Kāñcaṇākar (the gold mine), thence to Kāñcuka and various other forests echoed with the sweet sounds of cuckoos. There, on beds strewn with flowers and scented with sandal-paste they both enjoyed each other to their hearts content and with great pleasure.

न हि रुणतो दानवैद्रसूर्पित नैव जगाम सा ॥ 40 ॥

हविवा कृष्णवस्थैव ववुधे मदानसतः ।

But none of them, whether Śaṅkhacūḍa or Tulasī, got quenched with their thirst. Rather their passions were inflame! like the fire on which clarified butter is poured (in sacrifices).

तया सह समागत स्वासभं दानवस्ततः ॥ 41 ॥

रम्यं क्रीडाल्यं गत्वा विजहार पुनः पुनः ।

एवं स बुधुजे राज्यं शबुचूईः प्रतपावान् ॥ 42 ॥

एकमवन्तरं पूर्ण राजराजेश्वरो महान् ।

देवातामसुगाणां च दानवानां च संतन्तु ॥ 43 ॥

गधर्वाणि क्रिसरणारी राक्षसनां च शानितः ।

हताधिकारा देवाधुरिति चिक्षुका यथा ॥ 44 ॥

The King of the Dānavas, then, brought Tulasi to his own kingdom and, there, in his own beautiful garden house, he incessantly enjoyed her. Thus the powerful king of the Dānavas passed away one Manvantara in the enjoyment of his kingdom. He spread his sway over the Devatās, Asuras, Dānavas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, and Rāksasas. The Devas, dispossessed of their realms, wandered everywhere like beggars.

ते संर्वेतिविचरणाध्य प्रजमुर्षेधण: सभम् ।

युत्तांत कवधामासु रुनछुय भुगे युयु: ॥ 4 5 ॥

तदा बहा सुरैः सार्थ जागम शंकारलायम् ।

सर्वेगं कवधामास विधाता चंत्रोज्यम् ॥ 46 ॥

At last they united in a body and went to the Brahma's assembly and there they began to cry and then related the whole history how the Dānava Śankhacūda oppressed them. Hearing all this, Brahma took them to Śaṅkara and informed Him of the whole history of the case.

बढ़ा शिक्ष श्रीः सार्धे वैकुंदे च जगाम है ।

दुलैभं परमं धाम जराम्यतुहरं परम् ॥ 47 ॥

संप्राप च वरं द्वारमाङ्गमाणं हरेरों ।

ददर्श द्वारपालांश रत्नसिंहासनसिंहयतान् ॥ 48 ॥

When Mahādeva heard all this, He took them all to the highest place, Vaikuntha devoid of old age and death. Going towards the first entrance of Nārāyana's, abode, they saw the gate-keepers watching the gate, taking their seats on jewel thrones.

गोभितानीतावर्येक्ष रत्नभूषितान् ।

समितान्सेरावक्रासायान्यघनेत्रान्मोहान् ॥ 49 ॥

गंखचक्रमादापवधारांश्रैव चतुर्भज्ञान् ।

वनमालात्वितान्सर्वेअथाममुद्रविश्रहान् ॥ 50 ॥

They all looked brilliant, clothed with the yellow garments, adorned with jewel ornaments, garlanded with forest flowers, all of Śyāma Sundara (dark blue, very beautiful) bodies. They were fourarmed, holding on their hands, conch, mace, discus and lotus; sweet smile was on their faces and eyes beautiful like lotus leaves.

बहा तान्बथायाम वृत्तांत गमनार्थकम् ।

ते5नुर्जा च ददुस्तम्पे प्रविशेष तद्धान्या ॥ 51 ॥

एवं घोडण झाराणि निरीक्ष्य कामलोद्यः ।

दैदेः सार्थ तानतील प्रविशेष हरेः सभाम् ॥ 52 ॥

On Brahāmā asking them for entrance to the assembly, they nodded their assent. He, then, accompanied by the Devas, passed one by one, sixteen gates and at last came before Nārāyaṇa.

देवर्विधि: परितृता पार्थेड्ध चतुर्भर्जे: ।

नारायणस्वरूपेधे सर्वे: कौतुरुभ्यृषिति: ॥ 53 ॥

नवैदुर्मंडलाकारं चतुरतां मनोहराम ।

On reaching there. He saw that the assembly was completely filled with Devarşis, and four-armed Nārāyaṇalike Pārisads (attendants), decked with Kaustubha jewels. The sight of the Sabha (assembly) makes one think that the Moon has just arisen, shedding effulgent rays all round.

मणिर्द्वारनिर्माणी हीरासासुरुणीभितम् ॥ ५४ ॥

अमूल्यतल्याचितां रचितां सेवल्याय होः ।

माणिक्यमालजालभां मुक्तपर्चिक्विष्णितम् ॥ 55 ॥

Book IX Chapter XIX

मंडितां मंडलाकारे रत्नदर्पणकोदिधि: ।

विश्नेशीअत्रेखाशिमर्नानाशिवसिविशितमा। ५६ ॥

By the will of Śrī Hari, excellent diamonds, invaluable gems and necklaces of gems and jewels were placed at various places. At other places rows of pearls were shedding their splendour and brilliance like the garlands of gems and jewels. At others, the mirrors were placed in a circle; and at various other places, the endless wonderful picture lines were drawn.

पदारानोंद्रसितां स्तिरां माणियंकजैः ।

सोपानशतकैयुक्ता स्यमन्तकविरिपिंदितेः ॥ 57 ॥

पटुसूग्रधिष्युकै.शुशचन्द्रपललवेः ।

इन्द्रीललंपवर्वर्वैहिता सुमनोहारण ॥ 58 ॥

Again at other places, the jewels called Padmarāgas were artistically arranged as if the lotuses were there spreading their lustrous beauty all around. At many other places rows of steps were made of wonderful Syamantak jewels. All around the assembly, there were the excellent pillars, built of Indranīlam jewels.

तद्विन्पूर्णकृष्यानां समूहैंक्ष सम्यित्वात् ।

पारिजातग्रसुनानां मालगाजलैर्वितजितान् ॥ 59 ॥

कस्तूरीकुंकुमारकेत्: सुगाधिचन्दनुघैः ।

सुसंस्कृतां तु सर्वे वासितां नंधावगुना ॥ 60 ॥

Over those pillars, sandal leaves strung on strings from pillar to pillar, were suspended. Golden jars, all brimful with water were located at various places. All around, the garlands of Parijāta flowers were seen. The hall was decorated with sweet scented sandal trees, red like saffron and musk. Sweet scents were being emitted all round.

विद्यारीसूढानी दान्त्यालईरिवारितान् ।

सहस्योजनायमो परिपूर्ण च क्रिके: ॥ 6 1 ॥

The Vidyādharis were dancing at places. The assembly hall measured one thousand Yojanas. Countless were engaged all over on various works.

ददर्श शीहीरं बझा शंकरऊ शुरैः सह ।

वसंतं तन्मध्येशे यथेन्दुं तारकावुतम् ॥ 62 ॥

अमूल्यरत्नियर्णचित्रसिंहासने त्रियतम् ।

क्रनीटिंटं कुण्डलिंन वनमालाविष्यति ॥ 63 ॥

चन्द्रनीक्षितसर्वां क्षितं कैलिंकजम् ।

पुगते नृत्यगीतं च पश्वांतं सस्मितं मुदा ॥ 64 ॥

Brahmā, Śaṅkara, and the other Gods saw there Śrī Hari seated in the centre on an invaluable jewel throne, as a Moon looks surrounded by stars. There were the crown on His head, the earrings on His ears; garlands made of wild flowers were on his neck and His body was smeared all over with sandal paste and He was holding Kelipadma (a sort of lotus) in His hand. He was seeing with a smiling countenance, the dancing and music before Him.

गर्भार सरस्वतीताकां लक्ष्रीधृतयाद्यबुजम् ।

लक्ष्म्या प्रदर्त तांबुतं भुक्तवंत सुवासितम् ॥ 65 ॥

गंगाया पराया भक्त्या सेवितं प्रशेतचारम्: ।

सर्वेक्षा स्तूयानां च भक्तिन्यापतकर्षेः ॥ 66 ॥

He was full of peace, the Lord of Sarasvati Lakṣmī was holding gently His lotus-feet and He was chewing the sweet scented betal offered by Her. Gaṅgā also was fanning Him devotedly with a white Cāmara and the others were singing hymns to Him with their heads bent low with devotion.

एर्वसिधिष्टं तं दृष्टा परिपुरातां प्रभुम् ।

बहादाय: सुग: सर्वे प्रणय्य तुड्युस्तदा ॥ 67 ॥

पुलकाशितसर्वाग्नः साधुनेत्राश महपादा: ।

भक्ताश पश्चा भक्तवा भीता न्यात्मकंधाः ॥ 68 ॥

Brahmā and the other Gods all bowed down to Him; their bodies were all filled with Pulaka (excessive joy causing hair stand on end); tears flowed from their eyes and their voices were choked out of emotion.

कृताजिलुपुं भृत्वा विधाता जगतामपि ।

वृत्तां कंक्षयामास विलयेन हेः पूः ॥ 69 ॥

हरितद्विचनं शुत्वा सर्वतः सर्वभावयित् ।

प्रहस्योवाच ब्रहाणां रहस्यं च मनोहम् ॥ 70 ॥

The creator Brahmā, then, with clasped hands informed Him, with head bowed down, of the whole history of Śaṅkhacūḍa." Hearing this, the omniscient Hari, knowing the minds of all, smiled and spoke to Brahmā all the interesting secrets:

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

श्रीभगवानुवाव

गंखच्छस्य वृत्तां सर्वे ज्ञानाय पचत्र ।

मद्राकस्य च गोपस्य महातेजस्विनः पुरा ॥ 7 1 ॥

शृणु तत्नर्ववृत्तानिमितिहासुं पुताननम् ।

गोलोकस्यैव चरितं पापचं पुण्यकात्मम् ॥ 7 2 ॥

O Lotus born! I know all about Śaṅkhacūḍa. He was in his previous birth My great devotee, an energetic Gopa. Now I speak to you the ancient history of Goloka; hear. This story about Goloka is sidestroyang and highly meritorious.

सुदामा नाम गोष्ठ प्रापेद्वगरे मम ।

स प्राप दानवी थोर्नि राधागपालसुद्राभणत् ॥ 7 3 ॥

तत्रैकदारुभगमं स्वालयद्वासमंडलम् ।

विराजामपि नीचा च मम प्राणाधिका पता ॥ 7 4 ॥

śaṅkhacūda, in his previous birth was the Gopa Sudāmā, My chief Pārisad (attendant). He has now become a Dānava on account of the dire curse pronounced by Śri Rādhā.

सा मां विज्ञा साधि विज्ञाय किंकरीयुखात् ।

पश्रात्कृष्टा सा जगान न द्वर्शि च तत्र ताम ॥ 75 ॥

विज्ञां च नदीकर्णं मां ज्ञाला च तिरोहित्न् ।

पुर्जनांगम सा द्वृषा स्वालयं सखिधिः सह ॥ 76 ॥

One day when I went from My abode, accompanied by Virajā Gopi, to the Rāsa Manḍala, My beloved Rādhā, hearing this news from a maid servant, came up at once with Her whole host of Sakhīs wrathful, to the Rāsa Manḍalam (ball dance in Goloka) and, not being able to see Me, saw Virajā turned into a river, She thought that I had disappeared.

मां दूद्रा मन्द्रे देवी सुदामना सहितं पुरा ।

भूगं सा भरल्यामास मौनीभूतं च सुविध्यम् ॥ 77 ॥

तच्छुलाससहमानऊ सुदामा तां चुकोप है ।

स च तां भरल्यामास कोपेन मम सक्रिधे ॥ 78 ॥

So She went back to Her own abode with Her Sakhis. But when I returned to the house with Sudāmā, Rādhā rebuked Me very much. I remained silent. But Sudāmā could not bear and he rebuked Rādhā in My presence, a thing quite intolerable to Her dignity!

तच्छूला कोययुक्ता सा रकपढ़जलोचना ।

बहिक्तूं चकात्माजी संसरन्तं मम संसदि ॥ 7 9 ॥

सखीलक्षं समुतस्थी दुवरिं तेजसोल्बणम् ।

बहिक्षाकर तेतूर्ण जल्यन्ते च पुनः पुनः ॥ 80 ॥

On hearing this rebuke, Rādhā's eyes became red with anger and She immediately ordered Her Sakhīs to drive him away. Sudāmā began to tremble with fear. Immediately on Her command lakhs and lakhs of Sakhīs got up immediately and drove that not irresistible Sudāmā away. Sudāmā repeated his chafings and roarings.

सा च तत्ताऊं तासां श्रुत्वा रहा शाशण है ।

याहि है दानवीं योविंमित्येवं दाहणं वचः ॥ 81 ॥

तं गच्छते शर्षते च रूवन्तं मां ग्रणम्य च ।

वारयामास तुहा सा रुदती कृपया पुनः ॥ 82 ॥

On hearing these, She cursed him: 'You better be born in the womb of a Dānavi.' Hearing the terrible curse, Sudāmā bowed down to Me and went away crying; then Rādhā, who was all-mercy, became melted with mercy.

है वत्स तिष्ठ मा गच्छ क्व यासीति पुनः पुनः ।

सपुच्चार्य च तत्थाङ्गजगमा सा च विकल्पम् ॥ 83 ॥

गोय्यछ रुकुनु: सर्वा गोग्याशीय सुवुःखिताः ।

ते सर्वे राधिका चापि तत्स्थात्रोंधिता मया ॥ 84 ॥

And She prevented him repeatedly, not to go away. Rādhā wept and told him, 'O Child! Wait. Where are you going? No more you will have to go; return.' Thus saying She became very distressed. The Gopas and Gopiś also began to weep. I then explained to them.

आयास्यति क्षणानें कृत्वा शापस्य पालनम् ।

सुदामंस्विभ्रागच्छेयुक्वा सा च निवारिता ॥ 85 ॥

गोलोकस्य क्षणान्धि चेक मन्त्रतं भवेत् ।

पृथिव्यां जगतां धारातिरेव वचनं ध्यम् ॥ 86 ॥

In about half a moment Sudāmā will come back, fulfilling the conditions of the curse. 'O Sudāmā! Come here when the curse expires.' Then he appeased Rādhā also. Know that one moment (Kṣaṇa) in Goloka is equal to one Manvantara on earth.

Book IX Chapter XX

इत्येवं शंखपूढ़शु पुनस्तत्रेव यास्यति ।

महाबलिष्ठो योगेशः सर्वमायाशिपर: ॥ 87 ॥

मम शूलं गृहीत्वा च शीधं गच्छुु भातम् ।

शिवः करोतु सहारं मम शुलेन रक्षसः ॥ 88 ॥

The Yogi Śankhacūda, expert in Mañā and very powerful will soon return from the earth. Take this My weapon Śūla and go early to Bhārata. Śiva will slay the Dānava by this Śūlāstra.

मैव कवचं कंठे सर्वमंगलकारकम् ।

विशर्पित दानवः शश्वस्मारे विजयती तः ।। ८९ ॥।

तम्मब्बाद्भियन्ते चैव न को3पि द्विंस्तुं क्षभः ।

तद्वाचनां कारिधामि विग्रस्पोजहमेव च ॥ ९० ॥।

The Dānava holds always on his neck My auspicious Kavaca and will therefore become the conqueror of the universe. No one will he able to kill him as long as he holds the above Kavaca. So, first of all, I will go to him in the form of a Brāhmaṇa and ask from him the Kavaca.

सतीत्यहान्सितत्यन्या यत्र काले भविष्यति ।

तत्रैव काले तन्म्यूरिति दन्तो वरसत्वया ॥ 9 ।। ॥

तत्पत्याश्रोदे सौर्मेपर्यिषयाम पितश्रतम् ।

तत्बणे चैव तन्मूल्यंविषयिति न संशयः ॥ 92 ॥

पशास्ता देहुस्त्युज्य भविष्यिति मम प्रिया ।

O Creator! Thou also didst give him the boon that his death would occur when the chastity of of his wife would be destroyed. I will go and hold intercourse with his wife. Then his death will occur without fail. His wife after her death will come and become My dearest wife.

इत्युक्त्या जगतां नायो ददौ शुले हराय च ॥ ९३ ॥

शुले दत्ता ययी शीघं हरिरचन्तरे मुदा ।

भारतं च ययुद्वां ब्रह्मक्ररुपोमाः ॥ ९४ ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे नवमस्कन्ये

एकोनविशोर्यथा: 11 19 1

Thus saying, Nārāyaṇa gave over to Mahādeva the Sūlaśtra. Then He went gladly to His inner compartments. On the other hand, Brahmā and Rudra and the other Devas incarnated themselves in Bhārata.

Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter on the going of the Devas to Vaikuntha after Tulasi's

marriage with Śaṅkhacāḍa in the Mahāpurāṇaṃ

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XX

