[Ch 19 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada said: O Bhagavan! Wonderful is the story that has been now recited by you. My ears are not satisfied. So tell me what happened afterwards.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- “O Bhāgavān! Wonderful is the story that has been now recited by you. My ears are not satisfied. So tell me what happened afterwards.”

[Ch 19 Verse 2-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! The Creator Brahmā, blessing them, departed to His own abode. The Dānava married Tulasi under the Gandharva method. The celestial drums sounded and the flowers were showed. In the beautiful lovely house the Dānaverdra, remained in perfect enjoyment.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Nārada! The Creator Brahmā, blessing them, departed to His own abode. The Dānava married Tulasī under the Gandharba method. The celestial drums sounded and the flowers were showered. In the beautiful lovely house the Dānavendra, remained in perfect enjoyment.

[Ch 19 Verse 4-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Tulasī, too, being busy with fresh intercourses, became almost mad after them. The chaste Tulasī and Śaṅkhacūda both became deeply immersed in the ocean of bliss in their sexual union and began to enjoy sixty-four sorts of amorous sports.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Tulasī, too, being busy with fresh intercourses, became almost mad after them. The chaste Tulasī and Śaṅkhacūḍa both became deeply immersed in the ocean of bliss in their sexual union and began to enjoy sixty-four sorts of amorous sports.

[Ch 19 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the Śāstras on love affairs, all the connections of limbs with limbs that are described, as the lover and the loved desire, they both enjoyed those with perfect freedom and pleasure. The place was solitary; to add to it, the scenery was grand and lovely; so nothing remained untasted of the several tastes of amorous pleasures.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the Śāstras on love affairs, all the connections of limbs with limbs that are described, as the lover and the loved desire, they both enjoyed those with perfect freedom and pleasure. The place was solitary; to add to it, the scenery was grand and lovely; so nothing remained untasted of the several tastes of amorous pleasures.

[Ch 19 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the banks of the river, in flower-gardens, they slept on the flower-beds smeared with sandal-paste, and enjoyed the amorous pleasures. Both were adorned with jewel ornaments; both were skilled in amorous practices; so no one desisted.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the banks of the river, in flower-gardens, they slept on the flower beds smeared with sandal-paste, and enjoyed the amorous pleasures. Both were adorned with jewel ornaments; both were skilled in amorous practices; so no one desisted.

[Ch 19 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The chaste Tulasi out of her nimbleness due to young age, easily stole into the heart of her husband. Śaṅkhacūḍa, too, a great expert in knowing other's amorous sentiments, attracted with heart of Tulasi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The chaste Tulasī out of her nimbleness due to young age, easily stole into the heart of her husband. Śaṅkhacūḍa, too, a great expert in knowing other’s amorous sentiments, attracted the heart of Tulasī.

[Ch 19 Verse 12-13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Tulasi obliterated the sandal marks from the breast of the King and the sign of tilak from his nose. The King also wiped away the dot of Sindūra and Alakā (vermillion) marks from Tulasi's forehead and put marks of nails on her round plump breasts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Tulasī obliterated the sandal marks from the breast of the King and the sign of tilak from his nose. The King also wiped away the dot of Sindur and Alakā (vermillion) marks from Tulasī’s forehead and put marks of nails on her round plump breasts.

[Ch 19 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Tulasi also hurt the King's left side by her bracelets. Then the King bit the lips of Tulasi. Thus each one embraced the other, kissed each other and each one began to champoo the thighs, legs, etc. When both of them thus spent their time in amorous sports, they got up and began to dress themselves as they desired.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Tulasī also hurt the King’s left side by her bracelets. Then the King bit the lips of Tulasī. Thus each one embraced the other, kissed each other and each one began to champoo the thighs, legs, etc. When both of them thus spent their time in amorous sports, they got up and began to dress themselves as they desired.

[Ch 19 Verse 16-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Tulasi smeared Śaṅkhacūḍa's nose with red sandal-paste mixed with Kumkum (saffron), smeared his body with sweet-scented sandal-paste, offered sweet-scented betels in his mouth, mad him put on celestial garments (fireproof; brought from Fire) put unto his neck the wonderful garland of Pārijāta flowers, destructive of disease and old age, invaluable jewel rings on his hand, and offering him excellent gems, rare in the three worlds, said: "O Lord! I am your maidservant" and uttering this repeatedly bowed down to the feet of her husband with devotion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Tulasī smeared Śaṅkhacūḍa’s nose with red sandal-paste mixed with kumkum (saffron), smeared his body with sweet-scented sandal-paste, offered sweet-scented betels in his mouth, made him put on celestial garments (fireproof; brought from Fire) put unto his neck the wonderful garland of Pārijāta flowers, destructive of disease and old age, invaluable jewel rings on his hand and offering him excellent gems, rare in the three worlds, said :-- “O Lord! I am your maidservant” and uttering this repeatedly bowed down to the feet of her husband with devotion.

[Ch 19 Verse 20-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She then got up and with smiling countenance began to look on his face with a steadfast gaze. The king Śankhacūda then attracted his dear Tulasi to his breast and took off the veil fully from her face and began to look on that, next moments he kissed on her cheek and lips and gave her a pair of garments brought from the Varuna's house, a necklace of jewels, hard to get in the three worlds, the tinklets of Svāhā, th wife of Agni, the Keyūra (armlets) of the Sun's wife Chāyā, the two earrings of Rohinī, the wife of the Moon, the finger rings of Rati, the wife of Kāmadeva, and the wonderfully beautiful conch, given by Viśva Karmā, excellent bedding studded with pearls and jewels and various ornaments; and when he gave her all these things, he smiled.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She then got up and with smiling countenance began to look on his face with a steadfast gaze. The king Śaṅkhacūḍa then attracted his dear Tulasī to his breast and took off the veil fully from her face and began to look on that, next moment he kissed on her cheek and lips and gave her a pair of garments brought from the Varuṇa’s house, a necklace of jewels, hard to get in the three worlds, the tinklets of Svāhā, the wife of Agni, the Keyura (armlets) of the Sun’s wife Cāyā, the two earrings of Rohiṇī, the wife of the Moon, the finger rings of Rati, the wife of Kāmadeva, and the wonderfully beautiful conch, given by Viśva Karmā, excellent bedding studded with pearls and jewels and various ornaments; and when he gave her all these things, he smiled.

[Ch 19 Verse 27-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king then put garlands on Tulasi's braid of hair, nicely variegated Alakās on her cheek, three crescent lines of sweet-scented sandal paste within the Alakās, dots of saffron all around that, the brilliant Sindūra mark looking like a flame, and red Alkā on the feet and toes; he then placed feet on his breast and uttered repeatedly:
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king then put garlands on Tulasī’s braid of hair, nicely variegated Alakās on her cheek, three crescent lines of sweet-scented sandal paste within the Alakās, dots of saffron all around that, the brilliant Sindura mark looking like a flame, and red Āltā on the feet and toes; he then placed those feet on his breast and utterred repeatedly :--

[Ch 19 Verse 31-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "I am your servant" and then held her on his breast. They then left the hermitage, in that state and began to travel in various places. In the Malaya mountain, in mountains after mountains, in solitary flower gardens, in the mountain caves, in beautiful sea-beaches, on the banks of the Puspabhadrā river, cool with watery breeze, in various rivers and riversides, in Vispandana forest with sweet songs of the birds of the vernal season.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “I am your servant” and then held her on his breast. They then left the hermitage, in that state and began to travel in various places. In the Malaya mountain, in mountains after mountains, in solitary flower gardens, in the mountain caves, in beautiful sea-beaches, on the banks of the Puṣpabhadrā river, cool with watery breeze, in various rivers and riversides, in Viṣpandana forest echoed with sweet songs of the birds of the vernal season.

[Ch 19 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They then went from Vispandana forest of the Surasana forest, from the Surasana, forest to the Nandana forest, from the Nandana forest to the nice Candana forests, from Candana forest to Campaka, Ketaki; Mâdhavi Kunda, Mâlati, and Kumuda and lotus forests; thence they went to the forest of desire gratifying trees (Kalpavrksa forest,) and Pârijâta trees.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They then went from Viṣpandana forest to the Surasana forest, from the Surasana, forest to the Nandana forest, from the Nandana forest to the nice Chandana forests, from Chandana forest to Champaka, Ketakī; Mādhavī Kuṇḍa, Mālatī, and Kumuda and lotus forests; thence they went to the forest of desire gratifying trees (Kalpavrikṣa forest,) and Pārijāta trees.

[Ch 19 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They then went to the solitary place Kāñcana, thence to the Kāncī (forest) they then went to the Śrinaddevibhāgavatam Kījjalaka forest, thence to the Kāñcaṇākar (the gold mine), thence to Kāñcuka and various other forests echoed with the sweet sounds of cuckoos. There, on beds strewn with flowers and scented with sandal-paste they both enjoyed each other to their hearts content and with great pleasure.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They then went to the solitary place Kāñcan, thence to the Kāñcī (forest) they then went to the Kīñjalaka forest, thence to the Kāñcanākar (the gold mine), thence to Kañcuka and various other forests echoed with the sweet sounds of cuckoos. There, on beds strewn with flowers and scented with sandal paste they both enjoyed each other to their hearts content and with great pleasure.

[Ch 19 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But none of them, whether Śaṅkhacūḍa or Tulasī, got quenched with their thirst. Rather their passions were inflame! like the fire on which clarified butter is poured (in sacrifices).
NEW CORR ENG ──► But none of them, whether Śaṅkhacūḍa or Tulasī, got quenched with their thirst. Rather their passions were inflamed like the fire on which clarified butter is poured (in sacrifices).

[Ch 19 Verse 41-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King of the Dānavas, then, brought Tulasi to his own kingdom and, there, in his own beautiful garden house, he incessantly enjoyed her. Thus the powerful king of the Dānavas passed away one Manvantara in the enjoyment of his kingdom. He spread his sway over the Devatās, Asuras, Dānavas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, and Rāksasas. The Devas, dispossessed of their realms, wandered everywhere like beggars.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King of the Dānavas, then, brought Tulasī to his own kingdom and, there, in his own beautiful garden house, he incessantly enjoyed her. Thus the powerful king of the Dānavas passed away one Manvantara in the enjoyment of his kingdom. He spread his sway over the Devatās, Asuras, Dānavas, Gandharbas, Kinnaras, and Rākṣasas. The Devas, dispossessed of their realms, wandered everywhere like beggars.

[Ch 19 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At last they united in a body and went to the Brahma's assembly and there they began to cry and then related the whole history how the Dānava Śankhacūda oppressed them. Hearing all this, Brahma took them to Śaṅkara and informed Him of the whole history of the case.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At last they united in a body and went to the Brahmā’s assembly and there they began to cry and then related the whole history how the Dānava Śaṅkhacūḍa oppressed them. Hearing all this, Brahmā took them to Śaṅkara and informed Him of the whole history of the case.

[Ch 19 Verse 47-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Mahādeva heard all this, He took them all to the highest place, Vaikuntha devoid of old age and death. Going towards the first entrance of Nārāyana's, abode, they saw the gate-keepers watching the gate, taking their seats on jewel thrones.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Mahādeva heard all this, He took them all to the highest place, Vaikuṇṭha devoid of old age and death. Going towards the first entrance of Nārāyaṇa’s abode, they saw the gate-keepers watching the gate, taking their seats on jewel thrones.

[Ch 19 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They all looked brilliant, clothed with the yellow garments, adorned with jewel ornaments, garlanded with forest flowers, all of Śyāma Sundara (dark blue, very beautiful) bodies. They were fourarmed, holding on their hands, conch, mace, discus and lotus; sweet smile was on their faces and eyes beautiful like lotus leaves.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They all looked brilliant, clothed with the yellow garments, adorned with jewel ornaments, garlanded with forest flowers, all of Śyāma Sundara (dark blue, very beautiful) bodies. They were four-armed, holding on their hands, conch, mace, discus and lotus; sweet smile was on their faces and eyes beautiful like lotus leaves.

[Ch 19 Verse 51-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On Brahāmā asking them for entrance to the assembly, they nodded their assent. He, then, accompanied by the Devas, passed one by one, sixteen gates and at last came before Nārāyaṇa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On Brahmā asking them for entrance to the assembly, they nodded their assent. He, then, accompanied by the Devas, passed one by one, sixteen gates and at last came before Nārāyaṇa.

[Ch 19 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On reaching there. He saw that the assembly was completely filled with Devarşis, and four-armed Nārāyaṇalike Pārisads (attendants), decked with Kaustubha jewels. The sight of the Sabha (assembly) makes one think that the Moon has just arisen, shedding effulgent rays all round.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On reaching there, He saw that the assembly was completely filled with Devarṣis, and four-armed Nārāyaṇlike Pāṛṣadas (attendants), decked with Kaustubba jewels. The sight of the Sabhā (assembly) makes one think that the Moon has just arisen, shedding effulgent rays all round.

[Ch 19 Verse 54-56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► By the will of Śrī Hari, excellent diamonds, invaluable gems and necklaces of gems and jewels were placed at various places. At other places rows of pearls were shedding their splendour and brilliance like the garlands of gems and jewels. At others, the mirrors were placed in a circle; and at various other places, the endless wonderful picture lines were drawn.
NEW CORR ENG ──► By the will of Śrī Hari, excellent diamonds, invaluable gems and necklaces of gems and jewels were placed at various places. At other places rows of pearls were shedding their splendour and brilliance like the garlands of gems and jewels. At others, the mirrors were placed in a circle; and at various other places, the endless wonderful artistic picture lines were drawn.

[Ch 19 Verse 57-58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again at other places, the jewels called Padmarāgas were artistically arranged as if the lotuses were there spreading their lustrous beauty all around. At many other places rows of steps were made of wonderful Syamantak jewels. All around the assembly, there were the excellent pillars, built of Indranīlam jewels.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again at other places the jewels called Padmarāgas were artistically arranged as if the lotuses were there spreading their lustrous beauty all around. At many other places rows of steps were made of wonderful Syamantak jewels. All around the assembly, there were the excellent pillars, built of Indranīlam jewels.

[Ch 19 Verse 59-60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Over those pillars, sandal leaves strung on strings from pillar to pillar, were suspended. Golden jars, all brimful with water were located at various places. All around, the garlands of Parijāta flowers were seen. The hall was decorated with sweet scented sandal trees, red like saffron and musk. Sweet scents were being emitted all round.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Over those pillars, sandal leaves strung on strings from to pillar to pillar, were suspended. Golden jars, all brimful with water were located at various places. All around, the garlands of Pārijāta flowers were seen. The hall was decorated with sweet scented sandal trees, red like saffron and musk. Sweet scents were being emitted all round.

[Ch 19 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Vidyādharis were dancing at places. The assembly hall measured one thousand Yojanas. Countless were engaged all over on various works.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Vidyadhāris were dancing at places. The assembly hall measured one thousand Yojanas. Countless servants were engaged all over on various works.

[Ch 19 Verse 62-64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā, Śaṅkara, and the other Gods saw there Śrī Hari seated in the centre on an invaluable jewel throne, as a Moon looks surrounded by stars. There were the crown on His head, the earrings on His ears; garlands made of wild flowers were on his neck and His body was smeared all over with sandal paste and He was holding Kelipadma (a sort of lotus) in His hand. He was seeing with a smiling countenance, the dancing and music before Him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā, Śaṅkara, and the other Gods saw there Śrī Hari seated in the centre on an invaluable jewel throne, as a Moon looks surrounded by stars. There were the crown on His head, the ear-rings on His ears; garlands made of wild flowers were on his neck and His body was smeared all over with sandal paste and He was holding Kelipadma (a sort of lotus) in His hand. He was seeing, with a smiling countenance, the dancing and music before Him.

[Ch 19 Verse 65-66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He was full of peace, the Lord of Sarasvati Lakṣmī was holding gently His lotus-feet and He was chewing the sweet scented betal offered by Her. Gaṅgā also was fanning Him devotedly with a white Cāmara and the others were singing hymns to Him with their heads bent low with devotion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He was full of peace, the Lord of Sarasvatī. Laksmī was holding gently His lotus feet and He was chewing the sweet scented betel offered by Her. Gaṅgā also was fanning Him devotedly with a white Cāmara and the others were singing hymns to Him with their heads bent low with devotion.

[Ch 19 Verse 67-68]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā and the other Gods all bowed down to Him; their bodies were all filled with Pulaka (excessive joy causing hair stand on end); tears flowed from their eyes and their voices were choked out of emotion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā and the other Gods all bowed down to Him; their bodies were all filled with Pulaka (excessive joy causing hair stand on end); tears flowed from their eyes and their voices were choked out of emotion.

[Ch 19 Verse 69-70]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The creator Brahmā, then, with clasped hands informed Him, with head bowed down, of the whole history of Śaṅkhacūḍa." Hearing this, the omniscient Hari, knowing the minds of all, smiled and spoke to Brahmā all the interesting secrets:
NEW CORR ENG ──► The creator Brahmā, then, with clasped hands informed Him, with head bowed down, of the whole history of Śaṅkhacūḍa. Hearing this, the omniscient Hari, knowing the minds of all, smiled and spoke to Brahmā all the interesting secrets :--

[Ch 19 Verse 71-72]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lotus born! I know all about Śaṅkhacūḍa. He was in his previous birth My great devotee, an energetic Gopa. Now I speak to you the ancient history of Goloka; hear. This story about Goloka is sidestroyang and highly meritorious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- O Lotus born! I know all about Śaṅkhacūḍa. He was in his previous birth My great devotee, an energetic Gopa. Now I speak to you the ancient history of Goloka; hear. This story about Goloka is sin destroying and highly meritorious.

[Ch 19 Verse 73-74]
OLD OCR ENG ──► śaṅkhacūda, in his previous birth was the Gopa Sudāmā, My chief Pārisad (attendant). He has now become a Dānava on account of the dire curse pronounced by Śri Rādhā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śaṅkhacūḍa, in his previous birth was the Gopa Sudāmā, My chief Pāṛṣad (attendant). He has now become a Dānava on account of the dire curse pronounced by Śrī Rādhā.

[Ch 19 Verse 75-76]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One day when I went from My abode, accompanied by Virajā Gopi, to the Rāsa Manḍala, My beloved Rādhā, hearing this news from a maid servant, came up at once with Her whole host of Sakhīs wrathful, to the Rāsa Manḍalam (ball dance in Goloka) and, not being able to see Me, saw Virajā turned into a river, She thought that I had disappeared.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One day when I went from My abode, accompanied by Virajā Gopī, to the Rāsa Maṇḍala, My beloved Rādhā, hearing this news from a maid servant, came up at once with Her whole host of Sakhīs wrathful, to the Rāsa Maṇḍalam (ball dance in Goloka) and, not being able to see Me, saw Virajā turned into a river, She thought that I had disappeared.

[Ch 19 Verse 77-78]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So She went back to Her own abode with Her Sakhis. But when I returned to the house with Sudāmā, Rādhā rebuked Me very much. I remained silent. But Sudāmā could not bear and he rebuked Rādhā in My presence, a thing quite intolerable to Her dignity!
NEW CORR ENG ──► So She went back to Her own abode with Her Sakhīs. But when I returned to the house with Sudāmā, Rādhā rebuked Me very much. I remained silent. But Sudāmā could not bear and he rebuked Rādhā in My presence, a thing quite intolerable to Her dignity!

[Ch 19 Verse 79-80]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On hearing this rebuke, Rādhā's eyes became red with anger and She immediately ordered Her Sakhīs to drive him away. Sudāmā began to tremble with fear. Immediately on Her command lakhs and lakhs of Sakhīs got up immediately and drove that not irresistible Sudāmā away. Sudāmā repeated his chafings and roarings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On hearing this rebuke, Rādhā’s eyes became red with anger and She immediately ordered Her Sakhīs to drive him away. Sudāmā began to tremble with fear. Immediately on Her command lakhs and lakhs of Sakhīs got up immediately and drove that hot irresistible Sudāmā away. Sudāmā repeated his chafings and roarings.

[Ch 19 Verse 81-82]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On hearing these, She cursed him: 'You better be born in the womb of a Dānavi.' Hearing the terrible curse, Sudāmā bowed down to Me and went away crying; then Rādhā, who was all-mercy, became melted with mercy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On hearing these, She cursed him :-- “You better be born in the womb of a Dānavī.” Hearing the terrible curse, Sudāmā bowed down to Me and went away crying; then Rādhā, who was all-mercy, became melted with mercy.

[Ch 19 Verse 83-84]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And She prevented him repeatedly, not to go away. Rādhā wept and told him, 'O Child! Wait. Where are you going? No more you will have to go; return.' Thus saying She became very distressed. The Gopas and Gopiś also began to weep. I then explained to them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And She prevented him repeatedly, not to go away. Rādhā wept and told him, “O Child! Wait. Where are you going? No more you will have to go; return.” Thus saying She became very distressed. The Gopas and Gopīs also began to weep. I then explained to them,

[Ch 19 Verse 85-86]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In about half a moment Sudāmā will come back, fulfilling the conditions of the curse. 'O Sudāmā! Come here when the curse expires.' Then he appeased Rādhā also. Know that one moment (Kṣaṇa) in Goloka is equal to one Manvantara on earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “In about half a moment Sudāmā will come back, fulfilling the conditions of the curse. O Sudāmā! Come here when the curse expires.” Then he appeased Rādhā also. “Know that one moment (Kṣaṇ) in Goloka is equal to one Manvantara on earth.

[Ch 19 Verse 87-88]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Yogi Śankhacūda, expert in Mañā and very powerful will soon return from the earth. Take this My weapon Śūla and go early to Bhārata. Śiva will slay the Dānava by this Śūlāstra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Yogi Śaṅkhacūḍa, expert in Māyā and very powerful will soon return from the earth. Take this My weapon Śūla and go early to Bhārata. Śiva will slay the Dānava by this Śūlāstra.

[Ch 19 Verse 89-90]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Dānava holds always on his neck My auspicious Kavaca and will therefore become the conqueror of the universe. No one will he able to kill him as long as he holds the above Kavaca. So, first of all, I will go to him in the form of a Brāhmaṇa and ask from him the Kavaca.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Dānava holds always on his neck My auspicious Kavaca and will therefore become the conqueror of the universe. No one will he able to kill him as long as be holds the above Kavaca. So, first of all, I will go to him in the form of a Brāhmaṇa and ask from him the Kavaca.

[Ch 19 Verse 91-92]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Creator! Thou also didst give him the boon that his death would occur when the chastity of of his wife would be destroyed. I will go and hold intercourse with his wife. Then his death will occur without fail. His wife after her death will come and become My dearest wife.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Creator! Thou also didst give him the boon that his death would occur when the chastity of of his wife would be destroyed. I will go and hold intercourse with his wife. Then his death will occur without fail. His wife after her death will come and become My dearest wife.

[Ch 19 Verse 93-94]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, Nārāyaṇa gave over to Mahādeva the Sūlaśtra. Then He went gladly to His inner compartments. On the other hand, Brahmā and Rudra and the other Devas incarnated themselves in Bhārata. Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter on the going of the Devas to Vaikuntha after Tulasi's marriage with Śaṅkhacāḍa in the Mahāpurāṇaṃ Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, Nārāyaṇa gave over to Mahādeva the Śūlāstra. Then He went gladly to His inner compartments. On the other hand, Brahmā and Rudra and the other Devas incarnated themselves in Bhārata. Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter on the going of the Devas to Vaikuṇṭha after Tulasī’s marriage with Śaṅkhacūḍa in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
