CHAPTER V

On Mountains and Rivers

शीनारायण उवाच

देवर्षे श्रणु वित्तरां द्वीपवर्षिवेपत: ।

भूमण्डलस्य सर्वस्य यथा देवप्रकल्पितम् ॥ १ ॥

समासात्संप्रवक्ष्यामि नालं वित्तरतः क्रचित् ।

जव्युद्वीप: प्रवमतः प्रमाणे लक्षयोजनः ॥ २ ॥

Śrī Nārāyana said: O Child Nārada! Now hear in detail about the divisions of the earth into the

Dvipas and the Varsas as marked out by the Devas. In brief, I describe about them; no one can speak about this in details. First, the Jambu Dvipa is one lakh Yojanas in its dimensions.

विशालो वर्तुलाकारो यथाउजस्य च कर्फिका ।

नव वर्षाणि यास्मैंध्र नवसाहस्योजनैः ॥ ३ ॥

आयाबै: परिसंख्यानि सिरिध: परितः द्विता ।

अष्टिभर्दीर्घरूपेध्र सुविभक्तानि सर्वतः ॥ ४ ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

This Jambu Dvipa is round like a lotus. There are nine thousand Yojanas in its dimensions (i.e., in its diameter or circumference?) and there are eight very lofty mountains, in those Varsas, forming their boundaries.

ཕུརྡོལ་པོར་ཆེན་ ཟེའི དྲེ ཟོ ཡོ དྲོག་ཀྱི་ནེ་ །

दीयाणि तर चलायि वतुरस्विमलावूनम ॥ 5 ॥

ཕྱགतं मध्यर्षं यद्याभ्यां सुरातिहतः ।

सीवाणों गिरिराजोउर्व लक्ष्योजनमृष्टिकृतः ॥ 6 ॥

Of the Varsas, the two Varsas that are situated in the North and South, are of the size of a bow (segmental); and the four others are elongated in their size. The centre of all these Varsas is named Ilāvīta Varsa and its size is rectangular. In the centre of this Ilāvarsa is situated the golden Sumeru Mountain, the King of all the mountains, one lakh Yojanas high. It forms the pericarp of the lotus earth.

कर्पिकास्त्र एवायं भूगोलकमलस्य च ।

भूर्दिं द्वारिशस्थलश्वयोजनैवैततस्वयम् ॥ 7 ॥

मृते घोडगासाहुलस्तावतांस्ततः क्षिता ।

इलावृत्योतातो नील: श्रेतश्र श्रूज्वान् ॥ 8 ॥

त्रयो के गिरयः प्रोक्ता मर्याद्वायश्मिक्षु ।

रयकाखेल तथा वर्षे द्वितीये च हित्यमये ॥ 9 ॥

कुर्वर्षे तृतीये तु मर्यादां खंजर्वाते ते ।

प्रागायता उभयतः क्षारोदावध्यस्तथा ॥ 10 ॥

The top of this mountain is thirty Yojanas wide. O Child! The sixteen thousand Yojanas of this mountain is under the ground and the eighty-four Yojanas are visible outside. In the north of this llāvarṣa are the three mountains the Nilagiri, the Śvetagri and the Śrīgāvaṇ, forming the boundaries respectively of the three Varsas named Ramyaka, Hiranmaya and Kuru respectively. These run along from the east and gradually extend at their base and towards the salt ocean (Lavana Samudra).

द्विसहस्पथुतारतथा एकैकश: कमात् ।

पूर्वाल्यच्छोतरस्यां दशांगाद्यिकांशतः ॥ १ १ ॥

दैर्य एव हुस्तनीे नानानन्दनीयुतः ।

इलावृतादक्षिणतो निषघो हेमकुटकः ॥ १ २ ॥

हिमालयश्रौति ययः प्राविस्तीणः सुगोभनाः ।

अयुतोल्सेधाजनते योजनैः परिकीर्तिनः ॥ 13 ॥

हरिवर्ष किंपुरुचं भारतं च यथातथम् ।

विभागात्क्वयंत्नेते यदाद्विगारयख्वः ॥ 14 ॥

These three mountains, that form the boundaries, are each two thousand Yojanas wide. The length of each from the east towards north is less by one-tenth (1/10) of the above dimensions. Many rivers take their sources and flow from them. On the south of Ilāvarsa, three beautiful mountain ranges, named Nişadha, Hemakūta, and Himālayas, are situated, extending from the east. They are each one Ayuta Yojanas high. These three mountains form the boundaries again of Kirinpuruṣa and Bhārata Varsa.

इलावृतात्थिमतो माल्यवातामपर्वतः ।

पूर्वेण च ततः श्रीमानन्यमादनवर्षः ॥ 15 ॥

अनीलिनिधः त्वेती चार्वती द्विसहस्तः ।

योजनैः पृथुतां याती मर्वदाकारकी सीचि ॥ 16 ॥

To the west of Ilāvrtta is situated the mountain called Mālyavān and to the east situated the mountains Gandhamādana, Nīla, and Niṣadha, the centres of the highest sublime grandeur and beauty. The length and breadth of these the boundary (limiting) mountains are each two thousand Yojanas.

केतुमालाख्यदाभ्रविधवोः प्रयिति च तो ।

मन्दर्ष तथा मेकमन्दर्ष सुपाईकः ॥ 17 ॥

कुमुद्धोति विद्याता निरयो मेकपादकः ।

योजनायुतवित्तरोगहा मेपोक्षतुर्दिभू ॥ 18 ॥

Then the mountains Mandara, Supārsvak, and Kumuda and others are situated in the Ketumāla and Bhadrāśva Varsas; but these all are reckoned as the Pāda Parvatas (mountains at the foot) of the Sumeru mountain. The height and breadth of each of these is one Ayuta Yojanas. These form the pillars, as it were, of Meru on the four sides.

अवधंफकारते तु सर्वतेपरिवारिजातः ।

एतेषु गिरिष्य प्राप्ताः पादायश्रतर्जनुनी ॥ १९ ॥

Book VIII Chapter V

कंदेवन्यप्रोध इति चत्वार: पर्वतः स्थिता: ।

केनवो निरिरावेषु एकादशगतोच्छया: ॥ 20 ॥

On these mountains, the mango, the jack, plantain, and the fig trees and various others are situated, four hundred (400) Yojanas wide and eleven hundred (11,00) Yojanas high; they seem to extend to the Heavens and form, as it were, the flagstaffs on the top.

तावद्धिपवितसारः शताख्यपरिणाहिनः ।

चत्वार्ध हुद्रास्तेषु यवोभधिक्युसज्जला: ॥ 21 ॥

यदुपस्थिजीने देवा योगैश्वर्धिधि विंदते ।

देवोद्वानिच चत्वारि भवन्ति ललनासुखाः ॥ 22 ॥

The roots, bases of these trees as well as their branches are wonderfully equally thick and extend to enormous distances. On those mountain tops are situated, again, the four very capacious lakes. Of these, one lake is all milk; the other lake is all honey; the third lake is all sugarcane juice and the fourth lake is all sweet water.

नन्तं चैत्रयकं वैषाणं सर्वभूकम् ।

येषु पिश्वताउमरणा ललनायूयसंपुतः ।। 23 ॥

उपदेवाणीर्गितामहिना महागया: ।

विद्धरिंत स्वतान्यते यथाकामं यथासुखम् ॥ 24 ॥

There are, then, again the four very lovely gardens named Nandana, Caitrarath, Vaibhrājaka, and Sarvatobhadra, very lovely, enchanting and pleasing to the delicate female sex and where the Devas enjoy the wealth and prosperity and their other Yogic powers.

मन्त्रोलसूर्शस्थस्य देवचृतस्य मस्तकात् ।

एकादशगतोच्छुयात्कलान्यमृतभाँत्र च ॥ 25 ॥

गिरिकुदप्रमाणानि सुस्वादूनि मूदूनि च ।

तेषां विशीर्मामानां फलानां सुरसेचे च ॥ 26 ॥

Here the Devas live always with numerous hordes of women and have their free amorous, dealings with them, to their heart's contents; and they hear the sweet songs sung by the Gandharvas and Kinnaras, the Upa Devatās about their own glorious deeds. On the top of the Mandara mountain, there are the Heavenly mango trees

hundred Yojanas high; the sweet delicious creature-like mango fruits, very soft and each of the size as the summit of a mountain, fall to the ground; and out of their juices of a colour of the rising sun, a great river named Arunodā takes her origin.

अकणोदास्वर्णेन अकणोदा प्रवर्तेने ।

नदी च्यन्तुला देदेदैत्याजप्रपुक्ति। ॥ 27 ॥

अकणाख्या महात्राव वर्तेत पशद्धारिणी ।

पूज्यतिन च तां देदीं सर्वकामकलप्रदान् ॥ 28 ॥

Here the Devas always worship the great Devi Bhagavatī named Arunā, the Destructrix of all sins, the Grantrix of all desires and the Bestower of all fearlessness with various offerings and with the lovely water of this Arunodā river, with great devotion. O Child! In ancient days, the King of the Daityas (worshipped always this Mahā Māyā) Arunā Devi (and obtained immense wealth and prosperity).

नानोपहारविलिधः कलमष्ट्य भयप्रदाम् ।

तस्या: कृपावलोकेन क्षेमारोगेय ज्ञति ते ॥ 29 ॥

आदा मायाद्रतुलानन्ता पुरिधीक्षरामलिनी ।

दूषनाशकर्ती कान्तिवार्थिनीत स्मृता भृति ॥ 30 ॥

अस्या: पूजाप्रभावेण जाम्बूनदपुवद्धत् ॥ 31 ॥

इति शीमदैबीभागवते महापुराणो अश्मकन्ये भुवनकोशो नाम

पड्गमोउध्याः ॥ 32 ॥

He who worships Her becomes cured of all diseases gets his health and other happiness by Her grace. Therefore, She is named Ādyā, Māyā, Atulā, Anantā, Puṣṭi, Īśvaramālinī, the Destroyer of the wicked and the Giver of lustre and beauty and thus remembered on this capacious earth. The river Jāmbūnada has come out, as a result of Her worship, containing divine gold.

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description of the receptacle of beings and on the mountains and on the origin of rivers in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

