[Ch 5 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śrī Nārāyana said: O Child Nārada! Now hear in detail about the divisions of the earth into the Dvipas and the Varsas as marked out by the Devas. In brief, I describe about them; no one can speak about this in details. First, the Jambu Dvipa is one lakh Yojanas in its dimensions.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śrī Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Child Nārada! Now hear in detail about the divisions of the earth into the Dvīpas and the Varṣas as marked out by the Devas. In brief, I describe about them; no one can speak about this in details. First, the Jambu Dvīpa is one lākh Yoyanas in its dimensions.

[Ch 5 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Jambu Dvipa is round like a lotus. There are nine thousand Yojanas in its dimensions (i.e., in its diameter or circumference?) and there are eight very lofty mountains, in those Varsas, forming their boundaries. ཕུརྡོལ་པོར་ཆེན་ ཟེའི དྲེ ཟོ ཡོ དྲོག་ཀྱི་ནེ་ །
NEW CORR ENG ──► This Jambu Dvīpa is round like a lotus. There are nine Varṣas in it and excepting the Bhadrāśva and Ketumāla, each is nine thousand Yoyanas in its dimensions (i.e., in its diameter or circumference?) and there are eight very lofty mountains, in those Varṣas, forming their boundaries.

[Ch 5 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Of the Varsas, the two Varsas that are situated in the North and South, are of the size of a bow (segmental); and the four others are elongated in their size. The centre of all these Varsas is named Ilāvīta Varsa and its size is rectangular. In the centre of this Ilāvarsa is situated the golden Sumeru Mountain, the King of all the mountains, one lakh Yojanas high. It forms the pericarp of the lotus earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Of the Varṣas, the two Varṣas that are situated in the North and South, are of the size of a bow (segmental); and the four others are elongated in their size. The centre of all these Varṣas is named Īlāvrita Varṣa and its size is rectangular. In the centre of this Īlāvarṣa is situated the golden Sumeru Mountain, the King of all the mountains, one lakh Yoyanas high. It forms the pericarp of the lotus earth.

[Ch 5 Verse 7-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The top of this mountain is thirty Yojanas wide. O Child! The sixteen thousand Yojanas of this mountain is under the ground and the eighty-four Yojanas are visible outside. In the north of this llāvarṣa are the three mountains the Nilagiri, the Śvetagri and the Śrīgāvaṇ, forming the boundaries respectively of the three Varsas named Ramyaka, Hiranmaya and Kuru respectively. These run along from the east and gradually extend at their base and towards the salt ocean (Lavana Samudra).
NEW CORR ENG ──► The top of this mountain is thirty Yoyanas wide. O Child! The sixteen thousand Yoyanas of this mountain is under the ground and the eighty four Yoyanas are visible outside. In the north of this Īlāvarṣa are the three mountains the Nīlagiri, the Śvetagiri and the Śriṅgavau, forming the boundaries respectively of the three Varṣas named Ramyaka, Hiraṇmaya and Kuru respectively. These run along from the east and gradually extend at their base and towards the salt ocean (Lavana Samudra).

[Ch 5 Verse 11-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► These three mountains, that form the boundaries, are each two thousand Yojanas wide. The length of each from the east towards north is less by one-tenth (1/10) of the above dimensions. Many rivers take their sources and flow from them. On the south of Ilāvarsa, three beautiful mountain ranges, named Nişadha, Hemakūta, and Himālayas, are situated, extending from the east. They are each one Ayuta Yojanas high. These three mountains form the boundaries again of Kirinpuruṣa and Bhārata Varsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► These three mountains, that form the boundaries, are each two thousand Yoyanas wide. The length of each from the east towards north is less by one-tenth (1/10) of the above dimensions. Many rivers take their source and flow from them. On the south of Īlāvarṣa three beautiful mountain ranges, named Niṣadha, Hemakūta, and Himālayās, are situated, extending from the east. They are each one Ayuta Yoyanas high. These three mountains form the boundaries again of Kimpuruṣa and Bhārata Varṣa.

[Ch 5 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► To the west of Ilāvrtta is situated the mountain called Mālyavān and to the east situated the mountains Gandhamādana, Nīla, and Niṣadha, the centres of the highest sublime grandeur and beauty. The length and breadth of these the boundary (limiting) mountains are each two thousand Yojanas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► To the west of Īlāvrita is situated the mountain called Mālyavān and to the east are situated the mountains Gandhamādan, Nīla, and Niṣadha, the centres of the highest sublime grandeur and beauty. The length and breadth of these the boundary (limiting) mountains are each two thousand

[Ch 5 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the mountains Mandara, Supārsvak, and Kumuda and others are situated in the Ketumāla and Bhadrāśva Varsas; but these all are reckoned as the Pāda Parvatas (mountains at the foot) of the Sumeru mountain. The height and breadth of each of these is one Ayuta Yojanas. These form the pillars, as it were, of Meru on the four sides.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the mountains Mandara, Supārśvak, and Kumuda and others are situated in the Ketumāla and Bhadrāśva Varṣas; but these all are reckoned as the Pāda Parvatas (mountains at the foot) of the Sumeru mountain. The height and breadth of each of these is one Ayuta Yoyanas. These form the pillars, as it were, of Meru on the four sides.

[Ch 5 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On these mountains, the mango, the jack, plantain, and the fig trees and various others are situated, four hundred (400) Yojanas wide and eleven hundred (11,00) Yojanas high; they seem to extend to the Heavens and form, as it were, the flagstaffs on the top.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On these mountains, the mangoe, the jack, plantain, and the fig trees and various others are situated, four hundred (400) Yoyanas wide and eleven hundred (1,100) Yoyanas high; they seem to extend to the Heavens and form, as it were, the flagstaffs on the top.

[Ch 5 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The roots, bases of these trees as well as their branches are wonderfully equally thick and extend to enormous distances. On those mountain tops are situated, again, the four very capacious lakes. Of these, one lake is all milk; the other lake is all honey; the third lake is all sugarcane juice and the fourth lake is all sweet water.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The roots, bases of these trees as well as their branches are wonderfully equally thick and extend to enormous distances. On those mountain tops are situated again, the four very capacious lakes. Of these, one lake is all milk; the other lake is all honey; the third lake is all sugarcane juice and the fourth

[Ch 5 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There are, then, again the four very lovely gardens named Nandana, Caitrarath, Vaibhrājaka, and Sarvatobhadra, very lovely, enchanting and pleasing to the delicate female sex and where the Devas enjoy the wealth and prosperity and their other Yogic powers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There are, then, again the four very lovely gardens named Nandana, Caitrarath, Vaibhrājaka, and Sarvatobhadra, very lovely, enchanting and pleasing to the delicate female sex and where the Devas enjoy the wealth and prosperity and their other Yogic powers.

[Ch 5 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Here the Devas live always with numerous hordes of women and have their free amorous, dealings with them, to their heart's contents; and they hear the sweet songs sung by the Gandharvas and Kinnaras, the Upa Devatās about their own glorious deeds. On the top of the Mandara mountain, there are the Heavenly mango trees hundred Yojanas high; the sweet delicious creature-like mango fruits, very soft and each of the size as the summit of a mountain, fall to the ground; and out of their juices of a colour of the rising sun, a great river named Arunodā takes her origin.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Here the Devas live always with numerous hordes of women and have their free amorous, dealings with them, to their heart’s contents and they hear the sweet songs sung by the Gandharbas and Kinnaras, the Upa Devatās about their own glorious deeds. On the top of the Mandara mountain, there are the Heavenly mangoe trees eleven hundred Yoyanas high; the sweet delicious nectarlike mangoe fruits, very soft and each of the size as the summit of a mountain, fall to the ground; and out of their juices of a colour of the rising sun, a great river named Aruṇodā takes her origin.

[Ch 5 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Here the Devas always worship the great Devi Bhagavatī named Arunā, the Destructrix of all sins, the Grantrix of all desires and the Bestower of all fearlessness with various offerings and with the lovely water of this Arunodā river, with great devotion. O Child! In ancient days, the King of the Daityas (worshipped always this Mahā Māyā) Arunā Devi (and obtained immense wealth and prosperity).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Here the Devas always worship the great Devī Bhagavatī named Aruṇā, the Destructrix of all sins, the Grantrix of all desires, and the Bestower of all fearlessness with various offerings and with the lovely water of this Aruṇodā river, with great devotion. O Child! In ancient days, the King of the Daityas worshipped always this Mahā Māyā Aruṇā Devī (and obtained immense wealth and prosperity).

[Ch 5 Verse 29-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He who worships Her becomes cured of all diseases gets his health and other happiness by Her grace. Therefore, She is named Ādyā, Māyā, Atulā, Anantā, Puṣṭi, Īśvaramālinī, the Destroyer of the wicked and the Giver of lustre and beauty and thus remembered on this capacious earth. The river Jāmbūnada has come out, as a result of Her worship, containing divine gold. Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description of the receptacle of beings and on the mountains and on the origin of rivers in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He who worships Her becomes cured of all diseases, gets his health and other happiness by Her grace. Therefore She is named Ādyā, Māyā, Atulā, Anantā, Puṣṭī, Īśvaramālinī, the Destroyer of the wicked and the Giver of lustre and beauty and thus remembered on this capacious earth. The river Jāmbūnada has come out, as a result of Her worship, containing divine gold. Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description of the receptacle of beings and on the mountains and on the origin of rivers in the Mahā Purāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
