CHAPTER III

The King Śaryāti's Giving His Daughter in Marriage to Cyavana Muni

यास उवाच

इति पप्रच्छ तान्सर्वाज्ञा चिन्ताकुलतस्तथा ।

पर्यष्छ्छसूढ़ाद्री सामान ओरातनाउपि च ॥ १ ॥

पीड्वामानं जनं बीक्ष्य पितर्ते दुःखितं तथा ।

विश्चित्य शूलभेदे सा सुकान्या चेदमब्रवीत् ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus the King, troubled with cares, asked his soldiers, in an angry mood. Next he asked his friends in sweet words. The princess, seeing his father and his soldiers sorrowful, thought of her piercing the two eyes of the Muni with a thorn and thus spoke to the King:

वने मया पित्तस्त वल्यीको क्रीभावृतः ।

क्रीड़ल्या सुद्वो दृष्टिश्छद्वयसमित्वः ॥ 3 ॥

"O Father! While sporting in that forest, I came to see a very hard anthill covered with creepers and shrubs wherein I found two holes.

तत्र खडोतद्वीर्णत्नोतीषी वीक्षिते मा ।

सूच्या विद्रे महाराज पुनः खडोतरांका ॥ 4 ॥

O King! Through those small openings, I saw the two shining things as if they were fireflies and thinking them so I pierced them with thorns.

जलविक्ना तदा सूची मया द्वाहा पितः किल ।

हाहेति च श्रुतः शब्दो मन्तो वल्पीकमध्यतः ॥ 5 ॥

तदाहं विक्सिता राजन्किमेति दर्शका ।

न जाने किं मया विद्धं तस्मिन्वल्यीकमण्डले ॥ 6 ॥

At this time a faint voice I heard coming from that anthill. “Oh! I am killed!” I then took out my thorns and found them wet with water. “What is this! I asked myself and was thunderstruck with fear; but I could not know that what I pierced in that anthill.”

राजा शुत्वा तु शयिति: सुकन्यावचनं मूढु ।

मुनेतद्धोर्न नात्वा वर्चीक किंग्रमप्यभात् ॥ ७ ॥

Hearing these gentle words of his daughter, the King Śaryāti thought that that act had no doubt insulted the Muni and went at once to the anthill.

ततापयतपोकूद्ध च्यवनं दुःखतं धूगम् ।

स्कोटयामास वर्चीक मुनिवेदाबृतं ततः ॥ ८ ॥

He broke the anthill that covered the Muni and saw the suffering Cyavana aged in practising Tapasyā, very much in pain.

Book VII Chapter III

प्रणाथ्य देडवब्दूमौ राजा तं भागर्वं प्रति ।

तृधाव विनयोपेतस्मुवाच कृताजुस्ति: ॥ 9 ॥

पुर्या मम महाभाग क्रीडीर्या दुकृतं कृतम् ।

अज्ञानाढूलया बढ़ान्हुत तन्धनुर्महींस ॥ 10 ॥

The King prostrated flat before the Muni and then with folded hands, praised him with hymns and humbly said to him: "O Intelligent One! My daughter has done this wrong act while sporting; therefore O high-souled One! What she had done unknowingly, do you forgive out of your own high-heartedness and liberality.

अकोधिता ही मुनयो घर्वतीति मया श्रुन्ति ।

तस्माचमयि बालायाः क्षेतुमहींस संग्रन्न ॥ 11 ॥

I have heard that the ascetics are always void of anger; therefore now you have to forgive this daughter of the offence and thus shew your kindness.

व्यास उवाच

इति शुत्वा वचस्तस्य च्यवनो वाक्यमब्रवीत् ।

विन्योपानंतं चूद्वा राजानं दुःखितं घृष्णम् ॥ १२ ॥

Vyāsa said: The Maharṣi Çyavana, hearing thus the King's words and specially seeing his humble and distre:sed nature, said:

च्यवन उवाच

राजत्राई क्वार्चिद्धे क्रोपि मेधोभयपवी ।

न ययाजदीथ ग्रणतस्तं दुहिता पीडने कृते ॥ १३ ॥

नैसे पीडा समुदायम मम चाह निरागरास: ।

तेन पापे न जानामि दुःखितस्तं महीपते ॥ १४ ॥

“O King! I never was angry a bit; your daughter had pained me; yet I am not angry and have not cast on her any curse; you better see, that I am innocent; much pain is felt by me due to my eyes being pricked. O King! It seems that you are sorry and troubled for that sin.

अपराधं परं कृत्वा देवीभकस्य को जनः ।

सुखं लभेत यदपि भवेत्नात शिवः स्वयम् ॥ 15 ॥

Who can acquire happiness in this world who has committed a great offence to a Bhakta of the Devi, in spite he gets even Śiva as his Protector.

कि कारोम महीपाल नेत्रहीनो जरावुतः ।

अन्यस्य परिचर्यां चकः कर्तिष्यात पार्थिवः ॥ 16 ॥

O King! On the one hand, I am now worn out by old age, and then, on the other hand, I am deprived of my eyes; what shall be now my means? Please say, who will take care of the blind man?

राजोवाच

सेवका बहूवः सेवां कर्तिथित त्वातिशम्भ ।

क्षमस्व पुनिराष्ट्रैल स्वल्पक्रोषा हि तपासः ॥ 17 ॥

The King said: “O Muni! The anger of the ascetics is transient; you are in practice of your tapasyā; so your anger is a thing of impossibility. So kindly forgive the offence of the daughter. I have got many persons who will incessantly take care of you.”

च्यन्त उवाच

अन्धोर्ह निर्जनी राजसंतपतर्णुं कक्ष क्षमः ।

त्वदीयः सेवकाः किं के तक्रिथन्ति मम प्रिग्यम् ॥ 18 ॥

Cyavana said: "O King! There is none of my relations with me; then I am now made blind; how shall I go on with my tapasya? I do not think that your servants will take care of me.

क्षमाप्यसि चैनம் त्वं कुं कुं मे वचनं नृप ।

देहि मे परिचर्याँई कन्यां कलमलोचनम् ॥ 19 ॥

तुध्ये-उनया महाराज युथा तव महानते ।

करिष्यामि पत्थहांह सा मे सेवां करिष्यति ॥ 20 ॥

O King! If you think it your duty to please me, then do my word, give me your lotus-eyed daughter to serve me and take care of me. O King! I will be very glad if I acquire your daughter; she will serve me when I will be engaged in my tapasyā.

एवं कुते सुखं मे स्थानच वैव भविष्यति ।

सन्तुई ययि राजेन्र सैनिकानां न संशयः ॥ 21 ॥

विश्वित्व मनसा भूप कन्यातानं समाचर ।

न चात्र दूषणं किंचितापासोउहं यतन्ततः ॥ 22 ॥

O King! This, if observed, will satisfy me and all the troubles that are now with you and your army will no doubt disappear. O King! Think and grant me your daughter to me, you will not incur any sin nor any fault.

व्यास उवाच

श्यातिवर्चनं शुत्वा मुनेश्रितातुरोःपवत् ।

न दास्येउपयवा दास्ये किंचिज्ञोवाच भात । २३ ॥

Vyāsa said: O Bharata! Hearing thus the Muni's words, the King Śaryāti was immersed in care and could not say anything whether he would or would not give over his daughter to him.

कवेमंधाय वृद्धाय कुरूपाय सुतामिमान् ।

देवक-योगमां दत्ता सुखी स्यामानस्पमवान् ॥ 24 ॥

The King thought, “my daughter is very fair like a Devakanyā and this Muni is aged, ugly and specially he is blind; how then can I be happy if I give over my daughter to him.

को वात्मन: सुखार्थीय पुत्रा: संसारतं सुखम् ।

इतेतैल्यमिति: पाणो जानत्रिय शुभाणुभम् ॥ 25 ॥

Who is there so stupid and vicious that knowing his good and bad, he for his own selfish happiness wants to deprived his beautiful daughter of the enjoyments of her married life.

प्राय सा च्यवनं सुधूः पञ्जवाणगरित्ति ।

अर्थं वृद्धे पति प्राय कं कलं नयिध्यति ॥ 26 ॥

How will that fair eyebrowed daughter of mine pass her days happily in the company of this aged Muni when she will be overpowered by passion.

यौवने दुर्जेय: कामो विशेषेण सुरूपया ।

आमतुल्यं पति प्राय किंयु वृद्धं विलोचनम् ॥ 27 ॥

गौतमं तापसं प्राय रूपवीवनसंरुता ।

अहल्या वासेवेनाणु वक्षिता वरवर्गिनी ॥ 28 ॥

The more so when the young beautiful ladies are not able to conquer their passions though possessed of husbands of their own standard and liking, how then can my daughter conquer her passion on getting this old blind husband! The exquisitely beautiful Ahalyā married Gautama; but, seeing the youthful beauty of that lovely lady, Indra deceived her and took away her chastity.

ग्राता च पतिता पशुज्ञाता धर्मविपर्यम् ।

तस्माद्वतुर्ने चे दुःखं न द्वाद्वि सुकंत्यकम् ॥ २९ ॥

Till at last, her husband Gautama finding that action contrary to Dharma, cursed him. Now

through the severe curse of that Brahmarṣi many troubles many arise; so I cannot in any case give my daughter Sukanyā over to him.

इति संचित्य श्रान्तिविभ्ना: स्वगृहं यथो ।

सचिवांश समादाय मन्चे क्रोस्तिश्वितः ॥ ३० ॥

Thus thinking and absent-minded the King went back to his home and, being very distressed, called his ministers to form a council.

भो मिन्णो बुवल्पा कि कत्वेलं मायापुना ।

पुत्री देवारण विधाय भोक्त्यं चुःखेवा न ॥ ३१ ॥

विचारायधं मिलिता हितं स्यामय वे कवम् ।

O Ministers! What am I to do now? Is it advisable to give over my daughter to the Muni? Or is it better to suffer these pains? Judge and say what is the best course for me."

मन्त्रिण कचुः

किं बुभोर्यसम्भृतराज संकंठेगतिनुतारये ॥ ३२ ॥

दुर्भागाय सुकन्यैषा कर्थे देवासितमुन्नरी ।

The Ministers said: “O King! What shall we say in this critical juncture? How can you bestow your exceedingly beautiful daughter to that ugly unfortunate ascetic?

व्यास उवाच

तदा चिन्ताकुलं वीध्य पितरं मज्जान्सादा ॥ 33 ॥

सुकन्या त्वितिगतं जाला प्रहस्येदमुवाच ह ।

चितः कसम्बुद्वानचं चितन्याकृतितेज्व्य: ॥ 34 ॥

मकृतते कु:खसिंविनो विषणवादनोअ सि ।

Dvaippāyna said: At this moment, seeing her father and ministers troubled very much with care, Sukanyā understood at once everything by signs and hints; she then smilingly said to her dear father: "O Father! Why are you looking so sad with cares? Perhaps you are very much troubled and sad for me.

अहं गाला मुनिं तत्र समाश्रास्य भयार्दितम् ॥ 35 ॥

करिष्याम प्रसत्र तमात्यदानेन वे सितः ।

इति राजा वचः शुत्वा भाषितं वत्कुकन्याय ॥ 36 ॥

तामुवाय प्रसताला सचिवानां च श्रवताम् ।

O Father! I have pained that Muni; so I will go

Book VII Chapter III

and console him; what more than this that I will give up myself at his feet and please him." Hearing these words of Sukanyā, the King spoke to her very gladly before all the ministers.

कयं पुत्र त्वमंध्य परिचर्यं चनेउक्ता ॥ 37 ॥

क्रियसि जरातंस्य क्रोधनस्य विशेषतः ।

“O Daughter! The Cyavana Muni is blind, aged and of a worn figure, especially of a very irritable temper; and you are a mere girl; how will you be able to serve him in that dreadful forest?

कवमन्याय चानेन रूपेण रतिस्त्रिभाण् ॥ 38 ॥

तद्योय वरया प्रस्तद्वाहा सुखवांछया ।

You are like Rati in beauty and loveliness; how can I bestow my daughter to that aged worn out, blind Muni for my own pleasure!

पिता पूर्वी प्रदातव्या वयोज्ञानितेवावता च ॥ 39 ॥

धनधान्यसमुद्धाय नान्धाय कदाचन ।

The father marries the daughter to him who has got relations, who is a proper age, strong, who has got unequalled grains and wealth, gems and jewels; never to a man void of wealth.

व्व ते रूप विशालाक्षि व्वसौं वृद्धो वनेचरः ॥ 40 ॥

कयं देवा मया पुत्री तस्मै चातिवराय च ।

O broad-eyed One! You are exquisitely handsome; and that ascetic is very old; see what an amount of difference lies between you two. The Muni, moreover, has past his marriageable age; so how can I give over my daughter.

उठजे निवर्ते वासो यस्य नित्यं मनोहरे ॥ 4 1 ॥

कमधेनुवगवश्रिक कल्पनीये मय तव ।

O Lotus-eyed! You always dwell in beautiful places; how can I now make you dwell for ever in thatched huts?

मरणों में वरे प्राणं सैनिकानां तबैव च ॥ 4 2 ॥

न ते प्रदामांधाय रोचते पिकभापिण ।

O Cuckoo voiced one! Rather will I and my soldiers die than to bestow you to that blind husband.

भवितयं भवलेव एंयै नैव त्याज्यम्हम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

सुविधा भव सुश्रेणि न दास्येऊन्याकर्हिंचित ।

Let whatever come it may, I will never lose patience; therefore, O One of good hips! Be quiet. I will never give you to that blind man.

राज्यं त्रिष्ठुं वा यातु दैहेडेयं च तदीये मे ॥ 44 ॥

न त्वां दास्यास्छई तम्पै नेह्रानीय बालिके ।

O my Daughter! I do'nt care a straw whether my kingdom and my body live or die, but I will never be able to give you over to the ascetic."

सुकन्या तं तदा प्राह श्रुत्वा तद्धचनं पितुः ॥ 45 ॥

प्रसवद्वतानीत स्नेहायुक्तिमितं वचः ।

Hearing thus the father's words, Sukanyā began to speak with a glad face the following sweet and gentle words:

सुकन्योवाच

न मे चिंता पित: कार्यं दौड़े मां मुनयेरुध्न ॥ ४ ६ ॥

सुखं भवतुं सर्वैषां लोकानां मकृतेन है ।

संवशियाभि सन्तुषा पति परमपावनम् ॥ ४७ ॥

भक्न्या परमया चाधि वृद्धि च विजने वने ।

सतीधार्यात चाहं चार्थिमा सुसंमतम् ॥ ४८ ॥

न भोगेच्छाउसि ने तात सत्यर्थ चित्तं मानाव ।

"O Father! Do not trouble yourself for nothing with cares on my account. Give me over now to that best of Munis; then all the persons will be happy, no doubt. I will derive my intense pleasure there in that dense forest by serving with intense devotion my old husband, who is very holy. I have got not the least inclination towards these worldly enjoyments which are the sources of all troubles for nothing. My heart is now quiet. Therefore, O Father! I will become a chaste wife to him and act according to his liking."

यास उवाच

तब्धुर्वा भाषितं तस्य मन्निणो विस्तयं गताः ॥ 49 ॥

राजा च परमप्रीतो जगाम मुनिसप्रिधो ।

गत्वा प्रणय्य शिरसा तमुवाच तोत्पधन् ॥ 50 ॥

स्वामिन्यूहाण पूर्वी मे सेवार्थ विंधितद्विषो ।

इन्युक्त्वाप्रमै ददी पूर्णी विवाहविद्धिना नृपः ॥ 51 ॥

प्रतिगृहा मुनिनः कन्या प्रसजो भागवीक्षणवत् ।

पारिवह्नं न जग्रह दीयमानं नृपेण ह ॥ 52 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

कन्यामेवाग्रहीत्कामं परिचरार्थमात्मनः । प्रसजेडसिमनुनी जातं सैरिकतनां सुखं तदा । ५३ ।। राजश्व परमाहुादः संज्ञातस्तक्षणाद्वि । दत्त्वा पुत्रीं यदा राजा गमनाय गृहं प्रति ॥ ५४ ।। मर्ति चकात तन्वंनी तदोवाच नृपं सुता ।

Vyāsa said: O King! The Ministers were greatly amazed on hearing these words and the King also become greatly pleased and took her to the presence of the Muni. Going before him, he bowed down to the Muni and said: "O Lord! Please accept duly this daughter for your Sevā." Thus saying, the King betrothed his daughter to him according to rules. Cyavana Muni also become very glad to receive her. The Muni took the daughter willingly for his Sevā but refused other dowries that the King presented. Thus the Muni became pleased; immediately the soldiers began to evacuate and were very glad. Seeing this, the King's heart became filled with joy. When the King, thus finishing the betrothal ceremony of his daughter wanted to return home, the thin bodied princess then told her father:

सुकन्योवाच

गृहाण मम वासांसि प्रपणानि च मे चितः ॥ 55 ॥

बल्कलं परिधानाय प्रपच्छाजिनमुन्तमम् ।

वेयं तु मुनिपत्नीना कृत्वा तपसि सेवनम् ॥ 56 ॥

करिष्यामि तथा तात यथा ते कौतिंरच्छुता ।

भविष्याति भुवः पुढ़े तथा स्वर्ग साताले ॥ 57 ॥

परतोककरुप्यायहं चरिष्यामि दिवानिरगम् ।

दरवांधाय च बुद्धाय सु-तरीं युवती तु माम् ॥ 58 ॥

चिन्ता त्वया न कर्तव्य शनिनाशसमुद्धता ।

अकन्यती वसिष्ठस्य धर्मपनी यथा भृति ॥ 59 ॥

तर्वेहाई भविष्यामि नात्र कार्या विचारणा ।

Sukanyā said: “O Father! Take away all my ornaments and clothing and give me for my use an excellent dear skin and one bark. O Father! I will dress myself like the wives of Munis and serve my husband in such a way as will bring to you the unparalleled undying fame in Heaven, Earth and

the Nether regions; also I will serve my husband's feet so that I can derive the highest happiness in the next world. I am now full of youth, especially beautiful; do not think a bit that as I am wedded to an aged ascetic, that my character will be spoilt. As Vasiṣṭha's wife Arundhati has attained celebrity in this world, so also I will attain success; there is no doubt in this.

अनसूया यथा साखी भार्यांत्रेः प्राणिता भृति ॥ 60 ॥

तर्वेहाई भविष्यामि पुत्री कर्जितकी ततः ।

सुकन्यावचनं श्रुत्वा राजा परमधर्मवित् ॥ 61 ॥

दत्वास्त्रिनं करोदणु वीक्ष्य तां चाहसृहासीनि ।

त्यलव्या भूषणवासांसि मुनिवेषधरां सुतान् ॥ 62 ॥

विवर्णवदनो भूत्वा स्थिततरत्रेव पार्थिवः ।

राज्ञ: सर्वी: सुतां दृष्टवा वर्कलाजिनधारिणीम् ॥ 63 ।

रूकदृष्टिशणोकांतत विमाना इवाधवन्त ।

तामापुरच्छा महीपालो मन्द्रिभि: परिवारितः ।

ययी स्वनगरं राजन्मुक्ता पूर्णे शुच्ञार्थिताम् ॥ 64 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे सत्यमकन्धे

तृतीयोउधायः 11 3 11

As the chaste wife Anasūyā of Maharṣi Attri has become widely known in this world so will I be known also and establish your fame. The exceedingly religious King, hearing all these words of Sukanyā, gave her decr skin and all other articles wanted. The King could not help weeping, when he saw that his daughter had dressed herself like the daughter of a Muni. He stood fixed, very sad, on that very spot. All the queens were exceedingly filled with sorrow to see the daughter dressed in bark and deer-skin. Their hearts quivered and they began to weep. O King! Then the King Śaryāti bade goodbye to the Muni, leaving there his daughter. He went with a grievous heart and returned to his own city, accompanied by the ministers.

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Seventh Book on the bestowing of the daughter of the King Śaryāti to the Cyavana Muni in Śrimaddevitbhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsā.

Book VII Chapter IV

