CHAPTER II

On the Birth of Vṛtrāsura

यमस उवाच

अथ स लोभमुपोत्थ सुराधिध:

सामधिग्य गजानसनंस्थितः।

क्रिशिरसं प्रति दृष्यमितस्तदा

मुनियपश्यदीयपराक्रम् ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: The extremely covetous Indra, then, mounted on his Airāvata elephant and determined to kill the Muni.

तमधिवीक्ष्य दृझासनसंस्थित

जितारीरं सुममाधिवर्गं गतम् ।

रविविभावसुसत्रिभभोजसा

सुर्पतिः परमापदमभ्यगत् ॥ 2 ॥

He went to him and saw him immersed in deep Samādhi, firmly seated in his posture and with his speech controlled. At that time, a halo of light emanated from his body and he looked like a second Sun and a blazing fire. Indra became very sad and dejected when he saw that.

कथमसौ विविनटनुमहो

मया मुनिरपायमति किल सम्मतः।

रिपुर्यं सुसमिद्धिनोपोकल:

कथपुषेय इहासनकामुकः॥ 3 ॥

Indra then thought within himself thus: "Oh! Can I slay this Muni, free from any vicious inclinations, and endowed with the power of Tapas, blazing like a fire! This is quite against the Dharma.

इति विविन्य पविं परमायुधं

प्रतिमुभोच मुनि नासि स्थितम् ।

श्रशिवाकास्त्रिभ्यमाणुगं

श्रिशरां सुरासंघपति: स्वयम् ॥ 4 ॥

But, Alas! He wants to usurp my position; how can I, then, neglected such an enemy? Thus cogitating, Indra hurled at the Muni his swift-going, infallible thunderbolt, the Muni remaining engaged in his penance and shining like the Sun and Moon.

तदधिच्यातहतः स ध्यातले किल

पयात ममार च तापसः ।

शिखारिणः शिखारं कुलिशादितं

निपिततं धृति चाडूतद्रौनम् ॥ 5 ॥

तं निहल्य मुदामप

सुरेश्युकुरुंस मुनयसु सर्यस्तः ।

हा हातेते भूगमातर्नित्यतः

किं कृतं शतमद्वतं पाधिता ॥ ६।।

विनापराधं तपसां निश्रहतः श्रवीपिति: पायमितैतृतात्मा ।

फलं कितायां तरसा कृतस्य प्रामोतु पाणे हननोढ़ल्य ॥ ७ ॥

The ascetic, struck thus, fell on the ground and died, like a mountain peak struck by thunder falling on the ground and presenting a wonderful sight. Indra became very glad when he killed the Muni; but the other Munis then cried aloud: "Oh! We are killed! Alas! What a crime has Indra committed today! Oh! The vicious Indra has killed today this jewel amongst the Munis without any offence! Let, then, this sinner reap the fruits of his sinful act without any delay."

तं निहन्य ततसा सुरारजो

निजांगाम निजमन्दिरमाणु ।

स हतोउप विराज महाना

जीवमान इव तेजतां निधि: ॥ 8 ॥

तं दृष्ट्या पातितं धूमौ जीवन्तमवि बुझरा ।

चिन्तामापातिखांगाः किं वा जीवेदयं पुनः ॥ 9 ॥

Indra, then, went back soon to his own abode; on the other hand, the high-souled Muni, though killed, looked as it were, living by the lustre of his own body. Indra, then, seeing him lying like a living man thought that the Muni might get alive and so became very sad.

विषयप्र यमसाउजीव तक्षाणं पुतः स्थितम् ।

मप्वा बीक्ष्य तं प्राह स्क्वास्यैसुर्णं चः ॥ १० ॥

तक्षिजिधि शिरास्यस्य कुरुब बचनं मम् ।

मा जीवतु महातेजा भाति जीविज्व सत्यम् ॥ ११ ॥

इत्याकपर्थे बवस्तस्य तक्षोवाच विगहाय् ।

While he was thus arguing in his mind, he saw before him a wood cutter named Takşa and began to speak to him for his own selfish ends thus “O

Book VI Chapter II

Artisan! Cut all the heads of this Muni and keep my word; this highly lustrous Muni is looking as if it were alive; therefore; if you sever his heads, he cannot be alive." Takṣa then cursed him and spoke thus.

तहीवाच

महास्कन्यो भृणां भालित परपूर्ण तपोक्षिति ॥ 12 ॥

ततो नाहं करीष्यामि कार्यमेताद्वारहितम् ।

त्वया वे निर्वितं कर्म कृती सद्विवर्गितम् ॥ 13 ॥

उहं विधेमि पापाद्रे पुनर्यैव च मारणे ।

भृतोर्धं सुनिसरस्येव शिरसः कृतनेन किम् ॥ 14 ॥

भयं किं तेत्र संजारं पाकशासन कंध्यताम् ।

"O King of the Devas! The neck of this Muni is very hard and therefore cannot be severed; my axe is not at all fit for this work. Specially I cannot do such a blameable act." You have done a very heinous crime, quite against the law of the good persons; I fear sin; I will not be able to cut the heads of a dead man. This Muni is lying dead; what use is there in severing his head again? O Pakaśāsana! The killer of the demon Pāka! Why do you fear in this?"

इन्र उवाच

सजीव इव देहोउम्याभाति विश्यादुक्ति: ॥ 15 ॥

तस्माधिपेमि मा जीवेमुनि: शत्रुयं मम।

Indra said: “O Artisan! This Muni is my dire enemy. Life seems to be still lingering in his body; his body is still lustrous, I fear if the Muni be alive again!”

तक्षोवाच

नात्र किं जपसे विद्धनूरेणानेन कर्मणा ॥ १६ ॥

ऋषिपुत्रिमं दृत्वा बढ़ादृत्याभयं न किम् ।

Taksā told: “Do you not feel shame in doing this heinous crime, when you know everything? Do you not fear God for the crime of killing a Brāhmin?”

इन्व उवाच

प्रायश्रितं कर्त्रियाम पशुलापक्षयाय वै ॥ १७ ॥

शुत्रु सर्वथा बध्यघृछनेतापि महामते ।

Indra said: “I will make Prāyaścitta (penance) afterwards for the washing away of my sins; but my duty at present is to kill my enemy. O Fortunate One! The wise men, clever in polity, say that enemies must be killed by any excuse whatsoever.”

तक्षेताव

त्वं लोभापितृतः पार्यं क्रतिभि मवयवितृह ॥ 18 ॥

तं चिनाउंह कर्थ पायं करोति चद् त विधो ।

Taksa then replied: "O Maghavan! You are doing this sinful deed out of your avarice; but, O Lord! I have no cause whatsoever; how then without any cause, can I engage myself in such a vicious act?"

मखेषु खतु भागं ते कारिथामि सदैव हि ॥ 19 ॥

शिर: पशोस्तु ते भागं चेउ दास्यति मानवाः ।

शृल्केनानेन तिद्धि त्वं शिरायस्य कृक प्रियम् ॥ 20 ॥

Indra said: “O Takṣan! I will allot a share to you wherever there will be a sacrifice. The human beings will invariably offer to you the head of the animal killed at any sacrifice. Now cut his head according to this rule.

व्यास उवाच

एतच्छुत्वा महेन्द्रस्य वचनस्थां पुद्यान्वितः ।

कुठारेण शिरास्यस्य चकर्तं सुचुकेन हि ॥ 21 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! That Takṣa became very glad when he heard thus from Indra and struck off the heads of the Muni with his very strong axe.

छित्रानि जीण श्रिंधिणि पिततानि यदा भृति ।

तेभ्यस्तु पक्षिणः क्षिशुं विधिनेषुः सहसृशः ॥ 22 ॥

O powerful King! When the three heads, thus severed, fell to the ground, thousands and thousands of birds came out of those heads in quick succession.

कलर्विकासिततिरयस्तबैव च कर्मिंजला: ।

पृथक्युष्विनिषेन्तुमुंखतस्तसा तदा ॥ 23 ॥

The three groups of birds Kalavinikas, Tittiris and Kapiñjalas come out very rapidly from the three heads in due succession.

येन वेदात्यापीते स्म योमं च पिवतो तथा ।

तस्माद्वक्रतिकलोयेनुः सर्व एव कपिंजपताः ॥ 24 ॥

येन सर्वा दिशः कामं पिबपित्रव निरीक्षते ।

तस्मातु तितिरास्तव नि:सुतासितमपतेजसः ॥ 2 5 ॥

The Kapīnjala birds came out of that mouth that used to chant the Vedas and used to drink Soma; the Tittri birds came out of that mouth that used to see all the quarters as if it drank them; and the Kalavinika birds came out of that face that used to drink one.

यत्सुरारं तु तद्वक्तं तस्मातुं चटकाः किल।

विनिषेन्तृस्थिगिरस एवं ते विहाग नृप ॥ 26 ॥

Indra became very glad to see the birds thus coming out of his mouths and went back at once to his Heavens.

एवं विनिःसुतान्यूहा तेभ्यः शक्रसद्णडज्ञान् ।

मुमोद मसता राजझगाम विविदं पुनः ॥ 27 ॥

O King! No sooner Indra went back, than Taksa came back to his own house and felt himself very pleased to receive his share of sacrificial things.

गते शके तु तहापि स्यगृहे तस्या यये ।

यज्ञभां परं लब्धया मुदायम गमीते ॥ 28 ॥

On returning to his home, Indra thought that he had done his duty in slaying his powerful enemy.

इन्हो5थ स्वगृहं गत्या हत्वा शनुं महावलम् ।

मेने कृताधीयमानां ब्रहाहत्यामित्यन्ति ॥ 29 ॥

It did not pass in his mind that he had committed the Brahmatahyā sin (i. e., that he had killed a Brāhmin.

तं श्रुत्वा नितहां त्वहा पूरं परमधार्मिकम् ।

चुकोपातीव मनसा वचनं चेदमब्रबीत् ॥ 30 ॥

अनागसं मुनि वयमात्पूरं नितहावामः ।

तस्मातृत्वादियथामि तद्धार्थ सुतं पुनः ॥ 31 ॥

When Viśvakarmā heard that his virtuous son had been killed, he became very angry (in his mind) and said that as Indra had killed his qualified son engaged in asceticism without any offence, he would create another son to kill Indra.

सुगा: परभुंगु मे वीर्य तपसघ्र बलं तथा ।

जानातु सर्वे पाणात्या सकृतार्थ फलं मृत्ति ॥ 32 ॥

इलुक्न्वास्त्रिनं जुहावाय मनैराधवर्षणोदिति: ।

पुरम्योत्पादनाथीय त्वहा मोधेसमाकुक: ॥ 33 ॥

Let the Devas see his strength and power of

Tapasyā and let Indra, too, reap the far-reaching effects of his own Karma. Thus saying, Viśvakarmā, distressed with anger, offered oblations in the sacrificial Fire, reciting Mantram from the Atharvan Vedas, with the objects of producing a son.

कृते ह्रोमेउर्धात्रं तु सन्दीपाच्य विभावसोः ।

प्रादुर्बंभृव तसा पुरुष: पाचकोपम: ॥ 34 ॥

When Homa was per formed for eight nights consecutively, a man came out of that burning fire, as if he was the Incarnate of Fire itself.

तं दूरद्वाउं सुतं तद्धा तेजोबतस्पमवित्तम् ।

वेगात्यक्रतिटं वहैर्दीयमानमिवानलम् ॥ 35 ॥

उवाच वचनं तद्धा सुतं वीक्ष्य पुरः स्थितम् ।

इउत्रागो विवर्धेय प्रतापातपसे मा ॥ 36 ॥

Seeing the lustrous son before him, come out of the fire and endowed with power and energy, Viśvakarmā said “O Indra’s enemy! Grow by my power of asceticism.”

इत्युक्ति चवने त्वहा मोधप्रज्यलितेन च ।

सोउर्वर्तित दिंल सहज्वा वैश्वानरसमघुति: ॥ 37 ॥

When Viśvakarmā spoke these words, burning with anger, that brilliant fiery son began to grow, towering high above the Heavens.

जातः स पर्वताकारः कालमनुसम्मः स्वादः ।

किं कंरापीनि तं प्राह पितरं परमातुम् ॥ 38 ॥

कुक मे नामकं नाथ कार्य कथय सुठत ।

चितातुरोरिस कमानवं वृहि मे गोकाकारणम् ॥ 39 ॥

Within a moment that man looked a second God of Death and appeared like a mountain and shone like the God Himself. Then he spoke to his own father Vísvakarmā, who was very distressed “O Father! Put my name. Pray, what use can I be to you? Why do you look so aggrieved and anxious; please explain to me all the causes.

नाशयाम्यद्ध ते गोकामिति मे बतमाहितम् ।

तेने जातेन किं भूय: पिता भवति दुःवितः ॥ 4 0 ॥

I make a firm vow to-day that I will remove the cause of your sorrow. Father! Of what avail is that son to his father when he is not able to remove his sorrows!"

Book VI Chapter III

पिवामी सागरं सहाङ्गणीयामि धराधरान् ।

उर्धंतं वारायमध्य तर्पिं तिम्पतेजसम् ॥ 41 ॥

हन्मीन्द्र ससुरं सहो ययं वा देवलान्तम् ।

क्षिपामी सागरे सर्वान्समुवाट्य च मेदिनीम् ॥ 42 ॥

O Father! Shall I drink the ocean or crumble the mountain to dust or shall I obstruct the passage of the rising Sun or shall I kill Indra, Yama, or the other host of Devas or shall I root out the earth and throw it with all beings into the ocean?"

इत्याकर्णं वचस्तस्य त्वध पुरस्य पेणतम् ।

प्रत्युवाचातिमुदितस्तं सुतं पर्वतोपमम् ॥ 43 ॥

कृषिनात्यानुपानुया समाधठकौंस पुरक।

तस्माद्वुरं इति खलातं तत नाम भयिष्यति ॥ 44 ॥

O King! Hearing thus the sweet words of his son, Viśvakarmā gladly told his mountain like son "O my Son! You are now capable to save me from troubles (Vṛjna) hence you are named Vṛtra."

धाता तत महाभाग्र सिंगतरा नाम तापस: ।

त्रीण तस्य च शीर्षिणि ह्रामवन्दीर्विति च ।। ४५ ॥

वेदवेद्यान्त्वज्ञः सर्वविद्याविशारत: ।

संस्थिततपसि प्राविश्लोकीविमयप्रदे ॥ 46 ॥

गलेगु तृ हतः सोउढा वज्ञातेन सांगतम् ।

विनासप्रायं सहसा छिज्ञानि मस्तकानि च ॥ 47 ॥

O highly Fortunate One! Your brother, named Triśirā, was a great ascetic; his three faces were all very strong. He was thoroughly conversant with the Vedas and the Vedangas and well versed in all the other knowledges. He remained always engaged in practising asceticism, surprising to the three worlds. Indra killed my qualified son with his thunderbolt; that wicked soul severed the three heads without any offence.

तस्मात्वं पुरुषव्याप्र जहि शकं कृतासम् ।

ब्रह्मल्यापृतं पार्थ निश्चयं दुमाँति शकम् ॥ 48 ॥

Therefore, O Best of beings! Kill that vicious, shameless, doceful, wicked Indra, guilty of the sin Brahmatahyā.

इत्युक्चा च तदा त्वषा पुरशोकसमाकुलः ।

आयुधानि च दिव्यानि चकार विवधानि च ॥ 49 ॥

O King! Thus saying, Viśvakarmā very much confounded with the breavement of his son, created various divine weapons.

ददावमें सहसाक्षधाय प्रवलानि च ।

खद्गणुलमदाणिक्तोमरमुखानि वै ॥ 50 ॥

शगई धनुस्ताव बाण पत्रिं पडिणं तथा ।

चक्र दिव्यं सहसारं सुदर्गतरमग्रभम् ॥ 51 ॥

तृणीरी चाक्षयी दिव्यी कवचं चातिसुन्दम् ।

रधं मेघप्रतीकाशं चूदं भारसहं जवम् ॥ 52 ॥

He prepared weapons specially suited to kill Indra, the best axes, tridents, clubs, Saktis, Tomaras and bows made of horns and arrows, Parighas, Pattisās, divine discus like the Sudarśana Cakra, two divine inexhaustible arrow cases with arrows, nice Kavaca, very substantial air-like swift-going chariot looking like a cloud and capable to carry great loads; all these he created and gave over to his son.

युद्धोपकरणं सर्वे कृत्वा पुत्रय पार्थिव ।

दत्वासोड़ी प्रेरयामास त्यहा क्रोधसमित्वतः ॥ 53 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणी भच्छक्ये

दितीयोउधाय: 112 11

O King! Viśvakarma, the best of architects, excited by anger, made ready all the equipments necessary for war and gave them to his son Vītrāsura and sent him to kill Indra.

Here ends the Second Chapter of the Sixth Book on the birth of Vītrāsura in the Mahā Purānam

śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter III

