[Ch 2 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: The extremely covetous Indra, then, mounted on his Airāvata elephant and determined to kill the Muni.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- The extremely covetous Indra, then, mounted on his Airāvata elephant and determined to kill the Muni.

[Ch 2 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He went to him and saw him immersed in deep Samādhi, firmly seated in his posture and with his speech controlled. At that time, a halo of light emanated from his body and he looked like a second Sun and a blazing fire. Indra became very sad and dejected when he saw that.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He went to him and saw him immersed in deep Samādhi, firmly seated in his posture and with his speech controlled. At that time, a halo of light emanated from his body and he looked like a second Sun and a blazing fire. Indra became very sad and dejected when he saw that.

[Ch 2 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra then thought within himself thus: "Oh! Can I slay this Muni, free from any vicious inclinations, and endowed with the power of Tapas, blazing like a fire! This is quite against the Dharma.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra then thought within himself thus :-- “Oh! Can I slay this Muni, free from any vicious inclinations, and endowed with the power of Tapas, blazing like a fire! This is quite against the Dharma.

[Ch 2 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But, Alas! He wants to usurp my position; how can I, then, neglected such an enemy? Thus cogitating, Indra hurled at the Muni his swift-going, infallible thunderbolt, the Muni remaining engaged in his penance and shining like the Sun and Moon.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But, Alas! He wants to usurp my position; how can I, then, neglect such an enemy?” Thus cogitating, Indra hurled at the Muni his swift going, infallible thunderbolt, the Muni remaining engaged in his penance and shining like the Sun and Moon.

[Ch 2 Verse 5-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The ascetic, struck thus, fell on the ground and died, like a mountain peak struck by thunder falling on the ground and presenting a wonderful sight. Indra became very glad when he killed the Muni; but the other Munis then cried aloud: "Oh! We are killed! Alas! What a crime has Indra committed today! Oh! The vicious Indra has killed today this jewel amongst the Munis without any offence! Let, then, this sinner reap the fruits of his sinful act without any delay."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The ascetic, struck thus, fell on the ground and died, like a mountain peak struck by thunder falling on the ground and presenting a wondrous sight. Indra became very glad when he killed the Muni; but the other Munis then cried aloud :-- “Oh! We are killed! Alas! What a crime has Indra committed today! Oh! The vicious Indra has killed today this jewel amongst the Munis without any offence! Let, then, this sinner reap the fruits of his sinful act without any delay.”

[Ch 2 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra, then, went back soon to his own abode; on the other hand, the high-souled Muni, though killed, looked as it were, living by the lustre of his own body. Indra, then, seeing him lying like a living man thought that the Muni might get alive and so became very sad.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra, then, went back soon to his own abode; on the other hand, the high-souled Muni, though killed, looked as it were, living by the lustre of his own body. Indra, then, seeing him lying like a living man thought that the Muni might get alive and so became very sad.

[Ch 2 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► While he was thus arguing in his mind, he saw before him a wood cutter named Takşa and began to speak to him for his own selfish ends thus “O Artisan! Cut all the heads of this Muni and keep my word; this highly lustrous Muni is looking as if it were alive; therefore; if you sever his heads, he cannot be alive." Takṣa then cursed him and spoke thus.
NEW CORR ENG ──► While he was thus arguing in his mind, he saw before him a wood cutter named Takṣa and began to speak to him for his own selfish ends thus “O Artisan! Cut all the heads of this Muni and keep my word; this highly lustrous Muni is looking as it were alive; therefore, if you sever his heads, he cannot be alive.” Takṣa then cursed him and spoke thus.

[Ch 2 Verse 12-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O King of the Devas! The neck of this Muni is very hard and therefore cannot be severed; my axe is not at all fit for this work. Specially I cannot do such a blameable act." You have done a very heinous crime, quite against the law of the good persons; I fear sin; I will not be able to cut the heads of a dead man. This Muni is lying dead; what use is there in severing his head again? O Pakaśāsana! The killer of the demon Pāka! Why do you fear in this?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O King of the Devas! The neck of this Muni is very big and therefore cannot be severed; my axe is not at all fit for this work . Specially I cannot do such a blameable act. You have done a very heinous crime, quite against the law of the good persons; I fear sin; I will not be able to cut the heads of a dead man. This Muni is lying dead; what use is there in severing his head again? O Pākaśāsana! The killer of the demon Pāka! Why do you fear in this?”

[Ch 2 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra said: “O Artisan! This Muni is my dire enemy. Life seems to be still lingering in his body; his body is still lustrous, I fear if the Muni be alive again!”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra said :-- “O Artisan! This Muni is my dire enemy. Life seems to be still lingering in his body; his body is still lustrous, I fear if the Muni be alive again!”

[Ch 2 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Taksā told: “Do you not feel shame in doing this heinous crime, when you know everything? Do you not fear God for the crime of killing a Brāhmin?”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Takṣa told :-- “Do you not feel shame in doing this heinous crime, when you know everything? Do you not fear God for the crime of killing a Brāhmin?”

[Ch 2 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra said: “I will make Prāyaścitta (penance) afterwards for the washing away of my sins; but my duty at present is to kill my enemy. O Fortunate One! The wise men, clever in polity, say that enemies must be killed by any excuse whatsoever.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra said :-- I will make Prāyaścitta (penance) afterwards for the washing away of my sins; but my duty at present is to kill my enemy. O Fortunate One! The wise men, clever in polity, say that enemies must be killed by any excuse whatsoever.

[Ch 2 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Taksa then replied: "O Maghavan! You are doing this sinful deed out of your avarice; but, O Lord! I have no cause whatsoever; how then without any cause, can I engage myself in such a vicious act?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► Takṣā then replied :-- “O Maghavan! You are doing this sinful deed out of your avarice; but, O Lord! I have no cause whatsoever; how then without any cause, can I engage myself in such a vicious act?”

[Ch 2 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra said: “O Takṣan! I will allot a share to you wherever there will be a sacrifice. The human beings will invariably offer to you the head of the animal killed at any sacrifice. Now cut his head according to this rule.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra said :-- “O Takṣan! I will allot a share to you wherever there will be a sacrifice. The human beings will invariably offer to you the head of the animal killed at any sacrifice. Now cut his head according to this rule.”

[Ch 2 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O King! That Takṣa became very glad when he heard thus from Indra and struck off the heads of the Muni with his very strong axe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! That Takṣā became very glad when he heard thus from Indra and struck off the heads of the Muni with his very strong axe.

[Ch 2 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O powerful King! When the three heads, thus severed, fell to the ground, thousands and thousands of birds came out of those heads in quick succession.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O powerful King! When the three heads, thus severed, fell to the ground, thousands and thousands of birds came out of those heads in quick succession.

[Ch 2 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The three groups of birds Kalavinikas, Tittiris and Kapiñjalas come out very rapidly from the three heads in due succession.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The three groups of birds Kalavinkas, Tittiris and Kapiñjalas came out very rapidly from the three heads in due succession.

[Ch 2 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Kapīnjala birds came out of that mouth that used to chant the Vedas and used to drink Soma; the Tittri birds came out of that mouth that used to see all the quarters as if it drank them; and the Kalavinika birds came out of that face that used to drink one.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Kapiñjala birds came out of that mouth that used to chant the Vedas and used to drink Soma; the Tittiri birds came out of that mouth that used to see all the quarters as if it drank them; and the Kalavinka birds came out of that face that used to drink wine.

[Ch 2 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra became very glad to see the birds thus coming out of his mouths and went back at once to his Heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra became very glad to see the birds thus coming out of his mouths and went back at once to his Heavens.

[Ch 2 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! No sooner Indra went back, than Taksa came back to his own house and felt himself very pleased to receive his share of sacrificial things.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! No sooner Indra went back, than Takṣā came back to his own house and felt himself very pleased to receive his share of sacrificial things.

[Ch 2 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On returning to his home, Indra thought that he had done his duty in slaying his powerful enemy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On returning to his home, Indra thought that he had done his duty in slaying his powerful enemy.

[Ch 2 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It did not pass in his mind that he had committed the Brahmatahyā sin (i. e., that he had killed a Brāhmin.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It did not pass in his mind that he had committed the Brahmahattyā sin (i. e., that he had killed a Brāhmin).

[Ch 2 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Viśvakarmā heard that his virtuous son had been killed, he became very angry (in his mind) and said that as Indra had killed his qualified son engaged in asceticism without any offence, he would create another son to kill Indra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Viśvakarmā heard that his virtuous son had been killed, he became very angry (in his mind) and said that as Indra had killed his qualified son engaged in asceticism without any offence, he would create another son to kill Indra.

[Ch 2 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Let the Devas see his strength and power of Tapasyā and let Indra, too, reap the far-reaching effects of his own Karma. Thus saying, Viśvakarmā, distressed with anger, offered oblations in the sacrificial Fire, reciting Mantram from the Atharvan Vedas, with the objects of producing a son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Let the Devas see his strength and power of Tapasyā and let Indra, too, reap the far-reaching effects of his own Karma. Thus saying, Viśvakarmā distressed with anger, offered oblations in the sacrificial Fire, reciting Mantram from the Atharvan Vedas, with the object of producing a son.

[Ch 2 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Homa was per formed for eight nights consecutively, a man came out of that burning fire, as if he was the Incarnate of Fire itself.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Homa was performed for eight nights consecutively, a man quickly came out of that burning fire, as if he was the Incarnate of Fire itself.

[Ch 2 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the lustrous son before him, come out of the fire and endowed with power and energy, Viśvakarmā said “O Indra’s enemy! Grow by my power of asceticism.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the lustrous son before him, come out of the fire and endowed with power and energy, Viśvakarmā said “O Indra’s enemy! Grow by my power of asceticism.”

[Ch 2 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Viśvakarmā spoke these words, burning with anger, that brilliant fiery son began to grow, towering high above the Heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Viśvakarmā spoke these words, burning with anger, that brilliant fiery son began to grow, towering high above the Heavens.

[Ch 2 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Within a moment that man looked a second God of Death and appeared like a mountain and shone like the God Himself. Then he spoke to his own father Vísvakarmā, who was very distressed “O Father! Put my name. Pray, what use can I be to you? Why do you look so aggrieved and anxious; please explain to me all the causes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Within a moment that man looked a second God of Death and appeared like a mountain and shone like the God Himself. Then he spoke to his own father Viśvakarmā, who was very distressed “O Father! Put my name. Pray, what use can I be to you? Why do you look so aggrieved and anxious; please explain to me all the causes.

[Ch 2 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I make a firm vow to-day that I will remove the cause of your sorrow. Father! Of what avail is that son to his father when he is not able to remove his sorrows!"
NEW CORR ENG ──► I make a firm vow today that will remove the cause of your sorrow. Father ! Of what avail is that to his father when he is not able to remove his sorrows!”

[Ch 2 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Father! Shall I drink the ocean or crumble the mountain to dust or shall I obstruct the passage of the rising Sun or shall I kill Indra, Yama, or the other host of Devas or shall I root out the earth and throw it with all beings into the ocean?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Father! Shall I drink the ocean or crumble the mountains to dust or shall I obstruct the passage of the rising Sun or shall I kill Indra, Yama, or the other host of Devas or shall I root out the earth and throw it with all beings into the ocean?”

[Ch 2 Verse 43-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Hearing thus the sweet words of his son, Viśvakarmā gladly told his mountain like son "O my Son! You are now capable to save me from troubles (Vṛjna) hence you are named Vṛtra."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Hearing thus the sweet words of his son, Viśvakarmā gladly told his mountain-like son “O my Son! You are capable to save me from troubles (Vrijina) hence you are named Vṛtra.

[Ch 2 Verse 45-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O highly Fortunate One! Your brother, named Triśirā, was a great ascetic; his three faces were all very strong. He was thoroughly conversant with the Vedas and the Vedangas and well versed in all the other knowledges. He remained always engaged in practising asceticism, surprising to the three worlds. Indra killed my qualified son with his thunderbolt; that wicked soul severed the three heads without any offence.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O highly Fortunate One! Your brother, named Triśirā, was a great ascetic; his three faces were all very strong. He was thoroughly conversant with the Vedas and the Vedaṅgās and well versed in all the other knowledges. He remained always engaged in practising asceticism, surprising to the three worlds. Indra killed my qualified son with his thunderbolt; that wicked soul severed the three heads without any offence.

[Ch 2 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Best of beings! Kill that vicious, shameless, doceful, wicked Indra, guilty of the sin Brahmatahyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Best of beings! Kill that vicious, shameless, deceitful, wicked Indra guilty of the sin of Brahmahattyā.”

[Ch 2 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Thus saying, Viśvakarmā very much confounded with the breavement of his son, created various divine weapons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Thus saying, Viśvakarmā very much confounded with the breavement of his son, created various divine weapons.

[Ch 2 Verse 50-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He prepared weapons specially suited to kill Indra, the best axes, tridents, clubs, Saktis, Tomaras and bows made of horns and arrows, Parighas, Pattisās, divine discus like the Sudarśana Cakra, two divine inexhaustible arrow cases with arrows, nice Kavaca, very substantial air-like swift-going chariot looking like a cloud and capable to carry great loads; all these he created and gave over to his son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He prepared weapons specially suited to kill Indra, the best axes, tridents, clubs, Śaktis, Tomaras and bows made of horns and arrows, Parighas, Pattiśas, divine discus like the Sudarśan Cakra, divine inexhaustible arrow cases with arrows, nice Kavaca, very substantial air-like swift-going chariot looking like a cloud and capable to carry great loads; all these he created and gave over to his son.

[Ch 2 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Viśvakarma, the best of architects, excited by anger, made ready all the equipments necessary for war and gave them to his son Vītrāsura and sent him to kill Indra. Here ends the Second Chapter of the Sixth Book on the birth of Vītrāsura in the Mahā Purānam śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Viśvakarmā, the best of architects, excited by anger, made ready all the equipments necessary for war and gave them to his son Vṛtrāsura and sent him to kill Indra. Here ends the Second Chapter of the Sixth Book on the birth of Vṛtrāsura in the Mahā Purānam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
