CHAPTER XII

On the Ambā Yajñā

राजोवाच

वद् यज्ञिविं प्रस्पदेव्यालस्त्या: समंततः ।

भुत्वा करीयहं स्वामिन्याश्रिक हार्तरितः ॥ १ ॥

The King spoke: “O Lord! Kindly describe the rules and regulations as to how the Devi Yajña (sacrifice) is performed with its duly prescribed

rites and ceremonies. Hearing it I will unwearied perform it, as far as it lies in my power, with as little delay as possible.

पूजाविधि च मन्त्रांशे होमरुद्यमर्शगयम् ।

बाहाणाः कतिसंख्याश दक्षिणाशं तथा पुनः ॥ 2 ॥

How the worship is done, what are the mantras,

Book III Chapter XII

what are the articles required for oblations, how many Brāhmīns are required and what Daksinās are to be paid to them, describe in detail all these."

व्यास उवाच

शृणु राजन्यवक्ष्यामि देया यजं विधान्त ।

विविधे तु सदा जेयं विधिपटुते कर्मणा ॥ ३ ॥

सात्चिक राजसं चैव तामसं च तथापरम् ।

मृनीनां सात्चिक प्रोक्त नृपाणां राजसं स्मृतः ॥ 4 ॥

तामसं ग्रहसानां वे ज्ञानिनां तु गुणीड्ज्ञान् ।

विशुक्तानां ज्ञानमयं विक्सतारब्रवीमि ते ॥ 5 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! I am telling you duly how the Devi Yajñā is performed, hear. The actions are always three-fold according as the preparations are made and according as they are practised with regard to the observed rules. The three-fold divisions are Sāttvik, Rājasik and Tāmasic. The Munis do the Sāttvik Pūjā, the kings celebrate the Rājasic and the Rakṣasas do the Tāmasik Pūjās. There is another Pūjā which is devoid of qualities and which is performed by the liberated wise ones. I will describe to you all these in detail.

हैगः कालस्वा हृल्यं मन्यां ह्र ब्राह्मणाल्या ।

श्रद्धा च सात्कवी यत्र तं चत्र सात्कवि किंवुः ॥ 6 ॥

ह्व्यशुद्धि: क्रियाणुद्विनशुद्धिक्ष धृम्पि ।

भवेद्यादि तता पूर्ण फलं भवति नान्या ॥ 7 ॥

O king! The Yajña is then called Sāttvik, when it is performed in a Sāttvik country, like Benares, etc., in Sāttvik time e.g. in Uttarāyana, when the materials collected are earned rightly, when the mantras are those of the Vedas, when the Brāhmin is Śrotriya, where there is Sāttvik faith, void of any attachment towards the sensual objects. when all these happen to coincide. O King! When all the above takes place and where there is purification of materials, actions, and mantras, i.e. when the materials are all right, when the actions are done as they ought to be, and where there is no error or omission, etc. in the mantras, etc.) then and then only the Yajña becomes perfect and no doubt yields full results; there would be nothing contrary to this.

अन्यायोपार्जितेनैव कतल्वं सुकृतं कृतम् ।

न कॉर्टिंग्र लोके च परलोके न तत्कलम् ॥ ८ ॥

तस्मान्यायाजितेनैव कतल्वं सुकृतं सदा ।

यशसे परलोकाय भवलेव सुखाय च ॥ ९ ॥

If the Yajña is performed with articles not rightly earned, then there is no fame either in this world nor there is any reward in the next world Therefore, it is necessary that the Yajña should be performed with rightly earned materials; then there is fame in this world and better state in the next world; and happiness is also acquired; there is no doubt in this.

प्रत्यक्षं तव राजेन्द्र पंडवैसु मखः कृत ।

राजसूयः क्रतुवरः साम्पावरद्धिणः ॥ 10 ॥

O King! It is before your eyes, as it were, that the Pāndavas performed the Rājasūya Yajña, the king of sacrifices, and on the completion whereof, the excellent Dakṣinās were paid to Brāhmins and others.

यत्र साक्षादुः: कृष्णो याद्वरेजे महान्नः ।

बाहाण: पूर्णविद्याङ् भगद्धाजाद्वरसधा ॥ 1 1 ॥

In that Yajña the highly intelligent Śrī Krṣṇa Himself, Lord of the Yādavas was present, as well as many Brāhmanas, like Bharadvāja and other fully enlightened souls.

कृत्वा यजं सुसंपूर्णे मासमाजेण पाण्डवेः ।

प्राप्त महर्तरं कई वनवासघ उदारणः ॥ 12 ॥

But within three months after completing the sacrifice, the Pāndavas suffered extreme hardships and had to live, with extreme difficulty, as exile in the forest.

पीड़नं चैव पाझाल्यासता घृते पराजयः ।

वनवासो महकई कव गत मखजं फलम् ॥ 13 ॥

Consider the insult shown towards Draupadī, the Pāndava's defeat in the play of gambling, their going away to dwell in the forest; these hardships were borne by the Pāndavas. What rewards did then the Pāndavas derive from the Rājasūya yajñā?

दास्तर्व च विरास्य कृतं सर्वैम्हालमिः ।

कोपकेन परिक्लिणा द्विपदी च प्रमद्वा ॥ 14 ॥

अशीर्वादा द्विजातीनां क्व नाताः शुद्धचेतसाम् ।

भक्तिवां वासुदेवस्य कव गता तत्र सकुटे ॥ 15 ॥

Šrimaddevīthāgavatam

All the high-souled Pāṇḍavas had to work as slaves of Virāta; and Draupadī, the best of women, was very much troubled and insulted by Kīcaka. When all these occurred, any one can easily ask where were the asīrvādas of the pure souled Brāhmanas? Also what result did they derive from their unflinching devotion towards Śrī Krṣṇa when they were involved in the above critical sate?

न रक्षिता तदा बाला केनापि दुपादतम्बा ।

प्रापतेकेशग्रहा काले साध्यी च चरवार्थणी।। १६ ॥।

No one protected Draupadī, the chaste and the best, the daughter of Drupada, when she was drawn by her hair on her head into the hall of assembly where gambling was being played.

क्रमम द्वितनीयं वे धार्मेतुग्यकारणम् ।

कैग्ये सति देवेगे धार्मेतुं चुधिष्ठि ॥ 17 ॥

O King! How could all these happen in a place where Śrī Bhagavān Keśava Himself and the high souled Yudhishira were present? If one argues, one would conclude “there must have been something wrong in that Yajñā”.

भवित्वयिति प्रोक्ते निष्णल: स्यातदायाम: ।

वेदमन्तासधाउन्ये च वितावा: सूयुरसंगयम् ॥ 18 ॥

If you say that nothing wrong happened in the Yajña, all these were caused by Fate; then it comes to this: that the Vedic mantras, Āgamans and the other Vedic rites are all fruitless.

साधनं निष्कलं सर्वपुरायघु निरर्धकः ।

भवित्वयं भवत्वेव वचने प्रतिपाटके ॥ 19 ॥

If it be argued that thought the Vedic mantras are powerful enough to bear fruits, yet whatever is predistened to come to pass, will surely pass, then the proposition resolves into this: that all the means, expedients, and appliances lead to meaningless conclusions.

आभाओंयर्वाहवर: स्यातिकया: सर्वा निर्विका: ।

स्वार्षा च तपो व्यर्थ वर्णायमंत्र ये तथा ॥ 20 ॥

Then the Agamas, the Vedas merely recommend a vidhi or precept by stating the good arising from its proper observance and the evils arising from its

omission and also by adducing historical instances as its support; in other words, they are powerless as far as bearing fruits is concerned; all the acts are meaningless, asceticism to attain Heaven comes as useless and the peculiar duties of caste are fruitless. O king! This view is exceedingly culpable; it is never fit for acceptance by the high-souled persons.

सर्व प्रमाणं व्यर्थ स्याद्धितन्त्ये कृते इदि ।

उभयं चापि मन्त्रयं दैवं चोपाय एव च ॥ 21 ॥

O King! If what is laid by God in the womb of futurity, (a state of things preordained by God in which it is sure to take place in the fulness of time) be taken as the first-hand proof, then all the other proofs are rendered null and void. Therefore, Fate and human exertion both are to be undoubtedly taken into account to ensure success.

कृते कर्मणि चेस्तिविद्विपरीता यदा भवेत् ।

वैगुणयंकल्पनीयंस्यातुझोः पण्डितमौतिलिपि: ॥ 22 ॥

Human exertion being applied, if the results come otherwise, wise Pundits would infer that some defect, omissions or imperfections crept into the work.

तत्कर्म बहुधा प्रोक्ते विहूद्ध: कर्मकारिभि: ।

कर्तुभेदात्मानभेदादुद्व्यभेदात्घा पुनः ॥ 23 ॥

All the Pundits, very learned and institutes of sacrifices have classed Karma under different headings according as the agents, mantras, and articles employed in the worship vary.

यथा मयतात पूर्वे विश्रभणे वृत्तो गुरु: ।

वियातीत कृते तेन कर्म मगृत्रिताय वै ॥ 24 ॥

E.g. Once on an occasion Viśvarūpa, ordained as a Guru by Indra (in a Yajñā) (intentionally) did things contrary so as to benefit the Daityas, who belonged to his mother's side.

देवेधयो द्रावेधयस्तु वसतीयुक्त्वा पुनः पुनः ।

असुरा मातृपक्षीया: कृतं तेषां च रक्षणम् ॥ 25 ॥

Viśvārūpa uttered repeatedly the mantrams beneficial to the gods, while they were present; and, during their absence, prayed heartily for the

Book III Chapter XII

welfare of the Daityas; and, in the long run, protected the Daityas.

दैत्यान् दूर्वातिसम्पुहाशुकोप मयवा तदा ।

शिरोगित सत्य वज्जेन चिश्छेद्त सराह हरि: ॥ 26 ॥

On seeing the Asuras gaining strength, Indra, the Lord of the Devas, became very much enraged and instantly cut off Viśvarūpa's head by his thunderbolt.

क्रियावैगुण्यमत्रै कर्तृभेदारसंशयम् ।

नोतेवेचालारजेन रोषेणपि कृता क्रिया ॥ 27 ॥

O King! This is then the instance where that contrary fruits were borne out by the agent employed in performing the Yajña; there is no doubt in this. This is not possible in the other cases.

भगत्राजिनाशया पुत्रयोग्यादानय च ।

ध्रशुध्न: सुस्पत्नो वेदिमध्याच्छ द्वीर्षी ॥ 28 ॥

See, again, the king of Pāncāla performed sacrifice to get a son to kill Droṇa, the son of Bharadvāja; and though he did this out of angry motives, still Dhṛṣtadyumna was born out of fire; and Draupadi sprang out of the altar.

पुरा दर्शशेनापि युवेहिष्ठु कृता यदा ।

अपूत्रस्य सुतास्तस्य चत्वारः संग्रजित्रे ॥ 29 ॥

Again, in days of yore, Daśaratha, the king of Kosala, was sonless; and he instituted a sacrifice to get one son; and lo! he got four sons.

अतः क्रिया कृता युक्त्या सिद्धिदा सर्वथा भवेत् ।

अयुकत्ता विपरीता स्यात्सर्वांना नृसत्तम ।। ३० ॥

Therefore O King! If the Yajña be performed according to proper rules and regulations, it yields fruites in all respects; again if it be done unrighteously, without any regard for the rules etc. it yields results just the contrary; there is no doubt in this.

पाण्डवानां यथा यसे किंक्षिक्रीण्ययोगतः ।

विवरीत फलं प्राप्तं निर्विंगतलरे दुरोरे ॥ ३ १ ॥

सत्यवाही तथा राजन्यमंपुत्रो युधिष्ठि: ।

त्रीयदी च तथा साध्वी तवान्येयज्ञानु: शुभाः ॥ ३ २ ॥

Therefore, there must have been some defects in the Yajña of the Pāṇḍavas; hence contrary effects

ensued, and therefore the truthful king Yudhiṣṭhira and his powerful brothers and the chaste Draupadī were all defeated in the play at dice.

कुर्व्ययोगाङ्गुगायं समुत्थं मघडेअधवा ।

साधिमानैः कृताढारि दूषणं समुपथित्यान् ॥ 33 ॥

It might be that the materials were not of a good stamp; they were all earned by killing the kings, good many in number, and earned thus unrighteously; or it might happen that the Pāndavas did their Yajña with too much egoism. However, this is certain that there had crept in some defects in their actions.

सात्विकस्तु महाराज दुर्लंभो वे मतः स्मृतः ।

वैखानसम्पुनीनां हि विहितोजसी महामखः ॥ 34 ॥

O King! The Sāttvik Yajña is rare; it can be done only by the Sāttvik Munis who live in the 3rd order of the household life or who live as hermits.

सात्विकं भोजनं ये वे नित्यं कुर्बैन्ति तपासः ।

न्यायार्थितं च चर्यं च तथा ऋध्यं सुसंस्कृतम् ॥ 35 ॥

पुरोडाभपरा नित्यं विव्युपा मन्त्यपूर्वकाः ।

श्रद्धाधिका मखा राजनसान्तिकाः परमाः स्मृतः ॥ 36 ॥

The ascetics that eat daily the Sāttvik food, the roots and fruits, collected from forests and obtained rightly, that is good to the Munis and that is well cleaned and purified, are the only ones that can perform with full devotions the Sāttvik Yajñas, where no animals are sacrificed (where there are no sacrificial posts to which the victim is fastened at the time of immolation) and where offerings of cakes of ground rice in vassels are given. These are the best of all the Sāttvik Yajñas.

राजसा ऋलबहुताः सयुपाश्र सुर्मेकृताः ।

क्षत्रियाणां विशां चैव साधिमानाङ्ध ये मखाः ॥ 37 ॥

The Kṣattriyasandthe Vaīsyasperformthe Yajñas with Abhimāna (self-conceit and egoism) where many presents are given, animals are sacrificed, and all things are well cleansed, purified and elaborately decorated. This Yajña is called Rajasic.

तामसा दानवानां वै सक्रोधा मदवधकाः ।

सामर्षी: संस्कृता: कृता मखा: प्रोता महात्माथि: ॥ 38 ॥

That Yajña is according to the sages, Tāmasik, where the Dānavas, puffed up with arrogance, infatuated with anger, jealousy and wickedness perform their acts with the sole object of killing their enemies.

भूनीनां मोक्षाकामानां विरक्तानां महात्मनाम् ।

मानसस्तु स्मृते याग: सर्वसाधानसंवृतः ॥ 39 ॥

That Yajña is called Mānas Yāga or mānasic (mental) where the high-souled Munis, void of worldly desires, collect mentally all the necessary articles and perform the Yajña the sole object of liberation from the bondages of the world.

अन्येषु सर्ववेसु किंकित्यूनं भवेदीय ।

इंलोग श्रद्धया वासिप क्रियया ब्राह्मणैस्तथा ॥ 40 ॥

In all the other Yajñas (than the Mānas Yāga) some imperfections or other naturally arise, due to some defects in the materials, or want of faith, or in the performance or in the Brāhmins.

देशकालपृथग्द्यसाधानैः सकलैस्तथा ।

नान्यो भवति पूर्णे वै तथा भवति मानसः ॥ 41 ॥

No other Yajñas can be so complete as the Mānas Yajña; the reason being that in the other Yajñas some, imperfections come out due to time, place, and separate ingredients to be collected.

प्रथमं तु मनः शोथे कर्तव्यं गुणवर्जितम् ।

शुद्धे मनसि देते है शुद्ध एवं न संशयः ॥ 42 ॥

इन्द्रप्रधधर्यित्यक्ते यदा जातं मनः शृत्रि ।

तदा तस्य मखस्यासी प्रभवेद्धिकारवान् ॥ 43 ॥

Now hear who are the persons fit to undertake this mental Yajña in honour of the Great Goddess. First this mind is to be purified, by making it void of the Guñas; the mind being pure, the body becomes also pure, there is no doubt. When the mind becomes completely pure, after it has abandoned all sensual objects, fit for enjoyment, then that man is entitled to perform the Mother's Yajña.

तद्धिजी मपड़णं कृत्वा बढ्योजनविस्तृतम् ।

स्तवैश्र विपुलैः रणल्यौर्यिप्रदुमसाम्बवै: ॥ 44 ॥

वेदीं च विग्वर्ता तत्र मनसा परिकल्ययेत् ।

अन्यशोप्रि तथा स्थाय्य विधिव्यन्मसा किल ॥ 45 ॥

There he should build mentally the big hall for sacrifice, many Yojñas wide, decorated with high polished pillars out of the materials brought for the purpose (e.g. fortitude, etc.). Within the hall he will imagine a wide and spacious altar and place the Holy Fire on it mentally according to due rules and regulations.

ब्राह्माणानां च वरणं तथेव प्रतिपाठ च ।

ब्रह्मात्यवृत्तथा होता प्रस्तोत विधिपूर्वकम् ॥ 46 ॥

उद्गाता प्रतित्तां च सच्याश्रान्ये यथाविद्धि ।

पूजनीया: प्रयत्नेन मनसेव द्विजोत्तमाः ॥ 47 ॥

He is to select mentally the Brāhmīn priests and consecrate them as Brahmā, Adhvaryu, Hotā, Prastotā, Udgātā, Prathartā and other assistants. He is to worship mentally all these priests.

प्राणोपानस्तथा व्यानः समानोदार एव च ।

पावकाः पञ्र पृदैते स्थाया वेहां विधानतः ॥ 48 ॥

Then he will have to imagine the five Vāyus Prāna, Apāna, Vyāna, Samāna, and Udāna as the five fires and locate them duly on the altar.

गाह्विन्यस्तदा प्राणोपनाश्रहवनीयकः ।

दक्षिणानिवस्ताया व्यानः समानशासयकः ॥ 49 ॥

सभ्योदानः स्मृत होते पावकाः परभोकतः ।

ग्रव्यं च मनसा भाव्यं निर्णुर्णं परमं शृष्चि ॥ 50 ॥

Prāna Vāyu stands for Gārthapatya; Apāna, for Āhavanīya; Vyāna for Daksīnā; Samāna for Avasathya; and Udāna for Samya Agni. These fires are all very terrible; then one should place these carefully on the altar with great concentration of mind. He is to collect then all the other necessary materials and think all are very pure and free from any defects.

मन एल तदा होता चकामानस्वीव तत् ।

यज्ञाधिवेदता बढ़ा निरुर्णं च सनातनम् ॥ 51 ॥

फलाद निरुर्णा शक्ति: सदा निर्वेद्दा शिका ।

बढ़ाविद्वाउलिजायाग याय्य सर्वे संशित्या ॥ 52 ॥

तदुईने तदूरब्ध हुनेताणानियु शिकः ।

पश्राचितं निरालंक कृत्ता प्राणानिप प्रभो ॥ 53 ॥

कुण्डलीमुख्यामाणि हुनेद्र ब्रह्माण शाश्यो ।

स्वानुभूतस्थ्यात्मानं सर्वभूतानि चातमिन ॥ 54 ॥


समाधिनेव योगेन ध्यायेच्छेतस्यनाकुतः ।

सर्वभूतस्याभानं सर्वभूतानि चात्मिनि ॥ 55 ॥

यदा एश्वति भूतात्मा तदा एश्वति तां शिखाम ।

इश्चा तां ब्रह्मिवृष्यात्सीच्चानंद्रकिपिणी ॥ 56 ॥

तदा मायादिकं सर्वे दूधं भवति भूमिप ।।

प्रारख्या कर्मारां तु चावडेई च तिहिति ॥ 57 ॥

In the Mānasic Yajñā, mind is the offerer of oblations and mind is the Yajarnāna, the performer of the Sacrifice; and the Presiding Deity of the Sacrifice is the Nirguna Brahma. The Great Goddess, the Nirguna Energy, who is always auspicious and gives the feeling of dispassion and indifference to worldly objects is the awarder of fruits in this Yajnā. She is the Brahma Vidyā, She is the substratum of all and She is all pervading. The Brāhmīn is to take Devi's name and offer oblations in the fire of Prāna, the necessary articles for the Devi's satisfaction. Then he is to make his Citta and Prāna void of any worldly thought or any worldly support and to offer oblations to the Eternal Brahma through the mouth of Kundalini (the Serpent Fire). Next, within his Nirvikalpa mind, by means of Samādhi, he should meditate his own Self, the Maheśvari Herself by his consciousness. Thus, when we will see his own self in all the beings and all the beings in his own self, then the Jiva will get the vision of the Goddess Mahāvidyā, giving auspicious liberation (Mokṣa) O King! After the high souled Munis have seen the Goddess, of everlasting intelligence and bliss, then he becomes the knower of Brahman. All the Māyā, the cause of this Univirse becomes burnt up; only, as long as the body remains, the Prārabdha Karma remains.'

जीवन्युक्तस्त्वा जातो मृतेो मोक्षमावानुयात् ।

कृतकृष्णो भवेत्ता यो भजेजवादीवक्रम। ॥58॥

Then the Jivas become liberated, while living; and when the body dissolves, he attains to final liberation. Therefore, O Child! Whoever worships the Mother becomes crowned with success; there is no doubt in this.

तस्मात्सर्वेलेन धेयया श्रीभुवनेश्री ।

श्रोतम्बा चैव मंत्व्या गुरुवाक्यानुसारतः ॥ ५९ ॥

Therefore follow the advise of the Guru, the Spiritual Teacher; and with all attention, hear, think and meditate on the Great Goddess of the World. राजत्रेवं कृती यज्ञे मोक्ष्वो नात्र संशयः ।

अन्ये यज्ञः सकामासुरूपबन्ति क्षयोभ्युखा: ॥ 60 ॥

O King! Liberation is sure to ensue of this Mānasa Yajñā. All the other Yajñās are Sakāma (with some object in view) and therefore their effects are temporary.

अनिष्ठोभेन विधिवत्स्वगिकामो यजेदिति ।

वेयातुगासनं चैततुववर्ति मनीषिणः ॥ 6 1 ॥

क्षीणे पुण्ये मृत्युर्लोक विगर्पित च यथापति ।

तस्मातु मानसः श्रेष्ठे यजोउपब्रथ एव सः ॥ 6 2 ॥

He who wants enjoyments in Heaven, should perform the Agnisotma Yajña, with due rites and ceremonies; such is the Vedic injunction. But when the acquired merit expires, the sacrificer will have to come again into this world of mortals. Therefore the Manasa Yajña is eternal and best.

न राजा साधितुं योग्यो मखोउसी जयमिच्छता ।

तामसस्तु कृतः पूर्वे सर्वेत्रस्वयासुंधना ॥ 63 ॥

वैरं निविंहितं राजसत्तकस्य दुरात्मनः ।

यकृतेनितस्ता: सपार्त्ववासानीकोडिग्र: पेरं ॥ 64 ॥

देवीयजं कुरुवाठा विततं विधिपूर्वकम् ।

विष्णुना यः कृत पूर्वे सुह्यादो गुर्पसन ॥ 65 ॥

O King! Hear now about the Devi Yajña, that was performed by Viṣnu in the beginning of the creation. You better now do that Devi Yanjña with due rules.

तथा त्वं कुक राजेन्र विधिं ते प्रव्रीभ्यम् ।

ब्राह्मण: सन्ति राजेन्व विधित्रा वेवदितमाः ॥ 66 ॥

देवीवीविधान्ता मन्त्रमार्थिविष्णाः ।

याजकास्ते पवीध्यन्ति यजमानस्वलेवे हि ॥ 67 ॥

I will tell you all about the rules; there are Brāhmins that know the rules and know best also the Vedas; they know also the seed mantrams of the Devi, as well as the rules of their application; they are clever in all the mantrams. These will be your priests and you yourself will be the sacrificer.

कृत्वा यज्च विधानेन दत्त्वा पुण्यं मयाजितम्।

समुद्रर महाराज चितरं दुर्गति गतन् ॥ 68 ॥

O King! Do this sacrifice duly and deliver your father from hell by the merits that you will acquire thereby.

विश्रावमानजं पायं दुर्घटं नरकप्रदम् ।

तथैव शापजी दोषः प्रापः चित्रा ततवान्य ॥ 69 ॥

O Sinless One! The sin incurred on account of insulting a Brāhmīn is serious and leads the sinner to hell. Your father committed that sin and incurred the curse from a Brāhmīn. Therefore he has gone to the hell.

तथा दुर्भरण प्राप्तं सर्वदेशेन घ्युग्जा ।

अन्तराले तथा मृत्युर्नं घ्युनी कुशसंस्तरे ॥ 70 ॥

Your father died also out of a snake bite which is not a meritorious one. The death occurred also in a palace built high up in the air (on a pillar), instead of taking place on the ground on a bed of Kuśa grass.

न संप्रामे न गृत्रायां स्नानदानादिवर्जितम् ।

मरणं ते चितुस्तत्र सीधे जाते कुरुद्धः ॥ 71 ॥

O best of the Kurus! The death did not occur in any battle nor on the banks of the Ganges. Void of proper bathing and charities, etc., he died in a palace.

कृणपानि च सर्वाणि नरकस्य नृपोतम ।

तर्केक कारणं तस्य न जातं चातितुर्तेभम् ॥ 72 ॥

O best of Kings! All the ugly causes, leading to hell, were present in the case of your father. See, again, there is also one thing which done will lead to one's liberation; but that was absent too with your father.

यत्र यत्र स्थितः प्राणो ज्ञाला कालं समागतम् ।

साधनानामभावेप्रि ढ्वशश्रातिसघुक्टे ॥ ७३ ॥

यदा निवेद्यमाति मनसा निमेनेल वै ।

पशुभृतामको देहो मम किं चार्र दुःखदम् ॥ ७४ ॥

पतत्वघ यथाकामं मुक्तोर्द हिनुगोगेख्ययः ।

नागामकानि तत्वानि तत्र का परिवेदना ॥ ७ 5 ॥

ब्रहीवाहं न संसारी सदा मुक्तः सनातनः ।

देहेन मम सब्बन्धः कर्मणा प्रतिपादितः ॥ ७ 6 ॥

That is this: Let a man remain, wherever he may, whenever he comes to learn that his end is approaching, even if he had not practised before any good practises or meritorious deeds, and even if he becomes senseless in the trial time of death, when dispassion comes to an individual whose mind gets, for the time being, clear and free from any worldly thoughts, then he should think thus: "Thus my body, composed of five elements, will soon be destroyed; there is no cause whatsoever in having any remorse for it; let whatever come, that it may; I am free, void of qualities; and I am the Eternal Pursua; death is not capable to do any harm to me. All the elements are liable to decay and destruction; what remorse can overtake me? I am not a man of the world, I am always free, Eternal Brahma; I have got no connection with this body that is merely the outcome of actions.

तानि सर्वाणि मुक्तानि शुभानि चेतताराणि च।

मनुव्यदेशयोगेन सुखदुःखानुसाध्यन्ति ॥ 77 ॥

Before I did meritorious or unmeritorious acts, leading to happiness and pain; therefore I have got this mortal coil and am enjoying the fruits of my past auspicious or inauspicious Karma.

विमुक्तो3तिभयादुयोगाद्यमात्संसारसंकटात् ।

इत्येवे चित्यमानसु नन्दानविवर्षितः ॥ 78 ॥

Whoever thinks thus and dies, even if he does not take proper purificatory bath or make any charity, he gets himself freed from the awful Sarinsāra and never comes to see himself again born in this world.

मरणं चेद्वापोति स मुचेजजनमदुःखतः ।

एषा काछा पर प्रोक्ता योरिनामयि दुर्विभ ॥ 79 ॥

O King! This method of parting from one's body is rarely attained even by the Yogins; this is the acme, the highest height of all the human efforts towards liberation.

पिता ते नृपश्रादुर्ग दृष्ट्वा शापा दिजोदितम् ।

देहे ममत्वं कृतायास निर्वेदमयावतान् ॥ 80 ॥

But your father, hearing even the curse from a

Book III Chapter XIII

Brähmin, retained his attachment towards his body; therefore, he did not attain dispassion.

नीरीतो मम देहोउयं राख्य निरूत्कण्टकम् ।

कयं जीवाग्रहं कामं मन्त्रानानयन्तु है ॥ 81 ॥

He thought thus: “My body is now free from any disease; my kingdom is free from enemies or any other source of danger; how can I now get myself saved from this untimely death.” Thinking thus, he ordered to call the Brāhmapas, who know the mantrams.

और्धधं मणिमन्ते च यन्ते परमकं तथा ।

आतोर्ण तथा सौधे कृतत्वामुपतित्वा ॥ 82 ॥

Then that king ascended to the palace, with medicines, maṇi mantras and many other instruments.

न स्नाने न कृतं दानं न देथ्या: स्मरणं कृतम् ।

न प्रभौ शयनं चैव देवं मचा परं तथा ॥ 83 ॥

मनो मोहाणंदे धोरे मृत: सौधेडिहना हतः ।

कृत्वा पापा कलेयेंगातापससत्याबमानजम् ॥ 84 ॥

He considered his fate to be the strongest and, therefore, did not take his bath in any holy place; he did not perform any charities, did not sleep on the ground or remember any mantram of the Devi. Due to Kali entering into his body, he committed the sin of insulting an ascetic and plunged himself

in the ocean of delusion and died bitten by the Taksaka snake on the top of a palace.

अवश्यमेव नरकं एतैरावरणेभवैत ।

तस्मातं चितरं प्याततमपुढर नृपोतम ॥ 85 ॥

The King has now fallen undoubtedly to hell, on account of those vicious deeds. Therefore, O King! dost Thou deliver your father from the sin.

सूत जवाच

इति श्रुत्वा वचसत्य व्यासस्यामिततेजसः ।

साशुकफो3तितु:खात्तों बधूव जनमेवय: ॥ 86 ॥

Sūta said, O Rsis! Hearing these words from the fiery Vyāsa, the king Janamejaya became very sad and tears came from his eyes and flowed down his cheeks and throat.

स्थिरिं अंजिति मेठध चित्त मे नरके स्थितः ।

तत्कारीय यथैवाठा खर्चा यात्युत्तासुतः ॥ 87 ॥

डीत श्रीमदेवीभागलो महापुराणे तृतीयकल्पे

प्रदारोडध्याः ॥ 88 ॥

He then exclaimed in a suffocating voice “Fie on me! my father is still in the hell. I will now do at once whatever leads my father to heaven.”

Thus ends the Twelfth Chapter on the Amba

Yajña rules in the Third Book of

Śrimaddevīthāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of

18,000 verses composed by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book III Chapter XIII

