CHAPTER XVII

On the Anecdote of Tulasi

श्रीनारायण उवाच

धार्यध्वजस्य पत्ती च माध्यवीति च विश्रुता ।

युंण सार्थ सासोरामे तेभे च गन्यमादने ॥ 1 ॥

ग्रवां रतिकर्गे कृत्वा पुष्पचन्दनचर्धिताम् ।

चन्दनाफिलसावाँकुं पुष्पचन्दनवायुना ॥ 2 ॥

Śrī Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! The wife of Dharmadhvaja was Mādhavi. Going to the Gandhamādana mountain, She began to enjoy, with great gladness, the pleasures with the king Dharmadhvaja. The bed was prepared, strewn with flowers and scented with sandal-paste. She smeared all over her body with sandal-paste. The flowers and cool breeze in contact with the sweet

scent of sandal-paste began to cool the bodies. Mādhavī was the jewel amongst women.

स्ट्रीरत्मतिचारवाँक्री रत्नभूषणभूषिता ।

कामुकी रसिका सुहा रसिकेन च संसूता ॥ 3 ॥

सुरते विरतिन्तित तयोः सुरतिविजयोः ।

गतं देवर्षग्रंत न जाते च दिवानिगम् ॥ 4 ॥

Her whole body was very elegant. Besides it was adorned all over with j-wel ornaments. As she was humorous, so the king was very expert in that respect. It seemed as if the Creator created especially for Dharmadhvaja, the humorous lady Mādhavī expert in amorous affairs. Both of them were skilled in amorous sports. So no one did like

to desist from amorous enjoyments. One hundred divine years passed in this way, day and night passed unnoticed.

ततो राजा मर्ति प्राय्य सुरताद्विराम च ।

कामुकी सूदरी किंचित्र च तुरिं जगाम सा ॥ 5 ॥

दधार गर्भे सा सडो दैवाद्वर्ज्ञतं सती ।

श्रीभगों श्रीयुना सा च संबंभूव दिवे दिवे ॥ 6 ॥

The king then got back his consciousness and desisted from his amorous embraces. But the lustful woman did not find herself satisfied. However, by the Deva's influence, she became pregnant and conceived for one hundred years. In the womb there was the incarnation of Lakṣmī; and the body's lustre increased day by day.

शुभे क्षणे शुभदिने शुभमवेगे च संयुते ।

शुभलने शुभांगे च शुभस्वामिमघात्विते ॥ 7 ॥

क्रान्तिकीपुर्णिमावां तु सितावरे च पचवा ।

सुभाव सा च पचांगां शपित्यों तां मनोहामू ॥ 8 ॥

Then, on an auspicious day, on an auspicious moment, auspicious Yoga, auspicious lagna, auspicious Arinśa, and on an auspicious combination of planetary rules and their houses, she delivered on the full moon night of the month of Kārtika one beautiful daughter, the incarnation in part of Lakṣmī.

ग्रत्याव्यिच्छात्यां ग्रस्यंकजलोचनान् ।

पक्वाविंबाघारोईी च पर्पर्ती समितां गृहम् ॥ 9 ॥

इस्तपादतालरतां निम्ननाधिं मनोरामाम् ।

तद्धसिज्जलयुक्ता नितंबयुगवतुलम् ॥ 10 ॥

The face of the body looked like the autumnal moon; Her two eyes resembled autumnal lotuses and her upper and lower lips looked beautiful like ripe Bimba fruits. The daughter began, no sooner it was born, to look on all sides of the lying-in-room. The palm and lower part of feet were red. The navel was deep and below that there were three wrinkles. Her loins were circular.

शीते सुखीण्यसर्वी शीधे च सुखशीतालम् ।

शयामां सुकेशी चिर्वां न्यौधोर्षमिंडालम् ॥ 1 1 ॥

पीतचंपकवणांभां सुन्दीचेव सुन्दीम् ।

नरा नार्येछ तां झुढ़ा तुलनां दातुमक्षामाः ॥ १ २ ॥

Her body was hot in the winter and cold in the summer and pleasant to touch. Her hairs on the head were hanging like the roots of the fig tree. Her colour was bright like Campaka; She was a jewel amongst women. Men and women cannot compare her beauty.

तेन नाना च तुलसी तां वंदिति मनीषिणः ।

सा च भूविष्यमानेन योग्यशी प्रकृतिरंथा ॥ 13 ॥

सर्वैपिंविद्धा तपसे जगाम बदरीवन् ।

तत्र देवाद्वलक्षं च चकार परमं तपः ॥ 14 ॥

The holy wise men named Her Tulasī. As soon as she was born, she looked of the female sex, full on every way. Though prevented repeatedly by all, She went to the forest of Badari for practising Tapasyā. There she practised that Rapasyā for one lākh divine years.

मनसा नारायण: स्वामी भवितेति च निश्रिता ।

ग्रीधे पंचताय शीते तोयवझा च प्रावृषि ॥ 15 ॥

आसनस्वा बृधित्याग: सह्नौति दिवानिग्नम् ।

विश्रासह्ववर्ष च फलतोयागना च स ॥ 16 ॥

Her main object was to get Nārāyaṇa for her husband. In summer she practised Pañcatapā (surrounded by fire on four sides and on the top); in the winter she remained in water and in the rainy season she remained in the open air and endured the showers of the rain, twenty thousand years. She passed away thus in eating fruits and water.

स्थितसहस्वर्ष च पत्राहारा तप्तविनी ।

चत्वारिंशलसुश्रव्दं बाय्याहार कृणोहरी ॥ 17 ॥

For thirty thousand years she subsisted only on the leaves of trees. When the forty thousandth year came, she subsisted only on air and her body became thinner and thinner day by day.

ततो दशसहवाद्वे निर्याहारा बभूव सा ।

निलक्षा चैकपादस्था द्वुतां तां कमलोद्वः ॥ 18 ॥

समावयी वरं दातुं परं बदरिकाओम् ।

चतुर्मुंचं च सा द्वुहा ननाम हंरवाहन् ॥ १९ ॥

तामुवाच जयकता विधाता जगतामपि ॥

Book IX Chapter XVII

Then for ten thousand years afterwards she left eating anything whatsoever and without any aim, stood on only one leg. At this time the lotus-born Brahmā, seeing this, appeared there to grant her boons. On seeing Him, Tulasī immediately bowed down to Brahmā, the Four-faced One riding on His vehicle, the Swan.

Note: The vehicle theory of the Devas came from Egypt. The Devas were without vehicles at first and were faced half-beasts. Then they were rendered men and their vehicles were fancied as beasts. The face of the Durgā Devi was thought of as that of a tiger.

बशोवाच

वरं वृषीष्य तुलसि यते मनसि वांतिहन् ॥ 20 ॥

हरिभर्पितं हेरदास्यमजारमततामपि ।

He then addressed her and said: "O Tulasī! Ask any boon that you like. Whether it be devotion to Hari, servantship to Hari, freedom from old age or freedom from death, I will grant that to you."

तुलस्याच

श्रुणु तात प्रवक्ष्यापि यन्मे मतसि बाँतिछ्न ॥ 21 ॥

सर्वेत्रस्यापि पुरतः का लज्जा मम संप्रिन् ।

Tulasi said: “Father! I now say you my mind. Hear. What is the use of hiding away my views out of fear or shame to One who knows everything reigning in One’s Heart.

अहं तु तुलसी गोपी गोलोकेंद्रहं स्थिता पूरा ॥ 22 ॥

कृपाधिया किंकरी च तद्वेगा तत्सखी प्रिया ।

गोविद्वतिसंभुकतामतुरांगां मो च मृष्टिताम् ॥ 23 ॥

रासेध्वरी समानतय ददर्ग रासमपडले ।

गोविदं भर्तीयामास मां शगतप सभविता ॥ 24 ॥

I am Tulasi Gōpi (cowerdess); I used to dwell before in the Goloka. I was a dear she-servant of Rādhikā, the beloved of Kṛṣṇa. I was also born of Her in part. Her Sakhis (female attendants) used to love me. Once in Rāsa Maṇḍalam I was enjoyed by Govinda; but I was not satiated and while I was lying down in an unconscious state, Rādhā, the Governess-in-chief of the Rāsa circle, came there and saw me in that state. She rebuked Govinda and, out of anger, cursed me:

याहि त्वं मानवीं योगनियत्वेचं च शशाप्र ह ।

मामुवाच स गोविदो मदांगं च चतुर्भुज् ॥ 25 ॥

लधिष्यस तपस्तवा भाते बढ़णी वरत् ।

‘Go at once and be born as a human being.’ At this Govinda spoke to me: “If you go and practise Tapas in Bhārata, Brahmā will get pleased and He will grant you boon. When you will get Nārāyaṇa, the Four-armed, born of Me in part as your husband.”

इत्येवमुक्त्वा देदेशो3प्यंतधार्वं चकार स: ॥ 26 ॥

देव्या भिया ततू त्यक्त्वा प्राप्तं जन गुते शुधि ।

अहं नारायणां कांतं शगतं सुन्दरविष्यम् ॥ 27 ॥

सांग्रतं ते पर्न लक्ष्यु वय्ये त्वं च देहि मे ।

O Father! Thus speaking, Śri Kṛṣṇa disappeared out of sight. Out of Rādhā's fear, I quitted my body and am now born in this world. Now grant me this boon that I get the peaceful, lovely beautiful Nārāyaṇa for my husband."

ब्रहादेव उवाच

सुदामा नाम गोपश्र शीकृष्णांगसमूद्रवः ॥ 28 ॥

तदंशश्रातितेजस्वी लेणे जम च भारते ।

सांग्रतं राधिकारशापहनुवंशसमूद्रवः ॥ 29 ॥

Brahmā said: O Child Tulasi! The Gopa (cowherd) Sudāmā was born of Śrī Krṣna's body. At the present time he is very energetic, He too, under the curse of Rādhā, has come and taken his birth amongst the Dānavas.

गंखच्छूंदित विज्यातरबौलेकोये न च ततमाः ।

गोलेके त्वां पुरा द्वृषा कामोनभितमानमसः ॥ 30 ॥

He is named Śañkha Cūḍa. No one is equal to him in strength. In Goloka, when he saw you before, he was overpowered with passion for you.

विलिभिनुं न शगाक शरिकायाः: प्रभातः ।

स च जातिस्मरतस्माव्रुदयामाभूच्च सागरे ॥ 31 ॥

जातिस्मरा त्वयपि सा सर्वं जानासि सुन्दरि ।

अधुना तस्य पत्नी त्वं संभविष्यसि शोभेन ॥ 32 ॥

पश्रात्रारायणं शांतं कतमेक वरिष्यसि ।

शापात्रारायणस्यैव कल्या दैवयोगतः ॥ 33 ॥

Only out of Rādha's influence, he could not embrace you. That Sudāmā is Jātismara (knows

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

all about his previous births); and you, too, are Jātismarā. Therefore is nothing unknown to you. O Beautiful One! You will now be his wife. Afterwards you will get Nārāyaṇa, the Beautiful and Lovely for your husband.

भविष्यसि वृक्षरूपा त्वं पृता विश्वपावनी ।

प्रधाना सर्वपुषेपु विद्युप्राणाधिका पश्चे ॥ 34 ॥

त्वया विचा च सर्वेषां पूजा च विफलां भवेत् ।

वृन्दावने वृक्षरूपा नाना वृद्धावतीति च ॥ 35 ॥

Thus under the curse of Nārāyaṇa, you will be transformed into the world purifying Tulasi tree. You will be the foremost amongst the flowers and will be dearer to Nārāyaṇa than His life. No one's worship will be complete without Thee as leaf. You will remain as a tree in Vrndāvana and you will be widely known as Vrndāvani.

त्वतयोगीयिणाया पुत्रिययिति माधायम् ।

युशातिवेदीकरण सार्थ फूर्णोय नंतरत् ॥ 36 ॥

विद्यार्थिसे गोपेन स्वच्छंद मदुर्गण च ।

इत्वंदे वचनं श्रुत्वा सस्मिता हद्यमानसा ॥ 37 ॥

प्रणानाम च द्वाणा तं च किंचिद्वावास स ।

The Gopas and Gopīs will worship Mādhava with Your leaves. Being the Presiding Diety of the Tulasī tree, you will always enjoy the company of Kṛṣṇa, the best of the Gopas." O Nārada! Thus hearing Brahmā's words, the Devi Tulasī became very glad. Smile appeared in her face. She then bowed down to the Creator and said:

तुलस्याच

यथा मे दिषुर्जे कृष्णो वांछा च र्यामासून्दरे ॥ 38 ॥

सर्वे ब्रावीमि दे तात न तथा च चतुष्टिंगे ।

अतूपाउई च गोयिदे दैवाच्छूजारभगतः ॥ 39 ॥

गोविन्द्वर्यैव वचनात्रार्थयामि चतुर्भुम् ।

त्वत्रमावेत० गोविद्व० पुनेरेव सुतुलंभम् ॥ 40 ॥

धूवमेव लिध्यामि राधाभीति प्रमोचय ।

“O Father! I speak now truly to Thee that I am no! as devoted to the four-armed Nārāyaṇa as I am devoted to Śyāma Sundra, the two-armed. For my intercourse with Govinda Śrī Krṣṇa was suddenly interrupted and my desire was not gratified. It is

because of Śrī Govinda's words that I prayed for the four-armed. Now it appears certain that by Thy grace I will get again my Govinda, very hard to be attained. But, O Father! Do this that I be not afraid of Rādhā."

ब्रहादेव उवाच

गृहाण राधिकामांत्र द्वादीय भोड्गाशमू। ॥ 41॥

तत्स्था प्राणतुल्या त्वं मद्रोगे घाधव्यासि ।

श्रंगारं व्यवारोगोंव न जास्यति च राधिका ॥ ४ २ ॥

राधासमा त्वं सुभगे गोविन्दस्य घथिव्यासि ।

Brahmā said: “O Child! I now give you the sixteen lettered Rādhā mantra to you. By Her Grace you will be dear to Rādhā as Her life. Rādhikā will not be able to know anything of your secret dealings. O Fortunate! You will be dear to Govinda like Rādhā.”

इन्येवमुक्का तत्ता च देख्य वे घोडगाशमू १। ४३ ।।

मंत्रे चैव जगद्धाता स्तोत्रे च कवचं परम् ।

सर्वे पूजाधियानं च पुरुध्याधिधिकमम् ॥ ४ ४ ॥

Thus saying, Brahmā, the Creator of the world, gave her the sixteen lettered Rādhā mantra, stotra, Kavaca and mode of worship and puraścarana and He blessed her.

परां शृभाधिरां चैव पूजां चैव ककरा स ।

बधूव सिद्धा सा देयी तनुसादात्रमा यथा ॥ 45 ॥

सिद्धं मंत्रेण तुरुसी वरं प्राप यथोदितम् ।

बुधुजे च महाभोगें यडिष्येचु च दुर्लेम् ॥ 46 ॥

Tulasi, then, engaged herself in worshipping Rādhā, as directed. By the boon of Brahmā, Tulasi attained Siddhi (success) like Lakṣmī. Out of the power of the Siddha mantra, She got her desired boon. She became fortunate in getting various pleasures, hard to be attained in this world. Her mind became quiet.

प्रसत्रमनसा देवी तत्वाज तपस: कलमम् ।

सिद्धे फले नगणों च दुःखं च सुखमुजनम् ॥ 47 ॥

भृक्वा पीत्वा च संतुहा ग्रनंचे च चक्या स ।

तत्वे मनोमे तत्र पुष्पचंदनर्पिते ॥ 48 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वैभिणगवते नवमलकन्ये नारायणनारदस्यंदरे

तुलस्युपाध्याने सपतद्वी3धायाः ।। 17 11

Book IX Chapter XVIII

All the the toils of Tapasyā disappeared. When one gets the fruit of one's labour, all the troubles then transform to happiness. She then finished her

food and drink and slept on a beautiful bed strewn with flowers and scented with sandal paste. Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the anecdote of Tulasi in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XVIII

