CHAPTER XXV

On the Devi's Highest Supremacy

राजोवाच

सन्देहो मे मुनिश्रेष्ठ जायते वचनात्व ।

वैभायांशे भगवति दुःखोचर्चिं विलोकंच च ॥ १ ॥

The King said: “O Best of Munis! Hearing these sorrows of Śrī Krṣna, the part incarnate of Viṣṇu Bhagavān, I am in doubt on your utterances.

नारायणांगसम्पूर्ती वासुदेवः प्रतपाचान् ।

कर्ष स सूचितकागाराब्दूनी बालो हेरोरि ॥ 2 ॥

Behold! Bhagavān Vāsudeva is the part incarnate of Nārāyaṇa; how could the Asura Śambara steal away His son from the lying-in-chamber!

सुगुप्तनगरे रथे युगते5ध सूचितकारुह ।

प्रविष्य तेन देहैलय गृहीतोउसी कर्ध शिष्यु ॥ ३ ॥

The beautiful Dvarakā city is specially well-guarded; the lying-in-chamber is again within the centre of that; under these circumstances, how was it that the Daitya could enter there and steal away the child!

न जातो वासुदेवेन चित्रमेतन्माद्धतम् ।

जायते महदाशयं चिते सत्यवतीभुत ।। ४।।

O Son of Satyavati! How was it that Vāsudeva could not know that! this appears very strange to me!

ब्रहि तत्कारणं बढ़ारज्ञातं क्रवेच नत् ।

हरणं तत्र संस्थेन शिरोगोंवं सृत्तिकागृहत् ।। ५ ॥

O Brāhmaṇa! Please explain to me why was that child stolen away from the lying-in-chamber, though Śrī Kṛṣṇa was staying there at the city; and how was it that he was not able to know this beforehand!

व्यास उवाच

माया बलवती राजत्राणां बुद्धिमोहिनी ।

गम्भवी विश्रुता लोके को वा मोहै न गच्छिति ॥ 6 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! The Māyā called Sāmbhavī (Pārvatī) is the cause; it fascinates and deludes the minds of human beings. Thus it is

Book IV Chapter XXV

known to us. Who is there in this world that is not deluded by this Māyā?

मानुषं जन्म सम्प्राय युणा: सर्वेक्षि मानुषा: ।

भवन्ति देहजा: कामं न देवा नागुसात्शा ॥ 7 ॥

The Jivas, no sooner they are born as human beings, are immediately overcome with human qualities; the Deva or Astura qualities or their natures do not then visibly exist.

श्रुचपिन्ना भयं तन्त्र व्याभोहः शोकसंशयः ।

हर्षेश्वाथमानछ जारमणयेव च ॥ 8 ॥

अनानं रतानिरप्रीतिरीध्यासुया मदः श्रमः ।

एते देहभवा भावाः प्रभवन्ति नराधिप ॥ 9 ॥

O King! Hunger, thirst, sleep, fear, lassitude, delusion, sorrow, doubt, pleasure, egoism, old age, disease, death, non-knowledge, knowledge, displeasure, envy, jealousy, pride and weariness all these human qualities are seen to exist in human embodiments.

यथा हेमभुगं रामो न बुबोधे पुरोतगम् ।

जानक्या हूर्ण चैव जटायुभरणं तथा ॥ 10 ॥

अधिषेकदिने रामो वनवासं न वेद च ।

तथा न जातवाताम: स्वशोकात्मरणं वितृः ॥ 11 ॥

Behold! The night wandere: Rāksasa Mārica assumed, by his Māyā, the form of a golden deer and came before Śrī Rāmacandra; and Rāmacandra was not the least aware of it. Then the stealing away of Sītā, the death of Jaṭāyu, Rāma's going to the forest on the very day of his installation to the throne of Ayodhyā; the death of his father due to his bereavement, all these Śrī Rāmacandra did not know a bit beforehand.

अज्ञविद्वचारासी पश्यमानो वने वने ।

जानकीं न विवेदाय रावणेन हर्तां बलात् ॥ 12 ॥

When Rāvana stole away Jānakī and carried her by force Rāma did not know this before or after that event had happened. He wandered from forest to forest in search of Her, like a quite ignorant man.

सहायान्वानरान्कुला हत्वा शक्रभुतं बलात् ।

सारो सेतुबन्ध च क्रवोतीयं सरित्यादि ।। १३ ॥

Afterwards He killed Vāli, the son of Indra and

with the help of the monkeys, erected a bridge across the ocean, and, crossing it, went to Lanka.

प्रेषयामास सर्वसृत्र दिष्छु तान्कपिकुझरान् ।

संग्रामं कृत्वान्भोरं दुःखं प्राप रणातिजे ॥ 14 ॥

He sent the chief monkeys to all the quarters in search of Sitā and had to undergo all the troubles of deadly battles in the great battlefield.

बन्धूनं नागपाणेन प्राप रामो महावलः ।

गरूडान्मोक्षणं पशुदान्वभूद्रपुनन्दनः ॥ 15 ॥

The most powerful Raghunandana was tied down by Nāgapāśa (snakes) and was afterwards freed from it by Garuda.

अहनूद्रावर्ग संख्ये कृम्भकर्ण महावलम् ।

मैघनादं निकुम्भं च कृपितोर्युनन्दनः ॥ 16 ॥

Then, being furiously enraged, the great Rāghava slew Kumbhakarna, Nikumbha, Megha Nāda and Rāvana.

अनुध्यलं च जानक्या न विवेद जनादनः ।

विद्यं च कारयामास जलितेजनी प्रवेशनम् ॥ 17 ॥

The Janārdana Rāmacandra was not aware of the innocence of Sitā; and therefore He made her take an oath about the purity of Her character and even made Her undergo an ordeal of fire.

लेकापवादाच्च परंतरल्याज तां प्रियाम् ।

अनुधां दूषितां मत्वा सीतां दुर्शयात्मतः ॥ 18 ॥

Afterwards Rāmacandra, the son of Daśaratha, had to banish his dear blameless Sītā on the more ground of bad name, imputed to her by some ignorant person and that he would be thus blamed by the public

न जातौ स्वसुती तेन रामोघा च कुशीतवी ।

मुनिना क्रथिती तौ तु तस्य पुत्री महावली ॥ 19 ॥

He did not know that Kuśa and Lava were His two sons, born in the forest. Afterwards when the Muni Vālmiki told him, He came to know of them.

पातालमानं चैव जानक्शा ज्ञातवात्र च ।

राधव: कोपसंयुक्तो धातरं हन्तुभुक्तः ॥ 20 ॥

Behold also Rāmacandra could not know about the departure of Sītā to Pātāla; getting angry once He was about to kill his brother Laksmanāva even.

Srimaddevibhagavatam

कालस्यामानं चैव न विवेदे खरानकः ।

मानुषं देहमाश्रित्य चके मानुपणेहितून ॥ 2 1 ॥

तबैव मानुष्याभावात्रात कार्य विचारणा ।

Rāma, the slayer of Rāksasa Khara, did not know that Kāla Puruṣa was coming to him. He, incarnating in the human body, did acts all becoming to a man. Similarly Śri Krṣṇa, the descendant of Yadu, taking human birth did acts all like a man. What more discussion can there be in this?

पूर्व कंसभ्यात्माप्तो गोकुलेये वयुनन्दनः ॥ 22 ॥

जत्संधभयात्यशादुबारवलां गतो हरि: ।

Lo! From the very outset He fled, out of fear of Karīsa, to Gokula; afterwards he fled out of fear of Jarāsandha to the Dvārkā city.

अधर्म कृत्वाकृष्णो रूकियणा हृष्यो चत ॥ २३ ॥

शिशुपालहतायाश्र जानन्यमं सनातनम् ।

Knowing all the rites and ceremonies of the Sanātan Dharma (the Eternal Religion) He stole away Rukminī who was chosen as bride elect by Sísupāla. This act was very unreligious of Him.

शृणोव बालकं कृष्ण: शबेशण हर्त बलात् ॥ 24 ॥

भुपोद जानन्यूत्र तं हर्षगीक्षयुतस्ततः ।

Sambara Daitya stole away his newly born child and Kṛṣṇa lamented for this. Afterwards on coming to know of the real state of things from the Goddess Bhagavatī, He was very glad. Therefore it can be easily seen from all these circumstances that He had to yield to pleasures and to undergo remorse like ordinary human beings.

सत्यभापान्राय वतु युयुधे खर्गतः किल ॥ 25 ॥

इन्हेण पादपार्थ तु क्षीजितन्तं प्रकाशयन् ।

Again, under the orders of his wife Satyabhāmā, He had to go to Heaven to bring the Pārjiāta tree and He had to fight with Indra. This shows clearly that He was under the subjection of His wife.

जहार कल्पवृघं यः पराभ्यूय शतकतुम् ॥ 26 ॥

मानेनीमानसक्षर्ष हितश्रधरः प्रभुः ।

In that battle Hari with disc in hand defeated Indra, the Lord of the Devas, took away the Kalpa

tree and retained the prestige of His respected wife (whom He had offended).

बद्धया युक्षे हरिं सल्या नारदाय ददी पतिम् ॥ 27 ॥

दत्तावकानकंकृणांभोच्यामतभामिनी ।

Again Satyabhāmā tied down Hari against a tree and presented Him as a gift to Nārada; afterwards she, the passionate woman, freed Krṣna on paying an equivalent of gold coins.

दूर्वा पुत्रानुकरुणान्युद्नप्रमुखानय ॥ 28 ॥

कृष्ण जीवबाती दीना ययावे सन्ति शुभाम् ।

स ययो पर्वतं कृष्णसत्ययाकृतनिश्रयः ॥ 29 ॥

उपमन्युर्जित्यं शिवधन्कः पत्नपः ।

On seeing Rukminis many sons, Pradyumna and others, all qualified with diverse qualifications, His wife Jāmbavati prayed to Śri Krṣna with humility, so that she may have also many beautiful sons. For her sake, Krṣna firmly resolved to practise tapasyā and went to the place where the great devotee of Śiva, Upamanyu, was staying.

उपमन्युं गृं कृत्वा दीक्षां पाणुपर्ती दीः ॥ 30 ॥

जग्राह पुत्रकामसून मुण्डी दण्डी बयून ह ।

Hari desiring to have sons engaged Upamanyu as His spiritual guide and obtained from him the Mantram called Pāsūpata Mantra and became a Dandī (holder of a staff) and shaved His head.

उर्जा तन तपसेपे माममेकं फलाशनः ॥ 31 ॥

जजाप शिवमन्त्रं तु शिवध्यानपरो हरि: ।

द्वितीये तु जलाहारसिहछलेक्यदा हरि: ॥ 32 ॥

तृतीये वायुभक्षस्तु पादाङ्छुधारसंश्रितः ।

In the first month He subsisted on fruits only and meditated on Śiva and repeated silently the Śiva mantra. Thus He practised very severe austerities. In the second month He subsisted on water only and stood on only one leg. In the third month he lived on air only and stood on the end of His great toe.

घड़े तु भगवानुङ़ः प्रसजो भक्तिभावतः ॥ 33 ॥

दर्शनं च ददी तत्र सोमः सोमकलापः ।

आजगाम बुधाकडः सुरीरित्रविषयन्तः ॥ 34 ॥

बहाविष्यानुतः साक्षाध्यान्यवेसेवितः ।

Book IV Chapter XXV

स्वाधोधन् वासुदेवं शक्रस्तमुवाच ह 1135 ||

तुओंस्मि कृष्ण तपसा तवोत्रेण महामते ।

द्वामि वार्ज्डितान्कामान्वृहि यादवनन्दन ॥ 36 ॥

मय दृष्टे कामपुरे कामशेणो न सभ्यन्ते ।

Thus time passed away. In the sixth month the God Rudra, holding Moon on His forehead, was pleased with His asceticism and devotion and appeared before Him on that spot. The God Mahā Deva came on a bull; He was attended by Brahma and Viṣṇu, Indra and the other Devas, Yakṣas and Gandharvas and addressed thus—“O high minded Krṣṇa of Yadu’s descent; I am pleased with Your severe asceticism; now ask Your desired boon; I will grant it just now. I fulfil all the desires of all my devotees; what desire, then, there can be that is not fulfilled, when I am seen by the devotees!”

व्यास उवाच

तं दूद्वा शड़ूं तुहं भपावाद्वेकसुतः ॥ 37 ॥

यात पादयोलस्य दण्डवल्यमेस्युतः ।

स्तुर्ति चकार देवेशो मेघाभधीरया सिता ।

स्थितस्तु पुरतः शभ्योबांसुदेवः सन्तानः ॥ 38 ॥

Vyāsa said: The son of Devaki was very glad to see the God Śaṅkara and fell prostrate at His feet. Then that eternal supreme God of the Devas began to recite hymns in praise of Him in a tone as deep as the rumbling of cloud.

कृष्ण खच्च

देवदेव जगत्राय सर्वभूतातिनारण नि 39 ॥

विश्योने सुरारिटन नमक्रौलोक्यकाकाः ।

Krṣṇa said: O Deva of the Devas! O Lord of the world! You alone destroy the misfortunes and sorrows of all the beings. O Destroyer of Asuras! You are the Cause and Creator of this universe. I salute Thee.

नीतकष्ठ नमतुध्यं शूलिने ते नामोनमः ॥ 40 ॥

शैलाजाल्लभायाव यज्ञदाय नामोउस्तु ते ।

O One having a blue throat! I bow down to Thee! O Holder of trident! I again and again salute Thee! O Lord of Pārvatī! You destroyed Dakṣa's sacrifice. I salute Thee.

बद्धोर्धे कृतकृत्योर्धे एर्शान्ताव सुघत ॥ 4 1 ॥

जन्म मे सफलं जातं नत्वा ते पाद्यंकजम् ।

I am blessed by Thy sight and think myself as having discharged all my duties and satisfied. O Virtuous One! My human birth is crowned with success by saluting Thy feet.

बढ़ोर्ड़े सीमये: पाशैः संसारोस्मिडगयुगृतः । ४२ ॥

गरणं तेउघ संग्रणतो रक्षणार्थि तिलोघ्न ।

O Lord of everything! O there-eyed! I am tied down to this world by my attachment towards my wives, now I take refuge unto Thee to free me from these bonds.

सग्राम या मनुं जन्म तिज्ञोड़े दुःखनाशन ॥ ४३ ॥

ग्राहि मां शरणां प्रावर्षितं घवासुंगना ।

O Destroyer of sorrows! I am very much troubled on attaining this human birth; O Bhava! I am afraid of this world; and hence I take refuge unto Thee; now save me.

गर्भवासे महदुदुःखं प्रगतं मदन्तहक् ॥ 44 ॥

जन्मतः कंसमघजमनुभूतं च गोकुले ।

जातोर्जं नन्दीपालो बल्वनाझाकरस्तथा ॥ 45 ॥

गोराज:कौगीकौशस्तु भूम्बन्दावने वने ।

O Destroyer of cupidity! I experienced a good deal of troubles in the womb; next out of fear to Kañsa I had to go to Gokula where I suffered much pains; there I had to obey the orders of cow-herds; there I had to attends as Nanda's cow-herd, the pasturing of his cows and was constantly suffocated with the awful dust thrown up by the cows; I had to wander constantly in the wild forests of Vrndāvana.

स्नेच्छताजभयजस्तो गतो द्वारवर्ती पुनः ॥ 46 ॥

त्वक्वा चित्रयं शुभे देशे मारुं दुर्लिं विधो ।

O Omnipresent One! I had to leave my dear ancestral place, the city of Mathurā, a rare place to be found anywhere else, out of the great fear of Kāla Yavana, the king of the Mlechas and had to go to Dvārakā city.

ययातिगायबढ़ेन तस्ये दर्न भयाधिणो ॥ 47 ॥

राज्यं सुयुषमपि च धर्मेश्वापरणे च ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

उप्रमेनस्य दासत्वं कृतं वै सर्वदा मया ॥ 48 ॥

राजास्त्री यावदानां वे कृतो न: पूर्वैक्ष: किल ।

O Lord! In order to preserve the cause of religion, I had to hand over the best prosperous kingdom to Ugrasena, due to the curse of Yayāti. My elders made him the king of the Yādavas; following their examples. I gave him the kingdom and now serving him always like his servant.

गार्त्रस्थयुःखदंगभोक्रीविश्यंधमैखणजन्। 49 ॥

पातन्त्यं सदा बज्यो मोक्षवातांत्र उत्नेंगा ।

O Śambhu! The householder's life is exceedingly troublesome; it make one subject to one's wife and go against his religion. There we are always dependent on others; and no word is heard or dreamt even, how to free oneself from those bondages of the world. Oh! What an irony of Fate.

रूमिभ्यास्तनयान्धूवा भार्यां जांववीत माम ॥ ५० ॥

प्रेयामास पुत्रार्थ तपसे मद्यान्तक ।

O Destroyer of cupid! My wife Jāmbavatī, on seeing the sons of my wife Rukmini has urged me to practise this Tapasyā so that she might get excellent sons born to her also.

सकामेन मया ततं तय: पुत्रार्थमघ वै ॥ 51 ॥

लजा भवति देतेश प्रार्थानया जगदगुते ।

O Lord of the Devas! O Lord of the world! I am engaged in this asceticism with the desire to get sons; O Deva! I feel shame in asking you for the sons!

कल्वमातायय देवेगं मुक्तिं भक्तवलसम् ॥ 52 ॥

प्रसत्रं चायते मुकः फलं तुच्छं विनारीय चत् ।

You are the lover of your devotees; You give eternal freedom; You are the Lord of all the Devas. By worshipping and satisfying You, who is so fool as to ask for this trivial and transient thing!

सोउरं मायायिकृताया चाचे पुत्रमुखं विषो ॥ 53 ॥

कामाया प्रेति: शफ्यो मुक्तिई त्वां जगत्ये ।

O Omnipresent One! O Sambhu! O Lord of the world! Knowing You as the giver of salvation, I, still deluded by Māyā, ask from You, being

requested by my wife, this happiness that sons be born to me of my wife.

जनामि दुःखदं शम्भो संसारं दुःखासाधन् ॥ 54 ॥

अतिनर्ते नाशप्रभांगं तथापि वित्तिनं मे ।

शपावात्रायणोगोर्ड जातास्त्रिमस्तिमरमड़ते ॥ 55 ॥

भोर्भु बहुतरं दुःखं मायापणेन व्यक्ततः ।

O Śaṅkara! This world and its concerns are the abode of all sorrows; it is the cause that brings in all sorts of pains and troubles, and it is transient and will go to destruction. I know all these; still my mind does not desist from it.

व्यास उवाच

इतुभक्तवर्त गोविन्दे प्रत्युवाच महेश्वः ॥ 56 ॥

बह्वस्ते भविष्यन्ति पुत्रा: शबुनिभूदत ।

Vyāsa said: O great and powerful king! The God of Gods, Mahā Deva, thus praised and adored by Govinda, the Destroyer of enemies, replied: "You will get many sons.

स्वीणां घोडगसाहर्ते भविष्यति शताधिकम् ॥ 57 ॥

तातु पुत्रा दूरा दूरा भविष्यन्ति महाबाला: ।

You will get 16,100 sixteen thousand one hundred wives and no doubt you will get ten sons of each of them. These sons will be very powerful and valorous.

इत्युक्लोयरमागु शड़ूः : प्रियदर्शनः ॥ 58 ॥

उवाच गिरिता देवी प्रगतं मधुमुदनम् ।

कृष्ण कृष्ण महाबाहो संसारे-स्मित्याधि ॥ 59 ॥

गृहस्यवरो लोके बधियति भवानिरू ।

ततो वर्षीतानते तु दिज्ञगणाज्ञानंदि ॥ 60 ॥

गधायांशु तथा शाणाद्विता ते कुलक्षयः ।

The good-looking Śaṅkara saying these words remained silent; then Śri Krṣna bowed down at the feet of Girijā, the wife of Śaṅkara. Then the Goddess Pārvatī addressed repeatedly to Vāsudeva and said: O mightly armed! O Krṣna! O best of human beings! You will be the typical exemplary householder; (all people will try to follow you). When one hundred years will pass away, your race will be extinct, due to the curse of the Brāhmaṇa and Gāndhāri.

Book IV Chapter XXV

परम्परं निर्हलाजी पुत्रासे शापमोहिता: ॥ 6 1 ॥

गाययिति कृरं सर्वे याद्वाहु तथापरे ।

Your sons and the other Yâdavas will lose their senses on drinking liquor; they will kill each other in the battle field and thus will be extirpated.

Note: Here Viṣṇu and Andhkas are meant.

सानुजस्त्वं तथा देहें वल्कता याख्यासे वै दिवम् ।

गोककतत्र न कतिथो भवितस्यां प्रति प्रश्नो ।

Then you and your elder brother Balabhadra (Balarāma) will give up your bodies and will ascend to the Heavens; O Mighty Person! Do not grieve in matters that cannot be avoided.

अवश्यभाविभावानां प्रतीकाएं न विहते ॥ 6 3 ॥

तन शोको न कत्वीयो नूनं मम मतं सदा ।

You should know that there can be no remedy to what will inevitably come to pass; therefore no one is to grieve for them; this is all along my view.

अशावकस्य शपेन भार्यावैत मधुसूदन ॥ 64 ॥

वीरेभ्यो ग्रहणं कृष्णा गमिष्यन्ति मृते त्वयि ।

O Madhusūdana! After Your death, due to the curse of Asṭāvakra Muni, your wives will be forcibly stolen away by indomitable robbers. There is no doubt in this.

इत्युक्नवान्तदीय शम्भुः सोमः ससुरामण्डलः ॥ 65 ॥

उपमन्यु प्रणायधा कृष्णोर्षि द्वाराकां ययो ।

Vyāsa said: When Devi Pārvatī thus spoke, Śambhu, with the other gods disappeared; Kṛṣṇa too, bowed down to Upamanyu and went back to the city Dvārkā.

यस्मात्र ब्रह्मादयो राज्ञस्निति यद्यपधीक्षाः ॥ 6 6 ॥

तवापि मायाकल्लोतवोगासंक्षुपितांततः ।

तद्धीना: त्रित्यातः सर्वे कार्युतलिकोपमा: ॥ 6 7 ॥

Therefore, O King! Though Brahmā and the other Devas are heard to be the lords of the world, still they are all being tossed hither and thither by the waves of the ocean of Māyā. They are all like wooden dolls, subject to Māyā.

वया वाया पूर्वमहं कर्म तेषां तथा तथा ।

प्रेत्यवर्सिणं माया परबहास्वकर्षिणे ॥ 6 8 ॥

As their previous karmas, so their several

manifestations in the field of action, by the Great Māyā, the incarnate of Para Brahma.

न वैषयं न नैयुंर्णे भागवयंां कहावन ।

केवलं जीवगेक्षार्यं चतेन भुवनेश्वी ॥ 69 ॥

She has no differences nor any want of mercy; That Goddess of the universe is always leading the Jivas towards the Eternal Freedom (freedom from Māyā).

यदि सा नैव सुभ्रेत जयदेतच्चाचयम् ।

तदा मायां विना भृतं जईं स्यादेवं निवशः ॥ 70 ॥

Had She not created this world, moving and unmoving and if She had not remained there as the Controller of the Jivas in the shape of unshakeable consciousness the Kūtashya Caitanya, this whold world would have become devoid of any consciousness, like an insentient substance and would have dissolved in the Tāmasī māyā (sheer darkness). There is no doubt in this.

तस्मालाकार्यमाधिस्य जगज्जीवादिकं च यत्।

करोति सततं देढो प्रेर्यत्थिजीं च तत् ॥ 71 ॥

Therefore that Goddess of the Universe has, through Her mercy, created all these worlds and Jivas, and resting incarnate in each Jiva, is directing each and every of them according to his karmic merits and demerits.

तस्माद्बहादिपोह्ड़ीस्मिन्तैम्बः संशोगो न हि ।

मायात्न: पात्रात्न: सर्वे मायाधीना: सुगतुग्न: ॥ 72 ॥

Therefore it is a matter not to be doubted that Brahmā and the other gods are all under this Māyā; the Suras and Asuras are subject to Her.

स्वतनाव सेव देवेशी संदेष्ठागराविद्यारिण ।

तस्मात्बसितना राजन्सेवनीया मेहंशी ॥ ७ ३ ॥

Therefore, O King! Know this as certain that the Great Goddess moves and enjoys freely according to Her will; She is not dependent on any body. Therefore it is the duty of every one to serve and worship, with whole head and heart, that Devi.

नातः परतरं किंक्रिद्धिकं भुवनत्रये ।

एतद्धि जनसामफल्य परागक्तेः: पदसूमिति: ॥ 74 ॥

In these worlds there is nothing higher or more

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

excellent than Her. Therefore this birth cannot be crowned with success in any other way than remembering that Highest Force, the Parā Śakti and Her place.

मामूत्रा कुले जन्य यत्र देवी न देवतम् ।

अर्हे देवी न चान्योर्थि ब्रहीवादं न गोकाभाक् ॥ 7 5 ॥

इत्यभेदेन तां नित्यां चिन्तयेजगद्धिकवम् ।

त्राला गुस्पुखादेनं वेदान्तप्रवाणादिधि: ॥ 7 6 ॥

नत्ययेकाप्रामनसा भावयेदात्मकरणिपाणि ।

मुक्तो भवति तेनागु नान्यथा कर्मकोटिधि: ॥ 7 7 ॥

One should always think, without any difference, that Eternal World Mother, thus “Let me not be born in that family which has not that Supreme Goddess for its presiding Deity; I am that Goddess Bhagavati and no other; I am Brahma, untouched by sorrows.” One should hear first from the mouth of one’s Spiritual Guide; next by hearing Vedānta and other religious scriptures, one should first form an idea of that Bhagavati; and then if one daily meditates on That Goddess, the Highest Self incarnate with one minded devotion, one will get, within a short period, the Eternal Freedom; else there is not the least chance, even if one performs lots of innumerable good works of becoming free.

श्रोताधतादयः सर्वे ऋषयो मिनैलागया: ।

आत्मक्शा इदा जाता विमुक्ता भवबंधान्त् ॥ 78 ॥

śvetāśvatara and other pure hearted Rṣis obtained this freedom from the bondages of Māyā by meditating, in their hearts, this Highest Self and nothing else.

ब्रद्धिष्णवाद्यस्तद्वृगीर्णक्ष्याद्यस्तथा ।

तापेव समुपास्ने सच्चिदानन्द्रकिपणीम् ॥ 79 ॥

Brahmā, Viṣṇu and the other Devas, Gaurī, Lakṣmī and other goddesses, all worship This Supreme Goddess, of Saccidāṇanda Para Brahmānī. 

इति के क्षितं राजन् यद्यतायुरं त्यवा२२ ॥

प्रंभवपाप्राप्रतेनै किं भूयः शोतृचित्यक्षि ॥ 8 0 ॥

O pure-hearted king! I answered all that you

asked me, terrified with the fears of this world; what more do you want to hear?

एत्ते कथितं राजन्यासे5ख्यानमनुत्तमम्।

सर्वेपारहं पुण्यं पुराणं परमाद्धुन्त् ॥ 81 ॥

य इदं शृणयार्तिरयं पुराणं सेदरमीमन्ति ।

सर्वेपारविनिभूनीं देवीलोके महीयते ॥ 82 ॥

O king! I have described this wonderful Purāna narrative, destructive of sins, productive of virtue. He who daily listens to this Bhāgavatam equal alike to Veda, becomes freed from all sorts of sins and goes to the region of the Highest Goddess and passes his time in the midst of the Highest Glory. There is no doubt in this.

सूत उवाच

एतनया श्रुतं व्यासात्कध्यानं सविस्तरम् ।

पुर्णा पड़पं नृते शीमद्धागवताशिभम् ॥ 83 ॥

इति श्रीदैवीभागवते महापुराणे चतुर्विकचे

पत्रविरोधःप्रायः ॥ 84 ॥

अधाधिकैकैसुविश्युपगविष्णभग (1418।) शिरः।

चौड्गुरुषैककन्योरयं कांकिते व्यासपिंनिः : ॥ 85॥

स्मागतोयं चतुर्वः स्कमः : ॥86॥

Sūta said: “O Rṣis! This Śrimadbhāgavatam, called otherwise the Fifth Purānam was recited, in detail, in days of yore by Vyāsa. Whatsoever I heard from him, I have now told exactly the same to you.”

Note: The best mantra is the whole hearted devotion to one's Guru, and devotion and surrender of one's Self to the Supreme Mother, doing works without attachment to the fruits thereof. This will lead to dispassion and Renunciation. To one who is faithful in this, all the other mantras will be duly revealed and all his desires will be found to be true and fulfilled.

Here ends the Twenty fifth Chapter in the Fourth

Book of Srimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā

Purānam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi

Veda Vyāsa on the Devi's Highest Supremacy.

Here ends as well as the Fourth Book

***
