CHAPTER XI

On Madhu Kaijabha Killed

राजोवाच

का सा देवी त्वया प्रोक्ता बूहि कालविदां दर ।

का मोहयति सत्वाति कारणं कि भवेद्ट्रिक्ष ॥ १ ॥

कामपुवच्छते देवी किं रूपा स किमापित्का ।

सर्वमाख्याहि भूदेव कृपया मम सर्वतः ॥ 2 ॥

The king Suratha spoke: O Best of the twice born! Who is that Devi that you spoke just now? Why the Devi deludes all these beings? What for does She do so? Whence is the Devi born? What

is Her Form? and what are Her qualities? O Brāhmin! Kindly describe all these to me."

पुनिष्ठाच

राजन्द्रेख्या: स्वक्षरं ते वर्णायिम निशगाय ।

यथा चोत्पतिता देवी तेन वा सा जानमवी ॥ ३ ॥

यदा नारायणो देवो विश्वं संहस्य योगारत् ।

अस्तीसीं श्रेषं भगावास्मुर्रे निरितोरोभवत् ॥ 4 ॥

तदा प्रस्वायरणगो देवदेवो जनादंनः ।

तत्कर्णमलंजातो दानवी मधुकैटधौ ॥ 5 ॥

Book X Chapter XI

The Muni spoke: “O King! I will now describe the nature of the Devi Bhagavatī and why does She take Her Form in due time. Listen. In ancient days, when Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa, the king of the Yogis, was lying in deep sleep on the ocean on the bed of Ananta, after He had destroyed the the Universe, there came out of the wax of his ear the two, Dānavas, Madhu and Kaitabha, of monstrous appearances.

बहाणां हेतुमुचुक्तो दानवी पोरक्रिपिणि ।

तदा कमलजो देते पूद्धा तौ मधुकैटपी ॥ 6 ॥

नित्रिते देवेदेवेशं चिन्तापाय दुरत्यव्यम् ।

नित्रितो भगवानीशो दानवी च दुगासदी ॥ 7 ॥

They wanted to kill Brahmā, who was lying on the lotus coming out of the navel of Bhagavān. Seeing the two Daityas Madhu and Kaitabha and seeing also Hari asleep the Lotus-born Brahmā became very anxious and thought:

किं कंतीचि चक्र पच्छामि कयं शर्म लेच हुईम् ।

एवं चित्यतस्तस्य पदायोनेंमहात्मनः ॥ 8 ॥

सुविद्र: प्रादूर्षभत्तत तदा कार्यप्रसाधिति ।

यस्या वर्गोगते देवो निर्ऋति भगवान्हरि: ॥ 9 ॥

तां देवीं शरणं वाथि निद्रां सर्वेग्रपृतिकाम् ।

Now Bhagavān is asleep; and these two indomitable Daityas are ready to kill me. Now what am I to do? Where to go? How shall I get ease? O Child! Thus thinking, the high souled Lotus born suddenly came to a practical conclusion. He said: Let me now take refuge to the Goddess Sleep, Nidrā, the Mother of all and under Whose power Bhagavān Hari is now asleep. \( ^{3} \)

बह्योवाच

देवि देवि जगद्धाति चकाचीधरूकप्रे ॥ १० ॥

जग्नामये महामये समुद्राशयने जिवे ।

त्वद्भावशगणः सर्वे स्वस्वकार्यविधायिनः ॥ १ १  ॥

Brahmā then began to praise Her thus: "O Devi of the Devas! O Upholdress of the world! Thou grantest desires of Thy devotees. O Thou auspicious! Thou art Para Brahma! By Thy Command all are doing respectively their proper spheres!

कालाप्रिभूषाग्रामैहान्रामैदोक्टा । 
व्यापिनी वर्गगा मान्य माह्नदैकेशपिः ॥ 12 ॥ 
महनीय महाराध्या माया मधुमती मही । 
परपराणां सर्वैंपं परम त्व प्रक्रितिता ॥ 13 ॥ 
लज्जा पुहि: क्षमा कीर्ति: क्रान्ति: काल्पत्ययिषहा । 
कर्मनीय जगहंहा जागदारिद्वस्कपिणी ॥ 14 ॥

Thou art the Night of Destruction (Kāla Rātri); Thou art the Great Night (Mahā Rātri). Thou art the greatly terrible Night of Delusion (Moha Rātri); Thou art omnipresent; omniscient; of the nature of the Supreme Bliss. Thou art regarded as the Great. Thou art highly worshipped; Thou art alone in this world as highly intoxicated; Thou art submissive to Bhakti only; Thou art the Best of all the things; Thou art sung as the Highest, Thou art modesty; Thou art Puṣṭi (nourishment); Thou art forgiveness (Kṣamā); Thou art Beauty (Kānti); Thou art the embodiment of mercy; Thou art liked by all; Thou art adorned by the whole world; Thou art of the nature of wakefulness, dreamn and deep sleep; Thou art the Highest; Thou art alone Highest Deity; Thou art highly attached to the Supreme Bliss. There is no other thing than Thee. There is One only and that is Thee. Hence art denominated as One; Thou becomest again the two by contact with Thy Māyā.

परम परमेगानी परानंदपरायणा ।

एकास्प्रोकस्वरूपा च संद्रितीया द्वार्यतिका ॥ 15 ॥

त्रयी त्रिवार्णिलया तृर्णं तृर्णयदात्रिका ।

पंचमी पंचभूतेशी पट्टी पेछधारीत च ॥ 16 ॥

सप्तमी सप्तवारेगी सप्तसप्तवर्षरा ।

अष्टमी खनुगाथा च नवश्रामशीधी ॥ 17 ॥

नवरागकला रेमा वनसंख्या नवेश्वी ।

Thou art the refuge of Dharma, Artha and Kāma; hence Thou Thou art Thee; Thou art the Turiya (the fourth state of consciousness) hence Thou art Four. Thou art the God of the five elements; hence Thou art Pañcami (five); Thou president over the six passions Kāma, anger etc.; hence Thou art Saṣthi; Thou president over the seven days of the week and Thou grantest boons seven by seven;

hence Thou art seven. Thou art the God of the eight Vasus; hence Thou art Aṣṭamī; Thou art full of the nine Rāgas and nine parts and Thou art the Goddess of nine planets; hence Thou art Navamī.

यमपी द्रादिव्युर्ज्ञा द्वशागल्यापिनी सता ॥ १ ८ ॥

एकादशपित्मका चैकादाशक्रत्निवेषिता ।

एकादाशितिथियोगा एकादशगणाप्रिया ॥ १९ ॥

द्वार्जी द्वारभुक्रा द्वारशादिवन्यम्भुः ।

त्रयोदाशपित्का देही जयोहरणाप्रिया ॥ 20 ॥

त्रयोदाशपिधा भिन्ना विश्वेशेदाविधिदेवता ।

Thou pervadest the ten quarters and Thou art worshipped by the ten quarters; hence Thou art named Daśamī (the tenth day of the fortnight); Thou art served by the Eleven Rudras, the Goddess of eleven Gaṇas and Thou art fond of Ekādaśi Tithī; hence Thou art denominated Ekādaśī; Thou art twelve armed and the Mother of the twelve Ādityas; hence Thou art Dvādaśī; Thou art dear to the thirteen Gaṇas; Thou art the presiding Deity of Viśve Devās and Thou art the thirteen months including the Malas Māsa (dirty month), hence Thou art Trayodaśī.

चतुर्वैर्यवरा चतुर्वैर्यानुप्रसू: ॥ 21 ॥

पंचाधिकद्वीवेहा पंचाधिकद्वीर्शितिथः ।

घोडणी घोडाशुज्ञा घोडोज्ञ-तुकलमधी ॥ 22 ॥

घोडाशतमकंत्रीशूल्यानदिव्यकंलेश ।

Thou didst grant boons to the fourteen Indras and Thou gavest birth to the fourteen Manus; hence Thou art Caturdaśī. Thou art knowable by the Pañcadaśī. Thou art sixteen armed and on Thy forehead the sixteen digits of the Moon are always shining; Thou art the sixteenth digit (ray) of the Moon named Amā; hence Thou art Sodaśī.

एवंक्षापसि देवेति निरुर्णे तामसेदोः ॥ 23 ॥

त्वया गृहीतो भगवान्देवदेवो तपापति: ।

एतूं दुरासदौ दैर्वो किंक्रांतो मधुक्रैकरी ॥ 24 ॥

एत्योक्षु कदायार्थ देवेशं प्रतिविधाय ।

O Deveśī! Thou, though attributeless and formless, appearest in these forms and attributes. Thou hast now enveloped in Moha and Darkness

the Lord of Ramā, the Bhagavān, the Deva of the Devas. These Daityas. Madhu and Kaitābha are indomitable and very powerful. So to kill them, Thou better dost awake the Lord of the Devas.

युनिष्वाच

एवं सुत्ता भगवती तामसी भगवतिगृया ॥ 25 ॥

देवदेवं तदा त्यक्ना मोह्यामास दानवी ।

The Muni said: Thus praised by the Lotus-born, the Tāmasi Bhagavati (the Goddess of sleep and ignorance), the Beloved of Bhagavān, left Viṣṇu and enchanted the two Daityas.

तदैव भगवान्विणु: परमात्मा जगत्यति: ॥ 26 ॥

प्रबोधपाप देवेशो दर्शो दानवोत्तो ।

तदा ती दानवी घोरौ ग्रृद्धा तं मधुपुदन् ॥ 27 ॥

युब्धाय कृतसंकरणी जममु: सविधि हरे: ।

युवुघे च तततताथां भगवान्मधुरून: ॥ 28 ॥

पड्ववर्षसूक्षाति वाजुप्रदरणो विभुः ।

On being awakened, the Supreme Spirit Viṣṇu, the Lord of the world, the Bhagavān, the Deva of the Devas, saw the two Daityas. Those two monstrous Dānavas, beholding Madhu Sūdana, came up before Him, ready to fight. The hand-to-hand fight lasted amongst them for five thousand years.

तौ तद्धार्तिकलोम्नती जगन्यायाविधोहिती ॥ 29 ॥

वियतां वर इन्येवम्बुत: परमेश्वरम् ।

एवं ततोर्वतः श्रुता भगवानादिपुक्नः ॥ 30 ॥

बड़े वर्यातुषी मेठा घबेतामिति निश्रितम् ।

Then the two Dānavas, maddened by their great strength, were enchanted by the Māyā of Bhagavati and told the Supreme Deity “Ask boon from us.” Hearing this, the Bhagavān Ādi Puruṣa (the Prime Man) asked the boon that both of them would be killed that day be Him.

तो तत्प्रतिबली देेवं पुरनेयोजनुर्हिम् ॥ 31 ॥

आवां जाड़ि न ययोर्वों पसवा च पयिल्तुता ।

तथेवनुस्वा भगवता गदारंगख्णाने नृप ॥ ३२ ॥

Those two very powerful Dānavas spoke to Hari again “Very Well. Kill us on that part of the earth which is not under water.” O King! Bhagavān

Book X Chapter XII

Vişnu, the Holder of the conch and club, spoke: "All right. Indeed! Let that be so."

कृत्वा चढेकण वै छिके जघने शिरसो तयोः ।

एवं देयी सभुत्वत्रा बह्वाणा संस्तुता नृप ॥ 33 ॥

महाकाली महाराज सर्वयोगेच्छरक्षी ।

महालक्ष्यमास्त्रीयार्चिंत निशामय महीपते ॥ 34 ॥

इति श्रीद्दैवीभागवते महापुराणे सशमकल्चे देवीमाहात्मये

एकावशो5धाया: 11 1 1 11

Saying this He placed their heads on His thigh

and severed them with His disc (cakra). O King! Thus Mahā Kālī, the Queen of all the Yogas arose on this occasion when the praise was offered Her by Brahmā. O King! Now I will describe another account how this Mahā Lakṣmī appeared on another occasion. Listen.

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Tenth Book on the killing of Madhu Kaitabha in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book X Chapter XII

