[Ch 9 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: On hearing Viṣṇu’s words, the Devas became very glad and presented immediately their own weapons, ornaments and clothing.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- On hearing Viṣṇu’s words, the Devas became very glad and presented immediately their own weapons, ornaments and clothings.

[Ch 9 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Ksīroda (Milk) Occan presented to Her gladly, the well fitted necklace, clear as crystal, and a pair of divine cloths, of a red colour, never becoming old and very fine.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Kṣiroda (Milk) Ocean presented to Her gladly, the well fitted necklace, clear as crystal, and a pair of divine cloths, of a red colour, never becoming old and very fine.

[Ch 9 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vísvakarmā was very much gratified in his heart and presented a divine jewel to be worn in Her diadem or crest, blazing like hundreds of suns; white earrings, bracelets for Her wrist, bracelets for Her upper arm, and other bracelets decked with various gems and jewels and anklets brilliant like gems, of a clear Sun-like lustre, decked with jewels, and tinkling nicely.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viśvakarmā was very much gratified in his heart and presented a divine jewel to be worn in Her diadem or crest blazing like hundreds of suns; white earrings; bracelets for Her wrist, bracelets for Her upper arm, and other bracelets decked with various gems and jewels and anklets brilliant like gems, of a clear Sun-like lustre, decked with jewels, and tinkling nicely.

[Ch 9 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The architect of the gods, the ocean of intellect, Visvakarmā gave Her as offerings beautiful ornaments also for the neck, all very beautiful, as well as for the fingers decked with gems and jewels, all shining splendidly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The architect of the gods, the ocean of intellect, Viśvakarmā gave Her as offerings beautiful ornaments also for the neck, all very beautiful, as well as for the fingers decked with gems and jewels, all shining splendidly.

[Ch 9 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Varuna gave for Her head a garland of lotuses, never fading away, of such a sweet fragrance as bees constantly hover round them and the Vajjayanti garland for Her breast.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Varuṇa gave for Her head garland of lotuses, never fading away, of such a sweet fragrance as bees constantly hover round them and the Vaijayantī garland for Her breast.

[Ch 9 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The mountain Himalaya gladly offered Her various gems and a beautiful lion, of a golden colour for Her conveyance.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The mountain Himālyā gladly offered Her various gems and a beautiful lion, of a golden colour for Her conveyance.

[Ch 9 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then that beautiful Lady, having all the auspicious signs, wishing welfare to all, and decorated with the divine ornaments began to look grand and splendid, mounted on Her conveyance, the Lion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then that beautiful Lady, having all the auspicious signs, wishing welfare to all, and decorated with the divine ornaments began to look grand and splendid, mounted on Her conveyance, the Lion.

[Ch 9 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Visnu then created another thousand spoked discus (Cakram) from His own Cakra, capable to take off the head of any Asura, and offered it to Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viṣṇu then created another thousand spoked discus (Cakram) from His own Cakra, capable to take off the head of any Asura, and offered it to Her.

[Ch 9 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śaṅkara created another excellent Triśūla from his own Trident, terrible and demon-killing, and offered it to the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śaṅkara created another excellent Triśūla from his own Trident, terrible and demon-killing, and offered it to the Devī.

[Ch 9 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Varuna created another bright conch from his own conch and offered it gladly to the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Varuṇa created another bright conch from his own conch and offered it gladly to the Devī.

[Ch 9 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Fire offered Her a weapon named Sātaghni which kills violently the demons, as if that is another god of death.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Fire offered Her a weapon named Śataghni which kills violently the demons, as if that is another god of death.

[Ch 9 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Maruta (wind), the chief of the gods, offered Her a wonderful bow and an arrow case filled with arrows. The bow can be drawn with great difficulty and emits a very harsh sound.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Maruta (wind), the chief of the gods, offered Her a wonderful bow and arrow case filled with arrows. The bow can be drawn with great difficulty and emits a very harsh sound.

[Ch 9 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra created another dreadful thunderbolt from his own thunderbolt and gave it at once to the Devi; as well the beautiful sonorous bell that used to hang from the elephant Airāvata.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra created another dreadful thunderbolt from his own thunderbolt and gave it at once to the Devī; as well the beautiful sonorous bell that used to hang from the elephant Airāvata.

[Ch 9 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Yama, the God of Death, created another beautiful staff from his own sceptre which takes away when time comes, the life of all beings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Yama, the God of Death, created another beautiful staff from his own sceptre which takes away when time comes, the life of all beings.

[Ch 9 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā gladly gave Her a divine Kamandalu, filled with the Ganges water; and Varuna offered Her a weapon called Pāśa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā gladly gave Her a divine Kamandalu, filled with the Ganges water; and Varuṇa offered Her a weapon called Pāśa.

[Ch 9 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Time gave Her an axe and a shield and Viśvakarmā gave Her a sharp Paraśu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Time gave Her an axe and a shield and Viśvakarmā gave Her a sharp Paraśu.

[Ch 9 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kubera, the Lord of wealth, gave her a golden drinking cup, filled with wine; and Varuna offered Her a divine beautiful lotus.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kuvera, the Lord of wealth, gave her a golden drinking cup, filled with wine; and Vāruṇa offered Her a divine beautiful lotus.

[Ch 9 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vísvakarmā became very glad and gave Her the Kaumodakī gadā, capable to kill the enemy of the gods and whence hundreds of bells are hanging, an impenetrable armour and various other weapons. The Sun gave to the Divine Mother his own rays.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viśvakarmā became very glad and gave Her the Kaumodakī gadā, capable to kill the enemy of the gods and whence hundreds of bells are hanging, an impenetrable armour and various other weapons. The Sun gave to the Divine Mother his own rays.

[Ch 9 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas, seeing Her adorned with ornaments and weapons, began to praise and chant hymns to that most Auspicious Goddess, the Great Enchantress of the three worlds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas, seeing Her adorned with ornaments and weapons, began to praise and chant hymns to that most Auspicious Goddess, the Great Enchantress of the three worlds.

[Ch 9 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas said: “Salutation to Śivā, Salutation to the Most Auspicious; Thou art peace and nourishment; we salute again and again to Thee. Salutation to Thee, the Bhagavati Devi; Thou art the Goddess Rudrāni (the terrible), we always salute again and again to Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Deva said :-- “Salutation to Śiva, Salutation to the Most Auspicious; Thou art peace and nourishment; we salute again and again to Thee. Salutation to Thee, the Bhagavatī Devī; Thou art the Goddess Rudrānī (the terrible), we always salute again and again to Thee.

[Ch 9 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou art the Kālarātri (the night of destruction at the end of the world); Thou art the Indrānī. Thou art the Mother, we salute again and again to Thee; Thou art the success, Thou art the intelligence, Thou art the growth, Thou art the Vaisnavī; salutation again and again to Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thou art the Kālarātri (the night of destruction at the end of the world); Thou art the Indrānī. Thou art the Mother, we salute again and again to Thee; Thou art the success,

[Ch 9 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou art within the earth; yet the earth does not know Thee. Thou art again the inmost of the earth and controlled the things within this earth; we offer our salutations to that Supreme Cause, he may have God.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thou art within the earth; yet the earth does know know Thee. Thou art again the inmost of the earth and controllest the things within this earth; we offer our salutations to that Supreme Cause,

[Ch 9 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou art within this Maya (the unborn) yet the Maya does not know Thee. Thou resident again within the innermost of the Maya and directest that Unborn One, the Maya, we salute again and again to that Supreme Cause, the Great Directress, the Siva (the most auspicious).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thou art within this Māyā (the unborn) yet the Māyā does not know Thee. Thou residest again within the innermost of the Māyā and directest that Unborn One, the Māyā, we salute again and again to that Supreme Cause, the Great Directress, the Śivā (the most auspicious).

[Ch 9 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! Do what is good to us; we are oppressed by our enemy, dost thou protect us; by Thy own power dost Thou overpower and kill that Mahisa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! Do what is good to us; we are oppressed by our enemy, dost then protect us; by Thy own power dost Thou overpower and kill that Mahiṣa.

[Ch 9 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That demon is vulnerable by woman only, he is deceitful, cunning, dreadful, and swollen with pride on his having got the blessing; he assumes many forms and torments the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That demon is vulnerable by woman only, he is deceitful, cunning, dreadful, and swollen with pride on his having got the blessing; he assumes many forms and torments the Devas.

[Ch 9 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O One, devoted to the Bhaktas! Thou art the only refuge of all the gods; O Thou art the supreme goddess, we are very much harassed and oppressed by the Dānava; therefore dost Thou now protect us; we bow down to Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O One, devoted to the Bhaktas! Thou art the only refuge of all the gods; O Thou art the supreme goddess, we are very much harassed and oppressed by the Dānava; therefore dost Thou now protect us; we bow down to Thee.”

[Ch 9 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: When the Devas had praised thus, the Highest Goddess, the Giver of all happiness, then smilingly said in the following auspicious terms:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- When the Devas had praised thus, the Highest Goddess, the Giver of all happiness, then smilingly said in the following auspicious terms :--

[Ch 9 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Devas! Today in the battle group I will overpower what wicked Mahisa, of cruel disposition and take away his life.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Devas! Today in the battle ground I will overpower that wicked Mahiṣa, of cruel disposition and take away his life.”

[Ch 9 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Speaking thus in a melodious voice, the Supreme One smiled and again said: "Thus world is all full of error and delusion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Speaking thus in a melodious voice, the Supreme One smiled and again said :-- “This world is all full of error and delusion.

[Ch 9 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Really, it is very wonderful that Brahma, Vispu Maheśa, Indra and other gods are all shuddering out of fear from Mahisa Dānava.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Really, it is very wonderful that Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Indra and other gods are all shuddering out of fear from Mahiṣa Dānava.

[Ch 9 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The power of Destiny is exceedingly great and terrible; its influence cannot be overcome even by the best of the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The power of Destiny is exceedingly great and terrible; its influence cannot be overcome even by the best of the Devas.

[Ch 9 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! The Time is the Lord of happiness and pain; Time is, therefore, the God. The wonder is this that even those who can create, preserve and destroy this world, they are being overpowered and tormented by Mahiṣa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! The Time is the Lord of happiness and pain; Time is, therefore, the God. The wonder is this that even those who can create, preserve and destroy this world, they are being overpowered and tormented by Mahiṣa.

[Ch 9 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi, thinking thus, smiled; then laughed and laughed very hoarsely; it seemed that a roar of laughter then arose.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī, thinking thus, smiled; then laughed and laughed very hoarsely; it seemed that a roar of laughter then arose.

[Ch 9 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And the Dānavas were struck with terror at that very dreadful sound. The earth trembled at that extraordinary sound; the mountains began to move and the vast oceans that remained calm began to be agitated with billows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And the Dānavas were struck with terror at that very dreadful sound. The earth trembled at that extraordinary sound; the mountains began to move and the vast oceans that remained calm began to be agitated with billows.

[Ch 9 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The uproar filled all the quarters and the mountain Meru trembled. Then the Dānavas, hearing the tumultuous uproar, were all filled with tremendous fear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The uproar filled all the quarters and the mountain Meru trembled. Then the Dānavas, hearing the tumultuous uproar, were all filled with tremendous fear.

[Ch 9 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas became very glad and said thus: "O Devi! Let victory be Yours; save us. The intoxicated Mahisa, too, hearing those words, became very angry.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas became very glad and said thus :-- “O Devī! Let victory be Yours; save us.” The intoxicated Mahiṣa, too, hearing those words, became very angry.

[Ch 9 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mahisa, struck with terror at those words, asked the Daityas “O Messengers! Go and ascertain how has originated this sound.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mahiṣa, struck with terror at those words, asked the Daityas “O Messengers! Go and ascertain how has originated this sound.

[Ch 9 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Who has made this harsh sound? Bring that devil who has made this hoarse noise, be he a Deva, Dānava, or anyone else unto me, and I will kill that roaring villain, who, it seems, has been puffed with egoism and vanity.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Who has made this harsh sound? Bring that devil who has made this hoarse noise, be he a Deva, Dānava, or anyone else unto me and I will kill that roaring villain, who, it seems, has been puffed with egoism and vanity.

[Ch 9 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas are not making this noise, for they are vanquished and terror-stricken; The Asuras are not doing so, for they are my subjects; then, who is the stupid fellow that has done so?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas are not making this noise, for they are vanquished and terror-stricken; The Asuras are not doing so, for they are my subjects; then, who is the stupid fellow that has done so?

[Ch 9 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Surely he is of very little understanding; his days are numbered; and I will carry him to the home of Death.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Surely he is of very little understanding; his days are numbered; and I will carry him to the home of Death.

[Ch 9 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Go you, ascertain the cause of sound and come back to me; then I will go there and destroy that wretch who made this noise to no purpose.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Go you, ascertain the cause of sound and come back to me; then I will go there and destroy that wretch who made this noise to no purpose.”

[Ch 9 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: No sooner the messengers heard these words of Mahiṣa, than they at once went to the Devi and saw that Her body and the several parts thereof were all very beautiful; She had eighteen hands, She was decorated completely with various ornaments all over Her body, all the auspicious signs were being seen in Her body and that She was holding excellent divine weapons. That auspicious Goddess beautiful, was holding in Her hands, the cup and drinking wine again and again.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- No sooner the messengers heard these words of Mahiṣa, than they at once went to the Devī and saw that Her body and the several parts thereof were all very beautiful; She had eighteen hands, She was decorated completely with various ornaments all over Her body, all the auspicious signs were being seen in Her body and that She was holding excellent divine weapons. That auspicious Goddess beautiful, was holding in Her hands, the cup and drinking wine again and again.

[Ch 9 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Beholding Her this form, they were afraid and fled at once to the Mahisa and informed him the cause of that sound.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Beholding Her this form, they were afraid and fled at once to the Mahiṣa and informed him the cause of that sound.

[Ch 9 Verse 48-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The passengers said: “O Lord! We have seen one grown up woman; whose whereabouts we are quite ignorant. The Devi is decorated with jewels and ornaments all over Her body; She is not human nor Asurit but Her form is extraordinary and beautiful.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Daityas said :-- “O Lord! We have seen one grown up woman; whose whereabouts we are quite ignorant. The Devī is decorated with jewels and ornaments all over Her body; She is not human nor Asurī but Her form is extraordinary and beautiful.

[Ch 9 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That noble Lady is mounted on a lion, holding weapons on all Her eighteen hands and is roaring loudly; She is drinking wine; so it seems that She is puffed up with liquor. It is quite certain that She has no husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That noble Lady is mounted on a lion, holding weapons on all Her eighteen hands and is roaring loudly; She is drinking wine; so it seems that She is puffed up with liquor. It is quite certain that She has no husband.

[Ch 9 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas are gladly chanting praises from the celestial space that Let Victory be to Her side and that She save the Devas, O Lord! We don't know at all who is that handsome woman? or whose wife is she; why has she come there? and what is Her motive?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas are gladly chanting praises from the celestial space that Let Victory be to Her side and that She save the Devas, O Lord! We don’t know at all who is that handsome woman? or whose wife is she; why has she come there? and what is Her motive?

[Ch 9 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sentiments of love, heroism, laughter, terror and wonder are all fully shining in Her; therefore we are very much overpowered by the halo emitted from Her; and we could not even see Her well. Note: Rasas means sentiments. The rasas are usually eight. Śrīngāra, Hāṣya, Karunā, Raudra, Vira, Bhayānakab, Bibhatsādbhū tasangān, Cetyaṣṭau, Natyan, Rasab smṛtab but sometimes Śāntarasa, is added thus making the total number nine; sometimes a tenth, Vatsalyarasa is also added.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sentiments of love, heroism, laughter, terror and wonder are all fully shining in Her; therefore we are very much overpowered by the halo emitted from Her; and we could not even see Her well. Note :-- Rasas means sentiments. The rasas are usually eight. Sriṅgāra, Hāsya, Karuṇā, Raudra, Vīra, Bhayānakāh, Bibhatsādbhū tasangau, Cetyaṣṭau, Natyan, Rasāh smritāh but sometimes Sāntarasah, is added thus making the total number nine; sometimes a tenth, Vātsalyarasa is also added.

[Ch 9 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! In compliance with your order, we have come back to you no sooner we had seen the Lady, without even addressing Her in any way. Now order us what we are to do.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! In compliance with your order, we have come back to you no sooner we had seen the Lady, without even addressing Her in any way. Now order us what we are to do.”

[Ch 9 Verse 55-57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mahisā said: “O Best of ministers! O Hero! Under my command, go there with all the forces and use the means, conciliation, etc., and bring that woman, having a beautiful face (like the Moon), to me. If that Lady do not come even when the three policies, Sāma (conciliation), Dāna (making gifts), and Bheda (sowing dissensions in an enemy’s party and thus winning him over to one’s side, one of the four Upāyas or means of success against an enemy) are adopted by you, then apply the last resort Dāna, (or war) in such a way that Her life be not destroyed and bring that beautiful woman to me. I will gladly make Her, of black curling hairs, my queen-consort.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mahiṣa said :-- “O Best of ministers! O Hero! Under my command, go there with all the forces and use the means, conciliation, etc., and bring that woman, having a beautiful face (like the Moon), to me. If that Lady do not come even when the three policies, Sāma (conciliation), Dāna (making gifts), and Bheda (sowing dissensions in an enemy’s party and thus winning him over to one’s side, one of the four Upāyas or means of success against an enemy) are adopted by you, then apply the last resort Danḍa, (or war) in such a way that Her life be not destroyed and bring that beautiful woman to me. I will gladly make Her, of black curling hairs, my queen-consort.

[Ch 9 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In case that deer-eyed one comes gladly, then do my desires without causing any unpleasant feeling; (a cessation of sentiment). I am enchanted on hearing about Her beauties and wealth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In case that deer-eyed one comes gladly, then do my desires without causing any unpleasant feeling; (a cessation of sentiment). I am enchanted on hearing about Her beauties and wealth.”

[Ch 9 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: The prime minister, on hearing the words of Mahisa, took with him elephants, horses, and chariots and hurriedly went to the desired place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- The prime minister, on hearing the words of Mahiṣa, took with him elephants, horses, and chariots and hurriedly went to the desired place.

[Ch 9 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On coming near to the Devi, the minister began to address Her in sweet words from a sufficient distance in a very humble and courteous way.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On coming near to the Devī, the minister began to address Her in sweet words from a sufficient distance in a very humble and courteous way.

[Ch 9 Verse 61-62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sweet speaking! Who art Thou? What has caused Thee to come here? O Highly fortunate! My master has asked through me these questions. My master cannot be killed by all the Devas and men; he has conquered all the Lokas (worlds).
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sweet speaking! Who art Thou? What has caused Thee to come here? O Highly fortunate! My master has asked through me these questions. My master cannot be killed by all the Devas and men; he has conquered all the Lokas (worlds).

[Ch 9 Verse 63-64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Beautiful-eyed! On account of getting his boon from Brahmā, the Lord of the Daityas has become very powerful; and consequently being very proud, assumes different forms at will. He, our King-Emperor Mahisa, the lord of the earth hearing about Thy beauty and dress, has expressed a desire to see Thee. O Beautiful one! Whether he will appear before Thee in a human form?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Beautiful-eyed! On account of getting his boon from Brahmā, the Lord of the Daityas has become very powerful and consequently being very proud, assumes different forms at will. He, our King-Emperor Mahiṣa, the lord of the earth, hearing about Thy beauty and dress, has expressed a desire to see Thee. O Beautiful one! Whether he will appear before Thee in a human form?

[Ch 9 Verse 65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He will do whatever Thou likest. O Deer-eyed One! Be pleased now to go to that intelligent King. In case Thou dost not go, we will bring the King, Thy devotee, to Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He will do whatever Thou likest. O Deer-eyed One! Be pleased now to go to that intelligent King. In case Thou dost not go, we will bring the King, Thy devotee, to Thee.

[Ch 9 Verse 66-68]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the Devas! Our King has heard of Thy beauty and grandeur and has become very much submissive to Thee. We will therefore do exactly what Thou desirest. Therefore, O Thou having thighs thick and round like those of a young of an elephant! Be pleased to express what Thou likest and we will do quickly as Thou desirest. Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the worship offered by the gods to the Devi and the weapons offered by them in the Mahā Purānam, Śrimaddevibhayatarat of Vas, 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa. [Unreadable] Śrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the Devas! Our King has heard of Thy beauty and grandeur and has become very much submissive to Thee. We will therefore do exactly what Thou desirest. Therefore, Thou having thighs thick and round like those of a young of an elephant! Be pleased to express what Thou likest and we will do quickly as Thou desirest. Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the worship offered by the gods to the Devī and the weapons offered by them in the Mahā Purāṇam, Śrī Mad Devī Bhagāvatam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
