CHAPTER IX

On the Worship by the Gods to the Devi

व्यास उवाच

देवा विष्णुवचः श्रृत्वा संर्वे प्रमृदितासन्तव ।

ददुश्ध प्र्यरणान्याणु वस्त्राणि सवायुधानि च ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: On hearing Viṣṇu’s words, the Devas became very glad and presented immediately their own weapons, ornaments and clothing.

श्रीरोद्धशंद्र विद्ये रतेके सूक्षे तधाउजरे ।

निर्मलं च तथा हारं प्रीतस्तद्ये सुमाणिदुक्ति ॥ 2 ॥

The Ksīroda (Milk) Occan presented to Her gladly, the well fitted necklace, clear as crystal, and a pair of divine cloths, of a red colour, never becoming old and very fine.

ददौ चुदामणि दिव्यं सुर्योकौटिममुभम् ।

कृष्ण्डले च तथा शुष्के कटकानि भुजेषु वे ॥ ३ ॥

केनूरात्करणान्दियाज्ञानालयिकाज्ञान।

ददौ तसे विश्वकामां प्रसर्जेत्रियमानासः ॥ 4 ।

Vísvakarmā was very much gratified in his heart and presented a divine jewel to be worn in Her diadem or crest, blazing like hundreds of suns; white earrings, bracelets for Her wrist, bracelets for Her upper arm, and other bracelets decked with various gems and jewels and anklets brilliant like gems, of a clear Sun-like lustre, decked with jewels, and tinkling nicely.

नूपुरी सुस्वरी कान्ती निर्मतीं रत्नभूषिति ।

दूदी सूर्यप्रीकाणी लखा तव्ये सुप्रादयोः ॥ 5 ॥

तथा त्रीयकं रयं दूदी तत्वे महापाँवंः ।

अदूलीयकरत्नारि तेजोबलित च सर्वेशः ॥ 6 ॥

The architect of the gods, the ocean of intellect, Visvakarmā gave Her as offerings beautiful ornaments also for the neck, all very beautiful, as well as for the fingers decked with gems and jewels, all shining splendidly.

अत्नापजूँजां मालां शीघाड्यां धामगुभाम।

तथेव वैजवन्ती च वर्णः संप्रथळ्त । ७ ।।

Varuna gave for Her head a garland of lotuses,

never fading away, of such a sweet fragrance as bees constantly hover round them and the Vajjayanti garland for Her breast.

हिमवानय सन्तुषो रत्नानि विवियानि च ।

ददी च गहानं सिंहं कनकाभं मनोहाम् ॥ 8 ॥

The mountain Himalaya gladly offered Her various gems and a beautiful lion, of a golden colour for Her conveyance.

भूर्णीभूषित तिद्वे: सा राज वरा रुषा ।

सिंहाकडा वरारोहा सर्वेलक्षणयेयुत ॥ 9 ॥

Then that beautiful Lady, having all the auspicious signs, wishing welfare to all, and decorated with the divine ornaments began to look grand and splendid, mounted on Her conveyance, the Lion.

विष्यधुकात्मसुचाधा ददावख्ये रथांगकम् ।

सहचारं सुदीर्णं च देवारिगिरासां हन् ॥ 10 ॥

Visnu then created another thousand spoked discus (Cakram) from His own Cakra, capable to take off the head of any Asura, and offered it to Her.

स्वयिगूलातमयुभाथा शड़़ः: शूलमुत्तमम् ।

ददी देखे सुर्गीर्णां कृतेनं भयनाशनम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Śaṅkara created another excellent Triśūla from his own Trident, terrible and demon-killing, and offered it to the Devi.

वर्णाधा प्रसतात्या ददी शंखं सपुज्जलम् ।

घोथवन्तं स्वशंखानु सम्यताय सुमतलम् ॥ १ २ ॥

Varuna created another bright conch from his own conch and offered it gladly to the Devi.

हुताशनस्तथा शर्फिं शतन्यीं सुमनोजाम् ।

प्रायच्छतु प्रसत्रात्मा तब्ये दैत्यविनाशिनीम् ॥ 13 ॥

Fire offered Her a weapon named Sātaghni which kills violently the demons, as if that is another god of death.

शुध्धि बाणपूर्णं च चापं चाळ्ठतर्शनम् ।

मात्तो दत्तांसत्ये दुराकर्षं खरस्यम् ॥ 14 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Maruta (wind), the chief of the gods, offered Her a wonderful bow and an arrow case filled with arrows. The bow can be drawn with great difficulty and emits a very harsh sound.

स्वज्जाद्रप्रमुतयाद द्वाद्विऋ3स्तितारुणम् ।

घंटामैरावततृष्णु सुग्ब्वी चातिसुन्द्वाम् ॥ 15 ॥

Indra created another dreadful thunderbolt from his own thunderbolt and gave it at once to the Devi; as well the beautiful sonorous bell that used to hang from the elephant Airāvata.

ददी दण्डे यमः कामं कातदण्डसमुढ़वम् ।

येनानं सर्वभृतानामकरीकाल अगते ॥ 16 ॥

Yama, the God of Death, created another beautiful staff from his own sceptre which takes away when time comes, the life of all beings.

बह्मा कर्मबंर्तु दिव्यं गंगाविरप्रपूर्तिन् ।

ददावस्य मुवायुक्तो कमण: पाणमेव च ॥ 17 ॥

Brahmā gladly gave Her a divine Kamandalu, filled with the Ganges water; and Varuna offered Her a weapon called Pāśa.

काल: खदुरा तथा चर्म प्रावछन्तु नराधिय ।

परगूं विश्वकर्मा च तीक्षामास्टे द्वावव ॥ 18 ॥

O King! Time gave Her an axe and a shield and Viśvakarmā gave Her a sharp Paraśu.

धनदसु सुगपूर्णे पानघांसु सुवर्णम् ।

पृज्ञं वक्षणश्रादोद्वैये चिदयं मनोहम् ॥ 19 ॥

Kubera, the Lord of wealth, gave her a golden drinking cup, filled with wine; and Varuna offered Her a divine beautiful lotus.

गदां कोमोदर्की नत्हा घंटगणनिरनादीम् ।

अदात्तयै प्रस्नात्या सुरगनुविनाशिणीम् ॥ 20 ॥

अक्षापयेनकल्पाणि तावाउभेघं चे उंगनम् ।

ददौ तत्हा जगनाये निजगभीन्दिकाः ॥ 21 ॥

Vísvakarmā became very glad and gave Her the Kaumodakī gadā, capable to kill the enemy of the gods and whence hundreds of bells are hanging, an impenetrable armour and various other weapons. The Sun gave to the Divine Mother his own rays.

सायुधां भूषणैयुक्तो बृद्धता ते विस्ययं गतः ।

गुरुवुस्तां सुरा देवीं तैनेल्व्यमोहैर्नी विगवाम ॥ 22 ॥

The Devas, seeing Her adorned with ornaments and weapons, began to praise and chant hymns to that most Auspicious Goddess, the Great Enchantress of the three worlds.

देवा कबुः

नमः शिवायै कल्याण्ये शास्तै पृष्टे नामेनः ।

भगवल्ये नमो देद्ये क्रतूणये सत्तं नमः ॥ 23 ॥

The Devas said: “Salutation to Śivā, Salutation to the Most Auspicious; Thou art peace and nourishment; we salute again and again to Thee. Salutation to Thee, the Bhagavati Devi; Thou art the Goddess Rudrāni (the terrible), we always salute again and again to Thee.

कालतार्ये तर्वावार्ये इन्हारणे ते ननोमतः ।

मिल्दीं घुब्दीे तथा वृद्धों वैश्याल्ये ते ननोमः ॥ 24 ॥

Thou art the Kālarātri (the night of destruction at the end of the world); Thou art the Indrānī. Thou art the Mother, we salute again and again to Thee; Thou art the success, Thou art the intelligence, Thou art the growth, Thou art the Vaisnavī; salutation again and again to Thee.

पृथिव्यां या शिवता पृथव्यां न ज्ञाता पृथिवी च या ।

अनं:शिवता यमयिति वन्दे तामीक्षीं पराम् ॥ २५ ॥

Thou art within the earth; yet the earth does not know Thee. Thou art again the inmost of the earth and controlled the things within this earth; we offer our salutations to that Supreme Cause, he may have God.

मायायां या श्विता ज्ञाता मायायां न च तमाजाम् ।

अन्त:स्थिता प्रेयति प्रेयित्री नुम: शिवाय् ॥ 26 ॥

Thou art within this Maya (the unborn) yet the Maya does not know Thee. Thou resident again within the innermost of the Maya and directest that Unborn One, the Maya, we salute again and again to that Supreme Cause, the Great Directress, the Siva (the most auspicious).

कल्याणं कुरु भो मातस्ताहि नः श्रुतापितान् ।

जहि पारं द्वाराि त्वं तेजसा स्थेन मोहितम् ॥ 27 ॥

O Mother! Do what is good to us; we are oppressed by our enemy, dost thou protect us; by

Book V Chapter IX

Thy own power dost Thou overpower and kill that Mahisa.

खलं मायाबिनं घोरं क्रीवध्यं वरद्यपिंन् ।

दुःखदं सर्वदैवानां नानारूपधरं शक्न् ॥ 28 ॥

That demon is vulnerable by woman only, he is deceitful, cunning, dreadful, and swollen with pride on his having got the blessing; he assumes many forms and torments the Devas.

त्वमेका सर्वदैवानां शरणं भक्तवत्सले ।

पीडितान्दानवेनाद्य जाहि दैव नमो3तु ते ॥ 29 ॥

O One, devoted to the Bhaktas! Thou art the only refuge of all the gods; O Thou art the supreme goddess, we are very much harassed and oppressed by the Dānava; therefore dost Thou now protect us; we bow down to Thee.

व्यास उवाच

एवं सृत्ता तदा देवी सुरैः सर्वसुखादया ।

तानुवाच माठदौषी सिमातूर्वे शुभं चवः ॥ 30 ॥

Vyāsa said: When the Devas had praised thus, the Highest Goddess, the Giver of all happiness, then smilingly said in the following auspicious terms:

देव्युवाच

भयं त्वजुत् गीर्वाणा महिषामन्दोचेतसः ।

हनिष्यामि रणोईव वरतून विमोहितम् ॥ 31 ॥

“O Devas! Today in the battle group I will overpower what wicked Mahisa, of cruel disposition and take away his life.”

व्यम उवाच

इत्युक्लवा सा सुरान्देवी जहासातीव सुस्यम् ।

चिचमेतच्च संसारे घममोहतुर्जत जन्त । ३२ । ॥

Vyāsa said: Speaking thus in a melodious voice, the Supreme One smiled and again said: "Thus world is all full of error and delusion.

ब्रहाविष्यामुळेशादा: सैराङ्ठाये सुगतस्तथा ।

कमययुक्ता भयवस्ता वर्तन्ते महिषात्कल ॥ 33 ॥

Really, it is very wonderful that Brahma, Vispu Maheśa, Indra and other gods are all shuddering out of fear from Mahisa Dānava.

अहो दैवबलं घोरं दुर्जंय सुरस्तम्भः ।

कालः कतप्रस्ति दुःखानां सुखानां प्रभुशिः : ॥ 34 ॥

The power of Destiny is exceedingly great and terrible; its influence cannot be overcome even by the best of the Devas.

सृष्टिपालनसंहिते समर्था अपि ते यदा ।

मुह्यिति कलेशसन्तमा महिषेण प्रपीक्षिति: ॥ 35 ॥

O king! The Time is the Lord of happiness and pain; Time is, therefore, the God. The wonder is this that even those who can create, preserve and destroy this world, they are being overpowered and tormented by Mahiṣa.

इति कृत्वा सितं देवी साउटुहासं चकार ह ।

उच्छे: शब्दे महापोरं दानवानां भपप्रदम् ॥ 36 ॥

The Devi, thinking thus, smiled; then laughed and laughed very hoarsely; it seemed that a roar of laughter then arose.

चक्रमे वसुभा तत्र श्रुत्वा तलळ्यद्धानुम् ।

चेलुध शवतो: सर्वे चुक्षोपाधिश्र श्रीवयान् ॥ 37 ॥

And the Dānavas were struck with terror at that very dreadful sound. The earth trembled at that extraordinary sound; the mountains began to move and the vast oceans that remained calm began to be agitated with billows.

मेक्रश्याला शब्देन दिशः सर्वा: प्रपृत्तिनः ।

घयं जमुस्ताद शुवा टानवास्तत्वयं महत ॥ 38 ॥

The uproar filled all the quarters and the mountain Meru trembled. Then the Dānavas, hearing the tumultuous uproar, were all filled with tremendous fear.

जय पाहिति देवात्सापुचः परमहर्षितः ।

महिषोपि स्वयं शूला चुकोय पदार्तिः ॥ 39 ॥

The Devas became very glad and said thus: "O Devi! Let victory be Yours; save us. The intoxicated Mahisa, too, hearing those words, became very angry.

किमेत्तिति तन्दीत्यायप्रछ स्वनाशिकृतः ।

गच्छन्तु वारिता दूता ज्ञानु शब्दसमुद्वय् ॥ 40 ॥

Mahisa, struck with terror at those words, asked the Daityas “O Messengers! Go and ascertain how has originated this sound.

कृतः केनायमत्युः शब्दः करण्यायकाः ।

देवो वा दानवो वापि यो घबेत्ववनाकाः ॥ 4 1 ॥

Who has made this harsh sound? Bring that devil who has made this hoarse noise, be he a Deva, Dānava, or anyone else unto me, and I will kill that roaring villain, who, it seems, has been puffed with egoism and vanity.

गृहीता तं दुगात्मानं मत्सीपं नर्यत्थत् ॥

ह्निष्यामि दुराचारं गर्जन्तं सम्यदुमंदम् ॥ 42 ॥

The Devas are not making this noise, for they are vanquished and terror-stricken; The Asuras are not doing so, for they are my subjects; then, who is the stupid fellow that has done so?

क्षीणायुयं मन्दमर्ति नवामि यमसादनम् ।

पराजिता: सुरा: कामं न गर्जित भवानुग: ॥ 43 ॥

Surely he is of very little understanding; his days are numbered; and I will carry him to the home of Death.

नासुरा मम वश्यासते कमयेदं मुद्धरेष्टितम् ।

त्विता मामुपायातु जात्वा शब्दस्य कारणम् ॥ 44 ॥

अहं गत्वा हनिययामि तं पायं वित्तवश्रमम् ।

Go you, ascertain the cause of sound and come back to me; then I will go there and destroy that wretch who made this noise to no purpose.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तास्तेन ते दुता देर्वी सर्वांकुष्यदीयम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

अष्टादिषुर्जा दिव्यां सर्वांभरणभूरिताम ।

सर्वलक्षणास्यम्बों वरायुध्यरां रुभाम् ॥ 4 6 ॥

द्यर्तीं चरकं हरले पिबन्ती च मुहुभेंम् ।

Vyāsa said: No sooner the messengers heard these words of Mahiṣa, than they at once went to the Devi and saw that Her body and the several parts thereof were all very beautiful; She had eighteen hands, She was decorated completely with various ornaments all over Her body, all the auspicious signs were being seen in Her body and that She was holding excellent divine weapons. That auspicious Goddess beautiful, was holding in Her hands, the cup and drinking wine again and again.

संवैध्य भयभीताते जमुक्तसा: सुर्णिकता: ॥ 47 ॥

सकाशं महिष्यायु तमयु: स्वनकारणम् ।

Beholding Her this form, they were afraid and fled at once to the Mahisa and informed him the cause of that sound.

दूत ऊयु:

देवी दैनेश्व श्रंड दूण्यते कार्विदंगना ॥ 4 8 ॥

सर्वोईभूषण नारी सर्वत्लोषणीघात ।

न मानुषी नासुरी सा दिव्यस्पा मनोहता ॥ 49 ॥

The passengers said: “O Lord! We have seen one grown up woman; whose whereabouts we are quite ignorant. The Devi is decorated with jewels and ornaments all over Her body; She is not human nor Asurit but Her form is extraordinary and beautiful.

सिंहासूकडेपुथाप्रा चाहार्यकार वरा ।

सा नादं कुकते नारी लक्ष्ये मदार्थिति ॥ 50 ॥

सुरापानरता कामं जानीमो न सम्भृतं ।

अन्तरिक्षिता देवासां सुवर्ति मुदाविता: ॥ 51 ॥

That noble Lady is mounted on a lion, holding weapons on all Her eighteen hands and is roaring loudly; She is drinking wine; so it seems that She is puffed up with liquor. It is quite certain that She has no husband.

जयेति पाहि नक्षिति जहि शत्रुमिति प्रभो ।

न जाने का वरोगोहा कव या सा परिश्रहः ॥ 52 ॥

किमर्थमाता चात्र किं विधकीपिति सुन्दरी ।

The Devas are gladly chanting praises from the celestial space that Let Victory be to Her side and that She save the Devas, O Lord! We don't know at all who is that handsome woman? or whose wife is she; why has she come there? and what is Her motive?

उलुं नैव समर्षा: समस्ततेज: परिधर्षिति: ॥ 53 ॥

भूगारवीतासाभिका रौत्रादुतरासाधिता ।

Sentiments of love, heroism, laughter, terror and wonder are all fully shining in Her; therefore we are very much overpowered by the halo emitted from Her; and we could not even see Her well.

Note: Rasas means sentiments. The rasas are usually eight. Śrīngāra, Hāṣya, Karunā, Raudra, Vira,

Book V Chapter IX

Bhayānakab, Bibhatsādbhū tasangān, Cetyaṣṭau, Natyan, Rasab smṛtab but sometimes Śāntarasa, is added thus making the total number nine; sometimes a tenth, Vatsalyarasa is also added.

दृष्टिवैंविधो नारीमममाथ्य समागतः ॥ 5 4 ॥

वयं त्वदान्ना राजन्कि कर्तव्यमतः परम् ।

O King! In compliance with your order, we have come back to you no sooner we had seen the Lady, without even addressing Her in any way. Now order us what we are to do.

महिष उवाच

गच्छ चीर मावाहिष्टी मन्न्रश्रेशु कलावित्वः ॥ 55 ॥

सामादिसभगवैत्सवं समानव शुभाननाम् ।

नवाति यदि या नारी तिथि: सामादिपिबित्व ॥ 56 ॥

अहत्वा तां वशरोहां त्वामानय मपातितकम् ।

कर्मणि यदुगहिंगी तां मारलभुवं मुदा ॥ 57 ॥

Mahisā said: “O Best of ministers! O Hero! Under my command, go there with all the forces and use the means, conciliation, etc., and bring that woman, having a beautiful face (like the Moon), to me. If that Lady do not come even when the three policies, Sāma (conciliation), Dāna (making gifts), and Bheda (sowing dissensions in an enemy’s party and thus winning him over to one’s side, one of the four Upāyas or means of success against an enemy) are adopted by you, then apply the last resort Dāna, (or war) in such a way that Her life be not destroyed and bring that beautiful woman to me. I will gladly make Her, of black curling hairs, my queen-consort.

प्रीतिपुत्ता समायाति यदा सा मुगलोचना ।

रसभंगो यथा न स्थताया कुक मेमोपैतम् ॥ 58 ॥

श्रवणान्मोहितोरम्यद्य तत्या कल्पस्य सम्पत् ।

In case that deer-eyed one comes gladly, then do my desires without causing any unpleasant feeling; (a cessation of sentiment). I am enchanted on hearing about Her beauties and wealth.

व्यास उवाच

महिषय स्व च: शुत्वा पेगलं मन्थिसतम: ॥ 59 ॥

जगाम तरसा कामं गजाश्रधस्येतुः ।

Vyāsa said: The prime minister, on hearing the words of Mahisa, took with him elephants, horses, and chariots and hurriedly went to the desired place.

गत्वा दुर्तर्ग स्थत्वा तामुवाच मनस्विनीम् ॥ 60 ॥

विवयावन्तः रलक्षणं मन्त्री मधुरया गिरा ।

On coming near to the Devi, the minister began to address Her in sweet words from a sufficient distance in a very humble and courteous way.

प्रधान उवाच

कांसि तवं मधुरतावे किमजागमं कृतम् ॥ 6 1 ॥

पृष्ठति तां महाभागे मन्युवेन मम प्रधुः ।

स ज्ञाते सर्वदैवानामवध्यन्तु नौः किल ॥ 6 2 ॥

O Sweet speaking! Who art Thou? What has caused Thee to come here? O Highly fortunate! My master has asked through me these questions. My master cannot be killed by all the Devas and men; he has conquered all the Lokas (worlds).

बहाणो बरादोने गर्वितशुकालोचने ।

दैत्येश्वीरोंजी बलवात्कामरूपधर: सदा ॥ 63 ॥

श्रुत्वा तांं समुपायानांं चाक्चेयं मनोहमाः।

प्रधुमिच्छति राजा मे महीचो नाम पार्थिवः ॥ 64 ॥

मानुर्ष रूपभादाय त्वत्सीपं समेध्यति ।

O Beautiful-eyed! On account of getting his boon from Brahmā, the Lord of the Daityas has become very powerful; and consequently being very proud, assumes different forms at will. He, our King-Emperor Mahisa, the lord of the earth hearing about Thy beauty and dress, has expressed a desire to see Thee. O Beautiful one! Whether he will appear before Thee in a human form?

यथा कष्टेत चार्विङ्ग तथा नयामहे वयम् ॥ 65 ॥

तहिंहि मृगशगवांसि समीपं तस्य धीमतः ।

He will do whatever Thou likest. O Deer-eyed One! Be pleased now to go to that intelligent King. In case Thou dost not go, we will bring the King, Thy devotee, to Thee.

नो चैहिद्वानयद्येने राजानं भफित्तलयम् ॥ 66 ॥

तथा कशोम विशेष यथा ने मनसोयितम् ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

<table><tr><td>वशणोउसी ततात्यर्थ कृपसंश्वरणान्ति १ 6 7 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>क्रमोफे वदागु त्वं संविधेयं मया तथा ॥ 6 8 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणो वैवीमाहात्ये</td></tr><tr><td>नवमोउध्याः 11 9 11</td></tr></table>

O Lord of the Devas! Our King has heard of Thy beauty and grandeur and has become very much submissive to Thee. We will therefore do exactly what Thou desirest. Therefore, O Thou

having thighs thick and round like those of a young of an elephant! Be pleased to express what Thou likest and we will do quickly as Thou desirest.

Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the worship offered by the gods to the Devi and the weapons offered by them in the Mahā Purānam,

Śrimaddevibhayatarat of Vas, 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

[Unreadable]

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

