[Ch 13 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya said: O Muni! I see that at the command of the King, the ministers installed Hariścandra on the royal throne; but how Triśanku got rid of his Cāndāla body, kindly say.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya said :-- “O Muni! I see that at the command of the King, the ministers installed Hariścandra on the royal throne; but how Triśaṅku got rid of his Cāṇḍāla body, kindly say.

[Ch 13 Verse 2-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Was it that he bathed in the holy waters of the Ganges and lived in the forest and when he died he was freed of the curse; or was it that the Guru Vasistha favored him by his grace and freed him of the curse? O best of Rşis! I am extremely eager to hear the life of the King therefore kindly describe to me in detail his wonderful career.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Was it that he bathed in the holy waters of the Ganges and lived in the forest and when he died he was freed of the curse; or was it that the Guru Vaśiṣṭha favoured him by his grace and freed him of the curse? O best of Ṛṣis! I am extremely eager to hear the life of the King; therefore kindly describe to me in detail his wonderful career.”

[Ch 13 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! The King became gladdened in his heart to instal his son on the throne and began to pass his days in that forest in the meditation of Bhagavatī Bhavānī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! The King became gladdened in his heart to install his son on the throne and began to pass his days in that forest in the meditation of Bhagavatī Bhavānī.

[Ch 13 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus some time passed when Viśvāmitra, the son of Kuśika, completing his course of Tapasyā with an intent mind returned to his home to see his wife and sons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus some time passed when Viśvāmitra, the son of Kauśika, completing his course of Tapasyā with an intent mind returned to his home to see his wife and sons.

[Ch 13 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On coming back to his house, the intelligent Muni found his sons and other members of family happy and well conditioned, became very glad and when his wife came to him for his service, asked her: "O Fair-eyed One! How did you spend your time in days of famine? There was nothing whatsoever of the stock of rice, etc., in the house; how then did you nourish these days? Please speak to me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On coming back to his house, the intelligent Muni found his sons and other members of the family happy and well conditioned, became very glad and when his wife came to him for his service, asked her :-- O Fair-eyed One! How did you spend your time in days of famine? There was nothing whatsoever of the stock of rice, etc., in the house; how then did you nourish these boys? Please speak to me.

[Ch 13 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Fair One! I was very busy with my austerities, I could not therefore come to you and see my boys; how then, O Beloved, and what measure did you resort to for their maintenance? O good and aucipious One! When I heard of the dire famine, I thought then 'I have no wealth; so what shall I do if I go there?'
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Fair One! I was very busy with my austerities, I could not therefore come to you and see my boys; how then, O Beloved, and what measures did you resort to for their maintenance? O good and auspicious One! When I heard of the dire famine, I thought then “I have no wealth; so what shall I do if I go there?”

[Ch 13 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus thinking I did not come then. O Beautiful One! At that time, one day I was very hungry and being very much tired I entered into the house of a Cāṇḍāla, with the object of stealing. On entering the house I found the Cāṇḍāla sleeping; then being extremely distressed with hunger, I entered into his kitchen if I could find anything there."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus thinking I did not come then. O Beautiful One! At that time, one day I was very hungry and being very much tired I entered into the house of a Cāṇḍāla, with the object of stealing. On entering the house I found the Cāṇḍāla sleeping; then being extremely distressed with hunger, I entered into his kitchen if I could find anything there.

[Ch 13 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the dishes were sought and turned, and when I was going to take cooked dog's flesh I immediately fell into the sight of that Cāṇḍāla.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the dishes were sought and turned, and when I was going to take cooked dog’s flesh I immediately fell into the sight of that Cāṇḍāla.

[Ch 13 Verse 13-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He asked me very affectionately “Who are you? Why have you entered here at this hour of night? Why are your looking after the dishes? Speak what you want.” O Beautiful One! When the Cāndāla asked me these questions, I was very much pressed by hunger and I spoke out my wants in a tremulous voice: O Fortunate One! I am an ascetic Brāhmin; very much pained by hunger I have entered your house stealthily and am looking out for some eatables from your cooking pots.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He asked me very affectionately “Who are you? Why have you entered here at this hour of night? Why are your looking after the dishes? Speak what you want.” O Beautiful One! When the Cāṇḍāla asked me these questions, I was very much pressed by hunger and I spoke out my wants in a tremulous voice :-- O Fortunate One! I am an ascetic Brāhmin very much pained by hunger; I have entered your house stealthily and am looking out for some eatables from your cooking pots.

[Ch 13 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Intelligent One! I am now your guest in the form of a thief; I am now specially very hungry; so I will now eat your cooked meat; kindly permit me. Hearing these words, the Cāndāla spoke to me in words authorised by the Śāstras: "O One of the Superior Varna! Know this to be the house of a Cāndāla; so never eat that flesh.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Intelligent One! I am now your guest in the form of a thief; I am now specially very hungry; so I will now eat your cooked meat; kindly permit me. Hearing these words, the Cāṇḍāla spoke to me in words authorised by the Śāstras :-- O One of the Superior Varṇa! Know this to be the house of a Cāṇḍāla; so never eat that flesh.

[Ch 13 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Širičaddevibhāgavatam The human birth is very rare in this words; then again to be born a Dvija is more difficult; and to get Brāhmaṇa hood again in the Dvijas is exceedingly difficult.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The human birth is very rare in this world; then again to be born a Dvīja is more difficult; and to get Brāhmaṇhood again in the Dvījas is exceedingly difficult.

[Ch 13 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Are you not aware of this? They ought never to eat the defiled food who desire to attain to the Heavens; owing to Karma, the Maharṣi Manu has denominated the seventh caste as Antyaja and has discarded them altogether.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Are you not aware of this? They ought never to eat the defiled food who desire to attain to the Heavens; owing to Karma, the Maharṣi Manu has denominated the seventh caste as Antyaja and has discarded them altogether.

[Ch 13 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So, O Brāhmīn! I am now by my actions turned into a Cāndāla and so forsaken by all; there is no doubt in this. I am forbidding you so that this fault of Varṇa Śaṅkara may not suddenly attack you."
NEW CORR ENG ──► So, O Brāhmin! I am now by my actions turned into a Cāṇḍāla and so forsaken by all; there is no doubt in this. I am forbidding you so that this fault of Varṇa Śaṅkara may not suddenly attack you.

[Ch 13 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vísvāmitra said: “O Knower of Dharma! What you are speaking is quite true; though a Cāndāla, your intelligence is very clear; hear, I will now speak to you the subtleties of the Dharma in times of danger.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viśvāmitra said :-- “O Knower of Dharma! What you are speaking is quite true; though a Cāṇḍāla, your intelligence is very clear; hear, I will now speak to you the subtleties of the Dharma in times of danger.

[Ch 13 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Giver of respect! Always and by all means it is advisable to keep up the body; if sin be thereby incurred, one ought to perform Prāyaścitta (penance) for its purification when the time of danger is over.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Giver of respect! Always and by all means it is advisable to keep up the body if sin be thereby iñcurred, one ought to perform Prāyaścitta (penance) for its purification when the time of danger is over.

[Ch 13 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But if one commits sin when the time is not one of danger, one gets degraded; not so in the time of danger. The man that dies out of hunger, goes to hell, no doubt.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But if one commits sin when the time is not one of danger, one gets degraded; not so in the time of danger. The man that dies out of hunger, goes to hell, no doubt.

[Ch 13 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore every man seeking for his welfare must satisfy his hunger. Therefore I intend to steal for preserving my body. O Cāndāla! See!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore every man seeking for his welfare must satisfy his hunger. Therefore I intend to steal for preserving my body. O Cāṇḍāla See!

[Ch 13 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The sin, incurred in stealing during famine, which the Paṇdits have declared, goes to the God of rains until he does not pour forth rain.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The sin, iñcurred in stealing during famine, which the Pundits have declared, goes to the God of rains until he does not pour forth rain.”

[Ch 13 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the clouds thus poured forth rains with the glitterings of the lightnings, I felt very glad and left the house of the Cāndāla.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the clouds thus poured forth rains with the glitterings of the lightnings, I felt very glad and left the house of the Cāṇḍāla.

[Ch 13 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Beautiful One! Now speak out to me how did you behave in that famine time, so terrible to all the beings."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Beautiful One! Now speak out to me, how did you behave in that famine time, so terrible to all the beings.

[Ch 13 Verse 29-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I became very anxious to see the sons hungry; I then went out to the forest in quest of wild rice; and I got some fruits.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I became very anxious to see the sons hungry; I then went out to the forest in quest of wild rice; and I got some fruits.

[Ch 13 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus I spend some months by collecting the rice growing wildly in the forest; then in times these also could not be got and I became again anxious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus I spent some months by collecting the rice growing wildly in the forest; then in times these also could not be got and I became again anxious.

[Ch 13 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Nivāra rice, too, is now not available; and nothing is obtained also by begging; there are no fruits on the trees and no roots are found under the earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Nibāra rice, too, is now not available and nothing is obtained also by begging; there are no fruits on the trees and no roots are found under the earth.

[Ch 13 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The sons are crying in agony of hunger. What to do? And where to go? What am I to say now to the hungry boys?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The sons are crying in agony of hunger. What to do? And where to go? What am I to say now to the hungry boys?

[Ch 13 Verse 35-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Oh God! Thus thinking on various ways, I at last came to this conclusion that I would sell one of my sons to a rich man and whatever price I can fetch, with that I will preserve the lives of the others sons. O Dear! Thus thinking, I became ready and went out. O Fortunate One! Then this boy began to cry aloud and became very distressed; yet I was so shameless that I took the crying boy and got out of my Asrama.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Oh God! Thus thinking on various ways, I at last came to this conclusion that I would sell one of my sons to a rich man and whatever price I can fetch, with that I will preserve the lives of the other sons. O Dear! Thus thinking, I became ready and went out. O Fortunate One! Then this boy began to cry aloud and became very distressed; yet I was so shameless that I took the crying boy and got out of my Āśrama.

[Ch 13 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this time one Rājarsi Satyavrata seeing me very distressed, asked me “O One of good vows! Why is this boy weeping?”
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this time one Rājarṣi Satyavrata seeing me very distressed, asked me “O One of good vows! Why is this boy weeping?”

[Ch 13 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! I spoke to him “To-day I am going to sell this boy.” The King’s heart became overfilled with pity, and spoke to me: “Take back to your Āśrama this boy.” Daily I will supply you with meat for the food of your boys until the Muni returns home.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! I spoke to him “Today I am going to sell this boy.” The King’s heart became overfilled with pity, and spoke to me :-- “Take back to your Āśrama this boy. Daily I will supply you with meat for the food of your boys until the Muni returns home.”

[Ch 13 Verse 43-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! The King from that time used to bring, with great pity, daily the flesh of deer and boar killed by him in the forest and he used to tie that on this tree." O Beloved! Thus I could protect my sons in that fearful ocean of crisis; but that King was cursed by Vasistha only for my sake.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! The King from that time used to bring, with great pity, daily the flesh of deer and boar killed by him in the forest and he used to tie that on this tree. O Beloved! Thus I could protect my sons in that fearful ocean of crisis; but that King was cursed by Vaśiṣṭha only for my sake.

[Ch 13 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One day that King did not get any meat in the forest; so he slaughtered the Kāma Dhenu (the cow giving all desires) of Vasistha and the Muni became therefore very angry with him. The high-souled Muni, angry on account of the killing of his cow, called the King by the name of Trisanku and made him a Cāndāla.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One day that King did not get any meat in the forest; so he slaughtered the Kāma Dhenu (the cow giving all desires) of Vaśiṣṭha and the Muni became therefore very angry with him. The high-souled Muni, angry on account of the killing of his cow, called the King by the name of Triśaṅku and made him a Cāṇḍāla.

[Ch 13 Verse 47-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Kauśika! The prince turned into a Cāndāla because he came forward to do good to me, so I am very sorry for his sake." So it is your urgent duty to save the King from his terrible position by any means or by the influence of your powerful Tapasya."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Kauśika! The prince turned into a Cāṇḍāla because he came forward to do good to me, so I am very sorry for his sake. So it is your urgent duty to save the King from his terrible position by any means or by the influence of your powerful Tapasyā.

[Ch 13 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing these words from his wife the Muni Kaūśika consoled her and said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing these words from his wife the Muni Kauśika consoled her and said :--

[Ch 13 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Lotus-eyed One! I will free the King of his curse, who saved you at that critical moment; what more than this that I promise to you that I will remove his sufferings whether it be by my learning or it be by my Tapas.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lotus-eyed One! I will free the King of his curse, who saved you at that critical moment; what more than this that I promise to you that I will remove his sufferings whether it be by my learning or

[Ch 13 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus consoling his wife at that moment, Kauśika, the Knower of the Highest Reality, began to think how he could destroy the pains and miseries of the King.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus consoling his wife at that moment, Kauśika, the Knower of the Highest Reality, began to think how he could destroy the pains and miseries of the King.

[Ch 13 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus thinking, the Muni went to the King Triśañku, who was staying at that time very humbly in a village of the Cāndālas, in the garb of a Cāndāla.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus thinking, the Muni went to the King Triśaṅku, who was staying at that time very humbly in a village of the Cāṇḍālas, in the garb of a Cāṇḍāla.

[Ch 13 Verse 53-55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the Muni coming, the King was greatly astonished and instantly threw himself before his feet like a piece of stick. Kauśika raised the fallen King and consoling him said: "O King! You are cursed, on my account, by the Muni Vasiṣṭha. I will, therefore, fulfil your desires. Now speak what I am to do."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the Muni coming, the King was greatly astonished and instantly threw himself before his feet like a piece of stick. Kauśika raised the fallen King and consoling him said :-- O King! You are cursed, on my account, by the Muni Vaśiṣṭha. I will, therefore, fulfil your desires. Now speak what I am to do.

[Ch 13 Verse 56-57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King said: "With a view to perform a sacrifice I prayed to Vasistha that "I would perform a sacrifice, kindly do this for me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King said :-- With a view to perform a sacrifice I prayed to Vaśiṣṭha that I would perform a sacrifice, kindly do this for me.

[Ch 13 Verse 58-59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Muni! Do that sacrifice, by which I can go to the Heavens in this my present body. Vasistha became angry and said: “O Villain! How can you go and live in the Heavens in this your human body?” I was very anxious to go to the Svarga (Heaven) so I again spoke to him:
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! Do that sacrifice, by which I can go to the Heavens in this my present body.” Vaśiṣṭha became angry and said :-- “O Villain! How can you go and live in the Heavens in this your human body?” I was very anxious to go to the Svarga (Heaven) so I again spoke to him :--

[Ch 13 Verse 60-62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Sinless One! I will then have the excellent sacrifice done by another priest.” Hearing this, Vasiṣṭha Deva cursed me, saying “Be a Cāndāla.” O Muni! Thus I have described to you all about my curse. You are the one quite able to remove now my grievance.” Distressed in pain an agony, the King informed him and became quiet. Viśvāmitra, too, thought how he could free him of his curse. Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the coming of Viśvāmitra to Triśañku in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “O Sinless One! I will then have the excellent sacrifice done by another priest.” Hearing this, Vaśiṣṭha Deva cursed me, saying “Be a Cāṇḍāla.” O Muni! Thus I have described to you all about my curse. You are the one quite able to remove now my grievances. Distressed in pain and agony, the King informed him and became quiet. Viśvāmitra, too, thought how he could free him of his curse. Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the coming of Viśvāmitra to Triśaṅku in the Mahā Purāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
