CHAPTER XIII

Visvāmitra Helping Trisanku

राजोबाच

हरिश्रज: कृत्तो राजा सचिवैर्युपशासनात् ।

त्रिशंकुस्तु कर्थ मुक्तस्तस्माच्छांडालदेहतः ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: O Muni! I see that at the command of the King, the ministers installed Hariścandra on the royal throne; but how Triśanku got rid of his Cāndāla body, kindly say.

मृती वा बनमध्ये तु गड़त्रातैर परित्युतः ।

गरुणा वा कृपरां शापात्तस्माद्वीभित्तः ॥ 2 ॥

एतदुक्त्रांतमिखलं कथयस्य ममाप्रतः ।

चरितं तस्य रूपतेः श्रोतुकामो5सि मर्वथा ॥ 3 ॥

Was it that he bathed in the holy waters of the Ganges and lived in the forest and when he died he was freed of the curse; or was it that the Guru Vasistha favored him by his grace and freed him of the curse? O best of Rşis! I am extremely eager to hear the life of the King therefore kindly describe to me in detail his wonderful career.

Book VII Chapter XIII

म्यास उवाच

अभियक्ति सूतं कृत्वा राजा सन्तुष्यानसः ।

कालातिक्रमणं तत्र चकार चिन्तयच्छवाम् ॥ 4 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The King became gladdened in his heart to instal his son on the throne and began to pass his days in that forest in the meditation of Bhagavatī Bhavānī.

एवं गच्छति काले तु तपस्त्वा स्माहितः ।

दूई द्वारानुस्तादौश्य तद्धगात्कौशिको मुपिनः ॥ 5 ॥

Thus some time passed when Viśvāmitra, the son of Kuśika, completing his course of Tapasyā with an intent mind returned to his home to see his wife and sons.

आगात्य स्वजनं दृष्ट्या सुशित्यां मुदामपतावान् ।

भार्यं पच्छ्च मेधावी स्थितामप्रे सपर्यां ॥ ६ ॥

दुर्धिके तु कर्थ काललस्वा नीतः सुनीचेने ।

अरब विज्ञ विषय बाला: पालिता: केन तद्धः ॥ ७ ॥

On coming back to his house, the intelligent Muni found his sons and other members of family happy and well conditioned, became very glad and when his wife came to him for his service, asked her: "O Fair-eyed One! How did you spend your time in days of famine? There was nothing whatsoever of the stock of rice, etc., in the house; how then did you nourish these days? Please speak to me.

अर्ह तपसि संनढ़ो नागतः शृषु सुन्दार ।

किं कृतं तु तयवा कान्ते विना इव्येण गोपने ॥ ८ ॥

मया चिन्ता कृतत तत्र शुत्वा दुर्भिश्रमद्धुतम् ।

नागतोर्दं विचार्वैर्व कि कार्चियासि निधंनः ॥ ९ ॥

O Fair One! I was very busy with my austerities, I could not therefore come to you and see my boys; how then, O Beloved, and what measure did you resort to for their maintenance? O good and aucipious One! When I heard of the dire famine, I thought then 'I have no wealth; so what shall I do if I go there?'

अहम्यातिवामोक भीडितः कुध्या वने ।

प्रशिक्ष्तीभावेन कुर्जचिष्छ्वयाणाले ॥ १० ॥

श्रच्चं निरितं दूर्वहा कुध्या भीडितो भृगम् ।

महानसं परिजाय भक्यार्थं समुपस्थितः ॥ १ १ ॥

Thus thinking I did not come then. O Beautiful One! At that time, one day I was very hungry and being very much tired I entered into the house of a Cāṇḍāla, with the object of stealing. On entering the house I found the Cāṇḍāla sleeping; then being extremely distressed with hunger, I entered into his kitchen if I could find anything there."

यदा भाषडं समुद्धाय पवखं श्रन्तुजामिषम् ।

गृह्ठामि भक्षणाध्यय तदा दृष्टभु तेन वै ॥ 12 ॥

When the dishes were sought and turned, and when I was going to take cooked dog's flesh I immediately fell into the sight of that Cāṇḍāla.

पृष्टः कसलं बयं प्राणो गृहे मे निशि साद्यम् ।

ब्रृहि कार्य किमर्थं त्वमुद्वादयसि पाडकम् ॥ 13 ॥

इतुक्तः: धघ्चेनाहं कुध्या पीडितो भृगम् ।

तमवोचं सुकेशान्तं कामं गद्रद्वा सिति ॥ 14 ॥

ब्राह्मणोड़ महाभाग तापसः कुध्यादितः ।

चौराभावमनुपातो भक्यं पश्यामि थांडके ॥ 15 ॥

He asked me very affectionately “Who are you? Why have you entered here at this hour of night? Why are your looking after the dishes? Speak what you want.” O Beautiful One! When the Cāndāla asked me these questions, I was very much pressed by hunger and I spoke out my wants in a tremulous voice: O Fortunate One! I am an ascetic Brāhmin; very much pained by hunger I have entered your house stealthily and am looking out for some eatables from your cooking pots.

चीराबेने सम्पाठोःस्म्यतिथिस्ते महामते ।

क्षुधितोस्ति सद्वस्वातां मोरमयिषि सुरस्कृतम् ॥ 16 ॥

शपस्तु वचः शुत्वा मामुवाव सुनिश्छान् ।

भक्षं मा कुर्व वर्णाध्य जानीहि शप्चतावम् ॥ 17 ॥

O Intelligent One! I am now your guest in the form of a thief; I am now specially very hungry; so I will now eat your cooked meat; kindly permit me. Hearing these words, the Cāndāla spoke to me in words authorised by the Śāstras: "O One of the Superior Varna! Know this to be the house of a Cāndāla; so never eat that flesh.

दुर्भेयं खतु मानुभ्यं ततप्रिय च द्विज्ञन्ता ।

द्विजल बाहाणलं च दुर्भेयं वैसि किं नहि ॥ 18 ॥

Širičaddevibhāgavatam

The human birth is very rare in this words; then again to be born a Dvija is more difficult; and to get Brāhmaṇa hood again in the Dvijas is exceedingly difficult.

युहाहाते न कतिथः सर्वथा लोकमिष्ठता ।

अग्राहा मनुना प्रोक्ताः कर्मेणा सत चांत्यजाः ॥ १९ ॥

Are you not aware of this? They ought never to eat the defiled food who desire to attain to the Heavens; owing to Karma, the Maharṣi Manu has denominated the seventh caste as Antyaja and has discarded them altogether.

त्याच्योर्ड कर्माण विश्व शुच्यो नात्र संशयः ।

निवार्यायि मध्याच्चां न तोभेनांसया द्विज ॥ २० ॥

वर्णसंकटादोषोउं मा यातु चां द्विजोन्म ।

So, O Brāhmīn! I am now by my actions turned into a Cāndāla and so forsaken by all; there is no doubt in this. I am forbidding you so that this fault of Varṇa Śaṅkara may not suddenly attack you."

विश्वामिन उवाच

सत्वं वदसि धर्मत्र मतिस्ते विश्वांत्वम् ॥ २१ ॥

तथाप्यापदि धर्मस्य मुक्षमागरं ब्वीयामृम् ।

Vísvāmitra said: “O Knower of Dharma! What you are speaking is quite true; though a Cāndāla, your intelligence is very clear; hear, I will now speak to you the subtleties of the Dharma in times of danger.

देहस्य रक्षणं कार्य सर्वथा यदि मान्द ॥22 ॥

पायस्याने पुनः कार्य प्रायश्छत विगुज्द्रे।

O Giver of respect! Always and by all means it is advisable to keep up the body; if sin be thereby incurred, one ought to perform Prāyaścitta (penance) for its purification when the time of danger is over.

दुर्गतिन्तु भवेन्यापदानपादि न चापादि ॥ 23 ॥

मरणाख्छ्यितत्याव नरको नात्र संशयः ।

But if one commits sin when the time is not one of danger, one gets degraded; not so in the time of danger. The man that dies out of hunger, goes to hell, no doubt.

तस्माख्यापहरणं कर्तव्यं शुभमिष्ठता ॥ 24 ॥

तेनाहं चौर्यमिंग दौहं रक्षेप्रव्यर्थत्वा ।

Therefore every man seeking for his welfare must satisfy his hunger. Therefore I intend to steal for preserving my body. O Cāndāla! See!

अवर्धेगे च चौर्वेग वत्यापं कथितं बुधै: ॥ 25 ॥

यो न वर्धेति पर्नीवस्तु तकैय वधिष्यति ।

The sin, incurred in stealing during famine, which the Paṇdits have declared, goes to the God of rains until he does not pour forth rain.

विश्रामित्र उवाच

इत्युक्ते वचने कानते पर्ने-यः सहसाप्तन्ति ॥ 26 ॥

यानाद्धरितस्ततिभधारीयरिपकाश्रितः ।

O Beloved! Just when I spoke these words, the God of Rains began to pour forth rain so desired by all, like that coming out of the elephant's trunk. मृदितोई धर्न वीक्ष्य वर्षते विद्युता सह ॥ 27 ॥ तदारई तदारूई त्यक्वा नि:सूतः परया मुदा ।

When the clouds thus poured forth rains with the glitterings of the lightnings, I felt very glad and left the house of the Cāndāla.

कवय लं वरोहैं कालो नीतल्या कवम् ॥ 28 ॥

कान्तारे परमः क्रूरः क्षयकृत्याणिनीह ।

O Beautiful One! Now speak out to me how did you behave in that famine time, so terrible to all the beings."

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः शुल्या पतिमाह प्रियंवदा ॥ 29 ॥

यथा श्यु मया नीतः कालः परमदाक्णः ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the above words of the husband, the sweet-speaking lady spoke: "Hear, how I passed my time in times of famine." गते त्वयि मुनिश्रेश दुर्भिशं समुपागतम् ॥ 30 ॥

अत्राष्ट्र पुक्रका: सर्वे बच्छुश्रातितूःखिता: ।

“O Muni! After you had gone to practise tapasyā, the dire famine raged; and my sons, exhausted of hunger, became very anxious for food. शुधितान्वालकान्वीक्ष्य नीलायार्थ वने चे ॥ 31 ॥ शांताउर्द चिन्तयाविष्टा किंक्रिप्रापां फलं तथा ।

Book VII Chapter XIII

I became very anxious to see the sons hungry; I then went out to the forest in quest of wild rice; and I got some fruits.

एवं च कतिथित्मासा नीवारेणातिवाहिता: ॥ 32 ॥

तदपावे यवा कानत चितितत मनसा पुनः ।

Thus I spend some months by collecting the rice growing wildly in the forest; then in times these

also could not be got and I became again anxious.

न विश्वा किल दुर्भिक्षनेवारा नापि कानने ॥ 33 ॥

न वृक्षेषु पलान्यामुने मूलानि धरातले ।

The Nivāra rice, too, is now not available; and nothing is obtained also by begging; there are no fruits on the trees and no roots are found under the earth.

धुघाया पीडिता बाला रूदिति भृगमातृतः ॥ 34 ॥

कि कंपीय वर नख्यमि किं र्वदीय क्षुधादितान् ।

The sons are crying in agony of hunger. What to do? And where to go? What am I to say now to the hungry boys?

एवं विधिन्थ मनसा निश्यस्तु मया कृतः ॥ ३ ५ ॥

पुत्रमेकं ददायघ कर्मीचिद्धन्नि किन्त ।

गृहीत्वा तस्य मोल्यं तु तेन उद्येण बालकान् ॥ ३ ६ ॥

पालयेईं कृष्णात्रैन्तु नान्योपायोर्यित पालने ।

शूनि संचीधेन मसना युप्रोजंद प्रहितो मया ॥ ३ ७ ॥

विक्रवार्य महाभाग कंद्रमानो भूशगतुः ।

कन्द्मानं गृहीतैर्वेनं निर्णोताई गतत्रया ॥ ३ ८ ॥

Oh God! Thus thinking on various ways, I at last came to this conclusion that I would sell one of my sons to a rich man and whatever price I can fetch, with that I will preserve the lives of the others sons. O Dear! Thus thinking, I became ready and went out. O Fortunate One! Then this boy began to cry aloud and became very distressed; yet I was so shameless that I took the crying boy and got out of my Asrama.

तदा सत्यवातो मांग मामुढीक्ष्य भूशातुगम् ।

पूछछ स च राजर्षि: कस्माइंदिति बालकः ॥ 39 ॥

तदारूं तनुबादेवे ववनं मुनिससना ।

विक्रियार्थ नीयतेउसी बालकोउछा मय नृप ॥ 40 ॥

At this time one Rājarsi Satyavrata seeing me

very distressed, asked me “O One of good vows! Why is this boy weeping?”

श्रुत्वा मे वचनं नजा द्यारूईद्यस्ततः ।

मामुवाया गृहं गृहि गृहीतैर्ने कुमारकम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

भोजनार्थे कुमाराणामायिर्य विहितं तव ।

प्रापयिष्याम्यहं नित्यं यावन्मुनिसमागमः ॥ 4 2 ॥

O Muni! I spoke to him “To-day I am going to sell this boy.” The King’s heart became overfilled with pity, and spoke to me: “Take back to your Āśrama this boy.” Daily I will supply you with meat for the food of your boys until the Muni returns home.”

अह्यमहिन भृपातो वृघेश्सिम्नुगसूकरान् ।

विध्यस्य याथि हत्वाउसौ प्रत्यहं ददयावित्तः ॥ 43 ॥

तेवेव बालका: कानत पालिता तुविनार्थित् ।

वसिष्ठेनार शगतोउरी भृपतितिमं कारणत् ॥ 44 ॥

O Muni! The King from that time used to bring, with great pity, daily the flesh of deer and boar killed by him in the forest and he used to tie that on this tree." O Beloved! Thus I could protect my sons in that fearful ocean of crisis; but that King was cursed by Vasistha only for my sake.

कस्मिहिष्ठिवसे मांसं न प्रातं तेन कानने ।

हता दोर्धी वसिषुस्य तेनासौ कुपिति भूनि: ॥ 45 ॥

त्रिशंकृपिति भपस्य कृतं नाम महात्मना ।

कुपितेन वधाद्वैतोधाण्डालक्ष झुको तृप: ॥ 46 ॥

One day that King did not get any meat in the forest; so he slaughtered the Kāma Dhenu (the cow giving all desires) of Vasistha and the Muni became therefore very angry with him. The high-souled Muni, angry on account of the killing of his cow, called the King by the name of Trisanku and made him a Cāndāla.

तेनाहं दुःविता जाता तस्य दुःखेन कौशिक ।

श्रपचलमसौ प्राणो मल्लुते नुपनन्दनः ॥ 47 ॥

येन कंनाप्यायेच भवता नृपतेः किल ।

तस्माद्रक्षा प्रकर्तेथा तस्मा प्रबलेन ह् ॥ 48 ॥

O Kauśika! The prince turned into a Cāndāla because he came forward to do good to me, so I am very sorry for his sake." So it is your urgent

duty to save the King from his terrible position by any means or by the influence of your powerful Tapasya."

व्यास उवाच

इति भार्थिविधः शुल्चा कौशिको मुनिसत्तमः ।

तमामू कामिनी दीनों सांतलपूर्वमैरित्यद् ॥ 49 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing these words from his wife the Muni Kaūśika consoled her and said:

विश्रामित्र उवाच

मोचायिषम प्रे ते शापाधुरं कमलतोचने ।

उपकारः कृती येन कान्ताराखित्रातसि ये ॥ 50 ॥

विद्यापोबलेनंह कार्चिे चुःखस्थानम् ।

“O Lotus-eyed One! I will free the King of his curse, who saved you at that critical moment; what more than this that I promise to you that I will remove his sufferings whether it be by my learning or it be by my Tapas.”

इत्याशय एवियां तत्र कौशिकः परमार्थवित् ॥ 51 ॥

चिन्त्यामास रूपतः कर्थ स्यादुःखानाग्न।

Thus consoling his wife at that moment, Kauśika, the Knower of the Highest Reality, began to think how he could destroy the pains and miseries of the King.

संविमुर्श्य मुनिनस्त जगाम यत्र पार्थिव: ॥ 52 ॥

त्रिशंकृ: पत्रवर्णे दीन: संस्थितः: शयपाब्धाति: ।

Thus thinking, the Muni went to the King Triśañku, who was staying at that time very humbly in a village of the Cāndālas, in the garb of a Cāndāla.

आपच्छतं मुनि दुर्ध्या विमितोंउसौ नराधिपः ॥ 53 ॥

दणखत्रिपणतोल्यों पादयोतरासा मुने: ।

गृहीत्वा तं केरं भूपं पतितं कौशिकस्तदा ॥ 54 ॥

उद्याप्योवाच वचनं सांतवपूर्व दिजोनम: ।

मतूते तं व्य मौघाल शतोर्जी सु पनिना सतः ॥ 55 ॥

वांछिते ते कौर्यामि बृहि किं करावण्यहम् ।

Seeing the Muni coming, the King was greatly astonished and instantly threw himself before his feet like a piece of stick. Kauśika raised the fallen King and consoling him said: "O King! You are cursed, on my account, by the Muni Vasiṣṭha. I

will, therefore, fulfil your desires. Now speak what I am to do."

राजोवाच

मया संग्राधितः पूर्व वासिष्ठो मखहतेवे ॥ 56 ॥

मां याजय मुनिश्रष्ठ क्रोंमि मखुपुतमम् ।

यथेछे कुर विग्रेंछे यथा स्वर्ग जजाम्यमू ॥ 57 ॥

The King said: "With a view to perform a sacrifice I prayed to Vasistha that "I would perform a sacrifice, kindly do this for me."

अनेनैव शारीरण शक्तलोकं सूखालयम् ।

कोपे कृत्वा वसिष्ठोजी माफाहिति सुदुपमे ॥ 58 ॥

मानुषेण हि देहेत वर्गवासः कृतस्व ।

पुनर्भयोक्तो भगवान्यर्वगलुळेच नाचय ॥ 59 ॥

“O Muni! Do that sacrifice, by which I can go to the Heavens in this my present body. Vasistha became angry and said: “O Villain! How can you go and live in the Heavens in this your human body?” I was very anxious to go to the Svarga (Heaven) so I again spoke to him:

अन्यं पुरोहितं कृत्वा यध्येउईं यसुभुतमम् ।

तदा तेनैव शगतोउईं चाण्डलोण भव पाम ।। 60 ॥

इत्येतत्क्थितं सर्वे कारणं शापसंभवम् ।

मम दुःखविनाशय सपर्वोसि मनुनीश ।। 61 ॥

इन्युक्णा विरयामासी राजा दुःखक्राजिंदतः ।

कौशिकोर्जीय निराकर्तुं शापं तन्य व्यक्तिवत् ॥ ६२ ॥

इति श्रीवेदौभीगावते महापुरुषो सतमस्करभे

योदादोक्याय: 11 13 11

“O Sinless One! I will then have the excellent sacrifice done by another priest.” Hearing this, Vasiṣṭha Deva cursed me, saying “Be a Cāndāla.” O Muni! Thus I have described to you all about my curse. You are the one quite able to remove now my grievance.” Distressed in pain an agony, the King informed him and became quiet. Viśvāmitra, too, thought how he could free him of his curse.

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the coming of Viśvāmitra to Triśañku in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XIV

