[Ch 12 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! Now about the meditation (Dhyāna) of the Devi Gāngā as per Kāṇve Śākhā, which destroys all the sins. 'O Gānge! Of white colour like white lotuses! Thou destroyest all the sins of men. Thou hast appeared from the body of Śri Kṛṣṇa. Thou art powerful like Him. Thou art very chaste and pure. Thou hast worn the raiment, uninflammable and decorated all over with ornaments made of jewels.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Nārada! Now about the meditation (Dhyān) of the Devī Gaṅgā as per Kāṇva Śākhā, which destroys all the sins, O Gange! Of white colour like white lotuses! Thou destroyest all the sins of men. Thou hast appeared from the body of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Thou art powerful like Him. Thou art very chaste and pure. Thou hast worn the raiment, uninflammable and decorated all over with ornaments made of jewels.

[Ch 12 Verse 3-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou art more brilliant than one hundred autumnal Moons. Thou art also well pleased with a smile on Thy lips. And Thou art always of steady youthful beauty (that never wanes). Thou art dear to Nārāyaṇa, calm and of peaceful temper, and proud of being His with His fortune. Thou bearest the braid of hair, decked with garlands of Mālatī flowers; Thy cheeks are anointed with sandal dots, with Sindūra bindu (dots of red powder, vermilion) and well adorned with various artistic lines made of musk.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thou art more brilliant than one hundred autumnal Moons. Thou art also well pleased with a smile on Thy lips. And Thou art always of steady youthful beauty (that never wanes). Thou art dear to Nārāyaṇa, calm and of peaceful temper, and proud of being His with His fortune. Thou bearest the braid of hair, decked with garlands of Mālatī flowers; Thy cheeks are anointed with sandal dots, with Sindūra bindu (dots of red powder, vermilion) and well adorned with various artistic lines made of musk.

[Ch 12 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thy garment and Thy beautiful lips are more red than the ripe Bimba fruit (the red fruit of a cucurbitaceous plant); Thy teeth vie as it were, with the rows of pearls.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thy garment and Thy beautiful lips are more red than the ripe Bimba fruit (the red fruit of a cucurbitaceous plant); Thy teeth vie as it were, with the rows of pearls.

[Ch 12 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How lovely are Thy eyes! How delightsome is Thy side-long glance! How close are Thy breasts like Bel fruits! Thy loins are thicker and more solid then the plantain trees. How do Thy feet look beautiful, defying the beauty of the Sthalapadma (ground Lotus)!
NEW CORR ENG ──► How lovely are Thy eyes! How delightsome is Thy side-long glance! How close are Thy breasts like Bel fruits! Thy loins are thicker and more solid then the plantain trees. How do Thy feet look beautiful, defying the beauty of the Sthalapadma (ground Lotus)!

[Ch 12 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How do the red sandals look lovely with Kunkuma and alaktak (red powder)! What a red tinge Thy feet have shewn with the honey of Parijāta flower that is seen on the head of Indra).
NEW CORR ENG ──► How do the red sandals look lovely with Kuṅkuma and alaktak (red powder)! What a red tinge Thy feet have shewn with the honey of Pārijāta flower that is seen on the head of Indra.

[Ch 12 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas, the Siddhas, the Munis, offer always Arghyas (offerings of rice with Durba grass) at Thy feet; the ascetics bow down at Thy feet, and it seems as Though so many lines of bees are on Thy lotus feet. O Mother! Thy lotus feet give liberation to those that want Mukti and enjoyment to those that want Bhukti (enjoyments). O Mother! Thou art the boon; Thou art the chief excellent; Thou grantest boons and Thou showest Thy favour to Thy devotees; Thou bestowest the Viṣṇupadam (the place of Viṣṇu); but Thou hast come from the feet of Viṣṇu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas, the Siddhas, the Munis, offer always Arghyas (offerings of rice with Durba grass) at Thy feet; the ascetics bow down at Thy feet, and it seems as though so many lines of bees are on Thy lotus feet. O Mother! Thy lotus feet give liberation to those that want Mukti and enjoyment to those that want Bhukti (enjoyments). O Mother! Thou art the boon; Thou art the chief excellent; Thou grantest boons and Thou showest Thy favour to Thy devotees; Thou bestowest the Viṣṇupadam (the place of Viṣṇu); but Thou hast come from the feet of Viṣṇu.

[Ch 12 Verse 12-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus meditating on the Devi Gāngā flowing by three routes (in Heaven, earth and internal regions), the bestower of good things one should offer to the Devi sixteen things: Śasana, Pādya, Arghya, water for bathing, ointment (anūlepana), Dhūpa (scents), Dīpa (lights), Naivedya (offerings of food), betel, cool water, clothings, ornaments, garlands, sandal-paste, Āacamanīya (water for sipping), and beautiful bedding and worship Her with these.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus meditating on the Devī Gaṅgā flowing by three routes (in Heaven, earth and infernal regions), the bestower of good things one should offer to the Devī sixteen things :-- Āsana, Pādya, Arghya, water for bathing, ointment (anūlepana), Dhūpa (scents), Dīpa (lights), Naivedya (offerings of food), betel, cool water, clothings, ornaments garlands, sandal-paste, Ācamanīya (water for sipping), and beautiful beddings and worship Her with these.

[Ch 12 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then, with folded hands, one should perform stotra to Her and bow down to Her with devotion. Thus the worshipper gets the fruits of Asvamedha sacrifice.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then, with folded hands, one should perform stotra to Her and bow down to Her with devotion. Thus the worshipper gets the fruits of A’svamedha sacrifice.

[Ch 12 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada said: O Lord of the Devas! At present I am desirous to hear the sin-destroying and virtue-bestowing stotra (hymn) of Gaṅgā Devī, the Purifier of all those that are fallen from virtue, originated from the feet of Viṣṇu, the Lord of world and the husband of Lakṣmi. Kindly narrate all these in detail.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- O Lord of the Devas! At present I am desirous to hear the sin-destroying and virtue-bestowing stotra (hymn) of Gaṅgā Devī, the Purifier of all those that are fallen from virtue, originated from the feet of Viṣṇu, the Lord of world and the husband of Lakṣmī. Kindly narrate all these in detail.

[Ch 12 Verse 17-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! Now I am narrating the stotra of Gāngā Devi, that destroys all sins and bestows all religious merits. Hear. I bow down to the Ganges who appeared from the body of Śri Krṣṇa, enchanted by the music of Śiva, and, who was bathed with the prespiration (water coming out of the body) of Śri Rādhā. I bow down to Gāngā Devi who first appeared in the circular dance (Rāsa Maṇḍalam) in the region of Goloka and who always remains with Śaṅkara.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Nārada! Now I am narrating the stotra of Gaṅgā Devī, that destroys all sins and bestows all religious merit. Hear. I bow down to the Ganges who appeared from the body of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, enchanted by the music of Śiva, and, who was bathed with the perspiration (water coming out of the body) of Śrī Rādhā. I bow down to Gaṅgā Devī who first appeared in the circular dance (Rāsa Māṇḍalam) in the region of Goloka and who always remains with Śaṅkara.

[Ch 12 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My obeisance to the Devi Gāngā who remains in the auspicious grand utsav of Rādhā (Rāsa Māndalam), crowded with Gopas and Gopīs, in the Full Moon night of the month of Kārtika. She is one kotī yojanas wide and one lakh times on kotī yojanas long in the region of Goloka.
NEW CORR ENG ──► My obeisance to the Devī Gaṅgā who remains in the auspicious grand utsab of Rādhā (Rāsa Māṇḍalam), crowded with Gopas and Gopīs, in the Full Moon night of the month of Kārtik. She is one koti yojanas wide and one lakh times one koti yojanas long in the region of Goloka.

[Ch 12 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My obeisance to Her! In Vaikuntha, Gaṅgā is sixty lakh yajonas in width and four times that in lenght. My Obeisance to Her! In Brahma-loka, Gaṅgā is thirty lakh yajonas wide and five times as long. I bow down to Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► My Obeisance to Her! In Vaikuṇṭha, Gaṅgā is sixty lakh yojanas in width and four times that in length. My Obeisance to Her! In Brahmā-loka, Gaṅgā is thirty lakh yojanas wide and five times as long. I bow down to Her.

[Ch 12 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In Śiva-loka, She is thirty lakh yoganas wide and four times that in length. I bow down to Her. In Dhruva-loka, She is one-lakh yoganas wide and seven times as long. I bow down to Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In Śiva-loka, She is thirty lakh yojanas wide and four times that in length. I bow down to Her. In Dhruva-loka, She is one lakh yojanas wide and seven times as long. I

[Ch 12 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In Candra loka She is on lakh yoganas wide and five times as long. My obeisance to Śri Ganga Devī. I bow down to the Ganges who is sixty thousand yoganas wide in the Sūrya loka and ten times that in length.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In Candraloka She is one lakh yojanas wide and five times as long. My obeisance to Śrī Gaṅgā Devī. I bow down to the Ganges who is sixty thousand yojanas wide in the Sūrya loka and ten times that in length.

[Ch 12 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I bow down to Gāngā in Tapo-loka who is one lakh yojanas wide and five times that in length. My obeisance to Gāngā Devi in Janar-loka, who is one thousand yojanas wide and ten times that as long.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I bow down to Gaṅgā in Tapo-loka who is one lakh yojanas wide and five times that in length. My obeisance to Gaṅgā Devī in Janar-loka, who is one thousand yojanas wide and ten times that as long.

[Ch 12 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I bow down to Gāngā in Mahar-loka who is ten lakh yojanas wide and five times that in length. My obeisance to Gāngā Devi in Kailāsa who is one thousand yojanas wide and one hundred times as long.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I bow down to Gaṅgā in Mahar-loka who is ten lakh yojanas wide and five times that in length. My obeisance to Gaṅgā Devī in Kailāśa who is one thousand yojanas wide and one hundred times as long.

[Ch 12 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I bow down to Gāngā Devi who is known as Mandākini in Indra-loka, and who is one hundred yojanas wide and ten times than that in length.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I bow down to Gaṅgā Devī who is known as Mandākinī in Indra-loka, and who is one hundred yojanas wide and ten times than that in length.

[Ch 12 Verse 33-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My obeisance to Gāngā Devi, known as Bhagavati in Pātāla who is ten yojanas wide and five times as long. I bow down to Gāngā Devi, known as Alakanandā in this earth, who is two miles wide, in som places more wide and in some places less wide. I bow down to Gāngā Devi who was of the colour of milk in Satya yuga, of the colour of Moon in Trejā Yuga of the colour of white sandal paste in Dvāpara yuga.
NEW CORR ENG ──► My obeisance to Gaṅgā Devī, known as Bhogavati in Pātāla who is ten yojanas wide and five times as long. I bow down to Gaṅgā Devī, known as Alakanandā in this earth, who is two miles wide, in some places more wide and in some places less wide. I bow down to Gaṅgā Devī who was of the colour of milk in Satya yuga, of the colour of Moon in Tretā Yuga, of the colour of white sandal-paste in Dvāpara yuga.

[Ch 12 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I bow down to Śrī Gāngā Devī who is as water in Kali yuga in this earth and as milk in Kali yuga in Heaven. O Child! By the touch of one molecule of the water of the Ganges, all the horrible sins incurred in ten million births, the murder of a Brāhmin and so forth, are burnt to ashes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I bow down to Śrī Gaṅgā Devī who is as water in Kali yuga in this earth and as milk in Kali yuga in Heaven. O Child! By the touch of one molecule of the water of the Ganges, all the horrible sins iñcurred in ten million births, the murder of a Brāhmin and so forth, are burnt to ashes.

[Ch 12 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus I have described in twenty-one years the great stotra (human) of the sin-destroying and the virtue-increasing merits of Gaṅgā. He reaps the fruit of the Aśvamedha sacrifice (Horse sacrifice), who daily sings this praise of Gaṅgā after worshipping Her with devotion. There is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus I have described in twenty-one verses the great stotra (human) of the sin-destroying and the virtue-increasing merits of Gaṅgā. He reaps the fruit of the A’svamedha sacrifice (Horse sacrifice), who daily sings this praise of Gaṅgā after worshipping Her with devotion. There is no doubt in this.

[Ch 12 Verse 40-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The persons that are without any sons get sons hereby and those who have no wives get wives. The diseased get themselves free from their diseases, and the man who is under bondage, is liberated from that bondage. He who getting up early in the morning reads this stotra of Ganga, becomes widely known even if he be not known at all and he becomes illumined with wisdom even if he be quite ignorant. Even if he sees a bad dream, he acquires the merit of bathing in the Ganges and of seeing good dreams.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The persons that are without any sons get sons hereby and those who have no wives get wives. The diseased get themselves free from their diseases, and the man who is under bondage, is liberated from that bondage. He who getting up early in the morning reads this stotra of Gaṅgā, becomes widely known even if he be not known at all and he becomes illumined with wisdom even if he be quite ignorant. Even if he sees a bad dream, he acquires the merit of bathing in the Ganges and of seeing good dreams.

[Ch 12 Verse 42-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śrī Nārāyaṇa spoke: O Nārada! With this stotra (hymn) did Bhagiratha praise the Gaṅgā Devī. Who then went with him to the spot where the Sagara's sons were burnt to ashes by the curse of Kapila. By the contact of the wind in touch with the particles of water of the Ganges, those sons of Sagara were instantly freed of their curses and they all repaired to Vaikuntā. She is named Bhāgirāthi, because Bhagiratha brought Her to this earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śrī Nārāyaṇa spoke :-- O Nārada! With this stotra (hymn) did Bhagīratha praise the Gaṅgā Devī. Who then went with him to the spot where the Sagara’s sons were burnt to ashes by the curse of Kapila. By the contact of the wind in touch with the particles of water of the Ganges, those sons of Sagara were instantly freed of their curses and they all repaired to Vaikuṇṭha. She is named Bhāgirathī, because Bhagīratha brought Her to this earth.

[Ch 12 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus I have discribed to you the story of the Ganges. This anecdote is highly meritorious and the great step to liberation. What more do you now want to hear? Say.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus I have described to you the story of the Ganges. This anecdote is highly meritorious and the great step to liberation. What more do you now want to hear? Say.

[Ch 12 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada said: O Lord! How did Gaṅgā come to flow through the three worlds by there routes, and thus purify them? How was she carried and to which places? How did the people of those localities accord respect to Her? Kindly describe all these in detail.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- O Lord! How did Gaṅgā come to flow through the three worlds by three routes, and thus purify them? How was she carried and to which places? How did the people of those localities accord respect to Her? Kindly describe all these in detail.

[Ch 12 Verse 47-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! On the Full Moon night of the month of Kārtik in the Rāsa mandalam, at the great festivity in honour of Rādhā, Śri Kṛṣṇa worshipped Rādhā and remained there. Next Rādhā, worshipped by Śri Kṛṣṇa, was worshipped by Brahmā and the other Devas, by Śaunaka and the other Rṣis, who also stopped there with much gladness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Nārada! On the Full Moon night of the month of Kārtik in the Rāsa māṇḍalam, at the great festivity in honour of Rādhā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa worshipped Rādhā and remained there. Next Rādhā, worshipped by Śrī Kṛṣṇa, was worshipped by Brahmā and the other Devas, by Saunaka and the other Ṛṣis, who also stopped there with much gladness.

[Ch 12 Verse 49-54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this moment the Devi Sarasvatí, the Presiding Deity of the Science of Music began to sing lovely songs regarding Krṣna, in tune with vocal and instrumental music. Brahmā became glad and presented to Sarasvatí a necklace of jewels; Mahā Deva gave her gems and jewels rare in this universe; Krṣna presented the best Kaustubha jewel; Rādhikā offered excellent invaluable necklace of jewels; Nārāyāna presented to her the best and most excellent garland of jewels; Lakṣmī gave her invaluable golden earrings decked with gems; Viṣṇu-Māyā Mūla Prakṛti, Bhagavatī Durgā, who is Nārāyanī, Īśvari, Īśānī, presented Her devotion to Brahma, so very rare; Dharma gave her devotion to Dharma and high fame; Agni (fire) gave her excellent raiments purified by fire and Vāyu gave Her Nūpura (toc ornaments) made of gems and jewels.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this moment the Devī Sarasvatī, the Presiding Deity of the Science of Music began to sing lovely songs regarding Kṛṣṇa, in tune with vocal and instrumental music. Brahmā became glad and presented to Sarasvatī a necklace of jewels; Mahā Deva gave her gems and jewels rare in this universe; Kṛṣṇa presented the best Kaustubha jewel; Rādhikā offered excellent invaluable necklace of jewels; Nārāyaṇa presented to her the best and most excellent garland of jewels; Lakṣmī gave her invaluable golden earrings decked with gems; Viṣṇu-Māyā Mūla Prakriti, Bhagvatī Durgā, who is Nārāyaṇī, Īśvarī, Īśānī, presented Her devotion to Brahmā, so very rare; Dharma gave her devotion to Dharma and high fame; Agni (fire) gave her excellent raiments purified by fire and Vāyu gave Her Nūpura (toe ornaments) made of gems and jewels.

[Ch 12 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this time, Maheśvara, the Lord of Bhūtas (elements) began to sing, at the suggestion of Brahmā, songs relating to Śri Kṛṣṇa's grand Rāsa festival.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this time, Maheśvara, the Lord of Bhūtas (elements) began to sing, at the suggestion of Brahmā, songs relating to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s grand Rāsa festival.

[Ch 12 Verse 56-57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, the Devas became very much enchanted and remained motionless like statues. With great difficulty, they regained their consciousness. Then they saw that there was no Rādhā nor Krṣna in the Rāsa maṇḍala; everything was deluged with water.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, the Devas became very much enchanted and remained motionless like statues. With great difficulty, they regained their consciousness. Then they saw that there was no Rādhā nor Kṛṣṇa in this Rāsa māṇḍala; everything was deluged with water.

[Ch 12 Verse 58-59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Gopas, Gopis, Devas and Brahmanas began to cry loudly. Brahmā in his meditation then came to know that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa both have assumed this liquid appearance for the deliverance of the people of the world. Brahmā and others, all began to praise Śrī Kṛṣṇa and said: “O All pervading One! Now be pleased to show as Thy form and grant us our desired boons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Gopas, Gopīs, Devas and Brāhmaṇas began to cry loudly. Brahmā in his meditation then came to know that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa both have assumed this liquid appearance for the deliverance of the people of the world. Brahmā and others, all began to praise Śrī Kṛṣṇa and said :-- “O All prevading One! Now be pleased to show us Thy form and grant us our desired boons.”

[Ch 12 Verse 60-61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At that instant a sweet incorporeal voice was clearly heard by all, as coming from air above, that, "I am the Self of all, pervading all; and this my Śakti, Rādhā, is also the Self of all, prevades all; so there is no separation of us from you all even for a moment. It is only to show our favour to the devotees that we assume special forms. For this reason only there is separation of us from you as regards this body! There is nothing else. Besides you have no necessity with our bodies.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At that instant a sweet incorporeal voice was clearly heard by all, as coming from air above, that, “I am the Self of all, pervading all; and this my Śakti, Rādhā, is also the Self of all, prevades all; so there is no separation of us from you all even for a moment. It is only to show our favour to the devotees that we assume special forms. For this reason only there is separation of us from you as regards this body! There is nothing else. Besides you have no necessity with our bodies.

[Ch 12 Verse 62-64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devas! Now if my Manus, men, Munis, Vaīnśpavas and you all, purified by Mantras, desire very much to see My From clearly, then I tell you to request Maheśvara to carry out My word. O Brahma! O Creator! Better ask Mahādeva, the World-Teacher, that He would better compose the beautiful Tāntra Śāstra, in accordance with the limbs of the Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devas! Now if my Manus, men, Munis, Vaiṣṇavas and you all, purified by Mantras desire very much to see My Form clearly, then I tell you to request Maheśvara to carry out My word. O Brahmā! O Creator! Better ask Mahādeva, the World Teacher, that He would better compose the beautiful Tantra Śāstra, in accordance with the limbs of the Vedas.

[Ch 12 Verse 65-66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And that the above Śāstra be full of Mantras, capable to yield desired fruits, Sottras (hymns) and Kavacas (protection mantras) and rules of duc worship in proper order. And that also My Mantra, My Stotra, and My Kavaca be also given there in a hidden form. So that those people that are sinners might not understand their real meanings and thus turn out against Me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And that the above Śāstra be full of Mantras, capable to yield desired fruits, Stotras (hymns) and Kavacas (protection mantras) and rules of due worship in proper order. And that also My Mantra, My Stotra, and My Kavaca be also given there in a hidden form. So that those people that are sinners might not understand their real meanings and thus turn out against Me.

[Ch 12 Verse 67-69]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It may be that one in a thousand or in a hundred may worship My Mantra. And My Mantra worshippers, the saints, become purified and come to My Abode. If My Śāstra be not well made (i.e., if every one be able to understand its meaning) and if every one be able to go from Bhūrloka to Goloka, then Thy labour in this creation of the world will all be in vain. Therefore dost Thou better create different worlds according to the difference of Sāttvik, Rājasik, and Tamo Gunas; then some will be the inhabitants of this Bhūrloka, some will be the inhabitants of Dyuloka according to their Karmas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It may be that one in a thousand or in a hundred may worship My Mantra. And My Mantra worshippers, the saints, become purified and come to My Abode. If My Śāstra be not well made (i. e., if everyone be able to understand its meaning) and if everyone be able to go from Bhūrloka to Goloka, then Thy labour in this creation of the world will all be in vain. Therefore dost Thou better create different worlds according to the differences of Sāttvik, Rājasik, and Tamo Guṇas; then some will be the inhabitants of this Bhūrloka, some will be the inhabitants of Dyuloka according to their Karmas.

[Ch 12 Verse 70-71]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brahman! If Mahā Deva promises earnestly in this assembly of the Devas, I will then exhibit My True Form. O Nārada! Thus speaing, the Eternal Puruṣa Śrī Krṣṇa remained silent. (i.e., the aerial incorporeal voice stopped).”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brāhmaṇ! If Mahā Deva promises earnestly in this assembly of the Devas, I will then exhibit My True Form.” O Nārada! Thus speaking, the Eternal Puruṣa Śrī Kṛṣṇa remained silent (i. e., the aerial incorporeal voice stopped).

[Ch 12 Verse 72-74]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, Brahmā, the Creator of the world, gladly informed Śiva of this. When the Lord of Knowledge, the Foremost of the Jñāniens, Bhūtanātha heard the words of the Creator, He took the Ganges water in His hands and swore that “I will complete the Tantra Śāstra, full of Rādhā mantras and not opposed to the Vedas.” If one touches the Ganges water and speaks lies, one remains in the terrible Kālasūtra hell for a period of one Brahmā’s life time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, Brahmā, the Creator of the world, gladly informed Śiva of this. When the Lord of Knowledge, the Foremost of the Jñānins, Bhūtanātha heard the words of the Creator, He took the Ganges water in His hands and swore that “I will complete the Tantra Śastra, full of Rādhā mantras and not opposed to the Vedas. If one touches the Ganges water and speaks lies, one remains in the terrible Kālasutra hell for a period of one Brahmā’s life time.”

[Ch 12 Verse 75-76]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Dvija! When Bhagavān Śaṅkara said this before the assembly of the Devas in the region of Goloka, Śrī Krṣṇa appeared there with Rādhā. The Devas became exceedingly glad to see Him. They praised Him, the Best Puruṣa and they were all filled with rapture and again engaged themselves in the grand Rāsa Festival.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Dvija! When Bhagavān Śaṅkara said this before the assembly of the Devas in the region of Goloka, Śrī Kṛṣṇa appeared there with Rādhā. The Devas became exceedingly glad to see Him. They praised Him, the Best Puruṣa and they were all filled with rapture and again engaged themselves in the grand Rāsa Festival.

[Ch 12 Verse 77-78]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Some time after, Mahā Deva lighted the Torch of Mukti ॥.e., the Tantra Śāstra was published by Him, as promised. O Child! Thus I have disclosed to you this anecdote, so-very secret, and hard to be attained. Thus Śrī Krṣṇa Himself, is verily the liqueed Gaṅgā sprung in the region of Goloka.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Some time after, Māhā Deva lighted the Torch of Mukti, i.e., the Tantra Śāstra was published by Him, as promised. O Child! Thus I have disclosed to you this anecdote, so very secret, and hard to be attained. Thus Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself, is verily the liquid Gaṅgā sprung in the region of Goloka.

[Ch 12 Verse 79]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This holy Gaṅgā, born of the bodies of Krṣṇa and Rādhā inseparable from each other, grants enjoyment, lordship and libe,ation. Śrī Krṣṇa, the Highest Self, has placed Her in various places; so Gaṅgā is of the nature of Śrī Krṣṇa and is everywhere, equally honoured everywhere in the Brahmāṇḍa (universe). Here ends the Twelfth Chapter in the Ninth Book on the origin of Gaṅgā in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This holy Gaṅgā, born of the bodies of Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā inseparable from each other, grants enjoyment, lordship and liberation. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Highest Self, has placed Her in various places; so Gaṅgā is of the nature of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and is everywhere, equally honoured everywhere in the Brahmāṇḍa (universe). Here ends the Twelfth Chapter in the Ninth Book on the origin of Gaṅgā in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
