CHAPTER XII

On the Origin of the Gaigā

श्रीनारायण उवाच

ध्यानं च कपवशाखोक्तं सर्वायपरणाशनम् ।

श्वेतपंकाजरणांचा नंगां पापपूरणाशिनीम् ॥ १ ॥

कृणविष्यहंर्षभृतां कृणन्तुत्वां परां सतीम् ।

विक्षुरूप्योर्गुकाधानां रत्नप्रणापृषितम् ॥ २ ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! Now about the meditation (Dhyāna) of the Devi Gāngā as per Kāṇve Śākhā, which destroys all the sins. 'O Gānge! Of white colour like white lotuses! Thou destroyest all the sins of men. Thou hast appeared from the body of Śri Kṛṣṇa. Thou art powerful like Him. Thou art very chaste and pure. Thou hast worn the raiment, uninflammable and decorated all over with ornaments made of jewels.

ग्रत्यपूर्णे-पुगतकमूर्शोभाकारं वराम ।

ईपद्वाय्यप्रसाध्या गशल्यतृषियर्योवरानि ॥ 3 ॥

नारायणियां शांतां सस्तीभावयस्माप्रिताना ।

विष्पतीं कवरीभारे भाललीमाल्यसंयुना ॥ 4 ॥

सिंतूरविंद्युलिलं सार्थे चंदनविंद्यिभः ।

कस्तूरीपकं तोँ नानाधिसम्यमित्ति ॥ 5 ॥

Thou art more brilliant than one hundred autumnal Moons. Thou art also well pleased with a smile on Thy lips. And Thou art always of steady youthful beauty (that never wanes). Thou art dear to Nārāyaṇa, calm and of peaceful temper, and proud of being His with His fortune. Thou bearest the braid of hair, decked with garlands of Mālatī flowers; Thy cheeks are anointed with sandal dots, with Sindūra bindu (dots of red powder, vermilion) and well adorned with various artistic lines made of musk.

पत्थविविविनिधाछचाबाँधुपुतुमम् ।

मुक्ताप्तिङ्गप्रभायुद्वतंपतिफ्चानोरम् ॥ 6 ॥

Thy garment and Thy beautiful lips are more red than the ripe Bimba fruit (the red fruit of a cucurbitaceous plant); Thy teeth vie as it were, with the rows of pearls.

सुचास्वक्वनयनं सकटाखं मनोहारम् ।

कठिनं शीफलाकारं सनतयुगं च विश्वतीं ॥ 7 ॥

ब्रहछ्छीघी सुकठितं सैपास्तीविवित्तम् ।

स्वलपद्यभाग्युषावपव्युगं वरम् ॥ 8 ॥

How lovely are Thy eyes! How delightsome is Thy side-long glance! How close are Thy breasts like Bel fruits! Thy loins are thicker and more solid then the plantain trees. How do Thy feet look beautiful, defying the beauty of the Sthalapadma (ground Lotus)!

रत्यापुकसंयुक्ते कुकुमार्ते सयावकम् ।

देवेश्वरीलियंदारमकरंदकाणकम् ॥ 9 ॥

How do the red sandals look lovely with Kunkuma and alaktak (red powder)! What a red tinge Thy feet have shewn with the honey of Parijāta flower that is seen on the head of Indra).

सुरसिद्धमुप्नीरैछ्छ दत्तार्थसंतुं सदा ।

तपसियोलिनिकन्धमगढ़ीणिरंगेतुम् ॥ 10 ॥

मुकितपूर्व मुपुळ्णा कामिनां सर्वीभगवत् ।

वरां वरेण्या वरांं भक्तानुग्रहकाणिरिध् ॥ 11 ॥

श्रीविष्णो: पददार्ची च भत्रे विष्णुपर्ती सतीम् ।

The Devas, the Siddhas, the Munis, offer always Arghyas (offerings of rice with Durba grass) at Thy feet; the ascetics bow down at Thy feet, and it seems as Though so many lines of bees are on Thy lotus feet. O Mother! Thy lotus feet give liberation to those that want Mukti and enjoyment to those that want Bhukti (enjoyments). O Mother! Thou art the boon; Thou art the chief excellent; Thou grantest boons and Thou showest Thy favour to Thy devotees; Thou bestowest the Viṣṇupadam (the place of Viṣṇu); but Thou hast come from the feet of Viṣṇu.

इत्यनेत्रेय ध्यानेन ध्याना त्रिपशां शुभाम् ॥ 12 ॥

दत्वा सैपुजरेवुद्धविशुपचाराणि चोडग ।

आसनं पादामर्धे च स्नानीयं चानुलेपनम् ॥ 13 ॥

धूपं दीपं च नेवेघं तांवूलं शीतलं जलम् ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

वसनं भूषणं माल्यं गंधभाचमनीयकम् ॥ 14 ॥

मनोहं सुतत्वं च देशायैतानि पोड्गा ।

Thus meditating on the Devi Gāngā flowing by three routes (in Heaven, earth and internal regions), the bestower of good things one should offer to the Devi sixteen things: Śasana, Pādya, Arghya, water for bathing, ointment (anūlepana), Dhūpa (scents), Dīpa (lights), Naivedya (offerings of food), betel, cool water, clothings, ornaments, garlands, sandal-paste, Āacamanīya (water for sipping), and beautiful bedding and worship Her with these.

दत्ता बकला च प्रणोकसंसूय सैपुट्रांलिः: ॥ १ ५ ॥

संपूर्वैवं प्रक्रोग एसो5धमेधफलं भवेत् ।

Then, with folded hands, one should perform stotra to Her and bow down to Her with devotion. Thus the worshipper gets the fruits of Asvamedha sacrifice.

नारद खाच

घोतुमिच्छामि देवेश लक्ष्मीकात जपत्यते ॥ १ ६ ॥

विष्णोर्विष्यपरीतेयं पापपं पुण्यकातकम् ।

Nārada said: O Lord of the Devas! At present I am desirous to hear the sin-destroying and virtue-bestowing stotra (hymn) of Gaṅgā Devī, the Purifier of all those that are fallen from virtue, originated from the feet of Viṣṇu, the Lord of world and the husband of Lakṣmi. Kindly narrate all these in detail.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

शृणु नारद वक्ष्यामि पापपं पुणवकाराण् ॥ 17 ॥

शिवसंगीतसंपुथश्रीकृष्णगांगस्पुद्वाम। ।

राधांगुद्वसंसूक्तां तां गंगां प्रणामावमूँ ॥ 18 ॥

यज्ञम् युहोराटी च गोलोके रासमंडले ।

सविधाने गंकरस्य तां गंगां प्रणामावमूँ ॥ 19 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! Now I am narrating the stotra of Gāngā Devi, that destroys all sins and bestows all religious merits. Hear. I bow down to the Ganges who appeared from the body of Śri Krṣṇa, enchanted by the music of Śiva, and, who

was bathed with the prespiration (water coming out of the body) of Śri Rādhā. I bow down to Gāngā Devi who first appeared in the circular dance (Rāsa Maṇḍalam) in the region of Goloka and who always remains with Śaṅkara.

गोर्यैर्गीर्यिज्ञाकीर्णे शुणे राधामहोत्सवे ।

क्रार्तिकीर्णिगावा च तां गंगां प्रणामायहम् ॥ 20 ॥

कोटियोजनविस्तीर्ण हेट्ये लक्षपुणा ततः ।

समावृता या गोलेके तां गंगां प्रणामायहम् ॥ 21 ॥

My obeisance to the Devi Gāngā who remains in the auspicious grand utsav of Rādhā (Rāsa Māndalam), crowded with Gopas and Gopīs, in the Full Moon night of the month of Kārtika. She is one kotī yojanas wide and one lakh times on kotī yojanas long in the region of Goloka.

थिहल्ब्योजना या ततो देर्थे चतुर्णुगा ।

स्मावुता या वैकुण्ठे तां गांगं प्रणामायून ॥ 2 2 ॥

प्रिंगलल्ब्योजना या देर्थे घंचुर्णुगा ततः ।

आवृता ब्रहूलोके या तां गांगं प्रणामायून ॥ 23 ॥

My obeisance to Her! In Vaikuntha, Gaṅgā is sixty lakh yajonas in width and four times that in lenght. My Obeisance to Her! In Brahma-loka, Gaṅgā is thirty lakh yajonas wide and five times as long. I bow down to Her.

शिशल्योजना या देर्धें चतुरुर्णित ततः ।

आवृत्त शिवतोके या तां गंगां प्रणामायहम् ॥ 24 ॥

लक्ष्योजनविस्तीर्ण देर्धें सन्त्युना ततः ।

आवृत्त ध्रुलोके या तां गंगां प्रणामायहम् ॥ 25 ॥

In Śiva-loka, She is thirty lakh yoganas wide and four times that in length. I bow down to Her. In Dhruva-loka, She is one-lakh yoganas wide and seven times as long. I bow down to Her.

लक्ष्योजनविर्तिणी दैर्धें घड़गुणा ततः ।

आवृता चंड्रलोक यां तां गंगां प्रणामायहम् ॥ 26 ॥

थहिसह्वयोजना या दैर्धें दूरपुणत ततः ।

आवृता सूर्यलोक यां तां गंगां प्रणामायहम् ॥ 27 ॥

In Candra loka She is on lakh yoganas wide and five times as long. My obeisance to Śri Ganga Devī. I bow down to the Ganges who is sixty thousand yoganas wide in the Sūrya loka and ten times that in length.

Book IX Chapter XII

लक्ष्योजनविस्तीर्ण हैर्षे पंचगुणा ततः ।

आयुता या तपोलोके तां गंर्ण प्रणायामदूम् ॥ 28 ॥

सहस्वयोजनायामा देधें द्वगुगुणा ततः ।

आयुता जनलोके या तां गंगा प्रणायामदूम् ॥ 29 ॥

I bow down to Gāngā in Tapo-loka who is one lakh yojanas wide and five times that in length. My obeisance to Gāngā Devi in Janar-loka, who is one thousand yojanas wide and ten times that as long.

इशलक्ष्योजना वा दैर्धें चंचपुणता ततः ।

अगतृता या महलोंके तां गंगा प्रणमाच्यमूँ ॥ ३० ॥

सहस्वयोजनायामा दैर्धें द्रगुणा ततः ।

अगतृता या च केलासे तां गंगी प्रणमाच्यमूँ ॥ ३ १ ॥

I bow down to Gāngā in Mahar-loka who is ten lakh yojanas wide and five times that in length. My obeisance to Gāngā Devi in Kailāsa who is one thousand yojanas wide and one hundred times as long.

शतयोजनविस्तीणां दैधें द्वरुणगा ततः ।

मंदाकिनी चेंद्रलोके तां गंगां प्रणामावमृह् ॥ 32 ॥

I bow down to Gāngā Devi who is known as Mandākini in Indra-loka, and who is one hundred yojanas wide and ten times than that in length.

पाताले भवाती च दिस्तीर्णा द्याजयोजना ।

ततो द्वगुणा दैर्थे तां गांगी प्रणामाम्यहम् ॥ 33 ॥

कोशीकमाविस्तीर्णत ततः क्षीणा च कुत्रचित् ।

क्षिती चालकनंव या तां गांगी प्रणामाम्यहम् ॥ 34 ॥

सत्ये या क्षीरवर्णों च जेतायामिद्वसभिपा ।

द्वारे चंदनाभा या तां गांगी प्रणामाम्यह् ॥ 35 ॥

My obeisance to Gāngā Devi, known as Bhagavati in Pātāla who is ten yojanas wide and five times as long. I bow down to Gāngā Devi, known as Alakanandā in this earth, who is two miles wide, in som places more wide and in some places less wide. I bow down to Gāngā Devi who was of the colour of milk in Satya yuga, of the colour of Moon in Trejā Yuga of the colour of white sandal paste in Dvāpara yuga.

जलप्रभा कली या च नान्य वृधवीरितो ।

स्वर्गे च नित्यं क्षीराभा तां गंगां प्रणामायह्म् ॥ 36 ॥

यत्तोयकणिकास्पर्षे पाचितां ज्ञानसंघवः ।

बहाह्त्यादिके यपं कोटिजन्यार्जिंतं दौह्न् ।। 37 ॥

I bow down to Śrī Gāngā Devī who is as water in Kali yuga in this earth and as milk in Kali yuga in Heaven. O Child! By the touch of one molecule of the water of the Ganges, all the horrible sins incurred in ten million births, the murder of a Brāhmin and so forth, are burnt to ashes.

इत्येवं कथिता ब्रह्नानगायदीकर्षितशितः ।

सतोकरं च परमं पाघनं पुणवजीवनम् ॥ 38 ॥

नित्यं चो हि पटेढ़क्वता संपूज्य च सुरुष्वीम् ।

सोउस्वीधकर्त नित्यं रूपते नात्र संशयः ॥ 39 ॥

Thus I have described in twenty-one years the great stotra (human) of the sin-destroying and the virtue-increasing merits of Gaṅgā. He reaps the fruit of the Aśvamedha sacrifice (Horse sacrifice), who daily sings this praise of Gaṅgā after worshipping Her with devotion. There is no doubt in this.

अपुत्रो लभते पुत्रे भगवाहीनो लभेस्त्रिव्यम् ।

रोगापमृष्यते रोगी बध्नानुक्ती भवेद्युबम् ॥ 40 ॥

अस्पष्टकीर्ति: सूयग मुखों भवति पीडितः ।

यः पदेग्रातरूथाय गंगात्सोत्रमिदं शुभम् ॥ 41 ॥

गुणं भवेच्च दुःखनो गंगात्नापकर्त लयेत् ।

The persons that are without any sons get sons hereby and those who have no wives get wives. The diseased get themselves free from their diseases, and the man who is under bondage, is liberated from that bondage. He who getting up early in the morning reads this stotra of Ganga, becomes widely known even if he be not known at all and he becomes illumined with wisdom even if he be quite ignorant. Even if he sees a bad dream, he acquires the merit of bathing in the Ganges and of seeing good dreams.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

स्तोत्रेषानेन गंगा च सूला चैव भगीराः ॥ 42 ॥

जगाम तं गृहीला च यत्र नष्टा श सगारः ।

वैकुपंठ ते ययसूनुर्ण गंगायाः स्पर्शिवायुना ॥ 43 ॥

भगीरथेन सा.उन्मीता तेन भागीरथी स्मृता ।

Śrī Nārāyaṇa spoke: O Nārada! With this stotra (hymn) did Bhagiratha praise the Gaṅgā Devī. Who then went with him to the spot where the Sagara's sons were burnt to ashes by the curse of Kapila. By the contact of the wind in touch with the particles of water of the Ganges, those sons of Sagara were instantly freed of their curses and they all repaired to Vaikuntā. She is named Bhāgirāthi, because Bhagiratha brought Her to this earth.

क्रुलेयं बकितं सर्व गड़ोपाख्यानमुपनम् ॥ 44 ॥

पुण्यदं मोक्षदं सारं किं घ्यः झोतुमिच्छतिस ।

Thus I have discribed to you the story of the Ganges. This anecdote is highly meritorious and the great step to liberation. What more do you now want to hear? Say.

नारद खाच

कयं गड़ा विधधाग जाता घुवनपावजी ॥ 4 5 ॥

कृत्र वा केन विधिना तत्सर्वे वद मे प्रभो ।

तत्स्थाशु जान ये वे ते च किं चकुकृतभम् ॥ 46 ॥

एतत्सर्वे तु विस्तीर्ण कृत्वा वतुभिरहाईरि ।

Nārada said: O Lord! How did Gaṅgā come to flow through the three worlds by there routes, and thus purify them? How was she carried and to which places? How did the people of those localities accord respect to Her? Kindly describe all these in detail.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

क्रात्तिक्यां पूर्णिमायां तु राधाया: सुमहोतस्वः ॥ 47 ॥

कृष्ण: संपूछ्न तां राधायपास रासमंडले ।

कृष्णोन पूजितां तां तु संपूछ्य हृद्यानसाः ॥ 48 ॥

क्रवृद्धोद्धादयः सर्वे ऋषयः शेनेकादयः ।

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! On the Full Moon night of the month of Kārtik in the Rāsa mandalam, at the great festivity in honour of Rādhā, Śri Kṛṣṇa worshipped Rādhā and remained there. Next Rādhā, worshipped by Śri Kṛṣṇa, was worshipped by Brahmā and the other Devas, by Śaunaka and the other Rṣis, who also stopped there with much gladness.

एतसिम्ब्रंतरे कृष्णसंगीता च सरस्थती ॥ 49 ॥

जगी सुन्दरतालेन वीणया च मनोहस् ।

तुही बढ़ा ददौ तस्ये रन्ट्रैसाराहाकम् ॥ 50 ॥

शिको मणीद्रसारे तु सर्वेबहाण्डवुर्णभम् ।

कृष्णा: कौतपुभरलं च सर्वेरन्तारयं वस् ॥ 51 ॥

अमूत्यरत्निर्माणं हारसारं च राधिका ।

नारागश्र भगवान्द्दी मालं मनोहान् ॥ 52 ॥

अमूत्यरत्निर्माणं लक्ष्मी: कनककुडलम् ।

विष्णुभावा भगवती भूतप्रकृतिरीखरी ॥ 53 ॥

दुर्गा नातयगशीगना बह्वभक्ति सुतुर्वर्णम् ।

धार्मेबृद्धिं च धर्मड्य शयश विष्णुभ के ॥ 54 ॥

यहिष्टुपद्राणुकं वहिद्वार्थ्य महिनुपुरान् ।

At this moment the Devi Sarasvatí, the Presiding Deity of the Science of Music began to sing lovely songs regarding Krṣna, in tune with vocal and instrumental music. Brahmā became glad and presented to Sarasvatí a necklace of jewels; Mahā Deva gave her gems and jewels rare in this universe; Krṣna presented the best Kaustubha jewel; Rādhikā offered excellent invaluable necklace of jewels; Nārāyāna presented to her the best and most excellent garland of jewels; Lakṣmī gave her invaluable golden earrings decked with gems; Viṣṇu-Māyā Mūla Prakṛti, Bhagavatī Durgā, who is Nārāyanī, Īśvari, Īśānī, presented Her devotion to Brahma, so very rare; Dharma gave her devotion to Dharma and high fame; Agni (fire) gave her excellent raiments purified by fire and Vāyu gave Her Nūpura (toc ornaments) made of gems and jewels.

एतस्मिनंते शुर्भबृह्णा प्रेरितो मुहु: ॥ 55 ॥

जगी झीकृष्यांसीनत रासोललाससमन्दिनत् ।

At this time, Maheśvara, the Lord of Bhūtas (elements) began to sing, at the suggestion of Brahmā, songs relating to Śri Kṛṣṇa's grand Rāsa festival.

मृच्छीप्रपु: सुरा: सर्वे चित्रयुन्तिका यथा ॥ 56 ॥

कषेन चेतनां प्राय्य ददुग्र रासमडले ।

स्वलं सर्वे जलकौर्ण राधाकृष्णायहीनकम् ॥ 57 ॥

Hearing this, the Devas became very much

Book IX Chapter XII

enchanted and remained motionless like statues. With great difficulty, they regained their consciousness. Then they saw that there was no Rādhā nor Krṣna in the Rāsa maṇḍala; everything was deluged with water.

अत्युचै क्रकुः सर्वे गोण गोयः सुरा दिजा: ।

ध्यानेन बढ़ा बुकुंये सर्वे तीर्थमभीरितमन ॥ ५८ ॥

गतछ्त्रा तथाया साधुं श्रीकृष्णो उत्रतामिति ।

ततो बहादायः सर्वे तुहुवः परमेश्वग्न ॥ ५९ ॥

स्वमूर्ति त्रृपत विषो बांछितं वरमेव नः ।

The Gopas, Gopis, Devas and Brahmanas began to cry loudly. Brahmā in his meditation then came to know that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa both have assumed this liquid appearance for the deliverance of the people of the world. Brahmā and others, all began to praise Śrī Kṛṣṇa and said: “O All pervading One! Now be pleased to show as Thy form and grant us our desired boons.

एलमिश्रते तत्र वार्षमपूशारीरिणी ॥ 60 ॥

तामेव शुश्वु: सर्वे सुव्यक्तां मधुगान्यतान् ।

स्वात्माउहीयं शक्तिभक्तानुग्रहायिका ॥ 61 ॥ ॥

माग्यव्याश्र येटेन कर्तैलं च किमावराः ।

At that instant a sweet incorporeal voice was clearly heard by all, as coming from air above, that, "I am the Self of all, pervading all; and this my Śakti, Rādhā, is also the Self of all, prevades all; so there is no separation of us from you all even for a moment. It is only to show our favour to the devotees that we assume special forms. For this reason only there is separation of us from you as regards this body! There is nothing else. Besides you have no necessity with our bodies.

मनवो मानवा: सर्वे मुनयक्षेय वैश्वना: ॥ 62 ॥

मन्यन्तपुता मां उद्युगगायिध्यांति मन्यदम् ।

मृति राष्ट्र च सुव्यक्तां यदीच्छव सुरेश्वा: ॥ 63 ॥

कंगेतु ईंगभूतनेव मदीयं वाक्यपालनम् ।

स्वयं विधाततस्तं बह्रात्माजां कुक जगदगुम् ॥ 64 ॥

O Devas! Now if my Manus, men, Munis, Vaīnśpavas and you all, purified by Mantras, desire very much to see My From clearly, then I tell you

to request Maheśvara to carry out My word. O Brahma! O Creator! Better ask Mahādeva, the World-Teacher, that He would better compose the beautiful Tāntra Śāstra, in accordance with the limbs of the Vedas.

कर्तु शाखविशेषं च वेदांगं सुमनोहाम् ।

अपूर्वमन्त्रिनर्धे: सर्वभीषीकल्पदे: ॥ 65 ॥

सतीक्षेत्र निकर्ण्यर्विनेपुं पुजाविधिकमे: ।

मन्यंत्रकवचस्तोत्र कृत्वा यल्लेन गोपानम् ॥ 66 ॥

And that the above Śāstra be full of Mantras, capable to yield desired fruits, Sottras (hymns) and Kavacas (protection mantras) and rules of duc worship in proper order. And that also My Mantra, My Stotra, and My Kavaca be also given there in a hidden form. So that those people that are sinners might not understand their real meanings and thus turn out against Me.

भर्वति विमुखा येन जना मां तत्कल्थिति ।

सहसुः शगलेको मन्मंत्रोपासको भवेते ॥ 67 ॥

जना मानंप्रपृताङ्गा यमिध्योति च मयदम् ।

अन्वधा न भविष्यिति सर्वे गोलोकवासिनः ॥ 68 ॥

निष्णलं भविता सर्वे ब्रह्मांडं चैव ब्रह्मणः ।

जना: पढ़ प्रकाशा युक्ता: स्थुं भवे भवे ॥ 69 ॥

It may be that one in a thousand or in a hundred may worship My Mantra. And My Mantra worshippers, the saints, become purified and come to My Abode. If My Śāstra be not well made (i.e., if every one be able to understand its meaning) and if every one be able to go from Bhūrloka to Goloka, then Thy labour in this creation of the world will all be in vain. Therefore dost Thou better create different worlds according to the difference of Sāttvik, Rājasik, and Tamo Gunas; then some will be the inhabitants of this Bhūrloka, some will be the inhabitants of Dyuloka according to their Karmas.

पृथिवीरासिन: कैचित्केचित्वर्शनिवासिन: ।

इदं कर्तु महादेव: क्रांति देवसंसदि ॥ 70 ॥

प्रतितां सुर्द्वां सहचतन्तो मृतिं च रूक्ष्यति ।

इन्येवमुक्त्वा गाने विरातम सनातनः ॥ 71 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

O Brahman! If Mahā Deva promises earnestly in this assembly of the Devas, I will then exhibit My True Form. O Nārada! Thus speaing, the Eternal Puruṣa Śrī Krṣṇa remained silent. (i.e., the aerial incorporeal voice stopped).”

तच्छूला जगतां धाता तमुवाच शिवं मृदा ।

ब्रहणो वचनं श्रुत्वा जानेगो जानिनां वर: ॥ ७२ ॥

गड़तोगं वं करे कृत्वा स्वीकारं च चकार स: ।

संयुक्त विद्यामायावा मंत्रीश: शास्तमुतमम् ॥ ७३ ॥

वेदसारं कार्थियाम प्रतिज्ञापतलनाय च ।

गंगातोयमुपम्युय विद्या यदि वदेजनः ॥ ७४ ॥

स याति कालसूत्रं च यावद्रै बढ़णो यवः ।

Hearing this, Brahmā, the Creator of the world, gladly informed Śiva of this. When the Lord of Knowledge, the Foremost of the Jñāniens, Bhūtanātha heard the words of the Creator, He took the Ganges water in His hands and swore that “I will complete the Tantra Śāstra, full of Rādhā mantras and not opposed to the Vedas.” If one touches the Ganges water and speaks lies, one remains in the terrible Kālasūtra hell for a period of one Brahmā’s life time.

इत्युक्ते शंकरे बह्ञानोलोके सुरसंसदि ॥ 75 ॥

आविश्वभूव श्रीकृष्णो राशया सहितस्ततः ।

तं सुद्धा च संह्धासुदुवुः पुरुषोतमम् ॥ 76 ॥

O Dvija! When Bhagavān Śaṅkara said this before the assembly of the Devas in the region of Goloka, Śrī Krṣṇa appeared there with Rādhā. The Devas became exceedingly glad to see Him. They

praised Him, the Best Puruṣa and they were all filled with rapture and again engaged themselves in the grand Rāsa Festival.

परमानंदपूर्णांश चकुश पुनरूपवम् ।

कालेन शैर्षभगवान्युक्तिदीयं चकार सः ॥ 77 ॥

इत्येवे कथितं सर्वे सुगोय्यं च सुदुर्लेम् ।

स एव उद्वक्ता सा गड़ा गोलोकसंचा ॥ 78 ॥

Some time after, Mahā Deva lighted the Torch of Mukti i.e., the Tantra Śāstra was published by Him, as promised. O Child! Thus I have disclosed to you this anecdote, so-very secret, and hard to be attained. Thus Śrī Krṣṇa Himself, is verily the liqueed Gaṅgā sprung in the region of Goloka.

राधाकृष्णांशंभृता धृतिमूर्तिकफल्याद ।

स्थाने स्थाने स्थायिता सा कृष्णन च परात्मना ॥ 79 ॥

कृष्णयस्कणा परम सर्वेब्रह्यांधपूर्ति ॥ 79 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीयाणवते महापुराणे नवमस्कन्चे

प्रदारोअधाय: 11 12 11

This holy Gaṅgā, born of the bodies of Krṣṇa and Rādhā inseparable from each other, grants enjoyment, lordship and libe,ation. Śrī Krṣṇa, the Highest Self, has placed Her in various places; so Gaṅgā is of the nature of Śrī Krṣṇa and is everywhere, equally honoured everywhere in the Brahmāṇḍa (universe).

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter in the Ninth Book on the origin of Gaṅgā in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

