[Ch 41 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyna said: O Twice-born! Indra then remembered Hari and took Brhaşpati, the Guru of the Devas, to the assembly of Brahmā, accompanied by the other Devas. They soon reached the region of Brahmā and no sooner they saw Him, than Indra and the other Devas and Brhaşpati all bowed down to Him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Twice-born! Indra then remembered Hari and took Brihaspati, the Guru of the Devas, to the assembly of Brahmā, accompanied by the other Devas. They soon reached the region of Brahmā and no sooner they saw Him, than Indra and the other Devas and Bihaspati all bowed down to Him.

[Ch 41 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brhaşpati, the Ācārya of the Devas, then communicated all to Brahmā. Hearing this, He smiled and spoke, addressing Indra:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brihaspati, the Ācārya of the Devas, then communicated all to Brahmā. Hearing this, He smiled and spoke, addressing Indra :--

[Ch 41 Verse 4-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Indra! You have been in My race; nay, you are My grandson; the Ārya Brhaşpati is your Guru; you yourself are the ruler of the Devas and you are very wise and sagacious; the mother of your father is the powerful Dakṣa, a great Viṣṇu Bhakta. How is it, then that when the three sides of the family are pure, one would turn out so haughty and arrogant!
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- O Indra! You have been born in My race; nay, you are My grandson; the Ārya Brihaspati is your Guru; you yourself are the ruler of the Devas and you are very wise and sagacious; the mother of your father is the powerful Dakṣa, a great Viṣṇu Bhakta. How is it, then that when the three sides of the family are pure, one would turn out so haughty and arrogant!

[Ch 41 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whose mother is so much devoted to her husband, whose father, mother's father and mother's brother are self-controlled and of pure Sattva Guna, he is not expected to be so very haughty! Every man may be guilty to Hari for the three faults: For some fault due to that of his father, or of his mother's father, or of Guru, the Spiritual Teacher.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whose mother is so much devoted to her husband, whose father, mother’s father and mother’s brother are self-controlled and of pure Sattva Guṇa, he is not expected to be so very haughty! Every man may be guilty to Hari for the three faults :-- For some fault due to that of his father, or of his mother’s father, or of Guru, the Spiritual Teacher.

[Ch 41 Verse 8-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa, resides in this great holy temple of our this physical body controlling the hearts of all. At whatever moment, Śrī Nārāyaṇa quits this temple-body, at that moment this body becomes dead. I myself am the mind; Śaṅkara is the knowledge, Viṣṇu is the vital breaths, Bhagvati Durgā is the intelligence (Buddhi), sleep, etc., the powers of Prakṛti; when these are being reflected on by the Ātman, Jīva is formed with a body for enjoyment called Bhoga Śarīrabhṛt.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa, resides in this great holy temple of our this physical body controlling the hearts of all. At whatever moment, Śrī Nārāyaṇa quits this temple-body, at that moment this body becomes dead. I myself am the mind; Śaṅkara is the Knowledge, Viṣṇu is the vital breaths, Bhagavatī Durgā is the intelligence (Buddhi), sleep, etc., the powers of Prakriti; when these are being reflected on by the Ātman, Jīva is formed with a body for enjoyment called Bhoga Śarīrabhrit.

[Ch 41 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When a king departs, his attendants also follow him; so when this Indra! We all, are verily, the parts of Śrī Krṣṇa I myself, Śiva, Ananta Deva, Viṣṇu, Dharma, Mahā Virāt, you all are His parts and entirely devoted to Him. And you have shown contempt for His flowers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► depart from this body and follow the Ātman. O Indra! We all, are verily, the parts of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. I myself, Śiva, Ananta Deva, Viṣṇu, Dharma, Mahā Virāt, you all are His parts and entirely devoted to Him. And you have shown contempt for His flower.

[Ch 41 Verse 13-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhagavān Śaṅkara, the Lord of the Bhūtas, worshipped the lotus feet of Śrī Krṣna with that flower. The Rṣi Durvāsā gave you that flower. But you showed disrespect to it. The flower, Pārjjāta, after being offered at the lotus-feet of Krṣna, should be placed on the head of an Immortal; His worship is to be done first; and it is the foremost amongst the Devas. So you are now being afflicted by the inevitable course of Fate; Fate is the most powerful of all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bhagavān Śaṅkara, the Lord of the Bhūtas, worshipped the lotus-feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa with that flower. The Ṛṣi Durvāsā gave you that flower. But you showed disrespect to it. The flower, Pārijāta, after being offered at the lotus-feet of Kṛṣṇa, should be placed on the head of an Immortal; His worship is to be done first; and it is the foremost amongst the Devas. So you are now being afflicted by the inevitable course of Fate; Fate is the most powerful of all.

[Ch 41 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Who can save that unlucky man against whom Fate has turned? Seeing that you have rejected the flower offered to Śri Krṣṇa, Śri Laksmī Devi has left you out of anger. Now come with Me and with your family priest Bhaspati to Vaikunṭha and worship the Lord of Lakṣmī; then by His grace you may get back your Heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Who can save that unlucky man against whom Fate has turned? Seeing that you have rejected the flower offered to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Lakṣmī Devī has left you out of anger. Now come with Me and with your family priest Brihaspati to Vaikuṇṭha and worship the Lord of Lakṣmī; then by His grace you may get back your Heavens.

[Ch 41 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, Brahmā with Indra and all the other Devas, went to the Eternal Puruṣa Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa and saw that He was full of Fire and Energy like one hundred koti summer mid-day Suns, yet perfectly cool and calm. He has no beginning, and no end, nor any middle. He is Infinite.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, Brahmā with Indra and all the other Devas, went to the Eternal Puruṣa, Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa and saw that He was full of Fire and Energy like one hundred koṭi summer midday Suns, yet perfectly cool and calm. He has no beginning, and no end, nor any middle. He is Infinite.

[Ch 41 Verse 20-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The four-armed Pārisādas, Sarasvaītī, the four Vedas, and the Ganges, all were surrounding Him. Seeing Him, Brahmā and the other Devas bowed down with devotion and began to chant hymns to Him with tears in their eyes. Brahmā, then, informed Him of everything when all the Devas, dispossessed of their places, began to weep before Him. Nārāyana saw that the Devas were very afraid and much distressed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The four-armed Pāṛṣadas, Sarasvatī, the four Vedas, and the Ganges, all were surrounding Him. Seeing Him, Brahmā and the other Devas bowed down with devotion and began to chant hymns to Him with tears in their eyes. Brahmā, then, informed Him of everything when all the Devas, dispossessed of their places, began to weep before Him. Nārāyaṇa saw that the Devas were very afraid and much distressed.

[Ch 41 Verse 23-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They had no jewel ornaments as before, no vehicles (Vāhanas), nor the Daivic splendour as before, not that brilliance; always fearful. Then Nārāyana, the Destroyer of fear, seeing the Devas in that state, addressed Brahmā and the other Devas: O Brahmaṇa! O Devas! Discard all fears. What fear can overcome you? I am here. I will give you again the immoveable prosperous Rājya Lakṣmi (the Lakṣmī of the kings).
NEW CORR ENG ──► They had no jewel ornaments as before, no vehicles (Vāhanas), nor the Daivic splendour as before, not that brillance; always fearful. Then Nārāyaṇa, the Destroyer of fear, seeing the Devas in that state, addressed Brahmā and the other Devas :-- O Brāhmaṇ! O Devas! Discard all fears. What fear can overcome you? I am here. I will give you again the immoveable prosperous Rājya Lakṣmī (the Laksmī of the kings).

[Ch 41 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But for the present, I give you some advice proper for this moment. Listen. There are endless universe where exist innumerable persons. All of them are under Me. So know verily, that I am under them also.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But for the present, I give you some advice proper for this moment. Listen. There are endless universes where exist innumerable persons. All of them are under Me. So know verily, that I am under them also.

[Ch 41 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My devotees regard Me as the Highest They know no other than Me; they are fearless; so I do not remain in that house where My devotees are dissatisfied. I instantly quit that hous with Lakṣmī. Durvāsā Rṣi is born in part of Śaṅkara. He is highly devoted to Me. He is pakkā Vaiṣṇava. He cursed you and, as a matter of fact, I am Lakṣmī instantly left your house.
NEW CORR ENG ──► My devotees regard Me as the Highest. They know no other than Me; they are fearless; so I do not remain in that house where My devotees are dissatisfied. I instantly quit that house with Lakṣmī. Durvāsā Ṛṣi is born in part of Śaṅkara. He is highly devoted to Me. He is a pakkā Vaiṣṇava. He cursed you and, as a matter of fact, I and Lakṣmī instantly left your house.

[Ch 41 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Lakṣmī does not reside in that house where conchshells are not blown, where there are no Tulasī trees, where there is no worship of Śiva and Śivā, where the Brāhmaṇas are not fed. O Brāhmaṇa! O Devas! Where I and My Bhaktas are blamed, Mahā Lakṣmī becomes greatly displeased. She instantly goes away out of that house.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Lakṣmī does not reside in that house where conch shells are not blown, where there are no Tulasī trees, where there is no worship of Śiva and Śivā, where the Brāhmaṇas are not fed. O Brāhmaṇ! O Devas! Where I and My Bhaktas are blamed, Mahā Lakṣmī becomes greatly displeased. She instantly goes away out of that house.

[Ch 41 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Lakṣmī does not stay even for a moment in that house where the stupid person, without any devotion for me, takes his food on the Harivāsara Ekādaśī day (the eleventh day of the moon's wane or increase) or on My anniversary birthday. If anybody sells My name or his own daughter, where the guests are not served, Lakṣmī quits that house instantly and goes away. Note: That Guru is the Real Guru, who, being capable, imparts the name of God to worthy persons without taking any fee at all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Lakṣmī does not stay even for a moment in that house where the stupid person, without any devotion for me, takes his food on the Harivāsara Ekādaśī day (the eleventh day of the moon’s wane or increase) or on My anniversary birthday. If anybody sells My name or his own daughter, where the guests are not served, Lakṣmī quits that house instantly and goes away. (Note :-- That Guru is the Real Guru, who, being capable, imparts the name of God to worthy persons without taking any fee at all.)

[Ch 41 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If the son of an unchaste woman be a Brāhmana, he and the husband of an unchaste woman are great sinners. If anybody goes to such a person's house or eats the food of a Śūdra during a Śrāddha ceremony, Lakṣmī becomes very angry and vacates that house. Being a Brāhmin, if one burns a Śūdra's corpse, one becomes very wretched and the vilest of the Brāhmins.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If the son of an unchaste woman be a Brāhmaṇa, he and the husband of an unchaste woman are great sinners. If anybody goes to such a person’s house or eats the food of a Śūdra during a Srāddha ceremony, Lakṣmī becomes very angry and vacates that house. Being a Brāhmin, if one burns a Śūdra’s corpse, one becomes very wretched and the vilest of the Brāhmins.

[Ch 41 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Laksmī never stays for a moment more in that house. Being a Brāhmīn, if he be a Śūdra's cook and drives oxen, Laksmī fears to drink water there and quits his house. Being a Brāhmīn, if his heart be unholy, if he be cruel, envies others and elames persons, if he officiates as a priest for the Śūdra, Laksmī Devī never stays in his house.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Lakṣmī never stays for a moment more in that house. Being a Brāhmin, if he be a Śūdra’s cook and drives oxen, Lakṣmī fears to drink water there and quits his house. Being a Brāhmin, if his heart be unholy, if he be cruel, envies others and blames persons, if he officiates as a priest for the Śūdra, Lakṣmī Devī never stays in his house.

[Ch 41 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The World-Mother never stays even for a moment in his house who eats at the house of one who marries an unmarried girl twelve years old in whom rienstration has commenced. He who cuts grass by his nails, or writes on the ground with his nails, or from whose house a Brāhmaṇa guest goes back disappointed, Lakṣmī never stays in his house.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The World-Mother never stays even for a moment in his house who eats at the house of one who marries an unmarried girl twelve years old in whom menstruation has commenced. He who cuts grass by his nails, or writes on the ground with his nails, or from whose house a Brāhmaṇa guest goes back disappointed, Lakṣmī never stays in his house.

[Ch 41 Verse 40-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If any Brāhmaṇa eats food at the early sunrise, sleeps during the day or engages in a sexual intercourse during the day, Lakṣmī never stays in his house. Lakṣmī slips away from that Brāhmaṇa who is devoid of Ācāra (rules of conduct), who accepts gifts from Śūdras, from him who remains uninitiated in his Mantram.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If any Brāhmaṇa eats food at the early sunrise, sleeps during the day or engages in a sexual intercourse during the day, Lakṣmī never stays in his house. Lakṣmī slips away from that Brāhmaṇa who is devoid of Ācāra (rules of conduct), who accepts gifts from Śūdras, from him who remains uninitiated in his Mantram.

[Ch 41 Verse 42-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The ignorant man who sleeps naked and with his feet wet, who laughs always, and always talks at random on disconnected subjects like a mad man, is forsaken at once by Laksmī. Lakṣmī becomes angry and goes away from the house of that man who applies oil all over his body first and then touches the bodies of others and always makes some sounding noise on several parts of his body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The ignorant man who sleeps naked and with his feet wet, who laughs always, and always talks at random on disconnected subjects like a mad man, is forsaken at once by Lakṣmī. Lakṣmī becomes angry and goes away from the house of that man who applies oil all over his body first and then touches the bodies of others and always makes some sounding noise on several parts of his body.

[Ch 41 Verse 44-45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If any Brāhmaṇa forsake observing vows, fastings, the Sandhyā ceremony, purity and devotion to Viṣṇu, Kamalā (Lakṣmī) does not remain in his house any longer. If anybody blames always the Brāhmaṇas and shews his hatred always towards the Brāhmaṇas, if he does injury to the animals, and if he does not indulge in his heart anything of pity, kindness, Lakṣmī, the Mother of the Worlds, quite him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If any Brāhmaṇa forsakes observing vows, fastings, the Sandhyā ceremony, purity and devotion to Viṣṇu, Kamalā (Lakṣmī) does not remain in his house any longer. If anybody blames always the Brāhmaṇas and shews his hatred always towards the Brāhmaṇas, if he does injury to the animals, and if he does not indulge in his heart anything of pity, kindness, Lakṣmī, the Mother of the Worlds, quits him.

[Ch 41 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lotus-born! But where Hari is worshipped and Hari's Name is chanted, Lakṣmī, the Mother of all auspiciousness remains there. Lakṣmī remains where the glories of Śrī Krṣna and His Bhaktas are sung.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lotus-born! But where Hari is worshipped and Hari’s Name is chanted, Lakṣmī, the Mother of all auspiciousness, remains there. Lakṣmī remains where the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His Bhaktas are sung.

[Ch 41 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Lakṣmī always remains there with the greatest gladness where conch-shells are blown, where there are conchshells, the Śālagrāma stone, the Tulasī leaves and the service and meditation of Lakṣmī are daily done.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Lakṣmī always remains there with the greatest gladness where conch-shells are blown, where there are conchsells, the Śālagrāma stone, the Tulasī leaves and the service and meditation of Lakṣmī are daily done.

[Ch 41 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Where the phallic emblem of Śiva is worshipped, and His glories sung, where Śri Durgā is worshipped and Her glories are sung, Laksmī, the Dweller in the Lotus, remains there. Where the Brāhmanas are honoured and they are gladly feasted, where all the Devas are worshipped; the chaste Lakṣmī, the Lotus-faced, remains there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Where the phallic emblem of Śiva is worshipped, and His glories sung, where Śrī Durgā is worshipped and Her glories are sung, Lakṣmī, the Dweller in the Lotus, remains there. Where the Brāhmaṇas are honoured and they are gladly feasted, where all the Devas are worshiped; the chaste Lakṣmī, the Lotus-faced, remains there.

[Ch 41 Verse 51-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying to the Devas, the Lord of Lakṣmī said: "O Devi! Go without any delay to the Kṣiroda Ocean and incarnate there in part." He then addressed Brahmā and said: "O Lotus-born! You also better go there and then churn the Kṣiroda Ocean; when Lakṣmī will arise, give Her to the Devas."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying to the Devas, the Lord of Lakṣmī said :-- O Devī! Go without any any delay to the Kṣiroda Ocean and incarnate there in part. He then addressed Brahmā and said :-- “O Lotus-born! You also better go there and churn the Kṣiroda Ocean; when Lakṣmī will arise, give her to the Devas.”

[Ch 41 Verse 53-54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devarsi! Thus saying, the Lord Kamalā went to His inner compartment. On the other hand the Devas, after a long time, reached the shores of the Kṣiroda Ocean. The Devas and the Daityas then made the Golden Mountain (the Sumeru) the churning rod, the Deva Kūrma (the tortoise), the churning pot and Ananta Deva (the thousand headed serpent) the churning cord and began to churn the ocean.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devarṣi! Thus saying, the Lord Kamalā went to His inner compartment. On the other hand the Devas, after a long time, reached the shores of the Kṣiroda Ocean. The Devas and the Daityas then made the Golden Mountain (the Sumeru) the churning rod, the Deva Kurma (the tortoise), the churning pot and Ananta Deva (the thousand headed serpent) the churning cord and began to churn the ocean.

[Ch 41 Verse 55-56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► While churning was going on, by and by arose Dhanvantari, Amṛta (the nectar), the horse Ucchaihśrava, various other invaluable jewels that were desired, the elephant Airāvata and the beautiful eyed Laksmi. Viṣnupriyā, Śrī Lakṣmi Devi, no sooner She got up from the ocean, she, the chaste woman, presented on the neck of Nārāyaṇa, of beautiful appearance, the Lord of all, Who slept on the Kṣiroda ocean the garland (indicative of accepting Him for her bridegroom).
NEW CORR ENG ──► While churning was going on, by and by arose Dhanvantarī, Amrita (the nectar), the horse Uccaihśravā, various other invaluable jewels that were desired, the elephant Airāvata and the beautiful eyed Lakṣmī. Viṣṇupriyā, Śrī Lakṣmī Devī, no sooner She got up from the ocean, she, the chaste woman, presented on the neck of Nārāyaṇa, of beautiful appearance, the Lord of all, Who slept on the Kṣiroda ocean the garland (indicative of accepting Him for her bridegroom).

[Ch 41 Verse 57-58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Brahmā and Maheśvara and the other Devas being pleased, cast a favourable glance towards the homes of the Devas, in order to free them from their curse. Then, by the grace of Mahā Lakṣmī and by the granting of the boon by Brahmā, the Devas got back their own possessions from the hands of the Daityas."
NEW CORR ENG ──► hymns. At this time Lakṣmī Devī being pleased, cast a favourable glance towards the homes of the Devas, in order to free them from their curse. Then, by the grace of Mahā Lakṣmī and by the granting of the boon by Brahmā, the Devas got back their own possessions from the hands of the Daityas.

[Ch 41 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Nārada! Thus I have described to you the story of Lakṣmī Devī, the Essence of all Essences, and very pleasant to hear. Now what more do you want to hear? Say. Here ends the Forty-first Chapter of the Ninth Book on the churning of the ocean and on the appearing of Lakṣmī in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevihbāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Nārada! Thus I have described to you the story of Lakṣmī Devī, the Essence of all Essences, and very pleasant to hear. Now what more do you want to hear? Say. Here ends the Forty-first Chapter of the Ninth Book on the churning of the ocean and on the appearing of Lakṣmī in the Mahā Purāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
