CHAPTER XLI

On the Churning to the Ocean

श्रीनारायण उवाच

हरिं ध्यात्या हरिकंब्राउजागाम बझाण: सभाम् ।

ब्रह्म्यति पुरस्कृत्य सर्वैः सुरागणैः सह ॥ १ ॥

शीर्ष गत्वा बझालेकं वृढ़ा च कमलेझ्वम् ।

प्रणेमुद्वेततः सर्वे सहैत्रा गुर्गणा सह ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyna said: O Twice-born! Indra then remembered Hari and took Brhaşpati, the Guru of the Devas, to the assembly of Brahmā, accompanied by the other Devas. They soon reached the region of Brahmā and no sooner they saw Him, than Indra and the other Devas and Brhaşpati all bowed down to Him.

भूतांतं कथयामास सुराव्यों विधिं प्रति ।

प्रह्योवाच तच्छुत्वा महेन्द्र कमलसनः ॥ ३ ॥

Brhaşpati, the Ācārya of the Devas, then communicated all to Brahmā. Hearing this, He smiled and spoke, addressing Indra:

ब्रह्मोयाच

वत्स महंजगतोर्जस प्रप्तीयं मे विद्बानः ।

ब्रह्मयतेष शिष्यत्वं सुगणामधिधः स्ववम् ॥ 4 ॥

मातामहः द्वक्षते विद्याभकः प्रतायवान् ।

कुलत्रयं यस्य शूद्रं कर्व सोर्जकृते भवेत् ॥ 5 ॥

“O Indra! You have been in My race; nay, you are My grandson; the Ārya Brhaşpati is your Guru; you yourself are the ruler of the Devas and you are very wise and sagacious; the mother of your father is the powerful Dakṣa, a great Viṣṇu Bhakta. How is it, then that when the three sides of the family are pure, one would turn out so haughty and arrogant!

माता यतिता यस्य पिता शुद्धो जितेन्द्रिया: ।

मातामहो मातुलकु कर्व सोउईकृती भवेत् ॥ 6 ॥

जनः धैतुकाटीयेण दोषान्मातामहस्य च ।

गुरुकोषातिनिपदैर्षहिंद्रोषी भवेद्युवन् ॥ 7 ॥

Whose mother is so much devoted to her husband, whose father, mother's father and mother's brother are self-controlled and of pure Sattva Guna, he is not expected to be so very haughty! Every man may be guilty to Hari for the three faults: For some fault due to that of his father, or of his mother's father, or of Guru, the Spiritual Teacher.

सर्वान्तरात्मा भगवान् सर्वेट्रेष्वसिताः ।

यस्य देशात्स प्रगति स शवस्तक्षणो भवेत् ॥ 8 ॥

मनोड़मिंद्रियेशं च ज्ञानकणे हि शंकाः ।

विष्णुपाणा च प्रकृतित्विद्धभगवती सती ॥ 9 ॥

निद्रादय: शकनध्यं ता: सर्वी: प्रकृतेः कलाः ।

आत्मनः प्रतिबिष्यः जीवो भाणगरीभ्यून् ॥ 10 ॥

Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa, resides in this great holy temple of our this physical body controlling the hearts of all. At whatever moment, Śrī Nārāyaṇa quits this temple-body, at that moment this body becomes dead. I myself am the mind; Śaṅkara is the knowledge, Viṣṇu is the vital breaths, Bhagvati Durgā is the intelligence (Buddhi), sleep, etc., the powers of Prakṛti; when these are being reflected on by the Ātman, Jīva is formed with a body for enjoyment called Bhoga Śarīrabhṛt.

आत्मनीगे गते देहात्सर्वे गांति सरंभाप्नः ।

यथा वर्तनि गच्छन्ते नरदेवमिवानुगाः ॥ ११ ॥

अहं शिवश्छ शेषश्छ शिवणूर्पमें महाविराद् ।

यूयं यद्रिण भवताशं तत्पूर्णे न्यककृतं तत्वा ॥ १ २ ॥

When a king departs, his attendants also follow him; so when this Indra! We all, are verily, the parts of Śrī Krṣṇa I myself, Śiva, Ananta Deva,

Book IX Chapter XLI

Viṣṇu, Dharma, Mahā Virāt, you all are His parts and entirely devoted to Him. And you have shown contempt for His flowers.

शिशेन पूजितं पादपयं पुवेण येन च ।

तत्र दुवांसस दर्जे दैवेन -व्यक्तून तथा ॥ 13 ॥

तत्पुष्यं मतके यय कृष्णपादाकप्रच्छत् ।

सर्वेषां च सुराणां च तत्पूजा पुरतो भवेत् ॥ 14 ॥

दैवेनं वैधितस्त्वं हि दैवं च बलवत्नम् ।

भाग्यहीनं जनं मूढ़ को वा रक्षितुमीक्षरः ॥ १ ५ ॥

Bhagavān Śaṅkara, the Lord of the Bhūtas, worshipped the lotus feet of Śrī Krṣna with that flower. The Rṣi Durvāsā gave you that flower. But you showed disrespect to it. The flower, Pārjjāta, after being offered at the lotus-feet of Krṣna, should be placed on the head of an Immortal; His worship is to be done first; and it is the foremost amongst the Devas. So you are now being afflicted by the inevitable course of Fate; Fate is the most powerful of all.

सा श्रीनंतापुना कोपात्कृष्णानिर्माल्वजन्ति।

अभुना गच्छ वैकुण्डे मया च गुणना सह ॥ १६ ॥

नियेब त्रन झीनाथं क्षियां प्राप्यसि मढ़तात् ।

एवमुक्क्वा च स बढ़ा सर्वैः सुरागपैः सह ॥ १७ ॥

Who can save that unlucky man against whom Fate has turned? Seeing that you have rejected the flower offered to Śri Krṣṇa, Śri Laksmī Devi has left you out of anger. Now come with Me and with your family priest Bhaspati to Vaikunṭha and worship the Lord of Lakṣmī; then by His grace you may get back your Heavens.

तत्र गत्वा परवढ़ा घपावंतं सनातनम् ।

द्वाु तेजःस्वरूपं तं प्रजल्लं स्वतैससा ॥ 18 ॥

ग्रीभयमध्यामताद्विज्ञात्कोटिसम्प्रभम् ।

शांतं चानादिमध्यांतं लक्ष्मीकांतमानन्तकम् ॥ 19 ॥

Thus saying, Brahmā with Indra and all the other Devas, went to the Eternal Puruṣa Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa and saw that He was full of Fire and Energy like one hundred koti summer mid-day Suns, yet perfectly cool and calm. He has no beginning, and no end, nor any middle. He is Infinite.

चतुर्षुर्षे: पार्वदैषु सरस्वता युतं प्रभुम् ।

भकस्या चतुर्भिवेदैष्ठ गंगाय परिवेशित् ॥ 20 ॥

तं प्रणेपु: सुरा: सर्वे मृतःन बहुपुगेनाम: ।

भवितन्याः: साधुनेजान्तुहुवुः परमेश्वम् ॥ 21 ॥

वृत्तांत कवयामास स्वयं बहुा कृतांजलि: ।

रूकुद्विता: सर्वा: स्वाधिकाराव्छ्युता तः ॥ 22 ॥

The four-armed Pārisādas, Sarasvaītī, the four Vedas, and the Ganges, all were surrounding Him. Seeing Him, Brahmā and the other Devas bowed down with devotion and began to chant hymns to Him with tears in their eyes. Brahmā, then, informed Him of everything when all the Devas, dispossessed of their places, began to weep before Him. Nārāyana saw that the Devas were very afraid and much distressed.

स द्वर्शं सुरागण विषयुरासं भयाकुलम् ।

तत्पृष्णणान्यं च वाहान्तिविजितम् ॥ 23 ॥

गोभाण्य-नं हतश्रीकं निष्पर्भं सभयं परम् ।

उवाच कातरं चूषा भवभीतिविधंजनः ॥ 24 ॥

श्रीभगवानुवाच

मार्भैबहान् हे सुराक्ष भयं किं वो मधि स्थिते ।

दास्यामि लक्ष्मीमचरणं परिप्रियवंद्रिणीम् ॥ 25 ॥

They had no jewel ornaments as before, no vehicles (Vāhanas), nor the Daivic splendour as before, not that brilliance; always fearful. Then Nārāyana, the Destroyer of fear, seeing the Devas in that state, addressed Brahmā and the other Devas: O Brahmaṇa! O Devas! Discard all fears. What fear can overcome you? I am here. I will give you again the immoveable prosperous Rājya Lakṣmi (the Lakṣmī of the kings).

किं च मद्यनं किंचिच्छ्यतं समयोचित् ।

हितं सत्यं सारभृतं परिणामसुखावहम् ॥ 26 ॥

जनाश्रासंख्यिव्यवस्या मदधीनाशं संततम् ।

यथा त्वाङ़ं महक्रतपराधीनोस्वतंक: ॥ 27 ॥

But for the present, I give you some advice proper for this moment. Listen. There are endless universe where exist innumerable persons. All of them are under Me. So know verily, that I am under them also.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

पं ये रहो हि मढ़कतो मतयो हि निरंकुश: । तद्गुरुर्नं र नित्यिय पदाया सह निश्रितम् । 2 8 ॥ दुबांसा: शंकरांग्रश वैण्यावे मतयाया: । तच्छापादागतोर्हे च सल्ब्यीको हि वो गृहात् ॥ 2 9 ॥

My devotees regard Me as the Highest They know no other than Me; they are fearless; so I do not remain in that house where My devotees are dissatisfied. I instantly quit that hous with Lakṣmī. Durvāsā Rṣi is born in part of Śaṅkara. He is highly devoted to Me. He is pakkā Vaiṣṇava. He cursed you and, as a matter of fact, I am Lakṣmī instantly left your house.

पत्र शंख्यविनिरीत सुतली न शिवार्थेन्मु ।

न भोजनं च शिवाणां न पचा तत शिक्षित् ॥ ३० ॥

मढ़कानां च मे निदा यत्र बहान् भवेतुर्गः ।

महाहा महाल्कूमीसतो याति परभवम् ॥ ३१ ॥

Lakṣmī does not reside in that house where conchshells are not blown, where there are no Tulasī trees, where there is no worship of Śiva and Śivā, where the Brāhmaṇas are not fed. O Brāhmaṇa! O Devas! Where I and My Bhaktas are blamed, Mahā Lakṣmī becomes greatly displeased. She instantly goes away out of that house.

मद्धिकितीची नो मुहो धुचने को हरिजासरे ।

मम जन्मदिते वाथि याति श्रीसद्गुरावर्धि ॥ 32 ॥

मत्रामविक्री यंघ विलोणति स्वकन्यकम् ।

यजातिविंधं धुचने च मतिग्या याति तद्गुराह्न । 33 ॥

Lakṣmī does not stay even for a moment in that house where the stupid person, without any devotion for me, takes his food on the Harivāsara Ekādaśī day (the eleventh day of the moon's wane or increase) or on My anniversary birthday. If anybody sells My name or his own daughter, where the guests are not served, Lakṣmī quits that house instantly and goes away.

Note: That Guru is the Real Guru, who, being capable, imparts the name of God to worthy persons without taking any fee at all.

यो विध: पृंडुलीपुत्रो महापापी च ततवितः ।

पापिनो यो गृहं याति गृहप्रश्राद्वारभोजकः ॥ 34 ॥

महाक्रष्टा ततो याति मंदिरात्कमलालया ।

गृह्जाणं शवदाही च भाग्यहीनो दिज्ञायमः ॥ 35 ॥

If the son of an unchaste woman be a Brāhmana, he and the husband of an unchaste woman are great sinners. If anybody goes to such a person's house or eats the food of a Śūdra during a Śrāddha ceremony, Lakṣmī becomes very angry and vacates that house. Being a Brāhmin, if one burns a Śūdra's corpse, one becomes very wretched and the vilest of the Brāhmins.

याति रूषा तदनुग्रच्छ देवा: कमलावासिनि ।

गृह्जाणां सूपकारी यो बाहाणो वृषवाहकः ॥ 36 ॥

तन्तोयपानभीता च कमला याति तदनुग्रहत् ।

अशुब्द्रदाय: कृरो हिंसको निंदको दिजः ॥ 37 ॥

Laksmī never stays for a moment more in that house. Being a Brāhmīn, if he be a Śūdra's cook and drives oxen, Laksmī fears to drink water there and quits his house. Being a Brāhmīn, if his heart be unholy, if he be cruel, envies others and elames persons, if he officiates as a priest for the Śūdra, Laksmī Devī never stays in his house.

ब्राह्मा: शूर्याजी च वाति देवी च तद्गुरुहा ।

अवीराड़ च वो घुंचेत तम्याड़ाति जगतमू: ॥ 38 ॥

तृणं चिन्ति नखरेसैर्वां वो विलिजेबमहीम् ।

निरागो बाड़ाणो यत्र तद्गुरुहाथाति मतिथा ॥ 39 ॥

The World-Mother never stays even for a moment in his house who eats at the house of one who marries an unmarried girl twelve years old in whom rienstration has commenced. He who cuts grass by his nails, or writes on the ground with his nails, or from whose house a Brāhmaṇa guest goes back disappointed, Lakṣmī never stays in his house.

सूर्योदये द्विजो घुंकते दिवास्याची च बाहाणः ।

दिवा मैयुवकारी च यस्तस्माताति मतिथ्या ॥ 40 ॥

आचारतीनी विधो यो यछ गुर्जप्रतिर्ही ।

अदीक्षितो है यो मुहुस्तस्माड़े यांति मतिथ्या ॥ 41 ॥

If any Brāhmaṇa eats food at the early sunrise, sleeps during the day or engages in a sexual intercourse during the day, Lakṣmī never stays in his house. Lakṣmī slips away from that Brāhmaṇa

Book IX Chapter XLI

who is devoid of Ācāra (rules of conduct), who accepts gifts from Śūdras, from him who remains uninitiated in his Mantram.

स्थमघाद्धाने नगो हि यः शेते ज्ञानदूबलः ।

शशब्दवित बाचालो याति सा तद्गृहास्ति ॥ 42 ॥

शिर:सनातसु तैलेन थोउ-यांग समुपयुशेत् ।

स्वांगे च बायद्येहांं रहा सा याति तद्गृहात् ॥ 43 ॥

The ignorant man who sleeps naked and with his feet wet, who laughs always, and always talks at random on disconnected subjects like a mad man, is forsaken at once by Laksmī. Lakṣmī becomes angry and goes away from the house of that man who applies oil all over his body first and then touches the bodies of others and always makes some sounding noise on several parts of his body.

ततोपवासाहीना वः संध्याहीनेअृषिचिहितः ।

विष्णुभक्तिवाहीनतृन सभ्याठिति च मप्रिया ॥ 44 ॥

ब्राहणं निवेदोही है तं च यो द्रैष्टि सतन्ति ।

जीवाहिंहो द्याहीयो गाति सर्वप्रमुस्ततः ॥ 4 5 ॥

If any Brāhmaṇa forsake observing vows, fastings, the Sandhyā ceremony, purity and devotion to Viṣṇu, Kamalā (Lakṣmī) does not remain in his house any longer. If anybody blames always the Brāhmaṇas and shews his hatred always towards the Brāhmaṇas, if he does injury to the animals, and if he does not indulge in his heart anything of pity, kindness, Lakṣmī, the Mother of the Worlds, quite him.

यत्र यत्र हरेची हरेल्कतींतं तथा ।

तत्र तिष्ठिति सा देवी सर्वमंगलमंगलां ॥ 46 ॥

यत्र प्रशंसा कृष्णस्य तद्धकतस्य पितामह ।

सा च कृष्णप्रिया देवी तत्र सिष्ठिति संतन्ति ॥ 47 ॥

O Lotus-born! But where Hari is worshipped and Hari's Name is chanted, Lakṣmī, the Mother of all auspiciousness remains there. Lakṣmī remains where the glories of Śrī Krṣna and His Bhaktas are sung.

यत्र शकुष्ययि: शंखः शिला च तुलसीद्वाल्।

तलैसावांद्वं द्यानं तत्र सा परितिष्ठिति ॥ 48 ॥

Lakṣmī always remains there with the greatest

gladness where conch-shells are blown, where there are conchshells, the Śālagrāma stone, the Tulasī leaves and the service and meditation of Lakṣmī are daily done.

शिवालिगार्थं चत्र तस्य चोत्कीर्तिं शुभम् ।

दुर्गार्थं तद्गुण्डा तत्र पद्यिवासिनि ॥ 49 ॥

विजाणां सेवंत्रे चत्र तेचं च भोजनं शुभम् ।

अर्जंने सर्वदैवानां तत्र पद्मपुखी सती ॥ 50 ॥

Where the phallic emblem of Śiva is worshipped, and His glories sung, where Śri Durgā is worshipped and Her glories are sung, Laksmī, the Dweller in the Lotus, remains there. Where the Brāhmanas are honoured and they are gladly feasted, where all the Devas are worshipped; the chaste Lakṣmī, the Lotus-faced, remains there.

इत्पुक्त्वा च सुरान्सर्वान्मात् स सपात्रितः ।

क्षीरोद्वाराने जन्म करल्या कर्येति च ॥ 51 ॥

इत्पुत्वा तां जगायधो बढ़ाणां पुनराह च ।

माधित्वा सारगं लक्ष्मी देयेच्छो देहि पव्जा ॥ 52 ॥

Thus saying to the Devas, the Lord of Lakṣmī said: "O Devi! Go without any delay to the Kṣiroda Ocean and incarnate there in part." He then addressed Brahmā and said: "O Lotus-born! You also better go there and then churn the Kṣiroda Ocean; when Lakṣmī will arise, give Her to the Devas."

इत्थुक्ला कामलकांतो जगामांत:पूरं मुने ।

देवाधिश्रण कालेन ययुः क्षीरोदसागरम् ॥ 53 ॥

मंथानं मंद्रं कृत्वा कुमं कृत्वा च भाजनम् ।

कृत्वा रोगे मंधपाणं मंधधूसरुग: सुरा: ॥ 54 ॥

O Devarsi! Thus saying, the Lord Kamalā went to His inner compartment. On the other hand the Devas, after a long time, reached the shores of the Kṣiroda Ocean. The Devas and the Daityas then made the Golden Mountain (the Sumeru) the churning rod, the Deva Kūrma (the tortoise), the churning pot and Ananta Deva (the thousand headed serpent) the churning cord and began to churn the ocean.

धर्वतंत्रि च पीयुषमुच्चे: ब्रवसमीषितम् ।

नानारलं द्वित्रितं प्रापुल्लेक्षी सुदर्शनम् ॥ 55 ॥

वनमालां ददौ सा च शीरोद्वगाधिये मुने ।

सर्वेश्राय रत्याय विश्वाये वैश्वासी सती ॥ 56 ॥

While churning was going on, by and by arose Dhanvantari, Amṛta (the nectar), the horse Ucchaihśrava, various other invaluable jewels that were desired, the elephant Airāvata and the beautiful eyed Laksmi. Viṣnupriyā, Śrī Lakṣmi Devi, no sooner She got up from the ocean, she, the chaste woman, presented on the neck of Nārāyaṇa, of beautiful appearance, the Lord of all, Who slept on the Kṣiroda ocean the garland (indicative of accepting Him for her bridegroom).

देवे: स्तुता भृजिता च ब्रह्मा गंकलेण च ।

ददौ पूर्वि सुरगृहे ब्रह्माणविमोचन्ता ॥ 57 ॥

गुपदूर्वा: स्वविषयं दैत्यमतं घयंकेनम् ।

महालक्ष्मीप्रमदेन चरत्नेन नारद ॥ 58 ॥

Then Brahmā and Maheśvara and the other

Devas being pleased, cast a favourable glance

towards the homes of the Devas, in order to free them from their curse. Then, by the grace of Mahā Lakṣmī and by the granting of the boon by Brahmā, the Devas got back their own possessions from the hands of the Daityas."

इत्येवं कथितं सर्वे लक्ष्यपाखानभुत्तामम् ।

सुखदं सारभृतं च किं भूयः शोतुमिष्ठसि ॥ 59 ॥

इति शीमद्वीरागवते महापुराणे नवमरकचे

एकचत्वारिशोराधाय: 11 41 11

O Nārada! Thus I have described to you the story of Lakṣmī Devī, the Essence of all Essences, and very pleasant to hear. Now what more do you want to hear? Say.

Here ends the Forty-first Chapter of the Ninth Book on the churning of the ocean and on the appearing of

Lakṣmī in the Mahā Purānam

Śrimaddevihbāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

