CHAPTER XII

On Sāvārni Manu

मुनिवाच

महिषीर्षभंभुतो महावलपराकमः ।

देवान्सर्वायपात्रियल महिषोःप्रूजगतप्रधु: ॥1 ॥

सर्वेधां तोकामलानामधिकातामहासुर: ।

बलाभिश्रित्य बुधुजे जैतोकवैध्यर्मद्धुतम् ॥ 2 ॥

The Muni said: O King! The powerful Asura Mahisa, born of a She-buffalo, defeated all the Devas and became the Lord of the whole universe. That indomitable Dānava seized forcibly all the right of the Devas and began to enjoy the pleasures of the kingdom over the three worlds.

ततः पराजिताः: सर्वे देवाः: स्वर्णरिच्युतः ।

ब्रह्माणं च पुरस्कृत्य ते जगमृतौकमुत्तमम् ॥ 3 ॥

यजोत्तमी देवदेवौ संस्थितों शंकारच्छृती ।

युत्तानं कथयामासुर्महिषस्य दुर्गात्मनः ॥ 4 ॥

The Devas, thus defeated, were expelled from their abodes in Heavens. They took Brahmā as their Leader and went to the excellent regions where Mahā Deva and Viṣṇu resided and informed them of all that had been done by that vicious Asura Mahisa.

देवानां चैव सर्वेभं स्यानानि तरसासुरः ।

विनिज्ञस्य स्वयं भूंने बलवीयंमदोद्धतः ॥ 5 ॥

महिष्यसुरनामास्ते दुर्घटैलोउमर्शरी ।

वधीपायक्षु तस्याशु चित्यतामसुरादैनी ॥ 6 ॥

They said: O Deva of the Devas! The insolent

Mahisāśura has become unbearable and he has taken possessions of the rights and properties of the whole host of the Devas and he is now enjoying them. Both of you are quite capable to destroy the Asura. So why do you not devise means to annihilate him in no time!

एवं शुवा स भगवान्देवनामार्तिमुवचः ।

चकार कोयं सुबहु तथा शंकपर्यजी ॥ ७ ॥

एवं कोषयुत्स्थाय सूरात्यामहीपते ।

तेजः प्रातृष्यूढ़िथ्वं सहसाकंसमयुति ॥ ८ ॥

Hearing these pitiful words of the Devas, Bhagavān Viṣṇu became quite indignant. Śaṅkara, Brahmā and the other Devas all were inflamed with anger. O King! From the face of the angry Hari, then emanated an Unusual Fire, brilliant like thousand Suns.

अथातुकमतस्तेजः सर्वेषां शिविद्वीकासाम् ।

शरीरादुद्वं प्राप् हर्षविद्वुधाधिपान् ॥ 9 ॥

वयभूच्छंपूर्ज तेजो मुखाम्योदयचत ।

केशा बभूव्यायीय वैश्यावेन च शबहः ॥ 10 ॥

Then by and by emanated fires also from the bodies of all the Devas who were filled then with joy. From the mass of fire thus emanated there came out a beautiful Female Figure. The face of this figure was formed out of the fire that emanated from the body of Mahā Deva. Her hairs were

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

formed out of the fire of Yama and Her arms were formed out of the fire that emanated from Viṣṇu.

सीयेच्न च स्नौ जातौ माहे-ग्रेण च मध्यम: ।

वाकणेन ततो भूप जंचोर सेवप्रवुतुः ॥ ११ ॥

नित्यावी तैलसा भूमे: पाटी ब्राह्मण तैलसा ।

पादाङूल्यो भानवेल वासवेन कारूकृती ॥ १ २ ॥

कोवीर्ण तथा नासा दन्ता: संज्ञिरे तदा ।

प्राजापत्येनोतपने तैलसा वसुयाधिपि ॥ १ ३ ॥

पावकेन च संजातं लोचनत्रितयं शुभम् ।

संधेयने तेलसा जाते भूकुट्यी तेलसां निर्भी ॥ १ ४ ॥

O King! From the fire of the Moon came out two breasts; from the fire of Indra came out Her middle portion; from the fire of Varuna, appeared Her loins and thighs; from the fire of Earth, Her hips were formed; from the fire of Brahmā, Her feet were formed; from the fire of the Sun, Her toes were formed; from the fire of the Vasus, Her fingers were formed; from Kubera's fire, Her nose came out; from the excellent tejas of Prajāpati, teeth; from the fire of Agni, Her three eyes; from the fire of the twilights, Her eye-brows and from the fire of Vāyu, Her ears appeared.

कर्षा बायव्यो जाती तेजसो मनुजाधिप।

सर्वोषा तेजसा देवी जाता महिषमर्दिति ॥ १ 5 ॥

शूलं द्वी शिवो विष्णुधकं शर्ज़ च पाणभृत् ।

दुताग्नो ददी शर्फिं माल्जाशप्यासके ॥ 16 ॥

खत्र महेन्द्र: प्रददी घणटं चैरावतादज्ञात् ।

कालदण्डं यमो बढ़ा चाक्षमालाकमण्डत् ॥ 17 ॥

दिवाकरी राश्ममालां रोमकृषेपुं संदद्धि ।

काल: खड्यां तथा चर्म पिंनलं वसुधाधिपि ॥ 18 ॥

स्मुहो निर्मलं हारमजरे चावजे नृपः ।

चूढामणि कुण्डले च कटकानि तयासुकूदे ॥ 19 ॥

अधिनन्द्र निर्मलं च नूपुराणि तथा दहो ।

प्रेवयकं पूर्णं च तस्ये देखे मृदावित्वः ॥ 20 ॥

विश्वकर्मा चोमिकाक्षा ददी तस्ये धरापते ।

हिमबान्बहनं सिंहं रत्नानि विधियानि च ॥ 21 ॥

O Lord of men! Thus Bhagavatī Mahisamardini was born of the Tejas (fiery substances) of the Devas. Next Śiva gave Her the Śula (weapon spear); Viṣṇu gave Sudarśana (Cakra:) Varuna gave

the conchshell; Fire gave Śakti (weapon); Vāyu gave Her bows and arrows; Indra gave Her thunder bolt and the bell of the elephant Airāvata; Yama gave Her the Destruction Staff (Kāla Dānḍa); Brahmā gave Her the Rudrāksa, rosary and Kamandalu; the Sun gave Her, in every pore the wonderful rays; the Time (Kāla) gave Her sharp axe and shield; the oceans gave Her the beautiful necklace and new clothes two in number); Viśvakarmā gladly gave Her the crown, ear-rings, Katāka, Aīgada, Candrādhā, tinklets; and the Himālayas gave Her the Lion as Her Vehicle and various gems and jewels.

पानपात्रं सुरापूर्णं ददौ तस्ये धनाधिपः ।

गेशघ्र भगवान्देवो नागहानं ददी विषुः ॥ 2 2 ॥

अन्यैरोषविद्ध्यैर्मानिता सा जगन्मयी ।

तां तुड्युर्भोहदौं देवा महिष्योहिताः ॥ 2 3 ॥

नानास्तोत्रैमैंडगानीं जगतुुद्वकतिरिणीम् ।

तेषां निगम्य देवेशीं स्तोयं विबुधपूजिता ॥ 2 4 ॥

Kubera, the Lord of wealth gave Her the cup filled with the drink; Bhagavān Ananta Deva gave Her a necklace of snakes (Nāgahāra). Thus the World Mother, the Devi, became honoured by all the Devas. The Devas, very much oppressed by Mahisāsura, then, chanted various hymns of praise of the World Mother Maheśvari Mahā Devi.

महिषस्य व्याधार्य महानादं चकार है ।

तेन नाने महिष्यक्तितोभूद्धारणे ॥ 25 ॥

आसासदा जगद्धारी सर्वैसै-यममावृतः ।

ततः स युवुये देव्या महिषाखो महामुतः ॥ 26 ॥

Hearing their Stotras, the Devesí, worshipped by the Devas, shouted aloud the War-Cry. O King! Mahisāsura, startled at that War-Cry, came to Bhagavatī with all his army corps.

शक्रात्बैबंद्धा हिंपर: पूर्यब्रंबरात्मम् ।

विश्वुगो प्रामणी: सेनपातिरुंधरवुंखी ॥ 27 ॥

वाक्लस्ताम्रकश्ठेव विज्ञालवद्नोउपर: ।

एतेश्ञान्यैरसंख्यतः संग्रामांकसश्रिधः ॥ 28 ॥

Then that great Asura Mahisa hurled various weapons in the air and overcast the sky with them

Book X Chapter XII

and began to fight with great skill. The several generals Ciksura, Durdhara, Durmukha, Bāskala, Tāmraka, Bidālākṣa and various other innumerable generals as if Death incarnate, accompanied Mahisa, the chief Dānava. A fierce fight then ensued.

योधे: परिवृत्तो वीरी महिषो दानवोभमः ।

ततः सा कोपताघाडी देवी लोकविमोहिति ॥ 29 ॥

जघान योधानसमरे देवी महिष्याशितान् ।

तत्नतेषु ह्रोल्लेय स दैर्यो रोषमूर्हितः ॥ 30 ॥

Then the Devi Who enchants all the beings, became red-eyed with anger and began to kill the generals of the against party. When the generals were killed one by one Mahisāsura, skilled in the science of magic, came up quickly to the front of the Devi.

अससाद तदादेवीं तूर्ण माया शिज्ञादः ।

रूपात्रातणि संभेने मायया दानविश्वः ॥ 31 ॥

तानि तान्यस्य रूपाणि नागयामास सा तदा ।

ततोउने मिहिं रूपं विश्वाणाममार्दिनम् ॥ 32 ॥

The Lord of the Dānvas, then, by his magic power, began to assume various forms. Bhagavati, too, began to destroy his those forms. Then the Daitya, the crusher of the Devas, assumed the form of a buffalo and began to fight.

पाशेन बद्यमा सुवृद्धित्या खद्येन तिछ्छः ।

पातयामास माहिषे देवी देवपाणोतकम् ॥ 33 ॥

हाहाकृतं ततः शेयं सैन्यं भवनं दिशो द्वग ।

गुरुदुर्देवदेवेशीं सर्वे देवाः प्रमोदिताः ॥ 34 ॥

The Devi then fastened the animal, the Asura, the Death of the Devas, tightly and cut off his head by Her axe. The remainder of his forces, then, fled away in terror and disorder with a loud cry. The Devas became very glad and began to chant hymns to the Devi.

एवं लक्ष्मी: समुपत्रमा महिषासुरमादिंति ।

राजऋषुगु सरस्वला: प्रादुभवीये यधारभवत् ॥ 35 ॥

एकदा शुभ्यनामासेसहित्यो मद्वलोतकरः ।

निरुभंश्याति तद्ध्याता महावलपराकमः ॥ 36 ॥

O King! Thus the Lakṣmī Devi appeared to kill

Mahisāsura. Now I will describe how Sarasvatī appeared. Listen. Once on a time the two very powerful Daityas Śumbha and Nisūmbha were born.

तेन संपीक्षिता देवाः सर्वे षछ्धिगयो नृप ।

हिम्वंतमथासाठ देवीं तुडुबुगदात् ॥ 37 ॥

They attacked the Devas, oppressed them and siezed their houses and rights. The Devas became dispossessed of their kingdoms and went to the Himalayas and offered stotras to the Devi with the greatest devotion:

देव कबुः

जय देवेशि भक्तानामार्तिनार्फकोंविदे ।

दानवांतकल्पे त्वमजामाणेउपदे ॥ 38 ॥

देवेशि भक्तिसुलभे महावलपताकमे ।

विष्णुगंकरबघाद्धावस्वलोउनंतविक्रम ॥ 39 ॥

“O Devesi! O Thou, skilled in removing the difficulties of the Bhaktas! Victory to Thee! O Thou, the Sinless One! Old age and death cannot touch Thee. O Thou! Death incarnate to the Dānavas! O Devesi! O Thou, of mighty valour and prowess! O Thou, the embodiment of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa! Unbounded is Thy might; Thou canst be easily reached by the power of devotion.

यृष्टिश्वितिकर नाराकारिके कांतिदायिनि ।

महातांडवसुप्रीते मोदादायिनि माधवि ॥ 40 ॥

O Thou, the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer! O Mādhavī! O Thou, the Giver of Bliss! Thou dance with great joy at the time of the dissolution of all the things (Pralaya).

प्रसीद देवदेवेशि प्रसीद कल्पानिधे ।

निरुभयुभंसभृतभयागतंबुवारयिधे ॥41 ॥

उद्धारसामप्रभातीनाफिके शरणागतान् ।

एवं संस्तुवतां तेचां विद्यानां धरायते ॥42 ॥

O Thou, full of mercy! O Deva Devesi! Be gracious unto us. O Thou, the Remover of the sufferings of the refugees! We now come unto Thy protection. The terror of Śumbha and Niśumbha is like an endless ocean unto us. Save, save us from their fast clutches. O Devi! save us O King! verily.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

प्रसा शिरिजा प्राह् वृत् तत्वनकारणम् ।

एतमिसत्रेते तत्या कौगरूपातस्मृति्वता ॥ 43 ॥

कोशिकी सा जगत्पूज्या देवान्यीत्येदमब्रवीत् ।

प्रसाजई सुरश्रेषा: तद्वोत्तमसषिणी ॥ 44 ॥

When the Devas praised thus, the daughter of the Himālayas, Bhagavatī became pleased and asked “What is the matter?” In the meanwhile, there emitted from the physical sheath of the Devi, another Devi Kaūsikī who gladly spoke to the Devas: “O Suras! I am pleased with Thy Stotra. Now ask the boon that you desire.

विद्यतां वर इन्युक्ते देवा: संविज्ञे वरम् ।

गुभनामास्वरो घाता निरुभभतस्य विश्रुतः ॥ 4 5 ॥

त्रैलोक्यमोजसास्धात्रां दैत्येन वलगालिना ।

तद्धधिक्न्यतां देवि दुरात्मा दानवेक्षरः ॥ 4 6 ॥

बाघते सततं देवि तिरस्कृत्य निजीजसा ।

The Devas then asked for the following boon: "O Devi! The two famous Daityas Śumbha and Niśumbha have forcibly the three worlds. The wicked Lord of the Dānavas, Śumbha, has overcome us by the power of his arm and is now tormenting us without any break. Kindly devise some means to kill him."

श्रीव्यवाच

देवशर्तु पातयिष्ठ निरुर्णं शुर्णमेव च ।। 47 ।। स्वस्थातिस्वतुं घरूदं कः कंटक नारणायाम वः ।

इत्युक्त्वा देवदेवेशी देवान्सेग्रान्त्वायामी ॥ 48 ॥

जगामादर्शने सघो भिवर्तो विद्वीकासम् ।

देवा: समागता हुई सुवर्णाश्रिगृहा गुभम् ॥ 49 ॥

The Devi said: “O Devas! Be patient. I will kill these two Daityas, Śumbha and Niśumbha and thus remove the thorn on your way. At an early date I will do good to you” Thus saying to Indra and the other Devas, the merciful Devi disappeared at once before their eyes. The Devas with their hearts delighted went to the beautiful Sumeru Mountain and dwelt there in the caves thereof.

चंद्रमुंडी पयन्त:सभ पृभ्यी शृभनिरुर्णभयो:।

दूद्या तां चास्वर्मीं देवीं लोकविमेहिन् ॥ 50 ॥

Here the servants of Śumbha and Niśumbha

Canda and Mumda, while they were making their circuits, saw the exquisitely beautiful Devi, the Enchantress of the world, and came back to Śumbha, their King and said:

कथयामासृत रोते घृष्यौ ती चरणडुंडको ।

देव सर्वीसुरोष्ठ रत्नभोगाई मानद ॥ 51 ॥

अपूर्वों कामिनी द्वा चाचाप्यां रिपुमदौन ।

तत्या: सभागोपायोरत्वमस्येव तत सम्रात् ॥ 52 ॥

"O Destroyer of enemies! O Giver of honour! O Great King! You are the Lord of all the Daityas and are fit to enjoy all the gems and jewels. Today we have seen an extraordinary beautiful woman jewel. She is fit to be enjoyed by you.

तां समानय चार्वर्गी घंभूव सीख्यसमन्वितः ।

ताडूरी नागूरी नारी न गंधर्वर्गे न दानवी ॥ ५३ ॥

न मानवी नायि देये यादूगी सा मनोहरा ।

So now you would better bring that perfectly beautiful woman and enjoy. No such enchanting woman can be seen amongst the Asura women, Nāga Kanyās, Gandharva women, Dānavīs or men."

एवं भृपत्यचः श्रुत्वा शुभ्यः परखतादनः ॥ 54 ॥

दूतं संप्रेयामास सुर्गीवं नाम दानयम् ।

स दूतत्वितरं गत्वा देल्या: सविध्यपादगत् ॥ 55 ॥

Hearing thus the words of the servent, Sumbha, the tormentor of the foes, sent a Daitya named Sugriva as a messenger to Her. The messenger went to the Devi as early as possible and spoke to Her all that Sumbha had told him.

यूतांतं कवयामास देखे शुभ्यस्य यद्धचः ।

देवि शुभ्यासुरो नाम जैतोक्याविकरणी प्रभुः ॥ 56 ॥

सर्वेषा रत्वसूनां भोक्ता माटो दिवीकसाम ।

तदुक्ते शृणुं मे देखे रत्नभोक्ताउहमव्यः ॥ 57 ॥

“O Devi! The Asura Śumbha is now the conqueror of the three worlds and respected by the Devas. O Devi! He is now enjoying all that is best, the gems and jewels. O Devi! I am his messenger sent here to convey to you his message as follows: O Devi! I am the sole enjoyment of all the jewels. O Beautiful-eyed! You are a gem; so you would worship me.

Book X Chapter XII

तं चापि रत्नभूताउसि भव मां भाछलोचने ।

सर्वेषु याति रत्नाति देवासुरनरेषु च ॥ 58 ॥

ताति मध्ये सुभगे भव मां कामजे सैः ।

O Fair One! All the gems and jewels that are in the Deva loka, in the Daitya loka, or amongst the regions of men, are under my control. So you would lovingly worship me."

देव्युवाच

स्वयं वदसि हे दूत दैत्यराजप्रियंकरम् ॥ 59 ॥

प्रतित्रा या मया पूर्वं कृता सप्रयन्ता कवम् ।

घवेत्तां श्युण मे दूत या प्रतित्रा यथा कृता ॥ 60 ॥

The Devi said: “O Messenger! True that you are speaking for your King; but I made a promise before How can I act against it? O Messenger! Hear what I promised.

घो मे दूरं चिक्युतुते घो मे बलमपोहिति ।

घो मे प्रतिबलो भूमालय एवं मय भोगभाक् ॥ 6 1 ॥

तत एणां प्रतिभां ते सत्यां कृतवासुरुंश्रः ।

गृह्तुत पाणिं तरसा तत्यागलयं किमग्र ति ॥ 62 ॥

Whoever in the three worlds will conquer me by sheer force and thus crush My vanity, whoever will be as stong as Myself, He can enjoy Me. So the King of Daityas can prove My promise true and by sheer force can marry Me.

तस्माद्रच्छ महातून स्वामिनं बूहि चातून: ।

प्रतिज्ञां चापि ते सत्यां चित्यायिति वन्ताधिकः ॥ ६३ ॥

एवं वायवं महाविद्याः स्माकाण्यं स दानाः ।

कदयामास सुभार देवता वृत्तनामदिति: ॥ 6 4 ॥

What is there with him that he cannot do? So, Messenger! Go back to your master and tell him all this so that the powerful Šumbha may fulfil My promise." Hearing thus the words of the Great Devi, the messenger went back to Šumbha and informed him everything regarding the Devi's sayings.

तद्धार्थि वृत्तावयं सुभभः शुत्वा महावलः ।

कोभमाहारयामास महांतं दनुजाधिपः ॥ 65 ॥

ततो ध्यास्थनामानं दैत्वं दैत्यपति: प्रभुः ।

आदिदेश शृणु वचो धृमाश्रम मचान्तः ॥ 66 ॥

The very powerful Lord of the Daityas, Śumbha

became very angry at the unpleasant words of the messenger and commanded the Daitya named Dhūmrāksa: "O Dhūmrāksa! Listen to my words with great attention.

तां दुहों केशागशेषु धृत्वाध्यानीयतां मा ।

सभीभगवितंबेन शीर्घं गच्छव मे पुरः ॥ 67 ॥

इत्यादेशे समासाठा दैत्येणो ध्रुपलोचनः ।

घट्याउपुराणां सहितः सहस्नाणां महावलः ॥ 68 ॥

Go and catch hold of that wicked woman by her hairs and bring her to me. Go quikly; do not delay." Thus commanded, the very powerful and the best of the Daityas, Dhūmraksa, went at once to the Devi with sixty thousand Daityas and cried aloud to Her:

तुहित्यालमासादा देल्या: सविधमेव स: ।

उन्द्रैदेंँी जगादायु भज देत्यलिं गुधे ॥ 69 ॥

गुण्यं नाम महात्रीयं सर्वभोगानादपुहि ।

नोचेकेशग-गृतीखा त्वां नेचे देत्यलिं प्रति ॥ 70 ॥

"O Auspicious One! You would better worship quickly our Lord Śumbha, who is very powerful and mighty; you will then acquire all sorts of pleasures; else I will hold you by your hairs and take you to the Lord of the Daityas.

इतयुक्ता सा ततो देवी दैलेन विहरणार्णा ।

उदाच देल यदखूसे ततस्यां ते महावल ॥ ७ १ ॥

राज यृष्मापुरस्यं च किं कंरिष्यस तिहद ।

इतयुक्ती देलयोधावतूर्णी शहस्मन्वितः ॥ ७ २ ॥

Thus addressed by Dhūmrāksa Daityas, the enemy of the Devas, the Devi said: "O Powerful One! O Dainya! What you have spoken is perfectly right, but tell me first what you or your king Šumbha can do to Me? When the Devi said thus, the Dainya Dhūmralocana rushed to Her at once with arms and weapons.

भस्मसानं चकारायुं हृकांगण महेश्वरी ।

ततः सैन्यं वाहनेन देव्या भनम् महीपते ॥ 73 ॥

दिश्री द्राणभाज्छीधं हाहाम्पतमचोतनम् ।

तत्वुक्तांत समाश्रुल स युष्यो देवतार्विषयु: ॥ 74 ॥

With one loud noise, Maheśvari burnt him immediately to ashes. O King! The other forces

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

were partly crushed by the Lion, the vehicle of the Devi and partly fled away in disorder to all the quarters; some become senseless out of fear. Šumbha, the Lord of the Daityas, became very angry to hear this.

घुकोप च महाकोपाद्धुकुटीकुटिलानः ।

ततः कोयपरीतात्या दैत्यराजः प्रसापवान् ॥ 75 ॥

चण्डे भुपं रक्तबीजं कमतः श्रेयदिषुः ।

ते च गत्वा जयो दैत्या विक्रिता बहुविक्रमः ॥ 76 ॥

His face assumed a terrible form with eyebrows contracted. Then he became impatient with anger and sent in order Caṇḍa, Muṇḍa and Raktabīja. The three powerful Daityas went to the battle and tried their might to capture the Devi.

देवी ग्रहीतुपारक्ष्यतालते हृषयब्बलात् ।

तानपातत एवासी जनाद्धारी गदोल्कटा ॥ 77 ॥

गूलं गृहीत्वा वेगेन पातवामास भृतले ।

ससै-्याजित्ञातञ्युल्या दैत्यांक्सी-त्नावेश्वशी ॥ 78 ॥

The Devi Jagaddhātri, of violent prowess, seeing that these three Daityas were coming to Her, killed them by Her trident and laid them prostrate on the ground. Hearing their death with all their army, Śumbha and Niśumbha came in their own persons arrogantly to the battlefield.

गृभश्रैय निर्गुंभश्र समाजमनुर्गोजसा।

निरुभश्रैय रूपमश्र कृत्वा युद्धं महोत्कटम् ॥ 79 ॥

देव्याश्र वरणो जाती नित्ती च तयासुरुगे ।

इति दैत्यवं रुष्मं घताथित्वा जानमयी ॥ 80 ॥

Śumbha and Niśumbha fought for a time with the Devi a terrible fight and became tired, when the Devi killed them outright. When the Bhagavatī, Who is all this world, killed Śumbha and Niśumbha, the Devas began to praise Bhagavatī, the Supreme Deity of Vāk (Word) incarnate.

विद्युः: संस्तुता तत्साधाश्वात्राणीश्वरा ।

एवं ते वर्णिता राजन्यादुभांवो5तिरयकः ॥ 8 1 ॥

काल्याश्री महालक्षया: सस्वतःा: क्रंणेच च ।

परा पोषधी देवी जानसर्व कांतीत च ॥ 8 2 ॥

O King! Thus I have spoken to you in due order the manner in which the beautiful Kālī, Mahā

Laksmī and Sarasvatī incarnated themselves on the earth. That Supreme Deity, the Devi Paramesvārī thus creates, preserves, and destroys the Universe.

पालनं चैव संहारं सेव देवी द्याति हि ।

तं समाश्रय देवेश्रीं जानमोहनिवारिणीम् ॥ 83 ॥

महागायां पूज्यतमां सा ते कार्य विधायस्ति ।

You better take refuge of that highly adored Devi, that causes the distinction and the delusion of this Universe. Then only you will attain success.

नारायण उवाच

इति राजा वचः श्रुत्वा मुनेः परमर्शोभनम् ॥ 84 ॥

देवीं जगाम राशणं सर्वकामफलप्रदाम् ।

निराहो यतमाच च तन्मानघा समाहितः ॥ 85 ॥

Nārāyana said: The king Suratha, hearing these beautiful words of the Muni, took refuge of the Devi, that yields all desired objects.

देवीभूर्ति भूममची च पूर्वयामास भक्तितः ।

पूजनांते बलिं तस्ये निजगायासृवं द्वत् ॥ 86 ॥

तदा प्रसादा देवेशी जगदोनिः: कृपावतां ।

प्रादुर्भूषय पुत्तो वरं बूदीति भाषिणी ॥ 87 ॥

He built an earthen image of the Devi and, with concentrated attention, thought wholly of the Devi and began to worship Her with devotion. When the worship was over, he offered sacrifice of the blood of his body to the Devi. Then the World-Mother, the Deity of the Devas, became pleased and appeared before him and asked him: Accept the boon that you desire.

स राजा निजमोहस्य नारणं ज्ञानमुत्तमम् ।

राज्यं निष्क्रदंके चैव याचतिमय मेहधीगि ॥ 88 ॥

When the Devi said thus, the king asked from the Maheśvari that excellent knowledge whereby the ignorance is destroyed and as well the kingdom free from any dangers of difficulties.

श्रीद्व्यवास

राजशिक्कंटक राज्यं जानं दे मोहानागन् ।

भविष्यति मया दत्तमस्मिचेव भवे तव ॥ 89 ॥

अन्यच्छ श्रुणु घृपाल जन्मांतरविषेधि ।

भानोर्जन्म सामसाठा सावर्धिभ्यक्ति भवान् ॥ 90 ॥

The Devi said: "O King! By My boon, you will

Book X Chapter XIII

get your foeless kingdom in this very birth as well as the Jñānam that removes ignorance. O King! I will tell you also what you will be in the next birth. Hear. In your next birth, you will be the son of the Sun and be famous as Śāvarni Manu.

तत्र मन्त्रत्यापि पतित्वं बहुष्विकम् ।

सन्तर्ति बहुतां चाधि प्राधवसे महान्द्वान् ॥ 91 ॥

एवं दत्ता वरं देखी जगामादर्शनं तत ।

सोर्पि देख्या: प्रसदेत जातो मन्त्रताधिप: ॥ 92 ॥

By My boon you will be the Lord of the Manvantara, become very powerful and you will get good many sons." Thus granting him this boon, the Devi disappeared. By the Grace of the Devi,

Suratha became the Lord of the Manvantara.

एवं ते वर्धित साधो सावर्जझन्य कर्म च ।

एततदंतशा शुणवन्द्यमुकामान्यात् ॥ 93 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमहेशीभागते दशमरकम्ये देवीमहात्मये

ब्रहशो3धागः 11 12 11

O, Sādhu! Thus I have described to you the birth and deeds of Śāvārṇī. He who hears or reads this anecdote with devotion, will be a favourite of the Devi.

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the anecdote of Śāvārṇī Manu in the Mahāpurānam

Srimaddevbihāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book X Chapter XIII

