[Ch 34 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King said: O Bhagavan! Kindly narrate to me in detail now the methods how to serve and worship the Goddess and the Mantrams that are used on such occasions.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King said :-- O Bhagavān! Kindly narrate to me in detail now the methods how to serve and worship the Goddess and the Mantrams that are used on such occasions.

[Ch 34 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rsi said: “O King! I am now describing the method how to worship the Goddess. Hear. This leads to the fulfilment of all desires, to the liberation from one’s bondage, to self-realisation and to the destruction of all miseries.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣi said :-- O King! I am now describing the method how to worship the Goddess. Hear. This leads to the fulfilment of all desires, to the liberation from one’s bondage, to self-realisation and to the destruction of all miseries.

[Ch 34 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The worshipper has to perform his bath; then putting on a white cloth, he will have to perform his Vaidika and Tāntrika Sandhyā; then he should, with his heart controlled, perform his Ācamana a ceremony and select a good auspicious site for his own Pūjā purposes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The worshipper has to perform his bath; then putting on a white cloth, he will have to perform his Vaidik and Tāntrik Sandhyā; then he should, with his heart controlled, perform his Ācamana ceremony and select a good auspicious site for his own Poojā purposes.

[Ch 34 Verse 4-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next he should plaster the site with cow-dung and spread his sacred carpet (Āsana) whereon he is to take his seat with a cheerful mind and sip water for Āśamana three times. Then he is to collect the articles for worship according to his best capacity and place them duly in their respective position. He is to perform Prānāyāma (regulated his breath); and then follows the Bhūta Śuddhi, the purification of the old and the formation of the celestial body and Jīva-Śuddhi by which the Sādhaka becomes the Devatāmaya; he then proceeds to Mātrkā Nyāsa (i.e., setting mentally in their several places in the six Cakras and then externally by physical action the letters of the alphabet which form the different parts of the body of the Devatā. He then places his hand on different parts of his body, uttering distinctly at the same time the appropriate Mātrkā for that part). Bhūta-Śuddhi: Dissolve earth into water, water into fire, fire into air, air into ether into Aharhākra, Aharhākra into Mahat and Mahat into Prakṛti, the final Cause. This process is called Bhūta-Śuddhi. He is to mention then the time, date, tithi, and month of the year and make his Sankalapa; then he will have to assign to the different parts of his body the Mātṛkā Mantras duly as well as his own Mantram; next he is to meditate in his own body the seat of the different Devatās and do the internal worship. He is to breathe life into the Deity outside to be worshipped as well as within himself to be meditated and worshipped; then he is to do the same with the articals for worship and purify them by sprinkling with water and Astra or Phat Mantram, thus removing all sources of obstacles that are likely to interfere with the act. Next, on an auspicious copper plate, he is to draw inside a six-angled (hexagonal) figure (two triangles crossing each other with their vertices one upward and the other below) with white sandal paste or with eight perfumed things and outside this figure, an octagonal figure of eight petals; outside this he is to draw the boundary lines that is called the Bhūpura. On each of the eight petals he is to write each letter of the nine-lettered Bīja (Seed) Mantram and the ninth letter in the central ovum. Next by the Mantram by which breath is infused or by the Vedic Mantram he will have to place the Yantra in the proper position and then worship the Ādhāra Śakti (the Vital Force) in the central ovum and the holy seat with the Pitha Mantrams. He will have to invoke the Devi, uttering the Seed Mantram over a golden plate or figure and carefully worship Her by offering seats and other articles duly as enunciated in the Yāmala Tantras etc. Then he will have to perform the six-fold worship of the Ganas in the six angles and worship Indra, etc., and Vajra and others in the Bhūpura (the boundary), and thus finish the Pūjā of the Yantra. (For the Pūjā see the Prapañca Sāra.) Note.—Bhūpura is what is thought over outside front or in the beginning. Here the Gana Devatās are first thought over and worshipped. Worship outside, worship inside and See the Deity in and out, everywhere and be free” is the motto of the worship. In the absence of the Yantra, one will have to make a metalled image of Bhagavatī and worship Her with the greatest caution with the Mantras as expounded by Śiva in the Tantrams (of Yāmalā and others). Note: Yantra is that which restrains. This human body is the Yantra. And its imitators is placed outside in various shapes and figures. The Yantra is the mystical diagram used by the dovetes for worship.—Or one may use the Vaidika Mantrams in worshipping the Deity in accordance with the prescribed rules and with his mind controlled; then, merged in meditation, one is to mutter silently (perform the Japam of) the nine-lettered Mantram. (The Mantram is Krim, Dakṣine, Kālike, Svāhā). Japam (muttering or repeating silently the Mantram) is of two kinds—Nitya (daily) and Pauraścaranik (repetition of the name of the deity accompanied with burnt offerings). In the Nitya Japam, Nitya Homas are performed and in the occasional Pauraścaranik Japam, one tenth of this is offered; Abhiṣeka, too, is one-tenth of this Homa; Tarpanam is one-tenth of Abhiṣeka and the feeding of the Brāhmanas is one-tenth of what is done in the Tarpanam. O King! Thus completing the Japam one is to read daily the Canḍī (do the Candīpātha) where the three glorious deeds of the Devi are narrated; next he will have to allow the Deity invoked to depart to Her own place. The Navarātra Vrata (nine night vow) is next to be observed according to the proper rites and ceremonies. Hrīm Mahiṣa Mardinyai Svāha is the Mantra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next he should plaster the site with cow-dung and spread his sacred carpet (Āsana) whereon he is to take his seat with a cheerful mind and sip water for Ācamana three times. Then he is to collect the articles for worship according to his best capacity and place them duly in their respective positions. He is to perform Prāṇāyāma (regulate his breath); and then follows the Bhuta-Śuddhi, the purification of the old and the formation of the celestial body and Jīva-Śuddhi by which the Sādhaka becomes the Devatā-maya; he then proceeds to Mātrikā Nyāsa (i.e., setting mentally in their several places in the six Cakras and then externally by physical action the letters of the alphabet which form the different parts of the body of the Devatā. He then places his hand on different parts of his body, uttering distinctly at the same time the appropriate Mātrikā for that part). Bhuta-Śuddhi :-- Dissolve earth into water, water into fire, fire into air, air into ether; ether into Ahamkāra, Ahamkāra into Maḥat and Maḥat into Prakriti, the final Cause. This process is called Bhuta-Śuddhi. He is to mention then the time, date, tithi, and month of the year and make his Saṅkalpa; then he will have to assign to the different parts of his body the Mātrikā Mantrams duly as well as his own Mantram; next he is to meditate in his own body the seat of the different Devatās and do the internal worship. He is to breathe life into the Deity outside to be worshipped as well as within himself to be meditated and worshipped; then he is to do the same with the articles for worship and purify them by sprinkling with water and Astra or Phaṭ Mantram, thus removing all sources of obstacles that are likely to interfere with the act. Next, on an auspicious copper plate, he is to draw inside a six-angled (hexagonal) figure (two triangles crossing each other with their vertices one upward and the other below) with white sandal paste or with eight perfumed things and outside this figure, an octagonal figure of eight petals; outside this he is to draw the boundary lines that is called the Bhūpura. On each of the eight petals he is to write each letter of the nine-lettered Vīja (Seed) Mantram and the ninth letter in the central ovum. Next by the Mantram by which breath is infused or by the Vedic Mantram he will have to place the Yantra in the proper position and then worship the Ādhāra Śakti (the vital Force) in the central ovum and the holy seat with the Pīṭha Mantrams. He will have to invoke the Devī, uttering the Seed Mantram over a golden plate or figure and carefully worship Her by offering seats and other articles duly as enunciated in the Yāmala Tāntras, etc. Then he will have to perform the six-fold worship of the Gaṇas in the six angles and worship Indra, etc., and Vajra and others in the Bhūpura (the boundary) and thus finish the Poojā of the Yantra. (For the Poojā see the Prapañca Sāra. ) Note :-- Bhūpura is what is thought over outside front or in the beginning. Here the Gaṇa Devatās are first thought over and worshipped. Worship outside, worship inside and See the Deity in and out, everywhere and be free is the motto of the worship. In the absence of the Yantra, one will have to make a metalled image of Bhagavatī and worship Her with the greatest caution with the Mantras as expounded by Śiva in the Tantrams (of Jāmalā and others). Note :-- Yantra is that which restrains. This human body is the Yantra. And its imitation is placed outside in various shapes and figures. The Yantra is the mystical diagram used by the devotees for worship. Or one may use the Vaidik Mantrams in worshipping the Deity in accordance with the prescribed rules and with his mind controlled; then, merged in meditation, one is to mutter silently (perform the Japam of) the nine-lettered Mantram. (The Mantram is Krīm Dakṣiṇe Kālike Svāhā). Japam (muttering or repeating silently the Mantram) is of two kinds :-- Nitya (daily) and Pauraścaranik (repetition of the name of the deity accompanied with burnt offerings). In the Nitya Japam, Nitya Homas are performed and in the occasional Pauraścaranik Japam, one tenth of this is offerred; Abhiṣeka, too, is one-tenth of this Homa; Tarpaṇam is one-tenth of Abhiṣeka and the feeding of the Brāhmaṇas is one-tenth of what is done in the Tarpaṇam. O King! Thus completing the Japam one is to read daily the Caṇḍī (do the Caṇḍīpāṭha) where the three glorious deeds of the Devī are narrated; next he will have to allow the Deity invoked to depart to Her own place. The Navarātra Vrata (nine night vow) is next to be observed according to the proper rites and ceremonies. Hrīm Mahiṣa Mardinyai Svāhā is the Mantra.

[Ch 34 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the bright fortnight of the month of Śāvin or Caitra, is to be observed the fasting of the Navarātra by those who desire for their own welfare.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the bright fortnight of the month of Āsvin or Caitra, is to be observed the fasting of the Navarātra by those who desire for their own welfare.

[Ch 34 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Homas are to be offered, many in number, and Mantrams are to be recited, the same as in one's own Mantram, good Pāyasam with sugar, ghee, and honey mixed is to be offered in this ceremony.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Homas are to be offered, many in number, and Mantrams are to be recited, the same as in one’s own Mantram, good Pāyasam with sugar, ghee, and honey mixed is to be offered in this ceremony.

[Ch 34 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Goat meat, or holy leaves of the Bel tree, or red Karavīra flowers or til (sesamum seed) mixed with honey can be used instead in the Homa ceremony.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Goat meat, or holy leaves of the Bel tree, or red Karavīr flowers or til (sesamum seed) mixed with honey can be used instead in the Homa ceremony.

[Ch 34 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The special days for the worship of the Devi are the eighth, ninth, or fourteenth day (tithi) of the half month. The feeding of the Brāhmins must be done on each occasion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The special days for the worship of the Devī are the eighth, ninth, or fourteenth day (tithi) of the half month. The feeding of the Brāhmins must be done on each occasion.

[Ch 34 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Thus the poor become wealthy, the diseased get cured, and the persons that have no issue get obedient and well qualified sons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Thus the poor become wealthy, the diseased get cured, and the persons that have no issue get obedient and well qualified sons.

[Ch 34 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King, expelled from his kingdom, gets back by the grace of Mahā Māyā, dominion over the whole earth and becomes able to destroy all those enemies of his, by whom he was before vanquished, when he worships the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King, expelled from his kingdom, gets back by the grace of Mahā Māyā, dominion over the whole earth and becomes able to destroy all those enemies of his, by whom he was before vanquished, when he worships the Devī.

[Ch 34 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The persons, desirous of learning, get undoubtedly the learning honourable and auspicious, provided he worships the Devi with his senses restrained.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The persons, desirous of learning, get undoubtedly the learning honourable and auspicious, provided he worships the Devī with his senses restrained.

[Ch 34 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Persons of all castes, Brāhmīns, Ksatriyas, Vaiśyas or Śūdras can become masters of all pleasures and happiness provided they worship with devotion to the Devi, the Preserver of the World (the Jagaddhātri).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Persons of all castes, Brāhmins, Kṣatriyas, Vaiśyas or Śūdras can become masters of all pleasures and happiness provided they worship with devotion the Devī, the Preserver of the World (the Jagaddhātrī).

[Ch 34 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► A man or woman whoever performs the Navarātra vow always full of devotion, gets all the desired fruits. Whoever celebrates the holy Navarātra ceremony in the bright fortnight of the month of Aśvin with his heart full of the thought of the Devi, gets all his desired fruits.
NEW CORR ENG ──► A man or woman whoever performs the Navarātra vow always full of devotion, gets all the desired fruits. Whoever celebrates the holy Navarātra ceremony in the bright fortnight of the month of Āśvin with his heart full of the thought of the Devī, gets all his desired fruits.

[Ch 34 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Now I am describing the rites and ceremonies; here a square raised platform or altar is to be made according to the prescribed rules; a water jar is then to be placed on it with the Vedic mantrams and due rites and ceremonies.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Now I am describing the rites and ceremonies; here a square raised platform or altar is to be made according to the prescribed rules; a water-jar is then to be placed on it with the Vedic mantrams and due rites and ceremonies.

[Ch 34 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One will have to make a beautiful Yantra according to the previously laid rules and the water-jar is to be placed on it; then spread the beautiful Yava grains all around the jar.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One will have to make a beautiful Yantra according to the previously laid rules and the water-jar is to be placed on it; then spread the beautiful Yava grains all around the jar.

[Ch 34 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► An awning or pandāla is to be erected over the altar and the place of worship, and the site is to be decorated with flowers. Lights and Dhūpas, incense and perfumes are then to be used in the hall of the Candikā Devī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► An awning or pandal is to be erected over the altar and the place of worship, and the site is to be decorated with flowers. Lights and Dhūpas, incense and perfumes are then to be used in the hall of the Caṇḍikā Devī.

[Ch 34 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The Devi is to be worshipped thrice; morning, midday and evening; no miserliness is to be shown in spending wealth for this purpose.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The Devī is to be worshipped thrice; morning, midday and evening; no miserliness is to be shown in spending wealth for this purpose.

[Ch 34 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Light, dhūp, good presents of rice and other edibles, flowers, and fruits of various kinds are to be offered in this worship of the Devi; the chanting of the hymns of the Vedas, songs, and music with the various instruments are to be done and a grand festivity is to be made.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Light, dhūp, good presents of rice and other edibles, flowers, and fruits of various kinds are to be offered in this worship of the Devī; the chanting of the hymns of the Vedas, songs, and music with the various instruments are to be done and a grand festivity is to be made.

[Ch 34 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Moreover, note this carefully that virgins are to be worshipped duly with sandal, ornaments, clothing, various edibles, sweet scented oil, and beautiful garlands. (This worship of the virgins of the virgins is one of the essentials.)
NEW CORR ENG ──► Moreover, note this carefully that virgins are to be worshipped duly with sandal, ornaments, clothings, various edibles, sweet scented oil, and beautiful garlands. (This worship of the virgins is one of the essentials.)

[Ch 34 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus completing the worship of the Devi, Homa is to be done duly with Mantrams and other necessary articles on the eighth or the ninth tithi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus completing the worship of the Devī, Homa is to be done duly with Mantrams and other necessary articles on the eighth or the ninth tithi.

[Ch 34 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Lastly the Brāhmins are to be fed duly; then the worshipper is to take his first meal after fasting (i.e., make pānaṃ) on the tenth day; then presents and various articles are to be offered to the Brāhmins according to one's might and with devotion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Lastly the Brāhmins are to be fed duly; then the worshipper is to take his first meal after fasting (i.e., make pāraṇam) on the tenth day; then presents and various articles are to be offered to the Brāhmin, according to one’s might and with devotion.

[Ch 34 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Any man, or any chaste married woman or a chaste widow whoever performs thus the Navarātra Vrata gets in this world all the desired fruits and enjoys all sorts of enjoyments and gets unbounded happiness and after death goes to the highest place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Any man, or any chaste married woman or a chaste widow whoever performs thus the Navarātra Vrata gets in this world all the desired fruits and enjoys all sorts of enjoyments and gets unbounded happiness and after death goes to the highest place.

[Ch 34 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And if, owing to some cause or other, he has to take his birth again in this world, he would be born in an excellent and would become endowed with good conduct and qualifications and get the unflinching devotion towards the Ambikā Devī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And if, owing to some cause or other, he has to take his birth again in this world, he would be born in an excellent family and would become endowed with good conduct and qualifications and get the unflinching devotion towards the Ambikā Devī.

[Ch 34 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! I have thus described to you the rules of the Navarātra ceremony; this vow is the best of all; highest and greatest pleasures and happinesses are obtained in worshipping thus the auspicious Mahā Māyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! I have thus described to you the rules of the Navarātra ceremony; this vow is the best of all; highest and greatest pleasures and happinesses are obtained in worshipping thus the auspicious Mahā Māyā.

[Ch 34 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Better worship Caṇḍikā duly according to the prescribed rules; then you would be able, by Her grace, to conquer all your enemies and you will regain your excellent dominion, unshaken by any, and you will get again the highest pleasure and happiness when you will be reunited with your wife and sons in your own palace; there is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Better worship Caṇḍikā duly according to the prescribed rules; then you would be able, by Her grace, to conquer all your enemies and you will regain your excellent dominion, unshaken by any, and you will get again the highest pleasure and happiness when you will be reunited with your wife and sons in your own palace; there is no doubt in this.

[Ch 34 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Vaiśya! You, too, better worship the same Mahā Māyā, the Goddess of the Universe, worshipping Whom leads to the fructification of all desires.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Vaiśya! You, too, better worship the same Mahā Mayā, the Goddess of the Universe, worshipping Whom leads to the fructification of all desires.

[Ch 34 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You will then be able to regain all your wordily pleasures in your own home and be respected by your relatives and acquaintances and finally, after your death, you will go to the holy abode of the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You will then be able to regain all your worldly pleasures in your own home and be respected by your relatives and acquaintances and finally, after your death, you will go to the holy abode of the Devī.

[Ch 34 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There is no doubt in this. Those that do not worship the Devi, go to Naraka or hell; moreover they suffer much from various diseases in this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There is no doubt in this. Those that do not worship the Devī, go to Naraka or hell; moreover they suffer much from various diseases in this world.

[Ch 34 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those that do not worship the Devi are always defeated by their enemies, are void of wife and sons, become stupid and suffer pains from their unsatisfied desires.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those that do not worship the Devī are always defeated by their enemies, are void of wife and sons, become stupid and suffer pains from their unsatisfied desires.

[Ch 34 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And those that worship the Preservix of this world the Bel leaves, Karavīra flowers, Śatapatra and Campaka flowers, that blessed man, devoted to the Devi, gets filled with all sorts of enjoyments.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And those that worship the Preservrix of this world with the Bel leaves, Karavīra flowers, Śatapatra and Champaka flowers, that blessed man, devoted to the Devī, gets filled with all sorts of enjoyments.

[Ch 34 Verse 43-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! What more can I say than this, that those who have worshipped the Devi Bhavānī with the Mantrams approved by the Nigama Śāstras, those very persons get honour in this world and are filled with all sorts of power and wealth. Verily, they stand foremost in the rank of best men, becoming the only repositories of all the best qualities in this world. Here ends the Thirty-fourth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the methods of the worship of the Devi in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa. [1] 2017年1月1日 Šrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! What more can I say than this, that those who have worshipped the Devī Bhavānī with the Mantrams approved by the Nigama Śāstras, those very persons get honour in this world and are filled with all sorts of power and wealth. Verily, they stand foremost in the rank of best men, becoming the only repositories of all the best qualities in this world. Here ends the Thirty-fourth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the methods of the worship of the Devī in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
