CHAPTER XXXIV

On the Worship of the Devi

राजोबाच

भाववन्दूरि मे सत्यकन्या आरापने विधिम् ।

पूजारिविं च मन्योक्ष तथा होमविंधि वद ॥ १ ॥

The King said: O Bhagavan! Kindly narrate to me in detail now the methods how to serve and worship the Goddess and the Mantrams that are used on such occasions.

ऋरिकवाच

शृणु राजन्यवक्ष्यामि तस्याः पूजाविशुं शुभम् ।

कामवं मोक्षवं नृणां ज्ञानदं दुःखनारुम् ॥ 2 ॥

The Rsi said: “O King! I am now describing the method how to worship the Goddess. Hear. This leads to the fulfilment of all desires, to the liberation from one’s bondage, to self-realisation and to the destruction of all miseries.

आदी सनापिधिं कृत्वा गुधि: शुकलापवो नरः ।

आचय प्रवतः कृत्वा शुभमायतनं निजम् ॥ ३ ॥

The worshipper has to perform his bath; then putting on a white cloth, he will have to perform his Vaidika and Tāntrika Sandhyā; then he should, with his heart controlled, perform his Ācamana a ceremony and select a good auspicious site for his own Pūjā purposes.

ततोउलिपतभूम्यां तु संस्थायासनुभनम् ।

तत्रोपधिप्य विधिप्रवित्रचच्य मूर्यान्वतः ॥ 4 ॥

पूजाद्यैं सुसंस्थाय यथाशक्यनुसारतः ।

प्राणायमं ततः कृत्वा भूतगृद्धि विधाय च ॥ 5 ॥

कुर्णवीर्णाप्रतिशं तु संघांर प्रोक्ष्य मंत्रतः ।

काल्नानं ततः कृत्वा न्यासं कुर्णीधाविधि ॥ 6 ॥

शुभे ताममये पात्रे चन्देन सितेन च ।

यद्कोर्ण विलिखिडोत्रं चाहकोणं ततो कहि: ॥ 7 ॥

नवाक्षरस्य मनस्य बीजानि विलिखेत्ततः ।

कृत्वा चन्द्रगितईं च वेदेत्नां संविधाय च ॥ 8 ॥

अर्शा वा धातर्वी कुर्मोलुजामनैः शिक्षोदितैः ।

पूजनं पृथिवीपाल भगवल्या: प्रयन्ततः ॥ 9 ॥

कृत्वा वा विक्रियलुजामागमोक्तां समाहितः ।

जयेत्रबाक्षरं मन्त्रं सत्ततं ध्यानपूर्वकम् ॥ 10 ॥

होमं द्रशणशतः कुर्महिंशोजेन च तर्पणम् ।

भोजनं ब्राह्मणानां च तद्धशोजन कारयेत् ॥ 11 ॥

चरित्रयपाटं च नियं कुर्मीढ़िसज्वैत् ।

नवरावतं चैव विधेयं विनिपूर्वकम् ॥ 12 ॥

Next he should plaster the site with cow-dung and spread his sacred carpet (Āsana) whereon he is to take his seat with a cheerful mind and sip water for Āśamana three times. Then he is to collect the articles for worship according to his best capacity and place them duly in their respective position. He is to perform Prānāyāma (regulated his breath); and then follows the Bhūta Śuddhi, the purification of the old and the formation of the celestial body and Jīva-Śuddhi by which the Sādhaka becomes the Devatāmaya; he then proceeds to Mātrkā Nyāsa (i.e., setting mentally in their several places in the six Cakras and then externally by physical action the letters of the alphabet which form the different parts of the body of the Devatā. He then places his hand on different parts of his body, uttering distinctly at the same time the appropriate Mātrkā for that part).

Bhūta-Śuddhi: Dissolve earth into water, water into fire, fire into air, air into ether into Aharhākra, Aharhākra into Mahat and Mahat into Prakṛti, the final Cause. This process is called Bhūta-Śuddhi.

He is to mention then the time, date, tithi, and month of the year and make his Sankalapa; then he will have to assign to the different parts of his body the Mātṛkā Mantras duly as well as his own Mantram; next he is to meditate in his own body the seat of the different Devatās and do the internal worship. He is to breathe life into the Deity outside to be worshipped as well as within himself to be meditated and worshipped; then he is to do the same with the articals for worship and purify them

Book V Chapter XXXIV

by sprinkling with water and Astra or Phat Mantram, thus removing all sources of obstacles that are likely to interfere with the act. Next, on an auspicious copper plate, he is to draw inside a six-angled (hexagonal) figure (two triangles crossing each other with their vertices one upward and the other below) with white sandal paste or with eight perfumed things and outside this figure, an octagonal figure of eight petals; outside this he is to draw the boundary lines that is called the Bhūpura. On each of the eight petals he is to write each letter of the nine-lettered Bīja (Seed) Mantram and the ninth letter in the central ovum. Next by the Mantram by which breath is infused or by the Vedic Mantram he will have to place the Yantra in the proper position and then worship the Ādhāra Śakti (the Vital Force) in the central ovum and the holy seat with the Pitha Mantrams. He will have to invoke the Devi, uttering the Seed Mantram over a golden plate or figure and carefully worship Her by offering seats and other articles duly as enunciated in the Yāmala Tantras etc. Then he will have to perform the six-fold worship of the Ganas in the six angles and worship Indra, etc., and Vajra and others in the Bhūpura (the boundary), and thus finish the Pūjā of the Yantra. (For the Pūjā see the Prapañca Sāra.) Note.—Bhūpura is what is thought over outside front or in the beginning. Here the Gana Devatās are first thought over and worshipped. Worship outside, worship inside and See the Deity in and out, everywhere and be free” is the motto of the worship. In the absence of the Yantra, one will have to make a metalled image of Bhagavatī and worship Her with the greatest caution with the Mantras as expounded by Śiva in the Tantrams (of Yāmalā and others). Note: Yantra is that which restrains. This human body is the Yantra. And its imitators is placed outside in various shapes and figures. The Yantra is the mystical diagram used by the dovetes for worship.—Or one may use

the Vaidika Mantrams in worshipping the Deity in accordance with the prescribed rules and with his mind controlled; then, merged in meditation, one is to mutter silently (perform the Japam of) the nine-lettered Mantram. (The Mantram is Krim, Dakṣine, Kālike, Svāhā). Japam (muttering or repeating silently the Mantram) is of two kinds—Nitya (daily) and Pauraścaranik (repetition of the name of the deity accompanied with burnt offerings). In the Nitya Japam, Nitya Homas are performed and in the occasional Pauraścaranik Japam, one tenth of this is offered; Abhiṣeka, too, is one-tenth of this Homa; Tarpanam is one-tenth of Abhiṣeka and the feeding of the Brāhmanas is one-tenth of what is done in the Tarpanam. O King! Thus completing the Japam one is to read daily the Canḍī (do the Candīpātha) where the three glorious deeds of the Devi are narrated; next he will have to allow the Deity invoked to depart to Her own place. The Navarātra Vrata (nine night vow) is next to be observed according to the proper rites and ceremonies. Hrīm Mahiṣa Mardinyai Svāha is the Mantra.

अधिंचे च तथा चैवे गुर्जले पढ़े नातिप्र ।

नवरायावसायों वै कर्तेल्य: शुभपिच्छता ॥ 13 ॥

In the bright fortnight of the month of Śāvin or Caitra, is to be observed the fasting of the Navarātra by those who desire for their own welfare.

होम: शुविषुतः कावोंं जयमनंः सुगवसः ।

गर्कनैरावृतमिश्री धन्युक्तैः सुसेंकृतैः ॥ 14 ॥

Homas are to be offered, many in number, and Mantrams are to be recited, the same as in one's own Mantram, good Pāyasam with sugar, ghee, and honey mixed is to be offered in this ceremony.

डागमांसेन वा कायां बिल्वपरैतंस्वा शुधेः ।

द्वाराकुर्णी रेन्थिनलैवां शक्रकायुतः ॥ 15 ॥

Goat meat, or holy leaves of the Bel tree, or red Karavīra flowers or til (sesamum seed) mixed with honey can be used instead in the Homa ceremony.

अध्यमं च चतुर्वयं नवम्यां च विशेषतः ।

कत्वेयं पूजनं देया ब्राह्मानां च भोजनम् ॥ 16 ॥

The special days for the worship of the Devi are the eighth, ninth, or fourteenth day (tithi) of the half month. The feeding of the Brāhmins must be done on each occasion.

निर्मीयं धन्यानोति रोगी रोगात्मुष्यने ।

अपूजी लभने पुत्राङ्छणांशे यशालनिंनः ॥ 17 ॥

O King! Thus the poor become wealthy, the diseased get cured, and the persons that have no issue get obedient and well qualified sons.

राज्यश्रो गोराज्य प्राप्नोति सावर्धीमिकम् ।

श्रविधि: यौवित्ती हृति रिर्युं मयाप्रसात्तः ॥ 18 ॥

The King, expelled from his kingdom, gets back by the grace of Mahā Māyā, dominion over the whole earth and becomes able to destroy all those enemies of his, by whom he was before vanquished, when he worships the Devi.

विद्यार्थी पुर्जनं यस्तु क्रोगे तिवर्पेतिः ।

अनवहां शुभां विहां विहेंं नात्र संशयः ॥ 19 ॥

The persons, desirous of learning, get undoubtedly the learning honourable and auspicious, provided he worships the Devi with his senses restrained.

ब्राहणः क्षिवौये कैश्यः शुत्रो वा फक्तिसंयुतः ।

पूजयेज्ञानां धात्री सर्वसैयुखाभगवेदे ।। 20 ॥

Persons of all castes, Brāhmīns, Ksatriyas, Vaiśyas or Śūdras can become masters of all pleasures and happiness provided they worship with devotion to the Devi, the Preserver of the World (the Jagaddhātri).

नवरात्रजतं कुयांत्रस्नारीणाङ्ग यः ।

वांछितं फलमाणोति सर्वदा भक्तित्यतः ॥ 21 ॥

आधिंने शुक्लपक्षे तु नवरात्रजत शुभम् ।

क्रौलिं भावसंयुक्तः सर्वां-कामानवान्युताः ॥ 22 ॥

A man or woman whoever performs the Navarātra vow always full of devotion, gets all the desired fruits. Whoever celebrates the holy Navarātra ceremony in the bright fortnight of the

month of Aśvin with his heart full of the thought of the Devi, gets all his desired fruits.

विविधान्यजलं कृत्वा पूत्रास्थानं प्रकलयेत् ।

कलर्श स्थायपेतच येवदान्यविधानतः ॥ 23 ॥

O King! Now I am describing the rites and ceremonies; here a square raised platform or altar is to be made according to the prescribed rules; a water jar is then to be placed on it with the Vedic mantrams and due rites and ceremonies.

यन्ये सुर्विरं कृत्वा स्थायपेकलशोगरि ।

वापवित्वा वर्ग्रांश्रात्याध्रश्न: परिवर्तितान् ॥ 24 ॥

One will have to make a beautiful Yantra according to the previously laid rules and the water-jar is to be placed on it; then spread the beautiful Yava grains all around the jar.

कृत्वोपरि वितानं च पुष्पमातासमावृतम् ।

यूर्वपित्युर्वयुक्ते कत्विं चरिककारुम् ॥ 25 ॥

An awning or pandāla is to be erected over the altar and the place of worship, and the site is to be decorated with flowers. Lights and Dhūpas, incense and perfumes are then to be used in the hall of the Candikā Devī.

त्रिकालं तत्र कतंच्या पूजा शक्तयनुसारतः ।

विशरणाक्यं न कतवं चशिककायाङ्ग पूजने ॥ 26 ॥

O King! The Devi is to be worshipped thrice; morning, midday and evening; no miserliness is to be shown in spending wealth for this purpose.

धूर्वैर्दिंष: सुनेवेधे: फलपुष्पेनकशः ।

गतिजादीः स्तोजपार्तैर्वद्यागरणैस्या ॥ 27 ॥

उत्सवस्त कत्हीयो नानावादिर्वसर्युतः ।

Light, dhūp, good presents of rice and other edibles, flowers, and fruits of various kinds are to be offered in this worship of the Devi; the chanting of the hymns of the Vedas, songs, and music with the various instruments are to be done and a grand festivity is to be made.

कन्यकानां पूर्वनं च विधयं विधिपूर्वकम् ॥ 28 ॥

चन्द्रनेपूर्णवैलैर्भधैक्षे ध्रुवित्या ।

सुगन्धतैलागलैश मनसो कृचिकारकै: ॥ 29 ॥

Moreover, note this carefully that virgins are

Book V Chapter XXXIV

to be worshipped duly with sandal, ornaments, clothing, various edibles, sweet scented oil, and beautiful garlands. (This worship of the virgins of the virgins is one of the essentials.)

रूवं सम्पूजनं कृत्वा होंमं मन्त्रविधानतः ।

अध्यायां वा नव्यां वा कारयेढ़िपूर्वकंम् ॥ 30 ॥

Thus completing the worship of the Devi, Homa is to be done duly with Mantrams and other necessary articles on the eighth or the ninth tithi.

ब्राह्माणामोवेयश्रात्मारणं द्रगभिति ।

कर्तव्यं शक्तितो दानं देयं भक्तिरपरैपैः ॥ 31 ॥

Lastly the Brāhmins are to be fed duly; then the worshipper is to take his first meal after fasting (i.e., make pānaṃ) on the tenth day; then presents and various articles are to be offered to the Brāhmins according to one's might and with devotion.

एवं यः कुन्ते भक्ल्या नवरायजतं नरः ।

नारी वा सध्वा भक्ल्या विषया वा पतितान ॥ 32 ॥

O King! Any man, or any chaste married woman or a chaste widow whoever performs thus the Navarātra Vrata gets in this world all the desired fruits and enjoys all sorts of enjoyments and gets unbounded happiness and after death goes to the highest place.

इह लोके सुखं भोगान्यापोति मनस्पेलितान् ।

देहान्ते परमं स्थानं प्रापोति ब्रतत्पर: ॥ 33 ॥

जन्मानरोप्रिकवाफिकर्मवेल्याथिवारीणि ।

जन्मोतमकुले गाय सदाचारो भवेद्रिक सः ॥ 34 ॥

And if, owing to some cause or other, he has to take his birth again in this world, he would be born in an excellent and would become endowed with good conduct and qualifications and get the unflinching devotion towards the Ambikā Devī.

नवराजत्रत प्रोक्ते ब्रतानामुत्तमं ब्रतम् ।

आराधनं शिवायास्तु सर्वसौख्यकं परम् ॥ 35 ॥

O King! I have thus described to you the rules of the Navarātra ceremony; this vow is the best of all; highest and greatest pleasures and happinesses are obtained in worshipping thus the auspicious Mahā Māyā.

अनेन विधिना राजनस्माराधय चण्डिकम् ।

बिला पिणुसखिलतं राज्यं प्राप्यस्तानुतमम् ॥ ३६ ॥

सुखं च परयं भूप देडे.प्रिमन्यगृहे पुनः ।

पुत्रदारानसामासादा तप्यसे नात्र संशयः ॥ 37 ॥

O King! Better worship Caṇḍikā duly according to the prescribed rules; then you would be able, by Her grace, to conquer all your enemies and you will regain your excellent dominion, unshaken by any, and you will get again the highest pleasure and happiness when you will be reunited with your wife and sons in your own palace; there is no doubt in this.

वैश्योतम लवेयाड़ समाराधय कामदान् ।

देवीं विश्रेष्ठशी माघा सृष्टिसंहारकारिणी ॥ 38 ॥

O Vaiśya! You, too, better worship the same Mahā Māyā, the Goddess of the Universe, worshipping Whom leads to the fructification of all desires.

स्वजनानां च मान्यस्तं चविध्यास गृहे गतः ।

सूखं सांसारिकं प्रायय यथाभिलिविं पुनः ॥ 39 ॥

देवीलोके शुभे वासो भवित्त ते न संशयः ।

You will then be able to regain all your wordily pleasures in your own home and be respected by your relatives and acquaintances and finally, after your death, you will go to the holy abode of the Devi.

नाराधिता भगवती यैसेने नरकभागिनः ॥ 40 ॥

इह लोकेशितु:खालाँ नानारोर्षे: प्राणिडितः ।

There is no doubt in this. Those that do not worship the Devi, go to Naraka or hell; moreover they suffer much from various diseases in this world.

भवन्ति मानवा राजब्धुर्विश्र घराजिताः ॥ 41 ॥

निष्कलजा हुशुजाशु रूणानीः सत्यकुद्धयः ।

Those that do not worship the Devi are always defeated by their enemies, are void of wife and sons, become stupid and suffer pains from their unsatisfied desires.

बिल्वीदतेः कार्यैरः शनपरेष्ठ चमपकैः ॥ 42 ॥

अशिता जानतां धात्री यैसेतोरनि विलासिनः ।

And those that worship the Preservix of this

world the Bel leaves, Karavīra flowers, Śatapatra and Campaka flowers, that blessed man, devoted to the Devi, gets filled with all sorts of enjoyments.

भवन्ति कृतपुण्यासे शक्तिभक्तिपरायणा: ॥ 43 ॥

घनविभवमुखाख्या मानवा मानवतः

सकलगुणागणानां भाजनं भारतीशा: ।

निर्मापतिदात्मनः: पूजिता वैभंबानी

नृपतितिलकमुख्यासे भवन्तीह लोके ॥ 44 ॥ ॥

इति शीर्द्वैभागवतो महापुराणे पत्रमस्कन्मे

वतुसिंशोरधाव: 11 34 11

O King! What more can I say than this, that

those who have worshipped the Devi Bhavānī with the Mantrams approved by the Nigama Śāstras, those very persons get honour in this world and are filled with all sorts of power and wealth. Verily, they stand foremost in the rank of best men, becoming the only repositories of all the best qualities in this world.

Here ends the Thirty-fourth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the methods of the worship of the Devi in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

[1] 2017年1月1日

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

