CHAPTER IV

On the War Counsels Given by Indra

व्यास उवाच

गते दुते सुरेन्द्रोप्रि समाहूय सुरान्य ।

यमावायुभान्यक्ष्मणानिवमूचिवान् ॥ 1 ॥

महिषो नाम दैवेन्द्रो रमभूत्रो महावलः ।

वरदर्भमेदो-मन्तो मायाशतविश्वक्षणः ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The messenger of the Dānavas having departed, Indra, the lord of the Devas, Yama, Vāyu, Varuna, and Kubera and other Devas, called an assembly and addressed thus: "O Devas! the most powerful Mahisa, the son of Rambha, is now the king of the Dānavas; he is particularly expert in hundred of Māyās (māyic) and has become haughty on the strength of his boon."

तस्य दृतोडा सम्यालतः प्रेषितसेन भोः सुरा: ।

स्वर्गकामेन लुब्धिन मायुवारोदूर्ण वचः ॥ 3 ॥

O Devas! Mahiṣa has sent his messenger; he wants to take possession of the heaven; he come down to me and spoke thus:

स्वज देवालयं शक्र यदेष्छं जज वासव ।

सेवां वा कुरू दैत्यस्य महिषस्य महात्मनः ॥ 4 ॥

“O Indra! Quit your this heaven and go any where you like, or be ready to pay your homage to the high souled Mahisāsura, the Lord of the Dānavas.”

दयावादानवेत्रोउसी से तुक्ति विधायती।

से तेषु भृत्यभूतेषु न कुण्यति कदाचन ॥ 5 ॥

The Dānava Chief never becomes angry with his opponent who becomes submissive like a servant; if you surrender and serve him, he will, out of mercy, grant an allowance to you.

नोचेबुद्धाय देवेश सेनोहोांगं कुर स्ववम् ।

गते माय स दैल्येन्द्रस्वित्तः समुपेथति ॥ 6 ॥

O Lord of the Devas! If this does not behave you, then collect your forces and be ready for fight; no sooner I return, the Lord of the Dānavas will come here at once ready to give battle to you.

इत्युक्त्वा स गतो तृती दानवस्य दुरात्मनः ।

क्रिं कतन्यमतः कार्य चित्तपत्थं सुरोतमाः ॥ ७ ॥

Thus saying, the messenger of that wicked Dānava departed. Now what are we to do? O Devas! Think on that.

दुबलेतीपि न चोधेक्यः शुब्बैलवता सुरा: ।

विशोधेण सदोद्योगी बलवान्बलदार्यितः ॥ 8 ॥

O Devas! Even a weak enemy is not to be overlooked by a powerful opponent, especially when the enemy is powerful by his own powers and is ever energetic, never is he to be overlooked.

उद्यम: कलि कर्तेणी यथा बुद्धिद्यां बलम् ।

दैवाधीनी भवेघूनं जयो वाउध पराजयः ॥ 9 ॥

It is always incumbent on us to make our efforts, as best as we can, both by our body and mind as far as lies in our power; the result, victory or defeat depends entirely on Fate.

सचिव्योगो न चागसित खले सचित्रिनिर्वकः ।

सर्वथा साधुभि: कार्य विचार्य च पुन: पुनः ॥ 10 ॥

It is useless to make treaty with a deceitful and dishonest person; we therefore never should make treaty with this person; you are all honest; that Dānava is dishonest; therefore ponder and ponder deeply and ponder again; do you that which is proper.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

यानमध्यून नैव कत्लेंव सहसा पुनः ।

प्रेशकाः प्रेषणीयाशु शीर्भगाः सुप्रेशकाः ॥ १ १ ॥

It is not advisable to go out at once for fight when we are unaware of our enemy's strength; let us therefore send spies truthful, honest, motiveless, quick, to ascertain their strength, those who can easily enter amongst our enemies and yet who have no relation, nor any interest with them.

ईक्तिज्ञान्थ निसज्ञा निस:सुखा निस:सुखा सत्यबालिनः ।

सेनापियोगं प्रव्यानं बलसेंख्यां यथावीतः ॥ 12 ॥

The arrangements of their forces, their movements, their numbers, they will ascertain correctly; who are their generals, what is their number and what is their strength, they will thoroughly examine and return here quickly.

वीरणांच च परिज्ञानं कृत्वा यान्तु त्वारपिततः ।

त्राला दैत्यपतेतस्य सै-नस्य च बलाबलम् ॥ 13 ॥

First, we will ascertain the strength of the force of our opposite party and then we will decide at once whether we will start for battle or seek protection within forts.

कौर्यामि ततस्तूर्णे याता वा दुर्गसंग्रहम् ।

"विषायं खतु कतैल्यं कार्य बुद्धिपता सदा ।"

सहसा विहितं कार्य दुःखदं सर्वधा भवेत् ॥ 14 ॥

Wise persons always consider before they act; any act done rashly leads in all respects to many troubles, and anything done after mature prejudgments leads to happiness; so the wise do.

तस्मादिपूग्य कतैलं सुखदं सर्वथा बुधैः ।

नात्र भेदविधिन्यान्यो दानवेषु च सर्वथा ॥ 15 ॥

The Dānavas are all one in their heart and mind; therefore it is not advisable, in any way to apply the principal of Bheda (sowing principles of discord).

एकशित्रेषु कार्येस्सिमस्तमाचारा जन्तु वै ।

ज्ञाला बतालतं तेषां पश्ञाजिति विचार्य च । । १ ६ ॥

Let our spies go there, ascertain their strength, return and inform us; we will then judge what principle is proper and apply to the expert Dānavas.

विधेधा विधिचित्जैस्तेषु कार्यपेषु च ।

अन्यथा विहितं कार्य विव्यतिफत्पत्रम् ॥ १ ७ ॥

सर्वथा तद्वेक्नूनमज्ञातपोषधं यथा ।

Any act done contrary to policy and expediency will undoubtedly produce effects contrary in every way just like a medicine which we have not tried already.

व्यास उवाच

इति संचित्य तै: सर्वे: प्राणिधं कार्यवेदिन् ॥ १ ॥

प्रेयवामास देवेऋः: परिज्ञानाय पार्थिवः ।

दूतस्तु चित्तीत गत्वा समागम्य सुर्गाधिधम् ॥ १९ ॥

निवेदयामास तदा सर्वे सैन्यवलावनम् ।

Vyāsa said: O king! Thus counselling with the Devas, Indra, sent expert spies to ascertain the true state of affairs. The spies, too, went into the abode of the Daityas, with no delay and made their searches thoroughly into every nook and corner and returned and told Indra all the strength of the Dānava force.

ज्ञाना तद्वलपुत्रोगे तुरापाडतिविसितः ॥ 20 ॥

देवानचोदयनुर्ण समाहूय पुरीहिनम् ।

मन्नं मन्नविंशं श्रेष्ठ चकार विदशेष्यः ॥ 21 ॥

उवाचांगिरासश्रेष्ठ समासीने वासने ।

Indra was very much startled to know, then, of their arrangements. He immediately bade all the Devas be ready for battle and called for his High priest Bhraspati, expert in giving advices and began to consult with him how to carry on the warfare with that indomitable enemy, the Lord of the Asuras. On Bhraspati, the best and famous of the Aginā family, taking his excellent seat.

इन्र उवाच

घो भो देवगुर्गे विद्धिकं कत्थं वद्यव नः ॥ 22 ॥

सर्वैज्ञोसि समुपवे कार्यं त्व गतिच्छ नः ।

Indra thus said: "O Guru of the Devas! O Learned! Please say what are we to do now in this critical juncture? You are omniscient; today you are our guide.

दानवो महिषो नाम महार्थीवर्ग मदोत्तिथ : ॥ 23 ॥

योढ़ुकामः समायाति बहुभिद्वनिवैवृतः ।

Book V Chapter IV

The Demon Mahisa has become very powerful, very haughty; surrounded by Dānavas he is now coming to fight with us.

तत्र प्रतिक्रिया कार्यं त्वया मन्त्रविद्धपुना ॥ 24 ॥

तेषा शुक्रतथा त्वं मे विन्तहतां सुसंयतः ।

You are expert in mantras; find out the remedy for us. Śukrācārya is the remover of all obstacles on their side; and that you are our safe guard is well known to us.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं प्राह तुलासहं बृह्यसितः ॥ 25 ॥

विविच्य मनसा कामं कार्वसाधानतपर: ।

Vyāsa said: Hearing these words of Indra, Brhaspati, who is always ready to effect the Deva's purposes, thought intently on the subject, said very shortly thus :

गुरुक्षवाच

स्वस्यो भव सुरेन्र त्वं धीयमोल्ब्य मारिष ॥ 2 6 ॥

यवमने च समुचये न त्याज्यं धीयागु वै ।

Brhaspati spoke: O Lord of the Devas! O Venerable One! Be peaceful; have patience; when a difficulty comes, one should not, all on a sudden, lose one's patience.

वयाजयी सुराध्यक्ष देवार्थिनी सदैव हि ॥ 27 ॥

स्वातयं दीयमातंव्य तस्मादुबुद्धिमता सदा ।

O Chief of the Immortals! Victory or defeat is completely under the control of destiny; therefore intelligent ones should always be patient.

भवित्यं भवत्येव जानत्रेव शतक्नो ॥ 28 ॥

उद्यम: सर्वेथा कायों यद्यापौरभयामना ।

O Śatakratu! What will unavoidably be done must come to pass; knowing this as certain, one would always be an enthusiast and exert one's powers.

मुनयोपि हि मुक्नवयंमुधामैकरता: सदा ॥ 29 ॥

दैवधार्थि च जानन्तो योगाध्यानपरायणा: ।

तस्मासदैव कर्तैवो स्वहारोदितोदाय: ॥ 30 ॥

सुखं भवतु या मा वा दैव का परिवेदना ।

विना पुरुषकारेण कदाचिशसिद्धमानुयात् ॥ 31 ॥

अन्यवत्पडूवत्कामां न तथा मुदामाबहेत् ।

कृते पुरुषकारोंपि यदि सिद्धिनं जायते ॥ 32 ॥

Everything is guided by Fate. Knowing this, the Munis devote themselves at all times solely filled with energy in their meditation and Yoga practices for their final liberation. Therefore, to show one's energy, according to the rules of the daily practices, ought to be indespensably done; and one should not repent or feel pleasure on failure or success; for that is under Fate. Success sometimes comes without the exercise of one's own powers, as seen in cases of the lame and the blind; and that is not the reason why one should be very glad.

न तत्र दूषणं तस्य दैवाधिने श्रौरिपि ।

कार्यसिद्धिर्नं सैनैर्जस्ति न मनेन न च मज्यो ॥ 33 ॥

न रथे नायुधे नूनं दैवाधीनासुरापि ।

The embodied beings are all under Daiva (Fate); therefore, even if success be not attained, though one's own powers are exercised thoroughly, no one is to blame for that. O Lord of the Suras? What to say of forces, mantras, or advices, what if chariots or weapons, nothing is to lead to success; It is Daiva, and only Daiva that makes one successful.

बलवान्वलेषाग्यानोति निर्विलः सुखम्यनुते ॥ 34 ॥

बुद्धिमान्थ्यितः शेने निर्विद्धभोगवान्ययेत् ।

कातारो जययान्तोने शुग्रे याति पराजयम् ॥ 35 ॥

धवाधिने तु संसारे कामं का परिदेवना ।

उद्यो योजयेनुं भवित्वयं सुराधि ॥ 36 ॥

दुःखदे सुखदे वार्थि तत्र तो न विधितंयेत् ।

This whole universe is under Daiva; it is, therefore, that we see powerful persons suffering pains, and weak ones getting happiness; the intelligent ones sleeping without any food and fools enjoying merrily; distressed persons getting victory and powerful ones suffering defeats; what cares, then, ought one to entertain in this. O Lord of the Suras! Whatever is inevitable to come to pass, be it success or failure, one will lead one's

Šimaddevbīhgāvatam

energies to that end; therefore one needs to consider beforehand whether one's energies will be successful or not. In times of distress, one sees distress too much; and in times of pleasure, one seeks pleasure too much; one's self, therefore one should not surrender to one's enemies pleasure and pain.

कुर्ये दुःखाधिकान्यपेसुरेषे पशेस्युखाधिकम् ॥ 37 ॥

आमानं हर्षीकोकायां सुब्याधीमव नार्येत् ।

धीयमेवावगानलंहं हर्षीकोद्वे वृष्टे: ॥ 38 ॥

अर्थयोद्याणुरं कुं त्र न दुर्धेंयित तादुपग् ।

दुर्लंभं सहन्तवे वै समये सुखदुःखयो: ॥ 39 ॥

हर्षीकोद्वीय तय न यवेवेतुद्विन्दिश्यात् ।

किं कुःखं कस्य वा कुःखं निरुणोड़े सदाजययः ॥ 40 ॥

चतुर्बिशातिरित्तोउस्मि किं मे दुःखं सुखं च किम् ।

प्राणस्य कृष्णविपासे हैः मनसः शोकमूच्छैप ॥ 41 ॥

जगमूच्यगुरीरस्य चकुर्भिरिक्तः शिवः ।

Pain and suffering is not felt so much in patience as is felt when impatient; therefore one must practise patience when pain or pleasure comes. Indeed, it is very difficult to bear oneself up in distress or happiness; therefore wise persons try not to let these feelings crop up at all from the very beginning. “I am always full, undiminishable, I am beyond Prākrtiç qualities. Who is there to suffer? What is suffering?” Thus one ought to think at that moment. I am beyond the twenty four Tattvas; what pleasure or pain can, arise to me? Hunger and thirst are the Dharma of Prāna; pain and insensibility is the Dharma of mind, old age and death belong to this physical body. I am free from these six diseases; I am Śiva.

गोकामोही शरीरस्य गुणी किं मेउत्र चिंतते ॥ 42 ॥

शरीरं नात्यमयात तत्सव्यनी न चायह्म।

सपैकेकोडगादिष्यो विभिन्नोड़ं सदा सुखी ॥ 43 ॥

प्रकृतिर्विकृतिराई किं मे दुःखं सदा पुनः ।

इति मत्वा सुरेश त्वं मनसा भव निर्ममः ॥ 44 ॥

Grief and delusion are the qualities of this body; what then do I care for them? “I” am not the qualities of the body nor “I” am the soul pertaining

to that. I am beyond the seven transfigurations, change, e.g. Mahat, etc., I am beyond this Prakrti, Nature, and beyond the sixteen changes wrought out by Prakrti; I am therefore eternally happy, I am beyond Prakrti and its transformation, then why am I to suffer pain always? O Lord of the Suras! Think on these and be without any passion.

उपायः प्रथमोउन ते दुःखनागे शतक्रतो ।

ममता परमं दुःखं निर्ममत्वं परं सुखम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

सन्तोबादपरं नास्ति सुखस्थानं शबीपते ।

अथवा यदि न जानं ममत्वनाग्ने किल ॥ 4 6 ॥

ततो विवेकः कर्तेबो भवित्ये सुराधिप ।

प्रारक्षकर्मणां नागो नाभोगतलस्थवे किल ॥ 4 7 ॥

यद्धालि तद्धलयेव का चिन्ता सुखुख्यवो ।

O Śatakratu! This attachment is the root of all miseries; and non-attachment is the source of all happiness; non-attachment, therefore, is the chief means of the extirpation of all your troubles. O Lord of Śachi! Nothing can be happier than contentment. In case you do find it difficult to practise dispassion, apply, then, discrimination and think of Fate, that what comes inevitably to pass. O Lord of the Suras! Actions already done cannot die out without their effects being enjoyed.

सु: सर्वै: सहायैर्वां बुद्धा वा तल सत्ता ॥ 48 ॥

सुर्ज क्षयाय पुण्यस्य दु:खं पायस्य मारिति ।

O Best of the Suras! Let all your intelligence be brought to action, let all the Devas lend their helping hands to you; what is inevitable must come to pass; what then can you care for your happiness or pain?

तस्मात्सुखक्षये हर्ष: कतन्व्य: सर्वेबा बुधै: ॥ 49 ॥

अश्वा मन्त्रलाड़ कुरु यन्तं यथाविषि ।

कृते यन्ते महाराज भवित्वयं भविष्यति ॥ 50 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पढ़मकन्के

चतुर्धोध्याः ॥ 51 ॥

O King! Happiness is felt for the expiation of good deeds and pain is felt for the expiation of bad deeds; therefore wise persons get thoroughly delighted when their punya ends. O King! Judge

Book V Chapter V

and hold a council today; then try your best. But what is unavoidable will come to pass, even if you try your best.

Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the counsels given by Indra in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter V

