CHAPTER VIII

On the Appearance of the Highest Śakti

जनमेजय उवाच

भगवान्सर्वधर्जन्स सर्वशास्त्रवर्ति वर ।

डिज्ञातीनां तु सर्वैषा शकस्युपास्ति: श्रुतोरिति ॥ 1 ॥

संध्याकालग्रदेशेउ-यमिनमकाले निव्यतया विषो ।

तां विहाया द्विजा: कस्मादगूर्हीयुश्ञान्यदेवता: ॥ 2 ॥

दूर्षन्ते वैश्वा: केन्धित्राणयन्त्यतायपे ।

कापालिकाश्रीनमार्गतां बत्कलधारिण: ॥ 3 ॥

Janamejaya spoke to Veda Vyāsa: O Bhagavan! Thou art the knower of all the Dharmas and Thou art the chief, the crown of the Pandits, knowing all the Śāstras. Now I ask Thee how is it that the twice-born have ceased to worship the Highest Śakti, the Gāyatrī and they now worship the other Devatās, on the face of the distinct command in the Śrutis

that the worship of the Gāyatrī is nityā, that is, daily to be done at all times, especially during the three Sandhyā times, by all those that are twice-born?

दिरंगबारस्ताय बौद्धान्धारिका एवमादयः ।

दूरयंते बह्वो लोके वेदश्रद्धाविर्वर्षिताः ॥ 4 ॥

In this world some are the devotees of Viṣṇu, some, the followers of Ganapati, some are Kāpālikas, some follow the doctrines prevalent in China; some are the followers of Buddha or Cārvāka; some of them again wear the barks of trees and others roam naked. So various persons are seen having no trace of faith in the Vedas.

किमत्र कारणं ब्रह्मस्तद्वावन्तुर्महिति ।

Book XII Chapter VIII

बुद्धिमंतः पंडिताश नानातर्कविश्वभाणः ॥ 5 ॥

अपि संलेव वेदेषु श्रद्धया तु विवर्जिताः ।

O Brāhmaṇa! What is the real cause underlying secretly here in this! Kindly mention this to me. Again there are seen many men, well versed in various metaphysics and logic, our B.A.s and M.A.s but then, again, they have no faith in the Vedas.

न हि कश्रित्सवकल्याणं बुद्धा हातुमिहेच्छिति ॥ 6 ॥

किमत्र कारण तस्मादुदं वेदविद्धं चर ।

How is this? Nobody wants anything ominous to him consciously. But how is it that these so-called learned men are fully aware and yet they are wonderfully void of any trace of faith in the Vedas? Kindly mention the cause underlying this,

O Thou! The foremost of the knowers of the Vedas.

मिणीद्वीपस्य महिमा वर्गितो भवता पुरा ॥ 7 ॥

कीतून्तदिति यदेध्या: परं स्थानं महत्सम् ।

तच्चापि वदं भक्ताय श्रद्धानाय मेउनच ॥ 8 ॥

प्रसजास्तु वदन्येव गुरवो गुहामप्युत ।

There is, again, another question: Thou hadst described before the glories of Manidvīpa, the highest and the best place of the Devi. Now I want to hear how is that Dvīpa greater than the great. Satisfy this servant of thine by describing these. If the Guru be pleased, he reveals even the greatest and the highest esoteric secret to his disciple.

सूत उवाच

इति राजो वचः श्रुत्वा भगवान्वादरायणः ॥ 9 ॥

निजगाद ततः सर्वे क्रमेणि मुनीश्वा: ।

यच्छुला तु द्वितानीता वेदप्रद्वा विवर्धिते ॥ 10 ॥

Sūta spoke: Hearing the words of the King Janamejaya, the Bhagavān Veda Vyāsa began to answer the questions in due order. The hearing of this increases the faith of the twice-born in the Vedas.

व्यास जवाच

सयवमुधुं त्वया राजनस्मये सयायोचितम् ।

बुद्धिमानसि वेवेषु प्रब्दावांश्रिव लक्ष्यसे ॥ १ १ ॥

पूर्व मदोढ़ता दैत्या देवेयुंद्धु तु चक्रिके ।

गतवर्ष महाराज महाविस्याकारकम् ॥  १ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: Well has this been asked by you, O King! in due time and in an appropriate moment. You are intelligent and it seems that you have got the faith in the Vedas. I now answer. Listen. In ancient days, the Asuras, maddened with pride, fought against the Devas for one hundred years. The war was very extraordinary and remarkable.

नानागक्षत्रुर्ण नानामायाधिरिज्ञन ।

जगत्थ्यकर्ते नूनं तेषां युद्धमपथुण ॥ 13 ॥

परागक्तिकुपावेशगारेदैर्वैना जिता युधि ।

भूयं स्वर्ग परित्यज्ञ नगतः पातालेशमनि ॥ 14 ॥

In this great war various weapons were used, variegated with numerous Māyās or ingenious devices. It tended to destroy the whole world. By the mercy of the Highest and the Most Exalted Śakti, the Daityas were overcome by the Devas in that Great War. And they quitted the Heavens and the Earth and went to the nether regions, the Pātāla.

ततः प्रहर्तित देवाः स्वपात्रमवर्णनम् ।

चक्रः परस्यरं मोहात्साधिमाना: समंततः ॥ 15 ॥

जयो5स्माकं कुतो न स्वाद्यमाकं महिमा यतः ।

सर्वोत्तमः कुत्र दैत्याः पागम तिच्यात्मकाः ॥ 16 ॥

The Devas were all delighted and began to dwell on their own prowesses and became proud. They began to say: "Why shall not victory be ours. Why are not our glories great? We are by far the best! Where are the Daityas? They are devils, powerless.

सृष्टिश्वतिश्वयकरा वयं संयं यशपिबिनः ।

असमदो घापराणां दैत्यानां चैव का कथा ॥ 17 ॥

पराशक्तिप्रभावं ते न ज्ञाना मोहमागतः ।

तेषाम्पनुर्द्रं कर्तुं तदैव जनद्विका ॥ 18 ॥

We are the causes of creation, preservation and destruction. We all are glorious! Oh! What can be said before us in favour of the Ausras, the devils?" Thus, not knowing the Highest Sakti, the Devas were deluded. At this moment, seeing this plight of the Devas, the World Mother took pity on the Devas and, to favour them,

Śrimadievbhāgavatam

प्रतुरासीत्कृयाणुणं यक्षलोपेण भूमिप ।

कोटिपूर्युप्तीकाणं चंक्रोकौटिकुशीतलम् ॥ 19 ॥

विद्युत्कोटिसमानाभयं हतसपादादिवर्षितम् ।

O King! She appeared before them in the form of the Most Worshipful, the Great Holy Light. It was resplendent like ten million Suns, and cool as well like ten million Moons. It was brilliant and dazzling like ten million lightning flashes, without hands and feet, and exceedingly beautiful! Never was this witnessed before!

अदृष्टपूर्व तद्धुतृ तेजः परमसुन्दरम् ॥ 20 ॥

सविस्मयास्तदा प्रोषुः किमिदं किमिदं त्विति ।

दैत्यानो चौहितं किं वा माया कामी महीयसी ॥ 21 ॥

केन्धिन्निर्मिता वात्य देवानां सम्यकाशिणी ।

Seeing this Extraordinary Beautiful Lovely Light, the Devas were taken aback; they spoke amongst themselves, thus: “What is this! What is this! Is this the work of the Daityas or some other great Māyā (Magic) played by them or is it the work of another for creating the surprise of the Devas!”

संभ्युय ते तता सर्वे विचारं चक्रुस्तमम् ॥ 22 ॥

यक्षस्य निकटे गत्वा प्रग्रह्यं कर्तविभविषि ।

बलावलं ततो जाता कर्मव्या तु प्रतिक्रिया ॥ 23 ॥

ततो वाईं समादूय प्रोबाचेंत्र: सुराधिप: ।

गच्छ वई्त ल्यमसाकं यतो5सि मुखमुत्तमम् ॥ 24 ॥

O King! Then they all assembled together and decided to approach towards that Adorable Light and to ask It what It was. They, then, would determine its strength and decide what to do afterwards. Thus, coming to this ultimate conclusion, Indra called Agni and said: "O Agni! You are the mouth-piece of the Devas.

ततो गत्वा तु जानीहि किमितं यक्षमित्यति ।

सहस्वाक्षयचः शुत्वा स्वपरात्रमगर्भितम् ॥ 25 ॥

वेगात्स निर्गोत वहिद्ययी यक्ष्यस संनिधी ।

तदा प्रोवाच यक्षस्तं त्वं कॉउसीति हुताशनम् ॥ 26 ॥

वीर च त्वयि किं चन्त्रदु सर्वे ममाप्रातः ।

Therefore do you go first and ascertain distinctly what this Light is." Hearing thus the words of Indra,

Agni, elated by his own prowess, set out immediately from the place and went to that Light. Seeing Agni coming, the Light addressed him thus: "Who are you? What is your strength? State this before Me."

अग्निरस्मि तथा जातवेदा अस्मिति मोउद्रबीति ॥ 27 ॥

सर्वस्य दह्ने शक्तिमयि विश्वस्य तिहिति ।

At this Agni replied: “I am Agni. All the yajñas, ordained in the Vedas are performed through me. The power of burning everything in this universe resides in me.”

तदा यक्ष: परं तेजस्तद्यो निदधी तृणम् ॥ 28 ॥

दहैनं यदि ते शक्तिकर्षिश्य दह्नेउस्ति हि ।

तदा सर्वकलैनेवाकीघांचं हुतागतः ॥ 29 ॥

न शगशक तृणं दारुं लज्जतोगात्सागृद्धित ।

पृष्टे देखेस्तु वृत्तांते सर्वे प्रोवाच ह्वथभुक् ॥ 30 ॥

वृधानप्रियानो ह्रामकां सर्वेशालविं के सुराः ।

Then that adorable Light took up a straw of grass and said: "O Agni! If you can burn everything in this universe, then do you burn this trifling straw." Agni tried his best to burn the straw but he could not burn it. He got ashamed and fast went back to the Devas. Asked by the Devas, Agni told them everything and said: "O Devas! Know verily that the pride cherished by us that we are supreme, is entirely false."

ततस्तु वृत्रहा वायुं समाहुयेदमब्रवीते ॥ 31 ॥

त्वयि प्रोतं जानखर्च त्वचेहाशिस्तु चेहितम् ।

त्व प्राणरूप: सर्वैधां सर्वैशक्तिविधारकः ॥ 32 ॥

Indra then asked Vāyu (wind) and said: "O Vāyu! You are dwelling in this universe, through and through; by your efforts, all are moving; therefore you are the Prāna of all; it is possible that all forces are concentrated within you.

त्वमेव गत्वा जानीहि किमिद्धं यक्षमित्यपि ।

नान्यः कोटिप समर्पोस्ति जनुं यर्थं परं महः ॥ 33 ॥

सहसाधावश्वः श्रृता गुणातीरवर्णफिनम् ।

साधिमानो जगमाग्यु यत्र यर्थं विराजते ॥ 34 ॥

Go and ascertain what is this Light? Verily I do not see any other person here than you who can ascertain this great adorable Light." Hearing these

Book XII Chapter VIII

commendable words of Indra, Vāyu felt himself elated and went at once to that place where was that Light.

यक्षे द्वृषा ततो वायुं प्रोवाच मुयुभाषया ।

कोप्रिस त्वं त्वयि का शक्तिर्वं सर्वे मात्रातः ॥ ३ ५ ॥

ततो यक्षवतः शुत्वा गर्वेण मसुद्ववीत् ।

मातरिग्वाइस्मितीत वायुस्मिति चाङवीत् चाङवीत् ॥ ३ ६ ॥

वीर्य तु मायि सर्वस्य चालने ग्रहणेगस्तित् ।

मच्छेह्या जानासर्वे सर्वेल्यापरवृद्वेत् ॥ ३ ७ ॥

Seeing the Vāyu, the Light, the Yaksa, the demi-god, the Spirit asked in a gentle language: “Who are you? What strength is there in you? Speak out all these to me.” At this, Vāyu spoke arrogantly, “I am Mātarisāvan, I am Vāyu; about my strength, I can move anything and I hold everything. It is through the strength of mine, that this universe is, and is alive and brisk with movements and works.”

इति श्रुता वायुवाणी निजगाद परं महः ।

तृणमेततचाये यतच्चालय यथेपितम् ॥ 38 ॥

नोचेद्रवि विहायैनं लज्जिता गच्छ वासवम् ।

That Highest Mass of Light then replied: “O Vāyu! Move this straw that lies before you, and if you cannot, quit your pride and go back to Indra ashamed.”

भुत्वा यक्षवचो वायु: सर्वशक्तिसम्पित्वः ॥ ३ ९ ॥

उद्योगमक्रोतच्च स्वस्थानान्न चचाल ह ।

लज्जतोगडेवाणर्शे दिला गर्व स चानितः ॥ ४ ० ॥

वृत्तानमद्वत्सर्वे गर्वनिवधिकारणम् ।

सैतज्ञानुं समर्थ: स्म चिष्यागवीधमानिनः ॥ 4 1 ॥

अलौकिक भाति यक्षं तेजः परमहानणम् ।

At this Vāyu tried all his might but, alas! He could not move the straw a bit from that place! Vāyu then gave up his pride and returned to the Devas and spoke to them all about the Yakṣa (a sort of demi-god, a ghost). O Devas! Our pride is vain; in no way can we be able to ascertain the nature of that Light. It seems that that Holy Light, adorable by all, is extraordinary.

ततः : सर्वे सुराणाः सहस्रासं समूचिरे ॥ 42 ॥

देवराडसि यस्मान्च यसं जानीहि तत्वतः ।

तत इन्नो महागर्वतिष्ठं समुपारवत् ॥ 43 ॥

प्रारदच्च परं तेजो यक्षलयं परात्यम् ।

Then all the Devas spoke with one voice to Indra: "When You are the King of the Devas, better go yourself and ascertain the reality of Its Nature." Indra, then, with great pride, went himself to the Light; the Light, too, began to disappear gradually from the place, and ultimately vanished from Indra's sight.

अंतर्धानं ततः प्राप तद्धां वासवाप्रतः ॥ 44 ॥

अंतरि लकित जातो वासवो देवारप्रि ।

यक्षसंभाषणाभावाल्छयुतं प्राप चेतसि ॥ 45 ॥

अतः परं न नांव्यं मया तु सुरसर्पदि ।

किं मया तत्र वत्क्यं स्वलघुतं सुराप्रति ॥ 46 ॥

देहत्यागो वरस्तमानानो हि महतां धनम् ।

When Indra found that he could not even speak to That Light, he became greatly ashamed and began to conceive of his own nothingness. He thought thus: "I won't go back to the Devas. What shall I say to them? Never will I disclose to them my inferiority; one is better to die than do this. One's self-honour is the only treasure of the great and honourable.

माने नटे जीवितं तु मृततुल्यं न संशयः ॥ 47 ॥

इति निश्रित्य तत्रैव गर्वे हिता सुरेषः ।

चरिभाईगुं यस्य तपेव शरणं गतः ॥ 48 ॥

तस्मिनेव क्षणे जाता व्योमवाणी नभसले ।

मायावीजं सहस्राक्ष जप तेन सुखी भव ॥ 49 ॥

If honour is gone, what use, then, is there in living?" O King! Then Indra, the Lord of Devas, quitted his pride and took refuge unto That Great Light which exhibited, ere long, such a glorious character. At this moment, a celestial voice was heard from the Heavens: "O Indra! Go on now and do the japam, the reciting of the Māyā Bija Mantra, the basic Mantra of Māyā. All your troubles will, then, be over."

तत्ते जजाप परमं मायावीजं परतवम् ।

लक्षवर्ष निराहारो ध्यानीकिललोचन: ॥ 50 ॥

Hearing this celestial voice, Indra began to repeat

the Māyā Bija, the Seed Mantra of Māyā, with rapt concentration and without any food.

अकस्माच्यैमासीयनवयां मध्ये गरी ।

तद्वाविरभूतेजस्तिम्भ्नेव स्थले पुनः ॥ 51 ॥

तेजोमंडलमध्ये तु कुमारी नवयोनाम ।

भार्वकजापुस्ताभां बालकोटिरविष्णुभ। 52 ॥

बालगतीलायुकुटां वक्तान्वीज्ञान्स्तीम् ।

चतुष्विरहस्तैतु वरायागंकुशाघ्यान् ॥ 53 ॥

Then on the ninth lunar day of the month of Caitra when the Sun entered the meridian, suddenly there appeared in that place a Great Mass of Light as was seen before. Indra saw, then, within that Mass of Light, a Virgin Form in full youth. The lustre from Her body was like that of ten million Rising Suns; and the colour was rosy red like a full-blown Java flower. On Her forehead was shining the digit of the Moon; Her breasts were full, and, though veiled under the cloth, they looked very beautiful. She was holding noose and a goad in Her two hands and Her other two hands indicated signs of favour and fearlessness.

दधानां परणीधांगी कामलांगलां त्रिभात् ।

भत्कल्यदुमार्यां नानाधूषणाध्यिताम् ॥ 54 ॥

त्रिनेत्रा मल्लकामालाककरीतूरणोंभित्तम् ।

चतुर्दिक्षु चतुर्दैर्दैर्दिनीद्धारिभकुतुम् ॥ 55 ॥

Her body was decked with various ornaments and it looked auspicious and exceedingly lovely; nowhere can be seen a woman beautiful like Her. She was like a Kalpa Vṛksa (celestial tree yielding all desires); she was three eyed and Her braid of hair was encircled with Mālati garlands. She was praised on Her four sides by the Four Vedas, Incarnate, in their respective Forms.

दन्तच्छटाधिरभितः पद्यागोकृतक्षमान् ।

प्रसत्रमेरवदां कोटिकदार्वभु-सूनरम् ॥ 56 ॥

रत्नांवपरीधानां रत्नचन्दनचक्षितम् ।

उमाधिधानां पुरतो देखीं हैमवर्ती शिजाण ॥ 57 ॥

निव्याजकरणागृति सर्वकारणकारणम् ।

दर्शं वासस्वस्त प्रेमगद्रदितन्तरः ॥ 58 ॥

The brilliancy of Her teeth shed lustre on the

ground as if ornamented with Padmarāga jewels. Her face looked smiling. Her clothing was red and Her body was covered with sandalpaste. She was the Cause of all causes. Oh! She was all Full of Mercy. O King Janamejaya! Thus Indra saw, then, the Umā Pārvati Maheśvari Bhagavati and the hairs of his body stood on ends with ecstasy.

प्रेमाधुपर्णिनयो रोभाधितानुस्ततः ।

दंडवल्यान्नाथ पाद्योजमतीशितुः ॥ ५ ९ ॥

तृत्राव विविधे: स्तोर्ष्यैनिकसजतक्न्यर: ।

उवाच परमगृतः किमितं यक्षमित्यपि ॥ 60 ॥

His eyes were filled with tears of love and deep devotion and he immediately fell prostrate before the feet of the Devi. Indra sang various hymns to Her and praised Her. He became very glad and asked Her, "O Fair One! Art Thou that Great Mass of Light?

प्रादुपूर्त च कस्मातनुद्र सर्वे सुगोधने ।

इति तस्य वच: श्रुत्वा प्रोवाच करणाणीव ॥ 61 ॥

If this be, kindly state the cause of Thy appearance." O King! Hearing this, the Bhagavati replied.

रूपं मदीयं बढ़ोत्सर्वकरणाकरणम् ।

मयाधिष्ठानभृतं तु सर्वसाशि निरामयम् ॥ 62 ॥

सर्वे वेदा यत्यद्यामनिति तपाँति सर्वाणि च यद्धटिति ।

यद्धच्छो ब्रहाचरं चरिति पदं संग्रेषणे ब्रवीम ॥ 63 ॥

"This My Form is Brahma, the Cause of all causes, the Seat of Māyā, the Witness of all, infallible and free from all defects or blemishes. What all the Vedas and Upanjsads try to establish, what ought to be obtained, as declared by all the rules of austerity, and for which the Brāhmaṇas practise Brahmacaryam, I am all that. I have told you about that Brahmā, of the nature of the Great Holy Light.

ओपायिकासंत्र बहा तदेवालुश्छ हौमयम् ।

दे बीजे मम मंत्रीको मुख्यवेन सुरोतम् ॥ 64 ॥

भागादयवर्ती यस्मात्यज्ञासि सकलं जगत् ।

तत्रेक्षभाग: संप्रोक: सच्चिदानन्दनामकः ॥ 65 ॥

The sages declare that Tha Brāhmaṇa is revealed

Book XII Chapter VIII

by “Om” and “Hrim”, the two Bijas (mystic syllables) that are My two first and foremost Mantras wherein I remain hidden. I create this universe with My two parts (in My two aspects); therefore My Bija mantra is two. “Om” Bija is denominated as Saccidānanda (everlasting existence, intelligence and bliss) and “Hrim” Bija is Māyā Prakṛti, the Undifferentiated Consciousness, made manifest.

मायाप्रकृतिसंज्ञनु द्वितीयो भाग ईरितः ।

सा च माया परा शक्ति शक्तिमन्दमीक्षी ।। ६ ६ ॥

चन्द्रस्य चन्द्रिकेवेयं मया भिन्त्यमानतः ।

साम्यास्थासिका वैषा माया मम सुगतम। ॥ ६७ ॥

Know, then, That Māyā as the Highest Śakti and know Me as that Omnipotent Goddess at present revealed before your eyes. As moonlight is not different from the Moon, so this Māyā Śakti in the state of equilibrium is not different from Me. (The powerful man and the power he wields are not different. They are verily one and the same.)

प्रलये सर्वजगतो मद्यमेनैव तिष्ठति ।

प्राणिकार्मेपरीायकशरतः पुरेनेव हि ॥68 ॥

रूपं तदेवमव्यकं च्यक्तभावमृषिति च ।

अंतमुंखा तु वातवस्त्या सा मायेविभधीयतेि ॥69 ॥

During Pralaya (the Great Latency period), this Māyā lies latent in Me, without there being any difference. Again at the time of creation, this Māyā appears as the fructification of the Karmas of the Jivas. When this Māyā is potential and exists latent in Me, when Māyā is Antarmukhī, it is called Unmanifested and when the Māyā becomes Kinetic, when the Mayā is Bahirmukhī, when She is in an active Kinetic state, it is said to be Manifested.

वहिंमुखा तु या माया तमःशब्देन सोच्छते ।

वहिंमुखात्मोकृपाजयते सत्त्वसंपवः ॥ 70 ॥

रजोगुणस्तदैव स्यातमगदी सुरसस्तम ।

गुणत्रयात्मका: प्रोक्ता ब्रहाधिण्यमूर्धेशः ॥ 71 ॥

There is no origin or beginning of this Māyā. Māyā is of the nature of Brahmā in a state of

equilibrium. But, during the beginning of the creation, Her form consisting of the several Gunas appears, when Māyā is Bahirmukhi, She becomes Tāmas, in Her Unmanifested state. O Indra! For this reason Her state of abstraction, and becoming introspective, this is Her Antarmukhī state; it is known as Māyā and Her looking outward is Her Bahirmukhi state; it is denominated by Tāmas and the other gunas.

राजोगणाधिको बहा विष्यु: सत्वाधिको भवेत्।

तमोगुणाधिको कहः: सर्वकारणकाध्युम् ॥ 72 ॥

स्यूलदेहो भवेद्बहा लिंगदोहो हरि: स्मृत: ।

क्रसूत कारणो देहसुरीया त्वलोभे हि ॥ 73 ॥

From this comes Sattva and then Rajas and Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa are of the nature of the three gunas. Brahmā has the Rajo guna in Him preponderating; in Viṣṇu, the Sattva guna preponderates and in Maheśa, the Cause of all Causes, is said to reside the Tamo guna.

सामावस्था तु या प्रोक्ता सर्वात्यामिकरणी ।

अत ऊर्धर्ष परं बढ़ा मदूधे रूपवर्जिनम् ॥ 74 ॥

Brahmā is known as of the Gross Body; Viṣṇu is known as of the Subtle Body; and Rudra is known as of the Causal Body and I am known as Turiya, transcending the Gunas.

निर्गुर्णं सगुर्णं चेति ब्रिषा मदुगम्पूछते ।

निर्गुर्ण मायया हीनं सगुर्ण मायया युन्त् ॥ 75 ॥

साउहं सर्वे जान्यश्रुत तदन्तः संप्रविश्य च ।

प्रेयाम्यनिर्ं जीवं ययाकर्मे वयाश्रुन्त् ॥ 76 ॥

This Turiya Form of Minc is called the state of equilibrium of the Gunas. It is the Inner Controller of all. Beyond this there is another state of Minc which is called the Formless Brahmā (Brāhmaṇa having no Forms). Know, verily, that my Forms are two, as they are with or without attributes (Saguna or Nirguna). That which is beyond Māyā and the Māyīc qualities is called Nirguṇa (without Prākritic attributes) and that which is within Māyā is called Saguna.

सृष्ट्रित्थितितिणीधाने प्रेयाम्यहमेव हि ।

ब्रहाणं च तथा विष्णं रुद्र वै कारणात्मकम् ॥ 77 ॥

मद्याहिति पवनो भील्या सुर्वैघा गछक्षित ।

इन्द्रापिमुत्यवसन्तदासाउं सर्वोत्तमा स्मृता । 78 ॥

O Indra! After creating this universe, I enter within that as the Inner Controller of all and it is I that impel all the Jivas always to their due efforts and actions. Know, verily, that It is I that engage Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra, the causes of the several works of creation, preservation and destruction of this universe (they are performing their functions by My Command). Through the terror from Me the wind blows; through my terror, the Sun moves in the sky; through My terror, Indra, Agni, and Yama do their respective duties. I am the Best and Superior to all. All fear Me.

मतूसादाद्वादिस्तु जयो लक्षोर्जित सर्वदा ।

युभानई न्तरीय काषुप्नलिकोभान् ॥ 79 ॥

कदापिरिद्विवजये दैन्यानां विजयं कवित् ।

स्वतांका सेच्छण सर्व कुर्वे कर्मानुरोधतः ॥ 80 ॥

तां मां सर्वलिंकां युयं विस्मृत्य निजगवतः ।

अहंकारावृततामनो मोहमाप्ता दुर्तकम् ॥ 81 ॥

Through My Grace you have obtained victory in the battle. Know, verily, that it is I that make you all dance like inert wooden dolls as My mere instruments. You are merely My functions. I am the Integral Whole. I give sometimes victory to you and sometimes victory to the Daityas; Yea, I do everything as I will, keeping My independence duly and, according to the Karmas, justly. Oh! You all, have forgotten me though your pride and sheer nonsense. You have been carried deep into dire delusion by your vain egoism.

अनुग्रहं ततः कर्तुं युधमेहाद्वनुत्तमम् ।

निःसृतं सहसा तेनो मदीयं यक्षित्यविति ॥ 82 ॥

उतः परं सर्वभार्वहैत्वा गर्वं तु देहजम् ।

मापेवे शरणं यात सच्चिदानन्द्रकाणिगम् ॥ 83 ॥

And know now that to favour you, this My Adorable Light has issued suddenly. Hence forth banish ever from your heart all your vain boastings and idle pratings. Take refuge wholly unto Me with

all your head, heart and soul, unto My Saccidānanda Form and be safe. (At times the Devas forget and so fall into troubles).”

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा च महादेवी मूलप्रकृतिरीर्षति ।

अन्तर्धर्न गता सदो भक्न्या देर्वेभिकृत्न ॥ 84 ॥

ततः सर्वे स्वागवं तु विहाय पद्यंकजम् ।

सव्यगात्ध्यामासुभगवतः पतारवम् ॥ 85 ॥

त्रिसंधे सर्वेत सर्वे गायकीजपतततः ।

यज्ञभागतिभिः सर्वे देवीं नित्यं सिवेषिते ॥ 86 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus saying, the Mūla Prakṛti, the Great Devi, the Goddess of the Universe, vanished from their sight. The Devas, on the other hand, began to praise Her then and there, with rapt devotion. Since that day, all the Devas quitted their pride and engaged themselves in worshipping the Devi devotedly. They worshipped the Gāyatrī Devi daily during the three Sandhyā times and performed various Yajñas and thus they worshipped Bhagavatī daily.

एवं सत्ययुने सर्वे गायजीजपतयरा: ।

तारह्लेखयोग्याप जय निष्णालमानसः ॥ 87 ॥

न विष्णुपानस नित्य बेरे नोकता तु कुर्वित् ।

न विष्णुदीक्षा नित्यास्ति शिवस्यापि तवैव च ॥ 88 ॥

Thus, in the Satya Yuga, everybody engaged themselves in repeating the Mantra Gāyatrī and worshipped the Goddess indwelling in the Pranava and Hrīnkāra. So, See now for yourself, that the worship of Viṣṇu or Śiva or initiation in the Viṣṇu Mantra or in the Śiva Mantra are not mentioned anywhere in the Vedas as to be done always and for ever.

गायघ्यासना तिथ्या सर्वेवेछः समीरिता ।

यया विना तध्यःपातो ब्राह्मण्यास्ति सर्वेधा ॥ 89 ॥

तावता कृतकृत्यत्वं नान्यापेक्षा द्विजस्य हि ।

गायत्रीमात्रिनिष्णातो द्विजो मोक्षमावानुवत् ॥ 90 ॥

They are done for a while and not required any more when the objects are fulfilled; only the worship of Gāyatrī is always compulsory, to be done at all times, as mentioned in the Vedas. O

Book XII Chapter IX

King! If a Brāhmaṇa does not worship the Gāyatrī, know, then, for certain, that in every way, he is sure to go down lower and lower. There is no doubt in this. A Brāhmin is not to wait, no never, to do any other thing; he will have all his desires fulfilled if he worships only the Devi Gāyatrī.

कुर्यादन्य वा कुर्यादिति प्राह मनुः स्वयम् ।

विद्यार तां तु गायकीं विद्यापतिवरायणः ॥ 9 1 ॥

शिवापित्ततो विधो नरकं याति सर्वथा ।

तस्मादाधुयोगे राजनायशीजपततयतः ॥

देवीपदाम्बजरता आसान्यैं दिजोतमाः ॥ 9 2 ॥

श्रिति श्रीद्वैभागवाले महापुराणे द्वारसाकन्योउष्ठमोउधायाः ॥ 8 1 ॥

Bhagavān Manu says that a Brāhman, whether he does any other thing or not, can be saved if he worships only the Divine Mother Gāyatrī. (This

worshipping the Gāyatrī is the highest, greatest, and most difficult of all the works in this universe). If any devotee of Śiva or Viṣṇu or of any other Deity worships his desired Deity without repeating the Gāyatrī, he is sure to suffer the torments of hell. (But this age of Kālī deludes the people and draws away their minds from reciting this Gāyatrī save a few of them.) O King! For this reason, in the Satya Yuga, all the Brāhmaṇas kept themselves fully engaged in worshipping the Gāyatrī and the lotus feet of the Devi Bhagavatī.

Here ends the Eighth Chapter in the Twelfth Book on the appearance of the Highest Śakti in the Mahāpurānam Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book XII Chapter IX

