[Ch 8 Verse 1-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya spoke to Veda Vyāsa: O Bhagavan! Thou art the knower of all the Dharmas and Thou art the chief, the crown of the Pandits, knowing all the Śāstras. Now I ask Thee how is it that the twice-born have ceased to worship the Highest Śakti, the Gāyatrī and they now worship the other Devatās, on the face of the distinct command in the Śrutis that the worship of the Gāyatrī is nityā, that is, daily to be done at all times, especially during the three Sandhyā times, by all those that are twice-born?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya spoke to Veda Vyāsa :-- O Bhagavān! Thou art the knower of all the Dharmas and Thou art the chief, the crown of the Pundits, knowing all the Śāstras. Now I ask Thee how is it that the twice-born have ceased to worship the Highest Śakti, the Gāyatrī and they now worship the other Devatās, on the face of the distinct command in the Śrutis that the worship of the Gāyatrī is nityā, that is, daily to be done at all times, especially during the three Sandhyā times, by all those that are twice-born?

[Ch 8 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In this world some are the devotees of Viṣṇu, some, the followers of Ganapati, some are Kāpālikas, some follow the doctrines prevalent in China; some are the followers of Buddha or Cārvāka; some of them again wear the barks of trees and others roam naked. So various persons are seen having no trace of faith in the Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In this world some are the devotees of Viṣṇu, some, the followers of Gaṇapatī, some are Kāpālikas, some follow the doctrines prevalent in China; some are the followers of Buddha or Cārvāka; some of them again wear the barks of trees and others roam naked. So various persons are seen having no trace of faith in the Vedas.

[Ch 8 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brāhmaṇa! What is the real cause underlying secretly here in this! Kindly mention this to me. Again there are seen many men, well versed in various metaphysics and logic, our B.A.s and M.A.s but then, again, they have no faith in the Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brāhmaṇa! What is the real cause underlying secretly here in this! Kindly mention this to me. Again there are seen many men, well versed in various metaphysics and logic, our B.A.s and M.A.s but then, again, they have no faith in the Vedas.

[Ch 8 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How is this? Nobody wants anything ominous to him consciously. But how is it that these so-called learned men are fully aware and yet they are wonderfully void of any trace of faith in the Vedas? Kindly mention the cause underlying this, O Thou! The foremost of the knowers of the Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► How is this? Nobody wants anything ominous to him consciously. But how is it that these so-called learned men are fully aware and yet they are wonderfully void of any trace of faith in the Vedas? Kindly mention the cause underlying this, O Thou! The foremost of the knowers of the Vedas.

[Ch 8 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There is, again, another question: Thou hadst described before the glories of Manidvīpa, the highest and the best place of the Devi. Now I want to hear how is that Dvīpa greater than the great. Satisfy this servant of thine by describing these. If the Guru be pleased, he reveals even the greatest and the highest esoteric secret to his disciple.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There is, again, another question :-- Thou hadst described before the glories of Maṇidvīpa, the highest and the best place of the Devī. Now I want to hear how is that Dvīpa greater than the great. Satisfy this servant of thine by describing these. If the Guru be pleased, he reveals even the greatest and the highest esoteric secret to his disciple.

[Ch 8 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta spoke: Hearing the words of the King Janamejaya, the Bhagavān Veda Vyāsa began to answer the questions in due order. The hearing of this increases the faith of the twice-born in the Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta spoke :-- Hearing the words of the King Janamejaya, the Bhagavān Veda Vyāsa began to answer the questions in due order. The hearing of this increases the faith of the twice-born in the Vedas.

[Ch 8 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Well has this been asked by you, O King! in due time and in an appropriate moment. You are intelligent and it seems that you have got the faith in the Vedas. I now answer. Listen. In ancient days, the Asuras, maddened with pride, fought against the Devas for one hundred years. The war was very extraordinary and remarkable.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Well has this been asked by you, O King! in due time and in an appropriate moment. You are intelligent and it seems that you have got the faith in the Vedas. I now answer. Listen. In ancient days, the Asuras, maddened with pride, fought against the Devas for one hundred years. The war was very extraordinary and remarkable.

[Ch 8 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In this great war various weapons were used, variegated with numerous Māyās or ingenious devices. It tended to destroy the whole world. By the mercy of the Highest and the Most Exalted Śakti, the Daityas were overcome by the Devas in that Great War. And they quitted the Heavens and the Earth and went to the nether regions, the Pātāla.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In this great war various weapons were used, variegated with numerous Māyās or ingenious devices. It tended to destroy the whole world. By the mercy of the Highest and the Most Exalted Śakti, the Daityas were overcome by the Devas in that Great War. And they quitted the Heavens and the Earth and went to the nether regions, the Pātāla.

[Ch 8 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas were all delighted and began to dwell on their own prowesses and became proud. They began to say: "Why shall not victory be ours. Why are not our glories great? We are by far the best! Where are the Daityas? They are devils, powerless.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas were all delighted and began to dwell on their own prowesses and became proud. They began to say :-- “Why shall not victory be ours. Why are not our glories great? We are by far the best! Where are the Daityas? They are devils, powerless.

[Ch 8 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We are the causes of creation, preservation and destruction. We all are glorious! Oh! What can be said before us in favour of the Ausras, the devils?" Thus, not knowing the Highest Sakti, the Devas were deluded. At this moment, seeing this plight of the Devas, the World Mother took pity on the Devas and, to favour them, Śrimadievbhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► We are the causes of creation, preservation and destruction. We all are glorious! Oh! What can be said before us in favour of the Asuras, the devils?” Thus, not knowing the Highest Śakti, the Devas were deluded. At this moment, seeing this plight of the Devas, the World Mother took pity on the Devas and, to favour them, O

[Ch 8 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! She appeared before them in the form of the Most Worshipful, the Great Holy Light. It was resplendent like ten million Suns, and cool as well like ten million Moons. It was brilliant and dazzling like ten million lightning flashes, without hands and feet, and exceedingly beautiful! Never was this witnessed before!
NEW CORR ENG ──► King! She appeared before them in the form of the Most Worshipful, the Great Holy Light. It was resplendent like ten million Suns, and cool as well like ten million Moons. It was brilliant and dazzling like ten million lightning flashes, without hands and feet, and exceedingly beautiful! Never was this witnessed before!

[Ch 8 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing this Extraordinary Beautiful Lovely Light, the Devas were taken aback; they spoke amongst themselves, thus: “What is this! What is this! Is this the work of the Daityas or some other great Māyā (Magic) played by them or is it the work of another for creating the surprise of the Devas!”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing this Extraordinary Beautiful Lovely Light, the Devas were taken aback; they spoke amongst themselves, thus :-- “What is this! What is this! Is this the work of the Daityas or some other great Māyā (Mayic) played by them or is it the work of another for creating the surprise of the Devas!”

[Ch 8 Verse 22-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Then they all assembled together and decided to approach towards that Adorable Light and to ask It what It was. They, then, would determine its strength and decide what to do afterwards. Thus, coming to this ultimate conclusion, Indra called Agni and said: "O Agni! You are the mouth-piece of the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Then they all assembled together and decided to approach towards that Adorable Light and to ask It what It was. They, then, would determine its strength and decide what to do afterwards. Thus, coming to this ultimate conclusion, Indra called Agni and said :-- “O Agni! You are the mouth-piece of the Devas.

[Ch 8 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore do you go first and ascertain distinctly what this Light is." Hearing thus the words of Indra, Agni, elated by his own prowess, set out immediately from the place and went to that Light. Seeing Agni coming, the Light addressed him thus: "Who are you? What is your strength? State this before Me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore do you go first and ascertain distinctly what this Light is.” Hearing thus the words of Indra, Agni, elated by his own prowess, set out immediately from the place and went to that Light. Seeing Agni coming, the Light addressed him thus :-- “Who are you? What is your strength? State this before Me.”

[Ch 8 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this Agni replied: “I am Agni. All the yajñas, ordained in the Vedas are performed through me. The power of burning everything in this universe resides in me.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this Agni replied :-- “I am Agni. All the yajñās, ordained in the Vedas are performed through me. The power of burning everything in this universe resides in me.”

[Ch 8 Verse 28-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then that adorable Light took up a straw of grass and said: "O Agni! If you can burn everything in this universe, then do you burn this trifling straw." Agni tried his best to burn the straw but he could not burn it. He got ashamed and fast went back to the Devas. Asked by the Devas, Agni told them everything and said: "O Devas! Know verily that the pride cherished by us that we are supreme, is entirely false."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then that adorable Light took up a straw of grass and said :-- “O Agni! If you can burn everything in this universe, then do you burn this trifling straw.” Agni tried his best to burn the straw but he could not burn it. He got ashamed and fast went back to the Devas. Asked by the Devas, Agni told them everything and said :-- “O Devas! Know verily that the pride cherished by us that we are supreme, is entirely false.”

[Ch 8 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra then asked Vāyu (wind) and said: "O Vāyu! You are dwelling in this universe, through and through; by your efforts, all are moving; therefore you are the Prāna of all; it is possible that all forces are concentrated within you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra then asked Vāyu (wind) and said :-- “O Vāyu! You are dwelling in this universe, through and through; by your efforts, all are moving; therefore you are the Prāṇa of all; it is possible that all forces are concentrated within you.

[Ch 8 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Go and ascertain what is this Light? Verily I do not see any other person here than you who can ascertain this great adorable Light." Hearing these commendable words of Indra, Vāyu felt himself elated and went at once to that place where was that Light.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Go and ascertain what is this Light? Verily I do not see any other person here than you who can ascertain this great adorable Light.” Hearing these commendable words of Indra, Vāyu felt himself elated and went at once to that place where was that Light.

[Ch 8 Verse 35-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the Vāyu, the Light, the Yaksa, the demi-god, the Spirit asked in a gentle language: “Who are you? What strength is there in you? Speak out all these to me.” At this, Vāyu spoke arrogantly, “I am Mātarisāvan, I am Vāyu; about my strength, I can move anything and I hold everything. It is through the strength of mine, that this universe is, and is alive and brisk with movements and works.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the Vāyu, the Light, the Yakṣa, the demi-god, the Spirit asked in a gentle language :-- “Who are you? What strength is there in you? Speak out all these to me.” At this, Vāyu spoke arrogantly, “I am Mātarisvan, I am Vāyu; about my strength, I can move anything and I hold everything. It is through the strength of mine, that this universe is, and is alive and brisk with movements and works.”

[Ch 8 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That Highest Mass of Light then replied: “O Vāyu! Move this straw that lies before you, and if you cannot, quit your pride and go back to Indra ashamed.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► That Highest Mass of Light then replied :-- “O Vāyu! Move this straw that lies before you, and if you cannot, quit your pride and go back to Indra ashamed.”

[Ch 8 Verse 39-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this Vāyu tried all his might but, alas! He could not move the straw a bit from that place! Vāyu then gave up his pride and returned to the Devas and spoke to them all about the Yakṣa (a sort of demi-god, a ghost). O Devas! Our pride is vain; in no way can we be able to ascertain the nature of that Light. It seems that that Holy Light, adorable by all, is extraordinary.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this Vāyu tried all his might but, alas! He could not move the straw a bit from that place! Vāyu then gave up his pride and returned to the Devas and spoke to them all about the Yakṣa (a sort of demi-god, a ghost). O Devas! Our pride is vain; in no way can we be able to ascertain the nature of that Light. It seems that that Holy Light, adorable by all, is extraordinary.

[Ch 8 Verse 42-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then all the Devas spoke with one voice to Indra: "When You are the King of the Devas, better go yourself and ascertain the reality of Its Nature." Indra, then, with great pride, went himself to the Light; the Light, too, began to disappear gradually from the place, and ultimately vanished from Indra's sight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then all the Devas spoke with one voice to Indra :-- “When You are the King of the Devas, better go yourself and ascertain the reality of Its Nature.” Indra, then, with great pride, went himself to the Light; the Light, too, began to disappear gradually from the place, and ultimately vanished from Indra’s sight.

[Ch 8 Verse 44-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Indra found that he could not even speak to That Light, he became greatly ashamed and began to conceive of his own nothingness. He thought thus: "I won't go back to the Devas. What shall I say to them? Never will I disclose to them my inferiority; one is better to die than do this. One's self-honour is the only treasure of the great and honourable.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Indra found that he could not even speak to That Light, he became greatly ashamed and began to conceive of his own nothingness. He thought thus :-- “I won’t go back to the Devas. What shall I say to them? Never will I disclose to them my inferiority; one is better to die than do this. One’s self-honour is the only treasure of the great and honourable.

[Ch 8 Verse 47-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If honour is gone, what use, then, is there in living?" O King! Then Indra, the Lord of Devas, quitted his pride and took refuge unto That Great Light which exhibited, ere long, such a glorious character. At this moment, a celestial voice was heard from the Heavens: "O Indra! Go on now and do the japam, the reciting of the Māyā Bija Mantra, the basic Mantra of Māyā. All your troubles will, then, be over."
NEW CORR ENG ──► If honour is gone, what use, then, is there in living?” O King! Then Indra, the Lord of Devas, quitted his pride and took refuge unto That Great Light which exhibited, ere long, such a glorious character. At this moment, a celestial voice was heard from the Heavens :-- “O Indra! Go on now and do the japam, the reciting of the Māyā Vīja Mantra, the basic Mantra of Māyā. All your troubles will, then, be over.”

[Ch 8 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this celestial voice, Indra began to repeat the Māyā Bija, the Seed Mantra of Māyā, with rapt concentration and without any food.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this celestial voice, Indra began to repeat the Māyā Vīja, the Seed Mantra of Māyā, with rapt concentration and without any food.

[Ch 8 Verse 51-53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then on the ninth lunar day of the month of Caitra when the Sun entered the meridian, suddenly there appeared in that place a Great Mass of Light as was seen before. Indra saw, then, within that Mass of Light, a Virgin Form in full youth. The lustre from Her body was like that of ten million Rising Suns; and the colour was rosy red like a full-blown Java flower. On Her forehead was shining the digit of the Moon; Her breasts were full, and, though veiled under the cloth, they looked very beautiful. She was holding noose and a goad in Her two hands and Her other two hands indicated signs of favour and fearlessness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then on the ninth lunar day of the month of Caitra when the Sun entered the meridian, suddenly there appeared in that place a Great Mass of Light as was seen before. Indra saw, then, within that Mass of Light, a Virgin Form in full youth. The lustre from Her body was like that of ten million Rising Suns; and the colour was rosy red like a full-blown Javā flower. On Her forehead was shining the digit of the Moon; Her breasts were full, and, though veiled under the cloth, they looked very beautiful. She was holding noose and a goad in Her two hands and Her other two hands indicated signs of favour and fearlessness.

[Ch 8 Verse 54-55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her body was decked with various ornaments and it looked auspicious and exceedingly lovely; nowhere can be seen a woman beautiful like Her. She was like a Kalpa Vṛksa (celestial tree yielding all desires); she was three eyed and Her braid of hair was encircled with Mālati garlands. She was praised on Her four sides by the Four Vedas, Incarnate, in their respective Forms.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her body was decked with various ornaments and it looked auspicious and exceedingly lovely; nowhere can be seen a woman beautiful like Her. She was like a Kalpa Vrikṣa (celestial tree yielding all desires); she was three eyed and Her braid of hair was encircled with Mālatī garlands. She was praised on Her four sides by the Four Vedas, Incarnate, in their respective Forms.

[Ch 8 Verse 56-58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The brilliancy of Her teeth shed lustre on the ground as if ornamented with Padmarāga jewels. Her face looked smiling. Her clothing was red and Her body was covered with sandalpaste. She was the Cause of all causes. Oh! She was all Full of Mercy. O King Janamejaya! Thus Indra saw, then, the Umā Pārvati Maheśvari Bhagavati and the hairs of his body stood on ends with ecstasy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The brilliancy of Her teeth shed lustre on the ground as if ornamented with Padmarāga jewels. Her face looked smiling. Her clothing was red and Her body was covered with sandalpaste. She was the Cause of all causes. Oh! She was all Full of Mercy. O King Janamejaya! Thus Indra saw, then, the Umā Parvatī Maheśvarī Bhagavatī and the hairs of his body stood on ends with ecstasy.

[Ch 8 Verse 59-60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► His eyes were filled with tears of love and deep devotion and he immediately fell prostrate before the feet of the Devi. Indra sang various hymns to Her and praised Her. He became very glad and asked Her, "O Fair One! Art Thou that Great Mass of Light?
NEW CORR ENG ──► His eyes were filled with tears of love and deep devotion and he immediately fell prostrate before the feet of the Devī. Indra sang various hymns to Her and praised Her. He became very glad and asked Her, “O Fair One! Art Thou that Great Mass of Light?

[Ch 8 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If this be, kindly state the cause of Thy appearance." O King! Hearing this, the Bhagavati replied.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If this be, kindly state the cause of Thy appearance.” O King! Hearing this, the Bhagavatī replied.

[Ch 8 Verse 62-63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "This My Form is Brahma, the Cause of all causes, the Seat of Māyā, the Witness of all, infallible and free from all defects or blemishes. What all the Vedas and Upanjsads try to establish, what ought to be obtained, as declared by all the rules of austerity, and for which the Brāhmaṇas practise Brahmacaryam, I am all that. I have told you about that Brahmā, of the nature of the Great Holy Light.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This My Form is Brahmā, the Cause of all causes, the Seat of Māyā, the Witness of all, infallible and free from all defects or blemishes. What all the Vedas and Upaniṣadas try to establish, what ought to be obtained, as declared by all the rules of austerity, and for which the Brāhmaṇas practise Brahmacaryam, I am all that. I have told you about that Brahmā, of the nature of the Great Holy Light.

[Ch 8 Verse 64-65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The sages declare that Tha Brāhmaṇa is revealed by “Om” and “Hrim”, the two Bijas (mystic syllables) that are My two first and foremost Mantras wherein I remain hidden. I create this universe with My two parts (in My two aspects); therefore My Bija mantra is two. “Om” Bija is denominated as Saccidānanda (everlasting existence, intelligence and bliss) and “Hrim” Bija is Māyā Prakṛti, the Undifferentiated Consciousness, made manifest.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The sages declare that That Brāhmaṇ is revealed by “Oṃ” and “Hrīm”, the two Vījas (mystic syllables) that are My two first and foremost Mantras wherein I remain hidden. I create this universe with My two parts (in My two aspects); therefore My Vīja mantra is two. “Oṃ” Vīja is denominated as Saccidānanda (everlasting existence, intelligence and bliss) and “Hrīm” Vīja is Māyā Prakriti, the Undifferentiated Consciousness, made manifest.

[Ch 8 Verse 66-67]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Know, then, That Māyā as the Highest Śakti and know Me as that Omnipotent Goddess at present revealed before your eyes. As moonlight is not different from the Moon, so this Māyā Śakti in the state of equilibrium is not different from Me. (The powerful man and the power he wields are not different. They are verily one and the same.)
NEW CORR ENG ──► Know, then, That Māyā as the Highest Śakti and know Me as that Omnipotent Goddess at present revealed before your eyes. As moonlight is not different from the Moon, so this Māyā Śakti in the state of equilibrium is not different from Me. (The powerful man and the power he wields are not different. They are verily one and the same.)

[Ch 8 Verse 68-69]
OLD OCR ENG ──► During Pralaya (the Great Latency period), this Māyā lies latent in Me, without there being any difference. Again at the time of creation, this Māyā appears as the fructification of the Karmas of the Jivas. When this Māyā is potential and exists latent in Me, when Māyā is Antarmukhī, it is called Unmanifested and when the Māyā becomes Kinetic, when the Mayā is Bahirmukhī, when She is in an active Kinetic state, it is said to be Manifested.
NEW CORR ENG ──► During Pralaya (the Great Latency period), this Māyā lies latent in Me, without there being any difference. Again at the time of creation, this Māyā appears as the fructification of the Karmas of the Jīvas. When this Māyā is potential and exists latent in Me, when Māyā is Antarmukhī, it is called Unmanifested and when the Māyā becomes Kinetic, when the Māyā is Bahirmukhī, when She is in an active Kinetic state, it is said to be Manifested.

[Ch 8 Verse 70-71]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There is no origin or beginning of this Māyā. Māyā is of the nature of Brahmā in a state of equilibrium. But, during the beginning of the creation, Her form consisting of the several Gunas appears, when Māyā is Bahirmukhi, She becomes Tāmas, in Her Unmanifested state. O Indra! For this reason Her state of abstraction, and becoming introspective, this is Her Antarmukhī state; it is known as Māyā and Her looking outward is Her Bahirmukhi state; it is denominated by Tāmas and the other gunas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There is no origin or beginning of this Māyā. Māyā is of the nature of Brahmā in a state of equilibrium. But, during the beginning of the creation, Her form consisting of the several Guṇas appears, when Māyā is Bahir Mukhī, She becomes Tāmas, in Her Unmanifested state. O Indra! For this reason Her state of abstraction, and becoming introspective, this is Her Antarmukhī state; it is known as Māyā and Her looking outward is Her Bahirmukhī state; it is denominated by Tāmas and the other guṇas.

[Ch 8 Verse 72-73]
OLD OCR ENG ──► From this comes Sattva and then Rajas and Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa are of the nature of the three gunas. Brahmā has the Rajo guna in Him preponderating; in Viṣṇu, the Sattva guna preponderates and in Maheśa, the Cause of all Causes, is said to reside the Tamo guna.
NEW CORR ENG ──► From this comes Sāttva and then Rājas and Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa are of the nature of the three guṇas. Brahmā has the Rājo guṇa in Him preponderating; in Viṣṇu, the Sāttva guṇa preponderates and in Maheśa, the Cause of all Causes, is said to reside the Tāmo guṇa.

[Ch 8 Verse 74]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā is known as of the Gross Body; Viṣṇu is known as of the Subtle Body; and Rudra is known as of the Causal Body and I am known as Turiya, transcending the Gunas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā is known as of the Gross Body; Viṣṇu is known as of the Subtle Body; and Rudra is known as of the Causal Body and I am known as Turīya, transcending the Guṇas.

[Ch 8 Verse 75-76]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Turiya Form of Minc is called the state of equilibrium of the Gunas. It is the Inner Controller of all. Beyond this there is another state of Minc which is called the Formless Brahmā (Brāhmaṇa having no Forms). Know, verily, that my Forms are two, as they are with or without attributes (Saguna or Nirguna). That which is beyond Māyā and the Māyīc qualities is called Nirguṇa (without Prākritic attributes) and that which is within Māyā is called Saguna.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This Turīya Form of Mine is called the state of equilibrium of the Guṇas. It is the Inner Controller of all. Beyond this there is another state of Mine which is called the Formless Brahmā (Brāhmaṇ having no Forms). Know, verily, that my Forms are two, as they are with or without attributes (Saguṇa or Nirguṇa). That which is beyond Māyā and the Māyic qualities is called Nirguṇa (without Prākritic attributes) and that which is within Māyā is called Saguṇa.

[Ch 8 Verse 77-78]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Indra! After creating this universe, I enter within that as the Inner Controller of all and it is I that impel all the Jivas always to their due efforts and actions. Know, verily, that It is I that engage Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra, the causes of the several works of creation, preservation and destruction of this universe (they are performing their functions by My Command). Through the terror from Me the wind blows; through my terror, the Sun moves in the sky; through My terror, Indra, Agni, and Yama do their respective duties. I am the Best and Superior to all. All fear Me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Indra! After creating this universe, I enter within that as the Inner Controller of all and it is I that impel all the Jīvas always to their due efforts and actions. Know, verily, that It is I that engage Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra, the causes of the several works of creation, preservation and destruction of this universe (they are performing their functions by My Command). Through the terror from Me the wind blows; through my terror, the Sun moves in the sky; through My terror, Indra, Agni, and Yama do their respective duties. I am the Best and Superior to all. All fear Me.

[Ch 8 Verse 79-81]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Through My Grace you have obtained victory in the battle. Know, verily, that it is I that make you all dance like inert wooden dolls as My mere instruments. You are merely My functions. I am the Integral Whole. I give sometimes victory to you and sometimes victory to the Daityas; Yea, I do everything as I will, keeping My independence duly and, according to the Karmas, justly. Oh! You all, have forgotten me though your pride and sheer nonsense. You have been carried deep into dire delusion by your vain egoism.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Through My Grace you have obtained victory in the battle. Know, verily, that it is I that make you all dance like inert wooden dolls as My mere instruments. You are merely My functions. I am the Integral Whole. I give sometimes victory to you and sometimes victory to the Daityas; Yea, I do everything as I will, keeping My independence duly and, according to the Karmas, justly. Oh! You all, have forgotten me though your pride and sheer nonsense. You have been carried deep into dire delusion by your vain egoism.

[Ch 8 Verse 82-83]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And know now that to favour you, this My Adorable Light has issued suddenly. Hence forth banish ever from your heart all your vain boastings and idle pratings. Take refuge wholly unto Me with all your head, heart and soul, unto My Saccidānanda Form and be safe. (At times the Devas forget and so fall into troubles).”
NEW CORR ENG ──► And know now that to favour you, this My Adorable Light has issued suddenly. Hence forth banish ever from your heart all your vain boastings and idle pratings. Take refuge wholly unto Me with all your head, heart and soul, unto My Saccidānanda Form and be safe. (At times the Devas forget and so fall into troubles).

[Ch 8 Verse 84-86]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Thus saying, the Mūla Prakṛti, the Great Devi, the Goddess of the Universe, vanished from their sight. The Devas, on the other hand, began to praise Her then and there, with rapt devotion. Since that day, all the Devas quitted their pride and engaged themselves in worshipping the Devi devotedly. They worshipped the Gāyatrī Devi daily during the three Sandhyā times and performed various Yajñas and thus they worshipped Bhagavatī daily.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Thus saying, the Mūla Pakriti, the Great Devī, the Goddess of the Universe, vanished from their sight. The Devas, on the other hand, began to praise Her then and there, with rapt devotion. Since that day, all the Devas quitted their pride and engaged themselves in worshipping the Devī devotedly. They worshipped the Gāyatrī Devī daily during the three Sandhyā times and performed various Yajñās and thus they worshipped Bhagavatī daily.

[Ch 8 Verse 87-88]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus, in the Satya Yuga, everybody engaged themselves in repeating the Mantra Gāyatrī and worshipped the Goddess indwelling in the Pranava and Hrīnkāra. So, See now for yourself, that the worship of Viṣṇu or Śiva or initiation in the Viṣṇu Mantra or in the Śiva Mantra are not mentioned anywhere in the Vedas as to be done always and for ever.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus, in the Satya Yuga, everybody engaged themselves in repeating the Mantra Gāyatrī and worshipped the Goddess indwelling in the Praṇava and Hrīṃkāra. So, See now for yourself, that the worship of Viṣṇu or Śiva or initiation in the Viṣṇu Mantra or in the Śiva Mantra are not mentioned anywhere in the Vedas as to be done always and for ever.

[Ch 8 Verse 89-90]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They are done for a while and not required any more when the objects are fulfilled; only the worship of Gāyatrī is always compulsory, to be done at all times, as mentioned in the Vedas. O King! If a Brāhmaṇa does not worship the Gāyatrī, know, then, for certain, that in every way, he is sure to go down lower and lower. There is no doubt in this. A Brāhmin is not to wait, no never, to do any other thing; he will have all his desires fulfilled if he worships only the Devi Gāyatrī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They are done for a while and not required any more when the objects are fulfilled; only the worship of Gāyatrī is always compulsory , to be done at all times, as mentioned in the Vedas. O King! If a Brāhmaṇa does not worship the Gāyatrī, know, then, for certain, that in every way, he is sure to go down lower and lower. There is no doubt in this. A Brāhmin is not to wait, no never, to do any other thing; he will have all his desires fulfilled if he worships only the Devī Gāyatrī.

[Ch 8 Verse 81]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhagavān Manu says that a Brāhman, whether he does any other thing or not, can be saved if he worships only the Divine Mother Gāyatrī. (This worshipping the Gāyatrī is the highest, greatest, and most difficult of all the works in this universe). If any devotee of Śiva or Viṣṇu or of any other Deity worships his desired Deity without repeating the Gāyatrī, he is sure to suffer the torments of hell. (But this age of Kālī deludes the people and draws away their minds from reciting this Gāyatrī save a few of them.) O King! For this reason, in the Satya Yuga, all the Brāhmaṇas kept themselves fully engaged in worshipping the Gāyatrī and the lotus feet of the Devi Bhagavatī. Here ends the Eighth Chapter in the Twelfth Book on the appearance of the Highest Śakti in the Mahāpurānam Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bhagavān Manu says that a Brāhmin, whether he does any other thing or not, can be saved if he worships only the Divine Mother Gāyatrī. (This worshipping the Gāyatrī is the highest, greatest, and most difficult of all the works in this universe). If any devotee of Śiva or Viṣṇu or of any other Deity worships his desired Deity without repeating the Gāyatrī, he is sure to suffer the torments of hell. (But this age of Kālī deludes the people and draws away their minds from reciting this Gāyatrī save a few of them.) O King! For this reason, in the Satya Yuga, all the Brāhmaṇas kept themselves fully engaged in worshipping the Gāyatrī and the lotus feet of the Devī Bhagavatī. Here ends the Eighth Chapter in the Twelfth Book on the appearance of the Highest Śakti in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
