CHAPTER XVI

On Yudhājit's Going to the Hermitage of Bharadvāja

व्यास उवाच

युधाजित्वच संग्रामादुरात्वाउयोधां महावल: ।

मनोरामां च पगच्छ सुदर्शनविधासंया ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: After gaining the victory in the battle, the king Yudhājit returned to the city of Ayodhyā, with his huge army and asked where are Sudarśana and Manoramā? He wanted to kill Sudarśana.

सेवकान् प्रिययामास क्व गतेति मुड्वैदन्त् ।

शुषे दिनेउध दौहित्रं स्थाययामास चासने ॥ 2 ॥

He repeatedly exclaimed “Where are they gone?” and sent his servants on their search. Then, on an auspicious day, he installed his daughter’ son on the throne.

मन्त्रिभिध्धु वसिष्ठन मन्त्रैगवर्धौगै: शुभे: ।

अधिपिच्छा सम्पूर्णै: कलशैज्लपूर्तै: ॥ 3 ॥

Mahārṣi Vasistha was engaged as the priest; he and the other ministers began to chant the auspicious hymns of the Atharvaveda and with the jars, filled with water, and consecrated by these hymns, installed Śatrujit on the throne.

भोरीगढ़ानिद्रेश तृयाणं चाथ नि:स्वर्ने: ।

उत्सवतु नायर्यों वै सवधूव कूक्छड़ १। ४। १।

O best of the Kurus! Conch shells resounded; bheris and tūriyas resounded; and great festivals and rejoicings took place in the city.

विग्राणां वेदपाठैश्र वैदितां स्तुतिभस्तथा ।

अयोध्या मुदितेवासीज्वयग्वदे: सुमझूलेः ॥ 5 ॥

Book III Chapter XVI

The reciting of the Vedic mantrams by the Brāhmaṇa, the chanting of hymns by the bards and the auspicious acclamation of Victory to their new king resounded the whole city of Ayodhyā with joy.

हृदयुङनाकीर्ण स्तुलिवाद्विन:स्वना ।

नवे तत्मम्बीराले पूर्वयौने नृत्नेव सा ॥ 6 ॥

When the new king Śatrujit ascended on the throne, the subject were filled with joy; everywhere hymns were sung; drums were resounded. At this Ayodhyā looked as fresh as ever.

कैत्रितस्पृजन वे चै चकुः शोक गृह् त्रिवतः ।

सूरर्गेन विधित्याच्य क्व नातोउसी नृपात्मकः ॥ ७ ॥

मनोरापतिसार्यी सा क्व गता सुतसंयुता ।

वितास्थना निहतः संख्ये राज्यलोभेन वैशिण ॥ 8 ॥

O King! Though there were thus great rejoicings and festivals, yet some good persons were found that remembered Sudarśana and gave vent to this feeling of sorrow, thus: “Alas! Where has that prince gone? Where has that chaste queen Manoramā gone with her son? Oh! the enemies have killed his father for greed of kingdom.”

इल्वेवं त्वित्यमानासे साधव: समबुद्धय: ।

अतिषद्धु:वित्तास्तत्र शतुविज्ञधार्वर्तिनः ॥ 9 ॥

The saints with their views impartial, thus rendered uneasy, sorry, began to pass away their time there subject to Śatrujit.

युधाजित्यि दौहिंत्रे स्थापयित्वा विधानतः ।

राज्यं च मन्सिकानुत्वा चलितः स्वां पुरीं प्रति ॥ 10 ॥

After installing duly his daughter's son on the throne and after having made over the charge of the kingdom to the wise councillors, Yudhājit turned towards his own city.

श्रुत्वा सुदर्शनं त्रनु पीनानामप्रमे स्थितम् ।

हनुकामो जगामाग्य् चित्रकुटं स पवैनम् ॥ ११ ॥

निवादाधिपर्ति गृरं पुरस्कूल बलाधिधम् ।

दूर्वेशिल्यमतादणु शूब्जेवपुराधिप्यम् ॥ १२ ॥

Afterwards Yudhājit heard that Sudarśana was staying in the hermitage with the Munis. He started at once for Citrakūṭa and went quickly to Durdarśa,

the chief of the city of Śrṅgavera, being accompanied by Bala, the chief of the Niṣādas.

श्रुत्वा मनोराम तत्र बधूवातिसुतुःखिता ।

आगच्छंतं बालपुत्रा भयातां सै-व्यसंयुन्त् ॥ 13 ॥

तमुवाचातिरोगोकातां मुर्नि साश्रविलोचना ।

किं कंटीम वर्य नष्ठागये युधाजित्मयुगवित्यः ॥ 14 ॥

चिता में निर्होर्जनेने दौहितो भृपति: कृतः ।

सुर्गे में हनुकार्मोज्ञ समावाति बलात्विनः ॥ 15 ॥

Hearing that Yudhājit was coming there with his army, Manoramā began to think that his son was a minor and became very sorrowful, distressed and terrified. Then she with tears in her eyes addressed the Muni thus: "Yudhājit is coming here; what shall I do and whither shall I go? He has slain my father, and has installed his daughter's son on the throne. Still he is not satisfied and he is now coming with his army here to kill my minor child."

पुरा शुक्त मया स्थामियापडण वे वने स्थितः ।

मुनीनामामे पुण्ये पाझात्या सहितास्तदा ॥ १ ६ ॥

गतात्मे मृगयां पार्था घातरः पझे एल ते ।

ग्रीष्टी संस्थिता तत मुनीनामामझे शुभे ॥ १ ७ ॥

धीयोउप्रीमाल्वः पैले जाबालिरीतमो धपुः ।

च्यवनश्छानिगोऋ कपवश्रैव जनुः मन्तु ॥ १ ८ ॥

वीर्णितिजोः सुमुन्त्र शवन्तोज स्वलतः ।

राशनसः कहोडश्व यवक्रीयंजकृतक्नः ॥ १९ ॥

एते चान्ये च मुनयो भारजावद्य: शुभा: ।

वेदपाठयुता: सर्वे संस्थिताशायये स्थिताः ॥ 20 ॥

दारसीधि: सहित तत याजसेनी स्थिता मुने ।

आधमे चात्सर्वाईी निर्भय गुनिसंपुते ॥ 21 ॥

O Lord! In days of yore, I heard that the Pāndavas, when they went to the forest, lived in the holy hermitage of the Munis with Draupadi. One day the five brethren went a hunting, and the beautiful Draupadi stayed without any fear with other maid servants in the hermitage where there was the chanting of the Vedas by Dhaumya, Attri, Gālava, Paila, Jābāli, Gautama, Bhrgu, Cyavana, Kanva of the Atrigotra, Jatu, Kratu, Vītihotra, Sumantu, Yajñādatta, Vatsala, Rāsāsana, Kahoda Yavakrī Yajñakrit, Kratu and other holy high souled Rṣis like Bhāradvāja and others.

पार्यां मृगानुगास्तावस्थ्याताङ्ग वनाङ्गम् ।

धनुबोधापश वीराः पत्रे वै शज्ञातपानः ॥ 2 2 ॥

तावलिस्पृपति: श्रीमान्यानिर्बी बलसंयुतः ।

आगताश्रशमाध्यायो शुवत तु नियमधेबिन् ॥ 2 3 ॥

While the five great heroes Arjuna and others, the destroyers of their enemies, were reaming in the forests, Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu came with his army to the hermitage, hearing the reciting of the Vedic hymns.

शुचा वेदेधर्नि राजा मुनीां भावितात्मान् ।

उत्तरत रथतपूर्ण दर्जानकांक्षया नृपः ॥ 24 ॥

Hearing thus, that king quickly descended from the chariot so that he might have a sight of these holy Maharsis.

यदा निरगमन्तत्र भूत्यद्वयसमिति: ।

वेदपावदुगत्यावीक्ष्य मृनीनुड्यमसंसिति: ॥ 25 ॥

कृतांखिलुप: स्वियम्संशितो३ वजद्वतः ।

आम्रो मुनिभिनुंटे पुपति: संविवेश ह ॥ २६ ॥

तरोपविद्धं राजनं ग्रहकामाः तैक्षयस्तत् ।

आययमुर्पिनायांश कॉउयमिव्यबुव्यप् ॥ २७ ॥

Accompanied by two attendants only, he approached to the Munis and, finding them engaged in the study of the Vedas, waited there with folded hands for an opportunity. O Lord! When the king Jayadrathā on entering the hermitage took his seat, the wives of the Munis came there to see the king and began to enquire “who is this person?

तासां मध्ये वरातोहा गाउसेनी समानात ।

यजत्रदेने चूहा सा रूपणे शीरिवारणे ॥ 28 ॥

With the wives of the Munis came there also the beautiful Draupadi. Jayadratha looked upon Draupadi as if she were the second goddess Laksmī.

तं चितोक्यासितापांगी देवक-न्यामिवापराम् ।

प्रपछ्छ नृपतिर्थीम्यं केयं रणाया वरान्ता ॥ 29 ॥

भार्यां कस्य सुता कस्य नान्मा का वरवर्गिनि ।

रूपतावणयसंयुक्ति जशीव वसुयां गता ॥ 30 ॥

Looking at that lovely royal daughter who looked like the Deva girls Jayadratha asked Maharṣi Dhaumya, “Who is this beautiful lotus eyed lady? Whose wife is she and who is her father?

What is her name? Oh! From her beautiful appearance it seems that the goddess Śacī has come down on earth."

बब्बुलवनमध्यस्या लर्वंगलितका यथा ।

ग्रास्तीर्वृतान नूत नम्बेवापति भार्थिनि ॥ 31 ॥

This fair woman is shining like the celestial nymph Rambhā surrounded by the Rāksasīs or like the beautiful creeper Lavāngalatika encircled by thorny trees.

सत्वं वद महाभाग कस्वेयं वल्लभाउवला ।

राजपतिव चापाति नैया मुनिवर्षूद्धिं ॥ ३ २ ॥

O good ones! Tell truly whose beloved is she?

O Brāhmins! It seems that she is the wife of some king, not the wife of a Muni.

धौम्य उवाच

पाण्डवाना पिंवा भार्यां त्रीदपी सृष्णतक्षणा ।

पाङ्गाली सिस्युगजेन्द्र बस्वयर वराङ्मे ॥ 33 ॥

Dhaumya said: "O king of Sindhu! She is the daughter of Pānācala; her name is Draupadī; she is the wife of the Pāndavas; they are residing in this forest, having got rid of their fears."

जयद्धय सचाच

वक्त नातः पाण्ड्वा: पढ़ शुगा: सम्पति विश्वुतः ।

वसंस्वय चे वीरा वीतगोंका महावतः ॥ 34 ॥

Jayadratha said: “Where have those powerful Pāndavas of great prowess gone now? Are they dwelling in this forest, free from fears?

धौम्य उवाच

भृगवार्थी गताः पझु पाण्डवा रथसंस्थिता ।

आभिध्यन्ति मध्याङ्गे भुगानाठाय पार्थिवाः ॥ 35 ॥

Dhaumya said: "The five Pāndavas have gone out on hunting, ascended on a chariot. They will return at noon with their game."

तच्छूला वचनं तस्य उदतिड्वसो नृपः ।

ग्रीपतिसप्रिधौ गत्या प्राग्येदमुबाच् ६ ॥ 36 ॥

कुगलं ते वरागेहे वक गता: पतयक्ष ते ।

एकादश गतान्यक्ष वर्षाणि च वने किल ॥ 37 ॥

Hearing the Muni's words Jayadratha got up, and going near Draupadi, bowed down to her and

Book III Chapter XVI

said: “O Fair One! Is there every thing well with you? Where have your husbands gone? Today it is eleven years that you are residing in the forest.”

ह्रीपरी तु ततोवाच स्वसि ते०तु नृपालन ।

विश्रयावश्रामाध्याशे क्षणाद्यान्ति पणड्वाः ॥ 38 ॥

Draupadī then said: “O prince! Let all be well with you, wait here for a short while; the Pāndavas are coming quickly.

एवं बुवंलां तस्यां तु लोपाधिष्टः स भूपति: ।

जहाग्र हीपर्वी वीरोउनाद्य पुनिसत्तमान् ॥ ३ ९ ॥

While Draupadi thus spoke, that powerful king, being overpowered with greed and avarice, stole her away, disregarding all the Munis present there.

कस्याधिवेय विश्वासः कर्तेम्यः सर्वेधा बुधेः ।

कुर्वन्तु:खमवाणोति वृहांतत्स्वत वै बलि: ॥ 40 ॥

वैरोचनसुतः श्रीमान्यमिंहु सत्यसूत्र: ।

युक्तची च दाता च गरण्य साधुसमानः ॥ 4 1 ॥

नामं मैनतः क्वापि ग्रहादस्य च गैरकः ।

एकोनगरायज्ञान्यै स चकार सदक्षिणान् ॥ 4 2 ॥

O Lord! The wise should never trust anybody; if on anybody he places his trust, he will surely come to grief. For example, see the case of the King Bali. Bali, the son of Virocana, and the grandson of Prahlāda, was prosperous, devoted to his religion, true to his promise, performer of sacrifices, generous, always giving protection to and liked by the saints and a great warrior. His mind never turned to any irreligious subject and he performed ninety-nine Yajñas with full Dakṣinās (remunerations).

सचमूर्ति: सदा विष्यु: सेव्यः से योगिनापि।

निर्विकोरोपि भगवान्वैकवार्थविंसद्धये ॥ 4 3 ॥

कर्यवाच्च समुद्धते विष्यु: कपटवामन: ।

ताव्यं छतेन हतावनाई चैव समातागम् ॥ 44 ॥

But the Bhagavān Viṣṇu, who is all full of Sāttvik purity and who is never affected with passions and changeless, who is always worshipped by the Yogis, He, in the form of a dwarf in his Vāmana incarnation as the son of Kaśyapa Rṣi, to serve the Devas, stole away his whole seagirt earth and kingdom deceitfully on hypocritical pretext.

सो5भवत्स्यायाग्राजा बलिर्वीरोचन्सिता ।

कयंटं कृतवास्त्याग्रिद्धर्यं तु मया श्रुन्ति ॥ 4 5 ॥

O Lord! I heard that the son of Virocana was a generous largehearted king. He truly resolved to give what was wanted; but Viṣṇu behaved with him deceitfully to serve the cause of Indra.

अन्य: किं न कत्नोलेवे कृतं वे सचचुप्तिनं ।

वामनं रूपमास्थाय यज्ञातं चिक्तीपत् ॥ 46 ॥

When the pure, Sāttvik Viṣṇu could assume this dwarf incarnation to bring about the hindrance to Bali's Yajña, what wonder is that other ordinary mortals would practise things like that?

न च शिश्रसित्ये वै कदाचिकेन्पितशना ।

लोपश्रोतसि चेत्यसिम्बीदृक्यापकृतं भयम् ॥ 47 ॥

Therefore never trust anybody in any way. Lord! Where there are greed and avarice, reigning in one's heart, what fear can he have to perpetrate any evil deed?

लोभाहुतः प्रवृहिति पापाति प्राणिनः किल ।

परलोकाद्वयं नासित कस्यचित्कर्हिंचनुने ॥ 48 ॥

मनसा कर्मण बाचा परस्वादानेहुतः ।

प्रपतित नतः सध्यतलोभिपतृतेस्ततः ॥ 49 ॥

O Muni! It is through avaric that men commit sinful deeds; they do not care what good or bad will happen to them in the next world. Thoroughly overpowered by greed, they take away in mind, word and deed other's things; and thus they become fallen.

देवानाराध्य सत्तं वाख्छित च धनं नराः ।

न देवानत्करें कृत्वा सभर्था दतुर्मंसता ॥ 50 ॥

अन्यस्यानीयते विलिं प्रयच्छित् मनीषितम् ।

वाणिज्ञेनाथ दानेन चौरैंणपि बलेन वा ॥ 51 ॥

Lo! Human beings always worship Gods for wealth; but the Devas do not give them wealth instantly; they give them these things through others by making them carry on trade, make gifts, or shew their strength or by making them steal.

विक्रभाथं गृहीला च धान्यवशदिकं बहु ।

देवानचंयेत वैश्यो महाद्विंमं भवेदिति ॥ 52 ॥

The Vaiśyas worship the Gods simply because

they they will be highly prosperous and therefore, they sell many things as grains, cloth and the like.

नात्र किं परवित्तेच्छा वाणिज्चेन परन्तप ।

प्रशुणकाले तु सम्पाले महर्षे वाचि काछ्छूषिति ॥ ५३ ॥

O Controlled one! Is there not the desire to take away the other's property in this act of merchandise? Certainly there is. Besides the merchants, when they find that when people are in urgent need of buying articles from them, expect that the price of those articles might run higher.

एवं हि प्राणिनः सर्वे परस्वादानततरतः ।

वर्तनै सन्ततं ब्रह्मृ विश्वाश: कौदुश: पुनः ॥ ५४ ॥

O Muni! Thus every one is anxious to take away other's properties. How, then, can we trust them?

यूषा तीर्थं वृथा दानं वृथा0ध्यनमेव च ।

तोभमोहावृतानां वै कृतं तदत्कृतं भवेत् ॥ 55 ॥

Those who are clouded by greed and delusion, their going to places of pilgrimages, their making charities, their reciting the Vedas, all are rendered useless. Though they go to the holy places, etc, still these things bear no fruits to them, as if they have not done these things at all.

तस्मादेनं महाभाग विसर्जय गृहं प्रति ।

सपुत्राड़ं विस्फामीय जानकीवर्दिक्जोतम्म । ५६ ॥

Therefore, O Enlightened one! You make Yudhājit go back to his own place. Then I will be able to remain here, like Sitā, with my son.

इलुक्तोउसी भुनिसावदास्त्वा युधाजितं वृपम् ।

उवाच वचनं रोहे भारज्ञानः प्रतपावान् ॥ 57 ॥

गच्छ राजन्यथाकामं स्वपुरं नृपसत्तम ।

नेयं मनोरामध्येति बालपुत्रा सुदुःवित्ता ॥ 58 ॥

On Manoramā's thus speaking to the Muni, the fiery Maharṣi went to Yudhājit and said: "O King! You better go back to your own place or anywhere else you like. The son of Manoramā is a minor; that queen is very much grieved; she cannot come to you now."

युधानिदुबाच

मुने युंच हंड सौम्यां विसर्जय मनोरामाम् ।

न च यायाम्यादं मुक्तया नेथ्याम्यड चलान्तुतः ॥ 59 ॥

Yudhājit said “O peaceful ones! Kindly cease shewing this impudence and give me Manoramā. I will never go away leaving her. If you do not give her easily, I will take her away by force.”

त्रशिक्षाच

नयस्य यदि शक्तिरुते बलेनाठा मामाश्रमात् ।

विश्वाधिमत्रो यथा धोनुं वसिश्छस्य मुने: पुरा ॥ 60 ॥

श्री श्रीमद्वीर्यागतो महापुराणी तृतीयरकन्धे

पोडशोअधाय: ॥ 61 ॥

The Rsis said: “O King! If there be any strength in you, you can take away Manoramā by force; but the result will be similar to that when the King Viśvāmitra wanted to take away the heavenly cow by force from teh hermitage of Vasisṭha.”

Thus ends the Sixteenth Chapter on the glory of the

Devī and the going of the king Yudhājit to the

hermitage of Bharadvāja, to kill Sudarśana, in the the

Third Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam by Maharṣi

Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

