[Ch 16 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: After gaining the victory in the battle, the king Yudhājit returned to the city of Ayodhyā, with his huge army and asked where are Sudarśana and Manoramā? He wanted to kill Sudarśana.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- After gaining the victory in the battle, the king Yudhājit returned to the city of Ayodhyā with his huge army and asked where are Sudarśana and Manoramā? He wanted to kill Sudarśana.

[Ch 16 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He repeatedly exclaimed “Where are they gone?” and sent his servants on their search. Then, on an auspicious day, he installed his daughter’ son on the throne.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He repeatedly exclaimed “Where are they gone?” and sent his servants on their search. Then, on an auspicious day, he installed his daughter’s son on the throne.

[Ch 16 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mahārṣi Vasistha was engaged as the priest; he and the other ministers began to chant the auspicious hymns of the Atharvaveda and with the jars, filled with water, and consecrated by these hymns, installed Śatrujit on the throne.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Maharṣi Vaśiṣṭha was engaged as the priest; he and the other ministers began to chant the auspicious hymns of the Atharvaveda and with the jars, filled with water, and consecrated by these hymns, installed Śatrūjit on the throne.

[Ch 16 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O best of the Kurus! Conch shells resounded; bheris and tūriyas resounded; and great festivals and rejoicings took place in the city.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O best of the Kurus! Conch shells resounded; drums, bherīs and tūriyas, resounded; and great festivals and rejoicings took place in the city.

[Ch 16 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The reciting of the Vedic mantrams by the Brāhmaṇa, the chanting of hymns by the bards and the auspicious acclamation of Victory to their new king resounded the whole city of Ayodhyā with joy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The reciting of the Vedic mantrams by the Brāhmaṇs, the chanting of hymns by the bards and the auspicious acclamation of Victory to the new king resounded the whole city of Ayodhyā with joy.

[Ch 16 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the new king Śatrujit ascended on the throne, the subject were filled with joy; everywhere hymns were sung; drums were resounded. At this Ayodhyā looked as fresh as ever.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the new king Śatrūjit ascended on the throne, the subjects were filled with joy; everywhere hymns were sung; drums were resound. At this Ayodhyā looked as fresh as ever.

[Ch 16 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Though there were thus great rejoicings and festivals, yet some good persons were found that remembered Sudarśana and gave vent to this feeling of sorrow, thus: “Alas! Where has that prince gone? Where has that chaste queen Manoramā gone with her son? Oh! the enemies have killed his father for greed of kingdom.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Though there were thus great rejoicings and festivals, yet some good persons were found that remembered Sudarśana and gave vent to this feeling of sorrow, thus :-- “Alas! Where has that prince gone? Where has that chaste queen Manoramā gone with her son? Oh! The enemies have killed his father for greed of kingdom.”

[Ch 16 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The saints with their views impartial, thus rendered uneasy, sorry, began to pass away their time there subject to Śatrujit.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The saints with their views impartial, thus rendered uneasy, sorry, began to pass away their time there subject to Śatrūjit.

[Ch 16 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After installing duly his daughter's son on the throne and after having made over the charge of the kingdom to the wise councillors, Yudhājit turned towards his own city.
NEW CORR ENG ──► After installing duly his daughter’s son on the throne and after having made over the charge of the kingdom to the wise councillors, Yudhājit turned towards his own city.

[Ch 16 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Afterwards Yudhājit heard that Sudarśana was staying in the hermitage with the Munis. He started at once for Citrakūṭa and went quickly to Durdarśa, the chief of the city of Śrṅgavera, being accompanied by Bala, the chief of the Niṣādas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Afterwards Yudhājit heard that Sudarśana was staying in the hermitage with the Munis. He started at once for Citrakūta and went quickly to Durdarśa, the chief of the city of Sriṅgavera, being accompanied by Bala, the

[Ch 16 Verse 13-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing that Yudhājit was coming there with his army, Manoramā began to think that his son was a minor and became very sorrowful, distressed and terrified. Then she with tears in her eyes addressed the Muni thus: "Yudhājit is coming here; what shall I do and whither shall I go? He has slain my father, and has installed his daughter's son on the throne. Still he is not satisfied and he is now coming with his army here to kill my minor child."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing that Yudhājit was coming there with his army, Manoramā began to think that his son was a minor and became very sorrowful, distressed and terrified. Then she with tears in her eyes addressed the Muni thus :-- “Yudhājit is coming here; what shall I do and whither shall I go? He has slain my father, and has installed his daughter’s son on the throne. Still he is not satisfied and he is now coming with his army here to kill my minor child.”

[Ch 16 Verse 16-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord! In days of yore, I heard that the Pāndavas, when they went to the forest, lived in the holy hermitage of the Munis with Draupadi. One day the five brethren went a hunting, and the beautiful Draupadi stayed without any fear with other maid servants in the hermitage where there was the chanting of the Vedas by Dhaumya, Attri, Gālava, Paila, Jābāli, Gautama, Bhrgu, Cyavana, Kanva of the Atrigotra, Jatu, Kratu, Vītihotra, Sumantu, Yajñādatta, Vatsala, Rāsāsana, Kahoda Yavakrī Yajñakrit, Kratu and other holy high souled Rṣis like Bhāradvāja and others.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord! In days of yore, I heard that the Pāndavas, when they went to the forest, lived in the holy hermitage of the Munis with Draupadī. One day the five brethren went a hunting, and the beautiful Draupadī stayed without any fear with other maid servants in the hermitage where there was the chanting of the Vedas by Dhaumya, Attri, Gālava, Paila, Jāvāli, Gautama, Bhṛgu, Cyavana, Kanva of the Atrigotra, Jatu, Kratu, Vītihotra, Sumantu, Yajñadatt, Vatsala, Rāśāsana, Kahoḍa, Yavakrī, Yajñakrit, Kratu and other holy high souled Ṛṣis like Bhāradvāja and others.

[Ch 16 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► While the five great heroes Arjuna and others, the destroyers of their enemies, were reaming in the forests, Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu came with his army to the hermitage, hearing the reciting of the Vedic hymns.
NEW CORR ENG ──► While the five great heroes Arjuṇa and others, the destroyers of their enemies, were roaming in the forests, Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu came with his army to the hermitage, hearing the reciting of the Vedic hymns.

[Ch 16 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing thus, that king quickly descended from the chariot so that he might have a sight of these holy Maharsis.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing thus, that king quickly descended from the chariot so that he might have a sight of these holy maharṣis.

[Ch 16 Verse 25-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Accompanied by two attendants only, he approached to the Munis and, finding them engaged in the study of the Vedas, waited there with folded hands for an opportunity. O Lord! When the king Jayadrathā on entering the hermitage took his seat, the wives of the Munis came there to see the king and began to enquire “who is this person?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Accompanied by two attendants only, he approached to the Munis and, finding them engaged in the study of the Vedas, waited there with folded hands for an opportunity. O Lord! When the king Jayadratha on entering the hermitage took his seat, the wives of the Munis came there to see the king and began to enquire “Who is this person?”

[Ch 16 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► With the wives of the Munis came there also the beautiful Draupadi. Jayadratha looked upon Draupadi as if she were the second goddess Laksmī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► With the wives of the Munis came there also the beautiful Draupadī. Jayadratha looked upon Draupadī as if she were the second goddess Lakṣmī.

[Ch 16 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Looking at that lovely royal daughter who looked like the Deva girls Jayadratha asked Maharṣi Dhaumya, “Who is this beautiful lotus eyed lady? Whose wife is she and who is her father? What is her name? Oh! From her beautiful appearance it seems that the goddess Śacī has come down on earth."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Looking at that lovely royal daughter who looked like the Deva girls Jayadratha asked the Maharṣi Dhaumya, “Who is this beautiful lotus eyed lady? Whose wife is she and who is her father? What is her name? Oh! From her beautiful appearance it seems that the goddess Śacī has come down on earth.”

[Ch 16 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This fair woman is shining like the celestial nymph Rambhā surrounded by the Rāksasīs or like the beautiful creeper Lavāngalatika encircled by thorny trees.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This fair woman is shining like the celestial nymph Rambhā surrounded by the Rakṣasis or like the beautiful creeper Lavangalatika encircled by thorny trees.

[Ch 16 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O good ones! Tell truly whose beloved is she? O Brāhmins! It seems that she is the wife of some king, not the wife of a Muni.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O good ones! Tell truly whose beloved is she? O Brāhmins! It seems that she is the wife of some king, not

[Ch 16 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Dhaumya said: "O king of Sindhu! She is the daughter of Pānācala; her name is Draupadī; she is the wife of the Pāndavas; they are residing in this forest, having got rid of their fears."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Dhaumya said :-- “O king of Sindhu! She is the daughter of Pāñcāla; her name is Draupadī; she is the wife of the Pāndavas; they are residing in this forest, having got rid of their fears.”

[Ch 16 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Jayadratha said: “Where have those powerful Pāndavas of great prowess gone now? Are they dwelling in this forest, free from fears?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Jayadratha said “Where have those powerful Pāndavas of great prowess gone now? Are they dwelling in this forest, free from fears?”

[Ch 16 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Dhaumya said: "The five Pāndavas have gone out on hunting, ascended on a chariot. They will return at noon with their game."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Dhaumya said :-- “The five Pāndavas have gone out on hunting, ascended on a chariot. They will return at noon with their game.”

[Ch 16 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing the Muni's words Jayadratha got up, and going near Draupadi, bowed down to her and said: “O Fair One! Is there every thing well with you? Where have your husbands gone? Today it is eleven years that you are residing in the forest.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing the Muni’s words Jayadratha got up, and going near to Draupadī, bowed down to her and said :-- “O Fair One! Is there everything well with you? Where have your husbands gone? To-day it is eleven years that you are residing in the forest.”

[Ch 16 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Draupadī then said: “O prince! Let all be well with you, wait here for a short while; the Pāndavas are coming quickly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Draupadī then said :-- “O prince! Let all be well with you, wait here for a short while; the Pāndavas are coming quickly.”

[Ch 16 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► While Draupadi thus spoke, that powerful king, being overpowered with greed and avarice, stole her away, disregarding all the Munis present there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► While Draupadī thus spoke, that powerful king, being overpowered with greed and avarice, stole her away, disregarding all the Munis present there.

[Ch 16 Verse 40-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord! The wise should never trust anybody; if on anybody he places his trust, he will surely come to grief. For example, see the case of the King Bali. Bali, the son of Virocana, and the grandson of Prahlāda, was prosperous, devoted to his religion, true to his promise, performer of sacrifices, generous, always giving protection to and liked by the saints and a great warrior. His mind never turned to any irreligious subject and he performed ninety-nine Yajñas with full Dakṣinās (remunerations).
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord! The wise should never trust any body; if on any body he places his trust, he will surely come to grief. For example, see the case of the king Bali. Bali, the son of Virocana, and the grandson of Prahlāda, was prosperous, devoted to his religion, true to his promise, performer of sacrifices, generous, always giving protection to and liked by the saints and a great warrior. His mind never turned to any irreligious subject and he performed ninety nine Yajñas with full Dakṣiṇās (remunerations).

[Ch 16 Verse 43-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But the Bhagavān Viṣṇu, who is all full of Sāttvik purity and who is never affected with passions and changeless, who is always worshipped by the Yogis, He, in the form of a dwarf in his Vāmana incarnation as the son of Kaśyapa Rṣi, to serve the Devas, stole away his whole seagirt earth and kingdom deceitfully on hypocritical pretext.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But the Bhagavān Viṣṇu, who is all full of Sāttvic purity and who is never affected with passions and changeless, who is always worshipped by the Yogis, He, in the form of a dwarf in his Vāmana incarnation as the son of Kaśyapa Ṛṣi, to serve the Devas, stole away his whole seagirt earth and kingdom deceitfully on hypocritical pretext.

[Ch 16 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord! I heard that the son of Virocana was a generous largehearted king. He truly resolved to give what was wanted; but Viṣṇu behaved with him deceitfully to serve the cause of Indra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord! I heard that the son of Virocana was a generous large hearted king. He truly resolved to give what was wanted; but Viṣṇu behaved with him deceitfully to serve the cause of Indra.

[Ch 16 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the pure, Sāttvik Viṣṇu could assume this dwarf incarnation to bring about the hindrance to Bali's Yajña, what wonder is that other ordinary mortals would practise things like that?
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the pure, Sāttvik Viṣṇu could assume this dwarf incarnation to bring about the hindrance to Bali’s Yajña, what wonder is that other ordinary mortals would practise things like that?

[Ch 16 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore never trust anybody in any way. Lord! Where there are greed and avarice, reigning in one's heart, what fear can he have to perpetrate any evil deed?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore never trust on any body in any way. Lord! Where there are greed and avarice, reigning in one’s heart, what fear can he have to perpetrate any evil deed?

[Ch 16 Verse 48-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! It is through avaric that men commit sinful deeds; they do not care what good or bad will happen to them in the next world. Thoroughly overpowered by greed, they take away in mind, word and deed other's things; and thus they become fallen.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! It is through avarice that men commit sinful deeds; they do not care what good or bad will happen to them in the next world. Thoroughly overpowered by greed, they take away in mind, word and deed other’s things; and thus they become fallen.

[Ch 16 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Lo! Human beings always worship Gods for wealth; but the Devas do not give them wealth instantly; they give them these things through others by making them carry on trade, make gifts, or shew their strength or by making them steal.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Lo! Human beings always worship the Gods for wealth; but the Devas do not give them wealth instantly; they give them these things through others by making them carry on trade, make gifts, or shew their strength or

[Ch 16 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Vaiśyas worship the Gods simply because they they will be highly prosperous and therefore, they sell many things as grains, cloth and the like.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Vaiśyas worship the Gods simply because they think they will be highly prosperous and therefore they sell many things as grains, cloth and the like.

[Ch 16 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Controlled one! Is there not the desire to take away the other's property in this act of merchandise? Certainly there is. Besides the merchants, when they find that when people are in urgent need of buying articles from them, expect that the price of those articles might run higher.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Controlled one! Is there not the desire to take away the other’s property in this act of merchandise? Certainly there is. Besides the merchants, when they find that when people are in urgent need of buying articles from them, expect that the price of those articles might run higher.

[Ch 16 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! Thus every one is anxious to take away other's properties. How, then, can we trust them?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! Thus every one is anxious to take away other’s properties. How, then, can we trust them?

[Ch 16 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who are clouded by greed and delusion, their going to places of pilgrimages, their making charities, their reciting the Vedas, all are rendered useless. Though they go to the holy places, etc, still these things bear no fruits to them, as if they have not done these things at all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who are clouded by greed and delusion, their going to places of pilgrimages, their making charities, their reciting the Vedas, all are rendered useless. Though they go to the holy places, etc., still these things bear no fruits to them, as if they have not done these things at all.

[Ch 16 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Enlightened one! You make Yudhājit go back to his own place. Then I will be able to remain here, like Sitā, with my son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore O Enlightened one! You make Yudhājit go back to his own place. Then I will be able to remain here, like Sītā, with my son.

[Ch 16 Verse 57-58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On Manoramā's thus speaking to the Muni, the fiery Maharṣi went to Yudhājit and said: "O King! You better go back to your own place or anywhere else you like. The son of Manoramā is a minor; that queen is very much grieved; she cannot come to you now."
NEW CORR ENG ──► On Manoramā’s thus speaking to the Muni, the fiery Maharṣi went to Yudhājit and said :-- “O King! You better go back to your own place or anywhere else you like. The son of Manoramā is a minor; that queen is very much grieved; she cannot come to you now.”

[Ch 16 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Yudhājit said “O peaceful ones! Kindly cease shewing this impudence and give me Manoramā. I will never go away leaving her. If you do not give her easily, I will take her away by force.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Yudhājit said “O peaceful ones! Kindly cease showing this impudence and give me Manoramā. I will never go away leaving her. If you do not give her easily, I will take her away by force.”

[Ch 16 Verse 60-61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rsis said: “O King! If there be any strength in you, you can take away Manoramā by force; but the result will be similar to that when the King Viśvāmitra wanted to take away the heavenly cow by force from teh hermitage of Vasisṭha.” Thus ends the Sixteenth Chapter on the glory of the Devī and the going of the king Yudhājit to the hermitage of Bharadvāja, to kill Sudarśana, in the the Third Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa. Šrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣis said “O King! If there be any strength in you, you can take away Manoramā by force; but the result will be similar to that when the King Visvāmitra wanted to take away the heavenly cow by force from the hermitage of Vaśiṣṭha.” Thus ends the Sixteenth Chapter on the glory of the Devī and the going of the King Yudhājit to the hermitage of Bhāradvāja, to kill Sudarśana, in the the
