[Ch 21 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! In the meanwhile the King Turvasu performed the Jātakarma (a religious ceremony performed at the bātrakha (a child) and other ceremonies of the child. The boy was nurtured duly and began to grow older day to day.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! In the meanwhile the King Turvasu performed the Jātakarma (a religious ceremony performed at the birth of a child) and other ceremonies of the child. The boy was nurtured duly and began to grow older day by day.

[Ch 21 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King began to enjoy his worldly life on getting this son and thought within himself that the boy had freed him from the three debts due to the Fathers, the Rşis and the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King began to enjoy his worldly life on getting this son and thought within himself that the boy had freed him from the three debts due to the Fathers, the Ṛṣis and the Devas.

[Ch 21 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next, in the sixth month, the King performed the Annaprāsana ceremony (putting the boiled rice in the mouth of the child) and in the third year performed regularly his Cūdākarana (the ceremony of the first tonsure) ceremony.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next, in the sixth month, the King performed the Annaprāsana ceremony (putting the boiled rice in the mouth of the child) and in the third year performed regularly his Cūḍa Karaṇa (the ceremony of the first tonsure) ceremony.

[Ch 21 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He distributed on those occasions various articles, wealth and cows to the Brāhmaṇas and other articles to various other mendicants and made them glad.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He distributed on those occasions various articles, wealth and cows to the Brāhmaṇas and other articles to various other mendicants and made them glad.

[Ch 21 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the eleventh year, he performed the boy's holy thread (Upanayana) ceremony and tying the girdle made of a triple string of Muñja grass and put the boy to learn archery.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the eleventh year, he performed the boy’s holy thread (Upanayana) ceremony and tying the girdle made of a triple string of Muñja grass and put the boy to learn archery.

[Ch 21 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next when the boy passed off proficiently in the study of the Vedas and in learning the kingly duties, the King desired to instal him on the throne.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next when the boy passed off proficiently in the study of the Vedas and in learning the kingly duties, the King desired to install him on the throne.

[Ch 21 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King Turvasu then collected with great care all the necessary articles for installation in an auspicious day, the combination of Pusyā asterism and Arka Yoga.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King Turvasu then collected with great care all the necessary articles for installation in an auspicious day, the combination of Puṣyā asterism and Arka Yoga.

[Ch 21 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He called then the Brāhmins, well versed in the Vedas and in the Śāstras, and became ready, in accordance with due rites, to perform the installation ceremony of the prince.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He called then the Brāhmins, well versed in the Vedas and in the Śāstras, and became ready, in accordance with due rites, to perform the installation ceremony of the prince.

[Ch 21 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Waters were brought from various sacred places of pilgrimage and from the several oceans and on an auspicious day the King performed himself the installation of his son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Waters were brought from various sacred places of pilgrimage and from the several oceans and on an auspicious day the King performed himself the installation of his son.

[Ch 21 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the ceremony was over the King gave away hoardes of wealth to the Brāhmins and giving the charge of his kingdom to his son, he went to the forest with a desire to ascend to the Heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the ceremony was over the King gave away hoards of wealth to the Brāhmins and giving the charge of his kingdom to his son, he went to the forest with a desire to ascend to the Heavens.

[Ch 21 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus placing Ekavīra on the throne, the King Turvasu shewed respects to his ministers, and, controlling his senses went to the forest accompanied by his wife.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus placing Ekavīra on the throne, the King Turvasu shewed respects to his ministers, and, controlling his senses went to the forest accompanied by his wife.

[Ch 21 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the top of the Maināka mountain he took up the vow of Vānaprastha and sustaining his life on leaves and fruits began to meditate Pārvatī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the top of the Maināka mountain he took up the vow of Vānaprastha and sustaining his life on leaves and fruits began to meditate Pārvatī.

[Ch 21 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► . Thus when his Prārabdha Karma ended, he left his mortal coil with his wife and went by virtue of his good deeds to the Indraloka. Hearing that the King had ascended to Heavens, his son Ekavīra Haihaya performed his funeral ceremonies according to the rules laid down by the Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus when his Prārabdha Karma ended, he left his mortal coil with his wife and went by virtue of his good deeds to the Indraloka. Hearing that the King had ascended to Heavens, his son Ekavīra Haihaya performed his funeral ceremonies according to the rules laid down by the Vedas.

[Ch 21 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King's son, the intelligent Haihaya, performed, one after another, all the ceremonies due and began to govern the kingdom which was free enemies.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King’s son, the intelligent Haihaya, performed, one after another, all the ceremonies due and began to govern the kingdom which was free from enemies.

[Ch 21 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The virtuous King Ekavīra remained duly obedient to his ministers after he got possession of his kingdom and began to enjoy all the best things.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The virtuous King Ekavīra remained duly obedient to his ministers after he got possession of his kingdom and began to enjoy all the best things.

[Ch 21 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The powerful Kings one day went on horseback to the banks of the Ganges with the minister's son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The powerful King one day went on horseback to the banks of the Ganges with the minister’s son.

[Ch 21 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Roaming about, he found there the boughs of trees had assumed a very graceful appearance, with loads of fruits, echoed with the sweet voice of the cuckoos and with the humming of the bees.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Roaming about, he found there the boughs of trees had assumed a very graceful appearance, with loads of fruits, echoed with the sweet voice of the cuckoos and with the humming of the bees.

[Ch 21 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Close by were the hermitages of the Munis, where the bucks were skipping about and at other places the Vedas were being chanted. The smoke was seen rising from the altars, where oblations were being offered and appeared to form like a black canopy in the Heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Close by were the hermitages of the Munis, where the bucks were skipping about and at other places the Vedas were being chanted. The smoke was seen rising from the altars, where oblations were being offered and appeared to form like a black canopy in the Heavens.

[Ch 21 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Full ripe grains were enhancing the beauty of the fields and the cowherdesses were merrily watching the fields. Places of recreations adorned with full blown lotuses and beautiful groves were attracting the attention of the victiors.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Full ripe grains were enhancing the beauty of the fields and the cowherdesses were merrily watching the fields. Places of recreations adorned with full blown lotuses and beautiful groves were attracting the attention of the visitors.

[Ch 21 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The various trees, Priyāla, Campaka, Panasa, Bakula, Tilaka, Kadamba and Mandāra, and others were adorned with fruits, stealing away the minds of the people.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The various trees, Piyāla, Champaka, Panasa, Bakula, Tilaka, Kadamba and Mandāra, and others were adorned with fruits, stealing away the minds of the people.

[Ch 21 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At other places, other trees Sāla, Tamāla, Jack, Mango, Kali Kadamba, etc., stood gracefully. Next when the King went to the Ganges water, he saw the gay beautiful full blown lotuses were spreading their fragrant scents all around.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At other places, other trees Sal, Tamāla, Jack, Mango, Kali Kadamba, etc., stood gracefully. Next when the King went to the Ganges water, he saw the gay beautiful full blown lotuses were spreading their fragrant scents all around.

[Ch 21 Verse 23-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the right side of these lotuses, he saw a lotus-eyed girl. She was shining like the gold, her beautiful hairs were long and curling; her throat was like a Kambu, belly thin, lips like the Bimba fruits, several other limbs well built and graceful, breasts riene a little, nose beautiful and all her body was exquisitely lovely; that lady just blooming into youth was suffering bereavements from her comrades and was very distressed and seemed bewildered. She was crying like an ewe in a dense lonely forest. Seeing her, the King asked her what was the reason of her sorrows? "O Cuckoo-voiced One! You are as yet a girl; who has left you alone in this state?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the right side of these lotuses, he saw a lotus-eyed girl. She was shining like the gold, her beautiful hairs were long and curling; her throat was like a Kambu, belly thin, lips like the Bimba fruits, several other limbs well built and graceful, breasts risen a little, nose beautiful and all her body was exquisitely lovely; that lady just blooming into youth was suffering bereavements from her comrades and was very distressed and seemed bewildered. She was crying like an ewe in a dense lonely forest. Seeing her, the King asked her what was the reason of her sorrows? O Cuckoo-voiced One! You are as yet a girl; who has left you alone in this state?

[Ch 21 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sweet One! Tell me where is your husband now or where is your father? O One looking askance! What is your trouble; explain it to me. C thin-bellied One! I will, no doubt, remove all your sorrows and troubles.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sweet One! Tell me where is your husband now or where is your father? O One looking askance! What is your trouble; explain it to me. O thin-bellied One! I will, no doubt, remove all your sorrows and troubles.

[Ch 21 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O fair-bellied One! I will, no doubt, remove all your sorrows and troubles. O fair-limbed One! In my dominion nobody ever gives trouble to any other body. O lovely One! There is no fear in my kingdom from thieves or Rāksasa; or any fear from any serious dangerous calamities on this earth, fear from lions, tigers or any other dangers while my sway is predominant.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O fair-limbed One! In my dominion nobody ever gives trouble to any other body. O lovely One! There is no fear in my kingdom from thieves or Rākṣasas; or any fear from any serious dangerous calamities on this earth, fear from lions, tigers or any other dangers while my sway is predominant.

[Ch 21 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O One of beautiful thighs! Why are you crying on this lonely bank of the Ganges? Tell me what is your pain?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O One of beautiful thighs! Why are you crying on this lonely bank of the Ganges? Tell me what is your pain?

[Ch 21 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Pure One! I can remove the pains and miseries, even of a serious nature, of men, whether they come from the Deva or human sources; and this is my principal vow.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Pure One! I can remove the pains and miseries, even of a serious nature, of men, whether they come from the Deva or human sources; and this is my principal vow.

[Ch 21 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Large-eyed One! Speak what is your inmost desire; I will carry it out instantaneously." When the king thus spoke, that beautiful woman spoke in gentle words: "O King! Heart the cause of my sorrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Large-eyed One! Speak what is your inmost desire; I will carry it out instantaneously. When the king thus spoke, that beautiful woman spoke in gentle words :-- O King! Hear the cause of my sorrows.

[Ch 21 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Why will the people cry, to no purpose, unless calamities come before them? O Mighty-armed One! I now tell you why I am weeping.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Why will the people cry, to no purpose, unless calamities come before them? O Mighty-armed One! I now tell you why I am weeping.

[Ch 21 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! There was a very religious King named Rabhya in another province that is not yours. At first he had no issue. He had a very beautiful wife named Rukmarekhā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! There was a very religious King named Rabhya in another province that is not yours. At first he had no issue. He had a very beautiful wife named Rukmarekhā.

[Ch 21 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She was clever, chaste and endowed with all auspicious qualities. But isuseless as she was, she remained very sorry and, in a remorseful tone, she spoke to her husband Raibhya: "O Lord! I am barren; I have no sons; I am therefore a very unhappy creature. My life is in vain; what use is there in my living?
NEW CORR ENG ──► She was clever, chaste and endowed with all auspicious qualities. But issueless as she was, she remained very sorry and, in a remorseful tone, she spoke to her husband Raibbya :-- O Lord! I am barren; I have no sons; I am therefore a very unhappy creature. My life is in vain; what use is there in my living?

[Ch 21 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the queen thus spoke very distressedly, the king called the Brāhmaṇas, versed in the Vedas, and began to perform an excellent sacrificial ceremony, in due accordance with the Vedic rules. With a desire to get a son, he made many presents in profuse quantities.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the queen thus spoke very distressedly, the king called the Brāhmaṇas, versed in the Vedas, and began to perform an excellent sacrificial ceremony, in due accordance with the Vedic rules. With a desire to get a son, he made many presents in profuse quantities.

[Ch 21 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When copious quantities of ghee were offered as oblations, there arose, from the fire, a girl beautiful in all respects and endowed with all auspicious signs.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When copious quantities of ghee were offered as oblations, there arose, from the fire, a girl beautiful in all respects and endowed with all auspicious signs.

[Ch 21 Verse 42-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her teeth were very nice, eyebrows very lovely, face enchanting like a Full Moon, the lustre of the body lovely and of a golden colour; her hairs were fine and curling, her lips like the Bimba flowers; her hands and face were of a red colour; her eyes were red like lotus and her limbs were soft and gentle.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her teeth were very nice, eyebrows very lovely, face enchanting like a Full Moon, the lustre of the body lovely and of a golden colour; her hairs were fine and curling; her lips like the Bimba flowers; her hands and face were of a red colour; her eyes were red like lotus and her limbs were soft and gentle.

[Ch 21 Verse 44-45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the girl arose from the fire, the priest (Hotā) took that lean and thin lady of a nice waist by her arms and presented her to the King and said: "O King! Accept this daughter, endowed with all auspicious signs.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the girl arose from the fire, the priest (Hotā) took that lean and thin lady of a nice waist by her arms and presented her to the King and said :-- O King! Accept this daughter, endowed with all auspicious signs.

[Ch 21 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Homa was being performed, the daughter came up like the garland Ekāvalī; therefore this girl became famous in this world by the name Ekāvalī. O Ruler of the earth! Take this girl, resembling a son and be happy. O King! Visnu, the Deva of the Devas, has given you this Jewel, this daughter; so be contented."
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Homa was being performed, the daughter came up like the garland Ekāvalī; therefore this girl became famous in this world by the name Ekāvalī. O Ruler of the earth! Take this girl, resembling a son and be happy. O King! Viṣṇu, the Deva of the Devas, has given you this Jewel, this daughter; so be contented.

[Ch 21 Verse 48-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing thus the words of the priest, the King saw this good looking girl and with gladdened heart took the beautiful daughter from his hands. Thus with that lovely daughter he went to his wife Rukmarekhā and said: "O Beautiful One! Take this daughter." The queen Rukmarekhā felt the pleasures of having a son when she got in her arms lotus eyed beautiful daughter.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing thus the words of the priest, the King saw this good-looking girl and with gladdened heart took the beautiful daughter from his hands. Thus with that lovely daughter he went to his wife Rukmarekhā and said :-- O Beautiful One! Take this daughter. The queen Rukmarekhā felt the pleasure of having a son when she got in her arms that lotus eyed beautiful daughter.

[Ch 21 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King next performed the natal and other ceremonies of the daughter and did all other acts as if she had been a son to him duly in accordance with the rules.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King next performed the natal and other ceremonies of the daughter and did all other acts as if she had been a son to him duly in accordance with the rules.

[Ch 21 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King performed his own sacrificial ceremonies and gave away lots of Dakṣinās to the Brāhmins and dismissed them and became very glad.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King performed his own sacrificial ceremonies and gave away lots of Dakṣiṇās to the Brāhmins and dismissed them and became very glad.

[Ch 21 Verse 52-53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On that very day the birth day festival was performed as on the occasion of the birth of a son. And that daughter grew older, very affectionate and dear to all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On that very day the birthday festival was performed as on the occasion of the birth of a son. And that daughter grew older, very affectionate and dear to all.

[Ch 21 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lovely one! You are a king and intelligent too; I will describe to you all the details; Hear. I am the daughter of the minister to that King.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lovely One! You are a king and intelligent too; I will describe to you all the details; Hear. I am the daughter of the minister to that King.

[Ch 21 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My name is Yásovati. That daughter and I look alike and of the same age. Therefore the king has made me her comrade. I spend my time day and night always with her as her constant dear companion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► My name is Yaśovatī. That daughter and I look alike and of the same age. Therefore the king has made me her comrade. I spend my time day and night always with her as her constant dear companion.

[Ch 21 Verse 56-57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Ekāvalī likes very much to remain and sport wherever she finds sweet scented lotuses; at other places she does not find happiness. At the distant banks of the Ganges many lotuses grow; therefore Ekāvali goes there with great pleasure to that place with me and her other fellow mates.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Ekāvalī likes very much to remain and sport wherever she finds sweet-scented lotuses; at other places she does not find happiness. At the distant banks of the Ganges many lotuses grow; therefore Ekāvalī goes there with great pleasure to that place with me and her other fellow mates.

[Ch 21 Verse 58-59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One day I told the King that Ekāvali used to go daily to a distant solitary forest to see the lotus-lake. Then the King addressed her not to go and he got a lake built within the compounds of his palace and planted many lotus seeds therein.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One day I told the King that Ekāvalī used to go daily to a distant solitary forest to see the lotus-lake. Then the King addressed her not to go and he got a lake built within the compounds of his palace and planted many lotus seeds therein.

[Ch 21 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Gradually the lotuses began to blossom and the bees came there to drink honey. Still she used to go outside in search of lotuses. Then the King sent armed guards to accompany her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Gradually the lotuses began to blossom and the bees came there to drink honey. Still she used to go outside in search of lotuses. Then the King sent armed guards to accompany her.

[Ch 21 Verse 61-62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus that thin-bodied daughter of the King used to go daily to the banks of the Ganges for play, guarded by armed soldiers, accompanied by myself and other companions. Again when the sporting was over, she used to return to the palace. Here ends the Twenty-first Chapter on the Sixth Book on the installation of Ekavīra and the birth of Ekāvali in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus that thin-bodied daughter of the King used to go daily to the banks of the Ganges for play, guarded by armed soldiers, accompanied by myself and other companions. Again when the sporting was over, she used to return to the palace. Here ends the Twenty-First Chapter on the Sixth Book on the installation of Ekavīra and the birth of Ekāvalī in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devi Bhāgavatam by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
