CHAPTER XXI

On the Installation of Ekavira

भ्यास उवाच

जातकर्मादि संक्कारांक्रहार नृपतिस्तव ।

दिने दिने जगमाग्यु वृद्धिं बालः सुलातिलतः ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! In the meanwhile the King Turvasu performed the Jātakarma (a religious ceremony performed at the bātrakha (a child) and other ceremonies of the child. The boy was nurtured duly and began to grow older day to day.

यूर: सेसारंज प्राय सुरुखूद्ववम् ।

इष्णयविधोक्षं च मेने तेन महात्मना ॥ २ ॥

The King began to enjoy his worldly life on getting this son and thought within himself that

the boy had freed him from the three debts due to the Fathers, the Rşis and the Devas.

घड़ेअप्राणतं तस्य कृत्वा मासि यथाविधि ।

तृतीयेघ तथा वर्षे चुडाकरणमुतमम् ॥ ३ ॥

Next, in the sixth month, the King performed the Annaprāsana ceremony (putting the boiled rice in the mouth of the child) and in the third year performed regularly his Cūdākarana (the ceremony of the first tonsure) ceremony.

चकार ब्राह्मणान् द्रव्यैः सम्पूज्य विविधैर्धनैः ।
गोभिश्च विविधैर्दानैर्याचकानितरानपि ॥ ४॥


He distributed on those occasions various

Book VI Chapter XXI

articles, wealth and cows to the Brāhmaṇas and other articles to various other mendicants and made them glad.

वर्षे चैकादृषे तस्य मौजीबन्धनकार्मे वै ।

कार्यिता धनुर्वैद्याध्ययत पार्थि ॥ ५ ॥

In the eleventh year, he performed the boy's holy thread (Upanayana) ceremony and tying the girdle made of a triple string of Muñja grass and put the boy to learn archery.

अधीनवेदे पुरं तं राजधर्मविशारादम् ।

दूद्वा तस्याधिकेवाय मिति चढ़े जनाधियः ॥ 6 ॥

Next when the boy passed off proficiently in the study of the Vedas and in learning the kingly duties, the King desired to instal him on the throne.

पुधाकंयोगसंयुक्ते दिवसे नृपसत्तमः ।

कारयामास संभारनाश्चिकार्यादगत् ॥ 7 ॥

The King Turvasu then collected with great care all the necessary articles for installation in an auspicious day, the combination of Pusyā asterism and Arka Yoga.

द्वितानाद्य वैद्वान्यर्वैशास्त्रविद्धश्रणत् ।

अभियेषेक चकाराते विधियन्त्स्वतानजस्य ह ॥ 8 ॥

He called then the Brāhmins, well versed in the Vedas and in the Śāstras, and became ready, in accordance with due rites, to perform the installation ceremony of the prince.

जलमानीय तीर्थेभ्यः सागरेष्यघु पार्थिवः ।

स्वयं चकार विधिवर्भेबिके रुष्पे दिन ॥ 9 ॥

Waters were brought from various sacred places of pilgrimage and from the several oceans and on an auspicious day the King performed himself the installation of his son.

धर्म दचावा विशेष्यो राज्ये पुत्रे निवेश्य स ।

जगाम वन्मेवाशु स्वर्गकाम: स भूपति: ॥ 10 ॥

When the ceremony was over the King gave away hoardes of wealth to the Brāhmins and giving the charge of his kingdom to his son, he went to the forest with a desire to ascend to the Heavens.

एकौरीं नृपं कृत्ता सम्पान्य सचिवानय ।

भार्येया सह भूपालः प्रयिवेश जयं शी ॥ ११ ॥

Thus placing Ekavīra on the throne, the King Turvasu shewed respects to his ministers, and, controlling his senses went to the forest accompanied by his wife.

मैनाकशिखरे राजा कृत्वा तर्तीयमाघमम् ।

निर्वं यत्रकलहाराश्रिन्यायास पार्वतीम् ॥ १ २ ॥

On the top of the Maināka mountain he took up the vow of Vānaprastha and sustaining his life on leaves and fruits began to meditate Pārvatī.

एवं स नुपतिः कृत्वा दिष्ठोत सह भार्याय ।

मृतोउसी बासलं लोकं गतः पुष्पेक कर्मण ॥ १ ३ ॥

इत्रलोकं पिता प्राप्त इति शुलासंह हैहयः ।

चकार वेदनिर्दिकं कर्म वैशोर्ध्वेदितिबम् ॥ १ ४ ॥

. Thus when his Prārabdha Karma ended, he left his mortal coil with his wife and went by virtue of his good deeds to the Indraloka. Hearing that the King had ascended to Heavens, his son Ekavīra Haihaya performed his funeral ceremonies according to the rules laid down by the Vedas.

कृतीतता: क्रिया: सर्वा: पितु: पार्थिवन्दनः ।

राज्य चकार मेघायी पिंगा दर्त सुसमान् ॥ 15 ॥

The King's son, the intelligent Haihaya, performed, one after another, all the ceremonies due and began to govern the kingdom which was free enemies.

एकवीरोअ धर्मैः प्रायः राज्यमन्तमम् ।

बुधुजे विधित्याभोगसचिवेशु सुमानितः ॥ 16 ॥

The virtuous King Ekavīra remained duly obedient to his ministers after he got possession of his kingdom and began to enjoy all the best things.

एकसिंन्दिवसं राजा मनियुर्भेः समन्वितः ।

जगाम जाइवीतीरे ह्यास्ड़ः प्रतायवान् ॥ 17 ॥

The powerful Kings one day went on horseback to the banks of the Ganges with the minister's son.

संपश्यन्यादपात्याफीकिलालापसंयुतान् ।

पुष्यितान्तसंयुक्तान्यदुपार्शिविराजितान् ॥ 18 ॥

Roaming about, he found there the boughs of trees had assumed a very graceful appearance, with loads of fruits, echoed with the sweet voice of the cuckoos and with the humming of the bees.

भुनीनामाश्रामन्स्थ्यानेद्यविनिरनादितान् ।

होभधूमातृताकाशाम्भागावसमातृत् ।। १९ ॥

Close by were the hermitages of the Munis, where the bucks were skipping about and at other places the Vedas were being chanted. The smoke was seen rising from the altars, where oblations were being offered and appeared to form like a black canopy in the Heavens.

केदाराखिलसमपबवानोषिकाभि: सुर्धितान् ।

प्रकुलपढ़ जारामार्कुकुर्जांश मनोरमान् । 20 ॥

Full ripe grains were enhancing the beauty of the fields and the cowherdesses were merrily watching the fields. Places of recreations adorned with full blown lotuses and beautiful groves were attracting the attention of the victiors.

प्रश्माणा: प्रियालांस्तु घमफलान्यनसूमान् ।

बकुलासिलकाधीयान्दारांश प्रधुलितान् ॥ 21 ॥

The various trees, Priyāla, Campaka, Panasa, Bakula, Tilaka, Kadamba and Mandāra, and others were adorned with fruits, stealing away the minds of the people.

शालांस्तालमालांश जम्बुचृतकद्यबकान ।

सूब्ध्छज्ञाहकीतोये प्रकुललं शतपत्रकम् ॥ 22 ॥

At other places, other trees Sāla, Tamāla, Jack, Mango, Kali Kadamba, etc., stood gracefully. Next when the King went to the Ganges water, he saw the gay beautiful full blown lotuses were spreading their fragrant scents all around.

पढ़ुं जं चातिन्याठ्यामपश्यद्वनीपति: ।

द्रिंक्षेण जलजस्याय पार्शुं कमललोचनाम् ॥ २३ ॥

कनकाथां सुकर्शीं च कम्बुयीवां कुशोदरीम् ।

विवोहीं सुन्दरी किंचित्समुखान्युपयोर्यम् ॥ 24 ॥

सुसारां चातसर्वांशीमयपयल्कन्यकां नृपः ।

रुदती तां सखीं नयत्वा विहूलां दुःखपीक्षिताम् ॥ 25 ॥

साशुनंत्री कन्दमानां विजने कुररीमिव ।

संर्वेश्व सरा पच्छ्छ कन्यकां शोकाकारणम् ॥ 26 ॥

सुर्से बृहि काउसि तं कस्य पुत्री शुभानने ।

नार्यादी वेदकन्यात्र कर्थे तिविंषि सुन्दारि ॥ 27 ॥

On the right side of these lotuses, he saw a lotus-eyed girl. She was shining like the gold, her

beautiful hairs were long and curling; her throat was like a Kambu, belly thin, lips like the Bimba fruits, several other limbs well built and graceful, breasts riene a little, nose beautiful and all her body was exquisitely lovely; that lady just blooming into youth was suffering bereavements from her comrades and was very distressed and seemed bewildered. She was crying like an ewe in a dense lonely forest. Seeing her, the King asked her what was the reason of her sorrows? "O Cuckoo-voiced One! You are as yet a girl; who has left you alone in this state?"

कथेक्रौकिनी वाले त्यत्ता केन पिक्सवरे ।

पतितेच वय गता: कान्ते पिता वा बृहि समाप्ति ॥ 28 ॥

किं ते दुःखमारतषु कथयाठा मपातिंके ।

कोरीमि दुःखनागं ते सर्वदीय कृणेशेटि ॥ 29 ॥

O Sweet One! Tell me where is your husband now or where is your father? O One looking askance! What is your trouble; explain it to me. C thin-bellied One! I will, no doubt, remove all your sorrows and troubles.

न राज्ये मम तर्विकृ पीडां कोउपि कोरल्यम् ।

न धर्षे चौराजं कानेत न राक्षसधयं तथा ॥ ३० ॥

मायि शासति पभाणते नोर्याता दाक्णा भुवि ।

भयं न व्याप्रसिंहेच्छो न भयं कंसचिछद्वेत ॥ ३ १ ॥

O fair-bellied One! I will, no doubt, remove all your sorrows and troubles. O fair-limbed One! In my dominion nobody ever gives trouble to any other body. O lovely One! There is no fear in my kingdom from thieves or Rāksasa; or any fear from any serious dangerous calamities on this earth, fear from lions, tigers or any other dangers while my sway is predominant.

वद्य वामोक कर्मात्चं वित्यपं जाइक्रवीते ।

कोषीय जगहीनात्रन कि के दुःखं वद्यव मे ॥ 32 ॥

O One of beautiful thighs! Why are you crying on this lonely bank of the Ganges? Tell me what is your pain?

हन्यहं दुख्यत्युं प्राणिनां पृथिवीतले ।

दैंदं च मानुषं कानते ज्ञातेतनमाज्ञुतम् ॥ 33 ॥

Book VI Chapter XXI

O Pure One! I can remove the pains and miseries, even of a serious nature, of men, whether they come from the Deva or human sources; and this is my principal vow.

विशाललोचने वृहि क्रोगेम तव चिन्तितम् ।

इत्युक्ते वचने राजा श्रुत्योवाच मुखुस्वना ॥ 34 ॥

शृणु राजेन्द्र बक्षयामि मम शोकस्य कारणम् ।

विवितिरात्रितः प्राणी कर्थं र्वतीत भूपते ॥ 35 ॥

O Large-eyed One! Speak what is your inmost desire; I will carry it out instantaneously." When the king thus spoke, that beautiful woman spoke in gentle words: "O King! Heart the cause of my sorrows.

प्रवंधीय महावाहो यदर्थ र्वती त्वाह्म ।

तर राजादान्येगे शगाजा परभधार्मिकः ॥ ३६ ॥

O King! Why will the people cry, to no purpose, unless calamities come before them? O Mighty-armed One! I now tell you why I am weeping.

भ्यो नाम महाराज: संतानरहितो भृभम् ।

तस्य भयंां सुविख्याता रुक्मरेडोत नामतः ॥ 37 ॥

O King! There was a very religious King named Rabhya in another province that is not yours. At first he had no issue. He had a very beautiful wife named Rukmarekhā.

सुरूपा चतुरा साध्वी सर्वलक्षणसंयुता ।

अपुत्रा दु:वित्ता कान्तमिव्युवारा वुन: पुन: ॥ 38 ॥

कें जीवितेन मे नाय धिन्युवा जीविते मय ।

वंध्याया: सुख्तीनाया हुप्रयुवा धरातले ॥ 39 ॥

She was clever, chaste and endowed with all auspicious qualities. But isuseless as she was, she remained very sorry and, in a remorseful tone, she spoke to her husband Raibhya: "O Lord! I am barren; I have no sons; I am therefore a very unhappy creature. My life is in vain; what use is there in my living?

इत्येवं भार्याय भूप प्रेरितो मख्युतमम् ।

चक्का ब्राह्मणांस्त्रानारुव विधिवतदा ॥ 40 ॥

When the queen thus spoke very distressedly, the king called the Brāhmaṇas, versed in the Vedas, and began to perform an excellent sacrificial ceremony, in due accordance with the Vedic rules.

With a desire to get a son, he made many presents in profuse quantities.

पुरकामो धर्म भूरि ददावध यथोदितम् ।

हूयमाने धृतेत्यर्थे पावकादितिसुपभत् ॥ 4 1 ॥

When copious quantities of ghee were offered as oblations, there arose, from the fire, a girl beautiful in all respects and endowed with all auspicious signs.

अविर्बंभूव चार्वीनी कन्यका शुभलक्षणा ।

विवोषीं सुदतीं सुधूः पूर्णचन्द्रिनिभानना ॥ 4 2 ॥

कनकाभा सुकेशाना तस्याणिता मुदुः ।

सुरकानयना तत्वी रक्तयादाला भुगम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

Her teeth were very nice, eyebrows very lovely, face enchanting like a Full Moon, the lustre of the body lovely and of a golden colour; her hairs were fine and curling, her lips like the Bimba flowers; her hands and face were of a red colour; her eyes were red like lotus and her limbs were soft and gentle.

हुतापानातस्पूद्धता होजा सा स्वीकृता ततः ।

होता प्रोवार याजनं गृहीत्या ता सुभ्यमान् ॥ 44 ॥

राज-न्यूजीं गृहाणेमां सर्वतक्षणास्युतान् ।

एकावलीव सभ्यन्तां हृदयानाद्युताशन्त् ॥ 45 ॥

When the girl arose from the fire, the priest (Hotā) took that lean and thin lady of a nice waist by her arms and presented her to the King and said: "O King! Accept this daughter, endowed with all auspicious signs.

नामनोकबाली लोक खलाता पूत्री भविष्यति ।

सुवित्तो भव भृपाल पुत्रा पुत्रसमानया ॥ 46 ॥

सन्तोयं कुर राजेन्द्र दत्ता देवेन विद्याना ।

होतुवांक्यं पुर शुक्षा युद्धता तो कन्यकों रुभणम् ॥ 47 ॥

When Homa was being performed, the daughter came up like the garland Ekāvalī; therefore this girl became famous in this world by the name Ekāvalī. O Ruler of the earth! Take this girl, resembling a son and be happy. O King! Visnu, the Deva of the Devas, has given you this Jewel, this daughter; so be contented."

जग्राह भयमीती होरा दुत्ता सुर्मंभतम् ।

गृहीरः नृपतिस्तां तु ददी पल्यै वरानानम् ॥ 48 ॥

अभाव्य रुक्मेरख्ये गृहाग सुभगे सुर्गतम् ।

सा तां कमलपत्राङ्गी प्राय कन्यां मनोरामम् ॥ 49 ॥

Hearing thus the words of the priest, the King saw this good looking girl and with gladdened heart took the beautiful daughter from his hands. Thus with that lovely daughter he went to his wife Rukmarekhā and said: "O Beautiful One! Take this daughter." The queen Rukmarekhā felt the pleasures of having a son when she got in her arms lotus eyed beautiful daughter.

जहर्षं पृदिता राजी पुरं प्राय्य यथा सुखम् ।

चकात मूब्तं कर्मे जातकर्मिटिकं शुभम् ॥ 50 ॥

The King next performed the natal and other ceremonies of the daughter and did all other acts as if she had been a son to him duly in accordance with the rules.

पुरजन्मस्मुर्नं यत्नसर्वे विधित्वन्तः ।

समाय च मखं राजा द्विजेष्यो दक्षिणा शुभाम् ॥ ५ १ ॥

The King performed his own sacrificial ceremonies and gave away lots of Dakṣinās to the Brāhmins and dismissed them and became very glad.

दत्वा विसृज्य विघे-त्रानूदं प्राप महीपति: ।

द्विते दिते सितापार्यो पुरुबढ्छ्वा घृष्टां बभौ ॥ 52 ॥

That beautiful girl was nursed and cared after like a son and she grew older day by day. The Queen Rukmarekha was very gladdened to get her. मुदं च परमां प्राप नृपभार्य सुतान्विता ।

उसवस्तिद्रेत तस्य प्रवृतः सुतन्यमनः ॥ 53 ॥

On that very day the birth day festival was performed as on the occasion of the birth of a son. And that daughter grew older, very affectionate and dear to all.

युनी पुत्रसमास्त्यर्वे बभूव बल्लभा किल ।

रातो मनिस्तुत चाहं सुखुदे मन्यधाकृते ॥ 54 ॥

O Lovely one! You are a king and intelligent too; I will describe to you all the details; Hear. I am the daughter of the minister to that King.

यगोतवी च मे नाम स्यानं वय आवयोः ।

वयय्याउं कृता राजा मीडिनाय तया सह ॥ 55 ॥

स्वत सहचरी जाता प्रेयुक्ति द्विताग्रियम् ।

My name is Yásovati. That daughter and I look alike and of the same age. Therefore the king has

made me her comrade. I spend my time day and night always with her as her constant dear companion.

एकावली गंधर्विति यत्र पचानि पश्यति ॥ 56 ॥

तत्र सा साते बाला नान्यस सुखमापुवात् ।

सुद्रें जाड्वीतीरे भवन्ति कमलान्यपि ॥ 57 ॥

स्मभाण तत्र याता मत्स्मिता सखीयुत ।

Ekāvalī likes very much to remain and sport wherever she finds sweet scented lotuses; at other places she does not find happiness. At the distant banks of the Ganges many lotuses grow; therefore Ekāvali goes there with great pleasure to that place with me and her other fellow mates.

मया निविदितं राज्यजी ते कमलाकान् ॥ 58 ॥

प्रेक्षमाणाउतितूरे सा प्रयाति निर्जिने बने ।

निषेधितास दयाजसी गृहे कृत्वा जलागयान् ॥ 59 ॥

One day I told the King that Ekāvali used to go daily to a distant solitary forest to see the lotus-lake. Then the King addressed her not to go and he got a lake built within the compounds of his palace and planted many lotus seeds therein.

कमातन् वापयित्वाश्व पुधितान्ध्रमरातुतान्।

तथापि निर्वीये बाला कमलास्तचतेना ॥ 60 ॥

Gradually the lotuses began to blossom and the bees came there to drink honey. Still she used to go outside in search of lotuses. Then the King sent armed guards to accompany her.

तदा राजा स्थापना: प्रेरिता: शरक्षापाय: ।

एवं स्थापता तन्बी मत्सेता सखीयुता ।

मौड़ाथँ जाइतीनेते विन्यमाठित याति च ॥ 61 ॥

इति श्रीद्वेभावते महापुराणे कथलकम्ये

एकविंशोराधयः ॥ 62 ॥ 

Thus that thin-bodied daughter of the King used to go daily to the banks of the Ganges for play, guarded by armed soldiers, accompanied by myself and other companions. Again when the sporting was over, she used to return to the palace.

Here ends the Twenty-first Chapter on the Sixth Book on the installation of Ekavīra and the birth of Ekāvali in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XXII

