CHAPTER II

On the Rudras Going Towards the Heavens on the Celestial Car

व्यास उवाच

यत्वया च महाबाहो पृष्टोई कुरुस्तम ।

तान्यन्नातादः प्राह मया पृष्टो मुनीश्ररः ॥ १ ॥

नातद उवाच

व्यास दिके ते बबीम्यदु पुराउयं संगयो मम ।

उत्पनो हृदयेउत्पवर्ष सन्दोहासारपीडितः ॥ 2 ॥


गत्याड़े पितरं स्थाने बढ़ाणपमितीसानम् ।

अपूच्छे चत्वया पूरुं व्यासाठा प्रसन्नुत्तमम् ॥ 3 ॥

पितः कुतः समुपरत्रं बढ़ाण्डपरिष्तलं विभो ।

भवत्कृतेन वा सम्यकिंक वा विद्युक्तं तिवदम् ॥ 4 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O mighty armed Kuru! What you have asked me just now, I also asked the same thing of Nārada, the Lord of the Munis and he gave me the following reply: “O Vyāsa! What shall I say to you on this point more than this that a doubt occurred to me also in my former days. The question that you have put to me today rose in my mind before; and I went to my father Brahmā, of endless energy and asked to him thus: “O Lord! O Father! Whence is this whole Brahmāda born? Have You created it? Or is it Viṣṇu or Maheśvara? O all- pervading soul!

རྟན་ན་ལ་སྟན་མཆུང་སྟན་ལ་སྟན་ལ་

आराधनीय: कः कामं सर्वोनृक्छ कः प्रयुः ॥ 5 ॥

तत्वरं वद मे बढ़ासन्देहांशिड्धि चानय ।

नियमानो ह्रास्म संसारे दुःखद्धेप्रतोपाये ॥ 6 ॥

सन्देहोतिलतं चेतो न प्रशाप्यति कुजचित् ।

न तीर्थ्यु न देवेषु साधयेनिवतेषु च ॥ 7 ॥

Who is there in this Brahmānda fit to be worshipped? O Lord of the world! Who is the topmost Lord ruling over everything? Kindly say. O Brahman! I am plunged in this sea of Māyā and perils; my heart is agitated with doubts; hence, it is not appeased in any place of pilgrimage; or in thinking any Deva or in practising any Sādhana or in any other object. O Sinless one! Give me the answers duly and thus remove my doubts.

अविक्षाय परंतर्व कृतः शान्ति: परन्त्प ।

विक्रीणं बहुधा चित्रं नैकक स्थितरां जतेन् । ८ ॥

O Tormentor of foes! Unless the highest truth is not known, peace is not found. This heart, distracted in various ways, cannot rest fixed on one subject.

कंसरामीय युगे के वा के जजायन्द्रधारीः क्म ।

स्तीमि के नाथिज्ञानामि देव सर्वेश्छेश्वग्न् ॥ ९ ॥

Whom am I to remember? Whom to worship?

Where to go? Whom to praise? Who is the Supreme God in this Universe?

ततो मां प्रत्युबारोदं बढ़ा लोकपितामाहः ।

मया सत्यवतीसुनी कृते प्रजेन सुडुस्ते ॥ 10 ॥

ब्रह्मोवाच

किं ब्रवीम सुताछाई दुर्बोधं प्रजन्मुत्तम् ।

त्वया शक्यं महामागा विधणोरस सुनिश्रवात् ॥ 11 ॥

I do not understand these things. O Satyavati's son!" Hearing these my serious queries, Brahmā, the Grandsire of beings, replied to me as follows: "O highly illustrious son!

रोगी कोईपि न जानाति संसारोत्रस्मिन्महामते ।

विरत्कष्ठ शिवजानाति निरीहो यो विम्वसरः ॥ 12 ॥

एकाणीवे पुरा जाते नष्टे स्वायरजुद्रे ।

भूतमात्रे समुपदेवे संज्ञे कमलादहम् ॥ 13 ॥

What more shall I say to you than this that even Vīṣuḥ is unable to answer your questions; so difficult are they indeed! O great intelligent one! Nobody that is attached to the world knows anything about this. Those who are unattached to this world, who are free from any envy, those who are without desires and calm, those high-souled ones know the secret of all this. In former days when all was water, water everywhere and all things, moving and non-moving were destroyed, when five elements were sprung, then I was also born from the lotus navel of Vīṣuḥ.

नाप्यर्थ तर्पि सोमं न वृक्षात्र च पर्यतान् ।

कर्फिकायां समाविष्टांशनामकरं त्वा ॥ १ ४ ॥

Then not seeing Moon, Sun, trees, or mountains or anything and sitting on the centre (Karnikā) of the lotus thought thus: 'Whence I am born in this great ocean of waters?

कस्मादुः समुद्धतः सलितेशस्मिन्हाणों ।

को मे जाता प्रशुः कर्ता सहंतां वा युगात्यये ॥ 15 ॥

Who has created me? Who is now my Protector? And Who will be my Destroyer when this cycle ends? There is no earth distinctly visible anywhere here; on what, then, this mass of watch rests?

न च भूविद्धोत स्पष्टा यद्धारं जलं लिवदम् ।

पछ्जं कवम्यत्पत्र प्रसिद्धं रूविद्योगयो: ॥ १ ६ ॥

Lotus is turned Pankaja because it springs from mud and dirt; so unless there exists the earth underneath with mud and dirt, how this lotus will come out here!

पश्याम्यात्याय पढ़ं त मृत वे पढ़जस्य च ।

भविष्यति धरा तत्र मृतं नात्स्यत्र संशयः ॥ 17 ॥

Now let me try and find out where is the root of this lotus, where is the mud and dirt? If this be found, then the earth will be also certainly there.

उत्तरसलिले त्रय यावदूर्भसहचकम् ।

अन्वेयमाणो धरणी नावाय तां यदा तदा ॥ 18 ॥

Thus thinking, I dived underneath the water and searched for one thousand years but could not find earth anywhere, when the celestial voice entered my ears “Practise tapasyā (austerities).”

तपस्पिति चाकारो वाग्यदूरशीरिणि ।

ततो माय तपतलां पदो वर्षसहसूकम ॥ 19 ॥

Hearing this celestial voice, I sat on the lotus, my birth place, and practised tapasyā for one thousand years.

सुजेति पुनरुद्धता वाणी तत्र श्रुता माय ।

विघ्राहं तताकषर्ष के सुर्जामि करोपेम किम् ॥ 20 ॥

Next, the celestial voice again came saying "Create" Hearing this. I became quite confounded and began to think within myself "now what am I to create? What to do?"

तदा दैत्यावपि प्राप्तो दाराणी मयुकैटो भ ।

तान्यां विभीषितश्रहं युद्धाय मकरालये ॥ 21 ॥

After this, the two terrible Daityas Madhu and Kaitabha came to me and affrighted me saying "Fight with us."

ततोड़ नालमालंख्य वारियध्यमावताम ।

तत तम मया दृष्टः पुरुषः परमादुतः ॥ 22 ॥

I became quite terrified and holding the stem of the lotus, I got down within the water. There I saw a wonderful person, sleeping on the Ananta serpent.

मेध्यमागसीतु पीतावासाशुतुर्षुः ।

गेशगाशी जगाओं वनमालाविश्वपितः ॥ 23 ॥

He was of a deep blue colour like a rain-cloud,

wearing yellow clothes, four-armed, garlanded with forest flowers, and the Lord of this whole Universe.

गंखचक्रान्तपचाधाव्युघै: सुविराजितः ।

तमहाक्षं महाविष्णुं शेषपर्यंक्षागायिन् ॥ 24 ॥

On the four arms of this Mahā Viṣṇu there were conchshells, disc, club, and lotus and other weapons.

योगनिज्ञा समाक्रान्तमाविस्यं द्विनमच्छुतम् ।

शयानं तं समातोकव भोगिणोगोपरिस्थितम् ॥ 25 ॥

I saw this Acyuta Puruṣa, sleeping on the Ananta serpent bed, motionless and under the influence of Yoga Nidrā. I then thought within myself “What am I to do”?

चित्त मामद्धुता जाता किं कर्मोति नारद ।

मय स्मृता तदा देखी स्तुता निद्रास्कपिणी ॥ 26 ॥

Not being able to find out any other way, I recollected the Devi who was then of the nature of sleep and began to praise Her.

देहाधिरन्य सा देवी गाने संस्थिता शिवा ।

अवितकसंगरीरा सा दिव्याभरणमणिकता ॥ 27 ॥

विष्यादौंहं विद्यायणु विराजव नमःशिता ।

उदतिष्ठदेयोनाता तथा मुक्तो जनादनः ॥ 28 ॥

The auspicious Devi Yoga Nidrā, whose form could not be determined, immediately left the body of Viṣṇu and decorated with divine ornaments, began to shine in the air. After She left the body of Viṣṇu, Viṣṇu immediately got up.

पडवर्षेसहस्वाणि कृतबान्, शुद्धमुत्तमम् ।

तदा विलोकिती दैलही इरीण विविपातिती ॥ 29 ॥

And He fought terribly for five thousand years with the Dānavas Madhu-Kaitabha; then by the grace of the Bhagavati, He extended His own thighs and then, on those thighs, He slew the two demons.
उत्सईं चिवलं कृत्वा तत्रैव निर्तीत चे ति ।
क्रूसत्रैव म्याप्तो यजावां संश्विताबुणी ॥ 30 ॥

विधि: संवीक्षितामामि: स्वथा देवी मनोहार ।

Where Viṣṇu and myself were standing, Rudra Deva came also and joined with us. Then we three saw the beautiful Devī in the celestial space.


संसुता परम शक्तिरुचाचास्मानवस्थितान् ॥ 31 ॥

कृपावलोकनैः कृत्वा पावनैभूदितानथ ।

देल्युवाच

काजेशा: स्वानि कार्याणि कृकस्यं समतिन्रतः ॥ 32 ॥

सृष्टिश्वितिविशिष्यानि हतवेती महासुरै ।

कृत्वा स्वानि निकेतानि बस्पयं विमतज्वरः ॥ 33 ॥

प्रजाक्षतुर्विधा: सर्वाः सुक्राथे स्वविष्णितिभः ।

We three, then, commenced to chant hymns to Her and She gladdened our hearts by Her gracious look and said: "O Brahma! O Viṣṇu! O Rudra! The two great Daityas are slain. Now forsake your laziness and do your respective work of creating, preserving, and destroying the Universe; create your own abodes, and live in happiness; create by your respective lordly powers, the four-fold beings."

ब्रह्मोवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्याः पेशलं सुखदं मुदु ॥ 34 ॥

अबुम् तामशस्ताः स्मः कर्व कुमीरत्वाः प्रजाः ।

न मही वित्ता मातः सर्वत्र वित्तं जलम् ॥ 35 ॥

न घृतानि गृणाशामि तन्माजाणीद्रियाणि च ।

त्वाकपर्थ वचोद्यमाक् शिवा जाता सितानन्ति॥36 ॥

झटिवेवागनं तत्र विमानं गनानच्छुभम् ।

सोवाचासिन्युगः कामं विजार्यं तनासाध्यसः ॥ 37 ॥

विचाने ब्रद्धिष्यधीगा दर्शायमध्य चा ब्रहुन्तम् ।

तिश्रिय चवस्तस्या ओमित्युक्त्वा पुनर्विम् ॥ 38 ॥

Hearing the Devi's gentle sweet words, we

spoke: “O Mother! There is no wide earth here; all is one mass of infinite ocean. No five elements, no five nāmatrās, no sensual organs, no Guṇas, nothing exists here; how can we then execute the work of creation, etc.” Hearing our words, the Devi smiled. Immediately, there came from the sky overhead a beautiful aerial car. The Devi said: “O Brahma! O Viṣṇu! O Rudra! Get in this car without any fear. Today I will show you one wonderful thing.”

समाकष्टीपविहा: स्मो विमाने रत्नमधितुं ।

मृक्तादामयुसंवीते किंकीपीजाजशबिद्धि ॥ 39 ॥

सुसचचिनिधे ग्वयं जयस्त्राजिश्विकता: ।

सोपविहांस्तो नृद्ध्या देव्यसान्वितजिंद्रियान् ॥ 40 ॥

स्वशक्तया तद्विमानं वै नोदयामास चोत्रे ॥ 41 ॥

शीत शीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयस्कन्ये

दितीयोरध्याः ॥ 42 ॥ 

At Her word, we got into the beautiful car without any fear. It was decorated with various gems and jewels, bedecked with pearls, emitting sweet tinkling sounds of bells and looking as the abode of the celestials. Seeing us seated without any fear, She made the car get high up in the sky by Her force.

Thus ends the Second Chapter of the Third Book on Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra's going towards the heavens on the celestial car, given by the Devi in the Mahāpurāna Śrīmaddevībhāgvatam of 18,000 verses by Mararsi Veda Vyāsa.

Book III Chapter III

