[Ch 2 Verse 1-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O mighty armed Kuru! What you have asked me just now, I also asked the same thing of Nārada, the Lord of the Munis and he gave me the following reply: “O Vyāsa! What shall I say to you on this point more than this that a doubt occurred to me also in my former days. The question that you have put to me today rose in my mind before; and I went to my father Brahmā, of endless energy and asked to him thus: “O Lord! O Father! Whence is this whole Brahmāda born? Have You created it? Or is it Viṣṇu or Maheśvara? O all- pervading soul! རྟན་ན་ལ་སྟན་མཆུང་སྟན་ལ་སྟན་ལ་
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O mighty armed Kuru! What you have asked me just now, I also asked the same thing to Nārada, the lord of the Munis and he gave me the following reply :-- O Vyāsa! What shall I say to you on this point more than this that a doubt occurred to me also in my former days. The question that you have put to me today rose in my mind before; and I went to my father Brahmā, of endless energy and asked to him thus :-- O Lord! O Father! Whence is this whole Brahmāṇḍa born? Have You created it? Or is it Viṣṇu or Maheśvara? O all pervading soul!

[Ch 2 Verse 5-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Who is there in this Brahmānda fit to be worshipped? O Lord of the world! Who is the topmost Lord ruling over everything? Kindly say. O Brahman! I am plunged in this sea of Māyā and perils; my heart is agitated with doubts; hence, it is not appeased in any place of pilgrimage; or in thinking any Deva or in practising any Sādhana or in any other object. O Sinless one! Give me the answers duly and thus remove my doubts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Who is there in this Brahmāṇḍa fit to be worshipped? O Lord of the world! Who is the top-most Lord ruling over everything? Kindly say. O Brahmāṇ! I am plunged in this sea of Maya and perils; my heart is agitated with doubts; hence it is not appeased in any place of pilgrimage ; or in thinking any Deva or in practising any Sādhan or in any other object. O Sinless one! Give me the answers duly and thus remove my doubts.

[Ch 2 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Tormentor of foes! Unless the highest truth is not known, peace is not found. This heart, distracted in various ways, cannot rest fixed on one subject.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Tormentor of foes! Unless the highest truth is not known, peace is not found. This heart, distracted in various ways, cannot rest fixed on one subject.

[Ch 2 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whom am I to remember? Whom to worship? Where to go? Whom to praise? Who is the Supreme God in this Universe?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whom am I to remember? Whom to worship? Where to go? Whom to praise? Who is the Supreme God this Universe?

[Ch 2 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I do not understand these things. O Satyavati's son!" Hearing these my serious queries, Brahmā, the Grandsire of beings, replied to me as follows: "O highly illustrious son!
NEW CORR ENG ──► I do not understand these things. O Satyavatī’s son! Hearing these my serious queries, Brahmā, the grand-Sire of beings, replied to me as follows :-- O highly illustrious son!

[Ch 2 Verse 12-13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What more shall I say to you than this that even Vīṣuḥ is unable to answer your questions; so difficult are they indeed! O great intelligent one! Nobody that is attached to the world knows anything about this. Those who are unattached to this world, who are free from any envy, those who are without desires and calm, those high-souled ones know the secret of all this. In former days when all was water, water everywhere and all things, moving and non-moving were destroyed, when five elements were sprung, then I was also born from the lotus navel of Vīṣuḥ.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What more shall I say to you than this that even Viṣṇu is unable to answer your questions; so difficult are they indeed! O great intelligent one! Nobody that is attached to the world knows anything about this. Those who are unattached to this world, who are free from any envy, these who are without desires and calm, those highsouled ones know the secret of all this. In former days when all was water, water everywhere and all things, moving and non-moving were destroyed, when five elements were sprung, then I was also born from the lotus navel of Viṣṇu.

[Ch 2 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then not seeing Moon, Sun, trees, or mountains or anything and sitting on the centre (Karnikā) of the lotus thought thus: 'Whence I am born in this great ocean of waters?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then not seeing Moon, Sun, trees, or mountains or anything and sitting on the centre (Karṇikā) of the lotus thought thus :-- When I am born in this great ocean of waters?

[Ch 2 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Who has created me? Who is now my Protector? And Who will be my Destroyer when this cycle ends? There is no earth distinctly visible anywhere here; on what, then, this mass of watch rests?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Who has created me? Who is now my protector? And Who will be my Destroyer when this cycle ends? There is no earth distinctly visible anywhere here; on what, then, this mass of water rests?

[Ch 2 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Lotus is turned Pankaja because it springs from mud and dirt; so unless there exists the earth underneath with mud and dirt, how this lotus will come out here!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Lotus is termed Pankaja because it springs from mud and dirt; so unless there exists the earth underneath with mud and dirt, how this lotus will come out here!

[Ch 2 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now let me try and find out where is the root of this lotus, where is the mud and dirt? If this be found, then the earth will be also certainly there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now let me try and find out where is the root of this lotus, where is the mud and dirt? If this be found, then the earth will be also certainly there.

[Ch 2 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus thinking, I dived underneath the water and searched for one thousand years but could not find earth anywhere, when the celestial voice entered my ears “Practise tapasyā (austerities).”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus thinking, I dived underneath the water and searched for one thousand years but could not find earth anywhere, when the celestial voice entered my ears “Practise tapasyā (austerities).”

[Ch 2 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this celestial voice, I sat on the lotus, my birth place, and practised tapasyā for one thousand years.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this celestial voice, I sat on the lotus, my birth place, and practised tapasyā for one thousand years.

[Ch 2 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next, the celestial voice again came saying "Create" Hearing this. I became quite confounded and began to think within myself "now what am I to create? What to do?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next, the celestial voice came again “Create.” Hearing this, I became quite confounded and began to think within myself “now what am I to create? What to do?”

[Ch 2 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After this, the two terrible Daityas Madhu and Kaitabha came to me and affrighted me saying "Fight with us."
NEW CORR ENG ──► After this, the two terrible Daityas Madhu and Kaitabha came to me and affrighted me saying “Fight with us.”

[Ch 2 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I became quite terrified and holding the stem of the lotus, I got down within the water. There I saw a wonderful person, sleeping on the Ananta serpent.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I became quite terrified and holding the stem of the lotus, I got down within the water. There I saw a wonderful person, sleeping on the Ananta serpent.

[Ch 2 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He was of a deep blue colour like a rain-cloud, wearing yellow clothes, four-armed, garlanded with forest flowers, and the Lord of this whole Universe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He was of a deep blue colour like a rain-cloud, wearing yellow clothes, four-armed, garlanded with forest flowers, and the Lord of this whole Universe.

[Ch 2 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the four arms of this Mahā Viṣṇu there were conchshells, disc, club, and lotus and other weapons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the four arms of this Mahā Viṣṇu there were conch-shells, disc, club, and lotus and other weapons.

[Ch 2 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I saw this Acyuta Puruṣa, sleeping on the Ananta serpent bed, motionless and under the influence of Yoga Nidrā. I then thought within myself “What am I to do”?
NEW CORR ENG ──► I saw this Achyuta Puruṣa, sleeping on the Ananta serpent bed, motionless and under the influence of Yoga Nidrā. I then thought within myself “What am I to do?”

[Ch 2 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Not being able to find out any other way, I recollected the Devi who was then of the nature of sleep and began to praise Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Not being able to find out any other way, I recollected the Devī who was then of the nature of sleep and began to praise Her.

[Ch 2 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The auspicious Devi Yoga Nidrā, whose form could not be determined, immediately left the body of Viṣṇu and decorated with divine ornaments, began to shine in the air. After She left the body of Viṣṇu, Viṣṇu immediately got up.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The auspicious Devī Yoga Nidrā, whose form could not be determined, immediately left the body of Viṣṇu and decorated with divine ornaments, began to shine in the air. After She left the body of Viṣṇu, Viṣṇu immediately got up.

[Ch 2 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And He fought terribly for five thousand years with the Dānavas Madhu-Kaitabha; then by the grace of the Bhagavati, He extended His own thighs and then, on those thighs, He slew the two demons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And He fought terribly for five thousand years with the Dānavas Madhu Kaitabha; then by the grace of the Bhagavatī, He extended His own thighs and then, on those thighs, He slew the two demons.

[Ch 2 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Where Viṣṇu and myself were standing, Rudra Deva came also and joined with us. Then we three saw the beautiful Devī in the celestial space.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Where Viṣṇu and myself were standing, Rudra Deva came also and joined with us. Then we three saw the beautiful Devī in the celestial space.

[Ch 2 Verse 31-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We three, then, commenced to chant hymns to Her and She gladdened our hearts by Her gracious look and said: "O Brahma! O Viṣṇu! O Rudra! The two great Daityas are slain. Now forsake your laziness and do your respective work of creating, preserving, and destroying the Universe; create your own abodes, and live in happiness; create by your respective lordly powers, the four-fold beings."
NEW CORR ENG ──► We three, then, commenced to chant hymns to Her and She gladdened our hearts by Her gracious look and said :-- “O Brahmā! O Viṣṇu! O Rudra! The two great Daityas are slain. Now forsake your laziness and do your respective works of creating, preserving, and destroying the Universe; create your own abodes, and live in happiness; create by your respective lordly powers, the fourfold beings.”

[Ch 2 Verse 34-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing the Devi's gentle sweet words, we spoke: “O Mother! There is no wide earth here; all is one mass of infinite ocean. No five elements, no five nāmatrās, no sensual organs, no Guṇas, nothing exists here; how can we then execute the work of creation, etc.” Hearing our words, the Devi smiled. Immediately, there came from the sky overhead a beautiful aerial car. The Devi said: “O Brahma! O Viṣṇu! O Rudra! Get in this car without any fear. Today I will show you one wonderful thing.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing the Devī’s gentle sweet words, we spoke :-- “O Mother! There is no wide earth here; all is one mass of infinite ocean. No five elements, no five tanmātrās, no sensual organs, no Guṇas, nothing exist here; how can we then execute the works of creation, etc. Hearing our words, the Devī smiled. Immediately there came from the sky overhead a beautiful aerial car. The Devī said :-- “O Brahmā! O Viṣṇu! O Rudra! Get in this car without any fear. To-day I will show you one wonderful thing.”

[Ch 2 Verse 39-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At Her word, we got into the beautiful car without any fear. It was decorated with various gems and jewels, bedecked with pearls, emitting sweet tinkling sounds of bells and looking as the abode of the celestials. Seeing us seated without any fear, She made the car get high up in the sky by Her force. Thus ends the Second Chapter of the Third Book on Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra's going towards the heavens on the celestial car, given by the Devi in the Mahāpurāna Śrīmaddevībhāgvatam of 18,000 verses by Mararsi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At Her word, we got into the beautiful car without any fear. It was decorated with various gems and jewels, bedecked with pearls, emitting sweet tinkling sounds of bells and looking as the abode of the celestials. Seeing us seated without any fear, She made the car get high up in the sky by Her force. Thus ends the second chapter of the third skandha on Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra’s going towards the heavens on the celestial car, given by the Devī in the Mahāpurāṇa Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyās.
