CHAPTER II

On the Birth of Vyāsa Deva

मूत उवाच

एकदा तीर्थयात्रायां बजन्याराशेगे मुनि: ।

आजगाम महातंजाः कारिलंशास्तदमुक्तमम् ॥ १ ॥

निवादमाह धर्मात्मा कुर्वर्त भोजनं तदा ।

प्रायवस्य परं पारं कार्यतिंहा उद्धुपेन माम् ॥ २ ॥

Once on an occasion, the highly energetic Muni Parāśara went out on pilgrimage and arrived on the banks of the Yamunā, and spoke to the religious fisherman who was taking his food then thus: 'O

fisherman! Take me on your boat and carry me to the other side of the river.'

दारणः श्रुत्वा मुनेवाक्यं कुबाणी भोजनं तटे ।

उवाच तां सुतां वालां मत्स्यान्यां मनोरामम् ॥ ३ ॥

Hearing this, the fisherman spoke to the beautiful girl Matsyagandhā: “O beautiful smiling one! This religious ascetic intends to cross the river; so take the boat and carry him to the other bank.

उड़पेन मुनिं बाले परं परं नयव्य है ।

गंतुकामोडिति धर्मात्मा तापसोउंश गृधिकिति ॥ 4 ॥

Thus ordered by her father, the exceedingly beautiful Vasu girl Matsyagandhā began to steer the boat whereon sat the Muni.

इत्युक्ता सा तदा पित्रा मत्स्यांधाउथ वासकी ।

उदुपे भुनिवासीनों संवाहवति भामिनी ॥ 5 ॥

प्रजन् सूर्यतातोये भावित्वाहिवयोगतः ।

कामातंतसु भुनिजातो दृष्ट्या तां चाक्लोचनाम् ॥ 6 ॥

Thus while the boat was sliding on the waters of the Yamunā, the Muni Parāśara saw the beautiful-eyed damsel Matsyagandhā and became as if under the command of the great destiny, greatly enamoured of her.

गृहीतुकामः स भुनिवृष्ट्या व्यजितयोवन् ।

दक्षिणेन कर्णेनामव्यूगद्धिणे करे ॥ 7 ॥

He desired to enjoy Matsyagandhā, full of youth and beauty and with his right hand caught hold of her left hand; the blue coloured Matsya looking askance spoke out smilingly in the following words:

तमुवाचासितापांनी सितमुर्षिंमदं चचः ।

कुलस्य सदृशं वः किं श्रुतस्य तपसश्छ किम् ॥ 8 ॥

“O knower of Dharma! What are you going to do, pierced by the arrows of Cupid?

लं वे वसिष्ठदायादः कुलशीलसम्बन्धितः ।

किं चिकारीपर सधर्म मनवेशने प्रपर्षितः ॥ 9 ॥

What you desire now, is it worthy of your family or your study of the Śāstras or worthy of your Tapasyā; see, you are born in the line of Vasiṣṭha and you are well known as of good character.

दुर्भर्भ मानुपं जन्म भृवि ब्राह्मणसन्न ।

तजारी दुर्भर्भ मन्ये ब्राह्मणत्व विशेषतः ॥ १० ॥

O best of Brāhmins! You are quite aware that the attaining of a man-birth in this world is very rare; and over and above this the attainment of Brāhminhood is, as far as my knowledge goes, particularly difficult.

कुलेन शीलेन तथा श्रुतेन

द्विजोतमस्तं चिक्त धर्मविष्च।

अनार्थभावं कक्षयमात्रोसि विश्रेद

मां वीक्ष्य च मीनारभात् ॥ १ १ ॥

O Prince of Brāhmins! You are the foremost and best as far as your family, goodness, and learning in the Vedas and other Śāstras are concerned; you are will versed in Dharma; how is it, then, that you are going to do this act, not worthy of an Ārya, though you see me possessed of this bad smell of fish throughout my body.

मदीये शरीरे ऋतामोषयुद्धे

शुभं किं समातोक्य पाणि ग्रहीतुम् ।

समीपं समायासि कामातुरस्त्वं

कर्वं नाफिकानासि धार्य स्ककीम् ॥ 12 ॥

O one of unbaffled understanding! O best of twice-born! What auspicious sign do you see in my body that you are stricken with passion on my account that you have caught hold of my hand to enjoy me? Why have you forgotten your own Dharma?"

अहो मंदवुद्धिहिकोजंयं ग्रीषीच्छले

मन एवाहा मां वे गृहीत्वा ।

मनो व्याकुलं पडबाणातिविद्ध

न कोर्पीह शक्तः प्रतीये हि कतुम् ॥ 13 ॥

Thus saying, Matsyagandhā thought within herself: “Alas! This Brāhmīn has certainly lost his brains in order to enjoy me; certainly he will be drowned just now in his attempt to enjoy me in this boat; his mind is so much agitated with the arrows of Cupid that no body, it seems, can act against his will.”

इति संचित्य सा बाला तमुवारा ।

धैर्य कुरु महाभाग वर्गे वर्गे नवामि वे ॥ 14 ॥ ॥

Thus thinking Matsyagandhā spoke again to the Muni: “O highly fortunate one! Hold patience! let me first take you to the other side of the river; then you may do as you please.”

सूत उवाच

पाराशरस्तु तच्छूला वचनं हितपूर्वकम् ।

करं वल्कता स्थितस्तत्र सिंधी: पारं गत: पुनः ॥ 15 ॥

Hearing these reasonable words, the Muni let

loose of her hand and took his seat on the boat and gradually got down on the other bank of the river.

मत्यमान्यां प्रज्ञाह सुनि: कामातुरस्त्वा ।

वेयमाना तु सा काना तमुवाच पुरःस्थितम् ॥ 16 ॥

But the Muni, becoming again extremely passionate caught hold of Matsyagandhā; when the young woman spoke to Parāśara, in front of her, shuddering:

दुर्धायड़ं मुनिश्रे कर्व लें नोपगड़्जे ।

समानरूपयो कामसंयोगसु सुखावहः ॥ 17 ॥

"O best of Munis! My body is emitting very bad smell; do you not feel this? You know very well that the sexual intercourse between male and female of similar types brings in happiness and comfort."

इत्युक्तेन तु सा कन्या क्षणमाजेण भामिनि ।

कृता योजनमाया तु सुक्षण च वरानना ॥ १८ ॥

भुगनाभिसुगंधां तां कृत्वा कान्तां मानोहारम् ।

जग्राह दक्षिणे पाणी भूनीमन्मथपीक्षितः ॥ १९ ॥

Thus spoken to, Parāśara made Matsyagandhā emit sweet scent like that of musk to a distance of one Yojana (8 miles) and her body exceedingly lovely and beautiful and, becoming extremely passionate, again caught hold of her right hand.

ग्रहीतुकामां ते ग्राह नाना सत्यवतीं शुभा ।

मुने पश्यति लोकोयं पिता चैव तत्थितधानः ॥ 20 ॥

पशुधामां न मे प्रीति जनयत्यतिहानः ।

प्रतीक्षस्य मुनिश्रेश यावद्धवति यामिनि ॥ 21 ॥

Then the auspicious Satyavati addressed Parāśara Muni, resolved to enjoy her, thus: “O Muni! Behold! all are looking at us; my father too, is there on the bank of the Yamunā; so, O Muni! wait till night; this beastly act before all is highly unsatisfactory to me.

रात्री व्यवाय उद्धिटो दिवा न मनुजस्य दि ।

दिवासङ्गे महान्दोय: पर्ष्यति किल मानवा: ॥ 22 ॥

The wise persons declare it a great sin to commit sexual intercourse during day; they have ordained night time as the best time of intercourse for men;

not the day time; the more so that many person's eyes are in this direction.

कामं चघ्छ महावृद्धे लोकनिदा दुरास्वा ।

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य युनभुक्तमुदारधीः ॥ 23 ॥

So, O intelligent one! hold on your passion for a while; for the blame pronounced by the public is horrible. Hearing these reasonable words, the liberal-minded Parāśara created, by his influence of Tapasyā, a dense fog so that both the banks of the Yamunā became covered with darkness."

नीहारं कल्यामास शीर्घं पुणवबलेन वै ।

नीहारे च समुपये तटेस्तितमसा युते ॥ 24 ॥

कामिनी तं सुविं ग्राह मुदुपूर्विमंद वचः ।

कन्यारई ब्रिजगाईन धुक्चना गंतासि कामतः ॥ 25 ॥

अमोपधीर्वस्वे बहान्ना गतिमंं भवेदिति ।

पितरं किं ब्वीयाद्ध सभागं चेद्वायामह्न ॥ 26 ॥

त्वं गमिष्यस भुक्ना मां किं करोगें वद्यत तत ।

Then Matsyagandhā gently spoke to the Muni: O, best of Dvijas! I am not as yet married; I am now a girl; you will go away after enjoying me; your semen virile is not fruitless; so Brāhman! What will be my fate? If I be pregnant today, what shall I say to my father? and what will be my future state? There is no doubt that, after enjoying me, you will go away; what will I do afterwards; kindly say.'

पागरण उवाच

कोतेउ मलियुं कृत्वा कन्यैव तं पधियसि ॥ 27 ॥

वृषीष च वरं भीक यं लमिष्ठसि पाधिनी ।

Hearing these words of Matsyagandhā, Parāśara said: “O beloved! after you have done my pleasant duty, you will remain a girl as you are now; yet, O timid one! ask from me any boon you like; I will grant it to you.”

सत्यवल्युवाच

यथा मे पितरी लोकेन न जानीते हि मानद ॥ 28 ॥

कन्यातनं न मे हन्यातथा कुक्र हिज्ञोम ।

पुरत्रु तत्समः कामं घवेद्धुद्तीयांन्ति ॥ 29 ॥

गोधोर्यं सर्वदा मे स्याहीदानं च नव नवम् ।

Satyavati then said: O best Brāhmin, O giver of one's honour! grant me these things: That my father and mother do not know anything of this affair and that my virginity be again as ever the same. Also, let an extraordinarily powerful energetic son be born to me like you; let this nice smell continue to remain always in my body and let my youth and beauty remain afresh and increase ever more."

पातागर उवाच

शृणु सुन्दरी पुत्रसे विष्यक्षाममयः शृति: ॥ ३० ॥

भविष्यित च विध्यातर्षतेलोकवे वरवर्धिंन ।

केन्चित्कारणेनाहं जातः कामातुरस्वायि ॥ ३१ ॥

Hearing this, Parāśara said: “O beautiful one! a son, very pure and holy, will be born to your, from Nārāyaṇa’s part! his name will be famous in the three worlds. O beautiful one! never before my heart was agitated with such passion.

कदापि च न सम्मोहो भूतपूर्वां वरानने ।

यूद्या चास्मसां रूपं सदारड़ं धैर्यमावहम् ॥ 32 ॥

दैवयोगेन बीक्ष्य त्वां कामव सयाणोपवम् ।

तल्किचित्कारणं विद्धि दैवं हि दुर्लित्कमम् ॥ 33 ॥

दूध्वारड़ं चातिरुर्नीया तां कंकं मोहमानुपायम् ।

पुराणकर्ता पुत्रसे भविष्यति वरानने ॥ 34 ॥

वेदविद्धागकर्ता च खलातघ भुवनत्रये ।

I do not know why I have become so much passionate for you. I saw the unrivalled beauties of Apsarās but I never lost my patience; but seeing you, I have become attracted to you; it must be under the direction of Providence; know it certain that there must be some mysterious cause in this. However Fate is unavoidable to all; otherwise you are full of so bad smell; why shall I be fascinated by your sight? O beautiful one! your son will be famed in the three worlds; will compose the Purānas and will sub-divide the Vedas."

सूत उवाच

इत्युक्चता तां वर्णं यातां भुक्त्वा स मुविसमतः ॥ ३ ५ ॥

जगमा तरसा स्नात्वा कालितीद्वीसलिते भूतः ।

Thus saying, Muni Parāśara enjoyed Matsyagandhā who became quite submissive; and after bathing in the Yamunā, quickly went away.

साउपि सत्यवती जाता सहो गर्भवती सती ॥ ३ ६ ॥

सुखेवे यमुनाईपे पुरं कामविवारपम् ।

On the other hand, the chaste Satyavati, too, became pregnant and immediately gave birth on the island of Yamunā to a son beautiful, as if the Second Kāmadeva, the god of Love, Kāmadeva.

जातमास्तु तेजस्वी तामुावा स्वमातन् ॥ 37 ॥

तपस्वेय मनः कृत्वा विविधे चातिवीर्वान् ।

No sooner that son, very fiery and highly potent, was born than he devoted his mind to tapasyā and spoke to his own mother Satyavatī thus: "O Mother! now go wherever you like; I will also go to perform tapasyā. O highly fortunate one; No sooner you remember me, I will come to you.

गछ्छ मातार्यकामां गछ्ध्यामृद्धतः परम् ॥ 38 ॥

मतर्दि महापाभगे सूर्यिध्यापि वै स्मुतः ।

मातर्यदा घबेकार्यत तत किंचिद्वतुतम् ॥ 39 ॥

सात्योज्डेत तत शीप्रमानीयिण्य पारभिति ।

स्वतित रेतसु पशिव्यापि तव्वता चित्ता सुखं सस । 40 ।

इत्पुक्तवानिर्योवायासःसाउपिधिर्योक्तताकत ।

O Mother! where you will have any onerous duty, remember me and I will instantly come to you. Let all good be unto you; now I go. Avoid all cares and live happily." Thus saying, Vyāsa Deva went out. Matysagandhā, too, went back to her father.

ड्रीये व्यस्तस्वा बालस्तमावटुषायनेठभवत् ॥ 4 1 ॥

जातमाजो जगामाशु बृद्धिं विष्वश्योगतः ।

Vyāsa was named also Dvaipāyana (born on an island, a Dvipa) in as much as Satyavati gave birth to him in a Dvipa island); and as he was born of Vispu's parts, he grew up no sooner he was born. तीर्थे तीर्थे कृतसनाशुचार तय उत्तम ॥ 4 2 ॥

एवं द्विषायो जेत्र सत्यवल्या पराशगत् ।

Muni Dvaipāyana bathed in every Tīrtha and performed the highest asceticism. Thus Dvaipāyana Vyāsa was born of Parāśara in Satyavati's womb.

चकार वेल्गाख्याक्ष प्राणं ज्ञाला केलयुंगम् ॥ 43 ॥

वेद्यस्तिराकरणाझ्ञासनामाभवम्पिनः ।

पुराणसहिताङ्गके महापारतमुतमम् ॥ 44 ॥

शिष्यानध्यायमास वेदान्कृत्वा विभाणशः ।

सुमन्तुं जैमिनि पैलं वैशमायनमेव च ।। 4 5 ।।

असिते देखलं चैव शुक्रं चैव स्यामात्बजम् ।

Seeing the advent of Kali Yuga, he adorned the tree of the Vedas with many Sákhās (branches). It is because he expanded the Vedas by many Sákhās, that he is denominated also as Veda Vyāsa; he composed eighteen Purāṇas, Sarinītās, the excellent Mahābhārata, subdivided the Vedas and made his disciples Sumantu Jaimini, Paila, Vaiśampāyana, Asita, Devala and his son Sūka to study them.

सूत उवाच

एतच्च कथितं सर्वे कारणं मुनिसत्तमाः ॥ 46 ॥

सत्यव्यथा: सुतस्यापि समुयतितस्तथा शुभा ।

Sūta said: “O Munis! Thus I have described to you the birth of the holy Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati and all the causes.

संशयोज्ञ न कतंच्य: सभये मुनिसन्ता: ॥ 47 ॥

मह्नां चिति चैव गृणा ग्राहा मुनैतिति ।

O Munis! Do not allow any doubt enter your mind as regards his birth; for it is always advisable to take up only the good things as far as the lives of great persons and Munis are concerned.

कारणाच्छ समुवर्तितः सत्यव्वता इम्पोदेः ॥ 48 ॥

पाराशरेण संयोगः पुनः शनत्नुना तथा ।

There must be some extraordinary mysterious cause owing to which Satyavati was born of a fish and she was first united to Parāśara and then to Śāntanu.

अन्यथा तु मुनेक्षितं कर्व कामाकुलं भवेत् ॥ 49 ॥

अनार्थग्रुं धर्मैनः कृतावान्न कर्वे भृति: ।

Otherwise how can one account for the fact of the Muni Parāśara being so much agitated by passion and why he would behave like a mean low person in the committal of such a grossly blameable act?

सकारणेयमुत्पत्ति: कथितासे5शयंकीर्णी ॥ ५० ॥

शुत्वा पाणच्छ निर्मुक्तो नरो भवति सर्वथा ।

य एतच्छुभभाख्यानं शृणोति श्रुतिमात्रः ॥ ५१ ॥

न दुर्गतिसवानोति सुखी भवति सर्वदा ॥ ५२ ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे द्वितीयसक्थे

द्वितीयोरध्या: 11 2 11

Now has been spoken the wonderful birth story of Vyāsa Deva together with all incidents, enveloped under the great mystery. If any one hears this holy narrative, he will be freed from all sins and will always be happy.

Thus ends the Second Chapter of the Second Book on the birth of Vyāsa Deva in the Mahāpurānam Śrimadevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.

GTA DODD III

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

