[Ch 2 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once on an occasion, the highly energetic Muni Parāśara went out on pilgrimage and arrived on the banks of the Yamunā, and spoke to the religious fisherman who was taking his food then thus: 'O fisherman! Take me on your boat and carry me to the other side of the river.'
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once on an occasion, the highly energetic Muni Parāśara went out on pilgrimage and arrived on the banks of the Yamunā, and spoke to the religious fisherman who was taking his food then thus :-- “O fisherman! Take me on your boat and carry me to the other side of the river.”

[Ch 2 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, the fisherman spoke to the beautiful girl Matsyagandhā: “O beautiful smiling one! This religious ascetic intends to cross the river; so take the boat and carry him to the other bank.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, the fisherman spoke to the beautiful girl Matsyagandhā :-- “O beautiful smiling one! This religious ascetic intends to cross the river; so take the boat and carry him to the other bank.”

[Ch 2 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus ordered by her father, the exceedingly beautiful Vasu girl Matsyagandhā began to steer the boat whereon sat the Muni.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus ordered by her father, the exceedingly beautiful Vasu girl Matsyagandhā began to steer the boat whereon sat the Muni.

[Ch 2 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus while the boat was sliding on the waters of the Yamunā, the Muni Parāśara saw the beautiful-eyed damsel Matsyagandhā and became as if under the command of the great destiny, greatly enamoured of her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus while the boat was sliding on the waters of the Yamunā; the Muni Parāśara saw the beautiful-eyed damsel Matsyagandhā and became as if under the command of the great destiny, greatly enamoured of her.

[Ch 2 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He desired to enjoy Matsyagandhā, full of youth and beauty and with his right hand caught hold of her left hand; the blue coloured Matsya looking askance spoke out smilingly in the following words:
NEW CORR ENG ──► He desired to enjoy Matsyagandhā, full of youth and beauty and with his right hand caught hold of her left hand; the blue coloured Matsya looking askance spoke out smilingly in the following words :--

[Ch 2 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O knower of Dharma! What are you going to do, pierced by the arrows of Cupid?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O knower of Dharma! What are you going to do, pierced by the arrows of Cupid?

[Ch 2 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What you desire now, is it worthy of your family or your study of the Śāstras or worthy of your Tapasyā; see, you are born in the line of Vasiṣṭha and you are well known as of good character.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What you desire now, is it worthy of your family or your study of the Śāstras or worthy of your Tapasyā; see, you are born in the line of Vaśiṣṭha and you are well known as of good character.

[Ch 2 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O best of Brāhmins! You are quite aware that the attaining of a man-birth in this world is very rare; and over and above this the attainment of Brāhminhood is, as far as my knowledge goes, particularly difficult.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O best of Brāhmins! You are quite aware that the attaining of a man-birth in this world is very rare; and over and above this the attainment of Brāhminhood is, as far as my knowledge goes, particularly difficult.

[Ch 2 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Prince of Brāhmins! You are the foremost and best as far as your family, goodness, and learning in the Vedas and other Śāstras are concerned; you are will versed in Dharma; how is it, then, that you are going to do this act, not worthy of an Ārya, though you see me possessed of this bad smell of fish throughout my body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Prince of Brāhmins! You are the foremost and best as far as your family, goodness, and learning in the Vedas and other Śāstras are concerned; you are well versed in Dharma; how is it, then, that you are going to do this act, not worthy of an Ārya, though you see me possessed of this bad smell of fish throughout my body.

[Ch 2 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O one of unbaffled understanding! O best of twice-born! What auspicious sign do you see in my body that you are stricken with passion on my account that you have caught hold of my hand to enjoy me? Why have you forgotten your own Dharma?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► O one of unbaffled understanding! O best of twice-born! What auspicious sign do you see in my body that you are stricken with passion on my account that you have caught hold of my hand to enjoy me? Why have you gotten your own Dharma?

[Ch 2 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, Matsyagandhā thought within herself: “Alas! This Brāhmīn has certainly lost his brains in order to enjoy me; certainly he will be drowned just now in his attempt to enjoy me in this boat; his mind is so much agitated with the arrows of Cupid that no body, it seems, can act against his will.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, Matsyagandhā thought within herself :-- “Alas! This Brāhmin has certainly lost his brains in order to enjoy me; certainly he will be drowned just now in his attempt to enjoy me in this boat; his mind is so much agitated with the arrows of Cupid that no body, it seems, can act against his will.”

[Ch 2 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus thinking Matsyagandhā spoke again to the Muni: “O highly fortunate one! Hold patience! let me first take you to the other side of the river; then you may do as you please.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus thinking Matsyagandhā spoke again to the Muni :-- “O highly fortunate one! Hold patience! let me first take you to the other side of the river; then you may do as you please.”

[Ch 2 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these reasonable words, the Muni let loose of her hand and took his seat on the boat and gradually got down on the other bank of the river.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these reasonable words, the Muni let loose of her hand and took his seat on the boat and gradually got down on the other bank of the river.

[Ch 2 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But the Muni, becoming again extremely passionate caught hold of Matsyagandhā; when the young woman spoke to Parāśara, in front of her, shuddering:
NEW CORR ENG ──► But the Muni, becoming again extremely passionate caught hold of Matsyagandhā; when the young woman spoke to Parāśara, in front of her, shuddering :--

[Ch 2 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O best of Munis! My body is emitting very bad smell; do you not feel this? You know very well that the sexual intercourse between male and female of similar types brings in happiness and comfort."
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O best of Munis! My body is emitting very bad smell; do you not feel this? You know very well that the sexual intercourse between male and female of similar types brings in happiness and comfort.”

[Ch 2 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus spoken to, Parāśara made Matsyagandhā emit sweet scent like that of musk to a distance of one Yojana (8 miles) and her body exceedingly lovely and beautiful and, becoming extremely passionate, again caught hold of her right hand.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus spoken to, Parāśara made Matsyagandhā emit sweet scent like that of musk to a distance of one Yojana (8 miles) and her body exceedingly lovely and beautiful and, becoming extremely passionate, again caught hold of her right hand.

[Ch 2 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the auspicious Satyavati addressed Parāśara Muni, resolved to enjoy her, thus: “O Muni! Behold! all are looking at us; my father too, is there on the bank of the Yamunā; so, O Muni! wait till night; this beastly act before all is highly unsatisfactory to me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the auspicious Satyavatī addressed Parāśara Muni, resolved to enjoy her, thus :-- “O Muni! Behold! all are looking at us; my father too, is there on the bank of the Yamunā; so, O Muni! wait till night this beastly act before all is highly unsatisfactory to me.

[Ch 2 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The wise persons declare it a great sin to commit sexual intercourse during day; they have ordained night time as the best time of intercourse for men; not the day time; the more so that many person's eyes are in this direction.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The wise persons declare it a great sin to commit sexual intercourse during day they have ordained night time as the best time of intercourse for men not the day time; the more so that many person’s eyes are in this direction.

[Ch 2 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So, O intelligent one! hold on your passion for a while; for the blame pronounced by the public is horrible. Hearing these reasonable words, the liberal-minded Parāśara created, by his influence of Tapasyā, a dense fog so that both the banks of the Yamunā became covered with darkness."
NEW CORR ENG ──► So, O intelligent one! hold on your passion for a while; for the blame pronounced by the public is horrible.” Hearing these reasonable words, the liberal minded Parāśara created, by his influence of Tapasyā, a dense fog so that both the banks of the Yamunā became covered with darkness.

[Ch 2 Verse 24-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Matsyagandhā gently spoke to the Muni: O, best of Dvijas! I am not as yet married; I am now a girl; you will go away after enjoying me; your semen virile is not fruitless; so Brāhman! What will be my fate? If I be pregnant today, what shall I say to my father? and what will be my future state? There is no doubt that, after enjoying me, you will go away; what will I do afterwards; kindly say.'
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Matsyagandhā gently spoke to the Muni :-- “O best of Dvījas! I am not as yet married; I am now a girl; you will go away after enjoying me; your semen virile is not fruitless; so Brāhmaṇ! What will be my fate? If I be pregnant today, what shall I say to my father? and what will be my future state? There is no doubt that, after enjoying me, you will go away; what will I do afterwards; kindly say.”

[Ch 2 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Matsyagandhā, Parāśara said: “O beloved! after you have done my pleasant duty, you will remain a girl as you are now; yet, O timid one! ask from me any boon you like; I will grant it to you.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Matsyagandhā, Parāśara said :-- “O beloved! after you have done my pleasant duty, you will remain a girl as you are now; yet, O timid one! ask from me any boon you like; I will grant it to you.”

[Ch 2 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Satyavati then said: O best Brāhmin, O giver of one's honour! grant me these things: That my father and mother do not know anything of this affair and that my virginity be again as ever the same. Also, let an extraordinarily powerful energetic son be born to me like you; let this nice smell continue to remain always in my body and let my youth and beauty remain afresh and increase ever more."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Satyavatī then said :-- “O best Brāhmaṇ, O giver of one’s honour! grant me these things :-- That my father and mother do not know anything of this affair and that my virginity be again as ever the same. Also let an extraordinarily powerful energetic son be born to me like you; let this nice smell continue to remain always in my body and let my youth and beauty remain afresh and increase ever more.

[Ch 2 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, Parāśara said: “O beautiful one! a son, very pure and holy, will be born to your, from Nārāyaṇa’s part! his name will be famous in the three worlds. O beautiful one! never before my heart was agitated with such passion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, Parāśara said :-- “O beautiful one! a son, very pure and holy, will be born to you, from Nārāyana’s part! his name will be famous in the three worlds. O beautiful one! never before my heart was agitated with such passion.

[Ch 2 Verse 32-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I do not know why I have become so much passionate for you. I saw the unrivalled beauties of Apsarās but I never lost my patience; but seeing you, I have become attracted to you; it must be under the direction of Providence; know it certain that there must be some mysterious cause in this. However Fate is unavoidable to all; otherwise you are full of so bad smell; why shall I be fascinated by your sight? O beautiful one! your son will be famed in the three worlds; will compose the Purānas and will sub-divide the Vedas."
NEW CORR ENG ──► I do not know why I have become so much passionate for you. I saw the unrivalled beauties of Apsarās but I never lost my patience; but seeing you, I have become attracted to you; it must be under the direction of Providence; know it certain that there must be some mysterious cause in this. However Fate is unavoidable to all; otherwise you are full of so bad smell; why shall I be fascinated by your sight? O beautiful one! your son will be famed in the three worlds; will compose the Purāṇas and will sub-divide the Vedas.

[Ch 2 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, Muni Parāśara enjoyed Matsyagandhā who became quite submissive; and after bathing in the Yamunā, quickly went away.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, the Muni Parāśara enjoyed Matsyagandhā, who became quite submissive; and after bathing in the Yamunā, quickly went away.

[Ch 2 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the other hand, the chaste Satyavati, too, became pregnant and immediately gave birth on the island of Yamunā to a son beautiful, as if the Second Kāmadeva, the god of Love, Kāmadeva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the other hand, the chaste Satyavatī, too, became pregnant and immediately gave birth on the island of Yamunā to a son beautiful, as if the Second Kāmadeva, the god of Love, Kāmadeva.

[Ch 2 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No sooner that son, very fiery and highly potent, was born than he devoted his mind to tapasyā and spoke to his own mother Satyavatī thus: "O Mother! now go wherever you like; I will also go to perform tapasyā. O highly fortunate one; No sooner you remember me, I will come to you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► No sooner that son, very fiery and highly potent, was born than he devoted his mind to tapasyā and spoke to his own mother Satyavatī thus :--“O Mother! now go wherever you like; I will also go to perform tapasyā. O highly fortunate one; No sooner you remember me, I will come to you.

[Ch 2 Verse 38-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! where you will have any onerous duty, remember me and I will instantly come to you. Let all good be unto you; now I go. Avoid all cares and live happily." Thus saying, Vyāsa Deva went out. Matysagandhā, too, went back to her father.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! where you will have any onerous duty, remember me and I will instantly come to you. Let all good be unto you; now I go. Avoid all cares and live happily. Thus saying, Vyāsadeva went out. Matsyagandhā, too, went back to his father.

[Ch 2 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Muni Dvaipāyana bathed in every Tīrtha and performed the highest asceticism. Thus Dvaipāyana Vyāsa was born of Parāśara in Satyavati's womb.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Muni Dvaipāyana bathed in every Tīrtha and performed the highest asceticism. Thus Dvaipāyan Vyāsa was born of Parāśara in Satyavatī’s womb.

[Ch 2 Verse 43-45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the advent of Kali Yuga, he adorned the tree of the Vedas with many Sákhās (branches). It is because he expanded the Vedas by many Sákhās, that he is denominated also as Veda Vyāsa; he composed eighteen Purāṇas, Sarinītās, the excellent Mahābhārata, subdivided the Vedas and made his disciples Sumantu Jaimini, Paila, Vaiśampāyana, Asita, Devala and his son Sūka to study them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the advent of Kali Yuga, he adorned the tree of the Vedas with many Śākhās (branches). It is because he expanded the Vedas many Śākhās, that he is denominated also as VedaVyās; he composed eighteen Purāṇas, Samhitas, the excellent Mahābhārat, subdivided the Vedas and made his disciples Sumantu, Jaimini, Paila, Vaisāmpāyan, Asita, Devala and his son Śuka to study them.

[Ch 2 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: “O Munis! Thus I have described to you the birth of the holy Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati and all the causes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- “O Munis! Thus I have described to you the birth of the holy Vyāsa, the son of Satyavatī and all the causes.

[Ch 2 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Munis! Do not allow any doubt enter your mind as regards his birth; for it is always advisable to take up only the good things as far as the lives of great persons and Munis are concerned.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Munis! Do not allow any doubt enter your mind as regards his birth; for it is always advisable to take up only the good things as far as the lives of great persons and Munis are concerned.

[Ch 2 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There must be some extraordinary mysterious cause owing to which Satyavati was born of a fish and she was first united to Parāśara and then to Śāntanu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There must be some extraordinary mysterious cause owing to which Satyavatī was born of a fish, and she was first united to Parāśara and then to Sāntanu.

[Ch 2 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Otherwise how can one account for the fact of the Muni Parāśara being so much agitated by passion and why he would behave like a mean low person in the committal of such a grossly blameable act?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Otherwise how can one account for the fact of the Muni Parāśara being so much agitated by passion and why he would behave like a mean low person in the committal of a a grossly blameable act?

[Ch 2 Verse 50-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now has been spoken the wonderful birth story of Vyāsa Deva together with all incidents, enveloped under the great mystery. If any one hears this holy narrative, he will be freed from all sins and will always be happy. Thus ends the Second Chapter of the Second Book on the birth of Vyāsa Deva in the Mahāpurānam Śrimadevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses. GTA DODD III Šrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now has been spoken the wonderful birth story of Vyāsa Deva together with all incidents, and enveloped under the great mystery. If any man hears this holy narrative, he will be freed from sins and will never fall into difficulties and will always be happy. Thus ends the Second Chapter of the Second Skandha on the birth of Vyāsa Deva in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.
