CHAPTER XIII

On the Dvipas

<table><tr><td></td><td>नारद उवाच</td></tr><tr><td>शिष्ट्रीपप्रमाणं</td><td>च वद सर्वार्थदर्शन ।</td></tr><tr><td>येन विज्ञातमाजेण</td><td>परानन्दमयो भवेत् ॥ १ ॥</td></tr></table>

Nārada said: Thou, the Knower of everything! Describe about the remaining Dvipas, knowing which we will be highly delighted.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

कुरशीपस्य परितो भूतोद्वारणं महत् ।

ततो बहि: क्रीचढ़ीपो द्विगुण: स्यात्स्यमानतः ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyaṇa spoke thus: The very vast Ghrta Sāgara (the ocean of clarified butter) is encircling the Kuśa Dvipa. Next to it is the Krauñca Dvipa. It is twice as large as Kuśa.

क्षीरोहेनावुतो भाति यस्मिन्त्रीभाएत्रिति च ।

नामनिर्वर्कर्क: सोर्धं द्वीपस्य परिवर्ते ॥ 3 ॥

योसी ग्रुल्य शल्पा च भिवकुक्षिः: पुरुषपवत् ।

क्षीरोदनास्त्रियमानो वर्णेच न रक्षितः ॥ 4 ॥

The Kṣīra Sāgara (the ocean of milk) is surrounding this Dvipa. The Krauñca mountain is standing here. The name of this Dvipa is derived from this mountain. In days gone by, the highly intelligent Kārtikeya burst this mountain by his own prowess. This Dvipa is washed by the Kṣīra Sāgara; and Varuna is its Regent.

भृतपृष्ठो नाम यस्य विभागित किल नायकः ।

प्रियतातमतः श्रीमान्यवंतीकनमस्कृतः ॥ ५ ॥

The son of Priyavrata, Ghtrapṣṭha, respected by all and whose prosperity knows no end, is the Lord of this Dvipa. He divided this Dvipa into the seven parts and distributed them to his sons and named the Varṣas after the names of his sons.

स्वतीये तु विभन्यैव सतधा सतालजान्दौ ।

पुरनामसु वर्षेषु वर्षान्यतिवेशन् ॥ 6 ॥

स्वयं भगवतस्तस्य शरणं संगगाम है ।

आमो मधुहडीय नेयपुः सुधामकः ॥ 7 ॥

भाजिडो लोहिताण्डि वन्यसर्वितिति च ।

नगा नद्धि स्पतैव विल्याता भृति सर्वतः ॥ 8 ॥

He made his sons the rulers of those places and he himself took the refuge of the Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa. The names of the seven Varṣas are respectively: Āma, Madhuruha, Meghaprṣṭha, Sudhāmaka, Bhājisṭha, and Vanaspati. O Nārada! The seven mountains and the rivers there are very celebrated throughout the worlds.

शुक्लो वै वर्ध्यानघ अंपोजशोधर्भाः ।

नन्द्रश नन्द्रन: सर्वती भग्र इति कॉर्पिता: ॥ 9 ॥

अभया अमृतौभाचार्यका तीर्थवेत्तित च ।

वृत्तिक्तपवर्ती शुक्ता पवित्रवतिक्ता तथा ॥ 10 ॥

The names of the mountains are: Šukla, Vardhamāna, Bhojana, Upavarhaṇa, Nanda, Nandana, and Sarvatobhadra. The names of the rivers are: Abhayā, Amrtaughā, Āryakā, Tirthavatī, Vrttirūpavati, Šuklā, and Pavitravatikā.

एतातामुदकं पुण्यं चातुर्वर्णेय नीयते ।

पुरुषत्रष्णी तद्वर्विणाण्डस्य देवकः ॥ १ १  ॥

एते चतुर्वर्णिताः पुरुषा निवसन्ति हि ।

तत्राया: पुरुषा आपायंय देवेमपां पतिम् ॥ १ २ ॥

The inhabitants there drink the highly pure water of these rivers. The people there are divided into four colours Puruṣa, Ṣaṣba, Dravinā, and Vedaka and they worship the Bhagavān Varuṇa, of the form of water.

युर्जनांर्जितान यकस्या यजेते विधधाक्रियाः ।

आपः पुरुभवीर्यां स्व पुननीर्धभूंवः स्वरः ॥ 13 ॥

ता नः पुनीतामीवटीः सूशतामात्मानं भुवः ।

इति मन्त्रजपते च स्वुवित्त विविधः सर्वेः ॥ 14 ॥

Then they become very discriminative, and, with great devotion, and holding full within their folded palms the water, repeat the following mantra: 'O Water! Thou art the essence Virya of the Person Bhagavān and Thou sanctifiest the Bhūrloka, Bhuvarloka, and Svarloka.

एवं परस्ततक्षीरोद्वरितश्रीवेधरिक्षितः ।

ड्रार्थिणलक्षसंख्याकोजतायामासितः ॥ 15 ॥

स्वामनेच च द्वीपोर्धं द्वीमणघडोदकंच च ।

गकाडीपी विकिष्ठोर्ध यंस्यऊको महोहः ॥ 16 ॥

Thou destroyest the sins of all. We all are touching it; purify our bodies'. After finishing their mantrams, they sing various hymns to Varuna. Next to the Kṣirode Sāgara, is the Śaka Dvipa, thirty two lakh Yojanas wide, surrounded by the Dadhi Sāgara (the ocean of curds), of similar dimensions. Here the most excellent tree named the Śaka tree exists.

स्वश्रेत्रव्यदोर्यस्य कारणं स हि नारद ।

प्रियतो5धिपत्यस्तय मेधातिधिरिति स्मृतः ॥ 17 ॥

Book VIII Chapter XIII

विभज्य सप्त वर्षिणि पुत्रनामानि तेषु च ।

सप्त पुराजिरजान-स्थाय्य स्वयं योगगति नतः ॥ 18 ॥

O Nārada! The Dvīpa is named so after the tree. Medhātithi, the son of Priyavrata is the Lord of this Dvipa. He divided this land into the seven Varsas and distributed each to his seven sons respectively; and ultimately he took refuge to the path of Yoga.

पुरोजयो मनःपूर्वंजरो5थ पव्यमानकः ।

धूपानीकाश्ररेको बहुरूपो5थ विश्धयूक् ॥ 19 ॥

मयाद्विगाय: सप्त नहा: सप्तैव कीर्तिता: ।

ईशना ऊकर्भगो5थ बलभ्यः शतकैसरः ॥ 20 ॥

सहस्वरोतको देवेपालो5प्यन्ते महाशन: ।

एते5प्रय: सप्त चोक्ता: सरिशमानि सप्त च ॥ 21 ॥

The names of the seven Varsas are Purojava, Manojava, Pavamānaka, Dhūmrānika, Citrarepha, Bahurūpa, and Viśvadhṛk. In these Varsa there are seven mountains, one in each Varsa, as forming their boundaries; and there seven rivers also. The names of the mountains are: Íśana, Üruśrīnga, Valabhadra, Śata Kesara, Sahasra srotaka, Devapāla, and Mahāsana; the names of the rivers are:

अनया प्रथमायुर्दं उभयस्यृष्टित्व च ।

अपराजिता पंचपदी सहस्वभुतित्व च ॥ 22 ॥

तते निद्वपृतेशोत्ता: सरा नदो घटोज्जलत: ।

तद्रार्यपुरुषः सर्वे सत्यवतकृतुतते ॥ 23 ॥

दान्त्रान्तुताते च चतुर्वर्णी उदीरिताः ।

भगवर्त प्राणावयुं प्राणायामेन संयुतः ॥ 24 ॥

Anaghā, Āyurdā, Ubhayasprṣti, Aparājjitā, Paīcapadī, and Sahasraśruti and Nijadhṛti. These seven rivers are all very big and resplendent with lustre. The people are divided into four classes: Varṣas, Satyavrata, Kratuvrata, Dānavrata, and Anuvrata. They all take the Prānāyāma exercise and thereby bring the Rajas, and Tamo Gunas under their subjection and they worship Hari, of the nature of Prāna Vāyu, Higher than the Highest.

यजिति निर्भूतजलसमय: परमं हरिम् ।

अन्तः प्रविष्य भूतानि ये विषधात्यमेकृतिधः ॥ 25 ॥

अन्त्यामीधीर साक्षात्यानु नो यद्धो इदम् ।

परस्ताधिमपडोदारान्तननु बदुवितस्तः ॥ 26 ॥

Their mantra is this: 'He has entered into all the living beings and no urishes them by the Prāṇa and other faculties; He is the Internal Ruler of all and the Supreme Controller; this Universe is under His control; let Him protect and nourish us.

पुष्कर्यैपनामारयं शकाक्रीपहिरुगनः ।

स्वसमानेन स्वादूदकेनारयं परिवेष्टितः ॥ 27 ॥

यत्रासते पुष्करं ध्वाजदनिच्छुडानिभानि च ।

पत्राणि विश्वरानीरू स्वर्णपत्रायतुतम् ॥ 28 ॥

O Nārada! Next to this Dadhi Sāgara is Puṣkara Dvīpa; it is twice as large as Śāka Dvīpa. It is surrounded by the Dudha Sāgara (the ocean of milk) all twice as large. The leaves of Puṣkara tree that shines in the Puṣkara Dvīpa, are fiery like golden flames; they are as clean and pure.

श्रीमद्रगवतशेद्यमासनं परमेछिनः ।

कलितं लोकानुकणा सर्वलोकास्युस्यां ॥ 29 ॥

तद्वीप एक एवायं मानसोतरनामकः ।

अर्वाचीनपराचीनवर्षयोतद्धारिणीर: ॥ 30 ॥

Crores and crores of leaves, golden in colour ornament this Tree. Vāsudeva, the Guru of all the Lokas, has created this Puṣkara Dvīpa as the seat of Parameṣṭhī Brahmā, possessed of six extraordinary powers, for the purpose of creation. There is one mountain in this Dvīpa; it is divided into two parts, named Arvācina and Parācina.

उच्छायायामयो: संख्यास्युयोजनसंगिति ।

यत्र दिवृषु च चत्वारि चतसरुषु पुर्णीह ॥ 31 ॥

इज्ञादिलोकपालानां यदुपर्यर्किनिगमः ।

मेरे प्रदक्षिणीकुर्वेमानु: पर्यैति यत्र हि ॥ 32 ॥

These form the boundaries of the two Varsas. The mountain is one Ayuta Yojana high and one Ayuta Yojana wide. There are four cities on the four sides. Indra and the three other Lokapālas are the lords of these cities. The Sun God comes out from their top and circumambulating Meru, goes there again.

संवस्नात्मकं चक्रं देवाहोराजते भ्रमन् ।

प्रियन्तो5तीयो वीतिहोत्रः स्वात्मजकद्वम् ॥ 33 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

वर्षिद्धे परिस्थाय वर्षनामधरं क्रमात ।

सभो धातक्रिक्षेल तनतृष्पेती उभी ॥ 34 ॥

The whole year is his Cakram, circle of circuit; His path is Uttarāyanam and Daksināyanam. Vithotra, the son of Priyavrata is the lord of this island. He distributed the two Varsas amongst his two sons, Ramana and Dhātaki. They rule over the two Varsas named also after them.

कृताः स्वयं पूर्वबवद्धारवद्धारितकतयाः ।

तद्रवैपुरुषा ब्रह्मरिणं परमेश्वम् ॥ 35 ॥

सकर्मकेन्य योगेन वयर्नित परिशीलिताः ।

यत्तकर्मभयं लिंगं ब्रह्मलिङ्गे जनोउचेयते ॥ 36 ॥

एकतममुद्य शान्तं तस्मै वभावते नमः ।

इति श्रीमदैभीणावते महापुराणोउद्यमतकन्धे

यग्वेसशो3याय: 11 13 11

Like the inhabitants of the above Varsas, the people also get power of themselves and worship devotedly the God seated on the lotus and follow such path of the Yoga as leads them to the Brahma Sālokya, etc. The mantra runs thus: 'We bow down to that One God, without a Second, of the nature of Peace, Who is the Fruit of all the Karmas, Who is the seat of illumination of Brahmā, Who is established in Unity, and Who is worshipped by all the Lokas.

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description of the remaining Dvipas in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

