[Ch 5 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: The thousand-eyed Indra, hearing this, again asked Brūṣapati that he would make preparations for war against Mahisāsura.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- The thousand eyed Indra, hearing this, again asked to Brihaspati that he would make preparations for war against Mahiṣāsura.

[Ch 5 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Without effort kingdoms are not attained; no nor happiness, nor fame, nor anything; those who are weak, they exol effortlessness; but the powerful never praise that.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Without effort kingdoms are not attained; no - nor happiness, nor fame, nor anything; those who are weak, they extol effortlessness; but the powerful never praise that.

[Ch 5 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Knowledge is the ornament of the ascetics and contentment is the ornament of the Brāhmanas; but those who desire lordship over powers, effort and prowess to destroy one's enemies are their excellent ornaments.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Knowledge is the ornament of the ascetics and contentment is the ornament of the Brāhmaṇas; but those who desire lordship over powers, effort and prowess to destroy one’s enemies are their excellent ornaments.

[Ch 5 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! I will kill this Mahisāsura by my heroism as I had, of old, destroyed Vṛtta, Namuci and Balāsura.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! I will kill this Mahiṣāsura by my heroism as I had, of old, destroyed Vritra, Namuchi and Balāsura.

[Ch 5 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You are the Deva Guru; therefore you and my thunderbolt are my strength. The immortal Hari and Hara also will help me in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You are the Deva Guru; therefore you and my thunderbolt are my strength. The immortal Hari and Hara also will help me in this.

[Ch 5 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Guru! Preserver of my honour and prestige! Now recite the mantras calculated to remove all the obstacles towards my victory. I, too, am making preparations and raising up my own forces to wage up war against that Dānava Mahiṣa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Guru! Preserver of my honour and prestige! Now recite the mantras calculated to remove all the obstacles towards my victory. I, too, am making preparations and raising up my own forces to wage up war against that Dānava Mahiṣa.

[Ch 5 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: On hearing Indra's words, Brāhspati smiled and said: "O Lord of the Devas! I see you are bent on fight. I will neither stimulate you to fight nor shall I make you desist from your the purpose. The issue is doubtful.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- On hearing Indra’s words, Brihaspati smiled and said “O Lord of the Devas! I see you are bent on fight. I will neither stimulate you to fight nor shall I make you desist from the purpose. The issue is doubtful.

[Ch 5 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There may be defeat or there may be victory. O Lord of Śacī! You are not to blame at all in this matter; what is written in the Book of Fate will come to pass, be it victory or defeat.
NEW CORR ENG ──► there may be victory. O Lord of Śacī! You are not to blame at all in this matter; what is written in the Book of Fate will come to pass, be it victory or defeat.

[Ch 5 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I am not aware of the future in this respect. O Child! You know already what an amount of suffering I had to endure in times gone by when my wife had been stolen.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I am not aware of the future in this respect. O Child! You know already what an amount of suffering I had to endure in times gone by when my wife had been stolen.

[Ch 5 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Destroyer of the enemies! My wife had been stolen by Moon who turned out my enemy; living in my stage of an householder, I was put to all sort of miseries, deprived of all my happiness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Destroyer of the enemies! My wife had been stolen by Moon who turned out my enemy; living in my stage of an householder I was put to all sort of miseries, deprived of all my happiness.

[Ch 5 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the Suras! I am renowned in all the worlds as a man of much wisdom and intelligence. Where then was my intelligence, when Moon carried away, perforce, my wife.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the Suras! I am renowned in all the worlds as a man of much wisdom and intelligence. Where then was my intelligence, when Moon carried away, perforce, my wife.

[Ch 5 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the Suras! To my mind, success or failure depends entirely on destiny; yet intelligent ones should always resort to efforts and be energetic.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the Suras! To my mind, the success or failure depends entirely on destiny; yet intelligent ones should always resort to efforts and be energetic.

[Ch 5 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! On hearing the words of Brhaṣpati, pregnant with truth, Indra went with him to Brahmā, took his refuge and saluting him said: O Grand Sire! The Dānavas are collecting a big army, and wants to conquer and take possession of the Heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! On hearing the words of Brihaspati, pregnant with truth, Indra went with him to Brahmā, took his refuge and saluting him said :-- O Grand Sire! The Dānava is collecting a big army, and wants to conquer and take possession of the Heavens.

[Ch 5 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► All the other Dānavas have enrolled themselves in the list of his army; they are eager to fight and they are all very powerful and skilled in arts of warfare.
NEW CORR ENG ──► All the other Dānavas have enrolled themselves in the list of his army; they are eager to fight and they are all very powerful and skilled in arts of warfare.

[Ch 5 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I am therefore very afraid and have come to you. You know everything; please help me in this matter.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I am therefore very afraid and have come to you. You know everything; please help me in this matter.

[Ch 5 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā said: We all will go today to the Mount Kailāsa and take Śaṅkara with us and go to Viṣṇu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā said :-- We all will go today to the Mount Kailāśa and take Śaṅkara with us and go to Viṣṇu.

[Ch 5 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There all the Devas, assembled, will hold a council and consider the time and place, when it will be settled whether it is proper or not to fight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There all the Devas, assembled, will hold a council and consider the time and place, when it will be settled whether it is proper or not to fight.

[Ch 5 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► For one who dares to do any act without considering one's strength and without any judgment, certainly courts his own downfall.
NEW CORR ENG ──► For one who dares to do any act without considering one’s strength and without any judgment, certainly courts his own downfall.

[Ch 5 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing this, Indra with the other Lokāpalas and Devas, headed by Brahmā, went to Kailāśa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing this, Indra with the other Lokāpalas and Devas, headed by Brahmā, went to Kailāśā.

[Ch 5 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then they came to Śaṅkara and sang vedic hymns to him. Maheśvara became very much pleased and they taking Him went to Vaikuntha, the abode of Viṣṇu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then they came to Śaṅkara and sang vedic hymns to him. Maheśvara became very much pleased and they taking Him went to Vaikunṭha, the abode of Viṣṇu.

[Ch 5 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra saluted Viṣṇu and sang hymns to him, and told about his errand thus: “Mahīṣa has become very haughty on account of the favour bestowed on him and therefore we are very afraid (and therefore ask your help to relieve us from this danger).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra saluted Viṣṇu and sang hymns to him, and told him about his errand thus :-- “Mahiṣa has become very haughty on account of the favour bestowed on him and therefore we are very afraid (and therefore ask your help to relieve us from this danger).”

[Ch 5 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Viṣṇu, then, hearing the cause of fear, told them: "We all will fight and kill that Demon."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viṣṇu, then, hearing the cause of fear, told them :-- “We all will fight and kill that Demon.”

[Ch 5 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! Thus settling the questions, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Hari and Indra and the other Devas riding on their own Vāhanas (means of conveyance) respectively dispersed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :--O king! Thus settling the question, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Hari and Indra and the other Devas riding on their own Vāhanas (means of conveyance) respectively dispersed.

[Ch 5 Verse 26-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► While Brahmā on his vehicle Swan, Viṣṇu on his Garuda, Śaṅkara on his Bull, Indra on his elephant Airāvata, Kārtika on his peacock, and Yama, the god of death on his Vāhana, the Buffalo, were on the point of going with the other Deva forces, the army of the Dānava Mahisa met them on their way, all fully equipped with arms and weapons. A dreadful fight then ensued between the Devas and the Dānavas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► While Brahmā on his vehicle Swan, Viṣṇu on his Garuḍa, Śaṅkara on his Bull, Indra on his elephant Airāvata, Kārtika on his peacock, and Yama, the god of death on his Vāhana, the Buffalo, were on the point of going with the other Deva forces, the army of the Dānava Mahiṣa met them on their way, all fully equipped with arms and weapons. A dreadful fight then ensued between the Devas and the Dānavas.

[Ch 5 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Arrowas, axes, Prāsas, Mūsalas (clubs), Paraśus (pick axes), Gadās (clubs), Pattisās, Sūlas (tridents), Cakras (discus) Śakti (weapons), Tomaras, Mudgaras, Bhindipālas, Lāngalas, and various other deadly weapons appeared on the scene with which they fought against one another.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Arrows, axes, Prāsas, Muṣalas (clubs), Paraśus (pick axes), Gadās (clubs), Pattiśas, Śūlas (tridents), cakras (discus) Śakti (weapons), Tomaras, Mudgaras, Bhindipālas, Lāṅgalas, and various other deadly weapons appeared on the scenes with which they fought against one another.

[Ch 5 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Commander-in-Chief of Mahisa, the very powerful Ciksura, shot five sharp arrows at Indra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Commander-in-Chief of Mahiṣa, the very powerful Cikṣura, shot five sharp arrows at Indra.

[Ch 5 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The ever-ready and light-handed Indra, too, with his arrows cut off all of them and struck at his heart heavily with his Ardachandra (half moon) arrow.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The ever-ready and light-handed Indra too, with his arrows cut off all of them and struck at his heart heavily with his Ardhacandra (half moon) arrow.

[Ch 5 Verse 33-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Commander-in-Chief, struck by this arrow fell senseless on the back of his elephant. Indra, then struck the trunk of the elephant with his Vajra (thunderbolt); the elephant then severely struck with the Vajra fled away into the Dānava's forces, The Lord of the Dānavas seeing this, got very angry and addressed the general Vidāla "O Hero! You are very powerful; go then and kill first that haughty Indra; then kill Varuna and other Devas and come back to me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Commander-in-Chief, struck by this arrow fell senseless on the back of his elephant. Indra, then struck the trunk of the elephant with his Vajra (thunderbolt); the elephant then severely struck with the Vajra fled away into the Dānava’s forces. The Lord of the Dānavas seeing this, got very angry and addressed the general Vidāla “O Hero! You are very powerful; go then and kill first that haughty Indra; then kill Varuṇa and other Devas and come back to me.”

[Ch 5 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: The very powerful Vidāla, on receiving the order came up at once to Indra, mounted on a very furious elephant.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- The very powerful Asura Viḍāla, on receiving the order came up at once to Indra, mounted on a very furious elephant.

[Ch 5 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing him coming, Vāsava shot at him angrily with very terrible and most powerful arrows that looked like deadly snakes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing him coming, Vāsava shot at him angrily with very terrible and most powerful arrows that looked like deadly snakes.

[Ch 5 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But the Demon, too, cut off those arrows at once with his excellent arrows and quickly shot at Vāsava fifty arrows, sharpened on stones.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But the Demon, too, out off those arrows at once with his excellent arrows and quickly shot at Vāsava fifty arrows, sharpened on stones.

[Ch 5 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra cut off all those and, being infuriated, shot again sharp deadly serpent like arrows at him, and cutting off again all his enemies' arrows by arrows discharged from his bow, struck the elephant's trunk with his Gadā (club).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra cut off all those and, being infuriated, shot again sharp deadly serpent-like arrows at him, and cutting off again all his enemieś arrows by arrows discharged from his bow, struck the elephant’s trunk with his Gadā (club).

[Ch 5 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The elephant, being thus struck on his head, cried aloud in a distressed tone and being afraid turned back, thus killing the Dānava forces as he fled away.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The elephant, being thus struck on his head, cried aloud in a distressed tone and being afraid turned back, thus killing the Dānava forces as he fled away.

[Ch 5 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► General Vidāla, seeing the elephant fleeing away from the battlefield, mounted on a beautiful chariot and instantly appeared before the Devas to fight with them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► general Viḍāla, seeing the elephant fleeing away from the battle-field, mounted on a beautiful chariot and instantly appeared before the Devas to fight with them.

[Ch 5 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the Dānava coming again on a chariot, Indra shot at him sharp arrows after arrows like venomous snakes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the Dānava coming again on a chariot, Indra shot at him sharp arrows after arrows like venomous snakes.

[Ch 5 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The powerful Dānava, too, infuriated hurled at terrible arrows; then a sharp conflict ensued between Vāsava and the Dānava.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The powerful Dānava, too, infuriated hurled at him terrible arrows; then a sharp conflict ensued between Vāsava and the Dānava.

[Ch 5 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Finding the Dānava powerful, Vāsava's senses were confounded with anger; he then took his son Jayanta before him and began to fight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Finding the Dānava powerful, Vāsava’s senses were confounded with anger; he then took his son Jayanta before him and began to fight.

[Ch 5 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Jayanta stretched his bow tight and shot at the breast of the Dānava swollen with pride, five sharp arrows with his full strength. Thus shot at by the network of arrows with his full strength.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Jayanta stretched his bow tight and shot at the breast of the Dānava swelled with pride, five sharp arrows with his full strength. Thus shot at by the network of

[Ch 5 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus shot at by the network of arrows, the Dānava fell unconscious on the chariot; the charioteer then fled away with his chariot from the battle-field.
NEW CORR ENG ──► arrows, the Dānava fell unconscious on the chariot; the charioteer then fled away with his chariot from the battle-field.

[Ch 5 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus on the Dānava Vidāla becoming unconscious and being taken away from the field, the Dundubhīs (drums) of the Devas were resounded and great aclamations of “Victory to the Devas” were heard.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus on the Dānava Viḍāla becoming unconscious and being taken away from the field, the Dunduvis (drums) of the Devas were resounded and great acclamations of “Victory to the Devas” were heard.

[Ch 5 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas were very glad and sounded hymns before Indra; the Gandharvas began to sing and the Apsarās began to dance.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas were very glad and sounded hymns before Indra; the Gandarbhas began to sing and the Apsarās began to dance.

[Ch 5 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Hearing the loud acclamations of victory to the Devas, Mahiṣa became very angry and ordered the Dānava Tāmra, the destroyer of enemy's pride, to go to the battle-field.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Hearing the loud acclamations of victory to the Devas, Mahiṣa became very angry and ordered the Dānava Tāmra, the destroyer of enemy’s pride, to go to the battle-field.

[Ch 5 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Tāmra appeared in the battle, and, coming face to face with many Deva warriors, hurled on them showers of arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Tāmra appeared in the battle, and, coming face to face with many Deva warriors, hurled on them showers of arrows.

[Ch 5 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Varuna appeared with his Pāśa weapon and Yama, mounted on his buffaio, appeared with his Dāndā (staff).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Varuṇa appeared with his Pāśa weapon and Yama, mounted on his buffalo,

[Ch 5 Verse 53-55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Yama raising his Dānḍa with his hands struck at Tāmra; but the powerful Tāmra, though severely struck, was not at all moved and remained firm in his place in the field. On the other hand, Tāmra, violently drawing his bow, hurled a mass of sharp arrows at Indra and the other Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Yama raising his Daṇḍa with his hands struck at Tāmra; but the powerful Tāmra, though severely struck, was not at all moved and remained firm in his place in the field. On the other hand Tāmra, violently drawing his bow, hurled a mass of sharp arrows at Indra and the other Devas.

[Ch 5 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas got angry and shot at the Dānavas multitudes of divine arrows sharpened on stone, and frequently called aloud “Wait, wait.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas got angry and shot at the Dānava multitudes of divine arrows sharpened on stone, and frequently called aloud “Wait, wait.”

[Ch 5 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Dānava Tāmra thus shot at by the arrows of the Devas, fell unconscious in the battle-field; the Dānava forces got afraid and a cry of universal consternation and distress arose. Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the defeat of the Dānava forces of Mahisa in the Mahāpurānam Śrimadlevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Dānava Tāmra thus shot at by the arrows of the Devas, fell unconscious in the battle-field; the Dānava forces got afraid and a cry of universal consternation and distress arose. Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Fifth Skandha on the defeat of the Dānava forces of Mahiṣa in the Māhāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.
