CHAPTER V

On the Defeat of the Dānava Forces of Mahisā

व्यास उवाच

इति श्रुत्वा सहसाधः पुनराह बृह्यस्तिन् ।

युद्धोर्णं करिष्यामि ह्यानेनिशनाय वे ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: The thousand-eyed Indra, hearing this, again asked Brūṣapati that he would make preparations for war against Mahisāsura.

नोद्योन विना राज्यं न सुखं न च वै यशः ।

निरुद्धायं न शंसिति कातता न च सोहायः ॥ 2 ॥

Without effort kingdoms are not attained; no nor happiness, nor fame, nor anything; those who are weak, they exol effortlessness; but the powerful never praise that.

यतीनां भृपणं ज्ञानं सन्तोषो हि ह्विजनमान्।

उद्यम: श्रत्रुकनं भूषणं भूतिमच्छताम ॥ ३ ॥

Knowledge is the ornament of the ascetics and contentment is the ornament of the Brāhmanas; but those who desire lordship over powers, effort and prowess to destroy one's enemies are their excellent ornaments.

उद्यमेन हतल्याष्ट्री नपुचिबल एव च ।

तर्वेनं निर्हिन्यापि मदिषं नुप्सितस्म ॥ 4 ॥

O Muni! I will kill this Mahisāsura by my heroism as I had, of old, destroyed Vṛtta, Namuci and Balāsura.

वलं देवगुरुस्तं पे घड़ामायुधतुमम् ।

सहायस्तु हरितूनं तथोपापतित्वयः ॥ 5 ॥

You are the Deva Guru; therefore you and my thunderbolt are my strength. The immortal Hari and Hara also will help me in this.

रक्षोटानयट मे साधो करोग्यदा समुदायम् ।

स्वरैन्यार्थिनियं च महिंत्र प्रति मानद ॥ 6 ॥

O Guru! Preserver of my honour and prestige! Now recite the mantras calculated to remove all

the obstacles towards my victory. I, too, am making preparations and raising up my own forces to wage up war against that Dānava Mahiṣa.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तो देवराजेन वायस्यतिकावाच ह ।

सुरेन्द्रं युद्धसरांक सिमतपूर्वं वचलसाद ॥ ७ ॥

Vyāsa said: On hearing Indra's words, Brāhspati smiled and said: "O Lord of the Devas! I see you are bent on fight. I will neither stimulate you to fight nor shall I make you desist from your the purpose. The issue is doubtful.

ब्रह्मसतिकावच

प्रेयामि न चाहं त्वां न च निवर्तेयामदम् ।

सन्दिष्योज जये कामं युध्यतश्र पाजाये ॥ 8 ॥

There may be defeat or there may be victory. O Lord of Śacī! You are not to blame at all in this matter; what is written in the Book of Fate will come to pass, be it victory or defeat.

न तेउन दूषणं किकड्ज्द्वितन्त्ये जशीयते ।

सुखं वा यदि वा दुःखं द्विक्तं च भविष्यति ॥ 9 ॥

I am not aware of the future in this respect. O Child! You know already what an amount of suffering I had to endure in times gone by when my wife had been stolen.

न मया व्यस्तिर्ज्ञां भावि दुःखं सुखं तथा ।

यद्वायहिरणे प्राप्तं पुगा सामव वेसि सि ॥ १० ॥

O Destroyer of the enemies! My wife had been stolen by Moon who turned out my enemy; living in my stage of an householder, I was put to all sort of miseries, deprived of all my happiness.

शशिना में हता भार्यों निश्चेगामिकर्जन ।

स्वाभ्रमश्चेन सम्याप्त दुःखं सर्वसुखापहम् ॥ 11 ॥


ब्रुद्धिमान्सर्वलोकेषु विवितोर्जे सुराधिप ।

क्व मे गता तता बुद्धिदंदा भार्यां हता कवतात ॥ 12 ॥

O Lord of the Suras! I am renowned in all the worlds as a man of much wisdom and intelligence. Where then was my intelligence, when Moon carried away, perforce, my wife.

तमायुपायः कत्नोये बुद्धिमद्धिः सदा सरे: ।

कार्यसिद्धिः सदा नूनं देवधीनीय सुरापीध ॥ 13 ॥

O Lord of the Suras! To my mind, success or failure depends entirely on destiny; yet intelligent ones should always resort to efforts and be energetic.

3 यास उवाच

तच्छुवा वचनं सत्यं गुरोः सार्थि श्रवीपितः ।

ब्रहाणां शरणं पत्या नत्वा वचनमब्रवीत् ॥ 14 ॥

विनामहं सुगाध्यक्ष दैत्यो महिषर्शकाः ।

ग्रहीतुकामाः स्वर्ग में वक्तोषांगं करोलत्यम् ॥ 15 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! On hearing the words of Brhaṣpati, pregnant with truth, Indra went with him to Brahmā, took his refuge and saluting him said: O Grand Sire! The Dānavas are collecting a big army, and wants to conquer and take possession of the Heavens.

अन्ये च तयावा: सर्वे तत्सैन्यं समुपस्थिता: ।

योत्पुकामा महावीधीः सर्वे युद्धविशारादः ॥ 16 ॥

All the other Dānavas have enrolled themselves in the list of his army; they are eager to fight and they are all very powerful and skilled in arts of warfare.

तेनाहं घीतभीतोउभि्य तलसकाशमिहारतः ।

सर्वज्ञोसि महाप्रात साहाययं कत्नुमहिंसि ॥ 17 ॥

I am therefore very afraid and have come to you. You know everything; please help me in this matter.

ब्रहोवाच

गच्छामः सर्वे एवाहि केलासं स्विता वयम् ।

शूक्तं पुस्तः कृत्वा विष्णुं च बलिनां वयम् ॥ 18 ॥

Brahmā said: We all will go today to the Mount Kailāsa and take Śaṅkara with us and go to Viṣṇu.

ततो युद्ध प्रकर्त्व्य सर्वैः सुरगणैः सह ।

मिलिता मन्यमाधाय देशं काला विधित्य च ॥ १९ ॥

There all the Devas, assembled, will hold a council and consider the time and place, when it will be settled whether it is proper or not to fight.

बलाबलमवित्रतं विवेकमपहाय च ।

साहसं तु प्रकृत्यागी नरः पतनमूच्छिति ॥ 20 ॥

For one who dares to do any act without considering one's strength and without any judgment, certainly courts his own downfall.

व्यास उवाच

तश्रिण्य सहस्वाक्ष: कैलासं निर्जीगाम है ।

ब्रहाणं पुतः कृत्वा लोकपालसमविन्तः ॥ 21 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing this, Indra with the other Lokāpalas and Devas, headed by Brahmā, went to Kailāśa.

तृषाव शड़हं नरा वेदन-नैमेहंधम् ।

प्रसर्च पत: कृत्वा यद्यै विद्युपुरं प्रति ॥ 22 ॥

Then they came to Śaṅkara and sang vedic hymns to him. Maheśvara became very much pleased and they taking Him went to Vaikuntha, the abode of Viṣṇu.

स्तुत्वा तं देवदेवेशं कार्य प्रोवाच चामनः ।

महिषात्मद्धं चोर्धं वरदानमदोढ़तान् ॥ 23 ॥

Indra saluted Viṣṇu and sang hymns to him, and told about his errand thus: “Mahīṣa has become very haughty on account of the favour bestowed on him and therefore we are very afraid (and therefore ask your help to relieve us from this danger).

तत्करणं घयं तस्य विज्युद्वितानुवाच ह ।

क्रतिथायो वयं युद्ध हनिष्यामस्तु दुर्जनम् ॥ 24 ॥

Viṣṇu, then, hearing the cause of fear, told them: "We all will fight and kill that Demon."

व्यास उवाच

इति ते निशयं कृत्वा ब्रह्धिष्युहीक्षा: ।

स्वानि स्वानि समासष्ठ वाहतानिय क्युः सुः ॥ 25 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Thus settling the questions, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Hari and Indra and the other

Book V Chapter V

Devas riding on their own Vāhanas (means of conveyance) respectively dispersed.

बहा हंससमाको विष्णुगंडवहानः ।

गंकते वृषभाक्तो वृत्रहा गरसंश्रितः ॥ 26 ॥

मयूरवाहनः क्वन्तो यमो महिषवाहनः ।

कृत्वा सैन्यसमायोगं घावते निर्वयुः सुरा: ॥ 27 ॥

तादहैर्यवलं प्राप्तं चूनं महिष्यपालिनम् ।

ततभूतभूतनं युद्धे देवदानवसैन्ययो: ॥ 28 ॥

While Brahmā on his vehicle Swan, Viṣṇu on his Garuda, Śaṅkara on his Bull, Indra on his elephant Airāvata, Kārtika on his peacock, and Yama, the god of death on his Vāhana, the Buffalo, were on the point of going with the other Deva forces, the army of the Dānava Mahisa met them on their way, all fully equipped with arms and weapons. A dreadful fight then ensued between the Devas and the Dānavas.

वागी: खड़रीत्या प्रासैमुलेष्ते पघधोः।

गदाधि: पद्ट्रीश: गृत्योक्षेक्षे शक्तितापे: ॥ 29 ॥

मुढैर्धिन्यपालैंह छटीक्षातिदाकणी: ।

अन्यैक्षि विविधरखैर्निजनुले पस्पमम् ॥ 30 ॥

Arrowas, axes, Prāsas, Mūsalas (clubs), Paraśus (pick axes), Gadās (clubs), Pattisās, Sūlas (tridents), Cakras (discus) Śakti (weapons), Tomaras, Mudgaras, Bhindipālas, Lāngalas, and various other deadly weapons appeared on the scene with which they fought against one another.

सेनानीश्रिक्षुरतस्य गजार्को महावलः ।

मथवन्तं पशुधभसैः सायकैः समताड्यत् ॥ 31 ॥

The Commander-in-Chief of Mahisa, the very powerful Ciksura, shot five sharp arrows at Indra.

तृग्याड़ी पतिछला वाणीबाणांस्वात्रिलतः ।

हदये चाधधन्नेण ताउवामास ते कृती ॥ 32 ॥

The ever-ready and light-handed Indra, too, with his arrows cut off all of them and struck at his heart heavily with his Ardachandra (half moon) arrow.

बाणाहतसु सेनानीः प्राण मूच्छा गजोपये ।

वर्णं वज्ञायनेस स ज्ञान करे ततः ॥ 33 ॥

तद्ध्रापिछातो नागो भवनः सैन्यं जगाम ह ।

दृष्ट्वा ते दैव्यगद् कुब्दो विज्ञालास्मधावर्जीत् ॥ 34 ॥

गच्छ वीर महावाहो जहाँई मदार्यादिनम् ।

वरणाधीर्यान्दोबान्द्वासप्राव्यमान्तिकम् ॥ 35 ॥

The Commander-in-Chief, struck by this arrow fell senseless on the back of his elephant. Indra, then struck the trunk of the elephant with his Vajra (thunderbolt); the elephant then severely struck with the Vajra fled away into the Dānava's forces, The Lord of the Dānavas seeing this, got very angry and addressed the general Vidāla "O Hero! You are very powerful; go then and kill first that haughty Indra; then kill Varuna and other Devas and come back to me."

व्यास उवाच

तच्छुला वचनं तस्य विज्ञालायो महावलः ।

आहकही वाकणं मर्त जगाम विद्याधिपनम् ॥ 36 ॥

Vyāsa said: The very powerful Vidāla, on receiving the order came up at once to Indra, mounted on a very furious elephant.

वासवस्तं समावानं नृद्वा क्रोभस्पनितः ।

ज्ञान विगिष्ठतस्तीक्षणीरागविषयमप्रधे: ॥ 37 ॥

Seeing him coming, Vāsava shot at him angrily with very terrible and most powerful arrows that looked like deadly snakes.

स तु त्रित्ता शतस्नुर्णं स्वरगैक्षापनि: सुतेः ।

पश्ठागर्द्रजक्रौभागृ आसचं च शिलीमुर्षे: ॥ 38 ॥

But the Demon, too, cut off those arrows at once with his excellent arrows and quickly shot at Vāsava fifty arrows, sharpened on stones.

तर्पेज्ञपि च तत्बाणिछित्वा कोपसमित्ति: ।

ज्ञान विज्ञास्त्रीक्षीरात्रिविस्वमप्रधे: ॥ 39 ॥

स तु चित्वा शरांसृर्ण स्वरोंश्रापनि: सुतेः ।

गद्वा तात्यामास गजं तस्य क्रोपेरि ॥ 40 ॥

Indra cut off all those and, being infuriated, shot again sharp deadly serpent like arrows at him, and cutting off again all his enemies' arrows by arrows discharged from his bow, struck the elephant's trunk with his Gadā (club).

स्वकरे निर्तहो नायश्रकारात्रैवरं मुहु: ।

परिवृत्य जयानागु दैत्यसैन्यं भयातुर्म् ॥ 41 ॥

The elephant, being thus struck on his head, cried aloud in a distressed tone and being afraid turned back, thus killing the Dānava forces as he fled away.

दानवस्तु गर्ज बीक्ष्य परावूल्य तत गर्ता ।

स्मार्विष्य रद्ये रच्ये जगामाशु सुर्गन् रणे ॥ 42 ॥

General Vidāla, seeing the elephant fleeing away from the battlefield, mounted on a beautiful chariot and instantly appeared before the Devas to fight with them.

तृगधादि तं वीक्ष्य रथस्यं पुनरागतम् ।

अहनद्रिशिजैस्तीक्ष्योगशिविमसप्रमर्धे: ॥ 43 ॥

Seeing the Dānava coming again on a chariot, Indra shot at him sharp arrows after arrows like venomous snakes.

सोप्रि कुब्द्रशकायोरी याणवृष्टि महावल ।

बधूव तुयुले युद्धं तयोसत्र जयैषिणीः ॥ 44 ॥

The powerful Dānava, too, infuriated hurled at terrible arrows; then a sharp conflict ensued between Vāsava and the Dānava.

इस्ट्रस्टु बलिनं दूध्वा कोपेनाकुलितेंत्रिय ।

जयन्तमग्रतः कृत्वा युवुघे तेन संयुतः ॥ 4 5 ॥

Finding the Dānava powerful, Vāsava's senses were confounded with anger; he then took his son Jayanta before him and began to fight.

जयन्तसु शितिवाँगीलेयं जयान सनानते ।

पड़धिः प्रवलक्रुहैरुर्ग मवर्याविंन ॥ 4 6 ॥

Jayanta stretched his bow tight and shot at the breast of the Dānava swollen with pride, five sharp arrows with his full strength. Thus shot at by the network of arrows with his full strength.

स वाणाधिरस्तावत्रियपत श्वोरिप ।

अतिनाहा रथे मुतो निजांगमा रणाजितरात ॥ 47 ॥

Thus shot at by the network of arrows, the Dānava fell unconscious on the chariot; the charioteer then fled away with his chariot from the battle-field.

तम्मिन्विनिर्ते दैते विडालाखेउव मूर्छित ।

जगगळो महानासीद्वनुभौनां च पि:स्वतः ॥ 48 ॥

Thus on the Dānava Vidāla becoming

unconscious and being taken away from the field, the Dundubhīs (drums) of the Devas were resounded and great aclamations of “Victory to the Devas” were heard.

सुग प्रभृदिता: सर्वे तुहुवुस्तं ज्ञाचीपतिम ।

जनुर्गधर्वेषतयो ननृतृधायसोपेगणः ॥ 49 ॥

The Devas were very glad and sounded hymns before Indra; the Gandharvas began to sing and the Apsarās began to dance.

चुकोप मधिष: शुत्वा जयग्वल सुरैः कृतम् ।

प्रेयायास तदेव तापं परमदायकम् ॥ 50 ॥

O king! Hearing the loud acclamations of victory to the Devas, Mahiṣa became very angry and ordered the Dānava Tāmra, the destroyer of enemy's pride, to go to the battle-field.

तामस्तु बहुधिः सार्यं समायाल्य रणातिजे ।

शराष्ट्री चकाशगृ ततिह्वानिव सागरे ॥ 51 ॥

Tāmra appeared in the battle, and, coming face to face with many Deva warriors, hurled on them showers of arrows.

वक्षण: पाणिणुच्य जगाम स्वरितस्तदा ।

यमश्र महिषारूको दर्षदामादाय निर्वर्षी ॥ 52 ॥

Varuna appeared with his Pāśa weapon and Yama, mounted on his buffaio, appeared with his Dāndā (staff).

तत्र युदमभूष्ठौरं देवदानवयोर्षय: ।

बाणीः खद्यौषु मुसलेः शक्तिश्विष्य पर्षधे: ॥ 53 ॥

A terrible fight then ensued between the Devas and Dānavas and the weapons, arrows, axes, Mūsalas, Śaktis and Paraśuṣ guittered in the fields. दर्जकेन निहतसाधो यमहत्नोहोने च ।

न चचाल महाबाहु: संग्रामांगणतस्तदा ॥ 54 ॥

वापमाकृय योगे मुक्लवा तीवार्षिद्वरीमुखान ।

इन्द्रादीनहन्तृष्टा तापसतमिश्रणारिजे ॥ 55 ॥

Yama raising his Dānḍa with his hands struck at Tāmra; but the powerful Tāmra, though severely struck, was not at all moved and remained firm in his place in the field. On the other hand, Tāmra, violently drawing his bow, hurled a mass of sharp arrows at Indra and the other Devas.

Book V Chapter VI

तेपि देवा: शरीद्वैर्दर्दिशितेश शिलाशितः ।

निजनुद्रनवानकुन्द्रांतिरूल तिष्ठेति चुकुशुः ॥ 56 ॥

The Devas got angry and shot at the Dānavas multitudes of divine arrows sharpened on stone, and frequently called aloud “Wait, wait.”

निहतसर्ः: सुरैद्वेयो मृष्ठ्रांमाय रणांगणे ।

हाहाकारो महानासीदैत्यसैये भयातुरे ॥ 57 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमदैशीभगवते महापुराणे पत्रमकन्चे दैनसैन्यपराजयो

- नाम पड़गोउध्याः 11 5 11

The Dānava Tāmra thus shot at by the arrows of the Devas, fell unconscious in the battle-field; the Dānava forces got afraid and a cry of universal consternation and distress arose.

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the defeat of the Dānava forces of Mahisa in the Mahāpurānam Śrimadlevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter VI

