CHAPTER VIII

On Deciding Who is to be Worshipped

སྐོབ་ཆེན་

संदेहोउर महाभाग कथायां तु महादुतः ।

वेदगास्पूराषीश निश्रितं तु सदा बुधे: ॥ १ ॥

ब्रह्मा विद्युः्छ रछश प्रसे देवा: सनातना: ।

न तः परतं किंचिद्वह्नाष्ट्रप्रेस्ममहापते ॥ 2 ॥

The Rsis said: “O highly fortunate one! A great doubt has arisen on your statement. This is ascertained by all the wise men as written in the Vedas, Purāṇas and other Śāstras that Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara, these three Devas are eternal. None is superior to them in this Bhamāṇḍa.

बहा सुजित लोकान्वे विष्ण: पालविहितं जगत् ।

रू: संसृत्ते काले जय एतेज कराणम् ॥ 3 ॥

एका मृतिंल्यो देवा बढ़ाविष्णमहेक्षारः ।

रंज:सच्ततप齋िष्ठ संयुताः कार्यकताः ॥ 4 ॥

Brahmā creates all the beings, Viṣṇu preserves and Maheśvara destroys all in due time. These are the causes of creation, preservation and destruction. The Trinity Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa are really one form, indeed, Trinity in Unity and Unity in Trinity. Being endowed respectively with Sattva, Raja and Tamo Guṇas they do their respective works.

तेनां मध्ये हरि: श्रेष्ठ माधवः पुरुषोत्तमः ।

आदिद्वेलो जगत्राश: समर्थ: सर्वकर्मिषु ॥ 5 ॥

Amongst these, again, Purusottama Ādideva Jagannātha Hari, the husband of Kamalā is the best; for he is capable of doing all the actions; no other than the Viṣṇu, of unrivalled prowess is so capable.

नान्यः कोर्पीस समर्वोर्जित विष्णोतरुतन्तेसः ।

स कर्थ स्वायित स्वामी विवरणो यो-भायया ॥ 6 ॥

How is it, then that Yogamāyā has overpowered Hari with sleep and made him altogether senseless? O highly fortunate one! whither did, then, go that extraordinary self-knowledge and power, etc. of Hari while alive?

क्व गर्त तस्य विज्ञानं जीवतश्छीनिछतं कुतः ।

संदेहोरोयं महाभाग कथारव्य यथागृभम् ॥ ७ ॥

This is our greatest doubt; so kindly advise us that our this doubt be removed and our well being be thus ensured.

का सा शक्ति: पुरा प्रोक्ता यथा विद्यार्जितः प्रभुः ।

कुतो जाता कर्थ शक्ता का शक्तिर्वं सूतत ॥ ८ ॥

यस्तु सर्वेश्वो तिथयार्जुंदोयो जगतुहः ।

परमात्मा परानन्द सचिवदानन्दविधहः ॥ 9 ॥

सर्वकृतसर्वभृतस्व हाविज सर्वनः शुण्रितः ।

स कर्व निद्रया नीतः परन्त्रय परावतरः ॥ 10 ॥

What is that Śakti? Which you mentioned to us before as well by whom Viṣṇu is conquered? Whence is She born? What is the power of that Śakti and what is Her nature? O Suvrata! explain to us these fully.

How was it that Yogamāyā overpowered with sleep the Highest Deity Bhagavān Viṣṇu who is everlasting-intelligence bliss! who is the God of all, the Guru of the whole world, the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer, who is omnipresent, an incarnate of purity and holiness and beyond Rajoguna; how was such a personage brought under the control of sleep?

एताद्धार्यभृतो हि सन्दोहो न : परंतप ।

छिथि ज्ञानासिन सूत व्यासशिष्य महामते ॥ १ १ ॥

O Sūta! You are very intelligent and the pupil of Vyāsa Deva; destroy our this doubt by the sword of wisdom.

सूत उवाच

क: सन्देहं भिनन्चेनं जैतोक्ये सगचरे ।

मुह्यिति मुनयः कामं बढ़ापुरा: सनातना: ॥ १ २ ॥

नारः कानिलश्री प्रणेत्रस्मिनस्तमाः ।

किं ब्रवीम महाभागा दुर्घेटप्रस्मिन्यर्ने ॥ १ ३ ॥

Hearing this, Sūta said: “O highly fortunate rhunis! There is none in the three Lokas who can

Book 1 Chapter VIII

clear your this doubt; the mind-born sons of Brahmā, Nārada, Kapila and other eternal sons get bewildered by these questions; what can I, then, say on this very difficult point!

देवेषु विष्ण: कथितः सर्पिः: सर्पिःतः ।

यतो विराडिदं सर्वमुत्यत्रं सचराचरम् ॥ 14 ॥

ते सर्वे समुपासन्ते नत्वा देवं परात्परम् ।

नारायणं इद्यौकेशं गासुदेवं जनादनम् ॥ 15 ॥

तवा केचिच्महादेवं गंकरं श्रीशोख्यम् ।

त्रिजेत्रं पड्ववलयं च शूलपाणीं शूच्यजम् ॥ 16 ॥

तथा वेदेयुं सर्वेषुं गीतं नाना त्रिवम्बकम् ।

कर्पिदंने पड्ववरयं गौरौद्धार्धधारिणम् ॥ 17 ॥

कैलासावसान्तरं सर्वेश्णिक्समर्थवन्तम् ।

भृतवृद्धतुं देवं दक्षयतप्रियातकम् ॥ 18 ॥

तया सूर्ये वेदविदः सायंभगर्दिते दिने ।

मध्याहे तु महाभागा सुत्विति विविधेः सर्वेः ॥ 19 ॥

यथा वेयुए सर्वेषु सूर्यापासनुतमम् ।

परामातैति विद्यातं नाम तस्य महामतः ॥ 20 ॥

See, some persons call Bhagavān Viṣṇu omnipresent, the preserver of all and the best of all the Devas; according to them all this universe-moving and non-moving, is created by Viṣṇu; they bow down before the Highest Nārāyaṇa Hrṣikeśa Janārdana Vāsudeva and worship Him, whereas others worship Mahādeva Śaṅkara, having Gaurī for the other half of his body, endowed with all powers, residing in Kailāśa, surrounded by hosts of bhūtas, that destroyed the Dakṣa's sacrifice, who is mentioned in the Vedas as Śaśišekhara (having moon on his forehead), with three eyes and five faces and holding trident in his hand and known as Vṛṣadhaja and Kapārddi. O highly intelligent ones! There are some other persons, that know the Vedas and worship the Sun every day in the morning, midday and in the evening with various hymns.

अन्नि: सर्वत्रे वेदेयु सन्तुतें वेदिवर्गतः ।

इन्द्रशापि जितोकेशो कर्णश्र तावाप: ॥ 21 ॥

In all the Vedas, it is stated that the worship of the sun is excellent and they have named the high-souled sun as Paramātnā (the Highest Deity). Whereas there are other Vedavits (the knowers of

the Vedas) who worship the Devas, Fire, Indra, and Varuna.

यथा गंगा प्रवाहैश बन्धिभः वरित्तंते ।

तबैव सर्वदेवेषु विष्णु: प्रोत्तो महर्षिभः ॥ 22 ॥

But the Maharsis say, that as Ganga Devi (the river Ganges), though one, is expressing Herself by many channels, so the one Viṣṇu is expressing in all the Deva forms. Those who are big Pundits, declare perception, inference, and verbal testimony as the three modes of proofs.

श्रीपेवेह पूर्व प्रमाणानि पतिवानि सूपधिजुतः ।

प्रत्यक्षं चानुभानं च शाखं चैव तृतीकम् ॥ 23 ॥

चत्वार्यवैतरे प्राहुक्रपमानयुतानि च ।

अर्थपरिन्युतान्यन्ये पछ प्रप्रमुंहाधियः ॥ 24 ॥

सदा परीशिकाक्षीव प्रवदन्ति मनीविणः ।

एतेः प्रमाणोईनंय वद्बहा परमं च तत ॥ 25 ॥

The Naiyāyik Pundits add to the above three, a fourth proof which they call upamā, resemblance, similitude and some other intelligent Pundits add another fifth proof called Arthāpatti, an inference from circumstances, presumption, implication. It is deduction of a matter from that which could not else be; it is assumption of a thing, not itself perceived but necessarily implied by another which is seen, heard or proved; whereas the authors of the Purāṇas add two other, called Sākṣī and Aitijhya, thus advocating seven modes of proofs. Now the Vedānta Śāstra says that the supreme being (Param Brahma), the Prime cause of the Universe, cannot be comprehended by the above-mentioned seven proofs.

तिरतक्रश्रात कर्तेबी बुद्ध्वा चैवागमेच न ।

निश्यासिकया युक्त्या विवार्यं च पुनः पुनः ॥ 26 ॥

Therefore, first of all, adopt the reason leading to sure belief, the Buddhi, according to the words of the Vedas and discriminate and discuss again and again and draw your inference about Brahma.

प्रत्यक्षनस्तु विज्ञानचित्रं मतिमतां सदा ।

दृष्टान्नेपि सन्तं शिष्टमानानुसारिणा ॥ 27 ॥

And the intelligent person should adopt what is

Šimaddevibhāgavatam

seen by perception as self-evident and what is inferred by the observance of good conduct.

विद्धांसोप्रि वदन्त्येवं पुराणै: परिणीयते ।

ड्रहिणे सृष्टिशफ्रड हरी पालनशक्तिता ॥ 28 ॥

हरे संहारशक्तिश्र सूर्ये शक्ति: प्रकाशिका ।

धराधरणशक्तिश्र शेषे कूर्मे तथैव च ॥ 29 ॥

साउदा शक्ति परिणता सर्वसीमना प्रतिहिता ।

The wise persons say, and it is also stated in the Puranas, that the Prime Force is present in Brahmā as the Creative Force; is present in Hari as the Preservative Force; is present in Hara as the Destructive Force; is present in Kūrma (tortoise) and in Ananta (the thousand-headed Snake) as the earth supporting Force; is present in fire as the Burning Force, is present in air as the moving Force, and so is present everywhere in various manifestations of forces.

वहाशक्तिस्वा बह्यौ समीरे प्रेरणात्मिका ॥ 30 ॥

शिबोर्पि शबतां याति कुण्डलिन्या विवर्जितः ।

शक्तिहीनसु यः कविचदसमयेः स्मृते बुधैः ॥ 31 ॥

एवं सर्वेन भूतैषु स्थावेपु चेपु च ।

ब्रवाहित्संवर्षयन्तं ब्रह्मोडप्रस्मिनहातपाः ॥ 32 ॥

शक्तिजीतु तु निंद्यं स्याङ्तुमात्रं चराचरण् ।

अशकाः शुशुविजये गमने भोजने तथा ॥ 33 ॥

In this whole Universe, whoever he may be, all are incapable of any action if he be deprived of his force; what more than this, if Śiva be deprived of Kula Kunḍalini Śakti, He becomes a lifeless corpse; O great ascetic Rṣis! She is present everywhere thus in every thing in this universe from the highest Brahma to the lowermost blade of grass, all moving and non-moving things. Verily everthing becomes quite inert, if deprived of force; whether in conquering one's enemies, or in going from one place to another or in eating—one finds oneself quite incapable, if deprived of force.

एवं सर्वेगता शक्ति: सा ब्रहोति विविच्छते ।

सोपाय्या विविधे: सन्यनिवार्याँ सुधिया सदा ॥ 34 ॥ विद्याँ च सातिक्यों शक्तिस्तया हीनो5यकर्मेकृता । द्विणे राजसीं शक्तियां दीना ह्यादृष्टिकृता ॥ 35 ॥

शिके च तामसी शक्तिस्तया संहारकारकाः।

Thus the omnipresent Śakti, the wise call by the name of Brahma. Those who are verily intelligent should always worship Her in various ways and determine thoroughly the reality of Her by every means. In Viṣṇu, there is the Śatīvki Śakti; then He can preserve; otherwise He is quite useless; so in Brahmā there is Rājasī Śakti and He creates; otherwise He is quite useless; in Śiva, there is Tāmasī Śakti and He destroys; else He is quite useless.

इन्यूढ़ो मनसा सर्वे विवार्य च पुनः पुनः ॥ ३६ ॥

शक्ति: कांति बढ़ापड़ा सा वै पालयतेशल्म,।

इच्छय संहूरल्यो जगदेतच्चारचम् ॥ ३७ ॥

न विभूर्णं हरः शक्रो न बढ़ा न च पायका।

न सूर्वी वक्षणः शकः: स्वे रेव कार्यं कर्बेचन ॥ ३८ ॥

Thus, arguing again and again in one's mind, everyone should come to know that the Highest Ādyā Śakti by Her mere will creates and preserves this Universe and She it is who destroys again in time the whole Brahmānda, moving and non-moving; no one is capable to do his respective work be he Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Indra, Fire, Sun, Varuna or any other person whatsoever; verily all the Devas perform the respective actions by the use of this Ādyā Śakti.

तथा युक्त हि कुर्येति स्वानि कार्याणि ते सुरः ।

सैव कारणकार्येषु प्रत्यक्षेणावम्पते ॥ 39 ॥

That She alone is present in cause and effect and is doing every action, can be witnessed vividly.

सरुणा निर्गुणा सा तु दिषा प्रोक्ता मनीविधि: ।

सरुणा राशिधि: सेवा निर्गुणा तु विराशिधि: ॥ 40 ॥

The intelligent ones call that Sakti twofold; one is Sagunā and the other is Nirgunā. The people, attached to the senses and the objects, worship the Sagunā aspect, and those who are not so attached worship the Nirgunā aspect.

धार्यविक्रमामेणा सवामीन स निराकुला ।

द्वाति वहितान्कामान्यूजिता विचारिपूर्वकम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

Book I Chapter IX

That conscious Sakti is he Lady of the fourfold aims of life, religion, wealth, desires, and liberation. When She is worshipped according to the rules, She awards all sorts of desires.

न जानीत जना मुहास्तां सदा माययतुतः ।

जानन्तोप्रि नरा: कैचिन्योह्यंति परानपि ॥ 4 2 ॥

पोषकता: स्वोतार्थ वै पार्शक्षानि पृथक्ययक् ।

The worldly persons, charmed by the Māyā of this world, do not know Her at all; some persons know a little and charm others; whereas some stupid and dull-deaded Pundits, impelled by Kali, start sects of heretics, Pāsundas for the sustenance of their own bellies.

प्रवर्तेयिति कलिना प्रेरिता मन्द्वेसतः ॥ 43 ॥

कलावस्मिन्द्रभाग नानाधेवसूम्यिततः ।

नान्ये युग तथा धर्मों वेदवाहाः कंधवंच ॥ 44 ॥

O highly fortunate Munis! In no other Yugas were found acts as prevelent in this Kali Yuga, based on various different opinions and altogether beyond the pale of the Vedic injunctions.

विष्णुश्रत्यसायुंगो तपो वर्णयनेकशः ।

बद्याहारखयो देवा ध्यारंतः कमपि ध्यूम ॥ 4 5 ॥

कामयाना: सदा कामं ते ग्रयः सर्वदैव हि ।

वर्जित यज्ञान्विवधान्ब्वाहियामुहेशुशः ॥ 4 6 ॥

Behold again, if Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa be the supreme Deities, then why do these three Devas meditate on anot'er One beyond speech, beyond mind and practise, for years, hard austerities; and why do they perform yajñas (sacrifices) for their success in creation, preservation, and destruction?

ते शै सफिं परां देरी बढ़ाढ़ायां परपातिमकान् ।

ध्यार्योत मनसा नित्यं नित्यां मत्वा सनातनीम् ॥ 47 ॥

They know, verily, the Highest Supreme Being,

Brahmanī Devī Śakti eternal, constant and therefore they meditate Her always in their minds.

तस्म्यक्तिस् सदा सेव्या विद्धिद्रः कृतलिश्रधः ।

निश्रयः सर्वशताकाणां जातव्यो मुनिस्तस ॥ 48 ॥

Therefore the wise man, knowing this firmly, should serve in every way the Highest Śakti. O Munis! This is the settled conclusion of all the Śāstras.

कृष्णाच्छुतं मया चैततेने ज्ञातं तु नारवात् ।

पितुः सकाशातनोपि बहुणा विश्यावक्रवतः ॥ 49 ॥

I have heard of this great hidden secret from Bhagavān Krṣna Dvaipāyana. He heard it from Nārada, and Nārada heard it from his own father Brahmā.

न श्रोत्थ न मंतव्यमन्येधां वचनं बुधैः ।

गवित्ते सदा सेव्या विद्धिद्वः कृतनिश्रधः ॥ 50 ॥

Brahmā heard this from Viṣṇu. O Munis! it is well that the wise even should not hear or think anything to the contrary from other sources; they should with their concentrated heart serve the Brahma Sanātani Śakti.

प्रत्यक्षमपि ग्रहस्यागत्क्य यिवेहितम् ।

अतः सर्वेषं घृतेषु जाताया शक्तिरेव हि ॥ ५१ ॥

इति श्रीमदेशीभगवते महापुराणे प्रथमकक्योडग्नोडधायः ।।८।।

It is clearly witnessed in this world that if there be any substance wherein this conscious Sākti does not exist, that becomes inert, quite useless for any purpose. So know this fully that it is the Highest Divine Mother of the Universe that is playing here, residing in every being."

Thus ends the Eighth Chapter of the First Book on deciding who is to be worshipped in the

Mahāpurāna Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

Book I Chapter IX

