CHAPTER XXVII

On Harisćandra's Going to the Heavens

सूत खवच

ततः: कृत्वा चित्ता राजा आरोध्य ततयं स्वकम् ।

भार्यया सहितो राजा बढ्जांतसिदुस्तदा ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: The King Harisācandra then prepared the funeral pile, and placed his son on it. Next he and his wife with folded palms merged themselves in the meditation of the Parameśvari, the Lady of of the Universe.

धिन्तन्यम्पलेग्रानी जगताश्री जगदीधीम् ।

पछकोशान्तरातं पुरच्छद्वास्वकपिणीम् ॥ 2 ॥

रक्तान्बरणरीधानां कंकणारससागगम् ।

नानायुध्यरामंबां जगत्यालन्ततव्यम् ॥ 3 ॥

तस्य चिन्तयमानस्य सर्वे देवा: स्वासवा: ।

धर्म प्रमुखतः कृत्वा समाजगमुस्त्वार्थिता: ॥ 4 ॥

आगत्य सर्वे प्रोचुसं तराजब्छुण महाप्रभो ।

That Hundred-eyed is reigning within these five Koşas (or sheaths) Annamaya, etc. She resides in the sacral plexus of the nature of Brahman, of the Puruşa composed of Anna and Rasa And She is the Ocean of Mercy. Wearing the red robe, She is ever ready with various weapons in Her hands for the preservation of the Universe. When the King was engaged thus in meditating on Her, Indra and all the Devas with Dharma in their front came to the King Hariścandra with no delay. They all coming up said to the King: "O King! Hear.

आहूं पितामहः साक्षाद्धिश्व भगवान्वयम् ॥ ५ ॥

साध्यः सविश्वभर्तो लोकपालः स्वारणाः ।

नागाः सिद्धा सर्पभर्घा कृत्रश्रेय तथा3श्रनी ॥ ६ ॥

एते चान्येउथ बह्वो विश्वामित्रस्तथैव च ।


विश्वप्रेयण यो भैत्री कर्तुभिच्छित धार्मतः ॥ 7 ॥

विश्वाधिमसः से तेरभीटागहतुं सत्यागिच्छित ।

I am the Grand Sire and here are present Dharma Himself, the Bhagavān Viṣṇu, the Sādhyas, Viśvedevas, Maruts, the Lokapālas, the Cāranas, the Nāgas, the Gandharvas, Siddhas, Rudras, the twin Aśvins, and all the other Devas and Viśvāmitra, who going over the three worlds wishes to make friendship according to the law ordained by Dharma, is now himself desirous to grant you your desired objects."

धर्म उवाच

मा राजन्नाहसं कार्यिधीनोंई त्वामुपानतः ॥ 8 ॥

तितिश्वासमस्तथीःस्वदुगुणीः पितोभिति: ।

Dharma said: “O King! Do not risk such an hazardous undertaking. I am Dharma; I am satisfied with your patience and forbearance, control of your senses, and the other Sāttvic qualities and have therefore come to you.

इन उवाच

हरिश्रत्र महाभाग प्राप्तः शक्रोप्रिय तेर्रतिकम् ॥ 9 ॥

त्वासऊघ भावापुंत्रण क्षिता लोकाः सनाताः ।

आगेहि प्रिविदं राजन्मार्वापुंत्रसम्पित्तः ॥ 10 ॥

सुदुष्पार्य नैरर्यैर्वितमातीयकर्मिधः ।

Indra said: “O Hariscandra! I have also come to you. So your good fortune knows no bounds, today. You with your wife and son, have conquered the Eternal World. O King! What is hardly attainable by any human being, you have conquered that, by dint of your own merits. So Get up to the Heavens (vibrations of the Fourth-dimensional Space) with your wife and son.

सूत उवाच

ततोप्रमतयं वर्षमपमृत्यनिशानगम ॥ 1 1 ॥

इनः प्रासुवदाकाणिष्चितामध्यगते शिशी ।

पुष्पवृष्टिश मर्ती दुर्भिभवम एव च ॥ 12 ॥

Sūta said: Indra then sprinkled over the dead son on the funeral piles, the netcer, destroying the fatal effect product by unnatural death. At that time

big showers of flowers were thrown on him and Dundubhīs were sounded.

समुक्तथी मृत: पुरो राजस्तस्य महात्मनः ।

सुकुमारतनुः सवस्थः प्रसनः प्रीतमानसः ॥ 13 ॥

ततो राजा हरिश्रद्र: परिछज्ञ सुतं तदा ।

सभार्यः स्वाश्रिया युक्ते दिव्यमाल्यांबारबाह्नः ॥ 14 ॥

In the meanwhile, the prince got up from the funeral pile. He got back his former beautiful body and he looked peaceful, healthy, and greatly satisfied. Hariścandra embraced his son instantly in his bosom; the King and Queen also both regained their former beautiful appearance at that time and were decked with clothes and garlands.

स्वस्थः सम्पूर्णद्वयो मुदा परमया वृतः ।

बधूव तत्स्थणादिदों धर्म चैवमभालत ॥ 15 ॥

सभार्यस्वं सपुत्रश स्वलोकं सहितं पराम् ।

सभारोह महाभाग निजानां कर्मणां फलम् ॥ 16 ॥

Their hearts were then deeply filled with great joy at their getting back their desired object and their health. Indra then said to the King: "O Highly Fortunate One! Now ascend to the Heavens with your son and wife, by dint of your meritorious deeds and get the holy happy ends of your endeavours."

हरिश्रनु उवाच

देवराजान्नुज्ञातः स्वामिना धृषचेन हि ।

अकृत्वा निष्कृति तस्य नारोक्षेवे वै सुगतलयम् ॥ 17 ॥

Harīścandra said: "O King of the Devas! The Cāndāla is my master; so until I get freedom from his bondage, I cannot go to the Heavens without his permission."

धर्म जवाच

तर्वेवं भावियं क्लेशप्रभायात्मायाय।

आत्मा धुचपत्तां नीती दर्शितं तच्च पकर्ण् ॥ 18 ॥

Dharma said: "I am myself that Cāndāla and had assumed that from and shewed you the city of the Cāndāla. Knowing that you will suffer.

इन्य उवाच

प्राध्यैत यत्परं स्थानं समसतीनुजैभूषिव ।

Book VII Chapter XXVII

तदारोह हरिश्रत्र स्थानं पुण्यकृती नृणाम् ॥ 19 ॥

What more than this, that I myself am that very Cangāla, I am that very Brāhmin and I am that very poisonous serpent who had smitten your boy."

Note: This is all the one and the same the Fourth Dimensional Space.

Indra said: Harisācranda! Now got up, by virtue of your own meritorious deeds to that place which is highly coveted by all the human beings that exist on earth.

हरिचरू उवाच

देवाराज नमस्तुर्णे वाक्यं चेदे निवोधे मे ।

मळोकामनमसः कोसले नगरे नगर: ॥ 20 ॥

Harīścandra said: “O King at the Devas! I bow down to you. Kindly consider what I say now. All the inhabitants of the city Kośala are in mourning, due to their being separated from me.

तिहीन तानपार्यैवं कर्थ यायाय्यं दिव्यम् ।

ब्रहृहत्या सुरायानं गोवध: क्षीवधस्तथा ॥ 21 ॥

How then, Can I go to the Heavens leaving my sorrow-stricken subjects here. To abandon the Bhaktas, the devotees, is to incur the great sin due to the murder of a Brāhmín, the killing of a woman, the drinking of liquors and the killing of a cow.

तुल्यमेभिर्हायां भक्त्यागादुदाहतम् ।

भक्ते भक्तत्याज्यं त्यजतः स्याकक्षे सुखम् ॥ 22 ॥

सैहिता न प्रयास्यामि तस्माखछा दिवं जज ।

यदि ते सहिता: स्वर्ग मया याति सुरेश्व ॥ 23 ॥

ततो3दपरि यास्यामि नरकं वारपि तैः सह ।

O Indra! It is highly inadvisable to abandon a Bhakta who is always in service. How can one be happy when one abandons such devotees. So I will not go to the Heavens without them. You better go back to the Heavens. O Lord of the Devas! If my subjects can go with me, I am ready to go with them to the Heavens or to the Hell."

इन्व उवाच

बहून पुण्यपापानि तेलां भिन्जानि वै नृप ॥ 24 ॥

कथं संपातभोज्यं त्वं भूपा स्वर्गमभीयासि ।

Indra said: “O King! Some of them are more sinful, some are more meritorious; different grades of people exist there. So, O King! How can you desire all to go simultaneously to the Heavens.”

हरिश्रत्र उवाच

भुक्ते शक्र नृपो राज्यं भपावासुकतेधूम. ॥ 25 ॥

यजते च महापत्रेः कर्म पूर्तं क्रगेति च ।

तच्च तेषां प्रभावेण मया सर्वेमनुषितम् ॥ 26 ॥

उपदादार संस्थये तान्हे स्वर्गतिप्रिया ।

Harisācranda said: 'O Indra! It is through the power of the citizens that the Kings enjoy their kingdoms, perform great many sacrifice, and do many engineering works (in excavating tanks, etc.) There is no doubt in this. So I, too, have due religious acts and sacrifice through my citizen's help. They gave me all the articles necessary for kings. So how can I now quit them so that I may get the Heavens.

तस्माठ्यम देवेश किंचवर्गस्त सुचौहितम् ॥ 27 ॥

दत्तमिष्टमथो जलं सामान्यं तैनस्तदनु नः ।

बहुकातोपभोग्यं च फलं यवमय कर्मगम् ॥ 28 ॥

तदनु दिनमयेकं तै: समं त्वत्सादतः ।

O Lord of the Devas! If my subjects have no such Punyams as to enable them to the Heavens, then let the Punyams done by me in giving away charities, in the performance of sacrifice, and other meritorious works be divided amongst them equally. If I myself enjoy Svarga for a very long time; but, if by your favour, I can enjoy with them even one day's residence in Švarga for my merits, that is also superior to me."

सूत जवाच

एवं भविष्यतीत्युक्चा शक्रकिंश्वपृवतः ॥ 29 ॥

प्रसत्रचेता धर्मश्र विश्वाशिक्र शापित्रः ।

गत्वा तु नगरं सर्वे चातुर्वयं समाकुलम् ॥ 30 ॥

हरिश्रान्स्य निकटे प्रोवाच विद्याधिपः ।

Sūta said: 'Let that be;' saying thus Indra, the Lord of the three worlds, Viśvāmitra, and Dharma who were very pleased went immediately to

Ayodhyā from Kāśī by their yogic power. In an instant they reached Ayodhyā, filled with the Brāhmaṇas, Kṣattriyas, Vaīsyās, and Śūdas; and Indra exclaimed to them all: 'Let all the citizens come before Harisācranda, without any delay.

आगव्छौं जना: शीधे खर्सौंको सुवुतैंम् ॥ ३ १ ॥

धर्मप्रसादासंप्राप्तं सर्वैयुभाधिरेव तु ।

हरिश्रज्ञोपि तात्मवर्ज्ञनावगरावसिनः ॥ ३२ ॥

प्राह राजा धर्मपोरो दिव्यमारुहातामिति ।

Today they all will go to the Heavens by virtue of the Punyams of Harisācandra. Thus saying, they took all the men to Harisācandra. Then that religious King told his subjects, 'let you all now ascend with me to the Heavens."

सूत उवाच

तद्रिद्रस्य वचः श्रुत्वा प्रीतास्तस्य च भुपतेः ॥ ३३ ॥

ये संसारेषु निविर्थणातसे पूरं स्वतुरेषु वे ।

कृत्वा प्रहृष्टमनसो दिवमास्कहनुजना: ॥ 34 ॥

विमानवरामाक्त्वः सर्वे भाप्तयियम्हाः ।

Sūta said: Hearing these words of Indra and their King, they all became very glad. Then those who were engaged in their worldly desires, they handed over the charge of their worldly concerns to their own sons, gladly became ready to go up to the Heavens.

तवा सम्पुनहाशीते हरिश्रत्रशे पाधिवः ॥ 35 ॥

राजेर्धिधिचिच्य तनयं रोहिताखं महामानः ।

अयोध्याखे पुरे नये ह्वयुधज्ञान्विते ॥ 36 ॥

तनयं सुहद्धाधि प्रतिज्ञापिनन्द च ।

पुणयेन लभ्यां विपुर्णतं देवादीनां सुवुर्णभाम् ॥ 37 ॥

The high-minded King Hariścandra then installed his son Rohitāśva on the royal throne and permitted him to go the beautiful city Ayodhyā, filled with jolly and healthy inhabitants. Next addressing his son and friends, he took leave of them. Thus, by virtus of his own good deeds, the King Hariścandra attained great celebrate.

संप्राय कौतिलिंतुलां विमाने स महीपति: ।

आसांचेक कामागे शुर्धर्यतिवारजिते ॥ 38 ॥

ततस्ताईं समालोक्य रूलोकमन्ते तदाजगी ।

दैत्याचार्यं महाभागः सर्वशक्तार्यं तत्त्ववित् ॥ 39 ॥

He then got up and took his seat in the aerial car that has no equal and that goes at will. It was beautifully adorned, very rare even to the Devas and decked with bells emitting jingling Kinkini sounds. The high-souled Śukrācārya versed in the Śaštras and the Guru of the Daityas, seeing Haricārandra in the Vimāna, spoke thus:

शुक्र उवाच

अहो तिलित्वागाहत्यमहो दानकलं महत् ।

यदागतो हरिश्रत्रो महैंद्रस्य सलोकताम् ॥ 40 ॥

Oh! What is the glorious result of forbearance (Titiksā)! What is the great fruit of charity! Oh! Due to whose influence, the King Harisācandra today has attained the some region with Mahendra!

सूत उवाच

एतते सर्वमाख्यातं हरिश्रान्य चेध्टितम् ।

यः: शणोते च दुःखातः स सुखं लभते-वहम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

स्वर्गोंक्षी प्रापुवात्यकर्यं सुताशी सुतामापुवात् ।

भाव्योंक्षी प्रापुवाद्वारा सत्राज्यारी राज्यामपुवात् ॥ 4 2 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणि सतमस्कन्धे हरिश्रद्रोषाखाने

सत्वविरोधोअषय: 11 27 11

Sūta said: Thus I have described to you all the doings of Harisācandra. Any man, oppressed with sorrows and troubles, no doubt, attains constant happiness, if he hears it. What more than this, those who want Svarga get Svarga, those who want son get sons, those who want wife get wife, and those who want kingdoms get their kingdoms by hearing this incident.

Here ends the Twenty-seventh Chapter of the Seventh Book on the going of Harisācandra to the Heavens in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XXVIII

