CHAPTER XXIII

On the Birth of Śri Kṛṣṇa

व्यास उवाच

हतेयु घटसु घुपेयु देवकवा औग्रमेसिना ।

समये पत्ति गर्भे वचनारावरस्य च ॥ १ ॥

अधमस्य च गर्भस्य रक्षणार्थमतिन्रतः ।

प्रयत्नकारोज्ञा मरणं स्वं विवित्यन्त्र ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: The six sons of Devaki being thus killed by Kānsa and the seventh womb being miscarried, Kānsa began, when Devaki was pregnant for the eighth time, to think of the cause of his own death, as advised by Nārada and watched carefully, day and night, so that this time there would be born a son and there be no miscarriage.

समये देवकीर्णपं प्रवेशमकेतोद्धरि: ।

अंगेन वसुदेवे तु समागन्य यथाकमम् ॥ 3 ॥

On the other hand the Bhagavān Hari came down and rested on the body of Vasudeva as part incarnate and then entered into the womb of Devaki, in due order.

तदेवं योगाया च यगोदायां यधेष्छया ।

प्रवेशमकाहोद्वी देवकार्थर्विसद्धे ॥ 4 ॥

That very time the Goddess Yogamāyā, of Her own accord, entered into the womb of Yaśodā in order to help the workings of the gods.

गौहिष्यात्तयो रामो गोकुले समाजयत ।

यतः कंसमयोद्विज्ञान संस्थिता सा च कामिनी ॥ 5 ॥

Rohinī, the wife of Vasudeva was anxiously dwelling at that time through the fear of Kahīsa in the Nanda Gokula; Balarāma, the part incarnate of Ananta, took his birth there as Her son.

कारागते ततः कंसो देवकांी देवसंस्तुगम् ।

स्थाययामास रक्षार्थं सेवकान्समकल्यन्त ।। 6 ॥

Kainśa then imprisoned Devaki, who was being worshipped by gods, and engaged servants to take care of her.

वसुंदवस्तु काभिन्याः प्रेमतनुपिनवर्षिताः ।

पुत्रोर्याति स सझिन्त्य प्रविष्य: सह भार्यया ॥ 7 ॥

Vasudeva, too, entered into the prison with his wife Devakī, thinking of his issue and also being attracted by his attachment towards his wife.

देवकांगर्भागो विष्णुदेवकावार्थसिद्धये ।

संस्तुतोप्रसर्वेश्य व्यवर्तन यथाकम्प् ॥ 8 ॥

Visnu, here, the Deva of the Devas, to accomplish the purpose of the gods began to grow regularly in the womb of Devaki, being incessantly adored and praised by the gods.

सझाते द्वगम तत्र मातरेश शाखणे शुभे ।

प्रजापत्यवह्मंसृक्ते कृष्णपक्षेउर्धातिवि ॥ 9 ॥

कंसस्तु दानवास्वनुवाच भयविह्वतः ।

रक्षणीया भवाद्धि देककी गर्भिन्ति ॥ 10 ॥

When the tenth month was complete, on the eighth day of the dark fortnight, under the star Rohinī, Karīsa became much bewildered with fear and called on his Dānava followers and said “you must all carefully protect Devakī in the prison.”

अष्टयो देवकौर्गभर्ग: श्रूर्गर्भ प्रभविष्यति ।

स्थगीय: प्रयन्तेन मृत्युस्प: स बालकः ॥ 11 ॥

हलैनं बालकं दैव्या: सुखं स्वध्यामि मन्दिते ।

निर्वृतिवर्जिते दुःखे नाशिते चाह्मे सुते ॥ 12 ॥

The son born from this eighth womb of Devaki will turn out my dire enemy; therefore do you all very carefully protect that child, my death incarnate (so that the child may not be transferred anywhere

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

else). O Daityas! I will be able to sleep without any anxiety then, when I will be successful. Kill this eighth son of Devakī who has become the source of my constant worries and endless troubles."

खद्धुपासधातः सर्वे नित्रुत् धृतकामुंका: ।

निद्रातन्नविरीनीआ सर्वेन नितिनेक्षणाः ॥ १३ ॥

Equipped with swords, shafts and bow and darts do you all incessantly watch with eyes open on all sides, leaving off your sleep and drowsiness.

व्यास उवाच

ज्ञ्यादिश्यासुराणान् कंसो5तिभयविद्धूनः ।

मन्दिरं स्वं जगामाशु न लेभे दानवः सुखम् ॥ 14 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus ordering the Demons, the king Kāṃsa who had become worn out with this anxiety and was bewildered with fear, went quickly to his own palace room; but he could not find any trace of happiness.

निरीधे देवकी तत्र वसुवेदयुपाव च ।

कि कंतीम महाराज प्रसवावसरी मम ॥ १५ ॥

बह्वो रक्षपालाछ्छा निर्होत्थय चयानका: ।

नन्दपन्य मया सार्थ कृतोर्जित समयः पूग ॥ १६ ॥

प्रेगतिच्यस्तया पुत्री मन्दिते मम मानिति ।

पालियध्याम्यं तत्र तवातिमनसा किल ॥ १७ ॥

अपत्ये ते प्रदायामि कंसस्य प्रत्यायाय दे ।

किं कर्तैव्य प्रभो चाहा विषये सपुषपित्थते ॥ १ ८ ॥

On the other hand, Devakī, at dead of night, in that prison, told Vasudeva “O king! My birth pain has come; I see here many guards, terrific, who are watching and protecting us; what shall I do now? Yasōdā, the wife of Nanda, promised me before this “O respected one! Your heart is almost burnt up with the fire of grief; therefore do you send to my house your son; I will protect it with utmost care; and especially to incur Kamsa’s faith and belief, I will give you another son. O Lord! This is now a very hard moment; what are we to do now?

व्यय्यः सन्ततेः शीरे कयं कर्तुं क्षणो भयेः ।

दूरे तिहस्य कान्नाछ लज्जा मेउतिदुर्भायया ॥ १९ ॥

And again how are you to exchange the two sons? However let what may come, to pass; now the moment of child birth has come; I am possessed by a feeling of shame not liable to be overcome.

परावृष्य मुखं स्वामिन्यथा किं केभीयहम् ।

इत्युक्त्वा तं महाभागं देवकी देवसमतम् ॥ 20 ॥

बालकें सुचुवे तर निर्णीधे परमादुर्जन् ।

You better turn away your face; there is no other remedy here. Thus saying to that blessed Vasudeva, worshipped by the gods, Devakī, at dead of night, delivered a wonderful child.

तं द्रव्या विस्मयं प्राप देवकी बालकं शुभम् ॥ 21 ॥

पति प्राह महाभागा हर्षोर्भूललकेवरा ।

The blessed Devaki looking on that exceedingly beautiful child, was struck with wonder and told her husband, her whole body being filled with joy.

पश्य पुत्रपुत्रं कान्त दुर्लंभ हि त्व प्रभो ॥ 22 ॥

अर्धैने कानरूपोउसी घातविषयित भातुजः ।

O Lord! Look at the face of your new born child, a very rare thing to see such a face as this. Alas! The son of my paternal uncle, Karīsa, will kill my this new born child.

वसुदेवसधीयुक्तना तमादाय के सुतम् ॥ 23 ॥

अपश्चचानं तन्य सुतस्यादुतकर्णः ।

"Karīsa will do so." Saying this, Vasudeva took up that child in this arms and began to look amorously at the face of that child of wonderful deeds.

वीक्ष्य पुत्रमुखं शेगिरित्थतिषिधे बभूव ह ॥ 24 ॥

किं कारीमि कर्ण न स्यादुःख्यस्य कृते मम ।

Thus looking, Vasudeva thought “What can I do now so as to relieve me from my sorrows owing to the future destruction of this child.

एवं चिन्तातुरे तत्म्यान्यावाश्रासीरिणी ॥ 25 ॥

वसुदेवं समाभाध्य गगने विश्यास्यास ।

वसुदेव गृहीर्वेनं गोकुले नय सत्यरः ॥ 26 ॥

रक्षापालास्था सर्वे मया नित्यविमोहिताः ।

विवृतिने कृतान्यही कपालिन च श्रंखला: ॥ 27 ॥

मुक्स्वैनं नन्दग्रे ल्व योगमायां समानय ।

While Vasudeva was thus anxiously pondering

Book IV Chapter XXIII

over, the Heavenly Voice clearly said thus: "O Vasudeva! Quickly go to Gokula with this child. The keepers and guards I have made dead asleep by My Māyā. The eight very strong doors are now lying wide open. You better free yourself from your chains and take this child, keep it in the house of Nanda and bring Yoga Māyā from there and come back here."

शुवैवं वसुदेवस्तु तस्मिन्कारागृहे नतः ॥ 28 ॥

विवृतं द्वापमालोक्य बभूव तसला नृप ।

तमादाय ययावाणु द्वारपालैरलस्तिक्तः ॥ 29 ॥

कालिन्दीतटमासाठ पूरं दूद्वा सुनिश्छितम् ।

Thus hearing the Heavenly Voice, he cast his glance at the doors and found them all wide open. O King! Very quickly then he took the child and stepped out of the prison, quite unnoticed by the guards and watchmen. Going to the banks of the Yamunā he found there the daughter of Kalindi, flowing with great force and became anxious.

तदैव कदिद्धनी सा बभूवासु सरिद्धा ॥ 30 ॥

योगमायाप्रभावेण ततारानकन्दुर्भिः ।

गला तु गोकुलं शीरिंगनिशीये निजनै पथि ॥ 31 ॥

नन्द्वारे स्थितः पश्यविश्वर्ति पशुसंजिताम् ।

But the river Yamanūś instantaneously turned out to be easily fordable, just knee deep; then Vasudeva, guided by Yoga Māyā, crossed the Yamanūś and betaking to an unfrequented road arrived at Gokula at dead of night. There, at the doorway of the house of Nanda, he began to see the cows, buffaloes, the wealth and property of Nanda.

तदेव तत्र संजाता यशोदा गर्भसम्भवा ॥ 32 ॥

योगमायांशजा देवी विगुणा दिव्यरूपिणी ।

At that very moment, there was born of Yośodā, the Mahā Devi, the part of the Divine Yoga Māyā, the Incarnate of the three qualities.

जाता तां बालिकां दिव्यां गृहीता कार्यकंत्र ॥ 33 ॥

तनागपत ददौ देखी सैरंधीक्रपतिरंगी ।

Then the Mahādevi Yoga Māyā, assuming the appearance of a female artisan, taking that divine

child in her arms came there and handed her over to Vasudeva.

वसुदेव: सुर्त दत्ता सैरंधीकरणेंकते ॥ 34 ॥

तमादाय ययौ शीर्धे बालिकां मुदिताशयः ।

Vasudeva, too, delivered his child over to the lotus like hands of the Devi and, taking the female child instead, quickly returned with his heart full of joy.

कारागारे ततो गत्वा देवक्षया: शयने सुताम् ॥ 35 ॥

नि:क्षित्य संस्कित: पार्षे चिन्ताविषो घयातुः ।

He went unto the prison and kept that female child in the bed of Devakī and remained aside, fearful and anxious.

रोरो सुरस्वरं कन्या तदैवागतसंज्ञाकः ॥ 36 ॥

उत्तस्थु: सेवका रातः श्रुत्वा तद्विति निशि ।

तप्तुभूपर्ति नत्वा वरितात्से3तिथिह्नतः ॥ 37 ॥

देवव्याशु सुतो जातः शीघ्रभेटि महामते ।

But that child, the moment she was lulled to sleep, began to cry in a sonorous voice; the royal guards at once woke upon that cry, and being bewildered with fear, hurriedly went to their king and said “O King! Come quickly. Devaki has brought forth a child.”

तदाकर्ण वचसोशं शीधे भोजपतिर्यो ॥ 38 ॥

प्रावृतं द्वारमालोक्य वसुदेवमधावृकत ।

कंस उवाच

सुतामान्य देवक्या वसुदेव महामते ॥ 39 ॥

गृत्युमें चाहणो गर्भसंत निहन्य सिंगुं शृत्रिम ।

The King of the Bhojas, hearing their words, went there quickly and saw the doors open, called on Vasudeva “O blessed one! Let me have the eighth son of Devaki, my death incarnate; I will at once kill that enemy of mine, born as part incarnate of Hari.”

व्यास उवाच

शुत्वा कंसचवः शीरिभ्यजस्तिविज्ञोः ॥ 40 ॥

तामादाय सुना पाणी ददी चारु महदिव्व ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing Kamsa's words, Vasudeva handed over to him the female child crying and very much bewildered with fear.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

इश्रासे ४ दारिकां रागा विस्मयं परंम गतः ॥ 4 1 ॥

देवबाणी बृथा जाता नारदस्य च भारितम् ।

At the sight of the female child, the king was very much astonished and began to think that the Heavenly Voice and the Seer Nārada's words turned out false.

वसुदेवः कवे कुर्वादितून संकटे त्रिशतः ॥ 4 2 ॥

रक्षपालाक्षे मे सर्वे साधधाना न संशयः ।

How can Vasudeva be able to bring about, in this dreadful place, the unnatural act of turning male into a female. Especially my guards are carefully watching the place. There is no doubt in this.

कुतोउक कन्यका कामं वक्ष गतः स सुतः किला। 4 3 ॥

सन्देशोउन न कलंक्यः कालस्य विषया गति: ।

How has this female child come here? Where has that eighth born child gone? I ought not to doubt in this matter. For the ways of Time are mysterious!

ईत सच्छिन तां बालां गृहीत्वा पादयोः खलः ॥ 44 ॥

पोययामास पायाणो निरुर्ण: कुलपासेनः ।

सा कारमिःसृता बाला ययावाकाणप्रपहलम् ॥ 45 ॥

दिव्यक्षा तदा भूत्वा तमुवाच मुदुस्वना ।

किं मया हताया पाप जाततेले बलवाधिपुः ॥ 46 ॥

हन्धियाति दुरागाध्य: सर्वेथा त्वां नारधामम् ।

Thinking thus, the cruel King Karīsa caught hold of that female child by her legs and, raising her high up in the air, was going to strike her against a stone, when the female child slipped out of his hands and flying into the air assumed a divine appearance and gently spoke to Karīsa, thus: "What will you get by killing me? Your powerful enemy is already born on the earth. O vilest of men! Disgrace to your family! He, the Excellent Human being Who is very difficult to be worshiped will certainly kill you."

इत्युक्त्वा सा गता कन्या गगनं कामगा शिवा ॥ 47 ॥

कंसरतु विस्यायविधो गतो निजगूई तदा ।

आनाय्य दानावन्यर्विंनिदं चरणमव्यवीत् ॥ 48 ॥

बकधेनुकवत्सादी-न्कोधाविधो भयानुगः ।

गछन्तु दानवा: सर्वे मम कार्यांशिसिद्धे ॥ 49 ॥

जातमात्राशु हेत्वया बालका यय कुत्रयित् ।

Saying thus, the auspicious female child, able to go anywhere according to her will, disappeared. Katīsa astonished returned to his own home and, becoming impatient with fear and anger, called all the Dānavas Baka, Dhenuka, Vatsa and others, and addressed them thus: "O Dānavas. Go all of you to serve my purpose. Kill any where the child whom you see just born.

पूतनैभा ब्रजावरा बालकी नन्दगोकुलम् ॥ 50 ॥

जातमाजार्विनिर्भन्ती शिशुन्तम ममाज्ञा ।

Let Pitanā, expert in killing children go to-day to Nanda's Gokula. My order is this: Any child recently born they must kill.

घैनुको वासकः केशी प्रलोबे बक एव च ॥ 51 ॥

सर्वे तिष्ठुं तत्रैव मम कार्यविकारीय ।

Dhenuka, Vatsaka, Keśī, Pralamba, and Vaka etc., all should remain in Gokula to carry out my order."

इत्याज्याम्यसुरान्कसो ययी निजगृहं खलः ।

चित्तविष्ठोर्दीनात्मा चिन्तियैवं तं पुनः ॥ 52 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते मातुपुराणे वतुर्षकन्चे ज्योविंशोराधायः ।

The cruel king Kasma, thus ordering the Demons, went away to his own palace, and, thinking on this matter over and over again became, very much afflicted with fear and his mind got immensely depressed.

Thus ends the Twenty Third Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimadevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāpam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa,

on the birth of Sat Vrana

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

