[Ch 23 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: The six sons of Devaki being thus killed by Kānsa and the seventh womb being miscarried, Kānsa began, when Devaki was pregnant for the eighth time, to think of the cause of his own death, as advised by Nārada and watched carefully, day and night, so that this time there would be born a son and there be no miscarriage.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- The six sons of Devakī being thus killed by Kaṃsa and the seventh womb being miscarried, Kaṃsa began, when Devakī was pregnant for the eighth time, to think of the cause of his own death as advised by Nārada and watched carefully, day and night, so that this time there would be born a son and there be no miscarriage.

[Ch 23 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the other hand the Bhagavān Hari came down and rested on the body of Vasudeva as part incarnate and then entered into the womb of Devaki, in due order.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the other hand the Bhagavān Hari came down and rested on the body of Vāsudeva as part incarnate and then entered into the womb of Devakī, in due order.

[Ch 23 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That very time the Goddess Yogamāyā, of Her own accord, entered into the womb of Yaśodā in order to help the workings of the gods.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That very time the Goddess Yogamāyā, of Her own accord, enters into the womb of Yasodā in order to help the workings of the gods.

[Ch 23 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Rohinī, the wife of Vasudeva was anxiously dwelling at that time through the fear of Kahīsa in the Nanda Gokula; Balarāma, the part incarnate of Ananta, took his birth there as Her son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Rohinī, the wife of Vāsudeva was anxiously dwelling at that time through the fear of Kaṃsa in the Nanda Gokula; Balarāma, the part incarnate of Ananta, took his birth there as Her son.

[Ch 23 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kainśa then imprisoned Devaki, who was being worshipped by gods, and engaged servants to take care of her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kaṃsa then imprisoned Devakī, who was being worshipped by gods, and engaged servants to take care of her.

[Ch 23 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vasudeva, too, entered into the prison with his wife Devakī, thinking of his issue and also being attracted by his attachment towards his wife.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vāsudeva, too, entered into the prison with his wife Devakī, thinking of his issue and also being attracted by his attachment towards his wife.

[Ch 23 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Visnu, here, the Deva of the Devas, to accomplish the purpose of the gods began to grow regularly in the womb of Devaki, being incessantly adored and praised by the gods.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viṣṇu, here, the Deva of the Devas, to accomplish the purpose of the gods began to grow regularly in the womb of Devakī, being incessantly adored and praised by the gods.

[Ch 23 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the tenth month was complete, on the eighth day of the dark fortnight, under the star Rohinī, Karīsa became much bewildered with fear and called on his Dānava followers and said “you must all carefully protect Devakī in the prison.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the tenth month was complete, on the eighth day of the dark fortnight, under the star Rohinī, Kaṃsa became much bewildered with fear and called on his Dānava followers and said “You must all carefully protect Devakī in the prison.

[Ch 23 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The son born from this eighth womb of Devaki will turn out my dire enemy; therefore do you all very carefully protect that child, my death incarnate (so that the child may not be transferred anywhere else). O Daityas! I will be able to sleep without any anxiety then, when I will be successful. Kill this eighth son of Devakī who has become the source of my constant worries and endless troubles."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The son born from this eighth womb of Devakī will turn out my dire enemy; therefore do you all very carefully protect that child, my death incarnate (so that the child may not be transferred anywhere else). O Daityas! I will be able to sleep without any anxiety then, when I will be successful. Kill this eighth son of Devakī who has become the source of my constant worries and endless troubles.

[Ch 23 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Equipped with swords, shafts and bow and darts do you all incessantly watch with eyes open on all sides, leaving off your sleep and drowsiness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Equipped with swords, shafts and bow and darts do you all incessantly watch with eyes open on all sides, leaving off your sleep and drowsiness.”

[Ch 23 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Thus ordering the Demons, the king Kāṃsa who had become worn out with this anxiety and was bewildered with fear, went quickly to his own palace room; but he could not find any trace of happiness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Thus ordering the Demons, the king Kaṃsa who had become worn out with this anxiety and was bewildered with fear, went quickly to his own palace room; but he could not find any trace of happiness.

[Ch 23 Verse 15-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the other hand, Devakī, at dead of night, in that prison, told Vasudeva “O king! My birth pain has come; I see here many guards, terrific, who are watching and protecting us; what shall I do now? Yasōdā, the wife of Nanda, promised me before this “O respected one! Your heart is almost burnt up with the fire of grief; therefore do you send to my house your son; I will protect it with utmost care; and especially to incur Kamsa’s faith and belief, I will give you another son. O Lord! This is now a very hard moment; what are we to do now?
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the other hand, Devakī, at dead of night, in that prison, told Vāsudeva “O king! My birth pain has come; I see here many guards, terrific, who are watching and protecting us; what shall I do now? Yasodā, the wife of Nanda, promised me before this. O respected one! Your heart is almost burnt up with the fire of grief; therefore do you send to my house your son; I will protect it with utmost care; and especially to iñcur Kaṃsa’s faith and belief, I will give you another son. O Lord! This is now a very hard moment; what are we to do now?

[Ch 23 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And again how are you to exchange the two sons? However let what may come, to pass; now the moment of child birth has come; I am possessed by a feeling of shame not liable to be overcome.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And again how are you to exchange the two sons? However let what may come, come to pass; now the moment of child birth has come; I am possessed by a feeling of shame not liable to be overcome.

[Ch 23 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You better turn away your face; there is no other remedy here. Thus saying to that blessed Vasudeva, worshipped by the gods, Devakī, at dead of night, delivered a wonderful child.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You better turn away your face; there is no other remedy here.” 20. Thus saying to that blessed Vāsudeva, worshipped by the gods, Devakī, at dead of night, delivered a wonderful child.

[Ch 23 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The blessed Devaki looking on that exceedingly beautiful child, was struck with wonder and told her husband, her whole body being filled with joy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The blessed Devakī looking on that exceedingly beautiful child, was struck with wonder and told her husband, her whole body being filled with joy.

[Ch 23 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord! Look at the face of your new born child, a very rare thing to see such a face as this. Alas! The son of my paternal uncle, Karīsa, will kill my this new born child.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord! Look at the face of your new born child, a very rare thing to see such a face as this. Alas! The son of my paternal uncle, Kaṃsa, will kill my this new born child.

[Ch 23 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Karīsa will do so." Saying this, Vasudeva took up that child in this arms and began to look amorously at the face of that child of wonderful deeds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “Kaṃsa will do so.” Saying this, Vāsudeva took up that child in his arms and began to look amorously at the face of that child of wonderful deeds.

[Ch 23 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus looking, Vasudeva thought “What can I do now so as to relieve me from my sorrows owing to the future destruction of this child.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus looking, Vāsudeva thought “What can I do now so as to relieve me from my sorrows owing to the future destruction of this child.”

[Ch 23 Verse 25-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► While Vasudeva was thus anxiously pondering over, the Heavenly Voice clearly said thus: "O Vasudeva! Quickly go to Gokula with this child. The keepers and guards I have made dead asleep by My Māyā. The eight very strong doors are now lying wide open. You better free yourself from your chains and take this child, keep it in the house of Nanda and bring Yoga Māyā from there and come back here."
NEW CORR ENG ──► While Vāsudeva was thus anxiously pondering over, the Heaven Voice clearly said thus :-- “O Vāsudeva! Quickly go to Gokula with the child. The keepers and guards I have made dead asleep by My Māyā. The eight very strong doors are now lying wide open. You better free yourself from your chains and take this child, keep it in the house of Nanda and bring Yoga Māyā from there and come back here.”

[Ch 23 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus hearing the Heavenly Voice, he cast his glance at the doors and found them all wide open. O King! Very quickly then he took the child and stepped out of the prison, quite unnoticed by the guards and watchmen. Going to the banks of the Yamunā he found there the daughter of Kalindi, flowing with great force and became anxious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus hearing the Heavenly Voice, he cast his glance at the doors and found them all wide open. O King! Very quickly then he took the child and stepped out of the prison, quite unnoticed by the guards and watchmen. Going to the banks of the Jumnā he found there the daughter of Kalindi, flowing with great force and became anxious.

[Ch 23 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But the river Yamanūś instantaneously turned out to be easily fordable, just knee deep; then Vasudeva, guided by Yoga Māyā, crossed the Yamanūś and betaking to an unfrequented road arrived at Gokula at dead of night. There, at the doorway of the house of Nanda, he began to see the cows, buffaloes, the wealth and property of Nanda.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But the river Jumnā instantaneously turned out to be easily fordable just knee deep; then Vāsudeva, guided by Yoga Māyā, crossed the Jumnā and betaking to an unfrequented road arrived at Gokul at dead of night. There, at the doorway of the house of Nanda, he began to see the cows, buffaloes, the wealth and property of Nanda.

[Ch 23 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At that very moment, there was born of Yośodā, the Mahā Devi, the part of the Divine Yoga Māyā, the Incarnate of the three qualities.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At that very moment, there was born of Yośodā, the Mahā Devī, the part of the Divine Yoga Māyā, the Incarnate of the three qualities.

[Ch 23 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the Mahādevi Yoga Māyā, assuming the appearance of a female artisan, taking that divine child in her arms came there and handed her over to Vasudeva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the Mahādevī Yoga Māyā, assuming the appearance of a female artisan, taking that divine female child in her arms came there and handed her over to Vāsudeva.

[Ch 23 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vasudeva, too, delivered his child over to the lotus like hands of the Devi and, taking the female child instead, quickly returned with his heart full of joy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vāsudeva, too, delivered his child over to the lotus like hands of the Devī and, taking the female child instead, quickly returned with his heart full of joy.

[Ch 23 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He went unto the prison and kept that female child in the bed of Devakī and remained aside, fearful and anxious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He went unto the prison and kept that female child in the bed of Devakī and remained aside, fearful and anxious.

[Ch 23 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But that child, the moment she was lulled to sleep, began to cry in a sonorous voice; the royal guards at once woke upon that cry, and being bewildered with fear, hurriedly went to their king and said “O King! Come quickly. Devaki has brought forth a child.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► But that child, the moment she was lulled to sleep, began to cry in a sonorous voice; the royal guards at once woke up on that cry, and being bewildered with fear, hurriedly went to their king and said “O King! Come quickly. Devakī has brought forth a child.”

[Ch 23 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King of the Bhojas, hearing their words, went there quickly and saw the doors open, called on Vasudeva “O blessed one! Let me have the eighth son of Devaki, my death incarnate; I will at once kill that enemy of mine, born as part incarnate of Hari.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King of the Bhojas, hearing their words, went there quickly and saw the doors open, called on Vāsudeva “O blessed one! Let me have the eighth son of Devakī, my death incarnate; I will at once kill that enemy of mine, born as part incarnate of Hari.”

[Ch 23 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing Kamsa's words, Vasudeva handed over to him the female child crying and very much bewildered with fear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing Kaṃsa’s words, Vāsudeva handed over to him the female child crying and very much bewildered with fear.

[Ch 23 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At the sight of the female child, the king was very much astonished and began to think that the Heavenly Voice and the Seer Nārada's words turned out false.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At the sight of the female child, the king was very much astonished and began to think that the Heavenly Voice and the Seer Nārada’s words turned out false.

[Ch 23 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How can Vasudeva be able to bring about, in this dreadful place, the unnatural act of turning male into a female. Especially my guards are carefully watching the place. There is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► How can Vāsudeva be able to bring about, in this dreadful place, the unnatural act of turning male into a female. Especially my guards are carefully watching the place. There is no doubt in this.

[Ch 23 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How has this female child come here? Where has that eighth born child gone? I ought not to doubt in this matter. For the ways of Time are mysterious!
NEW CORR ENG ──► How has this female child come here? Where has that eighth born child gone? I ought not to doubt in this matter. For the ways of Time are mysterious!

[Ch 23 Verse 44-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thinking thus, the cruel King Karīsa caught hold of that female child by her legs and, raising her high up in the air, was going to strike her against a stone, when the female child slipped out of his hands and flying into the air assumed a divine appearance and gently spoke to Karīsa, thus: "What will you get by killing me? Your powerful enemy is already born on the earth. O vilest of men! Disgrace to your family! He, the Excellent Human being Who is very difficult to be worshiped will certainly kill you."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thinking thus, the cruel King Kaṃsa caught hold of that female child by her legs and, raising her high up in the air, was going to strike her against a stone, when the female child slipped out of his hands and flying into the air assumed a divine appearance and gently spoke to Kaṃsa, thus :-- “What will you get by killing me? Your powerful enemy is already born on the earth. O vilest of men! Disgrace to your family! He, the Excellent Human being Who is very difficult to be worshiped will certainly kill you.”

[Ch 23 Verse 47-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Saying thus, the auspicious female child, able to go anywhere according to her will, disappeared. Katīsa astonished returned to his own home and, becoming impatient with fear and anger, called all the Dānavas Baka, Dhenuka, Vatsa and others, and addressed them thus: "O Dānavas. Go all of you to serve my purpose. Kill any where the child whom you see just born.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Saying thus, the auspicious female child, able to go anywhere according to her will, disappeared. Kaṃsa astonished returned to his own home and, becoming impatient with fear and anger, called all the Dānavas Baka, Dhenuka, Vatsa and others, and addressed them thus :-- “O Dānavas. Go all of you to serve my purpose. Kill anywhere the child whom you see just born.

[Ch 23 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Let Pitanā, expert in killing children go to-day to Nanda's Gokula. My order is this: Any child recently born they must kill.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Let Pūtanā, expert in killing children go today to Nanda’s Gokula. My order is this :-- Any child recently born they must kill.

[Ch 23 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Dhenuka, Vatsaka, Keśī, Pralamba, and Vaka etc., all should remain in Gokula to carry out my order."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Dhenuka, Vatsaka, Keśi, Pralamba, and Vaka, etc., all should remain in Gokula to carry out my order.”

[Ch 23 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The cruel king Kasma, thus ordering the Demons, went away to his own palace, and, thinking on this matter over and over again became, very much afflicted with fear and his mind got immensely depressed. Thus ends the Twenty Third Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimadevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāpam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa, on the birth of Sat Vrana
NEW CORR ENG ──► The cruel king Kaṃsa, thus ordering the Demons, went away to his own palace, and, thinking on this matter over and over again became, very much afflicted with fear and his mind got immensely depressed. Thus ends the 23rd Chapter in the 4th Skandha of Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa, on the birth of
