Chapter 7 - On the going of the Devas to Kailāsa



1-3. Vyāsa said :-- O King! Mahiṣa seeing the Dānavas afflicted with grief, quitted his buffalo appearance, assumed a lion form and spreading this long manes began to roar aloud and fell amidst the Deva forces; then the Devas were terrified on seeing his sharp nails. That lion-form Mahiṣa first attacked so severely the Garuḍa with his nails, that his whole body was besmeared with blood; then he attacked Viṣṇu’s arms with his nails.

4-11. Seeing the Dānava, Vāsudeva Hari raised his discus in anger and attacked him with great force to kill him. Just when Hari struck the Dānava violently with his Cakra, the powerful Dānava quitted immediately his lion-form, assumed the buffalo form and struck Hari with his two horns. Vāsudeva, thus pierced in his breast with the horns, became confounded and fled away as best as he could till he reached his own abode, Vaikunṭha. Seeing Hari thus fleeing away, Śaṅkara, too, thought him invulnerable and fled to his Kailāśa mountain with fear. Brahmā, too, fled to his own abode with terror; but the powerful Vāsava took patience and remained steady in the battle. Varuṇa taking his Śakti waited patiently for battle. Yama, too, with his staff remained there ready to fight. Kuvera, the Lord of the Yakṣas, remained very busy in close fighting with the Dānavas; Fire, taking Śakti, also waited. The Sun and Moon, the Lord of the stars, both remained in firm resolve to fight with Mahiṣa, the lord of the Dānavas.

12-22. O King! In the meanwhile, the Dānava forces got angry and attacked them on all sides, shooting at the enemies a mass of dangerous serpent-like arrows. The Lord of the Dānavas, Mahiṣa, too, assuming the buffalo appearance, reigned supreme in the middle. At this moment fierce sounds of the warriors on both the sides were heard. During the sharp contest of the Devas and Dānavas, the sounds from the bowstrings and the clappings of the hands were heard like the roarings of thunder. The powerful Dānava, then, swelled with pride, began to hurl the mountain tops with his horns, thus killing the Deva forces. Some by hoofs and some by the lashing of the tail, that angry Mahiṣa, very wonderful to behold, sent to the region of Death. Then the Devas and Gandarbhas became very much frightened; so much so, that Indra fled away at once on the sight of Mahiṣa. Indra thus retreating from the field, Yama, Kuvera, and Varuṇa all quitted the battle-ground with fear. Indra fled away quitting his Airāvata elephant and Uccaiśravā horse; so Mahiṣa got the possession of the elephant and the horse, as well the heavenly cow of the Sun. So the Dānavas considered themselves pre-eminently victorious and returned to their abodes. Next they wanted to go, as early as possible, to the Heavens, with all their forces. In no time Mahiṣa went to the abode of Indra, deserted by all the terror-stricken Devas and got the possession thereof. Then taking his seat on the beautiful throne of Indra, he made the other Dānavas occupy the several seats of the other Devas.

23-27. Thus fighting full one hundred years, the Dānava Mahiṣa, puffed up with pride, acquired the seat of Indra, his desired object. He banished the Devas from the Heavens; the Devas, thus tormented began to wander in the caves of hills and dales for a period of good many years. O King! The Devas, at last, were quite tired and took the four-faced Brahmā, the Creator’s refuge. At that instant, the Lord of the world, the Rajas incarnate, the Originator of the Vedas, was seated on His lotus seat; surrounding Him were standing his mortal sons Marīci, etc., with their passions subdued, mind calm and beyond the sphere of the Vedas and Vedāṅgas; there were there also Siddhas, Gandarbhas, Kinnaras, Cāranas, Uragas, and Pannagas. The terrified Devas then began to praise and chant hymns to Brahmā, the Lord of the world.

28-33. The Devas said :-- “O Creator! O Lotus-born! O Thou, the Remover of the pains and afflictions of all this world! How is it that you are not moved with pity towards the Devas, seeing that we are defeated by the lord of the Dānavas and have been banished from our abode; what more shall we say, our troubles are now indescribable, as we are living in the caves of hills and dales. O Creator! A son may be a hundred times guilty of offence; is it, then, that the father, devoid of any feeling of covetousness, deserts his sons and gives them trouble! We are oppressed by the Dānavas, we who are wholly devoted to your lotus-feet, why are you today showing signs of indifference towards us! That wicked Dānava is thoroughly enjoying to-day the Heavens of the Devas, is forcibly taking their share of the oblations of clarified butter in the Yajñas (sacrifices)

from the Brāhmaṇas; is enjoying the Pārijāta tree and also the heavenly milching cow, the jewel of the ocean. What more shall we describe to you the strange doings of the Asuras; O Lord of the Devas! You are perfectly aware of all that they strive and execute; for, by your knowledge, you know everything of this world; therefore, O Lord! We lie prostrate at your feet. That vicious Dānava, of wicked character and full of mischievous actions, gives us troubles in various ways wherever we go; O Lord of the Devas! Thou art our only Protector; therefore, O Lord! Do what is good to us. Thou art the Awarder of the desires of the Devas. Thou art the First Creator of the world, and Preserver; therefore if Thou dost not do us our good, to whom else shall we take refuge, when we are so severely oppressed as if we are burnt in a forest conflagration! Who else is more lustrous, more beneficent and more peace-giving Governor?

34-35. Vyāsa said :-- O king! All the Devas, praising Him thus, bowed down to the Lord of creation with folded hands and saluted him, with their faces very heavy, overladen with deep sorrow. The Grand Sire of all the Lokas, seeing the plight of the Devas, consoled them with sweet words and made them happy.

36-43. O Suras! What shall I do? The Dānava has become exceedingly haughty on account of his getting boons; he can be killed by females only; He is invulnerable by any male. What remedy is there now? Therefore, O Suras! Let us all go to Kailāsa, the best of all the mountains; thence we will take Śaṅkara, the expert in doing the works of Gods, and go to Vaikunṭha, where Viṣṇu, the Deva of the Devas resides. There we all will unite and hold a counsel and decide what is best to do, to serve the purpose of the gods. Thus making out the programme, Brahmā riding on his Hamsa went to Kailāsa, accompanied by all the Devas. At the same time Śiva came to know out of his introspection about the coming of Brahmā and the other Devas and soon came out of his dwelling abode. When they met each other, they saluted each other and felt very glad. The Devas then bowed down to them. Seats were given to the Devas; and when they sat respectively on their Āsanas, the Lord of Pārvatī also took his own seat. Śiva asked the welfare of Brahmā and the Devas and asked the reasons of their coming to Kailāsa.

44. O Brahmā! What has caused you to come here along with Indra and the other Devas? O highly fortunate one! Please mention it.

45-47. Brahmā said :-- O Deva of the Devas! The Dānava Mahiṣa is oppressing all the Devas in the Heavens; they therefore terrified are wandering hither and thither in the caves and hills with Indra. Mahiṣa and the other Dānavas are now accepting their share of Yajñas; the Lokopālas, being oppressed, have come to-day and are now taking shelter of Thee. O Śambhu! Considering the situation serious, I have taken them with me here; therefore, O Deva, do that which is reasonable and by which the purpose of the Devas can be carried out. O Bhūta Bhāvana! (The creator of the world) The whole charge and responsibility of all the Devas devolves on Thee.

48. Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus, Śaṅkara smiled a little and spoke charming words to the Lotus-born in the following manner :--

49-55. O Bibhu! It is You that gave before this boon to Mahiṣa; and therefore it is you that have wrought this mischief. The Dānava has become so strong a hero that he has caused terror to all the Devas even. Now where can we get such a noble woman who becomes able to kill that Dānava, elated with pride. My wife nor your wife ought to go to battle; even if they, the good ladies go, how will they be able to fight? The fortunate wife of Indra, too, is not expert in the art of warfare; where else there is another lady who can kill this demon, blinded with pride. I, therefore, propose this; let us all go today to Viṣṇu and, praising him with hymns, engage him quickly to this cause of the gods. Viṣṇu is foremost amongst the intelligent; therefore it is highly advisable to execute all actions after duly consulting with him. He, by dint of his high intelligence, will find out means and effect our purpose.

Vyāsa said :-- O King! Brahmā and the other Devas heard Rudra and approved heartily and saying, “Be it so” instantly rose up. At the time, seeing all the auspicious signs concerning the success of the gods, they all became glad; and, riding on their respective vehicles, drove towards the abode of Viṣṇu. Favourable fragrant winds, pleasant to touch, began to blow gently, birds began to chant hymns of praise and signs of success were seen all along their way. The sky was clear and the quarters became free; in short, everything showed favourable all along their way.

Here ends the Seventh Chapter on the going of the Devas to Kailāsa in the Fifth Skandha of Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.