[Ch 7 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Mahiṣa, seeing the Dānavas afflicted with grief, quitted his buffalo appearance, assumed a lion form and spreading his long mains began to roar aloud and fell amidst the Deva forces; then the Devas were terrified on seeing his sharp nails.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Mahiṣa seeing the Dānavas afflicted with grief, quitted his buffalo appearance, assumed a lion form and spreading this long manes began to roar aloud and fell amidst the Deva forces; then the Devas were terrified on seeing his sharp nails.

[Ch 7 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That lion-form Mahisa first attacked so severely the Garuda with his nails, that his whole body was besmeared with blood; then he attacked Vişnu's arms with his nails.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That lion-form Mahiṣa first attacked so severely the Garuḍa with his nails, that his whole body was besmeared with blood; then he attacked Viṣṇu’s arms

[Ch 7 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the Dānava, Vāsudeva Hari raised his discus in anger and attacked him with great force to kill him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the Dānava, Vāsudeva Hari raised his discus in anger and attacked him with great force to kill him.

[Ch 7 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Just when Hari struck the Dānava violently with his Cakra, the powerful Dānava quitted immediately his lion-form, assumed the buffalo form and struck Hari with his two horns.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Just when Hari struck the Dānava violently with his Cakra, the powerful Dānava quitted immediately his lion-form, assumed the buffalo form and struck Hari with his two horns.

[Ch 7 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vāsudeva, thus pierced in his breast with the horns, became confounded and fled away as best as he could till he reached his own abode, Vaikuntha.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vāsudeva, thus pierced in his breast with the horns, became confounded and fled away as best as he could till he reached his own abode, Vaikunṭha.

[Ch 7 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing Hari thus fleeing away, Śaṅkara, too, thought him invulnerable and fled to his Keilāśa mountain with fear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing Hari thus fleeing away, Śaṅkara, too, thought him invulnerable and fled to his Kailāśa mountain with fear.

[Ch 7 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā, too, fled to his own abode with terror; but the powerful Vāsava took patience and remained steady in the battle.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā, too, fled to his own abode with terror; but the powerful Vāsava took patience and remained steady in the battle.

[Ch 7 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Varuna taking his Sakti waited patiently for battle. Yama, too, with his staff remained there ready to fight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Varuṇa taking his Śakti waited patiently for battle. Yama, too, with his staff remained there ready to fight.

[Ch 7 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kubera, the Lord of the Yakṣas, remained very busy in close fighting with the Dānavas; Fire, taking Śakti, also waited.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kuvera, the Lord of the Yakṣas, remained very busy in close fighting with the Dānavas; Fire, taking Śakti, also waited.

[Ch 7 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Sun and Moon, the Lord of the stars, both remained in firm resolve to fight Mahişa, Lord of the Dānavas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Sun and Moon, the Lord of the stars, both remained in firm resolve to fight with Mahiṣa,

[Ch 7 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! In the meanwhile, the Dānavas forces got angry and attacked them on all sides, shooting at the enemies a mass of dangerous serpent-like arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! In the meanwhile, the Dānava forces got angry and attacked them on all sides, shooting at the enemies a mass of dangerous serpent-like arrows.

[Ch 7 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Lord of the Dānavas, Mahisa, too, assuming the buffalo appearance, reigned supreme in the middle.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Lord of the Dānavas, Mahiṣa, too, assuming the buffalo appearance, reigned supreme in the middle.

[Ch 7 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this moment fierce sounds of the warriors on both the sides were heard. During the sharp contest of the Devas and Dānavas, the sounds from the bowstrings and the clippings of the hands were heard like the roarings of thunder.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this moment fierce sounds of the warriors on both the sides were heard. During the sharp contest of the Devas and Dānavas, the sounds from the bowstrings and the clappings of the hands were heard like the roarings of thunder.

[Ch 7 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The powerful Dānava, then swollen with pride, began to hurl the mountain tops with his horns, thus killing the Deva forces.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The powerful Dānava, then, swelled with pride, began to hurl the mountain tops with his horns, thus killing the Deva forces.

[Ch 7 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Some by hoofs and some by the lashing of the tail, that angry Mahisa, very wonderful to behold, sent to the region of Death.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Some by hoofs and some by the lashing of the tail, that angry Mahiṣa, very wonderful to behold, sent to the region of Death.

[Ch 7 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the Devas and Gandharvas became very much frightened; so much so, that Indra fled away once on the sight of Mahisa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the Devas and Gandarbhas became very much frightened; so much so, that Indra fled away at once on the sight of Mahiṣa.

[Ch 7 Verse 18-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra thus retreating from the field, Yama, Kubera, and Varuna all quitted the battle-ground with fear. Indra fled away quitting his Airāvata elephant and Uccaísravā horse; so Mahiṣa got the possession of the elephant and the horse, as well the heavenly cow of the Sun. So the Dānavas considered themselves pre-eminently victorious and returned to their abodes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra thus retreating from the field, Yama, Kuvera, and Varuṇa all quitted the battle-ground with fear. Indra fled away quitting his Airāvata elephant and Uccaiśravā horse; so Mahiṣa got the possession of the elephant and the horse, as well the heavenly cow of the Sun. So the Dānavas considered themselves pre-eminently victorious and returned to their abodes.

[Ch 7 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next they wanted to go, as early possible, to the Heavens, with all their forces. In no time Mahisa went to the abode of Indra, deserted by all the terror-stricken Devas and got the possession thereof.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next they wanted to go, as early as possible, to the Heavens, with all their forces. In no time Mahiṣa went to the abode of Indra, deserted by all the terror-stricken Devas and got the possession thereof.

[Ch 7 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then taking his seat on the beautiful throne of Indra, he made the other Dānavas occupy the several seats of the other Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then taking his seat on the beautiful throne of Indra, he made the other Dānavas occupy the several seats of the other Devas.

[Ch 7 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus fighting full one hundred years, the Dānava Mahiṣa, puffed up with pride, acquired the seat of Indra, his desired object.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus fighting full one hundred years, the Dānava Mahiṣa, puffed up with pride, acquired the seat of Indra, his desired object.

[Ch 7 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He banished the Devas from the Heaven; the Devas, thus tormented began to wander in the caves of hills and dales for a period of good many years.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He banished the Devas from the Heavens; the Devas, thus tormented began to wander in the caves of hills and dales for a period of good many years.

[Ch 7 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The Devas, at last, were quite tired and took the four-faced Brahmā, the Creator's refuge.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The Devas, at last, were quite tired and took the four-faced Brahmā, the Creator’s refuge.

[Ch 7 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At that instant, the Lord of the world, the Rajas incarnate, the Originator of the Vedas, was seated on His lotus seat; surrounding Him were standing his mortal sons Marici, etc., with their passions subdued, mind calm and beyond the sphere of the Vedas and Vedāngas; there were also Siddhas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Čāranas, Uragas, and Pannagas, the terrified Devas then began to praise and chant hymns to Brahmā, the Lord of the world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At that instant, the Lord of the world, the Rajas incarnate, the Originator of the Vedas, was seated on His lotus seat; surrounding Him were standing his mortal sons Marīci, etc., with their passions subdued, mind calm and beyond the sphere of the Vedas and Vedāṅgas; there were there also Siddhas, Gandarbhas, Kinnaras, Cāranas, Uragas, and Pannagas. The terrified Devas then began to praise and chant hymns to Brahmā, the Lord of the world.

[Ch 7 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas said: “O Creator! O Lotus-born! O Thou, the Remover of the pains and afflictions of all this world! How is it that you are not moved with pity towards the Devas, seeing that we are defeated by the lord of the Dānavas and have been banished from our abode; what more shall we say, our troubles are now indescribable, as we are living in the caves of hills and dales.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas said :-- “O Creator! O Lotus-born! O Thou, the Remover of the pains and afflictions of all this world! How is it that you are not moved with pity towards the Devas, seeing that we are defeated by the lord of the Dānavas and have been banished from our abode; what more shall we say, our troubles are now indescribable, as we are living in the caves of hills and dales.

[Ch 7 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Creator! A son may be a hundred times guilty of offence; is it, then, that the father, devoid of any feeling of covetousness, deserts his sons and gives them trouble! We are oppressed by the Dānvans, we who are wholly devoted to your lotus-feet, why are you today showing signs of indifference towards us!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Creator! A son may be a hundred times guilty of offence; is it, then, that the father, devoid of any feeling of covetousness, deserts his sons and gives them trouble! We are oppressed by the Dānavas, we who are wholly devoted to your lotus-feet, why are you today showing signs of indifference towards us!

[Ch 7 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That wicked Dānava is thoroughly enjoying today the Heaven of the Devas, is forcibly taking their share of the oblations of clarified butter in the Yajñas (sacrifices) from the Brāhmanas; is enjoying the Pārijāta tree and also the heavenly milching cow, the jewel of the ocean.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That wicked Dānava is thoroughly enjoying to-day the Heavens of the Devas, is forcibly taking their share of the oblations of clarified butter in the Yajñas (sacrifices) from the Brāhmaṇas; is enjoying the Pārijāta tree and also the heavenly milching cow, the jewel of the ocean.

[Ch 7 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What more shall we describe to you the strange doings of the Asuras; O Lord of the Devas! You are perfectly aware of all that they strive and execute; for, by your knowledge, you know everything of this world; therefore. O Lord! We lie prostrate at your feet.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What more shall we describe to you the strange doings of the Asuras; O Lord of the Devas! You are perfectly aware of all that they strive and execute; for, by your knowledge, you know everything of this world; therefore, O Lord! We lie prostrate at your feet.

[Ch 7 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That vicious Dānava, of wicked character and full of mischievous actions, gives us troubles in various ways wherever we go; O Lord of the Devas! Thou art our only Protector; therefore, O Lord! Do what is good to us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That vicious Dānava, of wicked character and full of mischievous actions, gives us troubles in various ways wherever we go; O Lord of the Devas! Thou art our only Protector; therefore, O Lord! Do what is good to us.

[Ch 7 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou art the Awarder of the desires of the Devas. Thou art the First Creator of the world, and Preserver; therefore if Thou dost not do us our good, to whom else shall we take refuge, when we are so severely oppressed as if we are burnt in a forest conflagration! Who else is more lustrous, more beneficent and more peace giving Governor?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thou art the Awarder of the desires of the Devas. Thou art the First Creator of the world, and Preserver; therefore if Thou dost not do us our good, to whom else shall we take refuge, when we are so severely oppressed as if we are burnt in a forest conflagration! Who else is more lustrous, more beneficent and more peace-giving Governor?

[Ch 7 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! All the Devas, praising Him thus, bowed down to the Lord of creation with folded hands and saluted him, with their faces very heavy, overladen with deep sorrow. The Grand Sire of all the Lokas, seeing the plight of the Devas, consoled them with sweet words and made them happy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! All the Devas, praising Him thus, bowed down to the Lord of creation with folded hands and saluted him, with their faces very heavy, overladen with deep sorrow. The Grand Sire of all the Lokas, seeing the plight of the Devas, consoled them with sweet words and made them happy.

[Ch 7 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā said: O Suras! What shall I do? The Dānava has become exceedingly haughty on account of his getting boons; he can be killed by females only; He is invulnerable by any male.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Suras! What shall I do? The Dānava has become exceedingly haughty on account of his getting boons; he can be killed by females only; He is invulnerable by any male.

[Ch 7 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What remedy is there now? Therefore, O Suras! Let us all go to Kailāśa, the best of all the mountains; thence we will take Śankara, the expert in doing the works of Gods, and go to Vaikuntha, where Visnu, the Deva of the Devas resides. There we all will unite and hold a counsel and decide what is best to do, to serve the purpose of the gods.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What remedy is there now? Therefore, O Suras! Let us all go to Kailāsa, the best of all the mountains; thence we will take Śaṅkara, the expert in doing the works of Gods, and go to Vaikunṭha, where Viṣṇu, the Deva of the Devas resides. There we all will unite and hold a counsel and decide what is best to do, to serve the purpose of the gods.

[Ch 7 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus making out the programme, Brahmā riding on his Hamsa went to Kailāśa, accompanied by all the Devas. At the same time Śiva came to know out of his introspection about the coming of Brahmā and the other Devas and soon came out of his dwelling abode.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus making out the programme, Brahmā riding on his Hamsa went to Kailāsa, accompanied by all the Devas. At the same time Śiva came to know out of his introspection about the coming of Brahmā and the other Devas and soon came

[Ch 7 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When they met each other, they saluted each other and felt very glad. The Devas then bowed down to them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When they met each other, they saluted each other and felt very glad. The Devas then bowed down to them.

[Ch 7 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seats were given to the Devas; and when they sat respectively on their Asanas, the Lord of Pārvati also took his own seat.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seats were given to the Devas; and when they sat respectively on their Āsanas, the Lord of Pārvatī also took his own seat.

[Ch 7 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śiva asked the welfare of Brahmā and the Devas and asked the reasons of their coming to Kailāśa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śiva asked the welfare of Brahmā and the Devas and asked the reasons of their coming to Kailāsa.

[Ch 7 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brahmā! What has caused you to come here along with Indra and the other Devas? O highly fortunate one! Please mention it.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brahmā! What has caused you to come here along with Indra and the other Devas? O highly fortunate one! Please mention it.

[Ch 7 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā said: O Deva of the Devas! The Dānava Mahisa is oppressing all the Devas in the Heavens; they therefore terrified are wandering hither and thither in the caves and hills with Indra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā said :-- O Deva of the Devas! The Dānava Mahiṣa is oppressing all the Devas in the Heavens; they therefore terrified are wandering hither and thither in the caves and hills with Indra.

[Ch 7 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mahīsa and the other Dānavas are now accepting their share of Yajñas; the Lokapālas, being oppressed have come today and are now taking shelter of Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mahiṣa and the other Dānavas are now accepting their share of Yajñas; the Lokopālas, being oppressed, have come to-day and are now taking shelter of Thee.

[Ch 7 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sambhu! Considering the situation serious, I have taken them with me here; therefore, O Deva, do that which is reasonable and by which the purpose of the Devas can be carried out. O Bhūta Bīśvana! (The creator of the world) The whole charge and responsibility of all the Devas devolves on Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Śambhu! Considering the situation serious, I have taken them with me here; therefore, O Deva, do that which is reasonable and by which the purpose of the Devas can be carried out. O Bhūta Bhāvana! (The creator of the world) The whole charge and responsibility of all the Devas devolves on Thee.

[Ch 7 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus, Śankara smiled a little and spoke charming words to the Lotus-born in the following manner:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus, Śaṅkara smiled a little and spoke charming words to the Lotus-born in the following manner :--

[Ch 7 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Bibhu! It is You that gave before this boon to Mahisa and therefore it is you that have wrought this mischief. The Dānava has become so strong a hero that he has caused terror to all the Devas even.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Bibhu! It is You that gave before this boon to Mahiṣa; and therefore it is you that have wrought this mischief. The Dānava has become so strong a hero that he has caused terror to all the Devas even.

[Ch 7 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now where can we get such a noble woman who becomes able to kill that Dānava, elated with pride. My wife nor your wife ought to go to battle; even if, the good ladies go, how will they be able to fight?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now where can we get such a noble woman who becomes able to kill that Dānava, elated with pride. My wife nor your wife ought to go to battle; even if they, the good ladies go, how will they be able to fight?

[Ch 7 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The fortunate wife of Indra, too, is not expert in the art of warfare; where else there is another lady who can kill this demon, blinded with pride.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The fortunate wife of Indra, too, is not expert in the art of warfare; where else there is another lady who can kill this demon, blinded with pride.

[Ch 7 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I, therefore, propose this; let us all go today to Visnu and, praising him with hymns, engage him quickly to this cause of the gods.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I, therefore, propose this; let us all go today to Viṣṇu and, praising him with hymns, engage him quickly to this cause of the gods.

[Ch 7 Verse 54-55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Visnu is foremost amongst the intelligent; therefore it is highly advisable to execute all actions after duly consulting with him. He, by dint of his high intelligence, will find out means and effect our purpose.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viṣṇu is foremost amongst the intelligent; therefore it is highly advisable to execute all actions after duly consulting with him. He, by dint of his high intelligence, will find out means and effect our purpose.

[Ch 7 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Brahmā and the other Devas heard Rudra and approved heartily and saying, "Be it so" instantly rose up.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Brahmā and the other Devas heard Rudra and approved heartily and saying, “Be it so” instantly rose up.

[Ch 7 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At the time, seeing all the auspicious signs concerning the success of the gods, they all became glad; and, riding on their respective vehicles, drove towards the abode of Viṣṇu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At the time, seeing all the auspicious signs concerning the success of the gods, they all became glad; and, riding on their respective vehicles, drove towards the abode of Viṣṇu.

[Ch 7 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Favourable fragrant winds, pleasant to touch, began to blow gently, birds began to chant hymns of praise and signs of success were seen all along their way.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Favourable fragrant winds, pleasant to touch, began to blow gently, birds began to chant hymns of praise and signs of success were seen all along their way.

[Ch 7 Verse 59-60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The sky was clear and the quarters became free; in short, everything showed favourable all along their way. Here ends the Seventh Chapter on the going of the Devas to Kailāsa in the Fifth Book of Śrimaddevi-bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The sky was clear and the quarters became free; in short, everything showed favourable all along their way. Here ends the Seventh Chapter on the going of the Devas to Kailāsa in the Fifth Skandha of Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
