CHAPTER VII

On the Going of the Devas to Kailāsa

व्यास उवाच

असुतामहिषो भूद्यि विषणपन्नसत्त्वा ।

त्यक्त्वा तन्माहिषह रूपं बचुप मृगगडसी ॥ १ ॥

कृत्वा नादं महापोरं विस्तार्यं च महासटान् ।

घपात सुरसेनायां जासयत्रखदर्शनैः ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Mahiṣa, seeing the Dānavas afflicted with grief, quitted his buffalo appearance, assumed a lion form and spreading his long mains began to roar aloud and fell amidst

the Deva forces; then the Devas were terrified on seeing his sharp nails.

मार्डे च नखापातैः कृत्वा कृधिरवितृम् ।

जयान च धुवे लिणुं नख्यापातेन केक्षेरी ॥ ३ ॥

That lion-form Mahisa first attacked so severely the Garuda with his nails, that his whole body was besmeared with blood; then he attacked Vişnu's arms with his nails.

वासुदेवो5पि तं दूधका चकमुध्यय वेगवान् ।

हन्तुकामो हरि: काममवायगु कुश्यान्वितः ॥ 4 ॥

Book V Chapter VII

Seeing the Dānava, Vāsudeva Hari raised his discus in anger and attacked him with great force to kill him.

यावद्ध्यरियुं वेगान्चक्रेणाणिबज्ञान तम् ।

तावलोरोतिजलः शुड़ीं शुर्णायां न्यह्नद्धरिण ॥ 5 ॥

Just when Hari struck the Dānava violently with his Cakra, the powerful Dānava quitted immediately his lion-form, assumed the buffalo form and struck Hari with his two horns.

वासुदेवो विषाणायां ताडितोरिस विद्धलः ।

पलायवपरो वेणाजजगाम पूर्वनं निजम् ॥ 6 ॥

Vāsudeva, thus pierced in his breast with the horns, became confounded and fled away as best as he could till he reached his own abode, Vaikuntha.

गतं दूद्वा हरिं कामं संक्रोरूपि भयान्यन्तः ।

अवध्यं तं परं मत्ता ययी केतामयर्वतम् ॥ 7 ॥

Seeing Hari thus fleeing away, Śaṅkara, too, thought him invulnerable and fled to his Keilāśa mountain with fear.

हद्धारपि च निथ धाम त्वरितः प्रययो भयात् ।

भयावा वज़्मालंब्य तस्थावाजौ महावलः ॥ 8 ॥

Brahmā, too, fled to his own abode with terror; but the powerful Vāsava took patience and remained steady in the battle.

वकणः शक्तिमालंब्य धैर्यमालंब्य संस्थितः ।

यभोर्षि दणघमादाय चत: समतत्वरः ॥ 9 ॥

Varuna taking his Sakti waited patiently for battle. Yama, too, with his staff remained there ready to fight.

ततो यक्षाधियः कामं बधूव रणतयरः ।

पाबकः शक्तिभादाय तताभ्युब्द्रमानसः ॥ 10 ॥

Kubera, the Lord of the Yakṣas, remained very busy in close fighting with the Dānavas; Fire, taking Śakti, also waited.

नक्षत्राधियपितः सुर्यः स्मवेति श्वितावृषी ।

बीक्ष्य तं दानवश्रेष्टे युद्धाय कृतनिश्रशी ॥ १ १ ॥

The Sun and Moon, the Lord of the stars, both remained in firm resolve to fight Mahişa, Lord of the Dānavas.

एतमिचलेते कुब्दे देत्यसेन्यं समभ्यगत् ।

विशुजबाणजालानि कृगहिसुशानि च ॥ १ २ ॥

O King! In the meanwhile, the Dānavas forces got angry and attacked them on all sides, shooting at the enemies a mass of dangerous serpent-like arrows.

कूला हि महिषं रूपं भृपति: संस्थितस्तदा ।

देवदानवयोधानां निनादस्तमुतोप्रभत् ॥ १ ३ ॥

The Lord of the Dānavas, Mahisa, too, assuming the buffalo appearance, reigned supreme in the middle.

न्याघात्रु ततल्यातो मेघनादसमोर्भभवत् ।

संग्रामे सुमहायोरे देवदानवसेनयोः ॥ १ ४ ॥

At this moment fierce sounds of the warriors on both the sides were heard. During the sharp contest of the Devas and Dānavas, the sounds from the bowstrings and the clippings of the hands were heard like the roarings of thunder.

श्रुभाध्यां पवतत्वरूपांशिक्षेय पर महावलः ।

जयान सुरसंधांश दानवो महावर्षितः ॥ 15 ॥

The powerful Dānava, then swollen with pride, began to hurl the mountain tops with his horns, thus killing the Deva forces.

सुरापाततैल्वा देवान्युच्छस्य धामणेन च ।

स जयान रूपाधिछा महिषः परमादूतः ॥ 16 ॥

Some by hoofs and some by the lashing of the tail, that angry Mahisa, very wonderful to behold, sent to the region of Death.

तते देवाः सर्पिधर्वा भयमाजमुकझाताः ।

मघवा महिंशे दूद्वा पलायवनरोभवत् ॥ 17 ॥

Then the Devas and Gandharvas became very much frightened; so much so, that Indra fled away once on the sight of Mahisa.

संगरं संपरित्यज्ञ नगे श्रेक शचीपती ।

यमो धनाधिः पाशी जमुः सर्वे भयानुतः ॥ 18 ॥

महिषोर्पि जयं मंता जगाम स्यगृहं ततः ।

रेरातं गजं प्राय त्यचार्मिदेश गच्छता ॥ 19 ॥

तवोच्चे:श्वसं भानो: कामधेपुं पश्वस्वीम् ।

स्वरैय-त्मसंतूनर्णे स्वर्ग गन्तुं मनो दो ॥ 20 ॥

Indra thus retreating from the field, Yama,

Kubera, and Varuna all quitted the battle-ground with fear. Indra fled away quitting his Airāvata elephant and Uccaísravā horse; so Mahiṣa got the possession of the elephant and the horse, as well the heavenly cow of the Sun. So the Dānavas considered themselves pre-eminently victorious and returned to their abodes.

तस्या देवसदनं गत्वा स महिषासुरः ।

जग्रह सुरारज्यं वै त्यक्तं देदेश्यातुरैः ॥ 21 ॥

Next they wanted to go, as early possible, to the Heavens, with all their forces. In no time Mahisa went to the abode of Indra, deserted by all the terror-stricken Devas and got the possession thereof.

इत्रासने तदा रथे दानवः समुपाविष्ठान ।

द्रानवान्स्याययामास देवानां स्थानवेकु सः ॥ 2 2 ॥

Then taking his seat on the beautiful throne of Indra, he made the other Dānavas occupy the several seats of the other Devas.

एवं वर्षेगतं पूर्णं कृत्वा युद्धं सुदारुकाण् ।

जयार्थैप्रदरं कामं दानवो मदार्थिकं: ॥ 23 ॥

Thus fighting full one hundred years, the Dānava Mahiṣa, puffed up with pride, acquired the seat of Indra, his desired object.

निर्जी निर्मिता नाकानेने सर्वेजनीतीझता: ।

एवं बहुिन वर्षाणि बध्मुर्गिरागूरं ॥ 24 ॥

He banished the Devas from the Heaven; the Devas, thus tormented began to wander in the caves of hills and dales for a period of good many years.

श्राता: सर्वे तदा राजनबहाणों शरणं ययुः ।

प्रजापति जगजाधं राजोकर्ण चतुर्मुद्धम् ॥ 25 ॥

O King! The Devas, at last, were quite tired and took the four-faced Brahmā, the Creator's refuge.

यद्यासनं वेदभर्भे सेवितं मुनिनिः स्वजैः ।

मतीचिपुप्रषुः शान्तैर्वंदेवतूद्वपारः ॥ 26 ॥

किन्ने: सिद्धान्यवैक्षारणोरागवर्षेः ।

गुरुद्वर्भेधनीताने देवेवंदे जगतुतुम् ॥ 27 ॥

At that instant, the Lord of the world, the Rajas

incarnate, the Originator of the Vedas, was seated on His lotus seat; surrounding Him were standing his mortal sons Marici, etc., with their passions subdued, mind calm and beyond the sphere of the Vedas and Vedāngas; there were also Siddhas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Čāranas, Uragas, and Pannagas, the terrified Devas then began to praise and chant hymns to Brahmā, the Lord of the world.

धातः किमेत्तदिखलातिर्हारांबुजन्म

जन्माधिवीक्ष्य न दया कुरुषे सुगान् यत् ।

सम्पीडितानप्रणजितानसुराधिघने

स्थानच्युतानिरगुरुहाकृतसश्रिवासान् ॥ 28 ॥

The Devas said: “O Creator! O Lotus-born! O Thou, the Remover of the pains and afflictions of all this world! How is it that you are not moved with pity towards the Devas, seeing that we are defeated by the lord of the Dānavas and have been banished from our abode; what more shall we say, our troubles are now indescribable, as we are living in the caves of hills and dales.

पुत्रमिता किमपराधानतेः समेतानंत्यज्य

लोभग्रहितः कुकतेजितुःस्थान् ।

यस्त्वं सुरांतव पदावुज्ञभिन्युक्तानान्

दैत्यादितांध कुपणान् यदुपेक्षसेपेध ॥ 29 ॥

O Creator! A son may be a hundred times guilty of offence; is it, then, that the father, devoid of any feeling of covetousness, deserts his sons and gives them trouble! We are oppressed by the Dānvans, we who are wholly devoted to your lotus-feet, why are you today showing signs of indifference towards us!

अमभयुवनारज्य तेन भूक्ते नितानंत

मसूडविरपि योग्य ब्राह्मणीयदाति ।

सुरत्कवरपूर्ण यंसेवतउसी दुरात्मा

जलनिधितिधिभृतां गामयी सेवते ताम ॥ 30 ॥

That wicked Dānava is thoroughly enjoying today the Heaven of the Devas, is forcibly taking their share of the oblations of clarified butter in the Yajñas (sacrifices) from the Brāhmanas; is

Book V Chapter VII

enjoying the Pārijāta tree and also the heavenly milching cow, the jewel of the ocean.

किं वा गृणीमः सुराकार्यदम्भृतं

ज्ञानासि देवेश सुरारिचेहितम् ।

ज्ञानेन सर्वे त्यमश्रेषकार्यवित्त-

स्मात्यफो ते प्रणातःस्म पादादोः ॥ 31 ॥

What more shall we describe to you the strange doings of the Asuras; O Lord of the Devas! You are perfectly aware of all that they strive and execute; for, by your knowledge, you know everything of this world; therefore. O Lord! We lie prostrate at your feet.

यशापि कृत्रापि गतान्युग्नासी

नानावरिः: खलु पायमानसः ॥

पीडा कोतेवेच स दृष्ट्येढितैस्त्रातासि

देवेश विधेहि रां विधो ॥ ३२ ॥

That vicious Dānava, of wicked character and full of mischievous actions, gives us troubles in various ways wherever we go; O Lord of the Devas! Thou art our only Protector; therefore, O Lord! Do what is good to us.

नो घेढ़यं दावमहातिन्मीवितान:

क शान्तिकतारियन्तेतेजसम् ।

याम: प्रजेशं गरणं सुरेषं

धातारमाद्यं परिभूच्य के शिवम् ॥ 33 ॥

Thou art the Awarder of the desires of the Devas. Thou art the First Creator of the world, and Preserver; therefore if Thou dost not do us our good, to whom else shall we take refuge, when we are so severely oppressed as if we are burnt in a forest conflagration! Who else is more lustrous, more beneficent and more peace giving Governor?

शूनि सुत्वा सुग: सर्वे प्रणेपुन्ते प्रजापतिन् ।

बद्धांशिलपुटा: सर्वे विश्वणवद्वना भूगण् ॥ 34 ॥

तांस्वा पीक्षितान्दृष्टा तदा लोकपितामहः ।

उवाच रलक्षणया वाचा सुखं संजयनप्रिद्धि ॥ 35 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! All the Devas, praising Him thus, bowed down to the Lord of creation with folded hands and saluted him, with their faces very heavy, overladen with deep sorrow. The Grand

Sire of all the Lokas, seeing the plight of the Devas, consoled them with sweet words and made them happy.

ब्रह्मोवाच

किं करोमि सुरा: कामं दानवो वरादर्पितः ।

स्वीरयोउसी न पुंवयो विधेयं तक किं पुः न । ३ ६ ॥

Brahmā said: O Suras! What shall I do? The Dānava has become exceedingly haughty on account of his getting boons; he can be killed by females only; He is invulnerable by any male.

प्रजामोउदा सुरा: सर्वे कैलासं पवर्तोनाम् ।

शकूरं पुरतः कृत्वा सर्वक्राविशारादम् ॥ 37 ॥

ततो प्रजाम वैकुंट यत्र देवो जनादनैः ।

मितिलावा देवकायं च विश्रामो विश्रतः ॥ 38 ॥

What remedy is there now? Therefore, O Suras! Let us all go to Kailāśa, the best of all the mountains; thence we will take Śankara, the expert in doing the works of Gods, and go to Vaikuntha, where Visnu, the Deva of the Devas resides. There we all will unite and hold a counsel and decide what is best to do, to serve the purpose of the gods.

इत्युत्वना हंसभारकु बढ़ा कार्यममूच्चये ।

देवांगे पृथतः कृत्वा कैलासाधिषुखो यदी ॥ 39 ॥

ताविच्छोयोरित तस्मा जाला ध्यानेन पचबम् ।

आगच्छनं सुरैः सार्यं निरनतः स्वगृहाद्विः ॥ 40 ॥

Thus making out the programme, Brahmā riding on his Hamsa went to Kailāśa, accompanied by all the Devas. At the same time Śiva came to know out of his introspection about the coming of Brahmā and the other Devas and soon came out of his dwelling abode.

दृष्ट्या परमर्ते तौ तु कृताधिवादनी भृणम् ।

प्रणती च सुरैः सर्वैः सन्तुष्टी संव्यपुन्तः ॥ 4 1 ॥

When they met each other, they saluted each other and felt very glad. The Devas then bowed down to them.

आसानपि पुधवत्या देयेभ्यो मिरित्यपति: ।

उपविष्टि तेयेव निवसादासने स्वके ॥ 42 ॥

Seats were given to the Devas; and when they

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

sat respectively on their Asanas, the Lord of Pārvati also took his own seat.

कृत्वा तु कुशलप्रश्नं बढ़ाणं वृषभध्वजः ।

पग्रष्ठ कारणं देवात-कैलासागमाने विषुः ॥ 43 ॥

Śiva asked the welfare of Brahmā and the Devas and asked the reasons of their coming to Kailāśa.

शिव उवाच

किम्रागमानं ब्रहान्कृतं देवे: स्वासर्वे: ।

भवता च महाभाग बृहि तत्कारणं किल ॥ ४ ४  ॥

O Brahmā! What has caused you to come here along with Indra and the other Devas? O highly fortunate one! Please mention it.

ब्रहोयाच

महिषेण सुरेशान पीडिता: स्वर्निवासिन: ।

प्रभन्ति गिरिरुंगेषु भयजस्ताः स्वासबाः ॥ 4 5 ॥

Brahmā said: O Deva of the Devas! The Dānava Mahisa is oppressing all the Devas in the Heavens; they therefore terrified are wandering hither and thither in the caves and hills with Indra.

यजभुड्महिषो जातस्तशप्रे भूराशयः ।

पीक्षिता लोकपालाश्व त्वायमा शरणं गताः ॥ 46 ॥

Mahīsa and the other Dānavas are now accepting their share of Yajñas; the Lokapālas, being oppressed have come today and are now taking shelter of Thee.

मया ते भवर्न संभो प्रापिताः कार्यंगीरयात् ।

ययुक्ते तिद्धपल्यदा सुरकायं सुरेश्य ।। 47 ।।

वलिये भारोस्ति सर्वंशी देवानां भृतभावान ।

O Sambhu! Considering the situation serious, I have taken them with me here; therefore, O Deva, do that which is reasonable and by which the purpose of the Devas can be carried out. O Bhūta Bīśvana! (The creator of the world) The whole charge and responsibility of all the Devas devolves on Thee.

व्यास उवाच

इति तद्विनं शुचा संकर: प्रहसचिद्य। ॥ 48 ॥

वचनं रलक्षणाय वाचा प्रोवाच पघानं प्रति ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus, Śankara

smiled a little and spoke charming words to the Lotus-born in the following manner:

श्रव उवाच

घवतैव कृतं कार्यं वर्यानात्युरा विभो ॥ 49 ॥

अनर्थैं च देवानां किं कत्न्यमतः परम् ।

ईयुगे बल्पाच्यूः सर्वेदेवभयमूदः ॥ 50 ॥

O Bibhu! It is You that gave before this boon to Mahisa and therefore it is you that have wrought this mischief. The Dānava has become so strong a hero that he has caused terror to all the Devas even.

का समर्थ बरा नारी ते रन्तुं मदर्दर्षिनम् ।

न मे भाषां न ते भाषां संग्रामा नन्तुर्महिति ॥ ५१ ॥

Now where can we get such a noble woman who becomes able to kill that Dānava, elated with pride. My wife nor your wife ought to go to battle; even if, the good ladies go, how will they be able to fight?

गत्वैव ते महाभागो युवुघाते कर्व पुनः ।

इन्द्राणी च महाभागा न युद्धकुशलाति हि ॥ 52 ॥

The fortunate wife of Indra, too, is not expert in the art of warfare; where else there is another lady who can kill this demon, blinded with pride.

कान्या हनूं सामर्थान्ति ते पाणे मवदर्पिन् ।

ममेदे मतमदीय गत्या देखें जनादेन्म् ॥ 53 ॥

I, therefore, propose this; let us all go today to Visnu and, praising him with hymns, engage him quickly to this cause of the gods.

सूत्या तं देहवाक्याय प्रेत्याम: सुस्तवम् ।

सोस्तिषुद्यमां श्रंशो विष्यु: सर्वांशसाधने ॥ 54 ॥

यिलाला वासुदेवे वै कत्वेलं कार्यवित्नम् ।

प्रपड़ेच च बुद्ध्वा स संविद्यास्यति साधनम् ॥ 55 ॥

Visnu is foremost amongst the intelligent; therefore it is highly advisable to execute all actions after duly consulting with him. He, by dint of his high intelligence, will find out means and effect our purpose.

व्यास उवाच

इति रूक्षच: शुत्वा ब्ब्याहा: सुरसत्तमा: ।

उपस्थितासते तेथ्युक्त्वा शिवेन सह सत्वा: ॥ 56 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Brahmā and the other

Book V Chapter VIII

Devas heard Rudra and approved heartily and saying, "Be it so" instantly rose up.

स्वकीयविंहनः सर्वे चयुविंथणुर्ग प्रति ।

भुक्ताङ्ठकानन्यूधा कार्यसिद्धिकाराङ्कुमान् । ५७ ।।

At the time, seeing all the auspicious signs concerning the success of the gods, they all became glad; and, riding on their respective vehicles, drove towards the abode of Viṣṇu.

ववुर्विता: शुभा: शान्ता: सुगन्धा: शुभशंसिन: ।

पहिषण्ड शिवा वास्तस्तोचुः पथि सर्वशेनः ॥ 58 ॥

Favourable fragrant winds, pleasant to touch, began to blow gently, birds began to chant hymns

of praise and signs of success were seen all along their way.

निर्मलं चाधावक्रौभो विश्राक्ष त्रिवात्तशा ।

गमने तत्र देवानां सर्वं शुभमिवाभवत् ॥ ५९ ॥

श्रिति शीमदैवीयाणवते महापुराणे पद्धस्कन्चे

स्वामोउध्याः ॥ 60 ॥ 

The sky was clear and the quarters became free; in short, everything showed favourable all along their way.

Here ends the Seventh Chapter on the going of the Devas to Kailāsa in the Fifth Book of Śrimaddevi-bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter VIII

