[Ch 5 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of Lakṣmī, and the knower of the essences of all subjects, seeing the Devas extremely attached to him and anxious, spoke to them thus: O Suras! Why have you kept silent? Tell me why you have all come, let it be good or bad, tell me; I will try to remove your miseries.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Nārāyana, the Lord of Lakṣmī, and Knower of the essences of all subjects, seeing the Devas extremely attached to him and anxious, spoke to them thus :-- O Suras! Why have you kept silent? Tell me why you have all come, let it be good or bad, tell me; I will try to remove your miseries.

[Ch 5 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas said: “O Lord! Is there any thing unknown to you in this Trilokī; You know everything; why then art Thou asking us again and again? In ancient times You in your Dwarf incarnation overspread the three worlds by Your three feet and thus bound the King Bali in his own premises and gave of sovereignty over the Devas to Indra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas said :-- O Lord! Is there anything unknown to you in this Triloki; You know everything; why then art Thou asking us again and again? In ancient times You in your Dwarf incarnation overspread the three worlds by Your three feet and thus bound the King Vali in his own premises and gave over the sovereignty over the Devas to Indra.

[Ch 5 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O All Pervading One! It is You who deluded the Daityas and procured nectar for the Devas, and it is You who sent them to the house of Death. Therefore, O Lord! You are the one and only one that is capable in warding off all the evils that befall on the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O All Pervading One! It is You who deluded the Daityas and procured nectar for the Devas, and it is You who sent them to the house of Death. Therefore, O Lord! You are the one and only one that is capable in warding off all the evils that befall on the Devas.

[Ch 5 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus hearing the Devas' words, Viṣṇu said: "O Suras! You need not fear; I know one remedy, approved by all, by which that Daityas might be killed so that you would be happy. I am now giving it out to you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus hearing the Devaś words, Viṣṇu said :-- “O Suras! You need not fear; I know one remedy, approved by all, by which that Daitya might be killed so that you would be happy. I am now giving out to you.

[Ch 5 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Your welfare, your benefit must be looked at by me whether by the exercise of my intelligence or by using my prowess, by wealth, by pretext or by any other means whatsoever.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Your welfare, your benefit must be looked at by me whether by the exercise of my intelligence or by using my prowess, by wealth pretext or by any other means whatsoever.

[Ch 5 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Four means, viz., conciliation, gifts, sowing discord, or punishment are mentioned by the wise statesmen to be applied to friends and specially to the enemies.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Four means, viz., conciliation, gifts, sowing discord, or punishment are mentioned by the wise statesmen to be applied to friends and specially to the enemies.

[Ch 5 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā was worshipped by Vṛtra with severe austerities and He granted boons and it is due to the influence of that favour that this Asura has become so indomitable.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā was worshipped by Vṛtra with severe austerities and He granted boons and it is due to the influence of that favour that this Asura has become indomitable.

[Ch 5 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The more so that Viśvakarmā created him from the sacrificial fire; it is through all these causes that the Demon Vṛtṣārusa, the conqueror of the enemies' stronghold, has grown up so very powerful that he can hardly be conquered by any being.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The more so that Viśvakarmā created him from the sacrificial fire; it is through all these causes that the Demon Vritrāsura, conqueror of the enemieś stronghold, has grown up so very powerful that he can hardly be conquered by any being.

[Ch 5 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Suras! First peace must be negotiated with him; then deceive him, otherwise the enemy will be very difficult to conquer. First entice him and bring him under control; then kill him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Suras! First peace must be negotiated with him; then deceive him, otherwise the enemy will be very difficult to conquer. First entice him and bring him under control; then kill him.

[Ch 5 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now take the Rsis and Gandharvas with you and go where the powerful enemy Vītrāsura is residing and make a treaty with him; thus he will be conquered.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now take the Ṛṣis and Gandharbas with you and go where the powerful enemy Vṛtrāsura is residing and make a treaty with him; thus he will be conquered.

[Ch 5 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Swear on oath and accede to the terms he proposes and thus create faith in him; then cultivate friendship with him; lastly, when time will come, kill that powerful enemy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Swear on oath and accede to the terms he proposes and thus create faith in him; then cultivate friendship with him; lastly, when time will come, kill that powerful enemy.

[Ch 5 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Suras! I will also enter, unseen by anybody, into the excellent weapon of Indra, his thunderbolt and will help him in due time. Wait till the period of his longevity expires; otherwise his death will never take place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Suras! I will also enter, unseen by anybody, into the excellent weapon of Indra, his thunderbolt and will help him in due time. Wait till the period of his longevity expires; otherwise his death will never take place.

[Ch 5 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now go to that Asura, with Gandharvas and Rsis and cunningly cultivate friendship between him and Indra, by conciliatory words; when he begins thus to put his confidence, then deceive him. I will enter hidden into the strong well-covered thunderbolt.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now go to that Asura, with Gandharbas and Ṛṣis and cunningly cultivate friendship between him and Indra, by conciliatory words; when he begins thus to put his confidence, then deceive him. I will enter hiddenly into the strong well covered thunderbolt.

[Ch 5 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Indra will come to know that the Demon has put complete faith in him, he will hurl his thunderbolt against him and thus the enemy will be killed and not otherwise.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Indra will come to know that the Demon has put complete faith in him, he will hurl his thunderbolt against him and thus the enemy will be killed and not otherwise.

[Ch 5 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the Devas! Do not consider for the present the act of treachery that you will commit: take my help and kill that wicked Demon with thunderbolt.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the Devas! Do not consider for the present the act of treachery that you will commit: take my help and kill that wicked Demon with thunderbolt.

[Ch 5 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► To practise hypocrisy with an hypocrite is not considered a sin; specially no powerful enemy can be killed only by the well known rules applicable to warriors, without any deceit.
NEW CORR ENG ──► To practise hypocrisy with an hypocrite is not considered a sin; specially no powerful enemy can be killed only by the well known rules applicable to warriors, without any deceit.

[Ch 5 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I also deceived, before, Bali, with my dwarf body and again I deceived all the Demons by showing myself as a beautiful woman; therefore to practise deceit with a strong deceitful enemy is never considered a sin.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I also deceived, before, Vali, with my dwarf body and again I deceived all the Demons by showing myself as a beautiful woman; therefore to practise deceit with a strong deceitful enemy is never considered a sin.

[Ch 5 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Know this. O Devas! Now you all conjointly worship the Devi Bhagavatī with Mantras and prayers and take Her shelter; the Yoga Māyā, then, will help you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Know this. O Devas! Now you all conjointly worship the Devī Bhagavatī with Mantras and prayers and take Her shelter; the Yoga Māyā, then, will help you.

[Ch 5 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We too, worship that Devi, the Highest Prakrti, the Incarnate of pure Satva Guna, Who grants success, bestows us all our desires, Who is Herself the object of desires, and Who is never realised by any except by those Yogis, self-controlled pure men.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We, too, worship that Devī, the Highest Prakriti, the Incarnate of pure Sattva Guṇa, Who grants success, bestows us all our desires, Who is Herself the object of desires, and Who is never realised by any except by those Yogis, self-controlled pure men.

[Ch 5 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra, too, will certainly be able to kill his enemy in battle if he worships Her; for the Mahā Māyā, the Creatrix of Delusion, will, when worshipped, delude that Demon.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra, too, will certainly be able to kill his enemy in battle if he worships Her; for the Mahā Māyā, the Creatrix of Delusion, will, when worshipped, delude that Demon.

[Ch 5 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus deluded by Her Māyā, Vītrāsura will easily be killed by him; there is no doubt in this, what more do you want than this that everything will be successfully accomplished when the Devi Ambikā is propitiated and gets well pleased.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus deluded by Her Māyā, Vṛtrāsura will easily be killed by him; there is no doubt in this, what more do you want than this that everything will be successfully accomplished when the Devī Ambikā is propitiated and gets well pleased.

[Ch 5 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She regulates the hearts of all and is the Cause of all causes. Without Her worship no one's desires can be expected to be accomplished.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She regulates the hearts of all and is the Cause of all causes. Without Her worship no one’s desires can be expected to be accomplished.

[Ch 5 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Best of Suras! Worship the Universal Mother, the Prakrti Devi with greatest devotion and with greatest purity for the destruction of your enemy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Best of Suras! Worship the Universal Mother, the Prakriti Devī with greatest devotion and with greatest purity for the destruction of your enemy.

[Ch 5 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See! In days of yore, I fought for five thousand years, dreadfully with the two Demons Madhu and Kaíṭabha and then killed them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► See! In days of yore, I fought for five thousand years, dreadfully with the two Demons Madhu and Kaiṭabha and then killed them.

[Ch 5 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I worshipped, then, the Mahā Māyā, the Highest Prakrti; She was thus pleased and deluded the two Asuras; thus the two powerful Asuras puffed up with vanity were deluded and thus I could kill those terrible Daityas under a pretext.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I worshipped, then, the Mahā Māyā, the Highest Prakriti; She was thus pleased and deluded the two Asuras; thus the two powerful Asuras puffed up with vanity were deluded and thus I could kill those terrible Daityas under a pretext.

[Ch 5 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Suras! You, too, worship that Highest Prakṛti with the greatest devotion; She will then surely fulfill your desires."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Suras! You, too, worship that Highest Prakriti with the greatest devotion; She will then surely fulfill your desires.

[Ch 5 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! When the intelligent Visnu enlightened thus the Devas, they went to the top of the Mount Sumeru, adorned with the Mandāra trees, remaining at a secluded place, recited slowly Her Mantrams and thus engaged in asceticism and meditation, began to chant hymns and praise that Universal Mother, the Holder of the world, the Remover of all worldly ailings and the Creatrix, Preservrix and Destructrix of the world and the Bestover of all desires to Her devotees.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! When the intelligent Viṣṇu enlightened thus the Devas, they went to the top of the Mount Sumeru, adorned with the Mandāra trees, and, remaining at a secluded place, recited slowly Her Mantrams and thus engaged in asceticism and meditation, began to chant hymns and praise that Universal Mother, the Holder of the world, the Remover of all world ailings, and the Creatrix, Preservatrix and Destructrix of the world and the Bestower of all desires to Her devotees.

[Ch 5 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas said: "O Devi! Be graciously pleased unto us! O Thou, the Destructrix of the afflictions of the distressed! We have taken refuge unto Thy lotus-feet. We have been defeated by Vṛtrāsura in the battle, we are very much oppressed and afflicted.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas said :-- “O Devī! Be graciously pleased unto us! O Thou, the Destructrix of the afflictions of the distressed! We have taken refuge unto Thy lotus-feet. We have been defeated by Vṛtrāsura in the battle, we are very much oppressed and afflicted.

[Ch 5 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Thou, the Highest Reality! O Thou, the Mother of the whole Universe! Protect us as a Mother protects her child; we are fallen into this difficulty arising from our enemies.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Thou, the Mother of the whole Universe! Protect us as a Mother protects her child; we are fallen into this difficulty arising from our enemies.

[Ch 5 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! Nothing is hidden from Thy knowledge in the three worlds. Why art Thou taking no notice of us, that are being tormented by the Asuras! O Mother! Thou createst, preservest, and destroyest the three worlds; Brahma, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa are created by Thy mere will and are doing all Thy works.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! Nothing is hidden from Thy knowledge in the three worlds. Why art Thou taking no notice of us, that are being tormented by the Asuras! O Mother! Thou createst, preservest, and destroyest the three worlds; Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa are created by Thy mere will and are doing all Thy works.

[Ch 5 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! They are not independent; by the contraction of Thy eye-brows, they are directed and enjoy all the pleasures. The Mother protects her sons afflicted with various difficulties and dangers, even when they are found guilty of various offences. It is Thou that hast made this rule; then why, O Merciful! Art Thou not protecting us who are quite innocent and whom Thou dost know as having taken refuge unto Thy lotus-feet.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mother! They are not independent; by the contraction of Thy eye-brows, they are directed and enjoy all the pleasures. The Mother protects her sons afflicted with various difficulties and dangers, even when they are found guilty of various offences. It is Thou that hast made this rule; then why, O Merciful! Art Thou not protecting us who are quite innocent and whom Thou dost know as having taken refuge unto Thy lotus-feet.

[Ch 5 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devi! If Thou thinkest that we forget Thee, being too much attracted by the enjoyments that Thou hast been pleased to confer unto us and therefore we are proper not to be looked upon with Śrimaddevibhāgavatum Thy merciful eyes, we would say that this is quite true; but, O Mother! Nowhere is seen such a feeling of a Mother to Her child; we are no doubt, objects of Thy mercy and favour always.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devī! If Thou thinkest that we forget Thee, being too much attracted by the enjoyments that Thou hast been pleased to confer unto us and therefore we are proper not to be looked upon with Thy merciful eyes, we would say that this is quite true; but, O Mother ! Nowhere is seen a feeling of a Mother to Her child; we are no doubt, objects of Thy mercy and favour always.

[Ch 5 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Besides there is no fault of us in this matter, O Mother! that we do not worship Thee and become immersed in sensual enjoyments; for Thy creation, the Moha (delusion) is very powerful and deludes us. O Mother! Thou art naturally Merciful! Knowing these, why art Thou not showing mercy unto us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Besides there is no fault of us in this matter, O Mother! that we do not worship Thee and become immersed in sensual enjoyments; for Thy creation, the Moha (delusion) is very powerful and deludes us. O Mother! Thou art naturally Merciful! Knowing these, why art Thou not showing mercy unto us.

[Ch 5 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devi! Thou hadst killed before in battle, for our sake, the powerful Daitya Chief Mahiśāsura, very terrible to all the beings. Then why art not Thou, O Mother! killing this dreadful Vṛtrāsura?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devī! Thou hadst killed before in battle, for our sake, the powerful Daitya Chief Mahiśāsura, very terrible to all the beings. Then why art not Thou, O Mother ! killing this dreadful Vṛtrāsura?

[Ch 5 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! Thou hadst killed the two brother Daityas, Śumbha and Niśumbha, extraordinarily powerful, and the other Daityas that followed them; O Thou, the embodiment of mercy! Similarly destroy now this deceitful strong Vṛtrāśura. O Mother! Delude this proud Asura so that he could not manifest, in the least, his power.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! Thou hadst killed the two brother Daityas, Śumbha and Niśumbha, extraordinarily powerful, and the other Daityas that followed them; O Thou, the embodiment of mercy! Similarly destroy now this deceitful strong Vṛtrāsura. O Mother! Delude this proud Asura so that he could not manifest, in the least, his power.

[Ch 5 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We are very much troubled by the Asuras and overwhelmed with terror from them; Thou savest us; for there is no other in the three worlds that can by his own force remove the sorrows and sufferings of the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We are very much troubled by the Asuras and overwhelmed with terror from them; Thou savest us; for there is no other in the three worlds that can by his own force remove the sorrows and sufferings of the Devas.

[Ch 5 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! Though Thou hast shown favour towards Vṛtra, now dost kill him soon, whose nature is cruel and tormenting to others. O Bhavānī! Better dost Thou save him from sin by Thy holy arrows. Otherwise that vicious. Asura will surely enter into the hideous Hell.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! Though Thou hast shown favour towards Vṛtra, now dost kill him soon, whose nature is cruel and tormenting to others. O Bhavānī! Better dost Thou save him from sin by Thy holy arrows. Otherwise that vicious Asura will surely enter into the hideous Hell.

[Ch 5 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is for his welfare that Thou oughtest to kill him. Those that had been before enemies of the Gods, Thou didst purify them by weapons in the battle-field and hadst sent them to the Nandana Garden in the Heavens. O Thou, the Mercy personified! Was it not that Thou didst not save them from hell? Then why art not Thou killing this Vītrāsura!
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is for his welfare that Thou oughtest to kill him. Those that had been before enemies of the Gods, Thou didst purify them by weapons in the battle-field and hadst sent them to the Nandana Garden in the Heavens. O Thou, the Mercy personified! Was it not that Thou didst not save them from hell? Then why art not Thou killing this Vṛtrāsura!

[Ch 5 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We know this for certain that the Asura is Thy enemy, not Thy servant; for that mischievous soul is giving us trouble. O Mother! How can he be Thy servant and devotee who torments the Devas that are always engaged in worshipping Thy lotus feet. O Mother! How can we perform Thy worship?
NEW CORR ENG ──► We know this for certain that the Asura is Thy enemy, not Thy servant; for that mischievous soul is giving us trouble. O Mother! How can he be Thy servant and devotee who torments the Devas that are always engaged in worshipping Thy lotus feet. O Mother! How can we perform Thy worship?

[Ch 5 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The flowers and other acticles used in worship all are created by Thee; especially we and the Mantras, in fact, everything is the manifestation of Thy power. Therefore, O Bhavānī! We worship Thee by laying ourselves prostrate on Thy feet. Best Thou pleased.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The flowers and other articles used in worship all are created by Thee; especially we and the Mantras, in fact, everything is the manifestation of Thy power. Therefore, O Bhavānī! We worship Thee by laying ourselves prostrate on Thy feet. Be’st Thou pleased.

[Ch 5 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those men are blessed that worship with devotion Thy lotus feet for crossing this ocean of world. O Devi! Those Yogins that want final liberation and forsake therefore all attachments, vikāras and delusions, even they attain success then only when they meditate Thy lotus feet.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those men are blessed that worship with devotion Thy lotus feet for crossing this ocean of world. O Devī! Those Yogins that want final liberation and forsake therefore all attachments, vikāras and delusions, even they attain success then only when they meditate Thy lotus feet.

[Ch 5 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those that are great Sacrifices and know best the essence of the Vedas, even they when they offer oblations to the sacrifice, utter “Svāhā” that is cheering to the Devas and “Svadhā” very consoling to the Pitts; thus they always think of Thee (for “Svāhā and Svadhā” are Thy names only).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those that are great Sacrificers and know best the essence of the Vedas, even they when they offer oblations to the sacrifice, utter “Svāhā” that is cheering to the Devas and “Svadhā” very consoling to the Pitris; thus they always think of Thee (for Svāhā and Svadhā are Thy names only).

[Ch 5 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! Thou art the retentive power and memory. Thou art the beauty, Thou art the peace, Thou art the Buddhist (intellect) well know to clarify men's minds; and Thou art the prosperity and wealth of all these three worlds. O Devi! Those that worship Thee, Thou givest them, out of mercy, those wealth in some way or other."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! Thou art the retentive power and memory. Thou art the beauty, Thou art the peace, Thou art the Buddhi (intellect) well known to clarify men’s minds; and Thou art the prosperity and wealth of all these three worlds. O Devī! Those that worship Thee, Thou givest them, out of mercy, those wealth in some way or other.

[Ch 5 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O King! Thou worshipped by the Devās, the Devi Bhagavatī appeared before them in a very beautiful form, thin, adorned with all ornaments.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Thus worshipped by the Devas, the Devī Bhagavatī appeared before them in a very beautiful form, thin, adorned with all ornaments.

[Ch 5 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her two hands holding a noose, and goad, and the other two hands making signs to discard all fear and ready to grant boons; Her loins very beautiful, girdled with a gold band with small bells pending and making sweet tinkling sounds; Her feet with anklets (ornaments) making sweet sonorous sounds with tiny tinkling bells.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her two hands holding a noose, and goad, and the other two hands making signs to discard all fear and ready to grant boons; Her loins very beautiful, girdled with a gold band with small bells pending and making sweet tinkling sounds; Her feet with anklets (ornaments) making sweet sonorous sounds with tiny tinkling bells.

[Ch 5 Verse 52-53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her voice was exceedingly sweet and lovely, Her forehead was adorned with the crescent of the Moon and on Her head was glittering a diadem of jewels, Her lotus-face adorned with sweet soft smiles and with Her three beauteous lotus-eyes looking like Indibaras Her body was of a red colour like the Pārijāta flowers and Her limbs were marked with red sandal-paste.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her voice was exceedingly sweet and lovely, Her forehead was adorned with the crescent of the Moon and on Her head was glittering a diadem of jewels, Her lotus-face adorned with sweet soft smiles and with Her three beauteous lotus-eyes looking like Indībaras. Her body was of a red colour like the Pārijāta flowers and Her limbs were marked with red sandal-paste.

[Ch 5 Verse 54-56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She was dressed in a red attire. The Devi looked well pleased, like an ocean of infinite mercy, wearing complete dress suited to happy interviews, the Creatrix of all this Cosmos, the Highest, the Knower of all, the Directrix of all, and the Great Upholder of all. She looked like an embodiment of the Truth of all Vedāntas and the Incarnate of ever Existence, Intelligence, Bliss, the Mahā Devi Bhagavati Bhuvaneśvari. The Devas all bowed down before Her standing in front of them. The Mother then spoke: “What business have you got here? Speak to Me.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► She was dressed in a red attire. The Devī looked well pleased, like an ocean of infinite mercy, wearing complete dress suited to happy interviews, the Creatrix of all this Cosmos, the Highest, the Knower of all, the Directrix of all, and the Great Upholder of all. She looked like an embodiment of the Truth of all Vedāntas and the Incarnate of ever Existence, Intelligence, Bliss, the Mahā Devī Bhagavatī Bhuvaneśvarī. The Devas all bowed down before Her standing in front of them. The Mother then spoke :-- “What business have you got here? Speak to Me.”

[Ch 5 Verse 57-58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas said: “O Bhagavatī! Vṛtrāsura is tormenting much the Devas; Bewitch him. O Devi! Do such as he can trust the Devas; and impart then strength on our weapons such as he can be killed.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas said :-- “O Bhagavatī! Vṛtrāsura is tormenting much the Devas; Bewitch him. O Devī! Do such as he can trust the Devas; and impart then strength on our weapons such as he can be killed.”

[Ch 5 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O King! That will be done”, Saying thus, the Devi departed then and there. The Devas became very glad and returned respectively to their abodes. Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the praising of the Devi by the Devas in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa. Srimaddevibhaigavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- “O King! That will be done.” Saying thus, the Devī departed then and there. The Devas became very glad and returned respectively to their abodes. Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the praising of the Devī by the Devas in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
