CHAPTER V

On Praising the Devi

व्यास उवाच

तथा चिन्तातुर्गन् वीक्ष्य सर्वान्सर्वांतित्त्वित् ।

प्राह प्रेमभरोद्धान्तान्माधवो मेदिनीपते ॥ १ ॥

विष्णुर्वाच

क्रि मौन्माश्रिता युयं बुवंतु कारणं सुराः ।

सदस्व्राउपि तच्छुत्वा यतिच्ये तत्रिवारये ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of Lakṣmī, and the knower of the essences of all subjects, seeing the Devas extremely attached to him and anxious, spoke to them thus: O Suras! Why have you kept silent? Tell me why you have all come, let it be good or bad, tell me; I will try to remove your miseries.

Book VI Chapter V

देश ऊचुः

किम्भातं तव विषो स्थि लोकेषु वर्तते ।

सर्वे वेद भवान्कार्यं किं पृष्ठसि पुनः पुनः ॥ ३ ॥

त्वया पूर्वे बलिर्बंदः शगडो देवाधिपः कृतः ।

वामनं वपुताश्याय क्रान्तं तिभुचनं पदे ॥ ४ ॥

The Devas said: “O Lord! Is there any thing unknown to you in this Trilokī; You know everything; why then art Thou asking us again and again? In ancient times You in your Dwarf incarnation overspread the three worlds by Your three feet and thus bound the King Bali in his own premises and gave of sovereignty over the Devas to Indra.

अमृतं त्वाहुतं विजणो दैत्याश्र विविपतिततः ।

त्वं प्रपुः सर्वदैवानां सर्वापहित्विवारणो ॥ 5 ॥

O All Pervading One! It is You who deluded the Daityas and procured nectar for the Devas, and it is You who sent them to the house of Death. Therefore, O Lord! You are the one and only one that is capable in warding off all the evils that befall on the Devas.

विष्णुस्वाच

न भेतल्यं सुरावरा वेच्युपायं सुसंमतम् ।

तद्धाय प्रवक्ष्यामि येन सौख्यं भविष्यति ॥ 6 ॥

Thus hearing the Devas' words, Viṣṇu said: "O Suras! You need not fear; I know one remedy, approved by all, by which that Daityas might be killed so that you would be happy. I am now giving it out to you.

अवश्यं क्रपाँयि मे भवतां हितामात्मा ।

बुद्ध्वा बलेन चार्थेन येन केन छलेन वा ॥ 7 ॥

Your welfare, your benefit must be looked at by me whether by the exercise of my intelligence or by using my prowess, by wealth, by pretext or by any other means whatsoever.

उपाया: खलु चत्वार: कवितास्त्वर्शिभि: ।

सामावय: सुढ़लेवे दुर्दैसु विशेषतः ॥ 8 ॥

Four means, viz., conciliation, gifts, sowing discord, or punishment are mentioned by the wise

statesmen to be applied to friends and specially to the enemies.

बहाणास्थ वयो दत्सलपास़ारतीधेतन च ।

दुर्जल्यं च संप्रातं वरत्नप्रभावतः ॥ 9 ॥

Brahmā was worshipped by Vṛtra with severe austerities and He granted boons and it is due to the influence of that favour that this Asura has become so indomitable.

अजेवः सर्वैभृतानां त्वधुं समुपपादितः ।

ततो बलेन वृद्धिं स प्रातः परपुरंबतः ॥ 10 ॥

दु:साध्योजसी सुरा: शकुर्विना सामप्रातरणम् ।

प्रलोभ्य वर्जगामयेयं हन्तव्यस्तु ततः परम् ॥ 11 ॥

The more so that Viśvakarmā created him from the sacrificial fire; it is through all these causes that the Demon Vṛtṣārusa, the conqueror of the enemies' stronghold, has grown up so very powerful that he can hardly be conquered by any being.

गच्छध्यं सर्वान्यर्वा यत्रासित बलवन्तः ।

साम तस्य प्रपुंजभयं तत एनं विजेषध्य ॥ 12 ॥

O Suras! First peace must be negotiated with him; then deceive him, otherwise the enemy will be very difficult to conquer. First entice him and bring him under control; then kill him.

संगम यणवान्कूला विश्वास्य समयेन हि ।

मित्रत्वं च समाधाय हेतल्यः प्रबलो रिपुः ॥ 13 ॥

Now take the Rsis and Gandharvas with you and go where the powerful enemy Vītrāsura is residing and make a treaty with him; thus he will be conquered.

अनुव्यः संप्रदेक्ष्यायि वज्रमय्य वरायुधम् ।

साहाय्यं च कर्तियासि शक्रस्पहां सुगतमाः ॥ 14 ॥

Swear on oath and accede to the terms he proposes and thus create faith in him; then cultivate friendship with him; lastly, when time will come, kill that powerful enemy.

समयं च प्रतीक्ष्यं सर्वैवायुप: क्षये ।

मरणं विबुधास्तस्य नान्यथा सम्पत्थिति ॥ 15 ॥

O Suras! I will also enter, unseen by anybody, into the excellent weapon of Indra, his thunderbolt

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

and will help him in due time. Wait till the period of his longevity expires; otherwise his death will never take place.

गच्छधर्मविधि: सार्थ नाथवां: कपटावुता: ।

इंज्ञण सह मित्रत्वं कुर्वर्ध वाक्यवादानतः ॥ १ ६ ॥

Now go to that Asura, with Gandharvas and Rsis and cunningly cultivate friendship between him and Indra, by conciliatory words; when he begins thus to put his confidence, then deceive him. I will enter hidden into the strong well-covered thunderbolt.

वथा स याति विश्रासं तथा कार्य प्रतारणम् ।

गुप्तोई संपवेक्ष्यामि परिवं संघादितं इदम् ॥ १ ७ ॥

When Indra will come to know that the Demon has put complete faith in him, he will hurl his thunderbolt against him and thus the enemy will be killed and not otherwise.

विश्रभं मधवा श्रगु हनिष्वित न चान्यथा ।

विश्रास्य कृते पार्थ पंकृता शक्रस्तु पुरुषः ॥ १ ८ ॥

O Lord of the Devas! Do not consider for the present the act of treachery that you will commit: take my help and kill that wicked Demon with thunderbolt.

मस्तहायोख वज्जेण शान्तीव्यति पापिनम् ।

न तोषो3त्र उले शगी जाठ्यमेव प्रकुर्जत: ॥ १९ ॥

To practise hypocrisy with an hypocrite is not considered a sin; specially no powerful enemy can be killed only by the well known rules applicable to warriors, without any deceit.

नान्यथा बलवान् वध्यः शूरधर्मेण जायते ।

वामनं रूपमाधाय यमात्यं बक्षितो बक्षितः ॥ 20 ॥

I also deceived, before, Bali, with my dwarf body and again I deceived all the Demons by showing myself as a beautiful woman; therefore to practise deceit with a strong deceitful enemy is never considered a sin.

कृत्वा च भोहिणीवे दैव्या: सर्वेपि वक्षिताः।

पबंतः सहिताः सर्वे देवीं भगवर्ती शिक्षाम् ॥ 2 1 ॥

Know this. O Devas! Now you all conjointly worship the Devi Bhagavatī with Mantras and

prayers and take Her shelter; the Yoga Māyā, then, will help you.

गच्छधं शरणं भावै: स्तोजमनैः सुरोतमाः ।

साहायं सा योगमाया भवतां संशियास्यति ॥ 22 ॥

वन्दामहे सदा देवीं सात्चिकों प्रकृति पराग ।

सिद्धिदां कामवां कामां दुरापामकृतात्मधिः ॥ 23 ॥

We too, worship that Devi, the Highest Prakrti, the Incarnate of pure Satva Guna, Who grants success, bestows us all our desires, Who is Herself the object of desires, and Who is never realised by any except by those Yogis, self-controlled pure men.

इंत्रोर्षि ता समाराध्य हनिष्यति सिंगुं गे।

मोहित्री सा महामाया मोहलिययात दानवम् ॥ 24 ॥

Indra, too, will certainly be able to kill his enemy in battle if he worships Her; for the Mahā Māyā, the Creatrix of Delusion, will, when worshipped, delude that Demon.

मोहितो मायाव युः सुखसाधो भविष्यति ।

प्रसवायां परांवायां सर्व साधयं भविष्यति ॥ 25 ॥

Thus deluded by Her Māyā, Vītrāsura will easily be killed by him; there is no doubt in this, what more do you want than this that everything will be successfully accomplished when the Devi Ambikā is propitiated and gets well pleased.

नोचेमनोराथावादिनं कंस्याय विधायिति ।

अन्त्यामिवस्कपा सा सर्वकारणकारण ।। 26 ॥

She regulates the hearts of all and is the Cause of all causes. Without Her worship no one's desires can be expected to be accomplished.

तस्मातां विश्वजन्नीं प्रकृति परमातृतः ।

भज्ञं सात्विकेभर्ते: श्रनुजागय सतमाः ॥ 27 ॥

Therefore, O Best of Suras! Worship the Universal Mother, the Prakrti Devi with greatest devotion and with greatest purity for the destruction of your enemy.

पुरा मवाउपि संगाम कृत्वा परम दारभणम् ।

पढ़वर्षसहस्राणि नितही मधुकैटफी ॥ 28 ॥

See! In days of yore, I fought for five thousand years, dreadfully with the two Demons Madhu and Kaíṭabha and then killed them.

Book VI Chapter V

स्तुता मया तदात्यर्थ प्रससा प्रकृति: परा ।

मोहिती ती तदा देवी छलेन च मया हतो ॥ 29 ॥

विप्रलक्षी महाबाहू दानवो मदार्थिति ।

तथा कुलघं प्रकृतेनैर्जनं भावस्यभुतः ॥ 30 ॥

I worshipped, then, the Mahā Māyā, the Highest Prakrti; She was thus pleased and deluded the two Asuras; thus the two powerful Asuras puffed up with vanity were deluded and thus I could kill those terrible Daityas under a pretext.

सर्वेधा कार्यसिद्धि सा कार्यसिंत सुरोतमाः ।

एवं ते दत्तमतयो विद्याना प्रभविष्यानुना ॥ 31 ॥

Therefore, O Suras! You, too, worship that Highest Prakṛti with the greatest devotion; She will then surely fulfill your desires."

जम्पुते मेसीखारं मन्त्राद्रामपिडतम् ।

एकाने संश्चिता देवाः कृत्वा ध्यानं जयं तपः ॥ 32 ॥

गुह्युर्जंगता धार्जी सृष्टिसंहाराकिरणिभू ।

भक्काममुद्रामंबां संसाराक्लेशनाशिनीम् ॥ 33 ॥

O King! When the intelligent Visnu enlightened thus the Devas, they went to the top of the Mount Sumeru, adorned with the Mandāra trees, remaining at a secluded place, recited slowly Her Mantrams and thus engaged in asceticism and meditation, began to chant hymns and praise that Universal Mother, the Holder of the world, the Remover of all worldly ailings and the Creatrix, Preservrix and Destructrix of the world and the Bestover of all desires to Her devotees.

देश ऊचुः

देव प्रसिद परिपाहि सुगन्मतान्

चूगसूगे रामरे परिपीक्षितांश ।

दीनानिताशनपरे परमार्थतचे

प्राप्तिस्वर्दिकमलं गरणं सदैव ॥ 34 ॥

The Devas said: "O Devi! Be graciously pleased unto us! O Thou, the Destructrix of the afflictions of the distressed! We have taken refuge unto Thy lotus-feet. We have been defeated by Vṛtrāsura in the battle, we are very much oppressed and afflicted.

त्वं सर्वविश्वजननी परियलायमान्

पूत्रानिवासितपितातिपुसंकेतप्रम्न् ।

मातनं तेउस्वविदितं भुवनयेप्रप

कस्मादुपेक्षासि सुरानसुपत्रतान् ॥ 35 ॥

O Thou, the Highest Reality! O Thou, the Mother of the whole Universe! Protect us as a Mother protects her child; we are fallen into this difficulty arising from our enemies.

त्रैलोक्यमेतदिज्वलि विहितं त्वयेव

ब्रहा हरि: पशुपतित्वल वासत्नोल्या: ।

कुर्वन्ति कार्यमिहलं स्वलग्न न ते ते

धूभंगचालनवशगतिहूरतिं कामम् ॥ 36 ॥

O Mother! Nothing is hidden from Thy knowledge in the three worlds. Why art Thou taking no notice of us, that are being tormented by the Asuras! O Mother! Thou createst, preservest, and destroyest the three worlds; Brahma, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa are created by Thy mere will and are doing all Thy works.

माता सुताम्यरिघावत्यियाति दीनान्

गीतिस्ववैय रचिता प्रकटापशयान् ।

कस्मात्र पालयसि देखे विनापराधानस्मार-

स्वदर्शिशरणाकरणारासाढे ॥ 37 ॥

O Mother! They are not independent; by the contraction of Thy eye-brows, they are directed and enjoy all the pleasures. The Mother protects her sons afflicted with various difficulties and dangers, even when they are found guilty of various offences. It is Thou that hast made this rule; then why, O Merciful! Art Thou not protecting us who are quite innocent and whom Thou dost know as having taken refuge unto Thy lotus-feet.

नूनं मन्दधिबजानपदाय: किलेले

थक्ति विहाय विषये सुखभोगलुखाः ।

नेमे कटाक्षविषया इति चेच चैया सिंतः

सुते जनकर्तौरं चापि दृष्टा ॥ 38 ॥

O Devi! If Thou thinkest that we forget Thee, being too much attracted by the enjoyments that Thou hast been pleased to confer unto us and therefore we are proper not to be looked upon with

Śrimaddevibhāgavatum

Thy merciful eyes, we would say that this is quite true; but, O Mother! Nowhere is seen such a feeling of a Mother to Her child; we are no doubt, objects of Thy mercy and favour always.

दोषो न नोउज जनानि प्रतिभागिति चित्ते

यते विहाय भजनं विषवे निममना: ।

मोहल्यवा विरचितः प्रभवल्यसी

नततमात्मल्याबककणे दयसे कर्थ न । ३ ९ ॥

Besides there is no fault of us in this matter, O Mother! that we do not worship Thee and become immersed in sensual enjoyments; for Thy creation, the Moha (delusion) is very powerful and deludes us. O Mother! Thou art naturally Merciful! Knowing these, why art Thou not showing mercy unto us.

पूर्वं त्वया जननि दैत्यपतिवर्षितिष्ठो

व्यापादितो महिष्करणधरः किताबजी ।

अस्मकृते सकललोकभयवाहोउसौ

ब्रुं कवं न भवदं विधुप्तोषि मातः ॥ 4 0 ॥

O Devi! Thou hadst killed before in battle, for our sake, the powerful Daitya Chief Mahiśāsura, very terrible to all the beings. Then why art not Thou, O Mother! killing this dreadful Vṛtrāsura?

गुभमलाउसतिवलावानुजो निरुभमस्ती

भातौ तदनुगा निहता हतौ च ।

दृत्र तथा जहि खलं प्रबलं द्याएँदे मन्ते

विमोह्य तथा न भवेढ्याएँसी ॥ 4 1 ॥

O Mother! Thou hadst killed the two brother Daityas, Śumbha and Niśumbha, extraordinarily powerful, and the other Daityas that followed them; O Thou, the embodiment of mercy! Similarly destroy now this deceitful strong Vṛtrāśura. O Mother! Delude this proud Asura so that he could not manifest, in the least, his power.

त्वं पालयाद्ध विबुधानसुरेण मातः

सन्तापिनानिततां भयविक्छलांश ।

नान्यो5ति को3पि भुवनेषु सुर्गात्रिंहता यः

क्लेशजालयिखलं निवदैत्स्वजास्कता ॥ 4 2 ॥

We are very much troubled by the Asuras and overwhelmed with terror from them; Thou savest

us; for there is no other in the three worlds that can by his own force remove the sorrows and sufferings of the Devas.

यूत्र देदा तव यदि प्रथिता तथापि

जहोनामृषु जननुःखकरं खरं च ।

पापात्समुद्धर भवानि शरैः पुनाना

नोचेत्यायतीत तमो ननू दृष्टवृद्धि: ॥ 43 ॥

O Mother! Though Thou hast shown favour towards Vṛtra, now dost kill him soon, whose nature is cruel and tormenting to others. O Bhavānī! Better dost Thou save him from sin by Thy holy arrows. Otherwise that vicious. Asura will surely enter into the hideous Hell.

ते प्रापिता: सुरवनं विद्धुपारयो ये हत्या

राणेपि विशिष्टः किल पाचितास्ते ।

त्राता न किं निरसयातभवाह्याद्रों

यच्छत्रवोप्र न कि किं विहित्रंसि शूजम् ॥ 44 ॥

It is for his welfare that Thou oughtest to kill him. Those that had been before enemies of the Gods, Thou didst purify them by weapons in the battle-field and hadst sent them to the Nandana Garden in the Heavens. O Thou, the Mercy personified! Was it not that Thou didst not save them from hell? Then why art not Thou killing this Vītrāsura!

जानीमहै सिपुरसी तब सेवको न

प्रायेण पीडवति नः किल पाभवूद्धि: ।

यस्तावकसिर्वह भवेद्यमरानसी

किन्चल्यादंकजरात्वनु पीडवेझा ॥ 45 ॥

We know this for certain that the Asura is Thy enemy, not Thy servant; for that mischievous soul is giving us trouble. O Mother! How can he be Thy servant and devotee who torments the Devas that are always engaged in worshipping Thy lotus feet. O Mother! How can we perform Thy worship?

कुर्म: कवं जननि पुजनमह ते उम्ब

पुष्पादिके तव विनिर्मितेय वयमात् ।

मन्त्रा वयं च सकलं यगर्जित्रकर्णं

तस्माद्वानि चरणे प्रणता: स्म नूनम् ॥ 46 ॥

Book VI Chapter V

The flowers and other acticles used in worship all are created by Thee; especially we and the Mantras, in fact, everything is the manifestation of Thy power. Therefore, O Bhavānī! We worship Thee by laying ourselves prostrate on Thy feet. Best Thou pleased.

वन्यास्त एव मनुजा हि भवतीत भक्या

पार्वेब्जं तव भवाधिव्यतेषु पोतम् ।

वं योगिनोर्षि यनसा सततं स्मरिते

मोक्षार्थिनो विनतारणविकारमोहाः ॥ 47 ॥

Those men are blessed that worship with devotion Thy lotus feet for crossing this ocean of world. O Devi! Those Yogins that want final liberation and forsake therefore all attachments, vikāras and delusions, even they attain success then only when they meditate Thy lotus feet.

वे यात्रिकाः सकलवेदिविदोंरि नूनं

त्वां संस्मरिति सत्ततं किल हीमकाले ।

स्वाहां तु तृतीजननीनमुरुंधाणां भृध:

स्वधां पितुनाणस्य च तृप्तिकेतुम् ॥ 48 ॥

Those that are great Sacrifices and know best the essence of the Vedas, even they when they offer oblations to the sacrifice, utter “Svāhā” that is cheering to the Devas and “Svadhā” very consoling to the Pitts; thus they always think of Thee (for “Svāhā and Svadhā” are Thy names only).

मेधाउस कान्तिस प्राणत्नस प्रसिद्धा

ब्रैद्धस्वमेव शिरादायंकी नराणाम ।

सर्वे त्यमेव विषधं वघवन्येउस्मिन्

कृत्वा द्वारासे भक्तां कृपया सदैव ॥ 49 ॥

O Mother! Thou art the retentive power and memory. Thou art the beauty, Thou art the peace, Thou art the Buddhist (intellect) well know to clarify men's minds; and Thou art the prosperity and wealth of all these three worlds. O Devi! Those that worship Thee, Thou givest them, out of mercy, those wealth in some way or other."

व्यास उवाच

एवं स्तुता सुरैद्वी प्रव्यक्षा सारभवत्ता ।

चारूकपधारा तन्वी सर्वभिरणभूषिता ॥ 50 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! Thou worshipped by the Devās, the Devi Bhagavatī appeared before them in a very beautiful form, thin, adorned with all ornaments.

पाणाङ्गशराभीतिलसद्वाहुचतुध्या ।

शालिकीपाकाजालरशनावब्द्रसल्किदः ॥ 51 ॥

Her two hands holding a noose, and goad, and the other two hands making signs to discard all fear and ready to grant boons; Her loins very beautiful, girdled with a gold band with small bells pending and making sweet tinkling sounds; Her feet with anklets (ornaments) making sweet sonorous sounds with tiny tinkling bells.

कलकधरीया कान्ता ब्वणलकर्णपुत्रु ।

चन्द्रखण्डसमाबद्धरलमौलिवराजिता ॥ 52 ॥

मन्दिमास्तारविन्दाया नेत्रबरविभूषिता ।

पारजिताप्रसूनान्छनीलवभसमप्रभा ॥ 53 ॥

Her voice was exceedingly sweet and lovely, Her forehead was adorned with the crescent of the Moon and on Her head was glittering a diadem of jewels, Her lotus-face adorned with sweet soft smiles and with Her three beauteous lotus-eyes looking like Indibaras Her body was of a red colour like the Pārijāta flowers and Her limbs were marked with red sandal-paste.

रकाध्वयपीधाना रकचन्दनचर्धित ।

प्रसादमुपुर्धी देवी कर्णगारससागरा ॥ 54 ॥

सर्वेयुक्त्रावेषाढ्या सर्वद्वितारिध; पत्र ।

सर्वांजा सर्वकर्जी च सर्वाधिष्ठान्कारिणी ॥ 55 ॥

सर्वेवदान्तसिंस्दा सच्चिदान्दिक्षणी ।

प्रणीपुस्ता समालोक्य सुरा देवी पुरःस्थितान् ॥ 56 ॥

तानाहु प्रणतान्दा किं कः कार्य ब्रवनु भाम ।

She was dressed in a red attire. The Devi looked well pleased, like an ocean of infinite mercy, wearing complete dress suited to happy interviews, the Creatrix of all this Cosmos, the Highest, the Knower of all, the Directrix of all, and the Great Upholder of all. She looked like an embodiment of the Truth of all Vedāntas and the Incarnate of

Śrimaddevibhagavatam

ever Existence, Intelligence, Bliss, the Mahā Devi Bhagavati Bhuvaneśvari. The Devas all bowed down before Her standing in front of them. The Mother then spoke: “What business have you got here? Speak to Me.”

देवा ऊनुः

मोहैर्यैं नि सुं चुरं देवानामितिदुःखदूम ॥ 57 ॥

यथा विश्वसते देवांस्तथा कुरु विमोहितम् ।

आयुधे च बलं देहि हतः स्याधेन वा सिुः ॥ 58 ॥

The Devas said: “O Bhagavatī! Vṛtrāsura is tormenting much the Devas; Bewitch him. O Devi! Do such as he can trust the Devas; and impart then strength on our weapons such as he can be killed.”

ध्यास उवाच:

तथेयुक्त्वा भगवती तत्रैवान्तथीयत ।

स्वानि स्वानि विकेतानि जभुदैवा मुदाविता: ॥ ५९ ॥

इति श्रीमदैबीभागवते महापुराणो पशुरकम्बे देवीमाहात्मये

पत्रभोउवाय: 11 5 11

Vyāsa said: “O King! That will be done”, Saying thus, the Devi departed then and there. The Devas became very glad and returned respectively to their abodes.

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the praising of the Devi by the Devas in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhaigavatam

