CHAPTER IV

On the Defeat of the Devas by Vrtra

व्यास उवाच

निर्नतासे परावृतास्त्रीविध्नकारः सुरा: ।

निराणा: कार्यसंसिद्धो तं दृष्ट्वा दृढ्चतेस्मा ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Suras that wanted to create hindrance in Vītra's tapasyā, seeing him firmly resolved, became disappointed in the fulfilment of their objects and returned to their own abodes."

जाते वर्षेगते पूर्णं बझा लोकपितामहः ।

तत्राजगाम तरसा हंसाकछ्धतुर्मुंखः ॥ 2 ॥

आगत्य तमुवाचैदं लक्षुः पुरु सुखी भव ।

स्वतन्त ध्यानं वं हूई द्वतायि तत वधीऊन्तम ॥ 3 ॥

Thus full one hundred years passed away. The four-faced Brahmā, the Gandsire of the Lokas, came there mounted on his carrier the Swan, and said: "O Vītra! Be happy; now quit your meditation and ask boon; I will grant you the boon that you choose.

तमसा तेऊढा तुओस्मि तां दूढ्वा चातिकर्हितम् ।

वंरं वरय घरं ते मनोशितर्षितं तव ॥ 4 ॥

O Child! Your body has become very lean and thin through your penance. I am now very pleased to see your this very hard tapasyā. Welfare be to you. Now ask the boon that you desire."

व्यास उवाच

चूरस्तदार्तिचित्रशर्ती पुरातो निशाय

वाचे सुधासमसरां जारंदेककर्तुः।

संत्यव्य योगकलनां सहसोदितिछत्

संज्ञातहर्षनयान्थुकलाकलाप: ॥ 5 ॥

पाटी प्रणाय शिरासा प्रणायाधिधातुः

बढ़ाजिल: पुत एव समाससाद।

प्रोबाच तं सुवरूत तस्पा प्रपर्थ

प्रेणासतिरान्द्वसिरा विवनेन नमः || 6 ||

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the clearly distinct nectar like sweet words of the Creator Brahmā, Vṛtha shed tears of joy and suddenly stood up. And going to him, bowed down gladly before His feet, and, with folded hands, spoke to Him, Who is desirous to grant him boons, in a tremulous voice:

प्राप्त मया सकलदेवपर्द प्रभोडा

यहर्भैनं तव सुकुलैभगभू जातम् ।

वाज्छाजसि नाव मनसि प्रवणे दुरापा

तां प्रवबीयि कमलासन वैसि भावम् ॥ 7 ॥

“O Lord! To-day I have been fortunate to see Thee who art generally seen with great difficulty; and I have acquired thus the posts of all the Devas; O Lotus-seated One! I have got an insatiable desire burning within me. Thou art omniscient, Thou knowest everything; still I am speaking out my mind.

भृत्युंघ मा भवतु मे किल

लोहाकाशुणकार्डरिंशनिचर्यपरेशु शकैः ।

खूँद्र प्रयातु मम वीर्यमैताव

युढे यस्माद्वासी सवलैनरपैजेयः ॥ 8 ॥

O Lord! Grant that my death does not occur with iron, wood, dry or wet substances or with bamboos or any other weapons and let my strength and valour be increased very much in the battle;

Book VI Chapter IV

for, then, I will be unconquerable by all the Devas with all their armies.

व्यास उवाच

इन्यं सप्पार्थितो ब्रह्मा तमाह प्रहसप्रिव ।

ज्ञिष्ठ गच्छ भर्ते ते वाक्तितं सफलं सदा ॥ 9 ॥

न शुक्रेन पर नाईरँग न पायणेने दाहणा ।

भविष्यिति च ते मृत्युरिति सर्व ब्वीयमहूम् ॥ 10 ॥

ज्ञित दत्वा वरं बह्वा जगमा घुवनं परम् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus prayed for, Brahmā said to him smiling: "O Child! get up; I grant that your desired boon will always be fulfilled; now go to your own place Your death wo'nt occur with dry or wet substances or with stones or wood. I say this truly unto you." Thus granting the boon, Brahmā went to His Brahmaloka.

युसन्तु तं वरं लब्धया मुदितः स्वगृहं ययौ ॥ १ १ ॥

शगसं विगुरो तद्धवनं महापतिः ।

त्वषा तु मुदितः प्राप्त पुत्र प्राप्तवरं तदा ॥ १ २ ॥

स्वस्ति तेजसु महाभाग जहि शक्रं सिंगु मम् ।

हूला गच्छ विश्रिसो हन्तारं पापसंयुन्तम् ॥ १३ ॥

Vītra, too, became very glad on receiving his desired object, and returned to his own abode. The highly intelligent Vītra informed the father about the boon granted to him; Viśvakarmā become very glad to hear it. He said, “O highly fortunate One! Let all bliss and good fortune come unto you; kill Indra, my greatest enemy. Go and kill the murderer of my son Triśirā, the vicious Indra and return to me.

भव लं विद्वगाशीगः सम्याय विकयं रोगे ।

मगाधि छिपि विवृलं पुरनाशसमुद्ववम् ॥ 14 ॥

Be victorious in the battle and became the Lord of all the Devas and remove my mental agony due to the killing of my son.

जीवतो वाक्यकरणात्यशहे धृरिभोजनात् ।

गयायां चिपडदानाच्छ विधिभः पुत्रस्य पुत्रत ॥ 15 ॥

तस्मातुप्र मापात्यधे दुःखं नागितुमहित्र ।

त्रिश्रा मम चित्तानु नापसर्पति कर्हिचित् ॥ 16 ॥

A son becomes then really a son when he obeys the commands of his father and when he feeds

plentifully good many people on the Śrāddha day (after his father's death) and when he offers Pindā at Gayā. Therefore, O Son! Keep my words and try to remove my sorrows.

सुशीलः सत्यवाटी च तापयो वेद्यितमः ।

अपराधं विना तेन निरतः पापबुद्धिना ॥ 17 ॥

Know this as certain that Triśirā vanishes from my mind. Triśirā was very truthful, amiable and good-natured; he was an ascetic and foremost amongst the Vedic scholars. The wicked Indra killed my dear son without any offence."

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः श्रुत्वा वृत्रः परमदुर्जयः ।

रथमाङ्ठा तस्ता निजर्जाम पितुर्णैतृत्ति ॥ 18 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the father's words, that extremely Vītrāsura mounted on his chariot and quickly got out of his father's house.

रणतदुन्धपिनिर्याँ सज्ञानं महाकलम् ।

कारयित्या प्रयाणं स चकार मदार्थिकं: ॥ १९ ॥

The proud Asura, then, marched to the battle, accompanied with his vast army, to the sounding of the conchsells and war drums.

निर्यंयी नवसंयुक्तः सेवकानिति संवद्न् ।

हत्वा शक्र प्रश्रीध्यामि सुरात्यमकंटकम् ॥ 20 ॥

Vītrā, versed in politics and morals, exhorted his soldiers before marching and said : “To-day we will kill Indra and possess the kingdom of the Immortals, freed of all enemies.”

इत्युक्त्वा निर्वगामायु स्वरी-ययरिवारितः ।

महता सैन्यान्देन भीषयत्रमवारतीम् ॥ 21 ॥

O King! Thus, accompanied by his soldiers, and raising a tremendous war-cry terrifying to the Devas, the Asura set out for battle.

तमागच्छनमात्राय तुराषाडपि सत्वः ।

सेनोष्ठांगे भयत्रस्तः कार्यवामास भारत ॥ 22 ॥

सर्वानाहुय ततसा लोकपालानिर्दभः ।

युद्धाद्धी प्रेयनस्वर्ण-व्योत्तत महावृत्ति: ॥ 23 ॥

O Bhārata! The King of the Devas, knowing that the Asura is quite at hand, became overwhelmed with terror and ordered at once the

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

soldiers to be ready for the battle and called quickly all the Lokapālas and sent them all for the battle.

पृध्यूई ततः कृत्वा संस्थितः पाकशासनः ।

तत्राजगाम वेगतु चूवः परबलादर्दिनः ॥ 24 ॥

देवदानवयोस्तावलभ्यामस्तमुतोःघवत् ।

वृत्रासवयो: संख्ये मनसा विजर्विषणोः ॥ 25 ॥

The highly lustrous Indra, the tormentor of the foes, arrayed his troops in order according to Grdhra Vyūha (the method in which the vultures arrange themselves while flying) and stayed there. On the other hand Vṛtra, the slayer of enemies, dashed unto that place with all swiftness.

A dreadful fight then ensued between the Devas and Dānavas; the two parties each, desirous to get victory over the other, fought awfully hard.

एवं परस्यं युद्धे सन्दीपे भयदे भृगम् ।

आकृतं देवता: प्रगुदैत्याशु परमां मुद्धू ॥ 26 ॥

तोभरैर्पिंद्यालेशं खद्धरैः परगुपिडुर्शैः ।

जन्यः परमयं देवदैवा: स्वस्ववरायुधैः ॥ 27 ॥

When the blaze of the battle fire rose to a very high pitch, the Devas dropped with sorrow while the Asuras became excited with joy. The Devas and Dānavas struck each other with Tomaras, Bhindipālas, axes, Parasūs, Patiṣas, and various other weapons.

एवं युद्धे वर्तमाने दारुको लोमहर्षेगे ।

गऊ क्रजाह सहसा वृढ़: क्रीभप्रमन्तिन: ॥ 28 ॥

अपावूल्य मुखे क्रिपला स्थितो चूवः शतकतुम् ।

मुक्तिडेपृभ्नहाराज पूर्ववैरमनुस्मर् ॥ 29 ॥

When the dreadful battle rose to a high pitch causing horripilation, Vītra became very angry and suddenly caught hold of Indra and denuding him of all clothes and armors swallowed him; he, then, remembering his former enmity, became very glad and stayed there.

गढ़े प्रतलेख वड्रेण सम्ब्धान्ता निर्जासताद ।

चुक्रुगु: परपातांतरे हा ग्रकौति मुदुघुँ; ॥ 30 ॥

अपावृते मुखे गढ़े म्रांक्र जाता सर्वे दिवैकास: ।

ब्रह्मास्ति प्रणायोयुदीन व्यक्षितचेतसः ॥ 31 ॥

किं कतल्वे द्विजश्रेष्ठ त्वमसाकं गुरः परः ।

ग्राको प्रस्ततु चुवेण रक्षिते देवतांतरिः ॥ 32 ॥

When Indra was thus devoured by Vītra, the Devas were overwhelmed with terror and cried out frequently, with great distress: "O Indra! O Indra! All the Devas became very dejected and grieved in their hearts to see Indra denuded of his armour and clothes in the belly of Vītra and bowed down to Brhaspati and said: "O Indra of the Brāhmaṇas! You are our best Guru; what are we to do now? Though the gods tried their best to save Indra, still Vītra has devoured him.

विना शक्रेन किं कुर्भ: सर्वे हीनपातकामः ।

अधिचारं कुक विषो सत्वः शक्रमुक्ते ॥ 33 ॥

We are all powerless, what can we do without Indra? O Lord! Perform quickly magic spells (Abhicāra process) which will lead to our Indra's liberation."

ब्रह्मस्तिवलाच

किं कर्तव्यं सुरा: शिक्षो मुखमयेप्रति वासवः ।

वृजीणतमादितो जीवप्रतिन कोढ़ीतर तेपोः ॥ 34 ॥

Brhaspati said: "O Suras! The king of the gods is swallowed by Vṛtra, he has been quite disabled; but Indra is living in his bowels; attempt therefore must be made that he comes out while living.

व्यास उवाच

देवाधिंतातुरा: सर्वे सुरासाई तथाकृतम् ।

दृष्टवा विमृष्य तसा चकुर्बनं विमुक्तचे ॥ 35 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! The Devas became very anxious to see Indra in that plight and took all the ways and means carefully how he might be freed.

असुर्जत महास्तचां तृपिमकां रिपुताशिनीम् ।

ततो विजूभ्यमाण: स व्यावृतस्यो बभूव ह ॥ 36 ॥

Then they created a state tending to cause yawning, very powerful and irresistible and calculated to destroy one's enemy.

विजृष्मयाणास्य ततो बृत्रस्यास्यदापतत् ।

स्वाज्ञान्यपि संबिध्य निष्कान्तो बलस्मुरुव: ॥ 37 ॥

Vīrtāsura then yawned and his mouth got widely opened and extended. In the meanwhile Indra, the destroyer of one's enemies strength, contracted all

Book VI Chapter IV

his limbs and came out of the expanded mouth of the Asura and fell down.

ततः प्रभृति लोकेषु ज्ञीपक्का प्राणिसंस्थता ।

जहुशुश सुरा: सर्वे शर्क इयूदा विनिर्मितम् ॥ 38 ॥

Since that time, this state of yawning has become prevalent amongst the beings. The Devas were all glad to see Indra thus come out.

ततः प्रवृत्ते युद्धे त्वोलोकभयप्रदम् ।

वर्षाणामयुतं यावहूफणं लोमहर्षणम् ॥ 39 ॥

When Indra thus got out, he fought again with Vītra for 10,000 years (Ayuta years). The fight was very dreadful, causing horripilation.

एकतश्ठा सुरा: सर्वे युद्धाय समुपस्थिता: ।

एकतो बतलांस्त्वादुः संग्रामे समवर्तेत ॥ 40 ॥

On one side all the Devas joined in the battle; on the other side, the pre-eminently powerful Vītra, the son of Viśvakarmañ fought.

यदा व्यक्तित रणे चुचो वरमदावृतः ।

पराजितस्तदा शक्रसंज्ञे सात्य चर्षितः ॥ 41 ॥

विवध्ये मघवा युद्धे ततः प्राय्य पराजयम् ।

विवादमगमन्टेवा दृष्टवा शक्रे पराजितम् ॥ 42 ॥

जगमूस्वक्तवा रांग सर्वे देवा इन्द्रपुरोभागः ।

गृहीतं देवसदनं चुवेणागत्य रंहसा ॥ 43 ॥

When Vītrāsura got more and more energy in the battle, Indra became gradually dwindled and was at last defeated. Indra became very much grieved when he found himself defeated; the Devas also were very dejected to see this. Indra and the other Devas quitted the battle-field and fled away.

देवोहानानि सविणि धुंकाउसी दानवो बलात् ।

ऐरावतोदपि दैत्येन युहितोसी गजोत्तमः ॥ 44 ॥

Vītrāsura too, quickly arrived and occupied the Heavens. Vītra began to enjoy by force the Heavenly gardens and took the Airāvatā elephant. विमानानि च सर्वाणि गृहीतानि विशांपते ।

उच्चे: श्वला ह्ववयो जाततस्तय वरे गते ॥ 45 ॥

कामयेनु: पारिजातो गणशासरां सतां ।

गृहीतं रत्नायां नुं तेन त्वसुतुने ह १। 46 ॥

O King! The Asura, the son of Tvaṣṭā, took away all Vimānas (the self-moving chariot of

gods), Uccaisārava, the best of horses, the heavenly cow, the giver of all desires, the Pārījāta tree, the Apsarās, and all other jewels of the Heavens.

स्थानधारा: सुरा: सर्वे निरिवुरुंगे संस्थिताः ।

दुःखमापु: परिध्धा चक्रभागासुरालयात् ॥ 47 ॥

चूत्र: सुरपूदं प्राय० बभूव मद्रार्वितः ।

त्वधातरीन सुखं प्राय० मुमोद सुतसंयुतः ॥ 48 ॥

The Devas, on the other hand, deprived of their shares in sacrifices and driven away from their Heavens, suffered very much. Vṛtāsura became puffed up with vanity, when he got possession of the Heavens. Viśvakarma, too, became very happy at that time and began to enjoy pleasures along with his son.

अमंत्रयिन्द्रतं देवा सुनिधि: सह भारत ।

कि कतव्यमिति प्रायो विवित्य भयमोहिति: ॥ 49 ॥

जमु: कैतासमवर्त सुरा: शक्रममवित्रतः ।

महावेदं प्रणाभ्योचु: प्रहा: प्रांजलयो भृगाम् ॥ 50 ॥

देवदेव महादेव कृपामित्यो महेश्व ।

सहासमान्यभधीतांतु वृज्योगतिपराजितान् ॥ 51 ॥

O Bharata! The Devas, then, united with the Munis and they began to consult about their own welfare. When the Devas took Indra with them and went to Mahā Deva in the Mount Kailāśa and bowed down to His feet very humbly and, with folded hands, spoke thus: "O Deva of the Devas! O Mahā Deva! Thou art the Mahesvara and the unbounded Ocean of Mercy! We are defeated by Vṛtrasura and we are very much terrified.

गृहीतं देवसदनं तेन देव कवीरमा ।

कि कतक्यमतः शम्भो बृहि सर्व शिवाय नः ॥ 52 ॥

Save us, O Śambhu! Thou dost good to all the beings; dost thou tell us, therefore, truly what are we to do now when that powerful Dānava has dispossessed us of our Heavens.

कि कुर्ज: कव च भच्छाम: स्थानप्रदा महेश्व ।

दुःखस्य नाएगवच्छामो विजानोषायामीक्षा ॥ 53 ॥

O Maheśa! Now dislodged, where are we to go? We are not finding any remedy by which our miseries can be destroyed.

साहायें कुक भूतेश व्यथिता: स्म कुपानिधे ।

यूत्र जहि मदोसित्कं वदानबलाहिपो ॥ 54 ॥

O Bhūta Bhāvana! We are very much pained; helps us; O merciful One! That Vītrāsura has become intoxicated with vanity due to his being granted the boon. Therefore destroy him."

शिरा खचा

ब्रहाणं पुतः कृत्वा बयं सर्वे हरेः क्षयम् ।

गत्वा समेत्य तं विधुं चित्तयामो वधीडामम् ॥ 55 ॥

Śaṅkara said: “O Devas! We will keep Brahmā in the front and let all of us go to the residence of Hari and there consult with Him how to destroy this unruly Vṛtra.

स शफक्ष छलज्ञे बलवानुविद्मन्तः ।

शरणयछ दयाधिछ्धा वासुदेवो जनादनः ॥ ५६ ॥

The Janārdana Vāsudeva is fully capable to do all actions. He is powerful, knower of pretexts, highly intelligent, ocean of mercy, and fit to be asked by all for protection.

विना तं देवदेवेगं नार्थसिद्धमविष्यति ।

तस्मात्त च गतन्यं सर्वेकार्यार्थसिद्धदे ॥ 57 ॥

Without Him, the Deva of the Devas, no success is possible in any action. Therefore all of us ought to go there for the success in our undertaking.

व्यास उवाच

इति सखिल ते सर्वे बहा शकः सशंकतः ।

जभुपिंक्षिणः क्षयं देया: शरणपे भक्तवललम् ॥ 5 8 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! Thus settling their plan of action, Indra and other Devas took Śankara and

Brahmā with them and went to the abode of Hari, who protects all and is gracious to His devotees.

नत्वा विद्युपदं देवास्तुषुवु: परमेश्वरम् ।

हरि पुरुषसूक्ति वेवोत्नन जगतुकम् ॥ 59 ॥

They, then, began to chant Puruṣasūkta hymns to Him and thus they praised the God Hari, the Guru of this Universe.

प्रत्यक्षोः भृज्ञगाथत्सेति स कमलापति: ।

समान्य च सुत्रान्वविन्युवाच उप:स्थितः ॥ 60 ॥

किमागता: स लोकेशा हरबहामन्विता ।

कारणं कथायधं च: सर्वेधां सुसत्तमाः ॥ 61 ॥

The Janārdana Hari, the Lord of Kamalā, then, appeared before them and, after showing his respect, addressed them thus: O Lord of the several Lokas! What have brought you all together with Brahmā and Śaṅkara hither? O best of Suras! Please tell me the reason of your coming here.

व्यास उवाच

इति शुत्वा हरेर्वाक्यं नोचुदैवा सभापितम् ।

चित्तविषहा: स्थिता: ग्रायः सर्वे प्राजलवस्तथा ॥ 62 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे पशवल्ये

चतुर्वाँस्थायः ॥ 63 ॥

Vyāsa said: "O King! Thus hearing Hari's words, the Devas could not reply anything; rather almost all of them remained with an anxious look with their hands folded, overwhelmed with cares. Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the efeat of the Devas by Vṛtra in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Vyāsa said: “O King! Thus hearing Hari’s words, the Devas could not reply anything; rather almost all of them remained with an anxious look with their hands folded, overwhelmed with cares. Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the efetat of the Devas by Vītra in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

