CHAPTER XXXIV

On the Final Emancipation

शीटेल्याच

क्र यूर्य मन्दभाया वे क्रेट रूपं महाबुद्तम् ।

तबायि भक्तवालल्यादौदूरां दर्शितं मया ॥ १ ॥

The Devi said: “O Devas! You are not at all worthy to see this My Wonderful Cosmic Form. Where are Ye! and where is this My Form! But it

is my affection towards the Bhaktas that I have shewn to you all this great form of mine.

न वेटाधवयभेयीनैनं दानैस्वापेज्यया ।

रूपं रूष्टिमं रणकयं केवलं मन्त्रभां विणा ॥ 2 ॥

प्रकृतं श्रणु राजेन्द्र परमात्माज्ञ जीवताम् ।

उपाधियोगासंप्रानतः कर्तृत्वादिकमयत् ॥ 3 ॥

Nobody can see this form without My Grace;

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

the study of the Vedas, the Yoga, the gift, the Sacrifice, the austerities or any other Sâdhanas are quite incompetent to make this form visible to anybody. O King of mountains! Now hear the real instructions. The Great Self is the only Supreme Thing in this world of Maÿâ (Illusions).

क्रिया: क्रोति विविधा धार्मिर्यिकेहतवः ।

नानायोनिसतः प्राय सुखदुः:खेछ युज्चे ॥ 4 ॥

पुनस्तसंस्कृतिवशाज्ञानाकर्मते: सदा ।

नानादेहास्मापोतिं सुखदुः:खेछ युज्ञते ॥ 5 ॥

He it is that under the various Upādhis of an actor and enjoyer performs various functions leading to the Dharma (righteousness) and the Adharma (unrighteousness). Then he goes into various wombs and enjoy pleasure or pain according to his Karma. Then again owing to the tendencies pertaining to these births he becomes engaged in various functions and gets again various bodies and enjoys varieties of pleasures and pains.

घटीयन्बदेत्स्य न विरामः कदापि है ।

अज्ञानमेव मूलं स्थिततः कामः क्रियास्तः ॥ 6 ॥

O Best of Mountains! There is no cessation of these births and death; it is like a regular clockwork machine; it has no beginning and it goes on working to an endless period. Ignorance or Avidyā is the Cause of this Sarīsāra. Desire comes out of this and action flows thence. So men ought to try their best to get rid of this Ignorance.

तस्पाद्रान्नाशाय यतेत नियतं नर: ।

तृतीन्द्र जनस्मात्मक्यं यद्धज्ञानस्य नारणम् ॥ ७ ॥

O, King of Mountains! What more to say than this that the Goal of life is attained when this Ignorance is destroyed. The highest goal is attained by a Jīva when he becomes liberated, while living.

पुरुषार्थस्मापितिश जीवन्नृत्तद्वगाशि च ।

अज्ञानाग्ने शक्ता विश्वैत तु पटीयसी ॥ 8 ॥

And Vidyā is the only thing that is able and skilful in destroying this Ignorance. (As darkness cannot dispel darkness, so) the Karma done out of

Ignorance is Ignorance itself; and such a work cannot destroy Ignorance.

न कर्म तर्ज नोयासिर्विंरीयाथावतो गिरे ।

प्रस्तुताग्राउनानगरै कर्मणा नैव भाव्यताम् ॥ 9

अनर्वदाति कर्माणि चुन: चुनर्शगति हि ।

ततो गरास्ततो दोषस्ततोउनयों महान्यन्ते ॥ 10 ॥

So it is not proper to expect that this Avidyā can be destroyed by doing works. The works are entirely futile. The Jīvas want again and again the sensual enjoyments out of this Karma. Attachment raises out of this desire; discrepancies creep in and out of this ignorant attachment great calamities befall when such faults or discrepancies are committed.

तत्मासर्वप्रियने्न जानं सम्पादयैत्र: ।

कुर्वेब्रेह कर्मणीतन्तः कर्मणविश्यकम् ॥ १ १ ॥

ज्ञानादेव हि कैकल्यमतः स्यातत्समुचव्यः ।

सहायतां प्रजेनकर्मे जानस्य हितकारि च ॥ १ १ ॥

So every sane man ought to make his best effort to get this Jñānam (knowledge). And as it is also enjoined in the Śrutis that one ought to do actions (and try to live one hundred years) so it is advisable to do works also. Again the Śrutis declare that the ‘final liberation comes from Knowledge’ so one ought to acquire Jñānam. If both these be collectively followed, then works become beneficial and helping to Jñānam.

इति केचिद्धरंत्र तद्धिरोधाय सम्भयेत् ।

ज्ञानादूर्यस्थिधे: स्वादुदूर्यीथी कर्मसाध्वः ॥ 13 ॥

योगपदं सम्भाव्यं विशोधानु तततवरोः ।

तमः प्रकाशयोद्ध्वीरापर्धे न सम्पवि ॥ 14 ॥

(Therefore the Jivas should take up both of these.) Others say that this is impossible owing to their contradictory natures. The knots of heart are let loose by Jñānam and the knots are knit more by Karma. So how can they be reconciled! They are so very diametrically opposite. Darkness and light cannot be brought together, so Jñānam and Karma cannot be brought together.

तस्मात्स्विणी कर्मिणि वैद्धिकानि महामते ।

चित्णुक्रवर्तमेव स्युस्तानि कुयात्रव्यन्तः ॥ 15 ॥

Book VII Chapter XXXIV

ग्रामो दूमितितक्षा च वैराग्यं सत्त्वम्भवः ।

तावत्यर्वनोमेव स्यु: कर्माणि न ततः परम् ॥ 16 ॥

Therefore one ought to do all the Karmas as best as one can, as enjoined in the Vedas until one gets Cittaśuddhi (the purification of one's heart and mind). Karmas are to be done until Śama (the control of the inner organs of senses), Dama (the control of the outer organs of senses), Titikṣā (the power to endure heat and cold and other dualities), Vairāgyam (Dispassion), Sattva Sambhava (the birth of pure Sattva Guna in one's own heart) take place. तदन्ते चैव संन्यस्य संशयेद्रुकुमात्यान् । शोचित्वे ब्रह्मात्रिचं च भन्धनां निव्योजाय पुनः ॥ 17 ॥

After these, the Karmas cease for that man. Then one ought to take Sarinyāsa from a Guru (Spiritual Teacher) who has got his senses under control, who is versed in the Śrutis, attached to Brahma (practising the Yogic union with Brahma). He should approach to him with an unfeigned Bhakti. वेदान्तशवणं कुयाश्रिव्यमेवमतिहतः । तत्प्रमयादिव्यासस्य नित्यमर्थे विचारयेत् ॥ 18 ॥ तत्प्रमयादिव्यासं तु जीवक्रौत्ययोब्धिकम् । ऐक्ये ज्ञाते निर्भयस्तु मदुगो हिं प्रजायते ॥ 19 ॥ पदार्थशवगति: पूर्वं वाक्यायांवगतिस्ततः । तत्पदस्य च वाक्यायांं गिरिडं परिकीर्जितः ॥ 20 ॥

He should day and night, without any laziness, do Śravaṇam, Mananam, and Nididhyāsanam (hearing, thinking and deeply realising) the Vedānta saying. He should constantly ponder over the meanings of the Mahāvākyam ‘Tat Tvam Asi.’ ‘Tat Tvam Asi’ means Thou art That; it asserts the identity of the Supreme Self (Brahma) and Embodied Self (Jīvātmā). When this identity is realised, fearlessness comes and he then gets My nature. First of all, he should try to realise (by reasoning) the idea conveyed by that sentence. By the word ‘Tat’ is meant Myself, of the nature of Brahman; and by the word ‘Tvam’ is meant ‘Jīva’ embodied self and the word ‘Asi’ indicates, no doubts, the identity of these two.

त्वपदस्य च वाच्यार्थ जीव एव न संशयः ।

उभवोरैक्यमसिता पदेन प्रोथते बुधैः ॥ 21 ॥

वाच्यार्थवीर्विक्त्वादैवं्यं नैव घटेत है ।

लक्षणातः प्रकर्तेया तत्वमोः शुतसंस्थयोः ॥ 22 ॥

The two words ‘Tat and ‘Tvam’ cannot be apparently identified, as they seem to convey contradictory meanings (‘Tat’ implying omniscience, omnipresence, and other universal qualities and ‘Tvam’ implying non-omniscience and other qualities of a limited nature). So to establish the identity between the two, one ought to adopt Bhāgalaksmanā and Tyāgalaksmanā.

Note: Bhāgalaksmanā—kind of Laksmanā or secondary use of a word by which it partly loses and partly retains its primary meaning also called Jahadajahallaksanā. Tyāga Laksmanā—a secondary use of a word by which it loses partly its primary meaning. त्रिवात्रं तु ततोलैक्ष्य तयोर्वस्य यंपवः ।

तयोर्वस्य तथा जात्वा स्वाभेदेनाङ्गवो भवेत् ॥ 23 ॥

The Supreme Self is Brahma—Consciousness, endowed with the omniscience, etc., and the Embodied Self is Limited Jiva Consciousness, etc.). Leaving aside their both the adjuncts, we take the Consciousness, when both of them are identical and we come to Brahma, without a second.

देवदत्तः स एवायिमितवलक्षणा स्मृता ।

सूचनादिद्वर्भिति कदा संभेदत नः ॥ 24 ॥

The example is now quoted to illustrate what is called Bhāgalakṣanā and Tyāgalakṣanā. “This is that Devadatta” means Devadatta seen before and Devadatta seen now means one and the same persons, if we leave aside the time past and the time present and take the body of Devadatta only.

पश्रीकृतमहाप्रतस्मभुतः स्थूलदेहकः ।

भोगालयो जराव्याधिसंयुतः सर्वकर्मणाम ॥ 25 ॥

मिथ्यापृतोउवम्भापति सुर्टे भायामवन्तः ।

सोउयं स्थूल उपाधि: स्यादात्मानो मे नोगेश् ॥ 26 ॥

This gross body arises from the Pañcikṛta gross elements. It is the receptacle of enjoying the fruits

Šrimaddevibhāgavaatam

of its Karma and liable to disease and old age. This body is all Māyā; therefore it has certainly no real existence. O, Lord of Mountains! Know this to be the gross Upādhi (limitation) of My real Self.

ज्ञानकर्मीद्रवयुर्न प्राणपड़कसंयुर्न ।

मनोबुद्धिद्युर्ने चैतत्मूक्षம் तत्कवयो विद्य: ॥ 27 ॥

अपडीकृतपृत्योल्य सूक्ष्यदेडोउभातनः ।

दितीयोउपमुपाधि: स्यात्युखादेवकाधः ॥ 28 ॥

The five Jānandreniryas (organs of senses), five Karmerdniyas (working organs), the Prāna Vāyus, mind and Buddhī (rational intellect), in all, these seventeen go to form the subtle body, Sūksma Deha. So the Pandits say. This body of the Supreme Self is caused by the Apañcikṛta five original elements. Through this body, pain and pleasure are felt in the heart. This is the second Upādhi of the Ātman.

अनादानिवर्ध्यमिद्धमानुं तु तृतीयकः ।

देहोउपमान्नो भाति कारणात्या नोक्षः ॥ 29 ॥

उपाधिविलये जाते केवलात्माउविश्यक्ते ।

देहवये पछकोणा अनतःस्था: संति सर्वदा ॥ 30 ॥

The Ajñāna or Primeval Ignorance, without beginning and indescribable, is the third body of the ātman. Know this also to be my third Upādhi. When all these Upādhis subside, only the Supremed Self, the Brahman remains.

पछकोषाणपित्यानो ब्रहमुच्छं हि तप्पये ।

नैतिनैतीयादिवाब्वैमीम रूपं यदुच्छे ॥ 31 ॥

न जायते प्रियते तत्कादिचार्य

भृत्वा न बघ्यूव काश्चत् ।

अजों नित्यः शाश्छतोयं पुणणो

न हन्ते हन्यमाने शरीर ॥ 32 ॥

Within these three gross and subtle bodies, the five sheaths, Annamaya, Prānamaya, Vijñānamaya, and Ānandamaya always exist. When these are renounced, Brahmapucccha is obtained. That is Brahma and My Nature, too, This is the Goal of 'Not this, Not this' the Vedānta words. This Self is not born nor It dies. It does not live also, being born. (But it remains constant, though It is not

born). This Self is unborn, eternal, everlasting, ancient.

हर्ते चेमन्यते हन्तुर्हेत्थन्यते हतम् ।

उभौ ती न विज्ञानीति नायं हन्ति न हन्ति ॥ 33 ॥

अणोरणीयामहातो महीयानात्मार्थ

जतोर्निंहितो गृहायाम् ।

तमकनुः पश्यति वीतगोको धातुः

प्रसातामहितानमयम् ॥ 34 ॥

It is not killed, when the body is killed. If one wants to kill it or thinks It as slain, both of them do not know; this does not kill nor is it killed. This Atman, subtler than the subtlest, and greater than the greatest, resides within the cave (the Buddhi) of the Jivas.

आत्मनं रथिनं विद्धि शरीरं रथमेव तु ।

बुद्धिं तु सार्थिं विद्धि मनः प्रग्रहेव च ॥ 35 ॥

इन्द्रियाणि हवानाहुविंश्यांतैमु गोचरान् ।

आत्मैद्धिमनोपुकर्त भोकते त्यादुर्मनीषिणः ॥ 36 ॥

He whose hearts is purified and who is free from Sankalpa and Vikalpa (doubts and mental phenomena), knows It and Its glory and is free from sorrows and troubles. Know this Atman and Buddhi as the charioteer, this body as the chariot, and the mind as the reins. The senses and their organs are the horses and the objects of enjoyments are their aims. The sages declare that the Atman united with mind and organs of senses enjoys the objects.

यत्स्विद्धान्यक्षिति चामन्यकक्षि सदारुणि: ।

न ततव्यदायानोते संसरां चाधिप्यक्षिति ॥ 37 ॥

यस्तु विज्ञानाव्यक्षिति समयकः सदा शृषि: ।

स तु ततव्यदामानोत यस्याम्बूयो न जायते ॥ 38 ॥

He who is non-discriminating, unmindful, and always impure, does not realise his Atman; rather he is bound in this world. He who is discriminating, mindful, and always pure reaches the Goal, realises the Highest Self; and he is not fallen again from That.

विज्ञानसाराधियन्तु मनःप्रमहावार: ।

सोउध्वनः पारमाप्रोत मतीयं यस्यं पदम् ॥ 39 ॥

इत्थं श्रुताय च मत्या च निश्रियात्मानमात्मना ।

भाववैन्यामात्मरूपां निविद्यासनातोप्र च ॥ ४० ॥

Book VII Chapter XXXIV

That man becomes able to cross the Ocean of Saṃsāra and gets My Highest Abode, of the nature of everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss, whose charioteer is Discrimination, and who keeps his senses under control by keeping tight the reins of his mind. Thus one should always meditate intensely on Me to realise the nature of Self by Śravaṇam (hearing), Mananam (thinking) and realising one's own self by one's Self (pure heart).

योगयुक्ते: पुगा स्वास्मिन्यावयेद्वशरयम् ।

देवीप्रणवसंजस्य ध्यानार्थ मनवाच्ययो: ॥ 4 1 ॥

हकार: स्थूलदेहः स्यादकारः सूक्ष्मदेहकः ।

ईकारः कारणात्मासी ईंकारोर्धे तुर्णिकम् ॥ 4 2 ॥

When by the constant practise, as mentioned above, one's heart is fit for Samādhi (being absorbed in the Spirit), just before that, he should understand the meaning of the separate letters in the seed Mantra of Mahāmāyā. The letter 'Ha' means gross body and the letter 'Ra' means subtle body and the letter 'I' means the causal body; the (dot over the semicircle) is the fourth 'Turiya' state of Mine.

एवं समहिदेड़ेपि ज्ञाता बीजजयं क्रमात् ।

समहिष्यक्षोरकलं भाववेभमतिभावर: ॥ 43 ॥

समाधिकालान्यूर्वे तु भावविद्वेबमतुतः ।

तते ध्यायेत्रिनीनाड़ो देर्वीं मां जगदीश्वीम् ॥ 44 ॥

Thus meditating on the separate differentiated states, the intelligent man should meditate on the aforesaid three Bijas in the Cosmic body also and he should then try to establish the identity between the two. Before entering into Samādhi, after very carefully thinking the above, one should close one's eyes and meditate on Me, the Supreme Diety of the Universe, the Luminous and Self-Effulgent Brahma.

प्राणापानी समी कृत्वा नासाध्यंतराचारिणी ।

निद्रातविषयाकांशी वीतदोषो विमतसरः ॥ 45 ॥

भक्ता निव्यान्या युक्तो गुहायां निःसने चखले ।

हकारं विश्वामानां रकोर प्रवितापयेते् ॥ 46 ॥

रकारं तैजसं देवमीकारे प्रवितापयेते् ।

ईकारं प्राजमात्यानं ढौकारे प्रवितापयेते् ॥ 47 ॥

O Chief of Mountains! Putting a stop all worldly desires, free from jealousy and other evils, he should (by constant practise of Prānāyāma) make equal according to the rules of Prānāyāma, the Prāna (the inhaled breath) and Apāna (the exhaled breath) Vāyus and with an unfeigned devotion get the gross body (Vaiśvana) indicated by the letter 'Ha' dissolved in the subtle body Taijasa, the Taijasa body, the letter 'Ra' is in a cave where there is no noise (in the Susumnā cave) after that He should dissolve the Taijasa, 'Ra' into the Causal body 'I' He should then dissolve the Causal body the Prājna 'I' into the Turiya state Hrim.

वाय्यचारकताहीनं ऋतभाविवर्जितम् ।

अखण्डे सचिवदानन्दे भावयेतचिष्छालते ॥ 48 ॥

इति ध्यानेन मां राजसाखाकृत्य नरोतमः ।

मदुप एव भवति इयोर्येकता यतः ॥ 49 ॥

Then he should go into a region where there is no speech or the thing spoken, which is absolutely free from dualities, that Akhaṇḍa Saccidāanda and meditate on that Highest Self in the midst of the Fiery Flame of Consciousness. O, King of Mountains! Thus men by the meditation mentioned above, should realise the indentity between the Jīva and Brahma and see Me and get My Nature.

योगयुक्पाउपनया बृह्वा मामातानां परातयम् ।

अज्ञानस्य सकार्यस्य तक्षणे नागको भवेते ॥ 50 ॥

डीत श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणो सदानस्कन्दे देवीनीतायां

चतुविंशो3.यायः ।। 51 ।।

O Lord of Mountains! Thus the firmly resolved intelligent man, by the practise of this Yoga sees and realise the nature of My Highest Self and destroys immediately the Ignorance and all the actions thereof."

Here ends the Thirty-fourth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the Knowledge, Final Emancipation in the Mahā Purānam, Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

