CHAPTER V

On Chanting Hymns by Hara and Brahmā

ब्रह्मोयाय

इत्युक्चता वित्ते विद्यणौ देवदेव जनाद्ने ।

उवाच शड़ूः: शबै: प्रणतः पुतः स्थितः ॥ 1 ॥

Brahmā said: “O Nārada! Thus speaking, Viṣṇu stopped; Śaṅkara, the Destroyer, then stepped in and, bowing down to the Devi said:

Book III Chapter V

शिव उचार

यदि हरित्व देय विभावज-

स्वत्पु घवघ एवं तवोढ़ावः।

किमहमत्र तवापि न सुडण:

सकललोकविधी चतुरा शिवे ।

Śiva said: “O Devi! If Hari be born by Thy power and the lotus-born Brahmā have come into existence from Thee, why, then, I who am of Tamo Guṇa be not born of Thee! O Auspicious One! Thou art clever in creating all the Lokas! What wonder is there in My being created by Thee.

त्वामिति भृ: सहिलं पवन-

स्वथा खमपि विक्रीणुक तथा पतुः।

जननि तानि पुनः करणानि च

त्वमिति बुद्धिमनोउथव हंकृतिः।

O Mother! Thou art the earth, water, air, ākāśa and fire. Thou art, again, the organs of senses and the organs of perception; Thou art Buddhi, mind and Ahanikāra (egoism).

न च विदन्ति वदन्ति च येउन्यथा

हिरहाजकृतं निखिलं जान् ।

त्व कृताख्य एव सदैव ते

विरच्यन्ति जनसचराचर्म ।

Those who say that Hari, Hara, and Brahmā respectively the Preserver, the Destroyer and the Creator of this whole Universe do not know anything. All the three, above mentioned, are created by Thee; then they perform always their respective functions; their sole refuge being Thyself.

अवनिवायुखविड्जलादिपि;

सविषये: सगुर्णीय जान्द्रवेत् ।

यदि तदा कवमध्य च तत्सुर्ट

प्रभवतीति तवांव कलामुते ॥ 5 ॥

O Mother! If the Universe be created of the five elements, earth, air, ether, fire, and water, having the properties of touch, taste, etc, then how these five elements possessing attributes and of the nature of effects, can come into manifestation, without their being born from Thy Cit portion (Intelligence)?

भवसि सर्वीमंदं सचराचरं

ल्यमजिथ्यग्रीवाकस्पित्यम् ।

विविधवेषविलासकृतृहतै-

विसमे रासरेप्रब यथाफ्चि ॥ 6 ॥

O Auspicious Mother! It is Thou in the shape of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva, That art creating this Universe and it is Thou that hast assumed the form of this whole Universe, moving non-moving. Thus Thou playest, as it wills Thee, under variour- forms, again and again. Thou dost cease from play (during pralaya) as it likes Thee.

सकललोकसिश्युहरं हरि:

कमलपूँँ घबाम यद्धार्थिके ।

तव पदाम्बुजांपुर्परिष्टं

समाधिभ्य तन्द ननु चकिम ॥ 7 ॥

O Mother! When Brahmā, Viṣṇu and I become desirous to create the world, we execute our duties by taking the dust (earth, etc.) of Thy lotus feet.

यदि द्वाद्रमेनान न सदाधिकंके

कथमहं विहित्ध तमोगुणः ।

कमलजक्षं रजोगुणासभ्य

सुविहितः किमु सच्चगुणो हरि: ॥ 8 ॥

O Mother! If it were not Thy mercy, then how Brahmā could have become endowed with Rajoguna, Viṣṇu Sattvaguna and I with Tamoguna?

यदि न ते विषया मतिरिकेक

कथमिदं बहुधा विहितं जगत् ।

सचिवपूपतिष्यतज्ञातृतं

बहुधनैरधनैधु समाकुलम् ॥ 9 ॥

O Mother! If there were no differences observed in Thy mind, then why hast Thou created in this world rich and poor, king and councillors, servants, etc., various classes of beings? Why hast Thou not created all alike happy or all alike miserable?

तव गुणाक्रय एव सदा

क्षमा: प्रकट-नावनसहरणेषु वै।

हरित्यूद्धिणा क्रमाच्वया

विरचितास्क्रियन्ति किल कारणम् ॥ 10 ॥

So, Thou wilt have to shew Thy mercy towards me. Thy three gunas are capable at all times to

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

create, preserve and destroy the world; then Hari, Hara and Brahmā, whom Thou hast created as the cause of the three worlds, is simply Thy will.

परिचितानि मगा हरिणा

तथा कमलजेन विमानानते वे ।

पशिणतीभूवनानि कृतानि वा

कथय केन भवानि नवानि च ॥ 11 ॥

O Bhavāni! If Thy Gunas had no power in the acts of creation, etc. then how can the fact that while we three Hari, Brahmā and I were coming in the air craft, we saw on our way new worlds created by Thee, become possible? Kindly dost Thou say on this.

सृजसि पासि जगजजगदिष्के

स्वकलया क्रिविद्धचस नाशितुम् ।

नयमसे स्वपर्ति पुरूयं सदा तदा

गर्ति न हि विश्व वयं रोषे ॥ 12 ॥ ॥

O World-Mother! It is Thou that desirest to create, preserve, and destroy this world by Thy part. Māyik power. Thou art always enjoying with Purusa, Thy husband. O Śiva! We cannot fathom Thy inscrutable ways.

जननि देहि पदामयुजसेवनं

भवति भागवतानपि नः सदा ।

पुरुषतामाधिगाय पदाम्बुजाड्रहिता:

क्व लभे न सुखं स्मूटम् ॥ 13 ॥

न सुधिरस्ति मर्मांब पदाम्बुर्ज

तव हिद्धाय हिथे घुवनेचषलम् ।

निवसितुं नरदेहमवाय्य च

त्रिषुवनस्य पतितमवाय्य ते ॥ 14 ॥

सुवर्ति नासि मनागराये मे

रतिर्वुवतिभावमवाय्य तवानितके ।

पुरुषता क्व सुखाय भवत्यलं

तव पदं न यदीक्षणगोकरम् ॥ 15 ॥

O auspicious one! How can we understand Thy sport? O Mother! We are transformed into young women before Thee let us serve Thy lotus feet. If we get our manhood, we will be deprived from serving Thy feet and thus of the greatest happiness. O Mother! O Sire! I do not like to leave Thy lotus

feet and get my man-body again and again in the three worlds. O Beautiful faced one! Now that I have got this youthful feminine form before Thee, there in not a trace of desire within me to get again my masculine form. What use is there is getting manhood, what happiness is there if I do get sigh of Thy lotus-feet!

निष्पवेन्यु भवलिव्यमिधके

मम सदैव हिं कर्जितनार्थिला ।

युवतिषाचवमाव्य पदाछ्जुर्ज

परिसिंत तव संयुतिनाशनम् ॥ 16 ॥

O Mother! Let this unsullied fame of mine be spread over in the three worlds that I have got, in this young womanly form, the chance of serving Thy lotus feet that has got this effect that the idea of world goes away.

भृवि विहाय त्वान्तिक्सेवनं

क ऋर वाज्छति राज्यकंटकम् ।

ब्रुटिसौ किल याति युगायन्तां

न निकटं यदि तैंडिभसोरोहम् ॥ 17 ॥

Who is there will leave Thy service and desire to enjoy the foeless kingdom in the world? Oh! even a moment appears a Yuga to him who has not got Thy lotus feet with him!

तपसि ये निरता मुनयोप्रमालास्तव

बिहार्य घतम्युजपूजनम् ।

जननि ते वित्थिना किल विज्ञानः

परिभबो विषये परिकसित्यः ॥ 18 ॥

O Mother! Those that leave the worship of Thy lotus feet and become engaged in performing tapasyā are certainly deprived of the best thing by the Creator, though their minds be pure and holy. Their power from their Tapasyā may be acquired and they be entitled for Mukti; yet they get dire defeat from not having Thee.

न तपसा न दमेन समाधिना

न च तथा विहितैः क्रतुभिर्यथा ।

तव पदाकवपगानीवेबणा.द्वविति

भूक्तिजे भवसागगत् ॥ १९ ॥

O Unborn One! Austerities, control of passions,

Book III Chapter V

enlightenment or performance of sacrifice, as ordained in the Vedas, nothing can save, from this ocean of Sarinsāra. It is the devotional worship only of Thy lotus feet that can make one attain the Beatitude.

कुरु द्वयं द्वये यदि देयि

मां कथय मन्मनमातिलमद्धुतम् ।

सभपत्र प्रजन्मृत्तिक्षो हृहं

सुविशर्द न नवाणमनुतमम् ॥ 20 ॥

O Devi! If Thou be extremely merciful towards me, then initiate me in that wonderful holy mantra of Thine; I will repeat that omnipotent par-excellent nine-lettered mantra of the Candikā Devi and be happy.

प्रथमज्ञमनि चाधिणतो मया

तद्धुना न विभागित नवाक्षरः।

कथय मां मनुमछ भवाणांव-

ज्ञननि तारय तारय तारके ॥ 21 ॥

O Mother! In my former birth I got the nine-lettered mantra but now I have forgotten it. O Tārīn! O, Savior! Give me today that mantra and save me from this ocean of world.

ब्रहोयाच

इत्युक्ता सा ताद देवी शिवेनाद्रततेजसा ।

उच्चवारांविका मंत्र प्रपुस्तं च नवाक्षरम् ॥ 22 ॥

तं गृहीत्वा महादेवः परां मुतमाया ह ।

प्रणाय चरणो देयास्त्रैवावस्थितः शिवः ॥ 23 ॥

जपत्रवाक्षरं मन्ते कामदं मोक्षेतं तथा ।

बीजयुक्ते शुभोच्चारं शुक्रस्त्रियबांस्ताद । 24 ॥

Brahmā said: “When Śiva, of wonderful fire and energy, said this, Devi Ambikā clearly uttered the nine-lettered mantra. Mahādeva accepted the mantra and became very glad. He fell down at the feet of the Devi, and then and there began to repeat the nine-lettered mantra together with Bija (seed) that yields desires and liberation and can be easily pronounced.

तं तथाउत्थितं दूद्या शड़ूः लोकशड़ूम् ।

अयोचे तां महामायां संश्वितोड़ं पदानिके ॥ 25 ॥

When I saw Śankara, the Auspicious One to all

the Lokas, in that state, I fell down also at the feet of the Devi and spoke to Mahā Māyā:

न वेदास्त्वामेवं कलियतुमिहासप्रपटवो ।

यात्ले नोकुत्वां सकतल्पतायीमविकलाम् ।

स्वधान्धुता देवी सकलमखहोगेम्यु विहिता ।

तदा त्वं सर्वज्ञ जननि खलु जाता सिभुचने ॥ 26 ॥

“O Mother! It is not that the Vedas are unable to ascertain Thy nature; for, in the performances of sacrifices and other minor actions, they do not mention Thy full Nature, the Ordainer of all but mention simply Indra and minor deities and Svāhā Devi, a portion of Thy essence as the presiding deities of the sacrificial offerings and oblations. So, O Devi! It is Thou that hast been extolled in this Universe as the Universal Consciousness, all knowing and transcending all the Devas and all the Lokas.

Note: The nine-lettered mantra is "Om Hrim Śrim Candikāyai namah."

कर्ताईं प्रकृतीय स्वर्भित्वं ब्रह्मण्डमत्यद्धुतं।

कोउन्योस्तीह चारचोरे विभुवने मन्तः सपर्थे: पुमान् ।

धयोउपम्बन न संशयः किल यदा ब्रह्माउसि लोकातिगो ।

मानतेई भवसागरे प्रवित्ते गर्वाधिरेशादिति ॥ 27 ॥

I have created this greatly wonderful Universe; I am the Lord of this Brahmānda. Who is there more powerful than me in these three world? When I am Brahmā, transcending all the lokas, then I am blessed; there is no doubt in this. By reason of this vanity I am plunged in this widely extended ocean of Sarīsāra.

अशहां तव पादपूर्जपरागादानर्जीण वे ।

धन्योर्जसीति चयार्थवैर्दानिपुणो जात प्रसादाच्छ्च ते ।

याचे त्वां घबर्षीतिनाशवतुरां मुक्तिप्रदां चेश्रिं ।

हित्वा मोहकृतं महातर्दीनिर्भई त्वद्धक्तियुक्तं कुक १। २८। १।

That now I have been able to get the dust of Thy lotus feet, has now made me really proud; and truly I am blessed today and by Thy grace this manifestation of pride on my part has become quite justified.

अतोर्दे च जातौ विमुक्तः क्वं

स्वां सरोजादये मात्वद्वीक्षित्तां ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

तवाज्ञाकः किंकरोउस्मिति नूनं शिशे

पाहि मां महामरं भवाख्यों ॥ 29 ॥

Thou destroyest the fear of this Sarinsāra and givest Mukti. So, O Goddess! I pray unto Thee that Thou dost cut asunder this iron chain of my delusion, full of great troubles and make me devoted to Thee. O, Auspicious One! I am born from the lotus discovered by Thee; now I am extremely anxious how I can get Mukti. I am Thy obedient servant; I am merged in this delusion of this ocean of world. Save me O Śivā! from this Sarinsāra.

न जानीत ये मानवासते वदन्ति

प्रभुं मा तवाढं चरित्रं पवित्रम् ।

यजेतीह ये वायकाः स्वर्गकामा

न ते ते प्रभावं विद्वेलये कामम् ॥ 30 ॥

Those who do not know Thy character, think that I am the Creator and Lord of this Universe; those, who do not worship Thee and worship Indra and other Devas and perform sacrifices to attain Heaven are certainly ignorant of Thy glory. O Prime Māya! Thou art the Eternal Mahā Māya! It is Thou that dost want to play this world play, and for that purpose hast created me as Brahma.

त्वया निर्मितोर्ह विधित्य पेहतरं

विकर्तुं चतुर्णं विधायादिसर्गम् ।

अर्हे वेधि कोउ-या विवेत्रातियाये

क्षमस्वापराथं त्वहूजारं में ॥ 31 ॥

Then I created these four sorts of beings, engendered by heat and moisture (said of insects and worms), those that are oviparous, those that are sprung from germs or shoots, and those that are born from womb, viviparous and exhibit my pride “That I am Omniscient” So forgive this sin of mine, this my pride.

प्रभं येड्धधा योगमाणं प्रवृत्ता:

प्रकृति मुहा: सामार्थी स्थिता है ।

न जानीत ने ताम मोक्षप्रदं वा

स्पष्टचारितं जातु मातर्पिणे च ॥ 32 ॥

O Mother! Those ignorant persons blinded by

passion, who take recourse to the eight-fold Yoga and Samādhi and labour under it, do not know for certain, they would get Moksā, if they utter Thy name, even under a pretext.

विचारे पे तत्वसंख्याविधाने

पंदे मोहिता नाम ते संविदाय।

न कि के विमृष्टा भवाक्यों भवानि

त्वमेवासि संसारमुक्तिप्रदा वै ॥ ३३ ॥

O Bhavānī! are they not deluded by error and blinded by passion for this world, who discriminate only the Tattvas (essences) and forget Thy name? For it is Thou that dost give Mukti from this world.

परं तत्वविज्ञानमहीजैर्नैरजे

चानुभूतं त्वज्वेल वे तिकम् ।

निमेषाधामांत पवित्रं चरित्रं

शिवा चात्विका शक्तिरीशित नाम ॥ 34 ॥

O Thou Unborn! Can Hari, Hara, etc. and other ancient persons who have realised the highest Truth, forget, even for a second Thy holy character and Thy names Śivā, Ambikā, Śakti, Iśvari and others? Canst Thou not create, by Thy glance merely, this four-fold creation? In fact, for mere recreation and will, it is Thou that hast made me as a Creator from the earliest times.

न कि कंल सभार्थसि विश्वं

वियातुं दृषीवागुं सर्वे चतुर्ण विष्णम् ।

विनोदार्थीयंविंधियां मां विध्याराविसर्गें

किलेते कंरीषिति कामम् ॥ 35 ॥

Is it not that Thou didst save Hari in the ocean from the two Daityas Madhu and Kaitabha? Is it not again the fact that Thou destroyest Hara who is the great destroyer, when Thou dissolvest the creation? Otherwise why is it that Hara becomes born from my eye-brows at the time of fresh creation?

हरि: पालकः किं त्यसाओं

मथोर्वां तथा कैटभाड्रक्षितः सिसूमध्ये ।

हर: संकेत: किं त्यसाओं न काले

कर्थे मे धुवोभीध्येशास्त जातः॥ ३६ ॥

So Hari is not the Preserver of all. Hara is not

Book III Chapter V

the Destroyer of all. Had they been such, why would they be preserved and destroyed respectively by Thee? So Thou alone art the Creatrix and Preservetrix of all.

न ते जन्म क्रायरि दूई श्रुतं वा

कृत: सम्पावसे न कोउपीह वेद ।

किलाधासि शन्निरल्यमेका भवानि

स्ततःम: सम्पतैतो वोधितासि ॥ 37 ॥

O Bhavānī; no one has heard of or seen Thee taking birth; no body knows whence Thou art born. Thou art, indeed, the One and only Sakti! Only the four Vedas can make one understand Thy Nature. O Mother! It is only by Thy help that I am able to create this creation; Hari, to preserve; and Hara to destroy.

त्वया संयुतोड़ं विकर्तुं समर्थों

हरिशतुर्मेव त्वया संयुतश ।

इरः सम्रह्तुं त्वयैवेह सुतः क्षमा

नाए सर्वे त्वया विग्युक्ताः ॥ 38 ॥

Without Thy aid, We are able to do nothing. There is nobody, in this world, born or that was born or that will be born, who does not become doubtful as we are.

यावरई हरि: शक्रः किं त्वासन्ये

न जाता न सोहौ नो वारभायिन् ।

न मुह्याति केजस्मिन्तावाल्यंतिचित्र

विनोरे विवादास्यदेःल्याणयान् ॥ 39 ॥

This Thine wondrously variegated Universe, full of Thy Lilā, consisting in variety, is the common ground of dispute of the imperfect intellects; who are not deluded here! In this Sarīnāra, full of things, visible and invisible, there is another one who is more ancient than Thee; there is another Highest Person who is Thy substratum.

अकाती गुणस्यष एवादा देवो

निरीहोउनुपाधि: सदैवाकतश।

तवाणीश्ररसे वितिर्णिं चिनोदे

सुसंपश्यतीत्याहुरेवं विधिप्राने: ॥ 40 ॥

If it be argued nicely, it will be seen that there is no other third Person that can be proved as far as evidences or proofs go to measure it.

दूरादृष्टविपेदेडस्म्याकलत्तो वै पुमान्यः ।

नान्यः कौरिप चृतीयोरित प्रमेवे सुविचारिति ॥ 41 ॥

The wise persons, knowing all the laws, declare that there is the One God attributedness, inactive, without any object in view, without any upādhis or adjuncts, without any parts, who is the witness of Thy widely extended Lilā. “One alone exists; and that is Brahman, and there is nothing else.”

न प्रियथा वेदवाक्यं वै कल्पनीयं कदाचन ।

विरोधोरयं मवाप्तवर्ते हृदतं चै विजर्णिक्तः ॥ 4 2 ॥

This is the saying of the Vedas. Now I feel in my mind a doubt as to the discrepancy with this Veda saying. I cannot say that Veda is false.

एकभेवाद्रितीयं यदुङ्ग देवा वदन्ति च ।

सा किं तं वाधासी वा किं सन्देह विवित्वर्ध ॥ 43 ॥

So I ask Thee: “Art Thou the Brahman, the one and the secondless that is mentioned in the Vedas? or Is the other Person Brahma? Kindly solve this doubt of mine.

नि:संशयं न मे चेत: प्रभवत्यिशिज्ञतम् ।

द्वित्वेकत्वचिरोर्समिभ्रमनं शूलतकं मनः ॥ 44 ॥

My mind is not completely free from doubts; this little mind is still discussing whether the Reality is dual or one; I cannot solve myself.

स्वमुखोनापि नन्टैं छेतुमहिंस मामकम् ।

पुषयभोगाच्च मे प्राप्ता संगतितस्त पादयो: ॥ 45 ॥

पुभानासि त्वं की वार्डिस वह विस्तरतो मम् ।

ज्ञालाड़े परमां गर्जिक मुक्तः: स्वा भवमसागत् ॥ 46 ॥

इति श्रीमदैबीभागवते महापुराणी तृतीयकन्के

पख्योरध्या: 11 5 11

So dost Thou say from Thy mouth and cut my doubts asunder. Whether Thou art male or female, describe in detail to me. So that, knowing the Highest Šakti, I be freed from this ocean of Sarīsāra.”

Thus ends the Fifth Chapter of the Third Book as the chanting of hymns by Hara and Brahmā in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevīthāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

