[Ch 5 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā said: “O Nārada! Thus speaking, Viṣṇu stopped; Śaṅkara, the Destroyer, then stepped in and, bowing down to the Devi said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā said :-- O Nàrada! Thus speaking, Viṣṇu stopped; Saṅkara, the Destroyer, then stepped in and, bowing down to the Devī said :--

[Ch 5 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śiva said: “O Devi! If Hari be born by Thy power and the lotus-born Brahmā have come into existence from Thee, why, then, I who am of Tamo Guṇa be not born of Thee! O Auspicious One! Thou art clever in creating all the Lokas! What wonder is there in My being created by Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śiva said :-- O Devī! If Hari be born by Thy power and the lotus-born Brahmā have come into existence from Thee, why, then, I who of Tamo Guṇa be not born of Thee! O Auspicious One! Thou art clever in creating all the Lokas! What wonder is there in My being created by Thee.

[Ch 5 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! Thou art the earth, water, air, ākāśa and fire. Thou art, again, the organs of senses and the organs of perception; Thou art Buddhi, mind and Ahanikāra (egoism).
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! Thou art the earth, water, air, ākāsa and fire. Thou art, again, the organs of senses and the organs of perception; Thou art Buddhi, mind and Ahaṅkāra (egoism).

[Ch 5 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who say that Hari, Hara, and Brahmā respectively the Preserver, the Destroyer and the Creator of this whole Universe do not know anything. All the three, above mentioned, are created by Thee; then they perform always their respective functions; their sole refuge being Thyself.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who say that Hari, Hara, and Brahmā are respectively the Preserver, the Destroyer and the Creator of this whole Universe do know anything. All the three, above mentioned, are created by Thee; then they perform always their respective functions; their sole refuge being Thyself.

[Ch 5 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! If the Universe be created of the five elements, earth, air, ether, fire, and water, having the properties of touch, taste, etc, then how these five elements possessing attributes and of the nature of effects, can come into manifestation, without their being born from Thy Cit portion (Intelligence)?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! If the Universe be created of the five elements, earth, air, ether, fire, and water, having the properties of touch, taste, etc., then how these five elements possessing attributes and of the nature of effects, can come into manifestation, without their being born from Thy Chit portion (Intelligence)?

[Ch 5 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Auspicious Mother! It is Thou in the shape of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva, That art creating this Universe and it is Thou that hast assumed the form of this whole Universe, moving non-moving. Thus Thou playest, as it wills Thee, under variour- forms, again and again. Thou dost cease from play (during pralaya) as it likes Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Auspicious Mother! It is Thou in the shape of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva, That art creating this Universe and it is Thou that hast assumed the form of this whole Universe, moving and non-moving. Thus Thou playest, as it wills Thee, under various forms, again and again. Thou dost cease from play (during pralaya) as it likes Thee.

[Ch 5 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! When Brahmā, Viṣṇu and I become desirous to create the world, we execute our duties by taking the dust (earth, etc.) of Thy lotus feet.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! When Brahmā, Viṣṇu and I become desirous to create the world, we execute our duties by taking the dust (earth, etc.) of Thy lotus feet.

[Ch 5 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! If it were not Thy mercy, then how Brahmā could have become endowed with Rajoguna, Viṣṇu Sattvaguna and I with Tamoguna?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! It it were not Thy mercy, then how Brahmā could have become endowed with Rajoguṇa, Viṣṇu with Sattvaguṇa and I with Tamoguṇa?

[Ch 5 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! If there were no differences observed in Thy mind, then why hast Thou created in this world rich and poor, king and councillors, servants, etc., various classes of beings? Why hast Thou not created all alike happy or all alike miserable?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! If there were no differences observed in Thy mind, then why hast Thou created in this world rich and poor, king and councillors, servants, etc., various classes of beings? Why hast Thou not created all alike happy or all alike miserable?

[Ch 5 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So, Thou wilt have to shew Thy mercy towards me. Thy three gunas are capable at all times to create, preserve and destroy the world; then Hari, Hara and Brahmā, whom Thou hast created as the cause of the three worlds, is simply Thy will.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So Thou wilt have to show Thy mercy towards me. Thy three guṇas are capable at all times to create, preserve and destroy the world; then Hari, Hara and Brahmā, whom Thou hast created as the cause of the three worlds, is simply Thy will.

[Ch 5 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Bhavāni! If Thy Gunas had no power in the acts of creation, etc. then how can the fact that while we three Hari, Brahmā and I were coming in the air craft, we saw on our way new worlds created by Thee, become possible? Kindly dost Thou say on this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Bhavāni! If Thy Guṇas had no power in the acts of creation, etc., then how can the fact that while we three Hari, Brahmā and I were coming in the aeroplane, we saw on our way new worlds created by Thee, become possible? Kindly dost Thou say on this.

[Ch 5 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O World-Mother! It is Thou that desirest to create, preserve, and destroy this world by Thy part. Māyik power. Thou art always enjoying with Purusa, Thy husband. O Śiva! We cannot fathom Thy inscrutable ways.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O World-Mother! It is Thou that desirest to create, preserve, and destroy this world by Thy part Māyik power. Thou art always enjoying with Puruṣa, Thy husband. O Śiva! We cannot fathom Thy inscrutable ways.

[Ch 5 Verse 13-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O auspicious one! How can we understand Thy sport? O Mother! We are transformed into young women before Thee let us serve Thy lotus feet. If we get our manhood, we will be deprived from serving Thy feet and thus of the greatest happiness. O Mother! O Sire! I do not like to leave Thy lotus feet and get my man-body again and again in the three worlds. O Beautiful faced one! Now that I have got this youthful feminine form before Thee, there in not a trace of desire within me to get again my masculine form. What use is there is getting manhood, what happiness is there if I do get sigh of Thy lotus-feet!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O auspicious one! How can we understand Thy sport? O Mother! We are transformed into young women before Thee; let us serve Thy lotus feet. If we get our manhood, we will be deprived from serving Thy feet and thus of the greatest happiness. O Mother! O Sire! I do not like to leave Thy lotus feet and get my man-body again and reign in the three worlds. O Beautiful faced one! Now that I have got this youthful feminine form before Thee, there is not a trace of desire within me to get again my masculine form. What use is there in getting manhood, what happiness is there if I do not get sight of Thy lotus-feet!

[Ch 5 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! Let this unsullied fame of mine be spread over in the three worlds that I have got, in this young womanly form, the chance of serving Thy lotus feet that has got this effect that the idea of world goes away.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! Let this unsullied fame of mine be spread over in the three worlds that I have got, in this young womanly form, the chance of serving Thy lotus feet that has got this effect that the idea of world goes away.

[Ch 5 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Who is there will leave Thy service and desire to enjoy the foeless kingdom in the world? Oh! even a moment appears a Yuga to him who has not got Thy lotus feet with him!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Who is there that will leave Thy service and desire to enjoy the foeless kingdom in the world? Oh! even a moment appears a Yuga to him who has not got Thy lotus feet with him!

[Ch 5 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! Those that leave the worship of Thy lotus feet and become engaged in performing tapasyā are certainly deprived of the best thing by the Creator, though their minds be pure and holy. Their power from their Tapasyā may be acquired and they be entitled for Mukti; yet they get dire defeat from not having Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! Those that leave the worship of Thy lotus feet and become engaged in performing tapasyā are certainly deprived of the best thing by the Creator, though their minds be pure and holy. Their power from their Tapasyā may be acquired and they be entitled for Mukti; yet they get dire defeat from not having Thee.

[Ch 5 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Unborn One! Austerities, control of passions, enlightenment or performance of sacrifice, as ordained in the Vedas, nothing can save, from this ocean of Sarinsāra. It is the devotional worship only of Thy lotus feet that can make one attain the Beatitude.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Unborn One! Austerities, control of passions, enlightenment or performance of sacrifices, as ordained in the Vedas, nothing can save, from this ocean of Samsāra. It is the devotional worship only of Thy lotus feet that can make one attain the Beatitude.

[Ch 5 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devi! If Thou be extremely merciful towards me, then initiate me in that wonderful holy mantra of Thine; I will repeat that omnipotent par-excellent nine-lettered mantra of the Candikā Devi and be happy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devī! If Thou be extremely merciful towards me, then initiate me in that wonderful holy mantra of Thine; I will repeat that omnipotent par-excellent nine-lettered mantra of the Candikā Devī and be happy.

[Ch 5 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! In my former birth I got the nine-lettered mantra but now I have forgotten it. O Tārīn! O, Savior! Give me today that mantra and save me from this ocean of world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! In my former birth I got the nine-lettered mantra but now I have forgotten it O Tariṇī! O Saviour! Give me today that mantra and save me from this ocean of world.

[Ch 5 Verse 22-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā said: “When Śiva, of wonderful fire and energy, said this, Devi Ambikā clearly uttered the nine-lettered mantra. Mahādeva accepted the mantra and became very glad. He fell down at the feet of the Devi, and then and there began to repeat the nine-lettered mantra together with Bija (seed) that yields desires and liberation and can be easily pronounced.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā said :-- When Śiva of wonderful fire and energy, said this, the Devī Ambikā clearly uttered the nine lettered mantra. Mahādeva accepted the mantra and became very glad. He fell down at the feet of the Devī, and then and there began to repeat the nine-lettered mantra together with Vīja (seed) that yields desires and liberation and can be easily pronounced.

[Ch 5 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When I saw Śankara, the Auspicious One to all the Lokas, in that state, I fell down also at the feet of the Devi and spoke to Mahā Māyā:
NEW CORR ENG ──► When I saw Śaṅkara, the Auspicious One to all the Lokas, in that state, I fell down also at the feet of the Devī and spoke to Mahā Māyā :--

[Ch 5 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Mother! It is not that the Vedas are unable to ascertain Thy nature; for, in the performances of sacrifices and other minor actions, they do not mention Thy full Nature, the Ordainer of all but mention simply Indra and minor deities and Svāhā Devi, a portion of Thy essence as the presiding deities of the sacrificial offerings and oblations. So, O Devi! It is Thou that hast been extolled in this Universe as the Universal Consciousness, all knowing and transcending all the Devas and all the Lokas. Note: The nine-lettered mantra is "Om Hrim Śrim Candikāyai namah."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! It is not that the Vedas are unable to ascertain Thy nature; for, in the performances of sacrifices and other minor actions, they do not mention Thy full Nature, the Ordainer of all but mention simply Indra and minor deities and Svāhā Devī, a portion of Thy essence as the presiding deities of the sacrificial offerings and oblations. So, O Devī! It is Thou that hast been extolled in this Universe as the Universal Consciousness, all knowing and transcending all the Devas and all the Lokas. Note :-- The nine lettered mantra is “Om Hrīm Śrīm Canḍikāyai namaḥ.”

[Ch 5 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I have created this greatly wonderful Universe; I am the Lord of this Brahmānda. Who is there more powerful than me in these three world? When I am Brahmā, transcending all the lokas, then I am blessed; there is no doubt in this. By reason of this vanity I am plunged in this widely extended ocean of Sarīsāra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I have created this greatly wondrous Universe; I am the Lord of this Brahmānḍa. Who is there more powerful than me in these three worlds? When I am Brahmā, transcending all the Lokas, then I am blessed; there is no doubt in this. By reason of this vanity I am plunged in this widely extended ocean of Samsàra.

[Ch 5 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That now I have been able to get the dust of Thy lotus feet, has now made me really proud; and truly I am blessed today and by Thy grace this manifestation of pride on my part has become quite justified.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That now I have been able to get the dust of Thy lotus feet, has now made me really proud; and truly I am blessed today and by Thy grace this manifestation of pride on my part has become quite justified.

[Ch 5 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou destroyest the fear of this Sarinsāra and givest Mukti. So, O Goddess! I pray unto Thee that Thou dost cut asunder this iron chain of my delusion, full of great troubles and make me devoted to Thee. O, Auspicious One! I am born from the lotus discovered by Thee; now I am extremely anxious how I can get Mukti. I am Thy obedient servant; I am merged in this delusion of this ocean of world. Save me O Śivā! from this Sarinsāra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thou destroyest the fear of this Samsāra and givest Mukti. So, O Goddess! pray unto Thee that Thou dost cut asunder this iron chain of my delusion, full of great troubles and make me devoted to Thee. O Auspicious One! I am born from the lotus discovered by Thee; now I am extremely anxious how I can get Mukti. I am Thy obedient servant; I am merged in the delusion of this ocean of world. Save me O Śiva! from this Samsāra.

[Ch 5 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who do not know Thy character, think that I am the Creator and Lord of this Universe; those, who do not worship Thee and worship Indra and other Devas and perform sacrifices to attain Heaven are certainly ignorant of Thy glory. O Prime Māya! Thou art the Eternal Mahā Māya! It is Thou that dost want to play this world play, and for that purpose hast created me as Brahma.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who do not know Thy character, think that I am the Creator and Lord of this Universe; those, who do not worship Thee and worship Indra and other Devas and perform sacrifices to attain Heaven are certainly ignorant of Thy glory. O Prime Māyā! Thou art the Eternal Mahā Māyā! It is Thou that dost want to play this worldplay, and for that purpose hast created me as Brahmā.

[Ch 5 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then I created these four sorts of beings, engendered by heat and moisture (said of insects and worms), those that are oviparous, those that are sprung from germs or shoots, and those that are born from womb, viviparous and exhibit my pride “That I am Omniscient” So forgive this sin of mine, this my pride.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then I created these four sorts of beings, engendered by heat and moisture (said of insects and worms), those that are oviparous, those that are sprung from germs or shoots, and those that are born from womb, viviparous and exhibit my pride “That I am omniscient” So forgive this sin of mine, this my pride.

[Ch 5 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! Those ignorant persons blinded by passion, who take recourse to the eight-fold Yoga and Samādhi and labour under it, do not know for certain, they would get Moksā, if they utter Thy name, even under a pretext.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother ! Those ignorant persons blinded by passion, who take recourse to the eight-fold Yoga and Samādhi and labour under it, do not know for certain, they would get Mokṣa, if they utter Thy name, even under a pretext.

[Ch 5 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Bhavānī! are they not deluded by error and blinded by passion for this world, who discriminate only the Tattvas (essences) and forget Thy name? For it is Thou that dost give Mukti from this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Bhavānī! are they not deluded by error and blinded by passion for this world, who discriminate only the Tattvas (essences) and forget Thy name? For it is Thou that dost give Mukti from this world.

[Ch 5 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Thou Unborn! Can Hari, Hara, etc. and other ancient persons who have realised the highest Truth, forget, even for a second Thy holy character and Thy names Śivā, Ambikā, Śakti, Iśvari and others? Canst Thou not create, by Thy glance merely, this four-fold creation? In fact, for mere recreation and will, it is Thou that hast made me as a Creator from the earliest times.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Thou Unborn! Can Hari, Hara, etc., and other ancient persons who have realised the highest Truth, forget, even for a second Thy holy character and Thy names Śiva, Ambikā, Śakti, Isvarī and others? Canst Thou not create, by Thy glance merely, this fourfold creation? In fact, for mere recreation and will, it is Thou that hast made me as a Creator from the earliest times.

[Ch 5 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Is it not that Thou didst save Hari in the ocean from the two Daityas Madhu and Kaitabha? Is it not again the fact that Thou destroyest Hara who is the great destroyer, when Thou dissolvest the creation? Otherwise why is it that Hara becomes born from my eye-brows at the time of fresh creation?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Is it not that Thou didst save Hari in the ocean from the two Daityas Madhu and Kaitabha? Is it not again the fact that Thou destroyest Hara even who is the great destroyer, when Thou dissolvest the creation? Otherwise why is it that Hara becomes born from my eye-brows at the time of fresh creation?

[Ch 5 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So Hari is not the Preserver of all. Hara is not the Destroyer of all. Had they been such, why would they be preserved and destroyed respectively by Thee? So Thou alone art the Creatrix and Preservetrix of all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So Hari is not the Preserver of all. Hara is not the Destroyer of all. Had they been such, why would they be preserved and destroyed respectively by Thee? So Thou alone art the Creatrix and Preservatrix of all.

[Ch 5 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Bhavānī; no one has heard of or seen Thee taking birth; no body knows whence Thou art born. Thou art, indeed, the One and only Sakti! Only the four Vedas can make one understand Thy Nature. O Mother! It is only by Thy help that I am able to create this creation; Hari, to preserve; and Hara to destroy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Bhavānī; no one has heard of or seen Thee taking birth; nobody knows whence Thou art born. Thou art, indeed, the One and only Śakti! Only the four Vedas can make one understand Thy Nature. O Mother! It is only by Thy help that I am able to create this creation; Hari, to preserve; and Hara, to destroy.

[Ch 5 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Without Thy aid, We are able to do nothing. There is nobody, in this world, born or that was born or that will be born, who does not become doubtful as we are.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Without Thy aid, we are able to do nothing. There is nobody, in this world, born or that was born or that will be born, who does not become doubtful as we are.

[Ch 5 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Thine wondrously variegated Universe, full of Thy Lilā, consisting in variety, is the common ground of dispute of the imperfect intellects; who are not deluded here! In this Sarīnāra, full of things, visible and invisible, there is another one who is more ancient than Thee; there is another Highest Person who is Thy substratum.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This Thine wondrously variegated Universe, full of Thy Līlā, consisting in variety, is the common ground of dispute of the imperfect intellects; who are not deluded here! In this Samsārā, full of things, visible and invisible, there is another one who is more ancient than Thee; there is another Highest Person who is Thy substratum.

[Ch 5 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If it be argued nicely, it will be seen that there is no other third Person that can be proved as far as evidences or proofs go to measure it.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If it be argued nicely, it will be seen that there is no other third Person that can be proved as far as evidences or proofs go to measure it.

[Ch 5 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The wise persons, knowing all the laws, declare that there is the One God attributedness, inactive, without any object in view, without any upādhis or adjuncts, without any parts, who is the witness of Thy widely extended Lilā. “One alone exists; and that is Brahman, and there is nothing else.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The wise persons, knowing all the laws, declare that there is the One God attributeless, inactive, without any object in view, without any upādhis or adjunct without any parts, who is the witness of Thy widely extended Leelā “One alone exists; and that is Brahmān, and there is nothing else.”

[Ch 5 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This is the saying of the Vedas. Now I feel in my mind a doubt as to the discrepancy with this Veda saying. I cannot say that Veda is false.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This is the saying of the Vedas. Now I feel in my mind a doubt as to the discrepancy with this Veda saying. I cannot say that the Veda is false.

[Ch 5 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So I ask Thee: “Art Thou the Brahman, the one and the secondless that is mentioned in the Vedas? or Is the other Person Brahma? Kindly solve this doubt of mine.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So I ask Thee :-- Art Thou the Brahmān, the one and the secondless that is mentioned in the Vedas? or Is the other Person Brahmā? Kindly solve this doubt of mine.

[Ch 5 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My mind is not completely free from doubts; this little mind is still discussing whether the Reality is dual or one; I cannot solve myself.
NEW CORR ENG ──► My mind is not completely free from doubts; this little mind is still discussing whether the Reality is dual or one; I cannot solve myself.

[Ch 5 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So dost Thou say from Thy mouth and cut my doubts asunder. Whether Thou art male or female, describe in detail to me. So that, knowing the Highest Šakti, I be freed from this ocean of Sarīsāra.” Thus ends the Fifth Chapter of the Third Book as the chanting of hymns by Hara and Brahmā in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevīthāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa. Śrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► So dost Thou say from Thy mouth and cut my doubts asunder. Whether Thou art male or female, describe in detail to me. So that, knowing the Highest Śakti, I be freed from this ocean Samsāra. Thus ends the fifth chapter of the Third Skandha on the chanting of hymns by Hara and Brahmā in the Mahā Purāṇam Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
