CHAPTER XVIII

On Janaka's instructions to Šuka Deva

सूत उवाच

शुत्वा तमागतं राजा मन्त्रिभ: सहितः शुधि: ।

पूर: पूरीहितं कृत्वा गुरूपूत्रं समाध्यगात् ॥ 1 ॥

कृत्वा:डर्णी नृप: सत्यवर्तासनमनुतनमम् ।

पूर्णच्छकुशलं गां च विनिवेदो घयस्विनीम् ॥ 2 ॥

स च तां नृपपूजां वै प्रत्यगृह्धादयाविति ।

पूर्णच्छ कुशलं गेउं स्वं निवेद्न निरातमयम् ॥ 3 ॥

Sūta said: "Maharsis! When the king Janaka heard of the arrival of Šuka Deva, the son of his Guru, he took his priest before him and attended

by his ministers came before him in pure spirit. Then he duly worshipped Śuka, offering him Pādya, Arghya and an excellent seat, and a cow, yielding milk and then enquired about his walfare.

कृत्वा कुणलसंप्रसन्पुरविष्टे सुखासने ।

शुक्के व्याससुतं शान्तं पर्यंच्छत पार्थिव: ॥ 4 ॥

Suka Deva accepted duly all the things offered by the king; and informed him of his well-being and asked the king in return, of his welfare and took his seat at ease on the Asana. The king Janaka asked the son of Vyāsa, full of peace:

किं निमितं महाभाग नि: स्मूरुवच च मां प्रति ।

जातं हागामं बृहि कार्यं तन्मुनिस्तम ॥ 5 ॥

“O Mahābhāga Muni Sattama! You are devoid of any attachment and you have no desires. May I enquire why such a person as your honored self has come to me.”

शुक उवाच

व्यासेनेतो महाराज कुक दारपरिश्रहम् ।

सर्वेभामाभाणां च गृह्वाथाम उतमः ॥ 6 ॥

मया नांगीकृतं वाक्यं मत्वा बन्धु गुरोरपि ।

न बस्योरस्तीलित तेनेतोच्छततृकताव्युन: ॥ 7 ॥

Šuka Deva said: “O great king! my father told me thus: “O child, take a wife; for the householder’s life is the best of all the ašramas but I thought that will be the source of my bondage to this world and therefore, did not obey his word, though he was my highest Guru.” He then again said to me:

शून स्त्रियमनं मत्वा स मुनिसतमः ।

उवाच वचनं तखं मिथिलां गच्छ मागूचः ॥ 8 ॥

"If one takes a household life, it does not at once follow that he will be held in bondage"; yet I did not agree to that. Then the Muni, thinking me still to be in some doubt, spoke this word of advice to me:

याज्योर्जित जनकस्तत्र जीवमुनीं नराधिः ।

विदेही लोकविदितः पाति राज्यमंकटकम् ॥ 9 ॥

"O Son! Do not be sorry; go to Mithilā and have your doubts solved. There my disciple king Janaka,

is governing his kingdom without any source of danger. He is Jīvanamukta (liberated while living) and is free from the ideas of body, etc., so everybody knows.

कुर्वं नराजं तथा राजा मायापार्थीनं बध्ये।

त्व विषयेक कर्व पुत्र वनवृत्ति: परन्तप ॥ 10 ॥

When that royal sage, Janaka, though governing his kingdom, is not seen tied up by Māyā, then O Son! why are you afraid of this Sarinśāra, when you are living this forest life."

पृथ्य तं नृपशालूंल त्वज मोहं मनोगतम् ।

कुक दारानमहाभाग पृष्ठ बा धूपति च तम् ॥ १ १ ॥

सन्देह ते मनोजातं कवियधिति पार्थिवः ।

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तत्थ मागेहि ततसा सुत ॥ 12 ॥

"Thefore, O Mahābhāga! Trust me and marry; and in case you doubt very much, then go and see king Janaka; ask him and remove your doubts. He will certainly solve your doubts. But, O son! After hearing him, come again quickly to me."

सभीकतोई महाराज तत्पुरे च तद्वारा ।

मोक्षकामोउसि राजेन्द्रवृष्टि कृत्वं ममानय ॥ 13 ॥

O king! When my father spoke thus, by his permission I have come now to your capital. O king! I don't want any thing, save Mokṣa (liberation); therefore O Sinless one! Kindly advise what am I to do, so that I attain Mokṣa.

तपस्तीक्षितेचांशु स्वाधायस्तीक्षेयवनम् ।

जानं वा बद राजेन्द्र मोक्षे प्रति च कारणम् ॥ 14 ॥

O Lord of kings! Practising asceticism, going to the holy places of pilgrimage, holding vratas (vows), performing sacrifices, studying the Vedas, or earning wisdom, whatever is the cause of Mokṣa, kindly say that."

जनक उवाच

श्रणु विशेषा कर्तेयं मोक्षामार्गश्रितेन यत् ।

उपनीतेो वसेद्योतै वेद्यमासाय वे गुरी ॥ १ ५ ॥

Hearing this, Janaka said: "O son of my Guru! I am telling what ought to be done by the Brāhmins, following the path of Mokṣa; listen.

Book I Chapter XVIII

अधीतय वेदवेदोतान्टत्ता च गुरुदक्षिणाम् ।

समावृतस्तु गाह्रस्वये सदारो निवसेन्मुनि: ॥ १ ६ ॥

नान्यवृत्तिस्तु सन्तोभी निराणीरतकल्पयः ।

अनिर्दोजादिकर्माणिकुवर्णः सत्यवाक्युचि: ॥ १ ७ ॥

पूत्र पौत्रं समासाङ्ग वानप्रस्थापनं वसेत् ।

तपसा घकिपूपुक्त्वा भावां पुरं निवेश्य च ॥ १ ८ ॥

सर्वाननीन्याधान्यामानन्यांगोप यधिवत् ।

वसेत्पूर्णिभे शान्तः शुट्दे वैराग्यमभवे ॥ १ ९ ॥

After having the holy thread, a Brāhmīn should live in the house of his Guru to study the Vedas, the Vedāntas and pay the Dakṣinā (the fee) to the Guru according to rules; he will then return home and marry and enter into the householder's life; he should lead a life of contentment, be free from desires, sinless and truthful and earn his livelihood with a pure heart and according to the sanction of justice and conscience. He is to perform the Agnihotra and other sacrifices; and after getting sons and grandsons, he is to leave his wife under the care of his son and then to take the life of a Vānaprastha (third stage of life). That Brāhmin, the knower of Dharma, must practise tapasyā and become master of his six passions (enemies); and when he gets disgusted with the world and when the Vairāgyam (dispassion) will arise within him, he would enter into the fourth Āśrama. For, the man is first to enter into the householder's life; and when he will be quite dispassionate towards the world, he will then have a right to take the Āśrama of Sarinnyāsa (renunciation).

वित्कत्याधिकारोस्ति संन्यासे नान्यथा ख्वचित् ।

वेदवाक्यमिदं तव्यं नान्यथेति मितिमं ॥ 20 ॥

A course contrary to this can never entitle one to the Āśrama of Sarinyāsa. This is the beneficial word of the Vedas and it must hold true; it cannot be false; this is my firm belief.

शुक्राध्वाविरिंहो सैस्कारा वेदबोधिता: । चत्वारिण्यरुहास्थय प्रोक्तानतर महात्मिभः ॥ 21 ॥ अधी च मुक्तिकामय प्रोक्ता: ग्रामदादयः। आश्रमादाश्रमं गच्छेदिति शिष्टानुगासनम् ॥ 22 ॥

O Śuka! In the Vedas are mentioned forty-eight Saṃskāras (consecrations; purificatory rites); out of which the learned Mahātmās have reserved forty Saṃskāras for the householders and the last eight Saṃskāras (śama, Dama, etc.) for the Saṃnyāsins. And this good usage is heard to come down from very ancient times. A Brāhmīn ought to complete his previous Śāramas successively and then enter into the succeeding Śārama.”

श्रीशुक उवाच

उत्पत्रे इदि वैराये ज्ञानविज्ञानसम्पये ।

अवश्यमेव वस्तव्यमाभ्येषु वनेषु वा ॥ 23 ॥

Šuka said: “If the pure Vairāgyam (dispassion) arising out of knowledge and wisdom (Jñāna and Vijñāna) already arises (before taking to the Grhastha Āśrama), is it still necessary to pass through householder’s life, Vānaprastha life, etc., or is one entitled then to take up at once the Saṃyāsa Āśrama, quit everything and reside in the forest?”

जनक उवाच

इन्द्रियाणे बलिष्ठानि न नियुक्तिन मानद ।

अपवस्य प्रकृतीत विकारांस्ताननेकग: ॥ 24 ॥

भोजनेखां सुखेखां न गयेच्छायाम जय च ।

यती भृत्वा कर्थ कुर्गधिकारो समुपस्थिते ॥ 25 ॥

दुर्जरं वासनाजलं न ग्रान्तिपुयाति वे ।

अतस्तछमानाधय क्रमेण च परित्यन्ते ॥ 26 ॥

Janaka said: O! One giving honour to the Śāstras and Gurus! Though the powerful passions seem to be under control in the period of unripened Yoga (the imperfect yogic state), yet one ought not to trust them; for, it is generally seen, many imperfect Yogins find themselves disturbed by one or other of the senses. If the mind of one who has already entered into the Sarinyāsa Āśrama gets perturbed in his course, then, how can he, you can see this for yourself, satisfy desires of eating good things, sleeping nicely, seeing his son, or wishing any other desires, knowing them to lead to his degradation?

He is then in a very serious state. The net of desires is very difficult to be conquered by men; that can never die out. Therefore, to put an end to them, the advise is to cut them slowly and slowly.

ऊर्ध्वं सुप्तः पतत्येव न शयानः पतत्यधः ।

परिव्रज्य परिभ्रष्टो न मार्ग लभते पुनः ॥ 27 ॥

He who sleeps on an elevated place has the
danger of tumbling down; but one who slceps ina
low place has no such danger. So any body who
has once taken the highest dharma Sarhnyasa, and
if he be fallen, then he never gets hold of the real
track.

यथा पिपीलिका मूलाच्छाखायामधिरोहति ।

शनैः शनैः फलं याति सुखेन पदगामिनी ॥ 28 ॥

As an ant begins to get from the root of tree,
and, by and by, gets to the topmost part of the
branches, so human beings go by degrees from one
Aérama to another till they go to the highest; then
and then only they are able to get easily the desired
truth.

बिहंगस्तरसायाति विघ्नशंकामुदस्घ वै ।

श्रान्तो भवतिविश्रम्यसुखं यातिपिपीलिका॥ 29 ॥

The birds without anticipating any danger, get
up to the skies very quickly and soon they get tired
and cannot go to their desired place but the ant
goes with rest to its desired place.

मनस्तु प्रबलं काममजेयमकृतात्मभिः ।

अतः क्रमेण जेतव्यमाश्रमानुक्रमेण च ॥ 30 ॥

This mind is very difficult to be controlled, for
this reason men of unripened minds, cannot
conquer it all at once; and are advised to conquer
it, by and by, observing the laws of one Aérama
after another.

गृहस्थाश्रमसंस्थोऽपि शान्तः सुमतिरात्मवान्‌ ।

न च हृष्येन्न च तपेल्लाभालाभे समो भवेत्त ॥ 31 ॥

विहितं कर्म कुर्वाणस्त्यजा्चितान्वितं च यत्‌।

आत्मलाभेन सन्तुष्टो मुच्यते नात्र संशयः ॥ 32 ॥

See also if anybody, remaining in his household
life be of a quiet temper and of good intellect, and
if he takes success and failure in the same light,

and be not elated in times of pleasure and not
depressed in times of pains and does his duty for
duty’s sake without troubling his mind with cares,
and anxieties, then that householder acquires pure
happiness by the realisation of his sclf and acquires
Moksa.

पश्य़ाहं राज्यसंस्थोऽपि जीवन्मुक्तो यथानघ ।

विचरामि यथाकामं न मे किंचित्प्रजायते । 33 ॥

There is no manner of doubt in this. O Sinless
One! Sce, Tam liberated while living, though Tam
engaged in preserving kingdom; if any source of
pain or pleasure arises, I am not in any way affected
by them.

भुंजानो विविधान्भोगान्कुर्वन्कार्याण्यनेकशः |

भविष्यामि यथाऽहं त्वं तथा मुत्तो भवानघ ॥ 34 ॥

As I will attain in the Videha Mukti (liberation
from bodies) though Tam always wandering at my
free will, enjoying various things as I like and do
various things as it pleases me, so you can do your
duties and then be liberated in the end.

Head खलु यष्ठश्यमवश्यं बध्यते Ge: |

दृश्यानि पञ्चभूतानि गुणास्तेषां तथा पुनः 3S ॥

O Son of my Guru! When this material world,
the cause of all error according to the Vedanta
Sastras, is simply an object of sight, then how can
this material substance, an object of sight, be the
source of bondage to the Atman, the Self?

आत्मा गम्योऽनुमानेन प्रत्यक्षो न कदाचन ।

स कथं बध्यते ब्रह्मान्निर्विकारो निरञ्जनः ॥ 36 ॥

O Brahmin! Though the five material elements
can be seen, their qualities or Gunas can be known
only be inference, so the self is to be inferred; it
can never be an object of sight; and also this self,
known by inference, changeless and without any
impurity or stain can never be bound by the visible
changeful material thing.

मनस्तु सुखदुःखानां महतां कारणं द्विज ।

जाते तु निर्मले हास्मिन्सर्ब भवति निर्मलम्‌ ॥ 37 ॥

O Brahmin! This impure heart is the source of
all pleasures and pains; so when the heart becomes

Book 1 Chapter XVIII

pure and quiet, all the things then become fully pure, O Brāhmīn!

प्रम-सर्वेषु तीर्थेषु सात्वा स्नाता पुन: पुनः ।

निर्नंत न मनो यावत्नावत्सर्वं निरर्थकम् ॥ 38 ॥

If going often and often to all Tirathas and bathing there, do not make one's heart pure and holy, then all one's troubles are taken in vain.

न रेहो न च जीहान नैंद्रियाणि परंतय ।

मन एव मनुष्याणां कारणं कन्धमोक्षतः ॥ 39 ॥

O Destroyer of enemies! It is the mind that is the cause of bondage or freedom; and not the body, nor the Jivātmā (the embodied soul), nor the senses.

गुस्तो मुक्तः सदैवात्मा न वै कथेते कहिधित् ।

कन्धामौक्षी मनःसंश्यी तम्मछ्ठते प्रणायिति ॥ 40 ॥

The Self or Âtman is always pure consciousness and is ever free; so, truly speaking, it can never be bound. Bondage and freedom reside only in the mind; so, when the mind gets peace, the bondage of Sarisāra is also at an end.

श्रग्निमयुतसीनो भेदा: सर्वे मनोगता: ।

एकात्मवे कर्वं भेद सम्पवेद्रुतलैर्गन्ता ॥ 41 ॥

He is an enemy, he is a friend, he is neither an enemy nor a friend, all these different thoughts reside in the mind and arise out of duality; how can the ideas of differences exist, when everything has become all one pervading self?

जीवो बहा सदैवाहं नात्र कार्या विचारणा ।

भेदबुद्धिस्तु संसारे वर्तेनागा प्रवर्ते ॥ 4 2 ॥

Jiva is Brahma; I am that Brahma and nothing else; there is nothing to be discussed here. It is owing to the dualities that monism appears not clear and differences between Jiva and Brāhmin arise.

अविद्धियं महाभाग विहा चैतबिजनन् ।

विद्याविद्य च विज्ञेय सर्वैद्व विद्याणीः ॥ 4 3 ॥

O Mahābhāga! This difference is due to Avidyā and by which this difference vanishes, that is termed Vidyā.

This difference between Vidyā and Avidyā ought to be always kept in view, by those that are clever.

विनास्तरपं हि छायायां ज्ञाते च कयं सुखम् ।

अविदाया विना तद्धकयं विद्यां च वेति चे ॥ 44 ॥

How can the pleasure from the cooling effect of the shadow, be felt, if the heating effect of the rays of the Sun be not previously experienced? So, how Vidyā is to be experienced if Avidyā be not felt before?

युणा युणेय् वत्तेय् पृतानि च तथैव च ।

इन्द्रियाणीग्रिद्यार्थ्यु को दोषस्तत्र चातम्नः ॥ 4 5 ॥

Sattva, Rajas and Tamo Gunas reside naturally in things, made of Gunas; and the five principal elements reside naturally in substances made up of elements; so the senses reside naturally in thier own forms, etc., so how can there be any stain to the Atman which is unattached?

मयादा सर्वस्थार्थं कृता वेदेयु सर्वश: ।

अन्यथा धर्मानगः स्थानसीगतानामिवानय च ४ 6 ॥

Yet to teach humanity, the high souled persons preserve always with greatest care the respect of the Vedas. If they do not do this, then, O, Sinless One! the ignorant persons would act lawlessly according to their wishes, like the Cārvākas; and Dharma will become extinct.

धर्मानगो विनतः स्यातुणांचारोस्तितर्जितः ।

अन्तो वेद्रादिष्ठने मार्गेण गच्छतां रुषुम् ॥ 47 ॥

When Dharma will become extinct, the Varṇāśrama will gradually die out; so the well-wishers should always follow the path of the Vedas.

श्रीगृक त्वाच

संदेहो वर्तैते राजत्र निवर्तीत मे वक्षित् ।

भवता कार्यितं यतच्छुण्वतो मे नाराय ॥ ४८ ॥

Šuka said: 'O King! I have now heard all that you have said; still my doubt remains; it is not solved.

वेद्यार्थे पहिंसा स्याद्यार्थवहृता हि सा ।

कर्थ पुक्तिछो धर्मे वेदोक्नो बत पूर्णते ॥ 49 ॥

O King! In the Dharma of the Vedas, there is Himsā (act of killing and injuring); and we hear that there is much of Adharma (sin) in the above Hirnsā.

प्रत्यक्षेण त्वनाचारः सोमपानं नराधिप ।

यनृता हिंसनं तद्धृद्धरणं चामियस्य च ॥ 50 ॥

सीत्रामपणे तथा प्रोक्तः प्रत्यक्षेण सुराग्रहः ।

धृतक्रीडा तथा प्रोक्ता हतानि विविधापनि च ॥ 51 ॥

So how can the Dharma of the Vedas give Mokṣa? O King! One can see before one's eyes that the drinking of Soma rasa, the killing of animals, the eating of fish and flesh and so are advised in the Vedas; so much so that in the sacrificial ceremony named Sautrāmana the rule of drinking wine and many other vratas are clearly mentioned; even gambling is advised in the Vedas.

भूवतेस्प पुरा ह्रासीच्छशर्विद्नुंपोभाम: ।

यज्ञ धर्मपेते निवं वदान्यः सत्यसंगरः ॥ 52 ॥

So how can Mukti be obtained by following the Veda Dharma? It is heard that, in ancient times, there was a great king, named Śaśabindu, very religious, truthful, and performing sacrifices, very liberal; he protected the virtuous, and chastised those that were wicked and going astray.

गोता च धर्मेसूनां शास्ता चोत्थथामिनम् ।

यज्ञश्र वित्तितसेन बहचो भूरित्दिक्षणः ॥ ५३ ॥

He performed many Yajñas, where many cows and sheep were sacrificed according to the rules of the Vedas and abundant Dakṣinās (sacrificial fees) were presented to every one that performed their parts in the sacrifices.

चर्पोणं घर्वेते जातो विक्षायात्मसः पुनः ।

मेधांतुष्णावनाजाता नदी चर्मप्वतां शुभा ॥ 54 ॥

In these sacrifices, the hides of the cows that were sacrificed as victims, were heaped to such an enormous extent that they looked liked a second Vindhyācala mountain. Then the rains fell and the dirty water coming out of that enormous heap of skins flowed down and gave rise to a river which was thence called the Carmanvatī river.

सोरी श जात दिवं यातः कीतरिस्याचला भृथि ।

एवं धर्मेषु वेदेषु न मे बुद्धिः प्रतन्ते ॥ 55 ॥

And what a wonder? That cruel king left behind

him an ineffaceable fame and went to Heavens. Whatever it may be, it can never come to my head that I should perform the Veda Dharma, filled with so many acts of killing and cruelties.

खीसीने सदा भोगे सुखामानोति मानवः ।

अतापे कुःखामन्तं जीवान्युक्तः कबं भवेत् ॥ 56 ॥

Again, when the man find pleasure in sexual intercourse and when they do not have that intercourse, they experience pain, how can you expect such persons to attain liberation."

जनक उवाच

हिंसा यतेषु प्रत्यक्षा साउहिंसा परिक्लीर्तिता ।

उपाधियोगातो हिंसा नान्यथेति विविणीधः ॥ 57 ॥

Janaka said: “The killing of animals in a sacrificial ceremony is not killing; it is known as Ahimsā, for that himsā is not from any selfish attachment; therefore, when there is no such sacrifice and the animals are killed out of selfish attachment. Then that is real himsā; there is no other opinion in this.

यथा चैधनसंयोगात्नरी धूमः प्रवर्तेत ।

तद्धिणीगताश तस्मिजिध्यान्तव विषपाति चे ॥ 58 ॥

Smoke arises from a fire when fuell is placed in it; and smoke is not seen when no fuel is added. So, O Munisattama! The himsâ, as prescribed in the Vedas, is free from all blemishes, selfish attachment, etc., and therefore, it is unblameable.

अंहिसां च तथा विद्धि वेतेकां गृहिनस्तम ।

राशिणां साथि हिंक्षेत निः:सूछाणां न सा माता ॥ 59 ॥

So it follows the himsā committed by persons attached to objects, is the real himsā; that can be blamed, but the himsā of those persons who have no desires is not that sort of himsā.

अराणेण च चत्कर्मे तत्याङ्डकारवर्जितम् ।

अकृतं वेदे विहासेः प्रवहिते मनीधिणः ॥ 60 ॥

Therefore, learned men that know the Vedas declare that the himsā done by the dispassionate persons, with their hearts free from egoism, is no hirsā done at all.

Book 1 Chapter XIX

गृहस्थानां तु हिंसेव या यजे द्विजसत्तम ।

अंगोंण च यकमं तथाउढ़कारवर्जितम् ॥ 61 ॥

साईसैव महाभाग मुभुकुर्णा जितात्मनाम् ।

इति शीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणो प्रथमस्कन्ये

अशासरीअथायः ॥ 1 18 ॥

O Dvija! Really speaking, the killing of animals done by the householder attached to senses and their objects, and done under their impulses can be taken into account as a real act killing; but, O

Mahābhāga! of those whose hearts are not attached to anything, of those self-controlled persons desirous of moksa, if they do an act of Hirnśa out of a sense of duty, with no desires of fruits and with their hearts free from egoism, that can never be reckoned as a real act of killing.

Thus ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the First Book on Janaka's giving instructions on truth to Šuka Deva in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam by Veda Vyāsa.

Book 1 Chapter XIX

