[Ch 18 Verse 1-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: "Maharsis! When the king Janaka heard of the arrival of Šuka Deva, the son of his Guru, he took his priest before him and attended by his ministers came before him in pure spirit. Then he duly worshipped Śuka, offering him Pādya, Arghya and an excellent seat, and a cow, yielding milk and then enquired about his walfare.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Mahārṣis! When the king Janaka heard of the arrival of Śūka Deva, the son of his Guru, he took his priest before him and attended by his ministers came before him in pure spirit. Then he duly worshipped Śūka, offering him Pādya, Arghya and an excellent seat, and a cow, yielding milk and then enquired about his welfare.

[Ch 18 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Suka Deva accepted duly all the things offered by the king; and informed him of his well-being and asked the king in return, of his welfare and took his seat at ease on the Asana. The king Janaka asked the son of Vyāsa, full of peace:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śūka Deva accepted duly all the things offered by the king; and informed him of his well-being and asked the king in return, of his welfare and took his seat at ease on the Āsana. The king Janaka asked the son of Vyāsa, full of peace :--

[Ch 18 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Mahābhāga Muni Sattama! You are devoid of any attachment and you have no desires. May I enquire why such a person as your honored self has come to me.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “O Mahābhāga Muni Sattama! You are devoid of any attachment and you have no desires. May I enquire why such a person as your honoured self has come to me.”

[Ch 18 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Šuka Deva said: “O great king! my father told me thus: “O child, take a wife; for the householder’s life is the best of all the ašramas but I thought that will be the source of my bondage to this world and therefore, did not obey his word, though he was my highest Guru.” He then again said to me:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śūka Deva said :-- O great king! my father told me thus :-- O child; take a wife; for the house-holder’s life is the best of all the āśramas but I thought that will be the source of my bondage to this world and therefore did not obey his word, though he was my highest Guru. He then again said to me :--

[Ch 18 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "If one takes a household life, it does not at once follow that he will be held in bondage"; yet I did not agree to that. Then the Muni, thinking me still to be in some doubt, spoke this word of advice to me:
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- If one takes a household life, it does not at once follow that he will be held in bondage; yet I did not agree to that. Then the Muni, thinking me still to be in some doubt, spoke this word of advice to me :--

[Ch 18 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O Son! Do not be sorry; go to Mithilā and have your doubts solved. There my disciple king Janaka, is governing his kingdom without any source of danger. He is Jīvanamukta (liberated while living) and is free from the ideas of body, etc., so everybody knows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “O Son! Do not be sorry; go to Miṭhilā and have your doubts solved. There my disciple the king Janaka, is governing his kingdom without any source of danger. He is Jivanamukta (liberated while living) and is free from the ideas of body, etc., so everybody knows.

[Ch 18 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When that royal sage, Janaka, though governing his kingdom, is not seen tied up by Māyā, then O Son! why are you afraid of this Sarinśāra, when you are living this forest life."
NEW CORR ENG ──► When that royal sage, Janaka, though governing his kingdom, is not seen tied up by Māyā, then O Son! why are you afraid of this Samsāra, when you are living this forest life.

[Ch 18 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Thefore, O Mahābhāga! Trust me and marry; and in case you doubt very much, then go and see king Janaka; ask him and remove your doubts. He will certainly solve your doubts. But, O son! After hearing him, come again quickly to me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Mahābhāga! Trust me and marry; and in case you doubt very much, then go and see the king Janaka; ask him and remove your doubts. He will certainly solve your doubts. But, O Son! After hearing him, come again quickly to me.”

[Ch 18 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! When my father spoke thus, by his permission I have come now to your capital. O king! I don't want any thing, save Mokṣa (liberation); therefore O Sinless one! Kindly advise what am I to do, so that I attain Mokṣa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! When my father spoke thus, by his permission I have come now to your capital. O king! I don’t want any thing, save Mokṣa (liberation); therefore O Sinless one! Kindly advise what am I to do, so that I attain Mokṣa.

[Ch 18 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of kings! Practising asceticism, going to the holy places of pilgrimage, holding vratas (vows), performing sacrifices, studying the Vedas, or earning wisdom, whatever is the cause of Mokṣa, kindly say that."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of kings! Practising asceticism, going to the holy places of pilgrimage, holding vratas (vows), performing sacrifices, studying the Vedas, or earning wisdom, whatever is the cause of Mokṣa, kindly say that.

[Ch 18 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, Janaka said: "O son of my Guru! I am telling what ought to be done by the Brāhmins, following the path of Mokṣa; listen.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, Janaka said :-- “O son of my Guru! I am telling what ought to be done by the Brāhmaṇas, following the path of Mokṣa; listen.

[Ch 18 Verse 16-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After having the holy thread, a Brāhmīn should live in the house of his Guru to study the Vedas, the Vedāntas and pay the Dakṣinā (the fee) to the Guru according to rules; he will then return home and marry and enter into the householder's life; he should lead a life of contentment, be free from desires, sinless and truthful and earn his livelihood with a pure heart and according to the sanction of justice and conscience. He is to perform the Agnihotra and other sacrifices; and after getting sons and grandsons, he is to leave his wife under the care of his son and then to take the life of a Vānaprastha (third stage of life). That Brāhmin, the knower of Dharma, must practise tapasyā and become master of his six passions (enemies); and when he gets disgusted with the world and when the Vairāgyam (dispassion) will arise within him, he would enter into the fourth Āśrama. For, the man is first to enter into the householder's life; and when he will be quite dispassionate towards the world, he will then have a right to take the Āśrama of Sarinnyāsa (renunciation).
NEW CORR ENG ──► After having the holy thread, a Brāhmin should live in the house of his Guru to study the Vedas, the Vedāntas and pay the Dakshiṇā (the fee) to the Guru according to rules; he will then return home and marry and enter into the householder’s life; he should lead a life of contentment, be free from desires, sinless and truthful and earn his livelihood with a pure heart and according to the sanction of justice and conscience. He is to perform the Agnihotra and other sacrifices; and after getting sons and grandsons, he is to leave his wife under the care of his son and then to take the life of a Vānaprastha (3rd stage of life). That Brāhman, the knower of Dharma, must practise tapasyā and become master of his six passions (enemies); and when he gets disgusted with the world and when the Vairāgyam (dispassion) will arise within him, he would enter into the fourth Āśrama. For, the man is first to enter into the householder’s life and when he will be quite dispassionate towards the world, he will then have a right to take the Āśrama of Sannyāsa (Renunciation).

[Ch 18 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► A course contrary to this can never entitle one to the Āśrama of Sarinyāsa. This is the beneficial word of the Vedas and it must hold true; it cannot be false; this is my firm belief.
NEW CORR ENG ──► A course contrary to this can never entitle one to the Āśrama of Sanyāsa. This is the beneficial word of the Vedas and it must hold true; it cannot be false; this is my firm belief.

[Ch 18 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Śuka! In the Vedas are mentioned forty-eight Saṃskāras (consecrations; purificatory rites); out of which the learned Mahātmās have reserved forty Saṃskāras for the householders and the last eight Saṃskāras (śama, Dama, etc.) for the Saṃnyāsins. And this good usage is heard to come down from very ancient times. A Brāhmīn ought to complete his previous Śāramas successively and then enter into the succeeding Śārama.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Śūka! In the Vedas are mentioned forty-eight Samskāras (consecrations; purificatory rites); out of which the learned Mahātmas have reserved forty Samskāras for the householders and the last eight Samskāras (Śama, Dama, etc.,) for the Sannyāsins. And this good usage is heard to come down from very ancient times. A Brāhmaṇa ought to complete his previous Āśramas successively and then enter into the succeeding Āśrama.

[Ch 18 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Šuka said: “If the pure Vairāgyam (dispassion) arising out of knowledge and wisdom (Jñāna and Vijñāna) already arises (before taking to the Grhastha Āśrama), is it still necessary to pass through householder’s life, Vānaprastha life, etc., or is one entitled then to take up at once the Saṃyāsa Āśrama, quit everything and reside in the forest?”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śūka said :-- If the pure Vairāgyam (dispassion) arising out of knowledge and wisdom (jñān and Vijñān) already arises (before taking to the grihasth Āśram), is it still necessary to pass through house holder’s life, Vānaprastha life, etc. , or is one entitled then to take up at once the Sannyāsa Āśrama, quit everything and reside in the forest?

[Ch 18 Verse 24-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janaka said: O! One giving honour to the Śāstras and Gurus! Though the powerful passions seem to be under control in the period of unripened Yoga (the imperfect yogic state), yet one ought not to trust them; for, it is generally seen, many imperfect Yogins find themselves disturbed by one or other of the senses. If the mind of one who has already entered into the Sarinyāsa Āśrama gets perturbed in his course, then, how can he, you can see this for yourself, satisfy desires of eating good things, sleeping nicely, seeing his son, or wishing any other desires, knowing them to lead to his degradation? He is then in a very serious state. The net of desires is very difficult to be conquered by men; that can never die out. Therefore, to put an end to them, the advise is to cut them slowly and slowly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janaka said :-- O! One giving honour to the Śāstras and Gurus! Though the powerful passions seem to be under control in the period of unripened Yoga (the imperfect yogic state), yet one ought not to trust them; for, it is generally seen, many imperfect Yogins find themselves disturbed by one or other of the senses. If the mind of one who has already entered into the Sannyāsa Āśram gets perturbed in his course, then, how can he, you can see this for yourself, satisfy desires of eating good things, sleeping nicely, seeing his son, or wishing any other desires, knowing them to lead to his degradation? He is then in a very serious state. The net of desires is very difficult to be conquered by men; that can never die out. Therefore, to put an end to them, the advise is to cut them slowly and slowly.

[Ch 18 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He who sleeps on an elevated place has the danger of tumbling down; but one who slceps ina low place has no such danger. So any body who has once taken the highest dharma Sarhnyasa, and if he be fallen, then he never gets hold of the real track.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He who sleeps on an elevated place has the danger of tumbling down; but one who sleeps in a low place has no such danger. So any man who has once taken the highest dharma Sannyāsa, and if he be fallen, then he never gets hold of the real track.

[Ch 18 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As an ant begins to get from the root of tree, and, by and by, gets to the topmost part of the branches, so human beings go by degrees from one Aérama to another till they go to the highest; then and then only they are able to get easily the desired truth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As an ant begins to get from the root of tree, and, by and by, gets to the topmost part of the branches, so human beings go by degrees from one Āśrama to another till they go to the highest; then and then only they are able to get easily their desired truth.

[Ch 18 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The birds without anticipating any danger, get up to the skies very quickly and soon they get tired and cannot go to their desired place but the ant goes with rest to its desired place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The birds without anticipating any danger, get up to the skies very quickly and soon they get tired and cannot go to their desired place but the ant goes with rest to its desired place.

[Ch 18 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This mind is very difficult to be controlled, for this reason men of unripened minds, cannot conquer it all at once; and are advised to conquer it, by and by, observing the laws of one Aérama after another.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This mind is very difficult to be controlled; for this reason the men of unripened minds, cannot conquer it all at once; and are advised to conquer it, by and by, observing the laws of one Āśrama after another.

[Ch 18 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See also if anybody, remaining in his household life be of a quiet temper and of good intellect, and if he takes success and failure in the same light, and be not elated in times of pleasure and not depressed in times of pains and does his duty for duty’s sake without troubling his mind with cares, and anxieties, then that householder acquires pure happiness by the realisation of his sclf and acquires Moksa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► See also if anybody, remaining in his household life be of a quiet temper and of good intellect, and if he takes success and failure in the same light, and be not elated in times of pleasure and not depressed in times of pains and does his duty for duty’s sake without troubling his mind with cares, and anxieties, then that householder acquires pure happiness by the realisation of his self and acquires Mokṣa.

[Ch 18 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There is no manner of doubt in this. O Sinless One! Sce, Tam liberated while living, though Tam engaged in preserving kingdom; if any source of pain or pleasure arises, I am not in any way affected by them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There is no manner of doubt in this. O Sinless One! See, I am liberated while living, though I am engaged in preserving kingdom; if any source of pain or pleasure arises, I am not in any way affected by them.

[Ch 18 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As I will attain in the Videha Mukti (liberation from bodies) though Tam always wandering at my free will, enjoying various things as I like and do various things as it pleases me, so you can do your duties and then be liberated in the end.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As I will attain in the end Videha Mukti (liberation from bodies) though I am always wandering at my free will, enjoying various things as I like and do various things as it pleases me, so you can do your duties and then be liberated in the end.

[Ch 18 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Son of my Guru! When this material world, the cause of all error according to the Vedanta Sastras, is simply an object of sight, then how can this material substance, an object of sight, be the source of bondage to the Atman, the Self?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Son of my Guru! When this material world, the cause of all error according to the Vedanta Śāstras, is simply an object of sight then how can this material substance, an object of sight, be the source of bondage to the Ātman, the Self?

[Ch 18 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brahmin! Though the five material elements can be seen, their qualities or Gunas can be known only be inference, so the self is to be inferred; it can never be an object of sight; and also this self, known by inference, changeless and without any impurity or stain can never be bound by the visible changeful material thing.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brāhman! Though the five material elements can be seen, their qualities or Guṇas can be known only by inference, so the self is to be inferred; it can never be an object of sight; and also this self, known by inference, changeless and without any impurity or stain can never be bound by the visible changeful material thing.

[Ch 18 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brahmin! This impure heart is the source of all pleasures and pains; so when the heart becomes pure and quiet, all the things then become fully pure, O Brāhmīn!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brāhman! This impure heart is the source of all pleasure and pains; so when the heart becomes pure and quiet, all the things then become fully pure, O Brāhmaṇa!

[Ch 18 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If going often and often to all Tirathas and bathing there, do not make one's heart pure and holy, then all one's troubles are taken in vain.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If going often and often to all Tiraths and bathing there, do not make one’s heart pure and holy, then all one’s troubles are taken in vain.

[Ch 18 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Destroyer of enemies! It is the mind that is the cause of bondage or freedom; and not the body, nor the Jivātmā (the embodied soul), nor the senses.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Destroyer of enemies! It is the mind that is the cause of bondage or freedom; and not the body, nor the Jivātmā (the embodied soul), nor the senses.

[Ch 18 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Self or Âtman is always pure consciousness and is ever free; so, truly speaking, it can never be bound. Bondage and freedom reside only in the mind; so, when the mind gets peace, the bondage of Sarisāra is also at an end.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Self or Ātman is always pure consciousness and is ever free so, truly speaking, it can never be bound. Bondage and freedom reside on in the mind; so when the Mind gets peace, the bondage of Samsāra is also at an end.

[Ch 18 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He is an enemy, he is a friend, he is neither an enemy nor a friend, all these different thoughts reside in the mind and arise out of duality; how can the ideas of differences exist, when everything has become all one pervading self?
NEW CORR ENG ──► He is an enemy, he is a friend, he is neither an enemy nor friend, all these different thoughts reside in the mind and arise out of duality; how can the ideas of differences exist, when everything has become all one pervading self?

[Ch 18 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Jiva is Brahma; I am that Brahma and nothing else; there is nothing to be discussed here. It is owing to the dualities that monism appears not clear and differences between Jiva and Brāhmin arise.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Jīva is Brahmā; I am that Brahmā and nothing else; there is nothing to be discussed here. It is owing to the dualities that monism appears not clear and differences between Jīva and Brahmā arise.

[Ch 18 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mahābhāga! This difference is due to Avidyā and by which this difference vanishes, that is termed Vidyā. This difference between Vidyā and Avidyā ought to be always kept in view, by those that are clever.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mahābhāga! This difference is due to Avidyā and by which this difference vanishes, that is termed Vidyā. This difference between Vidyā and Avidyā ought to be always kept in view, by those that are clever.

[Ch 18 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How can the pleasure from the cooling effect of the shadow, be felt, if the heating effect of the rays of the Sun be not previously experienced? So, how Vidyā is to be experienced if Avidyā be not felt before?
NEW CORR ENG ──► How can the pleasure from the cooling effect of the shadow, be felt, if the heating effect of the rays of the Sun be not previously experienced? So how Vidyā is to be experienced if Avidyā be not felt before?

[Ch 18 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sattva, Rajas and Tamo Gunas reside naturally in things, made of Gunas; and the five principal elements reside naturally in substances made up of elements; so the senses reside naturally in thier own forms, etc., so how can there be any stain to the Atman which is unattached?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sattva, Rajas and Tamo Guṇas reside naturally in things, made of Guṇas; and the five principal elements reside naturally in substances made up of elements; so the senses reside naturally in their own forms, etc.; so how can there be any stain to the Ātman which is unattached?

[Ch 18 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Yet to teach humanity, the high souled persons preserve always with greatest care the respect of the Vedas. If they do not do this, then, O, Sinless One! the ignorant persons would act lawlessly according to their wishes, like the Cārvākas; and Dharma will become extinct.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Yet to teach humanity, the high souled persons preserve always with greatest care the respect of the Vedas. If they do not do this, then, O Sinless One! the ignorant persons would act lawlessly according to their wishes, like the Cārvākas; and Dharma will become extinct.

[Ch 18 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Dharma will become extinct, the Varṇāśrama will gradually die out; so the well-wishers should always follow the path of the Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Dharma will become extinct, the Varṇāśrama will gradually die out; so the well-wishers should always follow the path of the Vedas.

[Ch 18 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Šuka said: 'O King! I have now heard all that you have said; still my doubt remains; it is not solved.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śūka said :-- “O King! I have now heard all that you have said; still my doubt remains; it is not solved.

[Ch 18 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! In the Dharma of the Vedas, there is Himsā (act of killing and injuring); and we hear that there is much of Adharma (sin) in the above Hirnsā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! In the Dharma of the Vedas, there is Himsā (act of killing and injuring); and we hear that there is much of Adharma (sin) in the above Himsā.

[Ch 18 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So how can the Dharma of the Vedas give Mokṣa? O King! One can see before one's eyes that the drinking of Soma rasa, the killing of animals, the eating of fish and flesh and so are advised in the Vedas; so much so that in the sacrificial ceremony named Sautrāmana the rule of drinking wine and many other vratas are clearly mentioned; even gambling is advised in the Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So how can the Dharma of the Vedas give Mokṣa? O King! One can see before one’s eyes that the drinking of Soma rasa, the killing of animals, the eating of fish and flesh and so are advised in the Vedas; so much so that in the sacrificial ceremony named Sautrāmaṇa the rule of drinking wine and many other vratas are clearly mentioned; even gambling is advised in the Vedas.

[Ch 18 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So how can Mukti be obtained by following the Veda Dharma? It is heard that, in ancient times, there was a great king, named Śaśabindu, very religious, truthful, and performing sacrifices, very liberal; he protected the virtuous, and chastised those that were wicked and going astray.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So how can Mukti be obtained by following the Veda Dharma? It is heard that, in ancient times, there was a great king, named Śaśavindu, very religious, truthful, and performing sacrifices, very liberal; he protected the virtuous, and chastised those that were wicked and going astray.

[Ch 18 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He performed many Yajñas, where many cows and sheep were sacrificed according to the rules of the Vedas and abundant Dakṣinās (sacrificial fees) were presented to every one that performed their parts in the sacrifices.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He performed many Yajñas, where many cows and sheep were sacrificed according to the rules of the Vedas and abundant Dakshiṇās (sacrificial fees) were presented to every one that performed their parts in the sacrifices.

[Ch 18 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In these sacrifices, the hides of the cows that were sacrificed as victims, were heaped to such an enormous extent that they looked liked a second Vindhyācala mountain. Then the rains fell and the dirty water coming out of that enormous heap of skins flowed down and gave rise to a river which was thence called the Carmanvatī river.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In these sacrifices, the hides of the cows that were sacrificed as victims, were heaped to such an enormous extent that they looked liked a second Bindhyācal mountain. Then the rains fell and the dirty water coming out of that enormous heap of skins flowed down and gave rise to a river which was thence called the Carmaṇvatī river.

[Ch 18 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And what a wonder? That cruel king left behind him an ineffaceable fame and went to Heavens. Whatever it may be, it can never come to my head that I should perform the Veda Dharma, filled with so many acts of killing and cruelties.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And what a wonder? That cruel king left behind him an ineffaceable fame and went to Heavens. Whatever it may be, it can never come to my head that I should perform the Veda Dharma, filled with so many acts of killing and cruelties.

[Ch 18 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again, when the man find pleasure in sexual intercourse and when they do not have that intercourse, they experience pain, how can you expect such persons to attain liberation."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again, when the man find pleasure in sexual intercourses and when they do not have that intercourse, they experience pain, how can you expect such persons to attain liberation.”

[Ch 18 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janaka said: “The killing of animals in a sacrificial ceremony is not killing; it is known as Ahimsā, for that himsā is not from any selfish attachment; therefore, when there is no such sacrifice and the animals are killed out of selfish attachment. Then that is real himsā; there is no other opinion in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janaka said :-- “The killing of animals in a sacrificial ceremony is not killing; it is known as Ahimsā; for that himsā is not from any selfish attachment; therefore when there is no such sacrifice and the animals are killed out of selfish attachment, then that is real himsā; there is no other opinion in this.

[Ch 18 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Smoke arises from a fire when fuell is placed in it; and smoke is not seen when no fuel is added. So, O Munisattama! The himsâ, as prescribed in the Vedas, is free from all blemishes, selfish attachment, etc., and therefore, it is unblameable.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Smoke arises from a fire when fuels are placed in it; and smoke is not seen when no fuel is added. So, O Munisattama! The himsā, as prescribed in the Vedas, is free from all blemishes, selfish attachment, etc., and therefore it is unblameable.

[Ch 18 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So it follows the himsā committed by persons attached to objects, is the real himsā; that can be blamed, but the himsā of those persons who have no desires is not that sort of himsā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So it follows the himsā committed by persons attached to objects, is the real himsā; that can be blamed, but the himsā of those persons who have no desires is not that sort of himsā.

[Ch 18 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, learned men that know the Vedas declare that the himsā done by the dispassionate persons, with their hearts free from egoism, is no hirsā done at all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore the learned men that know the Vedas declare that the himsā done by the dispassionate persons, with their hearts free from egoism, is no himsā done at all.

[Ch 18 Verse 61-118]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Dvija! Really speaking, the killing of animals done by the householder attached to senses and their objects, and done under their impulses can be taken into account as a real act killing; but, O Mahābhāga! of those whose hearts are not attached to anything, of those self-controlled persons desirous of moksa, if they do an act of Hirnśa out of a sense of duty, with no desires of fruits and with their hearts free from egoism, that can never be reckoned as a real act of killing. Thus ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the First Book on Janaka's giving instructions on truth to Šuka Deva in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam by Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Dvija! Really speaking, the killing of animals done by the house-holder attached to senses and their objects, and done under their impulses can be taken into account as a real act of killing; but, O Mahābhāga of those whose hearts are not attached to anything of those self controlled persons, desirous of mokṣa, if they do an act of Himsā out of a sense of duty, with no desires of fruits and with their hearts free from egoism that can never be reckoned as a real act of killing.” Thus ends the 18th Chapter of the 1st Skandha on Janaka’s giving instructions on truth to Śūka Deva in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam.
