CHAPTER VI

On the Powers of the Devi

ब्रहीयाच

इति पृषा मया देबी विनयावन्नेत च ।

उवाच वचनं रलक्षणमाठा भगवती हिं सा ॥ १ ॥

देव्युवाच

सदैकतवं ने घेठोर्सित सर्वैद्धव मापास्य च ।

योउसौ साहमहं योसौ घेँटोर्सित मतिविष्मात् ॥ २ ॥

Brahmā said: “When I thus asked with great humility, Devi Bhagavatī, the Prime Śakti, She addressed me thus in sweet words: There is oneness always between me and the Purusa; there is no difference whatsoever at any time between me and the Purusa (the male, the Supreme Self). Who is I, that is Purusa; who is Purusa, that is I. The difference between force and the receptacle of force is due to error.

आवयोत्नरं सूक्ष्मं यो वेद मतिमानि सः ।

विमुक्तः स तु संसारान्युच्यते नात्र संगयः ॥ ३ ॥

He who knows the subtle difference between us two, is certainly intelligent; he is freed from this bondage of Sarīsāra; there is no manner of doubt in this. The One Secondless Eternal Everlasting Brahma substance becomes dual at the time of creation.

एकमेवात्रितीयं वे बहा निरयं सनातनम् ।

दैनभावं पुनर्वाति काल उत्पल्सुसंजके ॥ ४ ॥

As a lamp, though one, becomes two by virtue of adjuncts; as a face, though one, becomes two, as reflected in a mirror; as one man becomes double by his shadow, so we become reflected into many, by virtue of different Anthah Karanas (mind, buddhi, and aharikāra) created by Māyā.

यथा द्वीपतल्योपायर्गालसंजयते हिंया ।

छावेशदार्णिये वा प्रतिथिंबं त्वासउवयो: ॥ 5 ॥

The necessity of creation, again and again, after the Prākṛt Pralayas is due to the fructification of those Karmas of the Jīvas, whose fruits were not enjoyed before the Pralayas; so when creation again

commences, the above said differences are found to appear; Brahma is the material cause of these changes; without Brahma the existence of Māyā is simply impossible. It is, therefore, that in Māyā and Māyā's action, Brahma is interwoven.

भेद उत्पत्तिकाले वे सर्पार्य प्रधावयत ।

दूरयातृरयिभेदोर्धं द्विविधे सति सर्वथा ॥ 6 ॥

For this reason as many differences are found in Māyā, so many differences exist in Brahma. Māyā and Brahma appear as two and hence all the differences, visible and invisible, have come forth. नाई क्ती न पुंगांश्राई न क्तीर्व सर्गसंक्षेये ।

सर्ग सति विभेदः स्यात्कलितोर्ध विधा पुः: ॥ 7 ॥

Only during creation are these differences conceived. When every thing melts away i.e. there comes the Pralaya or general dissolution, then, I am not female, I am not male, nor I am hermaphrodite. I then remain as Brahma with Māyā latent in it.

अहं बुद्धिरहं श्रीध युति: कीर्ति: सुतीस्तथा ।

श्रद्धा मेधा दया लज्जा क्षुया तृष्णा तथा क्षमा ॥ 8 ॥

क्रान्ति: शान्ति: पियासा च नित्या तन्त्र जारज्ञा ।

विद्याविद्या सुहा वाठ्छा शक्तिश्राजीकरोच्च च ॥ 9 ॥

वसा मज्जा च त्वक्चादं दृष्टिविंगन्तानृता ।

परा मध्या च पर्षतीं नतद्योर्धं विविधाय नः ॥ 10 ॥

During the time of creation I am Śrī (wealth), Buddhi (intellect), Dhṛti, (fortitude), Smṛti (recollection), Śraddhā (faith), Medhā (intelligence), Dayā (mercy), Lajjā (modesty), Kṣudhā (hunger), Trṣṇā (thirst), Kṣamā (forgiveness), Akṣamā (non-forgiving), Kānti (lustre), Śānti (peace), Pipāśa (thirst), Nidrā (sleep) Tandrā (drowsiness), Jarā (old age), Ajarā (non old-age), Vidyā (knowledge), Avidyā (non-knowledge) Sprhā (desires), Vāñchā (desires), Śakti (force), Aśakti (non-force), Vasā (fat), Majjā (marrow), Tvak (skin), Drṣti (sight), Satyāsatya Vākya (true and untrue words) and it is

Book III Chapter VI

that become Parā, Madhyamā, Paśyanti, etc. the innumerable Nāḍīs (tubular organs of the body e.g. arteries, veins, intestines, blood vessels, pulses, etc.); there are three koti and a half Nādīs (35 millions of Nādīs).

किं नाई पश्य संसारो मद्धियुक्त किमस्ति हि ।

संस्मैवाद्यैपलेवे निश्रयं विद्धि पच्चा ॥ १ १ ॥

O Brahmā! See—what substance is there in this Saṃsāra, that is separate from Me? And what can you imagine with which I am not connected?

तैमें निश्रिते क्वेर्विंहीनं किं वद्रव मे ।

तस्माद्धं विधे चात्मसमर्पे वै वित्तासंवम् ॥ १२ ॥

So know this as certain that I am these all forms. O Creator! Say, Is there any such thing, where you will not see my above mentioned positive form? So, in this creation, I am one, and I am many as well, in various forms.

नूनं सर्वेषु देवेषु नानानामध्यरा हहाम् ।

भवामि शनिकार्जेण क्रामे च पराकामम् ॥ 13 ॥

Know this as certain that it is I, that assuming the names of all the various Devas, exist in so many forms of Śaktis. It is I that manifest power and wield strength.

नौरी जाही तथा रौरी वाराही वैधाबी शिवा ।

वारुणी चाय कौवेरी नारासिंही च वासची ॥ 14 ॥

O Brahmā! I am Gauri, Brāhmī, Raudri, Vārahī, Vaiṣnavī, Śivā, Vāruni, Kauberī, Nāra Sinhī, and Vāsavi Śaktis. I enter in every substance in every thing of the nature of effect.

उत्पत्रेषु समस्पेषु कार्येषु प्रविशामि तान ।

क्रोंमि सर्वक्राविणि चिनिति तं चिधाय ते ॥ 15 ॥

Making that Purusa the instrument, I do all the actions (rather Purusa is the efficient cause, the immediate agent).

जले श्रौत तथा बढ़ावीर्ण्यं ज्योतिद्विकारे ।

निज्ञानों के हिमा कर्म प्रभवाति यथा तथा ॥ 16 ॥

I am the coolness in water, the heat in fire, the lustre in the Sun, the cooling rays in the Moon; and thus I manifest my strength.

मया त्वक्ति विधे नूनं स्यन्त्रुं न क्षम भवेत् ।

जीवजातं स संसारे निश्छयोज्यं बुढे त्वियं ॥ 17 ॥

O Brahma! Verily, I tell you this as certain that this universe becomes motionless, if it be abandoned by Me.

अशक: शड़ूरी हेतु दैत्यान्कित मयोष्ठितः ।

शक्तिहीनं नरं बृते लोकेश्वातितुबलम् ॥ 18 ॥

रुद्रहीनं विद्याहीनं न वद्यन्ति जनाः किल ।

शक्तिहीनं यथा सर्वे प्रवदन्ति नराधमम् ॥ 19 ॥

If I leave Śaṅkara, he will not be able to kill the Daityas. A very weak man is declared to be as without any strength; he is not said to be without Rudra, or without Viṣṇu, nobody says like this; everyone says, he is without strength, without Śakti. पतितः स्वतितो भीतः शानतः शुज्वग ततः । अशकः प्रोचते लोके नाहतः कोपि कवणे ॥ 20 ॥

Those who get fallen, tumbled, afraid, quiet, or under one's enemies are called powerless; no one says that this man is Rudraless and so forth.

तिद्रिक कारणं शक्तिर्यर्थां त्वं च सिसुक्षसि ।

भविता च यदा सुतः शक्यता कर्ता तदार्यgस्तिथम् ॥ 21 ॥

So the creation that you perform, know Sakti, power to be the cause thereof. When you will be endowed with that Sakti, you will be able to create this whole Universe.

तथा हरित्णा शम्भुस्तधौंज्ञाय विभावसुः ।

शगरी सूर्यो यमस्त्वहा कशण: पवनस्तथा ॥ 2 2 ॥

Hari, Rudra, Indra, Agni, Candra, Sūrya, Yama, Viśvakarmā, Varuna, Pavana, and other Devas all are able to do their karmas, when they are united respectively with their Śakti.

धरा स्थिता तदा धर्तुं शक्तिकृता यदा भवेत् ।

अन्यथा चेहरात्ता स्यात्रमागणोक्ष धारणे ॥ 23 ॥

This Earth, when united with Śakti, remains fixed and becomes capable to hold all the Jivas and beings. And if this Earth be devoid of force, She cannot hold an atom even.

तया शेपस्तथा कुमी वि:०ःये सर्वे च दिमाजाः ।

मयुक्तावैसमर्थस्यानिकाव्याणिसाधितुम्। 24 ॥

"Thus Ananta, Kūrma and all the other elephants

of the eight points of the compass, become able to do their respective works, only by My help (when united with Me, the Force).

जलं विवामि सकलं संहारामि विन्यावसून ।

पवनं संभयामध्य यदिष्ठामि तथायरम् ॥ 25 ॥

तत्वानां चैव सर्वां कदापि कमती.द्व व

असतां भावसन्देः कतव्यो न कदाचन ॥ 26 ॥

कदापितूगाभाव: स्यात्यप्रेसापाव एव वा ।

भृस्वेडु कणालेपु घटाभावे यव तथा ॥ 27 ॥

O Lotus born! If I wish, I can drink all the fire and waters today and I can hold wind in check. I do whatever I wish. If I say that I am creating this world then the inconsistency arises thus: "When I am everything, then I being eternal, all this universe, made up of Prapañca, becomes eternal." (Whereas this universe is not eternal in the sense that it is changing). If it were said that this universe is different from Me, then My saying that I am everything becomes inconsistent." Thinking thus, do not plunge yourself in the doubt as to the reality and origin and separateness of the non-eternal universe. For that is unreal, how can that come into existence? The unreal substances can never come into existence; as the child of a barren woman, the flowers in the sky are simply absurd. What is real can only be born. In discussing about origin, birth, etc. the appearance and disappearance of real things is called their birth and dissolution. In the cold of earth exists the previous existence of the jar and this is the cause of the appearance of the jar; the disappearance of the jar exists in the jar; hence this disappearance is the cause of the destruction of the jar. Thus the appearance and disappearance of the causal eternal things are called the Origin and Parlaya. Similarly, in discussing on the causal nature, there does not arise any inconsistency in My being everything.

अशाय पृथिवी नास्ति क्व गतेति विचारणे ।

संज्ञाता इति विज्ञेया अस्यास्तु परमाणवः ॥ 28 ॥

So there is nothing to fear. In discussing about the reality of effects, this is to be conceived, that today there does not exist here the earth in the form of jar, if it is destroyed, where it has gone?

गश्रतं क्षीणिकं शृन्य निव्यानियं सकतुंकम् ।

अहूकारायिमं चैव सपन्नदेवैर्विवहितम् ॥ 29 ॥

The conclusion is that the earth in the form of jar exists in atoms. O Brahman! All substances eternal, existing for a moment only, the void, and the substances of the nature, real and unreal both, all are due to a cause. Ahankāra is born first among them.

गृहाणाज महतचमहश्रास्तदुळवः ।

ततः सर्वाणि भूतानि रचयस्व यथा पुरा ॥ 30 ॥

Thus substances are of seven kinds: Mahat, etc. O Unborn One! Mahatattva first arises from Prakrti; from Mahatattva springs Ahaṅkāra; and from ahaṅkāra arises other substances. Thus, in this order, you go on creating this Universe.

त्रजनुं खानि धिष्ण्यानि विरध्य निवसन्तु च: ।

स्वानि स्वानि च कार्याणि कुर्वैतु देवभाविताः ॥ 31 ॥

O Brahmā! Now you better go to your respective places, and after crc. 'ing the Universe, remain there and perform your respective functions ordained by Prārabdha.

गृहाणीम विधे शर्कि सुकर्ण चाह्हासिनीम् ।

महासरस्तीं नाम्ना रजोगण्यतां वरम् ॥ 32 ॥

Take this beautiful great Śakti Mahā Sarasvatī, full of Rajoguna, and of a smiling nature.

श्रताम्पर्यतं दिव्यां दिव्यभूषणभूषिताम् ।

वरासनसमारकां क्रीताथं सह्चारिणीम् ॥ 33 ॥

This Śakti, wearing white clothes, adorned with divine ornaments and sitting on Varāsana, will always be your playmate.

एषा सह्चरी नित्यं भविष्यिति वराङ्गना ।

माजससन्ध्या विषूर्ति मे मत्वा पूज्यतना विष्यम् ॥ 34 ॥

This beautiful woman will always be your boon companion; consider Her as My vibhūti (manifestation of power), and so most worshipful. Never show any sort of disrespect towards Her.

Book III Chapter VI

गच्छ त्वमनया सार्थ सत्यलोकं बतायुः ने।

वीजाच्छतुर्विंधं सर्वे मसुत्यादव साम्यन्तः ॥ 35 ॥

तिङुकौशोक्ष आवैसतः सहिताः कर्मिभितया ।

वर्तेन संस्थिताः काले तनकुक त्वं यथा पुरा ॥ 36 ॥

Take Her and go immediately to Satyaloka; and from the seed of Mahatattva, create the fourfold beings from these. The subtle bodies (Linga śarīra) and Karmas are remaining mixed up with each other. Separate them, as before, duly, in due time.

कालकर्मवधावाखे: कारणै: सकलं जगत् ।

स्वभावसूगपौरुक्ते पूर्वस्वसारचारम् ॥ 37 ॥

Now go on as before and according to Kāla (time), Karma, and Svabhāva (nature), join them with their respective attributes (sounds and other qualities); in other words bestow fruits according to their guṇas and Karmas (Prārabdhas), and to the time when these fruits are due.

माननीस्वस्या विष्ण: पूजनीयश्छ सर्वतः ।

सत्यगुणधानावहिधिकः सर्वतः सदा ॥ 38 ॥

Visnu is prominent in Sattvaguna and hence superior to You. So You should always respect and worship Him.

यदा यदा हिं कार्यं को भविष्यति दरत्ययम् ।

करिष्यति पृथिव्यां वे अवतारं तदा हरि: ॥ 39 ॥

Whenever any difficulty will come to you, Visnu will come down on earth to fulfil your ends.

तिर्यनोवावयान्य मानुर्गी तनुमाशितः ।

दानावनां विनागं वे कौर्यति जनादं: ॥ 40 ॥

Janārdana Visnu will sometimes be born in the wombs of men and destroy the Dānavas.

भवोदयं ते सहायघ भविषयित महावलः ।

सपुर्णादा सुरान्यसांविहरस्य यथासुखम् ॥ 41 ॥

श्राण: श्रिन्या वैश्या नान्यवै: सद्विभीः ।

यजिखनि वियानेन सर्वान: सुसमाहितः ॥ 42 ॥

The highly powerful Mahā Deva, too, will help you. Now create the Devas and enjoy as you like. The Brāhmaṇas, Kṣaṭtriyas, and Vaiśyas will worship you, with devotion, in various sacrifices, endowed with due sacrificial fees.

नमानोच्चारणासर्वे मवेधु सकलैयु च ।

सदा तृणतश सतुश पविष्यध्वं सुरा: किल ॥ 4 3 ॥

शिवश्र माननीयो वे सर्वेधा यतभोगुणः ।

यज्ञावैयुं सर्वेधु पुवनीय: प्रयतन्तः ॥ 4 4 ॥

All the Devas will be always satisfied when my name “Svāha” will be uttered in the sacrificial oblations and ceremonies. Śiva, the incarnate of Tamo gunā will be revered and worshipped by all persons in every sacrifice.

यदा पुनः सुराणों वे भयं दैत्याद्विधिति ।

गक्त्वो मे तदोत्यज्ञ हीर्धनित् सुविधातः ॥ 4 5 ॥

वाराही वैश्वायो नौरि नारसिंही सदाशिजा ।

एताङ्गान्याक कार्याणि कृत्य कं कमलोद्ध्य ॥ 4 6 ॥

When the Devas will be frightened by the Daityas, then Vārahī, Vaisnavī, Gaurī, Nāra Sirinhi, Śacī, Šivā and My other Śaktis will take excellent bodies and destroy your fear.

नावक्षामियं मन्यं बीज्यायन्युं सदा ।

जपन्स्वाणी कार्याणि कृक त कमलोद्य ॥ 47 ॥

So, O Lotus-born! Be at your ease and do work. You utter and repeat my nine-lettered mantra with Bijā and Dhyāna and do your work.

मन्त्राणामुनेजये दैव ते जानीहि महामते ।

हदये ते सदा धार्यः सर्वकामार्थसिद्ध्ये ॥ 48 ॥

O highly intelligent one! This nine-lettered mantra is the best of all the mantras. You are to keep this mantra, within your heart, for the accomplishment of all your ends.

इनुकुला मां जगन्माता हरिं प्राह रुष्थिमिता ।

विष्णो बज गृहाधोमां महातर्षमी मनोहाग् ॥ 49 ॥

Thus saying to me, Bhagavati smiled and began to say to Viṣṇu: “O Viṣṇu! Take this beautiful Mahā Lakṣmī and go.

सदा वक्ष:स्थले स्थाने भविता नज संशय: ।

श्रीद्वारा ते नया दत्ता शक्ति: सर्वांद्यि शिवा ॥ 50 ॥

She will always reside within your breast; there is no doubt in this. This all auspicious giving Śakti I give to you for your enjoyment.

त्वयेयं नावमन्तव्या माननीया च सर्वदा ।

लक्ष्मीनारायणाख्योयंयोगोविवहितोमया। 51 ॥

जीवनार्थ कृता यज्ञ देवानां सर्वथा मया ।

अधिरोधेन सईन वर्तित्वं तिधिः सदा ॥ 52 ॥

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

You should always shew respect to Her; never show hatred or contempt. For the good of the world, I unite thus Lakṣmī and Nārāyaṇa. For your sustenance I create Yajña. You three will act together in harmony unanimously.

तं च वेधा: शिवस्तेते देवा मदुगुपम्भवा: ।

मान्या: पूच्याश्रु सर्वेभं पशिव्यनि न संशया: ॥ 53 ॥

You, Brahmā and Śiva are my three Devas, born of my Guṇas. You three will undoubtedly be respected and worshipped by the world.

ये विषेदं करिथ्यिति मानवा मुह्चोतसः ।

निरयं ते गाम्यन्ति विपेदात्राजर संशय: ॥ 54 ॥

यो हीर: स शिका: साक्षादा: शिका: सच्यं हरि: ।

एतयोभैद्मातिष्ठत्रकाय भवेत्रः ॥ 55 ॥

The stupid man who find any difference between you three, will go to hell; there is no doubt in this. He who is Hari, is Śiva; He who is Śiva, is Hari; to make difference between these will lead one to hell. तथेव द्रुविणो जेयं नारा कार्य विचारणा ।

अपरो रुणपेदोरस्ति शृणु युणिणो ब्रवीमि ते ॥ 56 ॥

मुख्य: सत्त्वगुप्ततेउत् वरमावार्थिचितने ।

नौणत्वेउपि परी ख्याती रजोगुणतामोगुणी ॥ 57 ॥

लक्ष्या सह क्विकारेयु नानाभेदेयु सर्वैत ॥

रजोगुणगुतो भूत्वा विहरल्याना सह ॥ 58 ॥

So Brahmā is one and the same with Śiva and Viṣṇu; there is no manner of doubt in this. O Viṣṇu! But there are other differences in their Gunas; I will tell this; listen, as far as meditation of the Supreme Self is concerned you will have Sattva Guna predominant within you; and Rajo Guna and Tamo Guna will be secondary. In various other pursuits and Vikāras (changes) better have Rajo Guna with Lakṣmī and always enjoy Her.

वार्षीजें कामराजं च मायावीजं तृतीयकम् ।

मनोउयं त्वं रामकान महत: परमार्थै: ॥ ५९ ॥

O Lord of Rama! I give you Vākbīja, Kāmabīja, and Māyābīja that will lead you to the highest end.

गृहीता जप ते नियं विहरस्य ययासुखम् ।

न ते मृत्युभयं विज्ञाने न कालग्रभयं भयम्। 6 0 ॥

Take this Mantra and repeat it and enjoy as you

like. O Viṣṇu! By this, danger of death, caused by Kāla, will never come to you.

यावदेष विहारो मे भविष्यति सुनिश्रयः ।

संहरिष्यामहं सर्वे यदा विश्धं चराचरम् ॥ 6 1 ॥

When the creation of this Universe will be completely done I will then destroy this whole thing moving and non-moving. You all will then be dissolved in Me.

भवन्तीपि तदा नूनं लीना भविष्यय ।

सर्तेल्योर्ध सदा मनः कामदो मोक्षत्सतया ॥ 6 2 ॥

You should add pranava to this mantra with Kāmabīja leading to Mokṣa and repeat it always with auspicious motives.

उद्योधिन च संयुक्तः कर्तेल्यः शुभमिष्ठता ।

कारयित्वाद येकुंटं वस्तव्यं पुरुषोत्तम ॥ 6 3 ॥

विश्रस्य यथाकामं चिन्तयन्मां सनातनीम् ।

O Puruşottama! Build your Vaikuntha-puri; live there and think of this My Eternal Form and enjoy as you like.

ब्रहोावच

इत्युक्लवा वासुदेवं सा सिगुणा प्रकृति: परा ॥ 64 ॥

निर्गुणा शक्ररं देवमोविद्युतं चवः ।

Brahmā said: Saying thus to Vāsudeva, that Higher Prakṛti Devī, who is all of the three Gunas and yet transcending them, began to address Mahā Deva, the Deva of the Devas, in sweet words, thus:

देव्याच

गृहाण हरगौरी त्वं महाकालीं मनोहामू ॥ 65 ॥

कैलासं कार्यित्वा च हविरस्व यथासुद्यम् ।

मुख्यस्तमोगुणस्तेउन्य गोगी सचराजोगुणी ॥ 66 ॥

विहासुरुनाशर्ष रजोगुणतमोगुणी ।

“O Śānkara! Accept this beautiful Mahā Kālī Gauri, build a new Kailāśa city and live there happily. Your primary Gunas will be Tamas; Sattva and Rajas will be your secondary Gunas. Have recourse to Rajo and Tamo Gunas while you slay the Asuras and thus wander. O sinless Śānkara! Have recourse to peaceful Sattra Guna, when you reflect on the Supreme Self and practise austerities.

Book III Chapter VI

तपस्तर्न तथा कर्तूं स्मरणं परमात्मनः ॥ 67 ॥

सर्वसच्युगः शान्तो गृहीतव्यः सदानप्रय ।

सद्यां त्रिगुणा यूयं सृष्टिश्वत्यंतकारकाः ॥ 68 ॥

एविवहीर्नि संसारे वस्तु नैवात्र कुत्रचित् ।

You all are for creating, preserving and destroying the Universe; and you are all of the three Gunas. There is no such thing in this world as are devoid of these three Gunas. Every thing, that is visible, is endowed with the three Gunas, and whatever will be or was before cannot exist without them.

वस्तुमात्रु तु व्यदूर्यं संसारे प्रिगुर्ण हि तत् ॥ 69 ॥

दूर्यं च निरुर्णं लोके न पृतं नो भविष्यति ।

निर्गुण: परमात्माउसी न तु दूर्यः कदाचन ॥ 70 ॥

सुगुण निरुगणा चाहं समये शुक्रोतमा ।

Only the Supreme Self is without these Gunas; but He is not visible. O Śaṅkara! I am the Parā Prakṛti; at times I appear with Gunas; and at other I remain without any Gunas.

सदार्डं कारणं शम्पो न च कार्यं कदाचन ॥ 7 1 ॥

सगुण कारणवाद्ये निर्गुण पुरुषांतिके ।

O Śambhu! I am always of the causal nature; never I am of the nature of effect. When I am causal, I am with Gunas; and when I am before the Highest Puruṣa, I am, then, without any Gunas (on account of my remaining in the state of equilibrium (Sāmyāvasthā)).

महत्तचमहूत्रो गुणा: शब्दाद्यस्तथा ॥ 72 ॥

कार्यकारणशेष संसरेत त्वहर्सिण् ।

सुद्धुतस्वहंकारसेनाहं कारणं शिवा ॥ 73 ॥

अहूबार्ध मे कार्यं सिगणोजीसी प्रतिद्धतः ।

अहूबारामहन्तत्वं बुद्धि: सा परिकीर्तिता ॥ 74 ॥

महत्तचं हे कार्यं स्वादुहंकारी हे काराणम् ।

Mahattattva, Aahirākāra, and sound, touch, etc. all the Guṇas perform the work of Saṃsāra, day and night, each preceding one being the cause each subsequent one being the effect; never do they cease in their activities. From the Reality (Sat vastu) springs Aharikāra (Avyakta); therefore, I am of the nature of causalty; again Aharikāra is embodied

with the three Guṇas, and so the Pundits call it as an effect of mine. From Aharikāra arises Mahatattva; this is denominated as Buddhi. So Mahatattva is the effect and Aharikāra is its cause. From Mahatattva arises again another Aharikāra; from this second Aharikāra arise the five Tanmātrās or the subtle elements.

तन्मात्राणि तर्वहाकारानुद्यतीं सदैव हि ॥75 ॥

कारणं पझभृतानां तानि सर्वसमुद्धे ।

From these five Tanmātrās, the five gross elements arise after a process called Pañcikarāṇa. From the Sāttvika part of the five Tanmātrās, arise the five organs of perception; from their Rājasik part, the five organs of action come; from their Pañcikarāṇa, come the five gross elements sixteen things come into existence.

कर्मेन्द्रियाणि पडीव पढ़ ज्ञानेश्रियाणि च ॥ 76 ॥

महाप्रतानि पडीव मनः घोडगमेव च ।

कार्य च कारणं चैव गुणोटयं घोड़गात्मकः ॥ 77 ॥

परमात्म पुमानाठो न कार्य न च कारणम् ।

These organs of perception, etc., and other effects together with the Mahā bhūtas form one Ganga, composed of the sixteen categories. The original Puruṣa is the Supreme Self; He is neither cause nor is He any effect.

एवं समुद्रः शम्भो सर्वेभागत्सम्भये ॥ 78 ॥

संक्षेपेण मया प्रोक्तस्व तत्र समुद्रवः ।

O Śambhu! At the beginning of the creation, all the above things are born in the way already indicated. Thus I have described to you, in brief, about creation.

ब्रजंच्छ विमानेन कार्यार्थ मम सत्तामे ॥ 79 ॥

सरणाङ्गरांन तुर्थ यंत्रये इंचिमे स्थिते ।

सर्तेन्वार्डं सदा देण: परमात्मा सनातन: ॥ 80 ॥

उपयो: सरणायेल कार्यसिद्धरसंगयम् ।

O Devas! Now get up in your air craft and go to your respective places and fulfil your respective duties. Whenever you get into any dire distress, then remember Me; I will appear before you. O Devas! You should remember always the Eternal

Supreme Self and Me. When you will remember us both, all your actions, will, no doubt, be crowned with success.

ब्रहीवाच

इत्युक्त्वा विससर्जीस्मादत्त्वा शक्तीः सुसंस्कृताः ॥ 81 ॥

विषयोद्ध प्र महातक्ष्मी महाकर्ति शिवाय च ।

महासरस्वती महं स्थानातासामहिसर्जिताः ॥ 82 ॥

स्थलान्तं समासाधत ते जाताः पुरुषा वयम् ।

चिन्तयन्तः स्वक्षो ततृष्यावं परमादुतम् ॥ 83 ॥

Brahmā said: “Bhagavati Durgā gave us Śakti, full of Divine beauty and lustre; She gave Mahā Lakṣmī to Viṣṇu, Mahā Kālī to Śiva, and Mahā Sarasvatī to me and bade good bye to us. Thus given farewell to by the Devi, we three went to another place and were born as males. We thought of the very wonderful nature and influence of the Devi and we got upon divine aircraft.

विमानं तत्समासाय संकलास्त्र वे प्रय: ।

न द्वीपोउसी न सा देवी सुधास्थिसुत्येव च ।

पुन्द्रैंं विमानं वै ततासाधिनं चान्यथा ॥ 84 ॥

When we ascended, we saw there was no Manidvīpa, there was no Devi, there was no ocean of nectar, nothing whatsoever. Save our aircraft we did not see anything.

आसाध तत्मिन्वितते विमाने

प्राणा वयं पड़्जसन्धिये च ।

महापाँचे यत्र हर्ती दुरत्ययं

भूरात्रिणा ती मधुकैटभाख्यों ॥ 85 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयकन्ये

फर्उ3प्रथाय: 11 6 11

We then got into our wide aircraft and reached there where Viṣṇu killed the two indomitable Daityas, in the great ocean, where I was born from the lotus.

Thus ends the Sixth Chapter of the Third

Book on the description of the Devi's

Vibhūtis (powers) in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

