[Ch 6 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā said: “When I thus asked with great humility, Devi Bhagavatī, the Prime Śakti, She addressed me thus in sweet words: There is oneness always between me and the Purusa; there is no difference whatsoever at any time between me and the Purusa (the male, the Supreme Self). Who is I, that is Purusa; who is Purusa, that is I. The difference between force and the receptacle of force is due to error.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā said :-- When I thus asked with great humility, the Devī Bhāgavatī, the Prime Śakti, She addressed me thus in the following sweet words :-- There is oneness always between me and the Puruṣa; there is difference whatsoever at any time between me and the Puruṣa (Male, the Supreme Self). Who is I, that is Puruṣa; who is Puruṣa, that is I. The difference between force and the receptacle of force is due to error.

[Ch 6 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He who knows the subtle difference between us two, is certainly intelligent; he is freed from this bondage of Sarīsāra; there is no manner of doubt in this. The One Secondless Eternal Everlasting Brahma substance becomes dual at the time of creation.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He who knows the subtle difference between us two, is certainly intelligent; he is freed from this bondage of Samsāra; there is no manner of doubt in this. The One Secondless Eternal ever-lasting Brahmā substance becomes dual at the time of creation.

[Ch 6 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As a lamp, though one, becomes two by virtue of adjuncts; as a face, though one, becomes two, as reflected in a mirror; as one man becomes double by his shadow, so we become reflected into many, by virtue of different Anthah Karanas (mind, buddhi, and aharikāra) created by Māyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As a lamp, though one, becomes two by virtue of adjuncts; as a face, though one, becomes two, as reflected in a mirror; as one man becomes double by his shadow, we become reflected into many, by virtue of different Antah Karaṇas (mind, buddhi, and ahaṅkāra) created by Māyā.

[Ch 6 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The necessity of creation, again and again, after the Prākṛt Pralayas is due to the fructification of those Karmas of the Jīvas, whose fruits were not enjoyed before the Pralayas; so when creation again commences, the above said differences are found to appear; Brahma is the material cause of these changes; without Brahma the existence of Māyā is simply impossible. It is, therefore, that in Māyā and Māyā's action, Brahma is interwoven.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The necessity of creation, again and again, after the Prākriti Pralayas is due to the fructification of those Karmas of the Jīvas, whose fruits were not enjoyed before the Pralayas ; so when creation again commences, the above said differences are found to appear; Brahmā is the material cause of these changes; without Brahmā as the basis, the existence of Māyā is simply impossible. It is therefore that in Māyā and Māyā’s action, Brahmā is interwoven.

[Ch 6 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Only during creation are these differences conceived. When every thing melts away ॥.e. there comes the Pralaya or general dissolution, then, I am not female, I am not male, nor I am hermaphrodite. I then remain as Brahma with Māyā latent in it.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Only during creation are these differences conceived. When everything melts away, i.e., there comes the Pralaya or general dissolution, then, I am not female, I am not male, nor I am hermaphrodite. I then remain as Brahmā with Māyā latent in it.

[Ch 6 Verse 8-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► During the time of creation I am Śrī (wealth), Buddhi (intellect), Dhṛti, (fortitude), Smṛti (recollection), Śraddhā (faith), Medhā (intelligence), Dayā (mercy), Lajjā (modesty), Kṣudhā (hunger), Trṣṇā (thirst), Kṣamā (forgiveness), Akṣamā (non-forgiving), Kānti (lustre), Śānti (peace), Pipāśa (thirst), Nidrā (sleep) Tandrā (drowsiness), Jarā (old age), Ajarā (non old-age), Vidyā (knowledge), Avidyā (non-knowledge) Sprhā (desires), Vāñchā (desires), Śakti (force), Aśakti (non-force), Vasā (fat), Majjā (marrow), Tvak (skin), Drṣti (sight), Satyāsatya Vākya (true and untrue words) and it is that become Parā, Madhyamā, Paśyanti, etc. the innumerable Nāḍīs (tubular organs of the body e.g. arteries, veins, intestines, blood vessels, pulses, etc.); there are three koti and a half Nādīs (35 millions of Nādīs).
NEW CORR ENG ──► During the time of creation I am Śrī (wealth), Buddhi (intellect), Dhriti, (fortitude). Smriti (recollection), Sraddhā (faith), Medhā (intelligence), Dayā (mercy), Lajjā (modesty), Kshudhā (hunger), Trishnā (thirst), Kshamā (forgiveness), Akshamā (non-forgiving), Kānti (lustre), Sānti (peace), Pipāsā (thirst), Nidrā (sleep) Tandrā (drowsiness), Jarā (old age), Ajarā (non old-age), Vidyā (knowledge), Avidyā (non-knowledge), Sprihā (desires), Vāñcā (desires), Śakti (force), Aśakti (non-force), Vasā (fat), Majjā (marrow), Tvak (skin), Dṛṣṭi (sight), Satyāsatya Vākya (true and untrue words) and it is I that become Parā, Madhyamā, Paśyanti, etc., the innumerable Nādis (tubular organs of the body, e. g., arteries, veins, intestines, blood vessels, pulses, etc.); there are three koti and a half Nāḍis (35 millions of Naḍis).

[Ch 6 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brahmā! See—what substance is there in this Saṃsāra, that is separate from Me? And what can you imagine with which I am not connected?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brahmā! See what substance is there in this Samsāra, that is separate from Me? And what can you imagine with which I am not connected?

[Ch 6 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So know this as certain that I am these all forms. O Creator! Say, Is there any such thing, where you will not see my above mentioned positive form? So, in this creation, I am one, and I am many as well, in various forms.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So know this as certain that I am these all forms. O Creator! Say, is there any such thing, where you will not see my above mentioned positive form? So, in this creation, I am one, and I am many as well, in various forms.

[Ch 6 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Know this as certain that it is I, that assuming the names of all the various Devas, exist in so many forms of Śaktis. It is I that manifest power and wield strength.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Know this as certain that it is I, that assuming the names of all the various Devas, exist in so many forms of Śaktis. It is I that manifest power and wield strength.

[Ch 6 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brahmā! I am Gauri, Brāhmī, Raudri, Vārahī, Vaiṣnavī, Śivā, Vāruni, Kauberī, Nāra Sinhī, and Vāsavi Śaktis. I enter in every substance in every thing of the nature of effect.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brahmā! I am Gaurī, Brāhmī, Raudrī, Vārāhī, Vaisnavī, Śiva, Vāruni, Kauverī, Nāra Sinhī, and Vāsavī Śaktis. I enter in every substance, in everything of the nature of effect.

[Ch 6 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Making that Purusa the instrument, I do all the actions (rather Purusa is the efficient cause, the immediate agent).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Making that Puruṣa the instrument, I do all the actions (rather Puruṣa is the efficient cause, the immediate agent).

[Ch 6 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I am the coolness in water, the heat in fire, the lustre in the Sun, the cooling rays in the Moon; and thus I manifest my strength.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I am the coolness in water, the heat in fire, the lustre in the Sun, the cooling rays in the Moon; and thus I manifest my my strength.

[Ch 6 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brahma! Verily, I tell you this as certain that this universe becomes motionless, if it be abandoned by Me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brahmā! Verily, I tell you this as certain that this universe becomes motionless, if it be abandoned by Me.

[Ch 6 Verse 18-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who get fallen, tumbled, afraid, quiet, or under one's enemies are called powerless; no one says that this man is Rudraless and so forth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who get fallen, tumbled, afraid, quiet, or under one’s enemies are called powerless; no one says that this man is Rudraless and so forth.

[Ch 6 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So the creation that you perform, know Sakti, power to be the cause thereof. When you will be endowed with that Sakti, you will be able to create this whole Universe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So the creation that you perform, know Śakti, power to be the cause thereof. When you will be endowed with that Śakti, you will be able to create this whole Universe.

[Ch 6 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hari, Rudra, Indra, Agni, Candra, Sūrya, Yama, Viśvakarmā, Varuna, Pavana, and other Devas all are able to do their karmas, when they are united respectively with their Śakti.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hari, Rudra, Indra, Agni, Candra, Sūrya, Yama, Viśvakarmā, Varuṇa Pavana, and other Devas all are able to do their karmas, when they are united respectively with their Śaktis.

[Ch 6 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Earth, when united with Śakti, remains fixed and becomes capable to hold all the Jivas and beings. And if this Earth be devoid of force, She cannot hold an atom even.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This Earth, when united with Śakti, remains fixed and becomes capable to hold all the Jīvas and beings. And if this Earth be devoid of force, She cannot hold an atom even.

[Ch 6 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Thus Ananta, Kūrma and all the other elephants of the eight points of the compass, become able to do their respective works, only by My help (when united with Me, the Force).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus Ananta, Kurma and all the other elephants of the eight points of the compass, become able to do their respective works, only by My help (when united with Me, the Force).

[Ch 6 Verse 25-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lotus born! If I wish, I can drink all the fire and waters today and I can hold wind in check. I do whatever I wish. If I say that I am creating this world then the inconsistency arises thus: "When I am everything, then I being eternal, all this universe, made up of Prapañca, becomes eternal." (Whereas this universe is not eternal in the sense that it is changing). If it were said that this universe is different from Me, then My saying that I am everything becomes inconsistent." Thinking thus, do not plunge yourself in the doubt as to the reality and origin and separateness of the non-eternal universe. For that is unreal, how can that come into existence? The unreal substances can never come into existence; as the child of a barren woman, the flowers in the sky are simply absurd. What is real can only be born. In discussing about origin, birth, etc. the appearance and disappearance of real things is called their birth and dissolution. In the cold of earth exists the previous existence of the jar and this is the cause of the appearance of the jar; the disappearance of the jar exists in the jar; hence this disappearance is the cause of the destruction of the jar. Thus the appearance and disappearance of the causal eternal things are called the Origin and Parlaya. Similarly, in discussing on the causal nature, there does not arise any inconsistency in My being everything.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lotus born! If I wish I can drink all the fire and waters today and I can hold wind in check. I do whatever I wish. If I say that I am creating this world then the inconsistency arises thus :-- “When I am everything, then I am being eternal, all this universe, made up of Prapañca, becomes eternal.” (Whereas this universe is not eternal in the sense that it is changing.) If it were said that this universe is different from Me, then My saying that I am everything becomes inconsistent. Thinking thus, do not plunge yourself in the doubt as to the reality and origin and separateness of the non-eternal universe. For what is unreal, how can that come into existence? The unreal substances can never come into existence; as the child of a barren woman, the flowers in the sky are simply absurd. What is real can only be born. In discussing about origin, birth, etc., the appearance and disappearance of real things is called their birth and dissolution. In the cold of earth there exists the previous existence of the jar and this is the cause of the appearance of the jar; the disappearance of the jar exists in the jar; hence this disappearance is the cause of the destruction of the jar. Thus the appearance and disappearance of the causal eternal things are called the Origin and Pralaya. Similarly in discussing on the causal nature, there does not arise an inconsistency in My being everything.

[Ch 6 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So there is nothing to fear. In discussing about the reality of effects, this is to be conceived, that today there does not exist here the earth in the form of jar, if it is destroyed, where it has gone?
NEW CORR ENG ──► So there is nothing to fear. In discussing about the reality of effects, this is to be conceived, that today there does not exist here the earth in the form of jar, if it is destroyed, where it has gone?

[Ch 6 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The conclusion is that the earth in the form of jar exists in atoms. O Brahman! All substances eternal, existing for a moment only, the void, and the substances of the nature, real and unreal both, all are due to a cause. Ahankāra is born first among them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The conclusion is that the earth in the form of jar exists in atoms. O Brahmā! All substances eternal, existing for a moment only, the void, and the substances of the nature, real and unreal both, all are due to a cause. Ahaṅkāra is born first among them.

[Ch 6 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus substances are of seven kinds: Mahat, etc. O Unborn One! Mahatattva first arises from Prakrti; from Mahatattva springs Ahaṅkāra; and from ahaṅkāra arises other substances. Thus, in this order, you go on creating this Universe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus substances are of seven kinds: Mahat, etc. O Unborn One! Mahattattva first arises from Prakriti; from Mahattattva springs Ahamkāra; and from Ahamkāra arises other substances. Thus, in this order, you go on creating this Universe.

[Ch 6 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brahmā! Now you better go to your respective places, and after crc. 'ing the Universe, remain there and perform your respective functions ordained by Prārabdha.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brahmā! Now you better go to your respective places, and after creating the Universe, remain there and perform your respective functions ordained by Prārabdha.

[Ch 6 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Take this beautiful great Śakti Mahā Sarasvatī, full of Rajoguna, and of a smiling nature.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Take this beautiful great Śakti Mahā Sarasvatī, full of Rajoguṇa, and of a smiling nature.

[Ch 6 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Śakti, wearing white clothes, adorned with divine ornaments and sitting on Varāsana, will always be your playmate.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This Śakti, wearing white clothes, adorned with divine ornaments and sitting on Varāsana, will always be your playmate.

[Ch 6 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This beautiful woman will always be your boon companion; consider Her as My vibhūti (manifestation of power), and so most worshipful. Never show any sort of disrespect towards Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This beautiful woman will always be your boon companion; consider Her as My bibhuti (manifestation of power), and so most worshipful. Never show any sort of disrespect towards Her.

[Ch 6 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Take Her and go immediately to Satyaloka; and from the seed of Mahatattva, create the fourfold beings from these. The subtle bodies (Linga śarīra) and Karmas are remaining mixed up with each other. Separate them, as before, duly, in due time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Take Her and go immediately to Satyaloka; and from the seed of Mahattattva, create the fourfold beings from these. The subtle bodies (Liṅga sarīra) and Karmas are remaining mixed up with each other. Separate them, as before, duly, in due time.

[Ch 6 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now go on as before and according to Kāla (time), Karma, and Svabhāva (nature), join them with their respective attributes (sounds and other qualities); in other words bestow fruits according to their guṇas and Karmas (Prārabdhas), and to the time when these fruits are due.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now go on as before and according to Kāla (time), Karma, and Svabhāva (nature), join them with their respective attributes (sounds and other qualities); in other words bestow fruits according to their guṇas and Karmas (Prārabdhas), and to the time when these fruits are due.

[Ch 6 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Visnu is prominent in Sattvaguna and hence superior to You. So You should always respect and worship Him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viṣṇu is prominent in Sattvaguna and hence superior to You. So You should always respect and worship Him.

[Ch 6 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whenever any difficulty will come to you, Visnu will come down on earth to fulfil your ends.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whenever any difficulty will come to you, Viṣṇu will come down on earth to fulfil your ends.

[Ch 6 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janārdana Visnu will sometimes be born in the wombs of men and destroy the Dānavas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► and animals, be sometimes in the wombs of men and destroy the Dānavas.

[Ch 6 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The highly powerful Mahā Deva, too, will help you. Now create the Devas and enjoy as you like. The Brāhmaṇas, Kṣaṭtriyas, and Vaiśyas will worship you, with devotion, in various sacrifices, endowed with due sacrificial fees.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The highly powerful Mahā Deva, too, will help you. Now create the Devas and enjoy as you like. The Brāhmaṇas, Kshattriyas, and Vaisyās will worship you, with devotion, in various sacrifices, endowed with due sacrificial fees.

[Ch 6 Verse 43-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► All the Devas will be always satisfied when my name “Svāha” will be uttered in the sacrificial oblations and ceremonies. Śiva, the incarnate of Tamo gunā will be revered and worshipped by all persons in every sacrifice.
NEW CORR ENG ──► All the Devas will be always satisfied when my name “Svāhā” will be uttered in the sacrificial oblations and ceremonies. Śiva, the incarnate of Tamo guṇa will be revered and worshipped by all persons in every sacrifice.

[Ch 6 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the Devas will be frightened by the Daityas, then Vārahī, Vaisnavī, Gaurī, Nāra Sirinhi, Śacī, Šivā and My other Śaktis will take excellent bodies and destroy your fear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the Devas will be frightened by the Daityas, then Vārāhī, Vaisnavī, Gaurī, Nara Simhī, Śacī, Śiva and My other Śaktis will take excellent bodies and destroy your fear.

[Ch 6 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So, O Lotus-born! Be at your ease and do work. You utter and repeat my nine-lettered mantra with Bijā and Dhyāna and do your work.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So, O Lotus-born! Be at your ease and do work. You utter and repeat my nine-lettered mantra with Vīja and Dhyān and do your work.

[Ch 6 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O highly intelligent one! This nine-lettered mantra is the best of all the mantras. You are to keep this mantra, within your heart, for the accomplishment of all your ends.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O highly intelligent one! This nine-lettered mantra is the best of all the mantras. You are to keep this mantra, within your heart, for the accomplishment of all your ends.

[Ch 6 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying to me, Bhagavati smiled and began to say to Viṣṇu: “O Viṣṇu! Take this beautiful Mahā Lakṣmī and go.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying to me, Bhagavatī smiled and began to say to Viṣṇu :-- O Viṣṇu! Take this beautiful Mahā Lakṣ’mī and go.

[Ch 6 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She will always reside within your breast; there is no doubt in this. This all auspicious giving Śakti I give to you for your enjoyment.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She will always reside within your breast; there is no doubt in this. This all auspicious giving Śakti I give to you for your enjoyment.

[Ch 6 Verse 51-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śrimaddevībhāgavatam You should always shew respect to Her; never show hatred or contempt. For the good of the world, I unite thus Lakṣmī and Nārāyaṇa. For your sustenance I create Yajña. You three will act together in harmony unanimously.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You should always shew respect to Her; never show hatred or contempt. For the good of the world, I unite thus Lakṣ’mī and Nārāyan. For your sustenance I create Yajña. You three will act together in harmony unanimously.

[Ch 6 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You, Brahmā and Śiva are my three Devas, born of my Guṇas. You three will undoubtedly be respected and worshipped by the world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You, Brahmā and Śiva are my three Devas, born of my Gunas. You three will undoubtedly be respected and worshipped by the world.

[Ch 6 Verse 54-58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So Brahmā is one and the same with Śiva and Viṣṇu; there is no manner of doubt in this. O Viṣṇu! But there are other differences in their Gunas; I will tell this; listen, as far as meditation of the Supreme Self is concerned you will have Sattva Guna predominant within you; and Rajo Guna and Tamo Guna will be secondary. In various other pursuits and Vikāras (changes) better have Rajo Guna with Lakṣmī and always enjoy Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So Brahmā is one and the same with Śiva and Viṣṇu; there no manner of doubt in this. O Viṣṇu! But there are other differences in their Guṇas; I will tell this; listen, as far as meditation of the Supreme Self is concerned you will have Sattva Guṇa predominant within you; and Rajo Guṇa and Tamo Guṇa will be secondary. In various other pursuits and Vikāras (changes) better have Rajo Guṇa with Lakṣ’mī and always enjoy Her.

[Ch 6 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of Rama! I give you Vākbīja, Kāmabīja, and Māyābīja that will lead you to the highest end.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of Ramā! I give you Vākvīja, Kāmavīja, and Māyāvīja that will lead you to the highest end.

[Ch 6 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Take this Mantra and repeat it and enjoy as you like. O Viṣṇu! By this, danger of death, caused by Kāla, will never come to you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Take this Mantra and repeat it and enjoy as you like. O Viṣṇu! By this, the danger of death, caused Kāla, will never come to you.

[Ch 6 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the creation of this Universe will be completely done I will then destroy this whole thing moving and non-moving. You all will then be dissolved in Me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the creation of this Universe will be completely done I will then destroy this whole thing, moving and non-moving. You all will then be dissolved in Me.

[Ch 6 Verse 62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You should add pranava to this mantra with Kāmabīja leading to Mokṣa and repeat it always with auspicious motives.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You should add praṇava this mantra with Kāmavīja leading to Mokṣa and repeat it always with auspicious motives.

[Ch 6 Verse 63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Puruşottama! Build your Vaikuntha-puri; live there and think of this My Eternal Form and enjoy as you like.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Puruṣottama! Build your Vaikunṭhapurī; live there and think of this My Eternal Form and enjoy as you like.

[Ch 6 Verse 64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā said: Saying thus to Vāsudeva, that Higher Prakṛti Devī, who is all of the three Gunas and yet transcending them, began to address Mahā Deva, the Deva of the Devas, in sweet words, thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā said :-- Saying thus to Vāsudeva, that Higher Prakriti Devī who is all of the three Guṇas and yet transcending them, began to address Mahā Deva, the Deva of the Devas, in sweet words, thus :--

[Ch 6 Verse 65-66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Śānkara! Accept this beautiful Mahā Kālī Gauri, build a new Kailāśa city and live there happily. Your primary Gunas will be Tamas; Sattva and Rajas will be your secondary Gunas. Have recourse to Rajo and Tamo Gunas while you slay the Asuras and thus wander. O sinless Śānkara! Have recourse to peaceful Sattra Guna, when you reflect on the Supreme Self and practise austerities.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Saṅkara! Accept this beautiful Mahā Kālī Gaurī, build a new Kailàśa city and live there happily. Your primary Guṇas will be Tamas; Sattva and Rajas will be your secondary Guṇas. Have recourse to Rajo and Tamo Guṇas while you slay the Asuras and thus wander. O sinless Śaṅkara! Have recourse to peaceful Satto Guṇa, when you reflect on the Supreme Self and practise austerities.

[Ch 6 Verse 67-68]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You all are for creating, preserving and destroying the Universe; and you are all of the three Gunas. There is no such thing in this world as are devoid of these three Gunas. Every thing, that is visible, is endowed with the three Gunas, and whatever will be or was before cannot exist without them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You all are for creating, preserving and destroying the Universe and you are all of the three Guṇas. There is no such thing in this world as are devoid of these three Guṇas. Everything, that is visible, is endowed with the three Guṇas, and whatever will be or was before cannot exist without them.

[Ch 6 Verse 69-70]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Only the Supreme Self is without these Gunas; but He is not visible. O Śaṅkara! I am the Parā Prakṛti; at times I appear with Gunas; and at other I remain without any Gunas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Only the Supreme Self is without these Guṇas; but He is not visible. O Saṅkara! I am the Parā Prakriti; at times I appear with Guṇas; and at others I remain without any Guṇas.

[Ch 6 Verse 71]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Śambhu! I am always of the causal nature; never I am of the nature of effect. When I am causal, I am with Gunas; and when I am before the Highest Puruṣa, I am, then, without any Gunas (on account of my remaining in the state of equilibrium (Sāmyāvasthā)).
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Śambhu! I am always of the causal nature; never I am of the nature of effect. When I am causal, I am with Guṇas; and when I am before the Highest Puruṣa, I am, then, without any Guṇas on account of my remaining in the state of equilibrium (Sāmyā vasthā).

[Ch 6 Verse 72-74]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mahattattva, Aahirākāra, and sound, touch, etc. all the Guṇas perform the work of Saṃsāra, day and night, each preceding one being the cause each subsequent one being the effect; never do they cease in their activities. From the Reality (Sat vastu) springs Aharikāra (Avyakta); therefore, I am of the nature of causalty; again Aharikāra is embodied with the three Guṇas, and so the Pundits call it as an effect of mine. From Aharikāra arises Mahatattva; this is denominated as Buddhi. So Mahatattva is the effect and Aharikāra is its cause. From Mahatattva arises again another Aharikāra; from this second Aharikāra arise the five Tanmātrās or the subtle elements.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mahattattva, Ahamkāra, and sound, touch, etc., all the Guṇas perform the work of Samsāra, day and night, each preceding one being the cause and each subsequent one being the effect; never do they cease in their activities. From the Reality (Sat vastu) springs Ahamkāra (Avyakta); therefore I am of the nature of causality; again Ahamkāra is embodied with the three Guṇas, and so the Pundits call it as an effect of mine. From Ahamkāra arises Mahattattva; this is denominated as Buddhi. So Mahattattva is the effect and Ahamkāra is its cause. From Mahattattva arises again another Ahamkāra; from this second Ahamkāra arise the five Tanmātrās or the subtle elements.

[Ch 6 Verse 75]
OLD OCR ENG ──► From these five Tanmātrās, the five gross elements arise after a process called Pañcikarāṇa. From the Sāttvika part of the five Tanmātrās, arise the five organs of perception; from their Rājasik part, the five organs of action come; from their Pañcikarāṇa, come the five gross elements sixteen things come into existence.
NEW CORR ENG ──► From these five Tanmātrās, the five gross elements arise after a process called Pañcīkaraṇa. From the Sāttvika part of the five Tanmātrās, arise the five organs of perception; from their Rājasik part, the five organs of action come; from their Pañcīkaraṇa, came the five gross elements;

[Ch 6 Verse 76-77]
OLD OCR ENG ──► These organs of perception, etc., and other effects together with the Mahā bhūtas form one Ganga, composed of the sixteen categories. The original Puruṣa is the Supreme Self; He is neither cause nor is He any effect.
NEW CORR ENG ──► These organs of perception, etc., and other effects together with the Mahā bhūtas form one Gaṇa, composed of the sixteen categories. The original Puruṣa is the Supreme Self; He is neither cause nor is He any effect.

[Ch 6 Verse 78]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Śambhu! At the beginning of the creation, all the above things are born in the way already indicated. Thus I have described to you, in brief, about creation.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Śambhu! At the beginning of the creation, all the above things are born in the way already indicated. Thus I have described to you, in brief; about the creation.

[Ch 6 Verse 79-80]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devas! Now get up in your air craft and go to your respective places and fulfil your respective duties. Whenever you get into any dire distress, then remember Me; I will appear before you. O Devas! You should remember always the Eternal Supreme Self and Me. When you will remember us both, all your actions, will, no doubt, be crowned with success.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devas! Now get up in your aeroplane and go to your respective places and fulfil your respective duties. Whenever you get into any dire distress, then remember Me; I will appear before you. O Devas! You should remember always the Eternal Supreme Self and Me. When you will remember us both, all your actions, will, no doubt, be crowned with success.

[Ch 6 Verse 81-83]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā said: “Bhagavati Durgā gave us Śakti, full of Divine beauty and lustre; She gave Mahā Lakṣmī to Viṣṇu, Mahā Kālī to Śiva, and Mahā Sarasvatī to me and bade good bye to us. Thus given farewell to by the Devi, we three went to another place and were born as males. We thought of the very wonderful nature and influence of the Devi and we got upon divine aircraft.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā said :-- Bhagavatī Durgā gave us Śaktis, full of Divine beauty and lustre; She gave Mahā Lakṣmī to Viṣṇu, Mahā Kāli to Śiva, and Mahā Sarasvatī to me and bade good bye to us. Thus given farewell to by the Devī, we three went to another place and were born as males. We thought of the very wonderful nature and influence of the Devī and we got upon our divine

[Ch 6 Verse 84]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When we ascended, we saw there was no Manidvīpa, there was no Devi, there was no ocean of nectar, nothing whatsoever. Save our aircraft we did not see anything.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When we ascended, we saw there was no Manidvīpa, there was no Devī, there was no ocean of nectar, nothing whatsoever. Save our aeroplane, we did not see anything.

[Ch 6 Verse 85]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We then got into our wide aircraft and reached there where Viṣṇu killed the two indomitable Daityas, in the great ocean, where I was born from the lotus. Thus ends the Sixth Chapter of the Third Book on the description of the Devi's Vibhūtis (powers) in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We then got into our wide aeroplane and reached there where Viṣṇu killed the two indomitable Daityas, in the great ocean, where I was born from the lotus. Thus ends the Sixth Chapter of the Third Skandha on the description of the Devī’s Vibhutis (powers) in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyās.
