[Ch 28 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! The Devi, hearing thus, laughed and spoke the following reasonable words, in a voice deep as a rumbling cloud: "O Dull brained one! Already I told to that messenger before in reply to you; why then do you boast in vain?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! The Devī, hearing thus, laughed and spoke the following reasonable words, in a voice deep as a rumbling cloud :-- O Dull brained one! Already I told to that messenger before in reply to you; why then do you boast in vain?

[Ch 28 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If there be any such in the three worlds who can stand equal to Me in appearance, strength, and prosperity, I will marry him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If there be any such in the three worlds who can stand equal to Me in appearance, strength, and prosperity, I will marry him.

[Ch 28 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Go to Sumbha and Niśumbha and inform them that thus I promised before; therefore let any of them conquer Me in battle and then marry Me according to the prescribed rules.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Go to Śumbha and Niśumbha and inform them that thus I promised before; therefore let any of them conquer Me in battle and then marry Me according to the prescribed rules.

[Ch 28 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You have come here to execute the order of Śumbha; so either stand up and fight or fly to Pātala with your King.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You have come here to execute the order of Śumbha; so either stand up and fight or fly to Pātāla with your King.

[Ch 28 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the Devi's words, the Dānava was filled with anger and began to shoot dreadful arrows at once on the lion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing the Devī’s words, the Dānava was filled with anger and began to shoot dreadful arrows at once on the Lion.

[Ch 28 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Ambikā, then, ready-handed, seeing the multitude of arrows coming in the sky like serpents, cut them off in a moment to pieces by Her sharp arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Ambikā, then, ready-handed, seeing the multitude of arrows coming in the sky like serpents, cut them off in a moment to pieces by Her sharp arrows.

[Ch 28 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi, then, drawing Her bow, shot arrows sharpened on stone at the great Asura Raktabija.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī, then, drawing Her bow, shot arrows sharpened on stone at the great Asura Raktabīja.

[Ch 28 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then that wicked Demon, thus shot at by the arrows, fell unconscious on the chariot. When he lay thus senseless, a great uproar arose amidst his army and the soldiers began to cry aloud saying "Alas! We all are killed."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then that wicked Demon, thus shot at by the arrows, fell unconscious on the chariot. When he lay thus senseless, a great uproar arose amidst his army and the soldiers began to cry aloud saying, “Alas! We all are killed.”

[Ch 28 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Šumbha, the king of the Asuras, hearing the sound of Boombā (a danger cry by hands and mouth) ordered all the Dānavas to be ready for the battle.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Śumbha, the king of the Asuras, hearing the sound of Boombā (a danger cry by hands and mouth) ordered all the Dānavas to be ready for the battle.

[Ch 28 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Šumbha said: “Let all Kāmbojas* go to the battle with all their forces; let other powerful heroes, especially the Kālakeyas, too, who are very strong heroes, go up for the battle. Note: Kamboja, name of a people and their country. They inhabited the Hindukusā mountain which separates the Giljit valley from Balkh, and probably extended upto little. Tibet and Ladakh. The Kālakeyas may be the Afridis.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Śumbha said :-- Let all Kāmbojas go to the battle with all their forces; let other powerful heroes, especially the Kālakeyās, too, who are very strong heroes, go up for the battle. (Note: Kāmboja, name of a people and their country. They inhabited the Hindoo Koosh mountain which separates the Giljit valley from Balkh and probably extended up to little Tibet and Lādak. The Kālakeyās may be the Afridis.)

[Ch 28 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Thus ordered, all the fourfold army of Sumbha, viz., cavalry, infantry, elephants and chariots, went out, intoxicated for war, to the battle ground where the Devi existed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Thus ordered, all the fourfold army of Śumbha, viz., cavalry, infantry, elephants and chariots went out, intoxicated for war, to the battle ground where the Devī existed.

[Ch 28 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi Çandikā, seeing the Dānava forces coming near, made at once terrible sounds frequently.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī Caṇḍikā, seeing the Dānava forces coming near, made at once terrible sounds frequently.

[Ch 28 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Ambikā Devi also made the sound with Her bowstring and blew Her conchshell. Kālī, then, shouted aloud opening Her mouth widely.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ambikā Devī also made the sound with Her bowstring and blew Her conchshell. Kālī, then, shouted aloud opening Her mouth widely.

[Ch 28 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The powerful Lion, the Devi's Vāhana, hearing the terrible sounds, roared so loudly that the Dānavas were struck with strange terror.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The powerful Lion, the Devī’s Vāhana, hearing the terrible sounds, roared so loudly that the Dānavas were struck with strange terror.

[Ch 28 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The powerful Dānavas, then, hearing that sound became impatient with anger and shot arrows after arrows on the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The powerful Dānavas, then, hearing that sound became impatient with anger and shot arrows after arrows on the Devī.

[Ch 28 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The wonderful horrible battle, then, ensued, causing horripilation and the Śaktis of Brahmā and the other Devas began to come to Caṇdikā Devī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The wonderful horrible battle, then, ensued, causing horripilation and the Śaktis of Brahmā and the other Devas began to come to Caṇḍikā Devī.

[Ch 28 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devīs, the wives of the several Devas, then went, to the battle-field in their respective forms with ornaments and Vāhanas as generally on such occasions.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devīs, the wives of the several Devas, then went, to the battlefield in their respective forms with ornaments and Vāhanas as generally on such occasions.

[Ch 28 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Śakti (wife) of Brahmā named Brahmānī, mounting on the back of Her Swan came there with a string of beads and Kamandalu (a wooden waterpot used by ascetics).
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Śakti (wife) of Brahmā named Brahmāṇi, mounting on the back of Her Swan came there with a string of beads and Kamaṇḍalu (an wooden waterpot used by ascetics).

[Ch 28 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Vaṣṇavī with Her yellow robes came there mounted on Garudā (the sacred bird of Viṣṇu, the carrier of Him) with conch, discus, club, and lotus in Her hands.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Vaiṣṇavī with Her yellow robes came there mounted on Garuḍa (the sacred bird of Viṣṇu, the carrier of Him) with conch, discus, club, and lotus in Her hands.

[Ch 28 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi Śaṅkari, the wife of Śiva, the Auspicious One, arrived on the back of Her Bull. The emblem of half-moon was on Her forehead while in Her hands She held snake, bracelet, and trident (Triśūla) and the sign of fearlessness for Her devotees.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī Śaṅkarī, the wife of Śiva, the Auspicious One, arrived on the back of Her Bull. The emblem of half-moon was on Her forehead while in Her hands She held snake, bracelet, and trident (Trisūla) and the sign of fearlessness for Her devotees.

[Ch 28 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The beautiful wife of Kártika, Kaumārī Devī, looking like Kärtika, came to fight there mounted on a peacock.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The beautiful wife of Kārtika, Kaumāri Devī, looking like Kartika, came to fight there mounted on a peacock.

[Ch 28 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The fairfaced Indrānī, decked with ornaments on Her several limbs, came there to fight, with thunderbolt in Her hand, mounted on the elephant Airāvata.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The fairfaced Indrāṇī, decked with ornaments on Her several limbs, came there to fight, with thunder-bolt in Her hand, mounted on the elephant Airāvata.

[Ch 28 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Vārāhi Devi looking like a female boar, came also, seated on an elevated seat of departed souls (Preta). The Nārasinhi, resembling Nṛsirīha (the Man-Lion Incarnation) came there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Vārāhī Devī looking like a female boar, came also, seated on an elevated seat of departed souls (Preta). The Nārasimhī, resembling Nrisimha (the Man Lion Incarnation) came there.

[Ch 28 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The wife of Yama, looking fearful like Yama arrived there on the battle-field smiling and with staff in Her hand and mounted on the back of a buffalo.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The wife of Yama, looking fearful like Yama arrived there on the battlefield smiling and with staff in Her hand and mounted on the back of a buffalo.

[Ch 28 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus the wives of Kubera, Varuna, and other Devas came there with proper forms, Vahanas, ornaments, accompanied by their forces and all excited.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the wives of Kuvera, Varuṇa, and other Devas came there with proper forms, Vāhanas, ornaments, accompanied by their forces and all excited.

[Ch 28 Verse 27-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing them all, the Devi Ambikā became glad; the Devas, too, became peaceful and expressed their great joy the Dānavas were afraid at the sight of them, Śaṅkara, auspicious to all the beings, came there to the battle-field, surrounded by these goddesses and thus said to Capdikā: “Slay quickly all these Asuras, Śumbha, Niśumbha and all other Dānavas to serve the cause of the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing them all, the Devī Ambikā became glad; the Devas, too, became peaceful and expressed their great joy; the Dānavas were afraid at the sight of them. Śaṅkara, auspicious to all the beings, came there to the battlefield, surrounded by these goddesses and thus said to Caṇḍikā :-- Slay quickly all these Asuras, Śumbha, Niśumbha and all other Dānavas to serve the cause of the Devas.

[Ch 28 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Let all the goddesses destroy the Dānava race and thus free the world from dangers; they may, then, return to their own abodes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Let all the goddesses destroy the Dānava race and thus free the world from dangers; they may, then, return to their own abodes.

[Ch 28 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Let the Devas get their shares of sacrifices, let the Brāhmaṇas perform the sacrificial acts, and let all the creatures, moving or not moving, be happy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Let the Devas get their shares of sacrifices, let the Brāhmaṇas perform the sacrificial acts, and let all the creatures, moving or not moving, be happy.

[Ch 28 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Let all calamities such as proceed from drought, excessive rain, rats, foreign invasion, locusts and birds, bats, etc., come to an end. Let the clouds bestow rains regularly and let the cultivation yield ample harvests. Note here that rats bring in plague."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Let all calamities such as proceed from drought, excessive rain, rats, foreign invasion, locusts and birds, bats, etc., come to an end. Let the clouds bestow rains regularly and let the cultivation yield ample harvests. Note here that rats bring in plague.

[Ch 28 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! When Śaṅkara, the Lord of the gods and Auspicious to all, said thus, a wonderful female ensued out of the body of Candikā, very furious, horrible, with hundreds of jackals surrounding and yelling; then that Śakti of dreadful appearance, said to Śiva, smiling:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! When Śaṅkara, the Lord of the gods and Auspicious to all, said thus, a wonderful female ensued out of the body of Caṇḍikā, very furious, horrible, with hundreds of jackals surrounding and yelling; then that Śakti, of dreadful appearance, said to

[Ch 28 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Deva of the Devas! Go quickly to the lord of the Daityas; do the duty of a messenger for us, O Destroyer of lust! O Śānkara! Tell that haughty Iustful Śumbha and Niśumbha to leave the Heavens and go to Pātāla.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- O Deva of the Devas! Go quickly to the lord of the Daityas; do the duty of a messenger for us, O Destroyer of lust! O Śaṅkara! Tell that haughty lustful Śumbha and Niśumbha leave the Heavens and go to Pātāla.

[Ch 28 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Let the Devas reign in the Heavens; Indra go to his own beautiful throne; let all the Devas go to their appropriate places in Heaven and receive their sacrificial offerings duly. And if the Demons desire to live, let them go quickly to the city of Pātāla where other Dānavas are dwelling.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Let the Devas reign in the Heavens; Indra go to his own beautiful throne; let all the Devas go to their appropriate places in Heaven and receive their sacrificial offerings duly. And if the Demons desire to live, let them go quickly to the city of Pātāla where other Dānavas are dwelling.

[Ch 28 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Else, if they like to die, let them go quickly come to the battle-field and let their flesh be eaten up by Her jackals.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Else, if they like to die, let them go quickly to the battlefield and let their flesh be eaten up by Her jackals.

[Ch 28 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing Her words, Sūlapāni went quickly to Sumbha, the lord of the Dānavas, seated in the assembly, and said thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing Her words, Śūlapāṇi went quickly to Śumbha, the lord of the Dānavas, seated in the assembly, and said thus :--

[Ch 28 Verse 41-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O king! I am Hara, the Destroyer of the Asura Tripura; now I have come to you for your good as a messenger of Ambikā Devī. Quit the Heavens and Earth and go quickly to Pātāla where reside the powerful Bali and Prahlāda, or if you like to court Death, come to fight; I will slay you all in a moment. O king! The Great Queen Ambikā Devī has sent me with these instructions for your welfare and information."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! I am Hara, the Destroyer of the Asura Tripurā; now I have come to you for your good as a messenger of Ambikā Devī. Quit the Heavens and Earth and go quickly to Pātāla where reside the powerful Bali and Prahlāda, or if you like to court Death, come to fight; I will slay you all in a moment. O King! The Great Queen Ambikā Devī has sent me with these instructions for your welfare and information.

[Ch 28 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Thus conveying the nectar-like, beneficial words of the Devi to the chief Daityas, Śiva, the Holder of the trident, returned to his own place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Thus conveying the nectarlike, beneficial words of the Devī to the chief Daityas, Śiva, the Holder of the trident, returned to his own place.

[Ch 28 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Daityas, thus hearing the rigorous words of the Devi, put on their coats of armour and taking their bows and arrows quickly went out to fight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Daityas, thus hearing the rigorous words of the Devī, put on their coats of armour and taking their bows and arrows quickly went out to fight.

[Ch 28 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They came with great force to the battle field, stretched their bows to their ears and shot piercing arrows, sharpened on stone and tipped with iron, at the Caṇḍikā Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They came with great force to the battlefield, stretched their bows to their ears and shot piercing arrows, sharpened on stone and tipped with iron, at the Caṇḍikā Devī.

[Ch 28 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Kālika Devi, too began to strike some with the trident, some with Śakti weapons, and some with clubs and rent them asunder and devoured them all, and began to roam in the field.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Kālikā Devī, too began to strike some with the trident, some with Śakti weapon, and some with clubs and rent them asunder and devoured them all, and began to roam in the field.

[Ch 28 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmānī began to pour water from Her Kamandalu on the powerful Dānavas in the battlefield and thus destroyed them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmāṇi began to pour water from Her Kamandalu on the powerful Dānavas in the battlefield and thus destroyed them.

[Ch 28 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Māheśvari, mounting on Her Bull gave violent blows by Her trident and thus lay them dead on the ground.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Maheśvarī, mounting on Her Bull gave violent blows by Her trident and thus lay them dead on the ground.

[Ch 28 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vaisņavi, with the blow of Her club, took away the lives of many Daityas and striking them with Her Discus cut off the heads of several others.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vaiṣṇavī, with the blow of Her club, took away the lives of many Daityas and striking them with Her Discus out off the heads of several others.

[Ch 28 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indrānī hurled Her thunderbolt on the chief Dānavas, already struck by the feet of the elephant and lay them dead on the field.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indrānī hurled Her thunderbolt on the chief Dānavas, already struck by the feet of the elephant and lay them dead on the field.

[Ch 28 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vārāhi, angrily killed thousands of Daityas with her sharp teeth and trunk.
NEW CORR ENG ──► strongest Dānavas with the sharp nails and, devouring

[Ch 28 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārasinhi tore the strongest Dānavas with the sharp nails and, devouring them, walked to and fro and made dreadful sounds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► them, walked to and fro and made dreadful sounds.

[Ch 28 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śiva Dūti began to laugh hoarsely and laid the Dānavas flat on the field, when they were atonce devoured by Kalikā and Candikā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śiva Dūtī began to laugh hoarsely and laid the Dānavas flat on the field, when they were at once devoured by Kālikā and Caṇḍikā.

[Ch 28 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kaumārī, seated on a peacock, by drawing the bowstring to Her ears hurled arrows sharpened on stone on the enemies and killed them to serve the cause of the gods.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kaumāri, seated on a peacock, by drawing the bowstring to Her ears hurled arrows sharpened on stone on the enemies and killed them to serve the cause of the gods.

[Ch 28 Verse 58-59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vārṇuī tied down the Dānavas by Her Pāśa weapons in a face to face fighting; thus they lay down senseless on the ground. O King! Thus the Mātrkās, the goddesses, crushed the forces. Then the other powerful soldiers fled away terrified.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vāruṇi tied down the Dānavas by Her Pāsa weapons in a face to face fighting; thus they lay down senseless on the ground. O King! Thus the Mātrikās, the goddesses, crushed the forces. Then the other powerful soldiers fled away terrified.

[Ch 28 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The “Boombā” danger cry rose then loudly; on the other hand, the Devas began to shower flowers on the Devís.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The “Boombā” danger cry rose then loudly; on the other hand, the Devas began to shower flowers on the Devīs.

[Ch 28 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing the distressful agonies of the Asuras and the shouts of victory of the Devas, Raktabīja, the chief of the Dānavas became very angry.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing the distressful agonies of the Asuras and the shouts of victory of the Devas, Raktabīja, the chief of the Dānavas became very angry.

[Ch 28 Verse 62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing specially the Dānavas flying away and the Devas shouting, that powerful Demon came hurriedly to the battle-field in anger.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing specially the Dānavas flying away and the Devas shouting, that powerful Demon came hurriedly to the battlefield with anger.

[Ch 28 Verse 63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then with eyes reddened with anger, and with various weapons came before the Devi, Raktabija mounting on a chariot, and making sounds unusual with his bowstring. Here ends the Twenty-eighth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the description of the fighting of the goddesses in Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then with eyes reddened with anger, and with various weapons came before the Devī, Raktabīja mounting on a chariot, and making sounds unusual with his bowstring. Here ends the Twenty-eighth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the description of the fighting of the goddesses in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam the Mahā Purāṇam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
