CHAPTER XXVIII

On the Devi's Fighting

व्यास उवाच

कृत्वा हास्यं ततो देवी तमुवाच विश्यांपते ।

मेघाभ्यामीरा वाचा युक्तिपुर्णमिदं वचः ॥ १ ॥

पूर्वमेव मवा प्रोक्ते मन्दात्मार्कि विकलध्यसे ।

दूतस्यो यथायोगं वचनं हितसंयुतम् ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Devi, hearing thus, laughed and spoke the following reasonable words, in a voice deep as a rumbling cloud: "O Dull brained one! Already I told to that messenger before in reply to you; why then do you boast in vain?

सदृगो मम रूपेण बलेन विषवेन च ।

त्रितोक्यां यदि कोउपि स्यानं पर्ति प्रयुणोभ्यम् ॥ ३ ॥

If there be any such in the three worlds who can stand equal to Me in appearance, strength, and prosperity, I will marry him.

ब्रहि शुभ्यं निशुभ्यं च प्रतित्रा मे पुरा कृता ।

तस्मातुद्रव तिथा मां विहाई विप्रित्वलुक ॥ 4 ॥

Go to Sumbha and Niśumbha and inform them that thus I promised before; therefore let any of them conquer Me in battle and then marry Me according to the prescribed rules.

तं वै तदात्राया प्राप्तस्तस्य कार्यांविसिद्धये ।

संग्रामं कुक पातालं गच्छ वा पतिना सह ॥ 5 ॥

You have come here to execute the order of Śumbha; so either stand up and fight or fly to Pātala with your King.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छूला वचनं देया: स दैत्योउमर्षपूरितः ।

मुभोच तरसा बाणान्सिद्वल्योपरि दारुणान् ॥ 6 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the Devi's words, the Dānava was filled with anger and began to shoot dreadful arrows at once on the lion.

अधिका ताउछानीवीक्ष्य गमाने प्रजोगोपाम्न ।

चिच्छेद सायकैस्तीक्ष्मौनैवुड्स्तनाव क्षणात् ॥ 7 ॥

Ambikā, then, ready-handed, seeing the multitude of arrows coming in the sky like serpents, cut them off in a moment to pieces by Her sharp arrows.

अर्थैर्जयान विशिष्टे रक्तबीजं महातुर्मुम् ।

अधिका चारभिनुर्फै: कर्णाङ्टैः शिलाशिति: ॥ 8 ॥

The Devi, then, drawing Her bow, shot arrows sharpened on stone at the great Asura Raktabija.

देवीबाणघतः पायो भूछ्ठीमाय एथोपरि ।

पत्तिते रक्तबीजे तु हाहाकारो महानभूत् ॥ 9 ॥

Then that wicked Demon, thus shot at by the arrows, fell unconscious on the chariot. When he lay thus senseless, a great uproar arose amidst his army and the soldiers began to cry aloud saying "Alas! We all are killed."

सैनिकाशुकुगुः सर्वे हताः स्म इति चावुवन् ।

ततो बुबारवं शुत्वा शुम्भः परमदातगणम् ॥ 10 ॥

उद्योगं सर्वैसैन्यानां दैत्यानामादिदेश है ।

Then Šumbha, the king of the Asuras, hearing the sound of Boombā (a danger cry by hands and mouth) ordered all the Dānavas to be ready for the battle.

यृष्म उवाच

निवान्तु दानावा: सर्वे कांबोजा स्वबलैवृता:॥ 11  ॥

अन्येध्यातिकावः शृगः कालकेवा विशेषतः ।

Then Šumbha said: “Let all Kāmbojas* go to the battle with all their forces; let other powerful heroes, especially the Kālakeyas, too, who are very strong heroes, go up for the battle.

Note: Kamboja, name of a people and their country. They inhabited the Hindukusā mountain which separates the Giljit valley from Balkh, and probably extended upto little. Tibet and Ladakh. The Kālakeyas may be the Afridis.

व्यास उवाच

इत्याजदां बलं सर्वे रुष्मेचन च घतुलीर्वम् ॥ 12 ॥

निर्जीगम मद्यादिष्ट देवी समरमण्डले ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus ordered, all the fourfold army of Sumbha, viz., cavalry, infantry, elephants and chariots, went out, intoxicated for war, to the battle ground where the Devi existed.

तमागतं समालोक्य चधिडका दानवं बलम् ॥ 13 ॥

घण्टनादं चकाराणु भीषणं भयंदं मुड़ुः ।

The Devi Çandikā, seeing the Dānava forces coming near, made at once terrible sounds frequently.

ज्यास्वनं गढ़ुनादं च चकार जगद्विष्का ॥ 14 ॥

नेन नादेन सा जाता काली विस्तारितानना ।

The Ambikā Devi also made the sound with Her bowstring and blew Her conchshell. Kālī, then, shouted aloud opening Her mouth widely.

शुत्वा तिभिनंदो घोर सिंहो देल्याश्र वाहनम् ॥ 15 ॥

ज्ञानं सोउपि बलवाझ्ञनयभ्यमद्धुतम् ।

The powerful Lion, the Devi's Vāhana, hearing the terrible sounds, roared so loudly that the Dānavas were struck with strange terror.

तत्रिनादमुपश्रुच्य दानवा: क्रोधमूर्हिता: ॥ 16 ॥

सर्वे चिश्रिपुरस्त्राणि देर्वीं प्रति महावासतः ।

The powerful Dānavas, then, hearing that sound became impatient with anger and shot arrows after arrows on the Devi.

तस्मिनेवायते युद्धे टारुणे लोमड़र्णे ॥ 17 ॥

बहाद्यीनां च वेदानां गन्धाक्षीष्टिकां ययुः ।

The wonderful horrible battle, then, ensued, causing horripilation and the Śaktis of Brahmā and the other Devas began to come to Caṇdikā Devī.

यस्य देवस्य यदूर्य यथा भूषणवाहनम् ॥ 18 ॥

तादुपूरसदा देख्न: प्रययुः समराजूणे ।

The Devīs, the wives of the several Devas, then went, to the battle-field in their respective forms with ornaments and Vāhanas as generally on such occasions.

बहाणी वराटक्वा साक्षसूकमण्डलुः ॥ 19 ॥

अगगता बहाणा: शनिकन्द्रवाणीति प्रतिश्छिता ।

The Śakti (wife) of Brahmā named Brahmānī, mounting on the back of Her Swan came there with a string of beads and Kamandalu (a wooden waterpot used by ascetics).

वैष्णी गरुकाड़ा शुबुचक्रान्धरा ॥ 20 ॥

पचहस्ता समायात पीतावर्गविष्यिता ।

The Vaṣṇavī with Her yellow robes came there mounted on Garudā (the sacred bird of Viṣṇu, the carrier of Him) with conch, discus, club, and lotus in Her hands.

शाङ्गरी तु वृष्णकाठा निरुणलवधारिणी ॥ 21 ॥

अधिन्द्रप्राय देवी तथार्हिवलया शिका ।

The Devi Śaṅkari, the wife of Śiva, the Auspicious One, arrived on the back of Her Bull. The emblem of half-moon was on Her forehead while in Her hands She held snake, bracelet, and trident (Triśūla) and the sign of fearlessness for Her devotees.

कौभागी शिकाससंरका शफिरूस्ता वरान्ना ॥ 22 ॥

यूद्धकामा समयाता कार्तिकेयस्वलिधेण ।

The beautiful wife of Kártika, Kaumārī Devī,

Book V Chapter XXVIII

looking like Kärtika, came to fight there mounted on a peacock.

इन्द्रगी सुसुवदना सुश्रेतगजाछ्ना ॥ 23 ॥

वज्डस्तास्तिरोगबखा संग्रामिभूगुंची ययी ।

The fairfaced Indrānī, decked with ornaments on Her several limbs, came there to fight, with thunderbolt in Her hand, mounted on the elephant Airāvata.

वाराही सुकराकारा प्रौढ़ोतासना मता ॥ 24 ॥

नारसिंही नृसिंहस्य विष्नती सुर्गं वपुः ।

The Vārāhi Devi looking like a female boar, came also, seated on an elevated seat of departed souls (Preta). The Nārasinhi, resembling Nṛsirīha (the Man-Lion Incarnation) came there.

भाया च महिषाङ्ठा दण्डहन्ता भयप्रदा ॥ 25 ॥

सभ्यातात्य संग्रामे यमस्पा गृचिविस्ता ।

The wife of Yama, looking fearful like Yama arrived there on the battle-field smiling and with staff in Her hand and mounted on the back of a buffalo.

तर्वेय वाक्णी गस्ति: कौवेरी च मदोल्कटा ॥ 26 ॥

एर्वेशियालयाकाया ययु: स्वस्ववर्षैईता ।

Thus the wives of Kubera, Varuna, and other Devas came there with proper forms, Vahanas, ornaments, accompanied by their forces and all excited.

आगतातला: समालोक्य देवी मुदमवाप च ॥ 27 ॥

स्वस्था मुप्रदेरे देवा दैत्याक्ष भयमाययुः ।

ताथि: परिवृतसत्र ऋष्टो लोकशुक: ॥ 28 ॥

समागत्व च संग्रामे चधिडकामित्युवारा है ।

हन्यन्तामुर्ग: शीर्घे देवानां कार्यसिद्धये ॥ 29 ॥

निरुभधे वैद्युभचे च ये चान्ये दानवा: स्थितः।

Seeing them all, the Devi Ambikā became glad; the Devas, too, became peaceful and expressed their great joy the Dānavas were afraid at the sight of them, Śaṅkara, auspicious to all the beings, came there to the battle-field, surrounded by these goddesses and thus said to Capdikā: “Slay quickly all these Asuras, Śumbha, Niśumbha and all other Dānavas to serve the cause of the Devas.

हत्वा देत्यबलं सर्व कृत्वा च निर्भयं जगत् ॥ 30 ॥

स्वानि स्वानि च चिष्याप्नि समापच्छुं जनकः ।

Let all the goddesses destroy the Dānava race and thus free the world from dangers; they may, then, return to their own abodes.

देवा यजभुज: सन्तु ब्राह्मण यजने रतः ॥ 31 ॥

प्राणिनः सन्तु सन्तुतः सर्वे स्वावरजनाः ।

Let the Devas get their shares of sacrifices, let the Brāhmaṇas perform the sacrificial acts, and let all the creatures, moving or not moving, be happy.

गर्भ यान्तु तथोल्पात ईत्थक्ष तथा पुनः ॥ 32 ॥

यना: काले प्रवर्धन्तु कृधिवढ़मूला तथा ।

Let all calamities such as proceed from drought, excessive rain, rats, foreign invasion, locusts and birds, bats, etc., come to an end. Let the clouds bestow rains regularly and let the cultivation yield ample harvests. Note here that rats bring in plague."

व्यास उवाच

एवं बुवति देवेगे शड़हे लोकशड़हे ॥ 33 ॥

चिडकाया: शरीगतु निर्मात शक्तिच्छुता ।

भीषणाउतिषुचछा च शिवास्ताननितिदि ॥ 34 ॥

घोरकाणशय पडास्यमित्युवाच सिमतानना ।

Vyāsa said: O King! When Śaṅkara, the Lord of the gods and Auspicious to all, said thus, a wonderful female ensued out of the body of Candikā, very furious, horrible, with hundreds of jackals surrounding and yelling; then that Śakti of dreadful appearance, said to Śiva, smiling:

देवदेव द्वजायु एवं दैत्यनामियं प्रति ॥ 35 ॥

दूतत्वं कुरु कामारे बृहि सुभ्यं समत्कुलम् ।

निरुभयं च महोत्सवं चवनामम शक्र ॥ ३ ६ ॥

मुक्चा त्रिविष्ट्यं यात यूयं पातालमागुं चै ।

O Deva of the Devas! Go quickly to the lord of the Daityas; do the duty of a messenger for us, O Destroyer of lust! O Śānkara! Tell that haughty Iustful Śumbha and Niśumbha to leave the Heavens and go to Pātāla.

देवा: स्वर्गे सुसंयातु तुगाष्ट् स्वासनं गुभम् ॥ 37 ॥

तपन्ति विविद्वे स्थानं यद्भागांश्र देवता: ।

जीवितेच्छा च युभाकं यदि ययानु महत्ता ॥ 38 ॥

तहिं गच्छत पाताल तरसा यत्र दानवाः ।

Let the Devas reign in the Heavens; Indra go to his own beautiful throne; let all the Devas go to their appropriate places in Heaven and receive their sacrificial offerings duly. And if the Demons desire to live, let them go quickly to the city of Pātāla where other Dānavas are dwelling.

अथवा बतनास्थाय युद्धेच्छा मरणाय चेत ॥ 39 ॥

तदा.उगच्छनु रुवन्यु मधिच्वा: विशितेन वः ।

Else, if they like to die, let them go quickly come to the battle-field and let their flesh be eaten up by Her jackals.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छ्वा वचने तथा शूलपाणिर्वल्यापिताः ॥ 40 ॥

गत्वाउं दैत्यजानं शुभ्मं सदस संस्थितम् ।

Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing Her words, Sūlapāni went quickly to Sumbha, the lord of the Dānavas, seated in the assembly, and said thus:

शिव उवाच

राजन्नृतींहर्मंबायासिपुर्जपत्नकारो हर: ॥ 4 1 ॥

स्वलसकाशमिहायाते हितं कर्तुं त्वाविडलम् ।

त्वल्बा सर्ग तथा घूमिं यूयं गच्छत सलवम् ॥ 4 2 ॥

याताले यत्र प्रक्रादो बलिश्छ खलिनां बरः ।

अथवा मरणेच्छा चेनह्रागच्छत सलवम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

संग्रामे को हनिष्यामि सर्वनिवाहमागुः वै ।

इत्युवाच महात्रजी युष्याकल्याणहतेव ॥ 44 ॥

"O king! I am Hara, the Destroyer of the Asura Tripura; now I have come to you for your good as a messenger of Ambikā Devī. Quit the Heavens and Earth and go quickly to Pātāla where reside the powerful Bali and Prahlāda, or if you like to court Death, come to fight; I will slay you all in a moment. O king! The Great Queen Ambikā Devī has sent me with these instructions for your welfare and information."

व्यास उवाच

इति दैत्यवरान्देवी वाक्यममुत्स्त्रकिंपम् ।

हितकृष्णव्यवित्या स प्रत्यवातश्छ शूलभृत् ॥ 45 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus conveying the nectar-like, beneficial words of the Devi to the chief Daityas, Śiva, the Holder of the trident, returned to his own place.

यवाउसौ प्रेरितः शम्भूर्तन्चे दानवान्यप्रति ।

शिववृतीति विद्यताना जाता विभुवनेत्रखले ॥ 46 ॥

The Śakti that sent Śambhu as a messenger to the Dānavas is known in three worlds as Śiva Dūti. तेजी क्षुवा वचो देखाः शकुंगेनें तु उक्रमः ।

युद्धाय निर्वयुः शीर्धे दंशिताः शाखणायाः ॥ 47 ॥

The Daityas, thus hearing the rigorous words of the Devi, put on their coats of armour and taking their bows and arrows quickly went out to fight.

ततसा रणागान्य चधिछकां ग्रात दानावाः ।

निजन्धुघ शरैसतीधैः: कर्णकुँधै: शिलापिति: ॥ 48 ॥

They came with great force to the battle field, stretched their bows to their ears and shot piercing arrows, sharpened on stone and tipped with iron, at the Caṇḍikā Devi.

कालिकामुपलितन्तून गदाशक्तिविद्यारितान् ।

कुर्वीतुं व्यचरत्त्र भक्षयन्ती च दान्यान् ॥ 49 ॥

The Kālika Devi, too began to strike some with the trident, some with Śakti weapons, and some with clubs and rent them asunder and devoured them all, and began to roam in the field.

कमपडतुलनाधेपनताणान् महावलान् ।

ब्रह्माणीं चाकोत्तित्र दानवान्यमरांगणे ॥ ५० ॥

Brahmānī began to pour water from Her Kamandalu on the powerful Dānavas in the battlefield and thus destroyed them.

माहेश्वी वृबाहस्त दिशूलेनारितरंस्ता ।

जशन दानवासंख्ये पातयामास भूतते ॥ ५१ ॥

Māheśvari, mounting on Her Bull gave violent blows by Her trident and thus lay them dead on the ground.

वैथावी चक्रपातेन गदाधातेन दानवान् ।

गतप्राणांशकागयु चोतमांगविवर्जित् ॥ 52 ॥

Book V Chapter XXIX

Vaisņavi, with the blow of Her club, took away the lives of many Daityas and striking them with Her Discus cut off the heads of several others.

पैरीविप्रभूरोग पातयामास भूतले ।

रेशालकरायातपीक्षितान्दैत्यपुगवान् ॥ 53 ॥

Indrānī hurled Her thunderbolt on the chief Dānavas, already struck by the feet of the elephant and lay them dead on the field.

वाराष्टीतुपड्योतेन दंद्याप्रापतेनेच च ।

जयान कोधयंसुक्ता शतशो देह्वदावन्त्य ॥ 54 ॥

Vārāhi, angrily killed thousands of Daityas with her sharp teeth and trunk.

तारसिंही नखैसौदीर्वेरितान्दैत्यपुंगवान् ।

प्रश्यन्ती चचाराजी ननाद च मुडुबुईः ॥ 55 ॥

Nārasinhi tore the strongest Dānavas with the sharp nails and, devouring them, walked to and fro and made dreadful sounds.

शिवदूतीं सगुहासं पातयामास भूतले ।

नोंख्यादाय वाणुका कालिका च त्वर्यात्मा ॥ 56 ॥

Śiva Dūti began to laugh hoarsely and laid the Dānavas flat on the field, when they were atonce devoured by Kalikā and Candikā.

शिखसंस्या च कोमी काणंहुःः शिलाशिनः।

निज्ञान रंगे शत्रुदेवानां च हितार वे ॥ 57 ॥

Kaumārī, seated on a peacock, by drawing the bowstring to Her ears hurled arrows sharpened on stone on the enemies and killed them to serve the cause of the gods.

वाश्णीपाशसम्बद्धान्दैत्यान्समयमस्तके ।

पातयामास तत्पृष्टे भूर्द्धितानातवेतनान् ॥ 58 ॥

एवं मातृगणेनाजातिर्वीर्यपराक्रमम् ।

मदितं दानवं सैन्यं पलायनपरं हृषभूत् ॥ 59 ॥

Vārṇuī tied down the Dānavas by Her Pāśa weapons in a face to face fighting; thus they lay down senseless on the ground. O King! Thus the Mātrkās, the goddesses, crushed the forces. Then the other powerful soldiers fled away terrified.

बुंबारबस्तु सुमहानभूतत्र बल्णवे ।

पुष्पबिहं तदा देवाश्रकुंदेव्या गणेशपरि ॥ 60 ॥

The “Boombā” danger cry rose then loudly; on the other hand, the Devas began to shower flowers on the Devís.

तच्छ्वा निवन्दे घोरं जयगब्द च दानावाः ।

रक्त्वीजशुकोपाणु इव्हा दैत्यान्यतायितान् ॥ 61 ॥

Hearing the distressful agonies of the Asuras and the shouts of victory of the Devas, Raktabīja, the chief of the Dānavas became very angry.

गर्जमान्तिस्वा देेवान्बीक्ष्व दैत्यो महाकलः ।

त्क्तीजसु तेजस्वी राणाभ्याययी ताद ॥ 6 2 ॥

Seeing specially the Dānavas flying away and the Devas shouting, that powerful Demon came hurriedly to the battle-field in anger.

सावुधी रक्षसिंहिः: कुर्वेक्राणास्वधदुतम् ।

उजाजगाम तदा देर्वीं क्रोधरनैक्षणीघातः ॥ 63 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे

पद्रभकन्देगेडणिविंगोअधाय: 11 28 11

Then with eyes reddened with anger, and with various weapons came before the Devi, Raktabija mounting on a chariot, and making sounds unusual with his bowstring.

Here ends the Twenty-eighth Chapter of the Fifth

Book on the description of the fighting of the

goddesses in Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam the Mahā

Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter XXIX

