CHAPTER XV

On the Motion of the Sun

श्रीनारायण खाच

अतः परं प्रवक्ष्यामि भानोर्भिमनुत्तमम्।

शीर्भमंदादिशतिभिश्रबिधियं गमनं रेवे: ॥ १  ॥

Nārāyana said: O Nārada! I will now describe the motion of the Sun. Hear. It is of three kinds; Sīghra (perihelionic), Manda (Aphelionic), (and even).

सर्वेग्रहाणां जीघवे स्थानानि सुरस्तम।

स्थानं जगद्रं मध्यं तथैवतनुस्तम् ॥ 2 ॥

वैश्रानर दक्षिणाने निर्दिष्टिमिति तचलतः ।

अंश्री कृत्तिका याय्या नागरीकीशीत शक्तिद्धि ॥ 3 ॥

O Surasattama! Every planet has three positions. The name of the Madhyagati position is Jāradgava, the name of the northern position is Airāvata; and the name of the southern position is Vaiśvānara. The asterisms Aśvini Kṛtikā and Bharaṇi are known by the term Nāgavīthī.

रोहिण्यात्रों मृगारीगे गरजीव्यधिपरीयते ।

पृष्यास्लेला तनादित्या वीधी चैरावती स्मृता ॥ ४ ॥

एतास्तु वीथयस्तित्व उत्तो मार्ग उच्छते ।

तथा हे चापि फल्ग-यी मदा चौवार्थपी मता ॥ 5 ॥

Rohinī, Ärdrā, and Mrgasirā are named Gaja Vithī; Pusyā, and Punarvasu are named Airavativīthī. The three Vithis, above-mentioned are called Uttara Mārga. Pūrvaphālgunī, Uttara Phālgunī and Maghā are named Ārsābhi Vithī.

हस्ताक्षात तथा स्वाती गोवीक्षीति तु शक्तिता ।

जेश्ठा विशालातुनार्था वीधी जारद्वी मता ॥ 6 ॥

एतातु वीधयस्तसे मध्यमो मार्ग उच्छते ।

भूलायाबोतसाराबा अजवीध्यिभग्रवित्ता ॥ 7 ॥

श्रवणं च धयिष्ठ च मार्गे सतिभ्य तथा ।

वैश्यानी भाउपदे रेवती चैव कीर्तिता ॥ 8 ॥

Hastā, Citrā and Svātī are called Govīthī; Jyesthā, Viśākhā and Anurādhā are named Jāradgavī Vīthī. These three Vīthis are named Madhyamā Mārga. Mūlā, Purvāsādhā, Uttarāsādhā are termed Ajavīthī Šravaṇā, Dhanisṭhā and Śatabhisā are termed Mrga Vīthī. Uttara bhādrapadā, Pūrvabhādrapadā, and Revatī and called Vaiśvānārīvīthī.

एतासु वीथवस्तको दक्षिणो मार्ग उच्छते ।

उत्तरायणासाठ युगाङ्गतर्निबद्धोः ॥ 9 ॥

कर्षणं पाशयोर्विषद्ध्वयो रोहणं स्मृतः ।

तदाध्यन्तरागमरडलाद्धस्य तर्पेभेत् ॥ 10 ॥

These three Vithis (paths) are called Dakṣiṇamāgra. During the Uttarāyaṇa time, as the Dhruva attracts the rope of air from both the sides of the Yuga, orbit (or axis), the chariot of the Sun ascends, (i.e. is drawn up by the rope).

मांघं दिवसयुद्धिक उपाये सुरसतम ।

राजिकुमास्य भवति सौम्यायनक्रमो हायम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Book VIII Chapter XV

Thus when the Sun enters within the sphere, the motion of the chariot becomes slower and the day is lengthened and the night is shortened. O Sura Sattama! Know this to be the course of the path of the Sun.

दक्षिणायनके पाशे प्रेरणाद्वरेहाणम् ।

बहिमईतवलेवेने गतिरीक्ष्ये तदा भवेत् ॥ १२ ॥

तदा दिनाल्पता रात्रिवृष्टिक्ष प्रतिकीर्तिता ।

वैयुवे पाशसामातु सामावस्थानते रचेः ॥ १३ ॥

When the cord draws towards the south, the Chariot descends and as the Sun then comes out of the sphere, the motion becomes quick. The day shortens and the night is lenghtened. Again when the cord is neither tightened nor is it slackened, rather its motion is exactly midway, the Sun also remains in a medium position and his Chariot enters within a sphere of equilibrium and the day and night become equal.

मध्यमपडलेवोक्षा साम्य राशिदिवादिके ।

आक्यधेते यदा तौ तु ध्रुवेण समाधिचित्ति ॥ १ ४ ॥

तद्यभ्यन्ततः सूर्यों घ्रमते मण्डलानि च ।

ध्रुवेण मुच्यमानेप नुना राशिव्युगेन तु ॥ १ ५ ॥

When the cord of air, in a state of equilibrium is attacked by the Polar Star, then it is that the Sun and the Solar system revolves; and when the Polar Star slackens its attraction over the cord of air, the Sun coming out of the middle sphere, revolves; and the Solar system also revolves.

तथैव बाहुत: सूर्यं घमने मण्डलानि च ।

तस्मिन्मौरे पूर्वंभागे पुर्वैन्ही देहधारिका ॥ १ ६ ॥

दिभेगे वै संवयमी नाम याय्मा महापुरी ।

पश्रासित्ञोचनी नाम वाक्णी वे महापुरी ॥ १७ ॥

On the east of Meru is established the city of Indra and the Devas dwell there. It is called therefore Devadhānikā. On the south of the Meru, is the famous city of Yama, the God of Death, named Samyamanī. On the west of Meru, is the great city of Varuṇa, named Nimlocanī.

तदुत्ते पुरी सीमा प्रोक्ता नाम विभावारी ।

ऐस्पूर्वा रेवेः प्रोक्त उदयो ब्रह्माविद्धिः ॥ 18 ॥

संयमनां च मध्याढ़े निरलोचनां निर्मिलनम् ।

विभाववाँ निरीशिः स्वास्तिमांगोः सुगुपजितः ॥ 19 ॥

On the north of Meru is the city of the Moon, named Vibhāvari. O Nārada! The Brahmapāvādis say that the Sun first rises in the city of Indra. At noon the Sun goes to Samyamani; at evening the Su goes to Nilmocani and He is said to set. In the night the Sun remains in Vibhāvari.

प्रवृत्तोक्ष निवितानि भृतानां तानि सर्वेश: ।

मोरोक्षुर्दिंश भानो: कीतितानि मया मुने ॥ 20 ॥

मेरुस्थानां सदा मध्यं गत एव विभागि हि ।

सद्यं गच्छद्धिषणेन करोति स्वर्णपर्वतम् ॥ 21 ॥

O Muni! The going of the Sun round Meru is the cause of all the beings getting themselves engaged in their respective duties. The inhabitants of their Meru see the Sun always in the central position. The Sun moves on, eastwards towards the stars, keeping the Meru to his left; but if the Zodiac betaken into account, it would appear that the Meru is left towards the south of the Sun. The rising and the setting of the Sun are always considered in front of Him.

उदयास्तमये चैव सर्वकालं तु स्मयुखे ।

दिगास्त्यरणेषागु तथा सुरर्षे विविगासु च ॥ 22 ॥

यैर्वंत्र दृष्यते भार्यात्म तेभ्यादूय: स्मृत: ।

तिरोपारं च चयेति तर्वास्तमनं रवे: ॥ 23 ॥

O Devarsj! Every point, every quarter, every person, seeing the Sun says that the Sun has risen there: again where he becomes invisible, He is considered to set there. The Sun always exists. so there is no rising nor setting for Him. It is His appearance and disappearance that make men say that the Sun rises or sets.

नैवास्तमानमक्स्य नोदय: सर्वदा सतः ।

उदयास्तमानाखं हि दर्जान्दर्शनं रेवः ॥ 24 ॥

गक्राटीनीं पुरे तिहन्यूगलेष पुरुवयम् ।

विकर्णीं ही विकर्णियस्तीन्कोणादे पुरे तथा ॥ 25 ॥

When the Sun is in the Indra's city, He illumines the three cities, those of Indra, Yama, and the Moon and illumines the north-east and east-west corners.

Šrumaddevibhāgavatam

So when He rests in the city of Fire, he illuminens north-east, east-west, and south-west, the three corners, and at the same time the cities of Indra and Yama; and so on for the other cities and corners.

सर्वेधां द्वीपवर्धाणां मेकरूतरतः स्थितः ।

थैरत्र इयवते भानु: सेव प्रधारिति चोच्चते ॥ २६ ॥

तद्वामभातो मेक्रवर्तेति विवर्गपं: ।

यदि देख्ना: प्रचलते घटिका दारणंचिभ: ॥ 27 ॥

O Nārada! The Mount Meru is situated towards the north of all the Dvipas and Varsas. So whenever any person sees the Sun rise he calls that side "east." But Meru exists towards the left of the Sun; so it is said. If the Sun travels in 15 (fifteen)

Ghatikās, the distance from Indrapuri to Yamapurī.

वायायां त्वा योजनानां सपारं कोटियुभयम् ।

साध्योद्वारणलाशणि पंचनेत्रसहकवम् ॥ 28 ॥

प्रक्रमाति सहस्रौलु: कालमागंग्रदर्गक: ।

एवं ततो वाकणी च सीयामौत्री सहस्वद्।। 29 ॥

He is said to travel within that time a distance equal to  \( 2\frac{1}{4} \)  Kotis,  \( 12\frac{1}{2} \)  lakhs and 25000 Yojanas (22695000 Yojanas). The thousand-eyed and thousand-rayed Sun God is the Manifester of Time. He travels in the aforesaid way the cities of Varuna, Candra and Indra respectively.

पर्वेति कालचकाठमा युभणीः कालचुद्धये ।

तथा चान्ये ग्रहाः सोमादयो वे दिविचारणि: ॥ 30 ॥

नक्षेः: सह चोद्यांत सह चारतं ब्रजति ते ।

एवं युद्धैनि रथो भानोर्धशताप्रिकम् ॥ 31 ॥

He is diadem of the Svarloka; and the Zodiac is his Atman. He travels thus, to mark off time to all persons. O Nārada! The Moon and the other planets and stars rise and set in the aforesaid manner. Thus the powerful chariot of the Sun travels in a Muhūrta 142,00000 Yojanas.

योजनानां चतुर्विश्ललक्षाणि भ्रमति प्रभुः ।

त्रयीमयघर्तूरिद्धू पूरीषु च समीगणत् ॥ ३२ ॥

प्रवहाख्यासदा कालचकं पर्पेति भानुम् ।

यय्य चकं राय्यकैं क्राद्रगरं त्रिनाफिमम् ॥ ३ ३ ॥

षणेमिका कवयस्तच्च च वत्सराक्तकामूचिरे ।

मेकमूर्पनि तत्याश्रो मानसोतपरवैते ॥ ३ ४ ॥

By the force of Pravaha Vāyu (air), the Sun God, the Incarnate of the Vedas travels round the cities, the Zodiac, in one Samvatsara (year). The wheel of the Sun's Chariot is one year; twelve months are the spokes; three Cāturnāsyas are the nave and the six seasons are the outer ring or circumference of the wheel. The learned men call this chariot as the Samvatsara (one year). The axis or axle points to the Meru on one side and to Mānasottara mountain on the other. The end or circumference of the wheel marks off other divisions of the time as Kalā, Kāṣṭhā, Muhūrta, Yāma, Parahara, day and night, and fortnights.

क्रमेतरविषायो यः प्रोत तर यशोकम् ।

तैलकाकाय-जेण चकसायां परिपम्ति ॥ 35 ॥

मानसोस्तनान्हि गिरी पर्यैति चोज्यान् ।

तत्पिऋत्रे कृतं मूलं द्वितीयोऊंधे घुके कतः ॥ 36 ॥

तुयामानेन तैलस्य यंत्राक्षवदितीरितः ।

कृतोपरितनो भाग: सूर्येय जगतापतेः ॥ 37 ॥

The wheel is fixed on the nave. The Sun goes on this wheel, like an oilman's on his oil-machine, round and round the Mānasottara mountain. The eastern side of the wheel is on that axis and the other part is fixed on the Pole Star. The dimension of the first axis is (15750000 Yojanas). The second axis measures one-fourth of the above (3937500 Yojanas). It resembles the axis of an oil-machine. The upper side of that is considered to belong to the Sun.

रथनीडस्तु घट्जिशललक्षयोजनमायतः ।

ततनुंभागतः सोउरं परिणाह्न कार्तिकतः ॥ 38 ॥

तावानकर्णस्थयात्र युगस्तिम्बन्हाय: शृणः ।

सप्तच्छोर्टीभधानाश्र सूगमुतेन योजिताः ॥ 39 ॥

वहाँत देवमादित्यं लोकानां सुखहतेवे ।

पुस्तात्सवितु: सुतो3रण: पश्ञापियोजितः ॥ 40 ॥

The seat of the Sun on his chariot measures 36 Lakh Yojanas wide. The Yuga measures in length one-fourth of the above dimensions, that of his seat.

Book VIII Chapter XVI

The Chariot is moved by seven horses, consisting of the seven Chandas, Gāyatri, etc., driven by Aruna.

सैत्ये कर्मणि संयुक्तो वर्तैत गरुकाद्वग्रतः ।

तथैव बालसिद्धल्याखा ऋषधोगुवर्षकाः ॥ 4 1 ॥

प्रमाणेन परिख्याताः: बहिसाहरसंख्याकाः।

सुवन्न पुतः: सूर्व सूत्त्वावदै: सुशोभपे: ॥ 4 2 ॥

The horses carry the Sun for the happiness of all. Though the charioteer sits in front of the Sun, his face is turned towards the west. He does his work as a charioteer in that state. Sixty thousand Vālakhilya Rṣis, of the size of a thumb, chant the sweet Vedic hymns before Him.

तथा चान्ये च ऋषयो नयर्धा असमरोगतः ।

ग्रामपयो यातुधानाङ्ग देवाः सर्वे पोक्षायम् ॥ 43 ॥

एकैकशः सप्त सप्त मासि मासि विरोधनम् ।

सार्योलक्षोतरं कोटिनवकं भूमिमण्डलम् ॥ 44 ॥

द्विसह्वं योजनानां स गव्य्वतुतरं क्षणात् ।

पर्यति देवदेवेगो विश्वव्यापी नित्ततम् ॥ 45 ॥

इति शीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणोउभरकचे

पडवरगोउध्याः ॥ 46 ॥ 

Other Rsis, Apsarās, Uragas, Grāmaṇīs, Rāksasas, and all the Devas, each divided in groups of seven, worship every month that highly lustrous Sun-god. The earth measures 90152000 Krośa Yuga Yojanas. (1 Krośa  \( \frac{1}{4} \)  Yojana) The Sun passes over this distance in a moment. He does not take rest in his this work even for a day; no, not even for a moment.

Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the motion of the Sun in the Mahāpurānam, Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VIII Chapter XVI

