[Ch 21 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyana said: O Devarsi! Sanātana, the son of Brahmā, recites thus in the assembly of the Devas, the glories of the Bhagavān Ananta Deva, and worships Him, thus: How can one of ordinary sight and understanding grasp the real nature of Brahma, Whose mere Glance enables the Prakṛti work Her Guṇas in the Creation, Preservation and Destruction of this Universe! Him Whose nature has no beginning nor end; Who though One, has created all this Prapañca (the universe of five elements) as a covering to the Ātman (the True Self).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Devarṣi! Sanātana, the son of Brahmā, recites thus in the assembly of the Devas, the glories of the Bhagavān Ananta Deva, and worships Him, thus :-- How can one of ordinary sight and understanding grasp the real nature of Brahmā, Whose mere Glance enables the Prakriti work Her Guṇas in the Creation, Preservation and Destruction of this Universe! Him Whose nature has no beginning nor end; Who though One, has created all this Prapañca (the universe of five elements) as a covering to the Ātman (the True Self).

[Ch 21 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He has made the Sat and Asat, out of his infinite compassion, this universe, full of cause and effects, visible in His one and only one Suddha Sattva nature where even the very powerful lion is imitating his Lilā (Pastime), void of all defects, to bring under His control the minds of His own kinsmen. Note: This Ananta Deva is the Ruling Principle in the Fourth Dimensional Space.)
NEW CORR ENG ──► He has made the Sat and Asat, out of his infinite compassion, this universe, full of cause and effect, visible in His One and only one Śuddha Sattva nature where even the very powerful lion is imitating his Leelā (Pastime), void of all defects, to bring under His control the minds of His own kinsmen. (Note :-- This Ananta Deva is the Ruling Principle in the Fourth Dimensional Space.)

[Ch 21 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► To Whom else, then, the persons, desirous of Moksa, will take refuge, the mere hearing or reciting Whose Name, in a fallen or a distressed condition, or merely in jest, takes away instantly all the sins! He is upholding the earth with the mountains, oceans, rivers and all the beings as if an atom on his thousand heads. He is infinite. His power knows no decrease in any time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► To Whom else, then, the persons, desirous of Mokṣa, will take refuge, the mere hearing or reciting Whose Name, in a fallen or a distressed condition, or merely in jest, takes away instantly all the sins! He is upholding the earth with the mountains, oceans, rivers and all the beings as if an atom on his thousand heads. He is infinite. His power knows no decrease in any time.

[Ch 21 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No one can describe his actions even if one had thousand tongues to speak. He is an infinite strength, of the endless high qualities and of unlimited understanding. Thus staying at the bottom of the earth, the Bhagavān Ananta Deva is upholding with ease this earth for her protection, unaided and independent.
NEW CORR ENG ──► No one can describe his actions even if one had thousand tongues to speak. He is of an infinite strength, of the endless high qualities and of unlimited understanding. Thus staying at the bottom of the earth, the Bhagavān Ananta Deva is upholding with ease this earth for her protection, unaided and independent.

[Ch 21 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! The people get the fruits of their actions and desires as they want and as they have followed the paths laid down in the Śāstras and become according kings, men, deer or birds or other creatures in other states.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! The people get the fruits of their actions and desires as they want and as they have followed the paths laid down in the Śāstras and become accordingly kings, men, deer or birds or other creatures in other states.

[Ch 21 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Nārada! This I have described, as you questioned me before, the various and dissimilar fruits of various actions, done according to the dictates of the Dharma and the Śāstras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Nārada! This I have described, as you questioned me before, the various and dissimilar fruits of various actions, done according to the dictates of the Dharma and the Śāstras.

[Ch 21 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada said: O Bhagavan! Kindly describe to me now why has the Bhagavān created so many diversities, when the Karmas, done by the Jivas, are the same.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- “O Bhagavān! Kindly describe to me now why has the Bhagavān created so many diversities, when the Karmas, done by the Jīvas, are the same.”

[Ch 21 Verse 11-13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyana said: O Narada! So many different states arise because the Śraddhas of the docers are so different. The fruits differ because the Śraddhas vary, some being Sättvik, some Rājasik and some Tāmasik. If the Śraddhā be Sättvik, happiness comes always; if it be Rājasik, incessant pain and misery is the result; if it be Tāmasik, misery comes and the loss of the knowledge of good or bad is the result.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārayaṇa said :-- O Nārada! So many different states arise because the Śraddhās of the doers are so very different. The fruits differ because the Śraddhās vary, some being Sāttvik, some Rājasik and some Tāmasik. If the Śraddhā be Sāttvik, happiness comes always; if it be Rājasik, incessant pain and misery is the result; if it be Tāmasik, misery comes and the loss of the knowledge of good or bad

[Ch 21 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus the fruits differ as the Śraddhā varies. O Best of Dvijas! Thousands and thousands of states occur to a man as the result of their Karmas, done under the influence of the beginningless Avidyā (Nescience), O Dvijottama! I will now deal in detail with their varieties; hear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the fruits differ as the Śraddhā varies. O Best of Dvījas! Thousands and thousands of states occur to a man as the result of their Karmas, done under the influence of the beginningless Avidyā (Nescience). O Dvījottama! I will now deal in detail with their varieties; hear.

[Ch 21 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Behind this Triloki, below this earth and over the Atala, the Pitrs named Agnisvāttas and other forefathers live. Those Pitrs stay there, and, practising deep Samādhis, they offer always, to their best, blessing to their own Gotra (families) respectively.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Behind this Triloki, below this earth and over the Atala, the Pitris named Agniṣvāttas and other forefathers live. Those Pitris stay there, and, practising deep Samādhis, they offer always, to their best blessings to their own Gotra (families) respectively.

[Ch 21 Verse 18-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There Yama, the God of the Pitts gives punishment to the dead brought there by His messengers according to their Karmas and faults. By the command of the Bhagavān, the Yama, surrounded by his own Ganaş (persons), judges and does full justice according to the Karmas that they had done and the sins they and had committed He sends always those of his messengers who obey his order and know the Tattva of Dharma, and who are posted to their respective duties to carry out what He commands.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There Yama, the God of the Pitris gives punishment to the dead brought there by His messengers according to their Karmas and faults. By the command of the Bhagavān, the Yama, surrounded by his own Gaṇas (persons), judges and does full justice according to the Karmas that they had done and the sins they had committed. He sends always those of his messengers who obey his order and know the Tattva of Dharma, and who are posted to their respective duties to carry out what He commands.

[Ch 21 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The writers of the Śāstras describe twenty-one Narakas of hells; others say there are twenty-eight hells. Now hear their names: Tāmisra, Andha
NEW CORR ENG ──► The writers of the Śāstras describe twenty-one Narakas or hells; others say there are twenty-eight hells. Now hear their names :-- Tāmisra, Andha

[Ch 21 Verse 22-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Tāmisra, Raurava, Mahāraurava, Kumbhīpāka, Kālasūtra, Asipatrakānana, Śūkaramukha, Andhakūpa, Kṛmibhojana, Taptamūrti, Samdamśa, Vajrakaṇṭaka, Śālmalī, Vaitaranī, Pūyoda, Prāṇarodha, Viśasanam, Lālābhakṣa, Śarameyādana, Avīci, Aapahpāna, Kṣārakardama, Raksogana, Sambhoja, Śūlaprota, Dandaśūka, Avatārodha, Paryāvartanaka, and Sūcimukha. These are the twenty-eight Narakas or hells. Note: These are 29.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Tāmisra, Raurava, Mahāraurava, Kumbhīpāka, Kālasūtra, Asipatrakānana, Śūkaramukha, Andhakūpa, Krimibhojana, Taptamūrti, Samdaṃśa, Vajrakaṇṭaka, Śālmalī, Vaitaraṇī, Pūyoda, Prāṇarodha, Viśasana, Lālābhakṣa, Sārameyādana, Avīci, Apahpāna, Kṣārakardama, Rakṣogaṇa, Sambhoja, Śūlaprota, Dandaśūka, Avaṭārodha, Paryāvartanaka, and Sūcimukha. These are the twenty-eight Narakas or hells. (N.B. These are 29).

[Ch 21 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► These hells are very tormenting. O Son of Brahma! The embodied beings (jīvas) suffer these according to their own Karmas respectively. Here ends the Twenty-first Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narrative of hells in the Mahā Purānam, Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa. Śrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► These hells are very tormenting. O Son of Brahmā! The embodied beings (jīvas) suffer these according to their own Karmas respectively. Here ends the Twenty-first Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narrative of hells in the Mahā Purāṇam, Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
