CHAPTER XXI

On the Narrative of Hells

नारायण उवाच

तत्यानुभावं भयावनबढ़ापुरः सनातनः ।

सभायां बढ़ावेदस्य गाययान उपासते ॥ 1 ॥

उत्पत्तिश्वतिलयहेतावो.उस्य कल्याः

सत्वाएा: प्रकृतिणुण यदीक्षयासस्न ।

यदूरं धुवमकृतं यदेकनाभात्मज्ञानाधात्

कथमूद वेद तस्य वर्धे ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Devarsi! Sanātana, the son of Brahmā, recites thus in the assembly of the Devas, the glories of the Bhagavān Ananta Deva, and

worships Him, thus: How can one of ordinary sight and understanding grasp the real nature of Brahma, Whose mere Glance enables the Prakṛti work Her Guṇas in the Creation, Preservation and Destruction of this Universe! Him Whose nature has no beginning nor end; Who though One, has created all this Prapañca (the universe of five elements) as a covering to the Ātman (the True Self).

भूर्ति नः पुकृषया बधार सचं

संगुखं सदसिद्धं विषाति चर ।

वल्लीलो भृगपतितादेउनवद्यामातुं

स्वजनमांस्वयुरावैयींः ॥३ ॥

He has made the Sat and Asat, out of his infinite compassion, this universe, full of cause and effects, visible in His one and only one Suddha Sattva nature where even the very powerful lion is imitating his Lilā (Pastime), void of all defects, to bring under His control the minds of His own kinsmen.

Note: This Ananta Deva is the Ruling Principle in the Fourth Dimensional Space.)

यत्राम श्रुतमनुकीर्तेयदकस्मात्तों

वा यदि पतितः प्रलभ्पनात् ।

हैल्यईः सपरि नृणामोषमन्यं कं

गेषाद्वत आश्येन्मुख्धुः ॥ 4 ॥

To Whom else, then, the persons, desirous of Moksa, will take refuge, the mere hearing or reciting Whose Name, in a fallen or a distressed condition, or merely in jest, takes away instantly all the sins! He is upholding the earth with the mountains, oceans, rivers and all the beings as if an atom on his thousand heads. He is infinite. His power knows no decrease in any time.

मूर्ध-त्यर्धितमणुललसहच मूर्धनीं

भूगोल सार्वसित्सिमुपुसत्तच् ।

आनंल्यादनसितिकमस्य पूंभः

को वीयायिद्विगायोलसहचजिद्धः ॥ 5 ॥

एवं प्रभावो भगवान्नोतो दुर्तवीयोंर्भगुणानुभावः ।

मूले सयााः स्थित आत्मतंजो यो

लीलाया क्या स्थितये विभर्नि ॥ 6 ॥

No one can describe his actions even if one had thousand tongues to speak. He is an infinite strength, of the endless high qualities and of unlimited understanding. Thus staying at the bottom of the earth, the Bhagavān Ananta Deva is upholding with ease this earth for her protection, unaided and independent.

एता होदेह तु नृभितायो भूतिसत्तम ।

गन्त्या बहुगो यद्धधाकर्मविनिर्मिता: ॥ 7 ॥

यथोपदेशं च कामास्टा कामयमानकैः ।

एतावतीई गजेन्द्र मनुष्यमृगविष्ठु ॥ 8 ॥

O Muni! The people get the fruits of their actions and desires as they want and as they have followed the paths laid down in the Śāstras and become according kings, men, deer or birds or other creatures in other states.

विषयाकानयः प्रोक्ता धर्मस्य वर्गगातस्य ।

उच्चावचा विसर्गुण यद्धारूंन निजोधत ॥ 9 ॥

O Nārada! This I have described, as you questioned me before, the various and dissimilar fruits of various actions, done according to the dictates of the Dharma and the Śāstras.

नाद उवाच

विधिच्छमेतल्लोकस्य कर्धं भयाता कृतम् ।

समानले कर्माणं च तसे बृहि स ययातयम् ॥ 10 ॥

Nārada said: O Bhagavan! Kindly describe to me now why has the Bhagavān created so many diversities, when the Karmas, done by the Jivas, are the same.

नारायण उवाच

कर्तुः श्रद्धावगादेव गतयो5पि पृथविकायः ।

त्रिगुणतावास्ता तासां फलं विस्तर्गे सिक्ध ॥ १ १ ॥

सात्चिक्या श्रद्धवा कर्तुः सुख्जलं जायते सवा ।

दुःखित्वं च तथा कर्तुं राजस्या श्रद्धया भवेत् ॥ 12 ॥

दुःखित्वं चैव मुकूलं तामस्या श्रद्धयोदितम् ।

तातत्पथानु श्रद्धानां फलवैधित्यमीरितम् ॥ 13 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Narada! So many different states arise because the Śraddhas of the docers are so different. The fruits differ because the Śraddhas

Book VIII Chapter XXI

vary, some being Sättvik, some Rājasik and some Tāmasik. If the Śraddhā be Sättvik, happiness comes always; if it be Rājasik, incessant pain and misery is the result; if it be Tāmasik, misery comes and the loss of the knowledge of good or bad is the result.

अनादिषिधास्थितिकर्मणं परिणामातः ।

सहस्वग: प्रवृत्तासु गतयो डितपुछ्न ॥ १४ ॥

तद्द्वान्यर्धियाथिम प्रायुर्धेण डिजोतम ।

त्रिज्ञान्या अन्तराते दक्षिणस्यां दिषिणे चै ॥ १५ ॥

Thus the fruits differ as the Śraddhā varies. O Best of Dvijas! Thousands and thousands of states occur to a man as the result of their Karmas, done under the influence of the beginningless Avidyā (Nescience), O Dvijottama! I will now deal in detail with their varieties; hear.

प्रेभेध्यस्तादुपरि त्वलत्यच च नारद ।

अनिव्याना: चितृगण वर्तैने चित्रश्र  ॥ १६ ॥

वर्सिते यस्यां स्त्रीवानां गोजाणां परमाशिषः ।

सत्य: समाधिना शीधं त्वालासाना: पेणे वे ॥ १७ ॥

Behind this Triloki, below this earth and over the Atala, the Pitrs named Agnisvāttas and other forefathers live. Those Pitrs stay there, and, practising deep Samādhis, they offer always, to their best, blessing to their own Gotra (families) respectively.

विद्यार्जोषि भगवान्संपरेतेषु जंतुष ।

विवयं प्राप्तिचेधु स्वकौरिः पुर्वरिंहि ॥ १ ८ ॥

सगणो भगवतृभोक्तापरो दमधारकः ।

यथाकर्म यथादोर्ष विद्याति विद्यारूद् ॥ १९ ॥

स्वानाणाध्यंतचज्ञान्विनाज्ञावर्तिकान् ।

सदा प्रेयति प्राजो यथादेशिनीयोजितान् ॥ २० ॥

There Yama, the God of the Pitts gives punishment to the dead brought there by His messengers according to their Karmas and faults. By the command of the Bhagavān, the Yama, surrounded by his own Ganaş (persons), judges and does full justice according to the Karmas that they had done and the sins they and had committed He sends always those of his

messengers who obey his order and know the Tattva of Dharma, and who are posted to their respective duties to carry out what He commands.

नरकानेकर्शित्या संख्या वर्णयन्ति हि ।

अष्टार्थिश्रितान्कैरितान्ननुकमतो बुधे ॥ 21 ॥

The writers of the Śāstras describe twenty-one Narakas of hells; others say there are twenty-eight hells. Now hear their names: Tāmisra, Andha

तामिस अंधातामिसो रैराउंपि तृतीयकः ।

महारीवनामा च कृष्मीपाकोउपरे मतः ॥ 22 ॥

कालमूत्र तथा चात्सिपातरण्यमुदाह्म ।

सुक्रस्य मूर्डं चधिकूपोउध कृमिभोजनः ॥ 23 ॥

संदंशस्तनमूर्तिंश बझकंटक एव च ।

शाल्यली जाथ देवर्वें नाना वैतरणी तथा ॥ 24 ॥

पूयोदः प्राणायोध्छु तथा विशसनं मतम् ।

लालाभक्षः सारमेवादनमुक्तमतः परम् ॥ 25 ॥

अवीचित्ययः पानं क्षारकर्दम एव च ।

रक्षोगणाख्यसंपोजः शूलप्रोतेप्यतः परम् ॥ 26 ॥

दंद्यूकोअवदायोधः पर्वावर्तनंकः परम् ।

सुचीमुख्यमिति प्रोक्ता अष्टार्थिशित्नारकाः ॥ 27 ॥

Tāmisra, Raurava, Mahāraurava, Kumbhīpāka, Kālasūtra, Asipatrakānana, Śūkaramukha, Andhakūpa, Kṛmibhojana, Taptamūrti, Samdamśa, Vajrakaṇṭaka, Śālmalī, Vaitaranī, Pūyoda, Prāṇarodha, Viśasanam, Lālābhakṣa, Śarameyādana, Avīci, Aapahpāna, Kṣārakardama, Raksogana, Sambhoja, Śūlaprota, Dandaśūka, Avatārodha, Paryāvartanaka, and Sūcimukha. These are the twenty-eight Narakas or hells.

Note: These are 29.

इन्येते नारका नाम यातानभूमय: परा: ।

कर्मप्रियातृति नायय: पचत्रसंचव: परम् ॥ 28 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागते महापुराणे अष्टमल्बन्धे

एकविशोराध्याः ॥ 29 ॥

These hells are very tormenting. O Son of Brahma! The embodied beings (jīvas) suffer these according to their own Karmas respectively.

Here ends the Twenty-first Chapter of the Eighth

Book on the narrative of hells in the Mahā Purānam,

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

