CHAPTER XL

On the Birth of Lakṣmi

नारद जवाच

नारायणायिता सा च वारा वैकुण्डवासिनी ।

वैकुण्डपिछाणुदोर्गे महाक्षभी सनातनी ॥ १ ॥

कथं बभूव सा देवी पृथिव्यां सिन्युकन्यका ।

पुरा केन स्तुनाउर्डी सा तन्मे व्याख्यातुमहाँसि ॥ २ ॥

Nārada said: O Lord! How did the eternal Devi Mahā Lakṣmī, the dweller in Vaikuntha, the beloved of Nārāyaṇa, the Presiding Deity of Vaikuntha, come down to the earth and how She, became the daughter of the ocean? By whom was She first praised? Kindly describe all these in details to me and oblige.

शीनारायण उवाच

पुरा दूर्वाससः शपाद्धण्ड्छीश्छ पुरंदरः ।

बधूव देहसंघघ मर्यलोके च नारद ॥ 3 ॥

लक्षीः स्वर्गादिकं तयक्त्वा कहा परमदूःदिता ।

गत्वा लीनर च वैकुण्ठे महाकृष्णश्रि नारद ॥ 4 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! In ancient days when on Durvāsās curse, Indra was dispossessed of his kingdom, all the Devas came down to earth. Lakṣmī, too, getting angry, quittied the Heavens, out of pain and sorrow and went to Vaikuntha and took the shelter of Nārāyaṇa.

तदा शोकाधुः: सर्वे दु: विज्ञा बहुणः सभाम्।

ब्रह्माणं च पुरस्कृत्य ययूर्वैकुण्ठमेव च ॥ 5 ॥

वैकुणंडे शरणापत्रा देवा नारायणे परे ।

अंतीव दैन्यपृताक्ष शुण्ककण्ठोशतालुकाः ॥ 6 ॥

The Devas, then, went to Brahmā with their hearts full of sorrow and, taking Him from there, they all went to Nārāyaṇa in Vaikuntha. Going there they all took refuge of the Lord of Vaikuntha. They were very much distressed and their throats, palates and lips were quite dry.

तदा लक्ष्मीध्र करल्या पुराणपुरुकाप्राया ।

बधूव सिन्युक्ना सा सर्वेसंपल्बक्रिपिणी ॥ ७ ॥

तथा माधिला क्षीरोदं देवा देल्याणीः सह ।

संग्रापताङ्ग महाक्षसी विम्युस्तां च द्वरहं ह ॥ ८ ॥ ॥

At that time Lakṣmī, the wealth and prosperity of all, came down on earth by the command of Nārāyaṇa and became born in part as the daughter of the ocean. The Devas, then, with the Daityas churned the Kṣīroda Ocean and, out of that, Mahā Lakṣmī appeared.

सुराधियो वरं दत्ता वनमालां च चिणयो ।

ददौ प्रसजद्वना तृहा क्षीरेणादायिने ॥ 9 ॥

देवाध्यायसुग्रस्तं राज्यं प्रापुष्य नातर ।

तां संपूच च संभूय सर्वेच च नित्यदः ॥ 10 ॥

Viṣnu looked on Her. Her joy knew no bounds.

She smiling, granted booms to the Devas and then offered a garland of flowers on the neck of

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

Nārāyaṇa (as a symbol of marriage celebrated). O Nārada! the Devas, on the other hand, got back their kingdoms from the Asuras. They then worshipped and chanted hymns to Mahā Lakṣmī and since then they became free from further dangers and troubles.

नारद उवाच

कयं शगाय दुवासा मुनिशेषः कदाचन ।

केन दोषय च बढ़ान् बढ़ावास्तचित्युना ॥ १ १ ॥

ममंयुः केन रूपेण जलधिं ते सुराव्यः ।

केन स्तोत्रेण वा देवी शक्र साक्षादभूव सा ॥ १२ ॥

को वा तायोक्ष संगघाटो बभूव तद्ध प्रभो ।

Nārada said: O Bhagavan! Durvāsā was the best of the Munis; he was attached to Brahma and had spiritual knowledge. Why did he curse Indra? What offence had he committed? How did the Devas and Daityas churn the ocean? How, and by what hymns Lakṣmī became pleased and appeared before Indra? What passed on between them. Say all this, O Lord.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

मधुपानप्रमतश्छे नैलोक्यापितिः पुग ॥ 13 ॥

क्रीडां चकार रहीस रंभया सह कामुकः ।

कृत्वा क्रीडां तवा सार्थं कामुक्या हनमानसः ॥ 14 ॥

तस्थौ तत महारण्ये क्रामोभवित्मानसः ।

कैलसशिखे चांते वैकुण्ठवृषिसत्मम् ॥ 15 ॥

Nārāyana said: In ancient days, Indra the Lord of the three worlds, intoxicated with wine and becoming lustful and shameless, began to enjoy Rambhā in a lonely grove. After having enjoyed her, he became attracted to her; his mind being wholly drawn to her, he remained there in that forest, his mind becoming very passionate.

दुर्वाससं ददर्शन्हे ज्वलंते बढ्धतेजसा ।

ग्रीममध्याभ्रामतर्णदसहसप्रभमीक्ष्मर् ॥  १ ६ ॥

प्रतपतकाचनाकारं जटाभारमहोजजल्ले ।

गुरुल्वजोपवीर्त च चोरत्पडी कमणडलुम् ॥ १ ७ ॥

महोज्जलं च लिलक विष्वां चेनुसन्धिमम् ।

Indra then saw the Muni Durvāsā on his way from Vaikuntha to Kailśa burning with the fire of

Brahma. From the body of the Rsi, emitted, as it were, the rays of the thousand mid-day Suns. On his head was the golden matted hair. On his breast there was the hoary holy thread; he wore torn clothes; in his hands there was the Danḍa and Kamandalu; on his forehead there was the bright Tilaka in the form of the Crescent Moon.

(Tilaka—a sectarian mark on the forehead made with coloured earth or sandalpaste.)

सम्रवित् शिष्यलक्ष्रैर्वेद्विद्धुपारीः ॥ 18 ॥

दृष्टा ननाम शिरासा संप्रमत: पुरंदर: ।

शिष्यवर्ग तदा भकत्या तुहाव च पूदार्वितम् ॥ 19 ॥

One hundred thousand disciples, thoroughly-versed in the Vedas and the Vedāngas, were attending him. The intoxicated Purandara, seeing him, bowed down to him and he began to chant with devotion hymns to his disciples also. They were very glad. The Rsi with his disciples then blessed Indra and gave him one Pārājāta flower.

मुनिना च सशिष्येण दत्तास्मरै सुभाशिषः ।

विष्युन्तं पारितानुपर्थे स सुमनेहारू ॥ 20 ॥

तज्जरातोगमृत्युने शोकंठ मोक्षात्कारम् ।

शक्र: पुर्ण गृहीत्वा च प्रभत्तो राज्यसंवेद्य ॥ 21 ॥

पुर्थं स न्यतस्यामास तदेव करिमस्तके ।

When the Muni was returning from the region of Vaikuntīha, Viṣṇu, gave him that beautiful Parijāta flower. Old age, death, disease, sorrows, etc., all are removed by the influence of the flower; and the final liberation is also attained. The Devendra was intoxicated with his wealth; so taking the flower given by the Rṣi, he threw it on the head of the elephant Airāvata. No sooner the elephant touched the flower, than he became suddenly like Viṣṇu, as it were, in beauty, form, qualities, fire and age.

हस्ती तत्यर्पगीदायेच रूपेच गुणेन च ॥ 22 ॥

तेजसा व्यसासेकस्मादिष्यानुल्यो बभूव ह ।

त्यक्ता शक्रि गजेन्द्रश जगाम घोकाननम् ॥ 23 ॥

न शगकाम मेहेन्द्रस्त रक्षतुं तेजसा मुने ।

The elephant, then, forsook Indra and entered

Book IX Chapter XL

into a dense forest. The Lord of the Devas could, in no way, get him under his control.

तनुष्यं त्यक्तवंतं च द्वृषा शक्र मुनीशः ॥ 24 ॥

तमुवाच महाकरः शगणा च भगवित्नः ।

On the other hand, the Muni Durvāsā seeing that Mahendra had thus dishonoured the flower, became inflamed with rage and cursed him saying

मुनिवाचा

अरे श्रिया प्रमत्तस्वं कर्थे मायमवन्यसे ॥ २५ ॥

मद्तपुथ्यं दर्ते च मर्यंग कार्मिसतके ।

विष्णोर्निवित्ते देव नैवेहां वा फलं जलम् ॥ २६ ॥

प्रतिभात्रोग घोक्तायं त्यागने बहुहा भवेत् ।

प्रश्रधीर्ध्वनुद्धि पुरुष्य भवेतु सः ॥ 27 ॥

यत्स्वजिद्विण्येनैवं घायनेघार्षिवर्तं शुभम् ।

प्रतिवात्रोग यो पुंक्ते भक्तो कविष्यविद्येनि ॥ 28 ॥

पुंसां शतं समुद्ध्य जीवनुक्तः स्वयं भवेत् ।

“O Indra! You are so mad with wealth that you have dishonoured me. The flower that I gave you so lovingly, you have thrown that, out of vanity, on the elephant’s head! No sooner one gets the food, water, fruits that had been offered to Viṣṇu, one should eat that at once otherwise one incurs the sin of Brahmahattyā. If anybody forsakes the things offered to Viṣṇu, that he has got perchance, he becomes destitute of wealth, prosperity, in telligence, and his kingdom. And if he eats the food already offered to Viṣṇu with devotion, he then elevates his hundred families passed before him and he himself becomes liberated while living.

नैवेहं भोजनं कृत्वा नित्यं यः प्रणमेद्वरिंच् ॥ 29 ॥

पूजवेस्तीति वा भवत्वा स विणुगपूजीये भवेत्।

तत्यर्शवायुना सघतसीधीधघ शिव्युध्यति ॥ 30 ॥

If any-body daily cats Viṣnu’s Naivedyam (food offered to Viṣnu) and bows down before Him or worships Hari with devotion and chants hymns to Him, he becomes like Viṣnu in energy and wealth. By mere touch with the air round about his body, the places of pilgrimage become all purified.

तत्पादराजसा मूढ सढः पूता वसुभ्यग ।

पृंशत्यन्त्रमवीरांं श्रूक्षाड्धाद्रामेव च ॥ 31 ॥

यद्धरेनिवेईं च वृषा मांसस्य भक्षणम् ।

शिवलिंगप्रदानं च यहर्तं श्रूर्याजिना ॥ 32 ॥

चिकित्मकद्धिज्ञांं च देवलात्रं तदैव च ।

कन्यादिक्रियाणानं यदन्त्योजिनीजिनाम् ॥ 33 ॥

उच्छ्छानं पर्युक्ति सर्वभक्षावशैचितम् ।

आन्यायागामनं चैव द्विजानामत्रमेव च ॥ 34 ॥

अदीक्षितद्विजानं च यदन्तं शरवादीहानम् ।

आन्यायागामनं चैव द्विजानामन्तेव च ॥ 35 ॥

मित्रदुर्गही कृतन्तानामन्त विश्वासायतातिनम् ।

मिथ्यासाक्षयदानं च ब्रहणान्तं तथैव च ॥ 36 ॥

एते सर्वे सिंग्य्यान्ति विज्ञान्विवेशधक्रणतम् ।

O You Stupid! The earth becomes purified by the contact of the dust of the feet of such a one devoted to Viṣṇu. If anybody eats the food unoffered to Hari and flesh that is not offered to any Deity; if he eats the food of any unchaste woman, any woman without husband and sons, the food offered at any Śūdra's Śrāddha (funeral) ceremony, the food offered by a Brāhmana, who is a priest to the Śūdras in honour of a Śiva Lingam, the food of a Brāhmana priest who subsists on the presents of a temple, the food of one who sells his daughter, the food of one who subsists on dealings with womb concerns, the leavings of others, the stale food left after all others had eaten, the food of the husband of an unmarried girl (twelve years old in whom menstruation has commenced), the driver of oxen, the food of one uninitiated in one's Iṣṭamantram, of one who burns a corpse, of a Brāhmin who goes to one not fit for going, the food of a rebel against friends, of one who is faithless, treacherous who gives false evidence, the food of a Brāhmin who accepts offerings in a sacred place of pilgrimage, all his sins (incurred in the ways above-mentioned) will be removed if he eats the prasādam of Viṣṇu, i.e., the food offered to Viṣṇu.

शयवशेहीद्विणुसौवी वैशनां कोटिपूढ़रेत् ॥ 37 ॥

होरघक्को मनुज: स्वं च रक्षितुमक्षम: ।


अज्ञानाद्वि गृह्वाति विष्णोपैविद्धोचे च ।। 38 ॥

सज्जन्मार्जितात्यापान्यूचरो नात्र संग्रयः ।

Even if a Cāndāla be attached to the service of Viṣṇu, he sanctifies his millions of persons born in his family before him. And the man who is devoid of the devotion to Hari is not able even to save himself. If anybody takes unknowingly the remains of an offering (such as flowers) made to Viṣṇu, he will certainly be freed from all the sins incurred in his seven births.

जात्वा भक्त्वा च गृह्ठति विलोगेशिद्धोच्चे च ॥ 39 ॥

कोटिजनामतितायपानमुच्यते निश्छतं हरे ।

यस्मातसंख्यापितं पुर्ण्य गर्जेण कारिमतकते ॥ 40 ॥

तस्मायुष्यान्यतिच्यय यातु लक्ष्मीहि: पदम् ।

And if he does this knowingly and with intense devotion, he will certainly be freed of all sorts of sins incurred in his Koti births. So, O Indra! I am a devotee of Śri Hari. And when you have cast away the Pārijāta flower offered by me on the elephant's head, then I say unto you that the Mahā Lakṣmī will leave you and She will go back to Nārāyaṇa.

नारायणस्य भनोड़रं न विषेमि सुराधिधेः ॥ 41 ॥

कालान्ययोजरात्रक कान्यानाणवाथि च ।

किं कस्पिति ते ततः कार्यप्रध प्रप्रापितः ॥ 42 ॥

ब्रृहस्पितृकृक्षि विज्ञांकस्य च मे हरे ।

इंद पूर्ण यस्य भूर्टित तस्यैव पूर्जनं परम् ॥ 43 ॥

I am highly devoted to Nārāyaṇa; so I do not fear anybody, I fear neither the Creator, nor Kāla, the Destroyer, nor old age, nor death; what to speak of other petty persons! I do not fear your father Prajāpati Kaśyapa nor do I fear your family priest Brhaṣpati. Now he, on whose head there lies the flower Pārjiāta offered by me, verily he should be worshipped by all means.

इति श्रुत्वा महैन्द्रध धृत्वा स चरणं मुने ।

उच्चे रोदे शोकात्तसामुवाच भयाकुलः ॥ 44 ॥

Hearing these word of Durvāsā, Indra became bewildered with fear, and being greatly distressed and holding the feet of Muni, < >d out loudly.

महेन्द्र उवाच

दन्तः समुचितः त्राणे महा मायापड प्रभो ।

हन्तां न चाचे संपत्ति किंचिज्ञानं च देहि मे ॥ 4 5 ॥

ऐष्यर्य विद्यां बीजं ज्ञानप्रकलकारण ।

मुकित्मागंकुतारघु घकतेश व्यवधायकम् ॥ 46 ॥

He said: The curse is now well inflicted on me; and it has caused my delusion vanish. Now I do not want back my Rāja Lakṣmī from you; instruct me on knowledge. This wealth is the source of all coils; it is the cause of the veil to all knowledge, it hides the final liberation and it is a great obstacle on the way to get the highest devotion."

पुनिवहाच

जन्ममृत्युजराशोकोगवीअंगूरं परम् ।

संपत्तितिमितिध्छ पुक्तिमानों न प्रपक्षिति ॥ 47 ॥

संपमन्तो विमुक्छ सुरामन्तः स एव च ।

बांधवेर्वेक्षितः सो3पि बंधुत्वेनेव है हे ॥ 48 ॥

The Muni said: This birth, death, old age, disease, and afflictions, all come from wealth and the manipulation of great power. Being blind by the darkness of wealth, he does not see the road to Mukti.

संपत्तिमदमतष्ठ विषयांध्रु विद्धुतः ।

महाकामी राजसिकः सच्चमार्गं परथपति ॥ 49 ॥ 11

द्विविधो विषयांध्रु राजसस्तामसः स्मृतः ।

अशाल्ब्रस्तामसश शाल्ब्तो राजस: स्मृतः ॥ 50 ॥

The stupid man that is intoxicated with wealth is like the one that is intoxicated with wine. Surrounded by many friends, he is surrounded by the unbreakable bondage. The man that is intoxicated with wealth, blind with property and overwhelmed with these things has no thought for the real knowledge. He who is Rājasik, is very much addicted to passions and desires; he never sees the path to Sattvaguṇa. The man that is blind with sense-objects is of two kinds, firstly, Rājasik and secondly Tāmasik. He who has no knowledge of the Śāstras Tamasik and he who has the knowledge of the Śāstras is Rājasik.

Book IX Chapter XL

शास्त्र च द्विषिधं मार्ग दर्शयेत्सुपंगव ।

प्रवृत्तिकीजेपंक च निवृत्तेः कारणं परम् ॥ 51 ॥

चरिति जीविनशादी प्रवृत्तेःखवमंपि ।

स्वच्छन्दं च प्रसनं च निविंशोथे च संततम् ॥ 52 ॥

O Child of the Devas! Two paths are mentioned in the Śāstras; one is Pravṛtti, going towards the sense objects and the other is Nivṛtti, going away from them. The Jivas first follow the path of Pravṛtti, the path that is painful, gladly and of their own accord like a mad man.

आयाति मधुनो लोभालल्लेशेन सुख्यमिति: ।

परिणामेनाश्वीजे जन्मयतुजराकरे ॥ ५३ ॥

अनेकजनभयंन्ते कृत्वा च भ्रमणे मुता ।

As bees, blind with the desires of getting honey, go to the lotus bud and get themselves entangled there, so the Jivas, the embodied souls, desirous first of getting enjoyments come to this very painful circle of births and deaths, this wordly life, which in the end is realised as vapid and the only cause of old age, death, and sorrow and get themselves enchained there.

स्वकर्मविदितायां च नानायोन्यां क्रमेण च ॥ 54 ॥

ततश्रीगानुग्राहच सतर्गं लभते च सः ।

सहसैषु शतेच्येको भवाच्ये:पारकाणम् ॥ 55 ॥

For many births he travels gladly in various wombs, ordained by his own Karmas, till at last by the favour of gods, he comes in contact with the saints. Thus one out of a thousand or out of a hundred finds means to cross this terrible ocean of world.

साधुस्तचप्रदीयेन मुक्तिमागों प्रदर्शयते ।

तदा करोति यत्नं च जीवो कंधनखंडेन ॥ 56 ॥

अनेकजनयोगेन तसपासज्ञानेन च ।

तदा लभेम्युक्तिमागं निखित्यं सुखदं परम् ॥ 57 ॥

When the saintly persons kindle the lamp of knowledge and shew the way to Mukti, then the Jiva makes an attempt to sever this bondage to the world. After many births, many austerities and many fastings, he then finds safely the way to Mukti, leading to the highest happiness. O Indra! What you asked me, I thus heard from my Guru.

इदं श्रुत गुरोर्वेकत्रादित्यच्छिस पुरन्दर ।

मुनेस्तद्वचं शुत्वा वीततगगे बधूव सः ॥ ५८ ॥

वैराग्यं वर्धयामास तस्य ब्रह्माद्विने दिते ।

मुनेः स्थानादूर्भूं गतवा स ददर्गामरावतीम् ॥ ५९ ॥

O Nārada! Hearing the words of the Muni Durvāsā Indra became dispassionate towards the Samsāra. Day by day his feeling of dispassion increased. One day, when he returned to his own home from the hermitage of the Muni, he saw the Heavens overspread by the Daityas and it had become terrible.

दैत्यैसुरासंधैष सामाकीर्ण भयाकुलाम् ।

विषयोपल्पां पुत्रवन्मुहीनां च कुत्रप्रित् ॥ 60 ॥

पितृगत्कलगविविहीनामितिचलम् ।

गजुघमतां च तां द्वृष्टा जगाम वाक्यति प्रति ॥ 61 ॥

गज्ञो मन्दाकिनीर्ति दर्दगं गृह्मीप्रवम् ।

ध्यायमानं परं बहु गंगताये स्थितं परम् ॥ 62 ॥

सूर्याशिपसंगुं पूर्वमुक्तं च विश्वतोगुक्तम् ।

At some places outrage and oppression knew no bounds; some places were devoid of friends; at some places, some persons had lost their fathers, mothers, wives, relations; so no rest and repose could be found. Thus, seeing the Heavens in the hands of the enemies, Indra went out in quest of Brhaspati, the family preceptor of the Devas. Seeking to and fro Indra ultimately went to the banks of the Mandākinī and saw that the Guru Deva had bathed in the waters of the Mandākinī and sitting with his face turned towards the East towards the Sun, was meditating on Para Brahma, Who has His faces turned everywhere.

साधुनैयं पुलिकतं परमानन्दर्वसुतम् ॥ 63 ॥

वरिष्ठ च गरिष्ठ च धर्मिष्ठ श्रेक्ष्येक्षितम् ।

प्रेशे च बन्युवार्णायातिश्रेशे च ज्ञानिनम् ॥ 64 ॥

Tears were flowing from his eyes and the hairs of the body stood erect with delight. He was elderly in knowledge; the spiritual Teacher of all, religious, served by all great men; he was held as most dear to all the friends. Those who are Jñānišn regard him as their Gurus.

śrimaddevibhāgavatam

न्येई च भातुवर्गाणामिच्छे सुर्वैशिणाम् ।

द्वृा गुरु जानतं च तत तस्थौ सुरुश: ॥ 65 ॥

प्रहर्तो गुरु द्वृा चोचितं प्रणाना सः ।

प्रणाय चरणांभोजे रोदोद्वैयैमुधुर्दुः ॥ 66 ॥

He was the eldest of all his brothers; he was considered as very unpopular to the enemies of the Devas. Seeing the family priest Brhaṣpati merged in that state of meditation, Indra waited there. When after one Prahara (three hours), the Guru Deva got up. Indra bowed down to his feet and began to weep and cry out repeatedly.

युत्तांत कथयामास बह्रागपादिकं तथा ।

पुनर्वीरपलिध्ध च ज्ञानप्रियां सुतुलंभाग् ॥ 67 ॥

वैरप्रस्तां च स्वपूर्ण क्रमेपीव सुरेवरः ।

Then he informed his Guru about his curse from a Brāhmīn, his acquiring the true knowledge as so very rare, and the wretched state of Amarāvatī, wrought by the enemies.

शिष्यस्य ववनं शुत्वा सुबुद्धवैतां वरः ॥ 68 ॥

ब्रृह्मपतिचावेदे कोपसंरक्तलोचन: ।

O Best of Brāhmaṇas! Hearing thus the words of the disciple, the intelligent speaker Brhaspati spoke with his eyes reddened out of anger.

गुरुकावा

श्रुतं सर्वे सुरश्रछ्मा मारोदीर्बनं श्रणु ॥ 69 ॥

न कातारो है नीतिजो विषती च कदाचन ।

संपत्तिबा विपत्तिं नक्ष्या अमस्पिणी ॥ 70 ॥

पूर्वस्य कर्मविता च स्वयं कर्ता तयोरि ।

सर्वेषां च भवत्येव शगवज्जन्मिन जन्मिन ॥ 71 ॥

'O Lord of the Devas! I have everything that you said; do not cry; have patience; hear attentively what I say. The wise politicians of good behaviour, with moral precepts, never lose their heads and get themselves distressed in times of danger. Nothing is everlasting; whether property or adversity; all are transient; they only give troubles. All are under one's own Karma. What had been done in previous births, so one will have to reap the fruits afterwards. (Therefore property or adversity, all are due to

one's own Karma.) This happens to all persons eternally, births after births.

घकनेकिमेणीय नत का परिवेदना ।

उक्त हि स्वकृतं कर्म भुज्जतेश्वलभारते ॥ 72 ॥

Pain and happiness are like the ring of a rolling wheel. So what pain is there? It is already stated that one's own Karma must be enjoyed in this Holy Bhārata.

शुभाणुभं च राकिंचित्तवकर्मफलभुबमुगान ।

नापुक्तं क्षीयते कर्म कल्याकोटगतरिंप ॥ 73 ॥

The man enjoys the effects of his own Karmas, auspicious or inauspicious. Never the Karma gets exhausted in one hundred Koti Kalpas, without their effects being enjoyed.

अवर्यमेव भोक्त्वयं कृतं कर्म शुभागुर्णं ।

इन्वेवमुक्ति बेदे च कृष्णेन परमात्मना ॥ 74 ॥

सामवेदोक्तगाखायां संबोध्य कामलोढ़वम् ।

जन्मभोगावर्षे च सर्वेणं कृतकर्माण्म ॥ 75 ॥

अनुकूलं हि तेणं च भातरेण्यत्र चैव हि ।

The Karma, whether auspicious or inauspicious must be enjoyed. Thus it is stated in the Vedas and as well by Śrī Krṣna, the Supreme Spirit. Bhagavan Śrī Krṣna addressed Brahmā, the lotus-born, in the Sāma Veda Sākhā that all persons acquire their births, whether, in Bhārata or in any other country, according to the Karma that he had done.

कर्मण ब्रह्माणं च कर्माण च रुभाशिष्य  ॥76 ॥

कर्मण च महलक्ष्मी लभैर्यं च कर्मण ।

कोदिज्ञानर्जित कर्म जीवितामनुगच्छति ॥ ७ ७ ॥

The curse of a Brāhmaṇa comes though this Karma; and the blessings of a Brāhmaṇa come again by this Karma. By Karma one gets great wealth and prosperity and by Karma again one gets poverty. You may take one hundred Koti births; the fruit of Karma must follow you.

न हि स्वाजेदिता भोगं तच्छायेव पुरंदर ।

कालपेरे देशपेरे पात्रपेरे च कर्णामणि ॥ 78 ॥

न्यूनताधिकभावोजीय भवेदेद हि कर्णाण ।

वस्तुघाने वस्तूनां सां पुर्ण द्विते दिने ॥ 79 ॥

दिनपेरे कोदिगामसंखं वा ततोर्धिकम् ।

समे देणे च वस्तूनां दाने पुर्ण्यं समं सुर ॥ 80 ॥

Book IX Chapter XL

O Indra! The fruit of Karma follows one like one's shadow. Without enjoyment, that can never die. The effects of Karma become increased or diseased according to time, place, and the person concerned. As you will give away anything to persons, of different natures, in different times and in different places, your merit acquired will also very accordingly. Gifts made on certain special days bring in Koti times the fruits (merits, punyam) or infinite times or even more than that.

हेशपोदे कोटिगुणाकसंखंख वा ततोर्धिकम् ।

समे पात्र सेमं पुणं वस्नुर्नां कतुरैव च ॥ 81 ॥ 11

पात्रभेते शतगुणामसंखं वा ततोर्धिकम् ।

यथा फलिते सस्यानि न्यूनान्यथिकानि च ॥ 82 ॥

कर्मकाणां क्षेत्रभेदे पात्रभेते फलं तथा ।

सामान्यदिवसे विघ दानं समफलं भवेत् ॥ 83 ॥

अमायां रविकसंतंचां फलं शगतुर्णं भवेत् ।

Again gifts, similar in nature, made in similar paces yield punyam the same, in character also. Gifts made in different countries yield punyams, Koți times, infinite times, or even more than that. But similar things given to similar persons yield similar punyams. As the grains vary in their natures as the fields differ, so gifts made to different persons yield different grades of punyas infinitely superior or infinitely inferior as the case may be.

Giving things to a Brāhmaṇa on any ordinary days yields simple punya only. But if the gift be made to a Brāhmaṇa on an Amāvasyā day (new moon day) or on a Sankrānti day (the day when the Sun enters another's sign) then hundred times more punyam is acquired.

चतातुमांसां पौर्णमास्यानंतं फलमेव च ॥ 84 ॥

प्रहणे शफिनः कोटिगुणं च फलमुच्यते ।

सूर्यस्य प्रगणे वारप्रि ततो दशगुणं भवेद् ॥ 85 ॥

अश्वयायाम्बयं यदसंखं फलभूचते ।

एवमान्यत्र पुणवाहे फलाधित्यं भवेक्षिति ॥ 86 ॥

Again charities made on the Cāturmāśya periods (the vow that lasts for four months in the rainy season) or on the full moon day, yield infinite

punyams. So charities made on the occasion of the lunar eclipses yield Koti times the result and if made on the occasion of the solar eclipse yield ten times more punyamas. Charities made on Aksayaya Trītyā or the Navamī day yield infinite and endless results. So charities on other holy days yield religious merits higher than those made on ordinary days.

यथा दाने तथा स्नाने जये3न्यपुणवकमैसु ।

एवं सर्वत्र बौक्द्यं पुराणां कर्मणां फलम् ॥ 87 ॥

यथा दार्डेन चक्रेण शार्तोषा ध्योग च ।

कुभ्यं निर्मिति निर्माता कुभ्यकारो मृदा भृति ॥ 88 ॥

As charities made on holy days yields religious merits, so beating, reciting mantrams, and other holy acts yield meritorious results. As superior results are obtained by pious acts; so inferior results are obtained by impious acts. As an earthen potter makes pots, jars, etc., out of the earth with the help of rod, wheel, earthen cups or plates and motion, so the Creator awards respective fruits to different persons, by the help of this thread (continuity) of Karma.

तथैव कर्मसूत्रण फर्ल धाता ददाति च ।

यस्यान्ना सूधिमदं तं च नारायणं भज ॥ 89 ॥

स विधाता विधातुंष पातु: पाता जगत्येव ।

स्वेषु: स्वहा च संहर्तुः संहर्तं कालकलकः ॥ 90 ॥

Therefore if you want to have cessation of this fruition of Karma, then worship, Nārāyaṇa, by whose command all these things of Nature are created. He is the Creator of even Brahmā, the Creator, the Preserver of Viṣnu, the Preserver, the Destroyer of Śiva, the Destroyer and the Kāla (the great Time) of Kāla (the Time).

महाविषत्तो संसारे यः: सरेन्धुधूसूनम् ।

विषपत्ति तस्य संपतिभर्वेदित्याह शंकरः ॥ 9 1 ॥

इन्वेवयुक्त्वा तत्वज्ञः सामालिय युंशयम् ।

दत्वा शुभाशिषं चेहं बोधायामास नारद ॥ 9 2 ॥

डीते श्रीमद्वीभागचते महापुराणे नवम्बलम्

चत्वारिंशोभयाः ॥ 93 ॥

Śaṅkara has said: He who remembers



Madhusūdana (a name of Viṣṇu) in great troubles, his dangers cease and happiness begins. O Nārada! The wise Brīhaspati thus advised Indra and then embraced him and gave him his hearty blessings and good wishes.

Here ends the Fortieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the birth of Lakṣmi in the discourse of Nārada and Nārāyaṇa in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

