CHAPTER XXX

On the Killing of Niśumbha

यास उवाच

निरूपभो निद्धयं कृत्वा मरणाय जयाय वा ।

सोहाम: सबल: शूरी रोणे देहीपुणयची ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus making a firm resolve that there would be either victory or death, the great warrior Niśumbha went to fight with the Devi, with great excitement and with all his forces.

नामाजाग सृष्मोर्धि स्वबलेन समावृतः ।

प्रेशकोंअप्रूर्णे राजा संग्रामसमपिडतः ॥ २ ॥

Šumbha, too the Lord of the Daityas, accompanied by his forces, went after Niśumbha; Šumbha knew full well the rules of warfare; therefore he remained a witness there.

नागने संस्थिता देयास्तदाउप्रभटलातूनः ।

दिदूक्ष्वस्तु संगमे सेन्द्रा यक्षनगातताः ॥ ३ ॥

Indra and the other Devas and Yakṣas, all stationed themselves in the celestial space, eager to see that fight, covered with clouds.

निरुभ्योद्ध रणे गत्या धनुराद्य शार्डैक्म ।

चकार शरबृष्टि स भीयवझगद्धिकम ।। ४ ॥

Nisūmbha came to the field, and, taking the strong bow made of horns, began to shoot arrow after arrows at the Divine Mother with the object of frightening Her.

मुब्जतं शरबालातिन सिगूभ्यं चधिडका राणे ।

वैश्यादाय धनु:श्रेडं जहास सुखरं गुड़ुः ॥ 5 ॥

Seeing Niśumbha with his excellent bow, shooting arrows, Candikā began to laugh frequently.

उवाच कालिका देवी पश्य मुत्बल्मेपतेयो: ।

मरणायगती कालि मत्समीयमिहाछ्ना ॥ 6 ॥

दूर्शा देत्यवधी घोरं रक्तबीजाययं तथा ।

जयागां कृतस्त्वेती मोहिती मम मायया ॥ 7 ॥

With a soft slow voice She spoke to Kalikā: "O Kāli! See their foolishness! They have come before me, courting death. They are so much deluded by My Māyā, that they yet expect victory when they have already witnessed the death of Raktabjā and many Dānavas.

आणा बलवती होना न जाहित नरं क्वचित् ।

भर्न हतं बलं नहं गतपक्षे चित्रनेनम् ॥ 8 ॥

आशापाशनिबद्धौ ही युद्धाय समुपगतो ।

निह्नल्यो मया कालि रणे शुभ्यनिरुभ्यकी ॥ 9 ॥

Hope is so very that it never quits a man. How wonderful is this that some of their armies are destroyed, some are wounded, some are rendered senseless, some made powerless, some have fled; seeing all these, yet, they have come to fight, as it were, fastened by the cord of hope of victory. O

Book V Chapter XXX

Kāli! Today I will certainly slay Niśumbha and Śumbha.

आसम्रमणावेति संप्राती देवभोहिती ।

पश्यतां सर्वदैवानां हनिष्याम्यमहम तो ॥ 10 ॥

Their death is nigh; deluded by the Daivi Maya, they have come to Me. Therefore, in the face of all the Devas, I will kill them to day.

व्यास उवाच

इतुसुक्वा कालिकां चण्डी कणाकृशगेतकरैः ।

छाव्यामास तस्या निशुभ्यं पुरतः स्थितम् ॥ 1 1 ॥

द्रानवोदी प्रशंसल्याधिछ्छेद्व निशितः शरैः ।

तयोः परस्यं युद्धं बध्वातिसंचायकम् ॥ 12 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus saying, and suddenly drawing Her bow, Candi covered Niśumbha, in front, all over with a multitude of arrows. Niśumbha, too, cut off those arrows into pieces by his sharp arrows; thus the fight became more and more dreadful between them.

कैसरी कैगलानिति धुवानः कैन्यसागम् ।

गह्यामास बलवान्सरर्गे वाणीय चथा ॥ 13 ॥

At this time, the lion of Bhagavati, came down upon the forces, quivering his manes, like a powerful elephant going down into a lake.

नरईदैन्तप्रहीरसु दानवान्युतः स्थितान् ।

चयाद च विशीणाईन्न गवानिव मोत्केवान् ॥ १४ ॥

By his nails and teeth, he tore asunder the bodies of the Dānavas that fell before him and devoured them, as if they were infatuated elephants.

एवं विद्यमयाने तु सैन्ये केसरीणा तव ।

अभ्यधाविज्ञाम्बो 5व कृष्टवराकामुकः ॥ 1 5 ॥

अन्येपि कृष्टा देलेन्द्रा देवी हनुपायवयुः ।

सन्द्धदानसना रक्तेना झनेकाः ॥ 16 ॥

That lion thus crushing down the soldiers, Nüsumbha came forward hurriedly, drawing his excellent bow. Hundreds of other generals of the Dānavas came up there to kill the Devi, biting their lips and with their eyes reddened with anger.

ततजगान तस्या गुष्पः सैन्यस्मापुतः ।

नित्य कालिकां कोपादुरुहीतुं जगदधिकवम् ॥ 17 ॥

In the meantime Śumbha killed Kālīkā and

came very hurriedly there with his forces to capture the Divine Mother.

तत्राग्य ददुराजावंविका च पुरःस्थिताम् ।

गैरससुतां कानतां श्रंगारससंयुताम् ॥ 18 ॥

Coming to the battle field Sumbha saw that the Divine Mother was standing before him; though She was looking very beautiful, fit for love sentiment, yet She was filled also with the sentiment of fiery wrath.

तां वीक्ष्य विमुतपाणीं शैतैकव्यसरुन्दीम् ।

सुरत्कनयं तस्यां ठोधोरात्क्षणां तथा ॥ १९ ॥

At that time the large eyes of Bhagavatī, the Beautiful in the three worlds, though naturally red, looked more red due to wrath.

विवाहेच्छो परित्यज्य जयाणां दूततस्तथा ।

मरणे निश्रयं कृत्वा तत्थावाहित्कामुईकः ॥ 20 ॥

When Śumbha saw Her lovely feature, the desire to marry Her and the hope of victory all vanished away from his mind; and he stood there with bow in his hand, firmly holding in his mind that he would die.

तं तथा दानवं देवी सिमन्तुर्धिंदः चवः ।

वधापे श्रुण्वतां तेषां द्वैत्यानां रणमस्तके ॥ 2 1 ॥

Seeing the Dānava in that state, She smiled and began to say, so that all the Dānavas could hear. गच्छधं पामता युंपालतां वा जलाणविम ।

जीतिज्ञां स्थितं कृता व्यक्तात्रजेवापुधानि च ॥ 2 2 ।

“O Wretched Fools! If you all want to live, quite all your weapons here, go to the Pātāla or to the middle of the ocean.

अथवा मच्छागतहतमुणा रणाशि ।

प्राय स्वर्गसुखं सर्वे क्रीईतु विनतज्ञतः ॥ 23 ॥

Or be slain in the battle by My arrows and go to heavens and enjoy there without any fear all the enjoyments and sports there.

काततरंचे च शूरत्वं न भववेय वरवंथा ।

द्वाद्यभयदानं वै यानु सर्वे यथासुपुखम् ॥ 24 ॥

Weakness and heroism, both cannot be expected at one and the same time and at the same individual; therefore I am ordering you to dispel

your fears. Now go wherever you find your ease and happiness.

व्यास उवाच

इत्याकर्णं वचस्तस्यां नित्यमो मटगर्वितः ।

नित्रितं खद्गमादाय चर्मे चैवाहचन-ऋकम् ॥ 25 ॥

धावामान्तु तसास्त्रसिना सिंहं मदोक्कटम् ।

जयानातिवलान्मृदिन धाययझादिवक्षाम। 26 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing these words of the Devi, that haughty Niśumbha ran forward, holding in his hand the sharpened axe and shield adorned with eight Candras (embossed) and firstly struck with sword violently on the proud lion; then, whirling with great force that sword, hurled it upon the Divine Mother.

ततो देवी खरवाद्या वंचवित्याउसिपातनम् ।

ताड्यामास तं बाहोभूले पर्युना तदा ॥ 27 ॥

The Devi, then, thwarted off the blow of the sword by Her club and struck at his arm by Paraśu.

खडेरोन निर्हत: सोडपि बाहुमूले महामदः ।

संलम्य वेदनां घुवो जाघान चोषड़का तदा ॥ 28 ॥

साउपि घणटावनं घोरे चकार घायदं नृणाम् ।

The warrior Niśumbha, thus struck at his arm, patiently bore that hurt and struck at Candikā by his axe. The Devi then made such a terrible noise of bells that all the Daityas were struck with terror.

परी पुनः पुनः पानं नियुर्णमं हनुनीच्छती ॥ 29 ॥

पूर्व परसरं युद्धं बभूवातिभप्रमुद्रम् ।

देवानां दानवानां च परस्पराजवीर्णम् ॥ 30 ॥

Then She, desiring to kill Niśumbha, began to drink nectar frequently. O King! Thus the terrible fight went on between the Devas and Dānavas both trying to defeat the other party.

पलादा: पक्षिणः कृतः सामेवाश्र जयकुाः ।

ननुशुशासित्नुशा गृधा: केनाका शयासः ॥ 31 ॥

राण्यपणिति भृथिष्यतितानुरवर्षकैः ।

कौरास्वावसंयुवर्तैर्गजाश्वेदेसंकुला ॥ 32 ॥

पतितान्दावनावन्दूखा निर्गुभ्योतिरुकाश्विततः ।

प्रयथी चणिकडा तृर्णबुद्याबाद्य द्रकाणाम ॥ 33 ॥

Then began to dance ir the battle-field, the cruel varacious dogs, jackals, vultures, herons, crows

and other birds, very much gladdened. The battlefield was drenched in blood and the dead carcasses of innumerable Dānavas, elephants, and horses were strewn around. Nisūmbha, then, seeing the Dānavas dead on the field, became very angry and ran forward with his terrible club before the Devi.

सिंहं जघान गटया मरतके मदगवितैः ।

प्रहृत्य च सितं कृत्वा पुनर्वैभिवाडवत् ॥ 34 ॥

सापि ते कुपिताऊतील निषुभं पुतः स्थितम् ।

प्रहन्तं समीक्षाय देवी वचनमवर्षित् ॥ 35 ॥

That proud Asura struck first at the head of the lion with that club and laughed again and again and struck the Devi with that same club. The Devi, too, got very angry seeing Niśumbha before Her and striking at Her. She then spoke thus:

देव्यवाच

सिट्ठ मंदमते ताव्हायावलड्वारमिदं तव ।

ग्रीवायां ग्रेरायाम्यसाद्र-तासिर यमसदनम् ॥ 36 ॥

O You Stupid! Wait till I sever your head from your body by this axe. Soon you will be sent unto death with your head severed off your body.

व्यास उचाच

इत्युक्चना तरसा देवी कृपाणेन समाहिता ।

चिच्छेद मस्तकं तस्य निजुम्भस्याच चिष्ठकां ॥ 37 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus saying, the Caṇḍikā Devī instantly cut off the head of Niśumbha by Her axe with great caution.

स हिजमस्तको देया कबन्धोर्जीव दारूण: ।

वधाम च गदापाणिशासयदेवतागणान् ॥ 38 ॥

The head thus severed from the body by the blow of the Devī, the headless Demon began to roam there with great force with club in his hand. The Devas then got very much frightened.

देवी तस्य त्रिरितांणीशिक्छेद्व चरणी करी ।

पपातोल्यात ततः पपी नातानुः पवर्तेनोपः ॥ ३९ ॥

The Devī, then, cut off the hands and feet of that headless Demon with sharpened arrows.

तत्मिभिपतिते दैतेः निर्गुभे भीभिविक्रोः ।

हाहाकारो महानासीतलै-वे भयकमीयते ॥ 40 ॥

Book V Chapter XXX

That vicious wretch fell down lifeless, on the ground like a mountain. The powerful Daityas Niśumbha being thus killed, a great uproar arose amidst his panic stricken forces.

व्यक्त्वासप्रधानि सर्वांगी सैनिका: क्षताज्यतुतः ।

जगयुर्धावरां सर्वे कुबीणा राजमन्त्रिय् ॥ 41 ॥

The soldiers, covered all over their bodies with blood, left all their weapons in the field, began to make Boombā sound (a piteous cry with mouth and hands as sign of danger) and fled away to the king Śumbha.

तानागतानुसंप्रेक्ष्य शुभ्यः शज्ञिपृद्व्नः ।

प्रच्छ क्व निशुमोजसी कवं भग्न: पलायिता: ॥ 4 2 ॥

He, the tormentor of the foes, then asked them coming: "Where is Niśumbha now? Why have you fled away from the field?"

तच्छुत्वा बचनं ग्रासते प्रोषुः प्रगता भ्रुगम् ।

राजसेन निद्रातो भाता शेते समस्यूर्दिन ॥ 4 3 ॥

Thus hearing the King's words, they bowed down and said: "O King! Your brother Niśumbha is lying dead on the battle-field.

तया निपातिता: शूगा ये च तेध्यज्ञानुगा: ।

वय त्वां कवितुं सर्वे वृत्तानं समुपगाता: ॥ 4 4 ॥

O King The Devi killed all the Dānava warriors that attended your brother; only we are left and have come here to give you the information.

निरुभामो निद्रास्तरस तथा चण्डिकवासुघान ।

न हि युद्धस्य कालो3घ तत राजजगंगोगे ॥ 4 5 ॥

O King! Niśumbha has been killed by the weapons of the Devi. So we think you ought not to go to the battle.

देवकार्य समुहिष्य कारपीय परमांगना ।

हन्तु देत्यकुलं नूनं प्रापतीत परित्थित्य ॥ 4 6 ॥

Know this as certain that the Lady, the Highest Cause of this Universe has come here to destroy the Dānavas, the object being to serve the cause of the Gods.

नैया प्राकृतयोषिव देवीशक्तिरन्तमा ।

अर्विव्यचरिता क्वापि दुर्जेया द्वैतरीपि ॥47 ॥

नानारूपधरातील मायामृत्यिशारत ।

विश्वभूषणा देवी सर्वायुधरा शुभा ॥ 48 ॥

This Lady is not an ordinary woman; She is the Supreme Force; Her doings are inconceivable; what more can be said than the fact that the Devas never can know Her! This Devi can assume various forms; She is the origin of Māyā; She is very clever; She is adorned with various ornaments and is holding various weapons in Her hands.

गह्ना गृहवर्ति कालरात्रिविपाया ।

अपारपारगा पूर्णी सर्वलक्षणसंयुता ॥ 49 ॥

Her doings are incomprehensible; She is like a Second Night of Dissolution (at the end of the world); She is Perfect, endowed with all auspicious signs, capable to go beyond the insurmountable.

अन्तर्रक्षित्या द्विवासी सुवंकृतुकोभावः ।

देवकार्य च कुवर्णी श्रीदेवी परमादुताम ॥ 50 ॥

This wonderful Devi is serving the cause of the gods and the Devas from the sky are singing hymns to Her.

पलायनं पोर धर्मः सर्वथा देहराक्षणम् ।

रक्षिते कित देशैस्म्य-कालो5स्मसुखताक्षते ॥ 51 ॥

O King! It is now your paramount duty to fly away and save your life; if you live, you may have the chance for gaining the victory when time will turn out favourable; there is no doubt in this.

संग्रामे विजयो राजन्यविता ते न संग्रतः ।

कालः कंपोत बलिनं समये निर्विवतं कवित् ॥ 52 ॥

It is Time that makes a strong man weak; and it is that very Time that makes that weak man strong again and stimulates him for victory.

तं पुनः सकलं कृत्वा जयायोपद्धाति हि ।

दातारं याचकं कालः करोति समये कवित् ॥ 53 ॥

भिश्छूकं धनदातारं करोति समयान्तरे ।

विषयु: कालवजो नृनं बढ़ा वा पर्वतीपति: ॥ 54 ॥

Time makes a generous donor a beggar and it is Time that makes the same beggar again a generous donor. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa, Indra and other Devas are all under the sway of this Time; so Time is the Sovereign of all.

इन्हादा निजीरा: सर्वे काल एव प्रभु: स्वयम् ।

तस्माकालं प्रतीक्षस्य विपरीतं ततायुना ॥ 5 5 ॥

Therefore, O King! Wait for this Time. Now Time is favourable to the Gods and inimical to you.

सम्पुखो देवतानां च दैत्यानां नाशहेतुकः ।

एकैव च गतिनिति कालस्य किल भृपते ॥ 5 6 ॥

Therefore Time is destroying now the Daityas. But the course of Time is not the same throughout. O King! The actions of Time are various no doubt.

- नानास्पधाराध्यपति झात्म्यं तस्य चेषितम् ।

कदाचित्सभवो नृणां कदाचित्त्वलयतथा ॥ 57 ॥

Time creates men and Time destroys them. The time of creation is different from the time of destruction, this is evident to you before your eyes.

उत्पत्तिहुः कालोज्ञ्यः क्षयहुतुलसाधपः ।

प्रत्यक्षे ते महाराज देल्या: सर्वे सवासना: ॥ 58 ॥

करताले कृतः पूर्व कालेन समुद्धेन च ।

तेनैव विमुचेनाठ्य बलिनोजलवग्यसुराः ॥ 59 ॥

नित्ता नितरां कालः करोति च सुभागुभम् ।

न चात्र कारणं काली नैव देवा: सनातना: ॥ 60 ॥

See! When Time was favourable to you, you subjected Indra and all other Devas and made them pay taxes to you; and now Time is unfavourable to you; so an ordinary weak woman is killing the powerful Dānavas; Time, therefore, is doing favourable things and also unfavourable things.

The host of Devas or the woman Kālī is not the cause thereof.

यथा ते रोचते राजसंखा कुक विमुश्य च ।

कालोउं यान हैतुले दानवानां तथा पुनः ॥ 6 1 ॥

त्वद्याते गतः शको भपनः संख्ये निरगुधः ।

तथा विद्युस्तथा रुडो करणो धनदो यमः ॥ 6 2 ॥

O King! The present Time is not favourable to you and the Daityas; knowing this, do as you like. See! Indra, Viṣṇu, Varuna, Yama and other prominent Devas all fled before in battle, quitting their weapons.

तथा त्वमिप राजेन्द्र वीक्ष्य कालवर्गे जगत् ।

पातालं गच्छ तरसा जीवन्मुद्रमाव्यसि ॥ 63 ॥

मृते त्वयि महाराज शगवस्ते मुदाधिततः ।

मंगलानि प्रगायंती विचारिधानि सर्वतः ॥ 64 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पत्रमकन्के

शिरोअधाय: 11 30 ॥

So, knowing this world as subject to the control of Time, you can now fly away and go quickly to the Pātāla. For if you live, you will get in future all the pleasures; and if you be killed, you enemies will all be very glad and roam everywhere fearlessly, singing propitious songs.

Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of Niśumbha in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam,

the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

