[Ch 30 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Thus making a firm resolve that there would be either victory or death, the great warrior Niśumbha went to fight with the Devi, with great excitement and with all his forces.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Thus making a firm resolve that there would be either victory or death, the great warrior Niśumbha went to fight with the Devī, with great excitement and with all his forces.

[Ch 30 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Šumbha, too the Lord of the Daityas, accompanied by his forces, went after Niśumbha; Šumbha knew full well the rules of warfare; therefore he remained a witness there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śumbha, too the Lord of the Daityas, accompanied by his forces, went after Niśumbha; Śumbha knew full well the rules of warfare; therefore he remained a witness there.

[Ch 30 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra and the other Devas and Yakṣas, all stationed themselves in the celestial space, eager to see that fight, covered with clouds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra and the other Devas and Yakṣas, all stationed themselves in the celestial space, eager to see that fight, covered with clouds.

[Ch 30 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nisūmbha came to the field, and, taking the strong bow made of horns, began to shoot arrow after arrows at the Divine Mother with the object of frightening Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Niśumbha came to the field, and, taking the strong bow made of horns, began to shoot arrows after arrows at the Divine Mother with the object of frightening Her.

[Ch 30 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing Niśumbha with his excellent bow, shooting arrows, Candikā began to laugh frequently.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing Niśumbha with his excellent bow, shooting arrows, Caṇḍikā began to laugh frequently.

[Ch 30 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► With a soft slow voice She spoke to Kalikā: "O Kāli! See their foolishness! They have come before me, courting death. They are so much deluded by My Māyā, that they yet expect victory when they have already witnessed the death of Raktabjā and many Dānavas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► With a soft slow voice She spoke to Kālikā :-- “O Kālī! See their foolishness! They have come before me, courting death. They are so much deluded by My Māyā, that they yet expect victory when they have already witnessed the death of Raktabīja and many Dānavas.

[Ch 30 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hope is so very that it never quits a man. How wonderful is this that some of their armies are destroyed, some are wounded, some are rendered senseless, some made powerless, some have fled; seeing all these, yet, they have come to fight, as it were, fastened by the cord of hope of victory. O Kāli! Today I will certainly slay Niśumbha and Śumbha.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hope is so very strong that it never quits a man. How wonderful is this that some of their armies are destroyed, some are wounded, some are rendered senseless, some made powerless, some have fled; seeing all these, yet, they have come to fight, as it were, fastened by the cord of hope of victory. O Kālī! Today I will certainly slay Niśumbha and Śumbha.

[Ch 30 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Their death is nigh; deluded by the Daivi Maya, they have come to Me. Therefore, in the face of all the Devas, I will kill them to day.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Their death is nigh; deluded by the Daivī Māyā, they have come to Me. Therefore, in the face of all the Devas, I will kill them today.”

[Ch 30 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Thus saying, and suddenly drawing Her bow, Candi covered Niśumbha, in front, all over with a multitude of arrows. Niśumbha, too, cut off those arrows into pieces by his sharp arrows; thus the fight became more and more dreadful between them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Thus saying, and suddenly drawing Her bow, Caṇḍī covered Niśumbha, in front, all over with a multitude of arrows. Niśumbha, too, cut off those arrows into pieces by his sharp arrows; thus the fight became more and more dreadful between them.

[Ch 30 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this time, the lion of Bhagavati, came down upon the forces, quivering his manes, like a powerful elephant going down into a lake.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this time, the lion of Bhagavatī, came down upon the forces, quivering his manes, like a powerful elephant going down into a lake.

[Ch 30 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► By his nails and teeth, he tore asunder the bodies of the Dānavas that fell before him and devoured them, as if they were infatuated elephants.
NEW CORR ENG ──► By his nails and teeth, he tore asunder the bodies of the Dānavas that fell before him and devoured them, as if they were infatuated elephants.

[Ch 30 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That lion thus crushing down the soldiers, Nüsumbha came forward hurriedly, drawing his excellent bow. Hundreds of other generals of the Dānavas came up there to kill the Devi, biting their lips and with their eyes reddened with anger.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That lion thus crushing down the soldiers, Niśumbha came forward hurriedly, drawing his excellent bow. Hundreds of other generals of the Dānavas came up there to kill the Devī, biting their lips and with their eyes reddened with anger.

[Ch 30 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the meantime Śumbha killed Kālīkā and came very hurriedly there with his forces to capture the Divine Mother.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the meantime Śumbha killed Kālikā and came very hurriedly there with his forces to capture the Divine Mother.

[Ch 30 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Coming to the battle field Sumbha saw that the Divine Mother was standing before him; though She was looking very beautiful, fit for love sentiment, yet She was filled also with the sentiment of fiery wrath.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Coming to the battlefield Śumbha saw that the Divine Mother was standing before him; though She was looking very beautiful, fit for love sentiment, yet She was filled also with the sentiment of fiery wrath.

[Ch 30 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At that time the large eyes of Bhagavatī, the Beautiful in the three worlds, though naturally red, looked more red due to wrath.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At that time the large eyes of Bhagavatī, the Beautiful in the three worlds, though naturally red, looked more red due to wrath.

[Ch 30 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Śumbha saw Her lovely feature, the desire to marry Her and the hope of victory all vanished away from his mind; and he stood there with bow in his hand, firmly holding in his mind that he would die.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Śumbha saw Her lovely features, the desire to marry Her and the hope of victory all vanished away from his mind; and he stood there with bow in his hand, firmly holding in his mind that he would die.

[Ch 30 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Wretched Fools! If you all want to live, quite all your weapons here, go to the Pātāla or to the middle of the ocean.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Wretched Fools! If you all want to live, quit all your weapons here, go to the Pātāla or to the middle of the ocean.

[Ch 30 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Or be slain in the battle by My arrows and go to heavens and enjoy there without any fear all the enjoyments and sports there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Or be slain in the battle by My arrows and go to heavens and enjoy there without any fear all the enjoyments and sports there.

[Ch 30 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Weakness and heroism, both cannot be expected at one and the same time and at the same individual; therefore I am ordering you to dispel your fears. Now go wherever you find your ease and happiness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Weakness and heroism, both cannot be expected at one and the same time and at the same individual; therefore I am ordering you to dispel your fears. Now go wherever you find your ease and happiness.

[Ch 30 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing these words of the Devi, that haughty Niśumbha ran forward, holding in his hand the sharpened axe and shield adorned with eight Candras (embossed) and firstly struck with sword violently on the proud lion; then, whirling with great force that sword, hurled it upon the Divine Mother.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing these words of the Devī, that haughty Niśumbha ran forward, holding in his hand the sharpened axe and shield adorned with eight Caṇḍras (embossed) and firstly struck with sword violently on the proud lion; then, whirling with great force that sword, hurled it upon the Divine Mother.

[Ch 30 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi, then, thwarted off the blow of the sword by Her club and struck at his arm by Paraśu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī, then, thwarted off the blow of the sword by Her club and struck at his arm by Paraśu.

[Ch 30 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The warrior Niśumbha, thus struck at his arm, patiently bore that hurt and struck at Candikā by his axe. The Devi then made such a terrible noise of bells that all the Daityas were struck with terror.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The warrior Niśumbha, thus struck at his arm, patiently bore that hurt and struck at Caṇḍikā by his axe. The Devī then made such a terrible noise of bells that all the Daityas were struck with terror.

[Ch 30 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then She, desiring to kill Niśumbha, began to drink nectar frequently. O King! Thus the terrible fight went on between the Devas and Dānavas both trying to defeat the other party.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then She, desiring to kill Niśumbha, began to drink nectar frequently. O King! Thus the terrible fight went on between the Devas and Dānavas both trying to defeat the other party.

[Ch 30 Verse 31-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then began to dance ir the battle-field, the cruel varacious dogs, jackals, vultures, herons, crows and other birds, very much gladdened. The battlefield was drenched in blood and the dead carcasses of innumerable Dānavas, elephants, and horses were strewn around. Nisūmbha, then, seeing the Dānavas dead on the field, became very angry and ran forward with his terrible club before the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then began to dance in the battlefield, the cruel voracious dogs, jackals, vultures, herons, crows and other birds, very much gladdened. The battlefield was drenched with blood and the dead carcasses of innumerable Dānavas, elephants, and horses. Niśumbha, then, seeing the Dānavas dead on the field, became very angry and ran forward with his terrible club before the Devī.

[Ch 30 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That proud Asura struck first at the head of the lion with that club and laughed again and again and struck the Devi with that same club. The Devi, too, got very angry seeing Niśumbha before Her and striking at Her. She then spoke thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► That proud Asura struck first at the head of the lion with that club and laughed again and again and struck the Devī with that same club. The Devī, too, got very angry seeing Niśumbha before Her and striking at Her. She then spoke thus :--

[Ch 30 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O You Stupid! Wait till I sever your head from your body by this axe. Soon you will be sent unto death with your head severed off your body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O You Stupid! Wait till I sever your head from your body by this axe. Soon you will be sent unto death with your head severed off your body.

[Ch 30 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Thus saying, the Caṇḍikā Devī instantly cut off the head of Niśumbha by Her axe with great caution.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Thus saying the Caṇḍikā Devī instantly cut off the head of Niśumbha by Her axe with great caution.

[Ch 30 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The head thus severed from the body by the blow of the Devī, the headless Demon began to roam there with great force with club in his hand. The Devas then got very much frightened.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The head thus severed from the body by the blow of the Devī, the headless Demon began to roam there with great force with club in his hand. The Devas then got very much frightened;

[Ch 30 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devī, then, cut off the hands and feet of that headless Demon with sharpened arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī, then, cut off the hands and feet of that headless Demon with sharpened arrows.

[Ch 30 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That vicious wretch fell down lifeless, on the ground like a mountain. The powerful Daityas Niśumbha being thus killed, a great uproar arose amidst his panic stricken forces.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That vicious wretch fell down lifeless, on the ground like a mountain. The powerful Daitya Niśumbha being thus killed, a great uproar arose amidst his panic stricken forces.

[Ch 30 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The soldiers, covered all over their bodies with blood, left all their weapons in the field, began to make Boombā sound (a piteous cry with mouth and hands as sign of danger) and fled away to the king Śumbha.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The soldiers, covered all over their bodies with blood, left all their weapons in the field, began to make Boombā sound (a piteous cry with mouth and hands as sign of danger) and fled away to the King Śumbha.

[Ch 30 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He, the tormentor of the foes, then asked them coming: "Where is Niśumbha now? Why have you fled away from the field?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► He, the tormentor of the foes, then asked them coming :-- “Where is Niśumbha now? Why have you fled away from the field?”

[Ch 30 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus hearing the King's words, they bowed down and said: "O King! Your brother Niśumbha is lying dead on the battle-field.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus hearing the King’s words, they bowed down and said :-- O King! Your brother Niśumbha is lying dead on the battlefield.

[Ch 30 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King The Devi killed all the Dānava warriors that attended your brother; only we are left and have come here to give you the information.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The Devī killed all the Dānava warriors that attended your brother; only we are left and have come here to give you the information.

[Ch 30 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Niśumbha has been killed by the weapons of the Devi. So we think you ought not to go to the battle.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Niśumbha has been killed by the weapons of the Devī. So we think you ought not to go to the battle.

[Ch 30 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Know this as certain that the Lady, the Highest Cause of this Universe has come here to destroy the Dānavas, the object being to serve the cause of the Gods.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Know this as certain that the Lady, the Highest Cause of this Universe has come here to destroy the Dānavas, the object being to serve the cause of the Gods.

[Ch 30 Verse 47-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Lady is not an ordinary woman; She is the Supreme Force; Her doings are inconceivable; what more can be said than the fact that the Devas never can know Her! This Devi can assume various forms; She is the origin of Māyā; She is very clever; She is adorned with various ornaments and is holding various weapons in Her hands.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This Lady is not an ordinary woman; She is the Supreme Force; Her doings are inconceivable; what more can be said than the fact that the Devas never can know Her! This Devī can assume various forms; She is the origin of Māyā; She is very clever; She is adorned with various ornaments and is holding various weapons in Her hands.

[Ch 30 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her doings are incomprehensible; She is like a Second Night of Dissolution (at the end of the world); She is Perfect, endowed with all auspicious signs, capable to go beyond the insurmountable.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her doings are incomprehensible; She is like a Second Night of Dissolution (at the end of the world); She is Perfect, endowed with all auspicious signs, capable to go beyond the insurmountable.

[Ch 30 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This wonderful Devi is serving the cause of the gods and the Devas from the sky are singing hymns to Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This wonderful Devī is serving the cause of the gods and the Devas from the sky are singing hymns to Her.

[Ch 30 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! It is now your paramount duty to fly away and save your life; if you live, you may have the chance for gaining the victory when time will turn out favourable; there is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! It is now your paramount duty to fly away and save your life; if you live, you may have the chance for gaining the victory when time will turn out favourable; there is no doubt in this.

[Ch 30 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is Time that makes a strong man weak; and it is that very Time that makes that weak man strong again and stimulates him for victory.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is Time that makes a strong man weak; and it is that very Time that makes that weak man strong again and stimulates him for victory.

[Ch 30 Verse 53-54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Time makes a generous donor a beggar and it is Time that makes the same beggar again a generous donor. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa, Indra and other Devas are all under the sway of this Time; so Time is the Sovereign of all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Time makes a generous donor a beggar and it is Time that makes the same beggar again a generous donor. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa, Indra and other Devas are all under the sway of this Time; so Time is the Sovereign of all.

[Ch 30 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O King! Wait for this Time. Now Time is favourable to the Gods and inimical to you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O King! Wait for this Time. Now Time is favourable to the Gods and inimical to you.

[Ch 30 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore Time is destroying now the Daityas. But the course of Time is not the same throughout. O King! The actions of Time are various no doubt.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore Time is destroying now the Daityas. But the course of Time is not the same throughout. O King! The actions of Time are various no doubt.

[Ch 30 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Time creates men and Time destroys them. The time of creation is different from the time of destruction, this is evident to you before your eyes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Time creates men and Time destroys them. The time of creation is different from the time of destruction, this is evident to you before your eyes.

[Ch 30 Verse 58-60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See! When Time was favourable to you, you subjected Indra and all other Devas and made them pay taxes to you; and now Time is unfavourable to you; so an ordinary weak woman is killing the powerful Dānavas; Time, therefore, is doing favourable things and also unfavourable things. The host of Devas or the woman Kālī is not the cause thereof.
NEW CORR ENG ──► See! When Time was favourable to you, you subject Indra and all other Devas and made them pay taxes to you; and now Time is unfavourable to you; so an ordinary weak woman is killing the powerful Dānavas; Time, therefore, is doing favourable things and also unfavourable things. The host of Devas or the woman Kālī is not the cause thereof.

[Ch 30 Verse 61-62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The present Time is not favourable to you and the Daityas; knowing this, do as you like. See! Indra, Viṣṇu, Varuna, Yama and other prominent Devas all fled before in battle, quitting their weapons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The present Time is not favourable to you and the Daityas; knowing this, do as you like. See! Indra, Viṣṇu, Varuṇa, Yama and other prominent Devas all fled before in battle, quitting the weapons.

[Ch 30 Verse 63-64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So, knowing this world as subject to the control of Time, you can now fly away and go quickly to the Pātāla. For if you live, you will get in future all the pleasures; and if you be killed, you enemies will all be very glad and roam everywhere fearlessly, singing propitious songs. Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of Niśumbha in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So, knowing this world as subject to the control of Time, you can now fly away and go quickly to the Pātāla. For if you live, you will get in future all the pleasures; and if you be killed, your enemies will all be very glad and roam everywhere fearlessly, singing propitious songs. Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of Niśumbha in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
