CHAPTER VII

On the Praise of the Devi

सूत उतार

तौ वीक्ष्य बलिनी बह्या तदोपायान्धितयत् ।

सामदानभिवादीशं युद्धोतानसंरक्षिति ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: Seeing the two Dānavas very powerful, Brahmā, the knower of all the śāstras, thought of the means Sāma, Dāma, Bheda, Dāndā (conciliation, gifts, (bribe, or sowing dissensions and war or punishment); which of these four he should apply.

न जानेई वर्ल नुन्नमेतोवांं यथात्यम् ।

अजाने तु वले कामं नैव युद्धे प्रशस्यते ॥ 2 ॥

He thought thus: I do not know their strength and it is not advisable to enter into war without knowing their strength.

सूति क्रौमि चेददा दुव्योर्मदमतयो: ।

प्रकाशित भवेधूनं निवर्तेल मया स्वयम् ॥ 3 ॥

वधिष्यति तदैको3पि निवर्तेले प्रकाशिते ।

दानं नैवाए योगेवा वा भेदः कावो मया कवम् ॥ 4 ॥

Again, if I offer praises to them puffed up with pride, it will be simply displaying my own weakness; and when they will come to know this, only one of them will be sufficient to kill me and this they will do certainly. To offer bribes is not also advisable; and how can I sow dissensions.

विष्णु प्रवोधायमद्ध शेषे शूरतं जनादनम् ।

वतुर्भूत्रं महावीरं दुःखहा स भविष्यति ॥ 5 ॥

Therefore, it is best that I should rouse the four-armed Janārdana Viṣṇu, who is very powerful, from his sleep on the thousand, headed Ananta serpent. He will remove my difficulties.'

इति संचित्य मनसा पदानालगतो$3बजः ।

जगाम गरणं विष्णुं मनसा दुः:खानगकम् ॥ 6 ॥

तुहाव योधनार्थ नं तुभी: सप्वोधपर्नेहीम् ।

नारायणं जगन्धार्थ निस्पये योगनिद्रया ॥ 7 ॥

Thus thinking in his mind, Bhagavān Brahmā, the lotus-born remained in the tubular stalk of the lotus from Viṣṇu's navel and thence took refuge mentally of Viṣu, the remover of difficulties and began to chant auspicious hymns composed of various metres to Jagannātha Nārāyaṇa, involved in deep Yogandārdā (meditative sleep).

ब्रह्मोचच

दीनानाथ हरे विध्यो वामानोत्रि माधव ।

भक्तानिरहद्यूर्पिकेग सर्वावास जानचते ॥ 8 ॥

अत्यांमिभवेयायात्मन् वासुदेव जानयते ।

दुह्यानिरागेनैकायाजित चक्रनाद्धर ॥ 9 ॥

He said: “O Refuge of the poor! O Hari! O Viṣṇu! O Vāmana! O Mādava, Thou art the Lord of the universe and omnipresent. O Hṛṣikeśa! Thou removest all the difficulties of Thy devotees; therefore leave your Yoganidrā and get up. O Vāsudeva! O Lord of the Universe! Thou resistest within the hearts of all and knowest their desires. O Thou, holder of the disc and club! Thou always destroyest the enemies of Thy devotees.

सर्वत्रे सर्वतीकेश सर्वशक्तिस्मयिति ।

उत्तिष्ठान्ति देवेशु दुःखानाशन पाहि मण् ॥ 10 ॥

O Omniscient One! Thou art the lord of all the lokas and all-powerful; no one can know what is Thy form; O Lord of the Devas! Thou art the

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

destroyer of all pains and sufferings! So get up and protect me.

विश्वभर विशालाक्ष पुण्यप्रवणकीर्तन ।

जगाओने निराकार सर्गसिध्यलताकार ॥ 11 ॥

O Protector of the Universe! nothing is concealed from Thy eyes! Every one becomes pure by hearing and chanting Thy name. Thou art Nirākāra (without any form); yet Thou createst, preserve and destroyst the Universe.

इमौ दैत्यी महाराज हेतुकामी मदोद्धतों ।

न जानास्यखिलाधार कर्म मां सकटे गतन् ॥ 12 ॥

O Cause of the world! O Supporter of all; Thou art shining as king of kings over all and yet Thou dost not understand that the two Dānavas, puffed up with pride have become ready to kill me.

उपेक्षेस्त्रिषु:खात्रं यदि मां शरणं गतन् ।

पालतक्लं महाविष्णो निरायारं भवेत्तः ॥ 13 ॥

If thou dost neglect me, seeing me very much distressed and under your protection then Thy name as Preserver will become quite useless."

एवं स्तुतोर्षि भगवात्र युवोध यदा हरि: ।

योगानिरासमाक्रान्तस्तदा बढ़ा हार्धितयाद् ॥ 14 ॥

नूनं शक्तिसमाक्रांतो विज्णनिद्रावर्गे नतः ।

जजागार न धर्माता कि कौरोमध्य दु:खितः ॥ 15 ॥

हैतुकामावृषी प्राणी दानवी घटगविति ।

कि कारोमि कव नष्ठाधि नास्ति मे शरणं कवचित् ॥ 16 ॥

Thus praised, when Viṣṇu did not get up, Brahmā thought that “Bhagavān Viṣṇu is now surely under the influence of sleep of the Primal Force Ādyā Śakti and is not therefore getting up; what am I do now, thus distressed! These two Dānavas, elated with pride are ready to kill me; now what am I to do and where shall I go? I don’t find anybody who can protect me any where.”

इति संघिंव मनसा निष्यां प्रतिपच च ।

तृहाव योगिनाई तामेकाप्रद्धवस्थितः ॥ 17 ॥

विवार्यं मनसाप्रयेचं शफिर्मे स्थमे भगा ।

यथा इतेनतो विष्णु: कृतोस्ति सर्वदार्षितः ॥ 18 ॥

Thus thinking, Brahmā came to the conclusion and decided to chant hymns to Yoga Nidrā Herself with one pointed heart. Discussing in his mind, He

thought that that Ādyā Śakti (the Prime Force) which kept Bhagavān Viṣṇu, senseless and motionless would alone be able to save him.

व्यसुर्यान त जानाति गुणाऊष्ट्र दिकानितु ।

तथा हरिं जानाति निद्रामीतिलतोचनः ॥ १९ ॥

न जहाति यतो निद्रां बहुधा स नृतोप्रयतो ।

मन्ये नास्य बये निद्रा निद्रावयं बशीकृतः ॥ 20 ॥

यो यस्य वशमापात्रः स तस्य किंकतः किल।

तस्माच्च योगनिद्रेयं स्वामिनी मापतेईः ॥ 21 ॥

As a dead man cannot hear any sound so Hari, merged in deep sleep, knows not anything. When I have praised Him so much and when He has not awakened, then it is certain that sleep is not under Hari, but Hari is under sleep, and he who is under another becomes his slave; so this Yoga Nidrā is now exercising Her control over Hari.

सिंधुजाया अधि वर्षे यथा स्थामी वर्षोतुतः ।

नूनं जनदिंदं सर्वे भगवत्या वशीकृतम् ॥ 22 ॥

Again she, too, who brought Hari under control, that daughter of the Kṣira (milk) ocean is now under the control of Yoga Nidrā; so it seems that that Bhagavatī Mahāmāyā has brought the whole Universe under Her control.

अर्ह विगुस्तसा शम्भुः सावित्री च रामायुगा ।

सर्वे वयं वरेगे यस्या नात्र किंचिविडारणा ॥ 23 ॥

Whether it be Myself, or Viṣṇu or Śambhu, or Śāvitrī or Ramā or Umā, all are under Her control; there is nothing to be doubted here?

हरिर्यावश: शेते यधान्य: प्राकृतो जनः ।

यथापिभूतः कावातर्गिकलान्येभगहतानगः। 24 ॥

What to speak of other high souled persons! Now I will chant hymns to Yoga Nidrā, under whose influence Bhagavān Hari even is lying, under deep sleep, inert like an ordinary man.

स्तीमध्य योगिन्हि वै यया मुक्तो जनादनः ।

घटथिषाति युद्धे च वासुदेवः सनातनः ॥ 25 ॥

When the eternal Vāsudeva Janārdana will be dispossessed by Her, He will no doubt fight with the Dānavas.

इति कृत्वा मर्ति ब्रह्मा पचनालस्थितस्तदा ।

तुहाव योगिनांतं ति शिक्षोगोपेरिणु संशित्यान् ॥ 26 ॥

Book I Chapter VII

Thus deciding, Bhagavā Brahmā, seated on the tubular stalk of the lotus, began to chant hymns to Yoga Nidrā, residing on the body of Viṣṇu, thus.

ब्रह्मोवाच

देवि ल्यमस्य जगतः किल कारणं हि

जातं मया सकलेवेद्वयोभिपन्य ।

यदिष्युग्यिखललोकाविवेकाकर्ता

निद्रावर्ष च गामितः पुरुषोत्मोउढ् ॥ 27 ॥

को बेव ते जननि मोहविलासलीलां

मूढोउस्मदं हरिरयं विवराश्छ शेते ।

ईंद्रक्तया सकलभूममनोनिवासे

विद्वनामो विबुध्यकौटिपु निर्गुणाया:॥ 28 ॥

Brahmā said: “O Devi! I have come to understand on the authority of all the words of the Vedas, that Thou art the only One Cause of this Universal Brahmāṇḍa. The more so when Thou hast brought the best Puruṣa Viṣṇu, endowed with discrimination above all beings, under the control of sleep, then the above remark is self-evident.

O Thou, the Player in the minds of all beings! O Mother! I am extremely ignorant of the knowledge of Thy nature; when Bhagavān Hari is sleeping inert by Thy power, then who is there amongst Koṭis and Koṭis of wise men, who can understand completely the Pastime, Lilā, full of Māyā of Thine, who art beyond the Gunas.

सांख्या वर्तित पुरुषं प्रकृति व यां

तां चैतन्यभावरितां जनातँ कर्मीम ।

किं तातूणासि कल्यज्ञ जगन्धिवास-

श्रीतत्यातिवहितो विहोतस्त्वयाउचि ॥29 ॥

नात्यं तनोय सगुण विविधप्रकारं

नो वेति कोर्पि तव कृत्यविधानयोग् ।

ध्यार्योत यां मुनिणा निवतं विकालं

संध्येति नाम परिकल्य युणान्यवाति ॥ 30 ॥

The Sānkhyā philosophers say that the Puruṣa (the male aspect of Śakti) is the pure, conscious being and that Thou art the Prakṛti, without any consciousness, material inert, Creatrix of the universe; but, O Mother! art Thou really inert like that? Never like that; had it been like that, how is

it that Thou hast made Bhagavān Hari, the receptacle of the world quite unconscious like this? O Bhavānī! Thou, being beyond the Guṇas art displaying like a dramatic performance these various dramatic plays by the conjunction with the three Guṇas. It is Thy three qualities, Sattva, Rajas and Tamas that the Munis meditate every day in the morning mid-day, and evening, the three Sandhyās; but no one is aware of Thy ways of doings.

बुद्धिहिं बोधकरणा जानता सदा त्वं

श्रीशासि देवि सन्त सुखदा सुराणाम् ।

कीर्तिस्वा मित्युक्ती किल कांतितेय

शब्दा रतिश्व सकलेषु जनयु मातः ॥ 31 ॥

नातः परं किल वितर्कशर्गतः

प्रमाणं प्राप्तं मया यदिह़ दुःगति गतेन ।

त्वे चात्र सर्वर्जानां जननीति सर्व

निद्रालुतां वित्तता हरिणज्ञ दृष्टम् ॥ 32 ॥

O Devi! Thou art of the nature of the judgment and understanding giving rise to knowledge of all the beings in the Universe; Thou art always the Śri (wealth and prosperity) giving pleasures to the Devas. O Mother! Thou art reigning in all as Kirti (fame), Mati (intellect), Dhrti (fortitude), Kānti (beauty) Śraddhā (faith) and Rati (enjoyment). O Mother! Now I am put to great difficulties and therefore, I have got eye witness of Thy nature; no need of further reasoning and discussing about it.

लं देवि वेदिविदुषामपि दुर्विभाव्या

वेदोर्पि नृन्मवित्राणताया न वेद ।

यस्मात्वदुब्रमयी श्रुतितपुवाना

प्रत्यक्षमेव सकलं तव कार्येति ॥ 33 ॥

I have now known that verily, verily Thou art the only Mother of all the worlds as Thou hast brought Hari under the influence of sleep. O Devi! Now when it is evident that all the worlds, etc., have come from Thee, then the Vedas have also come from Thee; what doubt is there? So the Vedas, too, do not know fully Thy nature; for the effect can never know its cause.

कते चरित्रमखिलं भृति वेद

धीमाज्ञहं हरिंचे च भवो न सुरासलास०-२ ।।

ज्ञातुं क्षमाशु मुनयो न मामतायाजाशु

दुर्बीच्य एल महिमा तव सर्वतोके ॥ 34 ॥

So, it is very true that Thou art incomprehensible of the Vedas. O Mother! When I, Hari, Hara and the other Devas and my son Nārada and other Munis have not able to realise Thy nature fully, then who else can be so intelligent in this world that will realise all Thy nature? So, Thy glory is beyond the speech of all beings.

यजेसु देय यदि नाम न ते वद्रति

स्वाहिते वेदविद्युचो हवने कृतेश्वि ।

न प्रापुवंति सततं मखभाणोघं

देवास्मेवम विबुधेघवि वृत्तिदासि ॥ 35 ॥

O Devi! If, in the place of sacrifice, the ritualists, the knowers of the Vedas, do not utter Thy name Svāha, then the Devas, participants of the offerings in Yajīna, do not get their share, however hundreds of oblations be offered; so Thou art also the giver of sustenance allowances to the Devas.

ग्राता वयं भगवाति प्रवयं त्वया

वै देवारिसंभवभगदायुना तथैव ।

भौतोरास्म दैवि वरदे शरणं गतोरस्म

घोरं निरीक्ष्य मधुना सह कैटभं च ॥ ३६ ॥

O Bhagavati! In previous Kalpas, Thou hadst saved me terrified from the fear of the Dānavas. O Devi Varade! now, too, I am terrified at the sight of the terrible forms of Madhu and Kaitabha and take Thy refuge.

ने वेति विधापुरभुना मम

दुःखमेतजाने त्यायात्मविशणीकृतदेश्यिः ।

मृचाविद्वेमयाव जहि दानवेंशी

यूँत्रोते तव कुरुच महानुभावे ॥ 37 ॥

O high-minded one! Now I thoroughly see that by Thee, by Thy power Yoganidrā the whole body of Bhagavān Viṣṇu is senseless; but how is it that Thou dost not realise my sufferings. So, either dost thou leave possession of this Ādi-Deva, or destroy Thyself these two Dānavendras—dost of either of the two as Thou likest.

जानांति चे न तव देवि परं प्रभावं

ध्यायांति ते हरित्रावयि मंदधिचना: ।

ज्ञातं मयासऊ जानन प्रकटं प्रपाणं

यदिष्ण्यत्वित्तगं विवशगोस शेते ॥ 38 ॥

O Devi! Those that do not know Thy extraordinary powers, those stupid ones meditate Hari, Hara, etc. But, O Mother! By Thy grace, I realise today, as eye-witness, that Viṣṇu even is today lying unconscious in deep sleep, totally senseless of anything outside by Thy force.

सिन्धूद्वायि न हरि प्रतिवोधितुं

वै शक्ता पति तव यशानुगमघ शक्त्या ।

मन्ये तवया भगवति प्रसर्भे स्यायि

प्रस्वापिता न बुबुधे विश्वगीक्षांते ॥ 39 ॥

O Bhagavati! Now, when Kamalā, the daughter of Sindhu is unable to rouse Her husband Hari, by her effort, or rather Thou hast made Her, too, perforce, sleep unconsciously, it seems she is without any effort and does not know anything of what is going on outside.

धन्यात एव भृवि भक्तिपरास्त्राणी

त्वक्लास-यदेवभजनं त्वयि लीनभावाः ।

कुर्विति देवि भजनं सकलं निकामं

जात्वा समस्तजननीं किलन कामधेनुम् ॥ 40 ॥

O Devi! Verily those are blessed who worship Thy lotus feet with their whole heart full of devotion and without any hope of getting rewards, abondoning the worship of other Devas and knowing Thee as the Creatrix of the whole world and the giver of all desires.

धिकांतिकीर्तिण्यपहित्नगुपाद्यसेत

विष्णोगुणास्तु परित्य तगत: क्व चाछ ।

वंदीकृतो हरिस्ती ननु निव्यासउ

शक्यता तवेव भगतयतिमानत्वातः ॥ 41 ॥

Alas! now the intelligence beauty, fame, and all good qualities have forsaken Hari and fled away to some unknown quarters. O Bhagavati! Thou art really adorable in the three worlds for, by Thy power of Yoganidrā, Hari has been kept in prison, as it were, in this way.

Book 1 Chapter VII

त्वं शफित्वे जगतामवित्वल्पभावा

त्वार्मिति च सकलं खलु भावमात्रम् ।

तं क्रीडसे निविविनिमित्मोज्ञाने

नाट्ये यथा विह्तते स्वकृती नटो वे ॥ 42 ॥

O Mother! Thou art the Śakti of all this universe and endowed with all prowess and energy; all other things are Thy creation. As a dramatic player, though one, plays in the 'heatre, assuming many forms, so Thou, too, being one, playset always in this charming theatre of world, created by Thy Gunas, in various forms.

विष्णुस्वया प्रक्रतिः प्रथम् युगादी

दत्ता च शक्तिस्मला खलु पालनाय ।

ग्रातं च समर्वसितं विवशीकृतोडा

यूत्रोते तत तथाप्रया कलोषि नृन्म ॥ 4 3 ॥

मुह्यात्रा मां भपवाति प्रविनाशितुं

घेत्रेच्छाति ते कृक एवां पहित्य मोन्म ।

कस्मादिमो प्रकटिती किल कालकणी

यहा भवानि ह्मितुं नु किमिच्छसे माम || 44 ॥

ज्ञातं मया तत विजेहितम्बुतं वै

कृत्वांस्त्रिजां जापिट परमे स्वतंगा ।

लीनं कांपी सकल किल मां

तवैय हेतुं त्वमिच्छसि भवानि किमग्र तिचग्म ॥ 45 ॥

O, Mother! Thou, in the beginning of the Yugas, dost manifest first the Visupu form and givest him the pure Sattvik Śakti, free from any obscuration and thereby madest Him preserve the Universe; and now it is Thyself that hast kept Him thus unconscious; therefore, it is an undoubted fact that Thou art doing whatever Thou willest, O Bhagavatī! I am now in danger; if it be Thy desire not to kill me, then dost break the silence, look on me and show Thy mercy. O Bhavānī! If it be not Thy desire to kill me, then why hast Thou created these two Dānavas, my death incarnate; or is it that Thou wantedest to put me to ridicule. I have come to know of Thy wonderful acts; Thou createst this whole Universe, and Thyself remaining aloof, plays always and in the time of Pralaya resolvest everything again into Tbæ.

कामं कुरुच वधमघ मयेव

मातनुःखं ने मे पराणं जगदिबके

कर्ता त्वयैव विहितः प्रथम्

स चार्यं दैत्यातृते४य मृत् तृत्ययगो गरिष्ठम् ॥ 46 ॥

Therefore, O Bhavānī, what wonder is there, that Thou wouldst want to kill me in this way? But, O Mother! I wont feel any pain if Thou willingly killest me but this is to my great dishonour that being given power over these beings, I would then be made an object to be killed by the Daityas; this, indeed, is hard to me.

उत्तिषु देखे कुक रूपमिहाड़ुतुं

तं मां वा त्वमी जक्ति यथेछ्यिस बाललीतो ।

नोचेर्यबोधय हरि निर्भनैदोर्धी

यस्त्वलाथयमेदोर्धिति कल कार्वजात्मा ॥ 47 ॥

So, O Thou Lilāmayī like a sportive girl! get up! O Devi! assumest the wonderful form Thyself and kiliest me or the two Daityas, as Thou willest; or rouse Hari who will then kill 'he Daityas. All these are in Thy hands."

सूत जचाच

एवं सुत्ता तदा देवी तामसी तन येधसा ।

नि:सूत्य हरिदिकृतुं संस्थिता पार्थतस्तदा ॥ 48 ॥

त्यक्चलांगानि च सर्वाणि विधागोतृतेजस: ।

निर्भाता योगनिद्रा सा नाशाय च तयोस्ता ॥ 49 ॥

विस्यंदितशरीरोसरी यदा जातो जनादनः ।

धाता परमिकां प्राप्तो मुदं दृष्ट्वा हरि ततः ॥ 50 ॥

इति शीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणो प्रथमकक्रभे विद्यप्रबोषो नाम

सरनाभिश्याः ॥ 51 ॥

Sūta said: “Thus praised by Brahmā, the Nidrā Devi (the goddess of sleep), of the nature of Tamo Gunas, quitted the body of Bhagavān Hari and stood by him. When thus left completely by the Devi Yoga Nidrā, of unequalled brilliance and splendour, for the destruction of Madhu Kaitabha, Viṣṇu began to move his body and at this Brahmā became very glad.

Thus ends the Seventh Chapter of the First Book on the praise of the Devi, in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevi bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

