CHAPTER XXXIX

On Mahā Lakṣmi

नारद उवाच

श्रीमूलप्रकृतेद्वया गायव्यास्तु निराकृतेः ।

साविरीयमसंवादे श्रुतं चै निर्मलं वशः ॥ १ ॥

तद्गुणोक्लीनिं सत्यं मंगलानां च मंगलम् ।

अधाना श्रोतुमिच्छामि लक्ष्यपाण्डलानामीध्न ॥ 2 ॥

Nārada said: O Lord! I have heard in the discourse on Sāvitrī and Yama about the Formless Devi Mūla Prakṛti and the glories of Sāvitrī, all true and leading to the endless good. Now I want to hear the story of the Devi Lakṣmī. O Thou, the Chief of the knowers of the Vedas! What is the nature of Lakṣmī?

केनादौ पूजिता सार्थ पिंक भृता केन वा पुरा ।

तदुगणोत्किनीत मढ़ो वद्द विद्वीत वर ॥ ३ ॥

By whom was She first worshipped? and by what Mantra? Kindly describe Her glories to me.

शीनारायण उवाच

मुटोरांत पुत्र बढ़ान्छान्य परमासनः ।

देवी वामासंभृता बघ्य रासमंडेल ॥ 4 ॥

उर्जीव सुदरी ग्रवामा न्यप्रोधारमिडता ।

यथा द्वारणवर्गीय शश्वसृत्यिरयोग्ना ॥ 5 ॥

ग्रवेतचफवजर्णाभा सुखदूगया मनोहरा ।

शरत्यावर्णिकोटीदुपभाप्रस्तदानना ॥ 6 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: Of old, in the beginning of the Prākṛtika Creation, from the left side of Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Spirit, appeared in the Rāsamandalam (the Figure Dance) a Devī. She looked exceedingly handsome, of a dark blue colour, of spacious hips, of thin waist, and with high breast, looking twelve years old, of steady youth, of a colour of white Campaka flower and very lovely. The beauty of Her face throws under shade millions and millions of autumnal full moons.

साम्यम्याप्रदायानां शोभामोचनलोचना ।

सा देरी द्विविधा भूता सह सर्वेश्रैच्छया ॥ 7 ॥

स्वीयक्षेण बर्णीन तेजसा व्यसा त्रिवा ।

यशसा वाससा कृत्वा धृष्णेने गुणेन च ॥ 8 ॥

Before Her wide expanded eyes, the midday lotus of the autumnal season becomes highly ashamed. By the Will of God, this Devi suddenly divided Herself into two parts. The two looked equal in every respect; whether in beauty, qualities, age, loveliness, colour, body, spirit, dress ornaments, smile, glance, love, or humanity, they were perfectly equal.

सितेन वीक्षणेपेव प्रेरणा वासूनयेन च ।

तद्वारांसाम्हाल्क्यसीद्विणांसाच्च राधिका ॥ 9 ॥

राधास्टी द्वी वरयामास दिषुर्णं च परात्यम् ।

महालक्ष्मीश तत्थान्चकर्मे कमनीयकम् ॥ 10 ॥

Now she who appeared from the right side is named Rádhā and she who came from the left side is named Mahā Lakṣmī. Rádhā wanted first the two armed Śri Kṛṣṇa, Who was Higher than the highest; then Mahā Lakṣmī wanted Him.

कृष्णसद्गीरावीय द्विःतणो बयुर ह ।

दक्षिणांसह्य दिषुपुंजो बगामसहच्छतुर्पुंजः ॥  1 1 ॥

चतुषुंगाय दिषुपुंजो महाकृष्णी ददी पुरा ।

लक्ष्यते शुभ्यते विखुं सिन्याद्धुखा यवाड़ीनगम् ॥ 1 2 ॥

देवीभूता च महाती महातक्ष्मीघा सा स्मृता ।

Rādhā came out of the right side and wanted first Krṣna; so Krṣna, too, divided himself at once into two parts. From His right side came out the two-armed and from his left side came out the four-named The two-armed person first made over to Mahā Lakṣmī the four-armed One; then the two-armed person Himself took Rādhā. Lakṣmī looks on the whole universe with a cooling eye; hence She is named Lakṣmī and as She is great, She is called Mahā Lakṣmī.

राधाकांतक्ष दिषुजी लक्ष्मीकांतक्षानुर्षि: ॥ 13 ॥

शूद्रसचल्यस्तपा च गोरौर्गोंभिभातृता ।

चतुर्वंजक शैकुणं प्रवयी पदाया सह ॥ 14 ॥

And for that reason the Lord of Rādhā is two-armed and the Lord of Lakṣmī is four-armed. Rādhā is pure Aprākrtic Śuddha Sattva (of the nature of pure Sattva Guṇa, the illuminating

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

attribute) and surrounded by the Gopas and Gopis. The four-armed Puruṣa, on the other hand, took Lakṣmī (Padmā) to Vaikuntha.

सर्वर्गेन समी ती ही कृष्णनारायणी वरी ।

महाल्यक्षीय योगेन नानाक्या बभूव सा ॥ 15 ॥

बैकुण्डे च महाल्यक्षी: परिपूर्णतमा राम ।

गृह्मसचल्वसना च सर्वसीभायसंयुना ॥ 16 ॥

The two-armed person in Krṣṇa; and the four-armed is Nārāyaṇa. They are equal in all respects. Mahā Lakṣmī became many by Her Yogic powers. (i.e., She remained in full in Vaikuntha and assumed many forms in parts). Mahā Lakṣmī of Vaikuntha is full, of pure Sattva Guṇa, and endowed with all sorts of wealth and prosperity.

प्रेणा सा च प्रधाना च सर्वसृ तपणीषु च ।

स्वपौष्य स्वार्लक्सीय शक्संपरवल्किपणि ॥ 17 ॥

पाताले नाराल्क्यीय राजलक्ष्मीय राजसु ।

गृहलक्ष्मीगृह्चेय च गृहिंगं च कलांगतः ॥ 18 ॥

संपल्सक्या गृहिंगां सर्वमंगलमंगला ।

गवां प्रसृति: सुराभिर्दिक्षणा चत्रकामिनी ॥ 19 ॥

She is the crest of woman-kind as far as loving one's husbands is concerned. She is the Svarga Lakṣmī in the Heavens; the Nāga Lakṣmī of the serpents, the Nāgas, in the nether regions; the Rāja Lakṣmī of the kings and the Household Lakṣmī of the householders. She resides in the houses of house-holders as prosperity and the most auspicious of all good things. She is the progenetrix, She is the Surabhi of cows and She is the Dakṣinā (the sacrificial fee) in sacrifices.

श्रीरोसिंधुकन्या सा श्रील्पा पश्चिनीषु च ।

गोभावस्क्या चन्द्रे च सूर्यमंडलमंडिता ॥ 20 ॥

She is the daughter of the milk ocean and she is Padmini, the beauty of the spheres of the Moon and the Sun.

विषयूणोषु रन्तेषु फलेषु च जलेषु च ।

नृपेषु नृपपत्नीषु दिव्यक्षीषु गृहेषु च ॥ 21 ॥

सर्वसत्ययु वलेषु स्थानेषु संकृतेषु च ।

प्रतिमासु च देवानां मंगलेषु घटेषु च ॥ 22 ॥

माणिक्येषु च मुक्तासु माल्येषु च मनोहरा ।

मणीत्रेषु च हरिषु क्षीरुषु चन्दनेषु च ॥ 23 ॥

चक्षणाखासु रथासु नवमेधेषु वस्तुवु ।

वैकुण्डे पूजिता साउसदी देवी नारायणेन च ॥ 24 ॥

She is the lustre and beauty of the ornaments, gems, fruits, water, kings, queens, heavenly women, of all the houses, grains, clothings, cleansed places, images, auspicious jars, pearls, jewels, crest of jewels, garlands, diamonds, milk, sandal, beautiful twigs, fresh rain cloud, or of all other colours. She was first worshipped in Vaikuntça by Nārāyaṇa.

हितीये बहाणा भन्ध्या तृतीये शंकरेण च ।

विष्णुना पूजिता सा च क्षीरोदे भारते मुने ॥ 25 ॥

स्वायंभुवेन मनुना मानवेत्रश सर्वतः ।

ऋषी-नैक्षे सुनी-नैक्षे सिद्धश गृहिभिर्भयै ॥ 26 ॥

गन्धर्वैंश्व नागाठीः पातालेघु च पूर्तित ।

Next She was worshipped by Brahmā and then by Śaṅkara with devotion. She was worshipped by Viṣṇu in the Kṣirāda Samudra. Then she was worshipped by Svāyambhava Manu, then by Indras amongst men, then by Munis, Rṣis, good householders, by the Gandharvas, in the Gandharvaloka; by the Nāgas in the Nāgaloka.

गूकलाध्यां भगदपे कृता पूजा च बढ़णा ॥ 27 ॥

भक्ल्या च पक्षर्यन्ति तिशु लोकेनु नाद् ।

चैत्रे पौधे च भारे च पुण्ये मंगलवासरे ॥ 28 ॥

She was worshipped with devotion by Brahmā for one fortnight commencing from the bright eighth day in the month of Bhādra and ending on the eighth day of the dark fortnight in the three-worlds. She was worshipped by Viṣṇu, with devotion in the three worlds on the meritorious Tuesday in the months of Pauṣa, Caitra, and Bhādra, Manu, also, worshipped Her on the Pauṣa Saṅkrānti (the last day of the month of Pauṣa when the Sun enters another sign) and on the auspicious Tuesday in the month of Māgha.

विष्णुना पुविता सा च विशु लोकेषु पविततः ।

वर्षान्ते पौष्यसंक्रायां माध्यामावाहु मांगले ॥ 29 ॥

मनुस्ता पूजयामास सा भूता सुवनवये ।

पूजिता सा महेन्द्रेश मांगलैयेव मांगला ॥ 30 ॥

Book IX Chapter XL

Thus the worship of Mahā Lakṣmī is made prevalent in the three worlds. She was worshipped by Indra, the Lord of the Devas and by Maṅgala (Mars) on Tuesday.

कैदारीपेल नीलेन सुबलेन नलेल च ।

घुवेणोत्तनपादेन श्रांकण बलिना तथा ॥ 31 ॥

क्रणयेन च द्रक्षेण कर्दौन विवस्वता ।

ग्रियव्रतेन चढ्रेण कुवेर्णेण वायुना ॥ 32 ॥

घानेन वह्रिना चैव कर्णपैर्व पूजिता ।

एवं सर्वत्र सर्वेषु पूजिता वन्दिता सदा ॥

सर्वेश्वराधिरिद्वी सा सर्वसंपरक्स्तिपिणी ॥ 33 ॥

इति शीमद्दैवीभागवते महापुराणे नवमककन्

एकोनचत्वारिशो3थावा: 11 39 11

She was then worshipped by Kedāra, Nīla, Subala, Dhruva, Uttānapāda, Śakra, Bali, Kaśyapa, Dakṣa, Kardama, Sūrya, Priyavrata, Candra, Vāyu, Kubera, Varuṇa, Yama, Hutāśana and others. Thus Her worship extended by and by to all the places. She is the Presiding Deity of all wealth; so She is the wealth of all.

Here ends the Thirty-ninth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the story of Mahā Laksmī in the Mahā Purāṇam Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

[1] 2014年1月1日

Book IX Chapter XL
