CHAPTER XIII

On the Killing of Bāskala and Durmukha

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्ता ती महाबाहू दैत्यों बाक्यलनुंगुंढ़ी ।

जगमनुर्मदिद्धगांगी सर्वशास्त्राकोदिति ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The two powerful Dānavas Bāskala and Durmukha, well-versed in arts of warfare, went out for battle, maddened with their prowess.

तौ गत्वा समरे देवीमूचतुर्वचंन तदा ।

दानवी च मदोन्मत्ती मेघमाम्पीत्या शिरा ॥ 2 ॥

The two Dānavas, elated with vanity, went to the battle-field and began to address the Devi in voice deep as the rumbling of a cloud.

देवि देवा जिता येन महिषेण महात्मना ।

वाय त वं तरातोरे सर्वैत्यापिधिं पुर्णम् ॥ 3 ॥

O Beautiful Devi! You better choose and worship the Lord of the Daityas, that high-souled Mahisāsura who has conquered all the Devas.

स कृत्वा मानुषं रूपं वर्मलक्षणसंयुतम् ।

भूषितं भूषणैदिख्यैस्त्वामेध्यति रहः किल ॥ 4 ॥

He will come before you in privacy in a human shape, with all auspicious signs and adorned with beautiful ornaments.

त्रैलोक्यविभयं कामं त्वमेध्यस गृधचिमिते ।

महिषे परं भयं भाकं कुरु कानते मनगेतगम् ॥ 5 ॥

O Sweet smiling One! Better place your highest feelings of love on the lovely Mahisa as your husband, and you will get all the pleasures of the three worlds as you desire.

कृत्वा पर्लिं महावीरं संसामसुखमढ़तम् ।

त्वं प्राप्यसि चिकालाये योचितां खलु वांक्षितम् ॥ ६ ॥

O Sweet speaking! In short, if you select him as your husband, you will be the mistress of those incomparable worldly happiness that women always aspire.

श्रीद्युबाच

जात्य तवं किं विज्ञानासि नारीयं काममोहिता ।

मन्दबुद्धिजलात्यर्ष भजेयं महिंश शठम ॥ ७ ॥

Hearing thus the words of Vāşkala and Durmukha, the Devi said: "O Stupid! Do you think Me as deluded by passion? Do I not possess strength and intelligence that I will worship that hypocrite Mahisa as husband?

कुलशीलगुणैसुन्यै तं भजन्ति कुलशिक्षय: ।

अधिक रूपचातुर्वैब्द्रशीलक्षमादिधि: ॥ 8 ॥

का नु कामातुरा नारी भयंेच्च यगुहविषणम् ।

पगुनामघां नूनं महिष्यं देवकपिणी ॥ 9 ॥

See! The ladies of a high family select those persons that are equal in rank as far as family and distinctions, qualifications and propriety of conduct are concerned or those who are superior in beauty, cleverness, intelligence and other qualifications. Then how can a Devi, becoming passionate, worship the worst of all beasts, the beast Mahisa?

गच्छ तं महिषं तृर्णं भूरं बाक्लतुर्मेदी ।

वदतं तद्ञचे दैत्यं गतृतुल्यं विषाणिनम् ॥ 10 ॥

भालतं गच्छ वातभ्येन संभागं कुरा वभा ।

रो जाते सहसाधो निर्भयः स्यादिति धुम्म ॥ 11 ॥

O two Asuras! Go you immediately to your King Mahiṣa resembling in his body like an elephant and having a pair of horns and tell him "Go either to Pātāla (the nether regions) or come and fight with Me; the Lord of the Devas will no doubt be happy if war ensues."

हलाई त्वा गमिष्यामि नान्यथा गमनं मम ।

इन्ध जाला सुवुरुबैद्य पेशेच्छसि तथा कुक ॥ १२ ॥

मामनिजीक्य धूभागे न स्थानं ते कदाचन ।

भविष्यति चतुण्यात दिवि वा गिरिकन्दरे ॥ 13 ॥

“O Stupid! My advent here cannot go in vain; I will easily slay you and then depart; knowing this do as you like.” “O Beast! Without conquering Me, you would get no shelter either in the heavens, or in this earth, or in the caves of mountains?

व्यास उवाच

इतृपुत्ती ती ताया दैत्यौ कोपालुकिलतलोचनौ ।

धनुबाँधणार्य वीरी युद्धकामी बथपुतुः ॥ 14 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing thus, the two powerful Daityas, with eyes reddened with anger, firmly resolved to fight and took bows and arrows in their hands.

कृत्वा सुविष्णुं नादं देसी सा निर्भाय स्थिता ।

उभी च चक्रतुस्तीजां बाणवृहिं कुरूकृद्ध ।। १५ ॥

भगवत्ययि बाणीयान्मुगेच दानवौ प्रति ।

कृत्वास्तिमधुरं नादं देवकायार्थीसिद्धदे ॥ १६ ॥

O Descent of Kuru! The Devi then made a terrible noise and fearlessly stood there. The two Dānavas then began to shoot dreadful arrows at Her. For the victory of the Devas, the Devi also began to hurl arrows after arrows on the two Dānavas, emitting a sweet sound.

तयोसु बाषकललूर्ण सम्पुखो3प्रयुगाणे।

दुर्भुखः प्रेशकस्तत्र देवीभिभयुखः स्थितः ॥ 17 ॥

तयोर्भुंद्रमभूद्धोगं देवीबाषकल्योस्तदा ।

बाणातियरियात्यारैभंदरे मंद्येतेसान्म ॥ 18 ॥

Bāskala first came forward with no delay; and Durmukha stood aloof there simply as a witness. A terrible flight then ensued between the Devi and Bāskala; arrows, swords and weapons were seen shining in the air and raised terror to those that were dull in intellect.

ततः कुन्द्र जगमाता शूद्यात ते युद्धुमंदम् ।

जयान पद्धभिवर्गी कागोईः शिलानिंतः ॥ 19 ॥

Then the Mother of the Universe seeing Bāskala growing turbulent shot at him five arrows sharpened on stone.

दानवोदी शगत्नोद्याधिष्छेद निशिणे: शरैः ।

सदाधिततादयामास देवीं सिंहोपरि सिद्धात्म। ॥ 20 ॥

The Dānava, too, cut off the arrows of the Devi and hurled seven arrows at Her, seated on a lion. साउपि तं दशामिश्तीक्षैगः सुयीतः सायकैः खलम् ।

जयान तच्छरांश्चला जहास च मुबुरुईः ॥ 21 ॥

The Devi cut off the Dānava's arrows and shot at that hypocrite, sharpened arrows and began to laugh frequently.

अधिन्द्रेश आणेन चिष्ठदं च शासनम् ।

बाक्लोर्स पि यतं गृहा देवाँ हंतुमुपायची ॥ 22 ॥

She again cut off his arrows with Ardachandra arrow; Bāskala then pursued the Devi with a club in his hands to slay Her.

आगछर्टन गदायाणि दानवं मदगर्वितम् ।

चपिड़का स्वगदाधाते: पातयामास भृत्ते ॥ 23 ॥

Seeing the arrogant Dānava with club in his hands, Candikā Devi struck him down on the ground with Her own club.

Book V Chapter XIII

The very powerful Bāskala fell down on the ground but rose up within a very short time and hurled again on the Devi his club.

बाक्कल: पतितो भूमौ मुहुर्नादुत्वितः पुनः ।

चिक्षेप च गद्य सोरीय चिष्टकां चंद्रविक्रमः ॥ 24 ॥

Seeing him again attacking Her, the Devi got angry and pierced him with Her trident; Bāskala fell down, thus pierced, and died.

तमागच्छन्तमालोक्य देवी शुलेन बक्षसि ।

जयान बाषकर्त कुन्दा पपात च ममार सः ॥ 25 ॥

पत्तेत बाषकले सैन्यं भगत तस्य दुरात्मतः ।

जयेति च मुदा देवाङ्धुकुशुपर्गाने स्थिता: ॥ 26 ॥

Bāskala falling thus dead on the field, the soldiers of the wicked demon routed; whereas the Devas became glad and repeatedly shouted aloud "Victory to the Devi."

तरिमंधु सितदे देद्ये दुर्वैज्ञोरित्वालान्ति: ।

आजगाम रणे देदी क्लोभसंरक्तलोचनः ॥ 27 ॥

On this Daitya being slain, Durmukha came forward on the battlefield, filled with anger and accompanied by a stronger army.

तिथि तिथावले सोर्धि भाषमाण: पुन: पुन: ।

धनुर्बाणघः श्रीमात्रथसः कवचावृतः ॥ 28 ॥

Mounted on a chariot, shielded all over his body with a coat of armour, Durmukha came before the Devi, shouting all along “Wait, wait, O You weak woman!” and with bows and arrows in his hands. तमागछंतमालोकय देवी रंगखमावद्यत् ।

कोपयन्ती दानवं तं ज्याओंचे च चकार है ॥ 29 ॥

The Devi blew Her conchshell and made sounds by stretching Her bow in order to make the Dānava infuriated with anger.

सोर्पि बाणामुभोद्यगृ तैश्यागशिविणमान् ।

स्वाशीरनामहामाया चिद्धेद्व च ननाव च ॥ 30 ॥

The Asura then began to shoot sharp arrows after arrows like poisonous snakes. The Mahāmāyā, by Her own arrows, cut off those of Her enemy and began to shout loudly.

तयोः परस्यं मुव्दे बभव तुमुलं नृव ।

बाणशक्तिपदाप्रातैमुसलैस्तोमरैस्तथा ॥ 31 ॥

The fight then raged furiously, when both parties began to use arrows, Śaktis, clubs, Mūsalas, and Tomaras.

राणभूमौ तदा जाता कृदीरोयवहा नदी ।

पतितानि तदा तीर शिरोसि प्रवभुस्तदा ॥ 32 ॥

यथा सन्तरणायीय यमिकंकनायकैः ।

तृबीकतानि नीतानि नविशिषाणरैभूदा ॥ 33 ॥

Blood began to flow in the battle-field in torrents like rivers and on the banks of that river of blood, were seen the severed heads of the dead bodies which looked like so many hollow shells of gourds, as if kept there by the attendant of the god of Death, for their swimming purposes.

राषभमितदा घोरा बभूवातीत दुर्गा ।

शरीरै: पतितैभूमी खाद्यानेर्कृकादिधि: ॥ 34 ॥

गोपायुसारमेवाङ्ग काकाः कंका अयोगुपातः ।

गृधा: ग्रेशगांख खाद्यान्ति शरीरागि दुरायान् ॥ 35 ॥

The battle-field, then, became very dreadful and impassable; at some places dead bodies are lying; wolves were feeding on their flesh; at other places were seen jackals, dogs, herons, crows, vultures, eagles, and other voracious birds and beasts and iron-tipped arrows, eating the dead bodies of those wicked demons.

वबी वायुश दुर्निधो मुनीनां देहसंगतः ।

अभूतिकतिकताश्दः खानां पतभक्षिणाम् ॥ 36 ॥

Air began to emit an offensive smell, because of its contact with these corpses; and there were heard the heart-rending sounds of various carnivorous birds and animals.

तदा चुकोप दुर्भाला दुर्भुंकः कालभौहितः ।

देवामुवाच गर्येंण कृत्वा चोर्यकेंरं शुभम् ॥ 37 ॥

Then the wicked Durmukha began, as if inspired by the god of Death, to address the Devi angrily and arrogantly with his right hand raised up before Her.

गच्छ चाधिड हनियाथि त्वामश्रिव सुवातिलेशे ।

दैत्य वा भग वामोक महिषं मदार्वितम् ॥ 38 ॥

"Your brain has become perverted; fly away just now or I will send you unto death, or you

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

better accept the proud Mahiṣa, the lord of the Daityas, as your husband.

देव्युवाच

आसत्रमरण: कामं प्रलपयव्य महोहितः ।

अष्टिव त्वं हनिष्यामि ययावयं बाक्लोहतः ॥ 39 ॥

The Devi said: “O Villain! I see your death at hand this very day; therefore you are deluded and therefore raving like a mad man. I will kill you today like Bāskala.”

गच्छ वा तिछ वा मंद मरणं यदि रोचते ।

हूलां तां वैविध्यामि वालिंगं महीपीतुन्ति ॥ 40 ॥

O Stupid! Better fly away; or if you prefer death, then wait; I will slay you first; then the dull Mahisa, the son of she buffalo".

तच्छुला वचनं तस्य दुर्भुवो मतुमुक्तः ।

भुमोच बाणवहिं तु चरिष्ठकां प्रति दारुणम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

Hearing thus, Durmukha, as if prompted by Death, hurled dreadful arrows on the Devi.

सार्थि तां तस्या ईल्चा बाणवहिं श्रिं: श्रैः ।

जयान टानवं कूदा चूर्वे जूदधरे यथा ॥ 42 ॥

तयोः परस्यरं युद्धे सझातं चातिककर्णम् ।

Instantly the Devi, too, cut off all his arrows and, infuriated with anger, pierced the Dānava by sharpened arrows as Indra had pierced Vītrāsura before. The fight then turned out very dreadful.

भयदं कातागणं च शूगाणं बलवधीनम् ॥ 43 ॥

देवी चिक्छेट तस्या धनुस्य करे चित्यान् ।

तथेव पड़ाधिबाणीर्बभघ्र तथमुन्तम् ॥ 44 ॥

O King! Weak persons become very afraid and strong ones become very excited. Instantly the Devi cut off the Asura's bow and broke his chariot by five arrows.

रधे भने महाबाहुः पदातिवृभुंखस्तदा ।

गदा गृहीता दुर्भारं जगाम चधिडको प्रति ॥ 4 5 ॥

On seeing his chariot broken, the powerful Durmukha attacked on foot the Devi with his club, very hard to overcome.

चक्रास स गद्याघतं सिंहमौली महावतात् ।

न चचाल हौरे: स्थानाताविहेतप्रेम महावत: ॥ 46 ॥

He knocked at the head of the lion with that club with great force; but the powerful lion did not become unsteady, though so very hard hit.

अधिकां ते समातेकय गतृपाणी पुरः स्थितम् ।

खडूनेन शितापोरण शिराकुळेद मौलितम् ॥ 47 ॥

Seeing the demon thus standing before Her, the goddess Ambikā cut down his head by her sharpened axe.

छिडे च मतके भूमी पगत दुर्मुखो मृतः ।

जयगर्भं तदा चकुम्पित्त निजांर भृगम् ॥ 48 ॥

On his head being thus severed, Durmukha fell down dead on the field. The band of Immortals, then, loudly shouted “Victory to the Devi.”

तृषुवुस्तां तदा देवीं दुमुंखे नितर्धेमतः ।

पुष्पवृष्टि तथा चक्रवैर्याद्ध नभःस्थितः ॥ 49 ॥

When Durmukha was slain, the Immortals from the celestial space began to chant praises and hymns to the Devi, showered down flowers on Her head and gave shouts of “Victory to the Devi.”

त्रिष्य: सिद्धान्यर्वर्न: सिद्धायर्यकित्रनः ।

जद्धुस्तं हतं दृष्ट्वा दानवं रणमतकरः ॥ 50 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे पत्रमकन्के

त्रयोद्योअयगः ॥ 51 ॥

The Rsjs, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Vidyādharas, and Kinnaras all became very glad to see the Demon dead on the field.

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book

on the killing of Bāskala and Durmukha in

Śrimaddevithāgavatam, the Mahāpurānam, of

18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

