[Ch 13 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! The two powerful Dānavas Bāskala and Durmukha, well-versed in arts of warfare, went out for battle, maddened with their prowess.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! The two powerful Dānavas Vāskala and Durmukha, well-versed in arts of warfare, went out for battle, maddened with their prowess.

[Ch 13 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The two Dānavas, elated with vanity, went to the battle-field and began to address the Devi in voice deep as the rumbling of a cloud.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The two Dānavas, elated with vanity, went to the battle-field and began to address the Devī in voice deep as the rumbling of a cloud.

[Ch 13 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Beautiful Devi! You better choose and worship the Lord of the Daityas, that high-souled Mahisāsura who has conquered all the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Beautiful Devī! You better choose and worship the Lord of the Daityas, that high-souled Mahiṣāsura who has conquered all the Devas.

[Ch 13 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He will come before you in privacy in a human shape, with all auspicious signs and adorned with beautiful ornaments.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He will come before you in privacy in a human shape, with all auspicious signs and adorned with beautiful ornaments.

[Ch 13 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sweet smiling One! Better place your highest feelings of love on the lovely Mahisa as your husband, and you will get all the pleasures of the three worlds as you desire.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sweet smiling One! better place your highest feelings of love on the lovely Mahiṣa as your husband, and you will get all the pleasures of the three worlds as you desire.

[Ch 13 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sweet speaking! In short, if you select him as your husband, you will be the mistress of those incomparable worldly happiness that women always aspire.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sweet speaking! In short, if you select him as your husband, you will be the mistress of those incomparable worldly happinesses that women always aspire.

[Ch 13 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing thus the words of Vāşkala and Durmukha, the Devi said: "O Stupid! Do you think Me as deluded by passion? Do I not possess strength and intelligence that I will worship that hypocrite Mahisa as husband?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing thus the words of Vāskala and Durmukha, the Devī said :-- “O Stupid! Do you think Me as deluded by passion? Do I not possess strength and intelligence that I will worship that hypocrite Mahiṣa as husband?

[Ch 13 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See! The ladies of a high family select those persons that are equal in rank as far as family and distinctions, qualifications and propriety of conduct are concerned or those who are superior in beauty, cleverness, intelligence and other qualifications. Then how can a Devi, becoming passionate, worship the worst of all beasts, the beast Mahisa?
NEW CORR ENG ──► See! The ladies of a high family select those persons that are equal in rank as far as family and distinctions, qualifications and propriety of conduct are concerned or those who are superior in beauty, cleverness, intelligence and other qualifications. Then how can a Devī, becoming passionate, worship the worst of all beasts, the beast Mahiṣa?

[Ch 13 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O two Asuras! Go you immediately to your King Mahiṣa resembling in his body like an elephant and having a pair of horns and tell him "Go either to Pātāla (the nether regions) or come and fight with Me; the Lord of the Devas will no doubt be happy if war ensues."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O two Asuras! Go you immediately to your King Mahiṣa resembling in his body like an elephant and having a pair of horns and tell him, Go either to Pātāla (the nether regions) or come and fight with Me; the Lord of the Devas will no doubt be happy if the war ensues.

[Ch 13 Verse 12-13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Stupid! My advent here cannot go in vain; I will easily slay you and then depart; knowing this do as you like.” “O Beast! Without conquering Me, you would get no shelter either in the heavens, or in this earth, or in the caves of mountains?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Stupid! My advent here cannot go in vain; I will easily slay you and then depart; knowing this do as you like. O Beast! Without conquering Me, you would get no shelter either in the heavens, or in this earth, or in the caves of mountains?”

[Ch 13 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Hearing thus, the two powerful Daityas, with eyes reddened with anger, firmly resolved to fight and took bows and arrows in their hands.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Hearing thus, the two powerful Daityas, with eyes reddened with anger, firmly resolved to fight and took bows and arrows in their hands.

[Ch 13 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Descent of Kuru! The Devi then made a terrible noise and fearlessly stood there. The two Dānavas then began to shoot dreadful arrows at Her. For the victory of the Devas, the Devi also began to hurl arrows after arrows on the two Dānavas, emitting a sweet sound.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Descent of Kuru! The Devī then made a terrible noise and fearlessly stood there. The two Dānavas then began to shoot dreadful arrows at Her. For the victory of the Devas, the Devī also begin to hurl arrows after arrows on the two Dānavas, emitting a sweet sound.

[Ch 13 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bāskala first came forward with no delay; and Durmukha stood aloof there simply as a witness. A terrible flight then ensued between the Devi and Bāskala; arrows, swords and weapons were seen shining in the air and raised terror to those that were dull in intellect.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vāskala first came forward with no delay; and Durmukha stood aloof there simply as a witness. The terrible fight then ensued between the Devī and Vāskala; arrows, swords and weapons were seen shining in the air and raised terror to those that were dull in intellect.

[Ch 13 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the Mother of the Universe seeing Bāskala growing turbulent shot at him five arrows sharpened on stone.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the Mother of the Universe seeing Vāskala growing turbulent shot at him five arrows sharpened on stone.

[Ch 13 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi cut off the Dānava's arrows and shot at that hypocrite, sharpened arrows and began to laugh frequently.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī cut off the Dānava’s arrows and shot at that hypocrite, sharpened arrows and began to laugh frequently.

[Ch 13 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She again cut off his arrows with Ardachandra arrow; Bāskala then pursued the Devi with a club in his hands to slay Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She again cut off his arrows with Ardhacandra arrow; Vāskala then pursued the Devī with a club in his hands to slay Her.

[Ch 13 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the arrogant Dānava with club in his hands, Candikā Devi struck him down on the ground with Her own club. The very powerful Bāskala fell down on the ground but rose up within a very short time and hurled again on the Devi his club.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the arrogant Dānava with club in his hands, Caṇḍikā Devī struck him down on the ground with Her own club. The very powerful Vāskala fell down on the ground but rose up within a very short time and hurled again on the Devī his club.

[Ch 13 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing him again attacking Her, the Devi got angry and pierced him with Her trident; Bāskala fell down, thus pierced, and died.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing him again attacking Her, the Devī got angry and pierced him with Her trident; Vāskala fell down, thus pierced, and died.

[Ch 13 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bāskala falling thus dead on the field, the soldiers of the wicked demon routed; whereas the Devas became glad and repeatedly shouted aloud "Victory to the Devi."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vāskala falling thus dead on the field, the soldiers of the wicked demon routed; whereas the Devas became glad and repeatedly shouted aloud, “Victory to the Devī.”

[Ch 13 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On this Daitya being slain, Durmukha came forward on the battlefield, filled with anger and accompanied by a stronger army.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On this Daitya being slain, Durmukha came forward on the battle-field, filled with anger and accompanied by a stronger army.

[Ch 13 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi blew Her conchshell and made sounds by stretching Her bow in order to make the Dānava infuriated with anger.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī blew Her conchshell and made sounds by stretching Her bow in order to make the Dānava infuriated with anger.

[Ch 13 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Asura then began to shoot sharp arrows after arrows like poisonous snakes. The Mahāmāyā, by Her own arrows, cut off those of Her enemy and began to shout loudly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Asura then began to shoot sharp arrows after arrows like poisonous snakes. The Mahāmāyā, by Her own arrows, cut off those of Her enemy and began to shout loudly.

[Ch 13 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The fight then raged furiously, when both parties began to use arrows, Śaktis, clubs, Mūsalas, and Tomaras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The fight then raged furiously, when both parties began to use arrows, Śaktis, clubs, Muṣalas, and Tomaras.

[Ch 13 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Blood began to flow in the battle-field in torrents like rivers and on the banks of that river of blood, were seen the severed heads of the dead bodies which looked like so many hollow shells of gourds, as if kept there by the attendant of the god of Death, for their swimming purposes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Blood began to flow in the battle-field in torrents like rivers and on the banks of that river of blood, were seen the severed heads of the dead bodies which looked like so many hollow shells of gourds, as if kept there by the attendant of the god of Death, for their swimming purposes.

[Ch 13 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The battle-field, then, became very dreadful and impassable; at some places dead bodies are lying; wolves were feeding on their flesh; at other places were seen jackals, dogs, herons, crows, vultures, eagles, and other voracious birds and beasts and iron-tipped arrows, eating the dead bodies of those wicked demons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The battle-field, then, became very dreadful and impassable; at some places dead bodies are lying; wolves are feeding on their flesh; at other places are seen jackals, dogs, herons, crows, vultures, eagles, and other voracious birds and beasts and iron-tipped arrows, eating the dead bodies of those wicked demons.

[Ch 13 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Air began to emit an offensive smell, because of its contact with these corpses; and there were heard the heart-rending sounds of various carnivorous birds and animals.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Air began to emit an offensive smell, because of its contact with these corpses; and there were heard the heart-rending sounds of various carnivorous birds and animals.

[Ch 13 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the wicked Durmukha began, as if inspired by the god of Death, to address the Devi angrily and arrogantly with his right hand raised up before Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the wicked Durmukha began, as if inspired by the god of Death, to address the Devī angrily and arrogantly with his right hand raised up before Her.

[Ch 13 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Your brain has become perverted; fly away just now or I will send you unto death, or you Šrimaddevībhāgavatam better accept the proud Mahiṣa, the lord of the Daityas, as your husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “Your brain has become perverted; fly away just now or I will send you unto death, or you better accept the proud Mahiṣa, the lord of the Daityas, as your husband.”

[Ch 13 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi said: “O Villain! I see your death at hand this very day; therefore you are deluded and therefore raving like a mad man. I will kill you today like Bāskala.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī said :-- “O Villain! I see your death at hand this very day; therefore you are deluded and therefore raving like a mad man. I will kill you today like Vāskala.

[Ch 13 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Stupid! Better fly away; or if you prefer death, then wait; I will slay you first; then the dull Mahisa, the son of she buffalo".
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Stupid! Better fly away; or if you prefer death, then wait; I will slay you first; then the dull Mahiṣa, the son of a she-buffalo.”

[Ch 13 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing thus, Durmukha, as if prompted by Death, hurled dreadful arrows on the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing thus, Durmukha, as if prompted by Death, hurled dreadful arrows on the Devī.

[Ch 13 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Instantly the Devi, too, cut off all his arrows and, infuriated with anger, pierced the Dānava by sharpened arrows as Indra had pierced Vītrāsura before. The fight then turned out very dreadful.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Instantly the Devī, too, cut off all his arrows and, infuriated with anger, pierced the Dānava by sharpened arrows as Indra had pierced Vritrāsura before. The fight then turned out very dreadful.

[Ch 13 Verse 43-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Weak persons become very afraid and strong ones become very excited. Instantly the Devi cut off the Asura's bow and broke his chariot by five arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Weak persons become very afraid and strong ones become very excited. Instantly the Devī cut off the Asura’s bow and broke his chariot by five arrows.

[Ch 13 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On seeing his chariot broken, the powerful Durmukha attacked on foot the Devi with his club, very hard to overcome.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On seeing his chariot broken, the powerful Durmukha attacked on foot the Devī with his club, very hard to overcome.

[Ch 13 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He knocked at the head of the lion with that club with great force; but the powerful lion did not become unsteady, though so very hard hit.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He knocked at the head of the lion with that club with great force; but the powerful lion did not become unsteady, though so very hard hit.

[Ch 13 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the demon thus standing before Her, the goddess Ambikā cut down his head by her sharpened axe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the demon thus standing before Her, the goddess Ambikā cut down his head by her sharpened axe.

[Ch 13 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On his head being thus severed, Durmukha fell down dead on the field. The band of Immortals, then, loudly shouted “Victory to the Devi.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► On his head being thus severed, Durmukha fell down dead on the field. The band of Immortals, then, loudly shouted, “Victory to the Devī.”

[Ch 13 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Durmukha was slain, the Immortals from the celestial space began to chant praises and hymns to the Devi, showered down flowers on Her head and gave shouts of “Victory to the Devi.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Durmukha was slain, the Immortals from the celestial space began to chant praises and hymns to the Devī, showered down flowers on Her head and gave shouts of “Victory to the Devī.”

[Ch 13 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rsjs, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Vidyādharas, and Kinnaras all became very glad to see the Demon dead on the field. Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of Bāskala and Durmukha in Śrimaddevithāgavatam, the Mahāpurānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣis, Siddhas, Gandarbhas, Vidyādharas, and Kinnaras all became very glad to see the Demon dead on the field. Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of Vāskala and Durmukha in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahāpurāṇam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
