CHAPTER IX

On the Anecdote of Cāksuṣa Manu

श्रीनारायण उवाच

अशात: श्रूयतां चित्रं देदौमिहात्यमुत्तमम् ।

अंगपुत्रेण मनुना यथा0.25नं राजमुत्तमम् ॥ १ ॥

अंगस्य राज: पुत्रोप्रच्छाक्ष्यो मनुत्तमः ।

मष: सुपुल्हं नाम ब्रह्मार्थ शरणं गत: ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Nārada! I will now narrate the supreme glories of the Devi and the anecdote how Manu, the son of Aṅga, obtained excellent kingdom by worshipping the Devi Bhagavati. The son of the king Aṅga, named Cāksuṣa became the Sixth Manu. One day he went to the Brahmarṣi Pulaha Rṣi and taking his refuge said:

बहार्य त्वामड़े प्राप्त: शरणं प्रणतातिन्ह्न ।

गाथि मां किंकरं स्वामिन् येणाडं प्राप्तुयं त्रिषयम् ॥ 3 ॥

मेदिव्याश्राधितम्बं मे स्याहायावदखितम्न ।

अव्याहतं भुजवलं शक्तास्बनिगुणां क्षमम् ॥ 4 ॥

O Brahmarsi! Thou removest all the sorrows and afflictions of those that come under Thy refuge; I now take Thy refuge. Kindly advise Thy servent how he may become the Lord of an endless amount of wealth. O Muni! What can I do so that I may get the sole undisputed sway over the world? How my arms can wield the weapons and manipulate them so that they may not be baffled?

Book X Chapter IX

सतितिश्राकलीनास्पखडं वय उत्तम् ।

अंतेउपवर्लाभप्रच स्यातधोपदिशाय मे ॥ 5 ॥

इत्येवं वचनं तस्य मनो: कर्णवेधभवत् ।

How my race and line be constant and my youth remain ever the same, undecayed? And how can I, in the end, attain Mukti? O Muni! Kindly dost Thou give instructions to me on these points and oblige.

प्रत्युवाच मुनिः श्रीमान्देख्या: संराधनं परम् ॥ 6 ॥

राजकाण्यि वचो मम श्रीसुखं महत् ।

शिवामाराधयादा तं तस्मादादिवं भवेत् ॥ 7 ॥

Hearing thus, the Muni wanted him to worship the Devi and said: "O King! Listen attentively to what I say you to-day. Worship to-day the all auspicious Śakti; by Her grace, all your desires will be fulfilled."

वाक्षय उवाच

कौरुगाराधं न देव्यासत्मय: परमपावनम् ।

केनाकारेण कतवें काफयाद्रकतुमईसि ॥ 8 ॥

Caksuşa said: “O Muni! What is that very holy worship of Śrī Bhagavatī? How to do it? Kindly describe all these in detail.”

मुनिवाचा

राजत्राकर्षतां देया: पूजनं परमव्यम् ।

वापभं बीजमव्यक्तं सज्वयमिनीर्ण तथा ॥ 9 ॥

त्रिकालं सड़पन्यम्वाँ पुक्तिभुक्ती लोभेतु न्हि ।

न बीजं वारभावाद्यवटित राजन्यनन्दन ॥ 10 ॥

The Muni said: “O King! I will now disclose all about the excellent Pūjā of the Devi Bhagavatī. Hear. You recite (mentally) always the seed mantra of Vākbhava (Speech) (The Deity being Mahā Sarasvatī). If any one makes japam (recites slowly) of the Vākbhava Bīja thrice a day, one gets both the highest enjoyment here and, in the end, release (Mukti). O Son of a Kṣaṭtriya!

वाणसिद्धिकरं वीर्यबलवृद्धिकरं परम् ।

सृतःस आपत्याचोर्धि सुधित्तां महावलः ॥ १ १ ॥

विष्यार्जसपतः सुधित्यालकः परिकीर्तितः ।

महेश्वोर्जपि संहर्ता यज्ञापदाभवन्यू ॥ १ २ ॥

There is no other Bija Mantra (word) better than

this of Vāk (the Word). Through the Japam of this Bija Mantra comes the increase of strength and prowess and all successes. By the Japam of this, Brahmā is so powerful and has become the Creator; Viṣṇu preserve the Universe and Maheśvara has become the Destroyer of the Universe.

लोकपालास्तबायोरि निश्रातुनुग्रक्षमाः ।

यदाशयादघुबंते कलवीयमेदोद्धता: ॥ 13 ॥

एवं त्वमपि राजन्य मेड्गी जगद्धिकमम् ।

समातध्य महर्षि च लयस्यरेचिरकालतः ॥ 14 ॥

The other Dikpālas (the Regents of the quarters) and the other Siddhas have become very powerful by the power of this Mantra, and are capable of favouring or disfavouring others. So, O King! You, too, worship the Devi of the Devas, the World Mother and are long you will become the Lord of unbounded wealth.

एवं स पुनिवर्षण पुल्लेन प्रवोधितः ।

अंगपुत्रस्तपस्तुं जगाम विरजां नदीम् ॥ 15 ॥

स च तेपे तपस्तीक्षे वाभव्यस्य जपे तः ।

ब्रीजस्य पूर्ववैधालय: श्रीणपणिण्गो विषुः ॥ 16 ॥

There is no doubt in this" O Narada! Thus advised by Pulaha Rsi, the son of the King Añga went to the banks of the Virajā river to practise austerities. There the king Cāksuṣa remained absorbed in making Japam of the Vāgbhava Bijā Mantra and took for his food the leaves of the trees that dropped on the ground and thus practised severe austerities.

प्रवेभेउद्धे पल्लगशो हितीये तोयभक्षण: ।

तृतीयेउद्धे पवनभृतक्शी स्थाणुरिवाकः ॥ 17 ॥

एवं झाइण वर्षिणि सत्काहारस्य ध्युर्ज: ।

वाग्बं जातो निवयं मतितारीबृष्णभाविता ॥ 18 ॥

The first year he ate leaves; the second year he drunk water and in the third year he sustained his life by breathing air simply and thus remained steady like a pillar. Thus he remained without food for twelve years. He went on making Japam of the Vāgbhava Mantra and his heart and mind became purified.

तथा च देध्याः परमं मन्त्रं संज्ञपतो रहः ।

प्रागुरासीजनामाता साक्षात्यधीरपमेधी ॥ 19 ॥

तेजोमयी दुराधर्षा सर्वदेवमयीक्षी ।

उवाचागन्तूनं ते प्रसला ल्लिलाक्षमम् ॥ 20 ॥

While he was sitting alone, absorbed in the meditation of the Devi Mantra, there appeared before him suddenly the Parameśvari, the World Mother, the Incarnate of Lakṣmī. The Highest Deity, full of dauntless fire and the Embodiment of all the Devas, spoke graciously in seet words of Cākṣuṣa, the son of Anga.

देव्युवाच

पृथिवीपाल ते चत्यार्च्चितितं परवं वतम् ।

तद्वृष्टि संप्रदास्यामि तपसा ते सुतोक्षिति ॥ 2 1 ॥

"O Regent of the earth! I am pleased with your Tapasyā. Now ask any boon that you want. I will give that to you.

चान्युय उवाच

ज्ञानासि देवदेवेशि यत्नाख्यों मनसेपित्तम् ।

अनत्यांमिवस्करणे तत्सर्वे देवपूजिते ॥ 22 ॥

तथापि मम भाधेयन जातं यत्चत दर्जानम् ।

बलीम देव मे दैहि राज्यं राजन्यस्तमम् ॥ 23 ॥

Chāksuṣa said: “O Thou, worshipped by the Devas! O Sovereign of the Deva of the Devas! Thou art the Controller Inside; Thou art the Controller Outside. Thou knowest everything what I desire in my mind. Still, O Devi! When I am so fortunate as to see Thee, I say “Thou grantest me the kingdom for the Manvantara period.”

श्रीद्व्यवाच

दर्तं मन्वन्तरस्याय राज्यं राज्यसन्तम ।

पुत्रा महावलास्ते च भविष्यन्ति गुणाधिकाः ॥ 24 ॥

राज निष्कण्टकं भावि मेक्षोज्ञे तचीय निश्रितः ।

The Devi said: “O Best of the Kṣaṭtrīyas! I grant unto you the kingdom of the whole world for one manvantara. You will have many sons, very powerful, indeed, and well qualified. Your kingdom will be free from any danger till at last you will certainly get Mukti.”

एवं दत्ता वरं देवी मनवे वरमुत्तम्म् ॥ 25 ॥

जगामादर्जनं सद्यतने भवल्या च संस्तुता ।

सोर्धि राजा मनुः पष्टः प्रसादानु तद्धभवान् ॥ 26 ॥

बधूम मनुमान्यो३सी सार्वभीममुखैवृतः ।

पुत्रास्तव बलोकुतःः कार्यभरसहानुतः ॥ 27 ॥

Thus granting the excellent boon to Manu, She disappeared then and there, after being praised by Manu, with deep devotion. The Sixth Manu, then favoured by the Devi, enjoyed the sovereignty of the earth and other pleasures and became the best of the Manus.

देवीभकाठ शूराङ्ग महावलपराकमः ।

अन्यत्र माननीयाठ महाराज्यसुखायदा: ॥ 28 ॥

एवं च चाष्यमनुर्देवासाधनतः प्रभु: ।

बभूम नमुवर्गोंसी जगामाते शिवायदम् ॥ 29 ॥

इति शीमद्वीभागाते महापुराणे दशमकल्पे वैद्वीर्चे

नवमो3धाय: 11 9 11

His sons became the devotees of the Devi, very powerful and expert and became respected by all and enjoyed the pleasures of the kingdom. Thus getting the supremacy by the worship of the Devi, the Cāksuṣa Manu became merged in the end in the Holy Feet of the Devi.

Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the narrative of Cāksuṣa Manu in the Mahāpurānam

Srimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

