CHAPTER XXIV

On the Devi Pūjā

नारद खाच

धर्मश्रु कौद्यग्रास्तत देल्याराधनलक्षणः ।

कक्षयाराधिता देवी सा ददाति परं यदम् ॥ १ ॥

आराध्यनिधिधः को वा कक्षयाराधिता कदा ।

केन सा दुर्गनरकादुर्गा जाणप्रदा भवेत् ॥ २ ॥

Nārada said: O Bhagavān! Of what sort is the Dharma, i.e., the worship of the Devi? In what way shall we worship Her, so that She gives us the Highest Place? What are the methods and forms of Her Worship? Where and when shall we worship Her! So that the Durgā saves us from the above mentioned hells.

शीनारायण उवाच

देवर्वं शृणु चितैकाध्येण मे विदुर्षां वर ।

वथा प्रसीतते देवी धर्मार्थानतः स्ववम् ॥ ३ ॥

स्वधार्मं वाहुगः प्रोक्तस्तं च मे शृणु नारत् ।

अनादासिक्र संसारे देवी सम्युक्तिता स्ववम् ॥ 4 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Devarsī! You are the foremost of the Knowers of Truth. I will therefore tell you how the Devi gets pleased and how Her worship is

conducted according to the Dharma. Hear attentively. O Nārada! I will also describe the nature of Sva Dharma. Hear that also. When one worships, with due rites and ceremonies, the Devi in this beginningless world, She Herself removes all the terrible dangers and difficulties.

परियलयते घोरसङ्गुदायितु सा मुने । सा देवी पुज्यते लोकैयशवातर्हित्र श्रणु ॥ 5 ॥ प्रतिवत्थिमासाठा देवीपाञ्जेन पूजयेत् । घृतं द्वादा ब्राह्माणय रोहाहीने भवेल्सदा ॥ 6 ॥

Hear the rules how the people worship the Devi. When the Pratipat Tithi (the first day after the Full or New Moon) comes, one should worship the Devi with a present of rice, etc., with ghee (clarified butter) and give that to the Brāhmin.

वित्तीयां शर्काया पूजयेजनार्विकवम् ।

शर्कांर प्रददेविष्ठे दीपयुर्जायेत नरः ॥ ७ ॥

Then one becomes completely free from any disease. On the second day (Dvitiyā Tithi), one must serve the Mother of the Universe with sugar

and give that to the Brāhmins; he then becomes long-lived.

दृतीयादिवसे देखे दुर्भ्यं पूजनकर्मणि ।

क्षौरं दरचा बिज्ञायय सर्वेदुःखालिंगो भवेत् ॥ 8 ॥

चतुर्थ्यं पूजनेयुपा देया देखे बिजाय च ।

अपूपा एव दातव्या न विष्टेरिभ्यभूयते ॥ 9 ॥

On the third (tithi) on commencing with the Pūjā, the worshipper must give milk to the Devi and give that to a best Brāhmin; he is then freed from all his troubles and ailings. On the fourth (tithi) the worshipper is to offer a cake of flour to the Devi and then give that to a Brāhmin; no obstacles come to that man.

पछ्यमां कर्तीजातफलं देखे निवेदयेत् ।

तदेव ब्रहणे देवे मेधावानुभो घरेते ॥ 10 ॥

पडीनीषी मधु प्रोक्ते देवीपुजनकर्मीप ।।

ब्राह्याया च दातवयं मधुकांतिर्वीनी घरेत् ॥ 11 ॥

On the fifth tithi, the worshipper is to offer plantations to the Devi and then to give that to the Brāhmins; he thus becomes intelligent. On the sixth tithi, the worshipper gives honey to the Devi and then that to a Brāhim; he gets thus the beauty of his body.

सत्यायां गुड़नैवेढ्धो देखे दत्ता ब्रिजाय च ।

गृड़ं दत्ता शोकहीनो जायते ब्रिजसत्ता ॥ 12 ॥

नारिकेलमधाट्यमां देखे नैवेढ़ामपर्येत् ।

ब्राह्माया प्रदातलं ताराहीनो भवेत्रः ॥ 13 ॥

नव्यमं लाजमंबायै चारपीयत्वा द्विजाय च ।

दत्ता सुखाधिको भूयादिरू लोके पत्र च ॥ 14 ॥

On the seventh tithi, the Brāhmin gives to the Devi the Naivedya (an offering of rice, etc.) with Gur (sugarcandy) and then that to the Brāhmins; he then becomes freed from his mental sorrows. On the eighth day, if one give cocoanut, one is freed of one's remorse, etc.; on the ninth, if anybody gives fried rice (Lāj), he will have his happiness increased both in this world and in the next.

दशमायमंचिता तु देखी कृष्णतिलान्मुने ।

बहाणाय प्रदत्ता तु यमलोकाद्वयं न हि ॥ 15 ॥

एकादश्यां दधि तथा देखे चार्थयेत तु यः ।

द्वातिते ब्राह्माणतैर्नेदौरिप्रसनो घबेत् ॥ 16 ॥

O Muni! If on the tenth tithi, one offers to the Devi black Til (sesamun) and then to the Brāhmīn, he becomes free from the fear of death. If, on the eleventh tithi, (ekādaśī) one gives the curd to the Devi and then to the Brāhmīn, one becomes a great favourite of the Devi.

ब्राद्यां पुचुकान्देथे दन्चा उराग्योग यो ददेत् ।

तानेव च भुनिश्रेष्ठ स देवीप्रितां जतेन ॥ 17 ॥

त्रयोदरायां च दुर्गाई चणकान्यद्वाति च ।

तानेव दत्ता विघाय प्रजासंततिमान्यबेतेत् ॥ 18 ॥

If on the twelfth day, one offers to the Devi and to the Brāhim in the Cipitaka rice or grain (well parched and flattened) one becomes a favourite of the Devi. If, on the thirteenth day one gives to the Bhagavatī grains and then that to a Brāhim, one gets progeny.

चतुरंदायां च देवपैं देल्ये सक्तूप्रयच्छिति ।

तानेव द्वादिष्राप्र शिक्षस्य दयितो भवेत् ॥ 19 ॥

पायसं पूर्णिमानित्यामपर्गाये प्रयच्छिति ।

द्वाति च द्वित्राप्राय पितुनुब्रद्धतेर्षतिज्ञान् ॥ 20 ॥

If, on the fourteenth day, one gives to the Devi the flour of fried barley or other grains (Saktu) and then that to a Brāhmin, one becomes a favourite of Śiva. If on the Full Moon day, one offers to the Devi Pāyas and then that to a Brāhmin, then one's Piṭs are uplifted to the higher regions.

ततिषही हवनं प्रोक्ते देवीप्रीले महापुने ।

ततिषघृष्टिकनसूनामगोपारिहासगन् ॥ 21 ॥

O Muni! On the above tithis, if one forms daily Homas, as stated in the Pūjā Chapter, the Devi becomes very pleased. The articles corresponding to the tithi as mentioned above destroy all the evils and inauspicious omens.

रविवारे पायसं च नैवेधो परिकीर्तिन् ।

सोमवारे पयः प्रोकें भीमे च कदलीफलम् ॥ 22 ॥

बुधवारे च संप्रोक्ते नवनीत नवं हिज ।

गुर्वारे शर्कर्मा च सितां भागविसारसे ॥ 23 ॥

शनिवारे चृतं नवः वैदेशं परिकीर्तिम् ।

Book VIII Chapter XXIV

On Sunday, it is a rule to give an offering of Pāyasam (a food prepared of rice, milk, and sugar). On Monday, the milk; on Tuesday, the nice plantains; on Wednesday, the fresh butter; on Thursday, the gur or sagarcandy, Friday, the white sugar, and on Saturday, it is a rule to give the clarified butter of cows milk.

सलाविंशरितनक्षत्रनैवेहं श्रूयतां मुने ॥  24 ॥

भृतं तिलं शक्रां च दधि दुर्धं क्रिलाटकम् ।

दधिकृषीं मोदकं च फेणिका घृतमण्डकम् ॥ 2 5 ॥

कंसारां वदपत्रं च घृतपूरमतः परम् ।

वटके कोकरसके पूर्ण मधु सूरणम् ॥ 2 6 ॥

गृड़ं घुधक्रावे च खड़रं चैव चारकम् ।

अपूर्वं नवतींत च मुईं मोटकमेव च ॥ 2 7 ॥

मातृलुभायिति प्रोकं भनैवेघं च नारद ।

विकंभाविष्य योगेषु प्रवक्ष्यामि निवेदनम् ॥ 2 8 ॥

Now hear what should be offered on the Nakṣattras. The following are the the Naivedyas given to each of the Nakṣattras, in due order, from Asvini: Clarified butter (ghee), sesamum (Til), sugar, curd, milk, Kilāṭak (Mālai, milk), Dadhikūrci (Mālai curd), Modaka (a kind of sweetmeat, a confection) Phenikā, Ghrta Maṇḍaka, a sort of sweet meat of wheaten flour and gur, Vātapattra, Ghrtapura (Ghior), Vataka, Kharijura juice (of the datepalm), a sort of sweet meat of Gur and gram, honey, Šūrana, Gur Pīthuka, grapes, datelpalms, Čarakās, Apūpa, Navanīta (fresh butter), muḍga, modaka, and Mātulīnga. Now hear what are given in the Viṣkambha and the other Yogas.

पदार्थानां कृतोक्ष्ये प्रीणाति जगद्धिका ।

गुड़ं मधु घृतं दुर्धं दधि तकं त्वपूपकम् ॥ 29 ॥

नवनीत कर्कटीं च कृष्मांई चापि मोटकम् ।

पनंसं कदर्तीं जबुपलमापफलं तिलम् ॥ 30 ॥

नारंगं दाडिमं चैव बदरीफलमेव च ।

धारीफलं पायसं च प्युके चणकं तथा ॥ 31 ॥

नारिकेलं जंभफलं कसेर्मे सूर्ण तथा ।

The World Mother becomes very much pleased when one offers to Her the following things: Gur, honey, ghee, milk, curd, Takra, Apūpa, fresh butter,

Karkatī, Kuṣmāṇḍa, Modaka, Panasa, plantain, Jambu (rose-apple), mango, sesamum, oranges, Dādima, (pomegranate) Vadari (Jujube) the Dhātri (Amalakī) fruit, Pāyasā, Prthuka, gram, cocoanut, Jambira. Kaseru, and Śūrana.

एतानि क्रमगो विश्व नैद्यानि शुभानि च ॥ 32 ॥

विक्रीभाविषु योगिषु निर्णितानि मनोविधि: ।

अथ नैद्याभाग्यास्ये कर्णानां पृवडपुने ॥ 33 ॥

कंसारं मण्डकं फेणी मोदंक वटपत्रकम् ।

लब्डुकं घृतपूरं चि लतं दधि घृतं मधु ॥ 34 ॥

The auspicious events occur when these are offered. The intelligent persons have thus decided to give the above on Viskambha and the other Yogas. Now hear: I will describe the things that are offered on the respective Karanas: Kamsāra, Mandāka, Mfenī, Modaka, Vatapattakra, Ladduka, Ghrāpārua, Til (sesamum), curd, ghec, and honey. कर्णानामिदं प्रोर्के देवीनैवेटामवर्ति ।

अथान्यसंप्रवक्ष्यामि देवीग्रितिकरं परम् ॥ 35 ॥

विधानं नारद मुने श्युण तत्सर्वमादूनः ।

चैत्रमूढ़तृतीयायां नगो मधुकवृक्षकम् ॥ 36 ॥

पूजवेत्यचखाड़ा च नैवेहमुपकल्पयेत् ।

एवं द्वारामासेषु तृतीयातिथिषु कमात् ॥ 37 ॥

गुड़प्रधे विधानेन नैवेहमाभिवद्भरे ।

वैशगाख्मासे नैवेहां गुड़गुर्षे च नारद ॥ 38 ॥

These are to be offered devotedly to the Devi

on the respective Karanas. Now I will describe to you the other offerings very pleasing to the Devi. Hear. O Nārada! Hear it with great attention and

love. On the third tithi of the bright fortnight, in the month of Caitra, one is to worship duly the Madhuka tree and offer Pañca Khādya (the five sorts of food). So hear what articles are to be offered according to the rules that are laid down on the third day of the white fortnight of the other months.

ज्येषुभासे मनु प्रोक्ते देवीग्रील्यंधीव नृ ।

ज्येषुभासे मनु प्रोक्ते देवीग्रील्यंधीव नृ ।

आपार्चे नवर्जितं च मधुकल्य निविदनम् ॥ ३९ ॥

श्रावणे द्विध नैवेहं भाठ्यासे च राकरा ।

आधिंचे पायसं प्रोक्ते कार्तिके पय उतनम् ॥ ४० ॥

मार्गे फेण्युतन्मा प्रोक्ता रोपे च दधिकृष्टिंबा ।

माटे मासि च नैवेहां घृतां गव्यं समाहारेत् ॥ 4 1 ॥

नार्विकेतं च नैवेहां फाल्नुने परिकोर्टितम् ।

एवं झाद्यानेवेहीमांसे च क्रमतो.5चेयेत् ॥ 4 2 ॥

The Guru, in the month of Vaiśākha; the honey, in Jyeṣṭha; the fresh butter, in Āśādhā; the curd, in Śrāvana; the Śarkarā, in Bhādra; the Pāyas, in Aśvin; the pure milk, in Kārtika; the Phenī, in Agrahāyana; the Dadhi Kūrcikā in Pausa; the clarified butter of cow's milk, in Māgha, and the cocoanut offerings, in the month of Phālguna Thus with these twelve sorts of offerings, one is to worship the Devi in the twelve months respectively.

भंगता वैश्वासी माया काललारब्रिद्रल्यया ।

महामाया मार्नी च काली कमलावसिति ॥ 4 3 ॥

शिवा सहसचरणा सर्वमेबुललपिणी ।

One should worship the Devi in the Madhuka tree with these names: Māngalā, Vaisnavī, Māyā, Kāla-rāti, Duratyayā, Mahāmāyā, Mātāngī, Kālī, Kamalavāsini, Śivā, Sahasracaranā, and Sarvamāngalarūpini. (One name for each of the 12 months).

गृभनमायमदैर्वेर्नी मधूके परिपुजयेत् ॥ 44 ॥

ततः सुतीत देवेशीं मधूकस्यां महेश्वीम् ।

सर्वकामसमुद्धार्थं ततपूर्णत्वसिद्धये ॥ 45 ॥

नमः पृष्क्तरत्रावै जगद्धान्ये नगोउनु ते ।

माहेश्यै महादेवे महामझलमूर्तैव ॥ 46 ॥

Finally, to bring the vow to a good issue and to have one's desires fulfilled with greater success, one is to sing stotras (hymns) to the Mahésvarī, the Controller of all the gods, in that Madhūka tree, thus: 'Thou art lotus-eyed; obeisance to Thee! Thou art Jagaddhātrī, the Upholdress of the Universe, I bow down to Thee; Thou art Mahesvarī, Mahā Devī, and Mahāmanāgalarūpīnī (Thou art the great Devī, and Thou dost great good to all).

परमा पारमूनी च परमार्गद्वारिनि ।

परमेष्ट्री प्रजोत्थपितः परबहुरास्त्रकरणिधि ॥ 47 ॥

मद्वारी मदोभस्ता मानगम्या महोजस्ता ।

मनस्विनी मुनियेया मानघडसहचारिणी ॥ 48 ॥

Thou destroyest the sins, Thou givest Mokṣa or final liberation. Thou art Parameśvarī, Thou art the World Mother and Thou art of the nature of the Highest Brahma. Thou art Madadātri (the giver of Mada, the Supreme Felicity and rapture or excessive delight), Thou art maddened with Mada the (Excessive Joy); Thou canst be reached When Thou art given proper veneration; Thou art the Most High. Thou art Intelligent; Thou art meditated upon by the Munis; and Thou dwellest in the Sun. Thou art the Lord of the several Lokas (worlds); Thou art endowed with the Highest Knowledge; and Thou art of the colour of water at the time of Pralaya (the Universal Dissolution).

जय लोकेश्वर प्राते प्रलयांवुदस्विधे ।

महामोहविनाणार्थ पूजितासि सुरासुरैः ॥ 49 ॥

यमलोकाभावकर्जी यमपूज्या यमाप्रजा ।

यमयिष्ठहणा च चजनीये नमे नमः ॥ 50 ॥

Thou art worshipped by the Gods and the Asuras for the destruction of the Great Moha. So Great Victory to Thee! Thou art the Rescuer of one from the abode of Death; Thou art worshipped by Yama, Thou art the elder of Yama, Thou art the Controller of Yama and Thou art worshipped by all. Obeisance to Thee! Thou art impartial; Thou controlledst all; Thou art perfectly unattached; Thou destroyest the people's worldly attachments; Thou art The one to whom all look for the fructification of their desires; and Thou art the Compassion Incarnate. Thou art, worshipped by the names: Kaṅkāla Krūra, Kāmāksī; Mīnāksī Marabhedinī, Mādhuryarūpaśalini; and Thou art worshipped with the Pranava Om prefixed to all the Stotras and the Mantras.

समस्वभावा संर्वीं सर्वसंगवर्वित्ता ।

संभाग्राकारी काव्यरूपा कारण्यविद्वारा ॥ 51 ॥

कंकालकृता कामाक्री मीनाक्री मर्मेधिति ।

माधुर्मेक्रणीता च मधुरस्वपृत्रिता ॥ 52 ॥

Thou art of the nature of the Seed Māyā (māyābīja); Thou canst be realised by repeating

Book VIII Chapter XXIV

the mantra and Thou canst be pleased by the deep concentration (Nidiyāsana) on Thee. Thou canst be reached by all men through their minds and Thou dost things that are pleasing to the Mahā Deva.

महामन्वयती मन्नायया मन्त्रियंकरी ।

मनुष्यमानसगाम मन्यशरित्रियङ्कृति ॥ 53 ॥

अर्थ्यव्यत्नैर्वाबक्पिथवबरीगत ।

पनसान्डकैरीराष्टिक्षिरबुक्स्वस्थिपि ॥ 54 ॥

Thou dwellest in the trees Asvattha, Vata, (Peepal tree) Neem, mangoe, Kapittha, (wood apple tree) and the tree Kul (Jujube) trees. Thou art the Panas (Jack) tree, Thou art Arka, Karīra and Kṣīra trees.

दुर्धयल्लीनीवासाईं द्यनीये द्याधिके ।

दाहिष्यकक्रगाल्पे जय सर्वेत्रल्वर्षे ॥ 55 ॥

एवं सत्वेन देवेर्णी पूजनोंते सुवीत ताम ।

दातस्य सकलं पुणवं लभते सर्वदा नः ॥ 56 ॥

तिथ्यं यः पठते स्तोत्रं देवीप्रतिकरं नः ।

आधिष्ट्याधिययं नास्ति रिपुभौतिंत तस्य हि ॥ 57 ॥

Thou resisted in Dugdha valli (the milky juice of plants); Thou art the Compassion Incarnate; and fit to shew mercy. Thou art sincerity and kindness and Thou art the Consort of the Omniscient. So Victory to Thee!' O Nārada! After the worship, if one performs the stotra above described, to the Devi, the worshipper derives all sorts of Punyams (merits) He who reads daily the Stotra, pleasing to the Devi, becomes freed of all sorts of diseases, pain and freed of his fear of passions, so hard to conquer!

अर्थवीं चार्यमाप्नोति दार्थीधं धर्मानुवात् ।

कामावत्यया कामी मोक्षार्थी मोक्षामयुक्ति ॥ 58 ॥

What more than this that he who wants money, gets money; who wants Dharma, gets Dharma; he who wants Kāma, gets his Kāma (objects of desires); and he who wants Mokṣa, gets Mokṣa. The Devi is the Awarder of the Catur Varga fourfold fruits.

बाहाणो वेदसम्पत्रो विजयी क्षितयो भवेत् ।

वैयश्व धनायान्वाको भवेच्छूर: सुखाधिकः ॥ 59 ॥

If this Stotra be read, the Brāhmin becomes

Vedavit, the knower of the Vedas; the Kṣattriya gets the victory; the Vaiśya gets wealth and the Śūdra gets happiness.

सतीमनेच्छ्याढ़काने यः पदैत्ययनो नरः ।

पितृणामक्षया तृरितजीयते कल्यवितिनी ॥ 60 ॥

एवमाराधनं देव्या: समुक्ते सुर्पूजितम् ।

यः क्रोति नो भक्ता स देवीलोकभाषयते ॥ 61 ॥

देवीपुजन्ती विघ्य सर्वे कामा भवन्ति ह ।

सर्वेपासृति: शुर्द्धा मतिरन्ते प्रजायते ॥ 62 ॥

If this Stotra be read with devotion and attention, the Pitrs get undying satisfaction, lasting till Pralaya (the time of universal dissolution). Thus I have described to you the method of worshipping the Devi. The Devas consider it with great attention. He gets the Devi Loka, who performs the worship of the Devi, as above described, with devotion.

यत्र तत्र भवेत्यूचो मान्यो मानधेभ्यु च ।

जायते जगदाबाया: प्रसादेन विरिश्छि ॥ 63 ॥

O Brāhmaṇa! When the Devi is thus worshipped, all the desires are fulfilled; all sins are destroyed; and, in the end, one's mind becomes pure and the worshipper is respected and worshipped everywhere.

नरकाणां न तयातिति भयं सत्येपि कुत्रवित् ।

महामायाप्रसदेत प्रपरीत्रादधर्न: ॥ 64 ॥

देवीभन्तो भवत्येव नात्र कार्या विचारणा ।

इत्येव ते समाख्यानं नरकोद्धारलक्षणम् ॥ 65 ॥

O Son of Brahma! His fear of going into hell is destroyed by the Grace of the Devi; even in dreams, he does not fear anything. By the Grace of Mahā Māyā, his sons and his grandsons, riches and grains multiply and multiply. He becomes a great and steadfast devotee of the Devi; there is no doubt in this. Now I have described to you completely the rules of worship of the Devi.

पूजनं हि महादेवा: स्वर्मंगलाकरम् ।

मधूकपूजनं तद्वानासानां कमातो मुने ॥ 66 ॥

सर्वे सामावेशयत् पूजनं मधुकाढ्यम् ।

न तस्य रोगवाधादिषयमुद्वतरेजय ॥ 67 ॥

When one performs this, one becomes freed of

the Narakas; and all sorts of good things come to him. O Muni! The Madhūka worship and the monthly worship have been described also. He who performs this Madhūka worship fully, never meets with any disease or obstacles.

अयाव्यदीय बव्यामि प्रकृतेः पझड़क परम् ।

नाना रूपेण चोत्पन्चा जगदानन्ददायकम् ॥ 68 ॥

Now I will describe to you the other five aspects of the Great Devi of the nature of Prakrti. Her Name, Form and Origin give pleasure to all the worlds.

साखानं च समाहात्ययं प्रकृतेः पझकं मुने ।

कुतूहलकरं चैव शृणु मुक्तिविधायकम् ॥ 69 ॥

O Muni! Now hear this Prakrti Pañcaka, its narrative and the greatness thereof. Know that this is as curious as it gives liberation.

श्री श्रीद्वैर्योगपाते महापुरणोउदासासाहक्वां सहितायां

वैर्यासिक्यां समाराधवनिष्चानोउद्यक्यक्ये देवीपुजनाभिल्पणं नाम

चर्चिवींगोधाय: ॥ 70 ॥

नंद्रापनवसुधिभः (839) पद्रौढ़ीयावनमुखच्छुरैः ॥

देवीभागवतस्यावल्यासकथा उद्योरितः ॥ 71 ॥

Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter of the Eighth

Book on the worship of the Devi in the

Mahāpurānam Śrimadevibhāgavatam,

of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi

Veda Vyāsa.

* * *