CHAPTER XIII

On the Description of Janamejaya's Devi Yajña

यास उवाच

इति ते क्रियतं भृप यटतृषुं त्वयाउनच ।

नारायणेन यद्योकें नारदाय महात्मने ॥ १ ॥

शुवैतन्तु महादेवय: पूरणां परमाद्धूनम् ।

कृतकृचो भवेन्मत्याँ देव्या: प्रियतमो हि सः ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King Janamejaya! Thus I have answered all your nice queries; also what Nārāyana spoke to the highscolded Nārada is also said by me. He who hears this greatly wonderful Purānam Śrī Devī Bhāgavatam certainly becomes dear to the Devī and all his actions become fructified with success.

कुरु चाचामखं राजन-वधिपुढ़रणाय वै ।

खिजोसि येन येनोन्द्र पितुजीत्वा तु वुर्गिति ॥ 3 ॥

गृहाण तं यहाहेल्या मनं संतिणमोनमम् ।

यथाधिधि धवापने जन्मसाक्यदायकम् ॥ 4 ॥

Now as regards your mental distress, how you prevent any evil falling to your late father in his future life, I advise you to do the Yajña in the name of Bhagavati; and certainly your father will be saved. And you also better take the Most Excellent Mantra of the Mahā Devi duly, according to rules; and your human life will then be crowned with success; (your life will be saved; thus you as well as your father will be saved).

सूत उवाच

तच्छुला नृपशर्दुलः प्रार्थयित्या मुनीश्रम् ।

तस्मावेल महामनं देरीषणवसंजकम् ॥ 5 ॥

दीक्षाविधि विधानेने जग्राह नृपसत्तमः ।

तत आह्य दीभ्यादीत्रवारासमागे ॥ 6 ॥

Sūta said: O Rsis! Hearing thus, the King asked Vyāsa Deva to initiate in the Great Devi Mantra and thus to become his Guru. He was then initiated duly according to rules with the Great Mantra of Bhagavati united with Pranava.

अव्यावर्ज चकाराशु विनशास्धविवर्जितः ।

ब्राहुणीः पाठयामास पुराणं ल्लेतुन्तमम् ॥ 7 ॥

श्रीद्वयोरप्रिककार्तीये देवीभागवतं परम् ।

ब्राहुणाभोजयामासायसंख्याता: सुवासिनीः ॥ 8 ॥

कुमारीर्वंडुकादीक्षु दीनानाथास्तर्वेथ च ।

ग्रव्यप्रदानैतसान्बन्सोतोथ वसुपाधायिः ॥ 9 ॥

When the Navarātra period arrived, he called Dhaumya and other Brāhmanas and performed the Navarātra Vrata so very dear to the Devi, according to his state. At this time for the satisfaction of the Devi, he caused this Devi Bhāgavata Purāna to be read by the Brāhmanas and fed innumerable Brāhmanas and Kumāris (virgins) and gave in charity lots of things to the poor, orphans, and the Brāmin boys and thus finished the Vrata.

समाथि व्य संस्थाने संशित्यो वायदेव है ।

तावदेव है चाकाशात्रारद: समवात्त्त् ॥ 10 ॥

रायवमहर्ती वीर्णां ज्वलद्विनिशेतापयः ।

ससम्बमः समुवाया युवृ ते नारदं मुनिम् ॥ 11 ॥

O Rşis! Thus completing the Devi yajñā, while the King was sitting on his seat, the fiery Devarsī Nārada came there from above playing with his lute. Seeing him there, all on a sudden, the King got up, and paid due respects to him by asking him to take his seat, with other necessary things.

असनावृष्यारोष्ठ पूर्वायामास भूषियः ।

कृत्वा तु कुणलाप्नरं पण्छ्वागमकारणम् ॥ 12 ॥

When the Devarsi became relieved of his labour of journey, the King asked him about his welfare and then enquired into the cause of his coming there.

राजोवाच

कुत आमानं साधो बृहि किं करावाणि ते ।

सनायोई कृताथोंई त्वदायामनकारणात् ॥ 13 ॥

O Devarsi! Whence and what for are you now coming? By your arrival here I am become blessed and feel that my Lord has come to me; now what can I serve to you; kindly command and oblige.

Book XII Chapter XIII

इति राजा वच: शुत्वा प्रोवाच मुनिसत्तम: ।

अधाश्रयं मया दूर्ध देवलोके नृपोनम ॥ 14 ॥

तविवेदयितुं प्रापतत्वस्कारोगे सुविधित: ।

पिता ते दुर्गति प्राप्तो निजकर्मविपयेतात् ॥ 15 ॥

Hearing this, the Devarşi Nārada said: “O King! Today I saw in the Devaloka a very wonderful event. I wanted eagerly to inform that to you. Hence I have come here. Your father met with a bad turn of fate for his bad action. I saw today he assumed a divine form and he was going on a chariot.

स एवायं दिव्यरूपवप्रपूर्णताथुपैन हि ।

देवदेवै: स्तुतः स्मयाग्वसौधिभः समन्ततः ॥ 16 ॥

विभानवरमाहटा मणिद्वीरं गतो3भवत् ।

देवीभागवतत्यास्य शवणोत्थफलेन च ॥ 17 ॥

अव्यापखफलेनापि चिता ते सुगर्ति गतः ।

ध्योर्सिस कृतकृष्योर्सि जीर्वितं सफलं तत ॥ 18 ॥

The Devas were praising him and the Apsarās were encircling him. It seemed he was going in that dress to the Maṇi Dvīpa. O King! You performed the Navarātra Vrata and read the Devi Bhāgavata; it seems, as a result of that, your father has now been rewarded with such a noble and good turn of fate. Now you have become blessed and your actions have borne fruits.

नरकादुद्युतस्तात्रव्या तु कुलभूषण ।

देवलोके स्मीतकांतिर्तिवादा विपुलोभवत् ॥ 19 ॥

You have delivered your father from the hell and so you have become an ornament in your family. Today your name and fame have extended to the Devaloka."

सूत उवाच

नारदोर्फं समाकपयं प्रेमगृद्धितानतः ।

पपात पादाम्बुजयोब्यासेम्याद्धतकर्णः ॥ 20 ॥

तवानुग्रुतते देव कृताधौर्ह महापुने ।

क्र क्र मया प्रतिकतंत्यं नम्मकारतुते त्व ॥ 21 ॥

Sūta said: O Rṣis! Hearing these words from the mouth of Nārada, the King Janamejaya became very much happy and delighted and fell prostrate at the feet of Vyāsa Deva of glorious deeds and said: O Best of Munis! By Thy Grace, today I have

become blessed. Now what return can I pay to Thee save bowing down to Thee.

अनुग्राहः सदैहादभेवमेव त्वया मुने ।

इति राजा बचः शुत्वायागर्भिरभिनंद च ॥ 22 ॥

उवाच चवनं रूक्षणं भगावाब्दायणः ।

राजन्सर्व परित्यज्य भज देयीपदाम्बुजम् ॥ 23 ॥

I pray that Thou dost shew such favours to me ever and again. O Rsis! Hearing these words of the King Janamejaya, Vādarāyana Veda Vyāsa blessed him and spoke to him in sweet words: "O King! Now leave all other actions.

देवीभागवर्त चैव पठ नित्यं समाहितः ।

अंबामखं सदा भकन्या कुक नित्यमनंतिः ॥ 24 ॥

अनायासेन तेन च मोह्यसे भवबन्धन्त ।

सन्यन्यानि पुराणानि हरित्रमुद्याथिन ॥ 25 ॥

देवीभागवतत्यास्य कलां नाहिति घोडगीम ।

सारोस्तसूराणानां वेदानां चैव सर्वशैः ॥ 26 ॥

Read always the Devi Bhāgavata and worship the Lotus Feet of Śrī Devi. Leave off all laziness and now perform the Devi Yajñā with great eclāt. And you will surely be able to cross this bondage of the world. True there are various Purāṇas, the Viṣṇu Purāṇa, the Śiva Purāṇa, but those cannot compare with one sixteenth of this Devi Bhāgavatam.

मूलप्रकृतिवेधा यत्र तु प्रतिपाठते ।

समं तेन पुर्णा स्यात्कधमन्ययुचोपेमा ॥ 27 ॥

पाठे वेदसमं पुर्णयं यस्य स्याजनमेवत ।

पठितव्यं प्रयन्तेन तदेव विद्युभोनमैः ॥ 28 ॥

In fact, this Purāna is the Essence of all the Purānas. How can the other Purānas be compared with this, wherein is established the Devi Mūla Prakṛti? Reading this Purāna from the beginning to the end yields the result of reading the Vedas. So the wise persons should try their best to study it always.”

इत्युक्त्वा पुरवर्ष तं जगाम मुनिसर् ततः ।

जम्भुश्चि यथास्थान धीभ्यादिमुपनोप्रलः ॥ 29 ॥

देवीभागवतस्यैव प्रगसां चकुकृतभाम् ।

राजा शगशास धरणी ततः सन्तुह्यानसः ॥

<table><tr><td>देवीभागवतं चैव पठब्धुपविज्ञानतम् ॥ 30 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>इति शीद्रैविभागवते महापुराणं द्वारसाकन्वे</td></tr><tr><td>ज्योदरसंगोरधावः ॥ 1 3 13 ॥</td></tr></table>

Thus saying to Janamejaya, Veda Vyāsa departed. Then the pure minded Dhaumya and the other Brāhmaṇas highly praised the Devi Bhāgavatam and went to their desired places. And

the King Janamejaya, on the other hand, began to read and hear always the Devi Bhāgavatam and spent his days happily in governing his kingdom.

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the description of Janamejaya's Devi Yajñā in the Mahā Purānam Śrimadevibhāgavatam of 18000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Yyāsa.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

