CHAPTER XX

On the Narrative of Talātala

श्रीनारायण उवाच

ततो3प्रस्ताविक्यकं तलातलमुदीरितम् ।

दानवेन्नो मयो नाम विगुराधियतिमंतान् ॥ १ ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! The cave lower down than Sutala is Talātala! The Lord of Tripura, (the three cities) the great Maya Dānava is the Ruler of this region.

वित्रोलयाः शक्रैणास्पं पालितो दयापूछवः ।

देवदेवप्रसातुं लक्ष्याज्यसुखायस्वः ॥ 2 ॥

Maheśvara, the Doer of good to the three Bhuvanas, burnt his three cities; but at last, being pleased with his devotion, He rescued him. Thus Maya, by the favour of that God, has regained his own kingdom and the enjoyments thereof.

आचार्यों माथितां सोउयं नानामायाविशपरः ।

पूजते राशसैर्यैः सर्वेकार्यमुद्धरे ॥ ३ ॥

ततोउरस्तावृद्धिद्यात महातलमिति सुकुटम् ।

सपाणों काउवेयाणं गण: क्रोधशणो महान् ॥ 4 ॥

This Maya Dānava is the Teacher (Ācārya) of the Māyāvī sect and the cult thereof; and he is skilled in various Māyās or all sorts of the majic powers. All the fierce demons, of cruel temper, worship him for their prosperities in their various enterprises. Next to this Talātala is the most renowned Mahātala. The sons of Kadru, the very angry Snakes, live here.

अंकरिकासी विघ प्रधानान्धतीर्यामि ते ।

कुहकलक्षकश्रीय सुर्षेणः कालियस्था ॥ 5 ॥

महाभोगा महासत्त्वा: कृरा: कृरस्वजातयः ।

पतत्रिज्ञापितेनक्रिदान: सर्व एत ते ॥ 6 ॥

They are many headed. O Vipra! I now mention to you the names of the famous amongst them: Kuhaka, Taksaka, Susena, and Kāliya. These all have very wide hoods and they all very strong; they all are of cruel, temper. Their kinsmen also are so.

स्वकलापायसुहुक्छुद्येव न समता: ।

प्रमत्ता विहृन्त्येव नानाफ्रोडाविशरादा: ॥ 7 ॥

ततो3प्रस्ताच्च विवरे सतातलसमाहूये ।

दैत्या निवसंसेव पणयो दानवाङ्छ ये ॥ 8 ॥

They are always afraid of Garuda, the Kings of birds. Surrounded with their sons, wives, friends and acquaintances, they live happily, well skilled in various sports and pleasures. Lower down this Mahātala is Rasātala. The Daityas, Dānavas and Pani Asuras live here.

नियातकबचा नाम हिरणयपूर्वासिनः ।

कालेया इति च प्रोक्ता: प्रत्यनीका हविषुंगम् ॥ 9 ॥

महीजस्थोत्यचैव महासाहसिनस्तथा ।

सकलेशस्य च हरेलेजसा हतविकमः ॥ 10 ॥

बिलेशया इव सदा विवरे निवसन्ति हि ।

ये वै वाधिभः सरमया शक्रवृत्त्या नितन्तम् ॥ 11 ॥

Besides these, there live the Nivāta Kavacas of the Hiranyapura city and the Asuras named Kāleyas, the enemies of the Devas. These all are naturally very energetic and brave; their powers are baffled by the Tejas of the Bhagavān and they live like snakes in this region.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

मान्वणाधिसुरास्ताडिता विध्यति स्म ह ।

ततोउध्यस्तालाताले नागलोकाधिपालकाः ॥ १२ ॥

वासुकिपुसुवा: शंखः कुलिकः झेत एव च ।

धनझयो महाशंखो धृततामुखलथेव च ॥ १३ ॥

शंखघुडः कम्बलाश्रतो देवोपदतकः ।

महामर्षा महाभोगा निवसन्ति विशोत्क्षणाः ॥ १४ ॥

The other Asuras that were driven and were afraid of the Mantras, uttered by Saramā, the messenger of Indra, live here too. O Nārada! Lower down is Pātāla, where live Vāsuki, the Chief of the snakes, and others named Śaṅkha, Kulika, Śveta, Dhañanjaya, Mahāśaṅkha, Dhrāraśstra. Śaṅkha cūḍa, Kambala, Aśvatara, and Devopadattaka, all very angry, of wide hoods, and virulently poisonous.

पश्रमतकावर्तिश कृपासपतक्षपिता: ।

कैच्छिष्णपा: कैच्च्छतगीषित्वापरे ॥ १ ५ ॥

सहसशिरसः केप्रि रोचिष्यमणिधायरका: ।

Some of these have five heads, some seven hoods, some ten; some hundred, some others have thousand heads, while some other have on their crects exceedingly luminous jewels.

पातालरंधितिमरिनकरं स्वमरीचिधि: ॥ 16 ॥

विप्राप्त न चेवर्षे सदा संजातमन्यवः ।

अस्य मृनुपद्रेणे हि प्रिंशलाहरूककंन्तरे ॥ 17 ॥

योजनैः पारिसंख्याते तामसी भगवल्कला ।

अन्तन्तख्या समासले हि सर्वेविद्यपूजिता ॥ 18 ॥

By their rays, they dispel the darkness of the nether regions; but they are awfully prone to anger. At the bottom of this Pātāla, and at a distance of the thirty Yojanas; the Portion of Bhagavān in the shape of the Infinite Darkness is reigning there.

अहमित्यिभिनानस्य तल्णयं यं प्रच्छते ।

संकर्षी सात्वतीयाः कर्षणं उद्रुर्धययोः ॥ १९ ॥

इंदं भूमण्डलं यस्य सहशिरासः प्रभो ।

अनन्तमूर्तैः शोषस्य त्रियमाणं च शीर्षैक ॥ २० ॥

O Devarşi! All the Devas worship this Form. The devotees call Him by the name of Śaṅakarsāna, as He is the manifested emblem of “Aham” and the common ground where the Seer and the Seen blend into one.

पृथ्वीगोलमशेधे हि सिद्धार्थं इत लध्येते ।

यस्य कालेन वेदस्य संशिर्वीर्षे: सम् विषेः ॥ 2 1 ॥

चराचरं पृथ्वीत्पलिवेयादुपद्यत ।

सांकर्णे नाम मूदो व्यूहैकादशगोषितः ॥ 2 2 ॥

He is the thousand-headed Controller of all, moving and non-moving; He is of infinite forms; He is Śeṣa; this whole universe is being held as a mustard bean on His head; He is the Nature Intelligence and Bliss and He is Self-manifest. When he wants to destroy all this during the Palaya, the very powerful Saṅkarṣana Rudra, well arrayed with the eleven Vyūhas, military (squadrons) arrangements, springs up from Him.

वित्तोच्छ न्युतिषां शूलमुनीयययम् ।

उद्विष्ठमहासच्चे महापृतक्षयूद्र: ॥ 23 ॥

From His Central Eyebrows, looking wide with His Three Eyes and raising His Trident, resplendent with three flames.

यस्याधिकमलद्धूक्षोगाणच्छतमण्डले ।

विराजन्मिणिविवेषु महाहिषतयो3निगम् ॥ 24 ॥

एकान्तभक्तिगोपने सह सात्तपुब्बेः ।

प्रणपानः: स्वमुर्जनं ते स्वमुखानि समीक्षते ॥ 25 ॥

All the (prominent) principal snakes, ruling over many others, come to Him during the nights, filled with devotion and surrounded with Bhaktas (devotees) and bow down to Him with their heads bent low and look at each other's faces, enlightened with the lights from the jewels shining with clear lustre, on the nails of the red toes of His Lotus-Feet.

सुक्रतृष्डलमाणिक्यप्रभामडलभांज्यपि ।

सुक्रपोलातिन चार्कणि गंडस्थलघुमन्ति च ॥ २६ ॥

नागराजकुमार्योंपि चार्याविजसत्तिषपः ।

शिगर्दैर्विपुलैस्तद्धद्वलैः सुभगैतया ॥ 27 ॥

At that time their faces become brilliant with the rays emitting from the jewels on the top of their very gay encircled hoods; and their cheeks look beautiful and shining. The daughters of the Nāga Rāja also do like this; when very beautiful rays come out of their perfectly excellent bodies.

Book VIII Chapter XXI

स्विर्मैपुंजदण्डैश गोभमाना इतस्ततः ।

चन्दनागुरुकाशमरीपूढ़लेपेन भूषितः ॥ 28 ॥

तदीभिपर्वसंजातकामावेशसमायुतः ।

स्तलितसमतसंयुक्ता: सबीडं लोकवन्ति च ॥ 29 ॥

Their arms are wide extended; they look very clear and they are beautifully white. They use always Sandalpaste, Aguru and Kāsmirī unguments. Being overpowered by the amorous passion, due to their contact with those scented things, they look at Him with bashful glances and sweet smiles and expect Asis (benedictions) from Him.

अनुगामदोभात्रियूणांकणलोचनम् ।

करणावलोकनेचे च आशासानासतशीक्षाः ॥ ३० ॥

सोअन्तो भगवान्देवोजनस्तचो महाशयः ।

अनन्तगुणवार्थीश आदिवेदो महाशुतः ॥ ३१ ॥

And then His eyes roll maddened with love and express signs of kindness and mercy. The Bhagavān Ananta Deva is of boundless strength; His attributes are infinite; He is the ocean of infinite qualities. He is the Ādi Deva, of a very good nature and His Nature is highly luminous.

संहतामर्परीचादिवोगो लोकगुभाय च ।

आरते महात्चतिनिधि: सर्वेवद्वगुपजितः ॥ 32 ॥

He has abandoned anger and envy and He wants the welfare of all. All the Devas worship Him and He is the repository of all Sāttvic qualities.

ध्यायमानस सुरै: सिद्धैत्सुरैश्वोगैरैस्वा ।

विद्याधरैश गंधर्वैपुनिवेशैय शिन्यश: ॥ 33 ॥

अनारतमदो-मतलोकविद्धलतोचनः ।

वाक्यमानेन विबुधान्यवर्षवेगगानपि ॥ 34 ॥

The Devas, Siddhas, Asuras, Uragas,

Vidyātharas, Gandharvas, and Munis always meditate on Him. On account of His constant Mada Rāga the ethusiasm and intoxication, His sight appears intoxicated and His eyes look perturbed with emotions. He is always pleasing to those who surround him and to the Devas by His sweet nectar-like words.

आयायमानः स विभुर्षैवन्ती चर्ज द्यत् ।

अस्नाताभिनवैः स्वच्छेस्तुलसीदासंचदोः ॥ 35 ॥

माद्धान्यकृतवतोघाशिंयुतां सदा ।

नीलासा देवदेव एककुण्डतर्भपितः ॥ 36 ॥

The Vajjayanti garland hangs from His neck; it never wanes and it is always decorated with the fresh and clear Tulsaí leaves. The maddened bees make their humming noises incessantly and thus add to the beauty. He is the Deva of the Devas and He wears a blue coloured cloth and He is ornamented with only one ear-ring.

हलस्य ककुति न्यस्तपुविरभुजोस्ययः ।

महेन्द्र: काकुर्सी यद्धुरजां च मतर्भमः ॥ 37 ॥

उदारलीते देवेशो वर्णितः सात्चतर्षिः ।

इति श्रीदेवीभागवते महापुराणोउद्यमकन्धे विशोरध्वायः ॥ 20 ॥

He (the God Visṇu) Undecaying and Immutable; resting His fleshy arms on the Halakakuda (the lofty portion of the plough), He is upholding the golden girdle as the elephant Airāvata of Indra upholds the golden girdle. O Nārada! The devotees describe Him as the Source of this Lilā of the Universe and the Controller of the Devas.

Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narrative of the Talātala in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VIII Chapter XXI

