[Ch 21 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: On hearing the sound words of his daughter Śāśikālā, prcgnant with reason, Subāhu the king of Benares, become very anxious and began to think what he would now: so short a space of time in this momentous occasion, thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- On hearing the sound words of his daughter Śaśikalā, pregnant with reason, Subāhu the king of Benares, became very anxious and began to think what he would now, so short a space of time in this momentous occasion, thus :--

[Ch 21 Verse 2-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "The powerful kings, all, have come here on intention that they would fight and therefore they are all attended with their armies and followers respectively; and they are now sitting on their respective daisess in the Swayamvarahal. If I go now and tell them that my daughter Sāsikalaïs is not willing tocome of her won accord in the hall, the evil-minded kings will certainly kill me out of their wrath."
NEW CORR ENG ──► “The powerful kings, all, have come here on intention that they would fight and therefore they are all attended with their armies and followers respectively; and they are now sitting on their respective daises in the Svayamvara hall. If I go now and tell them that my daughter Śaśikalā is not willing to come of her own accord in the hall, the evil minded kings will certainly kill me out of their wrath.

[Ch 21 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I have not so much strength, whether in my army or in forts, as to be able to decline these kings and drive them away from my kingdom.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I have not so much strength, whether in my army or in forts, as to be able to decline these kings and drive them away from my kingdom.

[Ch 21 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sudarsāna, too is, alone, helpless, wealthless, and a mere boy. What shall I do now? Alas! I am now plunged in deep sorrow."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sudarśana, too is, alone, helpless, wealthless, and a mere boy. What shall I do now? Alas! I am now plunged in deep sorrow.”

[Ch 21 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thinking thus, with head bowed down by humility, the king went to the kings, and said thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thinking thus, with head bowed down by humility, the king went to the kings, and said thus :--

[Ch 21 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Kings! The girl, though requested repeatedly by me and her mother, is not willing to come to this hall. What can I do now?
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Kings! The girl, though requested repeatedly by me and her mother, is not willing to come to this hall. What can I do now?

[Ch 21 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I am your servant and, bowing my head at the feet of you all, pray to you, to accept my worship and return to your own places respectively. I am ready to give a sufficient quantity of gems and jewels, clothes, elephants, chariots. Kindly accept these and go back to your own homes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I am your servant and, bowing my head at the feet of you all, pray to you, to accept my worship and return to your own cities respectively. I am ready to give a sufficient quantity of gems and jewels, clothes, elephants, chariots. Kindly accept these and go back to your own homes.

[Ch 21 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My daughter is as yet a girl; if I chastise her, she may commit suicide; and I will be exceedingly sorry; therefore I am very much distressed with this thought.
NEW CORR ENG ──► My daughter is as yet a girl; if I chastise her, she may commit suicide; and I will be exceedingly sorry; therefore I am very much distressed with this thought.

[Ch 21 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You all are fortunate, energetic, and of a merciful disposition; what will it serve you to accept the daughter of mine, who is disobedient and unfortunate?
NEW CORR ENG ──► You all are fortunate, energetic, and of a merciful disposition; what will it serve you to accept the daughter of mine, who is disobedient and unfortunate?

[Ch 21 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I am your obedient servant; shew your mercy on me and it is your duty to consider my daughter as your daughter."
NEW CORR ENG ──► I am your obedient servant; shew your mercy on me and it is your duty to consider my daughter as your own daughter.”

[Ch 21 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Hearing Subāhu's words, the kings did not utter a single word; but Yudhājit, with his eyes reddened out of wrath, began to address the king of Benares in an angry tone:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Hearing Subāhu’s words, the kings did not utter a single word; but Yudhājit, with his eyes reddened out of wrath, began to address the king of Benares in an angry tone :--

[Ch 21 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O King! You are a veteran fool; what do you say now after committing a most blameable act? Had you any doubt as to your proceedings, why have you, out of sheer delusion, called this meeting hall of Svayamvara, without thinking the matter before-hand.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O King! You are a veteran fool; what do you say now after committing a most blameable act? Had you any doubt as to your proceedings, why have you, out of sheer delusion, called this meeting hall of Svayamvara, without thinking the matter before-hand.

[Ch 21 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "You have invited the kings and princes in this marriage ceremony Svayamvara; and they all have assembled here; how can they now go back to their homes?
NEW CORR ENG ──► You have invited the kings and princes in this marriage ceremony Svayamvara; and they all have assembled here; how can they now go back to their homes?

[Ch 21 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Are you going now to insult these? and will give your daughter in marriage to Sudarśana? Nothing can be more ignoble than this?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Are you going now to insult these? and will you give your daughter in marriage to Sudarśana? Nothing can be more ignoble than this?

[Ch 21 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The welfare-seeking person ought to judge before-hand and then to act. But you have started your work without any previous judgment and decision. You will have to reap its fruit; there is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The welfare-seeking person ought to judge before-hand and then to act. But you have started your work without any previous judgment and decision. You will have to reap its fruit; there is no doubt this.

[Ch 21 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Why are you now thinking of giving your daughter to this helpless, wealthless Sudarśana in the presence of kings that are powerful and that command a great militia.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Why are you now thinking of giving your daughter to this helpless, wealthless Sudarśana in the presence of kings that are powerful and that command a great militia.

[Ch 21 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O thou most sinful! Today I will certainly kill you; next I will kill Sudarśana and then give your daughter to my daughter's son; know that this is my firm resolve.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O thou most sinful! Today I will certainly kill you; next I will kill Sudarśana and then give your daughter to my daughter’s son; know that this is my firm resolve.

[Ch 21 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Who is there, when I am standing, in this assembly that can aspire to carry away the bridegroom elect by force or theft? Nothing to speak of Sudarśana who is powerless, wealthless and a mere boy!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Who is there, when I am standing, in this assembly that can aspire to carry away the bridegroom elect by force or theft? Nothing to speak of Sudarśana who is powerless, wealthless and a mere boy!

[Ch 21 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I spared his life before in the hermitage of Bhāradvāja at the Muni's request; but today I will not spare the boy under any circumstances whatsoever.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I spared his life before in the hermitage of Bhāradvāja at the Muni’s request; but today I will not spare the boy under any circumstances whatsoever.

[Ch 21 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, please go and consult with your wife and daughter and give your dear beautiful daughter to my daughter's son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, please go and consult with your wife and daughter and give your dear beautiful daughter to my daughter’s son.

[Ch 21 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Be engaged in a marriage tie with me by giving your exquisitely beautiful daughter to my daughter's son. You can very well judge that it is always proper and advisable that a great man shall come under the protection of another great man.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Be engaged in a marriage tie with me by giving your exquisitely beautiful daughter to my daughter’s son. You can very well judge that it is always proper and advisable that a great man shall come under the protection of another great man.

[Ch 21 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What happiness can you expect from this Sudarśana, who is helpless and banished from his kingdom, that you are going to give him your dear and auspicious daughter!
NEW CORR ENG ──► What happiness can you expect from this Sudarśana, who is helpless and banished from his kingdom, that you are going to give him your dear and auspicious daughter!

[Ch 21 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “Family, wealth, army, appearance, kingdoms, forts and true friends and other helping persons,” these a man should consider when he is going to give away his daughter in marriage to any body; else there is no surety of happiness. Think over the royal custom and the never failing Dharma and do what is proper. Never it is advisable to do any act, abandoning the path of Dharma and morals.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Family, wealth, army, appearance, kingdoms, forts and true friends and other helping persons; these a man should consider when he is going to give away his daughter in marriage to anybody; else there is no surety of happiness. Think over the royal custom and the never failing Dharma and do what is proper. Never it is advisable to do any act, abandoning the path of Dharma and morals.

[Ch 21 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You are my intimate friend; therefore I am telling you these good words. O king! Better bring your daughter, surrounded by her attendant maids, in this hall of Swayamvara.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You are my intimate friend; therefore I am telling you these good words. O king! Better bring your daughter, surrounded by her attendant maids, in this hall of Svayamvara.

[Ch 21 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Let this daughter select any man other than Sudarsana; I have got no cause of quarrel; and the marriage will then be celebrated according to your will.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Let this daughter select any man other than Sudarśana; I have got no cause of quarrel; and the marriage will then be celebrated according to your will.

[Ch 21 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O best of kings! The other kings are all of high descent; and they have armies and are all in positions befitting your connection! If the daughter chooses any one amongst them, then no quarrels would arise.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O best of kings! The other kings are all of high descent; and they have armies and are all in positions befitting your connection! If the daughter chooses any one amongst them, then no quarrels would arise.

[Ch 21 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But if the daughter choose Sudarśana, then certainly I will carry her by force. Therefore, O king! act in such a way that no quarrels occur in future.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But if the daughter chooses Sudarśana, then certainly I will carry her by force. Therefore, O king! act in such a way that no quarrels occur in future.”

[Ch 21 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Thus addressed by Yudhājit, the king of Benares was very sorrowful, and, after a heavy sigh, went to his palace and told with a grieved heart to his wife, thus: "O fair eyed one! Now I am completely under your control, you better explain to Śaśikalā that a dreadful quarrel is now to occur; what am I to do now?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Thus addressed by Yudhājit, the king of Benares was very sorrowful, and, after a heavy sigh, went to his palace and told with a grieved heart to his wife, thus :-- “O fair eyed one! Now I am completely under your control; you better explain to Śaśikalā that a dreadful quarrel is now to occur; what am I to do now?”

[Ch 21 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Hearing her husband's words, the queen went to her daughter and spoke thus: "O child! Quarrels have now ensued amongst the kings for your sake; your father has become very sorrowful; therefore, O fair one! Choose any other man your husband than Sudarśana.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Hearing her husband’s words, the queen went to her daughter and spoke thus :-- “O child! Quarrels have now ensued amongst the kings for your sake; your father has become very sorrowful; therefore, O fair one! Choose any other man your husband than Sudarśana.

[Ch 21 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Child! If you do not judge and rashly choose Sudarśana, then the powerful King Yudhājit, possessing a large army, will no doubt kill you, me and Sudarśana. It might be, if quarrels ensue, you might be married to another husband; therefore better think now and act.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Child! If you do not judge and rashly choose Sudarśana, then the powerful king Yudhājit, possessing a large army, will no doubt kill you, me and Sudarśana. It might be, if quarrels ensue, you might be married to another husband; therefore better think now and act.

[Ch 21 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O dear eyed! It is now your incumbent duty to choose another king for your husband, if you want your and my welfare and happiness. Leave Sudarśana."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O dear eyed! It is now your iñcumbent duty to choose another king for your husband, if you want your and my welfare and happiness. Leave Sudarśana.”

[Ch 21 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The mother thus advised her daughter; the king, too, afterwards explained and tried to convince her. The girl spoke fearlessly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The mother thus advised her daughter; the king, too, afterwards explained and tried to convince her. The girl spoke fearlessly.

[Ch 21 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O king! What you have said is all true; but you know my firm resolve already. I won’t ever select any other king than Sudarśana.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O king! What you have said is all true; but you know my firm resolve already. I won’t ever select any other king than Sudarśana.

[Ch 21 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O king! If you are afraid and be in agony, then do this thing: better give me in marriage to Sudarśana and then drive us away from your city. He will put me in his chariot and go away out of your city. After that what is inevitable will surely come to pass. There cannot be anything otherwise.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! If you are afraid and be in agony, then do this thing: better give me in marriage to Sudarśana and then drive us away from your city. He will put me in his chariot and go away out of your city. After that what is inevitable will surely come to pass. There cannot be anything otherwise.

[Ch 21 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! You need not fear anything about what is kept in the womb of future by Destiny. What is inevitable will happen; there is no doubt in this."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! You need not fear anything about what is kept in the womb of future by Destiny. What is inevitable will happen; there is no doubt in this.”

[Ch 21 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king said: "O child! The intelligent persons never shew too much rashness and insolence. The learned people, versed in the Vedas, say it is never advisable to quarrel with many persons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king said :-- “O child! The intelligent persons never show too much rashness and insolence. The learned people, versed in the Vedas, say it is never advisable to quarrel with many persons.

[Ch 21 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How can I give my daughter in marriage to one and then banish them both? The kings have turned out enemies. There is no heinous crime, that they cannot commit now.
NEW CORR ENG ──► How can I give my daughter in marriage to one and then banish them both? The kings have turned out enemies. There is no heinous crime, that they cannot commit now.

[Ch 21 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O child! If it be your opinion, I can pledge something as a pawn for your marriage, as the king Janaka pledged in days of yore for his daughter Sitā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O child! If it be your opinion, I can pledge something as a pawn for your marriage, as the king Janaka pledged in days of yore for her daughter Sitā.

[Ch 21 Verse 44-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I will also put forward a pawn very difficult to be carried out, as Janaka originally made an offer of the hands of Sītā to whomsoever, who would break the Śiva's strong bow. Thus the quarrels amongst the king might be diminished; for he, who will be able to fulfill the promise, will be able to accept you. Then, be he Sudarśana or any other king, whoever will be strong to fulfill the promise will take you as his wife.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will also put forward a pawn very difficult to be carried out, as Janaka originally made an offer of the hands of Sitā to whomsoever, who would break the Śiva’s strong bow. Thus the quarrels amongst the kings might be diminished; for he who will be able to fulfill the promise, will be able to accept you. Then, be he Sudarśana or any other king, whoever will be strong to fulfill the promise will take you as his wife.

[Ch 21 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus the quarrels will cease and I will also be able to perform your marriage ceremony in peace and happiness."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the quarrels will cease and I will also be able to perform your marriage ceremony in peace and happiness.”

[Ch 21 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The daughter said: “Father! On hearing from you, I am merged in an ocean of doubt, for it seems to me what you are saying is the act of a fool; already I have chosen in my mind Sudarśana for my husband; now it cannot be otherwise.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The daughter said :-- “Father! On hearing from you, I am merged in an ocean of doubt, for it seems to me what you are saying is the act of a fool; already, I have chosen in my mind Sudarśana for my husband; now it cannot be otherwise.

[Ch 21 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! The mind is the source of virtue and vice. When I have mentally selected, how can I now forego him and choose another?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! The mind is the source of virtue and vice. When I have mentally selected, how can I now forego him and choose another?

[Ch 21 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! If you keep any pledge, then I will be subject to any and every body; if one, two, or more fulfill the same pledge, I will be then subject to any or all of them. Father! in that case quarrels may arise. What shall I do then? I cannot give my vote on this doubtful point."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! If you keep any pledge, then I will be subject to any and everybody; if one, two, or more fulfill the same pledge, I will be then subject to any or all of them. Father! in that case quarrels may arise. What shall I do then? I cannot give my vote on this doubtful point.

[Ch 21 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! You need not fear anything. Better give me in marriage to Sudarśana according to the prescribed rules; then, in that case, the Goddess Caṇḍikā will certainly protect us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! You need not fear anything. Better give me in marriage to Sudarśana according to the prescribed rules; then, in that case, the Goddess Candikā will certainly protect us.

[Ch 21 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Taking Whose Name destroys a whole host of sins, take Her Name and think the Almighty and perform carefully our marriage ceremony.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Taking Whose Name destroys a whole host of sins, take Her Name and think the Almighty and perform carefully our marriage ceremony.

[Ch 21 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Better go to the king's assembly today, and, with folded hands, tell them come tomorrow to the hall of Swayamvara.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Better go to the king’s assembly today, and, with folded hands, tell them come tomorrow to the hall of Svayamvara.

[Ch 21 Verse 55-56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus bidding goodbye to the kings, perform in the right spirit, according to the prescribed rites, our marriage ceremony. Next, after giving fit dowries and other articles after the marriage, better tell the prince Sudarśana to depart. The son of Dhruvasandhi will take me away with him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus bidding goodbye to the kings, perform in the right spirit, according to the prescribed rites, our marriage ceremony. Next, after giving fit dowries and other articles after the marriage, better tell the prince Sudarśana to depart. The son of Dhruvasandhi will take me away with him.

[Ch 21 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If, at this, the kings get angry and be ready to quarrel with you, then in that case, Goddess Bhagavatī wili no doubt help us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If, at this, the kings get angry and be ready to quarrel with you, then in that case, the Goddess Bhagavatī will no doubt help us.

[Ch 21 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sudārasāna then will fight against those kings; and if he loses his life perchance in the battle, then I will also follow him and die.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sudarśana then will fight against those kings; and if he loses his life perchance in the battle, then I will also follow him and die.

[Ch 21 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Let all good come unto you! Better give me in marriage to Sudarśana and remain here with your army. I will go alone with him, the object of my love."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Let all good come unto you! Better give me in marriage to Sudarśana and remain here with your army. I will go alone with him, the object of my love.”

[Ch 21 Verse 60-61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Hearing these words from her daughter, the king Subāhu trusted her, and firmly resolved to act according to that, and to celebrated the marriage of Śaśikalā. Thus ends the Twentyfirst Chapter on the king of Benares fulfilling the advice of her daughter in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Hearing these words from her daughter, the king Subāhu trusted her, and firmly resolved to act according to that, and to celebrate the marriage of Śaśikalā. Thus ends the 21st chapter on the king of Benares fulfilling the advice of his daughter in Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
