CHAPTER XXI

On the King of Benares Fulfilling the Advice of His Daughter

व्यास उवाच

सुवाहुर्यि तच्छूला युक्तभूर्न तथा तदा ।

स्थिताविष्टो बभूवाणु किं कतन्यमतः परम् ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: On hearing the sound words of his daughter Śāśikālā, prcgnant with reason, Subāhu the king of Benares, become very anxious and began to think what he would now: so short a space of time in this momentous occasion, thus:

संगता: पृथिवीपाला: सरी-न्या: सपरिभूहा: ।

उपविष्टाङ्ग प्रमेषु योदुक्कामा महावाला: ॥ 2 ॥

यदि ब्रवीमि तान्सर्वान्सुता नायाति साम्यान् ।

तथापि कोपसंयुक्ता हनुर्मा दुख्युद्ध्वः ॥ 3 ॥

"The powerful kings, all, have come here on intention that they would fight and therefore they are all attended with their armies and followers respectively; and they are now sitting on their respective daisess in the Swayamvarahal. If I go now and tell them that my daughter Sāsikalaïs is not willing

tocome of her won accord in the hall, the evil-minded kings will certainly kill me out of their wrath."

न मे सैन्यवलं तादूक्टन दुर्गवलमढ़तमू ।

येनाहं नृपतीस्विन् प्रत्यादेयुभिकोलसे ॥ ४ ॥

I have not so much strength, whether in my army or in forts, as to be able to decline these kings and drive them away from my kingdom.

सूदर्गनस्तथेकाको हृसहाशोरोधन: शिणुः ।

किं कतव्य विमानोउर्ष सर्वथा दुःखसारने ॥ ५ ॥

Sudarsāna, too is, alone, helpless, wealthless, and a mere boy. What shall I do now? Alas! I am now plunged in deep sorrow."

इति चिन्तापरो राजा जगाम नृपस्विजरी ।

प्रणय तानुवाचाय प्रश्यावन्तो वृपः ॥ ६ ॥

Thinking thus, with head bowed down by humility, the king went to the kings, and said thus:

कि कर्तव्ये नृपा: कामं नैति मे मण्डये सुता ।

बहुगः प्रेयमाणासि सा मात्रासि यमासि च ॥ ७ ॥

“O Kings! The girl, though requested repeatedly by me and her mother, is not willing to come to this hall. What can I do now?

मूनां पतामि पावेरु राजां दासोस्म साम्यान् ।

प्रतिहिक गृहीताउऊ जजंतु सद्यानि वः ॥ 8 ॥

द्वामि बहुल्यानि वस्त्राणि च गजावधान् ।

गृहीत्वाउऊ कृपां कृत्वा जजुंत भवान्यूत ॥ 9 ॥

I am your servant and, bowing my head at the feet of you all, pray to you, to accept my worship and return to your own places respectively. I am ready to give a sufficient quantity of gems and jewels, clothes, elephants, chariots. Kindly accept these and go back to your own homes.

न वजे मे सुता बाता प्रियते यदि खेदिता ।

तदा मे स्यामहुदुःखं तेन चिन्तागुरोउम्यम् ॥ १० ॥

My daughter is as yet a girl; if I chastise her, she may commit suicide; and I will be exceedingly sorry; therefore I am very much distressed with this thought.

घर्वतः कल्पावन्तो महाभाग्या महौजसः ।

किं मे तया वृद्धिता तु मंद्या दुर्विंनीतया ॥ १ १ ॥

You all are fortunate, energetic, and of a merciful disposition; what will it serve you to accept the daughter of mine, who is disobedient and unfortunate?

अनुग्राहीउपि वः कामं दासोउहमिति सर्वथा ।

सुता सुतेव मन्तव्या भवादूः सर्वथा माम ॥ १२ ॥

I am your obedient servant; shew your mercy on me and it is your duty to consider my daughter as your daughter."

व्यास उवाच

शुना सुबाहुवचनं नोचुः केचन भूमिपा: ।

युयातिकोयाताभ्रास्तमुवाच रभावितः ॥ १ ३ ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing Subāhu's words, the kings did not utter a single word; but Yudhājit, with his eyes reddened out of wrath, began to address the king of Benares in an angry tone:

राजमूर्खोंसि किं बृषे केला कार्य सुनिंदितम् ।

स्वयंवरः कर्थ मोहात्रयितः संगेश सति ॥ 14 ॥

“O King! You are a veteran fool; what do you say now after committing a most blameable act? Had you any doubt as to your proceedings, why have you, out of sheer delusion, called this meeting hall of Svayamvara, without thinking the matter before-hand.”

मितिता धमुपत्रः सर्वे त्वयाउरुत्ता: स्वयंरे ।

कथमदा नृपा गन्तु योग्याते स्वगृहान्धति ॥ 15 ॥

"You have invited the kings and princes in this marriage ceremony Svayamvara; and they all have assembled here; how can they now go back to their homes?

अवमान्य नृपान्सर्वित्व किं सूर्णनाय वै ।

दातुपिच्छसि पुरीं च किमानार्यमतः परम् ॥ 16 ॥

Are you going now to insult these? and will give your daughter in marriage to Sudarśana? Nothing can be more ignoble than this?

विद्यार्थे पुरुभेणादौ कार्ये वै रुणमिच्छता ।

आरब्धस्यं तव्या ततु कृतं राजत्र जानता ॥ 17 ॥

The welfare-seeking person ought to judge before-hand and then to act. But you have started your work without any previous judgment and decision. You will have to reap its fruit; there is no doubt in this.

एताविहाय नृपती-वलवाहनसंयुतान् ।

वरं सुर्जर्गं कर्तुं कथमिष्ठस साम्पत्न ॥ १ ८ ॥

Why are you now thinking of giving your daughter to this helpless, wealthless Sudarśana in the presence of kings that are powerful and that command a great militia.

अहं त्वा हन्मि यपिष्ठं तथा पशुत्सूरर्भन् ।

दौहित्रायाद्ध ते कन्यां दास्यामीति विविधुः ॥ १९ ॥

O thou most sinful! Today I will certainly kill you; next I will kill Sudarśana and then give your daughter to my daughter's son; know that this is my firm resolve.

मय विस्तृति कोन्योक्ति यः कन्यां हृतिंभिच्छिति ।

सुर्दर्शन: क्रिज्ञानघि निर्विधी निर्वर्ज: शिष्टु। ॥ 20 ॥

Who is there, when I am standing, in this assembly that can aspire to carry away the

Book III Chapter XXI

bridegroom elect by force or theft? Nothing to speak of Sudarśana who is powerless, wealthless and a mere boy!

भातुझाज्ञभे पूर्व मुक्तो मुनिकृते मया ।

नाहाई मोचिय्यामि सर्वेया जीवितं शिशणेः ॥ 21 ॥

I spared his life before in the hermitage of Bhāradvāja at the Muni's request; but today I will not spare the boy under any circumstances whatsoever.

तस्मादिषार्थी सम्यलं पूज्या च भार्याय सह ।

दीहिजाय प्रियां कन्यां देहि मे सुभृवं किल ॥ 22 ॥

Therefore, please go and consult with your wife and daughter and give your dear beautiful daughter to my daughter's son.

सव्यती भव दत्वा त्वं पुत्रीमतो मनोरामम् ।

उच्चाशय: प्रकर्तेव्य: सर्वदा: शुभमित्छता ॥ 23 ॥

Be engaged in a marriage tie with me by giving your exquisitely beautiful daughter to my daughter's son. You can very well judge that it is always proper and advisable that a great man shall come under the protection of another great man.

सुर्जर्नाय दत्ता तव पुरीं प्राणिचिया शुभाम् ।

एकाडिलेज्यराज्याय किं सुखं प्राप्तिमछस्थिसि ॥ 24 ॥

What happiness can you expect from this Sudarśana, who is helpless and banished from his kingdom, that you are going to give him your dear and auspicious daughter!

"कुत विजं बत रूप रायं तुग सुकुजनम् ।

दूरवा कन्या प्रताल्या नान्या सुखमुच्छिति ॥"

परिस्थिति धर्म तं रजानीति च राश्धतीम् ।

कुक कार्य वयायोगं मा कृया मतिमन्यथा ॥ 25 ॥

“Family, wealth, army, appearance, kingdoms, forts and true friends and other helping persons,” these a man should consider when he is going to give away his daughter in marriage to any body; else there is no surety of happiness. Think over the royal custom and the never failing Dharma and do what is proper. Never it is advisable to do any act, abandoning the path of Dharma and morals.

सुहृदासि ममात्यर्थ हितं ते प्रव्रीयामृदम् ।

समानव सुतां राजान्मण्डये तां सखीबुतम् ॥ 26 ॥

You are my intimate friend; therefore I am telling you these good words. O king! Better bring your daughter, surrounded by her attendant maids, in this hall of Swayamvara.

सुदर्जनमुने चेयं वरीचिति चतुदयसौ ।

वियहो मे दात न स्यादिवाहोस्तु लदैकितः ॥ 27 ॥

Let this daughter select any man other than Sudarsana; I have got no cause of quarrel; and the marriage will then be celebrated according to your will.

अन्ये नृपतयः सर्वे कुलीना: सबला: समा: ।

विरोधः कौदुगस्वेने वर्णोषादि नृपोन्मि ॥ 28 ॥

O best of kings! The other kings are all of high descent; and they have armies and are all in positions befitting your connection! If the daughter chooses any one amongst them, then no quarrels would arise.

अन्यधानई हरियेऊ डालत्कान्यामिं शुभाम् ।

मा विरोधं सुकु:साधयं नष्ठ पार्थिवसत्ति ॥ 29 ॥

But if the daughter choose Sudarśana, then certainly I will carry her by force. Therefore, O king! act in such a way that no quarrels occur in future.

व्यास उवाच

युधाजिता समाविष्टः सुबाड़ः शोकसंयुतः ।

निः शुभस्मवं नवा पार्था प्रह शुचावुतः ॥ 30 ॥

पूर्वी बृहि सुधांजे कलहे समुपस्थिते ।

कि कतैल्व मया शक्यं लढ़णोर्सि समुलेचे ॥ 31 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus addressed by Yudhājit, the king of Benares was very sorrowful, and, after a heavy sigh, went to his palace and told with a grieved heart to his wife, thus: "O fair eyed one! Now I am completely under your control, you better explain to Śaśikalā that a dreadful quarrel is now to occur; what am I to do now?"

व्यास उवाच

सा श्रुत्वा पतिवाक्यं तु गत्वा ग्रह सुतालिकम् ।

वत्से राजातिपु:खात्र: पिता तेउधापि वर्ते ॥ 32 ॥


त्वर्धे विग्रहः कामं समुल्यजोउघ भूभुताम् ।

अन्यं वरय सुशोणि सुर्दर्शनमुते नृपम् ॥ 33 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing her husband's words, the queen went to her daughter and spoke thus: "O child! Quarrels have now ensued amongst the kings for your sake; your father has become very sorrowful; therefore, O fair one! Choose any other man your husband than Sudarśana.

यदि सुर्दर्शनं वतले हुढान्चं वे वीर्थसि ।

युधार्चितं च मां चैव हरिन्धति बलावित्वः ॥ 3 4 ॥

सुदर्शनं च राज्ञसौ बलमन्तः प्रतापवान् ।

द्वितीयसे पति: पश्चाद्विता कलहे सति ॥ 35 ॥

O Child! If you do not judge and rashly choose Sudarśana, then the powerful King Yudhājit, possessing a large army, will no doubt kill you, me and Sudarśana. It might be, if quarrels ensue, you might be married to another husband; therefore better think now and act.

तस्मालुदर्शनं त्यक्त्वा वरायांव नृपोतमम् ।

सुवामिच्छस चेनमहुं तुर्थं वा भृगलोचने ।

O dear eyed! It is now your incumbent duty to choose another king for your husband, if you want your and my welfare and happiness. Leave Sudarśana."

इति मात्रा बौधितां तां पशुग्राजायबोधायम् । ३ 6 ॥

उभयोर्विनं शुता निर्भयोवास कन्यक।

The mother thus advised her daughter; the king, too, afterwards explained and tried to convince her. The girl spoke fearlessly.

कन्योवाच

सत्यमुक्ते ग्रपक्षे ज्ञानासि च ततं मा ॥ 37 ॥

नान्यं वृणीय भृपाल सुर्गर्णमृते कवचित् ।

“O king! What you have said is all true; but you know my firm resolve already. I won’t ever select any other king than Sudarśana.

विशेषेय पद्य तराजेन नृपयः किल कातरः ॥ 38 ॥

सुर्जर्णाय दत्त्वा मां विसर्जप पुरादिहः ।

स मां रेखे समातेय निर्मिष्यति ते पुरात् ॥ 39 ॥

भवित्यं तु पश्राद्रे भविष्यति न चान्यथा ।

"O king! If you are afraid and be in agony, then do this thing: better give me in marriage to Sudarśana and then drive us away from your city. He will put me in his chariot and go away out of your city. After that what is inevitable will surely come to pass. There cannot be anything otherwise.

नात्र चित्ता त्यया कार्या भविलये नृपोत्न ॥ 40 ॥

यद्धारि तद्वलयेव सर्वधात्रन न संगयः ।

O king! You need not fear anything about what is kept in the womb of future by Destiny. What is inevitable will happen; there is no doubt in this."

राजोवाच

न पुत्र साहसं कार्वं मतिम्दिः कदाचन ॥ 41 ॥

बहुर्भिनं विरोद्व्यमिति वेदविद्धो विद्यः ।

The king said: "O child! The intelligent persons never shew too much rashness and insolence. The learned people, versed in the Vedas, say it is never advisable to quarrel with many persons.

विश्वक्षयामि कर्व कंवा दंच्या राजसुनाय च ॥ 4 2 ॥

राजानो वरसंयुक्ता: किं न कुर्षुरासीप्रान् ।

How can I give my daughter in marriage to one and then banish them both? The kings have turned out enemies. There is no heinous crime, that they cannot commit now.

यदि ते रोचते वसे पर्ण संविद्धायाम्बन् ॥ 43 ॥

जनकेन यथा पूर्व कृत: सीतास्वयंरे ।

O child! If it be your opinion, I can pledge something as a pawn for your marriage, as the king Janaka pledged in days of yore for his daughter Sitā.

गैर्य धनर्यांते तेन धृतं कृत्वा पर्ण तथा ॥ 44 ॥

तथा3हमयि तद्वीगि करोग्यघ दुर्गसदम् ।

विवादो चेन राजां है कृते सीत समं जजेने ॥ 45 ॥

पालिथयिति वः कामं से ते भर्तां भथित्यिति ।

सुर्दर्गनस्तधान्यो वा वः कांळ्रहुलवतरः ॥ 46 ॥

पालिथिता पणं त्वां वे वरीथयिति सर्वथा ।

I will also put forward a pawn very difficult to be carried out, as Janaka originally made an offer of the hands of Sītā to whomsoever, who would break the Śiva's strong bow. Thus the quarrels

Book III Chapter XXI

amongst the king might be diminished; for he, who will be able to fulfill the promise, will be able to accept you. Then, be he Sudarśana or any other king, whoever will be strong to fulfill the promise will take you as his wife.

एवं कृते नृपाणां तु विवाद शमितो भवेत् ॥ 47 ॥

सुवैकान्हे विवादं ते कृत्त्वामिति तत परम् ।

Thus the quarrels will cease and I will also be able to perform your marriage ceremony in peace and happiness."

कन्योवाच

संदेहे नैव मज्जामि मुतुक्त्यमिदं यतः ॥ 48 ॥

मया सुदर्जनः पूर्वे पृत्तशेत्तिस नान्यथा ।

The daughter said: “Father! On hearing from you, I am merged in an ocean of doubt, for it seems to me what you are saying is the act of a fool; already I have chosen in my mind Sudarśana for my husband; now it cannot be otherwise.

कारणं पुच्यपापानां मन एह महीपते ॥ 49 ॥

मनसा विधुयं त्यक्त्वा कवमन्यं वृणे पितः ।

O king! The mind is the source of virtue and vice. When I have mentally selected, how can I now forego him and choose another?

कृते पणे महाराज सर्वेधां वरणगा हादून ॥ 50 ॥

एकः पात्रविता ही वा बह्वो वा भविते चेत् ।

किं कर्तव्यं त्वत तात विवादे सपुर्पिध्यते ॥ 51 ॥

संशयाधिष्ठि कार्मे माते नाहं करोयन्तः ।

O king! If you keep any pledge, then I will be subject to any and every body; if one, two, or more fulfill the same pledge, I will be then subject to any or all of them. Father! in that case quarrels may arise. What shall I do then? I cannot give my vote on this doubtful point."

मा चिन्तां कुरु राजेंद्र दैहि सुदर्शनाय माम् ॥ 52 ॥

विवहं विधाय कृता सं विधाययिति चण्डिका ।

O king! You need not fear anything. Better give me in marriage to Sudarśana according to the prescribed rules; then, in that case, the Goddess Caṇḍikā will certainly protect us.

यत्रामकर्तीनादेव दुःखीघो विलयं व्रजेत् ॥ 53 ॥

तां सूच्या परमां शर्फिक कुक काव्यमित्रितः ।

O king! Taking Whose Name destroys a whole host of sins, take Her Name and think the Almighty and perform carefully our marriage ceremony.

गत्वा वद नुपेध्यस्तं कृतांजलिपुटोउष्ठ चै ॥ 54 ॥

आगतंत्य च शः वसंरिते भूपै: स्वयंवरे ।

Better go to the king's assembly today, and, with folded hands, tell them come tomorrow to the hall of Swayamvara.

इत्युक्ता तव सिकुर्जाणु सर्वं नुपतिमण्डलम् ॥ 55 ॥

विद्यारं कुक रातों मे वेदोराकविद्धिता नृप ।

पारिवहं यथायोग्यं दत्ता तमैय सिवर्सये ॥ 56 ॥

गामिधाति गृहीताय मां धुवसंसीयुतः किल ।

Thus bidding goodbye to the kings, perform in the right spirit, according to the prescribed rites, our marriage ceremony. Next, after giving fit dowries and other articles after the marriage, better tell the prince Sudarśana to depart. The son of Dhruvasandhi will take me away with him.

कदाचिते नृपा: कुद्धा: संग्रामं कर्तुंपुवताः ॥ 57 ॥

भविष्यित तद्ये सीहास्ये नः कार्येष्ठित ।

If, at this, the kings get angry and be ready to quarrel with you, then in that case, Goddess Bhagavatī wili no doubt help us.

सोप्रिय राजसुर्तैनैस्तुं संग्रामं संविद्यास्यति ॥ 58 ॥

दैवान्पुधे मृते तस्मिन्तिध्याम्यहमयुत ।

Sudārasāna then will fight against those kings; and if he loses his life perchance in the battle, then I will also follow him and die.

स्वस्ति तैस्तु गृहे तिष्ठ दत्ता मां सहसैयकः ॥ ५९ ॥

एकैवाई गाधियमि तेन सार्थ रिसंस्या ।

O king! Let all good come unto you! Better give me in marriage to Sudarśana and remain here with your army. I will go alone with him, the object of my love."

यास उवाच

इति तस्या वचः शुत्वा राज्ञाजी कृतिनिध्यः ॥ 60 ॥

मर्ति चक्रे तथा कर्तु विश्वासं प्रतिषघ च ।

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयस्कन्ये

एकविंशो3प्रयाः ॥ 61 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Vyāsa said: Hearing these words from her daughter, the king Subāhu trusted her, and firmly resolved to act according to that, and to celebrated the marriage of Śaśikalā.

Thus ends the Twentyfirst Chapter on the king of Benares fulfilling the advice of her daughter in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

