[Ch 27 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Seeing the two Dānavas killed in the battle, the remnant soldiers all fled away back to Śumbha. Some of them were cut and wounded in many places by arrows, some had their arms severed, some were bleeding; thus they entered crying into the city.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Seeing the two Dānavas killed in the battle, the remnant soldiers all fled away back to Śumbha. Some of them were cut and wounded in many places by arrows, some had their arms severed, some were bleeding; thus they entered crying into the sky.

[Ch 27 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On reaching the lord of the Daityas, they began to make frequently the noise indicative of danger and exclaimed “O King! Save us, Save us; Kālika is devouring everything today.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► On reaching the lord of the Daityas, they began to make frequently the noise indicative of danger and exclaimed, “O King! Save us, Save us; Kālikā is devouring everything today.

[Ch 27 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The two great warriors Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa, the tormentors of the Devas, were slain by Her; all the soldiers were devoured by Her; we have fled away panic stricken.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The two great warriors Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa, the tormentors of the Devas, were slain by Her; all the soldiers were devoured by Her; we have fled away panic-stricken.

[Ch 27 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord! Kālika has rendered the battle-field horrible by the dead bodies of elephants, horses, camels, warriors, and foot soldiers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord! Kālikā has rendered the battlefield horrible by the dead bodies of elephants, horses, camels, warriors, and foot soldiers.

[Ch 27 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► A river of blood is flowing there is which the flesh of the soldiers is sufficient mud, their hairs are like aquatic plants, the broken chariot wheels are like whirlpools, the severed arms and feet are like fishes and their heads look like Tumbi fruits (long gourds).
NEW CORR ENG ──► A river of blood is flowing there of which the flesh of the soldiers is sufficient mud, their hairs are like aquatic plants, the broken chariot wheels are like whirlpools, the severed arms and feet are like fishes and their heads look like Tumbi fruits (long gourds).

[Ch 27 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Save your line; go quickly to Pātāla. The Devi has become angry and will, no doubt, destroy our race.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Save your line; go quickly to Pātāla. The Devī has become angry and will, no doubt, destroy our race.

[Ch 27 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Even the lion is eating away the Dānavas; and the Kālīkā Devi is killing innumerable Dānavas by Her arrows. Therefore, O king! What intentions are you cherishing in your mind?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Even the lion is eating away the Dānavas; and the Kālikā Devī is killing innumerable Dānavas by Her arrows. Therefore, O King! What intentions are you cherishing in your mind?

[Ch 27 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Is it that you have desired to be merely slain with your younger brother Niśumbha! And what good purpose will this cruel woman, destroying your race, serve, for Whose sake, you have desired to kill all your friends?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Is it that you have desired to be merely slain with your younger brother Niśumbha! And what good purpose will this cruel woman, destroying your race, serve, for Whose sake, you have desired to kill all your friends?

[Ch 27 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Victory or defeat in this world are under the Daiva. The wise never risk to meet with great difficulties for the gratification of an ordinary whim.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Victory or defeat in this world are under the Daīva. The wise never risk to meet with great difficulties for the gratification of an ordinary whim.

[Ch 27 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! You have conquered by the help of your army all the Lokapālas (guardians of the quarters of the sky); but now that Lady, though alone and unsupported by anybody, is challenging you to fight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! You have conquered by the help of your army all the Lokapālas (guardians of the quarters of the sky); but now that Lady, though alone and unsupported by anybody, is challenging you to fight.

[Ch 27 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! In ancient times, in the holy pilgrimage of Puskara, the sacred place of the Devas, you performed austerities when Brahmā, the Grandsire of all the worlds, came to you to grant a boon. Then you asked the boon and wanted to become to be immortal.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! In ancient times, in the holy pilgrimage of Puṣkara, the sacred place of the Devas, you performed austerities when Brahmā, the Grandsire of all the worlds, came to you to grant a boon. Then you asked the boon and wanted to become to be immortal.

[Ch 27 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But when Brahmā refused to grant it you wanted from him and were granted that you would not be killed by any male being, be he a Deva, Dānava, a man, Nāga, Kinnara, Yakṣa, or any other person.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But when Brahmā refused to grant it you wanted from him and were granted that you would not be killed by any male being, be he a Deva, Dānava, a man, Nāga, Kinnara, Yakṣa, or any other person.

[Ch 27 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord! For that very reason we think now that this Lady has timely come to kill you. Think over it seriously and cease fighting.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord! For that very reason we think now that this Lady has timely come to kill you. Think over it seriously and cease fighting.

[Ch 27 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! This Devi is the great Mahā-Maÿā, the Highest Prakṛti; It is She that devours everything at the end of a Kalpa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! This Devī is the great Mahā-Māyā, the Highest Prakriti; It is She that devours everything at the end of a Kalpa .

[Ch 27 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This auspicious Devi is the Creatrix of all the worlds and the Devas. She is the embodiment of the three qualities, endowed with all the powers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This auspicious Devī is the Creatrix of all the worlds and the Devas. She is the embodiment of the three qualities, endowed with all the powers.

[Ch 27 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She is Tāmasi, ॥.e., is the Destructrix of the whole world. This Devi can never be conquered, Imperishable, Eternal, She is the Sandhyā and the Refuge of the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She is Tāmasi, i.e., is the Destructrix of the whole world. This Devī can never be conquered, Imperishable, Eternal, She is the Sandhyā and the Refuge of the Devas.

[Ch 27 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She is Gāyatrī, the Mother of the Vedas. She is All-knowing and always manifested. This Undecaying Lady is void of any Prākṛtic attributes, though She at times possesses attributes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She is Gāyatrī, the Mother of the Vedas. She is All-knowing and always manifested. This Undecaying Lady is void of any Prakritic attributes, though She at times possesses attributes.

[Ch 27 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She is Success Incarnate and bestows success to all; She is Bliss Herself and gives bliss to all. This Gauri bids all the Devas discard all their fears.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She is Success Incarnate and bestows success to all; She is Bliss Herself and gives bliss to all. This Gaurī bids all the Devas discard all their fears.

[Ch 27 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She is Śuddha Sattva. Thus knowing, O king! Quit thy inimical feelings to Her; seek refuge unto Her; the Devi would then certainly protect you. Be obedient to Her and save your race. Then the remnant Dānavas will be able to live for a very long time."
NEW CORR ENG ──► She is Śuddha Sattva. Thus knowing, O King! Quit thy inimical feelings to Her; seek refuge unto Her; the Devī would then certainly protect you. Be obedient to Her and save your race. Then the remnant Dānavas will be able to live for a very long time.”

[Ch 27 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus, Šumbha, the conqueror of the Devas, told them truly in words becoming of a hero.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus, Śumbha, the conqueror of the Devas, told them truly in words becoming of a hero.

[Ch 27 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śumbha said: “O Fools! Hold your tongue. You have fled because your desire to live is very strong. So you better go to Pātāla without any delay.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śumbha said :-- “O Fools! Hold your tongue.You have fled because your desire to live is very strong. So you better go to Pātāla without any delay.

[Ch 27 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This world is under the control of Fate; so I need not think about Victory. I am under this Fate just as Brahmā and other Devas are under it.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This world is under the control of Fate; so I need not think about Victory. I am under this Fate just as Brahmā and other Devas are under it.

[Ch 27 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Yama, Agni, Varuna, Sūrya, Candra, and Indra are all under the sway of this Destiny.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Yama, Agni, Varuṇa, Sūrya, Candra, and Indra are all under the sway of this Destiny.

[Ch 27 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Fools! Whatever is inevitable will certainly come to pass. What need I think over it then? The effort also comes to be of such a nature as will lead to that ordained by Fate.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Fools! Whatever is inevitable will certainly come to pass. What need I think over it then? The effort also comes to be of such a nature as will lead to that ordained by Fate.

[Ch 27 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus thinking, the wise never grieve; especially the wise ones never leaves their own Dharma for fear of death.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus thinking, the wise never grieve; especially the wise ones never leave their own Dharma for fear of death.

[Ch 27 Verse 31-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The happiness, pain, longevity, birth and death of all the embodied souls are all determined by Fate when their proper time arrives. See! When the time is over, Brahmā, Viṣṇuṇad Mahādeva, the lord of Pārvati die away; on the expiration of their terms of lives, Indra and other Devas go to destruction.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The happiness, pain, longevity, birth and death of all the embodied souls are all determined by Fate when their proper time arrives. See! When the time is over, Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Mahādeva, the lord of Pārvatī die away; on the expiration of their terms of lives, Indra and other Devas go to destruction.

[Ch 27 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Similarly I am also completely under the sway of time; so what doubt is there that I, too, will go to destruction when I have observed my own Dharma! This Lady is challenging me to fight of Her own will; how can I fly away and live hundreds of years.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Similarly I am also completely under the sway of time; so what doubt is there that I, too, will go to destruction when I have observed my own Dharma! This Lady is challenging me to fight of Her own will; how can I fly away and live hundreds of years.

[Ch 27 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I will fight today, Let the result come whatever it may. I will gladly take the victory or defeat whatever the case may be.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will fight today. Let the result come whatever it may. I will gladly take the victory or defeat whatever the case may be.

[Ch 27 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The learned approving of the cause of efforts declare Fate as fictitious; those who realise their saying know that they are full of reason. Without exertion no end can be achieved; weak persons depend on the destiny.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The learned approving of the cause of effort declare Fate as fictitious; those who realise their sayings know that they are full of reason. Without exertion no end can be achieved; weak persons depend on the destiny.

[Ch 27 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Foolish persons say that Fate is strong; but the wise do not say so. There is no proof whether Fate exists or not; in fact what is called Fate is invisible; how can it then be seen? Has anybody seen Fate?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Foolish persons say that Fate is strong; but the wise do not say so. There is no proof whether Fate exists or not; in fact what is called Fate is invisible; how can it then be seen? Has anybody seen Fate?

[Ch 27 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is simply a scare for the illiterate; remedy only to console one's mind in times of distress. Simply proximity to a grindmill without any man's effort cannot grind a material.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is simply a scare for the illiterate; remedy only to console one’s mind in times of distress. Simply proximity to a grindmill without any man’s effort cannot grind a material.

[Ch 27 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore if exertion be made in proportion to the gravity of the work, success is sure to ensue; if exertion be made less in proportion, the work does not come to a successful issue.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore if exertion be made in proportion to the gravity of the work, success is sure to ensue; if exertion be made less in proportion, the work does not come to a successful issue.

[Ch 27 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If time, place and one's enemies' forces be correctly taken into account and then if the proper attempts be made, success follows; thus Brhaspati has said."
NEW CORR ENG ──► If time, place and one’s enemieś forces be correctly taken into account and then if the proper attempts be made, success follows; thus Bṛhaspati has said.”

[Ch 27 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O (King! Thus making a firm resolve to send the powerful Raktabija to the battle with a vast army.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Thus making a firm resolve to send the powerful Raktabīja to the battle with a vast army;

[Ch 27 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śumbha said: “O Raktabjā! You are a very powerful hero; therefore do you go to the battle. O Fortunate One! Fight as you are the strength of your forces.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śumbha said :-- “O Raktabīja! You are a very powerful hero; therefore do you go to the battle. O Fortunate One! Fight as you are the strength of your forces.”

[Ch 27 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Raktabīja said: “O king! You need not be a bit anxious for this work. Certainly I will either slay Her or I will bring Her under your control. Please see my skill in this warfare; that Lady, favourite of the gods, is worth nothing; I will just now conquer Her and make Her your slave.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Raktabīja said :-- “O King! You need not be a bit anxious for this work.Certainly I will either slay Her or I will bring Her under your control. Please see my skill in this warfare; that Lady, favourite of the gods, is worth nothing; I will just now conquer Her and make Her your slave.”

[Ch 27 Verse 47-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O Best of Kurus! Thus saying, the powerful Raktabijā mounted on his chariot and went to the battle accompanied by his forces. The battalion consisted of cavalry, infantry, chariots and elephants. Thus surrounded he departed from the city for that Devi, seated on a mountain top.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O Best of Kurus! Thus saying, the powerful Raktabīja mounted on his chariot and went to the battle accompanied by his forces. The battalion consisted of cavalry, infantry, chariots and elephants. Thus surrounded he departed from the city for that Devī, seated on a mountain top.

[Ch 27 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the Devi, seeing him coming, blew Her conchshell; the Dānavas were terrified at that sound and the joy of the Devas increased. Hearing that sound Ratkatbija came very hurriedly to Cāmupāda and began to speak to Her sweetly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the Devī, seeing him coming, blew Her conchshell; the Dānavas were terrified at that sound and the joy of the Devas increased. Hearing that sound Raktabīja came very hurriedly to Cāmuṇḍā and began to speak to Her sweetly.

[Ch 27 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O Girl! Do you think me weak and thus want to terrify me with the sound of a conchshell? O Lean One! Have you taken me to be a Dhimralocana?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Girl! Do you think me weak and thus want to terrify me with the sound of a conchshell? O Lean One! Have you taken me to be a Dhūmralocana?

[Ch 27 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sweet speaking one! My name is Raktabjja; I have come here for Thy sake. If Thou desirest to fight, be prepared; I am not a bit afraid of that.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sweet speaking one! My name is Raktabīja; I have come here for Thy sake. If Thou desirest to fight, be prepared; I am not a bit afraid of that.

[Ch 27 Verse 53-56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Dear! You saw those who were weak; I do not belong to that class. Therefore dost Thou fight as Thou likest and then Thou wilt be able to ascertain my strength. O Beautiful! If Thou didst serve the old persons before, if Thou hadst heard the science of politics and morals, if thou hadst studied the political economy, joined the assemblage of the Pandits or if Thou hast been well versed in literature and Tantras, then hear this my good counsel which will serve as a medicinal diet to Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Dear! You saw those who were weak; I do not belong to that class. Therefore dost Thou fight as Thou likest and then Thou wilt be able to ascertain my strength. O Beautiful! If Thou didst serve the old persons before, if Thou hadst heard the science of politics and morals, if Thou hadst studied the political economy, joined the assemblage of the Pundits or if Thou hast been well versed in literature and Tantras, then hear this my good counsel which will serve as a medicinal diet to Thee.

[Ch 27 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Out of the nine sentiments, the Śrīgāra (Amorous love sentiments) and Śānti (Peace) are considered as the chief by the assemblage of the Paṇdits. Again out of these two, the love sentiment is the king.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Out of the nine sentiments, the Śriṅgāra (Amorous love sentiments) and Śānti (Peace) are considered as the chief by the assemblage of the Pundits. Again out of these two, the love sentiment is the king.

[Ch 27 Verse 58-59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Drenched with this sentiment, Vishnu lives with Kamalā; Brahmā, the four-faced, lives with Śāvitrī; Indra with Śacī and Śaṅkara resides with his wife Umā. The tree stands with creepers surrounding it, the deer lives with his female deer, the pigeon lives with the female pigeon; thus all the beings are very attached to this sentiment of remaining in couples.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Drenched with this sentiment, Viṣṇu lives with Kamalā; Brahmā, the four-faced, lives with Sāvitri; Indra with Śacī and Śaṅkara resides with his wife Umā. The tree stands with creepers surrounding it, the deer lives with his female deer, the pigeon lives with the female pigeon; thus all the beings are very attached to this sentiment of remaining in couples.

[Ch 27 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who cannot enjoy owing to certain disease or illness, they are deprived by Fate of such enjoyments.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who cannot enjoy owing to certain disease or illness, they are deprived by Fate of such enjoyments.

[Ch 27 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who are ignorant of this love sentiment in couples, they are deprived of it by the sweet juggler of words of the cheat and yet attached to the Peace sentiment.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who are ignorant of this love sentiment in couples, they are deprived of it by the sweet jugglery of words of the cheat and yet attached to the Peace sentiment.

[Ch 27 Verse 62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When delusion, the destroyer of Buddhi, the common sense, when the violent indomitable anger, greed, and lust arise, where, then, is the place for knowledge and dispassion? Therefore, O Auspicious One! Dost Thou marry the beautiful Sumbha or the powerful Niśumbha."
NEW CORR ENG ──► When delusion, the destroyer of Buddhi, the common sense, occurs, when the violent indomitable anger, greed, and lust arise, where, then, is the place for knowledge and dispassion? Therefore, O Auspicious One! Dost Thou marry the beautiful Śumbha or the powerful Niśumbha.

[Ch 27 Verse 63-64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! When Raktabīja spoke all these words, standing before the Devi Kalikā, Ambikā and Cāmuṇda began to laugh. Here ends the Twenty-seventh Chapter of the Fifth Book on the description of the war of Raktabīja in Srimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! When Raktabīja spoke all these words, standing before the Devī Kālikā, Ambikā and Cāmuṇḍā began to laugh. Here ends the Twenty-seventh Chapter of the Fifth Book on the description of the war of Raktabīja in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
