CHAPTER XXVII

On the Fight of Raktabija

व्यास उवाच

हतौ तौ दानवी नुद्ध्या हतोगेभ्यो श्वैनिकाः ।

पलायनं ततः कृत्वा जम्पुः सर्वे गृप प्रति ॥ १ ॥

भिनांगा विशिष्टः केचित्केवचिष्छकरास्तथा ।

कौधरस्वावदेहाश्र चतंतेगभिवयुः परे ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Seeing the two Dānavas killed in the battle, the remnant soldiers all fled away back to Śumbha. Some of them were cut and wounded in many places by arrows, some had their arms severed, some were bleeding; thus they entered crying into the city.

Book V Chapter XXVII

गत्या दैत्यपति सर्वे चकुर्बुबारवे मुङुः ।

रक्ष रक्ष महाराज भक्षत्यच्छ कालिका ॥ 3 ॥

On reaching the lord of the Daityas, they began to make frequently the noise indicative of danger and exclaimed “O King! Save us, Save us; Kālika is devouring everything today.”

तया हर्ते महावीरो चपड़पुण्डी सुरादनी ।

भक्षिताः सैनिकाः सर्वे वर्ष भन्पा भयतुतः ॥ 4 ॥

The two great warriors Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa, the tormentors of the Devas, were slain by Her; all the soldiers were devoured by Her; we have fled away panic stricken.

भीतिदं च रणस्वानं कृतं कालिकया प्रभो ।

पातितैर्गवीराधेदिंदिसरक्पदातिभि: ॥ 5 ॥

O Lord! Kālika has rendered the battle-field horrible by the dead bodies of elephants, horses, camels, warriors, and foot soldiers.

शोणतोषवहा कुल्या कृता मोसातिकदर्भा ।

कैगशैलिनी भन्नरधघक्रविराता ॥ 6 ॥

छिडबाढ़ापिमल्याड्या शीर्भेत्रीजलान्धिता ।

भयदा कातताणां वै सुगणां मोदखर्दिनि ॥ 7 ॥

A river of blood is flowing there is which the flesh of the soldiers is sufficient mud, their hairs are like aquatic plants, the broken chariot wheels are like whirlpools, the severed arms and feet are like fishes and their heads look like Tumbi fruits (long gourds).

कुलं रक्ष महाराज पातालं गच्छ सत्यम् ।

कूद्धा देवी क्षयं सचः कार्चिति न संगया ॥ 8 ॥

O king! Save your line; go quickly to Pātāla. The Devi has become angry and will, no doubt, destroy our race.

सिंहोरपि भक्षत्याजी दानवाद्नुनेक्षर ।

तथैव कालिका देवी हाँत बाणैरनेकथा ॥ 9 ॥

Even the lion is eating away the Dānavas; and the Kālīkā Devi is killing innumerable Dānavas by Her arrows. Therefore, O king! What intentions are you cherishing in your mind?

तस्माचवमी राजेन्द्र मरणाय मृषा मतिम् ।

कंरोष सहितो धाता शुभ्येन कुपिताशय: ॥ 10 ॥

किं कंचिति नारैघा कृता कुलिवनाशिन।

यस्या हेतोर्महाराज हेतुमिष्ठसि बोधयान् ॥ १ १ ॥

Is it that you have desired to be merely slain with your younger brother Niśumbha! And what good purpose will this cruel woman, destroying your race, serve, for Whose sake, you have desired to kill all your friends?

दैवधाती महाराज लोके जयपराजये ।

अल्याधीय महदुःखं बुद्धिमात्र प्रकल्यन्ते ॥ 12 ॥

O king! Victory or defeat in this world are under the Daiva. The wise never risk to meet with great difficulties for the gratification of an ordinary whim.

चित्रं पश्य विधेः कर्म यद्धीनं जगत् प्रभो ।

निह्ता ताक्षसा: सर्वे तिक्वा पश्येकाउन्पाय ॥ 13 ॥

O Lord! Look at the wonderful deeds of that Great Creator? What more wonder can there be than this that a woman alone killed all the Dānavas. जेता त्वं लोकपालानां वैन्ययुक्ता हि संधानम् ।

एका प्रार्थयते बाला युद्धायेति सुसंधभः ॥ 14 ॥

O King! You have conquered by the help of your army all the Lokapālas (guardians of the quarters of the sky); but now that Lady, though alone and unsupported by anybody, is challenging you to fight.

पुरा त्वया तपस्तपं पुक्रते देवतायने ।

वद्दानाय संप्राणो बहा लोकपितामहः ॥ 15 ॥

ध्योक्तिस्तर्व महाराज वर्ग वर्य सूत्रत ।

तदा त्वयाभरन्त च प्रार्थितं ब्रहणा: किन ।। 16 ॥

O King! In ancient times, in the holy pilgrimage of Puskara, the sacred place of the Devas, you performed austerities when Brahmā, the Grandsire of all the worlds, came to you to grant a boon. Then you asked the boon and wanted to become to be immortal.

देवदैत्यमनुषेधनो न भवेन्मरणं मम ।

सर्पिक्रतयक्षेध्च: पुंलिङ्गवाचकादि १। १७ ॥

But when Brahmā refused to grant it you wanted from him and were granted that you would not be killed by any male being, be he a Deva,

Dānava, a man, Nāga, Kinnara, Yakṣa, or any other person.

तस्मारां हनुकामीय प्राप्ता योषित्वा प्रभो ।

यूद्म म कुर फजेन्द्र विषार्विं हियाउंगून ॥ 18 ॥

O Lord! For that very reason we think now that this Lady has timely come to kill you. Think over it seriously and cease fighting.

देवी होया महामाया प्रकृति: परमा मता ।

कल्प्यतकाले राजेन्र सर्वसंहारकारिणी ॥ 19 ॥

O King! This Devi is the great Mahā-Maÿā, the Highest Prakṛti; It is She that devours everything at the end of a Kalpa.

उत्पादयिती लोकानां देवनामीक्षी शुभा ।

विरुणा तामसी देवी सर्वशक्तिसमवित्ति ॥ 20 ॥

This auspicious Devi is the Creatrix of all the worlds and the Devas. She is the embodiment of the three qualities, endowed with all the powers.

जज्यच चाक्षया निवा सर्वज्ञा च सदोदिता ।

वेदमाता च गाययी संध्या सर्वसुगतया ॥ 21 ॥

She is Tāmasi, i.e., is the Destructrix of the whole world. This Devi can never be conquered, Imperishable, Eternal, She is the Sandhyā and the Refuge of the Devas.

निर्णीग सुगण सिद्धा सर्वसिद्धप्रदास्थ्या ।

आनन्दोद्ध उनन्ददा गौरी देवानामभयप्रदा ॥ 22 ॥

She is Gāyatrī, the Mother of the Vedas. She is All-knowing and always manifested. This Undecaying Lady is void of any Prākṛtic attributes, though She at times possesses attributes.

एवं जाला महाराज वैरभावं स्वाज्ञाय ।

गरणं जज राजेन्द्र देवी त्वां पतायिष्यति ॥ 23 ॥

She is Success Incarnate and bestows success to all; She is Bliss Herself and gives bliss to all. This Gauri bids all the Devas discard all their fears.

आज्ञाको भवेतावा: संजीवय निजं कुलम् ।

हतोगेश्ठा ये दैत्यासे भवन्तु चितयपुष: ॥ 24 ॥

She is Śuddha Sattva. Thus knowing, O king! Quit thy inimical feelings to Her; seek refuge unto Her; the Devi would then certainly protect you. Be obedient to Her and save your race. Then the

remnant Dānavas will be able to live for a very long time."

व्यास उवाच

इति तेषां वचः श्रुवा शुभमः सुरबलादिनः ।

उवाच बचनं तव्यं वीरवर्गे गृणान्वितम् ॥ 25 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus, Šumbha, the conqueror of the Devas, told them truly in words becoming of a hero.

शुभ्य उवाच

मानं कुर्वर्तु भो मेदा यूयं भगना रणाधिजित् ।

शीधं गछ्ठत पातालं जीविताशा बतीयसी ॥ २ ६ ॥

Śumbha said: “O Fools! Hold your tongue. You have fled because your desire to live is very strong. So you better go to Pātāla without any delay.

दैवाधीनं जानसर्वं का चिन्तानज जये मम ।

देवास्तबैव ब्रहादा देवाधीना चयं यथा ॥ 27 ॥

This world is under the control of Fate; so I need not think about Victory. I am under this Fate just as Brahmā and other Devas are under it.

ब्रह्मा विष्युध मृत्रोयं यमोर्जनवैरभत्सता ।

सूर्यश्रुस्त्वाण शक्र: सर्वे दिवशग: किति ॥ 28 ॥

Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Yama, Agni, Varuna, Sūrya, Candra, and Indra are all under the sway of this Destiny.

का चिता ताई्धे मे मंदा यद्धावि तद्धाविषिति ।

उड्यमस्ताङ्गो भूयादूर्गी भवित्यन्ता ॥ 29 ॥

O Fools! Whatever is inevitable will certainly come to pass. What need I think over it then? The effort also comes to be of such a nature as will lead to that ordained by Fate.

सर्वेवैव विचार्यैव न शेणैस्ति वुभा: क्वचित् ।

स्वधर्ष न त्वजेनीतु जानिनो मरणाद्वान् ॥ 30 ॥

Thus thinking, the wise never grieve; especially the wise ones never leaves their own Dharma for fear of death.

सुखं दुःखं तथेवायुर्जीवितं मरणं नृगाण ।

क्राने घवाति संग्रामे सर्वेश दैवनिर्मितम् ॥ 31 ॥

बह्ञा पतिति काले सेव विद्युध पार्वतीपति: ।

नाशुब्धल्यायुगोंने सर्वे देवा: सवासया: ॥ 32 ॥

Book V Chapter XXVII

तथाड़मपि कालस्य वर्गगः सर्वेधार्धुना ।

नाश जयं वां नानासि स्वधर्मपरिणतन्ति । 33 ।।

The happiness, pain, longevity, birth and death of all the embodied souls are all determined by Fate when their proper time arrives. See! When the time is over, Brahmā, Viṣṇuṇad Mahādeva, the lord of Pārvati die away; on the expiration of their terms of lives, Indra and other Devas go to destruction.

आहृतोंप्रयनया कामं युद्धायावलया किल ।

कर्च पत्नायपनरो जीवेये शरादों शगन् ॥ 34 ॥

करिष्यायद्य संगाय यद्धावि तद्वारवित्व ।

जयो वा मरणं वाउपि स्वीकृतोमि यथा तथा ॥ 35 ॥

Similarly I am also completely under the sway of time; so what doubt is there that I, too, will go to destruction when I have observed my own Dharma! This Lady is challenging me to fight of Her own will; how can I fly away and live hundreds of years.

दैवं पिथ्येति विह्जोसो वदन्युधामविन्दि: ।

युनिक्षुर्फं बचसेवो थे जानंत्यिभाषपितुम् ॥ 36 ॥

I will fight today, Let the result come whatever it may. I will gladly take the victory or defeat whatever the case may be.

उद्यमेन विना कामं न सियत्थिन मनोराशः ।

काता एव जल्पनिति यद्धान्यं तद्धाविषयति ॥ 37 ॥

अनुर्धे बलवन्यूहा: प्रवदन्ति न पशिडता: ।

प्रमाणं तस्य सचो क्रिममुळयं दूरयते कर्ण ॥ 38 ॥

The learned approving of the cause of efforts declare Fate as fictitious; those who realise their saying know that they are full of reason. Without exertion no end can be achieved; weak persons depend on the destiny.

अनुहें स्वार्थ पूर्वे स्यादेषा मूर्खिधिभिका ।

अललब्यं विवेर्वेया दुःः येचितस्य धाणा ॥ 39 ॥

Foolish persons say that Fate is strong; but the wise do not say so. There is no proof whether Fate exists or not; in fact what is called Fate is invisible; how can it then be seen? Has anybody seen Fate?

चक्रीममीपे संश्रिय संश्रित्यापीटकाशिणी ।

उद्यमेन विना पिछे न भवत्वेव सर्वथा ॥ 40 ॥

It is simply a scare for the illiterate; remedy only to console one's mind in times of distress. Simply proximity to a grindmill without any man's effort cannot grind a material.

उद्यो च कृते कार्य सिंद्धि यायेव सर्वथा ।

कदाचित्तस्य न्यूनले कार्य नैव भवेद्येच ॥ 41 ॥

Therefore if exertion be made in proportion to the gravity of the work, success is sure to ensue; if exertion be made less in proportion, the work does not come to a successful issue.

देशं कालं च विज्ञाय स्ववलं शुज्जं बलम् ।

कृतं कार्य भवत्येव बृहस्यतिचरो यथा ॥ 42 ॥

If time, place and one's enemies' forces be correctly taken into account and then if the proper attempts be made, success follows; thus Brhaspati has said."

व्यास उवाच

इति निश्रय दैत्येन्द्रो रक्तवीजं महासुरम् ।

प्रेयामास संग्रामे सैयेन मतहातुम् ॥ 43 ॥

Vyāsa said: O (King! Thus making a firm resolve to send the powerful Raktabija to the battle with a vast army.

गृष्म उवाच

रक्तबीज महाबाहो गच्छ लं व समारंगोगे ।

कुक युद्धं महाभाग यथा ते बतलाथहितम् ॥ 44 ॥

Śumbha said: “O Raktabjā! You are a very powerful hero; therefore do you go to the battle. O Fortunate One! Fight as you are the strength of your forces.

त्कर्जित ज्ञाच

महाराज न ते कार्या चित्ता स्वत्यतारीय वा ।

अहमंनी हनिष्यापि करिष्यापि वरते तब ॥ ४५ ॥

पश्य मे युद्धचातुर्यं केवयं बाला सुराया ।

दार्ती तेर्ह करिष्यापि तिजेपांा समेर वतत् ॥ ४ ६ ॥

Raktabīja said: “O king! You need not be a bit anxious for this work. Certainly I will either slay Her or I will bring Her under your control. Please see my skill in this warfare; that Lady, favourite of the gods, is worth nothing; I will just now conquer Her and make Her your slave.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

<table><tr><td>व्यास उवाच</td></tr><tr><td>जूल्याध्य कुरक्रशे त्क्त्रीजो महापुरः ।</td></tr><tr><td>जगाम रथामक्हा स्वसैन्यपरिवारितः ॥ 47 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>हस्वयश्रयपादान्त्वन्देश परिवहितः ।</td></tr><tr><td>निर्वर्णाम रथाकडो देवीं शैलोपरि स्थितगम ॥ 48 ॥</td></tr></table>

Vyāsa said: O Best of Kurus! Thus saying, the powerful Raktabijā mounted on his chariot and went to the battle accompanied by his forces. The battalion consisted of cavalry, infantry, chariots and elephants. Thus surrounded he departed from the city for that Devi, seated on a mountain top.

तमागतं समालोक्य देवौशुकुमवादयत् ।

भवदं सर्वदैत्यानां देवानां मोदवधान् ॥ 49 ॥

शुत्वा शुबुस्वनं चोघं रक्तकीज्ञोतिवेगान् ।

गत्वा समीपे चामुपडां बभावे चवनं मृदु ॥ 50 ॥

Then the Devi, seeing him coming, blew Her conchshell; the Dānavas were terrified at that sound and the joy of the Devas increased. Hearing that sound Ratkatbija came very hurriedly to Cāmupāda and began to speak to Her sweetly.

रत्कारीज उवाच

वाले कि मां भीषधसि मत्वा तं व कातरं हिये ।

शढ़ान्देत नत्विकु वैसि किं धूपलोचनम् ॥ 51 ॥

"O Girl! Do you think me weak and thus want to terrify me with the sound of a conchshell? O Lean One! Have you taken me to be a Dhimralocana?

रक्तबीजीसि नामाद्रई तलसकाशिमहागत: ।

युद्धेष्ठ योत्सिकालापे सज्ञा भव भयं ने ॥ 52 ॥

O Sweet speaking one! My name is Raktabjja; I have come here for Thy sake. If Thou desirest to fight, be prepared; I am not a bit afraid of that.

पश्यादि मे वर्लं काने सूदा ये कातारत्स्वया ।

नाहं पैंकितानतेर्षा कुक युद्धं ययेच्छसि ॥ 53 ॥

युद्धाश सेविता: पूर्व नीतिशाखं श्रुत त्वया ।

पठितं चार्यविज्ञानं विद्वूर्तोही कृतास्ववा ॥ 54 ॥

साहित्यतन्त्रविज्ञानं चेदिस्त तव सून्ति ।

शुणु पे चचनं पध्य तत्थं प्रमितिबृहितम् ॥ 55 ॥

रसानां च नवानां वे हुावेव मुख्यतां गते ।

शुज्ञाकः शान्तिसो विद्वज्ञनसभासु च ॥ 56 ॥

O Dear! You saw those who were weak; I do not belong to that class. Therefore dost Thou fight as Thou likest and then Thou wilt be able to ascertain my strength. O Beautiful! If Thou didst serve the old persons before, if Thou hadst heard the science of politics and morals, if thou hadst studied the political economy, joined the assemblage of the Pandits or if Thou hast been well versed in literature and Tantras, then hear this my good counsel which will serve as a medicinal diet to Thee.

त्योः शूक्रात एवाटी नृपभावे प्रतिहितः ।

विष्णुर्वंक्षया सहातेवे स वासिव्या चतुरानः ॥ 57 ॥

Out of the nine sentiments, the Śrīgāra (Amorous love sentiments) and Śānti (Peace) are considered as the chief by the assemblage of the Paṇdits. Again out of these two, the love sentiment is the king.

शब्येत्र: शैलमुतया शक्रूर: सह श्रेते ।

वल्या युक्षो मुगो मृया ककोलाया च कोपोकाः ॥ 58 ॥

एवं सर्वे प्राणभूत: संयोगारसिका भृगम् ।

अप्राप्तभोगाविषया च यान्ये कतत नगः ॥ 59 ॥

Drenched with this sentiment, Vishnu lives with Kamalā; Brahmā, the four-faced, lives with Śāvitrī; Indra with Śacī and Śaṅkara resides with his wife Umā. The tree stands with creepers surrounding it, the deer lives with his female deer, the pigeon lives with the female pigeon; thus all the beings are very attached to this sentiment of remaining in couples.

भवन्ति यतयते वे मुका देवेन वक्षिताः ।

असंसाररसत्राते वक्षिता वज्चनापरेः ॥ 60 ॥

Those who cannot enjoy owing to certain disease or illness, they are deprived by Fate of such enjoyments.

मधुरतालपितुर्णे ततः शान्तितरें है ते ।

क्व तातं क्व च वैरायं वर्तमाने मनोभये ॥ 61 ॥ 

Those who are ignorant of this love sentiment in couples, they are deprived of it by the sweet

Book V Chapter XXVIII

juggler of words of the cheat and yet attached to the Peace sentiment.

तोपे कोटोच व तुर्धर्ष मोहे सति विनाशके ।

तस्माचमपि कल्याणि कुरक कानतं मनोहारूम ॥ 62 ॥

गुध्मं सुराणों जेतातं निर्गुध्मं चा महाजतम् ।

When delusion, the destroyer of Buddhi, the common sense, when the violent indomitable anger, greed, and lust arise, where, then, is the place for knowledge and dispassion? Therefore, O Auspicious One! Dost Thou marry the beautiful Sumbha or the powerful Niśumbha."

व्यास उवाच

इन्युक्चा रक्तबीजोर्सी विरास मुःश्रितः ॥ 6 3 ॥

श्रुत्वा जहास चामुखा कार्षिका चाधिक्का तथा ।

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे पड्यकस्क्ये

सप्तिश्रेणीअवयः ॥ 64 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When Raktabīja spoke all these words, standing before the Devi Kalikā, Ambikā and Cāmuṇda began to laugh.

Here ends the Twenty-seventh Chapter of the Fifth Book on the description of the war of Raktabīja in Srimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter XXVIII

