[Ch 26 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya said : “O Best of the Brāhmīns! What are men to do in the time of Navarātra? Especially in the Navarātra ceremony during the autumnal season how is the ceremony to be performed? Kindly relate all this with the prescribed rules regulations.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya said :-- “O Best of the Brāhmins! What are men to do in the time of Navarātra? Especially in the Navarātra ceremony during the autumnal season how is the ceremony to be performed? Kindly relate all this with the prescribed rules and regulations.

[Ch 26 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O intelligent one! What are the fruits therein of the Navarātra ceremony? and what are the rules to be observed? Kindly describe all these to me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O intelligent one! What are the fruits therein of the Navarātra ceremony? and what are the rules to be observed? Kindly describe all these to me.”

[Ch 26 Verse 3-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O king! Hear about the vow of auspicious Navarātra. This has to be performed with loving devotion in the vernal season; but its special season is autumn. The two seasons. autuman and spring, are famous as the teeth of Yama, the God of Death; and these are the two seasons, very hard for the persons to cross over. Therefore every goodfaring man should everywhere perform this vow very carefully.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! Hear about the vow of auspicious Navarātra. This has to be performed with loving devotion in the vernal season; but its special season is autumn. The two seasons, autumn and spring, are famous as the teeth of Yama, the God of Death; and these are the two seasons, very hard for the persons to cross over. Therefore every goodfaring man should everywhere perform this vow very carefully.

[Ch 26 Verse 6-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! The people are very much afflicted with various terrible diseases in these two seasons autumn and spring and many lose their lives during these portions of the year. Therefore the wise should unquestionably worship with great devotion the Cangākā Devi in these auspicious months of Caitra and Śśvina.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! The people are very much afflicted with various terrible diseases in these two seasons autumn and spring and many lose their lives during these portions of the year. Therefore the wise should unquestionably worship with great devotion the Candikā Devī in these auspicious months of Caitra and

[Ch 26 Verse 9-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the day previous to the commencement of the vow, when the Amāvasyā tithi commences, one should collect the materials that will be required in the worship and should eat only once in that tithi what is called Havisyānna (sacred food, boiled rice with ghee) and should on that day prepare an open shade in a temporary building, twenty four (24) feet in dimensions, on a level piece of ground, that is considered holy; it is to be equipped with a post and a flag. Next, this is to be heaped over with yellow earth and cow dung. Then a raised platform called the Vedī, six feet wide and 1 ½ one and a half foot high, level and hard, is to be erected, and provided with an excellent space thereon for the seat of the Devi. Provisions are to be made also for ornamented gate ways and an awning over the top.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the day previous to the commencement of the vow, when the Amāvasyā tithi commences, one should collect the materials that will be required in the worship and should eat only once in that tithi what is called Habiṣyānna (sacred food, boiled rice with ghee) and should on that day prepare an open shade in a temporary building, twenty four (24) feet in dimensions, on a level piece of ground, that is considered holy; it is to be equipped with a post and a flag. Next, this is to be heaped over with yellow earth and cow dung. Then a raised platform called the Vedī, six feet wide and one and a half foot high, level and hard, is to be erected, and provided with an excellent space thereon for the seat of the Devī. Provisions are to be made also for ornamented gate ways and an awning over the top.

[Ch 26 Verse 12-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One should invite then, those Brāhmins, that observe fully the customs and usages, who are self restrained and versed in the Vedas and Vedāngas, especially those who are skilled in the ceremony of worshipping the Devi. Next, in the Pratipadā tithi (the first day of the bright half), one should take one's morning ablutions in a river, or in a lake, tank or a well or in one's own residence, according to rules, and one should perform one's every day practices of Sandhyā Vandanam. Afterwards he should appoint the Brāhmins and give them water for washing their feet and Arghya (offerings of grass, rice etc.), and Madhuparka (an oblation of honey and milk etc.), and give and then, as his means permit, clothings and ornaments to them. If he happens to be rich, he should never shew his miserliness here in making these gifts; for if the Brāhmins be satisfied, they will try their best to make the ceremony a complete success. O king! The Candī Pātha (the reading of the book called Candī) and Bhāgavata Pātha (the reading of some portions of the book named Bhāgavat) are done on this occasion, for the satisfaction of the Goddess; and either nine Brāhmins or five or three or at least one Brāhim, of a restrained and calm nature, is to be appointed, who would observe the fasting on the day previous (pārāyana). All these being done, the able man is to perform the ceremony preparatory to the solemn Devi worship, (in which the priest utters the Vedic mantra Svasti-vācana, Svasti na Indro vṛddha-śravāḥ etc.). Om Hrim Śrim Dūm Durgāyai namah is the nine lettered Durgā mantra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One should invite then, those Brāhmins, that observe fully the customs and usages, who are self restrained and versed in the Vedas and Vedāṅgas, especially those who are skilled in the ceremony of worshipping the Devī. Next, in the Pratipad tithi (the first day of the bright half), one should take one’s morning ablutions in a river, or in a lake, tank or a well or in one’s own residence, according to rules, and one should perform one’s every day practices of Sandhyā Bandanam. Afterwards he should appoint the Brāhmins and give them water for washing their feet and Arghya (offerings of grass, rice, etc.,) and Madhuparka (an oblation of honey and milk, etc.) and give then, as his means permit, clothings and ornaments to them. If he happens to be rich, he should never show his miserliness here in making these gifts; for if the Brāhmins be satisfied, they will try their best to make the ceremony a complete success. O king! The Canḍī paths (the reading of the book called Canḍī) and Bhāgavata paths (the reading of some portions of the book named Bhāgavat) are done on this occasion, for the satisfaction of the Goddess; and either nine Brāhmins or five or three or at least one Brāhmin should be appointed for the purpose. Moreover one other Brāhmin, of a restrained and calm nature, is to be appointed, who would observe the fasting on the day previous (pārāyaṇa). All these being done, the able man is to perform the ceremony preparatory to the solemn Devī worship, (in which the priest utters the Vedīc mantra Svasti-vācana, Svasti na Indro vriddhaśravāh, etc.). Om Hrīm Śrīm Dūm Dūrgāyai namah is the nine lettered Dūrgā mantra.

[Ch 26 Verse 18-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! When the ceremony has been thus commenced, one should place on the Vedi (a raised platform; an altar), the throne fitted with double silken clothes; and, on that throne, he should place the image of the Devi. The Devi, the Eternal World-Mother, is to be four-armed or eighteen armed, (4 or 18) fully provided with all the weapons, ornamented with garlands of pearls and jewels, decorated with various ornaments of gems and precious stones, wearing excellent heavenly clothing, all the parts of the image being artistically finished and endowed with all the auspicious signs, mounted on a lion, and holding conch shell, wheel, club, and lotus in Her hands. Note: The Devī, here, is represented with four (4) or eighteen (18) hands.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! When the ceremony has been thus commenced, one should place on the Vedī (a raised platform; an altar), the throne fitted with double silken clothes; and, on that throne, he should place the image of the Devī. The Devī, the Eternal World-Mother, is to be four-armed or eighteen armed, (4 or 18) fully provided with all the weapons, ornamented with garlands of pearls and jewels, decorated with various ornaments of gems and precious stones, wearing excellent heavenly clothings, all the parts of the image being artistically finished and endowed with all the auspicious signs, mounted on a lion, and holding conch shell, wheel, club, and lotus in Her hands. Note :-- The Devī, here, is represented with four (4) or eighteen (18) hands.

[Ch 26 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the absence of the image, one should place an earthen water-pot, on that throne, thoroughly purified by the Vedic Mantras, filled with gold and jewels, and filled fully with the water, brought from a sacred river or a sacred place of pilgrimage and with five young shoots of plants, the extremities of branches bearing new leaves immersed in water. Beside the water-pot on the throne, there should be a symbol (Diagram or Yantra) with the nine lettered Mantram (Om Hrim Śrim Čandikāyai namah) in it for the purpose of worship.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the absence of the image, one should place an earthen water-pot, on that throne, thoroughly purified by the Vedīc Mantras, filled with gold and jewels, and filled fully with the water, brought from a sacred river or a sacred place of pilgrimage and with five young shoots of plants, the extremities of branches bearing new leaves immersed in water. Beside the water-pot on the throne, there should be a symbol (Diagram or Yantra) with the nine lettered Mantram (Om Hrīm Śrīm Caṇḍikāyai namah) in it for the purpose of worship.

[Ch 26 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One should place on one's side all the materials of worship in their due places, and then have the music and other sounding drums played, for the good fortune and prosperity of the family. Note: Look for the mantras in the book Mantramaho Dadhi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One should place on one’s side all the materials of worship in their due places, and then have the music and other sounding drums played, for the good fortune and prosperity of the family. Note :-- Look for the mantras in the book Mantramaho Dadhi.

[Ch 26 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! If the first day be the Nanda tithi (i.e. the first day of the bright half with the asterism Hastā in the ascendant), then that is the best time for worshipping duly the Holy Goddess. There is no doubt that special fortunate results would arise on this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! If the first day be the Nandā tithi (i.e., the first day of the bright half with the asterism Hastā in the ascendant), then that is the best time for worshipping duly the Holy Goddess. There is no doubt that special fortunate results would arise on this.

[Ch 26 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the previous night, one should observe fasting, or on the previous day one should take only one meal of Havisyānnā (boiled rice and ghee); and on the next day one should make a Saṅkalpa (an avowal of the purpose to perform a rite) and then begin worship.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the previous night, one should observe fasting, or on the previous day one should take only one meal of Habiṣyānna (boiled rice and ghee) and on the next day one should make a Saṅkalpa (an avowal of the purpose to perform a rite) and then begin worship.

[Ch 26 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One should pray before the Goddess thus, “O Mother, Mother of the World! I will perform this excellent Navarātra vow; be pleased to help me in every respect.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► One should pray before the Goddess thus, “O Mother, Mother of the World! I will perform this excellent Navarātra vow; be pleased to help me in every respect.”

[Ch 26 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One is to observe, as far as possible, all the rules enjoined in this vow, and then utter the mantras and do the worship according to the prescribed rules.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One is to observe, as far as possible, all the rules enjoined in this vow and then utter the mantras and do the worship according to the prescribe rules.

[Ch 26 Verse 28-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► First of all, one should worship duly the Goddess Jagaddhātri, presenting Her Candana (sandal paste), Aguru (a fragrant wood, the aloe wood), Camphor, the flowers Mandāra (one of the five trees of the celestial regions), Karaja (a kind of fragrant flower)! Aśoka, Campaka, Karavira, Mālaṭi, and Brāhmi and various lovely sweet scented flowers and good Bel leaves, Dhūpa (incense, a fragrant gum burnt before idols) and lamps. Next one should present the fruits cocoanut, Mātulinga, the pomegranate, bananas, oranges, the jack furits, Bel, Bel and various other delicious fruits and then, offering Her ardghya, present boiled rice and other food with a heart, full of devotion. Šrımaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► First of all, one should worship duly the Goddess Jagaddhātri, presenting Her Chandan (sandal paste), Aguru (a fragrant wood, the aloe wood), Camphor, the flowers Mandāra (one of the five trees of the celestial regions), Karaja a kind of fragrant flower)! Aśoka, Champaka, Karavir, Mālatī, and Brāhmī and various lovely sweet scented flowers and good Bel leaves, Dhūpa (incense, a fragrant gum burnt before idols) and lamps. Next one should present the fruits cocoanut, Mātuliṅga, the pomegranate, bananas, oranges, the jack fruits, Bel and various other delicious fruit and then, offering Her arghya, present boiled rice and other food with a heart, full of devotion.

[Ch 26 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who eat meat, they can sacrifice animals in this worship of the Devi; and, for this purpose, goat and wild boars are the best.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who eat meat, they can sacrifice animals in this worship of the Devī; and, for this purpose, goat and wild boars are the best.

[Ch 26 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O sinless one! The goats etc., offered as a sacrifice before the Devi, attain to unending heavens. Therefore persons offering the sacrifices of goats do not incur any sin. O king! The goats etc., and other beasts offered as a sacrifice before the Devas undoubtedly go to the heavenly regions; therefore, in all the Śāstras, it has been decided that this killing of animals in a sacrifice is considered as non-killing.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O sinless one! The goats, etc., offered as a sacrifice before the Devī attain to unending heavens. Therefore persons offering the sacrifices of goats do not iñcur any sin. O king! The goats, etc., and other beast offered as a sacrifice before the Devas undoubtedly go to the heavenly regions; therefore, in all the Śāstras, it has been decided that this killing of animals in a sacrifice is considered as non-killing.

[Ch 26 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now, for doing the Homa, ceremony one should prepare, according to one's requirements, attriangular pit from one to ten hands in dimensions and a triangular level piece of ground covered with sand.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now, for doing the Homa ceremony one should prepare, according to one’s requirements, a triangular pit from one to ten hands in dimension and a triangular level piece of ground covered with sand.

[Ch 26 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Daily, thrice, one should worship the Devi with various lovely articles and finally make a great festivity with dancing, singing and music.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Daily, thrice, one should worship the Devī with various lovely articles and finally make a great festivity with dancing, singing and music.

[Ch 26 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Everyday he should sleep on the ground and worship the virgins (young girl from the age of the age of ten) with nectar like sweetmeats and beautiful clothings and ornaments.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Everyday he should sleep on the ground and worship the virgins (young girl from the age of two to the age of ten) with nectar like sweetmeats and beautiful clothings aud ornaments.

[Ch 26 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Everyday one virgin or increased by one, two, or three every day or nine virgins in all the days respectively are to be worshipped.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Everyday one virgin or increased by one, two, or three every day or nine virgins in all the days respectively are to be worshipped.

[Ch 26 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! One should perform worshipping this Kumārī (virgint) Pujā for the satisfaction of the Devi, as his means allow; never one is to shew miserliness in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! One should perform worshipping this Kumārī (virgin) Pujā for the satisfaction of the Devī, as his means allow; never one is to shew miserliness in this.

[Ch 26 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Hear the rules of the virgin worship that I am going to tell you. The virgin, aged one year, is not to be worshipped: for they are quite ignorant as to smell and tasting various delicious things.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Hear the rules of the virgin worship that I am going to tell you. The virgin, aged one year, is not to be worshipped; for they are quite ignorant as to smell and tasting various delicious things.

[Ch 26 Verse 41-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The virgin aged two years is named the Kumārī; aged three years is named the Trimurtī; four years, is called the Kalyāṇī; five years, Rohinī; six years, Kālīkā; seventh year, Cangīkā; eighth year, Śambhavī; ninth year, Durgā; and a virgin, aged ten year, is called Subhadrā. Virgins aged more than ten years are not allowed in all ceremonies.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The virgin aged two years is named the Kumārī; aged three years is named the Trimurtī four years, is called the Kalyānī; five years, Rohiṇī; six years, Kālikā; seventh year, Candikā; eighth year, Śāmbhavī; ninth year, Dūrgā; and a virgin, aged ten years, is called Subhadrā. Virgins aged more than ten years are not allowed in all ceremonies.

[Ch 26 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One should worship these virgins, taking their names and observing all the rules. I am now mentioning the different results that arise from the worship of these nine classes of virgins.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One should worship these virgins, taking their names and observing all the rules. I am now mentioning the different results that arise from the worship of these nine classes of virgins.

[Ch 26 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The worship of Kumārī leads to the extinction of miseries and poverty, to the extirpation of one's enemies and the increment of riches, longevity and power.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The worship of Kumārī leads to the extinction of miseries and poverty, to the extirpation of one’s enemies and the increment of riches, longevity and power.

[Ch 26 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Trimūrti Pūjā yields longevity, and the acquisition of the three things, Dharma, wealth, and desires, the coming in of riches, sons and grandsons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Trimurtī Pujā yields longevity, and the acquisition of the three things, Dharma, wealth, and desires, the coming in of riches, sons and grandsons.

[Ch 26 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who want learning, victory, kingdom and happiness, they should worship the Kalyānī, the fructifier of all desires.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who want learning, victory, kingdom and happiness, they should worship the Kalyānī, the fructitier of all desires.

[Ch 26 Verse 48-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Men should worship Rohinī duly for the cure of diseases. For the destruction of enemies, the worship of the Kalikā with devotion is the best. For prosperity and riches, Candikā is to be worshipped with devotion. O king! For the enchanting and overpowering of one's enemies, for the removal of miseries and poverty, and for victory in battles, Sāmbhavī worship is the best.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Men should worship Rohiṇī duly for the cure of diseases. For the destruction of enemies, the worship of the Kālikā with devotion is the best. For prosperity and riches, Candikā is to be worshipped with devotion. O king! For the enchanting and overpowering of one’s enemies, for the removal of miseries and poverty, and for victory in battles, Śāmbhavī worship is the best.

[Ch 26 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► For the destruction of awfully terrible enemies and for happiness in the next world, the worship of Durgā is the safest and best. People worship Subhadrā when they want their desires to be fulfilled.
NEW CORR ENG ──► For the destruction of awfully terrible enemies and for happiness in the next world, the worship of Dūrgā is the safest and best. People worship Subhadrā when they want their desires to be fulfilled.

[Ch 26 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► People should, with great devotion, worship the Kumāris (virgins) with the mantrans “Širrastu” or other mantrams, beginning with “Šri” or with the seed mantrams.
NEW CORR ENG ──► People should, with great devotion, worship the Kumārīs (virgins) with the mantrams “Śrīrastu” or other mantrams, beginning with “Śrī” or with the seed mantrams.

[Ch 26 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Goddess who can create without any difficulty all the sacred tattvas of the Kumāra Kārtikeya and who effects, as if in sport, the creation of all the Devas Brahmā and other; I am worshiping the same “Kumārī” Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Goddess who can create without any difficulty all the sacred tattvas of the Kumār Kārtikeya and who effects, as if in sport, the creation of all the Devas Brahmā and others; I am worshiping the same Kumārī Devī.

[Ch 26 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She who is appearing under the three forms as differentiated by the three gunas Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, and who is appearing in multiple forms, owing to the differentiations of the three gunas again into various minor differences, I am worshipping Her the “Trimūrtī” Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She who is appearing under the three forms as differentiated by the three guṇas Sāttva, Rājas, and Tāmas, and who is appearing in multiple forms, owing to the differentiations of the three guṇas again into various minor differences, I am worshipping Her the Trimūrtī Devī.

[Ch 26 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She who being worshipped always fares with auspicious things, I am worshipping Her, with devotion, the Kumārī “Kalyānī”, the awarder of all desires.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She who being worshipped always fares us with auspicious things, I am worshipping Her, with devotion, the Kumārī Kalyānī, the awarder of all desires.

[Ch 26 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I am worshipping the “Rohinī Devi” with a heart, full of devotion who is germinating all the karmas in seed forms, that have accumulated owing to past deeds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I am worshipping the Rohiṇī Devī with a heart, full of devotion who is germinating all the karmas in seed forms, that have accumulated owing to past deeds.

[Ch 26 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She who, at the end of a Kalpa gathers unto Her in the form of “Kālī” all this Universe, moving and unmoving, I worship that “Kālikā Devi” with devotion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She who, at the end of a Kalpa gathers unto Her in the form of Kālī all this Universe, moving and unmoving, I worship that Kālikā Devī with devotion.

[Ch 26 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She, who is furious and wrathful and hence is called “Candikā” and who killed the two Demons “Canda” and “Munda” I bow down to Her humbly with devotion, to that “Candikā Devi,” who destroys the terrible sins.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She, who is furious and wrathful and hence is called Candikā and who killed the two Demons Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa I bow down to Her humbly with devotion, to that Candikā Devī, who destroys the terrible sins.

[Ch 26 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I worship that, “Sāmbhavī Devi” the giver of all pleasures and happiness, whose form is the Veda Brahma, and whose origin is without any cause, and who is so recited in the Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I worship that Śāmbhavī Devī, the giver of all pleasures and happiness, whose form is the Veda Brahmā, and whose origin is without any cause, and whe is so recited in the Vedas.

[Ch 26 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She who saves from danger her devotees and who always delivers from various difficulties and troubles, whom all the Devas are incapable to know, I worship with devotion that “Durgā Devi” the destroyer of all calamities.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She who saves from danger her devotees and who always delivers from various difficulties and troubles, whom all the Devas are incapable to know, I worship with devotion that Dūrgā Devī the destroyer of all calamities.

[Ch 26 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I, with my mind devoted, offer my salutations to that “Subhadrā Devi”, Who procures all auspiciousness to Her devotees and removes all inauspicious incidents.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I, with my mind devoted, offer my salutations to that Subhadrā Devī, Who procures all auspiciousness to Her devotees and removes all inauspicious incidents.

[Ch 26 Verse 62-63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus, in the mantrams, above described, people should always worship the virgin girls, giving them clothings, ornaments, garlands, scents, and various other articles. Here ends the Twenty sixth Chapter on the narration of what are to be done in the Navarātri in the Mahā Purānam in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa. Śrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus, in the mantrams, above described, people should always worship the virgin girls, giving them clothings, ornaments, garlands, scents, and various other articles. Here ends the 26th Chapter on the narration of what are to be done in the Navarātri in the Mahā Purāṇam in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
