CHAPTER XXVI

On the Navarătri

जनमेज उवाच

नवराएे तु संग्राटे किं कर्तवें छिजोत्तम ।

वियांन विविचव दृष्टि श्रताकाले विशेषतः ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said : “O Best of the Brāhmīns! What are men to do in the time of Navarātra? Especially in the Navarātra ceremony during the autumnal season how is the ceremony to be performed? Kindly relate all this with the prescribed rules regulations.

फिंक फतं खतु करतार विधि: कार्यों महामते ।

एताद्धितरती बहु कृयया द्विजसत्तम ॥ 2 ॥

O intelligent one! What are the fruits therein of the Navarātra ceremony? and what are the rules to be observed? Kindly describe all these to me.

व्यास उचाच

शृणु राजनप्रवक्ष्यामि नवरात्रजतं शुभम् ।

शरकाले विशेषेण कत्नं विधिपूर्वकम् ॥ 3 ॥

वसंते च प्रकत्थं तथैव प्रेभपूर्वकम् ।

ब्रावृत् यमदैशूल्यो नूनं सर्वजेनयु वै ॥ 4 ॥

शराद्रसंतनामानी दुर्भी प्राणिनामिक् ।

तस्म्यात्नार्विदं कार्य सर्वन सुभमिष्ठता ॥ 5 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O king! Hear about the vow of auspicious Navarātra. This has to be performed

with loving devotion in the vernal season; but its special season is autumn. The two seasons. autuman and spring, are famous as the teeth of Yama, the God of Death; and these are the two seasons, very hard for the persons to cross over. Therefore every goodfaring man should everywhere perform this vow very carefully.

इवावे सुमहापोरावूत् रोगकर्गे रुणाम् ।

वसंतगरादावे सर्वनोगकारवृषी ॥६  ॥

तस्मात्त्र प्रकर्तेच चण्डिकापूजनं बुधैः ।

चैराधिति शृणे मासे पत्तिपूर्वे नराधिप ॥ ७ ॥

अमावायां च संग्राय संभारं कल्यचेछूषम् ।

हविष्यं, राजानं कार्यमेकपुवतं तु तहिने ॥ ८ ॥

O king! The people are very much afflicted with various terrible diseases in these two seasons autumn and spring and many lose their lives during these portions of the year. Therefore the wise should unquestionably worship with great devotion the Cangākā Devi in these auspicious months of Caitra and Śśvina.

मण्डपस्पू प्रकत्ने: सभे देशे रुष्पे स्थले ।

इतपोडणमानेन संभव्रजसमन्ति: ॥ 9 ॥

गौरमुद्रोमवाय्यां च लेपनं कारयेत्ततः ।

तन्यधे वैदिका शुभा कर्तेचा च स्मा स्थिता ॥ 10 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

चतुहैस्ता च हस्तोच्छा पीटावँ स्थानुत्तमम् ।

तोरणानि विचित्राणि वितानं च प्रकल्पयेत् ॥ १ १ ॥

On the day previous to the commencement of the vow, when the Amāvasyā tithi commences, one should collect the materials that will be required in the worship and should eat only once in that tithi what is called Havisyānna (sacred food, boiled rice with ghee) and should on that day prepare an open shade in a temporary building, twenty four (24) feet in dimensions, on a level piece of ground, that is considered holy; it is to be equipped with a post and a flag. Next, this is to be heaped over with yellow earth and cow dung. Then a raised platform called the Vedī, six feet wide and 1 ½ one and a half foot high, level and hard, is to be erected, and provided with an excellent space thereon for the seat of the Devi. Provisions are to be made also for ornamented gate ways and an awning over the top.

राते द्विजानायांन्य देवीतत्वविशारदान् ।

आचारनितन्तादांतान्देवदारंगपाणना ॥ 12 ॥

प्रतिपद्विसे कार्य' प्रात:स्नानं वियानतः ।

नहा नदे तडागे वा वाय्यां कुरे गृड़ेश्वा ॥ 13 ॥

प्रतर्नित्वं पुर कृत्वा द्विजानां वरणं ततः ।

अर्थप्याचारिके सर्व कर्नोल मधुपूर्वकम् ॥ 14 ॥

वस्त्रालंकरणादीनि देवापि व स्वशक्ततः ।

विशगणाटों कर्तेलि चिपवे सर्टीकहित् ॥ 15 ॥

विश्रे: संतोर्वितः कार्य मयूर्ण सर्वेथा भवेत् ।

नवषघ्रदयश्छीके देवा: थाटे डिजा: स्मृतः ॥ 16 ॥

वरयेद् बाढ्याणं शान्ते पारायणकृते तदा ।

स्वत्सरावचनं कार्य वेद्यन्स्वियाताः ॥ 17 ॥

One should invite then, those Brāhmins, that observe fully the customs and usages, who are self restrained and versed in the Vedas and Vedāngas, especially those who are skilled in the ceremony of worshipping the Devi.

Next, in the Pratipadā tithi (the first day of the bright half), one should take one's morning ablutions in a river, or in a lake, tank or a well or in one's own residence, according to rules, and one

should perform one's every day practices of Sandhyā Vandanam. Afterwards he should appoint the Brāhmins and give them water for washing their feet and Arghya (offerings of grass, rice etc.), and Madhuparka (an oblation of honey and milk etc.), and give and then, as his means permit, clothings and ornaments to them. If he happens to be rich, he should never shew his miserliness here in making these gifts; for if the Brāhmins be satisfied, they will try their best to make the ceremony a complete success. O king! The Candī Pātha (the reading of the book called Candī) and Bhāgavata Pātha (the reading of some portions of the book named Bhāgavat) are done on this occasion, for the satisfaction of the Goddess; and either nine Brāhmins or five or three or at least one Brāhim, of a restrained and calm nature, is to be appointed, who would observe the fasting on the day previous (pārāyana). All these being done, the able man is to perform the ceremony preparatory to the solemn Devi worship, (in which the priest utters the Vedic mantra Svasti-vācana, Svasti na Indro vṛddha-śravāḥ etc.). Om Hrim Śrim Dūm Durgāyai namah is the nine lettered Durgā mantra.

वेश्वा सिहासन स्थाय श्रीमवहसामभवितम् ।

तत्र स्थाया प्रविका देवी चतुर्वैतसायुधात्वा ॥ 18 ॥

रन्यप्रपणसंयुक्ता मुक्रात्राविराविता ।

विद्याम्ब्यसरा सीमा सर्वतक्षणसंयुता ॥ १९ ॥

गंखचक्रतापवधान सिंहे स्थिता शिका ।

अश्वतशपुत्रा वासि प्रतिष्ठाया सन्तानी ॥ 20 ॥

O king! When the ceremony has been thus commenced, one should place on the Vedi (a raised platform; an altar), the throne fitted with double silken clothes; and, on that throne, he should place the image of the Devi. The Devi, the Eternal World-Mother, is to be four-armed or eighteen armed, (4 or 18) fully provided with all the weapons, ornamented with garlands of pearls and jewels, decorated with various ornaments of gems and precious stones, wearing excellent heavenly

Book III Chapter XXVI

clothing, all the parts of the image being artistically finished and endowed with all the auspicious signs, mounted on a lion, and holding conch shell, wheel, club, and lotus in Her hands.

Note: The Devī, here, is represented with four (4) or eighteen (18) hands.

अर्याधोत तथा यनं नवाणीमन्यसंयुतम् ।

स्थापवैनौदुपानी कलशं तत्र पाईशः ॥ 21 ॥

पशुपल्लवसंयुक्तं वेद्यान्ये: सुरंस्कृतम् ।

सुतीर्थंजलस्म्यूर्णं हेमरन्ते: समन्तितम् ॥ 22 ॥

In the absence of the image, one should place an earthen water-pot, on that throne, thoroughly purified by the Vedic Mantras, filled with gold and jewels, and filled fully with the water, brought from a sacred river or a sacred place of pilgrimage and with five young shoots of plants, the extremities of branches bearing new leaves immersed in water. Beside the water-pot on the throne, there should be a symbol (Diagram or Yantra) with the nine lettered Mantram (Om Hrim Śrim Čandikāyai namah) in it for the purpose of worship.

पार्थु पूर्णवर्षम्भात्यारिकल्य्य समन्ततः ।

गतिवादिविधोषाकारयेन्मालय ते ॥ 23 ॥

One should place on one's side all the materials of worship in their due places, and then have the music and other sounding drums played, for the good fortune and prosperity of the family.

Note: Look for the mantras in the book Mantramaho Dadhi.

तिशी इत्सान्याया च नन्दाया पुजनं वरम् ।

प्रथमे दिवसे राजन्धित्यकतामदं नृणम् ॥ 24 ॥

O King! If the first day be the Nanda tithi (i.e. the first day of the bright half with the asterism Hastā in the ascendant), then that is the best time for worshipping duly the Holy Goddess. There is no doubt that special fortunate results would arise on this.

नियमं प्रवयं कृत्वा पश्रात्यूजां समाचरेत् ।

उपवासेन नेकेन चैकभकेन चा युनः ॥ 25 ॥

On the previous night, one should observe fasting, or on the previous day one should take only one meal of Havisyānnā (boiled rice and ghee); and on the next day one should make a Saṅkalpa (an avowal of the purpose to perform a rite) and then begin worship.

करिष्यामि जते पातर्नवराममन्तमम् ।

साहाय्यं कुभ मे देखि जगदेव ममापीडलम् ॥ 26 ॥

One should pray before the Goddess thus, “O Mother, Mother of the World! I will perform this excellent Navarātra vow; be pleased to help me in every respect.”

यथाशक्ति प्रकर्तेबा नियमो प्रतहतेव ।

पश्रातृज्ञा प्रकतैव्य विधिव्यमान्यपूर्वकम् ॥ 27 ॥

One is to observe, as far as possible, all the rules enjoined in this vow, and then utter the mantras and do the worship according to the prescribed rules.

चन्दनागृककप्रैः कुसुमैधा सुगात्थिनः ।

मन्दारकराजाशिकच्यकः कदार्विकः ॥ 28 ॥

मालतीब्रह्माकुपुष्येस्तथा शिवल्वदलेः शुभेः ।

पूजरेज्ञगतां धार्जी पूर्वैर्विपेक्षित्धानतः ॥ 29 ॥

फलैर्नानाविश्येर्ध प्रदात्वं च तत्र वै ।

नारिकेल्मांगतुलुर्गैर्विडिमावक्तिपैकलेः ॥ 30 ॥

नारैर्ः: पनसैश्व तथा पूर्णफैले: शूपैः ।

अत्रदानं प्रकर्तैर्वं भक्तिपूर्वै नराधिप ॥ 31 ॥

First of all, one should worship duly the Goddess Jagaddhātri, presenting Her Candana (sandal paste), Aguru (a fragrant wood, the aloe wood), Camphor, the flowers Mandāra (one of the five trees of the celestial regions), Karaja (a kind of fragrant flower)! Aśoka, Campaka, Karavira, Mālaṭi, and Brāhmi and various lovely sweet scented flowers and good Bel leaves, Dhūpa (incense, a fragrant gum burnt before idols) and lamps. Next one should present the fruits cocoanut, Mātulinga, the pomegranate, bananas, oranges, the jack furits, Bel, Bel and various other delicious fruits and then, offering Her ardghya, present boiled rice and other food with a heart, full of devotion.

Šrımaddevībhāgavatam

मांसाशनं वे कुबेलित तैः कार्य परुहिंसनम् ।

महिषाजवराहाणां बलित्वां विशिष्यमे ॥ ३२ ॥

Those who eat meat, they can sacrifice animals in this worship of the Devi; and, for this purpose, goat and wild boars are the best.

देव्यो नित्ता याति पशवः स्वर्गम्वयम् ।

न हिंसा पयुजा तन निवन्ता तकृतेनं२४ ॥ ३३ ॥

आहिंसा यात्रिकी प्रोक्ता सर्वेगात्रक्षिविधिपो।

देवतार्व विसुहानां पयून्तां स्वर्गतिर्युंव ।। ३४ ॥।

O sinless one! The goats etc., offered as a sacrifice before the Devi, attain to unending heavens. Therefore persons offering the sacrifices of goats do not incur any sin. O king! The goats etc., and other beasts offered as a sacrifice before the Devas undoubtedly go to the heavenly regions; therefore, in all the Śāstras, it has been decided that this killing of animals in a sacrifice is considered as non-killing.

होभार्थ चैव कर्तेलं कुण्डे चैव विजोभाकम् ।

स्थप्रिडतं व प्रकर्त्यं त्रिकोणं मानतः शुभम् ॥ 35 ॥

Now, for doing the Homa, ceremony one should prepare, according to one's requirements, attriangular pit from one to ten hands in dimensions and a triangular level piece of ground covered with sand.

त्रिकालं पूजनं निवयं नानाद्यैमंनोहरैः ।

गतिवादिप्रनुवैध कत्वेध्य मतोतस्वः ॥ 36 ॥

Daily, thrice, one should worship the Devi with various lovely articles and finally make a great festivity with dancing, singing and music.

नित्यं पूर्णो च शयनं कृमारीणां च पूर्णन् ।

वस्त्रालंकर्णिर्दिवेशैभाँजैनघु सुधामयै ॥ ३७ ॥

Everyday he should sleep on the ground and worship the virgins (young girl from the age of the age of ten) with nectar like sweetmeats and beautiful clothings and ornaments.

एकैका पूर्णवित्यमेककुब्द्रा तथा पुनः ।

द्विगुर्ग विगुर्णं वाउपि प्रत्येकं नवकं च वा ॥ ३८ ॥

Everyday one virgin or increased by one, two, or three every day or nine virgins in all the days respectively are to be worshipped.

विषयस्वानुसारेण कतैल्पूवनं किल ।

वित्तगाठ्यं न कतवें राजस्वक्तिमस्ते यदा ॥ ३ ९ ॥

O king! One should perform worshipping this Kumārī (virgint) Pujā for the satisfaction of the Devi, as his means allow; never one is to shew miserliness in this.

एकबर्षा न कतंव्या कन्या पूजावियौ गृय ।

परमज्ञा तु भोगानां गन्यादीनां च बालिका ॥ 40 ॥

O king! Hear the rules of the virgin worship that I am going to tell you. The virgin, aged one year, is not to be worshipped: for they are quite ignorant as to smell and tasting various delicious things.

कुमारिका तु सा प्रोक्ता द्विवर्षा या भवेदित् ।

त्रिमूर्ति श्रिवर्षा च कल्याणी चतुर्त्विक्धा ॥ 41 ॥

रोहिणी पड्वर्षा च पड्वर्षा कालिका स्मृत ।

चिफडका सतवर्षा स्याहद्वर्षा च शाम्याची ॥ 42 ॥

नवषर्षा भवेद्वरुगा सुभत्रा रुशाखिकी ।

अत ऊर्धे न कतैव्या सर्वकार्याविनहिता ॥ 43 ॥

The virgin aged two years is named the Kumārī; aged three years is named the Trimurtī; four years, is called the Kalyāṇī; five years, Rohinī; six years, Kālīkā; seventh year, Cangīkā; eighth year, Śambhavī; ninth year, Durgā; and a virgin, aged ten year, is called Subhadrā. Virgins aged more than ten years are not allowed in all ceremonies.

पश्रिका नामाभि: पूजा कत्हीया विधिसंपुता ।

तासां फलाति वक्ष्यामि नवानां पूजने सदा ॥ 44 ॥

One should worship these virgins, taking their names and observing all the rules. I am now mentioning the different results that arise from the worship of these nine classes of virgins.

कुमारी पूजिता कुर्बादुःखदारित्रानाशनम् ।

सत्रुस्थं धनायुर्णे बलवृष्टि करोति वै ॥ ४ ५ ॥

The worship of Kumārī leads to the extinction of miseries and poverty, to the extirpation of one's enemies and the increment of riches, longevity and power.

विमूर्तिपूजनारावुस्त्रिवर्षय फलं भवेत् ।

धनधान्यागमश्रैव पुर्येराधिद्वद्धृद्ध: ॥ 46 ॥

The Trimūrti Pūjā yields longevity, and the

Book III Chapter XXVI

acquisition of the three things, Dharma, wealth, and desires, the coming in of riches, sons and grandsons.

विद्यार्थी विजर्यार्थी च राज्यार्थी यक्षा पार्थिवः ।

सुखार्थी पुत्रविद्यार्थी कल्याणी सर्वकामादम् ॥ 47 ॥

Those who want learning, victory, kingdom and happiness, they should worship the Kalyānī, the fructifier of all desires.

कालिकां शयुनागर्थ पुत्रेयद्धक्तिपूर्वकम् ।

पृष्यर्थपनाकामश उचिष्ठकां परिपूर्वेणे ॥ 48 ॥

पूजयेच्छोपर्षी नित्यं नृपसंभोहनाय च ।

दुःखदारिद्धिनागाय संग्रामे विजयाय च ॥ 49 ॥

Men should worship Rohinī duly for the cure of diseases. For the destruction of enemies, the worship of the Kalikā with devotion is the best. For prosperity and riches, Candikā is to be worshipped with devotion. O king! For the enchanting and overpowering of one's enemies, for the removal of miseries and poverty, and for victory in battles, Sāmbhavī worship is the best.

क्रूरशूरविनाराणि नशोप्रकर्मसाधने ।

दुर्गा च पुर्वेद्धूतचा परलोकसुखाव च ॥ 50 ॥

वांशितार्थस्य सिद्ध्वयं सुभर्तां पुर्वेस्तव।

रोष्टिणी रोनाशगाय पूर्वेत्रेड्धिवसरः ॥ 51 ॥

For the destruction of awfully terrible enemies and for happiness in the next world, the worship of Durgā is the safest and best. People worship Subhadrā when they want their desires to be fulfilled.

श्रीरित्विति च मन्नेण पूर्णवेद्धक्तितपर: ।

श्रीयुक्तमंत्रशवा जीजमन्द्रेशपयि वा ॥ 52 ॥

People should, with great devotion, worship the Kumāris (virgins) with the mantrans “Širrastu” or other mantrams, beginning with “Šri” or with the seed mantrams.

कुमारस्य च तत्वापि या मुजल्पि लीलया ।

कादीपि च देवांस्ताकुमारी पूजयामहम् ॥ 5 3 ॥

The Goddess who can create without any difficulty all the sacred tattvas of the Kumāra Kārtikeya and who effects, as if in sport, the

creation of all the Devas Brahmā and other; I am worshiping the same “Kumārī” Devi.

सत्तादिधिक्षमूलित्यों तैहै नानावस्कपिणी ।

त्रिकाल्यापिनी गर्फिक्षमूलित् पूजायाम्बून् ॥ 54 ॥

She who is appearing under the three forms as differentiated by the three gunas Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, and who is appearing in multiple forms, owing to the differentiations of the three gunas again into various minor differences, I am worshipping Her the “Trimūrtī” Devi.

कल्याणाकर्षिति नियंच भक्तानं पूजितान्निण् ।

पूजयामि च तां भकता कल्याणी सर्वकामादम् ॥ 55 ॥

She who being worshipped always fares with auspicious things, I am worshipping Her, with devotion, the Kumārī “Kalyānī”, the awarder of all desires.

गेहयंती च चीजानि प्रागज्ञमस्त्रितानि वे ।

या देयी सर्वभृतानां गौहितीं पुरावाभ्यमूँ ॥ 56 ॥

I am worshipping the “Rohinī Devi” with a heart, full of devotion who is germinating all the karmas in seed forms, that have accumulated owing to past deeds.

कालो कालयते सर्वे ब्रह्माण्डं सचाराचरम् ।

कल्पानसमये या तां कालिकां पुत्रायामघ्न ॥ 57 ॥

She who, at the end of a Kalpa gathers unto Her in the form of “Kālī” all this Universe, moving and unmoving, I worship that “Kālikā Devi” with devotion.

तां चचडपावरूर्णी चपिड़ां पूजायामघ्न ॥ 58 ॥

She, who is furious and wrathful and hence is called “Candikā” and who killed the two Demons “Canda” and “Munda” I bow down to Her humbly with devotion, to that “Candikā Devi,” who destroys the terrible sins.

अकाराणालम्यतित्यनयैः परिकीर्तिता ।

यथास्तां सुखदां देवाँ शाम्भवां पूजायाम्दम् ॥ 59 ॥

I worship that, “Sāmbhavī Devi” the giver of all pleasures and happiness, whose form is the Veda Brahma, and whose origin is without any cause, and who is so recited in the Vedas.

दुर्गतायिति भर्ते या सदा दुर्गतिनाथि ।

दुर्जेया सर्वैद्यानां तां दुर्गा पूजयामध्यम ॥ 6 0 ॥

She who saves from danger her devotees and who always delivers from various difficulties and troubles, whom all the Devas are incapable to know, I worship with devotion that “Durgā Devi” the destroyer of all calamities.

सुभ्रदायी च भक्तानां कुकते पूजिता सदा ।

अभ्यन्त्रिनीं देवीं सुभत्रों पूजायामहम् ॥ 6 1 ॥

I, with my mind devoted, offer my salutations to that “Subhadrā Devi”, Who procures all auspiciousness to Her devotees and removes all inauspicious incidents.

एभियंत्रै: पूजनीया: कन्यकाः सर्वेवा बुधैः ।

वस्ताल्वूर्णोपौरल्यैर्पीटरूचावेरपि ॥ 6 2 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयस्कन्धे

वद्धिवींशोध्याः ॥ 63 ॥ 

Thus, in the mantrams, above described, people should always worship the virgin girls, giving them clothings, ornaments, garlands, scents, and various other articles.

Here ends the Twenty sixth Chapter on the narration of what are to be done in the Navarātri in the Mahā Purānam in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

