CHAPTER XXI

On the Gāyatrī Puraścarānaṃ

श्रीनारायण उवाच

अशात: श्रूयतां बहून् गायव्या: पाणनाशन् ।

पुरुषाणं पुणयं यथेष्टफलयाकम् ॥ १ ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: Now I shall speak of the Gāyatrī-purāscarānaṃ. Hear. By its performance all the

desires are obtained and all the sins are destroyed.

पर्वतोंटे नदीतीर विद्यमुले जलाग्ये ।

गोष्टे देवालये5श्वधे उदाने तुलसीवने ॥ 2 ॥

पुण्यक्षेने युगीः पापर्वे चितैकाध्यस्थलैपि च ।

पुरुषरपणकृमंत्री सिस्योव्येन न संगयः ॥ 3 ॥

On the tops of mountains, on the banks of the

Book XI Chapter XXI

rivers, on the roots of Bel trees, on the edges of tanks, within the enclosures of the cows (cow-stalls), in temples, on the root of Asvattha trees, in gardens, in the Tulasi groves, in the Punya Ksétrams (holy places), before one's Guru, or wherever the mind feels exalted and cheerful, and gets strength, the Puraścaranam if performed, lead to a speedy success.

यस्य कस्यापि मंत्रस्य पुरश्वरणामारपेते ।

व्याहित्रवसंयुक्ता गायत्री चायुतं जणेते ॥ 4 ॥

नृसिंहाक्रवराहाणां तांत्रिकं वैदिकं तथा ।

विना जप्ता तु गायत्री तत्सर्वे निष्कलं भवेत् ॥ 5 ॥

Before commencing the Puraścaranam of a mantra (the Puraścaranam means repetition of the name of a deity or of a mantra attended with burnt offerings, oblations, etc.,) first Prāyaścitta (penance) is done in the shape of repeating one million times the Gāyatri with the Vyārhitis. In any Vaidic Karma or in making Puraścaranam of the mantra of the Devatās Nṛsiniha, Sūrya, Varāha, etc., the first thing done is to repeat the Gāyatrī. Without the japam of Gāyatrī, no action is attended with success.

सर्वे शाता द्विजा: प्रोक्ता न शैला न च बेधावा: ।

आदिशकिमुपायते गायजी वेदमात्तम् ॥ 6 ॥

मंत्र संगोध्य यवनेन पुरुषचरगतत्यतः ।

मंत्रागोपन्वाईमात्मयोगेधनुत्तम् ॥ 7 ॥

The reason is this: Every Brāhmana is a Śākta (a follower of Śakti); he cannot be a Vaiṣṇava or Śaiva; for he is the worshipper of the Prime Force Vedamāta Gāyatrī. Therefore obtain first the Grace of one's own Īṣta Devatā Gāyatrī by Her Japam. Then worship the other Deities.

Thus one should purify one's jāpya mantra (the mantra that is to be repeated) by first repeating one million times the Gāyatrī; then one is to commence Puraścaranam.

आत्मतचार्णोधानय त्रिलक्षं प्रजपेदेच्छुः ।

अथवा चैकलक्षं तु श्रुतिप्रोक्तेन वर्तेना ॥ 8 ॥

आत्मयूढ़ि विना कर्तुर्जपेहामादिका: क्रिया: ।

निष्णतासात्य विहेया: कारणं श्रुतिचोदितम् ॥ 9 ॥

तपसा तापयेहेहं चिन्तृद्वांश्च । त
पसा स्वर्गमानोति तपसा विदंत महत् ॥ 10 ॥

Again before purifying the mantra, one is to purify one's Atman (Self). In this purification of one's Atman three lakh times, in case of inability, one lakh times Gāyatrī is to be repeated without one's ātman's purification, the Japam, Homa and other actions all become useless. This is specially noted in the Vedas. By Tapas e.g., Japam, Cāndrāyana and Vrata, (asceticism) mortify your body. By offering Tarpanam (peace-offerings) to the Fathers and the Devas, one can get self purification. If you want to get the Heavens and if you want to become great, practise Tapasyā. There is no other way. Tapasyā is the intent calling of the Mother, That Call which penetrates through and through the Brahmāndā.

क्षयेयो बाहुवीयैन तद्वाद् आवनः ।

धनेन वैश्यः शूत्रस्तु जपहोमैद्धिजोतमः ॥ 11 ॥

अताद्य तु विग्रेंत्र तनः कुर्मीद्यलन्तः ।

शरीरोगेणं प्राहुततासास्तव उत्तम् ॥ 12 ॥

The Kṣattriyas should cross difficulties and dangers by force of arms; the Vaiśyas, by wealth; the Śūdras, by serving the twice born; and the Brāhmaṇas should cross difficulties and dangers, by Tapasyā, Homa, Japam, etc. So the Brāhmaṇas should always be cheerful and in prompt readiness to do Tapasyā. Of all sorts of tapasyās, mortifying the body by observing vows and fastings is the best. So say the Rṣis. (This mortification of the body gives self-reliance and self intuition more surely and speedily than all the other studies and other practices.)

गोधयेढित्धिमार्गण कृष्छचोरायणादिधि: ।

अथात्यादिकरणं बध्यायि श्रणु नारद ॥ 13 ॥

अयाचितोछ्युकलाखिभक्षात्तिचतुहया ।

तांत्रिकैर्विकैर्शेवि प्रोक्तार्थ विधुज्ञता ॥ 14 ॥

The Brāhmanas should purify themselves by following duly Krcchra Cāndrāyana vrata, etc.,  O Nārada! Now I am speaking of the purification of food. Hear. The following four occupations of the Brāhmaṇas are the best: Ayācita, (without begging or asking for anything), Uñca, (the gathering in of handfuls of the corn left by the reapers), Šukla (the maintenance derived by a Brāhmaṇa from other Brāhmaṇas; a pure mode of life). And Bhikṣu (begging). Whether according to the Tantras or according to the Vedyas, the food obtained by the above four means is pure.

पिभ्राशं गृढ़मानीय कृत्वा भागचतुध्यम् ।

एकं भागं द्विजेघ्यन्तु गोप्रासन्तु द्वितीयकः ॥ 15 ॥

अतिशिप्यन्तुतीयसुन्तूतूं तृवभाव्योः ।

आश्रमस्य यथा यस्य कृत्वा प्रासविधि क्रमान् ॥ 16 ॥

आदौ क्षिप्ता तु गोगुरं यव्याणिक्त यव्याक्रम ।

तदूर्ध्यं ग्राससंख्या स्याड्गान्यस्यगृहस्ययोः ॥ 17 ॥

What is earned by Bhikṣā (begging) is divided into four parts: one part is given to the Brāhmanas; the second part is given to the cows; the third part is given to the guests, the fourth part is to be taken by him and his wife. Whatever is fixed for taking (swallowing) mouthfuls of food, that is to be taken on a tray or a platter. First throw a little cow-urine over that and count duly the number of mouthfuls.

कृककुटांडप्रमाणं तु प्रासमानं विधीयते ।

अष्टी प्रासा गृहस्यय वनस्यय तत्प्रधकम् ॥ 18  ॥

बहाचारी यथेथे च गोपुत्रं विधिपूर्वकम् ।

प्रोक्षणं नववारं च घव्हारं च चित्राकारम् ॥ 19 ॥

निश्छर्ने च करं कृत्ता साविक्री च तदित्यम् ।

मंत्रपुच्चार्य मनसा प्रोक्षणे विधिकच्छये ॥ 20 ॥

The mouthfuls are to be of the size of an egg; the house-holders are to take eight such mouthfuls and the Vānaprasthīs are to take four such mouthfuls. The Brahmaçarīns can sprinkle their food with cow-urine nine times, six times, or three times as they like; while sprinkling, the fingers are to remain intact. The Gāyatrī is to be repeated also.

चौरो वा यदि चांडाणे वैश्यः क्षनस्तेवे च ।

अन्नं द्वानु च: कश्चिद्धभो विधिन्धचते ॥ 21 ॥

शूग्रान्नं शूग्रसर्पकं शूग्रेन च सहाशनम् ।

ते यांति नरकं घोरं यावच्छर्दिवाकरी ॥ 22 ॥

The food offered by a thief, Cāndāla, Kṣattriya or Vaiśya is very inferior. The food of a Śudra, or the companion with a Śudra or taking food in the same line with a Śudra leads one to suffer in the terrible hells as long as there are the Sun and Moon.

गायकीच्छोदो मंत्रस्य यथासंख्याक्षराणि च ।

तावललक्षाणि कतैल्यं पुरुषाणकं तथा ॥ 23 ॥

द्वार्षिणलक्ष्मानं तु विध्यामित्रन्तं तथा ।

जीवहीनो यथा देहः सर्वकर्मेषु न क्षमः ॥ 24 ॥

The Purāścarānam of Gāyatrī is repeating this twenty four lakh times (i.e., as many lakh times as there are syllables in the Gāyatrī). But, according to Viśvāmitra, repeating thirty two lakh times is the Purāscarānam of Gāyatrī. As the body becomes useless when the soul leaves the body, so the mantra without Purāścarānam is useless.

पुरुषगणहीनसु तथा मंत्र: प्रकर्षिततः ।

ज्येषाघावौ भारदर्पे पौधे तु मलमासकम् ॥ 25 ॥

अंगारं गणिरावं च व्यतिपातं च वैधूतिम् ।

अष्टमी नवर्मी पष्टी चत्थीं च गयोदर्शीम् ॥ 26 ॥

चतुर्वैगीमनावास्यां प्रदोषं च तथा निशगम् ।

यमापिनरूसरप्रे-व्यसुश्रवणजन्मभम् ॥ 27 ॥

मेघककतूलाकुंभामकरं चैव वर्जयेत् ।

सर्वोपेयतिने वज्जिति पुरुषारामकर्गमि ॥ 28 ॥

The Purāścarānam is prohibited in the months of Yajaiṣṭha, Āsādhā, Pauṣa and Mala (dirty) months. Also on Tuesday, Saturday; in the Vyatīpāta and Vaidhrī Yogas; also in Aṣṭamī (eighth), Navamī (ninth), Ṣaṣṭhī (sixth), Caturthī (fourth) Trayodaśī (thirteenth), Caturdaśī (fourteenth) and Amāvasyā (New Moon), Tithis (lunar days); in the evening twilight and in the night; while the star Bharaṇī, Kṛttikā, Ārdrā, Aśleśā, Jyeṣṭhā, Dhanisṭhā, Śravaṇā, or the Jamma nakṣatra (Birth time star) is with the Moon; while the signs Meṣa, Karkata, Tulā, Kumbha, and Makara are the Lagnas (signs in the ascendant).

चंद्रतातयकुके च गुकलपक्षे विशेषतः ।
पुःक्षरणकं कुवार्मंत्रसिद्धः प्रजायते ॥ 29 ॥

स्वतिनवाचनकं कुवार्वार्वीशाद्धे यथाविति ।

विज्ञानंतयं यवनेय भोजनाच्छादनादिधि: ॥ 30 ॥

आरभेषु ततः पश्रादनुजानपुरःसम् ।

प्रत्यड्युप: शिवस्थाने द्विज्ञान्यानमे जेचत् ॥ 31 ॥

When the moon and the start are auspicious, especially in the bright fortnight, the Puraścaranam performed, gives the Mantra Siddhi. First of all repeat Svasti vācana and perform duly the Nāndi mukha Śrāddha and give food and clothing to the Brāhmaṇas. Take the permission of the Brāhmaṇas and begin the Puraścaranam. Where the Śiva Liṅgam exists, facing west, or in any Śiva temple, commence repeating the mantra.

काणीपुरी च केदारो महाकालोय व नासिकम् ।

यंकक च महाक्षेयं पंच दीपा इमे भृति ॥ 32 ॥

सर्वेश्व हि दीपस्तु कृमास्वमिति स्मृतः ।

प्रारभदिनामाध्य समाप्तिवसावस्थि ॥ 33 ॥

The other Śiva Kṣeṭtramas are: Kāśī, Kedāra, Mahā Kāla, Śri Kṣeṭtra, and Tryambakam. These five are the Great Kṣeṭtrams, known widely on this earth, for the fructification and the siddhis of the Mantras. At all other places than these, the Karma Cakra is to be drawn according to the principles of the Tantra. And then they will be fit for Puraścaranam. The number of times that the Puraścaranam (the repeating of the mantra) is done on the first day, the same number is to be continued every day until completion; not greater nor less than that and also no intermission or stoppage should occur in the interval.

न न्यूनं नातिरिकं च जपं कुर्बादिने दिवे ।

नैरंतर्शेन कुर्वन्ति पुरुषायां भूनीषधरः ॥ 34 ॥

प्रातरार्थ्य विविधज्ञपेन्म्यर्दिवारविध ।

मन:संहरणं ग्रीचे ध्यानं मंत्रार्थिवित्नम् ॥ 35 ॥

गायत्रीच्छोदो मंत्रस्य यथासंख्याश्रापीण च ।

The repeating of the Mantra is to be commenced in the morning and should be done up to midday. While doing this, the mind is to be kept free from other subjects, and it is to be kept pure; one is to

meditate on one's own Deity and on the meaning of the mantra and one should be particularly careful that no inaccuracies nor omissions should occur in the Gāyatrī, Chandas and in the repetition of the Mantra.

ताल्वल्ब्राणि कर्तेयं पूरुषाणक तथा ॥ 36 ॥

जुहुवानहशोजेन सभुतेन यदोउमता ।

तिलै: पत्रे: प्रसूत्रेय वैधुः प्रभूतप्रिन्तै: ॥ 37 ॥

One tenth of the total number of Purasācaranams that are repeated is to be used for the Homa purpose. The Caru is to be prepared with ghee, til, the Bel leaves, flowers, jaya grain, honey and sugar; all mixed, are to be offered as oblations to the fire in the Homa. Then the success in the Mantra comes (i.e., mantra siddhi is obtained or the Mantra becomes manifested).

कुयराशिणातो होमं ततः सिद्धो घनैमनुः ।

गायत्री चैव संलेखा धर्मकामायंभिक्षुः ॥ 38 ॥

नित्ये नैमितिके काय्ये जितये तु परायण: ।

गायवास्तु परं नारित इह लोके परत्र च ॥ 39 ॥

मध्यात्र मिनम्बुह् यौनी ति: स्नानार्चनतरप: ।

जले लक्षत्रयं धीमानन्यमानसक्रियः ॥ 40 ॥

After the Purāścarānam one should do properly the daily and occasional duties and worship the Gāyatrī that brings in dharma, wealth, objects of desire and liberation. There is nothing superior an object of worship to this Gāyatrī, whether in this world or in the next. The devotee, engaged in the Purāścarānam, should eat moderately, observe silence, bathe thrice in the three Sandhyā times, should be engaged in worshipping one's Deity, though not he unmindful and should not do any other work. He is to remain, while in water, to repeat the Gāyatrī three lakhs of times.

कर्मण यो जेपरशुताकर्मिथि: संवेद्ध्याजीय वा ।

यावत्कार्यं न सिद्धोषुत तावत्कृयाजगदिकम् ॥ 41 ॥

सामान्यकायकर्मादौ यवावहित्धिकच्छते ।

आदित्यस्योदये स्नाता सहहं प्रत्यई जपेत् ॥ 42 ॥

In case the devotee repeats the mantra for

In case the devotee repeats the mantra for achieving success in any other desired work (kāmya karma), then he should willingly stick to it until the desired success is attained. Now is being told how to get success in ordinary Kāmya karmas. When the sun is rising, repeat the Puraścarānam mantra daily thousand times.

आयुरातोयमेक्ष्यं धर्न च लभते ध्यम् ।

पणमाः वा त्रिमासं वा वशति सिद्धिमामुव्यन्त् ॥ 4 3 ॥

पवानां लक्षहोगेन चृतात्कानां हुताशेन ।

प्राप्नोति निर्विल्ठं मोक्षं सिध्यत्वेन व संशया: ॥ 4 4 ॥

Then one's life will be lengthened, no disease will occur, and wealth and prosperity will be obtained. If it be done this way, success is surely attained within three months, six months or at the end of one year. If the Homa (offering oblations to the fire) be offered one lakh times with lotuses besmeared with ghee (clarified butter), Mokṣa (liberation) is attained.

मंत्रसिद्धि विना कर्तुँर्षेभ्यादिका: क्रिया: ।

कांये वा यदि वा मोक्षः सर्वे नरिष्कलं भवेत् ॥ 4 5 ॥

पंचिर्यगतिराक्षेण दर्शना क्षीरग वा हुतात् ।

स्ववेहे सिध्यते जंतुमहर्शिणां मतं यथा ॥ 46 ॥

If, before the Mantra-Siddhi, or the success in realising the Mantra, is attained, one performs Japam or Homan for Kāmya Siddhi (to get certain desires) or mokṣa, then all his actions become useless. If anybody performs twenty-five lakh Homas by curd and milk, be gets success (Siddhi) in this very birth. So all the Maharsis say.

अष्टाणयोपासिद्धाच च नर: प्राप्नोति यत्कलम् ।

तत्कर्तं सिद्धिमाप्नोति नात कार्या विचारणा ॥ 47 ॥

गत्तो वाचि सत्रणतो च आहारं निवतं चेत्त।

चणमासात्य सिद्धि: त्यादुगुभफित्ततः सदा ॥ 48 ॥

By this the same result is attained that is got by the aforesaid means, i.e., by the eight-limbed Yoga, whereby the Yogis become perfect. He will attain Siddhi if he be devoted to his Guru and keep himself under restraint for six months only (i.e., practise Samyama) as regards taking food, etc.,

whether he be incapable or his mind be attached to other sensual objects.

एकाई पंचग्यागी चैकाई माफ्ताग्नः ।

एकाई ब्राङ्णगाङ्गी गायजीजपकूद्वेत् ॥ 49 ॥

स्नाता रंगादितिधेंषु शगर्मतजैले जपेत् ।

शतेनापस्ततः पीत्वा सर्वधारये: प्रमुच्यते ॥ 50 ॥

One should drink Pañcagavya (cow-urine, cow-dung, milk, curd, ghee) one day, fast one day, take Brāhmaṇa's food one day and be mindful in repeating the Gāyatrī. First bathe in the Ganges or in other sacred places and while in water repeat one hundred Gāyatrīs. If one drinks water on which one hundred Gāyatrīs are repeated, one is freed from all one's sins.

चांग्रवाणादि कृष्ण्यस्य फलं प्राप्नोति निश्रितम् ।

राजा वा यदि व शिवसपः कुयान्वके गृहे ॥ 51 ॥

गृहस्यो ब्रह्मचारी वा वान्यस्यो३ घवापि च ।

अधिकारपत्चेने फलं च्यातिवृद्विकम् ॥ 52 ॥

श्रीतस्मार्त्रिदिकं कर्म क्रिवते मोक्षाक्रांक्षिभि: ।

He gets the fruit of performing the Krcchra vrata, the Cāndrāyana vrata and others. Be he a Kṣattriya King, or a Brāhmaṇa, if he is to remain in his own house, hold Śāśrama and be engaged in performing Tapasyā then he will be certainly freed of all his sins. Be he a house holder or a Brahmacārī or Vānaprasthī, he should perform sacrifices, etc., according to his Adhikāra (or his rights) and he will get fruits according to his desires.

सार्फिकक्ष सदाचारो विद्धिद्धि सुर्गिश्रितः ॥ 53 ॥

ततः कुर्यात्रयनेन फललुलेदाक्रविधिः ।

शिक्षात्रं शुद्धप्रभीवाद्यौ प्रासान्वयं भुजेत् ॥ 54 ॥

एवं पुरुषरूपांक कृत्वा मंत्रसिद्धावानुवान् ।

The Sāgnik man (who keeps the Holy Fire) and other persons of good conduct and of learning and of good education should perform actions as prescribed in the Vedas and Smṛtis with a desire to attain Mokṣa. Thus one should eat fruits and vegetables and and water or take eight mouthfuls of Bhikṣāāna (the food got by begging). If the Puraścarānam be performed this way, then the Mantra Siddhi is obtained.

Book XI Chapter XXII

तच्छुत्वपि च पुण्यानां महतीं सिद्धिमानुपयात् ॥ 55 ॥

ज्ञि श्रीमदैभीगपावते मालुगुर्णो एकावशास्कन्मे

एकविशो3ध्यायः ॥ 56॥

O Nārada ! If the Purāscaraṇam be done with the mantra thus, his poverty is removed entirely. What more shall I say than this that if anybody

hears this simply, his merits get increased and he attains great success.

Here ends the Twenty first Chapter of the Eleventh Book on Gāyatri Purascaraṇam in the Mahāpurāṇaṃ Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

