[Ch 5 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rşis said: “O Sūta! Our minds are merged in the sea of doubt, hearing your this most wonderful saying, surprising to the whole world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣis said :-- “O Sūta! Our minds are merged in the sea of doubt, hearing your this most wonderful saying, surprising to the whole world.

[Ch 5 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The head of Janārdana Mādhava, the Lord of all, was severed out of His body! And He was afterwards known as Hayagriva, the horse-faced! Oh! what more wonder can there be than this?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The head of Janārdan Mādhava, the Lord of all, was severed out of His body! And He was afterwards known as Hayagrīva, the horse-faced! Oh! what more wonder can there be than this?

[Ch 5 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whom the Vedas even praise, all the Devas rest on Whom, Who is the Cause of all causes, the Ādi Deva Jagannātha (the Lord of the universe), Oh! how is it that His head came to be severed! O, highly intelligent one! Describe all this in detail."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whom the Vedas even praise, all the Devas rest on Whom, Who is the Cause of all causes, the Ādi Deva Jagannath (the Lord of the universe), Oh! how is it that His head came to be severed! O highly intelligent one! Describe all this to me in detail”.

[Ch 5 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: “O Munis! Hear all attentively the glorious deeds of the supremely energetic Viṣṇu, the Deva of the Devas. Once upon a time the eternal Deva Janārdana became tired after the terrible continuous battle for ten thousand years.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- O Munis! Hear all attentively the glorious deeds of the supremely energetic Viṣṇu, the Deva of the Devas. Once on a time the eternal Deva Janārdana became tired after the terrible continuous battle for ten thousand years.

[Ch 5 Verse 7-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After this the Lord Nārāyaṇa seated Himself on Padmāsana (a kind of posture) in some lonely place on a level plot of ground and placing his head on the front of his bow with the bow strung and placed erect on the ground fell fast asleep. Viṣṇu, the Lord of Ramā, was exceedingly tired and thus he fell soon into deep sleep. At this time, Indra and the other Devas, with Brahmā and Maheṣā began a sacrifice.
NEW CORR ENG ──► After this the Lord Nārāyana seated Himself on Padmāsan (a kind of posture) in some lovely place on a level plot of ground and placing his head on the front of his bow with the bow strung and placed erect on the ground fell fast asleep. Viṣṇu, the Lord of Ramā, was exceedingly tired and thus he fell soon into deep sleep. At this time Indra and the other Devas, with Brahmā and Maheṣā began a sacrifice.

[Ch 5 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then they, for the sake of success in Deva's work, went to the region of Vaikuntha to meet with the Deva Janārdana, the Lord of sacrifices. There, the Devas, not finding Viṣṇu, came to know by their Dhyāna (meditation) where Bhagvān Viṣṇu was staying and thither they went.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then they, for the sake of success in Deva’s well, went to the region of Vaikuṇṭha to meet with the Deva Janārdana, the Lord of sacrifices. There the Devas, not finding Viṣṇu, came to know by their Dhyān (meditation) where Bhagavān Viṣṇu was staying and thither they went.

[Ch 5 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They saw that Lord Viṣṇu, the Deva of the Devas was lying unconscious, being under the arms of Yoganiḍrā (the yogic sleep).
NEW CORR ENG ──► They saw that the Lord Viṣṇu, the Deva of the Devas was lying unconscious, being under the arms of Yoganidrā (the yogic sleep).

[Ch 5 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, they took their seats there. Seeing the Lord of the universe asleep, Brahmā, Rudra and the other Devas became anxious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore they took their seats there. Seeing the Lord of the universe asleep, Brahmā, Rudra and the other Devas became anxious.

[Ch 5 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra then addressed the Devas: “O best of the Suras! Now what is to be done! How shall we awaken Bhagavān from His sleep? Now think of the means by which this can be effected.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra then addressed the Devas :--“O best of the Suras! Now what is to be done! How shall we rouse Bhagavān from His sleep? Now think of the means by which this can be effected”.

[Ch 5 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing Indra's words Śambhu said: "O good Devas! Now we must finish our sacrificial work. But if the sleep of Bhagavān be disturbed, He would get angry."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing Indra’s words Śambhu said :-- “O good Devas! Now we must finish our sacrificial work. But if the sleep of Bhagavān be disturbed, He would get angry.”

[Ch 5 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing Śaṅkara's words, Paramesṭhī Brahmā created Vamrī insects (a sort of white ants) so that they might eat up the forepart of the bow that was lying on the ground causing the other end rise up and thus break His sleep.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing Śaṅkara’s words, Parameṣṭhī Brahmā created Vamrī insects (a sort of white ants) so that they might eat up the forepart of the bow that was lying on the ground causing the other end rise up and thus break His sleep.

[Ch 5 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus the Deva's purpose will, no doubt, be fulfilled. Thus settling his mind, the eternal Deva Brahmā ordered the white ants Vamris to cut the bow string.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the Deva’s purpose will, no doubt, be fulfilled. Thus settling his mind, the eternal Deva Brahmā ordered the white ants Vamrīs to cut the bow string.

[Ch 5 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this order of Brahmā, Vamrī spoke to Brahmā, thus: “O Brahman! How can I disturb the sleep of the Devadeva, Lord of Lakṣmī, the World Guru?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this order of Brahmā, Vamrī spoke to Brahmā, thus :-- “O Brahmān! How can I disturb the sleep of the Devadeva, Lord of Lakṣmī, the World Guru?

[Ch 5 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► To rouse one from one's deep sleep, to interrupt one in one's speech, to sever love between husband and wife, to separate a child from one's mother, all these are equivalent to Brahmahatya (murdering a Brāhmaṇa).
NEW CORR ENG ──► To rouse one from one’s deep sleep, to interrupt one in one’s speech, to sever the love between a couple husband and wife, to separate a child from one’s mother, all these are equivalent to Brahmāhatyā (murdering a Brahmān).

[Ch 5 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Deva! how can I interrupt the happiness of sleep of the Devadeva? And what benefit shall I derive by eating the bowstring, so that I may incur this vicious act? But a man can commit a sin if there be any interest of his; I am ready to eat this, if I get a personal interest.'
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Deva! how can I interrupt the happiness of sleep of the Devadeva? And what benefit shall I derive by eating the bowstring, so that I may iñcur this vicious act? But a man can commit a sin if there be any interest of his; I am ready to eat this, if I get a personal interest”.

[Ch 5 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā said: We will give you, too, share in this our Yajñā sacrifice) so hear me; do our work and rouse Viṣṇu from His sleep.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā said :-- We will give you, too, share in this our Yajña (sacrifice); so hear me; do our work and rouse Viṣṇu from His sleep.

[Ch 5 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► During the time of performing Homa whatever ghee will fall outside the Homa-Kuṇḍa (the sacrificial pit) will fall to your share; so be quick and do this."
NEW CORR ENG ──► During the time of performing Homa whatever ghee will fall outside the Homa-Kund (the sacrificial pit) will fall to your share; so be quick and do this.

[Ch 5 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūtā said: Thus ordered by Brahmā, the Vamri insect soon ate away the fore end of the bow that rested on the ground.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Thus ordered by Brahmā, the Vamrī insect soon ate away the fore end of the bow that rested on the ground.

[Ch 5 Verse 26-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Immediately the string gave way and the bow went up; the other end became free and a terrible sound took place. The Devas became afraid; the whole universe got agitated; the earth trembled. The sea became swollen; the aquatic animals became startled; violent wind blew; the mountains shook; ominous meteors fell.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Immediately the string gave way and the bow went up; the other end became free and a terrible sound took place. The Devas bcame afraid; the whole universe got agitated; the earth trembled. The sea became swollen; the aquatic animals became startled; violent wind blew; the mountains shook; ominous meteors fell.

[Ch 5 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O ascetics! while the Devas were thus cogitating, the head with crown on it of the Devadeva Visnu vanished away; no body knew where it fell.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O ascetics! while the Devas were thus cogitating, the head with crown on it of the Devadeva Viṣṇu vanished away ; no body knew where it fell.

[Ch 5 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the awful darkness disappeared, Brahma and Mahadeva saw the disfigured body of Vishu with its head off.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the awful darkness disappeared, Brahmā and Mahādeva saw the disfigured body of Viṣṇu with its head off.

[Ch 5 Verse 32-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing that headless figure of Viṣṇu they were greatly surprised; they were drowned in the ocean of cares and, overwhelmed with grief, began to weep aloud O Lord! O Master! O Devadeva! O Eternal one! what unforeseen extraordinary mishap occurred to us today! O Deva! Thou canst not be pierced nor cut asunder, nor capable of being burnt; how is it then that Thy head has been taken away! Is this the Māyā (magic) of some Deva? O all pervading one!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing that headless figure of Viṣṇu they were greatly surprised; they were drowned in the ocean of cares and, overwhelmed with grief, began to weep aloud. O Lord! O Master! O Devadeva! O Eternal one! what unforeseen extraordinary mishap occurred to us to-day! O Deva! Thou canst not be pierced nor cut asunder, nor capable of being burnt; how is it then that Thy head has been taken away! Is this the Māyā (majic) of some. Deva? O all pervading one!

[Ch 5 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas cannot live when Thy condition is thus; we do not know what affection dost Thou have towards us. We are crying because of our selfish ends; perhaps this therefore has occurred. The Daityas, Yakṣas, or Rākṣasas have not done this; O Lord of Lakṣmī! Whose fault will we ascribe this to? The Devas themselves have committed this loss to themselves!
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas cannot live when Thy condition is thus; we do not know what affection dost Thou have towards us. We are crying because of our selfish ends; perhaps this therefore has occurred. The Daityas, Yakṣas, or Rākhṣasas have not done this; O Lord of Laksmī! Whose fault will we ascribe this to? The Devas themselves have committed this loss to themselves?

[Ch 5 Verse 37-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the Devas! The Devas are now dependent! They are under Thee. Now where are we to go? What are we to do? There is none to save the dull stupid Devas! At this juncture, seeing Śiva and the other Devas crying, Brhaşpati, supremely versed in the Vedas, consoled them thus: O highly fortunate one! what use there will be in thus crying and repenting? it ought you now to consider the means that you should adopt to redress your calamities. O Lord of the Devas! Fate and one's own exertion and intelligence are equal; if the success come not through Fate (luck or chance) one is certainly to show one's prowess and merit.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the Devas! The Devas are. now dependent! They are under Thee. Now where are we to go? What are we to do? There is none to save the dull stupid Devas! At this juncture, seeing Śiva and the other Devas crying, Brihaspati, supremely versed in the Vedas, consoled them thus :-- “O highly fortunate one! what use there will be in thus crying and repenting? it ought you now to consider the means that you should adopt to redress your calamities. O Lord of the Devas! Fate and one’s own exertion and intelligence are equal; if the success comes not through Fate (Luck or chance) one is certainly to show one’s prowess and merit”.

[Ch 5 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra said: Fie to your exertion when, before our eyes, the head of Bhagavān Viṣṇu Himself has been carried off! Fie, Fie to your prowess and intelligence! Fate is in my opinion, the supreme.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra said :-- Fie to your exertion when, before our eyes, the head of Bhagavān Viṣṇu Himself has been carried off! Fie, Fie to your prowess and intelligence! Fate is in my opinion, the supreme.

[Ch 5 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā said: Whatever, auspicious or inauspicious, is ordained by Daiva (Fate), everyone must bear that; no one can go beyond the Daiva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā said :-- Whatever, auspicious or inauspicious, is ordained Daiva (Fate), every one must bear that; no one can go beyond the Daiva.

[Ch 5 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When one has taken up a body, one must experience pleasure and pain; there is no manner of doubt in this. See, in long-past days, by the irony fo Fate, Śambhu severed my head.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When one has taken up a body, one must experience pleasure and pain; there is no manner of doubt in this. See, in long-past days, by the irony of Fate, Śambhu severed my head;

[Ch 5 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► His generative organ, too, dropped down through curse. Similarly, Hari's head has, today, fallen into the salt ocean.
NEW CORR ENG ──► His generative organ, too, dropped down through curse. Similarly Hari’s head has, to-day, fallen into the salt ocean.

[Ch 5 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► By the influence of time, Indr., the Lord of Śacī, had thousand genital marks over his body, was expelled from Heaven and had to live in the Mānas sarovar in the lotuses and had to suffer many other miseries.
NEW CORR ENG ──► By the influence of time, Indra, the Lord of Sachi, had thousand genital marks over his body, was expelled from Heaven and had to live in the Mānas sarovar in the lotuses and had to suffer many other miseries.

[Ch 5 Verse 47-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Glorious ones! When such personages have suffered pains, then who else is there in the world, that does not suffer! so, you all cease sorrows and meditate on the Eternal Mahāmāyā; who is the Mother of all, who is the supporter of all, who is of the nature of Brahmavidyā (the Supreme Knowledge) and who is beyond the Gunas, who is the Prime Prakṛti, and who pervades the three Lokas, the whole universe, moving and unmoving; She will dispense our welfare.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Glorious ones! When such personages have suffered pains, then who else is there in the world, that dues not suffer! so you all cease sorrows and meditate on the Eternal Mahāmāyā; who is the Mother of all, who is supporter of all, who is of the nature of Brahmāvidyā (the Supreme Knowledge) and who is beyond the Gunas, who is the Prime Prākriti, and who pervades the three Lokas, the whole universe, moving and unmoving; She will dispense our welfare.

[Ch 5 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta then said: Thus saying to the Devas Brahmā ordered all the Vedas, that were incarnate there in their forms, for the successful issue of the Deva's work.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Thus saying to the Devas, Brahmā ordered all the Vedas, that were incarnate there in their forms, for the successful issue of the Deva’s work.

[Ch 5 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā said: “O Vedas! Now go on and chant hymns to the Sacred Eternal Highest Devi Mahāmāyā, who is Brahmavidyā, who brings all actions to their successful issues, who is hidden in all forms.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā said :-- “OVedas! Now go on and chant hymns to the Sacred Highest Devī Mahāmāyā, who is Brahmāvidyā, who brings all issues to their successful issues, who is hidden in all forms.”

[Ch 5 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing His words, the all-beautiful Vedas began to chant hymns to Mahāmāyā who can be comprehended by Jñāna, and who pervades the world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing His words, the all-beautiful Vedas began to chant hymns to Mahāmāyā who can be comprehended by Jñān, and who pervades the world.

[Ch 5 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Vedas said: “Obeisance to the Devi! to the Mahāmāya! to the Auspicious One! to the Creatrix of the Universe! We bow down to Thee, who is beyond the Gunas, the Ruler of all the Beings!
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Vedas said :-- Obeisance to the Devī! to the Mahāmāyā! to the Auspicious One! to the Creatrix of the Universe! We bow down to Thee, who is beyond the Gunas, the Ruler of all the Beings!

[Ch 5 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! Thou givest to Śaṅkara even His desires. Thou art the receptacle of all the things; Thou art the Prāna of all the living beings; Thou art Buddhī, Lakṣmī (wealth), Śobhā, Kṣamā (forgiveness), Śānti (peace); Śraddhā (faith), Medhā (intellect), Dhṛti (fortitude), and Smṛti (recollection).
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! Thou givest to Śaṅkara even His desires. Thou art the receptacle of all the things; Thou art the Prāṇa of all the living beings; Thou art Buddhi, Lakṣmī (wealth), Śobhā, Kśhamā (forgiveness), Śānti (peace), Sraddhā (faith), Medhā (intellect), Dhriti (fortitude), and Smriti (recollection).

[Ch 5 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou art the Bindu (m) over the Pranava (om) and thou art of the nature of semi-moon; Thou art Gāyatri; Thou art Vyārthiti; Thou art Jayā, Vijayā, Dhātri (the supportress) Lajjā (modesty) Kirti (fame); Icchā (will) and Dayā (mercy) in all beings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thou art the vindu (ṃ) over the Prānava (om) and thou art of the nature of semi-moon; Thou art Gāyattri, Thou art Vyārhiti; Thou art Jayā, Vijayā, Dhātri (the supportress), Lajjā (modesty), Kīrti (fame), Iccā (will) and Dayā (mercy) in all beings.

[Ch 5 Verse 56-57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! Thou art the nerciful Mother of the three worlds, Thou art the adorable auspicious Vidyā (knowledge) benefit ing all the lokas; Thou destroyest the Universe and Thou skilfully resisted (hidden) in the Bija mantras. Therefore, we are praising Thee. O Mother! Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Indra, Sūrya, Fire, Sarasvatī and other regents of the Universe are all Thy creation; so none of them is superior to Thee. Thou art the Mother of all the things, moving and non-moving.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! Thou art the merciful Mother of the three worlds; Thou art the adorable auspicious Vidyā (knowledge) benefitting all the Lokas; Thou destroyest the Universe and Thou skilfully residest (hidden) in the Vīja mantras. Therefore we are praising Thee. O Mother! Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Indra, Sūrya, Fire, Sarasvatī and other Regents of the Universe are all Thy creation; so none of them is superior to Thee. Thou art the Mother of all the things, moving and non-moving.

[Ch 5 Verse 58-59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! When Thou dost will to create this visible Universe, Thou createst first Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara and makest them create, preserve and destroy this universe; but Thou remainest quite unattached to the world. Ever Thou remainest constant in Thy one form.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother ! When Thou dost will to create this visible Universe, Thou createst first Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara and makest them create, preserve and destroy this universe; but Thou remainest quite unattached to the world. Ever Thou remainest constant in Thy one form.

[Ch 5 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No one in this Universe is able to know Thy nature; nor there is any body who can enumerate Thy names. How can he promise to jump across the illimitable ocean, who can not jump across an ordinary well.
NEW CORR ENG ──► No one in this Universe is able to know Thy nature; nor there is any body who can enumerate Thy names. How can he promise to jump across the illimitable ocean, who cannot jump across an ordinary well.

[Ch 5 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Bhagavati! No one amongst the Devas even knows particularly Thy endless power and glory. Thou art alone the Lady of the Universe and the Mother of the world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Bhagavatī! No one amongst the Devas even knows particularly Thy endless power and glory. Thou art alone the Lady of the Universe and the Mother of the world.

[Ch 5 Verse 62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Vedas all bear testimony how thou alone hast created all this unreal and fleeting universe. O Devi! Thou without any effort and having no desires hast become the cause of this visible world, Śrimaddevibbāgavatam thyself remaining unchanged. This is a great wonder. We cannot conceive this combination of contrary varieties in one. O Mother! How can we understand thy power, unknown to all the Vedas even, when thou thyself dost not know thy nature! We are bewildered at this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Vedas all bear testimony how thou alone hast created all this unreal and fleeting universe. O Devī! Thou without any effort and having no desires hast become the cause of this visible world, thyself remaining unchanged. This is a great wonder. We cannot conceive this combination of contrary varieties in one. O Mother! How can we understand thy power, unknown to all the Vedas even, when thou thyself dost not know thy nature! We are bewildered at this.

[Ch 5 Verse 63-64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! It is that thou dost know nothing about the falling off of the Viṣṇu's head! Or knowingly thou wanted to examine Viṣṇu's prowess. Is it that Hari incurred any heinous sin. How can that be! Where is sin to thy followers who serve Thee! O Mother! Why art Thou so much indifferent to the Devas! It is a great wonder that the head of Viṣṇu is severed! Really, we are merged in great misfortunes. Thou art clever in removing the sorrows of Thy devotees. Why art Thou delaying in fixing again the head on Viṣṇu's body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! It is that thou dost know nothing about the falling off of the Viṣṇu’s head! Or knowingly thou wanted to examine Viṣṇu’s prowess. Is it that Hari iñcurred any heinous sin. How can that be! Where is sin to thy followers who serve Thee! O Mother! Why art Thou so much indifferent to the Devas! It is a great wonder that the head of Viṣṇu is severed! Really, we are merged in great misfortunes. Thou art clever in removing the sorrows of Thy devotees. Why art Thou delaying in fixing again the head on Viṣṇu’s body.

[Ch 5 Verse 65-66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devi! Is it that Thou taking offence on the gods hast cast that on Viṣṇu! or was it that Viṣṇu became proud and to curb that, Thou hast played thus! or is it that the Daityas, having suffered defeat from Viṣṇu went and practised severe tapasyā in some beautiful holy place, and have got some boons; and so Viṣṇu's head has thus fallen off! Or is it, O Bhagavati! that Thou wert very eagerly interested to see Viṣṇu's headless body and, therefore, Thou hast seen thus! O Prime Force! Is it that Thou art angry on the daughter of the Sindhu (ocean); Lakṣmī Devī! Else, why hast Thou deprived Her of Her husband? Lakṣmī is born as a part of Thine; So Thou oughtst to forgive Her offence. Therefore dost Thou gladden Her by giving back Her husband's life.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devī! Is it that Thou taking offence on the gods hast cast that on Viṣṇu! or was it that Viṣṇu became proud and to curb that, Thou hast played thus! or is it that the Daityas, having suffered defeat from Viṣṇu went and practised severe tapasya in some beautiful holy place, and have got some boons; and so Viṣṇu’s head has thus fallen off! Or is it, O Bhagavatī! that Thou wert very eagerly interested to see Viṣṇu’s headless body and therefore Thou hast seen thus! O Prime Force! Is it that Thou art angry on the daughter of the Sindhu (ocean); Laksmī Devī! Else, why hast Thou deprived Her of Her husband? Laksmī is born as a part of Thine; So Thou oughtest to forgive Her offence. Therefore dost Thou gladden Her by giving back Her husband’s life.

[Ch 5 Verse 67]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The principal Devas, engaged in Thy service, always makes their praṇāmas (bow down) to Thee; O Devi! Beest Thou kind enough and make alive the Deva Viṣṇu, the Lord of all and crossest us across this ocean of sorrows. O Mother! We cannot make out anything whatsoever where Hari's head has gone.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The principal Devas, engaged in Thy service, always make their Prānams (bow down) to Thee; O Devī! Beest Thou kind enough and make alive the Deva Viṣṇu, the Lord of all and crossest us across this ocean of sorrows. O Mother! We cannot make out anything whatsoever where Hari’s head has gone.

[Ch 5 Verse 68]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We have no other protectress than Thee who canst give back His life? O Devi Thou give life to the whole world as the nectar gives life to all the Devas."
NEW CORR ENG ──► We have no other protectress than Thee who canst give back His life? O Devī! Dost Thou give life to the whole world as the nectar gives life to all the Devas.

[Ch 5 Verse 69]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Süta said: Thus praised by the Vedas with their Angas, with Sāmagānas (the songs from the Sāma Veda), the Nirgunā Maheśvari Devī Mahāmāyā became pleased.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Thus praised by the Vedas with their Aṅgas, with Sāmagānas (the songs from the Sāma Veda), the Nirguṇā Maheśvari Devī Mahāmāyā became pleased.

[Ch 5 Verse 70-71]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the auspicious voice came to them from the Heavens, gladdening all, and pleasing to the ears though no form was seen: "O Suras! Do not care anything about it; you are immortal (what fear can you have ?) Come to your senses. I am very much pleased by the praise sung by the Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the auspicious voice came to them from the Heavens, gladdening all, and pleasing to the ears though no form was seen: “O Suras! Do not care anything about it; you are immortal (what fear can you have?) Come to your senses. I am very much pleased by the praise sung by the Vedas.

[Ch 5 Verse 72]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There is no doubt in this. Amongst men, whoever will read this my stotra with devotion, will get all what he desires.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There is no doubt in this. Amongst men, whoever will read this My stotra with devotion, will get all what he desires.

[Ch 5 Verse 73]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whoever will hear this: devotedly, during the three Sandhyās, will be freed from troubles and become happy. When this stotra has been sung by the Vedas, it is equivalent to the Vedas."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whoever will hear this devotedly, during the three Sandhyas, will lie freed from troubles and become happy. When this stotra has been sung by the Vedas, it is equivalent to the Vedas.

[Ch 5 Verse 74-75]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Does anything take place in this world without any cause? Now hear why Hari's head was cut off. Once upon a time, seeing the beautiful face of His dear wife Lakṣmī Devī, Hari laughed in presence of Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Does anything take place in this world without any cause? Now hear why Hari’s head was cut off. Once on a time, seeing the beautiful face of His dear wife Laksmī Devī, Hari laughed in presence of Her.

[Ch 5 Verse 76-77]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this Lakṣmī Devi came to understand that "He has seen surely something ugly in my face and, therefore, He laughed; otherwise why my Husband would laugh a: seeing me. But what reason can there be to see ugliness in my face after so long a time. And why shall He laugh without seeing something ugly, without any cause. Or it may be, He has made some other beautiful woman as my co-wife."
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this Laksmī Devī came to understand that “He has seen surely something ugly in my face and therefore He laughed; otherwise why my Husband would laugh at seeing me. But what reason can there be as to see ugliness in my face after so long a time. And why shall He laugh without seeing something ugly, without any cause. Or it may be, He has made some other beautiful woman as my co-wife”.

[Ch 5 Verse 78-81]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus arguing variously in her mind, Mahā Lakṣmī gradually got angry and Tamo guna slowly possessed Her. Then, by turn of Fate, in order that gods' work might be completed, very fierce Tamas Śakti entered into her body. She got very angry and slowly said; "Let Thy head fall off". Thus, owing to feminine nature and the destiny of Bhagavān, Lakṣmī cursed without any thought of good or bad, causing Her own suffering.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus arguing variously in her mind, Mahā Laksmī gradually got angry and Tamo guna slowly possessed Her. Then, by turn of Fate, in order that god’s work might be completed, very fierce Tamas Sakti entered into Her body. She got very angry and slowly said :-- “Let Thy head fall off”. Thus, owing to feminine nature and the destiny of Bhagvan, Laksmī cursed without any thought of good or bad, causing Her own suffering.

[Ch 5 Verse 82]
OLD OCR ENG ──► By the Tamasī Śakti possessing Her, she thought that having a co-wife would be more painful than Her widowhood and thus she cursed Him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► By the Tāmasī Śakti possessing Her, she thought that a co-wife would be more painful than Her widowhood and thus She cursed Him.

[Ch 5 Verse 83-84]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Falsehood, vain boldness, craftiness, stupidity, impatience, over-greediness, impurity, and harshness are the natural qualities of women. Owing to that curse, the head of Vāsudeva has fallen into the salt ocean. Now I will fix the head on His body as before.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Falsehood, vain boldness, craftiness, stupidity, impatience, over-greediness, impurity, and harshness are the natural qualities of women. Owing to that curse, the head of Vasudeva has fallen into the salt ocean. Now I will fix the head on His body as before.

[Ch 5 Verse 85]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sura Sattamas! There is another cause, also, regarding this affair. That will bring you great success.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sura Sattamas! There is another cause, also, regarding this affair. That will bring you great success.

[Ch 5 Verse 86]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In ancient days a famous Daitya, named Hayagrīva practised severe tapasyā on the bank of the Sarasvātī river.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In ancient days a famous Daitya, named Hayagrīva practised severe tapasya on the bank of the Sarasvatī river.

[Ch 5 Verse 87-88]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “Abandoning all sorts of enjoyments, with control over his senses and without any food, the Daitya did Japam of (repeated) one syllabled Māyā-Bija-mantra and, meditating the form of the Tāmasī Sākti of Mine, adorned with all ornaments, practised very terrible austerities for one thousand years.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Abandoning all sorts of enjoyments, with control over his senses and without any food, the Daitya did Japam of the (repeated) one syllabled Māyā-Vija-mantra and, meditating the form of the Utmost Sakti of Mine, adorned with all ornaments, practised very terrible austerities for one thousand years.

[Ch 5 Verse 89]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I, too, went to the place of austerities in My Tāmasī form, meditated by the Daitya and appeared before him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I, too, went to the place of austerities in My Tāmasī form, meditated by the Daitya and appeared before him.

[Ch 5 Verse 90]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There, seated on the lion's back, feeling compassion for his tapasya I spoke to him: "O glorious One! O one of good vows! I have come to grant boon to Thee!"
NEW CORR ENG ──► There, seated on the lion’s back, feeling compassion for his tapasya I spoke to him :-- “O glorious One! O one of good vows! I have come to grant boon to Thee!”

[Ch 5 Verse 91-92]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing the words of the Devi, the Daitya instantly got up and falling down with devotion at Her feet, circumambulated Her. Looking at My form, his large eyes became cheerful with feelings of love and filled with tears; shedding tears, then, he began to chant hymns to Me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing the words of the Devī, the Daitya instantly got up and falling down with devotion at Her feet, circumambulated Her. Looking at My form, his large eyes became cheerful with feelings of love and filled with tears; shedding tears, then, he began to chant hymns to Me.

[Ch 5 Verse 93]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hayagrīva said: “Obeisance to the Devi Mahāmāye! I bow down to Thee, the Creatrix, the Preserver, and the Destructrix of the universe!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hayagrīva said :-- “Obeisance to the Devī Mahāmaye! I bow down to Thee, the Creatrix, the Preserver, and the Destructrix of the universe!

[Ch 5 Verse 94]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Skilled in shewing favour to Thy devotees! Giver of the devotee's desires! Obeisance to Thee! O Thou, the giver of liberation! O Thou! The auspicious one! I bow down to Thee. Thou art the cause of the five elements—earth, water, fire, air, and Ākāśa! Thou art the cause of form, taste, smell, sound and touch.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Skilled in shewing favour to Thy devotees! Giver of the devotee’s desires! Obeisance to Thee! O Thou, the giver of liberation! O Thou! The auspicious one! I bow down to Thee. Thou art the cause of the five elements -- earth, water, fire, air, and Akasa! Thou art the cause of form, taste, smell, sound and touch.

[Ch 5 Verse 95]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O, Maheśvarī! the five Jñāneendriyas (organs of perception) eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and skin and the five organs of action Kamrendriyas: hands, feet, speech, arms, and the organ of generation are all created by Thee."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Maheśvari! the five jñānendriyas (organs of perception) eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and skin and the five organs of action Karmendriyas :-- hands, feet, speech, arms, and the organ of generation are all created by Thee.

[Ch 5 Verse 96]
OLD OCR ENG ──► ‘The Devi said: “O child! I am very much satisfied with your wonderful tapasyā and devotion. Now say what boon do you want. I will give you the boon that you desire.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī said :-- “O child! I am very much satisfied with your wonderful tapasya and devotion. Now say what boon do you want. I will give you the boon that you desire”.

[Ch 5 Verse 97]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hayagriva said: “O Mother! grant me that boon by which death will not come to me, and I shall be invincible by the Suras and Asuras, I may be a Yogi and immortal.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hayagrīva said ;-- “O Mother! grant me that boon by which death will not come to me, and I be invincible by the Suras and Asuras, I may be a Yogi and immortal”.

[Ch 5 Verse 98-99]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi said: “Death brings in birth and birth brings in death; this is inevitable. This order of things is extant in this world; never its violation takes place. Obest of the Rākṣasas! Thus knowing death sure, think in your mind and ask another boon."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī said :-- “ Death brings in birth and birth brings in death; this is inevitable.” This order of things is extant in this world; never its violation takes place. O best of the Rākṣasas! Thus knowing death sure, think in your mind and ask another boon.

[Ch 5 Verse 100]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hayagriva said: “O Mcther of the universe! If it be that Thou art not willing at all to grant me immortality, then grant me this boon that my death may not occur from any o:her than from one who is horse-faced. Be merciful and grant me this boon that I desire.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hayagrīva said: -- “O Mother of the universe! If it be that Thou art not willing at all to grant me immortality, then grant me this boon that my death may not occur from any other than from one who is horse-faced. Be merciful and grant me this boon that I desire.”

[Ch 5 Verse 101]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O highly fortunate one: “Go home and govern your kingdom at your ease; death won’t occur to you from any other beings then from one who is horse-faced.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O highly fortunate one! “Go home and govern your kingdom at your ease; death won’t occur to you from any other beings then from one who is horse-faced.”

[Ch 5 Verse 102-104]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus granting the boon, the Devi vanished. Becoming very glad on getting this boon, Hayagriva went to his residence. Since then the wicked Daitya is troubling very much all the Devas and Munis. There is none in the three worlds to kill him. So let Viśvakarmā take a horse's head and fix it on the headless body of Viṣṇu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus granting the boon, the Devī vanished. Becoming very glad on getting this boon, Hayagrīva went to his residence. Since then the wicked Daitya is troubling very much all the Devas and Munis. There is none in the three worlds to kill him. So let Visvakarmā take a horse’s head and fix it on the headless body of Visnu.

[Ch 5 Verse 105]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Bhagavān Hayagrīva will slay the vicious wicked Asura, for the good of the Devas.'
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Bhagavān Hayagrīva will slay the vicious wicked Asura, for the good of the Devas”.

[Ch 5 Verse 106]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: “Thus speaking to the Devas, Bhagavati Śarvānī remained silent.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Thus speaking to the Devas, Bhagavatī Śarvānī remained silent.

[Ch 5 Verse 107]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas became very glad and spoke this to Viśvakarmā: “Kindly do this Deva work and fix Viṣṇu’s head. He will become Hayagriva and kill the indomitable Dānava.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas became very glad and spoke this to Visvakarmā :-- “Kindly do this Deva work and fix Visnu’s head. He will become Hayagrīva and kill the indomitable Dānava.”

[Ch 5 Verse 108-109]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: Hearing these words, Viśvakarmā quickly cut off with his axe, the head of a horse, brought it before the Devas and fixed it on the headless boy of Viṣṇu. By the grace of Mahāmāyā, Bhagavān became horse-faced or Hayagriva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Hearing these words, Visvakarmā quickly cut off with his axe, the head of a horse, brought it before the Devas and fixed it on the headless body of Visnu. By the grace of Mahāmāyā, Bhagavān became horse-faced or Hayagrīva.

[Ch 5 Verse 110-112]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then, a few days after, Bhagavān Hayagrīva killed that proud Dānava, the Deva's enemy, by sheer force. Any man, hearing this excellent anecdote, becomes freed, certainly of all sorts of difficulties. Hearing or reading Mahāmāyā's glorious deeds, pure and sin destroying, gives all sorts of wealth." Thus ends the Fifth Chapter of the First Book on the description of the narrative of Hayagrīva in the Mahā Purāna Śrimadāvevībhagavatam of 18,000 verses.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then, a few days after, Bhagavān. Hayagrīva killed that proud Dānava, the Deva’s enemy, by sheer force. Any man, hearing this excellent anecdote, becomes freed, certainly of all sorts of difficulties. Hearing or reading Mahāmāyā’s glorious deeds, pure and sin destroying, gives all sorts of wealth. Thus ends the fifth chapter of the first Skandha on the description of the narrative of Hayagrīva in the Mahā Purāṇa Śrimad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.
