CHAPTER V

On the Narrative of Hayagriva

སྐྱོབ་ཆུང་

सुतास्माके मनः कामं मनः संशयसागरे ।

यथोकतं महाद्धार्थं जगाध्रिस्याककाम् ॥ १ ॥

The Rşis said: “O Sūta! Our minds are merged in the sea of doubt, hearing your this most wonderful saying, surprising to the whole world.

यन्मूद्रों माधवस्यापि गते देहात्युनः परम् ।

इयप्रीयलतं जातः सर्वकर्ता जनवर्दनः। 2 ॥

The head of Janārdana Mādhava, the Lord of all, was severed out of His body! And He was afterwards known as Hayagriva, the horse-faced! Oh! what more wonder can there be than this?

वेदो:प्रि सतीतं वं नित्यं देवा: सर्वैं यदाश्रयाः ।

आदिद्वेलो जगाश्रावः सर्वकारणकारणः ॥ 3 ॥

तत्यापि वदन्त छिड़ दिवशोगात्कथं तदा ।

तत्सर्व कंकथायुं त्वं विज्ञतरेण महामते ॥ ४ ॥

Whom the Vedas even praise, all the Devas rest on Whom, Who is the Cause of all causes, the Ādi Deva Jagannātha (the Lord of the universe), Oh! how is it that His head came to be severed! O, highly intelligent one! Describe all this in detail."

सूत जवाच

श्रुवंतु मुनवः सर्वे सावधाना: समंततः ।

चरितं देवेदेवस्य विद्याणो: परमन्तेजसः ॥ 5 ॥

कदाचिद्धारणं शुब्दं कृत्वा देवे: सनाततः ।

द्रशवर्षसहस्राणि परिश्रांतो जनदानं: ॥ 6 ॥

Sūta said: “O Munis! Hear all attentively the glorious deeds of the supremely energetic Viṣṇu, the Deva of the Devas. Once upon a time the eternal Deva Janārdana became tired after the terrible continuous battle for ten thousand years.

समे देेशे शुभे स्थाने केताल पचासनं विषुः ।

अवलंब्य धनुः सच्यं कंदवेगे धराशिवलम् ॥ ७ ॥

दर्चा भारं धनुक्रोत्या निद्राग्य सपातिनः ।

श्रांतत्वाहैदयोगारच जातसत्रातिनिर्दितः ॥ ८ ॥

तदा कालेन क्रिवता देवा: सर्वे सर्वास्वाः ।

बढ्रोणसहिताः सर्वे चजं कर्तुं समुद्धातः ॥ ९ ॥

After this the Lord Nārāyaṇa seated Himself on Padmāsana (a kind of posture) in some lonely place on a level plot of ground and placing his head on the front of his bow with the bow strung and placed erect on the ground fell fast asleep. Viṣṇu, the Lord of Ramā, was exceedingly tired and thus he fell soon into deep sleep. At this time, Indra and the

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

other Devas, with Brahmā and Maheṣā began a sacrifice.

गता: सर्वेअध वैकुंठ द्वषुं देवं जनादन् ।

देवाकार्यार्थसिद्धार्थ मवतानामिधा प्रभुम् ।। 10 ।।

अष्टहा तु तदा तत्र ज्ञानुद्धा विनोलये ते ।

यत्रास्ते भगवाविच्यणुर्जमुस्तत्र तदा सुरा: ।। 11 ।।

Then they, for the sake of success in Deva's work, went to the region of Vaikuntha to meet with the Deva Janārdana, the Lord of sacrifices. There, the Devas, not finding Viṣṇu, came to know by their Dhyāna (meditation) where Bhagvān Viṣṇu was staying and thither they went.

द्वसृगते तलेगानं योगानिद्राशं गतम् ।

विचेतनं विषुं विषुं त्रासांचक्रिे सुरा: ॥ 12 ॥

They saw that Lord Viṣṇu, the Deva of the Devas was lying unconscious, being under the arms of Yoganiḍrā (the yogic sleep).

स्वतेषुं सर्वदेवेषुं निद्रासुपते जानताते ।

चित्तामुप: सुरा: सर्वे ब्रह्मरूपगीरामा: ॥ 13 ॥

Therefore, they took their seats there. Seeing the Lord of the universe asleep, Brahmā, Rudra and the other Devas became anxious.

तानुवाच ततः शकः किं कत्थं सुरोत्तमाः ।

निद्रापनः कवं कार्यक्षित्यं सुरोत्तमाः ॥ 14 ॥

Indra then addressed the Devas: “O best of the Suras! Now what is to be done! How shall we awaken Bhagavān from His sleep? Now think of the means by which this can be effected.”

तनुषाच तता संभुर्नित्राम्भोजस्त दूर्णणम् ।

कार्य चैव प्रकर्तेयं व्रास्य सुरसत्तमः ॥ 15 ॥

Hearing Indra's words Śambhu said: "O good Devas! Now we must finish our sacrificial work. But if the sleep of Bhagavān be disturbed, He would get angry."

उत्पादिता तदा वधी ब्रह्माण परमेऊना ।

तथा धर्मायैत् तत ध्रवुर्षोर्ध धराशित्यम् ॥ १६ ॥

भक्षितोउे ततदानिजनं गायिष्यत सातसनम् ।

तदा निर्वायिन्तोउसी देवदेवो भविष्यति ॥ 17 ॥

Hearing Śaṅkara's words, Paramesṭhī Brahmā created Vamrī insects (a sort of white ants) so that

they might eat up the forepart of the bow that was lying on the ground causing the other end rise up and thus break His sleep.

देवकायरं तदा सर्वे भविष्यति न संशयः ।

स बर्षी संदिदेशाय देवदेवः सनातनः ॥ 18 ॥

Thus the Deva's purpose will, no doubt, be fulfilled. Thus settling his mind, the eternal Deva Brahmā ordered the white ants Vamris to cut the bow string.

तमुबाच तदा वर्षी देवेदेवस्य मापतेः ।

निद्राभंगः कबं कार्यों देवस्य जगतां गुरोः ॥ 19 ॥

Hearing this order of Brahmā, Vamrī spoke to Brahmā, thus: “O Brahman! How can I disturb the sleep of the Devadeva, Lord of Lakṣmī, the World Guru?

निद्राभंगः कवाधेटो दंपत्योः प्रीतिभेदनम् ।

शिशुभगतविपेदघ ब्रहहास्यामं स्युन्त् ॥ 20 ॥

To rouse one from one's deep sleep, to interrupt one in one's speech, to sever love between husband and wife, to separate a child from one's mother, all these are equivalent to Brahmahatya (murdering a Brāhmaṇa).

तत्कधे देवेदेवस्य क्रोगिम सुखनाशनम् ।

कि फल भक्षणादेव येन पापं करोम्यद् ॥ 21 ॥

सर्वे: स्वार्थवर्गो तोकाः कुन्ते पातकं किल ।

तस्मादं कतिथामि स्वार्थमेव प्रभक्षणम् ॥ 22 ॥

Therefore, O Deva! how can I interrupt the happiness of sleep of the Devadeva? And what benefit shall I derive by eating the bowstring, so that I may incur this vicious act? But a man can commit a sin if there be any interest of his; I am ready to eat this, if I get a personal interest.'

ब्रहीवाच

तव भागं कार्थ्यामो मखमध्ये यथा श्रुण ।

तेन त्वं कुक्र कार्यं नो विध्णु बोधय माधिरम् ॥ 23 ॥

Brahmā said: We will give you, too, share in this our Yajñā sacrifice) so hear me; do our work and rouse Viṣṇu from His sleep.

होमकर्मिग पार्थे च हविद्वान्तयिति ।

तते भागं विज्ञानीहि कुरु कार्यं त्वार्थिता ॥ 24 ॥

Book I Chapter V

During the time of performing Homa whatever ghee will fall outside the Homa-Kuṇḍa (the sacrificial pit) will fall to your share; so be quick and do this."

सूत उवाच

इत्युक्ता बह्वाणा वधी द्युभोउं त्वार्पिता ।

चखादा संस्थितं भूमी विमुक्ता ज्या तदासभवत् ॥ 25 ॥

Sūtā said: Thus ordered by Brahmā, the Vamri insect soon ate away the fore end of the bow that rested on the ground.

प्रत्यंचायां विमुक्तायां भूक्ता कोटिस्तथोत्तरा ।

गब्दः समभवद्योरसंलेन प्रस्ना: सुरास्ताद ॥ 26 ॥

ब्रह्मांडं कृष्णितं सर्वे वसुधा कंपिता तदा ।

समूत्राक्र सपुहितगल्सूक्र आजलंबलः ॥ 27 ॥

ववुवर्तातावा चोग्रा: पर्वताश्व चकपिंशे ।

उल्कापाता महोत्पाता बध्वुरुं:खर्गसिनः ॥ 28 ॥

Immediately the string gave way and the bow went up; the other end became free and a terrible sound took place. The Devas became afraid; the whole universe got agitated; the earth trembled. The sea became swollen; the aquatic animals became startled; violent wind blew; the mountains shook; ominous meteors fell.

दिशो योरताशासनसूर्वॉप्यन्तोतोपवत् ।

चिनामपु: सुरा: सर्वे कि भविष्यति तुदिंदि ॥ 29 ॥

The quarters assumed a terrific aspect; the Sun went down the horizon. In the time of distress the Devas became anxious what evil might come down. एवं चित्तयाते तेषां भूर्ग विष्णो: सकुंडलः ।

गत: समुकुटः क्वापि देवदेवस्य तापासे: ॥ 30 ॥

O ascetics! while the Devas were thus cogitating, the head with crown on it of the Devadeva Visnu vanished away; no body knew where it fell.

अंभकारे तदा योरे शाले बह्वाहरी तदा ।

शिरोहीनं शरीरं तु ददुशाले विलक्षणम् ॥ 31 ॥

When the awful darkness disappeared, Brahma and Mahadeva saw the disfigured body of Vishu with its head off.

दूद्वा कर्बं विष्णोले विश्विता: सुरसत्ता: ।

चितासागरमनाङ्ग रूकुः शोकाकर्शिताः ॥ 32 ॥

हा नाथ किं पूषो जातमत्यछूतममानुषम् ।

वैशसं सर्वैद्वानां देवैद्व सनातन ॥ 33 ॥

मायेवं कस्य देवस्य यया तेउश शिरो हतम् ।

अच्छेश्वलमेषोडीस अप्रदाहोसि सर्वदा ॥ 34 ॥

Seeing that headless figure of Viṣṇu they were greatly surprised; they were drowned in the ocean of cares and, overwhelmed with grief, began to weep aloud O Lord! O Master! O Devadeva! O Eternal one! what unforeseen extraordinary mishap occurred to us today! O Deva! Thou canst not be pierced nor cut asunder, nor capable of being burnt; how is it then that Thy head has been taken away! Is this the Māyā (magic) of some Deva? O all pervading one!

एवंनेत त्वयि विषो मरिष्यन्ति च देवता: ।

कौदुगस्त्वयि नः स्नेहः स्यार्थेनैव रुदामहे ॥ 35 ॥

नायं विद्य: कृतो दैत्यैपं ब्रह्मैं च ग्रासै: ।

देवैव कृत: कस्य दूषणं च रयापते ॥ 36 ॥

The Devas cannot live when Thy condition is thus; we do not know what affection dost Thou have towards us. We are crying because of our selfish ends; perhaps this therefore has occurred. The Daityas, Yakṣas, or Rākṣasas have not done this; O Lord of Lakṣmī! Whose fault will we ascribe this to? The Devas themselves have committed this loss to themselves!

पराधीनाः सुराः सर्वे किं कुम्: कव्व जजाम च ।

शरणं नैव देवेश सुराणां मुकृदेवतसम् ॥ 37 ॥

न चेषा सात्विकी माया राजसी न च तामसी ।

यया छिड़ं शिरस्तेउ मायोरस्य जयतदुरुः ॥ 38 ॥

क्रंदयानांस्तदा दूर्वहा देवाधिष्ठवपुरीमान् ।

ब्रह्मासितस्तदोबाच समयवेदवितमः ॥ 39 ॥

रहितेन महाभागाः क्रंदितेन तथापि किम् ।

उपायक्षात्र कर्तेब्यः सर्वथा बुद्धिगोभरः ॥ 40 ॥

देवं पुरुषकारशे देवेशमसुगतयुभी ।

उपायक्ष विधात्ययो देवाकलतिं सर्वथा ॥ 41 ॥

O Lord of the Devas! The Devas are now dependent! They are under Thee. Now where are we to go? What are we to do? There is none to save the dull stupid Devas!

At this juncture, seeing Śiva and the other Devas crying, Brhaşpati, supremely versed in the Vedas, consoled them thus: O highly fortunate one! what use there will be in thus crying and repenting? it ought you now to consider the means that you should adopt to redress your calamities. O Lord of the Devas! Fate and one's own exertion and intelligence are equal; if the success come not through Fate (luck or chance) one is certainly to show one's prowess and merit.

इन्न उवाच

दैवमेव परं मन्ये धिवकीरूमवनंकम् ।

विद्यापरि शिरिछनं सुगणां चैव पश्यताम् ॥ 42 ॥

Indra said: Fie to your exertion when, before our eyes, the head of Bhagavān Viṣṇu Himself has been carried off! Fie, Fie to your prowess and intelligence! Fate is in my opinion, the supreme.

ग्रद्योवाच

अवश्यमेव भोक्त्यं कालेनपादितं च यत् ।

शुभं वाय्यशुभं वायि दैवं को5तिमकैयुतः ॥ 4 3 ॥

Brahmā said: Whatever, auspicious or inauspicious, is ordained by Daiva (Fate), everyone must bear that; no one can go beyond the Daiva.

देहवान्युखदुःखानां भोक्ता नैवात्र संशयः ।

यथा कालावशाल्युक्ति शिरो से शंभुना पुरा ॥ 44 ॥

When one has taken up a body, one must experience pleasure and pain; there is no manner of doubt in this. See, in long-past days, by the irony fo Fate, Śambhu severed my head.

तबैव तिनगातघ माढ़ेवस्य शापतः ।

तबैवाहा हरेमूँया पतितो लवणांभसि ॥ 4 5 ॥

His generative organ, too, dropped down through curse. Similarly, Hari's head has, today, fallen into the salt ocean.

सहस्वभासंग्रामितू:खं चैव श्वापिते: ।

स्वागद्धंशस्तथा वासः कमले मानसे सेर ॥ 46 ॥

By the influence of time, Indr., the Lord of Śacī, had thousand genital marks over his body, was

expelled from Heaven and had to live in the Mānas sarovar in the lotuses and had to suffer many other miseries.

एते दुःखस्य भोक्तारः केन दुःखं न भुज्यते ।

संसारोंप्रियन्महाभागास्तर्यमाछ्ठोकं त्यजंतु वै ॥ 47 ॥

चितयंतु महामावां विद्यावेर्वीं सनातनीम् ।

सा विधायसित नः कार्यं निर्थिणा प्रकृति: परा ॥ 48 ॥

बग्रविद्वां जगद्धार्जी सर्वैंण जनर्नी तथा ।

यथा सर्वांविद्य ल्यानं जैतोक्यं सचाराचम् ॥ 49 ॥

O Glorious ones! When such personages have suffered pains, then who else is there in the world, that does not suffer! so, you all cease sorrows and meditate on the Eternal Mahāmāyā; who is the Mother of all, who is the supporter of all, who is of the nature of Brahmavidyā (the Supreme Knowledge) and who is beyond the Gunas, who is the Prime Prakṛti, and who pervades the three Lokas, the whole universe, moving and unmoving; She will dispense our welfare.

सूत जावा

इल्युक्लवा वे सूगत वेधा निगमानादिदेश ह ।

देहयुक्तान्स्थितानये सुकायार्थिसिद्धदेय ॥ ५० ॥

Sūta then said: Thus saying to the Devas Brahmā ordered all the Vedas, that were incarnate there in their forms, for the successful issue of the Deva's work.

स्तुवंतु परमां देहीं ब्रहिवहां सन्तानीम् ।

गृहाज्ञी च महामायां सर्वेकार्यार्थसाधानीम् ॥ 51 ॥

Brahmā said: “O Vedas! Now go on and chant hymns to the Sacred Eternal Highest Devi Mahāmāyā, who is Brahmavidyā, who brings all actions to their successful issues, who is hidden in all forms.”

तच्छूता वचनं तस्य वेदा: सर्वाज्ञूचना: ।

तुषुवुज्ञनायनां तां महामायां जगस्थितम् ॥ 52 ॥

Hearing His words, the all-beautiful Vedas began to chant hymns to Mahāmāyā who can be comprehended by Jñāna, and who pervades the world.

Book 1 Chapter V

वेदा कमुः

नमो देयि महामाये विश्वोर्यक्तरे ऐशे ।

निर्णी सर्वभृतौण मातः शंकरकामे ॥ ५३ ॥

The Vedas said: “Obeisance to the Devi! to the Mahāmāya! to the Auspicious One! to the Creatrix of the Universe! We bow down to Thee, who is beyond the Gunas, the Ruler of all the Beings!

तं भूमि: सर्वभृतानां प्राण: प्राणवर्तां तथा ।

धी: श्री: काँति: क्षमा शांति: श्रद्धा मेघा धृति: स्थूति: ॥ 54 ॥

O Mother! Thou givest to Śaṅkara even His desires. Thou art the receptacle of all the things; Thou art the Prāna of all the living beings; Thou art Buddhī, Lakṣmī (wealth), Śobhā, Kṣamā (forgiveness), Śānti (peace); Śraddhā (faith), Medhā (intellect), Dhṛti (fortitude), and Smṛti (recollection).

त्यंमुटीयोउंधीमात्रासे गाठयी व्याहितिजा ।

जया च विश्वा धाती लज्ञा कौति: सूहा दया ॥ 55 ॥

Thou art the Bindu (m) over the Pranava (om) and thou art of the nature of semi-moon; Thou art Gāyatri; Thou art Vyārthiti; Thou art Jayā, Vijayā, Dhātri (the supportress) Lajjā (modesty) Kirti (fame); Icchā (will) and Dayā (mercy) in all beings.

त्वां संसृमोप्रथ पृचनप्रवर्मविधानद्वर्शं

द्वारास्युतां जननीं जानान् ।

विद्यां शिवां सकललोकहितां वेरणयां

वारबीजावसानिपुणां घवनाशकर्जीम् ॥ 56 ॥

बदा हुः शीरिसहस्वने-बारवहिक्युयां, घुवनाधिनायाः ।

ते चल्कृताः संति ततो न मुख्या

माता यतस्तं चिंशरजोगमानाम् ॥ 57 ॥

O Mother! Thou art the nerciful Mother of the three worlds, Thou art the adorable auspicious Vidyā (knowledge) benefit ing all the lokas; Thou destroyest the Universe and Thou skilfully resisted (hidden) in the Bija mantras. Therefore, we are praising Thee. O Mother! Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Indra, Sūrya, Fire, Sarasvatī and other regents of the Universe are all Thy creation; so none of them is superior to Thee. Thou art the Mother of all the things, moving and non-moving.

सकलभूवनमेताकर्तुकामा यदा त्वं

सुजसि जननि देवान्विण्युभूरजामुख्यान् ।

स्थितितयजननं तै: कार्यस्येकरूपा

न खलु तव कर्धधिद्वि संसारलेगः ॥ 58 ॥

न ते रूपं वेनुं सकलभवुने कोर्पि निपुणो

न नानां संख्या ते कधिरुभिट योग्योस्ति पुरुषः ।

यद्वल्यं कीलालं कलवितुमगक्तः स तु नरः

कर्थ पारावाराकलनचतुः: स्यादृतमति: ॥ 59 ॥

O Mother! When Thou dost will to create this visible Universe, Thou createst first Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara and makest them create, preserve and destroy this universe; but Thou remainest quite unattached to the world. Ever Thou remainest constant in Thy one form.

न देवानां मध्ये भगवति तवांनतविषयं

विज्ञानात्येकोर्षि लमिषु घुवनेकासिं जननी ।

कर्थ मिथ्या विश्वं सकलपरि चैका रचरसि

प्रमाणं तैतम्यिश्रामवचनं देय विहितम् ॥ 60 ॥

No one in this Universe is able to know Thy nature; nor there is any body who can enumerate Thy names. How can he promise to jump across the illimitable ocean, who can not jump across an ordinary well.

निरीहैसासि त्व निश्विलजगतां कारणमहो

चरितं ते चित्रं भगवतिं मनो नो व्यथयति ।

कर्केकारं वाच्यः सकल्निमागोपोचरगुणप्रभावः

स्वं यस्मात्यव्यपि न जानासि परमम् ॥ 6 1 ॥

O Bhagavati! No one amongst the Devas even knows particularly Thy endless power and glory. Thou art alone the Lady of the Universe and the Mother of the world.

न किं जानासि तवं जननि मधुजिन्मीतपन्ति शिवे

किं वा जात्वा विविविषयि शर्फिक मधुजितः ।

हरेः किंवा मातनुंरिततिरेषा बलतवी भवतः।

पादाङ्ठे भजननिषुणे क्वसितु वुरित् ॥ 62 ॥

The Vedas all bear testimony how thou alone hast created all this unreal and fleeting universe. O Devi! Thou without any effort and having no desires hast become the cause of this visible world,

Śrimaddevibbāgavatam

thyself remaining unchanged. This is a great wonder. We cannot conceive this combination of contrary varieties in one. O Mother! How can we understand thy power, unknown to all the Vedas even, when thou thyself dost not know thy nature! We are bewildered at this.

उदेश का चेयं तल सुस्ममूढ़े तिथिवयमा

हरैमूढ़ों नाशो मतमिह महाश्रयंजनकम् ।

महदुःखं मातल्वमसि जननछ्छेदकुशला

न जानीमो मोलीघिधटनिवलंबः कवमभूत् 1163 II

जात्वा दोर्षं सकलसुत्तापादितं देखि चित्ते

किंवा विष्णावमरजिनंत दुकृषतं पातिते ते ।

विष्णोर्गों कि समराजिनतः कोपयलोंजितिवाण्छेन्तु

मातस्तव विलसितं नैव विष्ठउत्र भावम् ॥ 64 ॥

O Mother! It is that thou dost know nothing about the falling off of the Viṣṇu's head! Or knowingly thou wanted to examine Viṣṇu's prowess. Is it that Hari incurred any heinous sin. How can that be! Where is sin to thy followers who serve Thee! O Mother! Why art Thou so much indifferent to the Devas! It is a great wonder that the head of Viṣṇu is severed! Really, we are merged in great misfortunes. Thou art clever in removing the sorrows of Thy devotees. Why art Thou delaying in fixing again the head on Viṣṇu's body.

किं वा द्वैल: समरविजितैस्तीर्धेशे सुग्रये

घोरं तत्वा भगवति वरं लक्ष्वविद्धभंत्वा ।

अन्तर्धानं गतिमतभुना विष्णुगरीषं भवानि

सूई किंवा वित्तिशिरसं खापुरेव विनोदः ॥ 65 ॥

सिंधोः पुर्या रोषिता किं त्वमाएँ,

कस्मादेतां प्रेक्षेस नावहीनाम् ।

क्षंत्रवस्ते खोजाजातपराधो

व्यृत्यायैने मोदितां तां कुरुच्च ॥ 66 ॥

O Devi! Is it that Thou taking offence on the gods hast cast that on Viṣṇu! or was it that Viṣṇu became proud and to curb that, Thou hast played thus! or is it that the Daityas, having suffered defeat from Viṣṇu went and practised severe tapasyā in some beautiful holy place, and have got some boons; and so Viṣṇu's head has thus fallen off!

Or is it, O Bhagavati! that Thou wert very eagerly interested to see Viṣṇu's headless body and, therefore, Thou hast seen thus! O Prime Force! Is it that Thou art angry on the daughter of the Sindhu (ocean); Lakṣmī Devī! Else, why hast Thou deprived Her of Her husband? Lakṣmī is born as a part of Thine; So Thou oughtst to forgive Her offence.

Therefore dost Thou gladden Her by giving back Her husband's life.

एते सुगत्स्वां सत्तं नमिति

कार्येषु मुख्याः प्रयितप्रभावाः ।

गोकाण्वीतात्पर येवे दिवानुत्थाप्य

देवं सकलाधिनायम् ॥ 6 7 ॥

The principal Devas, engaged in Thy service, always makes their praṇāmas (bow down) to Thee; O Devi! Beest Thou kind enough and make alive the Deva Viṣṇu, the Lord of all and crossest us across this ocean of sorrows. O Mother! We cannot make out anything whatsoever where Hari's head has gone.

मूधांगतः क्वाम्ब हरेनं विद्यो,

नान्यो2स्त्युपायः खलु जीवनेउघ।

यथा सुधा जीवनकर्मदेख़ा

तथा जगज्जीवितद्धासि देयि ॥ 68 ॥

We have no other protectress than Thee who canst give back His life? O Devi Thou give life to the whole world as the nectar gives life to all the Devas."

सूत उवाच

एवं सुत्ता तदा देवी गुणातीता महेश्वी ।

प्रसाा परम माया बदेः सांगैषु सामगैः ॥ 69 ॥

Süta said: Thus praised by the Vedas with their Angas, with Sāmagānas (the songs from the Sāma Veda), the Nirgunā Maheśvari Devī Mahāmāyā became pleased.

तानुवान तदा वाणी चाकाश्या शरीरिणी ।

देवान्याति सुरुखे: शब्दैज्ञानंवंकरी शृणा ॥ 70 ॥

मा कुर्वयं सुगाईशंतां स्वस्थानिष्ठंतु चामपः ।

सुतात्रई निभागे: कामं संगुशास्येन न संशय: ॥ 71 ॥

Book I Chapter V

Then the auspicious voice came to them from the Heavens, gladdening all, and pleasing to the ears though no form was seen: "O Suras! Do not care anything about it; you are immortal (what fear can you have ?) Come to your senses. I am very much pleased by the praise sung by the Vedas.

यः पुण्यानपुरे लोके सतीलोतं मामकी सुत्तिम्।

पदिष्यित सदा भपत्ना: सर्वां-कामानवाप्नुयात् ॥ 72 ॥

There is no doubt in this. Amongst men, whoever will read this my stotra with devotion, will get all what he desires.

शृणोति वा स्तोत्रमिदं मदीयं

भक्ता विक्रांतं सततं नोे थः ।

विमुक्तुःखः स भवेत्सुखी च

वेदोक्तमेतानु वेदतुल्यम् ॥ 73 ॥

Whoever will hear this: devotedly, during the three Sandhyās, will be freed from troubles and become happy. When this stotra has been sung by the Vedas, it is equivalent to the Vedas."

शुण्वतु कारणं चाहा यद्यातं वदनं हैः ।

अकारणं कर्थ कार्य संसारेउत्र भविष्यति ॥ 74 ॥

उदधेत्नयां विष्णु: संश्वित्यांतिके प्रियाम् ।

जहास वदनं बीक्ष्य तस्यास्तत्र मनोराम्म ॥ 75 ॥

Does anything take place in this world without any cause? Now hear why Hari's head was cut off. Once upon a time, seeing the beautiful face of His dear wife Lakṣmī Devī, Hari laughed in presence of Her.

तया जातं हरिन्नं ककं मां हसति प्रभुः ।

विकरी हरिणा हुई मुखं मे केन हेतुना ॥ 76 ॥

विनारि कारणेनाहा ककं हास्यस्य सम्भव: ।

सप्तवीव कृता तेन मये5-न्या वरवर्षिनी ॥ 77 ॥

At this Lakṣmī Devi came to understand that "He has seen surely something ugly in my face and, therefore, He laughed; otherwise why my Husband would laugh a: seeing me. But what reason can there be to see ugliness in my face after so long a time. And why shall He laugh without seeing something ugly, without any cause. Or it may be, He has made some other beautiful woman as my co-wife."

ततः कोयपुता जाता महालक्षी तमोगुणा ।

तामसी तु तदा शक्तिस्तया देहे समाविशण् । 78 ॥

केनचिकालयोगेन देवकायार्थसिद्धये ।

प्रविष्टा तामसी शक्तिस्तस्य देहैतिहाणा । 79 ॥

तामस्याविदेशेहा सा चुकोपातिशयं तदा ।

शनकैः समुवाचेदमिदं पत्तु ते शिरः ॥ 80 ॥

स्तीसभावाच्च भाविवाकालयोगद्धिनितः ।

अविवाचं ताद दत्तः शापः स्वसुखानाश्नः ॥ 81 ॥

Thus arguing variously in her mind, Mahā Lakṣmī gradually got angry and Tamo guna slowly possessed Her. Then, by turn of Fate, in order that gods' work might be completed, very fierce Tamas Śakti entered into her body. She got very angry and slowly said; "Let Thy head fall off". Thus, owing to feminine nature and the destiny of Bhagavān, Lakṣmī cursed without any thought of good or bad, causing Her own suffering.

सप्तनीसम्पवं दुःखं वैध्यवादीपकं चित्ति ।

विधित्व मनसेत्युक्ते तामसी गफिल्योगतः ॥ 82 ॥

By the Tamasī Śakti possessing Her, she thought that having a co-wife would be more painful than Her widowhood and thus she cursed Him.

अनुत्ते नासंस माया मुख्त्वमातिलोभता ।

अशोंचं निव्यवर्ष च स्थाणं वोणा: स्वभावजाः ॥ 83 ॥

सशीर्षं वापुरेवं तं कौरोमद्य यथा पुरा ।

शिरो5स्य शापायोगेन निमर्गनं लवणांबुधी ॥ 84 ॥

Falsehood, vain boldness, craftiness, stupidity, impatience, over-greediness, impurity, and harshness are the natural qualities of women. Owing to that curse, the head of Vāsudeva has fallen into the salt ocean. Now I will fix the head on His body as before.

अन्यच्छ कारणं किक्रिक्षतते सुरसतमाः ।

भवतां च महक्रायं भविष्यति न संशयः ॥ 85 ॥

O Sura Sattamas! There is another cause, also, regarding this affair. That will bring you great success.

पुरा दैत्यो महाबाहुर्दयीशेस्तिविश्रुतः ।

पतश्रके सरस्वत्यास्तीरि परमहाकर्णम् ॥ 86 ॥

In ancient days a famous Daitya, named

Hayagrīva practised severe tapasyā on the bank of the Sarasvātī river.

जपत्रेकाक्षरं मनं मायावीजात्यकं मम ।

निराहारो जितातामा च सर्वभोगाविर्वर्जितः ॥ 87 ॥

ध्यायमां ताम्यीं शर्निके सर्वभूषणभूषिताम् ।

एवं वर्षेसहचं च तपश्छेक्रतिद्राकृणम् ॥ 88 ॥

“Abandoning all sorts of enjoyments, with control over his senses and without any food, the Daitya did Japam of (repeated) one syllabled Māyā-Bija-mantra and, meditating the form of the Tāmasī Sākti of Mine, adorned with all ornaments, practised very terrible austerities for one thousand years.

तदाईं तामसे रूपं कृत्वा तत्र समगाता ।

दर्शनै पुरतस्तव्य ध्यातं तत्तेन याङ्गम् ॥ 89 ॥

I, too, went to the place of austerities in My Tāmasī form, meditated by the Daitya and appeared before him.

सिंहोपारि स्थिता तत्र तमावों द्वाप्तिचा ।

वरं बृहि महाभाग ददापि तव सुघत ॥ 90 ॥

There, seated on the lion's back, feeling compassion for his tapasya I spoke to him: "O glorious One! O one of good vows! I have come to grant boon to Thee!"

इति श्रुत्वा वचो देल्या दानवः प्रेमपूर्तिनः ।

प्रदक्षिणं प्राणां च चकार त्वरितस्तदा ॥ 91 ॥

सूद्वा करा मदीयं स प्रेमोरूललविलोचनः ।

हर्षाशुपुर्णनयनस्तुषा स च मां ताद ॥ 92 ॥

Hearing the words of the Devi, the Daitya instantly got up and falling down with devotion at Her feet, circumambulated Her. Looking at My form, his large eyes became cheerful with feelings of love and filled with tears; shedding tears, then, he began to chant hymns to Me.

हव्यास विज्ञा

नमो देखे महामाये सुशिष्यन्तकारिण ।।

भक्तानुप्रहचतुः कामदे मोक्षेदे शिशे ॥ 9 3 ॥

Hayagrīva said: “Obeisance to the Devi Mahāmāye! I bow down to Thee, the Creatrix, the Preserver, and the Destructrix of the universe!

धराम्बुतेज:पवनखपछानां च कारणम् ।

त्वं गान्यस्करणाणां कारणं स्पर्शिष्वदयोः ॥ 94 ॥

Skilled in shewing favour to Thy devotees! Giver of the devotee's desires! Obeisance to Thee! O Thou, the giver of liberation! O Thou! The auspicious one! I bow down to Thee. Thou art the cause of the five elements—earth, water, fire, air, and Ākāśa! Thou art the cause of form, taste, smell, sound and touch.

प्राणं च रसना चक्षुरलवछोत्रिमिंद्याणि च ।

कर्मेन्द्रियाणि चान्यानि तन्तः सर्वं महेश्वरि ॥ 95 ॥

O, Maheśvarī! the five Jñāneendriyas (organs of perception) eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and skin and the five organs of action Kamrendriyas: hands, feet, speech, arms, and the organ of generation are all created by Thee."

श्रीद्व्युवाच

किं तेउभीष्टं वरं कृहि वांडितं यद्याति मत् ।

परितृष्टास्थि भस्त्रा ते तपसा चाद्धुतेन च ॥ 96 ॥

‘The Devi said: “O child! I am very much satisfied with your wonderful tapasyā and devotion. Now say what boon do you want. I will give you the boon that you desire.

हयायीत उवाच

यथा मे मरणं मातर्नं भवेत्तथा कुरु ।

भवेयममयो गोरी तथाउजयः सुगुरुः ॥ 97 ॥

Hayagriva said: “O Mother! grant me that boon by which death will not come to me, and I shall be invincible by the Suras and Asuras, I may be a Yogi and immortal.

श्रीद्व्यवाच

जातस्य हि ध्रुं मृत्युधूरं जन्म मृतस्य च ।

मर्यादा चेयुर्गी लोके भयेच्च कथमान्या ॥ 98 ॥

एवं त्वं निश्रयं कृत्वा मरणो राक्षसोतम ।

वंरं वयर चेहै ते विचार्यं मनसा किल ॥ 99 ॥

The Devi said: “Death brings in birth and birth brings in death; this is inevitable. This order of things is extant in this world; never its violation

Book I Chapter V

takes place. Obest of the Rākṣasas! Thus knowing death sure, think in your mind and ask another boon."

हयसीय उवाच

हयसीवाचे मे मुलुर्नीयस्माजगदिष्के ।

इति मे वांछितं कामं पुरास्व मनोगतम् ॥ १०० ॥

Hayagriva said: “O Mcther of the universe! If it be that Thou art not willing at all to grant me immortality, then grant me this boon that my death may not occur from any o:her than from one who is horse-faced. Be merciful and grant me this boon that I desire.”

श्रीव्यवाच

गृहं गच्छ महाभाग कुरू राज्यं वधासुखम् ।

हयप्रीवापुते मृत्यूनं ते नूनं भविष्यति ॥ 101 ॥

O highly fortunate one: “Go home and govern your kingdom at your ease; death won’t occur to you from any other beings then from one who is horse-faced.”

इति दच्चा वरं तस्मा अन्तधार्नं मत तथा ।

मूंद परीमको प्राय सोषि स्थभवां गतः ॥ 102 ॥

स पीड्यति द्रुहाना मुनी-वेटांधा सर्वेगः ।

न कोर्पि विहते तस्य हंताउघ च्युनजये ॥ 103 ॥

तसाधीर्थे हृदयायर्य समुद्धल मनोहरम् ।

देईउत्र विहोगे विश्लोस्त्वा संयोजयित्वि ॥ 104 ॥

Thus granting the boon, the Devi vanished. Becoming very glad on getting this boon, Hayagriva went to his residence. Since then the wicked Daitya is troubling very much all the Devas and Munis. There is none in the three worlds to kill him. So let Viśvakarmā take a horse's head and fix it on the headless body of Viṣṇu.

हयप्रीयोद्ध भगवान्द्रनियर्त तनामसून् ।

पाधिष्ठ दानवे कूरं देवानां त्रितकायया ॥ 105 ॥

Then Bhagavān Hayagrīva will slay the vicious wicked Asura, for the good of the Devas.'

सूत उवाच

एवं सुरांस्तदाभाव्य शवर्गी । विरामा ह ।

देवास्तदातिसंतुहास्तमूचुदैविशिल्यनम् ॥ 106 ॥

Sūta said: “Thus speaking to the Devas, Bhagavati Śarvānī remained silent.

देवा ऊचुः

कुक कार्य सुराणां वै विद्योः शीर्षिधियोजनम् ।

दानवप्रवरं दैत्वं हरण्योहो हनियिति ॥ 107 ॥

The Devas became very glad and spoke this to Viśvakarmā: “Kindly do this Deva work and fix Viṣṇu’s head. He will become Hayagriva and kill the indomitable Dānava.”

सूत उवाच

इति श्रुना वचसेनं चल्हा चातिल्वात्यित ।

वाजिशर्षे चक्रतिणु खदुर्गेन सुरासिद्धी ॥ 108 ॥

विषणोः शरीरे तेनागु योजितं वाजिमस्तकम् ।

हदयीवो हरिजातो महामायाप्रसात: ॥ 109 ॥

Sūta said: Hearing these words, Viśvakarmā quickly cut off with his axe, the head of a horse, brought it before the Devas and fixed it on the headless boy of Viṣṇu. By the grace of Mahāmāyā, Bhagavān became horse-faced or Hayagriva.

क्रियता तेन कातेन दानवो मदाद्यपितः ।

निहततसरा संख्रे देवानां विपुतेजासे ॥ 110 ॥

य इदं शृभागत्यानं शृग्वतिन पृहिं गानतः ।

सर्वेदुःखविनिभृतकासे भवति न संशयः ॥ 111 ॥

महात्मायाचरितब्र उपविंग पापनाशनम् ।

पठतां शप्यतां चैव सर्वसंपत्तिकारकम् ॥ 112 ॥

ड्रि श्रीमदेवीपाणते प्रश्मरकंधे इर्शयीजिताकारकंनं नाम

पत्रप्रोस्थाय: 11 5 11

Then, a few days after, Bhagavān Hayagrīva killed that proud Dānava, the Deva's enemy, by sheer force. Any man, hearing this excellent anecdote, becomes freed, certainly of all sorts of difficulties. Hearing or reading Mahāmāyā's glorious deeds, pure and sin destroying, gives all sorts of wealth."

Thus ends the Fifth Chapter of the First Book

on the description of the narrative of

Hayagrīva in the Mahā Purāna

Śrimadāvevībhagavatam of

18,000 verses.

