[Ch 1 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said : Glad to hear the excellent divine stories of the Solar and Lunar races. The virtuous King Janamejaya, the son of Parikṣit, again asked:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Glad to hear the excellent divine stories of the Solar and Lunar races, the virtuous King Janamejaya, the son of Parīkṣit, again asked :--

[Ch 1 Verse 2-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Lord! I am now very eager to hear the increase of the two lines of Kings. O Sinless One! You know everything. So kindly describe, in detail, the pure histories, capable to destroy sins, of the kings and their characters. The kings of the Lunar and the Solar races were great Bhaktas of the Highest Śakti, Śri Bhagavati Devi; this I have heard. O Muni! Who wants not to hear further on the glorious anecdotes of the Bhaktas of the Śri Devi?
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Lord! I am now very eager to hear the increase of the two lines of Kings. O Sinless One! You know everything. So kindly describe, in detail, the pure histories, capable to destroy sins, of the kings and their characters. The kings of the Lunar and the Solar races were great Bhaktas of the Highest Śakti, Śrī Bhagavatī Devī; this I have heard. O Muni! Who wants not to hear further on the glorious anecdotes of the Bhaktas of the Śrī Devī?”

[Ch 1 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the Rājarsi asked thus, the Muni Krṣna Dvaipāyana, the son of Satyavati began to narrate gladly the several deeds of the Kings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the Rājarṣi asked thus, the Muni Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyan, the son of Satyavatī began to narrate gladly the several deeds of the Kings.

[Ch 1 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! I am now narrating to you in detail the origin, etc., of the Lunar and the Solar dynasties as well as of other kings in their connection. Hear attentively.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! I am now narrating to you in detail the origin, etc., of the Lunar and the Solar dynasties as well as of other kings in their connection. Hear attentively.

[Ch 1 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The four-faced Brahma sprang from the navel of Visnu; engaged in practising Tapasyā, he began to worship the Mahā Devi Durgā, extremely hard to conceive. Mahā Devi, pleased at his worship, granted boon to Brahma; Brahma, the Grandsire of all the Lokas on thus getting the boon, became ready to create the world; but he could not create all on a sudden the human beings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The four-faced Brahmā sprang from the navel of Viṣṇu; engaged in practising Tapasyā, he began to worship the Mahā Devī Durgā, extremely hard to conceive. Mahā Devī, pleased at his worship, granted boon to Brahmā; Brahmā, the Grandsire of all the Lokas on thus getting the boon, became ready to create the world; but he could not create all on a sudden the human beings.

[Ch 1 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Though the creation was eternally fashioned by the Parmātmā Bhagavati, the four-faced Brahmā thinking over in his mind variously, could not quickly spread it out and accomplish it as a veritable fact. Therefore He, the Prajāpati, first created mentally the seven mind-born sons. These were known by the names of Marici, Atri, Anigirā, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vasiṣṭha.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Though the creation was eternally fashioned by the Pramātmā Bhagavatī, the four-faced Brahmā thinking over in his mind variously, could not quickly spread it out and accomplish it as a veritable fact. Therefore He, the Prajāpati, first created mentally the seven mind-born sons. These were known by the names of Marīci, Atri, Aṅgirā, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vaiśiṣṭha.

[Ch 1 Verse 11-13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next sprang Rudra from the anger of Prajāpati, Nārada from his lap; Dakṣa from his right thumb. Thus Sanaka and the other Rṣi were also his mind bornson. O King! The wife of Dakṣa was born from the left thumb of Prajāpati; this all-beautiful daughter is well known in all the Purāṇas by the name of Virinī and Asiknī. Nārada, the chief of the Devarsis, was born, on some other occasion in her womb.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next sprang Rudra from the anger of Prajāpati, Nārada from his lap; Dakṣa from his right thumb. Thus Sanaka and the other Ṛṣis were also his mind-born sons. O King! The wife of Dakṣa was born from the left thumb of Prajāpati; this all-beautiful daughter is well known in all the Purāṇas by the name of Vīriṇī and Asiknī. Nārada, the chief of the Devarṣis, was born, on some other occasion in her womb.

[Ch 1 Verse 14-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya said: O Brahman! A great doubt arises in me to hear that the great ascetic Nārada was born of Dakṣa in the womb of Virinī. The Muni Nārada indeed, was the son of Brahmā; moreover he was the foremost of the ascetics and especially endowed with the knowledge of Dharma; how, then, can he be born of the womb of the Dakṣa's wife Virinī. Well, if that be so, then describe, in detail, that wonderful story of the birth of Nārada in the womb of Virinī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya said :-- “O Brāhmāṇ! A great doubt arises in me to hear that the great ascetic Nārada was born of Dakṣa in the womb of Vīriṇī. The Muni Nārada indeed, was the son of Brahmā; moreover be was the foremost of the ascetics and especially endowed with the knowledge of Dharma; how, then, can he be born of the womb of the Daksha’s wife Vīriṇī. Well, if that be so, then describe, in detail, that wonderful story of the birth of Nārada in the womb of Vīriṇī.

[Ch 1 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! Under whose curse, the high-souled Nārada, though very wise, had to leave his first body and be born again.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! Under whose curse, the high-souled Nārada though very wise, had to leave his first body and be born again.”

[Ch 1 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King, Brahmā, the Self-born, with a view to create offspring, ordered first Dakṣa: “Go and multiply innumerable children for the increase of the world.” Thus ordered by his father, the Prajāpati Dakṣa produced five thousand powerful and heroic sons in the womb of Virinī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King, Brahmā, the Self-born, with a view to create offspring, ordered first Dakṣa :-- “Go and multiply innumerable children for the increase of the world.” Thus ordered by his father the Prajāpati Dakṣa produced five thousand powerful and heroic sons in the womb of Vīriṇī.

[Ch 1 Verse 20-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing all the sons of Dakṣa, desirous to multiply, the Devarsī Nārada, urged on, as it were, by Fate, began to laugh at them. How do you desire to multiply when you know not the dimensions and capacity of earth; so you will, no doubt, be put to ridicule and laughter. Rather, if you proceed on work, knowing beforehand the earth's capacity, your efforts will be fruitful. Other wise, your attempt will, no doubt, end in failure.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing all the sons of Dakṣa, desirous to multiply, the Devarṣi Nārada urged on, as it were, by Fate, began to laugh at them. How do you desire to multiply when you know not the dimensions and capacity of earth; so you will, no doubt, be put to ridicule and laughter. Rather, if you proceed on work, knowing beforehand the earth’s capacity, your efforts will be fruitful. Otherwise, your attempt will no doubt, end in

[Ch 1 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Alas! You are awfully illiterate! Not knowing the dimensions of the world, you are ready to multiply your progeny; how, then, can you meet wit success!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Alas! You are awfully illiterate! Not knowing the dimensions of the world, you are ready to multiply your progeny; how, then, can you meet with success!

[Ch 1 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing, all on a sudden, these words, Haryaśva and other sons began to speak with each other “What this Muni has told, is very true.” Let us then ascertain the earth’s dimensions; we can easily multiply afterwards.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing, all on a sudden, these words, Haryaśva and other sons began to speak with each other, “What this Muni has told, is very true. Let us then ascertain the earth’s dimensions; we can easily multiply afterwards.”

[Ch 1 Verse 25-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, they all went out to reconnoitre the earth. Thus excited at Nārada's words, some went eastward, some southwards, some towards the north and some went to west all simultaneously and, as they liked, to make a survey of the earth. When the sons went away, Dakṣa became exceedingly sorry on their absence.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, they all went out to reconnoitre the earth. Thus excited at Nārada’s words, some went eastward, some southwards, some towards the north and some went to west all simultaneously and, as they liked, to make a survey of the earth. When the sons went away, Dakṣa became exceedingly sorry on their absence.

[Ch 1 Verse 28-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bent again on multiplying, he begat other sons; those sons again wanted to procreate. Seeing them, Nārada again laughed and said: "Alas! What fools are you! Not knowing the dimensions of the earth, why are you ready to procreate?" They were deluded by Nārada's words, took them as true, and went out as their elder brothers did. Not being able to see those sons, Prajāpati Dakṣa became very sorrowful for them and cursed Nārada in rage.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bent again on multiplying, he begat other sons; those sons again wanted to procreate. Seeing them, Nārada again laughed and said :--Alas! What fools are you! Not knowing the dimensions of the earth, why are you ready to procreate? They were deluded by Nārada’s words, took them as true, and went out as their elder brothers did. Not being able to see those sons, Prajāpati Dakṣa became very sorrowful for them and cursed Nārada in rage.

[Ch 1 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Dakṣa said: “O Evil-minded One! You have destroyed my sons; so be yourself destroyed; you will have to be born in the womb for your sin in causing the death of my sons; you have caused my sons to go abroad; so you must be born as my son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Dakṣa said :-- “O Evil-minded One! You have destroyed my sons; so be yourself destroyed; you will have to be born in the womb for your sin in causing the death of my sons; you have caused my sons to go abroad; so you must be born as my son.”

[Ch 1 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus cursed by Dakṣa, Nāradā had to take his birth in the womb of Virinī. I heard also that the Prajāpati Dakṣa begat afterwards sixty daughters in her womb.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus cursed by Dakṣa, Nārada had to take his birth in the womb of Vīriṇī. I heard also that the Prajāpati Dakṣa begat afterwards sixty daughters in her womb.

[Ch 1 Verse 35-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Dakṣa, the great knower of Dharma, then gave up the sorrows for his sons and married his thirteen daughters to the high-souled Kaśyapa, ten daughters to Dharma, twenty-seven daughters to the Moon, two to Bhrgu, four to Ariṣṭanemi, two to Krśāśva and the remaining two to Aṅgirā. Their sons and grandsons, the Devas and Dānavas, became powerful but antagonistic towards each other. All of them were heroes and very Māyāvīs; so, deluded by greed and jealousy, they quarrelled amongst each other. Here ends the First Chapter in the Seventh Book on the beginning of the narrative of the Solar and the Lunar lines of kings in the Mahā Purānam Śrīmadveṭbīhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Dakṣa, the great knower of Dharma, then gave up the sorrows for his sons and married his thirteen daughters to the high-souled Kaśyapa, ten daughters to Dharma, twenty-seven daughters to the Moon, two to Bhṛgu, four to Aṛṣṭanemi, two to Kriśāśva and the remaining two to Aṅgirā. Their sons and grandsons, the Devas and Dānavas, became powerful but antagonistic towards each other. All of them were heroes and very Māyāvis; so, deluded by their greed and jealousy, they quarrelled amongst each other. Here ends the First Chapter in the Seventh Book on the beginning of the narrative of the Solar and the Lunar lines of kings in the Mahā Purāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
