CHAPTER I

On the Solar and Lunar Kings

सूत उवाच

शुत्वैतां तापसाहिष्यां कथां राजा मुद्रावित्रतः ।

व्यासं पप्रच्छ धर्मात्मा परीक्षितसुतः पुनः ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said : Glad to hear the excellent divine stories of the Solar and Lunar races. The virtuous King Janamejaya, the son of Parikṣit, again asked:

जनमेव जयाच

स्वामिन्युंचायंना च राजां वंशस्य विहतम् ।

तथा सोमाव्यवानां च श्रोक्रामोउसि सर्वथा ॥ 2 ॥

कवयानय सर्वत्र कथां पापपूर्णाशिनीम् ।

चरितं भूपतीना च चितस्ताईशपोहोयोः ॥ ३ ॥

ते हि सर्वे पशाशिफभक्ता इति मया शुतम् ।

देवीभक्तस्य चितरं शृणवन्नोजसि विरक्तिभाक् ॥ 4 ॥

“O Lord! I am now very eager to hear the increase of the two lines of Kings. O Sinless One! You know everything. So kindly describe, in detail, the pure histories, capable to destroy sins, of the kings and their characters. The kings of the Lunar and the Solar races were great Bhaktas of the Highest Śakti, Śri Bhagavati Devi; this I have heard. O Muni! Who wants not to hear further on the glorious anecdotes of the Bhaktas of the Śri Devi?

इति राजर्षिण पृष्ठी व्यास: सत्यवतीसुतः ।

तमुवाच मुनिश्रेषः प्रसन्वदनो मुनि: ॥ 5 ॥

When the Rājarsi asked thus, the Muni Krṣna

Dvaipāyana, the son of Satyavati began to narrate gladly the several deeds of the Kings.

व्यास उवाच

निशामय महाराज विस्तारादृते मप ।

सोमसूर्यान्वयनां च तथाउन्ये समुद्धम ॥ 6 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! I am now narrating to you in detail the origin, etc., of the Lunar and the Solar dynasties as well as of other kings in their connection. Hear attentively.

शिष्योनाभिसारोजाडे ब्रहासभूच्छतुरनाः ।

तपस्तत्वा समाराध्य महावैदीं सुवुर्भाम् ॥ 7 ॥

तया दत्तवो धाता जगल्हनुं समुद्धातः ।

नागकन्मानुर्षी सृष्टि कर्तुं लोकपितामहः ॥ 8 ॥

The four-faced Brahma sprang from the navel of Visnu; engaged in practising Tapasyā, he began to worship the Mahā Devi Durgā, extremely hard to conceive. Mahā Devi, pleased at his worship, granted boon to Brahma; Brahma, the Grandsire of all the Lokas on thus getting the boon, became ready to create the world; but he could not create all on a sudden the human beings.

विद्यार्थ बहुधा चिते सुह्यर्थं चतुरानतः ।

न विस्तारं जगमाग्यु रचितापि महात्मना ॥ 9 ॥

सरबर्ग मानासान्युझानसर्वेश्वाग्रजापति: ।

मरीचिरंगिराउविश्र बसिष्यः पुलहः क्रतुः ।

पुलस्यश्रोति विद्याता: सप्तैते मानासा: सुता: ॥ 10 ॥

Though the creation was eternally fashioned by the Parmātmā Bhagavati, the four-faced Brahmā thinking over in his mind variously, could not quickly spread it out and accomplish it as a veritable fact. Therefore He, the Prajāpati, first created mentally the seven mind-born sons. These were known by the names of Marici, Atri, Anigirā, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vasiṣṭha.

रूदे तोषात्मुजो2प्युर्सगात्रादो2पवत् ।

दक्षांगुगताय4-2प्यैय मानस: सनकादय: ॥ ११ ॥

वागंगुहाइक्षपन्ती जाता स्वर्गीमुन्तरी ।

वीरिणी नाम विख्याता पुगणेषु महीपते ॥ १२ ॥

असिक्षिति च नान्मा सा यस्यां जातोअथ नादरः।

देवर्षिप्रवरः कामं बढ़णो मानस: सुतः ॥ 1 3 ॥

Next sprang Rudra from the anger of Prajāpati, Nārada from his lap; Dakṣa from his right thumb. Thus Sanaka and the other Rṣi were also his mind bornson. O King! The wife of Dakṣa was born from the left thumb of Prajāpati; this all-beautiful daughter is well known in all the Purāṇas by the name of Virinī and Asiknī. Nārada, the chief of the Devarsis, was born, on some other occasion in her womb.

जननेजय उवाच

अत्र मे सैरयो बहुत् वघुकं भवता चचः ।

वीरियां नराटे जातो दक्षाविति महातपः ॥ १ ४ ॥

कयं दक्षस्य पन्चां तु वीरियां नराटे पुनि: ।

जातो हि बहुण: पुत्रो धर्मसंतपासोनमः ॥ १५ ॥

विचित्रमिद्याग्रतां भवता नारदस्य च ।

दक्षाजन्माय भार्थायां तद्वरव सवित्तम् ॥ १६ ॥

Janamejaya said: O Brahman! A great doubt arises in me to hear that the great ascetic Nārada was born of Dakṣa in the womb of Virinī. The Muni Nārada indeed, was the son of Brahmā; moreover he was the foremost of the ascetics and especially endowed with the knowledge of Dharma; how, then, can he be born of the womb of the Dakṣa's wife Virinī. Well, if that be so, then describe, in detail, that wonderful story of the birth of Nārada in the womb of Virinī.

पूर्वद्रेहः कथं मुक्तः शापात्कस्य महात्मना ।

नारदेन बहुजेन कस्माज्ञन्म कृतं मुने ॥ 17 ॥

O Muni! Under whose curse, the high-souled Nārada, though very wise, had to leave his first body and be born again.

व्यास उवाच

ब्रहणासौ समाविष्टो दक्ष: सृष्टथर्मादितः ।

प्रतः सूजेते सुभुगं शुद्धितोः स्वयंपुं च ॥ 18 ॥ 

ततः पझसह्वांश्र उनयामास वीर्यन्ति ।

दक्षः प्रजापतेः पुत्रान्वीरिणयं बलवत्तग्न ॥ 19 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King, Brahmā, the Self-born, with a view to create offspring, ordered first Dakṣa: “Go and multiply innumerable children for the increase of the world.” Thus ordered by his father, the Prajāpati Dakṣa produced five thousand powerful and heroic sons in the womb of Virinī.

दूर्वहा तातारः: पुत्रान्सर्वान्वर्यिषयुप्रजाः ।

उवाच प्रहस-वाचं देविषि: कातनोदितः ॥ 20 ॥

भूवः प्रपाणमाताला सहुकामाः प्रजाः कथम् ।

लौकानां हास्यतां यूयं गमिष्यव न संशयः ॥ 21 ॥

पृष्विथ्या वै प्रपाणं तुं जात्वा कार्यः समुधामः ।

कृतो3सी सिद्धिमायाति नान्यथेति विनिश्रयः ॥ 22 ॥

Seeing all the sons of Dakṣa, desirous to multiply, the Devarsī Nārada, urged on, as it were, by Fate, began to laugh at them. How do you desire to multiply when you know not the dimensions and capacity of earth; so you will, no doubt, be put to ridicule and laughter. Rather, if you proceed on work, knowing beforehand the earth's capacity, your efforts will be fruitful. Other wise, your attempt will, no doubt, end in failure.

वातिगण वत युयं वै यद्धान्ताव भुवलस्तम् ।

सभुघातः प्रजा: कर्तुं कर्थ सिद्धिर्भविष्यति ॥ 23 ॥

Alas! You are awfully illiterate! Not knowing the dimensions of the world, you are ready to multiply your progeny; how, then, can you meet wit success!

व्यास उवाच

नारदेनैवमुक्तासे हर्षशा देवयोगतः ।

अन्योन्यमूचः सहसा सत्यगाह मुनि: किल ॥ 24 ॥

Book VII Chapter 1

जाला प्रमाणमुख्यांस्तु सुखं सक्ष्यामड़े प्रजा: ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing, all on a sudden, these words, Haryaśva and other sons began to speak with each other “What this Muni has told, is very true.” Let us then ascertain the earth’s dimensions; we can easily multiply afterwards.

इति संचिन्य ते सर्वे प्रयाता: प्रेक्षितुं पुच: ॥ 2 5 ॥

तलं सर्वे परितुतं वचनात्रादस्य च ।

प्राययं केचित्रतः कामं दक्षिणस्यां तथायरे । २६ ॥

प्रतीच्यानुतरस्यां तु कृतोत्साहा: संमततः ।

दक्ष: पुजानान्द्व्य वा पीडितस्तु शुचा धृष्णम् । २७ ॥

Thus saying, they all went out to reconnoitre the earth. Thus excited at Nārada's words, some went eastward, some southwards, some towards the north and some went to west all simultaneously and, as they liked, to make a survey of the earth. When the sons went away, Dakṣa became exceedingly sorry on their absence.

अन्यानुत्पाद्यामास प्रजार्थ कृतनिध्रयः ।

तेपि तनोघातः कर्तु प्रजार्थयुधमं सुत्ति ॥ 28 ॥

नारदः प्राह तान्द्वया पूर्वे यद्वचनं भूति: ।

बालिशा बत यूयं वै यद्धताला भुवः किल ॥ 29 ॥

प्रमाणं तु प्रजाः कर्तुं प्रवृत्ता: केन हेतुतः ।

शुवा वायवं मुनेतेर्पि मत्वा सर्व विमोहिताः ॥ 30 ॥

जमु: सर्वे यथापूर्वे भातरक्षितितास्ताव ।

तान्सुतान्यस्थितान्द्वहा दक्षः कोवसमन्त्रिनः ॥ 31 ॥

शणाप नारदे रोषाच्यशोकसमूढ़वात् ।

Bent again on multiplying, he begat other sons; those sons again wanted to procreate. Seeing them, Nārada again laughed and said: "Alas! What fools are you! Not knowing the dimensions of the earth, why are you ready to procreate?" They were deluded by Nārada's words, took them as true, and went out as their elder brothers did. Not being able to see those sons, Prajāpati Dakṣa became very sorrowful for them and cursed Nārada in rage.

दर्श उवाच

नासिला मे सुता यस्यास्तमाश्रयावपूर्वि ॥ 32 ॥

पायोनानेन दुर्बुद्धे गर्भावसं प्रजेति च ।

पुत्रो मे भव कामं तं चतो मे धर्षिता: सुतः ॥ 33 ॥

Dakṣa said: “O Evil-minded One! You have destroyed my sons; so be yourself destroyed; you will have to be born in the womb for your sin in causing the death of my sons; you have caused my sons to go abroad; so you must be born as my son.

इति शपतस्तो जातो वीरियणां नारदो मुनि: ।

पहिर्धूंधोरूपजल्कन्य वीरिष्यामिति नः श्रुन्ति ॥ 34 ॥

Thus cursed by Dakṣa, Nāradā had to take his birth in the womb of Virinī. I heard also that the Prajāpati Dakṣa begat afterwards sixty daughters in her womb.

शोकें विहाय पुजाणां दक्षः परमधर्मवित् ।

तासां जयोद्वा प्रादात्करणयाय महात्मने ॥ 35 ॥

द्वा धर्माय सोमाय सलविशंगित भुपते ।

दे चैव भृगवे प्रादाचलतरोप्रत्येभिने ॥ 36 ॥

दे चैवांगिरसे कन्ये तर्वेबांगिरसे पुनः ।

तासां पुत्राक्ष योगाक्ष देवाक्ष दानवासला ॥ 37 ॥

जाता बलसमायुक्ता: परस्परियोक्षतः ।

रागद्वान्विततः सर्वे परस्परिविरितः ।

सर्वे मोहावृताः शूरा हृषयबन्तिमाधिनः ॥ 38 ॥

इति शीदैवीभगवते महापुराणे सतमास्कन्ये

प्रभवोउध्याय: 11 1 11

O King! Dakṣa, the great knower of Dharma, then gave up the sorrows for his sons and married his thirteen daughters to the high-souled Kaśyapa, ten daughters to Dharma, twenty-seven daughters to the Moon, two to Bhrgu, four to Ariṣṭanemi, two to Krśāśva and the remaining two to Aṅgirā. Their sons and grandsons, the Devas and Dānavas, became powerful but antagonistic towards each other. All of them were heroes and very Māyāvīs; so, deluded by greed and jealousy, they quarrelled amongst each other.

Here ends the First Chapter in the Seventh Book on the beginning of the narrative of the Solar and the Lunar lines of kings in the Mahā Purānam Śrīmadveṭbīhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

