CHAPTER XII

On Vasistha's Course on the Trisāniku

व्यास उवाच

एवं प्रवोधितः पित्रा त्रिशंकुः प्रगतो नृपः ।

तथेति पितरं प्राह प्रेमपतृत्याद्या पिता ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus giving the advice to his son, the King Triśanku was excited with feelings of love and, in a choked voice, said to his father that he would fulfil what he had been ordered.

विप्रापात्रय मन्त्रान्वेक्षास्थिवगताद्न् ।

अधिषेक्षाय संभारात्कार्यामास सत्वम् ॥ 2 ॥

The King then called the Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas and Mantrams, and had all the materials for installation collected quickly.

सलिले सर्वतीर्थानं समानाय्य विश्रापितः ।

प्रकृतीश्र समाहुय सामन्ताभ्युपतितंस्या ॥ 3 ॥

He brought the waters from all the sacred place of prigrimages; he then called together with great respect all the kings.

पूर्णेयेई विधितचत्स्मै ददावासनुपतमम् ।

अभिविष्य सुत राज्ये त्रिशंकुं विधिवित्ति ॥ 4 ॥

On a sacred day, the father installed his son on the throne and gave him, in accordance with due rites and ceremonies, the royal throne.

तृतीयसाम्थां पुण्यं ज्याह भार्याय सुतः ।

वने त्रिशयाग्कृते चचार दुक्षं ततः ॥ 5 ॥

The King then adopted with his wife the third Vānaprastha stage of life and practised a severe tapasyā on the banks of the Ganges.

काले प्रपते ययी स्वर्ग पूजितस्बद्गरीयि ।

इज्ञासनसमीपस्थो राजा रविवस्ता ॥ 6 ॥

Then in due course of time the King went to the Heavens. There he began to shine like a second Sun by the side of Indra, respected by all the gods.

राजोवाच

पूर्वं भगवता प्रोक्तं कथायोगेन सम्रंपत् ।

सत्यव्रतो वसिष्ठेन शगतो दोर्धायिधात्रिकल ॥ 7 ॥

कुपितेन विगारचलं प्रपितेगे गुरुणा ततः ।

कर्थं सुकः विगारचत्वादिव्येतलंशयः प्रभो ॥ 8 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Bhagavan! You spoke before in course of conversation that Satyavrata was cursed by Vasistha on the killing of his cow to become a Piśāca; how then he got himself freed of this curse. There is a doubt on this point. Kindly clear it and oblige. Satyavrata was cursed; hence pronounced unfit to succeed to the throne.

न सिंहासनयोयो हि भयंच्छायसपित्रतः ।

मुनिना मोचितः शापात्केनान्येन च कर्माणा ॥ 9 ॥

एतनैः बृहि विशर्षे शापमोक्षणाकाराणम् ।

आनीतस्तु कर्ष विश्रा स्वगृहे ततुष्णाकृति: ॥ 10 ॥

How was the Muni, by what actions, was he freed of the curse? How could the father bring back to his home his son of the form of a Piśāca? O Viprarṣi! Kindly narrate to me how the Muni was freed of his curse.

Book VII Chapter XII

व्यास उवाच

वसिष्ठेन च शलोउसौ सहा: शैराचतां गतः ।

दुर्षेध्धातिरुद्धर्षः सर्वलोकप्रयंकरः ॥11॥

यदेवोपासिता देही भक्न्या सत्यवतेने है ।

तया प्रसव्या राजनिद्व्यदेहः कृततः क्षणात् ॥ १२ ॥

Vyāsa said: Cursed by Vasiṣṭha, Satyavrata became then and there transformed into a Piśāca, very ugly, violent and terrible to all; but when he worshipped the Devi with devotion, immediately the Devi gave him a beautiful divine body.

प्रिशाचत्वं गतं तस्य पारं चैव क्षयं गतम् ।

विषयामा चातितेजस्वी संभृतस्तकृष्यगुत् ॥ 13. ॥

विशेषोप्रि प्रसात्या जातः शफिष्यसदातः ।

पितासपि च कंभूबास्य प्रेमयुक्तत्वगुळ्हा ॥ 14 ॥

By the grace of the Devi, his sins were all washed away and his Piśāca form vanished. Satyavrata, then, freed from his sins became very much vigorous and energetic. Vasiṣṭha also became pleased with him, blessed thus by the Supreme Force; and so was his father, too.

रात्यं शणास धर्मात्मा मृते चितरि पार्थिति ।

ईंजे च विधियैयर्वेईवेद्वेती सतातनीम् ॥ 15 ॥

When his father died, the virtuous Satyavrata became King, governed his subjects and performed various sacrifices and worshipped, too, the Eternal Mother of the Gods.

तस्य पुत्रो बभूवाय हीरुधानः सुगोपनः ।

सक्षणे: ग्रास्किनिर्दैः संवृत्तगतिसुन्द्रः ॥ १६ ॥

O King! Trišanku had a very beautiful son born to him, named Hariścandra, endowed in all his limbs with auspicious signs.

युवराजं सुतं कृत्वा विशंकृ: पृथिवीपितः ।

मानुषेण शरीरेण स्वर्गे भोक्तु मनो द्वे ॥ 17 ॥

The King Trišanku wanted to make his son Yuvarāja (the Crown prince) and then in his that very body while living, enjoy the Heavens.

वसिष्ठसाश्रयं माता प्रणाय विधिवर्षुः ।

उदाच वचनं प्रीतः कृतार्जिनपुद्रतदा ॥ १ ८ ॥

The King went to the Āśrama of Vasiṣtha and

gladly asked him, with folded palms, bowing down before him duly.

राजोवाच

ब्रहुपत्र महाभाग सर्वेन्यविशारद ।

विज्ञिति मे सुमनसा श्रोतुमर्हिति तापस ॥ 19 ॥

“O Ascetic! You are the son of Brahmā, versed in all the Vaidik Mantrams; so you are exceedingly fortunate; now I beg to inform you one thing; hear it gladly.

इच्छा मेउषा सम्यपना खर्लीकसुखाय च ।

अनेवैर शर्जिणे भोगान्भोतुभमातुबान् ॥ 20 ॥

I now desire to enjoy the happiness of the Heavens and all the enjoyments of the Devas, while I am in this body.

अप्यापेधिष्ठ संसासः क्रीडितुं नन्दने बने ।

देवगन्धर्वांगना च झोतखं मधुरं किल ॥ 21 ॥

To enjoy in the Nandana Garden, to live with the Apsarās and to hear the sweet music of the Devas and the Gandharvas, these ideas now have taken a strong hold of my heart.

ययाजय त्वं मदजेनागु तादुर्गेन महामुने ।

यधानेन शनैरिण बस लोकें विशिष्टिण् ॥ 22 ॥

Therefore, O Great Muni! Engage me in such a sacrifice as will enable me, in this very body to live in the Svarloka.

समर्पोर्स मुनिश्रिक कुरु कार्य ममाधान ।

प्रपयाणु मघं कृत्वा देवलोकं दुगासद् ॥ 23 ॥

O Muni! You are fully competent to do this; therefore be ready for this. Have the sacrifice done and let me have quickly the Devaloka, so difficult to be obtained!

वसिष्य उवाच

राजन्मान्यद्रत्न र्वर्गे वास सुदुर्भिः ।

मृत्यक्ष हिं धुवं सर्ग: कथितः: पुण्यकर्माण ॥ 24 ॥

तस्माड्धिपेम सर्वत्र दुर्वभाव्य मनोरथान ।

अपसरीधिष्ठ संवारो जीवमानस्य दुरर्भिः ॥ 25 ॥

कुक घ्यान्महाभाग मृत: स्वर्गमवोभ्यसि ।

Vasistha said: "O King! It is exceedingly hard to live in the Heavens while in this mortal body.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

The departed only live in the Heavens by their merits, this is a known fact. Therefore, O Omniscient One! Your desire is hard to be attained. I am afraid of this. O King! The living men can hardly enjoy the Apsarās. Therefore, O Blessed One! Do the sacrifice first. Then, when you leave this body, you will go to the Heavens."

व्यास उवाच

इत्याकाण्यं वचस्तस्य राजा परमदुभानः ॥ 26 ॥

उवाच वचनं घृयो वसिषं पूर्वीरितम् ।

न त्वं यावजसे बहुत-गवविशेषाण्च मां वहि ॥ 27 ॥

अन्यं पुरोहितं कृत्वा यध्येउई क्रिकल साम्यानम् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! The Maharṣī Vasistha was already angry with the King; therefore when he spoke these words, the King heard and became absent-minded. He again spoke to the Maharṣi: “O Brāhmaṇa! If you do not allow me to do the sacrifice, on account of your haughtiness, I will have the sacrifice performed now by another priest.

तद्धूला वचनं तस्य वसियुः कोपसंयुतः ॥ 28 ॥

शशाप भूपति चेति चापड़तलो भव दुपते ।

अनेन त्वं शरीरेण श्रघचो घन सत्वम् ॥ 29 ॥

स्वांकृतन्त पायिष सुरपीधवदूषित ।

बह्यपनीहीद्धिज्ञ राममांगीविदूषक ॥ 30 ॥

न ते स्वर्गाति: पाप मृतस्पायी कर्धचन ।

Vasistha became very angry at the words of the King and cursed him: "O evil-minded One! Be as soon as possible a Cāndāla in this body. You have committed acts by which your path to the Heaven is obstructed. You have stolen a Brāhmins wife, and defiled the path of religion; you have killed the Surabhi Cow and you are a libertine. Therefore, O Sinner! Never you will go to the Heavens, even after your death."

यमस उवाच

इत्युक्तो गुहाण राजांक्षिगुकस्तक्षणादिं ॥ 31 ॥

तत्र तेन शरीण वभूव भुधचाकृति: ।

कुण्डवैज्ञमये चाधि जाते तस्य च तक्षणात् ॥ 32 ॥

देहे चन्दनान्यश्र विगन्यो हृषयचत्वा ।

नीलबर्णैर्ध सझाते दिव्ये पीताब्रते तनौ ॥ 33 ॥

गजवणोंरभवहैंः शापातस्य महात्मनः ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing these harsh words from the Guru, Triśanku became immediately Cāndāla in that very body. His golden earrings became turned into iron; the sweet sandal smell over his body smelled like faeces; his beautiful yellow clothes became blue, the colour of his body became like that of an elephant, due to his curse.

शकल्युपासकारोधेण फलमेततधूव्य ॥ 34 ॥

तस्माश्रीशक्तिभक्तो हि नावामान्यः कदाचन ।

O King! Those who are the worshippers of the Supreme Force can produce such things when they are angry; there is not the slightest doubt in this. Therefore one ought never to insult any devotee of the Supreme Force.

गायकीजपनिष्ठे हि वसिष्ठो मुनिसतपः ॥ 35 ॥

दृष्टा निंदा निजं द्रैहं त्रा जानु दुष्पावणतान् ।

न जगाम गृहे दीनो वन्मेवाधितो यद्ये ॥ 36 ॥

The Muni Vasistha is always engaged in repeating silently the Gāyatrī of the Devi. So what wonder is there that the body of the King will be reduced to such a wretched state by his rage.

चित्तनायामत दुःखात्तिचरंग़ः शोकबिढ़तः ।

कि कतीपि बल चतछापि द्रेहो मेठतीवर्भिति: ॥ 37 ॥

The King Triśanku became very sorry to see his ugly body; he did not go home; rather he remained in the forest in that form and poor dress.

कर्तव्यों नैव पर्यामि येन मे दुःखसंक्षयः।

गृहे पच्छायि चेतुग्र: पीक्षितोउ घावियत ॥ 38 ॥

He began to think, distressed with sorrow and overpowered with misery: “My body is now blameable to the extreme, so what to do and where to go in this wretched state! I find no remedy to exhaust all my sufferings.

भार्वाद्धि शुच्चं सूद्ध्वा नार्थिकारं क्रियत् ।

सचिवा नादिर्ध्योत वीक्ष्य मार्मीवृणु पुनः ॥ 39 ॥

ज्ञातयो बन्युवर्गश सजुतो न भविष्यति ।

सर्वस्लत्क्त्रय मे नूनं जीवितात्मारणं वतम् ॥ 40 ॥

If I go home, my son will be, no doubt, very

Book VII Chapter XII

much pained with sorrow. My wife, when she will see my Cāndāla appearance, she went accept me; my ministers will not regard me as they used to do before.

विश वा भक्षियलाउढ़ पतिला वा जलागेवे ।

कृत्वा वा कणठवाग़ं च दैह्यवागं करोम्यहम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

My friends and relations, when they will come to me, will not serve me with the former care. So it is far better to die than to live, thus despised.

जनौ वा जलिते देंं जुहोम विधिव्यद्वलात ।

कृत्वा वाज्ञनं प्राणांसत्याजीय दृषिलाभ्यूम ॥ 4 2 ॥

I will drink poison or drown myself in waters or hang myself. Or I will burn myself in the funeral pyre duly or I will quit this blameable life by starvation.

आसहत्या भवेकूनं पुनर्जन्मिन जन्मिन ।

श्रचत्वं च गार्ण श्रह्यादीषाद्वेदयि ॥ 4 3 ॥

पुर्निधार्यं भृपालश्रोता समर्पितयत् ।

आसाहत्या न कतैव्या सर्वैव यमार्धुत्न ॥ 4 4 ॥

But, Alas! I will be guilty of suicide; so again due to this sin I will be born a Cāndāla and I will be again cursed. Thus thinking, the King again thought that at present he ought not to commit suicide by any means.

भोक्त्वयं स्वकृतं कर्म देहेनानेन कानने ।

भोगेनास्य विषाकस्य भविता सर्वेधा क्षयः ॥ 45 ॥

"I will have to suffer for my Karma; and, after due suffering, this Karma will be exhausted. So I will suffer in this forest for my Karma in this my body.

प्रात्यकर्माणं भोगादन्यथा न क्षयो भवेत् ।

तस्मावयाउन घोक्तव्यं कृतं कर्म शुभागुभम् ॥ 46 ॥

Without the enjoyment of the fruits, the past actions can never die out; therefore all actions done by me, auspicious or inauspicious, I will enjoy or suffer in this place.

कुर्वेपुणवश्रमाध्यागे तीर्थानां सेवानं तथा ।

सरणं चाधिकायास्तु साधूनां सेवन्त तथा ॥ 47 ॥

Always to remain close to a holy Śārama, to wander in holy places of pilgrimage, to remember

the Devi Ambikā, and to serve the saints will now be my duties.

एवं कर्महयं नूनं कारिच्यापि वने वसन् ।

भाययोगाकदाचितचतु भवेत्साधुसमागनः ॥ 48 ॥

Thus I will no doubt exhaust all my actions, residing in this forest; then, if chance permits, and if I meet with a saintly person, all my intentions will be crowned with success.

इति संचित्य मनसा तयक्ता स्वनगरं नृपः ।

गड़ातीर गतः कामं गोशंचतवे संस्थितः ॥ 49 ॥

हरिंडीडरन्त द्रावा पितृः गोपाय्य कारणम् ।

दुःखितः सचिवांस्तत्र प्रेययामास पार्थिवः ॥ 50 ॥

Thus thinking, the King quitting his city went to the banks of the Ganges and repenting very much, remained there on the Ganges. The King Hariścandra came to know the cause of his father's curse and with a sorrowful heart sent ministers to him.

सचिवास्त्र गताल्गु तपुचुः प्रशयाचिताः ।

प्रणाय भधचाकारं नि:श्रसन्ते मुडुपुंहुः ॥ 51 ॥

राजन्युगेन ते नूनं प्रेषितान्समुपगतान् ।

अवेहि सचिवास्त्वं नो हरिश्छोज्ञान स्थितान् ॥ 52 ॥

Like a Cāndāla, the King was respiring frequently; at this time the ministers went to him and bowing humbly, said: "O King! Your son has ordered us to come here; we have come at his command; we are the ministers of the King Hariścandra.

युवराजसुतः प्राह यतच्छुणुच नराधिपः ।

आनयखे नृपे युवं संमान्य चितरं मम ॥ 53 ॥

Know this verily, O King! Kindly hear what the Crown Prince has said: "Go and bring my Father here without any delay."

तस्माझाजनसामाष्ठ राखं प्रति गत्थवधः ।

सेवां सर्वे कारियन्ति सचिवाश्र प्रजासना ॥ 54 ॥

Therefore, O King! Cast aside your mental agonies and come to the city. The ministers, the subjects all will be always at your service.

गुरु प्रसातद्विषाम्भः स यथा तु द्वेत वै ।

प्रसाधोसी महातेवा दुःखस्यन्तं कार्थिति ॥ 55 ॥

We will all try our best to please Vasiṣṭha, so that he may favour you. And that greatly illustrious Muni being pleased will certainly remove your sorrows quickly.

इति पुत्रेण ते राजकन्थितं बहुधा किल ।

तस्माद्रमन्मेवायु रोचतां निजस्वानि ॥ 56 ॥

O King! Thus your son has spoken to us many words; so now be pleased to go to your own abode.

ध्यास उवाच

इति तेषां नृपः श्रुत्वा भाषितं श्रपचाकृति: ।

स्वपूरं गमनायासी न मति कृतावन्दः ॥ 57 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! That Cāndāla-like King, hearing even their words thus, did not consent to go back to his house.

तानुवाच तटा वाक्यं ब्रन्तु सचिवा: पुम् ।

गाला पुरं महाभागा बुवैतुं वचनाच्च मे ॥ ५८ ॥

नागमिष्याम्यं पुत्र कुरे जयमन्तिनतः ।

Rather he told them: “Ministers, go back, all of you to the city; and at my word, tell my son that I won’t go back to my house. Better leaving off all idleness, you better govern the Kingdom carefully.

मानयन्बाहाणान्देवान्यजन्यज्ञतेजकाः ॥ ५९ ॥

नाहं भुधचवेण गहिनेन महात्माधि: ।

आगाधिष्यायोटायां सर्व गच्छुं गाधिरम् ॥ 60 ॥

Shew your respect specially to the Brāhmins and perform various sacrifices and worship the Devas. I do not like in this blameable Cāndāla form to go to the city of Ayodhyā with the high-souled ones;

so you all go back to Ayodhyā without any further delay.

पुरं सिंहासने स्थाय द्विश्रन्ह महावलम् ।

कुर्वर्त राज्यकर्माणि यूयं तत्र मामज्ञा ॥ 6 1 ॥

Instal, at my order, my powerful son Harisācandra on the throne and do all these stately duties."

इत्यादितास्तते नुं कनढुश्रातून यूणम् ।

सचिवा निर्येयुस्तुर्णं नत्वा तं च वजानप्रम् ॥ 62 ॥

When the ministers heard thus the King ordering them, they began to cry very much, and, bowing down, they went away early out of the hermitage.

अयोध्यायुपगात्य पुर्णेरूढ़ि विधिपुर्णकम् ।

अधिषेकं तत्व चकुर्हिरिश्रद्रस्य मूर्टि ते ॥ ६३ ॥

On coming back to Ayodhyā they regularly installed on a sacred day the King Harisācanda with Abhiṣeka water, purified with Mantrams.

अधिष्टितस्तु तेत्यसी सचिवाश्र पुनाया ।

राज्यं चकात घर्भिशु: पितर्त चित्तयन्मृगम् ॥ 64 ॥

श्री श्रीमदैर्षिगायतो महापुराणो सत्नराकन्धे

ब्रदासीअव्याः ॥ 65 ॥

Thus the powerful virtuous Harisācranda, on being installed on the royal throne by the command of the King, remembered always his father and began to govern his Kingdom with his ministers according to the dictates of Dharma.

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the description of Vasisṭha's curse on Trisānku in

the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

