CHAPTER V

On Cyavana's Getting His Youth

यास उवाच

तयोस्तूद्रावितं श्रुत्वा वेयमाना नृपात्मवा ।

धैर्यमालंख्य तौ तत्र बथाये पितभाषिणी ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing their words, the princess began to tremble; but holding on patience she spoke to them in reserved terms thus:

देवौ वां रविष्युजी च सर्वजी सुरुसमतो ।

सर्ती मां धर्मोहितां च नैवं वदितुमईः ॥ २ ॥

"You are the sons of Sūrya and you are the acknowledged deities amongst the gods; specially you know everything, I am a chaste virtuous woman. You ought not to speak to me in the above manner.

विज्ञा दत्ता सुरप्रेष्ठ मुनवे योगाधर्मिणे ।

कयं चेष्ठधीय तं मार्ग पुंड्रतरीगणसेवितम् ॥ ३ ॥

श्रडणसं सर्वलोकस्य कर्मसाक्षी दिवाकरः ।

क्रयपाच्चैव सम्पूर्ति नैवं भाषितुमईः ॥ ४ ॥

O Twin Devas! Father has betrothed me to the Muni practising the Yoga Dharma; besides I am chaste; how can I behave like a prostitute! This

Sun is the Witness of the actions good or bad of all people; He is therefore looking on our actions also. Besides you both are born in the family of the high-souled Kaśyapa.

कुलकन्या पर्चितं चलकत्या कवम्यां भजेजरम् ।

असारोउस्मिन्त संसरो जानंतं धर्मपिर्यम् ॥ 5 ॥

यथेच्छं गच्छतं देवौ शपां दास्यामि वान्नयो ।

सुकान्याद्रं च शपतिः पतिभक्तिपरायण ।। 6 ॥

Thus it is utterly wrong for you to utter such (irreligious and infamous) words. You know well the course of Dharma, what is religious and what is irreligious in this world which has got nothing substantial; how can a family woman leave her husband and serve another? Go wherever you like, O Sinless Devas! I am the daughter Sukanyā of the King Śaryāti, devoted to my husband. Otherwise I will curse you,”

व्यात उवाच

जूल्याकार्यं वचस्तस्य नास्त्वी विन्सितो भूगुम् ।

तावबूतां पुनस्त्वेजां शंकमानौ भयं मुने: ॥ 7 ॥

राजपुत्र प्रसत्री तु धर्मेण वरवर्गिनि ।

वरं वरय सुश्रोषि दास्यावः श्रेयसे तव ॥ 8 ॥

Vyāsa said: O Bhārata! Hearing these words, the Aśvīns were greatly surprised, and, afraid of the Muni, spoke again: “O Princess! We are very much pleased to see your chastity; therefore, O Beautiful Woman! Ask boon from us; we will grant for your welfare.

जानीहि प्रमदे नूनमावां देहिभिषयते ।

युवानं रूपसम्यत्र प्रकुर्बय पत्ते तव ॥ 9 ॥

O honoured Woman! We, the physicians of the gods, will certainly make your husband exceedingly beautiful and young.

ततख्यायामासंक पतिमेकतमं वुणु ।

समानरूपदेहानां मध्ये चातुर्पयिच्छते ॥ 10 ॥

सा तदोर्वदंचनं शुत्वा विक्सिता स्वपति तदा ।

गलोबारच तयोबाक्यं ताथयापुकर्तं यद्धतुम् ॥ 11 ॥

O Smart and Intelligent One! When we three will be exactly the same in figure, age and lustre! you better can make one us your husband." Hearing their words Sukanyā became greatly amazed and went to her own husband and spoke everything what they, the God's physicians, said.

सुकन्योचार

स्वामिन्यूयुक्ती देवी सम्पाती च्यवान्याने ।

दृष्टी मया विद्यदौंने नासली भूगुनन्दन ॥ १२ ॥

Sukanyā said: “O Husband! The Aśvins, the Sūrya’s sons, have come close to our Āśrama. I have seen the two Devas and their bright bodies.

वीक्ष्य में चास्वसईर्दी जातौ कामातुरवृष्णे ।

क्रवितं घवर्न स्वामियन्ति ते नवत्येवनम् ॥ 13 ॥

दिव्यदेहं कल्प्यवहशुक्यन्तं मृनिं किल ।

एतेन समयेनाङ्त तं शृणु तं मयोदितम् ॥ 14 ॥

समावयवक्षरं च करियावः परितं तल ।

तत्र जयाणामयमाके परितेकतमं वृषु ॥ 15 ॥

Seeing me beautiful they were overpowered with passion and told me. “We will, be sure, make your blind husband, young, bright and give him two eyes again; but you will have to make one condition. Hear it: Your husband will be exactly

like us and you will have to select your husband amongst three of us."

तच्छूवाउह्मिहायाता प्रहुं त्वां कार्यम्बुद्धान् ।

कि कतन्यवमतः साधो बृह्यास्म-कार्यसंकटे ॥ १ ६ ॥

O Holy One Hearing this as strange, I now come to inform you. Now judge and say what I am to do now.

देवयायाउपि दुर्जिया न जाने कपटं तयोः ।

यद्राजाय सर्वेत्र तत्कारोमि तद्वीक्षितम् ॥ 17 ॥

The Deva's Māyā is very difficult to comprehend; the more so, when I do not know their intentions! O Omniscient One! I will act as you desire."

च्यवन उवाच

गच्छ कान्तेउषा नास्त्वी वचनान्मय सुवते ।

आनास्य समीपं मे शीघं देवाधिपचर्ये ॥ १८ ॥

क्रियतात्मागु तद्वाक्यं नात्र कार्या विचारणा ।

Cyavana said: “O Beloved! Go just now, at my word, to the Aśvins and bring them, O auspicious One! before me. What more shall I say than this: Go and observe, what they say, as early as possible. There is no need to think over this matter.”

व्यास उवाच

एवं सा समनुसात तत्र नावा बचोउझवीत् ॥ १९ ॥

क्रियतामागु नासकी समयेन सुतेतमी ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus getting the permission from her husband, Sukanyā went immediately to them and said: "O Aśvins! You are the chief gods; now do as you say. I agree to observe what you desire."

तच्छूचा चाश्रिणी वाययं तस्याती तत्र चागती ॥ 20 ॥

उचतू ततवपुरी तां पतिस्तव शिशलपः ।

रूपार्थं च्यवनस्पूर्ण ततोउम्म: प्रविशेग्र ह ॥ 21 ॥

Hearing her words, the two Devas then went to the Muni's Aśrama and told the princess: "Let your husband enter in the midst of the water. The aged Cyavana Muni went down quickly in the midst of waters to attain a good form.

अधिनावपि पश्रान्त्रविष्टी सर उत्तमम् ।

ततस्ते निःसृतात्मासारसस्तक्षणात्वयः ॥ 22 ॥

Book VII Chapter V

Next the two Aśvins entered into the water of that tank. A few minutes after, the three persons came out of the tank.

तुल्यरूपा दिव्यदेहा युवानः सदुगाः किल ।

दिव्यकुष्ठतन्यभावाशा: समानावयवास्तताः ॥ 23 ॥

All were equally bright, equally beautiful, equally young and their limbs were decorated equally with earrings and various other ornaments. तेउबुचनाहिता: सर्वे वृषीध वरवर्धिनि ।

अस्माकभीक्षिति भईे पत्ते त्वमलानाने ॥ 24 ॥

यमस्नावधिका प्रीतस्ते वृषुध्व वराने ।

They all spoke simultaneously: “O Auspicious One! There is no other woman beautiful like you, especially your face is very clean and fair; therefore select any one of us three as your husband. O Fair One! Whomever you love most, choose him.

व्यास उतच

सा दृष्ट्वा तुल्यक्रपत्नास्मानवयसस्ता ॥ 25 ॥

एकस्वारामूल्यवेधोंकी-वे देवसुतोपायन् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Sukanyā then saw their bodies are equally bright and beautiful; not the least difference is to be found in beauty, age, voice and dress.

सा तु संशयापात्रा बीक्ष्य तान्सद्धगुक्तीन् ॥ 26 ॥

अजानाती पति संम्यन्त्याकुता समन्वितन्त् ।

She became doubtful on seeing their equal appearances. The princess, not being able to distinguish her husband, became very anxious and thought:

किं कंपोक प्रयस्तुल्याः कं कुणोभि न वेषण्डव्छ् ॥ 27 ॥

पत्ति देवसुता होते संशोय पतितास्म्यहम् ।

“What am I to do now? Whom to choose? They are exactly the same. I cannot distinguish who is my real husband?

इउजलादिंमं सभ्यदोषाभ्यामिक कलित्यम् ॥ 28 ॥

कर्तेल किं किया चाचा मरणं समुपानातम् ।

This may be the magic set up by the two Aśvins. However, I am put to a great crisis. I won't ever select another who is not my husband.

न मया पतिमुसूझ बरणीयः कर्धंचन ॥ 29 ॥

देवसत्यापुनिकः कक्षिद्वित्येभा मम धरणा ।

Therefore my death is well nigh; what to do now? The third form seen now may be also a Deva's son."

इति संचित्व मनसा परां विधेश्धां शिवान् ॥ 30 ॥

दस्ये भगवती देर्वी तुधाव च कृणोदरी ।

Thus cogitating, she resolved to meditate on the Highest Prakrti, the Lady of the Universe, the most Auspicious One. Then the thin-bellied princess began to sing the hymns of the Bhagavatī.

सुकन्योवाच

शरणं त्वां जगमातः प्राणतप्रेम भृणतु:खिता ॥ 31 ॥

रक्ष मेउषा सतीधर्मं नामृमि चरणी तव ।

Sukanyā said: “O World-Mother! Under most painful circumstances I take refuge; preserve my chastity; I bow down to thy feet.

नम: पद्योद्धृदे देविनः नः शंकरात्वणे ॥ 32 ॥

विष्णुपिये नयो नलिम्य वेदमातः सरस्वति ।

इदं जगच्चया मुंई सर्वे स्थावारजमाम् ॥ 33 ॥

पासि लविमदम्यथा तथाान्ति सलोकानाले ।

O Devi! Salutations to Thee, born of lotus. O Thou, the dear consort of Śañkara! Salutations to Thee. O Thou favourite to Viṣṇu, O Mother of the Vedas! O Sarasvatī! Salutations to Thee. Thou hast created the world, moving and unmoving; Thou art preserving it without being least excited; again Thou art swallowing it for the peace and well-being of all.

ब्रह्मविष्णुमहेशानां जननी त्वं सुर्मेमता ॥ 34 ॥

बुद्धिद्वासि सल्मानां ज्ञानिनां मोक्ष्यत सदा ।

What more, Thou art the Most Worshipful Mother of Brahmā, Visju, and Maheśa. Thou always illumined the understanding of the illiterate and Thou always grantest liberation to the Jñāins.

अज्ञा तं प्रकृति: पूर्णी पृंक्षपियदर्शना ॥ 35 ॥

भृक्तिमुक्तिप्रदास्ति त्व प्राणिनं विश्वतदानम् ।

अज्ञानं दुःखदा कामा सत्त्वानां मुखसाधानं ॥ 36 ॥

सिद्धिद्वा योगिनामंब जयदा कीर्तिंदा पुनः ।

Thou art the Prime Prakṛti in fulness and the Beloved of the Prime Puriṣa. Thou grantest Bhukti

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

(enjoyment) and Mukti (freedom) to the souls that are cleansed and pure; Thou givest pain to those that are entirely void of knowledge and Thou grantest happiness to those that are endowed with Satva Guna. O Mother! Thou bestowet Siddhi (the success, the eight supernatural powers), fame, and victory to the Yogis!

शरणं त्वं प्रवासास्मि विस्तयं घरमं नाति ॥ 37 ॥

पर्ति दृषीव मे मातर्मनास्मिछोकासारते ।

देवाभ्यां रचितं कूटं कं बुणोमि विमोहिता ॥ 38 ॥

पर्ति दृषीय सर्वेत्रे विदित्वा मे सतीत्रतम् ।

Being merged in an ocean of bewilderment, I come now to take refuge unto Thee. O Mother! The two Devas are playing hypocrisy with me; thus puzzled I ca'nt fix my mind whom to select; therefore I am merged in an ocean of sorrow. Save me by shewing my real husband. O Omniscient One! Knowing my vow of chastity dost Thou enlighten me to so that I can know my husband.

व्यास उवाच

एवं सुत्ता तदा देखी तथा त्रिपुसुन्दरी ॥ 39 ॥

इदयेप्रस्थानसदा ज्ञानं दद्वावधु सुखोदयम् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus pleased by the Sukanyā's prayers, the Devi Tripura Sundarī then imparted to her the pleasant Sattva Jñāna (knowledge pertaining to Sattva Guna).

निश्रित्य मनसा तुल्यवयोरूपधार्यसाति ॥ 40 ॥

प्रसभीम्य तु तात्मवर्चिब बाला स्वकं पतिन् ।

She then looked again at the three personages, and though they were similar in appearance and beauty, instantly she recognised mentally her husband and chose him.

ब्रुतेश द च्यवने देवो ननष्ट्री तो बभूवतुः ॥ 4 1 ॥

सतीभर्षे समालोक्य संप्रीति ददतुर्वेम् ।

When Sukanyā selected the Muni Cyavana, the two Devas became greatly pleased to see that.

भगवतः प्रसादेन प्रसत्री तौ सुरोत्तमो ॥ 42 ॥

सुनिमामंत्र तसा गमनायोहात्वाषी ।

The two Devas were pleased by the grace of

Bhagavati; they were further pleased to see the Dharma of chastity and granted her the boon.

लब्धा तु च्यवनो रूपं नेत्रे भार्याँ च यौवनम् ॥ 43 ॥

द्वी3वबीभ्मतोजास्ती नासत्याविद्वे वचः ।

उपकान: कृतोउयं मे युवाभ्यां सुस्सत्मी ॥ 44 ॥

किं बबीम सुखं प्राप्तं संसारोस्मिन्तुने ।

प्राथ भार्यी सुक्रिजानतो कु:ख मे पेभवद्वल्हम् ॥ 45 ॥

They then bade good-bye to Cyavana and were ready to start to their own place when Cyavana being very much pleased to get through their grace, his beauty, youth and wife, interrupted them, saying "O high-minded Devas! You have done much good to me. I used to feel pain every day, in spite of my having this wife having good hairs!

अनस्य चातिकुब्छ्य भोगहीनस्य कानने ।

युवाभयं नयने द्रते यौवन्तं रूपमद्धुतम् ॥ 46 ॥

सम्पादितं ततः किंचिवुक्नुर्गमहं बुवे ।

But owing to your mercy, I cannot describe how happy I am now in this world of woes and troubles. I was very aged and blind and was without any enjoyment but it is you that coming to this forest have brought to me eyes, youth and exquisite beauty. Therefore, O twin Devas! I desire to do something good to you in return.

उपकारिति मित्र थो नोपकुर्णत्कर्धचन ॥ 47 ॥

तं धियासून नरं देवी भवेच्च ऋणवान्युवि ।

तस्मादां वाहितं कैकिवहानुभिच्छाम साम्यन्ति ॥ 48 ॥

Fie on him, who does not return anything for the good that he has received from a beneficent friend. That man remains indebted for ever in this world; therefore I am desirous to give your two now whatever you want.

आत्माने क्रणभोक्षारा देवेशी नृतनस्य च ।

प्रार्थितं वां प्रतास्यामि यदत्पश्य सुगतुर्भेः ॥ 49 ॥

बुबाबां वां मनोदिष्टं प्रीतोरिस सुकुतेन वाम् ।

O twin Devas! Even if the Devas or the Asuras find it difficult to attain, I will give that to you to free myself of the debt I owe to you. I am greatly pleased at your good deed; therefore be kind enough to speak out whatever you desire."

Book VII Chapter VI

སྟན་པ་ཀྱི་ཀྱི་སྟན་པའི་རྒྱལ་མཚོགས་ཀྱི་སྟན་པ་ཀྱི་སྟན་པ་ཀྱི་སྟན་པ་ཀྱི་སྟན་པ་

मुने पितु: प्रसादेन सर्वे नो मनसेशित्मा ॥ 51 ॥

उत्काठा सोमपानस्य वर्तैं नी सुरैः सह ।

भिपजाविति देेवेन निपिडूची चमसघट्रे ॥ 52 ॥

They began to consult with each other, and spoke to the Muni Cyavana who was seated with Sukanya beside him: "O Maharsī! We have got all our desires by the grace of Father! Still it is difficult for us to drink some libation along with the other Devas and we thirst after that very strongly.

गढ़ेगा वित्ते चेउ ब्रहणः कनकावले ।

तस्माचमपि धर्मे यदि शफेर्स ताप्त ॥ 53 ॥

कार्यमेतिद्ध्र कत्थंव वाज्छतं नी सुसंतम्न ।

At the great sacrifice of Brahmā in the Golden Mountain (Kanakācala), Indra, the King of the Devas, ordered us not to drink Soma, as we were physicians.

तृतिड्राय वां बह्न-कुरु वां सोमपायिति ॥ ५४ ॥

विपासाउ्तित सुयुषाया तन्तः समुपायास्यति ।

Therefore, O Knower of Dharma! O Ascetic! You will certainly do us a great favour if you can make us drink the Soma juice; we would be very glad and have our desires satisfied."

च्यवनस्तु तयोः प्राह तच्छुत्वा वचनं मुचु ॥ 55 ॥

यदहं रूपसमयजो वयसा च सम्पिततः ।

Thus hearing the words of the Aśvins, Maharṣi Cyavana gladly spoke to them the following gentle words.

कृतो भवद्ध्वां वृद्धः सन्थायां च प्रणताविति ॥ 56 ॥

तत्माद्युवां कतिष्यामि प्रीत्याङ्ग सेभापयिति ।

O Twin Devas! I was blind and aged; but now I am become a young and beautiful man, and it is by your grace that I have got back my wife.

मिषातो देवराजस्य सत्यमेततुब्बीध्मसून ॥ 57 ॥

राजसूनं चितते यजे शर्जरोरितयहुतेः ।

Therefore I speak this truly before you that at the great sacrifice of the lustrous King Śaryāti, I will gladly make yōu drink the Soma in the presence of Indra, the King of the Devas.

इत्याकरणं वचो रहही ती विद्ध प्रति जममनुः ॥ 58 ॥

च्यवनस्तां गृहीतासु तुं नागामाशमपडतम् ॥ 59 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागते महापुराणे सतमकन्थे

पत्रजीयान: 11 5 11

Hearing these words of the Muni, the twin Aśvins were greatly pleased and went back to the world of the Devas. And the Muni Cyavana, too, returned to his own Āśrama with his wife Sukanyā.

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Seventh Book on

the getting of youth by Cyavana Muni in

Śrimaddevībhāgāvatam the Mahā Purānam of

18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter VI

