CHAPTER VIII

On the Extinction of the Family of Yadu and on the Anecdote of Pariksit

सूत उवाच

ततो दिने तृतीये च धृतात्प्र स भूपति: ।

दावागिनना बने दध्यः सभाये: कुनितसंयुतः ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: On the third day after the Pāndavas had returned to Hastināpur, king Dhrārāṣtra was burnt up together with Gāndhāri and Kunti, by the conflagration of fire in the forest.

सुप्रत्यलीय्यायां गतस्प्वल्पा महीपतिम् ।

शुत्वा युधिष्ठी राजा नारदादूःखामाद्वान् ॥ 2 ॥

Sañjaya went away at that time, leaving Dhrtarāshtra in the forest, on a tour on pilgrimage. King Yudhishthira heard all this from Nārada and was very sorry.

वट्रसिंगेश नाले वर्षे कीराणां शयानुतः ।

प्रभासे याद्वासे: सर्वे विघप्राणात्वर्थं गतः ॥ 3 ॥

Now after thirty six years after the Kuru family had become extinct, all the descendants of Yadu in the Prabhāsa tīrtha were destroyed by the Brāhmin's curse.

ते पीला मिच्टरां मत्ता: कृत्वा युद्धं परस्मरण ।

क्षयं प्राप्ता महात्यान: पंशयतो रामकृष्णायो: ॥ 4 ॥

The high-souled descendants of Yadu, intoxicated by drinking wine, fought against each other and were extirpated in the presence of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma.

देई तत्वाग रामसू कृष्णः कमललोचनः ।

व्याध्वाणहु: शपां पलायन्भगावाह्नर: ॥ 5 ॥

Balarāma then quitted his mortal coil; the lotus-eyed Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa quitted his life, struck by the arrows of a hunter, to pay respect to a Brāhmín's curse.

वसुदेवस्तु तच्छुत्वा देह्यागं होरेश ।

जही प्राणज्छूची-कृत्वाचिते श्रीभुवनेश्वीम ॥ 6 ॥

Vasudeva heard of Hari's quitting his mortal coil, and meditated the Goddess of the Universe within his heart and left his holy life.

अजुन्नस्तु ततो गत्वा प्रभासे चातिवृ:खित ।

संस्कार तत्र सर्वेधां यथायोग्यं चकार ह ॥ 7 ॥

Arjuna became very sorry; he went to Prabhāsa and performed the funeral obsequies of all duly.

सर्पीक्षया हरेईं कृत्वा काहस्य संचयम् ।

अधाभि: सह पत्नीभिद्रहायामास पार्थिव: ॥ 8 ॥

देहं रामस्य रेवल्या सह दारधा विभावसौ ।

अज्ञाने द्वाराकामेय पुरात्रिकामयजजनम् ॥ 9 ॥

पूरी सा वासुदेवस्य पतावितादधिता तत ।

अज्ञन: सर्वलोकानू वै गृहीत्वा निर्णतस्तदा ॥ 10 ॥

Seeing the dead body of Hari, Arjuna collected

fuel and burnt his body together with his eight principal wives; he burnt also Balarāma's body with that of his wife Revatī. Arjuna, then, went to the Dvārakā city and removed all the inhabitants of the city when the whole Dvārkā city of Vāsudeva was drowned in waters of the ocean.

कृष्णपन्यस्तदा मार्गे चीराभीर्षे तुर्विततः।

धनं सर्व गृहीत च निस्तेजशाज्ञी०प्रभव् ॥ १ १ ॥

इन्द्रप्रथे समागल वज्ञो राजा कृतस्तदा ।

अनिर्भटसुती नान्मा पार्वेर्नामिततेजसा ॥ १ २ ॥

While Arjuna was taking all the persons with him after getting out of Dvārākā, he felt himself very weak on the way; and therefore a band of robbers, known by the name of Ābhīras plundered all the wealth and all the wives of Krṣṇa.

व्यासाय कथितं दुःखं तेनोतो3रमी महारथः ।

पुर्णवेदा हरिस्चं च भवितासि महामते ॥ 13 ॥

Arjuna, of indomitable valour, after his arrival at Indraprastha made Vajra, Aniruddha's son, the king of the place.

तदा तेजतसावतुर्मं भविष्यति पुनर्वुंगे ।

तच्छुत्वा वचनं पार्यों गत्वा नागपुरे उर्जुनः ॥ १ ४ ॥

Then the highly powerful informed Vyāsa of his powerlessness when Vyāsa said: “O highly intelligent one! When Hari and you will reincarnate in another Yuga, then your heroic strength will again be manifested. Hearing all these words.

दुःरित्तो धर्मराजानं वृत्तानं सर्वमव्रवीत् ।

देहत्वानं हरेः श्रुत्वा याद्वतानां क्षयं तथा ॥ १ ५ ॥

गमनाय मति चक्रे राजा हेत्माण्ड प्रति ।

घट्टिश्रश्राप्रक्रियक राज्ये स्थापयित्वोत्तासुतम् ॥ १ ६ ॥

निजांगमा वनं राजा ऋरिषा भातृषिभः सह ।

चट्टिश्रष्टिव बचाणि कृत्वा राज्यं नाजाइये ॥ १ ७ ॥

गत्वा हिमायचले यह दे जहुः प्राणान्यधासुतः ।

परीक्षिति परिधर्षे: प्रजा: सेवां:सुधार्थिमकः ॥ १ ८ ॥

Prthā's son Arjuna returned to Hastinā with a sorrowful heart and informed everything to Yudhiṣṭhira, the Dharmarāja. Hearing the extinction of the Yādavas and Hari's quitting His mortal coil, Yudhiṣṭhira wanted to go to Himālayas.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

He installed Parikṣit, Uttarā's son who was then thirty six years old on the throne and went out of his palace in company of his brothers and Draupadi to the forests of the Himālayas. Thus the Pāndavas, Prthā's sons reigned for thirty six years in Hastnā and quitted their mortal coils in the Himālayas. Here the greatly religious sage-king Parikṣit governed with vigilance all his subjects for sixty years.

अपालयच्च राजेन्द्र: पथिवर्षपियतन्त्रतः ।

बधूव मुगायगीलो जगाम च वनं महत् ॥ 19 ॥

विद्धूगंगविधिन्वावनोभयद्राकेभूपति: स्वयम् ।

नृतिछ्छ प्रपिशान्तः क्ष्यपिशक्षीतासूनतः ॥ 20 ॥

After this, Parikṣit went once on an hunting expedition to a dense forest and shot a deer. He then searched for the deer and it became noon and he felt very thirsty, hungry, quite fatigued with his body, perspiring, when he saw a Muni, merged in meditation; he asked the Muni “Where can water be had?”

राजा धर्मेण संततो दर्शगं भूनिमंतिके ।

ध्याने स्थितं भूनीं राजा जलं पप्रच्छ चातुतः ॥ 21 ॥

नोवाच किक्रिभौनास्थ्युकोप भूपत्तिस्तत ।

मृतं सर्प ततोउद्वाय पनुष्कोट्या तुपातुः ॥ 22 ॥

But the Muni held at that time the vow of silence; so he did not answer anything. Seeing this, the thirsty king, influenced by Kali, became angry and raised a dead serpent by the fore-end of his bow and coiled it round the Muni's neck.

कलिनानउशिष्टिचित्तु कपठे तस्य न्येशशान् ।

आतोपिते तथा सर्पे नोवाच मुनिस्तमः ॥ 23 ॥

न चचाल समाधियो राजापि स्वगृहं गतः ।

Even thus coiled with a snake round his neck the Muni remained as before motionless in his state of enlightenment and spoke nothing. The king also returned home.

तस्य पुत्रोक्तितेजस्यी गवि जातो महातपः ॥ 24 ॥

महागताकोर्ष शुश्राव कौढ़िभानो वनानिके ।

मित्राण्याहुश तत्पुरं मितु: कपुंते तत्धानुना ॥ 25 ॥

Then the Muni's son, born from the cow's

womb, Śrīgi, a great ascetic, a fiery devotee of Mahāsakti, heard of the above event, while he was playing in the forest. His friends spoke to him:

लिभितोर्सित मुन: सर्पे: केनारीति मुनीक्षा ।

तेषां तद्वचनं श्रुत्वा चुकोपालितायां तदा ॥ 26 ॥

शशाप नृपति कुब्ठो गृहीत्वासृहु केरं जलम् ।

“O Muni! Some body has now enclosed a dead serpent around the neck of your father.” Hearing their words, Śrīgī became very angry and taking water in his hands cursed thus:

यितुः कण्ठेउषा मे येय विनिर्धिप्राणे सुतोर्गाः ॥ 27 ॥

तक्षकः सन्तराजेने तं द्रौल्यापुरुकम् ।

"He who has coiled today a dead serpent around my father's neck, let that villain be bitten by the serpent Taksaka within one week from this day."

मुने: शिष्योप्र राजानं समुपेत्य गृहे स्थितम् ॥ 28 ॥

शापं निवेदयामास मुपिभुजेण चार्थिनम् ।

One disciple of the Muni then went to the king in his house and informed him of the Muni's curse.

अभिमन्यपुत: शुभा शापं दत्त डिजेन वे ॥ 29 ॥

अनिवार्यं च विज्ञाय मनिवृद्धानुवाच ह ।

शणोर्नं द्विजकर्णेप माम झेशादांशयम् ॥ 30 ॥

Abhimanyu's son Parikṣit heard of the curse pronounced by a Brāhim, and knowing it infallible, spoke to the aged councillors: "O Ministers! Certainly, it is through my fault that I have been cursed by a Brāhim's son.

किं विधेयं मयामात्य उपायक्षीश्वताभिक् ।

मृगुः किलानिवार्योंसी बदलि वेदवादिव: ॥ 31 ॥

यलन्तवायिगाश्रोतः कर्दिवः सर्वेधावुः ।

उपायवादितः केचित्यबदित मन्नीचिणः ॥ 32 ॥

Now find out and settle what is to be done though the persons versed in the Vedas say that death is inevitable under these circumstances; yet the wise ones should try their best to thwart this according to the Sāstras. Many sages who are the advocates of taking steps to redress any act, say that all the actions of wise persons are fructified by proper means; their solution does not remain unsolved.

विद्योपायेन सियंति कार्याणि नेततस्य च ।

मणिमान्यप्रधीधानी वे प्रभावाः खलु दुर्विंदः ॥ 33 ॥

न भवेदिति कि तैसृ मणिमाद्वः सुसाधितः ।

सर्वद्वा पुरा भाषां मुनैः संर्जित्वा मृता ॥ 34 ॥

दत्तावधीभावुपवन्ते मुनिना सा वारासतः ।

भवितवे न विश्वासः कर्त्वः सर्वथा बृष्टे: ॥ 35 ॥

Therefore, I am saying that the powers of manis, mantrams and herbs (Osādhis) are indescribable; if applied duly, do you think that they will bear no fruit in this case? I heard that when a Muni's wife died out of snake bite, the Muni gave away the half of his life to his wife Apsarā and made her alive again.

प्रत्यक्षं तत्र दृष्टानं पश्यन्तु सचिवा: किल ।

दिवि कोर्पि पृथिव्या वा दुभयते पुकपः क्वचित् ॥ 36 ॥

It is not proper for the learned to depend on the maxim that what is inevitable must come to pass; one must try one's best to act for the living present.

देवे मर्ति समाधाय चसितेषु निकघाः ।

वित्क्त तु विनिर्पूला विभ्राशं याति सर्वथा ।। 37 ॥

गृहस्थानां गृहे कामामहृतो वातधवान्याय ।

यदूच्छयोपरचं च दिष्टं केनापि वा मुखे ॥ 38 ॥

O Ministers! Have you seen any person in the Heavens or in the world who remains idle, depending on fate alone? The Sarinyāsins have renounced the world; but they must have to go to the houses of the house-holders, whether they be invited or not invited. See again, supposing that the food of a person is brought to him unasked and suppose it is thrown into the mouth by some one, can you conceive that food would go down into the belly from the mouth without one's effort?

उद्यमेन विना चास्यादुते संविशेक्तबम् ।

प्रयलक्षोद्यो कार्यं यदा सिंद्रि न याति चेत् ॥ 39 ॥

तदा देख स्थिते चेति चित्तमालंवयेद्वुध: ।

Therefore one should exert one's own prowess from the very outset; though the intelligent ones should be satisfied with the thought "what can be done? It is not ordained in my fate."

मन्त्रण ऊचुः

को मुनिवर्न दत्त्वार्धमायुगे जीविता प्रिया ॥ 40 ॥

कर्थ मृता महाराज तसेच बूढ़े सविस्तम् ।

When Parikşit said thus, the ministers asked: "Which Muni made his dead wife alive again, by giving her half his own life? And how did his wife die? Kindly describe all these in detail to me."

राजोबाच

भूगोर्षायां वरातोहा पुलोमा नाम सुदूर्धे ॥ 41 ॥

तस्यां तु च्ववनो नाम मुनितांगोपतिशिश्रतः ।

च्यवनस्य च शयातेः सुकन्यानाम सुदूर्धे ॥ 42 ॥

The king said: Bhrgu Muni had a very beautiful wife Pulomā. In her womb the world renowned Cyavana Muni was born. Sukanyā, the daughter of Śaryāti was the wife of Cyavana.

तस्यां जउे सुतः शीमान्यमतिनांय विश्रतः ।

प्रमेतस्तु प्रिया भाषां प्रतापी नाम विश्रन्ति ॥ 43 ॥

In her womb was born a beautiful son named Pramati; he was famous. Pramati had his famous beautiful wife Pratāpi.

रूकनाम सुतो जाततस्था परमतपास: ।

तत्मिश्रा सपवे काश्रल्युकनेश्रा विश्रन्तः ॥ 44 ॥

बष्यत तपसा युक्ता धर्मात्मा सत्यस्ममतः ।

एतमित्रनेट मान्या मेनका च वरापसतः ॥ 45 ॥

फ्रीडो चके नदीतीरे जिपु लोकेषु मुन्त्रों ।

गर्ष विश्वाससोः प्राप्य निर्नाता वरवर्गिनी ॥ 46 ॥

In her womb was born the great ascetic son Ruru. At this time a person named Sthūlakesa, a religious truthful man of great name, was practising tapasyā. O Ministers! In the meanwhile, the chief Apsarā Menakā held sexual intercourse with Viśvāvasu Gandhvara on the banks of a river and became pregnant.

स्वृतःकेशागे माला विसर्सर्ज वारामपा: ।

कन्यकां च नदौतीरि चिपु लोकेषु सुदीम् ॥ 47 ॥

She went out from that place to the hermitage of Sthūlakēsa on the river bank and gave birth to a very beautiful daughter.

दूर्वाउनाथा तदा कन्यां जग्राह मुनिसनमः ।

पुणेष चसूलकौलनु नाना चक्रे प्रमद्गरम् ॥ 48 ॥

Seeing this girl quite an orphan and very beautiful, Muni Sthūlakesa began to rear her up and named her Pramadvarā.

सा काले यौवन प्राप्ता स्वेलक्षणासंपुता ।

कर्नईयाद्धा तं चालां कामबाणार्थितों हुषपुत् ॥ 49 ॥

शीत श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे द्वितीयरकन्नेउर्धभोपस्थायः ॥ 8 ॥ 11

This all-auspicious girl Pramadvara attained youth in due course when Muni Ruru saw her and became smitten with passion."

Thus ends the Eighth Chapter of the Second Book on

the extinction of the family of Yadu and on the

anecdote of Parikṣit in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgāvatam of 18,000 verses.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

