CHAPTER VII

On Indra's Disguise in the Mānasa Lake

व्यास उवाच

अथ तं पत्तितं दूर्वा विद्याप्रिद्याणुरीं चयो ।

मनसा शकमानस्तु तस्य हत्याकृतं भयम् ॥ १ ॥

इउरीपि भयसन्त्यने चयाविद्वरुर्गि ततः ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Now seeing Vṛtra slain, Viṣṇu, the Deva of the Devas, went to Vaikuntha; but, with this fear reigning supreme in his mind that it was He that virtually slew him. Indra, too, then became afraid of the sin committed by him and returned to his Heavens.

मृनयो धयसंविज्ञान हृषभविश्रहते रिपी ॥ 2 ॥

किमसाधिप: कृतं पापं यदसी वक्षितः किल।

मृनीग्वडो ब्या जातः सुरोरास्य च संगमात् ॥ 3 ॥

अस्माकं वचनाद्वयो विश्वासगमित्कल ।

सिक्षापशातिनः सङ्ग्राद्यं विश्वासभातका: ॥ 4 ॥

The Munis, too, became very anxious and thought what great sin they have committed in cheating Vītrāsura. It is the company of Indra that now made their name “Munis” as meaningless. The Munis thought thus: “Oh! Vītra on our words trusted Indra and we have thus turned out to-day traitors in company with that traitor Indra.

धिराये ममता पापमूलेवमवर्धकृत् ।

वदस्माधिष्णलं कृत्वा गणधैर्विचितोउरुप: ॥ 5 ॥

भन्कुद्वुद्धिद्वाता च प्रेरकः पापकामिणाम् ।

पापभावस भवेकूनं पशुकतां तथैव च ॥ 6 ॥

Attachment and affection is the cause of all mischief. Fie on that attachment! It is, as it were, tied by the cord of affection that we had sworn falsely on oath and thus deceived Vītra. Those that deliberately guide others to do vicious acts or those that advise or incite others to do sinful acts or those that side with the sinners certainly partake of the fruits of the sin committed.

विष्णुभातपि कृतं पापे वस्नात्यमवापतवान् ।

बड़े प्रविष्य येभतो पातितः सत्त्वमूर्तिना ॥ 7 ॥

Visnu, too, committed the sin, though he had Sattva Guna in preponderance, when he entered into the thunderbolt and thus helped Indra in killing Vītra.

नूनं स्वार्थपर: प्राणी न पाणात्यसमग्रुते ।

हरिण हरिसंगेन सर्वेया दुष्कृतं कृत्तम् ॥ 8 ॥

झावेव स्तः पदाधर्नां झावेव निधनं गतो ।

प्रथमश्रु तुरीयश्र यो सितोकंया तु दुर्वर्भौ ॥ 9 ॥

अर्थकामी प्रगतर्ती झी सर्वेयं सम्पतौ प्रियो ।

धर्माधर्मिति यावादो दर्भोउयं महतामपि ॥ 10 ॥

It seems that henceforth the people, when selfish, wont hesitate of commit afterwards any sinful act when they will see that Bhagavān Viṣṇu could have done, in concert with Indra, such a vicious thing. Of the four virtues Dharma, Artha, Kāma, and Mokṣa, Dharma and Mokṣa are very rare in the

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

three worlds. Artha (wealth) and Kāma (desires) are everywhere recommended as excellent and therefore held very dear; Dharma is now merely in name and is the cause of the vanity of the Pandits (no one now really practises Dharma with devotion).

पुनायोर्पि मनस्तापमेवं कृत्वा पुन: पुन: ।

जमुः स्वानाभानेव विमनस्का हतोघाः ॥ १ १ ॥

Thus arguing, the Munis became very much afflicted in their minds and went back to their own hermitages respectively, broken-hearted and absent-minded.

त्वधा तु निहतं श्रुत्वा पुत्रमिश्रेन भात ।

कोद दुःखसंततो निर्वेदमयामनुः: ॥ १२ ॥

O Bharata! Hearing of the death of his son by Indra, Viśvakarmā wept very much and he become disgusted very much with the affairs of the world. यत्रासी पतितस्तत्र गत्वा वीक्ष्य तथा गतम् ।

संस्कारं कारयामास विधियव्यालर्गीककम् ॥ १३ ॥

He went to the place where lay his son Vīrta and became pained very much to see him that state; and he performed his cremation and other funeral obsequies according to the prescribed rules.

स्नाताउस्य सलिलं दत्ता कृत्ता चैवीध्वंदैहिकम् ।

शणपाँत्र स शक्रातः पाधिष्ठं मिश्रयातकम् ॥ 14 ॥

यथा मे निहतः पुःः प्रतोष्य शयदीभूशम् ।

तंद्योरीय महदुःखं प्राप्नोति विधिनिमितम् ॥ 15 ॥

He then bathed, performed his Tarapanam (peace-offering) and funeral ceremonies due to a person in the first year of his death. Then his heart became afflicted with sorrow and he cursed the vicious Indra saying that as Indra had killed his son, enticing him by falsely swearing on oath, so Indra, in his turn would suffer a heavier suffering, to be inflicted by Vidhi (the Great Creator of Universe).

इति शल्या सुरेशाने त्वथा तापसम्पतिजः ।

मेगो: शिख्यास्थाय तपतरेने सुतुष्कतम् ॥ 16 ॥

O King! Thus cursing Indra, Viśvakarmā, very much afflicted due to the loss of his son, went to the top of the Mountain Meru and began to practise a hard tapasyā.

जनमेजय उवाच

हत्वा त्वाष्ट्र सुशोष्ठक कामवस्थामावपतवान् ।

सुखं वा दुःख्येवाठी तन्ये बृहि पितामह ॥ 17 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Grandsire! First tell me what happiness or pain did Indra derive by killing Vītra, the son of Tvaṣṭā.

व्यास उवाच

किं पृष्ठसि महाभाग संदेहः कीनुशस्तव ।

अवश्यमेव भोक्त्यं कृतं कर्म शूभागुभम् ॥ 18 ॥

बलिष्ठेईर्वेलिवीय सत्यं वा बहु वा कतम् ।

सर्वैथैव हि भोक्त्यां संदेवासुरमानुषैः ॥ 19 ॥

गक्रायेत्यं मतितंता हरिणा वृत्रयान्तिने ।

प्रविष्टो३ पर्व विवणुः सहायः प्रत्यपहत ॥ 20 ॥

Vyāsa said: O fortunate One! What are you asking? and what is the nature of your doubt? The fruit of one's Karma is certainly to be enjoyed, whether it be auspicious or inauspicious. Be he weak or strong. Be he a Deva, an Asura or a human being, everyone in fact, will have to suffer for one's Karma, good or bad, to its full extent, whether it be done a little or too much. See! It was Viṣṇu that gave advise to Indra and entered into his thunderbolt and helped him when Indra was ready to kill Vītrā; but when there had been Indra's difficult time, Viṣṇu did not help Indra in any way.

येता येता येता येता येता येता येता येता येता येता येता येता येति

यिता माता तथा भार्यां भाता वार्य सहोदरः ॥ 22 ॥

सेवको वार्षि भित्र वा पुरुईव तक्षीरसः ।

Therefore, O King! It is clear that when one's time is favourable, everybody turns out friends; but when Fate turns adverse, nobody is seen to come forward to help. When Fate is against anybody, one's father, mother, wife or brother, servant, friend or one's own son becomes quite incapable to help anybody.

प्रतिकूलो गते दैवे न कोउध्येति महायानाम् ॥ 23 ॥

भोक्ता पापस्य पुण्यस्य कर्ता भवति सर्वथा ।

वृत्रं हत्वा गता: सर्वे नित्तेजस्क: जश्वीपति: ॥ 24 ॥

Book VI Chapter VII

गैपुस्ते विद्वाणा: सर्वे ब्रह्मेत्थबुखबऊनैः ।

The man, who does good or bad acts, suffers for his deeds. When Vītra was killed, everyone went back to their respective homes; but Indra, the Lord of Śacī, became very much deprived of his energy and brilliancy due to the sin of his killing a Brāhmīn; all the Devas, then, blamed him as a Brahmaghātaka (the killer of a Brāhmīn).

को नाम शपथान्कृता सत्यं दृत्वा वचः पुनः।। 25 ॥

जिधांस्ति सुविश्रन्तं भृति विग्रतवमापतन्त् ।

They talked further that no other body would have been able to even indulge the idea of killing a Muni who was an intimate friend and who placed full confidence on him when Indra had sworn on oath that he would be a friend to Vītra.

देवगोहादा सुरोहाने नास्वर्पर्ण समापाने ॥ 26 ॥

सर्वत्रैव कथा तस्य विस्तारमागतिकल ।

किं कृतं तुकृतं कर्मं शोकणाङ्ग विधास्तां ॥ 27 ॥

यूयं छलेन विश्वस्तं पुनिभिश्र प्रगतिरत् ।

वेदप्रमाणमूलुच्य स्वीकृतं सीगतं मत् ॥ 28 ॥

O King! Everywhere then there was this gossip in the assemblages of the gods, in their gardens, at the meetings of the Gandharvas that Indra had deceived Vītra who had relied on him, on the words of the Munis and then killed him by pretext, and so had done, indeed, a horrible crime. Indra had now forsaken the eternal proofs of the Vedas; and he had become a Bauddha; therefore he could have easily killed Vītra.

वदयं नित्रतः श्रुवृष्चित्यास्तिसाहसान् ।

को नाम वचनं दत्ता विपरीतमायारेने् ॥ 29 ॥

विना शक्र हरिं कासिप व्यासउं विनिपातितः।

ग्रवीवा: कवाधान्याः समाजेविषयवगृणम् ॥ 30 ॥

गृशवोद्रोषि विविधाः स्वकर्जितानिकाकाः ।

No other body, save Visnu and Indra, could have acted contrary to their words, as clearly evidenced by the manner in which Vītra had been killed. These remarks, similar to those mentioned above, became everywhere current and Indra heard all of them, tending to his own disgrace.

यस्य कीर्तितंता लोके चित्रस्थैव कुजीवितम् ॥ 31 ॥

यं दूद्वा पथि पच्छन्तं शगु: स्मेपुर्षी घबेत् ।

इन्द्रयुंनोरि गवार्षि: पतितः कीर्तिंक्षायत् ॥ 32 ॥

O King! Fie on that man's life that is blamed everywhere! Fie on that man whose fame has been marred amongst the people. Such a person becomes laughed at by his enemies, when seen by them on the way. The royal saint Indradyumna (Rajarsī) was made to get down, though sinless, from Heavens when his good deeds expired.

स्वगंदकृतयापोउसी यापकृतिकं न याचते ।

स्वल्यप्रापेधपि रुणे ययाति: पत्ति: किल ॥ 33 ॥

Why, then, would not vicious persons be made to descend? The king Yayāti had to get down from Heavens for his very little fault and had to pass eighteen Yugas in the form of a crab.

नृप: कक्रंति प्राणो सुगान्हाद्योर नु ।

भृगुपलिनिगच्छेदाद्भगवान्दिरिच्छुतः ॥ 34 ॥

What more can be said than the fact that even the Bhagavān Acyut Hari had to take several incarnations in the wombs of boar, crocodile, etc., out of the curse from a Brāhmin, due to his cutting off the head of the wife of Bhrgu.

ब्रह्माणायनशोयैनी संजातो मक्रावितृषु ।

विष्णुश्व यामनो भूत्वा याचनार्थ बलेगुरु ॥ 35 ॥

गतः किमपरं दुःखं प्रापोनिते दुकृती नरः ।

रामोर्पि बनवासेषु सीताविर्भूतं बहु ॥ 36 ॥

दुःखं च प्रापतवान्योरं भ्रुगुणायेन भारत ।

Though omnipresent, yet he had to take the appearance of a dwarf and had to beg from the King Bali's palace. What more troubles and miseries than this can be inflicted on those that had sinned viciously. O Ornament of Bharata! Rāmacandra, too, had to experience, due to the curse of Bhṛgu, terrible miseries on the bereavement of Sītā Devī.

तर्षेडोपि ब्रह्मत्यालुतं प्रायं महद्वयम् ॥ 37 ॥

न स्वास्थ्य प्राप गेहेउसी सर्वसिद्धुमन्धिते ।

Similarly Indra, too, for his sin of killing a Brāmin, was so much terrified that he could not

Srimaddevibhagavatam

get his healthy condition though he remained in his own house, endowed with all sorts of prosperity and wealth.

पोलोगी तं सभाहीनं वृष्ट्वा प्रोवाच वासवम् ॥ 38 ॥

निः श्रान्तं भयत्रसं नद्यसं निवेतसम ।

किं प्रभोडघ भयातोंस पृतसे दाक्णो स्पुः ॥ 39 ॥

Seeing, then, Indra lustreless, knowledgeless, almost void of consciousness, and overwhelmed with fear, his wife Śacī, the daughter of Pulomā, spoke to him thus: "O Lord! Your dreadful enemy has been killed; why are you, then, sighing so much, being afflicted with so much terror? O Lord! You have destroyed your enemy; then why are you so much anxious?

का चित्रा वतीर कान्त तव शुकुनिषुव्न ।

कर्माच्छोचर लोकेश नि: श्वस्याकृता यथा ॥ 40 ॥

नायोर्जित बलावाऊछ्यैन चितापरो भवान् ।

Why are you then so much remorseful and drawing such deep heavy sighs like an ordinary man? I am not seeing any other powerful enemy of yours; then, why do you look so anxious and bowed down with cares, as if you look quite unconscious.

इन उवाच

नारातिर्वल्यामेप्रति न शोत्तिं सुखं तथा ॥ 4 1 ॥

ब्रहाहत्याभ्यमद्वारात्र विषधेपि सततं गुहे ।

न नंदनं सुखकरं नामृतं न गृहं वनम् ॥ 4 2 ॥

Indra said: “O Devi! True that I have no other powerful enemy, yet I do not find peace nor any happiness. I fear for the sin Brahmahatya in my house. O Devi! This Nandana Garden, the city of Kubera, the lord of riches, this nectar forest, the sweet music of the Gandharvas, the beautiful dance of the Apsarās, all these now do not give the least pleasure to me.

गन्थवर्णी तथा गेयं नृत्यमत्सरां पुनः ।

न त्वं सुखकार नाती नाना च सुर्योक्षितः ॥ 4 3 ॥

न तथा कामधेनुश देववृक्षः सुखप्रदः ।

किं करोगि कव गच्छापि कव रामं मम जायते ॥ 4 4 ॥

इति त्रिपातप: कान्ने न लघे सुखामतमि ।

What more can I say than this that the beautiful Lady like you, most beautiful amidst the three worlds, and other beautiful ladies, the Heavenly cow, the Mandāra tree (one of the five trees of the celestial region), the Pārjjāta trees (the flower tree), the Santāna tree, the Kalpa tree (yielding all desires) and the Haricandana (saffron tree) and others cannot give pleasure to me. What to do, where to go, so that I get happiness, O Beloved! This thought makes me uneasy. And so I am not able to get happiness in my own thought.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा वचनं शक्रः प्रियां परमकतगाम् ॥ 45 ॥

निजांगाम गृहान्यदो मानसं सर उत्तमम् ।

पचानाले प्रविष्टोजसी भयातंः शोककर्षितः ॥ 46 ॥

न प्राजागत देवेन्रस्विभिभृतुं कल्यपैः ।

प्रतिछ्छजो वस्वास्यपुं चेधान इवोरगः ॥ 47 ॥

असहायसुर्जाराक्षैद्विचन्तातिं विकलेनिद्रयः ।

ततः प्रगटे देवेत्रे ब्रहाहत्याभयादिंते ॥ 48 ॥

सुराक्षितानुराघासवृत्यात्राशभवजय ।

Vyāsa said: Thus speaking to his most distressed wife, Indra got out of his house and went to the exceedingly beautiful lake, named Mānasarovara. Indra there entered into the tubular stalk of the lotus, his body becoming very lean and thin out of the fear and sorrow. Nobody could recognise him as he was overpowered by his terrible sin. He then began to behave himself, as regards fooding and enjoying, like a snake; and he became overelmed with thought, helpless, and his organs were out of order. He remained hidden in the water.

When Indra, the king of the Devas, thus fled away out of the fear of his Brahmahatyaś sin, the other Devas became very anxious; everywhere. Various evil signs manifested themselves.

त्रश्य: सिद्धार्थवाँ भयातांशभावन्यूगम ॥ 49 ॥

अराजक जगतस्यर्विभूगतमुपदयै: ।

The Rsis, Siddhas and Gandharvas were very much panic-stricken, as various disturbance and

Book VI Chapter VII

violent symptoms covered all over the world without any king.

अवर्णर्ग तत जातं पृथिवी क्षीणविभा ॥ 50 ॥

विच्छन्नोतासो नदा: सारंयनुद्वाकिन वे ।

Grains began to grow very scanty, due to want of rains; the streams were almost dry and very little water was there in tanks.

एवं त्वराजके जाते देवता मुनवसताः ॥ 51 ॥

विवार्यं नहुषं चकुः शक्रे सर्वे दिवाकीसः ।

In such a state of anarchism, all the inhabitants of the celestial regions, the Devas and Rsis consulted and intalled the king Nahuṣa in the place of Indra.

संग्रणत ननुगे राजा धर्मिको5पि रजोकलात् ॥ ५२ ॥

वभूव विषयासन्कः पछत्रवाणशराततः ।

O King! Nahuṣa, though virtuous, came, under the sway of Rajoguna, influenced by lust and thus he got very much addicted to worldly enjoyments.

अस्पारोभिवृतः क्रीडवैद्योवानेषु भात्र ॥ ५३ ॥

गऊपत्नीगुणात्युत्वा चकमे तां स पाधिवः ।

He began to amuse himself in the Garden of Paradise, surrounded by the Apsarās or celestial nymphs. One day he heard of the excellent qualifications of Śaci Devī, the wife of Indra, and desired to acquire her.

त्रषीन्ति किम्पितृणी नोपणछति पां किल ॥ ५४ ॥

भवाद्रैढ्रामपे: सर्वै: कृतोर्ध्रं वासवसित्वः ।

प्रेयध्यं सूग: कामं सेवार्थे मय ने शरणीम् ॥ ५५ ॥

प्रियं चेभ्य कत्लैयं सर्वेथा मुनवोभरतः ।

Then he spoke to the Rsis: The Devas and you, united, have installed me in the office of Indra; but why does not the Indrānī, (the wife of Indra) come to me so long? If you want to do what I like, then quickly bring Śacī here before me for my gratification.

अर्हिमीउद्ध उद्धवानों तोकानां च तथेश्वः ॥ 56 ॥

आगच्छुतु शची मढ़ा क्षिप्रमढ़ा निवेशनम् ।

I am now Indra and therefore the god of the Devas and all the worlds; therefore bring to-day quickly Indrānī to my house.

इति तस्य वच: श्रुत्वा देया देवार्यतया ॥ 57 ॥

गत्वा चितातुगा: प्रोषु: पौलेनांपी प्रणातासतः ।

इन्द्रपलि दुराचारी ननुष्तत्वामिहे छाति ॥ 58 ॥

कुपितो3स्मानुवाचेदं प्रेषघधं जचीमिह ।

किं कुमैस्तद्धीना: स्म येनैउ्ठरं पुतः कितः ॥ 59 ॥

Hearing thus the words of the king Nahuṣa the Devas and Devarṣis became anxious and went to Śacī, and, with their heads bowed down, spoke thus: "O Wife of Indra! The wicked Nahuṣa is nowdesiring you; he became angry and told us to send you to him quickly; O Devi! We have made him Indra and are therefore under him; what shall we do now under these circumstances?

तत्कृष्टा तुम्ना देवी कुर्यतिनुपावर च ।

रक्ष मां नहुपाद्वह्छांतलास्मि शरणं गता ॥ 60 ॥

Śacī, the wife of Indra, hearing their words, became absent-minded and spoke to Brhaspati, thus: "O Brahmaṇa! I now take refuge unto you."

ब्रह्मतिकावा

न भेत्यलं त्यया देये नहुषानायाभौहितात् ।

न त्वां दाययामहं वसेल त्यकत्वा धर्म सततानम् ॥ 6 1 ॥

शरणागतामताँ च यो द्वाति नराधमः ।

स एव नरकं याति यावदायुभत्संवलम् ।

स्वस्था भव पृष्ठुशोणि न त्यम्रे त्वां कदाचन ॥ 62 ॥

इति श्रीगदैवीभागतं महापुराणे घटकच्चे

सत्तोर्ध्याच: 11 7 11

Brhaspati said: “O Devi! Do not be afraid of Nahuṣa; he has been deluded by Moha. O Child! I wo’nt forsake the eternal religion and thus I wo’nt give you over to the hands of Nahuṣa. No doubt that wretch suffers the severest torments in Hell to the end of Pralaya (the Great Dissolution) who quits and hands over the distressed person under one’s refuge to another. O Good One! Be comfortable; I will never forsake you.”

Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Sixth

Book on Indra's living in disguise in the

Mānas Lake in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

