CHAPTER IV

On Sukanyā and the Aśvīns

व्यास उवाच

गते राजनि सा बाला पतिसेवापरायण।

बधूव च तधारुनीर्ना सेवेधे धर्मतसरा ॥ 1 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When the King Śaryāti departed, that virtuous lady devoted her time in serving her husband, and the Fire.

फलान्यादाय स्वानूनि मूलानि विविधानि च ।

ददौ सा मुनये बाला परिसेवापरायण ॥ 2 ॥

पर्ति तपोदकेनागृ स्वायधित्वा मृगत्वचा ।

परिवेश्य शुभायां तु तुच्यां स्थापितवल्यपि ॥ 3 ॥

तितान् यवकुशगानेय पौकल्य कमण्डतुम् ।

त्युवाच तिवकर्म कुरुच मुनिसत्ता ॥ 4 ॥

She gave to the Muni for his food various delicious roots and fruits. She made him bathe with warm water; then making him put on the deer skin, she made him sit on the Kuśāsana. (Seat made of the Kuśa grass.) Next she used to place in his front Kuśa, Til and Kamandalu and speak to him “O best of Munis! You are now to perform your daily rites (Nitya Karma).”

तमुत्थाय करे कृत्वा समापते नियतकर्भिन ।

दूर्यां वा संस्ते बाला घतरिं संन्येशशत् ॥ 5 ॥

When the Nitya Karma was finished, the lady used to catch him by his hand and make him sit on another seat.

पशुतादानीय पव्वानि फलानि च नृपात्मज ।

भोजयामास च्यवनं नीवारात्रं सुसंस्कृत् ॥ 6 ॥

Next the princess brought fresh ripe fruits and cooked rice, grown without cultivation and gave to the Muni for his food.

सुक्नवंत पति तृणत दुत्वा3प्रमन्मादात् ।

पश्राच्च पूरं प्रयाणि दटौ चारतसंयुता ॥ 7 ॥

When the husband finished his meals, she gave him devotedly water for cleansing his mouth; then washing his hands and feet gave him the betelnuts and pān leaves.

गृहीतमुखवासं तं संवेश्य च शुभासने ।

गृहीत्नाजी शरीरस्य चकार साधनं ततः ॥ 8 ॥

Next he made him sit on an excellent seat, and with his permission, performed her own bodily purifications.

फलाहांर स्वयं कृत्वा पुर्जनांचा च सश्रिधो ।

प्रोवाच प्रणयोपेता किमाजापयसे प्रभो ॥ 9 ॥

She then, used to eat the remnants, fruits and roots of the dishes of her husband; and coming next to her husband addressed him affectionately “O Lord! Order me what can I do now for you?

पादस्यहान्ते नेउष्ठ क्रोगेय यदि मन्यसे ।

एवं सेवापान नित्यं कपूर पतितलग्न ॥ 10 ॥

If you like, I may champoo your legs and feet"; thus every day that princess devotedly spent her time in serving her husband.

सार्य होमावसाने सा फलान्याह्य सुन्दरी ।

अर्पयामास मुनवे स्वाजून च पूरून्च ॥ 11 ॥

At evening when the Homa ceremony was finished, she collecting delicious and soft fruits presented to him to eat.

ततः शेभाणि खुचुसे प्रेमयुक्ता तद्वान्या ।

सूयशणितरणं कृत्ता शाययामास तं पूदा ॥ 12 ॥

With his permission she, then, ate that were left of the fruits; next she prepared bedding soft to the touch and gladly made him sleep on it.

सुते सुखं प्रिये कान्ता पादसंहानं तदा ।

चकार पृच्छती धर्म कुतस्थाणं कुशोदरी ॥ 13 ॥

When his dear husband thus laid himself on the bed, she champooed his feet and legs and in the interval, asked him about the religious duties of the chaste wives of the family.

पादसंहानं कृत्वा निशि शफित्सरायण ।

निद्रितं च मुनि नात्वा सुवाया चरणातिके ॥ 14 ॥

गुची प्रतिहितं बीक्ष्य तालवृतेन भामिति ।

कुवाणी शैनितं वायुं सिवेषे स्वपति सदा ॥ 15 ॥

Śrimaddevithāgavatam

When the Muni fell asleep in the night, she devotedly laid herself close to his feet and slept. During the summer season when her husband was perspiring, the lady used to fan him with cool breeze. She took off his troubles and thus served her husband.

हैमंते कामहंभारं कृत्वादिभिजलनं पुरः ।

स्थापयिता तथाउपृच्छसुखं तेउसीति चासकृत् ॥ 16

In the cold season, she collected firewood and lit them before him and used to ask him frequently "O Muni! Are you feeling pleasure in this?"

बाहो मुहूर्ते चोलाया जलं पात्र च मृतिकाम् ।

समर्पयित्वा शोचार्थी समुत्थाय पति क्रिया ॥ 17 ॥

स्थानादूरे च संस्थाय दूरं नाला स्थितभक्ति ।

कृतग्रेषचं पति ज्ञाला गत्या जग्राह तं पुनः ॥ 18 ॥

That lady, dear to her husband, used to get up from her bed in the Brāhma Muhūrta before Sunrise, next made her husband get up and took him some short way off and there made him sit for calling on nature. She kept ready water and earth and stood in readiness at a suitable distance apart.

आनीयाममव्यगा चोपवेश्यासने रुषे ।

भुज्जलाथा च श्रबाल्प पादास्य यथाविधि ॥ १९ ॥

दत्वाचमपात्रं तु दन्तधावनमाहत् ।

सत्यं दलकाई च यथोक्ते नृपनिद्वनी ॥ २० ॥

चक्राशोषु जलं शूढ़े समानीते सुपावनम् ।

स्नानार्थ जलमाहूलय पघछ्छ प्रणायचिता ॥ २१ ॥

किमाजापयसे बढ़ान्तुतं थै दन्तधावनम् ।

उथोटके सुसमयं कुक सन्तां समन्वकम् ॥ २२ ॥

Knowing that he had finished his calls for nature, she took him back to the Asrama and washed his hands and feet with water duly making him sit on a convenient Asana. She then gave to him the pot for Acamana and then began to collect fuel. She used to bring pure clear water and made it hot; then she asked her husband fondly "O Husband! Have you finished cleaning your teeth? Warm water is ready; may I bring it to you? You better bathe with that, uttering your Mantrams.

वर्तते होमकालोउयं सन्यापा पूर्वां प्रवर्तते ।

विधिवघद्वानं कृत्वा देवतापुजनं कृफ ॥ 23 ॥

एवं कन्या पर्ति लक्ष्या तप्तविशमर्पमिदिता ।

नित्यं पर्यंचराग्रीत्या तपसा नियमेन च ॥ 24 ॥

The time is now for performing the morning Sandhyā and for performing Homa. Do the Homa regularly and worship the Devas." The princess, whose nature was pure and clean as anything, kept herself engaged daily in serving her husband, Cyavana Muni, with perfect gladness, austerity, and observing all the rules duly.

अन्नीनामितीधीनं च गुरूप्यां कुर्वीत सदा ।

आराध्यामास मुदा च्यवनं सा शुभानना ॥ 25 ॥

Thus that beautiful-paced princess worshipped gladly Cyavana Muni, serving Fire and the guests daily.

कर्मिश्रिक्षय काले तु रविज्ञाविशान्यभी ।

च्यवनत्याभाप्यायो क्रीघानी समाराती ॥ 26 ॥

Then, once, on an occasion, the Asvin twins, the sons of Sūrya came sporting and at their pleasure, close to the hermitage of the Cyavana Muni.

जले सत्ताव तु तां कन्यां निवृत्ता स्वाध्यमं प्रति ।

गच्छतीं चारुकसर्वीं रविवुगवायपर्यतम् ॥ 27 ॥

At that time the princess, beautiful in all respects, was returning home after her bath in a pure clear stream and came to the sight of the two Aśvins.

तां नुह्या देकक्यां तां गत्वा चांतिकामदात् ।

कचतुः समधिद्वून नास्यावलियोगेहिति ॥ 28 ॥

Being enchanted by her extraordinary lovely beauty, they thought she might be a Deva Kanyā, quickly went to her and fondly questioned her: "O slow moving One like an elephant! Look! We are the sons of Devas; we have come to you to ask some question.

क्षणं तिड् वरागेहे प्रडुं त्वां गजगामिनि ।

आगां देवसुती प्राप्ती बृहि सत्यं शुचिसिते ॥ 29 ॥

O Excellent One! Wait for a moment; we request thus to you. O Sweet-smiling One! Please answer our questions truly and properly."

Book VII Chapter IV

पूरी कसय पति: कसे के कथमुहानमागता ।

एकाकिनी तद्योर्यम्बन्नानार्थे चारकोचोचे ॥ 30 ॥

द्वितीय श्रीराघाभासि कांवा कमलतोचने ।

इच्छामसु वयं ज्ञातु तत्चवामाखीह शोभने ॥ 31 ॥

O Lovely-eyed! Whose daughter are you? Who is your husband? Why have you come here alone to bathe in this tank? O Lotus-eyed! You seem to be a second Lakṣmī; O Beautiful One! We want to know-something; please reply exactly.

कोमती चरणी कान्ते स्थिती भूमावानुक्ती ।

हदये कुरतः पीड़ां चलर्ते चललोचने ॥ 32 ॥

O Beloved! Your feet are exceedingly gentle; why have you not put on any shoes; why are you walking barefooted? Our hearts are being troubled to see you walking thus barefooted?

विमानाहासि तर्वीण कांध पढ़्यां जयस्वः ।

अनावृतात्र तविपि किमर्थे गमान तव ।। 33 ॥

O Thin bodied One! Your body is very soft that you ought to have gone in car; why are you thus walking on foot and in such an ordinary dress in this forest?

दारीशितसमयुक्ता कयं न त्व विनिर्मिता ।

राजपुत्रप्रसा वासि वद सर्व चरानेने ॥ 34 ॥

Why have not hundreds of maid-servants accompanied you? O lovely faced One! Speak truly whether you are a princess or an Apsarā.

धन्या भाता यतो जाता धन्योजी जनकस्तव ।

वक्तू त्वां नैव शगतो च भर्तुभार्य त्वाना ॥ 35 ॥

O Sinless One! Blessed is your mother from whom you are born; blessed is your father. Specially the person with whom you are married, we are unable to describe his fortune.

देवलोकाधिका भूमिर्ये चैव सुतोचने ।

प्रचलंड्गरणतेउ द्य स्माववति भूतलम् ॥ ३६ ॥

O Lovely eyed! This earth is being sanctified by the movements of your feet; consequently this garden is now purer today than the Devaloka.

सीभाग्याद्य मृगा: कामं ये त्वां एपवित् वे वे ।

ये चान्ये पक्षिणः सर्वे भूरिये चातिरियातना ॥ 37 ॥

Boundless is the fortune of these deer and birds

who can see you whenever they like; what more can we say than this that this forest is rendered very pure.

सत्यार्जत तब चात्यर्थ सत्यं बृहि सुतोचने ।

पिता कल सपी: क्वासी ग्रहुधिज्ञात्स सादर ॥ 38 ॥

O Fair One with fair eyes! It is needless to praise your beauty; speak truly who is your father and who is your husband; we like very much to see them.

व्यास उवाच

तयोरिति वचः श्रुत्वा राजाकन्याजितिपुस्ति ।

तत्वुवाच जयाक्रान्ता देव्युजी नृपात्मजा ॥ 39 ॥

गर्जाप्तितनयं मां वां विज्ञं भार्यां मुनेत्रि ।

च्यवनस्य सर्ती कान्ता पिंग द्रतां चयुच्छया ॥ 40 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! On hearing their words, the exquisitely beautiful princess bespoke to the twin Devas with much bashfulness: "I am the daughter of Sāryāti; father has given me over, under the directions of the Daiva, to the Maharṣi Cyavana.

पतिरधोर्षिति मे देखे वृद्धशातीव तापसः ।

तस्य सेवामहोत्रयं करोमि प्रीतमानसा ॥ 4 1 ॥

I am his chaste dear wife; the Maharṣi is staying in this very place. O Twin Devas! My husband is a blind ascetic and he is very aged. I gladly serve him day and night according to the rules of chastity amongst women.

को युवा किंभिह्यातो परीतिरीक्षित चाओं ।

तजागल प्रकुस्तमाओं चाछा पावनम् ॥ 42 ॥

Who are you? And why have you come here? My husband is staying in the Asrama; kindly come and sanctify the Asrama."

तदाकरणं वचो दसावुचतुस्तां नाराधि ।

कर्थ त्वमसि कल्याणि विंत्रा दत्ता तपविचेने ॥ 43 ॥

O King! The two Aśvins heard her and said: "O Auspicious One! Why has your father betrothed you, such a gem, to an old ascetic?

धानसोर्पस्मिनोहेशे विद्युल्लीसादामी यथा ।

न देखेवधि तूल्य हि तल दृष्टास्ति पभामी ॥ 44 ॥

लं दिव्यांवरायेयासि सोभसे नाजिनैवृता ।

सर्वाभरणसंयुक्ता नीलालकवर्धिधी ॥ 45 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

It is very strange. Indeed! In this solitary forest you are shining like a steady lightning; what more can we say than this that we hardly find a beautiful lady like you, even in the Devaloka! Alas! The Deva dress and a full set of ornaments and blue dyes look well on you; this deer-skin and barks of trees in no way fit you.

अहो विधेईकलितं विवेहितं

यद्रच रफ्मोक वने विश्वीदिस ।

विशालानेउन्यमितं पति प्रिये

मुर्नि समासाछ जाततूरं भृणम् ॥ 46 ॥

वृथा वृतलेन पृष्ठं न शोभसे

नवं वयः प्राय्य मुनेत्यपिछते ।

मनोभवेनाशु शगः सुर्मंधिताः

पत्ति कसिन्यतितीदुशस्तव ॥ 47 ॥

O Beautiful One! Your eyes are very large; yet the Creator has given you a blind husband; specially a very aged one; and you are wearing away by constantly dwelling with your blind husband in this forest. What more can be wrong for the Creator than this? O deer-eyed One! In vain you have selected him for your husband.

त्यमेधभार्यों नवरोयान्याचिता

कृतासि धात्रा ननू मंदबुद्धिना ।

न वैनमहैस्यसितायतेक्षणो पत्ते

त्यमर्थ कुरु भारकोचने ॥ 48 ॥

At this period 'of your and beauty it does not look at all well to see you with your blind husband. You are versed in dancing and music; but your husband is blind and aged; when in dancing you will shoot your darts of love, on whom then, will those arrows fall?

यूथेव ते जीविकेम्बनुजेशणे

पर्ति च सम्पाय्य मुनिं गतेक्षणम् ।

वने निवासं च तथासजिनांवर-

प्रधारणं योग्यतं न मवमहे ॥ 49 ॥

O large-eyed One! Oh! The Creator is certainly of a very little understanding! Else why would he have made you, so full of youthful vitality, the wife of a blind man? O lovely-eyed One! You are never fit for him; select another husband.

अतो5नवद्योग्यभयोस्त्वमेकं

वरं कुरुध्यावहिता सुलोचने ।

किं यौविनं मानिनि संक्रोपेथि

द्वथा सुर्दि सुन्दरी सेवमाना ॥ 50 ॥

O Lotus-eyed One! Your husband is not only blind but an ascetic; so your life is quite useless; we do not consider it fit that you reside in this forest and put on this bark and deer-skin. O dark-eyed One! Your body and every limb thereof is very beautiful; judge well and make one amongst us your husband.

किं सेवसे5भाग्यविजितं तं

सापुस्तां पोषणार्थणाथम् ।

त्वकत्वा भुनीं सर्वसुखापवर्जितं

भजानवहायंगुभयोरूत्वमेकम् ॥ 51 ॥

O Proud One! Why are you being so very beautiful, spending your youth in vain in serving this Muni? No good signs are visible in this Muni; he cannot maintain nor protect you even; why are you, then, serving him in vain? O spotless One! Leaves at once this Muni, quite incapable in giving any sort of pleasure, and marry one of us.

लं नन्दने चैत्रध्ये चने च

कृष्णव कानते प्रथितं विहाराम ।

अन्नेय भूद्रुने कर्थ हिं कारतं

विजेच्चे मानिनि मानहीन् ॥ 5 2 ॥

O Beloved! Then you will enjoy in the Nandana Kānana or in the forest of Caitraratha. O Proud One! How will you spend your time with the aged husband, being brought to so much humiliation and without any dignity and self-respect.

भूपात्मजा तर्व शुभ्नक्षणा च

जानासि संसारविद्धारभावम् ।

भायेत्र हीना विजने वनेत्र

कालं कवं वाहस्ये चृषा च ॥ 53 ॥

You are endowed with all auspicious signs; moreover you are a princess; you are not ignorant of all enjoyments in this world; why then you like to live such an unfortunate life in vain in this forest? O Princess! Your face is exceedingly beautiful;

Book VII Chapter V

your eyes are wide and your waist is thin. Your voice is sweet like a cuckoo.

तस्माद्रजस्य चिकभाविणि चाक्ववले

एकं झ्योत्सव सुखाय विशालानेते ।

देवालयेषु च कुशोदिरं पृथ्व

भोगोरत्थत्वा मुनि जरठमाणू नृपैंश्रुपत्रि ॥ 54 ॥

Who is more beautiful than you? Quite now your aged ascetic husband and marry one of us for your happiness; then you will be able to enjoy excellent celestial things in the heavens.

किं ते सुखं चात्र वने सुकेशि

ब्रुद्रेन सार्थ विजने मृगाशि ।

सेवा तर्पाधस्य नवं चयछ्न

किं ते मर्तं भूपतिषुवि दुःखम् ॥ 55 ॥

O good-haired one! What pleasure can you derive by your staying in this forest with your blind husband! O deer-eyed One. It is very painful for

you to serve at this young age of yours, to remain in this forest and serve this aged man. O Princess! Is it that you like troubles and nothing else.

नववयः सुखोभोगसमीहितं

चटुलपक्ष्मधरे वराविधिन ।

शशिमुखि त्वमतीव सुकोमतत

फलजनाहरणं तव नोचिनम् ॥ 56 ॥

शीत श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणो सत्यमरक्ये

चतुर्वी5ध्याः: 11 4 11

O One with a face lovely like the Moon! We see that you are of a very soft body; so to collect water fruits is never a duty fit for you."

Here ends the Fourth Chapter in the Seventh Book on the conversation between the two Aśvins and the

Princess Sukanyā in Śrimaddeviḥhāgavatam, the

Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses, by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter V

