[Ch 4 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! When the King Śaryāti departed, that virtuous lady devoted her time in serving her husband, and the Fire.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! When the King Śaryati departed, that virtuous lady devoted her time in serving her husband, and the Fire.

[Ch 4 Verse 2-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She gave to the Muni for his food various delicious roots and fruits. She made him bathe with warm water; then making him put on the deer skin, she made him sit on the Kuśāsana. (Seat made of the Kuśa grass.) Next she used to place in his front Kuśa, Til and Kamandalu and speak to him “O best of Munis! You are now to perform your daily rites (Nitya Karma).”
NEW CORR ENG ──► She gave to the Muni for his food various delicious roots and fruits. She made him bathe with warm water; then making him put on the deer skin, she made him sit on the Kuśāsan. (Seat made of the Kuśa grass.) Next she used to place in his front Kuśa, Til and Kamandalu and speak to him “O best of Munis! You are now to perform your daily rites (Nitya Karma).”

[Ch 4 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the Nitya Karma was finished, the lady used to catch him by his hand and make him sit on another seat.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the Nitya Karma was finished, the lady used to catch him by his hand and make him sit on another seat.

[Ch 4 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next the princess brought fresh ripe fruits and cooked rice, grown without cultivation and gave to the Muni for his food.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next the princess brought fresh ripe fruits and cooked rice, grown without cultivation and gave to the Muni for his food.

[Ch 4 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the husband finished his meals, she gave him devotedly water for cleansing his mouth; then washing his hands and feet gave him the betelnuts and pān leaves.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the husband finished his meals, she gave him devotedly water for cleansing his mouth; then washing his hands and feet gave him the betelnuts and pān leaves.

[Ch 4 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next he made him sit on an excellent seat, and with his permission, performed her own bodily purifications.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next she made him sit on an excellent seat, and with his permission, performed her own bodily purifications.

[Ch 4 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She then, used to eat the remnants, fruits and roots of the dishes of her husband; and coming next to her husband addressed him affectionately “O Lord! Order me what can I do now for you?
NEW CORR ENG ──► She then, used to eat the remnants, fruits and roots of the dishes of her husband; and coming next to her husband addressed him affectionately “O Lord! Order me what can I do now for you?

[Ch 4 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If you like, I may champoo your legs and feet"; thus every day that princess devotedly spent her time in serving her husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If you like, I may shampoo your legs and feet.” Thus every day that princess devotedly spent her time in serving her husband.

[Ch 4 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At evening when the Homa ceremony was finished, she collecting delicious and soft fruits presented to him to eat.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At evening when the Homa ceremony was finished, she collecting delicious and soft fruits presented to him to eat.

[Ch 4 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► With his permission she, then, ate that were left of the fruits; next she prepared bedding soft to the touch and gladly made him sleep on it.
NEW CORR ENG ──► With his permission she, then, ate that were left of the fruits; next she prepared bedding soft to the touch and gladly made him sleep on it.

[Ch 4 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When his dear husband thus laid himself on the bed, she champooed his feet and legs and in the interval, asked him about the religious duties of the chaste wives of the family.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When his dear husband thus laid himself on the bed, she shampooed his feet and legs and in the interval, asked him about the religious duties of the chaste wives of the family.

[Ch 4 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śrimaddevithāgavatam When the Muni fell asleep in the night, she devotedly laid herself close to his feet and slept. During the summer season when her husband was perspiring, the lady used to fan him with cool breeze. She took off his troubles and thus served her husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the Muni fell asleep in the night, she devotedly laid herself close to his feet and slept. During the summer season when her husband was perspiring, the lady used to fan him with cool breeze. She took off his troubles and thus served her husband.

[Ch 4 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the cold season, she collected firewood and lit them before him and used to ask him frequently "O Muni! Are you feeling pleasure in this?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the cold season, she collected firewood and lit them before him and used to ask him frequently “O Muni! Are you feeling pleasure in this?”

[Ch 4 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That lady, dear to her husband, used to get up from her bed in the Brāhma Muhūrta before Sunrise, next made her husband get up and took him some short way off and there made him sit for calling on nature. She kept ready water and earth and stood in readiness at a suitable distance apart.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That lady, dear to her husband, used to get up from her bed in the Brāhma Muhūrta before Sunrise, next made her husband get up and took him some short way off and there made him sit for calling on nature. She kept ready water and earth and stood in readiness at a suitable distance apart.

[Ch 4 Verse 19-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Knowing that he had finished his calls for nature, she took him back to the Asrama and washed his hands and feet with water duly making him sit on a convenient Asana. She then gave to him the pot for Acamana and then began to collect fuel. She used to bring pure clear water and made it hot; then she asked her husband fondly "O Husband! Have you finished cleaning your teeth? Warm water is ready; may I bring it to you? You better bathe with that, uttering your Mantrams.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Knowing that he had finished his calls for nature, she took him back to the Āśram, and washed his hands and feet with water duly making him sit on a convenient Āsana. She then gave to him the pot for Ācamana and then began to collect fuel. She used to bring pure clear water and made it hot; then she asked her husband fondly “O Husband! Have you finished cleaning your teeth? Warm water is ready; may I bring it to you? You better bathe with that, uttering your Mantrams.

[Ch 4 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The time is now for performing the morning Sandhyā and for performing Homa. Do the Homa regularly and worship the Devas." The princess, whose nature was pure and clean as anything, kept herself engaged daily in serving her husband, Cyavana Muni, with perfect gladness, austerity, and observing all the rules duly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The time is now for performing the morning Sandhyā and for performing Homa. Do the Homa regularly and worship the Devas.” The princess, whose nature was pure and clean as anything, kept herself engaged daily in serving her husband, Cyavana Muni, with perfect gladness, austerity, and observing all the rules duly.

[Ch 4 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus that beautiful-paced princess worshipped gladly Cyavana Muni, serving Fire and the guests daily.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus that beautiful-faced princess worshipped gladly Cyavana Muni, serving Fire and the guests daily.

[Ch 4 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then, once, on an occasion, the Asvin twins, the sons of Sūrya came sporting and at their pleasure, close to the hermitage of the Cyavana Muni.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then, once, on an occasion, the Aśvin twins, the sons of Sūrya came sporting and at their pleasure, close to the hermitage of the Cyavana Muni.

[Ch 4 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At that time the princess, beautiful in all respects, was returning home after her bath in a pure clear stream and came to the sight of the two Aśvins.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At that time the princess, beautiful in all respects, was returning home after her bath in a pure clear stream and came to the sight of the two Aśvins.

[Ch 4 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Being enchanted by her extraordinary lovely beauty, they thought she might be a Deva Kanyā, quickly went to her and fondly questioned her: "O slow moving One like an elephant! Look! We are the sons of Devas; we have come to you to ask some question.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Being enchanted by her extraordinary lovely beauty, they thought she might be a Deva Kavyā, quickly went to her and fondly questioned her :-- “O slow moving One like an elephant! Look! We are the sons of Devas; we have come to you to ask some questions.

[Ch 4 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Excellent One! Wait for a moment; we request thus to you. O Sweet-smiling One! Please answer our questions truly and properly."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Excellent One! Wait for a moment; we request thus to you. O Sweet-smiling One! Please answer our questions truly and properly.

[Ch 4 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lovely-eyed! Whose daughter are you? Who is your husband? Why have you come here alone to bathe in this tank? O Lotus-eyed! You seem to be a second Lakṣmī; O Beautiful One! We want to know-something; please reply exactly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lovely-eyed! Whose daughter are you? Who is your husband Why have you come here alone to bathe in this tank? O Lotus-eyed! You seem to be a second Lakṣmī; O Beautiful One! We want to know something; please reply exactly.

[Ch 4 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Beloved! Your feet are exceedingly gentle; why have you not put on any shoes; why are you walking barefooted? Our hearts are being troubled to see you walking thus barefooted?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Beloved! Your feet are exceedingly gentle; why have you not put on any shoes; why are you walking barefooted? Our hearts are being troubled to see you walking thus barefooted?

[Ch 4 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Thin bodied One! Your body is very soft that you ought to have gone in car; why are you thus walking on foot and in such an ordinary dress in this forest?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Thin bodied One! Your body is very soft that you ought to have gone in a car; why are you thus walking on foot and in such an ordinary dress in this forest?

[Ch 4 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Why have not hundreds of maid-servants accompanied you? O lovely faced One! Speak truly whether you are a princess or an Apsarā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Why have not hundreds of maid-servants accompanied you? O lovely faced One! Speak truly whether you are a princess or Apsarā.

[Ch 4 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sinless One! Blessed is your mother from whom you are born; blessed is your father. Specially the person with whom you are married, we are unable to describe his fortune.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sinless One! Blessed is your mother from whom you are born, blessed is your father. Specially the person with whom you are married, we are unable to describe his fortune.

[Ch 4 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lovely eyed! This earth is being sanctified by the movements of your feet; consequently this garden is now purer today than the Devaloka.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lovely eyed! This earth is being sanctified by the movements of your feet; consequently this garden is now purer today than the Devaloka.

[Ch 4 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Boundless is the fortune of these deer and birds who can see you whenever they like; what more can we say than this that this forest is rendered very pure.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Boundless is the fortune of these deer and birds who can see you whenever they like; what more can we say than this that this forest is rendered very pure.

[Ch 4 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Fair One with fair eyes! It is needless to praise your beauty; speak truly who is your father and who is your husband; we like very much to see them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Fair One with fair eyes! It is needless to praise your beauty; speak truly who is your father and who is your husband; we like very much to see them.”

[Ch 4 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! On hearing their words, the exquisitely beautiful princess bespoke to the twin Devas with much bashfulness: "I am the daughter of Sāryāti; father has given me over, under the directions of the Daiva, to the Maharṣi Cyavana.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! On hearing their words, the exquisitely beautiful princess bespoke to the twin Devas with much bashfulness :-- I am the daughter of Śaryati; father has given me over, under the directions of the Daiva, to the Maharṣi Cyavana.

[Ch 4 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I am his chaste dear wife; the Maharṣi is staying in this very place. O Twin Devas! My husband is a blind ascetic and he is very aged. I gladly serve him day and night according to the rules of chastity amongst women.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I am his chaste dear wife; the Maharṣi is staying in this very place. O Twin Devas! My husband is a blind ascetic and he is very aged. I gladly serve him day and night according to the rules of chastity amongst women.

[Ch 4 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Who are you? And why have you come here? My husband is staying in the Asrama; kindly come and sanctify the Asrama."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Who are you? And why have you come here? My husband is staying in the Āśrama; kindly come and sanctify the Aśrama.

[Ch 4 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The two Aśvins heard her and said: "O Auspicious One! Why has your father betrothed you, such a gem, to an old ascetic?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The two Aśvins heard her and said :-- “O Auspicious One! Why has your father betrothed you, such a gem, to an old ascetic?

[Ch 4 Verse 44-45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is very strange. Indeed! In this solitary forest you are shining like a steady lightning; what more can we say than this that we hardly find a beautiful lady like you, even in the Devaloka! Alas! The Deva dress and a full set of ornaments and blue dyes look well on you; this deer-skin and barks of trees in no way fit you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is very strange. Indeed! In this solitary forest you are shining like a steady lightning; what more can we say than this that we hardly find a beautiful lady like you, even in the Devaloka! Alas! The Deva dress and a full set of ornaments and blue dyes look well on you; this deer-skin and barks of trees in no way fit you.

[Ch 4 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Beautiful One! Your eyes are very large; yet the Creator has given you a blind husband; specially a very aged one; and you are wearing away by constantly dwelling with your blind husband in this forest. What more can be wrong for the Creator than this? O deer-eyed One! In vain you have selected him for your husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Beautiful One! Your eyes are very large; yet the Creator has given you a blind husband; specially a very aged one; and you are wearing away by constantly dwelling with your blind husband in this forest. What more can be wrong for the Creator than this? O deer-eyed One! In vain you have selected him for your husband.

[Ch 4 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this period 'of your and beauty it does not look at all well to see you with your blind husband. You are versed in dancing and music; but your husband is blind and aged; when in dancing you will shoot your darts of love, on whom then, will those arrows fall?
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this period of your youth and beauty it does not look at all well to see you with your blind husband. You are versed in dancing and music; but your husband is blind and aged; when in dancing you will shoot your darts of love, on whom then, will those arrows fall?

[Ch 4 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O large-eyed One! Oh! The Creator is certainly of a very little understanding! Else why would he have made you, so full of youthful vitality, the wife of a blind man? O lovely-eyed One! You are never fit for him; select another husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O large-eyed One! Oh! The Creator is certainly of a very little understanding! Else why would he have made you, so full of youthful vitality, the wife of a blind man? O lovely-eyed One! You are never fit for him; select another husband.

[Ch 4 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lotus-eyed One! Your husband is not only blind but an ascetic; so your life is quite useless; we do not consider it fit that you reside in this forest and put on this bark and deer-skin. O dark-eyed One! Your body and every limb thereof is very beautiful; judge well and make one amongst us your husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lotus-eyed One! Your husband is not only blind but an ascetic; so your life is quite useless; we do not consider it fit that you reside in this forest and put on this bark and deer-skin. O dark-eyed One! Your body and every limb thereof is very beautiful; judge well and make one amongst us your husband.

[Ch 4 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Proud One! Why are you being so very beautiful, spending your youth in vain in serving this Muni? No good signs are visible in this Muni; he cannot maintain nor protect you even; why are you, then, serving him in vain? O spotless One! Leaves at once this Muni, quite incapable in giving any sort of pleasure, and marry one of us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Proud One! Why are you being so very beautiful, spending your youth in vain in serving this Muni? No good signs are visible in this Muni; he cannot maintain nor protect you even ; why are you, then, serving him in vain? O spotless One! Leave at once this Muni, quite incapable in giving any sort of pleasure, and marry one of us.

[Ch 4 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Beloved! Then you will enjoy in the Nandana Kānana or in the forest of Caitraratha. O Proud One! How will you spend your time with the aged husband, being brought to so much humiliation and without any dignity and self-respect.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Beloved! Then you will enjoy in the Nandana Kānana or in the forest of Caitratarha. O Proud One! How will you spend your time with the aged husband, being brought to so much humiliation and without any dignity and self-respect.

[Ch 4 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You are endowed with all auspicious signs; moreover you are a princess; you are not ignorant of all enjoyments in this world; why then you like to live such an unfortunate life in vain in this forest? O Princess! Your face is exceedingly beautiful; your eyes are wide and your waist is thin. Your voice is sweet like a cuckoo.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You are endowed with all auspicious signs; moreover you are a princess; you are not ignorant of all enjoyments in this world; why then you like to live such an unfortunate life in vain in this forest? O Princess! Your face is exceedingly beautiful; your eyes are wide and your waist is thin. Your voice is sweet like a cuckoo.

[Ch 4 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Who is more beautiful than you? Quite now your aged ascetic husband and marry one of us for your happiness; then you will be able to enjoy excellent celestial things in the heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Who is more beautiful than you? Quit now your aged ascetic husband and marry one of us for your happiness; then you will be able to enjoy excellent celestial things in the heavens.

[Ch 4 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O good-haired one! What pleasure can you derive by your staying in this forest with your blind husband! O deer-eyed One. It is very painful for you to serve at this young age of yours, to remain in this forest and serve this aged man. O Princess! Is it that you like troubles and nothing else.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O good-haired one! What pleasure can you derive by your staying in this forest with your blind husband! O deer-eyed One. It is very painful for you to serve at this young age of yours, to remain in this forest and serve this aged man. O Princess! Is it that you like troubles and nothing else.

[Ch 4 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O One with a face lovely like the Moon! We see that you are of a very soft body; so to collect water fruits is never a duty fit for you." Here ends the Fourth Chapter in the Seventh Book on the conversation between the two Aśvins and the Princess Sukanyā in Śrimaddeviḥhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O One with a face lovely like the Moon! We see that you are of a very soft body; so to collect water and fruits is never a duty fit for you. Here ends the Fourth Chapter in the Seventh Book on the conversation between the two Aśvins and the Princess Sukanyā in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
