[Ch 2 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śrī Sūta said: “I am highly fortunate; I consider myself blessed and I am purified by the Mahātmās (high souled persons); inasmuch as I am questioned by them about the highly meritorious Purāṇa, famous in the Vedas. I will now speak in detail about this Purāṇa, the best of the Āgamas, approved of by all the Vedas and the secret of all the Śāstras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śrī Sūta said :-- “I am highly fortunate; I consider myself blessed and I am purified by the Mahātmās (high souled persons); inasmuch as I am questioned by them about the highly meritorious Purāṇa, famous in the Vedas. I will now speak in detail about this Purāṇa, the best of the Āgamas, approved of by all the Vedas and the secret of all the Śāstras.

[Ch 2 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brāhmins! I bow down to the gentle lotus feet, known in the three Lokas, of the Devi Bhagavatī, praised by Brahmā and the other devas Viṣṇu, Maheśa and others, meditated always by the Munindras and which the Yogis contemplate as their source of liberation. Today I will devotedly describe, in detail and in plain language, that Purāna which is the best of all the Purānas, which gives prosperity and contains all the sentiments (rasas) that a human being can conceive, the Śrimad Devi Bhāgavatam.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brahmins! I bow down to the gentle lotus feet, known in the three Lokas, of the Devī Bhagavatī, praised by Brahmā and the other devas Viṣṇu, Maheśa and others, meditated always by the Munindras and which the Yogis contemplate as their source of liberation. Today I will devotedly describe, in detail and in plain language, that Purāṇa which is the best of all the Purāṇas, which gives prosperity and contains all the sentiments (Rasas) that a human being can conceive, the Śrimad Devī Bhāgavatam.

[Ch 2 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► May that Highest Primal Śakti who is known as Vidyā in the Vedas; who is omniscient, who controls the innermost of all and who is skilled in cutting off the knot of the world, who cannot be realised by the wicked and the vicious, but who is visible to the Munis in their meditation, may that Bhagavatī Devi give me always buddhi fit to describe the Purāṇa!
NEW CORR ENG ──► May that Highest Primal Śakti who is known as Vidyā in the Vedas; who is omniscient, who controls the innermost of all and who is skilled in cutting off the knot of the world, who cannot be realised by the wicked and the vicious, but who is visible to the Munis in their meditation, may that Bhagavatī Devī give me always the buddhi fit to describe the Purāṇa!

[Ch 2 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I call to my mind the Mother of all the worlds who creates this universe, whose nature is both real (taking gross, practical point of view) and an unreal (taking a real point of view), preserves and destroys by Her Rājasik, Sāttvik and Tāmasik qualities and in the end resolves all these into Herself and plays alone in the period of Dissolution—at this time, I remember my that Mother of all the worlds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I call to my mind the Mother of all the worlds who creates this universe, whose nature is both real (taking gross, practical point of view) and and unreal (taking a real point of view), preserves and destroys by Her Rājasik, Sāttvik and Tāmasik qualities and in the end resolves all these into Herself and plays alone in the period of Dissolution - at this lime, I remember my that Mother of all the worlds.

[Ch 2 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is commonly known that Brahmā is the creator of this universe; and the knowers of the Vedas and the Purāṇas say so; but they also say that Brahmā is born of the navel-lotus of Viṣṇu. Thus, it appears that Brahmā cannot create independently. Again, Viṣṇu, from whose navel lotus Brahmā is born, lies in Yoga sleep on the bed of Ananta (the thousand-headed serpent) in the time of Pralaya; so how can we call Bhagavān Viṣṇu who rests on the thousand headed serpent Ananta, as the creator of the universe?
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is commonly known that Brahmā is the creator of this universe; and the knowers of the Vedas and the Purāṇas say so; but they also say that Brahmā is born of the navel-lotus of Viṣṇu. Thus it appears that Brahmā cannot create independently. Again Viṣṇu, from whose navel lotus Brahmā is born, lies in Yoga sleep on the bed of Ananta (the thousand headed serpent) in the time of Pralaya; so how can we call Bhagavān Viṣṇu who rests on the thousand headed serpent Ananta as the creator of the universe?

[Ch 2 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again, the refuge of Ananta is the water of the ocean Ekārṇava; a liquid cannot rest without a vessel; so I take refuge of the Mother of all beings, who resides as the Śakti of all and thus is the supporter of all; I fly for refuge unto that Devi who was praised by Brahmā while resting on the navel lotus of Viṣṇu who was lying fast in Yoga Nidrā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again the refuge of Ananta is the water of the ocean Ekārṇava; a liquid cannot rest without a vessel; so I take refuge of the Mother of all beings, who resides as the Śakti of all and thus is the supporter of all; I fly for refuge unto that Devī who was praised by Brahmā while resting on the navel lotus of Viṣṇu who was lying fast asleep in Yoga ṇidrā.

[Ch 2 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Munis! meditating on that Māyā Devi who creates, preserves and destroys the universe who is known as composer of the three gunas and who grants mukti, I now describe the whole of the Purāṇas; now you all better hear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Munis! meditating on that Maya Devī who creates, preserves and destroys the universe who is kuown as composed of the three guṇas and who grants mukti, I now describe the whole of the Purāṇas; now you all better hear.

[Ch 2 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Purāṇa Śrimad Bhāgavat (Devi Bhāgavat) is excellent and holy; eighteen thousand pure Ślokas are contained in it. Bhagavān Krṣṇa Dvaipāyana has divided this Purāṇa into twelve auspicious Skandhas (Books) and three hundred and eighteen chapters.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Purāṇa Śrimad Bhāgavat (Devī Bhāgavat) is excellent and holy; eighteen thousand pure Ślokas are contained in it. Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyan has divided this Purāṇa into twelve auspicious Skandhas (Books) and three hundred and eighteen chapters.

[Ch 2 Verse 12-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Twenty chapters compose the first skandha; twelve chapters in the second Skandha; thirty chapters in the third Skandha; twenty-five chapters in fourth Skandha, thirty-five, in the fifth; thirty-one, in the sixth; forty, in the seventh; twenty-four, in the eighth; fifty chapters in the ninth; thirteen, in the tenth; twenty-four in the eleventh and fourteen chapters are contained in the twelfth Skandha. O Munis! Thus the Dvaipāyana Muni has arranged his chapters in each Skandha.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Twenty chapters compose the first Skandha; twelve chapters in the second Skandha; thirty chapters in the the third Skandha; twenty-five chapters in the fourth Skandha, thirty-five, in the fifth; thirty-one, in the sixth; forty, in the seventh; twenty-four, in the eighth; fifty chapters in the ninth; thirteen, iu the tenth; twenty-four in the eleventh and fourteen chapters are contained in the twelfth Skandha, O Munis! Thus the Dvaipāyan Muni has arranged his chapters in each Skandha.

[Ch 2 Verse 16-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus, the Mahātmā Veda Vyāsa has divided this Bhāgavata Purāṇa into so many Skandhas and into so many chapters; and that the number of verses is eighteen thousand is already stated. That is denominated as Purāṇa which contains the following five characteristics: (1) Creation of the universe, (2) Secondary creation, (3) Dynasties (4) Manvantaras and (5) The description of Manus and other kings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the Mahātmā Veda Vyās has divided this Bhāgavata Purāṇa. into so many Skandhas and into so many chapters; and that the number of verses is eighteen thousand is already stated. That is denominated as Purāṇa which contains the following five characteristics :-- (1) Creation of the universe, (2) Secondary creation, (3) Dynasties (4) Manvantaras and (5) The description of Manus and other kings.

[Ch 2 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śivā is beyond Prākṛtic attributes, eternal and ever omnipresent; She is without any change, immutable, unattainable but by yoga; She is the refuge of the universe and Her nature is Turīya Caityanya.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śiva is beyond Prākritic attributes, eternal and ever omnipresent; She is without any change, immutable, unattainable but by yoga; She is the refuge of the universe and Her nature is Turīya Caitanya.

[Ch 2 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mahā Laksmī is Her Sāttvikī Śakti; Sarasvatī is Her Rājasik Śakti and Mahā Kālī is Her Tāmasik Śakti; these are all of feminine forms.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mahā Lakshmi is Her Sattvikī Śakti; Sarasvati is Her Rājasik Śakti and Mahā Kālī is Her Tāmasik Śakti; these are all of feminine forms.

[Ch 2 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The assuming of bodies by these three Śaktis for the creation of this universe is denominated as “Sarga” (creation) by the high-souled persons (Mahārpuruṣa), skilled in Śāstras. And the further resolution of these three Śaktis into Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa for the creation, preservation, and destruction of this universe is denominated (in this Purāṇa) as Pratisarga (secondary creation).
NEW CORR ENG ──► The assuming of bodies by these three Śaktis for the creation of this universe is denominated as "Sarga" (creation) by the high souled persona (Mahārpuruṣa), skilled in Śastras. And the further resolution of these three Śaktis into Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa for the creation, preservation, and destruction of this universe is denominated (in this Purāṇa) as Pratisarga (secondary creation.)

[Ch 2 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The description of the kings of the solar and lunar dynasties and the families of Hiranyakāśipu and others is known as the description of the lineages of kings and their dynasties.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The description of the kings of the solar and lunar dynasties and the families of Hiraṇya Kasipu and others is known as the description of the lineages of kings and their dynasties.

[Ch 2 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The description of Sväyambhuva and, other Manus and their ruling periods is known as Manvantaras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The description of Svāyambhūva and, other Manus and their ruling periods is known as Manvantaras.

[Ch 2 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And the description of their descendants is known as the description of their families. (Thus these are the five characteristics in the Purānas.) O best of Munis! all the Purānas are endowed with these five characteristics.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And the description of their descendants is known as the description of their families. (Thus these are the five characteristics in the Purāṇas.) O best of Munis! all the Purāṇas are endowed with these five characteristics.

[Ch 2 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So is Mahābhārata written by Veda Vyāsa, characterised by these five things. This is known as the fifth Veda and Ithāsa (history). In this are something more than one lakh sklaks."
NEW CORR ENG ──► So is Mahābhārata writen by Vedavyāsa, characterised by these five things. This is known as the fifth Veda and Itihāsa (history.) In this are something more than one lakh slokas.

[Ch 2 Verse 27-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śaunaka said: O Sūta! What are those Purāṇas and how many verses are contained in each? Speak all these in detail in this holy Kṣetra; we, the residents of Naimisāranya are all very eager to hear this. (Why we call ourselves as the residents of Naimiśārayya, hear; you will realise then that no other place exists in this Kali age for hearing the holy discourses on religion):—When we were afraid of the Kali age, Brahmā gave us a Manomaya Cakra (wheel) and said to all of us:—Follow this wheel, go after it and the spot where the felly of the wheel will become thin (so as to break) and will not roll further, that country is the holy place; Kali will never be able to enter there; you all better remain there until the Satya age comes back. Thus, according to the saying of Brahmās we have got orders to stay here.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śaunaka said :-- “O Sūta! What are those Purāṇas and how many verses are contained in each? Speak all those in detail in this holy Kṣettra; we, the residents of Naimisāranya are all very eager to hear this. (Why we call ourselves as the residents of Naimisāranya, hear; you will realise then that no other place exists in this Kali age for hearing the holy discourses on religion) :-- When we were afraid of the Kali age, Brahmā gave us a Manomaya Cakra (wheel) and I said to all of us :-- Follow this wheel, go after it and the spot where the felly of the wheel will become thin (so as to break) and will not roll further, that country is the holy place; Kali will never be able to enter there; you all better remain there until the Satya age comes back. Thus, acording to the saying of Brahmā, we have got orders to stay here.

[Ch 2 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Oh, hearing the words of Brahmā, we went out quickly keeping the wheel go on, our object being to determine which place is best and holiest.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On hearing the words of Brahmā, wo went out quickly keeping the wheel go on, our object being to determine which place is best and holiest.

[Ch 2 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When we came here, the belly of the wheel become thin and shorn before my eyes; hence, this Kṣetra is called Naimiṣa; it is the most sanctifying place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When we came here, the felly of the wheel become thin and shorn before my eyes; hence this Kṣettra is called Naimis; it is the most sanctifying place.

[Ch 2 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kali cannot enter here; hence the Mahātmas, Munis and Siddhas, terrified by the Kali age, have followed me and resorted to this place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kali cannot enter here; hence the Mahatmas, Munis and Siddhas, terrified by the Kali age, have followed me and resorted to this place.

[Ch 2 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We have performed yajñas with Purodāśa (clarified butter as is offered in oblation to fire), here no animals are sacrificed; now we have no other important work to do except to pass our time here until the arrival of Satyayuga.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We have performed yajñas with Purodāsa (clarified butter as is offered in oblations to fire) where no animals are sacrificed; now we have no other important work to do except to pass our time here until the arrival of Satyayuga.

[Ch 2 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sūta! we are extremely fortunate in all respects that you have come here; purify us today by narrating to us the names of the Purāṇas equivalent to the Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Śūta! we are extremely fortunate in all respects that you have come here; purify us to-day by narrating to us the names of the Purāṇas equivalent to the Vedas.

[Ch 2 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sūta! you are also a learned orator; we, too, are ardent listeners, with no other works to bother our heads; narrate to us today the auspicious holy Bhāgavata Purāna.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Śūta! you are also a learned orator; we, too, are ardent listeners, with no other works to bother our heads; narrate to us to-day the auspicious holy Bhāgavata Purāṇa.

[Ch 2 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sūta! Long live you; and no ailings, internal, external, or from the Devas torment you (this is our blessing to you).
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Śūta! Long live you; and no ailings, internal, external, or from the Devas torment you. (this is our blessing to you).

[Ch 2 Verse 38-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We have heard that in the most santifying Purāṇa, narrated by Maharsi Dvaipāyana, all about Dharma (religion), Artha (wealth) and Kāma (desires) are duly described as well the acquiring of Tattvajñāna and liberation are also spoken of. O Sūta! our desires are not satisfied the more we hear of those beautiful holy words. Now describe to us the highly pure Śrimad Devī Bhāgavatam where all the Lilās (the dramatic acts) of the Mother of the three worlds, purifying the sins, adorned with all the qualifications are described as yielding all the desires like the Kalpa Vṛkṣa (the celestial tree yielding all desires). Thus ends the Second Chapter of the First Book on the description of the Purāṇa (the text) in Mahā Purāṇa Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahraṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We have heard that in the most sanctifying Purāṇa, narrated by Maharṣi Dvaipāyan, all about Dharma (religion), Artha (Wealth) and Kama (desires) are duly described as well the acquiring of Tattvajñan and liberation are also spoken of. O Śūta! our desires are not satisfied the more we hear of those beautiful holy words. Now describe to us the highly pure Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam where all the Lilas (the dramatic acts) of the Mother of the three worlds purifying the sins, adorned with all the qualifications are described as yielding all the desires like the Kalpa Vrikṣa (the celestial tree yielding all desires). Thus ends the second chapter of the first Skandha on the description of the Purāṇa (the text) in Mahā Purāṇa Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyās.
