CHAPTER II

On the Question by Šaunaka and Other Rşi

श्रीसूत उवाच

ध्योउहमतिभायोउहं पाचितोउहं महात्मिभः ।

यस्यूं सुमहल्पणं पुराणं वेदविश्रन् ॥ १ ॥

तदई संप्रवक्ष्यासि सर्वश्रुत्यवंसमतम् ।

रहस्यं सर्वीगाकाणामागमानामनुतनम् ॥ 2 ॥

Śrī Sūta said: “I am highly fortunate; I consider myself blessed and I am purified by the Mahātmās (high souled persons); inasmuch as I am questioned by them about the highly meritorious Purāṇa, famous in the Vedas. I will now speak in detail about this Purāṇa, the best of the Āgamas, approved of by all the Vedas and the secret of all the Śāstras.

नत्वा तत्पदपूर्जनं सुल्तिलितं मुक्तिपूर्दं योगिनां

ब्रह्माष्टीय सेवितं सुल्तिलेपेत्यैवं पुनी-त्रै: सव।

वध्यायच्छ सविस्तरं बहुतरं श्रीमनुषाणातमं

भवस्या सर्वसालयं भगवतीनाम्न प्रसिद्धं द्विजा: ॥ 3 ॥

O Brāhmins! I bow down to the gentle lotus feet, known in the three Lokas, of the Devi Bhagavatī, praised by Brahmā and the other devas Viṣṇu, Maheśa and others, meditated always by the

Munindras and which the Yogis contemplate as their source of liberation. Today I will devotedly describe, in detail and in plain language, that Purāna which is the best of all the Purānas, which gives prosperity and contains all the sentiments (rasas) that a human being can conceive, the Śrimad Devi Bhāgavatam.

या विश्वोथिपीयते श्रुतिथय शक्ति: सदास उदा पा सर्वज्ञा भवबन्धशितिपुणा सर्वांगेशे संस्थिता ।

दुर्जेया सुवुरुतमधिष्ठु मुनिभिश्योनास्यदं प्रपित्त प्रत्यक्षा भवतीह सा भावर्ती सिद्धिप्रदा स्थास्तवा ॥ ॥ ॥

May that Highest Primal Śakti who is known as Vidyā in the Vedas; who is omniscient, who controls the innermost of all and who is skilled in cutting off the knot of the world, who cannot be realised by the wicked and the vicious, but who is visible to the Munis in their meditation, may that Bhagavatī Devi give me always buddhi fit to describe the Purāṇa!

सृष्टाव्याडिलं जगदिदं सदसत्यवल्पं

शक्तया स्वया त्रिगृया परिपाति विधम् ।

संह्य कल्यसमये रमते तथैका

तां सर्वविश्वजन्नीं मनसा स्मारमि ॥ 5 ॥

I call to my mind the Mother of all the worlds who creates this universe, whose nature is both real (taking gross, practical point of view) and an unreal (taking a real point of view), preserves and destroys by Her Rājasik, Sāttvik and Tāmasik qualities and in the end resolves all these into Herself and plays alone in the period of Dissolution—at this time, I remember my that Mother of all the worlds.

बहा सुवत्यखिलमेतिविति प्रसिद्ध

पौराणिकैकु कवलं खलु वेवेदिविछः ।

विष्णोस्तु नाथिकमले किल तस्य जन्म

तैत्कमेव सुजते न हि स स्वतर्नः ॥ 6 ॥

विष्णुस्तु शोशप्यने स्वपतीति काले

तत्राभिपयमुकुले खलु तस्य जन्म ।

आधारातं किल गतोउत्र सहस्वतीलः

सम्बोध्यतं स भगवान् हि कर्थ सुपारि: ॥ 7 ॥

It is commonly known that Brahmā is the creator of this universe; and the knowers of the Vedas and the Purāṇas say so; but they also say that Brahmā is born of the navel-lotus of Viṣṇu. Thus, it appears that Brahmā cannot create independently. Again, Viṣṇu, from whose navel lotus Brahmā is born, lies in Yoga sleep on the bed of Ananta (the thousand-headed serpent) in the time of Pralaya; so how can we call Bhagavān Viṣṇu who rests on the thousand headed serpent Ananta, as the creator of the universe?

एकाणंवस्य सलिलं रसकपेवे पात्र

विना न हि रसचिशिरसि कचित् ।

या सर्वभूतिवये किल शक्तिप्रा तां

सर्वभूतजनर्नी शरणं गतोउम्मि ॥ 8 ॥

योगनिद्वापीलिताक्षं, विश्युं दृष्टवांबुजे स्थितः ।

अजस्तुषार यां देतीं तामई शरणं जजे ॥ 9 ॥

Again, the refuge of Ananta is the water of the ocean Ekārṇava; a liquid cannot rest without a vessel; so I take refuge of the Mother of all beings, who resides as the Śakti of all and thus is the supporter of all; I fly for refuge unto that Devi who was praised by Brahmā while resting on the navel lotus of Viṣṇu who was lying fast in Yoga Nidrā. 

त आया सगुणां मायां मुक्तिदां निर्णुणां तथा । 
वक्षेय पुर्णामवित्रं भृणवंतु मुनवसित्वर ॥ 10 ॥

O Munis! meditating on that Māyā Devi who creates, preserves and destroys the universe who is known as composer of the three gunas and who grants mukti, I now describe the whole of the Purāṇas; now you all better hear.

पुर्णापुन्तं पुर्णं शीम्द्रागवताधिभू ।

अष्टार्ण सहस्वाणि रुलोकास्तत्र तु संस्कृता: ॥ 1 1 ॥

स्कन्धा द्वारण चैवात्र कृष्णोन विहिता: शुभा: ।

त्रिशर्ते पूर्णमध्याया अष्टार्णसुता: स्मृता ॥ 1 2 ॥

The Purāṇa Śrimad Bhāgavat (Devi Bhāgavat) is excellent and holy; eighteen thousand pure Ślokas are contained in it. Bhagavān Krṣṇa Dvaipāyana has divided this Purāṇa into twelve auspicious Skandhas (Books) and three hundred and eighteen chapters.

विश्रिति प्रथमे तत्र द्वितीये द्वार्थीवे तु ।

श्रिण्चैव तृतीये तु चतुर्षं पंचविश्रिति: ॥ 13 ॥

पंचश्रितणताधयाया: पंचमे परिकीर्तिता: ।

एकत्रिशता चष्टे चत्वारिणच्च सदमे ॥ 14 ॥

अष्टे ततचसंख्याक्रं पंचाशत्रवमे तथा ।

त्रयोद्ग तु संप्रोक्ता द्रामे मुनिना किल ॥ 15 ॥

तथा चैकाईशक्क्ये चतुर्विंशतितीरिता ।

चतुदीर्श चाध्याया द्वारणे मुनिसत्ताः ॥ 16 ॥

Twenty chapters compose the first skandha; twelve chapters in the second Skandha; thirty chapters in the third Skandha; twenty-five chapters in fourth Skandha, thirty-five, in the fifth; thirty-one, in the sixth; forty, in the seventh; twenty-four, in the eighth; fifty chapters in the ninth; thirteen, in the tenth; twenty-four in the eleventh and fourteen chapters are contained in the twelfth

Book I Chapter II

Skandha. O Munis! Thus the Dvaipāyana Muni has arranged his chapters in each Skandha.

एवं संख्या समाख्याता पुराणेSस्मिन्महात्मना।

अष्टादशसह्वीया संख्या च परिकीर्तिति ॥ 17 ॥

सर्गंश प्रतिसर्गश्छ शंको मन्वंतराणि च ।

वंशानुचरितं चैव पुराणं पंचलक्षणम् ॥ 18 ॥

Thus, the Mahātmā Veda Vyāsa has divided this Bhāgavata Purāṇa into so many Skandhas and into so many chapters; and that the number of verses is eighteen thousand is already stated. That is denominated as Purāṇa which contains the following five characteristics: (1) Creation of the universe, (2) Secondary creation, (3) Dynasties (4) Manvantaras and (5) The description of Manus and other kings.

निर्गुण या सदा नित्या व्यापिका विकृता शिका ।

योगमायाजतिलाधारासुतीयायाचसचित्यां ॥ 19 ॥

Śivā is beyond Prākṛtic attributes, eternal and ever omnipresent; She is without any change, immutable, unattainable but by yoga; She is the refuge of the universe and Her nature is Turīya Caityanya.

तस्यासु सात्चिको शक्ति राजसी तामसी तथा ।

महातल्यीं सरस्वती महाकालीति ता: सिक्यः ॥ २०॥

Mahā Laksmī is Her Sāttvikī Śakti; Sarasvatī is Her Rājasik Śakti and Mahā Kālī is Her Tāmasik Śakti; these are all of feminine forms.

तासां तिसुर्णा शक्तिनां देवांगीकारलक्षणः ।

सुख्यर्थे च समायात्यः सर्गः शाखल्यिगारहः ॥ 21 ॥

हरित्रुद्रिणक्रज्णां सम्यूचितस्ततः स्मृता: ।

पातनोत्नतिनागार्थं प्रतिसर्गः स्मृता हिं सः ॥ 22 ॥

The assuming of bodies by these three Śaktis for the creation of this universe is denominated as “Sarga” (creation) by the high-souled persons (Mahārpuruṣa), skilled in Śāstras. And the further resolution of these three Śaktis into Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa for the creation, preservation, and destruction of this universe is denominated (in this Purāṇa) as Pratisarga (secondary creation).

सोमपूर्वौंद्वानां च राजां वंशप्रकीर्तनम् ।

हिरण्यकशिष्यादीनां वंशाते परिकीर्तितः ॥ 23 ॥

The description of the kings of the solar and lunar dynasties and the families of Hiranyakāśipu and others is known as the description of the lineages of kings and their dynasties.

स्वायंभुव्युक्तानं च मन्त्रां परिवर्णन् ।

कालसंख्या तथा तेषां तत्मन्वंतराणि च ॥ 24 ॥

The description of Sväyambhuva and, other Manus and their ruling periods is known as Manvantaras.

तेषां वंशानुकबनं वंशानुचरितं स्युतम् ।

पंचलक्षणयुक्तानि भवति मुनिसत्तमः ॥ 25 ॥

And the description of their descendants is known as the description of their families. (Thus these are the five characteristics in the Purānas.) O best of Munis! all the Purānas are endowed with these five characteristics.

स्मादतर्षणं च तवा भारतं मुनिना कृतम् ।

इतिहास इति प्रोक्ते पछ्रयं वेदसंमतम् ॥ 26 ॥

So is Mahābhārata written by Veda Vyāsa, characterised by these five things. This is known as the fifth Veda and Ithāsa (history). In this are something more than one lakh sklaks."

गैरोक उवाच

कानि तानि पुराणानि बृहि सूत सविस्तन् ।

कतिसंख्यानि सर्वेज झोतुकामा वयं तिथि ॥ 27 ॥

कलिकालविधिता: सभो नैमिचारणयवासिन: ।

बह्वाणात्र समादिष्टाधक्ते तत्त्वा मानेमयम् ॥ 28 ॥

कथितं तेन नः सर्वानाछंचेतस्य पुक्तः ।

नेमि: संगीयिते यत्र स देश: पावन: स्मृत ॥ 29 ॥

कलेस्तत्र प्रवेशो न कदाचित्मंचविषयिति ।

तावतिछतु तत्रैव यावत्सत्ययुगं पुनः ॥ 30 ॥

Śaunaka said: O Sūta! What are those Purāṇas and how many verses are contained in each? Speak all these in detail in this holy Kṣetra; we, the residents of Naimisāranya are all very eager to hear this. (Why we call ourselves as the residents of

Naimiśārayya, hear; you will realise then that no other place exists in this Kali age for hearing the holy discourses on religion):—When we were afraid of the Kali age, Brahmā gave us a Manomaya Cakra (wheel) and said to all of us:—Follow this wheel, go after it and the spot where the felly of the wheel will become thin (so as to break) and will not roll further, that country is the holy place; Kali will never be able to enter there; you all better remain there until the Satya age comes back. Thus, according to the saying of Brahmās we have got orders to stay here.

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य गृहीत्वा तक्रधानकम् ।

चालविश्रिंतसूर्णं सर्वेडगतिद्वृक्षया ॥ 3 1  ॥

Oh, hearing the words of Brahmā, we went out quickly keeping the wheel go on, our object being to determine which place is best and holiest.

प्रेलाया चालयंघकं नेपि: शीणोंद्र पश्वतः ।

तेनैदं नैमियं प्रोक्ते क्षेत्रं परपयावनम् ॥ ३२ ॥

When we came here, the belly of the wheel become thin and shorn before my eyes; hence, this Kṣetra is called Naimiṣa; it is the most sanctifying place.

कलियुवेगो नैवात्र तस्मात्स्थानं कृते मया ।

युनिधि: सिद्धसंधैधु कलिषितीर्मेहात्यिधि: ॥ 33 ॥

Kali cannot enter here; hence the Mahātmas, Munis and Siddhas, terrified by the Kali age, have followed me and resorted to this place.

पशुहीना: कृता यज्ञा: पुरोडासाधिधि: किल ।

कालातिवाहनं कार्य वाललत्ययुगानाम : ॥ 34 ॥

We have performed yajñas with Purodāśa (clarified butter as is offered in oblation to fire), here no animals are sacrificed; now we have no other important work to do except to pass our time here until the arrival of Satyayuga.

भाययोगेन संप्रान: सुत तं चारा सर्वथा ।

कथयाठ पुराणे हि पावनं बढ़ासंगतम् ॥ ३ 5 ॥

O Sūta! we are extremely fortunate in all respects that you have come here; purify us today by

narrating to us the names of the Purāṇas equivalent to the Vedas.

सूत शुषूषवः सर्वे चत्का त्वं मतिमानय ।

निष्योगारा वयं नृनमेकरिनासत्येव च ॥ ३६ ॥

O Sūta! you are also a learned orator; we, too, are ardent listeners, with no other works to bother our heads; narrate to us today the auspicious holy Bhāgavata Purāna.

त्वं सूत भव दीर्घसुस्तापजयविवर्षतः ।

कथंवाया पुराणं हि पुरयं भागवतं शिवम् ॥ 37 ॥

O Sūta! Long live you; and no ailings, internal, external, or from the Devas torment you (this is our blessing to you).

यत्र धर्मार्थकमानां वर्णनं विधिपूर्वकम् ।

विद्यां प्राय्य तथा मोक्षः कवितो मुनिना किल ॥ 38 ॥

द्वीपायने मुनिना कवितं यच्च पावनम् ।

न तृयामो वयं सूत कवां श्रुवा मनोरामम् ॥ 39 ॥

सकलनुणणणानामेकमारं पवित्र-

मविलभुवन्यमानुनीटववाद्विविधितम् ।

निविलमलमाणानां नारणकृतकामकर्दं

प्रकटय भगवता नामयुक्ते पुराणम् ॥ 40 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे प्रवभवकर्ये

द्वितीयो5थायः ॥41॥

We have heard that in the most santifying Purāṇa, narrated by Maharsi Dvaipāyana, all about Dharma (religion), Artha (wealth) and Kāma (desires) are duly described as well the acquiring of Tattvajñāna and liberation are also spoken of. O Sūta! our desires are not satisfied the more we hear of those beautiful holy words. Now describe to us the highly pure Śrimad Devī Bhāgavatam where all the Lilās (the dramatic acts) of the Mother of the three worlds, purifying the sins, adorned with all the qualifications are described as yielding all the desires like the Kalpa Vṛkṣa (the celestial tree yielding all desires).

Thus ends the Second Chapter of the First Book on the description of the Purāṇa (the text) in Mahā Purāṇa Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahraṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book 1 Chapter III

