CHAPTER X

On the Description of Mani Dvipa

व्यास उवाच

ब्रह्मलोकादुर्वंभागे सर्वलोकोउस्ति व: श्रुतः ।

मिगाढीप: स एवास्ति यत्र देवी विराजते ॥ १ ॥

सर्वेमाद्धिको यमात्सर्वेलोकस्ततः स्मृतः ।

पुरा पराम्बदैवायं कल्पितो मानसेच्छया ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King Janamejaya! What is known in the Srutis, in the Subāla Upaniṣad as the Sarvaloka over the Brahmaloka, that is Manjdivīpa. Here the Devi resides. This region is superior to all the other regions. Hence it is named “Sarvaloka.” The Devi built this place of yore according to Her will.

सर्वोदि निजसासर्ध प्रकृत्या मूलभृत्या ।

कैलगसाधिको लोको वैकुपठादरि चोतमः ॥ 3 ॥

गोलोकादपि यदीसात्मर्वलोकोडीधिकः स्मृतः ।

नैतत्मां जिलोक्यां तु सुन्दरं विद्यते क्वचित् ॥ 4 ॥

In the very beginning, the Devi Mūla Prakṛti Bhagavati built this place for Her residence, superior to Kailāśa, Vaikuntha and Goloka. Verily no other place in this universe can stand before it. Hence it is called Manjdivīpa or Sarvaloka as superior to all the Lokas.

छरीभूतं जिजगतो भवसंतपानाशकम् ।

छायामृतं तद्वासिन ब्रद्यांडानां तु सतमः ॥ 5 ॥

बहुयोजनविस्तीर्णों गंभीरतावदेव हिं ।

मिणीद्वीप्य परितो वर्ते तु सुधोद्धिः ॥ 6 ॥

This Manidvipa is situated at the top of all the regions, and resembles an umbrella. Its shadow falls on the Brahmāṇda and destroys the pains and sufferings of this world. Surrounding this Manidvīpa exists an ocean called the Sudhā Samudra, many yojanas wide and many yojanas deep.

मत्सर्विप्रुनेतीक्षीनंतरगतस्कुक: ।

रत्नाङ्णलुकायुक्तो झाषशंखसमाकु: ॥ 7 ॥

वीचिर्यंधर्येंजातलहरीक्षणरीतल: ।

नानाध्वजसमायुक्तनानापोतगतगाते: ॥ 8 ॥

Many waves arise in it due to winds. Various fishes and conches and other aquatic animals play and here the beach is full of clear sand like gems. The sea-shores are kept always cool by the splashes of the waves of water striking the beach. Various ships decked with various nice flags are plying to and fro.

विराजमानः परितस्तरील्युगे महान् । तदुतनमयोधातूनिमिति गगाने ततः ॥ 9 ॥ सपतयोजनविस्तर्णीः प्राकागो वर्तेत महान् ।

नानाशक्षप्ररणा नानायुद्विशपादः ॥ 10 ॥

Various trees bearing gems are adorning the beach. Across this ocean, there is an iron enclosure, very long and seven yojanas wide, very high so as to block the Heavens.

सृक्षा निवस्थेन्य मोद्यानाः समंततः ।

चतुद्रासमायुक्तो द्वारपालशान्तिबतः ॥ 11 ॥

नानागणैः परितृतो देवीभवित्युक्तैप् ।

दर्शनाथं समायांति: ये देवा जनदीशितु: ॥ 12 ॥

Within this enclosure wall the military guards skilled in war and furnished with various weapons are running gladly to and fro. There are four gateways or entrances; at every gate there are hundreds of guards and various hosts of the devotees of the Devi. Whenever any Deva comes to pay a visit to the Jagadiśvari, their Vāhanas (carriers) and retinue are stopped here.

तेशं गाणा वसंत्यत्र वाह्नानि च तत्र हि ।

विमानगतसंपर्धेटार्थवनमाकुक: ॥ 13 ॥

हयहेषायलुपातविधीरिकृतदिपुख: ।

गणै: किलकिलागर्वैवैत्रहसेशु ताडिताः ॥ 14 ॥

O King! This place is being resounded with the chimings of the bells of hundreds of chariots of the Devas and the neighbors of their horses and the sounds of their hoofs. The Devas walk here and there with canes in their hands and they are chiding at intervals the attendants of the Devas.

Book XII Chapter X

सेवका देवसंधानां धाजने तेर भूमिपि ।

तस्मिकोलाहले राजस शब्दः केनचित्वस्थिति ॥ 15 ॥

कल्याचिष्यवृते त्वर्तं नानाख्यसिसमालुले ।

पदे पदे मिष्टाविरिपिरुपर्गसरांसि च ॥ 16 ॥

This place is so noisy that no one can hear clearly another's word. Here are seen thousands of houses adorned with trees of gems and jewels and tanks filled with plenty of tasteful good sweet waters.

वाटिका विविधा राजन् स्तनुमविराजिता ।

तदुर्भरं महासारधानुर्भिमितमंडल: ॥ 17 ॥

शणोरप्रपे महान्तिर नगान्त्रसिंग यचित्रः ।

तेजसा स्याच्छतगुण: पूर्वशालादयं परः ॥ 18 ॥

O King! After this there is a second enclosure wall, very big and built of white copper metal (an amalgam of zinc or tin and copper); it is so very high that it almost touches the Heavens. It is hundred times more brilliant than the preceding enclosure wall; there are many principal entrance gates and various trees here.

गोपुपूद्रासहितो बहुवृक्षसम्पिति: ।

या वृक्षजातयः सिति सर्वास्तानसर सैति च ॥ 19 ॥

निरंतरं पुष्ययुतः सदाफलमम्पित्वतः ।

नवपल्वसंयुक्ततः परसौरभसंकुलः ॥ 20 ॥

What to speak of the trees there more than this that all the trees that are found in this universe are found there and they bear always flowers, fruits and new leaves! All the quarters are scented with their sweet fragrance!

पनसा वकुला लोधा कर्णिकारणच हिंगणाः ।

देवदाराकचिनरा आप्रार्थवे सुमेवः ॥ 21 ॥

लिङ्गवा हिंगुलगश्वेला लवेगा: कटफललावा ।

पाटला मुचुकुदारच फलिन्यो जघनेफलाः ॥ 22 ॥

तालसभाला: सालश्र केकोला नाभप्रक्राः ।

पूजागा: पीलवः सात्वका वै कर्णुर्गाशिनः ॥ 23 ॥

अश्वकर्ण हिंतिकाणांस्ताल्यपणांशे दाडिमाः ।

गीपाका बंधुजीवाश उजीरार्य कुरंकाः ॥ 24 ॥

दांपेया बंधुजीवारच तथा वै कनककुभाः ।

सालगृभगाञ्चैव तथा चंदनपादाः ॥ 25 ॥

खजीरा युधिकासालपर्यष्टिव व तथेक्षाः ।

श्रीवृक्षाश्रा खदिराश्रधारभलातकास्तथा ॥ 26 ॥

रुचका: कुटजा वृक्षा बिल्ववृक्षास्तवैव च ।

तुलसीनीं वान्येवं मल्लका तवैव च ॥ 27 ॥

O King! Now hear, in brief, the names of some of the trees that are found in abundance there: Panasa, Vakula, Lodhra, Karnikāra, Śinśapa, Deodāra, Kāñcanāra, mango, Sumeru, Likuca, Híngula, Elā, Labaṅga, Kat ḥruit tree, Pāṭala, Mucukunda, Tāla, Tamāla, Sāla, Kaṅkola, Nāgabhadra, Punnāga, Pīlu, Sālvaka, Karpūra, Aśvakarṇa, Hasīkarṇa, Talaparṇa, Pomegranate, Gaṇikā, Bandhujīva, Jamvīra, Kuraṇḍaka, Cāmpeya, Bandhujīva, Kanakavṛksa, Kālāguru (usually coiled all over with cobras, very black poisonous snakes), Sandaltree, Datetree, Yūthikā, Tālaparṇī, Sugarcane, Kṣīra-tree, Khadira, Bhallātaka, Rucaka, Kutaja, Bel tree and others, the Talasī and Mallikā and other forest plants.

इत्यादितकजातीनां वनान्युवतनिन च ।

नानावाणीगतरैयुक्तान्ये संति धराधिप ॥ २८ ॥

कोकिलावासवंयुक्ता गुजद्धभरभूषिताः ।

निर्वासवाकिण्य: सर्वे सिन्ध्यछायास्तलभाम: ॥ 29 ॥

नानाङ्गरुभवा वृक्षा नानापक्षिसमाकुलाः ।

नानाससविषिणीभिनन्दीघिरित्णीघितः ॥ 30 ॥

The place is interspersed with various forests and gardens. At intervals there are wells, tanks, etc., adding very much to the beauty of the place. The cuckoos are perching on every tree and they are cooing sweetly, the bees are drinking the honey and humming all around, the trees are emitting juices and sweet fragrance all around. The trees are casting cool nice shadows. The trees of all seasons are seen here; on the tops of these are sitting pigeons, parrots, female birds of the Mayanã species and other birds of various other species.

पारावलगुकातमारसीकापक्षमानते: ।s

हंसपक्षमपुद्रुतावात्रानेड्छलदुदुम् ।। ३१ ।।

सुगंधग्राहियवनपूर्ति तद्धनोतम् ।

सहितं हरिणीयुधीधावनैरितस्ततः ॥ 32 ॥

There are seen rivers flowing at intervals carrying many juicy liquids. The Flamingoes,

swans, and other aquatic animals are playing in them. The breeze is stealing away the perfumes of flowers and carrying it all around.

नृत्यद्रहिंकदंव्यः केकारावै: सुखप्रदैः ।

नारिदं तन्तं दिव्यं मधुस्वाविस मंसतः ॥ 3 3 ॥

कांक्यशालातुत्ते तु तापाशल: प्रकीर्तितः ।

चतुरसस्माकार उज्ञा स्मतयोजनः ॥ 3 4 ॥

The deer are following this breeze. The wild mad peacocks are dancing with madness and the whole place looks very nice, lovely and charming. Next this Kāmsya enclosure comes the third enclosure wall of copper. It is square shaped and seven yojanas high.

द्वयोस्तु शालयोधीये संप्रोक्ता कल्यवाहिका ।

येभां तरुभां पुण्याणि कॉचनाभानि भृपिम ॥ ३५ ॥

पत्राणि कॉचनाभानि रत्कवीजफलिन व ।

द्गयोजनगंधी हि प्रसर्पति समन्तः ॥ ३६ ॥

Within this are forests of Kalpavrksas, bearing golden leaves and flowers and fruits like gems. Their perfumes spread ten yojanas and gladden things all around. The king of the seasons preserves always this place.

तद्रनं रक्षतं राज्यसतन्तैना0निणम् ।

पूधसिंहासनसीन: पृष्यच्छत्रवित्रितः ॥ 37 ॥

पुष्पभूषापूँचित्र उष्णासविवधूर्पितः ।

मधुत्रीमांधवश्रीऊ दे भार्ये तस्य संमते ॥ 38 ॥

The king's seat is made of flowers; his umbrella is of flowers; ornaments made of flowers; he drinks the honey of the flowers; and, with rolling eyes, he lives here always with his two wives named Madhu Śrī and Mādhava Śrī. The two wives of Spring have their faces always smiling.

क्रीडतः संसरद्वने सुमसतबकंदुकः ।

अतीय रथे विविभं मधुसावि सन्ततः ॥ ३९ ॥

द्रणयोजनपर्यर्त कुसुमामोद्वायुना ।

पृत्रिं दिव्यांशधें: संगानैगानलोर्णे: ॥ 40 ॥

They play with bunches of flowers. This forest is very pleasant. Oh! The honey of the flowers is seen here in abundance. The perfumes of the full blown flowers spread to a distance of ten yojanas.

The Gandharvas, the musicians, live here with their wives.

गर्भितं तदूनं दिख्यं मतकाकिल्वानदितम् ।

वसन्तक्ष्मीसंयुक्तं कामिकामप्रवर्धनम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

तापशाल्यतुलर सीसशालः प्रकर्षिततः ।

समुच्छाय: स्मृतोप्रथ्य सप्तवोजनसंख्याय ॥ 4 2 ॥

The places round this are filled with the beauties of the spring and with the cooing of cuckoos. No doubt this place intensifies the desires of the amorous persons! O King! Next comes the enclosure wall, made of lead. Its height is seven yojanas. Within this enclosure there is the garden of the Santānaka tree.

संतानवाहिकामध्ये शाल्योस्तु द्वयोनृप ।

दशयोजनांधस्तु प्रसूनानां संमततः ॥ 43 ॥

हिरणयाभानि कुर्णमान्यतुलनानि निरंतरम् ।

अमृतद्वरसंयुक्तफलिनि मभूगणि च ॥ 44 ॥

The fragrance of its flowers extends to ten yojanas. The flowers look like gold and are always in full bloom. Its fruits are very sweet. They seem to be imbued with nectar drops.

ग्रीष्मान्नारकस्तया वार्टिकाया नृपोन ।

गुक्रक्रीश्र शुच्धिश्रीश्र दे भार्य तस्य संमते ॥ 4 5 ॥

संताप्रसन्तोकास्तु वृक्षानुलेयु संस्थिताः ।

नानासिद्धः परितृता नानावेदेः समवित्तः ॥ 4 6 ॥

In this garden resides always the Summer Season with his two wives Sukra Śrī and Śuci Śrī. The inhabitants of this place always remain under trees; otherwise they will be scorched by summer rays. Various Siddhas and Devas inhabit this place.

विलासिनीनां बृद्धेसु चंदनरुदयर्षिके: ।

पुष्यमालाघूषितैसु ताल्वृन्तकारुबेः ॥ 47 ॥

प्राकारः शोभिता राजझीलावृनिविधिः ।

सीसालालुदानरायामारकुदायः शुभः ॥ 48 ॥

The female sensualists here get their bodies all anointed with sandal paste and all decked with flower garlands and they stalk to and fro with fans in their hands. There is water to be found here very cool and refreshing.

प्राकारो वर्तैन राजन्मुनिवोजन्दैध्यान् ।

हिरचंदनवृष्णाणां वाटीमध्ये तयो: स्मृतः ॥ 49 ॥

Book XII Chapter X

गालयोरर्धिनाशस्तु वर्षतुमेघवाहनः ।

विद्युत्सियलनोत्रछ जीभूतकवचः स्मूतः ॥ 50 ॥

And owing to heat all the people here use this water. Next to this lead enclosure comes the wall made of brass, the fifth enclosure wall. It is seven yoganas long. In the centre is situated the garden of Hari Candana trees. Its ruler is the Rainy Season.

वज्ञनिर्यमिपुरुयरईध्न-वा समततः ।

सहस्रणो बारिताया मंचघातले गणायतुः ॥ 51 ॥

नभःशीघ्च नभ्यशीः स्वर्वारस्यामालिनी ।

अंबा तुल निरलिश्राधमर्नी मेघवेरिका ॥ 52 ॥

वर्षवंती विश्वणिका वारित्यारा च समता: ।

वर्षेतिद्विवश प्रोक्ता: शकलयो मदविकुलाः ॥ 53 ॥

The lightnings are his anburn eyes; the clouds are his armour, the thunder is his voice and the rainbow is his arrow. Surrounded by his hosts he rains incessantly. He has twelve wives: (1) Nabhaśrī, (2) Nabhahṣya Śrī, (3) Svarasya, (4) Rasyasālini, (5) Ambā, (6) Dulā, (7) Niratni, (8) Abhramantī, (9) Megha Yantikā, (10) Varṣayantī, (11) Civunikā, and (12) Vāridhāra (some say Madamatā).

नवपल्वबुक्षाणच नवीनलतिकाविता: ।।

हरितानि वृणान्येव वेषिता वैधराशिज्ञा ॥ 54 ॥

नदीनदप्रवाहाश्र प्रवहित च वेगतः ।

सारसि कलुर्षांवून राशिचित्समानि च ॥ 55 ॥

All the trees here are always seen with new leaves and entwined with new creepers. The whole site is covered all over with fresh green leaves and twigs. The rivers here always flow full and the current is strong, indeed! The tanks here are very dirty like the minds of worldly persons attached to worldly things.

वसंति देवा सिद्धांश ये देवीकर्मकारिणः ।

वाणीकृपतद्वागाश ये देयर्थे समर्पितः ॥ 56 ॥

ते गणा निवसंल्य सचिलासाशं सानाः ।

आरकूटमयाद्रो सप्तोयजनदैर्धयन्त् ॥ 57 ॥

The devotees of the Devi, the Siddhas and the Devas and those that consecrated in their life times tanks, wells, and reservoirs for the satisfaction of

the Devas dwell here with their wives. O King! Next to this brass enclosure comes, the sixth enclosure wall made of five fold irons.

पंचलोहामकः शालो मध्ये मंदारवाहिका ।

नानायुपलताकाणी नानापललशोभिति ॥ 58 ॥

अधिष्ठास  संप्रोक्तः शगतुत्नामयः ।

शुषुल्बीहाजैल्यप्रौईं भार्यै तस्य संपते ॥ 59 ॥

नानासिद्धा वसंलय संगाना: सपरिष्छद्धः ।

पछलोहमायादी सपरोयाजन्दीध्वान् ॥ 60 ॥

It is seven yojanas long. In the centre is situated the Garden of Mandāra trees. This garden is beautified by various creepers, flowers and leaves. The Autumn season lives here with his two wives Işulakşmī and Ūrjalakṣmī and he is the ruler. Various Siddha persons dwell here with their wives, well clothed. O King! Next to this comes the seventh enclosure wall, seven yojanas long and built of silver.

दीयमानो महागृर्वतैनं रोग्यशालकः ।

पारिजातादी मध्ये प्रसूनसबक्रवित्ति ॥ 6 1 ॥

द्वगवोजनंधीयिन कुसुमानि संसततः ।

मोदयति गणान्सर्वानि वे देवीकर्मक्षितिणे ॥ 6 2 ॥

In the centre is situated the garden of Pārijāta trees. They are filled with bunches of flowers. The fragrance of these Pārijātas extend upto the ten Yojanas and gladden all the things all around. Those who are the Devi Bhaktas and who do the works of the Devi are delighted with this fragrance.

तजाधिनाथः संप्रोक्तो हेमन्तर्महोज्जलः ।

सगण: सामुधः सवन् नागिणो रंज्यन्नः ॥ 6 3 ॥

सहश्री सहस्यशीर्दे भार्यं तस्य संमते ।

वसंति तन सिद्धाश्र धे देवीजतकारिणः ॥ 64 ॥

The Hemanta (Dewy) season is the Regent of this place. He lives here with his two wives Saha Śrī and Sahasya Śrī and with his hosts. Those who are of a loving nature are pleased hereby.

गैप्याणामवादो सप्तोजनदैर्ध्यन्ति ।

सोवर्षणालाः संप्रोक्तस्तपहाटककलितः ॥ 65 ॥

मध्ये कद्वबवादी तु पुष्पपललग्रोधिता ।

कद्वबमदिराधारा: प्रवर्तैने सहस्थः ॥ 66 ॥

Širmaddevibhāgavatam

Those who have become perfect by performing the Vratas of the Devi live here also. O King! Next to this silver, there comes the eighth enclosure wall built of molten gold. It is seven Yojanas long.

याभिनिर्मितीतानिभिनिजानंदोउनपूयते ।

त्रापितायाः संप्रोक्तः शैशिर्तुमेंहोदयः ॥ 67 ॥

तपःश्रीश्र तपस्यश्रैई भार्ये तस्य संमते ।

मोदमानः सहिताभ्यां वर्तते शिशिराकृति: ॥ 68 ॥

In the centre there is the garden of the Kadamba tree. The trees are always covered with fruits and flowers and the honey is coming out always from the trees from all the sides. The devotees of the Devi drink this honey always and feel intense delight; the Dewy Season is the Regent of this place.

नानाविलाससंयुक्तो नानागणसमावृतः ।

निवसंति महासिद्धा ये देवौदानकाविणः ॥ 6 9 ॥

नानाभोगसमुपत्यमहानन्दसमवित्ताः ।

संगना परिवारैसृं संधशः परिवारिताः ॥ 70 ॥

He resides here with his two wives Tapah Śrī and Tapasyā Śrī and his various hosts, and enjoys gladly various objects of enjoyments. Those who had made various gifts for the Devi's satisfaction, those great Siddha Puruṣas live here with their wives and relatives very gladly in various enjoyments.

स्वर्गीणलमवादो मुनिवोजनदैर्थयान् ।

पुष्यराममयः शालः कुंकुमारणधियहः ॥ ७ १  ॥

पुष्यरामायी भूमिवैनान्यपवनानि च ।

रत्वृक्षाल्बालाक्ष पुष्यरामायम: सन्ति: ॥ ७  २ ||

O King! Next to this golden enclosure well comes the ninth enclosure made of red Kumkum like (saffron) Pusparāga gems. The ground inside this enclosure, the ditches or the basins for water dug round their roots are all built of Pusparāga gems.

प्राकारो यस्य रत्नस्य तद्रत्नरिता हुमा: ।

वनभूः पक्षिणधौत्र रत्नवर्णलानि च ॥73 ॥

मंडया मंडपत्थभा: सरासि कमलानि च ।

प्राकारे तत्र यद्यत्थातत्सर्व तत्समं भवेत् ॥ 74 ॥

Next to this wall there are other enclosure walls built of various other gems and jewels; the sites, forests, trees, flowers birds, rivers, tanks, lotuses, manḍapas (halls) and their pillars are all built respectively of those gems. Only this is to be remembered that those coming nearer and nearer to the centre are one lakh times more brilliant than the ones receding from them.

परिभावयमुविद्धा रन्तशालविषु प्रभो ।

तेजसा स्थालल्ब्रगुण: पूर्वशालत्यरो नृप ॥ 75 ॥

दिव्याला निवसंत्वप्र प्रतिबझांडावर्तिनाम् ।

दिव्यालानां समष्टात्मकूपा: सूक्जंद्रायुधा: ॥ 76 ॥

This is the general rule observed in the construction of these enclosures and the articles contained therein. Here the Regents of the several quarters, the Dikpālas, representing the sum total of the several Dikpālas of every Brahmānda and their guardians reside.

पूर्वशायां समुतृगर्भगा पुरमारकती ।

नानोपवनसंयुक्ता महैंद्रस्तत्र राजते ॥ 77 ॥

स्वर्गीशा चा य सर्गे यावती स्याततेप्रधिका ।

समछितगतेत्रस्य सहस्रगुणतः स्मृता ॥ 78 ॥

On the eastern quarter is situated the Amarāvatī city. Here the high-peaked mountains exist and various trees are seen. Indra, the Lord of the Devas, dwells here. Whatever beauty exists in the separate Heavens in the several places, one thousand times, rather more than that, exists in the Heaven of this cosmic Indra, the thousand-eyed, here.

ऐरावतसमारूको बजड़हतः प्रतापवान् ।

देवसेनापरिकृता राजतेत्र शतकतुः ॥ 79 ॥

देवांगनागयुता ज्ञी तत्र विराजते ।

वहिकोणे वहिकुपी वहिकुप:सूर्गी नृप ॥ 80 ॥

Here Indra mounting on the elephant Airāvata, with thunderbolt in his hand, lives with Śaci Devī and other immortal ladies and with the hosts of the Deva forces. On the Agni (south-eastern) corner is

the city of Agni. This represents the sum total of the several cities of Agni in different Brahmāndas.

स्वाहास्थ्यासमायुक्तो बहित्रत विराजाते ।

स्वाहास्थ्यासमायुक्तो बहित्रत विराजाते ।

निजवाहनभूषाढ्यो निजदेवाणीबृतः ॥ 81 ॥

Book XII Chapter X

याम्याशायां यमपुती तत्र दंडधेपो महान् ।

स्वभदैर्शित हो जन् चित्रगुपतुरोपमे: ॥ 82 ॥

Here resides the Agni Deva very gladly with his two wives Svāhā and Svadhā and with his Vāhana and the other Devas. On the south is situated the city of Yama, the God of Death. Here lives Dharma Rāja with rod in his hand and with Citragupta and several other hosts.

निजशक्तिगुजी भास्वतनयोजित यमो महान् ।

नैक्रस्वी दिजि राक्षस्या शक्षसः परिवारितः ॥ 83 ॥

खड्याणायी सुक्रसासे निर्द्रौतिंनिजानकिंयुम् ।

वारुणयं वरणो राजा पाणधारी प्रतापवान् ॥ 84 ॥

On the south-western corner is the place of the Rākṣasas. Here resides Nirṛti with his axe in his hand and with his wife and other Rākṣasas. On the west is the city of Varuna.

महाप्रसभाकडो वारुणीभ्युबिहाः ।

निजगत्तिसमायुक्तो निजायदोगणान्धतः ॥ 85 ॥

समाने वारुणे लोके वक्षणानीरातुलः ।

वायुकोणे वायुकोणे वायुस्तार्धितिहिति ॥ 86 ॥

Here Varuna rāja resides with his wife Vārunī and intoxicated with the drink of Vārunī honey; his weapon is the noose, his Vāhana is the King of fishes and his subjects are the aquatic animals. On the north-western corner dwells Vāyudeva.

वायुसाथनसंसिद्धयोशिधः परिवारितः ।

धज्ञहत्ने शिलागलक्षो मृगवाहनसंसिंधि: ॥ ८ ७ ॥

महदगुणीः परिवृत्ते निजगणिक्समन्वितः ।

उत्तरस्वां दिशि महान्यक्षलोकोर्स्त भृम्पि ॥ 88 ॥

Here Pavana Deva lives with his wife and with the Yogis perfect in the practice of Prānāyāma. He holds a flag in his hand.

यक्षाधिरासतराते युद्धकद्वादिशक्तिभि: ।

नविधिनिधिभियुक्तसूदितिले धननायकः ॥ ८९ ॥

मिणमद्रः पूर्णमेघ्ने मिणमान्मिणकंधरः ।

मिणभूषो मिणस्वर्यी मिणाकामुंकासः ॥ ९० ॥

His Vāhana, is deer and his family consists of the forty nine Vāyus. On the north resides the Yakṣas. The corpulent King of the Yakṣas, Kubera, lives here with his Śaktis Vṛddhi and Rāddhi, and

in possession of various gems and jewels. His generals Manibhadra, Pūrnabhadra, Manimān, Manikandhara, Manibhūṣa, Manīsragvī, Manjkar-mukadhāri, etc., live here.

इत्यादियस्मेनानीसहितो निजग्रतिचतुम् ।

ईशानकोणे संप्रोकतो इन्ट्रोलोक महत्तरः ॥ 9 1 ॥

अनव्यरेनल्बाचितो यत्र हन्नोर्धिदेवान् ।

मन्युमान्दीपतयनो बन्दुपुशमहेषुधि: ॥ 92 ॥

On the north eastern corner is situated the Rudra loka, decked with invaluable gems. Here dwells the Rudra Deva. On His back is kept the arrow-case and he holds a bow in his left hand. He looks very angry and his eyes are red with anger.

सृष्ट्रनिद्वानिभर्ततेपिज्ञायन्विभावपुतः ।

स्वसमानैरसंख्यातकईः शुल्वसायुधैः ॥ 93 ॥

विकृतातयैः कालल्यैर्वेमघड़हिंभित्यतः ।

दशहतैः शतकरैः सहसभुजसंयुतः ॥ 94 ॥

दशपादैर्धगीवैस्चिनेकेन्यमूर्तिभः ।

There are other Rudras like him with bows and spears and other weapons, surrounding him. The faces of some of them are distorted; some are very horrible indeed! Fire is coming out from the mouths of some others. Some have ten hands; some have hundred hands and some have thousand hands; some have ten feet; some have ten heads whereas some others have three eyes.

अंतरिष्ठचारा वे च वे च भूमिचरा: स्मृता: ॥ 95 ॥

राजायये स्मृता रुकारेः सर्वेशु समाप्ताः ।

राजणीकीटिसहिती भत्रकाल्यादिनार्थः ॥ 96 ॥

नानाशक्तिसमाविष्टडयमवर्योगणानुः ।

वीरप्रदासिहिते रुद्रो राजन्विराजते ॥ 97 ॥

Those who roam in the intermediate spaces between the heaven and earth, those who move on the earth, or the Rudras mentioned in the Rudrádhāyāya all live here. O King! Iśāna, the Regent of the north eastern quarter lives here with Bhadrakālī and other Mātṛganas, with Kotis and Kotis of Rudrānī s and with Dāmaris and Vīra Bhadras and various other Sāktis.

मुण्डमालाधरो नागवलयो नागकन्धरः ।
व्याघ्रचर्मपरीधानो गजचर्मोत्तरीयकः ॥ ९८॥

चिताभस्माङ्ग लिप्ताङ्गः प्रमथादिगणावृतः ।
निनदड्डमरुध्वानैर्बधिरीकृतदिङ्मुखः ॥ ९९॥

अट्टहासास्फोटशब्दैः सन्त्रासितनभस्तलः ।
भूतसङ्घसमाविष्टो भूतावासो महेश्वरः ।
ईशानदिक्पतिः सोऽयं नाम्ना चेशान एव च ॥ १००॥

इति श्रीमद्देवीभागवते महापुराणेऽष्टादशसाहस्र्यां संहितायां
द्वादशस्कन्धे मणिद्वीपवर्णनं नाम दशमोऽध्यायः ॥ १२.१०॥

On his neck there is a garland of skulls, on his hand there is a ring of snakes; he wears a tiger skin; his upper clothing is a tiger skin and his body

is smeared with the ashes of the dead. He sounds frequently his Damaru; this sound reverberates on all sides, he makes big laughs called Aṭṭahāśya, reverberating through the heavens. He remains always surrounded with Pramathas and Bhūtas; they live here.

Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the description of Mani Dvipa in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevybhāgavatam

