[Ch 18 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: The King's lovely daughter was very glad on hearing the words of the Brāhmaṇa, and drowned herself in ecstasy of love. The Brāhmaṇa also departed, thinking of the whole affair.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- The King’s lovely daughter was very glad on hearing the words of the Brāhmaṇa, and drowned herself in ecstacy of love. The Brāhmin also departed, thinking of the whole affair.

[Ch 18 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The daughter was already attached to the prince, and now she became the more merged in love for him and became very anxious. Now, on the departure of the Brāhmin, she felt herself struck by the arrows of love.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The daughter was already attached to the prince, and now she became the more merged in love for him and became very anxious. Now, on the departure of the Brāhmin, she felt herself struck by the arrows of love.

[Ch 18 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Śaśikalā, oppressed by love, addressed her dear companion, who followed her inclinations' thus: "O my companion! I have not as yet had any knowledge of the king's son; still the signs of love have sprung up in my body and mind, from the moment that I heard about him from the Brāhmin. The love is giving me much trouble; tell, my companion, what am I to do now? and whither shall I go?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Śaśikalā, oppressed by love, addressed her dear companion, who followed her inclinations thus :-- “O my companion! I have not as yet had any knowledge of the king’s son; still the signs of love have sprung up in my body and mind, from the moment that I heard about him from the Brāhmin. The love is giving me much trouble; tell, my companion what am I to do now? and whither shall I go?

[Ch 18 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O dear companion! I saw him like a second God of Love in my dreams; and, since then, my innocent mind is being troubled with his being away from me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O dear companion! I saw him like a second God of Love in my dreams; and, since then, my innocent mind is being troubled with his being away from me.

[Ch 18 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O fair one! The sandal paste on my body appears to me like a poison, this garland is like a serpent and the moon's rays seem like a fire."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O fair one! The sandal paste on my body appears to me like a poison, this garland is like a serpent and the moon’s rays seem like a fire.

[Ch 18 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O companion! My mind gets not rest any where, in palaces, in gardens, in lakes, in hills, at any time, during the day or night; all the enjoyable things have assumed now contrary aspects and are paining me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O companion! My mind gets not rest anywhere, in palaces, gardens, in lakes, in hills, at any time, during the day or night; all the enjoyable things have assumed now contrary aspects and are paining me.

[Ch 18 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The bedding, betel leaves, music, singing, and dancing, all now fail to give me satisfaction and peace.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The bedding, betel leaves, music, singing, and dancing, all now fail to give me satisfaction and peace.

[Ch 18 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O companion! I would have gone today where is residing that deceiver; but I fear for my father as well for the honour of my family.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O companion! I would have gone to-day where is residing that deceiver; but I fear for my father as well for the honour of my family.

[Ch 18 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My father is not yet declaring the svayamvara for my marriage. What shall I do? Had he given me in marriage to that Sudarśana, I would have allowed him embrace me and satisfy his passion today!
NEW CORR ENG ──► My father is not yet declaring the svayamvara for my marriage. What shall I do? Had he given me in marriage to that Sudarśan, I would have allowed him embrace me and satisfy his passions to-day!

[Ch 18 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O friend! look at the strange ideas of the Creator! There are hundreds of kings today who are influential and I do not consider them beautiful; and that King's son is exiled from his kingdom. and yet he has stolen away my heart."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O friend! look at the strange ideas of the Creator! There are hundreds of kings today who are influential and I do not consider them beautiful; and that King’s son is exiled from his kingdom and yet he has stolen away my heart.”

[Ch 18 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Thus that King's son, Sudarsana, though helpless, and living in forest on roots and fruits, deprived of wealth, power, and army, began to reign in the heart of that princess.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Thus that King’s son, Sudarśana, though helpless, and living in a forest on roots and fruits, deprived of wealth, power, and army, began to reign in the heart of that princess.

[Ch 18 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śaśīkālā, too, began to recite slowly the root mantra of Sarasvatī and therefore her love towards this prince held out signs of success. Once engaged in meditation on that excellent root mantra on Kāma, and, whole repeatedly reciting it mentally, he got in a dream the vision of that Ever Full, the World Mother Ambikā, that cannot be expressed in words, the Vaisṇavi Śakti and capable to bestow all wealth and property.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śaśikalā, too, began to recite slowly the root mantra of Sarasvatī and therefore her love towards this prince held out signs of success. Once engaged in meditation on that excellent root mantra on Kāma, and, while repeatedly reciting it mentally, he got in a dream the vision of that Ever Full, the World Mother Ambikā, that cannot be expressed in words, the Vaiṣṇavī Śakti and capable to bestow all wealth and property.

[Ch 18 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this time the King of Niśādas, the lord-of Śrīngaverpur came to the hermitage and presented an excellent chariot together with all other necessary things. This chariot was drawn by four horses, decorated with nice flags and was endowed with the prospect of getting victory everywhere; thinking it thus a befitting present to be given to the King, he gave it to Sudarśana.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this time the King of Niṣādas, the lord of Śrimgaverpur came to the hermitage and presented an excellent chariot together with all other necessary things. This chariot was drawn by four horses, decorated with nice flags and was endowed with the prospect of getting victory everywhere; thinking it thus a befitting present to be given to the King, he gave it to Sudarśana.

[Ch 18 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sudarśana, too, accepted the offer of a friend and worshipped him well in return, with roots and fruits of the forest.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sudarśana, too, accepted the offer of a friend and worshipped him well in return, with roots and fruits of the forest.

[Ch 18 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The lord of the Nisādas, thus worshipped as a guest, went away. The Munis and ascetics then began to address Sudarśana, with fondness “O son of the king! Don’t be anxious and restless; within a very short time, you will get your kingdom, no doubt, by your own good luck and prowess.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The lord of the Niṣādas, thus worshipped as a guest, went away. The Munis and ascetics then began to address Sudarśana, with fondness “O son of the king! Don’t be anxious and restless; within a very short time, you will get your kingdom, no doubt, by your own good luck and prowess.

[Ch 18 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O one attached to one's vows! The Goddess that enchants the whole universe, the Giver of boons, Śrī Ambikā, has been pleased with you; assistance is rendered well to you; therefore do not trouble yourself with contrary thoughts any more."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O one attached to one’s vows! The Goddess that enchants the whole universe, the Giver of boons, Śrī Ambikā, has been pleased with you; assistance is also rendered well to you; therefore do not trouble yourself with contrary thoughts any more.”

[Ch 18 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Munis, who have taken vows, addressed Manoramā also “Your son will soon become the lord of the world; you need not care any more.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Munis, who have taken vows, addressed Manoramā also “Your son will soon become the lord of the world; you need not care any more.”

[Ch 18 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the lean and thin Manoramā, hearing the Muni's words said "O Brāhmaṇas! Let your āśīs (words of benedictions) be justified with success. What wonder that a kingdom be obtained by the good will of the Sādhus!"
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the lean and thin Manoramā, hearing the Muni’s words said “O Brāhmaṇas! Let your āsiss (words of benedictions) be justified with success. What wonder that a kingdom be obtained by the good will of the Sādhus!

[Ch 18 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There is no force, no minister, no help, no property; how, under what combinations, can then my son get kingship?
NEW CORR ENG ──► There is no force, no minister, no help, no property; how, under what combinations, can then my son get kingship?

[Ch 18 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You are the best of the knowers of mantrams; due to the influence of your good will, my son will surely be a king; there is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You are the best of the knowers of mantrams; due to the influence of your good will, my son will surely be a king; there is no doubt in this.”

[Ch 18 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Wherever that intelligent Sudarsāna used to go on his chariot, there he seemed by his own prowess, as if he were surrounded by a whole army consisting of 109, 350 foot, 65,610 horse, 21,870 chariots and 21,870 elephants.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Wherever that intelligent Sudarśana used to go on his chariot, there he seemed by his own prowess, as if he were surrounded by a whole army consisting of 109, 350 foot, 65,610 horse, 21,870 chariots and 21,870 elephants.

[Ch 18 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This is the influence of the seed mantra; it is not an ordinary acquisition. It is because Sudarśana, with gladness and one-pointedness of his mind, meditated on his seed mantra, that he acquired the above powers; there is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This is the influence of the seed mantra; it is not an ordinary acquisition. It is because Sudarśana, with gladness and one-pointedness of his mind, meditated on his seed mantra, that he acquired the above powers; there is no doubt in this.

[Ch 18 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Becoming pure and peaceful, whoever gets this wonderful seed mantra from a true spiritual guide and meditates on it incessantly, is destined certainly to attain all desires.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Becoming pure and peaceful, whoever gets this wonderul seed mantra from a true spiritual guide and meditates on it incessantly, is destined certainly to attain all desires.

[Ch 18 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O best of kings! There is no such thing either in the heavens above or in the worlds below, that a man won't get, when the Supreme Goddess becomes pleased.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O best of kings! There is no such thing either in the heavens above or in the worlds below, that a man won’t get, when the Supreme Goddess becomes pleased.

[Ch 18 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those are certainly very unfortunate and of intellect, who cannot place their faith on the worship of this Goddess and consequently suffer incessantly all sorts of troubles.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those are certainly very unfortunate and of dull intellect, who cannot place their faith on the worship of this Goddess and consequently suffer incessantly all sorts of troubles.

[Ch 18 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O best of the Kurus! At the beginning of the creation, this Amba Devi was the Mother of all the Gods, and is therefore known as the First Mother.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O best of the Kurus! At the beginning of the creation, this Ambā Devī was the Mother of all the Gods, and is therefore known as the First Mother.

[Ch 18 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She is practically seen in this world in the shape of Buddhi (intelligence), Kirti (fame), Dhṛti (fortitude), Laksmī (Goddess of wealth), Śakti (the Force), Śraddhā (Faith), Mati (Intellect), Smṛti (memory), etc.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She is practically seen in this world in the shape of Buddhi (iutellgence), Kīrti (fame), Dhrīti (fortitude), Lakṣmī (Goddess of wealth), Śakti (the Force), Śraddhā (Faith), Mati (Intellect), Smriti (memory), etc.

[Ch 18 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is only the deluded souls that do not realise the nature of the Devi; it is only those, whose hearts are destroyed by the glare of false argument, that do not worship this All-auspicious Goddess of the Universe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is only the deluded souls that do not realise the nature of the Devī; it is only those, whose hearts are destroyed by the glare of false argument, that do not worship this All-auspicious Goddess of the Universe.

[Ch 18 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Śambhu, Indra, Varuna, Yama, Vāyu, Agni, Kubera, Viśvakarmā, Pūṣā, Bhaga, the two Aśvīns, Ādītyas, Vasavas, Rudras, Víśvedevās, Maruts, all worship the Supreme Deity of Creation, Preservation and Dissolution.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Śambhu, Indra, Varuṇa, Yama, Vāyū, Agni, Kuvera, Viśvakarmā, Pūṣā, Bhaga, the two Asvins, Ādityas, Vasus, Rudras, Viśvedevas, Maruts, all worship the Supreme Deity of Creation, Preservation and Dissolution.

[Ch 18 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Who is there amongst the wise that does not serve this Highest Energy? The real nature of that Auspicious Goddess, the Bestower of all desires, Sudarśana came to know very well.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Who is there amongst tho wise that does not serve this Highest Energy? The real nature of that Auspicious Goddess, the Bestower all desires, Sudarśana came to know very well.

[Ch 18 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She is the Real Essence, Brahma, very rarely realised : She is the Higher Vidyā and the Lower Vidyā (Avidyā) and She is the vital energy, the Mukhya Prāna, of the best of the Yogis, who are desirous of liberation.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She is the Real Essence, Brahmā, very rarely realised; She is the Higher Vidyā and the Lower Vidyā (Avidyā) and She is the vital energy, the Mukhya Prāṇa, of the best of the Yogis, who are desirous of liberation.

[Ch 18 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! What individual is there that is able to realise the nature of Pramātmā (the Highest Universal Self) without having recourse to Her, Who is manifesting this universal consciousness, by bringing into existence these Sātvik, Rājasik, and Tāmasik creations.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! What individual is there that is able to realise the nature of Pramātmā (the Highest Universal Self) without having recourse to Her, Who is manifesting this universal consciousness, by bringing into existence these Sātvik, Rājasik, and Tāmasik creations.

[Ch 18 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sudarśana, though the dwelt in the forest, realised a greater happiness than that in obtaining the sovereignty of a kingdom, by constantly meditating on that Goddess.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sudarśana, though he dwelt in the forest, realised a greater happiness than that in obtaining the sovereignty of a kingdom, by constantly meditating on that Goddess.

[Ch 18 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śaśikalā, too, being too much oppressed with the arrows of love, any how remained with her soul in her body, having had to be always cared for her health in various ways by her attendants.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śaśikalā, too, being too much oppressed with the arrows of love, any how remained with her soul in her body, having had to be always cared for her health in various ways by her attendants.

[Ch 18 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the king Subahū, on coming to know that her daughter is desirous of getting her husband, made arrangements for her Swayarīnvara (a marriage in which the girl chooses her husband from among a number of suitors assembled together) without any delay.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the king Subāhu, on coming to know that her daughter is desirous of getting her husband, made arrangements for her Svayambara (a marriage in which the girl chooses her husband from among a number of suitors assembled together) without any delay.

[Ch 18 Verse 41-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Svaaryānvara of the royal family, the Pundits say, is of three kinds: 1st Icchā Svaamyvara (optional); 2nd Panya Svayamvara by fulfilling a promise e.g. Rāmacandra broke in two the bow of Śiva and married Sītā; 3rd the Svaamyvara, preferring one who will prove the strongest hero by one's own prowess. Of these three kinds of Svaaymvaras, the king Subāhu preferred Icchā Svaaymvara (according to the bride's free choice).
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Svayambara of the royal family, the Pundits say, is of three kinds :-- lst Icchā Svayambara (optional); 2nd Paṇya Svayamvara by fulfilling a promise, e.g. Rāmacandra broke in two the bow of Śiva and married Sītā; 3rd the Svayambara, preferring one who will prove the strongest hero by one’s own prowess. Of these three kinds of Svayambaras, the king Subāhu preferred Iccā Svayamvara (according to the bride’s free choice).

[Ch 18 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Accordingly the king employed many artisans, had platforms covered with beautiful carpets and big halls decorated beautiful in various ways.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Accordingly the king employed many artisans, had platforms covered with beautiful carpets and big halls decorated beautifully in various ways.

[Ch 18 Verse 45-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus the assembly hall for Svaaryinvara built and decorated and all the necessary articles and equipments brought thither, the fair eyed Śaśikalā, told her companions with sorrow “Better go to my mother and say her privately that I have already selected mentally my husband the beautiful Sudarśana, the son of the king Dhruvasandhi in my mind; I wo’nt marry any other prince than him; the Goddess Bhagavatī has settled him for my husband.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the assembly hall for Svayambara built and decorated and all the necessary articles and equipments brought thither, the fair eyed Śaśikalā, told her companions with sorrow “Better go to my mother and say her privately that I have already selected mentally my husband the beautiful Sudarśana, the son of the king Dhruvasandhi in my mind; I won’t marry any other prince than him; the Goddess Bhagavatī has settled him for my husband.”

[Ch 18 Verse 48-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said, the companion of Saśikālā hearing thus, went quickly to her mother Vaidarbhi and addressed her sweetly in private “O chaste one! Your daughter, with a sorrowful heart, has sent me to you to say the following; Please hear and do at your earliest convenience, what is good and beneficial, the son of the king Dhruvasandhi; I have mentally selected him as my husband; I won’t select any other prince.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said, the companion of Śaśikalā hearing thus, went quickly to her mother Vaidarbhī and addressed her sweetly in private “O chaste one! Your daughter, with a sorrowful heart, has sent me to you to say the following; Please hear and do at your earliest convenience, what is good and beneficial.” She said “There is staying in the hermitage of Bhāradvāja, the son of the king Dhruvasandhi; I have mentally selected him as my husband; I won’t select any other prince.”

[Ch 18 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: The queen, hearing her words, told to her husband, when he returned to the palace, all her daughter's words as she had heard them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- The queen, hearing her words, told to her husband, when he returned to the palace, all her daughter’s words as she had heard them.

[Ch 18 Verse 52-53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, the king Sabāhu was astonished and then laughed frequently and then began to say to his wife, the daughter of the king of Vidarbha the following true words: "O fair one! That king's son Sudarśana is a minor, he has been exiled to the forest; now he is helpless and is residing with his mother in a dense forest.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, the king Subāhu was astonished and then laughed frequently and then began to say to his wife, the daughter of the king of Vidarbha the following true words :-- “O fair one! That king’s son Sudarśana is a minor, he has been exiled to the forest; now he is helpless and is residing with his mother in a dense forest.

[Ch 18 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► For his sake, the king Virasena was slain in battle by the king Yudhājit. O fair eyed! how can that helpless exiled poor boy become her husband.?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► For his sake, the king Vīrasena was slain in battle by the king Yudhājit. O fair eyed! how can that helpless exiled poor boy become her husband.

[Ch 18 Verse 55-111]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Do say therefore to Śaśikalā that, in the assembly hall for her Swayanivara, many kings commanding honour and respect would be present; She would then choose whomever she likes. She need nor repeat such words any more. Thus ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Third Book about the Swayanīvara of Śaśikalā, the daughter of the king Kāśirāja in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Do say therefore to Śaśikalā that, in the assembly hall for her Svayamvara, many kings commanding honour and respect would be present. She would then choose whomever she likes. She need not repeat such words any more.” Thus ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the 3rd Skandha about the Svayambara of Śaśikalā, the daughter of the king Kāsirāja in the Mahā Purāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
