CHAPTER XVIII

On Swayamvara of the Daughter of the King of Benares

यास उवाच

भुत्वा तद्वचनं ज्यामा प्रेमयुक्ता बभूव ह ।

प्रतस्पे ब्राह्मणतस्तमात्स्थानावुक्त्वा समाहितः ॥ 1 ॥

Vyāsa said: The King's lovely daughter was very glad on hearing the words of the Brāhmaṇa, and drowned herself in ecstasy of love. The Brāhmaṇa also departed, thinking of the whole affair.

सा तु पूर्वानुगाई मना प्रेण्ञान्तिवंचला ।

कामवाणहोतवास गते तस्मिन्डजोतमे ॥ 2 ॥

The daughter was already attached to the prince, and now she became the more merged in love for him and became very anxious. Now, on the departure of the Brāhmin, she felt herself struck by the arrows of love.

अथ कामारिता प्राह सखी छ-दोनुवर्तनीम् ।

विकारुः समुत्वोः देहे यच्छ्वणादुः ॥ 3 ॥

अज्ञातरसविज्ञानं कुमारं कुलतम्प्रयम् ।

दुनौति मदान: पापः किं करोमि कव याथि च ॥ 4 ॥

Then Śaśikalā, oppressed by love, addressed her dear companion, who followed her inclinations' thus: "O my companion! I have not as yet had any knowledge of the king's son; still the signs of love

have sprung up in my body and mind, from the moment that I heard about him from the Brāhmin. The love is giving me much trouble; tell, my companion, what am I to do now? and whither shall I go?

स्वानेषु वा मया दृषः पड्वाणा इवापरः ।

तपते मे मनोरभर्ध विहाहुकृतिरंतं मघु ॥ ५ ॥

O dear companion! I saw him like a second God of Love in my dreams; and, since then, my innocent mind is being troubled with his being away from me."

चन्दनं देहल्पनं मे विषवद्धाति भामिनी ।

स्वागर्व सर्वेषच्छेच नन्द्रपात्रध वहिहत् ॥ 6 ॥

O fair one! The sandal paste on my body appears to me like a poison, this garland is like a serpent and the moon's rays seem like a fire."

न हर्षे न वने गं से दीर्घिकानां न वर्ते ।

न दिवा न निशायां वा न सुखं सुखतायभैः ॥ ७ ॥

O companion! My mind gets not rest any where, in palaces, in gardens, in lakes, in hills, at any time, during the day or night; all the enjoyable things have assumed now contrary aspects and are paining me."

न शल्या न च तांबूतं न गीतं न च घादनम् ।

प्रीण्यांति मनो मेउढ़ा न तृते मम लोचने ॥ 8 ॥

The bedding, betel leaves, music, singing, and dancing, all now fail to give me satisfaction and peace.

प्रयाम्यच्चं वने तत्र यत्रासी वर्तेत शकः ।

भीतातीय कुललज्जायाः परन्तःया प्रिकुतशा ॥ 9 ॥

O companion! I would have gone today where is residing that deceiver; but I fear for my father as well for the honour of my family.

स्वयंवरं पिता मेउष्ठा न क्रातीक क्रोगेम क्रिम् ।

दास्यामि राजपुराय कामं सुदर्शनाय बै ॥ १० ॥

My father is not yet declaring the svayamvara for my marriage. What shall I do? Had he given me in marriage to that Sudarśana, I would have allowed him embrace me and satisfy his passion today!

संस्थाने पृथिवीपाला: शतश: संभृतद्विः ।

सपीया ने तेउडा राज्यहीनोउपसी मनः ॥ १ १ ॥

"O friend! look at the strange ideas of the Creator! There are hundreds of kings today who are influential and I do not consider them beautiful; and that King's son is exiled from his kingdom. and yet he has stolen away my heart."

व्यास उवाच

एकाकी निर्धनश्रिव बलहीनः सुदर्भनः ।


वनवासी फलाहारतसत्याश्रिते सुसंश्रिता ॥ 12 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus that King's son, Sudarsana, though helpless, and living in forest on roots and fruits, deprived of wealth, power, and army, began to reign in the heart of that princess.

वार्थीक्रिय सपासिद्धित्सया एषायुपस्थिता ।

सोषि ध्यानयोरोस्थन्ते जजापा मन्त्यमुत्तम् ॥ 13 ॥

स्वने पश्यस्यी देवीं विष्ण्यामायाखिद्धात्म।

विश्वभात्मयक्तां सर्वसंपत्कारंविकाम् ॥ 14 ॥

Śaśīkālā, too, began to recite slowly the root mantra of Sarasvatī and therefore her love towards this prince held out signs of success.

Once engaged in meditation on that excellent root mantra on Kāma, and, whole repeatedly

reciting it mentally, he got in a dream the vision of that Ever Full, the World Mother Ambikā, that cannot be expressed in words, the Vaisṇavi Śakti and capable to bestow all wealth and property.

श्रगावेषुराधक्षो निवादः समुदोच तम् ।

द्वौं रथवरं तत्मे सर्वोपरूकरसंयुतम् ॥ १ ५ ॥

चतुर्भिस्तुरीयुक्ति पताकावरमधितुम् ।

जैत्रं राजसुतं ज्ञाला ददी चोपायन्ते तद् ॥ १ ६ ॥

At this time the King of Niśādas, the lord-of Śrīngaverpur came to the hermitage and presented an excellent chariot together with all other necessary things. This chariot was drawn by four horses, decorated with nice flags and was endowed with the prospect of getting victory everywhere; thinking it thus a befitting present to be given to the King, he gave it to Sudarśana.

सोर्धि ज्यात्र हं प्रीवा सित्तेन सुसीक्षितम् ।

वन्यैमूलकर्ते: सव्यार्थियामास शंखरम् ॥ 17 ॥

Sudarśana, too, accepted the offer of a friend and worshipped him well in return, with roots and fruits of the forest.

कृतातिथ्ये गते तस्मिभिद्यादिघपते तदा ।

मुनयः प्रीतियुक्तासे तम्बुतत्पासा मिथः ॥ 18 ॥

राजपुत्र धृष्टा नज्य प्राप्यसि तर्चे च सर्वथा ।

स्वल्यैरहोभिरव्ययः प्रतापाशत्र संशयः ॥ 19 ॥

The lord of the Nisādas, thus worshipped as a guest, went away. The Munis and ascetics then began to address Sudarśana, with fondness “O son of the king! Don’t be anxious and restless; within a very short time, you will get your kingdom, no doubt, by your own good luck and prowess.

प्रसता तेरभिका देवी वरद विधभोहिती ।

सहायस्तु सुसंपयो न चित्तां कुक सुवत् ॥ 20 ॥

O one attached to one's vows! The Goddess that enchants the whole universe, the Giver of boons, Śrī Ambikā, has been pleased with you; assistance is rendered well to you; therefore do not trouble yourself with contrary thoughts any more."

मनोरां तथोच्छुत मृन्य संशित्राततः ।

पुत्रसंउद्ध धारधीशो भविष्यति शुचिशित्मे ॥ 21 ॥

Book III Chapter XVIII

The Munis, who have taken vows, addressed Manoramā also “Your son will soon become the lord of the world; you need not care any more.

सा तानुवाच तन्वीी वचनं वोउसु सरूकल्प।

दास्तोउयं भवतां विधा: किं चित्रं सदुपासन्ति । 22 ॥

Then the lean and thin Manoramā, hearing the Muni's words said "O Brāhmaṇas! Let your āśīs (words of benedictions) be justified with success. What wonder that a kingdom be obtained by the good will of the Sādhus!"

न सैन्यं सचिवा: कोशो न सहायघ कक्षन ।

केन योगेन पुत्रो मे राज्यं प्रापुविहाहित् ॥ 23 ॥

There is no force, no minister, no help, no property; how, under what combinations, can then my son get kingship?

आशीर्विद्धि वो नूनं पुत्रोउयं मे महीपति: ।

भविष्यनि न सन्देहो घवन्तो मन्त्रविनता: ॥ 24 ॥

You are the best of the knowers of mantrams; due to the influence of your good will, my son will surely be a king; there is no doubt in this.

व्यास उवाच

याहाकडः स मेधावी यत्र याति सुदर्भनः ।

अशौहिणीसामवृत इवापाशित से तेजसा ॥ 25 ॥

Vyāsa said: Wherever that intelligent Sudarsāna used to go on his chariot, there he seemed by his own prowess, as if he were surrounded by a whole army consisting of 109, 350 foot, 65,610 horse, 21,870 chariots and 21,870 elephants.

प्रताथो मन्त्रीजस्य नावः क्रऊन भूपते ।

गृवं के जपतस्तस्य प्रीतियुक्तस्य सर्वेथि ॥ 26 ॥

This is the influence of the seed mantra; it is not an ordinary acquisition. It is because Sudarśana, with gladness and one-pointedness of his mind, meditated on his seed mantra, that he acquired the above powers; there is no doubt in this.

समप्राय सदगुरोर्षिंत कामराजाखमद्धुतम् ।

जदेषासु गृधि: शानतः सर्वान्कामानावगुतम् ॥ 27 ॥

Becoming pure and peaceful, whoever gets this wonderful seed mantra from a true spiritual guide and meditates on it incessantly, is destined certainly to attain all desires.

न तर्सिति पृथिव्यां वा दिवि वारपि सुतुर्विभम् ।

प्रसवाचा: शिवायाङ्य यद्याप्यं नृपोन्म ॥ 28 ॥

O best of kings! There is no such thing either in the heavens above or in the worlds below, that a man won't get, when the Supreme Goddess becomes pleased.

ते मन्दारतेश्रिदुष्योग्योगेसं समाधिगुतः ।

येषां चित्ते न विश्ठासो भवेदेवार्थनायिषु ॥ 29 ॥

Those are certainly very unfortunate and of intellect, who cannot place their faith on the worship of this Goddess and consequently suffer incessantly all sorts of troubles.

या माता सर्वेदेवानां युगावौ परिकीर्तिता ।

आदिमातेति विश्याता नाना तेन कुकढ़हं ॥ 30 ॥

O best of the Kurus! At the beginning of the creation, this Amba Devi was the Mother of all the Gods, and is therefore known as the First Mother.

बुद्धि: कीर्तिधूतितर्षीः शक्ति: श्रद्धा मति: स्थूति: ।

सर्वेषां प्राणिनां सा वे श्रवर्षे वै विपासते ॥ 31 ॥

She is practically seen in this world in the shape of Buddhi (intelligence), Kirti (fame), Dhṛti (fortitude), Laksmī (Goddess of wealth), Śakti (the Force), Śraddhā (Faith), Mati (Intellect), Smṛti (memory), etc.

न जानांति नरा ये वै मोहिता मायया किल ।

न भजित कृतकौना देवी विधेश्धी शिकाम् ॥ 32 ॥

It is only the deluded souls that do not realise the nature of the Devi; it is only those, whose hearts are destroyed by the glare of false argument, that do not worship this All-auspicious Goddess of the Universe.

ब्रह्मा विष्यासा शम्बुरास्वो वक्षणो यमः।

वायुरानि: कुबेरिष्ठ न्वष्टा पूर्णिष्ठनी भनः ॥ 33 ॥

अदिल्या वसवो रुदा विश्वेशेवा मन्द्राणा: ।

सर्वे ध्यायिन तां देवीं सृहित्यचल्नकारिणीम् ॥ 34 ॥

O king! Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Śambhu, Indra, Varuna, Yama, Vāyu, Agni, Kubera, Viśvakarmā, Pūṣā, Bhaga, the two Aśvīns, Ādītyas, Vasavas, Rudras,

Víśvedevās, Maruts, all worship the Supreme Deity of Creation, Preservation and Dissolution.

को न सेवेत विद्यान्ये तां शर्से परमात्मिकाम ।

सुवर्भनि न सा जाता देवी सर्वांदीय शिला:।। 35 ॥

Who is there amongst the wise that does not serve this Highest Energy? The real nature of that Auspicious Goddess, the Bestower of all desires, Sudarśana came to know very well.

ब्रहीव सातिनुकुमार विघाउविद्यारस्विधो।

योगेशया परा शनिर्भमुभुर्णों च बलल्पा ॥ ३ ६ ॥

She is the Real Essence, Brahma, very rarely realised : She is the Higher Vidyā and the Lower Vidyā (Avidyā) and She is the vital energy, the Mukhya Prāna, of the best of the Yogis, who are desirous of liberation.

परामास्वरूयं को वेतुमहिति तां विना ।

या सृहि विधियां कृता दर्शनयविद्यालमना । ३ ७ ॥

O king! What individual is there that is able to realise the nature of Pramātmā (the Highest Universal Self) without having recourse to Her, Who is manifesting this universal consciousness, by bringing into existence these Sātvik, Rājasik, and Tāmasik creations.

सुर्वान्तु तां देवीं मनसा परिधितयन् ।

राज्यलाभार्यं प्राया सुखं वे कानेन स्थितः ॥ 38 ॥

Sudarśana, though the dwelt in the forest, realised a greater happiness than that in obtaining the sovereignty of a kingdom, by constantly meditating on that Goddess.

सारपि चंद्रकलाजस्यं कामबाणप्रपीक्षिता ।

नानोपचार्तैरिभं हद्यार दुःखितं वपुः ॥ 39 ॥

Śaśikalā, too, being too much oppressed with the arrows of love, any how remained with her soul in her body, having had to be always cared for her health in various ways by her attendants.

ताततस्या: पिता जाता कन्यो पुत्रवार्षितीम् ।

सुबाहु: कारयामास स्वयंवरमनंर्तिद्र: ॥ 40 ॥

Then the king Subahū, on coming to know that her daughter is desirous of getting her husband, made arrangements for her Swayarīnvara (a marriage

in which the girl chooses her husband from among a number of suitors assembled together) without any delay.

स्वयंवरसू त्रिविधो विद्धिद्र: परिकीर्तितः ।

राज्ञी विद्वाह्योग्यो के नान्येबां कवितः किल ॥ 41 ॥

इच्छास्वयंवरछोकी छितीयछ प्रणाधिधः ।

यथा रामेण भपाने वे अयंकस्य शासनम् ॥ 42 ॥

तृतीयः श्रीयंगुल्का श्रूगणां परिकीर्तितः ।

इच्छास्यवरं तत्र चकार नुचसनम्:। 43 ॥

The Svaaryānvara of the royal family, the Pundits say, is of three kinds: 1st Icchā Svaamyvara (optional); 2nd Panya Svayamvara by fulfilling a promise e.g. Rāmacandra broke in two the bow of Śiva and married Sītā; 3rd the Svaamyvara, preferring one who will prove the strongest hero by one's own prowess. Of these three kinds of Svaaymvaras, the king Subāhu preferred Icchā Svaaymvara (according to the bride's free choice).

शिष्यिध: कातिरा मंचा: शुभैरातलपौर्युतः।

ततश्र विविधाकारा: सुकल्ला: सध्यमखुपा: ॥ 44 ॥

Accordingly the king employed many artisans, had platforms covered with beautiful carpets and big halls decorated beautiful in various ways.

एवं कृतेस्तिमंचारे विद्वार्थे सुवित्तरे ।

सखीं शणिकला प्राह दुःविता चाहलोचना ॥ 45 ॥

इदं मे मातरं बृहि त्वमेकानते वचो मम ।

मया वृत: परितिक्षे धुवसन्धिसून: शुभ ॥ 46 ॥

नान्ये वरं वरिष्यामि मनुते वै सुरुर्जनम् ।

स मे भर्तां नृपसुतो भगवया प्रतिष्ठितः ॥ 47 ॥

Thus the assembly hall for Svaaryinvara built and decorated and all the necessary articles and equipments brought thither, the fair eyed Śaśikalā, told her companions with sorrow “Better go to my mother and say her privately that I have already selected mentally my husband the beautiful Sudarśana, the son of the king Dhruvasandhi in my mind; I wo’nt marry any other prince than him; the Goddess Bhagavatī has settled him for my husband.”

ह उवाच

इत्युक्ता सा सखी गत्वा प्राह सत्वरा ।

वैदर्भी विजने वाक्यं मधुरं मञ्जुभाषिणी ॥ 48 ॥

पुत्री ते दुःखिता प्राह साध्वी त्वां मन्मुखेन यत्‌ ।

शृणु त्वं कुरु कल्याणि तद्द्रितं त्वरिताऽधुना ॥ 49 ॥

Usa पुण्ये श्रुवसंधिसुतोऽस्ति यः |

स मे भर्ता catered नान्यं भूपं वृणोम्यहम्‌ ॥ 50 ॥

Vyāsa said, the companion of Saśikālā hearing thus, went quickly to her mother Vaidarbhi and addressed her sweetly in private “O chaste one! Your daughter, with a sorrowful heart, has sent me to you to say the following; Please hear and do at your earliest convenience, what is good and beneficial, the son of the king Dhruvasandhi; I have mentally selected him as my husband; I won’t select any other prince.”

म्यास उवाच

रानी तद्वचनं श्रुत्वा स्वपतौ गृहमागते ।

निवेदयामास तदा पुत्रीवासयं यथातमम् ॥ 51 ॥

Vyāsa said: The queen, hearing her words, told to her husband, when he returned to the palace, all her daughter's words as she had heard them.

तच्छूत्वा वचनं राजा विवित्मतः प्रहस्मयुः ।

भार्यामुवाच वेदपूर्ण सुवाहुस्तु न्रतं वचन: ॥ 52 ॥

सुषुं जानासि वालोउसी राज्याधिक्यासितो वन ।

एकाकी सह मात्रा वे वसते निजने वने ॥ 53 ॥

Hearing this, the king Sabāhu was astonished and then laughed frequently and then began to say to his wife, the daughter of the king of Vidarbha the following true words: "O fair one! That king's son Sudarśana is a minor, he has been exiled to the forest; now he is helpless and is residing with his mother in a dense forest.

तकृते नितहतो राजा वीरसेनो युधापिता ।

स कर्बं निर्धोने भर्ती योग्य: स्याच्याक्लोचने ॥ 54 ॥

For his sake, the king Virasena was slain in battle by the king Yudhājit. O fair eyed! how can that helpless exiled poor boy become her husband.?"

खृष्टि पुरीं ततो वाक्यं कदाधिद्धि विध्रियम् ।

आगमिष्यिति राजान: स्थितिनं: स्वयंदेचे ॥ 55 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागते महापुराणे

तृतीयकन्येडगहसोड्याव: ।। १ १ १ ।।

Do say therefore to Śaśikalā that, in the assembly hall for her Swayanivara, many kings commanding honour and respect would be present; She would then choose whomever she likes. She need nor repeat such words any more.

Thus ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Third Book about the Swayanīvara of Śaśikalā, the daughter of

the king Kāśirāja in the Mahā Purānam

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī

Veda Vyāsa.

Book III Chapter XIX

