Book VII Chapter XL

CHAPTER XL.

On the Outer Worship of the Devi

देख्यवाच

प्रातरल्याय शिराति संस्मरेत्वयपुज्ज्वलम् ।

कर्पूरायं संरेत्तत्र श्रीगुर्भ निजरूषिप्पम् ॥ १ ॥

सूपसत्रं लसद्व्यापुवितं शफिरसंयुतम् ।

नमकूल्य ततो देवीं कुण्डलीं संस्मरेद्वृषः ॥ 2 ॥

प्रकाशमानां प्रथये प्रयाणे प्रतिप्रयाणेउपमृतायमानाम् ।

अन्त: पद्यव्यानुसंचरितीमानन्दरूपाभवलां प्रपते ॥ 3 ॥

The Devi said: “Getting up from the bed early in the morning, one is to meditate on the thousand petalled lotus, bright, of the colour of camphor, in the top part his brain on the head. On this he should remember his Śrī Guru, very gracious looking, well decorated with ornaments, with His Consort Sakti and bow down to Him and within Him he should meditate the Kuṇḍalini Devi thus: “I take refuge unto that Highest Śakti Kuṇḍalini, of the nature of

the Supreme Consciousness, Who is manifest as Caitanya while up-going to the Brahmarandhra (the aperture supposed to be at the crown of the head, thorough which the soul takes its fight at death) and Who is of the nature of nectar while returning back in the Susumnā canal."

ध्यातवैरं तिच्छखामध्ये सचिव्दानन्दूरिपिणी।

मां ध्यावेद्व शोभामि क्रिका: सर्वः समापयेत् ॥ 4 ॥

After meditating thus, he should meditate on the Blissful Form of Mine within the Kuṇdalini Fire situated in the Mūlādhāra Lotus (coccygeal lotus). Then he should rise up to go for the calls of nature, etc., and complete Sandhyā Vandamans and other duties.

अग्निच्छोत ततो हुत्वा मत्नीत्यर्थे बिज्ञानम: ।

होमांते स्वासने स्थित्वा पूजासंकल्यमाचरेत् ॥ 5 ॥

Srimadavedbhāgavatam

The best of Brāhmins, then should for My satisfaction perform the Agnihotra Homa and sitting in his Āsana māke Sankalapa (determination) to do My Pūjā (worship).

Note: The brain has three divisions, the lower; the middle and the higher, or top-most part which is very pure.

भूतगृधें पुरा कृत्ता मातृकान्यासभेव च ।

हल्लोख्यामातृकान्यासं नित्यमेव सामारेत्त् ॥ 6 ॥

भूतागारे हक्तां च हदये च रकारकम् ।

भूतपछे तद्वीक्षांत हींकारं मतलेक न्यसेत् ॥ 7 ॥.

Next he is to make Bhūta Suddhi (purification of elements of the body by respiratory attraction and replacement) and then the Mātṛkā Nyāsa. Then he should arrange the letters of the root Mantra of Māyā and execute the Hrllekhā Mātṛkā Nyāsa. In this he is to place the letter 'Ha' in the Mulādhāra, the letter 'Ra' in his heart and the vowel 'T' in the middle of his brows and Hripn on the top part of his head.

तत्ननोजितान्याव्यासान्तविनामाजरेत् ।। ।

कल्यवेदत्यान्नो देहे पीरं घपार्थिभ्य; युनः ॥ ८ ॥

Finishing then all the other Nyāsas according to that Mantra, he should think within his body Dharma, Jñāna, Vairāgyam, and Prosperity as the four legs of the seat and Adharma. Ajñāna, Avairāgyam and non-prosperity, these four as the body, of the seat on the four quarters East, South, West and North.

ततो धयावेमहादौं प्राणाभावीसिज्ञभिते ।

दर्भोपोजे मण स्थाने पड़भोजसेने ब्यः ॥ 9 ॥

ब्रहां विण्युं रूरूश्र उद्धुं श्ररु सर्वोरिधः ।

एते पंडो महोरिधः पाद्वुने मन स्थिता ॥ 10 ॥

Then he should meditate on the Great Devi in the lotus of his heart blew by Pranāyāma, situated on the five seats of the Pretas. O Mōunitani Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, Sadāśiva and Tsvara are the five Pretas situated under My feet.

पशुभात्माका होते प्रजावस्थामाका अधि ।

अहं व्यक्ष्यचिद्धुपा नदातीतआसि सर्वेबी । । । ।

These ate of the nature of earth, water, fire, air, and ether, the five elements and also of the nature of Jāgrat (waking), Svapna (dreaming). Susupti (deep sleep state). Turyā (the fourth state) and Atita Rūpa, the (the fifth state) excluding the 4 states, corresponding to the five states. But I, who am of nature of Brahma, am over and above the five elements and the five states; therefore My seat is always on the top of these five forces.

ततो विहरां त्राता: शक्तितन्त्रे सर्वेयु ।। १२. ३५

ध्यत्वैवं मानसैभंगैर: पुत्रवेभां जादेविष ।। १२. ३५

Meditating on Me thus and worshipping Me with his mind concentrated, he is next to make Japam (reciting My name slowly). After Japam he is to make over the fruits of Japam to Me. He should then place the Arghya for the external worship.

जयं समर्थ शीदेधैत ततोर्धर्थ्यापनं चेत् ।

पायासादनंक कृत्वा पूत्रप्रद्योग शोधयेत् ॥ 13 ॥

Then the worshipper is to sprinkle with the Astra mantra 'Phat', all the articles of worship that are placed in front of him and purify them.

जलेन तेन मनुना चात्मानेण दोशिकः ।

विद्यकंच च पुरा कृत्ता गृहान्ता ततः परम् ॥ 14 ॥

तदनुजां समादारक ब्राह्मधोते ततः परम् ।

इदित्यां भावितां मृत्ति मम दिवमां मनोहारम् ॥ 15 ॥

आवाहयन्ततः पौरे प्राणस्थापनविद्धाय ।

आसनावाहते चार्थे प्याहाश्रमने तथा ॥ 16 ॥

स्नानं वासोद्धवं चेवं भरणायि च मवर्गे ।

गन्धं पुर्णं वयाणायनं दत्ता वैश्यकृतं तत: पृथि ॥ 17 ॥

यनश्वानामावृत्तीनां पजनं समवाचित ।

प्रतिव्यामशक्तानां शुक्रकर्ता निव्यानाकर ॥ 18 ॥

He should close the ten quarters with the Chopika Mudrā and bow down to his Guru. Taking his permission, he should meditate on the outside seat, the beautiful divine form of his heart lotus and involve the divine outside power of his heart. The deity outside and place Her on the seat by Braha Pratisthā and perform Avāhmana, and present to Her Arghya (an offer of green grass, rice, etc., made in worshipping a god), Pádaya (water for washing legs and feet), Acamana, water for bath, a couple of

Book VII Chapter XI

clothes, all sorts of ornaments, or scents, flowers and the necessary articles with due devotion and he should worship the attendant deities, of the Yantra. If one be unable to worship daily, the attendant deities, one must worship themon Friday.

मृत्येदीप्रभालय, स्पर्गल्या अंसदेशतः ।

तत्प्रभापटल्यावर तैतोक्यं च विक्रितयेन् ॥ 19 ॥

Of the attendant deities, one must meditate the principal deity of the, natupre of Prabhā (illmination) and, think that, by Her rays the three worlds are pervaded.

पुतराष्ट्रसितांत मुलदेर्षे च, पूजयेत् ।

नसाविक्षि: सुगान्यैसुत तथा पुषे: सुवासितः ॥ 20 ॥

Next, he should worship again the Bhuvayesyari Devi, the Chief Deity along with other attendant deities with seer, good-smelling flowers and Naivedya and various other tasteful dishes.

नैवेटीतर्णीयीशि, दूमाल्यैर्विषणातिपि:

तोपयेमां लतुकेतेन नाना। प्राक्रास्वेणा, ॥ 21 ॥

कवचेन च मुक्तेगई उद्यिपिति प्रभो ।

देव्यवर्गोरामैन्द्रिकुल्यापितुबड़ी ॥ 22 ॥

He should then recite the Sahasranāma (thousand names) sottas and the Devi. Sūkta Mantra 'Aham Rudreph, etc., and 'Sarvevat Deva, Devi' mupatasthu etc.,' the Devi Atharva Siro Mantra and the Upanisads Mantra of Bhuvanesvari, the fathous mantras; repeatedly and thus bring My satisfaction. 

महाविश्यामहाभन्मैन्स्तोष्येनां पुरुषुरु: ।

भूमपावेकमाद्याति भगमद्धद्वीये नरः ॥ 23 ॥

पुर्णकाकित्तसर्वीवाल्यमुपाधिकारिनः ।

प्रत्कमीताद्वीदोषण: , तोषयेनां मुडुपु: ॥ 24 ॥

With hearts filled with love and with hairs standing on their ends, and also should satisfy: Me frequently with tears of love; flowing from their eyes and with voice choked with feelings and with dancing, music and singing, and with his whole body filled with joy.

वेदयात्यायीक्षेत पुराणीः सकालीनीः ।

प्रतिपशा यतोड़ हे तमात्सीलोषवेतु मामि ॥ 25 ॥

My glory is well-established in the Veda Parāyaṇa and in all the Purāgas. So for My satisfaction, one should offer daily to Me one's everything with one's body and recite the, reading from the Vedas.

निजं सर्वेलवमपि से सदैह निवल्यानप्रयेत् ।

नित्योतं ततः कुर्णविद्याग्रधा सुवासिति: ॥ 26 ॥

वदुकान्यामानत्क्रावैवीयुकुमा तु: भोगयेत् ।

नत्वा पुत्र: स्वहृदये व्यक्तमेण विस्तर्जेद् ॥ 27 ॥

Next, after completing the Homa offerings, he should feed the Brahmapas, the young virgins well clothed, the boys, and the public and the poor, thinking all of them to be so many forms of the Devi. Then he should bow before the Devi that resides in his heart and finally by Sarihāra Mudrā take leave of the Deity invoked.

सर्व हूललोखण कुर्णयैनुंनं मय सुवते ।

हूललोखा सर्वन्याणं नारिका परम मंशुत ॥ 28 ॥

O One of good vows! The Hrllekhā Maitrā (Hrim) is the chief of all matarams; so My worship and all other action ought to be performed with this Hrllekhā Mantram.

हूललोखाएँने निव्यमई नुसंतिविधिता ।

तरमंबादुलेखाया दर्न सर्वमांत्रेः समर्विना ॥ 29 ॥

I am always reflected in this Mirror of Hrllekhā form; so anything offered in this Hrllekha Mahitā of Mine is offered as it were with all the Maitrāṣṭa. Then one should worship the Guru with ownership, etc., and think oneself blessed.

गुरु संपूर्ण प्रपीषी: "कृतकृत्यल्यापवित्" । पूर्णे जये।

य एवं पूर्णवेदेही शीमद्धवनपुरुंगि ॥ 30 ॥

न तस्य तुर्वर्ण किंविकार्याविष्यादिति नि ।

देहान्ते नु यमिहिंश-मन, ब्रत्नेल सर्वेक्षणा ॥ 31 ॥

O Khiyanyah: Nothing, regains-ah; anghrime unavailable to hipa, why, so gaships, thup, the Bhuvaneshari Devi, After quitting his family, he goes to the Mani, Dvipas, My place, He, so, the form of the Devi, and the Devas constantly bow down to him.

जेय देवविश्वलोर्पी, देवा तिथि नवांति तम ।

जाते त. कांवारे रात-महादेवाय. प्रपजन्म ॥ 32 ॥



वियुग्यैतद्वगेशेणायधिकारानुक्पतः ।

कृते ये पूवनं तेन कृतार्थेत्वं भविष्यासि ।। ३३ ॥

O Mahīdhara! Thus I have described to you the rules of worshipping the Great Devi; consider this in all aspects and worship Me according to your Adhikāra (claim) and you will attain your Goal. There is no doubt in this.

इवं तु नीतिगास्तं मे नाडिणायय वेत्काकित् ।

नाभक्ताय प्रदात्ब्यं न धृताय च तुद्रे ॥ 34 ॥

एतत्रकाकारं मातृकुर्वटनपुरीजेचा: ।

तस्माद्वरयं यत्नेन गोपनीविमंद सदा ॥ 35 ॥

O Best of mountains! This Śāstra Deviṣitā you are not to tell to those who are not the devotees, to those who are enemies, and to those who are cunning. If one gives out this secret of Gītā, it is like taking off the covering from the breast of the mother; so carefully keep it secret and think that this is very necessary.

देशं भक्ताय शिषाय्य जेषछुपाया चैव है ।

सुग्रीलाय सुवेषाय देवीभिकतुगता च ॥ ३६ ॥

श्राद्धकाले पदेतेन्द्वाहाणनां समीपतः ।

नुरास्तमित्यतः सर्वे प्रयाति परमं पदम् ॥ ३७ ॥

This Devi Gītā ought to be given to a disciple, a Bhakta, the eldest son, and to one who is good natured, and well dressed and devoted to the Devi. O Mountain! In the time of Śrāddha (solemn obsequies performed in honour of the manes of deceased ancestors) he gets the highest place of the Pitrs who reads this Devi Gītā before the Brāhmaṇas.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्सा सा भगवती तरीवान्तरीयत ।

देवांश्र मुदिताः सर्वे दैवीदर्शनोतेभवन् ॥ 38 ॥

ततो हिमालये जते देवी हैमवती तु सा ।

या गौतीति प्रसिद्धा०५सौदिता सा शंकायच च ॥ 39 ॥

ततः स्कंदः सम्बुद्धततारकरनेच पातितः ।

Vyāsa said: The Devi vanished there after describing all these. The Devas were glad and considered themselves blessed by the sight of the Devi. O Janamejaya! The Haimavati next took Her

birth in the house of the Himālaya and was known by the name of Gaurī. Śaṅkara, the Deva of the Devas, married Her. Ṣadānaṇa (Kārtika) was born of them. He killed the Tārakāśura.

सुग्रुम्यन्ते पूर्वे रत्तन्यासुनरात्रिय १। ४०। १

तत्र देखे: सुत्ता देखी लक्ष्मीप्राव्यर्थमादतात् ।

तेषामनुग्रहायंथ विनीत तु एम तातः १। ४१। १

वैकुष्ठय सुरैदतां तेन तस्य शमोप्रभवत् ।

O King! In ancient times, when the ocean was churned, many gems were obtained. At that time the Devas chanted hymns to the Devi with a concentrated mind to get Lakṣmī Devi. To show favour to the Devas, Ramā Devi got out of the ocean. The Devas gave Lakṣmī to Viṣṇu, the Lord of the Vaikuntha. Viṣṇu was very glad at this.

इति ते काधितं राजन्देवीमाहात्मयमुत्तमम् ॥ 42 ॥

गौरील्ब्योः समुद्युप्नितिवर्षे सर्वकामदम् ।

न वार्यं तेलैद्वास्यमै हरस्यं काधितं यतः ॥ 43 ॥

गौता रहस्यभूतेयं गोपनीया प्रयन्ततः ।

सर्वभुक्ति समासेन यत्पूर्त तत्चवान्याः ॥

पवित्र पावनं दिव्यं किं भूयः श्रीघृतमिच्छसि ॥ 44 ॥

इति शीमदैवीभागते मागुपगो४शदासाहाक्वो सहितायां

सतपासक्न्ये देवौगीतायां चत्वारिचोरोस्थायाः ॥ 45 ॥

खशगढ़ाविं (2250) यदोस्तु द्वैपयनमुखच्छतैः ।

श्रीमद्धागवतस्यास्य सतमाक्क-म इरितः ॥ 56 ॥

O King! Thus I have described to you the Greatness of the Devi and the birth of Gaurī and Lakṣmī. One's desires are all fulfilled when one hears this. O King! This secret I have described to you. Take care not to divulge it to any other body. This is the secret of the Gītā; so carefully conceal it. O One of pure heart! I have told to you this Divine and Sin-destroying narration, that you asked. What more do you want to hear? Say.

Here ends the Fortieth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the External Worship of the Devi in the Mahāpurānam, Śrimadevībhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.