CHAPTER V

On Sarasvati Stotra

श्रीनारायण उवाच

वायंदतायाः स्तवनं श्र्यतां सर्वकामदम् ।

महामुपनिर्ज्ञालक्यो येन तुहाव तां पुरा ॥ १ ॥

गुरुशापाच्य स मुनिन्द्रविधो बभूव ह ।

तदा जमाम दुःखातरं रविस्थानं सुपुण्यदम् ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Nārada! I now describe the

Stotra (hymn) of Sarasvati Devi, yielding all desires that Yajñavalya, the best of the Rsis recited in days of yore to Her. The Munis Yajñavalya forgot all the Vedas out of the curse of Guru and with a sad heart went to the Sun, the great meriting giving place.

संग्राप्य तपसा सूर्यं लोलाकें द्विगोचरे ।

तृशव सूर्यं शोकेन रोरोच च मुटुपुंम्: ॥ 3 ॥

सूर्यसंत पाठयामास वेदं वेदांगमीप्रवर: ।

उवाच सतीहि यावेदैर्षी भक्न्या च स्मृत्तितेचे ॥ 4 ॥

तमित्युक्त्वा दीननाथोउद्योत्थानं चक्तार सः ।

सुनि: सत्ताव च तुताव भक्तिन्यात्मकंधर: ॥ 5 ॥

There he practised asturieties for a time when the Lolákhya Sun became visible to him, when, being overpowered by great sorrow, he began to cry repeatedly; and then he sang hymns to him. Then Bhagavān Sūrya Deva became pleased and taught him all the Vedas with their Ángas (limbs) and said: "O Child! Now sing hymns to Sarasvatī Devī that you get back your memory." Thus saying, the Sun disappeared. The Muni Yājñavalkyā finished his both and with his heart full of devotion began to sing hymns to the Vāg Devī, the Goddess of Speech.

याज्रवल्प्य उवाच

कृपां कुरं जगन्यातमीमेवं हततेजसम् ।

गुरुषाणात्म्यतिष्णई विहाहीर्न च दुःखितम् ॥ 6 ॥

जानं देहि सुर्ति विशा शक्ति शिष्यप्रवोधीभि ।

प्रेथकर्तृलशर्फर्न च सुशिष्यं सुप्रतिहितम् ॥ 7 ॥

प्रतिभा सत्सभाशं च विचाराक्षमतां शुभान् ।

तुर्नं सर्वे दैवयोगावकीभूतं पुनः कुक ॥ 8 ॥

Yājñavalkya said: “Mother! Have mercy on me. By Guru’s curse, my memory is lost; I am now void of learning and have become powerless; my sorrow knows no bounds. Give me knowledge, learning, memory, power to impart knowledge to disciples, power to compose books, and also good disciples endowed with genius and Pratibhā (ready wit). So that in the council of good and learned men my intelligence and power of argument and judgment be fully known.

यथावृतुं भयमिति च करोति देयता पुनः ।

ब्रह्मस्कृपा परमा ज्योतिस्का सनातनी ॥ 9 ॥

सर्विविधाधिद्वी या तस्ये वाण्ये नोः नमः ।

विसर्गविंदुग्रायग्रु यद्यध्रानमेव च ॥ १० ॥

Whatever I lost by my bad luck, let all that come

back to my heart and be renewed as if the sprouts come again out of the heaps of ashes. O Mother! Thou art of the nature of Brahma, superior to all; Thou art of the nature of Light, Eternal; Thou art the presiding Deity of all the branches of learning. So I bow down again and again to Thee. O Mother! The letters Anusvāra, Visarga; and Cardrabindu that are affixed, Thou art those letters.

तद्धिष्ठत्री या देवी तपः नीर्वे नामे नमः ।

व्याख्यास्कला सा देवी व्याख्याधिष्ठतृषीपि ॥ १ १ ॥

यया विना प्रसंख्यावासंखां कर्तु न शक्यते ।

कालसंख्यास्कला या तपः देख्ने नमः नमः ।। १ २ ॥

So obeisance to Thee! O Mother! Thou art the exposition (Vyākhyā) of the Śāstras; Thou art the Presiding Deity of all the expositions and annotations. Without Thee no mathematician can count anything. So Thou art the numbers to count time; Thou art the Śakti by which Siddhāntas (definite conclusions) are arrived at; Thus Thou dost remove the errors of men.

भ्रमसिद्धान्तिका या तस्ये देव्ये नामोनाः ।

सूतिशक्तिज्ञानशक्तिबुद्धशक्तिस्वरूपिणी ॥ १३ ॥

प्रतिभाकल्पनाशिक्तिर्यां च तस्ये नामोनाः ।

सन्तुक्मातो ब्रह्णा ज्ञाने पूषच्छ चत्र वै ॥ १४ ॥

So again and again obeisance to Thee. O Mother! Thou art the Śakti, memory, knowledge, intelligence, Pratibhā, and imagination (Kalpanā). So I bow down again and again to Thee. Sanatkumāa fell into error and asked Brahmā for solution.

वधूम मुकवल्पोरपि सिद्धांतं कर्तुमक्षम: ।

तद्वाजगाम भगवानातमा श्रीकृष्ण ईश्वरः ॥ 15 ॥

He became unable to solve the difficulties and remained speechless like a dumb person. Then Śrī Krṣṇa, the Highest Self arriving there, said: 'O Prajāpati! Better praise and sing hymns to the Goddess of speech; then your desires will be fulfilled.'

उवाच स च तां स्तौहि वाणीमिष्टां प्रजापते ।

स च तुहाव तां बहा चाज्ञा परमात्मनः ॥ १ ६ ॥

Book IX Chapter V

चक्का ततूमसादेन तदा सिद्धांतमुतमम् ।

यदाय्यन्तं पण्ड्छ ज्ञानमेकं वसुंप्रा ॥ 17 ॥

Then the four-faced Brahmā advised by the Lord, praised the Devi Sarasvatī; and, by Her grace, arrived at a very nice Siddhānta (conclusion). One day the goddess Earth questioned one doubt of Her to Ananta Deva, when He being unable to answer, remained silent like a dumb persons.

बभूव मूकवलो5पि सिद्धांतं कतुमक्षमः ।

तदा तां स च तुहाव संत्रस्तः कश्यपात्रना ॥ १ ८ ॥

ततछाका सिद्धान्तं निर्मलं धमर्भजनम् ।

व्यास: पुराणसूत्रं च पण्ड्छ वाल्मिकं यदा ॥ १९ ॥

मौनीभृतघ सस्मार तामेव जगदंविकाम् ।

तदा चकार सिद्धांतं तड्रेण भूनीशुः ॥ 20 ॥

संग्राय निर्मलें ज्ञानं घमाधध्वसंदीपकम् ।

पुराणसूरं शुचा च व्यास: कृष्णकालोद्धः ॥ 21 ॥

At last He became afraid; and advised by Kaśyapa, praised Thee when He resolved the doubt and came to a definite conclusion. Veda Vyāsa once went to Vālmīki and asked him about some Sūtras of the Purāṇas when the Muni Vālmīki got confounded and remembered Thee, the Mother of the world. When by Thy Grace, the Light flashed within him and his error vanished. Thereby he became able to solve the question. Then Vyāsadeva, born of the parts of Śri Kṛṣṇa, heard about the Purāṇa Sūtras from Vālmīki's mouth and came to know about Thy glory.

तं शिवां वेद दूधौ च शतवर्ष च पुक्ले ।

त्वा त्वती वं प्राय्य सत्कर्षितीं बयुवह् ॥ 22 ॥

तवा वेदविषाणां च पुराणं च चकार सः ।

He then went to Puṣkara Tīrtha and became engaged in worshipping Thee, the Giver of Peace, for one hundred years. Then Thou didst become pleased and grant him the boon when he ascended to the rank of the Kavindra (Indra amongst the poets). He then made the classification of the Vedas and composed the eighteen Purānas.

यदा महैदः पपछ्छ तत्चज्ञानं स्वात्रिणय् ॥ 23 ॥

क्षणं तामेव सचित्य तस्मै जानं ददी विषुः ।

पपछ्छ शब्दशालं च महैरूश बृह्मतिम् ॥ 24 ॥

विद्यं वर्षमहर्षे च स त्वा च पुक्रोः ।

तदा त्वत्तो वर्ग प्राय पद्धव्यवर्षमहकम् ॥ 25 ॥

उवाच शब्दशालं च तदर्थे च सुरेश्वगम् ।

अध्यापिताश ये शिष्या यैरधितं मुनीक्षेः ॥ 26 ॥

ते च तां परिसंश्चित्य प्रवर्तेने सुरेश्वगम् ।

When Sadā Śīva was questioned on some spiritual knowledge, by Mahendra, He thought of Thee for a moment and then answered. Once Indra asked Brhaşpati, the Guru of the Devas, about Śabda Śāstra (Scriptures on sound). He became unable to give any answer. So he went to Puşkara Tirtha and worshipped Thee for a thousand years according to the Deva Measure and he became afterwards able to give instructions on Śabda Śāstra for one thousand divine years to Mahendra. O Sureśvari! Those Munis that give education to their disciples or those that commence their own studies remember Thee before they commence their works respectively.

लं संस्तुता पुजिता च मुनीनैर्मनुभानवैः ॥ 27 ॥

दैल्यैंश्य सुरैशाधि ब्रदायिणुगिवादिधि: ।

जडीभृत: सहसायस: पंचवक्रश्रतुगुंखः ॥ 28 ॥

यां सतौतुं किमहं सतीम तामेकायेने मानवः ।

The Munindras, Manus, men, Daityendras, and Immortals, Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa all worship Thee and sing hymns to Thee. Viṣṇu ultimately becomes inert when He goes on praising Thee by His thousand mouths. So Mahā Deva becomes when he praises by His five mouths; and so Brahmā by His four mouths.

इत्युक्त्वा यात्रवल्यम्यक्ष भवित्नभात्मकंधरः ॥ 29 ॥

प्रणानाम निराहारो करोद च पुरुदुर्भुः ।

When great personages so desist, then what to speak of me, who is an ordinary mortal having one mouth only!" Thus saying, the Maharṣi Yājñavalkya, who had observed fasting, bowed down to the Devi Sarasvatī with great devotion and began to cry frequently.

ज्योतिरूपा महामाया तेन दृष्टास्वाव च तम् ॥ 30 ॥

सुकरीत्री घावेयुकत्वा वैकुंदं च जगाम है ।

Then the Mahāmāyā Sarasvatī, of the nature of Light could not hide Herself away. She became visible to him and said: "O Child! You be good Kavindra (Indra of the poets)." Granting him this boon, She went to Vaikuntha.

याज्ञल्वस्यक्तं वाणीस्तोजमेततु च: पठेत् ॥ 31 ॥

सुकरीत्री महावामगी बृह्यपतिममो भवेत् ।

महामूर्षेधु दुर्बुद्धवेभेंके चया पठेत् ॥ 32 ॥

स पंडितश्र मेधावी सुकरीत्रे भवेद्यूवम् ॥ 33 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे नवमस्कन्धे पंचमो:5याय: 15 I

He becomes a good poet, eloquent, and intelligent like Bhraspati who reads this stotra of Sarasvatī by Yājñavalkya. Even if a great illiterate reads this Sarasvatī stotra for one year, he becomes easily a good Pandjit, intelligent, and a good poet.

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Ninth Book on Sarasvatī stotra by Yajñavalkya in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

