CHAPTER XX

On the Peace of the World

जनमेजय उवाच

अथादभुतं वीक्ष्य मुने प्रभावं

देल्या जान्छोतिकरं परं च ।

न दृष्टिनरित्त डिजवयं शुपवतः

कथामृतं ने मुख्यघज्ञानम् ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: “O best of Rsis! I have now seen the wonderful excellent deeds of the Devi for the enhancement of peace in this world. Though I have heard from thy lotus face these nectar-like words, still I am not satisfied.”

अन्तर्हितायां च तदा घवात्यां

चढ़कृ शिके देवपुरोगामासते ।

देव्याश्रिरिं गर्पப் पविंत्र

दुरापमेवास्पपुषेर्नीराणाम् ॥ २ ॥

O best of Munis! What did the chief Devas do when the Goddess disappeared, kindly say to me.

O Bhagavan! I think those Jivas cannot fully comprehend these excellent sacred deeds of the Devi, that are less fortunate and have done not many meritorious deeds in this world.

Book V Chapter XX

कसूचितमापोति कथामुतेन

प्रिज्ञोउत्पश्याल्यादुकर्णरंध : ।

पौतेन येनामरता प्रयाति प्रित्चान्

नगत् चे न चिवलित सादरम् ॥ 3 ॥

O Muni! What to speak of the less fortunate souls, even the Mahātmās who are versed in hearing such things, can hardly be satiated on hearing the Devi's deeds. O! Fie to those, that do not hear of these things, the essence of essences, on hearing which men become Immortals.

सीलावरिंत्रे जगद्धिक्वाया

स्थान्वितं देवमहामुनीनाम् ।

संसारावर्शितरणं नराणां

कर्थ कृतजा हिं परित्यजेयु:॥ 4 ॥

The Mother's Līlā is to preserve the Devas as well as the great Munis and to serve as a boat for the human beings to cross this ocean of world. How can, then, the grateful souls forsake Her?

मृताक्षा ये चैव मुभुबवश

संसारिणो रोगयुताक्ष केचित् ।

तेषां सदा शोजपूटैक्ष पेयं

सर्वार्थवैं देवविदो वर्दिनि ॥ ५ ॥

The Pandits versed in the Vedas declare, that the Devi's life is able to fulfil all the desires. Therefore the liberated souls that want liberation, the wordly souls, the diseased all ought to drink incessantly the nectar-like nectar of Devi's doings.

तथा विशेषेण मुने तृपाणां

धार्मिकामेषु सदा ततानाम् ।

मृताका यमातखलु तत्वयांति

कर्थ न येयं रहितेह तेभ्यः ॥ 6 ॥

Especially the kings that are engaged in Dharma, in earning wealth and in enjoyments, ought to hear Her life. O Muni! When the liberated souls drink the nectar-like doings of the Devi, what doubt can there be with the ordinary human beings, to listen with rapt devotion those wondrous things! O Best of Munis!

ये: पूजिता पूर्वंभवे भवानी

सलुक्नटुपर्थेय चम्पकैक्न ।

बैल्वैर्वैलैसे पुवि वेभागुक्ता

नृपा घबन्तीलनृयेयये ॥7 ॥

It is those that worshipped the Goddess Bhavānī in their previous births with beautiful Kunda flowers, Campaka flowers and Bel leaves, they have, it is inferred, in their present births become possessed of rich enjoyments.

वे भक्तिहीनः समवाय्य देई

तं मानुर्ष भारतभूमिभानो ।

वैर्नांक्षिता ते धन्यान्यहीना

रोगान्विता: सन्तत्वर्जिता ॥ 8 ॥

And those devoid of any devotion, that obtained this human body in the land of Bharata and did not worship the Mother Goddess, they are, in their present births, without grains and riches, diseased, and void of any issues.

प्रभाति निव्यं किल दासभृता

आज्ञाका: केवलभारवाहा: ।

दिवानिंशं स्वार्थपरा: क्वार्थ

नैवापुब्ल्वौदारुप्तिमानघ। ॥ ९ ॥

Wander they always as servants, carrying out orders, and bearing only the burden loads; day and night, they seek for their own selfish ends, yet they cannot get their belly full meals.

अन्याधु स्काना वधिराशु खंत्रा:

कृष्णवित्ता ये भृवि दुः:खपानः ।

तत्रानुमन्त कविषिध्विधेयं

नाराधिता तै: सन्तं भवानी ॥ 10 ॥

The blind, deaf and dumb, lame and lepers suffer pain and misery in this earth; seeing them, it should be inferred that-never worshipped the Goddess Bhavānī.

ये राजभोगान्तवरक्षिपुर्णी:

संलेब्यमाना बहुविभिनुघे: ।

दूर्यंति ये वा विषचैः

संसोतर्से: पूजितास्वेत्यनुयेमयेव ॥ १ १ ॥ ॥

And those that are wealth, prosperous, attended by numerous attendants and are always enjoying, like kings, it is to be inferred that they certainly worshipped the lotus feet of the Mother Goddess in their past lives.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

तस्मास्त्रवर्तीभूनो देल्याश्रितमुक्तभम् ।

कथयस्य कृपां कृत्वा दयावानसि साम्यन्तम् ॥ 12 ॥

Therefore O Son of Satyavati! As you are kind-hearted, kindly narrate before me the excellent deeds of the Devi.

हवा तं महिषं पांच सृत्ता सम्पूक्तिता सुरैः ।

केव गता सा महलक्ष्मी: सर्वतेज:समुद्ध्वा ॥ 13 ॥

O best of Munis! Where did the Goddess, Mahā Lakṣmī, created out of the energies of all the gods, depart after She had slain the Mahisāsura and had been worshipped and praised by the Devas?

कथितं ते महाभाग नातित्यन्माणु सा ।

स्वरों वा मृत्युलोके वा संस्थता भूवनेश्वरी ॥ 14 ॥

तयं पता वा तत्रैव वैकुण्टे वा समाधिता ।

अथवा हेमग्रेल सा तत्त्वो मे वदाधुना ॥ 15 ॥

O highly Fortunate one! You told me that She vanished from the sight of the Devas; now I like to know where is She staying now, whether in the Heavens or in the Land of Mortals? Did She melt away then and there or did She descend to Vaikuntha or did She go to the mountain Sumeru? O Muni! Narrate all these duly before me.

यास उवाच

पूर्व मया ते कथितं मणिह़ीयं मनोहतम् ।

क्रीडास्थानं सदा देया वललभं परयं स्मृतम् ॥ 16 ॥

यत्र बहा हरि: स्थाणु: कौभायां ते प्रेपेदेरे ।

पुरुकत्वं पुनः प्राय्य स्वानि कार्याणि चिक्रे ।। 17 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! I told you before about the beautiful Mani Dvīpa; that island is the place of sport to the Devi and very dear to Her. In that place Brahmā, Visnu, Mahādeva were transformed into females; they afterwards became males and were engaged in their respective duties.

सः सुभातिर्यमध्येस्ति हीपः परमशोभनः ।

नानारष्टे: सदा तत्र विहारं कुकतेश्विका ॥ १ ८ ॥

That place is grand and splendid and is in the centre of the ocean of Nectar; the Devi Ambika assumes various forms there as She likes; and She sports there.

स्तुता सुंपुक्ति देहः सा तत्रेव गता शिका ।

यत्र संकीडोत नित्यं मायाशक्ति: सन्तान्ति ॥ 19 ॥

देवास्ता निर्गति बीक्ष्य देहीं सर्वेश्रिं तथा ।

रविवर्गोदूवं चकुभूमिपालं महावलम् ॥ 20 ॥

To that Mani Dvipa the auspicious Devi departed after She had been praised by the Gods, to that place where sports always the eternal Bhagavati Bhuvanesvari, the incarnate of Para Brahma.

अयोध्याप्रापितं वीरं श्रकुनं नाम पार्थिवम् ।

सर्वलक्षणासम्पत्रं महिष्यासने शुणे ॥ 21 ॥

When the Highest Goddess vanished, the Devas installed, on the throne of Mahisāsura, the powerful King Śatrughna, endowed with all auspicious qualities, the Lord of Ayodhyā and descended from the Solar line.

दत्वा राज्यं तदा तम्बे द्वा इन्द्रुपुर्गमाः ।

स्वकीर्वेहीईः सर्वे जगयुः स्वान्यालयारिति ॥ 22 ॥

After making him thus the King, Indra and the other Devas went to their respective abodes on their own conveyances.

गतेषु तेषु देवेषु पृथिवयं पृथिवीपते ।

धर्मारभे बभूवाथ प्रजाङ्ध सुचित्रास्तथा ॥ 23 ॥

O King! The Devas having gone to their places, the subjects were governed on this earth according to Dharma; and they passed their times in ease and comfort.

पर्जनः: कालवर्षी च धरा धान्यगुणावृता ।

पादायः फलपुथाल्वा बभूवुः सुख्वतः सदा ॥ 24 ॥

It used to rain, then, timely and the earth was covered with plenty of grains and wealth; the trees were all filled with fruits and leaves and gave enjoyment to people.

गावछ श्रीस्म्यजा घटोट्यः कामदा नृणाम् ।

नडः सुमर्गाः स्वच्छः श्रीतोदा: खगसंसुतः ॥ 25 ॥

The cows with their udders full like earthen pots gave such a profuse quantity of milk that men began to milk them whenever they liked! The rivers waters were all clear and cooling; and they flowed full in regular channels; the birds grouped round them.

ब्राह्मणा वेदतत्वाक्ष यजकर्मततास्या ।

क्षत्रिया धार्मेयुक्ता दानाध्ययन्ततपरा: ॥ 26 ॥

Book V Chapter XX

शल्सविद्याता नियं प्रजारक्षणतप्तः ।

न्यादवण्डधरा: सर्वे राजन: शमसर्वुतः ॥ 27 ॥

The Brāhmaṇas; versed in the Vedas, were engaged in performing sacrifices; The Kṣattriyas observed their virtues and were engaged in doing charities and in their education; the kings held their rods of justice and were engaged in governing their subjects; though the several kings were busy with various arms and weapons, they all became fond of peace.

अवियोधस्तु भूतानां सर्वेषां संबंचुर ह ।

आक्रता धनदातुर्ण जजा गोयुधसंयुता: ॥ 28 ॥

Thus no wars nor quarrels were seen amongst the subjects; and the mines yielded plenty of wealth to the people.

ब्राह्मणाः क्षितिवा वैश्याः शूग्राक्ष तृप्सस्तत ॥

देवीभक्तिपरा: सर्वे संबवृष्टिताले ॥ 29 ॥

O best of Kings! There were the Brāhmanas, Kṣatriyas, Vaīśyas and Śūdras who; became the devotees of the Goddess.

सर्वेय न्यून्याप्रा मण्डपाध्य मनोहरा: ।

महैः पूर्णा धराधासन् ब्राहणीः क्षिविः क्रौः। 30 ॥

The Brāhmaṇas and Kṣattriyas used, then, to perform so many sacrifices that, at every nook and corner in this globe, the sacrificial altars and the sacrificials posts became visible.

पतिन्तमत्या नार्ये: सुर्गालितः सत्यसंयुतः ।

पितृष्णसित्पर: पूत्रा आसन्यमंपरायणः ॥ ३१ ॥

न पाखण्डं न वासधम्: कुत्रापि पृथिवीतले ।

वेदवादा: शास्त्रवादा नान्ये वादास्तवादप्रवन्द् ॥ ३२ ॥

The female sex became gentle and of good behaviour, truthful and chaste towards their husbands respectively. Atheism and unrighteous acts vanished entirely from the face of the earth; the people left all dry discussions; they argued only about the Śāstras that did not go in contradistinction to the Vedas.

कलहों नैव कैमाधित्र दैन्य नैगुधा मिति: ।

स्वयं सुविज्ञो लोका: काले च मरुण तथा ॥ 33 ॥

सुहादं न विवोगश्रा नावद्धकं हवाचन ।

नानावृष्टिनं तुर्भिक्षं न मारी दुःखदानुणम् ॥ 34 ॥

Nobody liked to quarrel with each other; poverty, and evil inclinations were checked; the people everywhere relied in happiness. Untimely death was not there; so the people had no bereavements with their friends; no distress was seen.

न रोगों न च मालस्यं न विलोधः परमयम् ।

सर्वेत्र सुयुसंघना नरा नारंः सुखाचित्यः ॥ 35 ॥

Famine, want of rains, and deadly plagues were out of sight. The people had no illness even; and jealousies and quarrels vanished.

क्रीड़िति मानवा: सर्वे स्वर्ग देवणगा इव ।

न चोरा न च पाखण्डा वकुका टंभकासना ॥ 36 ॥

यिशुना लम्यटा: सक्था न बच्युस्तदा नृप ।

न वेदद्वेषण: पापा मानवा: पृथिवीपते ॥ 37 ॥

O King! all men and women began to sport merrily everywhere like the Gods in Heaven. Theft, atheism, deceit, vanity, hypocrisy, lustfulness, stupidity, and the anti-Vedic feelings were not to be seen.

सर्वे धर्माति नित्यं द्विज्ञसेवापरायणः ।

विशालात्यष्टिध्यमैय विविधा ब्राह्मास्ततः ॥ 38 ॥

O Lord of the Earth! All the men were then extremely devoted to their Dharma and engaged in serving the Brāhmanas.

सात्चिका राजसाश्रैव तामसाश्र तथापरे ।

सर्वे वेदविदो द्वशः सात्चिका: सत्यवृत्तयः ॥ 39 ॥

The Brāhmins were also, according to the three-fold plan of the creation, Sāttvik, Rājasik and Tāmasik.

प्रतिश्रद्धिरीन्त्रा दयादमपरायण: ।

यज्ञले सात्चिकरोः कुवाणि धर्मतत्पर: ॥ 40 ॥

The Sāttvik Brāhmins were all versed in the Vedas, clever and truthful; they were kind, they controlled their passions and they did not accept any presents from others.

पुरोडागधियानैश पशुपिंमं कदाचन ।

दाममध्ययनं चैव यजनं तु तृतीयकम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

Filled with their ideas of Dharma, they used to perform their Purodāsa and other such sacrifices

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

with sāttvik rice, etc., but never, did they immolate any animals.

Note: Where the victim is fastened during the time of immolation.

त्रिकर्मसिकास्ते वै सात्पिका ब्राह्मणा नृप ।

राजसा वेदविद्धांसः क्षत्रियाणां पुरोहितः ॥ 4 2 ॥

O King! The Sāttvik Brāhmaṇas gave charities, studied the Vedas and offered sacrifices for themselves. These were their three ordainate actions. They were busy in these.

यदकर्मनितरातः सर्वे विधित्वन्यासभक्षतः ।

यजनं याजनं दानं तथैव च प्रतिग्रहः ॥ 4 3 ॥

O King! The Rājaskī Brāhmaṇas were versed in the Vedas and acted as priests to the Kṣattiryas and ate flesh as sanctioned by recognised rules. They were busy with their six duties.

अध्ययनं तु वेदानां तथैवाध्यायनं तु पट् ।

तामसा: कोधिसंयुक्ता रागदेषपरा: पुनः । ४। ४। ॥

They offered sacrifices on their own behalf, assisted others in sacrifices, took gifts, made charities, studied and taught others the Vedas. The Tāmasik Brāhmaṇas were engry, attached to worldly objects, and jealous.

राजां कर्मकार नित्यं किंचिद्ध्ययने रता: ।

महिषे निर्हते सर्वे सुचित्वो वेदततरायः ॥ 4 5 ॥

They studied very little of the Vedas and spent most of their time in serving the kings.

वभ्युद्रतिनिण्यात तदानधर्मपरासवा ।

क्षत्रिया: पालने युक्ता क्षेयया वाणिजयुत्तयः ॥ 46 ॥

O King! Mahisāsura was killed, all the Brāhmanas were glad and began to practise Dharma according to the Vedas, observed vows and made charities.

कृपिवाणिज्ञगोर्श्राकृसीद्वृत्तयः परे ।

एवं प्रयुवित्तो लोको महिष्ये विनिपातिते ॥ 47 ॥

The Kṣaṭtīryas began to govern the subjects, the Vaiśyas carried on their trading business and the other tribes went on with their agriculture, preservation of the cows, and lending money on interest. Thus all men became very glad on the death of Mahisa.

अनुहितः प्रजानों ने संवधून धरायगाः ।

बहुक्षीगः शुभा गावो नट्यशेब बहुदकाः ॥ 48 ॥

Devoid of cares and anxieties, the subjects got much wealth! The cows were endowed with auspicious signs and gave plenty of milk and the rivers flowed full of waters.

वृक्षा बहुकलाशास्मानावा रोगवर्जिताः ।

नाधयो नेतय: ब्वाणि प्रजानां दुःखदायकः ॥ 49 ॥

The trees looked splendid with abundance of fruits; men were without diseases in short, people had no mental agony and too much or too little of rains were not there; Śālavas, mice, birds, and seditions were not extant.

न निधनमुपवाति प्राणिनस्तेध्यकाले

सकलविघवयुक्ता रोगहीना: सदैव ।

निर्माविहित्तधर्मे तस्पशुषिकानायाशरण-

सरसिजानां सेवने दत्तचिता: ॥ 50 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पद्रामकन्ये

विशोभायाः ।। 51 ।।

O king! The beings died not prematurely; rather enjoyed, incessantly, their full health and possessed lots of riches; especially all beings, engaged in the Vedic Dharma, served the lotus feet of Candjikā and thus spent their lives.

Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the peace of the world in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahasi

Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

