[Ch 20 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya said: “O best of Rsis! I have now seen the wonderful excellent deeds of the Devi for the enhancement of peace in this world. Though I have heard from thy lotus face these nectar-like words, still I am not satisfied.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya said :-- O best of Ṛṣis! I have now seen the wonderful excellent deeds of the Devī for the enhancement of peace in this world. Though I have heard from thy lotus face these nectar-like words, still I am not satisfied.

[Ch 20 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O best of Munis! What did the chief Devas do when the Goddess disappeared, kindly say to me. O Bhagavan! I think those Jivas cannot fully comprehend these excellent sacred deeds of the Devi, that are less fortunate and have done not many meritorious deeds in this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O best of Munis! What did the chief Devas do when the Goddess disappeared, kindly say to me. O Bhagavān! I think those Jīvas cannot fully comprehend these excellent sacred deeds of the Devī, that are less fortunate and have done not many meritorious deeds in this world.

[Ch 20 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! What to speak of the less fortunate souls, even the Mahātmās who are versed in hearing such things, can hardly be satiated on hearing the Devi's deeds. O! Fie to those, that do not hear of these things, the essence of essences, on hearing which men become Immortals.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! What to speak of the less fortunate souls, even the Mahātmas who are well versed in hearing such things, can hardly be satiated on hearing the Devī’s deeds. O! Fie to those, that do not hear of these things, the essence of essences, on hearing which men become Immortals.

[Ch 20 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Mother's Līlā is to preserve the Devas as well as the great Munis and to serve as a boat for the human beings to cross this ocean of world. How can, then, the grateful souls forsake Her?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Mother’s Līlā is to preserve the Devas as well as the great Munis and to serve as a boat for the human beings to cross this ocean of world. How can, then, the grateful souls forsake Her?

[Ch 20 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Pandits versed in the Vedas declare, that the Devi's life is able to fulfil all the desires. Therefore the liberated souls that want liberation, the wordly souls, the diseased all ought to drink incessantly the nectar-like nectar of Devi's doings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Pundits versed in the Vedas declare, that the Devī’s life is able to fulfil all the desires. Therefore the liberated souls that want liberation, the worldly souls, the diseased all ought to drink incessantly the nectar-like nectar of Devī’s doings.

[Ch 20 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Especially the kings that are engaged in Dharma, in earning wealth and in enjoyments, ought to hear Her life. O Muni! When the liberated souls drink the nectar-like doings of the Devi, what doubt can there be with the ordinary human beings, to listen with rapt devotion those wondrous things! O Best of Munis!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Especially the kings that are engaged in Dharma, in earning wealth and in enjoyments, ought to hear Her life. O Muni! When the liberated souls drink the nectar-like doings of the Devī, what doubt can there be with the ordinary human beings, to listen with rapt devotion those wondrous things! O Best of Munis!

[Ch 20 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is those that worshipped the Goddess Bhavānī in their previous births with beautiful Kunda flowers, Campaka flowers and Bel leaves, they have, it is inferred, in their present births become possessed of rich enjoyments.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is those that worshipped the Goddess Bhavānī in their previous births with beautiful Kuṇḍa flowers, Champaka flowers and Bel leaves, they have, it is inferred, in their present births become possessed of rich enjoyments.

[Ch 20 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And those devoid of any devotion, that obtained this human body in the land of Bharata and did not worship the Mother Goddess, they are, in their present births, without grains and riches, diseased, and void of any issues.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And those devoid of any devotion, that obtained this human body in the land of Bhārata and did not worship the Mother Goddess, they are, in the present births, without grains and riches, diseased, and void of any issues.

[Ch 20 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Wander they always as servants, carrying out orders, and bearing only the burden loads; day and night, they seek for their own selfish ends, yet they cannot get their belly full meals.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Wander they always as servants, carrying out orders, and bearing on the burden loads; day and night, they seek for their own selfish ends, yet they cannot get their belly full meals.

[Ch 20 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The blind, deaf and dumb, lame and lepers suffer pain and misery in this earth; seeing them, it should be inferred that-never worshipped the Goddess Bhavānī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The blind, deaf and dumb; lame and lepers suffer pain and misery in this earth; seeing them, it should be inferred that they never worshipped the Goddess Bhavānī.

[Ch 20 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And those that are wealth, prosperous, attended by numerous attendants and are always enjoying, like kings, it is to be inferred that they certainly worshipped the lotus feet of the Mother Goddess in their past lives.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And those that are wealthy, prosperous, attended by numerous attendants and are always enjoying, like kings, it is to be inferred that they certainly worshipped the lotus feet of the Mother Goddess in their past lives.

[Ch 20 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore O Son of Satyavati! As you are kind-hearted, kindly narrate before me the excellent deeds of the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore O Son of Satyavatī! As you are kind-hearted, kindly narrate before me the excellent deeds of the Devī.

[Ch 20 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O best of Munis! Where did the Goddess, Mahā Lakṣmī, created out of the energies of all the gods, depart after She had slain the Mahisāsura and had been worshipped and praised by the Devas?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O best of Munis! Where did the Goddess, Mahā Lakṣmī, created out of the energies of all the gods, depart after She had slain the Mahiṣāsura and had been worshipped and praised by the Devas?

[Ch 20 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O highly Fortunate one! You told me that She vanished from the sight of the Devas; now I like to know where is She staying now, whether in the Heavens or in the Land of Mortals? Did She melt away then and there or did She descend to Vaikuntha or did She go to the mountain Sumeru? O Muni! Narrate all these duly before me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O highly Fortunate one! You told me that She vanished from the sight of the Devas; now I like to know where is She staying now, whether in the Heavens or in the Land of Mortals? Did She melt away then and there or did She descend to Vaikuṇṭha or did She go to the mountain Sumeru? O Muni! Narrate all these duly before me.

[Ch 20 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! I told you before about the beautiful Mani Dvīpa; that island is the place of sport to the Devi and very dear to Her. In that place Brahmā, Visnu, Mahādeva were transformed into females; they afterwards became males and were engaged in their respective duties.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! I told you before about the beautiful Maṇi Dvīpa; that island is the place of sport to the Devī and very dear to Her. In that place Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Mahādeva were transformed into females; they afterwards became males and were engaged in their respective duties.

[Ch 20 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That place is grand and splendid and is in the centre of the ocean of Nectar; the Devi Ambika assumes various forms there as She likes; and She sports there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That place is grand and splendid and is in the centre of the ocean of Nectar; the Devī Ambikā assumes various forms there as She likes; and She sports there.

[Ch 20 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► To that Mani Dvipa the auspicious Devi departed after She had been praised by the Gods, to that place where sports always the eternal Bhagavati Bhuvanesvari, the incarnate of Para Brahma.
NEW CORR ENG ──► To that Maṇi Dvīpa the auspicious Devī departed after She had been praised by the Gods, to that place where sports always the eternal Bhagavatī Bhuvaneśvarī, the incarnate of Para Brahmā.

[Ch 20 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the Highest Goddess vanished, the Devas installed, on the throne of Mahisāsura, the powerful King Śatrughna, endowed with all auspicious qualities, the Lord of Ayodhyā and descended from the Solar line.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the Highest Goddess vanished, the Devas installed, on the throne of Mahiṣāsura, the powerful King Śatrughna, endowed with all auspicious qualities, the Lord of Ajodhyā and descended from the Solar line.

[Ch 20 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After making him thus the King, Indra and the other Devas went to their respective abodes on their own conveyances.
NEW CORR ENG ──► After making him thus the King, Indra and the other Devas went to their respective abodes on their own conveyances.

[Ch 20 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The Devas having gone to their places, the subjects were governed on this earth according to Dharma; and they passed their times in ease and comfort.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The Devas having gone to their places, the subjects were governed on this earth according to Dharma; and they passed their times in ease and comfort.

[Ch 20 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It used to rain, then, timely and the earth was covered with plenty of grains and wealth; the trees were all filled with fruits and leaves and gave enjoyment to people.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It used to rain, then, timely and the earth was covered with plenty of grains and wealth; the trees were all filled with fruits and leaves and gave enjoyment to people.

[Ch 20 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The cows with their udders full like earthen pots gave such a profuse quantity of milk that men began to milk them whenever they liked! The rivers waters were all clear and cooling; and they flowed full in regular channels; the birds grouped round them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The cows with their udders full like earthen pots gave such a profuse quantity of milk that men began to milk them whenever they liked. The riverś waters were all clear and cooling; and they flowed full in regular channels; the birds grouped round them.

[Ch 20 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmaṇas; versed in the Vedas, were engaged in performing sacrifices; The Kṣattriyas observed their virtues and were engaged in doing charities and in their education; the kings held their rods of justice and were engaged in governing their subjects; though the several kings were busy with various arms and weapons, they all became fond of peace.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmaṇas, versed in the Vedas, were engaged in performing sacrifices; the Kṣattriyas observed their virtues and were engaged in doing charities and in their education; the kings held their rods of justice and were engaged in governing their subjects; though the several kings were busy with various arms and weapons, they all became fond of peace.

[Ch 20 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus no wars nor quarrels were seen amongst the subjects; and the mines yielded plenty of wealth to the people.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus no wars nor quarrels were seen amongst the subjects; and the mines yielded plenty of wealth to the people.

[Ch 20 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O best of Kings! There were the Brāhmanas, Kṣatriyas, Vaīśyas and Śūdras who; became the devotees of the Goddess.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O best of Kings! There were the Brāhmaṇs, Kṣattriyas, Vaiśyas and Śūdras who became the devotees of the Goddess.

[Ch 20 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmaṇas and Kṣattriyas used, then, to perform so many sacrifices that, at every nook and corner in this globe, the sacrificial altars and the sacrificials posts became visible.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmaṇas and Kṣattriyas used, then, to perform so many sacrifices that, at every nook and corner in this globe, the sacrificial altars and the sacrificial posts became visible.

[Ch 20 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The female sex became gentle and of good behaviour, truthful and chaste towards their husbands respectively. Atheism and unrighteous acts vanished entirely from the face of the earth; the people left all dry discussions; they argued only about the Śāstras that did not go in contradistinction to the Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The female sex became gentle and of good behaviour, truthful and chaste towards their husbands respectively. Atheism and unrighteous acts vanished entirely from the face of the earth; the people left all dry discussions; they argued only about the Śāstras that did not go in contra-distinction to the Vedas.

[Ch 20 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nobody liked to quarrel with each other; poverty, and evil inclinations were checked; the people everywhere relied in happiness. Untimely death was not there; so the people had no bereavements with their friends; no distress was seen.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nobody liked to quarrel with each other; poverty, and evil inclinations were checked; the people everywhere lived in happiness. Untimely death was not there; so the people had no bereavements with their friends; no distress was seen.

[Ch 20 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Famine, want of rains, and deadly plagues were out of sight. The people had no illness even; and jealousies and quarrels vanished.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Famine, want of rains, and deadly plagues were out of sight. The people had no illness even; and jealousies and quarrels vanished.

[Ch 20 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! all men and women began to sport merrily everywhere like the Gods in Heaven. Theft, atheism, deceit, vanity, hypocrisy, lustfulness, stupidity, and the anti-Vedic feelings were not to be seen.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! all men and women began to sport merrily everywhere like the Gods in Heaven. Theft, atheism, deceit, vanity, hypocrisy, lustfulness, stupidity, and the anti-Vedic feelings were not to be seen.

[Ch 20 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the Earth! All the men were then extremely devoted to their Dharma and engaged in serving the Brāhmanas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the Earth! All the men were then extremely devoted to their Dharma and engaged in serving the Brāhmaṇas.

[Ch 20 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmins were also, according to the three-fold plan of the creation, Sāttvik, Rājasik and Tāmasik.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmins were also, according to the three-fold plan of the creation, Sāttvik, Rājasik and Tāmasik.

[Ch 20 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Sāttvik Brāhmins were all versed in the Vedas, clever and truthful; they were kind, they controlled their passions and they did not accept any presents from others.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Sāttvik Brāhmins were all versed in the Vedas, clever and truthful; they were kind, they controlled their passions and they did not accept any presents from others.

[Ch 20 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Filled with their ideas of Dharma, they used to perform their Purodāsa and other such sacrifices Šrimaddevībhāgavatam with sāttvik rice, etc., but never, did they immolate any animals. Note: Where the victim is fastened during the time of immolation.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Filled with their ideas of Dharma, they used to perform their Puroḍāṣa and other such sacrifices with Sāttvik rice, etc., but never, never did they immolate any animals.* O King!

[Ch 20 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The Sāttvik Brāhmaṇas gave charities, studied the Vedas and offered sacrifices for themselves. These were their three ordainate actions. They were busy in these.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Sāttvik Brāhmaṇas gave charities, studied the Vedas and offered sacrifices for themselves. These were their three ordained actions. They were busy in these.

[Ch 20 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The Rājaskī Brāhmaṇas were versed in the Vedas and acted as priests to the Kṣattiryas and ate flesh as sanctioned by recognised rules. They were busy with their six duties.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The Rājasik Brāhmaṇas were versed in the Vedas and acted as priests to the Kṣattriyas *N.B. - Where the victim is fastened during the time of immolation. and ate flesh as sanctioned by recognised rules. They were busy with their six duties.

[Ch 20 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They offered sacrifices on their own behalf, assisted others in sacrifices, took gifts, made charities, studied and taught others the Vedas. The Tāmasik Brāhmaṇas were engry, attached to worldly objects, and jealous.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They offered sacrifices on their own behalf, assisted others in sacrifices, took gifts, made charities, studied and taught others the Vedas. The Tāmasik Brāhmaṇas were angry, attached to worldly objects, and jealous.

[Ch 20 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They studied very little of the Vedas and spent most of their time in serving the kings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They studied very little of the Vedas and spent most of their time in serving the kings.

[Ch 20 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Mahisāsura was killed, all the Brāhmanas were glad and began to practise Dharma according to the Vedas, observed vows and made charities.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Mahiṣāsura was killed, all the Brāhmaṇas were glad and began to practise Dharma according to the Vedas, observed vows and made charities.

[Ch 20 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Kṣaṭtīryas began to govern the subjects, the Vaiśyas carried on their trading business and the other tribes went on with their agriculture, preservation of the cows, and lending money on interest. Thus all men became very glad on the death of Mahisa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Kṣattriyas began to govern the subjects, the Vaisya carried on their trading business and the other tribes went on with their agriculture, preservation of the cows, and lending money on interest. Thus all men became vary glad on the death of Mahiṣa.

[Ch 20 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Devoid of cares and anxieties, the subjects got much wealth! The cows were endowed with auspicious signs and gave plenty of milk and the rivers flowed full of waters.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Devoid of cares and anxieties, the subjects got much wealth! The cows were endowed with suspicious signs and gave plenty of milk and the rivers flowed full of waters.

[Ch 20 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The trees looked splendid with abundance of fruits; men were without diseases in short, people had no mental agony and too much or too little of rains were not there; Śālavas, mice, birds, and seditions were not extant.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The trees looked splendid with abundance of fruits; men were without diseases: in short, people had no mental agony and too much or too little of rains were not there; Śalavas, mice, birds, and seditions we not extant.

[Ch 20 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! The beings died not prematurely; rather enjoyed, incessantly, their full health and possessed lots of riches; especially all beings, engaged in the Vedic Dharma, served the lotus feet of Candjikā and thus spent their lives. Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the peace of the world in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahasi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The beings died not prematurely; rather enjoyed incessantly, their full health and possessed lots of riches; especially beings, engaged in the Vedic Dharma, served the lotus feet of Candikā and thus spent their lives. Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the peace of the world in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
