CHAPTER VI

On the Birth of the Pāndava

सूत उवाच

एवं सत्यवती तेन वृता शंतनुना किल ।

द्रो सुनी च तथा जातौ मृतौ कालवशादपि ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: “Thus Śāntanu married Satyavati; two sons were born to her and they died in course of time.

व्यासवीर्णेनु संजातो धृतताषोउप च च ।

मृति दृष्टाविश कामिन्या नेत्रसंमीरन्ते कृते ॥ २ ॥

Out of Vyāsa Deva's semen, Dhṛtaraṣstra was born. Ambikā Devi, the mother of Dhṛtaraṣstra

closed her eyes on seeing Veda Vyāsa; hence Dhṛtaraṣstra was born blind.

धौतरूपा यतो जाता दूद्धा व्यासं नृपात्मजा ।

व्यासकोपासमुपम्बः पाण्डुस्तेन न संशयः ॥ ३ ॥

(Seeing Dhṛtaraṣtra blind Satyavati asked Vyāsa to go to Ambālikā. (Pāndu's mother); the princess Ambālikā, mother of Pāndu turned pale at the sight of Vyāsa; hence, her son became of a pale colour out of Vyāsa's wrath. Hence, the name of the son was Pāndu.

सन्तोषितसाया व्यासो दास्या कामकलाधिवा ।

विदुस्तुं समुत्पत्रो धर्पाशि: सत्यवाक्युर्धि: ॥ 4 ॥

Next the maid servant, expert in the science of amorous pleasures, satisfied Vyāsa; hence her son Vidura was born of Dharma's part and became truthful and holy.

राज्येसंयाधित:पाणु:कनीयानपिमन्दिधि:।

अन्यत्वाद्युतराष्ट्रोउसी नाधिकारे निवेशितः ॥ 5 ॥

Though Pāndu was younger, the ministers installed him on the throne. Dhṛtārāstra could not become king, as he was blind.

भीभ्यस्यानुते राज्यं प्राप्त: पाणुभूमित्रावल: ।

विदुरोउथ्य येभावी मन्त्रकाँवे निवोजितः ॥ 6 ॥

By the permission of Bhīśma the powerful Pāndu obtained the sovereignty; and the intelligent Vidura became his minister.

धृतराष्यर हे भार्ये गन्धारी सौबलिं स्मृता ।

द्वितीया च तथा वैश्या गाईरस्थेयु प्रतिद्धिति ॥ 7 ॥

Dhrtarāstra had two wives Gāndhāri and Sauvāli; this Sauvāli was Vaiśyā; she was engaged in the household affairs.

पाण्डोर पिता पत्थी दे प्रोतेने वेदवादिधि: ।

गौरसेनी तथा कुन्ती मात्री च मढ़देशगा ॥ 8 ॥

King Pānḍu had two wives, too; the first was Kunti, the daughter of Sūrasena; and the other was Mādri, the daughter of the Madra king.

नायाती सुव्रे पूत्रगतं परमगोपनम् ।

वैश्यायेक सुतं कान्तं युयुत्सुं सुयुचे विद्यम् ॥ 9 ॥

Gandhāri gave birth to one hundred beautiful sons; Vaísyā Sauvāli gave birth to one beautiful son named Yuyutsu.

कुन्ही तु प्रथमं कन्या सूर्याल्कर्ण मनोहरम् ।

सुयुवे प्रितृगेहस्य पशुतायणुपरिषहः ॥ 10 ॥

While Kunti was a virgin, she gave birth, through the medium of the Sun, the lovely Karṇa; next he became the wife of Pānḍu.

སྐབས་ཆུང:

क्रिमेत्तसूत चित्रं त्वं भाषये भूतिसत्ता ।

जनितश्र सुत पूर्वे पाण्डुना सा विश्वाहिता ॥ 1 1 ||

सूयाकर्ण: कंबंजातः कन्यायांवद्विस्तरात् ।

कन्य कां बंधुज्जिता पाण्डुना सा विश्वाहिता ॥ 1 2 ॥

Hearing this, the Rsis said: “O Muni Sūta! What are you saying? First Kunti brought forth a child afterwards she was married to Pāndu; this is wonderful, indeed! How was Karṇa, born of Kunti, unmarried? and how came Kunti to be married afterwards? describe all these in detail.”

सूत जवाच

शूरसेनसुता कुन्ती बालभावे यदा दिजातः ।

कुनिभोजेन राजा तु प्राधिता कन्यका शृभा ॥ 13 ॥

कुनिभोजेन सा बाला पुत्री तु परिकलिता ।

सेवानर्थ तु दीप्तव्य विहिता चाहसासि ॥ 14 ॥

Sūta then said: "O Dvija! While Śūrasena's daughter Kuntī was a virgin girl, the king Kuntibhoja asked for Kuntī that she might become her girl and Śūrasena gave her to the king Kuntibhoja who brought up this beautifully smiling girl. He put to her the service of Agni of Agnihotra.

दुर्वासामु मुनि: प्राप्तश्रतुर्मांस्य स्थितो द्विजः ।

परिचयां कृता कुंल्या मुनिस्तोयं जगम है ॥ 15 ॥

ददौ मन्त्ये गुर्थं तस्ये येनातुः सुः: स्वयम् ।

समायाति तथा कामं प्रर्यिष्यति वाज्छतम् ॥ 16 ॥

Once, on an occasion, Durvāsā Muni, engaged in the vow, lasting for four months, came there; Kuntī served him during that period; the Muni became greatly pleased and gave her a very auspicious mantra, by virtue of which any Deva, when called upon by that mantra will come to Kuntī and satisfy her desires.

गते मुनी ततः कुन्ती निश्रायां गृहे स्थिता ।

चिन्तयामास मनसा के सुरं समचितये ॥ 17 ॥

When the Muni went away, Kunti, remaining in her house, wanted to test the accuracy of the mantra and asked within herself “What Devatā to call upon.”

उदितशु तदा भानुस्तथा युही दिवाकारः ।

मनोच्चारं तथा कृता चाहुतस्तिमगमुस्तद ॥ 18 ॥

Seeing God Sūrya had arisen in the sky, Kunti uttered the Mantra and invoked him.

Śrimaddevibhāgvatam

मगडलामानुर्ष रूपं कृत्वा सर्वतिपेशलम् ।

अवातरत्तदाकाशालसमीये तन्य मन्दिरे ॥ 19 ॥

The Sun, then, assuming an excellent human form, came down from the Heavens and appeared before Kunti in the same room.

दूर्याद देवं समायानं कुन्ती भानुं सुविस्तिता ।

वेयमाना रजोदोर्ष, प्राप्ता सहसून भामिनी । २० ॥

Seeing the Deva Sun, Kunti became greatly surprised and began to shudder and instantly became endowed with the inherent natural quality of passion (had menstruation).

कृताङ्गति: स्थिता सूर्य बभावे चाक्लोचना ।

सुर्जिता दर्जनेनाए गस्त्छ त्वं निजमण्डलम् ॥ 21 ॥

The beautiful-eyed Kunti, with folded palms spoke to Sūrya Deva standing before: “I am highly pleased to-day, seeing Thy form; now go back to Thy sphere.”

सूर्य उवाच:

आहृतोस्मिक कर्थ कुन्ति त्वया मन्त्रबलेनैः ।

न मां भवसि कसमाच्तं समाहूय पुरोतम् ॥ 22 ॥

Sūrya Deva said: “O, Kunti! What for you called me, by virtue of the Mantra? Calling me, why do you not worship me, standing before you?

कामातोंर्यसितापाकि भव मां भावसंयुम् ।

मनेशणीधीनां प्राणां क्रीषितुं नय माधिमि । २३ ॥

O beautiful blue eyed one! Seeing you, I have become passionate; so come to me. By means of the mantra, you have made me subservient to you; so take me for intercourse."

कुल्याच

कन्यास्मवहं तु धर्मत्र सर्वसाधिक्रामाध्यम् ।

तवाय्यहं ने वृकौच्या कुलकन्यास्मि सुवत् ॥ 24 ॥

Hearing this, Kunti said: “O Witness of all! O knower of Dharma! You know that I am a virgin girl. O Suvrata! I bow down to you; I am a family daughter; so do not speak ill to me.”

सूर्य तवाच

लज्जा मे महती चाहा यदि गच्छायहं बूथा ।

वाच्यातं सर्वदेवानां यास्यायत्र न संशयः ॥ 25 ॥

Sūrya then said: "If I go away in vain, I will be an object of great shame, and, no doubt, will be laughed amongst the gods.

गय्याति त हिजं चाह येय मन्थ समर्थितः ।

त्वां चाधि सुभूर्ण कुर्तिन तोयेन्मां त्वं भविष्यति ॥ 26 ॥

So, O Kunti! If you do not satisfy me, I will immediately curse you and the Brāhmin who has given you this mantra.

कन्याधर्षः स्थितसे स्यात्र जास्यन्ति जना: किल ।

मत्समन्तु तथा पुत्रो भविता ते वरानने ॥ 27 ॥

O Beautiful one! If you satisfy me, your virginity will remain; nobody will come to know and there will be born a son to you, exactly like me."

इत्युक्ता तारिण: कुन्ती तन्मानकां सुल्लिन्सात् ।

भुक्त्वा जगाम देयोगे वरं दन्धास्तिवाक्षित्म् ॥ 28 ॥

Thus saying, Sūrya Deva enjoyed the bashful Kunti, with her mind attracted towards him; He granted her the desired boons and went away.

गर्भ द्वारा, सुशोणी सुगुपे मन्त्रिे स्थिता ।

धात्री बेह पिंगा चैका न माता न जनसंथा ॥ 29 ॥

The beautiful Kunti became pregnant and began to remain in a house, under great secrecy. Only the dear nurs- knew that; her mother or any other person was quite unaware of the fact.

गृप्त: सघानि पुस्तु जातश्रातिमन्तोहः ।

कवचेनातिरयेण कुण्डलाथां सामवित्तः ॥ ३० ॥

In time, a very beautiful son like the second Sun and Kartikeya, decked with a lovely Kavaca coat of mail and two car-rings, was born there.

द्वितीय इव सुर्यैतु कुमार इव चापरः ।

को कृत्वाध धारयेथी तामुवाच सुर्विज्ञानम् ॥ 31 ॥

Then the nurse caught hold of the hand of the bashful Kunti and said: "O Charming one! What care can you possibly have as long as I am living."

कां चित्तां कार्योक त्वमाधलप्रेडाधित्यात्सभ्यम् ।

मकृष्णायां सुतं कुन्ती मुझ्न्ती वाक्यमवर्जित् ॥ 32 ॥

Kunti then, placed the son in a box and said: "O son! What shall I do? Being afraid of shame, I am leaving you, though you are dear to me as my life itself! I am exceedingly unfortunate that I am casting aside this all-auspicious son.

कि करोमि सुतातांई ज्येत तां प्राणवल्लभम् ।

मन्दभाया त्वाजामि तां सर्वलक्षणासंयुतम् ॥ 33 ॥

पातु तां सगुणासुगण भगवती सर्वक्षी चाधिक्वा ।

सन्त्ये सैव ददातु विश्वजननी कालायवनी कामव ।

इस्वेर्दे मुवप्रकृत्र सुललितां प्राणप्रियाई कृता ।

त्यवत्वा तां विजने वने रविस्तुं दुषा यथा सर्वेरणी । 34।

May the attributeless Bhagavati Ambikā, the World Mother and the Lady of all, endowed with attributes, protect Thee! May Kätyāyani, the giver of all desires, feed you with Her milk! Alas! I am quitting you, born of Sūrya's semen in this solitary forest like a vitiated wanton woman. I do not know, when shall I see your lotus like beautiful face, dearest to me like myself.

पूर्वस्मिनि जनानि जिजगतां माता न चाराधिता ।

न ध्यातं पदपूढ़जें सुखकरं देद्वाः : शिवायाश्रिभू ।

तेनाहं सुत दुर्भागरासि सत्तं त्यकत्वा पुसत्वां बने ।

नध्याधि प्रिय पातकं सुस्तवी कुद्धका कृतं वतवयम् ॥ 35 ॥

Alas! I never worshipped in my former birth Śivānī, the mother of the three worlds; I never meditated Her lotus like feet, the giver of all happiness; hence, I am so very unfortunate. O Dear son! I must perform great tapasyā to expiate for this terrible sin, that I knowingly commit in relinquishing you in the forest."

सूत उवाच

इतुसूचना तं सुतं कृती मद्यपायां धृतं किल ।

धारीहरते ददौ भीता जनदर्शनतस्वा ॥ 36 ॥

Sūta said: “Thus saying to the son within the casket, Kunti gave over that to the hands of her nurse, terrified, lest someone might see her.

सात्वा जस्ता तता कुनी पितृवेश्यन्युवास सा ।

मदुषा बहमाना च प्राप्ता हृधारथेने च ॥ 37 ॥

Kunti then bathed and remained with a fearful heart in her father's house. A carpenter (charioteer?) named Adhiratha got accidentally that casket floating in the Ganges.

राधा सुतस्य भार्यां चै तताउसी प्राधितः सुतः ।

कर्णोंभूद्रलवानीर: पालितः सुतसचिनि ॥ 38 ॥

The carpenter's wife Rādhā prayed for the son

and nourished him under her care. Thus nourished in the carpenter's house, the famous Kunti's son Karna became a very powerful warrior.

कुन्ती विवाहित कन्या पाणुज्ञा सा सर्ववेरे ।

माड़ी चैवापारा भार्यां महाराजसुता शुभा ॥ 39 ॥

King Pāndu then married Kunti in a Svyamvara, a marriage in which the girl chooses her husband from among a number of suitors, assembled together. And the all-auspicious daughter of the king of Madra became also the second wife of Pāndu.

मृगवां रममाणस्तु वने पाणडुर्महावलः ।

जयान मृगबुढ़या तु रममाणं मृनि वने ॥ 40 ॥

Once, on an occasion, the powerful Pāndu, while hunting in the forest killed a Muni, in the form of a deer, engaged in the act of co-habitation, thinking it to be a deer.

शगत्नरेने तत याणबुंगिनना कुपितेन च ।

स्तीसईं यदि कतांसि सत ते मरणं धुवम् ॥ 41 ॥

इति शणतस्तु मुनिना पाण्डु: शोकसमन्ति: ।

त्यक्त्वा राज्यं वने वासं चक्रात भृणतुः पित्रतः ॥ 42 ॥

The dying Muni became inflated with wrath, cursed Pānḍu: “If you cohabit, certainly you will die.” Thus cursed by the Muni, Pānḍu became very sorrowful and abandoned his kingdom and began to live in the forest.

कुन्ही माडी च भार्यें हे जमनुः सह संगते ।

सेवनार्थ सतीर्थं संश्रिंते गुनिसतमाः ॥ 43 ॥

O Munis! His two wives Kunti and Mādri, followed their husband as chaste women do, to serve him in the forest.

गड़ातीर स्थितः पाणडुर्जनीनामाश्रयेषु च ।

शृणवानो धर्मगृशक्षाणि चाकार दुक्षं तपः ॥ 44 ॥

Dwelling in the hermitage of the Munis, Pāndu listened to the Dharma Śāstras and practised severe penance.

कक्षायां वर्तमानायां मदार्थिद्वमंसांशितम् ।

अशणोड़चनं राजा सुगूरं मुनिभाषितम् ॥ 45 ॥

अपुत्रस्य गतिनर्जिति स्वयं गन्तुं परन्तः ॥

येन केनाप्यायोने पुत्रस्य जननं चरेत् ॥ 46 ॥

Once while he was listening to the religious discourses of the Munis, he heard unmistakably the Munis telling that the man who is senseless can never go to the Heavens; so he must get a son somehow or other.

अंगज: पुत्रिकापुजः क्षेत्रजो गोलकलस्था ।

कुपडः सहोढ़ः कानीनः क्रीतः प्रापतलस्था वरे ॥ 47 ॥

दन्तः केनाप घाशज्जी धन्याग्रिसुता: स्मृता:।

उनत्तोस्ततः पुत्रा निकृहा इति निश्रयः ॥ 48 ॥

The Pundits declare that the sons born of the father's semen, the sons born of their daughters, the Ksetraja, the Golaka, the Kunda, the Sahodha, the Kānina, the Krita, one obtained in the forest, or one offered by another father, unable to nourish his son, all are entitled to inherit the wealth of the father, but the sons, enumerated successively are more and more inferior.

Note: Ksetraja—of a son, the off-spring of the wife by a kinsman appointed to procreate issue to the husband.

Golaka—bastard child of a widow.

Kundā—a child born in adultery.

Sahodha—the son of a woman pregnant at the time of marriage.

Kānina—the son born of a young and unmarried woman.

Krita—purchased.

इत्याकर्णे तदा प्राङ् कुन्ती कमललोचनाम् ।

सुतमृत्यादयाणु त्वं मुपिन गत्या तपोचित्यम् ॥ 49 ॥

Hearing this, Pāndu spoke to the lotus-eyed Kunti to procreate sons for him soon by a great ascetic Muni:

ममाज्ञा न दोषस्ते पुरा राजा महात्मना ।

वसिष्ठाज्ञानितः पुत्रः सौदासेनैतेने मे श्रुन्तम् ॥ 50 ॥

“By my order, you will not incur any sin in doing this. I heard that in ancient times the high- souled king Saudāsa got son from Vasiṣṭha.”

वे कुन्ती वचन ग्राह मम मान्योस्ति कामतः ।

दत्तो दुर्वासा पूर्व सिंहिदुः सर्वेधा प्रभो ॥ 51 ॥

Kunti, then spoke to the king: "O Lord! I know

one Siddha mantra; it was given to me before by the Muni Durvāsā.

निम्नरेड़रं चे देवं मनेशानेन पार्थिव ।

आगच्छेलर्वंबारी वे मम पार्थं निमन्त्रितः ॥ 52 ॥

Whichever Devatā I will invoke by that Mantra, he will instantly come to my side, controlled by that Mantra.

भर्तीवंक्येन सा तत सूच्या धर्म सुर्तोमम् ।

सज्ञ्य सुवुवे पुत्र प्रवमं च युध्धित्यम् ॥ 53 ॥

At the request of the husband, Kunti invoked Dharma, the best of the Devas; and after being impregnated by him, gave birth to Yudhiṣṭhira.

वायोर्कौकांदं पूर्व जिथुं चैव शतक्रतोः ।

वर्षे वर्षे जयः पुत्रा: कृत्वा जाता महावक्ता: ॥ 54 ॥

Then she got through Pavana Deva, the son Vrkodara; and through Indra, the Lord of the Devas, Arjuna. Thus, in every year, Kunti gave birth to one son and so in three years she gave birth to three very powrvful and mighty sons.

माठ्री प्राह पर्षिते पाण्डु पुत्रे मे कुरु सत्तम ।

किं क्रोगिम माहारज दुःखं नारणय मे प्रभो ॥ 55 ॥

At this Mādri spoke to her husband: "O King, the best of the Kurus! What shall I do now?

प्रार्थिता पतिन कुन्ती द्वदी मन्ते द्वार्थिता ।

एकपुत्रप्रबच्नि मात्री पतिनते स्थिता ॥ 56 ॥

Kindly suggest to me the means of procreating sons; O Lord, remove my pain." Pānḍu asked Kunti for this; Kunti, moved with pity, gave her the mantra, so that she might get one son.

स्मृता तताधिजी देवी मूत्रासमुता सुती ।

नकुल: सहदेवघु सुयुवे वरविणीति ॥ 57 ॥

Then the beautiful Mādri, invoked the twin Asvins under the advice of her husband and got a pair of twins Nakula and Sahadeva through them. एवं ते पाषड्वा: पढ़ क्षेत्रोराश्नः सुरात्बजः ।

अहंवर्षान्ते जाता वने तस्मिन्ड्जोतमाः ॥ 58 ॥

O Munis! Thus five Pāndavas were born successively in every following year to the wives of Pāndu by the seeds of the Devas.

एकस्मि-समये पाण्डुर्गाई दृष्टवास्य निर्जनें ।

आश्रये चातिकामातों ज्याग्रानतदीशस: ॥ 59 ॥

Once upon a time Pāndu, whose end was drawing nigh, became very passionate at the sight of Mādrī in that solitary hermitage.

मा मा मा मेति बहुधा निषिद्धोपि तया भृणम् ।

अतिलिङ्ग प्रियां देवात्पयात धरणितेच । ६० ॥

He, though forbidden repeatedly by Mādrī, warmly embraced her, as if dictated by the great destroyer, and fell to the ground.

यथा यूक्षगता वल्ली तिक्रे पतिति वे दुगे ।

तथा सा पतिता बाला कुर्बती रोन्द न बहु ॥ 6 1 ॥

As the creeper falls down when the tree is felled, so Mādri dropped on the ground and began to cry violently.

प्रत्यगाता तदा कुनी रुद्ती बालकास्तथा ।

मुन्यश महाभाग शुत्वा कोलाहलं तथा ॥ 6 2 ॥

Having the wailings of Mādri, Kunti and the five sons of Pāndu came there weeping and crying; a tumult then ensued and the great Munis also appeared on the scene.

मृतः पाण्डुस्तदा सर्वे मुनयः संशितानतः ।

सहानिमिधिर्विधि कृत्वा गझ्जातीरे ताद्रवदून ॥ 6 3 ॥

Then those Munis, practising great vows, knew that Pāndu was dead and performed duly, on the banks of the Ganges, the ceremony of burning the dead.

चके सहैव गमनं माझी दत्वा सुती शिशु ।

कुन्चै धर्मे पुरस्कृत्य सतीनां सत्यकामतः ॥ 64 ॥

At that time Mādri gave over to Kunti the charge of her two sons and followed the Saṭi practise along with her husband to go to Satyaloka.

जलदानादिके कृत्वा मुनयरात्र वासिनः ।

पशुपुत्रयुतां कृनीमनयन्दस्तिनापुम् ॥ 65 ॥

The Munis, then, performed Tarpaṇa ceremonies in honour of Pāṇḍu and Mādri and took Kunti and the five sons to Hastināpur.

तां प्राणां च समात्राय गाङ्गेयो विदुरस्तथा ।

नगरीं घृतगृत्य्य सर्वे तत्र समाययुः ॥ 6 6 ॥

Knowing that Kunti has come, Bhīṣma, Vidura and the relatives of Dhṛtaraṣtra within the city, all came to Kunti.

पप्रच्छुश जना: सेवें कस्य पुत्रा वराने ।

पाणड़ो: शापं समाजाय कुन्ती दुःखात्विता तदा ॥ 67 ॥

They all asked Kunti: “O beautiful one! Whose are these five sons?” Kunti, then, remembered the curse on Pāndu and sorrowfully expressed:

तानुवाच सुराणां वे पुत्रा : कुरकुतोद्वा: ।

विश्वासार्थं समाहुतः कृत्या सर्वे सुरास्तद ॥ 68 ॥

आगत्य खे तदा तैस्तु कविरं नः सुतः किल ।

भीधोग सस्कृतं वाक्यं देवानां सकृताः सुतः ॥ 69 ॥

"These are the Deva's sons born in Kuru family." In order to convince the people assembled there, Kunti invoked the Devas who came in the celestial space above and said: "Yes, these are the sons born of our seeds. Bhismā, then, paid respect to the words of the Devas and honoured duly the boys.

गता नागपुरं सर्वे तानादाय सुतान्वधूम् ।

भीभादयः प्रीतचित्नः पालयामासुर्यतः ॥

एवं पाथा: समुद्वग्रा गाङ्गेयनाथ पालिताः ॥ 70 ॥

श्रित श्रीमदेवीभगवते महापुराणे द्वितीयकन्धे

श्वरोउध्याः ॥ ६ ॥

Bhisma then took the five sons and Pāndu's wife to Hastinā and gladly nourished them. O Munis! The sons of Pārthā were thus born and nourished by Bhismā."

Thus ends the Sixth Chapter of the Second Book on the birth of the Pāndavas in the Mahāpurānam Śrimadhevibhāgavatam.

