[Ch 6 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: “Thus Śāntanu married Satyavati; two sons were born to her and they died in course of time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :—Thus Śantanu married Satyavatī; two sons were born to her and they died in course of time.

[Ch 6 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Out of Vyāsa Deva's semen, Dhṛtaraṣstra was born. Ambikā Devi, the mother of Dhṛtaraṣstra closed her eyes on seeing Veda Vyāsa; hence Dhṛtaraṣstra was born blind.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Out of Vyāsa Deva’s semen, Dhritarāstra was born. Ambikā Devī, the mother of Dhritarāstra closed her eyes on seeing Veda Vyāsa; hence

[Ch 6 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► (Seeing Dhṛtaraṣtra blind Satyavati asked Vyāsa to go to Ambālikā. (Pāndu's mother); the princess Ambālikā, mother of Pāndu turned pale at the sight of Vyāsa; hence, her son became of a pale colour out of Vyāsa's wrath. Hence, the name of the son was Pāndu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing Dhritarāstra blind Satyavatī asked Vyāsa to go to Ambālikā (Pānḍu’s mother); the princess Ambālikā, mother of Pānḍu turned pale at the sight of Vyāsa; hence her son became of a pale colour out of Vyāsa’s wrath. Hence the name of the son was Pānḍu.

[Ch 6 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next the maid servant, expert in the science of amorous pleasures, satisfied Vyāsa; hence her son Vidura was born of Dharma's part and became truthful and holy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next the maid servant, expert in the science of amorous pleasures, satisfied Vyāsa; hence her son Vidura was born of Dharma’s part and became truthful and holy.

[Ch 6 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Though Pāndu was younger, the ministers installed him on the throne. Dhṛtārāstra could not become king, as he was blind.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Though Pānḍu was younger, the ministers installed him on the throne. Dhritarāstra could not become king, as he was blind.

[Ch 6 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► By the permission of Bhīśma the powerful Pāndu obtained the sovereignty; and the intelligent Vidura became his minister.
NEW CORR ENG ──► By the permission of Bhīsma the powerful Pānḍu obtained the sovereignty; and the intelligent Vidura became his minister.

[Ch 6 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Dhrtarāstra had two wives Gāndhāri and Sauvāli; this Sauvāli was Vaiśyā; she was engaged in the household affairs.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Dhritarāstra had two wives Gāndhāri and Sauvali; this Sauvali was Vaishyā; she was engaged in the household affairs.

[Ch 6 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► King Pānḍu had two wives, too; the first was Kunti, the daughter of Sūrasena; and the other was Mādri, the daughter of the Madra king.
NEW CORR ENG ──► king Pānḍu had two wives, too; the first was Kunti, the daughter of Sūrasena; and the other was Mādri, the

[Ch 6 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Gandhāri gave birth to one hundred beautiful sons; Vaísyā Sauvāli gave birth to one beautiful son named Yuyutsu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Gāndhāri gave birth to one hundred beautiful sons; Vaiśyā Sauvali gave birth to one beautiful son named Yuyutsu.

[Ch 6 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► While Kunti was a virgin, she gave birth, through the medium of the Sun, the lovely Karṇa; next he became the wife of Pānḍu. སྐབས་ཆུང:
NEW CORR ENG ──► While Kunti was a virgin, she gave birth, through the medium of the Sun, the lovely Karna; next he became the wife of Pānḍu.

[Ch 6 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, the Rsis said: “O Muni Sūta! What are you saying? First Kunti brought forth a child afterwards she was married to Pāndu; this is wonderful, indeed! How was Karṇa, born of Kunti, unmarried? and how came Kunti to be married afterwards? describe all these in detail.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, the Ṛṣis said :-- “O Muni Sūta! What are you saying ? First Kunti brought forth a child and afterwards she was married to Pānḍu; this is wonderful, indeed! How was Karna, born of Kunti, unmarried? and how came Kunti to be married afterwards? describe all these in detail.”

[Ch 6 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta then said: "O Dvija! While Śūrasena's daughter Kuntī was a virgin girl, the king Kuntibhoja asked for Kuntī that she might become her girl and Śūrasena gave her to the king Kuntibhoja who brought up this beautifully smiling girl. He put to her the service of Agni of Agnihotra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta then said :-- “O Dvija! While Sūrasena’s daughter Kunti was a virgin girl, the king Kuntibhoja asked for Kunti that she might become her girl and Sūrasena gave her to the king Kuntibhoja who brought up this beautifully smiling girl. He put to her the service of Agni of Agnihotra.

[Ch 6 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once, on an occasion, Durvāsā Muni, engaged in the vow, lasting for four months, came there; Kuntī served him during that period; the Muni became greatly pleased and gave her a very auspicious mantra, by virtue of which any Deva, when called upon by that mantra will come to Kuntī and satisfy her desires.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once, on an occassion, Durvāsā Muni, engaged in the vow, lasting for four months, came there; Kunti served him during that period; the Muni became greatly pleased and gave her a very auspicious, mantra, by virtue of which any Deva, when called upon by that mantra will come to Kunti and satisfy her desires.

[Ch 6 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the Muni went away, Kunti, remaining in her house, wanted to test the accuracy of the mantra and asked within herself “What Devatā to call upon.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the Muni went away, Kunti, remaining in her house, wanted to test the accuracy of the mantra and asked within herself “What Devatā to call upon.”

[Ch 6 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing God Sūrya had arisen in the sky, Kunti uttered the Mantra and invoked him. Śrimaddevibhāgvatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the God Sūrya had arisen in the sky, Kunti uttered the Mantra and invoked him. The

[Ch 6 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Sun, then, assuming an excellent human form, came down from the Heavens and appeared before Kunti in the same room.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sun, then, assuming an excellent human form, came down from the Heavens and appeared before Kunti in the same room.

[Ch 6 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the Deva Sun, Kunti became greatly surprised and began to shudder and instantly became endowed with the inherent natural quality of passion (had menstruation).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the Deva Sun, Kunti became greatly surprised and began to shudder and instantly became endowed with the inherent natural quality of passion (had menstruation).

[Ch 6 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The beautiful-eyed Kunti, with folded palms spoke to Sūrya Deva standing before: “I am highly pleased to-day, seeing Thy form; now go back to Thy sphere.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The beautiful-eyed Kunti, with folded palm; spoke to Sūrya Deva standing before :-- “I am highly pleased to-day seeing Thy form; now go back to Thy sphere.”

[Ch 6 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūrya Deva said: “O, Kunti! What for you called me, by virtue of the Mantra? Calling me, why do you not worship me, standing before you?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūrya Deva said :-- “O Kunti! What for you called me, by virtue of the Mantra? Calling me, why do you not worship me, standing before you?

[Ch 6 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O beautiful blue eyed one! Seeing you, I have become passionate; so come to me. By means of the mantra, you have made me subservient to you; so take me for intercourse."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O beautiful blue one! Seeing you, I have become passionate; so come to me. By means of the mantra, you have made me your subservient so take me for intercourse.”

[Ch 6 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, Kunti said: “O Witness of all! O knower of Dharma! You know that I am a virgin girl. O Suvrata! I bow down to you; I am a family daughter; so do not speak ill to me.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, Kunti said :-- “O Witness of all! O knower of Dharma! You know that I am a virgin girl. O Suvrata! I bow down to you; I am a family daughter; so do not speak ill to me.”

[Ch 6 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūrya then said: "If I go away in vain, I will be an object of great shame, and, no doubt, will be laughed amongst the gods.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūrya then said :-- “If I go away in vain, I will be an object of great shame, and, no doubt, will be laughed amongst the gods;

[Ch 6 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So, O Kunti! If you do not satisfy me, I will immediately curse you and the Brāhmin who has given you this mantra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So, O Kunti! If you do not satisfy me, I will immediately curse you and the Brāhmin who has given you this mantra.

[Ch 6 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Beautiful one! If you satisfy me, your virginity will remain; nobody will come to know and there will be born a son to you, exactly like me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Beautiful one! If you satisfy me, your virginity will remain; no body will come to know and there will be born a son to you, exactly like me.”

[Ch 6 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, Sūrya Deva enjoyed the bashful Kunti, with her mind attracted towards him; He granted her the desired boons and went away.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying Sūrya Deva enjoyed the bashful Kunti, with her mind attracted towards him; He granted her the desired boons and went away.

[Ch 6 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The beautiful Kunti became pregnant and began to remain in a house, under great secrecy. Only the dear nurs- knew that; her mother or any other person was quite unaware of the fact.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The beautiful Kunti became pregnant and began to remain in a house, under great secrecy. Only the dear nurse knew that; her mother or any other person was quite unaware of the fact.

[Ch 6 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In time, a very beautiful son like the second Sun and Kartikeya, decked with a lovely Kavaca coat of mail and two car-rings, was born there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In time, a very beautiful son like the second Sun and Kārtikeya, decked with a lovely Kavaca coat of mail and two ear-rings, was born there.

[Ch 6 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the nurse caught hold of the hand of the bashful Kunti and said: "O Charming one! What care can you possibly have as long as I am living."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the nurse caught hold of the hand of the bashful Kunti and said :-- “O Charming one! What care can you possibly have as long as I am living.”

[Ch 6 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kunti then, placed the son in a box and said: "O son! What shall I do? Being afraid of shame, I am leaving you, though you are dear to me as my life itself! I am exceedingly unfortunate that I am casting aside this all-auspicious son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kunti then, placed the son in a box and said :-- “O son! What shall I do? Being afraid of shame, I am leaving you, though you are dear to me as my life itself! I am exceedingly fortunate that I am casting aside this all auspicious son.

[Ch 6 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► May the attributeless Bhagavati Ambikā, the World Mother and the Lady of all, endowed with attributes, protect Thee! May Kätyāyani, the giver of all desires, feed you with Her milk! Alas! I am quitting you, born of Sūrya's semen in this solitary forest like a vitiated wanton woman. I do not know, when shall I see your lotus like beautiful face, dearest to me like myself.
NEW CORR ENG ──► May the attributeless Bhāgavatī Ambikā, the World Mother and the Lady of all, endowed with attributes, protect Thee! May Kātyāyani, the giver of all desires, feed you with Her milk! Alas! I am quitting you, born of Sūrya’s semen in this solitary forest like a vitiated wanton woman. I do not know, when shall I see your lotus like beautiful face, dearest to me like

[Ch 6 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Alas! I never worshipped in my former birth Śivānī, the mother of the three worlds; I never meditated Her lotus like feet, the giver of all happiness; hence, I am so very unfortunate. O Dear son! I must perform great tapasyā to expiate for this terrible sin, that I knowingly commit in relinquishing you in the forest."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Alas! I never worshipped in my former birth Śivānī, the mother of the three worlds; I never meditated Her lotus like feet, the Giver of all happiness; hence I am so very unfortunate. O Dear son! I must perform great tapasyā to expiate for this terrible sin, that I knowingly commit in relinquishing you in the forest.”

[Ch 6 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: “Thus saying to the son within the casket, Kunti gave over that to the hands of her nurse, terrified, lest someone might see her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Thus saying to the son within the casket, Kunti gave over that to the hands of her nurse, terrified, lest some one might see her.

[Ch 6 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kunti then bathed and remained with a fearful heart in her father's house. A carpenter (charioteer?) named Adhiratha got accidentally that casket floating in the Ganges.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kunti then bathed and remained with a fearful heart in her father’s house. A carpenter (charioteer?) named Adhiratha got accidentally that casket floating in the Ganges.

[Ch 6 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The carpenter's wife Rādhā prayed for the son and nourished him under her care. Thus nourished in the carpenter's house, the famous Kunti's son Karna became a very powerful warrior.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The carpenter’s wife Rādhā, prayed for the son and nourished him under her care. Thus nourished in the carpenter’s house, the famous Kunti’s son Karna became a very powerful warrior.

[Ch 6 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► King Pāndu then married Kunti in a Svyamvara, a marriage in which the girl chooses her husband from among a number of suitors, assembled together. And the all-auspicious daughter of the king of Madra became also the second wife of Pāndu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► king Pānḍu then married Kunti in a Svayamvara, a marriage in which the girl chooses her husband from among a number of suitors, assembled together. And the all auspicious daughter of the king of Madra became also the second wife of Pānḍu.

[Ch 6 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once, on an occasion, the powerful Pāndu, while hunting in the forest killed a Muni, in the form of a deer, engaged in the act of co-habitation, thinking it to be a deer.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once, on an occasion, the powerful Pānḍu, while hunting in the forest killed a Muni, in the form of a deer, engaged in the act of co-habitation, thinking it to be a deer.

[Ch 6 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The dying Muni became inflated with wrath, cursed Pānḍu: “If you cohabit, certainly you will die.” Thus cursed by the Muni, Pānḍu became very sorrowful and abandoned his kingdom and began to live in the forest.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The dying Muni became inflated with wrath, cursed Pānḍu :-- “If you co-habit, certainly you will die.” Thus cursed by the Muni, Pānḍu became very sorrowful and abandoned his kingdom and began to live in the forest.

[Ch 6 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Munis! His two wives Kunti and Mādri, followed their husband as chaste women do, to serve him in the forest.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Munis! His two wives Kuntī and Mādrī, followed their husband as chaste women do, to serve him in the forest.

[Ch 6 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Dwelling in the hermitage of the Munis, Pāndu listened to the Dharma Śāstras and practised severe penance.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Dwelling in the hermitage of the Munis, Pānḍu listened to the Dharma Śāstras and practised severe penance.

[Ch 6 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once while he was listening to the religious discourses of the Munis, he heard unmistakably the Munis telling that the man who is senseless can never go to the Heavens; so he must get a son somehow or other.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once while he was listening to the religious discourses of the Munis, he heard unmistakeably the Munis telling that the man who is sonless can never go to the Heavens; so he must get a son somehow or other.

[Ch 6 Verse 47-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Pundits declare that the sons born of the father's semen, the sons born of their daughters, the Ksetraja, the Golaka, the Kunda, the Sahodha, the Kānina, the Krita, one obtained in the forest, or one offered by another father, unable to nourish his son, all are entitled to inherit the wealth of the father, but the sons, enumerated successively are more and more inferior. Note: Ksetraja—of a son, the off-spring of the wife by a kinsman appointed to procreate issue to the husband. Golaka—bastard child of a widow. Kundā—a child born in adultery. Sahodha—the son of a woman pregnant at the time of marriage. Kānina—the son born of a young and unmarried woman. Krita—purchased.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Pundits declare that the sons born of the father’s semen, the sons born of their daughters, the Kṣettraja, the Goloka, the Kunḍa, the Sahoda, the Kānīna, the Krīta, one obtained in the forest, or one offered by another father, unable to nourish his son, all are entitled to inherit the wealth of the father; but the sons, enumerated successively are more and more inferior. N.B.: Ksettraja - of a son, the off spring of the wife by a kinsman appointed to procreate issue to the husband. Goloka - Bastard child of a widow. Kunda - a child born in adultery. Sahoda - the son of a woman pregnant at the time of marriage. Kānīna - the son born of a young and unmarried woman. Krīta - purchased

[Ch 6 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, Pāndu spoke to the lotus-eyed Kunti to procreate sons for him soon by a great ascetic Muni:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, Pānḍu spoke to the lotus-eyed Kunti to procreate sons for him soon by a great ascetic Muni :--

[Ch 6 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “By my order, you will not incur any sin in doing this. I heard that in ancient times the high- souled king Saudāsa got son from Vasiṣṭha.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► “By my order, you will not iñcur any sin in doing this. I heard that in ancient times the high souled kin Saudāsa got son from Vaśiṣṭha.”

[Ch 6 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kunti, then spoke to the king: "O Lord! I know one Siddha mantra; it was given to me before by the Muni Durvāsā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kunti, then spoke to the king :-- “O Lord! I know one Siddha mantra; it was given to me before by the Muni Durvāsā.

[Ch 6 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whichever Devatā I will invoke by that Mantra, he will instantly come to my side, controlled by that Mantra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whichever Devatā I will invoke by that Mantra, he will instantly come to my side, controlled

[Ch 6 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At the request of the husband, Kunti invoked Dharma, the best of the Devas; and after being impregnated by him, gave birth to Yudhiṣṭhira.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At the request of the husband, Kuntī invoked Dharma, the best of the Devas; and after being impregnated by him, gave birth to Yudhisṭhira.

[Ch 6 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then she got through Pavana Deva, the son Vrkodara; and through Indra, the Lord of the Devas, Arjuna. Thus, in every year, Kunti gave birth to one son and so in three years she gave birth to three very powrvful and mighty sons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then she got through Pavana Deva, the son Vrikodara; and through Indra the Lord of the Devas, Arjuṇa. Thus, in every year, Kunti gave birth to one son and so in three years she gave birth to three very powerful and mighty sons.

[Ch 6 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this Mādri spoke to her husband: "O King, the best of the Kurus! What shall I do now?
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this Màdri spoke to her husband :-- “O king, the best of the Kurus! What shall I do now?

[Ch 6 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kindly suggest to me the means of procreating sons; O Lord, remove my pain." Pānḍu asked Kunti for this; Kunti, moved with pity, gave her the mantra, so that she might get one son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kindly suggest to me the means of procreating sons; O Lord, remove my pain.” Pānḍu asked Kunti for this; Kunti, moved with pity, gave her the mantra, so that she might get one son.

[Ch 6 Verse 57-58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Munis! Thus five Pāndavas were born successively in every following year to the wives of Pāndu by the seeds of the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Munis! Thus five Pāṇḍavas were born successively in every following year to the wives of Pānḍu by the seed of the Devas.

[Ch 6 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once upon a time Pāndu, whose end was drawing nigh, became very passionate at the sight of Mādrī in that solitary hermitage.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once on a time Pānḍu, whose end was drawing nigh became very passionate at the sight of Mādrī in that solitary hermitage.

[Ch 6 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He, though forbidden repeatedly by Mādrī, warmly embraced her, as if dictated by the great destroyer, and fell to the ground.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He, though forbidden repeatedly by Mādri, warmly embraced her, as if dictated by the great destroyer, and fell to the ground.

[Ch 6 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As the creeper falls down when the tree is felled, so Mādri dropped on the ground and began to cry violently.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As the creeper falls down when the tree is felled, so Mādrī dropped on the ground and began to cry violently.

[Ch 6 Verse 62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Having the wailings of Mādri, Kunti and the five sons of Pāndu came there weeping and crying; a tumult then ensued and the great Munis also appeared on the scene.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Having heard the wailings of Mādrī, Kunti and the five sons of Pānḍu came there weeping and crying; a tumult then ensued and the great Munis also appeared on the scene.

[Ch 6 Verse 63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then those Munis, practising great vows, knew that Pāndu was dead and performed duly, on the banks of the Ganges, the ceremony of burning the dead.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then those Munis, practising great vows, knew that Pànḍu was dead and performed duly, on the banks of the Ganges, the ceremony of burning the dead.

[Ch 6 Verse 64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At that time Mādri gave over to Kunti the charge of her two sons and followed the Saṭi practise along with her husband to go to Satyaloka.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At that time Mādri gave over to Kunti the charge of her two sons and followed the Satī practice along with her husband to go to Satyaloka.

[Ch 6 Verse 65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Munis, then, performed Tarpaṇa ceremonies in honour of Pāṇḍu and Mādri and took Kunti and the five sons to Hastināpur.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Munis, then, performed Tarpaṇa ceremonies in honour of Pānḍu and Mādri and took Kunti and the five sons to Hastināpur.

[Ch 6 Verse 66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Knowing that Kunti has come, Bhīṣma, Vidura and the relatives of Dhṛtaraṣtra within the city, all came to Kunti.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Knowing that Kunti has come, Bhīsma, Vidura and the relatives of Dhritarāstra within the city, all came to Kunti.

[Ch 6 Verse 67]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They all asked Kunti: “O beautiful one! Whose are these five sons?” Kunti, then, remembered the curse on Pāndu and sorrowfully expressed:
NEW CORR ENG ──► They all asked Kunti :-- “O beautiful one! Whose are these five sons?” Kunti, then, remembered the curse on Pānḍu and sorrowfully expressed :--

[Ch 6 Verse 68-69]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "These are the Deva's sons born in Kuru family." In order to convince the people assembled there, Kunti invoked the Devas who came in the celestial space above and said: "Yes, these are the sons born of our seeds. Bhismā, then, paid respect to the words of the Devas and honoured duly the boys.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “ These are the Deva’s sons born in Kuru family.” In order to convince the people assembled there, Kunti invoked the Devas who came in the celestial space above and said :-- “Yes, these are the sons born of our seeds.” Bhīsma, then, paid respect to the words of the Devas and honoured duly the boys.

[Ch 6 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhisma then took the five sons and Pāndu's wife to Hastinā and gladly nourished them. O Munis! The sons of Pārthā were thus born and nourished by Bhismā." Thus ends the Sixth Chapter of the Second Book on the birth of the Pāndavas in the Mahāpurānam Śrimadhevibhāgavatam.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bhīsma then took the five sons and Pānḍu’s wife to Hastinā and gladly nourished them. O Munis! The sons of Prithā were thus born and nourished by Bhīsma. Thus ends the sixth chapter of the second Adhyāya on the birth of the Pāṇḍavas in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī
