CHAPTER XLVI

On Şaşthi Devi

नारद खाच

अनेकानां च देवीनां शुतमाख्याममुतम् ।

अन्यासां चरितं ब्रह्मावद् वेदविद्धां वर ॥ १ ॥

Nārada said: O Thou, the foremost of the Knowers of the Vedas! I have heard from you the anecdotes of many Devīs. Now I want to hear the lives of other Devīs also. Kindly describe.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

सर्वांसी चर्तितं विश्व देवेषु च पृवक्यप्रथक ।

पूर्वोक्तानां च देवीनी तासां श्रोतुमिह्छ्वसि ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Best of the Brāhmaṇas! The lives and glorious deeds of all the Devīs are described separately. Now say, which lives you want to hear.

नारद उवाच

घड़ी मंगलचंडी च मनसा प्रकृतेः कला ।

उत्पत्तिमासां चरितं श्रौतुमिच्छामि तचलतः ॥ ३ ॥

Nārada said: O Lord! Ṣaṣṭhī, Maṅgala Cangī, and Manasā, are the parts of Prakṛti. Now I want to hear the lives of them.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

पह्रीगा प्रकृतेयं च सा च घष्टी प्रकर्जितिता ।

बालकानामधित्वाश्री विष्णुमाया च बाल्वा ॥ 4 ॥

मातृकासु च विल्याता देवसेनाभिधा च या ।

प्राणाधिक्रिया साध्यी स्कंदभायां च सूत्रता ॥ 5 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Child! The sixth part of Prakṛti is named as Saṣṭhī. The Deviṣaṣthi is the Presiding Deity of infants and children; She is the Māyā of Viṣṇu and She bestows sons to all. She is one of the sixteen Mātṛkās. She is known by the name of Devasenā. She performs Vratas (vows); She is the chaste and dearest wife of Skanda.

आयुःप्रदा च जालानां धात्री स्थणकारिणी ।

सत्तं शिशुपाश्रंस्था योगेन सिद्ध्योगिनी ॥ ६ ॥

She decides on the longevity of children and is always engaged in their preservation. So much so, that this Siddha Yogini always keeps the children on her side.

तत्या: पूजार्थिधे बह्याजितृहासपिंदं श्रुचं परम् ॥ ७ ॥

यच्छृतं धर्मवेक्लेन सुखदं पुरुदं परम् ॥ ७ ॥

राज प्रियदात्रशास्त्रियंधुवमनो: सुतः ।

योगीऋ नोहद्धाद्यां तप्यासु ततः सदा ॥ ८ ॥

O Best of Brāhmaṇas! I will now talk about the method of worshipping this Devī and the history about Her bestowing children that I heard from Dharma Deva. Hear. Sväyambhuva Manu had one son Priyavrata. He was a great Yogindra and remained in practising austerities. So he was not inclined to have any wife.

बह्रात्रासा च यत्नेन कृतादारो बभ्यूर है ।

सुचिरं कृतदारश्र न लेभे तनयं मुने ॥ 9 ॥

पुत्रेष्यिज्ञ तं चापि कारयामास करयप: ।

मालिन्ये तय क्रांताएं मुनिवर्जनरं ददो ॥ १० ॥

At last by the effort and request of Brahmā, he got himself married. But many days passed, and he could not see the face of a son. Then Maharsi Kaśyapa became his priest in the Putreṣti Sacrifice (to get a son); and when the sacrifice was over, he gave the sacrificial offering called caru to his wife Mālini.

भुक्ला च तं चर्क तयासः सहो गर्भे बभूव है ।

दधार तं च सा देही देवे द्वारशलतस्मर ॥ १ १ ॥

ततः सुवासा सा ब्रह्म-कुमारं कनकप्रभम् ।

सर्ववियवस्मयं मृन्तुभारोल्पनम् ॥ १ २ ॥

On eating the caru, the queen Mälini become pregnant. For twelve Deva years she held the womb. After twelve years she delivered a full developed son, of a golden colour; but the son was lifeless and his two eyeballs were upset.

तं चुढ़ा रूकून: सर्वा नार्थं बोधवासिह्वः ।

पृष्ठभिवाप तन्माता पूत्रगोकेन भूयसा ॥ 13 ॥

प्रभाशं च ययौ राजा गृहीत्वा बालकं मुने ।

रोद तत कांतोरे पुत्रं कृत्वा स्ववक्षसि ॥ 14 ॥

At this, the friends wives became very sorry and began to weep. The mother of the child became so very sorrowful that she became senseless. O Muni! The King himself took the son on his breast and went to the burning ground.

नोल्पज्ञालक राजा प्राणांत्स्वन्तुं समुढ़तः ।

ज्ञानयोगं विस्तमार पुत्रशोकाल्युद्राणत् ॥ 15 ॥

तृतसिंग्रन्तरे तत्र विमानं च दर्शसं सः ।

गृह्यमक्रतिकसंकांगं मणिराजविनिर्मितम् ॥ 16 ॥

There with his child on his breast he began to cry aloud. Rather he got himself ready to quit his own life than leave the son from away his breast. At this time he saw in the space overhead an aerial car, white as crystal, made of excellent jewels, coming towards him.

तेजसा जलित्तं शशच्छोभितं क्रीमावासरा ।

नानाधिरविधिनाड्यो पुयमालाविरावितम् ॥ 17 ॥

ददर्शत तदेवीं च कमनीयां मनोहराम् ।

श्रतचंपकवर्णाभां शश्रतुषित्यरयोवानम् ॥ 18 ॥

The car was shining with its own lustre, encircled with woven silken cloth, which added to its beauty. Innumerable garlands of variegated colours gave it a very nice and charming appearance.

ईषद्धास्यप्रसात्यां रत्नभूषणभूषिताम् ।

कृपायमों योगसिद्धां भक्तानुग्रहकतारम् ॥ 19 ॥

दृष्टा तां पुरतो राजा तुराव परमदारत् ।

चकार पुजनं तत्या विहास वालकं भुवि ॥ 20 ॥

On that car was seated a Siddha Yogini, very beautiful, of a lovely appearance of a colour like that of white campakas, always youthful, smiling, adorned with jewel ornaments, ever gracious to show favour to the devotees. On seeing Her, the King Priyavrata placed the child from his breast on the ground and began to worship Her and chant hymns to Her with great love and devotion.

पूषछि राजा तां गुहां गीमसुर्यसमप्रभम् ।

तेजसा जल्लिंशी शांति कांतां कंकद्य नाद ॥ 21 ॥

राजोबाच

का तं वं सुगीघने काने कस्य कान्तासि सुवते ।

कस्य कन्या वरातोह धन्या मान्या च योषिताम् ॥ 22 ॥

And he then asked that peaceful lady, the wife of Skanda, Who was shining like a summer sun: "O Beautiful! Who art Thou? Whose wife art Thou and whose daughter art Thou? From Thy appearance it seems that Thou art fortunate and respected amongst the female sex."

नृपन्नस्य वच: श्रूला जनगर्नालचिडका ।

उवाच देवसेना सा देवानां राकारिणी ॥ 23 ॥

देवानां दैत्यम्रतानां पुरा सेना बयुप सा ।

जयं ददी सा तेभ्य्छुं देवसेना चे तेन सा ॥ 24 ॥

O Nārada! In ancient times, when the Daityas dispossessed the Devas of their positions, this Lady was elected as a general and got victory for the Devas; hence She was named Devasenā. Hearing the words of the King Priyavrata, Devasenā, who fought for the Devas and was all good to the whole world, said:

Book IX Chapter XLV1

श्रीदेवसेनोवाच

बहाणो मानसी कन्या देवसेनासुधीश्वी ।

श्रुधा मां नसता धाता दरी स्कंदाय भूपिम ॥ 2 5 ॥

मातृकासु च विश्वाता स्कंदभाथां च सुञात ।

विशे घर्षिति विज्ञाता घर्शाग प्रकृतेः परा ॥ 2 6 ॥

“O King! I am the mind-born daughter of Brahmā. My name is Devasenā. The Creator before created Me out of His mind and made Me over to the hands of Skanda. Amongst the Mārṭakās, I am known as Saṣthi, the wife of Skanda. I am the sixth part of Prakṛti; hence I am named Saṣthi.

अपूत्राय पुरवतरई प्रियवती प्रियाय च ।

धनतरई दरिस्थः कर्मिच्छ्य स्वकर्मदि ॥ 27 ॥

I give to those who have no sons, wives to those who have no wives, wealth to the poor, and I give works to those who are workers (karmis.)

सुखं दुःखं घणं श्रोको तृषों मंगलमेव च ।

सम्पतिश्व विपतिश्व सर्व भवति कर्मणि ॥ 28 ॥

कर्मण बहुपुत्रघ खर्गहीनः स्वकर्मण ।

कर्मण मृत्युपऋ कर्मण चित्रसीवनः ॥ 29 ॥

Happiness, pain, fear, sorrow, joy, good, and wealth and adversity all are the fruits of Karmas. As the result of one's Karmas, people get lots of sons and it is due to the result of one's Karma again that people are denuded of all the issues of their family. As the result of Karma, the people get dead sons; and as the result of Karma the people get long lives.

कर्णेण गुणवांश्रेय कर्णेण चांगहीनकः ।

कर्णेण बहुभारंश घ्यार्थीही कर्णेण ३ ३० ॥ ३० ॥

कर्णेण स्वायन्मार्यों तृती शश्वत्यकर्णा ।

कर्णेण च भवेद्वायधि कर्णोस उरीभयेच न ॥ 31 ॥

All enjoy the fruits of their Karmas, whether they be well qualified, or deformed or whether they have many wives, or whether they have no wife, whether they be beautiful, religious, diseased, it is all through Karmas. Disease comes out of their Karmas.

तस्माकर्मरं राजसर्वेष्यश्छुती श्रुन्तु ।

इत्येवमुक्त्वा सा देयी गृहीत्वा बालकं मुने ॥ 32 ॥

महान्नानेन सा देयी जीवयामास ललया ।

राजा द्वर्शी रं बालं सस्मितं कनकदमभम् ॥ 33 ॥

Again they get cured by their Karmas. So, O King! It is stated in the Vedas that Karma is the most powerful of all." Thus saying, Devasenā took the dead child on her lap; and, by the wisdom, early made the child alive. The King saw, the child, of a golden colour got back his life and began to smile.

देवसेना च पश्वर्तं नृपमापृष्ठा सा ततं ।

गृहीत्वा बालकं देवी गर्नग नत्नुपुक्ता ॥ 34 ॥

पुनस्तुधात तां राजा शुक्रकर्णदोक्षालुकः ।

नृपस्तोजेन सा देवी परितुषा बचव ह ॥ 35 ॥

उवाच तं नृपं ब्रह्न् वदेतेक कर्म निर्भिनम् ।

Thus bidding goodbye to the King, Devasenā took the child and became ready to depart, At this the King's palate and throat got dry and he began again to chant hymns to Her. The Deviṣaṣthi became pleased at the stotra made by the King. The Devi then addressed the King and said:

देल्युबाच

विषु लोकेषु चं त्रा सत्यवंभुवमानो: सुतः ॥ 36 ॥

मम पूजां च सर्वत्र कारयित्वा स्वयं कुतः ।

तदा दास्यामि पुत्रे ते कुलपयं मनोहमूम् ॥ 37 ॥

"O King! All that is stated in the Vedas, is made up of Karmas. You are the son of Svāyambhuva Manu, and the Lord of the three worlds. You better promulgate My worship in the three worlds and you yourself worship Me. Then I will give you your beautiful son, the lotus of your family.

सूत्रत नाम विद्यालां गुणवर्ते सुंपडितम् ।

जातिस्मरं च योगिरं नारायणकालात्मकम् ॥ 38 ॥

गतत्कुतकं श्रेष्ठ क्षत्रियाणां च वर्दितम् ।

मत्तातंगलक्षणाणां धृतवर्ते वलं शुभम् ॥ 39 ॥

धनिनं गृणिनं शूद्धं विद्यां प्रियवेच च ।

घोभिनां ज्ञानिनां चैव सिंहिकृक्षं परविष्टवान् ॥ 40 ॥

यशस्विनं च लोक्षयु दातातं सर्वसम्यदान् ।

Your son, born in part of Nārāyaṇa, will be famous by the name of Suvrata. He will be well-qualified, a great literary man, able to remember his conditions in his former lives, the best of Yogis,

performer of one hundred Yajñas, the best of all, bowed down by the Kṣattriyas, strong as one lakh powerful elephants, wealthy, fortunate, pure, favourite of literary persons, learned and bestower of the fruits of the ascetics, renowned and bestower of wealth and prosperity to the three worlds."

इत्येवमुक्ता सा देवौ तस्मै ते नालकं ददो ॥ 4 1 ॥

राजा चकार स्वीकारं पूजावं च प्रियवतः ।

जगाम देवी स्वर्गं च दत्ता तस्मै शुभं वरम् ॥ 4 2 ॥

Thus saying Devasenā gave the child to the king. When the king promised that he would promulgate Her worship, the Devi granted him boons and went up to the Heavens.

आजगाम सहागात्यः स्वगृहं हृद्यानसः ।

आगत्य कवयामास वृत्तां पुर्वेतुकम् ॥ 43 ॥

श्रुत्वा बच्युः सैतुहा वरा नारंक्षे नारद ।

मंगलं कारयामास सर्वत्र पुर्वेतुकम् ॥ 44 ॥

The king, too, becoming very glad and surrounded by his ministers, returned to his own abode and informed all about the son. The ladies of the house, become highly delighted when they heard everything. On the occasion of the son's getting back his life, the king performed everywhere auspicious ceremonies.

देवीं च पूजयामास बाहाणेघो धरं ददौ ।

राजा च प्रतिमाविषु शुक्लगघछां मोहालयस् ॥ 4 5 ॥

पशुवा देल्याश्य यन्ने कारयामास सर्वतः ।

बालानां सूतिकागरे घहाहे यत्पवृकम् ॥ 46 ॥

The worship of Saşthi Devi commenced. Wealth was bestowed to the Brāhmins, Since, then, on every sixth day of the bright fortnight in every month, great festivals in honour of Saşthi Devi began to be celebrated.

तत्पूजां कारयामास चैकविंशतिवासरे ।

बालानां शुभकार्ये च शुभासप्राशनते तथा ॥ 47 ॥

सर्वेक वर्धयामास स्वयमेव चकार ह ।

ध्यानं पूजाविधानं च स्तोरं मत्ते निशगाय ॥ 48 ॥

यच्छुतं धर्मवक्रोण कौधुभोक्ते च सुत्रतः ।

Since then, throughout the kingdom, on every sixth day after the birth of a child in the lying-in

chamber, Saṣṭhī Devī began to be worshipped. On the twenty-first day, the auspicious moment, at the ceremony of giving rice to a child for the first time, when sixth months old, and on all other auspicious ceremonies of the children, Saṣṭhī Devī's worship was made extant and the king himself performed those worships with great care and according to due rules. Now I will tell you about the Dhyānam and method of worship and stotra as I heard from Dharma Deva, and as stated in Kauthuma Sākhā. Hear. He has said:

शाल्यामे घरे वार्ध वदमूलेर्धया मुने ॥ 49 ॥

विर्त्यां पुतिलको कृत्वा पुवयेढ़ा विवध्रणः ।

घड़ांगी प्रकुतेः शुद्धां प्रतिष्ठाय च सुप्रभाम् ॥ 50 ॥

In a Śalāgrama stone, in a jar, on the root of a Vāṭa tree, or drawing the figure on the floor of the rooms, or making an image of Ṣaṣthi Devī, the sixth part of Prakṛti and installing it, one should worship the Devī.

सुपुत्रदो च शुभदां दयास्त्वां जगतमूम् ।

प्रेतेचेषकवाणां रतन्युपाण्युपितम् ॥ 51 ॥

पवित्रकर्णे घरमां देवसेनां घरां भजे ।

इति ध्याना स्वशिरस पुष्य दन्ता विद्वक्षणः ॥ 52 ॥

The Dhyānam is this: O Devasenā! Thou art the bestower of good sons, the giver of good luck; Thou art mercy and kindness and the progenitor of the world; Thy colour is bright like that of the white Campaka flowers. Thou art decked with jewel ornaments. Thou art pure, and the highest and best Devi. Obisance to Thee I meditate on Thee." Thus meditating, the worshipper should place flower on his own head.

पुनर्ध्यांचा च मूलेन पुजयेत्पुजतां सतीम् ।

पाणाध्यांचमनीयैश्रं गंपण्यं प्रदीपकैः ॥ 53 ॥

नैवेहीर्विविधेश्वायि फलेन शोभनेन च ।

३० हूीं षहीदेल्यै स्वाहिति विधिपुर्णकैम् ॥ 54 ॥

Then again meditating and uttering the principal mantra one is to offer the Pâdya (water for washing feet), Arghya, Âcamaniya, scents, flowers, dhūp, lights, offerings of food and best roots and fruits

Book IX Chapter XLV1

and one should worship thus the with various things Şaşthi Devi ‘Om Hrim Şaşthi Devyai Svâhâ’ is the principal Mantra of Şaşthi Devi.

अधाक्षरं महामन्तं ययाणिकं जानेन्नः ।

ततः सुत्वा च प्राणमेद्वानिभृक्तः समाहितः ॥ 55 ॥

सतोत्रं च समावेदोक्तं वरं चुपफलप्रदम् ।

अधाक्षरं महामन्तं लक्षया थो जपेततः ॥ 56 ॥

This great Mantra of eight letters a man should repeat as his strength allows. After the Japam, the worshipper should chant hymns with devotion and undivided attention and then bow down. The Stotra (hymn) of Saşthī Devi as per Sāma Veda is very beautiful and son-bestowing.

सुयुत्रं स लभेन्नारमित्वह कामलोढ़वः ।

सतीं शृणु भुतिश्रेश सर्वकामगुभावदूम ॥ 57 ॥

The lotus-born Brahmā has said: If one repeats (make Japam) this eight lettered mantra one lakh of times, one gets certainly a good son. O Best of Munis; Now I am going to say the auspicious stotra of Saṃthī Devi as composed by Priyavrata, Hear.

वांघारंद च सर्वेर्ग गृहं नारद ।

नमो देखे महादेवेल सिद्धो शार्लै नमो नमः ॥ 58 ॥

नुणारे देवसेनारे पश्टी देखे नमो नमः ।

बरादारे पुत्रदारे धनदारे नमो नमः ॥ 59 ॥

One's desires are fulfilled when one reads this very secret stotra. Thus the King Priyavrata said: "O Devi, Devasena! I bow down to Thee. O Great Devi! Obeisance to Thee! Thou art the bestower of Siddhis; Thou art peaceful; obeisance to Thee! Thou art the bestower of good; Thou art Devasena; Thou art Saṣṭhī Devi, I bow down to Thee! Thou grantest boons to persons; Thou bestowest sons and wealth to men.

सुखदायी मोक्षदायी बड़ी होदे तयो नमः ।

सुखी घडाशकलायी सिद्धारी चे नमः :। 60 ॥

मायावी सिद्ध्योगिन्ये घडीहोये नमः ।

सारावी सारादी च च परावेदेय नमः ॥ 6 1 ॥

So obeisance to Thee! Thou givest happiness and mokṣa; Thou art Ṣaṣthi Devi; I bow down to Thee. Thou thyself art Siddha; so I bow down to

Thee. O Ṣaṣṭhī Devi! Thou art the sixth part of this creation; Thou art Siddha Yogīnī, so I bow down to Thee. Thou art the essence, Thou art Śaradā; Thou art the Highest Devi.

बालाधिष्ठागुंदेचे च घडीहेल्चे नमे नमः ।

कल्पाणादी कल्पायी फलदाये च कर्माणम् ॥ 62 ॥

प्रत्यक्षारे स्वभक्तानां पहड़ी देल्ये नमो नमः ।

पूज्याये स्वेक्रकांताये सर्वेधा सर्वकमभु ॥ 63 ॥

So I bow down again and again to Thee. Thou art the Presiding Deity Saṣthi Devi of the children; I bow down to Thee. Thou grantest good; Thou Thyself art good and Thou bestowest the fruits of all Karmas. O Thou O Saṣthi Devi! Thou shewest thy from to thy devotees; I bow down to Thee! Thou art Śuddha Sattva and respected by all the persons in all their actions.

देवास्थणकारियर्षे घड़ीद्वेले नमो नमः ।

गृद्धसचल्यलपार्थे बल्न्तार्ये नृणां सदा ॥ 64 ॥

हिंसाक्रोधार्यस्तीतार्ये घड़ीदेलो नमः नामः ।

धर्ने देहि प्रियां देहि पुरं देहि सुरंधरि ॥ 65 ॥

Thou art the wife of Skanda. All worship Thee. O Saşthī Devi! Thou hadst saved the Devas. So obeisance to Thee O Saşthī Devi! Thou hast no envy no anger, so obeisance to Thee. O Sureśvari! Give me wealth, give me dear things, give me sons. Give me respect from all persons; give me victory; slay my enemies.

माने देहि जयं देहि जिको जमे महेश्वी ।

धर्मे देहि यगो देहि श्रीदीखे नो नामः ॥ 66 ॥

देही भूमिं प्रजां देहि विश्वां देहि सुगुजिते ।

कल्याणं च जयं देहि श्रीदीखे नो नामः ॥ 67 ॥

O Maheśvari! Give me Dharma; give me name and fame; I bow down again again to Saşthī Devi. O Saşthī Devi! worshipped reverentially by all! Give me lands, give me subjects, give me learning; have welfare for me; I bow down again and again to Saşthī Devi, O Nārada!

इति देवीं च सस्नृय लेभे पुत्रं प्रियन्तः ।

यग्रसितं च रोजेनः: यहीदेयाः प्रयात्टः ॥ 68 ॥

घहीस्तोर्मिदं इबान् यः शृणोति तुं जलसग् ।

अपुजो लभते पुत्रं परं सुविर्जीवितम् ॥ 69 ॥

Thus praising the Devi, Priyravata got a son, renowned and ruling over a great kingdom through the favour of Saṣṭhī Devi. If any man that has no son, hears this sorta of Saṣṭhī Devi for one year with undivided attention, he gets easily an excellent son, having a long life.

वर्षमेकि च यो भक्ल्या संपूजेदेरं शूणिति च ।

सर्वेपाराद्रसिन्मुक्तो महावल्य प्रमुचते ॥ 70 ॥

वीरं पुत्रं च गृणिनं विद्यार्वंतं यशस्विनम् ।

सुविरापुब्यव्रतं च सूते देवीप्रसातः ॥ 71 ॥

If one worships for one year with devotion this Devasenā and hears this stotra, even he most barren woman becomes freed from all her sins and gets a son. Through the grace of Ṣaṣṭhī Devī, that son becomes hero, well qualified, literate, renowned and long-lived.

काकबंध्या च या नारी मृतवत्सा च या भवेत् ।

वर्षं श्रुत्वा लभेमूयं घटीदौरिभसादतः ॥ 72 ॥

रोगयुक्ते च बाले च विदात्माता शृणोति चेत् ।

मासेन मुच्यते बालः घटीदौरिभसादतः ॥ 73 ॥

इति श्रीमदौकीभागते महापुराणो नवमरकवे भख्युपाख्याने

घट्चत्वारिशोअयायः ॥ 74 ॥ 

If any woman who bears only a single child or delivers dead children hears with devotion for one year this stotra, she gets easily, through the Devi's grace, a good son. If the father and mother both hear with devotion, this story during the period of their child's illness, then the child becomes cured by the Grace of the Devi.

Here ends the Forty-sixth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the anecdote of Şaṣthī Devi in the Mahā Purānam

Śrimaddeviḥhāgyatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

