CHAPTER XI

On the Dharma

जनमेजय उवाच

भारावतरणाधारी कथितं जन्म कृष्णायो ।

संशोधोर्ध विज्ञश्रेष्ठ हदये मम तिष्ठातः ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: O King of the Brāhmaṇas! You said that Rāma and Kṛṣṇa took their incarnations to relieve the burden of earth.

पृथिवी गोस्वक्सेण बढ़ाणं शरणं गता ।

द्वापरानेस्तिरिनाउउर्ते गुरुभापरूमफीऊता ॥ 2 ॥

One great doubt arises in my mind on this point. At the end of the Dvāpara Yuga, the Earth, burdened and oppressed very much, assumed, in anguish, the form of a cow and took refuge under Brahmā.

वेधसा प्रार्थितो विद्युः कमलपातिरीक्ष्रः ।

भूभगोरत्नणार्थी साधूनां रक्षणाय च ॥ ३ ॥

भगवान्भारत खणड़े देखे: सह जनादनः।

अवतारं गृहाणगु वसुदेवगृह विषो ॥ ४ ॥

Brahmā, then, went with the Earth to Visnu, the Lord of Laksmī, and thus prayed “O Bibhu! Let You, with all the other gods, incarnate soon on earth at the house of Vasudeva to relieve the Earth of Her load, as well as to protect the righteous.”

एवं सम्प्राधितो धाता भगावान्देवकसीत ।

वधूव सह रामेण भूभातोत्तायय वे ॥ ५ ॥

When Brahmā thus prayed, the Bhagavān Viṣṇu incarnated as the son of Devaki, along with Balarāma to lessen the burden of the Earth.

क्रियानुतिरितो भारो हत्वा दुशाननेकाः ।

जात्वा सर्वानुप्राचान्याप्रद्धिप्रभिक्र पी 6 ॥

And, in fact, he relieved to a certain extent, the Earth by killing many vicious persons and many wicked and irreligious Kings.

हतो भीभो होते ग्रोगो विराटो दुप्रदस्तथा ।

बाईकः सोमदन्तघ कर्णाँ वैकर्तनस्तथा ॥ ७ ॥

But, along with that, Bhisma, Drona, Virāta, Drupada, Somadatta, and Karna, the son of the Sun were killed.

वैतृपितत धनं सर्वे हताश हरियोषितः ।

कथं न नारीगता द्वये चे स्थिताः पृथिवीतले ॥ ८ ॥

आभीराश्रकानेच्छाविभावा कोटिशस्तथा ।

भारावतरणं क्रितन्तक्ते कृष्णेन धीमता ॥ ९ ॥

But, See! that those who plundered afterwards His riches, and stole away the wives of Hari, those crores of Ābhiras, Śakas, Mlecchas, and Niśādas and other vicious people remained alive; and how could it, then, be said that the Earth was relieved when Kṛṣṇa did not kill those people!

सन्देशेधं महाभाग न निवर्तितं चितन्तः ।

कलावस्मिन्भुना: सर्व: पश्यतः पाणिश्रायः ॥ 10 ॥

O Fortunate One! When I see all the people in this Kali Yuga addicted to sinful acts, this great doubts is not going out of my mind (how the Earth had been relieved of Her load).

व्यास उवाच

राजन् यास्मिनुगे वार्यक्रजा भवति कालतः ।

नान्यथा तद्विवृनं युगधार्डत्र कारणम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! As the Yuga changes, so the people changes in course of time. Nothing can after its course, for this is caused by the Yuga Dharma (the Dharma peculiar to each Yuga). Therefore if all the subjects that are considered wicked and vicious according to the law of the Yuga Dharma, then this creation would be

destroyed; hence Kṛṣṇa killed only those Dānavas and vicious Kṣatriyas that were really the burden of Earth.

ये धर्मपहिका जीवालते से सत्ययुगेप्रवन् ।

धर्मार्थसिका ये तु ते वै श्रोतायुर्पवन् ॥ 12 ॥

धर्मार्थकामरसिका द्वारे चाधवन् युगे ।

अर्थकामपात: सर्वे कलावस्मिन्यवानि हि ॥ 13 ॥

O King! The persons that are devoted to religion take their births in the Satya Yuga; those that are fond of religion and wealth they become manifest in the Tretā Yuga; those that like Dharma (religion), Artha (wealth) and Kāma (desires) they are born in the Dvāpara Yuga, and those that dote on wealth and lust, they are seen in the Kali Yuga.

युगाधमेनु राजेन्द्र न याति व्यत्थवं पुनः ।

कालः कलिति धर्मेश हृधार्थम च चे पुनः ॥ 14 ॥

O King! Know this as certain that these characteristics, peculiar to each Yuga, never very; and know this too, that Time, the Lord of Dharma and Adharma, is always present.

राजोबाच

ते तु सत्ययुगे जीवा भवतिन धर्मतयरा: ।

कुरु तरेष्ठ महाभाग सिहिंते पुण्यभाविन: ॥ १ ५ ॥

त्रेतायुगे द्वारे वा ये दानवतकारका: ।

वर्त्ने मुना: श्रेधा: कुत्र बृहि विमाभू ॥ १६ ॥

The King said: O Intelligent One! Where are those pious persons now that were born as high-souled religious persons in the Satya Yuga; where are those Munis now who were devoted to charity in the Trētā or Dvāpara Yuga?

कलावछ दुराचारा येउ सन्ति गतायनाः ।

आधे युगे कव यास्यिति पाथिधा देवेनिन्दकाः ॥ 17 ॥

एत्सर्वे समाचक्षव विस्तरेण महामते ।

सर्वथा श्रोतुकामोत्रसम यदेतद्वमैरिणयम् ॥ 18 ॥

Again where will go those shameless and merciless persons, that are being seen now in this Kali Yuga, these vicious creatures that revile their own Gurus? O Highly Intelligent One! I am very eager to know how these religious matters are brought to a decision and settlement; kindly

describe to me in detail all these secret truths.

व्यास उवाच

ते वै कृतयुगे राजनस्मधवंतीह मानवाः ।

कृत्वा ते पुण्यकर्माणि देवलोकान् जज्जित वे ॥ १९ ॥

ब्राह्माण: क्षत्रिया वैश्यः गुत्राक्रं नृपसत्तम ।

स्वधर्पितता याति लोकाकर्मवितानिकल ॥ 20 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Persons, born in the Satya Yuga, that perform acts of merit, go to the Deva Loka. O King! The Brāhminns, Kṣatriyas, Vaiśyas and Śūdras, if they remain in their own spheres and if they be devoted to religious acts, go to their respective spheres, earned by their meritorious deeds.

सर्व दया तथा दानं स्वदारामन्तं तथा ।

अउहोः सर्वभूतेषु समता सर्वेनानुषु ॥ 21 ॥

By virtue to truth, mercy, charity, going to one's own wives, not injuring animals, and having no jealousy and showing mercy equal towards all, by practising these universal forms of religious, even the lowest castes e.g., washermen and others all go to the Paradise.

एततसाधारणं धर्म कृत्वा सत्ययुगे पुनः ।

स्वर्गे यांतीते वर्णा धर्मते जतकादच: ॥ 22 ॥

So in the Trētā and Dvāpara Yuga's men go to Heaven by virtue to their merits, earned in practising their own Dharmas; but in this Kali Yuga persons addicted to vicious acts go to terrible hells and remain there till the end of the Kali Yuga when they will be again born in this earth.

तथा त्रैतायुगे राजन्नापरेक्ष युगे तथा ।

कलावसियम्युगे पाया नरकं याति मानावः ॥ 23 ॥

ताविताक्रिति ते तत यावत्स्याबुगयर्षयः ।

पुनश्र मानुषे लोके भवन्ति भूयि मानावः ॥ 24 ॥

O King! When the Satya Yuga begins and the Kali Yuga ends, at this junction time, the virtuous high-souled persons descend from Heaven and are born on this earth; and when the Kali begins and the Dvāpara ends, the vicious souls come on the earth again from their hells. O King! Know this as the course of Time; it never becomes otherwise.

Book VI Chapter XI

सदा सत्ययुगस्यादि: कलेरंतछ प्राधिव । तदा स्वर्गीयुपयकुतो जायने किल मानवाः ॥ 25 ॥ यदा कलियुगस्यादिद्वीपरस्य क्षसस्तथा । नरकात्यापिन: सर्वे भवन्ति भृति मानवाः ॥ 26 ॥ एवं कालसमाचारो नान्यधारेभृक्टादाचन । तस्माकतिलरसक्ती तस्मिन्तु तादृषी प्रजा ॥ 27 ॥

See, then, that the Kali Yuga tends to do vicious things and the people, therefore, become vicious. At times, the birth of beings takes place otherwise than the laws of Yugas, out of the strange combinations of Fate (i.e., good persons are seen in the Kali and vicious persons are seen in the Satya).

कदाप्रिद्धवोगातु प्राणिनां व्यतयो भवेत् ।

कती वे साधयः कंचिद्वापरे सम्पवन्ति ते ॥ 28 ॥

तथा जेतायुगे कंचित्केचित्सत्ययुगे तथा ।

द्वृध: सत्ययुगे ये तु ते भवन्ति कलावति ॥ 29 ॥

For this reason those that do meritorious acts in the Kali Yuga are born as men in the Dvāpara; so the Dvāpara good persons take their births as men in the Tretā; and the Tretā good persons are born as men in the Satya Yuga, Again those who are vicious in the Satya Yuga become persons of the Kali Yuga.

कृतकर्मप्रभावेण प्रापुत्वंसुसुखानि च ।

पुनश्छ तातूश कर्म कुर्वन्ति युगभावतः ॥ 30 ॥

The Jivas suffer miseries on account of their own bad Karmas; they again suffer more miseries by doing over and over again those bad Karmas by virtue of the Yuga Dharma.

जनमेजय उवाच

युगधार्मान्हभाग बृहि सर्वानीशेषतः ।

वस्मिन्वी यात्रणो धर्मों जातुप्रिक्छामि ने तथा ॥ ३ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: O Bhagavan! Describe particularly the details of the Yuga Dharma. I am now very desirous to hear which Dharma is for which Yuga?

यास उवाच

निवोध नृपशालूंल दृष्टान्ते ते ब्वीयाम्हन् ।

साधून्यमपि चेतासि युगभावाद्वर्वति हि ॥ 32 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! I will now shew to you by example the influence of the religion peculiar to each Yuga; hear it attentively. O King! The hearts even of sanits are quite disturbed by the Yuga Dharma.

पितृर्वंषा ते गरोन्ट्र बुद्धिविष्याहेलने ।

कृता वै कलिना राजन्यमंज्य महात्मनः ॥ 33 ॥

See! Your father was a religious and high-souled monarch; still the wicked Kali defiled his mind and prompted him to do an act very insulting, to a Brāhmaṇa.

अन्यथा क्षत्रियो राजा यथातिकुलसम्भवः ।

तापसस्य नाले सर्प मृतं कस्यदायोजयत ॥ 34 ॥

Otherwise would he, being a renowned prince amongst the Kṣatriyas and a descendant of Yayāti, thus go and encircle a snake round the throat of an ascetic Brāhmin?

सर्वे युगवलं राजन् वैदित्यं विज्ञानता ।

प्रयत्नेन हि कर्तव्यं धर्मकां विशेषतः ॥ 35 ॥

Therefore, O King! All actions are being influenced by the Yuga Dharma. The Pandits, also recognise this. If you try your best to perform any religious act, even then the Yuga Dharma would prevail, yet you would be able to perform to a certain extent, a part of your intention.

नूनं सत्ययुगे राजन्बाहूण वेदयपाराः ।

परागकच्यन्तरता देरीदर्भनलासाः ॥ 36 ॥

गायत्रीगणवासना गायत्रीध्यानकारिणः ।

गायत्रीजपसंसत्ता मायावीजैकाजपिनः ॥ 37 ॥

O King! In the Satya Yuga, the Brāhmins were versed in the Vedas, always devoted to worship the Highest Force, with an ardent desire to see the Devi; they were devoted to Gāyatrī with Pranava, devoted to the meditation of Gāyatrī, always reciting silent Gāyatrī, and the Māyāvīja Mantram, the chief mantram.

ग्रामे ग्रामे परावाया: ग्रासादकरणोतुका: ।

स्वकर्मनिततः सर्वे सत्याशिवदायित्वतः ॥ 38 ॥

In every village, the Brāhmins were very eager to erect temples of the Devi Mahā Māyā Ambikā

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

and were truthful and pure and devoted to their own respective works.

प्रत्युक्तकर्मनितरासतत्त्ब्ज्ञानविश्राताः ।

अभवस्त्रियात्मतत प्रजाभरणाततमतः ॥ ३९ ॥

The Ksatriyas, skilled in the science of the highest knowledge, were ever engaged in doing things ordained by the Vedas and were always intent in protecting well their subjects.

वैश्यास्तु कृचिवाणिज्ञानोसेवानिरास्तसा ।

गृह्म: सेवायासरत पुण्ये सत्ययुगे नृए ॥ 40 ॥

पराम्बापुजानास्ता: सर्वे वर्णा: परे युगे ।

तथा जेतायुगे किश्छिन्ना धर्मेव संश्स्थिति: ॥ 4 1 ॥

ह्रापे च विशेषेण न्यूना सत्ययुगस्थिति: ।

The Vaiśyas did their cultivation and trade and the Śūdras always served the other three castes. Thus, in the Satya Yuga, all the Varṇas (castes) were devoted to the worship of the Devi Ambikā, the Highest Śakti; but in the Tretā Yuga, the observance of the religion declined a little and in the Dvāpara, it declined very much.

पूर्वे रोक्षसा राजसैले कर्ती ब्राह्मण: सून्ता: ॥ 42 ॥

पाखणद्धरिता: प्रायो भवन्ति जनवझका: ।

असत्यवादिन: सर्वे वेद्यभिविर्वर्तिता: ॥ 43 ॥

दाधिष्का लोकवतुरा मानिनो वेद्वर्तिता: ।

गृह्मसेवायर: केविश्रानाधर्मवर्तका: ॥ 44 ॥

O Ornament of Indra! Those who were Rāksasas before, they become the Brāhmins of the Kali Yuga; they are the flowers of atheists, deceptors of men, untruthful, without any Vedas, devoid of the Vedic practices, arrogant, cunning, egoistic, and capable only to serve the Śūdras.

वेदन्पित्राकाः कृतः वर्धभश्चातिवाज्ञाः ।

यथा यथा कालिवर्द्धि याति राजसंतथा तथा ॥ 45 ॥

Some of them try to find fault with the Sanātana Dharma and are the promulgators of various other creeds, wicked, fallen from their religion and given to much talking.

धर्मेस सत्यमुलस्य क्षयः सर्वात्माना भवेत् ।

तवैव क्षत्रिय वैश्या: शुग्रृछ्ध धर्मवर्षिताः॥४ ६ ॥

O King! As Kali gets stronger, so the true religion declines and ultimately dies; and, in that

proportion, the Kṣatriyas, Vaīsyās and Śūdras are also devoid of their religion.

असत्यवादितः पापास्तथा वर्णैताग करती ।

गृह्धभर्यात विधा: प्रतिश्रहपरायण: ॥ 47 ॥

भविष्यन्ति कर्ती राज्य वुगे शूद्धितः किल।

कामाचारा: सिंध्यः कामातेभोर्मास्पित्वाः ॥ 48 ॥

When Kali will be in full swing, the Ksatriyas, Vaiśyas and Śūdras would all be untruthful, vicious; the Brāhmins will act like Śūdras and will accept other's gifts. O King! The women in the Kali Yuga would be very passionate, avaricious and ignorant.

पापा मिथ्याधिवाद्विः: सदा क्लेशराता नृप ।

स्वभरुंछका निव्यं धर्मभाणपिडता: ॥ 49 ॥

भवन्येवंधिधा नार्य: पापिच्छा कली युगे ।

They would be very powerful and insolent, wilful, vicious and untruthful and so would be a source of pain to the society. They would think themselves vainly religious and learned and would be always ready to impart religious instructions and deceive their own husbands and be exceedingly vicious.

आहास्युद्धा नृपते चित्नगुव्रिद्धु जायते ॥ 50 ॥

शुद्धे चित्ते प्रकाशः स्वादुमेस्य नृपसतम् ।

O King! Our minds are purified by the food that we take; when our minds are pure, the Light of Dharma shines clearly.

ब्रुतसंकदोषेण जायते धर्मसंक: ॥ 51 ॥

धार्थस्य संकरे जाते नृनं स्वादुर्गसंकर: ।

एवं कतिवुगे घृप सर्वेधर्मिवर्षिति ॥ 52 ॥

स्ववर्णधर्मावर्शिता न कुजायुपनघते ।

महान्तो5पि च धर्मज्ञ अधर्म कृकेते नृप ॥ 53 ॥

कलिस्वभाव राषेय परिहायों न केनिधित ।

The customs and practices of Varna and Asrama Dharma get intermixed with each other and so arises the fault of Dharma Sañkara (i.e., mixture of the several parts of religion with each other). When the Dharma Sañkara creeps in, the Varna Sañkara is seen (i. e., purity in blood and other matters of birth are lost). Thus, in the Kali Yuga,

Book VI Chapter XI

all the Dharmas will gradually die out and ultimately nothing will be heard about one's own religion. O King! In this Yuga even the religious high-souled persons will be found to do irreligious acts! The nature of Kali is so; nobody will be able to quit it.

तस्मादत्र मनुष्याणां स्वभावापयाकरिणा, ॥ 54 ॥

निकृकृतिं हिं राजेन्द्र सामान्योपायालो भवेत् ।

O King! Thus, in this age, men naturally commit vicious things; with ordinary means, therefore, no one becomes able to extricate from the worst vicious habits.

जनमेव जवाच

भगवान्वर्वधर्मे सर्वशास्त्रविशगत ॥ 55 ॥

कलावधर्मबहुले नराणां का गतिभवैत् ।

यद्यस्ते तदुपायश्छेद्यया तं वदस्य मे ॥ 56 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Bhagavan! You know all and you are versed in all the Sāstras; what will be the fate of so many persons in this Kali Yuga? If there be any path, kindly describe it to me.

व्यास उवाच

एक एव महाराज तसेपायो5लित नापर: ।

सर्वदोषनितसाखे ध्यायेदेघाद्यबुजम् ॥ 57 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! There is only path and none other which can save a man from the sin of Kali; and that is this: The Jivas must meditate on the lotus-feet of the Highest Devi for the purification of all their faults and sins.

न संत्याथिन तार्विति यावती शक्तिरस्ति है ।

नाम्न देहया: पापवहुते तस्माद्वीति कुतो नृण ॥ 58 ॥

अशेगीपि यवाग्र लीलायोद्वारितं यदि ।

कि कि ददाति तक्त्रानुं समर्थ न हरादयः ॥ 59 ॥

O King! There is so much strength in Her Sin-destroying Name, that the amount of sin in this world falls much less in proportion to that. Where, then, is the cause of fear? Her Name, uttered at random, even in an unconscious state, bestows so much unspeakable results that even Hari, Hara and others have not the capacity to know that.

प्रायशिजनं तु पायानां श्रीद्वीभामसंस्मृति: ।

तस्माकलिभयात्राजन्युगवछेत्र वसेत्रः ॥ 60 ॥

निरन्तरं पतायाया नामसंस्मरणं चेर्त् ।

O King! The mere remembrance of the name of Śrī Devi is an atonement for a multitude of sins; then it behaves that every man, afraid of the Kali Yuga, residing in a place of pilgrimage, ought to remember incessantly the Name of the Highest Deity.

छिला भिला च प्रतिन हल्ला सर्वीदं जन्तु ॥ 61 ॥

देवीं नमिति भकल्या यो न स पार्थिविलायते ।

रह्यं सर्वशास्त्राणां मया राजसुद्वीरितम् ॥ 62 ॥

विमुर्ध्यैतदडोगेश भज देयीपदाम्बुजकम् ।

Even if anybody cuts, pierces, and kills all the beings in this whole world, he won't be touched with the sins, if he bows down, with devotion, before the Devi. O King! I have narrated to you all the secret truths of all the Sāstras. Consider all these fully and always worship the lotus-feet of the Devi.

अजचां नाम गायर्षी जपन्ति निशित्ता जना: ॥ 63 ॥

महिमानं न जान्ति मायाया वैभवं महत् ।

All men are reciting silently the Japan called the Ajapā Gāyatrī; still they don't know the glory of it; such is the powerful influence of Māyā.

गयर्षी ब्राह्मणाः सर्वे जानपित् हृदयान्ते ॥ 64 ॥

महिमानं न जानंते मायाया वैभयं महत् ।

एतत्बर्षे समाख्यातं यत्पृष्टे तत्वया नृप ॥ 65 ॥

युगभयंव्यस्थायां किं भूयः शोभुपिछ्सि ।

इति श्रीमद्वीभागगते महापुराणे पश्वकन्ये एकारणीःप्रयाः: 111 ।

All the Brāhmanas are reciting in the depth of their hearts the Gāyatī Mantram, yet they do not know the glory of it (otherwise they would have been liberated); such is the great influence of Māyā. O King! I have described to you all that you asked me about the Yuga Dharmas; what more do you want to hear?

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Sixth Book on the ascertainment of Dharma in the Mahā Purānam,

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

