CHAPTER XIV

On Holding the Vibhūti

श्रीनारायण उवाच

भस्मदिष्णरीराय यो द्वाति धर्नं मुदा ।

तस्य सर्वाणि पापानि विनर्यंति न संशयः ॥ १ ॥

शुताय: स्मृतः सर्वा: पुराणान्यविल्वान्यपि ।

वर्दितं भूतिमाहात्यं तत्समातद्धारयेद् पिजः ॥ २ ॥

Nārāyana said: O Nārada! Whatever is given as charities to any man besmeared with holy ashes, takes away instantly all the sins of the donor. The Śrutis, Smṛtis, and all the Purāṇas declare the greatness of this Bhasma. So the twice-born must accept this.

सितेन भस्मना कुयिलिसंधें यस्विपुंकम् ।

सर्वेपार्थिविनिभूतः शिललोके महीयते ॥ 3 ॥

योगी सर्विकुंक स्नानामपादालमस्तकम् ।

शिसंधामचरेश्वलमायु । योगमवाप्नुयात् ॥ 4 ॥

Whoever holds this Tripundra, of this holy ashes at the three Sandhyā times, is freed from all his sins and goes to the region of Śiva. The Yogi who takes a bath of ashes throughout his body during the three Sandhyās, gets his Yoga developed soon. By this bath of ashes, many generations are lifted up.

भस्मत्नाने पुरुभः कुलस्योद्धारको भयेत् ।

भस्मत्नाने जलस्नानादर्षयेणाणावित्न् ॥ 5 ॥

सर्वतीर्थेणे यत्पुर्णयं सर्वतीर्थेणे यत्कलम् ।

तत्कलं लभते सर्वे भस्मत्नानार संशयः ॥ 6 ॥

O Nārada! This ash bath is many times superior to the water bath. To take once a bath of ashes secures to one all merits acquired by bathing in all the sacred places of pilgrimages. There is no doubt in this.

महापातकयुक्तो वा युक्तो वायुपपातकैः ।

भस्मत्नाने तत्सर्वे दहत्यपितरिधंपन् ॥ ७ ॥

भस्मत्नातारं स्नानं पवित्रं नैव विद्यते ।

एवयुक्ति शिवेनोदी तस्नातः स्वयं शिवः ॥ ८ ॥

By this bath of ashes, all the Mahāpātakas (great heinous sins) and other minor sins as well are

instantly destroyed as heaps of wood are brought down to ashes in a moment by the fire. No bath is holier than this one. This is first mentioned by Śiva and He took Himself this bath.

तदा प्रभुति बह्वाद्या मृन्यक्षि शिवाधिनः ।

सर्वकंमंसु यत्नेन भयस्मानं प्रचिक्ते ॥ 9 ॥

तस्मादेतच्छः: सनामानमेयं वे: सभाचरेत् ।

अनेनैव शरीरेण स हि रुते न संगस्ये ॥ 10 ॥

ये भयस्माधरिणं चूद्धा परितृपता भवन्ति ते ।

देवासुर्युर्नीढ़ी धूल्या नित्यं न संगस्ये ॥ 11 ॥

भयस्मंछसर्वांनं चुढ्धीत्त्रहित यः पुगान् ।

तं चूद्धा देवराजो5पि दंखवल्गमिष्यति ॥ 12 ॥

Since then this bath of ashes been taken with great care by Brahmā and the other Devas and the Munis for their own good in all the virtuous actions. This bath of ashes is termed the bath of fire. So he who applies ashes on his head, gets the state of Rudra while he is in this body of five elements. Those who are delighted to see persons with this ashes on their bodies are respected by the Devas, Asuras, and Munis. He who honours and gets up on seeing a man besmeared with ashes is respected even by Indra, the Lord of Heavens.

अभव्यभक्षणं येषां भयमधारणपूर्वकम् ।

तेषां तद्व्ययेच सनामुने नात्र विचाराण ॥ 13 ॥

यः स्नाति भयमा निधलं जले स्नाला ततः पपम् ।

बह्वारी गृहस्थो वा नागस्थो3 व्यबादतत् ॥ 14 ॥

सर्वेपाविधिनुभं: स याति परभां गतितम् ।

Even if any body eats any uncatables, then the sin incurred thereby wo'nt touch him, if his body be then besmeared with ashes. He who first takes a water bath and then an ash-bath, be he a Brahmacāri or an house-holder or an anchorite (Vānaprasthī) is freed of all sins and gets in the end the highest state.

आनगेयं भयस्ना सनां यतीनां च विशिष्यते ॥ 15 ॥

आईस्नानाइरं भयस्नानागर्दयोध धूय: ।

आरूं तु प्रकृति विद्याप्रकृति बंधन विद्य: ॥ 16 ॥

Book XI Chapter XIV

Specially for the Yatis (ascetics), this ash bath is very necessary. This ash hath is superior to the water bath. For the bonds of Nature, this pleasure and pain, are cut asunder by this ash bath. The Munis know this Prakrti as moist and wet; and therefore Prakrti binds men.

प्रकृतेस्तु प्रज्ञाणय भवसना स्नातिभिद्यने ।

भवसना सदूर्ग इद्वारासि लोकजयेधिनि ॥ 17 ॥

If any body desires to cut asunder this bondage of the body, he will find no other remedy for this in the three worlds than this Holy Bath of ashes.

स्थार्थे मंगलार्थे च पवित्रार्थे पुरा सुरैः ।

भस्म दृष्टा मुने पूर्वं दर्ते दैव्ये प्रियेणे तृ ॥ 18 ॥

तस्मादेताध्छर: सनामानेयं वः समाचरेत् ।

भवपाशैर्विनिमुक्तः शिवलोके महीयते ॥ १९ ॥

In ancient days the ashes were first offered to the Devi gladly by the Devas for their protection, their good and purification, when they first saw the ashes. Therefore any body who takes this bath of fire, gets all his sins destroyed and he goes to Śiva Loka.

ज्वरसूःप्रिशणाख्य पुत्नाकृष्ठगुल्मकाः ।

भगंदाराणि सर्वाणि चागीनित्वितोगेकाः ॥ 20 ॥

चतुःषहिः चितगोतः गरेशेमा: सताविरपंकाः ।

व्याप्रचीरभयं चैवाप्यान्ये वुधर्या अर्धि ॥ 21 ॥

He who daily uses this ashes has not to suffer from the oppression of the Rāksasas, Piśācas, Pūtanās and the other Bhūtas or leprosy, the chronic enlargement of spleen, all sorts of fistulae, from eighty sorts of rheumatism, sixty four kinds of bilious diseases, twenty two varieties of phlegmatic diseases and from tigers, thieves, and other vicious planetary influence.

भस्मस्तानेन नर्शयेति सिंहेनेव यथा गजाः ।

शुद्धगीताजलेनैव भस्मना च सिपुडकम् ॥ 22 ॥

यो धारयेवरं बढ़ा स प्राप्तोति न संश्राः ।

भस्मना च सिपुर्णुं च यः कोप्रिध धारयेवरम् ।

स ब्रह्मोलकामानोति भुक्तपायो न संश्राः ॥ 

यथाविधि ललाटे वे बहिद्वीर्घप्रापणात् ॥ 23 ॥

Rather he gets the power to suppress all these

as a lion kills easily a mad elephant. Any body who first mixes the ashes with pure cold water and then besmears his body with that and puts on the Tripundras, attains soon the Highest Brahma. He who holds the Tripundra of ashes becomes sinless and goes to the Brahma loka.

नागेशिल्हखाते यापी ललार्था लिली धुवम् ।

कंठोपरि कृतं पारं नागेशेनतद्धधारणत् ॥ 24 ॥

कंठे च धारणात्कंठभागदितृपताकम् ।

बाढ़ोबाढुक्ता पांग बक्षसा मनसा कृतम् ॥ 25 ॥

He can even wipe off the ordnances of the fate on his forehead to go to the jaws of Death, if he uses, according to the Śāstras, the Tripunāras on his forehead. If the ashes be used on the neck, then the sin, incurred through the neck, is completely destroyed. If the ashes be used on the neck, then the sin incurred by the neck, in eating uneatable things is entirely destroyed. If the ashes be held on the arms, then the sin incurred by the arms is destroyed. If it be held on the breast, the sin done mentally is destroyed.

नाभ्यां शिश्रणकां पांग युटे युकृतं हेतैत ।

पार्थ्योर्धरणाद्वान्यरन्त्यालिंगनादिकम. ॥ 26 ॥

तदूमयाधरणं शर्तं सर्वैश्व प्रिलिंगकाम् ।

ब्रहाविष्णमूढ़ोगांनां जयन्तीनां च धारणम् ॥ 27 ॥

गुणलोकक्रयाणां च धारणं तेन वै कृतम् ।

If it be held on the navel, the sin incurred by the generative organ is destroyed. If it be held on the anus, then the sin incurred by the anus is destroyed. And if it be held on the sides, then the sin incurred in embracing other's wives is destroyed. So, know fully, to use ashes is highly commendable. Everywhere three curved lines of ashes are to be used. Know these lines as Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa; Dakṣināgni, Gārhapatya fire and Āhavaniva fire; the Sattva, Rajas and Tamas qualities, Heaven, earth and Pātāla (nether regions).

भस्मच्छत्रो द्विजो विद्वान्यापातकर्षयेः ॥ 28 ॥

दोर्घर्विकुचनसे सहो मुच्छेत च न संशयः ।

भस्मनिश्रय दृढ़ोते दोषा भस्मारिनसंगमात् ॥ 29 ॥

If the wise Brāhmīn holds properly the ashes his Mahāpātakas are destroyed. He is not involved in any sin. Rather he, without any questionings, gets his liberation. All the sins, in the body besmeared with ashes, are burnt down by the ashes, are burnt down by the ashes, which is of the nature of fire, into ashes. He is called Bhasmanisṭha (a devotee of Bhasma i.e. ashes) who takes a bath of ashes, who besmears his body with ashes, who use the Tripundras of ashes, who sleeps in ashes.

भस्मस्नाविशुक्रतामा आसनिश्र इति स्मृतः ।

भस्मना दिष्यसर्वांगो भस्मदीतनिषुपुक़ः ॥ 30 ॥

भस्मागी च पुरुषो भस्मनिष्ठ इति स्मृतः ।

भूतप्रतिपशाचता रोगात्रशीत दुःसहः ॥ 31 ॥

He is called also Ātmanisṭha (a devotee of Ātman (Self), At the approach of such a man, the Demons, Piśācas, and very serious diseases run away to a distance.

भवमित्रस्य सार्थिप्रात्रिद्वर्तित न संग्रवः ।

भासनाड़सित प्रोर्फ भवम कल्पवश्रक्षणात् ॥ 32 ॥

भृतिभूपितिकी पुंसां रक्षा रक्षाकरी पुगा ।

विपुर्ण्याधारिं चुवा भृतप्रेपुर्ग: सा ॥33 ॥

There is no doubt in this. In as much as these ashes reveal the knowledge of Brahma, it is called Bhasita from Bhasma, to shine; because it eats up the sins, it is called Bhasma; because it increases the eight supernatural powers Animā, etc., it is called Bhūti; because it protects the man who uses it, it is called “Raksā.”

भीता: प्रक्रपित्त: शीर्छे नयवयेव न संगय: ।

सरणादेव रुद्रय यथा पारं प्रणयति ॥ 34 ॥

अयकावीसहसायि कृत्वा यः स्नाति भयसना ।

तत्सर्वे द्रतुते भय स्यानितनेज्ञा वनम् ॥ 35 ॥

As the sins are all destroyed by the mere remembrance of Bhagavān Rudra, so seeing the person using the Tripundra, the demons, bad spirits and other vicious hosts of spirits fly away quickly, trembling with fear. As a fire burns a great forest by its own strength, so this bath of ashes burns the sins of those who are incessantly addicted to sins.

कृत्वाथि चालुले पारं मृत्युकालेउपि यो द्विजः ।

घमस्नाथी भवेकाश्रिष्टिं पगेः पूज्यन्ते ॥ 36 ॥

घमस्नानाविष्टुब्धात्या जितकोंधी विप्तैद्यः ।

मत्स्तीयं समागल न स भूयोरभिवर्ते ॥ 37 ॥

Even if at the time of death one takes a bath of ashes, though he has committed an inordinate amount of vices, all his sins are soon destroyed. By this bath ashes, the Self is purified, the anger is destroyed; the senses are calmed down. The man who uses even once this Bhasma comes to Me; he has not to take any more births in future.

ब्रह्म्यतिते सोमे भयमोद्यूतिलियादुः ।

अर्हितं शंकरं चूषा सर्वपाँयः प्रमुच्छते ॥ 38 ॥

आयुकामोर्धवा विद्यापूर्तिकामोर्धवा नरः ।

नित्यं वै धारयेद्ध्रम मोक्षकामी स वै द्विजः ॥ 39 ॥

On Monday Amāvasyā (also on the full moon day) if one sees the Śiva Lūgam, with his body besmeared all over with ashes, one's sins will all be destroyed. (All the sins are not seen; hence the tithi is called Amāvas.) If people use Bhasma daily, all their desires will be fritified whether they want longevity, or prosperity or Mukti.

यिपुरं परमं पुणयं ब्रहायिषणुशिवातमकम् ।

ये घोरा गझसाः प्रोन ये चान्ये शूटुजरंलः ॥ 40 ॥

तिरुपुंधारिणं घुधा पलायते न संशयः ।

कृत्याशीवादिकं कर्म सात्वा तु वियले जले ॥ 41 ॥

भस्मनोर्युक्तं कार्यभिपादतलमस्तकम् ।

The Tripundra that represents Brahmā, Vīsṇu and Śiva is very sacred. Seeing the man with Tripundra on, the fierce Rākṣaśa or mischievous creatures flee to a distance. There is no doubt in this. After doing the Śauca (necessary cleanliness) and other necessary things, one bathes in pure cold water and besemares his body with ashes from head to foot.

केवलं वाक्णं स्नानं देहे बाहामलपादम् ॥ 42 ॥

विप्रतिन्तमनमर्थ बाहात्रतमलापदम् ।

त्वक्चापि वाक्षं स्नानं ततर: स्यात संशयः ॥ 43 ॥

By taking the water bath only, the outward unclean things are destroyed. But the ash bath not only cleanse the outer external uncleanliness but

Book XI Chapter XIV

cleanse also all the internal uncleanliness. So even if one does not take the water bath, one ought to take this ash bath. There is to be no manner of doubt in this.

कृतमपकृतं सर्वं भयस्मतं विना मुने ।

भयस्मतानं श्रुतिपोक्तमापेयं सत्नमुच्चत् ।। 44 ।।

अंतर्कहिड़ सैगुद्धि शिवपुजाफलं छपेत् ।

यद्धारामतमायस्य नागकं सनामनित सत् ।। 45 ।।

All the religious actions performed without this ash bath seem as if no actions are done at all. This ash bath is stated in the Vedas. Its another name is the Fire Bath. By this ash bath both outside and inside are purified. So a man who uses ashes gets the entire fruit of worshipping Śiva.

तद्विर्ययति तीक्षेण प्राणिवाह्यांतं मलम् ।

कृत्यापि कौटिणी तिथि वारणी सनामादरात् ॥ 46 ॥

न घवत्येव पुताया भयस्मानं विगा मुने ।

यद्यस्म्यसनामाहायनं तद्वो वैद तत्पतः ॥ 47 ॥

By the water Bath only the outside dirt is removed; but by this bath of ashes, outside dirts and inside dirts, both are fully removed. If this water bath be taken many times daily, still without an ash bath, one's heart is not purified. What more shall I speak of the greatness of ashes, the Vedas only appreciate its glories rightly! Yea, very rightly!

यज्ञ वेद महोदयः सर्ववेदिश्वापानि: ।।

भस्मसानमकृत्वैव यः कुर्णत्कर्म वैदिकम् ॥ 48 ॥

Or Mahā Deva, the Gem of all the Devas, knows the greatness of this Bhasma. Those who perform rites and works prescribed by the Vedas, without taking this bath of ashes, do not get even a tithe of the fruits of their works done.

स तत्कर्मकल्याधिर्य पानोते वस्तुतः ।

यः कार्थिवि यतेने भयस्मानं यथाविधि ॥ ४ ९ ॥

स एवैकः सर्वकर्मविधाकीि श्रुतिश्रुतः ।

पावर्न पावानां च भयस्मानं श्रुतिश्रुम् ॥ ५० ॥

Only that man will be entitled to the entire fruits of the Vedas who perform this bath of ashes duly. This is the opinion of the Vedas. This bath of ashes purifies more the things that are already pure; thus the Sruti says.

न कार्मिवित यो मोहालय महापातकी भवेत् ।

अनंतेर्वक्षीः स्नार्वैर्मुण्यं प्रायते द्विःः ॥ 51 ॥

ततोउनन्तुर्ण पुरुषं भयस्मानाद्वायण्ये ।

कालप्रेधेपि कर्तेयं भयस्मानां प्रयत्नतः ॥ 52 ॥

That wretch who does not take the bath of ashes as aforesaid is a Great Sinner. There is no doubt in this. By this bath greater interminable merits accure than what is obtained by innumerable baths aken by the Brāhmaṇas on the Vāruṇi momentous occasion. So take this bath carefully in the morning, mid-day and evening. This bath of ashes is ordained in the Vedas.

भयस्मतं स्मृतं श्रोतं तत्यागी पत्तिते भवेत् ।

मूत्राखुतर्जनांते तु भयस्मतानं प्रवततः ॥ 53 ॥

कर्तेब्यमन्यथा पूता न भविष्यन्ति मानावा: ।

विधिवक्तृगीचोर्धीय भयस्मतां बिना द्विजः ॥ 54 ॥

So know those who are against this bath mentioned in the Vedas, are verily fallen! After evacuating oneself of one's urine and faeces, one ought to take this bath of ashes. Otherwise men will not be purified. Even if one performs duly the water bath and if one does not take this bath of ashes, that man will not be purified.

न भविष्यिति पृतात्या नाधिकार्यपि कर्मणि ।

अपानावायुनिवर्ते जृमणे स्कन्दते क्षुते ॥ 55 ॥

ग्लेषोहारोर्पि कर्तैलं भयस्मानां प्रयन्ततः ।

श्रीभयस्मानागहात्ययैकद्रोत्र अर्धिति: ॥ 56 ॥

So he cannot get any right to do any religious actions. After evacuating one's abdomen of the outgoing air, after yawning, after holding sexual intercourse, after spitting and sneezing, and after easing oneself of phlegm, one ought to take this bath of ashes.

पुरुषं सुप्रबक्षाति भयस्मानोक्षितं फलम् ।

सावधानेन मनसा श्रोतस्त्य मुनिपुढ़ल १५७ ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे एकावशस्क्ये चतुर्वींशल्याः ।

O Nārada! Thus I have described to you here the greatness of Śrī Bhasma. I am again telling you more of it specially. Listen attentively.

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the greatness in holding the Bibhāti (ashes) in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

