CHAPTER XVI

On Šuka's desiring to go to Mithilā to See Janaka

व्यास उवाच

दूद्वा तं विमितं देदं शयानं वटपत्रके ।

उदारा समितं वात्मवं विल्यो कि विमितां हुशिति। १ ।।

Vyāsa spoke: "Then Devi Mahā Lakṣmī, seeing the Deva Janārdana lying on a banyan leaf and

surprised, spoke to him, smiling: "O Viṣṇu! Why are you becoming so much astonished?

महाग्रकान्या: प्रभावेण त्वं भ विम्युतावानुगा ।

प्रभवे प्रलये जाते भूत्वा भूत्वा पुनः पुनः ॥ 2 ॥

Before this, since times immemorial (without any beginning) there had been many dissolutions

(Pralayas); and many Srṣtis (creations); and at the beginning of every creation You came first into existence and every time I was united with you; but now You have forgotten me under the spell of that Mahā Śakti.

निरुणा सा परा शक्ति: सुगुषत्स्त त्वासप्रमूम् ।

सात्विकी किलयाशक्तिर्वांगक्ति शर्तिक्यमायिकाम। 3 ॥

That Highest Mahā Śakti is transcendent of all Guṇas; but you and I are with Guṇas. Know me as the Śakti, all of Sattva Guṇas widely known as Mahā Lakṣmi.

त्वत्राभिकमलावृद्धहा भविष्यति प्रजापति: ।

स कर्ता सर्वैलोकस्य रजोगुपाममित्वः ॥ 4 ॥

After this the Prajāpati Brahmā, full of Rajo Guṇas, the creator of all the Lokas, will come into existence from your navel lotus and will create the three worlds.

स तदा तप आस्थाय प्राय्य शक्तिमनुतमाम् ।

रजसा रक्तवर्षोढ़ कार्थिति जगतव्यम् ॥ 5 ॥

Then he will perform severe tapasyā and acquire the excellent power to create, and will create the three worlds by his Rajo Guṇa.

सगुणान्यझभृतौँँ समुताघ महामिति: ।

इन्द्रिणणिरिद्योगोँँँ मन:पूर्वान्समंततः ॥ 6 ॥

That highly intelligent Prajāpati will create first, the five Mahābhūtas (great elements), all endowed with Gunas and then create mind with sensory organs and the presiding deities of the senses, and thus with all the ingredients, fit for creation, will create all the worlds.

करियाति ततः सर्ग तेन कतां स उच्छे ।

विश्वास्याय महाभाग तवं वै पालयिता तथा ॥ 7 ॥

Therefore, He is denominated by all as the Creator of Brahmāṇḍa. O highly fortunate one! You will be the Preserver of this Universe.

तद्युष्वोर्धयदेशाज्च कोंधादुओं विधियात् ।

तपः कृत्वा महावोरो प्राय शक्ति तु तामसीम् ॥ 8 ॥

When the Prajāpati Brahmā will be angry at the beginning of the creation on his four mind-born sons, Rudra Deva will appear.

कल्पांते सेठपि संहतां भविष्यित महामते ।

तेनाहं तक्षाप्याता सात्प्रकां त्वमवेहि माम् ॥ 9 ॥

He will appear then from the centre of his eyebrows. On being born, this Rudra Deva will practice very severe tapasyā and will get the Sarhīhara Śakti, which is all of Tamo Guṇa and at the end of the Kalpa will destroy all this universe of five elements. O highly intelligent one! So I have come to you for this work of creation, etc.

स्वायोर्धे त्वत्स्मीपत्था सदार्डं मधुमुदून ।

हदये ते कृतावासा भवामि सन्तं किल ॥ 10 ॥

So take me to you as your Vaispavi Śakti full of Sattva Guṇa. O Madhusūdana! I will take refuge at your breast and will remain always with you."

विष्णुकाव्य

श्लोकस्यार्थं मवा पूर्वे श्रुतं देवि सुकुळासम् ।

तत्केनोकं चारगेहे रहस्यं परमं शिवम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Hearing all this, Bhagavān Viṣṇu spoke: “O Beautiful Devi! The half stanza was ere long heard by me, in clear words; by whom was that spoken? तन्मे बृहि वरागेहे संग्रायोयं वरानने ।

निर्भीने हि यथा रद्यं तत्सरामि पुन: पुन: ॥ १ २ ॥

Kindly speak to me on this great auspicious secret first. For, a great doubt has come and possessed my mind. What more shall I say than this that as a poor man always thinks of wealth, so I am thinking of that again and again."

व्यास उवाच

विष्णोस्तद्वचनं शुचा महातर्षशी: सितान्तान।

उवाच परया प्रील्य वचनं चाहल्हासिनी ॥ 13 ॥

Hearing these words of Viṣṇu, the Devi Mahā Lakṣmī smilingly said with great affection: "O Strong and Energetic one! I am now speaking in detail on this; listen.

महालक्षीरवाच

श्रणु श्रौरे वचो मेउषा सुर्गणाउहं चतुर्भुजा ।

मां जानासि न जानासि निरुणां सरुणालायम् ॥ 14 ॥

O Four-armed one! It is because I have come to you with form and endowed with Gunas that you

Book I Chapter XVI

have come to know me; but you have not known that Ādyā Śakti, the Prime force, transcending all the Guṇas, though. She is the substratum of all the Guṇas.

त्वं जानीहि महाभाग तथा तत्यकटीकृतम् ।

पुर्णं भागवतं विद्धि वेदसारं शुभावहम् ॥ 15 ॥

O highly fortunate one! That Devi Bhagavatī, transcendant of all the Guṇas, uttered that all auspicious, highly sanctifying semi-stanza, the essence of all the Vedas.

कृपां च महतीं मन्ये देह्या: शतुनिष्यून ।

यया प्रोकं परं गुहां हिताय तव सुमत ॥ 16 ॥

O destroyer of the enemies! I think that there is the highest grace of that Highest Śakti on you, that She spoke the greatest secret to you for your benefit.

ल्याणीयं सूदा चित्रे न विस्मायं कदाचन ।

सारे हि सर्वशिकाणां महाविदायाक्रतिणम् ॥ 17 ॥

O one performing good vows! know those words uttered by Mahāvidyā, as the essence of all the Śāstra.

नात: परं वैदित्ययं वर्ते पृवनत्रये ।

प्रियोस खलु देव्यास्त्वे तेन ते व्याक्तं वचः ॥ 18 ॥

So firmly retain them within your heart; never forget them. There is no other thing, save that, worth being known in earnest. Because you are most beloved by the Devi! That she has spoken this to you."

व्यास उवाच

इति श्रुत्वा वचो देव्या महालक्ष्म्याशुर्भुंजः ।

द्याग द्वये नित्यं मत्वा मंगमनुतमम् ॥ 19 ॥

कालेन क्रिवता तत्र तताधिकमलोद्धवः ।

ब्रह्मा दैत्यभयान्तस्तो जगाम शरणं हरेः ॥ 20 ॥

ततः कृत्वा महायुवं हृत्वा तो मधुकैकर्णो ।

जजाय भयाविष्यु: श्लोकाप्रविष्याद्धसूम्। 21 ॥

जपन्तं वासुतेवं च दृष्ट्वा देवः प्रजापति: ।

प्रपछ्छ परमप्रीतः कछ्ज्ञः कमलपातितम् ॥ 22 ॥

Hearing these words of the Devi Mahā Lakṣmī, the four-armed Bhagavān took that semi-stanza as a Mantra to be repeated in right earnest within his

mind and cherished that forever within his heart. After some time, Brahmā, born of the lotus of the navel of Viṣṇu, became afraid of the two Daityas, Madhu and Kaitabha, took refuge of Bhagavān Viṣṇu; Viṣṇu killed the two demons and began to do distinctly the japam of the semi-stanza. Brahmā, born of the lotus, then asked Viṣṇu with a gladdened heart:

किं तं जपसि देदेश त्वतः को3पधिकोरित वे ।

यत्स्याता पुष्ठरीकाक्ष प्रीतीस जनादीक्षा ॥ 23 ॥

“O Lord of the Devas! what japam are you doing? Lotus eyed! Is there any other body more powerful than you? O, Lord of the Universe! whom do you think and thus feel yourself so happy?”

हरिक्वाच

मयि त्वयि च या शफि: क्रियाकारणलक्षणा ।

विचार्य महाभाग या या भागवर्ती शिला ॥ 24 ॥

Hearing Brahmā, Bhagavān Hari said: “O highly fortunate one! Think out yourself once of the Primordial Force, the auspicious Bhagavati Ādyā Śakti who is reigning every where as the cause and effect and you will be able to understand everything.

यस्याधारे जगत्सर्वे लिछत्यत्र माणवे ।

साकारा या महाग्रात्क्रमेया च सनातनी ॥ 25 ॥

यया विमुज्ञते विश्वं जगदोत्चवारचम् ।

सैया प्रसावा वरुना गुणं भवति मुक्चे ॥ 26 ॥

सा विद्या परमा मुक्तेतुभूता सनातनी ।

संसारवन्योत्त्रेषु शैव सर्वेषेधेषी ॥ 27 ॥

My presiding Deity is that immeasurable eternal Mahā Śakti Brahmamayī; in whose Śakti, as a receptacle on this ocean rests the whole Universe; I am thinking of that, by which is created (often and often) this entire Universe, moving and non-moving. When Devi Bhagavatī, the giver of boons, become graciously pleased, human beings become freed of this bondage of Saṃsāra; and again that highest Eternal Wisdom, the cause of Mukti, becomes the source of bondage to this world, of those who are deluded by Her.

अर्ह च त्विडलं विश्वं तत्याश्रच्छक्तिस्तम्बमम् ।

विद्धि ब्रहासन्सद्धः कतन्ध्य: सर्वद्वान्त्र ॥ 28 ॥

ग्लोकोर्टन तया प्रोकर्ते तई भागवतं किल।

वित्तो भविता तस्य द्वागपाटी युगे तथा ॥ 29 ॥

She is the Iśvari of the Iśvaras of this universe. O Brahmā! You, I and all other things of the entire Universe are born of the Cit Sakti (the power of consciousness) of Her and Her alone; there is no manner of doubt in this. The semi-stanza by which She has sown within me the seed of Bhāgavata will get expanded by the beginning of the Dvāpara Yuga.

व्यास उवाच

ब्रह्मा संगृतीत च विज्ञोस्तु नाधिपङ्ग्रे ।

नारदाय च तेनौक्ते पुरायामितनुद्ये ॥ 30 ॥

नारदेन तथा महां दर्त हि मुनिना पुरा ।

मगा कृतमिदे पूर्णा ब्राह्मव्यक्तिवस्तम् ॥ 31 ॥

While Bhagavān Brahmā was resting on the navel lotus of Viṣṇu, He got the seed of Bhāgavata. Then He gave it to His own son Nārada, the best of the Munis. Nārada gave it to me and I have expanded that into twelve Skandhas.

तत्वठव्य महापाया पुराणं ब्रह्मांतिमत् ।

पडलक्षणयुक्त च देल्याशितमुत्तम्म ।। 32 ॥

तत्वज्ञानसोपेतं सर्वेमामुत्तमम् ।

धर्शगत्बसम् पुरयं वेदार्थेनोरबृहितम् ।। 33 ॥

ब्रासुरवधोपेने नानाख्यानकथायुम् ।

ब्रहायिद्वानिधानं तु संसाराणवित्ताकम् ॥ 34 ॥

Therefore, O Mahābhāga! You now study this Bhāgavata Purāṇa, equal to the Vedas and endowed with five characteristics. In this the wonderful glorious deeds and life of the Devi Bhagavatī, the hidden meanings of the Vedas and the wisdom, the truth are all described; hence this is the best of all the Purāṇas and sanctifying like the Dharma Śāstra. It is the substratum of Brahma Vidyā; therefore, if men study this, they will easily cross this sea of world; and those that are stupid and deluded get pleasure in hearing the death of Vṛtrāsura and many other narrations that are interspersed in this book.

गृहाण तं व महाभाग योग्योर्षि मतिमन्तः ।

पुर्णं भागवतं नाम पुर्णा पुरुषर्षि ॥ 35 ॥

Therefore, O Mahābhāga! hear this sanctifying Bhāgavata Purānam and retain it firmly within your heart. O best of persons! You are the foremost of those that are intelligent; so you are worthy to read this Purāna.

अश्वासनस्त्राणां रुलोकानां कुरु संग्रहम् ।

अज्ञाननाशनं दिव्यं ज्ञानभासकरणोक्षम् ॥ 36 ॥

सुखदं शणितं धन्यं दीर्घनुष्यकरं शिजम् ।

भुणक्तां पठतां चेदं पुवर्गनिवर्धनम् ॥ 37 ॥

शिष्योयं मय मधांमा लोमहर्षणसभवः ।

पढिष्यित तव्या सार्ये पुर्णारी संहितां रुभाम् ॥ 38 ॥

Eighteen thousand Ślokas are in that Purāṇa and you better get them by heart; for if any body reads or hears this Purāṇa, fit to be praised in every way, all-auspicious, capable to increase posterity by the addition of sons and grandsons, giving long life, happiness and peace, he sees the Sun of Wisdom, resting in his breast and dispelling all darkness of ignorance.”

सूत उवाच

इत्थुक्ते तेन पुत्राय महं घ चक्रितं किल ।

मया गृहीत तत्सर्वे पुराणं चातिवित्यम् ॥ ३९ ॥

Thus speaking to his son Śuka Deva, Krṣna Dvaipāyana, my Guru, taught us the Purāṇa and thought it was voluminous. I got the whole of it by heart. Śuka studied the Purāṇa and stayed in Vyāsa's Śāśrama.

शुको3धीत्य पुराणं तु स्थितो व्यासाओमे शुणे ।

न लेभे शर्मे धर्मात्मा ब्रह्मात्मन इवापरः ॥ 40 ॥

But he was naturally dispassionate like Sanat Kumāra, etc., the mind-born sons of Brahmā; therefore he could not get peace in studying the contents of the Purāṇa which deal with Karma Kānda (actions) fit for the householders.

एकांतरेसी विकलः स गृान्य इव लक्ष्यते ।

नात्यन्तभोजनासक्तो नोणवासतस्तथा ॥ 4 1 ॥

He remained in a solitary place, his heart being troubled very much. He appeared, as if, with his

Book 1 Chapter XVI

heart void. He did not mind much for his food and he did not fast also.

विन्तार्थि शुक्रं सूद्या व्यासः प्राह सुतं प्रति ।

किं पुत्र चिंचलं निवर्त कस्माछ्योरोसि मान्त ॥ ४ २  ॥

Once Vyāsa Deva seeing his son Śuka Deva so thoughtful, said: O Son! What do you think constantly? And why are you troubling yourself so much?

आसे सं ध्यानपरो तिथ्यमृणप्रत इवाधनः ।

का चित्ता वर्तेत पुर मयि तते तु तिष्ठिति ॥ 4 3 ॥

Like an impoverished man, entangled in debt, you are always disturbed by your thoughts. O child! When I your father is living, what for do you care? Leave aside your inmost sorrows and be happy.

सुर्षं भूक्व यथाकामं मुड़ शोकं मनोगतम् ।

ज्ञानं चिन्तय शाखोर्जे विज्ञाने च माति कुंह ।। ४४ ॥

Cast off all other thoughts and think of the wisdom contained in the Śāstras and try your best to acquire Vijñāna, the essence of wisdom.

न चेभ्यनसि ते शान्तिवंच्या मम सुवत ।

गच्छ त्वं विधितां पुरा पातितां जनकेन ह ॥ 4 5 ॥

O Suvrata! If you do not get peace by my words then go, at my word to Mithilā, the city of the king Janaka.

स ते मोहं महाभाग नागशियन्ती घपाति: ।

जनको नाम धर्मात्मा विदेहः सत्यसागरः ॥ 46 ॥

O Mahābhāga! That king Janaka, who is liberated while living, whose soul is religious and who is the ocean of truth will cut asunder the net of your delusion.

तं गत्वा तृपति पुर्र सन्तेई रखं निवर्ती ।

वर्जाध्यमाणां धार्मिलं पृष्छ पुर्र ययातयम् ॥ 47 ॥

O Son! Go to the king and question him on Varnāśrama Dharma (Dharma relating to caste and stages of life) and remove your doubts.

जीवन्युक्तः स राजार्थवैह्यानमितः शुचि: ।

तव्यवक्तितिगान्तश योगी योगिप्रयः सदा ॥ 48 ॥

That royal sage Janaka, the greatest Yogi, the knower of Brahma and liberated while living, is of pure soul, truth speaking, of a calm and quiet heart and always fond of Yoga."

सूत जवाच

ततलुत्वा वचनं तस्य व्यासस्यामिततजसः ।

प्रत्युवाच महातेजा: शुक्रधारिणसभ्यम्: ॥ 49 ॥

दम्भोर्धे किल धर्मात्म्यमिति चित्ते ममाधुन्ता ।

जीवमुक्तो विदेहछा राज्य शगतिर सुदार्वितः ॥ 50 ॥

Hearing these words of Vyāsa Deva, the highly spirited Sūka Deva of unrivalled energy replied: "O virtuous one! Your word can never turn out false; but when I hear that king Janaka is gladly governing his kingdom still he is liberated while living, and disembodied while he has body—this your word appears to me quite contradictory like light and darkness at one and the same place and time, and seems that these two epithets simply indicate vanity and nothing else.

वस्यापुर इवापारी राजसरी जनकः पितः ।

कुर्बेन्राज्चं विद्धेः किं सन्दोहोयं ममाद्धुतः ॥ ५ १ ॥

O Father! This is my greatest doubt how can the royal sage Janaka govern his kingdom, being disembodied. It appears that your word about Janaka is quite false as the son of a barren woman.

उद्यमिष्यामर्थे घृपं विदेहं नृपसतमम् ।

कर्धं जितृति संसारे पचपत्रमिवंभसि ॥ 5 2 ॥

सन्दोहोयं महांस्तात विदेहे परिवर्ते ।

मोक्षः किं वदतां श्रेष सीगतानामिवापरः ॥ 5 3 ॥

O Father! I have now got a desire to see the disembodied king Janaka; for my mind is plunged in great doubt how can he remain in saṃsāra unattached like a lotus leaf in water? O Greatest Orator! Is the liberation of Janaka according to Buddhistic doctrines or like the opinions of the materialistic Cārvākas! O highly intelligent one! How can the royal sage Janaka, in spite of his being a householder, quit the usages of his senses? I cannot comprehend this.

कर्थ पुक्रभयुक्तं स्थादुकृतं च कृतं कवम् ।

व्यवहारः कर्थ त्याज्य इत्रिग्राणी महामते ॥ 54 ॥

How can the things enjoyed by him appear to him, as if, unenjoyed and and how can his doings be his non-doings?

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

माता पुत्रसदा भार्यां भारिनी कुलटा तथा ।

घेदापेदे: कर्थं न स्याछ्योतन्मृतका कवम् ॥ 55 ॥

How can the ideas of mother, wife, son, sister, prostitutes and various persons having different relations, arising within him vanish again altogether? And if that be not the case, how can his Jivannuktahood be possible?

कटु क्षारं तथा तीक्षा कवायं चिष्येच च ।

सना यदि जानाति भुंके भोगाननुतमान् ॥ 56 ॥

If his taste be present of pungent, sour, astringent, bitter, and sweet things, then it is clear that he is enjoying all the most excellent things.

श्रीतोथापुखदं खादिपरित्रानं यदा भवेत् ।

मुक्ता कींदपूरी तात सन्देहो5यं ममादूतः ॥ 57 ॥

O Father! This is my greatest wonder and doubt, that if he has got the sense of heat and cold, pleasure and pain, how can he be a Jivannukta?

श्रनु मिवपरिज्ञानं वैरं प्रीतिकरं सदा ।

व्यवहीरे परे तिष्टकर्थ न कुकते नृपः ॥ 58 ॥

That king is thoroughly expert in reigning his kingdom; how then the ideas of enemy, friend, taste and distaste, remaining absent in him, he can govern his state?

चौरं वा तापसं वाथि समानं मन्यते कवम् ।

असमा यदि बुद्धि: स्यानुस्तत ताईं कौरीणि ॥ ५९ ॥

How can he look with the same eyes a thief and an ascetic? And if he makes any distinction, how then is his liberation effected?

दृष्टपूर्वीं ने मे क्रिछ्जलीवन्नृक्ष धूपति: ।

गंकेवं महती तात गृहे मुक्तः कर्थ नृपः ॥ 6 0 ॥

I have never seen such a man, that is liberated while living and at the same time an expert king in governing his subjects. For these reasons, great doubt has arisen in me. I cannot understand how can king Janaka be liberated, while he is remaining in his house?

दिद्धया महती जाता शुत्वा तं भूपति तथा ।

संदेश्विनिरुत्वचर्य नख्याभि विधित्वां प्रति ॥ 6 1 ॥

इति शीमदौंभिगावते महापुराणे प्रव्यमस्क्ये

घोडगोळप्याः: 11 16 11

Whatever it be, I desire now greatly to see him after his Jīvannukthaobod; so I desire to go to Mithilā to solve my doubts."

Thus ends the Sixteenth Chapter of the First Book on Šuka's desiring to go to Mithilā to see Janaka,

in the Mahapurāna Śrimaddevibhāgavatam

of 18,000 verses.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

