[Ch 16 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa spoke: "Then Devi Mahā Lakṣmī, seeing the Deva Janārdana lying on a banyan leaf and surprised, spoke to him, smiling: "O Viṣṇu! Why are you becoming so much astonished?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa spoke :-- Then the Devī Mahā Lakṣmī, seeing the Deva Janārdana lying on a banyan leaf and surprised, spoke to him, smiling :-- O Viṣṇu! Why are you becoming so much astonished?

[Ch 16 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Before this, since times immemorial (without any beginning) there had been many dissolutions (Pralayas); and many Srṣtis (creations); and at the beginning of every creation You came first into existence and every time I was united with you; but now You have forgotten me under the spell of that Mahā Śakti.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Before this, since times immemorial (without any beginning) there had been many dissolutions (Pralayas); and many Sṛṣṭis (creations); and at the beginning of every creation You came first into existence and every time I was united with You; but now You have forgotten me under the spell of that Mahā Śakti.

[Ch 16 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That Highest Mahā Śakti is transcendent of all Guṇas; but you and I are with Guṇas. Know me as the Śakti, all of Sattva Guṇas widely known as Mahā Lakṣmi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That Highest Mahā Śakti is transcendent of all the Guṇas; but you and I are with Guṇas. Know me as the Śakti, all of Sattva Guṇa who is widely known as Mahā Lakṣmī.

[Ch 16 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After this the Prajāpati Brahmā, full of Rajo Guṇas, the creator of all the Lokas, will come into existence from your navel lotus and will create the three worlds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► After this the Prajāpati Brahmā, full of Rajo Guṇas, the creator of all the Lokas, will come into existence from your navel lotus and will create the three worlds.

[Ch 16 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then he will perform severe tapasyā and acquire the excellent power to create, and will create the three worlds by his Rajo Guṇa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then he will perform severe tapasyā and acquire the excellent power to create, and will create the three worlds by his Rajo Guṇa.

[Ch 16 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That highly intelligent Prajāpati will create first, the five Mahābhūtas (great elements), all endowed with Gunas and then create mind with sensory organs and the presiding deities of the senses, and thus with all the ingredients, fit for creation, will create all the worlds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That highly intelligent Prajāpati will create first, the five Mahā bhūtas (great elements), all endowed with Guṇas and then create mind with sensory organs and the presiding deities of the senses, and thus with all the ingredients, fit for creation, will create all the worlds.

[Ch 16 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, He is denominated by all as the Creator of Brahmāṇḍa. O highly fortunate one! You will be the Preserver of this Universe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore He is denominated by all as the Creator of Brahmāṇḍa. O highly fortunate one! You will be the Preserver of this Universe.

[Ch 16 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the Prajāpati Brahmā will be angry at the beginning of the creation on his four mind-born sons, Rudra Deva will appear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the Prajāpati Brahmā will be angry at the beginning of the creation on his four mind-born sons, Rudra Deva will appear.

[Ch 16 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He will appear then from the centre of his eyebrows. On being born, this Rudra Deva will practice very severe tapasyā and will get the Sarhīhara Śakti, which is all of Tamo Guṇa and at the end of the Kalpa will destroy all this universe of five elements. O highly intelligent one! So I have come to you for this work of creation, etc.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He will appear then from the centre of his eye brows. On being born this Rudra Deva will practise very severe tapasyā and will get the Samhāra Śakti, who is all of Tamo Guṇa and at the end of the Kalpa will destroy all this universe of five elements. O highly intelligent one! So I have come to you for this work of creation, etc.

[Ch 16 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So take me to you as your Vaispavi Śakti full of Sattva Guṇa. O Madhusūdana! I will take refuge at your breast and will remain always with you."
NEW CORR ENG ──► So take me to you as your Vaiṣṇavī Śakti full of Sattva Guṇa. O Madhusūdana! I will take refuge at your breast and will remain always with you.

[Ch 16 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kindly speak to me on this great auspicious secret first. For, a great doubt has come and possessed my mind. What more shall I say than this that as a poor man always thinks of wealth, so I am thinking of that again and again."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kindly speak to me on this great auspicious secret first. For a great doubt has come and possessed my mind. What more shall I say than this that as a poor man always thinks of wealth, so I am thinking of that again and again.”

[Ch 16 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Viṣṇu, the Devi Mahā Lakṣmī smilingly said with great affection: "O Strong and Energetic one! I am now speaking in detail on this; listen.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Viṣṇu, the Devī Mahā Lakṣmī smilingly said, with great affection :-- “O Strong and Energetic one! I am now speaking in detail on this; listen.

[Ch 16 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Four-armed one! It is because I have come to you with form and endowed with Gunas that you have come to know me; but you have not known that Ādyā Śakti, the Prime force, transcending all the Guṇas, though. She is the substratum of all the Guṇas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Four-armed one! It is because I have come to you with form and endowed with Guṇas that you have come to know me; but you have not known that Ādya Śakti, the Prime force, transcending all the Guṇas, though She is the substratum of

[Ch 16 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O highly fortunate one! That Devi Bhagavatī, transcendant of all the Guṇas, uttered that all auspicious, highly sanctifying semi-stanza, the essence of all the Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O highly fortunate one! That Devī Bhāgavatī, transcendant of all the Guṇas, uttered that all auspicious, highly sanctifying semistanza, the essence

[Ch 16 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O destroyer of the enemies! I think that there is the highest grace of that Highest Śakti on you, that She spoke the greatest secret to you for your benefit.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O destroyer of the enemies! I think that there is the highest grace of that Highest Śakti on you, that She spoke the greatest secret to you for your benefit.

[Ch 16 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O one performing good vows! know those words uttered by Mahāvidyā, as the essence of all the Śāstra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O one performing good vows! know those words uttered by Mahāvidyā, as the essence of all the Śāstra.

[Ch 16 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So firmly retain them within your heart; never forget them. There is no other thing, save that, worth being known in earnest. Because you are most beloved by the Devi! That she has spoken this to you."
NEW CORR ENG ──► So firmly retain them within your heart; never forget them. There is no other thing, save that, worth being known in earnest. Because you are most beloved by the Devī! that She has spoken this to you.”

[Ch 16 Verse 19-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words of the Devi Mahā Lakṣmī, the four-armed Bhagavān took that semi-stanza as a Mantra to be repeated in right earnest within his mind and cherished that forever within his heart. After some time, Brahmā, born of the lotus of the navel of Viṣṇu, became afraid of the two Daityas, Madhu and Kaitabha, took refuge of Bhagavān Viṣṇu; Viṣṇu killed the two demons and began to do distinctly the japam of the semi-stanza. Brahmā, born of the lotus, then asked Viṣṇu with a gladdened heart:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing the words of the Devī Mahā Lakṣmī, the four-armed Bhagavān took that semi stanza as a Mantra to be repeated in right earnest within his mind and cherished that for ever within his heart. After some time, Brahmā born of the lotus of the navel of Viṣṇu, became afraid of the two Daityās Madhu and Kaiṭabha, took refuge of Bhagavān Viṣṇu; Viṣṇu killed the two demons and began to do distinctly the japam of the semi-stanza. Brahmā, born of the lotus, then asked Viṣṇu with a gladdened heart :--

[Ch 16 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Lord of the Devas! what japam are you doing? Lotus eyed! Is there any other body more powerful than you? O, Lord of the Universe! whom do you think and thus feel yourself so happy?”
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “O Lord of the Devas! what japam are you doing? Lotus eyed! Is there any other body more powerful than you? O Lord of the Universe! whom do you think and thus feel yourself so happy?”

[Ch 16 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing Brahmā, Bhagavān Hari said: “O highly fortunate one! Think out yourself once of the Primordial Force, the auspicious Bhagavati Ādyā Śakti who is reigning every where as the cause and effect and you will be able to understand everything.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing Brahmā, Bhagavān Hari said :-- “O highly fortunate one! Think out yourself once of the Primordial Force, the auspicious Bhāgavatī Ādya Śakti who is reigning everywhere as the cause and effect and you will be able to understand everything.

[Ch 16 Verse 25-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My presiding Deity is that immeasurable eternal Mahā Śakti Brahmamayī; in whose Śakti, as a receptacle on this ocean rests the whole Universe; I am thinking of that, by which is created (often and often) this entire Universe, moving and non-moving. When Devi Bhagavatī, the giver of boons, become graciously pleased, human beings become freed of this bondage of Saṃsāra; and again that highest Eternal Wisdom, the cause of Mukti, becomes the source of bondage to this world, of those who are deluded by Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► My presiding Deity is that immeasurable eternal Mahā Śakti Brahmamyī; on whose Śakti, as a receptacle with form on this ocean rests the whole Universe; I am thinking of that, by which is created (often and often) this entire Universe, moving and non-moving. When the Devī Bhāgavatī, the giver of boons, become graciously pleased, the human beings become freed of this bondage of Samsāra; and again that highest Eternal Wisdom, the cause of Mukti, becomes the source of bondage to this world, of those who are deluded by Her.

[Ch 16 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She is the Iśvari of the Iśvaras of this universe. O Brahmā! You, I and all other things of the entire Universe are born of the Cit Sakti (the power of consciousness) of Her and Her alone; there is no manner of doubt in this. The semi-stanza by which She has sown within me the seed of Bhāgavata will get expanded by the beginning of the Dvāpara Yuga.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She is the Īśvarī of the Īśvaras of this universe. O Brahmā! You, I and all other things of the entire Universe are born of the Chit Śakti (the power of consciousness) of Her and Her alone; there is no manner of doubt in this. The semi-stanza by which She has sown within me the seed of Bhāgavata will get expanded by the beginning of the Dvāpara Yuga.

[Ch 16 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► While Bhagavān Brahmā was resting on the navel lotus of Viṣṇu, He got the seed of Bhāgavata. Then He gave it to His own son Nārada, the best of the Munis. Nārada gave it to me and I have expanded that into twelve Skandhas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► While Bhagavān Brahmā was resting on the navel lotus of Viṣṇu, He got the seed of Bhāgavata. Then He gave it to His own son Nārada, the best of the Munis. Nārada gave it to me and I have expanded that into twelve Skandhas.

[Ch 16 Verse 32-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Mahābhāga! You now study this Bhāgavata Purāṇa, equal to the Vedas and endowed with five characteristics. In this the wonderful glorious deeds and life of the Devi Bhagavatī, the hidden meanings of the Vedas and the wisdom, the truth are all described; hence this is the best of all the Purāṇas and sanctifying like the Dharma Śāstra. It is the substratum of Brahma Vidyā; therefore, if men study this, they will easily cross this sea of world; and those that are stupid and deluded get pleasure in hearing the death of Vṛtrāsura and many other narrations that are interspersed in this book.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Mahābhāga! You now study this Bhāgavata Purāṇa, equal to the Vedas and endowed with five characteristics. In this the wonderful glorious deeds and life of the Devī Bhāgavatī, the hidden meanings of the Vedas and the wisdom, the truth are all described; hence this is the best of all the Purāṇas and sanctifying like the Dharma Śāstra. It is the substratum of Brahmā Vidyā; therefore if men study this, they will easily cross this sea of world; and those that are stupid and deluded get pleasure in hearing the death of Vritrāsura and many other narrations that are interspersed in this book.

[Ch 16 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Mahābhāga! hear this sanctifying Bhāgavata Purānam and retain it firmly within your heart. O best of persons! You are the foremost of those that are intelligent; so you are worthy to read this Purāna.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Mahābhāga! hear this sanctifying Bhāgavata Purānam and retain it firmly within your heart. O best of persons! You are the foremost of those that are intelligent; so you are worthy to read this Purāṇa.

[Ch 16 Verse 36-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Eighteen thousand Ślokas are in that Purāṇa and you better get them by heart; for if any body reads or hears this Purāṇa, fit to be praised in every way, all-auspicious, capable to increase posterity by the addition of sons and grandsons, giving long life, happiness and peace, he sees the Sun of Wisdom, resting in his breast and dispelling all darkness of ignorance.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Eighteen thousand Ślokas are in that Purāṇa and you better get them by heart; for if anybody reads or bears this Purāṇa, fit to be praised in every way, all-auspicious, capable to increase posterity by the addition of sons and grandsons, giving long life, happiness and peace, he sees the Sun of Wisdom, resting in his breast and dispelling all darkness of ignorance.

[Ch 16 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus speaking to his son Śuka Deva, Krṣna Dvaipāyana, my Guru, taught us the Purāṇa and thought it was voluminous. I got the whole of it by heart. Śuka studied the Purāṇa and stayed in Vyāsa's Śāśrama.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus speaking to his son Śūka Deva, Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyan, my Guru, studied us the Purāṇa and thought it was voluminous. I got the whole of it by heart. Śūka studied the Purāṇa and stayed in Vyāsa’s Āśrama.

[Ch 16 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But he was naturally dispassionate like Sanat Kumāra, etc., the mind-born sons of Brahmā; therefore he could not get peace in studying the contents of the Purāṇa which deal with Karma Kānda (actions) fit for the householders.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But he was naturally dispassionate like Sanat Kumāra, etc., the mind-born sons of Brahmā; therefore he could not get peace in studying the contents of the Purāṇa which deal with Karma-Kānḍa (actions) fit for the house-holders.

[Ch 16 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He remained in a solitary place, his heart being troubled very much. He appeared, as if, with his heart void. He did not mind much for his food and he did not fast also.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He remained in a solitary place, his heart being troubled very much. He appeared, as if, with his heart void. He did not mind much for his food and

[Ch 16 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once Vyāsa Deva seeing his son Śuka Deva so thoughtful, said: O Son! What do you think constantly? And why are you troubling yourself so much?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once Vyāsa Deva seeing his son Śūkdeva so thoughtful, said :-- “O Son! What do you think constantly? And why are you troubling yourself so much?

[Ch 16 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Like an impoverished man, entangled in debt, you are always disturbed by your thoughts. O child! When I your father is living, what for do you care? Leave aside your inmost sorrows and be happy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Like an impoverished man, entangled in debt, you are always disturbed by your thoughts. O child! When I your father is living, what for do you care? Leave aside your inmost sorrows and be happy.

[Ch 16 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Cast off all other thoughts and think of the wisdom contained in the Śāstras and try your best to acquire Vijñāna, the essence of wisdom.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Cast off all other thoughts and think of the wisdom contained in the Śāstras and try your best to acquire Vijñāna, the essence of wisdom.

[Ch 16 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Suvrata! If you do not get peace by my words then go, at my word to Mithilā, the city of the king Janaka.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Suvrata! If you do not get peace by my words then go, at my word to Mithilā, the city of the King Janaka.

[Ch 16 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mahābhāga! That king Janaka, who is liberated while living, whose soul is religious and who is the ocean of truth will cut asunder the net of your delusion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mahābhāga! That king Janaka, who is liberated while living, whose soul is religious and who is the ocean of truth will cut asunder the net of your delusion.

[Ch 16 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Son! Go to the king and question him on Varnāśrama Dharma (Dharma relating to caste and stages of life) and remove your doubts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Son! Go to the king and question him on Varnāśram Dharma (Dharma relating to caste and stages of life) and remove your doubts.

[Ch 16 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That royal sage Janaka, the greatest Yogi, the knower of Brahma and liberated while living, is of pure soul, truth speaking, of a calm and quiet heart and always fond of Yoga."
NEW CORR ENG ──► That royal sage Janaka, the greatest Yogi, the knower of Brahmā and liberated while living, is of pure soul, truthspeaking, of a calm and quiet heart and always fond of Yoga.”

[Ch 16 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Vyāsa Deva, the highly spirited Sūka Deva of unrivalled energy replied: "O virtuous one! Your word can never turn out false; but when I hear that king Janaka is gladly governing his kingdom still he is liberated while living, and disembodied while he has body—this your word appears to me quite contradictory like light and darkness at one and the same place and time, and seems that these two epithets simply indicate vanity and nothing else.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Vyāsa Deva, the highly spirited Śūka deva of unrivalled energy replied :-- “O virtuous one! Your word can never turn out false; but when I hear that the king Janaka is gladly governing his kingdom still he is liberated while living, and disembodied while he has body -- this your word appears to me quite contradictory like light and darkness at one and the same place and time, and seems that these two epithets simply indicate vanity and nothing else.

[Ch 16 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Father! This is my greatest doubt how can the royal sage Janaka govern his kingdom, being disembodied. It appears that your word about Janaka is quite false as the son of a barren woman.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Father! This is my greatest doubt how can the royal sage Janaka govern his kingdom, being disembodied. It appears that your word about Janaka is quite false as the son of a barren woman.

[Ch 16 Verse 52-53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Father! I have now got a desire to see the disembodied king Janaka; for my mind is plunged in great doubt how can he remain in saṃsāra unattached like a lotus leaf in water? O Greatest Orator! Is the liberation of Janaka according to Buddhistic doctrines or like the opinions of the materialistic Cārvākas! O highly intelligent one! How can the royal sage Janaka, in spite of his being a householder, quit the usages of his senses? I cannot comprehend this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Father! I have now got a desire to see the disembodied king Janaka; for my mind is plunged in great doubt how can he remain in samsāra unattached like a lotus leaf in water? O Greatest Orator! Is the liberation of Janaka according to Buddhistic doctrines or like the opinions of the materialistic Cārvākas! O highly intelligent one! How can the royal sage Janaka, in spite of his being a householder, quit the usages of his senses? I cannot comprehend this.

[Ch 16 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How can the things enjoyed by him appear to him, as if, unenjoyed and and how can his doings be his non-doings? Śrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► How can the things enjoyed by him appear to him, as if, unenjoyed and and how can his doings be his non-doings? How

[Ch 16 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How can the ideas of mother, wife, son, sister, prostitutes and various persons having different relations, arising within him vanish again altogether? And if that be not the case, how can his Jivannuktahood be possible?
NEW CORR ENG ──► can the ideas of mother, wife, son, sister, prostitutes and various persons having different relations, arising within him vanish again altogether? And if that be not the case, how can his Jivanmuktahood be possible?

[Ch 16 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If his taste be present of pungent, sour, astringent, bitter, and sweet things, then it is clear that he is enjoying all the most excellent things.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If his taste be present of pungent, sour, astringent, bitter, and sweet things, then it is clear that he is enjoying all the most excellent things,

[Ch 16 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Father! This is my greatest wonder and doubt, that if he has got the sense of heat and cold, pleasure and pain, how can he be a Jivannukta?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Father! This is my greatest wonder and doubt, that if he has got the sense of heat and cold, pleasure and pain, how can he be a Jivanmukta?

[Ch 16 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That king is thoroughly expert in reigning his kingdom; how then the ideas of enemy, friend, taste and distaste, remaining absent in him, he can govern his state?
NEW CORR ENG ──► That king is thoroughly expert in reigning his kingdom; how then the ideas of enemy, friend, taste and distaste, remaining absent in him, he can govern his state?

[Ch 16 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How can he look with the same eyes a thief and an ascetic? And if he makes any distinction, how then is his liberation effected?
NEW CORR ENG ──► How can he look with the same eyes a thief and an ascetic? And if he makes any distinction, how then is his liberation effected?

[Ch 16 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I have never seen such a man, that is liberated while living and at the same time an expert king in governing his subjects. For these reasons, great doubt has arisen in me. I cannot understand how can king Janaka be liberated, while he is remaining in his house?
NEW CORR ENG ──► I have never seen such a man, that is liberated while living and at the same time an expert king in governing his subjects. For these reasons, great doubt has arisen in me. I cannot understand how can the king Janaka be liberated, while he is remaining in his house?

[Ch 16 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whatever it be, I desire now greatly to see him after his Jīvannukthaobod; so I desire to go to Mithilā to solve my doubts." Thus ends the Sixteenth Chapter of the First Book on Šuka's desiring to go to Mithilā to see Janaka, in the Mahapurāna Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses. Śrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whatever it be, I desire now greatly to see him after his Jivanmuktahood; so I desire to go to Mithilā to solve my doubts.” Thus ends the Sixteenth Chapter of the first Skandha on Śūka’s desiring to go to Mithilā to see Janaka, in the Mahāpurāṇa Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.
