CHAPTER III

On the Daitya Armies Getting Ready

यास उवाच

एवं स महिषो नाम दानवो वर्दर्पितः ।

प्राय एकं उनसर्व वं जोके महाबलः ॥ १ ॥

पृथिवी पालवामास सागरानां भूजार्जिताम् ।

एकच्छत्रा निरारतंका वैरिवर्गविवर्जिताम् ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: “The very powerful Asura Mahisa, puffed up with vanity on his getting the boon, obtained sovereignty and brought the whole world under his control! He, being of paramount power, began to protect the sea-girt earth acquired by the power of his own arms, over which he had the sole sovereignty, there being no other rival to the king nor any cause of the slightest fear.

सेनानीश्रिक्षतस्य महावीर्णं मदोकटः ।

भान्यक्षन्धता ताभः सेनाशुतममावृतः ॥ 3 ॥

His Commander-in-Chief was then the very powerful Cikṣura, maddened with pride; and Tāmra was in charge of the Royal Treasury, guarded by many soldiers.

असिलोमा तयोदकों बिडालाख्य शाकपतः ।

त्रिजोउध तथा कालबन्धको बलदर्पितः ॥ 4 ॥

There were, then, many gencrals Asilomā, Vidāla, Udarka, Bāskala, Trinetra, Kāla, Bandhaka and others, very proud, and each in charge of his own corps respectively and occupying this sea-girt earth.

एते सै-ययुता: सर्वे दानवा मेदिति ताद ।

आयुल्य संशित्या: काममुख्यो सागगमेखलाम् ॥ 5 ॥

कराद्धि कृता: सर्वे भूमिपाला: पुरातना: ।

निहता ये बलोद्वाः क्षानप्रभ्यविधिताः ॥ 6 ॥

O king! The powerful kings that reigned before were made subservient and tributary; and those, that fought vaunility befitting the Kṣattriya line, were slain by Mahiṣa.

ब्राह्मणा वरणा जाता यज्ञापासमर्पका: ।

महिषय्य महाराज निखिले श्रितिमण्डले ॥ ७ ॥

The Brāhmaṇas over the earth becama subservient to Mahiṣa and gave their Yajña offerings to him.

एकातपधे तत्राम्यं कृत्वा स महिषासुर: ।

स्वर्गे जेतु मनघक्रे वरादानेन ग्रविंतः ॥ ८ ॥

When that Mahisāsura got the sole sovereign

Šrnuaddevibhāgavatam

sway of this world, he proud of his boons, desired to conquer the Heavens.

प्राणियाँ प्रश्वासाम श्यातिरस्तु शनीपतिम् ।

स सन्देशहं श्रीप्रभादूयोबार इत्यतर् ॥ ९ ॥

Then Mahiṣa, the Lord of the Daityas, desirous to send an envoy to Indra, the Lord of Śacī, instantly called for the messenger and spoke to him thus:

गच्छ बीर महाबाही दुत्तलं कुक मेउनय ।

बृहि ग्राके दिवं नाला नि:गंकः सुरासिर्धी ॥ 10 ॥

Go, O hero! O valiant one! to Heaven." Act as my messenger and tell Indra fearlessly thus:

मुंघ खर्याँ सहसाक्ष ययेघं गच्छ माधिमम् ।

सेवां वा कुक देवेश महिषय साहात्मनः ॥ 11 ॥

स त्वां संस्थयेयूनं राजा शरणमागतम् ।

तस्मार्चं शरणं याहि महिषय सर्चीपते ॥ 12 ॥

नोघद्रजं गृहाणगु युद्धाय बलसूदन ।

पूर्वॉजितोस चास्माकं जनामि तव पीक्षम् ॥ 13 ॥

"O thousand-eyed one! Quit the Heavens; go anywhere you like, or offer your service to the highshould Mahisa! He is the lord; and if you take refuge unto him, he will certainly protect you. Therefore, O Lord of Śacī, better seek the protection of Mahisa. If, O Balasūdana! Not willing to do so, wield your Vajra at once; we know your powers; you were, in days of yore, conquered by our ancestors."

अहत्याजार विज्ञातं बलं ते सुर्यंघ ।

युध्यस्व जत्र वा कामं यत्र ते रमेत मनः ॥ 14 ॥

O chief of the Sūras! You are the paramour of Ahalyā; your strength is well-known, give battle or go anywhere you like."

व्यास उवाच

तच्छूला घवर्न तस्य शक्र: क्रोधासम्वितः ।

उवाच तं नृपश्रेश सिमतपूर्वे घचस्तदा ॥ 15 ॥

न जाने३हं सुमन्दात्मन् यतस्तं मद्दर्पितः ।

चिकित्सां सूक्ष्त्रियामि रोगस्याय प्रभोतरा ॥ 16 ॥

Vyāsa said: “Hearing the messenger’s words, Indra became very indignant and laughed and said: “I did not know, O you stupid, that you were

maddened with vanity; I will shortly give medicines for your master's disease."

अतः परं क्रियामि मूलस्याय निकृतनम् ।

गच्छ दुत तथा बृहि तस्यो मम भाषितम् ॥ 17 ॥

शिष्टैदूनान हन्तव्यात्मसाचां विशुबामवहम् ।

युद्धच्छा चेत्समागच्छ त्वितो महिषीमुत ॥ 18 ॥

हयोर न्वढृतं ज्ञातं शुणास्तवर्न जडाकृति: ।

श्रगयोते कारीव्यामि सुरुर्धं च शगासनम् ॥ 19 ॥

"Now I will extirpate him by the roots; wise persons do not slay messengers; I therefore let you go. Better go and tell him what I say: "Son of a buffalo! If you are willing to fight, better come and do not delay." "O Enemy of horse! (Buffaloes and horses are always at war with each other) Your strength is well known to me; you are a grass eater and your appearance is stupid, idiotic; out of your horns I will make a good bow." "You depend on your horns for your strength; that I well know.

दर्प: श्रंगवालान्तेस्ति विवितं कारणं मया ।

विषाणे ते परिस्थित्या संहित्यामि तदूलम् ॥ 20 ॥

यद्रतेनातिपूर्णस्वं जातोस्ति वलदार्थितः ।

कुशलस्वं तदायाने न युद्धे महिषाधम ॥ 21 ॥

You are clever in striking with your horns; you don't know anything about warfare; therefore I will cut off your both the weapons and render you powerless. You are very much puffed up with vanity due to that.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तोउसी सुरो-द्रेण स दुतस्वचितरी गतः ।

जगाम महिषं मन्ते प्रणाय्य प्रज्युवाच ७ ॥ 22 ॥

Vyāsa said: “Indra having spoken thus, the messenger quickly returned to his haughty master Mahisa and saluting, spoke:

दूत उवाच

राजन्देवाधिष कामां न त्वा विगणायत्यसौ ।

मयते स्ववर्त पूर्णं देवसैन्यसामावृतः ॥ 23 ॥

The messenger said: "Indra counts you not even a fig, as he is surrounded by his Deva forces and considers himself quite sufficient.

Book V Chapter III

यदुर्फं तेन मुखैंग कथमन्यदूबवीभ्यहम् ।

प्रिय सलं च वक्त्वयं भूत्वेन पुतः प्रभो: ॥ 24 ॥

If ought one's servant to speak true and pleasant before one's master, how can I utter the words before my master, that are spoken by that brute Indra."

प्रिय सलं च वक्त्वयं प्रभोरो शुभेच्छुना ।

इति नितिमहात्राज जागर्ति शुभकारिणी ॥ 25 ॥

Whereas the well known maxim reigns in my mind withal that I am your well-wishing servant and I ought to speak truth before you, my master, and that truth is to be pleasant to hear also.

केवलं चेत्रियं ब्याज ते कार्य भाविष्यति ।

परभं च न वक्त्वं कदाचिच्छुभमिच्छता ॥ 26 ॥

If pleasant words I speak only, then I fail in my duty; at the same time, harsh words ought not to be spoken by me, your sincere will-wisher.

यथा रिपुभुवाद्वारः प्रसरन्ति विषयोपाः ।

तथा भृत्यमुखाग्राव नि:सरन्ति कर्थ गिरः ॥ 27 ॥

यादुशानीह वाक्यानि तेनोक्तानि महीपते ।

तादुशानि न मे विज्ञा वतुर्महति कहिंघित् ॥ 28 ॥

My Lord! The cruel poison-like words that come from the mouth of an enemy, how can I, a servant of yours, utter those harsh sayings! O Lord of the Earth! I will never be able to utter those rude sayings that Indra has spoken.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य हेतुगर्भं तृणाशनः ।

भूगं कोपपरीताता बभूव महिषासुरः ॥ 29 ॥

समाह्याववारीह्यानकोधसंरक्तलोचनः ।

तर्णूलं पृड्डरेगे च कृत्वा मूर्ष परित्यजन ॥ 30 ॥

Vyāsa said: “Hearing the messenger’s words full of meaning, the grass cater Mahisā Dānava got very angry and, waggling his tail behind his back, passed urine; then his eyes reddened with anger, he called the Dānavas before him and said:

भे भो दैवाः सुरैंडोजी युद्धकामोप्रेति सर्वथा ।

बलोद्योगं कुर्वयं वै जेतव्योजरी सुरायमः ॥ 31 ॥

“O Dānavas! The Lord of the Devas is firmly

resolved on battle; therefore collect your forces; we will have to conquer that devil, the chief of the Suras.

मद्यो को भवेच्छूरः कोटिगश्छेनाशविधाः ।

न विभेम्येकतः कामं इनिध्याय्यदा सर्वथा ॥ 32 ॥

Who can stand for him as my rival here! If hundreds and thousands of warriors like Indra come, I do not fear any of them at all; O Dānavas, we will thoroughly put an end to him.

शूरः शान्तेचस्पी नूनं तपस्विष्य बताधिकः ।

बलकर्ता हि कुहको लैप्टः पर्वात्रत् ॥ 33 ॥

His heroism is before only those that are peaceful and quiet, before the ascetics that have become lean and thin by penances; he is licentious and can only seduce other's wives by craftiness and arts.

अपरोबलसम्पत्नपोचिनकाः खलः ।

छिद्रप्ररण: यापो नित्य विश्वासयातकः ॥ 34 ॥

He is a thorough rogue and hypocrite, vicious and fault-finding; otherwise why does he put obstacles before others, depending for his strength only on the beauties of the Apsarās or heavenly prostitutes.

नापुचिनिरुक्तो येन कृत्वा सन्धि दुरावमना ।

नषायान्विवियानादौ कृत्वा भौतिन छघना ॥ 35 ॥

He is treachrous to very core; therefore he, being afraid at the very outset, took oaths, and entered into agreement with the high-souled Namuci; afterwards, when his time turned favourable, that villian broke his treaty and treacherously killed him."

विष्यानु कमटाचारः कुटकः शयाकाः ।

नानासपरः कामं बलकुर्भ्यपिडतः ॥ 36 ॥

Again the powerful Viṣṇu is a thorough master of treachery and hypocrisy, quick in taking oaths and can only show his vanity and is expert in that. He can assume many forms at will by his Māyic power."

कृत्वा कोलाप्तिकी येन हिरण्याक्षो निपातितः ।

हिरण्यक्रिशपुष्पैन् नृसिंहेन च पातितः ॥ 37 ॥

For these very reasons Viṣṇu had to take the form of a boar and kill Hiranyāksa; and again he had to take up a man-lion form to kill Hiranya Kaśipu.

नाहं तद्धगो नूनं भवेयं दनुनन्दना: ।

विश्वासं नैव गच्छापि देवानां कुक कहिंघित् ॥ 38 ॥

O Dānavas! Never shall I surrender myself to Viṣṇu, for I never place my trust in the words or deeds of Viṣṇu and his Devas.

किं कसिवाति मे विद्याप्रौत्रो वा वलवस्तः ।

रूजे वापि न मे शक़ः प्रतिकर्तू रणांगणे ॥ 39 ॥

What can Indra or Viṣṇu do against me, when the most powerful Rudra is not able to fight against me in the battlefield!

त्रिविष्टं प्रतिष्यामि तिजेन्द्रं वरुणं यमम् ।

धनदं पाककं चैव चन्द्रपूर्वीं विजित्व च ॥ 40 ॥

वझभाभपुज: सर्वे पशिव्यामोउढा सोभाप: ।

त्रिवा देवसमूहं च विहित्यामि दानवैः ॥ 41 ॥

I will instantly defeat Indra, Varuna, Yama, Kubera, Fire, Sun and Moon and get possession of their Heavens. On our conquering the Devas, we all shall get our share of Yajñas and we along with other Dānavas drink the Soma juice and enjoy ourselves in Heaven.

न मे भयं सुरोभ्युं खरादानेन दानवाः ।

मरणं न नरोभ्युं नारी किं मे कारिष्यति ॥ 42 ॥

O Dānavas! I have got the boon; what do I now care for the Devas. My death is not from men too. What can a woman do to me?

पातालपवैतैभ्यघ स्माहुव राजनारन् ।

द्रावनावाम सै-योगात्कुवंतु त्वलिताश्रर: ॥ 4 3 ॥

O my emissaries! Call without any delay the chief Dānavas from the nether regions and the mountains and make them my generals?

एकोडे सर्वदेवेशगतिविजतुं दानावा: शमः ।

शोभाषं वः समाहूय नयामि सुरसुझमे ॥ 4 4 ॥

O Dānavas! I can alone conquer all the Devas; only to make war arrangements look nice, that I am taking you to defeat them.

श्रृगायां च खुतायां च हनियेड़र्ग सुगतिकल ।

न मे भयंं सुरेय्यछु खरतानप्रभावतः ॥ 45 ॥

There is no fear of mine from the Devas, consequent on the boon conferred on me. I will kill them by my hoofs and horns.

अवध्योड़ं सुरगणैरसुरैमान्वैस्तथा ।

तस्मालज्ञा भवन्त्यद्वे देवलोकजयाय दै ॥ 46 ॥

I am not to be killed by Suras, Asuras, as men; therefore get yourselves ready to conquer the Devas.

त्रिला सुरालयं दैत्वा विकृत्तियामि नन्दने ।

मन्दारकुभुमपीडा देवयोषित्यमित्राने ॥ 47 ॥

O Dānavas! After conquering the Heavens we will be garlanded with Pārijāta wreaths and we will enjoy the Deva women in the Nandana Garden.

कामधेनुपयोसितभा: सुधापानप्रमोदिता: ।

देवान्यर्वर्गीतादितून्यलायमसपिततः ॥ 48 ॥

We will drink the milk of the heavenly mulching cow (the cow that yields all desires) and, intoxicated with the heavenly drinks, we will hear and see the music and singing the dancing of the Gandharvas there.

उद्वीगी मेमका राभा घृताभी च तिलोत्ताम ।

प्रमद्धरा महासेना मिश्रक्षेगी महोल्कटा ॥ 49 ॥

You will all be served there with various bottles of wine by Urvaśī, Menakā, Rambhā, Ghṛtāci, Tillottamā, Pramadvarā Mahāsenā, Miśra Keśi, Madotkatā.

विद्यचितिप्रपृतवी नृत्यनीतिविशपराद: ।

रूत्रविष्यन्ति वः सर्वांत्रानसविनिवेशीः ॥ 50 ॥

Vipracitti and others. Then be all ready at once for the auspicious occasion to march to Heaven and fight there with the Suras.

सर्वे सज्जा घर्वेल्हा रोत्नां गमनं दिवि ।

संग्रामार्थ सुरैः साधुं कृत्वा मुकूलपुत्तमम् ॥ 51 ॥

स्थूलार्थ च स्वर्वं घानांरं घुनिस्तमम् ।

समाहूच च संपूज्य स्थाय्य चेत्रे गुरुं परम् ॥ 52 ॥

And be pleased to call that pure-souled Muni Sukrācārya, the son of Bhrgu and the Guru of the Daityas and worship him and tell him to perform sacrificial ceremonies for the safety and victory of the Dānavas."

Book V Chapter IV

<table><tr><td>व्यास उवाच</td></tr><tr><td>इति सन्निर्यय दैत्येन्द्रान्माधिष: पाघपीस्तदा ।</td></tr><tr><td>जगाम त्वितीता राजन्मेवनं स्यं मुदात्यितः ॥ 5 3 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे ततुर्भरकन्मे दैत्यसैन्योहोगे नाम तृतीयोउतयान: ॥ 3 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>Vyāsa said: O king! Thus, ordering the chief</td></tr></table>

Dānavas, the wicked Mahiṣa went to his abode, with gladness.

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Fifth Book on the Daitya armies getting ready in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahāpurānam by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa of 18,000 verses.

Book V Chapter IV

