[Ch 3 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “The very powerful Asura Mahisa, puffed up with vanity on his getting the boon, obtained sovereignty and brought the whole world under his control! He, being of paramount power, began to protect the sea-girt earth acquired by the power of his own arms, over which he had the sole sovereignty, there being no other rival to the king nor any cause of the slightest fear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- The very powerful Asura Mahiṣa, puffed up with vanity on his getting the boon, obtained sovereignty and brought the whole world under his control! He, being the paramount power, began to protect the sea-girt earth acquired by the power of his own arms, over which he had the sole sovereignty, there being no other rival king nor any cause of the slightest fear.

[Ch 3 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► His Commander-in-Chief was then the very powerful Cikṣura, maddened with pride; and Tāmra was in charge of the Royal Treasury, guarded by many soldiers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► His Commander-in-Chief was then the very powerful Cikṣura, maddened with pride; and Tāmra was in charge of the Royal Treasury, guarded by many soldiers.

[Ch 3 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There were, then, many gencrals Asilomā, Vidāla, Udarka, Bāskala, Trinetra, Kāla, Bandhaka and others, very proud, and each in charge of his own corps respectively and occupying this sea-girt earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There were, then, many generals Asilomā, Viḍāla, Udarka, Vāskala, Trinetra, Kāla, Bandhaka and others, very proud, and each in charge of his own corps respectively and occupying this sea-girt earth.

[Ch 3 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! The powerful kings that reigned before were made subservient and tributary; and those, that fought vaunility befitting the Kṣattriya line, were slain by Mahiṣa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! The powerful kings that reigned before were made subservient and tributary; and those, that fought valiantly befitting the Kṣattriya line, were slain by Mahiṣa.

[Ch 3 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmaṇas over the earth becama subservient to Mahiṣa and gave their Yajña offerings to him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmaṇas over the earth became subservient to Mahiṣa and gave their Yajña offerings to him.

[Ch 3 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When that Mahisāsura got the sole sovereign Šrnuaddevibhāgavatam sway of this world, he proud of his boons, desired to conquer the Heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When that Mahiṣāsura got the sole sovereign sway of this world, he, proud of his boons, desired to conquer the Heavens.

[Ch 3 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Mahiṣa, the Lord of the Daityas, desirous to send an envoy to Indra, the Lord of Śacī, instantly called for the messenger and spoke to him thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Mahiṣa, the Lord of the Daityas, desirous to send an envoy to Indra, the Lord of Śacī, instantly called for the messenger and spoke to him thus :--

[Ch 3 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Go, O hero! O valiant one! to Heaven." Act as my messenger and tell Indra fearlessly thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Go, O hero! O valiant one! to Heaven. Act as my messenger and tell Indra fearlessly thus :--

[Ch 3 Verse 11-13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O thousand-eyed one! Quit the Heavens; go anywhere you like, or offer your service to the highshould Mahisa! He is the lord; and if you take refuge unto him, he will certainly protect you. Therefore, O Lord of Śacī, better seek the protection of Mahisa. If, O Balasūdana! Not willing to do so, wield your Vajra at once; we know your powers; you were, in days of yore, conquered by our ancestors."
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “O thousand-eyed one! Quit the Heavens; go anywhere you like, or offer your service to the high-souled Mahiṣa! He is the lord; and if you take refuge unto him, he will certainly protect you. Therefore, O Lord of Śacī, better seek the protection of Mahiṣa. If, O Balasūdana! Not willing, wield your Vajra at once; we know your powers; you were, in days of yore, conquered by our ancestors.

[Ch 3 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O chief of the Sūras! You are the paramour of Ahalyā; your strength is well-known, give battle or go anywhere you like."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O chief of the Sūras! You are the paramour of Ahalyā; your strength is well known, give battle or go anywhere you like.”

[Ch 3 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “Hearing the messenger’s words, Indra became very indignant and laughed and said: “I did not know, O you stupid, that you were maddened with vanity; I will shortly give medicines for your master's disease."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Hearing the messenger’s words, Indra became very indignant and laughed and said :-- I did not know, O you stupid, that you were maddened with vanity; I will shortly give medicines for your master’s disease.

[Ch 3 Verse 17-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Now I will extirpate him by the roots; wise persons do not slay messengers; I therefore let you go. Better go and tell him what I say: "Son of a buffalo! If you are willing to fight, better come and do not delay." "O Enemy of horse! (Buffaloes and horses are always at war with each other) Your strength is well known to me; you are a grass eater and your appearance is stupid, idiotic; out of your horns I will make a good bow." "You depend on your horns for your strength; that I well know.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now I will extirpate him by the roots; wise persons do not slay messengers; I therefore let you go. Better go and tell him what I say :-- “Son of a buffalo! If you are willing to fight, better come and do not delay. O Enemy of horse! (Buffaloes and horses are always at war with each other) Your strength is well known to me; you are a grass eater and your appearance is stupid, idiotic; out of your horns I will make a good bow. You depend on your horns for your strength; that I well know.

[Ch 3 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You are clever in striking with your horns; you don't know anything about warfare; therefore I will cut off your both the weapons and render you powerless. You are very much puffed up with vanity due to that.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You are clever in striking with your horns; you don’t know anything about warfare; therefore I will out off your both the weapons and render you powerless. You are very much puffed up with vanity due to that.”

[Ch 3 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “Indra having spoken thus, the messenger quickly returned to his haughty master Mahisa and saluting, spoke:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Indra having spoken thus, the messenger quickly returned to his haughty master Mahiṣa and saluting, spoke :--

[Ch 3 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The messenger said: "Indra counts you not even a fig, as he is surrounded by his Deva forces and considers himself quite sufficient.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The messenger said :-- Indra counts you not even a fig, as he is surrounded by his Deva forces and considers himself quite sufficient.

[Ch 3 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If ought one's servant to speak true and pleasant before one's master, how can I utter the words before my master, that are spoken by that brute Indra."
NEW CORR ENG ──► It ought one’s servant to speak true and pleasant before one’s master; how can I utter the words before my master, that are spoken by that brute Indra.

[Ch 3 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whereas the well known maxim reigns in my mind withal that I am your well-wishing servant and I ought to speak truth before you, my master, and that truth is to be pleasant to hear also.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whereas the well known maxim reigns in my mind withal that I am your well-wishing servant and I ought to speak truth before you, my master, and that truth is to be pleasant to hear also.

[Ch 3 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If pleasant words I speak only, then I fail in my duty; at the same time, harsh words ought not to be spoken by me, your sincere will-wisher.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If pleasant words I speak only, then I fail in my duty; at the same time, harsh words ought not to be spoken by me, your sincere well-wisher.

[Ch 3 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My Lord! The cruel poison-like words that come from the mouth of an enemy, how can I, a servant of yours, utter those harsh sayings! O Lord of the Earth! I will never be able to utter those rude sayings that Indra has spoken.
NEW CORR ENG ──► My Lord! The cruel poison-like words that come from the mouth of an enemy, how can I, a servant of yours, utter those harsh sayings! O Lord of the Earth! I will never be able to utter those rude sayings that Indra has spoken.

[Ch 3 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “Hearing the messenger’s words full of meaning, the grass cater Mahisā Dānava got very angry and, waggling his tail behind his back, passed urine; then his eyes reddened with anger, he called the Dānavas before him and said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Hearing the messenger’s words full of meaning the grass-eater Mahiṣa Dānava got very angry and, waggling his tail behind his back, passed urine; then his eyes reddened with anger, he called the Dānavas before him and said :--

[Ch 3 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Dānavas! The Lord of the Devas is firmly resolved on battle; therefore collect your forces; we will have to conquer that devil, the chief of the Suras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Dānavas! The Lord of the Devas is firmly resolved on battle; therefore collect your forces; we will have to conquer that devil, the chief of the Sūras.

[Ch 3 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Who can stand for him as my rival here! If hundreds and thousands of warriors like Indra come, I do not fear any of them at all; O Dānavas, we will thoroughly put an end to him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Who can stand for him a my rival here! If hundreds and thousands of warriors like Indra come I do not fear any of them at all; O Dānavas, we will thoroughly put a end to him.

[Ch 3 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► His heroism is before only those that are peaceful and quiet, before the ascetics that have become lean and thin by penances; he is licentious and can only seduce other's wives by craftiness and arts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► His heroism is before those only that are peaceful and quiet before the ascetics that have become lean and thin by the penances; he is licentious and can only seduce other’s wives by craftiness and arts.

[Ch 3 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He is a thorough rogue and hypocrite, vicious and fault-finding; otherwise why does he put obstacles before others, depending for his strength only on the beauties of the Apsarās or heavenly prostitutes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He is a thorough rogue and hypocrite, vicious and faultfinding; otherwise why does he put obstacles before others, depending for his strength only on the beauties of the Apsarās or heavenly prostitutes.

[Ch 3 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He is treachrous to very core; therefore he, being afraid at the very outset, took oaths, and entered into agreement with the high-souled Namuci; afterwards, when his time turned favourable, that villian broke his treaty and treacherously killed him."
NEW CORR ENG ──► He is treacherous to his very core; therefore he, being afraid at the very outset, took oaths, and entered into agreement with the high-souled Namuchi; afterwards, when his time turned favourable, that villain broke his treaty and treacherously killed him.

[Ch 3 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again the powerful Viṣṇu is a thorough master of treachery and hypocrisy, quick in taking oaths and can only show his vanity and is expert in that. He can assume many forms at will by his Māyic power."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again the powerful Viṣṇu is a thorough master of treachery and hypocrisy, the mine in taking oaths and can only show his vanity and is expert in that. He can assume many forms at will by his Magic power.

[Ch 3 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► For these very reasons Viṣṇu had to take the form of a boar and kill Hiranyāksa; and again he had to take up a man-lion form to kill Hiranya Kaśipu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► For these very reasons Viṣṇu had to take the form of a boar and kill Hiraṇyākṣa; and again he had to take up a man-lion form to kill Hiraṇya Kaśīpu.

[Ch 3 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Dānavas! Never shall I surrender myself to Viṣṇu, for I never place my trust in the words or deeds of Viṣṇu and his Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Dānavas! Never shall I surrender myself to Viṣṇu, for I never place my trust in the words or deeds of Viṣṇu and his Devas.

[Ch 3 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What can Indra or Viṣṇu do against me, when the most powerful Rudra is not able to fight against me in the battlefield!
NEW CORR ENG ──► What can Indra or Viṣṇu do against me, when the most powerful Rudra is not able to fight against me in the battle-field!

[Ch 3 Verse 40-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I will instantly defeat Indra, Varuna, Yama, Kubera, Fire, Sun and Moon and get possession of their Heavens. On our conquering the Devas, we all shall get our share of Yajñas and we along with other Dānavas drink the Soma juice and enjoy ourselves in Heaven.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will instantly defeat Indra, Varuṇa, Yama, Kuvera, Fire, Sun and Moon and get possession of their Heavens. On our conquering the Devas, we all shall get our share of Yajñas and we along with other Dānavas drink the Soma juice and enjoy ourselves in Heaven.

[Ch 3 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Dānavas! I have got the boon; what do I now care for the Devas. My death is not from men too. What can a woman do to me?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Dānavas! I have got the boon; what do I now care for the Devas. My death is not from men too. What can a woman do to me?

[Ch 3 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O my emissaries! Call without any delay the chief Dānavas from the nether regions and the mountains and make them my generals?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O my emissaries! Call without any delay the chief Dānavas from the nether regions and the mountains and make them my generals?

[Ch 3 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Dānavas! I can alone conquer all the Devas; only to make war arrangements look nice, that I am taking you to defeat them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Dānavas! I can alone conquer all the Devas; only to make the war arrangements look nice, that I am taking you to defeat them.

[Ch 3 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There is no fear of mine from the Devas, consequent on the boon conferred on me. I will kill them by my hoofs and horns.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There is no fear of mine from the Devas, consequent on the boon conferred on me. I will kill them by my hoofs and horns.

[Ch 3 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I am not to be killed by Suras, Asuras, as men; therefore get yourselves ready to conquer the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I am not to be killed by Suras, Asuras, as men; therefore get yourselves ready to conquer the Devas.

[Ch 3 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Dānavas! After conquering the Heavens we will be garlanded with Pārijāta wreaths and we will enjoy the Deva women in the Nandana Garden.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Dānavas! After conquering the Heavens we will be garlanded with Pārijāta wreaths and we will enjoy the Deva women in the Nandana Garden.

[Ch 3 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We will drink the milk of the heavenly mulching cow (the cow that yields all desires) and, intoxicated with the heavenly drinks, we will hear and see the music and singing the dancing of the Gandharvas there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We will drink the milk of the heavenly milching cow (the cow that yields all desires) and, intoxicated with the heavenly drinks, we will hear and see the music and singing the dancing of the Gandarbhas there.

[Ch 3 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You will all be served there with various bottles of wine by Urvaśī, Menakā, Rambhā, Ghṛtāci, Tillottamā, Pramadvarā Mahāsenā, Miśra Keśi, Madotkatā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You will all be served there with various bottles of wine by Urvasī, Menakā, Rambhā, Ghritācī, Tillottamā, Pramadvarā Mahāsenā, Mira Kesī, Madotkatā,

[Ch 3 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vipracitti and others. Then be all ready at once for the auspicious occasion to march to Heaven and fight there with the Suras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viprachitti and others. Then be all ready at once for this auspicious occasion to march to Heavens and fight there with the Suras.

[Ch 3 Verse 51-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And be pleased to call that pure-souled Muni Sukrācārya, the son of Bhrgu and the Guru of the Daityas and worship him and tell him to perform sacrificial ceremonies for the safety and victory of the Dānavas."
NEW CORR ENG ──► And be pleased to call that pure-souled Muni Śukrācārya, the son of Bhṛgu and the Guru of the Daityas and worship him and tell him to perform sacrificial ceremonies for the safety and victory of the Dānavas.

[Ch 3 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Dānavas, the wicked Mahiṣa went to his abode, with gladness. Here ends the Third Chapter of the Fifth Book on the Daitya armies getting ready in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahāpurānam by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa of 18,000 verses.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Dānavas, the wicked Mahiṣa went to his abode, with gladness. Here ends the Third Chapter of the Fifth Book on the Daitya armies getting ready in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahāpurāṇam by Maharṣi Vedavyāsa of 18,000 verses.
