[Ch 6 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! First there appeared, on the mountain, the king of the seasons, Vasanta, the Spring. All the trees flowered and became very beautiful; and the bees began to hum round all sides.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! First there appeared on the mountain, the king of the seasons, Vasanta, the Spring. All the trees flowered and became very beautiful; and the bees began to hum round all sides.

[Ch 6 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mangoes, Bokulla trees, the beautiful Tilaka trees, the good Kiriśukas, Sāla, Tāla, Tamāla and Madhuka trees assumed unequalled beauties, ornamented with their flowers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mangoes, Bokul trees, the beautiful Tilaka trees, the good Kimsukas, Sāl, Tāl, Tamāl and Madhuka trees assumed unequalled beauties, ornamented with their flowers.

[Ch 6 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Cuckoos began to coo coo (warble) beautiful on the tops of trees; the creepers flowered and began to embrace the trees.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Cuckoos began to coo coo (warble) beautifully on the tops of trees; the creepers flowered and began to embrace the trees.

[Ch 6 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The creatures became enamoured with love and began to look on their paramours with amorous eyes and began to hold pleasant sexual intercourses.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The creatures became enamoured with love and began to look on their paramours with amorous eyes and began to hold pleasant sexual intercourses.

[Ch 6 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The southern breeze blew gently, full of pleasant odours and agreeable to touch. The sensual organs became very powerful and could no longer be brought under their control by the Munis.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The southern breeze blew gently, full of pleasant odours and agreeable to touch. The sensual organs became very powerful and could no longer be brought under their control by the Munis.

[Ch 6 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Kāma, united with Rati, hurriedly entered into the Hermitage of Badarikā with the five arrows in his hands.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Kāma, united with Rati, hurriedly entered into the Hermitage of Badarikā with the five arrows in his hands.

[Ch 6 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Rambhā, Tilottamā, and other prominent Apsarās all went to that beautiful! hermitage and began to sing in perfect tune with gamuts, key notes and respective pauses.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Rambhā, Tilottamā, and other prominent Apsarās all went to that beautiful hermitage and began to sing in perfect tune with gamuts, key notes and respective pauses.

[Ch 6 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The two Mahariss awoke on hearing the sweet music, the warblings of the cuckoos and the nice hummings of the bees.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The two Maharṣis awoke on hearing the sweet music, the warbling of the cuckoos and the nice hummings of the bees.

[Ch 6 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nara Nārāyaṇa became anxious to see the untimely bursting of the Vasanta (vernal season) and the flowering of the trees.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nara Nārāyaṇa became anxious to see the untimely bursting of the Vasanta (vernal season) and the flowering of the trees.

[Ch 6 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How can the spring season come now at such an untimely season. I see, all the creatures are become extremely amorous with each other and infatuated with passionate lust.
NEW CORR ENG ──► How can the spring season come now at such an untimely season. I see, all the creatures are become extremely amorous with each other and infatuated with passionate lust.

[Ch 6 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is very unusual that untimely things should happen. How has this come to pass? Stuck with wonder, Nārāyaṇa began to speck to Nara with eyes wide apart.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is very unusual that untimely things should happen. How has this come to pass? Struck with wonder, Nārāyaṇa began to speak to Nara with eyes wide apart.

[Ch 6 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: “O Brother! See these trees look very elegant with flowers on them; the cuckoos are sounding sweet notes on all sides; the bees are humming on all sides.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Brother! See these trees look very elegant with flowers on them; the cuckoos are sounding sweet notes on all sides; the bees are humming

[Ch 6 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The spring, the lion of the seasons, has burst asunder the fierce elephant, the winter season, by its sharp nails, as testified by the budding of Palāsa flowers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The spring, the lion of the seasons, has burst asunder the fierce elephant, the winter season, by its sharp nails, as testified by the budding of Palāsa flowers.

[Ch 6 Verse 14-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brāhmīn! See how beautiful and excellent has become this hermitage with the presence of the Goddess Spring Lakṣmī? O Devarsī! The Raktāśoka flower is the palm of her hand; Kiniśuka flowers, her excellent feet; Nilāśoka flowers, her black hair on her head, the full-blown lotuses, her eyes; the bel fruits, her breast; the jolly Kunda flowers, her teeth; Mañjari, her beautiful ears; red Bandhu flowers, her lips; Sindhuvāra, her wonderful nails; the peacocks, her ornaments; the sounds of Sārasa birds, the jingling of her feet ornaments; the wreathes of flowers, her waist ornaments; the mad gooses, her gait; Kadamba flower's filaments, her hairs on her body; O best of ascetics! With all these, the Vasanta Lakṣmī has assumed a wonderful nice appearance.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brahman! See how beautiful and excellent has become this hermitage with the presence of the Goddess Spring Lakṣmi? O Devarsī! The Raktāśoka flower is the palm of her hand; Kiṃśuka flower, her excellent feet; Nīlāsoka flowers, her black hairs on her head, the full-blown lotuses, her eyes; the bel fruits, her breast; the jolly Kunda flowers, her teeth; Mañjari, her beautiful ears; red Bandhu flowers, her lips; Sindhubāra, her wonderful nails; the peacocks, her ornaments; the sounds of Sārasa birds, the jingling of her feet ornaments; the wreaths of flowers, her waist ornaments; the mad gooses, her gait; Kadamba flower’s filaments, her hairs on her body; O best of ascetics! With all these, the Vasanta Lakṣmī has assumed a wonderful nice appearance.

[Ch 6 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Why has this occurred untimely? Think over it; O Devarṣi! I am struck with wonder; surely this is obstructive of our penances.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Why has this occurred untimely? Think over it; O Devarṣi! I am struck with wonder; surely this is obstructive of our penances.

[Ch 6 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hear! There the Apsarās are singing sweetly the song, tending to destroy our Tapasyās; it seems, these are the means, no doubt, adopted by Indra to pollute our Tapasyā. མཆུང་བྱུམ་གྱུང་གྱུང་གྱུང་གྱུང་གྱུང་གྱུང་གྱུང་གྱུ
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hear! There the Apsarās are singing sweetly the song, tending to destroy our Tapasyās; it seems, these are the means, no doubt, adopted by Indra to pollute our Tapasyā.

[Ch 6 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Why is this spring season now generating our pleasures? It is clear that that. Indra, the enemy of the Asuras, is become afraid of our Tapasyā and is creating these obstructions to disturb our asceticisms.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Why is this spring season now generating our pleasures? It is clear that that Indra, the enemy of the Asuras, is become afraid of our Tapasyā and is creating these obstructions to disturb our asceticisms.

[Ch 6 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Lo! The cool, odorous, and pleasant breezes is blowing; no other cause can be traced than the wicked deed of Indra."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Lo! The cool, odorous, and pleasant breezes are blowing; no other cause can be traced than the wicked deed of Indra.

[Ch 6 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the best of the Brāhmins, the Deva Nārāyaṇa was addressing thus, the whole host of Cupid became visible before their sight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the best of the Brāhmins, the Deva Nārāyaṇa was addressing thus, the whole host of Cupid became visible before their sight.

[Ch 6 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And the two Rsis were very much surprised on seeing them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And the two Ṛṣis were very much surprised on seeing them.

[Ch 6 Verse 25-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They saw near to them the Cupid with his attendants Menakā, Rambhā, Tilottamā, Puspagandhā, Sukesī, Mahāśvetā, Manoranmā, Pramodvarā, Ghrṭāci, Čaruhāsini, the expert in music, Candra Prabhā, the cuckoo voiced Somā, the lotus eyed Vidyunmālā, Kāncanamlinī, and others.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They saw near to them the Cupid with his attendants Menakā, Rambhā, Tilottamā, Puspagandhā, Sukeśī, Mahāśvetā, Manoramā, Pramodvarā, Ghritācī, Cāruhāsinī, the expert in music, Candra Prabhā, the cuckoo voiced Somā, the lotus eyed Vidyunmālā, Kāñcana malinī, and others.

[Ch 6 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Eight thousand and five hundred Apsarās and long multitudes of the hosts of Cupid, the Munis saw and were surprised.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Eight thousand and five hundred Apsarās and long multitudes of the hosts of Cupid, the Munis saw and were surprised.

[Ch 6 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then those prostitutes of the Devas, dressed with their heavenly ornaments and the heavenly flowers, appeared before the Munis and bowed down their heads on the ground.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then those prostitutes of the Devas, dressed with their heavenly ornaments and the heavenly flowers, appeared before the Munis and bowed down their heads on the ground.

[Ch 6 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Apsarās began their enchanting songs, exciting much passion and rarely heard or seen in this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Apsarās began their enchanting songs, exciting much passion and rarely heard or seen in this world.

[Ch 6 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The two Munis Bhagavān Viṣṇu like Nara Nārāyaṇa were pleased with their music and addressed them thus: O thin waisted good looking Apsarās! You have come here as guests, I see, from your Heavenly world. Stay here in peace and all comfort; we will gladly serve you as your hosts."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The two Munis Bhagavān Viṣṇu-like Nara Nārāyaṇa were pleased with their music and addressed them thus :-- O thin waisted good looking Apsarās! You have come here as guests, I see, from your Heavenly world. Stay here in peace and all comfort; we will gladly serve you as your hosts.

[Ch 6 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! The two Munis, thinking that Indra has sent these Apsarās to obstruct their Tapasyā, were filled with egoism and determined to create, out of their strength of Tapasyā a new Apsarā, who would be very much more beautiful and possessing far more heavenly graces than the present ones, who are ordinary looking and clumsy in their behaviours.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! The two Munis, thinking that Indra has sent these Apsarās to obstruct their Tapasyā, were filled with egoism and determined to create, out of their strength of Tapasyā a new Apsarā, who would be very much more beautiful and possessing far more heavenly graces than the present ones, who are ordinary looking and clumsy in their behaviours.

[Ch 6 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And the Munis, by clapping or striking their thighs, instantly created a woman, exquisitely beautiful in all respects.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And the Munis, by clapping or striking their thighs, instantly created a woman, exquisitely beautiful in all respects.

[Ch 6 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This good looking woman was named Urvaśī, since she was produced from the thighs. And all the other Apsarās present there were very much thunderstruck on seeing that Urvaśī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This good looking woman was named Urvaśī, since she was produced from the thighs. And all the other Apsarās present there were very much thunderstruck on seeing that Urvaśī.

[Ch 6 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Muni Nārāyana easily created as many women as there were Apsarās to serve them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the Muni Nārāyaṇa easily created as many women as there were Apsarās to serve them.

[Ch 6 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The just produced Apsarās brought with them all sorts of offerings in their hands, and, singing and smiling, came before the Munis and with clasped hands bowed down before them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The just produced Apsarās brought with them all sorts of offering in their hands, and, singing and smiling, came before the Munis and with clasped hands bowed down before them.

[Ch 6 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The heavenly damsels sent by Indra, though enchanting to others, were themselves now bewildered on beholding Urvaśī, beautiful in all respects and produced out of the Tapasyā of the Munis; and their hairs over the bodies stood on their ends. Then they tried to make their faces as beautiful as they could and began to address the Munis thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► The heavenly damsels sent by Indra, though enchanting to others were themselves now bewildered on beholding Urvaśi, beautiful in all respects and produced out of the Tapasyā of the Munis; and their hairs over the bodies stood on their ends. Then they tried to make their faces as beautiful as they could and began to address the Munis thus :--

[Ch 6 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Munis! We are ignorant girls; how can we praise you and the greatness of your Tapasyā and at your steadiness. Oh! There is no one in this Universe, that is not burnt with the passion by the arrows of our sharp eyesight. But there is no trace of mental disturbance and defilement in you; Oh! Wonderful is your greatness, indeed!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Munis! We are ignorant girls; how can we praise you and the greatness of your Tapasyā and at your steadiness. Oh! There is no one in this Universe, that is not burnt with the passion by the arrows of our sharp eyesight? But there is no trace of mental disturbance and defilement in you; Oh! Wonderful is your greatness, indeed!

[Ch 6 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We are convinced that both of you are the Arnisas of Vişnu and that your treasures are your incessant peace and control of mind. We have come here not to serve you but to hinder you in you penances, that we may fulfill the desires of Indra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We are convinced that both of you are the Amsas of Viṣṇu and that your treasures are your incessant peace and control of mind. We have come here not to serve you but to hinder you in your penances, that we may fulfill the desires of Indra.

[Ch 6 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► By what good luck of ours we have got a sight of thee, we do not know; we do not know also what merits we did? We have committed a great offence to you; still you have not cursed us. You have considered us as those of your own family and have pardoned us. Therefore our minds are free from sorrow and anxiety. Much praise be to your forgiveness! Wise saints do not squander away their occult powers, derived from austerities, in trivial ways like cursing others. <table><tr><td>མས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྲིགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གློགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྱོགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གཅིགས་ཀྱི་གཅིགས་ཀྱི་གཅིགས་ཀྱི་གཆིགས་ཀྱི་གཅིགས་ཀྱི་གཅིགས་ཀྱི་ག Vyāsa said: Very pleased were those two Dharma's sons, the two Maharṣis self controlled and desireless, to hear these words of those goodly behaved heavenly damsels; they then spoke to the damsels, blazing with the fire of their Tapas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► By what good luck of ours we have got a sight of thee, we do not know; we do not know also what merits we did? We have committed great offence to you; still you have not cursed us. You have considered us as those of your own family and have pardoned us. Therefore our minds are free from sorrow and anxiety. Much praise be to your forgiveness! Wise saints do not squander away their occult powers, derived from austerities, in trivial ways like cursing others.  Vyāsa said :-- Very pleased were those two Dharma’s sons, the two Maharṣis, self controlled and desireless, to hear these words of those godly behaved heavenly damsels; they then spoke to the damsels, blazing with the fire of their Tapas.

[Ch 6 Verse 43-45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nara and Nārāyana said: O Damsels! We are pleased with you; better ask from us your desired boons; we will instantly grant them to you. You better take with you to your Heaven this beautiful eyed Urvaśī, born of our thighs as a present to your Deva Rāja, the Indra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nara and Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Damsels! We are pleased with you; better ask from us your desired boons; we will instantly grant them to you. You better take with you to your Heaven this beautiful eyed Urvaśī, born of our thighs as a present to your Deva Rāja, the Indra.

[Ch 6 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now peace be to all the Devas; you better go to your own places; do not, in future, disturb the Tapasyā of others.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now peace be to all the Devas; you better go to your own places; do not, in future, disturb the Tapasyā of others.

[Ch 6 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The damsels said: Where will we go now? We have reached your lotus feet through our devotion, and our joy knows no bounds; O Nārāyana the Supreme amongst the Gods!
NEW CORR ENG ──► The damsels said :-- Where will we go now? We have reached your lotus feet through our devotion, and our joy knows no bounds; O Nārāyaṇa the Supreme amongst the Gods!

[Ch 6 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord! O Madhusūdana! O Lotus-eyed! If Thou are pleased with us and dost want to give us our desired boons, we disclose to you our wished for object.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord! O Madhusūdana! O Lotus-eyed! If Thou art pleased with us and dost want to give us our desired boons, we disclose to you our wished for object.

[Ch 6 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the Devas! Thou art the Lord of the world; so beset Thou the Lord of us. O Destroyer of the foes! We will gladly put ourselves at the service of your feet.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the Devas! Thou art the Lord of the world; so beest Thou the Lord of us. O Destroyer of the foes! We will gladly put ourselves at the service of your feet.

[Ch 6 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Let those sixteen hundred and fifty beautifullyed damsels including Urvaśī, that are your creation and that are now existing here, let them go unto Heaven by your command.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Let those sixteen hundred and fifty beautiful-eyed damsels including Urvaśī, that are your creation and that are now existing here, let them go unto Heaven by your command.

[Ch 6 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And we, the sixteen hundred and fifty damsels that have come before, may be allowed to remain here at your service.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And we, the sixteen hundred and fifty damsels that have come before, may be allowed to remain here at your service.

[Ch 6 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mâdhava! You are the Lord of the Devas; be true to your word and give us our desires. Those seers, the Munis, who know what is Dharma, declare that it is sin, equivalent to murder, to destroy the hopes of those women that are struck with passion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mādhava! You are the Lord of the Devas; be true to your word and give us our desires. Those seers, the Munis, who know what is Dharma, declare that it is sin, equivalent to murder, to destroy the hopes of those women that are struck with passion.

[Ch 6 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We are very fortunate to come here from Heaven and we are filled with extreme love for you, O Devesa! You are the Lord of the world; you can do all things; therefore do not leave us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We are very fortunate to come here from Heaven and we are filled with extreme love for you, O Deveśa! You are the Lord of the world; you can do all things; therefore do not leave us.

[Ch 6 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: O thin bodied damsels! I am practising at this place the tapasyaś for full one thousand years, controlling my passion; how can I now break it by engaging myself to enjoy sensual things.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- O thin bodied damsels! I am practising at this place the tapasyā for full one thousand years, controlling my passions; how can I now break it by engaging myself to enjoy sensual things.

[Ch 6 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I have no inclination to indulge in sexual pleasures, tending to destroy the Highest Bliss as well as the Highest Dharma. What intelligent person will like to indulge like a beast in sensual pleasures.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I have no inclination to indulge in sexual pleasures, tending to destroy the Highest Bliss as well as the Highest Dharma. What intelligent person will like to indulge like a beast in sensual pleasures.

[Ch 6 Verse 56-57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Apsarās said: Of the five senses; sound, etc., the pleasures attained through the sensation of touch are excellent, and is reckoned as the source of Bliss; no other pleasures stand equal to it. Therefore do then fulfill our words, and enjoy incessantly this highest bliss and roam freely in this Gandhamādana mountain.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Apsarās said :-- Of the five senses; sound, etc., the pleasures attained through the sensation of touch are excellent, and are reckoned as the source of Bliss; no other pleasures stand equal to it. Therefore do then fulfill our words, and enjoy incessantly this highest bliss and roam freely in this Gandhamādan mountain.

[Ch 6 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If you like to go Heaven, be pleased to know that there is no Superior Heaven to Gandhamādana (the mountain like intoxicating happiness of the senses). Dost thou enjoy the highest bliss, the pleasant sexual intercourse with us, the heavenly damsels in this very beautiful and lovely place. Thus ends the Sixth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa on the origin of Urvaśī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If you like to go to Heaven, be pleased to know that there is no Superior Heaven to Gandhamādan (the mountain like intoxicating happiness of the senses). Dost thou enjoy the highest bliss, the pleasant sexual intercourse with us, the heavenly damsels in this very beautiful and lovely place. Thus ends the Sixth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa on the origin of Urvaśī.
