CHAPTER VI

On the Origin of Urvási

व्यास उवाच

प्रथमं तत्र सम्प्राटो वसन्तः पर्वतींत्तमे ।

पुधिताः पादपाः सर्वे डिंरेभालिर्वारिजिताः ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! First there appeared, on the mountain, the king of the seasons, Vasanta, the Spring. All the trees flowered and became very beautiful; and the bees began to hum round all sides.

आमाश्र डकुला रथासितलका: किंशुका: शृभा: ।

सालालासालास्मालाश मधुका: पुचिता बधु: ॥ 2 ॥

Mangoes, Bokulla trees, the beautiful Tilaka trees, the good Kiriśukas, Sāla, Tāla, Tamāla and Madhuka trees assumed unequalled beauties, ornamented with their flowers.

बधूवुः कोकिलालापा वृक्षायेषु मनोहराः ।

वल्ल्योदपि पुधिताः स्वां आलिलिंनुनीगोतमान् ॥ 3 ॥

Cuckoos began to coo coo (warble) beautiful on the tops of trees; the creepers flowered and began to embrace the trees.

प्राणिनः ख्वायु भार्यातु प्रेमयुक्ता: स्मातुतः ।

बभुव्छातिनात्रा क्रीडासक्ताः परस्वम् ॥ 4 ॥

The creatures became enamoured with love and began to look on their paramours with amorous eyes and began to hold pleasant sexual intercourses.

वसुर्भूत: सुगन्धाशु सुस्पर्शा दक्षिणानिताः ।

इन्द्रियाणि प्रमाहीति मुन्नौतामपि चाघवत् ॥ 5 ॥

The southern breeze blew gently, full of pleasant odours and agreeable to touch. The sensual organs became very powerful and could no longer be brought under their control by the Munis.

तित्युक्ततः कामः पूर्यन्यघ्न मारणान् ।

चका चरितस्तत्र वासं बदोरिकाओं ॥ 6 ॥

Then Kāma, united with Rati, hurriedly entered into the Hermitage of Badarikā with the five arrows in his hands.

रभा तिलोनमाद्धाङ्ग गत्वा तत्र वाराङ्गे ।

गानं चकुः सुगीतज्ञः स्वतातनसम्वित्यम् ॥ 7 ॥

Rambhā, Tilottamā, and other prominent Apsarās all went to that beautiful! hermitage and began to sing in perfect tune with gamuts, key notes and respective pauses.

तच्छ्वा मधुरोद्रौं कौकिलानां च कुजितम् ।

भ्रमतिलिवारं च प्रबुद्धौ तो मुनीधरी ॥ ८ ॥

The two Mahariss awoke on hearing the sweet music, the warblings of the cuckoos and the nice hummings of the bees.

ऋतुराजमकले तु दूद्या तो पुषितं नन् ।

जाती चिन्तापरो तत्र ननतारयाणची ॥ 9 ॥

Nara Nārāyaṇa became anxious to see the untimely bursting of the Vasanta (vernal season) and the flowering of the trees.

किमय शिशिरायाय: संवृत: समयं विना ।

प्राणिजी विद्वाल: सर्वे लक्ष्मोपेत्तिमातृतः ॥ 10 ॥

How can the spring season come now at such an untimely season. I see, all the creatures are

become extremely amorous with each other and infatuated with passionate lust.

कालधर्मविपर्यासः कथमघ दुर्गासदः ।

नरं नारायण: प्राह विस्यमोतुल्ललोचनः ॥ १ १ ॥

It is very unusual that untimely things should happen. How has this come to pass? Stuck with wonder, Nārāyaṇa began to speck to Nara with eyes wide apart.

नारायण उवाच

पथ्य ध्रातरिये वृक्षा: पुथिता: प्रतिभान्ति वे ।

कोकिलालायसंयुहा ध्रमारतिविजिताः ॥ 12 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: “O Brother! See these trees look very elegant with flowers on them; the cuckoos are sounding sweet notes on all sides; the bees are humming on all sides.

शिशिरं भीमातर्नां दारायन्वखर्नैवंः ।

वसंतैक्सरी प्राप्त: पलाशकुर्मपैनुं ॥ 13 ॥

The spring, the lion of the seasons, has burst asunder the fierce elephant, the winter season, by its sharp nails, as testified by the budding of Palāsa flowers.

राकाणीककात तन्वी देवर्ष किंशुकांधिका ।

नीलाणोककाना श्यामा विवाकीसकमलाना ॥ 14 ॥

नीलैंदीवतेना सा विज्वबुङ्घफलती ।

प्रोतुल्लोकुंदरदाना मछरी कर्णशीभता ॥ 15 ॥

पंधुजीक्षाया गृधा सिन्धुवारणखोद्वा ।

पुंकाकिलित्वसा पुणया कद्ववद्वसना सुभा ॥ 16 ॥

बाईवृन्दकालाप च सासस्वन्नपुरा ।

वासन्तो बढ़राना भनहंभगतिसथा ॥ 17 ॥

पुत्रजीवांशुक्यस्त रेमार्जिनिर्वारिता ।

वसन्तक्षीः सम्पाता बह्ञाव्यदीराक्रप्रे ॥ 18 ॥

O Brāhmīn! See how beautiful and excellent has become this hermitage with the presence of the Goddess Spring Lakṣmī? O Devarsī! The Raktāśoka flower is the palm of her hand; Kiniśuka flowers, her excellent feet; Nilāśoka flowers, her black hair on her head, the full-blown lotuses, her eyes; the bel fruits, her breast; the jolly Kunda flowers, her teeth; Mañjari, her beautiful ears; red Bandhu flowers, her lips; Sindhuvāra, her wonderful nails;

Book IV Chapter VI

the peacocks, her ornaments; the sounds of Sārasa birds, the jingling of her feet ornaments; the wreathes of flowers, her waist ornaments; the mad gooses, her gait; Kadamba flower's filaments, her hairs on her body; O best of ascetics! With all these, the Vasanta Lakṣmī has assumed a wonderful nice appearance.

अकाले किमियं प्राता विस्मयोउयं ममाधुना ।

तपोविफकारा नूनं देवर्षे परिधिंतय न ॥19 ॥

Why has this occurred untimely? Think over it; O Devarṣi! I am struck with wonder; surely this is obstructive of our penances.

भूयते सुरानीर्णां गानं ध्यानविनारानम् ।

आवयोस्तपिभंगाय कृतं मघवता किल ॥ 20 ॥

Hear! There the Apsarās are singing sweetly the song, tending to destroy our Tapasyās; it seems, these are the means, no doubt, adopted by Indra to pollute our Tapasyā.

མཆུང་བྱུམ་གྱུང་གྱུང་གྱུང་གྱུང་གྱུང་གྱུང་གྱུང་གྱུ

विनोद्यं विहितो भाति भीतेनासुराज्युण ॥ 21 ॥

Why is this spring season now generating our pleasures? It is clear that that. Indra, the enemy of the Asuras, is become afraid of our Tapasyā and is creating these obstructions to disturb our asceticisms.

वाता: सुगन्धा: शीला प्रसामाति मनोहा: ।

नान्यकारणमस्तीह शतक्रतुर्कर्ति बिना ॥ 22 ॥

Lo! The cool, odorous, and pleasant breezes is blowing; no other cause can be traced than the wicked deed of Indra."

इति बुवति विप्राप्ये देने नारायणे विभो ।

सर्वे द्विष्यं प्राता मन्यप्रमुखास्तात ॥ 23 ॥

When the best of the Brāhmins, the Deva Nārāyaṇa was addressing thus, the whole host of Cupid became visible before their sight.

दूरर्गं भगवान्यवर्त्रजे नारायणतशा ।

वियमायाश्यमनसी बभूवतुरभावपि ॥ 24 ॥

And the two Rsis were very much surprised on seeing them.

मान्यं मेकां दीव रभां दैव लिलोतमाम् ।

पुष्पान्यां सुकेशीं च महाश्रितां मारोपायम् ॥ 25 ॥

प्रमूत्रां घृताङ्गी व गीतजां चासहासिनीम् ।

चन्द्रप्रभां च सोमां च कोकिलालापमधिद्धतम् ॥ 26 ॥

विद्युभालांबुजाईं च तथा काङ्गनामिनीम् ।

एताङ्गान्या वरात्रोहा घृतसाध्यां ततदान्तिके ॥ 27 ॥

They saw near to them the Cupid with his attendants Menakā, Rambhā, Tilottamā, Puspagandhā, Sukesī, Mahāśvetā, Manoranmā, Pramodvarā, Ghrṭāci, Čaruhāsini, the expert in music, Candra Prabhā, the cuckoo voiced Somā, the lotus eyed Vidyunmālā, Kāncanamlinī, and others.

तासां ऋषसहस्वाणि पञ्ञारद्धिकानि च।

वीक्ष्य ती विक्सितो जाती कामकैस्यं सुविसतम् ॥ 28 ॥

Eight thousand and five hundred Apsarās and long multitudes of the hosts of Cupid, the Munis saw and were surprised.

प्रणम्याश्रे स्थिताः सर्वां देववारांगनास्ततः ।

दिव्याभरणभूमात्वा दिव्यान्योपोषभितः ॥ 29 ॥

Then those prostitutes of the Devas, dressed with their heavenly ornaments and the heavenly flowers, appeared before the Munis and bowed down their heads on the ground.

जगुष्ठलेन ताः सर्वा: पृथिव्यामितुलर्भम् ।

ततचावस्वित्यां दिव्यां मन्यथातिविवधान् ॥ 30 ॥

The Apsarās began their enchanting songs, exciting much passion and rarely heard or seen in this world.

शुषाव भगवान्विणुर्नो नारायणस्ततः ।

शुत्वा प्रोवाच सातस्त प्रीत्या नारायणो मुनि: ॥ 31 ॥

आस्वतां सुखमदैव करोमातिलयमद्धूनम् ।

भवन्योर्जितिध्यॉण प्रापतः स्वर्गाल्यमध्यम: ॥ 32 ॥

The two Munis Bhagavān Viṣṇu like Nara Nārāyaṇa were pleased with their music and addressed them thus: O thin waisted good looking Apsarās! You have come here as guests, I see, from your Heavenly world. Stay here in peace and all comfort; we will gladly serve you as your hosts."

व्यास उवाच

साधिभानस्तु संजातस्तवा नारायणो मुनि: । इन्द्रैण प्रेयिता नूनं तथा विद्यन्धिकरीयां ॥ ३ ३ ॥

वरायकः का इमा: सर्वी: सुजाम्यद्ध नावः किल ।

तृणभ्यो दिव्यस्पाधा दर्यायिम तपोबलम् ॥ 34 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! The two Munis, thinking that Indra has sent these Apsarās to obstruct their Tapasyā, were filled with egoism and determined to create, out of their strength of Tapasyā a new Apsarā, who would be very much more beautiful and possessing far more heavenly graces than the present ones, who are ordinary looking and clumsy in their behaviours.

इति संघिन्य मनसा करोगोंः प्रताङ्य चै ।

तस्सोत्पादयामास नारीं सर्वांकुषुन्दीम् ॥ 35 ॥

And the Munis, by clapping or striking their thighs, instantly created a woman, exquisitely beautiful in all respects.

नारायणोरभ्यमृत हुवैर्गिति ततः शुभा ।

दूरशुता: स्थितास्तात्र सियमयं परयं युः ॥ 36 ॥

This good looking woman was named Urvaśī, since she was produced from the thighs. And all the other Apsarās present there were very much thunderstruck on seeing that Urvaśī.

तासां च परिचार्यां तात्तीशातिसुन्दरी: ।

प्रादुशकार तसा तदा युनिसंम्बभ: ॥ 37 ॥

Then Muni Nārāyana easily created as many women as there were Apsarās to serve them.

गायल्थ इंसल्थ नानोपायनपाणव: ।

प्रमेमुस्ता मुनी सर्वा: स्थिता: कृत्वोउलिं पुरः ॥ 38 ॥

The just produced Apsarās brought with them all sorts of offerings in their hands, and, singing and smiling, came before the Munis and with clasped hands bowed down before them.

तां वीक्ष्य विभ्रमकर्ती तपसो विभूर्ति

देवांगना हि मुगुड़: प्रविमोहरंचल: ।

क्रत्रुधु ती प्रमुदिताननपश्ठोगेभा

रोगोहमालेलसितधान्तिनाजंगलल्पः ॥ ३ ९ ॥

The heavenly damsels sent by Indra, though enchanting to others, were themselves now bewildered on beholding Urvaśī, beautiful in all respects and produced out of the Tapasyā of the Munis; and their hairs over the bodies stood on

their ends. Then they tried to make their faces as beautiful as they could and began to address the Munis thus:

कुरुः कथं स्तुतिमहो तपसी महन्चं

धैर्य तर्वेय भवतामिधीक्ष्वेय बाला: ।

अस्मत्कारक्षियविद्याश्रोण द्धधः

को चा न ततभवातो मनसो व्यथा नः ॥ 40 ॥

O Munis! We are ignorant girls; how can we praise you and the greatness of your Tapasyā and at your steadiness. Oh! There is no one in this Universe, that is not burnt with the passion by the arrows of our sharp eyesight. But there is no trace of mental disturbance and defilement in you; Oh! Wonderful is your greatness, indeed!

जातौ युवां नरहः: परमांगभृतौ

देवी मुनी ग्रामदामतिनिधी सदैव ।

सेवानिकाममिह नो गानं न कामं

कार्य हरे: शनतमध्येय चितानुभेव ॥ 4 1 ॥

We are convinced that both of you are the Arnisas of Vişnu and that your treasures are your incessant peace and control of mind. We have come here not to serve you but to hinder you in you penances, that we may fulfill the desires of Indra.

भायेन केन युवयोः किलन दर्शनं नः

सम्पतितं न विदितं खलु सखितं तत् ।

चित्तं क्षம் निजजने विहितं युवाध्यामसप्रिद्धे

किल कृतानास तायमुक्त्म ॥ 4 2 ॥

कुर्वन्ति नैव विवृधासपसो व्ययं

ई शानेन तुच्छफलदेन महानुभावा: ।

By what good luck of ours we have got a sight of thee, we do not know; we do not know also what merits we did? We have committed a great offence to you; still you have not cursed us. You have considered us as those of your own family and have pardoned us. Therefore our minds are free from sorrow and anxiety. Much praise be to your forgiveness! Wise saints do not squander away their occult powers, derived from austerities, in trivial ways like cursing others.

Book IV Chapter VI

<table><tr><td>མས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྲིགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གློགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྱོགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གཅིགས་ཀྱི་གཅིགས་ཀྱི་གཅིགས་ཀྱི་གཆིགས་ཀྱི་གཅིགས་ཀྱི་གཅིགས་ཀྱི་ག

Vyāsa said: Very pleased were those two Dharma's sons, the two Maharṣis self controlled and desireless, to hear these words of those goodly behaved heavenly damsels; they then spoke to the damsels, blazing with the fire of their Tapas.

ननतावणावृषतुः

ब्रुन्तु वाजित्ञान्कामान्द्वावस्तुर्णमानसे ॥ 44 ॥

थांतु स्वगं गृहील्मामुर्षीं चाल्त्तोचनाम् ।

उपायनमियं बाला गच्छलवघ मनोहरा ॥ 45 ॥

Nara and Nārāyana said: O Damsels! We are pleased with you; better ask from us your desired boons; we will instantly grant them to you. You better take with you to your Heaven this beautiful eyed Urvaśī, born of our thighs as a present to your Deva Rāja, the Indra.

दतास्त्रवाण्यं भवतः श्रीणनायोकसभ्याः ।

स्वलस्तु सर्वदैवेण्यो यथेढ़े प्रजन्तु च ॥ ४६ ॥

“न कस्यापि तपोधित्वं प्रकर्तेल्यात परम् ”

Now peace be to all the Devas; you better go to your own places; do not, in future, disturb the Tapasyā of others.

दैव्य ऋनु:

वव गच्छागो महाभाग प्राप्तासे पादपूक्जम् ।

नारायण सुरश्रेष भक्ल्या परमया मुत् ॥ 47 ॥

The damsels said: Where will we go now? We have reached your lotus feet through our devotion, and our joy knows no bounds; O Nārāyana the Supreme amongst the Gods!

वार्षिडतं चेत्रं नाथ दूदासि मधुसूदन ।

तुः: कमलपत्राक्ष ब्रवीमो मनस्पतिसतम् ॥ 48 ॥

O Lord! O Madhusūdana! O Lotus-eyed! If Thou are pleased with us and dost want to give us our desired boons, we disclose to you our wished for object.

पतितर्वं घव देदेश वरामेनं परन्तप ।

भवामः प्रीतिङुक्तास्वां सेवितुं जगदीक्षा ॥ 4 9 ॥

O Lord of the Devas! Thou art the Lord of the world; so beset Thou the Lord of us. O Destroyer of the foes! We will gladly put ourselves at the service of your feet.

त्वया चोत्पादिता नांशे: संत्यन्यश्राललोचना: ।

उर्वयश्रात्तसा यान्तु खर्नि ५ भवतद्वासा ॥ 50 ॥

Let those sixteen hundred and fifty beautifullyed damsels including Urvaśī, that are your creation and that are now existing here, let them go unto Heaven by your command.

स्वीर्णा घोड़गासाड़े निर्हचल शताधंकम् ।

सेवां तैंउ कार्वियामो युव्योत्सायतोमती ॥ 5 1 ॥

And we, the sixteen hundred and fifty damsels that have come before, may be allowed to remain here at your service.

वाहित्ठं देहि देहेश सत्यवार्थभर भाधव ।

आशाभगो हि नारीणां हिंचनं परिकीर्तितम् ॥ 52 ॥

O Mâdhava! You are the Lord of the Devas; be true to your word and give us our desires. Those seers, the Munis, who know what is Dharma, declare that it is sin, equivalent to murder, to destroy the hopes of those women that are struck with passion.

कामातर्ना च मुनिभिधर्मिंस्तत्वदर्शिभि: ।

भाययोगादिष्ट प्राणत: स्वान्तिमुभपरितृतः ॥ 53 ॥

त्वक्रुं नाईसि देयेग समवर्धसि जगतयते ।

We are very fortunate to come here from Heaven and we are filled with extreme love for you, O Devesa! You are the Lord of the world; you can do all things; therefore do not leave us.

नारायण झगचे

पूर्ण वर्षसहर्ष तु तपस्तर्ण मात्राउत्र वै ॥ ५४ ॥

त्रितेन्द्रियण चाचायक: कर्थ भकुं कंपीयन्तः ।

Nārāyaṇa said: O thin bodied damsels! I am practising at this place the tapasyaś for full one thousand years, controlling my passion; how can I now break it by engaging myself to enjoy sensual things.

नेच्छा कामे सुखे कान्सिलुखधर्मविनारणेक ॥ ५५ ॥

पशुनामपि साधये रेमेत मतिमान्कधम् ।

I have no inclination to indulge in sexual pleasures, tending to destroy the Highest Bliss as well as the Highest Dharma. What intelligent person will like to indulge like a beast in sensual pleasures.

अपसर ऊचुः

शब्दादीनां च पझानां मध्ये स्पर्भासुं खरम् ॥ 56 ॥

आनन्दिसमूर्ते वै नायन्दिति सुखं किल ।

अतोउसाकां महाराज वचनं कुरु सर्वथा ॥ 57 ॥

The Apsarās said: Of the five senses; sound, etc., the pleasures attained through the sensation of touch are excellent, and is reckoned as the source of Bliss; no other pleasures stand equal to it. Therefore do then fulfill our words, and enjoy

incessantly this highest bliss and roam freely in this Gandhamādana mountain.

निर्भरं सुखामासाद चरसव गन्यमादने ।

यदि वाज्छसि नाकं त्वं नाधिको गन्यमादनात् ।

रामस्वात रुषे घनो प्राप्य सर्वा: सुर्गानतः ॥ 58 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे चतुर्धिकन्ये

फर्उीउध्वाः: 11 6 11

If you like to go Heaven, be pleased to know that there is no Superior Heaven to Gandhamādana (the mountain like intoxicating happiness of the senses). Dost thou enjoy the highest bliss, the pleasant sexual intercourse with us, the heavenly damsels in this very beautiful and lovely place.

Thus ends the Sixth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa on the origin of Urvaśī.

