CHAPTER XLVIII

On Manasā

शीनारायण उवाच

मत्त: पूजाविधानं च श्रूयता मुनिपुर्णाव । ध्यानं च सामवेदोरके प्रोके देवीविधानम् ॥ १ ॥

श्रवेतंपकवरणाणं। रत्नभूषणभूषितम् । वहिक्षुद्धिणुकाधानां नागयज्ञोपवीतिनम् ॥ २ ॥

महाजान्यतुतां तां च प्रवर्ताजिनां वराम् ।

सिद्धाधिगुदादेवीं च सिद्धा सिद्धिप्रदांं भगे ॥ ३ ॥

Nārāyana said: O Nārada! I will now speak of the Dhyānam and the method of worship of Śri Devi Manasā, as stated in the Sāma Veda. Hear. 'I meditate on the Devi Manasā, Whose colour is fair like that of the white campaka flower, whose body is decked all over with jewel ornaments, whose clothing is purified by fire, whose sacred thread is the Nāgas (serpent), who is full of wisdom, who is the foremost of great Jñāniens, who is the Presiding deity of the Siddhas, Who Herself is a Siddha and who bestows Siddis to all.'

इति ध्याना च तां देवी मूलेनैव प्रपुजयेत ।

नैवेटीविविधीपूरि: पुव्यपांधानुरेनपे: ॥ 4 ॥

मूलमेंग्रेष्ठ बेदोर्फैर्फन्तां वांशितप्रद: ।

मुने कल्यतरनाम सुसिंद्रो झादणाक्षतः ॥ 5 ॥

O Muni! Thus meditating on Her, one should present Her flowers, scents, ornaments, offerings of food and various other articles, pronouncing the principal Seed Mantra. O Nārada! The twelve

lettered Siddha Mantra, to be mentioned below, yields to the Bhaktas their desires like the Kalpa Tree.

उठे हीी बली रैंद मनसा देखे स्वाहिति कीर्तितः ।

पछल्बजपैने मन्त्रसिद्धमैन्द्रगणम् ॥ 6 ॥

मन्त्रसिद्धप्रदेशस्य स सिद्धो जगतिलो ।

सुधासपं चितं तस्य धवर्तिरसभो भवेत् ॥ 7 ॥

Now the Radical mantra as stated in the Vedas is ‘Om Hrim Śrīm Klīm Aim Manasā Devyai Svāhā’. Repetition of this, five lakhs of times, yields success to one who repeats. He who attains success in this mantra gets unbounded name and fame in this world. Poison becomes nectar to him and fame in this world. Poison becomes nectar to him and he himself becomes famous like Dhanvantarī.

बहान्नालात् तु संक्रांत्यां गृह्गालासु यन्ततः ।

आवाहा देवीमीगानां पुवयेडो प्रतिभक्ति: ॥ 8 ॥

पड्घयं मनसां धायन् देये दहाच्च यो बलिम।

धनवान्युवर्षोशे कौतिमान्स भवेद्युवम ॥ 9 ॥

O Nārada! If anybody bathes on any Saṅkranti day (when the sun enters from one sign to another) and going to a private room (hidden room), invokes the Devi Nanaśa Iśanā and worships Her with devotion, or makes sacrifices of animals before the Devi on the fifth day of the fortnight, he becomes certainly wealthy, endowed with sons and name and fame.

Book IX Chapter XLVIII

पूजाथिधानं कथितं तताद्यानं निशामय ।

कथयामि महाभाग यच्छुतं धार्यबस्तः ॥ 10 ॥

पुरा नागभ्याङ्गतां बधुबुर्मानंवा भृवि ।

गतातते शगरं सर्वे कशययं मुनिपुंगवम् ॥ 11 ॥

Thus I have described to you the method of worship of Manasā Devī. Now hear the anecdote of the Devi as I heard from Dharma. In olden days, men became greatly of the Devi as I heard from Dharma. In olden days, men become greatly terrified on earth from snakes and took refuge of Kaśyapa, the supreme amongst the Munis. The Maharṣi Kaśyapa became very afraid.

मंत्रांश सयुजे भरितः करणयो ब्रहणान्यितः ।

वेदवीजानुसारेण चोपदेशेन ब्रहाण: ॥ 1 2 ॥

मन्त्राधिष्ठानुदेवीं तां मनसां ससुजे तदा ।

तपसा मनसा तेन बन्यूव मनसा च सा ॥ 1 3 ॥

He then with Brahmā, and by His command composed a mantra following the principal motto of the Vedas. While composing this mantra, he intensely thought of the Devi, the Presiding Deity of that Mantra, through the power of his Tapasyā and through the mental power, the Devi Manasā appeared and was named so, as She was produced from the sheer influence of mind.

कुमारी सा च संभृता जगामा शंकालयम् ।

भक्ल्या संपूच्य कैलासे तुहाव चंद्रशेखादम् ॥ 14 ॥

दिव्यवर्षसहरूं ते सियेवे च मुनैः सुता ।

आगुतोषो महेश्ठा तां च तुहो बघूबर ए ॥ 15 ॥

On being born, the girl went to the abode of Śankara in Kailāśa and began to worship Him and chant hymns to Him with devotion. For one thousand Divine years, the daughter of Kaśyapa served Mahādeva when He became pleased.

महान्नां ददी तस्ये पाठयामास साम च ।

कृष्णमंत्र कल्पतर्के ददावधाक्षरं मुने ॥ १६ ॥

He gave her the Great Knowledge, made Her recite the Sāma Veda and bestowed to her the eight-lettered Krṣṇa mantra which is like the Kalpa Tree.

लक्ष्मीयायाकामार्थीजं डेनेन कृष्णपदत: ।

त्रैलोक्यमूढ़लं नाम कवचं पूजनकमम् ॥ 17 ॥

पुरुष्याक्रमं चापि वेदोक्तं सर्वसंपतम् ।

प्राय्य मृतुर्ज्ञान्यांत्र सा सती च मुनेः सुता ॥ 18 ॥

जगाम तपसे साखी पुक्छरं शंकराज्ञा ।

त्रिवुर्णं च तपतत्वा कृष्णस्य परमात्मनः ॥ 19 ॥

सिद्धा बभूव सा देवी द्वर्णे पुतः प्रभूम् ।

‘Śrīm, Hrīm Klīm Kṛṣnāya Namah, was the eight-lettered Mantra. She got from Him the Kavaca (amulet) auspicious to the three worlds, the method of worship and all the rules of Puraşcarana (repetition of the name of a deity attended with burnt offerings, oblations, etc.) and went by His command to perform in Puṣkara very hard austerities. There she worshipped Kṛṣṇa for the three Yugas. Śrī Kṛṣṇa then appeared before Her.

दूधा कुशार्गी बालां कृपया च कृपानिधि: ॥ 20 ॥

पूजां च कारयामास चकाच च स्वयं हरि: ।

वरं च प्रददी तस्ये पूजिता त्वं भवे भव ॥ 21 ॥

वरं दत्त्वा च कल्याण्ये ततशुतन्दीरं हरि: ।

On seeing Kṛṣṇa, immediately the girl, worn out by austerities, worshipped Him, and she was also worshipped by Śri Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa granted her the boon ‘Let you be worshipped throughout the world’ and departed.

प्रदये पुक्ति सा च कृष्णोन परमात्ना ॥ 22 ॥

द्वितीये शड़ूर्णैल कवयपेन सुरेण च ।

मुनिना मनुना चैव नागेन मानवादिभि: ॥ 23 ॥

बधूव पुक्ति सा च विमु लोकेषु सुवता ।

जरलाकामुनीत्रय कवयपस्तां ददी पुरा ॥ 24 ॥

O Nārada! She was thus first worshipped by the Supreme Spirit. the Deva Krṣṇa; secondly by Śaṅkara; thirdly by the Maharṣi Kaśyapa and the Devas.

अयाचितो मुनिश्रेषो जग्राह ब्राहणाज्ञा ।

कृत्वोद्वाहामहायोगी विश्रान्तसपसा चित्यम् ॥ 25 ॥

सुबण वेद्या जपने वद्युले च पुकेले ।

निर्जो जगाम स पुनि: स्मूला निर्जेशाधीर्ण ॥ 26 ॥

Then she was worshipped by the Munis, Manus, Nāgas, and men; and She become widely renowned in the three worlds. Kaśyapa gave Her over to the hands of Jaratāru Muni. At the request of the

Brāhmin Kaśyapa, the Muni Jarat Kāru married Her. After the marriage, one day, being tired with his long work of Tapasyā, Jarat Kāru laid his head on the hip and loins of his married wife and fell fast asleep.

जगामास्तं दिनकर: सायंकाल उपस्थिते ।

संविध्य मनसा साखी मनसा सा पतित्रानि । २७ ॥

धर्मलोपघयेनेव चकारालोचनं सती ।

अकूला पशुभां संख्या नित्यां चैव द्विजन्यम् ॥ २८ ॥

बहुहत्यादिके पायं लिभ्यति पतिमम् ।

नोपतिहित यः पूर्वी नोपासे न्यतु पशुधाम् ॥ 29 ॥

स सर्वेजागृधिनित्यं बहुहत्यादिके लभेत ।

वेदोक्तमिति संचित्य बोध्यामास सुंदरी ॥ 30 ॥

स च बुदो मुनिश्रभतां चुकांप भृर्णे मुते ।

Gradually the evening came in. The sun set. Then Manasā thought ‘If my husband fails to perform the Sandhyā, the daily duty of the Brāhmaṇas, he would be involved in the sin of Brahmahatyā. It is definitely stated in the Śāstras, that if any Brāhmaṇa does not perform his Sandhyā in the morning and in the evening, he becomes wholly impure and the sins Brahmahattyā and other crimes come down on his head.’ Arguning thus, these thoughts in her mind, as commanded by the Vedas, at last she awakened her husband, who then got up from his sleep.

मुनिवाच

कर्थ मे सृष्टिनः साधि्य निद्राभंः कृतस्वया ॥ 31 ॥

व्यर्थे तारादिकं तस्या या मनुंशापकारिणी ।

तपश्रानर्नं चैव त्रतं द्रानादिकं च यत् ॥ 32 ॥

भतुंरिध्यकाणिण्या: सर्वे भवति निष्णकम् ।

यया प्रियः पूजितश्र श्रीकृष्णः पूजितस्तथा ॥ 33 ॥

पतित्रतात्याचं च पतिस्णो हरि: स्वयम् ।

सर्वदानं सर्वयैज्ञः सर्वतीर्थसिवेशणम् ॥ 34 ॥

The Muni Jarat Kāru said: O Chaste One! I was sleeping happily. Why have you thus interrupted my sleep? All his vows turn out useless who injures her husband. Her tapas, fastings, gifts, and other meritorious works all come to vain who do things unpleasant to her husband. If she worships her husband, she is said to have worshipped Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

सर्वत्रत तपः सर्वमुपवासादिक च यत् ।

सर्वभंग्रष्ठ सर्वं च सर्वेवदिपूजनम् ॥ 35 ॥

तत्सर्वे स्वामिवेलाया: कलं नाहींत पोडगीम् ।

For the sake of fulfilling the vows of the chaste women, Hari himself becomes their husbands. All sorts of charities, gifts, all sacrifices, fastings, practising all the virtues, keeping to truth, worshipping all the Devas, nothing can turn out equal to even one-sixteenth part of serving one's husband.

पुण्ये च भाते वर्षे पतिसेवां क्रौतिं या ॥ 36 ॥

वैकुंते सवामिता सार्थ सा याति बहणण: पदम् ।

विषयें कुने भर्तविषियं वदति प्रियम् ॥ 37 ॥

असत्कुले प्रमृत्ता हि तत्कलं श्रवती सति ।

कृष्पीपाकं ब्रजेत्सा च यावच्छंद्रिवाकरी ॥ 38 ॥

ततो भवति चोडाली पतिभुत्रिवर्वर्जिता ।

She ultimately goes with her husband to the region of Vaikuntha, who serves her husband in this holy land Bhārata. She comes certainly of a bad family who does unpleasant acts to her husband or who uses unpleasant words to her husband. She goes to the Kumbhipāka hell as long as the Sun and Moon last and then she becomes born as a Cāndālī, without husband and son.”

इन्युक्णा च मुनिश्रेष्ठो बभूव सुर्गितापर: ॥ 39 ॥

चकंपे तेन सा साखी भयंनेवाव च त पतिम ।

Speaking thus, Jaat Kāru, the best of the Munis, became angry and his lips began to tremble. Seeing this, the best Manasā, shivering with fear, addressed her husband:

साध्युवाच

संध्यालोपघयेनैव नित्यांनः कृतस्व च ॥ 4 0 ॥

कुरु शर्ति महाभाग दुहाया मम सूत्रत ।

श्रगारात्रनिद्राणों यश्छ भंगं करोति हि ॥ 4 1 ॥

I have broken your sleep and awakened you, fearing you might miss your time of Sandhyā. I have committed an offence. Punish me as you think.

स ब्रजेक्तालसूत्र वै यावच्छंद्रिद्वाकरो ।

इत्युक्चना मनसा देवी स्वामिन्धग्रणाणुबे ॥ 42 ॥


पात्र भक्श्या भीता सा रोद च पुनः पुनः ।

कृपितं च मुनिं चूढ़ा श्रीसूई गणतुयुक्तम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

तत्राजगाम भगवान्संध्यया सह नारत ।

"I know that a man goes to the Kālasūtra hell as long as the Sun and Moon last in this world, who throws an obstacle when any man eats, sleeps or enjoys with the opposite sex." O Nārada! Thus saying, the Devi Manasā bell down at the feet of her husband and cried again and again. On the other hand, knowing the Muni angry, and ready to curse her, the Sun came there with Sandhyā Devi.

तत्रागय वृनीं सम्यगुवाच भास्कर: स्वयम् ॥ 44 ॥

विनयेन च भीतश्र तया सह यथोचितम् ।

And He humbly spoke to him with fear: "O Bhagavan! Seeing Me going to set, and fearing that you may miss Dharma, your chaste wife has awakened you.

भास्कर उवाच

सूर्यास्तसमयं द्वृषा साध्यो दर्भाथयेन च ॥ 4 5 ॥

बोधायामास त्वां विध्र शरणं त्यामहं नतः ।

शमस्व भगवन्बहामां शर्तु नोचितं मुने ॥ 46 ॥

बाहुणानां च इदयं नवनीतसमं सदा ।

तेषां क्षणार्थं क्रोधध्छ ततो भम भयंज्ञगत् ॥ 47 ॥

पुनः स्थूं द्विजः शक्तो न तेजस्वी द्विजात्पः ।

O Brāhmīn! Now I am also under your refuge; forgive me. O Bhagavan! You should not curse Me. The more so, a Brāhmaṇa's heart is as tender as the fresh butter. The anger of a Brāhmaṇa lasts only half the twinkling of an eye (Kṣāna). When a Brāhmaṇa becomes angry, he can burn all this world and can make a new creation.

ब्राह्मणो ब्रह्मणो वंश: प्रचलल्बब्रह्मतेसा ॥ 48 ॥

श्रीकृष्ण भावयेतित्ये ब्रह्म्योति: सनातनम् ।

So who can possess an influence like a Brāhmana. A Brāhmin is a part of Brahmā; he is shining day and night with the Tejas of Brahma. A Brāhmana meditates always on the Eternal Light of Brahma." O Nārada! Hearing the words of the Sun, the Brāhmin became satisfied and blessed Him. The Sun also went to His own place, thus blessed duly.

सूर्यस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा डिजस्तुहो बधूव है ॥ 49 ॥

सूर्यों जगाम स्वस्थानं गृतीलां बाहाणगीरमम् ।

तत्वाज मनसां विध्य: प्रतिज्ञापालनाय च ॥ 50 ॥

रुद्तीं गोकसंयुक्तां इद्येन विद्यता ।

सा समसार गृहं शंभुभिछेर्वं विधिं हरिम् ॥ 51 ॥

कर्यपं जन्मदातारं विषत्तो भयकर्गिता ।

To keep his promise the Brāhmin Jaratkāru quilted Manasā. She becomes very sorry and began to cry aloud with pain and anguish. Being very much distressed by the then danger, she remembered Her Iṣṭa Deva, Mahādeva, Brahmā, Hari and Her father Maharṣi Kaśyapa.

तजाजगाम गोरीगेश भगवाछक्षंपूरे च ॥ 52 ॥

विधिछ्छ कल्पवघैव मनसा परिचितितः ।

द्वृा विपो3भीद्वंवे निर्णी प्रकृतेः परम् ॥ 53 ॥

तृधाव परया भक्ल्या प्रणानाम मुहुपुरुः ।

On the very instant when Manasā remembered, Śrī Krṣṇa, the Lord of the Gopīs, Mahādeva, Brahmā and Maharṣi Kaśyapa appeared there. Then seeing his own desired Deity Śrī Krṣṇa, superior to Prakṛti, beyond the attributes, Jaratkāru began to praise Him and bowed down to Him repeatedly.

नमधुकार गंभु च ब्रहाणां करपयं तथा ॥ 54 ॥

कथमागमनं देहा इति प्रजनं चकार सः ।

बहा तद्वनं शुचा सहा सामयोचितान् ॥ 55 ॥

प्रत्युवाच नमस्कृत्य द्वीकैशपदांवुजम् ।

यदि त्यक्ता धर्मपन्ती धर्मिष्ठा मनसा सती ॥ 56 ॥



Then bowing down to Mahādeva, Brahmā and Kaśyapa, he enquired why they had come there. Brahmā, then, instantly bowed down at the lotus feet of Hrṣikeśa and spoke in befitting words at that time if the Brāhmin Jaratkāru leaves at all his legal wife, devoted to her own Dharma, he should

first of all have a son born of her to fulfil his Dharma.

कुरुष्वास्यां सुतोत्पत्तिं स्वधर्मपालनाय वै ।
जायायां च सुतोत्पत्तिं कृत्वा पश्चात्त्यजेन्मुने ॥ ५७॥

अकृत्वा तु सुतोत्पत्तिं विरागी यस्त्यजेत्प्रियाम् ।
स्रवते तस्य पुण्यं च चालन्यां च यथा जलम् ॥ ५८॥

ब्रह्मणो वचनं श्रुत्वा जरत्कारुर्मुनीश्वरः ।
चकार नाभिसंस्पर्शं योगेन मन्त्रपूर्वकम् ॥ ५९॥



Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

O Muni! Any man can quit his wife, after he has impregnated her and got a son. But if without having a son, he leaves his wife, then all his merits are lots as all water leaks out of a siever or a strainer. O Nārada! Hearing thus the words of Brahmā, the Muni Jaratkāru by his Yogic power recited a Mantra and touching the navel of Manasā spoke to her:

मनसाया मुनिश्रेष्ठ मुनिश्रेष्ठ उवाच ताम् ।
जरत्कारुरुवाच ।
गर्भेणानेन मनसे तव पुत्रो भविष्यति ॥ ६०॥

जितेनिद्वाणां प्रवरो धार्मिको ब्राह्मणामृगः ।

तेजस्वी च तपस्वी च यशल्वी च गुणात्वितः ॥ 6 1 ॥

वरो वेद्विद्वं चैव ज्ञानिनां योगिनां तथा ।

“O Manasā! A son will be born in your womb self-controlled, religious, and best of the Brāhmaṇas. That son will be fiery, energetic, renowned, well-qualified, the foremost of the Knowers of the Vedas, a great Jñānin and the best of the Yogis.

स च पुत्री विज्युस्तको धार्यिकः कुल्युद्धेत् ॥ 6 2 ॥

नृत्विन्त विपत: सर्वे जन्माग्रिण वै मुता ।

पतित्रता सुगीला या सा प्रिया विश्वादिति ॥ 6 3 ॥

धीग्रा युप्रमाता च कुलक्जी कुलपालिका ।

हरिभक्तिप्रदो बधुर्ने चाभीधसुखप्रदः ॥ 6 4 ॥

That son is a true son, indeed, who uplifts his family who is religious and devoted to Hari. At his birth all the Pitrs dance with great joy. And the wife is a true wife who is devoted to her husband, good-natured and sweet-speaking and she is religious, she is the mother of sons, she is the woman of the family and she is the preserver of the family. He is true friend, indeed, the giver of one's desired fruits, who imparts devotion to Hari.

यो बंधुँछेस च विता हरिवर्गप्रदर्शकः ।

सा गर्भधारिणी या च गर्भावासविभोच्नी ॥ 6 5 ॥

द्यारूषा च भयिनी यमधीतिविमोच्नी ।

विष्युभंगप्रदाता च स गुरूकिंव्युभनिक: ॥ 6 6 ॥

That father is true father who shows the way to devotion to Hari. And She is the True Mother,

through whom this entering into wombs ceases for ever, yea, for ever! That sister is the true kind sister from whom the fear of Death vanishes. That Guru is the Guru who gives the Viṣṇu Mantra and the true devotion to Viṣṇu.

गुरूछ ज्ञानदो यो हि यज्ञानं कृष्णाभावनम् ।

आब्रह्मतर्बायर्वन्त यात विश्वं चराचरम् ॥ 67 ॥

आविर्भूतं तितिभृतं किं वा जानं तद्यन्तः ।

वेदैतं यज्ञं यद्यतसारं हरिसेवनम् ॥ 68 ॥

That Guru is the real bestower of knowledge who gives the Jñānam by which Śrī Krṣṇa is meditated in whom this whole universe, moving and non-moving from the Brahmā down to a blade of grass, is appearing and disappearing. There is no doubt in this. What knowledge can be superior to that of Śrī Krṣṇa. The knowledge derived from the Vedas, or from the sacrifices or from any other source is not superior to the service to Śrī Krṣṇa.

तत्त्वानां सारभूतं च हरेन्यद्रिद्धबनम् ।

दर्ते ज्ञानं मया तृण्यं स स्वामी ज्ञानं ही च: ॥ 69 ॥

ज्ञानात्रपुच्यते बन्धात्स रिपुयं हि बन्धवः ।

विष्युभक्तियुतं ज्ञानं नो द्वालित हिं यो गुरुः ॥ 70 ॥

The devotion and knowledge of Śrī Hari is the Essence of all knowledge; all else is vain and mockery. It is through this Real Knowledge; that this bondage from this world is severed. But the Guru who does not impart this devotion and knowledge of Śrī Hari is not the real Guru; rather he is an enemy that leads one to bondage.

स रिषु: शिष्याती च यतो बंधात्र मोचयेत् ।

जनर्जी भर्पिबल्लेशाद्यमतानया तथा ॥ ७ १  ॥

न मोचवेधः स कर्थ गुरुस्ताले हि बांधवः ।

पर्यानन्दक्षं च कृष्णमार्गमन्वरम् ॥ ७ २ ॥

Verily he kills his disciple when he does not free him. He can never be called a Guru, father or friend who does not free his disciple from the pains in the various wombs and from the pains of death. Verily he can never be called a friend who does not show the way to the Undecaying Śrī Krṣna, the Source of the Highest Bliss.

Book IX Chapter XLVIII

न दर्शयिहः सततं कौद्युगो बांधवो नृणाम्।

भज साधित यरे ब्रह्माच्छृतं कृष्णं च निरुर्णम् ॥ 73 ॥

निर्भूले च भवेद्युंसां कर्म बै तस्य सेवया ।

मया छलेन त्वं तच्ना क्षमस्वैतनमय प्रिये ॥ 74 ॥

क्षमायुतांना साध्वीनो सचालकोयो न विहते ।

पृष्करं तपसे याथि गच्छ देवि यथासुखम् ॥ 75 ॥

So, O Chaste One! You better worship that Undecaying Para Brahma Śrī Krṣṇa, Who is beyond the attributes. O Beloved! I have left you out of a pretence; please excuse me for this. The chaste women are always forgiving; never they become angry because they are born of Sattvagunas.

Now I go to Puşkara for Tapasyā; you better go wherever you like.

श्रीकृष्यारणांभोजे नि:स्यूहाणां मनोराधा: ।

जरत्कान्चच: शुल्या मनसा शोककातन ॥ 76 ॥

साघुभोत्रा च विन्यादुवाच प्रणावल्लभम् ।

Those who have no desire have their minds always attached to the lotus feet of Śrī Krṣṇa. O Nārada! Hearing the words of Jaratkāru, the Devi Manasā became very much distressed and bewildered with great sorrow. Tears began to flow from her eyes. She then humbly spoke to her dearest husband:

मनसोवाच

दोषो नास्येव मे त्यक्तु निद्राभंगने ते प्रभो ॥ 77 ॥

यत्र स्मारीय त्वां नित्यं तत्र मागमागमध्ययि ।

बन्धुपेदे: क्लेलातम: पुज्येदस्ततः परम् ॥ 78 ॥

प्राणोशपेदः प्राणानां विच्छेदासर्वतः परः ।

पति: पतित्रानां तु शतपुजात्रिकं प्रियः ॥ 79 ॥

“O Lord! I have not committed any such offence, as you leave me altogether when I have thus broken your sleep. However kindly show Thyself to me when I will recollect you. The breavement of one’s friend is painful; more than that is the breavement of a son. Again one’s husband is dearer than one hundred sons; so the breavement of one’s husband is the heaviest of all.

सर्वेस्मातु प्रियः क्लीणं प्रियस्तेनोच्छते बुधैः ।

पुरे यथैकुपुजाणों वैष्णावानां यथा हरी ॥ 80 ॥

नेत्रे यथैकनेजाणं तृषितानां यथा जले ।

क्षुधितानां यथा5-ने च कामुकानां च मैयुने ॥ 8 1 ॥

यथा परस्वे चोरणगं यथा जारे कुयोधितान् ।

विद्यां च यथा शापसे वाणिज्ये वर्गिजां यथा ॥ 8 2 ॥

तथा शफवमनः काने साध्यीनां योचितां प्रभे ।

To woman, the husband is the most beloved of all earthly things; hence he is called Priya, i.e., dear. As the heart of one who has only one son is attached to that son, as the heart of a Vaiṣṇava is attached to Śrī Hari; as the mind of one-eyed man to his one eye, as the mind of the thirsty is attached to water, as the mind of the hungry is attached to food, as the mind of the passionate is attached to lust, as the mind of a thief is attached to the properties of others, as the mind of alewd man to his prostitute, as the mind of the learned is attached to the Śāstras, as the mind of a trader is attached to his trade, so the minds of chaste women are attached to their husband.

इत्युक्त्वा मनसा देवी पापात स्वामिनः पदे ॥ 83 ॥

क्षणं चकार कोड़े तां कृपया च कृपानिधि: ।

नेत्रोदकेन मनसां स्तायामास तां मुनि: ॥ 84 ॥

साधुनेत्रा मुनेः कोईं सिवेच भेदकाता ।

तदा ज्ञानेन तौ ही च विगोंकी संबंधमुतुः ॥ 85 ॥

Thus saying, Manasā fell down at the feet of her husband. Jaratkāru, the ocean of mercy, then, took her for a moment on his lap and drenched her body with tears from his eyes. The Devi Manasā, too, distressed at the bereavement of her husband also drenched the lap of the Muni with tears from her eyes.

स्मारं स्मारं पटुर्णोजे कृष्णस्य परमात्मनः ।

जगाम तपसे विधः स्वक्रांतों संप्रयोक्ष्य च ॥ 86 ॥

जगाम मनसा शंभोः कैलासं मंदितं गुरोः ।

पार्वती बोधयामास मनसां शोकाकशिताम ॥ 87 ॥

शिवक्षातीव ज्ञानेन शिवेन च शिवालयः ।

Some time after, the true knowledge arose in them and they both became free from fear. Jaratkāru then enlightened his wife and asked her to meditate on the lotus feet of Śri Kṛṣṇa the

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Supreme Spirit repeatedly; thus saying he went away for his Tapasyā. Manasā, distressed with sorrow, went to his Iṣṭa Deva Mahādeva on Kailāsa. The auspicious Śiva and Pārvati both consoled her with knowledge and advise.

सुप्रशस्ते दिने साध्यी सुचुवे मूज्छणे ॥ 88 ॥

नारायणोंं पूर्व ते योगिनां जानिनां गुभम् ।

गर्भस्थो महान्जानं शुचा शंकत्वकताः ॥ 89 ॥

संबभूव च योगिहो योगिनां जानिनां गुहः ।

जातकं कारायामास वाचवायामास मुकुलम् ॥ 90 ॥

Some days after, on an auspicious day and on an auspicious moment she gave birth to a son born in part of Nārāyaṇa, and as the Guru of the Yogis and as the Preceptor of the Jñāinis. When the child was in mother's womb, he heard the highest knowledge from the mouth of Mahādeva; therefore he was born as a Yogindra and the Spiritual Teacher of the Jñāinis. On his birth, Bhagavān Śaṅkara performed his natal ceremonies and performed various auspicious ceremonies.

वेटांघ पाठवामास रिवाया च चिक: शिलोः ।

मशिरलक्रीटांघ ब्राह्मणेच्ये द्वी तिकाः ॥ 91 ॥

पार्वती च गवां लक्षं रत्नानि विविधानि च ।

शंभृघ चतुरो वेद्यावैद्यानितरांसधा ॥ 9 2 ॥

The Brāhmaṇas chanted the Vedas for the welfare of the child; various wealth and jewels and Kīrītas and invaluable gems were distributed by Śaṅkara to the Brāhmaṇas; and Pārvāti gave one lakh cows and various jewels to others. After some days, Mahādeva taught him the four Vedas with their Aṅgas (six limbs) and gave him, at last, the Mrtyunjāya Mantra.

बालकं पाठ्यायमास ज्ञानं मृत्युबयं परम् ।

पवित्तस्पधिका कानतेउभीढ़देवे गुरी तथा ॥ 93 ॥

As in Manasa's mind there reigned the devotion to her husband, the devotion to her Iṣta Deva and Guru, the child's name was kept Āstika.

यस्यापतेचे च तत्पुजो बधुवास्तीक एव च ।

जगाम तपसे विष्णो: पुरूकरं शंकराज्ञाय ॥ ९४ ॥

संग्राय च महामन्तं ततश्व परमात्मन: ।

Aštika then got the Mahā Mantra from Śaṅkara and by his command went to Puṣkara to worship Viṣṇu, the Supreme Spirit.

विद्यं वर्षित्वर्श्चे च ततस्तत्वा तपोधनः ॥ 95 ॥

आजगमा महायोगी नामकर्तुं शिवं प्रभूम् ।

शंकरं च नमकृत्य स्थिता तत्रैव बालकाः ॥ 96 ॥

सा चाजगाम मनसां कशयपत्यामयं चितुः ।

There he practised tapasyā for three lakh divine years. And then he returned to Kailāśa, to bow down to the great Yogi and the Lord Śaṅkara. Then, bowing down to Śaṅkara, he remained there for some time when Manasā with her son Āstīka went to the hermitage of Kāśyapa, his father.

तां सपुत्रां सुतां दृष्टा मुदं प्राप प्रजापति: ॥ 97 ॥

शतलक्षं च रत्नानां ब्राह्मणेच्ये दटी मुने ।

ब्राह्मणाभोज्यामास सेोरसंखान्र श्रेयसे शिषणे: ॥ 98 ॥

अदितिक्षा दितिश्रान्या मूदं प्राप पत्नत ।

सा सपुत्रा च सुविरं तत्थी ततालये नेतृ ॥ 99 ॥

Seeing Manasā with son, the Maharsī's gladness knew no bounds. He fed innumerable Brāhmaṇas for the welfare of the child, and distributed lakhs and lakhs of jewels. The joy of Aditi and Diti (the wives of Kaśyapa) knew no bounds; Manasā remained there for a long, long time with his son.

तदीयं पुनराख्यानं वक्ष्यामि ननिशगाय।

अथापिम्बनुतनंने ब्रह्माण: परीक्षिते ॥ 100 ॥

बधूव सहसा बहान् दैवदोयेण कर्मणा ।

सपाठे समितीत तु तक्षकत्वां च धध्यति ॥ 101 ॥

गणप शूक्ती तैव कौशिक्याक्य जलेन वे ।

राजा शुचा तत्यष्टिंन विवर्तत्यनामगत: ॥ 102 ॥

तत्र तत्पथी च सपतहं देहक्षानत्पतर: ।

सपतहं समताते तु गच्छत तक्षकं पथि ॥ 103 ॥

O Child! Hear now an anecdote on this. One day due to a bad Karma, a Brāhmana cursed the king Parikṣit, the son of Abhimanyu; one Rṣi's son named Śrngī, sipping the water of the river Kausikī cursed thus: 'When a week expires, the snake Takṣaka will bite you, and you will be burnt with the poison of that snake Takṣaka.' Hearing this, the King Parikṣit, to preserve his life, went to a

Book IX Chapter XLVIII

place, solitary where wind even can have no access and he lived there.

ཕྲལོའི་ཀྱིན་ སོ བཞིན་ བྱུན་ གམཆུང་ གཟི་ གཞི། །

त्योबैभूव संवादः सुप्रीतिश्र परस्परम् ॥ 104 ॥

ཕྲལོའི་རིན་གྱི་གྲག་སྟན་ཆུང་: སྡེནོགྱམ་ཐའི། །

བ་མདའི་ཀྱིན་ནུ་སྟོགྱི་རྒྱལ་མཆོགས་ཆེ། ། 105 ॥

When the week was over, Dhanvantari saw, while he was going on the road, the snake Taksaka who was also going to bite the king. A conversation and a great friendship arose between them; Taksaka gave him voluntarily a gem; and Dhanvantari, getting it, became pleased and went back gladly to his house.

तक्षको भक्ष्यामास नृपं त मझके स्थितम् ।

राज जगाम तसरा देई त्यकत्वा परत्र च ॥ 106 ॥

संस्कार कार्यामास पितृर्वें जनोबेलः ।

राज चकार यज्च च सम्वसत्रं ततो मुने ॥ 107 ॥

The king Parikṣit was lying on his bed-stead when Takṣaka bit the king. The king died soon and went to the next world. The king Janamejaya then performed the funeral obsequies of his father and commenced afterwards the Sarpa Yajñā (a sacrifice where the sankes are the victims).

प्राणांस्तत्वास सपर्णो समूहो ब्रह्मोजसा ।

स तक्षको वै भीतस्तु महेन्द्रं शरणं ययौ ॥ 108 ॥

संद्रं च तक्षकं हेतुं विप्रवर्ग: समुद्रतः ।

अथ देवाशु संद्राशु संजगमुनेसांतिकम् ॥ 109 ॥

In that sacrifice, innnumerable snakes gave up their lives by the Brahma Teja (the fire of the Brāhmins). At this, Taksaka became terrified and took refuge of Indra. The Brāhmins, then, in a body, became, ready to burn Taksaka along with Indra, when, Indra and the other Devas went to Manasā.

तां तुहाव महेन्द्रश भयंकतारविह्लः ।

तत आसीक आगल्य चर्चं च मातुरात्रया ॥ 110 ॥

महैद्रतक्षकाणान्यायचे भृमियं परम् ।

ददौ वरं नृपश्रेष्ठः कृपया ब्राह्माणात्रया ॥ 111 ॥

यजं सामाय विधेभ्यो दक्षिणं च ददी मुदा ।

विग्राश मुनयो देया गत्वा च मनसांतिकम् ॥ 112 ॥

Mahendra, bewildered with fear, began to

chant hymns to Manasā. Manasā called his own son Āstika who then went to the sacrificial assembly of the king Janamejaya and begged that the lives of Indra and Takṣaka be spared. The king, then, at the command of the Brāhmaṇas, granted their lives. The king, then, completed his sacrifice and gladly gave the Dakṣinās to the Brāhmins. The Brāhmaṇas, Munis, and Devas collected and went to Manasā and worshipped Her separately and chanted hymns to Her.

मनसां पुकायामासुसुद्धुश पृथक् पृथक् ।

गकः संभृतसंघगते भक्तिपुकः सदा गृधि: ॥ 113 ॥

मनसां पुकायामास तृधाव पमादरात् ।

नत्वा घोडणोपचारं बलिंच ततिन्यं तदा ॥ 114 ॥

प्रदूदी परितृष्ण ब्रह्मविष्यगिशवाज्ञा ।

संपूच्य मनसां देयीं प्रवपुः स्वालयं च ते ॥ 115 ॥

इन्येकं कथितं सर्व किं कृप्यः श्रौतुपिच्छसि ।

Indra went there with the various articles and He worshipped Manasā with devotion and with great love and care; and He chanted hymns to Her. Then bowing down before Her, and under the instructions of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa, offered her sixteen articles, sacrifices and various other good and pleasant things. O Nārada! Thus worshipping Her, they all went to their respective places. Thus I have told you the anecdote of Manasā. What more do you want to hear. Say.

नारद उवाच

केन स्तोजण तुहाव महैद्रो मनसां सतीम् ॥ ११ ६ ॥

पूजाविधिकमं तस्या: श्रीदीम्ब्छामि तचताः ।

Nārada said: O Lord! How did Indra prasie Her and what was the method of His worshipping Her; I want to hear all this.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

सुस्नतः शूचिरचांतो धृत्वा धौते च वाससी ॥ 117 ॥

रत्नसिंहासने देर्वी वासयामास भक्तिः ।

स्वर्गीगया जलेनैव रत्नकुभथित्येत च ॥ 118 ॥

सत्पायामास मनसां महेन्द्रो वेद्यंत्रतः ।

वासवी वासयामास वहिह्युद्धे मनोहरे ॥ 119 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Nārāyaṇa said: Indra first took his bath; and, performing Ācāmana and becoming pure, He put on a fresh and clean clothing and placed Manasā Devī on a jewel throne. Then reciting the Vedic mantras he made Her perform Har bath by the water of the Mandākinī the celestial river Ganges, poured from a jewel jar and then He made Her put on the beautiful clothing, uninflammable by fire.

सर्वात्रें चंदनं कृत्वा पात्रार्थं भक्तिसंयुतः ।

गणेशं च दिनेशं च ताईं विद्युं जिशं विज्ञाम् ॥ 120 ॥

संपूज्यादौ देवयद्कं पूज्यामास तां सतीम् ।

ऊं हूँ श्री मनसादेवे सहोत्येवं च मंत्रतः ॥ 121 ॥

Then He caused sandalpaste to be applied to Her body all over with devotion and offered water for washing Her feet and Arghya, an offering of grass and flowers and rice, etc., as a token of preliminary worship. First of all the six Devatās Ganesa, Sun, Fire, Viṣṇu, Śiva, and Śivā were worshipped. Then with the ten lettered mantra ‘Om Hrim Śrim Manasā Devyai Svāhā’ offered all the offerings to Her.

दशाप्रसेण मूलेन ददी सर्वे यथोचितम् ।

दत्वा घोडंगोपचारानुर्लभान्देवनायकः ॥ 1 2 2 ॥

पूजयामास भत्त्या च विध्गान् प्रेिती मुदा ।

वार्यं नानाप्रकारं च वाद्ययामास तत्र वै ॥ 1 2 3 ॥

बभूव पुष्प्यहिष्ठ नभसे मनसोपरि ।

Stimulated by the God Viṣṇu, Indra worshipped with great joy the Devi with sixteen articles so very rare to any other person. Drums and instruments were sounded. From the celestial heavens, a shower of flowers was thrown on the head of Manasā.

देवप्रियात्या तत इद्विष्यणिशवात्या ॥ 124 ॥

सुवार साश्रनेशेडे पुलकांकितिविषहः ।

Then, at the advice of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa, the Devas and the Brāhmaṇas, Indra, with tears in his eyes, began to chant hymns to Manasā, when his whole body was thrilled with joy and hairs stood on their ends.

पुरंदर उवाच

देवि तां सतीपिच्छामि साधीनां प्रवं सराम् ॥ 125 ॥

परात्वरां च परमां न हि सतीतुं क्षमो3धुना ।

सतीजागां लक्षणां बेदे स्वभावाख्यानततसरम् ॥ 126 ॥

न क्षमः प्रकृते वक्तुं गुणानां गणानां तत ।

युद्धस्तचल्कल्पा त्वं कोर्धिसादिवर्षिता ॥ 127 ॥

न च शगतो मुनिसेन त्वक्तुं याच्वा कृता यातः ।

Indra said: O Devi Manase! Thou standest the highest amongst the chaste women. Therefore I want to chant hymns to Thee. Thou art higher than the highest. Thus art most supreme. What can I now praise Thee? Chanting hymns is characterised by the description of one's nature; so it is said in the Vedas. But, O Prakrti! I am unable to ascert ain and describe Thy qualities. Thou art of the nature of Śuddha Sattva (higher than the pure sattva unmixed with any other Gunas); Thou art free from anger and malice. The Muni Jaratāru could not forsake Thee; therefore it was that he prayed for Thy separation before.

तं यमा पुक्ता साखी जननी मे यवासंदिति: ॥ 128 ॥

दयाक्पा च भार्थिनी क्षमाक्पा यथा प्रसूः ।

तव्या मे रक्षिताः प्राणाः पुत्रवाताः सुरेश्वारि ॥ 129 ॥

O Chaste One! I have now worshipped Thee. Thou art an object of worship as my mother Aditi is. Thou art my sister full of mercy; Thou art the mother full of forgiveness. O Sureśvari! It is through Thee that my wife, sons and my life are saved.

अर्ह कंपीय त्वतुर्जां प्रीतिश्व कर्धितां सहा ।

नित्या चद्य पूरुचा त्वं सर्वैन जगदंबिके ॥ 130 ॥

तथापि त्व पूर्णा च कर्धायामि सुरोजरि ।

ये त्वामाषावसंक्रतायां पूर्णियधौत भक्तिः ॥ 131 ॥

पंचभयं मनसाख्यायां मासाने वा दिने दिने ।

पुरपौरावद्यतसेयं बर्धन्ते च ध्वानि वे ॥ 132 ॥

यशस्विनः कीर्तिमंतो विद्यावन्तो गुणात्विताः ।

I am worshipping Thee. Let Thy love be increased. O World-Mother! Thou art eternal; though Thy worship is extant everywhere in the universe, yet I worship Thee to have it extended and further. O Mother! Those who worship Thee with devotion on the Saṅkrāti day of the month

Book IX Chapter XLVIII

of Āsāḍha, or on the Nāga Pañcamī day, or on the Saṅkrānti day of every month or on every day, they get their sons and grandsons, wealth and grains increased and become themselves famous, well gratified, learned and renowned.

ये त्वां न पूत्रियध्येति निरंत्वज्ञानतो जना: ॥ 133 ॥

लक्ष्मीतीना भविष्यन्ति तेषां नापभयं सदा ।

त्वं सर्वे सर्वेल्ब्धीशु वैकुंटे कमललया ॥ 134 ॥

If anybody do not worship Thee out of ignorance, rather if he censures Thee, he will be bereft of Lakṣmī and he will be always afraid of snakes. Thou art the Gṛha Lakṣmī of all the householders and the Rāja Lakṣmī of Vaikunṭha.

नारायणांगो भगवाञ्जराकाम्पूनीश्वरः ।

तपसा तैनसा त्वां च मनसा सुखे पिता ॥ 135 ॥

अस्माके रक्षणायैव तेन तव मनसाधिपा ।

Bhagavān Jarat Kāru, the great Muni, born in part of Nārāyaṇa, is Thy husband. Father Kāśyapa has created Thee mentally by his power of Tapas and fire to preserve us; Thou art his mental creation hence thy name is Manasā.

मनसाद्वि शन्णा त्वं सतानना सिद्धोर्गिनी ॥ 136 ॥

तेन तं मनसाद्वी पूजिता वरिता भव ।

दे भक्या मनसां देवाः पूजयन्त्यिशं भृपाम ॥ 137 ॥

तेन तां मनसां देरी प्रवर्तिन मनीषिणः ।

सत्यस्करणा देखे तं शश्रवस्त्यनिश्चेणान् ॥ 138 ॥

Thou Thyself hast become Siddhā Yoginī in this world by thy mental power hence thou art widely known as Manasā Devī in this world and worshipped by all. The Devas always worship Thee mentally with devotion; hence the Pandits call Thee by the name of Manasā. O Devī! Thou always servest Truth, hence Thou art of the nature of Truth. He certainly gets Thee who always thinks of Thee verily as of the nature of truth."

यो हिं त्वां भवेयित्वं स त्वां प्राप्नोति तत्परः ।

इन्ध्छ प्रमतां सुत्ता यूहीता भपीनीतयम् ॥ 139 ॥

प्रजागम स्वभवन्तं भृपया सप्तिच्छदम् ।

पुंत्रेण सार्थ सा देवी चिरं तस्वी चितुर्गृहेः ॥ 140 ॥

O Nārada! Thus praising his sister Manasā and receiving from her the desired boon, Indra went back, dressed in his own proper dress, to his own abode. The Devi Manasā, then, honoured and worshipped everywhere, and thus worshipped by her brother, long lived in Her father's house, with Her son.

भातृभि: पूजिता श्रशवनान्या वंदा चा सर्वतः ।

गोलोकानुर्धिषब्रह्नु तनागत्य सुप्रजितान् ॥ 14 1 ॥

तां सनायचित्या क्षीरिता पूजवामास सादरम् ।

ज्ञानं च कथयामास गोये सर्वे सुवुलेभम् ॥ 14 2 ॥

Ond day Surabhi (the heavenly cow) came from the Goloka and bathed Manasā with milk and worshipped Her with great devotion and revealed to Her all the Tattva Jñānas, to be kept very secret. (This is now made the current story wherever any Liṅgam suddenly becomes visible.)

तथा देहै: पुत्रिता सा रखलोंके च पुनर्वयी ।

इन्द्रस्तोत्र पुण्यबीजं मनसां पुवयेयदेत् ॥ 143 ॥

तस्व नागपयं नारित तत्य यंजीढ़वस्य च ।

विषं घबेत्स्थानुल्यं विद्धस्तोत्रे यदा घबेत् ॥ 144 ॥

O Nārada! Thus worshipped by the Devas and Surabhi, the Devi Manasā went to the Heavenly regions. O Muni! One gets no fear from snakes who recites this holy Sotra composed by Indra and worships Manasā; his family descendants are freed from the fear due to snakes. If anybody becomes Siddha in this Stotra, poison becomes nectar to him.

पंचराक्षजपैन वि सिद्धतोत्री भवे-नरः ।

सर्पिणायीं घबेलोःपि निश्रितं सर्वाह्न: ॥ 145 ॥

इति श्रीमदैभीगवगते महापुराणे नवमरकमे-.

श्चालारिशी3थावः ॥ 146 ॥

Reciting the stotra five lakhs of times makes a man Siddha in this Stotra. So much so that he can sleep on a bed of snakes and he can ride on snakes.

Here ends the Forty-eight Chapter of the Ninth

Book on the anecdote of Manasā in the Mahā

Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

