CHAPTER XXXI

On Mahā Māyā

व्यास उवाच

निर्णाय महाराज ब्वीपि विश्वादक्षगम् ।

माहात्म्यं खतु मायाया नारतानुं मया श्रुन्तु ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! I am now recounting the detailed glory of Māyā, heard by me from Nārada.

मया पुनर्मुंपि: पृष्टो नारद: सर्ववितिमः ।

श्रुत्वा कर्णं मुनेतस्य नारोदेहसमुद्धवम् ॥ 2 ॥

Again I asked sage Nārada who is the most omniscient of all, after hearing the story of that sage in the female body.

ब्रह् नारद पश्रात्रिक कथितं हरिणा तदा ।

क्व तात्ध जगत्राधो भवता सह माधयः ॥ 3 ॥

O Nārada! Tell me! What did Hari say at that time? Where did Mādhava the lord of the universe go along with you?

नारद उवाच

इत्युक्चा भगवांस्तस्मितडागेगतिनोहरे ।

आहक्रा गरड़ नन्तु वैकुण्ठे च मनो दधे ॥ 4 ॥

Nārada said: After saying thus, in that beautiful lake, the lord made up his mind to go to Vaikuntha, mounting on Garuda.

मामुवाच समाकानो यथेह गच्छ नारद ।

एहि वा मन लोकं त्वं यथा कहित तथा कुभ ॥ 5 ॥

Mahāvisnu, the consort of Lakṣmi, told me. O Nārada! go as you wish. Or come to my world. Do as you wish.

ब्रह्मलोककृतश्रह्मापृष्छच मधुसूदनम् । भगवानपि देवेशरासत्कणारूक्षासनः ॥ 6 ॥ वैकृष्टमयमातृष्णं भगाभिर्य यथासुखम् । ततोड़ं चितुसदन्तं गतो याते जनादंने ॥ 7 ॥

After taking leave of Madhusūdana, I went to Brahmaloka. Viṣṇu the lord of Devas, seated on Garuda, went to Vaikuntha quickly, in a happy manner after directing me. When Janārdana was gone, I went to the region of my father (i.e., Brahmā).

चिंतयन्मकलं दुःखं सुखं च परमाद्धुतम् ।

गत्वा प्रणाय्य चितरं स्थितो यावत्पूर: चितृः ॥ 8 ॥

तावत्पृधो मुने चित्रा बीक्ष्य चिन्तानुर्ते मुम् ।

Thin king about all the wonderful miseries and the joys undergone, I went to my father and after prostrating to him, stood before him.

ब्रहोयाच

क्व गतो5स महाभाग कस्मार्थितानुः सुत ॥ 9 ॥

स्वयं नैवादा पश्यामि मानते मुवितस्तम ।

Then seeing me tormented by thoughts, my father Brahmā asked: O great one! Where had you gone? Son! Why are you troubled by thoughts?

केनापि वंचितोसि तवं चूदं या किंचिद्धुद्धुम् ॥ 10 ॥

विषणं गतवित्रानं पशयामि त्वां कंबे सुत ।

O great sages! I do not see your mind happy today. You have been deceived by some body. Or you have seen some wonder.

नारद उवाच

इति पृषस्तदा पित्रा बूस्यां समुपवेश्य च ॥ ११ ॥

तमबुंचं स्ववृत्तानं मायावलसमुद्वम् ।

वंचितोर्जमितः कामं विल्याना प्रभविष्यान् ॥ १२ ॥

O Son! How can I see you sad and devoid of discrimination?

Nārada said: Thus I was asked by my father. I sat on the seat.

I told him my story arising out of the power of Māyā. O father! I have been cheated by the powerful Mahāvisnu.

हीभावझूमितः कार्य वर्षाणि सुबह्न्यति ।

अनुभूत महदुःखं पुत्रशोकसुभुंद्वम् ॥ 13 ॥

I was made to attain the state of a woman for many many years. Extreme misery arising out of death of son was experienced by me.

प्रवोधितोड़ः तैनैव मुटुवावयामुनेन च ।

पुनः सरोबेर सन्ताव जातोड़ं गरादः पुणम् ॥ 14 ॥

I was instructed by him by nectarine sweet words about my real nature. Again after taking bath in that tank. I became a man (the old) Nārada.

किमेतत्कारणं बहान् यन्मोहमगां तदा ।

विस्युतं पूर्वविज्ञानं तन्यवसतसा कृत: ॥ 15 ॥

O Brahman! What is the reason that I attained delusion at that time? Earlier knowledge was forgotten. I became identified with that female form, so quickly.

एतन्यायावलं बह्रात जानेउई दुत्पत्यम् ।

ज्ञानात्विकर्त जातं मृतं मोहस्य विस्मुटम् ॥ 16 ॥

O Brahman! This is the strength of Māyā, which is difficult to cross. It is beyond my understanding. It destroyed all my knowledge. It was a clear cause of delusion.

अनुभूतं मया सम्यज्ञातं सर्वे शुभाशुभम् ।

कर्थं त्वं तिजातंस्तत तनुपायं वद्यव मे ॥ 17 ॥

I experienced it (power of Māyā) well. All good and bad were known. Of father! How did you attain victory over it? Tell me that clue.

नात्व उवाच

विज्ञतोउरी माया धाता प्रीतिपुर्वितः पनम् ।

मामुवाच स्मितं कृत्वा विगत मे वासवीर्तु ॥ 18 ॥

O Muni! When my Father learnt the cause of my cares, he smiled and spoke to me in sweet words:

ब्रहोवाच

दुर्जंथ्या सुरैः सर्वैर्जनिधिश्र महात्यमिथः ।

तापसैज्ञान्यैक्श्य योगिधि: पवनागरैः ॥ १९ ॥

न हांता सर्वथा जातुं गुक्तो मायां महावलम् ।

विष्णुजांतु न रणक्रहा तथा रंगभुभमापतिः ॥ 20 ॥

"O Child! The Devas, the high-souled Munis, the wise ascetics and the Yogis subsisting on air only are not able to conquer this Māyā. O Nārada!

Book VI Chapter XXX

The power of Māyā is so very great that I, Viṣṇu and Sāmbhu, the Lord of Umā, none are able to know Her power.

दूरंगा सा महामाया सृधिश्वत्यंतकारिणी ।

कालकर्मव्यापावाहीद्विपित्तकारणैवृत्ता ॥ 2 1 ॥

That Mahāmāyā is creating, preserving and dissolving this world by Time, Karma, and Nature and other efficient causes.

गोकं मा कुक भेधार्थित्त प्रायामाहावले ।

न चैव विसयः कावीं वयं सर्वे वियोहिताः ॥ 2 2 ॥

O Child! Know Her to be inconceivable and unapproachable. O Intelligent One! Do not be sorry nor should you be surprised about Māyā's great strength, for we all are deluded by Her."

नारद उवाच

चित्युक्तस्तदा व्यास तमापृष्छ्छा नात्मयः ।

आगतोउम्यय पश्य-वै तीर्थीनि च वारीण चे ॥ २३ ॥

O Dvaipāyana! Thus advised by my Father, my wonder disappeared. I then asked permission of my Father Padma Yoni (Lotus-born) and went out on tour round the sacred places of pilgrimages and on my way, seeing by and by the chief Tirthas, I have now come here.

तस्मात्रविमीय सत्यज्य मोहं कोरवानाजम् ।

काल्बयं सुखासीय: स्थानेउस्मिकुरु सत्तम ॥ 24 ॥

अवश्यमेव पोक्तयं कृतं मुणगुपम् ।

निश्छय हृदये कृत्वा विवारस्य यथासुखम् ॥ 25 ॥

Therefore, O Muni! Dost thou relinquish your sorrows for the extinction of the Kuru's family and remain here and pass your time in great joy and happiness. One must bear the fruits of one's Karma, good or bad; knowing this fully roam at your will wherever you like.

व्यास उवाच

इल्युक्ला नारदो राजनातो मां प्रतिवोध्य च ।

'अर्ह तत्चित्यन्याक्यं चतुर्भ मुनिना तत् ॥ 26 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Maharṣi Nārada thus kindling knowledge in me, went away; I also thought over his words.

स्थितः सरस्वतीरो करेले सारखते वरे ।

कालातिकाहन्योरत्कृतं भागवतं मया ॥ 27 ॥

On the banks of the river Sarasvati, I composed this Devi Bhāgavat to pass away my time during the excellent period of Sārasvata Kalpa.

पुराणमुक्तां भृप सर्वसंशयनाशनम् ।

नानाख्यानसमयमुक्ते वेद्यामाणयसंश्रिन् ॥ 28 ॥

This Purānam is excellent; it is composed on the authority of the Vedas; all doubts are removed by it; many nice events are narrated here.

सन्दोड़ोत्र न कतिथ्वः सर्वांश युपसत्तम् ।

यधेत्रजातिकः क्रौश्यांचाती उदार्यों के ॥ 29 ॥

कृत्वा नर्तेने कामं चेख्छाया यशवर्तीनम् ।

तथा नर्तेने माया जान्स्थावरणंजमम् ॥ 30 ॥

Therefore, O King! Not the least doubt should be entertained. As a magician makes the wooden dolls dance in his hands at his will, so this world-enchanting Māyā is making this world, moving and non-moving, dance from Brahmā down to the blades of grass and all human beings.

ब्रह्मातिवर्षपर्वतं सदेवासुरमानुपम् ।

पञ्चैद्रियसमापुर्न मन्त्रिभान्तुरवर्तीन् ॥ 31 ॥

O King! Know Māyā's triple Guñas to be the cause of the this mind consisting of five organs of senses, that follows the Citta (mind, Buddhi and Ahankāra).

गुणान्तु कारणं राजनर्वेंां सर्वेथा प्रयः ।

कार्यकारणसंयुक्ते भवातीति विविधास्यः ॥ 32 ॥

भिन्रभित्रव्यभावास्ते गुणा मायासमूद्वतः ।

शान्तो घोरस्तथा मृद्धक्यन्तु विविधा चत: ॥ 33 ॥

तत्समेत: पुगाजित्यं ताईहितः कर्णं भवेत् ।

न भवत्येव संसार रहितस्तुषि: पटः ॥ 34 ॥

Actions arise from the causes thereof; there is no doubt in this; what doubt, then, there can arisen that all these creatures of different temperaments will come out of the different Gunas of Mayā. Peaceful, terrible and stupid become the persons in contact with the Maÿic Gunas.

तथा गुर्गीक्षिभिंडीनी न देहौति विविश्रयः ।

देवदेहो मनुष्यो वा तिरशो वा नाराधि ॥३ ५ ॥

गुर्णीविंहितो न स्यान्पृद्धितीना घटो यथा ।

बहा विषूमत्या करूस्यधामी गुणागधाः। ॥ ३ ६ ॥

कदाचिद्धीतीयुक्तास्ते त्याउप्रीतयुतः पुनः ।

तथा विषादयुक्तासे भवति न गुणयोगतः ॥ ३ ७ ॥

How, then, can they exist, bereft of them? As the cloth cannot exist without threads, so the embodied beings cannot exist in the world without the triple Gunas of Māyā. There is no doubt in this. As a pot cannot be made without clay, so these bodies, Devas, human or blinds cannot be created without the Gunas. Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva, too, are possessed of those three Gunas and therefore they become sometimes happy and satisfied, sometimes unhappy and dissatisfied and sometimes they become sad and remorseful as they are then under the influence of one Guna or the other.

इदा कदावित्तस्यस्वरा शान्त: सामाधिमान्।

प्रीतियुक्ति भवेत्सर्वभेतु ज्ञानसंयुतः ॥ 38 ॥

पुनः सच्चिवीरान्सु रजोगुणसाम्यातु: ।

तदा भवेद्योरोकरूप: सर्वेत्रग्रीतिसंपुतः ॥ 39 ॥

यदा तमोगुणाविष्टे बाहुल्येन भवेढ़िधिः: ।

तदा विषादसम्पत्रो गृहो भवित नान्यथा ॥ 40 ॥

Brahmā happens at times to be full of wisdom and knowledge, his temper peaceful, sweet and pleasant; and his soul rapt in Samādhi, when he becomes possessed of Sattva Guṇa; again when he is void of Sattva and filled with Rajo Guṇa, His temper becomes unpleasant and his appearance gets dark and awful everywhere; and when he becomes grossly Tāmasic, He becomes sorrowful and bereft entirely of intelligence.

माधवोप्रि सदा सत्त्वसंश्रितः सर्वथा भवेत् ।

यदा शगत: प्रीतिवृष्ठने भवेक्रानसर्विन्त: ॥ 41 ॥

स एव रज्ञाप्रियव्याप्रीसिनंसुन्तो भवेत् ।

घोरछ सर्वभूतेषु गुणाधीनो रामपति ॥ 42 ॥

Vísnu, when resting in Sattva, becomes peaceful, sweet-tempered, and full of knowledge; when Rajo Gunā preponderates in Him, He becomes void of sweetness and becomes awful to all the beings.

रुद्रापि सचस्युक्तः प्रीलिमाङ्गनिलामाभ्यते ।

राजीनिधितिः सोअप्रि योरः प्रीतिविचिति: ॥ 43 ॥

तमोगुणयुतः सोअपि मुहो विषायदुभयते ।

एते यदि गुणाधीना बह्याविष्युहारदय: ॥ 44 ॥

सुर्विंगीज्ञद्वासतद्वासमावेशपवा अप्रि ।

मन्वादध३ ये प्रोक्ताश्रतुदैशगुणे युगे ॥ 45 ॥

Rudra becomes, too, peaceful and pleasant under the Sattva Guna, awful and void of sweetness under the Rajo Guna, and becomes sad and stupid under the Tamo Guna. O King! When Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara and the solar and lunar Kings, the fourteen lords of Manvantaras, Manu and other are under the control of the magic Gunas, what to speak of other ordinary mortals, men and the other Jivas. अन्येघं चैव का वातां संसारोस्मिन्योपेत्तम ।

मायाधीनं जानतस्यं सदेवासुरामानुम् ॥ 46 ॥

तस्मात्राज कतन्य: संदेहोत्र कदाचन ।

देही मायापराधीनश्रेते तदनुगानुगः ॥ 47 ॥

The whole world is under the control of Māyā; the Devas, men and all other beings. None should doubt on this point. All the embodied beings labour under the directions of Māyā; never can they work independently.

सा च माया परे तत्वे संविदूरोप्रि सर्वदा ।

तद्यपीन प्रेरिता च तेन जीवेषु सर्वदा ॥ 48 ॥

This Māyā is again always residing in the Highest Essence, the Samvit or the Universal Pure Consciousness. Thus Māyā is dependent on the Highest Goddess, Who is of the nature of Samvit, and, stimulated by Her, resides in the hearts of all the Jivas.

ततो मायाविशिष्ठां तां संविद्धे परमेश्वीम् ।

मायेश्वी भगवती सचिव्यान्द्रक्षणिणी ॥ 49 ॥

Therefore one ought to meditate, worship and bow down before the Bhagavati, the Creatrix of Māyā and Who is of the nature of Sarivīt, Pure Existence, Intelligence and Bliss.

ध्यायेतशास्त्रप्रपेच्च प्रणमेच्च जपेद्वि ।

तेन सा सदया भृत्वा मोचयत्येव देहैन्नि ॥ 50 ॥

Thus She becomes gracious and merciful and

Book VI Chapter XXX

liberates the Jivas, giving them Her realisation and drawing together Her own Māyā away from them.

स्वायायां संहत्येव स्वानुभूतिप्रदानतः ।

भुवनं खतु माया सत्यदीक्षरी तस्य नायिका ॥ 51 ॥

भुवनेगी ततः प्रोक्ता देवो शैलोक्यसून्दरी ।

This whole cosmos is nothing but Māyā and the Consciousness (Sarivīt) of the nature of Brahman is the Lord of Māyā. For this reason that Beautiful One in the triple worlds, the Devi Bhagavatī is known by the name Bhuvaneśvarī, the Great Lady of the worlds.

तदूये यदि सर्के स्याचित्चतं भूयिपते सदा ॥  52 ॥

मायया किं भवेत्तनत सदसद्धुतया नृप ।

O King! If the Jivas can fix their hearts on that Samvit, then Māyā, born of the real and unreal, is quite unable to do any harm to them.

तस्मान्यायानिरासार्थ नान्यदे देवतान्तरण ॥ 53 ॥

सभर्थे तु वित्त देवों सचिवदानंरक्षिपशिण ।

तभोराशि नागरियुं रुक्त नैव तमो भवेत् ॥ 54 ॥

किन्तु भानुपभाचन्द्रविद्युविद्विपभाद्यः ।

No other Deva than the Bhuvaneśvari, of the nature of pure existence, intelligence and bliss is able to remove this Māyā. O King! Darkness cannot destroy darkness; the Sun, Moon, Lightning or Fire can destroy it.

तस्मामावेश्वीमवां स्वप्रकाशं तु संविदम् ॥ 55 ॥

आताधयेद्वितिज्ञा मायागुणनिवृत्तये ।

इति सम्वहूसया उज्यातं चूवासुर्वधादिकम् ॥ 56 ॥

Therefore it is highly incumbent on us to worship the Lady of Māyā, the Sarīvatī, the Mother with a cheerful heart to remove the Māyā and Her Guṇas. O King! Now I have narrated to you all the events concerning the killing of Vṛtrāsura that you asked.

यत्पूरं राजशान्तैन किमन्यच्छौतुमिच्छिस ।

पूर्वार्थोंदंय पुराणस्य कविषतस्तव सूत्रत ॥ 57 ॥

यत्र देयास्तु मडिमा विस्तरेणोपादितः ।

एतद्रहस्यं श्रीमान्तै देवं यस्य कस्यचित् ॥ 58 ॥

What more do you want to hear now. O One devoted to vows! I have now described the first half of that Purāṇa, which describes in detail the glory of Śrī Devi Bhagavatī. This Purāṇa, the secret of this Mother of the whole Universe, is not to be disclosed indiscriminately to anybody.

देशं भक्ताय शान्ताय देवीभक्तिताय च ।

शिषाया ज्येषुरुाया युभभक्त्युता च ॥ 59 ॥

Those that are peaceful, self-restrained, devoted, and possessed of Bhakti to the Devi, the disciples that are devoted to their Gurus and the eldest son, those are the fit recipients thereof.

इदमविलकबाना सारभृतं पुराणं

निश्वलनिमानतुल्यं सरमणानुनिविद्धम् ।

पदति परभावाहा: शुणोतीह भक्ल्या स

भवति धरावान्दे ज्ञानवामान्वोउरा ॥ ६० ॥

इति श्रीदैर्शिभागवते महापुराणो घरकन्ये

भगवतीमाहान्ये एकत्रिंशोउध्या ॥ 61 ॥

वेदाठवसुभूमखेदी: (1884) यद्योर्मकृतै: शुभै: ।

देवीभागवतत्याय चरकक्यः समापनावन् ॥

।। सामानोयं बष्टः कक्नः ॥

Whoever reads, or hears with greatest devotion this Mahāpurānam, equivalent to the Vedas, fraught with sound proofs and the essence of all talks, becomes, in this world, possessed of great wealth, becomes wise and passes his time in the greatest happiness. There is no doubt in this.

Here ends the Thirty-first Chapter on the Sixth Book

on the glory of Māyā in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgāvatam of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

***
