[Ch 31 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! I am now recounting the detailed glory of Māyā, heard by me from Nārada.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! I am now recounting the detailed glory of Māyā, heard by me from Nārada.

[Ch 31 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again I asked sage Nārada who is the most omniscient of all, after hearing the story of that sage in the female body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again I asked sage Nārada who is the most omniscient of all, after hearing the story of that sage in the female body.

[Ch 31 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Nārada! Tell me! What did Hari say at that time? Where did Mādhava the lord of the universe go along with you?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Nārada! Tell me! What did Hari say at that time? Where did Mādhava the lord of the universe go along with you?

[Ch 31 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada said: After saying thus, in that beautiful lake, the lord made up his mind to go to Vaikuntha, mounting on Garuda.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said: After saying thus, in that beautiful lake, the lord made up his mind to go to Vaikuntha, mounting on Garuda.

[Ch 31 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mahāvisnu, the consort of Lakṣmi, told me. O Nārada! go as you wish. Or come to my world. Do as you wish.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mahāvisnu, the consort of Lakṣmi, told me. O Nārada! go as you wish. Or come to my world. Do

[Ch 31 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After taking leave of Madhusūdana, I went to Brahmaloka. Viṣṇu the lord of Devas, seated on Garuda, went to Vaikuntha quickly, in a happy manner after directing me. When Janārdana was gone, I went to the region of my father (i.e., Brahmā).
NEW CORR ENG ──► After taking leave of Madhusūdana, I went to Brahmaloka. Viṣṇu the lord of Devas, seated on Garuda, went to Vaikuntha quickly, in a happy manner after directing me. When Janārdana was gone, I went to the region of my father (i.e., Brahmā).

[Ch 31 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thin king about all the wonderful miseries and the joys undergone, I went to my father and after prostrating to him, stood before him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then king about all the wonderful miseries and the joys undergone, I went to my father and after prostrating to him, stood before him.

[Ch 31 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then seeing me tormented by thoughts, my father Brahmā asked: O great one! Where had you gone? Son! Why are you troubled by thoughts?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then seeing me tormented by thoughts, my father Brahmā asked: O great one! Where had you gone? Son! Why are you troubled by thoughts?

[Ch 31 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O great sages! I do not see your mind happy today. You have been deceived by some body. Or you have seen some wonder.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O great sages! I do not see your mind happy today. You have been deceived by some body. Or you have seen some wonder.

[Ch 31 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Son! How can I see you sad and devoid of discrimination? Nārada said: Thus I was asked by my father. I sat on the seat. I told him my story arising out of the power of Māyā. O father! I have been cheated by the powerful Mahāvisnu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Son! How can I see you sad and devoid of discrimination? Nārada said: Thus I was asked by my father. I sat on the seat. I told him my story arising out of the power of Māyā. O father! I have been cheated by the powerful Mahāvisnu.

[Ch 31 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I was made to attain the state of a woman for many many years. Extreme misery arising out of death of son was experienced by me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I was made to attain the state of a woman for many many years. Extreme misery arising out of death of son was experienced by me.

[Ch 31 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I was instructed by him by nectarine sweet words about my real nature. Again after taking bath in that tank. I became a man (the old) Nārada.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I was instructed by him by nectarine sweet words about my real nature. Again after taking bath in that tank. I became a man (the old) Nārada.

[Ch 31 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brahman! What is the reason that I attained delusion at that time? Earlier knowledge was forgotten. I became identified with that female form, so quickly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brahman! What is the reason that I attained delusion at that time? Earlier knowledge was forgotten. I became identified with that female form, so quickly.

[Ch 31 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brahman! This is the strength of Māyā, which is difficult to cross. It is beyond my understanding. It destroyed all my knowledge. It was a clear cause of delusion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brahman! This is the strength of Māyā, which is difficult to cross. It is beyond my understanding. It destroyed all my knowledge. It was a clear cause of delusion.

[Ch 31 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I experienced it (power of Māyā) well. All good and bad were known. Of father! How did you attain victory over it? Tell me that clue.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I experienced it (power of Māyā) well. All good and bad were known. Of father! How did you attain victory over it? Tell me that clue.

[Ch 31 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! When my Father learnt the cause of my cares, he smiled and spoke to me in sweet words:
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! When my Father learnt the cause of my cares, he smiled and spoke to me in sweet words :--

[Ch 31 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O Child! The Devas, the high-souled Munis, the wise ascetics and the Yogis subsisting on air only are not able to conquer this Māyā. O Nārada! The power of Māyā is so very great that I, Viṣṇu and Sāmbhu, the Lord of Umā, none are able to know Her power.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Child! The Devas, the high-souled Munis, the wise ascetics and the Yogis subsisting on air only are not able to conquer this Māyā. O Nārada! The power of Māyā is so very great that I, Viṣṇu and Śambhu, the Lord of Umā, none are able to know Her power.

[Ch 31 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That Mahāmāyā is creating, preserving and dissolving this world by Time, Karma, and Nature and other efficient causes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That Mahāmāyā is creating, preserving and dissolving this world by Time, Karma, and Nature and other efficient causes.

[Ch 31 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Child! Know Her to be inconceivable and unapproachable. O Intelligent One! Do not be sorry nor should you be surprised about Māyā's great strength, for we all are deluded by Her."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Child! Know Her to be inconceivable and unapproachable. O Intelligent One! Do not be sorry nor should you be surprised about Māyā’s great strength, for we all are deluded by Her.

[Ch 31 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Dvaipāyana! Thus advised by my Father, my wonder disappeared. I then asked permission of my Father Padma Yoni (Lotus-born) and went out on tour round the sacred places of pilgrimages and on my way, seeing by and by the chief Tirthas, I have now come here.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Dvaipāyan! Thus advised by my Father, my wonder disappeared. I then asked permission of my Father Padma Yoni (Lotus-born) and went out on tour round the sacred places of pilgrimages and on my way, seeing by and by the chief Tīrthas, I have now come here.

[Ch 31 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Muni! Dost thou relinquish your sorrows for the extinction of the Kuru's family and remain here and pass your time in great joy and happiness. One must bear the fruits of one's Karma, good or bad; knowing this fully roam at your will wherever you like.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Muni! Dost thou relinquish your sorrows for the extinction of the Kuru’s family and remain here and pass your time in great joy and happiness. One must bear the fruits of one’s Karma, good or bad; knowing this fully roam at your will wherever you like.

[Ch 31 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Maharṣi Nārada thus kindling knowledge in me, went away; I also thought over his words.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Maharṣi Nārada thus kindling knowledge in me, went away; I also thought over his words.

[Ch 31 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the banks of the river Sarasvati, I composed this Devi Bhāgavat to pass away my time during the excellent period of Sārasvata Kalpa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the banks of the river Sarasvatī, I composed this Devī Bhāgavat to pass away my time during the excellent period of Sārasvata Kalpa.

[Ch 31 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Purānam is excellent; it is composed on the authority of the Vedas; all doubts are removed by it; many nice events are narrated here.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This Purāṇam is excellent; it is composed on the authority of the the Vedas; all doubts are removed by it; many nice events are narrated here.

[Ch 31 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O King! Not the least doubt should be entertained. As a magician makes the wooden dolls dance in his hands at his will, so this world-enchanting Māyā is making this world, moving and non-moving, dance from Brahmā down to the blades of grass and all human beings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O King! Not the least doubt should be entertained. As a magician makes the wooden dolls dance in his hands at his will, so this world-enchanting Māyā is making this world, moving and non-moving, dance from Brahmā down to the blades of grass and all human beings.

[Ch 31 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Know Māyā's triple Guñas to be the cause of the this mind consisting of five organs of senses, that follows the Citta (mind, Buddhi and Ahankāra).
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Know Māyā’s triple Guṇas to be the cause of this mind consisting of five organs of senses, that follows the Chitta (mind, buddhi and Ahamkāra).

[Ch 31 Verse 32-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Actions arise from the causes thereof; there is no doubt in this; what doubt, then, there can arisen that all these creatures of different temperaments will come out of the different Gunas of Mayā. Peaceful, terrible and stupid become the persons in contact with the Maÿic Gunas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Actions arise from the causes thereof; there is no doubt in this; what doubt, then, there can arise that all these creatures of different temperaments will come out of the different Guṇas of Māyā. Peaceful, terrible and stupid become the persons in contact with the Mayic Guṇas.

[Ch 31 Verse 35-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How, then, can they exist, bereft of them? As the cloth cannot exist without threads, so the embodied beings cannot exist in the world without the triple Gunas of Māyā. There is no doubt in this. As a pot cannot be made without clay, so these bodies, Devas, human or blinds cannot be created without the Gunas. Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva, too, are possessed of those three Gunas and therefore they become sometimes happy and satisfied, sometimes unhappy and dissatisfied and sometimes they become sad and remorseful as they are then under the influence of one Guna or the other.
NEW CORR ENG ──► How, then, can they exist, bereft of them? As the cloth cannot exist without threads, so the embodied beings cannot exist in the world without the triple Guṇas of Māyā. There is no doubt in this. As a pot cannot be made without clay, so these bodies, Devas, human or birds, cannot be created without the Guṇas. Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva, too, are possessed of those three Guṇas and therefore they become sometimes happy and satisfied, sometimes unhappy and dissatisfied and sometimes they become sad and remorseful as they are then under the influence of one Guṇa or the other.

[Ch 31 Verse 38-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā happens at times to be full of wisdom and knowledge, his temper peaceful, sweet and pleasant; and his soul rapt in Samādhi, when he becomes possessed of Sattva Guṇa; again when he is void of Sattva and filled with Rajo Guṇa, His temper becomes unpleasant and his appearance gets dark and awful everywhere; and when he becomes grossly Tāmasic, He becomes sorrowful and bereft entirely of intelligence.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā happens at times to be full of wisdom and knowledge, his temper peaceful, sweet and pleasant and his soul rapt in Samādhi, when he becomes possessed of Sāttva Guṇa; again when he is void of Sāttva and filled with Rājo Guṇa, His temper becomes unpleasant and his appearance gets dark and awful everywhere; and when he becomes grossly Tāmasic, He becomes sorrowful and bereft entirely of intelligence.

[Ch 31 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vísnu, when resting in Sattva, becomes peaceful, sweet-tempered, and full of knowledge; when Rajo Gunā preponderates in Him, He becomes void of sweetness and becomes awful to all the beings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viṣṇu, when resting in Sāttva, becomes peaceful, sweet-tempered, and full of knowledge; when Rājo Guṇa preponderates in Him, He becomes void of sweetness and becomes awful to all the beings.

[Ch 31 Verse 43-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The whole world is under the control of Māyā; the Devas, men and all other beings. None should doubt on this point. All the embodied beings labour under the directions of Māyā; never can they work independently.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The whole world is under the control of Māyā; the Devas, men and all other beings. None should doubt on this point. All the embodied beings labour under the directions of Māyā; never can they work independently.

[Ch 31 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Māyā is again always residing in the Highest Essence, the Samvit or the Universal Pure Consciousness. Thus Māyā is dependent on the Highest Goddess, Who is of the nature of Samvit, and, stimulated by Her, resides in the hearts of all the Jivas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This Māyā is again always residing in the Highest Essence, the Samvit or the Universal Pure Consciousness. Thus Māyā is dependent on the Highest Goddess, Who is of the nature of Samvit, and, stimulated by Her, resides in the hearts of all the Jīvas.

[Ch 31 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore one ought to meditate, worship and bow down before the Bhagavati, the Creatrix of Māyā and Who is of the nature of Sarivīt, Pure Existence, Intelligence and Bliss.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore one ought to meditate, worship and bow down before the Bhagavatī, the Creatrix of Māyā and Who is of the nature of Samvit, Pure Existence, Intelligence and Bliss.

[Ch 31 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus She becomes gracious and merciful and liberates the Jivas, giving them Her realisation and drawing together Her own Māyā away from them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus She becomes gracious and merciful and liberates the Jīvas, giving them Her realisation and drawing together Her own Māyā away from them.

[Ch 31 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This whole cosmos is nothing but Māyā and the Consciousness (Sarivīt) of the nature of Brahman is the Lord of Māyā. For this reason that Beautiful One in the triple worlds, the Devi Bhagavatī is known by the name Bhuvaneśvarī, the Great Lady of the worlds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This whole cosmos is nothing but Māyā and the Consciousness (Samvit) of the nature of Brāhmaṇ is the Lord of Māyā. For this reason that Beautiful One in the triple worlds, the Devī Bhagavatī is known by the name Bhuvaneśvarī, the Great Lady of the worlds.

[Ch 31 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! If the Jivas can fix their hearts on that Samvit, then Māyā, born of the real and unreal, is quite unable to do any harm to them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! If the Jīvas can fix their hearts on that Samvit, then Māyā, born of the real and unreal, is quite unable to do any harm to them.

[Ch 31 Verse 53-54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No other Deva than the Bhuvaneśvari, of the nature of pure existence, intelligence and bliss is able to remove this Māyā. O King! Darkness cannot destroy darkness; the Sun, Moon, Lightning or Fire can destroy it.
NEW CORR ENG ──► No other Deva than the Bhuvaneśvarī, of the nature of pure existence, intelligence and bliss is able to remove this Māyā. O King! Darkness cannot destroy darkness; the Sun, Moon, Lightning or Fire can destroy it.

[Ch 31 Verse 55-56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore it is highly incumbent on us to worship the Lady of Māyā, the Sarīvatī, the Mother with a cheerful heart to remove the Māyā and Her Guṇas. O King! Now I have narrated to you all the events concerning the killing of Vṛtrāsura that you asked.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore it is highly iñcumbent on us to worship the Lady of Māyā, the Samvit, the Mother with a cheerful heart to remove the Māyā and Her Guṇas. O King! Now I have narrated to you all the events concerning the killing of Vritrāsura that you asked.

[Ch 31 Verse 57-58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What more do you want to hear now. O One devoted to vows! I have now described the first half of that Purāṇa, which describes in detail the glory of Śrī Devi Bhagavatī. This Purāṇa, the secret of this Mother of the whole Universe, is not to be disclosed indiscriminately to anybody.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What more do you want to hear now. O One devoted to vows! I have now described the first half of that Purāṇa, which describes in detail the glory of Śrī Devī Bhagavatī. This Purāṇa, the secret of this Mother of the whole Universe, is not to be disclosed indiscriminately to anybody.

[Ch 31 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those that are peaceful, self-restrained, devoted, and possessed of Bhakti to the Devi, the disciples that are devoted to their Gurus and the eldest son, those are the fit recipients thereof.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those that are peaceful, self-restrained, devoted, and possessed of Bhakti to the Devī, the disciples that are devoted to their Gurus and the eldest son, those are the fit recipients thereof.

[Ch 31 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whoever reads, or hears with greatest devotion this Mahāpurānam, equivalent to the Vedas, fraught with sound proofs and the essence of all talks, becomes, in this world, possessed of great wealth, becomes wise and passes his time in the greatest happiness. There is no doubt in this. Here ends the Thirty-first Chapter on the Sixth Book on the glory of Māyā in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgāvatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa. ***
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whoever reads or hears with greatest devotion this Mahāpurāṇam, equivalent to the Vedas, fraught with sound proofs and the essence of all talks, becomes, in this world, possessed of great wealth, becomes wise and passes his time in the greatest happiness. There is no doubt in this. Here ends the Thirty-first Chapter on the Sixth Book on the glory of Māyā in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
