[Ch 26 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada said: I have heard the anecdote of Tulasī. Now describe in detail the history of Śāvitrī. Śavitrī Śrimaddevībhāgavatam considered as the Mother of the Vedas. Why was She born, in days gone by? By whom was She first worshipped and subsequently also?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- I have heard the anecdote of Tulasī. Now describe in detail the history of Sāvitrī. Sāvitrī is considered as the Mother of the Vedas. Why was She born, in days gone by? By whom was She first worshipped and subsequently also?

[Ch 26 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: O Muni! She was first worshipped by Brahmā. Next the Vedas worshipped her. Subsequently the learned men worshipped her. Next the King Asvapati worshipped Her in India. Next the four Varnas (castes) worshipped Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Muni! She was first worshipped by Brahmā. Next the Vedas worshipped her. Subsequently the learned men worshipped her. Next the King Aśvapati worshipped Her in India. Next the four Varṇas (castes) worshipped Her.

[Ch 26 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada said: O Brahman! Who is that Āsvapati? What for did he worship? When the Devi Śāvitrī became adorable by all, by which persons was She first worshipped and by which persons subsequently.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- O Brāhmaṇ! Who is that Aśvapati? What for did he worship? When the Devī Sāvitrī became adorable by all, by which persons was She first worshipped and by

[Ch 26 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: O Muni! The King Asvapati reigned in Madradeśa, rendering his enemies powerless and making his friends painless. He had a queen very religious; her name was Mālati; She was like a second Lakṣmī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Muni! The King Aśvapati reigned in Bhadradeśa, rendering his enemies powerless and making his friends painless. He had a queen very religious; her name was Mālatī; She was like a second Lakṣmī.

[Ch 26 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She was barren; and desirous of an issue, She under the instruction of Vasistha, duly worshipped Sāvitrī with devotion. But She did not receive any vision nor any command; therefore She returned home with a grievous heart.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She was barren; and desirous of an issue, She under the instruction of Vaśiṣṭha, duly worshipped Sāvitrī with devotion. But She did not receive any vision nor any command; therefore She returned home with a grievous heart.

[Ch 26 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing her sorry, the king consoled her with good words and himself accompanied her to Puskara with a view to perform Tapas to Sāvitrī with devotion and, being self-controlled, practised tapasyā for one hundred years. Still he could not see Sāvitrī, but voice came to him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing her sorry, the king consoled her with good words and himself accompanied her to Puṣkara with a view to perform Tapas to Sāvitrī with devotion and, being self-controlled, practised tapasyā for one hundred years. Still he could not see Sāvitrī, but voice came to him.

[Ch 26 Verse 12-13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► An incorporeal, celestial voice reached his ears: 'Perform Japan (repeat) ten lakhs of Gāyatrī Mantram.' At this moment Parāśara came up there. The king bowed down to him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► An incorporeal, celestial voice reached his ears :-- “Perform Japam (repeat) ten lakhs of Gāyatrī Mantram.” At this moment Parāsara came up there. The king bowed down to him.

[Ch 26 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Muni said: “O King! One japa of Gāyatī, destroys the days sins. Ten Japams of Gāyatī destroy day and night’s sins.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Muni said :-- O King! One japa of Gāyatrī, destroys the days sins. Ten Japams of Gāyatrī destroy day and night’s sins.

[Ch 26 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One hundred Gāyatrī Japams destroy one month's sins. One thousand Japams destroy one year's sins. One lakh Gāyatrī Japams destroy the sins of the present birth and ten lakh Gāyatrī Japams destroy the sins of other births. One hundred lakhs of Japams destroy the sins of all the births. If ten times that (i.e. 1,000 lakhs) be done, then liberation is obtained.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One hundred Gāyatrī Japams destroy one month’s sins. One thousand Japams destroy one year’s sins. One lakh Gāyatrī Japams destroy the sins of the present birth and ten lakh Gāyatrī Japams destroy the sins of other births. One hundred lakhs of Japams destroy the sins of all the births. If ten times that (i.e., 1,000 lakhs) be done, then liberation is obtained.

[Ch 26 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► (Now the method, how to make Japam). Make the palm of the (right) hand like a snake's hood; see that the fingers are all close, no holes are seen; and make the ends of the fingers bend downwards; then being calm and quiet and with one's face eastward, practise Japam. Then count from the middle of the ring (nameless) finger and go on counting right-handed (with the hands of the watch) till you come to the bottom of the index finger. This is the rule of counting by the hand.
NEW CORR ENG ──► (Now the method, how to make Japam). Make the palm of the (right) hand like a snake’s hood; see that the fingers are all close, no holes are seen; and make the ends of the fingers bend downwards; then being calm and quiet and with one’s face eastward, practise Japam. Then count from the middle of the ring (name-less) finger and go on counting right-handed (with the hands of the watch) till you come to the bottom of the index finger. This is the rule of counting by the hand.

[Ch 26 Verse 19-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The rosary is to be of the seed of white lotus or of the crystals; it should be consecrated and purified. Japam is to be done then in a sacred Tīrtha or in a temple. Becoming self-controlled one should place the rosary on a banyan leaf or on a lotus leaf and smear it with cowdung; wash it, uttering Gāyatrī Mantra and over it perform one hundred times Gāyatrī Japam intently in accordance with the rules.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The rosary is to be of the seed of white lotus or of the crystals; it should be consecrated and purified. Japam is to be done then in a sacred Tīrtha or in a temple. Becoming self-controlled one should place the rosary on a banyan leaf or on a lotus leaf and smear it with cowdung; wash it, uttering Gāyatrī Mantra and over it perform one hundred times Gāyatrī Japam intently in accordance with the rules.

[Ch 26 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Or wash it with Pāñcagavya, milk, curds, clarified butter, cow urine and cowdung), and then consecrate it will. Then wash it with the Ganges water and perform best the consecrations. O Rājarsī! Then perform ten lakhs of Japam in due order. Thust he sins of your three births will be destroyed and then you will see the Devi Savitri.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Or wash it with Pañchagavya, milk, curds, clarified butter, cow urine and cowdung, and then consecrate it well. Then wash it with the Ganges water and perform best the consecrations. O Rājarṣi! Then perform ten lakhs of Japam in due order. Thus the sins of your three births will be destroyed and then you will see the Devī Sāvitrī.

[Ch 26 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Do this Jāpam, being pure, every day in the morning, mid-day, and in the evening. If one be impure and devoid of Sandhyā, one has no right to do any action; and even if one performs an action, one does not get any fruit thereby.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Do this Japam, being pure, everyday in the morning, mid-day, and in the evening. If one be impure and devoid of Sandhyā, one has no right to do any action; and even if one performs an action, one does not get any fruit thereby.

[Ch 26 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He who does not do the morning Sandhyā and the evening Sandhyā, is driven away from all the Brāhminic Karmas and he becomes like Śūdras. He who does Sandhyā three times throughout his life, becomes like the Sun by his lustre and brilliance of tapas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He who does not do the morning Sandhyā and the evening Sandhyā, is driven away from all the Brāhminic Karmas and he becomes like Śūdras. He who does Sandhyā three times throughout his life, becomes like the Sun by his lustre and brilliance of tapas.

[Ch 26 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What more than this, the earth is always purified by the dust of his feet. The Dvija who does his Sandhyā Vandanam and remains pure, becomes energetic and liberated while living. By his contact all the tirthas become pourified. All sins vanish away from him as snakes fly away at the sight of Garuda.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What more than this, the earth is always purified by the dust of his feet. The Dvīja who does his Sandhyā Bandanam and remains pure, becomes energetic and liberated while living. By his contact all the Tīrthas become purified. All sins vanish away from him as snakes fly away at the sight of Garuḍa.

[Ch 26 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Dvija who becomes void of Sandhyā three times a day, the Devas do not accept his worship nor the Pitrṣ accept his Pindas. He who has no Bhakti towards the Mūla Prakṛti, who does not worship the specific seed Mantra of Māyā and who des not hold festivities in honour of Mūla Prakṛti, know him verily to be an Ajagara snake without poison.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Dvīja who becomes void of Sandhyā three times a day, the Devas do not accept his worship nor the Pitris accept his Piṇḍas. He who has no Bhakti towards the Mūla Prakriti, who does not worship the specific seed Mantra of Māyā and who does not hold festivities in honour of Mūla Prakriti, know him verily to be an Ajagara snake without poison.

[Ch 26 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Devoid of the Viṣṇu mantra, devoid of the three Sandhyās and devoid of the fasting on the Ekādaśī Tithi (the eleventh day of the fortnight), the Brāhmin becomes a snake devoid of poison. The virābhmin who does not like to take the offerings dedicated to Hari and who does the washerman's work and eats the food of Śūdra and drives the buffaloes, becomes a snake devoid of poison.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Devoid of the Viṣṇu mantra, devoid of the three Sandhyās and devoid of the fasting on the Ekādaśi Tithi (the eleventh clay of the fortnight), the Brāhmin becomes a snake devoid of poison. The vile Brāhmin who does not like to take the offerings dedicated to Hari and who does the washerman’s work and eats the food of Śūdra and drives the buffaloes, becomes a snake devoid of poison.

[Ch 26 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmīn who burns the dead bodies of the Śūdras, becomes like the man who is the husband of an unmarried girl. The Brāhmīn also who becomes a cook of a Śūdra, becomes a snake void of poison.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmin who burns the dead bodies of the Śūdras, becomes like the man who is the husband of an unmarried girl. The Brāhmin also who becomes a cook of a Śūdra, becomes a snake void of poison.

[Ch 26 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmīn who accepts the gifts of a Śūdra, who performs the sacrifice of a Śūdra, who lives as clerks and warriors becomes like a snake void of poison. The Brāhmīn who sells his daughter, who sells the name of Hari or eats the food of a woman who is without husband and son, as well as of one who has just bathed after her menstruation period, becomes like a serpent void of poison.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmin who accepts the gifts of a Śūdra, who performs the sacrifice of a Śūdra, who lives as clerks and warriors becomes like a snake void of poison. The Brāhmin who sells his daughter, who sells the name of Hari or eats the food of a woman who is without husband and son, as well as of one who has just bathed after her menstruation period, becomes like a serpent void of poison.

[Ch 26 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmin who takes the profession of pimps and pampers and lives on the interest, is also like a serpent void of poison. The Brāhmin who sleeps even when the Sun has risen, eats fish, and does not worship the Devi is also like a poisonless serpent.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmin who takes the profession of pimps and pampers and lives on the interest, is also like a serpent void of poison. The Brāhmin who sleeps even when the Sun has risen, eats fish, and does not worship the Devī is also like a poisonless serpent.

[Ch 26 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus stating all the rules of worship in order, the best of the Munis told him the Dhyānam, etc., of the Devi Śavitrī, what he wanted. Then he informed the King of all the mantras and went to his own Śārama. The king, then worshipped accordingly and saw the Devi Śavitrī and got boons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus stating all the rules of worship in order, the best of the Munis told him the Dhyānam, etc., of the Devī Sāvitrī, what he wanted. Then he informed the King of all the mantras and went to his own Āśrama. The king, then worshipped accordingly and saw the Devī Sāvitrī and got boons.

[Ch 26 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada said: What is the Śāvitris Dhyāna, what are the modes of her worship, what is stotra, mantra, that Parāśara gave to the King before he went away?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- What is the Sāvitrī’s Dhyān, what are the modes of her worship, what is stotra, mantra, that Parāśara gave to the King before he went away?

[Ch 26 Verse 42-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And how did the King worship and what boon did he get? This great mystery, grand and well renowned in the Śrutis, about Śavitrī, I am desirous to hear in brief on all the points.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And how did the King worship and what boon did he get? This great mystery, grand and well renowned in the Śrutis, about Sāvitrī, I am desirous to hear in brief on all the points.

[Ch 26 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: On the thirteenth day (the trayodaśī, tithī) of the black fortnight in the month Jyeṣṭha or on any other holy period, the fourteenth day (the caturdasī tithī) this vow is to be observed with great care and devotion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- On the thirteenth day (the trayodaśi tithi) of the black fortnight in the month Jyaistha or on any other holy period, the fourteenth day (the caturdaśi tithi) this vow is to be observed with great care and devotion.

[Ch 26 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Forteen fruits and fourteen plates with offerings of food on them, flowers and incense are to be offered and this vow is to be observed for fourteen years consecutively. Garments, holy threads and other articles are also offered and after the Vrata is over, the Brāhmins are to be fed. The lucky pot (maniglahata) is to be located duly according to the rules of worship with branches and fruits.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Fourteen fruits and fourteen plates with offerings of food on them, flowers and incense are to be offered and this vow is to be observed for fourteen years consecutively. Garments, holy threads and other articles are also offered and after the Vrata is over, the Brāhmins are to be fed. The lucky pot (mangal ghaṭ) is to be located duly according to the rules of worship with branches and fruits.

[Ch 26 Verse 47-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Ganēsā, Agni, Viṣṇu, Śiva and Śivā are to be worshipped duly. In that ghata Śāvitrī is to be next invoked and worshipped. Now hear the Dhyānam of Śāvitrī, as stated in the Mādhyan Dina Śākhā, as well the stotra, the modes of worship, and the Mantra, the giver of all desires.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Gaṇeśa, Agni, Viṣṇu, Śiva and Śivā are to be worshipped duly. In that ghaṭ Sāvitrī is to be next invoked and worshipped. Now hear the Dhyānam of Sāvitrī, as stated in the Mādhyan Dina Sakhā, as well the stotra, the modes of worship, and the Mantra, the giver of all desires.

[Ch 26 Verse 49-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I meditate and adore that Sāvitrī, the Mother of the Vedas, of the nature of Pranava (Om), whose colour is like the burnished gold, who is burning with Brāhma teja (the fire of Brahma), effulgent with thousands and thousands of rays of the midday summer Sun, who is a smiling countenance adorned with jewels and ornaments, wearing celestial garment (purified and uninflammable by fire), and ready to grant blessings to Her Bhaktas; who is the bestower of happiness and liberation, who is peaceful and the consort of the Creator of the world, who is all wealth and the giver of all riches and prosperity, who is the Presiding Deity of the Vedas and who is the Vedas incarnate, I meditate on Thee. బాణా బాణనేనే జేక్రణ వాగ్రి ముక్రున్ । పునబ్రణా వేంక్రు వేంక్రు వేంక్రు వేంక్రు 153 ద్రావు శేంక్రంగేండర వేండ్రేండ మన్య్వేండు ।
NEW CORR ENG ──► I meditate and adore that Sāvitrī, the Mother of the Vedas, of the nature of Praṇava (Om), whose colour is like the burnished gold, who is burning with Brahmā teja (the fire of Brahmā), effulgent with thousands and thousands of rays of the midday summer Sun, who is of a smiling countenance adorned with jewels and ornaments, wearing celestial garment (purified and uninflammable by fire), and ready to grant blessings to Her Bhaktas; who is the bestower of happiness and liberation, who is peaceful and the consort of the Creator of the world, who is all wealth and the giver of all riches and prosperity, who is the Presiding Deity of the Vedas and who is the Vedas incarnate, I meditate on Thee.

[Ch 26 Verse 53-54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus reciting the Dhyānam, mantra and meditating on Her, one is to offer Naivedyas (offerings of food) to Her and then place one's fingers on one's head; one is to meditate again, and then invoke the Devi within the pot. One should next present fourteen things, uttering proper mantras according to the Vedas. Then one must perform special pūjā and chant hymns to the Devi and worship Her. The fourteen articles of worship are as under :
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus reciting the Dhyānam, mantra and meditating on Her, one is to offer Naivedyas (offerings of food) to Her and then place one’s fingers on one’s head; one is to meditate again, and then invoke the Devī within the pot. One should next present fourteen things, uttering proper mantras according to the Vedas. Then one must perform special pūjā and chant hymns to the Devī and worship Her. The fourteen articles of worship are as under :--

[Ch 26 Verse 55-56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► (1) Seat (Āsana); (2) water for washing feet (Padya), (3) offering of rice and Durba grass (Arghya), (4) water for bath (Snānīya), (6) anointment with sandalpaste and other scents (Anulepana), (7) incense (Dhūpa), (8) anointment with sandalpaste and other scents (Anulepana), (7) incense (Dhūpa), (8) Lights (Dipa), (9) offerings of food (Naivedya), (10) Betels (Tāmbūla), (11) Cool water, (12) garments, (13) ornaments, (14) garlands, scents, offering of water of sip, and beautiful bedding.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- (1) Seat (Āsan); (2) water for washing feet (Pādya), (3) offering of rice and Durba grass (Arghya), (4) water for bath (Snānīya), (6) anointment with sandalpaste and other scents (Anulepana), (7) incense (Dhūpa), (8) Lights (Dipa), (9) offerings of food (Naivedya), (10) Betels (Tambūl), (11) Cool water, (12) garments, (13) ornaments, (14) garlands, scents, offering of water to sip, and beautiful bedding.

[Ch 26 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► While offering these articles, one is to utter the mantras, this beautiful wooden or golden seat, giving spiritual merits is being offered by me to Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► While offering these articles, one is to utter the mantras, this beautiful wooden or golden seat, giving spiritual merits is being offered by me to Thee.

[Ch 26 Verse 58-59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This water from the Tirthas, this holy water for washing Thy feet, pleasant, highly meritorious pure, and as an embodiment of Pūjā is being offered Śrimaddevībhāgavatam by me to Thee. This holy Arghya with Durba grass and flowers and the pure water in the conch-shell is being offered by me to Thee. (as a work of initial worship).
NEW CORR ENG ──► This water from the Tīrthas, this holy water for washing Thy feet, pleasant, highly meritorious, pure, and as an embodiment of Pūjā is being offered by me to Thee. This holy Arghya with Durba grass and flowers and the pure water in the conch-shell is being offered by me to Thee (as a work of initial worship).

[Ch 26 Verse 60-61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This sweet scented oil and water being offered by me to Thee with devotion for Thy bathing purposes. Kindly accept these. O Mother! This sweet-scented water Divine-like, highly pure and prepared of Kumkuma and other scented things I offer to Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This sweet scented oil and water being offered by me to Thee with devotion for Thy bathing purposes. Kindly accept these. O Mother! This sweet-scented water Divine-like, highly pure and prepared of Kuṅkuma and other scented things I offer to Thee.

[Ch 26 Verse 62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Paramesvarī! This all-auspicious, all good and highly meritorious, this beautiful Dhūpa, kindly take, O World Mother! This is very pleasant and sweet scented; therefore I offer this to Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Parameśvarī! This all-auspicious, all good and highly meritorious, this beautiful Dhūpa, kindly take, O World Mother! This is very pleasant and sweet scented; therefore I offer this to Thee.

[Ch 26 Verse 63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! This light, manifesting all this Universe and the seed, as it were, to destroy the Darkness is being offered by me to Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! This light, manifesting all this Universe and the seed, as it were, to destroy the Darkness is being offered by me to Thee.

[Ch 26 Verse 64-67]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Devī! Kindly accept this delicious offering of food, highly meritorious, appeasing hunger, pleasant, nourishing and pleasure giving. This betel is scented with camphor, etc., nice, nourishing, and pleasure-giving; this is being offered by me to Thee. This water is nice and cool, appeasing the thirst and the Life of the World. So kindly accept this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Devī! Kindly accept this delicious offering of food, highly meritorious, appeasing hunger, pleasant, nourishing end pleasure giving. This betel is scented with camphor, etc., nice, nourishing, and pleasure-giving; this is being offered by me to Thee. This water is nice and cool, appeasing the thirst and the Life of the World. So kindly accept this.

[Ch 26 Verse 68-69]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devi! Kindly accept this silken garment as well the garment made of Kārpāsa Cotton, beautifying the body and enhancing the beauty. Kindly accept these golden ornaments decked with jewels, highly meritorious, joyous, beauteous and prosperous.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devī! Kindly accept this silken garment as well as the garment made of Kārpāsa Cotton, beautifying the body and enhancing the beauty. Kindly accept these golden ornaments decked with jewels, highly meritorious, joyous, beauteous and prosperous.

[Ch 26 Verse 70-71]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kindly accept these fruits yielding fruits of desires, obtained from various trees and of various kinds. Please have this garland, all auspicious and all good, made of various flowers, beauteous and generating happiness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kindly accept these fruits yielding fruits of desires, obtained from various trees and of various kinds. Please have this garland, all auspicious and all good, made of various flowers, beauteous and generating happiness.

[Ch 26 Verse 72-74]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devi! Kindly accept this sweet scent, highly pleasing and meritorious. Please take this Sindira, the best of the ornaments, beautifying the forehead, highly excellent and beautiful. Kindly accept this holy and meritorious threads and purified by the Vedic mantrams and made of highly holy threads and knitted with highly pure knots. Uttering thus, offer the above articles that are to be offered to the Devi, every time the specific seed mantra being uttered.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devī! Kindly accept this sweet scent, highly pleasing and meritorious. Please take this Sindūra, the best of the ornaments, beautifying the forehead, highly excellent and beautiful. Kindly accept this holy and meritorious threads an purefied by the Vedic mantrams and made of highly holy threads and knitted with highly pure knots. Uttering thus, offer the above articles that are to be offered to the Devī, every time the specific seed mantra being uttered.

[Ch 26 Verse 75-76]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the intelligent devote should recite the stotras and subsequently offer the Dakṣinās (presents) with devotion to the Brāhmaṇas. The Radical or the Specific Seed Mantra mantra is the eight lettered mantra Śrim Hrim Klim Śvaitrai Svāhā; So the sages know. The Stotra, as stated in the Mādhyandina Sākhā, gives fruits of all desires. I am now speaking to you of that mantra, the Life of the Brāhmaṇas. Listen attentively.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the intelligent devotee should recite the stotras and subsequently of the Dakṣiṇās (presents) with devotion to the Brāhmaṇas. The Radical or the Specific Seed Mantra mantra is the eight lettered mantra Srīm Hrīm Klīm Svāitrai Svāhā; So the sages know. The Stotra, as stated in the Mādhyandīna Śākhā, gives fruits of all desires. I am now speaking to you of that mantra, the Life of the Brāhmaṇas. Listen attentively.

[Ch 26 Verse 77-78]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Nārada! Savitri was given to Brahmā, in the ancient times of old in the region of Goloka by Kṛṣṇa; but Savitri did not come Brahma loka with Brahmā. Then by the command of Kṛṣṇa, Brahmā praised the mother of the Vedas. And when She got pleased, She accepted Brahmā as Her husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Nārada! Sāvitrī was given to Brahmā, in the ancient times of old in the region of Goloka by Kṛṣṇa; but Sāvitrī did not come to Brahmā loka with Brahmā. Then by the command of Kṛṣṇa, Brahmā praised the mother of the Vedas. And when She got pleased, She accepted Brahmā as Her husband.

[Ch 26 Verse 79-81]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā said: Thou art the everlasting existence intelligence and bliss; Thou art Mūlaprakrti; thou art Hiranya Garbha; Thou didst get pleased, O Fair one! Thou art of the nature of fire and Energy; Thou art the Highest; Thou art the Highest Bliss, and the caste of the twice born. Dost thou get appeased, O Fair One! Thou art eternal, dear to the Eternal; thou art of the nature of the Everlasting Bliss.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā said :-- Thou art the everlasting existence intelligence and bliss; Thou art Mūlaprakriti; thou art Hiraṇya Garbha; Thou didst get pleased, O Fair one! Thou art of the nature of fire and Energy; Thou art the Highest; Thou art the Highest Bliss, and the caste of the twice-born. Dost thou get appeased, O Fair One! Thou art eternal, dear to the Eternal; thou art of the nature of the Everlasting Bliss.

[Ch 26 Verse 82]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devi, O Thou, the all auspicious One! O Fair One! Beest thou satisfied. Thou art the form all (omnipresent)! Thou art the essence of all mantras of the Brâhmaṇgas, higher than the highest! Thou art the bestower of happiness and the liberator O Devi, O Fair One! Beest thou appeased.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devī, O Thou, the all auspicious One! O Fair One! Beest thou satisfied. Thou art the form of all (omnipresent)! Thou art the essence of all mantras of the Brāhmaṇas, higher than the highest! Thou art the bestower of happiness and the liberator O Devī, O Fair One! Beest thou appeased.

[Ch 26 Verse 83-85]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou art like the burning flame to the fuel of sins of the Brāhmaṇas! O Thou, the Bestower of Brahma teja (the light to Brahma) O Devi! O Fair One! Beest appeased. By Thy mere remembrance, all the sins to me by body, mind and speech are burnt to ashes." Thus saying the Creator of the world reached the assembly there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thou art like the burning flame to the fuel of sins of the Brāhmaṇas! O Thou, the Bestower of Brahmā teja (the light of Brahmā) O Devī! O Fair One! Beest appeased. By Thy mere remembrance, all the sins to me by body, mind and speech are burnt to ashes. Thus saying, the Creator of the world reached the assembly there.

[Ch 26 Verse 86-87]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Śāvitrī came to the Brahmaloka with Brahmā. The King Āśvapati chanted this stotra to Śāvitrī and saw Her and got from Her the desired boons. Whosoever recites this highly sacred king of Stotras after Sandhyā Vandanam, quickly acquires the fruits of studying the Vedas. Here ends the Twenty-sixth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the narration of Śāvitrī in Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Sāvitrī came to the Brahmaloka with Brahmā. The King Aśvapati chanted this stotra to Sāvitrī and saw Her and got from Her the desired boons. Whosoever recites this highly sacred king of Stotras after Sandhyā Bandanam, quickly acquires the fruits of studying the Vedas. Here ends the Twenty Sixth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the narration of Sāvitrī in Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
