CHAPTER XXVI

On Sāvitri

नारद जवाच

तुलस्यपाखानमिदं श्रुतं चातिसुधोपमम् ।

ततः: साविश्युपाखानं तन्मे व्याखानामूर्दिंस ॥ १ ॥

पूरा केन समुद्धता सा श्रुता च श्रुतेः प्रयुः ।

केन वा पूजिता लोक प्रमय केश डा परे ॥ 2 ॥

Nārada said: I have heard the anecdote of Tulasī.

Now describe in detail the history of Śāvitrī. Śavitrī

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

considered as the Mother of the Vedas. Why was She born, in days gone by? By whom was She first worshipped and subsequently also?

श्रीनारायण उवाच

ब्रहाणा वेदजननी प्रथमे पूजिता मुने ।

छितीये च वेदगाधैलत्यक्षाहितुवरां गणैः ॥ ३ ॥

तदा चाधुपतिभूप: पूजयामास भारते ।

तत्यक्षान्युजयमासुबर्गीक्षात्वार एव च ॥ ४ ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Muni! She was first worshipped by Brahmā. Next the Vedas worshipped her. Subsequently the learned men worshipped her. Next the King Asvapati worshipped Her in India. Next the four Varnas (castes) worshipped Her.

नारद उवाच

को वा से3प्रपतिद्वाक्नेन वा तेन पूजिता ।

सर्वपूजा चा स देवी प्रथमे कैक्ष वा परे ॥ 5 ॥

Nārada said: O Brahman! Who is that Āsvapati? What for did he worship? When the Devi Śāvitrī became adorable by all, by which persons was She first worshipped and by which persons subsequently.

श्रीनारायण खाच

महदेशे महाराजो बभूवाशुपतिनुने ।

वैरिणां बल्हतां च मिश्राणां दुःखानाशनः ॥ 6 ॥

आसीस्त्य महात्राडी महिकी धर्मचारिणी ।

मालतीति समाठ्याता यथा लक्ष्मीरिंघुभतः ॥ 7 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Muni! The King Asvapati reigned in Madradeśa, rendering his enemies powerless and making his friends painless. He had a queen very religious; her name was Mālati; She was like a second Lakṣmī.

सा च रात्री च वत्थ्या च विस्त्रस्योपेक्षतः ।

चकाराताधनं भक्त्या साविश्याश्रैव नारद ॥ 8 ॥

प्रत्यादेश न सा प्राणता महीर्णे न द्वर्शत नाम ।

गृहं जगाम दुःखातां हद्येन विद्यता ॥ 9 ॥

She was barren; and desirous of an issue, She under the instruction of Vasistha, duly worshipped Sāvitrī with devotion. But She did not receive any

vision nor any command; therefore She returned home with a grievous heart.

राजा तां दु:रित्तां द्वृष्टा बोधायित्या नयेन वे ।

साविश्वासपसे भकत्या जागम पुकर्त नदा ॥ 10 ॥

तपश्रकार तदैव संयतः शतावतस्मय ।

न ददर्शे च साविश्वा: प्रत्याद्रेणे बधूच च ॥ 11 ॥

Seeing her sorry, the king consoled her with good words and himself accompanied her to Puskara with a view to perform Tapas to Sāvitrī with devotion and, being self-controlled, practised tapasyā for one hundred years. Still he could not see Sāvitrī, but voice came to him.

शुश्रावाकाराणपी च नूप्रेश्राशीरीिणीम् ।

गायत्रा द्रशलक्षं च जयं त्वं कुक नारद ॥ 12 ॥

एतिम्बिते तत्र आजामा घराशः ।

प्रणानाम ततस्तं च पुनिनर्यमुवाच च ॥ 13 ॥

An incorporeal, celestial voice reached his ears: 'Perform Japan (repeat) ten lakhs of Gāyatrī Mantram.' At this moment Parāśara came up there. The king bowed down to him.

मुनिश्वाच

सकुज्ञपछ्ग गायकशः पापं दिनभवं हेरेत् ।

दूशारं जपैपैव न्ययेत्यां दिवामिजम् ॥ 14 ॥

The Muni said: “O King! One japa of Gāyatī, destroys the days sins. Ten Japams of Gāyatī destroy day and night’s sins.

शतवारं जपद्रैश पार्य मासर्जित हेत् ।

सहसधा जपद्रैश केलमयं वत्सरार्जिन् ॥ 15 ॥

लक्षो अन्मकृतं पारं शुलक्षो3-यज्ञमजम् ।

सर्वेजन्मकृतं पारं शतलक्षान्द्रियति ॥ 16 ॥

कोतीत सुक्ति विग्राणां जगो दशगुपान्ततः ।

One hundred Gāyatrī Japams destroy one month's sins. One thousand Japams destroy one year's sins. One lakh Gāyatrī Japams destroy the sins of the present birth and ten lakh Gāyatrī Japams destroy the sins of other births. One hundred lakhs of Japams destroy the sins of all the births. If ten times that (i.e. 1,000 lakhs) be done, then liberation is obtained.

कर्ते सर्पिणाकारं कृत्वा तर्धयमृद्रितम् ॥ १ ७ ॥

Book IX Chapter XXVI

आनमभूधंमचलं प्रजनेरामड्युखो द्विजः ।

अनामिकामध्येराद्वो घामक्रमेण च ॥ १८ ॥

तर्नीमूलपर्यन्तं जपर्यर्वे क्रमः कले ।

(Now the method, how to make Japam). Make the palm of the (right) hand like a snake's hood; see that the fingers are all close, no holes are seen; and make the ends of the fingers bend downwards; then being calm and quiet and with one's face eastward, practise Japam. Then count from the middle of the ring (nameless) finger and go on counting right-handed (with the hands of the watch) till you come to the bottom of the index finger. This is the rule of counting by the hand.

इतपंकजवीजानां स्थितकानां च संस्कृताम् ॥ १९ ॥

कृत्वा वै मालिकां राजसुचेप्तीर्वं सुरालये ।

संस्थाय मालामश्रवाये पचे च संपत: ॥ 20 ॥

कृत्वा गोरोचानांचा च मायद्या सपावेयुसर्धीः ।

गायत्रीगतंक तस्यां जपेच्च विधिपूर्वकम् ॥ 21 ॥

O King! The rosary is to be of the seed of white lotus or of the crystals; it should be consecrated and purified. Japam is to be done then in a sacred Tīrtha or in a temple. Becoming self-controlled one should place the rosary on a banyan leaf or on a lotus leaf and smear it with cowdung; wash it, uttering Gāyatrī Mantra and over it perform one hundred times Gāyatrī Japam intently in accordance with the rules.

अथवा पंचायवेने सनाला मालां सुरंस्कृतान् ।

अथ गोरोदकेनैव सनाला वाउतिसुसंकृतम् ॥ 22 ॥

एवं क्रमेण राजर्षे एश्लक्षे जपं कुं ।

साथाद्रुद्धसि साविर्जी जिजन्यपातकक्षयान् । 23 ॥

Or wash it with Pāñcagavya, milk, curds, clarified butter, cow urine and cowdung), and then consecrate it will. Then wash it with the Ganges water and perform best the consecrations. O Rājarsī! Then perform ten lakhs of Japam in due order. Thust he sins of your three births will be destroyed and then you will see the Devi Savitri.

नित्यं संभयं च हे राजकनिष्यसि दिने दिने ।

मध्याढ़े चापि सायाढ़े प्रातरे शुचि: सदा ॥ 24 ॥

संध्याहोनो3शुचिन्त्यमनईः सर्वकांसु ।

यद्धा कुतते कर्म न तस्य फलभाषयेत् ॥ 25 ॥

O King! Do this Jāpam, being pure, every day in the morning, mid-day, and in the evening. If one be impure and devoid of Sandhyā, one has no right to do any action; and even if one performs an action, one does not get any fruit thereby.

नोपतिष्ठिति यः पूर्वा नीपासे यस्तु पक्षिभाम् ।

स शूर्वद्वविद्धकार्यः वर्सेमादूढिक्रमेण: ॥ 26 ॥

यावज्जीकिनपर्यतं नि:संध्यां यः क्रांतीत च ।

स च सुर्यस्मो विध्यसंज्ञा तत्पसा सदा ॥ 27 ॥

He who does not do the morning Sandhyā and the evening Sandhyā, is driven away from all the Brāhminic Karmas and he becomes like Śūdras. He who does Sandhyā three times throughout his life, becomes like the Sun by his lustre and brilliance of tapas.

तत्वादपधारजसा सदा:पूता वसुंधरा ।

जीवन्युक्तः स तेकस्वी संस्थापुते हि यो द्विकः ॥ 28 ॥

तीर्थानि च पवित्राणि तस्य संस्पर्शगमातः ।

ततः पापानि यांत्येव वैन्तेयादिवीरगाः ॥ 29 ॥

What more than this, the earth is always purified by the dust of his feet. The Dvija who does his Sandhyā Vandanam and remains pure, becomes energetic and liberated while living. By his contact all the tirthas become pourified. All sins vanish away from him as snakes fly away at the sight of Garuda.

न गृह्धिंस सुरा: पूर्जा पितर: पिंडतर्णपुं।

सेवछया च जित्जतेष्ठि सिन्धोग्रतिहत्स च ॥ ३० ॥

मूलप्रकृत्यभक्तो यस्तनंसंख्यावनचकंः ।

ततुस्वविहित्रा विश्वहीने चयोरगः ॥ ३१ ॥

The Dvija who becomes void of Sandhyā three times a day, the Devas do not accept his worship nor the Pitrṣ accept his Pindas. He who has no Bhakti towards the Mūla Prakṛti, who does not worship the specific seed Mantra of Māyā and who des not hold festivities in honour of Mūla Prakṛti, know him verily to be an Ajagara snake without poison.

विष्णुंगंव्रिहीन्त्र शिवसंधारहित्ते द्विजः ।

एकादशीविहित्थ विश्वतीं नोयोरा: ॥ ३२ ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

हरेनेवैद्यभोजी च धावको वृषवाहकः ।

गृह्रारजभोजी यो विज्ञो विषहौने योधारण: ॥ 33 ॥

Devoid of the Viṣṇu mantra, devoid of the three Sandhyās and devoid of the fasting on the Ekādaśī Tithi (the eleventh day of the fortnight), the Brāhmin becomes a snake devoid of poison. The virābhmin who does not like to take the offerings dedicated to Hari and who does the washerman's work and eats the food of Śūdra and drives the buffaloes, becomes a snake devoid of poison.

ग्रृजणां शवदाही यः स विश्वे घुवतीपितः ।

ग्रृजणां सूपाकार्श विश्वहीनो यशेगतः ॥ 34 ॥

The Brāhmīn who burns the dead bodies of the Śūdras, becomes like the man who is the husband of an unmarried girl. The Brāhmīn also who becomes a cook of a Śūdra, becomes a snake void of poison.

ग्रृजणां च प्रतिगाही ग्रृजवारी च चो हिजः ।

मतिसीजि असतीजिति विषहतीचे घयोरभः ॥ 35 ॥

यः कन्याविकधी विषो घो रेनामिविकधी ।

यो विधोउरीतारभोजी क्रतुस्तातारभोजकाः ॥ 36 ॥

The Brāhmīn who accepts the gifts of a Śūdra, who performs the sacrifice of a Śūdra, who lives as clerks and warriors becomes like a snake void of poison. The Brāhmīn who sells his daughter, who sells the name of Hari or eats the food of a woman who is without husband and son, as well as of one who has just bathed after her menstruation period, becomes like a serpent void of poison.

यनार्जीवो वार्थप्रियको विद्वहितो नयोरतः ।

यो विद्याधिकर्मी विज्ञा विषहीनी नयोराः ॥ 37 ॥

सूयोदैव सयेषो हि मल्यपोजी च ची द्विजः ॥

शिवापूजादिरित्तो विद्वहीनी नयोराः ॥ 38 ॥

The Brāhmin who takes the profession of pimps and pampers and lives on the interest, is also like a serpent void of poison. The Brāhmin who sleeps even when the Sun has risen, eats fish, and does not worship the Devi is also like a poisonless serpent.

इत्युक्त्वा च मुनिश्रेषः सर्वपूजाविधिकम् ।

तमुवाच च साविधा ध्यानादिकमपीशितम् ॥ 39 ॥

दत्ता सर्वे नृप्रेत्रय ययो च स्वाध्रामे मुने ।

राजा संपूज्य साविडीं ददर्शं वरमाप च ॥ 40 ॥

Thus stating all the rules of worship in order, the best of the Munis told him the Dhyānam, etc., of the Devi Śavitrī, what he wanted. Then he informed the King of all the mantras and went to his own Śārama. The king, then worshipped accordingly and saw the Devi Śavitrī and got boons.

नारद उवाच

किं वा ध्यानं च साविध्या: किं वा पूजाविधिकम् ।

स्तोत्रं मंत्र च किं दत्त्वा प्रवयी स परागरः ॥ 4 1 ॥

Nārada said: What is the Śāvitris Dhyāna, what are the modes of her worship, what is stotra, mantra, that Parāśara gave to the King before he went away?

नृपः केन विधानेन संपूच्य शुतिमातान् ।

वरं च कं वा संप्राय संपूच्य तु विधानतः ॥ 42 ॥

तत्सर्व शोद्गीपछ्जीय सावित्राः परमं महत् ।

रह्याति रहस्यं च शुतिसिद्धं समासतः ॥ 43 ॥

And how did the King worship and what boon did he get? This great mystery, grand and well renowned in the Śrutis, about Śavitrī, I am desirous to hear in brief on all the points.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

ज्येष्ठकृष्णग्रयोद्वरायां शूढ़काले च सन्तः ।

जतमेवं चतुदैर्षया जती भक्पता समाचरेत् ॥ 44 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: On the thirteenth day (the trayodaśī, tithī) of the black fortnight in the month Jyeṣṭha or on any other holy period, the fourteenth day (the caturdasī tithī) this vow is to be observed with great care and devotion.

जर्ते चतुदैगाख्टं च हिंसपत्कलसंयुतम् ।

दत्ता हिंसपनवैद्यों युष्यपुराविके चेर्त् ॥ 45 ॥

खरसं यज्ञायतीतं च भोजन विधिपूर्वकम् ।

संस्थाय मंगलघटं फलशाखासम्बित्वम् ॥ 46 ॥

Forteen fruits and fourteen plates with offerings of food on them, flowers and incense are to be offered and this vow is to be observed for fourteen

Book IX Chapter XXVI

years consecutively. Garments, holy threads and other articles are also offered and after the Vrata is over, the Brāhmins are to be fed. The lucky pot (maniglahata) is to be located duly according to the rules of worship with branches and fruits.

पाणेगं च दिनेणं च बह्रू विष्णु पिशं पिशाण।

संपूछ पूजयेछ्छे घरे आवाहिते हिजः ॥ 47 ॥

गृणु ध्यानं च साविज्ञाशोक्ते माध्यंदिने च रत् ।

स्तोत्रं पूजाविधानं च मंत्रे च सर्वकामद्न् ॥ 48 ॥

Ganēsā, Agni, Viṣṇu, Śiva and Śivā are to be worshipped duly. In that ghata Śāvitrī is to be next invoked and worshipped. Now hear the Dhyānam of Śāvitrī, as stated in the Mādhyan Dina Śākhā, as well the stotra, the modes of worship, and the Mantra, the giver of all desires.

तपाकचिवनाथांा जल्लीतं बह्रातेसा ।

ग्रीमध्यग्रह्मातर्णेडसहस्मितिप्रभाग् ॥ 49 ॥

ईपद्वायप्रसाधायां तनभूषणभूषितगान ।

वहिषुर्द्रशुकामानां भक्तागुरहायिषहाय. ॥ 50 ॥

सुखदां मुक्तिदां शान्तां कांतां च जगतां विधः ।

सर्वसंपत्स्वल्पां च प्रदारीं सर्वसंपदान् ॥ 51 ॥

वेदाधिष्ठागृद्टवैं च वेदेग्रास्वरूकिपिणी ।

वेदवीजस्वल्पां च भजे तां वेदमात्तम् ॥ 52 ॥

I meditate and adore that Sāvitrī, the Mother of the Vedas, of the nature of Pranava (Om), whose colour is like the burnished gold, who is burning with Brāhma teja (the fire of Brahma), effulgent with thousands and thousands of rays of the midday summer Sun, who is a smiling countenance adorned with jewels and ornaments, wearing celestial garment (purified and uninflammable by fire), and ready to grant blessings to Her Bhaktas; who is the bestower of happiness and liberation, who is peaceful and the consort of the Creator of the world, who is all wealth and the giver of all riches and prosperity, who is the Presiding Deity of the Vedas and who is the Vedas incarnate, I meditate on Thee.

బాణా బాణనేనే జేక్రణ వాగ్రి ముక్రున్ ।

పునబ్రణా వేంక్రు వేంక్రు వేంక్రు వేంక్రు 153

ద్రావు శేంక్రంగేండర వేండ్రేండ మన్య్వేండు ।

संपूज्य स्तुला प्रणमेदेबदेवीं विधानतः ॥ 54 ॥

Thus reciting the Dhyānam, mantra and meditating on Her, one is to offer Naivedyas (offerings of food) to Her and then place one's fingers on one's head; one is to meditate again, and then invoke the Devi within the pot. One should next present fourteen things, uttering proper mantras according to the Vedas. Then one must perform special pūjā and chant hymns to the Devi and worship Her. The fourteen articles of worship are as under :

असने पाधामर्थ च स्नानीयं चानुलेवम् ।

धूप दीपं च नेवेढ़ा तांकुलं शीलतं जलम् ॥ 55 ॥

वसनं भृपणं माल्यं गंधामाचयनीवकम् ।

मनोहंरं सुतल्यं च देवायोतानि पोडण ।। 56 ॥

(1) Seat (Āsana); (2) water for washing feet (Padya), (3) offering of rice and Durba grass (Arghya), (4) water for bath (Snānīya), (6) anointment with sandalpaste and other scents (Anulepana), (7) incense (Dhūpa), (8) anointment with sandalpaste and other scents (Anulepana), (7) incense (Dhūpa), (8) Lights (Dipa), (9) offerings of food (Naivedya), (10) Betels (Tāmbūla), (11) Cool water, (12) garments, (13) ornaments, (14) garlands, scents, offering of water of sip, and beautiful bedding.

द्रासारविकारं च हेतावितिनिंत च जा ।

देवाधारं पुणवदं च मया तृभयं निवेदितम् ॥ 57 ॥

While offering these articles, one is to utter the mantras, this beautiful wooden or golden seat, giving spiritual merits is being offered by me to Thee.

तीर्थोदकं च पाठं च पुणवदं प्रीतिं महत् ।

पूजांगभृतं शूखं च मवा तुभयं चिविदितम् ॥ 58 ॥

पवित्रकपार्यं च दूर्वीपुचल्गवित्यम् ।

पुणवं ईखतोगताकं मया तुभ्यं निविदितम् ॥ 59 ॥

This water from the Tirthas, this holy water for washing Thy feet, pleasant, highly meritorious pure, and as an embodiment of Pūjā is being offered

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

by me to Thee. This holy Arghya with Durba grass and flowers and the pure water in the conch-shell is being offered by me to Thee. (as a work of initial worship).

सुर्पिध यंगतेयं च स्नेहं सौगाथ्यकाकाम।

मया निविदितं भन्या सनापीयं प्रतिगृहुतान् ॥ 60 ॥

भोग्य्वोजूद्वं पुण्यं प्रीतिं दिव्यगंधद् ।

मया निविदितं भन्चा गंशतोयं त्वामिकेः ॥ 61 ॥

This sweet scented oil and water being offered by me to Thee with devotion for Thy bathing purposes. Kindly accept these. O Mother! This sweet-scented water Divine-like, highly pure and prepared of Kumkuma and other scented things I offer to Thee.

सर्वमंगलकरं च सर्वे च मंगलप्रदम् ।

पूयदं च सुभूयं तं गृहाण परमेक्षिति ॥ 6 2 ॥

सुर्णध्युक्ते सुखदं मया तुर्थे निविदितम् ।

O Paramesvarī! This all-auspicious, all good and highly meritorious, this beautiful Dhūpa, kindly take, O World Mother! This is very pleasant and sweet scented; therefore I offer this to Thee.

ज्ञातां दर्जान्याय प्रदीयं दीपिकाकारम् ॥ 6 3 ॥

अन्यकार्यसंजीतं मना तुथ्यं निविदितम् ।

O Mother! This light, manifesting all this Universe and the seed, as it were, to destroy the Darkness is being offered by me to Thee.

तृहिंदं पुरिंदं चैव प्रीतिंदं कृष्टिनारानम् ॥ 64 ॥

पुणवं स्वावुरूपं च नैवेहं प्रतिगृहतानम् ।

तांबूलप्रवरं रमयं कर्णरातिवुसारासि ॥ 65 ॥

तृहिंदं पुर्विंहं चैव मला तृथवे निविदितम् ।

सुशीतलं वारि शीति चिपासानाशकाकरम् ॥ 66 ॥

ज्ञानतं जीवलचं च जीवनं प्रतिशुतानम् ।

देहशोभावलखं च सभाशोभाविदधनम् ॥ 67 ॥

Devī! Kindly accept this delicious offering of food, highly meritorious, appeasing hunger, pleasant, nourishing and pleasure giving. This betel is scented with camphor, etc., nice, nourishing, and pleasure-giving; this is being offered by me to Thee. This water is nice and cool, appeasing the thirst and the Life of the World. So kindly accept this.

कार्पासंचे च कृमिजं वसनं प्रतिगृहाताम ।

कार्वानादिविनिर्माण श्रीकरं श्रीमर्त सदा ॥ 68 ॥

सुखदं पुण्यदं रत्नभूषणं प्रतिगृहाताम ।

नानावृक्षसमुद्धून नानासपसमन्दितम् ॥ 69 ॥

O Devi! Kindly accept this silken garment as well the garment made of Kārpāsa Cotton, beautifying the body and enhancing the beauty. Kindly accept these golden ornaments decked with jewels, highly meritorious, joyous, beauteous and prosperous.

फलस्यखरां फलदे फलं च प्रतिगुहाताम ।

सर्वमंगलकर्ण च सर्वमंगलमंगलम् ॥ 70 ॥

नानापुष्यविनिर्माणं बहुगोभासमित्यम् ।

प्रीतिंदं पुणवदं चैव मालयं च प्रतिगुहातम् ॥ 71 ॥

Kindly accept these fruits yielding fruits of desires, obtained from various trees and of various kinds. Please have this garland, all auspicious and all good, made of various flowers, beauteous and generating happiness.

पुणवदं च सुर्णघाङ्गं यांचं च देवि गुहात् ।

सिंतूर च वरं रत्यं भालल्योपाविवर्धन् ॥ ७ २  ॥

भूषणानां च प्रवरं सिंतूरं प्रतिगुहात् ।

विशुणद्ध्रायिसंयुक्तं पुणयसूत्रविनिर्मितम् ॥ ७ ३ ॥

पचित्रं वेदमंत्रेण यजसूचं च गृहात् ।

द्वयाण्येतानि मुलेन दत्ता स्तोत्रं पदेसुर्धीः ॥ ७ ४ ॥

O Devi! Kindly accept this sweet scent, highly pleasing and meritorious. Please take this Sindira, the best of the ornaments, beautifying the forehead, highly excellent and beautiful. Kindly accept this holy and meritorious threads and purified by the Vedic mantrams and made of highly holy threads and knitted with highly pure knots. Uttering thus, offer the above articles that are to be offered to the Devi, every time the specific seed mantra being uttered.

ततो विधाय भकला च जती द्याच्च दक्षिणाम् ।

साविशिति चतुर्थ्यैतं वहिज्ञान्यानेव च ॥ 75 ॥

लक्ष्मीयायाकामपूर्वं मंत्र्याहक्षरं विदु: ।

माध्यंदिनोकं रसोत्रं च सर्वकामफलप्रदम् ॥ 76 ॥

Then the intelligent devote should recite the stotras and subsequently offer the Dakṣinās

Book IX Chapter XXVII

(presents) with devotion to the Brāhmaṇas. The Radical or the Specific Seed Mantra mantra is the eight lettered mantra Śrim Hrim Klim Śvaitrai Svāhā; So the sages know. The Stotra, as stated in the Mādhyandina Sākhā, gives fruits of all desires. I am now speaking to you of that mantra, the Life of the Brāhmaṇas. Listen attentively.

विप्रजीवनलंच च निवीधे कथायाम ते ।

कृष्णेन दन्तां साविर्जी गोलेके बढ़णे पुरा ॥ 77 ॥

नायाति सा तेन साधं बढ़ालेके च नरत ।

ब्रह्म कृष्णात्रया भन्च्या तुहाव वेदमात्तम् ॥ 78 ॥

तदा सा पत्तिकृहा च बढ़ाणों चकमे पतिन् ।

O Nārada! Savitri was given to Brahmā, in the ancient times of old in the region of Goloka by Kṛṣṇa; but Savitri did not come Brahma loka with Brahmā. Then by the command of Kṛṣṇa, Brahmā praised the mother of the Vedas. And when She got pleased, She accepted Brahmā as Her husband.

बढ़ोवाच

सच्चिदानंद्रलो तर्व मूल्यकृतिलिपिणि ॥ 79 ॥

हिरण्याभंकले तर्व प्रसना भव सुंदरी ।

तेज:स्वरूपे परमे परमानंद्रलिपिणी ॥ 80 ॥

डिवानीनी जातिरूपे प्रसना भव सुंदरी ।

नित्ये नित्यप्रिय देवि नित्यानंदस्वरूपिणी ॥ 81 ॥

Brahmā said: Thou art the everlasting existence intelligence and bliss; Thou art Mūlaprakrti; thou art Hiranya Garbha; Thou didst get pleased, O Fair one! Thou art of the nature of fire and Energy; Thou art the Highest; Thou art the Highest Bliss, and the caste of the twice born. Dost thou get appeased, O Fair One! Thou art eternal, dear to the Eternal; thou art of the nature of the Everlasting Bliss.

सर्वमंगलको च प्रसना भव सुंदरी ।

सर्वस्वको विज्ञाणां मंत्रसरे परात्परे ॥ 82 ॥

सुखदे मोक्षे देवि प्रसना भव सुंदरी ।

O Devi, O Thou, the all auspicious One! O Fair One! Beest thou satisfied. Thou art the form all (omnipresent)! Thou art the essence of all mantras of the Brâhmaṇgas, higher than the highest! Thou art the bestower of happiness and the liberator O Devi, O Fair One! Beest thou appeased.

विप्रपाधेपदाहाय जललन्निरिषाखोपे ॥ 83 ॥

ब्रह्मोतःप्रदे देवि प्रसन्ना भव सुंदरी ।

कायेन मनसा वाचा यत्पां कुकते नर: ॥ 84 ॥

तत्वस्मरणामत्रेण भवस्मीभूतं भविष्यति ।

इतुल्यक्ना जगतां धाता तस्वी तत च संसदि ॥ 85 ॥

Thou art like the burning flame to the fuel of sins of the Brāhmaṇas! O Thou, the Bestower of Brahma teja (the light to Brahma) O Devi! O Fair One! Beest appeased. By Thy mere remembrance, all the sins to me by body, mind and speech are burnt to ashes." Thus saying the Creator of the world reached the assembly there.

साधिक्री ब्रह्माणा साधुं ब्रह्मोके जगमा सा ।

अनेन सत्वार्जाने संस्न्याधुपतिनुप: ॥ 86 ॥

दर्शर्ग तां च साधिक्री वर्ग प्राप नगोगनम् ।

सत्वार्जामिं पूर्ण्यं संधरां कृत्वा च यः पदेत् ॥

पाठे चतुर्णां वैद्यानां तत्कलं लभते च तत् ॥ 87 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागतं महापुराणे नवमकद्भे

चद्धिवीश्वायः 11 26 11

Then Śāvitrī came to the Brahmaloka with Brahmā. The King Āśvapati chanted this stotra to Śāvitrī and saw Her and got from Her the desired boons. Whosoever recites this highly sacred king of Stotras after Sandhyā Vandanam, quickly acquires the fruits of studying the Vedas.

Here ends the Twenty-sixth Chapter of the Ninth

Book on the narration of Śāvitrī in

Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXVII

