[Ch 17 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya said: O Muni! You told before that the heavenly prostitutes sent by Indra in the hermitage of Nara Nārāyana became lustful and desired to live with Nārāyana only, whose heart was crlm and quiet.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya said :-- O Muni! You told before that the heavenly prostitutes sent by Indra in the hermitage of Nara Nārāyaṇa became lustful and desired to live with Nārāyaṇa only, whose heart was calm and quiet.

[Ch 17 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At that moment when Nārāyana was about to curse them, his brother Nara desisted him from taking that step.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At that moment when Nārāyaṇa was about to curse them, his brother Nara desisted him from taking that step.

[Ch 17 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now I ask you what did that triumphant Nārāyaṇa Muni do, in that critical juncture, when he was repeatedly asked by those prostitutes, sent by Indra, to satisfy their lust?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now I ask you what did that triumphant Nārāyaṇa Muni do, in the critical juncture, when he was repeatedly asked by those prostitutes, sent by lndra, to satisfy their lust?

[Ch 17 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Grand Sire! I am very eager to know the deeds of Nārāyaṇa, leading to one's freedom, Kindly describe in detail and fulfill my wishes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Grand Sire! I am very eager to know the deeds of Nārāyaṇa, leading to one’s freedom. Kindly describe in detail and fulfill my wishes.

[Ch 17 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Hear, O king! I am describing to you in, detail, what that high souled son of Dharma did.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Hear, O king! I am describing to you in detail, what that high souled son of Dharma did.

[Ch 17 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Nārāyaṇa Hari was ready to curse them, the Rsis Nara, seeing this, consoled him and desisted him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Nārāyaṇa Hari was ready to curse them, the Ṛṣi Nara, seeing this, consoled him and desisted him.

[Ch 17 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the great sage, the ascetic son of Dharma, Nārāyaṇa, leaving aside his anger, began to address them in sweet words with countenance smiling.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the great sage, the ascetic son of Dharma, Nārāyaṇa, leaving aside his anger, began to address them in sweet words with countenance smiling.

[Ch 17 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Fair women! We have determined to practise asceticism in this life; it does not therefore behave us to accept any wife; therefore shew your kindness unto us and go back to your Heaven. You would better think that those who know what is religion, they never desire to break the vow of another.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Fair women! We have determined to practise asceticism in this life; it does not therefore behove us to accept any wife; therefore shew your kindness unto us and go back to your Heaven. You would better think that those who know what is religion, they never desire to break the vow of another.

[Ch 17 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O beautiful eyed ones! In the sexual pleasure, it is the delightful feeling of passionate joy that is requisite; and we are wanting in those feelings; then how can we effect that union?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O beautiful eyed ones! In the sexual pleasure, it is the delightful feeling of passionate joy that is requisite; and we are wanting in those feelings; then how can we effect that union?

[Ch 17 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No action can come out of no cause; this is all clear. The poets say that the sexual power and pleasure, is the feeling, the mental attitude that corresponds; and that is the only thing, that lasts. And we have no desire for that.
NEW CORR ENG ──► No action can come out of no cause; this is all clear. The poets say that the sexual power and pleasure, is the feeling, the mental attitude that corresponds; and that is the only thing, that lasts. And we have no desire for that.

[Ch 17 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► However my limbs are all very graceful, I am very fortunate and blessed in this world, otherwise how can I be the object of your sincere love towards me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► However my limbs are all very graceful, I am very fortunate and blessed in this world, otherwise how can I be the object of your sincere love towards me.

[Ch 17 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You all are very fortunate; therefore do now shew this mercy unto me “do not break my vow. I pray now that, in a subsequent birth, I may become your husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You all are very fortunate; therefore do now show this mercy unto me “do not break my vow.” I pray now that, in a subsequent birth, I may become your husband.

[Ch 17 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O large eyed fair women! In the twenty-eighth Dvāpara Yuga, I will certainly incarnate on earth to effect the purpose of the Devas; then you all also would respectively incarnate as the daughters of kings and would also become my wives.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O large eyed fair women! In the twenty-eighth Dvāpara Yuga, I will certainly incarnate on earth to effect the purpose of the Devas; then you all also would respectively incarnate as the daughters of kings and would also become my wives.

[Ch 17 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyāna thus consented to marry them in some other next birth; and consoling them, made them go back to their Heavens. They also abandoned their mental disquietude and, on reaching back to Heavens, they explained everything to Indra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa thus consented to marry them in some other next birth; and consoling them, made them go back to their Heavens. They also abandoned their mental disquietude and, on reaching back to Heavens, they explained everything to Indra.

[Ch 17 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra heard (from these heavenly women) what the two two Rṣis did and saw before him Urvaśī and other women created by Nārāyaṇa from his thighs, etc. and began to extol the merits of the high souled Nārāyaṇa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra heard (from these heavenly women) what the two two Ṛṣis did and saw before him Urvaśī and other women created by Nārāyaṇa from his thighs, etc., and began to extol the merits of the high souled Nārāyaṇa.

[Ch 17 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra said: O! How wonderful is the patience of the Muni? What is the wonderful influence of his Tapas! Oh! He has created, by the sheer force of his Tapas, Urvaśī and these fair women, unrivalled for their beauties, from his thighs.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra said :-- O! How wonderful is the patience of the Muni? What is the wonderful influence of his Tapas! Oh! He has created, by the sheer force of his Tapas, Urvaśī and these fair women, unrivalled for their beauties, from his thighs.

[Ch 17 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Lord of the Devas thus extolled his merits and became freed from his anxieties. The virtuous Nārāyaṇa, too, devoted himself to the practice of his Tapasyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Lord of the Devas thus extolled his merits and became freed from his anxieties. The virtuous Nārāyaṇa, too, devoted himself to the practice of his Tapasyā.

[Ch 17 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Thus I have described to you, in detail, all the wonderful accounts regarding Nara Nārāyana.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Thus I have described to you, in detail, all the wonderful accounts regarding Nara Nārāyaṇa.

[Ch 17 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Superior in the descendants of Bharata! These two Nara and Nārāyana afterwards incarnated themselves, due to Bhīgu's curses the two great heroes Arjuna and Krṣna, to relieve the burden of the earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Superior in the descendants of Bharata! These two Nara and Nārāyaṇa afterwards incarnated themselves, due to Bhṛgu’s curse as the two great heroes Arjuṇa and Kṛṣṇa, to relieve the burden of the earth.

[Ch 17 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king said: O respect giving Muni! Now describe in detail the life of the Avatāra Krṣna and dispel my mental doubt.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king said :-- O respect giving Muni! Now describe in detail the life of the Avatar Kṛṣṇa and dispel my mental doubt.

[Ch 17 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O best of the Munis! Why were Vasudeva and Devaki, who were chosen by the very powerful Hari and Ananta as their parents, doomed to so many miseries and afflictions. Why had these parents to remain for good many years in the prison of Kanisa, who pleased directly by their Tapasyā that Bhagavān Janārdana.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O best of the Munis! Why were Vāsudeva and Devakī, who were chosen by the very powerful Hari and Ananta as their parents, doomed to so many miseries and afflictions. Why had these parents to remain for good many years in the prison of Kaṃsa, who pleased directly by their Tapasyā that Bhagavān Janārdana.

[Ch 17 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Why did Kṛṣṇa taking his birth at Mathurā, go to Gokula? Also what was his object to go to Dvārkā, situated in the ocean, when he killed the enemy Karīsa?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Why did Kṛṣṇa taking his birth at Mathurā, go to Gokula? Also what was his object to go to Dvārkā, situated in the ocean, when he killed the enemy Kaṃsa?

[Ch 17 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Also why did his father, mother adr relatives, leave their old holy places of residences and go abroad to live in a wretched old country?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Also why did his father, mother and relatives, leave their old holy places of residences and go abroad to live in a wretched old country?

[Ch 17 Verse 29-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Why was the Yadu race destroyed by the curse from a Brāhmaṇa! How did Śrī Kṛṣṇa Vāsudeva leave finally His body after He had relieved the burden of the earth and was about to enter into His Heaven? The evildoers of the earth were slain by Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, of unequalled prowess; but how was it, that those who plundered the wives of Śrī Hari, were not at all punished by Him!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Why was the Yadu race destroyed by the curse from a Brāhmaṇa! How did Śrī Kṛṣṇa Vāsudeva leave finally His body after He had relieved the burden of the earth and was about to enter into His Heaven? The evildoers of the earth were slain by Kṛṣṇa and Arjuṇa, of unequalled prowess; but how was it, that those who plundered the wives of Śrī Hari, were not at all punished by Him?

[Ch 17 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The great personages Bhīśma, Droṇa, Kāṃa, the king Vālhīka Virāta, Vikāma. Dhṛṣtadyumna, the king Somadatta were destroyed for relieving the burden of the earth; and the plunderers were acquitted! Kindly explain the cause of this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The great personages Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Karṇa, the king Vālhīka, Virāṭa, Vikarṇa, Dhṛṣṭadyumna, the king Somadatta were destroyed for relieving the burden of the earth; and the plunderers were acquitted! Kindly explain the cause of this.

[Ch 17 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How was it that those chaste and virtuous wives of Śrī Kṛṣṇa got into troubles at the latter end of their lives? There has arisen a doubt in my mind on this point.
NEW CORR ENG ──► How was it that those chaste and virtuous wives of Śrī Kṛṣṇa go into troubles at the latter end of their lives? There has arisen a doubt in my mind on this point.

[Ch 17 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Why did the virtuous Vaisudeva leave his mortal coil owing to the death of his sons and why djú he die an unusual death?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Why did the virtuous Vāsudeva leave his mortal coil owing to the death of his sons and why did he die an unusual death?

[Ch 17 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O best of Munis! The Pāṇḍavas were devoted to Kṛṣṇa and they were religious; they had to suffer so many troubles!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O best of Munis! The Pāṇḍavas were devoted to Kṛṣṇa and they were religious; they had to suffer so many troubles!

[Ch 17 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Why was Draupadī so very unfortunate and she had to suffer so much miseries, and pains, who was born of Lakṣmī from amidst the sacrificial place and from the altar.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Why was Draupadī so very unfortunate and she had to suffer so much miseries, and pains, who was born of Lakṣmī from amidst the sacrificial place and from the altar.

[Ch 17 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Why did Duhśāsana drag Her by hair while She was in Her menstruation period, in the hall of audience and why was it that Sindhu Rāja Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu, gave Her exceedingly mental troubles?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Why did Duhśāsan drag Her by Her hairs while She was in Her menstruation period, in the hall of audience and why was it that Sindhu Rāj Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu, gave Her exceedingly mental troubles?

[Ch 17 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Why was it that Her five sons residing in Her house were killed by Asvatthāmā? What was the cause that the son of Subhadrā had to die in the battlefield?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Why was it that Her five sons residing in Her house were killed by Aśvaththāmā? What was the cause that the son of Subhadrā had to die in the battlefield?

[Ch 17 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Why did the king Karīsa kill the six sons of Devakī; and why was it that Śrī Harī who was capable of averting the Fate did not at all prevent that?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Why did the king Kaṃsa kill the six sons of Devakī; and why was it that Śrī Hari who was capable of averting the Fate did not at all prevent that?

[Ch 17 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What a wonder is this that in the matters of Brāhmaṇa's curse towards the Jādavas, their being killed in the Prabhāsa, the total extermination of the Jadū race and the plundering of His wives, why did He allow Fate to do these great momentous things?
NEW CORR ENG ──► What a wonder is this that in the matters of Brāhmaṇa’s curse toward the Jādavas, their being killed in the Prabhāsa, the total extermination the Jadu race and the plundering of His wives, why did He allow Fate to do these great momentous things?

[Ch 17 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If He was the all-powerful God and He Himself Nārāyaṇa, that why did He incessantly act like a slave towards Ugrasena. Note: Ugrasena was the king of Mathurā and father of Kahīsa. He was deposed by his son; but Krṣṇa after having slain Kahīsa restored him to the throne.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If He was the all-powerful God and He Himself Nārāyaṇa, that why did He incessantly act like a slave towards Ugrasena. N.B. -- Ugrasena was the king of Mathurā and father of Kaṃsa. He was deposed by his son; but Kṛṣṇa after having slain Kaṃsa restored him to the throne.

[Ch 17 Verse 44-45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► All these bring doubt in our minds regarding Nārāyaṇa Munī that His deeds are always like those of ordinary persons; why did his pleasures and pains resemble those of ordinary human beings? Were he God, why his actions were not Godly? (i.e. superhuman)
NEW CORR ENG ──► All these bring doubt in our minds regarding Nārāyaṇa Muni that His deeds are always like those of ordinary persons; why did his pleasures and pains resemble those of ordinary human beings? Were he God, why his actions were not Godly? (i.e., superhuman)

[Ch 17 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore dost Thou describe in detail all the Divine Lilās (playful sports) done by Hari of super human powers in this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore dost Thou describe in detail all the Divine Leelas (playful sports) done by Hari of superhuman powers in this world.

[Ch 17 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Best of Munis! When one's longevity expires, one dies; then I cannot understand what glory was manifested by Hari in killing the Daityas? For Fate Killed them; not Hari.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Best of Munis! When one’s longevity expires, one dies; then I cannot understand what glory was manifested by Hari in killing the Daityas? For Fate Killed them; not Hari.

[Ch 17 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Was not the doing of Hari like a thief when he stole away the Lady Rukminī and fled quickly to his own place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Was not the doing of Hari like a thief when he stole away the Lady Rukmiṇī and fled quickly to his own place.

[Ch 17 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What did it mean when he fled to Dvārakā city, and quitted his own highly prosperous town Mathurā simply out of the fear of Jarāsandha?
NEW CORR ENG ──► What did it mean when he fled to Dvārkā city, and quitted his own highly prosperous town Mathurā simply out of the fear of Jarāsandha?

[Ch 17 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Did not any body at that time recognise that he was Śrī Bhagavān Hari? O Respected One! Were he Bhagavān, why did He hide himself in Vraja? Please explain the cause to me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Did not anybody at that time recognise that he was Śrī Bhagavān Hari? O Respected One! Were he Bhagavān, why did He hide himself in Vraja? Please explain the cause to me.

[Ch 17 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! These and many other doubts always exist in my mind; you are the best of the Dvijas and blessed; I pray, dost thou remove these doubts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! These and many other doubts always exist in my mind; you are the best of the Dvijas and blessed; I pray, dost thou remove these doubts.

[Ch 17 Verse 52-53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O best of Munis! Another doubt exists and is not dispelled and that is secret. Was not the taking of the five husbands by Pāncālī for herself shameful and despised by the society? The good manners and doings are always considered by the learned as he proofs of virtue. Why did those Pāndavas, then, capable in every respect, do this thing like brutes?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O best of Munis! Another doubt exists and is not dispelled and that is secret. Was not the taking of the five husbands by Pāñcālī for herself shameful and despised by the society? The good manners and doings are always considered by the learned as the proofs of virtue. Why did those Pāṇḍavas, then, capable in every respect, do this thing like brutes?

[Ch 17 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And what did Bhisma do living like a Deva in this world? May I ask, was has act of producing two sons by a widow and thus preserving his line of ancestors worthy of his name?
NEW CORR ENG ──► And what did Bhīsma do living like a Deva in this world? May I ask, was his act of producing two sons by a widow and thus preserving his line of ancestors worthy of his name?

[Ch 17 Verse 55-56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The religious sanctions advocated by the Munis "Procreate sons in any way whatsoever" is simply shameful. Fie to this religious sanction. Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter in the fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyasa on the questions asked by Janamcajaya.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The religious sanction advocated by the Munis “Procreate sons in any way whatsoever” is simply shameful. Fie to this religious sanction. Here ends the 17th Chapter in the 4th Book of Śrī mad Devī Bhagavatam of 18000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa on the questions asked by Janamejaya.
