CHAPTER XVII

On the Questions asked by Janamejaya

जनमेव जय जवाच

वारांगनास्त्वया छ्याता नरनारायणाओं ।

एकं नारायणं शान्तं कामयाना: स्मातुग: ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: O Muni! You told before that the heavenly prostitutes sent by Indra in the hermitage of Nara Nārāyana became lustful and desired to live with Nārāyana only, whose heart was crlm and quiet.

शपुत्कामस्तदा जातो मुनिनरीरायण्डा ततः ।

निवारितो नरोणा ध्राजा धर्मविद्धा नृप ॥ 2 ॥

At that moment when Nārāyana was about to curse them, his brother Nara desisted him from taking that step.

किं कृतं मुनिना तेन व्यसने समुपस्थिते ।

ताधि: संकल्पितेणना कामाशोधिभूर्णं मुने । 3 ॥

शक्रेनोराविताधिश्र यदुग्रार्थेनाय युनः ।

याचितेन विवाहार्थं किं कृतं तेन जिजाणूना ॥ 4 ॥

Now I ask you what did that triumphant Nārāyaṇa Muni do, in that critical juncture, when he was repeatedly asked by those prostitutes, sent by Indra, to satisfy their lust?

इन्येतच्छोतुपिच्छ्याम घरितं तस्य मोक्षदम् ।

नारायणस्य मे बूहि चित्रस्तेण चित्रात्मह ॥ ५ ॥

O Grand Sire! I am very eager to know the deeds of Nārāyaṇa, leading to one's freedom, Kindly describe in detail and fulfill my wishes.

व्यास उवाच

श्रणु राजन्यक्ष्यामि यथा तस्य महामन्तः ।

धार्मुपत्रस्य धर्मत विस्तरणं बद्यामि ते ॥ ६ ॥

Vyāsa said: Hear, O king! I am describing to you in, detail, what that high souled son of Dharma did.

शप्तुकाममतु सन्त्रयो नेरणाय यदा हरिः ।

वारितो3सौ समाधायस्य मुपनिरारीयणस्तदा ॥ 7 ॥

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

When Nārāyaṇa Hari was ready to curse them, the Rsis Nara, seeing this, consoled him and desisted him.

ग्रान्तकोपस्तदोवाच तासपस्यी महापुनि: ।

सितमुर्षिमितं वाक्यं मभूरं धर्मनन्दन: ॥ 8 ॥

Then the great sage, the ascetic son of Dharma, Nārāyaṇa, leaving aside his anger, began to address them in sweet words with countenance smiling.

अस्मिज्ञमनि चार्वीयः कृतसङ्कूल्यवानहम् ।

आवाय्यं च न कतैव्यः सर्वेधा दारमंत्रहः ॥ ९ ॥

तस्माद्रष्टनु त्रिविदं कृपां कृत्वा मापोपति ।

धर्मान न प्रकृर्वित्त बतभङ्गे परस्य वै ॥ 10 ॥

O Fair women! We have determined to practise asceticism in this life; it does not therefore behave us to accept any wife; therefore shew your kindness unto us and go back to your Heaven. You would better think that those who know what is religion, they never desire to break the vow of another.

शूत्रोरप्रिमसे नृतं स्वाधीभावो रितः म्यूतः ।

कथं क्रौमि सव्यर्थ तदभावे सुतोचना: ॥  1 1 ॥

O beautiful eyed ones! In the sexual pleasure, it is the delightful feeling of passionate joy that is requisite; and we are wanting in those feelings; then how can we effect that union?

कारणेन विना कार्य न भवेदिति निश्रायः ।

कविधि: कवितं शास्ते स्थायीभावो सः किक्त ॥ १२ ॥

No action can come out of no cause; this is all clear. The poets say that the sexual power and pleasure, is the feeling, the mental attitude that corresponds; and that is the only thing, that lasts. And we have no desire for that.

धन्य: सुचासवर्गी: सभायोर्द्ध रातते ।

प्रतिपातं यतो जातो भवतीनामकृतिमम् ॥ १३ ॥

However my limbs are all very graceful, I am very fortunate and blessed in this world, otherwise how can I be the object of your sincere love towards me.

भवतीभि: कृपा कृत्वा रक्षणीय इतं मा ।

भविष्यामि महाभागा: पतितम्यज्ञनमि ॥ १ ४ ॥

You all are very fortunate; therefore do now

shew this mercy unto me “do not break my vow. I pray now that, in a subsequent birth, I may become your husband.

अर्हायिंश शिर्तालाश्यो द्वापरेडस्मिश्रातले ।

देवानां कार्यसिद्ध्याँ प्रभविष्यामि सर्वथा ॥ 15 ॥

तदा भवत्यो महारा: प्राय्य जन्म पृथवमुथक् ।

भूपतीनी सुता भूत्वा पत्नीभावं गाधियव ॥  16 ॥

O large eyed fair women! In the twenty-eighth Dvāpara Yuga, I will certainly incarnate on earth to effect the purpose of the Devas; then you all also would respectively incarnate as the daughters of kings and would also become my wives.

इत्याश्रय हरिसतानु प्रतिश्रुच परिघहम् ।

व्यसज्वस भगवाइमगुढ विमतजरा: ॥ 17 ॥

Nārāyāna thus consented to marry them in some other next birth; and consoling them, made them go back to their Heavens. They also abandoned their mental disquietude and, on reaching back to Heavens, they explained everything to Indra.

एवं विस्वितास्तेन नाता: स्वर्ग तद्धाना: ।

गक्राव कथयामासु: कारणं सकरं पुन: ॥ 18 ॥

आश्रय मघवा तान्यो वृत्तानं तस्य विस्तत् ।

तुषाव तं महात्मानं नारीदूर्वा तयोर्षी: ॥ 19 ॥

Indra heard (from these heavenly women) what the two two Rṣis did and saw before him Urvaśī and other women created by Nārāyaṇa from his thighs, etc. and began to extol the merits of the high souled Nārāyaṇa.

इन्र उवाच

अहो धैयं मुनेः कामं तथैव च तपोबलम् ।

येनेवैध्यः स्वतपसा तापूरूपा: प्रकल्पितः ॥ 20 ॥

Indra said: O! How wonderful is the patience of the Muni? What is the wonderful influence of his Tapas! Oh! He has created, by the sheer force of his Tapas, Urvaśī and these fair women, unrivalled for their beauties, from his thighs.

इति सुत्वा प्रसातमा बथुप सुरारु ततः ।

नातयाणोष प्रभातमा तस्यधिपतो5पबत् ॥ 21 ॥

The Lord of the Devas thus extolled his merits and became freed from his anxieties. The virtuous

Book IV Chapter XVII

Nārāyaṇa, too, devoted himself to the practice of his Tapasyā.

इन्येततस्वीमाख्यातं मुनेवृत्तातमूढ़तम् ।

नारायणस्य सकर्ते नरस्य च महामुने ॥ 22 ॥

O king! Thus I have described to you, in detail, all the wonderful accounts regarding Nara Nārāyana.

तौ हि कृष्णाजुनी वीरी भूभारहणाय च ।

जातौ तौ भरतश्रेष्ठ भृगोः शणवशाद्धि ॥ 23 ॥

O Superior in the descendants of Bharata! These two Nara and Nārāyana afterwards incarnated themselves, due to Bhīgu's curses the two great heroes Arjuna and Krṣna, to relieve the burden of the earth.

राजोवाच

कृष्णावतारचरितं विस्तरणे वद्रव मे ।

सन्देहो मम चित्रोस्ति त निवारय मानव ॥ २४ ॥

The king said: O respect giving Muni! Now describe in detail the life of the Avatāra Krṣna and dispel my mental doubt.

ययो: पुत्रत्वमापजी हृद्रनन्ती महावली ।

देवकीक्युदौले ती दुःखभाजी कर्ण मुने ॥ 25 ॥

कंसेन निगडे बढ़ी पीक्षिति बहुवलसग्न ।

ययो: पुत्रो हरि: साक्षानपस तीपितोभवत् ॥ 26 ॥

O best of the Munis! Why were Vasudeva and Devaki, who were chosen by the very powerful Hari and Ananta as their parents, doomed to so many miseries and afflictions. Why had these parents to remain for good many years in the prison of Kanisa, who pleased directly by their Tapasyā that Bhagavān Janārdana.

जातोउसी मयुगरातु तु गोकुले स कथं नतः ।

कर्म हृता झारकायां निवासं कृतावाक्यम् ॥ 27 ॥

Why did Kṛṣṇa taking his birth at Mathurā, go to Gokula? Also what was his object to go to Dvārkā, situated in the ocean, when he killed the enemy Karīsa?

पित्रादिवैति हेणं समुद्धे पावनं किल ।

त्यक्त्वा हेणान्तोरनार्य गतावन्म कईं हरि ॥ 28 ॥

Also why did his father, mother adr relatives,

leave their old holy places of residences and go abroad to live in a wretched old country?

कुलं च द्विज्ञापेन कक्षमुसादितं हरे: ।

भारावतारणं कृत्वा वासुदेवः सनातनः ॥ 29 ॥

देहं मुभोच तरसा जगाम च दिवं हरि: ।

पाधिष्ठानां च भारेण व्याकृतासभून्य मेदिति ॥ 30 ॥

ते हता वासुदेवेन पार्थनामिकर्मणा ।

लुंटिता थैरीः पन्यन्ते कवं न पिवातिता ॥ 31 ॥

Why was the Yadu race destroyed by the curse from a Brāhmaṇa! How did Śrī Kṛṣṇa Vāsudeva leave finally His body after He had relieved the burden of the earth and was about to enter into His Heaven? The evildoers of the earth were slain by Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, of unequalled prowess; but how was it, that those who plundered the wives of Śrī Hari, were not at all punished by Him!

भीभी प्रोषतस्वा काणी वाहीकोंयण याधिवः।

वैराटो५४ विज्णांध्र ध्रष्ट्यान्छा पार्थिवः ॥ ३२ ॥

सोमदानादय: सर्वे निहताः समे नृप ।

तेषापुनीतो भार्यशीरणां न हतः कवम् ॥ ३३ ॥

The great personages Bhīśma, Droṇa, Kāṃa, the king Vālhīka Virāta, Vikāma. Dhṛṣtadyumna, the king Somadatta were destroyed for relieving the burden of the earth; and the plunderers were acquitted! Kindly explain the cause of this.

कृष्णपन्यः कक्षं दुःखं प्रपातः प्रान्तेः परिवत्ताः।

सन्देशोंस् पुनिश्रष्टि चिति ने परिवर्तिते ॥ 34 ॥

How was it that those chaste and virtuous wives of Śrī Kṛṣṇa got into troubles at the latter end of their lives? There has arisen a doubt in my mind on this point.

वसुवेस्वतु धर्मात्या पुत्रु:खेन तापितः ।

त्यकान्यान कयं प्राणानयमृत्रुं जगाम ह ॥ ३५ ॥

Why did the virtuous Vaisudeva leave his mortal coil owing to the death of his sons and why djú he die an unusual death?

पाण्ड्वा धर्मवंभुक्ता: कृष्णे च निततः सदा ।

ते कथं दुःखभोक्तारो हृषयन्मुनिसन्म ॥३६ ॥

O best of Munis! The Pāṇḍavas were devoted to Kṛṣṇa and they were religious; they had to suffer so many troubles!

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

ग्रीष्टी च महाभागा कर्थे दुःखस्य भागिनी ।

वेदीमध्याच्च संजाता तक्ष्ययासम्भवा किल ॥ 37 ॥

Why was Draupadī so very unfortunate and she had to suffer so much miseries, and pains, who was born of Lakṣmī from amidst the sacrificial place and from the altar.

सभावां च समानीता रजोदोर्षमन्त्रिता ।

बाला दु:शासनेनाथ केशग्रहणकर्शिता ॥ 38 ॥

पीडिता सिस्युताउष वनमध्यमता सती ।

तथैव कीचेकानपि पीडिता रूतीं भृणम् ॥ 39 ॥

Why did Duhśāsana drag Her by hair while She was in Her menstruation period, in the hall of audience and why was it that Sindhu Rāja Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu, gave Her exceedingly mental troubles?

पुत्रा: पड़ेल तस्यान्तु निहता श्रीभिना गृहे ।

सुभ्रात्रया: सुतो युद्धे बाल एव निपातितः ॥ 40 ॥

Why was it that Her five sons residing in Her house were killed by Asvatthāmā? What was the cause that the son of Subhadrā had to die in the battlefield?

तथा च देवकीपुःा: घट्कं केसेन निपूर्तितः ।

समर्थानि ह्रिणा दैवेन कृतमन्था ॥ 4 1 ॥

Why did the king Karīsa kill the six sons of Devakī; and why was it that Śrī Harī who was capable of averting the Fate did not at all prevent that?

यावतानां तथा ग्रापः प्रभासे नियनं पुनः ।

कृतक्षयस्तथा तीव्रस्तपत्नीचां च लुंठनम् ॥ 42 ॥

What a wonder is this that in the matters of Brāhmaṇa's curse towards the Jādavas, their being killed in the Prabhāsa, the total extermination of the Jadū race and the plundering of His wives, why did He allow Fate to do these great momentous things?

विष्णुना चेध्रोपापि साक्षात्रायायोने च ।

उप्रसेनस्य सेवा वे दासवस्ततं कृता ॥ 4 3 ॥

If He was the all-powerful God and He Himself Nārāyaṇa, that why did He incessantly act like a slave towards Ugrasena.

Note: Ugrasena was the king of Mathurā and father of Kahīsa. He was deposed by his son; but Krṣṇa after having slain Kahīsa restored him to the throne.

सन्देशेयं महाभाग तत्र नारायणे भुनी ।

सर्वजुत्समानत्वं व्यवहार्ते निरन्तम ॥ 4 4 ॥

हर्शगोकादयो भावाः सर्वेधी सद्गुगाः कवम् ।

ईशस्य हरेजांत कवमयन्याय मति: ॥ 4 5 ॥

All these bring doubt in our minds regarding Nārāyaṇa Munī that His deeds are always like those of ordinary persons; why did his pleasures and pains resemble those of ordinary human beings? Were he God, why his actions were not Godly? (i.e. superhuman)

तस्मादित्ततो बृहि कृष्णाय चरितं महत ।

अलीकिकेन हरिणा कृते कर्म महीतले ॥ 46 ॥

Therefore dost Thou describe in detail all the Divine Lilās (playful sports) done by Hari of super human powers in this world.

हता आयुः क्षये देल्या: क्लेणेन महता पुनः ।

कर्वेध्यंशनिः : प्रयिता ह्रिणा मुनिसन्तम ॥ 47 ॥

O Best of Munis! When one's longevity expires, one dies; then I cannot understand what glory was manifested by Hari in killing the Daityas? For Fate Killed them; not Hari.

राक्षमणीहणे नूनं गृहीत्पाटप्र पतायनम् ।

कृतं हि वासुदेवेन चीरबच्चरितं तदा ॥ 48 ॥

Was not the doing of Hari like a thief when he stole away the Lady Rukminī and fled quickly to his own place.

मवुगामण्डलं व्यक्तवा समुद्धे कुलसम्मतम् ।

जरासंधभवातेन द्वारकामानं कृतम् ॥ 49 ॥

What did it mean when he fled to Dvārakā city, and quitted his own highly prosperous town Mathurā simply out of the fear of Jarāsandha?

तदा केनापि न जातो भगवान्हिरीक्षरः ।

किंवित्यकृष्टि मे ब्रह्म-कारणं जजलोपनम् ॥ 50 ॥

Did not any body at that time recognise that he was Śrī Bhagavān Hari? O Respected One! Were he Bhagavān, why did He hide himself in Vraja? Please explain the cause to me.

Book IV Chapter XVIII

एते चान्ये च बह्वः सन्देहा वासवीसुत ।

नायाद्ध महाभ्यास सर्वज्ञोरिस डिजोजन्म ॥ ५ १ ॥

O Muni! These and many other doubts always exist in my mind; you are the best of the Dvijas and blessed; I pray, dost thou remove these doubts.

गोयस्तबैकः सन्देहो हदयार्त्र निवर्तैत ।

पाङ्गालयाः पञ्धभतैलं लोके किं न जुणीस्थितम् ॥ ५२ ॥

सदारावं प्रमाणं हि प्रवर्दिन मनीिणः ।

पशुप्रमं: कक्षे सैतु समर्थेसि संश्रितः ॥ ५३ ॥

O best of Munis! Another doubt exists and is not dispelled and that is secret. Was not the taking of the five husbands by Pāncālī for herself shameful and despised by the society? The good manners and doings are always considered by the learned as he proofs of virtue. Why did those Pāndavas, then, capable in every respect, do this thing like brutes?

भीभेणापि कृतं किं वा देवक्षोपेण भूतले ।

गोलकों ती सम्यपाङ्य यत्नु वंशस्य रक्षणम् ॥ 54 ॥

And what did Bhisma do living like a Deva in this world? May I ask, was has act of producing two sons by a widow and thus preserving his line of ancestors worthy of his name?

धित्यार्पिनिधा: कामं मुनिधिभ: परितर्पितः ।

येन केनाज्यपायेन पुत्रोस्पत्नलक्षण: ॥ 55 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागतते महापुराणे चतुर्बिकन्क्ये

सप्तद्वी3.शयः ।। 56 ।।

The religious sanctions advocated by the Munis "Procreate sons in any way whatsoever" is simply shameful. Fie to this religious sanction.

Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter in the fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyasa on the questions asked by Janamcajaya.

Book IV Chapter XVIII

