CHAPTER XIV

On the Birth of Šuka Deva and on the Duties of Householders

सूत उवाच

दूद्धा तामसिताप्रांशी व्यासश्रिंतापरो भवत् ।

क्रिक कारोम न मे योगा देवकन्येयमपसः ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: “O Maharjsis! (Now hear the main topic). Seeing the dark-blue lady looking askance at him, Vyāsa Deva thought: “Indeed! What is to be done now? This Devakanyā Apsarā Ghtrāci is not fit for my household.”

एर्व त्रितयमानं तु दूद्वा व्यासं तदापसतः ।

भयभीता हिं संजाता शागं मां विवुजेदयम् ॥ 2 ॥

Then, seeing Vyāsa Deva thus thoughtful, the Apsarā thought that the Muni might curse him and got terrified.

सा कृतासंथ शुकीरूपं निर्णत भयविह्ठत ।

कृष्णसु विस्मयं प्राणते विहर्गी तां चिलोकवन् ॥ 3 ॥

Confounded by terror, she assumed the form of a Šuka bird and fled away; Vyāsa, too, became greatly surprised to see her in the form of a bird.

कामसू देहे व्यासस्य दर्शनादेव संगतः ।

मनो3तिविमितं जातं स्वयोगत्रेषु विक्सितः ॥ 4 ॥

Book 1 Chapter XIV

The moment Vyāsa saw the extraordinary beautiful form of Ghrtāci, the Cupid entered then, in his body, and his mind was filled with the thought of sweet feminine form and was gladdened and all his body was thrilled with pleasure so that the hair of the body stood on their ends.

स तु दीर्थेण महता निर्युक्तमानं सुनि: ।

न शशाक नियंचुं च स व्यास: प्रमृतं मनः ॥ 5 ॥

Muni Vyāsa Deva tried his best and exerted his power of patience to its utmost, but failed to control his restless mind to enjoy the woman. Though he was very energetic, and he tried repeatedly to control his heart, enchanted with the beautiful form of Ghrtači, yet he could not, as due to a state of things pre-ordained by God, control his mind.

बहुगी गृहाणांचे च पृताच्या मोहितं मनः ।

भाविवावेश विशृते व्यास्याविततेजसः ॥ 6 ॥

At this state, when he was rubbing the firesticks to get the sacred fire, (two pieces of wood used in kindling the fire) his seed (semen) fell upon the Arani (the two pieces of wood used in kindling the sacred fire).

मथनं कुवर्तसत्य मुनेरानिचिकारींया ।

उपण्यायेव सहसा तस्य शुकमथापत् ॥ ७ ॥

But he did not take any notice of that, and he went on rubbing the firesticks when arose from that Arapi the wonderfully beautiful form of Suka Deva, looking like a second Vyāsa.

सोअविधित्य तथा पातं मम-थारिणायिव च ।

तस्माधुकः स्पडुतो व्यासाकृतिमनोहरः ॥ 8 ॥

This boy, born of Arani fuel, looked there brilliant like the blazing fire of the sacrificial place, whereon of ghee are poured.

विसमयं जान्यबाल: संजातस्तदारणवज: ।

यथाछरे समिद्धोरनिभांगित रहनेय दीपितान् ॥ 9 ॥

Seeing that son, Vyāsa Deva was struck with great wonder and thought thus: "What is this? How is that this son is born without any woman"

यासस्तु सुतामालोक्य विस्तयं परमं गतः ।

किमेत्तदिति संचिंत्य वरूदानाच्छवस्य वै ॥ 10 ॥

तेजोरूपी सुको जातोउपरणिणर्भस्मपवः ।

द्वितीयोनिर्विलासर्थ दीथमानः स्वतेजसा ॥ ११ ॥

Thinking for a while, he came to the conclusion, that this had certainly come to pass as the result of boon granted to him by Śiva. No sooner the fiery Šuka Deva, was born of Aranī, he looked brilliant, like fire, by his own tejas (spirit).

विलोकायामात तदा यासस्तु मृदितं सुतम् ।

दिव्येन तेजसा युक्तं गाईपत्यमिवायम् ॥ 1 2 ॥

At that time Vyāsa Deva began to look with one steady gaze the blissful form of his son as a second Gārhapatya Fire, brilliant with the Divine fire.

गड़ानंः स्नाययामास समागत्य गिरिस्तदा ।

पुष्यवृष्टिस्तु खाज्जाता शिशोभपरित तापस ॥ 13 ॥

O hermits! The river Ganges came there from the Himalayas and washed all the inner nerves of the child Šuka Deva, by her holy waters and showers of flowers were poured on his head.

जातकर्मादिके चक्रे व्यासस्तस्य माहतमः ।

देवदुर्भयो नेनुन्नुतुशासरोगणा: ॥ 14 ॥

जगुर्नीचर्पतयो मुदिताते दिवुद्धवः ।

विश्वासुर्गारद्ध त्रंबुरः शुकसंभवे ॥ 15 ॥

Vyāsa Deva next performed all the natal ceremonies of the high-souled child; the celestial drums were sounded and celestial nymphs began to dance and the lords of the Gandharvas Visāvasu, Nārada, Tumburu and others began to sing with great joy for the sight of the son.

तुह्युर्भूदिता: सर्वे देवा विद्याप्रतशा ।

दूर्धा व्यासुरुं दिव्यमरपीनार्थसभमम् ॥ 16 ॥

All the Devas and Vidyātharas began to chant hymns with gladdened hearts at the sight of the divine form, the son of Vyāsa, born of Aranī.

अन्तरिष्ठापताथीवं शपुः कृष्णारिनं शुभम् ।

कर्मडतुतथा दिव्यः शुक्रवर्षा द्विजोतमः ॥ 17 ॥

O twice born ones! Then were dropped down from the sky the dinine rod (Daṇḍa), Kamandalu, and the antelope skin.

सदा: वदुचो वाले जातमाज्ञोतिर्दीयान् ।

तस्योपनवं चके व्यासो विद्धाविधानित् ॥ 18 ॥

No sooner the extraordinarily brilliant Śuka Deva was born than he grew up, and Vyāsa Deva, who is master of endless learning and of how to impart them to others, performed the son's Upanayana ceremony.

उत्पत्रमात्रं ते वेदा: सरहस्या: सर्मेग्रहः ।

उपत्यमूँहात्मानं यथास्य सित्तं तथा ॥ १९ ॥

No sooner the child was born than all the Vedas with all their secrets and epitomes began to flash in the mind of Šuka Deva, as it reigned in Vyāsa Deva.

यतो रूई शुकीरूपं घृताच्या: सम्भवे तदा ।

शुक्रोत नाम पुरस्य चकार मुनिसस्तभः ॥ 20 ॥

O Munis! Bhagavān Vyāsa Deva gave the name of the child as Śuka as during the moment of this birth he saw the form of Ghrācī in the form of the Śuka bird.

ब्रह्म्यतिभुपाधायां कृत्वा व्यासुस्तस्तव ।

ज्ञानि ब्रह्मचर्य चकार विधिपुर्कम् ॥ 21 ॥

Śuka then accepted Brhaşpati as his guru and began devotedly, with his whole head and heart to perform duly the Brahmacarya vow (the life of studentship and celibacy).

सोउधीय निविलान्येवासारह्याससंप्रहान ।।

धर्मशाखणि सर्वांनी कृत्वा गुरुकुले गुकः ॥ 22 ॥

गुरव दक्षिणां दत्ता समावृत्तो मुनिनस्ता ।

आजगाम वितृः पार्श्ध कृष्णद्विष्यावनस्व ॥ 23 ॥

Muni Śuka remained in the house of his Guru and studied the four Vedas with their secrets and epitomes and all the other Dharma śāstras and gave Dakṣinā to the Guru duly according to proper rules, and returned home to his father Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana.

दूद्वा व्यासः शुकः प्राणं प्रेणतोवाया सर्वभ्रमम् ।

आलिलिंग मुडुप्राणि मृद्धिन तस्य चकार ह् । २४ ।।

Seeing his son Śūka, Vyāsa Deva got up and received him with great love and honour and embraced him and took the smell of his head.

पण्ड्छ कुगलं व्यासतस्थी चाध्यवनं गृधिः ।

आश्रास्य स्थापयामास शुकं ततप्रमे शुभे ॥ 25 ॥

The holy Vyāsa asked about his welfare and

about his studies and requested him to stay in that auspicious Śārama.

दारकर्मे तत्तो व्यासः शुकस्य पर्यंचितयत् ।

कन्यां मुनिसुता कान्तामपृष्छदतिवेगवान् ॥ 26 ॥

Vyāsa then thought of Sūka's marriage and he became anxious and began to enquire where a beautiful girl of a Muni can be found.

शुक्र प्रात सुतं व्यासो वैदोर्धीतत्ववासव्य ।

धर्मशाखाणि सर्वाणि कुक भायां महामते ॥ 27 ॥

And he spoke to his son: O highly intelligent one! You have now studied all the Vedas and Dharma Śāstras.

गहैर्य्यं च समासाठ्यं चत देवान्यिनुनाय ।

त्रणानोचय मां पुत्र प्राय्य दारान्मनोरमान् ॥ 28 ॥

Therefore, O sinless one! better marry now. O son! Take a beautiful wife, and leading a householder's life, worship the Devas and Pitts, and free me from debt.

अपुत्रस्य गतिनर्ििति स्वर्गों नैव च नैव च ।

तस्मात्युरु महाभाग कुरुक्यादा गृहामम् ॥ 29 ॥

There is no other way for isueless persons; he can never go to heaven; so, O highly fortunate son of mine! Now; enter into the life of a householder and make me happy.

कृता गृहाश्रमं पुरु सुखितं कुक मां गृह।

आगा मे महती पुरु पूरयव महामते ॥ 30 ॥

तपस्त्वा महागेरे प्राप्तोरिस त्वयपीनिजः ।

देवकर्णी महाप्राज पाहि मां पितरं गृह् ॥ 31 ॥

O highly intelligent one! I have big expectations from you; now try to fulfill them. O greatly wise Śuka! After a very severe asceticism, I have got you who are verily a Deva born without any womb. I am, therefore, your father; save me."

सूत जवाच

इति वादिनमध्यागे प्रापतः प्राह गुहकस्तदा ।

विरतः: सोउतित्कतं तं साक्षातिवतमात्मान: ॥ 32 ॥

When Vyāsa spoke thus to Śuka, making him sit close by, the highly dispassionate Śuka at once made out that his father was terribly attached to the world and replied:

Book 1 Chapter XIV

मूत उवाच

किं त्व वदसि धर्मत्र वेद्यास महामते ।

तत्वेन शाधि शिष्य मां त्वद्जां करावणयतम् ॥ 33 ॥

"O knower of Dharma! you have, by the power of your great intelligence, divided Veda into four parts; why are you, therefore, advising me so now? I am your disciple; so give me true advice. Certainly, I will obey your order."

व्यास उचाच

त्वर्यं यतपत्नं मया पूत्र शतं समा: ।

प्रातस्तं चातिडुःखेन शिवत्यातायनेन च। 34 ॥

At this Vyāsa Deva said: “O son! I have got you after I had performed very severe tapasyā, for one hundred years, and worshipped Bhagavān Śankara, with the sole object of having you.

द्वाति तव चिन्ते नु प्रार्थियात्यात्र घपातिम्।

मुखं घुब्ब महाप्राप्त प्राय्य यौविनमुताम् ॥ 35 ॥

O highly wise one! I will ask some king and will give you sufficient wealth for your family expenses. So that you, having attained this much desired youth, enjoy the householder's life."

शुक उवाच

किं सूखं मानुषे लोके बृहि तात निरामयम् ।

दुःखविद्धे सुखं प्रात्रा न वदति सुखं किल ॥ ३६ ॥

Hearing these words of the father, Šuka Deva said: "O father! Kindly say this to me what pleasure is there on this earth that is not mixed with pain. The happiness, that is mixed with pain, is not called happiness by the wise.

स्वयं कृत्वा महाभाग घवामि तड्गानुगः ।

मुखं किं पतनस्य स्त्रीजस्य विशेषतः ॥ 37 ॥

O highly fortunate one! when I will marry, I will become certainly submissive to that woman; see then how happiness can be possible to one who is dependent: especially to one, dependent on one's wife.

क्वाराधिदयि मुचेल लोकग्रादियमिनतः ।

पुरवर्धर्निबद्धस्तु न विमृष्येत कर्हिंचित् ॥ 38 ॥

विप्पूत्रसभ्यो देहो नारीणां तन्मयसंख्या ।

कः प्रीति तत्र विघेत्र विबुधः कर्तमिष्ठति ॥ 39 ॥

Rather freedom can be obtained one day when one is tied to an iron or wooden pillar; but never freedom will come to that man who is tied by his wife and children. As the body of man is full of urine and faeces, so is the body of the woman.

अयोनिजोर्द विभर्षे योनो मे कौष्टिगी मितः ।

न वांठायमहाप्रोष पीय नोवेव समुद्धम् ॥ 40 ॥

The more so, when I am born of no womb, how can I find happiness there; not only in this birth, but in my previous birth, too, I had no desire to be born of any womb.

विद्युपं किमु वांछामि चक्कवातामुपुडमदुतम् ।

आत्मातामघ पृथोर्नि च भवत्यतिलिपुः ॥ 4 1 ॥

How can I desire now to enjoy the pleasure of urines and faeces in face of the bliss of self that has got no other bliss equal to it? The high-souled persons, that find pleasure in their selves, never go after the sensual pleasures of the objects of enjoyments?

प्रवर्ष पठिता वेदा मवा विस्तारिताक्ष है ।

हिंसामायते पठिता: कर्ममांगप्रवर्तका: ॥ 4 2 ॥

When I studied first, the Vedas in detail, it struck me that the Vedas dealt with the Śāstra of Karmamārga (the way of action); and it is all full of Hirnśa (injury to others).

ब्रह्मधातिगृक: प्राप्न: सोर्धि मनो गृहाणैव ।

अविष्याग्रस्तद्व: कर्थ तारायितुं क्षम: ॥ 43 ॥

Then I took Brhaşpati as my Guru to shew me the way to true wisdom; but soon I found that he, too, was attacked with the dreadful disease of Avidyā (ignorance) and plunged in the terrible ocean of world, full of Maÿā. So it became quite clear to my mind, how could he save me?

गेगमुक्तो यथा वैदा: परतोगचिकित्सकः ।

तथागुर्मुपुक्षोर्ग गृह्वशोर्यं विह्वब्ना ॥ 44 ॥

If the physician be diseased himself, how can he effect cures to other diseases? When I am desirous of liberation, how can I get it from a Guru who is himself deeply attached to the world; how

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

can such a one treat my case to free me, from the disease of attachment to this world?

कृत्वा प्रणायं गुरवे तत्समीपपुणातः ।

ग्राहि मां तत्त्ववोरोने भर्ति संसारासपेतः ॥ 4 5 ॥

संसारोरन्मन्त्राधोरे प्रभणं नभचजवत् ।

न च विश्रमणं क्वापि सूर्येल्वे दिवानिजी ॥ 4 6 ॥

It would be merely a farce. I bowed: down to the Guru and now I am come to you to save me, frightened by this terrible serpent of Samśāra. Day and night the Jivas travel in this awful wheel of Samśāra, this constellation of Zodiac; they are moving like the Sun and never get any rest. Of father! If we discuss about the truth of Ātman, we will at once find that there is no trace of happiness in this Samśāra.

किं सुखं तत संसारे निधनत्वविराणात् ।

भूदानं सुखबुद्धितु विद्यु कौटसुतं यथा ॥ 47 ॥

As the worms enjoy pleasures in the midst of faeces, so the ignorant persons find pleasures in this Sarisāra.

अर्थीय वेदेशाखिणि संसारे राणिणागुथे ।

तेन्यः घरो न मूर्दोर्सित सधार्णं श्राश्यकुरंः ॥ 4 8 ॥

Those who have studied the Vedas and other Śāstras and yet are attached to the world, are certainly deluded and blind like horses, pigs and dogs; no one is more stupid and ignorant than those persons.

मानयुं दुर्लिंग प्राय वेहराशालयधीत्य च ।

बय्येय वदि संसरो को विमुघेत मानवः ॥ 49 ॥

Getting this extremely rare human birth and studying the Vedānta and other Śāstras, if they be attached to this world, then who are the men that will attain freedom? What more wonder can you find in this world than the fact that persons, attached to wives, sons and houses; are denominated as Pundits?

नात: परर्तं लोके कविधिदार्थवीमद्धुतम् ।

पुरवारगृहासक्तः पशिडत: परित्यिते ॥ 50 ॥

That man who is not bound by this Saṃsāra, composed of the three Guṇas of Māyā, is Pundit;

that man is intelligent and he has understood the real import of the Śāstras.

न बाध्यते यः संसारे नो मायानुगीक्षिति: ।

स विहान्स च मेधावी शाखायरं गते हि सः ॥ 5 1 ॥

What use can there be in studying the Śāstras, in vain, that teach how to bind men more firmly in this Saṃsāra, full of Māyā. That Śāstra ought to be studied, which tells how a man would be liberated.

किं ब्यासीयवन्नेनान्र दूर्वधंकारेण च ।

पदितवं तदेवायु, मोचयेद्धावक्ष्यानात् ॥ 52 ॥

गृह्मत पुरुषं यस्मादगृहं तेन प्रकर्गितम् ।

कव सुगुं बच्यानगारे तेन भीतोउरम्बं तिथः ॥ 53 ॥

The house is called “Gṛha” because it catches hold of a man firmly. So what happiness can you expect from the house which is like a prison? O father! I am therefore afraid.

येउकृया मन्त्रमतो विधिना मृचिताक्षु चे ।

ते प्राय्य मानुषं जन्म पुनर्बिं चित्यन्तु ॥ 54 ॥

Those Pundits are certainly stupid and they are certainly deceived by the Creator, who having the birth even of men, become again imprisoned.

व्यास उवाच

न गृहं बंधनागरं बंधने न च कारणम् ।

मनसा यो विनिपुक्तो गृहस्थो5 पिथुच्छे ॥ 55 ॥

Hearing these words of Šuka, Vyāsa spoke as follows: "O Son! The house is never a prison, nor is it the cause of any bondage; the householder whose mind is unattached, can get Mokṣa, in spite of his being such.

-यागपतधनः कुर्वं-वेदोक्ते विधित्कामत् ।

गृहस्योरि विमुघेते श्रादुकृतसत्यवाक्युति: ॥ ५६ ॥

Truthful, holy, earning wealth by just means and performing, according to rules the rites and ceremonies, as stated in the Vedas and doing Śrāddhas duly, a householder can certainly get Mokṣa.

Book 1 Chapter XIV

इद्वारागी यतिश्रेय वानप्रथ्यो मतस्तितः ।

गृहस्त्यं समुपासन्ते मध्याहातितकमे सदा ॥ 57 ॥

श्रद्धया चार्वदानेन वाचा स्नृतया तथा ।

उपकुर्विंन्त धर्मथा गृहासभनिवासिनः ॥ 58 ॥

See a man who is a Brahmaçarī, who is an ascetic, who is a Vānaprasthī or follows any other method or vow, all have got to worship the householder after mid-day. The religious householder, too; welcomes them all, with sweet words, and gives them food, with great love and respect, and thus does them an amount of good.

गृहासभालयो धर्मों न दृष्टो न च चे श्रुतः ।

वसिष्ठादिषितायर्यैज्ञानिथि: समुपाशितः ॥ ५९॥

For this reason the householder's stage is the most excellent of all; I have not seen or heard of any other Śārama superior to it. For this reason Vasisṭha and other Śācāryas resorted to householder's life, in spite of their being endowed with great wisdom. O highly fortunate one! If one performs duly the rites and ceremonies of the Vedas, there is nothing that is impracticable to him.

किमसाध्ये महाभाग येदोक्तानि न कृतेतः ।

स्वर्ग मौढ़ो च सज्जन्य यद्याङ्ठति तद्वयेत् ॥ 6 0 ॥

Be it birth in a good family, or the enjoyment of heavens say, or be it Mokṣa, whatever desires, it is fructified to success. Also there is no such rule that one will have to remain in one and in the same Śārama throughout his life.

आश्रमात्यामं चघेक्षिति धर्मविदो विदुः ।

तस्मादान्म समाधाय कुक कर्मपत्यन्त्रिटः ॥ 6 1 ॥

The Pundits who know Dharma say that pupils can go from one Śārama to another. Therefore, O child! accept Agni (the householder's fire) and try your best to do unremittingly your duties.

देवानिवन्नमनुवांधं सनल्यं विधिवसूनु ।

पुत्रमुत्वाघ धर्मे संयोज्च गृहाभे ॥ 6 2 ॥

O Son! Enter into a householder's life and appease the Devas, Pitrş and men; procreate sons and enjoy the pleasures of household life.

त्वक्त्वा गृहं वंन तत्वा कतर्जिसे ततमुतमम् ।

वानप्रस्थामं कृत्वा संन्यासं च ततः परम् ॥ 63 ॥

When old age will come, quit the house and take up the Vānaprasthāśrama (the third stage) and go to a forest and perform the excellent vows and then take up the dharma of the Saṃnyāsa (renunciation of everything).

इन्द्रियाणि महाभाग माढकानि सुनिश्छिन् ।

अदारस्य दुरन्तानि पछ्रेय मनसा सह ॥ 64 ॥

O Fortunate one! He who does not take a wife, is certainly maddened by these indomitable five organs of action, five organs of senses and mind.

तस्माहारामुकृबीत तज्जयाय महामते ।

वाधकैत तप आतिष्टेति शाखोदितं वचः ॥ 65 ॥

Therefore, the makers of the Śāstras say, that to save oneself from the pernicious influences of these vicious senses, one is to take wife during his youth time and then be engaged in performing tapasyā during his old age.

विश्वामिचे महाभागसतप: कृत्वास्तिदुक्रगम् ।

ग्रीण वर्षसहस्वाणि निर्वाहो रोतिःत्रय: ॥ 6 6 ॥

मोहित्रघ महातेजा वदे मेनकवा स्थितः ।

गकुन्तला समुच्या पुत्री तद्धीवंजा रुष्मा ॥ 67 ॥

O fortunate one! In days of yore, the fiery Rājarsi Viśvāmitra practised very severe tapasyā without any food for three thousand years, and thought he was very strong and shining like fire, he was fascinated by the charm of the celestial nymph Menakā. And an auspicious daughter was born from the womb of Menakā by Viśvāmitra.

दृष्टवा द्वासुस्तां कार्लिं पिता मम परागरः ।

कामबाणादितः कन्यां तां जमाहोदुर्भे स्थितः ॥ 68 ॥

My father Pariśāra, though a great ascetic, was struck with Cupid's arrows at the sight of the daughter of a fisherman, named Kālī and accepted her in the boat.

बढ्राउपि स्कसुतां दूर्वया पढ़बाणप्रपीडितः ।

धावमानछ क्रेश गृहितछ निवारितः ॥ 69 ॥

What more than this, that Brahmā seeing his own daughter Sandhyā was struck by passion and

ran after her, when Bhagavān Rudra Deva made him unconscious by his Hurūkāra sound and made Brahmā desist form the attempt.

तसाचचमपि कल्याण कुरु मे वचनं हितम् ।

कुलजां कन्यकां वृत्वा वेदवर्मा समाश्रय ॥ ७० ॥

इति श्रीद्वैभागवते महापुराणे प्रथमस्कन्धे

चतुर्वशी3ध्याय: 11 1 4 11

So, O fortunate one! Take my word pregnant of good issues and marry a lady, born of a good family, and follow the path presented in the Vedas." Thus ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the First Book on the birth of Šuka Deva and the duties of householders in the Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

