[Ch 14 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: “O Maharjsis! (Now hear the main topic). Seeing the dark-blue lady looking askance at him, Vyāsa Deva thought: “Indeed! What is to be done now? This Devakanyā Apsarā Ghtrāci is not fit for my household.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- O Maharṣis! (Now hear the main topic). Seeing the dark-blue lady looking askance at him, Vyāsa Deva thought :-- “Indeed! What is to be done now? This Devakanyā Apsarā Ghritācī is not fit for my household.”

[Ch 14 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then, seeing Vyāsa Deva thus thoughtful, the Apsarā thought that the Muni might curse him and got terrified.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then, seeing Vyāsa Deva thus thoughtful, the Apsarā thought that the Muni might curse her and got terrified.

[Ch 14 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Confounded by terror, she assumed the form of a Šuka bird and fled away; Vyāsa, too, became greatly surprised to see her in the form of a bird.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Confounded by terror, she assumed the form of a Śūka bird and fled away; Vyāsa, too, became greatly surprised to see her in

[Ch 14 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The moment Vyāsa saw the extraordinary beautiful form of Ghrtāci, the Cupid entered then, in his body, and his mind was filled with the thought of sweet feminine form and was gladdened and all his body was thrilled with pleasure so that the hair of the body stood on their ends.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The moment Vyāsa saw the extraordinary beautiful form of Ghritācī, the Cupid entered then, into his body, and his mind was filled with the thought of sweet feminine form and was gladdened and all his body was thrilled with pleasure so that the hairs of the body stood on their ends.

[Ch 14 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Muni Vyāsa Deva tried his best and exerted his power of patience to its utmost, but failed to control his restless mind to enjoy the woman. Though he was very energetic, and he tried repeatedly to control his heart, enchanted with the beautiful form of Ghrtači, yet he could not, as due to a state of things pre-ordained by God, control his mind.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Muni Vyāsa Deva tried his best and exerted his power of patience to its utmost, but failed to control his restless mind to enjoy the woman. Though he was very energetic, and he tried repeatedly to control his heart, enchanted with the beautiful form of Ghritācī, yet he could not, as due to a state of things pre-ordained by God, control his mind.

[Ch 14 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this state, when he was rubbing the firesticks to get the sacred fire, (two pieces of wood used in kindling the fire) his seed (semen) fell upon the Arani (the two pieces of wood used in kindling the sacred fire).
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this state, when he was rubbing the fire sticks to get the sacred fire, the two pieces of wood used in kindling the fire, his seed (semen) fell upon the Araṇī (the two pieces of wood used in kindling the sacred fire).

[Ch 14 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But he did not take any notice of that, and he went on rubbing the firesticks when arose from that Arapi the wonderfully beautiful form of Suka Deva, looking like a second Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But he did not take any notice of that, and he went on rubbing the firesticks when arose from that Araṇī the wonderfully beautiful form of Śūka deva, looking like a second Vyāsa.

[Ch 14 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This boy, born of Arani fuel, looked there brilliant like the blazing fire of the sacrificial place, whereon of ghee are poured.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This boy, born of Araṇī fuel, looked there brilliant like the blazing fire of the sacrificial place, whereon oblations of ghee are poured.

[Ch 14 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing that son, Vyāsa Deva was struck with great wonder and thought thus: "What is this? How is that this son is born without any woman"
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing that son,Vyāsa Deva was struck with great wonder and thought thus :-- “What is this? How is it that my son is born without any woman.”

[Ch 14 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thinking for a while, he came to the conclusion, that this had certainly come to pass as the result of boon granted to him by Śiva. No sooner the fiery Šuka Deva, was born of Aranī, he looked brilliant, like fire, by his own tejas (spirit).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thinking for a while, he came to the conclusion, that this had certainly come to pass as the result of boon granted to him by Śiva. No sooner the fiery Śūka Deva, was born of Araṇī, he looked brilliant, like fire, by his own tejas (spirit).

[Ch 14 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At that time Vyāsa Deva began to look with one steady gaze the blissful form of his son as a second Gārhapatya Fire, brilliant with the Divine fire.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At that time Vyāsa Deva began to look with one steady gaze the blissful form of his son as a second Gārhapatya Fire, brilliant with the Divine fire.

[Ch 14 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O hermits! The river Ganges came there from the Himalayas and washed all the inner nerves of the child Šuka Deva, by her holy waters and showers of flowers were poured on his head.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O hermits! The river Ganges came there from the Himalayas and washed all the inner nerves of the child Śūka Deva, by her holy waters and showers of flowers were poured on his head.

[Ch 14 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa Deva next performed all the natal ceremonies of the high-souled child; the celestial drums were sounded and celestial nymphs began to dance and the lords of the Gandharvas Visāvasu, Nārada, Tumburu and others began to sing with great joy for the sight of the son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa Deva next performed all the natal ceremonies of the high-souled child; the celestial drums were sounded and the celestial nymphs began to dance and the lords of the Gandharvas Visvāvasu, Nārada, Tumburu and others began to sing with great joy for the sight of the son.

[Ch 14 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► All the Devas and Vidyātharas began to chant hymns with gladdened hearts at the sight of the divine form, the son of Vyāsa, born of Aranī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► All the Devas and Vidyā Dharas began to chant hymns with gladdened hearts at the sight of the Divine form, the son of Vyāsa, born of araṇī.

[Ch 14 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O twice born ones! Then were dropped down from the sky the dinine rod (Daṇḍa), Kamandalu, and the antelope skin.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O twice born ones! Then were dropped down from the sky the divine rod (Daṇḍa), Kamanḍalu, and the antelope skin.

[Ch 14 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No sooner the extraordinarily brilliant Śuka Deva was born than he grew up, and Vyāsa Deva, who is master of endless learning and of how to impart them to others, performed the son's Upanayana ceremony.
NEW CORR ENG ──► No sooner the extraordinarily brilliant Śūka Deva was born than he grew up, and Vyāsadeva, who is master of endless learning and how to impart them to others, performed the son’s Upanayana ceremony.

[Ch 14 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No sooner the child was born than all the Vedas with all their secrets and epitomes began to flash in the mind of Šuka Deva, as it reigned in Vyāsa Deva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► No sooner the child was born than all the Vedas with all their secrets and epitomes began to flash in the mind of Śūka Deva, as it reigned in Vyāsa Deva.

[Ch 14 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Munis! Bhagavān Vyāsa Deva gave the name of the child as Śuka as during the moment of this birth he saw the form of Ghrācī in the form of the Śuka bird.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Munis! Bhagavān Vyāsa Deva gave the name of the child as Śūka as during the moment of his birth he saw the form of Ghritācī in the

[Ch 14 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śuka then accepted Brhaşpati as his guru and began devotedly, with his whole head and heart to perform duly the Brahmacarya vow (the life of studentship and celibacy).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śūka then accepted Brihaspati as his guru and began devotedly, with his whole head and heart to perform duly the Brahmacarya vow (the life of studentship and celebacy).

[Ch 14 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Muni Śuka remained in the house of his Guru and studied the four Vedas with their secrets and epitomes and all the other Dharma śāstras and gave Dakṣinā to the Guru duly according to proper rules, and returned home to his father Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Muni Śūka remained in the house of his Guru and studied the four Vedas with their secrets and epitomes and all the other Dharma Śāstras and gave Dakṣinā to the Guru duly according to proper rules, and returned home to his father Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyan.

[Ch 14 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing his son Śūka, Vyāsa Deva got up and received him with great love and honour and embraced him and took the smell of his head.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing his son Śūka, Vyāsadeva got up and received him with great love and honour and embraced him and took the smell of his head.

[Ch 14 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The holy Vyāsa asked about his welfare and about his studies and requested him to stay in that auspicious Śārama.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The holy Vyāsa asked about his welfare and about his studies and requested him to stay in that auspicious Āśrama.

[Ch 14 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa then thought of Sūka's marriage and he became anxious and began to enquire where a beautiful girl of a Muni can be found.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa then thought of Śūka’s marriage and he became anxious and began to enquire where a beautiful girl of a Muni can be found.

[Ch 14 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And he spoke to his son: O highly intelligent one! You have now studied all the Vedas and Dharma Śāstras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And he spoke to his son :-- “O highly intelligent one! You have now studied all the Vedas and Dharma Śāstras.

[Ch 14 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O sinless one! better marry now. O son! Take a beautiful wife, and leading a householder's life, worship the Devas and Pitts, and free me from debt.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O sinless one! better marry now. O son! Take a beautiful wife, and leading a householder’s life, worship the Devas and Pitris, and free me from debt.

[Ch 14 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There is no other way for isueless persons; he can never go to heaven; so, O highly fortunate son of mine! Now; enter into the life of a householder and make me happy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There is no other way of issueless persons; he can never go to heaven; so O highly fortunate son of mine! Now enter into the life of a householder and make me happy.

[Ch 14 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O highly intelligent one! I have big expectations from you; now try to fulfill them. O greatly wise Śuka! After a very severe asceticism, I have got you who are verily a Deva born without any womb. I am, therefore, your father; save me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O highly intelligent one! I have big expectations from you; now try to fulfill them. O greatly wise Śūka! After a very severe asceticism, I have got you who are verily a Deva born without any womb. I am, therefore, your father; save me.”

[Ch 14 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Vyāsa spoke thus to Śuka, making him sit close by, the highly dispassionate Śuka at once made out that his father was terribly attached to the world and replied:
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Vyāsa spoke thus to Śūka, making him sit close by, the highly dispassionate Sūka at once made out that his father was terribly attached to the world and replied :--

[Ch 14 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O knower of Dharma! you have, by the power of your great intelligence, divided Veda into four parts; why are you, therefore, advising me so now? I am your disciple; so give me true advice. Certainly, I will obey your order."
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O knower of Dharma! you have, by the power of your great intelligence, divided Veda into four parts; why are you therefore advising me so now? I am your disciple; so give me true advice. Certainly I will obey your order.”

[Ch 14 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this Vyāsa Deva said: “O son! I have got you after I had performed very severe tapasyā, for one hundred years, and worshipped Bhagavān Śankara, with the sole object of having you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this Vyāsa deva said :-- “O son! I have got you after I had performed very severe tapasyā, for one hundred years, and worshipped Bhagavān Śaṅkara in the sole object of having you.

[Ch 14 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O highly wise one! I will ask some king and will give you sufficient wealth for your family expenses. So that you, having attained this much desired youth, enjoy the householder's life."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O highly wise one! I will ask some king and will give you sufficient wealth for your family expenses. So that you, having attained this much desired youth, enjoy the householder’s life.”

[Ch 14 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words of the father, Šuka Deva said: "O father! Kindly say this to me what pleasure is there on this earth that is not mixed with pain. The happiness, that is mixed with pain, is not called happiness by the wise.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these words of the father, Śūka Deva said :-- “O father! Kindly say this to me what pleasure is there in this earth that is not mixed with pain. The happiness, that is mixed with pain, is not called happiness by the wise.

[Ch 14 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O highly fortunate one! when I will marry, I will become certainly submissive to that woman; see then how happiness can be possible to one who is dependent: especially to one, dependent on one's wife.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O highly fortunate one! when I will marry, I will become certainly submissive to that woman; see then how happiness can be possible to one who is dependent; especially to one, dependent on one’s wife.

[Ch 14 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Rather freedom can be obtained one day when one is tied to an iron or wooden pillar; but never freedom will come to that man who is tied by his wife and children. As the body of man is full of urine and faeces, so is the body of the woman.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Rather freedom can be obtained one day when one is tied to an iron or wooden pillar; but never freedom will come to that man who is tied by his wife and children. As the body of man is full of urine and faeces, so is the

[Ch 14 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The more so, when I am born of no womb, how can I find happiness there; not only in this birth, but in my previous birth, too, I had no desire to be born of any womb.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The more so, when I am born of no womb, how can I find happiness there; not only in this birth, but in my previous birth, too, I had no desire to be born of any womb.

[Ch 14 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How can I desire now to enjoy the pleasure of urines and faeces in face of the bliss of self that has got no other bliss equal to it? The high-souled persons, that find pleasure in their selves, never go after the sensual pleasures of the objects of enjoyments?
NEW CORR ENG ──► How can I desire now to enjoy the pleasure of urine and faeces in the face of the bliss of self that has got no other bliss equal to it? The high-souled persons, that find pleasure in their selves, never go after the sensual pleasures of the objects of enjoyments?

[Ch 14 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When I studied first, the Vedas in detail, it struck me that the Vedas dealt with the Śāstra of Karmamārga (the way of action); and it is all full of Hirnśa (injury to others).
NEW CORR ENG ──► When I studied first, the Veda in detail, it struck me that the Vedas dealt with the Śāstra of Karma mārga (the way of action); and it is all full of Himsā (injury to others).

[Ch 14 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then I took Brhaşpati as my Guru to shew me the way to true wisdom; but soon I found that he, too, was attacked with the dreadful disease of Avidyā (ignorance) and plunged in the terrible ocean of world, full of Maÿā. So it became quite clear to my mind, how could he save me?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then I took Brihaspati as my Guru to shew me the way to true wisdom; but soon I found that he, too, was attacked with the dreadful disease Avidyā (ignorance) and plunged in the terrible ocean of world, full of Māyā. So it became quite clear to my mind, how could he save me?

[Ch 14 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If the physician be diseased himself, how can he effect cures to other diseases? When I am desirous of liberation, how can I get it from a Guru who is himself deeply attached to the world; how Šrimaddevībhāgavatam can such a one treat my case to free me, from the disease of attachment to this world?
NEW CORR ENG ──► If the physician be diseased himself, how can he effect cures to other diseases? When I am desirous of liberation, how can I get it from a Guru who is himself deeply attached to the world; how can such a one treat my case to free me, from the disease of attachment to this world?

[Ch 14 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It would be merely a farce. I bowed: down to the Guru and now I am come to you to save me, frightened by this terrible serpent of Samśāra. Day and night the Jivas travel in this awful wheel of Samśāra, this constellation of Zodiac; they are moving like the Sun and never get any rest. Of father! If we discuss about the truth of Ātman, we will at once find that there is no trace of happiness in this Samśāra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It would be merely a farce. I bowed down to the Guru and now I am come to you to save me, frightened by this terrible serpent of Samsāra. Day and night the Jīvas travel in this awful wheel of Samsāra, this constellation of Zodiac; they are moving like the Sun and never get any rest. O father! If we discuss about the truth of Ātman, we will at once find that there is no trace of happiness in this Samsāra.

[Ch 14 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As the worms enjoy pleasures in the midst of faeces, so the ignorant persons find pleasures in this Sarisāra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As the worms enjoy pleasures in the midst of faeces, so the ignorant persons find pleasures in this Samsāra.

[Ch 14 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who have studied the Vedas and other Śāstras and yet are attached to the world, are certainly deluded and blind like horses, pigs and dogs; no one is more stupid and ignorant than those persons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who have studied the Vedas and other Śāstras and yet are attached to the world, are certainly deluded and blind like horses, pigs and dogs; no one is more stupid and ignorant than those persons.

[Ch 14 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Getting this extremely rare human birth and studying the Vedānta and other Śāstras, if they be attached to this world, then who are the men that will attain freedom? What more wonder can you find in this world than the fact that persons, attached to wives, sons and houses; are denominated as Pundits?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Getting this extremely rare human birth and studying the Vedanta and other Śāstras, if they be attached to this world, then who are the men that will attain freedom? What more wonder can you find in this world than the fact that persons, attached to wives, sons and houses; are denominated as Pundits?

[Ch 14 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That man who is not bound by this Saṃsāra, composed of the three Guṇas of Māyā, is Pundit; that man is intelligent and he has understood the real import of the Śāstras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That man who is not bound by this Samsāra, composed of the three Guṇas of Māyā, is Pundit; that man is intelligent and he has understood the real import of the Śāstras.

[Ch 14 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What use can there be in studying the Śāstras, in vain, that teach how to bind men more firmly in this Saṃsāra, full of Māyā. That Śāstra ought to be studied, which tells how a man would be liberated.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What use can there be in studying the Śāstras, in vain, that teach how to bind men more firmly in this Samsāra, full of Māyā. That Śāstra ought to be studied, which tells how a man would be liberated.

[Ch 14 Verse 52-53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The house is called “Gṛha” because it catches hold of a man firmly. So what happiness can you expect from the house which is like a prison? O father! I am therefore afraid.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The house is called "Griha" because it catches hold of a man firmly. So what happiness can you expect from the house which is like a prison? O father! I am therefore afraid.

[Ch 14 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those Pundits are certainly stupid and they are certainly deceived by the Creator, who having the birth even of men, become again imprisoned.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those Pundits are certainly stupid and they are certainly deceived by the Creator, who having the birth even of men, become again imprisoned.”

[Ch 14 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Šuka, Vyāsa spoke as follows: "O Son! The house is never a prison, nor is it the cause of any bondage; the householder whose mind is unattached, can get Mokṣa, in spite of his being such.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Śūka, Vyāsa spoke as follows :-- “O Son! The house is never a prison, nor is it the cause of any bondage; the householder whose mind is unattached, can get Mokṣa, in spite of his being such.

[Ch 14 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Truthful, holy, earning wealth by just means and performing, according to rules the rites and ceremonies, as stated in the Vedas and doing Śrāddhas duly, a householder can certainly get Mokṣa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Truthful, holy, earning wealth by just means and performing, according to rules the rites and ceremonies, as stated in the Vedas and doing Śrāddhas duly, a householder can certainly get Mokṣa.

[Ch 14 Verse 57-58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See a man who is a Brahmaçarī, who is an ascetic, who is a Vānaprasthī or follows any other method or vow, all have got to worship the householder after mid-day. The religious householder, too; welcomes them all, with sweet words, and gives them food, with great love and respect, and thus does them an amount of good.
NEW CORR ENG ──► See a man who is a Brahmacāri, who is an ascetic, who is a Vānaprasthī or follows any other method or vow, all have got to worship the householder after mid-day. The religious householder, too; welcomes them all, with sweet words, and gives them food, with great love and respect, and thus does them an amount of good.

[Ch 14 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► For this reason the householder's stage is the most excellent of all; I have not seen or heard of any other Śārama superior to it. For this reason Vasisṭha and other Śācāryas resorted to householder's life, in spite of their being endowed with great wisdom. O highly fortunate one! If one performs duly the rites and ceremonies of the Vedas, there is nothing that is impracticable to him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► For this reason the householder’s stage is the most excellent of all; and I have not seen or heard of any other Āśrama superior to it. For this reason Vaśiṣṭha and other Ācāryas resorted to householder’s life, in spite of their being endowed with great wisdom O highly fortunate one! If one performs duly the rites and ceremonies of the Vedas, there is nothing that is impracticable to him.

[Ch 14 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Be it birth in a good family, or the enjoyment of heavens say, or be it Mokṣa, whatever desires, it is fructified to success. Also there is no such rule that one will have to remain in one and in the same Śārama throughout his life.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Be it the birth in a good family, or the enjoyment of heavens say, or be it Mokṣa, whatever desires, it is fructifled to success. Also there is no such rule that one will have to remain in one and in the same Āśrama throughout his life.

[Ch 14 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Pundits who know Dharma say that pupils can go from one Śārama to another. Therefore, O child! accept Agni (the householder's fire) and try your best to do unremittingly your duties.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Pundits who know Dharma say that pupils can go from one Āsrama to another, Therefore, O child! accept Agni (the householder’s fire) and try your best to do unremittingly your duties.

[Ch 14 Verse 62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Son! Enter into a householder's life and appease the Devas, Pitrş and men; procreate sons and enjoy the pleasures of household life.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Son! Enter into a householder’s life and appease the Devas, Pitris and men; procreate sons and enjoy the pleasures of household life.

[Ch 14 Verse 63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When old age will come, quit the house and take up the Vānaprasthāśrama (the third stage) and go to a forest and perform the excellent vows and then take up the dharma of the Saṃnyāsa (renunciation of everything).
NEW CORR ENG ──► When old age will come, quit the house and take up the Vānaprasthāshram (the third stage) and go to a forest and perform the excellent vows and then take up the dharma of the Sannyāsa (renunciation of everything).

[Ch 14 Verse 64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Fortunate one! He who does not take a wife, is certainly maddened by these indomitable five organs of action, five organs of senses and mind.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Fortunate one! He who does not take a wife, is certainly maddened by these indomitable five organs of action, five organs of senses and mind.

[Ch 14 Verse 65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, the makers of the Śāstras say, that to save oneself from the pernicious influences of these vicious senses, one is to take wife during his youth time and then be engaged in performing tapasyā during his old age.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, the makers of the Śāstras say, that to save one self from the pernicious influences of these vicious senses, one is to take wife during his youth time and then be engaged in performing tapasyā during his old age.

[Ch 14 Verse 66-67]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O fortunate one! In days of yore, the fiery Rājarsi Viśvāmitra practised very severe tapasyā without any food for three thousand years, and thought he was very strong and shining like fire, he was fascinated by the charm of the celestial nymph Menakā. And an auspicious daughter was born from the womb of Menakā by Viśvāmitra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O fortunate one! In days of yore, the fiery Rājarṣi Viśvāmitra practised very severe tapasyā without any food for three thousand years, and thought he was very strong and shining like fire, he was fascinated by the charm of the celestial nymph Menakā. And an auspicious daughter was born from the womb of Menakā by Viśvāmitra.

[Ch 14 Verse 68]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My father Pariśāra, though a great ascetic, was struck with Cupid's arrows at the sight of the daughter of a fisherman, named Kālī and accepted her in the boat.
NEW CORR ENG ──► My father Parāśara, though a great ascetic, was struck with Cupid’s arrows at the sight of the daughter of a fisherman, named Kāli and accepted her in the boat.

[Ch 14 Verse 69]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What more than this, that Brahmā seeing his own daughter Sandhyā was struck by passion and ran after her, when Bhagavān Rudra Deva made him unconscious by his Hurūkāra sound and made Brahmā desist form the attempt.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What more than this, that Brahmā seeing his own daughter Sandhyā was struck by passion and ran after her, when Bhagavān Rudra Deva made him unconscious by his Humkār sound and made Brahmā desist from the attempt.

[Ch 14 Verse 70]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So, O fortunate one! Take my word pregnant of good issues and marry a lady, born of a good family, and follow the path presented in the Vedas." Thus ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the First Book on the birth of Šuka Deva and the duties of householders in the Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So, O fortunate one! Take my word pregnant of good issues and marry a lady, born of a good family, and follow the path presented in the Vedas.” Thus ends the fourteenth Chapter of the 1st Skandha, on the birth of Śūka Deva and the duties of householders in the Mahā Purāṇa Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Vedavyās.
