CHAPTER I

On the Questions Put by Janamejaya

जनमेव जय चाच

भगवन्यवता प्रोक्त यजमवाधिधं महत् ।

सा का कर्थं सम्युपसा कुरं कसाच्च किकुणा ॥ १ ॥

कौनूशा मखतस्तयाः स्वरूपं कौनूशा तथा ।

विधानं विधिवद्बृहि सर्वज्ञोस द्वानिधि ॥ २ ॥

ब्रह्माण्डस्य तयोत्परितं वद वित्तस्तत्या ।

ययोक्ते यायुगं बह्वार्जिखतं वैसि भ्रुगु ॥ ३ ॥

Janamejaya said: “O Bhagavān! What is that great Yajña (sacrifice) named Ambā Yajña about which you referred just now? Who is the Ambā? Where was She born? From whom and what for did Her birth take place? What are Her qualities? What is Her form and nature? O Ocean of mercy! You are all-knowing; kindly describe everything duly. Along with this, describe in detail the origin of Brahmānda. O Brahmāṇa! You know every thing of this whole Universe. I heard that Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra are the three Devatās, who are successively originated to create, preserve, and destroy this Universe.

इद्वा विद्युश्छ मरूढ़ यज्ये देवा मया शुताः ।

सृध्यपालनसंहारकाकार सुगणास्त्वमी ॥ 4 ॥

Are these three highshoulded entities independent? or Do they do their respective duties, being subservient to another Person? Now I am very eager to know all these.

स्वतनाराते महात्मानः पाराणर्यं वदस्य मे ।

आहोदियत्पत्नाराते श्रीतुममिष्छामी साम्यात्म । 5 ।

मृत्युधमांश्छ ते नो वा सचिवदानन्द्वीपणः ।

अधिप्नात्रविधियुक्ती न वा दुखैक्षधायकः ॥ 6 ॥

कालस्य वर्गगा नो वा ते सुग्रहा महावलाः ।

कर्थ ते वै समुत्वा कस्माविति च संशया: ॥ 7 ॥

हर्षोगकयुता ते वै निद्रातल्यस्माविताः ।

सप्तधातुमयातशें द्वेता: किं वाउ-नय्या मुने ॥ 8 ॥

So Pārāśara's son! Describe all these to me. Are these highly powerful Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara subject to Death like ordinary beings? Or are they of the nature of everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss? Are they subject to the three fold pains arising from their own selves from elements and from those arising from gods? Are they subject Time? How and wherefrom were they originated? Do they feel the influence of pleasure, pain, sleep or laziness? O Muni! Do their bodies consist of seven Dhātus? (blood, etc.) or are they of some other kinds?

कैईल्यैर्निंसितारे वे कैनुर्णीरिद्रैलस्था ।

भोगछ कौदुर्गस्लोयं प्रमाणमायुपस्था ॥ 9 ॥

निवासस्थानमध्येधां विभूर्ति च वदस्य मे ।

शोतुपिच्छान्यरं बह्वान्स्तरणं कथामिमम् ॥ 10 ॥

A great doubt has arisen in me on all these points. If these bodies be not made up of five elements, then of what substance are they built of? And of what gunas are their senses built also? How do they

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

enjoy objects of enjoyments? How long is their longevity? O Brāhmaṇa! where do they, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara, the best of the gods live? And of what nature are their powers and prosperities? I like very much to hear all these. So describe all these in detail to me."

व्यास उवाच

दुर्गम: प्रजनभारोद्यं कृती राजस्ववासधुना ।

बह्वादीनीं समुचपितः कस्मादिति महामते ॥ १ १ ॥

एतदेव मया पुत्र पुहोउसौ नारदो मुपिनः ।

विश्मितः प्रत्युबाचेदमुषित्वः शृणु भृपते ॥ १ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: “O highly intelligent king! The questions that you have asked me to day “whence and how Brahmā etc., were born? etc. are very difficult. In ancient days, once, on an occasion, I asked many questions like you of Muni Nārada. At first he was greatly surprised to hear my queries, afterwards he gave due replies to them. O King! I will answer to you in the same way; listen.

कम्पिश्रु समये चाहं गझूर्तीर चित्तं मुनिन् ।

अपर्यरं नारंड शान्तै सर्वतें वेदवितमम् ॥ १३ ॥

इद्वारड़ं मुदितो भूला पाद्योरपतं मुनेः ।

तेनाजप्तः समीपेरस्य संविष्टघुं वासरमे ॥ १४ ॥

Once, I saw that the all-knowing, peaceful Nārada, the knower of the Vedas was sitting on the banks of the Ganges. I became very glad and fell at his feet. By his order I took one excellent seat.

शुत्वा कुणलवाताँ है तमपूच्छं विधेः सुन्तम् ।

निर्विद्धं जाड्धवीतीरि निर्जेने सूक्ष्मवालुके ॥ १ ५ ॥

Hearing, then, of his welfare and seeing him sitting on the sands I asked him: 'O highly intelligent One! Who is the Supreme Architect of this widely extended Universe?

मुनेर्जितिततस्याय बढ़ाण्डस्य महामते ।

कः कर्ता परम: प्रोफ्रक्सने यहूं विधानतः ॥ १ ६ ॥

कस्मादेतस्मयुरवं बढ़ाण्डे मुनिसत्तम ।

अतिवं वा तथा निवं तदाचख्य दिजोत्तम ॥ 17 ॥

एककर्णक्मोतदा बहुकर्णकम-यथा ।

अकर्दिक न कार्य स्यादितोर्धोर्धा विक्षति में ॥ 18 ॥

इति सन्देशसदोहे मनं मां तारायधुना ।

विकल्पकोर्टीः कुर्बाणि संसारोप्रियम्न प्रविस्तरे ॥ 19 ॥

Whence is this Brahmāṇḍa born? It is eternal or temporary? When it is an effect, then it is natural that it cannot be created without a cause. Now when the cause, the creator, is certain, is he one or many? O sage! as regards this wide Saṃśāra, I have expressed my doubt; now answer me what is the Real and True, and thus remove my doubts.

ब्रुवेति शुक्रं केचिन्मत्वा कारणाकरणम् ।

सदार्थिकं महादेवं प्रलयोयतिचर्जितम् ॥ 20 ॥

आत्मारामं सुरेशं च त्रिणुणं निर्मलं हरम् ।

संसाराताकं निव्यं सृष्टितिथ्यतंकारणम् ॥ 21 ॥

Many believe Mahā Deva, the Lord of all the other Devas as the Supreme God, the Cause of all. He is the source of deliverance to all the Jīvas; devoid of birth and death; always auspicious: peaceful in Himself and the controller of the three gunas. He is the one and only cause of creation, preservation and destruction.

अन्ये विष्णुं सुवर्तेल्ने नसंवीं प्रभुनीशून् ।

परमात्मानम्यक्ते सर्वशक्तिसम्पित्यम् ॥ 22 ॥

भुक्तिरं भृक्तिरं शान्तं सर्वोदि सर्वतीमुखम् ।

व्यापकं विश्वशरणमानतिदिनिधनं हृति ॥ 23 ॥

धातारं च तथा चान्ये बुविति सुहिकाणम् ।

तमेव सर्वेक्ततं सर्वभूतप्रवर्तकम् ॥ 24 ॥

Some Pundits believe Viṣṇu as the God of all and praise Him as such. It is Viṣṇu that is the powerful Supreme Self, the Lord of all and the First Person Æúpuraṣu. It is He that has no birth nor death, the Deliverer of the whole Jīvas, Omnipresent; His faces are every where; He is the Granter of enjoyments and liberation to the devotees. Some others call Brahmā, the Cause of all. It is He that is omniscient and the Stimulator of all beings.

चतुर्मुंखं सूरेशानं नाथिपवधभवं विभूम् ।

स्वहारं सर्वलोकानां सल्यलोकानिवासिनम् ॥ 25 ॥

The four-faced Brahmā, the best of all the Devas is born from the navel lotus of some One endless

Book III Chapter I

force. He resides in Satyaloka; He is the Creator of all and the Lord of all the Devas.

दिनेशं प्रवैल्प्यमये सर्वेशं वेदवादिनः ।

सुवर्जिन चैव गायन्ति सार्यप्रातरन्तिजितः ॥ 26 ॥

यजनित च तथा यजे वासवं च शतकतनु ।

सहस्राकं देवदेवं सर्वेपां प्रभुभुल्बणम् ॥ 27 ॥

Again some other Pundits call the Sun, Surya as God. In the morning and in the evening they chant His hymns, without any lack of slackness and laziness. Again there are some others, who say that Indra is the lord of all the Jivas; He is thousand-eyed; it is Indra the of Śacī, that is the God of all. Those who perform Yajñas (sacrifices) worship Vāsava, the king of the Devas.

यज्ञार्थीं सुग्रहींग जिलोकों शर्बीपतिम् ।

यज्ञानं चैव भोक्तरं सोमयं सोमपरिष्यम् ॥ 28 ॥

He dirnks Soma juice Himself and those who drink Soma are his beloved. He is the one and only Lord of Sacrifices.

वरणं च तथा सोमं पावकं पवन्त तथा ।

यमं कुवेरं धनदं गणाधौशं तथायरे ॥ 29 ॥

हैरंबं गजवकं च सर्वकार्यप्रसाधकम् ।

स्मरणात्सिद्धं कार्यकामवं कामगं परम् ॥ 30 ॥

Thus, all men worship, according to their respective wishes. Varuna, Soma, Agni, Pavana (wind), Yama (the god of Death), Kubera, the lord of wealth; there are some again who worship the elephant-faced Ganapati, the Fructifier of all actions, the Granter of desires of all the devotees, and the Giver of success to all in all enterprises, no sooner He is remembered.

यवानी केचनाचारीः प्रवंद्रभवित्वालाथंद्वम् ।

आदिमायां महाशक्ति प्रकृति पुरुषानुगाम् ॥ 31 ॥

Some Ācāryas (professors) say again that the All-auspicious the Ādi Māyā, the Great Śakti Bhavānī, the Giver of everything, Who is the nature of with and without attributes.

ब्रहीकातासामपत्रां सुहित्यथन्तकारिधान् ।

मातरं सर्वभृतानां देवतानां तथैव च ॥ 32 ॥

अनातिदिनधनां पूर्णा व्यापिका सर्ववंतुम् ।

इश्री सर्वलोकानां निरुणां सपुर्णा शिवान् ॥ 33 ॥

Who is not different from Brahma, who is both Puruṣa and Prakṛti, the Creatrix, the Preservatrix and the Destructrix of all, the Mother of all the gods, beings and lokas is the Great Goddess of this Brahmānda. She is without beginning and end, full, present in all the beings and everywhere.

वैष्णाठी शाङ्गरी जाहती वासवीं वरकर्णी तथा ।

वाराहीं नारसिंही च महात्वमईी त्वाद्धुद्वान् ॥ 34 ॥

वेद्यतात्येकां च विद्यां भवतरोः त्रिवत्या ।

सर्वेकुःखनिर्हनी च स्मरणान्सर्वकामदान् ॥ 35 ॥

It is this Bhavānī that assumes the various endless forms such as Vaisṇavī, Śānkarī, Brahmī, Vāsaī, Vārunī, Vārahī, Nāra Sirīhī, Mahā Lakṣmī the one and without a second Vedamātā, and others. It is this Vidyā nature that is the One and the only Root of this tree of Sarīṣāra (universe).

मोक्षतं च मुभुकुषाणां कामदां च फलाधिणम् ।

त्रिगुणातीत्कपां च गुणाविस्तारकाकाम् ॥ 36 ॥

The mere act of remembering Her destroys heaps of afflictions of the devotees and fulfils all their desires. She gives Mokṣa to those who are desirous of liberation and gives rewards to those who want such.

निरुगां सुगुणां तस्मातां धार्यांति फताल्थिनः ।

निरज्ञनं निराकार निर्वर्षं निरुगणं किल ॥ 37 ॥

She is beyond the three Gunas and still She emanates them. Therefore, the Yogis that want rewards meditate on Her, Who is of the nature of Vidyā and Who is devoid of attributes.

अस्पं व्यापकं बहा प्रवदिति मुनीक्ष्रा: ।

वेदोपनिषदि प्रोफलसोजमय इति वस्वित् ॥ 38 ॥

The best Munis, the knowers of the truths of Vedānta meditate on Her as formless, immutable, stainless, omnipresent Brahma devoid of all Dharma. She is described in some Vedas and Upaniṣads as full of Light (Tejas).

सहसर्गिधा पुनर: सहस्नवनलवा ।

सहस्ककर्णश्रु सहस्वास: सहस्वात् ॥ ३९ ॥

विणीः पादमथाकाशं परमं समुदाहतम् ।

विराजं विरजं शान्तं प्रवदिति मनीषिणः ॥ ४० ॥

Some intelligent persons describe God as of

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

infinite hands, infinite ears, infinite legs, infinite faces, peaceful, Virāt Puruṣa and describe sky as the Pada (place) of Viṣṇu.

पुरुषोनमं तथा चान्ये प्रवदिति पुराविदः ।

नैकोपीति वर्त्यस्य प्रभूगीरः कदाचन ॥ 41 ॥

Other knowers of the Purāṇas describe Him as Purusottama. There are some others again who declare that this creation cannot be done by a single individual.

अनशीधरिंदं सर्वे ब्रह्माण्डमिति केचन ।

न कद्याण्डिजन्यं यज्ञपोदतद्विन्तितम् ॥ 4 2 ॥

Some atheists say that this inconceivable infinite Universe can never be created by one God.

सदैवेदेयमीर्ण च स्वभावोल्यं संदर्भुगम् ।

अकतांसी पुमान्योक्तः प्रकृतिस्तु तथा च सा ॥ 4 3 ॥

So there is no such definite God that can be called its Creator. Though without any creator, this Brahmāṇḍa is sprung from the Nature and conducted by Her.

एवं वदन्ति संख्याश्रु मुनयः कपिलादयः ।

एते सन्देहस्नोहाः प्रभवन्ति तथापरे ॥ 44 ॥

The followers of the Sānkhya system say that Puruṣa is not the creator of this Universe; they declare that Prakṛti is the Mistress of this Universe O Muni! Thus I have expressed to you what the Muni Kapila, the Ācārya of the Sānkhya and the other philosophers declare as their opinions; various doubts, thus, reign always in my breast.

विकल्पीवृष्टतं चेतः विकं क्रौमि मुनीश्र।

धार्मभिविख्याशा न मनो मे स्थरं भवेत् ॥ 45 ॥

Owing to these doubts my mind is so confused that I cannot arrive at any definite conclusion. My mind is very much unsettled as to what is Dharma and what is Adharma.

को धर्म: कौदुर्णोधर्मश्रिकृं नैवोपलभ्यते ।

देवा: सत्त्वगृत्याज्ञा: सत्यधर्मव्यविश्ता: ॥ 46 ॥

पीड़ान्दे तदानवै: पापै: कुत्र धर्मविश्वशिति: ।

धर्मविश्ता: सदाचारा: पाण्ड्वा मयं वंज्ञा: ॥ 47 ॥

दुःखं बहुविधां प्राप्तास्त्र धार्यं का शिथिति: ।

अतो मे हृदयं तात वेपतेउतीव संगये ॥ 48 ॥

कुँ भे मेसंगयं चेतः समवर्गसि महानुने ।

What are the characteristics of Dharma? I cannot make out them. For the Devas are all sprung from the Sattva Guna and are always attached to the true Dharma; yet they are frequently troubled by the sinful Dānavas. How, then, can I place my confidence on the permanence of the Dharma? My forefathers, the Pāṇḍavas were always endowed with good behavior and good actions and they remained always in the path of the Dharma; yet they suffered a good deal of troubles and sufferings. In these cases it is very difficult to understand the greatness of Dharma. So, O Father! Seeing all these, my mind is thrown into a sea of doubts and troubles.

ताहि संसारावाँस्वो ज्ञापयोतेन मां मुने ॥ 49 ॥

मझ्जंतं चोत्यतन्तं च मनं महाजलाविते ॥ 50 ॥

O Great Muni! There is nothing impracticable with you; so remove my doubts. O Muni! I am always plunged and raised and plunged again in this sea of delusion. So save me by lifting me on a boat of wisdom and carry me across this ocean of samsāra (this world).”

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयकल्पे

जननेजवप्रसने प्रश्वोरध्याः ॥ 51 ॥

Thus ends the First Chapter on the Third Book on the questions put by Janamejaya in the Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevibhagāvatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

