[Ch 1 Verse 1-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya said: “O Bhagavān! What is that great Yajña (sacrifice) named Ambā Yajña about which you referred just now? Who is the Ambā? Where was She born? From whom and what for did Her birth take place? What are Her qualities? What is Her form and nature? O Ocean of mercy! You are all-knowing; kindly describe everything duly. Along with this, describe in detail the origin of Brahmānda. O Brahmāṇa! You know every thing of this whole Universe. I heard that Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra are the three Devatās, who are successively originated to create, preserve, and destroy this Universe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya said :-- “O Bhagavān! What is that great Yajña (sacrifice) named Ambā Yajña about which you referred just now? Who is the Ambā? Where was She born? From whom and what for did Her birth take place? What are Her qualities? What is Her form and nature? O Ocean of mercy! You are all-knowing; kindly describe everything duly. Along with this, describe in detail the origin of Brahmānda. O Brahmāṇa! You know every thing of this whole Universe. I heard that Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra are the three Devatās, who are successively originated to create, preserve, and destroy this Universe.

[Ch 1 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Are these three highshoulded entities independent? or Do they do their respective duties, being subservient to another Person? Now I am very eager to know all these.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Are these three highsouled entities independent? or Do they do their respective duties, being subservient to another Person? Now I am very eager to know all these.

[Ch 1 Verse 5-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So Pārāśara's son! Describe all these to me. Are these highly powerful Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara subject to Death like ordinary beings? Or are they of the nature of everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss? Are they subject to the three fold pains arising from their own selves from elements and from those arising from gods? Are they subject Time? How and wherefrom were they originated? Do they feel the influence of pleasure, pain, sleep or laziness? O Muni! Do their bodies consist of seven Dhātus? (blood, etc.) or are they of some other kinds?
NEW CORR ENG ──► So Pārāśara’s son! Describe all these to me. Are these highly powerful Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara subject to Death like ordinary beings? Or are they of the nature of everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss? Are they subject to the three fold pains arising from their own selves from elements and from those arising from gods? Are they subject Time? How and wherefrom were they originated? Do they feel the influence of pleasure, pain, sleep or laziness? O Muni! Do their bodies consist of seven Dhātus? (blood, etc.) or are they of some other kinds?

[Ch 1 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► A great doubt has arisen in me on all these points. If these bodies be not made up of five elements, then of what substance are they built of? And of what gunas are their senses built also? How do they Śrimaddevībhāgavatam enjoy objects of enjoyments? How long is their longevity? O Brāhmaṇa! where do they, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara, the best of the gods live? And of what nature are their powers and prosperities? I like very much to hear all these. So describe all these in detail to me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► A great doubt has arisen in me on all these points. If these bodies be not made up of five elements, then of what substance are they built of? And of what guṇas are their senses built also? How do they enjoy objects of enjoyments? How long is their longevity? O Brāhmaṇa! where do they, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara, the best of the gods live? And of what nature are their powers and prosperities? I like very much to hear all these. So describe all these in detail to me.”

[Ch 1 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O highly intelligent king! The questions that you have asked me to day “whence and how Brahmā etc., were born? etc. are very difficult. In ancient days, once, on an occasion, I asked many questions like you of Muni Nārada. At first he was greatly surprised to hear my queries, afterwards he gave due replies to them. O King! I will answer to you in the same way; listen.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- “O highly intelligent king! The questions that you have asked me today whence and how Brahmā, etc., were born ? etc., are very difficult. In ancient days, once, on an occasion, I asked many questions like you to the Muni Nārada. At first he was greatly suprised to hear my queries, afterwards he gave due replies to them. O king! I will answer to you in the same way; listen.

[Ch 1 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once, I saw that the all-knowing, peaceful Nārada, the knower of the Vedas was sitting on the banks of the Ganges. I became very glad and fell at his feet. By his order I took one excellent seat.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once I saw that the all-knowing, peaceful Nārada, the knower of the Vedas was sitting on the banks of the Ganges. I became very glad and fell at his feet. By his order I took one excellent seat.

[Ch 1 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing, then, of his welfare and seeing him sitting on the sands I asked him: 'O highly intelligent One! Who is the Supreme Architect of this widely extended Universe?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing, then, of his welfare and seeing him sitting on the sands I asked him :-- “O highly intelligent One! Who is the Supreme Architect of this widely extended Universe?

[Ch 1 Verse 16-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whence is this Brahmāṇḍa born? It is eternal or temporary? When it is an effect, then it is natural that it cannot be created without a cause. Now when the cause, the creator, is certain, is he one or many? O sage! as regards this wide Saṃśāra, I have expressed my doubt; now answer me what is the Real and True, and thus remove my doubts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whence is this Brahmānda born? Is it eternal or temporary? When it is an effect, then it is natural that it cannot be created without a cause. Now when the cause, the creator, is certain, is he one or many? O sage! as regards this wide Samsāra, I have expressed my doubt; now answer me what is the Real and True, and thus remove my doubts.

[Ch 1 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Many believe Mahā Deva, the Lord of all the other Devas as the Supreme God, the Cause of all. He is the source of deliverance to all the Jīvas; devoid of birth and death; always auspicious: peaceful in Himself and the controller of the three gunas. He is the one and only cause of creation, preservation and destruction.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Many believe Mahā Deva, the Lord of all the other Devas as the Supreme God, the Cause of all. He is the source of deliverance to all the Jīvas; devoid of birth and death; always auspicious; peaceful in Himself and the controller of the three guṇas. He is the one and only cause of creation, preservation and destruction.

[Ch 1 Verse 22-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Some Pundits believe Viṣṇu as the God of all and praise Him as such. It is Viṣṇu that is the powerful Supreme Self, the Lord of all and the First Person Æúpuraṣu. It is He that has no birth nor death, the Deliverer of the whole Jīvas, Omnipresent; His faces are every where; He is the Granter of enjoyments and liberation to the devotees. Some others call Brahmā, the Cause of all. It is He that is omniscient and the Stimulator of all beings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Some Pundits believe Viṣṇu as the God of all and praise Him as such. It is Viṣṇu that is the powerful Supreme Self, the Lord of all and the First Person Ādipuruṣa. It is He that has no birth nor death, the Deliverer of the whole Jīvas, Omnipresent; His faces are everywhere; He is the Granter of enjoyments and liberation to the devotees. Some others call again Brahmā, the Cause of all. It is He that is omniscient and the Stimulator of all beings.

[Ch 1 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The four-faced Brahmā, the best of all the Devas is born from the navel lotus of some One endless force. He resides in Satyaloka; He is the Creator of all and the Lord of all the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The four-faced Brahmā, the best of all the Devas is born from the navel lotus of some One of endless force. He resides in Satyaloka; He is the Creator of all and the Lord of all the Devas.

[Ch 1 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again some other Pundits call the Sun, Surya as God. In the morning and in the evening they chant His hymns, without any lack of slackness and laziness. Again there are some others, who say that Indra is the lord of all the Jivas; He is thousand-eyed; it is Indra the of Śacī, that is the God of all. Those who perform Yajñas (sacrifices) worship Vāsava, the king of the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again some other Pundits call the Sun, Sūrya as God. In the morning and in the evening they chant His hymns, without any lack of slackness and laziness. Again there are some others, who say that Indra is the lord of all the Jīvas; He is thousand-eyed; it is Indra, the husband of Śacī, that is the God of all. Those who perform Yajñas (sacrifices) worship Vāsava, the king of the Devas.

[Ch 1 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He dirnks Soma juice Himself and those who drink Soma are his beloved. He is the one and only Lord of Sacrifices.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He drinks Soma juice Himself and those who drink Soma are his beloved. He is the one and only Lord of Sacrifices.

[Ch 1 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus, all men worship, according to their respective wishes. Varuna, Soma, Agni, Pavana (wind), Yama (the god of Death), Kubera, the lord of wealth; there are some again who worship the elephant-faced Ganapati, the Fructifier of all actions, the Granter of desires of all the devotees, and the Giver of success to all in all enterprises, no sooner He is remembered.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus all men worship, according to their respective wishes, Varuṇa, Soma, Agni, Pavana (wind), Yama (the god of Death), Kuvera, the lord of wealth; there are some again who worship the elephant-faced Gaṇapati, the Fructifier of all actions, the Granter of desires of all the devotees, and the Giver of success to all in all enterprises, no sooner He is remembered.

[Ch 1 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Some Ācāryas (professors) say again that the All-auspicious the Ādi Māyā, the Great Śakti Bhavānī, the Giver of everything, Who is the nature of with and without attributes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Some Ācāryas (professors) say again that the All auspicious the Ādi Māyā, the Great Śakti Bhavānī, the Giver of everything, Who is the nature of with and without attributes

[Ch 1 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Who is not different from Brahma, who is both Puruṣa and Prakṛti, the Creatrix, the Preservatrix and the Destructrix of all, the Mother of all the gods, beings and lokas is the Great Goddess of this Brahmānda. She is without beginning and end, full, present in all the beings and everywhere.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Who is not different from Brahmā, who is both Puruṣa and Prakriti, the Creatrix, the Preservatrix and the Destructrix of all, the Mother of all the gods, beings and lokas, is the Great Goddess of this Brahmāṇda. She is without beginning and end, full, present in all the beings and everywhere.

[Ch 1 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is this Bhavānī that assumes the various endless forms such as Vaisṇavī, Śānkarī, Brahmī, Vāsaī, Vārunī, Vārahī, Nāra Sirīhī, Mahā Lakṣmī the one and without a second Vedamātā, and others. It is this Vidyā nature that is the One and the only Root of this tree of Sarīṣāra (universe).
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is this Bhavanī that assumes the various endless forms such as Vaisnavī Śāṅkarī, Brāhmī, Vāsavī, Vāruṇī, Vārāhī, Nara Simhī, Mahā Lakṣmī the one and secondless Vedamātā, and others. It is this Vidyā nature that is the One and the only Root of this tree of Samsāra (universe).

[Ch 1 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The mere act of remembering Her destroys heaps of afflictions of the devotees and fulfils all their desires. She gives Mokṣa to those who are desirous of liberation and gives rewards to those who want such.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The mere act of remembering Her destroys heaps of afflictions of the devotees and fulfills all their desires. She gives Mokṣa to those who are desirous of liberation and gives rewards to

[Ch 1 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She is beyond the three Gunas and still She emanates them. Therefore, the Yogis that want rewards meditate on Her, Who is of the nature of Vidyā and Who is devoid of attributes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She is beyond the three Guṇas and still She emanates them. Therefore the Yogis that want rewards meditate Her, Who is of the nature of Vidyā and Who is devoid of attributes.

[Ch 1 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The best Munis, the knowers of the truths of Vedānta meditate on Her as formless, immutable, stainless, omnipresent Brahma devoid of all Dharma. She is described in some Vedas and Upaniṣads as full of Light (Tejas).
NEW CORR ENG ──► The best Munis, the knowers of the truths of Vedanta meditate on Her as formless, immutable, stainless, omnipresent Brahmā devoid of all Dharma. She is described in some Vedas and Upanishads as full of Light (Tejas).

[Ch 1 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Some intelligent persons describe God as of infinite hands, infinite ears, infinite legs, infinite faces, peaceful, Virāt Puruṣa and describe sky as the Pada (place) of Viṣṇu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Some intelligent persons describe God as of infinite hands, infinite ears, infinite legs, infinite faces, peaceful, Virāṭ Puruṣa and describe sky as the Pada (place) of Viṣṇu.

[Ch 1 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Other knowers of the Purāṇas describe Him as Purusottama. There are some others again who declare that this creation cannot be done by a single individual.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Other knowers of the Purāṇas describe Him as Puruṣottama. There are some others again who declare that this creation cannot be done by a single individual.

[Ch 1 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Some atheists say that this inconceivable infinite Universe can never be created by one God.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Some atheists say that this inconceivable infinite Universe can never be created by one God.

[Ch 1 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So there is no such definite God that can be called its Creator. Though without any creator, this Brahmāṇḍa is sprung from the Nature and conducted by Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So there is no such definite God that can be called its Creator. Though without any creator, this Brahmāṇda is sprung from the Nature and conducted by Her.

[Ch 1 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The followers of the Sānkhya system say that Puruṣa is not the creator of this Universe; they declare that Prakṛti is the Mistress of this Universe O Muni! Thus I have expressed to you what the Muni Kapila, the Ācārya of the Sānkhya and the other philosophers declare as their opinions; various doubts, thus, reign always in my breast.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The followers of the Sāmkhya system say that Puruṣa is not the creator of this Universe; they declare that Prakriti is the Mistress of this Universe O Muni! Thus I have expressed to you what the Muni Kapila, the Acārya of the Sāṅkhyas and the other philosophers declare as their opinions; various doubts, thus, reign always in my breast.

[Ch 1 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Owing to these doubts my mind is so confused that I cannot arrive at any definite conclusion. My mind is very much unsettled as to what is Dharma and what is Adharma.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Owing to these doubts my mind is so confused that I cannot arrive at any definite conclusion. My mind is very much unsettled as to what is Dharma and what is Adharma.

[Ch 1 Verse 46-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What are the characteristics of Dharma? I cannot make out them. For the Devas are all sprung from the Sattva Guna and are always attached to the true Dharma; yet they are frequently troubled by the sinful Dānavas. How, then, can I place my confidence on the permanence of the Dharma? My forefathers, the Pāṇḍavas were always endowed with good behavior and good actions and they remained always in the path of the Dharma; yet they suffered a good deal of troubles and sufferings. In these cases it is very difficult to understand the greatness of Dharma. So, O Father! Seeing all these, my mind is thrown into a sea of doubts and troubles.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What are the characteristics of Dharma? I cannot make out them. For the Devas are all sprung from the Sattva Guṇa and are always attached to the true Dharma; yet they are frequently troubled by the sinful Dānavas. How, then, can I place my confidence on the permanence of the Dharma? My forefathers, the Pāṇḍavas were always endowed with good behaviours and good actions and they remained always in the path of the Dharma; yet they suffered a good deal of troubles and sufferings. In these cases it is very difficult understand the greatness of Dharma. So, O Father! Seeing all these, my mind is thrown into a sea of doubts and troubles.

[Ch 1 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Great Muni! There is nothing impracticable with you; so remove my doubts. O Muni! I am always plunged and raised and plunged again in this sea of delusion. So save me by lifting me on a boat of wisdom and carry me across this ocean of samsāra (this world).”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Great Muni! There is nothing impracticable with you; so remove my doubts. O Muni! I am always plunged and raised and plunged again in this sea of delusion. So save me by lifting me on a boat of wisdom and carry me across this ocean of samsāra (this world).

[Ch 1 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus ends the First Chapter on the Third Book on the questions put by Janamejaya in the Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevibhagāvatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus ends the first chapter on the third Skandha on the questions put by Janamejaya in the Mahāpurāṇa Śrīmad Devī Bhagāvatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyās.
