[Ch 4 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Ṛṣi Nārāyaṇa said :-- The eldest son of Svāyambhuva, Priyavrata served always his father and was very truthful. He married the daughter of the Prajāpati Viśva Karmā, the exceedingly lovely and beautiful Barhiṣmatī, resembling like him, adorned with modesty, good nature and various other qualifications.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣi Nārāyaṇa said :-- The eldest son of Svāyambhuva, Priyavrata served always his father and was very truthful. He married the daughter of the Prajāpati Viśva Karmā, the exceedingly lovely and beautiful Barhiṣmatī, resembling like him, adorned with modesty, good nature and various other qualifications.

[Ch 4 Verse 3-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He begat ten sons, very spiritual and well qualified and one daughter named Ürjasvati. This daughter was the youngest of all. The names of the ten sons are respectively: (1) Āgnidhra, (2) Idhmajihva, (3) Yajñabāhu, (4) Mahāvīra, (5) Rukmaśukra (Hiranyaretā) (6) Ghrtaprṣṭha, (7) Savana, (8) Medhātithi, (9) Vitihotra and (10) Kavi. The name “Agni” was attached to each of the above names. Out of these ten, the three sons named Kavi, Savana, and Mahāvīra were indifferent and dispassionate to the world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He begat ten sons, very spiritual and well qualified and one daughter named Ūrjaṣvatī. This daughter was the youngest of all. The names of the ten sons are respectively :-- (1) Āgnīdhra, (2) Idhmajibha, (3) Jajñabāhu, (4) Mahāvīra, (5) Rukmaśukra (Hiraṇyaretā), (6) Ghritapṛṣṭha, (7) Savana, (8) Medhātithi, (9) Vītihotra and (10) Kavi. The name “Agni” was attached to each of the above names. Out of these ten, the three sons named Kavi, Savana, and Mahāvīra were indifferent and dispassionate to the world.

[Ch 4 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In due time, these became extremely free from all desires and they were proficient in Ātmayidāyā (Self-Knowledge). They were all Ürdhvaretā (of perpetual chastity; who has subdued all their passions) and took gladly to the Paramahāṃsa Dharma. Priyavrata had by his other wife threesons, named Uttama, Tāmasa, and Raivata.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In due time, these became extremely free from all desires and they were proficient in Ātmavidyā (Self-Knowledge). They were all Ūrdharetā (of perpetual chastity; who has subdued all their passions) and took gladly to the Paramahamsa Dharma. Priyavrata had by his other wife three sons, named Uttama, Tāmasa, and Raivata.

[Ch 4 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► These were all widely known; each of them in due time became endowed with great prowess and splendour and became the Lord of one Manvantara. Priyavrata, the son of Svāyambhuva, the King- Emperor enjoyed with his sons and relations, this earth for eleven Arbuda years; the wonder was this, that he lived so long and there was seen no decay in his strength as regards his body or his senses.
NEW CORR ENG ──► These were all widely known; each of them in due time became endowed with great prowess and splendour and became the Lord of one Manvatara. Priyavrata, the son of Svāyambhuva, the King-Emperor enjoyed with his sons and relations, this earth for eleven Arvuda years; the wonder was this, that he lived so long and there was seen no decay in his strength as regards his body or his senses.

[Ch 4 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once on an occasion, the King observed that when the sun appeared on the horizon and got up, one part of the earth was illumined and the remaining part was enveloped in darkness. Seeing this discrepancy, he thought over for a long time and exclaimed. "What! Will the Darkness be seen in my kingdom, while I am reigning? This can never be. I will stop this by my Yogic powers."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once on an occasion, the King observed that when the sun appeared on the horizon and got up, one part of the earth was illumined and the remaining part was enveloped in darkness. Seeing this discrepancy, he thought over for a long time and exclaimed, “What! Will the Darkness be seen in my kingdom, while I am reigning? This can never be. I will stop this by my Yogic powers.”

[Ch 4 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus thinking, the King Priyavrata mounted on a luminous chariot, as big as the Sun, to illumine the whole world and circumambulated round the earth seven times. Whatever portion of the earth was trodden by the wheel on each occasion, became an ocean.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus thinking, the King Priyavrata mounted on a luminous chariot, as big as the Sun, to illumine the whole world and circumambulated round the earth seven times. Whatever portion of the earth was trodden by the wheel on each occasion, became an ocean.

[Ch 4 Verse 15-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus the seven oceans had their origins. And the portion of the earth, that was included within the ruts, became the seven islands (Dvipas). O Child! Now hear about the seven Dvipas and the seven Oceans: The first is the Jambu Dvipa; the second is Plakṣa, the third is Śālmali; the fourth is the Kuśa Dvipa; the fifth is Krauñca; the sixth is the Śaka Dvipa; and the seventh is the Puṣkara Dvipa. The second Dvipa Plakşa is twice the first Jambu Dvipa and so on; each succeeding Dvipa is twice as large as its previous one.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the seven oceans had their origins. And the portion of the earth, that was included within the ruts, became the seven islands (Dvīpas). 0 Child! Now hear about the seven Dvīpas and the seven Oceans :-- The first is the Jambu Dvīpa; the second is Plakṣa, the third is Śalmalī; the fourth is the Kuśa Dvīpa; the fifth is Krauncha; the sixth is the Śaka Dvīpa; and the seventh is the Puṣkara Dvīpa. The second Dvīpa Plakṣa is twice the first Jambu Dvīpa and so on; each succeeding Dvīpa is twice as large as its previous one.

[Ch 4 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now hear the names of the oceans. The first ocean is named Kṣāroda (the salt water ocean); the second is Iṣkuras (the sugarcane ocean); the third is Surā (the wine ocean), the fourth is Ghṛtoda (the charified butter ocean) the fifth is Kṣīroda (the ocean of milk); the sixth is Dadhi Maṇḍa (the ocean of curds); and the seventh is that of ordinary water.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now hear the names of the oceans. The first ocean is named Ksāroda (the salt water ocean); the second is Ikṣurasa (the sugarcane ocean); the third is Surā (the wine ocean), the fourth is Ghritoda (the clarified butter ocean) the fifth is Kṣīroda (the ocean of milk); the sixth is Dadhi Maṇḍa (the ocean of curds); and the seventh is that of the ordinary water.

[Ch 4 Verse 20-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Jambu Dvipa is surrounded by Kṣīra Samudra. The King Priyavrata made his son Āgnidhra, the lord of this Dvipa. He gave to his Idmajihva, the Plakṣa Dvipa surrounded by Ikṣu Sāgara; so he gave to Yajñabāhu the Śālmali Dvipa surrounded by Surā Sāgara and he gave the lordship of Kuśa Dvipa to Hiranyaretā. Then he gave to his powerful son Ghṛtaprṣṭha the Krauñca Dvipa sufrounded by Kṣīra Samudra and to his son Medhāttithi the Śāka Dvipa surrounded by Dadhimāṇa Sāgara.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Jambu Dvīpa is surrounded by Kṣīra Samudra. The King Priyavrata made his son Āgnīdhra, the lord of this Dvīpa. He gave to his Idhmajibha, the Plakṣa Dvīpa surrounded by Ikṣu Sāgara; so he gave to Jajñabāhu the Śālmalī Dvīpa surrounded by Surā Sāgara and he gave the lordship of Kuśa Dvīpa to Hiraṇyaretā. Then he gave to his powerful son Ghritapṛṣṭha the Krauncha Dvīpa surrounded by Kṣīra Samudra and to his son Medhātithi the Śāka Dvīpa surrounded by Dadhimaṇḍa Sāgara.

[Ch 4 Verse 26-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Finally he gave to his Vitihorta, the Puskara Dvipa surrounded by the ordinary water. Thus distributing duly amongst his sons, the separate divisions of the earth, he married his daughter, the youngest Ürjasvatī to the Bhagavān Uśanā. In the womb of the Bhagavān Šukrācārya had his famous daughter. O Child! Thus giving the charge of each Dvīpa to each of his sons and marrying his daughters to the worthy hands, he took to Viveka (discrimination) and adopted the path of Yoga. Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narration of the family of Priyavrata in the Mahā Purānam, Śrimadevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Finally he gave to his Vītihotra, the Puṣkara Dvīpa surrounded by the ordinary water. Thus distributing duly amongst his sons, the separate divisions of the earth, he married his daughter, the youngest Ūrjasvatī to the Bhagavān Uśanā. In the womb of Ūrjasvatī the Bhagavān Śukrācārya had his famous daughter Devayānī. O Child! Thus giving the charge of each Dvīpa to each of his sons and marrying his daughters to the worthy hands, he took to Viveka (discrimination) and adopted the path of Yoga. Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narration of the family of Priyavrata in the Mahā Purāṇam, Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
