CHAPTER IV

On the family of Priyavrata

श्रीनारायण उवाच ।

मनोः स्वायम्भुवस्यासीञ्येष्ठः पुत्रः प्रियत्रतः ।
पितुः सेवापरो नित्यं सत्यधर्मपरायणः ॥ १॥
प्रजापतेईहितरं सुरूपां विश्वकर्मणः ।
बर्हिष्मतीं चोपयेमे समानां शीलकर्मेभिः ॥ २॥

The Ṛṣi Nārāyaṇa said :-- The eldest son of Svāyambhuva, Priyavrata served always his father and was very truthful. He married the daughter of the Prajāpati Viśva Karmā, the exceedingly lovely and beautiful Barhiṣmatī, resembling like him, adorned with modesty, good nature and various other qualifications. 

तस्यां पुत्रान्द्रसागुर्गैरवित्ताभ्यवित्तात्मा ।

जनयामास कन्यां ऐपोस्वस्ती च यवीयसीम् ॥ 3 ॥

आननीधड्धभविषढ़्ध यज्ञाहुस्तृतीयकः ।

महावीर्धतुर्धैस्तु घंचमो करमशुक्रकः ॥ 4 ॥

धृतपृष्ठघ सवनो मेधातिशयाधायः ।

वीत्तिज्ञ: कविष्ठिति दुरौरे वह्धिनामकः ॥ 5 ॥

एतेषां दशुप्राणा जयो5एवास्त्वराशिणः ।

कविष्ठ सवनश्रेष्ठ महावीर इति त्रयः ॥ 6 ॥

He begat ten sons, very spiritual and well qualified and one daughter named Ürjasvati. This daughter was the youngest of all. The names of the ten sons are respectively: (1) Āgnidhra, (2) Idhmajihva, (3) Yajñabāhu, (4) Mahāvīra, (5) Rukmaśukra (Hiranyaretā) (6) Ghrtaprṣṭha, (7) Savana, (8) Medhātithi, (9) Vitihotra and (10) Kavi. The name “Agni” was attached to each of the above names. Out of these ten, the three sons named Kavi, Savana, and Mahāvīra were indifferent and dispassionate to the world.

आत्मविद्यापरिणाताः सर्वे ते ब्रूधरीतसः ।

आम्चे परमहंसाठ्ये नि:सभूह हामवन्मुद्धा ॥ 7 ॥

अपरस्ः च जायायां जयः पुत्राछ जजिते ।

उत्तमतामसश्रैव वतश्छौति विश्रुतः।। 8 ॥

In due time, these became extremely free from all desires and they were proficient in Ātmayidāyā (Self-Knowledge). They were all Ürdhvaretā (of perpetual chastity; who has subdued all their passions) and took gladly to the Paramahāṃsa Dharma. Priyavrata had by his other wife threesons, named Uttama, Tāmasa, and Raivata.

मन्देनात्रियपतय एते पुत्रा महौजासः ।

प्रियजत: स राजेन्द्रो बुधुजे जगतीमिमम् ॥ 9 ॥

एकादिशाष्टुत्वाद्वानामव्याहतबलैद्रिकः ।

यदा सुर्यै: पृथिव्याश्र विषाणो प्रव्येजस्तम् ॥ 10 ॥

These were all widely known; each of them in due time became endowed with great prowess and splendour and became the Lord of one Manvantara. Priyavrata, the son of Svāyambhuva, the King-

Emperor enjoyed with his sons and relations, this earth for eleven Arbuda years; the wonder was this, that he lived so long and there was seen no decay in his strength as regards his body or his senses.

भागे द्वितीय तनासीदध्यकातोदयः दिल ।

एवं व्यक्तिरं राजा विलोक्य मनसा विरप् ॥ १ १ ॥

प्रशासित मिथ यभ्यां च नसः प्रादुपवैकल्यम् ।

एवं निवाराधिधापि भूभी योगावलेन च ॥ १ २ ॥

Once on an occasion, the King observed that when the sun appeared on the horizon and got up, one part of the earth was illumined and the remaining part was enveloped in darkness. Seeing this discrepancy, he thought over for a long time and exclaimed. "What! Will the Darkness be seen in my kingdom, while I am reigning? This can never be. I will stop this by my Yogic powers."

एवं व्यवसिते राजा पुत्र: स्वायंभुवस्य स: ।

रेशनादित्यबर्जनं सतनुकलः प्रकाशगव् ॥ 13 ॥

तस्यामि गच्छतो राज्ञे भूमौ गद्यनंमयः ।

पतितासते समुद्राखां भेत्ररे लोकहतेसे ॥ 14 ॥

Thus thinking, the King Priyavrata mounted on a luminous chariot, as big as the Sun, to illumine the whole world and circumambulated round the earth seven times. Whatever portion of the earth was trodden by the wheel on each occasion, became an ocean.

जाता: प्रदेशास्ते सदा हीपा भूमी विभागश: ।

रथेनैमिसमुत्थास्ते परिषहा: सदा सिंधवः ॥ 15 ॥

यत आसांस्ततः सदापुचो द्वीप हि ते सभुतः ।

जम्बुद्धीप: पल्बह्वीप: शाल्यतीद्वीपसंजकः ॥ 16 ॥

कुशद्धीप: कॉर्द्धीप: शकाद्धीप पुष्पतः ।

तेषां च परियाणं तु द्विगुणं चोत्तरीतम् ॥ 17 ॥

Thus the seven oceans had their origins. And the portion of the earth, that was included within the ruts, became the seven islands (Dvipas). O Child! Now hear about the seven Dvipas and the seven Oceans: The first is the Jambu Dvipa; the second is Plakṣa, the third is Śālmali; the fourth is the Kuśa Dvipa; the fifth is Krauñca; the sixth is the Śaka Dvipa; and the seventh is the Puṣkara

Book VIII Chapter V

Dvipa. The second Dvipa Plakşa is twice the first Jambu Dvipa and so on; each succeeding Dvipa is twice as large as its previous one.

सांतंतक्षोपकल्पं बहिभगीक्रमेण च ।

क्षापोद्वेकुसरोदी च सुरोदक्षु घृतोदकः ॥ 18 ॥

क्षीरोदोद्धिपणखोद: शुद्धोदक्षिति ते स्मृता: ।

सप्तेते प्रतिविख्याता: पृथिव्या सिंधवसतया ॥ 19 ॥

Now hear the names of the oceans. The first ocean is named Kṣāroda (the salt water ocean); the second is Iṣkuras (the sugarcane ocean); the third is Surā (the wine ocean), the fourth is Ghṛtoda (the charified butter ocean) the fifth is Kṣīroda (the ocean of milk); the sixth is Dadhi Maṇḍa (the ocean of curds); and the seventh is that of ordinary water.

प्रथमो जयद्वीपाख्यो यः क्षारोदेन वेहितः ।

तत्वर्षि विद्ये राजा पूर्वमापनीधसंजकम् ॥ 20 ॥

लक्षद्वीधे ब्रितीये3सिन्द्वीधेबुत्ससंवेतुते ।

जातनस्तदीधः प्रेयन्त इध्मादिविजकः ॥ 21 ॥

गायक्नौतीय एलम्मनुसोदीयपरितृएत ।

यजबाहुं तदीधरं करोतिस्म प्रियन्तः ॥ 22 ॥

कृष्णद्वीपेतिरये च पृतोतेनेपवेहिते ।

हिरण्यरेता राजास्पत्यियवतन्तर्जनः ॥ 23 ॥

मौंबढ़ीपे पढ़ामे तु क्षीतेदापरिसंपटुते ।

प्रियन्तो घृतपुरुषः परितारसी-महावाक: ॥ 24 ॥

गाकडीपे चान्तरे दधिमण्डोदयंकुलं ।

मेधातिधिरभूद्रजा प्रियन्तसुते वरः ॥ 25 ॥

The Jambu Dvipa is surrounded by Kṣīra Samudra. The King Priyavrata made his son Āgnidhra, the lord of this Dvipa. He gave to his Idmajihva, the Plakṣa Dvipa surrounded by Ikṣu

Sāgara; so he gave to Yajñabāhu the Śālmali Dvipa surrounded by Surā Sāgara and he gave the lordship of Kuśa Dvipa to Hiranyaretā. Then he gave to his powerful son Ghṛtaprṣṭha the Krauñca Dvipa sufrounded by Kṣīra Samudra and to his son Medhāttithi the Śāka Dvipa surrounded by Dadhimāṇa Sāgara.

पुक्पद्धोषक  शुब्दोदकासिंधुसमाप्कुले ।

वीतिहोजे बभूवासौ राजा जनकसंसदः ॥ 26 ॥

कन्यामुज्जस्वीतान्मी ददावुज्ञानसे विधुः ।

आसीतत्यां देदयानी कन्या काव्यस्य विश्वृता ॥ 27 ॥

एवं विषयप्य पुत्रेध्य: सतद्धीवान्ययन्तः ।

विवेकवरणो भूत्वा योगमागाधिर्वते.भवत् ॥ 28 ॥

इति शीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे अष्टमकन्ये भुवनकोशो नाम

चतुवंडीयायः ॥ 29 ॥ 

Finally he gave to his Vitihorta, the Puskara Dvipa surrounded by the ordinary water. Thus distributing duly amongst his sons, the separate divisions of the earth, he married his daughter, the youngest Ürjasvatī to the Bhagavān Uśanā. In the womb of the Bhagavān Šukrācārya had his famous daughter. O Child! Thus giving the charge of each Dvīpa to each of his sons and marrying his daughters to the worthy hands, he took to Viveka (discrimination) and adopted the path of Yoga.

Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narration of the family of Priyavrata in the Mahā Purānam, Śrimadevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VIII Chapter V

