CHAPTER XIII

On the Greatness of Bhasma

श्रीनारायण उवाच

महापातकसंघारण पाताकान्यपरणायि ।

नश्यन्ति मुनिशाष्टूल सत्य सत्यं न चान्यथा ॥ १ ॥

एकं भस्म धृतं येन तस्य पुण्यफलं श्रणु ।

यतीनां ज्ञानं प्रोक्तं वनस्थानां विरिक्तम् ॥ 2 ॥

गृहस्थानां मुने तद्वदमर्बुद्धिकरं तथा ।

ब्रद्धचर्यांभास्थानां स्वाध्यायप्रदमेव च ॥ 3 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Best of Munis! What shall I describe to you the effects of using the Bhasma! Only applying the ashes takes aways the Mahāpātakas (great sins) as well as other minor sins of the devotee. I speak this truly, very truly unto you. Now hear the fruits of using simply the ashes. By using Bhasma, the knowledge of Brahma comes to the Yatis; the desires of enjoyments are eradicated; the improvement is felt in all the virtuous actions of the householders and the studies of the Vedas and other Śāstras of the Brahmačarīs get their increase.

गूग्राणां पुणवर्द नित्यमन्येघां पापनाशनम् ।

प्रभन्नोद्धूलनं चैव तथा तिथिकं तिथिकुकम् ॥ 4 ॥

स्थार्थ सर्वभृतानां तिथिते वैदिक्षी भूति: ।

भस्मनोद्धूलनं चैव तथा तिथिकुकुमुक् ॥ 5 ॥

The Śūdras get merits in using Bhasmas and the sins of other are destroyed. To besmear the body with ashes and to apply the curved Tripuṇdras is the source of good to all beings. The Śruti says so.

यज्ञतेनैव सर्वेषां विधन्ते बैदिकांि श्रुति: ।

भस्मोद्धूललं चैव तथा त्रिवह्, विपुर्णकृम् ॥ 6 ॥

सर्वेधर्तमता तेनां विधन्ते बैदिकांि श्रुति: ।

भस्मनेद्धूलनं चैव तथा त्रिवह्, त्रिपुंकृम् ॥ 7 ॥

माहेशाणां जिंगार्थ विधन्ते बैदिकांी श्रुति: ।

भस्मनेद्धूलनं चैव तथा त्रिवह्, त्रिपुंकृम् ॥ 8 ॥

विज्ञानार्थे च सर्वेधां विधानते बैदिकांी श्रुति: ।

भस्मनेद्धूलनं चैव तथा त्रिवह्, त्रिपुंकृम् ॥ 9 ॥

हिरणयामर्शि तद्वतारौकर्णादिषिः ।

देवतातिभूर्तं भस्म त्रिपुंड्रेयुलनात्मकम् ॥ 10 ॥

That this implies the performance of sacrifice by all, is also asserted in the Srutis. To apply ashes to the whole of the body and to use Tripundra is common to all the religions; it has nothing, in principle, contradictory to others. So the Sruti says. This Tripundra and the besmearing with ashes is the special mark of the devotees of Śiva; this again is asserted in the Sruti This Bhasma and the Tripundra are the special marks by which one is

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

characterised; it is said so in the Vaidik Śruti. Śiva, Viṣṇu, Brahmā, Indra, Hiranyagarbha, and their Avatāras, Varuṇa and the whole host of the Devas all gladly used this Tripundra and ashes.

उमल्याच व लक्ष्यया च वाचा चान्याशिरसिकः ।

सर्वेकशिपधृतं भवम विशुंबुद्धूलनात्मना ॥ १ १ ॥

वक्षाराक्षसगंधवसिद्वविद्धिप्रातिधिभः ।

मृनिभिश्र धृतं भवम विशुंबुद्धूलनात्मना ॥ १ २ ॥

ब्राहणीः क्षत्रियैर्दिश्ये: शुत्रैरपि च संकरैः ।

अपधंशैर्दीतं भवम विशुंबुद्यूलनात्मना ॥ १३ ॥

Durgā, Lakṣmī, and Sarasvatī etc., all the wives of the gods daily anoint their bodies with ashes and use the Tripundras. So even the Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, Gandharvas, Siddhas, Vidyādharas, and the Munis have applied Bhasma and Tripundra This holding on of ashes is not prohibited to anybody; the Brāhmaṇas, Kṣatriyas, Vaiśyas, Śūdras, mixed castes, and the vile classes all can use this Bhasma and Tripundra.

उद्यूलनं विमुणई च वै: समावारितं मुदा ।

त एव शिक्षा विद्वांसो नेतेर सुविनुगव ॥ 14 ॥

शिवलिंगं मणि: संख्यां मंत्र: पंचाश्रसत्वा ।

विश्वतीरोषधं पुंसां पुक्तिजीवर्यकर्मणि ॥ 15 ॥

O Nārada! In my opinion they only are the Sādhus (saints) who use this Tripundra and besmear their bodies with ashes. In seducing this Lady Mukti (liberation is personified here as a lady) one is to have this gem of Śiva Liṅgam, the five lettered Mantra Namah Śivāya as the loving principle, and holding on the ashes as the charming medicine, (as in seducing any ordinary woman, gems, jewels and ornaments, love and charming medicines are necessary).

भुर्निक यत्र भस्मांगो मूर्खों वा पिंडितोर्षि वा ।

तत्र भुक्ते महादेव: सप्तनीको बूधधज्ञः ॥ 16 ॥

भस्मसंख्नसर्विभानुगच्छिति यः पुभान् ।

सर्वेपातकयुक्तोर्षि पूजितो मानावोर्शिरात् ॥ 17 ॥

भस्मसछ्नसर्वर्गे यः स्तीति श्रद्धया सह ।

सर्वेपातकयुक्तोर्षि पूज्यते मानावोर्शिरात् ॥ 18 ॥

O Nārada! Know the place where the person,

who has besmeared the body with ashes and who has used Tripundra takes his food as where Śaṅkara and Śaṅkari have taken their food together. Even if anybody himself not using the Bhasma, follows another who has used the Bhasma, he will be soon honoured in society even if he a sinner. What more than this, if anybody himself not using the ashes, praises another who uses the Bhasma, he is freed from all his sins and gets soon honour and respect in the society.

निरुपुंद्रापिरिणे चिक्षाप्रदानेन हि केवलम् ।

तेनार्थितं श्रुतं तेन तेन सर्वेमनुष्ठितम् ॥ १९ ॥

येन चिक्षण शिरसि विपूर्णुं भयसना कृतम् ।

All the studies of the Vedas come to him though he has not studied the Vedas, all the fruits of hearing the Srutis and the Purāṇas come to him, though he has not heard them, all the fruits of practised Dharma come to him though he has not practised any, if he always uses this Tripundra on his forehead and gives food to a beggar who uses Tripundra on his forehead.

क्रीकटेष्वि देशेषु यत्र भ्रतिविष्यपण: ॥ 20 ॥

मानवस्तु वसोत्रियं काणीक्षेत्रसमं हि तत् ।

Even in countries as Bihar (Kikata, etc., that have got a bad name) if there be a single man in the whole country whose body is besmeared with ashes and who uses this Tripundra, that is considered then as Kāśī (Benares city).

दुःगील शीलसुक्तो वा योगयुक्तोउपलक्षणः ॥ 21 ॥

भृतिशासनयुक्तो वा स पूज्यो मम पुजवत् ।

छचानीय चरेहो हि भूतिशासनमैधगम् ॥ 22 ॥

सोउपि यां गतिनामानीत न तां गझतरीतपि ।

Any body, of a bad or of a good character, be he a Yogī or a sinner, using Bhasma, is worshipped like my son, Brahmā. O Nārada! Even if an hypocrite uses Bhasma, he will have a good future, which cannot be attained even by performing hundreds of sacrifices.

संपकाल्लील्या वापि भयात्रा धारयेतु चः ॥ 23 ॥

विधियुक्तो विभूर्ति तु स च पूर्णो यथा हहाम् ।

Book XI Chapter XIII

शिवस्य विष्णोद्वीवां ब्रह्माणसूचित्काराण् ॥ 24 ॥

पार्वैताश्र महाक्रस्या भारत्यासूचित्काराण् ।

If any body uses Bhasma daily either through good companion or through neglect, he will be entitled, like me, to the highest worship. O Nārada! Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Mahcśvara, Pārvatī, Lakṣmī, Sarasvatī and all the other Devas become satisfied with simply holding on this Bhasma.

न दानेन न यजेन न तपोधिभः सुदुर्लेभः ॥ 25 ॥

न तीर्थयायण पुर्ण विपुषुंण च लयन्ते ।

दानं यज्ञा धर्मांश तीर्थयाया श्तार ॥ 26 ॥

ध्यानं तपोक्षुंचूय कलां नाईति घोड़गीम् ।

यथा राजा स्विह्राकों स्वजनं मयन्ते सहा ॥ 27 ॥

The merits that are obtained by using only the Tripundra, cannot be obtained by gifts, sacrifices, severe austerities, and going to sacred places of pilgrimages. They cannot give one sixteenth part of the result that accrues from holding the Tripundra. As a King recognises a person as his own, whom he has given some object of recognition, so Bhagavān Śaṅkara knows the man who uses Tripundras as His own person.

तथा शिवासिषुंकां क्रसनेन वर्गीकृतः ।

द्विताविराज्यव्यातिवारी शुद्धचितेन भयमना । । २८ ॥

धारयेचोक्षिभूंकां स्वक्रीयमिव मयते ।

त्यक्सर्वांशमाचारो लुपसविक्रौयेपि सः ॥ २९ ॥

They that hold Tripundras with devotion can have Bholā Nātha under their control; no distinction is made here between the Brāhmaṇas and Cāndālas. Even if any body be fallen from the state of observing all the Ācāras or rules of conduct proper to his Āśrama and if he be faulty in not attending to all his duties, he will be Mukta (freed) if he has used even once this Bhasma Tripundras.

स्कृतिर्वक्रिभुर्णिकं धारयेलोप्रि मुच्यते ।

नास्य जानं परीक्षेत न कुलं बत तथा ॥ 30 ॥

त्रिपुर्णकितभालेन पूज्य एव हि नारत ।

शिवमन्त्यपो मंत्रो नास्ति तुल्यं शिवात्यम् ॥ 31 ॥

शिवार्नान्तय एप्यं न हि तीर्थे च भयन्ता ।

रुद्रानेवैत्यरं तीर्थे तद्वम परिकोर्तितम् ॥ 32 ॥

Never bother Youself with the Caste or the family of the holder of the Tripundras. Only see whether the sign Tripundra exists in his forehead. If so, consider him entitled to respect. O Nārada! There is no mantra higher than this Śiva Mantra; there is no Deity higher than Śiva; there is no worship of greater merit-giving powers than the worship of Śiva; so there is no Tirtha superior to this Bhasma. This Bhasma is not an ordinary thing; it is the excellent energy (semen virile) of fire of the nature of Rudra.

ध्वरनं सर्वदुःखानां सर्वेपार्विशोधनम् ।

अंलवो वाउधो वाए मुखों वा पिंडतोपि वा ॥ 33 ॥

यास्त्रिजेचे वस्त्रित्यं भूतिणासनसंयुतः ।

तस्मिन्स्त्राविः सोमः सर्वभूतगर्भषैतुः ।

सर्वतीर्थे संयुक्तः साधिष्यं कुकते सदा ॥ 34 ॥

All sorts of troubles vanish, all sorts of sins are destroyed by this Bhasma. The country where the lowest castes reside with their bodies besmeared with ashes, is linhabited always by Bhagavān Śaṅkara, Bhagavati Umā, the Pramathas (the attendants of Śiva) and by all the Tirthas. Bhagavān Śaṅkara, first of all, held this Bhasma as an ornament to his body by purifying it first with “Sadyo Jāta,” etc., the five mantras.

तृातिने पंचशिवमंत्रपवित्रतिन

भस्माति कामदूर्नानिष्यृषितानि ।

त्रैयुंकृकाणि रचितानि ललायपटुं

लुंपति दैवलिष्ठतानि दुर्श्वगताणि ॥ 35 ॥

इति श्रीमदैर्शीभागते महापुराणे एकादशरकम्ये

त्रयोदशोउधाय: 11 13 11

Therefore, if any body uses the Bhasma Tripundra according to rules on his forehead, the writings written at the time of his birth by Vidhātā Brahmā will all be cancelled, if they had been bad. There is no doubt in this.

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Eleventh

Book on the greatness of Bhasma in the

Mahāpurānam Śrimadevībhāgavatam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimuddevibhāgavatam

