[Ch 18 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mahiṣa said: “O Devi! Mandodari had a sister Indumati;” unmarried and endowed with all auspicious signs. She grew up in time to a marriageable age.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mahiṣa said :-- O Devī! Mandodarī had a sister Indumatī; unmarried and endowed with all auspicious signs. She grew up in time to a marriageable age.

[Ch 18 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Svayamvara assembly (a marriage in which the girl chooses her husband from among a number of visitors assembled together) was then called for the marriage of the maiden Indumati.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Svayambara assembly (a marriage in which the girl chooses her husband from among a number of visitors assembled together) was then called for the marriage of the maiden Indumatī.

[Ch 18 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Kings from various parts came there and the maiden Indumati selected from among them a beautiful strong king, of noble lineage and endowed with all auspicious signs.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Kings from various parts came there and the maiden Indumatī selected from among them a beautiful strong king, of noble lineage and endowed with all auspicious signs.

[Ch 18 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At that time, by the undescribable power of Destiny, Mandodari seeing the deceitful cunning and hypocrite King of Madra, became passionate and desired to marry him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At that time, by the undescribeable power of Destiny, Mandodarī seeing the deceitful, cunning, and hypocrite King of Madra, became passionate and desired to marry him.

[Ch 18 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That slender woman Mandodari then addressed her father thus: "O Father! Seeing the King of Madra in this assembly, I am desirous to marry him; so perform also my marriage ceremony now.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That slender woman Mandodarī then addressed her father thus :-- “O Father! Seeing the King of Madra in this assembly, I am desirous to marry him; so perform also my marriage ceremony now.”

[Ch 18 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the king heard this request from her own daughter privately, he became very glad and began with promptness, to make preparations for the marriage.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the king heard this request from her own daughter privately, he became very glad and began with promptness, to make preparations for the marriage.

[Ch 18 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He invited the King of Madra to his own palace and gave him in marriage his own daughter Mandodari, according to due rites and ceremonies with an abundance of dowry and wealth. The King of Madra Cārudesṇa became very glad to marry the beautiful Mandodari and went back with her to his own abode.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He invited the King of Madra to his own palace and gave him in marriage his own daughter Mandodarī, according to due rites and ceremonies with an abundance of dowry and wealth. The King of Madra Cārudeṣṇa became very glad to marry the beautiful Mandodarī and went back with her to his own abode.

[Ch 18 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King Caurdesṇa then enjoyed with her for good many days; when one day a maid-servant found the king in sexual intercourse with another maid servant in a lonely place and divulged this to Mandodari; she finding the king in that state became angry and rebuked him with a slight smiling countenance.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King Cārudeṣṇa then enjoyed her for good many days; when one day a maid-servant found the king in sexual intercourse with another maid-servant in a lonely place and divulged this to Mandodarī; she finding the king in that state became angry and rebuked him with a slight smiling countenance.

[Ch 18 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again, on another occasion, Mandodari saw the king willingly engaged in amusements and sports with an ordinary beautiful woman and became very sorry and thought thus: When I saw him in the Swayanivara, I could not recognise him as a cheat; I am deceived by this King; Oh! What a wrong act have I done through delusion. This King is a rogue and he is totally shameless and has no dislike for contemptible things; it is now too late to repent for him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again, on another occasion, Mandodarī saw the king willingly engaged in amusements and sports with an ordinary beautiful woman and became very sorry and thought thus :-- When I saw him in the Svayamvara, I could not recognise him as a cheat; I am deceived by this King; Oh! What a wrong act have I done through delusion. This King is a rogue and he is totally shameless and has no dislike for contemptible things; it is now too late to repent for him.

[Ch 18 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How can I have any affection for this husband; fie on my living now! I forsake from this very day all the pleasures with my husband and all other worldly pleasures, and I take recourse now to contentment alone.
NEW CORR ENG ──► How can I have any affection for this husband; fie on my living now! I forsake from this very day all the pleasures with my husband and all other worldly pleasures, and I take recourse now to contentment alone.

[Ch 18 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I have committed a very wrong act that I ought never to have done; therefore it causes intense pain to me now. If I now commit suicide, then that sin will never forsake me, and I must have to enjoy the consequences thereof.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I have committed a very wrong act that I ought never to have done; therefore it causes intense pain to me now. If I now commit suicide, then that sin will never forsake me, and I must have to enjoy the consequences thereof.

[Ch 18 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And if I return to my father's house, I will not be happy there, for my companions seeing me thus will, no doubt, ridicule me. Therefore, it is now advisable for me to avoid all the sensuous pleasures, become dispassionate and remain here patiently and abide by the strange combinations of Time."
NEW CORR ENG ──► And if I return to my father’s house, I will not be happy there, for my companions seeing me thus will, no doubt, ridicule me. Therefore, it is now advisable for me to avoid all the sensuous pleasures, become dispassionate and remain here patiently and abide by the strange combinations of Time.

[Ch 18 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mahisa said: “Thus that woman lamented and remorsed and began to remain there, very much sorrowful and distressed, renouncing thoroughly all the pleasures of the world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mahiṣa said :-- Thus that women lamented and remorsed and began to remain there, very much sorrowful and distressed, renouncing thoroughly all the pleasures of the world.

[Ch 18 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Auspiciou ne! I am the king, yet your are showing your dislike for me; know, eventually, you, too, will be passionate and entertain afterwards an illiterate coward.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Auspicious One! I am the king, yet you are showing your dislike for me; know, eventually, you, too, will be passionate and entertain afterwards an illiterate coward.

[Ch 18 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Keep my word even now, it will be of great benefit and it will serve as a medicinal diet to you as to all women. In case you do not follow my advice, you will have to meet with extreme pain and misery, certainly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Keep my word even now, it will be of great benefit and it will serve as a medicinal diet to you as to all women. In case you do not follow my advice, you will have to meet with extreme pain and misery, certainly.

[Ch 18 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing the words of Mahisāsura, the Devi said: "O you fool! Go to the lower worlds or stand up for fight, I will send you and the other Dānavas unto death and then go away at my pleasure. O Demon! I take up form to preserve righteous, whenever they suffer pain on this earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing the words of Mahiṣāsura, the Devī said :-- O you fool! Go to the lower worlds or stand up for fight; I will send you and the other Dānavas unto death and then go away at my pleasure. O Demon! I take up form to preserve the righteous, whenever they suffer pain in this earth.

[Ch 18 Verse 23-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the Daityas! Formless, birthless I am; yet, at times, I take up form and be born to save the Devas. Know this firmly, O wicked Mahisa! The Devas prayed to Me for your destruction. Therefore I will not rest until I kill you. I speak all these truly to you. Therefore fight or go to Pātāla, the abode of the Asura; I speak truly to you again that I will destroy you wholly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the Daityas! Formless, birthless I am; yet, at times, I take up form and be born to save the Devas. Know this firmly. O wicked Mahiṣa! The Devas prayed to Me for your destruction. Therefore I will not rest until I kill you. I speak all these truly to you. Therefore fight or go to Pātāla, the abode of the Asuras; I speak truly to you again that I will destroy you wholly.

[Ch 18 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing thus the Devi's words, the Dānava took up his bow and came to the battle, fully stretching the string of his bow up to his ears, and began to shoot sharpened arrows with great force.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the Devī’s words, the Dānava took up his bow and came to the battle, fully stretching the string of his bow up to his ears, and began to shoot sharpened arrows with great force

[Ch 18 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi, too, hurled with anger, arrows tipped with iron and cut off the Asura's arrows to pieces.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī, too, hurled with anger, arrows tipped with iron and cut off the Asura’s arrows to pieces.

[Ch 18 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The fight between them rose to such a terrible pitch that it caused terror to both the Devas and the Dānavas, trying hard to be victorious over each other.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The fight between them rose to such a terrible pitch that it caused terror to both the Devas and the Dānavas, trying hard to be victorious over each other.

[Ch 18 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the midst of the terrible encounter, the demon Durdhara came up to fight and made the Devi angry and shot arrows, all terribly poisonous and sharpened on stones, at Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the midst of the terrible encounter, the demon Durdhara came up to fight and made the Devī angry and shot arrows, all terribly poisonous and sharpened on stones, at Her.

[Ch 18 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The demon Trinetra, well skilled in the uses of arrows and weapons, seeing him killed, came up to fight and shot at the Great Goddess with seven arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The demon Trinetra, well skilled in the uses of arrows and weapons, seeing him killed, came up to fight and shot at the Great Goddess with seven arrows.

[Ch 18 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Before these arrows came on Her, She cut them to pieces with Her sharp arrows and by Her trident killed Trinetra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Before these arrows came on Her, She cut them to pieces with Her sharp arrows and by Her trident killed Trinetra.

[Ch 18 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Trinetra thus killed, Andhaka quickly came in the battle-field and struck violently on the head of the lion with his iron club.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Trinetra thus killed, Andhaka quickly came in the battlefield and struck violently on the head of the lion with his iron club.

[Ch 18 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The lion killed that powerful Andhaka by striking the demon with his nails, out of anger, began to eat his flesh.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The lion killed that powerful Andhaka by striking the demon with his nails and, out of anger, began to eat his flesh.

[Ch 18 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mahisāsura became greatly astonished at the death of these Ausras and began to shoot pointed arrows, sharpened on stone, at Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mahiṣāsura became greatly astonished at the death of these Asuras and began to shoot pointed arrows, sharpened on stone, at Her.

[Ch 18 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi Ambikā cut his arrows into two before they came on Her and struck the Demon on his breast by Her club.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī Ambikā cut his arrows into two before they came on Her and struck the Demon on his breast by Her club.

[Ch 18 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That vile Mahisāsura, the tormentor of the Devas, fell in a swoon under the stoke of the club but patiently bore it and, at the next moment, came again and struck the lion on his head by his club.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That vile Mahiṣāsura, the tormentor of the Devas, fell in a swoon under the stoke of the club but patiently bore it and, at the next moment, came again and struck the lion on his head by his club.

[Ch 18 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The lion, too, by his nails rent that great Asura to pieces. Mahisāsura, then, quitting the man-form took up the lion-form and by his claws cut the Devi's lion and wounded him very much by his nails.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The lion, too, by his nails rent that great Asura to pieces. Mahiṣāsura, then, quitting the man-form took up the lion-form and by his claws cut the Devī’s lion and wounded him very much by his nails.

[Ch 18 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On Mahisāsura taking up this lion-form, the Devi became very angry and began to shoot arrows after arrows at him all very terrible, sharp and like poisonous snakes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On Mahiṣāsura taking up this lion-form, the Devī became very angry and began to shoot arrows after arrows at him all very terrible, sharp and like poisonous snakes.

[Ch 18 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the Asura quitting the lion form assumed the appearance of a male elephant, oozing out juice from his temples and began to hurl the mountain tops by his trunk.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the Asura quitting the lion form assumed the appearance of a male elephant, oozing out juice from his temples and began to hurl the mountain tops by his trunk.

[Ch 18 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the mountain peaks thus hurled on Her, She cut them off to pieces by Her sharp arrows and began to laugh.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the mountain peaks thus hurled on Her, She cut them off to pieces by Her sharp arrows and began to laugh.

[Ch 18 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi's lion on the other hand, sprang on the head of the elephant Mahisa and by his claws rent him to pieces.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī’s lion on the other hand, sprang on the head of the elephant Mahiṣa and by his claws rent him to pieces.

[Ch 18 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► To kill the Devi's lion, then, Mahisa quitted his elephant-form and assumed the appearance of a Sarabha, more powerful and terrible than lion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► To kill the Devī’s lion, then, Mahiṣa quitted his elephant-form and assumed the appearance of a Sarabha, more powerful and terrible than lion.

[Ch 18 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi seeing that Šarabha became angry and struck on the head of that Šarabha with Her axe; the Sarabha, too, attacked the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī seeing that Sarabha became angry and struck on the head of that Sarabha with Her axe; the Sarabha, too, attacked the Devī.

[Ch 18 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Their fight became horrible; Mahisāsura, then, assumed the appearance of a buffalo and struck the Bhagavatī by his horns.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Their fight became horrible; Mahiṣāsura, then, assumed the appearance of a buffalo and struck the Bhagavatī by his horns.

[Ch 18 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That horrible Asura, of hideous appearance, swinging his tail, began to attack the thin bodied Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That horrible Asura, of hideous appearance, swinging his tail, began to attack the thin bodied Devī.

[Ch 18 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That violent Asura caught hold of the mountain peaks by his tail and, whirling them round and round, hurled them on the Devi. That vicious soul, then, maddened with his strength, laughed incessantly and addressed thus: "O Devi! Be steady in the battle-field.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That violent Asura caught hold of the mountain peaks by his tail and, whirling them round and round, hurled them on the Devī. That vicious soul, then, maddened with his strength, laughed incessantly and addressed thus :-- “O Devī! Be steady in the battlefield.

[Ch 18 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I will send you today unto death, and your youth and beauty too. You are an illiterate fellow as you have become maddened to fight with me. Really you are deluded in your pretensions that you are very strong; this idea of yours is absolutely false.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will send you today unto death, and your youth and beauty too. You are an illiterate fellow as you have come maddened to fight with me. Really you are deluded in your pretensions that you are very strong; this idea of yours is absolutely false.

[Ch 18 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I will kill you first and the hypocrite Devas after who want to vanquish me by putting up a woman in their front.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will kill you first and the hypocrite Devas after who want to vanquish me by standing up a woman in their front.”

[Ch 18 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi said: “O Villain! Do not boast; keep yourself firm in the fight. Today I will kill you and make the Devas discard their fear.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī said :-- “O Villain! Do not boast; keep yourself firm in the fight. Today I will kill you and make the Devas discard their fear.

[Ch 18 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Wretch! You are a Sinner; you torment the Devas and terrify the Munis. Let me have my drink of sweet decoction of grapes. And then I will slay you undoubtedly."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Wretch! You are a Sinner; you torment the Devas and terrify the Munis. Let me have my drink of sweet decoction of grapes. And then I will slay you undoubtedly.”

[Ch 18 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Saying thus, the Devi, wrathful and eager to kill Mahisāsura, iook up the golden cup filled with wine and drank again and again.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Saying thus, the Devī, wrathful and eager to kill Mahiṣāsura, took up the golden cup filled with wine and drank again and again.

[Ch 18 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the Devi finished Her drink of the sweet grape juice, She pursued him with trident in Her hands, to the great joy of all the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the Devī finished Her drink of the sweet grape juice, She pursued him with trident in Her hands, to the great joy of gladdening all the Devas.

[Ch 18 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas began to rain showers of flowers on the Devi and praised Her and shouted victories to Her with Dundubhi (a Divine drum) Jai, Jiva; victory, live.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas began to rain showers of flowers on the Devī and praised Her and shouted victories to Her with Dundubhi (a Divine drum) Jai, Jīva; victory, live.

[Ch 18 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rşis, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Piśācas, Uragas, and Kinnaras witnessed the battle from the celestial space and became very much delighted.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣis, Siddhas, Gandarbhas, Piśācas, Uragas, and Kinnaras witnessed the battle from the celestial space and became very much delighted.

[Ch 18 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the other hand, Mahisāsura, the hyppocrite Pundit, began to assume various magic forms and struck the Devi repeatedly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the other hand, Mahiṣāsura, the hypocrite Pundit, began to assume various magic forms and struck the Devī repeatedly.

[Ch 18 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi Caṇḍika, then, infuriated and with eyes reddened, pierced violently the breast of that vicious Mahisa with Her sharp trident.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī Caṇḍikā, then, infuriated and with eyes reddened, pierced violently the breast of that vicious Mahiṣa with Her sharp trident.

[Ch 18 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Demon, then, struck by this trident, fell senseless on the ground; but got up in the next moment and kicked the Devi forcibly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Demon, then, struck by this trident, fell senseless on the ground; but got up in the next moment and kicked the Devī forcibly.

[Ch 18 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That Great Asura, thus kicking the Devi, laughed repeatedly and bellowed so loudly that the Devas were all terrified with that noise.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That Great Asura, thus kicking the Devī, laughed repeatedly and bellowed so loudly that the Devas were all terrified with that noise.

[Ch 18 Verse 62-63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the Devi held aloft the brilliant discus of good axle and of thousand spokes and loudly spoke to the Asura in front: O Stupid! Look! This Cakra will sever your throat today; wait a moment, I am sending you instantly unto death.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the Devī held aloft the brilliant discus of good axle and of thousand spokes and loudly spoke to the Asura in front :-- O Stupid! Look! This Cakra will sever your throat today; wait a moment, I am sending you instantly unto death.

[Ch 18 Verse 64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Saying this, the Divine Mother hurled the Cakra. Instantly that weapon severed the Dānava's head from his body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Saying this, the Divine Mother hurled the Cakra. Instantly that weapon severed the Dānava’s head from his body.

[Ch 18 Verse 65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The hot streams of blood gushed out from his neck as the violent streams of water get out from mountains, coloured red with red sandstones.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The hot streams of blood gushed out from his neck as the violent streams of water get out from mountains, coloured red with red sandstones.

[Ch 18 Verse 66-67]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The headless body of that Asura moved, to and fro, for a moment and then dropped on the ground. The loud acclamations of “Victory” were sounded to the great joy of the Devas. The very powerful lion began to devour the soldiers that were flying away, as if he was very hungry.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The headless body of that Asura moved, to and fro, for a moment and then dropped on the ground. The loud acclamations of “Victory” were sounded to the great joy of the Devas. The very powerful lion began to devour the soldiers that were flying away, as if he was very hungry.

[Ch 18 Verse 68]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The wicked Mahisāsura thus slain, the Demons that remained alive were terrified and fled away, very much frightened, to Pātāla.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The wicked Mahiṣāsura thus slain, the Demons that remained alive were terrified and fled away, very much frightened, to Pātāla.

[Ch 18 Verse 69]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas, Rşis, human beings and the other saints on this earth were all extremely glad at the death of this wicked Demon.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas, Ṛṣis, human beings and the other saints on this earth were all extremely glad at the death of this wicked Demon.

[Ch 18 Verse 70]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Bhagavati Caṇḍikā quitted the battle-field and waited in a holy place. Then the Devas came there with a desire to praise and chant hymns to the Devi, the Bestower of their happiness. Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of the Dānava Mahisāsura in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Bhagavatī Caṇḍikā quitted the battlefield and waited in a holy place. Then the Devas came there with a desire to praise and chant hymns to the Devī, the Bestower of their happiness. Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of the Dānava Mahiṣāsura in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
