CHAPTER XVIII

On the Killing of Mahiṣa

महिष उवाच:

तस्यासु भगिनो कन्या नान्या चैदुमती गृष्या ।

विवाह्योग्या संजाता सुरूपावराजा तदा ॥ १ ॥

Mahiṣa said: “O Devi! Mandodari had a sister Indumati;” unmarried and endowed with all auspicious signs. She grew up in time to a marriageable age.

तस्या विवाह: संपुन्तः संजातघः ख्वयवतः ।

राजानो बहुदेशीयाः संगतास्तत्र मण्डघे ॥ 2 ॥

The Svayamvara assembly (a marriage in which the girl chooses her husband from among a number of visitors assembled together) was then called for the marriage of the maiden Indumati.

तया वृत्तो नृपः काध्रक्षतवापूरंपुतः ।

कृलशीलसमायुक्तः सर्वतक्षणारंभुतः ॥ ३ ॥

The Kings from various parts came there and the maiden Indumati selected from among them a beautiful strong king, of noble lineage and endowed with all auspicious signs.

तदा कामातुरा जाता विद्ट वीक्ष्य नूर्यं तु सा ।

चक्रमे देवयोगातु शठं चातुर्यभूषितम् ॥ 4 ॥

At that time, by the undescribable power of Destiny, Mandodari seeing the deceitful cunning and hypocrite King of Madra, became passionate and desired to marry him.

पितरं प्रात् तत्वंी विवाहं कुरं मे पितः ।

इच्छा मे उध सपुढ़ता दृष्टवा मढ़ाधिंदं स्थित ॥ ५ ॥

That slender woman Mandodari then addressed her father thus: "O Father! Seeing the King of Madra in this assembly, I am desirous to marry him; so perform also my marriage ceremony now.

चन्द्रसेनोरिप तत्स्थूला पुचासत्स्वाधितं रहः ।

प्रसनेच च मनसा तत्कार्यें तत्परोभन्त ।। ६ ॥

When the king heard this request from her own daughter privately, he became very glad and began with promptness, to make preparations for the marriage.

तमाहूय नृप गेहे विवाहविधिता ददो ।

कन्या मन्दोदरीं तम्पी पारिखहं तथा बहु ॥ ७ ॥

चाहदेशोणीय तां प्राय्य सुत्वरीं मुदितोउभवत् ।

जगाम स्वगृहे तुढो राज्ञापि सहितः तिज्वा ॥ 8 ॥

Book V Chapter XVIII

He invited the King of Madra to his own palace and gave him in marriage his own daughter Mandodari, according to due rites and ceremonies with an abundance of dowry and wealth. The King of Madra Cārudesṇa became very glad to marry the beautiful Mandodari and went back with her to his own abode.

रेमे नृपतिशादूत: कामिन्या बहुवासरन् ।

क्रतिधिस्त्रासपत्या स समागो रहः किल ॥9॥

सैरंध्या कथितं तस्यै तना दृष्टः पतिस्तथा ।

उपालभ्यं ददौ तस्यै सिमतपूर्वे कश्चित्वा ॥ १० ॥

The King Caurdesṇa then enjoyed with her for good many days; when one day a maid-servant found the king in sexual intercourse with another maid servant in a lonely place and divulged this to Mandodari; she finding the king in that state became angry and rebuked him with a slight smiling countenance.

क्रवाचिवरी सामान्यां रहो रूपवर्तीं नृप: ।

क्रीडयेल्लालयन्धू: खेदे प्राप तदैव सा ॥ ११ ॥

न ज्ञातोर्ग शक्तः पूर्वे यदा दृष्टः स्वयंवरे ।

क्रिं कृतं तु यमा मोहाद्धिंविताड़ नृपेश है ॥ १ २ ॥

Again, on another occasion, Mandodari saw the king willingly engaged in amusements and sports with an ordinary beautiful woman and became very sorry and thought thus: When I saw him in the Swayanivara, I could not recognise him as a cheat; I am deceived by this King; Oh! What a wrong act have I done through delusion. This King is a rogue and he is totally shameless and has no dislike for contemptible things; it is now too late to repent for him.

किं कौरायदा सन्ताय निर्तेजे निर्घुणी गरे ।

का प्रतितिरुगे पर्वी विभाछ मम जीवितम् ॥ 13 ॥

How can I have any affection for this husband; fie on my living now! I forsake from this very day all the pleasures with my husband and all other worldly pleasures, and I take recourse now to contentment alone.

अष्ट प्रभूति संसारे सुखं त्यक्तं मया खलु ।

पतिसम्भोगर्ज सर्व सन्तोभोउदा मया कृतः ॥ 14 ॥

अकर्तैल्यं कृतं कार्य तज्जातं दुःखंद मम ।

देहत्याग: क्रिमये चेब्दूत्याजीते दुःल्यथा ॥ 15 ॥

I have committed a very wrong act that I ought never to have done; therefore it causes intense pain to me now. If I now commit suicide, then that sin will never forsake me, and I must have to enjoy the consequences thereof.

पितृगैहे ब्रजायणु त्रतपि न सुखं भवेत् ।

हास्ययोगा सखीनीं तु भवेयो नात्र संगश्ये ॥ १ ६ ॥

तस्मादत्रैव संवासो वैराययतुना मया ।

कतैल्यः कालायोगेन त्यस्वका कामसुखं पुतः ॥ १ ७ ॥

And if I return to my father's house, I will not be happy there, for my companions seeing me thus will, no doubt, ridicule me. Therefore, it is now advisable for me to avoid all the sensuous pleasures, become dispassionate and remain here patiently and abide by the strange combinations of Time."

महिष उवाच

इति सख्रित्य सा नारी दुःखाशोकपरायणा ।

स्थिता पतिर्गूं त्यक्वा सुखं संसारांत नतः ॥ 18 ॥

Mahisa said: “Thus that woman lamented and remorsed and began to remain there, very much sorrowful and distressed, renouncing thoroughly all the pleasures of the world.

तस्माल्यपि कल्याणी मामनाप्रत्य पूर्तिम्।

अन्यं कापु- कामात्तों संबिश्यासि ॥ 19 ॥

O Auspiciou ne! I am the king, yet your are showing your dislike for me; know, eventually, you, too, will be passionate and entertain afterwards an illiterate coward.

चर्चनं कुक मे तर्ध्य नारीणां परमं हित्म।।

अकुला परमं शोकं लप्ससे नात्र संशयः ॥ 20 ॥

Keep my word even now, it will be of great benefit and it will serve as a medicinal diet to you as to all women. In case you do not follow my advice, you will have to meet with extreme pain and misery, certainly.

देव्युवाच

मन्दात्मानच्छ पालाते युद्ध वा कुर समीघन्तम् ।

हत्वा लामसुगत्सर्वानामिष्यामि यथासुखम् ॥ 21 ॥



यदा यदा हि साधूनां इःखं भवति दानव ।

तदा तेभां च रक्षार्थे दैहं संभारायामदूम् ॥ 22 ॥

Hearing the words of Mahisāsura, the Devi said: "O you fool! Go to the lower worlds or stand up for fight, I will send you and the other Dānavas unto death and then go away at my pleasure. O Demon! I take up form to preserve righteous, whenever they suffer pain on this earth.

अस्पायाश्रु मे रूपयज्ञनाश्रु जन्य च ।

सुगणां रक्षणाथीय विद्धि देत्य विणिश्छान् ॥ 23 ॥

सर्वे ब्रवीय जानीति प्रार्थिताउं सूरैः किन।

त्वद्धार्थे ह्वरो लंहा स्वास्यामि निश्छला ॥ 24 ॥

तस्पायुध्यव वा गच्छ पातालमसुगतायम् ।

सर्वेधा त्वां हनिष्यामि सत्यमेनदुर्जीम्यह्न ॥ 25 ॥

O Lord of the Daityas! Formless, birthless I am; yet, at times, I take up form and be born to save the Devas. Know this firmly, O wicked Mahisa! The Devas prayed to Me for your destruction. Therefore I will not rest until I kill you. I speak all these truly to you. Therefore fight or go to Pātāla, the abode of the Asura; I speak truly to you again that I will destroy you wholly.

व्यास उचाच

इत्युक्तः स तया देया धनुगदाय दानवः ।

युद्धकाम: स्थितस्तत संग्रामायणभूमियु ॥ 26 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing thus the Devi's words, the Dānava took up his bow and came to the battle, fully stretching the string of his bow up to his ears, and began to shoot sharpened arrows with great force. 

युभोच तसरा बाणाकर्णक्रृष्टीक्रळशिलान् ।

देवी चिष्ट्रेत तावणीः कोधानुक्तरणिषुः ॥ 27 ॥

The Devi, too, hurled with anger, arrows tipped with iron and cut off the Asura's arrows to pieces.

तयोः परस्यं सुखं सम्बभूव भगप्रदम् ।

देवानां दानवानां च परस्यतज्वैविणाम् ॥ 28 ॥

The fight between them rose to such a terrible pitch that it caused terror to both the Devas and the Dānavas, trying hard to be victorious over each other.

मध्ये दुर्धर आगवय मुभोच च शिलीभुखान् ।

देवीं प्रति विषासकान्कोयज्ञतिदकाण्न ॥ 29 ॥

In the midst of the terrible encounter, the demon Durdhara came up to fight and made the Devi angry and shot arrows, all terribly poisonous and sharpened on stones, at Her.

ततो भगवती कृष्टा ते जयान शितः: शरैः ।

दूर्यस्त्य यपातोत्यां गतात्युगिरीरभुगवत् ॥ 30 ॥

The Bhagavatī, then, got very angry and hit him hard with sharp arrows. Durdhara, struck thus, fell down dead on the battle field like a mountain top. तं तथा निर्तरं दृष्ट्वा विज्ञेः परमास्थिति ।

आगाय सत्थिभाथीणीज्ञान परमेश्वीम् ॥ 31 ॥

The demon Trinetra, well skilled in the uses of arrows and weapons, seeing him killed, came up to fight and shot at the Great Goddess with seven arrows.

अनगानांतृ चिद्धेद देवी तान्थिशड़ः शगन् ।

शिशूलेन त्रिनेत्रे तु जयान जगद्धिक्वा ॥ 32 ॥

Before these arrows came on Her, She cut them to pieces with Her sharp arrows and by Her trident killed Trinetra.

अधकस्त्वाजगामागृ हनं दृष्टा शिलोचन् ।

गद्या लोहमथागृ सिंहं विद्याय मतकें ॥ 33 ॥

Trinetra thus killed, Andhaka quickly came in the battle-field and struck violently on the head of the lion with his iron club.

सिंहस्तु नखापातेन तं हत्वा बलवस्तम् ।

चखाद तत्सा मांसमंधकस्य क्वापित्वः ॥ 34 ॥

The lion killed that powerful Andhaka by striking the demon with his nails, out of anger, began to eat his flesh.

ताजणे निद्रातन्बीक्ष्य दानवो विस्मयं गतः ।

चिक्षेप तत्सा बाणानतितीक्षणाक्छिलाशन् ॥ 35 ॥

Mahisāsura became greatly astonished at the death of these Ausras and began to shoot pointed arrows, sharpened on stone, at Her.

दिक्षा चके शरणदेवी तानप्राणातिड्कीपुर्जेः ।

गद्या तात्यायामत दैत्यं बक्षसि चाधिक्वा ॥ 36 ॥

The Devi Ambikā cut his arrows into two

Book V Chapter XVII

before they came on Her and struck the Demon on his breast by Her club.

स गड़ाधिश्तो मुछीभवापामवाधकः ।

विश्रह्य पीड़ा पाणात्या पुनगताय सत्वरः ॥ 37 ॥

ज्यान गदया सिंहं मूर्टिंगं क्रोधस्मवित्रः ।

That vile Mahisāsura, the tormentor of the Devas, fell in a swoon under the stoke of the club but patiently bore it and, at the next moment, came again and struck the lion on his head by his club.

सिंहोरप्रि नख्यातने तं ददार महापुरम् ॥ 38 ॥

विद्यार यौरकं रूपं सोउप कसिंहो बघूव ह ।

नर्यैर्विद्यारयामास देवीर्भही मदोककटम् ॥ 39 ॥

The lion, too, by his nails rent that great Asura to pieces. Mahisāsura, then, quitting the man-form took up the lion-form and by his claws cut the Devi's lion and wounded him very much by his nails.

तं च केसिर्णं वीक्ष्य देवी कूढ़ा ह्योपुर्षेः ।

शरीरवाकिरन्तीक्षी: कृरोराशीविविर्ति ॥ 40 ॥

On Mahisāsura taking up this lion-form, the Devi became very angry and began to shoot arrows after arrows at him all very terrible, sharp and like poisonous snakes.

त्यक्ता स हरित्यं तु गजो भूत्वा मदयवः ।

शैलशुष़ं के कृत्वा चिक्षेप चपिड़ां प्रति ॥ 41 ॥

Then the Asura quitting the lion form assumed the appearance of a male elephant, oozing out juice from his temples and began to hurl the mountain tops by his trunk.

आगच्छनं निंरे: शूर्द्धे देयी बाणीः शिलाशिंतः ।

चकार तिलशः खण्डाडुहास जगद्धिक्वा ॥ 42 ॥

Seeing the mountain peaks thus hurled on Her, She cut them off to pieces by Her sharp arrows and began to laugh.

उत्पच च तत सिंहस्तस्य मूर्दिन व्यवसिताः ।

नद्यैविंदारयामास महिषं गजरूपिणम् ॥ 43 ॥

The Devi's lion on the other hand, sprang on the head of the elephant Mahisa and by his claws rent him to pieces.

विद्यार याजरूयं च बभूवाहिषदी तथा ।

हनुकामो हरिं कोपाएछाणो बलवततः ॥ 44 ॥

To kill the Devi's lion, then, Mahisa quitted his elephant-form and assumed the appearance of a Sarabha, more powerful and terrible than lion.

तं वीक्ष्य शगर्य देथी खड्योन सरषाचित्ता ।

उत्तमोने जघानागु सोअपि तो प्राहतत्तद ॥ 4 5 ॥

The Devi seeing that Šarabha became angry and struck on the head of that Šarabha with Her axe; the Sarabha, too, attacked the Devi.

तयोः परयरं युद्धे बध्वातिपचप्रदम् ।

माहिषं रूपमास्थाय शृंगाफ्यां प्रहतन्ते ॥ 46 ॥

Their fight became horrible; Mahisāsura, then, assumed the appearance of a buffalo and struck the Bhagavatī by his horns.

पृष्ठप्रधमणेनागु शृज्ञावितैम्हासुरः ।

ताड्याभास नत्वड़ी घोरकरो भयानकः ॥ 47 ॥

That horrible Asura, of hideous appearance, swinging his tail, began to attack the thin bodied Devi.

पृष्ठन पर्वतान्यूढ़े गृहीत्वा भामयन्वलत् ।

प्रेयाभास पाणातम प्रहसन्यरा मुदा ॥ 48 ॥

तामुवार चलोन्मत्सिह्छ देखि रणाणगे ।

That violent Asura caught hold of the mountain peaks by his tail and, whirling them round and round, hurled them on the Devi. That vicious soul, then, maddened with his strength, laughed incessantly and addressed thus: "O Devi! Be steady in the battle-field.

अशहां त्वा हनिष्यामि रूपयीवनभूषिताम् ॥ 49 ॥

मूखांत्रिस मदमातअष्य म्यम्न सह सूमून ।

क्रोषि मोहितास्तीव पूषा बलवती खरा ॥ 50 ॥

I will send you today unto death, and your youth and beauty too. You are an illiterate fellow as you have become maddened to fight with me. Really you are deluded in your pretensions that you are very strong; this idea of yours is absolutely false.

हृता लयं निहिन्यामि देवान्यपर्यष्ठान् ।

दे नारी प्रेत: कृत्वा जेतुष्टिनि मां शका: ॥ 51 ॥

I will kill you first and the hypocrite Devas after

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

who want to vanquish me by putting up a woman in their front.

देव्युवाच

मा गर्यं कृम मन्त्रमस्तित्त तिह रणोगणे ।

करिष्यामि निरतांकान्हता लां सुसतमान् ॥ 52 ॥

The Devi said: “O Villain! Do not boast; keep yourself firm in the fight. Today I will kill you and make the Devas discard their fear.”

पीवासुडा मार्वीमिं महां शगतामि रोउंधभ ।

देवानां दुःखदं यपं मुनीनां भयकारकम् ॥ 53 ॥

O Wretch! You are a Sinner; you torment the Devas and terrify the Munis. Let me have my drink of sweet decoction of grapes. And then I will slay you undoubtedly."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा चषकं हिंग गृहीत्वा सुर्या युन्तम् ।

पपौ पुनः पुनः क्रोधान्तुकामा महासुरम् ॥ 54 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Saying thus, the Devi, wrathful and eager to kill Mahisāsura, iook up the golden cup filled with wine and drank again and again.

पौत्वा श्राक्षासर्व मिहं शूलमादाय सत्वा ।

दुत्राव दानवं देवी हर्षयन्देवतागणन् ॥ 55 ॥

When the Devi finished Her drink of the sweet grape juice, She pursued him with trident in Her hands, to the great joy of all the Devas.

देवास्तां तखुवुः ग्रामा चढ़ः कुर्मुवर्षणम् ।

जय जीविते ते प्रौचुईनुभीनी च नि:स्वनैः ॥ 56 ॥

The Devas began to rain showers of flowers on the Devi and praised Her and shouted victories to Her with Dundubhi (a Divine drum) Jai, Jiva; victory, live.

སྟོབས: सिद्धान्यश्वर्ग: पिशाणोपारणारणा: ।

क्रिस्तारः प्रेक्ष्य संग्रामं सुदिता गगने स्थितः ॥ 57 ॥

The Rşis, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Piśācas, Uragas, and Kinnaras witnessed the battle from the celestial space and became very much delighted.

सोप्रि नानाविध्योद्वानुका कृपा पुनः पुनः ।

मायामयाङ्गधानाजौ देवीं कपटयपिडतः ॥ 58 ॥

On the other hand, Mahisāsura, the hyppocrite Pundit, began to assume various magic forms and struck the Devi repeatedly.

चिछकाउपि चे तं पायं विशूलेन बलादूघि ।

ताउवामास तीक्षणेन क्रोभाउमाणलोचना ॥ ५९ ॥

The Devi Caṇḍika, then, infuriated and with eyes reddened, pierced violently the breast of that vicious Mahisa with Her sharp trident.

ताडितोउसी पपातोवयं मृछ्धीय मुहुतकम् ।

पुनक्थाय चामुगडा पढ़्नां वेगतादाउवत् ॥ 60 ॥

The Demon, then, struck by this trident, fell senseless on the ground; but got up in the next moment and kicked the Devi forcibly.

विनिर्हल पदाचार्तैज्ञास च मुडुर्मुंः ।

राज वरा द्राणी शब्द देवानां भयंकारकम् ॥ 61 ॥

That Great Asura, thus kicking the Devi, laughed repeatedly and bellowed so loudly that the Devas were all terrified with that noise.

ततो देबी सहसरां सुनाभं चक्रभुतम् ।

को कृत्वा जगादाछ्वे: संस्थितं महिषासुम् ॥ 62 ॥

पश्य चक्रं मदांधाछ्त तव कण्डनिकृतनम् ।

क्षणामातं स्थितो भूत्वा यमलोकं जजापुंगा ॥ 63 ॥

Then the Devi held aloft the brilliant discus of good axle and of thousand spokes and loudly spoke to the Asura in front: O Stupid! Look! This Cakra will sever your throat today; wait a moment, I am sending you instantly unto death.

इत्युक्त्वा दाणां चकं मुमोच जगदायिका ।

शिरशिक्तां रथोगेन दानवस्य तदा गे। ॥ 64 ॥

Saying this, the Divine Mother hurled the Cakra. Instantly that weapon severed the Dānava's head from his body.

सुस्वाव कहिरं चोषणं कण्ठनलाद्रिरेथां ।

गैरिकाछाणं प्रौड़ प्रवाहामिव नैईरम् ॥ 65 ॥

The hot streams of blood gushed out from his neck as the violent streams of water get out from mountains, coloured red with red sandstones.

कबन्धस्तस्य दैत्यस्य ध्यान वै पतितः क्षितौ ।

जयशब्द्धु देवानां बधून सुखवर्धनः ॥ 66 ॥

सिंहस्तवितिकलस्तत पलायनप्रपत्ताव ।

दानवान्भक्ष्यायामास क्षुधानां इव सङूरे ॥ 67 ॥

Book V Chapter XIX

The headless body of that Asura moved, to and fro, for a moment and then dropped on the ground. The loud acclamations of “Victory” were sounded to the great joy of the Devas. The very powerful lion began to devour the soldiers that were flying away, as if he was very hungry.

युते च महिषे कुरे दानवा भयपीडिताः ।

यूतशेषाङ्ग ये केचित्यालां ते ययुपूँ ॥ 68 ॥

O King! The wicked Mahisāsura thus slain, the Demons that remained alive were terrified and fled away, very much frightened, to Pātāla.

आनन्दं परमं जगमुदैवालत्मिमघापातते ।

मुनयो मानवाश्रेव चे धान्ये साधव: श्रित्ते ॥ 69 ॥

The Devas, Rşis, human beings and the other

saints on this earth were all extremely glad at the death of this wicked Demon.

चिष्डकाउजि रणं चलकता शुभे देतेश्व संभिता ।

देवास्तताययु: शीर्घं सतोतुकामा: सुखप्रदाम् ॥ 70 ॥

इति श्रीमद्दीभागवते महापुराणे पद्रकास्कन्ने

महिषासुर्वधो नामाहादसो5धाव: 11 18 11

The Bhagavati Caṇḍikā quitted the battle-field and waited in a holy place. Then the Devas came there with a desire to praise and chant hymns to the Devi, the Bestower of their happiness.

Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of the Dānava Mahisāsura in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter XIX

