CHAPTER XVII

On the Sandhyā and other Daily Practices

श्रीनारायण खाच

भिन्नवादा तु गायर्सी बह्राहत्यापणारिणी ।

अभिन्नवादा गायर्सी बह्राह्त्यां प्रयच्छिति ॥ 1 ॥

अच्छिन्पादागायजीवं कुर्बतिन वे द्विजा: ।

अधोगुखाश्र तिष्ठिति कल्याकोटिशातिन च ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: If one divides or separates the pādas while reciting or making Japam of the Gāyatrī, one is freed from the Brāhminicide, the sin of Brahmahatyā. But if one does so without breaking the pādas, i.e., repeats at one breath, then one incurs the sin of Brahmahatyā. Those Brāhmaṇas who do the Japam of the Gāyatrī without giving due pause to the pādas, suffer pains in hells with their heads downwards for one hundred Kalpas. O Gāyatrī! Thou art of one foot, of two feet, of three feet and of four feet. Thou art without foot, because Thou art not obtained. Salutation to Thy Fourth Foot beautiful and which is above the Trilokī (Rājas). This cannot obtain that.

सुंटैका घडोंकारा गायजी त्रिविधा मता ।

धर्मशक्षुपाणेषु इतिहासेषु सुजत 11 3 ||

पंचप्रणावसंयुक्तां जपेदित्यनुशासनम् ।

जपसंस्क्याध्यभानते यादो जयस्युरीवकः ॥ 4 ॥

स चित्रः परमो ज्ञः परं सायुज्यमानुप्रयात् ।

अन्यथा प्रजपेधासु स जपो विफलो भवेत् ॥ 5 ॥

Firstly, Gāyatrī is of three kinds: “Samputā,” “Ekomkārā,” and “Sadomkārā.” There is also the Gāyatrī, with five Prāṇavas, according to the

Dharma Śāstras and Purānas. There is something to be noted while muttering or making the japam of the Gāyatrī: Note how many lettered Gāyatrī you are going to repeat (make japam). When you have repeated one-eighth of that, repeat (make japam) the Turīya pāda of Gāyatrī (i.e., the fourth Pāda, the mantram parorajase Śāvadomā prāpata) etc., once and then complete repeating the Gāyatrī. If the Brāhmaṇa makes the Japam (the silent muttering) in the above way he gets himself united with Brahmā. Other modes of making the Japam do not bear any fruit. Om Gāyatryasyekapadī dvipadī Tripadī catuspādasī nahi padyase namaste Turyāya darśatāyapadāya paro Rajase Sābado mā prāpat. Gāyatrī is one-footed in the form of Trilokī, two-footed, the Trayī Vidyā from thy second foot; tripadī (all Prānas are thy third foot, catuspadi, as the Puruṣa apadi without any foot, Parorajase above the Rājas, the dust; asau-that; adah this not prāpat may obtain.

संयुटेका पडोंकारा भवेता क्रधरीतसाम् ।

गृहस्यो ब्रहधारी वा मोक्षार्थी तुरिया जयेत् ॥ 6 ॥

तुरीयपादो गायऋ: परोजसे सावदोम् ।

ध्यानमय प्रवक्ष्यामि जयं संगफलप्रदम् ॥ 7 ॥

The Yogis who are Ürdhvaretas (hold Brahmācaryam, continence) are to make Japam of the Samputā Gāyatrī (i.e., with Om). Gāyatrī with one pranava and as well the Gāyatrī with six pranavas. The householder Brahmacārī or those

Book XI Chapter XVII

who want mokṣa are to make Japam of Gāyatrī with Om prefixed. Those householders who affix Om to the Gāyatrī do not get the increase of their families.

The Turīya pāda (foot) of Gāyatrī is the mantra “Parorajase Sāvōomā prāpat.” (Bhād. up. v.14.7). Salutation to Thy beautiful Fourth Foot which is above the Triloki (Rājas). This cannot obtain that. The presiding deity of this mantra is Brahma. I am now speaking of the full Dhyānam (meditation) of this Brahmā so that the full fruit of the Japam (recitation) may be obtained.

हर्यि विकसितपरां साक़ीसोमानिविखं

प्रणवमयमधित्यं यस्य पीठं प्रकल्यम् ।

अचलपरमयुक्षं ज्योतिराकाशसारं

भवतु यम मुद्रेजरी सचिवदानंदरूप: ॥ 8 ॥

There is a full blown lotus in the heart; its form is like the Moon, Sun, and the Spark of Fire; i.e., of the nature of pranava and nothing else. This is the seat of the inconceivable Brahma. Think thus. Now on that seat is seated well the steady constant subtle Light, the essence of Akāśa, the everlasting existence, intelligence and bliss, the Brahma. May He increase my happiness

Note: Aum! Gyatryaysekapadi dvipadi, tripadi, catuspadasi, nahi padyase namaste turyāya darśatāya padāya parorajase, sāvado mārpārat. O Gāyatrī! Thou art of one foot (in the farm of Trilokī), of two feet (the Trayī vidya from Thy second foot) of three feet all Prāna, etc., are Thy third foot and of four feet (as the Purusa). Thou art without foot because Thou art not obtained. Salutation to Thy beautiful fourth foot which is above the Trilokī (Rājas). This cannot obtain that.

प्रिगुल्योर्नि सुरिभमद्रमालां च लिंगकम् ।

अंबुजं च महामुजामिति सत प्रदर्शित् ॥ 9 ॥

Now I am speaking of the Mudrā of the Turiyā Gāyatrī: (1) Triśūla, (2) Yoni, (3) Surabhi, (4) Akṣamālā, (5) Liṅga, (6) Padma and (7) Mahāmudrā. These seven Mudrās are to be shewn.

या संख्या सेव गायत्री सचिवदानंदरूषिणी ।

भक्त्या तां बाहाणो नित्यं पुजयेच्च नेपत्तः ॥ 10 ॥

ध्यातस्य पूजां कुर्वित पचिभिधोघोचराकः ।

What is Sandhyā, that is Gāyatrī; there is no difference whatsoever between the two. The two are one and the same. Both are of the nature of Existence, Intelligence and Bliss. The Brāhmaṇas would daily worship Her and bow down before Her with greatest devotion and reverence. After the Dhyānam, first worship Her with five upacāras or offerings. Thus:

लं पुर्थित्याने गंधपर्यापि नमो नमः ॥ 11 ॥

ह्माकाशायाने पुर्थ चार्थापि नमो नमः ।

यं च वायात्माने पूर्ण चार्थापि ततो वदेत् ॥ 12 ॥

रं च वह्यात्माने दीपपर्यापि ततो वदेत् ।

वममृतात्मने तस्पै नैदेश्यापि चापयेत् ॥ 13 ॥

यं रं लं वं हर्मिति च पुण्याजलिषमापयेत् ।

एवं पूर्ण तिथायाय चानो मुत्रा: प्रदर्शयेत् ॥ 14 ॥

Om lam prithvyātmane gandham, arpayāmi namo namah. Om Ham ākāśātmane puspam arpayāmi namo namah. Om ram Vahnyātmane dipam arpayāmi namo namah. Aum vam amrtātmane naivedyam arpayāmi namo namah. Om yam ram lam vam ham puspānjalim arpayāmi namo namah. Thus worshipping with five upacāras, you must shew Mudrās to the Devi.

ध्यायेत् मनसा देदीं मंजमुचारयेच्छनैः ।

न कंपयेच्छिटीशां दंतावेब प्रकाशयेत् ॥ 15 ॥

विधिनाथोतरुलगामद्विशणितिव वा ।

दशवारमशक्तो वा नातो न्यूनं कदाचन ॥ 16 ॥

Then meditate on the Form of the Gāyatrī mentally and slowly repeat the Gāyatrī. Do not shake head, neck and while making japam, do not show your teeth. According to due rules repeat the Gāyatrī one hundred and eight times, or twenty-eight times. When unable, repeat ten times; not less than that.

तत उद्धासयेदेवीमुतमेल्यनुवाकतः ।

न गायर्जी जपेद्विद्वासलमये कर्पंचन ॥ 17 ॥

यतः सानिमुखी प्रोक्तेत्याहुः केचिन्दमद्धयः ।

सुराभिन्निरणूरं च कुमी योगिश्व फंकजम् ॥ 18 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Then raise the Gāyatrī placed before on the heart (seat) by the mantra “Gāyatrasyai kapadi Divpadiī, etc., and then bid farewell to Her after bowing down to Her and repeating the mantra “Omuttame Šikhare Devi bhumyām parvata mūrdhani Brāhmaṇa ebhyobhya anujñātā Gaccha Devi yathāsukham” on the highest top of the mountain summit in carth (i.e., on the Meru mountain) dwells the goddess Gāyatrī. Being pleased with Thy worshippers go back, O Devi! to Thy abode as it pleaseth Thee.” (See page 110, The Daily Practices of the Hindus.)

फिलीं निवाणेकं चैव जपानेउही प्रदर्शयेत् ।

वद्धस्पदघर्धे स्वार्थजनवर्जितम् ॥ 19 ॥

The wise men never mutter nor recite the Gāyatrī mantra within the water. For the Maharṣis say that the Gāyatrī is fire-faced (agnimukhi). After the farewell shew again the following mudrās: Surabhi Jñāna, Śūrpa, Kūrma, Yoni, Padma, Liṅga and Nirvāna Mudrās.

तत्वर्षे क्षयन्तं देयि कश्यपग्रियावतिन ।

गायजीतर्णं चातः कर्णीयं महापुने ॥ 20 ॥

Then address thus: “O Devi! O Thou who speakest pleasant to Kaśyapa! O Gāyatrī! Whatever syllables I have missed to utter in making Japam, whatever vowels and consonants are incorrectly pronounced, I ask Thy pardon for all my above faults.” O Nārada! Next one ought to give peace offerings to the Gāyatrī Devi.

भागक्रीईं आछागां विश्वाग्रिकक्षे: मुतः ।

सविता देवता प्रोक्ता विनियोगा तर्पे ॥ 21 ॥

The Chanda of Gāyatrī Tarpaṇam (peace offerings to Gāyatrī) is Gāyatrī; the Rsi is Viśvāmitra; Savitā is the Devatā; its application (Niyoga) is in the peace offerings.

भूरित्युक्ता च ऋर्यद्वरुषं तर्पायाम च ।

भूव इत्येतनुक्ला च यजुर्वेदायो वदेत् ॥ 22 ॥

स्वधाईत समुक्ला च सामवेदे समुच्येत् ।

मम इत्येततुकल्पोतःधववेदं च तपयेत् ॥ 23 ॥

जन: पदांत इतिहासपुराणमितीरयेत् ।

ततः सर्वांगमं चैव पुरभं तर्पायिति च ॥ 24 ॥

सत्वं च सत्यलोकाखं पुरुषं तर्पायिति च ।

उद्यपूर्णैलैकपुरुभं तर्पायिति ततो वदेत् ॥ 25 ॥

भूवक्षीत भुवलैकपुरुभं तर्पायिति च ।

स्वः स्वर्गैलैकपुरुभं तर्पायिति ततः परम् ॥ 26 ॥

उद्भूरेकाद्वां नाम गायत्रीं तर्पायिति च ।

भुवो हिवादुं गायत्री तर्पायितीत कौतैन्दि ॥ 27 ॥

स्वश्र प्रियादं गायत्री तर्पायिति तते बदेत् ।

उद्भूभूवश स्वश्छीन गायत्री च चतुष्यद्। ॥ 28 ॥

"Om Bhūḥ Rgvedapurūsam tarpayāmi."

"Om Bhuvaḥ Yajurvedapurūsam tarpayāmi."

"Om Svah Sāmaveda puruṣam tarpayāmi."

"Om Mahah Atharvaveda puruṣam tarpayāmi."

"Om Janah Itihāsapurāna puruṣam tarpayāmi."

"Om Tapah Sarvāgama puruṣam tarpayāmi."

"Om Satyam Satyaloka puruṣam tarpayāmi."

"Om Bhūḥ bhūrloka puruṣam tarpayāmi."

"Om Bhuvah bhuvoloka puruṣam tarpayāmi."

"Om Svah varloka puruṣam tarpayāmi."

"Om Bhūh rekapadām Gāyatrīm tarpayāmi."

"Om Bhuvo dvityapadām Gāyatrīm tarpayāmi."

"Om Svastripadām Gāyatrim tarpayāmi."

"Om Bhūrbhuvah Svaścatuspadām Gāyatrīm tarpayāmi."

उसर्ष तैव गायर्षी साविर्यो च सरस्वतीम् ।

वेदानां मातरं पृद्वीमाजं चैव तु कोशिकीम् ॥ 29 ॥

संकृति वै सर्वोविति गायर्षी तर्पीय वदेत् ।

तर्पणांत च शन्यर्थं जातवेदसभारीम् ॥ 30 ॥

मानस्तोकौत मंत्र च शान्त्यं प्रपतेस्पृधीः ।

ततो5पि अंबकों मंत्र: शांतयर्थ: परिकीर्तितः ॥ 31 ॥

तच्छोरिति मंत्रं च जपेच्छत्थयीये तु ।

अतो देया इरि द्वाण्यां सर्वागार्यर्नं चेत्त् ॥ 32 ॥

स्वोनापृथिविमंत्रेण भूम्ये कुर्गतृणगामकम् ।

यथाविधि च गोत्रावीनुच्चेरैद्धिकसनमः ॥ 33 ॥

Pronouncing these, offer the Tarpanams. Next add the word Tarpayāmi to each of the following words “Uṣasim, Gāyatrim, Sāvitrīm, Sarasvatim Vedamātaram, Prthvim, Ajām, Kauśikīm, Sāmkṛtim, Savajitīm, etc.,” and offer Tarpanams.

Book XI Chapter XVII

After the Tarpañam is over, offer the peace-chantings, (Śāntivāri) repeating the following mantras.

"Om Jātavedase sunavāma roman, etc."

"Om Mānastoka, etc."

"Om Tryambakam Yajāmahe, etc."

"Om Tacchamyoh, etc."

Then touch all the parts of your bodies, repeating the two mantra, “Om atodeva, etc.” And reciting the mantram “Svonā Prthivī,” bow down to the earth, after repeating one’s name, Gotra, etc.

पर्व विवानं संध्याया: प्रात:काले प्रवर्तितम् ।

संध्याकर्मं सम्यापानेउप्यानिक्रोशे स्वयं हुने। ॥ 34  ॥

पंचायतनपूजां च ततः कुयोल्समाहितः ।

शिवां शिवां गणपातिं सूर्य विद्युं त्वाजर्येचित् ॥ ३ ५ ॥

O Nārada! Thus the rules of the morning Sandhyā are prescribed. Doing works so far, bid farewell to the above-mentioned Gāyatrī. Next finishing the Agnihotra Homa sacrifice, worship the five Devatās, Śivā, Śiva, Ganeśa, Sūrya and Viṣṇu.

पोक्षेण तु सूफेन व्याहूला वा समाहितः ।

मूलमंत्रेण वा कुर्याद्धीघ्र ते इति मन्तः ॥ ३६ ॥

भवानी तु वेजेमध्ये तक्षेणान्यां तु माधवम् ।

आनन्येवां गिरितानावं गणेहां रक्षसां दिहिंग ॥ ३७ ॥

Worship by the Purusa Sūkta mantra, or by Hrim mantra, or by Vyahrti mantra or by Śriscate Lakṣmīśca, etc., place Bhavānī in the centre; Viṣṇu in the north east corner, Śiva in the south-east corner; Gangeśa in the south-west corner, and the Sun in the north-west corner; and then worship them. While offering worship with the sixteen offerings, worship by repeating sixteen mantras.

वाय्यायमचैवत्स्यैमिति देवास्थितिकमः ।

भोडाणुनप्तारांक्षे घोडशर्भहोरचः ॥ 38 ॥

As there is no other act more merit-giving than the worship of the Devi, so the Devi should first of all be worshipped. Then worship in due order the five Devatās placed in five positions.

देवीमध्यचं पुत्तो यजंद्याननुकमात ।

न देवीपूजनानुयमधिकं क्वचिद्धीक्षते ॥ 39 ॥

अतएव तु संधायुं संध्योपारिः श्रुतिंरिता ।

नाक्षतिरचंदीक्षुणं न तुलस्या गणेश्वरम् ॥ 40 ॥

दूर्वाधिपिनिर्वेदवृर्गा केतकैनं महेश्वरम् ।

मल्लिकाजातिकुकुमं कुटजं पनर्स तथा ॥ 41 ॥

क्रिस्णेक बकुले कंद लोध्रं तु करायीकरम् ।

शिशाप्ताराजितापुर्ण बंधुकागस्वयुपयेक ॥ 42 ॥

मदर्न सिंदुवारं च पालाशकुर्णमं तथा ।

दुवाकृतं खिल्वदले कुणमंजरिका तथा ॥ 43 ॥

शललकीमाध्वीर्ण्यमकंदारुप्यकम् ।

केतकों कर्फिकारं च कर्देवकुर्णा तथा ॥ 44 ॥

पुत्रागधफकतद्वृधिकाकागरो तथा ।

एवमादीन पुर्णाणि देवीघ्रिकावणि च ॥ 45 ॥

As the worship of the Devi is the chief object, so in the three Sandhyās, the worship of the Sandhyā Devi is approved of by the Śrutis. Never worship Viṣṇu with rice; Gānṣaś with Tulasī leaves; the Devi Durgā with Durba grass and Śiva with Ketakī flower. The under-mentioned flowers are pleasing to the Devi: Mallikā, Jāti, Kutaja, Panasa, Palāsa, Vakula, Lodha, Karavīra, Śimśapa, Aparājītā, Bandhūka, Vaka, Madanta, Sindhuvāra, Palāśa, Durbhā, Sallakī, Mādhavī, Arka, Mandāra, Ketakī, Karnikāra, Kadamba, Lotus, Campaka, Yūthikā, Tagara, etc.

गुगमुलस्य भवेद्वृदी दीप: स्यातिलेलतः ।

कृतेन्थे देवतापूजां ततो मूलमनुं जयेत ॥ 46 ॥

एवं पूजां समाधेव वेदायमां चरेद्वुधः ।

ततः स्वदूच्चा कुर्जिते पोव्यार्णांक्षीयान्यम् ।

तृतीयादिन्यभाने तु नियमेन विश्वज्णः ॥ 47 ॥

इति श्रीमहैर्षिगावते महापुराणे एकावशकंधे

सप्तवरीअधार्यः ॥ 17 7 ॥

Offer incenses Guggul, Dhūpa and the light of the Til oil and finish the worship. Then repeat the principal (male) mantra (make Japam). Thus finishing the work, study the Vedas in the second quarter of the next day; and in the third quarter of that day feed father, mother and other dependent relatives, with money earned by one's own self according to the traditions of one's family.

Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the description of Sandhyā and other daily practices in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

