CHAPTER VIII

On the Characteristics of the Gunas

ब्रह्मोचाच

सर्गोंदयं कक्षित्तसात यनुष्ठोर्ज त्वायोरुना ।

गुणानां रूपसंख्यां वै शुण्यैक्रामानस: ॥ १ ॥

Brahmā said: O Nārada! I have described to you what you asked me just now about the creation of this universe, etc. Now hear with attention the colour of the three qualities, as well their configuration and how they are seen to exist.

सन्त्यं श्रीत्याकं त्रेयं सुखात्यीतिसमुखवः ।

आरवं च तथा सत्यं शीचं शब्दा क्षमा धृति: ॥ 2 ॥

अनुकंपा तथा लज्ञा शान्ति: सन्तोष एच ॥

एतैः सत्त्वसीत्तिश्र आयते निश्रला सदा ॥ 3 ॥

The Sattva Guna is the source of pleasure and happiness; and when happiness comes, everthing seems delighting. When integrity, truthfulness, cleanliness, faith, forgiveness, fortitude, mercy, bashfulness, peace and contentment arise in one's heart, know certainly that there has arisen firmly the Sattva Gunas in that man.

श्रोतर्ण तथा सच्चं धर्मे श्रितिकरः सदा ।

सच्छूद्रोत्यादकं नित्यमसच्छूद्रानिवारकम् ॥ 4 ॥

The colour of the Sattva quality is white; it makes one always like religion, and have faith towards good purposes and discard one's tendencies towards bad objects.

सात्चिकी राजसी चैव तामसी च तथापग ।

अद्धातु त्रिविधा प्रोक्ता मुनिनिस्तत्वदर्शिधि: ॥ 5 ॥

The Rsis, the secers of truth classify Śraddhā (faith) under the three headings: Sāttvik, Rājasik and Tāmasik.

राकर्ण राव: प्रोक्तमप्रीतिकारमद्धुतम् ।

अभीतिरु:ख्योगलाढलवेल सुनिश्छिता ॥ 6 ॥

The quality Rajas is of red colour, wonderful and is not pleasant; it is the source of all troubles; there is no doubt in this.

प्रदोषोद्र तथा ग्रौहो मत्सरः सत्मप एव च ।

उक्तकी च तथा नित्रा श्रद्धा तव च राजसी ॥ 7 ॥

मानो मदतमा यावों रजसा किल जायते ।

प्रत्येतवं राजस्वतीर्तैर्वर्णोष्ठ विद्वर्णेः ॥ 8 ॥

The intelligent should understand that Rajas has certainly arisen in him, when his mind is filled with hatred, enmity, quarrelsome feeling, pride, stupification, uneasiness, sleeplessness, want of faith, egoism, vanity and arrogance.

कृष्णवर्ण तम प्रोक्ते मोहनं च विषादकृत् ।

आलस्यं च तथाड़ानां निजा दैन्यं भयं तथा ॥ 9 ॥

विषाद्धेडि कार्णयं कोटिल्यं रोष एव च ।

वैघयां वातिनातिरित्यं परदोषानुदर्शनम् ॥ 10 ॥

प्रत्येलन्तं तमस्त्वेतेतैक्षणै: सर्वथा बुधैः ।

तामस्या अघदया वृक्ते परतायोपपादकम् ॥ 11 ॥

The quality Tamas is of black colour. From Tamas arises laziness, ignorance, sleep, poverty, fear, quarrels, miserliness, insincerity, anger, aberration of intellect, violent atheism, and finding fault with others. The wise should think that Tamas has overpowered him when the above qualities are found to possess him. When this Tamas quality is attended with the Tāmasī faith, then it becomes the source of pain to others.

सस्त्व प्रकाशयित्यां निर्यंतयं रजः सदा ।

संहर्तेयं तमः कामं जनेन शुभमिच्छता ॥ 12 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

The well wishes of Self should manifest in themselves the Sattva qualities, control the Rājasic qualities, and destroy the Tāmasic qualities.

अन्योभायिभावाछेते विर्वयंति परमपरम् ।

तथाउन्योन्याश्या: सर्वे न तिष्ठिति निराश्या: ॥ 13 ॥

These three qualities are always found to remain intermingled with one another, and each of them has always an inherent tendency to overcome the others; and therefore they are always, as it were, at war with one another. They never have a separate existence from one another.

सत्तं न केवलं ब्वापि न रजो न तमसला ।

मिलिताशु सदा सर्वे तेनायोन्याश्रा: स्मृता ॥ 14 ॥

Never is found any where only one Sattva quality to the exclusion of others, the Rajas and Tamas ; similar is the case with the Rajas or Tamas. They remain intermingled and depend on one another.

अन्योयिष्यान्त्वैव विस्तारं कथायामहम् ।

शृणु नगर यज्ञाला मुच्यते भववन्यान्त ।। 15 ॥

O Nārada! Now hear, in detail, which two qualities remain in twins, knowing which, one is freed from this ocean of the transmigration of existence.

सन्तेड़ोत्र न कर्तेब्यो जातेल्युक्ति मया वचः ।

जातं तदनुभुतं यचरित्गतं फले सति ॥ १६ ॥

I have realised these; therefore you ought not to have any uncertainties on these points. The reality of these is especially felt, when it is really understood and when its effects begin to manifest themselves.

श्वजाणादूर्नाव्बे स्वपटोव महामते ।

संस्कानारुभवाच्यैव परित्रातं न जायते ॥ 17 ॥

O high-minded! No one is able to realise these at once; it requires to be heard, and then meditated upon. It also depends on one's natural capability and merits, due to the past actions.

भुतं तीर्थे परिवयं च श्रद्धोत्पत्रा च राजसी ।

निर्नतस्तत तीर्थे वै दूर्ध चैव यथाश्रुतम् ॥ १ ८ ॥

स्नातस्तत्र कृतं कृत्वं दर्त दानं च राजसम् ।

स्थितस्तत्र क्रियकालां रजोगुणासमावुतः ॥ १९ ॥

राग्येश्वात्र निर्मुक्तः: कामकोधीयस्मावुतः ।

पुनेवे गृहं प्राणतो यथापूर्व नवा शिक्षतः ॥ 20 ॥

श्रुतं च नानुपुतं वै तेन तीर्थं मनीश्व ।

न प्राप्ते च फलं यस्माद्वशुतं विद्धि नारद ॥ 21 ॥

Suppose one hears of the sacred places of pilgrimages and is filled with the Rājasic devotion. He goes out to those places and sees what he had heard before. There he performs his ablutions, makes offerings and the Rājasic gifts, stays there for some time; but all this he does under the influence of the Rājasic quality. And when he returns home, he finds himself not free from lust, anger, love and hatred; he remains the same that he was before. Therefore, in this case, O Nārada! a man hears but he does not realize the purifying effects of those holy places. O best of Munis! And when he does not find any benefit from the holy place of pilgrimage, it is equivalent to his not at all hearing of the place.

नियापचं वर्त विद्धि तीर्थेय मुनिसत्तम ।

कृषेः फलं यथा लोके नियज्ञात्रस्य भक्षगण् ॥ 22 ॥

O best of Munis! the effect of visiting the sacred places of pilgrimages is then said to accrue to any individual, when he becomes freed from his sins, just as the fruit of cultivating fields is then said to occur, when the cultivator gets the ripened harvest out of his labour and enjoys the produce of his fields.

पापस्ट्रविकारा ये कामकोधायय: परे ।

लोपो मोहत्सला सुभा द्रेयो रागसताय मदः ॥ 23 ॥

O Nārada! Lust, anger, covetousness, delusion, thirst, hatred, love, vanity, malice, jealousy, non-forgiveness, unrest all these indicate that there is sin; and until these are purged out of one's body and mind, man lives in sin. If the visiting of the sacred places of pilgrimages does not enable one to overcome the above passions, then the labours in going to those places are in vain i.e. those labours merely are the results just as the toil only undergone

Book III Chapter VIII

by the cultivator is his only result, and is not met with any reward when there is no harvest at all.

अस्येष्योःसामोउशीत: पाणान्योतिन नारत ।

न निर्वातिनि देहानुत तावल्यपयुतो नरः ॥ 24 ॥

कृते तीर्थे यद्वेतिनि देहात्र निर्गतिनि चेत् ।

निष्कलः श्रम एवैकः कर्षकस्य यथा तथा ॥ 25 ॥

श्रभाणपीक्षिति क्षेत्र कृष्टा भृमि: सुदुर्गेति ।

उर्ने बीज महर्षे च हिता शून्तिद्वाहा ॥ 26 ॥

अहोरात्र परिसिल्ही रक्षणार्थ फलोसुक : ।

काले सुभन्तु हेमने वने व्याणादिपिभूगण् ॥ 27 ॥

पक्षितं शतपे: सर्वे निराणश्रकु तप: ।

तद्धतीर्थम: पुर्र कष्टदो न फलप्रदः ॥ 28 ॥

Lo! The cultivator takes hard labour to clear his fields and cultivate the hard soil, he then sows the valuable seeds, because this is considered as doing good. Next, in expectation of the harvest, he undergoes a good deal of pains, day and night, to protect his fields and goes down to sleep, in the cold season, in the forest surrounded by tigers and other dangerous animals; but alas! locusts coming eat away and destroy all the crops, to the utter disappointment of the cultivator. All his labours are spent in vain. So, O Nārada! The labour taken by one in going to the holy places yields pain, and pain only, instead of success and happiness.

सत्त्वं समुक्तं जातं प्रवृद्धं शास्त्रर्जनात् ।

वैराग्यं तत्कर्तं जातं तामासांथैवु नारदः ॥ 29 ॥

प्रसहाधिपचार्येव तर्जतसामसी उपे ।

रज: समुक्तं जातं प्रवृत्तं लोपभयोगतः ॥ 30 ॥

तन्तथाधिपचार्येव तमः सच्चे तथा उपे ।

तमस्थोधोक्तं भृत्वा प्रवृद्धे मोहयोगतः ॥ 31 ॥

तत्सच्चरजसी चोपे संगम्याधिपचार्यति ।

वित्तरं कवयामच्य तयाधिपचारीति चे ॥ 32 ॥

When the Sattva quality grows in abundance, as a consequence of reading the Vedānta and the other Śāstras, dispassion comes towards the Rājasic and the Tāmasic qualities and things, and the Sattva quality overpowers the Rajas and Tamas. Similarly, when the Rājasic quality grows in abundance, as a natural consequence of greed and avarice, then it

overpowers Sattva and Tamas; so by delusion, when the Tāmasic quality grows in abundance, it overpowers the Sattva and the Rājasic qualities. O Nārada! I will now speak to you, in detail, about the overpowering of these qualities by one another.

यदा सत्तं प्रवृद्धं वै मतिधर्मं स्थिता तदा ।

न त्रिवतयिते बहाग्वां रजतन्म:समुद्वम्य ।। ३३ ॥

अर्थसत्त्वसमुद्धूतं गृह्वाति च न चान्यथा ।

अनायासकृतं चार्थं धर्मे व्रतं च चाऊछिति ॥ 34 ॥

सात्विकेवेथे भोगेयु कामं वै कुकते तदा ।

राजसेनु न मोक्षार्थ तामसेषु पुनः कुतः ॥ 35 ॥

When the Sattva quality grows in preponderance, the individual rests in religious ideas and things; it no more thinks of those external things, the products of the Rajas and Tamas qualities. Rather it wants to enjoy the Sättvik things; wealth, religious affairs, sacrifices that can be acquired or performed without any trouble. Then that individual yearns after salvation and renounces his pursuit after the Räjasic and Tāmasic objects.

एवं जित्वा रजः पूर्व ततशु तमसे जयः ।

सत्तच्चं पुत्र केवलं पुत्र तथा प्रवाति निर्मितम् ॥ 36 ॥

Thus, O Nārada! first try to conquer the Rajas and then the Tamas; then the Sativa becomes pure.

यदा रज प्रपूर्वे तै व्यक्त्वा धर्पान्यानतान् ।

अन्यधाकुक्ते धर्माध्युद्धां प्राप्त तु राजसीम् ॥ 37 ॥

When the Rājasic quality grows in preponderance, the individual imbibes the Rājasic faith, abandons his own Sanātan Dharma (settled eternal religion) and practises against his religious instructions.

राजसदार्थसंवृद्धिस्तथा भोगसृत्त ज्ञसः ।

सन्तं विगर्भितं तेन तमसह्वाधि निग्रहः ॥ 38 ॥

Under the Rājasic propensities, one is eager to amass wealth and enjoy the Rājasic things. The Rajas drives away the Satva and curbs the Tamas.

यदा तमो विवृद्धूं स्यादुक्तटं सवधपूव है ।

तदा वेदे हन विषायो धर्मशास्ते तदैव च ॥ 39 ॥

श्रद्धो च तामसी प्राय करोते च धनाययम् ।

ग्रौहं सर्वैक कुक्ते न शान्तिमिधाख्छिति ॥ 40 ॥

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

जित्या सत्त्वजड़ीय क्रोधिनो दुमैति: शठः ।

वर्तते कामचारेण भावेषु विततेषु च ॥ 41 ॥

Nārada! So, when the Tāmasic quality grows in preponderance, the faith in the Vedas and in religious Śāstras entirely disappears. Imbibing the Tāmasic faith, the individual squanders away his wealth and is always engaged in quarrels, and petty feelings, envy, violence and never enjoy space. The individual with the Tāmasic quality in excess overpowers the Rājasic and Sātvik qualities and becomes angry, wicked, and a great cheat and does everything, as he likes, without any regards to his superiors.

एकं सत्तं न भवति रजक्षेकं तमतसा ।

सहैवाश्रित्य वर्तै नृगा मिथुनधारिणः ॥ 4 2 ॥

Nārada! Thus you see that, of these three qualities, no one can remain entirely alone, free from the other qualities. These remain always in twos or threes.

रजो विज्ञा न सच्चं स्याद्रकः सच्चं विज्ञा वक्षित् ।

तमो विज्ञा न चैवैते वर्तन्ते पुरुषर्षभः ॥ 4 3 ॥

तमसाध्यां विहितीं तु केवलं न कदाचन ।

सर्वे पिबुनुभभंगी गुणा: कार्यान्तरेषु वे ॥ 4 4 ॥

The Sattva can never exist without the Rajas; the Rajas can never exist without the Tamas; and these two qualities can never exist without Tamas. Again Tamas cannot exist without Rajas and Sattva. These qualities act and react always in twos or threes.

अन्योर्यस्त्रितः सर्वे निर्घुते न विवोजिताः ।

अन्योर्यजनकाश्रय वातः प्रस्वधर्मिणः ॥ 4 5 ॥

सत्तं कदाचिच्च रजस्तमसी जनयत्युत ।

कदाचितु रजः सत्ततमसी जनयत्पर्य ॥ 4 6 ॥

कदाचितु तमः सत्त्वरसी जनयत्पुः ।

जनयंत्येवमयोन्यं मृत्यिंडश्र घटं यथा ॥ 47 ॥

They never exist separately; they live in pairs or threes and are the originators of each other; these qualities are of the nature of procreating things; in other words, Sattva originates the Rajas or Tamas; again the Rajas originates sometimes Sattva and Tamas. Again the Tamas sometimes originates Sattva and Rajas. Thus they generate each other as the earthen pots and earth are their mutual causes.

वृद्धिद्धासते गुणा कामान्वोधयन्ति परस्यम् ।

देवदत्तविष्णुमिप्रयज्ञदत्तादयो यथा ॥ 48 ॥

यथा क्लीषु पुरुषश्रैव भिवृष्टी च परस्यम् ।

तथा गुणा: समायाति युभमाचं परस्यम् ॥ 49 ॥

Deva Datta, Viṣṇu Mitra, and Yajña Datta these three unitedly perform any action, so these three qualities united reside in the Buddhi, (intellect) of the Jivas and generate their sense perceptions.

Just as the husband and wife form into a couple, the qualities get into couples.

रजसो मिवुने सच्चं सच्चय मिवुने रजः ।

उभे ते सच्चरजसी तमसे मिवुने विवुः ॥ 50 ॥

The Satva with Rajas forms the couple Rajas Sattva; So, Sattva Rajas forms another couple, where the Sattva predominates. So, Sattva and Rajas forms each with Tamas the other couples.

नात्द उवाच

इन्येतत्कथितं विश्रा गुणाक्षपन्तमम् ।

श्रुत्वाध्येतस एवाहं ततो.पुष्प्छं वितामहम् ॥ 51 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभाग्यते महापुरणो तृतीवस्कन्धे

अष्टधोरध्यः ॥ 52 ॥

Nārada said: “O Dvaipāyana! Hearing thus about these three qualities from my father, I asked him again these questions.”

Thus ends the Eighth Chapter of the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam containing the description of the Gunas, of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

