CHAPTER XXVIII

On Incidents Connected with Navarătri

जननेजय उवाच

कयं राणेम तच्वीर्णं ब्रतं देल्या सुखप्रदम् ।

राथ पष्टः कथं सोउप कथं सीता हत् पुनः ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: O Muni! How did Rāmcandra celebrate the Devi's Pūjā, that leads to happiness? Who was He! And how was stolen away His Sita? How was He deprived of His kingdom? Please satisfy me by narrating all these incidents to me.

व्यास उवाच

राजा दूराशः श्रीमानवोध्याधियपितः पुरा ।

सुर्येवैशप्राशीदेवबाहाणपुजकः ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! There lived, in days of yore, in the city of Āyodhyā, a prosperous king of the solar dynasty named Daśaratha, He always worshiped the Devas and Brāhmaṇas.

घनवारो जजिस तस्य पुत्रा लोकेषु विश्रुतः ।

तामलक्ष्मणातृब्ना भरतक्षिति नामतः ॥ 3 ॥

राजः प्रियकरा सर्वे सद्गा गुणकल्पतः ।

कोसल्यावा: सुत्तो राम कैकेव्या भरतः स्मृतः ॥ 4 ॥

सुप्रियन्तन्यो जातो यमली ह्री मनोहरी ।

ते जाता वे किंशोगेश्व धनुष्विणधरा: किल ॥ 5 ॥

He had four celebrated sons Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa, Bharata and Śatrughna. These four sons were equally learned and beautiful and they always did actions agreeable to the king. Of these, Rāmacandra was the son of the Queen Kauśalyā, Bharata was the son of Kaikeyi, and the good looking Lakṣmana and Śatrughna were the twin sons of Sumitrā. While young, they learned the art of archery and began to play with bows and arrows in their hands.

सुनवः कृतसंस्करा घपतेः सुखवधँकाः ।

कोशिकेन तदारअराव प्रार्थितो रघुनन्दनः ॥ ६ ॥

राघवं मखाखर्षा सूनुं पोडणवार्षिकम् ।

तस्मै सेठोयं ददी रायं कौशिकाय सलक्ष्मणम् ॥ ७ ॥

Thus educated and purified, the four sons began to give delight more and more to the king; one day the Maharṣi Vísvāmitra came to Ayodhyā and asked from the king Dāśaratha the help of his son Rāmacandra for the protection of his sacrificial ceremonies. The king could not cancel the Vísvāmitra's request and sent with him Rāma, accompanied by Lakṣmana.

तो समेलय पुनि मार्गे जममतुशाकदर्जनौ ।

ताटका निह्ता मार्गे राक्षसी घोरदर्जना ॥ ८ ॥

रामोपैकेन बाणेन मुनिनां दुःखदा सदा ।

यज्ञक्षा कृता तत्र सुबाहुनिंतः शठः ॥ ९ ॥

मारीचोउध मृतमायो निखिलो बाणवेगतः ।

एवं कृतवा महत्कर्मे यज्ञस्य परिश्रभणम् ॥ १ ० ॥

गताते मिथिलां सर्वे गरानक्षणकौशिकाः ।

अहल्या मोचिता शापाधिष्यापा से कृताउङताना । १ १ ॥

The lovely Rāma and Lakṣāmana accompanied the Muni on his way back. There lived a terrible looking Rāksaṣī, named Tāḍakā, in a forest on their way, who used to give great troubles to the ascetics; and Rāma killed her with only one arrow. Next he killed Subāhu and shot arrows at another night-wanderer Mārīca and made him senseless, almost dead and threw him at a great distance and thus saved Viśvāmitra from all the obstacles troubling him in his sacrificial ceremonies. Thus fulfilling the great work, protecting the sacrificial ceremonies,

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa and the Muni Kauśika, the three, started for the kingdom of Mithilā. On his way, Rāma Candra rescued Ahalyā from the curse that she was suffering from.

विदेशनरो तो तु जमतुर्भिना सह ।

वर्भज शिवचार्च च जनकेन परणीकृतम् ॥ 12 ॥

उपयेम ततः सीतां जानकी च चागंगजाम्।

तक्षमाणा ददौ राजा युप्रीमकां तथापिंलम् ॥ 13 ॥

At last the two brothers, accompanied by the Muni, reached the city Videhanagar. Just at this time the king Janaka of Ayodhyā made a vow to give in marriage Sītā to anybody who will be able to break the bow of Śiva; Rāma broke that bow into two and married Sītā, born of Lakṣmī's parts. The king Janaka gave in marriage to Lakṣmana his own daughter Urmilā.

कृणतेजसुते कन्य प्रापतृषतिरावुधी ।

तथा भरतागुञ्ची सुगीली सृष्नतक्षणी ॥ १४ ॥

The good and auspicious Bharata and Satrughna married respectively Māṇḍavi and Śrutakirti, the two daughter of Kuśadhvaja.

एवं दारिकासतेंधां घाणुणां चाभवघृषु ।

चतुर्णा मिथिलायां तु वयाविधि धियानतः ॥ 15 ॥

O king! Thus, in the great city of Mithilā, the four brothers performed their marriage ceremonies, according to the prescribed rules and rites.

राज्यमोर्थ सुतं दूद्वा राजा द्वाराश्रस्तां ।

रायवाय युंर दुतुं मनश्रके निजाय वे ॥ १६ ॥

The king Daśaratha, then seeing Rāma well qualified to take charge of the kingdom, proposed to instal him on the throne of Ayodhyā.

सभात्र वित्तिं दूद्वा केकेनी पूर्वक्रतिपती ।

चरी सम्यार्थयामास भर्तारं ब्यरातिंनम् ॥ 17 ॥

The queen Kaikeyi, seeing that various articles were being collected for the installation of Rāma, asked for the two boons, promised before, from her husband Daśaratha, who was completely under her control.

राज्यं सुताये चैकेन भरताय महात्मने ।

रायाय वनवासं च चतुर्दंस समास्तथा ॥ 18 ॥

The first request was her own son Bharata's becoming the king of Ayodhyā; and the second request was the banishing of Rāma to the forest for fourteen years.

रामसुं बचनातस्याः सीतालक्षमणसंयुतः ।

जगाम दण्डकारण्यं राक्सैरभवेशितम् ॥ 19 ॥

Thus Rāmacandra went accompanied by Sītā and Lakṣmana to the Dandakā forest, frequented by the Rāksasas.

राज दारण्यः पुरविरहेश प्रपीडितः ।

जही प्राणानंमेयाता पूर्वेशापमनुस्मरन्त् ॥ 20 ॥

The high souled king Dásaratha felt very much due to bereavement of his son, remembered the curse given to him by Andhaka Muni and left his mortal coil.

भरतः पितरं दूर्वा मृतं मातुकृतेन वै ।

राज्यमूदं न ज्याह भातुः प्रियचिचर्शीया ॥ २१ ॥

Bharata, seeing that his father died solely on account of his mother, refrained from becoming the king of Ayodhyā, the prosperous city and wanted the welfare of his brother Rāma.

पशुवट्यां वसन रामो रावणावरजां बने ।

गुर्णायां विकरां वे चकारातिस्मतानुगम ॥ 22 ॥

Rāmacandra went to the forest Pañcavaṭī. One day the youngest sister of Rāvaṇa, named Sūrpanakhā became very passionate and came to Rāma; whereon Rāmacandra disfigured her by cutting off her nose and ears.

खारदास्यस्तं तंद्ववा छिड़नासां निशाचराः ।

चक्रः संग्राममतुलं रायेणामिततेजसा ॥ 23 ॥

Seeing her nose thus cut away, the Rāksasas Khara, Dūṣana, and others fought very hard against the powerful Rāmacandra.

स जवान खार्त्रिंश दैत्यानतिवलात्वितान् ।

मुनीनां हितमान्च्छन्न तमः सत्यपात्मः ॥ 24 ॥

The truly powerful Rāma, killed Khara, Dūṣana and all other powerful Rāksaṣas, for the welfare of the Munis.

गत्वा शूर्पणेखा लढ़ी खादूषणधातनम् ।

दृषिता कथयामास रावणाय च रायवात् ॥ 25 ॥

Book III Chapter XXVIII

Then Šūrpanakkāh went to Laṅkā and informed Rāvana of her nose having been cut and of the death of Khara, Dūṣana and others.

सोये शुवा विजारों तं जातः क्रोयशः खलः ।

जगाम रथमाहु मारीचस्यामं तदा ॥ 26 ॥

The wicked and malignant Rāvana, hearing of their death, became filled with anger and, mounting on a chariot, quickly went to the forest of Mārica.

कृत्वा हेममृगं नेतुं प्रेषयामास राजणः ।

सीताप्रलोभनायाय मायात्यिनमसंभवम् ॥ 27 ॥

Rāvaṇa expressed his desire to take away Sitā; so ordered that magician Mārica to assume the form of a golden deer and go to Rāma and entice away.

सोउद हेममुगो भूत्वा सीतातृष्टिधधं गतः ।

मायायी चातिचित्रांश्रग्रवलमतिनके ॥ 28 ॥

The magician Mārica assumed the form of a golden deer and reached the sight of Jānakī. Then that variously spotted deer began to move about near the Sitā Devi.

तं दृष्ट्या जानकी प्राह्र तायर्वे दैवनोदिता ।

यान्नियस्य कान्तेति स्वाधीनपतिक्या यथा ॥ 29 ॥

Looking at the beautiful golden splendour of the body of that golden deer, Sitā Devi, prompted as it were by the great Fate, spoke to Rāmacandra like other independent women “O Lord! Bring me the skin of the deer.”

अर्विवार्याचे राजापीर तत्र संस्थाया लक्ष्मणम् ।

सर्गं धनुरादाय ययौ मृगपदानुगः ॥ ३० ॥

Rāma too, not judging at all, as if it was the work of Destiny, asked Laksamana to remain there and protect Sitā, took hold of his bows and arrows and went after the deer.

सारड़़ीपि हरिं दृष्टवा मायाकोटिविगारदः ।

दूर्यादृष्यो बभूवाथ जगाम च वनंतारम् ॥ 31 ॥

Infinitely skilled in magic, the deer seeing Hari in the shape of Rāma sometimes came and sometimes came not his sight and travelled from one forest to another.

मत्वा हस्तगत राम कोधाकृष्टधनु पुनः ।

जयान चातितीक्षणेन शेरण कृविर्मे मृगम् ॥ 32 ॥

When Rāma saw that He had come very far away from His place, He became angry and drew his bow and shot sharp arrows at that deer, the transformed Mārica.

स हृतोर्भितिवाताने च्छोज भुगुर्भ:वित्तः ।

हा लक्ष्मण हृतोर्भसीति मावाठी नधरः खतः ॥ 33 ॥

The deceitful conjuror Rāksasa, being thus shot very violently and pained intensely, cried out “O brother Lakṣmana! I am killed” and breathed his last.

स शब्दस्तुमुलस्तावज्ञानक्या संश्रुतस्त्वा ।

राघवस्येति सा मत्वा दीना देवमवबीत् ॥ 34 ॥

गच्छ लक्ष्मण तूर्णं त्वं हतोउसी सृष्ठनन्दनः ।

त्वामाह्यति सीमिते साहाय्यं कुरु सत्यम् ॥ 35 ॥

This loud awful cry reached Jānaki's ears. She took that voice for Rāma's voice and told to Lakṣmaṇa in a grieved tone "Lakṣmaṇa, go quickly. I fear Rāma is killed; hear the voice "O Lakṣmaṇa! come quickly and deliver me" is calling you to go there".

तत्राह लक्ष्मण: सीतामंव रामवधादपि ।

नाहं गछ्छउढ़ मुक्ल्वा तामसहायामिहासे ॥ ३६ ॥

Lakṣmaṇa then replied “Mother! You are alone in this forest; therefore I cannot leave you thus, even if Rāmacandra be killed”.

आज्ञा मे राजयस्यात्र सिष्ठिति जनकात्मजे ।

तदतिकमर्षीतोड़े ने त्वजामि त्वांतिकम। ॥ ३ ७ ॥

“O daughter of Janaka! Rāma has ordered me to remain here. Now if I leave you and go elsewhere, then I will be charged with having disobeyed his order. Fearing that, I am unable to leave this place.

दूरं है रायबं दूरबा वने मायाविना किल ।

त्यक्ता त्वां नाधिणछामी पद्मेकं शुच्चित्मे ॥ ३ ८ ॥

"It seems to me, moreover, that some magician has carried Rāma away from here; I am therefore unable to move a step from here and leave you alone."

कुरु धैर्य न मन्येडा रामं हेतुं क्षमं श्रिष्टो ।

नाहं त्वकता गमिष्यामि विलंच्य रामभाषितम् ॥ 39 s ॥

"Hold patience; let me consider; I find no such man as can kill Rāma; I am unable to leave you by any means alone here had and to go away, disobeying Rāma's orders."

व्यास उवाच

रुदती सुदती गह् तं तत्व विधिनोदिता ।

अक्रा वचनं क्रूरं लक्ष्मणं शुभलक्षणम् ॥ 40 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Then the young wife of Rāma, having handsome teeth, began to cry aloud, fearfully, as if made to do so by Destiny, and uttered the cruel words to the pure Laksamāna.

अहं जानामि सीम्रिः सानुगरां च मां प्रति ।

प्रेरितं भरतेनेव मद्यमिह संगतम् ॥ 41 ॥

“O son of Sumitra \( ^{1} \) . I know why you are so much attached towards me? I know very well that you have been sent here by Bharata to accompany us simply to obtain me.

नाहं तथायिता नारी स्थैरीणी कुहकायम् ।

मृते रामे पति त्वां न कृतीपिछ्यापि कामतः ॥ 42 ॥

O vile Ksattriya, skilled in magic! I am not that sort of woman acting to my wanton will; never I will accept you of my will as my husband in case Śri Rāmacandra be dead.

नागायिष्यिति चेघ्रामो जीवितं संलवाम्यहम् ।

वित्ता तेन न जीवामि विधानु तु:वित्ता शुभम् ॥ 43 ॥

In case Śrī Rāma does not return, I will certainly commit suicide; without him I would by very much grieved and afflicted with sorrows; and I would not be able to hold on my life.

गच्छ चाति सीमिति न जानोई तवैल्पितम् ।

वव गत तेउष सीहाईं ज्येषे धर्मते किन ।। ४४ ॥

“O Saumitri! Whether you remain here or do not remain, I won’t request anything more to you; for I am quite unaware of your mind; but this much I like to say to you, where has your intimacy towards your religious elder brother now gone?”

तच्छुता वचनं तत्या लक्ष्मणो दीयानातः ।

प्रोवाच नक्दूकपठनु तां तावे जानकतमाज् ॥ 4 5 ॥

किमायाश्र सिंत्तिते वाक्यं मयि क्रूतरां किल ।

किं वदस्यविनिर्ः ते भावि जाने धिया हुहम् ॥ 4 6 ॥

Hearing thus the Sītā Devi's words, Lakṣmaṇa became exceedingly sorry; and, being suffocated with heaving sighs on account of the internal pain told Sītā "O! One born from without any womb! Why are you uttering so cruel and malignant words; I clearly see when you are speaking such unworthy words, that some great evil is sure to befall on you very soon."

इतुकुलता निर्वेयी वीरतां त्वल्वा प्रकटन्युगम् ।

अग्रजस्य ययौ एपयळ्छोकातृः पृथिवीपते ॥ 47 ॥

O king! Thus saying, the spirited Lakṣmana left Sītā and went out weeping very much, and, being very much afflicted with grief, traced the footsteps of his elder and went on in search of him.

गते३थ लक्ष्मणे तत रावण: कयदाकृति: ।

विश्वल्ये ततः कृत्वा प्रावेक्षत तत्वामे ॥ 48 ॥ ॥

When Lakṣmaṇa thus departed, Rāvaṇa entered into the hermitage in the guise of a deceitful beggar (Bhikṣu wearing a red garb).

जानकी तं चर्ति मत्वा दत्तार्थं वन्यामदारत् ।

वैश्यं समर्यामास राजाणाय दुरातने ॥ 49 ॥

Jānaki took that villain Rāvaṇa to be a Yogī and respectfully gave him offerings of worship and forest fruits.

तां पप्रच्छ स दुहात्या नम्पूर्वं मुदुस्यम् ।

काउसि पघपलगाथि वने चैकाकिभि ग्रिये ॥ 50 ॥

पिता कल्पेल यामोक भ्राता कः कः पतितल ।

मृदे वेकाकिडीचा ग्रास स्थिताउसि वरवर्गिभी ॥ 51 ॥

निर्जेने विविजे किं त्व सीमाहुं त्वमसि चिंरे ।

उठने मुनिपनिलैवंकन्यासमप्रभा ॥ 52 ॥

That villain asked Sītā humbly, in a gentle tone, "O beautiful! Your eyes are beautiful like Palāśa! Lotus leaves; therefore it seems that you are not an ordinary woman; how is it that you are here alone in a wild forest? O fair one! Who is your father? Who is your brother and who is your husband? Being such a beautiful one, how is it that you are in this forest here like an ordinary woman, dumfounded? O good looking one! You are worthy to live in a palace filled with nectar; why are you

Book III Chapter XXVIII

living, in this hovel, in this wild forest like an ordinary Muni's wife, when your beauty is shining in lustrous beams like a Deva girl?"

व्यास उवाच

इति तद्वचनं श्रुवा प्रत्युवाच विदेहजा ।

दिव्यं दिद्वा यति जाला मंदोद्वर्ग: पत्ति तदा ॥ 53 ॥

राजा द्वारशः श्रीमांशुवात्सल्य वे सुता ।

तेवां जयेः पतिर्मेंस्तर गयमानेति विश्रुतः ॥ 54 ॥

विवासितो5य केकेया कृते भुपपतिन वर ।

चतुद्विंग समा रामो वसतेउत्र सलक्षमणः ॥ 55 ॥

Vyāsa said: The daughter of Jānaki, hearing the words of Rāvaṇa, the husband of Mandodari, unfortunately took him to be a good Yogi and replied in the following way: “Perhaps you have heard that a prosperous king Daśaratha is reigning in Ayodhyā city. He has four sons; the eldest of these, Śrī Rāma Candra, is my husband. The king offered two boons to Kaikeyī; due to which Rāmacandra has been exiled in this forest and is with his brother Lakṣmana.

जनकस्य सुता चाहं सीतानाम्पिति विश्वुता ।

पंस्वता शैरं धनुः कामा रामोणहं विहाहिता ॥ 56 ॥

"I am the daughter of the King Janaka; my name is Sitā; Rāma Candra has broken the bow of Śiva and has married me."

तामबाहुखलेनाव सवामो निर्भया वने ।

काऊंनं मृगामालोक्य हन्तु मे निर्फातः पति: ॥ 57 ॥

Resting under his prowess of arms, I am resting here fearlessly in this wild forest; seeing a golden deer, he has gone out to kill that for me.

तक्षमणो पि पुनः शुत्वा रवं घातुर्गतोरुधाना ।

तयोबाहुबलादत्र निर्भयोत्रं वसामि मे ॥58॥

Laksmaṇa, too, hearing his voice has gone just now: O Yogi! I am living here depending on the strength of these two brothers."

मयेदं कथितं सर्वे सूत्ताने वन्यासके ।

तेउगाग्याहूर्णां ते वे कार्यस्थिति यथाविधि ॥ 59 ॥

Thus I have told you all about our living in this forest; shortly they will come and worship you duly.

यतित्वैण्यवरूपोसि तस्माचं पूजितो मया ।

आश्रमो विविचे घोरे कृतोसि रक्षामं कुले ॥ 60 ॥

तस्माचां परिपृष्णामि सर्वं बृहि ममघतः ।

कोंसि विद्यिडल्लेण विविचे तंखे समाततः ॥ 61 ॥

"The man who has controlled his passions and has become a Yati is like Viṣṇu incarnate; therefore I have worshipped you. O Yogi! Our Śārama is in the midst of this terrible forest, surrounded by Rāksaṣas. Therefore I am asking you how is it that you have been able to come here in this dress of Tridānḍi (a Sainnyāsi Yogi); please speak in the name of Truth before me."

रावण उवाच

लेकेशोड़ं मरालाक्रि श्रीमान्यदोरपिति: ।

त्वलृते तु कृतं रूपं मयेल्थं शोभनाकृते ॥ 62 ॥

Rāvaṇa said: “O askance looking one! I am the king of Lanka, the husband of Mandodari. O beautiful one! it is for you that I have put on this dress of Yati.

आगतोड़ं वराग्रेः भगिन्या भ्रेतितोउर चे ।

जनस्थाने हृते श्रुत्वा भातरी खरुपणी ॥ 63 ॥

“O beautiful! My two brothers Khara and Dūṣṇaṇa have been killed in this forest; and being urged by my sister I have come here.

अजौकुक नृप मां तं त्यस्तत तं मानुपं पतिन् ।

हताराज्य तगक्षीकि निर्वर्ते वनवासियम् ॥ 64 ॥

पटुतापी भव तं मे मन्दीदुपरि सुकुटम् ।

द्वासोउम तत लनकिं स्यामीय भव भामिने ॥ 65 ॥

"Now leave your this man-husband, residing in the forest as a pauper, devoid of fortune and wealth; and worship me as a husband. O fair one I am Rāvaṇa, the king of kings; you now become my lord."

जेतातई लोकपालानां पतानि तव पादयोः ।

करं गृहाण मेउद्ध त्वं सनायं कुक्र जानकि ॥ 66 ॥

“O daughter of Janaka! I am the lord of the Regents of the quarters; and yet I bow my head down to your lotus feet; better accept me and fulfil my desires today.

विता ते याचितः पूर्वे मया चै स्वकृतिजले ।

जनको मामुवारेत्यं मतपार्वंधी मया कृतः ॥ 6 7 ॥

रुद्रवापभ्याराईं संग्रापत्सु खवंवरे ।

मनो मे सचित्यं तार्वक्रमनं विश्रातुगून् ॥ 6 8 ॥

Formerly I asked of you from father, the king Janaka; but he then said, that he had laid a pledge, "Whoever will break the Śiva's bow will marry my daughter." The Bhagvān Rudra is my Guru; hence I feared to break his bow, and therefore I was not present in your Swayamvara. But from that time my mind is always thinking of you and is in a state of bereavement for you."

वनेत्र सचित्वा श्रुत्वा पूर्वानुरागफौहितः ।

आगतोउम्यवित्तावार्थि सफलं कुरु मे अम्प। ॥ 69 ॥

श्री श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयकक्ये अशाविशो५व्या:

O beautiful one! Hearing now that you are residing in this forest, I, impelled by my previous fascination for you, have now come hither; and you better now crown labour with success."

Thus ends the Twenty Eighth Chapter on the incidents connected with the Nava Rātri and the description of Rāmayānam in Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam of .18000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa in the Third Book.

Note: The story about the origin of Sitā Devī runs thus: Rāvaṇa, the king of Ceylon (Lankā) practised very severe austerities and got extraordinary powers. He brought the three worlds under his subjection, levied taxes from all. The Devas and all the other inhabitants of the several worlds paid their taxes, as imposed by Rāvaṇa. Rāvaṇa sent messengers to the Rūsī and the Munis, the ascetics, dwelling in forests and asked then to pay their taxes. The Rūsī replied that they had no property. But Rāvaṇa insisted. The Rūsī gave, them, blood, cutting their thighs, in a jar that was carried to Lankā. Rāvaṇa kept that jar under the custody of his

queen Mandodarī, and instructed her that the jar contained poison and that she should not eat that. Mandodarī, however, ate a portion of that, out of curiosity, and became pregnant and gave birth to a daughter. Fearing Rāvaṇa, she floated the jar with the daughter, in the ocean, which, floating through oceans and rivers, came and touched the lands of the King Janaka. The peasants while tilling, found that and took the girl to the king, who reared her as his daughter. Thus Sītā, born out of the blood of the Brāhmaṇas, took away subsequently the kingdom, life, and all of Rāvaṇa.

Another version is this: As before, the messenger advised the Munis to give something; otherwise Rāvaṇa would insist and put them to various troubles. So the Munis cut their thighs and gave blood as their tax, saying that that blood in the jar would cause ruin and desolation to the country where it will be kept. Rāvaṇa, hearing this, ordered the jar to be carried to the kingdom of the king Janaka, thus causing ruin to him. The jar was brought and placed in the fields of Janaka.

Now it happened that there was a very severe drought; rains were absolutely wanting; and a dire famine was imminent. The Brāhmīn Pundits informed the king that if the king and his wife ploughed themselves the fields, rains would fall. So the king with his wife did that, the king holding the plough and the queen holding the hand of the king. The foreend of the plough accidentally hit upon that jar, out of which came out Sītā Devī with two women Rddhi and Siddhi, waving chowries on her two sides. The two ladies disappeared and Sītā Devī looked like a girl. The king Janaka reared her, as if his daughter. Sītā Devī use to lift daily with her left hand the bow of Śiva, kept in the king's house, and daily worshipped that, and thus cleansed the place: Seeing this, the king Janaka pledged the vow that, whoever would break the Śiva's bow, would marry Sītā.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

