[Ch 5 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rsis said: "O son of Lomaharṣna, O Sūta; you have described to us how the eight Vasus, cursed by Vasisṭṭha, took their birth and how Bhismā was born.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣis said :-- “O son of Lomaharṣaṇa, O Sūta; you have described to us how the eight Vasus, cursed by Vaśiṣṭha, took their birth and how Bhīsma was born.

[Ch 5 Verse 2-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O knower of Dharma! Now describe to us in detail how the greatly religious king Śantanu married the auspicious Yojanagandhā, the chaste Satyavati, the mother of Vyāsa, knowing full well that she was a fisherman's daughter? O Suvrata! Remove our this doubt."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O knower of Dharma! Now describe to us in detail how the greatly religious king Śantanu married the auspicious Yojanagandhā, the chaste Satyavatī, the mother of Vyāsa, knowing full well that she was a fisherman’s daughter? O Suvrata! Remove our this doubt.

[Ch 5 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta then said: The sage king Śantanu always used to go to forests on hunting expedition, with his heart addicted to hunting buffaloes, deer and various other wild animals.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta then said :-- The sage king Śantanu always used to go to forests on hunting expeditions, with his heart addicted to hunting buffaloes, deer and various other wild animals.

[Ch 5 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus, for four years that king went out a hunting, with his son Bhīsma, deer and other wild animals and got the highest happiness as Mahādeva finds in company with Kārtikeya.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus, for four years that king went out a hunting, with his son Bhīsma, deer and other wild animals and got the highest happiness as Mahādeva finds in company with Kārtikeya.

[Ch 5 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once, on an occasion, while he was shooting arrows at rhinoceros and boar, etc., he went so far as to reach the banks of the Yamunā, the chief of the rivers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once, on an occasion, while he was shooting arrows at rhinoceros and boar, etc., he went so far as to reach a forest on the banks of the Yamunā, the chief of the rivers.

[Ch 5 Verse 7-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There he began to smell an excellent nice smell that could not be described in words; he tried to find out the source and wandered here and there, and on all sides of the forest; and thought that this enchanting smell was not that of Mandāra flowers, musk, Campaka nor that of Mālati nor that of Ketaki flowers; the air was blowing saturated with peculiar fragrant smell that he never experienced before.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There he began to smell an excellent nice smell that could not be described in words; he tried to find out the source and wandered here and there, and on all sides of the forest; and thought that this enchanting smell was not that of Mandāra flowers, musk, champaka nor that of Mālatī nor that of Ketaki flower; the air was blowing saturated with peculiar fragrant smell that he never experienced before.

[Ch 5 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus thinking of that smell king Śantanu, being enchanted with that, followed to its source in that forest.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus thinking of that smell, the king Śantanu, being enchanted with that, followed to its source in that forest.

[Ch 5 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At last he came to a spot on the banks of the Yamunā the chief of the rivers, where a very beautiful girl, calm and quiet and with feminine gestures and posture amorous, lovely but ill-clad, was sitting; and he found out that the above beautiful smell was coming out of her body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At last he came to a spot on the banks of the Yamunā the chief of the rivers, where a very beautiful girl, calm and quiet and with feminine gestures and posture amorous, lovely but ill-clad, was sitting; and he found out that the above beautiful smell was coming out of her body.

[Ch 5 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The form of the lady was extremely beautiful; the smell was very wonderful, and captivating the hearts of all; her age then entered to youth and she was very auspicious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The form of the lady was extremely beautiful; the smell was very wonderful, and captivating the hearts of all; her age then entered to youth and she was very auspicious.

[Ch 5 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king was greatly surprised and was eager to know who the lady was; whence she had come; whether she was a Deva girl, or a human or a Gandharva daughter or a Nāga daughter?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king was greatly surprised and was eager to know who the lady was; whence she had come; whether she was a Deva girl, or a human or a Gandarbha daughter or a Nāga daughter?

[Ch 5 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But, being unable to come to a definite conclusion and passionate, he remembered Ganga and asked that lady sitting on the bank of the Yumunā, thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► But, being unable to come to a definite conclusion and becoming passionate, he remembered Gaṅgā and asked that lady sitting on the bank of the Yumnā, thus :--

[Ch 5 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O dear! Who are you? Whose daughter are you? Why are you alone in this lovely forest? O beautiful eyed! Are you married? Or are you as yet unmarried? So answer to all these.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O dear! Who are you? Whose daughter are you? Why are you alone in this lovely forest? O beautiful eyed! Are you married? Or are you as yet unmarried? So answer to all these.

[Ch 5 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O lovely eyed one! Seeing your lovely enchanting form I am become extremely passionate. So, O dear! Describe in detail to me, who are you? and what do you intend to do?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► O lovely eyed one! Seeing your lovely enchanting form I am become extremely passionate. So, O dear! Describe in detail to me, who are you? and what do you intend to do?”

[Ch 5 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the king spoke thus: "The lotus eyed nice- teethed lady replied as follows: "O king! know me as a fisherman's daughter and I am completely under my father's command.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the king spoke thus the lotus eyed nice-teethed lady replied as follows :-- “O king! Know me as a fisherman’s daughter and I am completely under my father’s command.

[Ch 5 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king of kings! For Dharma's sake I carry ferry across this Yamunā river. My father has gone today to our house. O Master of wealth! Thus I have spoken truth to you."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king of kings! For Dharma’s sake I carry ferry across this Yumnā river. My father has gone to-day to our house. O Master of wealth! Thus I have spoken truth to you.”

[Ch 5 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying the lady desisted; the passionate king then spoke to him: "I am the foremost hero of the Kuru family; so choose me as your husband; then your this youth will not go in vain.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying the lady desisted; the passionate king then spoke to her :-- “I am the foremost hero of the Kuru family; so choose me as your husband; then your this youth will not go in vain.

[Ch 5 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O fawn-eyed one! I have no other wife existing; so you will be my legal wife. O Dear! Passion is giving much pain to me; therefore, I am now become your obedient servant for ever.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O fawn-eyed one! I have no other wife existing; so you will be my legal wife. O Dear! Passion is giving much pains to me; therefore I am now become your obedient servant for ever.

[Ch 5 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Beloved! My former dear wife has abandoned me and gone away; but I have not married since then. Now seeing you beautiful, in all respects, I cannot bring my mind under control."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Beloved! My former dear wife has abandoned me and gone away; but I have not married since then. Now seeing you beautiful, in all respects, I cannot bring my mind under control.”

[Ch 5 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these nectar-like beautiful words of the king, the sweet scented fisherman's daughter, though also turned extremely passionate, held patience and exclaimed:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these nectar-like beautiful words of the king, the sweet scented fisherman’s daughter, though also turned extremely passionate, held patience and exclaimed :--

[Ch 5 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O King! I also desire that which you have expressed; I am of opinion to act according to your wishes. But, what am I to do? I am not dependent. You are to know this. My father alone can give me in marriage to you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O king! I also desire that which you have expressed; I am of opinion to act according to your wishes. But, what am I to do? I am not dependent. You are to know this. My father alone can give me in marriage to you.

[Ch 5 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So better ask my father for me. Though I am a fisherman's daughter, still I am not wanton and wilful. I am always obedient to my father; if my father wills, you can marry me. And I will be obedient to you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So better ask my father for me. Though I am a fisherman’s daughter, still I am not wanton and wilful. I am always obedient to my father; if my father wills, you can marry me. And I will be obedient to you.

[Ch 5 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! The god of love is tormenting me, who is endowed with youth; he does not torment you so much. Still I must regard my family manners and customs coming down from ancient times. I must hold my patience."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! The god of love is tormenting me, who is endowed with youth; he does not torment you so much. Still I must regard my family manners and customs coming down from ancient times. I must hold my patience.”

[Ch 5 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: “Thus passionately pleased with these fascinating words of the lady, the king went to the fisherman’s house for the lady.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Thus passionately pleased with these fascinating words of the lady, the king went to the fisherman’s house for the lady.

[Ch 5 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the king coming, the fisherman was greatly bewildered and astonished and bowed with great devotion and said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the king coming, the fisherman was greatly bewildered and astonished and bowed down with great devotion and said :--

[Ch 5 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O King! I am Thy servant. I am blessed by Thy presence. O great King! Now be graciously pleased to order me the cause of Thy arrival.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O King! I am Thy servant. I am blessed by Thy presence. O great King! Now be graciously pleased to order me the cause of Thy arrival.”

[Ch 5 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing the fisherman's words, the King said: "O sinless one! This I tell you truly that if you give me your daughter in marriage I will certainly make her my legal wife."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing the fisherman’s words, the King said :-- “O sinless one! This I tell you truly that if you give me your daughter in marriage I will certainly make her my legal wife.”

[Ch 5 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The fisherman replied: “O king! What must be given ever, how can I say that is not to be given. Therefore, if Thou askest for my daughter, I will certainly give her to Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The fisherman replied :-- “O king! What must be given ever, how can I say that is not to be given. Therefore if Thou askest for my daughter, I will certainly give her to Thee.

[Ch 5 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But, O Great King! Thou wilt have to make her son, the king of Thy kingdom; no other son of Thine could be king after Thy absence."
NEW CORR ENG ──► But, O great King! Thou wilt have to make her son, the king of Thy kingdom; no other son of Thine could be king, after Thy absence.”

[Ch 5 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words of the fisherman, king Śantanu became very anxious. He remembered Gāngeya and could not speak anything.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these words of the fisherman, the king Śantanu became very anxious. He remembered Gāṅgeya and could not speak anything.

[Ch 5 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He, being sick with love anxiously returned home; but he abandoned bathing, fooding, sleeping, etc.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He, being sick with love anxiously returned home; but he abandoned bathing, fooding, sleeping, etc.

[Ch 5 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this, the son Gāngeya Bhīṣma whose vow was equal to that of the gods, marking that the king was being troubled with some thought, went to him and asked why he was anxious:
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this, the son Gāṅgeya Bhīsma whose vow was equal to that of the gods, marking that the king was being troubled with some thought, went to him and asked why he was anxious :--

[Ch 5 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O king! Say truly what is your anxiety; who is your enemy that is not conquered; whom do you want to bring under your control? O King! What use is there of having a son who does not understand the difficulties of his father, or does not try to remove these difficulties.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O king! Say truly what is your anxiety; who is your enemy that is not conquered; whom do you went to bring under your control? O king! What use is there of having a son who does not understand the difficulties of his father, or does not try to remove these difficulties.

[Ch 5 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► A son can be called really the son, who is born to repay the debts incurred by him in previous births; there is no manner of discussion in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► A son can be called really the son, who is born to repay the debts iñcurred by him in previous births; there is no manner of discussion in this.

[Ch 5 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See, Raghu's son Dāśarathī Rāma abandoned his kingdom under the orders of his father and repaired to Citrakūta forest with his brother Laksmana and wife Sitā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► See, Raghu’s son Dāsarathī Rām abandoned his kingdom under the orders of his father and repaired to Citrakūta forest with his brother Lakṣman and wife Sītā.

[Ch 5 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The son of king Harisācandra, Rohita, ready to repay the debt of his father and sold by his father worked as a servant at a Brāhmin's house.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The son of king Haris Candra, Rohīta, ready to repay the debt of his father and sold by his father, worked as a servant at a Brāhmaṇa’s house.

[Ch 5 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So the famous Śunaśepha, sold by his high souled father Ajigarta was tied for sacrifice in a sacrificial post; but he was afterwards freed by the Gādhi's son Viśvāmitra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So the famous Śunahśephah, sold by his high souled father Ajigarta was tied for sacrifice in a sacrificial post; but he was afterwards freed by the Gādhi’s son Viśvāmitra.

[Ch 5 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is well known that, in ancient days, the Jamadagni's son Paraśurāma cut off his mother's head under the orders of his father. He considered the father's words more important, and hence could do such an unjust act.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is well known that, in ancient days, the Jamadagni’s son Paraśurām cut off his mother’s head under the orders of his father. He considered the father’s words more important, and hence could do such an unjust act.

[Ch 5 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! This my body is at your disposal; I can certainly do what you order me to do. So say what am I to do? as long as I am living, you need not express any sorrow; if you permit, I will do what is even hardly practicable to do.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! This my body is at your disposal; I can certainly do what you order me to do. So say what am I to do? as long as I am living, you need not express any sorrow; if you permit, I will do what is even hardly practicable to do.

[Ch 5 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Say why you are anxious; I will remove that at once with this bow in my hand. If my body goes in carrying you mandate, know that your desire will be fructified.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Say why you are anxious; I will remove that at once with this bow in my hand. If my body goes in carrying your mandate know that your desire will be fructified.

[Ch 5 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Fie to that son, who, being capable, is averse to do what his father desires! What use is there in having a son who does not remove the cause of his father's anxiety?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► Fie to that son, who, being capable, is averse to do what his father desires! What use is there in having a son who does not remove the cause of his father’s anxiety?

[Ch 5 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing the words of the son, King Śāntanu felt much ashamed in his heart and said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing the words of the son, the king Śantanu felt much ashamed in his heart and said :--

[Ch 5 Verse 46-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O son! This is now my gravest care that you are my only son; besides you are a hero very powerful, honoured and never showing your back in battles; therefore, if, out of ill-luck you become dead in some battlefield, I will become isueless; under such circumstances what am I to do?
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O son! This is now my gravest care that you are my only son; besides you are a hero very powerful, honoured and never showing your back in battles; therefore, if, out of ill-luck you become dead in some battlefield, I will become issueless; under such circumstances what am I to do?

[Ch 5 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So, O son! My life is fruitless when I have got only one son; this is my gravest care; therefore I am sorry. O son! I have no other cares that I can mention to you."
NEW CORR ENG ──► So, O son! My life is fruitless when I have got only one son; this is my gravest care; therefore I am sorry. O son! I have no other cares that I can mention to you.”

[Ch 5 Verse 51-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words of the father, Gāngeya called the old ministers and said that the king was ashamed to speak out to me the real matter; so I ask you all to know exactly the king's cares and communicate them to me as they are; I can carry them out, without any hitch, then. At these Bhisma's words, the ministers went to the king, and learned the true cause, and spoke to Bhisma; learning this, he began to think what ought to be done.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these words of the father, Gāṅgeya called the old ministers and said that the king was too ashamed to speak out to me the real matter; so I ask you all to know exactly the king’s cares and communicate them to me as they are; I can carry them out, without any hitch, then. At these Bhīsma’s words, the ministers went to the king, and learned the true cause, and spoke to Bhīsma; learning this, he began to think what ought to be done.

[Ch 5 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Gangā's son Bhīśma, then, accompanied by the ministers, quickly went to the house of the fisherman, and with words of humility and affection, spoke: "O tormentor of foes! I pray to you to give your beautiful daughter in marriage to my father. Your daughter will be my mother and I will be her servant."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Gaṅgā’s son Bhīsma, then, accompanied by the ministers, quickly went to the house of the fisherman, and with words of humility and affection, spoke :-- “O tormentor of foes! I pray to you to give your beautiful daughter in marriage to my father. Your daughter will be my mother and I will be her servant.”

[Ch 5 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The fisherman, then, said: “O highly lucky prince! Then the king’s son will not be able to become king, in your presence; so kindly marry yourself my daughter.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The fisherman, then, said :-- “O highly lucky prince! Then the king’s son will not be able to become king, in your presence; so kindly marry yourself my daughter.”

[Ch 5 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this Bhīsma again said: “Let your daughter be my mother; I will never accept the kingdom. The son of your daughter will, no doubt, become king.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this Bhisma again said :-- Let your daughter be my mother; I will never accept the kingdom. The son of your daughter will, no doubt, become king.

[Ch 5 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The fisherman said: “I know your words are true; but if your son be powerful, he can take forcibly the kingdom for himself.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The fisherman said :-- “I know your words are true; but if your son be powerful, he can take forcibly the kingdom for himself.”

[Ch 5 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this Bhima again said: “O Sire! Know my words as true; I will never marry; from today, I have accepted this difficult vow.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this Bhīsma again said :-- “O Sire! Know my words as true; I will never marry; from to-day I have accepted this difficult vow.”

[Ch 5 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: Hearing this firm resolve of Bhīṣma; the fisherman gave over his beautiful daughter to king Śāntanu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Hearing this firm resolve of Bhīsma; the fisherman gave over his beautiful daughter to the king Śantanu.

[Ch 5 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus Śāntanu married dear Satyavati; but he was quite unaware of the wonderful birth of Vyāsa Deva. Thus ends the Fifth Chapter of the Second Book the marriage of Satyavati in the Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses. Šrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus Śantanu married the dear Satyavatī; but he was quite unaware of the wonderful birth of Vyāsa Deva. Thus ends the fifth Chapter of the second Skandha on the marriage of Satyavatī in the Mahāpurāṇa Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.
