CHAPTER V

On the Marriage of Stayavati

རྟམས ཆུན:

མུརྡོ་ མུརྡོ་ མུརྡོ་ མུརྡོ་ མུརྡོ་ མུ་

गाङ्गेयस्य तथोयस्ति: कथिता लोगहर्षो ॥ १ ॥

The Rsis said: "O son of Lomaharṣna, O Sūta; you have described to us how the eight Vasus, cursed by Vasisṭṭha, took their birth and how Bhismā was born.

माता व्यासस्य धर्मत्र नान्ता सत्यवती सती ।

कथं शैतनुना प्राप्ता भार्याँ नाथवती शुभा ॥ २ ॥

तन्माघवृव विस्तारं दाराणुप्री कर्थं वृत्ता ।

राज्ञा प्रभवरिज्ञि संगयं छिधि सुवत ॥ ३ ॥

O knower of Dharma! Now describe to us in detail how the greatly religious king Śantanu married the auspicious Yojanagandhā, the chaste Satyavati, the mother of Vyāsa, knowing full well

that she was a fisherman's daughter? O Suvrata! Remove our this doubt."

सूत उवाच

शन्तनुपंमि राजर्धिभूगयानितर: सदा ।

वंनं जगाम निधनवै मृगांश्र महिष्यानृत्त् ॥ ॥ ॥

Sūta then said: The sage king Śantanu always used to go to forests on hunting expedition, with his heart addicted to hunting buffaloes, deer and various other wild animals.

चत्वायैंत तु वर्षिण पुत्रेण सह भूपति ।

यमाण: सुखं प्राप कुमारेण यथा हरः ॥ 5 ॥

Thus, for four years that king went out a hunting, with his son Bhīsma, deer and other wild animals and got the highest happiness as Mahādeva finds in company with Kārtikeya.

एकदा विश्वप-वाणणान्विनिचन-वड्वाग्युकग्न।

स क्वा चिद्वनं प्रातः कार्लिंदी सरितां वत् ॥ 6 ॥

Once, on an occasion, while he was shooting arrows at rhinoceros and boar, etc., he went so far as to reach the banks of the Yamunā, the chief of the rivers.

महीपतितनिद्रैन्यमाजिद्वरोंधमुतनम् ।

तस्य प्रवयमविच्छसंचचार वर्न तदा ॥ 7 ॥

न मंदारस्य न्योउंयं मृगनाभिमदस्य न ।

चमकस्य न मालत्वा न केततव्या मनोहरः ॥ 8 ॥

कृतोउपयेति वायुर्वं मम प्राणायिभाहन: ॥ 9 ॥

There he began to smell an excellent nice smell that could not be described in words; he tried to find out the source and wandered here and there, and on all sides of the forest; and thought that this enchanting smell was not that of Mandāra flowers, musk, Campaka nor that of Mālati nor that of Ketaki flowers; the air was blowing saturated with peculiar fragrant smell that he never experienced before.

इति सछित्यमानोउसी बघाम वनमण्डलम् ।

मोहितो गम्बोभेन शनतुः पवनानुगः ॥ 10 ॥

Thus thinking of that smell king Śantanu, being enchanted with that, followed to its source in that forest.

स दर्दर्ग नदीतीरे संस्थितां चाफर्दर्गनाम् ।

शूज्ञार्यहितां कान्तां सुस्थितां मलिनांवराम् ॥ 11 ॥

दूद्वा तामसितापांगी विमिता: स महीपति: ।

अन्या देहस्य गीधोर्यमिति संगतानिश्रधः ॥ 12 ॥

At last he came to a spot on the banks of the Yamunā the chief of the rivers, where a very beautiful girl, calm and quiet and with feminine gestures and posture amorous, lovely but ill-clad, was sitting; and he found out that the above beautiful smell was coming out of her body.

तद्धूत रूपयमतीय सुन्दरं

तथैव गयोर्शिखललोकसंमतः ।

वयश तारूद्नवयीवन रुभं दृहेव

राज किल विमितो५वत् ॥ 13 ॥

The form of the lady was extremely beautiful;

the smell was very wonderful, and captivating the hearts of all; her age then entered to youth and she was very auspicious.

केवं कृती वा समुपगातअरुना

देवांगना वा किमु मानुषी वा ।

गन्धर्वेपूत्री किल नागकन्या जाने

कर्वं गन्धवर्ती नु कामिनीम् ॥ 14 ॥

The king was greatly surprised and was eager to know who the lady was; whence she had come; whether she was a Deva girl, or a human or a Gandharva daughter or a Nāga daughter?

सख्रित्य चैवं मनसा नृगोरसी

न निश्छयं प्राप यदा ततः स्थवम् ।

गड़ां स्मारन्मावर्ग गतोस्थ

पप्रच्छ कान्ता ततसंस्थांत च ॥ 15 ॥

But, being unable to come to a definite conclusion and passionate, he remembered Ganga and asked that lady sitting on the bank of the Yumunā, thus:

कासि प्रिय केस्य सुतासि

कस्माद्रि स्थिता तं विजने वरेगे ।

एकाकिनी किं बद चाफनेत्रे

विद्यातिता या न विवाहितासि ॥ 16 ॥

“O dear! Who are you? Whose daughter are you? Why are you alone in this lovely forest? O beautiful eyed! Are you married? Or are you as yet unmarried? So answer to all these.

संजातकामोउहमालनेरे नवां

वीक्ष्य कान्ता च मनोहारं च ।

ब्रहूँ पिंये यासि चिकोर्षिस

वं किं चेति सर्वे मय चिस्तरेण ॥ 17 ॥

O lovely eyed one! Seeing your lovely enchanting form I am become extremely passionate. So, O dear! Describe in detail to me, who are you? and what do you intend to do?"

इत्येवमुक्ता सुदती गुरेण

प्रोवाच तं सस्मितमंबुजेक्षणा ।

दाराशय पूर्याँ त्वमवेहि

राज-कन्या चितुः शासनसंस्थितां च ॥ १८ ॥

When the king spoke thus: "The lotus eyed nice-

teethed lady replied as follows: "O king! know me as a fisherman's daughter and I am completely under my father's command.

तरीमिमां धर्मानिमितमेव

संवाहयामीह जले नृप्रेँ ।

पिता गृहे मेउढा गतोस्ति कामं

सत्यं ब्रवीमथर्वपते तवाएं ॥ 19 ॥

O king of kings! For Dharma's sake I carry ferry across this Yamunā river. My father has gone today to our house. O Master of wealth! Thus I have spoken truth to you."

इत्येवमुक्त्वा विरराम बाला

कामातुरस्तां नृपतिवंभाये ।

कुकप्रवीरं करभं पांति तवं

यूथा न गच्छेनु यौवने ते ॥ 20 ॥

Thus saying the lady desisted; the passionate king then spoke to him: "I am the foremost hero of the Kuru family; so choose me as your husband; then your this youth will not go in vain.

न चास्ति पली माम वै द्वितीया

तं धर्मपनी भव मे भुगाश्रि ।

दासोरीस्थि तेउई खगगः सदैव

मनोभवत्पायति प्रिये माम ॥ 21 ॥

O fawn-eyed one! I have no other wife existing; so you will be my legal wife. O Dear! Passion is giving much pain to me; therefore, I am now become your obedient servant for ever.

गता प्रिया मां पीह्व्य कान्ता

नान्या वृताङर्ह विधुरोस्मि कान्ते ।

त्वां वांक्ष्य सर्वांवरवातिरमां

मनो है जातं विवर्ग मदीवम् ॥ 2 2 ॥

O Beloved! My former dear wife has abandoned me and gone away; but I have not married since then. Now seeing you beautiful, in all respects, I cannot bring my mind under control."

शुत्वासभृतात्यातरसं नृपस्य

वचोस्त्रियं खतु दासक-न्या ।

उवाच तं सात्चिकभावसुना

कृत्वास्त्रियैं नृपत सुगना ॥ 23 ॥

Hearing these nectar-like beautiful words of the

king, the sweet scented fisherman's daughter, though also turned extremely passionate, held patience and exclaimed:

यदाच्य राजनमय तत्वेय

मन्येउद्यमेतनु यथा वधरले ।

नास्मि स्वतन्ना त्वमवेहि कामं

दाता पिता मेधये तं लवागु ॥ 24 ॥

“O King! I also desire that which you have expressed; I am of opinion to act according to your wishes. But, what am I to do? I am not dependent. You are to know this. My father alone can give me in marriage to you.

न स्थैरिणी हास्यपि दाणुर्जी

पितृर्वींगेउई सततं चरापि ।

स चेहद्वाति प्रधितः पिता

मे गृहाण पार्थि वरणागसि मेतेहम ॥ 25 ॥

So better ask my father for me. Though I am a fisherman's daughter, still I am not wanton and wilful. I am always obedient to my father; if my father wills, you can marry me. And I will be obedient to you.

मनोसवस्त्यां नृप किं दुनौति

यथा पुनर्मा नवयोर्नां च ।

दुनेति ततापि हि रक्षणीया

धृति: कुलतावारप्यमारसु ॥ 26 ॥

O king! The god of love is tormenting me, who is endowed with youth; he does not torment you so much. Still I must regard my family manners and customs coming down from ancient times. I must hold my patience."

सूत उवाच

इत्याकार्यं चचस्तस्या नुपति: काममोहितः ।

गतो द्वाणपतेर्ह तस्या याचनद्रेतर्ह ॥ 27 ॥

Sūta said: “Thus passionately pleased with these fascinating words of the lady, the king went to the fisherman’s house for the lady.”

दूर्वा नुपतिशायन्तं द्वागोस्तिविरमयं गतः ।

प्रणामं नृपतेः कृत्वा कृतावृत्तिरभायन ॥ 28 ॥

Seeing the king coming, the fisherman was

Srimaddevibhagavatam

greatly bewildered and astonished and bowed with great devotion and said:

द्वारा उवाच

द्वासोस्ति तव घ्याल कृतार्थोई हतायगे ।

आजाँ देहि महाराज यद्यमिह चागमः ॥ 29 ॥

“O King! I am Thy servant. I am blessed by Thy presence. O great King! Now be graciously pleased to order me the cause of Thy arrival.”

राजोवाच

धर्मपत्नी करिष्यामि सुतामेतां तवानय ।

त्वया चेदीयते महां सत्यमेतदूक्रवीति ते ॥ ३० ॥

Hearing the fisherman's words, the King said: "O sinless one! This I tell you truly that if you give me your daughter in marriage I will certainly make her my legal wife."

द्वारा उवाच

कन्यारन्तं मदीयं चेच्चतं प्रार्थयसे नृय ।

दालव्यं तु प्रदास्यामि न लद्येच कदाचन ॥ 31 ॥

The fisherman replied: “O king! What must be given ever, how can I say that is not to be given. Therefore, if Thou askest for my daughter, I will certainly give her to Thee.

तत्सा: पुत्रो महाराज त्वदन्ते पृथिवीपिति ।

सर्वथा चाभिषेक्यो नाव्यः पुरसत्वेति व ॥ ३२ ॥

But, O Great King! Thou wilt have to make her son, the king of Thy kingdom; no other son of Thine could be king after Thy absence."

सूत उवाच

शुत्वा वाक्यं तु वाशस्य राजा चित्तानुरोभवत् ।

ग्रासुँयं मसता कृता नोवाच नुपतितस्तद ॥ 33 ॥

Hearing these words of the fisherman, king Śantanu became very anxious. He remembered Gāngeya and could not speak anything.

कामातुरो गृहं प्राणालिंशतिबेहो महीपति: ।

न सस्तौ बुधुजे नाथ न सुचाम गृहं गतः ॥ 34 ॥

He, being sick with love anxiously returned home; but he abandoned bathing, fooding, sleeping, etc.

चिन्तातुरं तु तं दुर्धया पुत्रो देवबतस्तदा ।

गत्वारूपछ्चमहीपालं तदसनोषाकारणम् ॥ 35 ॥

At this, the son Gāngeya Bhīṣma whose vow was equal to that of the gods, marking that the king was being troubled with some thought, went to him and asked why he was anxious:

दुर्जेयः कोर्सित शुजस्ने कोरोमि बरागं तव ।

का चिन्ता नृपगाईल सत्यं वद नृपोनम ॥ 36 ॥

"O king! Say truly what is your anxiety; who is your enemy that is not conquered; whom do you want to bring under your control? O King! What use is there of having a son who does not understand the difficulties of his father, or does not try to remove these difficulties.

किं तेन नातेन सुतेन राजनुःखं

न जानाति न नागयेऊः ।

प्रथां प्रतीतुं सुगुयगातोउसी

प्रागजनं नात विशालगाउसित ॥ 37 ॥

A son can be called really the son, who is born to repay the debts incurred by him in previous births; there is no manner of discussion in this.

विमुच्य राज्यं सुवन्द्रतोपि

ताताज्ञा द्वाराशियतु रामः ।

वर्न गतं लक्ष्मणाजानकीभ्यां

सहैव गैले किल विश्रकटम् ॥ 38 ॥

See, Raghu's son Dāśarathī Rāma abandoned his kingdom under the orders of his father and repaired to Citrakūta forest with his brother Laksmana and wife Sitā.

सुतो हरिश-हन्नुपस्य राजन्

यो गेहितश्रौत प्रसिद्धनामा ।

क्रीतोर्ध यशि विश्यणोशस्थ

दासापिते चिपगृहे तु नृनम् ॥ 39 ॥

The son of king Harisācandra, Rohita, ready to repay the debt of his father and sold by his father worked as a servant at a Brāhmin's house.

तथासंजिनार्त्य सुतो वरिष्ठो

नामा शूर्ज-शेग इति प्रसिद्धः।

क्रीतस्तु पित्रायय युपवद्धः

संगीचितो गाधिसुतेन पशत् ॥ 40 ॥

So the famous Śunaśepha, sold by his high souled father Ajigarta was tied for sacrifice in a sacrificial post; but he was afterwards freed by the Gādhi's son Viśvāmitra.

प्रियात्रया जामदान्येन पूर्व

छिड़ शिंगे मातृर्नित प्रसिद्धम् ।

अकामीयमाचारित च तेन

गुरोतृज्ञा च गरीयसी कृता ॥ 41 ॥

It is well known that, in ancient days, the Jamadagni's son Paraśurāma cut off his mother's head under the orders of his father. He considered the father's words more important, and hence could do such an unjust act.

इंड शर्गीत तब घृपते न

क्ष्मोदासि नूनं बेते किं करोम्यहम् ।

न शोचरीयं मायि वर्तमाने-

उद्यासाध्यमर्थ प्रतिपाद्यम्यद: ॥ 42 ॥

O king! This my body is at your disposal; I can certainly do what you order me to do. So say what am I to do? as long as I am living, you need not express any sorrow; if you permit, I will do what is even hardly practicable to do.

प्रश्रूहि राजस्वत काजस्ति चिन्ता

निवारायामध्य धनुर्गृतीला ।

हेदेन मे चेच्चरिताथता वा

भवल्योभा भवतिश्राकीषि ॥ 43 ॥

O king! Say why you are anxious; I will remove that at once with this bow in my hand. If my body goes in carrying you mandate, know that your desire will be fructified.

धिन्के सुतं च: विगुरोषित्तार्थ

क्ष्मोर्षि सत्र प्रतियादयेध: ।

ज्ञानेन किं तेन सुतेन कामं

वितृनं चिन्तां हि समुद्धोहः ॥ 44 ॥

Fie to that son, who, being capable, is averse to do what his father desires! What use is there in having a son who does not remove the cause of his father's anxiety?"

सूत उवाच

निश्योति वचस्तस्थ पुत्र-य प्रोतनुर्पिणः ।

तज्जमानस्तु मनसा तमाह त्वितिं सुतम् ॥ 45 ॥

Hearing the words of the son, King Śāntanu felt much ashamed in his heart and said:

राजोवाच

चित्ता मे महती पुत्र यस्त्वमेकोप्रति से सुतः ।

शूरोअतिवलवान्मी संग्रामेवधराक्रधुःः ॥ 46 ॥

एकावतवस्य मे तात युद्धेते जीवितं कित् ।

मृते त्विय घुंरे क्वाथि कि कंकौमि नित्रावः ॥ 47 ॥

एषा मे महती चित्ना तेनाता दुःवित्तोस्यसहम् ।

नान्याचितानास्तिति से पुत्र यां ततायो घदायम्हम् ॥ 48 ॥

“O son! This is now my gravest care that you are my only son; besides you are a hero very powerful, honoured and never showing your back in battles; therefore, if, out of ill-luck you become dead in some battlefield, I will become isueless; under such circumstances what am I to do?

सूत उवाच

तदाक्षयां या गृहेयो मान्रवृद्धानपृष्ठत ।

न मां वदिति भृपातोल लज्जयाद्ध परिप्लुतः ॥ 49 ॥

वित्त वार्तां पुर्यचादु पृष्टवा यूयं विनिश्यात् ।

सत्यं बवैतु मां सर्वे तत्कारोभि निराकुलः ॥ 50 ॥

So, O son! My life is fruitless when I have got only one son; this is my gravest care; therefore I am sorry. O son! I have no other cares that I can mention to you."

तच्छूला ते नृयं गत्वा संविदाय च कारणम् ।

गश्गसुर्विविदायैस्तु गाज्ञेसर्वद्धिनन्तय् ॥ 51 ॥

सहिस्तैर्जगामगु दाशस्य सर्वन्त तथा ।

प्रेमपूर्वप्रावेदे विनयो जाह्वीसुतः ॥ 52 ॥

Hearing these words of the father, Gāngeya called the old ministers and said that the king was ashamed to speak out to me the real matter; so I ask you all to know exactly the king's cares and communicate them to me as they are; I can carry them out, without any hitch, then. At these Bhisma's words, the ministers went to the king, and learned the true cause, and spoke to Bhisma; learning this, he began to think what ought to be done.

गाङ्गेय उवाच

पिंत्रे देहि सुत्तां तेउदा प्रार्थयामि सुपाध्यामणि ।

माता मेउसु सुतेयं ते दासोउमध्ययाः परन्ता ॥ 53 ॥

Gangā's son Bhīśma, then, accompanied by the ministers, quickly went to the house of the fisherman, and with words of humility and affection, spoke: "O tormentor of foes! I pray to you to give your beautiful daughter in marriage to my father. Your daughter will be my mother and I will be her servant."

दाश उचाच

त्वं गृहाण महाभाग पत्नी कुक नृपात्मज ।

पुत्रोउस्या न भवेद्राजा वर्तीमाने त्वयितीत वे ॥ 54 ॥

The fisherman, then, said: “O highly lucky prince! Then the king’s son will not be able to become king, in your presence; so kindly marry yourself my daughter.”

गाङ्गेय उवाच

मातेवं मम दुरोशी राज्यं नैव क्रोम्यहम् ।

युओंस्या सर्वेथा राज्यं कार्वित्यान न संशयः ॥ 55 ॥

At this Bhīsma again said: “Let your daughter be my mother; I will never accept the kingdom. The son of your daughter will, no doubt, become king.”

द्वारा उवाच

सत्यं वाक्यं मया जातं पुत्रसें बलवान्भयेत् ।

सोर्पि राज्यं बलात्रूनं गृहीयादिति निश्रायः ॥ 56 ॥

The fisherman said: “I know your words are true; but if your son be powerful, he can take forcibly the kingdom for himself.”

गाङ्गेय उवाच

न दाससंघं नूनं कारिथामि हि सर्वथा ।

सत्यं मे वचनं तत मवा भीमं चतं कृतम् ॥ 57 ॥

At this Bhima again said: “O Sire! Know my words as true; I will never marry; from today, I have accepted this difficult vow.”

सूत उवाच

एवं कृतां प्रतिजां तु निशम्य झपजीवकः ।

ददौ सच्यतां तस्ये गोउे सर्वागीणेभानम् ॥ 58 ॥

Sūta said: Hearing this firm resolve of Bhīṣma; the fisherman gave over his beautiful daughter to king Śāntanu.

अनेन विधायिन तेन वृता सत्यवतीं प्रिया ।

न जानाति परं जन्य व्यासस्य नृपसत्तमः ॥ 59 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणो द्वितीयकन्धे

पड़मोउध्याः: 115 ॥

Thus Śāntanu married dear Satyavati; but he was quite unaware of the wonderful birth of Vyāsa Deva.

Thus ends the Fifth Chapter of the Second

Book the marriage of Satyavati in the

Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

of 18,000 verses.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

