CHAPTER I

On Svāyambhuva Manu

नारंद उवाच

नारायण धराधार सर्वपालनकारण ।

भवतोदीरितं देरीचरितं पायनाशनम् ॥ १ ॥

मन्त्रतेषु सर्वेषु सा देरीं यत्स्वरूपिणी ।

यदाकारेण कुरते प्रापूर्णं महेंग्वरी ॥ 2 ॥

तातः सर्वन्सामख्याहि देरी महातन्यमिश्रिताम् ।

Nārada said: O Nārāyaṇa! O Thou, the Supporter of this whole world! The Preserver of all! Thou hast described the glorious characters of the Devi, that take away all the sins. Kindly describe now to me the several forms that the Devi assumed in every Manvantara in this world as well as Her Divine Greatness.

यथा च येन येनेह पुजिता संस्तुतापि हि ॥ ३ ॥

मनोराथान्यूरवति भक्तानां भक्तबलला ।

तञः शुकृष्याणानां देदीचितमुभामम् ॥ ४ ॥

वर्णयस्य कृपासिन्यो येनानोति सुखं महत् ।

O Thou, full of mercy! Describe also how and by whom She was worshipped and praised; how She, so kind to the devotees, having been thus pleased, fulfilled their desires. I am very eager to hear these, the very best and blissful characters of the Devi.

शीनारायण उवाच

आकर्षीय महर्षे त्वं चरितं पापनाशनम् ॥ ५ ॥

भक्तानां भक्तिजनं महासंपतिकारकम् ।

जगाधोनिभृतेजा बहुा लोकपितामाः ॥ 6 ॥

Śrī Nārāyaṇa said: Hear O Maharṣi! The glories and greatness of the Devi Bhagavatī leading to the devotion of the devotees, capable of giving all sorts of wealth and destroying all sins. From the navel lotus of Viṣṇu, the holder of the Cakra (discus), was born Brahmā, the Creator of this universe, the great Energetic One, and the Grand Sire of all the worlds.

अविरासीजाभिवाहेदेवस्य चिक्षणः ।

स चतुमुखं आसाठा प्रातुभार्वं महामते ॥ ७ ॥

The four faced Brahmā, on being born, produced from His mind Svāyambhava Manu and his wife Śatarūpā, the embodiment of all virtues.

मनुं स्वायंभुंवे नाम जवायमास मानसात् ।

स मानसो मनुः पुत्रो ब्रह्मणः परमेऊनः ॥ 8 ॥

शतकपां च तत्पत्यीं जउे धार्यस्वीक्षणीम् ।

स मनुः क्षीरसिधोक्ष तोरे परपवावे ॥ 9 ॥

देवीमाराध्यामास महाभायकल्पज्यम् ।

मूर्ति च मुन्मवीं तस्या विधाय पृथिवीपति: ॥ 10 ॥

For this very reason, Svāyambhuna Manu has been known as the mind-born son of Brahmā. Svāyambhuna Manu got from Brahmā the task to create and multiply; he made an earthen image of the Devi Bhagavatī, the Bestower of all fortunes, on the beach of the sanctifying Kṣīra Samudra (ocean of milk) and he engaged himself in worshipping Her and began to repeat the principal mystic mantra of Vāgbhava (the Deity of Speech).

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

उपासतेभ्म तां देवीं वापभवं स जपन्र रहः ।

निराहारो जिततश्वासो नियममतकाश्रितः ॥ ११ ॥

एकपादेन संतितछ्न धरायामिनर्ग स्थितः ।

गतवर्ष जिताः कामः क्रोधस्तेन महात्मना ॥ १२ ॥

Thus engaged in worship, Svāyambhuna Maunu conquered by and by his breath and food and observed Yama, Niyama and other vows and became lean and thin. For one hundred years he remained standing always on one leg and became successful on controlling his six passions lust, anger etc.

भजे स्थावरातं देल्याशुराणी चिंतयन् हृदि ।

तस्य तत्परमा देवी प्रापुभूर्ता जान्यमी ॥ १३ ॥

उवाच चचनं दिव्यं वरं वरय भूपिये ।

तत आनंदजनकं श्रुत्वा वायकं महीपति: ॥ १४ ॥

वरयामास तान् इत्यन्त्यु वरान्यावतुर्वभान् ।

He meditated on the feet of that Aśdyā Sakti (the Primordial Śakti) so much that he became inert like a vegetable or mineral matter. By his Tapas the Devi, the World Mother appeared before him and said: "O King! Ask divine boons from Me." Hearing these joyous words, the King wanted his long cherished and heart-felt boon, so very rare to the Devas.

मनुरुवाच

जय देव विशालाशिंत्र जय सर्वान्तरस्थिते ॥ 15 ॥

मान्ये पूज्ये जगद्धात्रि सर्वेभगतमंगले ।

त्वकट्याश्वालोकेन पचभुः सुजते जगत् ॥ 16 ॥

वैकुंतः पालयत्वेह हरः संहर्ते क्षणात् ।

Manu said: “O Large eyed Devi! Victory to Thee, residing in the hearts of all! O Thou honoured, worshipped! O Thou the Upholders of the world! O Thou, the Auspicious of all auspicious! By Thy Gracious Look, it is that the Lotus born has been able to create the worlds; Viṣṇu is perserving and Rudra Deva is destroying in minute.

श्वीरपित्तिलोक्याशु शासको भवदात्रया ॥ 17 ॥

प्राणिज: शिक्षायनेव दंदेन न परेतात् ।

यादसामधिधः पाशी पालनं मात्रुशामपि ॥ 18 ॥

कृते स कुबोरीउप निर्थीनां पतिरवध्यः ।

जुतभुट् नैक्छंते वायुरीशानः शेष एव च ॥ 19 ॥

By Thy command it that Indra, the Lord of Śacī, has got the charge of controlling the three Lokas; and Yama, the Lord of the departed is awarding fruits and punishing according, to their merits or demerits, the deceased ones, O Mother! By Thy Grace, Varuna, the holder of the noose, has become the lord of all aquatic creatures and is preserving them; and Kubera, the lord of the Yakṣas, has become the lord of wealth. Agni (fire), Nairṭa, Vāyu (wind), Iśāna and Ananta Deva are Thy parts and have grown by Thy power.

त्वदोरंभवा एव त्वच्छक्तिपरिक्षिता: ।

अशापि यदि दे दिव वरो देवोप्रतिस भोजन् ॥ 20 ॥

तदा प्रद्वा: सर्गकांवं वित्पा नयंवुत् मे शिवे ।

वाग्यवस्यापि मंत्रय ये केविद्युपवेयितः ॥ 21 ॥

तेशां सिंदीदः सत्वापि कार्याणां जायतापि ।

ये संवादिभं देवि पद्टिं श्रावयन्ति च ॥ 22 ॥

Then, O Devi! If Thou desirest to grant me my desired boon, then, O Thou! the Auspicious One! Let all the great obstacles to my work of procreating in this universe and increasing my dominions die away. And if any body worships this great Vāgbhava Mantra or any body hears with devotion this history or makes others hear this, they all shall be crowned with success and enjoyment and Mukti be easy to them.

तेशं लोके भूक्तिभूमती सुरुषे भवाशे शिशे ।

जातिस्मरलं भवतु वक्तृलं सीछोत तथा ॥ 23 ॥

ज्ञानसिद्धि: कर्मभारसंसिद्धिपर चान्तु है ।

पुर्वगीरसम्पूढ़िक आयेदित्वेवे मे चवः ॥ 24 ॥

श्री श्रीमदेशीभागतं महापुराणे दशमकल्पे प्रधागोरधावः । १ ।

Specially they would get the power to remember their past lives, acquire eloquence in speaking, all round beauty, success in obtaining knowledge, success in their deeds and especially in the increase of their posterity and children. O Bhagavatī! This is what I want most.

Here ends the First Chapter of the Tenth Book on the story of Svāyambhuvā Manu in the Mahāpurānam Śrimadadevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book X Chapter II

