CHAPTER IV

On Adharma

राजोवाच

विसितोरभि महाभाग श्रुलारा उख्यानं महामते ।

संसारोउं घापहप: कर्थ मुच्येत बन्यन्ति ॥ १ ॥

The King spoke: O highly honoured and intelligent one! I have heard the anecdote just related to me by you. I am very much bewildered. This Samsāra (world) is vice incarnate. I wonder how the Jivas, entangled in its meshes, can again be freed!

क्रव्यस्यायि द्वादादिस्लोकविधेसे सति ।

कृतवानीदूर्ण कर्म को न कुयोज्वुपिस्तान् ॥ 2 ॥

When the son of Kaśyapa, whose kingdom is the three worlds, can commit such an heinous act,

what wonder, then, that any other ordinary person would do more blameable things!

नार्ध प्रविष्य बालस्य हूननं दाक्णा किल ।

सेवाधिरेण यानुछं कृत्वा शपथम्बुद्धून ॥ ३ ॥

On the pretence of serving and on a solemn oath, when a man can enter into his step-mother's womb and take away the life of the son, what more heinous and event dreadful can take place than this!

शास्ता धर्मेय योगा च जितोकया: पतित्यत् ।

कृतबानीदुर्ग कर्म को न कुर्दादसांग्रिन् ॥ 4 ॥

When the preserver and controller of religion, the ruler of the three worlds can do such acts, you

cannot expect that any other person would desist from committing heinous, contemptible acts.

पितामहा मे संग्रामे कुरूक्षेत्रेस्तदार्णम् ।

कृतवर्तनतावस3शर्षं दूरं कर्म जनतानुगे ॥ 5 ॥

O World Teacher! Indeed my grandfather did unjustifiable horrible mean acts in the battle field of Kuruksetra. It is really wonderful!

भीमो उराण: कुप: काणं धर्माशिप विध्धितः ।

सर्वे विक्बद्धर्मोग वासुदेवेन नोदिताः ॥ 6 ॥

असारातं विजानन्तः संसारस्य सुधेधसः ।

देवांशाशु कर्व चकुनिंन्दितं धर्मतत्पराः ॥ 7 ॥

Bhīsma, Droṇa, Krpa, Kārṇa, even Yudhīsthira, who is the part incarnate of Dharma all these were urged by Vāsudeva into this contrary religious act. These personages are all born of Devānās, devoted to religion, and intelligent. These know the transitory nature of this world; how can these commit such mean blameable things!

कासस्था धार्यव विश्रंत्र प्रमाणं किं विनिश्छिन् ।

चलिण्तोस्मि संजातः शुत्वा चैतकाधानकम् ॥ ८  ॥

O Glory of the Brāhmins! What faith or regard can we have for a religion, when such high souled persons commit such irreligious acts! Indeed, there is doubt whether religion exists at all or not! O Best of the Munis! My heart is agitated very much on hearing these incidents.

अनवाक्यं प्रमाणं चेद्यातः कः: परहेद्वान् ।

पुको विश्वासात्तो रागी भवति सर्वेथा ॥ 9 ॥

If it be said that the word of the Āptas (seers) is a sufficient guarantee for the entity of religion, it may then be questioned where there is such an Āpta, holding such a pure religious body? All those persons who are attached to woldliness are bent on all worldly objects with their whole head and heart; these, therefore, cannot be Āptas.

रागो ऋषो भवेघुन्यर्थानागरसंगयम् ।

द्वादस्यवचनं वक्त्वं स्वार्थसिद्धये ॥ 10 ॥

When self interest is obstructed, jealousy and anger arise; and to secure one's self interest, out of jealousy, arise untruthful words.

जरासंधविधातार्थ द्विरिण सत्त्वमूर्तिना ।

छलेत्र तिचेत रूपं ब्राह्मणस्य विज्ञानता ॥ 11 ॥

Even the pure, excellent, virtuous Śri Krṣṇa, with full consciousness, had to assume under pretence a Brāhimn form for killing Jarāsandha.

तद्वतः कः प्रमाणं किं सत्त्व्यूर्तिपौदुगः ।

अज्ञैनोर्षि तर्वेवास कर्यं चूत्रवित्थिनिति ॥ १२ ॥

Just as the holy Śrī Hari assumed a false appearance to kill Jarāsandha, similarly Arjuna, too, did a false sacrifice to accomplish his ends. Where is, then, one who can claim to be an Āpta? And what proof of there is the existence of such an Āpta?

कोदुशोर्धवं कृती वयः किमर्थं शमवर्जितः ।

परलोकपदार्थ वा यशसे वात-न्यथा किल ॥ 13 ॥

What sort of sacrifice was this? Did it lead to heaven in the next world or did it lead to glory or did it serve the cause of any goodwill? Why was it deprived of that peace and rest? (It was performed with a view to kill Śísūpāla and others).

धार्मेय प्रथम: पाद: सत्ययेतकुतेर्षतः ।

द्वितीयस्तु तथा शोचं दया पादसूतीयकः ॥ 14 ॥

दानं पादशुत्थंध्र पुराणजा वदन्ति वै ।

तैर्वितीतः कथं धर्मसिंहिद्र सुमंमतः ॥ 15 ॥

The Pundits, of yore, declare that truth is the first Pāda, cleanliness, the second; compassion, the third; and charity is the fourth Pāda (foot) of Dharma (Religion). Thus, devoid of these, how can Religion stand with due regards from all?

धर्महीन कृतं कर्म कर्ब तत्कलं घरेत् ।

धर्मे स्थिति मत: स्वापि न कस्यापि प्रतीयते ॥१६।१

How can an act bear good fruits, which has no trace of virtue in it? It seems no one had any trace of faith and steadiness in one's religion. (The Pāndavas did sacrifice out of arrogance; how can they be Āptas?)

छलाई च तदा विद्युविमानोतःपूजामतमुषु: ।

येन वामनकोण यंचितो३जी बलिनूप: ॥ 17 ॥

विहर्ता शलयत्रस्य वेद्यानं परिपालकः ।

धर्मिष्ठी दानशील सत्यवादी विलेत्रियः ॥ 18 ॥

Book IV Chapter IV

स्थानात्यप्रशितो5कसामविष्याना प्रभविष्याना । जितं केन तयोः कृष्ण बलिना वामनेन वा ॥ 19 ॥ छलकर्मविद्य चापं सन्देहोउत्र महान्यम् । वश्यित्या वश्चितेन सत्यं वद्य तिततोम् ॥ 20 ॥ पुराणकर्ता त्वमिति धर्मईघ महामिति: ।

Víṣṇu, the Lord of the Universe, assumed His Dwarf (Vāmana) Incarnation with the express object to cheat Vali, the king of the Daityas. Now, O Muni! The king Bali, performed one hundred sacrifice; he was the protector of the Vedas, virtuous, charitable, truthful and self-controlled; why was such a man dislodged from his position by Víṣṇu, the Powerful. Who was victorious in this affair? Was he the Bali, who was cheated? Or was it Vāmana Deva, the expert in making nice pretence? Who was the better of the two? I have got grave doubts on this point. O the best of the twice-born! You are the composer of the Purāṇas, virtuous, and liberal hearted. Speak what is true (and thus tranquil my heart).

व्यास उवाच

वित्त वे बलिना राजन्त्ता येन च मेदिति ॥ 21 ॥

विविक्रमोपि नाना यः प्रवितो वामानोभवत् ।

छलनार्थिमं राजन् वामनत्व नराधिप्य ॥ 22 ॥

संप्राप्त हरिणा भूयो द्वारपालत्वमेव च ।

सत्याद्यन्तराजसित मूलं धर्मेत्य पार्थिंद ॥ 23 ॥

दुःसाध्ये रैहिंना राजनस्वी सर्वसेना किल ।

Vyāsa said: O king! The victory was certainly Bali's in as much as he fulfilled his promise and gave over his kingdom of earth to Viṣṇu. And in as much as Viṣṇu in his fifth or dwarf Incarnation deceived Bali, he had to become a dwarf (i.e. a small mean person indicated even by the shortness of his body). O king! There is nothing superior in religion to truth. See! Śrī Hari even had to become, for his falsehood, a gate keeper of Bali. O king! It is hardly possible for a human being to observe in every way the injunctions of truth.

माया बल्वती घपू विभुगा बहुकशिपी ॥ 24 ॥

ययेदे निर्मिति विधं गुणै: शबलितं त्रिभि: ।

Powerful, indeed, is Māyā, composed of the three qualities and of various forms. By Her is created this Universe, made manifold by the admixture of the three qualities (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas).

तस्माखलतं सर्व कुतोर्शिद्धं भवेयुए १। २५ ॥

मिश्रण जनितश्रेय स्वितिरेया सन्तानी ।

How can you expect therefore, truth to be observed wholly, without the least violation, by a deceiver. This world is made up of the mixture of Rajas; O king! Know this as the every day routine of things in nature.

वैखानसाधा मुनवो नि:संगा निश्रितिधूतः ॥ 26 ॥

सत्ययुक्ता भवन्यत्र वीरातगा गततृषः ।

दूर्धान्दर्जानाथर विनिमिताने च तादूशाः ॥ 27 ॥

अन्यत्सर्वे शबलितं गुणैरिभितिबिंग्रु ।

It is only the Munis and Hermits that can observe pure truth; and that is why they are without any attachment; they do not accept any thing from any other body; they are desireless; and they all have no rough wear and tear of the world. They exist as perfect examples; their case is quite separate. All the others are caught under the meshes of the three Māyīc Guṇas.

नैकं वाक्यं पुराणेषु वेधेयु नृपस्तम १। २८ ॥

धर्मशास्त्रेषु चांगेषु सगुषी रचितेशिक्त ।

O Best of kings! The Dharma Śāstras, Purāṇas and the Angas of the Vedas are full of diverse opinions on any one point under consideration; for their composers were under the influence of the different Gūṇas.

सयुण: सयुणं कुर्बाशिवर्णं न करोति ते ॥ 29 ॥

गुणास्ते सिश्रिता: सर्वे न पृथभावसंगस्ता: ।

The Suguna persons (i.e. persons under Māyā) do Saguna works (works composed of qualities) and the Nirguna persons (i.e. persons above Māyā) do not do any Saguna work. And when the Guna are mixed with one another, they cannot remain pure (i.e. they exhibit qualities of those Gunaş with which they are mixed).

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

निव्यौतिके स्थिते धर्म मति: कस्यापि न स्थिति ॥ 30 ॥

भवो.टूबे महाराज मायया मोहितस्य वै ।

O king! One is influenced by Māyā no sooner one takes one's birth in this world; so that no body can remain steady in this pure, steady maxim of truth, untainted by any falsehood or deceit.

ईन्द्रियाणि प्रमाधीनि तदासर्फे मनसला ॥ 31 ॥

क्रातील विवियाभ्याल्यानुगीत: प्रेरितो भृणम् ।

The sense organs, Indriya, as, confound the Buddhi (reason) and make one follow the path of enjoying sensual things. Mind is attached to senses and follows diverse ways, urged on furiously by the three Gunas.

वशातिवर्षयपत्न : प्राणिनः : स्थितरंगमाः : । ३ २ । ॥

सर्वे मायावगा राजनसाउनुकीक्षिति लेरिह ।

O king! All the beings, Brahmā down to the moving and non-moving things, fall under the delusion of Māyā; She plays with them.

सर्वानैं मोहयत्येया विकुर्वेत्यिनगं जगत् ॥ 33 ॥

असलो जायते राजकार्यवान्यमं नरः ।

This Māyā is always imposing on all; and She is incessantly making formations and transformations in this Universe; O king of king! The man under the influence of action takes recourse to this untruth (i.e. actions arise first from this untruth) from the very moment of his birth.

शून्द्रियार्थीऋतयानो न प्राणानीत यदा नरः ॥ 34 ॥

तदर्थं छलमादने छलायपे प्रवर्ते ।

Persons when they do not get their desired object after they have pondered how to secure the sensual objects, take recourse to pretext, and, from that pretext do many sinful acts.

कामः क्रोधश लोभश्र वैरीणो बलवरतः ॥ 35 ॥

कृताकृतं न जानित प्राणिनस्तशं गता: ।

Lust, anger, and avarice; these are very powerful enemies. The Jivas under their influence cannot distinguish right from wrong.

विघये सत्यहंकार: प्रबलः प्रभावलपि ॥ 36 ॥

अहंकाराद्वेभोहो महामरणाये च ।

When wealth, might and rank come to a person,

he gets deep-rooted Aharinkāra, and becomes very egoistic; from Aharinkāra, delusion comes and, from delusion, insensibility and death ensue.

सकूल्य बहुवस्त्त विकल्पा: प्रपवन्ति च ॥ 37 ॥

ई्योंमृया तथा ईयः प्रायुर्भवित् चेतासि ।

आशा तृष्णा तथा दैन्यं द्यमो5धर्मापीतस्तथा ॥38 ॥

प्राणिज्ञा प्रभवेत्येते भावा महामुद्धावः ।

Here men argue mentally many plans; and thence jealousy, intolerance and enmity spring in the heart; next arise, out of delusion, hope, thirst, misery, low-spiritedness, arrogance and irreligiousness.

यज्ञानानि तीर्थानि ज्ञानानि नियमास्तथा ॥ 39 ॥

अहूब्रात्याभ्यन्तु कगोति पुरुषोउवहम् ।

It is through Ahamkāra that people are led to perform sacrifices charities, visiting places of pilgrimages, practising vows and rules for religious rites and ceremonies.

अहंभावकृतं सर्वे प्रपवेत्रे न शीचवत् ॥ 40 ॥

रागलीभावृक्तं कर्म सर्वांग शुद्धिवर्जितम् ।

Hence these sacrificial acts, etc, from Aharñkāra, are unable to remove the clouds of impurity from the mind, as observance of purity and cleanliness does. Especially when any action is done through greed or undue affection, as its motive, it cannot be pure in every respect.

प्रधानं रद्वयगृद्धिक्र शद्वया विबुधेः किल ॥ 4 1 ॥

अउहोष्णासितं रद्यं प्रगलं धर्मकर्मणि ।

Therefore, at the commencement of any sacrifice, the wise persons looks at the purity of sacrificial things; (Dravya Śuddhi); those articles that are collected without injuring others, are the best in religious acts.

उहार्जितेन रुद्येण यक्योति शुभं नः ॥ 42 ॥

विपरीतं भवेत्तु फलकाले नृपोतम ।

O best of Kings! If the things, acquired by injuring others, be utilised in any auspicious act, they yield contrary results at the time of fruition.

मनोरितिनिरंच यस्य स व्यव्यरूकतापाषयेत् ॥ 43 ॥

तस्मिन्विकारयुक्ते तु न यथार्थपर्ल लभेत् ।

Book IV Chapter V

It is he only, whose mind is very-pure and undefiled, who gets the results wholly auspicious from any sacrificial act. Minds defiled do not acquire their proper desired objects.

कताऱ: कर्मणां सर्वे आचार्यश्रस्तिजाद्यः ॥ 44 ॥

सूभे त्रिशुद्रमनसस्तदा पूर्ण भयेकतमम् ।

देशकालतिकागद्यमकुर्णो शुळता यदि ॥ 4 5 ॥

न-नाणां च तदा पूर्ण कर्माणं फलमपुन्ते ।

When the preceptor and the priests ordained are sincere and pure; more over, when the place, moment, act, sacrificial things, the mantras, and the sacrificer are all holy, then and there only, the full results accrue in their entirety to the sacrificer.

श्रूर्णो नारामहिष्य स्वयुद्धि परभां तथा ॥ 46 ॥

क्रांति सुकृतं तद्धिपरितं भवेकित्कि ।

If the sacrifice be intended for the destruction of one's enemy or for a personal motive and one's gain, it converts auspicious results into those that are inauspicious and leads to ruin in the ends.

स्वाधिसकः पुणप्रियरं न जानाति शुभाशुभम् ॥ 47 ॥

देवाधीन: सदा कुध्यत्पापमेव न सकृतम् ।

Selfish persons are unable to ascertain, which actions are auspicious and which are not; they depend on the circumstances what they call Daiva, and the people do acts sinful instead of virtuous.

प्रजापत्या: सुरा: सर्वे हुसुराधुः तदुद्धना: ॥ 48 ॥

सर्वे ते स्वार्थिनस्ताः परमसरविरोधिनः ।

सचोद्धता: सुरा: सर्वे प्ययुक्ता वेवेयु भागुना: ॥ 49 ॥

रजो-द्वावसातमासासु तिथच: परिकीर्तिता: ।

The Devas and demons all are created by Brahmā, the Prajāpati, the Creator; they all are selfish; hence they are always at war and war with each other. The Devas are born from the Satīva Guna; the human beings are sprung from the Rajas and the birds are sprung from the Tamas.

सत्त्वैद्वानां तैर्वरं परम्यमनातन् ॥ 50 ॥

तिरधान्य कि चित्र जातिवैरमुद्धे ।

O King! When the Devas, born of the Sativa Guna are always engaged in inimical actions, what wonder, then, is there, that the lower ones would be at war with one another!

सदा श्रौहमर देवास्तपोश्चनकारतथा ॥ 51 ॥

असन्तुषा देषपारः परम्यस्तेषिधिनः ।

अहूबारसपूद्रतः संसारोउयं यतो नृप ।

रागदेषविहीनस्तु स कर्व जायते नृप ॥ 52 ॥

शीत श्रीमदीभागवते महापुराणे वतृष्वैकन्ये

बतुर्षो5थायः 11 4 11

O King! When the Devas are always discontented, filled with jealousy and envy, at war amongst each other, and obstructors of the ascetics and the austere persons, then know that this Universe has sprung from Aharñkara (egoism). How can you expect them to be free from feelings of anger, jealousy; etc.!

Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Fourth Book, the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses on Adharma by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IV Chapter V

