CHAPTER I

On the Description of Prakrti

श्रीनारायण उवाच

गणेशजननी दुर्गा राशा लक्ष्मी: सरखती ।

सावित्री च सृष्टिविधो प्रकृति: पडधा स्मृता ॥ १ ॥

Śrī Nārāyaṇa said: This (Highest) Prakṛti is recognised as five-fold. When She is engaged in the work of Creation, She appears as:

(1) Durgā, the Mother of Ganeśa (2) Rādhā, (3) Lakṣmī, (4) Sarasvatī and (5) Sāvitrī.

नावर उवाच

आविवर्भूव सा केन का वा सा ज्ञानितां वर ।

के वा तत्लक्षणं साधो बभूव पछ्रधा कवम् ॥ 2 ॥

सर्वांसां चरितं पूजातियानं गुण ईसितः ।

अवतारः कुत्र कक्यातनो व्याख्यातुर्महिति ॥ 3 ॥

Nārada replied: O Thou, the Best of Jñānins! Who is this Prakṛti? (Whether She is of the nature of Intelligence or of matter?) Why did She manifest Herself and then again why did She reveal Herself in these five forms? And what are Her characteristics? Now Thou oughtest to describe the lives of all, the different modes of their worship, and the fruits that are accrued thereby. Please also inform me which Forms of them manifested themselves in which different places. Dost Thou please narrate to me all these.

प्रकृततैक्षणं वस्न कोा ववतुं क्षमो भवेत् ।

किंचित्वापि वक्ष्यासि यच्छृतं धर्मवेकरन्तः ॥ 4 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Child! Who is there in this

world that can describe fully the characteristics of Prakṛti! However I will describe to you that much which I heard from my own father, Dharma. Hear.

प्रकटवाचकः प्रश्र कृतिश्र सुहिवाचकः ।

सुही प्रकृता या देवी प्रकृति: स प्रकृतिantena || 5 ||

The prefix ‘Pra’ in the word Prakrti means exalted, superior, excellent; and the affix ‘Krti’ donotes creation. So the Goddess, the Devi Who is the most excellent in the work of creation is known as the Devi Prakrti.

गुणे सचे प्रकृते च प्रणब्धे वर्तते श्रुतः ।

मध्ये त्रासे कृछे तिणव्व्तसासे स्मृतः ॥ 6 ॥

To come closer: 'Pra' signifies the Sattva Guṇa, the most exalted quality, 'Kr' denotes the Rajo Guṇa and 'Ti' denotes the Tamo Guṇa. (The Sattva Guṇa is cosidered as the Highest as it is perfectly clear and free from any impurities whatsoever; the Rajo Guṇa is considered intermediate as it has this defect—that it spreads a veil over the reality of things, so as not to allow men to understand the True Reality, while the Tamo Guṇa is considered worst as it completely hides the Real Knowledge).

विरुणात्यकस्वरूपा या सा च गर्जिन्सम्पित्वा ।

प्रधाना सृष्टिकरणे प्रकृतिसेने कथयते ॥ ७ ॥

So When this Intelligence of the nature of Brahma, beyond the three attributes, gets tinged with the above three Gunas and becomes

omnipotent, then She is superior (Pradhānā) in the work of creation. Hence She is styled as Prakrti.

प्रथमे वर्तैत प्रश्र कृतिक शुहिवाचकः ।

सुरोरदी च या देही प्रकृति: सा प्रकृतिति ॥ 8 ॥

योगेनाता सुहित्यिधी द्वित्याणे बयुर सः ।

पुगांश दक्षिणाग्रांगे वामार्थं प्रकृति: स्मृता ॥ 9 ॥

O Child Nārada! The state just preceding that of creation is denoted by ‘Pra’; and ‘Kr’ signifies creation. So the Great Devi that exists before creation is called Prakrti after creation The Paramātmā by His Yoga (i.e., Māyā Śakti, the Holy Ghost) divided Himself into two parts; the right side of which was male and the left side was the female Prakrti.

Note: The Holy Ghost is the principal of Conception and Emanation, Creation). So the Prakrti is of the nature of Brahma.

सा च ब्रह्मास्वका च निल्या सा च सनाती ।

यास्तस्वा च त्वा जत्थित्यानी दाहिका स्थिता ॥ 10 ॥

She is Eternal. As the fire and its burning power are not different, so there is no separate distinction between Ātman and His Śakti, between Puruṣa and Prakṛti.

अतएव हि योगी-दैः क्लीपुंचेदो न मन्ते ।

सर्वे ब्रह्मणं ब्रह्मऊर्धशत्पदरि नारद ॥ १ १ ॥

Therefore those that are foremost and the highest of the Yogis do not recognise any difference between a male and a female. All is Brāhman. He is everywhere as male and female for ever. There is nothing in this world that can exist for a moment even without this Brahman consisting of male and female. (i.e. they are Brahman with Māyā manifested).

वेबळायमयेच्छया च श्रीकृष्यास्तिसूक्षया ।

साउप्रवैर्वभूव सहसा मूलप्रकृतीर्शीर्शी ॥ 12 ॥

Out of the Will of Śrī Krṣṇa, to create the world Whose Will is all in all, came out at once the Mūlā Prakṛti, the Great Devi Śivari, (the Lady Controller of the Universe) Brahma with Māyā in a state of equilibriums).

तद्वासा पश्रविधा सुहिकर्मविधिका ।

अथ भक्तानुगीयात्रा भक्तानुग्राहियात्रा ॥ १३ ॥

By Her Command came out five Forms from Her, either for the purpose of creation or for bestowing Fävour and Grace to the Bhaktas (devotees).

गणेशगात तुर्णा या शिवकल्या शिवशिया ।

नातायणी विद्याग्रामा पूर्णबहुस्वरूपिणी ॥ 14 ॥

Durgā the Mother of Ganeśa, comes, as the first, the most auspicious, loved by Śiva. She is Nārāyaṇī, Viṣṇu Māyā, and of the nature of Pūrṇa Brahma (the Supreme Brahma).

बह्वादिवेदेर्मनिवर्भनुर्भिभ: पूक्ता स्तुता ।

सर्वाधिष्ठात्री वैंदी सा गर्भेक्णा सनातनी ॥ 15 ॥

This eternal, all auspicious Devi is the Presiding Deity of all the Devas and is, therefore, worshipped and praised by Brahmā and the other Devas, Munis, and Manus.

धर्मस्वपुणवकीरियोगेमानतदायिनी ।

सुखामोक्षर्यद्वीरा शोकातिंदुःखनाशिनी ॥ १ ६ ॥

This Bhagavati Durgā Devi, (when She gets pleased) destroys all the sorrows, pains and troubles of the Bhaktas that have taken Her refuge, and gives them Dharma, everlasting name and fame, all auspicious things and bliss and all the happiness, nay, the Final Liberation!

शरणान्तादौनार्थविराणपरायण ॥

तेज:स्वकाण परमा तदधिष्ठानुदेवता ॥ 17 ॥

सर्वशक्तिर्वल्पा च शक्तिरीग्रस्य संतनम् ।

She is the Greatest Refuge of Bhaktas that come to Her wholly for protection and are in great distress, whom She saves from all their dangers and calamities. In fact, know this Durgā Devi as, verily, the Presiding Deity of the heart of Kṛṣṇa and as His Highest Śakti, of the nature of the Holy Fire and the Holy Light. She is Omnipotent and resides always Kṛṣṇa, the Great God.

सिद्धधरी सिद्धल्या सिद्धद्वा सिद्धरीधी ॥ 18 ॥

बुद्दिनिंश कृश्वियसा छाया तंत्र दया स्थूति: ।

जातिः क्षांतिश्र शांतिश्र शांतिनः चानिश्र चेना ॥ 19 ॥

Book IX Chapter I

तृतीः पृथित्या तक्षीभूतित्मायां तथैव च ।

सर्वशक्तिराक्लव्या सा कृण्यस्य परमात्मनः ॥ 20 ॥

She is worshipped by all the Siddha Puruṣas (those that have attained success); the (eighteen) Siddhis all go to Her and when pleased She gives whatever Siddhis (success) that Her Bhaktas want. This Great Devi is the intelligence, sleep, hunger, thirst, shadow, drowsiness, fatigue, kindness, memory, caste, forbearance, errors, peace, beauty, and consciousness, contentment, nourishment, prosperity, and fortitude, She is sung in the Vedas and in other Śāstras as the Mahā Māyā, of the nature of the Universe. In reality, She is the All Śakti of the Universe and She is the Śakti of Krṣṇa. All these qualities are also mentioned in the Vedas.

उक्तः श्रुनी श्रुतगुणाश्रातिस्त्वयो यथागमम् ।

गुणोउस्वन्नोउनताय अपरां च निशामय ॥ 21 ॥

गुद्धमतचस्कता य पचा सा परमात्मनः ।

सर्वसंपसल्कपा सा तदधिषतुदेवता ॥ 22 ॥

What is mentioned here is a tithe merely, in comparison to that of the Vedas. She has infinite qualities. Now hear of other Sāktis. The second Sākti of the Paramātmān is named Padmā (Lakṣmī). She is of the nature of Śuddha Sattva (Higher than Sattva Guna) and is Kṛṣṇa's Presiding Deity of all wealth and prosperity.

कान्तातिद्वितां शोला च सुशीला सर्वमैगला ।

लोभमोहाकामोरोमदाईहाकारवर्जिता ॥ 23 ॥

भक्तानुरक्ता पत्युश सर्वांभ्यश पतितला ।

प्राणतुल्या भगवतः प्रेमपात्र प्रियंवदा ॥ 24 ॥

This very beautiful Lakṣmī Devī is the complete master of the senses; She is of a very peaceful temper, of good mood and all-auspicious. She is free from greed, delusion, lust, anger, vanity and egoism. She is devoted to Her husband and to Her Bhaktas; Her words are very sweet and She is very dear to Her husband, indeed, the Life and Soul of Him.

सर्वस्यात्मिका देही जीवनोपायरक्षिपिणी ।

महात्वक्षीश दैकुंते पतिसेवारात सी ॥ 25 ॥

स्वर्गे च स्वार्षलक्षीश राजतक्षीश राजसु ।

गृहेषु गृहलक्षीश मत्थनां गृहिणां तथा ॥ २६ ॥

This Devi is residing in all the grains and vegetables and so She is the Source of Life of all the things. She is residing in Vaikuntşa as Mahā Lakṣmī, chaste and always in the service of her husband. She is the Heavenly Lakṣmī, residing in the Heavens and the royal Lakṣmī in palaces and the Gṛha Lakṣmī in the several families of several householders.

सर्वग्रीषिषु इत्येषु शोभाकृपा मन्तोहरा ।

कीतिंकृपा पुण्यवतां प्रभाकृपा नृपेषु च ॥ 27 ॥

वाणिज्ञकृपा वरणारां पाचितां कलहोकृपा ।

दयाकृपा च क्रायिता वेदोक्ता सर्वसंमता ॥ 28 ॥

O Nārada! All the lovely beauty that you see in all the living beings and all the things, it is She; She is the glory and fame of those that have done good and pious works and it is She that is the prowess of the powerful Kings. She is the trade of merchants, the mercy of the saints, engaged in doing good to others and the seed of dissensions in those sinful and vicious persons as approved of in the Vedas.

सर्वेपूज्या सर्वेवंद्या चान्यां मतो निशामय ।

वाग्बुद्धिविघानानधिक्री च परमात्मनः ॥ 29 ॥

सर्वविद्यासूकण या सा च देवी सरस्वती ।

सा बुद्धि: कविता मेण प्रतिभा सुविता गुणम् ॥ 30 ॥

She is worshipped by all, reverenced by all. Now I will describe to you about the third Śakti of the Great God who is the Presiding Deity of knowledge speech, intelligence, and learning. This third Śakti is named Sarasvatī. She is all the learning of this endless. Universe and She resides as medhā (intelligence) in the hearts of all the human beings; She is the power in composing poetry; She is the memory and She is the great wit, light, Splendor and inventive Genius.

नानप्रकारसिद्धानभेदार्थकलाना मता ।

व्याख्याबोध्यस्वधा च सर्वसंदेशुभजिनी ॥ 31 ॥

विचाराकारिणी प्रथकारिणी ग्राहिक्तिणी ।

स्वरसंगीतसंधानातलकारणकीपणी ॥ 32 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

She gives the power to understand the real meaning of the various difficult Siddhānta works; She explains and make us understand the difficult passages and She is the remover of all doubts and difficulties. She acts when we write books, when we argue and judge, when we sing songs of music; She is the time or measure in music; She holds balance and union in vocal and instrumental music.

वियपत्रानवायुपा प्रतिशक्षोपजीविति ।

याख्यावादकी शांता शीणपुतकाधिपीणि ॥ ३३ ॥

शूद्रसचस्कला च सुशिला श्रीहरिप्रिया ।

हिमचन्दनकुन्दैदुकुमुदांभोजसशिभा ॥ 34 ॥

She is the Goddess of speech; She is Presiding Deity in the knowledge of various subjects; in argumentations and disputations. In fact all the beings earn their livelihood by taking recourse to Her. She is peaceful and holds in her hands Vīnā (lute) and books. Her n:ature is purely Sāttvic (Śuddha Sattva); modest and very loving to Śrī Her. Her colour is white like ice clad mountains, like that of the white sandal, like that of the Kunda flower, like that of the Moon, or white lotus.

यजंती परमात्मानं श्रीकृष्णं रत्नमात्या ।

तपः:स्वकृता तपसां फतलत्री तपविन्नाम् ॥ ३ ५  ॥

सिद्धिविधास्वरूपा च सर्वसिद्धिप्रदा सदा ।

यथा विंना तु विग्रीची मृको मृतसमः सदा ॥ ३ ६ ॥

She always repeats the name of Paramātmā Sṛi Kṛṣṇa while She turn Her bead composed of jewels. Her nature is ascetic; She is the bestower of the fruits of the asceticism of the ascetics; She is the Siddhi and Vidyā of all; She grants always success to all. Were She not here, the whole host of Brāhmins would always remain speechles like the dead cluster of persons.

देवी तृतीया ग्रिता श्रुतयुक्ता जगदायिका ।

यथापमं यथा किंचिद्वर्गतं त्वं निवोधे में ॥ 37 ॥

माता चतुर्णा वर्णानां वेदांगानां च छेदसाम् ।

संध्यावन्दन्यज्ञाणं तन्जाणं च विद्वक्षणा ॥ 38 ॥

What is recited in the Vedas as the Third Devi is the Holy Word, the Third Śakti, Sarasvatī. Thus

I have described Her. Now hear the glories of the other Devīs in accordance with the Vedas. She is the mother of the four colour (castes), the origin of the (six) Vedāṅgas (the limbs of the Vedas and all the Chandas, the Seed of all the mantrams of Sandhyā vandanam and the Root, the Seed of the Tantras; She Herself is versed in all the subjects.

दिजातिजातिका च जपहाण तादयिनि ।

बहुपयजेतोह्पा च सर्वसंस्कारलिपि ॥ 39 ॥

पविज्ञस पालिकी गायकी बाहाणप्रिया ।

तीर्थिति यस्या: संस्पर्शं बांधिति हात्यगुब्दये ॥ ४० ॥

Herself an ascetic, She is the Tapas of the Brāhmins; She is the Tejas (Fire) and the caste of the Brāhmin caste and embodies in Herself all sorts of Sarinskāras (tendencies; inclinations); She is the Japam. Pure, known by the name of Sāvitrī and Gāyatrī, She resides always in the Brahma Loka (the Sphere of Brahmā) and is such as all the sacred places of pilgrimages want Her touch for their purification.

गृह्म्यक्रिकंकाशा शुहृदसचल्योर्णि ।

परमानन्दंरूपा च परमा च सनातनी ॥ 41 ॥

परबहुमक्षरूपा च निवर्णपद्धार्विति ।

बहुतनेजोमरी शक्तिस्तरीध्रातुरेदेवता ॥ 42 ॥

Her colour is perfectly white like the pure crystal. She is purely Śuddha Sattva, of the nature of the Highest Bliss; She is eternal and superior to all. She is of the nature of Para Brahma and is the bestower of Mokṣa. She is the Fiery Śakti and the Presiding Deity of the Brahma Teja (the fiery spirit of Brahma, and the Brāhmaṇas). The whole world is purified by the touch of Whose Feet, this Śāvitrī Devi is the Fourth Śakti.

यत्पदारजसा पृतं जनतर्श्चे च नारद ।

देशी चतुर्षी कथिता पछ्रमी वर्णायामि ते ॥ ४३ ॥

पड्गणाणिद्वेडी या पड्गणाणस्वरूपिणी ।

प्राणाधिकप्रियतम सर्वाध्य: सुन्दरी पत्त ॥ ४४ ॥

सर्वेषुक्ता च सौभाग्यमानितीनी गौराब्विता ।

वागंगाध्यास्वरूपा च गुणेन तेजसा समा ॥ ४५ ॥

O Child Nārada! Now I will describe to you

Book IX Chapter I

about the Fifth Šakti, the Devi Rādhikā. Hear. She is the Presiding Deity of the five Prāṇas; She Herself is the life of all; dearer than life even to Śrī Krṣṇa; and She is highly more beautiful and superior to all the other Prakṛti Devīs. She dwells in everything; She is very proud of Her good fortune (Saubhāgyam); Her glory is infinite; and She is the wife, the left body, as it were, of Śrī Krṣṇa and She is not in any way inferior to Him, either in quality or in the Tejas (fiery Spirit) or in any other thing.

परावत सारभृत परमाद्य सनातनी ।

परमानन्द्रका च ध्यान मान्य च पूजिता ॥ 46 ॥

सस्मीडाधियेदी श्रीकृष्य परमात्म: ।

तस्मयडत्सम्भूत तस्मयडलमण्डित ॥ 47 ॥

She is Higher than the Highest; the Essence of all, infinitely superior, the First of all, Eternal, of all the nature of the Highest Bliss, fortunate, highly respected, and worshipped by all. She is, the Presiding Devi of the Rāsa Lilā of Śrī Krṣṇa. From Her has sprung the Rāsa maṇḍalam and She is the Grace and the Ornament of the Rāsa maṇḍalam (the dance in a circle in Rāsa).

Note: Extracts from a paper on Creation as explained by Hon'ble Justice Sir G. Woodroffe.

The Lecturer commenced by pointing out that an examination of any doctrine of creation reveals two fundamental concepts: Those of Being (Kutastha) and Becoming (Bhava); Changelessness and Change; the one and Many. The Brahman or Spirit in its own nature (Svarūpa) is and never becomes. It is the evolutes derived from the Principle of Becoming (Mūlā Prakṛti) which constitute what is called Nature. The latter principle is essentially Movement. The world is displayed by consciousness (cit) in association with Mūlā Prakṛti in cosmic vibration (spandana). Recent Western hypotheses have made scientific ‘matter’ into Maÿā in the sense that it is but the varied appearances produced in our mind by vibration of and in the single substance ether. The doctrine of vibration (Spandana) is however in Indra an ancient inheritance. The whole world is born from the varied forms of the initial movement in Mūlā

Prakṛti. The problem is how does such multiplicity exist without derogation to the essential unit of its efficient cause, the spirit? The lecturer then made a rapid survey of the Sānkhya philosophy on this point which assumed two real and independent principles of Being and Becoming which it calls Puruṣa and Prakṛti and passed from this the easiest dualistic answer to the pure monism of Śaṅkara which asserted that there was but one Principle of Being, the Sadvasu and Māyā, whether considered as a Śakti of Iśvara or as the product of such Śakti was Avastu or nothing. He then pointed out that the Tāntrik doctrine with which he dealt occupied a middle position between these two points of view. Śiva in the Kūlārnava Tantra says 'Some desire Monism (Advaivatāva), others Dualism (Dvaivatāva). Such, however, know not My Truth which is neither Monism nor Dualism (Dvaikatvaiva vivarjita). Tantra is not Dvaivatāva for it does not recognise Prakṛti as an independent unconscious principle (Acit). It differs from Śankara's Advaitaivāda in holding that Prakṛti as a conscious principle of Becoming, that is as Śakti, is not not Avastu, though its displayed picture, the world is Māyā. It effects a synthesis of the Sānkhya dualism by the conversation of the twin principles of Puruṣa and Prakṛti into the unity which is the Ardhanārīśvara Śiva Śakti.

As regard other matters it adopts the notion of the Sānkhya such as the concepts of Mūla Prakṛti with the three Gunas, vibration (spandana), evalution (Parināma) of the Vikṛtis and the order of emanation of the Tattvas. Śakti which effects this exists and is Herself never unconscious (Acit) though It has the power to make the Jiva think It is such. If this were understood one would not hear such nonsense as that the Śaktas (whose religion is one of the oldest in the world) worship material force or gross matter (Jada).

The lecturer then shortly explained the nature of Śakti (Śakti Tattva), a term which derived from the rood ‘Śak’ meant the Divine Power whereby the world was created, manifested and destroyed. In Tantra the power and the Lord who wields it (Śakti is Brahman. The first is the transcendent, the second the immanent aspect of the one Brahman, Who is both Śiva and Śakti. The Mother creates (Kāryavibhāvinī). The Father wills what She

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

does (Kārya Vibhāvaka). From their union creation comes. Śakti is not like the diminutive female figure which is seen on the leap of some Indian images, to which is assigned the subordinate position which some persons consider a Hindu wife should occupy. She is not a handmaid of the Lord but the Lord Himself in Her aspect as Mother of the worlds. This Śakti is both Nirguna and Saguna that is Cit Śakti and Māyā Śakti.

After thus defining The nature of Śakti by which the world was created, the lecturer commenced an account of its manifestation as the universe, following in the main the Śarādā Tilaka written in the eleventh century by Lakṣmanācārya, the Guru of the celebrated Kashmirian Tāntrīk, Abhinava Gupta. The following is a very abbreviated summary of this, the main portion of the paper. The lecturer first referred to the Aghanāvasthā state which was that Niṣkala Śiva and touching upon the question why Śiva became Sakala (associated with Kalā) and creative explained the term Kalā and the theory of Adrṣtaṣrṣṭī taught by the Tantara as by other Śāstras. The former is according to Sānkhya, Mūlā Prakṛti; according to Vedānta, Avidyā and according to the Śiva Tantara, Śakti. The latter is the dectrine that the impulse to creation is proximately caused by the Karma of the Jivas. It is the seed of Karma which contains the germ of Cosmic will to life. When Karma becomes ripe, there arises the state called Ikṣana and other names indicative of creative desire and will. There then takes place a development which is peculiar to the Tantra called Sadrśa Parināma, which is a kind of Vivartta. The development is only apparent for there is no real change in the Ānandamaya Koṣa. Śakti which exists in Sakala Śiva in a purely potential state is said to issue from Him. This is the first Kinetic aspect of Śakti in which Sattaguna is displayed. This is the Paramākāṣāvaśthā. Nāda (Sound, Word) then appears. Śakti becomes further Kinetic through the enlivening of the Rajo Gunā. This the Akṣarāvaśthā. Then under the influence of Tamas, Iśvara becomes Ghanibhūta and what is called the Parābindu. This is the Avyaktāvaśthā. Thus the Supreme Bindu men call by different names, Mahā Viṣnu, Brahma Puruṣa, or Devi. It is compared to a grain of gram which under its sheath contains two seeds in undivided union. These are Śiva

Sakti and their encircling sheath is Māyā. This Bindu unfolds and displays itself, in the threefold aspect of Bindu, Bīja, Nāda; or Śiva, Śakti, and Śiva Śakti; the three Śaktis of will, knowledge and action. This is the mysterious Kāma Kalā which is the root of all Mantras. These seven: Sakala Śiva, Śakti, Nāda, Parābindu, Bindu, Bīja, Nāda are all aspects of Śakti which are the seven divisions of the Mantra Om and constitute what is called the creation of Parā sound in the Íśvara creation.

The lecturer having explained the nature of these Śaktis which formed part of the sound (Śabda), Sadṛṣa Parināma, referred to the form or meaning (Artha) creation in the same development by the appearance of the six Śivas from Śambhu to Brahmā which were aggregate (Samaṣti) sound powers. It was he said, on the differentiation of the Parābindu that there existed the completed causal Śabda which is the Hidden Word. The causal body or Parā Śabda and Artha being complete, there then appeared the Displayed word or Śabdārtha. This is a composite like the Greek Logos. The Śabda Brahman or Brahman as cause of Śabda is the Caitanya in all beings. The Śabdārtha in the Vedantin Nāmarūpa or world of name and form of this Śabdārtha the subtle and gross bodies are constituted, the Śaktis of which are the Hiranyagarbha sound, called Madhyamā and the Virāt sound Vaikhārī. By Śada is not meant merely physical sound which as a quality of atomic ether is evolved from Tāmasik Ahankāra.

The lecturer then pointed out that there had been Adrṣta Srṣṭi up to the appearance of Śakti and Vivartta development up to the completion of the ‘Word’ or causal sound. There then takes place real evolution (Parināma) in which the Tattvas (or elements discovered as a result of psychological analysis of our worldly experience) are said to emanate according to the Sānkhya and not the Vedāntic scheme, though there were some peculiarities in the Tānrik exposition which the lecturer noted. Finally Yogika Srṣṭi was accepted in so far as it was the elements which in varied combinations made up the gross world.

In conclusion the lecturer pointed out that Indian Śāstra was a mutually connected whole. Such peculiarities as existed in any particular Śāstra were due to variety of standpoint or purpose in view. The main

Book IX Chapter I

point in this connection to be remembered was that the Tantra was practical Sādhanā Śāstra. Whilst Śankara dealt with the subject from the standpoint of Jānakānda, the Tantra treated it from the point of view of worship (Upāsanākānda) the Tānrik doctrine is compounded of various elements some of which it shared with other Śāstras, some of which are its own, the whole being set forth according to a method and terminology which is peculiar to itself.

रासेक्ष्री सुरासिका रासावासनिवासिनी ।

गोलोकावासिनी देवी गोपीवेषधित्याचि ॥ 48 ॥

परमाढ़ाद्रवभा च सन्तोवर्षकंविरणी ।

निरुणा च निराकारा निरिलिता उस्मखल्पिणी ॥ 49 ॥

She is the Lady of the Rāsa Lilā, the Foremost of the Jovial, humourous (witty) persons and dwells always in Rāsa. Her abode is in Goloka and from Her have come out all the Gopikās. Rāsa—The circular dance of Kṛṣṇa and the cow-herdesses of Vṛndāvana. Her nature is the Highest Bliss, the Highest Contentment, and Excessive Joy; She transcends the three Sattva, Rajo and Tamo Gunas and is Nirākāra (without any particular form); but She dwells everywhere but unconnected with any. She is the soul of all.

निरीहा निरत्कारा भक्तानुग्रहायिष्ठा ।

वेदानुसाधित्यानेन विज्ञाता सा विद्यईपे! ।। ५० ॥

She is without any effort to do anything and void of Ahankāra. She assumes froms only os show Her favour to Her Bhaktas. The intelligent learned men (Pandits) read Her Mahimā (glories) in meditating on Her according to the Vedas.

दृधिद्धा न सा केशैः सुर्जेसुर्जिनुपरंः ।

वहिषुर्जईगृकभरा नानारंकारभूषिति ॥ 51 ॥

कोटिवज्ञप्रभापुरुषरवंशीयुक्तियशा ।

श्रीकृष्याफित्रदायैककाय च सर्वसम्पदास् ॥ 52 ॥

The chief of the Devas and the Munis could never see Her; Her clothings are fire proofs and She is decorated with many ornaments all over Her body. Her body looks as if the crores of moons have risen all at once; She is the Giver of Bhakti (devotion) towards Krṣṇa, service towards Krṣṇa;

and She bestows all wealth and prosperity.

अवतारे च वागहे वृषभानुसुता च या ।

यत्पादपवंस्यर्णवित्रा च वसुंधा ॥ 53 ॥

ब्रहादोषिनद्धता या सर्वैंधृता च भाते ।

स्तीतलसासम्पूता कृष्णवक्षःस्थले स्थिता ॥ 54 ॥

यथांबरे नवघने लोला सौद्यानि सुने ।

पहिथर्वसहस्राणि प्रतनं ब्रह्णा पुरा । 55 ॥

In Varāha Kalpa i.e., when the Varāha incarnation took place, She incarnated Herself as the daughter of one Gopa (cowherd), named Vṛṣabhānu. And Earth was blessed by the touch of Her feet. She is such as Brahmā and the other Devas could never perceive Her by any of their senses, yet every one at Vṛndāvan saw Her very easily. She is the Gem amongst women. And when She is seen on the breast of Kṛṣṇa, it seems that lightenings flash in the blue mass of clouds in the sky.

यत्वादपचनखतृष्ये चातमृषद्ये ।

न च रुईंच स्वल्पेपि प्रवश्यसायी क कवा ॥ 56 ॥

तेनैव तपसा दृषा भृथि बृन्दावने वने ।

कथिता पछ्जी देखी सा राया च प्रक्रौतिता ॥ 57 ॥

अंगलकाः कलाकूपाः या कलांगोग सम्बवाः ।

प्रकृतेः प्रतितिश्रेषु देय्युं सर्वोयोषितः ॥ 58 ॥

In days gone by, Brahmā practised several austerities for sixty thousand years to purify Himself by seeing the nails of Her toes; but far from seeing that, He could not have that even in His dreams. At last He succeeded in seeing Her at Vrndāvana and became blessed. O child Nārada! This is the fifth Prakṛti and she is denominated as Rādhā. Every female in every Universe is sprung from a part of Śrī Rādhā or part of a part.

परियुणतमा: पछ विद्यादेव्य: प्रक्रौतिता: ।

या या: प्रधानांशिक्या वर्णायामि निशामय ।। ५९ ॥

प्रधानांशस्वरूपा सा गंगा भुवनपावनी ।

विष्णुविग्रासम्प्रता उव्हरणा सनतानी ॥ 60 ॥

O Nārada! Thus I have described to you the five Highest Prakṛtis Durgā and others. Now I am going to describe those that are parts of these Prakṛtis.

Šrimaddevitbhāgavatam

Hear. The Gānges, Gahgā has sprung from the lotus feet of Viṣṇu; Her form is fluidlike; She is eternal.

पापिषपोधनदाहायजलतिनस्वक्रिपिणी ।

सुखस्यर्गं स्नानपानैर्विनिणपद्वादयिनि ॥ 6 1 ॥

गोलोस्थानप्रथानसुखसोपानकरणिपी ।

पवित्रक्पा तीर्थांना सरितां च परावता ॥ 6 2 ॥

And She is the veritable burning Fire to burn away the sins of the sinner. She is sweet to touch in taking baths and in drinking; She gives final liberation to the Jivas, and leads easily to the Goloka Abode. She is the holiest amongst the places of pilgrimages and is the first of the running rivers.

शम्भूमीलिदाथमेमुक्तायक्तिरीक्ष्वस्वीर्णि ।

तपःस्म्यादिती सद्यो भारतेषु तपत्स्वनाम् ॥ 6 3 ॥

चन्द्रप्रधौत्रीनिभा शूढ़सत्त्वस्वल्यिधि ।

निर्मान निरहंकारा साध्वी नारायणप्रिया ॥ 6 4 ॥

She is the rows of pearls in the clotted haris of Mahādeva's head and She is the Tapasyā (asceticism) incarnate of the Tapasvīs (ascetics) of the Bhārata Varsa. This Ganges purifies the three worlds and is the part of Mūlā Prakṛti; She shines like the Full Moon, is white like white lotus and like milk; She is pure Śuddha Satva, clear, free from any Ahanākāra, chaste and beloved of Nārāyana.

प्रधानांगसरक्या च तुलसी विद्याक्रामिति ।

विद्यापूषणका च विद्यापदस्थिता सती ॥ 65 ॥

तपःसंकल्पुजादिरसंपर्यापादिति मुने ।

सारभृता च पुष्पणं पवित्रा पुष्पवरा सदा ॥ 6 6 ॥

The Tulasí Devī is the consort of Viṣṇu. She is the ornaments of Nārāyaṇa, and dwells always at the lotus feet of Nārāyaṇa. By Her are performed all the acts of worship, all austerities, and all Sañkalaps (resolves). She is the chief of all the flowers, holy and able Sañkalaps (resolves). She is the chief of all the flowers, holy and able to give merits (Punyam) to others.

दूर्गनस्पर्गनाथ्यां च रघो विवर्णाद्वीयि ।

कर्ती कलुष्युषेधमद्रनायापिन्क्तिपिणी ॥ 67 ॥

यत्पादपत्रसंस्पर्गास्तवः पूता वसुंधग ।

यत्स्पर्गदाँनि चैवेछचिति तीर्थीनि शुद्धः ॥ 68 ॥

At her sight and touch, Nirvāna can be obtained; and, were it not for Her, there could be no other fire in this Kali Yuga to burn the sins. She Herself is of the nature of Fire and at the touch of Whose lotus-feet, the earth is purified; all the Tirthas desire to have Her sight and touch for purification and without Her all acts in this world become fruitless.

यया विना च विशुयु सर्वेकम् च निष्णन्तम् ।

मोक्षदा या मुमुक्षूणां कामिनि सर्वकामदा ॥ 69 ॥

कल्पवृक्षास्करण या भारते वृक्षलिपणि ।

भारतीनां प्रीणानय जाता या परदेवता ॥ 70 ॥

She bestows Moksa (liberation) to those who want final liberation, grants all sorts of desires to several people, Who Herself is like a Kalpa Vṛkṣa, Who is the Presiding Deity of all the trees in Bhārata and Who has come here to grant satisfaction to the ladies of Bhārata Varsa and She is considered very superior throughout all parts of India. This Tulasi Devi is the chief factor of Mūlā Prakṛti.

प्रधानांश्रवल्पा या मनसा कश्यपत्मजा ।

गंकरप्रियश्या च महानानविशारता ॥ 7 1 ॥

नागेश्रत्यानंतस्य भगिनी नागपूजिता ।

नागेश्री नागमाता सुन्दरी नागवाहिती ॥ 7 2 ॥

Then comes the Manasā Devī, the daughter of Kaśyapa, She is the dear disciple of Śaṅkara and is therefore very learned in matters of Śāstras. She is the daughter of Ananta Deva, the Lord of Snakes and is respected very much by all the Nāgas. She Herself is very beautiful, the Lady of the Nāgas, the mother of the Nāgas and is carried by them.

नारौद्रगणसंयुक्ता नानायुष्णभृत्ति ।

नार्गेद्वित्ता सिद्धा योगिनी नागगणियिनी ॥ ७ ३ ॥

विष्णुका विष्णुभक्ता विष्णुप्रजारयणा ।

तपस्वरूपा तपसां फलदायी तपसिंची ॥ ७ ४ ॥

She is decorated with ornaments of the Snakes; She is respected by the Nāgendras and She sleeps on the bed of Snakes. She is Siddha Yogini, the

Book IX Chapter I

devotee of Viṣṇu and always ready in the worship of Viṣṇu; She is the Tapas and the bestower of the fruits of Tapas.

दिव्यं सितक्षवर्षे च तपसत्प्वा च या हरे: ।

तपस्विनीषु पूज्या च तपस्विषु च भातेस् ॥ 75 ॥

सर्वमन्याधिवेदी च ज्वलतीं बढ्धतजास ।

Herself an ascite, She spent three lakh years (according to the Devas measure) and has become the foremost of the ascetics in Bhāratvaṃsa. She is the Presiding Deity of all the mantras; Her whole body shines with Brahmateja (the Holy Fire of Brahma).

ब्रह्मस्वरूपा परम ब्रह्मभावन्ततपा ॥ 76 ॥

जरकाममुने: पली कृष्णांगस्य पतितजा ।

आस्तीकस्य मुनेमांता प्रवरस्य तपस्विनम् ॥ ७ ७ ॥

प्रधानांशल्वया या देवसेना च नारव ।

मातृकासु पूर्वतमा सा यधी च प्रकीर्तिने ॥ ७ ७ ॥

Herself of the nature of Brahma, She again meditates on Brahman. She is sprung from a part of Śrī Krṣna and the chaste wife of Jarat Kāru Muni, the mother of Āstika, the great Muni; She is the part of Mūlā Prakṛti. O Child Nārada! Now comes the Saṣthī Devi, the Mother of Devasenā. She is the most superior amongst the Gaurī and the other sixteen Mārṭkās.

पुत्रपौगदिद्वारी च धार्जी विजगतां सती ।

घडीशल्या प्रकृतेतेने घटी प्रकंसिति ॥ 79 ॥

स्थाने शिशुर्नां परमा बुद्धल्या च वोगिति ।

पूजा ब्रादशमासेषु यस्या विशेषुं संतन् ॥ 80 ॥

This chaste woman is the giver of sons and grandsons in the three worlds and the nurse, the foster mother of all. She is the sixth part of Mūlā and is hence known by thename of Śaṣthi. She lives near to every child as an aged Yogini.

पूजा च सृत्तिकागारे पुरा घड्विदेने शिशे ।

एकविंशलिति चैव पूजा कल्याणहेतुकी ॥ 8 1 ॥

युनिभिर्मिता चैव नित्यकामास्थित: परा ।

मातृका च द्वारूपा शश्छक्षणाकारिणी ॥ 8 2 ॥

Her worship is everywhere prevalent in the twelve months Vaiśākha, etc. When the child gets

born, on the sixth day Her worship is done in the lying-in-chamber and again on the 21st day (after twenty days have passed away) the most auspicious worshipful ceremony of Her is performed. The Munis bow down to Her with reverence and want to visit Her daily.

जले स्थले चानत्रिक्रे शिशुनीं सद्योगेचे ।

प्रधानांशल्यचा च देवीभगडलचिचिडा ॥ 83 ॥

प्रकृतेपुंखसभूतत सर्वेभगलदा सदा ।

सुहीं मंगललचा च संहांरे कोरूपिणी ॥ 84 ॥

She protects all children always with a mother's affectionate heart. This Saṣṭhī Devī is again the part of Mūlā Prakṛti. Then appears the Devī Maṅgala Caṇḍikā. She goes from one house to another, on land or through water or in air, doing great good to them; She has come out of the face of the Prakṛti Devī and is doing always all sorts of good to this world.

तेन मेगलवचडी सा पधडतैः परिकीर्तिति ।

प्रतिमंगलावेषु प्रतिविश्वेषु पूजिता ॥ 85 ॥

पुरप्रीधानेप्रश्वय्वेगोमंगलाद्वारभी ।

परितृष्टा सर्ववांधप्रदात्री सर्ववंभितिम् ॥ 86 ॥

Her name is Māngala Cāndī because She is all auspicious at the time of creation and assumes very furious angry appearance at the time of destruction. So the Paṇdits say. On every Tuesday in all the worlds Her worship is done; and She, when pleased, gives to women sons, grandsons, wealth, prosperity, fame and good of all sorts and grants all desires.

रहा क्षणेन संहर्तुं शक्ता विश्वं महेश्वी ।

प्रधानांशस्वरूपा सा काली कमललोचना ॥ 87 ॥

दुगतिलतदासभूता रणे शुभ्यनिशुभ्यभोः ।

दुगांधीशस्वरूपा सा गुणेन तेजसा सभा ॥ 88 ॥

This Māngala Caṇḍī is again the part of Mūlā Prakṛti. Now come the lotus-eyed Māheśvari Kālī who when angry can destroy all this universe in a moment, who sprang from the forehead of the Mūlā Prakṛti, Durgā to slay the two Demons Sumbha and Niśumbha. She is the half-portion of Durgā and qualified like Her, fiery and energetic.

Śrimaddevbhāgavatam

कोटियुर्मसामूख्युखाज्ञलयिग्राहा ।

प्रधाना सर्वशगतिनां बला जलवती परा ॥ 8 9 ॥

सर्वसिद्धिप्रदा देवी परम योगसाधिगी ।

कृष्णभक्ता कृष्णानुल्या तेजसा विद्यमैगुंगीः ॥ 9 0 ॥

कृष्णाघावनया शक्रतृष्णाबर्गा सनातनी ।

संहर्तुं सर्वबह्ञापई शक्ता निःशासमाजतः ॥ 9 1 ॥

रां दैवेः समं तयाः क्रीवया लोकशिखाः ।

धर्मार्थकामपोक्षांश दातुं शक्ता च पूजिता ॥ 9 2 ॥

The beauty and splendour of whose body make one think as if the millions of suns have arisen simultaneously. Who is the foremost of all the Śaktis and is more powerful than any of them, Who grants success to all the persons, Who is superior to all and is of Yogic nature, Who is exceedingly devoted to Kṛṣṇa and like Him fiery, well-qualified, and valorous, Whose body has become black by the constant meditation of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Who can destroy in one breath this whole Brahmāṇḍa, Who was engaged in fighting with the Daityas simply for sport and instruction to the people and Who, when pleased in worship can grant the four fruits Dharma, Artha, Kāma and Moksa.

ब्रह्मादिषिः सूयमाना मुनिभिभर्निपरिः ।

प्रधानांगस्वक्या सा प्रकृतेश वसुंधा ॥ 9 3 ॥

आधारक्पा सर्वेथों वसंसय्या प्रकीर्तिता ।

रत्नकारा रत्नाभांं संर्वत्नाकाराश्रया ॥ 9 4 ॥

This Kālī is also the part of Prakrti. The Devi Vasundharā (Earth) is again the part of Mūlā Prakrti. Brahmā and the other Devas, all the Muni mandalams (the spheres of Munis), fourteen Manus and all men sing hymns to Her. She is the support of all and filled with all sorts of grains. She is the source of all gems and jewels, She bears in her womb all the precious metals. All sorts of best things issue from Her.

प्रजाशिक्ष प्रजेशैश धुक्तिता वन्दिता सदा ।

सर्वपरीजीक्वता च सर्वसम्पश्रधारिनी ॥ 95 ॥

She is the Refuge of all. The subjects and kings worship Her always and chant hymns to Her. All the Jivas live through Her and She bestows all sorts of wealth and prosperity.

यथा विना जानसर्वे निराधारं चराचरम् ।

प्रकृतेश कला या यास्ता निवोधे पुनीश्रः ॥ 96 ॥

यस्य यस्य च या पत्नी तत्सर्वे वर्णायति ते ।

स्वाहादेवी वह्हिन्ती प्रतिविशेषु पुजिता ॥ 97 ॥

Without Her, all this, moving or non moving, become void of any substratum. Where to rest on! O Child Nārada! Now hear about them who are issued again from the parts of Mūla Prakṛti as well as the names of their wives. I will now narrate duly. The Devi ‘Svāhā’ is the wife of Agni (Fire), and the whole Universe worships Her.

यथा विना हविदानं न ग्रहीतुं सुरा: क्षमा: ।

दक्षिणा यज्ञपनी च दीक्षा सर्वेत्र पुजिता ॥ 98 ॥

यया विना हि विशेषु सर्वेकर्म हि निष्पलम् ।

स्वधा पितृणां पत्नी च पुनिभिन्नुभिभर्नी: ॥ 99 ॥

Without Her, the Devi can never take any oblations. Dakṣinā and Dīkṣā are both the wives of Yajñā (Sacrifice). They are honoured everywhere. So much so that without Dakṣinā (the fees given at the end of the Sacrifice) no sacrificial ceremonies can be complete and fructifying. The Devi ‘Svadhā’ is the wife of the Pitrs. All worship this Devi ‘Svadhā’ whether they are Munis, Manus, or men.

पूजिता विद्यतांन हि निष्णलं च यया विता ।

स्वस्तिदेवी वायुपन्ती प्रतिविशेषु पूजिता ॥ 100 ॥

आदानं च प्रदानं च निष्णलं च च यया विता ।

पृष्टिपणपतेः पत्नी भूजिता जगतीतले ॥ 101 ॥

If this mantra ‘Svadhā’ be not uttered while making an offering to the Pitrs, all turn out useless. The Devi ‘Svasti’ is the wife of the Vāyu Deva; She is honoured everywhere in the Universe. Without this ‘Svasti’ Devi no giving nor taking nor any action can be fructifying and useful. ‘Puṣti’ (nourishment) is the wife of Ganapati. All in this world worship this Puṣti Devi. Without this ‘Puṣti’, women or men alike all become weaker and weaker.

यया बिना परिक्षिणा: पुर्भांतो योचितोर्पि च ।

अनंतपनी तुधिश पुर्जिता वर्दिता भवेत् ॥ 102 ॥

Book IX Chapter II

