CHAPTER XXXIV

On Various Hells

यम उवाच

छिन्ति जीवं खड्गेन द्याहीन: सुढारणः ।

नरधाती हाँत नरायलोभेन भारते ॥ १ ॥

असिपये बसेलोर्पि यावदिद्वारचतुरैंग ।

तेषु यो ब्राह्मणान्डिति शतमन्त्यंतरं वसेत ॥ 2 ॥

Dharma Rāja Yama said: “O Fair One! If, in this Bhārata, any murderer, merciless and fierce, kills any man, out of greed for money, he goes and miserably dwells in the Asipattra hell for fourteen Indra’s life periods. And if that murderer kills a Brāhmaṇa, he lives in that hell for one hundred manvantaras. While in hell, his body becomes fiercely cut and wounded by the swords.

छिन्नोगः संवसेत्सोरी खड्गायोगे संतानम् ।

अनाहार: शब्दमुच्यैयम्वेन्ते ताडितः ॥ 3 ॥

There My messengers chastise him and beat him and he cries aloud and passes his time without any food.

भंथान: शतजन्यानि शतजन्यानि सूकरः ।

कुक्कुटः सपतजनामिनि शुगालः सपतजनासु ॥ 4 ॥

व्याधरणं सपतजनामिने चुकरणेवेल जित्जनसु ।

सपतजनसु मंकुको यमयुतेन ताडितः ॥ 5 ॥

स भवेढ़ातरे वर्षे महिषश्च ततः शुचिः ।

Then he becomes born for one hundred years as a Manthāna insect, for hundred births as a boar, for seven births as a cock; for seven births as a fox, for seven births as a tiger; for three births, as an wolf; for seven births, as a frog; then as a buffaloe when he becomes freed of his sins of murders.

प्रामाणां नाराणां वा दहनं यः कोरिते च ॥ ६ ॥

बुत्प्रादे वसेलोप्रिय पिछनांगक्षितृगं सति ।

ततः प्रेते भवेत्स्वो वहिंबकको प्रभमन्हीम् ॥ ७ ॥

सदाजनामोयधभोजी कोपोतः सलाजनामु ।

ततेो घबेन्महागृली मानवः सलाजनम् ॥ ८ ॥

If any body sets fire to a city or a village, he will have to live in Kṣuradhāra Kūnda for three

yugas with his body severed. Then he becomes a Preta (disembodied spirit) and travels over the whole earth, being burnt up with fire. For seven births he eats unclean and unholy food and spends his time as a pigeon. Then for seven births he becomes diseased with a severe colic pain, for seven births as a leper; when ultimately he gets a pure human body.

सतजन्मालरुक्ट्री ततः शुद्धो घबेनः ।

परकर्णे मुखं दत्वा परनिंदां क्लोति वः ॥ 9 ॥

परदोषे महूल्याची देवबाडाणनिंदकः ।

सूचीमुखे यसेतोस्ती सूचीविब्दो युगायम् ॥ 10 ॥

ततो भवेद्वृधिकरच सपढ़ा सपतजन्मु ।

वज्रकीटः सतजन्म भस्मकीटस्ततः परम् ॥ 11 ॥

ततो भवेमानवरच महाव्याधिसतः शृष्चि: ।

If anybody whispers in one's ear another's calumny and thus glorifies himself and abuses and vilifies the Devas and Brāhmaṇas, he goes and remains in Sūcī Kuṇḍa for three Yugas, and he is pierced there by needles. Then he becomes a scorpion for seven births, a serpent for seven births, and an insect (Bhasma Kīta) for seven births; then he gets a diseased human body when, at last, he becomes purified.

गृहिणं हि गृहं भिन्ता वसुस्तेवं कौतिथ : च । १ २ । च।

गाध्ध छागांध्य मेघांध्य गाति गोकामुचे च सः ।

ताडितो यमदुतेने वसेतत्र युगायम् ॥ १३ ॥

ततो भवेत्पतजन्म गोजातिव्याधियंतुः ।

शिजान्यि मेघजातिष्ठागजातिशिज्ञानम् ॥ १४ ॥

ततो भवेमानावरूच नित्यरोगी दरिष्कः ।

If any-body breaks into another's house and steals away all the household articles, cows, goats or buffaloes, he goes to Gokā Mukha Kunda where faces are like cow's hoofs, there, beaten by My servants, for three Yugas. (Gokā is Gokṣura, hoof of a cow). Then, for seven births, he becomes a diseased cow; for three births, a sheep; for three births, a goat; and finally he becomes a man.

भार्यहीनी बंधुरीन: संतापी च ततः शृष्चि: ॥ 15 ॥

सामान्यद्व्यचौरच याति नक्रभुखं च सः ।

ताडितो यमदुतेन वसेत्त्राब्दकत्रयम् ॥ 16 ॥

But in this man-birth he is born first as diseased, poor, deprived of wife and friends, and a repenting person; when ultimately he is freed of his sin. If anybody steals any ordinary thing, he goes to Nakra Mukha Kūndā and lives there for three years, greatly tormented by My messengers.

ततो घबेस्पतजन मोगतिव्याधिसंयुतः ।

ततो घबेमानवरश महारोगीत ततः शुचि: ॥ 17 ॥ 11

हाँत गारच गजांशेत तुलगाङ्ग नगांलक्षा ।

स याति गतबईगं च महापाणी युगावम् ॥ 18 ॥

Next for seven births, he becomes a diseased ox. Then he attains a very diseased man-birth, and ultimately he is freed of his sins. Such are the horrible results. If anybody kills a cow, elephant, horse, or cuts a tree, he goes to Gaja Darbaśa Kunda for three yugas.

ताडिते यमदूतेन नागदंतेन सैततम् ।

स भवेदजजातिकु तुगाश्र जिनमनि ॥ 19 ॥

गोजातिलेखज्जातिकु ततः शुखो भवेत्रः ।

जलं पिंबर्ती तुचितां गां वारयित यः पुयान् ॥ 20 ॥

नरकं गोभुखाकारं कुमितपोदकापित्यम् ।

तन सिहुति संतनो यावम्बतंवराधि ॥ 21 ॥

There he is punished by My messengers freely by the teeth of elephants. Then he attains three elephants births, three horse-births; then he becomes born as a cow and ultimately he is born a Mleecha when he becomes pure. If anybody obstructs any thirsty cow from drinking water, he goes to Krmi Kunḍa and Gomukha Kunḍa filled with hot water and lives there for one manvantara.

ततो नोर्धि गोहीनो महातोरी दरिक्रकः ।

सपजन्माल्यजातिङ ततः शुद्धो भवेनः ॥ 22 ॥

गोहत्वां ब्रहहत्वां च कोरिते ह्रातिदेशिकांम ।

यो हिं गच्छल यम्यां च यः कहीत्वां कोरिते च ॥ 23 ॥

भिश्रुतत्वां महापापी भूणहत्वां च भारते ।

कुभीपाकि वसेत्सोरीय वार्वदौरश्रधुरुदैर ॥ 24 ॥

Next when he attains a human birth he owns

not any cattle nor any wealth; rather he is born as a man, very much diseased, in low castes, for seven births when he becomes freed. If anybody, being born in Bhārata, kills cows, Brāhmins, women, beggars, causes abortions or goes to those not fit to be gone into, he lives in the Kumbhīpāka hell for fourteen Indra's life periods.

ताडितो यमदुतेन चूर्ण्यमानश संततम् ।

क्षणं पतति वह्ही च क्षणं पतति कंटके ॥ 25 ॥

क्षणं योत्तपततेले तयो वेण क्षणम् ।

क्षणं च ततलोहे च क्षणं च ततलाप्रके ॥ 26 ॥

गृधो जनमसह्वाणि शतज्ञनामिन सूकतः ।

काकक्ष सत जन्यानि सपीक्ष सतजनस्मु ॥ 27 ॥

There he is pulverised always by My messengers. He is made to fall sometimes in fire, sometimes over thorns, sometimes in hot oil, sometimes in hot water, sometimes in molten iron or copper. That great sinner gets thousand vulture births, hundred boar births, seven crow births and seven serpent births.

पीछवर्षसहस्राणि विद्यायां जायते कृमि: ।

नानाजमन्सु स वृषस्तत: कुछी दरिक्र: ॥ 28 ॥

He then becomes worms of faeces for sixty thousand years. Thus travelling frequently in ox births he at last becomes born as a very poor leper.

साधिव्यवाच

विप्रह्ला च गोहाया किंवाया चातितेशिका ।

का वा नृणामपान्य च को वा संध्याविकृतिकः ॥ 29 ॥

Sāvitrī said: “O Bhagavan! What is, according to the Śāstras, Brahmahatya (murdering a Brāhmīn) and Gohatyā (killing a cow)? Who are called Agamyās (woman unfit to be approached)? Who are designated as void of Sandhyā (daily worship of the twice born castes)?

अर्दीक्षितः पुमान्को वा को वा तीर्थप्रतिगृति ।

दिजः को वा प्रायायजी को वा विरुओंदये देवलः ॥ 30 ॥

गृह्जाणां सुप्रकाश्य प्रमत्तो वृषलीपति: ।

एतेषां लक्षणं सर्वे वद वेदविदां वर ॥ 31 ॥

Who can be called uninitiated? Who are said to take Pratigrahams (gifts in a Tiratha? What are the

Book IX Chapter XXXIV

characteristics of a real Grāmayājī (village priests), Devala, (Brāhmaṇa of an inferior order who subsists upon the offerings made to the images which he attends), the cook of a Śūdra, of one who is infatuated (Pramatta) and the Vṛṣalipati (one who has married an unmarried girl twelve years old in whom menstruation has commenced; a barren woman). Kindly describe all those to me.

धर्मराज जवाच

श्रीकृष्ण च तद्चार्वायाम्येधां प्रकृती सति ।

शिवे च शिवालिंगे च सूर्वे सूर्मभणी तथा ॥ 32 ॥

गणेश वाथ दुर्गाधायमे संवर्गे सुंदरी ।

यः क्रोति भेदवृद्धि ब्रह्मत्या क्षेभतु सः ॥ 33 ॥

Dharmarājan said: O Fair Śāvitrī! If anybody makes a distinction between Krṣṇa and His Image or between any Deva and his image, between Śiva and His phallic emblem, between the Sun and the stone Sūrya Kānta (a precious stone of a bright and glittering colour) between Gānṣaśa and Durgā, he is said to be guilty of the sin Brahmahattyā.

स्वगुरी स्वेष्टदेच च जन्मदातरि माताति ।

करीति भेदवृद्धि यो ब्राह्मतांलो भनेत सः ॥ 34 ॥

दैयायेदु च भक्तेषु ब्रह्मणीवतरेषु च ।

करीति भेदवृद्धि यो ब्राह्मतांलो भनेत सः ॥ 35 ॥

If anybody makes any difference (superiority or inferiority) between his own Iṣṭa Deva (his Deity), his Spiritual Teacher, his natural father, and mother, is certainly involved in the sin of Brahmahattyā.

विप्रपादोदके चैव शाल्यामोदके तथा ।

कांगीत भेदवृद्धि यो ब्रह्मात्यां लभेपु सः ॥ ३६ ॥

शिववैद्यके चैव हरिनेवेढ़के तथा ।

कांगीत भेदवृद्धि यो ब्रह्मात्यां लभेपु सः ॥ ३७ ॥

He who shews any difference (superiority or inferiority) between the devotees of Viṣṇu and those of other Devas, is said to commit Brahmahattyā. He who makes any difference in matters of respect between the waters of the feet of any Brāhmaṇa and those of Śālagrāma stone, is said to commit Brahmahattyā. The difference

between the offerings to Hari and Hara leads to Brahmahatyā.

सर्वेशोधेत्र कृष्णे सर्वकारणकारणे ।

सर्वोष्टि सर्वदैवानां सेवे सर्वान्तराननि ॥ 38 ॥

मायवायानेकल्पे वायलेक एव हि निर्गुणे ।

कोतीशीगेन भेदं यो ब्रह्मल्यां लभेनु सः ॥ 39 ॥

शक्तिभक्ते द्विषद्धूद्व शक्तिभागस्टे तदैव च ।

द्रेषं यः कुलेते मल्यों ब्रह्मल्यां लभेनु सः ॥ 40 ॥

पितृदेवार्चं न या तयजेदेवान्तिकपितम् ।

यः करोति निषिद्धे च ब्रह्महालां लभेनु सः ॥ 41 ॥

He who shews any difference between Krṣna, Who is verily the God of gods, the Cause of all causes, the Origin of all, Who is worshipped by all the Devas, Who is the Self of all, Who is attributeless and without a second yet Who by His Magic powers assumes many forms and who is Iśāna, is said to commit, indeed, the Brāhmhattyā. If any Vaiṣṇava (a devotee of Viṣṇu) abuses and envies a Śakta (a devotee of Śakti), he commits Brahmahatya. He who does not worship, according to the Vedas, the Pitrs and the Devas or prohibits others in doing so, commits Brahmahatya.

यो निदिति हृधीकेशं तन्योपासकं तथा ।

पविजाणां पर्यविं च सानानन्दं सनातनम् ॥ 42 ॥

प्रधानं वैश्यानां च देवानां संव्याधिधरम् ।

ये नार्वयिति निदिति ब्रह्मात्यां लभिते ते ॥ 43 ॥

He who abuses Hrṣikeśa, Who is the Highest of the Holy things, Who is Knowledge and Bliss and Who is Eternal, Who is the only God to be served by the Devas and Vaiṣṇavas, and those Who are worshippers of His Mantra, and those who do not worship themselves are said to commit Brahmahatya.

वे निर्दन्ति महाद्वीं कारणब्रह्मार्विणीम् ।

सर्वश्चित्रवर्णा च प्रकृति सर्वमात्मम् ॥ 44 ॥

सर्वदेवस्वक्षा च सर्वेयं बन्दितां सदा ।

सर्वकारणत्वां च ब्रह्मत्वां लभन्ति ते ॥ 45 ॥

He who abuses and vilifies Mūlāprakṛti Mahā Devi, Who is of the nature of Causal Brahma (Kāraṇa Brahma), Who is All Power and the

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

Mother of all, Who is worshipped by all and who is of the nature of all the Devas and the Cause of all causes, Who is Ādyā Śakti Bhagavatī, is said to commit Brahmahatyā.

कृष्णजन्मार्थी रामनवर्मी च सुपुणयदान् ।

शिवरार्रिं तथा चैकाद्रर्णी वारंर रवेस्तथा ॥ 4 6 ॥

पञ्च पविण पुणवानि ये न कुबेति मानावः ।

लभनित ब्रह्महलां ते पंडालाथिक्यापिति: ॥ 4 7 ॥

He who does not observe the Holy Śri Kṛṣṇa Janmāṣṭamī. Śrī Rāma Navamī, Śivārātri, the Ekādāśī happening on Sunday, and five other holy Pārvaṇas (festivals), commits Brahmahatyā; is considered more sinful than a Cāndāla.

अंबुवाच्यां भृवुञनं जलगीचादिकं च ये ।

कृवैति भारते वर्ष ब्रह्मात्या लभन्ति ते ॥ 48 ॥

पूठे च मातरं ततं ताम्बीं भार्यां सुतं सुताम् ।

अर्सिंहा यो न पुणाति ब्रह्महत्या लभेनु सः ॥ 49 ॥

He who in this land of Bharata, digs earth on the day of Ambuvācī or makes water etc. in the waters of the tanks, is involved in the sin of Brahmatahyā. He who does not support his spiritual teacher, mother, father, chaste wife, son and daughter, though they are faultless, commits Brahmatahyā.

विद्याहो यस्य न भवेव प्रप्यति सुतं तु यः ।

हरिभक्तिवहीनो को बहुहत्या लंभुन सः ॥ 50 ॥

हरेनेवेदिधकोी निथ्व विष्णुं न पुवन्ते ।

पुर्णयं पार्थिवलिंगं च बहुहात्रसी प्रकीर्तितः ॥ 5 1 ॥

He whose marriage does not take place during his whole life-time, who does not see the face of his son, who does not cherish devotion to Hari, who eats things unoffered to Śri Hari, who never worshipped throughout his life Viṣṇu or an earthen symbol of Śiva, verily commits Brahmahatya.

गोष्टहा प्रकुर्बर्ते चूद्धा यो न निवारयेत् ।

याति गोविष्योभीध्य गोहाचां। च भलभुः सः ॥ 52 ॥

दंईगीताडवेन्मूढो यो विषो वृषवाहनः ।

द्विते दिति गोवयं च भलते नास संशयः ॥ 53 ॥

O Fair One! Now I will recite the characteristics, according to the Śāstras, of Gohatyā, (Killing a

cow). Listen. If anybody does not prohibit one, seeing one to beat a cow, or if he goes between a cow and a Brāhmin, he is involved in the sin of Gohatyā. If any illiterate Brāhman, carrying an ox, daily beats with a stick, the cows, certainly the Gohatyā.

द्वाति गीय म उचिष्ट धोजयेद्वुचावाकम् ।

भूनक्ति बुचवाहात्रं स मोहत्या कंधेदुकुम् ॥ 54 ॥

If anybody gives the remains of another's meal to a cow to eat, or feeds a Brāhmīn who caries, rather moves or drives, cows and oxen; or eats himself the food of such a Brāhmīn driver, he commits Gohattyā

वूर्वलीपिति वाजयेघो धुक्ते5त्र तस्य यो नर: ।

गोहत्यागतकं सोउपि लभते नात्र संपर्यः ॥ 55 ॥

पारं ददाति वह्वी यो गाशु पादेत ताडवेत् ।

गेहं विशेट्योतीपि: स्नाता गोवधामानुयात् ॥ 56 ॥

Those who do sacrifices of the husband of a barren woman (Vṛṣali) or eat his food, commit sin equal to one hundred Gohatyās; there is no doubt in this. Those who touch fire with their feet, beat the cows or enter the temple bathing but not washing their feet, commit Gohatyā.

यो भूक्ति निश्चयादेने शेते निर्याधिप्रदे च ।

सूयादेव च यो भूक्ति से गोहाला लभेद्युवम् ॥ 57 ॥

अवीराङ्च च यो भूक्ते योदिनील्यच्च च दिजः ।

यशिसन्यम्याविश्रीनश्छ गोहाल्यां पलते तु सः ॥ 58 ॥

Those who eat without washing their feet or those who sleep with their feet wetted with water and those who eat just after the Sun has risen, commit Gohatyā. Those who eat the food of women without husbands or sons or the food of pimps and pampers or those who do not perform their Sandhyās thrice, commit Gohattyā.

स्वभर्तीर च देवे वा भेदवृद्धि करोति या ।

कटूटत्या ताडवेल्लांतं सा गोहायां लेपेदुपुर्ण ।। ५९ ॥

गोमार्विजनं कृत्वा द्वाति सस्येव वा ।

तजाये वा तु दुर्गे वा स गोहत्या लभेद्युपर्ण ।। 60 ॥

If any woman makes any difference between her husband and the Devatā, or chastises and uses

Book IX Chapter XXXIV

harsh words to her husband, she commits Gohattyā. If any body destroys cow's pasture land, tanks, or land for forts and cultivates there grains, he commits Go-hatyā.

प्रायश्छिते गोवधस्य यः क्रोतिं व्यतिक्रमम्।

पुत्रलोभावद्धानात्स गोहत्थां लभेद्युबम् ॥ 6 1  ॥

राजक दैवके यन्त्रोहस्वामी गां न रक्षिति ।

दुःखं द्वताति यो मुहो गोहत्थां स लभेद्युबम् ॥ 6 2 ॥

He who does not do Prāyaśchita (expiation, atonement) for the expiation of the sin of Gohatyā done by his son (for fear of his son's life), commits the sin himself. If any troubles arises in the state or from the Devas, and if any master does not protect then his own cows, rather torments them, he is said to commit Gohatyā.

प्राणिनो लंययेघो हि देवाचिमन्तं जलम् ।

नैवेहं पृथमदं च स गोहृत्यां लभेद्रयम् ॥ 6 3 ॥

गश्रनारतीति वो वादी मिथ्यावादी प्राताकः ।

देवदेपी गृहद्री स गोहृत्यां लभेद्रयम् ॥ 6 4 ॥

देवताप्रितिमां द्वुता गुरुं वा बाड़णां सति ।

संभ्रमान्न नेचोही हि स गोहृत्यां लभेद्रयम् ॥ 6 5 ॥

If any Jiva oversteps the image of a Deva, fire, water, offerings to a god, flowers, or food, he commits the great sin Brahmahatī. When a guest comes, if the master of the house always says 'there is nothing, nothing with me; no, no' and if he be a liar, cheat and an abuser of the Devas, he commits the above sin. O fair One! Whoever seeing his spiritual teacher, and a Brāhman, does not bow down and make respectful obeisance to them, commits Gohatyā.

न द्वताराशिर्ये कोपातृणताय च यो द्विजः ।

विद्यार्थिने च विधां च स गोहल्यां लयेव्युवम् ॥ 6 6 ॥

If any Brāhmīn, out of sheer anger, does not blessings to a man who bows down or does not impart knowledge to a student, he commits Gohatyā.

गोहृत्वा विप्रहत्वा च कविता चातिर्विधिका ।

गयां तिच्यं गुणायेव निवोध कथयामि ते । ६७ ॥

O Fair One! Thus I have described to you the

characteristics, approved by Śāstras, of cow-killing (Gohatyā), and murdering a Brāhmin (Brahmahatyā). Now hear which women are (Agamyās) not fit to be approached and those which are fit to be approached (Gamyās).

स्वकी गमा च सर्वेधामिति वेदानुगासनम् ।

अगमाच्चा च तदन्याच्चा वितुः विवेदी विदुः ॥ 68 ॥

सामान्यं कवितं सर्वे विशेषं शपुं सु-वृत्ति ।

अत्यगम्या हिं च याथा निवोध कवयाभि तः ॥ 69 ॥

One's own wife is fit to be approached (Gamyā) and all other woman are Agamyās, so the Pandits, versed in the Vedas, declare. This is a general remark; now hear everything in particular.

ग्रृह्जागं विघुपन्ती च विघ्जाणां गृह्मकामिनि ।

अत्यमाया च निह्ना च लोके वेदे पतिजते ॥ 70 ॥

गृह्धं श्राहणी गत्वा ब्रह्मालग्रतं पल्ले ।

तत्समं ब्राहणी चाणि कुम्भीयाकं लेभ्युद्यम् ॥ 71 ॥

O Chaste One! The Brāhmin wives of Śūdra or the Śūdra wives of Brāhmaṇas are Atyāgamyās (very unfit to be approached) and blameable both in the Vedas and in the society. A Śūdra going to a Brāhmaṇī woman commits one hundred Brahmahatyās; so a Brāhmaṇa woman going to a Śūdra goes to the Kumbhipāka hell.

श्रूग्रतां विष्णप्त्री च विप्राणां श्रूग्रतामिनी ।

यदि श्रूग्रं जतेब्रिणो वृषलीपतिरेव सः ॥ 72 ॥

स प्रशो विष्जालोसु घडालालसोउदमः स्मूतः ।

विष्ठासमश्रु तत्नैष्ठो मूर्ते नस्य च तर्पणम् ॥ 73 ॥

As a Śūdra should avoid a Brāhmaṇi, so a Brāhmaṇa should avoid a Śūdra woman. A Brāhmaṇa going to a Śūdra woman is recognised a Vṛṣalipati (one who has married an unmarried girl twelve years old in whom menstruation has commenced. So much so that that Brāhmaṇa is considered an outcast and the vilest of the Cāndālas. The offerings of Pindas by him are considered as faeces and water offered by him is considered as urine.

न विगुर्णा सुराणां च तहत्नपुयितछिति ।

कोटिज्ञानार्जितं पुण्यं तत्यथार्चा तपसासार्जिता ॥ 74 ॥

द्विस्य वृषलीलोभान्यल्येव न संशयः ।

ब्राह्माण्ड सुर्पारीतिविद्यभोजी सृष्टीयपितः ॥ 75 ॥

No where whether in the Devaloka or in the Pitploka, his offered Piṇḍas and water are accepted. Whatever religious merits he has acquired by worshipping the Devas, and practising austerities for Koti births, he loses all at once by the greed of enjoying the Śūdra woman. There is no doubt in this. A Brāhmīn, if he drinks wine, is considered as the husband of a Vṛṣalī, eating faeces.

तदमुद्राद्धदेहसत्याल्गोकितस्था ।

हरिवासरभोजी च कृम्भीपाकं जनेदूद्धिकः ॥ 7 6 ॥

And if he be a Vaisnava, a devotee of Viṣṇu, his body must be branded with the marks of a Taptamudrā (hot seal); and if he be a Śaiva, his body is to be branded with the Tapta Śula (hot trident).

गुरुभर्ती राजपत्नी सपनीमातं धूवम् ।

सृत्तं पुरवर्धं इधूर्षे सभार्थं भार्थिनी सतीम् ॥ 77 ॥

सहोदरभालुवागां मालुलानी चितुः प्रमूम् ।

मातुः प्रमूं तत्वसारं भार्थिनी घालुकल्याम् ॥ 78 ॥

शिष्यां शिष्यस्य पत्नी च भागिनेत्यस्य कामिनीम् ।

भातुः सुप्रियां चैवात्यगया आह पत्रतः ॥ 79 ॥

The wife of a spiritual teacher, the wife of a king, step-mother, daughter, son's wife, mother-in-law, sister of the same father and mother, the wife of one's brother (of the same father and mother), the wife of a maternal uncle, the father's mother, mother's mother, the mother's sister, sisters, the brother's daughter, the female disciple, the disciple's wife, the wife of the sister's son, the wife of the brother's son, these all are mentioned by Brahman's attyagamyaś (very unfit to be approached). The people are hereby warned.

एता: कामेन कांता यो बजेहे मानवाधमः ।

स मातृगामी वेवेयु ब्रह्मल्यागतं जज्ने ।। 80 ॥

अकर्महींडप्यसंयुयो लोके वेदे च निदितः ।

स याति कृभ्योपाके च महापापी सुकुचक् ॥ 81 ॥

If anybody, overpowered by passion, goes to these Atyāgamyā women, he becomes the vilest of men. The Vedas consider him as if going to his

mother and he commits one hundred Brahmahatyaś sins. These have no right to do any actions. They are not to be touched by any. They are blamed in the Vedas, in the society everywhere. Ultimately they go to the dreadful Kumbhipāka bells.

करोल्युर्द्धा संख्या वा न संख्या वा कांति च ।

त्रिसंधे वर्जयेची वा संयाश्रीव्य स हिजः ॥ 82 ॥

वैशणं व च त्वा गैरं शालनं सौरं च गाणपम् ।

योर्धंकारात्र गृह्ठति मंत्र संगेदीक्षितः स्मृत: ॥ 83 ॥

O Fair One! He who performs Sandhyās wrongly or reads it wrongly or does not perform at all the three Sandhyās daily, is called as void of Sandhyā. He is said to remain uninitiated who does not, out of sheer vanity, receive any Mantra, whether he be a Vaiṣnavite, Śaivite, or a Sun worshipper or the Ganeśa worshipper.

प्रवासामविति कृत्वा यावद्धतस्तवतुयम् ।

तत्र नारायण: स्वामी गड़ागभीर्ते वसेत् ॥ 84 ॥

तत्र नारायणद्वेत्र मृती वाति हरे: पदम् ।

वाराणायां बद्याँ च गड़ासारमसूम् ॥ 85 ॥

पुब्जे हरित्धरेजे प्रभासे कामकल्पस्वले ।

हरिप्रते च केदारे तथा मातुपुरंप्रि च ॥ 86 ॥

सरस्वतीनतीरीत पुणये वृन्दावने वने ।

गोदावचं च कौशिक्वां विवेल्यां च हिमावले ॥ 87 ॥

Where there is the running stream of the Ganges, lands on other side, four hands in width, are said to be the womb of the Ganges (Gaṅgā Garbha) Bhagavān Nārāyana incessantly dwells there. This is called the Nārāyana (Kṣetra). One goes to Viṣṇupada who dies in such a place. Vārāṇasī (Benares), Badarī, the Confluence of the Ganges with the ocean (Gaṅgā-Sāgara), puškara, Hari Hara Kṣetra (in Bihar near Chaprā), Prabhāsa, Kāmarūpa, Hardwar, Kedāra, Mātripura, the banks of the river Sarasvatī, the holy land Vrndāvana, Godāvari, Kauśiki, Trivenī (Allahabad), and the Himālayas are all famous places of pilgrimages.

एषु तीर्वेषु यो दानं प्रतिरुहाति कामतः ।

स च तीर्थप्रतिगाही कुम्भीपाके प्रयाति सः ॥ 88 ॥

गृहसेवी गृह्याजी ग्रामवाजीति कीर्तितः ।

तथा देवोपजीची च देवलः परिकीर्तितः ॥ 89 ॥

Book IX Chapter XXXV

Those who willingly accept gifts in these sacred places are said to be Tirthapratigrāhīs (the acceptors of the gifts in the Tīrtha). These Tirthapratigrāhīs go in the end to Kumbhīpāka hell. The Brāhmaṇa who acts as priests to the Śūdras is called Śūdrayājī; the village priests are called Grāmayājīs. Those who subsist on the offerings made to the gods are called Devalas.

शूरयाकोपजीदी यः सूपकार इति स्मृतः । संधायुजनहीनघ उपनतः पातितः स्मृतः ॥ 90 ॥ उनके सर्वे मया भयं रूक्षणं वृषतीपतेः । एते महापातिकनः कृष्मीपाकं प्रयान्ति दे ॥ 91 ॥ पुक्रवात्य-ययातिि ये यांति निवोधे कवयायिि ते ॥ 92 ॥ इत इशीमदौभोगवते नवमरकंधे नारदनारायणरसंवंदे साविश्युपाड्याने चतुर्सिंशो3ध्याय: ॥ 34 ॥ 11

The cooks of the Śūdras are called Sūpakāras. Those who are void of Sandhyā Vandanamans are called Pramattas (mad). O Bhadre! These are the marks of the Vṛṣalīpatis that I have (now) enumerated. These are the Great Sinners (Mahā Pātakas). They go ultimately to the Kumbhīpāka hell. O Fair One! I now state by and by the other Kundas (hells) where other people go. Listen.

Here ends the Thirty-fourth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the description of the various hells in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXXV

