CHAPTER XIX

On Šuka's Marriage

श्रीशुक उवाच

सन्दहोर्यं महाराज वर्तैत हृदये मम ।

मायामार्ये वर्तैनानः स कर्थे निस्युहो भवेत् ॥ १ ॥

Śrī Šuka said: O king! This great doubt arises in my mind, how a man can be free from desires and the rewards of their actions, when he lives in the midst of this Samsāra, that is all full of Māyā? शाख्जानं च संग्राम्य नित्यान्त्यविचारणम् ।

त्वजते न मनो मोहं स कर्थ मुच्यन्ते नः ॥ 2 ॥

When even by the acquiring of wisdom of the Śāstras and the capability to judge which is real and which is unreal, the delusion of the mind is not dispelled until one resorts to the practise of Yoga, how then can freedom from desires and liberation come to a householder?

अन्तर्नातं तमपुरुष्तुं शाखाप्रोधो पी न क्षमः ।

यथा न स्थवति तमः कृतया दीपवातां ॥ 3 ॥

The darkness of a room is not destroyed by the mere mention of lamp, light; so the wisdom acquired by reading the Śāstras can never dispel the darkness of delusion that reigns in the inside of a man.

अश्रैहः सर्वभूतेषु कतिथः सर्वदा बुधैः ।

स कर्थ राजशान्दूत गृहस्थय भवेतथा ॥ 4 ॥

O lion of kings! If one wants Moksā, one ought not to commit any act of revenge or injury or killing any being; how can this be possible to a householder?

चित्तेषणा न ते शांता तथा राज्यसुखेषणा ।

जयेषणा च संग्रामे जीव्यनुकः कर्थ भवेः ॥ 5 ॥

Your desires to acquire wealth, to enjoy royal pleasures and to get victory in battle have not subsided; how then can you be a Jīvannukta?

चोरेषु चीर्वबुद्धिसे साधुबुद्धिस्तु तापसे ।

स्वपरत्वं तवाप्यतित विदेहस्वयं कंयं नृप ॥ 6 ॥

O king! You consider yet a thief, thief and a saint, saint; you consider a man as your relative or other than that; these ideas have not vanished from you; how then can you be called Vidéha?

कटुतीक्षाकाव्यानसात्यान्तैस सुभागुभान् ।

गुभेषु रमते चित्तं नागुभेषु तथा नृप ॥ ७ ॥

जागत्यदनपुर्यिष्ठा तव राजन्यवर्ति ॥

अवस्थान्तु यथाकालं तुरीया तु कर्थे नृपः ॥ ८ ॥

O king? You feel the pungent, bitter, astringent, sour tastes and the like; you feel good and bad rasas respectively; you become glad when success comes to you and you feel sorrow when you happen to fail; and you experience the three states, waking, dreaming, and deep sleep as an ordinary man does, how then can you be called to attain the Turiya (fourth) state? May I ask:

पदात्यधर्यमोक्षा सर्वे वै शरणा मम ।

स्वायम्बं चैव सर्वेयं मन्यसे त्वं न मन्यसे ॥ 9 ॥

“Whether you cherish this idea that all these infantries, cavalries, chariots, and that all these elephants are mine; I am the lord of all the wealth

and things"? Or whether you do not cherish this idea?

प्रिष्टमसि सदा राजन्मृदितो विमानास्था ।

मालायां च तथा सपें समुद्रक्स्व गुपोतम ॥ १ ० ॥

O king! I think you eat sweet and good things, and, at times, feel pleasure and, at other times, feel pain! So, O King! How can you look on the garland of flowers and the snake as one and the same?

विमुक्तभु भवेत्राजनसमलोश्रमकांचनः ।

एकात्मवृष्टि सर्वेत्र चितृकृत्यर्कवैजुतु ॥ १ १ ॥

O king! He who is a Muktapuruṣa considers a lump of earth, a piece of stone, and gold as of one and the same value; he considers everything to be the same Ātman and does good to all the beings.

न मेघा साते चिनां गृह्वाराविषु कवचित् ।

एकाकी निःसूष्ठोज्चर्वे चेपियमिति मे मितः ॥ १२ ॥

Whatever that may be, I do not find any pleasure at present with houses, wife, etc., or with anything, in fact. What my heart's desire is that I roam alone always without any desires in my heart.

निःसूष्ठो निर्मेमः शगतः चप्रमूलफलाग्नः ।

भूगवहित्रियाभि निर्द्रंचो निष्यग्रहः ॥ १ ३ ॥

Therefore, I like not to have any companion; to be free from any attachment and to be peaceful, and calm; I do not wish to accept anything from anybody; I will forego all pleasures and pain from cold, warmth, etc., and I will sustain my life on roots, fruits and leaves, obtained without any effort and will roam, as I like, like a deer.

किं मे गुहेश विलेने भार्याय च सुरूपया ।

विरागमनसः कामं गुणातीतस्य पार्थिव ॥ १ ४ ॥

When I have not got the least attachment to the household life and when I am beyond all the attributes, what necessity have I then of house, wealth or a suitable wife?

चित्यसे विविधाकारं नानागराममालूनम् ।

दंघोउं किल ते पाति विमुक्तोउस्मिति पापसे ॥ १ ५ ॥

And when you think of various things with loving heart, and yet say that you are a Jivanmukta, that is nothing but a mere vanity of yours!

कदाचिष्छजत्रा चिंता धनत्रा च कदाचन ।

कदाचिस्त्री-न्यत्रा चिंता निश्छितो-सि कदा नृप ॥ १६ ॥

O king! When you think and become anxious about your enemies, about your wealth or sometimes about your army, how then can you be said to be free from cares?

वैखानसा ये मुग्वो मिताहागा जितब्रतः ।

तेर्पि मुह्यिति संसारो जानंतीय हास्तवताम् ॥ 17 ॥

What more can be said than the fact that many Munis, eating moderately and controlling their senses, and leading an anchorite's life, and knowing the unreality of the world, fall victim to the Māyā!

तव वंशसमुत्थानां विदेहा इति भूपते ।

कुटिलं नाम जानीहि नान्यथेति कदाचन ॥ 18 ॥

विद्धायीय यवामूर्षतुं जनमाधिस्तु दिवाकरः ।

लक्ष्मीयोरं दरिद्रश नाम तेशं निर्वाकम् ॥ 19 ॥

Then what need there is to talk of you? O King! know that the hereditary the title “Videha” to your line of kings indicates downright insincerity; nothing can be other than this as the name “Vidyā Dhara” (holder of knowledge) is applied to an illiterate man; as the name “Divākara” (sun) is given to a born-blind man, as the name “Lakṣmīdhara” (holder of wealth) is given to even a poor man, as these names are quite useless to me.

तब यंजीद्ध्वा ये ये शुक्ता: पूर्वे मया नृपा: ।

विदेश द्वारा तिथ्याता नामतः कर्मोत ने ॥ 20 ॥

निमिनामाभवद्धज्ञा पूर्वे तक कुले नृप ।

यज्ञार्थं स तु राजर्षिविसिध्छं स्वगुरु मुनिम् ॥ 21 ॥

I have heard that the kings of your family who were your predecessors were called “Videha” in name only and not in deed. O king! In your family there reigned a king named “Nimi.” Once on a time that royal sage invited his Guru Vasistha to perform a sacrifice, when Vasistha said:

तिमंत्रयामास तदा तमुवाच नृपं सुनि: ।

निर्विशितीय सूत्राढे देयेउद्राणयुन किल ॥ 22 ॥

कृत्वा तस्य मखं पूर्णं कार्चियाम ततायि वै ।

Book 1 Chapter XIX

तावलूकच्य राजेंउर सभारं तु शनैः शनैः ॥ 23 ॥

"I am already invited by Indra, the lord of the Devas, to perform his sacrifice; so O king! let me first finish his work; I will then take up your work. Better go on collecting the sacrificial materials till my that work is complete."

इत्युक्त्वा निवंयी सोउध महैउद्वजने सुनि: ।

निविर्यां गुरु कृत्वा चक्रात मखमुतमम् ॥ 24 ॥

Thus saying, Vasiṣṭha went away to perform Indra's sacrifice; on the other hand, the royal sage Nimi selected another priest and made him his Guru and began his sacrifice.

तच्छूत्वा कुपिनोउत्यर्ध वसिषेहो युपति पुनः ।

शशाप च पतत्वष्ठ देहस्ते गुरुलोपक ॥२५ ॥

Hearing all this, Mahrsi Vasistha became angry and cursed him thus: "O forsaker of your Guru! For the crime of forsaking your Guru, let thy body be destroyed today!"

राजापि तं शशापाय त्वापि च पतत्यवम् ।

अन्यो-न्यशापात्यितीत तावेव च मया श्रुतम् ॥ 26 ॥

At this, the royal sage, too, cursed Vasiṣṭha in his turn “Let your body fall off also.” Then the bodies of both the persons fell.

विदेहेन च राजैंक कवा शणतो गुरुः स्वयम् ।

विनोद इव मे चिते विभाति नृपसत्तम ॥ 27 ॥

But, O king! this curiosity came to my mind, the royal sage, whose body fell before, cursed his own Guru afterwards."

जनक खाच

सत्यमुक्ते ल्या नात्र मिथ्या किंचिविदं मतम् ।

तथापि शृणु शिधेत्र गुर्भर्मे सुर्जितः ॥ 28 ॥

Janaka said: “O Lord of Brāhmins! what you have said is, in my opinion, all quite true; nothing is false. Still hear. Know what my most worshipful Guru Deva has spoken to me is, in fact, true (and nothing else).

प्रितृ: संगे परित्यज्य त्वं वर्ग नानुतिमछिति ।

मृगै: सह सुसंबन्धो भविता ते न संशयः ॥ 29 ॥

महापूर्तिन सर्वत्र निःसंग: क्व भविष्यति ।

आहाराषी सदा चिन्ता निश्रितः स्या: कर्थ मुने ॥ 30 ॥

You are now intending to quit the company of your father and go to the forest; well and good! but even then you will undoubtedly have the company of deer etc., see, also, that when the five elements, earth, water, air, etc., are present, encompassing everywhere, how, then, can you expect to be free from all companions? So, O Muni! when you will have to think always of your food, how, then, can you be said to be free from all cares?

दण्डार्विनक्ता वित्ता यथा तव वनरेपि च ।

तथैव राज्यचित्ता में चित्यानयन्य वा न वा ॥ ३ १  ॥

विकल्पोषहस्तं वै दूरदेशमुपानतः ।

न मे विकल्पसन्दोः निविकल्पोषिस सर्वथा ॥ ३ २ ॥

Again, even if you go to the forest, you will have to think there also for your staff, deer skin, etc., so you can take my case, too, of thinking of my kingdom, whether I think or not, as your thinking of staff, deer skin etc., your heart is tainted with Vikalpa Jñāna (knowledge of doubt, duality etc.); and therefore you have come here from a far-off country. But my heart is free from any such doubt and I am remaining quite cheerful here.

मुखं स्वपिति विज्ञाई मुखं भंजापि सर्वेता।

न वद्योरमीति बुद्धणाई सर्वदैव सुखी मुने ॥ ३३ ॥

O, best of Brāhmins! I have not got any doubt whatsoever on any point, and, therefore, I take my food and go to sleep with great pleasure. “I am not bound up by this world” this idea gives me constant happiness of the highest degree.

लं गु दुःखी सदैवासि बढ़ोड़मिति गुश्ठा ।

इति शर्ज़ा परित्यज्य सुखी भव समाहितः ॥ 34 ॥

But you consider that you are bound and, therefore, you feel always constant pain. So leave off your idea that you are bound, and be happy.

देहोरंचे मन बचोरोस्ति न मेमोति च मुन्ता ।

तथा धर्न गृहं राज्यं न ममेति च निश्रयः ॥ 35 ॥

"This body is mine" this knowledge leads to my bondage; "and this body is not mine" this knowledge leads to freedom so know this verily that all this wealth, kingdom, etc., are not mine."

सूत उवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य शुकः प्रीतमना5पबत् ।

आपृच्छ्नं तं जगामाशु व्यासस्याममुत्तम् ॥ 36 ॥

आगच्छतं सृतं दूर्वा व्यासोपि सुखामावतान् ।

आतिलयाधाय मूधानं पप्रच्छ कुगलं पुनः ॥ 37 ॥

Sūta said: “Hearing these words of the royal sage, Śuka Deva became exceedingly glad and pronounced “Sādhu” “Sādhu” (true saint, indeed true saint, well said!) and went away without any delay to the pleasant Śārama of Vyāsa. Vyāsa, too, seeing his son come back, became very glad and embraced him and took the smell of his head and asked about his welfare again.

स्थितस्ताओंभे राथे पितुः पार्थे समाहितः ।

वेदाध्यवसनमयः सर्वशास्त्रविशारदः ॥ 38 ॥

जनकस्य दर्शा दूद्या राजस्यस्य महान्यनः ।

स निवृत्ति परां प्राव्य पितुताश्रसर्शस्थितः ॥ 39 ॥

पितृपूर्णा सुभगा कन्या पीर्वरी नाम सुद्धरी ।

गुकऊधार पन्ती तां योगमार्शस्थितीय पि ॥ 40 ॥

Then Šuka Deva, well conversant with all the Śāstras and ever ready in studying the Vedas, sat by the side of his father, with an enlightened mind, in his lovely Śāśrama and thinking of the state of the high-souled Janaka in his kingdom, began to feel the highest peace. Though Šuka adopted the path of Yoga, yet he married the daughter of a Muni, named Pivari, very beautiful, fortunate, and enhancing the glory of her father's family.

स तस्यां जननामास पुर्जांशुतृर एहि ।

कृष्णं गौरुष्धं चैव भूरि देवक्षूनं तथा ॥ 4 1 ॥

कन्यां कीर्ति सुभृतघा व्यासपुत्र: प्रतापवान् ।

ददी विश्वाजपुत्रा त्वयुहाय महात्मने ॥ 4 2 ॥

अगृहस्त सुतः श्रीमान्बहादन्तः प्रतापवान् ।

ब्रह्म: पृथिवीपाल: शुककन्यासमुद्धव: ॥ 4 3 ॥

कालेन किवता तत्र नावद्ययपदेशतः ।

ज्ञानं परमकं प्राय योगामार्थिनुतम् ॥ 4 4 ॥

पुरे तर्यं निधायाय गते बदिरिकामम् ।

मायाकौजोपदेशेन तस्य ज्ञानं निरर्गलम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

Then were born first the four sons named Krṣna, Gauraprabha, Bhūri, and Devaśruta out of the

sperm of Śuka ad the ovum of Pīvarī; and next a daughter was born named Kīrtī of them. Vyāsa's son Śuka, endowed with the fire of asceticism gave the daughter Kīrtī in marriage in due time with the high-souled Anūha, the son of Vibhārja. As time passed on, a son was born of the womb of Kīrtī and the sperm of Anūha, a son who became the powerful king Brahmadatta, the knower of Brahma and endowed with wealth and prosperity. Some time elapsed when Anūha, the son-in-law of Śuka Deva, getting from Nārada the Māyābjja and highest knowledge of Yoga handed over his kingdom to his son and went to the hermitage of Badarīkā and became liberated.

The Devarṣi Nārada gave him the mantra, the bija of Māyā; and by the influence of that mantra and by the grace of the Devi, the knowledge of the Supreme Brahma, arose in him without any obstacle and gave him liberation,

नारदस्य प्रसादेन ज्ञातं सहो विमुक्तिम् ।

कैतासिगाङ्गेरे गये त्यक्त्वा सई पिटु: शुकः ॥ 46 ॥

On the other hand Šuka Deva, always averse to any company left his father and went to the beautiful mountain Kailāśa. He began to meditate on the unmoving Brahma and thus remained there.

ध्यानास्थाय विपुलं चित्य: संभराड्युपूढः।

उत्पाता निर: श्रृगासिनिद्ध च परमां गतः ॥ 47 ॥

After some time the highly energetic Śuka Deva attained Siddhi (supernatural powers) Aṇimā, Laghimā, etc., rose up high in the air from the top of the mountain and began to roam there, and then he appeared like a second Sun.

आकाशगो महातेजा विराजा यथा रवि: ।

गिरे: शूर्जे हित्रा जातं गुरुक्योत्पत्ने तदा ॥ 48 ॥

उर्याता बह्वो जाता: गृह्माकाकागोंपं भवत् ।

अन्तरिक्षे यथा वायु: सृत्यमानः सुरर्षिभः ॥ 49 ॥

When Šuka arose from the peak, it severed into two and various ominous signs became visible. When Šuka Deva, appearing like a second Sun by the dazzling brilliancy of his body, suddenly

Book I Chapter XIX

vanished away like air and became diluted in the Paramātman, entering into everything and became invisible, then the Devarṣis began to chant hymns to him.

तेजसाप्रतिवाराज्ये द्वितीय इव भास्कर: ।

यासस्तु विरहाक्रांत: क्रेद्युघेति चासृक्त् ॥ 50 ॥

गिरेः श्रुते गतस्तत्र सुको ययं स्थितोप्रथन्त ।

क्रैवमानं तदा दीनं व्यासं मत्वा भ्रामकुलम् ॥ 51 ॥

On the other hand, Vyāsa Deva became very much distressed with the separation from his son and cried out frequently “Oh, my son! Alas! my son Where are you gone ?” and went to the summit of the mountain where Śuka did go and wept bitterly. Then Śuka Deva, who was then residing as the Parmātman, the Internal controller of all the beings and with all the beings, knowing Vyāsa Deva as very much fatigued, distressed, and crying, spoke out as an echo from the mountains and trees thus: “O Father! There is no difference between you and me, considered in the light of Ātman; then why are you weeping for me ?”

सर्वभूतगत: साक्षी प्रतिशब्दमतान्ता ।

तत्राधापि पिंरे: शुर्ज प्रतिशब्द सुर्जोपेचित् ॥ 52 ॥

Even today the above echo is clearly heard (almost daily). Seeing Vyāsa Deva grieved very much for the separation from his son and always crying

रूदंत तं समालक्ष्य व्यासं शक्रमस्थित् ।

पुरु प्रेतेत भापन्तं विहरेते पश्रिलतृष्न् ॥ 53 ॥

शिवसत्त समालय पराणार्यमेवाधेयन्त ।

व्यास शोकों मा कुक त्वं पुत्रले योगचितमः ॥ 54 ॥

"Oh! my son! Oh! my son!" Bhagavān Maheśvara came there and consoled him saying O Vyāsa Deva! your son is the foremost of the Yogis; he has attained the highest state, so very rare to the ordinary persons that are not self controlled. So do not be sorry any more.

परमां गतिमापयो तृतीभ चाकृततानिधः ।

त्यशगोकोनकतिथ्यत्वयागोंकविज्ञातना ॥ 55 ॥

कीर्विते विवृता जाता तेन पुत्रेण चानय ।

O Sinless One! when you have realised the Brahma-tattva, then you ought not to express any sorrow for your Suka who is now stationed in that Brahman. Your fame is now unrivalled, only on account of your having got a son like him."

व्यास उवाच

न गोको याति देयेन कि कंकामे जागतले ॥ 56 ॥

अनुके लोचने मेउछ पुत्रदर्जनलासले ।

Vyāsa Deva said: “O Lord of the Devas! O Lord of the world! What am I to do now? my grief does not quit my heart anyhow or other. My eyes are as yet satisfied in seeing my son; they like still to see the son.”

महादेव उवाच

छायां ऋष्यसि पुरस्य पार्थ्थवां सुमनेहामू ॥ 57 ॥

तां वीक्ष्य सुनिशाषूत शोकें जलि परंतप ।

Hearing these sorrowful words of Vyāsa, Bhagāvan Mahādeva said: "O Muni Śārdūla! I grant this boon to you that you will see the form of your son abiding in shadow, very beautiful, by the side of you.

सूत उवाच

तदा दर्शणं व्याससृतु छायां पुरस्य सुप्रभाम् ॥ 58 ॥

दच्या वरं हरत्समै तेजांतत्थीयत ।

अन्तहिंत महावेदे व्यासः स्वाभ्रमम्यान्त् ॥ 59 ॥

शुक्रस्य विरहेशणायि तपतः परमदू:खितः ॥ 60 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे प्रमतकचं

एकोपविष्ठोअधानः ॥ 61 ॥

O Destroyer of enemies! Now abandon your grief by seeing that shadow form of your son." When Bhagavān Maheśvara said so, Vyāsa began to see the bright shadow form of his son."

Granting thus the boon, Bhagavān Mahādeva vanished then and there. When He vanished away, Vyāsa became very much distressed with sorrow for the bereavement of his son and returned with a heavy heart to his own hermitage.

Thus ends the Nineteenth Chapter of the First Book

on the description of the marriage of Śuka in the

Mahāpurāna Śrimaddeviḥhāgavatam

of 18,000 verses.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

