CHAPTER VII

On the Different Numbers of Facets of Rudrāksam

श्रीनारायण उवाच

एवं नादर चबुवकको गिरिशेज विजोधितः ।

रुद्धास्मिहामंच न झालासे3सीत्स कृताधकः ॥ १ ॥

इत्थंभूतानुभावोउंद्र मड़ाखे वर्णितो मया ।

सदाचारामुसंगेन श्रणु चान्यत्मादितः ॥ 2 ॥

Śrī Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! When Girīśa thus

explained to Kārtikeya the greatness of Rudrāksam, he became satisfied. Now I have spoken to you of the glories of the Rudrāksams as far as I know.

यथा रूक्षामहिमा वर्गितोs-ननुणद्व: ।

लक्षणं मन्त्रियासं तथाज़ं वर्णायामि ते ॥ ३ ॥

लक्षं तु दर्शनात्युपं कोदितत्मर्णेनान्द्रबेत् ।

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

तस्य कोदिगुणं पुर्णवं रूपते धारणात्रः ॥ 4 ॥

लक्षकोदिसहस्राणि लक्षकोदिशतानि च ।

तज्ञपालन्धते पुर्णवं नरो हरक्षधारणात् ॥ 5 ॥

Now, as to our subject of right way of acting, I will now speak on other things that ought to be known. Listen. The seeing of Rudrāksam brings in a lakh times of Punyam and koṭi times the merit arises from touching that; holding it brings in koṭi times merit; again if one makes the japan of a Mantra with that Rudrāksam, one obtains merit the hundred lakh koṭi times and one thousand lakh koṭi time the merit.

राज्ञान् तु भग्रक्षधारणात्स्यान्महापकलम् ।

धार्थीकुलप्रमाणं यच्छुघोस्तुद्वाहतम् ॥ 6 ॥

वद्रपीकलमात्रं तु प्रोच्यते मध्यमं बुधे: ।

अधर्मे चरणात्रं सत्याप्तितैषा मयोदिता ॥ 7 ॥

The merit in holding the Rudrāksam is far superior to that in holding Bhadrāksam. The Rudrāksam seed that is of the size of an Āmalaki is the best; which is the of the size of a plum, is middling; and which is of the size of a gram is the worst, this is my word and promise.

बाहाणः क्षत्रिया वैश्या: शुत्रश्रौति शिवाज्ञा ।

वृक्षाज्ञातः पृथिव्यां तु तज्जातीयः शुभास्कः ॥ 8 ॥

श्रोतासु बाहाणा ज्ञेमा: क्षत्रिया रक्तवर्णकाः ।

पीता वैश्यासु विज्ञेया: कृष्णा: शूत्र प्रक्रौतितः ॥ 9 ॥

The Rudrāksam trees is of four kinds: Brāhmaṇa, Kṣattriya, Vaīśya, and Śūdra. The white colour is Brāhmaṇa; the red colour is Kṣattriya; the yellow colour is Vaīśya and the black coloured Rudrāksam seed is Śūdra.

बाहाणी विभ्याच्छ्वेतात्रभक्तानाजा तु धारयेत् ।

पौतावीर्यसत् विभ्यालकृष्णावडूरत आयते् ॥ 10 ॥

समा: निध्या द्वासतद्धकंटकैः संयुता: शुभा: ।

कृमिद्वाधिष्ठविभान्कंटकैः रहितासथा ॥ 11 ॥

The Brāhmaṇas are to use the white coloured Rudrāksams; the Kṣattriyas, the red coloured ones, the Vaiśyas, the yellow coloured ones; and the Śūdras, the black ones. Those Rudrāksas seeds that are nicely circular, smooth, hard, and whose thorns or points are distinctly visible, are the best.

प्रजयुक्तानावृतांश्र घडूरब्राक्षांस्तु वर्जयेत्।

स्वयमेव कृतद्वारा रहावक्षे: स्यादिद्धितम्: ॥ 12 ॥

यत् पौरुषयन्तेन कृतं तनमध्यमं भवेत् ।

सामान्मन्धान्द्रबानुत्तान्बीमसूत्रेण धारयेत् ॥ 13 ॥

Those that are pierced by insects, broken in parts, whose thorns are not clearly visible, with swells and holes and those that are coated over, these six varieties of Rudrāksams are faulty. Those Rudrāksams that have their holes by nature running through and through are best; and those that have their holes pierced by men are middling.

सर्वगोत्रेषु साध्येन समानास्तिविकल्णा ।

निष्चें हेमलेखाभा चत्र लेखा प्रयुस्ते ॥ 14 ॥

तद्विमुक्तां विद्यात्य धार्येः शिवपुजकैः ।

शिखायामेकक्रश्रई जिंगई शिरसा बेहेत् ॥ 15 ॥

The Rudrāksa seeds that are all of uniform shape, bright hard, and beautifully circular should be strung together by a silken thread. How to test the Rudrāksa seed? As gold is tested by a touch stone; so the Rudrāksam is tested by drawing lines on it; those on which the lines are most uniform, bright and beautiful are the best and they should be worn by the Śaivas.

घट्टिशेषच नगे धार्यां बाह्योः पोडण योडण ।

मणिबंदी द्वादगाश्रान्स्कंधे पट्ट्यागरं भवेदि ॥ 16 ॥

अष्टोतराशंगीलोपवित्ति च प्रकल्पयेत् ।

द्विसरं निसरं वारि विभ्यात्काचढ़ेशतः ॥ 17 ॥

One should hold one Rudrāksam on the crown hair, thirty on the head, thirty six on the neck; sixteen on each arm, twelve on each wrist, fifty on the shoulders, one hundred and eight Rudrāksams in the place of the sacrificial thread; and the devotee should have two or three rounds on the neck.

कुण्डले मुकुटे वैव कर्गिकाकारयेतु च ।

केयुरे कटके चैव कृषिकंशे तथैव च ॥ 18 ॥

सुवे पौते सर्वकालं रुद्रक्षं धारयेवरः ।

सिगतं त्वधां पशुगतां मध्यममुचते ॥ 19 ॥

सहसुमुत्तां प्रोक्ते चैवं भैदेन धारयेत् ।

On the earrings, on the crown of the head, the head, on bracelets, on armlets, on necklace, on the

Book XI Chapter VII

ornament worn on the loins one should hold Rudrāksam always, whether one sleeps or eats. Holding three hundred Rudrāksams is the lowest; holding five hundred is middling; holding one thousand Rudrāksams is the best; so one ought to wear one thousand Rudrāksams.

शिरसीशानान्ये कर्णे ततुर्षने च ॥ २० ॥

अशोरेण ललटे तु तेनैव हृदयेपि च ।

अशोरौकीजम्येण करायोधरियेयुने: ॥ 21 ॥

At the time of taking Rudrāksam, on one's head, one should utter the Mantra of Iśāna; the mantra of Tat Puruṣa while holding on one's ears; Aghora mantra on one's forehead and heart; and the Bīja of Aghora mantra i.e. "hasau" while holding on one's hands.

पड़ाशाद्धार्थितां वामदेवेन चोदरे ।

पड़बहाधिर्मौधायेव हन्धधारणम् ॥ 22 ॥

प्रधितानमूलम-जेण सर्वानक्षितु धारयेत् ।

एकवबन्न्तु हन्धक्ष: परतत्वचकाकाः ॥ 23 ॥

परतत्वधारणाच्च जायते तत्वाकाशनम् ।

One should wear the rosary of fifty Rudrāksa seeds, suspended up to the belly, uttering the Vāmadeva mantra, i.e., Sadyojātādi, etc., the five Brahma mantras, and the six-limbed Śiva mantra. One is to string every Rudrāksa seed, uttering the root mantra and then hold it One-faced Rudrāksa reveals Paratattva (the highest Tattva); when worn, the knowledge of the highest Tattva arises; the Brahma is seen then.

दिवसन्तु मुनिश्रेष अर्धनारीधरो भवेत् ॥ 24 ॥

धाणाद्धनिरागीर: प्रीयते तस्य नित्यश: ।

विवसक्सन्तः साङ्गतल्हील्यां दहित क्षणत् ॥ 25 ॥

वियुखीश्व रहाश्रोपत्यनिवयस्वरूपकः ।

तद्वाणाच्छ हृतभृक्तस्य तृणयति नित्यश: ॥ 26 ॥

The two-faced Rudrāksam is Ardhanārīsvara, the Lord of the other half which represents woman (in the same person); if worn, Ardhanārīsvara Śiva is always pleased with that man who holds it. The threefaced Rudrāksam is Fire made manifest; it destroys in a moment the sin of killing a woman.

The three-faced Rudrāksam is the three Agnis, Dakṣināgni, Gārhaptya, and Āhavaniya; Bhagavān Agni is always pleased with that man who wears the three-faced Rudrāksam.

चतुर्मुखसु कृतश्रः पितामह एव रूपकः ।

तद्वारणान्महाश्रीमान्महदारोग्यमुतम् ॥ 27 ॥

महती ज्ञानसपतिज: शुद्वे धार्येनरः ।

पञुगयुक्ति मृतश्रः पञुब्राह्यस्पषकः ॥ 28 ॥

The four-faced Rudrāksam in Brahmā Himself. The wearer gets his prosperity enhanced, his diseases destroyed, the divine knowledge springs in him and his heart is always pleased. The five-faced Rudrāksam is the five-faced Śiva Himself; Mahādeva gets pleased with him who holds it.

तस्य धरणागानेम संतुथति महेधरः ।

पड्वक्सश्रेश्व हन्गः कार्तिकेश्याधिदेवतः ॥ 29 ॥

विनायकं चार्थि देयं प्रवटिन्दि मनीषिणः ।

सप्तवस्त्रने हन्गः सनगगाधिदेवतः ॥ 30 ॥

The Presiding Deity of the six-faced Rudrāksam is Kārtikeya. Some Pandits take Ganapati to be the Presiding Deity of the six-faced Rudrāksam. The presiding Deity of the seven-faced Rudrāksam is the seven Mārṭakās, The Sun and the seven Rsis.

सपताश्वेदतशेय मुनिसलकेदेयतः ।

तद्वारणान्याहशी: स्यामद्वारोग्यमुत्तमम् ॥ 31 ॥

महती ज्ञानसंपत्ति: शुचिर्धे धार्येन्नः ।

अश्वकसन्तु हर्शोजप्यमाग्रधिरिद्धतः ॥ 32 ॥

By putting on this, the prosperity is increased, health and the pure knowledge are established. It should be put on when one becomes pure. The Presiding Deity of the eight-faced Rudrāksam is Brāhmī, the eight Mārṭakās. By holding this, the eight Vasus are pleased and the river Ganges is also pleased.

वस्वरक्षीतिकते गुज्ञगीतिक: शुभ: ।

तद्वाणातिपे प्रीता भवेषु: सच्यावादिनः ॥ 33 ॥

नववक्सन्तु रुद्ध्रों यमदेव उदाहृतः ।

तद्वाणादामपरं न भवत्येव सर्वथा ॥ 34 ॥

The putting on of this makes the Jivas truthful and pleasant-minded. The Devatā of the nine-faced

Śrimaddevitbhāgavatam

Rudrāksam is Yama; holding this puts off the fears of Death.

दशावक्रस्तु रज्ञाक्षे दशागर्दितः स्मृतः ।

दशागर्पार्जितजनको धारणे नात्र संशयः ॥ 35 ॥

एकादागुपाखलस्थो करैकादगर्शेलतः ।

तमिद्रहेत चाहु: सदा सीख्यविद्यान्म ॥ 36 ॥

The Devatā of the eleven-faced Rudrāksam is ten quarters the ten quarters are pleased with him who wears the ten-faced Rudrāksam. The Devatā of the eleven-mounted Rudrāksam is the eleven Rudras and Indra. Holding this enhances happiness. The twelve-faced Rudrāksam is Viṣṇu made manifest; its Devatās are the twelve Ādityas; the devotees of Śiva should hold this.

क्रशेही ब्रादगुर्षो महाविष्ण्यस्कपक: ।

ब्रादगदादिवदेश्व विषनर्देन हिं ततप: ॥ 37 ॥

यगेदाणुपखश्राः कामदः सिंद्धदः शुभः ।

तस्य धारणमाजेश कामदेवः प्रसीर्दिति ॥ 38 ॥

The thirteen-faced Rudrāksam, if worn, enables one to secure one's desires; he does nowhere experience failures. The Kāma Deva becomes pleased with him who wears this.

चतुर्दशमुष्ठशक्षो हन्नेत्रसमुद्रवः ।

सर्वेथाप्रहरेशे सवर्गीरायप्रदायकः ॥ 39 ॥

गर्धा मांसं च ल्यूनं पलांड़े शिगुमोव च ।

ग्लेष्यातकं विद्वराई भक्षणे वर्जयेततः ॥ 40 ॥

The fourteen-faced Rudrāksam destroys all diseases and gives eternal health. While holding this, one ought not to take wine, flesh, onion, garlic, Sajñā fruit, Cālā fruit and the flesh of the boar which eats excrements, etc.,

ग्रहणे विवृषे चैव संक्रमे अयने तथा ।

दर्शे चे पौणीभावे च पुण्येषु दिवसेषधिष ।

रुद्धधारणात्सशु: सर्वपोपैः प्रमुच्यते ॥ 41 ॥

इति शीमद्वैर्षिगावते महापुराणे एकादशकम्भे

सत्तोउधान: 11 7 11

During the Lunar and Solar eclipses, daring the Uttarāyana Śaṅkrānti or the Dakṣināyana Sarinkrānti, during the full Moon or the New Moon day, if Rudrāksam be worn, one becomes instantly freed of all one's sins.

Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the greatness of one faced etc., Rudrāksam in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

