CHAPTER XII

On the Cabinet Held by Mahiṣa

व्यास उवाच

तिश्राम्य चचस्तस्य तात्यस्य जगद्धिक्का ।

मेयाम्भीरा वाचा हस्तनी तमुवाच् च ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: The World-Mother, hearing Tāmra's words, spoke laughing a little and with a deep voice like that of a rumbling thunder cloud.

देख्यवाच

गच्छ ताप यतं बृहि मुपुषु मन्दोतसम् ।

महिंचं चातिकामातं मूदं ज्ञानविवर्जितम् ॥ २ ॥

The Devi spoke: “O Tāmra! Go and say to your Lord Mahisa who, it seems, is stupid, whose end is nigh, who has become very passionate, and who is void of knowledge of what is proper and what is improper.

यथा ते महिषी माता प्रीक्षा यवसभक्षिणी ।

नाहं तथा शृगवती लम्बपुच्छा महोदरी ॥ ३ ॥

I am not like your grown up mother, the she-buffalo, having horns, eating grass, with a long tail and a big-belly.

न कामपेउई देवेशं नैव विद्युं न शक्रिम् ।

धनदं वर्णो नैव ब्रह्माणं न च पावकम् ॥ 4 ॥

I do not like to have even Visnu, the god Śaṅkara, Brahmā, Kubera, Varuna, or Fire.

एतान्देवाणादित्य पगुं केन युणेन वै ।

युणोम्यहं यूथा लोके गहीणां मे भवेदिति ॥ 5 ॥

How then can I select a beast? If I do so, I will be an object of much censure amongst the several worlds.

नाहं पतिवरा नारी वर्तते मे पति: प्रभु: ।

सर्वकर्ता सर्वसाधी ह्यकर्ता निःसृष्टः स्थग: ॥ 6 ॥

I am not desirous of any more husband; my Husband is existing; though He is the Lord of all, Witness of All, yet He is not the Actor; He is without any desires and He is calm and tranquil.

निर्गुणो निर्मांतीउनन्तो निरालम्बो निराश्रयः ।

सर्वैन: सर्वैन: साक्षी पूर्ण: पूर्णाशय: जिज: ॥ 7 ॥

He, the Śiva, is devoid of any Prāktric qualities, without any attachment, the Great Infinite, without anyone to rely on, without any refuge, omniscient, omnipresent, the Great Witness, the Full, and the scat of the Full, the Auspicious.

Book V Chapter XII

सर्वावास: क्षम: शान्त: सर्वद्वसर्वभावन: ।

तं चक्सना माहियं मन्दं कवं संवितुपुलहो ॥ 8 ॥

He is the abode of all, capable to do all, the peaceful, capable to create everything and He is seeing everywhere. How can I then leave Him and try to serve dull, stupid Mahisa?

प्रशुध्य युध्यतां कामं कारोमि यमावहान् ।

अथवा मनुजानां वै कार्ये जलवाहकम् ॥ ९ ॥

Let him come and fight with this understanding that he will be defeated and be made the conveyance of Yama, the God of Death or the carrier of water of the human beings.

जीवितेष्ठप्रति देवाया गळछ पालालमाशु वै ।

समसरीर्विवैयुक्तत्वव्या हृन्मि संगरे ॥ १० ॥

And if that impious heretic desires to live let him fly at once to Pātāla with all his demon comrades; else I will slay him in battle.

कामं सदूषायोर्गे: संसारे सुखदो घबेत् ।

अन्यवा तुःखदो घ्यावत्नानादिर कल्मितः ॥ १ १ ॥

See! combination of similar substances leads to happiness; and if out of ignorance, the connection takes place between things entirely different in their nature, it becomes at once the source of all pain and troubles."

मुर्जल्मवसि यदचूषे पर्ित मे भज आधिनि ।

क्याहं क्य महिषः शूत्री सवचः कीरुणो इयोः ॥ 12 ॥

You are a thorough by illiterate when you ask me to worship your lord; do you not see me endowed with exquisite beauty? and what is your Mahisa? A buffalo with horns; how can then connection become possible between us?

गच्छ सुध्यस्य वा कामं हनिष्येहं सवान्यवम् ।

यद्भागरं देवतलोके नोतेच्यकता सुखी भव ॥ 13 ॥

Better fly away or fight if you like; I will kill you and your friends, and if you leave the region of Heaven and the share of Yajña, then you will become happy."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा सा तात द्वेो वेगर्भ शुभामूद्तम् ।

कल्यान्तसूर्ण नावं चक्रे दैत्यभयावहम् ॥ 14 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus saying, the Devi howled and roared so loudly that it appeared strange and it caused a great terror to the Dānavas who took it as the great dissolution of the universe at the end of a Kalpa.

चक्षेय वसुधा चेलुस्तेन शब्देन भूधराः ।

भाधिशु दैन्यपत्नीना सर्वसुर्गर्पित्तस्वन्ता ॥ 15 ॥

The earth and the mountains trembled: the wives of the Dānavas had miscarriage at that terrific noise.

ताघः शुत्वा च तं शब्दं भयसत्मानस्ताद ।

पलायनं ततः कृत्वा जगाम महिष्योतिकम् ॥ 16 ॥

Tāmra hearing that sound was terrified; his mind became unsteady and he at once fled to Mahiṣa.

नगरे तस्य वे दैत्यास्तेपि चित्तमायानुवत् ।

वधिरीकृतकर्णगीछ पलायनपरा नृप ॥ 17 ॥

O King! The Dānavas present in the city became deaf; they fled and became very anxious and were absorbed in the thought whence and how that sound came.

तदा कोर्टेन सिंहोरूपि ननाद भुशमूलस्टः ।

तेन नाटेन दैतेवा भयं जगमूरिय स्कुटम् ॥ 18 ॥ 

तापं समागतं दूद्या ह्वारीरिंग मोहितः ।

चिंतयामास सचिवः किं कल्यमतः परम् ॥ १९ ॥

The lion, too, enraged and, raising up its manes, roared so loud that the Daityas became very much terrified. Mahisa too, became confounded to see Tāmra returning; he then held a council with his ministers on what ought to be done next?

दुर्गग्राहो वा कतव्यो युद्ध निरर्गत्व वा पुनः ।

पलायने कृते श्रैयो भयेड़ा द्वान्वोतमाः ॥ 20 ॥

Mahisāsura said: "O best of the Dānavas! Shall we now take our shelter within the forts? Or shall we go out and fight? Or will it be favourable to us if we fly away?

बुद्धिमन्तो दुताधर्षी: सर्वे शास्त्रविशगरातः ।

मनः खतु प्रकल्पः सुगुप्तः कार्यसिद्धो ॥ 21 ॥

You all are intelligent and versed in all the Śāstras and unconquerable by your foes; therefore

ought you all to consult over the matter in utmost privacy for our success at the present moment.

मन्त्रभूलं स्मृतं राज्यं यदि स स्यात्सृक्षितः ।

मन्त्रभिक्षा सदाचारित्विधेयः सर्वेधा चुयेः ॥ 22 ॥

The root of Kingdom lies in the council in the secret place (cabinet) and Statesmanship; if this counsel be kept well preserved in secrecy, then that Kingdom is also kept entire; therefore it is good and virtuous.

मन्त्रधेते विज्ञा: स्याज्ञस्य प्रपतेलया ।

तस्माद्रेवपयात्युतः कतवीय भूतिभिछ्ठता ॥ 23 ॥

If the plan be out, then destruction comes both to the King and his Kingdom; hence the plan must be kept secret by those wanting glory, lest it be taken advantage of and rendered ineffective by other persons.

तद्व मत्निषिबाँच्छं वचनं हेतुपादितून ।

कालदेशानुसारेण विविधेन नीतिनिवर्धियम् ॥ 24 ॥

या योषात्र समावाता प्रवला देविनिमिता ।

एकाकिनी निरालम्बा कारणं तद्धिव्यताम् ॥ 25 ॥

O Ministers! Now declare, taking due consideration of time and place, after duly discussing and ascertaining what is the best course to adopt, what would be beneficial and full of reason and intelligence. First find out the cause why this powerful woman, created by the Devas has come here alone and helpless?

युद्ध प्रार्थयेत बाला किमाध्ययेत: परम् ।

श्रेयोत्र विवर्गितं वा को वेति भुवनत्रये ॥ 26 ॥

That woman is challenging us to fight. What more wonder can there be than this? Who can say in the three worlds what the result will be, whether it will be good or otherwise?

न बहूनां जयोउपत्यित नैकस्य च परावयः ।

दैत्यापीनी सदा जेगेयु युद्रे जयपरावजी ॥ 27 ॥

Victory comes not to many persons nor defeat comes to a single individual; therefore victory or defeat lies at the hands of the Luck and Destiny.

उयायवादितः प्रगृदैर्व कैन कैन वीक्षितम् ।

अनुश्मिति यजाम प्रवर्तिन मनीषिणः ॥ 28 ॥

तस्तचेडपि प्रमाणं किं कततराणावलंबनम् ।

Those who plead for place, policy, statesmanship, they say what is Fate? Is there anyone who has seen Fate? (Adṛṣṭa) No one has seen His appearance." It may be argued that there may exist such a thing as Fate; to which it might be replied, what proofs are there for such an existence?

न समर्थजनानां हि दैर्व कुजापि लक्ष्यते ॥ 29 ॥

उद्यानो दैवलमेते हि शूरकातायोर्मन्ति ।

विधिन्याथ विधा सर्वी कतैल्यं कायमादातृम् ॥ 30 ॥

Thus the weak persons alone hold it out as their only hope; nowhere are seen energetic persons who can fulfil their ends by their own efforts, by those who enrol themselves under Fate. Therefore “effort,” “energy” are the words of the heroes and “Fate” is the word of cowards. You should all consider today these subjects fully and intelligently and then decide what are we to do?

व्यास उवाच

इति राजी वचः शुत्वा हेतुगर्भ महायाशा: ।

विद्वाताख्यो महाराजमिव्युवाच कृतांजलितः ॥ 31 ॥

राजेशेय शिवगालाशी ज्ञातया यतन्तः पुनः ।

किम्बर्धिंहि सभ्यापता कुतः कस्य परिश्रहः ॥ 32 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus hearing the King, the famous Vidālākṣa with folded hands spoke thus: "O king! First it should be definitely ascertained as to whose wife is she, this woman possessing large eyes? Whence and for what purpose has she come here; next what ought to be done should be decided.

मरणं ते परिश्राय सिक्वा: सर्वानिमा सुरैः ।

प्रेशिता यदपत्राक्षी समुचणा स्ततेजास ॥ ३३ ॥

It seems to me that the Devas, knowing that your death will ensue from the hands of a woman, have created very carefully this lotus-eyed woman out of their own essences.

तेपि छातः स्थिताः खेउत्र सर्वे युद्धिदूक्षतः ।

समयंेःस्थाः महायासे भविष्याति युयुसासः ॥ 34 ॥

And they are lying in wait, unknown to anybody in the celestial space with a desire to see the battle

Book V Chapter XII

but really to fight with you. In due time, they will undoubtedly help this woman.

पुस्त: कामिनी कृत्ता ते वे विद्यापुरोगमाः ।

विध्यन्ति च नः सर्वान्सा त्वं युद्धे हनिषयिति ॥ 35 ॥

When the war will ensue, Viṣṇu and the other Devas will put this woman in front and slay us all. Whereas this Devi will slay you.

एतचिक्वीर्तिते तेनां मवा ज्ञातं नराधिता ।

भवितत्यस्य न ज्ञानं वर्तेत मम सर्वेथा ॥ 36 ॥

This is their earnest desire. O king! I have come to know this beforehand; but what will be the actual result I cannot say.

योद्योपं न तव्याडोति नाहं वचुः क्षमः प्रभो ।

प्रमाणं त्वं महाराज कार्येज्ञ देविनिमिते ॥ 37 ॥

I cannot say also whether it is advisable for You to fight now; therefore it would be better if you consider yourself well on this matter of the gods and do accordingly.

त्वर्धेंउमाधिरनिणं मतंव्य कार्योगरावत् ।

विद्रतैंत्य तवा साधीमेव धर्मेउनुजीविनाम् ॥ 38 ॥

Our duty, the duty of your servants lies in this: That we should sacrifice at any moment our lives for the preservation of your prestige; and to enjoy with you whenever you are enjoying.

विद्यारोउन महान्सित यदेका कामिनी नृप ।

यूद्र प्रार्थवेउसामभि: ससै-यैर्वलिरपिंतेः ॥ ३ ९ ॥

But, O King! It is extremely advisable to ponder over this very carefully when we see that this woman, though alone, is challenging us to fight who are armed with powerful soldiers.

दूर्यैल उवाच

राजन् युद्रे जयं नोउष चपिता वैव्यई किल ।

पलायनं न कर्तव्य यगोहानिकरं नृगाम ॥ 40 ॥

Durmukha said: "O king! I know for certain, that we will not get victory in this battle; still we ought not to shew our back; for that would lead us to sheer disgrace.

इत्रादीनां संयुप्रेपि न कृतं यज्ञगुषिसतम् ।

एकाकिनी सिधंग प्राय को हि कुर्पत्पलयात्यम् ॥ 41 ॥

Even in our encounter with Indra and other Devas, we did nothing hateful and blameable; then how can any of us fly away when we come face to face with a helpless woman?

तस्मादुर्द प्रकर्नियं मरणां वा रणे जयः ।

यद्धालि तद्वलेवेक काऊत्र चिन्ता विषयश्न: ॥ 42 ॥

Therefore fight we must; that is certain; let whatever happen's happen. What is inevitable, must come to pass. Thus considered, what need we care for the result?

मरणोत्र यशःप्रापिरिजीचे च तथा सुखम् ।

उभयं मनसा कृत्वा कतिथ्यं युद्धमष्ट वै ॥ 43 ॥

If we die in the battle, we will get name and fame; if we be victorious, we will get happiness. Thus thinking both the cases, we must fight today.

पलायने यशोहामिरणं चायुषः क्षये ।

तस्माछोको न कर्तव्यो जीक्षिते मरणे बुबा ॥ 44 ॥

Death is inevitable when our longevity expires; our prestige will suffer if we fly away; therefore we ought not to spend uselessly our time in thus expressing our vain regret for life or for death.

व्यास उवाच

दुर्भूतय स्व च: शुत्वा बाक्लते वायवमब्रवीत् ।

प्रणतः प्रांजलिभूत्वा राजानं वाक्यकोविदः ॥ 45 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing thus Durmukha's words, Bāskala, the eloquent speaker, thus spoke to the king, with clasped hands and his head bowed down.

वाक्पल उवाच

राजौक्षिता न कतव्या कार्येत्रीयकातरप्रिये ।

अहमेको हनियापि चपईी चंचल्लोचनाम ॥ 46 ॥

“O king! You need not think thus in agony upon this unpleasant affair; alone I will kill that Caṇḍikā, of unsteady eyes.

उत्ताहतु प्रक्रतिथः स्थायीभावो सस्य च ।

भयानको भवेहौरी वीरस्य नृपसतम ॥ 47 ॥

O Best of kings! To be always prompt and energetic indicates that one is steady in one's heroic valour, to consider one's enemy as dreadful

Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam

is contrary to above; so we ought not to take recourse to heroic valour.

तस्मायत्ववा भयं घूप कारिष्य युद्धमद्धुतम् ।

नत्यथामि नरेन्हाई चपिड़कां यमसावन् ॥ 4 8 ॥

O King! Therefore I will discard fear altogether and fight out valiantly; I will no doubt, send Candikā in the battle field to the abode of Death.

न विधेमि यमादिद्राकुधेवाढ्गणादि ।

वायोवैहैस्तथा विष्णो: शुक्राछ्डिशनो रेवे: ॥ 49 ॥

एकाकिनी तथा नारी किं पुर्नमेदारविता ।

उहं तां निद्विण्यामि विशिषेक्छे शिलापिति: ॥ 50 ॥

I fear not Yama, nor Indra, nor Kubera, nor Vāyu nor Agni, nor Viṣṇu, nor Śaṅkara, nor Moon nor Sun; I do not fear any of them; what fear can I, then, entertain of that vain arrogant woman, who has got none to support her. I will kill Her with these arrows, sharpened on stones.

पश्य बाहुबलं मेउं हितरस्य यथासुरखम् ।

भवतात्रन न नत्वयं संग्रामे उपवन्या समम् ॥ 51 ॥

You can today see the prowess of my arms and enjoy peace; you will not have to go to battle any more to fight with Her."

एवं बृवति राजेन्द्रं वाक्कते मदगविंते ।

प्रणाय नृपति तन दुर्धीते वाक्यमवीत् ॥ 52 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Bāskala having said thus to the lord Mahisa in a haughty spirit, Durdhara bowed down and said thus:

दुर्धर उवाच

महिषहा विजेचायामि देर्वीं देवाविनिर्मितम् ।

अश्रदाशुजां रायां काराणाच्च समागताम् ॥ 53 ॥

“O Lord of the earth! Let the purpose be whatsoever, with which the beautiful Devi with eighteen hands, the creation of the gods, may come hither, I will vanquish Her.

राजभीयवितुं त्वां वे प्रपोषा तिमिता सुरैः ।

विधीपिकेयं विज्ञाय त्वज मोहं मनोगतम् ॥ 54 ॥

O king! I think, it is simply to terrify you, as the Suras have thus created this Māyā woman; therefore, do you forsake your delusion by knowing this merely as a scare.

राजनीतिरिंच राजन्मन्त्रिकृचं तथा श्रणु ।

साचित्का राजसा: कैरितानमासून तवापरे ॥ 55 ॥

O King! Such is the statesmanship; now hear about the workings of the ministers. Ministers in this world are of three kinds: (1) Sāttvik; (2) Rājasik and (3) Tāmasik.

मन्विणस्त्रिविधा लोके भविते दानवाधिप ।

सात्चका: प्रपुक्रायणीय साध्यपत्यि सखातिफिंभि: ॥ 56 ।

Those ministers in whom the Sattva quality is predominant, they perform their Master's duties according to their own strength.

आत्मकृत्य प्रकृवर्नित स्वामिकार्यविरोधतः ।

एकवित्ता धर्मपरा मन्त्रागत्कशियगरादः ॥ 57 ॥

The Sāttvik Mantri (ministers) are well versed in their Mantra Sāstras (the policies and statesmanship), virtuous and one-pointed in their thoughts, they never do any injury to their king and they fulfil their own purpose.

राजसा भिप्राचिता श्रु कव्यापिताना: सदा ।

कदाचित्यसामिकार्य ते प्रकुर्षिति यद्धच्या ॥ 58 ॥

The Rājasik Mantrīs are of different sorts; they are always after own interests; at times; whenever they like, they do the State duties.

तामसा लोभनितता: स्वक्यर्नितता: सदा ।

प्रभुकायं विनार्यैव स्वकर्ग साध्यान्ति ने ॥ 59 ॥

The Tāmasik Mantris always look of their own interests out of their greedy nature; they serve their ends even by ruining the regal interests.

समयं ते विधिन्धते पेस्टु परिवडिता: ।

स्विच्छर्ने शुण्रधीयानिर्दिशित गृहस्थितः ॥ 6 0 ॥

कार्यपेटकार नित्य कोशगृणताविसल्पा ।

संग्रामे5 थ समुस्परे औषयन्ति प्रभुं सदा ॥ 6 1 ॥

It is the Tāmasik Mantris that are influenced by the bribes from the enemies, become separated at their hearts from their own masters and give out the secrets to the enemies, while staying in their homes. They always advise alienation policy like the sword ensheathed in a scabbard; and when the time of war comes, they always frighten their masters.

Book V Chapter XIII

विश्वाससून न कतव्यस्तेषां राजकन्दाचन ।

विश्वास कार्वहीन: स्थानमन्दारिन: सदैव हि ॥62॥

खला: कि किं न कुर्जलि विश्वस्ता लभतवराः।

तामसा: पापनिरता बुद्धिहीनाः शठासस्था ॥ 6 3 ॥

Therefore, O King! Never put your trust on ministers; if you do so, they will always hinder you in your actions and counsels; what harm cannot be done by those ministers that are treacherous, greedy, deceitful and void of any intelligence and always addicted to vicious acts, when they are trusted!

तस्माकार्यं करिष्यामि गतावड़हं रामसतेक ।

चित्ता तव्या न कर्तेव्या सर्वेथा नृपसत्तम ॥ 64 ॥

गृहीत्वा तां दुराचारामागमिष्यामि सत्वः ।

पश्य मेउडा बलं दीर्घं प्रभुकामों स्थशफिततः ॥ 65 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे पहामकद्भ्ये

ब्राहणोउध्याः: 11 12 11

Therefore, O king! I will go myself to the battle and serve your purpose; you need not be at all anxious in this matter. I will soon bring before you that vicious woman; I will do your actions by my own strength and powers. Let you be calm; and look at my strength, fortitude and valour.

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Fifth

Book on the holding of counsel by Mahisāsura in

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam the Mahā Pruānam, of

18,000 Ślokas by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter XIII

