[Ch 12 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: The World-Mother, hearing Tāmra's words, spoke laughing a little and with a deep voice like that of a rumbling thunder cloud.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- The World-Mother, hearing Tāmra’s words, spoke laughing a little and with a deep voice like that of a rumbling thunder cloud.

[Ch 12 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi spoke: “O Tāmra! Go and say to your Lord Mahisa who, it seems, is stupid, whose end is nigh, who has become very passionate, and who is void of knowledge of what is proper and what is improper.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī spoke :-- “O Tāmra! Go and say to your Lord Mahiṣa who, it seems, is stupid, whose end is nigh, who has become very passionate, and who is void of knowledge what is proper and what is improper.

[Ch 12 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I am not like your grown up mother, the she-buffalo, having horns, eating grass, with a long tail and a big-belly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I am not like your grown up mother, the she-buffalo, having horns, eating grass, with a long tail and a big-belly.

[Ch 12 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I do not like to have even Visnu, the god Śaṅkara, Brahmā, Kubera, Varuna, or Fire.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I do not like to have Viṣṇu, the god Śaṅkara, Brahmā, Kuvera, Varuṇa, or Fire.

[Ch 12 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How then can I select a beast? If I do so, I will be an object of much censure amongst the several worlds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► How then can I select a beast? If I do so, I will be an object of much censure amongst the several worlds.

[Ch 12 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I am not desirous of any more husband; my Husband is existing; though He is the Lord of all, Witness of All, yet He is not the Actor; He is without any desires and He is calm and tranquil.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I am not desirous of any more husband; my Husband is existing; though He is the Lord of all, Witness of All, yet He is not the Actor; He is without any desires and He is calm and tranquil.

[Ch 12 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He, the Śiva, is devoid of any Prāktric qualities, without any attachment, the Great Infinite, without anyone to rely on, without any refuge, omniscient, omnipresent, the Great Witness, the Full, and the scat of the Full, the Auspicious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He, the Śiva, is devoid of any Prakritic qualities, without any attachment, the Great Infinite, without anyone to rely on, without any refuge, omniscient, omnipresent, the Great Witness, the Full, and the seat of the Full, the Auspicious.

[Ch 12 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He is the abode of all, capable to do all, the peaceful, capable to create everything and He is seeing everywhere. How can I then leave Him and try to serve dull, stupid Mahisa?
NEW CORR ENG ──► He is the abode of all, capable to do all, the peaceful, capable to create everything and He is seeing everywhere. How can I then leave Him and try to serve the dull, stupid Mahiṣa?

[Ch 12 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Let him come and fight with this understanding that he will be defeated and be made the conveyance of Yama, the God of Death or the carrier of water of the human beings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Let him come and fight with this understanding that he will be defeated and be made the conveyance of Yama, the God of Death or the carrier of water of the human beings.

[Ch 12 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And if that impious heretic desires to live let him fly at once to Pātāla with all his demon comrades; else I will slay him in battle.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And if that impious heretic desire to live, let him fly at once to Pātāla with all his demon comrades; else I will slay him in battle.

[Ch 12 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See! combination of similar substances leads to happiness; and if out of ignorance, the connection takes place between things entirely different in their nature, it becomes at once the source of all pain and troubles."
NEW CORR ENG ──► See! The combination of similar substances leads to happiness; and if out of ignorance, the connection takes place between things entirely different in their natures, it becomes at once the source of all pains and troubles.

[Ch 12 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You are a thorough by illiterate when you ask me to worship your lord; do you not see me endowed with exquisite beauty? and what is your Mahisa? A buffalo with horns; how can then connection become possible between us?
NEW CORR ENG ──► You are a thorough illiterate when you ask me to worship your lord; do you not see me endowed with exquisite beauty? and what is your Mahiṣa? A buffalo with horns; how can then creation become possible between us?

[Ch 12 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Better fly away or fight if you like; I will kill you and your friends, and if you leave the region of Heaven and the share of Yajña, then you will become happy."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Better fly away or fight if you like; I will kill you and your friends, and if you leave the region of Heavens and the share of Yajñā, then you will become happy.”

[Ch 12 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Thus saying, the Devi howled and roared so loudly that it appeared strange and it caused a great terror to the Dānavas who took it as the great dissolution of the universe at the end of a Kalpa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Thus saying, the Devī howled and roared so loudly that it appeared strange and it caused a great terror to the Dānavas who took it as the great dissolution of the universe at the end of a Kalpa.

[Ch 12 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The earth and the mountains trembled: the wives of the Dānavas had miscarriage at that terrific noise.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The earth and the mountains trembled; the wives of the Dānavas, had miscarriages at that terrific noise.

[Ch 12 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Tāmra hearing that sound was terrified; his mind became unsteady and he at once fled to Mahiṣa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Tāmra hearing that sound was terrified; his mind became unsteady and he at once fled to Mahiṣa.

[Ch 12 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The Dānavas present in the city became deaf; they fled and became very anxious and were absorbed in the thought whence and how that sound came.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The Dānavas present in the city became deaf; thy fled and became very anxious and were absorbed in the thought whence and how that sound came.

[Ch 12 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The lion, too, enraged and, raising up its manes, roared so loud that the Daityas became very much terrified. Mahisa too, became confounded to see Tāmra returning; he then held a council with his ministers on what ought to be done next?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The lion, too, enraged and, raising up its manes, roared so loud that the Daityas became very much terrified. Mahiṣa, too, became confounded to see Tāmra returning; he then held a council with his ministers what ought to be done next?

[Ch 12 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mahisāsura said: "O best of the Dānavas! Shall we now take our shelter within the forts? Or shall we go out and fight? Or will it be favourable to us if we fly away?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mahiṣāsura said :-- “O best of the Dānavas! Shall we now take our shelter within the forts? Or shall we go out and fight? Or will it be favourable to us if we fly away?

[Ch 12 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You all are intelligent and versed in all the Śāstras and unconquerable by your foes; therefore ought you all to consult over the matter in utmost privacy for our success at the present moment.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You all are intelligent and versed in all the Śāstras and unconquerable by your foes; therefore ought you all to consult over the the matter in utmost privacy for our success at the present moment.

[Ch 12 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The root of Kingdom lies in the council in the secret place (cabinet) and Statesmanship; if this counsel be kept well preserved in secrecy, then that Kingdom is also kept entire; therefore it is good and virtuous.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The root of Kingdom lies in the council in the secret place (cabinet) and Statesmanship; if this counsel be kept well preserved in secrecy, then that Kingdom is also kept entire; therefore it is

[Ch 12 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If the plan be out, then destruction comes both to the King and his Kingdom; hence the plan must be kept secret by those wanting glory, lest it be taken advantage of and rendered ineffective by other persons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If the plan be out, then destruction comes both to the King and his Kingdom; hence the plan must be kept secret by those wanting glory, lest it be taken advantage of and rendered ineffective by other persons.

[Ch 12 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Ministers! Now declare, taking due consideration of time and place, after duly discussing and ascertaining what is the best course to adopt, what would be beneficial and full of reason and intelligence. First find out the cause why this powerful woman, created by the Devas has come here alone and helpless?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Ministers! Now declare, taking due consideration of time and place, after duly discussing and ascertaining what is the best course to adopt, what would be beneficial and full of reason and intelligence. First find out the cause why this powerful woman, created by the Devas has come here alone and helpless?

[Ch 12 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That woman is challenging us to fight. What more wonder can there be than this? Who can say in the three worlds what the result will be, whether it will be good or otherwise?
NEW CORR ENG ──► That woman is challenging us to fight. What more wonder can there be than this? Who can say in the three worlds what the result will be, whether it will be good or otherwise?

[Ch 12 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Victory comes not to many persons nor defeat comes to a single individual; therefore victory or defeat lies at the hands of the Luck and Destiny.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Victory comes not to many persons nor defeat comes to a single individual; therefore victory or defeat lies at the hands of the Luck and Destiny.

[Ch 12 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who plead for place, policy, statesmanship, they say what is Fate? Is there anyone who has seen Fate? (Adṛṣṭa) No one has seen His appearance." It may be argued that there may exist such a thing as Fate; to which it might be replied, what proofs are there for such an existence?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who plead for place, policy, statesmanship, they say what is Fate? Is there anyone who has seen Fate? (Adṛṣṭa) No one has seen His appearance. It may be argued that there may exist such a thing as Fate; to which it might be replied, what proofs are there for such an existence?

[Ch 12 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus the weak persons alone hold it out as their only hope; nowhere are seen energetic persons who can fulfil their ends by their own efforts, by those who enrol themselves under Fate. Therefore “effort,” “energy” are the words of the heroes and “Fate” is the word of cowards. You should all consider today these subjects fully and intelligently and then decide what are we to do?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the weak persons alone hold it out as their only hope; nowhere are seen energetic persons who can fulfil their ends by their own efforts, by those who enrol themselves under Fate. Therefore “effort,” “energy” are the words of the heroes and “Fate” is the word of the cowards. You should all consider today these subjects fully and intelligently and then decide what are we to do?”

[Ch 12 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Thus hearing the King, the famous Vidālākṣa with folded hands spoke thus: "O king! First it should be definitely ascertained as to whose wife is she, this woman possessing large eyes? Whence and for what purpose has she come here; next what ought to be done should be decided.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Thus hearing the King, the famous Vidālākṣa with folded hands spoke thus :-- O King! First it should be definitely ascertained whose wife is she, this woman possessing large eyes? Whence and for what purpose has she come here; next what ought to be done should be decided.

[Ch 12 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It seems to me that the Devas, knowing that your death will ensue from the hands of a woman, have created very carefully this lotus-eyed woman out of their own essences.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It seems to me that the Devas, knowing that your death will ensue from the hands of a woman, have created very carefully this lotus-eyed woman out of their own essences.

[Ch 12 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And they are lying in wait, unknown to anybody in the celestial space with a desire to see the battle but really to fight with you. In due time, they will undoubtedly help this woman.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And they are lying in wait, unknown to anybody in the celestial space with a desire to see the battle but really to fight with you. In due time, they will undoubtedly help this woman.

[Ch 12 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the war will ensue, Viṣṇu and the other Devas will put this woman in front and slay us all. Whereas this Devi will slay you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the war will ensue, Viṣṇu and the other Devas will put this woman in front and slay us all. Whereas this Devī will slay you.

[Ch 12 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This is their earnest desire. O king! I have come to know this beforehand; but what will be the actual result I cannot say.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This is their earnest desire. O King! I have come to know this beforehand; but what will be the actual result I cannot say.

[Ch 12 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I cannot say also whether it is advisable for You to fight now; therefore it would be better if you consider yourself well on this matter of the gods and do accordingly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I cannot say also whether it is advisable for You to fight now; therefore it would be better if you consider yourself well on this matter of the gods and do accordingly.

[Ch 12 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Our duty, the duty of your servants lies in this: That we should sacrifice at any moment our lives for the preservation of your prestige; and to enjoy with you whenever you are enjoying.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Our duty, the duty of your servants lies in this :-- That we should sacrifice at any moment our lives for the preservation of your prestige and to enjoy with you whenever you are enjoying.

[Ch 12 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But, O King! It is extremely advisable to ponder over this very carefully when we see that this woman, though alone, is challenging us to fight who are armed with powerful soldiers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But, O King! It is extremely advisable to ponder over this very carefully when we see that this woman, though alone, is challenging us to fight who are armed with powerful soldiers.

[Ch 12 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Durmukha said: "O king! I know for certain, that we will not get victory in this battle; still we ought not to shew our back; for that would lead us to sheer disgrace.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Durmukha said :-- O King! I know for certain, that we will not get victory in this battle; still we ought not to show our backs; for that would lead us to sheer disgrace.

[Ch 12 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Even in our encounter with Indra and other Devas, we did nothing hateful and blameable; then how can any of us fly away when we come face to face with a helpless woman?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Even in our encounter with Indra and other Devas, we did nothing hateful and blameable; then how can any of us fly away when we come face to face with a helpless woman?

[Ch 12 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore fight we must; that is certain; let whatever happen's happen. What is inevitable, must come to pass. Thus considered, what need we care for the result?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore fight we must; that is certain; let whatever happen. What is inevitable, must come to pass. Thus considered, what need we care for the result?

[Ch 12 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If we die in the battle, we will get name and fame; if we be victorious, we will get happiness. Thus thinking both the cases, we must fight today.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If we die in the battle, we will get name and fame; if we be victorious, we will get happiness. Thus thinking both the cases, we must fight today.

[Ch 12 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Death is inevitable when our longevity expires; our prestige will suffer if we fly away; therefore we ought not to spend uselessly our time in thus expressing our vain regret for life or for death.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Death is inevitable when our longevity expires; our prestige will suffer if we fly away; therefore we ought not to spend uselessly our time in thus expressing our vain regret for life or for death.

[Ch 12 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing thus Durmukha's words, Bāskala, the eloquent speaker, thus spoke to the king, with clasped hands and his head bowed down.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the Durmukha’s words, Vāskala, the eloquent speaker, thus spoke to the king, with clasped hands and his head bowed down.

[Ch 12 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O king! You need not think thus in agony upon this unpleasant affair; alone I will kill that Caṇḍikā, of unsteady eyes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! You need not think thus in agony with this unpleasant affair; alone I will kill that Caṇḍikā, of unsteady eyes.

[Ch 12 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Best of kings! To be always prompt and energetic indicates that one is steady in one's heroic valour, to consider one's enemy as dreadful Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam is contrary to above; so we ought not to take recourse to heroic valour.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Best of kings! To be always prompt and energetic indicates that one is steady in one’s heroic valour; to consider one’s enemy as dreadful is contrary to above; so we ought now to take recourse to heroic valour.

[Ch 12 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Therefore I will discard fear altogether and fight out valiantly; I will no doubt, send Candikā in the battle field to the abode of Death.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Therefore I will discard fear altogether and fight out valiantly; I will no doubt, send Caṇḍikā in the battlefield to the abode of Death.

[Ch 12 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I fear not Yama, nor Indra, nor Kubera, nor Vāyu nor Agni, nor Viṣṇu, nor Śaṅkara, nor Moon nor Sun; I do not fear any of them; what fear can I, then, entertain of that vain arrogant woman, who has got none to support her. I will kill Her with these arrows, sharpened on stones.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I fear not Yama, nor Indra, nor Kuvera, nor Vayu nor Agni, nor Viṣṇu, nor Śaṅkara, nor Moon nor Sun; I do not fear any of them; what fear can I, then, entertain of that vain arrogant woman, who has got none to support her. I will kill Her with these arrows, sharpened on stones.

[Ch 12 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You can today see the prowess of my arms and enjoy peace; you will not have to go to battle any more to fight with Her."
NEW CORR ENG ──► You can see today the prowess of my arms and enjoy peace; you will not have to go to battle anymore to fight with Her.

[Ch 12 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! Bāskala having said thus to the lord Mahisa in a haughty spirit, Durdhara bowed down and said thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Vāskala having said thus to the lord Mahiṣa in a haughty spirit, Durdhara bowed down and said thus :--

[Ch 12 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Lord of the earth! Let the purpose be whatsoever, with which the beautiful Devi with eighteen hands, the creation of the gods, may come hither, I will vanquish Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the earth! Let the purpose be whatsoever, with which the beautiful Devī with eighteen hands, the creation of the gods, may come hither, I will vanquish Her.

[Ch 12 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! I think, it is simply to terrify you, as the Suras have thus created this Māyā woman; therefore, do you forsake your delusion by knowing this merely as a scare.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! I think, it is simply to terrify you, as the Suras have thus created this Māyā woman; therefore, do you forsake your delusion by knowing this merely as a scare.

[Ch 12 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Such is the statesmanship; now hear about the workings of the ministers. Ministers in this world are of three kinds: (1) Sāttvik; (2) Rājasik and (3) Tāmasik.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Such is the statesmanship; now hear about the workings of the ministers. Ministers in this world are of three kinds :-- (1) Sāttvik; (2) Rājasik and (3) Tāmasik.

[Ch 12 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those ministers in whom the Sattva quality is predominant, they perform their Master's duties according to their own strength.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those ministers in whom the Sattva quality is predominant, they perform their Master’s duties according to their own strength.

[Ch 12 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Sāttvik Mantri (ministers) are well versed in their Mantra Sāstras (the policies and statesmanship), virtuous and one-pointed in their thoughts, they never do any injury to their king and they fulfil their own purpose.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Sāttvik Mantris (ministers) are well versed in their Mantra Śāstras (the policies and statesmanship), virtuous and one-pointed in their thoughts, they never do any injury to their king and they fulfil their own purposes.

[Ch 12 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rājasik Mantrīs are of different sorts; they are always after own interests; at times; whenever they like, they do the State duties.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Rājasik Mantris are of different sorts; they are always after their own interests; at times, whenever they like, they do the State duties.

[Ch 12 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Tāmasik Mantris always look of their own interests out of their greedy nature; they serve their ends even by ruining the regal interests.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Tāmasik Mantris always look of their own interests out of their greedy nature; they serve their ends even by ruining the regal interests.

[Ch 12 Verse 60-61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is the Tāmasik Mantris that are influenced by the bribes from the enemies, become separated at their hearts from their own masters and give out the secrets to the enemies, while staying in their homes. They always advise alienation policy like the sword ensheathed in a scabbard; and when the time of war comes, they always frighten their masters.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is the Tāmasik Mantris that are influenced by the bribes from the enemies, become separated at their hearts from their own masters and give out the secrets to the enemies, while staying in their homes. They always advise alienation policy like the sword ensheathed in a scabbard; and when the time of war comes, they always frighten their masters.

[Ch 12 Verse 62-63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O King! Never put your trust on ministers; if you do so, they will always hinder you in your actions and counsels; what harm cannot be done by those ministers that are treacherous, greedy, deceitful and void of any intelligence and always addicted to vicious acts, when they are trusted!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O King! Never put your trust on ministers; if you do so, they will always hinder you in your actions and counsels; what harm cannot be done by those ministers that are treacherous, greedy, deceitful and void of any intelligence and always addicted to vicious acts, when they are trusted!

[Ch 12 Verse 64-65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O king! I will go myself to the battle and serve your purpose; you need not be at all anxious in this matter. I will soon bring before you that vicious woman; I will do your actions by my own strength and powers. Let you be calm; and look at my strength, fortitude and valour. Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the holding of counsel by Mahisāsura in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam the Mahā Pruānam, of 18,000 Ślokas by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O King! I will go myself to the battle and serve your purpose; you need not be at all anxious in this matter. I will soon bring before you that vicious woman; I will do your actions by my own strength and powers. Let you be calm; and look at my strength, fortitude and valour. Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the holding of counsel by Mahiṣāsura in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam the Mahā Purāṇam, of 18,000 Slokas by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
