CHAPTER XXXVIII

On the Glories of the Devi

साविष्यवाच

देवीभक्ति देहि महां साराणां चैव साकाम।

पूंसा मुक्तिद्रावीजं नरकाणवतारकम् ॥ १ ॥

कारणं मुक्तिसाराणं सर्वीगुभविनाशनम् ।

दारकं कर्मद्धुक्षाणां कृतपाणीघदारणम् ॥ २ ॥

Sāvitrī said: “O Lord! Give me the devotion to the Devi to that Adyā Śakti Bhagavati Mahā Māyā. Parameśvarī Māyī that is the Essence of all essences, the Door of final liberation to the human beings, and the Cause of delivering them from hells, that is the Root of all the Dharmas that lead to Mukti, that destroys all the inauspiciousness, that takes away the fear of all the Karmas, and that takes away always all the sins committed before.

युक्तिक्र कतिधायरित किं वा तासां च लक्षणम् ।

देवीभक्ति भक्तिभेद निकेकस्यापि खंडन् ॥ 3 ॥

तत्वज्ञानविद्वीना च स्त्रीजातिर्विधिनर्दिता ।

किंचित्ज्ञानं सारभृतं वद वेदिवेदां वर ॥ 4 ॥

O Thou, the Foremost amongst the knowers of the Vedas! How many kinds of Muktis are there in this world? What is the True Bhakti? What are its

characteristics? What is to be done by which the enjoyment of the karmas done can be desisted and nullified? O Bhagavan! The woman kind has been created by the Creator as devoid of any Tattvajñāna or true knowledge; now tell me something about this True Knowledge.

सर्वे दानं च यज्छु तीर्थे स्नाने बत ततः ।

अज्ञानिज्ञानदानस्य कलं नाईति घोडगीम् ॥ 5 ॥

यितु: श्रतगुणा माता गौरैवे चेति निशितान् ।

मातु: श्रतगुण: पूर्यो ज्ञानदाता गुरू: प्रभो ॥ 6 ॥

All the charities, sacrifices, bathing in the sacred places of pilgrimages, observing vows and austerities cannot be compared with one sixteenth of imparting knowledge to those who are ignorant (of true knowledge). Mother is hundred times superior to father; this is certain; but the Spiritual Teacher, the Giver of True Knowledge, is hundred times more to be reverenced and worshipped than the mother. O Lord!"

धर्मराज उवाच

पूर्व सर्वों वरो दन्तो यसे मनसि वांछितः ।

अधुना शक्तिभक्त्रेते वत्से भवतु महात् ॥ 7 ॥

Book IX Chapter XXXVIII

श्रौतुमघडिस कल्याणि श्रीदेवीपुणाकीर्तनम् ।

वक्तृणां पृष्छकानां च श्रौतृणां कुलतारणम् ॥ 8 ॥

Dharmarāja said: “O Child! What boons you desired of Me before, I granted them all to you. Now I grant this boon to you that ‘Let the devotion towards the Śakti now arise in your mind’ O Auspicious One! You want to hear the reciting of the Glories of Śri Devi; by this; both he who puts forward the question and he who hears the answer, all their families are delivered.

ग्रेणो वक्रसहस्रेशन न हि यद्रतुभीश्र: ।

भृत्युंजयो न क्षमघ वर्तु फघुपुखेन च ॥ 9 ॥

धाता चतुर्णा वेदानां विधाता जगतामयि ।

ब्रहा चतुर्मुंखैने वालं विद्यृष्ठ सर्ववित् ॥ 10 ॥

कांतिकेकः घणपुखेन नापि वतुभलं धुवम् ।

न गणेशः समधंधु योगीद्वागो युगैरुंक: ॥ 11 ॥

सामभृताक्र शासकाणां वेहताद्ध एव च ।

कलामातं व्यदुगानां न विहिति बुधायं च ॥ 12 ॥

सरस्वती जडीभृता नालं तद्गुणवर्षने ।

सन्तकुमारो धार्थि सनंदतः सनानतः ॥ 13 ॥

सनकः बकितः सूबों येघेच च बहणा: सुतः ।

विश्वक्षणा न यद्रुक्ति किं चान्ये जडबुद्धः ॥ 14 ॥

न यद्रक्तुं क्षमा: सिद्धा मुनींत्र योगिनस्तथा ।

के वा चान्ये वयं के वा श्रीदेव्या गुणवर्णनें ॥ 15 ॥

ध्यायते यत्पदांभोजं बढ्धाविष्णुशिवरातः ॥

अतिसाध्यं स्वभक्तानां तदन्येयं सुवुर्लंभम् ॥ 16 ॥

किंश्रिक्तिक्रिज्ञानीत दनुणोक्लोर्ने शुभम् ।

अतिरिक्त विज्ञानाति बहुना ब्रह्माविश्राद: ॥ 17 ॥

ततोतिरिक्ते ज्ञानाति गणेशो ज्ञानिनां गुरु: ।

सर्वातिरिक्तं ज्ञानाति सर्वतः शेषपुरैव सः ॥ 18 ॥

When the Śeṣa Nāga Ananta Deva with His thousand mouths is unable to recite the glories of the Devi, when Mahādeva cannot described with His five mouths, when the Creator Brahmā is incapable to recite Her glories with His four mouths, when Viṣṇu, the Omniscient, falls back, when Kārtikeya with His six mouths cannot sufficiently describe, when Gāncēa, the Guru of the Gurus of the great yogis is incapable, when the Pandits, the knowers of the four Vedas, the Essence

of all the Śāstras, cannot know even a bit of Her, when Sarasvati becomes inert in going to describe Her glories; when Sanatkumāra, Dharma, Sanātana, Sananda, Sanaka, Kapila, Sūrya and other sons of the Creator have fallen back, when the other Siddhas, Yogindras, Munindras are quite incapable to glorify the deeds of Prakṛti Devi, then how can I recite fully the Glories of Her? Whose lotus-feet Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Śiva and others meditate; and lo! when it becomes difficult for Her devotees even to think of Her, then what wonder is there that She will be so very rare to others! Brahmā, skilled in the knowledge of the Vedas knows more of Her than what other ordinary persons know so little of Her auspicious Glories.

तस्पी दर्ते पुरा जाने कृष्णोय परमात्मना ।

अतीव निज्ञानप्रणे गोलोकै रास्यदंचे ॥ 19 ॥

तत्रेव कथितं किंचित्तपुणोलक्तीनं शुभम् ।

धर्म च कवयामास शिवलोके शिव: स्वयम् ॥ 20 ॥

धर्मैतु कवयामास भावस्ते पृष्ठते तथा ।

यामाराध्य मयित्ताउपि संग्रण तपसा सभी ॥ 21 ॥

पूर्व त्वं विषयं चाहं न गृह्जीम प्रयन्ततः ।

वैराययुक्नतसपे संगृतमिष्ठति सुवते ॥ 22 ॥

More than Brahmā, Gāncā, the Guru of the Jñānins, knows; again Sāmhu, the Omniscient, knows the best of all. For, in ancient times, that knowledge of the Prakrti Devī was given to Him by Kṛṣṇa, the Highest Spirit in a solitary place in the Rāsa Maṇḍalam in the region of Goloka. Mahādeva, again, gave it to Dharma in the Śivaloka; Dharma again gave the Prakrti Mantra to My father. My father became successful (Siddha) in the worship of Prakrti Devī when he practised austerities.

तदा मां कथयामास पिता तदुगणकीतन् ।

यथानां तद्वादि निवीधातीव दुर्भिम् ॥ 23 ॥

तदुर्णसंानजानाति तदन्यस्य चाकाधा ।

यथाकाशो न जानाति स्वातमेव वरान्ने ॥ 24 ॥

सर्वांत्या सर्वभगवान्यवैकरणाकरण: ।

सर्वेश्वरश सर्वोष्ट: सर्ववित्यपिलाकः ॥ 25 ॥


नित्यरूपी नित्यदेही नित्यानन्दो निराकृतिः ।
निरङ्कुशो निराशङ्को निर्गुणश्च निरामयः ॥ २६॥

निर्लिप्तः सर्वसाक्षी च सर्वाधारः परात्परः ।
मायाविशिष्टः प्रकृतिस्तद्विकाराश्च प्राकृताः ॥ २७॥

स्वयं पुमांश्च प्रकृतिस्तावभिन्नौ परस्परम् ।
यथा वह्नेस्तस्य शक्तिर्न भिन्नास्त्येव कुत्रचित् ॥ २८॥

Of old, the Devas wanted to offer to me the Government of the Yama Loka; but as I was very much dispassionate towards the world, I became unwilling and became ready to perform austerities. Then my Father told the Glories of Prakrti Devi. Now I describe to you what I heard from my Father and what is stated in the Vedas, though very difficult to comprehend. Listen carefully. O Fair Faced One! As the eternal space does not know its own extent, so Prakrti Devi Herself knows not Her own Glories; then what can be said of any other person on this! She is the Self of all, endowed with all powers and lordship, the Cause of all causes, the Lord of all, the Origin of all and the Preserver of all; She is Eternal, always with Her Cosmic Body, full of everlasting bliss, without any special form, unrestrained, having no fear, without any disease and decay, unattached, the Witness of all, the Refuge of all, and Higher than the Highest; She is with Māyā and She is Mūla Prakrti; the objects created by Her being known as the Prākrt creation; Who remains as Prakrti and Purusa inseparable from each other as Agni and Her burning force; the Mahā Mayā, of the nature of everlasting existence, intelligence and bliss.

सेयं शक्तिर्महामाया सच्चिदानन्दरूपिणी ।
कर्व विव्यलैरूपा च भक्तानुपहतेवे ॥ 29 ॥

गोपालसुन्दरीकरं प्रवर्मा सा ससर्ज है ।

उत्तीव कर्मनीं च सुन्दरं सुमनोहरम् ॥ 30 ॥

नवीनीरिद्यमां किशोरों गोपवेधकम् ।

कंदपंकोटिलावणं लीलाधाम मनोहर्म ॥ 31 ॥

Though formless, She assumes forms for the gratification of the desires of Her Bhaktas. She created first the beautiful form of Gopāla Sundari i.e., the form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa very lovely and beautiful, captivating the mind. His body is blue like the fresh

rain cloud; He is young and dressed like that of a cow-herd. Millions of Kandarpas the (the Love deity) are, as it were, playing in His body.

गरान्यधारूपचानां गोभागोचनलोचन् ।

गरत्याविगोकौटुगोभाप्रख्यादानानन् ॥ 32 ॥

अमूल्यरत्निर्माणानानावृष्णभृष्णितम् ।

ससितं शोभितं शुश्वमूल्यपीलासासा ॥ 33 ॥

His eyes are vie with the midday lotus of the autumn. The beauty of His face throws under shade the millions and millions of the Full Moon. His body is decorated with invaluable ornaments decked with jewels. Sweet smile reigns ever in His lips; it is adorned more over with His yellow coloured invaluable robe.

परबहुस्तरूप च जलतें ब्रह्मतेजस ।

सुखदुपयं च शांतं च राथाकातमन्तकम् ॥ 34 ॥

He is Parama Brahma. His whole body is burning with the Brahma Teja, the Fire of Brahma. His Body is Fiery. He is lovely, sweet to look at, of a peaceful temper, the Lord of Rādhā and He is Infinite.

Note: The Universe; as we see, is unreal like what we see in the Kaleidoscope; various apparent pictures of an endless variety of beautiful colour, and forms.

गोर्पीधिर्विध्याणं च समित्याधिश्रं सतन्ति ।

रासमंडलमध्यस्वे त्रनिसिंहासनशित्यम् ॥ 35 ॥

He is sitting on a jewel throne in the Rāsa Mandalam, and is incessantly looked upon by the smiling lovely Gopīs at one and the same time. He is two-armed.

वंर्गी क्वणतं द्विषुजं वन्मालाविष्यितम् ।

कोस्तुपुंद्रपाणिद्रिप्रा शणवद्धः:स्थलोज्जलम् ॥ 36 ॥

कुकुभागुकस्तूरीचन्दनचर्धितयिद्यम् ।

चाफवेकमालाकारं मालतीगाल्यमंडितम् ॥ 37 ॥

A garland made of wild flowers is hanging from His neck. He is playing on His flute. His breast is resplendent with Kaustubha gem that He always wears. His body is anointed with Kumkuma (saffron); Aguru (the fragrant and cooling paste of the Aguru wood), musk, and sandal-paste. The garland of beautiful Campaka and Malati flowers is hanging from His neck.

Book IX Chapter XXXVIII

चाक्छंद्रक्रशेभाढ्ये चुडावंकिमराजितम् ।

एवंभूत च ध्यायिते भत्ता भक्तिपरित्युताः ॥ 38 ॥

यद्वयाज्जगतां धाता विधाते सुहिधेये च ।

कर्मानुसाराल्लिखतं क्रोतैत सर्वकर्माणम् ॥ 39 ॥

तपसां फलवाता च कर्माणं च यद्याया ।

On His head, the beautiful crest is being seen, a little obliquely situated in the form of the beautiful Moon. Thus the Bhaktas, filled with Bhaktis, meditate on Him. O Child! It is through His fear that the Creator is doing His work of creation of this Universe; and is recording the Prārabdha fruits of their Karmas.

विष्यु: पाता च सर्वेधां चद्यायातीय संततम् ॥ 40 ॥

कालान्सिक: सहर्तां सर्वविश्रेषु चद्यात् ।

शिवो मृत्युंजयश्रैव जानिनां च गुरोर्भूः ॥ 41 ॥

यज्ञानाज्ञानावनसित योगीशे जानविषमुः ।

परमानन्दयुक्तश्र भवित्वीरायसंयुतः ॥ 42 ॥

It is through His fear that Viṣnu is awarding the fruits of Tapas and preserving the Universe. By His command the Kālāgni Rudra Deva is destroying all. By Whose favour Śiva has become Mrtyunjāya, the Conqueror of Death and the Foremost of the Jñānis; knowing whom Śiva has become Himself endowed with knowledge and the Lord of the knowers of knowledge, full of the Highest Bliss, devotion and dispassion.

यद्यात्राविति पवन: प्रवर: श्रीभागीयनाम ।

तपश्छ प्रजपति यद्यातर्वतंत सति ॥ 43 ॥

यद्राज्ञा वर्षौतिंत्री मृत्युश्राति जन्तुष ।

यद्राज्ञा दोहद्राक्रिजलमेवे सुर्गीतलम् ॥ 44 ॥

Through Whose fear the wind becomes the foremost of runners and carries things, the Sun gives heat, Indra gives rain, Yama destroys, Agni burns, and Water cools all the things.

दिशो रक्षिति दिव्याला महापीति यद्राज्ञा ।

भ्रमति राशिचकानि ग्राह्य यद्रवेच न ॥ 4 5 ॥

भयात्कलिति वृक्षाङ्ग पुर्णविधि च यद्रयात् ।

यद्राज्ञा तु प्रस्कृत्य कालः काले हेर्द्वाया ॥ 4 6 ॥

By Whose command the Regents of the (ten) quarters of the sky are watching and preserving nice orders; through Whose fear the planets are

describing their several orbits. Through Whose fear, trees flower and yield fruits; By Whose command the Kāla destroys all. By Whose command all the beings whether on land on in water are quitting their lives in time; until the proper time comes no man does not die even if he be pierced whether in battle or in danger.

तया जलल्यल्स्थान न जीविते यद्यात्या ।

अकालेनाहरिद्रदूं रोगुं विषयेषु च ॥ 47 ॥

धते बायुत्नोरायिग तोयं कूर्मं तद्वारा ।

कूर्मेउनं च क्षोणी च समुद्रासा च पवतन् ॥ 48 ॥

सर्वे चैव श्मात्कपा नानारन्तं विषयितं च।

यतः सर्वाणि भूगानि स्वीयोते हौत तक हिं ॥ 49 ॥

By Whose command the wind supports the water; the water supports the tortoise; the tortoise supports the Ananta and the Ananta supports the earth; the earth supports the oceans, mountains and all the jewels. The earth is of the nature of forgiveness, i.e., endures all. For this reason all things, moving and non-moving, rest on Her and again melt away in Her. Seventy-one Divine Yugas constitute one Indra's life period.

इज्ञायुशि दिव्यानां युगानामेकसन्तति: ।

अशांत्रीशे ग्रकानते बहणाश दिवानिग्नम् ॥ 50 ॥

एवं त्रिंशदिनीमांसीद्वायमापायमानु: सुस्तः ।

ऋतुभि: पद्धभिवाद्व बहणो वै वयः स्मृतम् ॥ 51 ॥

Twenty-eight Indra's life periods constitute Brahma's one day and one night. Thus thirty days constitute Brahma's one month; so two months constitute one Rtu (season); six Rtus make one year.

ब्रहणध निपाते च चकुन्मीलनं हरे: ।

चक्षुन्मीलने तस्य लयं प्राकृतिकं विदु: ॥ 52 ॥

प्रलेश प्राकृते सर्वे देवाधाछा चराचरा: ।

लीना धाता विधाता च श्रीकृष्णानाथपिकं ॥ 53 ॥

Thus one hundred years constitute Brahma's life. When Brahmā dies, Śri Hari's eye closes. That is the Prākṛtik Pralaya. At this time, everything, moving and non-moving, from the Deva loka to Bhūr loka (earth) dies. The Creator Brahmā gets dissolved in the navel of Śri Krṣna.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

विष्यु: क्षीरेणायी च वैकुंठे यक्षुर्णुंज: ।

विलीना वामपार्थे च कृष्णस्य परमात्मन: ॥ 54 ॥

यस्म जाने शिवो लीने ज्ञानाधीश: सनातनः ।

दुर्गार्थ विष्णुभाग्यां विलीना: सर्वशक्ततः ॥ 55 ॥

The four-armed Viṣnu, of Vaikuntāha, sleeps on Kṣiṣra Samudra, the ocean of milk, i.e., He dissolves on the left side of Śrī Krṣna, the Highest Spirit. All the other Sāktis (forces) dissolve in Mūla Prakṛti, the Māyā of Viṣnu.

सा च कृष्णस्य बुद्धो च बुद्ध्यधिष्ठादुरेवता ।

नारायणांग: स्कन्दश्र तीनो वक्षसि तस्य च॥ ५६ ॥

श्रीकृष्णांगश्र तद्वाही देवाधीशो गणेश्वः ।

पदांगाश्रैव पदायांा सा तथाायां च सुद्धे। ॥५७ ॥

The Mūla Prakṛti Durgā, the Presiding Deity of Buddhi (reason) dissolves in the Buddhist of Kṛṣṇa. Skanda, the part of Nārāyana, dissolves in His breast. Ganeśa, the formot of the Devas, born in part of Kṛṣṇa, dissolves in the arm of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

गोयाशुचि च तस्यां च सर्वांशे देवोषितः ।

कृष्णप्राणाधिदेवी सा तस्य प्राणेषु संस्थिता ॥ 58 ॥

सावित्री च सरस्वल्यां वेदः शास्त्राणि याति च ।

स्थिता वाणी च निद्धायां यस्य च परमात्मनः ॥ 59 ॥

And those who are born in parts of Padmā, dissolve in Her body and Padmā dissolves in the body of Rādhā. All the cow-herdesses and all the bodies of the Devas dissolve in Rādhā's body. But Rādhā, the Presiding Deity of the Prāṇa of Śrī Krṣṇa, dissolves the Prāṇa of Śrī Krṣṇa. Śāvitrī, the four Vedas and all the Śāstras dissolve in Sarasvatī; and Sarasvatī gets dissolved in the tongue of Śrī Krṣṇa, the Highest Self.

गोलोकस्य च गोपाश्र विलीतासस्य लोमपु ।

तलापोषु च सर्वेधा प्राणा वाता हुताशना: ॥ 6 0 ॥

जटतरानी विलीनाश जलं तद्रसनाघतः ।

वैणावाङ्गराणोंने परमानन्दसंपुता: ॥ 6 1 ॥

The Gopas in the region of Goloka dissolve in the pores of His skin; the Prāna Vāyu of all dissolve in His Prāna Vāyu; the fire dissolves in the fire in His belly; water dissolves in the tip of His tongue, and the Vaiṣṇavas, (devotees of Viṣṇu), drinking

the nectar of Bhakti, the Essence of all essences, dissolve in His lotus-fect.

सारास्तारताभक्तिस्तरीयूषपातयिन: ।

विरार्डशास्त्र महाति लीना: कृष्णे महाविराद् ॥ 62 ॥

यस्यैल लोकमूषेपूष विश्वानि निविलुकानि च ।

यस्य चक्षुप उन्मेय प्राकृतः प्रलयो भवेत् ॥ 63 ॥

All smaller Virāts dissolve in the Great Virāt and the Great Virāt dissolves in the Body of Śrī Krṣṇa. O Child! He is Krṣṇa, on the pores of Whose skin are situated endless Universes; at the closing of Whose eyes, the Prākrītika Pralaya comes and on the opening of Whose eyes, the creation takes place.

चछुक्न्मीलने सृष्टियैर्वेय पुनरेव सः ।

यावकालो निभिषेण तावदुभीलोन च ॥ 64 ॥

बढ़णाक्ष शताछे च सुहः सूत्रलयः पुनः ।

बढ़पुरुषलयानां च संख्या नात्स्वेव सुतेने ॥ 65 ॥

The closing and opening of the eyes takes the same time. Brahmā's creation lasts one hundred years and the Pralaya lasts one hundred years. O One of good vows! There is no counting how many Brahmā's or how many creations and dissolutions have taken place.

यथा भृज्ञां चैव संख्यानं नैव विद्यते ।

चक्षुनिंमे प्रलयो यस्य सर्वान्तात्मनः ॥ 66 ॥

उभीलेन पुनः सृष्टिभेदेवेशप्रेख्या ।

स कृष्णः प्रलये तस्यां प्रकृती लीन एव हि ॥ 67 ॥

As one cannot count the number of dusts, so one cannot count the creations and dissolutions. This is the Great Unspeakable Wonder! Again on Whose closing of the eyes the Pralaya takes place and on whose opening of the eyes the creation takes place, out of the will of God, That Kṛṣṇa dissolves at the time of Pralaya in Prakṛti.

एकैव च परा शक्तिनिर्णुः परमः पुगन्त् ।

स एवेदम्य आंसीक्षिति वेदविद्धि विदुः ॥ 68 ॥

मूलप्रतिव्यक्ता उपव्याकृतपदार्थित्या ।

सिद्धिभ्रलवमापना प्रल्ले सेव तिक्षति ॥ 69 ॥

This Highest Śakti, the Mūla Prakṛti is the Only One without a second; it is the only one Nirgunā and the Highest Puruṣa. It is considered as ‘Sat’

Book IX Chapter XXXVIII

existing, by the Seers of the Vedas. Such a thing as Mūla Prakṛti is the unchanged state (Mukti). During the Pralaya, Force, Who can in this universe recite Her glories?

तदुर्णोक्लीनीत वक्तु ब्रह्माण्डेषु च कः क्रमः ।

मुकतयश् चतुवैदैर्निककताश् चतुर्विधा: ॥ 70 ॥

Mukti is of four kinds, (1) Sālokya, (2) Sārūpya, (3) Sāmipya and (4) Nirvāna. So it is stated in the Vedas.

तत्प्रधानेवे घनितमुक्तेरपि गरीयसी ।

सालोक्यदा घनेदेशा तथा सारूप्यदा घर ॥ 7 1 ॥

सामीप्यदा5थ निवर्णपूदा मुक्तिश्रुत्थित्रा ।

भकास्तांना ति वांक्षिति विना तत्केवनं विनः ॥ 7 2 ॥

Out of them Bhakti towards the Deva is the highest; so much so that the Deva Bhakti is superior to Mukti. Mukti gives Sālokya, Sārūpya, Sāmipya, and Nirvāna. But the Bhaktas do not want anything. They want service of the Lord. They do not want anything else.

शिवल्यममरतं च बहुरावं चाहवेल्या ।

जन्ममृत्युजाख्याधिपशयोकामिकर कं धनम् ॥ ७३ ॥

दिव्यस्पधारणं च निवर्णी मोक्षणं विदुः ।

मुक्तिश्रसोवारिता भक्ति: सेवाविर्धिनी ॥ ७ ४ ॥

The state of becoming Śiva, of becoming an Amara or an immortal, becoming a Brahmā, the birth, death, disease, old age, fear, sorrow, or wealth, or assuming a divine form, or Nirvāna or Mokṣa all are looked on alike by the Bhaktas with disregard and contempt.

पतितमुपक्नोरयं घरे पेनेविक्छंडनं श्रणु ।

विदुर्बुधा निवेक्चे च भोगं च कृतकर्माणम् ॥ 75 ॥

तत्वण्डनं च शुभयं श्रीविभः सेवनं परम् ।

तत्वज्ञानिविं साथि विश्यं च लोकवेदयो: ॥ 76 ॥

Because Mukti is without any service while Bhakti increases this service. Thus I have told you the difference between Bhakti and Mukti. Now hear about the cutting off of the fruits of the past Karmas. O Chaste one! This service of the Highest Lord severs the ties of Karmas (past acts). This service is really the True Knowledge.

निर्विचरं शुभदं चोकतं गच्छ वत्से यवासुखम् ।

इत्पुक्ला सूर्यपुरक्षा जीवनिवा च ततविति् ॥ 77 ॥

तत्ये शुभाशिंग दत्ता गमनं कर्तुभुक्तः ।

द्रष्टा यमं च गच्छतं सा सावित्री प्राण्य च ॥ 78 ॥

So, O Child! I have now told you the Real Truth, leading to auspicious results. Now you can go freely as you desire." Thus saying to Śāvitrī, Yama, the son of Sūrya, gave life back to her husband and blessing her, became ready to go to His own abode.

रूतीय चरणी धूला सापुच्छेदन दुःवित्ता ।

साविक्रीतैन्द्रं भृता यमश्रेक पूर्णमितिधः ॥ 79 ॥

तामित्युवारा संतुतः स्वयं चैव रूतेद है ।

Seeing Dharmarāja ready to go away, Śāvitrī became sorry to have the bereavement of a good company, bowed down at His feet and began to cry. Yama, the Ocean of Mercy, hearing the crying of Śāvitrī began to weep and told the following words:

धर्मारा उवाच

लक्षवर्षे सुखं भुक्ल्या पुण्यक्षेत्रे च भारते ॥ 80 ॥

अन्ते यास्यास्त लतलोकं यय देवी विराजते ।

गत्वा च स्वगृहं भरे सविष्याश्रा तर्नं कुर् ॥ 81 ॥

Dharma said: "O Child! You enjoy in this holy Bhārata happiness for one lakh years and you will in the end go to the Deviloka or Mani Dvipa. Now go back to your house and observe for fourteen years the vow called Śavitrī-vrata for the mukti of women.

द्विस्तवर्षपर्यन्ते नारीणां मोक्षकारणम् ।

ज्येष्टुग्रकचतुद्रंगया सावित्याश्रत रंगभूम ॥ 82 ॥

गुकलष्टायां भापद्रे महात्क्रया यथा जतम् ।

झूष्टवर्ष ततं चैव प्रपतवेर्गं शुचिभिते ॥ 83 ॥

This Vrata is to be observed on the fourteenth day of the white fortnight in the month of Jyṣṭha. Then observe the Mahā-Laksmī Vrata. Its proper time is the eighth day of the bright fortnight of the month of Bhādra. For sixteen years consecutively without any break this vow is to be observed.

करीति भवस्या या नारी सा याति च विधोः पदम् ।

प्रतिमूक्लवारे च देवीं मझूलदायिनीम् ॥ 84 ॥

प्रतिमासं शुक्लपष्ट्ठां घर्षी मढ़ल्यात्यिनीम् ।

तथा चाषास्क्रांक्णां मनसां सर्वसिद्धिद्यान् । 8 5 ॥

राधारासे च कार्तिक्वां कृष्णप्राणाधिक्रियाय् ।

उपोथ शुक्लाध्यचां च प्रतिमांस वर्षप्रदम् ॥ 8 6 ॥

विश्युगामां भगवतीं दुर्गा सुनतिनारिणीम् ।

प्रकृतिं जगदांचां च प्रतिमासं वर्षप्रदम् ॥ 8 7 ॥

The woman who practises with devotion this vow, goes to the abode of Mūla Prakṛti. You would worship on every Tuesday in every month the Devi Maṅgala Caṇḍikā, the giver of all good; on the eighth day in the bright fortnight you should worship Devi Saṣthī (i.e., Devasenā); you should worship Manasā Devī, the giver of all siddhis, on the Saṅkrānti day (when the Sun enters another sign) in every year; you should worship Rādhā, the Central Figure of Rāsa, more than the Prāṇa of Kṛṣṇa on every Full Moon night in the month of Kārtika and you should observe fasting on the eighth day in the bright fortnight and worship the Viṣṇu Māyā Bhagavatī Devī, the Destructrix of all difficulties and dangers.

Note: The Rāsa is the playing out of the Vedāntic saying of Brahma as ‘Raso vai Sah;’ He is of the nature of Rasa, the most sweet and lovely Divine Principle which unites the Rasika and the Rasikā).

पतित्रानासु शुद्धासु यनेषु प्रतिमासु च ।

या नाती पूजयेद्वल्पा धनसंतानहेतसे ॥८८ ॥

इह लोके सुखं घुकत्ता थायतेने औशिफोः पदम् ।

एवं देल्या विष्वतीषु पूजयेतसाधकोशनिषम् ॥ ८९ ॥ 

The chaste woman having husband and sons who worships the World Mother Mūla Prakṛti, whether in Yantra, or in Mantra or in image, enjoys all pleasures in this world; and, in the end, goes to the Devīloka or Manj Dvīpa. O Child! The worshippers Sādhaka (one who is in one's way to success) must worship all the manifestations of the Devi, day and night.

सर्वकाल सर्वक्या संल्या परमेश्वी ।

नात: परतरं किम्बिलुक्तकृत्यत्वदायकम् ॥ 90 ॥

इत्युक्चला तां धर्मोजी जागाम निजमंदितम् ।

गृहीला स्वामिने सा च साविका च निजाल्यम् ॥ 91 ॥

At all times one must worship the omnipresent Durgā, the Highest Āsari. There is no other way to attain blessedness than this." Thus saying, Dharmarāja went to His own abode. Sāvirīt. too, with her husband Satyavān went to her home.

साविकी सत्यवांशीव प्रयची च यथागतम् ।

अन्यांश्र कथयामास स्वतृत्तां हि नारद ॥ 92 ॥

साविकीजनकः पुत्रान्संप्रातः प्रक्रमेण च ।

श्रशुरश्रशुर्गी राज्यं सा च पुत्रान्वरेण च ॥ 93 ॥

Both Savitri and Satyavān, when they reached home, narrated all their stories to their friends and acquaintances. In time, by the blessing of Yama, Savitri's father got sons and father-in-law recovered his eyesight and kingdom and Savitri Herself got sons.

लक्षवर्षे सुखं भुक्ला पुणवश्रेत्रे च भारते ।

जगाम स्वामिना सार्य देवीलोके पतितता ॥ 94 ॥

सवितुशाधिरेदेयी या मंत्राधिशतृदेवता ।

For one lakh years, Śāvitrī, enjoyed pleasures in this holy land of Bhārata, and ultimately went with her husband to the Deviloka Śāvitrī is the Presiding Deity of the Sūryamandalam, the solar orb. The Sun is the central Para Brahma. The Gāyatrī Mantra, the Presiding Devi, proves the existence of the highest Brahma in the centre of the Sun.

साविक्री ह्रापि वेदानां साविक्री तेन कौतिला ॥ 95 ॥

इन्वेब कावितं वत्स साविक्याख्यानुभनम् ।

जीवकर्मविषयकं च किं पुनः श्रोतृमिष्ठसि ॥ 96 ॥

श्री श्रीमदैवीभगावते नवमरकंये नारदवारावणसांवरे

साविष्यगछ्ञानोउद्धिश्रीअवयाः ।। 97 ॥

Therefore She is called Śāvitrī. Or Her name is Śāvitrī because all the Vedas have come out of Her. Thus I have narrated the excellent anecdote of Śāvitrī, and the fruitions of the Karmas of the several Jīvas. Now what more do you want to hear? Say.

Here ends the Thirty-eighth Chapter in the Ninth Book on the glories of the Devi and on the nature of Bhakti in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXXIX

