CHAPTER XV

On the Anecdote of Tulasi

नार्त्व जयाच

नारायणप्रिया साध्वी कर्थ सा च बघव ह ।

तुलसी कुत्र संभृता का वा सा पूर्वकन्मिनि ॥ १ ॥

कस्य वा सा कुले जाता कस्य कन्या कुले सती ।

केन वा तपसा सा च संप्राप्ता प्रकृतेः परम् ॥ २ ॥

Nārada said: O Bhagavan! How came the pure chaste Tulasī to the wife of Nārāyaṇa? Where was Her birth place? And what was She in Her previous birth? What family did She belong to? Whose daughter was She?

निर्विकार निरीहं च सर्वविश्वस्वरूपकम् ।

नारायणं परं बहुत परमेश्वभीरप्रवर्ध ।। ३ ।।

सर्वार्ताधं च सर्वेर्ग सर्वईं सर्वकारणम् ।

सर्वाधारं सर्वकंरं सर्वेधां परिपालकम् ॥ ४ ॥

And what austerities did She practise, that She got Nārāyaṇa for Her husband, Who is above Prakrti, not liable to change without any effort, the Universal Self, Para Brahma and the Highest God; Who is the Lord of all, omniscient, the Cause of

all, the Receptacle of all, Omnipresent, and the Preserver of all.

कथेमतादूर्धी देयी वृक्षत्वं समवाप ह ।

कर्थ साउप्यमुर्यता संवेषूच तपचित्यनी ॥ ५ ॥

सुनिन्धुं मे मनो लोतं प्रेर्यनां मुडुपुंडुः ।

छेतुर्महींस संदेहं सर्वे संदेश्वपनन ॥ ६ ॥

And how did Tulasi, the chief Devi of Nārāyaṇa, turn out into a tree? Herself quite innocent, how She was attacked by the fierce Asura? O Remover of all doubts! My mind, plain and simple, has become restless. I am cager to hear all this. So kindly cut asunder all my doubts.

नारायण उवाच

मनुष्ठ दक्षसावार्थिण: पुण्यवार्येणयः शृचि: ।

यश्यकी कौतिमांश्रिव विज्ञांश्रसामुद्धतः ॥ 7 ॥

तन्यूजी ब्रह्मासार्थिणिधिजो क्षेणतः शृचि: ।

तन्युजो धर्मसार्थिणीक्षणवशि वितेत्रियः ॥ 8 ॥

तन्युजो रूससार्थिणीभक्तामविजितेन्रियः ।

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! The Manu Dakṣa

Sāvarni was very religious, devoted to Viṣṇu, of wide renown, of a great name, and born with Viṣṇu's parts. Dakṣa Sāvarni's son Brahma Sāvarni was also very religious, devoted to Viṣṇu and of a pure Śuddha Sattva Guṇa. Brahma Sāvarni's son, Dharma Sāvarni was devoted to Viṣṇu and He was the master of his senses.

तन्युरो देवसावर्णिर्थिणुरतपरायण: ॥ 9 ॥

तनुय इन्सावर्णिर्महाविष्णुपरायण: ।

युधधजऊऊ तनुयो वृषधजपरायण: ॥ 10 ॥

Dharma Sāvarni's sons Ruda Sāvarni was also a man of restraint and very devoted. Rudra Sāvarni's son was Deva Sāvarni, devoted to Viṣṇu. Deva Sāvarni's devoted to Viṣṇu. Deva Sāvarni's son was Indra Sāvarni. He was a great Bhakta of Viṣṇu. His son was Vṛṣadhvaja. But He was a fanatic Śaiva (devoted to Śiva).

यत्साधो स्वयं शंभुपासीद्वगुगतयम् ।

पुराविष पर: स्नेहो नृपे तस्मिऊळवरच च ॥ १ १ ॥

न च नारायणं मेने न ल्बूर्षी न सरस्वतीम् ।

पूजां च सर्वदेवानां दूरीभूतां चकास सः ॥ १२ ॥

At his house Śiva Himself remained for three Yugas according to the Deva measure. So much so that Bhagavān Bhūtanātha loved him more than His own son. Vṛṣadhvaja did not recognise Nārāyaṇa, nor Lakṣmī nor Sarasvatī nor another body. He discarded the worship of all the Devas. He worshipped Śaṅkara only.

भारे मासि महाल्बीपूर्णां मत्ते बर्भनह् ।

तया माधीयोपंचायां विस्तृतां सर्वदैवतः ॥ 13 ॥

पाप: सरस्वतीपुजां दूरीभृतां चकार स: ।

यजं च विणुपूजां च नर्वतं तं दिवाकरः ॥ 14 ॥

The greatly exciting Lakṣmī Pūjā (worship of Mahā Lakṣmī in the month of Bhādra and Śrī Pañcamī Pūjā in the month of Māgha, which are approved of by the Vedas, Vṛṣadhvaja put an entire stop to these and the Sarasvatī Pūjā. At this the Sun became angry with the King Vṛṣadhvaja, the discarder of the holy thread, the hater of Viṣṇu, and cursed Him thus:

चुकोप देवी धूपेंई शगायन शिवकारणात् ।

श्रष्टीस्तं च भवेति तं शगायन दिवाकर: ॥ 15 ॥

गृलं गृहीला तं सुर्यमायच्छंकर: स्वयम् ।

विंगा साद्धं द्वितेशश बह्याणं शगणं ययो ॥ 16 ॥

"O King! As you are purely devoted to Śiva and Śiva alone, and as you do not recognise any other Devas, I say within no time, you will be deprived of all your wealth and prosperity." Śaṅkara, hearing this curse, became very angry and taking His trident, ran after the Sun. The Sun, becoming afraid, accompanied His father Kaśyapa and took refuge of Brahmā.

शिवास्त्रिगुरूलस्तश ब्रहूलोकं ययी कृधा ।

बहुता सूर्यं पुरस्कृत्य वैकुण्टं च ययी मिया ॥ 17 ॥

बहाक्रावयमातंडा: संसन्ता: शुक्रतालुका: ।

नारायणं च सर्वैंगं ते ययुः शरणं भिया ॥ 18 ॥

Bhagavān Śañkara went to the Brahma Loka, with trident in His hands. Brahmā became afraid of Mahādeva and took Sun to the region of Vaikuntha. Out of terror, the throats of Brahmā, Kaśyapa, and Sun became parched an dry and they all went afraid for refuge to Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of all.

भूटर्जा प्रणेभुसे गत्वा तुवुवुश पुनः पुनः ।

सर्वे निवेदनं चकुर्भयस्य काणं हरी ॥ 19 ॥

नारायणश कुयया तेभ्यश हाभयं ददौ ।

स्विधा भवत हे भीता भवं किं च मिथ सिद्धि ॥ 20 ॥

They all bowed down to Him and praised Him frequently and finally informed Him of the cause of their coming and why they were so much afraid. Nārāyaṇa showed them mercy and granted them 'Abhaya' (no fear). "O You! Who are afraid, take rest. What cause of fear there can be to you, when I am here!"

सर्वेति वे यत्र वयं मां विपत्ती भगवित्ताः ।

तांस्व वगता श्वामि चक्रहस्तस्वारावित्तः ॥ 21 ॥

पाताउई जगतां देवाः कर्ता च सततं सदा ।

सदा च ब्रह्मरूपण संहर्ता शिक्षकपतः ॥ 22 ॥

Whoever remembers Me, wherever he may be, involved in danger or fear, I go there with the

Book IX Chapter XV

Sudarśara disc in My hand and save him. O Devas! I am always the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of this universe. In the form of Viṣṇu, I am the Preserver; in the form of Brahmā, I am the Creator; and in the form Maheśa,

शिलोई त्वमई चापि सूयोर्नई चित्रगुणात्मकः ।

वियाय नानारूपे च करोगि सुश्चापत्नम् ॥ २३ ॥

यूयं गच्छत मूर्ते वो भविष्यति भयं कृतः ।

अशुप्रपृति मड़रणे भयं वो नास्ति शंकरात् ॥ 24 ॥

I am the Destroyer. I am Śiva; I am you; and I am the Sūrya, composed of the three qualities. It is I who assumes many forms and preserves the universe. Better go to your respective places. What fear can ye suspect? I say, all your fears due to Śaṅkara, are verily removed from this day.

सर्वेशो वै स भपावाङ्ठकराङ्ग सतां गति: ।

भक्ताभीक्ष भक्तानां भक्ताना भक्तवललः ॥ 25 ॥

सुर्गर्नः शिवश्रैव मम प्राणाधिकः प्रियः ।

ब्रह्माण्डेषु न तेजस्वी है ब्रह्मनयो: पा: ॥ 26 ॥

Bhagavān Śaṅkara, the Lord of all, is the Lord of the Sādhus. He always hears the words of His Bhaktas; and He is kind to them. He is their Self. Both the Sun and Śiva are dearer to Me than My life. No one is more energetic than Śaṅkara and the Sun.

गृतः: स्वघु महादेव: सुर्वेकोंटि च लील्या ।

कोटि च बढ़ागमेवं नासारयं गृलिनः श्रभेः ॥ 27 ॥

बाहुज्ञानं वैव किंचिद्धायाने मां दिवानिगम् ।

मन्वीज्ञान्दुगणान्यत्ता पंचवक्रेण गयाति ॥ 28 ॥

Mahādeva can easily create ten million Suns and ten million Brahmās. There is nothing impossible with Sūlapāni. Having no consciousness of any outer thing, immersed, day and night, in meditating on Me, with His whole heart concentrated, He is repeating with devotion My Mantra from His five faces and He always sings My glories.

अहमेवे चित्रायाम तत्कल्याणं दिवानिगम् ।

दे यथा मां प्रपहीते तांतत्वैव भजामयदूम् ॥ 29 ॥

शिवस्वरूपो भगवाड्छवाधिष्ठादुपदेवता ।

शिवं घवित तस्माच्च शिवं तेन विद्वुरुधा: ॥ 30 ॥

I am also thinking, day and night, of His welfare. Whoever worships Me in whichever way, I also favour him similarly. Bhagavān Mahā Deva is of the nature of Śiva, all auspiciousness; He is the presiding deity of Śiva, that is, liberation. It is because liberation is obtained from Him, He is called Śiva."

एतमिधारंतर तत जगाम शंकर: शिव: ।

शूलहस्तो वृषाकडो तर्पेकजलोचन: ॥ 31 ॥

अवक्रहु वृषानुर्णं भक्तिज्ञात्मकन्यर: ।

ननाम भक्त्या तं शांतं लक्ष्मीकांतं परात्यम् ॥ 32 ॥

O dear Nārada! While Nārāyaṇa was thus speaking, the trident holder Mahādeva, with his eyes red like reddened lotuses, mounting on His bull, came up there and getting down from His Bull, humbly bowed down with devotion to the Lord of Laksmī, peaceful and higher the highest.

रत्नरिसोहनस्यं च रत्नलोकापृषितम् ।

क्रिरीटिंन कृपाड्लेनं चक्रिणं वनमालिनम् ॥ 33 ॥

नवीन्निरद्यमां सुंदरं च चतुर्षुंम् ।

चतुर्षुंः सेवितं च श्रेनतवामरावुना ॥ 34 ॥

चंदनोक्षितसर्वोईं भूषितं पोतवासमस् ।

लक्ष्मीप्रदत्तांबृत् भुक्चलं च नारद ॥ 35 ॥

विद्याधरीन्यपीनी पर्षवंत समितं सदा ।

ईक्षंर परमात्मानं भक्तानुग्रहविश्रद्धम ॥ 36 ॥

Nārāyaṇa was then seated on His throne, decked with jewel ornaments. There was a crown on His crest; two earrings were hanging from His ears; the disc was in His hand; forest flower's garlands on His neck; of the colour of fresh blue rain cloud; His form exceedingly beautiful. The four-armed attendants were fanning Him with their four hands; His body smeared all over with sandal-paste and He is wearing the yellow garment. That Bhagavān, distressed with the thought of welfare for His Bhaktas, the Highest Self was sitting on a jewel throne and chewing the betel offered by Padmā and with smiling countenance, seeing and hearing the dancing and singing of the Vidyādhāris.

तं नाना महादेवी बहाणा नमितघुः सः ।

ननाना सूर्यों पत्न्चा च संस्वतश्छूरेण्डायम् ॥ 37 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

कथप्यघ महाभक्त्या तुहाव च ननाम च ।

शिव: संनुय सर्वैंग समुवास सुखासने ॥ 38 ॥

When Mahādeva bowed down to Nārāyaṇa, Brahmā also bowed down to Mahādeva. The Sun, too, surprised, bowed down to Mahādeva with devotion. Kāśyapa, too, bowed and with great bhakti, began to praise Mahādeva. On the other hand, Śānkara praised Nārāyaṇa and took His seat on the throne.

सुखानसे सुखासीन विश्रांतं चंत्रशेखारम् ।

श्वेतनायारवातेन सेवितं विद्यापर्वदैः ॥ 39 ॥

पीयूषतुल्यमधुरं वचनं सुमनोहरम् ।

विष्युक्वाच

आगतो5सि कर्व चात्र वद कोपस्य काराण् ॥ 40 ॥

The attendants of Nārāyaṇa began to fan Mahādeva with white chowries. Then Viṣṇu addressed Him with sweet nectar-like voice and said: "O Maheśvara! What brings Thee here? Hast Thou been angry?"

महावेद उवाच

वृषधवं च मदूक्ते मव प्राणाधिकं ग्रियम् ।

सूर्वः शगाण झुति मे प्रकोपस्य तु काराणम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

पूत्रवल्लशोकेन सूर्वे हृतुं समुधुतः ।

स ब्रहाणं प्रपवश्र सूर्वेथ सर्विधास्त्रविषि ॥ 4 2 ॥

Mahādeva said: O Viṣṇu! The King. Vṛṣadhvaja is My great devotee; he is dearer to Me than My life. The Sun has cursed him and so I am angry. Out of the affection for a son I am ready to kill Sūrya. Sūrya took Brahmā's refuge and now he and Brahmā have taken Thy refuge.

त्वयि मे शरणापत्रा ध्यानेन वचसासीय वा ।

निरपादो विशंगकानले जग मृत्युस्थे लेत्रितः ॥ 4 3 ॥

प्रत्यक्षं शरणापत्रापत्णलं किं वदायि भोः ।

हरिम्युतिश्राभयदा सर्वेगंगलदा सदा ॥ 4 4 ॥

And Those who being distressed take Thy refuge, either in mind or in word, become entirely safe and free from danger. They conquer death and old age. What to speak of them, then, of those who come personally to Thee and take Thy refuge. The

remembrance of Hari takes away all dangers. All good comes to them.

किं के भक्तस्य भविता तन्य वृहि जगतमृषो ।

श्रीहतस्याय मुहस्य यूर्यागपेन हेतुना ॥ 45 ॥

O Lord of the world! Now tell me what becomes of My stupid Bhakta who has become devoid of fortune and prosperity by the curse of Sūrya."

विष्युकाव्य

कालोस्तितातो देवेन युनाानामेकविश्रितः ।

वैकुण्डं घटिकार्थिन शीर्षे पच्छ लयामलयम् ॥ 46 ॥

वृषयबो मुतः कालवदुर्निवायांत्सूदारभणात् ।

राध्यज्ञ क्रतुगे मृत : सोर्पिश्रिया हतः ॥ 47 ॥

Viṣṇu said: “O Śaṅkara! Twenty-one yugas elapsed within this one-half Ghaṭikā, by the coincidence of Fate (Daiva). Now go quickly to Thy abode. Through the unavoidable coincidence of the cruel Fate, Vṛṣadhvaja died. His son Rathadhvaja, too, died.

तत्सुजी च महाभागी धार्यवज्ञकुशध्यजी ।

हताश्री सूर्यशापात्म्युती परमदीवाणी ॥ 4 8 ॥

राज्यधडी श्रिया धडी कमलतपसा राते ।

तयोक्षा भाययोल्बीः कलया च भविष्यति ॥ 49 ॥

Rathadhvaja had two noble sons Dharmadhvaja and Kuśadhvaja. Both of them are great Vaiṣṇavas; but, through Sūrya's curse, they have become luckless. Their kingdoms are lost; they have become destitute of all property, prosperity and they are now engaged in worshipping Mahā Lakṣmī. Mahā Lakṣmī will be born in parts of their two wives.

संयतुकी तदा ती च नृपश्रेष्ठी वधिष्यतः ।

मृतस्ते सेवकः शंभो गच्छ यूयं च गच्छत ॥ 50 ॥

Then again, by the grace of Lakṣmī, Dharmadhvaja and Kuśadhvaja will be prosperous and become great Kings. O Śambhu Your worshipper Vṛṣadhvaja is dead. Therefore Thou dost go back to Thy place. O Brahmā, O Sun! O Kaśyapa! You all also better go to your places respectively.

Book IX Chapter XVI

<table><tr><td>इत्युक्त्वा च सल्ब्यमीक: सभातो3ध्यंतरं गतः ।</td><td>went gladly to their own places respectively. And Mahādeva, too, Who is always quite full within Himself, departed quickly to perform His Tapas.</td></tr><tr><td>दैवा जमुः सोमूद्रा: स्वाश्रमं परया मुत्ना ॥ 51 ॥</td><td>Himeself, departed quickly to perform His Tapas.</td></tr><tr><td>शिवघ्र तपसे शीर्घं परिपूर्णतचो यद्यो ॥ 51 ॥</td><td>Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter on the question of anecdote of Tulasi in the Ninth Book in the Mahāpurānam Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.</td></tr></table>

Book IX Chapter XVI

