[Ch 15 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada said: O Bhagavan! How came the pure chaste Tulasī to the wife of Nārāyaṇa? Where was Her birth place? And what was She in Her previous birth? What family did She belong to? Whose daughter was She?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- O Bhagavān! How came the pure chaste Tulasī to be the wife of Nārāyaṇa? Where was Her birth place? And what was She in Her previous birth? What family did She belong to? Whose daughter was She?

[Ch 15 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And what austerities did She practise, that She got Nārāyaṇa for Her husband, Who is above Prakrti, not liable to change without any effort, the Universal Self, Para Brahma and the Highest God; Who is the Lord of all, omniscient, the Cause of all, the Receptacle of all, Omnipresent, and the Preserver of all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And what austerities did She practise, that She got Nārāyaṇa for Her husband, Who is above Prakṛti, not liable to change without any effort, the Universal Self, Para Brahmā and the Highest God; Who is the Lord of all, omniscient, the Cause of all, the Receptacle of all, Omnipresent, and the Preserver of all.

[Ch 15 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And how did Tulasi, the chief Devi of Nārāyaṇa, turn out into a tree? Herself quite innocent, how She was attacked by the fierce Asura? O Remover of all doubts! My mind, plain and simple, has become restless. I am cager to hear all this. So kindly cut asunder all my doubts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And how did Tulasī, the chief Devī of Nārāyaṇa, turn out into a tree? Herself quite innocent, how She was attacked by the fierce Asura? O Remover of all doubts! My mind, plain and simple, has become restless. I am eager to hear all this. So kindly cut asunder all my doubts.

[Ch 15 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! The Manu Dakṣa Sāvarni was very religious, devoted to Viṣṇu, of wide renown, of a great name, and born with Viṣṇu's parts. Dakṣa Sāvarni's son Brahma Sāvarni was also very religious, devoted to Viṣṇu and of a pure Śuddha Sattva Guṇa. Brahma Sāvarni's son, Dharma Sāvarni was devoted to Viṣṇu and He was the master of his senses.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Nārada! The Manu Dakṣa Sāvarṇi was very religious, devoted to Viṣṇu, of wide renown, of a great name, and born with Viṣṇu’s parts. Dakṣa Sāvarṇi’s son Brahmā Sāvarṇi was also very religious, devoted to Viṣṇu and of a pure Śuddha Sattva Guṇa. Brahmā Sāvarṇi’s son, Dharma Sāvarṇi was devoted to Viṣṇu and He was the master of his senses.

[Ch 15 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Dharma Sāvarni's sons Ruda Sāvarni was also a man of restraint and very devoted. Rudra Sāvarni's son was Deva Sāvarni, devoted to Viṣṇu. Deva Sāvarni's devoted to Viṣṇu. Deva Sāvarni's son was Indra Sāvarni. He was a great Bhakta of Viṣṇu. His son was Vṛṣadhvaja. But He was a fanatic Śaiva (devoted to Śiva).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Dharma Sāvarṇi’s sons Rudra Sāvarṇi was also a man of restraint and very devoted. Rudra Sāvarṇi’s son was Deva Sāvarṇi, devoted to Viṣṇu. Deva Sāvarṇi’s son was Indra Sāvarṇi. He was a great Bhakta of Viṣṇu. His son was Vṛṣadhvaja. But He was a fanatic Śaiva (devoted to Śiva).

[Ch 15 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At his house Śiva Himself remained for three Yugas according to the Deva measure. So much so that Bhagavān Bhūtanātha loved him more than His own son. Vṛṣadhvaja did not recognise Nārāyaṇa, nor Lakṣmī nor Sarasvatī nor another body. He discarded the worship of all the Devas. He worshipped Śaṅkara only.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At his house Śiva Himself remained for three Yugas according to the Deva measure. So much so that Bhagavān Bhūtanātha loved him more than His own son. Vṛṣadhvaja did not recognise Nārāyaṇa, nor Lakṣmī nor Sarasvatī nor another body. He discarded the worship of all the Devas. He worshipped Śaṅkara only.

[Ch 15 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The greatly exciting Lakṣmī Pūjā (worship of Mahā Lakṣmī in the month of Bhādra and Śrī Pañcamī Pūjā in the month of Māgha, which are approved of by the Vedas, Vṛṣadhvaja put an entire stop to these and the Sarasvatī Pūjā. At this the Sun became angry with the King Vṛṣadhvaja, the discarder of the holy thread, the hater of Viṣṇu, and cursed Him thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► The greatly exciting Lakṣmī Puja (worship of Mahā Lakṣmī) in the month of Bhādra and Śrī Pañchamī Puja in the month of Māgha, which are approved of by the Vedas, Vṛṣadhvaja put an entire stop to these and the Sarasvatī Puja. At this the Sun became angry with the King Vṛṣadhvaja, the discarder of the holy thread, the hater of Viṣṇu, and cursed Him thus :--

[Ch 15 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O King! As you are purely devoted to Śiva and Śiva alone, and as you do not recognise any other Devas, I say within no time, you will be deprived of all your wealth and prosperity." Śaṅkara, hearing this curse, became very angry and taking His trident, ran after the Sun. The Sun, becoming afraid, accompanied His father Kaśyapa and took refuge of Brahmā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “O King! As you are purely devoted to Śiva and Śiva alone, and as you do not recognise any other Devas, I say within no time, you will be deprived of all your wealth and prosperity.” Śaṅkara, hearing this curse, became very angry and taking His trident, ran after the Sun. The Sun, becoming afraid, accompanied His father Kaśyapa and took refuge of Brahmā.

[Ch 15 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhagavān Śañkara went to the Brahma Loka, with trident in His hands. Brahmā became afraid of Mahādeva and took Sun to the region of Vaikuntha. Out of terror, the throats of Brahmā, Kaśyapa, and Sun became parched an dry and they all went afraid for refuge to Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bhagavān Śaṅkara went to the Brahmā Loka, with trident in His hands. Brahmā became afraid of Mahādeva and took Sun to the region of Vaikuṇṭha. Out of terror, the throats of Brahmā, Kaśyapa, and Sun became parched and dry and they all went afraid for refuge to Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of all.

[Ch 15 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They all bowed down to Him and praised Him frequently and finally informed Him of the cause of their coming and why they were so much afraid. Nārāyaṇa showed them mercy and granted them 'Abhaya' (no fear). "O You! Who are afraid, take rest. What cause of fear there can be to you, when I am here!"
NEW CORR ENG ──► They all bowed down to Him and praised Him frequently and finally informed Him of the cause of their coming and why they were so much afraid. Nārāyaṇa showed them mercy and granted them “Abhaya” (no fear). O You! Who are afraid, take rest. What cause of fear there can be to you, when I am here!

[Ch 15 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whoever remembers Me, wherever he may be, involved in danger or fear, I go there with the Sudarśara disc in My hand and save him. O Devas! I am always the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of this universe. In the form of Viṣṇu, I am the Preserver; in the form of Brahmā, I am the Creator; and in the form Maheśa,
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whoever remembers Me, wherever he may be, involved in danger or fear, I go there with the Sudarśan disc in My hand and save him. O Devas! I am always the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of this universe. In the form of Viṣṇu, I am the Preserver; in the form of Brahmā, I am the Creator; and

[Ch 15 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I am the Destroyer. I am Śiva; I am you; and I am the Sūrya, composed of the three qualities. It is I who assumes many forms and preserves the universe. Better go to your respective places. What fear can ye suspect? I say, all your fears due to Śaṅkara, are verily removed from this day.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I am the Destroyer. I am Śiva; I am you; and I am the Sūrya, composed of the three qualities. It is I who assumes many forms and preserves the universe. Better go to your respective places. What fear can ye suspect? I say, all your fears due to Śaṅkara, are verily removed from this day.

[Ch 15 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhagavān Śaṅkara, the Lord of all, is the Lord of the Sādhus. He always hears the words of His Bhaktas; and He is kind to them. He is their Self. Both the Sun and Śiva are dearer to Me than My life. No one is more energetic than Śaṅkara and the Sun.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bhagavān Śaṅkara, the Lord of all, is the Lord of the Sādhus. He always hears the words of His Bhaktas; and He is kind to them. He is their Self. Both the Sun and Śiva are dearer to Me than My life. No one is more energetic than Śaṅkara and the Sun.

[Ch 15 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mahādeva can easily create ten million Suns and ten million Brahmās. There is nothing impossible with Sūlapāni. Having no consciousness of any outer thing, immersed, day and night, in meditating on Me, with His whole heart concentrated, He is repeating with devotion My Mantra from His five faces and He always sings My glories.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mahādeva can easily create ten million Suns and ten million Brahmās. There is nothing impossible with Śūlapāni. Having no consciousness of any outer thing, immersed, day and night, in meditating on Me with His whole heart concentrated, He is repeating with devotion My Mantra from His five faces and He always sings My glories.

[Ch 15 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I am also thinking, day and night, of His welfare. Whoever worships Me in whichever way, I also favour him similarly. Bhagavān Mahā Deva is of the nature of Śiva, all auspiciousness; He is the presiding deity of Śiva, that is, liberation. It is because liberation is obtained from Him, He is called Śiva."
NEW CORR ENG ──► I am also thinking, day and night, of His welfare. Whoever worships Me in whichever way, I also favour him similarly. Bhagavān Mahā Deva is of the nature of Śiva, all auspiciousness; He is the presiding deity of Śiva, that is, liberation. It is because liberation is obtained from Him, He is called Śiva.

[Ch 15 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O dear Nārada! While Nārāyaṇa was thus speaking, the trident holder Mahādeva, with his eyes red like reddened lotuses, mounting on His bull, came up there and getting down from His Bull, humbly bowed down with devotion to the Lord of Laksmī, peaceful and higher the highest.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O dear Nārada! While Nārāyaṇa was thus speaking, the trident bolder Mahādeva, with his eyes red like reddened lotuses, mounting on His bull, came up there and getting down from His Bull, humbly bowed down with devotion to the Lord of Lakṣmī, peaceful and higher than the highest.

[Ch 15 Verse 33-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa was then seated on His throne, decked with jewel ornaments. There was a crown on His crest; two earrings were hanging from His ears; the disc was in His hand; forest flower's garlands on His neck; of the colour of fresh blue rain cloud; His form exceedingly beautiful. The four-armed attendants were fanning Him with their four hands; His body smeared all over with sandal-paste and He is wearing the yellow garment. That Bhagavān, distressed with the thought of welfare for His Bhaktas, the Highest Self was sitting on a jewel throne and chewing the betel offered by Padmā and with smiling countenance, seeing and hearing the dancing and singing of the Vidyādhāris.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa was then seated on His throne, decked with jewel ornaments. There was a crown on His crest; two earrings were hanging from His ears; the disc was in His hand, forest flower’s garlands on His neck; of the colour of fresh blue rain cloud; His form exceedingly beautiful. The four-armed attendants were fanning Him with their four hands; His body smeared all over with sandal-paste and He is wearing the yellow garment. That Bhagavān, distressed with the thought of welfare for His Bhaktas, the Highest Self was sitting on a jewel throne and chewing the betel offered by Padmā and with smiling countenance, seeing and hearing the dancing and singing of the Vidyādharīs.

[Ch 15 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Mahādeva bowed down to Nārāyaṇa, Brahmā also bowed down to Mahādeva. The Sun, too, surprised, bowed down to Mahādeva with devotion. Kāśyapa, too, bowed and with great bhakti, began to praise Mahādeva. On the other hand, Śānkara praised Nārāyaṇa and took His seat on the throne.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Mahādeva bowed down to Nārāyaṇa, Brahmā also bowed down to Mahādeva. The Sun, too, surprised, bowed down to Mahādeva with devotion. Kaśyapa, too, bowed and with great bhakti, began to praise Mahādeva. On the other hand, Śaṅkara praised Nārāyaṇa and took His seat on the throne.

[Ch 15 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The attendants of Nārāyaṇa began to fan Mahādeva with white chowries. Then Viṣṇu addressed Him with sweet nectar-like voice and said: "O Maheśvara! What brings Thee here? Hast Thou been angry?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► The attendants of Nārāyaṇa began to fan Mahādeva with white chowries. Then Viṣṇu addressed Him with sweet nectar like voice and said :-- “O Maheśvara! What brings Thee here? Hast Thou been angry?”

[Ch 15 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mahādeva said: O Viṣṇu! The King. Vṛṣadhvaja is My great devotee; he is dearer to Me than My life. The Sun has cursed him and so I am angry. Out of the affection for a son I am ready to kill Sūrya. Sūrya took Brahmā's refuge and now he and Brahmā have taken Thy refuge.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mahādeva said : -- “O Viṣṇu! The King Vṛṣadhavaja is My great devotee; he is dearer to Me than My life. The Sun has cursed him and so I am angry. Out of the affection for a son I am ready to kill Sūrya. Sūrya took Brahmā’s refuge and now he and Brahmā have taken Thy refuge.

[Ch 15 Verse 43-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And Those who being distressed take Thy refuge, either in mind or in word, become entirely safe and free from danger. They conquer death and old age. What to speak of them, then, of those who come personally to Thee and take Thy refuge. The remembrance of Hari takes away all dangers. All good comes to them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And Those who being distressed take Thy refuge, either in mind or in word, become entirely safe and free from danger. They conquer death and old age. What to speak of them, then, of those who come personally to Thee and take Thy refuge. The remembrance of Hari takes away all dangers. All good comes to them.

[Ch 15 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the world! Now tell me what becomes of My stupid Bhakta who has become devoid of fortune and prosperity by the curse of Sūrya."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the world! Now tell me what becomes of My stupid Bhakta who has become devoid of fortune and prosperity by the curse of Sūrya.”

[Ch 15 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Viṣṇu said: “O Śaṅkara! Twenty-one yugas elapsed within this one-half Ghaṭikā, by the coincidence of Fate (Daiva). Now go quickly to Thy abode. Through the unavoidable coincidence of the cruel Fate, Vṛṣadhvaja died. His son Rathadhvaja, too, died.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viṣṇu said :-- “O Śaṅkara! Twenty-one yugas elapsed within this one-half Ghaṭikā, by the coincidence of Fate (Daiva). Now go quickly to Thy abode. Through the unavoidable coincidence of the cruel Fate, Vṛṣadhvaja died. His son Rathadhvaja, too, died.

[Ch 15 Verse 48-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Rathadhvaja had two noble sons Dharmadhvaja and Kuśadhvaja. Both of them are great Vaiṣṇavas; but, through Sūrya's curse, they have become luckless. Their kingdoms are lost; they have become destitute of all property, prosperity and they are now engaged in worshipping Mahā Lakṣmī. Mahā Lakṣmī will be born in parts of their two wives.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Rathadhvaja had two noble sons Dharmadhvaja and Kuśadhvaja. Both of them are great Vaiṣṇavas; but, through Sūrya’s curse, they have become luckless. Their kingdoms are lost; they have become destitute of all property, prosperity and they are now engaged in worshipping Mahā Lakṣmī. Mahā Lakṣmī will be born in parts of their two wives.

[Ch 15 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then again, by the grace of Lakṣmī, Dharmadhvaja and Kuśadhvaja will be prosperous and become great Kings. O Śambhu Your worshipper Vṛṣadhvaja is dead. Therefore Thou dost go back to Thy place. O Brahmā, O Sun! O Kaśyapa! You all also better go to your places respectively.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then again, by the grace of Lakṣmī, Dharmadhvaja and Kuśadhvaja will be prosperous and become great Kings. O Śambhu Your worshipper Vṛṣadhvaja is dead. Therefore Thou dost go back to Thy place. O Brahmā, O Sun! O Kaśyapa! You all also better go to your places respectively.”
