CHAPTER XIX

On the Nether Regions

श्रीनारायण खाच

प्रथमे विवरे विश्व अतलाख्ये मनोरामे ।

मयपुत्रो बलो नाम वर्तितेउखर्वीयक्तून ॥ १ ॥

घणणवल्यो वेन सूहा मायाः: सर्वांशसाधिकाः।

मायाविनो याशु सदो धार्यस्ति च काङ्गत ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Vipra! In the first beautiful region Atala, the exceedingly haughty son of the Dānava Maya, named Bala, is living. He has created the ninety-six Māyās. All the requisites of the inhabitants are obtained by them. The other Māyāvis know one or two of these.

वृष्मभाणस्य यस्यैव बलस्य बलगशिलन: ।

स्त्रीणा उपघतीं त्रयो लोकाविमोहान: ॥ 3 ॥

पुंडाल्यश्रैय वरीिणः कांमिथ्यश्रौति विधुगता: ।

या वे विलायनं प्रेषं प्रविषं पुरुषं रहः ॥ 4 ॥

None of them are capable to know all, as they are exceedingly difficult to be carried out. When this powerful Bala yawned, the three classes of women were produced, fascinating to all the Lokas. They are named Punścali (or unchaste woman) Svairinī, (an adultress) and Kāmini (a lovely woman).

सेन्न हाटकाखेन साधयित्वा प्रयन्ततः ।

स्विलासावलोकानुगामिस्मतिवमुहनेः ॥ 5 ॥

संलापविष्यमाहीडा सम्यव्ययित ताः सिधाः ।

यस्मिष्युपुक्तो जनो मनुते बहुधा स्वयम् ॥ 6 ॥

Book VIII Chapter XIX

When any man, beautiful and lovely to them, enters into their Atala region, they, with the help of the Hātaka sentiment (of love), generate in him, while in solitude, the power to enjoy (copulate) and with their sweet smiles and amorous lovely looks and with great caution embrace him thoroughly and began to converse with him and with amorous gestures and postures, and thus please him well.

སྟོབསའི་བྱམན་ सिद्धो नागायतुतबलो महान् ।

आमतं नयमान: सन्मदान्य इव कल्यते ॥ 7 ॥

एवं प्रोक्ता स्थितिश्रात्र आतलस्य च नारत् ।

द्वितीयविवरस्यात्र वितलस्य निवोधित ॥ 8 ॥

When the people enjoy this Hātakarasa, they think often and often, that they themselves have become gods, they have become Siddhas and powerful like Ayuta elephants; being blind with vanity and finding them endowed with powers and prosperity, they think themselves so repeatedly an constantly. O Nārada! Thus the position in Atala has been described. Now hear, the description of the second region Vitala. Vitala is situated below the earth.

भूतलाधस्ते चैव वित्ते भगवान्भवः ।

हाटकेश्वरनामार्य स्वापर्वदगणैकृतेः ॥ 9 ॥

प्रजापतिकृतस्यापि सर्गेय बृह्गणाय च ।

भवान्याय विभूनीभूय आते देवाधिपूजितः ॥ 10 ॥

भवयोर्विर्यमेंभूता हाटकी सरितुवमा ।

There the Bhagavān Bhava, worshipped by all the Devas, has assumed the name of Hātakeśvara and is staying there coupled with Bhavāni, surrounded by His attendants specially for the increase of the creation of Brahmā. The river Hātaki flows there and has Her origin from the essences (Semen virile) of them both. Fire, augmented by the help of the wind, begins to drink it.

सभिद्रो मस्ता बह्रिकास विवर्गित है ॥ १ १ ॥

तिश्छूतं हाटकाल्यं सुवर्णं दैत्यवल्लभम् ।

When the Fire leaves that, making a Phutkāra

noise (i.e., blowing out air through the mouth), the gold, named Hātaka, is created. This gold is very much liked by the Daityas.

दैत्यांगनाभूषणाहं सदा तं धार्यति हि ॥ 12 ॥

तद्धित्यासलताग्रोकं सुतलाखं विलेशधम् ।

पुष्प्यलोको बलिनांमा आसते वैरोचिनिभुं ॥ 13 ॥

महेन्रस्य च देवस्य चिकांर्भुः प्रियमुतमम् ।

The Daityas women use this gold always for their ornaments. Below Vitala is Sutala. It is reckoned as of some special importance. O Muni! The highly meritorius Bali, the Son of Virocana lives here. The Bhagavān Vāsudeva, brought down this Bali into Sutala, for the welfare of Indra.

तिथिकमोर्धि भगवान्सुते लेकिनायन्द् ॥ 14 ॥

त्रैतेकियतक्ष्मीमाधिष्य स्थापितः किल देवयाद् ।

इज़ादिष्यव्यन्तथा या सा श्रीसन्मुकेतै ॥ 15 ॥

तमेव देवदेवेशगमार्थयिति भक्तितः ।

व्यपेतसाध्वसोउधापि वर्तैत सुतलाधिपः ॥ 16 ॥

He assumed the body of Trivikrama and gave to Bali all the wealth of the three Lokas, all the Lakṣmī went to him and installed him in the position of the Lord of the Daityas. What more can be said than this, that what prosperity, wealth and riches that Indra could not obtain, that Śrī Lakṣmī Devī Herself has followed Bali, Bali, as the Lord of Sutala, has become entirely fearless, remains here upto this day and is worshipping Vāsudeva.

भूमिदानफलं होतत्यात्रभूतेत्रखिलक्षे ।

वर्णयिति महात्मनो नैततुक्ति च नारद ॥ १७ ॥

वासुदेवे भगवति पुरुषाधर्रे हरी ।

एतहानफलं विध्र सर्वथा न हि युज्ञते ॥ 18 ॥

O Nārada! It is said by the high-minded persons that when Vāsudeva Himself, the Controller of all, appear as a beggar, Bali gave him land, and, therefore, on account of making gift to a good person, he acquired so much prosperity. But this cannot be reasonable. For, it is not at all reasonable to cast the effects of making this gift on Nārāyana, O Nārada! Who is Self-manifest by His own Extraordinary Glory and Who is Himself filled with

all Aiśvarya (prosperity) and Who can bestow the Highest Goal of life and other requirements of men.

यस्यैव देवदेवस्य नामारि विवशो गृणन् ।

स्वाकीयकर्मबन्धीयगुणान्स्थपुन्तोउजसा ॥ 19 ॥

तत्वलेणबन्धहानाय सांख्योगादिसाधनम् ।

कुवौते यतयो नित्यं भगवत्यखिलेश्वे ॥ 20 ॥

This Nārāyaṇa is the Devas of the Devas; if anybody takes His name, when in the greatest distress, he gets himself immediately freed from the Gunas, the cause of bondage due to his Karma. All persons perform many Yogas and follow the paths advised by the Sānkhya method, with their minds directed to the All-Controller Bhagavān, to abandon all sorts of troubles and miseries.

न चार्यं भगवान्समाननुजग्राह नारद ।

मागमार्च च भोगानार्मेषुंं व्यत्नोत्परम् ॥ 21 ॥

O Nārada! Know that the Bhagavān does not shew us His Favour when he gives us greatest wealth and prosperity. For the wealth and riches are the offspring of Māyā and the source of all worries, miseries and mental troubles; and one is liable to forget the Bhagavān when one gets such a wealth.

सर्वकसैलाप्रिधेतुं तदात्मानुस्मितोषणम् ।

यं साहातृभगवानिष्युं सर्वोपायविद्धीक्ष: ॥ 22 ॥

याज्ञाछलेनापहुतं सर्वस्वे देवेशेषकम् ।

अग्रातन्योपाय इंशः पाशैर्कनिणसभ्येः ॥ 23 ॥

The Bhagavān is pervading all this universe and is full of wisdom; and He is seeing always all the ways and means; He took away, in the way of begging, rather cheated all that Bali had, leaving only his body; and at last, finding no other means, fastened him by the Varuna Pāśa (noose) threw him in the middle of the mountain cleft (cave) and then has stationed Himself at his door as a Door-keeper.

बन्धयित्ञाउवमुच्यापि गिरिवर्धामिवाबबीत् ।

असाविश्री महापुजी यस्य मन्त्री बहुत्थसितः ॥ 24 ॥

प्रसत्रिममत्यर्थमयाचल्लोकसम्यदम् ।

Once, out of his extreme devotion, Bali did not

care at all for his difficulties, troubles, or miseries. Rather he gave out that Indra, whose minister is Bhaspati had acted very foolishly. For when the Bhagavān becomes very graciously pleased, he wanted from Him ordinary wealth.

त्रैलोक्यमिद्धीक्षर्य क्रियदेवातितृष्छकम् ॥ 25 ॥

आशिणा प्रभव मुक्तवा यो मुढो लोकस्पादि ।

अस्मितिमासः श्रीमान्यहादो भगवनियः ॥ 26 ॥

दास्यं ववे त्रिभोस्तस्य सर्वेलोकोपकारकः ।

But what will the wealth of the Trilokas avail? It is a quite insignificant thing. Surely, He is an illiterate and stupid brute who, for mere wealth, leaves the Bhagavān, Who is the Fountain of all Good Wishes to the Humanity. My grandfather Prahlāda, who was highly fortunate, who was devoted to the God and who was always ready to do good to others, he did not ask for any other thing than the servantship of God (the Dāṣya Bhāva).

पित्रमैषीश्रमन्तु त्रीयमानं च विद्याना ॥ 27 ॥

पितुर्भूपते पीरे नैवैच्छूद्मार्तिग्रयः ।

तस्यातुन्तुभावस्य सर्वलोकोपरीमतः ॥ 28 ॥

असमद्धिधो नात्यपक्रेततद्वोक्रप्राक्छिति ।

When his powerful father died, the Bhagavān wanted to give him unbounded wealth; but the Bhāgavata (devoted) Prahlāda did not want that. None of us, who are marked with so many deficiencies can know the nature of the Bhagavān Vāsudeva, Whose omnipotence cannot to compared and all these manifested worlds are but His Upādhis (adjuncts, limitations).

एवं देत्यपति: सोउयं बलि: परमपूजितः ॥ 29 ॥

सुतले वर्तैत यस्य द्वारपालो हरि: स्वयम् ।

एकदा दिथिवजरे राजा रावणो लोकारावणः ॥ 30 ॥

प्रविश्यन्तुले तेन भक्तानुपहकारिणा ।

पादांगुङ्ग प्रश्रिक्षो योजनायतुमत्र हि ॥ 31 ॥

O Devarsj! Thus Bali, the Lord of Daityas, the highly respected and renowned in all the Lokas, is reigning in Sutala. Hari Himself is his Door-keeper. Once the King Rāvaṇa, the source of torment to

Book VIII Chapter XX

all the people, went out to conquer the whole world; and when he entered Sutala, that Hari, ever ready to shew Grace to His devoted, threw him at a distance of one Ayuta Yojanas by the toe of His foot,

एवं भ्रान्तुभावो.२वं बलि: सर्वभृत्यैकभुम्।

आते सुतलराजब्धो देववेदप्रमदान: ॥ 32 ॥

प्रति श्रीमदौरिणगतते महापुराणोडप्रमक्के

एकोनाविशोडध्वाव: ॥ 32 ॥

Thus by the grace of the Devadeva Vāsudeva, Bali is reigning in Sutala, and enjoying all sorts of pleasures, without any equal anywhere.

Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narrative of the Atala, etc., the Pañalas in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VIII Chapter XX

