[Ch 19 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Thus granting the boon to the Goddess Laksmī, Śambhu quickly returned to the lovely Kailāśa, adorned with Apsarās (celestial nymphs) and frequented and served by the Gods. He then despatched his expert attendant Citrarūpa to Vaikuntha to bring the purpose of Laksmī to a successful issue.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Thus granting the boon to the Goddess Lakṣmī, Śambhu quickly returned to the lovely Kailāśa, adorned with Apsarās (celestial nymphs) and frequented and served by the Gods. He then despatched his expert attendant Citrarūpa to Vaikuṇṭha to bring the purpose of Lakṣmī to a successful issue.

[Ch 19 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He said to him thus: “O Citrarūpa! Go to Hari and speak to him on my behalf that He would go and remove the sorrows of His distressed and bereaved wife and thus make Her comfortable.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► He said to him thus :-- “O Citrarūpa! Go to Hari and speak to him on my behalf that He would go and remove the sorrows of His distressed and bereaved wife and thus make Her comfortable.”

[Ch 19 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus ordered, Citarāupa started immediately and reached at once Vaikuntha, the highest place, covered all over by the Vaisnavas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus ordered, Citrarūpa started immediately and reached at once Vaikuṇṭha, the highest place, covered all over by the Vaiṣṇavas.

[Ch 19 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The place was diversified with lots of various trees, with hundreds of lovely lakes, and echoed with sweet lovely sounds of swans, Kārandavas, peacocks, parrots, cuckoos and various other birds and adorned with beautiful places, decked with flags and banners. It was filled with charming dancing, music and other artistic things.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The place was diversified with lots of various trees, with hundreds of lovely lakes, and echoed with sweet lovely sounds of swans, Kāranḍavas, peacocks, parrots, cuckoos and various other birds and adorned with beautiful places, decked with flags and banners. It was filled with charming dancings, music and other artistic things.

[Ch 19 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There were the lovely Bakula, Asoka, Tilaka, Campaka and other trees; and the beautiful tree Mandāra looked beautiful and shed all around the sweet fragrance of its sweet flowers for a long distance.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There were the lovely Bakula, Aśoka, Tilaka, Champaka and other trees; and the beautiful tree Mandāra looked beautiful and shed all around the sweet fragrance of its sweet flowers for a long distance.

[Ch 19 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus seeing the lovely nice palace of Viṣṇu and the two doorkeepers Jaya and Vijaya standing with canes in their hands.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus seeing the lovely nice palace of Viṣṇu and the two doorkeepers Jaya and Vijaya standing with canes in their hands,

[Ch 19 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Cirtaratha bowed down to them and said: "Well! You go quickly and inform the Supreme Soul Hari that a messenger has come under the orders of the Bhagavān Śūlapānī and is now waiting at His doors."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Citraratha bowed down to them and said :-- Well! You go quickly and inform the Supreme Soul Hari that a messenger has come under the orders of the Bhagavān Śūlapāṇī and is now waiting at His doors.

[Ch 19 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing his words, the intelligent Jaya went to Hari and, with folded hands, said: "O Thou Ocean of Mercy! O Keśava! O Lord of Rama! O Deva of the Devas! A messenger has come from the Lord of Bhavānī and is waiting at the doors.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing his words, the intelligent Jaya went to Hari and, with folded hands, said :-- “O Thou Ocean of Mercy! O Keśava! O Lord of Ramā! O Deva of the Devas! A messenger has come from the Lord of Bhavānī and is waiting at the doors.

[Ch 19 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I do not know on what important business he has come. Please order whether I will bring him before You are not.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I do not not know on what important business he has come. Please order whether I will bring him before You or not.

[Ch 19 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On hearing the Jaya's words, Hari, aware of the inner feelings, knew at once the cause and said: "O Jaya! Bring before me the messenger come from Rudra."
NEW CORR ENG ──► On hearing the Jaya’s words, Hari, aware of the inner feelings, knew at once the cause and said :-- O Jaya! Bring before me the messenger come from Rudra.

[Ch 19 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus hearing, Jaya called the Śiva's servant, of a graceful form, and brought him to the presence of Janārdana.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus hearing, Jaya called the Śiva’s servant, of a graceful form, and brought him to the presence of Janārdana.

[Ch 19 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Citrarāpa, of variegated appearance, prostrated himself flat before Him in the form of a stick and stood up and remained with folded hands.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Citrarūpa, of variegated appearance, prostrated himself flat before Him in the form of a stick and stood up and remained with folded hands.

[Ch 19 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa, Whose carrier is Garuda, saw that servant of Śiva, of variegated appearance and full of all humility, and became very much astonished.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa, Whose carrier is Garuḍa, saw that servant of Śiva, of variegated appearance and full of all humility, and became very much astonished.

[Ch 19 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Lord of Kamalā then smiled and asked Citrarūpa; “O Pure One! Is it all well with Mahādeva, the Lord of the Devas and his other families and attendants? On what business has He sent you here? What does He want me to do? Or tell me if I have to do any other business of the gods.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Lord of Kamalā then smiled and asked Citrarūpa :-- “O Pure One! Is it all well with Mahādeva, the Lord of the Devas and his other families and attendants? On what business has He sent you here? What does He want me to do? Or tell me if I have to do any other business of the gods.”

[Ch 19 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The messenger said: "O Thou, the Knower of all that is within one's heart! There is nothing in this world hidden from Your knowledge; when is that which I will say unknown to you!
NEW CORR ENG ──► The messenger said :-- “O Thou, the Knower of all that is within one’s heart! There is nothing in this world hidden from Your knowledge; when is that which I will say unknown to you!

[Ch 19 Verse 19-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Thou, the Knower of present, past and future! I am now saying to you what Sambhu has told me to inform You. He has said: "O Lord! The Goddess Lakṣmī is Your dear consort. She, the daughter of the Ocean, and the Bestower of all success, though an object fit to be meditated by Yakṣas, Kinnaras, Naras and Immortals, is now undergoing severe penance at the confluence of Kalindi (the Yamunā, the daughter of Kalinda) and the Tamasā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Thou, the Knower of present, past and future! I am now saying to you what Śambhu has told me to inform You. He has said :-- O Lord! The Goddess Lakṣmī is Your dear consort. She, the daughter of the Ocean, and the Bestower of all success, though an object fit to be meditated by Yakṣas, Kinnaras, Naras and Immortals, is now undergoing severe penance at the confluence of Kalindī (the Jumnā, the daughter of Kalinda) and the Tamasā.

[Ch 19 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What is there in the three worlds that can be happy without that Mother of the worlds and the Giver of all desire? O Lotus-eyed One! What pleasure do You feel in abandoning Her?
NEW CORR ENG ──► What is there in the three worlds that can be happy without that Mother of the worlds and the Giver of all desires? O Lotus-eyed One! What pleasure do You feel in abandoning Her?

[Ch 19 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O All-pervading One! Even he who has no riches or who is very weak maintains his wife; then why have You, being the Lord of the worlds, forsaken your wife, without any offence, Who is worshipped by the whole universe. O Lord of the world! What advice shall I give to You? He whose wife suffer in the world, is blamed by his enemies.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O All-pervading One! Even he who has no riches or who is very weak maintains his wife; then why have You, being the Lord of the worlds, forsaken your wife, without any offence, Who is worshipped by the whole universe. O Lord of the world! What advice shall I give to You? He whose wife suffers in the world, is blamed by his enemies.

[Ch 19 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Omnipresent One! Fie on his such a life! O Lord of the worlds! Your enemies' desires are satisfied when they see Her very miserable. They are laughing and mocking and saying: "O Devī, Keśava has now forsaken you; you can spend happily your time with us now.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Omnipresent One! Fie on his such a life! O Lord of the worlds! Your enemieś desires are satisfied when they see Her very miserable. They are laughing and mocking and saying :-- O Devī, Keśava has now forsaken you; you can spend happily your time with us now.

[Ch 19 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Lord of the Devas! Bring that Lady back unto your palace and place Her unto your lap, Who is of good demeanour, beautiful, per excellence and endowed with all auspicious signs.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Lord of the Devas! Bring that Lady back unto your palace and place Her unto your lap, Who is of good demeanour, beautiful, par excellence and endowed with all auspicious signs.

[Ch 19 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Deva! Accept, please, your sweet-smiling wife and be happy. Though I am at present not in bereavement of my dear wife, yet when I remember my former state of bereavement, I feel very much trouble.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Deva! Accept, please, your sweet-smiling wife and be happy. Though I am at present not in bereavement of my dear wife, yet when I remember my former state of bereavement, I feel very much trouble.

[Ch 19 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lotus-eyed One! When Satī Devi, my beloved Wife, quitted Her life, in Dakṣa's house, I felt unbearable pain.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lotus-eyed One! When Satī Devī, my beloved Wife, quitted Her life, in Dakṣa’s house, I felt unbearable pain,

[Ch 19 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Keśava! Let no other body in this world suffer such pain. I now remember only the suffering and mental agonies that I felt on Her bereavement; I do not give it out to others.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Keśava! Let no other body in this world suffer such pain, I now remember only the suffering and mental agonies that I felt on Her bereavement; I do not give it out to others.

[Ch 19 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After a long time, practising severe Tapasyā (asceticism) I got Her back in the form of Girijā, who felt herself burnt up as it were by the anger She felt on account of censure cast on Me in the Dakṣa's house and thus gutted Her life.
NEW CORR ENG ──► After a long time, practising severe Tapasyā (asceticism) I got Her back in the form of Girijā, who felt herself burnt up as it were by the anger She felt on account of censure cast on Me in the Dakṣa’s house and thus quitted Her life.

[Ch 19 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Murāri! What happiness you have felt in forsaking your dear wife and in remaining thus alone for one thousand years. Console your fortunate young wife with good teeth and bring her back to your place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Murāri! What happiness you have felt in forsaking your dear wife and in remaining thus alone for one thousand years. Console your fortunate young wife with good teeth and bring her back to your place.

[Ch 19 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Bhagavān! Lastly, the Lord Bhavānī, the Originatrix of these worlds, told me to speak thus to you: “O Destroyer of Kāṃsa! Let nobody remain even, for a moment, without Lakṣmī, the Highest Goddess. O Long-lived One! You better assume the form of a horse and go and worship her. Then have a child of yours in the womb of your sweet-smiling wife and bring her back to your house.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Bhagavān! Lastly, the Lord Bhavānī, the Originatrix of these worlds, told me to speak thus to you :-- O Destroyer of Kaṃsa! Let nobody remain even, for a moment, without Lakṣmī, the Highest Goddess. O Long-lived One! You better assume the form of a horse and go and worship her. Then have a child of yours in the womb of your sweet-smiling wife and bring her back to your house.”

[Ch 19 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O Ornament of Bharata's race! Hearing thus the words of Citrarūpa, Bhagavān Hari told that he would do what Śaṅkara had told him to do and thus sent the messenger back to Śaṅkara.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O Ornament of Bhārata’s race! Hearing thus the words of Citrarūpa, Bhagavān Hari told that he would do what Śaṅkara had told him to do and thus sent the messenger back to Śaṅkara.

[Ch 19 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The messenger departing, Hari assumed the form of a beautiful horse and immediately left Vaikuntha with a passionate intent for the place where Lakṣmī was staying in the form of a mare and practicing her austerities. Coming there, he saw that the Devi Bimala was staying in the form of a mare.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The messenger departing, Hari assumed the form of a beautiful horse and immediately left Vaikuṇṭha with a passionate intent for the place where Lakṣmī was staying in the form of a mare and practising her austerities. Coming there, he saw that the Devī Bimalā was staying in the form of a mare.

[Ch 19 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The mare, too, seeing the horse form of her husband Govinda, recognised him and, chaste as she was, remained there with astonishment and tears in her eyes. Then those two copulated on the famous confluence.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The mare, too, seeing the horse form of her husband Govinda, recognised him and, chaste as she was, remained there with astonishment and tears in her eyes. Then those two copulated on the famous confluence.

[Ch 19 Verse 40-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The wife of Hari, in the shape of a mare became pregnant and, in due time, gave birth to a beautiful well qualified child. The Bhagavān then graciously smiled on her and spoke in words suited to the time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The wife of Hari, in the shape of a mare, became pregnant and, in due time, gave birth to a beautiful well qualified child. The Bhagavān then graciously smiled on her and spoke in words suited to the time,

[Ch 19 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Dear! Now quit this mare form and assume your former appearance. O Lovely-eyed One! Let both of us assume our own forms and go to Vaikuntha; and let your child remain in this place.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Dear! Now quit this mare form and assume your former appearance. O Lovely-eyed One! Let both of us assume our own forms and go to Vaikuṇṭha; and let your child remain in this place.”

[Ch 19 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Lakṣmī said: “O Lord! How can I go leaving here this child, born of my womb. It is very difficult to quit the attachments for one’s own child.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Lakṣmī said :-- “O Lord! How can I go leaving here this child, born of my womb. It is very difficult to quit the attachments for one’s own child.

[Ch 19 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Know this, O Lord! O High-souled One! This child is young and of small body; therefore it is quite incapable to protect itself. If I forsake it on the bank of this river, it will be an orphan, what will happen to it then?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Know this, O Lord! O High-souled One! This child is young and of small body; therefore it is quite incapable to protect itself. If I forsake it on the bank of this river, it will be an orphan, what will happen to it then?

[Ch 19 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lotus-eyed One! My mind is now in full attachment tecwards it. How can I quit this helpless child and go?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lotus-eyed One! My mind is now in full attachment towards it. How can I quit this helpless child and go?”

[Ch 19 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Lakṣmī and Nārāyaṇa resumed their divine bodies and mounted on the excellent Vimānas, the Devas began to praise them with hymns.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Lakṣmī and Nārāyaṇa resumed their divine bodies and mounted on the excellent Vimānas, the Devas began to praise them with hymns.

[Ch 19 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Nārāyaṇa expressed his desire to go, Kamalā said: "O Lord! You better take this child; I am unable to forsake it.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Nārāyaṇa expressed his desire to go, Kamalā said :-- “O Lord! You better take this child; I am unable to forsake it.

[Ch 19 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord! O Slayer of Madhu! This child is dearer to me than my life; see its body resembles exactly like you. Therefore we would take this child with us to Vaikuntha."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord! O Slayer of Madhu! This child is dearer to me than my life; see its body resembles exactly like you. Therefore we would take this child with us to Vaikuṇṭha.”

[Ch 19 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hari spoke: “O Dear! You need not be sorry; let this child remain here happily; I have arranged for its preservation and safety. O Beautiful One! There is a great act to do in this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hari spoke :-- “O Dear! You need not be sorry; let this child remain here happily; I have arranged for its preservation and safety. O Beautiful One! There is a great act to do in this world.

[Ch 19 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That will be executed by your child. For this reason I am leaving it here. I am now describing to you the above story.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That will be executed by your child. For this reason I am leaving it here. I am now describing to you the above story.

[Ch 19 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The famous King Yayāti had a son named Turvasu; his father kept his name as Hari Varmā; he is known by this name.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The famous King Yayāti had a son named Turvasu; his father kept his name as Hari Varmā; he is known by this name.

[Ch 19 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That king is now practising asceticism for getting a son for one hundred years in a place of pilgrimage. O Lakṣmī! I have begot this son for him. I will go there and send the King here.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That king is now practising asceticism for getting a son for one hundred years in a place of pilgrimage. O Lakṣmī! I have begot this son for him. I will go there and send the King here.

[Ch 19 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Beautiful-faced One! I will give this son to that King, desirous of an issue. He will take this son and go back to his house.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Beautiful-faced One! I will give this son to that King, desirous of an issue. He will take this son and go back to his house.”

[Ch 19 Verse 55-179]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Thus consoling his beloved, whose abode is in the Lotus and placing the child there in that position, He mounted on an excellent car with Lakṣmī and went to Vaikuntha. Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the origin of Haihayas from a mare in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Thus consoling his beloved, whose abode is in the Lotus and placing the child there in that position, He mounted on an excellent car with Lakṣmī and went to Vaikuṇṭha. Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the origin of Haihayas from a mare in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
