CHAPTER XIX

On the Haihayas Born of a Mare

यास उवाच

तस्यै दृत्वा वरं ग्रामुः कैलासं त्वितो घयी ।

रम्यं देवगपौजुष्मपसंपोधिष्णु मपिडतम् ॥ १ ॥

तत्र गत्वा चित्रकर्ण गर्ण कार्यविशारतम् ।

प्रेयभागत वैकुंटे लक्षनीकार्यांविसघ्ये ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus granting the boon to the Goddess Laksmī, Śambhu quickly returned to the lovely Kailāśa, adorned with Apsarās (celestial nymphs) and frequented and served by the Gods. He then despatched his expert attendant Citrarūpa

to Vaikuntha to bring the purpose of Laksmī to a successful issue.

शिव उवाच

चित्रकर वह त्रि गत्या बहुत त्वं चतवान्यम ।

यथाउसौ वु:शित्तां पत्नीं विगोकोां च करिष्यति ॥ 3 ॥

He said to him thus: “O Citrarūpa! Go to Hari and speak to him on my behalf that He would go and remove the sorrows of His distressed and bereaved wife and thus make Her comfortable.”

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

इयुस्तीष्चरूकोप्र धनर्जम त्वार्पितः ।

वैकुण्ड परं स्थानं वैश्वावैश गर्णैवृत्ति ॥ 4 ॥

Thus ordered, Citarāupa started immediately and reached at once Vaikuntha, the highest place, covered all over by the Vaisnavas.

नानादुमगणाकीणं वाणीशतिवारजितम् ।

संवृत्ते इसकारंडव्यूर्णकोंकिकेलः ॥ 5 ॥

उच्यमासादर्युक्ते पताकामिलडुक्तम् ।

नृत्यगीत्कलापूर्ण मन्दारुद्रमसंयुतम् ॥ 6 ॥

The place was diversified with lots of various trees, with hundreds of lovely lakes, and echoed with sweet lovely sounds of swans, Kārandavas, peacocks, parrots, cuckoos and various other birds and adorned with beautiful places, decked with flags and banners. It was filled with charming dancing, music and other artistic things.

ब्रुतुलाशीकतितकवच्यमकातिविधिषिडान् ।

कृकितैर्विहानां तु कर्णाहादकरैयुतम् ॥ 7 ॥

There were the lovely Bakula, Asoka, Tilaka, Campaka and other trees; and the beautiful tree Mandāra looked beautiful and shed all around the sweet fragrance of its sweet flowers for a long distance.

संवैश्य भवनं विल्योहृं:स्थी प्राह ग्रणाय च ।

जयविजवयानानी वेजरणी स्थितावृषी ॥ 8 ॥

Thus seeing the lovely nice palace of Viṣṇu and the two doorkeepers Jaya and Vijaya standing with canes in their hands.

वित्रलय उवाच

भो निवेद्यतं शीधं हरये परमात्मने ।

दूतं प्रातं हरस्यात प्रेरित सुर्णपाणिणा ॥ 9 ॥

Cirtaratha bowed down to them and said: "Well! You go quickly and inform the Supreme Soul Hari that a messenger has come under the orders of the Bhagavān Śūlapānī and is now waiting at His doors."

तच्छूत्वा वचनं तस्य जय: परमबुद्धिमान् ।

गत्वा हरिं प्रण्याह कृतांजलिपुटः पुरः ॥ 10 ॥

देवदेव रमाकान्त करणाकर केशव ।

दारि तिष्ठित दृतोउत्र शक्रृत्यस्य समाप्ताः ॥ 1 1 ॥

Hearing his words, the intelligent Jaya went to Hari and, with folded hands, said: "O Thou Ocean of Mercy! O Keśava! O Lord of Rama! O Deva of the Devas! A messenger has come from the Lord of Bhavānī and is waiting at the doors.

आजायय प्रवेहल्यो न वेति गरूछध्वज ।

विजरकपरोउधारित न जाने कार्यगीरमू। ॥ १ २ ॥

I do not know on what important business he has come. Please order whether I will bring him before You are not.

इत्याकरणं हरि: प्राह जयं प्रजातकारण: ।

प्रवेशयात करूस्य भृत्वं समपसंश्रितम् ॥ १ ३ ॥

On hearing the Jaya's words, Hari, aware of the inner feelings, knew at once the cause and said: "O Jaya! Bring before me the messenger come from Rudra."

इत्याकरणें जयस्टूर्ण गत्वा तं परमाद्धतम् ।

एहीत्याकारयामास जयः शक्रसेवकम् ॥ 14 ॥

Thus hearing, Jaya called the Śiva's servant, of a graceful form, and brought him to the presence of Janārdana.

प्रवेशितो जयेनाथ चित्रस्पतशक्रातिकः ।

प्रणय दण्डविष्णु कृतंजलिपुर: स्थितः ॥ 15 ॥

Citrarāpa, of variegated appearance, prostrated himself flat before Him in the form of a stick and stood up and remained with folded hands.

दूर्यत तं चित्तमां प्राप भगवानारकड्यजः ।

वित्रकरणशं रणभो: सेवकं विनयान्यितम् ॥ 16 ॥

The Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa, Whose carrier is Garuda, saw that servant of Śiva, of variegated appearance and full of all humility, and became very much astonished.

प्रपछ्छ तं सितं कृत्वा चित्रकर्ण रपापितः ।

कुगलं देवदेवस्य सकुटुबल्य चानय ॥ 17 ॥

The Lord of Kamalā then smiled and asked Citrarūpa; “O Pure One! Is it all well with Mahādeva, the Lord of the Devas and his other families and attendants? On what business has He sent you here? What does He want me to do? Or tell me if I have to do any other business of the gods.”

Book VI Chapter XIX

दूत उवाच

कस्माचं प्रशितोउस्यत्र हूंहि कार्य हृस्य किम् ।

अथवा देवतानां च किंचित्कार्यं समृत्यितम् ॥ 18 ॥

The messenger said: "O Thou, the Knower of all that is within one's heart! There is nothing in this world hidden from Your knowledge; when is that which I will say unknown to you!

किम्भातां ततावसीह संसारे गरुकघवज ।

वर्तमानं जिकालान्त वदई प्रब्बीयि वै ॥ १९ ॥

प्रेपितोउसि यदेवात्र विजृन्तु त्वां जनादंत ।

हर्यय ववनात्रावयं प्रब्बीय पत्थि प्रथे ॥ 20 ॥

तेनेक्रमेतेईयोगो भायां ते कमलालया ।

तपत्पति कार्तिवंतमासमझमे विभो ॥ 21 ॥

O Thou, the Knower of present, past and future! I am now saying to you what Sambhu has told me to inform You. He has said: "O Lord! The Goddess Lakṣmī is Your dear consort. She, the daughter of the Ocean, and the Bestower of all success, though an object fit to be meditated by Yakṣas, Kinnaras, Naras and Immortals, is now undergoing severe penance at the confluence of Kalindi (the Yamunā, the daughter of Kalinda) and the Tamasā.

हरीकाप्यात देवी सर्वांशसिद्धादयिनि ।

ध्यातुं योग्यप्रमरणैमानैवंशैक्रिकर्निः : ॥२२ ॥

What is there in the three worlds that can be happy without that Mother of the worlds and the Giver of all desire? O Lotus-eyed One! What pleasure do You feel in abandoning Her?

विता तथा नर: को3पि सुखभागी भवेद्वीय ।

तां स्वक्ना पुण्डकीक्रक्ष प्राणोपि किं सुखं हरे ॥ 23 ॥

दुबैलोर्पि सिंचं घाति निर्णयोने जानयते ।

विनासपराधं च विधो किं तत्का जगदीक्षी ॥ 24 ॥

O All-pervading One! Even he who has no riches or who is very weak maintains his wife; then why have You, being the Lord of the worlds, forsaken your wife, without any offence, Who is worshipped by the whole universe. O Lord of the world! What advice shall I give to You? He whose wife suffer in the world, is blamed by his enemies.

दुःखं प्राप्तोनि संसारे यस्य भायां जगदानुगो ।

धितकस्य जीवितं लोके निविदां त्वरिणवृते ॥ 25 ॥

सकामा विषयतेज्ठ दृष्टवा तां दुःवितां भृणग् ।

त्वां विषयुंचे च मया हरिस्थोति दिवानिभग्न् ॥ 26 ॥

O Omnipresent One! Fie on his such a life! O Lord of the worlds! Your enemies' desires are satisfied when they see Her very miserable. They are laughing and mocking and saying: "O Devī, Keśava has now forsaken you; you can spend happily your time with us now.

रामं रामय देवेशेण त्वदुत्मकुगतां कृते ।

सर्वतक्षणस्मप्रजां सुगीतां च सुरुविणीम् ॥ 27 ॥

Therefore, O Lord of the Devas! Bring that Lady back unto your palace and place Her unto your lap, Who is of good demeanour, beautiful, per excellence and endowed with all auspicious signs.

सुखितो भव तां प्राय वतलभां चाहहासिनीम् ।

कान्ताविरहर्नं दुर्दं स्मारमहमानुतः ॥ 28 ॥

O Deva! Accept, please, your sweet-smiling wife and be happy. Though I am at present not in bereavement of my dear wife, yet when I remember my former state of bereavement, I feel very much trouble.

मम भाषां मृता विद्यो दक्षयत्रे सती यदा ।

तदारई दुः: सर्भे दुःखं भुक्तान्त्वेजक्षण ।। 29 ॥

O Lotus-eyed One! When Satī Devi, my beloved Wife, quitted Her life, in Dakṣa's house, I felt unbearable pain.

संसारोप्रिस्त्र: कोर्पि माभूमत्स्वरुगोपर: ।

मनसाउकरं गोकं तस्य विरहपीक्षितः ॥ 30 ॥

O Keśava! Let no other body in this world suffer such pain. I now remember only the suffering and mental agonies that I felt on Her bereavement; I do not give it out to others.

कालेन महता प्राप्ता मया निरितुता पुनः ।

तपस्त्वान्तिडु: साध्यां या दाया तु रूपप्रदधे ॥ 31 ॥

After a long time, practising severe Tapasyā (asceticism) I got Her back in the form of Girijā, who felt herself burnt up as it were by the anger She felt on account of censure cast on Me in the Dakṣa's house and thus gutted Her life.

हरे किं सुखामपत्रं त्वया संत्यज्य कामिनीम् ।

एकाकी तिष्ठता कालं सहस्ववससात्यकम् ॥ 32 ॥

O Murāri! What happiness you have felt in forsaking your dear wife and in remaining thus alone for one thousand years. Console your fortunate young wife with good teeth and bring her back to your place.

गत्थाश्य महाभागं समानय निजालयम् ।

माभूतकोपीड़ं संसारे विमुक्तो सम्या तथा ॥ 33 ॥

कृत्वा तुगतर्ष तं चजातकामलालायम् ।

उत्पाद उपमायुधसंतामानय शुच्चिमिताम् ॥ 34 ॥

O Bhagavān! Lastly, the Lord Bhavānī, the Originatrix of these worlds, told me to speak thus to you: “O Destroyer of Kāṃsa! Let nobody remain even, for a moment, without Lakṣmī, the Highest Goddess. O Long-lived One! You better assume the form of a horse and go and worship her. Then have a child of yours in the womb of your sweet-smiling wife and bring her back to your house.

व्यास उवाच

हरिचाकर्णे तुढ़कयं चित्रस्पय भारत ।

तथेत्युक्तला तु तं दूतं प्रेय्यामास शुक्रम् ॥ ३ ५ ॥

Vyāsa said: O Ornament of Bharata's race! Hearing thus the words of Citrarūpa, Bhagavān Hari told that he would do what Śaṅkara had told him to do and thus sent the messenger back to Śaṅkara.

गते दूतेश भगावान्वैकुपठाकामसंयुतः ।

जगाम धृत्वा तजायु वाजिकण मनोहम ॥ 36 ॥

यत्र सा वडवासको कृत्वा तपति सिंधुजा ।

विषयुक्ते एगमासघटा तपाणयन्द्रयीं स्थितम् ॥ 37 ॥

The messenger departing, Hari assumed the form of a beautiful horse and immediately left Vaikuntha with a passionate intent for the place where Lakṣmī was staying in the form of a mare and practicing her austerities. Coming there, he saw that the Devi Bimala was staying in the form of a mare.

साउपि तं बीक्ष्य गोविन्दं ह्यरूषधरं पतिम ।

जाला वीक्ष्य स्थिता साध्यी विमिता साशुलोचना ॥

तस्यासु सड़मसतत्र प्रजुतो मन्यथातंयो: ।

कालिंदौतमसासेगे पावने लोकविश्रुते ॥ 39 ॥

The mare, too, seeing the horse form of her husband Govinda, recognised him and, chaste as she was, remained there with astonishment and tears in her eyes. Then those two copulated on the famous confluence.

सभार्थ सा तदा जाता बड्वा हरिवल्लभा ।

सुख्रे सुन्दरं बालं तदैव सा गुणोतत्त् ॥ 40 ॥

तामाह भगवान्वाक्यं ग्रहस्य समयाश्रितम् ।

त्वजाठ वाडवं देढे पूर्वदेहा भवाडुना ॥ 41 ॥

The wife of Hari, in the shape of a mare became pregnant and, in due time, gave birth to a beautiful well qualified child. The Bhagavān then graciously smiled on her and spoke in words suited to the time.

गामिष्याः स्वदैकुप्ठमावां कृत्वा निजं वपुः ।

तिष्ठत्व कुमारोर्धं त्वया जातः सुलोचने ॥ 42 ॥

“O Dear! Now quit this mare form and assume your former appearance. O Lovely-eyed One! Let both of us assume our own forms and go to Vaikuntha; and let your child remain in this place.”

लक्ष्मीत्वाच

स्वेदेहसभयं पुरं कर्थे त्रिला जाम्यहम् ।

स्टेह: युडुस्त्वज: कामं स्वातकरस्य सुरुषैय ॥ ४३ ॥

Lakṣmī said: “O Lord! How can I go leaving here this child, born of my womb. It is very difficult to quit the attachments for one’s own child.

का गति: स्यादोयमान्य-बालास्यास्य नदीते ।

अनाव्यस्यास्यर्थय विजने-त्यन्तानेहि ॥ 44 ॥

Know this, O Lord! O High-souled One! This child is young and of small body; therefore it is quite incapable to protect itself. If I forsake it on the bank of this river, it will be an orphan, what will happen to it then?

अनाश्रयं सुतं व्यक्त्वा कवं पन्तुं मनो भग ।

समर्थे स्वयं स्वामिभ्येवद्युजलोचन ॥ 45 ॥

O Lotus-eyed One! My mind is now in full

Book VI Chapter XX

attachment tecwards it. How can I quit this helpless child and go?"

दिव्यदेही ततो जातो लक्ष्मीनारायणाबूषो ।

विमानवरसंविद्धी सृत्यमानी सुरैदिंवि ॥ 46 ॥

When Lakṣmī and Nārāyaṇa resumed their divine bodies and mounted on the excellent Vimānas, the Devas began to praise them with hymns.

गन्तुकामं पति प्राह कमला कमलापतिम् ।

गृहाणेमं सृतं नाव गईं शक्ताभिम हाहिपत्न् ॥ 47 ॥

When Nārāyaṇa expressed his desire to go, Kamalā said: "O Lord! You better take this child; I am unable to forsake it.

प्राणधीयोनित मे पुःः कान्तां त्वतनुषः प्रभो ।

गृहीत्वैंन गमिच्यायो वैकुणं मधुयुदन ॥ 48 ॥

O Lord! O Slayer of Madhu! This child is dearer to me than my life; see its body resembles exactly like you. Therefore we would take this child with us to Vaikuntha."

हरिकवाच

मा विषादं प्रिये कर्तुं ल्यमहाँस वरान्ने ।

तिछल्वरं सुखेनात्र श्रह्मा मे विहिता तिच्छ ॥ 49 ॥

कार्य किम्पिय वामोक वर्तैने महद्धूद्मत् ।

निबोधि कवयामध्य सुतस्यात्र विमोचने ॥ 50 ॥

Hari spoke: “O Dear! You need not be sorry; let this child remain here happily; I have arranged for its preservation and safety. O Beautiful One! There is a great act to do in this world.

तुर्वेसुर्नाय विद्यातो ययातितनुजो घुवि ।

हरिवर्षिति पित्रास्थ वक्ते नाम सुविश्रुन्ति ॥ 51 ॥

That will be executed by your child. For this

reason I am leaving it here. I am now describing to you the above story.

स राजा युककामोड्ठ तपत्सपति पावने ।

तीर्धे वर्षगतं जातं तत्थ वे कुर्जततप: ॥ 52 ॥

The famous King Yayāti had a son named Turvasu; his father kept his name as Hari Varmā; he is known by this name.

तत्यर्थे तिमितः पुत्रे मयात्यं कमलालये ।

तत्र नाला तृपं सुधु प्रेरियधामि सामुळम् ॥ 53 ॥

That king is now practising asceticism for getting a son for one hundred years in a place of pilgrimage. O Lakṣmī! I have begot this son for him. I will go there and send the King here.

तस्मै दास्यामघुं पुंत्रु प्रकामायर कामिनी ।

गृहीता स्वगृहं राजा प्रायिध्यिति बालकम् ॥ 54 ॥

O Beautiful-faced One! I will give this son to that King, desirous of an issue. He will take this son and go back to his house.

व्यास उवाच

इत्याश्य चिया पवां कृत्वा रक्षां च बातके ।

विमानवरमाह्छा प्रययो चियया सह ॥ 55 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे घटस्कन्ये

एकोनिविशोअयाः ॥ 179 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus consoling his beloved, whose abode is in the Lotus and placing the child there in that position, He mounted on an excellent car with Lakṣmī and went to Vaikuntha. Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the origin of Haihayas from a mare in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XX

