CHAPTER II

On the Birth of the Dānava Mahiṣa

यात्र सच्च

योगेश्वरा: प्रभावोउरं कथितश्रातिविस्तरात् ।

ब्रृहि तचार्वितं स्वामिच्छ्योतुं कौतूहलं मम ॥ १ ॥

महादेवीप्रभावं वे श्रोतुं को नाभिवांशति ।

यो ज्ञानाति जगत्मखं तदुत्पयंचे चराचर्म ॥ 2 ॥

The king said: “Lord! You have described fully the glory of the Mahā Māyā Yogēsvari; now describe Her Life and Character; I am very eager to hear them. This whole universe, moving and non-moving, has been created by Maheśvarī; who is there that desires not to hear Her Glory!”

ध्यास उवाच

श्रुणु राजन्यवश्यामि विस्तरेण गहामते ।

श्रद्धायानय शानात्य न ब्यासल तु मन्दधीः ॥ 3 ॥

Vyāsa spoke: “O king! You are very intelligent; I will describe in detail all this to you; whoever does not describe Her Glory to the peaceful and faithful, is certainly low-minded?

पुरा युद्धमभूद्वारे देवदानवसेनयो: ।

पृथिव्यां पृथिव्याणल महिषाण्ये महीर्णते ॥ 4 ॥

In days of yore, a terrible battle ensued between

Devas and Dānava forces on this earth when Mahisāśura was the Ruler of this world.

महिषो नाम राजेन्द्र चकार तप उत्तमम् ।

गत्वा हेमिपती चोर्धे देवविस्यकाकतम् ॥ 5 ॥

O king! Mahisāśura went to the mountain of Suneru and performed a very severe and excellent tapasyā, wonderful even to the gods.

वर्षाणामयुतं पूर्ण चित्यनन्द्रिदे देखताम् ।

तस्य तुही महाराज बझा लोकपितामहः ॥ 6 ॥

O king! Meditating on his Iṣta Devatā (the deity for his worship) in his heart, elapsed full ten thousand years, when Brahmā the Grandfather of all the Lokas, was pleased with him.

तत्रागत्याब्वीढ़ावं हंसाक्वश्रतुर्भुंखः ।

वं वरय धर्मानन्दादिम तव वांछ्ठनम् ॥ 7 ॥

The fourfaced Brahmā, arrived there on his vehicle, the swan, and asked Mahisāsura “O One of virtuous soul! Ask from me what is your desired object; I will grant thee boon.”

महिष उवाच

आमत्वं देवेदेव वाज्छाभि द्रुहिण प्रभो ।

यथा मृत्युभयं न स्वात्तथा कुक चितात् ॥ 8 ॥

Mahiṣa said: “O Lord, Lotus-eyed! I want to become immortal! therefore O Thou, the Grandfather of the Devas! Dost thou do for me so that I have no fear of death.”

बह्योवाच

उत्पनस्य ध्रुवं मृत्युईं जन्म मृतस्य च ।

सर्वेधा मणीतचती सर्वेधां प्राणिजां किल ॥ 9 ॥

नाश: कालेन सर्वेधां प्राणिजां द्विपुंगव ।

महामहीधराणां च समुद्राणां च सर्वेधां ॥ 10 ॥

Brahmā said: “O Mahīsa! Birth must be followed by death, and death must be followed by birth; this is the eternal law of nature. Then know this as certain that when one is born, one must die; and when one dies, one will be born. O Lord of Dānavas! What more to say than this, that high mountains, vast oceans, and all the beings will die when time will come.

एकं स्थानं परित्यज मणयस्य महीपते ।

प्रबृहि तं वरं साधो यसे मनसि वर्ते ॥ १ १ ॥

O Ruler of the earth! You are virtuous; therefore ask any other boon than this immortality; I will grant that to you."

महिष्य उवाच

न देवामानुबाहैत्यामरणे मे पितामह ।

पुरुषाच च मे मृत्युर्षीया मां का हीन्यति ॥ १२ ॥

तसामाने मरणं नूनं कामियाः कुरु पयज ।

अवला हन मां केनुं कथं शक्ता भविष्यति ॥ 13 ॥

Mahisa said: “O Grand Sire! Grant, then, that no Deva, Dānava, nor human being of the male sex can cause my death. There is none among women who can cause my death. Therefore, O Lotus-eyed! Let women be the cause of my death; how can women slay me! They are too weak to kill me!”

ब्रह्मोवाच

यदा कदापि दैलेन्द्र नायांतसे मरणं धुवम् ।

न नरेषो महाभाग मृतिले महिषासुर ॥ 14 ॥

Brahmā said: “O Lord of the Dānavas! Your death will certainly occur, at any time, through a woman; O Highly Fortunate One! No man will be able to cause your death.”

व्यास उवाच

एवं द्रत्वा वरं तत्मी ययौ बह्जा निजालयम् ।

सोउपि दैत्यवरः प्राप्त निजं स्वानं मुतुवित्व: ॥ 15 ॥

Vyāsa said: “Thus granting him the boon, Brahmā went to his own abode; the lord of the Dānavas, too, returned to his place, very glad.”

राजोबाच

महिषः कस्य युप्रोउसी कर्वे जातो महावत्नी ।

कक्षे न माहिषं रूप प्राप्तं तेन महात्मना ॥ १ ६ ॥

The king said: “O Bhagavān! Whose son was this powerful Mahisāsura; how his birth took place? and why, too, did he get a body of a buffalo?”

Book V Chapter II

यास उवाच

दनोः पूत्री महाराज विद्यातों हिंतिमपड़ले ।

रामश्रीव कर्मभश्र द्वावास्तां दानवोतमौ ॥ 17 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O king! Rambha and Karambha were the two sons of Danu; these two Dānavas were far famed in this world for their pre-eminence.”

तावपूजी महाराज पूजार्थे तेनपुस्तपः ।

बदर्भर्पिणाण-कामा पुर्णे पछाने जले ॥ 18 ॥

“O king! They had no issues; hence, desirous of issues, they went to the sacred banks of the Indus (Pañca Nada) and there performed severe asceticism for long years.”

करामस्तु जले मान्यछाकार परमं तपः ।

यूक्षं रसावटं प्रायः रम्भोउनिम्मेववत् ॥ 19 ॥

पश्रामिनासधानासक्तः स रंभसून यदापवत् ।

जात्वा शर्षीपतिडुःखमुच्यो दानवो प्रति ॥ 20 ॥

Karamba got himself submerged in water and thus began his severe tapasyā; while the other, Rambha, had recourse to a juicy peepul tree (haunted by Yakṣinīs) and there began to worship Fire. Rambha remained, engaged in worshipping the Five Fires; knowing this, Indra, the Lord of Saṃ, was pained and hurried thither, being very anxious.

नाचा पड़नंदे तन ग्राहरूपं चकार है ।

वासवस्तु कारभं ते तदा जगाद पावयेः ॥ 21 ॥

Going to Pañcha Nada, Indra assumed the form of a crocodile and caught hold of the legs of the wicked Karambha and killed him.

निजधान च तं तुर्दं कारभं वूरमुद्नः ।

भातरं निरहतं शूला रम्भः कोपं परं नातः ॥ 22 ॥

स्वर्गीर्ष पावके होतुषेच्छच्छता केगे ।

केशणशे गृतीलास२५शु वामेन क्रोधसंयुतः ॥ 23 ॥

दक्षिणेन कर्णगर्भ गृहीला खद्वागुन्तामम् ।

छिन्ति शीर्ष तावाद्विहिना प्रतिविधितः ॥ 24 ॥

Hearing of the death of his brother, Rambha got very much enraged and wishing to offer his own head as an oblation to the Fire, he wanted to cut off his own head; he, being infuriated, held

the hair of his head by his left hand, and, catching hold of a good axe, by his right hand, was on the point of cutting it, when the Fire gave him knowledge, desisted him from this act and spoke thus:

उक्तछु दैत्य मुर्खोंजीस स्वर्गीशं उतुचिष्छसि ।

आतमह्यापतिछुःसाधाय कर्थं ले कर्तुमुहतः ॥ 25 ॥

वरं वरथ भई ते यत्मे मनसि वर्तते ।

मा विषयस मुनेताथ किं ते कार्य भविष्यति ॥ 26 ॥

"You are stupid; why have you desired to cut off your own head; killing one's own self is a great sin; and there is no means of deliverance from this sin. Why are you then ready to execute it?" Do not seek your death now; what end will that serve you? Rather ask boons from me; thus you will get your welfare."

व्यास उवाच

तच्छूला वचनं रमः पावकस्य सुभाषितम् ।

ततो3बबीडुचो रामस्थलवा केशकलापकम् ॥ 27 ॥

यदि तुढो3स देहेगा देहेि मे वारिड्ठतं वरम् ।

त्रैलोक्यविजयी पुः: स्यातः परवलातः ॥ 28 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O king! Hearing thus the sweet words of Fire, Rambha quitted the hold of his hairs and said: “O Lord of the Devas! If thou art pleased, grant my desired boon that a son be born unto me, who will destroy the forces of my enemy and who will conquer the three worlds.”

अजेब: सर्वथा स्याहेद्वतनयमानविः ।

कामस्पी महावीर्वः सर्वलोकामिवस्ति: ॥ 29 ॥

"And that son be invincible in every way is the Devas, Dānavas and men, very powerful, assuming forms at will, and respected by all."

पावकस्तं तंत्याहूष पविष्यति तवैप्रिस्तम् ।

पुत्रस्तव महाभाग मरणाहिमयानुना ॥ 30 ॥

Fire said: “O highly Fortunate! You will get your son, as you desire; therefore desist now from your attempt of suicide.”

यस्यां चित्तं तु रम्पा त्वं प्रमदानं कार्यस्य।

तस्यां पुत्रो महाभाग विध्वयित् वताधिकः ॥ 31 ॥

O highly fortunate Rambha! With any female

of whichever species, you will co-habit, you will get a son, more powerful than you; there is no doubt in this.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तो वहितां रभ्यो वचनं चितरऊनम् ।

भुत्वा प्रणाय्य प्रययी वहितं ते द्रावलोभमः ॥ 32 ॥

यक्षे: परिवृतं स्थानं परमाणिं शिव्यान्यितम् ।

सूद्वा चडेते तदा भावं महिष्यां द्रावलोभमः ॥ 33 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O king! Hearing thus the sweet words of Fire as desired, Rambha, the chief of the Dānavas, went, surrounded by Yaksas, to a beautiful place, adorned with picturesque sceneries; when one lovely she-buffalo, who was very maddened with passion, fell to the sight of Rambha.

मताचां रूपणुर्णां विहायान्यां च योषितम् ।

सा समागच्छ तसा कामवन्ती मुद्रान्ति ॥ 34 ॥

रामो5पि यानं चके भवित्यगुणिति: ।

सा तुु भर्षितां जाता महीधी तस्य वीयतेः ॥ 35 ॥

And he desired to have sexual intercourse with her, in preference to other women. The she-buffallo, too, gladly yielded to his purpose and Rambha had sexual intercourse with her, impelled as it were by the destiny. The she-buffalo became pregnant with his semen virile.

तां गृहीतावंथ पालातं प्रविश्य मनोह्मम् ।

महिषेध्यन्त्र तां रक्षिन्याममुन्ता किल ॥ ३ ६ ॥

The Dānava, too, carried the she-buffalo, his dear wife, to Pātāla (the lower regions) for her protection.

क्रताधिन्यिष्ठान्य कामान्तैस्तामुपाद्वल ।

स्वयमान्य तं हेतुं दानवः समुपाद्वत् ॥ 37 ॥

On one occasion, another buffalo got excited and wanted to fall upon the she-buffalo. The Dānava was also ready to kill him.

स्वरक्षां समान्यल महिंं समताड्यत ।

सोर्पि नं तिज्ञानायुं शुभाप्यां कामाभेहितः ॥ 38 ॥

The Dānava came hurriedly and struck the buffalo for the safety of his wife; whereon the excited buffalo attacked him with his horns.

ताडितस्तेन तीक्षणान्यां शुभाण्यां हृदये भुणम् ।

भूमौ प्यात ततसा ममार च विमूर्हितः ॥ 39 ॥

The buffalo struck him so violently with his sharp horns that Rambha fell down senseless all of a sudden and finally died.

मुते भर्तीर सा दीना भयातां विद्युत भुणम् ।

सा वेगातं वटं गाय्य व्यक्षाणों शरणत ॥ 40 ॥

Seeing her husband dead, the she-buffalo quickly fled away in distress and, with terror, she quickly went to the peepul tree and took refuge under the Yakṣas.

पृढ़तस्तु गतस्तत्र महिषः कामपीडितः ।

कामयानस्तु तां कामी बलवीर्यमोद्धतः ॥ 41 ॥

But that buffalo, excited very much and maddened with vigour, ran in pursuit of her, desiring intercourse with her.

रुदती सा भुशं दीना दृषा यद्येष्यातृना ।

धायानं च तं वीक्ष्य यक्षास्तुं समाययुः ॥ 42 ॥

On seeing the miserable plight of the weeping she-buffalo, distressed with fear, and seeing the buffalo in pursuit of her, the Yakṣas assembled to protect her.

युब्द्रं समभवब्दोरं यक्षाणां च ह्वायरिण ।

त्रोग ताडितस्तूर्णी पचात धरणितले ॥43 ॥

मृतं रभं समानीय यक्षान्ते परभं विद्यम् ।

चितायां तोयामामुस्तस्य देहस्यु शुक्रदे ॥44 ॥

A terrible fight ensued between the buffalo and the Yakṣas, when the buffalo, shot with arrows by them, fell down and died. Rambha was very much liked by the Yakṣas; so they cremated his dead body for its purification.

महिली सा पति हृद्धा चितायां रोपित तदा ।

प्रवेषु सा मर्ति चक्रे पतिना सह पावकम् ॥ 45 ॥

The she-buffalo, seeing her husband laid in the funeral pyre, expressed her desire to enter also into that fire.

वाय्योपार्थि यक्षेः सा प्रविशेष शुताशनम् ।

ज्ञात्मानालुकले साधी पतिमदाय वतलभगम् ॥ 46 ॥

The Yakṣas resisted; but that chaste wife quickly entered the pyre along with her husband.

Book V Chapter III

महिष्यनु चितामध्यात्समुन्त्रधौ महावलः ।

रभोयव्यविद्युः कृत्वा नि:सूत पुरवस्तलः ॥ 47 ॥

When the she-buffalo died, the powerful Mahisa rose from his mother's womb from the midst of the funeral pyre; Rambha, too, emerged from the fire in another form out of his affection towards his son.

रक्रीकीजोपयसी जातो महिषोपि महावलः ।

अधिधिस्त्रु राज्येउसी ह्वारिसुरोतमे: ॥ 4 8 ॥

Rambha was known as Raktabīja after he had changed his form. His son was thus born as a very powerful Dānava and became famous by the name of Mahisa.

एवं स महिषो जातो रक्तबीजश्छ खीयंवान् ।

अवध्यस्तु सुरैर्दैल्मानवैश्व रुणेतम ॥ ४९ ॥

The chief Dānavas installed Mahisa on the

throne. O king! The very powerful Raktabīja, the Dānava Mahisa, thus took their births and became invincible of the Devas, Dānavas and human beings.

इत्येतत्क्रियां राजझ्म तत्थ महात्मतः ।

वरप्रदानं च तथा प्रोक्ते सर्व सविस्तम् ॥ 50 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणी पद्धमस्कन्धे

महिषासुरो्य्पतिनीम द्वितीयंडधायः ॥ 51 ॥ 

O king! I have now described to you the birth of the high-souled Dānava Mahiṣa and his getting the boon, all in detail.

Here ends the Second Chapter of the Fifth Book on the birth of Mahiṣa Dānavā in the Devi Bhāgavatam of the Mahāpurāṇaṃ composed of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter III

