[Ch 2 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king said: “Lord! You have described fully the glory of the Mahā Māyā Yogēsvari; now describe Her Life and Character; I am very eager to hear them. This whole universe, moving and non-moving, has been created by Maheśvarī; who is there that desires not to hear Her Glory!”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king said :-- “Lord! You have described fully the glory of the Mahā Mayā Yogeśvarī; now describe Her Life and Character; I am very eager to hear them. This whole universe, moving and nonmoving, has been created by Maheśvarī; who is there that desires not to hear Her Glory!”

[Ch 2 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa spoke: “O king! You are very intelligent; I will describe in detail all this to you; whoever does not describe Her Glory to the peaceful and faithful, is certainly low-minded?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa spoke :-- O king! You are very intelligent; I will describe in detail all this to you; whoever does not describe Her Glory to the peaceful and faithful, is certainly low-minded?

[Ch 2 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In days of yore, a terrible battle ensued between Devas and Dānava forces on this earth when Mahisāśura was the Ruler of this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In days of yore, a terrible battle ensued between the Devas and Dānava forces on this earth when Mahiṣāsura was the Ruler of this world.

[Ch 2 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Mahisāśura went to the mountain of Suneru and performed a very severe and excellent tapasyā, wonderful even to the gods.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Mahiṣāsura went to the mountain of Sumeru and performed a very severe and excellent tapasyā, wonderful even to the gods.

[Ch 2 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Meditating on his Iṣta Devatā (the deity for his worship) in his heart, elapsed full ten thousand years, when Brahmā the Grandfather of all the Lokas, was pleased with him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Meditating on his Ista Devatā (the deity for his worship) in his heart, elapsed full ten thousand years, when Brahmā the Grandfather of all the Lokas, was pleased with him.

[Ch 2 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The fourfaced Brahmā, arrived there on his vehicle, the swan, and asked Mahisāsura “O One of virtuous soul! Ask from me what is your desired object; I will grant thee boon.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The fourfaced Brahmā, arrived there on his vehicle the swan, asked Mahiṣāsura “O One of virtuous soul! Ask from me what is your desired object; I will grant thee boon.”

[Ch 2 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mahiṣa said: “O Lord, Lotus-eyed! I want to become immortal! therefore O Thou, the Grandfather of the Devas! Dost thou do for me so that I have no fear of death.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mahiṣa said :-- “O Lord, Lotus-eyed! I want to become immortal! therefore O Thou, the Grandfather of the Devas! Dost thou do for me so that I have no fear of death.”

[Ch 2 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā said: “O Mahīsa! Birth must be followed by death, and death must be followed by birth; this is the eternal law of nature. Then know this as certain that when one is born, one must die; and when one dies, one will be born. O Lord of Dānavas! What more to say than this, that high mountains, vast oceans, and all the beings will die when time will come.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā said :-- “O Mahiṣa! Birth must be followed by death, and death must be followed by birth; this is the eternal law of nature. Then know this as certain that when one is born, one must die; and when one dies, one will be born. O Lord of the Dānavas! What more to say than this, that high mountains, vast oceans, and all the beings will die when time will come.

[Ch 2 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Ruler of the earth! You are virtuous; therefore ask any other boon than this immortality; I will grant that to you."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Ruler of the earth! You are virtuous; therefore ask any other boon than this immortality; I will grant that to you.”

[Ch 2 Verse 12-13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mahisa said: “O Grand Sire! Grant, then, that no Deva, Dānava, nor human being of the male sex can cause my death. There is none among women who can cause my death. Therefore, O Lotus-eyed! Let women be the cause of my death; how can women slay me! They are too weak to kill me!”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mahiṣa said :-- “O Grand Sire! Grant, then, that no Deva, Dānava, nor human being of the male sex can cause my death. There is none among women who can cause my death. Therefore, O Lotus-eyed! Let woman be the cause of my death; how can women slay me! The are too weak to kill me!”

[Ch 2 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā said: “O Lord of the Dānavas! Your death will certainly occur, at any time, through a woman; O Highly Fortunate One! No man will be able to cause your death.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā said :-- “O Lord of the Dānavas! Your death will certainly occur, at any time, through a woman; O Highly Fortunate One! No man will be able to cause your death.”

[Ch 2 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “Thus granting him the boon, Brahmā went to his own abode; the lord of the Dānavas, too, returned to his place, very glad.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Thus granting him the boon, Brahmā went to his own abode; the lord of the Dānavas, too, returned to his place, very glad.

[Ch 2 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king said: “O Bhagavān! Whose son was this powerful Mahisāsura; how his birth took place? and why, too, did he get a body of a buffalo?”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king said :-- “O Bhagavān! Whose son was this powerful Mahiṣāsura; how his birth took place? and why, too, did he get a body of a buffalo?”

[Ch 2 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O king! Rambha and Karambha were the two sons of Danu; these two Dānavas were far famed in this world for their pre-eminence.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! Rambha and Karambha were the two sons of Danu; these two Dānavas were far famed in this world for their pre-eminence.

[Ch 2 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O king! They had no issues; hence, desirous of issues, they went to the sacred banks of the Indus (Pañca Nada) and there performed severe asceticism for long years.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! They had no issues; hence, desirous of issues, they went to the sacred banks of the Indus (Pañca Nada) and there performed severe asceticism for long years.

[Ch 2 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Karamba got himself submerged in water and thus began his severe tapasyā; while the other, Rambha, had recourse to a juicy peepul tree (haunted by Yakṣinīs) and there began to worship Fire. Rambha remained, engaged in worshipping the Five Fires; knowing this, Indra, the Lord of Saṃ, was pained and hurried thither, being very anxious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Karambha got himself submerged in water and thus began his severe tapasyā; while the other, Rambha, had recourse to a juicy peepul tree (haunted by Yakshinīs) and there began to worship Fire. Rambha remained, engaged in worshipping the Five Fires; knowing this, Indra, the Lord of Śacī, was pained and hurried thither, being very anxious.

[Ch 2 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Going to Pañcha Nada, Indra assumed the form of a crocodile and caught hold of the legs of the wicked Karambha and killed him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Going to Pañca Nada, Indra assumed the form of a crocodile and caught hold of the legs of the wicked Karambha and killed him.

[Ch 2 Verse 22-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing of the death of his brother, Rambha got very much enraged and wishing to offer his own head as an oblation to the Fire, he wanted to cut off his own head; he, being infuriated, held the hair of his head by his left hand, and, catching hold of a good axe, by his right hand, was on the point of cutting it, when the Fire gave him knowledge, desisted him from this act and spoke thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing of the death of his brother, Rambha got very much enraged and wishing to offer his own head as an oblation to the Fire, he wanted to cut off his own head; he, being infuriated, held the hairs of his head by his left hand, and, catching hold of a good axe, by his right hand, was on the point of cutting it, when the Fire gave him knowledge, desisted him from this act and spoke thus :--

[Ch 2 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "You are stupid; why have you desired to cut off your own head; killing one's own self is a great sin; and there is no means of deliverance from this sin. Why are you then ready to execute it?" Do not seek your death now; what end will that serve you? Rather ask boons from me; thus you will get your welfare."
NEW CORR ENG ──► You are stupid; why have you desired to cut off your own head; killing one’s ownself is a great sin; and there is no means of deliverance from this sin. Why are you then ready to execute it? Do not seek your death now; what end will that serve you? Rather ask boons from me; thus you will get your welfare.

[Ch 2 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O king! Hearing thus the sweet words of Fire, Rambha quitted the hold of his hairs and said: “O Lord of the Devas! If thou art pleased, grant my desired boon that a son be born unto me, who will destroy the forces of my enemy and who will conquer the three worlds.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! Hearing thus the sweet words of Fire, Rambha quitted the hold of his hairs and said :-- O Lord of the Devas! If thou art pleased, grant my desired boon that a son be born unto me, who will destroy the forces of my enemy and who will conquer the three worlds.

[Ch 2 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "And that son be invincible in every way is the Devas, Dānavas and men, very powerful, assuming forms at will, and respected by all."
NEW CORR ENG ──► And that son be invincible in every way by the Devas, Dānavas and men, very powerful, assuming forms at will, and respected by all.

[Ch 2 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Fire said: “O highly Fortunate! You will get your son, as you desire; therefore desist now from your attempt of suicide.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Fire said :-- O highly Fortunate! You will get your son, as you desire; therefore desist now from your attempting suicide.

[Ch 2 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O highly fortunate Rambha! With any female of whichever species, you will co-habit, you will get a son, more powerful than you; there is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O highly fortunate Rambha! With any female of whichever species, you will co-habit, you will get a son, more powerful than you; there is no doubt in this.

[Ch 2 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O king! Hearing thus the sweet words of Fire as desired, Rambha, the chief of the Dānavas, went, surrounded by Yaksas, to a beautiful place, adorned with picturesque sceneries; when one lovely she-buffalo, who was very maddened with passion, fell to the sight of Rambha.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! Hearing thus the sweet words of the Fire as desired, Rambha, the chief of the Dānavas, went, surrounded by Yaksas, to a beautiful place, adorned with picturesque sceneries; when one lovely she-buffalo, who was very maddened with passion, fell to the sight of Rambha.

[Ch 2 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And he desired to have sexual intercourse with her, in preference to other women. The she-buffallo, too, gladly yielded to his purpose and Rambha had sexual intercourse with her, impelled as it were by the destiny. The she-buffalo became pregnant with his semen virile.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And he desired to have sexual intercourse with her, in preference to other women. The she-buffallo, too, gladly yielded to his purpose and Rambha had sexual intercourse with her, impelled as it were by the destiny. The she-buffalo became pregnant with his semen virile.

[Ch 2 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Dānava, too, carried the she-buffalo, his dear wife, to Pātāla (the lower regions) for her protection.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Dānava, too, carried the she-buffalo, his dear wife, to Pātāla (the lower regions) for her protection.

[Ch 2 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On one occasion, another buffalo got excited and wanted to fall upon the she-buffalo. The Dānava was also ready to kill him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On one occasion, another buffalo got excited and wanted to fall upon the she-buffalo. The Dānava was also ready to kill him.

[Ch 2 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Dānava came hurriedly and struck the buffalo for the safety of his wife; whereon the excited buffalo attacked him with his horns.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Dānava came hurriedly and struck the buffalo for the safety of his wife; whereon the excited buffalo attacked him with his horns.

[Ch 2 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The buffalo struck him so violently with his sharp horns that Rambha fell down senseless all of a sudden and finally died.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The buffalo struck him so violently with his sharp horns that Rambha fell down senseless all on a sudden and finally died.

[Ch 2 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing her husband dead, the she-buffalo quickly fled away in distress and, with terror, she quickly went to the peepul tree and took refuge under the Yakṣas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing her husband dead, the she-buffalo quickly fled away in distress and, with terror, she quickly went to the peepul tree and took refuge under the Yaksas.

[Ch 2 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But that buffalo, excited very much and maddened with vigour, ran in pursuit of her, desiring intercourse with her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But that buffalo, excited very much and maddened with vigour, ran in pursuit of her, desiring intercourse with her.

[Ch 2 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On seeing the miserable plight of the weeping she-buffalo, distressed with fear, and seeing the buffalo in pursuit of her, the Yakṣas assembled to protect her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On seeing the miserable plight of the weeping she-buffalo, distressed with fear, and seeing the buffalo in pursuit of her, the Yaksas assembled to protect her.

[Ch 2 Verse 43-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► A terrible fight ensued between the buffalo and the Yakṣas, when the buffalo, shot with arrows by them, fell down and died. Rambha was very much liked by the Yakṣas; so they cremated his dead body for its purification.
NEW CORR ENG ──► A terrible fight ensued between the buffalo and the Yaksas, when the buffalo, shot with arrows by them, fell down and died. Rambha was very much liked by the Yaksas; so they cremated his dead body for its purification.

[Ch 2 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The she-buffalo, seeing her husband laid in the funeral pyre, expressed her desire to enter also into that fire.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The she-buffalo, seeing her husband laid in the funeral pyre, expressed her desire to enter also into that fire.

[Ch 2 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Yakṣas resisted; but that chaste wife quickly entered the pyre along with her husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Yaksas resisted; but that chaste wife quickly entered into the burning fire along with her husband.

[Ch 2 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the she-buffalo died, the powerful Mahisa rose from his mother's womb from the midst of the funeral pyre; Rambha, too, emerged from the fire in another form out of his affection towards his son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the she-buffalo died, the powerful Mahiṣa rose from his mother’s womb from the midst of the funeral pyre; Rambha, too, emerged from the fire in another form out of his affection towards his son.

[Ch 2 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Rambha was known as Raktabīja after he had changed his form. His son was thus born as a very powerful Dānava and became famous by the name of Mahisa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Rambha was known as Raktavīja after he had changed his form. His son was thus born as a very powerful Dānava and became famous by the name of Mahiṣa.

[Ch 2 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The chief Dānavas installed Mahisa on the throne. O king! The very powerful Raktabīja, the Dānava Mahisa, thus took their births and became invincible of the Devas, Dānavas and human beings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The chief Dānavas installed Mahiṣa on the throne. O king! The very powerful Raktavīja and the Dānava Mahiṣa, thus took their births and became invincible of the Devas, Dānavas and human beings.

[Ch 2 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! I have now described to you the birth of the high-souled Dānava Mahiṣa and his getting the boon, all in detail. Here ends the Second Chapter of the Fifth Book on the birth of Mahiṣa Dānavā in the Devi Bhāgavatam of the Mahāpurāṇaṃ composed of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! I have now described to you the birth of the highsouled Dānava Mahiṣa and his getting the boon, all in detail. Here ends the Second Chapter of the Fifth Book on the birth of Mahiṣa Dānava in the Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahāpurāṇam composed of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
