CHAPTER XXXV

On Various Hells

धर्माज जवाच

देवसेवां विना साधित्र न भवेत्कर्मकृतनम् ।

शूद्रकर्म शूद्रबीर्ज नरकछ कुकर्मण ॥ १ ॥

पृंशल्यत्र च यो भुंक्ते योउस्यां गच्छेत्पतितते ।

स द्विः: कालयूरं च मृतो वाति सुतुगंमम् ॥ 2 ॥

Dharmarājan said: O Chaste One! Without serving the Gods, the Karma ties can never be severed. The pure act are the seeds of purities and the impure acts lead to impure seeds. If any Brāhmaṇa goes to any unchaste woman and eats her food, he will have to go ultimately to the Kālasūtra hell.

शतवर्षं कालमूत्रे त्रिवर्धीभूतो भवेद्युवम् ।

अन्यवन्मिन रोगी च ततः शुक्रो भवेद्विड़ः ॥ 3 ॥

There he lives for one hundred years when ultimately he gets a human birth when he passes his times as a diseased man and ultimately he gets purified.

पतित्रता चैकपती द्वितीयो कुलटा स्मृता ।

तृतीये धर्षिणी जैसा चलुईं पृंड्गलीत्यपि ॥ 4 ॥

वेप्या च पढ्रुभे पषे पुरुषी च सतमोउष्टिमे ।

तत क्रस्त्र माहावेप्या सास्म्यप्या सर्वजातिषु ॥ 5 ॥

यो द्विजः कुलटां गछ्छेद्वर्षिणी पुंड्गलीमपि ।

पुरुषीं वेयर्यां महावेयरां मल्योदे याति निश्छितम् ॥ 6 ॥

Those women who are addicted to their (one) husbands only are called Pativratās. Those addicted to two persons are named Kalatās; to three, are called Dharsinīs; to four, called Purīścalis; to five, six persons, called Veyas; to seven, eight, nine persons are called Pungis; and to more than these, are called Mahāveśyās. The Mahāveśyās are unfit to be touched by all the classes. If any Brāhmaṇa goes to Kulatā, Dharsinī, Puriścalī, Pūngī, Veśyā and Mahāveśyās, he will have to go to the Matsyoda Kunda.

शताब्द्र कुलतामपी ध्रधामपी चतुर्णणम् ।

चडुगुणं पृंशुलीमापी गोरणमापी गुणाधकम् ॥ 7 ॥

पुड़़ीगमी दरणुणं वसेत्तन न संशयः ।

महावेश्याकामुक्क उतते दरणुणं वसेत्त ॥ 8 ॥

Those who go to Kulatās remain there for one hundred years; those who go to Dharsinīs, remain for four hundred years, those who go to Punīscalīs for six hundred years; those who go to Veśyās, of eight hundred years; those who go to Puṅgīs,

remain for one thousand years and those who go to Mahā-vesyās remain in the Matsyoda Kuntā for ten thousand years.

तत्रेव यातर्नां भुक्ते यमदुतेन ताडितः ।

तितितः: कुलटागगाथी ध्रातगाथी च वायसः ॥ 9 ॥

कोकिलः पुंशलीगाथी वेश्यागाथी वृकः स्मृतः ।

पूर्जीगाथी सूकषः सतजन्मनि भाते ॥ 10 ॥

My messengers chastise and beat and torment them very severely. And when their terms expire, the Kulatā-goes become Tittirīs (a bird), the Dharsīnī-goers become crows, the Purīścalī-mongers become cuckoos, the Veśyā-haunters become wolves; the Pungī-goers become for seven births boars.

महावेश्यापूर्णी च जायते शाल्मलीतः ।

यो भूक्ते ज्ञानहीनश्र प्रहणे चन्द्रमूर्योः ॥ १ १ ॥

अन्तनुदं स यात्येवायव्यमानावध्येच च ।

ततो भवेमानवश्यापूर्वते रोगपीडितः ॥ १२ ॥

गुल्यमृक्त्र काणधुं दर्तीनस्ततः शृष्चि: ।

वाव्यद्तां स्वक्यां च थोउ-यम्ये प्रद्वति च ॥ १३ ॥

स वसेर्यासुकुपंचे च तद्वीजी शतवलसम् ।

If any ignorant person eats food during the lunar and solar eclipses, he goes to Aruntuda Kunḍa for as many years as there are particles in that food. He then becomes born diseased with Gulma (a chronic enlargement of spleen) having no ears nor teeth, and after passing his time so, he becomes freed of his previous sin. If anybody makes a promise to give his daughter to one but he gives actually to a different person, he goes to Pāmsu Kunḍa where he eats ashes for one hundred years.

तद्व्यक्षात्री यः साधित्य पंभुवेषे शताब्दिकम् ॥ १४ ॥

निवसेच्छग्णायायां मम दुतेन ताक्रितः ।

भक्ना न पूजयेढ़िःः शिवालिंगं च पार्थिवम् ॥ १ ५ ॥

स याति शुलिनः पायाच्छूल्योतं सुसाडणम् ।

स्थत्वा शताब्दं तत्रैव शापदः सतजन्मसु ॥ १ ६ ॥

ततो भवेदेहलक्ष सतजन्म ततः शुचि: ।

Again if anybody sells his daughter, he sleeps on a bed of arrows in Pamsuvesta Kunda for one

hundred years, chastised and beaten by My messengers. If any Brāhmaṇa does not worship with devotion the phallic emblem of Śiva, he goes to the dreadful Śulaprota Kunḍa for that heinous sin. He remains there for one hundred years; then he becomes a quadruped animal for seven births and again he becomes born a Devala Brāhmin for seven births when he becomes freed.

कोरिते कुंडित विधं वर्द्धमा केपते द्विजः ॥ 17 ॥

प्रक्रमे वसेतोरपि विगुलोमाछमेव च ।

If any Brāhmaṇa defeats another Brāhmaṇa in a bad useless argument and triflies him and makes him tremble, he goes to the Prakampana Kunda for as many years as there are hairs on his body.

प्रकोपवदान कोपात्स्वामिनं चा च पश्यति ॥ 18 ॥

कटूर्तिके तं प्रवदति सोत्पुकं संप्रयाति हि ।

उत्कां द्वाति तुळके सत्तं मम किंकतः ॥ 19 ॥

दंडेन ताडवेभ्यर्दिन तत्लोभाळद्यप्राणातम् ।

ततो भवेभवानी च विध्वा सतजनस्पु ॥ 20 ॥

सा भुकता चैव वैधयं व्याधियुक्ता ततः शुचि: ।

If any woman, being very furious with anger, chastises and uses harsh words to her husband, she goes to Ulkāmukha Kuṇḍa for as many years as there are hairs on his body. My servants put fiery meteors or torches in her mouth and beat on her head. At the end of the term, she becomes a human being but she has to bear the torments of widow hood for seven births. Then she is again born as diseased; when at last she gets herself freed.

या बहाणी शुरुघेपाया चांधकूपे प्रयाति स ॥ २ १ ॥

तदाशौचोदके ध्यांते तदाहारी दिवानिगग् ।

निवसेवौतिसंपतां मम दूतेन ताडिता ॥ 2 2 ॥

The Brāhmana woman, enjoyed by a Śūdra, goes to the terrible dark Andhakūpa hell, where she remains, day and night, immersed in the impure water and eats that for fourteen Indra's life periods. Her pains are unbounded and My messengers beat her severely and incessantly."

श्रीचोदके निम्नाना सा यावद्दिश्रातुर्दीर ।

काकी जन्मसह्वाणि शतजन्मानि सूकरी ॥ 23 ॥

Book IX Chapter XXXV

भूगाली शतज्ञमानि शतज्ञमानि कुक्कुटी ।

पातावती सतज्ञम यानरी सपतजमसु ॥ 24 ॥

At the expiry of the term in that hell, She becomes a female crow for thousand births, a female boar for one hundred births, a female fox for one hundred births, a hen for one hundred years, a female pigeon for seven births, and a female monkey for seven births.

ततो भवेल्सा चांडाती सर्वभोग्या च भाते।

ततो भवेच्च रजकी यक्ष्मप्रता च पुंछती ॥ 25 ॥

ततः कुक्ष्युता तैलकारी शुद्धा भवेत्ततः ।

निवसैद्धधेने वैश्या पुंगी च देंडताऊने ॥ 26 ॥

Then she becomes a Cāndālī in this Bhārata, enjoyed by all. Then she becomes an unchaste woman with the pthisis disease, a washerwoman, and then an oilwoman with leprosy when she becomes freed.

जलरेये वसैद्धश्या कुलटा देहचणके ।

स्वीरिधी त्वलने चैव धृष्टा च गोषणे तथा ॥ 27 ॥

निवसेघातान्युक्ता मम दूतेन ताडिता ।

विणमुभक्षा सत्तं वामन-वंतंर सति ॥ 28 ॥

ततो भवेढ़दुकामिश ल्ब्बर्व सत: शूचि: ।

O Fair One! The Veśyās live in the Vedhana, and Jalarandhra hells; the Púngis live in the Dangatāḍana hell; the Kulatās live in the Dehacūrna hells; the Svairīnjs live in the Dalana hells; the Dharsīnjs live in Śoṣana hells. Their pains know no bounds at all those places. My messengers always beat and chastise them and they eat always the urine and faeces for one Manvantara. Then, at the expiry of their hell period, they become worms of faeces for one lakh years when they become freed.

बाहाणो बाहाणी गच्छेश्वियां वासि श्वित्वः ॥ 29 ॥

वैर्यो वैर्यां च गुर्हृ वा गुर्हृशायि मेजेहादि ।

सर्वपरिवर्त्रेष् काययं यांति ते जनाः ॥ 30 ॥

भुक्ता काययं तपोदं निवसेहा शताब्दकम् ।

ततो विज्ञा भवेच्छूद्धतन्ती वे क्षत्रियादयः ॥ 31 ॥

योषित्धातीय शूढ्धतीनोल्यमाहू पितामहः ।

क्षयिचो बाहाणी गच्छेशूयो सर्वपि तिथि ॥ 32 ॥

मातृगामी भवेल्सोर्पि शूर्षे च नरके वसेत् ।

शूर्णकौरिक कृमिभिश्रांत्या सह भक्षितः ॥ 33 ॥

प्रतनमूत्रभोजी च मम तुदेन ताडितः ।

तत्रेव यातनां घुंकेे यावदिंद्राश्रतुदैर ॥ 34 ॥

If a Brāhmaṇa goes to another Brāhmaṇa's wife, if a Kṣattriya, Vaiśya and Śūdra do so, they go to the Kasaṇa hell. There they drink the hot Kasaṇa water for twelve years when they become purified. The lotus-born Brahmā has said that the wives of Brāhmins, Kṣattriyas, etc., live in hells like Brāhmins, Kṣattriyas, etc., and they then get freed. If a Kṣattriya or a Vaiśya goes to a Brāhimn's wife, he is involved in the sin of his going to his mother and goes and lives in the Śurpa hell. There the worms of the size of a Śurpa bit that Kṣattriya, that Vaiśya and that Brāhmaṇa's wife. My messengers chastise them and they have to eat the hot urine. Thus they suffer pains for fourteen Indra's life periods.

सप्तान्य बारहश्छ धान्याल्छ ततः शुचि: ।

को ध्युत्वा तु तुलसी प्रतिज्ञा यो न पालयेत् ॥ 35 ॥

मिथ्या वा शपर्थ कुवात्स च जलामुखं चजेत् ।

दत्वा दक्षिणाहतं च प्रतिज्ञां यो न पालयेत् ॥ 36 ॥

शिलां वा देवप्रतिमां स च जालमुखं जजेत् ।

गंगातोयं करे कृत्वा प्रतिज्ञां यो न पालयेत् ॥ 37 ॥

स्थत्वा देवगृहे वास्पि स च जालमुखं जजेत् ।

आस्युर्य ब्राह्मणां गां च जलालाबूति निवेश च ॥ 38 ॥

न पालल्योतितां च स च जालमुखं जजेत् ।

मित्रजेही कृतलघ्य यक्ष विश्वासयातकः ॥ 39 ॥

मिथ्यासाक्ष्यप्रदेश्व स च जलामुखं जजेत् ।

एते तत्र वसंलेवेय वावादिद्राशुदर्श Ⅱ 40 ॥

तथांगारुपदधाङ्ग यमदूनत ताहिताः ।

When they become boars for seven births and goats for seven births, when at last they are freed. Now if any body makes a false promise or swears falsely, taking the Tulasi leaf in his hands, if anybody makes a false promise, taking the Ganges water, Śālagrāma stone, or any other images of God in his hand; if any body swears falsely, placing his right palm on the palm of another; if anybody

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

swears falsely, being in a temple or touching a Brāhmana or a cow; if any body acts against his friends or others, if he be treacherous or if he gives a false evidence; then all these persons go to Vālā Mukha hell, and remain there for fourteen Indra's life periods, chastised and beaten by My messengers and feeling pain as if one's body is being burnt by red hot coal.

चांडालसुलसी स्यूढ़ा सतजन ततः शुचिः ॥ 4 1 ॥

लेल्ली गंगालक्ष्याँ पंचजन ततः शुचिः ततः शुचिः ।

शिलायर्पीं विद्युकामिष्य सतजन्मसु सुंदिरि ॥ 4 2 ॥

अर्चास्यर्गी ब्रह्मूकामि: सतजन्म ततः शुचिः ।

दशहस्तप्रदाता च समर्थे सतजनस्मु ॥ 4 3 ॥

ततो भवेद्वहह्यौंटी मानवश्छ ततः शुचिः ।

मिथ्यावादी देवगृहे देवलः सतजनस्मु ॥ 4 4 ॥

One who gives a false evidence, with the Tulasi (holy basil) in his hand becomes a Cāndāla for seven births; one who makes a false promise with the Ganges water in his hand, becomes a Mlecha for five births; one who swears falsely while touching the Śālagrāma stone, becomes a worm of the faeces for seven births; on who swears falsely, touching the image of the God, becomes a worm in a Brāhmin's house for seven births; one who gives a false evidence touching with the right hand, becomes a serpent for seven births; then he becomes born as a Brāhmin, void of the knowledge of the Vedas, when he becomes freed. One who speaks falsely, while in a temple, is born as a Devala for seven births.

विपादिस्णीकीची च व्याजातिभवैद्युवम् ।

ततो भवेच्च मुकः स बधिर्धा त्रिजन्मिनि ॥ 4 5 ॥

भार्यांतीने बंधुतीने यंशीरानस्त: शूँचि: ।

If one swears falsely, touching a Brāhmaṇa, one becomes a tiger. Then he becomes dumb for three births, then for three births he becomes deaf, without wife, without friends, and his family becomes extinct. Then he becomes pure.

मित्रत्रोही च नकुलः कृतपद्धार्थि खंडकः ॥ 46 ॥

विश्रास्याती व्याक्प्र सतजन्मु भाते ।

मिथ्यासक्षी च चत्ब्ये मंदुकः सतजन्मु ॥ 47 ॥

Those that rebel against their friends, becomes mongoose; the treacherous persons become rhinoceroses; the hypocrite and treacherous persons become tigers and those who give false evidences become frogs.

पूर्वान्स्तापगस्पत पुरुषबन्धिति चातमः ।

नित्यक्रियाविहीक्षा अजदोवे युतो क्रिकः ॥ 48 ॥ ॥

So much so, that their seven generations above and seven generations below go to hell. If any Brāhmana does not perform his daily duties (Nitya Karma), he is reckoned as Jada (an inert matter).

यस्यानाखया वेदवाबये मन्दे ह्मसी संतान् ।

त्रतोषवास्त्रीश सूद्राव्यपर्पिद्धः ॥ 49 ॥

धूपधो च सेत्नो5 पि शताद्धं धूपभक्षकः ।

जलजुर्णविलोपि शततजमक्रमे च ॥ 50 ॥

He has no faith in the Vedas. Rather he laughs at the Vedic customs. He does not observe vows and fastings; he blames others who give good advices. Such persons live in Dhūmrāndhakāra hell where they eat dark smoke only.

ततो नानाप्राकाशु मत्स्यजातिसतः शृष्चि: ।

यः कोतैपुर्भासं च देवब्राह्मणायोर्धेन ॥ 51 ॥

पातयित्वा स पुरुषान्द्रग पूर्वाद्विशपरान् ।

सोउयं याति तु ध्रुप्रान्यं ध्रुपध्यंतसमयित्न ॥ 52 ॥

Then he roams about as an aquatic animal for one hundred births successively. Then he becomes born as various fishes when he is freed. If anybody jests at the wealth of a Deva or a Brāhmaṇa, then he with his ten generations above and below becomes fallen and he himself goes to the Dhūmrāndhakāra hell, terribly dark and filled with smoke.

धूपविल्हो धूपभोजी वसेतत्र चतुर्णुणम् ।

ततो मूषकाजितिह सपतजमसु भारते ॥ ५३ ॥

ततो नानाधिधाः पश्जजातवः कृमिजातिधिः ।

ततो नानाधिधा वृक्षा: पश्वश्छ ततो नर: ॥ 54 ॥

There his pains know no bounds and he lives there for four hundred years, eating smoke only. Then he becomes a mouse for seven births, and he

Book IX Chapter XXXVI

becomes various birds and worms, various trees and various animals when ultimately he gets a human birth.

विधे दैवूजजीच च दैशुजीच विवित्कसः ।

लहाफालीहाद्विषायपी रसादिविक्रीच च च: 155 च।

स याति नागवेई च नागर्वैहित्येव च ।

वसेल लोममागवर्धे तवैव नागपणिताः । ५६ ॥

If a Brāhmīn earns his livelihood by being an astrologer or if he be a physician and lives thereby or if he sells lac, iron, or oil, etc., he goes to the Nāgaevṣṭana Kuṇḍa hell where he lives for as many years as there are hairs on his body, tied up by snakes.

ततो नानाविधाः पश्रिजातयशु ततो नः ।

ततो भवेत्स गणको वैश्छु सप्तजमसु ॥ 57 ॥

Then he becomes born as various birds; ultimately he gets a human birth and becomes an astrologer for seven births and a physician for seven births.

गोपशु कर्मकार्ता संगकारस्ततः शुचि: ।

प्रसिद्धानि च कुंडानि कथितानि पतितते ॥ 58 ॥

Then for sometime he becomes a cowherd (milkman), for sometimes a blacksmith; for sometimes a painter, when he becomes freed of his sin. O Chaste One! Thus I have described to you all the famous Kūndas or hells.

अन्त्यानि चाप्रसिद्धानि कुंडाणि सन्ति तव ते ।

संति पातकिनस्तेषु रखकर्मेकृतभोपिन: ॥

भर्मति नानायोनि च किं भूयः श्रोतुष्चद्धसि ॥ 59 ॥

श्री श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे नवमरकम्पे

पंचिशोरधाग: 11 35 11

Besides there are innumerable small Kunḍas. The sinners go there and suffer the fruits of their own Karmas and travel through various wombs. Of Fair One! What more do you now want to hear? Say."

Here ends the Thirty-fifth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the description of the various hells for the various sinners in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXXVI

