CHAPTER XXI

On the War between Maḥā Deva and Śaṅkhacūda

श्रीनारायण उवाच

श्रीकृष्णं मनसा ध्याना रक्षः कृष्णायपणाः ।

बाहो मुतूर्ते उद्याय पुष्पतल्यान्मनोहात् ॥ १ ॥

रास्वास: परित्यज्य स्नाला मंगलवारिणा ।

धौते च वाससी धूला कृत्वा तिलकमुज्जलम् ॥ २ ॥

चक्रताहिकमावग्यमभीट्येववंदनम् ।

Śrī Nārāyaṇa spoke: Then the Dānava, the devotee of Śrī Krṣna, got up from his flower strewn bed, meditating on Śrī Krṣna, early in the morning time, at the Brahma Muhūrta. Quitting his night dress, he took his bath in pure water and put on a fresh washed clothing. He then put the bright Tilaka mark on his forehead and, performing the daily necessary worship, he worshipped his Īsta devatā (The Deity doing good to him).

दस्यावमधुललांशं द्वर्शं वस्तु मंगलम् ॥ 3 ॥

त्यनश्रेष्ठ मणिश्रेष्ठं वक्षश्रेष्ठ च काञ्ञान् ।

ब्राह्मणेचो द्वी भक्प्या यथा सित्य च नारद ॥ 4 ॥

अमूल्यन्तरं वर्लिकविन्नुभामाणिव्यहीराक् ।

द्वौ विज्ञाय गुर्वे यात्रामङ्गल्लेते ॥ 5 ॥

गजरात्मभ्रतर्नं धनत्नं मनोहारूम ।

द्वौ सर्वे दरित्रय विधाय मंगलाय च ॥ 6 ॥

भांत्राणों सहस्वाणि नगराणों दिल्छकम् ।

ग्रामाणां शतकोंदि च ब्राह्मणाय ददौ मुदा ॥ 7 ॥

He then was the auspicious things such as curd, ghee, honey, fried rice, etc., and distributed as usual, to the Brāhmaṇas the best jewels, pearls, clothing an gold. Then for his marching to turn out auspicious, he gave at the feet of his Guru Deva priceless gems, jewels, pearls, diamonds, etc., and finally he gave to the poor Brāhmins with great gladness, elephants, horses, wealth, thousands of stores, two lakhs of cities and one hundred kotis of villages.

पुत्रं कृत्वा तु राजेन्रं सर्वेषु दानवेषु च ।

पुत्रे समर्थ भार्यां तां राज्यं च सर्वसंपदम् ॥ ८ ॥

प्रजानुचरसंघं च भांड़ांत वाहनादिकम् ।

खयं संसाहुषनुष्ठ धनुष्याणिबंभूत ॥ ९ ॥

He then gave over to his son, the charge of his kingdom and of his wife, and all the dominions, wealth, property, all the servants and maid servants, all the stores and conveyances. He dressed himself for the war and took up bows and arrowcases.

भृत्यव्राता क्रमेणैव चकार सैन्यसझयम् ।

अशानां च चिक्छेण लक्षेण वर्हरितानम् ॥ १ ० ॥

रथानामयुतेनैव धानुक्काणं चिकोदिधिः ।

विकोदिभिवर्षिणं च गृल्लिं च विकोदिधिः ॥ १ १ ॥

By the command of the King, the armies began together. Thee lakhs of horses, one lakh elephants, one ayuta chariots, three Kotṣ of bowmen, three Kotṣi armoured sodiers and three Kotṣis of trident holders got themselves ready.

कृता सेना परिपित्ता दानवेज्ञेण नारद ।

तस्वी सेनापतिश्रेय युद्धगणबिधगारः ॥ 12 ॥

महायः स विज्ञोयं रयैनां प्रवरी एणे ।

त्रिलक्षास्त्रशीहिणी सेनापति कृत्वा नाराधिय: ॥ 13 ॥

सिंगदश्वीतिणीवार्यं भांडीयं च चकार है ।

बहिद्वेष्य शिविरामनसा शीहरिं स्मर् ॥ 14 ॥

Then the King counted his forces and appointed one Commander-in-Chief. (Mahāratha), skilled in arts of warfare, over the whole army. Thus the generals were appointed over the three lakh Akṣauhīnī forces and their provisions were collected by three hundred Akṣauhīnī men. He, then, thinking of Śri Hari, started for war, accompanied by his vast army.

Note: One Akṣauhīnī consists of a large army consisting of 21870 chariots, as many elephants, 65,610 horses, and 109,350 foot).

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

रत्ने-त्रसारनिर्माणीयमानमारकोह सः ।

गुरुबानी-गुरुकूल्य प्रवयी शंकरांतिकमू ॥15॥

पुष्पभ्रजनदीतीरं यज्राक्षयवटः शुभः ।

He then mounted on a chariot built of excellent jewels and, headed by his Guru and all his other elders, went to Śaṅkara. O Nārada! Bhagavān Mahādeva was at that time, staying on the banks of Puspabhadrā.

सिद्धाभ्यं च सिद्धानां सिद्धिक्षेत्रं च नारद ॥ 16 ॥

कम्पिलस्य तपःस्थाने पुण्यक्षेत्रे च भारते ।

पश्रिमोदिपुर्वे च मलयस्य च पश्रिमे ॥ 17 ॥

श्रीलोततभागे च नाभ्यामदानखिणे ।

पछयोजनविस्तीर्णां दैर्थे शतगुणा तथा ॥ 18 ॥

That place was Siddhāśrama (the hermitage where the yogic successes had been obtained and can easily be acquired in future for the Siddhas as well a Siddha Kṣettra.) It was the place where the Muni Kapila practised. Tapasyā, in the holy land of Bhārata. It was bounded on the east by the western ocean, on the west by the Malaya mountain, on the south, by the Śrī Śaila mountain and on the north by the Gandha Mādana Mountain. It was five yojanas wide and one hundred times as long.

शुद्धस्कित्कसंकाशा भारते च सुपुण्यदा ।

ग्राष्ट्री जल्पूर्णां च पुष्पभत्र नदी सुभा ॥ 19 ॥

ल्वाणाक्रियाय भार्या शश्वतीभायसर्वुता ।

शरावतीमित्धिता च निरिता सा हिमालयात् ॥ 20 ॥

This auspicious river in Bhārata yields great religious merits and is always full of clear, sparkling running water. She is the favourite wife of the Salt Ocean and She is very blessed. Issuing from Sarāvatī Himālayas, She drops into the ocean.

गोमती वामतः कृत्वा प्रविष्य पश्रिमोद्धरी ।

तत्र गत्वा शुबुच्छो द्वर्शं चंत्रशेखम्य ॥ 21 ॥

वटमुले समारीनं सुर्वंकोदिसमप्रमम् ।

कृत्वा योगासनं घुवा मुवतुर्केच सस्मितम् ॥ 22 ॥

Keeping the river Gomati (Goomti) by her left; She falls into the west ocean. Śaṅkhacūḍa, arriving there, saw Mahādeva under a Peepul tree near its

root with a smiling countenance, like one Koti Sun seated in a yogic posture.

शुद्धम्किकसंकांग ज्वलंत बढ्जतेजसा ।

शिशुलविशुशरं व्याप्चमीबरं वरम् ॥ 23 ॥

भक्तमूलूरं शान्तं गौरीकांतं मनोहरम् ।

तपसां फलदातारं दातारं सर्वसंपदाम् ॥ 24 ॥

His colour was white like a pure crystal; as if the Fire of Brahma was emitting from every pore of His body (burning with Brahma Teja); He was wearing the tiger skin and holding the trident and axe. He dispels the fear of death of His Bhaktas; His face is quite calm. He, the Lord of Gauri, is the Giver of the fruits of Tapasyā and of all sorts of wealth and prosperity.

आशुतोष प्रसात्यर्थ भक्तानुग्रहकात्मम् ।

विश्वान्यं विश्वश्रैंज विश्वश्रचं च विश्वजम् ॥ 25 ॥

विश्वामरं विश्वसरं विश्वसंहाराकात्मम् ।

कारणं कारणानां च नरकाणर्वतारणम् ॥ 26 ॥

The smiling face of Aśutosā (one who is pleased quickly) is always thinking of the welfare of the Bhaktas; He is the Lord of the Universe, the Seed of the universe, the All-form (all-pervading), and the Progenitor of the universe. He is omnipresent, All pervading, the Best in this universe, the Destroyer of this universe, the Cause of all causes, and the Saviour from the hells.

ज्ञानपूदं ज्ञानवीजं ज्ञानानन्दे सनातनम् ।

असकूहा विमानाच्छ तं दुब्धा दानवेश्वरः ॥ 27 ॥

सर्वैः सार्थ भक्तिमुक्तः शिरसा प्रणामास सः ।

वामाते भक्तलों च स्कंदं च ततुः चित्यम् ॥ 28 ॥

He is the Awakener and Bestower of Knowledge, the Seed of all knowledges, and He Himself is of the nature of Knowledge and Bliss. Seeing that Eternal Puruṣa, the King of the Dānavas at once descended from his chariot and bowed down with devotion to Him and to Bhadra Kālī on His left and and to Kārtikeya on his front. The other attendants did the same.

आशिषं च ददौ तस्यै काली रूपद्ध शंकरः ।

उत्स्थुरागतं दृष्टा सर्वे नंदीश्वरादयः ॥ 29 ॥

Book IX Chapter XXI

परस्यं च भाषन्ते चकूस्तत्र च संग्रतम् ।

राजा कृत्वा च संभाषापुवास ति शिवसंनिर्भी ॥ ३० ॥

प्रसजात्मा महदोवे भगवासतमवाच ह ।

Śankara, Bhadra Kālī and Skanda all blessed him. Nandīśvara and others got up from their seats on seeing the Dānava King and began to talk with each other on that subject. The King addressed Śiva and sat by Him. Bhagavān Mahādeva, the Tranquil Self, then, spoke to him, thus:

महादेव उवाच

वियाता जगतां बह्या विता धर्मेय धर्मवित् ॥ 31 ॥

मरीचितस्य पूजँधु वैभाव्बात्रि धार्मिकः ।

करणयक्षापि तलुजो धर्मिष्ठघु प्रजापति: ॥ 32 ॥

“O King! Brahmā, the knower of Dharma and the Creator of the world, is the Father of Dharma, The religious Marīci, a devotee of Viṣṇu, is the son of Brahmā. The religious Prajāpati Kaśyapa is also the Brahmā’s son.

दक्ष: प्रीत्या द्वदी तमैके भत्त्वा कन्याख्योदण ।

तावेका च दनु: साखी तत्लीभाग्यविवर्धिति ॥ 33 ॥

Daksa gladly gave over to Kaśyapa in marriage, his thirteen daughters. Danu, fortunate and chaste, is also one of them.

चत्वारिगहनो: पुत्र दानवासलेजसोल्वणा: ।

तेथेको विध्रचितिष्ठ महाबलपातकम: ॥ 34 ॥

तनुप्रो धार्मिको दोषो विध्णभफो जितेन्द्रयः ।

जजाप परमं मन्त्रं पुचकरे लक्षवतस्मर् ॥ 35 ॥

Danu had forty sons, all spirited and known as Dānavas. The powerful Vipracitti was the prominent amongst them. Vipracitti's son was Dambha, self controlled and very much devoted to Viṣṇu. So much so that for one lakh years he recited the Viṣṇu mantra at Puṣkara.

शुक्राभार्य गुरु कृत्वा कृष्णस्य परमात्मनः ।

तदा एतां तनयं प्राप परं कृष्णपरायणम् ॥ 36 ॥

पुरा तं चपार्वे गोपो गोपेष्वपि सुधामिकः ।

अशुना राधिकाणापाद्राते दानवेषरः ॥ 37 ॥

His Guru (spiritual teacher) was Śukrācārya; and, by his advice, he recited the mantra of Śri

Krṣṇa, the Highest Self. He got you as his son, devoted to Krṣṇa. In your former birth, you were the chief attendant Gopa (cow-herd) of Krṣṇa. You were very religious. Now, by Rādhikā's curse, you are born in Bhārata, as the Lord of the Dānavas powerful, heroic, valorous, and chivalrous.

आबहास्तेवार्यन्ते नृत्यं मेने च देशणः ।

सालोकवसाहित्यानुजसामीध्चे च हरेरपि ॥ 38 ॥

दीयामाने न गृह्न्ति वैशणाल: सेवनं विना ।

ब्रहात्वममरत्वं वा तृच्छं मेने च देशणः ॥ 39 ॥

All the things from Brahmā down to a blade of grass, the Vaiṣṇavas regard as very trifling; even if they get Sālokya, Sārṣṭi, Sāyujya and Sāmīpya of Hari, they do not care a straw for that. Without serving Hari, they do not accept those things, even if those are thrust on them. Even Brahmahood and immortality, the Vaiṣṇavas count for nothing.

इन्हलं चामन्तवं वा न मेने गणान्यु च ।

कृष्णभक्रस्य ते किं वा देवानां विषये पभः ॥ 40 ॥

देहि राजचं च देवानां मटुगिति रक्ष भूमिप ।

सुखं खराज्ये तं लिह देवालितघुं वे पेरे ॥ 41 ॥

They want to serve Hari (Sevā-bhāva). Indrahood, Manuhood, they do not care. You, too, are a real Kṛṣṇa Bhakta. So what do you care for those things that belong to the Devas, that are something like false to you. Give back to the Devas their kingdoms thus and please Me. Let the Devas remain in their own places and let you enjoy your kingdom happily.

अर्के भृतिवेशेघेन सर्वे कश्यपवंशजाः ।

यानि कानि च प्यानि ब्रह्मत्यादिकानि च ॥ 42 ॥

जातिद्रोहस्य प्यानि कलां गर्हिति घोडणीम् ।

सर्वसंदर्षा च हानि च यदि राजेंत्र मन्यसे ॥ 43 ॥

No need now for further quarrels. Think that you all belong to the same Kaśyapa's family. The sins that are incurred, for example, the murder of a Brāhmīn, etc., are not even one-sixteenth of the sins incurred by hostilities amongst the relatives.

सर्वावस्था च समतं केषां गाति च सर्वदा ।

बहागधा तिरोपाचो लये प्राकृतिके सदा ॥ 44 ॥

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

आविषांव: पुनस्तव्य प्रभवादीश्वरेच्छया ।

ज्ञानवृष्टिश्व तत्पसा स्मृतिलोषश्र निश्छितम् ॥ 45 ॥

If, O King! You think that by giving away to the Devas their possessions, your property will be diminished, then think that no one's days pass ever in one and the same condition. Whenever Prakrti is dissolved, Brahmā also vanishes. Again He appears by the Will of God. This occurs always.

कोतीत सृष्टि जानेन सद्य तोश पत्रि क्रमेण च ।

परिपूर्णितमो धर्मः सत्ते स्वास्थये सद्ये ॥ 46 ॥

विश्रभा: सोडपि वेतायां दिषागो ज्ञापे स्मृतः ।

एकभागः कली पूर्व तदोशँक क्रमेण च ॥ 47 ॥

True, that knowledge is increased by true Tapasyā; but memory fails then. This is certain. He who is the creator of this world, does his work of creation gradually by the help of his Knowledge-power (Jñāna-Śakti). In the Satya Yuga, Dharma reigns in full; in the Tretā Yuga, one quarter is diminished; again in the Dvāpara only one-half remains. And in the Kali Yuga, only one quarter remains.

कल्यामांकले: शेपे कुह़ा चन्द्रकला यथा ।

यातृकेनो रेव्यौधीय न तानूकिशिरे पुनः ॥ 48 ॥

दिनेयु यायुद्यम्याहे सयां प्रातर्ने तत्समम् ।

उदयं यांति कालेन बालतां च क्रमेण च ॥ 49 ॥

Thus Dharma gets increase and decrease. At the end of the Kali, the Dharma will be seen very feeble as the phase of the Moon is seen very thin on the Dark Moon night. See, again, the Sun is very powerful in summer; not so in winter. At midday the Sun is very hot; it does not remain so in the morning and evening?

प्रकांडतां च ततशुशात्कालोउस्तं पुनेरिति सः ।

दिन प्रच्छन्तां वाति कालेन वृदिने घने ॥ 50 ॥

ग्राहुमते कंपितक्ष पुनेरेय प्रसजताम ।

परिपूर्णतमश्रद्रः: पूर्णिभायां च जायते ॥ 51 ॥

तादूशो न भवेत्रित्यं क्षयं याति दिने दिने ।

पुनश पुरिष्यायाति परं कुहा दिने दिने ॥ 52 ॥

The Sun rises at one time; then he is considered as young; at another time be becomes very

powerful and at another time he goes down. Again in times of distress (i.e., during the cloudy days) the Sun gets entirely obscured. When the Moon is devoured by Rāhu (in the Lunar Eclipse), the Moon quivers. Again when the Moon becomes liberated (i.e., when the eclipse passes away) She becomes bright again. In the Full-Moon night She becomes full but She does not remain so always. In the Dark fortnight She wanes every day. In the bright fortnight She wanes every day.

संययुक्तः शुकल्पक्षे कृष्णो रूपान्य शक्रमण।

गहुप्रासे दिने रूपनो वृद्विने न विरोचते ॥ 53 ॥

काले चन्द्रे पंचेच्छूकें पश्छीः कालभेदतः ।

भविष्याति बलिश्छेन्द्रो भश्छी: सुतलेउरुप्न ॥ 54 ॥

In the bright fortnight, the Moon becomes healthy and prosperous and in the dark fortnight, the Moon becomes thinner and thinner as if attacked with consumption. In the time of eclipse She becomes pale and in the cloudy weather, She is obscured. Thus the Moon also becomes powerful at one time and weak and pale at another time. Vali now resides in Pātāla, having lost all his fortunes; but, at some other time, he will become Devendra (the Lord of the Devas).

कालेन पृथ्वी सस्याड्ञा सर्विधारा वसुभ्यात ।

काले जले नियमना सा तिरोधभृतुबिल्युत् ॥ 55 ॥

काले नर्यांति विश्वानि प्रपवेचेव कालतः ।

चराचराङ्ग कालेन नर्यांति प्रपवर्ति च ॥ 56 ॥

ईश्वरस्वे समता बहुपा: परमात्मनः ।

अहं मृत्रुजयो यम्यादस्यां प्राकृतं लवम् ॥ 57 ॥

अदर्शं चापि श्रस्यामि वारं वारं पुनः पुनः ।

This earth becomes at one time covered with grains and the resting-place of all beings; and, at another time, She becomes immersed under water. This universe appears at one time and disappears at another. Every thing, moving or non-moving, sometimes appears and again, at another time, disappears. Only Brahma, the Highest Self, remains the same. By His grace, I have got the name Mrtyuñjaya (the Conqueror of Death). I, too, am

Book IX Chapter XXI

witnessing many Prākṛtik dissolutions, I witnessed repeatedly many; dissolutions and will in future, wintenss many dissolutions,

स च फ्रकृतरूपश स एव पुरुष: स्मृतः ॥ 58 ॥

स चात्मा स च जीवश नानारूपधर: परः ।

कांतीस सततं यो हि ततामगुणकांतरन् ॥ 59 ॥

काले भूतरुं स जयति जन्मोगभयं जग्न् ।

स्वा कृतो विधितेने पाता विद्युः कृतो भवेत् ॥ 60 ॥

अहंकृतशं सहर्तां वयं विविधिणः कृततः ।

The Paramātman becomes of the nature of Prakrti. Again it is He that is the Purusa (male principle). He is the Self; He is the individual soul (Jiva). He thus assumes various forms. And, again, Lo! He is beyond all forms! He who always repeats His Name and sings His Glory, can conquer, at some occasion, death. He is not to come under the sway of this birth, death, disease, old age and fear. He has made Brahmā the Creator, Viṣṇu the Preserver and Me the Destroyer. By His Will, we are possessed of those influences and powers.

कालापिनरूई संहारे नियोज्य विषये नृप ॥ 6 1 ॥

अर्ह करोमि सत्तत ततामपुणाकीतनम् ।

तेन मृत्युंजयोड़ं च ज्ञानेनानेन निर्भयै ॥ 6 2 ॥

भृत्युंमृत्युभयाद्याति वैनतयादिवेगानः ।

O King! Having deputed Kāla, Agni and Rudra, to do the destruction work, I Myself repeat only His name and sing His glory, day and night, incessantly. My name is, on that account, Mrtyunjjaya. By His Knowledge Power, I am fearless. Death flies away fast from Me as serpents fly away at the sight of Garuda, the Vinatā's son."

इत्युक्त्वा स च सर्वैगः सर्वभावेन तस्वः ॥ 6 3 ॥

विरताम च शंभूघु सभामध्ये च नात्र ।

राजा तुद्रवचनं शुत्वा प्रशोशस पुनः पुनः ॥ 6 4 ॥

उवाच मपूरं देते परं विनयपूर्वकम् ।

O Nārada! Thus saying, Śambhu, the Lord of all, the Progenitor of all, remained silent. Hearing the above words of Śambhu, the King thanked Mahādeva again and again and spoke in sweet humble words.

शंखचूढ़ उवाच

त्वया यत्कथितं देह नान्यथा चवनं स्मृतम् ॥ 65 ॥

तथापि किंड्डाद्यायल्यं श्रूवर्ता मिहेवेदनम् ।

जातिग्रहे महतपारं व्यतोतमभुना च यत् ॥ 66 ॥

गृहीत्व तस्य सर्वेयं कृत: प्रस्थापिति बलि: ।

मया समुद्धुतं सर्वेभूत्येंमैध्वर्पीधार ।। 67 ॥

सुतलाच्च समुद्धुत् नालं तत्र गद्धास: ।

सभातुको हित्यपालः कयं देयेक्ष हिंसितः ॥ 68 ॥

गुभावद्यशासुराक कयं देर्वेनिपातिताः ।

Sankhacūda said: The words spoken by Thee are quite true. Still I am speaking a few words. Kindly hear.' Thou hast spoken just now that very great sins are incurred by kindred hotilities. How is it, then, that He robbed Bali of his whole possessions and sent him down into Pātāla.? Gadādhara Viṣṇu could not recover Bali's glory But I have done that. Why did the Devas kill Hiranyāksa and Hiranyakāṣipu, Śumbha and the other Dānavas?

पुरा समुद्रमदने पीरुयं भक्रितं सुरैः ॥ 69 ॥

क्लेशपाओं वयं तत्र ते सर्वे फलभोपानि: ।

क्रीडाभाड़ीदिवि विश्व प्रकृतेः परमात्मनः ॥ 70 ॥

यस्मै यत्र स ददाति तस्यैधर्थं घतेतादा ।

देवदानवयोर्वादः शश्छ्रैमितिकः सदा ॥ 71 ॥

पराजयो जयसेनो काठेरूसाकं क्रमेण च ।

In the gone days, we laboured hard when the nectar was obtained out of the churning of the ocean; but the best fruit was reaped by the Devas only. However, all these point that this universe is but the mere sporting ground of Paramātman, Who has become of the nature of Prakṛti (the Polarities of the one and the same current to produce electric effects). Whomsoever He grants glory and fortune, he only gets that. The quarrel of the Devas and the Dānavas is eternal, Victory and defeat come to both the parties alternately.

तदास्वयोक्षित्रोे वा गानं निष्णलं परम् ॥ 72 ॥

समसवस्थिति बन्योरीश्वस्य महात्मतः ।

इयं ते महही लज्ञा युद्धेउसामाथि: सहायूना ॥ 73 ॥

जये ततो5धिका कांतिंहूर्निश्वि पराजये ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

So it is not proper for Thee to come here in this hostility. For Thou art the God, of the nature of the Highest Self. Before Thee, we both are equal So it is a matter of shame, no doubt, for Thee to stand up against us in favour of the gods. The glory and fame that will result to Thee, if Thou favour of the gods. The glory and fame that will result to Thee, if Thou art victorious, will not be so much as it will be if we get the victory. On the contrary the inglory and infamy that will be inconceivably much more than what would come to us if we are defeated. (For we are low and Thou art Great.)

སྒྱི་བཞིན་མཐའ་སྐྱི་བཅུག་མཐའ་བཞིན་སྐྱི་བཅུག་མཐའ་བཞིན་སྐྱི་བཅུག་སྐྱི་བཅུག་སྐྱི་བཅུག་སྐྱི་བཅུག་རྒྱི་བཅུག་སྐྱི་བཅུག་སྐྱི་བཅུག་སྐྱོག་སྐྱོག་སྐྱོག་སྐྱོག་སྐྱོག་སྐྱོག་སྐྲོག་སྐྱོག་སྐྱོག་སྐྱོག་སྐྱོག་སྐྱོག་སྟན་སྟན་སྟན་སྟན་སྟན་སྟན་སྟན་སྟན་སྟན་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་ས�

Book IX Chapter XXII

