[Ch 12 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! On seeing Viṣṇu killing his wife, and thus committing a dreadful atrocious act, the Bhagavān Bhrgu was very sorry and began to tremble with anger and addressed Madhusūdana thus.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! On seeing Viṣṇu killing his wife, and thus committing a dreadful atrocious act, the Bhagavān Bhṛgu was very sorry and began to tremble with anger and addressed Madhusūdana thus.

[Ch 12 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhruj said: O Viṣṇu! You have done an extremely sinful act. O intelligent one! Knowing it, you have done so; what a great wonder! No body dreams of the murder of this Brāhmana's daughter; and you have committed it deed, black and white.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bhṛgu said :-- O Viṣṇu! You have done an extremely sinful act. O intelligent one! Knowing it, you have done so; what a great wonder! Nobody dreams of the murder of this Brāhmaṇ’s daughter; and you have committed it in deed, black and white.

[Ch 12 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devas! The Maharṣis declare you to be Sāttvic, engaged in preservation; Brahmā to be Rajasic (creator) and Śambhu Śiva to be Tāmasic (destroyer). Why then is the contrary thing visible in this case?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Deva! The Mahārṣis declare you to be Sāttvic, engaged in preservation; Brahmā to be Rājasic (creator) and Śambhu Śiva to be Tāmasic (destroyer). Why then is the contrary thing visible in this case?

[Ch 12 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Why have you become Tāmasic? Why have you done this heinous crime? O Viṣṇu! The females are never to be killed; this is a known fact; then why have you killed this woman without any fault.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Why have you done this heinous crime? O Viṣṇu! The females are never to be killed; this is a known fact; then why have you killed this woman without any fault.

[Ch 12 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You have done a very execrable act. What shall I do to you? It is another matter that I would curse you. O Great Sinner! You have pained me very much and made me very weary. I will not curse Indra. You always assume a deceitful appearance and behave like a black cruel serpent; your mind is all full of wickedness; I will curse you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You have done a very execrable act. What shall I do to you? It is mete that I would curse you. O Great Sinner! You have pained me very much and made me very weary. I will not curse Indra. You always assume a deceitful appearance and behave like a black cruel serpent; your mind is all full of wickedness; I will curse you.

[Ch 12 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Janārdana. Those Munis who call Sāttvic are fools; I have seen to day that your ways are exceptionally vicious and tāmasic.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Janārdana. Those Munis who call you Sāttvic are fools; I have seen today that your ways are exceptionally vicious and Tāmasic.

[Ch 12 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Viṣṇu! I curse you now to take frequent births, suffer very frequently in different wombs, in the earth and thus suffer the pains of remaining in the wombs.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Viṣṇu! I curse you now to take frequent births, suffer very frequently in different wombs, in the earth and thus suffer the pains of remaining in the wombs.

[Ch 12 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Therefore whenever religion subsides in the world, Bhagavān Viṣṇu incarnates frequently in this human world, due to the curse of Bhrgu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Therefore whenever religion subsides in the world, Bhagavān Viṣṇu incarnates frequently in this human world, due to the curse of Bhṛgu.

[Ch 12 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king said: O best of the Munis! Did that Mahātmā Bhrgu again marry and lead a householder's life when his wife was thus killed by the lustrous disc Sudarśana.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king said :-- O best of the Munis! Did that Mahātmā Bhṛgu again marry and lead a householder’s life when his wife was thus killed by the lustrous disc Sudarśana.

[Ch 12 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! The sacrifice Bhṛgu angrily cursed Hari and next took that severed head and quickly placed it over the body as before and said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! The sacrificer Bhṛgu angrily cursed Hari and next took that severed head and quickly placed it over the body as before and said :--

[Ch 12 Verse 12-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devi! Viṣṇu has slain you to day; I will make you regain your life just now. If I am acquainted with all the Dharmas and if I have practised these in my life and if have spoken truth always, then dost thou regain your life by my religious merit. Let all the Devas witness my power and strength. If I know the True, if I have studied all the Vedas and if I have realised the Knowledge of the Vedas, then I, sprinkling your body with this cold water, charged with my mantras, will revive you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devī! Viṣṇu has slain you today; I will make you regain your life just now. If I am acquainted with all the Dharmas and if I have practised these in my life and if I have spoken truth always, then dost thou regain your life by my religious merit. Let all the Devas witness my power and strength. If I know the True, if I have studied all the Vedas and if I have realised the Knowledge of the Vedas, then I, sprinkling your body with this cold water, charged with my mantras, will revive you.

[Ch 12 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! Sprinkled by the water by Bhruṇ, his wife regained her life and rose up at once and felt herself glad and smiled.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! Sprinkled by the water by Bhṛgu, his wife regained her life and rose up at once and felt herself glad and smiled.

[Ch 12 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► All the persons and living creatures seeing her stand, as if awoken from her sleep, at once exclaimed from all sides “well done, well done!” thanked Bhrgu and his wife very much and highly praised them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► All the persons and living creatures seeing her stand, as if awoken from her sleep, at once exclaimed from all sides “well done, well done!” thanked Bhṛgu and his wife very much and highly praised them.

[Ch 12 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus seeing the fair complexioned wife regain her life through Bhrgu, Indra and all the Devas were very much struck with wonder. Note: Thought power and inhalation of some medicines might have revived her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus seeing the fair complexioned wife regain her life through Bhṛgu, Indra and all the Devas were very much struck with wonder. NOTE :-- Thought power and inhalation of some medicines might have revived her.

[Ch 12 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra then addressed the Devas: Now the mother of Śukra has regained her life through Bhrgu; but when Śukrācārya will receive the mantra after his severe tapasyā, we do not know what terrible harm he would do to us!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra then adressed the Devas :-- Now the mother of Śukra has regained her life through Bhṛgu; but when Śukrācārya will receive the mantra after his severe tapasyā, we do not know what terrible harm; he would do to us!

[Ch 12 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! Though the deep sleep that overtook Indra had now left him, yet he became very unhappy, remembering the severe asceticism of Šukra's tapasyā and his receiving mantras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! Though the deep sleep that overtook Indra had now left him, yet he became very unhappy, remembering the severe asceticism of Śukra’s tapasyā and his receiving mantras.

[Ch 12 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thinking over deeply in his mind, Indra called his daughter Jayanti and spoke to her with affection.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thinking over deeply in his mind, Indra called his daughter Jayantī and spoke to her with affection.

[Ch 12 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Go! Daughter! I have given thee over to the ascetic Kāvya. Do this service for me, go to Kāvya and help him in his asceticism and bring him under your control. By whatever acts the Muni be pleased, dost thou do at once and please him in every way and thus remove my fear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Go! Daughter! I have given thee over to the ascetic Kāvya. Do this service for me, go to Kāvya and help him in his asceticism and bring him under your control. By whatever acts the Muni be pleased, dost thou do at once and please him in every way and thus remove my fear.

[Ch 12 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The large eyed beautiful Jayanti, hearing her father's words, went to her hermitage and there saw the Rṣi inhaling the smoking.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The large-eyed beautiful Jayantī, hearing her father’s words, went to the hermitage and there saw the Ṛṣi inhaling or

[Ch 12 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On seeing the body of the ascetic, and remembering her father's words she brought the leaves of the plantain trees and began to fan him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On seeing the body of the ascetic, and remembering her father’s words she brought the leaves of the plantain trees and began to fan him.

[Ch 12 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The intelligent Jayanti with no excitement used to bring the pure, clear, cool, and well scented water and place it, with great devotion, before the sage for his drinking. Note: Here Indra bribes by giving away his daughter.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The intelligent Jayantī with no excitement used to bring the pure, clear, cool, and well scented water and place it, with great devotion, before the sage for his drinking. NOTE: Here Indra bribed by giving away his daughter.

[Ch 12 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the sun was over his head, she used to prepare some protection, with her clothes, from the sun and thus made the shade for him. Thus, in various ways, did she begin to serve the Muni, herself remaining steady in her religion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the sun was over his head, she used to prepare some protection, with her clothes, from the sun and thus made the shade for him. Thus, in various ways, did she begin to serve the Muni, herself remaining steady in her religion.

[Ch 12 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She brought sweet and ripe fruits proper according to the Śāstras and used to place them before him for his repast.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She brought sweet and ripe fruits proper according to the Śāstras and used to place them before him for his repast.

[Ch 12 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the performance of her daily duties, she used to collect the Kuśa grass of the span of thumb and fore finger, and flowers, white and yellow and placed them before him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the performance of his daily duties, she used to collect the Kuśa grass of the span of thumb and fore finger, and flowers, white and yellow and placed them before him.

[Ch 12 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► For the Muni's bedding to lie down and sleep, she used to gather soft green leaves and with them she used to keep his bed ready; and when the Muni laid himself down, she used to fan him gently.
NEW CORR ENG ──► For the Muni’s bedding to lie down and sleep, she used to gather soft, green leaves and with them she used to keep his bed ready; and when the Muni laid himself down, she used to fan him gently.

[Ch 12 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The sweet-tongued, thin lady used to praise Šukrācārya in pleasing and favourable terms.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The sweet-tongued, thin lady used to praise Śukrācārya in pleasing and favourable terms.

[Ch 12 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the Muni awoke, she placed water before him to wash his face and hands. Thus serving the Muni, did she stay in the hermitage.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the Muni awoke, she placed water before him to wash his face and hands. Thus serving the Muni, did she stay in the hermitage.

[Ch 12 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The fear stricken Indra used to send messengers to fathom the mind of that self controlled Muni.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The fear stricken Indra used to send messengers to fathom the mind of that self controlled Muni.

[Ch 12 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus did Jayanti serve for good many years the Muni, being void of anger and observing duly her celibacy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus did Jayantī serve for good many years the Muni, being void of anger and observing duly her celibacy.

[Ch 12 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In this way one thousand years passed duly, the God Mahādeva was very pleased and addressed Śukrācārya that He had come to give him boons that he desired.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In this way one thousand years passed duly, the God Mahādeva was very pleased and addressed Śukrācārya that He had come to give him boons that he desire.

[Ch 12 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The God Mahādeva said: Whatever there exists in this universe, whatever you see with your eyes and whatever can not be described in words, you will be the lord of all these and the conqueror of all. There is no doubt in this. You can not be killed by any creature; you will be the ruler of all beings and will be reckoned as the best of the Brāhmanas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The God Mahādeva said :-- Whatever there exists in this universe, whatever you see with your eyes and whatever cannot be described in words, you will be the lord of all these and the conqueror of all. There is no doubt in this. You cannot be killed by any creature; you will be the ruler of all beings and will be reckoned as the best of the Brāhmaṇas.

[Ch 12 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: The God Mahādeva disappeared then and there, after granting him the boons. Then Śukrācārya saw Jayanti and said to her: O lady of beautiful hips! Who and whose daughter art thou? What is the desire in your mind? What for you have come here? O one of beautiful thighs! what is your duty?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- The God Mahādeva disappeared then and there, after granting him the boons. Then Śukrācārya saw Jayantī and said to her :-- O lady of beautiful hips! Who and whose daughter art thou? What is the desire in your mind? What for you have come here? O one of beautiful thighs! what is your duty?

[Ch 12 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O beautiful eyed! I am very pleased with all that you have done for me. What do you want? O one of good vows! Ask boons from me; I will grant them even if they be difficult.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O beautiful eyed! I am very pleased with all that you have done for me. What do you want? O one of good vows! Ask boons from me; I will grant them even if they be difficult.

[Ch 12 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On hearing this, Jaiyanti's face became bright with joy; she said: whatever I desire, you know that already by force of your Tapasyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On hearing this, Jayantī’s face became bright with joy; she said :-- whatever I desire, you know that already by force of your Tapasyā.

[Ch 12 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Kārya said: Your mental desires I know; still mention them yourself particularly; I will do good to you in any way you like; I am pleased with your services.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Kāvya said :-- Your mental desires I know; still mention them yourself particularly; I will do good to you in any way you like; I am pleased with your services.

[Ch 12 Verse 43-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Jayanti said: O Brāhmīn! I am the daughter of Indra and I am the younger of my brother Jayanta. Father has given me over to you; I now like to live with you. Kindly fulfil my desires now. O blessed one! You better take me and enjoy me according to Dharma. This is my desire.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Jayantī said :-- O Brāhmin! I am the daughter of Indra and I am the younger of my brother Jayanta. Father has given me over to you; I now like to live with you. Kindly fulfil my desires now. O blessed one! You better take me and enjoy me according to Dharma. This is my desire.

[Ch 12 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Šukrācārya said: O thou of large and handsome hips! Better enjoy with me for ten years, according to your liking, without being visible to any body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śukrācārya said :-- O thou of large and handsome hips! Better enjoy with me for ten years, according to your liking, without being visible to anybody.

[Ch 12 Verse 46-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāśya said: Thus saying, Šukrācārya went to his home and, according to religious observances, married Jayanti and lived with her for ten years under the shade of Māyā and unobserved by any body. On the other hand, the Daityas, hearing that Šukrācārya returned home successful getting his desired Mantra, were very glad and went to his house to pay their respects to him. But Šukra was then living with Jayanti; hence the Asuras could not see him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Thus saying, Śukrācārya went to his home and, according to religious observances, married Jayantī and lived with her for ten years under the shade of Māyā and unobserved by anybody. On the other hand, the Daityas, hearing that Śukrācārya returned home successful getting his desired Mantra, were very glad and went to his house to pay their respects to him. But Śukra was then living with Jayantī; hence the Asuras could not see him.

[Ch 12 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then they got very much dejected, sorry and were drooped in spirits; they searched for again and again.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then they got very much dejected, sorry and were drooped in spirits; they searched for him again and again.

[Ch 12 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Not being able to see Šukra under the shade of Māyā, the Daityas were very sorry and got afraid and then returned to their own residences.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Not being able to see Śukra under the shade of Māyā, the Daityas were very sorry and got afraid and then returned to their own residences.

[Ch 12 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the other hand, the Devas, knowing that Šukra was holding intercourses with Jayanti, Indra, the God of Devas, spoke to the Deva Guru Brhaşpati. O Guru! Advise us what to do under the present circumstances and relieve us from the impending difficulties.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the other hand, the Devas, knowing that Śukra was holding intercourses with Jayantī, Indra, the God of Devas, spoke to the Deva Guru Bṛhaspati. O Guru! Advise us what to do under the present circumstances and relieve us from the impending difficulties.

[Ch 12 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brāhmaṇa! Better go to day to the Dānavas and do that by which our honour may be maintained. You better put the Dānavas under some charm by your magical spell and think and do good to us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brāhmaṇa. Better go today to the Dānavas and do that by which our honour may be maintained. You better put the Dānavas under some charm by your magical spell and think and do good to us.

[Ch 12 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On hearing Indra's words and knowing that Śukra is now enjoying with Jayanti, Brhaṣpati went to the Dānavas, putting on the appearance of Śukrācārya.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On hearing Indra’s words and knowing that Śukra is now enjoying with Jayantī, Bṛhaspati went to the Dānavas, putting on the appearance of Śukrācārya.

[Ch 12 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Going to the Demons, he called on then very politely and sweetly. The Asuras said that Śukrācārya had come in presence of them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Going to the Demons, he called on them very politely and sweetly. The Asuras said that Śukrācārya had come in presence of them.

[Ch 12 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Demons were very glad and bowed down before Śukrācārya and could not make out that he was the false Śukrācārya, under the Māgic charm of Brhaspati.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Demons were very glad and bowed down before Śukrācārya and could not make out that he was the false Śukrācārya, under the māyic charm of Bṛhaspati.

[Ch 12 Verse 56-57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the false Śukrācārya asked the welfare of the Daityas? and said: I went so long for your good; I performed severe tapasyā and satisfied the God Śambhu and acquired from him the Mantra, the sacred knowledge, and that I will frankly explain to you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the false Śukrācārya asked the welfare of the Daityas and said :-- I went so long for your good; I performed severe tapasyā and satisfied the God Śambhu and acquired from him the Mantra, the sacred knowledge, and that I will frankly explain to you.

[Ch 12 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On hearing this, the Demons were very pleased and, knowing that the Guru had been successful, were filled with joy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On hearing this, the Demons were very pleased and, knowing that the Guru had been successful, were filled with joy.

[Ch 12 Verse 59-60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They saluted him with joy and began to live quietly and freely and without pain, having got rid of fear the Devas. Here ends the Twelth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhagāvatam, the Mahāpurānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa on Bhargu's curse and the dialogue between Śukrācāryā and the Daityas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They saluted him with joy and began to live quietly and freely and without pains, having got rid of fear from the Devas. Here ends the twelfth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahāpurāṇam of 18,000 verses by Mahārsi Veda Vyāsa on Bhṛgu’s curse and the dialogue between Śukrācārya and the Daityas.
