CHAPTER XII

On Bhruś's Curse and the Dialogue Between. Śukrācārya and the Daityas

व्यास उवाच

तं दृष्टा तु वधं घोरं चुकोध भगवान्यगुः ।

वेयमानो3तिजुःखातं: प्रोवाच मधुसुदनम् ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! On seeing Viṣṇu killing his wife, and thus committing a dreadful atrocious act, the Bhagavān Bhrgu was very sorry and began to tremble with anger and addressed Madhusūdana thus.

भूगुकावा

अकृतं ते कृतं विष्णो जानन्यपां महामते ।

वधोउं विश्वजाताया मनसा कनुमक्षमः ॥ २ ॥

Bhruj said: O Viṣṇu! You have done an extremely sinful act. O intelligent one! Knowing it, you have done so; what a great wonder! No body dreams of the murder of this Brāhmana's daughter; and you have committed it deed, black and white.

आख्यात्तस्व सच्गण: स्मृते ब्रह्मा च राजस: ।

तधारड़ी तामसः शेभुविंधरितं कांबे स्मृतः ॥ 3 ॥

O Devas! The Maharṣis declare you to be Sāttvic, engaged in preservation; Brahmā to be Rajasic (creator) and Śambhu Śiva to be Tāmasic (destroyer). Why then is the contrary thing visible in this case?

तामसरलं कंबं जातः कृतं कर्मातिनिर्विद्तम् ।

अवस्था स्ती त्वया विश्यो हता कसामशिरसाया ॥ 4 ॥

Why have you become Tāmasic? Why have you done this heinous crime? O Viṣṇu! The females are never to be killed; this is a known fact; then why have you killed this woman without any fault.

शपाधि त्वां दुराचारं किम्यन्त्रकारीयि ते ।

विषुर्गोई कृतः पाप त्वयाईं श्रकाकरणात् ॥ 5 ॥

न शपोई तथा शक्ऱे शपे तथा मधूमूर्त ।

सदा छलपोरीस त्वं कीटयोनिद्रुगायः ॥ 6 ॥

You have done a very execrable act. What shall

I do to you? It is another matter that I would curse you. O Great Sinner! You have pained me very much and made me very weary. I will not curse Indra. You always assume a deceitful appearance and behave like a black cruel serpent; your mind is all full of wickedness; I will curse you.

ये च त्वां सात्चिकं प्राहुले पूर्खां मुनवः किल ।

तामसस्त्वं दुरावारः प्रत्यक्षे में जनार्देन ॥ ७ ॥

O Janārdana. Those Munis who call Sāttvic are fools; I have seen to day that your ways are exceptionally vicious and tāmasic.

अवतारा मृत्युलोके सन्तु मच्छापसभावाः ।

प्रायो नर्भभवं दुःखं घुंक्ष्य पापाज्ञजनर्दिन ॥ 8 ॥

O Viṣṇu! I curse you now to take frequent births, suffer very frequently in different wombs, in the earth and thus suffer the pains of remaining in the wombs.

व्यास उवाच

तत्स्तेनाथ शापेन नष्टे धर्मे पुनः पुनः ।

लेकास्य च हिताथाय जयते मानुशेथिह ॥ 9 ॥

O king! Therefore whenever religion subsides in the world, Bhagavān Viṣṇu incarnates frequently in this human world, due to the curse of Bhrgu.

राजोवाच

भ्युभायां हता तर चेकेशपामिततेजसा ।

गाह्रैल्थ च पुननस्य कथं जाते महात्मन: ॥ 10 ॥

The king said: O best of the Munis! Did that Mahātmā Bhrgu again marry and lead a householder's life when his wife was thus killed by the lustrous disc Sudarśana.

व्यास उवाच

इति शल्चा हरि रोषात्तदायि शिरस्त्वन्त ।

कार्य संबोधे जरसा सभुः प्रोवाच कार्यविद्धि ॥ 11 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! The sacrifice Bhṛgu angrily cursed Hari and next took that severed head and quickly placed it over the body as before and said:

Book IV Chapter XII

अच ल्चां विष्णुनें देवैहं हतां संकीवायामहम् ।

यदि कृत्तनो मया धर्मों ज्ञानेचे चितिरो5पि चा ॥ १२ ॥

तेन सत्येन जीक्षिते यदि सत्यं ब्वीधमहम् ।

पर्यंतु देदाता: सर्वां मम तेजोबलं मह्न् ॥ १३ ॥

अद्रित्तां प्रोष्य शीताभिजीविमी पतोबलात् ।

सत्यं शीचं तथा चेदा यदि मे तपसो बलम् ॥ १४ ॥

O Devi! Viṣṇu has slain you to day; I will make you regain your life just now. If I am acquainted with all the Dharmas and if I have practised these in my life and if have spoken truth always, then dost thou regain your life by my religious merit. Let all the Devas witness my power and strength. If I know the True, if I have studied all the Vedas and if I have realised the Knowledge of the Vedas, then I, sprinkling your body with this cold water, charged with my mantras, will revive you.

व्यास उवाच

अद्विः: संग्रहिता देखी सखः संबंधिता तत।

अत्थिता परमप्रीता भुभोभार्यं गृधिस्तिमा ॥ 15 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Sprinkled by the water by Bhruṇ, his wife regained her life and rose up at once and felt herself glad and smiled.

ततस्तां सर्वभृतानि दूद्वा सुप्नोश्वतामिति ।

साधु साधिति तं तां तु तुडुवः सर्वती दिशम् ॥ 16 ॥

All the persons and living creatures seeing her stand, as if awoken from her sleep, at once exclaimed from all sides “well done, well done!” thanked Bhrgu and his wife very much and highly praised them.

एवं संकीक्षिता तेन भ्रुणा वरविधीनि ।

विसम्पं परमं अनुदैवा: संद्रा विलोक्य तत् ॥ 17 ॥

Thus seeing the fair complexioned wife regain her life through Bhrgu, Indra and all the Devas were very much struck with wonder.

Note: Thought power and inhalation of some medicines might have revived her.

इनः: सुरान्योवाच मुनिना जीविता सती ।

काव्यस्त्वा तपो घोर किं कश्यति मन्त्रित् ॥ 18 ॥

Indra then addressed the Devas: Now the mother of Śukra has regained her life through Bhrgu; but

when Śukrācārya will receive the mantra after his severe tapasyā, we do not know what terrible harm he would do to us!

व्यास उवाच

गता निद्रा सुरेन्द्रस्य देहे३क्षेमभूषून ।

सूचना काव्यस्य वृत्तांत मन्यार्थमितिद्वारभून ॥ 19 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Though the deep sleep that overtook Indra had now left him, yet he became very unhappy, remembering the severe asceticism of Šukra's tapasyā and his receiving mantras.

विमुग्य मनसा शक्रो जयन्ती स्वसुतां ततं ।

उवाच कन्यां चार्वींगि सिमतपूर्विमेदं चचः ॥ 20 ॥

Thinking over deeply in his mind, Indra called his daughter Jayanti and spoke to her with affection.

गच्छ पुत्रि मया दत्ता काव्याय त्वं तपस्विने ।

समाधाय तन्वीग मन्त्रुतं तं वर्णं कुक ॥ 21 ॥

उपवारीभूर्नितेर्हे: समाराध्य मन:प्रिये: ।

भयं मे ततसा गला हर तत्र वाराधे ॥ 22 ॥

Go! Daughter! I have given thee over to the ascetic Kāvya. Do this service for me, go to Kāvya and help him in his asceticism and bring him under your control. By whatever acts the Muni be pleased, dost thou do at once and please him in every way and thus remove my fear.

सा विपूर्वचंत्र श्रुता ततगछम्बनोराम ।

तत्पर्यश्रिंगलाश्री विवर्ते धूममाओं ॥ 23 ॥

The large eyed beautiful Jayanti, hearing her father's words, went to her hermitage and there saw the Rṣi inhaling the smoking.

तस्य देई समातोक्य सूच्या वाक्यं पितुस्त्वा ।

कदत्नीतदनामादय वीजयामास ते भुनिन् ॥ 24 ॥

On seeing the body of the ascetic, and remembering her father's words she brought the leaves of the plantain trees and began to fan him.

निर्मलें शीतलं वारि समानीय सुवासितम् ।

पानाय करत्ययामास भक्या परमया लघु ॥ 25 ॥

The intelligent Jayanti with no excitement used to bring the pure, clear, cool, and well scented water and place it, with great devotion, before the sage for his drinking.

Note: Here Indra bribes by giving away his daughter.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

हावां वस्तातपेण भास्करे मध्यसे सति ।

रचायमास तन्वीरा स्वयं धर्मे स्थिता सती ॥ 26 ॥

When the sun was over his head, she used to prepare some protection, with her clothes, from the sun and thus made the shade for him. Thus, in various ways, did she begin to serve the Muni, herself remaining steady in her religion.

फलान्यायीय दिखानि पक्वानि मभुगीण च ।

मुभोचाठी मुनेस्तस्य मध्यार्थ विहितानि च ॥ 27 ॥

She brought sweet and ripe fruits proper according to the Śāstras and used to place them before him for his repast.

कृणा: प्रोरणामा हि हिता: शुकसिन्भा: ।

दधाराटीअ ध्यूभाणि नित्यकर्ममुख्ये ॥ 28 ॥

In the performance of her daily duties, she used to collect the Kuśa grass of the span of thumb and fore finger, and flowers, white and yellow and placed them before him.

निद्राधौ कल्यामास संस्तरं पल्लवात्यन्ति ।

तस्मिन्नौ चारस्था चकार व्यजनं गर्भे: ॥ 29 ॥

For the Muni's bedding to lie down and sleep, she used to gather soft green leaves and with them she used to keep his bed ready; and when the Muni laid himself down, she used to fan him gently.

हावभावादिकं किंचिद्धिकारजनं च तत ।

न चकार जवनी सा शापपीता मुनेतदा ॥ 30 ॥

Never did she exhibit for fear of curse, any gesture or posture calculated to disturb his mind. स्तुति चकार तत्वीं गीधिंस्तस्य महात्मन: ।

सुभाषिण्यकुलाधिः प्रीतिकर्हिंभरयुत ॥ 31 ॥

The sweet-tongued, thin lady used to praise Šukrācārya in pleasing and favourable terms.

प्रबुद्धे जलमादाय दधाराचमानय च ।

मनोउनुकुलं सततं कुर्वन्ती व्यवरत्ता ॥ 32 ॥

When the Muni awoke, she placed water before him to wash his face and hands. Thus serving the Muni, did she stay in the hermitage.

इंडोर्जी सेवाकसंसत्र प्रेयमातमास चात्रुः ।

प्रवृत्ति ज्ञातुकामो वै मुनेतस्य जितानमतः ॥ 33 ॥

The fear stricken Indra used to send messengers to fathom the mind of that self controlled Muni.

एवं बहूनि वर्षिणि परिचयोपराउभवत् ।

निर्विकारा जितक्रोधा बहुतवर्परा सती ॥ 34 ॥

Thus did Jayanti serve for good many years the Muni, being void of anger and observing duly her celibacy.

पूर्णैं वर्षसहर्ये तु परितुँये महेश्वरः ।

वरेण छंदयामास काव्यं प्रति मनोहरः ॥ 35 ॥

In this way one thousand years passed duly, the God Mahādeva was very pleased and addressed Śukrācārya that He had come to give him boons that he desired.

ईश्व उवाच

यच्छ किंचिदपि ब्रह्मान्विधते घपुनन्दन ।

प्रतिपश्यसि यासर्वे तच्च वाच्यं न कस्यचित् ॥ 36 ॥

सर्वाधिभावकत्वेन भविष्यिन र संशयः ।

अवध्यः सर्वभृतानां प्रजेशश्र द्विजोन्म ॥ 37 ॥

The God Mahādeva said: Whatever there exists in this universe, whatever you see with your eyes and whatever can not be described in words, you will be the lord of all these and the conqueror of all. There is no doubt in this. You can not be killed by any creature; you will be the ruler of all beings and will be reckoned as the best of the Brāhmanas.

व्यास उवाच

एवं दत्ता वराऊघुभुतवैवांतराधीयत ।

काव्यसामय संवैश्व जवन्नी वाक्यमवबीत् ॥ 38 ॥

Vyāsa said: The God Mahādeva disappeared then and there, after granting him the boons. Then Śukrācārya saw Jayanti and said to her: O lady of beautiful hips! Who and whose daughter art thou? What is the desire in your mind? What for you have come here? O one of beautiful thighs! what is your duty?

कासिस कल्यासि सुश्रीणि बूहि किं ते चिकीक्षित् ।

किमर्थमिहु संप्राप्ता कार्य बद वरोके मे ॥ 39 ॥

किं बांछिस कांप्यष्ठ दुकंचे चेसुलोचने ।

प्रौतिसीय त्वलृतेनोषा वरं वरय सुहते ॥ 40 ॥

O beautiful eyed! I am very pleased with all that you have done for me. What do you want? O one

Book IV Chapter XII

of good vows! Ask boons from me; I will grant them even if they be difficult.

ततः सा तु पुर्न प्रह जयन्ती मुदितान्ना ।

चिकीर्षितं मे भगवंतनसा ज्ञानुमर्हसि ॥ 4 1 ॥

On hearing this, Jaiyanti's face became bright with joy; she said: whatever I desire, you know that already by force of your Tapasyā.

व्यास उवाच

ज्ञातं मया तथापि तवं बृहि यन्मनसेसितम् ।

कंरोपि सर्वेथा भर्त्र प्रीतो5स्म परिचर्यय ॥ 42 ॥

The Kārya said: Your mental desires I know; still mention them yourself particularly; I will do good to you in any way you like; I am pleased with your services.

जंदेल्यावर

गऊकस्याहं सुता ब्रह्मियात तुभ्यं समपिता ।

जयंती नामतश्राहं जयंतावरजा मुने ॥ 4 3 ॥

सकामास्मि तस्य विश्वेभीविधोबीछितंकुभेयुभा ।

रंस्ये तस्या महाभाग धर्मतः प्रीतिपुर्वकम् ॥ 4 4 ॥

Jayanti said: O Brāhmīn! I am the daughter of Indra and I am the younger of my brother Jayanta. Father has given me over to you; I now like to live with you. Kindly fulfil my desires now. O blessed one! You better take me and enjoy me according to Dharma. This is my desire.

गृक्र उवाच

मया सह त्वं सुश्रीण दूरा वर्षाणि भामिनि ।

सर्वभूतिरूपया च रमवेह यदृष्ठया ॥ 4 5 ॥

Šukrācārya said: O thou of large and handsome hips! Better enjoy with me for ten years, according to your liking, without being visible to any body.

व्यास उवाच

एवमुक्ता गृहं गत्वा जयंल्या: पाणिगमुढ़त् ।

तया सहासर्वेह्या द्रग वर्षिणि भागंशः ॥ 46 ॥

अजुष्यः सर्वभृतानां मायया संवृताः प्रपुः ।

दैत्यात्मतागानं क्रुवा कृतार्थ मान्सर्युतम् ॥ 47 ॥

अभिजमगुरुं तस्य मुदिताते दिवूक्ष्वतः ।

नाप्यवत्रममाणों ते जयेत्या सह संयुतम् ॥ 48 ॥

Vyāśya said: Thus saying, Šukrācārya went to his home and, according to religious observances, married Jayanti and lived with her for ten years under the shade of Māyā and unobserved by any body. On the other hand, the Daityas, hearing that Šukrācārya returned home successful getting his desired Mantra, were very glad and went to his house to pay their respects to him. But Šukra was then living with Jayanti; hence the Asuras could not see him.

तदा विमनसः सर्वे जाता भग्नोट्यामृतः ते ।

चिंतयारतिद्वीनाश्य वीक्षमाणाः पुनः पुनः ॥ 49 ॥

Then they got very much dejected, sorry and were drooped in spirits; they searched for again and again.

अर्द्धवा तं तु संवृतं प्रतिजनमुवंशगतम् ।

स्वगृहान्दैत्यवयासेते चिताविषाय भयानुतः ॥ 50 ॥

Not being able to see Šukra under the shade of Māyā, the Daityas were very sorry and got afraid and then returned to their own residences.

यमाणं तथा नात्वा शकः प्रोक्षितं गुकम् ।

ब्रह्माति महाभागं चिकं कर्तैल्यमतः परम् ॥ 51 ॥

On the other hand, the Devas, knowing that Šukra was holding intercourses with Jayanti, Indra, the God of Devas, spoke to the Deva Guru Brhaşpati. O Guru! Advise us what to do under the present circumstances and relieve us from the impending difficulties.

गच्छधा दानवान्बह्मभायया त्वं प्रतोभय ।

अस्माक कुरु कार्य त्वं बुद्धा संहित्य मान्दे ॥ 52 ॥

O Brāhmaṇa! Better go to day to the Dānavas and do that by which our honour may be maintained. You better put the Dānavas under some charm by your magical spell and think and do good to us.

तच्छूला वचनं काव्यं सम्भाणं सुरंसृन्ति ।

जाला तद्धुपास्थाय दैत्यान्याति यद्य गुरुः ॥ 53 ॥

On hearing Indra's words and knowing that Śukra is now enjoying with Jayanti, Brhaṣpati went to the Dānavas, putting on the appearance of Śukrācārya.

गत्या त्रातीथकत्वाउसौ दानवास्मुपाक्रवत् ।

आगातालेउपुगा: सर्वे द्वशु: काव्यमप्रतः ॥ 54 ॥

Going to the Demons, he called on then very politely and sweetly. The Asuras said that Śukrācārya had come in presence of them.

प्रणाय संशिता: सर्वे काव्यं मत्वाजित्मोहिताः ।

न विदुर्ते गुरोगियां काव्यरूपविषाथविनीम् ॥ 55 ॥

The Demons were very glad and bowed down before Śukrācārya and could not make out that he was the false Śukrācārya, under the Māgic charm of Brhaspati.

तानुवाच गुरः काव्यरूप: प्रच्छनमायया ।

स्वागतं मय याज्ञानां प्राणोर्भं चै तिहान ये ॥ 56 ॥

अहं वो बोधियधामि विश्वां प्राणातामाययां ।

तपसा तोषितः शंभुर्यामकल्याणहेते ॥ 57 ॥

Then the false Śukrācārya asked the welfare of the Daityas? and said: I went so long for your good; I performed severe tapasyā and satisfied the God Śambhu and acquired from him the Mantra, the

sacred knowledge, and that I will frankly explain to you.

तच्छूचा प्रीतमनसो जाताते दानवोत्तभाः ।

कृतकार्य गृहं मत्वा जडयुले विमोहिताः ॥ 58 ॥

On hearing this, the Demons were very pleased and, knowing that the Guru had been successful, were filled with joy.

प्रणेपुले मुदा युक्ता निरातांका गतत्यक्षाः ।

देवेध्यश्र भयं चत्वन्ता तस्युः सर्वे निरपायाः ॥ 59 ॥

इति शीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे चतुर्बेकन्चे

द्वादशोध्याः ॥ 60 ॥

They saluted him with joy and began to live quietly and freely and without pain, having got rid of fear the Devas.

Here ends the Twelth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhagāvatam, the Mahāpurānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa on Bhargu's curse and the dialogue between Śukrācāryā and the Daityas.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

