CHAPTER XXX

On Ramā's Performing the Navarātra Ceremony

व्यास उवाच

एवं ती संविदं कृत्वा यावतृष्णीं बभूवतुः ।

आजागम तदाकाशाजारदो भगवानुर्पिः ॥ १ ॥

रणायमहर्तीं वीणां स्वर्यामाविश्वभितम् ।

गायन्युहर्यं समा तदा तमुपतत्स्थवान् ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Rāma and Lakṣmana, discussing thus, remained silent; when the Rsi Nārada appeared there from the sky above, singing the Rathāntara Sāma Veda hymns in tune and musical gamut with his renowned lute.

दूरवा तं तग उत्थाय ददावध घूरं शुभम् ।

आसनं चार्थे पार्ं च कुरावानिमतशुक्ति: ॥ ३ ॥

पूजां परमिकां कृत्वा कृतांजलिसत्यक्षितः ।

उपविष्टः समीपे तु कृताजो मुनिना हरि: ॥ ४ ॥

Rāmacandra, of indomitable prowess, on beholding him rose up from his seat and gave him quickly an excellent seat and offerings of water for washing his feet. Then he worshipped the Muni and stood with folded hands. When the Muni ordered him, he took his seat close by Nārada.

उपविष्ट तदा रामं सानुजं दुःखामानसम् ।

पग्रच्छ नावरः प्रीत्या कुशल सुमितसम्: ॥ 5 ॥

कर्णं पाचर शोकातों यथा वे प्राकृतो नरः ।

हन्तों सीतां च जानापि रावणेन दुरात्मना ॥ 6 ॥

सुरस्मागतश्रईं शुतावाज्ञनाकामजम् ।

पौलस्त्येन हृतां मोहात्मरणं स्वमाजनात ॥ 7 ॥

तव जन च काकुत्थ्य पौलस्त्यनिधानय वे ।

सैवित्हीर्ण जातनेतदर्थे नातिपि ॥ 8 ॥

On Rāmacandra taking his seat there with Lakṣmaṇa with a grievous heart, Nārada asked him in sweet tone “O Descendant of Raghu! Why are you being afflicted with sorrows like an ordinary mortal? I know that the evil minded Rāvaṇa has stolen Sitā Devi. I heard while in the heavens that Rāvaṇa, the descendant of Pulastya, stole away Jānakī, out of fascination, could not know that

would be the cause of his death. O Descendant in the family of Kakuttsha! It is for the killing of Rāvaṇa that your birth has taken place; and for that purpose Jānakī has been stolen now.

Note: The real Jānakī was not stolen; Her shadow form was stolen.

पूर्वेज्यनि वैदेही मुपिनुपी तपोर्वनी ।

रावणेन वने दृष्टा तपस्यंनी शुचिसिता ॥ 9 ॥

प्रार्थिता रावणेनासी भव भार्येति रावय च ।

तिरस्कृततसादासी से जगह क्रवं कलात् ॥ 10 ॥

शरणाप तत्बणं राम रावणं तापसी भृणग ।

कुपिता तचकफिछ्ठती देई संस्पर्गद्धिपत्न ॥ 11 ॥

दुरात्मसेन तगरणां भविष्यामि धरातले ।

अयोनिजा वरा नारी त्यक्वा देई हाजविप ॥ 12 ॥

O Rāghava! The Devi Jānaki, in her previous birth, was the daughter of a Muni and practised asceticism. While engaged in her austerites, in her holy hermitage, Rāvana came and looking at her, prayed that beautiful woman to become his wife. Hearing this, she gave a good reproach to Rāvana, when he perforce caught hold of her hair. That ascetic woman got very angry, and, considering her body polluted by the devil's contact, resolved to put an end to her life and cursed Rāvana, thus: "O Vil!ain! I will be born on the surface of the earth, not from any womb but simply for your destruction and ruin." Thus saying, she parted with her life."

सेवं रायोसरम्भूता गृहीता तेन रक्षसा ।

विनागशर्ष कुलस्येव ब्यानी सचिरा संभ्रमात् ॥ 13 ॥

O Tormentor of the foes! Rāvana, the king of the Rāksasas, mistook a garland for the extremely poisonous serpent and has stolen away Sitā Devi, the part incarnation of Lakṣmī, in order to root out his race.

तव जन च काकुत्थ तस्य नागश चामरै: ।

प्राधित्यस्य हरेरंगादजवैगोप्रधजनम्: ॥ 14 ॥

“O Kākutstha! When the Devas prayed for the destruction of that wicked insolent Rāvaṇa, difficult to be subdued, you are born on this earth, in the family of Aja, as a part incarnate of Hari, beyond birth, old age and death.”

कुरु धैर्य महावाही तत्र सा वर्तेतेउरबना ।

सर्ती धर्मतत सीता त्वां धायांतीं दिवाबीऋमा ॥ १ ५ ॥

"O mighty-armed! Have patience; Sitā Devī is meditating you, day and night.

कामधेनुपय: पाते कृत्वा मघवता स्वयम् ।

पानाथे प्रेषित तस्या पीते चेवापृतं यथा ॥ १६ ॥

सुरभीदुयपानतास हुनुदुःखियवर्षिता ।

जाता कमलपत्राकी वर्ते वीक्षिता मया ॥ १७ ॥

Indra himself, the king of the Devas, sends the nectar and the Heavenly Cow's Milk in a pot to Her daily; and She subsists on that alone."

O Lord! On drinking the Heavenly Cow's Milk, the lotus eyed Sitā Devī is living without any hunger or thirst! I use to see Her daily."

उपारं कवयाम्यदा तस्य नाशाय रायव ।

ततं कुरुव बढ़ावानाश्चिने मासि साम्यान् ॥ 18 ॥

O Descendant of Raghu! I am telling how that Rāvaṇa can be killed. Perform, in this very month of Śśvina, the vow the devotion.

नवरायोपवासं च भगवत्या प्रपुजनम् ।

सर्वसिद्धिकरं राम जपह्मायिप्रानत ॥ 19 ॥

Fasting for nine nights, the worship of the Bhagavati, and repeating the Mantram silently and performing the Homa ceremony, observing all the rules, will certainly fulfill one's all the desires.

मेध्रैध प्रपुषिर्देव्या बलिं दत्ता विशर्षितः ।

द्राणां हवनं कृता सशक्तस्यं भविष्यति ॥ 20 ॥

O the best in the race of Raghu! You should offer the sacrifice before the Goddess of sacred and unblameable animal, perform Japam and Homa ceremony equivalent to one-tenth of Japam. If you do all this, you will certainly be able to release Sītā. विष्णानो 3वतितं पूर्व महादेवेन ब्रह्मा ।

तथा मघवता चीर्णं स्वर्णमध्यस्वितेन वै ॥ 21 ॥

In days of yore, Viṣṇu, Śiva and Brahmā and

the Devas in the Heavens all performed this worship of the Goddess.

सुविज्ञान राम कतैल्यं नवराजत्रतं शुभम् ।

विशेषेण च कतैल्यं भूमा कहणतेन वै ॥ 22 ॥

Therefore, O Rāghava! Every person desiring happiness, specially those that have fallen under great difficulties, ought to do this auspicious ceremony, without the least hesitation.

विश्यामिचेण काकुल्य कृततेतर संशयः ।

भ्यूगान्ध वसित्रेन कश्यपेन तवैव च ॥ 23 ॥

गुरुणा इतदारेण कृतमेतन्महातम् ।

तस्मार्त कृक राजेन्द्र राजायस्य वधाय च ॥ 24 ॥

O Kakuttsha! Viśvāmitra, Bhrgu, Vasistha and Kaśyapa all of them did this worship before. When some stole away the wife of Bhraspati, the Guru of the Devas, he, too, by the force of this worship, got his wife back. Therefore O king! dost thou also celebrate the Pūjā for the destruction of Rāvana."

इन्हेण बूँवनाशाय कृतं बतमनुतनम् ।

विपुरस्य विनाशाय शिवेनापि पुरा कृतम् ॥ 25 ॥

हरिणा मधुनाशाय कृतं मेरी महामते ।

विधिवल्कुक काकुलस्थ बतमेतदतंदितः ॥ 26 ॥

O high minded one! This vow was practised before by Indra for the destruction of Vītra, by Śiva for killing the demon Tripura, by Nārāyana for the killing of the demons Madhu and Kaitabha; so you should also firmly resolve to perform duly this vow with your whole heart.

श्रीम रावच

का देवी किंग्रपावा सा कुतो जाता किमकाकुति: ।

ततं किं विधित्वंद्वृहि मवर्त्रांस दयानघे ॥ 27 ॥

Rāma replied: “O Ocean of Knowledge! Who is that Devi? What is Her influence; whence has She sprung? What is Her Name? And how is that vow to be duly observed? Kindly describe all these to me in detail.”

नाद्य उवाच

श्रणु राम सदा नित्य शक्तिराखा सनातनी ।

सर्वकामप्रदा देवी पूजिता दुःखनाशिनी ॥ 28 ॥

Book III Chapter XXX

Nārada answered: “Listen, O Rāghava! That Goddess is Eternal and Ever Constant Primordial Force. If you worship Her, all your difficulties will be removed and all your desires will be fulfilled.”

कारणं सर्वेजन्तुं ब्रहादीनों रघुहृदं ।

तस्याः शर्कि विना को3पि संदितुं न क्षमो भवेत् ॥ 29 ॥

She is the source of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and others and of all these living beings. Without Her force, no body would be able even to move their limbs."

विषणो: पालनशीक: सा कर्णुशिक: पितृमानं।

रूद्यर नाशशीक: सा त्व-्यशर्षिक: परा शिका ॥ 30 ॥

That Supreme Auspicious Goddess is the preserving energy of Viṣṇu, is the creative power of Brahmā, and is the destroying force of Śiva.”

यच्च किंचित्वलविप्रद्रुं सर्वसद्धुवनयरे ।

तस्य सर्वस्य या शन्निकर्तमुत्वपितः कृते भवेत् ॥ ३ १ ॥

Whatever there exists in this infinite Universe, whether Temporal or Eternal, She is the Underlying Force of all; how, then, can She have an origin.

न ब्रह्मा न यदा विद्यान्हं कड़ो न दिवाक्कः ।

न चेन्यद्वादुसुरा: सर्वे न धाना न धारधानः ॥ 32 ॥

तदा सा प्रकृति: पूर्णा पुरुषेय परेय है ।

संयुता विहृत्येव युगादौ निरुग्णा शिका ॥ 33 ॥

Her origin is not Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa, Sun, Indra, or the other Devas, not this Earth nor this Upholder of the Earth; She is devoid of any qualities, the Giver of Salvation of all, the Full Prakrti. In the time of the final dissolution of this Universe, She lives with the Supreme Puruṣa."

मा भृत्वा सगुण पशुताक्लोति भुवनजयम् ।

पूर्वं संयुच्य ब्रदादी-दन्त्वा शनतीश्व सर्वेशः ॥ 34 ॥

She is also Saguna, full of qualities, and is the Creatrix of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa and has empowered them, in every way, to create the three Lokas.

तां ज्ञाता मुच्यते जन्तुर्जन्संसारव्यन्तान् ।

सा विहा परमा ज्ञेया वेद्धाता वेदकारिणी ॥ 35 ॥

She is the Supreme Knowledge, existing before the Vedas, and the Originator of the Vedas. The individual souls, knowing Her Nature, become able to free themselves from the bondages of the world.

असंख्यातिन नामानि तस्या ब्रहादिधिः: किल ।

गुणकर्मविधान्स्तु कल्स्यातिन च किं कुवे ॥ 36 ॥

She is known by endless names. The Brahmā and the other Devas might choose to call Her according to their actions and qualities. I am unable to describe those names.

अक्रारादिकारान्तै: स्वरैर्वर्णित्य योजितैः ।

असंख्योयानि नामानि भवन्ति सुन्तन्दन ॥ 37 ॥

O descendant in the race of Raghu! Her names are formed by the various cominations of the various vowels and consonants from the letter “A” to the letter “Kṣa”.

राम उवाच

विधि मे वृहि विषर्षे जतस्यास्य समासतः ।

कोरोमध्येत्र अब्द्वाराऊलीद्व्याः: पूजनं तथा ॥ 38 ॥

Rāma said: “O best of the Munis! Describe briefly all the rules and regulations as to how that vow and worship are to be performed. With my heart, full of devotion and faith, I will worship the Goddess to day.”

नात्व उवाच

पीठं कृता सेय स्थाने संस्थाया जगद्धिकाम् ।

उपवासज्ञवैल त्वं कुक राम विधानतः ॥ 39 ॥

Nārada said: “O Rāghava! On a level plot of ground, prepare an altar. Place the Goddess there and fast for nine days.

आचार्योई भविष्यामि कर्णपत्यिममाहीपते ।

देवकार्यविधानार्थमुताई प्रक्रोमेघम् ॥ 40 ॥

“O king! I will be your priest and I will, great energy, carry out this yajña to fulfil the work of the Gods.”

व्यास उवाच

तखूला वचनं सर्वे मत्वा रायः प्रापावान् ।

कारियला शुर्ण पीठे स्थायपित्वांकि शिक्षाम ॥ 41 ॥

विधिप्रवतुर्जन तस्याक्कार प्रतवान् हरि ।

संग्रापते चाधिने मासि तस्मिनारिवरे नदा ॥ 42 ॥

Vyāsa said: Then the powerful Bhagavān Hari, hearing all from the Muni, believed them to be true; and, on the approach of the month of Āśvina,

Śrimaddevitbhāgavatam

prepared the alter on the top of a hill and placed the Auspicious Goddess, one World Mother and, observing all the rules, performed the vow and worshipped the Goddess.

उपवासपरो रामः कुरावान्नतुभमम् ।

होमं च विधित्वतन बलिदानं च पूजनम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

भात्ते चक्रतुः प्रेणा बतं नारदस्मितम् ।

अध्यमां भधरात्रे तु देवी भगवती हिं सा ॥ 4 4 ॥

सिंहाकृका ददी तत्र उर्दीनं प्रतिपूजिता ।

निर्गिश्रू त्रिवलोबाच रावयं सानुजं निरा ॥ 4 5 ॥

मेघगम्भीरया चेदं भक्तिभावेन तोचिता ।

देवयुवाच

रामा राम महाबाही तुहा5स्पथढ़ा तेने ॥ 4 6 ॥

When, on the grand night of the Eighth lunar day, the two brothers completed the vow as told by Nārada, the Supreme Bhagavati was pleased with the worship and appeared before them, mounted on a lion, and remaining there on the mountain top, addressed Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, in a sweet grave tone, like the rumbling of a rain cloud, thus: “Rama, I am satisfied with your worship; ask from me what you desire.”

प्रावंधरव वर्ग कामं चते मनसि वर्तते ।

नारायणांशसंभृतस्त्वं चिंशे मानवेजनचे ॥ 47 ॥

Rāma! You are sent by the gods for the destruction of Rāvaṇa and are born as a part incarnate of Nārāyaṇa, in the pure and stainless family of Manu.”

रावणस्य वधावैय प्राणितस्त्वमरैसि ।

पुगा मन्यस्तुं कृत्वा हत्वा धोरं च राश्रमम् ॥ 48 ॥

It is You that, in ancient times, incarnated as a fish for serving the purpose of the Devas and preserved the Vedas by killing the terrible Rāksasas for the welfare of the Universe.

त्वया वै रक्षिता वेदः सुरणां हितिमछ्ठता ।

भृत्वा कच्छपक्षपतु धृतावामन्दरं गिरिग् ॥49॥

It is You that incarnated as a tortoise and held aloft the Mandara mountain, churned the ocean and nourished the Devas.

अकूपारं प्रमान्थानं कृत्वा देवानपोषयः ।

कोलरूषं परं कृत्वा दर्शनाधोगे मेदिनीम् ॥ 50 ॥

धतवानसि यद्राम हित्याश्रं जयान च ।

नारसिंहीं नतुं कृत्वा हित्यक्रकीर्ण पुगा ॥ 51 ॥

O Rāma! It is You that incarnated, in days of yore, as a boar and held aloft on your teeth this earth. It is You that assumed the form of a Man-Lion and preserved Prahlāda, by tearing asunder the body of Hiranya Kaśipu, by your sharp nails.

प्रहादं राम रक्षिता हतवानसि रावव ।

वामनं वपुरास्थाय पुरा छलितवान्बलिम् ॥ 52 ॥

O Descent of Raghu! It is You that assumed, in ancient times, the form of a dwarf and served the purpose of the Devas, by deceitfully cheating Bali, the younger of Indra."

भूवैन्द्रसानुज: कामं देवकायीप्रसाधक: ।

जमदार्मिनुस्तयं चे विण्योरोगेन संगतः ॥ 53 ॥

O son of Kauśalyā! You incarnated as the son of Jamadagni in the Brāhimin family, extirpated the line of Kṣaṭtriya kings and gave over this whole earth to Bhagavān Kaśyapa Rsi.

कृत्वांतं क्षत्रियाणां तु दानं घमेरदाद्विजे ।

तद्विदानी तु काकुष्य जातो उर्शयात्मज ॥ 54 ॥

So You are now born as the son of Daśaratha, in stainless race of Kakuttha, at the request of the Devas, harassed by Rāvana.

प्राधितिन्तु सुरैः सर्वे रावणेनातिपीडितैः ।

कपयस्ते सहाया वै देवांगा बलवतगतः ॥ 55 ॥

भविष्यन्ति नल्याप्र मच्छक्तिसंगुता हामी ।

गेशांगो3पनुजनसेउंचं रावणात्मजनागकः ॥ 56 ॥

These powerful monkeys, born as Deva incarnates, all endowed with great power by Me, will help you. Your younger brother Lakṣmana is the incarnate of Śeṣa serpent; this indomitable man will kill undoubtedly Indrajit, the son of Rāvana.

भविष्यति स नस्देहः कर्णवीउत्र त्वचाउनय ॥

यसने सेवनं कार्य त्वया त्रातिशघट्वाद्या ॥ 57 ॥

You will kill Ravana; then you would worship Me, with great devotion, in the vernal season and then enjoy your kingdom according to your liking.

Book III Chapter XXX

हलाड़ा राजर्गे पार्शं कृक राज्य बधासुखम् ।

एकादश सहस्राथि वर्षिण पूथिवितोले ॥ 5 8 ॥

कृत्वा राज्यं सुश्रैई नात्रसि निविदं पुनः ।

O best of the Raghus! For full eleven thousand years you will reign on this earth; and after that re-enter your heavenly abode."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्यांतदैपे देवी रास्तु प्रीतमानसः ॥ ५९ ॥

स्माया तद्वतं चक्र प्रयाणं ट्रामीदिते ।

विवयापूर्जनं कृत्वा दत्ता दानान्यनेकशः ॥ 60 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Thus saying, the Devi disappeared. Rāma Candra became very glad and, completing that most auspicious ceremony, performed the Vijaya Pūjā on the tenth day and gave lots of presents to Nārada and made him go towards the ocean.

कपियतिवलयुक्त : सानुज: श्रीपतिङ्ग

प्रकटपरमगलक्या प्रेरितः पूर्णकामः ।

उदयित्यतानोउसौ सेतुबन्धे विधायाय-

हनदमरात्रुं रावणं गौतिकांति: ॥ 6 1 ॥

O king! Thus stimulated by the Supreme Energy, the Highest Goddess brought front to fornt, Rāmacandra, the husband of Kamalā, went to the

shores of the orcean, accompanied by Lakṣmana and the monkeys. Then he erected the bridge across the ocean and killed Rāvaṇa, the enemy of the gods. His unparalleled fame spread every where throughout the three Lokas.

यः शुणोति नरो भक्त्या देद्याश्रितामुतमम् ।

स भुक्वता विपुलाभ्योगान्यानोति परमं पदम् ॥ 62 ॥

He who hears with devotion his excellent account of the Devi, will get the greatest happiness in this world, and, in the end, will get the final beatitude. There is no doubt in this.

संत्यानयि पुराणानि विस्तारीण बहूनि च ।

श्रीमद्रागततस्यान न तुर्यानीति मे पति: ॥ 63 ॥

डॉत श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणोडारासाहराक्वां सहितायां

तृतीयकन्चे प्रिंगोस्थायः ॥ 64 ॥

O king! There are extant many other Purāṇas, but none is equal to this Śrimadevibhāgavatam. Know, this is my firm belief.

Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter on the narration of the Navarātra ceremony by Nārada and the performance of that by Rāma Candra in the Third Book in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa. Here ends the Third Book.

***