[Ch 30 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! Rāma and Lakṣmana, discussing thus, remained silent; when the Rsi Nārada appeared there from the sky above, singing the Rathāntara Sāma Veda hymns in tune and musical gamut with his renowned lute.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, discussing thus, remained silent; when the Ṛṣi Nārada appeared there from the sky above, singing the Rathāntara Sāma Veda hymns in tune and musical gamut with his renowned lute.

[Ch 30 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Rāmacandra, of indomitable prowess, on beholding him rose up from his seat and gave him quickly an excellent seat and offerings of water for washing his feet. Then he worshipped the Muni and stood with folded hands. When the Muni ordered him, he took his seat close by Nārada.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Rāmacandra, of indomitable prowess, on beholding him rose up from his seat and gave him quickly an excellent seat and offerings of water for washing his feet. Then he worshipped the Muni and stood with folded hands. When the Muni ordered him, he took his seat close by Nārada.

[Ch 30 Verse 5-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On Rāmacandra taking his seat there with Lakṣmaṇa with a grievous heart, Nārada asked him in sweet tone “O Descendant of Raghu! Why are you being afflicted with sorrows like an ordinary mortal? I know that the evil minded Rāvaṇa has stolen Sitā Devi. I heard while in the heavens that Rāvaṇa, the descendant of Pulastya, stole away Jānakī, out of fascination, could not know that would be the cause of his death. O Descendant in the family of Kakuttsha! It is for the killing of Rāvaṇa that your birth has taken place; and for that purpose Jānakī has been stolen now. Note: The real Jānakī was not stolen; Her shadow form was stolen.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On Rāmacandra taking his seat there with Lakṣmaṇa with a grievous heart, Nārada asked him in a sweet tone “O Descendant of Raghu! Why are you being afflicted with sorrows like an ordinary mortal? I know that the evil minded Rāvaṇa has stolen Sītā Devī. I heard while in the heavens that Rāvaṇa, the descendant of Pulastya, stole away Jānakī, out of fascination, could not know that would be the cause of his death. O Descendant in the family of Kākutstha! It is for the killing of Rāvaṇa that your birth has taken place; and for that purpose Jānakī has been stolen now. Note :-- The real Jānakī was not stolen; Her shadow form was stolen.

[Ch 30 Verse 9-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Rāghava! The Devi Jānaki, in her previous birth, was the daughter of a Muni and practised asceticism. While engaged in her austerites, in her holy hermitage, Rāvana came and looking at her, prayed that beautiful woman to become his wife. Hearing this, she gave a good reproach to Rāvana, when he perforce caught hold of her hair. That ascetic woman got very angry, and, considering her body polluted by the devil's contact, resolved to put an end to her life and cursed Rāvana, thus: "O Vil!ain! I will be born on the surface of the earth, not from any womb but simply for your destruction and ruin." Thus saying, she parted with her life."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Rāghava! The Devī Jānakī, in her previous birth, was the daughter of a Muni and practised asceticism. While engaged in her austerities, in her holy hermitage, Rāvaṇa came and looking at her, prayed that beautiful woman to become his wife. Hearing this, she gave a good reproach to Rāvaṇa, when he perforce caught hold of her hairs. That ascetic woman got very angry, and, considering her body polluted by the devil’s contact, resolved to put an end to her life and cursed Rāvaṇa, thus :-- “O Villain! I will be born on the surface of the earth, not from any womb but simply for your destruction and ruin.” Thus saying, she parted with her life.

[Ch 30 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Tormentor of the foes! Rāvana, the king of the Rāksasas, mistook a garland for the extremely poisonous serpent and has stolen away Sitā Devi, the part incarnation of Lakṣmī, in order to root out his race.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Tormentor of the foes! Rāvaṇa, the king of the Rākṣasas, mistook a garland for the extremely poisonous serpent and has stolen away Sītā Devī, the part incarnation of Lakṣmī, in order to root out his race.

[Ch 30 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Kākutstha! When the Devas prayed for the destruction of that wicked insolent Rāvaṇa, difficult to be subdued, you are born on this earth, in the family of Aja, as a part incarnate of Hari, beyond birth, old age and death.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Kākutstha! When the Devas prayed for the destruction of that wicked insolent Rāvaṇa, difficult to be subdued, you are born on this earth, in the family of Aja, as a part incarnate of Hari, beyond birth, old age and death.

[Ch 30 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O mighty-armed! Have patience; Sitā Devī is meditating you, day and night.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O mighty-armed! Have patience; Sītā Devī is meditating you, day and night.

[Ch 30 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra himself, the king of the Devas, sends the nectar and the Heavenly Cow's Milk in a pot to Her daily; and She subsists on that alone." O Lord! On drinking the Heavenly Cow's Milk, the lotus eyed Sitā Devī is living without any hunger or thirst! I use to see Her daily."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra himself, the king of the Devas, sends the nectar and the Heavenly Cow’s Milk in a pot to Her daily; and She subsists on that, alone. O Lord! On drinking the Heavenly Cow’s Milk, the lotus eyed Sītā Devī is living without any hunger or thirst! I use to see Her daily.

[Ch 30 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Descendant of Raghu! I am telling how that Rāvaṇa can be killed. Perform, in this very month of Śśvina, the vow the devotion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Descendant of Raghu! I am now telling how that Rāvaṇa can be killed. Perform, in this very month of Āśvin, the vow with devotion.

[Ch 30 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Fasting for nine nights, the worship of the Bhagavati, and repeating the Mantram silently and performing the Homa ceremony, observing all the rules, will certainly fulfill one's all the desires.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Fasting for nine nights, the worship of the Bhagavatī, and repeating the Mantram silently and performing the Homa ceremony, observing all the rules, will certainly fulfill one’s all the desires.

[Ch 30 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In days of yore, Viṣṇu, Śiva and Brahmā and the Devas in the Heavens all performed this worship of the Goddess.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In days of yore, Viṣṇu, Śiva and Brahmā and the Devas in the Heavens all performed this worship of the Goddess.

[Ch 30 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Rāghava! Every person desiring happiness, specially those that have fallen under great difficulties, ought to do this auspicious ceremony, without the least hesitation.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Rāghava! Every person desiring happiness, specially those that have fallen under great difficulties, ought to do this auspicious ceremony, without the least hesitation.

[Ch 30 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Kakuttsha! Viśvāmitra, Bhrgu, Vasistha and Kaśyapa all of them did this worship before. When some stole away the wife of Bhraspati, the Guru of the Devas, he, too, by the force of this worship, got his wife back. Therefore O king! dost thou also celebrate the Pūjā for the destruction of Rāvana."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Kākutstha! Viśvamitra, Bhṛgu, Vaśiṣṭha and Kaśyapa all of them did this worship before. When some stole away the wife of Bṛhaspati, the Guru of the Devas, he, too, by the force of this worship, got his wife back. Therefore O king! dost thou also celebrate the Pūjā for the destruction of Rāvaṇa.

[Ch 30 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O high minded one! This vow was practised before by Indra for the destruction of Vītra, by Śiva for killing the demon Tripura, by Nārāyana for the killing of the demons Madhu and Kaitabha; so you should also firmly resolve to perform duly this vow with your whole heart.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O high minded one! This vow was practised before by Indra for the destruction of Vritra, by Śiva for killing the demon Tripurā, by Nārāyaṇa for the killing of the demons Madhu and Kaiṭava; so you should also firmly resolve to perform duly this vow with your whole heart.”

[Ch 30 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Rāma replied: “O Ocean of Knowledge! Who is that Devi? What is Her influence; whence has She sprung? What is Her Name? And how is that vow to be duly observed? Kindly describe all these to me in detail.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Rāma replied :-- “O Ocean of Knowledge! Who is that Devī? What is Her influence; whence has She sprung? What is Her Name? And how is that vow to be duly observed? Kindly describe all these to me in detail.”

[Ch 30 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada answered: “Listen, O Rāghava! That Goddess is Eternal and Ever Constant Primordial Force. If you worship Her, all your difficulties will be removed and all your desires will be fulfilled.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada answered :-- “Listen, O Rāghava! That Goddess is Eternal and Ever Constant Primordial Force. If you worship Her, all your difficulties will be removed and all your desires will be fulfilled.

[Ch 30 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She is the source of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and others and of all these living beings. Without Her force, no body would be able even to move their limbs."
NEW CORR ENG ──► She is the source of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and others and of all these living beings. Without Her force, no body would be able even to move their limbs.

[Ch 30 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That Supreme Auspicious Goddess is the preserving energy of Viṣṇu, is the creative power of Brahmā, and is the destroying force of Śiva.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► That Supreme Auspicious Goddess is the preserving energy of Viṣṇu, is the creative power of Brahmā, and is the destroying force of Śiva.

[Ch 30 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whatever there exists in this infinite Universe, whether Temporal or Eternal, She is the Underlying Force of all; how, then, can She have an origin.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whatever there exists in this infinite Universe, whether Temporal or Eternal, She is the Underlying Force of all; how, then, can She have an origin!

[Ch 30 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her origin is not Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa, Sun, Indra, or the other Devas, not this Earth nor this Upholder of the Earth; She is devoid of any qualities, the Giver of Salvation of all, the Full Prakrti. In the time of the final dissolution of this Universe, She lives with the Supreme Puruṣa."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her origin is not Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa, Sun, Indra, or the other Devas, not this Earth nor this Upholder of the Earth; She is devoid of any qualities, the Giver of Salvation of all, the Full Prakriti. In the time of the final dissolution of this Universe, She lives with the Supreme Puruṣa.

[Ch 30 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She is also Saguna, full of qualities, and is the Creatrix of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa and has empowered them, in every way, to create the three Lokas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She is also Saguṇa, full of qualities, and is the Creatrix of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa, and has empowered them, in every way, to create the three Lokas.

[Ch 30 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She is the Supreme Knowledge, existing before the Vedas, and the Originator of the Vedas. The individual souls, knowing Her Nature, become able to free themselves from the bondages of the world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She is the Supreme Knowledge, existing before the Vedas, and the Originator of the Vedas. The individual souls, knowing Her Nature, become able to free themselves from the bondages of the world.

[Ch 30 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She is known by endless names. The Brahmā and the other Devas might choose to call Her according to their actions and qualities. I am unable to describe those names.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She is known by endless names. The Brahmā, and the other Devas might choose to call Her according to their actions and qualities. I am unable to describe those names.

[Ch 30 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O descendant in the race of Raghu! Her names are formed by the various cominations of the various vowels and consonants from the letter “A” to the letter “Kṣa”.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O descendant in the race of Raghu! Her endless names are formed by the various combinations of the various vowels and consonants from the letter ‘A’ to the letter ‘Kṣa.

[Ch 30 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Rāma said: “O best of the Munis! Describe briefly all the rules and regulations as to how that vow and worship are to be performed. With my heart, full of devotion and faith, I will worship the Goddess to day.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Rāma said :-- “O best of the Munis! Describe briefly all the rules and regulations as to how that vow and worship are to be performed. With my heart, full of devotion and faith, I will worship the Goddess today.”

[Ch 30 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada said: “O Rāghava! On a level plot of ground, prepare an altar. Place the Goddess there and fast for nine days.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- “O Rāghava! On a level plot of ground, prepare an altar. Place the Goddess there and fast for nine days.

[Ch 30 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O king! I will be your priest and I will, great energy, carry out this yajña to fulfil the work of the Gods.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! I will be your priest and I will, with great energy, carry out this yajña to fullfil the work of the Gods.”

[Ch 30 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Then the powerful Bhagavān Hari, hearing all from the Muni, believed them to be true; and, on the approach of the month of Āśvina, Śrimaddevitbhāgavatam prepared the alter on the top of a hill and placed the Auspicious Goddess, one World Mother and, observing all the rules, performed the vow and worshipped the Goddess.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Then the powerful Bhagavān Hari, hearing all from the Muni, believed them to be true; and, on the approach of the month of Āśvin, prepared the altar on the top of a hill and placed the Auspicious Goddess, the World Mother and, observing all the rules, performed the vow and worshipped the Goddess.

[Ch 30 Verse 43-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When, on the grand night of the Eighth lunar day, the two brothers completed the vow as told by Nārada, the Supreme Bhagavati was pleased with the worship and appeared before them, mounted on a lion, and remaining there on the mountain top, addressed Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, in a sweet grave tone, like the rumbling of a rain cloud, thus: “Rama, I am satisfied with your worship; ask from me what you desire.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► When, on the grand night of the Eighth lunar day, the two brothers completed the vow as told by Nārada, the Supreme Bhagavatī was pleased with the worship and appeared before them, mounted on a lion, and remaining there on the mountain top, addressed Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, in a sweet grave tone, like the rumbling of a rain cloud, thus :-- “Rāma, I am satisfied with your worship; ask from me what you desire.

[Ch 30 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Rāma! You are sent by the gods for the destruction of Rāvaṇa and are born as a part incarnate of Nārāyaṇa, in the pure and stainless family of Manu.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Rāma! You are sent by the gods for the destruction of Rāvaṇa and are born as a part incarnate of Nārāyaṇa, in the pure and stainless family of Manu.

[Ch 30 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is You that, in ancient times, incarnated as a fish for serving the purpose of the Devas and preserved the Vedas by killing the terrible Rāksasas for the welfare of the Universe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is You that, in ancient times, incarnated as a fish for serving the purpose of the Devas and preserved the Vedas by killing the terrible Rākṣasas for the welfare of the Universe.

[Ch 30 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is You that incarnated as a tortoise and held aloft the Mandara mountain, churned the ocean and nourished the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is You that incarnated as a tortoise and held aloft the Mandara mountain, churned the ocean and nourished the Devas.

[Ch 30 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Rāma! It is You that incarnated, in days of yore, as a boar and held aloft on your teeth this earth. It is You that assumed the form of a Man-Lion and preserved Prahlāda, by tearing asunder the body of Hiranya Kaśipu, by your sharp nails.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Rāma! It is You that incarnated, in days of yore, as a boar and held aloft on your teeth this earth. It is You that assumed the form of a Man-Lion and preserved Prahlāda, by tearing asunder the body of Hiraṇya Kaśipu, by Your sharp nails.

[Ch 30 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Descent of Raghu! It is You that assumed, in ancient times, the form of a dwarf and served the purpose of the Devas, by deceitfully cheating Bali, the younger of Indra."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Descent of Raghu! It is You that assumed, in ancient times, the form of a dwarf and served the purpose of the Devas, by deceitfully cheating Balī, the younger of Indra.

[Ch 30 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O son of Kauśalyā! You incarnated as the son of Jamadagni in the Brāhimin family, extirpated the line of Kṣaṭtriya kings and gave over this whole earth to Bhagavān Kaśyapa Rsi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O son of Kauśalya! You incarnated as the son of Jamadagni in the Brāhmin family, extirpated the line of Kṣattrīya kings and gave over this whole earth to Bhagavān Kaśyapa Ṛṣi.

[Ch 30 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So You are now born as the son of Daśaratha, in stainless race of Kakuttha, at the request of the Devas, harassed by Rāvana.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So You are now born as the son of Daśaratha, in the stainless race of Kākutstha, at the request of the Devas, harassed by Rāvaṇa.

[Ch 30 Verse 55-56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► These powerful monkeys, born as Deva incarnates, all endowed with great power by Me, will help you. Your younger brother Lakṣmana is the incarnate of Śeṣa serpent; this indomitable man will kill undoubtedly Indrajit, the son of Rāvana.
NEW CORR ENG ──► These powerful monkeys, born as Deva incarnates, all endowed with great power by Me, will help you. Your younger Lakṣmaṇa is the incarnate of Śeṣa serpent; this indomitable man will kill undoubtedly Indragit, the son of Rāvaṇa.

[Ch 30 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You will kill Ravana; then you would worship Me, with great devotion, in the vernal season and then enjoy your kingdom according to your liking.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You will kill Rāvaṇa; then you would worship Me, with great devotion, in the vernal season and then enjoy your kingdom according to your liking.

[Ch 30 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O best of the Raghus! For full eleven thousand years you will reign on this earth; and after that re-enter your heavenly abode."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O best of the Raghus! For full eleven thousand years you will reign on this earth; and after that reenter your heavenly abode.”

[Ch 30 Verse 59-60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! Thus saying, the Devi disappeared. Rāma Candra became very glad and, completing that most auspicious ceremony, performed the Vijaya Pūjā on the tenth day and gave lots of presents to Nārada and made him go towards the ocean.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! Thus saying, the Devī disappeared. Rāma Candra became very glad and, completing that most auspicious ceremony, performed the Bejoyā Pūjā on the tenth day and gave lots of presents to Nārada and made him go towards the ocean.

[Ch 30 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Thus stimulated by the Supreme Energy, the Highest Goddess brought front to fornt, Rāmacandra, the husband of Kamalā, went to the shores of the orcean, accompanied by Lakṣmana and the monkeys. Then he erected the bridge across the ocean and killed Rāvaṇa, the enemy of the gods. His unparalleled fame spread every where throughout the three Lokas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Thus stimulated by the Supreme Energy, the Highest Goddess brought front to front, Rāmacandra, the husband of Kamalā, went to the shores of the ocean, accompanied by Lakṣmaṇa and the monkeys. Then he erected the bridge across the ocean and killed Rāvaṇa, the enemy of the gods. His unparalleled fame spread everywhere throughout the three Lokas.

[Ch 30 Verse 62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He who hears with devotion his excellent account of the Devi, will get the greatest happiness in this world, and, in the end, will get the final beatitude. There is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He who hears with devotion this excellent account of the Devī, will get the greatest happiness in this world, and, in the end, will get the final beatitude. There is no doubt in this.

[Ch 30 Verse 63-64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! There are extant many other Purāṇas, but none is equal to this Śrimadevibhāgavatam. Know, this is my firm belief. Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter on the narration of the Navarātra ceremony by Nārada and the performance of that by Rāma Candra in the Third Book in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa. Here ends the Third Book. ***
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! There are extant many other Purāṇas, but none is equal to this Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam. Know, this is my firm belief. Here ends the thirtieth chapter on the narration of the Navarātra ceremony by Nārada and the performance of that by Rāma Candra in the 3rd Adhyāya in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa. Here ends
