CHAPTER VIII

On the King Revata and the Solar Dynasty

जनमेक्य उवाच

संगयो5यं महान्ब्रह्मावर्तैं मप मानते ।

ब्रह्मलोकगतो राजा रेवतीरंसुक्ता स्वयम् ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: O Brāhmaṇa! The King was a Kṣattriya; how could he go himself with his

daughter Revati to the Brahmaloka (the abode of Brahmā)? I entertain a great doubt on this point.

मया पूर्वे शूनं कृत्कनं ब्रह्मोण्यः कबान्ते ।

ब्राह्मणो ब्रह्माधिष्यन्तो ब्रह्लोकमवान्युन्त ।। २ ॥

राजा कर्वं गततरतर रेवतीसंयुतः स्वयम् ।

सत्योकें3तिद्यूपरे भूर्नैकादिति संशयः ॥ ३ ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

I heard of yore while conversing about matters connected with the Brāhmins, that the Brāhmin only who self-restrained and the knower of Brahman could alone go to the Brahmaloka. The Satyaloka is very hard for the worldly people to go; so I doubt how the king could have gone with Revatī from the Bhūrloka to the Satyaloka.

भृत: स्वर्गमवाणोति सर्वग्रासेषु निरणयः ।

मानुषेण तु देते बहतफोके गति: कथम् ।

Man, when he discards his body, can go to the Heavens. So is recited in all the Śāstras. How then, people, while, in their human bodies can go to the Brahmaloka.

खर्गाल्युनः कर्थ लोके मानुषे जायते गति: ॥ 4 ॥

एतन्ने संगयं विद्रेश्तेनुमहिंस संग्रान् ।

यथा गता गतस्तत्र प्रयुकामः प्रजापतिन् ॥ 5 ॥

So cut asunder my doubts how the King Revata could go to the Brahma loka to ask the Prajāpati on certain matters.

व्यास उवाच

मेरोस्तु शिजारे राजन्सर्वें लोका: प्रतिभिताः ।

इन्ट्रलोको वाहिलोको या च संबमपी पूर्णी ॥ 6 ॥

तवैव सत्यलोकश्र केलासक्ष तथा पुनः ।

वैकुण्डछु पुनस्तत्र वैष्णवं पदमुच्यते ॥ 7 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! On the top of the mountain Sumeru, are located the Indra's heavens called Amarāvatī (the abode of the Immortals) the Samyamani city of Yama, the Satyaloka, the Vahniloka, the Kailāsa, Vaikuntha the abode of Viṣṇu and others.

यथाजुनैः शकलोके गतः पार्थों धनुधरः ।

पशु वर्षाणि कौतोनः स्थितस्तत्र सुरालये ॥ 8 ॥

मानुपेणिव देहेन वासवस्य च सविष्टी ।

तथेवायैरिध भूपानतः ककुल्वयमुपुजा: किल ॥ 9 ॥

The great archer Arjuna, the son of Prthā, went to the Indraloka and spent five years there. In ancient times, the Kings Kakuttha and others went to Indraloka, in their human bodies.

स्वलोकानतः पशाद्विधाशी महाकावतः ।

जित्वेन्सदनं प्राय सँस्थितास्तत्र कामतः ॥ 10 ॥

महाधिषः पुरा राजा ब्रह्मलोकं गतः स्वाद् ।

आगच्छतीं नृयो गंगामपर्यच्चातिसुन्दीय ॥ १ १ ॥

Even the powerful Daityas used to conquer the Indraloka and resided there at their will and pleasure. In ancient times, when the sovereign of the earth, the King Mahābhisa went to the Brahmaloka, the most beautiful Gāngā also was coming to the Brahmaloka.

वायुर्नांबरम्यस्तु दैवादपहतं नृप । किंचित्रान्ना नृपेणाय दृष्टा सा सुन्दरी तथा ॥ १२ ॥ सितं चकार कामातैः सा च किंचिज्जहास् वै ।

ब्रहणा तौ तदा दृष्टी शणतो जाती वसुंधगम् ॥ १३ ॥

On the way the King saw Her. O King! Accidentally at that time her clothing were cast aside by the wind; the King saw her partly in her naked state, and, overpowered with lust, smiled; Gāngā also smiled. Seeing the states of them, Brahmā instantly cursed them; and they had to come in this world and take their births.

बैकुण्ठेडीप सुरा: सर्वे पीडिता देत्यदानये: ।

गत्वा हरि जनगाथयमलुच्कमलायातिम् ॥ 14 ॥

सन्देहो नात्र कन्धेल: स्वांगा नृपसतम ।

गयाम: सर्वेर्पि लोका: सूर्मनिवानों नारीधि ॥ 15 ॥

All the Devas, when oppressed by the Dānavas, went to Vaikuntha and sang hymns to Hari, the Lord of Kamalā. O King! Men can go to all the Lokas; in fact those high-souled men that perform Yajñas or severe asceticisms and thus have acquired great merits, those performers of Sacrifices and ascetics surely go to the Heavens.

अव्ययं कृतपुर्णनां तापसानां नाराधि ।

पुण्यसूद्राव एवारा गमने कारणं नृप ॥ 16 ॥

तथैव यजमानानां यजेन भाषितात्मनाम् ।

O King! It is only the abundance of good merits that is the only cause of going to Heavens. So you ought not to entertain any doubts on this.

जनमेव अन्य

रेवातो रेवाती कन्यां गृहीत्वा चाहलोचनाम् ॥ 17 ॥

बह्वालेकं गत: पश्ञाक्के कृतं तेन धृषुज्ञ।

Book VII Chapter VII

ब्रद्गण किं समादिष्ट कम्पै दत्ता सुता पुनः ॥ 18 ॥

तल्पवं विस्तारबुद्धान्काय त्वं मामधान्ना ।

Janamejaya said: O Muni! The King Revata went with his daughter Revatī to the Brahmaloka; but what did he do when he went there? What did Brahmā order him? And to whom did the King betroth his daughter, when ordered by Brahmā? O Brāhmanā! Speak out all these in details to me now.

व्यास उवाच

निशामय महीपाल राजा रेवतक: किल ॥ 19 ॥

पुर्या वरं परिषुं बढ़ालोकं नातो यदा ।

आवर्तमाने गान्यर्य स्थितो लक्ष्यक्षणः क्षणम् ॥ 20 ॥

भृणवत्रतृयद्धृघाता सभायां तु सकन्यकः ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hear. When the King went to Brahmaloka to ask about the proper bridegroom of his daughter, there was going on singing and music; so he waited a while to find an opportunity when the assembly would have a leisure; but he was so very pleased with music that he could not desist from hearing it till the end.

समाप्ते तत्र नाभ्यई प्रणाय्य परमेध्वरम् ॥ 21 ॥

हर्षीयिता सुता तस्ये साधिपार्यं न्यदेवत् ।

When the music was finished, the King bowed down to Brahmā and showed him his daughter and informed Him of his intention.

राजोवाच

वर्ग कथय देदेग कन्येय मप चुकिता ॥ 22 ॥

देया कस्मै मया ब्रह्न्यूषु त्वां समुपागतः ।

बहवो राजपुत्रा मे वीक्षिताः: कुलसंपवाः: ॥ 23 ॥

कर्मधीछ्य मेमः कामं नोपातिष्ठित चक्रतम् ।

The King said: “O Deva! This good daughter is mine; now kindly say who will be her bridegroom. O Brahmā! To whom shall I betroth this daughter? I have come to you to ask on this point. I have searched for many princes and seen also a good many of them and none of them is to my liking and so my mind is not at rest.

तस्माचां देवदेवेश प्रष्ट्रभागातोउस्मह्मूं ॥ 24 ॥

तद्वात्राय सर्वैत्र योग्यं राजसुतं वरम् ।

कुलीनं बलवन्तं च सर्वतक्षणसंयुतम् ॥ 25 ॥

दातातं धर्मशीलं च राजयुं समाधिरा ।

O Lord of Devas! Therefore I have come to you. Kindly select one bridegroom for her. He is to be a Kulina (of good family), powerful, religious, liberal, and a prince endowed with all auspicious qualities. This is my prayer."

ध्यास उवाच

तदाकरणं जगत्कर्तों बेचनं नृपतेस्तदा ॥ 26 ॥

तमुवाच हसन्वाययं यद्धवो कालस्य पयंवम् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Brahmā, the lotus born, the Creator of the world, hearing these words, laughed, thinking that a very long interval had passed away. He then said:

ब्रहीावाच

राजपूत्रास्वया राजन्वरं ये हृदये कृतः ॥ 27 ॥

प्रस्ता: कालेन वे सर्वे सिवपूर्णैवबाधायः ।

O King! The princes that you thought would become the bridegroom of your daughter, all died; their sons and grandsons and their friends even have all passed away.

सप्तविंशरामोड़हीय द्वारस्तु प्रवर्तते ॥ 28 ॥

वंशजासे मृताः सर्वे पुरी दैर्वैर्वितुक्ति ।

सोमवर्शी.द्वावस्तर तथा राज्य प्रणास्ति हु ॥ 29 ॥

उप्रमेने इति ख्यातो मयुगाधिपति: किल ।

The twenty-seventh Manvantara of the Dvāpara Yuga is now going on, so none of the princes of your family are now existing. The Daityas sacked the King of Mathurā, is reigning in that place.

ययातिवंशसम्पृतो राजा माधुयमण्डले ॥ 30 ॥

उद्यनेतान्मतः कंस: सुरुद्धी महाबलः ।

दैन्येश: पितरं सोर्धि कारागारे न्येशगवत् ॥ 31 ॥

स्वयं राज्यं चकातसौ नृपाणां मदगवितः ।

मेदिती चातिभातां ब्रहाणं गरणं गता ॥ 32 ॥

दुष्टाराज्यसैन्यानां भारणांतिसमाकुला ।

अंगावततर्णं तत्र गतिद्त सुसततमैः ॥ 33 ॥ ॥

He belongs to the illustrious lunar family of Yayāti. His son, the powerful Karīsa, born of a

Dānava, began to do injuries always to the Devas; he threw his own father to the prison. Becoming very haughty, he began to govern himself the countries of other kings and began to tyrranise over the subjects. O King! The Earth became so much troubled by the armies of the wicked Demon Kings, that She became quite unable to bear further loads. So She went to seek refuge to Brahmā.

वासुदेव समुपघः कृष्णः कमललोचनः ।

देवक्वां देवसुधिण्यां योउसी नारायणोयुः नि 3 4 1 ||

तपश्वार दुःसाध्ये धर्मपुः: सन्तानतः ।

संगतीरां नसुरखा: पुण्ये बदिरिकाभेमे ॥ 3 5 ॥

Brahmā and the other Devas then began to say: "O Earth! To remove your burdens, the lotus-eyed Nārāyaṇa will incarnate Himself as part incarnation in the form of Śri Krṣṇa. He who is Nārāyaṇa practised in ancient times, as the son of Dharma, a very severe asceticism, in company with his brother Nara in the sacred hermitage of Badarī.

सोउवतीर्णं यदुकुले वासुदेवोप्र विश्रुतः ।

तेनासी नितहः पापः केसः कृष्णोस सन्ति ॥ 36 ॥

Now this very Deva is born in the great family of Yadu in the womb of Devakī by Vasudeva and is now celebrated by the name of Vāsudeva."

उप्रसेनाय राज्यं वै दर्तं दल्या खलं सुतम् ।

कंसस्य श्रुगुरः पापो ज्ञासंधी महावलः ॥ 37 ॥

O King! He has slain that vicious wicked Kanisa and has installed Ugrasena in his place. The very powerful Jarāsandha, the vicious King of Magadha, is the father-in-law of Karīsa. On hearing the death of his son-in-law, he became in infuriated with rage came to Mathurā, and raged a terrible war.

अगत्य मवृरा कोधाचकार संरं पूरा ।

कृष्णोनासी सितः संख्ये जरासीधे महावलः ॥ ३ ८ ॥

प्रेयवायास युद्धाय सवलं यवंन ततः ।

शुवायानं महूलूरं ससैच्यं यवतानिधपम् ॥ ३ ९ ॥

Vāsudeva defeated in a battle that Jarāsandha, proud of his mighty valour. Though defeated, Jarāsandha sent Kālayavana with his host of army to fight again with Krṣṇa. Bhārgava Vāsudeva,

when he heard that the King of Yavanas arrived, sent away all the members of his family and the Yādavas to Dvārkā and began to wait with his brother Balarāma for the Yavana King. Then he went alone to the camp of Yavana and led him away to a mountain cave where was sleeping the King Mucukunda and had then the Yavana King slain by Mucukunda.

कृष्णसुं मदुगतं त्यकत्वा पुरुरं द्वारवतीमगात् ।

प्रभानां तां पुरीं कृष्ण: शिलियपि: सह मंसी: ।

कार्यामास दुगांखी हडुशालाविमणिद्धात् ।

जीणोंद्वारं पुरः कृत्वा वासुदेवः प्रापवान् ।

उउसेनं च राजानं चकार वारणवर्तिनम् ॥ 

याद्वान्स्थाप्यामास द्वारलयं यदुतमः ।

वासुदेवस्तु तजाछ वर्तते बान्यदेः सह ॥ 4 0 ॥

Kṛṣṇa then went to Dvārkā. The city of Dvārkā was then in a dilapidated condition. Kṛṣṇa brought together the artists and got built exquisitely the beautiful palaces, forts, and markets and stalls, etc., and so added to the beauty of the place. That Vāsudeva, of mighty prowess, thus improving the city, made Ugrasena the King of that place; and Kṛṣṇa is now waiting there with his friends.

तस्याप्र: स विश्वगतो बलदेचो हलायुधः ।

गेशांगो मुसली बीगे वरोसंसु तव संमतः ॥ 4 1 ॥

His elder brother Baladeva, the carrier of the plough, is celebrated. Thus he with Muśala in his hands is a great warrior and the part incarnation of Ananta Deva.

संकर्षणाय देहागुण कन्यां कमललोचनाम् ।

रेकर्ती बलभघ्राय विवाहविधिना ततः ॥ 42 ॥

He is the fit bridegroom of your daughter. So give your daughter in marriage, without any delay, according to the rules of the marriage ceremony to Sankarşana Balabhadra.

दत्वा पुत्री तृपक्ष्र पाछ्छ लं बदारिकाओमम् ।

तपस्तनुं सुरातमं पावनं कामदं नृणम् ॥ 43 ॥

After giving your daughter in marriage, go to the hermitage of Badari and practise tapasyā. That sacred retreat is the (park) recreation ground of the

Book VII Chapter VIII

Devas, holy and yielding to human beings the objects of their desires.

व्यास उवाच

इति राजा समादिष्ठी ब्रह्माण पच्योनिना ।

जगाम तसरा राजन्द्राकों कन्यायन्ति: ॥ 44 ॥

ददौ तां बलदेवाय कन्यां वै शुभतक्षणाम् ।

ततसस्त्वा तपस्तीत्रं नृपति: कालपर्ये ॥ 45 ॥

जगाम तिःदशावासं त्यक्त्वा देहं सरित्ते ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus ordered by the lotus-born Brahmā, the King went to Dvārakā with his daughter. Reaching there he gave over his all auspicious daughter in marriage to Baladeva duly according to the rules and regulations. At last, according to Brahmā's injunction, he became engaged in severe austerities in the Badarikāśrama and, when the time of death arrived, left off his mortal coil on the banks of the river and went to the world of Gods.

जनमेव जवाच

भगवान्महाद्धार्थ भवता समुदाहतम् ॥ 46 ॥

रेवतस्तु चित्यतन्त्र ब्रह्मलोके सुतावंतः ।

युगानां तु गतं तत्र शनमघोत्रं चिकल ॥ 47 ॥

कन्या कुद्धा न संज्ञात तरका वाजिततां नु किम ।

एतावंतं तथा कालमायुः पूर्ण तयोः कवम् ॥ 48 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Bhagavan! You have uttered one wonderful thing. One hundred and eight Yugas passed away when the King of Revata with his daughter was deeply absorbed in hearing music in the Brahmaloka yet neither the good King nor the daughter did get sufficiently old. How could this be! How could they have lived so long! Were their longevities ordained to be such a long period!

यास उवाच

न जरा श्रुतिपासा वा न मृतूनं भयं पुनः ।

न तु लाना: प्रभवति ब्रह्मलोके सद्धान्य ॥ 49 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Brahmaloka is not touched by any vice nor sin; old age, hunger, thirst or fear of death nothing exists there; nor is there any other cause by which weariness comes. So what

doubt there can be that the people there will be long-lived, free from old age and death!

मेहं गतस्य शयिते: सन्ती राक्षसैहिता ।

गता: कुसास्यती लक्चल भवभीता इतस्ततः ॥ 50 ॥

मनोक्ष क्ष्वतः पुत्र उन्यको वीर्यवंततः ।

इक्षाकुपिति विद्यानतः सूर्येशंगकस्तु सः ॥ 51 ॥

When the King Śaryāti went up to the Heavens, his sons were all destroyed by the Rāksasas; those that remained, they, terrified left Kuśasthalī and fled on all sides. Vaivāsvata Manu sneized; owing to that, came out of his nose one powerful son; his name was Iksvāku.

वंशार्थ तय आतिरुक्छेरीं छायाला निरंतरम् ।

नारदस्योपदेशेन प्रायः दीक्षामनुतमम् ॥ 52 ॥

तस्य पुत्रगतं रावजिश्वकांकीरिति विश्रुतम् ।

विकृक्षिः प्रथमस्तेषां व्रतवीर्यमन्त्रितः ॥ 53 ॥

He spread the Solar dynasty and became celebrated. Getting excellent initiation from the Maharsi Nārada, he began to meditate the Devi constantly and practised severe tapasyā for the spread of his race. O King! Ikyāvāu had one hundred sons; Vūkṣṭiṣṭiṣṭiṣṭiṣṭiṣṭiṣṭiṣṭiṣṭiṣṭiṣṭiṣṭiṣटि.

अयोभ्यायां स्थिति राजा इक्यावुर्गिति विश्वतः ।

शकुनिमुभुक्ता: पुत्र: पंचागघृतवलतर: ॥ ५४ ॥

उत्तरायपदोशस्य रथिततः कृततः किल ।

Ikyāvāu became king and lived in Ayodhyā. He sent his fifty sons, the powerful Śakuni and others to Uttarāpatha (Eastern) provinces for governing those countries.

दक्षिणस्यां तथा राज्ञानिद्रासतेन ते सुता: ॥ 55 ॥

चत्वारिणशापाठी च रक्षणार्थ महात्मना ।

अन्यी द्वौ संस्थिती पार्थे सेवार्थ तस्य घूपते: ॥ 56 ॥

इति श्रीमद्धैर्षिगागते महापुराणे सप्तमकन्दोर्धुगोस्थाव: ॥ 8 ॥ 11

That high-souled monarch hath sent also other eight sons to govern the countries in the South. (Western). O King! He kept the remaining two sons by his side for his own service.

Here ends the Eight Chapter of the Seventh Book on

the story of the King Revata and the spread of the

Solar dynasty in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevī-bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

