CHAPTER III

On the Origin of Brahīmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa and others

श्रीनारायण उवाच

अथ तिषं जले तिष्थ्नावढ़े ब्रहाणो वयः ।

ततः से काले सुसरा त्रिपाभूता बभूव ह ॥1॥

तम्पणे शिशुरिकेशु शगकांटिरक्षिपभः ।

क्षणं तोरूवमाणश्च सतनंधः पीडितः क्षुधा ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Devars! The egg (born of Mūla Prakṛti) that was floating in the waters for a period equal to the life period of Brahmā, now in the fulness of time, separated into two parts. Within that egg there was a powerful Child, lustrous like one thousand millions of suns. This child could not suck mother's milk, as it was forsaken by Her.

पिता माता परित्यचो जलमध्ये निताश्रवः ।

ब्रहांतांसंल्यानाथो यो ददर्गार्थ्यमानायत् ॥ ३ ॥

स्थूलात्स्वुलतमः सोउपि नामा देयी महाविराद् ।

परमाणुर्वीय सूक्ष्मात्पर: स्थूलात्साध्यमसी ॥ ४ ॥

So being tired of hunger, the child for a moment cried repeatedly. The child that will become the Lord of countless Brahmāṇḍas (universes), now an orphan having no father nor mother began to looks upwards from the waters. This body came to be denominated afterwards by the name of Mahā Virāt, when he became gross and grosser. As there is nothing finer than radium so there is nothing grosser than Mahā Virāt.

तेजसा घोड़शांगी3यं कृष्णस्य परमात्मनः ।

आधारः सर्वविक्रायनां महाविष्णुरच प्रक्रातः ॥ 5 ॥

प्रत्येकं लोमकुर्णेषु शिवपानि निविलापनि च ।

अस्थापि तेषां संख्यां च कृष्णो वक्तुं न हि क्षमः ॥ 6 ॥

The power of this Mahā Virāt one-sixteenth of that of Śrī Krṣna, the Highes Self. But this boy, (born of the Prakṛti Rādhā) is the Sole Stay of all this Universe and he is denominated by the name ‘Mahā-Viṣṇu’. In his every pore countless universe are existing. So much so that even Śrī Krṣna could not count them.

संख्या चेउरजसामस्ति विश्वानां न कदाचन ।

ब्रह्माधिष्णिशादीनां तथा संख्या न विघते ॥ 7 ॥

प्रतिविश्वेषु संनंये ब्रह्माधिष्णिशादयः ।

पातालाद्वहृतोकतां ब्रह्तांं परिकीर्तिन् ॥ 8 ॥

If it were possible to count the number of the dust particles, it is impossible to count the number of the Universe. So there are endless Brahmās, Viṣṇus, and Maheśvaras. In every Brahmāṇḍa, there is Brahmā Viṣṇu, and Maheśa. Each Brahmāṇḍa extends from Pātāla to the Brahmaloka. तत क्रयं च वैकुंठो ब्रह्मोडाहिरेव सः । तत क्रयं च गोलोकः पंचाशालीदयोजनः ॥ 9 ॥

नित्य: सत्यस्करणप्रथ यथा कृष्णसाधाय्यम् ।

सप्तद्वीपिता पृथ्वी सप्तसागारसंपुता ॥ 10 ॥

The abode of Vaikuntha is higher than that (i.e. it is situated outside of Brahmāṇḍa), again the abode of Goloka is fifty koti yojanas (50×10×4 ×2 million miles) higher than Vaikuntha. This Goloka Dhāma is eternal and real as Śrī Krṣna is eternal and real. This world composed of the seven islands is surrounded by the seven oceans.

कनपोचारुपद्वीपासंखुरीलवनान्विता ।

क्रधें सप्त स्वर्गलोका ब्रह्मलोकसम्पित्तः ॥ 1 1 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

पातालानि च सतधार्धीवं ब्राहोंदमेव च ।

Forty-nine Upa-Dvipa (smaller islands adjacent to then) are existing here. Besides there are countless mountains, and forests. Higher than this earth is the Brahmaloka with seven heavens and below this are the seven Pātālas. This is the bounding limit of Brahmānda.

क्रर्षे धाराया भूतोंको घुवलोकस्ततः परम् ॥ १२ ॥

ततः परश्व स्वलोंको जनलोकस्तथापर: ।

ततः परस्पोलोकाः सत्यलोकस्ततः परः ॥ 13 ॥

ततः परं ब्रह्मोकल्पतकांचनसरिष्यः ।

एवं सर्वे कृत्रिमं च बाहाप्यन्तरोयचे च ॥ 14 ॥

Just above this earth there is the Bhūrloka; above is Bhuvarloka; then Svarloka, then Janarloka, then Taparloka, then Satyaloka, and above that is Brahmaloka. The splendour of Brahmaloka is like that of molten gold. But all the substances whether outside or inside this Brahmaloka, are transient.

तद्वितगे विनगक्षे सर्वेपामेव नारद ।

जलबुदुद्वत्सर्वे शिवसंयमानित्यकम् ॥ 15 ॥

नित्यौ गोलोककैकुंटी प्रोली गशवदुकामे ।

प्रत्येकं लोगकृप्पे बढ़ाई परिनिश्रितम् ॥ 16 ॥

When this Brahmāṇḍa (cosmos) dissolves, everything dissolves and is destroyed. All are temporary like bubbles of water. Only Goloka and Vaikunthā are eternal. In every pore of this Mahā Virāt is existing one Brahmāṇḍa (cosmos).

पूर्ण संख्या न जानाति कृष्णोन्यसायि का कवा ।

प्रत्येक प्रतिबढ़ांडं ब्रहविष्यणिवादः ॥ 17 ॥

तिः: कोट्यः सुराणां च संख्या सर्वेत्र पुत्रक ।

दिनीगाश्रव दिव्यपाला नक्षत्राणि ग्रहादयः ॥ 18 ॥

What to speak of others even Kṛṣna cannot count the number of these Brahmāṇdas. In every Brahmāṇda there is Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa. O Child Nārada! In every Brahmāṇda, the number of the gods is three kotis or 30 millions. Some of them are the Dikpatis (the Regents of the quarters); some are the Dikpālas (the Rulers of the Quarters), some are asterisms, and some planets.

पुवि वर्णाधु चत्वारोप्रधयो नागाधुशार्वा: ।

अथ कालेन स विगाङूर्ध्ये दृष्टा पुनः पुनः ॥ १९ ॥

दिंघांतरे च गृन्यं हि द्वितीयं च न किंचन ।

चितामावय शुवृत्तो रोते व पुनः पुनः ॥ 20 ॥

In the Bhūrloka, there are four Varpas (Brāhmins etc.), and in the Pātālas there are Nāgas. Thus the Universe exists composed of moveable and non-moveable things (this is Brahmāndā Vivṛti). O Nārada! Now the Virāt Puruṣa began to look up to the skies again and again but He could not see anything within that egg except the void.

ज्ञानं प्रायः तदा द्यौ कृष्णं वरमपुर्षम् ।

ततो ददर्ग तर्ने ब्रह्म्यज्योति: सनातनम् ॥ 21 ॥

नवीनजलद्यमां दिषुर्ज पीतवाससम् ।

ससितं मृगलैहरतं भक्तानुग्रहकातम् ॥ 22 ॥

Then distressed with hunger he cried out repeatedly and became merged in anxiety. Next moment getting back his consciousness, he began to think of Kṛṣṇa, the Highest Person and saw there at once the eternal light of Brahma. He saw there His form as deep blue like new rain-cloud; with two hands, garment of a yellow colour, sweet smile on His face, flute in His hand and He seemed to be very anxious to show His Grace to Devotees.

जहास बालकस्तुओं द्वृष्टा जनकमीक्षण ।

वरं तदा ददौ तस्मै वरेण: समयोचितम् ॥ 23 ॥

मत्समो ज्ञानयुकतश कृत्यिपयासाद्वितिः ।

ब्रह्मांडासंख्यनिलमो भव वत्स लयावधि ॥ 24 ॥

Looking at the Lord, His Father, the boy became glad and smiled. The Lord, the Bestower of boon granted him boons appropriate for that moment ‘O Child! Let you possess knowledge like Me; let your hunger and thirst vanish; let you be the holder innumerable Brahmāṇḍas till the time of Pralaya (the universal dissolution).

निष्कामो निर्यश्रैश्व सर्वेधां वरदो भव ।

जरामूल्योगणोकपीडादिवर्जिते भव ॥ 25 ॥

इत्युक्लवा तस्य कर्णे स महामांयं घडक्षरम् ।

त्रिःकुलश्व प्रजजाप वेदांगप्रवरं परम् ॥ 26 ॥

Be without any selfishness, be fearless and the bestower of boons to all. Let not old age, death, disease, sorrow nor any other ailings afflict thee.

Book IX Chapter III

Thus saying He repeated thrice on his ear the six-lettered great Mantra ‘Om Krṣṇāya Svāhā’ worshipped by the Vedas with their Aṅgas, the Giver of desires and the destrover of all troubles and calamities.

प्रणादिचतुर्थतं कृष्ण इत्यक्षत्रद्यम् ।

वहिजां यांतिभेषं च सर्वीक्षितर्हं परम् ॥ 27 ॥

मंत्र दत्ता तद्वाहारं कल्यमायाम वै विभुः ।

श्रूयतां तद्वहापुरि निवोधे कथायामि ते ॥ 28 ॥

प्रतिविषयं यद्रैवेदो द्वाति वैश्याजे जनः ।

तत्वोडशोगो विषयो विष्णो: पंचद्राग्यय तै ॥ 29 ॥

O Brahmā's Son! Thus giving the mantra, Śri Kṛṣṇa arranged for his fooding thus: In every universe, whatever offerings will be given to Śri Kṛṣṇa, one sixteenth of that will go to Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of Vaikuntha and fifteen-sixteenth is to go to this boy, the Virāt.

निरुर्णयताननर्शेव परिपूर्णतमस्य च ।

त्रेयेटे चैव कृष्णस्य न हि किंचित्ययोजनम् ॥ 30 ॥

यद्वदाति नैयेढ़ा तस्ये देवाय यो जनः ।

स च ख्याति ततवर्ते लक्ष्मीनाथो विवाद्य तथा ॥ 31 ॥

Śrī Krṣna did not allot any share for Himself. Himself transcending all the Gunas, and Full, He is always satisfied with Himself.

तं च मंत्रवं दर्चा तनुवाच पुनर्विषुः ।

वरमन किमिधे ते तमे बृहि ददामि च ॥ 32 ॥

कृष्णस्य वचनं मुक्ता तमुबाव विराव विधुः ।

कृष्णं तं वाकत्कसावझनं समयोचितम् ॥ 33 ॥

What necessity is there for any further offerings? Whatever the people offer with devotion, the Lord of Lakṣmī, the Virāt eats all these. Bhagavān Śrī Krṣna giving thus to the Virāt the boon and the Mantra said: 'O Child! Say what more you desire; I will give you that instantly.'

बालक उवाच

वरो मे त्वतद्याधोजेे पवित्तभंवृत् निश्ठता ।

सत्तं यावदायुर्मे क्षणं वा सुचितं च वा ॥ 34 ॥

The Virāt boy, hearing thus the words of Śri Kṛṣṇa, spoke: 'O Thou Omnipresent! I have got no desires whatsoever, save this that as long as I

live, whether for a short time or for a long time, let me have pure Bhakti towards Thy lotus feet.

त्वद्धिलयुक्तलोकेश्मस्रीवन्युक्तश्रंस्तम् ।

त्वद्धिलनींगे मूर्द्धिं शंकरविंग मृते है सः ॥ 35 ॥

किं तजपेन तपसा यजेन पूजेनेन च ।

ब्रतेन चोपवासेन पुण्येन तीर्थेसेवा ॥ 36 ॥

कृष्णभक्तिनिही-स्व मूर्द्धेयर जीवनं बुथा ।

येनात्मना जीवितशु तमेव न हि मन्त्ये ॥ 37 ॥

In this world he is Jivanmukta (liberated whilst living) who is your Bhakta; and that bewildered fool is dead while living who is devoid of any Bhakti to Thee. What needs he to perform Japam, asceticism, sacrifice, worship, holding fasts and observances, going to sacred places of pilgrimages and other virtuous acts if he be without any bhakti to Śrī Krṣṇa? Vain is his life who is devoid of any devotion to Śrī Krṣṇa, under Whose Grace he has obtained his life and Whom he does not now pay homage and worship.

यावदात्मा शरीरोस्ति नालत सशक्तिसंयुतः ।

पश्राधोति नते तस्मिन्वतंना: सर्वेशकतः ॥ 38 ॥

He is endowed with Śakti as long as Atmā (Self) resides in his body; no sooner the Ātma departs from his body all the Śaktis accompany him.

स च त्वं च महाभाग सर्वांना प्रकृते: परः ।

स्वेच्छामयश स्वर्दो बह्मज्योति: सनातनः ॥ ३९ ॥

इत्पुक्लवा कालकस्तत्र विरारम च नारद ।

उवाच कृष्ण: प्रतुव्रक्ति मनुगं श्रतिसुर्दीम् ॥ ४० ॥

O Great One! And Thou art the Universal Ātman (soul) who transcends Prakṛti, Who is All will, Primeval Person and of the nature of the Highest Light. O Child! Thus saying, the Virāt boy remained silent.

श्रीकृष्ण उवाच

सुचिरं सुस्थिरं तिष्ठ यथार्डं त्वं तथा भव ।

बहाणोसंख्यापते च पाततेने न भविष्यति ॥ 41 ॥

Śrī Kṛṣṇa then, spoke in sweet words: 'O Child! Let you remain as fresh as ever like Me. You will not have any fall even if innumerable Brahmās pass away.

अंगेन प्रतिबहाईं तं च शूर्यिवाड् भव ।

त्वात्रिभिपशाद्वहा च विश्वसहा भचिष्यति ॥ 42 ॥

ललाटे वह्वाणपरैव रूग्रडीकादणैर ते ।

शिवांगेन भचिष्यांत सृष्टिसंहरणाय वै ॥ 43 ॥

Let you divide yourself in parts and turn into smaller Virāṭs in every universe. Brahmā will spring from your navel and will create the cosmos. From the forehead of that Brahmā will spring eleven Rudras for the destruction of the creation. But they will all be parts of Śiva.

कालापिनरूसतेचेको विश्वसंहारकाकरः ।

पाता विष्णुश्र विष्णु स्त्रोंनेन भविष्यति ॥ 44 ॥

मद्धिलिनयुक्तः सन्तं भविष्यति वेगेन चे ।

धानेन कमनीयां मां नित्यं रुद्यसि निश्छितम् ॥ 45 ॥

The Ruler named Kālāgnī, of these eleven Rudras, will be the destroyer of all this Viśvas (cosmos). Besides, from each of your sub-divisions, the Viṣnu will originate and that Bhagavān Viṣnu will be Preserver of this Viśva world.

भारतं कर्मनीयं च मम वक्षःस्थलस्थितम् ।

यायि लोकं तिछ्र वसेलयुक्ना सांतरधीय। ॥४ ६ ॥

गत्वा स्वलोकं बढ़ाणों शंकरं समुवाच ह ।

स्वहांरं सदुपीर्णं च सहंतुं चैव तत्क्षणम् ॥ ४७ ॥

I say that under my favour you will always be full of Bhakti towards Me and so sooner you meditate on Me, you will be able to see My lovely form. There is no doubt in this; and your Mother, Who resides in My breast, will not be difficult for you to see. Let you remain here in ease and comfort. I now go to Goloka.

श्रीभगवानुवाच

सृष्टि सर्छु गच्छ वल्स नाभिपयोद्वोरो भव ।

महाविरावृ तलोमकुरो क्षुरस्य च विधो भृणु ॥ 48 ॥

गच्छ वल्स महादेव बहाभालोद्वो भव ।

Saying thus Śrī Krṣna, the Lord of world disappeared. Going to His own abode He spoke instantly to Brahmā and Śaṅkara, skilled in the works of creation and destruction: 'O Child Brahmā! Go quickly and be born in parts from the

navels of each of the smaller Virāts that will arise from the pores of the Great Virāt.

अंशेन च महाभाषा स्थयं च सुचिरं तय ॥ 49 ॥

इसुकुचना जानतां नाथो विरागा विधेः सुतः ।

जगाम द्वहा तं नत्वा शिक्षा शिवदायकः ॥ 50 ॥

O Child Mahādeva! Go and be born in parts from the forehead of each Brahmā in every universe for the destruction of the creation; (but be careful that you not forget) and perform austerities for a long, long time. O Son of the Creator Brahmā! Thus saying, the Lord of the Universe remained silent. Brahmā and Śiva, the auspicious, bowing to the Lord went to their own duties.

महाविराष् लोमकुरे ब्रह्मांगोलके जले ।

बधूव च विराद्धुरो विराईगेन सम्राजन् ॥ 51 ॥

र्यामो युवा पीतावासा: शयानो जललत्यके ।

ईमद्धार्यः प्रसात्यसो विश्वधार्पी जनादन्: ॥ 52 ॥

On the other hand, the Great Virāt that lay floating in the waters of the Brahmānda sphere, created from his every pore each smaller Virāt. That youth Janārdana of the form of the Great Cosmos, wearing yellow garment of the bluish-green colour of the Durba grass, lay sleeping pervading everywhere.

तत्थामिकाने बहा बधून कमलोद्रवः ।

संभय पचादंदे च बधाम युगलक्ष्मू ।। ५३ ॥।

नार्तं जगाम दंडस्य पचान्तालस्य पचत्रः ।

नाथिजस्य च पचस्य चित्तामापि पिता तत ।। ५४ ॥

स्वस्थानं पुनगात्य दर्शयी कृष्णपदांबुजम् ।

Brahmā took his birth in His navel. He, then, after his birth, began to travel in that navel-lotus and in the stem of the lotus for one lakh yugas. But he could not find out the place whence the lotus or its stem had sprung up. O Nārada! Then your father became very anxious and came back to his former place and began to meditate the lotus feet of Śrī Krṣna.

तते द्वर्श शूर्र तं ध्यानेन द्विष्यबुधा ॥ 55 ॥

शयानं जलतत्वे च बहापाडगोतकाण्तुते ।

यल्लीमकृपे ब्रहांडं तत्कृतं परपीश्वम् ॥ 56 ॥

श्रीकृष्णं चापि गोलेकों गोपगौरीसाम्बित्यम् ।

तं संस्तुव वरं प्राप ततः सृष्टि चकार सः ॥ 57 ॥

Book IX Chapter IV

Then, in meditation, with his introspective eye, he first saw the small Virāt, then the endless great Virat lying on the watery bed, in whose pores the universes are existing and then he saw the God Śri Kṛṣna in Goloka with Gopas and Gopiṣ. He then began to praise the Lord of Goloka when He granted boons to your father, and he began to do the work of creation.

वभुवृद्धिण: पुत्रा मानसा: सनकादय: ।

ततो कृकलाशापि शिवस्यैकादार स्मृतः ॥ 58 ॥

वभूव पाता विद्युश्छ्रस्य वामपाश्वतः ।

चतुर्भूजश भगवान् श्वेतत्रीप से चावसत् ॥ 59 ॥

From the mind of your father, were born first Sanaka and other brothers and then from forehead eleven Rudras sprang. Then from the left side of that small Virāt lying on the bed of waters, the four-handed Viṣṇu Bhagavān, the Preserver of the Universe, came. He went to Śvetadvīpa, where he remained.

श्रुत्रस्य नाभिपदमे च रज्ञा विश्वं ससर्ज ह।

स्वर्ग मदर्षे च पातालं जितोकांीं सचराचरम् ॥ 60 ॥

एवं सर्वतैलोमकृपे विष्णं प्रत्येकमेव च ।

प्रतिविश्ये क्रूरविराब्बहाविष्यणिशाद्यः ॥ 6 1 ॥

Then your father became engaged in creating this Universe, move able and non-moveable, composed of three worlds, heaven, earth and Pātāla, in the navel of that small Virāt Puruṣa. O Nārada! Thus from the pores of that great Virāt each universe has sprung and in every universe there is one small Virāt, one Brahmā, one Viṣṇu and one Śiva and others.

इत्येवं क्रवितं बढ़ा-कृष्णयसंकीर्तनं शुभम् ।

सुखदो मोक्षंदे झात्कि कंप्यः श्रोतुमिच्छसि ॥ 62 ॥

इति श्रीमदैर्षीभागवते महापुराणे नवसत्कन्ने तृतीयोरधायः । 3 ॥।

O Best of twice born! Thus I have described the glories of Krṣṇa, that give exceeding pleasure and Moksa. Now say what more you want to hear?

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Ninetth

Book on the Origin of Brahmā, Vīsṇu

and Maheśa and others in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa

Book IX Chapter IV

