[Ch 3 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: O Devars! The egg (born of Mūla Prakṛti) that was floating in the waters for a period equal to the life period of Brahmā, now in the fulness of time, separated into two parts. Within that egg there was a powerful Child, lustrous like one thousand millions of suns. This child could not suck mother's milk, as it was forsaken by Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said:-- “O Devarṣi! The egg (born of Mūla Prakriti) that was floating in the waters for a period equal to the life period of Brahmā, now in the fullness of time separated into two parts. Within that egg there was a powerful Child, lustrous like one thousand millions of suns. This child could not suck mother’s milk, as it was forsaken by Her.

[Ch 3 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So being tired of hunger, the child for a moment cried repeatedly. The child that will become the Lord of countless Brahmāṇḍas (universes), now an orphan having no father nor mother began to looks upwards from the waters. This body came to be denominated afterwards by the name of Mahā Virāt, when he became gross and grosser. As there is nothing finer than radium so there is nothing grosser than Mahā Virāt.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So being tired of hunger, the child for a moment cried repeatedly. The child that will become the Lord of countless Brahmāṇḍas (universes), now an orphan having no father nor mother began to look upwards from the waters. This boy came to be denominated afterwards by the name of Mahā Virāṭ, when he became gross and grosser. As there is nothing finer than radium so there is nothing grosser than Mahā Virāṭ.

[Ch 3 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The power of this Mahā Virāt one-sixteenth of that of Śrī Krṣna, the Highes Self. But this boy, (born of the Prakṛti Rādhā) is the Sole Stay of all this Universe and he is denominated by the name ‘Mahā-Viṣṇu’. In his every pore countless universe are existing. So much so that even Śrī Krṣna could not count them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The power of this Mahā Virāṭ is one-sixteenth of that of Śri Kṛṣṇa, the Highest Self. But this boy, (born of the Prakriti Rādhā) is the Sole Stay of all this Universe and he is denominated by the name “Mahā-Viṣṇu”. In his every pore countless universes are existing. So much so that even Śri Kṛṣṇa could not count them.

[Ch 3 Verse 7-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The abode of Vaikuntha is higher than that (i.e. it is situated outside of Brahmāṇḍa), again the abode of Goloka is fifty koti yojanas (50×10×4 ×2 million miles) higher than Vaikuntha. This Goloka Dhāma is eternal and real as Śrī Krṣna is eternal and real. This world composed of the seven islands is surrounded by the seven oceans.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The abode of Vaikuṇṭha is higher than that (i. e. it is situated outside of Brahmāṇḍa), again the abode of Goloka is fifty koṭi yojanas (50 x 10 x 4 x 2 million miles) higher than Vaikuṇṭha. This Goloka Dhāma is eternal and real as Śri Kṛṣṇa is eternal and real. This world composed of the seven islands is surrounded by the seven oceans.

[Ch 3 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Forty-nine Upa-Dvipa (smaller islands adjacent to then) are existing here. Besides there are countless mountains, and forests. Higher than this earth is the Brahmaloka with seven heavens and below this are the seven Pātālas. This is the bounding limit of Brahmānda.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Forty-nine Upa Dvīpas (smaller islands adjacent to them) are existing here. Besides there are countless mountains and forests. Higher than this earth is the Brahmāloka with seven heavens and below this are the seven Pātālas. This is the bounding limit of Brahmāṇḍa.

[Ch 3 Verse 12-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Just above this earth there is the Bhūrloka; above is Bhuvarloka; then Svarloka, then Janarloka, then Taparloka, then Satyaloka, and above that is Brahmaloka. The splendour of Brahmaloka is like that of molten gold. But all the substances whether outside or inside this Brahmaloka, are transient.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Just above this earth there is the Bhūrloka; above is Bhuvarloka; then Svarloka, then Janarloka, then Taparloka, then Satyaloka, and above that is Brahmāloka. The splendour of Brahmāloka is like that of molten gold. But all the substances whether outside or inside this Brahmāloka, are transient.

[Ch 3 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When this Brahmāṇḍa (cosmos) dissolves, everything dissolves and is destroyed. All are temporary like bubbles of water. Only Goloka and Vaikunthā are eternal. In every pore of this Mahā Virāt is existing one Brahmāṇḍa (cosmos).
NEW CORR ENG ──► When this Brahmāṇḍa (cosmos) dissolves, everything dissolves and is destroyed. All are temporary like bubbles of water. Only Goloka and Vaikuṇṭha are eternal. In every pore of this Mahā Virāṭ is existing one Brahmāṇḍa (cosmos).

[Ch 3 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What to speak of others even Kṛṣna cannot count the number of these Brahmāṇdas. In every Brahmāṇda there is Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa. O Child Nārada! In every Brahmāṇda, the number of the gods is three kotis or 30 millions. Some of them are the Dikpatis (the Regents of the quarters); some are the Dikpālas (the Rulers of the Quarters), some are asterisms, and some planets.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What to speak of others when even Kṛṣṇa cannot count the number of these Brahmāṇḍas. In every Brahmāṇḍa there is Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa. O Child Nārada! In every Brahmāṇḍa, the number of the gods is three koṭis or 30 millions. Some of them are the Dikpatis (the Regents of the quarters); some are the Dikpālas (the Rulers of the quarters), some are asterisms, and some planets.

[Ch 3 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the Bhūrloka, there are four Varpas (Brāhmins etc.), and in the Pātālas there are Nāgas. Thus the Universe exists composed of moveable and non-moveable things (this is Brahmāndā Vivṛti). O Nārada! Now the Virāt Puruṣa began to look up to the skies again and again but He could not see anything within that egg except the void.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the Bhūrloka, there are four Varṇas (Brāhmins, etc.,) and in the Pātālas there are Nāgas. Thus the Universe exists composed of moveable and non-moveable things (This is Brahmāṇḍa Vivriti). O Nārada! Now the Virāṭ Puruṣa began to look up to the skies again and again but He could not see anything within that egg except the void.

[Ch 3 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then distressed with hunger he cried out repeatedly and became merged in anxiety. Next moment getting back his consciousness, he began to think of Kṛṣṇa, the Highest Person and saw there at once the eternal light of Brahma. He saw there His form as deep blue like new rain-cloud; with two hands, garment of a yellow colour, sweet smile on His face, flute in His hand and He seemed to be very anxious to show His Grace to Devotees.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then distressed with hunger He cried out repeatedly and became merged in anxiety. Next moment getting back His consciousness, He began to think of Kṛṣṇa, the Highest Person and saw there at once the eternal light of Brahmā. He saw there His form as deep blue like new rain-cloud; with two hands, garment of a yellow colour, sweet smile on His face, flute in His hand and He seemed to be very anxious to show His Grace to Devotees.

[Ch 3 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Looking at the Lord, His Father, the boy became glad and smiled. The Lord, the Bestower of boon granted him boons appropriate for that moment ‘O Child! Let you possess knowledge like Me; let your hunger and thirst vanish; let you be the holder innumerable Brahmāṇḍas till the time of Pralaya (the universal dissolution).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Looking at the Lord, His Father, the boy became glad and smiled. The Lord, the Bestower of boon granted him boons appropriate for that moment “O Child! Let you possess knowledge like Me; let your hunger and thirst vanish; let you be the holder of innumerable Brahmāṇḍas till the time of Pralaya (the universal dissolution).

[Ch 3 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Be without any selfishness, be fearless and the bestower of boons to all. Let not old age, death, disease, sorrow nor any other ailings afflict thee. Thus saying He repeated thrice on his ear the six-lettered great Mantra ‘Om Krṣṇāya Svāhā’ worshipped by the Vedas with their Aṅgas, the Giver of desires and the destrover of all troubles and calamities.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Be without any selfishness, be fearless and the bestower of boons to all. Let not old age, death, disease, sorrow nor any other ailings afflict thee. Thus saying He repeated thrice on his ear the six-lettered great Mantra “Om Kṛṣṇāya Svāhā” worshipped by the Vedas with their Aṃgas, the Giver of desires and the destroyer of all troubles and calamities.

[Ch 3 Verse 27-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brahmā's Son! Thus giving the mantra, Śri Kṛṣṇa arranged for his fooding thus: In every universe, whatever offerings will be given to Śri Kṛṣṇa, one sixteenth of that will go to Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of Vaikuntha and fifteen-sixteenth is to go to this boy, the Virāt.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brahmā’s Son! Thus giving the mantra, Śri Kṛṣṇa arranged for his feeding thus:-- In every universe, whatever offerings will be given to Śri Kṛṣṇa, one sixteenth of that will go to Nārāyana, the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha and fifteen-sixteenth is to go to this boy, the Virāṭ.

[Ch 3 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śrī Krṣna did not allot any share for Himself. Himself transcending all the Gunas, and Full, He is always satisfied with Himself.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śri Kṛṣṇa did not allot any share for Himself. Himself transcending all the Gunas, and Full, He is always satisfied with Himself.

[Ch 3 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What necessity is there for any further offerings? Whatever the people offer with devotion, the Lord of Lakṣmī, the Virāt eats all these. Bhagavān Śrī Krṣna giving thus to the Virāt the boon and the Mantra said: 'O Child! Say what more you desire; I will give you that instantly.'
NEW CORR ENG ──► What necessity is there for any further offerings? Whatever the people offer with devotion, the Lord of Laksmī, the Virāṭ eats all these. Bhagavān Śri Kṛṣṇa giving thus to the Virāṭ the boon and the Mantra said:-- “O Child! Say what more you desire; I will give you that instantly.

[Ch 3 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Virāt boy, hearing thus the words of Śri Kṛṣṇa, spoke: 'O Thou Omnipresent! I have got no desires whatsoever, save this that as long as I live, whether for a short time or for a long time, let me have pure Bhakti towards Thy lotus feet.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Virāṭ boy, hearing thus the words of Śri Kṛṣṇa, spoke:-- “O Thou Omnipresent! I have got no desires whatsoever, save this that as long as I live, whether for a short time or for a long time, let me have pure Bhakti towards Thy lotus feet.

[Ch 3 Verse 35-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In this world he is Jivanmukta (liberated whilst living) who is your Bhakta; and that bewildered fool is dead while living who is devoid of any Bhakti to Thee. What needs he to perform Japam, asceticism, sacrifice, worship, holding fasts and observances, going to sacred places of pilgrimages and other virtuous acts if he be without any bhakti to Śrī Krṣṇa? Vain is his life who is devoid of any devotion to Śrī Krṣṇa, under Whose Grace he has obtained his life and Whom he does not now pay homage and worship.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In this world he is Jīvanmukta (liberated whilst living) who is your Bhakta; and that bewildered fool is dead while living who is devoid of any Bhakti to Thee. What needs he to perform Japam, asceticism, sacrifice, worship, holding fasts and observances, going to sacred places of pilgrimages and other virtuous acts if he be without any bhakti to Śri Kṛṣṇa? Vain is his life who is devoid of any devotion to Śri Kṛṣṇa, under Whose Grace he has obtained his life and Whom he does not now pay homage and worship.

[Ch 3 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He is endowed with Śakti as long as Atmā (Self) resides in his body; no sooner the Ātma departs from his body all the Śaktis accompany him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He is endowed with Sakti as long as Ātma (Self) resides in his body; no sooner the Ātma departs from his body all the Saktis accompany him.

[Ch 3 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Great One! And Thou art the Universal Ātman (soul) who transcends Prakṛti, Who is All will, Primeval Person and of the nature of the Highest Light. O Child! Thus saying, the Virāt boy remained silent.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Great One! And thou art the Universal Ātman (soul) who transcends Prakriti, Who is All will, the Primeval Person and of the nature of the Highest Light. O Child! Thus saying, the Virāṭ boy remained silent.

[Ch 3 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śrī Kṛṣṇa then, spoke in sweet words: 'O Child! Let you remain as fresh as ever like Me. You will not have any fall even if innumerable Brahmās pass away.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śri Kṛṣṇa then, spoke in sweet words:-- “O Child! Let you remain as fresh as ever like Me. You will not have any fall even if innumerable Brahmās pass away.

[Ch 3 Verse 42-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Let you divide yourself in parts and turn into smaller Virāṭs in every universe. Brahmā will spring from your navel and will create the cosmos. From the forehead of that Brahmā will spring eleven Rudras for the destruction of the creation. But they will all be parts of Śiva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Let you divide yourself in parts and turn into smaller Virāṭs in every universe. Brahmā will spring from your navel and will create the cosmos. From the forehead of that Brahmā will spring eleven Rudras for the destruction of the creation. But they will all be parts of Śiva.

[Ch 3 Verse 44-45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Ruler named Kālāgnī, of these eleven Rudras, will be the destroyer of all this Viśvas (cosmos). Besides, from each of your sub-divisions, the Viṣnu will originate and that Bhagavān Viṣnu will be Preserver of this Viśva world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Rudra named Kālāgni, of these eleven Rudras, will be the destroyer of all this Viśvas (cosmos). Besides, from each of your sub-divisions, the Viśnu will originate and that Bhagavān Viṣṇu will be the Preserver of this Viśvu world.

[Ch 3 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I say that under my favour you will always be full of Bhakti towards Me and so sooner you meditate on Me, you will be able to see My lovely form. There is no doubt in this; and your Mother, Who resides in My breast, will not be difficult for you to see. Let you remain here in ease and comfort. I now go to Goloka.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I say that under my favour you will always be full of Bhakti towards Me and no sooner you meditate on Me, you will be able to see My lovely form. There is no doubt in this; and your Mother, Who resides in My breast, will not be difficult for you to see. Let you remain here in ease and comfort. I now go to Goloka.

[Ch 3 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Saying thus Śrī Krṣna, the Lord of world disappeared. Going to His own abode He spoke instantly to Brahmā and Śaṅkara, skilled in the works of creation and destruction: 'O Child Brahmā! Go quickly and be born in parts from the navels of each of the smaller Virāts that will arise from the pores of the Great Virāt.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Saying thus Śri Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of the world disappeared. Going to His own abode He spoke instantly to Brahmā and Śaṅkara, skilled in the works of creation and destruction:-- “O Child Brahmā! Go quickly and be born in parts from the navels of each of the smaller Virāṭs that will arise from the pores of the Great Virāṭ.

[Ch 3 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Child Mahādeva! Go and be born in parts from the forehead of each Brahmā in every universe for the destruction of the creation; (but be careful that you not forget) and perform austerities for a long, long time. O Son of the Creator Brahmā! Thus saying, the Lord of the Universe remained silent. Brahmā and Śiva, the auspicious, bowing to the Lord went to their own duties.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Child Mahādeva! Go and be born in parts from the forehead of each Brahmā in every universe for the destruction of the creation; (but be careful that you not forget) and perform austerities for a long, long time. O son of the Creator Brahmā! Thus saying, the Lord of the Universe remained silent. Brahmā and Śiva, the auspicious, bowing to the Lord, went to their own duties.

[Ch 3 Verse 51-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the other hand, the Great Virāt that lay floating in the waters of the Brahmānda sphere, created from his every pore each smaller Virāt. That youth Janārdana of the form of the Great Cosmos, wearing yellow garment of the bluish-green colour of the Durba grass, lay sleeping pervading everywhere.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the other hand, the great Virāṭ that lay floating in the waters of the Brahmāṇḍa sphere, created from his every pore each smaller Virāṭ. That youth Janārdan of the form of the Great Cosmos, wearing yellow garment of the bluish-green colour of the Durba grass, lay sleeping pervading everywhere.

[Ch 3 Verse 53-54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā took his birth in His navel. He, then, after his birth, began to travel in that navel-lotus and in the stem of the lotus for one lakh yugas. But he could not find out the place whence the lotus or its stem had sprung up. O Nārada! Then your father became very anxious and came back to his former place and began to meditate the lotus feet of Śrī Krṣna.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā took his birth in His navel. He, then, after his birth, began to travel in that navel-lotus and in the stem of the lotus for one lakh yugas. But he could not find out the place whence the lotus or its stem had sprung up. O Nārada! Then your father became very anxious and came back to his former place and began to meditate on the lotus feet of Śri Kṛṣṇa.

[Ch 3 Verse 55-57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then, in meditation, with his introspective eye, he first saw the small Virāt, then the endless great Virat lying on the watery bed, in whose pores the universes are existing and then he saw the God Śri Kṛṣna in Goloka with Gopas and Gopiṣ. He then began to praise the Lord of Goloka when He granted boons to your father, and he began to do the work of creation.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then, in meditation, with his introspective eye, he first saw the small Virāṭ, then the endless great Virāṭ lying on the watery bed, in whose pores the universes are existing and then he saw the God Śri Kṛṣṇa in Goloka with Gopas and Gopis. He then began to praise the Lord of Goloka when He granted boons to your father, and he began to do the work of creation.

[Ch 3 Verse 58-59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► From the mind of your father, were born first Sanaka and other brothers and then from forehead eleven Rudras sprang. Then from the left side of that small Virāt lying on the bed of waters, the four-handed Viṣṇu Bhagavān, the Preserver of the Universe, came. He went to Śvetadvīpa, where he remained.
NEW CORR ENG ──► From the mind of your father, were born first Śanaka and other brothers and then from his forehead eleven Rudras sprang. Then from the left side of that small Virāṭ lying on the bed of waters, the four-handed Viṣṇu Bhagavān, the Preserver of the Universe, came. He went to Śvetadvīpa, where he remained.

[Ch 3 Verse 60-61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then your father became engaged in creating this Universe, move able and non-moveable, composed of three worlds, heaven, earth and Pātāla, in the navel of that small Virāt Puruṣa. O Nārada! Thus from the pores of that great Virāt each universe has sprung and in every universe there is one small Virāt, one Brahmā, one Viṣṇu and one Śiva and others.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then your father became engaged in creating this Universe, moveable and non-moveable, composed of three worlds, heaven, earth and Pātāla, in the navel of that small Virāṭ Purusa. O Nārada! Thus from the pores of that great Virāṭ each universe has sprung and in every universe there is one small Virāṭ, one Brahmā, one Viṣṇu and one Śiva and

[Ch 3 Verse 62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Best of twice born! Thus I have described the glories of Krṣṇa, that give exceeding pleasure and Moksa. Now say what more you want to hear? Here ends the Third Chapter of the Ninetth Book on the Origin of Brahmā, Vīsṇu and Maheśa and others in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Best of twice born! Thus I have described the glories of Kṛṣṇa, that give exceeding pleasure and Mokṣa. Now say what more you want to hear? Here ends the Third Chapter of the Ninth Book on the Origin of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa and others in the Mahā Purānam Śri Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahārsi Veda Vyāsa.
