[Ch 10 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! That King Mānthāthā, true to his promise, conquered one after another the whole world and became the paramount sovereign of all the other emperors and got the title 'Sārvabhauma' (Sovereign of all the earth).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyasa said :-- O King! That King Māndhātā, true to his promise, conquered one after another the whole world and became the paramount sovereign of all the other emperors and got the title “Sārvabhauma”

[Ch 10 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! What more to speak of Mándhāta's influence at that time than this that all the robbers, struck with his terror, all fled to the mountain caves. For this reason, Indra gave him the title 'Trasadasyu.'
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! What more to speak of Māndhātā’s influence at that time than this that all the robbers, struck with his terror, all fled to the mountain caves. For this reason, Indra gave him the title “Trasadasyu.”

[Ch 10 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He married Bindumati, the daughter of Sāsāvindu. Her limbs were proportioned and perfect and so she was very beautiful. Mándhātā had by that wife two sons: (1) the famous Purukustha and (2) Mucukunda.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He married Bindumatī, the daughter of Śaśavindu. Her limbs were proportioned and perfect and so she was very beautiful. Māndhātā had by that wife two sons :-- (1) the famous Purukutstha and (2) Muchukunda.

[Ch 10 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Purukustha had his son Anaranya; this prince was celebrated by the name of Brhadaśva. He was very religious and deeply devoted to his father.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Purukutstha had his son Anaraṇya; this prince was celebrated by the name of Brihadaśva. He was very religious and deeply devoted to his father.

[Ch 10 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► His son was Haryaśva; he was religious and knew the Highest Reality. His son was Tridhanvā; his son was Aruna.
NEW CORR ENG ──► His son was Haryaśva; he was religious and knew the Highest Reality. His son

[Ch 10 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Aruna's son was Satyavrata; he was very avaricious, lustful, wicked and wilful. Once one an occasion that vicious prince, overpowered by lust, stole away the wife of one Brāhmīn and so created an hindrance in his marriage.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Aruṇa’s son was Satyavrata; he was very avaricious, lustful, wicked and wilful. Once on an occasion that vicious prince, overpowered by lust, stole away the wife of one Brāhmin and so created an hindrance in his marriage.

[Ch 10 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The Brāhmins, united in a body, came to the King Aruṇa, bewailing and lamenting and uttered repeatedly: Alas! We are ruined!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The Brāhmins, united in a body, came to the King Aruṇa, bewailing and lamenting and uttered repeatedly :-- Alas! We are ruined!

[Ch 10 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King addressed to the grieved subjects, the Brāhmins: “O Brāhmins! What harm his been done to you by my son.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King addressed to the grieved subjects, the Brāhmins :-- “O Brāhmins! What harm has been done to you by my son.”

[Ch 10 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing thus the good words of the King, the Dvijas, versed in the Vedas, repeatedly blessed him and said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing thus the good words of the King, the Dvijas, versed in the Vedas, repeatedly blessed him and said :-

[Ch 10 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! You are the foremost of the powerful. So your son is like you. Today he has forcibly stolen away during the marriage ceremony a Brāhimin daughter already given over in marriage."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! You are the foremost of the powerful. So your son is like you. Today he has forcibly stolen away during the marriage ceremony a Brāhmin daughter already given over in marriage.

[Ch 10 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! The highly religious King hearing the words of the Brāhmins, took them to be true and said to his son: "O One of evil understanding! You have rendered today your name useless by perpetrating this evil act.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyasa said :-- O King! The highly religious King hearing the words of the Brāhmins, took them to be true and said to his son :-- “O One of evil understanding! You have rendered to-day your name useless by perpetrating this evil act.

[Ch 10 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Vicious One! Get away from my house! O Sinner! You will never be able to live in my territory!"
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Vicious One! Get away from my house! O Sinner! You will never be able to live in my territory!”

[Ch 10 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing his father angry, Satyavrata repeatedly said: "Father! Where shall I go?" He said: "Live with the Cāndālas. You have stolen a Brāhmīn's wife and so have acted like a Cāndāla.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing his father angry, Satyavrata repeatedly said :-- Father! Where shall I go? He said :-- “Live with the Caṇḍalas. You have stolen a Brāhmin’s wife and so has acted like a Cāṇḍala.

[Ch 10 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Go and live with them happily. O Disgrace to your family! I do't like to get issues through you; you have obliterated this family's name.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Go and live with them happily. O Disgrace to your family! I don’t like to get issues through you: you have obliterated this family’s name.

[Ch 10 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So, Sinner go wherever you like. Hearing thus the words from his angry father, Satyavrata instantly quitted the house and went to the Cāndālas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So, O Sinner! go wherever you like.” Hearing the the words from his angry father, Satyavrata instantly quitted the house and went to the Cāṇḍālas.

[Ch 10 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The prince, wearing his coat of armour and holding bows and arrows, began to spend away his time with the Cāndālas; but he could not get out of his breast his feeling of sympathy and mercy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The prince, wearing his coat of armour and holding bows and arrows, began to spend away his time with the Cāṇḍālas; but he could not get out of his breast his feeling of sympathy and mercy.

[Ch 10 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When he was banished by his liberal angry father, the Guru Vasishta instigated the King to the above purpose.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When he was banished by his liberal minded angry father the Guru Vaśiṣṭha instigated the King to the above purpose.

[Ch 10 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Satyavrata was therefore angry with Vasistha, inasmuch as he, versed in the Dharma Śāstras, did not dissuade the father from banishing his son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Satyavrata was therefore angry with Vaśiṣṭha, inasmuch as he, versed the Dharma Śāstras, did not dissuade the father from banishing his son.

[Ch 10 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► His father, then, owing to some inexplicable cause, quitted the city and, for the sake of his son, went to the forest to practise austerities.
NEW CORR ENG ──► His father, then, owing to some inexplicable cause, quitted the city and, for the sake of his son, went to the forest to practise austerities.

[Ch 10 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Owing to that sinful act, Indra did not rain at in his kingdom for twelve years.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Owing to that sinful act, Indra did not rain at all in his kingdom for twelve years.

[Ch 10 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Just then Viśvāmitra, too keeping his wife and children in that kingdom, began to practise severe austerities on the banks of the river Kauśikī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Just then Viśvāmitra, too, keeping his wife and children in that kingdom, began to practise severe austerities on the banks of the river Kauśikī.

[Ch 10 Verse 25-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The beautiful wife of Kuśika then fell into great trouble how she could maintain the family. All the children, pained with hunger, began to cry, begging for Nivāra rice food. The chaste wife of Kauśika became very much troubled in seeing all this. She thought, seeing the children hungry. “Where am I to go now and from whom to beg, and what to do, inasmuch as the King was not then staying in the Kingdom.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The beautiful wife of Kuśika then fell into great trouble how she could maintain the family. All the children, pained with hunger, began to cry, begging for Nibār rice food. The chaste wife of Kauśika became very much troubled seeing all this. She thought, seeing the children hungry, “Where am I to go now and from whom to beg, and what to do, inasmuch as the King was not then staying in the Kingdom.

[Ch 10 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The husband is not also near; so who would protect my children? The boys are incessantly crying. Fie therefore to my life!" She thought also thus: "My husband has left me in this penniless state; we are suffering for want of money. He does not know these, though he is quite able. Save my husband, who else will support my sons?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The husband is not also near; so who would protect my children? The boys are incessantly crying. Fie therefore to my life!” She thought also thus :-- “My husband left me in this penniless state; we are suffering for want of money. He does not know these, though he is quite able. Save my husband, who else will support my sons?

[Ch 10 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They will all die now of starvation. I might sell one of my sons, whatever I get out of that, I can support the others; this is now my highest duty.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They will all die now of starvation. I might sell one of my sons, whatever I get out of that, I can support the others; this is now my highest duty.

[Ch 10 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I ought not to do otherwise and kill all my children; so I will now sell one of my sons to support the others." Thus hardening her mind, she
NEW CORR ENG ──► I ought not to do otherwise and kill all my children; so I will now sell one of my sons to support the others.” Thus hardening her mind, she

[Ch 10 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Muni's wife, for the sake of the other children, fastened the middle son by a cord and got out of her house.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Muni’s wife, for the sake of the other children, fastened the middle son by a cord and got out of her house.

[Ch 10 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The prince Satyavrata saw her distressed with pain and sorrow and asked: "O Beautiful One! What are you now going to do? Who are you?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The prince Satyavrata saw her distressed with pain and sorrow and asked :-- “O Beautiful One! What are you now going to do? Who are you?

[Ch 10 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This boy is crying; Why have you tied him by a rope round his neck? O Fair One! Speak out truly to me the cause of all this." སྐྱོད་པའིབ་སྟན་བཟན
NEW CORR ENG ──► This boy is crying; Why have you tied him by a rope round his neck? O Fair One! Speak out truly to me the cause of all this.”

[Ch 10 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rşi's wife said: "O Prince! I am the wife of Viśvāmitra. These are my sons. I am now going, for want of food, to sell one of these out of my own accord. O King! My husband has gone away to practise tapasyā; I do not know where he has gone. There is no food in the house; so I will sell one to support the other sons."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The wife said :-- “O Prince! I am the wife of Viśvāmitra. These are my sons. I am now going, for want of food, to sell one of these out of my own accord. O King! My husband has gone away to practise tapasyā; I do not know where he has gone. There is no food in the house; so I will sell one to support the other sons.”

[Ch 10 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Satyavrata said: “O Chaste One! Save your children. I will bring to you your articles of food from the forest till your husband does not come here.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Satyavrata said :-- “O Chaste One! Save your children. I will bring to you your articles of food from the forest till your husband does not come here.

[Ch 10 Verse 40-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Daily I will fasten some food on a tree close by your Śārama. This I speak truly." The wife of Visvāmitra, hearing these words of the prince, freed the child of the fastening and took him to her Śārama.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Daily I will fasten some food on a tree close by your Āśrama. This I speak truly.” The wife of Viśvāmitra, hearing these words of the prince, freed the child of the fastening and took him to her Āśrama.

[Ch 10 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The child was named afterwards as Gālava, due to his being fastened by the neck. He became a great Rsi afterwards. The Viśvāmitra's wife then felt great pleasure in her home, surrounded by her children.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The child was named afterwards as Gālaba, due to his being fastened by the neck. He became a great Ṛṣi afterwards. The Viśvāmitra’s wife then felt great pleasure in her home, surrounded by her children.

[Ch 10 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Filled with regard, and mercy, Satyavrata duly performed his task and provided daily the family of Viśvāmitra with their food.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Filled with regard, and mercy, Satyavrata duly performed his task and provided daily the family of Viśvāmitra with their food.

[Ch 10 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He used to hunt wild boars, deer, buffaloes, etc; and used to take their flesh to the place where used to dwell the wife of Visvāmitra and the children and tie that up to an adjoining trees.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He used to hunt wild boars, deer, buffaloes, etc., and used to take their flesh to the place where used to dwell the wife of Viśvāmitra and the children and tie that up to an adjoining tree.

[Ch 10 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rṣi's wife used to give those to her children. Thus getting excellent food, she felt very happy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣi’s wife used to give those to her children. Thus getting excellent food, she felt very happy.

[Ch 10 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now when the King Aruṇa went for tapasyā to the forest, the Muni Vasistha carefully guarded the Ayodhyā city, and the palace and the household.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now when the King Aruṇa went for tapasyā to the forest, the Muni Vaśiṣṭha carefully guarded the Ayodhyā city, and the palace and the household.

[Ch 10 Verse 47-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Satyavrata, too, used to sustain his livelihood daily by hunting, according to his father's order; and abiding by Dharma, lived in the forest outside the city. Satyavrata cherished always in his heart, for some cause, a feeling of anger towards Vasiṣṭha. When his father banished his religious son, Vasiṣṭha did not prevent his father.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Satyavrata, too, used to sustain his livelihood daily by hunting, accordig to his father’s order; and abiding by Dharma, lived in the forest outside the city. Satyavrata cherished always in his heart, for some cause, a feeling of anger towards Vaśiṣṭha. When his father banished his religious son, Vaśiṣṭha did not prevent his father.

[Ch 10 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This is the cause of Satyavrata's anger. Marriage does not become valid until seven footsteps are trodden (a ceremony); so the stealing away of a girl within that period is not equivalent to stealing away a Brāhmin's wife. The virtuous Vasistha knew that; yet he did not prevent the King.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This is the cause of Satyavrata’s anger. Marriage does not become valid until seven footsteps are trodden (a ceremony); so the stealing away of a girl within that period is not equivalent to stealing away a Brāhmin’s wife. The virtuous Vaśiṣṭha knew that; yet he did not prevent the King.

[Ch 10 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One day the prince did not find anything for hunting; he saw in the forest the cow of Vasistha giving milk. Very much distressed by hunger, the King killed the cow like a dacoit, partly out of anger and partly out of delusion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One day the prince did not find anything for hunting; he saw in the forest the cow of Vaśiṣṭha giving milk. Very much distressed by hunger, the King killed the cow like a dacoit, partly out of anger and

[Ch 10 Verse 52-53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He fastened part of the flesh to that tree for the wife of Visvāmitra and the remainder he ate himself. O One of good vows! The Viśvāmitra's wife did not know that to be beef and thought it to be deer's and so fed her sons with that.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He fastened part of the flesh to that tree for the wife of Viśvāmitra and the remainder he ate himself. O One of good vows! The Viśvāmitra’s wife did not know that to be beef and thought it to be deer’s and so fed her sons with that.

[Ch 10 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now when Vasistha came to know that his cow been killed, he was inflamed with anger and spoke to Satyavrata “O Vicious One! What a heinous crime have you committed, like a Piśāca, by killing the cow?”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now when Vaśiṣṭha came to know that his cow had been killed, he was inflamed with anger and spoke to Satyavrata “O Vicious One! What a heinous crime have you committed, like a Piśāca, by killing the cow?

[Ch 10 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► For the killing of the cow, the stealing of a Brāhmīn's wife and the fiery anger of your father, for these three crimes, let there come out on your head three Śankus or three marks of leprosy as the signs for your crimes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► For the killing of the cow, the stealing of a Brāhmin’s wife and the fiery anger of your father, for these three crimes, let there come out on your head three Śaṅkus or three marks of leprosy as the signs for your crimes.

[Ch 10 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► From this day you will be widely known by the name of Trišanku and you will shew your Piśāca form to all the beings."
NEW CORR ENG ──► From this day you will be widely known by the name of Triśaṅku and you will show your Piśāca form to all the beings.”

[Ch 10 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! The prince Satyavrata thus cursed by Vaisiṣṭha remained in that retreat and practised severs tapasyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said : -- O King! The prince Satyavrata thus cursed by Vaiśiṣṭha remained in that retreat and practised severe tapasyā.

[Ch 10 Verse 58-111011]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But he got from a Muni's son the excellent Mantram of the Highest auspicious Devi Bhagavatī and became merged in the contemplation of that. Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the story of Satyavrata in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgvatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa. Šrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► But he got from a Muni’s son the excellent Mantram of the Highest auspicious Devī Bhagavatī and became merged in the contemplation of that. Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the story of Satyavrata in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
