CHAPTER X

On Satyavrata

व्यास उवाच

वधूव चक्रवर्ती स नृपति: सत्यसंगर: ।

मांधाता पृथिवीं सर्वमिजयद्वृत्तीश्व: ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! That King Mānthāthā, true to his promise, conquered one after another the whole world and became the paramount sovereign of all the other emperors and got the title 'Sārvabhauma' (Sovereign of all the earth).

दयवोदय भयत्रता ययुर्गिश्रिष्ठासु च ।

इन्टेनणस्य कृतं नाम जसहसूयिति स्कुटम् ॥ 2 ॥

O King! What more to speak of Mándhāta's influence at that time than this that all the robbers, struck with his terror, all fled to the mountain caves. For this reason, Indra gave him the title 'Trasadasyu.'

तस्य बिन्दुभती भार्यां शगत्थिदो: सुताभवत् ।

पतित्रता सुल्णा च सर्वलक्षणसंयुता ॥ 3 ॥

तस्यानुयाद्वयामास मांधाता ही सुतौ नृप ।

पुकुत्सं सुविख्यातं मुचुकुन्दं तथापपम् ॥ 4 ॥

He married Bindumati, the daughter of Sāsāvindu. Her limbs were proportioned and perfect and so she was very beautiful. Mándhātā had by that wife two sons: (1) the famous Purukustha and (2) Mucukunda.

पुकुत्सातातोउपय: पुरः परमधार्थिकः ।

पितृपतिचरताशुपदूर्वद्धविशस्तादायकः ॥ 5 ॥

Purukustha had his son Anaranya; this prince was celebrated by the name of Brhadaśva. He was very religious and deeply devoted to his father.

हर्यक्षतस्य पुत्रोभपूद्वामैकः परमार्थवित् ।

तस्यात्मजक्षित्यावभूद्रणतास्य चात्मयः ॥ 6 ॥

His son was Haryaśva; he was religious and knew the Highest Reality. His son was Tridhanvā; his son was Aruna.

Book VII Chapter X

अनुषय सुतः श्रीमान्स्यवत् इति श्रुतः ।

सोःभूदित्बधारः कामो मंदात्मा ह्यिततोतुः ॥ 7 ॥

स यापात्मा विध्धपार्यं हतवान्कामपोहितः ।

विवाहै तस्य विधनं स चकार नृपतेः सुतः ॥ 8 ॥

Aruna's son was Satyavrata; he was very avaricious, lustful, wicked and wilful. Once one an occasion that vicious prince, overpowered by lust, stole away the wife of one Brāhmīn and so created an hindrance in his marriage.

मितिला ब्राह्मणात्मत राजानामरणं नृप ।

क्रपुर्णें सुखुःखात्तां हा हातः स्मेति चासकृत् ॥ 9 ॥

O King! The Brāhmins, united in a body, came to the King Aruṇa, bewailing and lamenting and uttered repeatedly: Alas! We are ruined!

पूछ्छ राजा तात्प्रापनुःवितानुस्वारसिनः ।

किं कृतं मम पुत्रेण भवताययुर्भे बिज्ञा : ॥ १ ० ॥

The King addressed to the grieved subjects, the Brāhmins: “O Brāhmins! What harm his been done to you by my son.”

तिश्रण्य द्विजा वाक्यं राजो विनयपूर्वकम् ।

तदोयुस्त्वरणं विषा कृतागरीवंचना घृष्टम ।। ११ ।।

Hearing thus the good words of the King, the Dvijas, versed in the Vedas, repeatedly blessed him and said:

बाहाणा ऊचुः

राजस्व सुतेनाए विवाहे प्रहता किल ।

विवाहिता विग्रकन्या जलेन वलिनावं ।। १२ ॥

O King! You are the foremost of the powerful. So your son is like you. Today he has forcibly stolen away during the marriage ceremony a Brāhimin daughter already given over in marriage."

व्यास उवाच

श्रुत्वा तैशा वचस्तव्यं राजा परमधार्मिकः ।

पुत्रमाह वृथा नाम कृते ते दुर्कमर्गा ॥ 13 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The highly religious King hearing the words of the Brāhmins, took them to be true and said to his son: "O One of evil understanding! You have rendered today your name useless by perpetrating this evil act.

गच्छ दूरं सुमन्दात्मनुराचार गृहान्मा ।

न स्थातव्यं तव्या पाप विषये मम सर्वेश ॥ 14 ॥

O Vicious One! Get away from my house! O Sinner! You will never be able to live in my territory!"

कुपितं पितरं प्राह कव गच्छामीति के मुहुः ।

अकृतसमयोवाच भधाकैः सह वर्तेय ॥ 15 ॥

धपचय कृतं कर्म द्विद्वारापहारणम् ।

तस्मातैः सह संसर्ग कृत्वा तिह यथासुखम् ॥ 16 ॥

Seeing his father angry, Satyavrata repeatedly said: "Father! Where shall I go?" He said: "Live with the Cāndālas. You have stolen a Brāhmīn's wife and so have acted like a Cāndāla.

नाई पुत्रेप पुत्रार्थी त्वया च कुलपांसन ।

यथेई राज दुहात्यन्तीर्निजाः कृतत्स्वया ॥ 17 ॥

Go and live with them happily. O Disgrace to your family! I do't like to get issues through you; you have obliterated this family's name.

स निश्रय विमुवांवयं कुपितस्य महात्मनः ।

निश्रकाम पुतात्मास्तारा धघचान्ययी ॥ 18 ॥

So, Sinner go wherever you like. Hearing thus the words from his angry father, Satyavrata instantly quitted the house and went to the Cāndālas.

सत्यसत्सदा तत्र धपाकैः सह वर्तै।

धनुबाणधरः श्रीमान्कवची कर्णालायः ॥ 19 ॥

The prince, wearing his coat of armour and holding bows and arrows, began to spend away his time with the Cāndālas; but he could not get out of his breast his feeling of sympathy and mercy.

यदा निष्कासितः पिता कृपितेन महात्मना ।

गुणानाश वसितेन प्रेरितोस्ती महापिति: ॥ 20 ॥

When he was banished by his liberal angry father, the Guru Vasishta instigated the King to the above purpose.

तस्माल्यद्रतस्तस्मिन्धपत्र कोधसंसुत: ।

वसिषे धर्मशास्त्रेन निवारणपरादुमुखे ॥ 21 ॥

Satyavrata was therefore angry with Vasistha, inasmuch as he, versed in the Dharma Śāstras, did not dissuade the father from banishing his son.

केन्धितकारोगंथ पिता तस्य महीपति: ।

पुर्णार्थेजी तपस्तपुं पुरं व्यक्त्या बनं गतः ॥ 2 2 ॥

His father, then, owing to some inexplicable cause, quitted the city and, for the sake of his son, went to the forest to practise austerities.

न वर्षा नत तस्मिव्यये पाकाशासनः ।

सा द्वारण राजेन्द्र तेनाधर्मेण सर्वथा ॥ 23 ॥

O King! Owing to that sinful act, Indra did not rain at in his kingdom for twelve years.

विश्वामित्तदा दारांसतिमस्तु विषये नृप ।

संभ्यस्य कौशिकीतेरे चचार विपुलं तपः ॥ 24 ॥

O King! Just then Viśvāmitra, too keeping his wife and children in that kingdom, began to practise severe austerities on the banks of the river Kauśikī.

कातात तत संजाता भार्यां वे कौशिकस्य ह ।

कुट्वम्भरणायीय दुःखिता वरवर्गिनी ॥ 25 ॥

बालकान्बुध्याक्रांतान्तस्तदः पश्यतीं भृणम् ।

यामानांश्र नीवाराकरणम पत्रिता ॥ 26 ॥

चिन्यामाम दुःखाती तोकान्बीक्ष्य क्षुणतान् ।

युगे नासित पुरे हादा कं याचे वा कालीक किम् ॥ 27 ॥

न मे प्रातास्ति पुत्राणां पतिमें नास्ति सक्रियों ।

स्टंति बालकाः कामं घिछूरे जीवन्यदा थे ॥ 28 ॥

धनहीनों च मां त्यक्ता तपस्तपुं गत: पति: ।

न ज्ञानाति सम्बोभि दुःखितां धनवर्जितान् ॥ 29 ॥

The beautiful wife of Kuśika then fell into great trouble how she could maintain the family. All the children, pained with hunger, began to cry, begging for Nivāra rice food. The chaste wife of Kauśika became very much troubled in seeing all this. She thought, seeing the children hungry. “Where am I to go now and from whom to beg, and what to do, inasmuch as the King was not then staying in the Kingdom.

बालानां परर्ण के कनरोय पतिता दिना ।

मरिष्यन्ति सुना: सर्वे कुधाय भीडिता भूणम् ।। 30 ॥

एकं सुर्ट तु विक्रीय रबेण किया पुनः ।

पालयामि सुतान्यानेप के विहितो विधि: ॥ 31 ॥

The husband is not also near; so who would protect my children? The boys are incessantly crying. Fie therefore to my life!" She thought also

thus: "My husband has left me in this penniless state; we are suffering for want of money. He does not know these, though he is quite able. Save my husband, who else will support my sons?

सर्वेषां भाग्यं नाङ्धा युक्ते मम विधपर्ये ।

कालस्य कालनायाहं विक्रीणागय तावताम्बम् ॥ 32 ॥

They will all die now of starvation. I might sell one of my sons, whatever I get out of that, I can support the others; this is now my highest duty.

हृदयं कठिनं कृत्वा संचिन्य मनस सती ।

सा दर्भरज्ञा व्यट्याय गले पुत्रं विनिर्मिता ॥ 33 ॥

I ought not to do otherwise and kill all my children; so I will now sell one of my sons to support the others." Thus hardening her mind, she

मृत्यु तलि ही भुवि भुवि भुवि भुवि भुवि भुवि भुवि भुवि भुवि भुबी

मृपिनपनी गते बज्द्या मध्यमं पुत्रमौरमू ।

गोष्व सरणाध्याये गृहीत्वा चलिता गृहात् ॥ 34 ॥

The Muni's wife, for the sake of the other children, fastened the middle son by a cord and got out of her house.

दूद्वा सत्यव्रतेनातां तासयी गोकसंयुता ।

पण्ड्छ पूर्वातितां तु किं चिकोर्षिस गोभेने ॥ 35 ॥

The prince Satyavrata saw her distressed with pain and sorrow and asked: "O Beautiful One! What are you now going to do? Who are you?

रूर्तं बालकं कपड़े बदूट्यां नयसि कवानुना ।

किमर्थे चारभर्वांगि सत्वं बृष्टि ममाप्रतः ॥ 36 ॥

This boy is crying; Why have you tied him by a rope round his neck? O Fair One! Speak out truly to me the cause of all this."

སྐྱོད་པའིབ་སྟན་བཟན

विश्वामित्रय भावार्त्रं पुत्रोजयं मे नृपात्रज ।

विकेतुभीरसं कामां गमिष्य विषये सुतम् ॥ 37 ॥

अत्रं नारिति पतिर्वेल्चा नारतलनुं नृप वक्षित् ।

विक्रीणामि क्षुधात्रैंन शेषस्य भरणाय दै ॥ 38 ॥

The Rşi's wife said: "O Prince! I am the wife of Viśvāmitra. These are my sons. I am now going, for want of food, to sell one of these out of my own accord. O King! My husband has gone away to practise tapasyā; I do not know where he has

Book VII Chapter X

gone. There is no food in the house; so I will sell one to support the other sons."

राजोवाच

पत्तितः खू पुत्रं दास्यामि भरणं तव ।

तावदेव पतिसेउत्र वनाच्छैवागमिथिति ॥ ३ ९ ॥

Satyavrata said: “O Chaste One! Save your children. I will bring to you your articles of food from the forest till your husband does not come here.”

यूक्षे तावशामाथागे धस्यं किंशिरितरतम् ।

बन्ययिता गमिथ्यामि सत्यमेततुर्वीयमम् ॥ 40 ॥

इत्युक्ता सा तदा तेन रात्रा कोशिककामिनी ।

विद्वंधे तनयं कृत्वा जगमाभ्रमपण्डलम् ॥ 41 ॥

Daily I will fasten some food on a tree close by your Śārama. This I speak truly." The wife of Visvāmitra, hearing these words of the prince, freed the child of the fastening and took him to her Śārama.

सोउभवहालो नाम गतलव्यान्महातपः ।

सा तु स्वस्याम्पे गत्या मुमोद बालकैवृत्ता ॥ 42 ॥

The child was named afterwards as Gālava, due to his being fastened by the neck. He became a great Rsi afterwards. The Viśvāmitra's wife then felt great pleasure in her home, surrounded by her children.

स्वयस्तुम् बक्न्या च कृपया च परित्युतः ।

विश्वाधियस्य च मुनेः कलत्र नद्वषपार ह ॥ ४३ ॥

Filled with regard, and mercy, Satyavrata duly performed his task and provided daily the family of Viśvāmitra with their food.

वने सितानामृगान्त्वा वराहामहिषांस्त्वा ।

विश्वाधियत्रनाप्यापो मांसं पुवेळ वर्धंध हु ॥ 4 4 ॥

He used to hunt wild boars, deer, buffaloes, etc; and used to take their flesh to the place where used to dwell the wife of Visvāmitra and the children and tie that up to an adjoining trees.

त्रषिष्पती गृहीता तन्मांं पुत्रान्याततः ।

निर्वृति परमां प्राप प्रायव भक्यमन्तुलमम् ॥ 45 ॥

The Rṣi's wife used to give those to her children. Thus getting excellent food, she felt very happy.

अयोध्यां चैव राज्यं च तथैवात:पुरं पुंनि: ।

गते तनुं गुरे तास्मवासिषः पर्यक्षतः ॥ 46 ॥

Now when the King Aruṇa went for tapasyā to the forest, the Muni Vasistha carefully guarded the Ayodhyā city, and the palace and the household.

सत्यव्रतोसि धर्मांना ह्रातिह्वगगाईहः ।

वितुर्जातं समासाया यगुन्नवतावाने ॥ 47 ॥

सत्यव्रतो हाकस्पाच्छ कस्यचित्काराणाङ्गः ।

वसिष्ठे चार्थिकं मन्थुं धारयामास्त्र निव्याद् ॥ 48 ॥

Satyavrata, too, used to sustain his livelihood daily by hunting, according to his father's order; and abiding by Dharma, lived in the forest outside the city. Satyavrata cherished always in his heart, for some cause, a feeling of anger towards Vasiṣṭha. When his father banished his religious son, Vasiṣṭha did not prevent his father.

त्वम्यानं वने विज्ञा धार्मिर्धे च प्रियं सुन्तः।

न वारयामास भूनिर्विशेषः कारणेन है ॥ 49 ॥

पाणिग्रहणमान्जाणां निष्ठा स्यात्सदामे पदे ।

जानत्रसि स धर्माति विग्रदार्यस्पिष्ठे ॥ 50 ॥

This is the cause of Satyavrata's anger. Marriage does not become valid until seven footsteps are trodden (a ceremony); so the stealing away of a girl within that period is not equivalent to stealing away a Brāhmin's wife. The virtuous Vasistha knew that; yet he did not prevent the King.

कर्मिभ्रशिविरसोरन्पे पुणाभावे महीपति: ।

वसिष्ठस्य च गां दोर्धीयमयशूनमध्यागम ॥ 51 ॥

One day the prince did not find anything for hunting; he saw in the forest the cow of Vasistha giving milk. Very much distressed by hunger, the King killed the cow like a dacoit, partly out of anger and partly out of delusion.

तां जयान कुधात्रैनु कोधायोहाच्छ दस्युन्त ।

युङ़े बबंधे तन्मांसं नीत्वा स्वयमभक्षन्त् ॥ 52 ॥

ऋषिपनी सुतान्बतिभोजयामास तन्तद ।

गंकमाना भुगयेति न गोरिति च सुझत ॥ 53 ॥

He fastened part of the flesh to that tree for the wife of Visvāmitra and the remainder he ate

himself. O One of good vows! The Viśvāmitra's wife did not know that to be beef and thought it to be deer's and so fed her sons with that.

वसिष्ठसुत हतां दोर्धी ज्ञाला कुब्द्रसमक्षवी।

दुरात्मिके कृतं पार्य धेनुवातार्थयाचवर्ष ॥ 54 ॥

Now when Vasistha came to know that his cow been killed, he was inflamed with anger and spoke to Satyavrata “O Vicious One! What a heinous crime have you committed, like a Piśāca, by killing the cow?”

एवं ते शंकवः कृता: परंतु त्वरिताक्षय: ।

गोवधात्रहरणान्तियुः क्रोतानथा भूगण ॥ 55 ॥

For the killing of the cow, the stealing of a Brāhmīn's wife and the fiery anger of your father, for these three crimes, let there come out on your head three Śankus or three marks of leprosy as the signs for your crimes.

शिर्याकृपरित नामान वै भृवि ख्यानौ भविष्यात् ।

प्रिशाचरूपयात्मानं दर्शयन्सर्वेदिकानम् ॥ ५६ ॥

From this day you will be widely known by the name of Trišanku and you will shew your Piśāca form to all the beings."

यात्र उवाच

एवं शण्तो वसिष्ठेन तदा सत्यबतो नृपः ।

चचार च तपस्तीत तस्मिनेबाश्रमे स्थितः ॥ 57 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The prince Satyavrata thus cursed by Vaisiṣṭha remained in that retreat and practised severs tapasyā.

कस्माचिद्यमुपिज्ञातु प्राय मंत्रमन्तमम् ।

ध्यायभगवती देखीं प्रकृति परभां शिवान् ॥ 58 ॥

शीत श्रीवैदीभागवते गहापुराणे सत्यमक्क्ये

वशामीस्थाय: 11 10 11

But he got from a Muni's son the excellent Mantram of the Highest auspicious Devi Bhagavatī and became merged in the contemplation of that. Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the story of Satyavrata in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgvatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

