[Ch 5 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: Then the Devas, on arriving at Vaikuntha, saw the Lord of Lakṣmī, the Deva of the Devas, the World-Teacher, with his eyes beautiful like Padma Palāsa (lotus-leaves), shining with brilliance and began to praise Him in a voice choked with intense feelings of devotion, thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Then the Devas, on arriving at Vaikuṇṭha, saw the Lord of Lakṣmī, the Deva of the Devas, the World-Teacher, with his eyes beautiful like Padmā Palāsa (lotus-leaves), shining with brilliance and began to praise Him in a voice choked with intense feelings of devotion, thus :--

[Ch 5 Verse 2-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Victory to Visnu! O Lord of Rama! Thou art prior to the Virāt Puruṣa." O Enemy of the Daityas! O Thou, the Generator of desires in all and the Bestower of the fruits of those desires to all! O Govinda! Thou art the Great Boar and Thou art of the nature of Great Sacrifice!
NEW CORR ENG ──► “Victory to Viṣṇu! O Lord of Ramā! Thou art prior to the Virāṭ Puruṣa. O Enemy of the Daityas! O Thou, the Generator of desires in all and the Bestower of the fruits of those desires to all! O Gobinda! Thou art the Great Boar and Thou art of the nature of Great Sacrifices!

[Ch 5 Verse 4-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mahā Visṇu! O Lord of Dharma! Thou art the Cause of the origin of this world! Thou didst support the earth in Thy Fish Incarnation for the deliverance of the Vedas! O Thou Satyavrata of the form of a Fish! We bow down to Thee. O Thou! The Enemy of the Daityas! The Ocean of mercy! Thou dost do the actions of the Devas out of mercy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mahā Viṣṇu! O Lord of Dharma! Thou art the Cause of the origin of this world! Thou didst support the earth in Thy Fish Incarnation for the deliverance of the Vedas! O Thou Satyavrata of the form of a Fish! We bow down to Thee. O Thou! The Enemy of the Daityas! The Ocean of mercy! Thou dost do the actions of the Devas out of mercy.

[Ch 5 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Thou! The Tortoise Incarnation! That grantest Mukti to others! Obeisance to Thee! O Thou! That didst assume the form of a Boar for the destruction of the Daityas Jaya and others and for raising the earth from the waters! Obeisance to Thee! Thou didst assume that form—Half man and half Lion—of the Nṛsimha Mūrti and tore asunder Hiranya Kaśipu, proud of his boons, by Thy nails.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Thou! the Tortoise Incarnation! That grantest Mukti to others! Obeisance to Thee! 6-18. O Thou! That didst assume the form of a Boar for the destruction of the Daityas Jaya and others and for raising the earth from the waters! Obeisance to Thee! Thou didst assume that form - Half man and half Lion of the Nrisimha Mūrti and tore asunder Hiraṇya Kaśipu, proud of his boons, by Thy nails.

[Ch 5 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We bow down to Thee! Obeisance to Thee! That in Thy Dwarf Incarnation, didst deceive Bali, whose head got crazed by the acquisition of the kingdom over the three Lokas. We bow down to Thee, that in Thy Paraśu Rāma Incarnation, didst slay Kātra Viryārjuna, the thousand handed, and the other wicked Kṣattriyas! Obeisance to Thee!
NEW CORR ENG ──► We bow down to Thee! Obeisance to Thee! That in Thy Dwarf Incarnation, didst deceive Bali, whose head got crazed by the acquisition of the kingdom over the three Lokas. We bow down to Thee, that in Thy Paraśu Rāma Incarnation, didst slay Kārta Vīryāryuna, the thousand handed, and the other wicked Kṣattriyas! Obeisance to Thee!

[Ch 5 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That wert born of the womb of Renukā as the son of Jamadagni. Obeisance to Thee, of great prowess and valour, that in Thy Rāma Incarnation as the son of Daśaratha, didst cut off the heads of the wicked Rāksasa, the son of Pulastya!
NEW CORR ENG ──► That wert born of the womb of Reṇukā as the son of Jamadagni. Obeisance to Thee, of great prowess and valour, that in Thy Rāma Incarnation as the son of Daśaratha, didst cut off the heads of the wicked Rākṣasa, the son of Pulastya!

[Ch 5 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We bow down again and again to Thee, the Great Lord, that in Thy Kṛṣṇa incarnation, didst deliver this earth from the clutches of the wicked King Duryodhana, Kamsa and others and didst establish the religion by removing the then prevailing vicious ideas and doctrines.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We bow down again and again to Thee, the Great Lord, that in Thy Kṛṣṇa incarnation, didst deliver this earth from the clutches of the wicked King Duryodhana, Kaṃṣa and others and didst establish the religion by removing the then prevailing vicious ideas and doctrines.

[Ch 5 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We bow down to Thy Buddha Incarnation, that Great Deva who didst come down here to put a stop to the slaughtering of the innocent animals and to the performance of the wicked sacrificial ceremonies! Obeisance to the Deva! When almost all the persons in this world will turn out in future as Mleechas and when the wicked Kings will oppress them, right and left,
NEW CORR ENG ──► We bow down to Thy Buddha Incarnation, that Great Deva who didst come down here to put a stop to the slaughtering of the innocent animals and to the performance of the wicked sacrificial ceremonies! Obeisance to the Deva! When almost all the persons in this world will turn out in future as Mleccas and when the wicked Kings will oppress them, right and left,

[Ch 5 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou wilt then incarnate Thyself again as Kalki and redress all the grievances! We bow down to Thy Kalki Form! O Deva! These are Thy Ten Incarnations, for the preservation of Thy devotees, for the killing of the wicked Daityas. Therefore Thou art called as the Great Reliever of all our troubles.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thou wilt then incarnate Thyself again as Kalki and redress all the grievances! We bow down to Thy Kalki Form! O Deva! These are Thy Ten Incarnations, for the preservation of Thy devotees, for the killing of the wicked Daityas. Therefore Thou art called as the Great Reliever of all our troubles.

[Ch 5 Verse 16-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Thou! Victory to Thee! The Devas Who assumess the forms of women and water for destroying the ailings of the devotees! Who else can be so king! O Thou, the Ocean of mercy! O Rsis! Thus praising the yellow robed Viṣṇu, the Lord of all the Devas, the whole host of the Devas bowed down to Him and made Sāṣṭāngas. Then Viṣṇu Gādādhara, hearing their hymns, gladdened them and spoke:
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Thou! Victory to Thee! The Deva Who assumest the forms of women and water for destroying the ailings of the devotees! Who else can be so kind! O Thou, the Ocean of mercy!” O Ṛṣis! Thus praising the yellow robed Viṣṇu, the Lord of all the Devas, the whole host of the Devas bowed down to Him and made Shāsṭāmgas. Then Viṣṇu Gadādhara, hearing their hymns, gladdened them and spoke :--

[Ch 5 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śrī Bhagavāna said: “O Devas! I am pleased with your stotra. You need not be sorrowful. I will remove all your troubles that have become unbearable to you. O Devas! I am very glad to hear the praises that you have offered on Me. Better ask boons from Me. I will grant them though very rare even and obtained with difficulty.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śrī Bhagavāna said :-- “O Devas! I am pleased with your stotra. You need not be sorrowful. I will remove all your troubles that have become unbearable to you. O Devas! I am very glad to hear the praises that you have offered on Me. Better ask boons from Me. I will grant them though very rare even and obtained with difficulty.

[Ch 5 Verse 21-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Any person who rises early in the morning and recites with devotion this stotra sung by you, will never experience any sorrow. O Devas! No poverty, no bad symptoms, no Vetālas nor planets nor Brahma Rāksasas nor any misfortunes will overtake him. No disease, due to Vāta (windy temperament), Pitta (bile) and Kapha (phlegm) nor untimely death will visit him. His family will not be extinct and happiness will always reign there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Any person who rises early in the morning and recites with devotion this stotra sung by you, will never experience any sorrow. O Devas! No poverty, no bad symptoms, no Vetālas nor planets nor Brahmā Rākṣasas nor any misfortunes will overtake him. No disease, due to Vāta (windy temperament), Pitta (bile) and Kapha (phlegm) nor untimely death will visit him. His family will not be extinct and happiness will always reign there.

[Ch 5 Verse 25-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devas! This stotra can give every thing. Both the enjoyment and freedom will come within any one's easy access. There is no doubt in this. Now what is your difficulty? Give out. I will remove it at once. There is not a bit of doubt in this." Hearing these words of Śrī Bhagavān, the Devas became glad and spoke to Viṣṇu. Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the Devas' going to Viṣṇu, in the Mahā Purāṇam Śrīmaddevībhāgāvatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devas! This stotra can give everything. Both the enjoyment and freedom will come within anyone’s easy access. There is no doubt in this. Nov what is your difficulty? Give out. I will remove it at once. There is not a bit of doubt in this.” Hearing these words of Śrī Bhagavān, the Devas became glad and spoke to Viṣṇu. Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the Devaś going to Viṣṇu, in the Mahā Purāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahārṣi Veda Vyāsa.
