CHAPTER V

On The Devas' Going to Viṣṇu

सूत उवाच

ते नाता देवदेवेशं मानार्थे जगदगुकम् ।

विष्णुं कामलपत्रांहं द्रष्टुः प्रभ्याप्तिवर्षम् ॥ १ ॥

स्तोत्रेण तुडुकुर्भेनका यगद्धवसर्यक्ता: ।

Sūta said: Then the Devas, on arriving at Vaikuntha, saw the Lord of Lakṣmī, the Deva of the Devas, the World-Teacher, with his eyes beautiful like Padma Palāsa (lotus-leaves), shining with brilliance and began to praise Him in a voice choked with intense feelings of devotion, thus:

देवा कचुः

जय विजाणो रमेशाहा महापुरुष पूर्वज ॥ 2 ॥

दैत्याते कामजनक सर्वकामफलप्रद ।

महावारह गोर्विद महावस्वरूपधकु ॥ 3 ॥

"Victory to Visnu! O Lord of Rama! Thou art prior to the Virāt Puruṣa." O Enemy of the Daityas! O Thou, the Generator of desires in all and the Bestower of the fruits of those desires to all! O Govinda! Thou art the Great Boar and Thou art of the nature of Great Sacrifice!

Book X Chapter V

महाविष्णो ध्योराए आजुप्यक्तिकारण ।

मत्थवावतारे भैद्यानमुढ़ाराधारलफ्क ।। 4 ।।

सत्यव्रतधार्यीग मत्थलकाय ते नमः ।।

जयाकृपार दैत्यत सुराकार्यमरपर्क ।। 5 ।।

O Mahā Visṇu! O Lord of Dharma! Thou art the Cause of the origin of this world! Thou didst support the earth in Thy Fish Incarnation for the deliverance of the Vedas! O Thou Satyavrata of the form of a Fish! We bow down to Thee. O Thou! The Enemy of the Daityas! The Ocean of mercy! Thou dost do the actions of the Devas out of mercy.

अमृतातिपिकरणेन कुमंरूपाय ते नमः ।

जयादिदै-न्यनागधर्मादिपूरकरूपयूक ।। ६ ।।

महूद्धारुकतोष्ठोग कोल्हपाय ते नमः ।

नारसिंहं वयुः कृत्वा महादैत्यं द्वार यः ।। ७ ।।

O Thou! The Tortoise Incarnation! That grantest Mukti to others! Obeisance to Thee! O Thou! That didst assume the form of a Boar for the destruction of the Daityas Jaya and others and for raising the earth from the waters! Obeisance to Thee! Thou didst assume that form—Half man and half Lion—of the Nṛsimha Mūrti and tore asunder Hiranya Kaśipu, proud of his boons, by Thy nails.

करजैर्वपूर्णां तस्मी नृहरये नमः ।

वामनं रूपमास्थाय तैलोक्यैध्यंमोहितम् ॥ 8 ॥

बलि संछल्यामास तस्मै यामनरूपिणे ।

टुर्धर्जनिविनाणाय सहस्करणजये ॥ 9 ॥

We bow down to Thee! Obeisance to Thee! That in Thy Dwarf Incarnation, didst deceive Bali, whose head got crazed by the acquisition of the kingdom over the three Lokas. We bow down to Thee, that in Thy Paraśu Rāma Incarnation, didst slay Kātra Viryārjuna, the thousand handed, and the other wicked Kṣattriyas! Obeisance to Thee!

रैयुकागर्भजातना जामदन्यान ये नतः ।

दूरधासपीलल्यागरिष्डेदिवरीये ॥ 10 ॥

श्रीमहाराये तुभ्यं नमोरन्तकामय च ।

That wert born of the womb of Renukā as the son of Jamadagni. Obeisance to Thee, of great prowess and valour, that in Thy Rāma Incarnation

as the son of Daśaratha, didst cut off the heads of the wicked Rāksasa, the son of Pulastya!

कंससुद्योपनाडीश दैनैय: पृथ्वीगलाङ्गे: ॥ १ १ ॥

भात्राकांतां मही योरभाज्ञज्ञार महाविषुः ।

धर्म संस्थायामास पार्यं कृत्वा सुदूरतः ॥ १ २ ॥

तस्मै कृष्णाय देवाय नमो3स्तु बहुया विषो ।

We bow down again and again to Thee, the Great Lord, that in Thy Kṛṣṇa incarnation, didst deliver this earth from the clutches of the wicked King Duryodhana, Kamsa and others and didst establish the religion by removing the then prevailing vicious ideas and doctrines.

वृष्यज्ञिवधाताय पशुहिंसानिर्वृतं च ।। 13 ॥

बौद्धुरूपं दधी योउसी तमैं देवाय ते नमः ।

स्नेक्षणये5क्षल लोके बुहराजन्यपीक्षिते ॥ 14 ॥

We bow down to Thy Buddha Incarnation, that Great Deva who didst come down here to put a stop to the slaughtering of the innocent animals and to the performance of the wicked sacrificial ceremonies! Obeisance to the Deva! When almost all the persons in this world will turn out in future as Mleechas and when the wicked Kings will oppress them, right and left,

कल्किक्सं समाद्धयी देवेदेवाय ते नमः ।

दशावतारास्ते देव भक्तानां रक्षाणाय वै ॥ 15 ॥

दुष्टैल्विधायाता तस्माचं सर्वेयुःखहत् ।

Thou wilt then incarnate Thyself again as Kalki and redress all the grievances! We bow down to Thy Kalki Form! O Deva! These are Thy Ten Incarnations, for the preservation of Thy devotees, for the killing of the wicked Daityas. Therefore Thou art called as the Great Reliever of all our troubles.

जय भक्त्रतिंनाशाय घृतं नारीजलात्मसु ॥ १६ ॥

रूपं वेने तथा देव को०यस्ततो द्वारनिधि: ।

इत्येवं देवदेवेशं स्तुला श्रीपीतवाससम् ॥ १७ ॥

प्रणेषुपर्पिक्सहिताः साहांगं विबुधर्षधानः ।

तेषां स्तवं समाकरणं देवः शीपुरुचोतम् ॥ १८ ॥

उवाच चिकुधानस्वान् हर्षयन्त्यैगादायः ।

O Thou! Victory to Thee! The Devas Who

assumess the forms of women and water for destroying the ailings of the devotees! Who else can be so king! O Thou, the Ocean of mercy! O Rsis! Thus praising the yellow robed Viṣṇu, the Lord of all the Devas, the whole host of the Devas bowed down to Him and made Sāṣṭāngas. Then Viṣṇu Gādādhara, hearing their hymns, gladdened them and spoke:

श्रीभगवानुवाच

प्रसजोश्मि सत्येनार्हे द्वैवास्तारं विमुज्चथ ॥ 19 ॥

भवतां नागशिव्यामि दुःखं परमुःसहम् ।

वृणुघं च वरं मतो देवा: परमदुर्लंम् ॥ 20 ॥

द्वारमि परमप्रीतः सतव्यास्य प्रसाततः ।

Śrī Bhagavāna said: “O Devas! I am pleased with your stotra. You need not be sorrowful. I will remove all your troubles that have become unbearable to you. O Devas! I am very glad to hear the praises that you have offered on Me. Better ask boons from Me. I will grant them though very rare even and obtained with difficulty.

व एत्वयते स्तोत्रं कल्य उत्थाय मानवः ॥ 21 ॥

मिय भक्ति परां कृत्वा न तं शोकः स्युलेक्वा ।

अलक्ष्मीः कालकर्णि च नाकामेनदपूर्वुं सुः ॥ 22 ॥

नोपसर्गा ने वेताला न प्रहा बढ़मानवाः ।

न रेगा वातिकाः वैभातः ३लैम्यसंभवितनस्तथा ॥ 23 ॥

नाकाल्यरणं तस्य कदापि च भविष्यति ।

संततिःश्रकाल्क्या भोगाः सर्वे सुखादयः ॥ 24 ॥

Any person who rises early in the morning and

recites with devotion this stotra sung by you, will never experience any sorrow. O Devas! No poverty, no bad symptoms, no Vetālas nor planets nor Brahma Rāksasas nor any misfortunes will overtake him. No disease, due to Vāta (windy temperament), Pitta (bile) and Kapha (phlegm) nor untimely death will visit him. His family will not be extinct and happiness will always reign there.

संभविष्यति तन्मवीर्युहे यः स्तोजप्राछकः ।

कि पुनर्वहुनीकेन स्तोत्रं सर्वार्थसाधकम् ॥ 25 ॥

एतस्य पठनायूणां भृक्तिमुनी न दूरतः ।

देवा भवन्तु यवदुःखं कल्यतां तत्सेशगम् ॥ 26 ॥

नाशयामि न संदेहश्रान कार्योंणुरेव च ।

एवं शीभावह्वावं भूत्वा सर्वे दिवैकासः ।

प्रसवमनसः सर्वे पुनरूपचुर्याकपिम् ॥ 27 ॥

इति शीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे दशमकंधे

पूजमोर्षायाः ।। 28 ।।

O Devas! This stotra can give every thing. Both the enjoyment and freedom will come within any one's easy access. There is no doubt in this. Now what is your difficulty? Give out. I will remove it at once. There is not a bit of doubt in this." Hearing these words of Śrī Bhagavān, the Devas became glad and spoke to Viṣṇu.

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the

Devas' going to Viṣṇu, in the Mahā Purāṇam

Śrīmaddevībhāgāvatam of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

