CHAPTER II

On the Origin of Prakrti and Puruṣa

नारद खाच

समासेन श्रुतं सर्वे दैवीनां चरितं प्रभो ।

विद्योभनाय बोध्यस्य व्यासेन वतुभर्महिंस ॥ १ ॥

सुंरोराशा सृष्टिवधौं कक्षामाविर्वर्भूव ह ।

कयं वा पड़घा भूता वदे वेदविद्यावर ॥ 2 ॥

Nārada said: O Lord! I have heard all that you said in brief about the Prakṛti Devī. Now describe in detail. Why the Mūlā Prakṛti Ādyā Śaktī (the Prime Force) was created at the very beginning before the creation of this world of five elements.

भूता ययोग्रकलया तथा त्रिगुणाया भवे ।

व्यासेने तासां चरितं श्रोतूमिच्छामि संग्रम्न् ॥ ३ ॥

तासां जनानुकर्जन पुजाध्यानविधिं वुध ।

स्तोत्र करचनेमिद्याँ शौर्यं वर्धय मुकूलम् ॥ ४ ॥

How did She, being of the nature of the three Guqas, come to be divided into five parts? I desire to hear all this in detail. Now kindly describe their auspicious births, methods of worship, their meditation, their stotras, (praises) Kavacas (the mystic syllables considered as a preservation like armour) glory and power in detail.

शीनारायण उवाच

नित्य आसा नभो नित्यं कालो नित्यो दिशो यथा ।

शिवानी गोलकं नित्यं नित्यो गोलोंक एच च ॥ ५ ॥

तदेकडेगो वैकुणठो नप्रभागानुसारकः ।

तथैव प्रकृतिंनंता ब्रह्मलीला सनातनी ॥ 6 ॥

Nārāyana spokc: O Devarsī! The Mūlā Prakṛti, of the nature of Māyā of Para Brahman is an eternal entity (Nitya padārtha) just as the Ātman, the celestial space (the nabho maṇḍala); Time (Kāla), the ten quarters, the Universe Egg, the Goloka and, lower than this, the Vaikunṭha dhāma all are eternal things.

यथाउनो दाहिका चन्ने पदे योभा प्रभा रथी।

गश्युक्ता न विश्रा सा यथा प्रकृतिरात्मिन ॥ 7 ॥

विना सर्वा स्वणकारः कुण्डलं कनुांक्षमः ।

विना मुदा घटं कर्तु कुलालो हि न दीश्रः ॥ 8 ॥

न हिं क्षमसलाशउत्चा च सृष्टिं सर्वुं तया विना ।

Atman and Prakrti are in inseparable union with each other as Fire and its burning capacity, the Moon and her beauty, the lotus and its splendour, the Sun and his rays are inseparably united with each other. As the goldsmith cannot prepare golden ornaments without gold and as the potter cannot make earthen pots without earth, so the Atman cannot do any work without the help of this omnipotent Prakrti.

सर्वशक्तिस्वरूपा सा यथा च शक्तिमान्त्वा ॥ 9 ॥

ऐथ्यवचनः शक्ष क्रिकः पकारम एव च ।

तत्वरूपा तदोर्दीय सा शक्ति: परिकीर्तिति ॥ 10 ॥

ज्ञानं समुद्धः सम्यातिर्थोश्य वक्तं भगः ।

तेन शक्तिभगवती भगरूपा च सा सदा ॥ 11 ॥

The letter ‘Sa’ indicates ‘Aisyaryam’ prosperity, the divine powers; and ‘Kti’, denotes might, strength; and in as much as She is the Bestower of the above two, the Mullā Prakṛti is named ‘Šakti’. ‘Bhaga’ is indicative of knowledge, prosperity, wealth, fame; and in as much as Mullā Prakṛti has all these powers, She is also called ‘Bhagavatī.’

तया युक्तः सदार्तस्मा च भगवांतेन कब्यते ।

स च चेव्छामयो देय: साकासूत्र निगृतकिं: ॥ 12 ॥

And Ātman ‘is always in union with this Bhagavatī Who is all powers, so He is called ‘Bhagavān.’ The Bhagavān is therefore sometimes with form; and sometimes He is without form.

Note: When Prakṛti becomes latent, God is without form; with Prakṛti manifest, God is with form.)

तेजोकंपं निराकारं ध्यायने योगिन: सदा ।

वर्दन्ति च परं ब्रहा परमानन्दीभ्यम् ॥ 13 ॥

अरुग्यं सर्वेत्रहारं सर्वेत्रं सर्वकाणम् ।

सर्वेट सर्वकेशं तं वैश्यावतान मवते ॥ 14 ॥

The Yogis always think of the Luminous Form of the Formless Bhagavān and declare Him to be

all blissful Para Brahma, the God. Though He is invisible, the Witness of all, Omniscient, the Cause of all, the Giver of everything and of every form, yet the Vaiṣṇavas do not say so. The Vaiṣṇavas declare how can fire, strength and energy come when there is no fiery, strong, energetic Person behind it?

वदान्ति चैव ते कस्य तेजतेजस्विना विना ।

तेजोमण्डलमध्यस्थं ब्रहा तेजस्विनं परम् ॥ १५ ॥

स्वेळामयं संस्करणं सर्वकारणाकाराण ।

अतीव सुन्दं रूप विश्वतं सुमन्तोहम् ॥ १६ ॥

किशोरावसंग शान्तं सर्वकानतं परातवम् ।

Therefore He who shines in the centre of this fiery sphere is the Para Brahma; He is the Fiery Person; He is Higher than the Highest. He is All Will; He is All-Form, the Cause of all cause and His Form is Very Beautiful. He is Young; He looks very peaceful and loved by all.

नवीनीराद्भासधार्येक श्यामविद्यमूँ ॥ 17 ॥

गराम्याल्वपशीघोगभोपानतेचानम् ।

भुक्ताधविविनीँघकन्दतपोफिन्मोरमम् ॥ 18 ॥

He is the Highest; and His Blue Body shines like new rain-clouds. His two eyes defy the beauty of the autumn lotuses in the mid-day; His exquisitely nice rows of teeth put all the series of pearls in the dark back-ground.

मयूरपिछच्छूई च मालतीमायमपिछतम् ।

सुनेसं ससितं कानतं भक्तानुग्रहकारणम् ॥ 19 ॥

ज्वलदनिविश्यूढ़ैकपीतींगुकसुशोभिनम् ।

ढिपुर्जं मुतलीहतं रत्नभूषणभूषितम् ॥ 20 ॥

The peacock's feather is seen on His crown; the garland of Mälati flowers is suspended from His neck; His nose is exceedingly beautiful; the sweet smile is always seen on His lips. There is no second like Him in showing favour to the Bhaktas. He wears yellow clothings, as if the burning fire is emanating all round; the flute is seen on both His hands, reaching to the knees. His body is decorated all over with jewels.

सर्वीधरं च सर्वीं सर्वशक्तिमृते विभुम् ।

सर्वेश्यप्रं सर्वेस्तानं सर्वमुङ्गलम् ॥ 21 ॥

परिपूर्णतं सिद्धे सिद्धेगं सिद्धाकारकम् ।

ध्यात्ने वैश्वाना: शश्छेदेवेयं सनातनम् ॥ 22 ॥

He is the Sole Refuge of this Universe; the Lord of all, omnipotent and omnipresent. No trace of deficiency can be seen in Him; He is Himself a Siddha (perfect) Puruṣa; and the foremost of all Siddha Purusas; bestows Siddhis to all. The Vaiṣṇavas meditate always That Eternal Śrī Krṣṇa, the Deva of the Devas.

जन्ममृत्युसाख्याधिकोक्षीतिरहं परम् ।

ब्रहाणो वयसा यस्य निभेय उपचरहिं ॥ 23 ॥

स चात्या स परं बहु कृष्ण इत्यधियीयते ।

कृषिस्तद्धक्तिबचनो नक्षु तत्थस्यावकः ॥ 24 ॥

He takes always fully all the fears of birth, old age, and all ills and sorrows. The age of Brahmā is the twinkling of His eye. That Highest Self, the Para Brahma is denominated as Kṛṣṇa. The word ‘Kṛṣ’ denotes Bhakti to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the letter ‘na’ signifies devotion to His service. So He is the Bestower of Bhakti and devotion to His Service.

भक्तिवर्युद्धात यः स च कृष्ण: प्रक्रांति: ।

कृषि्यु सर्वेचनो नकाते वीजेपेव च ॥ 25 ॥

स कृष्ण: सर्वेक्षण3स्त्री सिसुक्षजेक एव च।

सृष्युनयुखस्तदंरोन कालेन प्रेरितः प्रपुः ॥ 26 ॥

Again ‘Kṛṣ’ denotes all; everything; and ‘na’ signifies the root. So He Who is the Root and Creator of all, is Śrī Kṛṣṇa. When He desired, in the very beginning, to create this Universe, there was nothing then except Śrī Kṛṣṇa; and at last, impelled by Kāla, (His Own Creation) He became ready, in His part, to do the work of creation.

सेव्छामयः सच्छ्या च द्विधाको बभूव ह ।

सौकोपो वाघमपांगोरो दक्षिणांगः पुणान्यन्तः ॥ 27 ॥

तां ददूरी महाकामी कामाधारांं सनाततः ।

अजीक कामनीचां च चारभंकजसभिपम् ॥ 28 ॥

The Lord, who is All Will, willed and divided Himself into two parts, His Left part becoming female and His Right part becoming male. Then that Eternal One, Who is greatly loving, looked at the female, His left part, the Sole Receptacle to

Book IX Chapter II

hold all the contents of love, very lovely to the eyes, and looking like the beautiful lotus.


चन्द्रबिम्बविनिन्द्यैकनितम्बयुगलां पराम् ।
सुचारुकदलीस्तम्भनिन्दितश्रोणिसुन्दरीम् ॥ २९॥

श्रीयुक्तश्रीफलाकारस्तनयुग्ममनोरमाम् ।
पुष्पजुष्टां सुवलितां मध्यक्षीणां मनोहराम् ॥ ३०॥

अतीव सुन्दरीं शान्तां सस्मितां वक्रलोचनाम् ।
वह्निशुद्धांशुकाधारां रत्नभूषणभूषिताम् ॥ ३१॥

The loins of this woman defy the Moon; Her thighs put the plantain trees quite in the background; Her breasts are mistaken for the beautiful Bel fruits; flowers are scattered as Her Hairs on the head; Her middle part is very slender, very beautiful to behold! Exceedingly lovely; appearance very calm; sweet smile reigning in Her lips; side long glances with Her; Her clothing is purified by fire; all over Her body decorated with gems.

शुधच्छ्रुधकोराघ्यां पिवंती सत्तं मुदा ।

कृष्णस्य मुवचनंचे च चन्द्रकोटिविनिदितम् ॥ 32 ॥

कस्तूरी विदुना साध्मभशूनन्दिकानु ।

संम सिन्दूरविन्दु च भालमध्ये च विष्णतीम् ॥ 33 ॥

Her eyes, also, like the Cakora bird (Greek partridge) began to drink incessantly with joy the moon beam from the face of Śrī Krṣna, defying, as it were, the ten millions of moons. On Her forehead there was the dot of vermilion (red-lead); over that the dot of of white sandal paste and over that was placed the musk.

वक्रमं कवरीयारं मालतीमाल्यभूषितम् ।

रतेंद्रसाहातं च दधर्ती कानतकामुकीम् ॥ 34 ॥

कोदिचन्द्रप्रभामृष्ठुपुशोभासम्पन्वितम् ।

गमनेन राजहंसगगवंविनाशिनीम् ॥ 35 ॥

The fillets or braids of hair on Her head are slightly curved; this was decorated with Mālati garlands; on Her neck was suspended the necklace of gems and jewels and She is always very amorous towards Her husband. On looking at Her face, it seems that ten millions of moons have arisen at once; when She walks, her gait puts (humiliates) those of ganders and elephants in shade.

दृष्ट्या तां तु तया सार्थे रासेणी रासमण्डले ।

रासोल्लासे सुरसिको रासकीहां चाकार है ॥ 36 ॥

O Muni! Śrī Krṣna, the Lord of the Rāsa Dance, and the Person of Taste in the Rāsa Sport, looked askance at Her for a while and then catching hold of Her by Her hand went to the Rāsamandalam and began to play the Rāsa sport, (the amorous pastime).

नानाप्रकारश्रगारं श्रगारे मृतैमानिव ।

चकार सुखसंभोगं चावढ़े ब्रहणो दिन्न ॥ 37 ॥

ततः स च परिशान्तस्तया योनौ जगत्थिता ।

चकार वीयाधानं च नित्यानन्दे शुणतक्षणे ॥ 38 ॥

गायजी योषितसत्या: सुततोचे च सुझत ।

नि:ससार भप्रजलं श्रांतायास्तेजसा हरे: ॥ 39 ॥

It seemed then the Lord of amorous pastimes had become incarnate there and had been enjoying the various pleasures of amorous passions and desires. So much, that Brahma's one day passed away in that sport. The Father of the Universe, then becoming tired, impregnated in an auspicious moment in Her womb who was born of His left portion.

महाकमणविल्हाया नि: शास्त्र शुच्य ह ।

तदा चेदे भप्रलं तत्सर्व विश्वगोतकम् ॥ 40 ॥

स च निशासवान्युः स्वांधारो बयूच है ।

निःशासवायु: सर्वेधां जीविनां च भवेषु च ॥ 41 ॥

The Prakrti Devi was also tired of the embraces of Śri Kṛṣṇa; so after the intercourse, she began to perspire and breathe frequently. Her perspiration turned into water and deluged the whole universe, with water; and Her breath turned into air and became the life of all the beings.

बधूव भूतिंद्रायोर्विंगगतायणावल्लभा ।

तत्सही सा च तत्सुज: प्राण: पश्च च जीविनाम् ॥ 42 ॥

प्राणोउपान: समानश्रीदान्यन्ती च वायवः ।

बधूतुंदे तत्सुजा अधः प्राणाश पश्च च ॥ 43 ॥

The female that sprung from the left side of Vāyu became his wife and out of their contact originated Prāna, Apāna, Samāna, Udāna and Vyāna, the five sons. These are the five vital Vāyüs of all the beings.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Besides these from the womb of the Vāyu's wife came out Nāga and the other four lower Vāyus.

प्रमतैगायाधिदेवश्र बथपूव वरणो महान् ।

तदामाज्ञच्च तपन्ती वक्षणानी बन्धुपव सा ॥ 44 ॥

अथ सा कृष्णचिछ्णिक: कृष्णाभर्ष द्वारा ह ।

गतमन्वन्तरं यावज्ज्वलतीं ब्रहातेजसा ॥ 45 ॥

The water that came out from perspiration, Varuna Deva became the presiding Deity of that; and the female, sprung out of the left side of Varuna Deva, became the wife of Varuna, called Varunānī. On the other hand, the Śakti, of the nature of knowledge of Śri Krṣna, remained pregnant for one hundred manvantaras. Her body became effulgent with Brahma-teja (the fire of Brahma).

कृष्णप्राणाधिर्देशी का कृष्णप्राणाधिक्रिया ।

कृष्णायस्य सांगिनी शक्रकृष्णायब्बःस्वतलस्थिता ॥ 46 ॥

गतमवन्दतरांत च कालेउजिते तु सुदरी ।

सुपाव डिषभं स्वर्णार्थ प्रविषधायातालयं परम् ॥ 47 ॥

Kṛṣṇa was her life and She again was dearer to Kṛṣṇa than his life even. She remained always with Śrī Kṛṣṇa; so much so that She constantly rested on His breast. When one hundred Manvantaras passed away, that Beautiful One gave birth to a Golden Egg. That egg was the repository of the whole universe.

दर्श्वा ईर्भ च सा देवी हृदयेन व्यद्युत ।

उत्सर्जं च कोपेन बह्यांडगोलके जले ॥ 48 ॥

दूर्ध्वा कृष्णा तन्यांग हाहाकारं चकार ह ।

शगण यदी देवेशलतक्षणं च यथोचितम् ॥ 49 ॥

The Beloved of Kṛṣṇa became very sorry to see the egg and out of anger, threw that within the water collected in the centre the Universe. Seeing this, Śrī Kṛṣṇa raised a great cry and immediately cursed Her duly and said:

यतोउपरंचं तव्या त्यक्तं कोपशीले च निशुते ।

भव तवमनपत्यापि चाधप्रभूति निश्छितम् ॥ 50 ॥

या यास्वदंशल्पाधु भविष्यन्ति सुरास्वयः ।

अनपत्याश्रु तः स्वास्त्वत्समा निवरीवीयना: ॥ 51 ॥

"O Angry One! O Cruel One! When you have forsaken out of ānger this son just born of you, I

say then that you become from to-day bereft of any issue. Besides, let all those godly women that will spring out of your parts, they also be deprived of having any issue or sons and they will remain ever constant in their youth."

एतमिचन्तरे देवी जिह्धागासहमा ततः ।

आविर्बैभूव कन्दैका शुक्रलवणी मनोहा ॥ 52 ॥

धृतवस्तपरिधाना वीणापुसलकाधारिणी ।

रत्नभूषणभूषाका सर्वशास्त्राप्रिदेवता ॥ 53 ॥

O Muni! While Śrī Krṣṇa was thus cursing, suddenly came out from the tongue of the beloved of Krṣṇa, a beautiful daughter, of a white colour. Her clothings were all white, in her hands there were lute and book and all Her body was decorated with ornaments made of gems and jewels. She was the presiding Deity of all the Śāstras.

अथ कालातंते सा च द्विधास्पा वधूच है ।

वामार्थगीच्च कमला दक्षिणाधार्च चीक्षा ॥ 54 ॥

एतमित्रवंतरे कृष्णो द्विधास्पो वधूच सः ।

दक्षिणाधंक्ष द्विपुजो वामार्थेघं चतुर्भुंजः ॥ 55 ॥

Some timer later the Mula Prakrti, the Beloved of Kṛṣṇa divided into two parts. Out of Her left portion came Kamalā and out of her right portion came Rādhikā. In the meantime Śrī Kṛṣṇa divided himself into two parts. From his right side appeared a form two-handed; and from left side appeared a form four-handed.

उदाय चाणी कृष्णास्ता लयस्य कामिनी भव ।

अत्रैव मानिनि राशा तत भर्ते भविष्यति ॥ 56 ॥

एवं लक्ष्मी च प्रदरी तुहो नारायणाय च ।

स जगाम च वैकुंटे ताथ्वां सार्यं जयानतिः ॥ 57 ॥

The Śrī Kṛṣṇa addressed the Goddess Speech, holding flute in her hand, 'O Devi! You follow this four-handed Person as his wife' and then spoke to Rādhā: O, Rādeh! You are a sensitive, proud lady; let you be My wife; so it will do you good' Śrī Kṛṣṇa also told Lakṣmī gladly to become the wife of the four-handed Nārāyaṇa. Then Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of the world, took both Lakṣmī and Sarasvatī to the abode Vaikunjha.

Book IX Chapter II

अनपत्ये च ते इे च जाते राधांगसंभये ।

भूता नारायणांगाच्च पार्वँद्रा चतुर्भुंज: ॥ 58 ॥

तेजसा वयसा कलपुणायां च समा हरे: ।

बभुतु: कमलांगाच्च दासीकोट्याच्र ततसमा: ॥ 59 ॥

O Muni! Both Lakṣmī and Sarasvatī became issueless, being born of Rādhā. From the body of Nārāyana arose his attendants, all four-handed. They were all equal to him in appearance, in qualifications; in spirit and in age. On the other hand, from the body of Kamalā arose millions and millions of female attendants all equal to Her in form and qualifications.

अथ गोलोकानायस्य लोमां विवरतो मुने ।

भूतश्वासांख्योगोपचर वयसा तेजसा सभा: ॥ 60 ॥

क्लेपण च गुणेनैव बलेन विफ्मेण च ।

प्राणतुल्यप्रिया: सर्वे बध्वुः पार्वादि विषोः ॥ 6 1 ॥

Then arose innumerable Gopas (cow-herds) from the pores of Śri Krṣṇa. They were all equal to the Lord of Goloka in form, Gunas, power and age; they were all dear to Him as if they were His life.

राधोगलोगकृपेयो बध्वुगोपकव्यकाः ।

राधातूल्याश तः सर्वा राधादास्य: प्रियंवदाः ॥ 6 2 ॥

रत्नाभूषणभूषाका: शगवत्सुस्थिरयोवतः।

अनपल्याच तः सर्वा: पुंसः शापेन संततम् ॥ 6 3 ॥

From the pores of Rādhikā came out the Gopa Kanyās (cow-herdesses). They were all equal to Rādhā and all were Her attendants and were sweet-speaking. Their bodies were all decorated with ornaments of jewels, and their youth was constant, they were all issueless as Śrī Krṣna cursed them thus.

एतस्मिन्तरे विष सहसा कृष्णदेवता ।

अविवर्धभूव दुर्गा सा विद्यामाया सनातनी ॥ 64 ॥

O Best of Brāhmaṇas! On the other hand, suddenly arose Durgā, the Māyā of Viṣṇu (The Highest Self) eternal and whose Deity was Krṣṇa.

Note: Durgā was the Avatāra of Mūla Prakṛti not the Avatāra of Rādhā as Laksmī and Sarasvati were.

देवी नारायणीगाना सर्वशनिक्सलक्षिपणी ।

बुद्ध्वाधिष्ठाी देवी स कृष्णायच परमात्मनः ॥ 6 5 ॥

देवीनीं बीजकपा चू मूलप्रकृतिरीश्वरी ।

परिपूर्णतम तेजःस्वकृता त्रिगुणामिका ॥ 6 6 ॥

She is Nārāyani; She is Iśāni; She is the Śakti of all and She is the Presiding Deity of the intelligence of Śri Kṛṣna. From Her have come out many other Devis; She is Mūla Prakṛti and she is Iśvari; no failings or insufficiencies are seen in Her. She is the Tejas (of the nature of Fire) and She is of the nature of the three Guṇas.

ततकाचनवर्षाभा कोटिरुर्भस्मप्रभा ।

ईपद्वायप्रसात्या सहस्वपुर्जयंत् ॥ 67 ॥

नानाशस्त्रकिनकरं विधती सा विलोचना ।

वहिषुर्ज्युंगक्रधाना तत्पभूषणभूषित ।। 68 ॥

Her colour is bright like the molten gold; Her lustre looks as if ten millions of Suns have simultaneously arisen. She looks gracious always with sweet smile on Her lips, Her hands are one thousand in number.

यस्यार्शांगीशकलया बभूवुः सर्वोपितः ।

सर्वे विश्वस्थिता लोका मोहिता: स्युध मायया ॥ 69 ॥

सर्वेश्वरप्रदारी च कामिनां गृह्वासिनाम् ।

कृष्णभक्तिप्रदा या च वैश्यानां च वैश्याची ॥ 70 ॥

मुमुक्षुर्णो मोक्षदारी सुखितां सुखदायिनी ।

स्वर्गेषु स्वर्णतक्ष्मीरच गृहलक्ष्मीगृहेषु च ॥ 71 ॥

Various weapons are in all Her hands. The clothings of the three-eyed one are bright and purified by Fire She is decorated with ornaments all of jewels. All the women who are the jewels are sprung from Her parts and parts and by the power of Her Māyā, all the people of the world are enchanted. She bestows all the wealth that a householder wants; She bestows on Krṣna's devotees, the devotion towards Krṣna; nay, She is the Vaiṣnavī Śakti of the Vaiṣnavas.

ततविष्यु तपस्या च श्रीकाण तु नृयेषु च ।

या वह्वी दाहिकाकाण प्रभाकाण च भास्करे ॥ 72 ॥

गोभाकाण च चंद्रे च सा पदमेषु च शोभान ।

सर्वोत्तिचरकाण या श्रीकृष्णे परमात्यनि ॥ 73 ॥

She gives final liberation to those that want such and gives happiness to those that want happiness.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

She is the Laksmī to the Heavens; as well She is the Laksmī of every household.

या च शक्तिमानताया यमा च शक्तिमज्ञगत् ।

यया विता जगतस्यं जीवन्मृत्तावि स्थितम् ॥ 74 ॥

या च संसारवृक्षस्य वीजरूपा सनातनी ।

स्थितिक्पा बुद्धिक्पा फलक्पा च नारद ॥ 75 ॥

She is the Tapas of the ascetics, the beauty of the kingdoms of the kings, the burning power of fire, the brilliancy of the Sun, the tender beauty of the Moon, the lovely beauty of the lotus and the Śakti of Śrī Krṣna the Highest Self. The Self, the world all are powerful by Her Śakti; without Her everything would be a dreary dead mass.

श्रुतिप्यासाद्याका नित्रा तंत्र क्षमा मति: ।

गतिलज्जातृशिष्टिधातिकालादिकरणी ॥ 76 ॥

सा च संसूय वसैर्णं तत्फरः समुवास ह ।

त्वर्सिंहासनं तस्ये प्रदरी रात्रिकेश्वरः ॥ 77 ॥

तृतसिंत्रते तन सक्रीकच चतुर्मुंतः ।

पद्यानोपनोभिपद्यापत्र:ससार महानुपे ॥ 78 ॥

O Nārada! She is the seed of this Tree of World; She is eternal; She is the Stay, She is Intelligence fruits, hunger, thirst, mercy, sleep, drowsiness, forgiveness, fortitude, peace, bashfulness, nourishment, contentment and lustre. The Mūla Prakṛti praising Śrī Krṣna stood before Him. The Lord of Rādhikā then gave Her a throne to sit. O Great Muni! At this moment sprang from the navel lotus the four-faced Brahmā, with his wife Śavitrī, an exceedingly woman.

कर्मडतुवर: श्रीमांतस्पर्सी ज्ञानिंवर: ।

चतुर्मुक्तिं तृहाय प्रजलन्द्वहातेजसा ॥ 79 ॥

सा तदा सुंदरी सूहा शनचंझरमग्रभा ।

वहिषूर्द्धोर्गक्राधाना रतभूषणपूषणा ॥ 80 ॥

रत्नसिंहासने तमये संस्त्यु वसंकारणम् ।

उवास स्वामिना सार्य कृष्णस्य पुत्तो मुदा ॥ 81 ॥

No sooner the fourfaced Brahmā, the foremost of the Jñānis, fond of asceticism and holding Kamandalu in His hand came into being than He began to praise Śrī Krṣṇa by His four mouths. On the other hand the Devi Śavitrī, with a beauty of

one hundred moons, born with great ease, wearing apparel purified by fire and decorated with various ornaments praised Krṣṇa, the One and Only Cause of the Universe and then took Her seat gladly with Her husband in the throne made of jewels.

तत्सिमन्त्रते कृष्णो द्विष्ठापको बधूव सः ।

वामाधोगो महदोवो दक्षिणो गोषिकापति: ॥ 82 ॥

शुद्धस्थिककंश: शतकोटिरविषप्रः ।

At that time Krṣna divided Himself into two parts; His left side turned into the form of Mahādeva; and his right side turned into the Lord of Gopikās (cow-herdesses). The colour and splendour of the body of Mahādeva is pure white like white crystal; as if one hundred suns have arisen simultaneously.

निशूलपहिशुभरो व्याप्रमपारि हरः ॥ 83 ॥

ततकाचरवगाधी जटाभारधर: पर: ।

भयम्प्रवितगाङ्ग सस्मितचंद्रगुखेखा: ॥ 84 ॥

दिगंबारे नीलकंठ: सरंभुषणपार्थिवि: ।

विष्घद्धिणहस्तेन रन्मालां सुसंस्कृतम् ॥ 85 ॥

In His hands there are the trident. (Triśūla) and sharp-edged spear (Pattiṣa); His wearing is a tiger skin; on His heads matted hair (Jatā) of a tawny hue like molten gold; His body was besmeared all over with ashes, smile reigning in His face and on His forehead, the semi-moon He has no wearing on his loins; so He is called Digambara (the quarters of the Sky being His clothing); His neck is of a blue colour; the serpent being the ornaments on His body and on His right hand the nice bead of jewels well purified.

प्रजन्यंचबलयेन बह्यान्योति: सनातनम् ।

सत्यवरूलं श्रीकृष्ण परमात्यानमीश्वरम् ॥ 86 ॥

कारणं कारणानां च सर्वमंगलमंगलम् ।

जन्मयनुराजव्याधिशोकभीतिरंतरं परम् ॥ 87 ॥

संस्तूय सुर्वोपौर्यूं तं चतो मनुर्जगवाधिधः ।

रत्नसिंहासने रथे समुवास हरे: पुरः ॥ 88 ॥

इति श्रीमद्दौभागवते महापुराणे नवमस्कन्धे द्वितीयोशया: ॥ 2 ॥

Who is always repeating with His five faces the Eternal Light of Brahmā, and Who was has

Book IX Chapter III

conquered Death by praising Śrī Krṣṇa, Who is of the nature of Truth, the Highest Self, the God Incarnate, the material cause of all things and the All auspicious of all that is good and favourable, and the Destroyer of the fear of birth, death, old age and disease and Who has been named

Mṛtyuñjaya (the conqueror of Death). This Mahādeva took His seat on a throne made of jewels (diamonds, emeralds, etc.)

Here ends the Second Chapter of the Ninth Book on the origin of Prakrti and Puruṣa in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa

Book IX Chapter III

