CHAPTER VII

On the Curses on Gaṅgā, Sarasvati and Laksmī

श्रीनारायण उद्वारा

इत्युक्चा जगातं नाथो विराराम च नारद ।

अतीव करुदैद्यः समार्तिनय परस्यम् ॥ १ ॥

तापच सर्वा: समालोक्य क्रमेणीचुस्तदेश्वरम् ।

कंपिता: साशुनेशारच शोकेन च भयेन च ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! Thus saying, the Lord of the World stopped. And Laksmī, Gaṅgā and Sarasvatī wept bitterly, embracing one another. All of them then looked to Śri Krṣṇa, and gave vent to their feelings one by one with tears in their eyes,

Book IX Chapter VII

and with their hearts throbbing with fears and sorrows.

सरसल्याचा

विश्रापों देहि है नाथ दुह्यामजनशोचन् ।

सत्यविमानपरित्यक्ता: कुतो जीवित ता: सिक्य: ॥ 3 ॥

देहत्यागं कार्यविमा योगेन भारते धूयन् ।

अत्युवृतते हि नियतं पातुमईति निश्रितन् ॥ 4 ॥

Sarasvati said: “O Lord! What is, now, the way out of this curse, so severe and paining since our births? How long can helpless women live, separated from their husbands? O Lord I certainly say that I will sacrifice my body when I go to Bhārata, by taking recourse to yoga. The Mahātmās always protect all the persons without fail.”

गड़ोवाच

अहं केनापराधेन त्वया त्यक्ता जगत्यते ।

देहत्यागं कार्यवाथि निर्देशायाः कथं लभ ॥ 5 ॥

निर्देशकामिनीत्यागं करोति थो नरो भुवि ।

स याति नरकं घोरे किंकुं सर्वेश्वरोरूप वा ॥ 6 ॥

Gāngā said: “O Lord of the Universe! Why have been abandoned by You. What fault have I committed? I will quit my body. And you will have to partake of the sin due to the killing of an innocent woman. He is surely to go to hell, even if he be the Lord of all, who forsakes in this world an innocent wife.”

पशोवाय

नाथ सत्त्वस्वरूपस्वे कोपः कथमहो तव । प्रसादं कुरु भार्ये डे सदीगस्य क्षमा वरा ॥ 7 ॥ भारते भारतीशगपाछास्यामि कल्या ह्रहम् ।

कियकालातं चितितरन कदा इत्यामिि ने पदम् ॥ 8 ॥

Padmā said: “O Lord! Thou art of the nature of Sattva Guṇa in fullness; what wonder, then, how Thou hast become angry! However let Thou be pleased now with Sarasvatī and Gaṅgā. Forgiveness is the best quality of a good husband. I am ready just now to go to Bhārata when Sarasvatī has cursed me.

दास्यति पापिन: पापं सदा: स्नानावगाहन्त् ।

केन तेन विकृताक्रदामगायिध्यामि ते पदम् ॥ 9 ॥

कलया तुलसीकर्ण धर्मध्वजसुता सती ।

भुक्ला कहा लिधायामि तलतदांबुजमच्छूत ॥ 10 ॥

But tell me, how long I will have to stay there? After how man days I shall be able to see again Thy lotus-feet? The sinners will wash away their dirts of sins in my waters by their constant baths and ablutions? By what means shall I be freed again and get back to Thy lotus-feet.

वृक्षरूपा भविष्यामि त्वद्धिध्रातुदेवता ।

समुद्धार्थसि कदा तन्मे बृहि कृपानिधे ॥  १ १ ॥

गंगा सरस्वतीशपाद्धि वास्यति भारते ।

शपेन भुक्ता पापाच्य कदा तां च लधियति ॥ १ २ ॥

How long shall I have to remain in my part, the daughter of Dharma Dhvaja, at the expiry of which I will be able to see Thee again? How long shall I have to assume the form of Tulasi tree, the abode of Thine. O Thou, the Ocean of mercy! Say, when wilt Thou deliver me?

गंगाग्रोपेन चा वाणी यदि व्यास्यित भारतम् ।

कदा शगपाङ्ठिनमुंच्य लिभथिति पंद तव ॥ 13 ॥

तां वाणी ब्रह्मसदने गंगां वा शिवमिन्दितम् ।

गन्तुं बदसि हे नाथ तत्क्रमस्व चे ते वचः ॥ 14 ॥

And if Gāngā have to go to Bhārata, by the curse of Bhāratī, when shall She be freed of the curse and sin and when shall She see back Thy feet? Again if Sarasvatī have to go to Bhārata out of Gāngā's curse, when will that period of curse expire? How many days after shall She be able to come back to Thy feet? Now, be pleased to cancel Thy order for them to go to Brahmā and Śiva respectively."

इत्युक्ता कमताकांतपादं धृत्वा ननाम सा ।

स्वकैशैर्षेहनं कृत्वा करोद च पुनः पुनः ॥ 15 ॥

O Nārada! Thus speaking to Jagannātha, the Devi Kamalā bowed down at His feet and embracing them by Her own hairs of the head, cried frequently.

(उवाच पच्याभस्तां पर्चां कृत्वा स्ववक्षसि ।

ईपद्धात्यप्रसात्यो भक्तानुग्रहकातरः ॥ )

श्रीभगवानुवाच

त्वद्वयमाचारिथामि स्वतावयं च सुरोष्वरि ।

समतां च कारिष्यामि शृणु तं कमलेक्षणे ॥ १ ६ ॥

भारती यातु कलया सरिद्धा च भारते ।

अर्थों सा बह्यादवं स्वयं तिक्तु मयूरहे ॥ १ ७ ॥

Now the lotus-naveled Hari, always eager to shew favour to the devotees, smiled and with a gracious heart took up Padmā on His breast and said: "O Suresvari! I will keep my own word, also I will act according as you like. O Lotus-eyed! Hear. How the two ends can be made to meet. Let Sarasvatī go in her one part to have the form of a river and in her one-half part to Brahmā and remain with me in Vaikuntha in Her full parts.

भगीरिणे सा नीता गंगा यास्यति भारते ।

पृतं कर्तुं त्रिभुवनं स्वयं तिहिति मरुग्रे ।। १ ८ ॥

तत्रेव चन्दमौलेश्च मौलिं प्राप्यति वुर्णम् ।

ततः स्वभावतः पूताउ्यतिपुत भाव्यति ॥ १ ९ ॥

Gahgā will have to go in one part to Bhārata to purify the three worlds, as she will be urged eagerly to do so by Bhagiratha. And She will remain in her one part in the matted hair of Candra Śekhara (the Mahādeva with Moon on his forehead), obtained with a great difficulty, and so will remain there purer than her natural pure state.

कलांगागेशने गच्छ त्वं भातरे वामतोचने ।

पदावाती सरिद्धूग तुलसीवृक्षस्तिपणी ॥ 2 0 ॥

कले: पझसहचे च गते वर्षे च मोक्षणम् ।

युक्रमाकं सतितं चैव मद्योहं च गमिष्यय । 2 1 ॥

And let her remain with me in full parts. O Padme! O Lovely-eyed One! You are most innocent; so part of your part will go to Bhārata and be the Padmāvatī river and you will be the Tulasi tree. After the expiry of five thousand years of Kali Yuga, your curse will expire. Again you all will come to My abode.

संपदां हेतुभूता च विपर्पितः सर्वेहैनान् ।

विना विपर्पेमहिमा केभां पदाघवे भवेत् ॥ 22 ॥

मन्योपासकानां च सतां सनानावगाहन्त् ।

युधाकं मोक्षणं पापादूर्शनात्स्यर्गेनात्पा ॥ 23 ॥

O Padme! Calamities are the causes of the happiness of the embodied beings. Without dangers no one can understand the true nature of happiness. The saint worshippers of My mantra who will perform their ablutions in your waters, will free you all of your curse by touch and sight.

पृथिव्यां चानि तीर्थानि संनसंख्यानि सुंदरि ।

भविष्यिति च पृतानि मद्रात्मत्यर्शन्तान् ॥ 24 ॥

मन्मोत्रोपासका भक्ता विश्रमन्ति च भारते ।

पूर्तं कर्तुं तारितुं च सुपवित्वां सचुंधगम् ॥ 25 ॥

O Fair One! By the sight and touch (Darśana, Sparśana) of My bhakts (devotees), all the sacred places of pilgrimages in the world will be purified. For uplifting and sanctifying the holy earth, My mantropāsakas, i.e., Śaivas, Śāktas, Gānapatyas, etc., that are devoted to Brahma all over residing in Bhārata.

मद्रकता यत्र तिहिति पादं प्रशालयेति च ।

तत्स्थानं च महातीर्वे सुपविदं भवेद्युवम् ॥ 26 ॥

सीनीने गोफ्नः कृतनछ श्रद्धाने गुन्तल्याः ।

जीवमुक्तो भवेतृतो मद्धकस्यर्वेशन्ति ॥ 27 ॥

Where My Bhaktas reside and wash their feet, that places is undoubtedly reckoned as the holy places of pilgrimages. So much so that by the sight and touch of My devotees, the murder of a woman, of a cow, of a Brāhmim, the treacherous and even the stealer of the wife of one's Guru will be sanctified and liberated while living.

एकादशपिवहीस्थ सन्याहीनोश्व नासिकाः ।

नरयाती भवेल्नृती मद्धनस्पर्शदर्शनात् ॥ 28 ॥

असिजीर्वी मसीजीवी धारको प्राययाचकः ।

वृषयाहो भवेल्नृती मद्धनस्पर्शदर्शनात् ॥ 29 ॥

Those who do not perform the vow of Ekādaśī, who do not perform Sandhyās, who are Nāstikas (atheists), the murderers, all are freed of their sins by the sight and touch of My devotees. By the sight and touch of My devotees, those who live on their swords, pens, and the royal officials, the beggars in a village and the Brāhmaṇas who carry (deal in) bullocks are also freed of their sins.

Book IX Chapter VII

विश्षासधाती मित्रनो मिथ्यासाध्यस्य दायकः ।

स्याण्याहारी घबेतुतो मद्धनस्पर्शर्सान्ति। ३० ॥

अत्युगो वा पुंदुरकछुं जारकः पुंछुंतपितः ।

पृतछुं घृषतपुंजो मद्धनस्पर्शर्सान्ति। ३१ ॥

The traitors, the mischief makers of their friends, those who give false evidence, those that steal other's trust properties, are also freed of their sins by the sight and touch of My devotees. Those who are foul-mouthed, bastards, the husbands and sons of unchaste women are all purified by the sight and touch of My Bhaktas.

ग्रुणणं सूपाकार्धे देवलो प्रामयाजकः ।

अर्धीक्षितो भवेतृतीं मद्राक्तस्यर्गर्शनात् ॥ ३२ ॥

The Brāhimn cooks of Śūdras, Brāhimns of an inferior order (who subsist upon the offerings made to the images which he attends), the village mendicants, those who are not initiated by their Gurus, these all are purified by the sight and touch of My devotees.

वितरं मातरं भार्थी घाततं तनयं सुताम् ।

गुतेः कुलं च भगिनीं चशुहीनं च बांधवम् ॥ 33 ॥

श्रश्रं च श्रगुरं चैव यो न पुणाति सुंदीर ।

स महापातकी पुत्तो मद्धकत्सर्शैर्नानां ॥ 34 ॥

O Fair One! The sins of those persons who do not maintain their fathers, mothers, brothers, wives, sons, daughters, sisters, the blind, friends, the families of the Gurus, the fathers-in-law, the mothers-in-law are also removed by the sight and touch of My devotees.

अश्व्यनागरकश्रैव मद्धक्तनिदंकस्तथा ।

गृत्रात्रभोजी विग्रस्त पुते मद्धक्तर्शन्ति ॥ 35 ॥

देवद्रवायाहती च विग्रद्व्यायहारकः ।

लश्रालीहरसानां च विमेता दुहितुलथा ॥ 36 ॥

महापातिकनश्रैव गृज्ञाणां गरवाहकाः ।

भवेयुते पुताङ्ग मद्धक्तस्यर्शिनन्ति ॥ 37 ॥

Those that cut the Aśvattha trees, that slander My devotees, and the Brāhmins that eat the food of Śūdras, are also freed of their sins. Those who steal the Deva's articles, the Brāhmaṇa's articles, those that sell lac, iron, and daughters, those who

commit Mahā Pātakas (Brahmahatya, Surāpānam, Steyam, Gurbanganāganah, Mahānti pātakānyāhuh, tatsamsargasheha Pañcamam) and those that burn the Śūdra's dead bodies, these also are freed of their respective sins by the sight and touch of My devotees."

श्रीमाहलक्ष्मीकावार

भक्तानं लक्षणं बृहि भक्तानुग्रहकातर ।

येघां तु दर्शनस्यर्सस्तयः पुता नराधमः ॥ 38 ॥

हरिभक्तिविश्रीना प्रहाहड्रारसंयुता: ।

स्वप्रशंसाता धृतां: शाखा साधुनिंदका: ॥ 39 ॥

Mahā Laksmī said: “O Thou gracious to faithful attendants! What are the characteristics, the marks of those Bhaktas of Thine that Thou hast spoken of just now whose sight and touch destroy instantly the Mahāpātakas (five great sins), that are destroyed after a long time by the water of the Tirthas and the earthen and stone images of the Gods.

पुनीत सर्वतीर्थानि येवां सनावागवाहान्त ।

येचं च पादरजसा पुता पादोदकान्मही ॥ 40 ॥

येचं संदर्भनं स्पर्शे ये वा वांछिति भारते ।

सर्वेषां परतो लाभो वैशवानां सामगमः ॥ 41 ॥

न ह्यामयाति तीर्थिति न देवा मृष्टिकलमायाः ।

ते पुनंत्युकालेन विद्युभक्ताः क्षणादहो ॥ 42 ॥

The sins of the vilest of men, devoid of Hari bhakti, vain and egoistic, cheats, hypocrites, slanderers of saints, vicious souls are destroyed by your Bhaktas, whose touch and ablutions sanctify the sacred places of pilgrimages; by the touch of the dust and water of whose feet, the earth is purified; whom the Bhaktas of Bhārata always pray to see; ad there is nothing higher than the meeting of those Bhaktas."

सूत उवाच

महालक्षीवचः शुत्वा लक्षीकांतक्ष सस्मितः ।

निगृहतच्चं क्रविंतुमारि श्रेशोचक्रमे ॥ ४३ ॥

Sūta said: O Great Kṣi! Thus hearing the words of Mahā Lakṣmī, the Lord smiled and began to speak about the secret things or the marks of the Bhaktas.

श्रीभगवानुवाच

भक्तानां लक्षणं लक्ष्म गूर्ड श्रुतिपुर्णायो: ।

पुण्यस्वरूपं पापचं सुखदं घृष्टिमुक्तिदचम् ॥ 4 4 ॥

सारभृतं गोपनीयं न वत्क्यं खलेषु च ।

त्वां पवित्रां प्राणतुल्यां कथयामि निशमाय ॥ 4 5 ॥

O Lakṣmī! The marks of the Bhaktas are all mentioned very hiddenly in Śrutis and Purāṇas. These are very sanctifying, destructive of sins, giving happiness, devotion, and liberation. These are never to be described to deceitful persons; these are the essences and to be kept hidden. But you are very simple and like my life.

पुरुवल्बन्रादिष्णुभंगो यस्य करणें पतिध्यति ।

वर्तिते वैद्यतं चापि पत्रिकं च नरोतमम् ॥ 46 ॥

I therefore speak to you. Hear. O Fair One! All the Vedas declare him to be holy and the best of men, in whose ears are pronounced from the mouth of a Guru, the Viṣṇu mantra.

पुक्रपाणां शर्ते पूर्वे तथा तज्जन्मात्रतः ।

स्वार्थ्यं नरकस्यं वा मुक्तिमामोति तक्षणात् ॥ 47 ॥

धै: करिष्ठात्र वा जन्म लब्धं येषु च जंतुम् ।

जीवन्मुक्तानु ते पूता वांति काले हरेः पदम् ॥ 48 ॥

At the very moment of his being born into this world, one hundred generations back of that person, whether they be at that time in heaven or hell, get instantaneous liberation and if any of them happen to be born then as Jivas, they become liberated at once while living and finally get Viṣṇupadam (the place of Viṣṇu).

मद्धक्तिगुक्तो मवल्यच स पुक्तो मदुगणान्वितः ।

मदुगणाधीवृत्तिर्वः: कथाविष्टचर संततम् ॥ 49 ॥

मदुगणश्रुतिमाजेण सानंदः पुलकान्वितः ।

सगद्रः साशुनेत्रः स्वातमविस्मत एव च ॥ 50 ॥

That mortal is My Bhakta (devotee) who is full of devotion to Me, who always repeats My glories and acts according to My directions, who hears with all his heart My topics, and hearing which, whose mind dances with joy, whose voice gets

checked and tears incessantly flow out from whose eyes, who loses his outward consciousness. Such a man is indeed, My Bhakta.

न वांछति सुखं मुक्ति सालोक्यादिच्छायम् ।

ब्रहात्यममरत्वं ना ताईतां मम सेवेन ॥ 51 ॥

इज़्तर्वं च मनुत्वं च ब्रहात्यं च सुवुतंभम् ।

स्वर्गोराज्यादिभोगं च स्वदेपेपि च न बोहिति ॥ 52 ॥

My Bhaktas do not long for happiness, or Mukti, or the four states Sālokya, Sāyujya, Sāmpiya and Sārṣṭi, nor the Brahmahood, nor the Devahood (the state of immortality); they want only to do Sevā (service) to Mc and they solely intent on doing this. Even in dreams they do not desire the Indraship, Manuship, the state of Brahmā, so very difficult to be had; nor do they want the enjoyment of kingdoms and heavens.

भर्मिति भारते भक्तास्तादृजन्म सुदुर्भिभम् ।

मदुगणशवणा: शाव्यामाणीनिवं मुदात्विता : 11 53 ॥

ते यांति च महीं पुल्चा नरं तीर्थे मानलवम् ।

इत्वेब कवितं सर्वे पदो कुर्रु यथोचितम् ॥

तद्वीरया तात्वच्छूर्गैरिस्तबी सुखासे 11 54 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीरापातते महापुराणे नवमकंधे

सप्तमोउधाय: 11 7 ||

My Bhaktas roam in Bhārata, eager to hear My glories, and always very glad to recite My sweet glorious deeds. The birth of such Bhaktas in Bhārata is very rare. They purify the world and go ultimately to My abode, the best of all Tirthas (sacred places). Thus I have spoken O Padme! all that you wanted to hear. Now do as you like." Then Gaṅgā and others all went to obey the order of Śrī Hari, Who went to His own abode.

Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Ninth Book on the curses of Gaṅgā, Sarasvatī, and Lakṣmī and the way to freedom thereof in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgāvatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter VIII

