CHAPTER XVII

On Śunahṣepa Freed and Hariścandra Lured

व्यास उवाच

क्टंतं वालकं वीक्ष्य विश्वामित्रो द्यातुः ।

शुना:गेप्यावाचेदं नाला पार्थंसितुःखितुम् ॥ १ ॥

मन्त्र प्रचेतसः पुत्र मयोक्ते मनसा स्मान् ।

जपतस्तल कल्याणं भविष्यति ममात्रया ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When Viśvāmitra saw that the boy was crying very pitifully, he went to him with a merciful heart and said: "O Child! I am giving you the Varūṇa Mantra; recollect this within your mind and if you go on repeating that Mantra silently, you will certainly fare well."

विश्वामित्रवचः श्रुत्वा शुन:गेपः शुचाकुलः ।

मन्त्र जजाप नमसा कौशिकोकर्तं स्मूटाङ्गस् ॥ 3 ॥

जपतस्तत्र तस्याशु प्रचेताल्तु कृपाकाः ।

प्रतुर्बंष्प्र सहसा प्रसोजे नृपवालके ॥ 4 ॥

The sorrowful Śunāhsepa, hearing thus from Viśvāmitra, began to repeat silently in his mind the above Mantra, clearly pronouncing each letter. O King! No sooner Śunāhsepa repeated that Mantra than the kind-hearted Varṇa came suddenly before the boy, greatly pleased with him.

दूर्श्वा तमागतं सर्वे विम्वयं परयं गता: ।

तुषुवर्कंचा देवं मुदिता दर्शनेन ते ॥ 5 ॥

राज़तित्थिमतः पादौ प्रणनाम क्रानुतः ।

बद्धांजसिपुटो देखे तुहाव पुरतः स्थितम् ॥ 6 ॥

Everyone in the assembly became thoroughly surprised to see Varuna Deva come there and they all became glad and chanted hymns in honour of him. The diseased Harisācranda was also thoroughly surprised, fell to his feet, and with folded palms began to sing hymns to Varuna, standing before him.

हशिश्र उवाच

देवदेव कृपासिस्त्यो पाणात्मार्डे सुमंदधी: ।

कृतापरायः कृपणः पाचितः परमेछिता ॥ 7 ॥

मया ते पुरकामेन दुःखसंस्थेन हेतनम् ।

कृतं क्षमायं प्रभृणा कोउपराधः सुखमेंते: ॥ 8 ॥

Hariscandra said: “O Deva of the Devas! I am very vicious; my intellect is much defiled; I am a sinner before you; O Merciful One! Now shew your mercy and sanctify this humble self I was very much troubled on not having a son; so I had disregarded your words; now shew your mercy on me; what offence can cling to him whose intellect is already out of order?

अर्थों दोष न जानाति तस्यात्यूत्राधिंना मया ।

विश्रितस्तर्वे देवदेवे धीतेन नरकाद्धिणे ॥ 9 ॥

अपूत्रस्य गतिनोंस्ति स्यगों नेव च नैव च ।

भौतोड़े तेन वाक्येन तमभाते हेलनं कृम् ॥ 10 ॥

A beggar does not see his own faults; I am also in want of a son; so I could not see my defects. O Lord! Being afraid of the terrors of hell, I have deceived you. Those, who are sonless, cannot find rest anywhere. Especially he is barred from the Heavens. Being terrified by this dictate of Śāstra, I have shown disregard to your words.

नात्रस्य दूषणं चिन्तयं नृनं ज्ञानवता विषो ।

दू:क्षितोड़े रुकामात्नो वक्षितः स्वसुतेन हु ॥ ११ ॥

न जानेड़े महाराज युगो मे क्व नतः प्रभो ।

वड्थिवता वने भीतो मरणानां कृपानिधे ॥ १२ ॥

O Lord! You are wise and I am ignorant; especially I am extremely afflicted by this terrible disease; I am also deprived of my son; so you ought

not to take my notice of my faults. O Lord! I do not know where my son has gone; O merciful One! Perhaps he, being afraid of his life, has fled away to some forest.

प्रयती रजिरणं दंत्वा गृहीतो तिज्बालकाः ।

यज्ञोरयं क्रौतपुंजेण प्रायम्बस्त तुच्ये ॥ 13 ॥

दर्शर्न तव सम्याय गतं दुःखं मयाबुद्गम् ।

जलोदकृतं सर्व प्रसले त्वयि साम्यान् ॥ 14 ॥

For your satisfaction, I have now commenced your sacrifice with this purchased boy; I gave an equivalent value and I have purchased this boy. O Deva of the Devas! You sight only has taken away my infinite troubles; now if your be pleased, I can be free of my this disease dropsy and my troubles will all be over.

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः शुत्वा ग्रहो नेगातुरस्य च ।

दयावान्देवदेशेशः प्रत्युवाच नृपोत्तमम् ॥ १ ५ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of that diseased King, Varuna, the Deva of Hearing thus the words of that diseased King, Varuna, the Deva of the Devas, took pity on him and thus spoke.

वरण जवाच

मुख्र राजबुन्तःजीपं सुवक्तं मां भूशानुम् ।

यज्ञोरयं परिपूर्णेते रोगमुक्तो भवात्मना ॥ 16 ॥

Varuna said: “O King! Śunahśepha is uttering hymns of praise to me; he has become very distressed; so quit him. Your sacrifice, too, is now completed; now let you be free from your present disease.”

इत्पुक्ल्वा वक्रणस्तूर्णे राजानं विरक्जं तथा ।

चकार पयन्तां तत्र सद्य्यानां सूर्मस्थितम् ॥ 17 ॥

वियुक्तेकरीं दिजः पाणगहकर्णेन महात्मान।

जयगब्दस्ततस्तत्र संजातो मघप्रपढ़े ॥ 18 ॥

Thus saying, Varuna, freed the King of his disease in the presence of all his councillors; the King became of a beautiful body and got himself completely cured and shone bright before the

Book VII Chapter XVII

assembly. Shouts of victory arose from the midst of the sacrificial ground when the Brāhmin boy was freed of his bonds of rope, by the mercy of the high-souled Deva Varuna.

राजा प्रमृदित: सद्यो रोगामुक्ति सुदारुकणत् ।

यूपान्मुक्त: शुनःशेपो बभूवातीव संस्थितः ॥ १९ ॥

राजा तिबमं मदं पूर्णं चकार विनयान्वितः ।

शुनःशेपस्तदा सभ्यानित्युवाच कृतांजसि: ॥ 20 ॥

The King became very glad on his, being recovered immediately from his disease and Śunahśepha, too, became free from his anxiety and pacified when he got himself liberated from his being immolated on the sacrificial post. Then the King Hariścandra completed his sacrifice with great modesty. Afterwards Śunahśepa addressed the councillors with folded palms and said:

भो भो सभ्या: सुधर्मेजा बुवंतु धर्मिनिधस्य ।

वेटगश्बनुसरणे यथावंवादिनः किन ॥ 2 1 ॥

पुत्रोई यस्य सर्वज्ञ: पिता मे केजेउक्त: परम् ।

भवतां वचनातस्य शरणं प्रजाजाम्यहम् ॥ 22 ॥

इल्पुके वचने तत्र सभ्यः प्रोषुः परस्पतम् ।

“O Councillors! You know well the Dharma; O Speakers of truth! Kindly specify according to the dictates of the Vedas. O Omniscient ones! Whose son am I now? Who is my most respectful father? Please deliver your judgement and I will take his refuge. When Śunahśépsha spoke thus, the members of the assembly began to speak to each other

सभ्या ऊनुः

अजीपत्नस्य पुत्रोर्ध वक्ष्यान्यस्य भवेदोर्ध ॥ 23 ॥

अंगादंगात्समुद्गुपाः पातितसतेन भक्तितः ।

अन्यस्य कस्य पुत्रोर्ध सप्रथवेदिति निश्रयः ॥ 24 ॥

"The boy must be of Ajgarta; whose else can he be? This boy is born of the limbs of Ajigarta; and he has nursed him according to his might. So he must be his son; whose else can he be?"

तच्छ्वा वामदेवस्तु तानुवाच समाप्तः ।

विमीर्तितन तातेन उद्वलोभातुः किता ॥ 25 ॥

पुत्रोयं धनदातुहा ग्रात्सतत्र न संशयः ।

अथवा बकणार्येष पाणान्युत्तो3रत्यनेन वै ॥ 26 ॥

Vāma Deva then told the people of the assembly "The father of the boy sold his son for money; the King purchased him. So he can be said as the son of the King; or he may be called son of Varuna, in as much as he freed him from his rope bondage.

अत्रवाता भयत्राता तथा विद्याप्रद्धु चः ।

तथा वित्पद्रशैव पढ़ौते पितर: स्मृतः ॥ 27 ॥

For, he who nourishes another with food, who saves one from one's fear, who protects one by giving money, who bestows learning to anybody and he who gives birth to any of the above five classes of persons can be called his father.

त्वा केचितिपतुः प्राषुः केचिद्धान्स्वाधारे ।

वकरणास्थिति संवादे निर्णयं न चयषुत ते ॥ 28 ॥

इर्थं सन्देशमापत्रे वसिष्ठो वाक्यमवृक्षित् ।

सभ्यानिववदतरत्न सर्वनंः सर्वपूजितः ॥ 29 ॥

श्रणुध्यं घो महाभागा निर्णयं श्रुतिसमन्तम् ।

O King! Thus some one turned out to be in favour of Ajigarta, some other in favour of the King; but nobody came to any definite conclusion. When matters stood in this doubtful condition, the omniscient all-respected Vasistha Deva addressed the disputing members thus: "O high-souled Ones! Kindly hear what the Srutis say on this point.

निःस्क्रेने नव द्वि पिश्रिकीतोरयं सून: शिशु: ॥ ३० ॥

सव्यान्यस्तु गततस्य तदैव धनसंप्रहत् ।

ह्रश्छान्स्य संकानत: पुरुषिसी क्रांत एव च ॥ ३१ ॥

यूपे बच्दो यदा ग्राहा तत्वा तस्व न वै सुतः ।

When the father has cut off his filial attachment and has sold his son, his fatherly connection has ceased then. No doubt this boy was purchased by the King Harisācandra. But when the King fastened him to the sacrificial post, he cannot be called as the father.

वक्रणासु स्तुतोउनेने तेन तुईने मोक्ति: ॥ 32 ॥

तस्माजार्य महाभागा हृसी पुत्र: प्रवेतसः ।

यो यं सतीत महामनः: सोउपि तुहो द्वतात च ॥ 33 ॥

धर्न प्राणान्यरुजाज्यं तथा मोहं निजैधितस्तम् ।

Again when this boy singing hymns in honour of Varuna, he being glad freed him of his

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

bondage, so Varuṇa cannot be called his father. For whoever praises a god by the great Mantras, that Deva becomes pleased with him and gives him wealth, life, cattle-kingdom and even final emancipation.

कोशिकस्य सुतक्षायं गरिष्टे येन रक्षितः ॥ 34 ॥

मनं त्रल्या महावीर्थे वरुणस्यातिसङ्गूरे ।

Rather Viśvāmitra saved the boy by giving him in his critical moment the powerful great Mantra of Varuna; hence the boy can be called as the son of Viśvāmitra and of none else.

व्यास उवाच

श्रुत्वा वाक्यं वसिष्ठस्य वाक्यमुचः सभासदः ॥ 35 ॥

विश्वामिसनु जग्राह तं के दक्षिणे तदा ।

एहि पुरू गृहं मे त्विमयुक्वता प्रेमप्रति: ॥ 36 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the words of Vasiṣṭha, all the members of the assembly gave their unanimous consent and Viśvāmitra with his heart filled with love, exclaimed “O Son! Come to my house.” And caught hold of his right hand.

शुन:शेपो जगामाशु तेनैव सह सत्वः ।

वरणस्तु प्रसज्ञात्मा जगाम च स्वमात्तवम् । 37 ॥

Šunahšepa, too, accompanied him and went away. Varuna also went to his own abode with a gladdened heart.

श्वलिज्ञु तथा सभ्यः स्वगुहाविर्युस्तदा ।

राजरपि रोगनिर्मुक्तो बयुवातिपुत्वावितः ॥ 38 ॥

प्रजासृ पालयामास सुप्रसने चेतसा ।

The councillors, too, departed. Freed from his disease, the King gladly began to govern his subjects.

रौहिताखसुत तछल्हा वृत्तानं बरणस्य ह ॥ 39 ॥

आजगाम गृहं प्रीतो दुर्गमाढनपर्वतात ।

At this time his son Rohita heard all about Varuga and became very glad and leaving the impassable forest passes and mountains, returned home.

दूता राजानमध्येय प्रोचुः पुत्रं समागतम् ॥ 40 ॥

मृदितोउसी जगामाग्यु समयुखः कोसलाधिः ।

The messengers informed the King of the arrival

of the prince; the King heard and his heart overflowed with love and he gladly came there with no delay.

दूर्वहा चितरमायानं प्रेभोद्रिकः सुसंधमः ॥ 4 1 ॥

दूषडवल्पित्तो भूमावक्षुपर्णिषुवः शृणा ।

राजापि ते समुत्थाय परिस्थ्य मुदावित्वः ॥ 4 2 ॥

समाधाय सृतं भूरिंप पप्रछ्छ कुगलं पुनः ।

Seeing the father coming, Rohitāśva became filled with love and overpowered with sorrow for long separation began to shed tears and fell prostrate at his feet. The King raised him up and embraced him gladly and smelling his head enquired of his welfare.

उसरीे ते समारोय मुदितो मेदितीपति: ॥ 43 ॥

उषीर्निजनते: श्रीर्यविपरिकमधारकोत्ति ।

राज्य शगशास तेनासी युप्रेणातिप्रिदेशण च ॥ 44 ॥

वृत्तांतं नर्योयस्य कथयामास विकस्तात् ।

When the King was thus asking his son, taking him on his lap, the hot tears of joy flowed from his eyes and fell on the head of the prince. The King and the prince then began to govern together his kingdom. The King described in detail all the events of the sacrifice where human victims are immolated.

राजसूयं क्रतुरं चकार नृपसत्तम: ॥ 4 5 ॥

वीसघु पूर्णयित्वाउं होतामकरीदिषुः ।

समाप्ते तव्य यजेशे वसिष्ठोस्ति पूजितः ॥ 4 6 ॥

He started next the Rājasūya sacrifice, the best of all sacrifices, and duly worshipping the Muni Vasīṣṭha, made him the Hotañ itn that sacrifice. When this grand sacrifice was finished, the King respected the Muni Vasīṣṭha with abundant wealth.

शक्रस्य सदनं रथं जगाम मुनिवरात् ।

विश्वाधिपत्रोति तत्रैव सहित्रेन च संरतः ॥ 47 ॥

मिलित्वा तो तिश्वती देवसदने मुनिसत्तम ।

विश्वाधिपत्रोति प्रपछ्छ वसिष्ठं प्रतिपूजितम् ॥ 48 ॥

वीक्ष्य विस्मयचित्तसं सभायां तु शबीयतेः ।

Once, on a time, the Muni Vasisṭha went gladly to the romantic Heaven of Indra; and Visvāmitra, too, went there also and both the Munis then met

Book VII Chapter XVII

with each other. The two Maharṣis took their seats in that Heaven. But Visvāmitra was astonished to see Vasiṣṭha greatly respected in Indra's hall of assembly and asked him, thus:

विश्वासि उवाच

केवेयं पूजा त्वय प्राता महती मुनिसत्तम ॥ 49 ॥

कृता केन महाभाग सत्यं बृहि ममांतिके ।

“O Muni! Where have you received this great honour and worship? O Highly Fortunate One! Who has worshipped you thus? Speak out truly.”

वसिष्ठ खचा

यजमानोस्ति मे राजा हरिश्रन: प्रतपावन् ॥ 50 ॥

राजमुः: कृततेने राजा प्रवरद्धिणः ।

Vasiṣṭha said: “O Muni! There is a King named Hariścandra; he is very powerful and my client; that King performed the great Rājasūya sacrifice with abundant Dakṣinās.

नेयुणो5ति नृपधान्यः सत्यवाघी पुतजतः ॥ 51 ॥

दाता च धर्मशीलश्व प्रजारझन्तत्यतः ।

तस्य यदे मया पूजा प्रापा कोशिकानन्तर ॥ 52 ॥

किं पृष्ठसि पुनः सत्यं ब्वीयम्बुकिंमं द्विज ।

There is no other King truthful like him; he is virtuous, charitable, and ever ready in governing his subjects. O Son of Kauśika! I have got my worship and honour in his sacrifice. O best of Dvijas! Are you telling me to speak truly?

ह्रिंश्रऊत्रमो राजा न भृती न भविष्यति ॥ ५३ ॥

सत्यादी तथा दाता शूरः परभाभिमंकः ।

Again I speak truly to you that there never was a King truthful, heroic charitable, and very religious like him nor there will be such a one.

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः: शुत्वा विश्वाधिमप्रेजोतकोपन: ।

वधूव कोधसंरक्तलोचनोउपवत्रीच्छ तम् ॥ 54 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing such words, the Viśvāmitra, of a very angry temper, spoke to him with his reddened eyes:

विश्वामित्र उवाच

एवं स्तीष नृपं विष्यावातिवर्नं कपटिप्रियम् ।

वडित्रो वकणो येन प्रतिश्रुल यरं पुनः ॥ 55 ॥

मम जन्मार्जितं पुण्यं तपसः पतितस्य च ।

त्वदीयं वाजतितपसो गलई कुक महापते ॥ 56 ॥

अर्हे चेतं नृयं सद्यो न करोम्यति संस्तुतम् ।

"O Vasistha! Hariścandra obtained a boon from Varuna when he made a certain promise; then he cheated Varuna with deceitful words. So he is a liar and cheat. Why are you praising then that King! O Intelligent One! Let us now stake all our virtues that we have earned since our birth by our asceticism and studies.

असत्यवादिनं काममदातारं महाखलम् ॥ 57 ॥

आजन्म सझितं सर्वे पुर्णं मम विनशयतु ।

अन्यथा त्वकृतं सर्वे पुर्णं लिचिति पणावहे ॥ 58 ॥

लनहं कृता ततस्तौ तु विवदन्ती मुनी तदा ।

स्वामं स्वर्गैलोकाच्छ नग्ती परमकोपने ॥ 59 ॥

डीत शीमद्वैभागवते महापुराणो सत्यमक्यान्पे

सतदशो3प्याः ॥ 60 ॥

You have praised exceedingly that King who is a great cheat; but if I cannot prove him to be a liar of the first water, I will lose all my virtues from my birth; but if it be otherwise, then all your virtues will be destroyed. Thus the two Munis quarrelled with each other and making this stake, departed from the Heavens and went to their respective Āśramas.

Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter in the Seventh Book on the freeing of Śunahśepa and the curing of Harisācanda in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgāvatam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

