[Ch 19 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of the King Hariścandra, the Maharṣi Kauśika smilingly said: "O King! This Tiratha is very sacred; if one bathes here, one is cleansed of one's sins and virtue springs up. So, highly fortunate One! Bathe in this and do peace-offerings (tarpaṇam) to your fathers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the words of the King Hariścandra, the Maharṣi Kauśika smilingly said :-- “O King! This Tīrath is very sacred; if one bathes here, one is cleansed of one’s sins and virtue springs up. So, highly fortunate One! Bathe in this and do peace-offerings (tarpaṇam) to your fathers.

[Ch 19 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! This time is very auspicious and highly meritorious; so take a bath in this sacred Punya Tirtha and make charities as far as it lies in your power. Svāyambhava Manu says: “He, who arriving at a Tirtha capable to give high merits (Punya), does not bathe and make charities, deceives himself; so he is the slayer of his soul, no doubt.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! This time is very auspicious and highly meritorious; so take a bath in this sacred Puṇya Tīrtha and make charities as far as it lies in your power. Svāyambhuva Manu says :-- He, who arriving at a tīrtha capable to give high merits (Puṇya), does not bathe and make charities, deceives himself; so he is the slayer of his soul, no doubt.

[Ch 19 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So, O King! Do meritorious acts as best as you can in this excellent tīrtha. Then I will shew you the way and you will go to Ayodhyā. O Kakuttsha! Today I will be pleased with your gifts and I will accompany you to shew you the way; this I have decided."
NEW CORR ENG ──► So, O King! Do meritorious acts as best as you can in this excellent tīrtha. Then I will shew you the way and you will go to Ayodhyā. O Kākutstha! Today I will be pleased with your gifts and I will accompany you to show you the way; this I have decided.”

[Ch 19 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing the deceitful words of the Maharṣi, the King took off his upper garments and tying the horse on to a tree, went towards the river to bathe according to due rites.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing the deceitful words of the Maharṣi, the King took off his upper garments and tying the horse on to a tree, went towards the river to bathe according to due rites.

[Ch 19 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The accidental combination, that was to have been so (sure to come), so enchanted the King by the Muni's words, that he got himself entirely under the control of the Muni. He duly completed his bath and offered peace offerings to the Devas and the Pitts and then spoke to Visvāmitra. "O Lord! I am now making gifts to you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The accidental combination, that was to have been so (sure to come), so enchanted the King by the Muni’s words, that he got himself entirely under the control of the Muni. He duly completed his bath and offered peace offerings to the Devas and the Pitris and then spoke to Viśvāmitra. “O Lord! I am now making gifts to you.

[Ch 19 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Fortunate One! Cows, lands, jewels, elephants, horses, chariots or horses, etc., anything that you like I will give you just now. There is nothing that I cannot give.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Fortunate One! Cows, lands, jewels, elephants, horses, chariots or horses, etc., anything that you like I will give you just now. There is nothing that I cannot give.

[Ch 19 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When I performed previously the Rājasūya sacrifice, I took, then, before all the Munis, this vow. So, O Muni! You are also present at this principal Tirtha (place of pilgrimage); so express what you desire; I will give you your desired object."
NEW CORR ENG ──► When I performed previously the Rājasūya sacrifice, I took, then, before all the Munis, this vow. So, O Muni! You are also present at this principal Tīrtha (place of pilgrimage); so express what you desire; I will give you your desired object.”

[Ch 19 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vísvāmitra said: “O King! Your glory is spread far and wide in this world; especially I have already heard that there is no second man charitable like you. The Muni Vasisṭha has said: “The King of the solar dynasty, the Trīśanku’s son, Hariścandra is foremost and first amongst the kings in this world and there is no one so liberal-minded as he is; such a king there never was nor ever there will be.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viśvāmitra said :-- “O King! Your glory is spread far and wide in this world; especially I have already heard that there is no second man charitable like you. The Muni Vaśiṣṭha has said :-- The King of the solar dynasty, the Triśaṅku’s son, Hariścandra is foremost and first amongst the kings in this world and there is no one so liberal-minded as he is; such a king there never was nor ever there will be.

[Ch 19 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So, O King! Now the marriage time of my son has arrived; so I pray before you to-day, that you give me wealth to celebrate this marriage."
NEW CORR ENG ──► So, O King! Now the marriage time of my son has arrived; so I pray before you today, that you give me wealth to celebrate this marriage.”

[Ch 19 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King said: “O Brāhmīn! Yes! Celebrate the marriage ceremony; I will give you your desired wealth. What more can be said than this that whatever wealth you would want, I will give that abundantly. There is no doubt in this.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King said :-- “O Brāhmin! Yes! Celebrate the marriage ceremony; I will give you your desired wealth. What more can be said than this that whatever wealth you would want, I will give that abundantly. There is no doubt in this.”

[Ch 19 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing these words of the King, the Muni Kausika became ready to deceive him and originating the Gāndharvi Māyā, created a beautiful youth and one daughter aged ten years and showing them to the King, said “The marriage of these two is to be celebrated today.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing these words of the King, the Muni Kauśika became ready to deceive him and originating the Gāndharbī Māyā, created a beautiful youth and one daughter aged ten years and showing them to the King, said, “The marriage of these two is to be celebrated today.

[Ch 19 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! To marry the boys and the girls in the household is to earn more merits than the Rājasūya sacrifice.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! To marry the boys and the girls in the house-hold is to earn more merits than the Rājasūya sacrifice.

[Ch 19 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So today you will get that desired fruit if you make charities for the marriage of this Brāhmīn Youth."
NEW CORR ENG ──► So today you will get that desired fruit if you make charities for the marriage of this Brāhmin Youth.”

[Ch 19 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King was much enchanted by his Māyā; so no sooner he heard those words, he immediately promised: "That will be done" he did not raise any objection whatsoever.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King was much enchanted by his Māyā; so no sooner he heard those words, he immediately promised :-- “That will be done,” he did not raise any objection whatsoever.

[Ch 19 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vísvāmitra then showed the way and the King went to his city. Vísvāmitra, too, thus deceiving the King, went back to his Āśrama.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viśvāmitra then showed the way and the King went to his city. Viśvāmitra, too, thus deceiving the King, went back to his Āśrama.

[Ch 19 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the King was staying in Agnisālā (cook room), Vīsāvimitra Muni went to him and said: "O King! The marriage rites have been finished; so today give me what I desire in this sacrifice hall."
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the King was staying in Agniśālā (cook-room), Viśvāmitra Muni went to him and said :-- “O King! The marriage rites have been finished; so today give me what I desire in this sacrificial hall.”

[Ch 19 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King said: “O Brāhmīn! Speak out what you want; now I like to get fame. So if there be anything in the world, that is not to be given by me, if you want, I will give that even to you, no doubt. The mortal, possessing all wealth, if he do not earn good name and fame capable to give happiness to him in his next world, passes his life in vain.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King said :-- “O Brāhmin! Speak out what you want; now I like to get fame. So if there be anything in the world, that is not to be given by me, if you want, I will give that even to you, no doubt. The mortal, possessing all wealth, if he does not earn good name and fame, capable to give happiness to him in his next world, passes his life in vain.”

[Ch 19 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Víśvāmitra said: “O King! Give to this bridegroom, while within this sacred sacrificial alter, you entire kingdom with the royal umbrella and Cāmara for fanning the king and elephants, horses, chariots, infantry and all the gems and jewels.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viśvāmitra said :-- “O King! Give to this bridegroom, while within this sacred sacrificial altar, your entire kingdom with the royal umbrella and Cāmara for fanning the king and elephants, horses, chariots, infantry and all the gems and jewels.”

[Ch 19 Verse 26-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this time, his soldiers who lost their roads in quest of their king, came to him. They were very glad to see him; but, seeing him anxious, they began to praise him in great haste.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this time, his soldiers who lost their road in quest of their king, came to him. They were very glad to see him; but, seeing him anxious, they began to praise him in great haste.

[Ch 19 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing their words, the King did not say anything, good or bad; but thinking on his own doing, entered into the zenānā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing their words, the King did not say anything, good or bad; but thinking on his own doing entered into the zenana.

[Ch 19 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Oh! What have I promised to give? I have made a gift of all that I have; I am cheated in this matter by the Muni like one robbed by a thief in a wilderness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Oh! What have I promised to give? I have made a gift of all that I have; I am cheated in this matter by the Muni like one robbed by a thief in a wilderness.

[Ch 19 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My dominion including my dress I have promised to give to him. Moreover I will have to pay besides two and a half loads of gold.
NEW CORR ENG ──► My whole dominion including my dress I have promised to give to him. Moreover I will have to pay besides two and a half loads of gold.

[Ch 19 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My brain seems to have been completely destroyed. What to do now? I did not know the cunningness of the Muni. Therefore I am cheated by this deceitful Brāhmīn. It is next to impossible to understand the work of Daiva. Oh! My Fate! What will happen to me now?' Very much bewildered, the King entered in the interior of the palace.
NEW CORR ENG ──► My brain seems to have been completely destroyed. What to do now? I did not know the cunningness of the Muni. Therefore I am cheated by this deceitful Brāhmin. It is next to impossible to understand the work of Daiva. Oh! My Fate! What will happen to me now? Very much bewildered the King entered in the interior of the palace.

[Ch 19 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The queen seeing her husband immersed in cares, enquired into the cause, thus: "O Lord! Why have you become so absent-minded? Kindly say what you are thinking now? O King! The son has come back from the forest before you completed your Rajasüya sacrifice; why then are you in grief now? Kindly speak out the cause of your sorrow.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The queen seeing her husband immersed in cares, enquired into the cause, thus :-- “O Lord Why have you become so absent-minded? Kindly say what you are thinking now? O King! The son has come back from the forest before you completed your Rājasūya sacrifice; why then are you in grief now? Kindly speak out the cause of your sorrow.

[Ch 19 Verse 41-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nowhere is your enemy, strong or weak; only Varuna was angry with you; now he is also very satisfied. So there is nothing further for you to do or to think. O King! Owing to cares, this body gets weaker and weaker, day by day. So nothing is like cares to lead one to death." When his dear wife said so, the King expressed to her somewhat the cause of his cares, good or bad.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nowhere is your enemy, strong or weak; only Varuṇa was angry with you; now he is also very satisfied. So there is nothing further for you to do to think. O King! Owing to cares, this body gets weaker and weaker day by day. So nothing is like cares to lead one to death.” When his dear wife said so, the King expressed to her somewhat the cause of his cares, good or bad.

[Ch 19 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But the King was much absorbed with his cares so that he could not eat nor sleep though his bedding was perfectly white and clear. Early in the next morning, when, getting up from his bed, he was doing anxiously his morning duties, Viśvāmitra came up there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But the King was much absorbed with his cares so that he could not eat nor sleep though his bedding was perfectly white and clear. Early in the next morning, when, getting up from his bed, he was doing anxiously his morning duties, Viśvāmitra came up there.

[Ch 19 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the sentinel informed the King of the arrival of Vísvāmitra, he gave order for him to enter. Vísvāmitra, the Looter of his all and everything, came before him and told the King who repeatedly bowed down to him:
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the sentinel informed the King of the arrival of Viśvāmitra, he gave order for him to enter. Viśvāmitra, the Looter of his all and everything, came before him and told the King who repeatedly bowed down to him :--

[Ch 19 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O King! Now leave your kingdom and give me the gold that you promised as Dakṣinā and prove that you are truthful.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “O King! Now leave your kingdom and give me the gold that you promised as Dakṣiṇā and prove that you are truthful.”

[Ch 19 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Harīścandra said: “O Lord! I have given you this vast dominion of mine; so my Kingdom has now become yours; I am leaving this Kingdom and going to somewhere else.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hariścandra said :-- “O Lord! I have given you this vast dominion of mine; so my Kingdom has now become yours; I am leaving this Kingdom and going to somewhere else.

[Ch 19 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Kauśika! You need not think a bit for this. O Brāhmaṇa! You have taken my all according to the technical rule; so now I am unable to give you Dakṣinā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Kauśika! You need not think a bit for this. O Brāhmaṇa! You have taken my all according to the technical rule; so now I am unable to give you Dakṣiṇā.

[Ch 19 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If, in time, wealth comes to me, I will at once give you your Daksinā." Saying him thus, the King told his wife Śaivyā and his son Rohita "In this Agnihotra room I say that I have given my vast dominion to the Muni Viśvāmitra."
NEW CORR ENG ──► If, in time, wealth comes to me, I will at once give you your Dakṣiṇā.” Saying him thus, the King told his wife Śaivyā, and his son Rohita, “In this Agnihotra room I say that I have given my vast dominion to the Muni Viśvāmitra.

[Ch 19 Verse 52-53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Elephants, horses, chariots, gold and jewels all I have given to him along with my kingdom. What more than this that save us three, everything else I have given to him. "O Maharṣi! Take fully this prosperous dominion; we are going somewhere else to a forest or a mountain cave."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Elephants, horses, chariots, gold and jewels all I have given to him along with my kingdom. What more than this that save us three, everything else I have given to him. O Maharṣi! Take fully this prosperous dominion; we are going somewhere else to a forest or a mountain cave.”

[Ch 19 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The exceedingly virtus Hairiscandra spoke thus to his wife and son, and, paying respects to the Muni, went out from his house.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The exceedingly virtuous Hariścandra spoke thus to his wife and son, and, paying respects to the Muni, went out from his house.

[Ch 19 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the King going thus away, his wife and son, afflicted with cares, followed him with their sad faces.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the King going thus away, his wife and son, afflicted with cares, followed him with their sad faces.

[Ch 19 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing thus, all the inhabitants of Ayodhyā cried aloud, and great consternation and uproar arose in the city.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing thus, all the inhabitants of Ayodhyā cried aloud, and great consternation and uproar arose in the city.

[Ch 19 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! What is this act that you have done? How has this suffering come to you! O King! The great Fate, without any consideration, has certainly deceived you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! What is this act that you have done? How has this suffering come to you! O King! The great Fate, without any consideration, has certainly deceived you.

[Ch 19 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmanas, Kṣattriyas, Vaísyas and Śūdras, all the four Varṇas gave vent to their sorrows, when they saw the King going away with his wife and son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmaṇas, Kśattriyas, Vaiśyas and Śūdras, all the four Varṇas gave vent to their sorrows, when they saw the King going away with his wife and son.

[Ch 19 Verse 59-60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmins and the other inhabitants of the city, all were afflicted with sorrows and began to abuse the vicious Brāhmaṇa saying that “He is a cheat, etc.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmins and the other inhabitants of the city, all were afflicted with sorrows and began to abuse the vicious Brāhmaṇa saying that “He is a cheat, etc.”

[Ch 19 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Give the gold for Dakṣinā and then go; or say that you will not be able to give and I will then not take the Dakṣinā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Give the gold for Dakṣiṇā and then go; or say that you will not be able to give and I will then not take the Dakṣiṇā.

[Ch 19 Verse 62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Or if you entertain within yourself any greed, then take back all your Kingdom. O King! If you think that you have really made this gifts, then give what you have promised."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Or if you entertain within yourself any greed, then take back all your Kingdom. O King! If you think that you have really made this gift, then give what you have promised.

[Ch 19 Verse 63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The son of Gādhī was saying so, when the King Harisācandra very humbly bowed down to him with folded palms and said to him. Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the taking away of Harisācandra's Kingdom in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The son of Gādhi was saying so, when the King Hariścandra very humbly bowed down to him with folded palms and said to him. Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the taking away of Hariścandra’s Kingdom in the Mahā Purāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
