[Ch 13 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king said: What did the intelligent Brhaṣpati do after he had assumed falsely the appearance of Śukrācārya, and lived there as the spiritual guide of the Demons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king said :-- What did the intelligent Bṛhaspati do after he had assumed falsely the appearance of Śukrācārya, and lived there as the spiritual guide of the Demons.

[Ch 13 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! Brhapsati is the Guru of the Devas; he also devotes his time in studying the Vedas; and is the ocean of all knowledge; he is the son of the Maharsi Angirā and he is himself a Muni. Endorsed with all these good qualifications, how could he deceive the Demons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! Bṛhaspati is the Guru of the Devas; he also devotes his time in studying the Vedas; and is the ocean of all knowledge; he is the son of the Maharṣi Aṅgirā and he is himself a Muni. Endorsed with all these good qualifications, how could he deceive the Demons.

[Ch 13 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In all the religious Sāstras, Truth is declared to be the essence of Dharma; and the Supreme Self is attained through Truth, so the wise sages say. How can we expect an ordinary householder to be true when such a man as Brhaspati takes recourse to falsehood with the Demons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In all the religious Śāstras, Truth is declared to be the essence of Dharma; and the Supreme Self is attained through Truth, so the wise sages say. How can we expect an ordinary householder to be true when such a man as Bṛhaspati takes recourse to falsehood with the Demons.

[Ch 13 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If one acquires, as one's wealth, the whole Universe, still one does not require anything more than what is required in feeding one's belly; how is it that Brhaspati could speak falsehood merely for the sake of his belly?
NEW CORR ENG ──► If one acquires, as one’s wealth, the whole Universe, still one does not require anything more than what is required in feeding one’s belly; how is it that Bṛhaspati could speak falsehood merely for the sake of his belly?

[Ch 13 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! The words sung by the ancient virtuous and respectable sages were true and had their corresponding objects by those words; now they employed the term Śiṣṭa meaning that there were virtuous, respectable persons as denoted by them. When Brhaṣpati can even commit such condemnable deceitful acts and speak falsehood, we can expect no virtuous respectable persons in the world. Where then do you find the Śiṣṭa persons, denoted by the word Śiṣṭa, sung by the ancient sages? The word Śiṣṭa is now meaningless!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! The words sung by the ancient virtuous and respectable sages were true and had their corresponding objects denoted by those words; now they employed the term Śiṣṭa meaning that there were virtuous, respectable persons as denoted by them. When Bṛhaspati can even commit such condemnable deceitful acts and speak falsehood, we can expect no virtuous respectable persons in the world. Where then do you find the Śiṣṭa persons, denoted by the word Śiṣṭa, sung by the ancient sages? The word Śiṣṭa is now meaningless!

[Ch 13 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas are sprung from the Sāttvic qualities, men from Rajisaci qualities and birds, etc. from the Tāmasic qualities.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas are sprung from the Sāttvic qualities, men from Rājasic qualities and birds, etc. from the Tāmasic qualities.

[Ch 13 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the Guru of the Immortals, the incarnate of Sāttvik qualities, can become a liar, how can one expect those who are Rājasik Tāmasik to follow rigorously the truth?
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the Guru of the Immortals, the incarnate of Sāttvic qualities, can become a liar, how can one expect those who are Rājasic or Tāmasic to follow rigorously the truth?

[Ch 13 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Oh! This Trilokī is all pierced with falschool! Where is the Religion! And what will be the ultimate goal of all these creatures!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Oh! This Trilokī is all pierced with falsehood! Where is the Religion! And what will be the ultimate goal of all these creatures!

[Ch 13 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Bhagavān Hari, Brahmā, Indra and the best of the Devas when all can betake to protest, fraud and trickery and show cleverness in them; what to speak of men!
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Bhagavān Harī, Brahmā, Indra and the best of the Devas when all can betake to pretext, fraud and trickery and show cleverness in them; what to speak of men!

[Ch 13 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Giver of honour! When all the Devas, Vasistha, Vāmadeva, Visvāmitra, Bhraspati and other ascetic Munis get themselves overpowered by lust and anger, when their intelligence gets destroyed by covetuousness and avarice, when they are addicted to vices and are expert in fraud, pretext and trickery, then what fate, alas! can you expect of Dharma and what help is there of any religious persons?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Giver of honour! When all the Devas, Vaśisṭha, Vāmadeva, Viśvamitrā, Bṛhaspati and other ascetic Munis get themselves overpowered by lust and anger, when their intelligence gets destroyed by covetousness and avarice, when they are addicted to vices and are expert in fraud, pre-text and trickery, then what fate, alas! can you expect of Dharma and what help is there of any religious persons!

[Ch 13 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Alas! Indra, Agni, Moon, and Brahmā when these get overpowered by the strong influence of lust, are in illicit love with others wives, where is the goodness and virtuous behaviour in this Triloki?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Alas! lndra, Agni, Moon, and Brahmā when these get overpowered by the strong influence of lust, are in illicit love with otherś wives, where is the goodness and virtuous behaviour in this Trilokī?

[Ch 13 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sinless One! To whom, then, can we look upon as our spiritual guide and our advice and law givers when all the Devas and Muni are corrupt with avarice?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sinless One! To whom, then, can we look upon as our spiritual guide and our advice and law givers when all the Devas and Munis are corrupt with avarice?

[Ch 13 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! Be he Indra, Brhaspati, Brahmā, Viṣṇu or Maheśa whoever is embodied or will put on bodies, he will have to be in touch with the previously mentioned Aharūkāra, and covetuousness and other vices due to name and form.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! Be he Indra, Bṛhaspati, Brahmā, Viṣṇu or Maheśa, whoever is embodied or will put on bodies, he will have to be in touch with the previously mentioned Ahamkāra, and covetousness and other vices due to name and form.

[Ch 13 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is through cleverness and fraud that any one devoted to sensual objects can easily make oneself as cleverly free from Māyā; but when difficulty comes, then his trickery gets discovered and the respective qualities hidden in him are brought to bear their respective results. Know, then, the three qualities to be conjointly the cause of all these actions; as without any cause, no action gets visible.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is through cleverness and fraud that any one devoted to sensual objects can easily make oneself as cleverly free from Māyā; but when difficulty comes, then his trickery gets discovered and the respective qualities hidden in him are brought to bear their respective results. Know, then, the three qualities to be conjointly the cause of all these actions; as without any cause, no action gets visible.

[Ch 13 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► These discrepancies in the case of Brahmā and others are caused by the three qualities; their bodies are all created from Pradhāna Mahat and the other 25 Tattvas. (essences).
NEW CORR ENG ──► These discrepancies in the case of Brahmā and others are caused by the three qualities; their bodies are all created from Pradhān Mahat and the other 25 Tattvas (essences).

[Ch 13 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Brahmā and others are subject to death; then how can you doubt on other things? In advising others, everybody gives, as it were, good and virtuous advices; but the burden falls upon their own heads; they fall off from their advices and act according to their hidden natures; then they yield to lust, anger, envy, egoism and fascination.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Brahmā and others are subject to death; then how can you doubt on other things? In advising others, everybody gives, as it were, good and virtuous advices; but the burden falls upon their own heads; they fall off from their advices and act according to their hidden natures; then they yield to lust, anger, envy, egoism and fascination.

[Ch 13 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No one who is embodied can get rid of passions, born of the three qualities. O king! Thus the Triloki goes, is the saying of the Maharsis.
NEW CORR ENG ──► No one who is embodied can get rid of passions, born of the 3 qualities. O king! Thus the Trilokī goes, is the saying of the Maharṣis.

[Ch 13 Verse 22-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Trilokī, auspicious, inauspicious, mixed, never gets any serious change; its nature remains always uniform. See Bhagavān Viṣṇu sometimes practises severe asceticism; Indra, the lord of the Devas some times follows the practices of religious sacrifices. Again you find Viṣṇu Bhagavān, full of youth, fond of the Līlā, enjoying the company of Ramā in Vaikuntha; some times He is the ocean of mercy, is fighting dreadful battles with the Demons and being severely afflicted with their clusters of arrows; some times he gains victories, some times he gets defeat through the irony of Fate; thus he gets undoubtedly pleasures and pains.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This Trilokī, auspicious, inauspicious, mixed, never gets any serious change; its nature remains always uniform. See Bhagavān Viṣṇu sometimes practises severe asceticism; Indra, the lord of the Devas sometimes follows the practices of religious sacrifices. Again you find Viṣṇu Bhagavān, full of youth, fond of the Leela, enjoying the company of Ramā in Vaikunṭha; sometimes He is the ocean of mercy, is fighting dreadful battles with the Demons and being severely afflicted with their clusters of arrows; sometimes he gains victories, sometimes he gets defeat through the irony of Fate; thus he gets undoubtedly pleasures and pains.

[Ch 13 Verse 27-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Oking! some time Nārāyaṇa draws all the worlds into his belly and takes his yogic sleep on the thousand headed serpent Śeṣa and again he gets himself awakened by Prakṛti. O king! Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa, Indra, the Devas, and Munis all of them, live up to the limit of their ordained time and when the time of Pralaya the Universal dissolution, ends, this whole Universe, moving and nonmoving, again comes into existence as before; there is no doubt in this. O king, at the expiry of the ordained time, Brahmā and all others will die, no doubt.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! some time Nārāyaṇa draws all the worlds into his belly and takes his yogic sleep on the thousand headed serpent Śeśa and again he gets himself awakened by Prakriti. O king! Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa, Indra, the Devas, and Munis all of them, live up to the limit of their ordained time and when the time of Pralaya, the Universal dissolution, ends, this whole Universe, moving and nonmoving, again comes into existence as before; there is no doubt in this. O king, at the expiry of the ordained time, Brahmā and all others will die , no doubt.

[Ch 13 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again, in due course, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa and the other Devas come out and assume bodies and get all the passions, lust, etc. as ordained. O King! You need not be astonished; this Trilokī always goes on accompanied by lust, anger, etc.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again, in due course, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa and the other Devas come out and assume bodies and get all the passions, lust, etc., as ordained. O King! You need not be astonished; this Trilokī always goes on accompanied by lust, anger, etc.

[Ch 13 Verse 32-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Persons free from lust, anger and other passions are very rare in this world. He who is afraid of this world does not marry, and thus being free from the attachments to any worldly objects, becomes free and roams fearless. The Moon stole away the wife of Brhaşpati, and Brhaşpati himself stole away the wife of his younger brothers. Thus in this wheel of Sanisāra, all the creatures are ever passionate with attachment avarice, etc.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Persons free from lust, anger and other passions are very rare in this world. He who is afraid of this world does not marry, and thus being free from the attachments to any worldly object, becomes free and roams fearless. The Moon stole away the wife of Bṛhaspati, and Bṛhaspati himself stole away the wife of his younger brother. Thus in this wheel of Samsāra, all the creatures are ever passioned with attachment, avarice, etc.

[Ch 13 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The householder can never expect to obtain freedom. Therefore those who want to be free, should carefully relinquish the idea of the stability of the world and worship the Eternal Mother Full and Sat, Cit and Ānandam.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The householder can never expect to obtain freedom. Therefore those who want to be free, should carefully relinquish the idea of the stability of the world and worship the Eternal Mother Full and Sat, Chit and Ānandam.

[Ch 13 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This world, moving and unmoving, O Maheśanī, rolls in madness, overpowered by Her Māyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This world, moving and unmoving, O Maheśānī, rolls in madness, overpowered by Her Māyā.

[Ch 13 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Intelligent persons worshipping Her, trample upon the three qualities and become free. O king! No other Path exists for Freedom.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Intelligent persons worshipping Her, trample down the three qualities and become free. O king! No other Path exists for Freedom.

[Ch 13 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Until one gets the Grace from the Maheśānī, one never gets happiness. True mercy is not found anywhere else but from Her. Then one should worship the All merciful, being of pure heart. For Her worship leads to freedom, even in this bodyhood.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Until one gets the Grace from the Maheśānī, one never gets happiness. True mercy is not found anywhere else but from Her. Then one should worship the All merciful, being of pure heart. For Her worship leads to freedom, even in this body-

[Ch 13 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He who getting a human frame fails to worship Maheśānī, gets down from the highest rung of the ladder. This is my opinion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He who getting a human frame fails to worship Maheśānī, gets down from the highest rung of the ladder. This is my opinion.

[Ch 13 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Universe, composed of the three qualities, is encompassed with Ahankāra and fastened to untruth; therefore freedom can never be expected without the worship of That Potent Goddess. O Muni! O king! Renounce every worldly object and serve the Goddess Bhuvanesvari; this is the highest duty of all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This Universe, composed of the three qualities, is encompassed with Ahamkāra and fastened to untruth; therefore freedom can never be expected without the worship of That Potent Goddess, O Muni! O king! Renounce every worldly object and serve the Goddess Bhuvaneśvarī; this is the highest duty of all.

[Ch 13 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king said: What did, then, the Devaguru do in the disguise of Śukrācārya? And when did the real Śukrācārya come there? O respected Muni! Speak on these points.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king said :-- What did, then, the Devaguru do in the disguise of Śukrācārya? And when did the real Śukrācārya come there? O respected Muni! Speak on these points.

[Ch 13 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Please hear what the disguised Brhaṣpati in the shape of Śukrācārya did afterwards.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Please hear what the disguised Bṛhaspati in the shape of Śukrācārya did afterwards.

[Ch 13 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The demons were made to understand clearly by Brhaşpati; and then they took him for Śukrācārya and placed implicit faith on him and began to think of him and him alone.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The demons were made to understand clearly by Bṛhaspati; and then they took him for Śukrācārya and placed implicit faith on him and began to think of him and him alone.

[Ch 13 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Daityas, enchanted and deceived by the magic of Brhaşpati, took now his refuge for acquiring the knowledge from him, since they mistook him for Śukrācārya. Who is there that is not enchanted by the idea of gaining something?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Daityas, enchanted and deceived by the magic of Bṛhaspati, took now his refuge for acquiring the knowledge from him, since they mistook him for Śukrācārya. Who is there that is not enchanted by the idea of gaining something?

[Ch 13 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the other hand, when the term of ten years was over, Šukrācārya, the real Guru of the Daityas, ceased enjoying Jayanti and began to remember his disciples, the Daityas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the other hand, when the term of ten years was over, Śukrācārya, the real Guru of the Daityas, ceased enjoying Jayantī and began to remember his disciples, the Daityas.

[Ch 13 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He now began to think that “my disciples, the Daityas, are expecting every instant my return; and I would now go and see them, bewildered with fear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He now began to think that “My disciples, the Daityas, are expecting every instant my return; and I would now go and see them, bewildered with fear.

[Ch 13 Verse 49-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They are my devotees and I ought to do such that they might not be afraid of the Devas." And then he exclaimed to Jayanti, "O beautiful one! Let my sons take the shelter of the Gods; your term of ten years is today over; I now go therefore, to see my disciples; soon I will again come to you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They are my devotees and I ought to do such that they might not be afraid of the Devas.” And then he exclaimed to Jayantī, “O beautiful one! Let my sons take the shelter of the Gods; your term of ten years is today over; I now go therefore, to see my disciples; soon I will again come to you.”

[Ch 13 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Be it so", replied Jayanti, the best of those who know religion, "you can go where you like; I am not to destroy your Dharma."
NEW CORR ENG ──► “Be it so”, replied Jayantī, the best of those who know religion, “you can go where you like; I am not to destroy your Dharma.”

[Ch 13 Verse 53-54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words, Šukrācārya went hurriedly to the Demons and saw the Devaguru Brhaspati sitting before them in the guise of Šukrācārya. He was explaining to him the Jaina doctrines, compiled by himself and finding fault with the act of envy, taking revenge and killing and cursing the sacrifices, etc.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these words, Śukrācārya went hurriedly to the Demons and saw the Devaguru Bṛhaspati sitting before them in the guise of Śukrācārya. He was explaining to them the Jaina doctrines, compiled by himself and finding fault with the act of envy, taking revenge and killing and cursing the sacrifices, etc.

[Ch 13 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He was telling them “O Enemies of Gods! Truly, I am telling you words that will, no doubt, prove good to you. Non-killing is the highest virtue; even the enemies ought never to be killed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He was telling them “O Enemies of Gods! Truly, I am telling you words that will, no doubt, prove good to you. Non-killing is the highest virtue; even the enemies ought never to be killed.

[Ch 13 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is the Brāhmanas, addicted to enjoyments and pleasures of senses, who want to satisfy their tastes and pleasures that are found in the Vedas injunctions to kill animals; but there is no virtue higher than non-killing animals.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is the Brāhmaṇas, addicted to enjoyments and pleasures of the senses, who want to satisfy their tastes and pleasures that are found in the Veda’s injunctions to kill animals; but there is no virtue higher than non-killing animals.”

[Ch 13 Verse 57-58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Sukrācārya was perfectly astonished to hear Brhaşpati, the Guru of the Devas, speaking against the Vedas and began to think that "Brhaşpati is certainly my enemy. My disciples have been duped by this cheat; there is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Śukrācārya was perfectly astonished to hear Bṛhaspati, the Guru of the Devas, speaking against the Vedas and began to think that Bṛhaspati is certainly my enemy. My disciples have been duped by this cheat; there is no doubt in this.

[Ch 13 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Fie to Avarice! It is the seed of sin; very strong and the veritable gate to hell; Brhaşpati, even, the Guru of the Devas, is speaking lies, bound under the influence of this heinous avarice!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Fie to Avarice! It is the seed of sin; very strong and the veritable gate to hell; Bṛhaspati, even, the Guru of the Devas, is speaking lies, bound under the influence of this heinous avarice!

[Ch 13 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Oh! What wonder is this that the Guru of the Devas, who is the promulgator of all the religious Śāstras and whose word is accepted as the final decision, is now expounding the doctrines of atheists.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Oh! What wonder is this that the Guru of the Devas, who is the promulgator of all the religious Śāstras and whose word is accepted as the final decision, is now expounding the doctrines of atheists.

[Ch 13 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Brhaşpati can become the expounder of atheistic doctrines, impelled by covetuousness: what to speak of those whose minds are not pure and whose intelligence is not sharp?
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Bṛhaspati can become the expounder of atheistic doctrines, impelled by covetousness what to speak of those whose minds are not pure and whose intelligence is not sharp?

[Ch 13 Verse 62-173]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Deva Guru, though a Brāhmin, is acting to-day like a rogue, wanting to take away all and is deceiving my disciples the Daityas, who have been confounded by his magic. Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahapurānam of 18,000 verses on cheating the Daityas by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This Deva Guru, though a Brāhmin, is acting today like a rogue, wanting to take away all and is deceiving my disciples the Daityas, who have been confounded by his magic. Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahāpurāṇam of 18,000 verses on cheating the Daityas by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
