CHAPTER XIII

On Cheating the Daityas

राजोवाच

किं कृतं गुर्गणां पशुब्राजूरूषण वर्तां ।

छनेनेव हि दैत्यानां पौरोहित्येन धीमता ॥ १ ॥

The king said: What did the intelligent Brhaṣpati do after he had assumed falsely the appearance of Śukrācārya, and lived there as the spiritual guide of the Demons.

गुरुः सुराणामिनि सर्वविद्यानिशितथा ।

सुतांगीरस एवासी स कबं छलकूम्पिनः ॥ 2 ॥

O Muni! Brhapsati is the Guru of the Devas; he also devotes his time in studying the Vedas; and is the ocean of all knowledge; he is the son of the Maharsi Angirā and he is himself a Muni. Endorsed with all these good qualifications, how could he deceive the Demons.

धर्मशक्षेपु सर्वेषु सत्यधर्मय कारणम् ।

कथितं मुनिभियैन परमात्यासि लभ्यते ॥ 3 ॥

वाय्यसितसथा मिथ्या वक्ता चेहानवान्यति ।

कः सत्यक्ता संसारे भविष्यति गृहाश्रामी ॥ 4 ॥

In all the religious Sāstras, Truth is declared to be the essence of Dharma; and the Supreme Self is attained through Truth, so the wise sages say. How can we expect an ordinary householder to be true when such a man as Brhaspati takes recourse to falsehood with the Demons.

आहाराद्धिक भोज्यं बहाण्डविभवेउपि न ।

तत्वं मुनयो मिथ्या प्रवर्तैने कर्थ मुने ॥ ५ ॥

If one acquires, as one's wealth, the whole Universe, still one does not require anything more than what is required in feeding one's belly; how is it that Brhaspati could speak falsehood merely for the sake of his belly?

शब्दप्रमाणमुच्छेदे शिषाधावे गत न किम् ।

छलकमप्रमुत्ते वारक्षितारांत गृती कथम् ॥ 6 ॥

O Muni! The words sung by the ancient virtuous and respectable sages were true and had their corresponding objects by those words; now they

Book IV Chapter XIII

employed the term Śiṣṭa meaning that there were virtuous, respectable persons as denoted by them. When Brhaṣpati can even commit such condemnable deceitful acts and speak falsehood, we can expect no virtuous respectable persons in the world. Where then do you find the Śiṣṭa persons, denoted by the word Śiṣṭa, sung by the ancient sages? The word Śiṣṭa is now meaningless!

देवा: सत्त्वसमुद्धुता राजसा मानवा: स्मृता: ।

तिर्वास्तमासा: प्रोक्ता उत्सत्ती भूनिषि: क्रिल ॥ ७ ॥

The Devas are sprung from the Sāttvic qualities, men from Rajisaci qualities and birds, etc. from the Tāmasic qualities.

अमराणां गुरु: साक्षात्म्यायावाटी स्वयं यदि ।

तदा कः सत्यवक्ता स्याध्वासस्तामास: पुनः ॥ 8 ॥

When the Guru of the Immortals, the incarnate of Sāttvik qualities, can become a liar, how can one expect those who are Rājasik Tāmasik to follow rigorously the truth?

व्य स्थितितस्य धर्मस्य सन्देड़ोयं मामात्नः ।

का गति: सर्वेन्तूनां पिथापुते जातयते ॥ 9 ॥

Oh! This Trilokī is all pierced with falschool! Where is the Religion! And what will be the ultimate goal of all these creatures!

हरिबंहा रणीकान्तस्वाधाउ्ये सुरस्वभा: ।

सर्वे छलिधी दह्म मनुयाणां च का कथा ॥ 10 ॥

When Bhagavān Hari, Brahmā, Indra and the best of the Devas when all can betake to protest, fraud and trickery and show cleverness in them; what to speak of men!

कामाबोधासिन्ताप लोधीपहत्तचेतस: ।

छल दक्षा: सुरा: सर्वे मुनयशु तपोधना: ॥ 11 ॥

वसिष्ठो बामदेवश्व शिक्षापित्रो गुरुरूषना ।

एते पारपततः काउत्र गतिभर्मेय मानव ॥ 12 ॥

O Giver of honour! When all the Devas, Vasistha, Vāmadeva, Visvāmitra, Bhraspati and other ascetic Munis get themselves overpowered by lust and anger, when their intelligence gets destroyed by covetuousness and avarice, when they are addicted to vices and are expert in fraud, pretext

and trickery, then what fate, alas! can you expect of Dharma and what help is there of any religious persons?

इन्ट्रोसिनशून्ट्रमा वेधा: परदाराभिलम्यता: ।

आर्यत्वं भुवनेचेषु स्थितं कृत्र मुने वद ॥ 13 ॥

Alas! Indra, Agni, Moon, and Brahmā when these get overpowered by the strong influence of lust, are in illicit love with others wives, where is the goodness and virtuous behaviour in this Triloki?

वचनं कस्य मन्त्यमुपदेशप्रियासनच ।

सर्वे लोपाधिभूतास्ते देवाशु मुनयस्तथा ॥ 14 ॥

O Sinless One! To whom, then, can we look upon as our spiritual guide and our advice and law givers when all the Devas and Muni are corrupt with avarice?

व्यास उवाच

किं विश्यु: किं शिवो बहुत मघवा किं बृहस्यति: ।

देहवान् प्रभवत्येव विकारैः संयुतः सदा ॥ 15 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Be he Indra, Brhaspati, Brahmā, Viṣṇu or Maheśa whoever is embodied or will put on bodies, he will have to be in touch with the previously mentioned Aharūkāra, and covetuousness and other vices due to name and form.

रागी विध्य: शिको रागी बह्ञापि रागसंयुतः।

“रायाविकमकुत्वं वै न करोति नाराधि ।”

रागवानपि चातुर्गविद्धेड इव लक्ष्यते ॥ १ ६ ॥

O king! Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa are all attached to sensual objects; and what improper and sinful actions there can be that cannot be committed by persons devoted to sensual objects! सम्प्रावे सुक्टे सेठीप गुणैः सम्वायते किल ।

कारणाद्रहितं कार्यं कवं भवितुर्महैति ॥ 17 ॥

It is through cleverness and fraud that any one devoted to sensual objects can easily make oneself as cleverly free from Māyā; but when difficulty comes, then his trickery gets discovered and the respective qualities hidden in him are brought to bear their respective results. Know, then, the three

qualities to be conjointly the cause of all these actions; as without any cause, no action gets visible.

इद्यादौनां च सर्वेषां गुणा एव हि कारणम् ।

पश्रविश्वसमुद्धता देहासेलां च नाच्यथा ॥ 18 ॥

These discrepancies in the case of Brahmā and others are caused by the three qualities; their bodies are all created from Pradhāna Mahat and the other 25 Tattvas. (essences).

काले मरणधार्मिते सन्देहः को3उ ते नृप ।

परोपदेशे विस्पर्धे शिषा: सर्व पवित्त च ॥ 19 ॥

विलुत्तिहिंशेशेषे। स्ककार्ये समुपस्थिते ।

कामः क्रोभत्धला लोभग्रोहाङ्कुरासस्तः ॥ 20 ॥

O king! Brahmā and others are subject to death; then how can you doubt on other things? In advising others, everybody gives, as it were, good and virtuous advices; but the burden falls upon their own heads; they fall off from their advices and act according to their hidden natures; then they yield to lust, anger, envy, egoism and fascination.

देहावा-कः परित्यक्त्मीशो भवति तान्युनः ।

संसारोउयं महाराज सदैवैर्विविधः स्मृतः ॥ 21 ॥

No one who is embodied can get rid of passions, born of the three qualities. O king! Thus the Triloki goes, is the saying of the Maharsis.

नान्यथा प्रभवत्येव रुभाग्रुभमयः किल ।

कदाचिद्वगाविच्यानुस्तपशृति दाकृणम् ॥ 22 ॥

कदाचिद्विषायान्यान्तिनतीसे सुराधिधः ।

कदाचितु स्मारूरस्त्रिक्तः परमेश्वरः ॥ 23 ॥

रमते किल वैकुणले तद्वासस्तरणो विभुः ।

कदाचिष्ठानवैः सारधे सुखं परमदाकाणम् ॥ 24 ॥

करीत कर्णासिम्युस्तद्वाणपीडिते धृप्यम् ।

कदाचिजयमानोति देवालसोप्रि पराजयम् ॥ 25 ॥

सुखदुःखाधिपृतीउसी भवलेवेव न संशयः ।

गेपे गोते कदाचिष्ठे योगनिद्रासमावृतः ॥ 26 ॥

This Trilokī, auspicious, inauspicious, mixed, never gets any serious change; its nature remains always uniform. See Bhagavān Viṣṇu sometimes practises severe asceticism; Indra, the lord of the Devas some times follows the practices of religious sacrifices. Again you find Viṣṇu Bhagavān, full of

youth, fond of the Līlā, enjoying the company of Ramā in Vaikuntha; some times He is the ocean of mercy, is fighting dreadful battles with the Demons and being severely afflicted with their clusters of arrows; some times he gains victories, some times he gets defeat through the irony of Fate; thus he gets undoubtedly pleasures and pains.

काले जागर्ति विश्रामा स्थायाप्रतिविधितः ।

गर्वें बढ़ा हरिश्छित इन्जाडा वे सुरातथा ॥ 27 ॥

मुनवश्व तिविनारीः स्वायुषो विवरान्ति हि ।

निशावसाने संजाते जनस्थावरजंगम् ॥ 28 ॥

घियते नात्र सन्देहो नृप किश्छलदापि च ।

स्वायुषो-ने पचजाड़ा: क्षयमूच्छिति पार्थिं ॥ 29 ॥

Oking! some time Nārāyaṇa draws all the worlds into his belly and takes his yogic sleep on the thousand headed serpent Śeṣa and again he gets himself awakened by Prakṛti. O king! Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa, Indra, the Devas, and Munis all of them, live up to the limit of their ordained time and when the time of Pralaya the Universal dissolution, ends, this whole Universe, moving and nonmoving, again comes into existence as before; there is no doubt in this. O king, at the expiry of the ordained time, Brahmā and all others will die, no doubt.

प्रभवन्ति पुनर्विष्णुहराशकाय: सुग: ।

तस्माल्कामादिकान्यावादैह्वान्यतिप्रदते ॥ ३० ॥

नात्र ते विमयम: काव्यं: कदापिचिप पार्थिति ।

संसारोयं तु सन्दिधाः कामक्रोधादिपिनूर ॥ ३१ ॥

Again, in due course, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa and the other Devas come out and assume bodies and get all the passions, lust, etc. as ordained. O King! You need not be astonished; this Trilokī always goes on accompanied by lust, anger, etc.

तुर्वभस्तिद्विनमुक्तः पुरुषः परमार्थवित् ।

यो विवेपौहं संसारे स दारात्र क्रौतलपि ॥ 32 ॥

विमुक्तः सर्वसोपेध्ये विवरत्याविगकतः ।

तस्मादुर्हस्यतेभिरां शगशनातिभिता पुनः ॥ 33 ॥

गुरुभालाभिता भार्यां तथा भातुर्थीवासः ।

एवं संसारचक्रोंस्मव्रगतोपादिविधित्विधृतः ॥ 34 ॥

Book IV Chapter XIII

Persons free from lust, anger and other passions are very rare in this world. He who is afraid of this world does not marry, and thus being free from the attachments to any worldly objects, becomes free and roams fearless. The Moon stole away the wife of Brhaşpati, and Brhaşpati himself stole away the wife of his younger brothers. Thus in this wheel of Sanisāra, all the creatures are ever passionate with attachment avarice, etc.

गत्थस्यं च समास्थाय कर्थं मुक्तो घेवेत्रः ।

तस्मासर्वप्रयतेनं हित्वा संसारसारताम् ॥ 35 ॥

The householder can never expect to obtain freedom. Therefore those who want to be free, should carefully relinquish the idea of the stability of the world and worship the Eternal Mother Full and Sat, Cit and Ānandam.

आत्यायेमहेशानी सचिद्वानन्द्रविणीम् ।

तन्मायागणतश्छं जगदेतच्चाराम् ॥ ३६ ॥

This world, moving and unmoving, O Maheśanī, rolls in madness, overpowered by Her Māyā.

प्रभत्यमन्तवलर्ष मदिरामपतवज्ञ ।

तस्या आगधानेपैव गुणानसर्विन्धयुत च ॥ ३७ ॥

Intelligent persons worshipping Her, trample upon the three qualities and become free. O king! No other Path exists for Freedom.

मुक्ति भजेत मतिमाजान्यः पंधास्थितः परः ।

आग्रायिता महेशगानी न यावकुकृतो कृपण।  ॥38॥

तावद्ध्वेल्पुं कमाकाकोयोर्जित दया युतः ।

करणासागरामेतां पंजतेन्स्मादायया ॥ ३ ९ ॥

Until one gets the Grace from the Maheśānī, one never gets happiness. True mercy is not found anywhere else but from Her. Then one should worship the All merciful, being of pure heart. For Her worship leads to freedom, even in this bodyhood.

यस्यास्तु भजनेनैव जीवन्मुत्कवमरन्तु ।

मानुध्यं तुर्वर्भ प्राय्य सेविता न महेश्वरीं ॥ 40 ॥

He who getting a human frame fails to worship Maheśānī, gets down from the highest rung of the ladder. This is my opinion.

निःशिणकाप्राप्तिता अथ इन्येव विवहें ।

अहूक्राप्तुं विश्वं गुणावसम्वित्यम् ॥ 41 ॥

असत्येनापि सम्वद्धं मृच्यते कायमन्यथा ।

हिला सर्व ततः सर्वे: संसेल्या घुवनेश्धी ॥ 42 ॥

This Universe, composed of the three qualities, is encompassed with Ahankāra and fastened to untruth; therefore freedom can never be expected without the worship of That Potent Goddess. O Muni! O king! Renounce every worldly object and serve the Goddess Bhuvanesvari; this is the highest duty of all.

राजोवाच

किं कृतं गुरुणा तत्र काव्यकपधेण च ।

कदा शुक्र: समायाततन्मे बृहि पितामहं ॥ 43 ॥

The king said: What did, then, the Devaguru do in the disguise of Śukrācārya? And when did the real Śukrācārya come there? O respected Muni! Speak on these points.

व्यास उवाच

भ्युण राजन्यव्ययामि यत्कृतं गुरुणा तदा ।

कृत्वा काव्यस्वरूपं च प्रच्छेने महात्मना ॥ 44 ॥

Vyāsa said: Please hear what the disguised Brhaṣpati in the shape of Śukrācārya did afterwards.

गुरुणा बोधिता दैत्या मत्वा काव्य स्वकं गुरुम् ।

विश्वास परमं कृत्वा बध्वुत्स्नमयास्ताद ॥ 45 ॥

The demons were made to understand clearly by Brhaşpati; and then they took him for Śukrācārya and placed implicit faith on him and began to think of him and him alone.

विद्यार्थे ग्रणत भातु भगुं मत्वाउमोगैहिताः ।

गुरुणा वियतख्याने तोभाको वा न मुवाहि ॥ 46 ॥

The Daityas, enchanted and deceived by the magic of Brhaşpati, took now his refuge for acquiring the knowledge from him, since they mistook him for Śukrācārya. Who is there that is not enchanted by the idea of gaining something?

दूरश्वर्णिके काले सम्पूर्णसमये तदा ।

जर्यवा सह क्रीडित्वा काव्यो याज्ञानचित्यत् ॥ 47 ॥

On the other hand, when the term of ten years was over, Šukrācārya, the real Guru of the Daityas, ceased enjoying Jayanti and began to remember his disciples, the Daityas.

आशया माम मार्गे ते प्रध्यन्तः संस्थिताः किल ।

गतला तान्ये प्रपयेउई घाज्ञानतिनययातुगन् ॥ 4 8 ॥

He now began to think that “my disciples, the Daityas, are expecting every instant my return; and I would now go and see them, bewildered with fear.

मा देवेध्यो भयं तेषां मदूकानां भवेदिति ।

सँत्रिल बुद्धिमास्थाय जयंत्रीं प्रत्युवाच इ ॥ ४९ ॥

देवानेवोघसंवर्ति पुरा मे चाहलोचने ।

समयलेउछ स्यमूर्णं जातोरअं दशाविषिकः ॥ ५० ॥

तस्माद्छामहं देवि रूढुं याज्ञान्सुमध्ये ।

पुरेनेवागमियामि तवान्तिकमनुद्रतः ॥ ५१ ॥

They are my devotees and I ought to do such that they might not be afraid of the Devas." And then he exclaimed to Jayanti, "O beautiful one! Let my sons take the shelter of the Gods; your term of ten years is today over; I now go therefore, to see my disciples; soon I will again come to you.

तथैति तमुवाचाय जयन्ती धार्यितमा ।

यथेहं गच्छ धर्मेन न ते धर्मं विलोपेचे ॥ 52 ॥

"Be it so", replied Jayanti, the best of those who know religion, "you can go where you like; I am not to destroy your Dharma."

तद्युवा वयनं काव्यो जाग्य वरितस्ततः ।

अप्यशूनवानां च पार्थे वाच्यति तदा ॥ 53 ॥

छरूक्षपरं सीयां बोधयन्तं छलेन तान् ।

जैनं धर्मं कृते खेने यज्ञनिद्वपरं तथा ॥ 54 ॥

Hearing these words, Šukrācārya went hurriedly to the Demons and saw the Devaguru Brhaspati sitting before them in the guise of Šukrācārya. He was explaining to him the Jaina doctrines, compiled by himself and finding fault with the act of envy, taking revenge and killing and cursing the sacrifices, etc.

भो देवरिप्वः सत्यं ब्रवीमि भवतां हितम् ।

अहिंसा परमो धर्मों हेतव्या ह्राततायिनः ॥ 55 ॥

He was telling them “O Enemies of Gods! Truly, I am telling you words that will, no doubt, prove good to you. Non-killing is the highest virtue; even the enemies ought never to be killed.

छिडीभोगतरैवैदे दर्शिनं हिंसनं पशोः ।

जिहास्वादपरै: काममहिंदेव परा मता ॥ 56 ॥

It is the Brāhmanas, addicted to enjoyments and pleasures of senses, who want to satisfy their tastes and pleasures that are found in the Vedas injunctions to kill animals; but there is no virtue higher than non-killing animals.

एर्वधिधानि वाक्यानि वेटगाछ्चपाराणि च ।

बुवाणे भूमकाकर्णे विक्सोजसी गुणो: सून: ॥ 57 ॥

चिन्त्यामास मनसा मम ढ्रेष्यो गुरुः किल ।

वझिता: किल धूतेन याज्ञा मे नात्र संशयः ॥ 58 ॥

O king! Sukrācārya was perfectly astonished to hear Brhaşpati, the Guru of the Devas, speaking against the Vedas and began to think that "Brhaşpati is certainly my enemy. My disciples have been duped by this cheat; there is no doubt in this.

प्रियतोषं पायबीजं वै नरक्रहागूर्जितम् ।

गुरुत्यन्ते बृते प्रेरितो येन पायमा ॥ 59 ॥

Fie to Avarice! It is the seed of sin; very strong and the veritable gate to hell; Brhaşpati, even, the Guru of the Devas, is speaking lies, bound under the influence of this heinous avarice!

प्रमाणं चत्वं यस्य तोप्रेप पाखण्डधारकः ।

गुरुः सुराणां सर्वैंधं धर्मशास्त्रवतर्कः ॥ 60 ॥

Oh! What wonder is this that the Guru of the Devas, who is the promulgator of all the religious Śāstras and whose word is accepted as the final decision, is now expounding the doctrines of atheists.

किं किं न तपते लोभामलिनीकृतमानसः ।

अन्योदपि गुरुरूपेवं जातः पारखण्डपिछतः ॥ ६१ ॥

When Brhaşpati can become the expounder of atheistic doctrines, impelled by covetuousness: what to speak of those whose minds are not pure and whose intelligence is not sharp?

Book IV Chapter XIV

<table><tr><td>शैलुपचेघितं सर्वे परिगूहा ब्रिजोत्तमः ।वंचययतिसम्मुजादैन्यान् याज्ञान्माप्यसी ॥ 6 2 ॥इति श्रीमद्वैभागवते महापुराणे चतुर्षकन्येत्रयोद्धारो5यायः ॥ 1 7 3 ॥</td></tr></table>

This Deva Guru, though a Brāhmin, is acting to-day like a rogue, wanting to take away all and

is deceiving my disciples the Daityas, who have been confounded by his magic.

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahapurānam of 18,000 verses on cheating the Daityas by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IV Chapter XIV

