CHAPTER XVII

On the Dhruva Maṇḍalam

श्रीनारायण जयार

अर्थमिभुक्तालुळ्ये योजनानां प्रभागणतः ।

लक्षेक्ष्योद्यामिति: परमं श्रेणवं पदम् ॥ १ ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: Beyond the Saptarṣi maṇḍalam (the Great Bear), thirteen lākh Yojanas higher is situated, the Viṣṇu's Parama Padam (the highest place of Viṣṇu).

महाभागवतः श्रीमान्ते लोकबंदितः ।

औतानपादित्रेन्द्रोण बहिना कार्यपने च ॥ २ ॥

धर्मे सह चैवास्ते समाकलपुजा धुवः ।

बहुमानं दक्षिणतः कुर्विद्धः प्रेशकः सदा ॥ ३ ॥

The Great Bhāgavat (devotee of God), the most respectful, Śrimān Dhruva, the son of Uttānapāda, is established there with Indra, Agni, Kaśyapa and Dharma and the Naksāttras. The visitors pay to him always their respects.

आजीव्यः कल्पजीविनापुपासे भगवतव्यम् ।

ज्योतिंगणानां सर्वेयं प्रहन्ब्रभावनाद् ॥ 4 ॥

कालेन्निनिषेयणां धायतां व्यक्तईसा ।

अवहंभव्याप्यरि विहितछोधेगर सः ॥ 5 ॥

He is the patron of those who live till the end of a Kalpa. He is engaged in serving the lotus-feet of the Bhagavān. He has been made by God Himself the pillar round whom all the planets, stars, and the luminary bodies are revolving always and with great force in the Zodiac and in the celestial Heavens.

भासते भासयन्यास स्वीयया देवपुक्ति: ।

मेहितमध्ये यथा युक्ताः पश्वाः कर्णाधर्काः ॥ 6 ॥

मण्डलानि चर्तीमे सवन्त्रितयेन च ।

एवं ग्रहादय: सर्वे भगणाद्या यथाक्रमम् ॥ 7 ॥

अन्तर्विहिंषाभोगेन कालचक्रे निव्योजिताः ।

धूवमेवालवंल्यगु यावनुनीदीरिता ते ॥ 8 ॥

The Devas also worship him. He, resplendent in his own glory, illumines and manifests all. As beasts tied to yoke go on tilling, so the planets and stars, fixed on the Zodiac, go quickly round and round this Dhruva, the Pole Star; some nearer, some further distant in spheres, propelled by Vāyu.

अकल्पितं च क्रमीते छे यनोदा: खगा झव ।

कर्मसाधयो वायुवर्गगा सर्व एव ते ॥ 9 ॥

एवं ज्योतिनिगाः सर्व प्रकृतेः पुरुषस्य च ।

संयोगानुर्गृहीतासे भूमौ न निवर्तित च ॥ 10 ॥

As the hawks hover round the sky, so the above-mentioned planets, go completely round and round under their own Karmas and controlled by the Vāyu in the sky. Thus all the luminaries do not fall to the ground, as they are kept up in their respective positions by the favour of the union of Prakṛti and Puruṣa.

ज्योतिष्ठकं केचिदेतिष्ठगूमारस्वरूपकम् ।

सोपयोगं भगवता योगधारणकर्मिण ॥ १ १ ॥

यस्यावर्काशिरसः कुण्डलीभृतवपुषो मुने ।

पृष्ठघो कलित्यो योरयं धूव उतनापवादः ॥ १ २ ॥

Some say that this Jyotiṣcakra, the celestial Heavens (the Zodiac) is Śiśumāra. It is kept duly in its position for the purpose of holding things up by the power of the Bhagavān. Hence, it does not fall. It is resting with its body coiled round and with its head lower down. O Muni! Dhruva, the son of Uttānapāda is staying at the tail end.

लागूलैरस च संप्रोक्तः प्रजापात्रिकलम्भः ।

अर्निर्दिक्ष धर्मक्षु तिष्ठनि सुगूर्णिता: ॥ 13 ॥

Book VIII Chapter XVII

भाता विधाता पृष्ठांते कत्थां सतर्पयस्ततः ।

दक्षिणावर्तनीभोगेन कुपडलाकातमीयुप: ॥ १ ४ ॥

And, in addition to him, also at the tail rest Brahmā, the Sinless Prajāpati, worshipped by the Gods, Agni, Indra and Dharma. Thus the creation is at the tail and the Saptarṣi mandala is staying at his waist. Thus the celestial wheel (Jyotisçakra) is resting with his coils turned in a right-hand direction.

उत्तरायभानीह दक्षापौर्गरितानि च ।

दक्षिणायवन्यानीह सव्ये पार्घुर्वितानि च ॥ १५ ॥

कुषडलाभोगवैगस्या पार्थ्योरभ्योगेच ।।

समसंख्याशयवा भवन्ति कजनन्दन ॥ १६ ॥

On his right side are found the Uttarāyana Nakṣattras, fourteen from Abhijit to Punarvasu and on his left side are found the other fourteen Dakṣināyanam Nakṣattras from Pusyā to Uttarāṣādhā. O Son of Brahmā! Thus the Nakṣattras form the coil-shaped body of the Śísumāra, the Zodiac; half the Nakṣattras on the one side and the other half Nakṣattras on the other.

अज्वीर्णीयुषभोगे आकाशसरितदौरे ।

पुनर्वसृष्टा पुच्छा झोगपी दक्षिणवामा: ॥ 17 ॥

आज्ञिरलेषे पौछ्यमो: पावदोर्दक्षावमाय: ।

अभिनिच्छोतापाखा नासवोर्दक्षावामा: ॥ 18 ॥

His back is on the Heavenly Ganges named Ajavithi. Punarvasu and Pusyā form the right and left side of loins; Ārdrā and Āśleśā form the right and left feet (westward); Abhijit and Uttarāśādhā form the right and left nostrils.

यवासंख्यं च देवर्षे शूनिष्ठ जलपं नवा ।

कल्पिते कल्पनाविद्धिनैवंदोक्षवामयो: ॥ १९ ॥

धनिष्य तैव मूलं च कर्णीदेशक्षायमायो: ।

भवादी-न्यक्ष्यानीह दक्षिणायवनापनि च ॥ 20 ॥

O Devarsjī: Śravaṇā and Pūrvāṣādhā form the right and left eyes respectively; so say the persons that form the Kalpanās (fancies) Dhanisṭhā and Mūlā form his right and left ears; Maghā, etc., the eight Dakṣināyanam Nakṣattras form the bones on the left side.

युक्तीत वामपार्थिवंकिषु क्रमतो मुने ।

तवैय मृगपीर्वदी-न्युद्यभानि च वायि हि ॥ 21 ॥

द्वक्षाप्थें वंकिकेषु प्राजिलोभ्येन योजयेत् ।

गततारा तथा ज्योहास्कन्यपोदैक्षवामयो: ॥ 22 ॥

O Muni! Mrgaśirsa, the Uttarāyana Nakṣattras form the bones on his right side. Śatabhīsā and Jyeṣṭhā form the right and left shoulders.

अगतिरहोत्तरहानावरायां हनौ यमः ।

मुखेखंगारकः प्रोक्तो मन्दः प्रोक्त उपस्थके ॥ 23 ॥

ब्रह्मसित्रि ककुदि वक्ष्यस्कर्ग प्रहाधियः ।

नारायणघ छूदे चन्द्रो मनसि तिष्ठति ॥ 24 ॥

Agasti (the Canopus) forms the upper jaw and Yama, the lower jaw. The planet Mars forms his face; Saturn forms his organ of generation; Brhaspati forms the hump on the shoulders; the Sun, the Lord of the planets, forms his breast; Nārāyana remains in the heart; and the Moon is in his mind.

Note: Śisūmāra is also the constellation Dolphinus and is sometimes meant for the polar star.)

सत्नयोरधिनी नाभ्यामुगना: परिकीर्तितः ।

बुधः प्राणापानवोश गते गृह्धु केतकः ॥ 25 ॥

सर्विणीय तथा रोमकुने तारागणाः स्मृतः ।

एतद्धगतते विष्णो: सर्वेदेवमयं वपु: ॥ 26 ॥

O Nārada! The two Aśvīns form the nipples on his breast; Uśanā forms his navel; the Mercury is his Prāṇa and Apāna; Rāhu is his neck and Ketu is all over his body; and the stars are reigning all over the hairs of his body. This Zodiac is the body composed of the Devas of that All Pervading Bhagavān. So every intelligent person should daily mediate this Śiśumāra in the Sandhyā time, with perfect purity and keeping himself Mauna (silent), and with his whole heart.

सन्यायां प्रवल्ह ध्यायेव्ययो वाययो मुनि: ।

निरीक्षामण्डीत्तिई-मन्वेणानेन धीक्षः ॥ 27 ॥

नमो ज्वीतिलोंकाय कालायानिर्मिथां

पतवे महापुरुषायाशिभीर्जीति ॥ 28 ॥

Then he should repeat the following mantras and get up and say: 'Thou art the Substratum of all the

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

luminaries, we bow down to Thee; Thou createst and destroyest all. Thou art the Lord of all the celestials. Thou art the Ādipuruṣa, the foremost of all the Puruṣas; we meditate fully on Thee.

प्रहर्षतारामवमाधिदेविकं

पापाषहं मन्त्रकृतां जिकालम् ।

नास्यस्त: स्मरतो वा जिकालं

नयेते तत्कालजमाणु पायम् ॥ 29 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणोउधमककम्

सप्तदशोउवाय: 11 17 ॥

The planets, Nakṣattras, and the stars are Thy body. The Daiva is established in Thee alone. Thou destroyest the sins of those that compose the Mantras. The sins are completely destroyed for the time being of him who bows down or remembers Thee in the morning, afternoon and evening.'

Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the Dhruva Mandalam in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

