[Ch 23 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Speaking these harsh and cruel words to the King, the Muni took that money and went away. When Viśvāmitra went away, the King Hariścandra became very much perplexed with sorrows and sighed frequently. He then began to say with his bent downwards.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Speaking these harsh and cruel words to the King, the Muni took that money and went away. When Viśvāmitra went away, the King Hariścandra became very much perplexed with sorrows and sighed frequently. He then began to say with his face bent downwards.

[Ch 23 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Suffering from constant pain and troubles, I am now turned into a Preta; if any body finds me serviceable, he may purchase me with value in gold as proper; but he should do this quickly before the sun sets."
NEW CORR ENG ──► “Suffering from constant pain and troubles, I am now turned into a Preta; if anybody finds me serviceable, he may purchase me with value in gold as proper; but he should do this quickly before the sun sets.”

[Ch 23 Verse 4-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Dharma, then, assuming the form of a heartless Cāndāla came there quickly to test Hariścandra. The body of that low mean person was of a black colour, his air looking ferocious, his belly elongated, body emitting stench odours, teeth very long, and his face, covered with beards. He had one bamboo in his hand; in his neck, the bones of the dead were hanging and his chest was very distorted.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Dharma, then, assuming the form of a heartless Cāṇḍāla, came there quickly to test Hariścandra. The body of that low mean person was of a black colour, his air looking ferocious, his belly elongated, body emitting stench odours, teeth very long, and his face, covered with beards. He had one bamboo in his hand; in his neck, the bones of the dead were hanging and his chest was very distorted.

[Ch 23 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Cāndāla said: "I am in urgent need of a servant; I will keep you as my slave; say, then, quickly what is, your price?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Cāṇḍāla said :-- “I am in urgent need of a servant; I will keep you as my slave; say, then, quickly what is your price?”

[Ch 23 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! When the cruel, extremely ferocious and heartless Cāndāla said thus, the King Harisācandra was surprised to see his appearance and said: "Who are you?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! When the cruel, extremely ferocious and heartless Cāṇḍāla said thus, the King Hariścandra was surprised to see his appearance and said :-- “Who are you?”

[Ch 23 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Cāṇḍāla said: “O King! I am the famous Cāṇḍāla, Pravīra; you will have to remain always subject to me and to collect the clothes of the dead persons.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Cāṇḍāla said :-- “O King! I am the famous Cāṇḍāla, Pravīra; you will have to remain always subject to me and to collect the clothes of the dead persons.”

[Ch 23 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing his word, the King said: "I want to be purchased by a Brāhmin or a Kṣattriya. See! The sages say, that the Dharma of good people is excellent; the Dharma of the persons intermediate is middling; and the Dharma of the mean is depressing. You belong to low and mean class. So my Dharma cannot be observed if I remain in your house."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing his word, the King said, “I want to be purchased by a Brāhmin or a Kṣattriya. See! The sages say, that the Dharma of good people is excellent; the Dharma of the persons intermediate is middling; and the Dharma of the mean is depressing. You belong to the low and mean class. So my Dharma cannot be observed if I remain in your house.”

[Ch 23 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Cāndāla said: “O King! This is the Dharma of yours now mentioned by you; then why did you mention that anybody can purchase you); without any previous consideration, you spoke before me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Cāṇḍāla said :-- “O King! This is the Dharma of yours now mentioned by you; then why did you mention that anybody can purchase you; without any previous consideration, you spoke before me.

[Ch 23 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He who speaks with preconsideration stains his desired object; but, O Sinless One! You did not consider and you spoke that ordinarily. However, if I take your words that you spoke first to be true, then you are no doubt, purchased by me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► He who speaks with preconsideration attains his desired object; but, O Sinless One! You did not consider and you spoke that ordinarily. However, if I take your words that you spoke first to be true, then you are no doubt, purchased by me.”

[Ch 23 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Harīscandra said: “The villain that speaks untruth, goes downright to a terrible hell; so to become a Cāndāla is far better for me than to use an untrue word.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hariścandra said :-- The villain that speaks untruth, goes downright to a terrible hell; so to become a Cāṇḍāla is far better for me than to use an untrue word.

[Ch 23 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! When the King was speaking thus, the ascetic Viśvāmitra arrived there out of anger and impatience; he rolled his eyes and said: "This Cāndāla is come to give you your desired money; why, then, are you not giving me the remnant of my Dakṣinā!"
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! When the King was speaking thus, the ascetic Viśvāmitra arrived there out of anger and impatience; he rolled his eyes and said :-- This Cāṇḍāla is come to give you your desired money; why, then, are you not giving me the remnant of my Dakṣiṇā!

[Ch 23 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Harīścandra said: “O Kauśika! Nothing is unknown to you. My this body is born for the Solar Line; how then can I accept this slavery of a Cāndāla!”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hariścandra said :-- “O Kauśika! Nothing is unknown to you. My this body is born for the Solar Line; how then can I accept this slavery of a Cāṇḍāla!”

[Ch 23 Verse 17-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Víśvāmitra said: “If you do not sell yourself to a Cāṇḍala, be certain that I will just now put you under my curse. Give me immediately my Dakṣinā, be it whether from a Cāṇḍala or from a Brāhmaṇa. There is no other purchaser at present than this Cāṇḍala. But know this as certain that I won’t go back until I get my money. O King! If you do not give me money just now, then when half the Ghatikā of the day is remaining, I will burn you up by my fire of anger.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viśvāmitra said :-- If you do not sell yourself to a Cāṇḍāla, be certain that I will just now put you under my curse. Give me immediately my Dakṣiṇā, be it whether from a Cāṇḍāla or from a Brāhmaṇa. There is no other purchaser at present than this Cāṇḍāla. But know this as certain that I won’t go back until I get my money. O King! If you do not give me money just now, then when half the Ghatikā of the day is remaining, I will burn you up by my fire of anger.

[Ch 23 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Šrimaddevīthāgavatam Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing these words of Viśvāmitra, the King became almost dead; bewildered with fear, then he clasped the feet of the Rṣi and said, “Be friendly, please.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing these words of Viśvāmitra, the King became almost dead; bewildered with fear, then he clasped the feet of the Ṛṣi and said, “Be friendly, please.”

[Ch 23 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Harisācranda said: “O Vipraṣi! I am now very humiliated and have become very afflicted and distressed. Especially I am your Bhakta, I am your servant; so begraciously pleased and free me from this painful companion of a Cāndāla. O Muni! In lieu of my remnant Dakṣinā, I will be your obedient slave; I will do your work and follow your commands.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► said :-- “O Viprarṣi! I am now very humiliated and have become very afflicted and distressed. Especially I am your Bhakta, I am your servant; so be graciously pleased and free me from this painful companion of a Cāṇḍāla. O Muni! In lieu of my remnant Dakṣiṇā, I will be your obedient slave; I will do your work and follow your commands.”

[Ch 23 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vísvāmitra said: “O King! You are then my slave, you will obey always my commands.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Visvamitra said :-- “O King! You are then my slave, you will obey always my commands.”

[Ch 23 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! When Viśvāmitra said so, the King, out of joy, thought that he regained his life and said to Kauśika. “Always I will obey your words; now order me what work I will have to do.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! When Viśvāmitra said so, the King, out of joy, thought that he regained his life and said to Kauśika. Always I will obey your words; now order me what work I will have to do.

[Ch 23 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Viśvāmitra, then addressed the Cāṃḍala and said: “O Cāṃḍala! Come to me and give me the price for this slave. I am now handing this slave over to you; give me the price and take him. I want money; I have no need for a servant."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viśvāmitra, then addressed the Cāṇḍāla and said :-- “O Cāṇḍāla! Come to me and give me the price for this slave. I am now handing this slave over to you; give me the price and take him. I want money; I have no need for a servant.”

[Ch 23 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! When Viśvāmitra spoke thus, the Cāndāla, overflowed with joy, came immediately to the Rṣi Viśvāmitra and said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! When Viśvāmitra spoke thus, the Cāṇḍāla, overflowed with joy, came immediately to the Ṛṣi Viśvāmitra and said :--

[Ch 23 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Dvija! The relief that you have given me by selling this servant, for that I will give you the ten Yoyanas wide land of Prayāga Manḍalam, covered over with jewels.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Dvīja! The relief that you have given me by selling this servant, for that I will give you the ten Yoyanas wide land of Prayāga Maṇḍalam, covered over with jewels.

[Ch 23 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! The Cāndāla then gave me thousand gems, one thousand jewels, one thousand pearls and one thousand gold mohurs and Viśvāmitra took them. No signs of distraction nor unpleasantness were visible on the face of the King Hariścandra rather he laid hold of his patience and thought within himself.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! The Cāṇḍāla then gave one thousand gems, one thousand jewels, one thousand pearls and one thousand gold Mohurs and Viśvāmitra took them. No signs of distraction nor unpleasantness were visible on the face of the King Hariścandra. Rather he laid hold of his patience and thought within himself,

[Ch 23 Verse 32-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Vísvāmitra is now my master; I will do any work that he puts me in." At this time, the incorporeal voice, the voice of the fourth dimensional space, sounded from the Heavens: "O Fortunate One! You are freed from the Dakṣinā, the debt before that you promised to give me." A shower of flowers fell on the head of the King from the Heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “Viśvāmitra is now my master; I will do any work that he puts me in.” At this time, the incorporeal voice, the voice of the fourth dimensional space, sounded from the Heavens :-- “O Fortunate One! You are freed from the Dakṣiṇā, the debt before that you promised to give me.” A shower of flowers fell on the head of the King from the Heavens.

[Ch 23 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this time the powerful Indra and the other hosts of the Devas praised the King, saying: "Sádhu! Sádhu! Well-done, Well-done." The heart of the King was then filled with intense joy and the King then said to Kauśika.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this time the powerful Indra and the other hosts of the Devas praised the King, saying :-- “Sādhu! Sādhu! Well-done, Well-done.” The heart of the King was then filled with intense joy and the King then said to Kauśika :--

[Ch 23 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Intelligent One! You are a greater benefactor to me then my father, mother and friend as you have freed me in a moment from my debts. So, O mighty armed one! Your words are beneficial to me. Now order what am I to do.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Intelligent One! You are a greater benefactor to me than my father, mother and friend as you have freed me in a moment from my debts. So, O mighty armed one! Your words are beneficial to me. Now order what am I to do.

[Ch 23 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the King said so, Viśvāmitra then said: "Go and observe from to-day the words of the Cāndāla. Let good befall on you!" Thus saying, the Maharṣi Viśvāmitra took the money given by the Cāndāla and went away to his own place. Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter of the Seventh Book on the King Hariścandra's acknowledgment of the slavery of the Cāndāla in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the King said so, Viśvāmitra then said :-- Go and observe from today the words of the Cāṇḍāla. Let good befall on you! Thus saying, the Maharṣi Viśvāmitra took the money given by the Cāṇḍāla and went away to his own place. Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter of the Seventh Book on the King Hariścandra’s acknowledging of the slavery of the Cāṇḍāla in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
