CHAPTER XXIII

On Hariscandra as a Slave of the Cāndāla

व्यास उवाच

तेवेयुक्न्वा राजानं निर्थुर्ण निरुर्णं वचः ।

तदादाय धर्म पूर्ण कृपितः कौशिको ययो ॥ 1 ॥

विश्वामिति गते राजा ततः शोकमुपागतः ।

शासोच्छ्वासं मुहुः कृत्वा प्रोवाचोच्छौधामुः ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Speaking these harsh and cruel words to the King, the Muni took that money and went away. When Viśvāmitra went away, the King Hariścandra became very much perplexed with sorrows and sighed frequently. He then began to say with his bent downwards.

वितन्मैतेन यस्यातिर्याय प्रेतेन गच्छति ।

स बबौतु त्वरायुक्तो यामे तिहिति भासकरः ॥ 3 ॥

"Suffering from constant pain and troubles, I am now turned into a Preta; if any body finds me serviceable, he may purchase me with value in gold as proper; but he should do this quickly before the sun sets."

अथाजगाम त्वरितो धर्मश्रांडालक्षपघुक ।

युगीभी विकृतोरकः समशुतो दन्तुरोउष्णी ॥ 4 ॥

कृष्णो लब्योद्रः सिनधः कालाः पुर्वाधामः ।

हस्तजजरयिष्ठ शवामार्यैरलंकृतः ॥ 5 ॥

Dharma, then, assuming the form of a heartless Cāndāla came there quickly to test Hariścandra.

The body of that low mean person was of a black colour, his air looking ferocious, his belly elongated, body emitting stench odours, teeth very long, and his face, covered with beards. He had one bamboo in his hand; in his neck, the bones of the dead were hanging and his chest was very distorted.

चाण्डल उवाच

अहं गृह्वामि दास्तवे भूत्याशः सुगहान्माम ।

क्षिप्रामावङ्क्य मौल्यं किमेत्ते संप्रदीयते ॥ 6 ॥

The Cāndāla said: "I am in urgent need of a servant; I will keep you as my slave; say, then, quickly what is, your price?

व्यास उवाच

तं ततद्रभायालक्ष्य क्रूरुष्टि सुनिभुणम् ।

वदन्तमित्रु:शीलं कल्वमिव्याद पार्थिवः ॥ 7 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When the cruel, extremely ferocious and heartless Cāndāla said thus, the King Harisācandra was surprised to see his appearance and said: "Who are you?"

वाण्डाल उवाच

चाण्डालोड़हिंह ख्यातः प्रवेरिति नृपोतम ।

शासनं सर्वदा तिह मृतदैलापहारकः ॥ ८ ॥

Book VII Chapter XXIII

The Cāṇḍāla said: “O King! I am the famous Cāṇḍāla, Pravīra; you will have to remain always subject to me and to collect the clothes of the dead persons.”

एवमुक्तिदा राजो वचनं चेदमब्रवीत् ।

ब्राहण: क्षत्रियो वांरि गृह्ञान्तिति मतिमां ॥ 9 ॥

उनमाधोनो। धर्म मध्यमय च मध्यमः ।

अयमयाधमश्रेव इति प्राहूर्भनीषिणः ॥ 10 ॥

Hearing his word, the King said: "I want to be purchased by a Brāhmin or a Kṣattriya. See! The sages say, that the Dharma of good people is excellent; the Dharma of the persons intermediate is middling; and the Dharma of the mean is depressing. You belong to low and mean class. So my Dharma cannot be observed if I remain in your house."

चाण्डल उवाच

एवमेव त्वया धर्मः कथितो नृपसत्तम ।

अविवर्धा त्वया राजस्थानोकर्त ममाप्रातः ॥ १ १ ॥

The Cāndāla said: “O King! This is the Dharma of yours now mentioned by you; then why did you mention that anybody can purchase you); without any previous consideration, you spoke before me.

विद्यारयित्वा वो बृते सौधीर्ध तपणे नतः ।

सामान्ययेन तत्रोफमविराचर्य त्वयानउनच ।। 12 ॥

यदि सत्य प्रमाणं ते गृहीते3सि न संशयः ।

He who speaks with preconsideration stains his desired object; but, O Sinless One! You did not consider and you spoke that ordinarily. However, if I take your words that you spoke first to be true, then you are no doubt, purchased by me."

हशिश्र उवाच

असत्यारकें गछलेसघ हुके नराधम: ॥ १३ ॥

तन्त्रश्छालता सार्थी न वरा मे हास्त्वलता ।

Harīscandra said: “The villain that speaks untruth, goes downright to a terrible hell; so to become a Cāndāla is far better for me than to use an untrue word.”

व्यास उवोच

तस्यैवं वदतः प्राप्तो विश्वाधिम्न स्त्वोनिधिः ॥ 14 ॥

क्रोधापार्थिवृत्ताक्षः प्राहे चेदं नाराधिपम् ।

चण्डालोयं मनस्यं ते दातुं चितमुपस्थितः ॥ 15 ॥

कमासा दीयते महामगेशा यजदक्षिणाः ।

Vyāsa said: O King! When the King was speaking thus, the ascetic Viśvāmitra arrived there out of anger and impatience; he rolled his eyes and said: "This Cāndāla is come to give you your desired money; why, then, are you not giving me the remnant of my Dakṣinā!"

राजेश्वर

भगवन्युर्विंशोत्यामातानं वेधि कौशिका ॥ १६ ॥

कर्थ चाण्डालादास्तवं गमिष्ये वितकामतः ।

Harīścandra said: “O Kauśika! Nothing is unknown to you. My this body is born for the Solar Line; how then can I accept this slavery of a Cāndāla!”

विश्रामित ज्ञाव

यदि चण्डालयितं त्यमातयिक्रमजं मम ॥ 17 ॥

न प्रज्ञास्यि चेताईं ग्रणयामि त्वामसंगयम् ।

चण्डालतादयव विज्ञाद्रेहि मे दक्षिणाधनम् ॥ 18 ॥

विना चण्डालम्भुना नान्यः कर्धिछ्जनप्रदः ।

धनेनाईं विज्ञा राजक्र यास्यामि न संग्रहः ॥ 19 ॥

इदानीमेव मे विन्तं न प्रदास्यसि चेषुः ।

दिनेउर्धयिकाणेसे तत्वां शापानिनना दहे ॥ 20 ॥

Víśvāmitra said: “If you do not sell yourself to a Cāṇḍala, be certain that I will just now put you under my curse. Give me immediately my Dakṣinā, be it whether from a Cāṇḍala or from a Brāhmaṇa. There is no other purchaser at present than this Cāṇḍala. But know this as certain that I won’t go back until I get my money. O King! If you do not give me money just now, then when half the Ghatikā of the day is remaining, I will burn you up by my fire of anger.”

व्यास उवाच

हरिश्रस्ततो राजा मृतविष्छुतर्जीवितः ।

प्रसीक्षिति वदन्यादौ ऋषेजैग्राह विहृतः ॥ 21 ॥

Šrimaddevīthāgavatam

Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing these words of Viśvāmitra, the King became almost dead; bewildered with fear, then he clasped the feet of the Rṣi and said, “Be friendly, please.”

हरिश्रनु उवाच

दासोउस्यातोंस्म दीनोस्म त्वद्धकघि सिक्षेपतः ।

प्रसादं कुरु विषर्षं कर्धक्षण्डालसंकरः ॥ 22 ॥

भवेयं विज्ञेशेण तव कर्मकौरोअरः ।

तवैव मुनिग्यातून प्रेयश्रितानुवर्तकः ॥ 23 ॥

Harisācranda said: “O Vipraṣi! I am now very humiliated and have become very afflicted and distressed. Especially I am your Bhakta, I am your servant; so begraciously pleased and free me from this painful companion of a Cāndāla. O Muni! In lieu of my remnant Dakṣinā, I will be your obedient slave; I will do your work and follow your commands.”

विश्वामित्र वाच

एवमसु महाराज ममेव भव किंकतः ।

किन्तु मढ़चनं कार्य सर्वदैव नारायि ॥ 24 ॥

Vísvāmitra said: “O King! You are then my slave, you will obey always my commands.”

व्यास उचाच

एवमुक्ते5थ वचने राजा हृंसमन्त्रितः ।

अभ्यन्त पुनर्जतितामानां प्राह कौशिकम् ॥ २ ५ ॥

त्वाद्रेशं कर्णिषामि यदैवाहं न संशयः ।

आदेशय द्विजश्र किं कौरोमि ततावन ॥ २ ६ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When Viśvāmitra said so, the King, out of joy, thought that he regained his life and said to Kauśika. “Always I will obey your words; now order me what work I will have to do.”

विश्वासि उवाच

वाण्डालागच्छ महस्मालैयं किं मे प्रच्छसि ।

गृहाण दासं मौल्येन मया दृत्तं तवापुर्ण ॥ 27 ॥

नासि दासेन मे कार्यं विस्तागा वर्तैं मग ।

Viśvāmitra, then addressed the Cāṃḍala and said: “O Cāṃḍala! Come to me and give me the price for this slave. I am now handing this slave

over to you; give me the price and take him. I want money; I have no need for a servant."

व्यास उवाच

एवमुक्ते तदा तेन ध्यपो हृद्यानसः ॥ 28 ॥

आगत्य सम्रिधो तूर्ण विश्वासीमतभाषात ।

Vyāsa said: O King! When Viśvāmitra spoke thus, the Cāndāla, overflowed with joy, came immediately to the Rṣi Viśvāmitra and said:

वाण्डाल उवाच

दशयोजनविस्तीर्ण प्रयागस्य च मण्डले ॥ 29 ॥

भूमि रूपमयीं कृत्वा दायले तेर्द हिकोतमा ।

अस्य विक्रयोनेयमार्तिक्ष प्रहता तवया ॥ 30 ॥

“O Dvija! The relief that you have given me by selling this servant, for that I will give you the ten Yoyanas wide land of Prayāga Manḍalam, covered over with jewels.”

व्यास उवाच

ततो रनसहस्वाणी सुवर्णिभागीचितिकः ।

चाण्डालेन प्रदत्तानि जग्राह डिजसत्तमः ॥ 31 ॥

हरिश्छ्रैतया राजा निर्विकारमुखोपभवत् ।

अम्पन्त तथा ध्यायिष्ठिभागे हि ये पति: ॥ 32 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Cāndāla then gave me thousand gems, one thousand jewels, one thousand pearls and one thousand gold mohurs and Viśvāmitra took them. No signs of distraction nor unpleasantness were visible on the face of the King Hariścandra rather he laid hold of his patience and thought within himself.

तत्तेवे मया कार्य यदयं कारिथयिति ।

अर्थात्रिषे सहसा वागुवाचारगीरिधि ॥ 33 ॥

अनुगोर्भस महाभाग दत्ता सा दक्षिणा स्वाय ।

तातो दिवः पुच्यष्टिः पपात नृपपूर्विन ॥ 34 ॥

"Vísvāmitra is now my master; I will do any work that he puts me in." At this time, the incorporeal voice, the voice of the fourth dimensional space, sounded from the Heavens: "O Fortunate One! You are freed from the Dakṣinā, the debt before that you promised to give me." A shower of flowers fell on the head of the King from the Heavens.

Book VII Chapter XXIV

साधु साधिति ते द्वेशः प्रोषु: मैंरा महीज्ञसः ।

हर्षण महत्ताप्रिद्धो राजा कौशिफकमबवीत् ॥ 35 ॥

At this time the powerful Indra and the other hosts of the Devas praised the King, saying: "Sádhu! Sádhu! Well-done, Well-done." The heart of the King was then filled with intense joy and the King then said to Kauśika.

त्वं हि माता पिता वोव त्वं हिं कवभूमंहमते ।

यदर्थं पोचितोर्डे ते क्षणाच्चैवानूणी कृतः ॥ ३६ ॥

किं करोषि महाबाहो श्रेयो मे वचनं तव ।

एवमुनेकं तु वचने नृपं मुपित्यभात् ॥ ३७ ॥

“O Intelligent One! You are a greater benefactor to me then my father, mother and friend as you have freed me in a moment from my debts. So, O mighty armed one! Your words are beneficial to me. Now order what am I to do.”

विश्वामित्र उवाच

चाण्डालतवचनं कार्यमेधापृथिते ने तृप ।

स्वस्ति तेजस्तिति ते प्रोथ्य तदादाय धनं यदो ॥ 38 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणो सतमस्कन्धे हरीक्षन्नीयास्ताने

यजीवितोउधाच्या: 11 23 11

When the King said so, Viśvāmitra then said: "Go and observe from to-day the words of the Cāndāla. Let good befall on you!" Thus saying, the Maharṣi Viśvāmitra took the money given by the Cāndāla and went away to his own place.

Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter of the Seventh Book on the King Hariścandra's acknowledgment of the slavery of the Cāndāla in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XXIV

