CHAPTER II

On the Earth Raised by the Boar

श्रीनारायण उवाच ।
एवं मीमांसतस्तस्य पद्मयोनेः परन्तप ।
मन्वादिभिर्मुनिवरैर्मरीच्याद्यैः समन्ततः ॥ १॥

ध्यायतस्तस्य नासाग्राद्विरञ्चेः सहसानघ ।
वराहपोतो निरगादेकाङ्गुलप्रमाणतः ॥ २॥

Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Child! When you have got your senses controlled and have overcome lust, anger, etc., and other enemies, then you are certainly entitled to hear this secret. While Brahmā was discussing on this subject with Marīci and the other Brahmārṣis and with Svāyambhuva Manu, suddenly there came out of the nose of the meditative Brahmā, one young boar (the child of a boar) of the dimension of one finger only.

तस्यैव पश्यतः खस्थः क्षणेन किल नारद ।
करिमात्रं प्रववृधे तदद्भुततमं ह्यभूत् ॥ ३॥

मरीचिमुख्यैर्विप्रेन्द्रैः सनकाद्यैश्च नारद ।
तद् दृष्ट्वा सौकरं रूपं तर्कयामास पद्मभूः ॥ ४॥

That little boar, that was just in the air, soon became, while they were looking at it, enlarged to a very big elephant, in an instant; a very strange sight, indeed! Seeing this, the Kumāras Sanaka, etc.

, Marīci and the other Seven Ṛṣis, and the Creator Brahmā were struck with wonder and Brahmā began to discuss thus 

किमेतत्सौकरव्याजं दिव्यं सत्त्वमवस्थितम् ।
अत्याश्चर्यमिदं जातं नासिकाया विनिःसृतम् ॥ ५॥

दृष्टोऽङ्गुष्ठशिरोमात्रः क्षणाच्छैलेन्द्रसन्तिभः ।
आहोस्विद्भगवान्किं वा यज्ञो मे खेदयन्मनः ॥ ६॥

Oh! This you have had to come out suddenly of

My nose; though it is a very small one, it is

certainly, comes under a disguise and it has all made us merge in an office of wonder: Is this something Divine, of a Sative quality under the guise of this boar? It was of the size of a thumb and it is now like the Himalaya Mountain?

इति तर्कयतस्तस्य ब्रह्मणः परमात्मनः ।
वराहरूपो भगवाञ्जगर्जाचलसन्निभः ॥ ७॥

विरञ्चिं हर्षयामास संहतांश्च द्विजोत्तमान् ।
स्वगर्जशब्दमात्रेण दिक्प्रान्तमनुनादयन् ॥ ८॥

Oh! Is this the Bhagavān, the- Yajñā Purusha?

While they were thus discussing, the Bhagavān, in

the shape of the boar; began to make a sound, is

like the rolling of the mountain clouds at the time

of the Pralaya resounding all the quarters.


ते निशम्य स्वखेदस्य क्षयितुं घुर्घुरस्वनम् ।
जनस्तपःसत्यलोकवासिनोऽमरवर्यकाः ॥ ९॥

छन्दोमयैः स्तोत्रवरैरृक्सामाथर्वसम्भवैः ।
वचोभिः पुरुषं त्वाद्यं द्विजेन्द्राः पर्यवाकिरन् ॥ १०॥

At this Brahma and all the Rsis assembled there became very glad, Hearing the ghugurha noise of the Boar, their troubles, ended and the people of Janarloka, Taparloka, Satyaloka and all the Deyas being very much gladdened began to chant sweet humms with Chandas of Rk, Yajus, Sama and Atharva Vedas,\( ^{1} \) to that 'Adi Purisa,\( ^{2} \) the Bhagavān, from all'sides.

तेषां स्तोत्रं निशम्याद्यो भगवान् हरिरीश्वरः ।
कृपावलोकमात्रेणानुगृहीत्वाऽऽप आविशत् ॥ ११॥

तस्यान्तर्विशतः क्रूरसटाघातप्रपीडितः ।
समुद्रोऽथाब्रवीद्देव रक्ष मां शरणार्तिहन् ॥ १२॥

'Hearling 'their' praises; the Bhagavān Hari

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

graciously looked on them and immediately merged Himself in the ocean. The ocean was very much agitated with the fierce striking of the hairs of the Boar, when He entered into the waters of your refuges! Protect me."

इत्याकर्णं समुढ्रोक्के वचनं हरितीश्रः ।

विद्यारखसचाराङ्गागारांनलैं लियुः ॥ 13 ॥

इस्ततो2पिधायात्य सिधिवन्यमृथिवी धारण।

आधायाधाय सर्वेशी धारामासादयच्छनैः ॥ 14 ॥

अन्नलैलगतां भृमि सर्वसत्ताभ्यां तत् ।

भूमिं स देवदेवेशो दंध्योवाजहार ताम ॥ 15 ॥

Hearing these words of the ocean, the God Hari tore asunder all the aquatic animals and went down beneath the waters. Searching violently hither and thither, He knew the earth by her smell. At once the Bhagavān Hari, the Lord of all, went to Her and rescued the earth by raising Her up on his big teeth, the Earth that was the abode of all the beings.

तां समुद्युद्य दंघापे यजेगो घनुसुचः ।

शुभुभे दिग्गजो यदुद्धुत्याश सुपधिचीम् ॥ १६ ॥

तं बृह्मा देवदेवेगो विदिति: स मनुः स्वात् ।

नुशा वार्षिवेदेंगे दंईघुतदासून्यम् ॥ १७ ॥

When the Bhagavān, the Lord of all the sacrifices, came up with the Earth on the top of His teeth, He looked beautiful like the elephant of a quarter taking out by the root and holding a thousand petalled lotus his tusks. When the Bhagavān rescued thus the Earth, raising Her up on His tusks, Brahmā and Indra, the Lord of the Devas, the powerful Manu began to praise Him with sweet words:

ब्रह्मोवाच ।
जितं ते पुण्डरीकाक्ष भक्तानामार्तिनाशन ।
खर्वीकृतसुराधार सर्वकामफलप्रद ॥ १८॥

Brahmā said: "O Lotus-eyed! O Bhagavān! Thou art victorious everywhere; O Thou, the Destroyer of the sufferings of the Bhaktas! Thou

hast, by Thy own prowess, humiliated the Heaven, the abode of the gods upto Satyaloka! Thou, the Giver of all the desires! O Deva! This earth shines so beautiful on Thy teeth as the thousand petalled lotus, taken up by the root by a mad elephant, shines on his two tusks.

इर्दे च ते शरीरं वै शोभने घुमिसुङ्गन्ति ।

उद्यूर्ताबुगपुखाकरिग्रिन्नसिषम्मि ॥ 20 ॥

नमो मनसे देवेश सुधिसंहाराकारक ।

दानबानां विज्ञानाय कृतनानाकृते प्रभो ॥ 21 ॥

O Bhagavān! This Form, i.e., that of Thy sacrificial Boar, with earth on Thee looks so very beautiful as the lotus looks beautiful on the tusks of an elephant. O Lord! We bow down to Thee, the Creator and the Destroyer of everything; Thou assumest many forms for the purpose of destroying the Dānavas; Thou dost do many acts that redound to Thy Glory.

अग्रजह नमलैरेस्तु पृछतक्ष नमो नमः ।

सर्वमाराधामृतं बृह्धाद्याम नामो5सु ते ॥ 22 ॥

We bow down to Thee, to Thy Front and to Thy Back. (Really thou hast no front nor back. Thou art everywhere.) Thou art the Upholder of all the Celestials and the Immortals! Thy eyes shine equally everywhere.

स्वायाड़ं च प्रजासर्स निवुक्तः शक्तिकृष्टितः ।

स्वदाज्ञायत: सर्गं क्रौरि विलेजीय च ॥ 23 ॥

स्वासहायेन देहेशा अमराधं पुरा हरे ।

सुधां विभेजिते सर्वे यथाकालं यथाबलम् ॥ 24 ॥

O Deva! By Thy power I am brought up and engaged in the work of creation and by Thy order I create in every Kalpa this Universe and destroy it. O Lord of Immortals! In the ancient times the Devas united churned the vast ocean by Thy help and got according to their merits their due shares. O Hari! Indra, the Lord of the Devas is enjoying the vast kingdom of Heaven, the Trilokas, by Thy Will and appointment. All the Devas worship him.

इज्ञिलोकीयासाअल व्यवायंस्विषिद्वेशतः ।

धुनक्ति लक्ष्मी बहुतं सुरसंधप्रयुक्ति: ॥ 25 ॥

Book VIII Chapter II

वहिं: पावक्ता लक्ष्या जाउराविधिभेदतः ।

देवासुमनुव्याणां कृतोल्यायमां नशा ॥ 2 6 ॥

धर्मताजोउथ चिनुणामधिप: सर्वकर्मनुम् ।

कर्मणां फलताउसौ त्विच्योगादधीश्वः ॥ 2 7 ॥

So the God of Fire has got his burning power and is residing in the bellies of the Devas, the Asuras, men and all other beings and penetrating their bellies, is satisfying all. Yama, the King of Dharma, by Thy appointment, is the Lord of the southern quarters, is presiding over the Pitts and being the witness of all the actions of the Jivas, is awarding duly to them the fruits thereof.

नैक्रीतो रक्षसागीर्णे यज्ञो विर्वनिवारानः ।

सर्वेधां प्राणिचां कर्मसाधी सन्तः प्रजायते ॥ २ ८ ॥

Nairta, the Lord of the Rākṣasas, the witness of all the actions of all the beings, by Thy commandment, is the destroyer of all the obstacles of the devotees that take refuge unto thee, though he is a Yakṣa.

वरणो यादस्मारीणे लोकपालो जलाधिः ।

त्वद्राजालवामाश्रित्य लोकपालत्वमापना: ॥ 29 ॥

The Varuna Deva, by Thy order, has become duly the Lord of the waters, and the Regent of the Loka (Dikpāla).

वायुधीयहः सर्वभूतग्राणनकारणम् ।

जाततत्व निदेशेन लोकपालो जनादुतः ॥ 30 ॥

The Vāyu, the Life of all, the carrier of the smell, has become by Thy order Lokapāla and the Guru of the universe.

कुबेर: किजरादीनां यक्षाणां जीवनाश्रय: ।

त्वद्रात्रातरान: सर्वलेकाप्रे च मान्यभू: ॥ 31 ॥

Kubera, obedient to Thy order, has become the Lord of the Yakṣas and the Kinnaras and is holding a respectful position like other Lokapālas.

ईगानः सर्वेक्रताणामीश्रंताकर: प्रभु: ।

जातो लोकैकशंदोरी सर्वदेवाधिपालकाः ॥ 32 ॥

Ísāna, Who is the destroyer of all the Jivas, has got his Lordship over a quarter by Thy order and is being praised by all the Rudras, the Devas, Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Kinnaras, the men and all the beings.

नमसृष्यं भगवते जगदीगाय कुम्हे ।

यस्यांगभागाः सर्वे हि जाता देवा: सह्वशः ॥ 33 ॥

O Bhagavān! We bow down to Thee, the Lord of the Universe; the innumerable Devas that are seen are merely the small fractions of Thy powers."

नारायण उवाच

एवं सुत्तो विश्युजा भगवानादिपुरुष: ।

लीलावलोकामोरणायनुग्रहमाव्युन्ति ॥ 34 ॥

तदैवाध्यानातं दैर्चं हिरणवाक्षं महासुरुम् ।

रूधानाभधनो भीमं गद्यासाताउवद्धरि: ॥ 35 ॥

तद्रत्कंकद्धियांगे भगवानादिपूरुष: ।

उद्यून्य धरणीं वेलो बंद्या लीलवाउमयुताम् ॥ 36 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Child Nārada! When Brāhmā, the Creator and the Grandsire of the Lokas, praised thus the Ādi Puruṣa Bhagavān, He cast a side long glance at them, offering His Grace, When the Bhagavān, the Sacrificial Boar, was coming up with earth rescued and placed on his teeth, the awful Hiranyāksa, the chief of the Daityas came before Him and obstructed His passage when He killed him by one violent stroke of his club.

निवेश्य लोक-नावेशेणे जगाम स्थानामानतः ।

एन्द्रप्रावतश्रंत्र धरणयुद्धरणं परम् ॥ 37 ॥

श्रणुयावा: पुगान्यश्र पटेच्चरितमुक्तमम् ।

सर्वपारिविन्मुक्ते बैध्वारी गतिमान्युवात् ॥ 38 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे उद्यमलक्ने

दितीयोरधान: ॥ 39 ॥

He was besmeared all over his body with the blood of the Daitya; and thus He came up from the Rasaśtala and placed the earth on the waters. He then went away to His Vaikuntha abode.

O Child Nārada! He who hears or reads devotedly this glorious deed of the Bhagavān and the deliverance of the Earth, will certainly be freed of all his sins and goes to the highest holiest place of Viṣṇu, the Lord of all. There is no doubt in this." Here ends the Second Chapter of the Eighth Book on the uplifting of the Earth by the Sacrificial Boar in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgāvaum

