[Ch 2 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Child! When you have got your senses controlled and have overcome lust, anger, etc., and other enemies, then you are certainly entitled to hear this secret. While Brahmā was discussing on this subject with Marīci and the other Brahmārṣis and with Svāyambhuva Manu, suddenly there came out of the nose of the meditative Brahmā, one young boar (the child of a boar) of the dimension of one finger only.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Child! When you have got your senses controlled and have overcome lust, anger, etc., and other enemies, then you are certainly entitled to hear this secret. While Brahmā was discussing on this subject with Marīci and the other Brahmārṣis and with Svāyambhuva Manu, suddenly there came out of the nose of the meditative Brahmā, one young boar (the child of a boar) of the dimension of one finger only.

[Ch 2 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That little boar, that was just in the air, soon became, while they were looking at it, enlarged to a very big elephant, in an instant; a very strange sight, indeed! Seeing this, the Kumāras Sanaka, etc. , Marīci and the other Seven Ṛṣis, and the Creator Brahmā were struck with wonder and Brahmā began to discuss thus
NEW CORR ENG ──► That little boar, that was just in the air, soon became, while they were looking at it, enlarged to a very big elephant, in an instant; a very strange sight, indeed! Seeing this, the Kumāras Sanaka, etc. , Marīci and the other Seven Ṛṣis, and the Creator Brahmā were struck with wonder and Brahmā began to discuss thus :--

[Ch 2 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Oh! This you have had to come out suddenly of My nose; though it is a very small one, it is certainly, comes under a disguise and it has all made us merge in an office of wonder: Is this something Divine, of a Sative quality under the guise of this boar? It was of the size of a thumb and it is now like the Himalaya Mountain?
NEW CORR ENG ──► come out suddenly of My nose; though it is a very small one, it is certainly, come under a disguise and it has all made us merge in an ocean of wonder. Is this something Divine, of a Sāttvic quality under the guise of this boar? It was of the size of a thumb and it is now like the Himālayā Mountain?

[Ch 2 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Oh! Is this the Bhagavān, the- Yajñā Purusha? While they were thus discussing, the Bhagavān, in the shape of the boar; began to make a sound, is like the rolling of the mountain clouds at the time of the Pralaya resounding all the quarters.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Oh! Is this the Bhagavān, the Yajña Puruṣa? While they were thus discussing, the Bhagavān, in the shape of the boar, began to make loud sounds, like the rolling of the mountain clouds at the time of the Pralaya resounding all the quarters.

[Ch 2 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this Brahma and all the Rsis assembled there became very glad, Hearing the ghugurha noise of the Boar, their troubles, ended and the people of Janarloka, Taparloka, Satyaloka and all the Deyas being very much gladdened began to chant sweet humms with Chandas of Rk, Yajus, Sama and Atharva Vedas,\( ^{1} \) to that 'Adi Purisa,\( ^{2} \) the Bhagavān, from all'sides.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this Brahmā and all the Ṛṣis assembled there became very glad. Hearing the ghurghura noise of the Boar, their troubles ended and the people of Janarloka, Taparloka, Satyaloka and all the Devas being very much gladdened began to chant sweet hymns with Caṇdas of Rik, Yajus, Sāma and Atharva Vedas, to that Ādi Puruṣa, the Bhagavān, from all sides.

[Ch 2 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► 'Hearling 'their' praises; the Bhagavān Hari graciously looked on them and immediately merged Himself in the ocean. The ocean was very much agitated with the fierce striking of the hairs of the Boar, when He entered into the waters of your refuges! Protect me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► their praises, the Bhagavān Hari graciously looked on them and immediately merged Himself in the ocean. The ocean was very much agitated with the fierce striking of the hairs of the Boar, when He entered into the waters,

[Ch 2 Verse 13-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words of the ocean, the God Hari tore asunder all the aquatic animals and went down beneath the waters. Searching violently hither and thither, He knew the earth by her smell. At once the Bhagavān Hari, the Lord of all, went to Her and rescued the earth by raising Her up on his big teeth, the Earth that was the abode of all the beings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing the words of the ocean, the God Hari tore asunder all the aquatic animals and went down beneath the waters. Searching violently hither and thither, He knew the earth by her smell. At once the Bhagavān Hari, the Lord of all, went to Her and rescued the earth by raising Her up on his big teeth, the Earth that was the abode of all the beings.

[Ch 2 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the Bhagavān, the Lord of all the sacrifices, came up with the Earth on the top of His teeth, He looked beautiful like the elephant of a quarter taking out by the root and holding a thousand petalled lotus his tusks. When the Bhagavān rescued thus the Earth, raising Her up on His tusks, Brahmā and Indra, the Lord of the Devas, the powerful Manu began to praise Him with sweet words:
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the Bhagavān, the Lord of all the sacrifices, came up with the Earth on the top of His teeth, He looked beautiful like the elephant of a quarter taking out by the root and holding a thousand petalled lotus upon his tusks. When the Bhagavān rescued thus the Earth, raising Her up on His tusks, Brahmā and Indra, the Lord of the Devas, the powerful Manu began praise to Him with sweet words :--

[Ch 2 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā said: "O Lotus-eyed! O Bhagavān! Thou art victorious everywhere; O Thou, the Destroyer of the sufferings of the Bhaktas! Thou hast, by Thy own prowess, humiliated the Heaven, the abode of the gods upto Satyaloka! Thou, the Giver of all the desires! O Deva! This earth shines so beautiful on Thy teeth as the thousand petalled lotus, taken up by the root by a mad elephant, shines on his two tusks.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- Brahmā said :-- O Lotus-eyed! O Bhagavān! Thou art victorious everywhere; O Thou, the Destroyer of the sufferings of the Bhaktas! Thou hast, by Thy own prowess, humiliated the Heaven, the abode of the gods upto Satyaloka! Thou, the Giver all the desires! O Deva! This earth shines so beautiful on Thy teeth as the thousand petalled lotus, taken up by the root by a mad elephant, shines on his two tusks.

[Ch 2 Verse 19-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Bhagavān! This Form, ॥.e., that of Thy sacrificial Boar, with earth on Thee looks so very beautiful as the lotus looks beautiful on the tusks of an elephant. O Lord! We bow down to Thee, the Creator and the Destroyer of everything; Thou assumest many forms for the purpose of destroying the Dānavas; Thou dost do many acts that redound to Thy Glory.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Bhagavān! This Form, i. e., that of Thy sacrificial Boar, with earth on Thee looks so very beautiful as the lotus looks beautiful on the tusks of an elephant. 21-22. O Lord! We bow down to Thee, the Creator and the Destroyer of everything; Thou assumest many forms for the purpose of destroying the Dānavas; Thou dost do many acts that redound to Thy Glory,

[Ch 2 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We bow down to Thee, to Thy Front and to Thy Back. (Really thou hast no front nor back. Thou art everywhere.) Thou art the Upholder of all the Celestials and the Immortals! Thy eyes shine equally everywhere.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We bow down to Thee, to Thy Front and to Thy Back. (Really thou hast no front nor back. Thou art everywhere.) Thou art the Upholder of all the Celestials and the Immortals! Thy eyes shine equally everywhere.

[Ch 2 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Deva! By Thy power I am brought up and engaged in the work of creation and by Thy order I create in every Kalpa this Universe and destroy it. O Lord of Immortals! In the ancient times the Devas united churned the vast ocean by Thy help and got according to their merits their due shares. O Hari! Indra, the Lord of the Devas is enjoying the vast kingdom of Heaven, the Trilokas, by Thy Will and appointment. All the Devas worship him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Deva! By Thy power I am brought up and engaged in the work of creation and by Thy order I create in every Kalpa this Universe and destroy it. O Lord of Immortals! In the ancient times the Devas united churned the vast ocean by Thy help and got according to their merits their due shares. O Hari! Indra, the Lord of the Devas is enjoying the vast kingdom of Heaven, the Trilokas, by Thy Will and appointment. All the Devas worship him.

[Ch 2 Verse 25-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So the God of Fire has got his burning power and is residing in the bellies of the Devas, the Asuras, men and all other beings and penetrating their bellies, is satisfying all. Yama, the King of Dharma, by Thy appointment, is the Lord of the southern quarters, is presiding over the Pitts and being the witness of all the actions of the Jivas, is awarding duly to them the fruits thereof.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So the God of Fire has got his burning power and is residing in the bellies of the Devas, the Asuras, men and all other beings and penetrating their bellies, is satisfying all. Yama, the King of Dharma, by Thy appointment, is the Lord of the southern quarters, is presiding over the Pitris and being the witness of all the actions of the Jivās, is awarding duly to them the fruits thereof.

[Ch 2 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nairta, the Lord of the Rākṣasas, the witness of all the actions of all the beings, by Thy commandment, is the destroyer of all the obstacles of the devotees that take refuge unto thee, though he is a Yakṣa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nairrita, the Lord of the Rakṣasas, the witness of all the actions of all the beings, by Thy commandment, is the destroyer of all the obstacles of the devotees that take refuge unto thee, though he is a Yakṣa.

[Ch 2 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Varuna Deva, by Thy order, has become duly the Lord of the waters, and the Regent of the Loka (Dikpāla).
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Varuṇa Deva, by Thy order, has become duly the Lord of the waters, and the Regent of the Loka (Dikpāla).

[Ch 2 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Vāyu, the Life of all, the carrier of the smell, has become by Thy order Lokapāla and the Guru of the universe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Vāyu, the Life of all, the carrier of the smell, has become by Thy order Lokāpāla and the Guru of the universe.

[Ch 2 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kubera, obedient to Thy order, has become the Lord of the Yakṣas and the Kinnaras and is holding a respectful position like other Lokapālas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kuvera, obedient to Thy order, has become the Lord of the Yakṣas and the Kinnaras and is holding a respectful position like other Lokapālas.

[Ch 2 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Ísāna, Who is the destroyer of all the Jivas, has got his Lordship over a quarter by Thy order and is being praised by all the Rudras, the Devas, Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Kinnaras, the men and all the beings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Īśāna, Who is the destroyer of all the Jīvas, has got his Lordship over a quarter by Thy order and is being praised by all the Rudras, the Devas, Gandharbas, Yakṣas, Kinnaras, the men and all the beings.

[Ch 2 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Bhagavān! We bow down to Thee, the Lord of the Universe; the innumerable Devas that are seen are merely the small fractions of Thy powers."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Bhagavān! We bow down to Thee, the Lord of the Universe; the innumerable Devas that are seen are merely the small fractions of Thy powers.

[Ch 2 Verse 34-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyana said: O Child Nārada! When Brāhmā, the Creator and the Grandsire of the Lokas, praised thus the Ādi Puruṣa Bhagavān, He cast a side long glance at them, offering His Grace, When the Bhagavān, the Sacrificial Boar, was coming up with earth rescued and placed on his teeth, the awful Hiranyāksa, the chief of the Daityas came before Him and obstructed His passage when He killed him by one violent stroke of his club.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Narayaṇa said :-- “O Child Nārada! When Brahmā, the Creator and the Grandsire of the Lokas, praised thus the Ādi Puruṣa Bhagavān, He cast a side long glance at them, offering His Grace. When the Bhagavān, the Sacrificial Boar, was coming up with earth, rescued and placed on his teeth, the awful Hiraṇyaksa, the chief of the Daityas came before Him and obstructed His passage when He killed him by one violent stroke of his club.

[Ch 2 Verse 37-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He was besmeared all over his body with the blood of the Daitya; and thus He came up from the Rasaśtala and placed the earth on the waters. He then went away to His Vaikuntha abode. O Child Nārada! He who hears or reads devotedly this glorious deed of the Bhagavān and the deliverance of the Earth, will certainly be freed of all his sins and goes to the highest holiest place of Viṣṇu, the Lord of all. There is no doubt in this." Here ends the Second Chapter of the Eighth Book on the uplifting of the Earth by the Sacrificial Boar in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa. Srimaddevibhāgāvaum
NEW CORR ENG ──► He was besmeared all over his body with the blood of the Daitya; and thus He came up from the Rasātala and placed the earth on the waters. He then went away to His Vaikuṇṭha abode. O Child Nārada! He who hears or reads devotedly this glorious deed of the Bhagavān and the deliverance of the Earth, will certainly be freed of all his sins and goes to the highest holiest place of Viṣṇu, the Lord of all. There is no doubt in this.” Here ends the Second Chapter of the Eighth Book on the uplifting of the Earth by the Sacrificial Boar in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
