CHAPTER XXXVII

On the Eighty-six Kunđas

धर्मोरज उवाच

पूर्णैनुप्रंडलाकारं सर्वे कुणई च वर्तुलम् ।

निर्भं पाणाणधेप्रेषच पाचितं बहुषिः: सति ॥ १ ॥

न नर्षर च प्रलयं निर्मितं चेधोर्च्छया ।

क्लेश्रं पातकानां च नानास्तः तदालयम् ॥ 2 ॥

Dharmarāja said: “All the Kūndas (hells) are circular in form like the Full Moon. Of these, the Vahnikūndā has the fire lit at its bottom, by the help of various kinds of stones. This Kūndā will not be destroyed till Mahāpralaya comes. Here the sinners are tormented severely.

ज्वल्ल्यारक्यं च शतस्तसगिखात्वितम् ।

परितः क्रोमानं च बह्दिकूपं प्रकर्पितत् ॥ 3 ॥

मह शर्द प्रकृतिद्वः पाधिभः पधिपृत्तिम ।

रक्षितं मम दूतैरश ताक्तिदेशपति संततम् ॥ 4 ॥

It looks like a blazing coke. The flames are rising from it one hundred hands high. In circumference those flames are two miles. This is named Vahnikunā. It is full of sinners crying loudly. It is constantly watched by My messengers who are chastising and punishing the sinners.

प्रत्नोदकर्णु च हिंसर्जुसमन्त्रितम् ।

महापोरं काकुशबं प्रहोरण दृदेन च ॥ 5 ॥

कोशाध्यानं तदुत्तैस्त्राडितैमं पार्वैंः ।

तन्त्रक्षातोदकैः पूर्ण पुनः काकैक्ष संकुलम् ॥ 6 ॥

Next comes the Tapta Kunda. It is filled with hot water and full of rapacious animals. The sinners there are severely beaten by My messengers and they are always crying out very loudly, which is being echoed and re-echoed all around terribly. It

extends for one mile. This Kunda is filled with hot salt water and the abode of many crows.

संकुलं पाधिषिधीय ब्रोगमानं भयानकम् ।

ग्राहीति शब्दं कुर्विंद्रमांन दूतैध तार्धितः ॥ ७ ॥

प्रचलिड्नताहीः शुककंठोछातुलैकः ।

विद्धभित्य कृर्ण पूर्णी क्षोभगर्भा च कुस्तिस्तम् ॥ ८ ॥

Then there is the Bhayānaka Kunda. It extends for two miles and it is filled with sinners. They are being punished by My messengers and they are incessantly crying ‘Save us, Save us.’ Next comes the Viṣṭhā Kunda. It is filled with foeces and excrements, where the sinners are moving without any food and with their palates and throats dry.

अतिरुर्गान्ससंसक्त्वायां पार्थिभिन्वहम् ।

ताडितीमंन दूतिधः सुतदाहीः सुतादणेः ॥ 9 ॥

श्वेति शब्दं कुर्विद्रसन्तकीटैरेव बर्षितः ।

तदपूगद्वरेः पूर्ण मुकाकौटिं शंकुम्म ।। 10 ॥

युक्ते महापातिक्रिभित्यकीटैर्यक्षितेः सदा ।

गव्यूतिमानं ध्यांताकर्ते शब्दकृद्धिह सतम् ॥ 11 ॥

Its size is two miles and it is very bad and ugly, with foetid and nasty smell. It is always filled with sinners, who are being chastised by My Dūtas (messengers) and eat those foecs and excrements. The worms therein are constantly biting and stinging them and they are crying ‘deliver us, deliver us.’ Then comes the hot Mūttra Kunda. It is filled with the hot urine and the worms thereof. The great sinners always dwell here. It measures four miles; and it is quite dark.

Book IX Chapter XXXVII

महैस्तातिडितैधरै: शुकककोडितालुके: ।

ग्लेशमपूर्ण प्रगामित तत्वहौरे: परितं तदा ॥ 12 ॥

तद्धोतिभः पाणिभिश्व वेहितः सदा ।

कोशार्यं गरकुंडं च गरभोजिभिन्यतम् ॥ 13 ॥

My Dūtas always beat them and their throats, lips, palates are all dry. Then comes the Ślesma Kuṇḍa. It is filled with phlegm and the insects thereof. The sinners dwell in phlegm and eat that phlegm. Then comes the Gara Kuṇḍa. It is filled with (factitious) poison. It measures one mile. The sinners eat this poison and dwell here.

गरकौदीर्धितिह यापिथि: पूर्णमेव च ।

तादितेमंन दुतेश शब्दकुन्द्रिक कंतेति: ॥ १४ ॥

सपांकारैवंजदईः शुल्ककंतेः सुराकृतेः ।

नेवयोमेनुपणं च कोशणों कीटसंयुन्त्र ॥ १ ५ ॥

The worms thereof bite them. They tremble at the chastisement of My Dūtas and cry aloud. My messengers look like serpents, with teeth like thunderbolt and they are very furious an fierce, with their throats dry and their words very harsh. Then comes Dūsīkā Kuṇḍa. It is filled with the rheum and dirt of the eyes and it measures one mile. Innumerable worms are born therein.

पाधिभि: संकुलं शब्धव्यमाद्वि: कॉदीवधक्षिति ।

वसारसेने संपूर्णं क्रीतगुर्वे सुदुःसहम् ॥ १६ ॥

तद्धोतिभि: पातकिमिभिम दुतेघा तातक्षे ।

शुक्कुंकं क्रीभालितं शुक्कबीटेघुं सर्वतुम् ॥ १७ ॥

Numberless sinners live there, and as they move, the insects immediately bite and sting them. Next comes the Vasā Kūndā It is filled with the serum or marrow of the flesh and it measures one-half mile. The sinners dwell there, chastised and punished by My messengers. Then comes the Śukra Kūndā. It measures two miles in diameter. The insects, born in the semen, bite the sinners, and they move on and on.

पाणिभि: संकुलं शश्युद्वस्द्धि: कीटभक्षिति: ।

दुर्गधित्रकर्णु च चाणियानं भयीरकम् ॥ १८ ॥

तद्धोर्जिभि: पाणिभिश्र संकुलं कीटभक्षितम् ।

पूर्ण नैत्राशुभित्तनं बहुपार्थिभिरन्यितम् ॥ १९ ॥

वाणीतुर्ध्रमाणं च रुद्धिः: कीटभक्षितः ।

Then comes the Rakta Kuṇḍa, with very offensive, footed smell. It is deep like a well and filled with blood. The sinners dwell here, drinking blood. The insects therein are always biting them. Then follows the Asru Kuṇḍa. It measures in size one fourth the measure of the well (above-mentioned). It is always filled with hot tears of eyes; and many sinners are seen there living weeping and crying and being bitten by the snakes.

नृणां मात्रमलैयुक्तं तद्वक्षे: पार्थिवर्भुन्ति || 20 ॥

तातिथीनं दूरीध व्यप्रेण कौभ्यक्षिते: ।

कर्णविद्यपिणुं च तद्वक्षे: पार्थिवर्भुन्ति || 21 ॥

वायीतुर्णेमणं च बुवाद्धे: कौभ्यक्षिते: ।

Then there is the Gātra Mala Kuṇḍa. The sinners are chastised and punished there by My messengers and being bitten by the insects thereof, they eat the dirts of the body and dwell there. Then comes the Karna Mala Kuṇḍa. The sinners eat the wax of the ear and fill the place. The insects always bite them and they are crying aloud. It measures one fourth the measure of a Vāpi.

मज्जापूर्ण नराणां च महावुर्गाधिसंयुन्ति ॥ 22 ॥

महापातकिषिधुक्तं वाणीतुर्णमाणकम् ।

परिषृणं निरन्यासौर्मेन मुंत्रेच तार्तिके ॥ 23 ॥

पाणिधि: संकुलं चैव वाणीमानं भयानकः ।

Then comes the Majjā Kunda. It is filled with fat and marrow, emitting footed offensive odour. It measures one fourth the measure of a Vāpī. The great sinners always dwell there. Then comes the Māmsa Kūndā. This is filled with the greasy flesh. If measures (one-fourth) that of a Vāpī.

कन्याविक्रविभिर्भवैव तद्व्यै: कौटभक्रिति: ॥ 24 ॥

पाहीति शब्द कुर्विद्वस्तिसैतच भयानकः ।

वागीतुर्भिभागं च नवातिकचतुष्यम् ॥ 25 ॥

पाणिधि: संयुतं शब्धनाम दूतैरच ताक्षितः ।

Those who sell their daughters dwell here. My messengers always chastise and punish them and horrible insects bite and sting them and they cry, out of fear and agony, 'Save us, Save us,' and eat

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

at times that flesh. Then come in succession the four Kuṇḍas Nakha, Loma and others. They also measure each one-fourth that of a Vāpi. The sinners dwell there, always chastised by My messengers.

प्रस्तताप्रकुंचे च तापोपर्युकृताचित्म् ॥ 26 ॥

तापाणां प्रतिमाल्यः प्रतलेव्यांत सदा ।

Next comes the very hot Tāmra Kunda. Burning cokes exist on the top of very hot coppers. There are lakhs and lakhs of very hot copper figures in that Kunda.

प्रत्येक प्रतिमारिष्ठः स्वद्धि: पार्थिभियुन्ति || 27 ॥

ग्व्युतिमानं विस्तीर्णं मम दूतैरच ताविहैः ।

प्रतपतलोहारं च ज्वललैगासंसुन्ति ॥ 28 ॥

लोहानां प्रतिमाशिले हविद्धः पाचिभिन्तुम् ।

प्रत्येक प्रतिमाशिले: शब्रज्ञजलितेपिता ॥ 29 ॥

The sinners, being compelled by My messengers, are made to embrace each of these hot copper figures and they cry loudly and live there. It measures four miles. Then come the burning Angāra Kuṇḍa and the hot Lauha Dhāra Kuṇḍa. Here the sinners are made to embrace the hot iron figures and, feeling themselves burnt, cry out of fear and agony.

रक्ष रक्षेति शब्दं च कुर्वीद्धूर्तताविति: ।

महापातिकीभूवंर्ते द्विव्यूनितिमाणकाम ॥३० ॥

भयानके ध्वतावृक्तं लोकुक्ते प्रक्रवितितम् ।

चर्मकुं तत्सूपाकुं वाय्यमीय च ॥ ३१ ॥

Whenever My messengers punish them they immediately cry out ‘Save us, Save us.’ It measures eight miles; and it is pitch dark and very awful. This is named the hot Lauha Kuṇḍa. Then come the Carma Kuṇḍa and Surā Kuṇḍa. The sinners, beaten by My men, eat the skin and drink the hot urine and dwell there.

तद्वीपिपाधिभिथार्म मन दूतेश्च ताकितः ।

अतः शामलिङ्ठं च बूबकंटकशीभितम् ॥ ३२ ॥

लक्ष्मीरमानं च कौशमानं च दुःखदम् ।

धनुमर्गेः कंटकैश्न सृतौक्षणेः परिवेशितम् ॥ ३३ ॥

Then comes the Sālmali Kunda; it is overspread with thorns and thorny trees, causing intense pain.

It measures two miles. Millions and millions of great sinners are made by My men to fall from the tops of those trees down below where their bodies get pierced by very sharp thorns, six feet long; and thus they dwell there, beaten by My men.

प्रत्येक विद्वापात्रिश्च महापातिकीभयुक्ति ।

चूक्षाग्रासिताद्विज्ञ मम दूर्तेध पातिनेः ॥ 34 ॥

जलं देहिति शब्द च कुर्बाद्धः शुक्रातलुर्केः ।

महाभियास्तिव्यीघु दारड़े: संभनमस्तकें: ॥ 35 ॥

Out of thirst, their palates get dried up; and they cry out repeatedly ‘Water, Water,’ Out of fear, they get very anxious and then their heads get broken by the clubs brought down on them by My men. So they move there like the beings burnt in very hot oil.

प्रचल्टिद्रयंथा तपतैलजीविभिवे च ।

विपदैस्तब्धाकाणां च पूर्व च कोआगनाकम् ॥ 36 ॥

तद्वक्षे: पाधिपियुक्ते मम दूर्तेश तातक्षे: ।

प्रतपतैलपूर्ण च कीटादिप्रविजितम् ॥ 37 ॥

Then comes the Visoda Kūndā. It measures two miles in diameter and is filled with the poison of the serpent called Taksakas. My men punish the sinners and they drink the poison thereof and dwell there. Then comes the hot Taila Kūndā. There are no insects here. Only the great sinners dwell.

महापाताकिभिन्धुरैंक दर्शभांगरिषर चेहितम् ।

काकुशर्द्धि उपहिन्दैषुकौद्वैर्दैयाप्रिकि: ॥ 38 ॥

ध्वातयुक्ते क्रीशमानं क्लेशादं च भयानकम् ।

गूलाकारै: सुतीक्षणालैहंशलैश्चर वेहितम् ॥ 39 ॥

All around burning coals are flaring and when My men beat the sinners, they run hither and thither. It is filled with horrible intense darkness and it is exceedingly painful. It looks dreadful and measures two miles. Then comes the Kunta Kunḍa. Sharp pointed iron weapons like tridents are placed in order all round.

शस्तत्प्वस्वरूपं च मोशतुर्वीप्रमाणकम् ।

वेहितं वयताकिभि: कृतविद्वेक्षि वेहितः ॥ 40 ॥

ताडितीमेन पूतेष शुक्रकंठीक्षितागृकैः ।

कौटैक्ष शुक्रप्रमिते: सर्पमानैर्पयंकरेः ॥ 41 ॥

Book IX Chapter XXXVIII

तैश्यादंतैरच विफृतैल्यांतं ध्यान्तुतं सति ।

महापानतिक्रियुक्ते मम दूतैरच ताक्रिटि: ॥ 42 ॥

The sinners, pierced by those weapons, are seen encircling the Kunḍa. It measures one-half mile. Beaten by My men, their throats and lips get dried up. Then comes the Krmi Kunḍa. It is filled with terrible worms and insects, snake, like-with sharp teeth, of the size of a Śañku (a Sāl tree) deformed and hideous looking; and it is filled with pitch darkness, terrible to look at. Beaten by My men, the great sinners dwell there.

द्विष्यतिभ्रमाणं च पूयकुंड प्रचक्षते ।।

तद्वक्षे: प्राणियर्भिकृं मन दूरैंतः ताडितः ॥ 43 ॥

तालवृक्षयमाणैं सर्वक्रौटिभिरावृतम् ।

सर्वेश्विताग्रैंय पालिभि: सर्भपिंक्षिते: ॥ 44 ॥

Then comes the Pūya Kuṇḍa. It measures eight miles in diameter (or in circumference?). The sinners dwell and eat the puss; thereof and, are beaten by My men. Then comes the Sarpa Kuṇḍa. Millions and millions of snakes of the length of a Tāl tree are existing there. These serpents encircle the sinners and as they bite them.

संकुलं शब्दकूद्रिक्ष मन दूतेक्ष ताक्तिकः ।

कुण्डत्रयं मगादीनों पूर्णं च मगकाविकिधि: ॥ 4 5 ॥

सर्वे क्रीणार्यमानं च मगुपातकिक्यितून ।

हस्पावादिवद्धिक्ष शतनीघेन लोकिंतः ॥ 46 ॥

हाहेति शब्दे कुर्वादिस्ताविदीन मापरिः ।

My men also beat them at the same time. So there arises a general hue and cry. 'Save us, Save us; we are done for.' Then come in order the Damša Kunḍa, Maśaka Kunḍa, and the Garala Kunḍa. These are filled with gad-flies, mosquitoes, and poison respectively. Each of them measures one mile. The sinners hands and feet are tied up. So when the gad-flies and mosquitoes fiercely sting them, and My men violently beat them simultaneously, they raise a loud uproar and are made to move on, in their tied states by My persons.

यज्ञवृहिका: कृपई तान्यां च परिपूर्तिन् ॥ 47 ॥

वाय्यर्धे पारिभियुक्तं चजुवृषिकर्निगते: ।

कुण्डत्रयं मग्राईनां तैरेव परिपूर्तिन् ॥ 48 ॥

Their bodies get thoroughly reddened and covered with blood by the stinging of the flies, etc. Then come the Vajra Kūnda and the Vṛsāka Kūndā filled respectively with Vajra insects and the scorpions. Each of them measures one-half that of the Vāpī. The sinners that dwell there, are incessantly bitten by insects (Vajras and scorpions. Then come in order the Śara Kūnda, Śūla Kūndā, and the Khādga Kūndas. They are filled respectively with arrows, spikes, and scimitars. Each of them measures one half that of the Vāpī.

तिंविद्धः पार्थिविभूतं काव्यधरं तनलोहितेः ।

तततोयोदकः पूर्ण सद्यांत गोलकुषाकम् ॥ 49 ॥

कोंटे: शंकुसमानैक्ष भक्षिते पार्थिविभूतन् ।

वाय्यधामनं भौतैष प्रापिधि: कॉटपत्रिहि: ॥ 50 ॥

The sinners are pierced by arrows, etc., and become covered over with blood and dwell there. Then comes the Gola Kūṇḍa. It is filled with boiling hot water and it is pitch dark. The sinners live there, bitten by the insects. This Kūṇḍa measures half that of the Vāpi. The insects bite them and My men beat them; so their fear knows no bounds; everyone of them is weeping and crying loudly.

रुद्रिः क्रीशमानेश्च मन दूरैंठ तार्तिः ।

अतिरुर्धिंधसंयुक्त दुःखदे पर्पिता सदा ॥ ५१ ॥

दारुनीदिकृताकारभैक्षितं पार्थिविभूतम् ।

वाय्यधे परिपूर्ण च जलयेर्नैकक्रौदिधि: ॥ ५२ ॥

This Kunja is filled with hideously offensive smells. So the pains of the sinners are infinite. The Nakra Kunja comes next. It measures half the Vāpī, is filled with millions and millions of crocodiles living in water. The horrible looking deformed sinners live there. The Kāka Kunja then follows.

विषमूत्रलेवमपश्रेष्ठ स्तुतं शतकोदिभि: ।

काकैक्ष विकृताकारैर्धक्षिते: पार्थिविभूतम् ॥ 53 ॥

मावानुकुर्दे बीकुकुर्दं ताथ्यों पूर्णे धनुःशनम् ।

भक्षितेः पार्थिविभूतैनं शब्दकृद्धिक्षं संतनम् ॥ 54 ॥

The sinners here are being bitten by hundreds of deformed crows eating focces, urines and

phlegm. Then come the Manthāna Kuṇḍa and Bijā Kuṇḍa. These are filled respectively with insects called Manthāna and Bijā. Each of them measures one hundred Dhanus. (One Dhanu=four hastas) Those insects are stinging the sinners and they cry out very loudly. Then follows the Vajra Kuṇḍa.

धनुःशतं जीवयुक्तं पापिभिः सङ्कुलं सदा ।
शब्दकृद्भिर्वज्रदंष्ट्रैः सान्द्रध्वान्तमयं परम् ॥ ५५॥

वापीद्विगुणमानं च तप्तप्रस्तरनिर्मितम् ।
ज्वलदङ्गारसदृशं चलद्भिः पापिभिर्युतम् ॥ ५६॥

It measures one hundred Dhanus. Many insects with their teeth as hard as thunderbolt live there and bite the sinners who cry out loudly. It is pitch dark. Then comes the hot Pāṣāṇa Kuṇḍa. It measures twice that of the Vāpi. It is so built of hot stones as it resembles a burning mass of coal. Th sinners become restless with the heat and turn round and round in the middle. Then comes the Pāṣāṇa Kuṇḍa and the Lālā Kuṇḍa. The Pāṣāṇa. Kuṇḍa is made up of the sharp pointed stones, having sharp edges.

क्षुरधारोपमैस्तीक्ष्णैः पाषाणैर्निर्मितं परम् ।
महापातिक्रियकृतं लालाकृष्टं च लोहितः ॥ 57 ॥

कोशगातं च गंभीरं मम दूरीढ़ ताहितः ।

ततार्जानाचलाकारः परिपूर्ण धनुःशतम् ॥ 58 ॥

चलढ़िः पार्थिवर्फ़े मम दूरीढ़ ताहितः ।

पूर्ण चूर्णद्रजेः क्रोगमानं पार्थिवर्षित्वन्ति ॥ 59 ॥

Innumerable sinners dwell there. Many red beings live in the Lālā Kuṇḍa. Then comes the Mahī Kuṇḍa. Its size is one hundred Dhanus and its depth is two miles. It is made up of hot stones, each measuring the Anjāna mountain. The sinners, beaten and driven by My persons, move on and on in the middle. Then comes the Cūrṇa Kuṇḍa. It measures two miles (in circumference) and is filled with (seven) cūrṇas (powders).

तद्रोकिंभ: प्रदार्थेपच मन दूतेश्च ताकितः ।

कूणंड कुललचकं च घुणीमानं च संतलम् ॥ 60 ॥

सुतीक्षा घोडणारे च चूर्णितेः पाधिविधून् ।

The sinners, driven and beaten My men, go on,

restless hither and thither and eat the powders and get themselves burnt. Then comes the Cakra Kuṇḍa. Here a potter's wheel sixteen sharp-edged spokes is constantly whirling round and round; the sinners are being crushed by this wheel.

अत्तीव चक्र निम्न च द्विगत्यूपिमागकान् ॥ 61 ॥

कंदराकारिनिगा तनोटेशच तनोटिंश्च समवित्यान् ।

महापातकिषियुक्तं पश्रितैर्जजकुर्जभः ॥ 62 ॥

जल्दिक्र: शब्दकूद्ध्रक्ष्वतुभयनाक् ।

Then comes the Vakra Kunḍa. It depth is eight miles. It is fashioned very much curved; and with and sharp slope it has gone down. It is built on the plan of a mountain cave, filled with hot water and it is enveloped with deep dense darkness. The aquatic animals there are biting the sinners, who get very much restless and are crying out very loudly. Then comes the Kūrma Kunḍa.

कोटिभिर्विकृताकाताः: कच्छयेष सुरावभोः ॥ 63 ॥

जल्पधे: संगुत तैश्य भ्रविष्यान् ।

जालाकलापैसेतोभिनिर्मितेः क्रीभागनम् ॥ 64 ॥

गब्दिकूपिट: पाताकिभि: संगुतं क्लेशदं सदा ।

क्रीभागनं च भापीरं ततन्यमविपरिन्यत् ॥ 65 ॥

Here millions and millions of tortoises in the water awfully distorted, are bitting the sinners. Then comes the Jvālā Kunḍa. It is built of fierce fiery flames. It measures two miles in circumference. The sinners here are always in great difficulty, with intense pain and crying out loudly. Next follows the Bhasma Kunḍa. It measures two miles.

शकुञ्जलिद्र: संयुक्तं पाविधिभर्मवधिक्षितः ।

तत्पायाणलोहानां स्मूर्ते: परिपूर्ति: ॥ 66 ॥

The sinners get themselves well burnt in hot ashes and live there, eating the ashes. It is filled with hot stones and hot irons. The sinners here are always being burnt in hot irons and hot stones and their throats and palates are being parched up.

पाधिविर्यायात्रीय युक्तं च गुण्यकालुफैः ।

कोशमानां ध्यातंयुक्तं नाभीयमितद्यारुभम् ॥ 67 ॥

ताडितैश प्रदर्भेश दरभकुं प्रकर्पितिंम् ।

Book IX Chapter XXXVII

अतीवीर्मितुं तोयं प्रतनक्षारसंयुतून् ॥ 68 ॥

नागप्राकर्षिकर्सैजलंर्गुभित्यवतम् ।

Then comes the Dagdha Kūndā. It is deep and horrible. It measures two miles in circumference. My messengers threaten always the sinners there. Then comes the Sūci Kūndā. It is filled with salt water. Waves are always rising there. It is filled with various aquatic animals making all sorts of noises.

घ्राव्यतिप्रामणं च गम्भीरं ध्वांतसंयुतम् ॥ 69 ॥

तद्वश्रैः पाचिभ्युक्तं दंशितैंलजतैपि: ।

ज्लिद्धः शब्दकृद्धड्र न पश्यद्धः परस्यम् ॥ 70 ॥

It measures eight miles in circumference and it is deep and dark. The sinners here cannot see each other and are bitten by the animals. Pained very much, they cry out loudly. Then comes the Asipattra Kūndā. On the top surface of the Kūndā there is a very big Tāl tree very high.

प्रतनसूचीकुर्षं च कीर्तितं च भवानकम् ।

असीव धारापत्रसाय्युचैस्तालतोरधः ॥ 71 ॥

कोशाध्यानं कुंचे च पतत्यत्रमन्यितम् ।

पापिनां रक्तपूर्णं च वृक्षाग्रावततां धूबम् ॥ 72 ॥

परित्राहीत शब्द च कुर्वंतमसतामपि ।

गाफीरं घतांतयुक्तं च रक्तकोदसन्त्यितम् ॥ 73 ॥

The edges of the leaves of this tree are sharp like the edge of a sword. One mile below this Tāl tree is situated the Kūnda. The sharpedged Tāl leaves, then, fall on the bodies of the sinners from the height of a mile and they get cut and wounded; blood comes out of them and the sinners, in great pain, cry out ‘save, save.’ It is very deep, very dark and filled with Rakta Kitā a kind of blood like insects.

तदसीपत्र कुंडं च कीर्तितं च भयानकम् ।

धनु:शतप्रमाणं च क्षुरधारासंभुतम् ॥ 74 ॥

पापियां तक्पूर्णं च क्षुरधारं भयानकम् ।

मूचीभुखीस्त्रसंयुक्तं पापित्तीघपूरितम् ॥ 75 ॥

This is the horrible Asipatra Kuṇḍa. Next comes the Kṣura Dhāra Kuṇḍa, measuring one hundred Dhanus (one Dhanu=four hastas). It is filled with

keenedged weapons, as sharp as nice razors. The blood of the sinners is flowing here profusely. Then comes the Śucī Mukha Kuṇḍa filled with sharp weapons of the form of long needles.

पडाशब्दुर्गरायमं क्लेशदं सूचिकामुखम् ।

कस्यचिजन्तुषेचस्य गोकाख्यस्य मुखाकृति ॥ 76 ॥

कूपकरं च गम्भीरं धनुर्विशत्रमागकम् ।

महापातकिनां चैव महल्लेशप्रदं पर्च ॥ 77 ॥

तल्कीटभक्षितानां च नमास्यानां च संततम् ।

It measures fifty Dhanus. The sinners get pierced by them and are constantly emitting blood. Their intense pain knows no bounds. Then comes the Gokāmukha Kunda; inhabited by a sort of insect, called Gokā. They look like mouths; hence they are named Gokāmukha. It is deep like a well and it measures twenty Dhanus. The great sinners suffer an intense amount of pain there. They have got to keep their mouths always downwards as the Gokā insects always bite and sting them.

कुण्ड नकमुखाकां धनु:पोड्डगामनकूम ॥ 78 ॥

गम्भीरं पापसूचं च पापिभ्रः संकुले सदा ।

धनु:शलगमाणं च कांतिैतं गवढेशनम् ॥ 79 ॥

Then comes the Nakra Kunda. It resembles like the mouth of a crocodile and measures sixteen Dhanus. It is deep like a well and numbers of sinners dwell there. Then comes the Gaja Damša Kunḍa.

धनु:खिलामणां च कुंडं च गोग्याखुकात् ।

पार्थिनां कलेशनं शग्रवद्गोगुर्षे परिकीर्तिन् ॥ 80 ॥

It measures one hundred Dhanus. Next comes the Gomukha Kunḍa. It measures thrity Dhanus and resembles the mouth of a cow. It gives incessant pains and troubles to the sinners.

कालचक्रेना संयुक्तं ध्रममाणं भयानकम् ।

कृम्भाकारं धर्तयुक्तं द्विग्व्यतिभगणकम् ॥ 81 ॥

Then comes the Kumbhipāka Kuṇḍa. It is like a wheel resembling that of the Kālacakra, very horrible; and it is rotating incessantly. It looks like a water-jar, measuring eight miles, and it is quite dark.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

लक्षपौरभमानं च गम्भीरं विस्तृतं सति ।

कृपचित्तपतलेलं च तापाविकुडेवेच च ॥ 82 ॥

पापिनां च प्रधान्येय मूर्दित: कृमिधित्युत् ।

पत्सरं च नर्यद्धिभः शब्दकुर्विश्रक्षे संत्ति ॥ 83 ॥

Its depth is one lakh Purusas of the height of 100,000 persons. There are many other Kunḍas, Tapta Taila Kunda and Tapta Taila Tāmra Kunḍa, etc., within it. This Kunda is filled with almost unconscious great sinners and insects. They beat each other and cry out loudly.

तातिदेवमदुळेघ मुसलैमूद्रैस्तथा ।

यूर्णमानै: पतन्द्रिभ्य मृद्धितेश्र क्षणं क्षणम् ॥ 84 ॥

पातितैर्मद्वर्तैष्ठ हटन्यस्माखणं पुनः ।

यावत्न: पायिन: संति सर्वकुंडेषु सुंदिर ॥ 85 ॥

My messengers also threaten them with clubs and Musalas. So at times they fall dizzy-headed, at times they get unconscious, and sometimes they get up and cry. O Fair One! The numbers of sinners here equal to four times that of all the other sinners in the other Kundas.

ततश्रुगुंग: सन्ति कुम्भीपाके च दुःखदे।

सुचिरं वध्यानातसे भोगदेहा न नश्वा: ॥ 86 ॥

They know no death, however much you beat them. Their lives persist. For the body is built up for sufferance, it is indestructible.

सर्वकुंडप्रधानं च कृम्भीपाकं प्रक़ीर्तिन् ।

कालर्गमितिपूर्णे निविद्धा चय पापिन: ॥ 87 ॥

उत्यापितारच दूतैरच क्षणमेव मिविजिता: ।

निश्रासबद्धा: सुचिरं तथा मोहं गता: पुनः ॥ 88 ॥

अतीव क्लेशसंयुक्ता देहघोगेने सुंदरी ।

प्रततोययुक्तं च कालसूरं प्रक्रांतितम् ॥ 89 ॥

अवटः कुपचेढ़ा मल्योदः स उदाहतः ।

प्रततोयपूर्ण च चतुर्वित्यमाणकम् ॥ 90 ॥

This Kumbhipāka Kūṇā is the chief of all the Kuṇḍas. This Kūṇā where the sinners are tied to a thread built by Kāla, where My men lift the sinners on high at one time, and sink them down below at another time, where the sinners becoming suffocated for a long time, get unconscious, where their sufferings know no bounds, where it is filled

with boiling oil, is named the Kālasūtra Kuṇḍa Then comes the Matsyoda Kuṇḍa, hollow like a well. It is filled with boiling water and it measures twenty-four Dhanus.

व्यापतं महापापिधित्यादायांशीक्षे संततम् ।

मदूतैस्तात्रिकै: शश्वद्वटेदं प्रकर्पितिंम् ॥ 91 ॥

यत्रोदस्यर्गमातेगर सर्वेक्षाप्रियेषु पापपिनम् ।

भवेदकस्मात्ततां यस्मल्कुंके छे.पृजते ॥ 92 ॥

Next comes the Avatoda Kunda. It measures one hundred Dhanus. The sinners get their bodies burned and chastised by My persons, live there. No sooner they drop into the water of this Kunda, than they are attacked with all sorts of diseases. Then comes the Krmikantuka Kunda.

अन्रतुर्दैभिश्रैतनु प्राणिभिवर्च्च संकुलम् ।

हाहिति शब्दं कुर्विद्धसर्वेकानुरं विषु: ॥ 93 ॥

तत्पारंभुर्भिताकीर्णं ज्वलिद्धसुनुवधधकैः ।

तद्धक्षेः पार्थिविरुक्तं पासुभोजैर्युग्रान् ॥ 94 ॥

The sinners are bitten by the Krimi Kantuka insects and cry out loudly, creating a general consternation and live there. Its another names is Arun tunda Kunda. Next comes the Pārisu Kunda. It measures one hundred Dhanus. It is overspread with burning rice husks.

पातामाश पाणी च पाशेग वेहितो भवेत् ।

कोशमाजेण कुईं च तत्णारवेछने विदुः ॥ 95 ॥

पापमाजेण पाणी च शूलेन वेहितो भवेत् ।

धनुर्विशताम्बां च शूलप्रोतं प्रकीर्तिन् ॥ 96 ॥

The sinners eat those hot husks and live there. Then comes the Pāsaveśtana Kunda. It measures two miles. No sooner the sinners fall in this Kunda than they are twined round by this rope or Pāśa. Hence its name. Then comes the Sūlaprota Kunda. पततां पाचिनां यत्र भवेदेव प्रकंपनम् ।

अत्तीव हित्योकातं क्रोगार्थ च प्रकंपनम् ॥ 97 ॥

दद्वलेव हि मे दूता यत्रोल्काः पाचिनां मुखे ।

धनुष्विण्यामां तदुल्कामिश्र सुसंकुलम् ॥ 98 ॥

It measures twenty Dhanus. No sooner the sinners fall here than they are encircled with the Sūlaśtra (darts). Then comes the Prakampana

Book IX Chapter XXXVII

Kupda. It measures one mile. It is filled with ice-cold water. The sinners, going there, shiver at once. Next follows the Ulkā Kupda. It measures twenty Dhanus.

लक्ष्वपीरम्यानं च भांपीरं च धनुःशतम् ।

नानप्रकरै: कृमिभि: संयुक्तं च भयानकम् ॥ 99 ॥

अनधीकाख्यालं च कृपाकारं च वर्तूलम् ।

नुद्वर्षे: पाणिभिकृतं प्रणयाद्विः: परस्यम् ॥ 100 ॥

It is filled with burning torches and meteors. My messengers thrust the torches and meteors into the mouths of the sinners living there Next comes the Andhra-Küpa Kunga. It is pitch-dark, shaped like a well, circular and very horrible. The sinners beat each other and eat the insects thereof.

तन्तौयप्रद्योः खलैद्धः कीटपश्रितैः ।

धातौपतच्छया चोर्धीधतुकाः प्रकीर्तिनः ॥ 101 ॥

Their bodies are burnt with hot water; they cannot see anything on account of dire darkness.

नानाप्राकारश्छौवैयंय विद्वांध पापिनः ।

धनुविंशमारणं च वेधन्तं तत्यकीर्तिन् ॥ 102 ॥

दंडेन ताहिता वय मम दूतेध पापिनः ।

धनु:घोडणानं च तत्कुंड दंडताडन् ॥ 103 ॥

The Kunāa where the sinners are pierced by various weapons is known as the Vedhana Kunāa. It measures twenty Dhanus. Then comes the Dangatāḍana Kunāa. It measures sixteen Dhanus. The sinners dwell here, threatened by My messengers.

निर्भूघ्रा महाजालैर्वया मीना प्रापिनः ।

धनुविश्रिपणों च जाल्धधे प्रकीर्तिन् ॥ 104 ॥

पततां पापिनां कुंडे देइक्षणों भवेदिरू ।

लोहबंदीनिवद्धानां कोटिपोरूषमानक्न ॥ 105 ॥

Then comes the Jālarandhra Kuṇda. Here the sinners live encompassed by a great net as fishes, etc., are tied in a net. Next comes the Dehaçūrna Kūnda. It is quite dark and its depth is that of the height of one kotī persons; its circumference is twenty Dhanus.

गंभीरं धतातसंयुक्तं धनुविंशम्रामाणकम् ।

मृदितानां जडानां च देहचूर्ण प्रकर्षितान् ॥ 106 ॥

दलिताः पापिने यत्र मम दूतैरश्त ताडिताः ।

धनु:घोडगमानं च तत्कुंड दल्लं स्मृतम् ॥ 107 ॥

The sinners, here, encompassed by iron chains are made to fall below where their bodies are reduced to powders and they are inert and almost unconscious. The Kūṇa where the sinners are crushed and threatened by My messengers is known as the Dalana Kūṇa; it measures sixteen Dhanus in circumference.

पत्नेनैव पापी च शुक्रककोठालुकः ।

बालुकासु च ततासु धनुषिंक्षामणकम् ॥ 108 ॥

गतपीकसामानं च गंभिरं ध्वातसंयुतम् ।

शोषणं कुंडतेपोद्ध पापिनां पयु:खतम् ॥ 109 ॥

नानाचर्मकपायोदपरिणूणं धनु:शगतम् ।

दुर्गीध्युक्तं नद्धसूः प्राणिधि: संकुलं कम् ॥ 110 ॥

Next comes the Śoşana Kūndā. It is deep up to the height of one hundred persons and it is very dark. It measures thirty Dhanus. On falling on the hot sand, the throats and palates of sinners get dried up. Their pains knows no bounds. Hence it is called the Śoşana Kūndā. Then comes the Kaṣa Kūndā. It measures one hundred Dhanus. It is filled with the juices of skins and its smell is very offensive. The sinners eat those astringent waters and live there.

शूपीकामुखं कुंडं धनुर्जिद्वगमानकम् ।

तत्नलोहबालुकाभि: पूर्णे पाताकिसंयुतम् ॥ 1 1 1 ॥

दुर्गीध्युक्तं तद्धस्वे: पाधिपि: संकुलं सति ।

शूपांकामपुर्जं कुंडे धनुद्वीद्यामानकम् ॥ 1 1 2 ॥

प्रतलवालकुर्णपाँ महापातिक्रियन्तु ।

अंतत्यिशिष्यानं च जाल्यावापुर्षं सदा ॥ 1 1 3 ॥

धनुषिंशितिमानं च प्रमाणं वय्य सूदीर ।

जालामिदंध्याग्रेश्व पार्थिविध्यांतिनेव च ॥ 1 1 4 ॥

Then comes Sūrpa Kunḍa. It measures twelve Dhanus and is extended like a winnowing basket. It is filled with hot iron dust and many sinners live there, eating those foetid iron dusts. Next comes the Vālāmukha Kunḍa. It is filled with red hot sand. From the (bottom) centre rises a flame,

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

overspreading the mouth of the Kunđa. It measures twenty Dhanus.

तन्महाकलेशंर शशकुर्कं जलामुपढ़ं स्मृतम् ।

पतामत्राधरच पापी मूर्तित हो वे नरो भवेद् ॥ १ १५ ॥

तपोहकाम्बर्नरितं वायर्धे जिहुकापुकदम् ।

धूपधोकारसंयुक्ते धूपधीघ पारिभिर्युतम् ॥ ११ ६ ॥

The sinners are burnt here by the flame and live awfully; they get fainted no sooner they are dropped in this Kunđa. Then comes the Dhūmrāndha Kunđa. It is dark, quite filled with smoke. Within that the hot bricks are placed. The sinners get suffocated with smoke; and their eyesight becomes also obstructed.

धनुःशर्तं शासरोधूमांधो परिकीर्तितम् ।

पात्ममात्राय पापी नारीश्च वेहितो भवेत् ॥ 117 ॥

धनु:शर्त नागपूर्ण तत्नार्येँहितं भवेत् ।

चडगीति च कुंडानि मयंतानि निशामय ।

लक्षणं पाचि तेषां च किं मुवः शोतुपिच्छिस ॥ 118 ॥

शीत शीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे नवमरकन्धे साविच्युपाधवाने

सर्वसिंगोउपया: || 137 ||

It measures one hundred Dhanus. Then comes the Nágavesṭana Kuṇḍa. It is encircled and filled with the serpents. No sooner the sinners are let fall there, than they are surrounded by the snakes. O Śavitri! Thus I have spoken to you about the eighty-six Kuṇḍas and their characteristics, Now what more do you want to hear? Say."

Here ends the Thirty-seventh Chapter of the Ninth Book on the Eighty-six Kuṇḍas and their characteristics in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

