CHAPTER XV

On Nimi's Getting Another Body and on the Haihayas

जनमेजय उवाच

देहप्रापितर्वसिष्ठस्य कथिता भवता किल ।

निमि: कथं पुनदैईं प्राप्ताविनिति मे वद ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: “The getting back of another similar body by Vasiṣtha is certainly described by you. Now tell me how the King Nimi got another body.”

व्यास उवाच

वसिष्ठेन च सम्पादन: पुनंदेहो नराधिप ।

निमिना न तथा प्राणो देहः शपादन्तमम् ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Rsi Vasistha only got back his body; but the King Nimi did not get back his body what had been cursed by Vasistha."

यदा शगतो बसिस्ठन तदा ते बाहाणा: क्रतौ ।

ऋलिजो ये वृत्ता राजत से वसे समर्पितदान् ॥ 3 ॥

कि कतंव्यमाहोठेउमाधिः शापद्धभो महीपति: ।

अभियन्त्रे तवस्पूर्णं दीक्षागुकछ्ध धार्पिकः ॥ 4 ॥

कि कतंव्य कार्यमेतिद्वरीतमधूलिकल ।

अवर्यभाबिषायत्वाद्वगभाः स्म निवारणे ॥ 5 ॥

मंत्रैबंहुविद्धैर्दैंह तत तस्य महात्यनः ।

रक्षित धारायामासु: किंचिद्वल्यसनसंतुम्न ॥ 6 ॥

गन्धीमाल्यैश्व विवधिः पूज्यमानं पुरुधुँघुः ।

मन्यग्रसता प्रतिष्य भर्विक्षतरं सुप्रजितम् ॥ 7 ॥

The priests engaged at the sacrifice by Nimi began to consider, when the Rsi Vasistha cursed

Book VI Chapter XV

him, in the following way: Oh! What a wonderful thing is this? Before the sacrifice is complete, the King Nimi has been cursed; this is against what we had expected; What can we do? What is inevitable must come to pass; how can we thwart it? By various Mantrams, they kept alive the body of the King in which breathing was still going on a little; and they prevented the body from decaying by worshipping the body with various Mantra Śaktis and kept it in a stationary state.

समाप्ते च क्रतौ तत देवा: सर्वे समाप्ततः ।

ब्रह्विधभस्तु सुत्ता: सर्वे सुप्रीताधाभवतूघ ॥ ८ ॥

When the sacrificial ceremony was completed, the Rsis began to praise the gods with hymns whereon the Devas became pleased and came to that spot.

विद्रतामु पुनिधि: स्तोर्शनिर्विशणात्मानबुबन् ।

प्रसानः स्म महीपाल वरं वरय सुन्ति ॥ 9 ॥

यज्ञानेने राजर्ष वरं जन्म विधीयते ।

देवदेहं नृदेहं वा चते मनसि वार्धितुम् ॥ 10 ॥

When the Munis informed the Devas fully of the condition of the King's body, the Devas spoke to the sorrowful King thus: "O performer of good vows! We are all pleased with your sacrifice; now ask boons from us." O King! You ought to get an excellent birth as the fruit of performing this sacrifice.

दूरा: कामी युधास्ते भूतूलोके यथासुखम् ।

एवमुक्तो निमेरासा सन्तुष्टसन्तुवाच हू ॥ 11 ॥

So ask what body, the body of a Deva or of a man, you desire? Or you can ask, if you like, for another similar body, that your priest Brhaşpati has got quitting his first body whereby he has become proud aud is now staying in the Loka of Yama.

न द्रेे मम बाळ्ठआरित सर्वदैव विनश्धे ।

बासो मे सर्वेत्तचानां दृष्टावस्तु सुरोत्तमाः ॥ १२ ॥

नेत्रेषु सर्वभृतानां वायुभृतशाख्याहम् ।

ऐवभुक्ताः सुरास्तत्र निमेरात्मामबुबन् ॥ १३ ॥

O King! At these words the King Nimi was very glad and spoke to them thus: "O Devas! I

have no aspiration for the body that is always liable to destruction; I therefore want to reside on the top of the eyelids of all the beings.

प्रार्थय त्वं महाराज देदों सर्वेश्वरिं शिवान् ।

मखेनानेन सन्तुहा सा तेरेभीत विभार्यति ॥ 14 ॥

Therefore I ask this boon that I be able to move in the shape of Vāyu (air) on the top of the eyes of all the beings."

स देवेशेवमुक्तस्तु प्रार्थयामास देवतान् ।

स्तोरैन्नानिविदिरिद्वीधरैक्ना गदुद्वा गिरा ॥ 15 ॥

Thus said, the Devas spoke to the soul of Nimi: "O King! Pray to the most auspicious Deity, the Devi, the Highest Goddess.

प्रसता सा तदा देखी प्रत्यक्षं एर्निं नदी ।

कोदिसूर्यप्रतीकारां कर्ण लावण्यदीपितम् ॥ 16 ॥

She has been pleased with this sacrifice; therefore your prayer will certainly by granted." Hearing thus, the King began to pray with various hymns with intense devotion, in tremulous voice, the Devi.

इत्था प्रमुहिता: सर्वे कृतकृत्याश्रये चेतिस ।

प्रसाओं देहतायां राजा बहे वरं नृप ॥ 17 ॥

The Devi became pleased and appeared before him. Seeing shining like a crore of suns and looking exceedingly lovely and beautiful, all the persons there became very happy.

ज्ञानं तद्विमन्ते देहि येन मोहोभे भवेदीय ।

नेत्रेषु सर्वभृतानां निवासो मे भवेदिति ॥ 18 ॥

They began to think themselves as very blessed and as having done all what they had to do. Knowing the Devi Bhagavatī pleased, the King asked this boon from her: "O Devi! Give me that knowledge, pure and simple, whereby final liberation is obtained.

ततः प्रसना देवेगी प्रोवाच जगद्धिक्वा ।

ज्ञानं ते विमतं भूवात्याख्यास्वावेगश्वतः ॥ 19 ॥

नेत्रेषु सर्वभूतानां निवासोर्पिय भविष्यति ।

निमिभं यान्ति चक्षिं चलकृतीनेव दैहिन् ॥ 20 ॥

तव वासामासनिभिमा मानाव: पशवसत्या ।

पतंगाश्र भविष्यन्ति पुनश्रानिमिभा: सुरा: ॥ 21 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Also, I may be able to reside on the top of the eyes of all the beings." The Devi, the Lord of the Devas, the Mother of the World being highly pleased, said thus: "O King! At the expiry of this your Prārabdha Karma, you will acquire pure knowledge and you will reside on the tops of the eyes in the shape of Vāyu, and through your residing there the beings will twinkle; i. e., open and close their eyes.

इति दत्ता वरं तस्मै तदा श्रीवदेवता ।

आमान्य च भूनी-सर्वात्रैर्वतान्त्रिंगभवत् ॥ 22 ॥

The men, beasts, and birds will twinkle due to your residing there; but the Immortals will always remain with a steadfast gaze; they will not twinkle." Thus granting him the boon, and addressing all the Munis the Bhagavati, the Highest Deity, disappeared.

अन्तर्दितां देव्यां तु मुनवस्त्र संश्रिताः ।

विचित्य वित्तिवलर्वे निवेईं सपाहतून ॥ 23 ॥

When the Devi disappeared from their sight, the Munis then thought much and they took the body of the King Nimī to churn it duly.

अर्शिणि तत्र संस्थाय मर्मधुम्न्यन्तत ।

मनहोर्मैमहानम: पुरहेतीनिराय ॥ 24 ॥

For the sake of getting a son from Nimi, the high-souled Munis performed Homa ceremony (oblations to the fire) and placing the piece of wood Aranī on his body began to utter Mantrams and churned his body.

उरणयां मध्यमानायां पुत्र: प्रादूरभूत्ता ।

सर्वतक्षणसंपत्रः साखारिभिरिवापरः ॥ 25 ॥

When the woods were thus churned, a son, endowed with all auspicious signs, looking like a second Nimi, was born to them.

उरणया मदानज्ञाततस्मामिथितिरिति सूतः ।

येनायं जनकाज्ञतारनेतासौ जनकोप्रस्ति ॥ 26 ॥

As this son was born due to the churning of the Aranis, the boy was named Mithi, and as it came out of the body of Janaka, the boy was named Janaka. O King!

विद्वेस्तु निमिजोंते यस्मात्स्मातद्वये ।

सयुद्धतान्तु राजानो विदेहा इति कर्जिति: ॥ 27 ॥

As the King Nimi lost his body, i. e., became Videha through the curse of Vasistha, all his descendants were known as Videha. Thus the son of Nimi was well known as the King Janaka.

एवं निविमुती राजा प्रधिलो जनको०भवत् ।

नगरी निवित्त तेन रंगगातीरे मनोहरा ॥ 28 ॥

He built a beautiful city on the banks of the Ganges; the city became famous also by his name (Janakapuri).

विधिलेति सुविद्याला गोपुरवृतलर्मयुता ।

धनधान्यसमायुत्ता हड़शालाविराजिता ॥ 29 ॥

The King Janaka beautified this city with many forts, arcades, markets and many nice buildings and palaces; and his city was full of wealth and grains.

वैंशसिन्योर्नि राजानलसे सर्वे जनकासखा ।

विख्याता ज्ञानि: सर्वे विदेयुः परिकीर्तितः ॥ 30 ॥

O King! All the Kings of this line became famous by the name of Janaka and all were endowed with the Supreme knowledge and known as Vidcha.

एत्ते क्रथितं राजमिमेराख्यान्मुत्तमम् ।

गणाधस्य विदेहत्वं विस्तरावुदितं मया ॥ 31 ॥

O King! I have now described to you the story of the King Nimi who got disembodiedness (Videhatva) out of the curse.

राजोबाच

भगवान्यवता प्रोक्ते निविषणायस्य कारणम् ।

श्रुत्वा सन्देशमाप्चं मनो मेउतीच चझतम् ॥ 32 ॥

The King said: O Bhagavan! You have described the cause why the King Nimi was cursed; my mind has grown very doubtful and restless on hearing it.

वसिष्ठो जहाणश्रेष्ठो राज्छीव पुरोहितः ।

पुत्र: पढ़ूजयोनेस्टु राजा शगतः कवं मुनि: ॥ 33 ॥

The Rsj Vasistha was the son of Brahmā and the best of the Brāhmins; especially he was the royal priest; how has it, then, that he was cursed by the King!"

Book VI Chapter XV

गृहं च ब्राह्मणं जाला निमिनान न कृता क्षमा ।

यजकमें शुभं कृल्या कर्थे क्रोधपुभाताः ॥ 34 ॥

Why did not the King Nimi forgive him as he was Guru and a Brāhmīn? Why he became angry, when he performed such a great, auspicious sacrifice?

जात्वा धर्म्य विज्ञानं क्वधिष्वाकुसभ्यः।

क्रोधय्य वर्षामपश: शपतवान्द्वारा गुर्भम् ॥ 35 ॥

He was born of the family of Iksvāku and he knew well the truths of the religion; then how was it that he became subject to anger and cursed his own Guru Brāhmin.

व्यास उवाच

क्षमास्तितुर्णभा राजन्नाणिभिर्जितातमिभः ।

क्षमावानुवर्णी लोक सुसमर्थी विशेषतः ॥ 36 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! It is very hard and rare for the persons not possessed of self-restraint to forgive; especially when one is fully capable, it is very rare to find one in the three worlds, who can forgive.

सर्वसंगयरित्यागी मुनिशंवृतु तापसः ।

निद्राक्षुधौर्वितंचा च योगाप्यासे सुनिहितः ॥ 37 ॥

कामः कोधस्तथा लोगो हृहंकारश्रुधंकः ।

दुर्जया देहमध्यस्था तपवस्तेन सर्वथा ॥ 38 ॥

He who has forsaken all attachments and has conquered hunger and sleep and is always engaged in the Yoga practices, even that ascetic Muni is not capable to conquer completely lust, anger and greed and Aharñkara, etc., the passions raging in the mortal coil.

न पूतपूर्वे: संसारे न चैव वर्तैल्पुना ।

भविता न पुमाकशिष्ठी जवेत रिपुभिनम् ॥ 39 ॥

None existed before in this whole world who conquered his passions! None exists now and none will be born ever-after. Hardly will be seen any in this earth, or the Heavens, or the Loka of Brahmā or in Vaikuntha, even in Kailāśa, that has conquered completely his passions?

न वर्षर्ने च भूतोके ब्रहातोके हरे: पदे ।

कैतलासे नेद्रुग: क्रिश्वो जयेत रिपुनीमान् ॥ 40 ॥

What can be said in regard to the ordinary mortals of this earth when the sons of Brahmā, the Maharsis, ascetics, Rṣis are all pierced by the Sattva, Rajas, or Tamo Gunas.

मुनीयो ब्रह्मपुगश्छ तथा उ-ये ताप्यसोनमाः ।

तेउपि गुणजयाविद्वा: किं पुनर्भानव भृति ॥ 4 1 ॥

कपित: संख्येजिता च योगाभ्यासतः शृषि: ।

तेनापि देवयोगाद्ध प्रद्धानः सगरात्मजः ॥ 4 2 ॥

Behold! The Rṣi Kapila was the Knower of Śānkhya and always engaged in his Yoga practises and he was a pure and holy soul; yet, by strange combinations of Fate, he became angry and burnt to ashes the sons of the King Sagara.

तस्मात्राजर्हकारासंजातं भुवनत्रयम् ।

कार्यकारणाबान्तु तद्विवृक्तं कर्थ भवेत् ॥ 43 ॥

ब्रह्मा गुणतयाविष्ठी विद्युश्रीवार शड़ूः ।

प्रभविति शरीरेषु तेषां यावातः पृथवस्यधूक ॥ 44 ॥

मानवानां च का वातां सत्त्वेकांतलव्यस्ति ।

गुणानां सड़ूरी राजनसर्वेन समविश्वतः ॥ 45 ॥

कदाचित्सचवुद्धि: स्याकदाचिद्रजस: कित ।

कदाचित्नमसो बुद्धिः समभावः कदाचन ॥ 46 ॥

O King! Out of Aharikāra, these three worlds are created; therefore this world and Aharikāra are related to each other as effect and cause; how then the Jivas that are born of this Sarisāra can extricate themselves from this Aharikāra? Brahmā, Visnu and Maheśa are also pierced by those three Gunas; different feelings are seen in their different bodies. Therefore it need hardly be said that the manifestation of the pure Sattva Guna alone is not to be seen in any of the human beings; for the three Gunas reside in a mixed way in all persons. Sometimes the Sattva preponderates; sometimes the Rajas and sometimes the Tamas preponderates. Sometimes they reside together, the three balancing one other.

निर्गुण: परमात्माउनी निर्गुण: परमोउध्यः ।

अलक्ष्य: सर्वसत्तानामप्रियः सनातनः ॥ 47 ॥

O King! Only that Eternal Highest Puruṣa is undecaying and untainted and can hardly be measured or seen by all the beings.

Sirmaddevibhagavatam

तवैव परम शक्तिनिर्गुणा बहासंश्रित्या ।

दुर्जेना चात्यमतिभि: सर्वभूतत्यवशिशिति: ॥ 48 ॥

परमात्मतरतश शक्तिर्वायौरस्यं सदैव हि ।

अभिनं तदुपूर्जाल्या मुच्यते सर्वदोषतः ॥ 49 ॥

That Highest Soul, the Highest of the High, is Nirguna (void of the three Gunas); and She who resides in all the beings and is hardly knowable by the small intellectual persons, that Highest Śakti, the Incarnate of Brahma, is also Nirgunā (void of attributes).

तज्ञानादेव मोक्षः स्यादिति वेदान्तर्हिक्षाः ।

यो वेद स विगुक्तोर्यिन्मसंसारे विगुणायकें ॥ 50 ॥

Paramātmā (the Highest Soul) and the Highest Force are also One; their Forms are not different. When such a knowledge arises, then the Jivas can be free from all sins and faults and blemishes.

जाने तु दिवियो प्रोन्न शादिकं प्रथमं स्मृतः ।

वेदशास्त्रार्थविज्ञानान्त्वेदेवृद्धिव्योगे ॥ ५१ ॥

"From that knowledge comes the liberation," this is sounded in the Vedānta Śāstra like Dīndima Śabda (thousands of small drums).

विकल्पातत्र बहवो भवन्ति मतिकल्पिता: ।

कृतकंकल्पिता: केचिसुतकंकल्पिता: परे ।

वितर्कैविधमोयत्निविधमवतुविद्धग्रंता ।

बुद्धिशाज्ञाननाग: प्राणिनां परिकीर्तितः ॥

अनुभवाखं द्वितीयं तु जानं तदुतर्दभं नृप ॥ 52 ॥

He, who comes to know That, is freed from the endless cycle of birth and death composed of the three Gunas; there is no doubt in this. O King! Knowledge is of two kinds: The first is considered as coming from sound; this comes out of the knowledge of the meaning of the Vedas by the help intellect. But this is full of fancies, agreements and doubts some of which are bad and some are good. The beings are led into errors by these discussions; errors cause destruction of intellect; and when the intellect is gone, the knowledge also goes away with it.

तत्वा प्रायये तस्य वेतुः संगो यदा भवेत् ।

गब्द्रज्ञानात्र कार्यस्य सिद्धभंवित भारत ॥ 53 ॥

Whereas the second kind of knowledge comes from intention or feeling within the depths of hearts and brain and it is called aparokṣa Jñāna. This knowledge is very rare to the beings. When one comes in contact with a Sad-Guru (a good teacher), then one gets this Aparokṣa Jñāna. From the sound knowledge, no successful result can issue; and, therefore it cannot give Aparokṣa Jñāna.

तस्मातानुपथवन्तां सम्भावत्यतिमानुपम् ।

अन्तर्गतं तम्यछेतुं गाख्दबोधोहि ति न क्षमः ॥ 54 ॥

Hence great effort is to be made for getting this Aparokṣa Jñāna. O King! As darkness cannot be destroyed merely by talking of light, without lighting any lamp, so the knowledge of sound merely cannot destroy the darkness of the inside.

यथा न न्ययति तमः कृतया दीपवर्तेना ।

तत्कर्म यद्य बंधाय सा विद्या या विमुकने ॥ 55 ॥

आयासायापरं कर्म विद्धात्यान शिल्पवैणुम् ।

शीलं परित्तत्वं च कोभापावः क्षमा धृति: ॥ 56 ॥

That Karma (action) is called True Karma which does not lead to bondage, and that Knowledge is the True Knowledge which leads to liberation. Other actions are only meant for one's own selfish enjoyments and other knowledge are merely the skill in arts. Good behaviour, doing good to others, having no anger, forgiveness, patience, and contentment are the best brilliant fruits of True Knowledge.

सन्तोषधीत विद्याय: परिपाकोउस्तं कलम् ।

विद्यार तत्सा वारपि योगाय्यसेन धुपते ॥ 57 ॥

O King! Without knowledge, without asceticism, and without the Yoga practises, the lust and other passions can never be destroyed.

विना कामादिशत्रूणां नैव नाशः कदाचन ।
(मनस्तु चञ्चलं रास्वभावादतिदुर्ग्रहम् ।
तद्वशः सर्वथा प्राणी त्रिविधो भुवनत्रये । )
कामक्रोधादयो भावाश्चित्तजाः परिकीर्तिताः ॥ ५८॥

The minds of the Jivas are naturally restless and without control; all the beings are completely under the sway of their minds; thus they roam on the surface of the earth as good, middling and bad.

Book VI Chapter XVI

ते तदा न घबन्चेव यदा दे निर्वितं मन: ।

तस्मातृ निमिना राजक क्षमा विहिता मुनी ॥ 59 ॥

Lust, anger, etc., originate from this mind; and when mind is conquered, then those feelings can no more arise.

वथा ययातिना पूर्व कृता शुक्र केतागति ।

भूगुपुजेश शनातेपि ययातिनंभरमनाः ॥ ६० ॥

O King! Therefore it was that Yayāti forgave when Šukrācārya did wrong before. The King Nimi could not forgive Vasiṣṭha in the same way. Yayāti, the best of kings, though cursed by Šukrācārya, the son of Bhrgu, did not curse in return but he took upon himself the old age.

न शशाप मुनि क्रोधाजरां रावा गृहीतान् ।

क्रश्रतौयो भवेतक्रश्रतूरो भवति पार्थिवः ॥ 6 1 ॥

O King! Some kings are naturally peaceful, whereas some other kings are wicked by their nature. Therefore, in this matter, whose fault is this, how can we ascertain?

स्वभावभेदाङ्गुपते कस्य दोयो5उ करल्यते ।

हैह्या भारीबान्यूर्ध धनतोभान्युरोहितान् ॥ 62 ॥

See! In ancient times the Haihayas, out of their greed of wealth, and being thus insensible destroyed completely, out of anger, the Brāhim priests of the family of Bhrgu.

बाहाणान्युततः सर्वाश्रीष्छु कौभ्यृष्टिताः ।

पातकं पुकृतः कृत्वा ब्रह्महात्यामुद्धवम् ॥ 63 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पश्वरकन्धे पश्वदर्शोस्थायाः 115 I

What more than this that those Ksatriyas did not consider the sin Brahmahatya; rather out of their dire anger, they cut to pieces the sons of those Brāhmaṇas, that were in embryos in their mother's wombs.

Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the Nimi's getting of another body and the beginning

of the story of Haihayas, in the Mahāpurānam

Srimaddevirbhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī

Veda Vyāsa.

CHANDINI VVI

Book VI Chapter XVI

