CHAPTER XX

On the Swayainvara Hall

व्यास उवाच

इतिवादिने भूपाले केरलाधिपतौ तदा ।

प्रत्युचार महाभाग युधारिवर्ष पार्थिवः ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa sand: O Noble minded one! King Yudhājit replied to the address of the king of Kerala, thus:

नीतिरयं महीपाल यदुखवीति भवानिह ।

समाने पार्थिवानां वै सत्यवार्षिवजित्रियः ॥ २ ॥

वोयेयु वर्तमानेयु कन्यारलं कृतोह्छ ।

अयोग्योड़हीत भृपाल न्यायोउंच तव रोचते ॥ 3 ॥

O King! You are truthful and have restrained your passions. What you have told just now in this assembly of kings is all correct and approved by morality. O best of the kings! You are born of a high family; you better say how can this take place that when so many fit persons are present here to become the bridegroom, can an unworthy person take away the offer?

भागं सिंहस्य रोगामुवर्णितुभर्हिति वा कथम् ।

तथा सुरर्गनीठयं वै कं व्यारालं किम्हिति ॥ 4 ॥

As a jackal never becomes fit to enjoy what are the dues of a lion, so this Sudarśana is also unfit to acquire this bride elect.

बलं वेदो हि विज्ञाणां ध्रुप्रजां घापजं बलम् ।

किम्याययं महाराज ब्वीवाम्यहिमहानुना ॥ 5 ॥

The Brāhmanas have the Vedas as their strength; the Kṣattriya kings take bows and arrows to be their

source of strength; this is ordained every where. Therefore O King! What wrong have I done in my statement. Kindly explain.

बलं शुरूकं यथा राजां विवाहे परिकीर्तितम् ।

बलवानेव गृहुतु नावलस्तु कदाचन ॥ ६ ॥

तस्माकन्याणं कृत्वा नीतित्र विधीयात् ।

अन्यथा कलहः कामं भविष्यित मतीभुजम् ॥ ७ ॥

The power of the kings is the befitting money given to the parents of a bride; according to this the strongest man is to acquire the bride, a jewel. The Ksatiriyas that are weak can never acquire that. Make this the rule in this marriage. The earth is fit to be enjoyed by the heroes only and not by the cowards and intriguing persons. Otherwise quarrels are sure to ensue amongst the kings.

एवं विवादे संवृते राजां तत्र परस्मरम् ।

आहुतस्तु सभामध्ये सुवाहुनुर्यसनमः ॥ 8 ॥

The dispute thus arose in that Svayamvara hall; and the king Subāhu was called in.

समाहूद नृपा: सर्वे तमुचुस्तत्वदर्शिनः ।

राज्जीतिस्वया कायां विवाहोउर समाहिता ॥ 9 ॥

The kings that could see the reality of things then addressed the king Subāhu. “O king! You are requested to establish a golden rule in this marriage ceremony”.

किं के चिकर्शिंत राजसन्तुद्रव स्वमाहितः ।

पुत्रा: प्रदानं कर्मे ते रोचते नृप चेतेसि ॥ १ ० ॥

Book III Chapter XX

“What is your object in calling this svayamvara. Better give it out after a mature consideration. Please be explicit whom have you intended to give over your daughter in this marriage?”

सुवाहुर्वाच

पुर्या मे मनसा कामं वृतः कलि सुदर्शनः ।

मवा निवारितोयवं न सा प्रत्येति मे वचः ॥ १ १ ॥

किं करोमि सुताया मे न वर्गे वर्तेत मनः ।

सुर्शन्नतवैकाकी सम्पानोरिति निराङ्कतः ॥ १ २ ॥

Subāhu said: “My daughter has mentally selected Sudarśana; I prevented her repeatedly from doing this; but she did not accept my word. What shall I do now? The mind of my daughter now is not at her will. Sudarśana, too, though uninvited, has come here singly and is residing calmly, without any signs of disturbance in his mind.

व्यस उज्ञ

स्मयत्रा घ्युर्ज: सर्वे समायुव सुर्जर्जन् ।

कंचु: समागतं शान्तोबाकिकान्मतरित्रता: ॥ 13 ॥

राजपुर महाभाग केनाहृतोउस सुत्रत ।

एकाठी यः समायातः समाजे ध्युन्तामिह ॥ 14 ॥

Vyāsa said: Then the chief kings all invited Sudarśana there; Sudarśana, too, came there quietly, and the princes, seeing his quiet nature, asked him. “O one, engaged in practising vows! Who has invited you here? Why have you come here singly, in this assembly of kings?

न वे सैन्यं न सचिवा न कोंगो न सहुदलम् ।

किमयं च समायाततत्त्वं बृहि महामते ॥ 15 ॥

You have no force, no ministers, no help, no wealth, and no army. O intelligent! Then explain why have you come here along?

युद्धकामा नृपतयो वर्तोत्र सामागे ।

कन्यार्थ सैन्यसमप्रा: किं त्व कर्पिभेच्छसि ॥ 16 ॥

In this assembly of kings you see that the powerful monarchs are ready to fight with each other for the sake of this princess. What do you intend to do under these circumstances?

भात ते सुखतः शुरः सम्याप्तोस्ति विषूक्षया ।

युयाज्च्च महाबाहु: साहाय्यं कर्भाग्रतः ॥ 17 ॥

Your brother, too, is come to have the princess; he has got his army and is also marked for his strength and valor. The powerful Yudhājit has come here also to help him.

गच्छ चा तिछु राजेंय यायात्वथ्युदाहन् ।

त्वयि सैन्यिहीने च यथेछे कुरु सुत्न ॥ 18 ॥

O observer of good vows! Seeing you without any army, we have narrated to you all the facts, Now think and do accordingly. If you please, remain here or go anywhere else.

सुर्गन उवाच

न बलं न सहायो मे न कोशो तुर्मिक्षयः ।

न मित्राणि न सौहाईं न नृया रक्षका मम ॥ 19 ॥

अत्र स्वयंवं श्रुत्वा उद्धुकाम इहागतः ।

स्वपे देया प्रेत्तोत्रिस भगवता न संशयः ॥ 20 ॥

Sudarśana replied: “True, I have no army, no help, no wealth, no forts, no friends or no kings to protect me. Hearing that Swayamvara will be held here, I have come here to witness it. But there is one particularity here; it is this: The Devi Bhagavatī has ordered me in my dream to come here. Under Her command I have come here; there is no doubt in this.”

नान्यचिर्याकीर्षित मेउदा भागह जगदीक्षृति ।

तया यद्धित्रतं तच्च भविताउघ न संशयः ॥ 21 ॥

I have got no other object in view; I have obeyed what the Bhagavati Bhavaneśvari has ordered me to do. Today will happen, no doubt, what She has ordained."

न शुज्ञित संसार कोअप्रज जगतीश्वरा ।

सर्वेय पश्यतो मेऊ घबाजीं जगाद्विकबान् ॥ 22 ॥

यः कौरियति शजुत्वं मया सह नृपात्मज्ञा: ।

शास्ता तव महाविद्यात नाहं ज्ञानीय मुक्तान् ॥ 23 ॥

O kings! I am seeing everywhere the Supreme Goddess Bhagavatī Bhavānī. Therefore there is no enemy of mine in this world; but he who will turn out an enemy of mine, will be duly punished by the Mahā Vidyā Mahā Māyā. I do not know what is enmity?

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

यद्धार्य तई भविता नान्यथा नृपसत्तम: ।

का चिता हुक्र कर्तेल्या देवाधोनोदिस सम्बत ॥ 24 ॥

O kings! What is inevitable will surely come to pass. There will be nothing otherwise. I am always depending on Fate, Destiny. What is the use, then, in thinking what will be the result?

देवभूमनपुर्वेषु सर्वभूतेषु सर्वदा ।

सर्वेषां तत्कृता भक्तिनान्यथा युपसमाना ॥ 2 5 ॥

Every where in the Devas, in the spirits, in men, in all the beings, the Devi's power is existent; it cannot be otherwise.

सा यं चिकारीपे भूयं तं केरोति नृपाधिया: ।

निर्मर वा नर काम का चित्ता चै तदा मम ॥ 26 ॥

O kings! Whomever She wishes, She makes kings masters of wealth or devoid of wealth. What is, then, the use of bothering my head in this?

तापुते परमां गर्जिक बढ़ाधिशुतारयः ।

न शक्ता: स्यंदितुं देघा: का चिंता से तदा नृपा: ॥ 27 ॥

When even the Gods Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa without Her presence, become powerless enough to move their hands or feet, then why shall I be anxious for the result?

अशक्ता या सशक्ता या याशुसतशुसत्वहम् ।

तद्धात्या नृपाधीव संग्रातोस्मि स्वयंवेते ॥ 28 ॥

O kings! Whether I am unable or able or an ordinary person, you have nothing to consider; I have come here in this assembly hall under the command of the Supreme Bhagavati.

सा यदिष्छलि तत्कुर्ग्याम्न किं चित्रनेन थे ।

नात्र शंका प्रक्रतिया सत्यमेततुद्बीयाम्न् ॥ 29 ॥

जये परायले जलना ने भेजापयाणे याधिःः ।

भगवत्यास्तु लजासित तद्धीनेत्रिस्म सर्वथा ॥ 30 ॥

What She has willed, She will do that. I am not to care for that. O high minded ones! You need not be afraid at all in this. I have told you all truth. Victory or defeat, I feel no shame in either of them. For I am always under the control of Bhagavatī; therefore if there be any shame here, it is all Hers.

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य तदाकपयं वचनं राजसत्तमाः ।

कचुः परस्परं प्रेक्ष्य निश्छयज्ञा नराधिप्र: ॥ 31 ॥

सत्यभृतं तव्या साधो न पिथया कहिंधूद्वेत् ।

तथाप्यूज्जयनीत्थस्वां हेतुं परिकांक्षिति ॥ 32 ॥

त्वाकृतै न दया दृषा त्यां बंधीमो महापते ।

यथुक्तं तत्वया कार्य विचारयं मनसाउनच ॥ 33 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing thus his words, and seeing that his mind is firmly devoted to Bhagavatī, the kings saw each other and said thus: "O Sudarśana! What you have said is quite true; it is never otherwise; still Yudhājit, the king of Ujjain is intent on killing you." O intelligent! O sinless! we have all come to know that there is no trace of evil in you, We were all overcome with pity for you; hence we have informed you; now think and do the needful?

सूरर्जन उवाच

सत्यमुक्तं भवद्धिकु धुकपावद्धि: सुहृजनैः ।

कि ब्रवीम पुनर्वाव्यमुक्तना गृपतिस्तमाः ॥ 34 ॥

Sudarśana said, “You are all kind and large hearted; what you all have said is quite true. What shall I tell you, being a minor as yet!

न मृगु: केनपिछ्याव्यः कस्यविद्धा कदाचन ।

दैवार्थीनिर्ध सर्वे जान्यथावरजुकुमम् ॥ 35 ॥

O kings! No one can cause the death of another. All this world, moving and unmoving, is under the control of Fate.

स्वलगोयं न जीवोर्सित स्वकर्मविगगः सदा ।

तत्कर्म विविध प्रोक्त विद्धान्तचलर्शिभि: ॥ 36 ॥

सघ्रितं वर्तमानं च प्राग्यं च तृतीयकम् ।

कालकर्मवस्थावैषर ततं सर्वसिंदं जन्त ॥ 37 ॥

न देवी मानुषं हन्तु शफः कालागमं विना ।

हन्त निमिनमाजेश हाँत काला: संसनतः ॥ 38 ॥

No soul is independent; every one is under the effect of one's own Karma. The Pundits that have realised the Truth, say that Karma is of three kinds, Accumulated, Present, and Prārabhā? This whole world is due to Kāla (Time), Karma (action) and Svabhāva (Nature); unless the proper time comes, even the Devas cannot kill men. The men are killed on account of some cause, immediate; but the Great Time is the real Destroyer.

Book III Chapter XX

यथा पिता मे निह्तः सिंहेनामित्रकर्षण: ।

तया मातामहोःपेवे वृद्धे युधातिता हतः ॥ 39 ॥

My father, though a destroyer of many others, was himself killed by a lion and my mother's father was slain by Yudhājit in the battle.

यत्नकोर्ट प्रकुर्बाणे ह्यन्ते देवयोगतः ।

जीविद्वर्मह्वाणि श्रणेल निवा नरः ॥ 40 ॥

The Jīvas, though caring hard to preserve their lives, are killed by Fate in spite of all their cares; and they live thousand years though there is none to protect them.

नाहं विषेपि धर्मिहुः कतचिन्च युधाजितः ।

देवमेव परं मत्वा सुस्तिशतोज्सि सदा युना: ॥ 4 1 ॥

O religious kings! I do not fear a bit Yudhājit. I consider Fate as the Supreme and I therefore remain always undisturbed, calm and quiet.

स्मार्ग सत्तं नित्यं भगवत्या: कांतोयहम् ।

विश्वस्य जननी देली कल्याणं सा कार्यित्धि ॥ 42 ॥

Daily and constantly I remember Bhagavatī, Who is the Mother of all this Universe. She will look after my welfare.

यूर्वांस्ति हि भोक्त्वयं शुभं वाय्यगृधं तथा ।

स्वकृतस्य च भोगेन कीवृक्षोको विजानात्म ॥ 43 ॥

Behold! One will have certainly to bear the burden of one's past Karma, whether it be good or it be bad; one's own actions must bear their fruits. Then why shall he be sorry, who has come to know this?

स्वकर्मफलयोगेन प्रायय दुःखमयनेतः ।

निमिताकारणे वैर क्रोतल्यमाति: किता ॥ 44 ॥

The less intelligent deluded persons, on getting pain from their own actions, turn out enemies on very trifling matters.

न तथाड़हं विज्ञानामि वैरं जोकें भयं तथा।

निःजकमिरु सम्पान्तः समाजे धूभृतामिह ॥ 45 ॥

I do not grieve nor do I fear on account of such enemies. I am staying here in this assembly of kings, cool-minded.

एकाकी उद्धकामोई स्वयंवरमनुतमम् ।

भविष्यिति च व्यद्वाय प्राप्तोत्रिम चिछकाझाम ॥ 46 ॥

Under the order of Candikā, I have come here to see this Svayamvara; whatever is inevitable will surely come to pass.

भगवत्या: प्रमाणं मे नान्यं जानामि संयतः ।

तत्कृतं च सुखं दुःखं भविष्यिति च नान्यथा ॥ 47 ॥

The words of the Bhagavatī are the best proof; I do not know any other. My mind is entirely given up to Her. There will be nothing otherwise than what She has ordained; whether it is good or whether it is bad.

युधाजित्सुख्यामोनुत न मे बेरं नृपोतमाः ।

यः क्रत्थिति मे बेरं से प्राप्यति फर्न तथा ॥ 48 ॥

O kings! Let Yudhājit remain in peace. I have no enmity with him. He, who will deal inimically with me, will certainly reap his reward. There is not the least doubt in this.

व्यास उवाच

इनुकृतसे तथा तेन सन्तुषा भूभुजः स्थितः ।

सोर्पि स्वामाभंग प्राय सूचितः संबंभून ह ॥ 49 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! When Sudarśana addressed them thus, all the kings became very glad and they all remained there for the Swayamvara. Sudarśana, too, went to his camp and remained also calm and quiet.

अपरेजिह्ट्रुभके काले नृपा: संभक्तितः किल ।

सुबाहुना नृपेणाय कधिरे वे स्वमण्डे ॥ 5 0 ॥

Next day the king Subāhu invited all the kings present in his city to their respective seats in the Svayamvara hall.

दिव्यास्तरणयुक्तेच मझेयु रचितेयु च ।

उपविशिष्ठा राजानः शुभालङ्करणीयुक्ता ॥ 51 ॥

The princes and kings, decorated with best ornaments, came and took their seats on their respective platforms, covered with valuable carpets of best workmanship.

दिव्यवेषधरा: कामं विमानेबयमा इव ।

दीय्यमाना: श्वितात्तन स्थवंरादिवृक्ष्या ॥ 52 ॥

The kings then looked like the celestial Devas, wearing divine ornaments and apparels, blazing with the lustrous light of gems, and remained to see the Swayamvara affair.

Śrimadievbhāgavatam

इति विप्तापसः संर्वे कदा सा०यागमिष्यति ।

भाग्यन्ते नृपश्रेष्ठ श्रतुपूर्णे वरिष्यति ॥ 5 3 ॥

Everyone there had this foremost thought in his mind when will the princess, the bride elect, would come there; and who will be the man so fortunate as to be blessed with garlands offered by her (as a token of selection of the bridegroom)!

वटा सुरुर्जनं देहात्मज्ञा सम्पृष्येदितु ।

विवादो वे नृपाणां च भविता नारं संशया ॥ ५४ ॥

If, accidentally, she offers the garland to Sudarśana in this Swayamvara assembly, then will ensue, no doubt, desperate struggles amongst the kings.

क्रूलेर्वं चित्यमानसे घृपा मढ़ेषु संशित्या: ।

वार्दियोषः सुमहानुवित्तो नृपमण्डपे ॥ ५५ ॥

अथ कार्थिपति: प्राह सुतां सन्तां स्वलंकृताम् ।

मगुकमालासयुक्तां क्षीमवासोपैध्यपिताम् ॥ ५६ ॥

विद्याएपकर्णैंकृतां दिव्यां सिंधुस्तोपामम् ।

चितापरां सुवसनां सितपूर्वमैदि वचः ॥ ५७ ॥

उत्तिष पुत्रि सुनीसे करे धृत्वा रुणां सकम् ।

जन मणदयायेउदा समाजं पर्य क्षपुब्जाम ॥ ५८ ॥

While they were thus meditating, sounds of drums were loudly sounded. Then Subāhu, the king of Benares, went to his daughter and found that Śaśikalā had just taken her bath and put on her silken clothes, and adorned herself its various ornaments and sweet garlands. Thus, dressed in complete marriage dress, she began to shine like another Goddess Laksmī, the Goddess of wealth. The king, on seeing his daughter dressed in silken cloth, afflicted with anxious thoughts, just smiled and said, “Child! Rise and take the beautiful garlands by your hands and go to the Svaayinvara hall and just look at the assembly of kings.

गुणावाह-स्पत्मम्पत्र कुतीनऊ शुनेतमः ।

तब चिते सवेशस्तु तं शुणुष सुमधमे ॥ 59 ॥

O lean bodied one! Whoever, well-qualified, beautiful, and of noble birth, amongst the kings is reigning in your mind, better select him.

देशदोशाधिया: सर्वे मढ्रेषु रचितेषु च ।

संश्रिया: परम तर्वयि वरयस्व यथाक्ति ॥ 60 ॥

O graceful! The kings from various quarters are adorning their respective seats; better go and see and select whomever you like."

व्यास उवाच

तं तथा भायमाणं वै तिरातं मितभाषिणी ।

उवाच वचनं बाला ललितं धर्मसंयुतम् ॥ 6 1 ॥

Vyāsa said: When Subāhu had spoken thus, Śaśikālā, who generally talked little, replied with sweet sonorous words, impregnated with religious truth.

शशिकलोचाच

नाहं दृष्टिपये राजा गणियामीय पितः किल ।

कामुकानां नोरंगानां गछल्यान्याशु योचिति ॥ 62 ॥

"Father! I won't go before the kings who are inspired by lust; women like me never go there; it is those that are dissolute that attend those places."

धर्भगास्ते श्रुत तात मयंदं चवनं कित ।

एक एव वरो नारां निरीक्षः स्यारा चापः ॥ 6 3 ॥

"Father! I have heard from the religious texts that women should cast their glances on their husbands only and not on any other.

सतीचं निर्मितं तस्या या प्रयाति बहून्य ।

कक्रल्यवित्ति से संवैं दूरवा मे भवतात्रिति ॥ 64 ॥

The woman that goes to many persons is mentally claimed by all; each of them contemplates strongly “Let this woman be mine.” Thus her chastisy is destroyed.

स्वयंवरे सर्व धृत्वा यद्यागछिति मणद्ये ।

सामान्या सा तदा जाता कुलटेवापारा वधूः ॥ 65 ॥

वास्त्री विषणे गत्वा यथा वीक्ष्य नान्धिस्वान् ।

गुणागुपणपित्रानं क्रौति निजमानसे ॥ 66 ॥

"Desirous of selecting her husband, when the woman holding in her hands, the garland for her would-be-husband, goes to the Swayarinvara hall, then she turns out like an ordinary unchaste woman.

As a prostitute going to a public shop looks on many persons and judges of their merits and demerits according to her own power of judgment,

Book III Chapter XXI

the maid that goes in the Svaṇyānvara hall does exactly the same."

वेकभावा यथा वेग्या वृथा पण्यति कामुकम् ।

तथाउड़ं मपडेप नत्वा कुर्वे वार्तखया कृतम् ॥ 67 ॥

"How can I behave myself in the hall of the assembly of kings like a prostitute, who does not attach her feelings firmly on a single individual but glances constantly at many lustful persons."

ब्रढ़ौरतः कृतं धर्म न कार्थिम साम्रातम् ।

पत्नीततं तथा कामं चरिष्ठसई धृततन्ता ॥ 68 ॥

Though this system of Swayamvara is approved by the elderly persons, I am not going to follow that now. I will take the vow of a chaste woman and act up to that doctrine as perfectly."

सामान्य प्रवर्म नाला कृत्वा सुकृत्तिवतं बहु ।

युणीति चैकं तद्वे द्याणीम कवमघ दै ॥ 6 9 ॥

I will never be able to act like an ordinary woman going in the Swayanīvara hall, mentally

determining many and finally selecting one.

सुर्दर्शनो मया पूर्वे वृत: सर्वात्मना चितः ।

तमुते नान्यथा कर्तूमिष्ठ्ठमीन नृपसतम ॥ 70 ॥

Father! From the very beginning, I have given myself up to Sudarsāna in mind, word and deed. I have not the least inclination to leave him and select another in his stead.

विद्यार्थिविधा देहै कन्यादानं शुभे दिने ।

सुदर्जनीय नृपते यदीच्छासि शुभं मप ॥ 71 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमद्वीभागपते महानुगणं तृनीयकन्धे

बिशोराध्याय: ॥ 20 ॥

O King! If you want to have my welfare, then give your daughter on an auspicious day and in an auspicious lagna to Sudarśana according to the prescribed rites.

Thus ends the Twenty Chapter on the Swayanivara hall and the king's conversation there in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verse by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book III Chapter XXI

