CHAPTER XXIV

On Sadācāra

श्रीनारद जवाच

नारायण महाभाग गायव्यास्तु समासतः ।

शंल्यादिकाम्योगोस्तु वद्रव ककणानिधे ॥ १ ॥

Nārada said: O Bhagavan! Thou art the ocean of mercy; kindly speak out to me in brief all the things and the duties to be observed and applied in the Śānti Karmas (the peace bringing acts) of Gāyatri.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

अतिगुरुधिमं पृष्टं त्वया बह्रानुनूदव ।

न कस्माथि च वत्कल्यं वृहाय विश्रुताय च ॥ २ ॥

अशगोति: पयोकताकिः सामिद्वड्ट्रुधावढ़िकः ।

शभीसमिद्धिः शाप्यन्ति भूततोगघादयः ॥ ३ ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! The question asked by you is esoteric. Never divulge this to a wicked person or any hypocrite. It is to be kept secret. While doing this Sānti Karma, the Brāhmanas are

to perform the Homas with fuel soaked in milk (Payah). If the fuel of the Sami tree be offered in Homa ceremony, then diseases caused by planets are cured.

आद्राधिः: श्रीरबुहस्य समिद्धिकुश्याद्धिकः ।

जुब्याचछकौर्वर्धि भूतगोपादिशांरके ॥ 4 ॥

जलेन तपर्येनरूई पाधिष्णां शांतिमान्युत् ।

जानुद्धे जले जप्दा सर्वन्दीषाण्डन्ये नयेत् ॥ 5 ॥

If the Homa be performed with wet Asvattha or Udumbara or other kṣira trees, the diseases caused by demons and hob-goblins are cured. If one offers Tarpanam with one palmful of water, repeating the mantra “Sūryam Tarpayāmi namah”, the pending evils are also averted and troubles are ceased.

कंदरद्धे जले जल्वा मूचेरूपाणितिकाद्यात् ।

सर्वेष्य: शातिकर्मीशो निमज्ञायुष जप: स्मृतः ॥ 6 ॥

सीवर्षे ज्ञाते वार्षपि पाते ताम्यमेर्षि चा ।

श्रीवृक्ष्मये वार्थ निर्वी० मृभ्मवेर्षि चा ॥ ७ ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

The repetition of the Gāyatrī mantra with knees immersed in water averts all evils. The repetition of Gāyatrī with body immersed in water upto the throat, averts the danger of life; and the same with whole body immersed grants all success.

सहच पड़ागयेने हृता सुचलितेउनले ।

श्रीरक्षमधः काहैः शेपं संपादयेद्धः ॥ 8 ॥

प्रत्याहुर्ति सूगड़ाप्चा सहचे पात्रसंस्थितम् ।

तेने ते प्रोक्षयेहीं कुर्गीर्यमानुस्मर् ॥ 9 ॥

This is the best of all the Śānti karmas, the acts that bring health, wealth, happiness and peace. While performing Homa, light with the fuel of Kṣiravrkṣa (the trees that emit milky juice); place Pañcagavya in a vessel made of gold, silver, copper or wood of kṣira trees, or in the vessels made of earth, without any knot or crack; utter the Gāyatri mantra and offer one thousand homas. Sprinkle with water at every offering, touching the Pañcagavya with Kuśa grass, thousand times.

बलि किंस्ततस्तमिन्यायेतु परदेवात्म।

अभिवारस्मुत्वांं कृत्वा पारं च न्ययति ॥ १० ॥

देवभूतिपशाचाछा यदोयं कृते जरे ।

गृढ़ो प्रामं पुरं गई सर्वे तपोय विमुचते ॥ १ १  ॥

Then offer the sacrifices there where calamities or nuisances are seen and meditate on the Highest Devatā. Thus all the magic spells used by other persons for a malevolent purpose will be rendered nugatory. Bring under your control any Deva Yoni, Bhūta Yoni, or Pisāca Yoni that causes you troubles; then they will quit the house, village, city, way, even that kingdom.

निद्धे मुचले तेभ्यो लिखने मघतोर्जीच च ।

मंडले ग्रुल्मालिख एवंर्षेच्चे चक्रीपच चा ॥ 12 ॥

अभियंत्र सहरं तप्रिछानेसर्वर्गांतये ।

सौराणं राजत वाबि कुंभं ताप्रमयं च च ॥ १३ ॥

Now hear how they are brought under control. Prepare a sacrificial altar with sand, draw a square on it, place a Śūla (spear) in its centre and plaster with Aṣṭagandha. For the sake of converting all the evils, repeat Gāyatrī mantra thousand times and

impregnate it with the mantra, dig the ground and place or bury the Śūla under it.

भूमयं चा नवं दिख्यं सूत्रवेहितमवाणम् ।

स्वाधिकुते सैकते स्थाय पूर्येन्मन्त्रविज्जलेः ॥ 14 ॥

दिष्य आह्यत तीर्थानि चतुर्णयो द्विजानेः ।

एलाचंदनकर्फूराजतीपाटलमल्लिकाः ॥ 15 ॥

बिल्पवं तथाकांतां देवाँ डीहियवांस्तिन् ।

सर्पेपान्द्रीरूबाणां प्रवालानि च निश्रियेत् ॥ 16 ॥

Place on the level ground or sthandjila a jar or Navaphala, a fruit made of gold, silver, or copper or a newly made earthen jar and enclose it with thread. Then have the sacred waters brought from the several Tirthas by the Brāhmins and fill the jar, repeating the Gāyatrī Mantra. Put within this jar the twigs, then of Cardamom tree, sandal tree, Karpūra tree, Jāti, Aparājītā. Saha Devī, Pāṭala, Mallikā flower, Bel leaves, rice, barley, Til, mustard, Aśvattha, and Udumbara trees and throw them within the jar. (The Kṣīra trees are Aśvattha, Udumbara, Plaksā, and Nyagrodha.)

सर्विणधिविधायैंक कुणकृचैमवित्तम् ।

स्नात: समाहितो विध: सूक्षे मंत्रवेदुर्ध: ॥ 17 ॥

दिखु सौरान्धीरीन्मंत्रान्विग्राम्बीवितः ।

प्रोक्षयेताययदेवेनं नीरं तेनाभिरिचयेत् ॥ 18 ॥

Doing all these, prepare one Kuśa Kūrca made of twenty seven Kuśa grass in the form of a braid of hair, round one end of a straight rod and tied in a knot and place it there. Then take your bath and repeat the Gāyatri mantra over it one thousand times with your whole mind fully concentrated. Then the Veda knowing Brāhmanas would recite the Saura mantra and sprinkle the man attacked by the demon with water and make him drink also the water saturated with the mantra and bathe him also with that. Then that person will be dispossessed of the devil and be happy.

भूतौरागाधिचोरभ्यः स निर्भुक्तः सुखी भवेत्।

अधिषेकंण मुचेत प्रभोरायमन्तो नरः ॥ 19 ॥

अवश्यं कारयेढ्धित्राज्ञा दौर्धि विजीविधुः ।

गावो देवाश्र ऋलिचम्य अधिषेक शर्त गुने ॥ 20 ॥

Book XI Chapter XXIV

Even when the man (possessed by a devil), is going to die, he gets his life again if he be made to drink this water saturated with this mantra and have his bath with that. So a wise King must do this, with a desire to have a long life; and after he is sprinkled with this mantra-charged water he is to give one hundred cows to the Brāhmaṇas as the Dakṣinā.

दक्षिण वेन वा पुर्विंथायणकल्यांखवा भवेत् ।

जपेदश्वथामल्यभ मन्दावरे शर्त जिजः ॥ 2 1 ॥

भृतारोगिभवारेच्यो मुच्यते मततो भवात् ।

गुड़्चा: पर्वविक्छाना: योक्ता जुड़गादुबिजः ॥ 22 ॥

The Dakṣinā is to be given according to one's might; and specially what gives satisfaction to the Brāhmanas. If one be terrified by a Devil or so or by the mischievous magic spells of others, one is to sit on Saturday under an Aśvattha tree and repeat one hundred Gāyatris.

एवं मृत्रुंजरो होमः सर्वेल्याधिविनाशना: ।

आप्रस्य जुड्यात्यजैः पयोकैज्जराशाते ॥ 23 ॥

वचाभि: पयसात्भिः क्षयं हुत्वा विनागयेत् ।

मधुत्रितवहोमेन राजयक्ष्मा विनयशति ॥ 24 ॥

For the cure of all diseases, if one has to perform the Mrtyunjjaya Homa, one will have to do Homa with the Gulañca creeper, soaked in milk and deducting the knots thereof. For the pacification of fever, mango leaves soaked with milk ought to be used in the Homa ceremony. The wasting diseases are cured if Homa be performed with the leaves of the Vaca soaked in milk; phthisis or consumption is cured if Homa be performed with curd, milk and ghce.

निवेश भास्करायांश पायसं होमपूर्वकम् ।

राजवस्माभिपूर्ण च प्राग्सेच्छांतिभानुपायून् । २ ५ ॥

लाना: परंसु विधिष्ठ होस्पल्य जुबुगदाईज्ञः ।

सोमे सूयैणं संयुक्ते पयोक्ता: क्षयगतंते ॥ २ ६ ॥

Again, if offerings be given to the Solar Deity and if Pāyasānnam be given to him and if this be given to the consumptive patient, his disease will be cured. Again, on the Amāvasyā tithi (new moon

day) if Homa be performed with Soma creeper (excluding the knot joints) soaked in milk, then consumption will be cured.

कुसुपी: शंखद्वक्षस्य द्रुला कुके विनागयेत् ।

अपस्मारविनाश: स्यादपामार्थस तंडुलैः ॥ 27 ॥

क्षीरवृक्षसिमद्वीमापु-नामदो-पि विनयति ।

औदुंबरसचिद्वामादतिनेहः क्षयं ब्रजेत् ॥ 28 ॥

प्रमेहं शमवेद्युत्वा मधुनेबुसरेन वा ।

मधुप्रितयहोमेन नयेच्छांति ममूरिकाम् ॥ 29 ॥

कपिलमार्थिगा हुत्वा नयेच्छांति ममूरिकाम् ।

उदुंबारवटावल्यैर्गीणाजश्रामयं हेरत् ॥ 30 ॥

If Homa be made with the flowers of the Śaṅkhya tree, then leprosy is cured; if the Homa be done with the seed of Apāmārgā, the Mīgīs or the hysteric and epileptic fits are cured. So if Homa be performed with the fuel of Kṣira trees, lunacy is cured; if with the fuel of Udumbara, meha (spermatorrhea) is cured; if with sugarcane juice, gonorrhea is cured; if with curd, milk and ghee or with the ghee of Kapilā cow, the homa be performed, the Masūrika disease or smallpox will be cured, and if Homa be performed with the fuels of Udumbara, Vaṭa, and Asvætha be performed, then the diseases of cows, elephants and horses are cured.

पियीलिमयुवल्पीक गृहे जाते शर्त शगत् ।

गशीमसिद्धिन्नेन सर्वेषा जुडुयाद्विजः ॥ 31 ॥

तदुर्ध्यं श्रातिमयाति शेषैप्तत्न बलि हेतुः ।

अभ्रस्तनितभूकमलक्ष्यादी वनवेतसः ॥ 32 ॥

If the trouble be caused by many ants and anthills (Madhu Valmika) then perform the Homaceremony with the fuel of Śamī tree one hundred times and with the food prepared of ghee one hundred times and offer sacrifices with the rest of the food; then the above troubles will cease. If there be a earth quake or if there be seen flashes of lightnings, then homa is to be performed with the fuel of Vana Vetsa and the whole kingdom will be happy.

सप्ताहं गुड्यादेवं राष्ट्र राज्य सुखी भवेत् ।

यां दिशं शतगवेने लोहेनाभिप्राताबेत् ॥ 33 ॥

ततो5नमाहतादिष्यो भयं तस्य विनश्यति ।

मनसैव जयेदोनं बब्दो मुच्येते बच्यन्ता ॥ 34 ॥

If you surcharge any piece of iron with Gāyatrī mantra repeated hundred times and if you throw it in any direction then no fear will arise from that quarter out of fire, air, or any other enemy. If one be imprisoned, and if he repeats the Gāyatrī mentally, he will be liberated from the prison.

भूतसोरायिविध्य: स्यूगज्ञावा विषोचयेत् ।

भूमातिध्यो विमुघेते जरुं पीलाचिभंत्रितम् ॥ 35 ॥

अभियंत्र शर्त भवम च्यदेवभृताविरुशांते ।

शिरसा धारयेद्वम्म मंत्रियाला तदित्यचा ॥ 36 ॥

सर्वेत्याधिविभूक्तः सुखी जीवेछन्ते समाः ।

अशक: कारयेछांति विध्यं दत्वा तु द्विष्णाम ॥ 37 ॥

If you touch the man possessed by a devil, disease or mortification and sorrow with the Kuśa grass and repeat the Gāyatī mantra, and thus charge him with Divine electricity, that man will be liberated from the fear caused thereby. If you make the man possessed by devils, etc., drink the water charged with the Gāyatī mantra or if you cast on his body the ashes charged with hundred Gāyatīs or tie those ashes on his head repeating the Gāyatī mantra, he will be instantly freed of all diseases and will live for one hundred years in happiness. In case a man is unable to do fully all these himself, he can get all these done by other Brāhmaṇas and pay Dakṣinā (fees) to them duly for the same.

अथ पृष्टि श्रियं लक्ष्मीं पृष्टीह्वालानुपादहित्रः ।

श्रीकामो जुड़यावर्षे रकैः शिवयमवानपुत् ॥ 38 ॥

हृत्वा श्रिवयमवानपोत जातीपुष्पैनंः शुभे: ।

शालिलंडुलोमेन श्रिवयमानपोत पुरूकलाम् ॥ 39 ॥

समिद्धर्विल्ववृक्षस्य हृत्वा श्रिवयमावानुयात् ।

बिल्वस्य शकलैहूला घतेः पुष्येः फलैरिप ॥ 40 ॥

श्रिवयमानपोत परमां मूलस्य शकलैरिप ।

समिद्धिवल्ववृक्षस्य पायसेन च सर्पिण ॥ 41 ॥

शर्त शर्त च सपतहं हुत्वा श्रिवयमावनुपायत ।

O Nārada! Now I will tell you how nourishment and wealth are attained. Wealth is attained if the

Homa be performed with red lotus or fresh Jāti flower or with the Sāli rice or with the fuel of Bel tress, leaves, flowers, fruits or roots or with any portions thereof. If for one week the oblations be offered with fuel of Bel tree mixed with Pāyasa or with ghee one hundred times, then Lakṣmī Devi will surely be attained.

लाजैसिभमुंपोपेहैमि कन्यामवानुगत् ॥ 42 ॥

अनेन विधिन कन्या वर्यापोति वांछितम् ।

रक्तोललगतं हृता सप्ताहं हेम चापनुवत् ॥ 43 ॥

सुर्यविंबे जलं हृता जलस्थं हेम चापनुवत् ।

अरं इृत्वापुयादरं जीही-नींवितर्पभैत् ॥ 44 ॥

If the Homa be performed with Lāja (fried rice) mixed with curd, milk, and ghee, the daughter will be obtained. If for one week, the Homa be performed with red lotus, then gold is obtained. If the Tarpanam (peace offering) be offered to the Sun, then the treasures, gold hidden under the water, are obtained. If the Homa be performed with food (Anna) then Anna is obtained; if Homa be performed with rice, then rice is obtained.

करीषचूर्णर्विसस्य हुत्वा यगुमवाप्यानुत ।

पिंयंगुपायासाज्यैश्ण भवेद्रोमादिधि: प्रजा ॥ 4 5 ॥

निवेश भाकरावानां पायसं होमपुर्कम् ।

भोजयेचनद्रुत्नातां पुरं परमवाप्यानुत् ॥ 4 6 ॥

If Homa be performed with calfung, dried and powdered, then animals are obtained. If Homa be performed with Priyaṅgu, Pāyasa or ghee then the progeny is obtained. If the oblations of Pāyasāna be offered to the Solar Deity and if the Prasādam (remnant) be given to one's wife under menstruation to eat, then excellent sons will be obtained. If the Homa be performed with the fuel of wet pointed Kṣīra trees, then longevity is attained.

सप्रोहाधिराङ्गी रक्ताधिमंभुरवेः ।

घौहीर्णा च शर्त हुवा हेम चाव्युरावानुवा ॥ 47 ॥

सुवर्णकुड्मल हुता शतमायुरावानुवात् ।

दूर्वाधिः घयसा वाथि मधुना सर्वधिपार वा ॥ 48 ॥

If Homa be performed with the fuel of the Palāsa tree, pointed and wet and mixed with curd, milk,

Book XI Chapter XXIV

and ghee for one hundred times consecutively, then longevity and gold are attained. If the Homa be performed with Durbā grass, milk, honey or ghee, one hundred times, then longevity and golden lotus are obtained.

शर्त शर्त च सताहमपमृत्युं व्यधोहित ।

शर्मी समिद्धिरेवन पवसा वा च सचिषि ॥ 49 ॥

शर्त शर्त च सताहमपमृत्युं व्यधोहित ।

न्यग्रीधसमिधो हुला पायसं होमयेत्त: ॥ 50 ॥

शर्त शर्त च सताहमपमृत्युं व्यधोहित ।

क्षीराहारोजेभृत्योः सताहाहित्वजी यबेत् ॥ 51 ॥

If for one week the Homa ceremony be performed with the fuel of Śami tree mixed with food, milk or ghee one hundred times of each or if for one week the Homa he performed with the fuel of Nyagrodha tree and afterwards one hundred Homas be made with Pāyasānna, the fear of unnatural death is removed. That man can conquer death who can remain for one week living on milk only and who performs during that time hundreds, and hundreds of Homas and repeats the Gāyatrī, controlling his speech.

अनशन्वायतो जत्वा जित्रां मुच्यते यमात् ।

निमज्ज्यापु जयेदेव सचो मृत्योविमुछ्यते। ॥52 ॥

जपेढिल्वे समाश्रित्य मासं राज्यमवानुपयात् ।

बिल्वं हुनावे3उन्यग्राज्यं समूलफललल्बम् ॥ 53 ॥

If anybody can fast three nights and control his speech and repeat Gāyatrī he gets himself freed from the hands of Death; or totally immersed in water if he repeats Gāyatrī, he will be saved from the impending danger of death. If anybody repeats the Gāyatrī mantra for one month, taking his seat under a Bel tree or performs Homa with Bel fruit, root or leaves, he gets kingdoms. (Know all the Mantrams are electric in their effects).

हूला पदार्जत मारंस राज्यमापोल्यकंटकम् ।

यवागृं ग्रामापानीते हुला शालिसमान्यितम् ॥ 54 ॥

अश्वस्यसिधो हुला युद्धादी जयमाप्न्यात् ।

अकैस्य समिधो हुला सर्वत्र वित्तयी भवेत् ॥ 55 ॥

संयुवक्ते: पयसा पत्रे: पुर्णेवो वेतस्वय च ।

पायसेन शर्त हुला सपताई वृद्धिपान्यात् ॥ 56 ॥

Similarly if anybody performs Homa with one hundred lotuses, he gets a foeless kingdom. So one becomes the lord of a village if one performs Homa with Yavāgu (barley gruel) and Śālidhānya. If the Homa be performed with the fuel of Aśvattha tree, victory in battle is ensured and if the Homa be performed with the fuel of Ākanda tree, then victory everywhere is ensured. If one hundred Homas be performed extending a week with Vetasa tree's leaves or fruits, dipped in milk and mixed with Pāyasā, the rainfall is ensured.

नाधिद्धने जले जल्या सताहं वृष्टिमान्युत् ।

जले भस्म शर्त हूला महावृष्टि निवारयेत् ॥ 57 ॥

Similarly if anybody repeats Gāyatrī for one week with his body upto navel immersed in water, the rainfall is ensured; on the contrary if the Homa be performed with ashes in water, then the cessation of heavy rainfall is ensured.

पालागीभिप्रवाप्नोति समिद्धिब्रंद्धावचंभम् ।

पलाशकुसुमैहूला सर्वीमध्यमावानुम् ॥ 58 ॥

पयो हुलासे उपुवान्येभागजरं बुद्धिमवानुवान् ।

अभियंत्र यिवेद्वाहा रं से मेधामवानुवान् ॥ 59 ॥

The Homa with the fuel of Palāśa gives Brahmateja; Homa with the flowers of Palāśa gives everything desired. Homa with milk or drinking Brāhmarasa, charged with mantra, increases the intellect; and the Homa with ghee gives Buddhi (medhā) (intelligence).

पृष्यहोभे भवेश्वासर्तुभित्धिधं पदम् ।

ल्वणं मारुसंमिश्रं इत्वेहं वशमानयेते ॥ 60 ॥

नवैदिष्टं वर्णं हुत्वा लक्ष्मी पृष्यैमीधूलुतः ।

नित्यमंजलिनात्मानमधिपिचेजले स्थितः ॥ 61 ॥

मतिनागोरयामाष्यवममघ्नं स्वास्यमयापन्यात् ।

कुयाद्धिप्रोज्ञ-यमूदिष्य सोप्रि पुहियपान्यात् ॥ 62 ॥

अथ चारकवित्धिर्मांस सहनै प्रत्यई जपेत् ।

आयुक्कामः शुण्चो देशे प्राप्नुवादायुक्तमम् ॥ 63 ॥

आयुरारोयकामसु जयेन्मासुद्वं द्विजः ।

Homa with flowers gives good smell; Homa with thread gives cloth; Homa with salt and honey mixed or Bel flowers gives one power to control

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

anything and everything that is desired. If anybody bathes everyday immersed completely within water and sprinkles water on his body, he becomes cured of diseases and he becomes very healthy. If any Brāhmana does these things for others, he becomes also no doubt healthy. If anybody wants to increase his life period he should practise good deeds and repeat Gāyatrī thousand times daily for one month. Thus his longevity will be increased.

पवेदाव्युव्यानोरयं विश्वे मासयं उपते् ॥ 64 ॥

आयु: शीघ्रद्वाराधाशुत्थिंध यशो जपात् ।

पुर्वतार्युरोगेचं शिवं विद्यां च पढ़िधि: ॥ 65 ॥

एवमेवोलराकामान् मासैरोलोर्नैजेन ।

Two months' such practice gives long life and perpetual health; three month's such practice will give life, health, and wealth, four months such practice gives longevity, wealth, fame, women, sons, etc., five months such practice gives longevity, health, wealth, wife, sons and learning. So one should repeat this as many months in proportion to the number of his desires and he would get them.

एकपायो उपेटूबंखाहु: स्थिता निराश्रय: ॥ 66 ॥

मासं त्रानयं त्रिसः सर्वान्कामानवानुयात् ।

एवं शतोत्तरं जप्चा सहस्वं सम्वमानुपयात् ॥ 67 ॥

रुद्ध्या प्राणमापनं च जेपन्मासं त्रानस्यम् ।

यदिच्छेत्तवदानोपेति सहस्तावरमानुपयात् ॥ 68 ॥

Again any Brāḥmana who stands on one leg without holding any other thing and raises both his hands and daily repeats three hundred Gāyatrīs for one month, gets all his desires fulfilled. And if he repeats one thousand one hundred Gāyatrīs, there is nothing in this world that is not met and attained with success. Controlling the Prāna (inhaling) and Apāna (exhaling) Vāyu (breath), he who repeats daily three hundred Gāyatrīs to the Devi, his highest desires are satisfied.

एकपाटो जोद्धूर्धबाहु रहस्याउनिले बशी ।

मार्ग सतमावपानीत यदिच्छेदिति कौशिक: ॥ 69 ॥

एवं सातयं जत्वा सहसं रसंमीघानुयान् ।

निमज्ज्याम्पु जपेन्मारं सतिभ्यमवाप्नयान् ॥ 70 ॥

Vísvāmitra Rṣi says: Standing on one leg, with both hands raised and controlling Vāyu he who repeats daily one hundred Gāyatrīs for one month, gets all his desires fulfilled. Similarly with three hundred or thousand repacetings, all things are attained. Submerged under water, if one repeats Gāyatrīs as many times as mentioned above, he gets everything.

एव शतत्रयं जल्वा सहसं सर्वमानुपयात् ।

एकपातो जपूर्ध्यबाहु रूष्टया निताङ्गय: ॥ ७ १ ॥

नत्कम्पनन्दिविष्यातं वसत्गयिषितामयात् ।

If, for one year, with hands uplifted and without holding anything, anyone stands on one leg, controls one's breath and repeats Gāyatrī mantra three hundred times or thousand times, eating Havisyānnam only in the night time, he becomes a Rsi (Scer).

गौरोपाया भवेदेवं जप्वा संवलसग्रद्यम् ॥ 72 ॥

त्रिवलसं जप्वेवं भवेतैकालरुदर्जनम् ।

आयाति भगवान्देवश्रु:संवलसं जपेत् ॥ 73 ॥

पश्चभिवल्लैरेबमिणामादितुगणो भवेत् ।

एवं घड्वलसं जत्वा कामकलिपल्याम्पान्यात् ॥ 74 ॥

सप्तभिवल्लैरेबमामत्वयावम्पान्यात् ।

मनुत्वं नवधिः: सिद्धमिंग्रवं एशभभिवेत् ॥ 75 ॥

एकादशभिपानोते प्रजाप्यत्वं सूव सरैः ।

ब्रहात्वमानुयादैवं जप्वा ब्रादशवलसान् ॥ 76 ॥

This thing repeated two years gives infallible speech; three years gives knowledge of the present, past and future; four years will enable one to see face to face the Solar God; five years will give the eight Siddhis, lightness, etc., six years will enable one to assume forms as he desires; seven years gives immortality; nine years gives Manuhood; ten years gives Indrahood; eleven years gives Brahmahood; and twelve years gives the state of Parama Brahma.

एतेनैव जिता लोकास्तपसा नारदादिधिः ।

शकमन्ये परे मूलं फलमये पय: परे ॥ 77 ॥

भृतमन्ये परे सोममपरे चरकृतयः ।

त्रषय: पक्षमर्जनित केविद्धैश्यशिनोउद्धिन ॥ 78 ॥

Book XI Chapter XXIV

हविष्यमपेउशन्तः कुर्वेयि परं तपः ।

अथ शुज्द्वी रह्यानां जिसहर्सं जयेदद्विजः ॥ 7 9 ॥

O Nārada! By these practices of Tapasyās you and other Rṣis have been able to conquer the three Lokas (regions). Some ate only vegetables; some fruits; some, roots; some simply water; some, ghee; some, Somarasa; whereas some others ate only caru and did tapasyā. Some Rṣis practised this great Tapasyā by eating very little for a fortnight only. Some ate food, only what they got by begging during the day; and some ate only Havisyānna. O Nārada! Now hear the rules for the purification and expiation of sins.

मारा शुद्धो भवेतेसोनासुवर्णस्य द्विजोत्नः ।

जेपेमानं प्रिसाहसं सुराप: शुद्धिमानुपयात् ॥ 80 ॥

मासे जपेलिसाहसू शुचिः: स्यादगुतलपण: ।

सिसहरुं जेपेमानं कुटी कृत्वा चैव सन्त् ॥ 81 ॥

For the expiation of the sin incurred in stealing gold, one is to repeat three thousand Gāyatrīs (daily) for one month; then the sin will be destroyed. By this act also the sins incurred by drinking or by going to one's Guru's wife are destroyed. Vísvāmitra Rṣi says: The sin incurred by killing a Brāhmaṇa (Brahmahatyā) is destroyed if one erects a shed in a forest and, living there, repeats three thousand Gāyatrīs daily for one month.

बहाहा मुच्यते पापादिति कौशिकभावितम् ।

इदार्णहं निमज्ज्याम्यु सहरं प्रत्यहं जेणे ॥ 8 2 ॥

मुच्येत्रइंस: सर्वे मतुपातिकनो द्विजा: ।

त्रिसाहहं जेपेमासं प्राणानायय याययतः ॥ 8 3 ॥

महापातकयुक्तो वा मुचेत महती भयात् ।

Those Brāhmaṇas that have committed the Great Sins (i.e., Mahāpātakas), become free, if they repeat one thousand Gāyatris daily, submerged under water, for twelve successive days. By controlling speech and by practising Prānāyāma, if one repeats three thousand Gāyatris daily for one month, one will be free from the Mahāpātakas.

प्राणायामसहस्रेण बहाहा:5पि विगुध्यति ॥ 84 ॥

घटूकं तवध्यसैटुर्ध्यैं प्राणायानी सभाहितः ।

प्राणायामो भवेदेय सर्वायप्रणाणनः ॥ 85 ॥

सहस्माध्यसेन्मासं हिंसितपः शुचितामियात् ।

If one practises one thousand Pranāyāmas repeating the Gāyatrī, one becomes freed also of Brahmahatyā. If one draws upwards the Prāna and Apāna Vāyus six times, repeating the Gāyatrī with collected mind, this destroys all the sins and it is called all-sin destroying Pranāyāma. If one practises this Pranāyāma one thousand times for one month, the lord of the earth becomes freed of all sins.

ब्रदार्हा सिनहासं चोपेढ़ा गोक्षो घेड़ा: ति ॥ 86 ॥

आयायामानस्तेहनानाश्वयभक्षणे ।

दशसाहतवध्यस्ता गायजी शोध्येद्विड्जम् ॥ 87 ॥

If any Brāhmaṇa incurs the sin of killing a cow, for twelve days he is to repeat three thousand Gāyatrīs daily for expiation. Similarly the repetition of ten thousand Gāyatrīs removes the sin of going to those not fit to be gone into, eating the uneatables, stealing and killing and this act brings in peace.

प्राणायामगतं कृत्वा मुच्यते सर्वैकल्बपात् ।

सर्वेघावेय पाणानां संक्रे सति गुरुद्ये ॥ 88 ॥

सहस्वमध्यसेन्मासं निवत्यापी वने वस्त् ।

उपवाससमं जये जिसहस्ते तदित्युचम् ॥ 89 ॥

All sins are destroyed by performing one hundred Pranāyāmas with Gāyatrī. Again if there be a mixture of various sins, one will have to live in the forest for one month and repeat one thousand Gāyatrīs or practise fasting and repeat three thousand Gāyatrīs; thus all sins will be destroyed.

चतुर्विशतिसहस्मघ्यस्ता कृष्यसिंगिता ।

चतु:वशिसहस्वाणि चोद्रायणसमानि तु ॥ 90 ॥

To repeat Gāyatrī twenty-four thousand times is equal to performing the Krcchra vrata and to repeat sixty four thousand Gāyatrīs duly is equal to performing the Cāndrāyaṇa.

शतकृतोयशैसित्यं प्राणानायय सत्ययोः ।

तदित्युचमवाप्नोति सर्वोपाश्रयं चम् ॥ 91 ॥

निमज्ज्यायुं जयेत्रिवरं शतकृत्वसदित्वयुम् ।

ध्यायदेवौं सुरैक्णं सर्वेपार्थे: प्रमुच्चे ॥ 92 ॥

If anybody repeats, in the morning and evening Sandhyā times, the merit giving Gāyatrī one hundred times, with Prānāyāma, all his sins are destroyed. So, submerged under water, if one repeats the Gāyatrī Devī, meditating Her in the Sun, one hundred times daily, one's all the sins are fully destroyed.

इति ते सभ्यागल्यातः: श्रौतिगुद्धादिकल्पना:।

रहस्यातिरहम्वाुं गोपनीयास्वलया सदा ॥ 9 3 ॥

इति संक्षेपतः प्रोक्ता: सदाचारस्य संग्रहः ।

विधिनाचरणादस्य माया दुर्गा प्रसीदति ॥ 9 4 ॥

भैमितिकं च नित्यं च काय्मकर्म चथाविधि ।

आचोरमपुत्र: सोरंयं भृतिकमृतिकालिपकम् ॥ 9 5 ॥

आचार: प्रथमो धर्मों धर्मेव प्रपुरीक्षी ।

O Nārada! Thus I have described to you all about averting or destroying the evils and the purification of various sins. All this is secret. Keep it carefully concealed. Never divulge this. Whoever divulges this will bring his own ruin. I have spoken to you, in brief, all about Sadācāra (right way of living). If anybody practises this duly, according to rules, Śri Mahāmāya Durgā Devī becomes pleased with him. If anybody wants to have both enjoyment and liberation, he is to practise all these daily, as well as the occasional, and Kāmya (desired) duties duly according to rules.

इतुक्ते सर्वशासेषु सदाचारफलं महत् ॥ 96 ॥

आचारावन्सदा पृत: सदैवाचारावन्सुखी ।

आचारावत्सदा धन्यः सत्यं सत्यं च नारत् ॥ 97 ॥

देवीप्रसादजनकं सदाचारविधायनकम् ।

यदिपि शपुयान्मत्यों महासंपत्तिसौख्याफम् ॥ 98 ॥

सदाचारोग सिद्धेच्छि ऐहिकामुषिकं सुखम् ।

तदेव ते मया प्रोक्ते किमन्तच्छोतुपिच्छसि ॥ 99 ॥

डीत श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे एकादशस्कन्चे सदाचारनिरूपणं

नाम वतुर्विंशोस्थावः ॥ 100 ॥

सार्थैं रागाध्यानेबेटु ( 1 2 4 3 1 ) पश्वीयमितुकृते: शुभैः ।

देवीभागवतस्यास्यैकादश: स्कन्ध्र डैरितः ॥ 101 ॥

समारोजीउमोकादश: स्कन्धः.

It is stated in all the Sāstras, that this Aśāra (right way of living) is the foremost and the chief Dharma, the Deity of which is the Supreme Mother Herself. O Nārada! That man who practises duly this Aśāra is, in this world, holy, happy and blessed. This I speak to you truly. If anybody desires to get the Devi Bhagavati's Grace, he should first of all set himself at once to practise this Sadācāra. He who hears this gets wealth and great happiness. There is no doubt in this. Now speak what more you want to hear.

Here ends the Twenty fourth Chapter of the Eleventh

Book on Sadācāra in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevithāgavatam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

[Here ends the Eleventh Book.]

***
