CHAPTER XLIX

On Surabhi

नारद उवाच

का वा सा सुरार्थिद्वीं गोकोलाकाराता च वा ।

ततन्मचरितं बह्ञ्यब्रौतुभिमछामि यन्ततः ॥ १ ॥

Nārada said: O Bhagavan! Who was that Surabhi, who came down from te region of Goloka. I want to hear Her life. Kindly describe.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

गवामधिष्ठातृदेवी गवामाद्या गवां प्रपुः ।

गवां प्रधाना सुराभंगोलोक से सामुद्धवा ॥ 2 ॥

सर्वादिसुईशिति कवयायि निशगाय ।

बभूव येन ततजन्म पुरा बृन्दावेय ने ॥ 3 ॥

Nārāyaṇa spoke: O Devarṣi! The Devi Surabhi sprang in the Goloka. She was the first in the creation of cows; and, from Her, all the other cows have come. She is the Presiding Deity of the cows. I will now speak Her history from the very beginning. Hear. Before, She appeared in the holy Vrndāvana.

एकदा राधिकानाधो राधाया सह कौतुकी ।

गोगंगनार्थितृती पुण्यं बृन्दावनं यथो ॥ 4 ॥

सहसा तत्र रहसि विजहार स कौतुकत् ।

बधूव क्षीरापनेछा ततय सेवेच्छामयस्य च ॥ 5 ॥

One day the Lord of Rádhā, surrounded by the Gopīs, was going gladly with Rádhā to the Holy Vrndāvana. There he began to enjoy in a solitary place with great pleasure. He is All Will and suddenly a desire arose in His mind that He would drink milk.

ससुजे सुराभि देखी लील्या वामपार्थतः ।

वत्सयुक्तो दृषधीर्वर्ती वस्लो नाम मनोरथः ॥ 6 ॥

द्वृषा सवसां श्रीदामा नवभणघे दुवोह च ।

क्षीरं सुधातिरिकं च जन्ममृत्युजारहम् ॥ 7 ॥

Then He created easily the Devi Surabhi, full of milk, with Her calf, from His own left side. The calf of Surabhi is nothing else but Her wish personified. Seeing Surabhi, Śrīdāmā milked Her in a new earthen jar. The milk is more sweet than even the nectar and it prevents births and death!

ततुर्थ च पय: स्वातु पपी गोपीपति: स्वयम् ।

सरो बधूव पयसां भाणड्विवसंनेच न ॥ ८ ॥

दीर्घं च विस्तृतं चैव परितः शतयोजनम् ।

गोलोकंदयं प्रसिद्धस्य योपि क्षीरसतीवरः ॥ 9 ॥

The Lord of the Gopis drank the milk. What milk dropped out of the jar, created a big tank! The tank measured one hundred Yojanas in length and in breadth and is known in Goloka by the name of Kṣirasāgara.

गोपिकानां च राधाया: क्रीडावाथी बघूव सा ।

रन्टेजरचिता पूर्णं भृत्ता चाधीयुंरेष्ठा ॥ 10 ॥

बभूव कामधेनूनां सहसा लक्षकोटयः ।

यावर्तसत्र गोपायां सुरभ्या लोमकुकत: ॥ 11 ॥

The Gopikas and Rādhā play therein. At the will of Śrī Krṣṇa, Whose Nature is All Will, that tank become full of excellent gems and jewels. Then, from every pore of Surabhi, there appeared suddenly one lakh koṭi Kāmadhenus (cows who yield according to one's desires). So much so that every Gopa who used to live there in Goloka had one Kāmadhenu and each house had one such.

तासां पुरात्र शक्र: संबंभूतसंख्याकः ।

कथिता च गर्वां सृह्डिस्वा च पूर्ति जन्त् ॥ 12 ॥

पूर्जा चकार भगवान् सुरभ्याशु पुरा मुने ।

ततो बभूव तत्पूजा त्रिषु लोकेपु तुर्वभा ॥ 13 ॥

Their calves again became so many that no limit can be put to them. Thus, by degrees, the whole universe was filled with cows. This is the origion of the Cow Creation. O Nārada! Surabhi was first worshipped by Bhagavān Sīrī Kṛṣṇa. Therefore She is so much honoured everywhere.

दीपालितप्रपतिदेशे श्रीकृष्यस्वाज्ञा हरे: ।

बधूस सुरभि: पूजा धर्मविज्ञादिदं श्रुतम् ॥ 14 ॥

धान स्तोत्र मूलमंत्र यदासूजाविधिक्रमम् ।

वेदोक्ते च महापाना निवोधि कथयामि ते ॥ 15 ॥

On the day next the Devālī night (new moon in the month of October), Surabhi was worshipped

Book IX Chapter XLIX

by the command of Śrī Krṣṇa. This is heard from the mouth of Dharma Deva. O Child! Now hear the Dhyānam, Stotra, and the method of worship of Surabhi as mentioned in the Vedas. I will now speak on this. ‘Om Surabhyaī namah,’ is the principal six-lettered mantra of Surabhi.

ஞ்கு புரங்கு மன துன் நிம்சனலா: ஏகத்ர: 1

सिद्धो लक्षसपैलैव भक्तानां कल्पपादः ॥ १६ ॥

ध्यानं यजुर्वेदगीतं तस्याः पूजा च सर्वतः ।

ऋद्धिदा शुद्धिदा चैव मुक्तिदा सर्वकामादा ॥ 17 ॥

If anybody repeats this mantra one lakh times, he becomes Siddha in this mantra. This is like Kalpa Vṛksa (a tree yielding all desires) to the devotees. The Dhyānam of Surabhi is mentioned in the Yajur Vedas. Success, prosperity, increase and freedom come as the result of worshipping Surabhi.

ल्हमीरकलां परां त्रासहर्षी परम् ।

गवामधिष्ठानृदेवों गवामाशा गवां प्रभूम् ॥ 18 ॥

पवित्रकपां पृतां च भक्तानां सर्वकामदाम् ।

यया पृतं सर्वविश्व तां देवीं सुरिभं भजे ॥ 19 ॥

घटे वा धनुषगिरिसे बंधवर्भे गयामपि ।

शाल्यामे जलानी वा सुर्धिं पूजवेद्धिजः ॥ 20 ॥

The Dhyānam runs as follows: “O Devi Surabhi! Thou art Lakṣmī, Thou art best, Thou art Rādhā; Thou art the chief companion of Śrī Rādhā, Thou art the first and the source of the cow creation, Thou art holy and Thou sanctifiest the persons; Thou fulfilled the desires of the devotees and Thou purifiest the whole universe. Therefore I meditate on Thee.”

दीपालितापरदिने पूर्वांढ़े पृत्यिसंयुतः ।

यः पूर्वेच्च सुरंपि स च पूज्यो भवेद्धृति ॥ २१ ॥

एकदा विशु लोकेषु वगहे विष्णुमायया ।

श्री जहार सुरिभिंशितिज्ञ सुरावयः ॥ 22 ॥

Reciting this Dhyānam, the Brāhmaṇas worship the Devi Śurabhi in jars, on the heads of cows, or on the pegs where cows are fastened or on Sālagrāma stone or in water or in fire. O Muni! He who worships with devotion on the next day

morning after Divālī night, becomes also worshipped in this world. Once a day in the Vārāhakalpa Surabhi did not yield milk, by the influence of Viṣṇu Māyā.

ने नेचा ब्रह्लोकें च ब्रह्लाणं तुधुवस्तव ।

तद्वज्ञा च सुरार्थ तुहाव पाकशासनः ॥ 23 ॥

The Devas became very anxious. Then they went to the Brahamloka and began to praise Brahmā. At His advice, Indra began to chant hymns (Stotra) to Surabhi:

पुन्तर वजाच

नमो देये महादेवे सुरार्थे च नमो नमः ।

गवां बीजस्वलपारे नमसे जगदंबिके ॥ 24 ॥

नमो राधाधियार्ये च पदाग्राशे नमो नमः ।

नमः कृष्णप्रियार्ये च गवां मात्रे नमो नमः ॥ 25 ॥

The Devenda said: "O World-Mother! O Devi! O Mahā Devi! O Surabhi! Thou art the source of the cow creation. Obeisance to Thee! Thou art the dear companion of Rādhā; Thou art the part of Kamalā; Thou art dear to Śrī Krṣna; Thou art the mother of cows, I bow down to Thee.

कल्पबुळस्वरूपारे सर्वेयं सततं परे ।

क्षीरादौये धनवाद्ये बुद्धिद्वार्ये नमः ॥ 26 ॥

गुभार्ये च सुभग्रह्ये गोप्रदार्ये नमः नमः ।

यगोदार्ये कौतित्वार्ये धर्मद्वार्ये नमः ॥ 27 ॥

Thou art like the Kalpa Vrksa (a tree yielding all desires), Thou art the Chief of all; Thou yieldest milk, wealth and prosperity and increase thereof. So I dow bown to Thee. Thou art auspicious, Thou art good, Thou bestowest cows. Obisance to Thee! Thou givest fame, name and Dharma. So I bow down to Thee."

सतोत्रप्रव्यमापोगे तृषा हुहा जगतप्रयु: ।

आविर्बभूव तत्रैव बह्योलके समतानी ॥ 28 ॥

महैत्राय वर्ध दत्ता बांहितं चापि दुलंभम् ।

जगाम सा च गोलोकं वयुदेवादायो गृहम् ॥ 29 ॥

O Nārada! Thus hearing the praise sung by Indra, the enternal Surabhi, the originator of the world, became very glad and appeared in the Brahmaloka. Granting boon to Mahendra, so very rare to others

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

and desired by him, Surabhi went to the Goloka. The Devas, also, went back to their own abodes.

वभूव विश्वं सहसा दुर्धपूर्णं च नाटव ।

दुर्भं घृतं ततो यजस्ततः प्रीति: सुरस्य च ॥ 30 ॥

इर्वं स्तोत्रं महापुर्णयं भक्तियुक्तघ यः पदेत् ।

स गोगान् धन्वांश्रेव कर्जितमान्युवर्जांस्तथा ॥ 31 ॥

The whole world was now full of milk; clarified butter came out of the milk; and from clarified butter sacrifice began to be performed and the Devas were fed and they became pleased. O Child! He who recites this holy Stotra of Surabhi with devotion, gets cows, other wealth, name, fame and sons.

स स्नातः सर्वतीर्थेयु सर्वयेजूय दीक्षितः ।

इह लोके सुखं घुकत्वा याच्येत कृष्णमन्दिरे ॥ 32 ॥

सुचिरं निवसेतत्र करीति कृष्णसेवनम् ।

न पुनर्भवंत तत्र बहपुरत्रो घयेततः ॥ 33 ॥

ड्रौं श्रीमद्वीघागवतो महापुराणं नवमरकन्के

एकानंपशासामो5ध्यायः ॥ 49 ॥

The reciting of this Stotra qualifies one as if he had bathed in all the sacred places of pilgrimages and he had acquired the fruits of all the sacrifices. Enjoying happiness in this world, he goes in the end to the Temple of Śri Kṛṣṇa. There living long in the service of Kṛṣṇa, he becomes able to be a son of Brahmā.

Here ends the Forty-ninth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the anecdote of Surabhi in the Mahā Purānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

