CHAPTER XXX

On the Glory of Mahā Māyā

नारद उवाच

मां बृह्वा नारदं विश्व विश्वमितोउसी महीधपति: ।

क्व गता मम भार्यों सा कुतोउवं मुनिसस्तम: ॥ १ ॥

वित्तलाप नृप्सतत्र हा प्रियेति मुकुँदुः ।

क्व गता मां परित्यज्य विलयन्ते विलयोगियम् ॥ २ ॥

Nārada said: “O Best of Munis! The King was greatly astonished to see me dip in the tank in a female figure and get up from the tank in a male

figure and thought. Where is my dearest wife? And how is this Nārada Muni suddenly come here! The King, not seeing his wife, lamented very much and cried frequently O my dear Wife! Where have you gone, leaving me here thus."

विता तां विपुलओणीच बृथा मे जीवितं गृहम् ।

राज्य कमलपत्राशिक्र किं करोमि शुचिभित्मे ॥ ३ ॥

न प्राणा मे बहिर्यान्ति विरहेण तवाधुना ।

गतो वै प्रीतिध्यमैस्तु तवामृते प्राणधारणात् ॥ ४ ॥

Without you, O One of spacious hips! My life, palace and kingdom, all, are quite useless. O Lotus-eyed one! What shall I do? O Smilling One! Why is not my life getting out of my body, suffering thus from thy separation? Without you, my sentiment of love has left me for ever.

विल्यामि विशालासिंह वेहि प्रवृत्तरं प्रियम् ।

क्व गता सा मायि प्रीतिवार्षभूद्यमयंगे ॥ 5 ॥

O Large-eyed One! Now I am lamenting for you, O Dear! Better give me your sweet reply; the love that you expressed at our first union, where has it gone now?

निमाना कि जले सुचृष्ठीक्षिता मत्स्यकच्छधेः ।

गृहीता वकृणेनाशु मम दोषाण्ययोगतः ॥ 6 ॥

धन्या सुचासर्वर्शि या त्वं पुत्रैः समागता ।

अकृतिमस्तु पुरेशुं नेत्रतेरेप्रतभाषिशि ॥ 7 ॥

O One with good eyebrows! Are you sunk in the water and have you given up your life? Or are you devoured by fishes or crocodiles? Or are you carried away by Varuna, the Deva of the waters, to my great misfortune? O One of beautiful limbs!

न युकमधुना व्यमां विहाय तिथिदंय गता ।

विलपन्ते पति दीनं पुत्रसनेहन यन्धिता ॥ 8 ॥

उभयं मे गतं काने पुत्रस्तं प्राणवल्लभे ।

तथापि मरणं नातित झुःवितत्य मृष्णं प्रिये ॥ 9 ॥

You are blessed, as you have gone away with your sons; O sweet-speaking One! Your affection for them was not artificial. Is it right for you to go up to the Heavens, attached by affection for yours sons, leaving me your distressed husband alone, thus weeping for your separation?

कि कारीम वक्ता मच्छामि रोगो नारित महीत्ते ।

रामाविरहर्जे दुः:खुखानाति सूचनन्दनः ॥ 10 ॥

O Dear! I have lost both, you and my sons; yet death is not carrying me away; O! How hard is my lot! What to do? Where to go? Rāma is not now in this world. He knew what was the pain caused by the separation from one's dearest wife.

विधिना निहुर्णान्र विवरीतं कृतम्भ्युवि ।

द्यपत्योर्मरणं भिन्नं सर्वथा समाचितयो: ॥ १ १  ॥

Oh! The cruel Fate has ordained very unwisely with great inconsistency the periods of parting from one another at different periods; when their minds and all other things are exactly the same in all circumstances of pleasure and pain.

उपकारस्तु नारीणां भूतिभर्वित्र: किल ।

यदुर्फे धर्मशक्षेषु ज्जलनं पतिनां सह ॥ १ २ ॥

एवं विलयमानं तं राजानं भगवाहर्य: ।

निवारयामास तदा चवनैयुक्तिक्योजितः ॥ 13 ॥

The practise of Satī (burning with one's deceased husband), as ordained by the Munis, is certainly for the good of the chaste women; but it would have been good no doubt, were there such practises allowed for the men to burn themselves with their deceased wives." Bhagavān Hari then spoke to the lamenting King in reasonable words and consoled him thus:

श्रीभगवानुवाच

क्रिक विवादिति राजेन्द्र स्व यत ते प्रियाङ्गन ।

न श्रुत किं स्व्य शास्त्र न कृतोतयी झुयाययः ॥ १ ४ ॥

"O King! Why are you thus troubling yourself with pain and sorrow? Where has gone your dearest wife? Have you not heard anything of Śāstras? or Have you not taken any shelter of any wise man!

का सा कतस्तंच स्व योगोय विवेयाः कौहुगस्तल ।

प्रवाहरूप संसारे नृणां नौतततापिव ॥ १ ५ ॥

Who was your wife? Who are you? Of what nature was your union and disunion and where did it take place? The union of wives and sons in this Saṃsāra is momentary like the meetings of persons on boats, while crossing a river.

गृहे गच्छ नृपश्रेष्ठ बुधा ते कहितेन किम् ।

संशोधाग्र विशोधाग्रुं देवधानि: सदा गुणान् ॥ 16 ॥

O King! Now go home, there is no use in your weeping thus in vain; the union and disunion of men are always under the control of Fate, the Daiva; therefore the wise should not lament for them.

अनया सह ते राजनसंयोगसिद्ध संवृतः ।

भुक्ता तथा विशालाक्षी सुंदरी तनुष्यमा ॥ 17 ॥

Book VI Chapter XXX

O King! Your union with the woman took place here; and now you have lost that beautiful, thin-bodied, large-eyed woman here also.

न दृष्टी पित्तावस्यास्त्वया प्राप्ता सरोवरे ।

काककालीप्रेसोन यद्भूतं ततथा गतम् ॥ 18 ॥

Her father and mother you have not seen; you have got her like what is heard in the story of the crow and the Tāla fruit; as you got her wonderfully, so you have lost her wonderfully.

मा शोकें कुरं राजेन्द्र कातोस्तिवृतिकमः ।

कालयोगी समासादा घूब्ध्व भोगानूहे यथा ॥ 19 ॥

यथाउउगता तगा सा तु तथैव वरविण्नी ।

यथा पूर्व तथा तत्र कष्ट कार्य कुरु प्रभो ॥ 20 ॥

O King! Do not grieve; Time cannot be ruled over; go home and enjoy yourself subservient to Time. That beautiful woman has gone away in the manner she came to you; you ought to do your stately affairs in the way as you used to do before as the ruler of all.

रूदितेन त्वाठीय नागमिष्यति कामिनी ।

दृथा शोचसि पृथ्वीश योगयुक्तो भवाछ्ञान ॥ 21 ॥

भोगः कालवशादेति तथैव प्रतिवाति च ।

नात्र शोकस्तु कत्होये निष्क्ले भवकल्मिन ॥ 22 ॥

O King! Consider that if you weep day and night, that woman will never return; why then are you giving vent to your sorrows in vain? Go now and have recourse to the path of the Yoga and thus while away your time.

नैकत्र सुखसंयोगो दुःखयोगस्तु नैकतः ।

यदिकायन्वकानां भ्रमणं सुखदुःखयोः ॥ २३ ॥

The enjoyable things come in course of time and they go away again in due course; therefore in this world of no gain whatsoever, the wise should never lament. Continuous pleasure or continuous pain does not always take place; pleasure and pain are never steady; they rotate always like a rotary instrument.

मन: कृत्वा सिंधां भृपु केतार्चं घ्यासुखम् ।

अथवा नस्य दायादे वर्न सेवस्य समीप्रणि ॥ 24 ॥

Therefore, O King! Make your mind calm and

a rotary instrument. Therefore, O King! Make your mind calm and quiet and rule happily your kingdom; or make over the charge of the kingdom to your sons and retire to the forest.

दुर्लभो मानुषो देहः प्राणिता क्षणधर्मग्रः ।

तस्मिन्नाते तु कतिथ्यं सर्वेश्वात्मसाधानम् ॥ 25 ॥

This human body is seldom obtained; it is frail; therefore getting that body it is advisable to practise the realisation of the Supreme.

विद्धोपस्थसरो राजन्यगुधोपितु वर्तते ।

ज्ञानं मानुपदेहे वै नान्यासु च कुयोगीम् ॥ 26 ॥

O King! This organ of generation and this tongue reside also with the beasts, the peculiarity of human body is that knowledge can be realised in it; not in any other inferior births.

तस्मादुपच्छ गृह्टवक्त्वाशोके कान्तामुकुद्वम् ।

मायेयं भगवत्यास्तु यया सम्मोहितं जगत् ॥ 27 ॥

Therefore leave your home, leave your sorrows for your wife; all this is the Māyā of Bhagavān; by Her the world is deluded."

नात्य उवाच

इत्युक्तो हरिणा राजा प्रणयम कमलापतिम् ।

कृत्वा सनाविषिधं सम्यजगाम तिजमतिर्यम् ॥ 28 ॥

Nārada said: Bhagavān Hari speaking thus, the King bowed down to Him, the Deva of the Devas and finishing the bathing duties returned to his home.

दत्ता राज्यं स्वपौत्राय प्राय पिवैदंमढुतम् ।

वर्नं जगाम भूपालस्तच्ज्ञानयाव च ॥ 29 ॥

He then became possessed of dispassion and discrimination and making over the charge of his kingdom to his grandsons retired to the forest and realised the Supreme Knowledge.

गते राजन्यई वीक्ष्य भगवनमाधोक्षजम् ।

तमकुबं जगताथं हस्तां मां पुन: पुन: ॥ 30 ॥

When the King went away, the Bhagavān began to laugh and laugh, seeing me again and again. I then told him “O Deva! You have deceived me.

विश्रितोई त्वया देह ज्ञातं मायावलं महत् ।

स्माराम चरितं सर्वे क्रीदेहे चक्तृत मया ॥ 31 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

I now come to know how great is the power of Māyā. O Janārḍana! Now I remember all that I did in my feminine form.

यूहि मे देवेदेयेन प्रविष्ठोई सरोये ।

वित्तं पूर्वविज्ञानं स्नानादेव कर्थे है ॥ 32 ॥

Tell me, O Hari! O Deva of the Devas! How I lost my previous consciousness, when I got down into the tank and bathed in it.

शोभिर्हें समासाद्ध मोहितोर्जे जगद्युगे ।

पर्ति ग्रण्य नृपश्रेष्ठ पुरुलोभी वासवं यथा ॥ 33 ॥

O Lord of the world! Why was I enchanted, when I got the female form and when I got the King as my husband like Śaci's getting Indra.

मनस्तदेव तिच्चतं देहः स च पुरातनः ।

लिंगं तदेव देहेश स्युतेनीश: कर्थ है ॥ 34 ॥

The same mind I had; the old Jīvātmā was there and the previous subtle body was there; how, then, I lost their memories?

विस्मयोर्ध महान्योज ज्ञानगांश प्रति प्रभो ।

कयवधा रमाकान कारणं परमं च यत् ॥ 35 ॥

O Lord! Give out the cause of it and clear my doubts; a great doubts has arisen in my mind.

नारीदेहं भवा प्राथ्य मुक्ता भोगा हुचनेकरः ।

सुपारपांत कृति निव्य विधिहीनं च कोवाजम् ॥ 36 ॥

Many enjoyments I had in my female form, drinking liquor and other prohibited things I tasted; O Slayer of Madhu! What is the cause of all these?

मया तदेव न ज्ञातं नारदोड़भिति सुकटम् ।

जानाभ्यद्य यथा सर्वे विकिति न तथा त्वा ॥ 37 ॥

I could not know then that I was Nārada, as I now recognise clearly what I was in and what I did in my female form. Say the Why of all these things.

विष्णुर्वाच

पर्य नारद् यायावी विलासतोर्प महामते ।

देहेषु सर्वेन्तूनां द्राणेवा हुधलेकशः ॥ 38 ॥

Visnu said: "Know, O Intelligent Nārada! That all this is merely the Pastime of Māyā. There are many states going on in the bodies of all the living beings.

जाग्रत्वपनमुचुलिहा तुरीया देहिनां द्वणा ।

तथा देहान्तरे प्रापते सन्देहः कौणुगः पुनः ॥ 39 ॥

The embodied beings have got their waking, dream, deep sleep and Turiya (beyond all the three above mentioned) states; then why you doubt that when there is another body, there would be also the change in the states?

सुगतो नरो न जानाति न शृणोति वदत्यपि ।

पुनः प्रवृद्धो जानाति सर्व ज्ञातमशेषतः ॥ 40 ॥

When a man sleeps, he knows not anything, he does not hear anything; but when he gets awake, he again comes to know everything completely.

निद्रा चाल्यते चिंतं भवन्ति स्वतमस्पषाः ।

नानाविधा मनोभेदो मनोभावा हुनेकशः ॥ 41 ॥

The Citta gets itself moved by sleep; then mind gets different states by dreams and there arises a variety of feelings.

गजों में हनुभावाति न शकतोरमि सलायने ।

कि कंकीम न ये सीनींच यज भख्यास सकर: ॥ 42 ॥

A mad elephant is coming to kill me, and I am not able to fly away; what to do? Where to go? There is no place where I can quickly go: thus, in dreams, there arise different mental states.

वितामहं स्वाने पश्यति स्वगृहात्मान् ।

संयोगसन्तेन वातां च भोजनं सह मयने ॥ 43 ॥

Sometimes we see in dreams that our departed grandfathers are come in our houses. I am seeing them, talking with them and I am dining with them.

प्रकुबः खलु जानाति स्वपे दुर्भे सुखासुखम् ।

भ्युला सर्वे जनेभ्यस्तु विस्ताराव्रदत्यपि ॥ 44 ॥

Whatever pain and pleasure are felt in dreams, when they awake, they know of what happened in their dreams and can also describe in details, recollecting what had been happened.

स्वपे कोप्रि न जानाति भ्रमोर्धिति निश्रयः ।

यथा तर्वेय विभयो मायाया दुर्गम: किल ॥ 4 5 ॥

O Nārada! Know the power of Māyā incomprehensible as the things seen in dreams cannot be certainly known that all those are false.

नाहं नारद ज्ञानापि पारम्परमुद्यंम ।

गुणानां किल मायाया नैव शाम्यानं घचज: ॥ 46 ॥

Book VI Chapter XXX

O Muni! Neither I, nor Šambhu, nor Brahmā can measure the power wielded by Māyā and Her three Guṇas, very hard to fathom.

கொலு சாள்து சுழல்பேழமானவே மறடே: ஒந: 1

మామాగురాగినాన న కంజువి పలేద్ద 147 11

How, then, can any ordinary mortal know them! Therefore, O Nārada! None is able to fathom the Māyā.

गुणारयकृतं सर्वे जगत्थावाज्जूमम् ।।

विना गुणैन संसारो वर्तते किंचिद्वाद्वः ॥ 48 ॥

उहं सत्वप्रधानोउसि रजतसमसप्तितः ।

न कदाचित्रिभर्षिणीं भावामि घुवनेश्र: ॥ 49 ॥

This world, moving and non-moving, is fashioned out of the triple Gunas of the Māyā; nothing whatsoever can exist without them. The predominant Guna in Me is Sattva; but Rajas and Tamas exist in me; being the Lord of this world, I cannot override the three Gunas.

तथा बहा पिता तेउत्र रजोमुख्यः प्रकीर्तितः ।

तम:सत्त्वसाम्युक्ति न ताध्यामुक्ति: किलि ॥ 50 ॥

So your father, Brahmā, is predominant in Rajo Guna; but Sattva and Tamas never leave Him.

शिवस्तथा तमोमुख्यो रजःसत्त्वसाम्यात् ।

गुणत्रयिवहीनस्तु नैव कोउपि मया शुतः ॥ 51 ॥

Our Mahā Deva is predominant in Tamo Guna, but Sattva and Raja are always with him. Therefore, no being can exist as separate from the three Gunas; this point I have settled in Śruti.

तस्मानोहो न कतिथ्व: संसारोत्रिस्मनुनीश ।

माया विवितिपेलुरासेपरे परमदुष्टे ॥ ५२ ॥

Therefore, O Lord of the Munis! Quit this endless Moha for the world, caused by Māyā, and very hard to get over and worship Bhagavatī, Who is of the nature of Brahman.

दूषा माया त्वयास्त्रीयं भुक्ता भोगा हुंचनेकशः।

किं पृष्छासि महाभाग तत्यश्रहीरात्मद्धुतम् ॥ 53 ॥

श्रित श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे भश्छकन्ये

प्रिंशोर्यावाः : 11 30 ॥

O Intelligent One! Now you have seen the power of Māyā; and you have enjoyed many things produced by Māyā and you have realised the extremely wonderful nature of Her. Then why do you ask me further on this point?

Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Sixth Book on

the glory of Mahā Māyā in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XXX

