[Ch 30 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada said: “O Best of Munis! The King was greatly astonished to see me dip in the tank in a female figure and get up from the tank in a male figure and thought. Where is my dearest wife? And how is this Nārada Muni suddenly come here! The King, not seeing his wife, lamented very much and cried frequently O my dear Wife! Where have you gone, leaving me here thus."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- O Best of Munis! The King was greatly astonished to see me dip in the tank in a female figure and get up from the tank in a male figure and thought, “Where is my dearest wife? And how is this Nārada Muni suddenly come here!” The King, not seeing his wife, lamented very much and cried frequently, “O my dear Wife! Where have you gone, leaving me here thus.

[Ch 30 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Without you, O One of spacious hips! My life, palace and kingdom, all, are quite useless. O Lotus-eyed one! What shall I do? O Smilling One! Why is not my life getting out of my body, suffering thus from thy separation? Without you, my sentiment of love has left me for ever.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Without you, O One of spacious hips! My life, palace and kingdom, all, are quite useless. O Lotus-eyed one! What shall I do? O Smiling One! Why is not my life getting out of my body, suffering thus from thy separation? Without you, my sentiment of love has left me for ever.

[Ch 30 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Large-eyed One! Now I am lamenting for you, O Dear! Better give me your sweet reply; the love that you expressed at our first union, where has it gone now?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Large-eyed One! Now I am lamenting for you. O Dear! Better give me your sweet reply; the love that you expressed at our first union, where has it gone now?

[Ch 30 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O One with good eyebrows! Are you sunk in the water and have you given up your life? Or are you devoured by fishes or crocodiles? Or are you carried away by Varuna, the Deva of the waters, to my great misfortune? O One of beautiful limbs!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O One with good eyebrows! Are you sunk in the water and have you given up your life? Or are you devoured by fishes or crocodiles? Or are you carried away by Varuṇa, the Deva of the waters, to my great misfortune? O One of beautiful limbs!

[Ch 30 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You are blessed, as you have gone away with your sons; O sweet-speaking One! Your affection for them was not artificial. Is it right for you to go up to the Heavens, attached by affection for yours sons, leaving me your distressed husband alone, thus weeping for your separation?
NEW CORR ENG ──► You are blessed, as you have gone away with your sons; O sweet-speaking One! Your affection for them was not artificial. Is it right for you to go up to the Heavens, attached by affection for your sons, leaving me your distressed husband alone, thus weeping for your separation?

[Ch 30 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Dear! I have lost both, you and my sons; yet death is not carrying me away; O! How hard is my lot! What to do? Where to go? Rāma is not now in this world. He knew what was the pain caused by the separation from one's dearest wife.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Dear! I have lost both, you and my sons; yet death is not carrying me away; O! How hard is my lot! What to do? Where to go? Rāma is not now in this world. He knew what was the pain caused by the separation from one’s dearest wife.

[Ch 30 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Oh! The cruel Fate has ordained very unwisely with great inconsistency the periods of parting from one another at different periods; when their minds and all other things are exactly the same in all circumstances of pleasure and pain.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Oh! The cruel Fate has ordained very unwisely with great inconsistency the periods of parting from one another at different periods; when their minds and all other things are exactly the same in all circumstances of pleasure and pain.

[Ch 30 Verse 12-13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The practise of Satī (burning with one's deceased husband), as ordained by the Munis, is certainly for the good of the chaste women; but it would have been good no doubt, were there such practises allowed for the men to burn themselves with their deceased wives." Bhagavān Hari then spoke to the lamenting King in reasonable words and consoled him thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► The practice of Satī (burning with one’s deceased husband), as ordained by the Munis, is certainly for the good of the chaste women; but it would have been good no doubt, were there such practices allowed for the men to burn themselves with their deceased wives.” Bhagavān Hari then spoke to the lamenting King in reasonable words and consoled him thus :--

[Ch 30 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O King! Why are you thus troubling yourself with pain and sorrow? Where has gone your dearest wife? Have you not heard anything of Śāstras? or Have you not taken any shelter of any wise man!
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “O King! Why are you thus troubling yourself with pain and sorrow? Where has gone your dearest wife? Have you not heard anything of Śāstras? or Have you not taken any shelter of any wise man!

[Ch 30 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Who was your wife? Who are you? Of what nature was your union and disunion and where did it take place? The union of wives and sons in this Saṃsāra is momentary like the meetings of persons on boats, while crossing a river.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Who was your wife? Who are you? Of what nature was your union and disunion and where did it take place? The union of wives and sons in this Śamsāra is momentary like the meetings of persons on boats, while crossing a river.

[Ch 30 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Now go home, there is no use in your weeping thus in vain; the union and disunion of men are always under the control of Fate, the Daiva; therefore the wise should not lament for them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Now go home, there is no use in your weeping thus in vain; the union and disunion of men are always under the control of Fate, the Daiva; therefore the wise should not lament for them.

[Ch 30 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Your union with the woman took place here; and now you have lost that beautiful, thin-bodied, large-eyed woman here also.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Your union with the woman took place here; and now you have lost that beautiful, thin-bodied, large-eyed woman here also.

[Ch 30 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her father and mother you have not seen; you have got her like what is heard in the story of the crow and the Tāla fruit; as you got her wonderfully, so you have lost her wonderfully.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her father and mother you have not seen; you have got her like what is heard in the story of the crow and the Tāl fruit; as you got her wonderfully, so you have lost her wonderfully.

[Ch 30 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Do not grieve; Time cannot be ruled over; go home and enjoy yourself subservient to Time. That beautiful woman has gone away in the manner she came to you; you ought to do your stately affairs in the way as you used to do before as the ruler of all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Do not grieve; Time cannot be ruled over; go home and enjoy yourself subservient to Time. That beautiful woman has gone away in the manner she came to you; you ought to do your stately affairs in the way as you used to do before as the ruler of all.

[Ch 30 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Consider that if you weep day and night, that woman will never return; why then are you giving vent to your sorrows in vain? Go now and have recourse to the path of the Yoga and thus while away your time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Consider that if you weep day and night, that women will never return; why then are you giving vent to your sorrows in vain? Go now and have recourse to the path of the Yoga and thus while away your time.

[Ch 30 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The enjoyable things come in course of time and they go away again in due course; therefore in this world of no gain whatsoever, the wise should never lament. Continuous pleasure or continuous pain does not always take place; pleasure and pain are never steady; they rotate always like a rotary instrument.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The enjoyable things come in course of time and they go away again in due course; therefore in this world of no gain whatsoever, the wise should never lament. Continuous pleasure or continuous pain does not always take place; pleasure and pain are never steady; they rotate always like a rotary instrument.

[Ch 30 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O King! Make your mind calm and a rotary instrument. Therefore, O King! Make your mind calm and quiet and rule happily your kingdom; or make over the charge of the kingdom to your sons and retire to the forest.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O King! Make your mind calm and quiet and rule happily your kingdom; or make over the charge of the kingdom to your sons and retire to the forest.

[Ch 30 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This human body is seldom obtained; it is frail; therefore getting that body it is advisable to practise the realisation of the Supreme.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This human body is seldom obtained; it is frail; therefore getting that body it is advisable to practise the realisation of the Supreme.

[Ch 30 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! This organ of generation and this tongue reside also with the beasts, the peculiarity of human body is that knowledge can be realised in it; not in any other inferior births.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! This organ of generation and this tongue reside also with the beasts, the peculiarity of human body is that knowledge can be realised in it; not in any other inferior births.

[Ch 30 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore leave your home, leave your sorrows for your wife; all this is the Māyā of Bhagavān; by Her the world is deluded."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore leave your home, leave your sorrows for your wife; all this is the Māyā of Bhagavān; by Her the world is deluded.”

[Ch 30 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada said: Bhagavān Hari speaking thus, the King bowed down to Him, the Deva of the Devas and finishing the bathing duties returned to his home.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- Bhagavān Hari speaking thus, the King bowed down to Him, the Deva of the Devas and finishing the bathing duties returned to his home.

[Ch 30 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He then became possessed of dispassion and discrimination and making over the charge of his kingdom to his grandsons retired to the forest and realised the Supreme Knowledge.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He then became possessed of dispassion and discrimination and making over the charge of his kingdom to his grandsons retired to the forest and realised the Supreme Knowledge.

[Ch 30 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the King went away, the Bhagavān began to laugh and laugh, seeing me again and again. I then told him “O Deva! You have deceived me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the King went away, the Bhagavān began to laugh and laugh, seeing me again and again. I then told him, “O Deva! You have deceived me.

[Ch 30 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I now come to know how great is the power of Māyā. O Janārḍana! Now I remember all that I did in my feminine form.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I now come to know how great is the power of Māyā. O Janārdana! Now I remember all that I did in my feminine form.

[Ch 30 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Tell me, O Hari! O Deva of the Devas! How I lost my previous consciousness, when I got down into the tank and bathed in it.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Tell me, O Hari! O Deva of the Devas! How I lost my previous consciousness, when I got down into the tank and bathed in it.

[Ch 30 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the world! Why was I enchanted, when I got the female form and when I got the King as my husband like Śaci's getting Indra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the world! Why was I enchanted, when I got the female form and when I got the King as my husband like Śacī’s getting Indra.

[Ch 30 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The same mind I had; the old Jīvātmā was there and the previous subtle body was there; how, then, I lost their memories?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The same mind I had; the old Jivātmā was there and the previous subtle body was there; how, then, I lost their memories?

[Ch 30 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord! Give out the cause of it and clear my doubts; a great doubts has arisen in my mind.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord! Give out the cause of it and clear my doubts; a great doubt has arisen in my mind.

[Ch 30 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Many enjoyments I had in my female form, drinking liquor and other prohibited things I tasted; O Slayer of Madhu! What is the cause of all these?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Many enjoyments I had in my female form, drinking liquor and other prohibited things I tasted; O Slayer of Madhu! What is the cause of all these?

[Ch 30 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I could not know then that I was Nārada, as I now recognise clearly what I was in and what I did in my female form. Say the Why of all these things.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I could not know then that I was Nārada, as I now recognise clearly what I was in and what I did in my female form. Say the Why of all these things.”

[Ch 30 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Visnu said: "Know, O Intelligent Nārada! That all this is merely the Pastime of Māyā. There are many states going on in the bodies of all the living beings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viṣṇu said :-- “Know, O Intelligent Nārada! That all this is merely the Pastime of Māyā. There are many states going on in the bodies of all the living beings.

[Ch 30 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The embodied beings have got their waking, dream, deep sleep and Turiya (beyond all the three above mentioned) states; then why you doubt that when there is another body, there would be also the change in the states?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The embodied beings have got their waking, dream, deep sleep and Tūriya (beyond all the three above-mentioned) states; then why you doubt that when there is another body, there would be also the change in the states?

[Ch 30 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When a man sleeps, he knows not anything, he does not hear anything; but when he gets awake, he again comes to know everything completely.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When a man sleeps, he knows not anything, he does not hear anything; but when he gets awake, he again comes to know everything completely.

[Ch 30 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Citta gets itself moved by sleep; then mind gets different states by dreams and there arises a variety of feelings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Chitta gets itself moved by sleep; then mind gets different states by dreams and there arises a variety of feelings.

[Ch 30 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► A mad elephant is coming to kill me, and I am not able to fly away; what to do? Where to go? There is no place where I can quickly go: thus, in dreams, there arise different mental states.
NEW CORR ENG ──► A mad elephant is coming to kill me, and I am not able to fly away. What to do? Where to go? There is no place where I can quickly go; thus, in dreams, there arise different mental states.

[Ch 30 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sometimes we see in dreams that our departed grandfathers are come in our houses. I am seeing them, talking with them and I am dining with them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sometimes we see in dreams that our departed grandfathers are come in our houses. I am seeing them, talking with them and I am dining with them.

[Ch 30 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whatever pain and pleasure are felt in dreams, when they awake, they know of what happened in their dreams and can also describe in details, recollecting what had been happened.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whatever pain and pleasure are felt in dreams, when they awake, they know of what happened in their dreams and can also describe in details, recollecting what had then happened.

[Ch 30 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Nārada! Know the power of Māyā incomprehensible as the things seen in dreams cannot be certainly known that all those are false.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Nārada! Know the power of Māyā incomprehensible as the things seen in dreams cannot be certainly known that all those are false.

[Ch 30 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! Neither I, nor Šambhu, nor Brahmā can measure the power wielded by Māyā and Her three Guṇas, very hard to fathom. கொலு சாள்து சுழல்பேழமானவே மறடே: ஒந: 1 మామాగురాగినాన న కంజువి పలేద్ద 147 11 How, then, can any ordinary mortal know them! Therefore, O Nārada! None is able to fathom the Māyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! Neither I, nor Śambhu, nor Brahmā can measure the power wielded by Māyā and Her three Guṇas, very hard to fathom. How, then, can any ordinary mortal know them! Therefore, O Nārada! None is able to fathom the Māyā.

[Ch 30 Verse 47-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This world, moving and non-moving, is fashioned out of the triple Gunas of the Māyā; nothing whatsoever can exist without them. The predominant Guna in Me is Sattva; but Rajas and Tamas exist in me; being the Lord of this world, I cannot override the three Gunas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This world, moving and non-moving, is fashioned out of the triple Guṇas of the Māyā; nothing whatsoever can exist without them. The predominant Guṇa in Me is Sāttva; but Rājas and Tāmas exist in me; being the Lord of this world, I cannot override the three Guṇas.

[Ch 30 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So your father, Brahmā, is predominant in Rajo Guna; but Sattva and Tamas never leave Him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So your father, Brahmā, is predominant in Rājo Guṇa; but Sāttva and Tāmas never leave Him,

[Ch 30 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Our Mahā Deva is predominant in Tamo Guna, but Sattva and Raja are always with him. Therefore, no being can exist as separate from the three Gunas; this point I have settled in Śruti.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Our Mahā Deva is predominant in Tāmo Guṇa, but Sāttva and Rājo are always with him. Therefore, no being can exist as separate from the three Guṇas; this point I have settled in Śruti.

[Ch 30 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Lord of the Munis! Quit this endless Moha for the world, caused by Māyā, and very hard to get over and worship Bhagavatī, Who is of the nature of Brahman.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Lord of the Munis! Quit this endless Moha for the world, caused by Māyā, and very hard to get over and worship Bhagavatī, Who is of the nature of Brāhmaṇ.

[Ch 30 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Intelligent One! Now you have seen the power of Māyā; and you have enjoyed many things produced by Māyā and you have realised the extremely wonderful nature of Her. Then why do you ask me further on this point? Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the glory of Mahā Māyā in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Intelligent One! Now you have seen the power of Māyā; and you have enjoyed many things produced by Māyā and you have realised the extremely wonderful nature of Her. Then why do you ask me further on this point?” Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the glory of Mahā Māyā in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devi Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
