CHAPTER XXV

On the Worship of Tulasi

नारद उवाच

तुलसी च घटा पुर्या कृतत नारायणप्रिया ।

अर्याः पूर्नायिधानं च स्तोयं च घद संप्रितम् ॥ 1 ॥

केन पूजा कृता केन स्तुता प्रथमतो मुने ।

तत्र पूर्णा सा बधूव केन वा घद मामहो ॥ 2 ॥

Nārada said: When the Devi Tulasī has been made so dear to Nārāyaṇa and thus an object for worship, then describe Her worship and Stotra (the

hymn of Tulasī) now. O Muni! By whom was She first worshipped? By whom were Her glories first sung? And how did She become therefore an object of worship? Speak out all these to me.

सूत जवाच

नारदस्य वचः श्रुला प्रत्य सुनिपुज्वः ।

कर्शा क्रवितुभारोचे पुर्णयं पाचहां परात् ॥ ३ ॥

Sūta said: Hearing these words of Nārada,

Book IX Chapter XXV

Nārāyaṇa, laughing, began to describe this very holy and sin-destroying account of Tulasī.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

हरि: संपूछ्य तुलसीं रेमे च रमया सह ।

रामसामानसीभायां चकार गौरेषण च ॥ 4 ॥

सैहे च लक्ष्मीगण च तत्याक्ष्य नवसंगमम् ।

सीभायागीरां कोपात्तन सेहे सरसती ॥ 5 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: Bhagavān Hari duly worshipped Tulasī, and began to enjoy her with Lakṣmī; He raised Tulasī to the rank of Lakṣmī and thus made her fortunate and glorious Lakṣmī and Ganga allied and bore this new union of Nārāyaṇa and Tulasī. But Sarasvatī could not endure this high position of Tulasī owing to Her anger.

सा तां जयान कल्ले मानिनी हरिसिद्धिणी ।

श्रीडया चापमानेन सांतधार्नं चकार ह १। ६ ॥

सर्वसिद्धेशी देवी ज्ञानिना सिद्ध्योगिनी ।

जगामादर्शनं कोपासर्वेत्र च हरेरो ॥ ७ ॥

She became self-conceited and beat Tulasī on some quarrel before Hari. Tulasī became abashed and insulted and vanished off. Being the Iśvari of all the Siddhis, the Devi, the Self-manifest and the Giver of the Siddhiyoga to the Jñānins, Tulasī, Oh! what a wonder, became angry and turned out as invisible to Śri Hari even.

हरिने चृष्टा तुलसी बोधयित्वा सरसतीम ।

तदनुर्गा गृहीत्वा च जगाम तुलसीवनम् ॥ 8 ॥

तत्र दत्वा च सुनतो हरि: स तुलसी सतीम् ।

पूजयामास तं घायाता स्तोयं भकत्वा चकार ह ॥ 9 ॥

Not seeing Tulasī, Hari appeared Sarasvatī and getting Her permission went to the Tulasī forest. Going there and taking a bath in due accord, and with due rites, worshipped with His whole heart the chaste Tulasī and then began to meditate on Her with devotion.

लक्ष्मी माया कामवाणी बीजपूर्व दशाक्षरम् ।

युन्धावनीति डेन्नं च चहिंजायांतमेव च ॥ 10 ॥

अनेन कल्पतला मन्त्राजेन नारद ।

पूजयेढी विधानेन सर्वसिद्धि लभेद्युम् ॥ 11 ॥

O Nārada! He gets certainly all siddhis who

worships Tulasi duly with the ten lettered mantra: 'Śrim Hrim Klīm Aim Vrndāvanyai Svāhā,' the King of mantras, yielding fruits and all gratifications like the Kalpa Tree.

भृतदीयेन धूपेन सिंदूरचन्दने च ।

नैवेदोन च पुर्णेण योचारणेन नारद ॥ 12 ॥

हरित्तोजेन तुहा सा चाविर्भूत महीकृतत् ।

प्रसा चरणांभोजे जगाम राणरं शुभा ॥ 13 ॥

ONārada! At the time of worship, the lamp of ghee, was lighted and dhūpa, sindūra, sandal, offerings of food, flowers, etc., were offered to Her. Thus hymned by Hari, Tulasi came out of the tree, pleased. And She gladly took refuge at His lotus feet.

वरं तस्यै ददी विष्णुः सर्वेपूजा भवेरिति ।

अहं चां धारिय्यामि सुरूपां भूटिन बक्षसि ॥ 14 ॥

सर्वे तां धारिय्याति स्वामूर्दिं च सुरादयः ।

इन्दुकृता तां गृहीला च प्रवयी स्वालव विषुः ॥ 15 ॥

Visnu, then, granted her boon that 'You will be worshipped by all; I will keep you in My breast and in My head and the Devas also will keep you in My breast and in My head and the Devas also will hold you on their heads.' And He then took her to His own abode.

नात्र उवाच

किं ध्यानं सत्वं किं वा किं पूजाविधानकम् ।

तुलस्वाश्र महाभाग तन्मे व्याख्यानुर्महिति ॥ 16 ॥

Nārada said: O Highly Fortunate One! What is Tulasi's dyhāna, sotra and method of worship? Kindly describe all these.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

अनर्हिंहतायां तस्यां च हरिकृद्वावने तदा ।

तस्याक्रके सुत्ति नाला तुल्मी विश्राहतुरः ॥ 17 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: When Tulasi vanished, Hari became very much agitated at her bereavement and went to Vrndāvana and began to praise her.

श्रीभगवानुवाच

ब्रन्दाक्षाया बृक्षाश्र यदैकत्र भवन्ति च ।

विदुर्घीयानेत वृन्दां मलिप्यां यां बजायमहम् ॥ 18 ॥

पुरा वर्ष्य वा देवी त्वाटी वृन्दावने वने ।

तेन वृन्दावनीं छलात्तं सौभायां तां पत्राव्यस्थम् ॥ १९ ॥

The Bhagavān said: The Tulasī trees collect in multitudinous groups; hence the Pandjts call it Vrndā. I praise that dear Tulasī. Of old, She appeared in the Vrndāvana forest and therefore known as Vrndāvanī. I worship that fortunate and glorious One.

असंख्रेषु च विश्वेषु पुक्ता या निरन्तरम् ।

तेन विश्वपूजिताख्यां पूजितां च भवाम्यम् ॥ 20 ॥

असंख्यान च शिवजानि पवित्राणि त्वया सदा ।

तां शिवधावनि देहीं विहेण समायाम्हम् ॥ 21 ॥

She is worshipped always in innumerable universe and is therefore, known as Viśvapūjitā (worshipped by all). I worship that Viśvapūjitā. By whose contact, these countless universe are always rendered pure and holy; and therefore She is called Viśvapāvani (purifying the whole universe). I am suffering from her bereavement, I remember the Devi. Without Tulasi, the Devas do not get pleased, thought other flowers be heaped on them; therefore She is considered as the essence of all the flowers.

देवा न तुहा: पुष्णागं समूहेन यया दिवा ।

तां पृष्यसारां शूर्दां च शूद्धिष्छायि शोकतः ॥ 2 2 ॥

विश्ये वर्जायिवमाजेष चक्तानंदो भवेद्धुवम् ।

निविजी तेन विश्वतासा सा प्रीता भक्तादिष्ट ॥ 2 3 ॥

Now I am in sorrow and trouble and I am very eager to see her, who is of the nature of purity incarnate. The whole universe gets delighted when the Bhaktas receive her; hence She is called Nandani; so may She be pleased with me.

यस्या देयास्तुला नास्ति निशिल्लेषु च ।

तुलसी तेन विज्ञाता तां यामि शरणं प्रियाणि ॥ 24 ॥

कृष्णकीवनस्पा सा शरणक्रियतमा सती ।

तेन कृष्णकीवनी सा सा मे रक्षुत जीवनम् ॥ 25 ॥

There is nothing in the universe that can be compared to Her; hence She is called Tulasi; I take refuge of that dear Tulasi. That chaste dear one is the life of Kṛṣṇa, hence She is known as Kṛṣnajivani. Now may She save my life.

इत्येवं स्तवनं कृत्वां तत्थी तत्र तयापतिः ।

दर्शतं तुलसी साक्षतादघघनतं सतीभ ।। २६ ।।

रुदतीमवमानेन नानिर्नीं मानपूक्तिमात् ।

प्रियां द्वृष्टा प्रियः शीर्धे वास्यामास वक्षसि ॥ 27 ॥

O Nārada! Thus praising, Ramāpati remained there. The chaste Tulasi then came to His sight and bowed down to His lotus feet; when She becoming sensitive out of the insult, began to weep. Bhagavān Viṣṇu, seeing that sensitive dear one, immediately took her to His breast.

भारत्याजां गृहीत्वा च स्वालयं च ययो गृहीः ।

भारत्या सह तर्नीति कार्यायामा सस्तम् ॥ 28 ॥

वरं विष्णुदौते तस्ये सर्वेज्ञा भवेरिति ।

शिरोधायां च सर्वेयं वंधा मान्यां ममेति च ॥ 29 ॥

Taking, then, Sarasvati's permission, He took her to His own home and brought about, first of all, the agreement between her and Sarasvati. Then He granted her the boon, 'You will be worshipped by all, respected by all, and honoured by all; and all will carry you on their heads.'

विष्णोदीप्त सा देदी पतिरुहा बभुव च ।

सरस्वती तामाकृष्य वास्यामास सक्रिधी ॥ 30 ॥

लक्ष्मीर्गा ससिता च तां समाकृष्य नारद ।

गृहं प्रवेश्यामास विनयेन सर्जी तदा ॥ 31 ॥

I will also worship, respect and honour you and keep you on My head. Receiving this boon from Viṣṇu, the Devi Tulasi became very glad. Sarasvatī then attracted her to her side, made her sit close to her. Laksmī and Gaṅgā both with smiling faces attracted her and made her enter into the house.

ब्रुदा बुद्धवी विश्वपूर्तिता विश्वपावती ।

पुष्यातार निदिति च तुलसी कृष्णाजीवी ॥ 32 ॥

एतजामाहकं चैव स्तोत्रं नामार्थसिंगुम् ।

यः पठेतां च संगुज्य सोउयवेधफलं लभेते ॥ 33 ॥

O Nārada! Whosoever worships her with her eight names Vrndā, Vrndāvaṇī, Viśvapūjitā, Viśvapāvaṇī, Tulasī, Puspasarā, Nandanī and Krṣṇa Jīvaṇī and their meanings and sings this hymn of eight verses duly, acquires the merit of performing Asvamedha Yajñā (horse sacrifice).

Book IX Chapter XXVI

कार्तिक्या पूर्णिमयां च तुलस्या जन्मांगलम् ।

तत्र तस्याश्र पूजा च विहिता हरिणा पुगा ॥ 34 ॥

तस्यां यः पूर्वेन्तो च भवल्या च विश्वपावनीम् ।

सर्वेपाराधिनेमुक्तो चिथणुलोकं स गच्छति ॥ 35 ॥

Specially, on the Full Moon night of the month of Katrika, the auspicious birth ceremony of Tulasi is performed. Of old Viṣṇu worshipped her at that time. Whoever worships with devotion on that Full Moon combination, the universe purifying Tulasī, becomes freed of all sins and goes up to the Viṣṇu Loka.

कांतिके तुलसीपत्रं यो द्वाति च वैशणले ।

गवामुतदानस्य फलं प्राप्नोति निश्छितम् ॥ 36 ॥

अपूत्रो लभते पूरं प्रियाहीनो लभेतिएवायम् ।

बन्युहीने लभेढ्रधून्स्तोत्रशवणामाततः ॥ 37 ॥

Offerings of Tulasi leaves to Viṣnu in the month of Kārtik bring merits equal to those in giving away Ayuta cows. Hearing this stotra at that period gives sons to the sonless persons, wives to the wife less persons and friends to friendless persons.

रोगी प्रमुच्यते रोगाद्रदो मुच्येत बंधन्ता ।

भयान्मुच्येत भीतस्तु प्यापान्मुच्येत पाकतकी ॥ 38 ॥

इत्येवं कथितं स्तोत्र ध्यान पूजाविधिं शृणु ।

On hearing this stotra, the diseased become free of their diseases, the persons in bondage become free, the terrified become fearless, and the sinners are freed of their sins. O Nārada! Thus it has been mentioned how to chant stotra to her. Now hear her dhyāna and method of worship.

त्वयेव वैदे जानासि कणवशणाकौकमेव च ॥ 39 ॥

तद्वक्षे पूजयेतां च भनशा चावाहनं विना ।

तं धात्वा चोपचारेण धवानं पातकनाशनम् ॥ 40 ॥

In the Vedas, in the Kānya Śākhā branch, the

method of worship is given. You know that one is to meditate on the Tulasi plant, without any invocation (āvāhana) and then worship her with devotion, presenting all sorts of offerings as required to her. Now hear Her Dhyānam.

तुलसी पुच्यसारं च सर्ती पृतां मनोहारम् ।

कृतपापेधनदाहाय जलदिनिशखोपामम् ॥ 41 ॥

पुष्ये पुत्ना यस्य नास्ति वेद्यु भाषितम् ।

पवित्रकरण सर्वसू पुल्ली सा च कीर्तिता ॥ 42 ॥

शिरोधार्यां च सर्वेभाषीस्ता विश्वपावनी ।

जीवन्युक्तो पुक्तिच्चा च भजे तां हरिभक्तिद्वम् ॥ 43 ॥

Of all the flowers, Tulasī (the holy basil) is the best, very holy, and captivating the mind. It is a flame burning away all the fuel of sins committed by man. In the Vedas it is stated that this plant is called Tulasi, because there can be made no comparison with Her amongst all the flowers. She is the holiest of them all She is placed on the heads of all and desired by all and gives holiness to the universe. She gives Jivanmkuti, muktī and devotion to Śrī Hari. I worship Her.

इति ध्याला च संपूज्य सुत्वा च प्रणमेक्सूधीः ।

उक्ते नुलस्याप्यादानं किं भूयः श्रीतुमिच्छसि ॥ 44 ॥

ड्रिति श्रीमदेवीपार्णतो महापुराणे नवमरकन्थे

पद्धविरोधधायः 11 25 11

Thus meditating on Her and worshipping Her according to due rites, one is to bow down to Her. O Nārada! I have described to you the full history of Śrī Tulasi Devī. What more do you want to hear now, say.

Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the method of worship of Tulasi Devi in the

Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXVI

