[Ch 25 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada said: When the Devi Tulasī has been made so dear to Nārāyaṇa and thus an object for worship, then describe Her worship and Stotra (the hymn of Tulasī) now. O Muni! By whom was She first worshipped? By whom were Her glories first sung? And how did She become therefore an object of worship? Speak out all these to me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- When the Devī Tulasī has been made so dear to Nārāyaṇa and thus an object for worship, then describe Her worship and Stotra (the hymn of Tulasī) now. O Muni! By whom was She first worshipped? By whom were Her glories first sung? And how did She become therefore an object of worship? Speak out all these to me.

[Ch 25 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: Hearing these words of Nārada, Nārāyaṇa, laughing, began to describe this very holy and sin-destroying account of Tulasī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Hearing these words of Nārada, Nārāyaṇa, laughing, began to describe this very holy and sin-destroying account of Tulasī.

[Ch 25 Verse 4-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: Bhagavān Hari duly worshipped Tulasī, and began to enjoy her with Lakṣmī; He raised Tulasī to the rank of Lakṣmī and thus made her fortunate and glorious Lakṣmī and Ganga allied and bore this new union of Nārāyaṇa and Tulasī. But Sarasvatī could not endure this high position of Tulasī owing to Her anger.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- Bhagavān Hari duly worshipped Tulasī, and began to enjoy her with Lakṣmī; He raised Tulasī to the rank of Lakṣmī and thus made her fortunate and glorious Lakṣmī and Gaṅgā allowed and bore this new union of Nārāyaṇa and Tulasī. But Sarasvatī could not endure this high position of Tulasī owing to Her anger.

[Ch 25 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She became self-conceited and beat Tulasī on some quarrel before Hari. Tulasī became abashed and insulted and vanished off. Being the Iśvari of all the Siddhis, the Devi, the Self-manifest and the Giver of the Siddhiyoga to the Jñānins, Tulasī, Oh! what a wonder, became angry and turned out as invisible to Śri Hari even.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She became self-conceited and beat Tulasī on some quarrel before Hari. Tulasī became abashed and insulted and vanished off. Being the Īśvarī of all the Siddhis, the Devī, the Self-manifest and the Giver of the Siddhiyoga to the Jñānins, Tulasī, Oh! what a wonder, became angry and turned out as invisible to Śrī Hari even.

[Ch 25 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Not seeing Tulasī, Hari appeared Sarasvatī and getting Her permission went to the Tulasī forest. Going there and taking a bath in due accord, and with due rites, worshipped with His whole heart the chaste Tulasī and then began to meditate on Her with devotion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Not seeing Tulasī, Hari appeased Sarasvatī and getting Her permission went to the Tulasī forest. Going there and taking a bath in due accord, and with due rites, worshipped with His whole heart the chaste Tulasī and then began to meditate on Her with devotion.

[Ch 25 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Nārada! He gets certainly all siddhis who worships Tulasi duly with the ten lettered mantra: 'Śrim Hrim Klīm Aim Vrndāvanyai Svāhā,' the King of mantras, yielding fruits and all gratifications like the Kalpa Tree.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Nārada! He gets certainly all siddhis who worships Tulasī duly with the ten lettered mantra :-- “Śrīm Hrīm Klīm Aim Vrindāvanyai Svāhā,” the King of mantras, yielding fruits and all gratifications like the Kalpa Tree.

[Ch 25 Verse 12-13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► ONārada! At the time of worship, the lamp of ghee, was lighted and dhūpa, sindūra, sandal, offerings of food, flowers, etc., were offered to Her. Thus hymned by Hari, Tulasi came out of the tree, pleased. And She gladly took refuge at His lotus feet.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Nārada! At the time of worship, the lamp of ghee, was lighted and dhūp, sindūra, sandal, offerings of food, flowers, etc., were offered to Her. Thus hymned by Hari, Tulasī came out of the tree, pleased. And She gladly took refuge at His lotus feet.

[Ch 25 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Visnu, then, granted her boon that 'You will be worshipped by all; I will keep you in My breast and in My head and the Devas also will keep you in My breast and in My head and the Devas also will hold you on their heads.' And He then took her to His own abode.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viṣṇu, then, granted her boon that, “You will be worshipped by all; I will keep you in My breast and in My head and the Devas also will hold you on their heads.” And He then took her to His own abode.

[Ch 25 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada said: O Highly Fortunate One! What is Tulasi's dyhāna, sotra and method of worship? Kindly describe all these.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- “O Highly Fortunate One! What is Tulasī’s dhyān, stotra and method of worship? Kindly describe all these.”

[Ch 25 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: When Tulasi vanished, Hari became very much agitated at her bereavement and went to Vrndāvana and began to praise her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- When Tulasī vanished, Hari became very much agitated at her bereavement and went to Vrindāvana and began to praise her.

[Ch 25 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Bhagavān said: The Tulasī trees collect in multitudinous groups; hence the Pandjts call it Vrndā. I praise that dear Tulasī. Of old, She appeared in the Vrndāvana forest and therefore known as Vrndāvanī. I worship that fortunate and glorious One.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Bhagavān said :-- The Tulasī trees collect in multitudinous groups; hence the Pundits call it Vrindā. I praise that dear Tulasī. Of old, She appeared in the Vrindāvana forest and therefore known as Vrindāvanī. I worship that fortunate and glorious One.

[Ch 25 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She is worshipped always in innumerable universe and is therefore, known as Viśvapūjitā (worshipped by all). I worship that Viśvapūjitā. By whose contact, these countless universe are always rendered pure and holy; and therefore She is called Viśvapāvani (purifying the whole universe). I am suffering from her bereavement, I remember the Devi. Without Tulasi, the Devas do not get pleased, thought other flowers be heaped on them; therefore She is considered as the essence of all the flowers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She is worshipped always in innumerable universes and is, therefore, known as Viśvapūjitā (worshipped by all). I worship that Viśvapūjitā. By whose contact, those countless universes are always rendered pure and holy; and therefore She is called Viśvapāvani (purifying the whole universe). I am suffering from her bereavement, I remember the Devī. Without Tulasī, the Devas do not get pleased, though other flowers be heaped on them; therefore She is considered as the essence of all the flowers.

[Ch 25 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now I am in sorrow and trouble and I am very eager to see her, who is of the nature of purity incarnate. The whole universe gets delighted when the Bhaktas receive her; hence She is called Nandani; so may She be pleased with me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now I am in sorrow and trouble and I am very eager to see her, who is of the nature of purity incarnate. The whole universe gets delighted when the Bhaktas receive her; hence She is called Nandinī; so may She be pleased with me.

[Ch 25 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There is nothing in the universe that can be compared to Her; hence She is called Tulasi; I take refuge of that dear Tulasi. That chaste dear one is the life of Kṛṣṇa, hence She is known as Kṛṣnajivani. Now may She save my life.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There is nothing in the universe that can be compared to Her; hence She is called Tulasī; I take refuge of that clear Tulasī. That chaste dear one is the life of Kṛṣṇa, hence She is known as Kṛṣṇajīvanī. Now may She save my life.

[Ch 25 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Nārada! Thus praising, Ramāpati remained there. The chaste Tulasi then came to His sight and bowed down to His lotus feet; when She becoming sensitive out of the insult, began to weep. Bhagavān Viṣṇu, seeing that sensitive dear one, immediately took her to His breast.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Nārada! Thus praising, Ramāpatī remained there. The chaste Tulasī then came to His sight and bowed down to His lotus feet; when She becoming sensitive out of the insult, began to weep. Bhagavān Viṣṇu, seeing that sensitive dear one, immediately took her to His breast.

[Ch 25 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Taking, then, Sarasvati's permission, He took her to His own home and brought about, first of all, the agreement between her and Sarasvati. Then He granted her the boon, 'You will be worshipped by all, respected by all, and honoured by all; and all will carry you on their heads.'
NEW CORR ENG ──► Taking, then, Sarasvatī’s permission, He took her to His own home and brought about, first of all, the agreement between her and Sarasvatī. Then He granted her the boon, “You will be worshipped by all, respected by all, and honoured by all; and all will carry you on their heads.”

[Ch 25 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I will also worship, respect and honour you and keep you on My head. Receiving this boon from Viṣṇu, the Devi Tulasi became very glad. Sarasvatī then attracted her to her side, made her sit close to her. Laksmī and Gaṅgā both with smiling faces attracted her and made her enter into the house.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will also worship, respect and honour you and keep you on My head. Receiving this boon from Viṣṇu, the Devī Tulasī became very glad. Sarasvatī then attracted her to her side, made her sit close to her. Lakṣmī and Gaṅgā both with smiling faces attracted her and made her enter into the house.

[Ch 25 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Nārada! Whosoever worships her with her eight names Vrndā, Vrndāvaṇī, Viśvapūjitā, Viśvapāvaṇī, Tulasī, Puspasarā, Nandanī and Krṣṇa Jīvaṇī and their meanings and sings this hymn of eight verses duly, acquires the merit of performing Asvamedha Yajñā (horse sacrifice).
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Nārada! Whosoever worships her with her eight names Vrindā, Vrindāvanī, Viśvapūjitā, Viśvapāvanī, Tulasī, Puṣpasārā, Nandanī and Kṛṣṇa Jīvanī and their meanings and sings this hymn of eight verses duly, acquires the merit of performing Aśvamedha Yajña (horse sacrifice).

[Ch 25 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Specially, on the Full Moon night of the month of Katrika, the auspicious birth ceremony of Tulasi is performed. Of old Viṣṇu worshipped her at that time. Whoever worships with devotion on that Full Moon combination, the universe purifying Tulasī, becomes freed of all sins and goes up to the Viṣṇu Loka.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Specially, on the Full Moon night of the month of Kārtik, the auspicious birth ceremony of Tulasī is performed. Of old Viṣṇu worshipped her at that time. Whoever worships with devotion on that Full Moon combination, the universe purifying Tulasī, becomes freed of all sins and goes up to the Viṣṇu Loka.

[Ch 25 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Offerings of Tulasi leaves to Viṣnu in the month of Kārtik bring merits equal to those in giving away Ayuta cows. Hearing this stotra at that period gives sons to the sonless persons, wives to the wife less persons and friends to friendless persons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Offerings of Tulasī leaves to Viṣṇu in the month of Kārtik bring merits equal to those in giving away Ayuta Cows. Hearing this stotra at that period gives sons to the sonless persons, wives to the wifeless persons and friends to friendless persons.

[Ch 25 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On hearing this stotra, the diseased become free of their diseases, the persons in bondage become free, the terrified become fearless, and the sinners are freed of their sins. O Nārada! Thus it has been mentioned how to chant stotra to her. Now hear her dhyāna and method of worship.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On hearing this stotra, the diseased become free of their diseases, the persons in bondage become free, the terrified become fearless, and the sinners are freed of their sins. O Nārada! Thus it has been mentioned how to chant stotra to her. Now hear her dhyān and method of worship.

[Ch 25 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the Vedas, in the Kānya Śākhā branch, the method of worship is given. You know that one is to meditate on the Tulasi plant, without any invocation (āvāhana) and then worship her with devotion, presenting all sorts of offerings as required to her. Now hear Her Dhyānam.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the Vedas, in the Kāṇva Śākhā branch, the method of worship is given. You know that one is to meditate on the Tulasī plant, without any invocation (āvāhana) and then worship her with devotion, presenting all sorts of offerings as required to her. Now hear Her Dhyānam.

[Ch 25 Verse 41-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Of all the flowers, Tulasī (the holy basil) is the best, very holy, and captivating the mind. It is a flame burning away all the fuel of sins committed by man. In the Vedas it is stated that this plant is called Tulasi, because there can be made no comparison with Her amongst all the flowers. She is the holiest of them all She is placed on the heads of all and desired by all and gives holiness to the universe. She gives Jivanmkuti, muktī and devotion to Śrī Hari. I worship Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Of all the flowers, Tulasī (the holy basil) is the best, very holy, and captivating the mind. It is a flame burning away all the fuel of sins committed by man. In the Vedas it is stated that this plant is called Tulasī, because there can be made no comparison with Her amongst all the flowers. She is the holiest of them all. She is placed on the heads of all and desired by all and gives holiness to the universe. She gives Jīvanmukti, mukti and devotion to Śrī Hari. I worship Her.

[Ch 25 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus meditating on Her and worshipping Her according to due rites, one is to bow down to Her. O Nārada! I have described to you the full history of Śrī Tulasi Devī. What more do you want to hear now, say. Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the method of worship of Tulasi Devi in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus meditating on Her and worshipping Her according to due rites, one is to bow down to Her. O Nārada! I have described to you the full history of Śrī Tulasī Devī. What more do yo want to hear now, say. Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the method of worship of Tulasī Devī in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
