CHAPTER XXVI

On Caṇḍa Muṇḍa Killed

व्यास उवाच

इत्याज्त्ती तदा वीरी घण्डयुपडौ महावर्ती ।

जममुत्स्तरीबाबी सैन्येन महात्रान्विती ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus ordered, the two strong warriors Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa hurriedly went to the battle, accompanied by a vast army.

सूद्या तत स्थिता देईी देवानां हिततारिणीम् ।

ऊचतुस्ती महावीर्णी तदा सामान्तितं वचः ॥ 2 ॥

There they saw the Devi, intent on doing good to the Gods. Then they began to address Her in conciliatory words.

बाले तवं किं न जानासे शुभ्म सुचलादनम् ।

निरुभयं च महीवीर्य तृताषड्विजयोढ़तम् ॥ 3 ॥

O Lady! Dost Thou not know that the extraordinarily strong Sumbha and Niśumbha, the Lords of the Daityas have crushed down the Devas and vanquished Indra and have become intoxicated with their victory?

ल्यमेकासि वरारोहे कालिका सिंहसंयुता ।

जेतुपिछ्छसि दुर्बदैवं सुभ्यं सर्वबलात्विन् ॥ ४।।

O Fair One! Thou art alone! Only Kālikā and Thy Lion are with Thee! It is Thy foolishness that Thou art desirous to conquer Śumbha, who is endowed with all power.

मतिहः कोप्रिय ते नास्ति नारी वार्थि नरोप्रिय वा ।

देवात्मां प्रियल्येव विनागाय तवैव ते ॥ ५ ॥

I think there is no adviser to Thee, man nor woman; the Devas have sent Thee here simply for Thy destruction.

विषय्य कुर्त त्वर्धिके कार्य स्वपरयोबल् ।

अष्टादशभुजत्वाच्चं गर्व च कुक्रे मृषा ॥ 6 ॥

Think, O Delicate One over the power of Thine as well as those of Thy enemy. Vainly dost Thou boast of Thy having eighteen hands.

किं घुरौबैहुभिव्यंशैरियुः किं शमगदैः ।

गृष्मचयो सुराणां वे जेतु: स्मारगालिनः ॥ 7 ॥

Before the great warrior Šumbha, the conqueror of Devas, many hands and many weapons will be useless; they will prove mere burden.

ऐरावतकरच्छेनृदितन्तरणाकारिणः ।

जयितः सुरसंघानां कार्य कुक्र मनोत्तम् ॥ 8 ॥

So dost Thou fulfil what reigns in the heart of Śumbha, the destroyer of the legs and the uprooter of the teeth of Airāvata elephant.

वृथा गवायसे कान्ते कुक्र मे वर्चनं विध्वम् ।

हितं तव विशालासिं सुखदं दुःखनागनम् ॥ ९ ॥

Vain is Thy boast, O Beloved! Follow my sweet words; they will do good to Thee, O Large-eyed One! They will destroy Thy pains and give Thee bliss.

Book V Chapter XXVI

दुःखदानि च कार्याणि त्यास्यानि दूततो बुधेः ।

सुखदानि च सेव्यानि शास्त्रत्वशिगारदेः ॥ 10 ॥

Those actions that lead to pain are to be avoided by the wise; and those that bring in happiness are to be served by the Pandits, versed in the Śāstras.

चतुराति चिकालापे पश्य शुभ्यबलं महत ।

प्रत्यक्षं सुरपेक्षायां मदौनेन महोदयम् ॥ ११ ॥

प्रत्यक्षे च परित्यज्य वृषेवानुभिति: ब्रिक्त ।

सन्देहसिते कार्ये न विषधित्यवर्ते ॥ १२ ॥

O Sweet speaking one! Thou art clever. Look at the great strength of Śumbha with Thy eyes. He has enhanced his glory by crushing the Devas. And if Thou thinkest the gods superior, that is false, for the wise men do not rely on mere guess, full of doubts; they believe what they actually see.

शुः सुगणं परमः शुभः समरुद्धिनः ।

तस्मात्तं प्रेर्यल्य देवा दैत्येयपीर्तितः ॥ 13 ॥

Šumbha, hard to be conquered in battles, is the great enemy of the Gods; they have been crushed down by him, and have therefore sent Thee here.

तस्मात्तद्वनै: सिनर्धैवैचितासि सुचिसिते ।

दुःखाय तव तेवानां शिक्षा स्वार्थस्य साक्षित्य ॥ 14 ॥

O Sweet smiling One! Thou hast been deceived by their sweet words; they, prompted by their selfish ends, have sent Thee here simply to give Thee trouble.

कार्यमिति परिशिष्य धर्ममिति समाश्रयेत् ।

देवा: स्वार्थपरा: कामं त्वामहं सत्यमवर्णम ॥ 15 ॥

The friends that come with certain business and selfish ends are to be rejected. Friends out of religious motives are only to be sought for refuge. Verily I tell Thee that the gods are terribly selfish.

भत्र शुर्णमं सुरेशानं जेतारं भुवनेक्षरम् ।

चतुरं सुन्दरं शूरं कामाशाखियशाराद् ॥ 16 ॥

Therefore dost Thou serve Sumbha, the conqueror of Indra and the lord of the three worlds; he is a hero, beautiful, lovely, cunning and thoroughly expert in the science of coronous love.

ऐभूयं सर्वतोकानां प्रायस्ये शुभाशासनान ।

निश्रयं परमं कृत्वा भतरिं भव जांशेभनम् ॥ 17 ॥

Thou wilt get the prosperity of all the worlds by the mere command of Sumbha; therefore make a firm resolve and serve that splendid husband Sumbha."

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः श्रुत्वा चंडस्य जगद्धिक्वा ।

मेधामार्थीनिरन्ति जगर्जं पुनरबहित् ॥ 18 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Universal Mother, hearing the words of Canda spoke with a voice deep as thunder. "O Boor! Why do you use false deceitful words?

गच्छ जात्म युषा किं त्वं भाषसे वंचकं वचः ।

त्यक्ता हरिदात्रादीक्ष शुभ्मं कस्माद्वजे पतिम् ॥ १९ ॥

Fly away just now. Why shall I make Śumbha my husband, disregarding Hari, Hara and the other Devas?

न मे कक्रित्यति: कार्यं न कार्य पतिना सह ।

स्वामिनी सर्वभृतानामहमेव निजामय ॥ 20 ॥

गृभा मे बह्वो दृषा निशुप्भाशु सहस्वण: ।

घातिताश मया पूर्वे शतगो देत्यदानतः ॥ 21 ॥

O You, a veritable Fool! I have no necessity for My lord; I have got nothing to do with my lord. I Myself am the Lord of all the beings; and I preserve this whole Universe with all the lord and beings therein. Note this. In ancient times I saw thousands and thousands of Śumbha and Niśumbha and I slew them all.

ममगो देवेबंदान विन्णधिन चुगे चुगे ।

नाशं यास्यसिं दैत्यानां युधानि पुनरब है ॥ 22 ॥

I sent hundreds and hundreds of Daityas and Demons to the realm of Death. Before Me the hosts of Devas were destroyed in yugas after yugas.

काल एवागतोउस्यत्र दैत्यसंहाराकारकः ।

वृथा त्वं कुर्ये चर्न स्थणायामसर्तेनैः ॥ 23 ॥

Today the Daityas again will go unto destruction. The Time has come to destroy the Daityas; why, then, are you struggling in vain with your followers for your lives?

कुर्यु पूर्वे वीरधर्मश्रव्ये त्वं महामते ।

मरणे भावि दुस्त्याज्यं योगे रक्ष्यं महात्माधि: ॥ 24 ॥

Fight now and keep the Dharma of the warriors; death is inevitable; thinking thus, the high-soiled ones should keep their name, fame, and respect.

क्रि ते कार्व निर्गुभ्येन रुष्येने च दुर्जान्ता ।

वीराधर्म परं प्राया गछ्छ स्वर्ग सुरालयम् ॥ 25 ॥

What business have you to do with Sumbha and Niśumbha? Follow the warrior's Dharma and go to Heavens, the abode of the gods.

गुष्पो निरुष्णश्रवीये चे चात्र तव बांधावः ।

सर्वे तवानुगा: पशुततापीम्यन्ति साम्यान् ॥ 26 ॥

Sumbha, Niśumbha and your other friends and followers, all will follow you and will come here no doubt.

क्रभशः सर्वेटैल्यानां कारीध्यायघु संक्षयम् ।

विवादं त्वज मन्दात्मकुन कुवूदं विश्रापिते ॥ 27 ॥

O Stupid One! I will put an end to all the Dānavas today. Therefore cast aside your weakness and go on, fight.

त्वामहं निर्हायाम विभारंत तव साम्यात् ।

ततः शुभ्यं निर्गुभं च रत्कबीजं मदोत्कटम् ॥ 28 ॥

अन्योक्षा दानवासर्वन्हल्वाउई समरोगेण ।

I will slay you and your brother just now; next I will kill the proud Rakta Bija, Nisumbha and Śumbha and the other Dānavas in the battlefield and will then go to My desired place.

गमिथामि यथास्थानं तिष्ठ वा गच्छ वा हुतम् ॥ 29 ॥

गृहाणालं च्या पुरु कुरु युद्धे मावअरुना ।

कि जल्यसि मुषा वाक्यं सर्वेण कातरिप्रियम् ॥ 30 ॥

Now remain here if you like or fly away quickly. You have been fed in vain because you fear to fight. What use is there now in using sweet words like a weak and distressed man. Well! Take up your arms now and fight."

व्यास उवाच

त्येवं प्रेति दैवी चडपुण्डी कृपास्तिति ।

न्याशर्धं तसा घोरं चक्रतुर्बतद्विती ॥ 31 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Candā and Munḍa, elated with pride, got excited at the Devi's words, became angry and made a violent noise with their bow strings.

सापि शंख्यवनं चके पुरवन्ती दिशो दग ।

सिंहोर्पि कुपितस्तावजारं समकारेहली ॥ 32 ॥

The Devi, too, blew Her conchshell so loudly that the ten quarters of the sky reverberated; in the meanwhile, the powerful lion became very angry and roared loudly.

तेन नानेव शक्राधजा जहरुंपरमरस्तव ।

मुनयो यक्षान्यावीः सिद्धाः साधायश क्रिकराः ॥ 33 ॥

Hearing that sound Indra and other Devas, the Munis, Yakṣas, Siddhas, and Kinnaras became all very glad.

युद्धे परस्परं तत्र जातं कातरभीतिदम् ।

चिण्डकावणद्योस्तीयं बाणाखुरणादिषिः ॥ 34 ॥

A dreadful fight then ensued between Caṇḍikā and Caṇḍa with arrows, axes and other weapons, causing terror to the weak.

चण्डपुकाळप्रत्यदेवी चित्रद्रेर निशितः शरैः ।

युमोच पुनस्त्याजाराचाङ्गिडिका पत्रगानिव ॥ 35 ॥

The Caṇḍikā Devi became very wrathful and cut off to pieces all the arrows shot by Caṇḍa and then hurled arrows serpent-like on him.

गगनं छात्रितं तत्र संग्रामे विगिर्छेस्तदा ।

शलभैरिव मेघान्ते कर्षिकाणां घयप्रदेः ॥ 36 ॥

Then the sky over the battle ground seemed to be overcast with arrows just as the clouds get covered over with locusts, dreadful to the cultivators.

मुण्डोरि सैनिकः सार्थ प्रपात तरसा रणे ।

मुभोच बाणवृहिं है कूढ़ः परमदाकणः ॥ 37 ॥

In the meanwhile Munda, exceedingly terrible, came up to the field, taking with him his army and becoming impatient with anger began to shoot arrows.

वाणजलं महदुपृथवा कुढ़ा तर्याविका भुग्ग।

कोपेन वदर्त नत्या बभूव घनपात्रिभम् ॥ 38 ॥

कदलीषुधपनें च भुकुटीकुटिलं ततां ।

निष्काना च तदा काती ललाद्धपलकादु हुणम् ॥ 39 ॥

Seeing that multitude of arrows, Ambikā got very angry; out of Her frowny look, Her eyebrows became crooked, Her face became black, and Her

Book V Chapter XXVI

eyes turned red like Kadalī flowers; at this time suddenly came out of Her forehead Kālī.

బాహ్వమన్నా క్రు నాక్రమన్నాన్నా ।

मुड़समालाधर थोरा शुक्वावासीमोदरा ॥ 40 ॥

खदुपाणप्रधान्डतीव बीषणा भयदाविनी ।

खद्वोगायारिणी रैत्रा कालगात्रियराया ॥ 41 ॥

वित्तीणिद्वाना चिज्ञां चालयन्ती मुहुर्दुः ।

वित्तारजघन वेगाजघायानुरसैरिकान् ॥ 42 ॥

Wearing the tiger's skin, cruel, covering Her body with elephant's skin, wearing a garland of skulls, terrible, with a belly like a well dried up, mouth wide open, with a wide waist, lip hanging loosely, with axe, noose, Śiva's weapon, in Her hands, She looked very terrible like the Night of Dissolution. She began to lick frequently and forcibly dashed into the Dānava army and began to destroy it.

करे कृत्वा महावीरांतसरा सा रुचान्यिता ।

मुखे चिश्वेप देतेतायिपेष दूरनैः रानैः ॥ 43 ॥

She angrily began to take the powerful Dānavas by Her arms and pouring them into Her mouth crushed them with Her teeth.

गजान्यंदायितान्हसे गृहीला निदधे मुखे ।

सारोहान्यक्षयित्वाजी सहुहासं चकार ह ॥ 44 ॥

Taking the elephants with bells by Her own power in Her hands She put them all into Her mouth and swallowed them all with their riders and began to laugh hoarsely.

तथैव तुरागदुर्गलक्षा साराधिभः सह ।

निश्रिय वक्रेः दूरनैश्वैल्यंतिभेदस्य ॥ 4 5 ॥

Thus camels, horses and charioteers with chariots all She put into Her mouth and began to chew them all grimly.

हन्यमानं बलं ग्रेक्ष्य चणद्युपही महासुरी ।

छाव्यामासतुहैंवी बाणासारित्नन्ते: ॥ 4 6 ॥

चणड्छश्डकन्छायं चकं चक्धभाग्युम् ।

चिश्वेग तसा देहीं नानद च मुहुंमुँः ॥ 47 ॥

नन्तं वीक्ष्य तं काली रथांगं च रविष्यम् ।

बाणौनैकेन चिष्छेद सुप्रभं तल्युदर्शनम् ॥ 48 ॥

O King! Seeing that the forces were being thus destroyed, the two great warriors Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa began to shoot arrows after arrows without intermission and covered the Devi with them. Chaṇḍa hurled the Sudarśana-like disc, lustrous like the Sun, with great force against the Devi, and frequently shouted thundering cries.

तं जयाने शरैस्तीक्षीशुष्टं चेषडी शिलाशिति: ।

मूँछितोउसी यपातोल्यों देवीबाणादिती० भृणम् ॥ 49 ॥

Seeing him roaring and the lustrous disc coming towards Her like another sun, She shot at him arrows sharpened on stones so that the warrior Caṇḍa became overpowered by them and lay down senseless on the ground.

पतितं भारतं बीक्ष्य मुण्डो दुःखादितस्तदा ।

चकार शरबृष्टि च कारिकोषपि कोपतः ॥ ५० ॥

The powerful Muṇḍa seeing his brother unconscious became very much distressed with grief, but he got angry and began to shoot arrows immediately on the Devi.

चण्डिका मुण्डविन्मुक्तां शरबृष्टि सुदारुकाणम् ।

ईयिकाखैर्वीन्यृकैश्यकार तिलशः क्षणगत् ॥ 51 ॥

अधिन्द्रेण बाणेन ताउवामास तं पुनः ।

पतितोउसी महावीर्वों मेहिन्यां मदवर्जितः ॥ 52 ॥

Candjikā Devi hurled the weapon named Iṣikā and thus cut off to pieces all the dreadful arrows of Muṇḍa in a moment and shot Ardha Candra (semi-circular) arrow at him. With this arrows the powerful Asura was deprived of his pride and made to lie down unconscious on the earth.

हाहाकारो महानासीहानवांग केले तदा ।

जहरुप्रमरा: सर्वे गतपन्स्वा गतपत्यतः ॥ 53 ॥

Mundra thus lying on the ground, a great uproar arose amidst the army of the Dānavas; and the Devas became delighted in the sky.

बिहाय मृहां चण्डसु मंग्रहा महर्ती गदाम ।

तरसा ताड्यामास कालिकां दक्षिणे घुजे ॥ 54 ॥

In the meanwhile Caṇda became conscious and taking a very heavy club hurled it violently on the right hand of Kālīkā.

वंचियत्वा गद्यापाते तं बबंध महासुरम् ।

तस्या बाणपाणेन मन्युक्तेन कांकिका ॥ 55 ॥

Kālīkā rendered that blow useless and instantly tied down that Asura by Her Pāśa weapon, purified by Mantras.

उदयित्रु तदा मुण्डो बबंदं दूध्यानुर्ज बलात् ।

आजगाम सुस्मद्धः शफिंक कृत्वा कें दूबम् ॥ 56 ॥

आपच्छन्तं तदा काली दानवं वीथ्य सत्यम् ।

बबंध तरसा तं तु द्वितीयं घातरं भृणम् ॥ 57 ॥

Mundā again rose up, and, seeing his brother in that fastened condition, came to the front well armoured and with an exceedingly strong weapon called Śakti. Seeing the Asura coming, She instantly fastened him down like his brother.

गृहीता ती महावौं चण्डपुर्णी शशगवित्र ।

कुकंती विपुर्णे हासमाजगमाधिकां प्रति ॥ 58 ॥

आयात्य तमाध्योवाच गृणोगेमी पशु प्रिये ।

राण्यज्ञाथीमांती दानवी रणुदुर्जी ॥ 59 ॥

Taking the powerful Caṇḍa and Munḍa like hares and laughing wildly, Kālī went to Ambikā, and said: "I have brought the two beasts very auspicious as offerings in this sacrificial war. Kindly accept these."

तावानीती तत वीक्ष चफिड का तेचुकावि ।

अंबिका कालिकां प्राड़ माधुर्गस्वरुं वचः ॥ 60 ॥

Seeing the two Dānavas brought, as if they were the two wolves, Ambikā told her sweetly: "O Thou, fond of war!

वर्ध मा कुक मा मुंच चतुरासि रणाधिये ।

देवानां कार्यसंभितिः कर्सेवा तरसा तवा ॥ 6 1 ॥

Thou art very wise; so dost not commit the act of envy nor dost leave them; think over the purport

of my words and know that it is Thy duty to bring the Deva's work to a successful issue."

व्यास उवाच

इति तथा वचः शुत्वा कालिका प्रह तां पुनः ।

यूद्वम्येज्ञतिविज्ञायते खड्यो यूये प्रतिक्ति ॥ 6 2 ॥

आलम्भे च करिष्यासि यथा हिंसा न जायते ।

इन्युक्त्वा सा तत देवी छखुर्जन ऐगरसी तयोः ॥ 6 3 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of Ambikā, Kālikā spoke to Her again: "In this warsacrifice there is this axe which is like a sacrificial post; I will offer two as victims to Thy sacrifice. Thy no act of envy will be committed (i.e., killing in a sacrifice is not considered as envy)."

चकर्ते तरसा काली पपी च रधिरं मुदा ।

एवं देयो हनौ दृष्टवा मुदतोगाच चाधिक्व ॥ 64 ॥

कृतं कार्य सुराणां ते ददाय्यघ वरं शुभम् ।

चण्डपुरुषी हर्ती यसात्स्याने नाम कालिके ।

चामुपडेति सुविख्यातं भविष्यति धरातले ॥ 65 ॥

इति श्रीद्वीभागवते महापुराणे पत्रमकन्दे

चंचदुपुरुवर्षे चद्विरोगेअवारः ॥ 66 ॥

Thus saying, the Kālikā Devi cut off their heads with great force and gladly drank their blood. Thus seeing the two Asuras killed, Ambikā said gladly: "Thou hast done the service to the gods; so I will give Thee an excellent boon. O Kālikā! As Thou hast killed Çanda and Muṇda, henceforth Thou wilt be renowned in this world as Cāmuṇḍa."

Here ends the Twenty-sixth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of Çanda and Muṇḍa in Śrimaddevirbhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

