CHAPTER X

On the Messenger's News to Mahiṣa

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः श्रुत्वा ग्रहस्य प्रमदोत्तमा ।

तमुवाच महाताजे मेघामार्थीर्या गिरा ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: The Māyā, that Excellent Lady, hearing thus the words of the prime minister of Mahisa, laughed and spoke with a voice, deep like that of a cloud, thus:

देव्यवाच

मत्थवर्षे सुराणां वै जननीं विविड्मां मां किल ।

महालक्ष्मीमिति ख्यातां सर्वैत्यनिपृष्टिनीम् ॥ २ ॥

“O Minister-in-chief! Know Me as the Mother of the gods; my name is Mahā Laksmī. It is I that destroy all the Daityas.

प्राधितानई सुरैः सर्वेर्मधिस्य वधाय च ।

पीक्षितैर्वर्णनवेत्रेण यज्भागवहिष्ठकृतेः ॥ ३ ॥

I am requested by all the Devas to kill the Dānava Mahisa; they have been oppressed and deprived of their share of Yajña offerings.

तस्मादितागतास्म्यघ तद्धार्थ कृतोष्णा ।

एकाकिकी न तै-येनो वंसुता मन्सिसमा ॥ 4 ॥

यच्चवार्डं साम्यवृं कृत्वा स्वागतमादात् ।

उक्ता मधुरया वाचा तेन तुहासमि तेनच ॥ 5 ॥

Therefore I have come here today alone, without any army, to take away his life. O Good One! I am pleased with your sweet words of welcome, in showing me marks of respect.

नोदेब्द्विम मृथा त्वां वे कालात्पिनसमया किल ।

कस्य प्रीतिकरं न स्यानाम्युवैवचनं खलु ॥ 6 ॥

Had you not behaved thus, I would have certainly burnt you to ashes by my fiery sight, which is the universal conflagration at the break up of the world. O Minister! Who is there that gets not pleased with sweet words!

गछ्त तं महिषं पारं वद मढ़चानादिदम् ।

गछ्त पातालमयुना जीवितेछा यदास्ति ते ॥ 7 ॥

Go you to Mahisa and speak to him the following words of mine: "O Villain! Go down to Pātāla (the nether regions) at once if you have any desire to live.

नोचेकृतागसं उदुं हनिष्यामि रणाङ्गो ।

मद्राणधृष्णपोहरूर्न नगतार्सि यमसादनम् ॥ 8 ॥

Otherwise, I will slay you, the wicked one, in the battle-field; you will have to go to the house of Death, pierced by my mass of arrows.

दयालुत्वं ममेदं त्वं विदित्वा गछ्छ सत्यम् ।

हते त्वयि सुरा मुह स्वर्गी प्राप्यक्ति सत्यम् ॥ 9 ॥

तस्माद्छस्य त्वलतेको मेढ़िणी च समागम् ।

पातालं तरसा मन्द यावद्धाना ने भेउपन्त् ॥ 10 ॥

O Stupid One! Know that this is merely kindness shown unto you, that I have told you to go soon to Pātāla and that the Devas get possession of their Heaven, with no delay, “O One of weak intellect! Therefore dost Thou leave possession of this sea girl earth and go alone without any delay to Pātāla, before my arrows are shot at you.

युद्धेच्छा चेन्मनसि ते नहोहि चलितोसुर।

वौरैर्हबालै: सर्वैन्यायी यमसादनम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Book V Chapter X

O Asura! Or if you desire to fight, then come at once with your powerful warriors; I will destroy all of them.

युगे युगे महामूद हतास्त्वसूशा: किल।

असंख्यातास्तथा त्वाँ वे हनिव्यायि पराणोंने ॥ 12 ॥

O One of dull intellect! I will kill you in battle, just as I killed before in yugas after yugas countless Asuras like you.

साक्ष्यं कुक श्रशाणं धारणे तु श्रभोट्यथा ।

तद्धुद्वस्य मया सार्थं समरे स्मरीक्ति: ॥ 13 ॥

O Passionate creature! Better shew that your efforts in holding weapons have been crowned with success by your being engaged in battle against Me; otherwise they will all be useless.

मा गर्व कुक दुहामन् यन्येजित ब्रहणो वरः ।

सीकाय्यले तथा मूढ़ पीक्षिता: सुरसामना: ॥ 14 ॥

O Stupid! You thought that you would be vulnerable alone to women hence you oppressed the Devas entitled to worship; O wicked one! No longer show your pride on the strength of your getting the boon from Brahmā, that you would be vulnerable only to the females.

कर्तेब्ये चर्चनं धातुस्तेनाहं त्वामुपागता ।

श्रीरूपमतुलं कृत्वा सत्यं हन्तुं कृतगामस् ॥ 15 ॥

यथेच्छं गच्छ वा मुंद पातालं पत्रमावृतम् ।

हिला भूसुसद्धाद्य जीवितेच्छा यदास्ति ते ॥ 16 ॥

Thinking it advisable to observe the words of the Creator, I have assumed this incomparable Eternal Female appearance and I have come here to slay you, O wicked one! O stupid one! If you have any desire for your life, then quit this Heaven and go to Pātāla, infested with snakes, or anywhere else you like.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तः स तातो देल्य मन्निश्रेष्ठो वर्तानितः ।

प्रत्युवाच निशण्यासी वचनं हेतुर्गर्भितम् ॥ 17 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing these words of the Devi, that minister, surrounded by forces replied in reasonable words thus:

देवि क्षीसरूर्ण वाक्यं बूँपे त्वं मदगार्विता ।

कवासी वक्त त्वं कंये युद्रमर्शेण्यविद्धि कित ॥18॥

एकाकिनी पुनर्वालिंग प्रायध्यवीवन मुचु: ।

महिषोस्ती महाकायो दुर्विभाव्यं हिं संगरम् ॥ १९ ॥

"O Devi! You are speaking in words befitting a woman and puffed up with pride. You are a woman; the lord of the Daityas is a hero; how can a battle be engaged between you two. It seems to me impossible. Your body is delicate, a girl in full youth; especially you are alone and Mahisa is of huge body and powerful; so the fight comes next to impossibility.

सैन्यं बहुविधं तस्य हस्तयश्रयसंकुलम् ।

पदातिणगर्भविद्धं नाना उद्युविराजजन् ॥ 20 ॥

कः. अम करिराजस्य मालतीपुथमदर्दे ।

मारणे तव वामोक महिषस्य तथा रणे ॥ 21 ॥

He has elephants, horses, chariots, infantry, etc., and countless soldiers all armed with weapons. Therefore, O Beautiful One! He will find no difficulty in killing you in battle as an elephant finds no difficulty in treading over the Mālati flowers.

यदि त्वा परभं वाक्यं ब्वीमि यवल्यमादून ।

शूगारे तिड़कूदे हि रसभूज्ञाद्धिभ्यमूँ ॥ 22 ॥

Rather, if I utter anything harsh to you, that would go against the sentiment of love with you; therefore I cannot speak rudely to you out of my fear not to interrupt the above feeling.

राजप्रेमाके सुरपिटुर्षतैत त्वयि भक्तिमान् ।

साममेव मया वाच्छं दानयुक्ते त्वा वचः ॥ 23 ॥

True, that our king is enemy of the gods; but he has become extremely devoted to you. Therefore it is wise to speak words full of conciliation or generosity.

नोचेद्वन्दमहादेव खाणेन त्वां मुचावदाम् ।

सिध्यास्थिमानचतुरां रूपदयीवनगर्वितम् ॥ 24 ॥

Were it otherwise. I would have shot arrows at you and would have killed you in as much as you have thus boasted in vain and spoken so dire a falsehood, resting merely on the strength of your youthful pride and cleverness.

स्वामी मे मोहितः श्रुत्वा रूपं ते धुवनातिभम् ।

तनिग्रामर्थि प्रियं कामां चकच्छ्यं त्वयि यन्यम् ॥ 2 5 ॥

राज्यं तत धरने वर्द सदासमे महिषः क्रिकल ।

कुक भावं विशालात्रिक्य त्वक्ना रोषं भूतिप्रदम् ॥ 2 6 ॥

My master has become fascinated on hearing your extraordinary beauty hardly to be seen in this world; it therefore behoves me to speak sweet words to you for the sake of pleasing my master. O Large-eyed! This kingdom and the wealth thereof are all yours; in fact, Mahisa will be your obedient servant; therefore, better forsake your anger, leading to your death; and cultivate friendship with him.

पतापि पाद्योलोर्डं चक्तिभावेन भामिनि ।

पुत्गाती महागतो भव शीघं शुचित्मिते ॥ 27 ॥

O Sweet Smiling One! I am falling at your feet; you better go to him and become at once his quenconsort.

त्रैलोक्यविघर्व सर्वे प्राय्यसि त्वमनाविलम् ।

सुखं संसारजं सर्वे महिष्यय परिश्रहान् ॥ 28 ॥

O Handsome Woman! No sooner you become the queen of Mahisa than you will get at once all the pure wealth of the three worlds and the unbounding happiness of this world.

देव्यवाच

शृणु मन्न्यव्ययामि वाक्यानां सारमुत्तमम् ।

शाखदुईने माणीं चातुर्मैननुंचित्य च ॥ 29 ॥

The Devi said: “Minister! I now speak what is pregnant with goodness and wisdom to you, according to the rules of the Śāstras, keeping in view also the cleverness that you have shown in using your words.

महिष्य प्रधानस्वं मया ज्ञातं त्रिया किल ।

पगुबुद्धिर्बभावो.सि ववनातल संग्रतम् ॥ 30 ॥

मनिजानस्वानुशा यस्य स कर्वं बुद्धिमाभ्यन्ते ।

Now I come to understand from your talk, that you are the chief secretary of Mahisa; and therefore your nature and intelligence are like those of a beast. And how can he be intelligent, whose ministership is occupied by a man of your nature!

उभयो: सरुगो योगः कृतोरयं विधिना किल ॥ 31 ॥

यदुक्ते कृसीव्यावासिर्स निद्वाराय मूद किम ।

पुभात्राई तत्सवाघावासं भयं क्रीवेधधारिणी ॥ 32 ॥

Nature has ordained connection between two persons of like nature. O Stupid One! Did you think a little beforehand the meaning of your words when you told me of my feminine nature? Though I am not apparently a man, yet my nature is that of the Highest Puruṣa (Man); I shew myself simply in a feminine form.

याचितं मरणं पूर्व तिच्या तत्प्रभृणा यथा ।

तस्मामन्ये3तिमुखों3सौ न वीरासितमः ॥ 33 ॥

Your master asked before from Brahmā that he would prefer death, if possible, at the hands of a woman; therefore, I consider him quite illiterate and ignorant of the sentiment, worthy of a hero.

कामिन्या मरणं कर्तीबारितरं शूरदुःखदम् ।

प्रार्थितं प्रभुणा तेन महिषेणातम्बुद्धिना ॥ 34 ॥

Because to die at the hands of a woman is very painful to one who is a hero; and this is gladly welcome to one who is a hermaphrodite.

तस्माल्डीक्रपादाधाय कार्यं कर्तुयुपाता ।

क्रवं विषयेच त्वद्वावैधंमीशाखविरोधकः ॥ 35 ॥

Now see that your master Mahisa has shown his intelligence, when he courted his death from the hands of a woman. For that very reason, I have come here in the shape of a woman to effect my purpose; why shall I fear, then, to hear your words, contradictory to those of the Śāstras.

विरपरितं यदा दैवं तृणं बजुसमं भवेत् ।

विधिधोत्पुरुः कामं कृलिंगं तृलवत्ता ॥ 36 ॥

When Fate goes against any one, a grass comes like a thunderbolt; and when fate goes in favour of anyone, a thunderbolt becomes a soft as a bundle of cotton.

कि सै-योगयुध: कि वा प्रपड़ेरुंगसेवनै: ।

मरणं सांगृतं यस्य तस्य सै-यैसृतु किं फलम् ॥ 37 ॥

What does it avail even when one possesses an extensive army or various weapons in abundance, taking shelter in a wide extending fort? What will

Book V Chapter X

his soldiers do to him, whose death has come close at hand?

यतउयं देहस्पबन्धो जीवस्य कालयोगतः ।

तदेव लिखितं सर्वे सुखं कुःखं तथा मृति: ॥ 38 ॥

Whenever, in due time, the connection of the Jiva (the human soul) with this body is brought about, then his pleasure, pains and death are written.

यस्य येन प्रक्रोगे मरणं दैविनिर्मितम् ।

त्यव तेनैव जातेन नान्यक्षेति विनिश्रय: ॥ 39 ॥

Know this as certain, very certain, that death will come to him in the manner as written by the hands of Fate; it will never be otherwise.

बहादीनां यथा काले नाशोत्पनी विनिर्मितं ।

तबेव भवतः कामं किमन्येषां विचार्यो ॥ 40 ॥

As the birth and death of Brahmā and other gods are ordained, your death had been similarly ordained; no, there is no need of taking the example further than this.

ये मृत्युपिंगपतैंशं वरतानेन दर्पिताः ।

मारियामो न मयवंते ते मृहा मन्द्वेतेसः ॥ 4 1 ॥

Those who are tied up by the hands of death are surely fools and of extremely blunt intellect, if they think simply on the strength of their getting some booms “that they would never die.”

तस्मादछ्न नृप बृहि वचनं मम सत्मम् ।

यदानापयते भूपसत्कर्तैलं त्वया किल ॥ 4 2 ॥

Therefore go quickly to your king and speak to him what I have said; you will then surely obey what he commands you to do.

मतया स्वर्गमाप्नोतु देवा: सन्तु हक्षियुंः ।

यूयं प्रयात पातालं यदि जीवितुमिच्छथ ॥ 4 3 ॥

If he wants his life, he, with his retinue, would at once go down to Pātāla; let Indra and the other Devas get possession of the Heavens and their share of Yajñas.

अन्यथा चेभातिर्वेर महिषयरु तुरात्मनः ।

त्वुध्यस्व मवा सार्थ मरणाय कृतात्रः ॥ 44 ॥

If he holds a contrary opinion, let him be eager

to go to the house of Death and come and fight with Me.

मन्यसे संगरे भग्ना देहा विद्युपुतेगमाः ।

दैर्व हि कारणं तत्र वर्दानं प्रजानेः ॥ ४ ५ ॥

If he thinks that Vishnu and the other Devas have fled from the battle-fields, he has nothing to boast of; for he has not shown his manliness at all even then; for his victory is solely due to his having got the boon from Brahmā.

व्यास उवाच

इति देया वच: शूला चिन्तयामास दानव: ।

किं कतिथ्या मया युद्धे नान्तवं वा नृपं प्रति ॥ 46 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing these words of the Devi, the Dānava began to think “whether I ought to fight or to go to Mahisa?”

विद्यार्थीमहात्रानो राजा कामातुर्ण वे ।

तत्कर्वे विरसं कृत्वा गत्क्छेन नृपसक्तिधी ॥ 47 ॥

The King has become very enamoured and has sent me hither to negotiate for marriage; how then will I be able to go to him if I make this affair unpleasant and interrupted in the middle in its course of harmony."

इयं बुद्धिः सभीदीना यद्धजामि कलि विना ।

यथाउजातं तथा शीर्भ ग्रांत सेवेदयाम्यदूम् ॥ 48 ॥

Now it is wise for me to go to the King without fighting; let me then go as early as possible in this way and inform him about this whole affair.

स प्रभाणं पुनः कार्यं गताम मितमांतं वरः ।

क्रतिथित विचार्यैव सचिवैर्निपृष्णे: सह ॥ 49 ॥

The King is exceptionally intelligent and experienced; he will consult with his other experienced ministers and do what is best.

सहसा न मया युद्रं कतल्ममनया सह ।

जये पराजये वाथि प्रप्तोष्रियं भवेत् ॥ 50 ॥

Therefore I ought not to fight here rashly; for victory or defeat would alike be distasteful to my monarch.

यदि मा सुंदरी हन्यादहं या हन्म तां पुनः ।

येन केनायण्यायेन स कुवोर्याधिवः किल ॥ 51 ॥

Šrimaddevīthāgavatam

Whether this Lady kills me, or I kill this Lady, the king will be angry in either case.

तन्यात्रवैर गत्वार्ड बोधीय्यामि तं पुम् ।

यवाउढ़ाथिहितं देय्या यवास्त्रिच करोतु सः ॥ 52 ॥

I will therefore go now to the king and tell him what the Devi has said; he will do whatever he likes.

व्यास उवाच

इति संचित्य मेधारी जगाम नृपसिद्धधि ।

प्रणाय तमुवाचैदं कृतांजलिसायाकः ॥ 53 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus that intelligent son of the minister argued and went to the king. Then, bowing down before him, he began to say thus:

मन्युवाच

राजन्देवी वरागोहा सिंहस्योपरि संस्थिता ।

अष्टाविशुभ्जा नया वरायुधधरा पत्ता ॥ 54 ॥

O King! That excellent woman, fascinating to the world, the beautiful Devi is sitting on a lion with weapons in all her eighteen hands. O King! I told her:

सा मयोत्ता महाराज महिंषं भज भाविता ।

महिषी भव राजसर्व तैगेलकायिपतेः पिया ॥ 55 ॥

“O Beautiful Lady! Be attached to Mahisāsura; you will become, then, the queen-consort of the king, the lord of the three worlds.

पुताजी तर्वेवास्य भविता नात्र संशयः ।

स तत्ज्ञाकरो जातो क्यवर्ती भविषयिति ॥ 56 ॥

You will certainly then be his queen-consort; he will pass his life, ever obedient to you like an obedient servant.

त्रैलोक्यविषयं भुक्त्वा चिरकालं वरानने ।

महिंशे परित्यासाठ्य योचितां सुभगम भव ॥ 57 ॥

"O Beautiful One! If you choose to make Mahisa your husband, you will become fortunate amongst women and will enjoy ever all the wealth of the three worlds."

इति महदानं भूत्वा सा स्यावोदगोर्भिता ।

मातुबच चिशालाड़ी सितमुर्बमिति वचः ॥ 58 ॥

Hearing my these words, that large-eyed

woman, puffed up with egoism, laughed a little and said thus:

महिषीर्षभिसम्पूतं पशुनामधरं किल ।

खलि दास्याम्बहं देखे सुगणां हितकाघमया ॥ 59 ॥

"Your king is born of a buffalo and is the worst of brutes; I will sacrifice him before the Devi for the benefit of the gods. Is there any woman in this world so stupid as to select Mahisa as her husband?

का मुका कामिनी लोके महिंवे वे पतिं भबेत् ।

मातृषी मन्त्वदुके किं पयुभावं भवेनिद्ध ॥ 60 ॥

महिषी महिंदा नावं सर्शगा श्रगसंयुतम् ।

कुकते कन्दमाना वे नाहं तत्सदृषी शका ॥ 61 ॥

O You stupid! Can a woman like me ever indulge in bestial sentiments! A female buffalo has got horns; she, being excited with passion, may select your Mahiṣa with horns as her husband and come to him bellowing. I am not stupid nor like her so as to make him my husband.

कतिच्छेड़े मुधे युद्धे हिचेल वांं सुरापिष्यम् ।

गछ्ध वा दृष्ट पातालं जीवितेच्छा यदित्ते ते ॥ 62 ॥

O Villain! I will fight and destroy the enemies of the gods in the battle-field. Or if he desires to live, let him flee to Pātāla.

परन्तु तृ तथा वाक्यमित्युक्तं नृय मतया ।

तच्छूलाड़ं समावातः प्रविष्टित्य पुनः पुनः ॥ 63 ॥

O King! Hearing those rough words uttered by Her in a moment of madness, I have come to you, thinking also how to redress this wrong.

सभंगं विविच्वैव न युद्धे तु मया कृतम् ।

आज्ञां तिवा तावाल्यन्ते ककं कुर्गा युंचोघामम् ॥ 64 ॥

O King! Only I feared not to interrupt in your love sentiment; and therefore I did not fight with Her; especially, without Your command, how can I engage myself in useless excitement?

साउसीच च कलोन्मत्ता वर्तते भूप भामिनि ।

शवितळं न ज्ञानाभि किं वा भावि भविष्यति ॥ 65 ॥

O Lord of the Earth! That handsome woman rests maddened on Her own strength; I do not know what is the womb of future or whatever is destined to happen, will surely come to pass. You

Book V Chapter XI

are the sole master in this matter; I will do whatever you order me.

கார்பீரியைல் प्रमाणं नो मन्योरितील वुरासदः ।

युद्धं पलायनं श्रेयो न जानेउहं चिन्धिश्यम् ॥ 6 6 ॥

इति शीमदैर्षीभागवते महापुराणे पड़सदकन्थे

दशगोर्धायाः 11 10 11

The matter is very difficult to be reflected upon; whether it is better to fight or it is better to fly away, I cannot say definitely.

Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the messenger's news to Mahisa, in Śrimaddevī-bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter XI

मामामान रसा यावा.

