CHAPTER VIII

On Ilāvṛta

श्रीनारायण उवाच:

तेषु वर्षेय देवेशगः पूर्वकैंकैः स्तवनैः सदा ।

पूजयति महादेवीं जपध्यानसमाधिधिः ॥ १ ॥

Nrāyana said: In those Varsas, Viṣṇu and the other Devas use to worship always the Great Devi with Japam and meditation and to chant hymns to Her.

सर्वर्तुकुसुमप्रेणीशोभिता चनारजय: ।

फलानां पल्लवानां च यत्र गोभा नितन्तम् ॥ 2 ॥

तेय काननवर्षेय वर्षपर्वतसानुयु ।।

निरिद्रोगीषु सर्वांगु निर्मलोदकारिषु ॥ 3 ॥

विकचोत्पलमालासु हंससारासंचर्यैः ।

विशिभ्रेशितु तेथेव वर्षिधिः: कृजिजेषु च ॥ 4 ॥

जलन्हीडाडिविधिश्रविज्ञेः: क्रीश्यन्ति च ।

सुत्वयं ललितभूष्णां विलासायतनेयु च ॥ 5 ॥

The forests there are ornamented with all sorts of fruits, flowers and leaves, in all the seasons. In those excellent forests, and on the mountains, in those Varsas and on the clear waters interspersed with full blewn lotuses and Sārasas (cranes) and in those countries where varieties of mountain trees are standing and where varieties of birds frequent and echo all around, the people play in waters and engage themselves with a great many pleasant occupations; and the beautiful women, as well, roam there with the kniting of their eyebrows.

तत्रया विहरन्यव रखेरं घुवतिभि: सह ।

नवस्वयि च वर्षेषु भपवानाविष्युभः ॥ ६ ॥

नारायणाखो लोकानामनुग्रहरसंकदूक् ।

Book VIII Chapter VIII

देवीमात्राध्यायज्ञासे स च सर्वैंध पूज्यते ।

आवल्यूद्वेनेज्यायज्ञी सब्धिनते समाहितः ॥ 7 ॥

The people there enjoy as they like, surrounded by young women; Nārāyaṇa, the Ādipuruṣa Bhagavān Himself, worships the Devi there, to shew his extreme grace of all the inhabitants of the Navavarsa. The people also worship the Deity.

इलावुते तु भगावायचाजक्षिसमूद्रवः ।

एक एवं घबो देदो निथं वसति संगानः ॥ 8 ॥

तल्लेजे नापरः कक्षित्यरेजे वित्नोति च ।

भवान्या: शागतस्तत पुमान्त्वी भवति सुटम् ॥ 9 ॥

By worshipping the Devi only, the Bhagavān remains there in Samādhi, surrounded with Aniruddha and his other Vyūhacatuṣṭaya (the four forms). But in Ilāvṛta Varṣa, the Bhagavān Rudra, originated from the eyebrows of Brahmā, resides only with women.

भवानीनाकै: हीणामांसुक्षेणिकोटिधि: ।

संरक्ष्यमानो देवेगो देवं संकर्षणं भजन् ॥ 10 ॥

आसाना ध्यानयोगेन सर्वभृतहितंच्छया ।

तां तामसीं तुरीयां च मृतिं प्रकृतिमामानः ॥ 11 ॥ ॥

उपधावते चैकामानसा भगवानजः ।

No other person can enter there; for the Bhavānī, the Śakti of Rudra has cursed that any male entering there would be transformed into a female. The Lord of Bhāvanī, surrounded by innumerable women, remains here engaged in the worship of the unmanifested unborn Bhagavān Sankarṣana. For the good of humanity, with intense meditation, He worships His own Turīya Form of the nature of Tamas, Thus:

श्रीभगवानुवाच

उ० नमो भगवते महापुरुषाय सर्वगुण-

संख्यानायानतायाव्यक्ताय नम इति ॥ 12 ॥

भजे बज्यारणाबादंपंकर्ज

भगव्य कृतनस्य घरं परायणम् ।

भनैक्यलं भावितभुतभावनं

भवार्थे त्वा भवभावामीक्षणम् ॥ 13 ॥

Śrī Bhagavāna said: Obeisance to Thee! the Bhagavān, the Great Puruṣa, endowed with all the

qualities (the principal six Aisvaryas or prosperities), the Ananta (the Infinite) and to the Unmanifested! We worship Thee, Whose lotus feet are the refuge of all. Thou art the great storehouse of all the superhuman powers and the divine faculties of omnipotence, etc.

न चस्य मावागुणकर्मेतिन्धि-

निरीक्षितो हृष्णविप दृष्टित्यन्ते ।

ईंगे यथा नो जितमन्युर्हसा

कस्तं न मन्त्ये जितिगीषुतमन: ॥ 14 ॥

Thou art always present to the Bhaktas. Thou art creating all these beings. Thou givest Mokṣa to the Bhaktas and destroyed their attachment to the world and Thou bindest Thy non-devotees in bondage to this world. Thou art the Lord. We worship Thee.

असद्वडुगो यः प्रतिभाति मायया क्षीवेब

मध्यासवताप्रोचनः ।

न नागवध्योड़ीण इशिरं छिद्या

यत्पादयो: स्पर्जनधर्मितिद्वायः ॥ 15 ॥

We are entirely under the control of the passions, anger, etc., and our minds are always attached to the senses; but though Thou art always looking at this world for its creation, etc., Thy mind is not a bit attached to it.

यमातुरस्य स्थितिजन-मसंयम्

विधिसिद्धीनं यमन्तमुष्चः ।

न वेद सिद्धायंमिव कधितिस्वर्न

भूमण्डलं भूर्भसहस्यामसु ॥ १ ६ ॥

So who will not turn to Thee, desirous to conquer his self. Thou art appearing by Thy Māyā as one whose sight is ignorant; Thou lookest dreadful with Thy eyes reddened with the drink of Madhu (wine). By the touch of Thy feet, the mental faculties are very much enchanted; hence the women folk of the Nāgas cannot in any way worship Thee, out of bashfulness.

यस्याए आसीदुणविध्यो महान्-

विज्ञानाधिष्यो भगवानज: विकल ।

तत्संवृतोर्डं विवृता स्वतेजसा

वैकात्रिक तामसर्मैन्द्रियं सृजे ॥ 17 ॥

The Rṣis say that though Thour that the Only One to create, preserve and destroy, yet Thou art quite unconcerned with them. Thou art Infinite and Thou hast innumerable heads. This vast universe is like the mustard seed resting somewhere on one of these heads, which Thou canst not feel even. The Mahat Tattva is Thy body manifested first. It is built of Sattva, Raja and Tamo Gunas.

एते वयं यस्य वजो महात्मन:

स्विता: गुकुन्ता एल सूत्रवर्गिताः ।

महान्द्वैकृतातामसौद्रिया:

सुजाम सर्वे यदतुग्रहादिदम् ॥ 18 ॥

Brahmā has come out of this and I again have sprung from This this Brahmā and am nurtured by the Sattva and the other Guṇas and with the help of the Teja, created these elements and the senses. These Mahat Tattvas and we all are controlled by Thy Extraordinary Form. Thou hast kept us in our respective places by Thy Kriyā Sakti as birds are kept duly by the strings through them. Mahat Tattva, Aharihāra, and the Devas, elements and the senses, before mentioned all united create this Universe by Thy Grace.

यदिस्तितां कह्यपि कर्मवर्षी

मायां जानोउंय गुरुसंगीधितः ।

न वेद नितलाणयोगमझसा

तस्मै नमसे लिवलयोद्यात्मने ॥ 19 ॥

Thy creation is very big and grand: for this reason the gross thinkers, deluded by Thy power, never understand it. This Māyā is the only means to get the Sarhsāra Nivṛtti, Mokṣa, the real Goal of man: and this Māyā, again involves them in the Karma entanglements, very hard to get through. Coming in and going out, both of these are Thy forms; so we bow down to Thee."

नातायण उवाच

एवं स भगवानुघरे देवं संकर्षी प्रभूम् ।

इलावृतपुयासीत देवीगणसमातिह: ॥ 20 ॥

तबैव धर्मपुत्रोजी नाम्ना मद्रक्ष्वा इति ।

तत्कुलस्यापि पतयः पुरुषा भन्नेवकाः ॥ 21 ॥

भत्राङ्चर्वें तां भूर्ति वासुदेवस्य विश्रुतान् ।

Nārāyana said: Thus the Bhagavān Rudra, with His Own persons in Ilāvṛta Varsa use to worship the Devi and the Sankarṣana, the Controller of all the Lokas. The son of Dharma, well known by the name of Bhadraśravā and all the persons born of his family and his attendants, worship thus the Devi.

हयमूर्तिंभिता तां तु ह्ययीवपदांकिताम् ॥ 22 ॥

पायेण समाध्यन्यावारोकन पिविजिताताम् ।

एवायेच च तां भूर्ति गृणत उपयांति च ॥ 23 ॥

This form is well known to all the the name of Hayagrīva and worshipped thus. All the persons there worship Him with the intense meditation and Samādhi and realise Him thoroughly. Then they praise Him, according to due customs and get the thorough Siddhis (success in getting extraordinary powers).

मद्रश्वस कषुः

उठे नमो भगवते धर्मायताबिक्षोधनाय नम झते ।

अहो विवित्रं भगवद्धिवेत्ति एंजतं

जनोउधं हि मियचर पश्यति ।

ध्यायर सर्हिह विकर्मे सेवितुं

निर्हल्य पुरं चित्तं जिजीविष्यः ॥ 24 ॥

The Bhadraśrāvas said: “Obeisance to Thee, the Bhagavān, the Incarnate of Virtue, and to Him who destroys completely the desires, attachments, etc., to worldly objects! Ho! How wonderful are the feats of the Bhagavān! Death always destroys all, but people, seeing this, seem not to see this. Seeing that the son meets with death, the father desires to live long not for a virtuous purpose but for sense enjoyments, what is called Vikarma. Those who are skilled in Jñāna and Vijñāna say that this Universe that is seen is very transient.

वर्दन्त विश्व कवयः स्म नर्भरं

पश्यन्ति चाधायमावित्वे विश्रक्षतः ।

तथापि मुहाति तवाज मायया

सुविक्षितं कृत्यमजं नतोप्रस तम् ॥ 25 ॥

Book VIII Chapter IX

Moreover those Pandits who are endowed with much Jñāna, see vividly the transitoriness of this Universe. Still, O Unborn One! When practically they come to deal with this, they all become overpowered with the influence of Māyā.

विश्वोद्वस्थानिनीधकर्ष

ते झकान्तूर्वीकृतमध्यपावृत:।

युक्त न विशं त्वयि कार्यकरणों सर्वात्मिन

व्यतिरिक्तो च सस्तुः ॥ 26 ॥

So Thy Pastime (Līla) is wonderfully variegated. (Instead of spending our time uselessly in discussing on Śāstras) we bow down to Thee, and Thee alone. Thou art the Self-manifest Caitanya. Thou are not the object to be covered by Māyā. Thou dost not do anything in the sort of creation etc., Thou remainest simply as the Witness thercof.

वेदान्युगानते तमसा तिरस्कृतात्र-

सातलाघो नुतुरंगियसूः ।

प्रत्याददे वै कवयेप्रियाचते

तस्मै नमस्ते विसधेहिताय ते ॥ 27 ॥

Sill the Vedas declare that Thou createst, preservest and destroyest the Universe. It is quite reasonable and nothing to be wondered at. Thou art the the Atman of all. When the Pralaya (the

time of great dissolution) comes, the Vedas were stolen by the Daityas and taken to the nether regions, the Raśatala.

एवं सुत्वेति देेवेशं इत्यगीर्ष हरिं च ते ।

भग्रवसनामानो वर्णयिति च तद्गुणान् ॥ 28 ॥

Thou, in the form of Hayagriva (Horse-faced), rescued the Vedas and gave them to the Grandsire Brahmā who was very eager to get them back and understand their meanings. Thou art the true Sanikalap (resolve); we bow down to Thee." Thus the Bhadraśravās praise the Hayagriva form of Hari and sing the glorious deeds of Him.

एपां चरितमेनोद्र यः पटेच्छावरेच्य च: ।

पापकंकुमुलुज्य द्वैतीलोंकं ब्रतेच सः ॥ 29 ॥

इति शीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे अष्टमरक्ये युवनकोशो नाम

अष्टमोउच्चाप: 11 8 11

He who reads these narratives of the Mahā Puruṣa (the high-souled personage) or he who makes others hear these things, both of them, quitting their sinful bodies, go to the Devi Loka.

Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description of Ilāvrta in the Mahāpurānam Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VIII Chapter IX

