[Ch 9 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Once on a time, the time for Aṣṭaka Śrāddha (the funeral ceremony in honour of the departed) arrived. Seeing this, the King Iśvāku ordered his son Vikukṣi: “O Child! Go immediately to the forest and bring carefully pure sanctified meat for the Śrāddha purpose; see, that there be no neglect of duty. Thus ordered, Vikukṣi instantly went to the forest equipped with arms.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Once on a time, the time for Aṣṭaka Śrāddha (the funeral ceremony in honour of the departed) arrived. Seeing this, the King Ikṣāku ordered his son Vikukṣi :-- “O Child! Go immediately to the forest and bring carefully pure sanctified meat for the Śrāddha purposes; see, that there be no neglect of duty.” Thus ordered, Vikukṣi instantly went to the forest equipped with arms.

[Ch 9 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He hunted in the forest lots of boars, pigs, deer, and hare. But he was so very tired with his journey in the forest and got so hungry that he forgot everything about the Asṭaka Śrāddha and ate one hare there in the forest. The remaining excellent meat he brought and handed over to his father.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He hunted in the forest lots of boars, pigs, deer, and hare. But he was so very tired with his journey in the forest and got so hungry that he forgot everything about the Aṣṭaka Śrāddha and ate one hare there in the forest. The remaining excellent meat he brought and handed over to his father.

[Ch 9 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When that meat was brought to be sprinkled for purification, the family priest Vasistha, on seeing it, at once came to know that some portion had already been eaten and it was the remaining part.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When that meat was brought to be sprinkled for purification, the family priest Vaśiṣṭha, on seeing it, at once came to know that some portion had already been eaten and it was the remaining part.

[Ch 9 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The leavings of food are not fit for the sprinkling purpose; this is the Śāstric rule. Vasiṣṭha informed the King of this defect in the food.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The leavings of food are not fit for the sprinkling purposes; this is the Śāstric rule. Vaśiṣṭha informed the King of this defect in the food.

[Ch 9 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In accordance with the Guru's advice, the King coming to know thus the violation of the rule by his son, became very angry and banished his son from his kingdom.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In accordance with the Guru’s advice, the King coming to know thus the violation of the rule by his son, became very angry and banished his son from his kingdom.

[Ch 9 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The prince became known from that time as Śaśāda; he did not become the least sorry for his father's anger; he went to the forest and gladly remained there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The prince became known from that time as Sa’sāda; he did not become the least sorry for his father’s anger; he went to the forest and gladly remained there.

[Ch 9 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He gladly passed his time absorbed in religion and sustained his life on forest fruits and roots. After sometime when his father died, he inherited his kingdom.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He gladly passed his time absorbed in religion and sustained his life on forest fruits and roots. After sometime when his father died, he inherited his kingdom.

[Ch 9 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On becoming the King of Ayodhyā, Śaśāda had only one son; he became famous in the three lokas by the name of Kakutsha. He was known also by other names Indravāha and Puranājaya.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On becoming the King of Ayodhyā, Śaśāda had only one son; he became famous in the three lokas by the name of Kakutstha. He was known also by other names Indravāha and Purañjaya.

[Ch 9 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya said: O Holy One! How and why was the prince named Kakutsha. Why was he known by the two other names? Speak all this to me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya said :-- “O Holy One! How and why was the prince named Kakutstha. Why was he known by the two other names? Speak all this to me.”

[Ch 9 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! When Śaśāda went to the Heavens, Kakutstha became king. That religious king then began to govern the country of his father and grandfather with an authority supported by a powerful arm. At this time the Devas suffered a defeat from the Dānavas and took refuge to Viṣṇu, the Infallible and the Lord of the three worlds. The eternal great Viṣṇu full of intelligence and bliss then addressed the Devas:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! When Śaśāda went to the Heavens Kakutstha became king. That religious king then began to govern the country of his father and grandfather with an authority supported by a powerful arm. At this time the Devas suffered a defeat from the Dānavas and took refuge to Viṣṇu, the Infallible and the Lord of the three worlds. The eternal great Viṣṇu full of intelligence and bliss then addressed the Devas :--

[Ch 9 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Visṇu said: “O Devas! Go and pray to the King Śaśāda. He will be your ally and kill all the Demons. That King is religious; especially he is a worshipper of the Highest Śakti. He is good archer and will come to help you. His strength is immense.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viṣṇu said :-- “O Devas! Go and pray to the King Śaśāda. He will be your ally and kill all the Demons. That King is religious; especially he is a worshipper of the Highest Śakti. He is a good archer and will come to help you. His strength is immense.”

[Ch 9 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Indra and the other Devas hearing the nectar like words of Hari went to Ayodhyā, to Kakuttsha, the son of Śaśāda. Seeing the Devas at his palace, the king worshipped them duly and with great care; and he asked them why they had come there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Indra and the other Devas hearing the nectar like words of Hari went to Ayodhyā, to Kakutstha, the son of Śaśāda. Seeing the Devas at his palace, the king worshipped them duly and with great care and he asked them why they had come there.

[Ch 9 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King said: O Devas! When you have favoured me by your presence here, I am blessed and sanctified; my life is crowned with success. Say what I can do for you; I will carry it out even if it be very hard for me to perform."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King said :-- “O Devas! When you have favoured me by your presence here, I am blessed and sanctified; my life is crowned with success. Say what I can do for you; I will carry it out even if it be very hard for me to perform.”

[Ch 9 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas said: “O Prince! Please help and back us and defeat the Daityas, invincible by the Devas and form an alliance with Indra. O King! By the grace of the Highes Sakti, you have nothing unattained anywhere; so we have come to you by the order of Viṣnu.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas said :-- “O Prince! Please help and back us and defeat the Daityas, invincible by the Devas and form an alliance with Indra. O King! By the grace of the Highest Śakti, you have nothing unattained anywhere; so we have come to you by the order of Viṣṇu.”

[Ch 9 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King said: "O Devas! I can back you and become your ally if Indra carries me on his back in the time of war.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King said :-- “O Devas! I can back you and become your ally if Indra carries me on his back in the time of war.

[Ch 9 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I will fight nor with the Daityas but for the Devas; but I will go to the battle-field on Indra's back; this I speak to you truly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will fight now with the Daityas for the Devas; but I will go to the battle-field on Indra’s back; this I speak to you truly.”

[Ch 9 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King The Devas then spoke to Indra: "O Lord of Śacī! It is now your bounden duty to do this; so quitting shame, be a carrier to this king."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! The Devas then spoke to Indra :-- “O Lord of Śaci! It is now your bounden duty to do this; so quitting shame, be a carrier to this King.”

[Ch 9 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra got ashamed very much, but being requested frequently by Hari, at last assumed the appearance of a bull like the great Bull of Śiva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra got ashamed very much, but being requested frequently by Hari, at last assumed the appearance of a bull like the great Bull of Śiva.

[Ch 9 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King mounted on that bull to go to the war; he fought while taking his seat on the hump on the shoulders of the bull (Kakuda); therefore he was named Kakustha.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King mounted on that bull to go to the war; he fought while taking his seat on the hump on the shoulders of the bull (Kakud); therefore he was named Kakutstha.

[Ch 9 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King was carried by Indra on his back hence he was named Indravāha; he conquered the Dānavas in battle; hence he was called Puranājaya. The powerful King defeated the Dānavas and gave away all their wealth to the Devas. He bade farewell to the Devas and returned to his own kingdom. Thus the alliance was formed with Indra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King was carried by Indra on his back hence he was named Indravāha; he conquered the Dānavas in battle; hence he was called Purañjaya. The powerful King defeated the Dānavas and gave away all their wealth to the Devas. He bade farewell to the Devas and returned to his own kingdom. Thus the alliance was formed with Indra.

[Ch 9 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Kakuttsha became very celebrated on this earth; his descendants became kings and were known as Kakutsthas and were all very famous here on this Earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Kakutstha became very celebrated on this earth; his descendants became kings and were known as Kakutsthas and were all very famous here

[Ch 9 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kakutstha had one powerful son, named Kakutstha by his legal wife; Kakutstha had the son Prthu, of mighty prowess.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kakutstha had one powerful son, named Kākutstha by his legal wife; Kākutstha had the son Prithu, of mighty prowess.

[Ch 9 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Prthu was the part incarnation personified of Visnu, and worshipper of the feet of the Supreme Śakti. His son was Visāvarandhi; he became king and governed the kingdom.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Prithu was the part incarnation personified of Viṣṇu, and worshipper of the feet of the Supreme Śakti. His son was Visvarandhi; he became king and governed the kingdom.

[Ch 9 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► His son was Candra; he came to be king, governed his subject and multiplied very much his issues.
NEW CORR ENG ──► His son was Candra; he came to be king, governed his subjects and multiplied very much his issues.

[Ch 9 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Yuvanāśva was one of his sons; he was very powerful and spirited. Śavanta was the son of Yuvanāśva; he was very religious. He built a nice city named Śāvanti like the Paradise of Indra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Yuvanāśva was one of his sons; he was very powerful and spirited. Śavanta was the son of Yuvanāśva; he was very religious. He built a nice city named Śāvantī like the Paradise of Indra.

[Ch 9 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brihadasâva was the son of the high-souled Śāvanta; he had a son Kuvalayâśva. He became the Lord of the earth by the power of his arms. He killed Dhundu Dānava; so he was very much celebrated by the name of Dhundumâra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brihadaśva was the son of the high-souled Śāvanta; he had a son Kuvalayāśva. He became the Lord of the earth by the power of his arms. He killed Dhundu Dānava; so he was very much celebrated by the name of Dhundumāra.

[Ch 9 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► His son Drḍhāśva; he governed the earth; His son was Śrimān Haryāśva. His son was Nikumbha; he became the King. Nikumbha had his son Varhaṇāśva. Kriśāśva was his son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► His son was Dridhāśva; he governed the earth; His son was Śrīmān Haryaśva. His son was Nikumbha; he became the King. Nikumbha had his son Varhaṇāśva. Kriśāśva was his son.

[Ch 9 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► His son was the powerful Paseanjit; his son's prowess knew no bounds. Parasenajit had the fortunate son Yauvanāśva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► His son was the powerful Parasenajit; his son’s prowess knew no bounds. Parasenajit had the fortunate son Yauvanāśva.

[Ch 9 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O fortunate One! The son of Yauvanāśva was Śrimān Māndhātā; he became the Lord of the Earth and for the satisfaction of the Devi Bhagavatī had one thousand and eight palaces built in Benares and in the other chief places of pilgrimages.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O fortunate One! The son of Yauvanaśva was Śrīmān Māndhātā; he became the Lord of the Earth and for the satisfaction of the Devī Bhagavatī had one thousand and eight palaces built in Benares and in the other chief places of pilgrimages.

[Ch 9 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Māndhāṭā was not born of his mother's womb but was born in the belly of his father. Then the ministers tore asunder the belly of his father and got him out.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Māudhātā was not born of his mother’s womb but was born in the belly of his father. Then the ministers tore asunder the belly of his father and got him out.

[Ch 9 Verse 42-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya said: O fortunate One! What you said was never seen nor heard ever before since. This sort of births is highly improbable. How was that beautiful son born in the belly of his father? Describe this in detail and satisfy my curiosity.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya said :-- O fortunate One! What you said was never seen nor heard ever before since. This sort of birth is highly improbable. How was that beautiful son born in the belly of his father? Describe this in detail and satisfy my curiosity.

[Ch 9 Verse 44-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! The King Yauvanāśva had one hundred queens; yet he had no issues. The King always thought much about his son. Once the King, sorry and desirous of a son, went to the holy retreats of the Rṣis. On arriving there, he began frequently to respire heavily before the ascetics. The Rṣis became filled with pity on seeing his sorrowful condition. O King! The Brāhmins then said to him: O King! Why are you thus sorrowful and distressed? What is your sorrow that is troubling your heart? Speak truly. We will surely redress your grievance.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! The King Yauvanāśva had one hundred queens; yet he had no issues. The King always thought much about his son. Once the King, sorry and desirous of a son, went to the holy retreats of the Ṛṣis. On arriving there, he began frequently to respire heavily before the ascetics. The Ṛṣis became filled with pity on seeing his sorrowful condition. O King! The Brāhmins that said to him :-- O King! Why are you thus sorrowful and distressed? What is your sorrow that is troubling your heart? Speak truly. We will surely redress your grievance.

[Ch 9 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Yauvanāśva said: “O Munis! I have got the kingdom, wealth, excellent horses, one hundred illustrious chaste wives.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Yauvanāśva said :-- “O Munis! I have got the kingdom wealth, excellent horses, one hundred illustrious chaste wives.

[Ch 9 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I have no enemies in the three worlds; no one is stronger than me. All the Kings and ministers are obedient to my call.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I have no enemies in the three worlds; no one is stronger than me. All the Kings and ministers are obedient to my call.

[Ch 9 Verse 51-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But O Ascetics! I have no son; this my sonless states is the only cause of my pain and sorrow. It has marred all my happiness. See! The persons that have no son cannot in any way go to Heavens. Therefore I am always being pained for this. You all are ascetic; you have taken great pains to learn the essence of the Veda Śāstras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But O Ascetics! I have no son; this my sonless state is the only cause of my pain and sorrow. It has marred all my happiness. See! The persons that have no son cannot in any way go to Heavens. Therefore I am always being pained for this. You all are ascetics; you have taken great pains to learn the essence of the Veda Śāstras.

[Ch 9 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So kindly order me what sacrifice is fit for me to have a son. O Ascetics! If you any pity for me, kindly perform this good work for me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► So kindly order me what sacrifice is fit for me to have a son. O Ascetics! If you feel any pity for me, kindly perform this good work for me.”

[Ch 9 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the words of the King, they were all filled with pity; and, with fullness of mind, made him to perform the sacrifice whose presiding deity was Indra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing the words of the King they were all filled with pity; and, with fulness of mind, made him to perform the sacrifice whose presiding deity was Indra.

[Ch 9 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► For the sake of the King, that he may get a son born to him, they had a jar filled with water by the Brāhmins and purified and charged that jar with the Vedic Mantrams.
NEW CORR ENG ──► For the sake of the King, that he may get a son born to him, they had a jar filled with water by the Brāhmins and purified and charged that jar with the Vedic Mantrams.

[Ch 9 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King got thirsty in the night and entered in the sacrificial ground; seeing the Brāhmins asleep, the King himself drank that water, surcharged with the Mantram.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King got thirsty in the night and entered in the sacrificial ground; seeing the Brāhmins asleep, the King himself drank that water, surcharged with the Mantram.

[Ch 9 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmins consecrated and kept that water apart, according to due rules, surcharging with Mantrams, for the wife of the King; but the King, getting thirsty, himself drank that water unconsciously.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmins consecrated and kept that water apart, according to due rules, surcharging with Mantrams, for the wife of the King; but the King, getting thirsty, himself drank that water unconsciously.

[Ch 9 Verse 58-59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next morning the Brāhmins seeing the jar of water empty, were started very much with fear; the Brāhmins then asked the King: Who drank the water?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next morning the Brāhmins seeing the jar of water empty, were startled very much with fear; the Brāhmins then asked the King :-- Who drank the water?

[Ch 9 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When they came to know that the King himself drank the water, the Munis thought this to be an act of Daiva (Fate) and completing the sacrifice returned to their abodes. Then the King became pregnant by the power of the sacrificial Mantrams.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When they came to know that the King himself drank the water, the Munis thought this to he an act of Daiva (Fate) and completing the sacrifice returned to their abodes. Then the King became pregnant by the power of the sacrificial Mantrams.

[Ch 9 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After some time, the son became fully developed. Then the King's minister, cutting his right bowel, got the son out. Out of the God's favour, the King did not die.
NEW CORR ENG ──► After some time, the son became fully developed. Then the King’s ministers, cutting his right bowel, got the son out. Out of the God’s favour, the King did not die.

[Ch 9 Verse 62-64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the ministers were troubled with the thought whose milk the child will suck, then Indra spoke out the child would drink (Mān Dhātā) my forefinger and gave his finger into the child's mouth. For that reason his name was Māndhātā. Thus I have described in detail the origin of Māndhātā. Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the story of Kākutstha and the origin of Māndhātā in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the ministers were troubled with the thought whose milk the child will suck, then Indra spoke out the child would drink (Mān-Dhātā) my forefinger and gave his finger into the child’s mouth. For that reason his name was Māndhātā. Thus I have described in detail the origin of Māndhātā. Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the story of Kakutstha and the origin of Māndhātā in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam the Mahā Purāṇam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
