CHAPTER IX

On the Story of Kākustha and on Māndhātā

व्यास उवाच

कदापिद्रष्टाकशाड़े विकृक्षिं पृथिवीपति: ।

आज्ञायवसतसंभुको मांसमानय सत्त्वम् ॥ १ ॥

मेरयं शाळ्यार्थभूना वने गत्वा सुतादरात् ।

इत्युक्तोउसी तथेत्याशु जगाम वनमस्त्रभृत् ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Once on a time, the time for Aṣṭaka Śrāddha (the funeral ceremony in honour of the departed) arrived. Seeing this, the King Iśvāku ordered his son Vikukṣi: “O Child! Go immediately to the forest and bring carefully pure sanctified meat for the Śrāddha purpose; see, that there be no neglect of duty. Thus ordered, Vikukṣi instantly went to the forest equipped with arms.

गत्या ज्ञान बाणी: स वराहान्युकारान्यगान् ।

शगर्शधारि परिश्रोतो बभूवाथ बुभूश्रितः ॥ 3 ॥

विम्मृता चाहका तत्प शगं चादद्वी वने ।

गंपं निवेदवामास पिधे मांसमन्तनम् ॥ 4 ॥

He hunted in the forest lots of boars, pigs, deer, and hare. But he was so very tired with his journey in the forest and got so hungry that he forgot everything about the Asṭaka Śrāddha and ate one hare there in the forest. The remaining excellent meat he brought and handed over to his father.

प्रोक्षाय समानीत मांतं दृष्ट्या गुरुस्तदा ।

अनहिंमिति नज्ञाना चुकोप मुनिसत्तमः ॥ 5 ॥

When that meat was brought to be sprinkled for purification, the family priest Vasistha, on seeing it, at once came to know that some portion had already been eaten and it was the remaining part.

भुक्तशंत्रु न आद्रे प्रोक्षणीयमिति स्थिति: ।

राझे निवेदयामास वसिष्ठः पाकदूषणम् ॥ 6 ॥

The leavings of food are not fit for the sprinkling purpose; this is the Śāstric rule. Vasiṣṭha informed the King of this defect in the food.

पुत्रस्य कर्म तन्त्राला भूपतिंगुभोदितम् ।

चुकोप विधित्योपातं देशाप्रिः:सारयस्ततः ॥ 7 ॥

In accordance with the Guru's advice, the King coming to know thus the violation of the rule by his son, became very angry and banished his son from his kingdom.

शग्राद इति विद्यतो नाना जातो नृपात्मजः ।

गतो वने शग्रादस्तु चितृकोपादसंधमः ॥ 8 ॥

वय्ने वर्तयक्लं नीतावान्यमंतलर: ।

The prince became known from that time as Śaśāda; he did not become the least sorry for his father's anger; he went to the forest and gladly remained there.

चितपुरंने राज्य प्राणतं तेन महात्मना ॥ 9 ॥

शशाद्रवककोरात्रामयोधायाः पति: स्वयम् ।

He gladly passed his time absorbed in religion and sustained his life on forest fruits and roots. After sometime when his father died, he inherited his kingdom.

यज्ञाननेकशः पूर्णांशकार सर्यतुटे ॥ 10 ॥

शशाद्रयाभवत्सुः ककुल्य इति विशुतः ।

तस्यैव नामभेदाड़े इंद्रवाहः पुरंवयः ॥ 11 ॥

On becoming the King of Ayodhyā, Śaśāda had only one son; he became famous in the three lokas by the name of Kakutsha. He was known also by other names Indravāha and Puranājaya.

जनमेव जयार

नामधेदः कर्थ जातो राजपुरस्य चानप्र ॥

कारणं बृहि मे सर्वे कर्मणा येन चाधवत् ॥ 12 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Holy One! How and why was the prince named Kakutsha. Why was he known by the two other names? Speak all this to me.

व्यास उवाच

शगादे सर्वाती राजा ककुल्य इंत्ति चाभवत् ।

राज्य चकार धर्मज्ञ: विपुर्वीमार्थ बलात् ।

एतसिभजतेरे देवा दैन्यैः सर्वे पराजितः ॥ 13 ॥

जगमुक्तिलोकाप्रियत विज्ञा ग्रणमाव्यव्यम् ।

तान्योवाच महाविष्युक्तदा देवान्सनातनः ॥ 14 ॥

Book VII Chapter IX

Vyāsa said: O King! When Śaśāda went to the Heavens, Kakutstha became king. That religious king then began to govern the country of his father and grandfather with an authority supported by a powerful arm. At this time the Devas suffered a defeat from the Dānavas and took refuge to Viṣṇu, the Infallible and the Lord of the three worlds. The eternal great Viṣṇu full of intelligence and bliss then addressed the Devas:

विष्णुराच

पाणिण्याहं महीपालं प्रार्थवन्तु शाशाद्वान् ।

स हनिष्यति वे दैत्यानंभामे सुरसतम ॥ १ ५ ॥

आगथीयति धर्मोसा साहाय्यार्थ धनुधरः ।

पराशनैः प्रसादेन सामर्थं तस्य चालुम् ॥ १ ६ ॥

Visṇu said: “O Devas! Go and pray to the King Śaśāda. He will be your ally and kill all the Demons. That King is religious; especially he is a worshipper of the Highest Śakti. He is good archer and will come to help you. His strength is immense.

हरे: सुवचनादेवा ययु: सर्वे सवासवा: ।

अलोध्यायां महात्राज शगतदानंय प्रति ॥ 17 ॥

तानगतान्युराजाज पूजयामास धर्मतः ।

पण्छलामाने राजा प्रयोजनमतिई: ॥ 18 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Indra and the other Devas hearing the nectar like words of Hari went to Ayodhyā, to Kakuttsha, the son of Śaśāda. Seeing the Devas at his palace, the king worshipped them duly and with great care; and he asked them why they had come there.

राजोवाच

ध-योड़ं पावितशामि जीवितं सक्लं मम ।

यदागत्य गृहे देवा ददुक्षा दर्जानं महत् ॥ १९ ॥

ब्रुवंतु कृत्यं देयेशा दुःसाध्यमपि मानतेः ।

करिष्ठामि महत्कार्य सर्वेधा भवतां महत् ॥ २० ॥

The King said: O Devas! When you have favoured me by your presence here, I am blessed and sanctified; my life is crowned with success. Say what I can do for you; I will carry it out even if it be very hard for me to perform."

देवा कचुः

साहाय्यं कुरा राजेन्द्र सखा भव शर्पीपतेः ।

संग्रामे जय दैत्येंग्रानुर्जांशिक्रदारीपि ॥ २१ ॥

पराशक्तप्रसादेत वुतर्भे नासित ते क्वचित् ।

विष्णुना प्रेरिताश्वेमानातस्व सक्रियो ॥ २२ ॥

The Devas said: “O Prince! Please help and back us and defeat the Daityas, invincible by the Devas and form an alliance with Indra. O King! By the grace of the Highes Sakti, you have nothing unattained anywhere; so we have come to you by the order of Viṣnu.”

पंजीवाच

पाणिग्राहो भावमयद्ध दैवानां सुरसतमाः।

इन्द्रे मे वाहनं तन भवेहादि सुपाधिपः ॥ 23 ॥

The King said: "O Devas! I can back you and become your ally if Indra carries me on his back in the time of war.

संग्रामं तु कार्वियामि देवैर्वैकृतोर्धपुना ।

आक्रड़ोंर नायियाभि सत्योतद्वयोम्हमू ॥ 24 ॥

I will fight nor with the Daityas but for the Devas; but I will go to the battle-field on Indra's back; this I speak to you truly.

तदोषुर्वास्व देवा: कर्तव्ये कार्यम्बद्धुतम् ।

पत्र भव नरेन्द्रस्य त्वक्वल जलजा शर्चापते ॥ 25 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King The Devas then spoke to Indra: "O Lord of Śacī! It is now your bounden duty to do this; so quitting shame, be a carrier to this king."

लज्जमानरलत शक्र: प्रेरितो हरिण भुगम् ।

वधूव वृषभस्तूर्णं क्रस्येवापरो महान् ॥ 26 ॥

Indra got ashamed very much, but being requested frequently by Hari, at last assumed the appearance of a bull like the great Bull of Śiva.

तमाहरोह राज्ञसौ संधामगानाय वे ।

चित्रा: कुकुदि येनाय कुकुर्म्यसेन चापवल ॥ 27 ॥

The King mounted on that bull to go to the war; he fought while taking his seat on the hump on the shoulders of the bull (Kakuda); therefore he was named Kakustha.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

इन्ही वाहः कृतो येन तेन नामेन्द्रवाहकः ।

पुरो जितातृ दैवानां तेनभुच्छ पुरंजय: ॥ 28 ॥

जिवा दैवाभ्यदावाहुर्धनं तेषां प्रतचान् ।

पप्रच्छ चैवं राजर्षेति सख्यं बभूव ह् ॥ 29 ॥

The King was carried by Indra on his back hence he was named Indravāha; he conquered the Dānavas in battle; hence he was called Puranājaya. The powerful King defeated the Dānavas and gave away all their wealth to the Devas. He bade farewell to the Devas and returned to his own kingdom. Thus the alliance was formed with Indra.

कुतुस्थोक्षातिविख्यातो नृपतिसत्य संशजाः ।

काकुत्स्था भृति राजानो बभूवुर्बुईविश्रतः ॥ ३० ॥

O King! Kakuttsha became very celebrated on this earth; his descendants became kings and were known as Kakutsthas and were all very famous here on this Earth.

कुकुत्स्थ्याभवतुजो धर्मपत्न्यो महावलः ।

अनेन विश्रुतस्तस्य पृषुः पुत्रछा वीर्यान् ॥ 31 ॥

Kakutstha had one powerful son, named Kakutstha by his legal wife; Kakutstha had the son Prthu, of mighty prowess.

विष्योगेर्य मसूतः साक्षात्यरागतिन्पदाचंकः ।

विश्रधित्यु विज्ञेय: पृथोः पुत्रो नराधिणः ॥ 32 ॥

Prthu was the part incarnation personified of Visnu, and worshipper of the feet of the Supreme Śakti. His son was Visāvarandhi; he became king and governed the kingdom.

चन्द्रस्तस्य सुतः श्रीमात्राजा शंकरः स्मृतः ।

तत्सुती युवानश्रस्तु तेजस्वी बलवततः ॥ 33 ॥

His son was Candra; he came to be king, governed his subject and multiplied very much his issues.

ग्रावन्ती युवनाश्रय जजे परमधार्मिकः ।

ग्रावर्ती निमिति तेन पुरी शक्रपुरीसामा ॥ 34 ॥

Yuvanāśva was one of his sons; he was very powerful and spirited. Śavanta was the son of Yuvanāśva; he was very religious. He built a nice city named Śāvanti like the Paradise of Indra.

ब्रह्मधस्तु पुत्रोःभूष्ठावर्तेस यहातनः ।

कुलवायाथः सुतस्तस्य बभूव पृथिवीपति: ॥ 35 ॥

ध्रुभुभागा हतो देत्यसंतनासी पृथिवीतले ।

ध्रुभुभारोति विल्यालां नाम प्रभातिविश्रुन्ति ॥ 36 ॥

Brihadasâva was the son of the high-souled Śāvanta; he had a son Kuvalayâśva. He became the Lord of the earth by the power of his arms. He killed Dhundu Dānava; so he was very much celebrated by the name of Dhundumâra.

पुत्रसत्यय दुर्बाश्रनु पालायामास मेदैनीम् ।

दूदाश्रय सून: श्रीमान्वर्थ श्रुत कीर्तिन: ॥ 37 ॥

निकुभभत्सूनु: प्रोन्नो बयूपू पृथिवीपितः ।

वर्णाश्धी निकुम्भस्य कृशाश्रस्तय वे सूनः ॥ 38 ॥

His son Drḍhāśva; he governed the earth; His son was Śrimān Haryāśva. His son was Nikumbha; he became the King. Nikumbha had his son Varhaṇāśva. Kriśāśva was his son.

प्रसेनशिकृष्णाश्रय बलवानसत्यविक्रमः ।

तस्य उपो महापाणो यौवनार्थिति विश्रतः ॥ 39 ॥

His son was the powerful Paseanjit; his son's prowess knew no bounds. Parasenajit had the fortunate son Yauvanāśva.

यौवनाश्रुतः श्रीमान्यांधातेति महीपति: ।

अष्टोत्तमसहं तु प्रासादा येन निर्मितः ॥ 40 ॥

O fortunate One! The son of Yauvanāśva was Śrimān Māndhātā; he became the Lord of the Earth and for the satisfaction of the Devi Bhagavatī had one thousand and eight palaces built in Benares and in the other chief places of pilgrimages.

भगवत्यान्तु तुर्धध्यं महातीध्यु मानद ।

मातृगर्भे न जातो:सावुर्वज्ञो जनकोदो ॥ 41 ॥

नि:सारितस्ततः पुः: कृषिं मिन्चा मिछु: पुनः ।

Māndhāṭā was not born of his mother's womb but was born in the belly of his father. Then the ministers tore asunder the belly of his father and got him out.

राजोबाच

न शुतं न च दृष्टं वा भवता तदुदाहतम् ॥ 42 ॥

असंभावं महाभाग तस्य जन यथोदितम् ।

विस्तेण वद्यवाहा मंधातुर्जन्माकरणम् ॥ 43 ॥

राजोदेर यथोतयः पुत्र: सर्वांगसुन्दरः ।

Janamejaya said: O fortunate One! What you

Book VII Chapter IX

said was never seen nor heard ever before since. This sort of births is highly improbable. How was that beautiful son born in the belly of his father? Describe this in detail and satisfy my curiosity.

यास उचाच

यौवनाश्रीउपच्यो5पूरज्ञा परमधामिक: ॥ 44 ॥

भार्थिणां च शर्त तस्य बथूव नृपतैनृप ।

राजा चित्तापर: प्रायश्रित्त्यामास निवल्यः ॥ 45 ॥

अपत्यर्थं यौवनाश्री कुःवित्तनु वर्न गतः ।

ग्रहीणामाओंपुण्ये निर्विलणः स च पार्थिवः ॥ 46 ॥

मुगोच कु:वित्तः श्रासांतोपासनां च पश्यतान् ।

दूद्वा तुं कुःवित्त विग्रा बभ्यूढ़ा कृपालतः ॥ 47 ॥

तमूच्ज्रांणा राजकन्समाख्छोचिति पार्थिति ।

किं ते दुःखं महाराज बृह्नि सत्यं मनोतमान् ॥ 48 ॥

प्रतीकारं क्रियामो दुःखस्य तत्व सर्वथा ।

Vyāsa said: O King! The King Yauvanāśva had one hundred queens; yet he had no issues. The King always thought much about his son. Once the King, sorry and desirous of a son, went to the holy retreats of the Rṣis. On arriving there, he began frequently to respire heavily before the ascetics. The Rṣis became filled with pity on seeing his sorrowful condition. O King! The Brāhmins then said to him: O King! Why are you thus sorrowful and distressed? What is your sorrow that is troubling your heart? Speak truly. We will surely redress your grievance.”

यौवानश उवाच

राज्यं धनं सदश्रश्छ वर्णैतं मुनयो मम ॥ 49 ॥

भायाणी च शर्त शुर्द्रं वर्तैत विशादप्रभम् ।

Yauvanāśva said: “O Munis! I have got the kingdom, wealth, excellent horses, one hundred illustrious chaste wives.

नारातिक्षु लोकेषु कोउध्यस्त बलवानाम ॥ ५० ॥

आज्ञाकास्तु सामंतत खर्तैने मन्थिणतस्ता ।

I have no enemies in the three worlds; no one is stronger than me. All the Kings and ministers are obedient to my call.

एकं सन्तानजं दुःखं नान्यतश्यामि तापसा: ॥ ५१ ॥

अपुत्रस्य गतिनार्िित स्थगों नैव च नैव च ।

तस्याच्छोभापि विघेज्ञानः सन्तानार्थे भृगतं ततः ॥ ५२ ॥

वेद्रगात्वारितच्ज्ञातपासधा कृतघ्रभाः ।

But O Ascetics! I have no son; this my sonless states is the only cause of my pain and sorrow. It has marred all my happiness. See! The persons that have no son cannot in any way go to Heavens. Therefore I am always being pained for this. You all are ascetic; you have taken great pains to learn the essence of the Veda Śāstras.

इर्हि सन्तानकामस्य वृक्तां ज्ञाला दिशिणुं मे ॥ 53 ॥

कुर्वन्तु मम कार्य वै कृष्णो चन्दिति तपायाः ।

So kindly order me what sacrifice is fit for me to have a son. O Ascetics! If you any pity for me, kindly perform this good work for me."

व्यास उवाच

तच्छूला वचनं राजः कृपया पूर्णमानसः ॥ 54 ॥

कारयामासुर्वयास्तस्येशिभिन्द्रवेतानम् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the words of the King, they were all filled with pity; and, with fullness of mind, made him to perform the sacrifice whose presiding deity was Indra.

कलगः स्थापितस्तत्र गतपूर्णास्तु वादधैः ॥ 55 ॥

मन्त्रितो वेदनार्थे घुर्जार्थ तस्य प्रपृतः ।

For the sake of the King, that he may get a son born to him, they had a jar filled with water by the Brāhmins and purified and charged that jar with the Vedic Mantrams.

राजा तर्डासूनं प्रविष्टसूचितो निशि ॥ 56 ॥

विज्ञानूद्वा शयानान्स पपी मन्त्रजलं स्वयम्।

The King got thirsty in the night and entered in the sacrificial ground; seeing the Brāhmins asleep, the King himself drank that water, surcharged with the Mantram.

भार्थ्योंर संकृतं विश्रमेमन्त्रित विधिनोद्युक्तम् ॥ 57 ॥

पीतं राजा तृषान्तेन तद्धानान्वुषोतम् ।

The Brāhmins consecrated and kept that water apart, according to due rules, surcharging with Mantrams, for the wife of the King; but the King,

getting thirsty, himself drank that water unconsciously.

व्युदकं कलशं दृष्ट्वा तदा विप्रा विशङ्किताः ॥ ५८॥

प्रश्रब्छूते रूपे केन पीते जलमिति बिज्ञा: ।

राजा पीते विदित्वा ते नात्वा दैवबलं भक्ति ॥ ५ ९ ॥

Next morning the Brāhmins seeing the jar of water empty, were started very much with fear; the Brāhmins then asked the King: Who drank the water?

श्रौं सामायमासुरीतासे मुनयो गृहान् ।

गर्भे द्वारा नृपतिस्तन्ते मन्बलाद्धि ॥ 60 ॥

ततः काले स उतयः कुझिं भिन्तास्य दक्षिणाम् ।

When they came to know that the King himself drank the water, the Munis thought this to be an act of Daiva (Fate) and completing the sacrifice returned to their abodes. Then the King became pregnant by the power of the sacrificial Mantrams.

पूरं निष्कासयामापूर्णेनितस्य भूपतेः ॥ 6 1 ॥

देवानां कृपया तत्र न ममार महीपितः ।

After some time, the son became fully

developed. Then the King's minister, cutting his right bowel, got the son out. Out of the God's favour, the King did not die.

कं धास्यति कुमारोयं मन्निणध्छुकर्णभूगम् ॥ 62 ॥

तद्वेरे देशिनीं प्रादान्मां धातेत्यवद्बृढ़ः ।

सोउभवढ़लावाजाजा मान्याता पृथिवीपति: ।

तदुर्नसित्तु भूपाल कथिता तव विहरान् ॥ 63 ॥

श्रौत श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणो सत्यमकन्धे

नवमो3ध्याः ।। 64 ।।

When the ministers were troubled with the thought whose milk the child will suck, then Indra spoke out the child would drink (Mān Dhātā) my forefinger and gave his finger into the child's mouth. For that reason his name was Māndhātā. Thus I have described in detail the origin of Māndhātā.

Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the story of Kākutstha and the origin of Māndhātā in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

