CHAPTER XXIV

On the Installation of Durgā Devi in Benares

व्यास उवाच

तस्यास्तुचनं श्रुत्वा भवान्या: स नृपोभमः ।

प्रोवाच चचनं तत्र सुबाहुर्षफित्भंसुतः ॥ 1 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing the Devi's words, the king Subāhu began to say with great devotion thus :

सुबाहुर्वाच

एकातो देवलोकस्य राज्यं भूमपडलस्य च ।

एकातो दर्शनं ते वै न च तुल्यं कदाचन ॥ 2 ॥

दर्शनानसदूर्ण किंचिनित्यु लोकेषु नासित मे ।

कं वरं देवि याचेर्दं कृतावाँर्गसम धरातले ॥ 3 ॥

"O Devi! If there be made a comparison between the kingdom of the Devas and the world on the one hand and the vision of Thine on the other hand, then it must be acknowledged that the kingdom of the Devas and the earth cannot stand in comparison before Thee. O Devi! There cannot be anything, in this Triloki, that is more exalted than Thy vision; therefore, O Mother! What other boom may I ask from Thee. I am very thankful and blessed; all my desires are fulfilled, when I have seen Thee.

तृतदिष्ठम्यं मालयीवितुं वार्थिजयं वम् ।

तब भक्ति: सदा मे०सृ निश्रुला हानपायिति ॥ 4 ॥

नगोउ तव्या मात: स्थातव्यं मम सर्वतः ।

दुगादेवीति नाना वै त्वं शक्तिर्व सभंस्वा ॥ 5 ॥

O Aupsicious Mother! I ask from You this boon, my desire that my devotion may remain constant, fixed, and unflinching towards You. O Mother! You would remain always in this city of mine being celebrated under the name of Śrī Durgā Devi, Your Śakti. This is my desire.

रक्षा तवया च कर्तेल्या सर्वदो नगरस्य ह ।

यथा सुदर्शनस्त्रातो तिपुसंघादनायमः ॥ 6 ॥

तथाउर उरक्षा कर्तेल्या वाराणास्यास्तव्याविके ।

यावत्पुरी भवेकूगी सुगतिष्ठा सुरंसीक्षता ॥ 7 ॥

तावत्च्याउर स्थातल्यं तुर्गं देवि कुपानिधे ।

यरोउरं मम ते देवः किमय-त्याद्यायमयून् ॥ 8 ॥

विविधान्यकलाप्त्वामान्देहि मे विद्धिंग जहि ।

अभ्यद्राणां विनाशं च कुरु लोकस्य सद्यो ॥ 9 ॥

ODevi! As you have cleared off all the obstacles of Sudarśana and saved him from this danger, so remain here in this city of Benares and protect it, so long as this city stands on the face of the earth and make it firm and well established and renowned. O Durgā, I pray that you may grant me these boons. O Devi! Grant me also various other desires of mine and destroy my enemies and extirpate all the irreligious and wicked people in this city. O Goddess of mercy! What more can I ask you?

व्यास उवाच

इति संप्राधित हो दीपुं दुर्गार्तिनारिणी ।

त्युवाच उपं तत्र स्तुत्वा वे संस्थितं पुरः ॥ 10 ॥

जुगांचच

राजन्सदा निवासो मे भुक्तिपूर्णं भविष्यति ।

स्थार्थ सर्वैलोकानां यावतिष्ठति मेदिनी ॥ 11 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus praising and praying, the king Subāhu stood, with folded hands, before the Devi Durgā, the remover of all calamities, when She addressed thus: "O king! I will remain no doubt, in this city of Benares, the place of salvation, as long as it stands on the face of the earth and protect all the people here."

अधो सुर्दर्गनस्तत्र समागत्य मुद्तवित्तः ।

प्रणाय्य परया भकत्या तुताव जतादिककाम् ॥ 12 ॥

Then came there Sudarśana, heartily gladdened; and he bowed to Her and began to praise Her with intense joy and devotion.

अहो कृपा ते कवयाम्यहं किं

ग्रातस्वया यात्रिक्त भक्तिहीनः ।

भक्तानुकंनी सकलो ज्ञानोस्त

वियुक्तभक्तैरवनं त्रत ते ॥ १३ ॥

“O Mother of this Universe! Everyone in this world shews mercy to those that are devoted to him; but, O Mother! I see, in Your case, You take it as if Your bounden duty, to save that are void of any devotion towards You; for You have saved my life, though I am devoid of any devotion towards you. Therefore how can I describe the boundless ocean of mercy that reigns in You!

त्वे देखे सर्वे सुजसि प्रपंचं

भूतं मया पालयसि स्वयुधम् ।

त्वमिति संहारपरे च काले न

तेउ प्रचित्र मम रक्षणं है ॥ 14 ॥

O Goddess! I have heard that You have created all this Universe, with its elements, and You are preserving this Your own creations and again You will destroy it in due time. Therefore O Mother! What wonder is there that you have saved me!

क्लोभि कि के वद देवि कार्यं

क्व वा राजानीयनुगेदालगु।

कार्य विमुळोर्यित तताज्ञान्ड

गच्छामि तिके विहरामि मातः ॥ 15 ॥

Book III Chapter XXIV

O Goddess! Now order me early what work of Yours shall I do now? Where shall I go? O Mother! Now I am unable to make out my duty; therefore kindly order me whether I will remain here or go anywhere else or remain anywhere, I like, at my leisure?"

यास उचाच

तं तथा भाषमाणं तु देवी प्राह द्वावित्ता ।

गच्छायोग्यां महाभाग कुर राज्यं कृतोचितम् ॥ 16 ॥

Vyāsa said: On Sudarśana thus petitioning before the Devi, She said with much kindness: "O good soul! Go to Ayodhyā and govern the country befitting your family.

स्मरणीया स्वादुर्भे ते पूजनीया प्रत्यन्तः ।

गं विधास्याम्बृं नित्यं राज्यं ते नृपसत्तम ॥ 17 ॥

O king! Constantly remember Me and worship Me with great care. I will always look after the welfare of your kingdom.

अध्यायं च चतुद्रैयां नवम्बं च विशेषतः ।

मप पूजा प्रकर्तेया बाल्वानयिपधानतः ॥ 18 ॥

Especially in the eighth, fourteenth, and in the ninth day of the lunar half month, worship Me according to the prescribed rites and rules and offer me victims (sacrifices).

अर्चा महीया नगरे स्वापनीया त्वयान्च।

पूजनीया प्रयलेन विकालं भक्तिपूर्वकम् ॥ 19 ॥

O sinless one! Establish my image in this city and worship it three times, morning, mid-day and evening carefully and with devotion.

गरत्काले महापूजा कर्तेल्या मन सर्वेदा ।

नवराशिद्धिनने भक्तिभावयुतेन च ॥ 20 ॥

It is noteworthy that My Great Pūjā in autumn for the nine nights (Navarātra) ought to be done with the greatest devotion.

दोत्रसंधिने तथापावे माघे कार्यां महोत्सव: ।

नवरारे महाराज पूजा कार्य। विशेषतः ॥ 21 ॥

कृष्णायुङे चतुदैर्थगं मय भक्तिस्मावित्रः ।

कतैल्या नृपशातूंल तथा3ध्यमां सदा बुढ़ीः ॥ 22 ॥

O king! In the month of Caitra, Māgha, Āśvina, and Āsādhā, My grand festival should be done on

the four Navarātris respectively; and especially on the fourteenth and on the eighth day of the black half, all persons ought to worship Me with their minds full of devotion towards Me."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्चनांतहिता देवी दुर्गां दुर्गार्तिनाशिन।।

नता सुदर्शनेनाव स्तुता बहुवितरम् ॥ 23 ॥

Vyāsa said: After the Devi, the Goddess Durgā, the Destroyer of all dangers, had finished Her sayings, Sudarśana bowed down to Her and praised Her much. The Devi, giving him the above mentioned advices, disappeared.

अन्तर्हितं तु तां दृष्ट्वा राजानः सर्वे एव ते ।

प्रणीयुक्तं समानाय्य यथा शक्रं सुरास्तथा ॥ 24 ॥

Seeing Her disappear, all the kings went to Sudarśana and bowed to him, as the Devas go to their lord, the Indra.

सुबाहुरपि तं नत्वा स्थितश्ठाये मुदावित्यः ।

क्रचुः सर्वे महीपाला अयोध्याधिपर्ति नत ॥ 25 ॥

The king of Benares, Subāhu, too, gladly bowed down and stood before him. Then all the kings began to address Sudarśana, the king of Ayodhyā.

त्यमसाकं प्रभुः शगता सेवकासे वयं सदा ।

कुरू राज्यमयोध्यायां पालयासमावृषोतम् ॥ 26 ॥

"O king! You are our lord and governor; we are always your servants; protect us as the king of Ayodhyā."

त्वत्रमसादामहाराज दूद्वा विश्रेध्वीरि शिका ।

आदिशक्तिभवीनी सा चतुरर्गीकलप्रदा ॥ 27 ॥

O king! It is through your grace only that we have seen the Supreme Force, the Goddess of this Universe, the most Auspicious, the Eternal Bhavānī, the Giver of the four-fold desires.

धयस्वं कृतकूलोसि बहुपुर्णे धरातले ।

यस्माण्य त्वल्कृते देवी प्रावुभूता सनातनी ॥ 28 ॥

O king! It is for your sake that the Eternal, Highest Prakrti Devi appeared; therefore you are very fortunate, auspicious, and most blessed in this world. Your have finished, as it were, all that you had to do.

न जानीमो वयं सर्वें प्रभावं नृपसत्तम ।

चिडकायासनोयुक्ता मायया मोहिता: सदा ॥ 29 ॥

O king! We all aue deluded by the Māyā of that Mahāmāyā Caṇḍikā Devi; therefore none of us is able to know Her prowess.

धनदासुतानां च सितनेधितता: सदा ।

मना महाणघे घोरे कामकाधोर्षणाकुले ।। ३० ॥

We are always engaged in thinking of wealth, sons and wives; there we are merged in this awful ocean of delusion, infested with crocodiles, etc., in the shape of lust, anger, greed, etc.

पृष्ठभास्त्वां महाभाग सर्वेजोत्रि महामते ।

कैये शक्ति: कृते जाता किंप्रपावा बदल सत् ॥ ३ १ ॥

O Blessed one! You are highly enlightened and you know everything; hence we ask you What is this Force; whence has She sprung? How is Her prowess? Kindly describe all these to us.

भव तं नीक्षा संसारे साध्योजित्यपारः ।

तस्याओं वद काकुल्य देवीमाहात्मयुन्तम् ॥ ३ २ ॥

O Descendant of Kakud! The saints are always merciful; kindly therefore relate to us the glory of the Excellent Goddess, that serves the purpose of a boat in crossing this ocean of world (transmigration).

यतृष्यावा च सा देवी यत्स्वरूपा यदुद्वा ।

सत्ववं श्रीतुष्चिषामत्वं बृहि नृत्रसोत्तम ॥ 33 ॥

O king! I am intensely desirous to hear the prowess and nature of the Devi."

Note: Kakud is an epithet of Puranājaya, son of Śaśāda, a king of the solar dynasty, and a descendant of Iśvāku. The Mythology relates that when in their war with the demons, *he gods were often worsted, they, headed by Indra went to the powerful king Puranājaya and requested him to be their friend in battle. The latter consented to do so, provided Indra carried him on his shoulders. Indra accordingly assumed the form of a bull Puranājaya seated on its hump, completely vanquished the demons. Puranājaya is therefore Kakuttha ‘standing on a hump’.

व्यास उवाच

इति पृष्टसदा तैस्तु धूबसंधिसुतो नृप: ।

चित्रित्य मनसा देखीं तानुवाच मुद्रावित्त ॥ 34 ॥

Vyāsa said: When the king had thus asked, the son of Dhruvasandhi, the king Sudaraśana became very glad and, meditating on the Goddess, began to say thus:

सुर्जन उवाच

किं कवीम महीपालास्तस्याङ्गरितमुभम् ।

ब्रहादाये न जानांत सैशा: सुरागातस्था ॥ 35 ॥

“O kings! Indra and the other Devas, even Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa are unable to fathom the most exalted deeds of that Goddess; how, then, can I describe to you the great glory of the Mahānayā.

सर्वस्यादा महलक्ष्मीदीयणा शफित्क्तमा ।

साचिक्तीयं महीपाल जान्यालनतलया ॥ 36 ॥

सुजते या राजोकूपा सचल्कापा च पालने ।

संहोर च तमोकूपा त्रिगुणा सा स्मत मात ॥ 37 ॥

निर्गुणा परमा शक्ति: सर्वकामफलप्रदा ।

सर्वेधां कारणं सा हि बढ्धादीनां नृपोनामे: ॥ 38 ॥

O Kings! The Bhagavati Bhavānī is present, as it were, being divided into four parts. She who is the first and foremost, the excellent Sāttvik Energy, worshipped by all, is always engaged in the preservation of this world. That part which is engaged in creating this world, is called the Rājasik Energy; and that part which is engaged in destroying the world is called the Tāmasik Energy, and that part which is the cause of all, Brahmā etc., that Highest Śakti, the Bestower of all desires, is called the fourth Śakti, the Nirgunā Śakti.

निरुणा सर्वेशा ज्ञानुभाग्यव योगिभिनुर्गेपः ।

सगुण सुखसेव्या सा चितनीया सदा बुद्धेः ॥ 39 ॥

O kings! Those who are not Yogis, will never be able to grasp the Nirgunā Śakti; The Sagunā Force can be easily served. All those middle Adhikārīs (fit persons) and learned men always meditate and worship the Sagunā Aspect of Her."

राजान कबुः

बाला एव वर्ण प्राप्तस्ते तु नृनं भयातुः ।

कर्थे ज्ञाता त्वया देवी परम शक्तिक्तनाम ॥ ४० ॥

Book III Chapter XXV

उपासिता कर्थ चैव पूजिता च कर्थ नृप ।

या प्रसरा तु साहाय्ये चकार त्वयाचिता ॥ 4 1 ॥

The kings said: “O king! You got afraid and went in your very early age to the forest; how is it, then, that you have been able to know the excellent Goddess Mahāmāyā. How did you worship and pray to Her? That She, becoming so glad, has favoured you and so helped you?

सुर्जन उवाच

बालभावान्यामा प्राणतं बीजं तस्याः सुर्भोभतम् ।

स्मारीय प्रजार्थित्यं कामबीजार्थिधं ग्रृपा: ॥ 4 2 ॥

झधिषि: कथ्यमाना सा यम ज्ञातोबिका शिला ।

स्मारीय तां दिवातरां भक्ल्या परमया पराम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

Sudarśana said: “O kings! Early in my childhood, I got the excellent root-mantra of desires, Kāmabjja; daily I meditated and silently uttered that mantram. After that I came to realise through the Rṣis That Eternal Auspicious Mother; and since that time, day and night, I always used to remember that Highest Deity, with the greatest devotion.”

व्यास उवाच

तश्रियय बचस्तस्य राजानो भक्तित्वपरः ।

तां मत्वा परमां शफिंक, नियंयुः व्यगृहान्ति ॥ 44 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing the words of Sudarśana, the kings came to know that the Goddess which they saw was the Highest Force and filled with the greatest devotion towards Her, returned to their own homes.

सुवाहुतृरामत्कारयां तमापृच्छ्य सूदर्शनम् ।

सुदर्शनीउपि धर्मात्मा निजर्जागम सुकोसलन्त् ॥ 4 5 ॥

The king of Benares, Subāhu, returned to his own city after bidding good-bye to Sudarśana. The

virtuous Sudarśana, too, went towards his Kosala kingdom.

मत्थिल्त नृरं श्रुता हतं शज्ञितं मृधे ।

स्ततं सूदरर्नं चैव बधूतुः प्रेमसंयुतः ॥ 46 ॥

The ministers were very glad to hear the death of Śatrujit and to see the victory of Sudarśana.

आपच्छंतं नृरं श्रुत्वा तं साकेतनिवासिनः ।

उपायान्न्युपादाय प्रयु: सम्युखे जनः ॥ 47 ॥

तथा प्रकृतय: सर्वे नानोपायनपायाः ।

धूवसंधिपुतं तत्त्वा भृतिताः प्रययुः प्रजाः ॥ 48 ॥

The inhabitants and armies of Saketa (Ayodhyā) hearing that Sudarśana is coming and knowing him to be the son of the king Dhruvasandhi, became highly delighted and approached to him with various offerings.

सिद्धोपसंयुतः सोअ ध्राप्यायोर्यां सूद्रनिः ।

संमान्य सर्वलोकांश ययो राजा निवेशगनम् ॥ 49 ॥

ब्रंधिभः सूयमानस्तु वंद्यामानश मन्थिनः ।

कन्याधिः कौर्मयाणश तातैः सुमनसैलना ॥ 50 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीयागवते महापुराणे तृतीयस्कन्दे

चतुर्षिरोधणः ॥ 51 ॥

Sudarsana, with his new consort, arrived at Ayodhyā with his heart highly gladdened, and shewed his regard and respect towards all his subject. Then the ministers came and saluted him; the women threw at him offerings of Lāja (fried rice) and flowers; the bards began to praise loudly. Thus, honoured by various auspicious ceremonies, the king entered into his palace.

Here ends the Twenty fourth Chapter on the installation of Durga Devi in the city of Benares and the return to Ayodhyā of Sudarśana in the Mahā Purānam Srimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book III Chapter XXV

