CHAPTER IX

On the Cause of Śrāddha in other Devas than the Devi Gāyatri

यास उवाच

कदाचिद्ध य काले तु दूरपंच समा विधो ।

प्राणिनां कर्मवशते न ववर्ष शतक्नुः ॥ १ ॥

अनावृष्ट्याजितुप्रिभूमभवल्यकराकम् ।

गृहे गृहे शवानां तु संख्या कर्तु न शक्यते ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King Janamejaya! Once on a time, on account of an evil turn of Fate (Karma) of the human beings, Indra did not rain on this earth for fifteen years. Owing to want of rain, the famine appeared horribly; and almost all the beings lost their lives. No one could count in every house the number of the dead persons.

कैनिवेश्वान्याहान्या भव्यांति क्षुधादिताः ।

श्वानि च मनुष्याणां भव्यंत्यपरे जना: ॥ 3 ॥

बालकं बालजन्नी स्थितं पुरुष एव च ।

भक्तुं चलिताः सर्वे क्षुधया पीक्षिता ना: ॥ 4 ॥

Out of hunger the people began to eat horses; some began to eat bears and pigs, some began to eat the dead bodies while some others carried on any how their lives. The people were so much distressed with hunger that the mother did not

refrain from eating her baby child and the husband did not refrain from eating his wife.

ब्राह्मण बह्वसन्त्र विचारं चक्रुत्नाम् ।

तपोधनो गतोमोस्ति स नः खेदं ह्रष्टित् ॥ 5 ॥

सर्वैमितल्वा गांतल्ये गतिमस्यामप्रेधुता ।

गायत्रीजपरसंस्त्रगीतमत्यामप्रेधुता ॥ 6 ॥

सुभिषक्षं भ्रूयते तत्र प्राणिणो बह्वो गताः ।

एवं विभूषण श्रद्वेला: सानिच्छोजाः: कुटुंबिनः ॥ 7 ॥

सगोधाना: सदासाङ्ग शताम्यासामं चयुः ।

O King! The Brāhmaṇas then united and after due discussion, came to the conclusion that they would go to the hermit Gautama who would be able to remove their distress. So all of them wanted to go quickly to the hermitage of the Muni Gautama. They began to say: "We hear that there is no famine in the hermitage of Gautama. Various persons are running there from various quarters."

पूर्वदेशाद्यु: केचित्केचिद्धिणोदस्तः ॥ 8 ॥

पाशुताया औरसाराहाशानादिष्यः समाययुः ।

दृष्टा समाजं विद्याणां प्रणानाम स गौतमः ॥ 9 ॥

Thus coming to a conclusion, the Brāhmaṇas

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

went to the Gautama's Āśrama with their cows, servants and relations. Some went from the east; some from the south; some from the west, and some from the north. Thus from various quarters the people flocked there.

आसनातृष्णवार्षेष्ठ पूजयामास वाडवान् ।

चकार कुशलप्रजनं ततक्षागामकारणम् ॥ 10 ॥

ते सर्वे स्वस्वचृतांत कथयामासुकृतस्मया:

दृष्णा तानुःश्रितात्पिज्ञानभयं दत्तवामुनीम् ॥ 11 ॥

युधाकामेततस्वनं भवहासोःस्मि सर्वथा ।

का स्थिता भवता विग्रा मयि द्वये शिवगजति ॥ 12 ॥

Seeing the Brāhmanas coming there, the Rsi Gautama bowed down to them and gave them a cordial welcome and served them with seats, etc. When all took their seats and became calm and quiet, Gautama enquired about their welfare and the cause of their arrival. They described everything about the dire famine and their own states and expressed their deep regret. Seeing them very much distressed, the Muni gave them word not to have any fear; he said: "I am today become blessed by the arrival of the great ascetics and honourable persons like you. I am your servant.

धन्योहमसिनसमये यूयं सर्वै तपोधिना: ।

येपांं डरनामत्रेण दुष्कृतं सुकृतायते ॥ १ ३ ॥

ते सर्वे पाद्रजसा पावयेति गृहं मम ।

को मदनो भवेढ़न्यो भवतां समुत्राहत् ॥ १ ४ ॥

स्वयं सर्वे: सुखेदेवे संधाजपरायणे: ।

You consider all my houses as yours. Be quite comfortable. Bear no uneasiness. When your servant is alive, what fear do your entertain and whom do you fear? When the demerits are transformed into good merits by your mere sight, and when you have blessed my house with the dust of your holy feet, then who is more blessed than me? O Vipras! Kindly perform your Sandhyās, and Japams and rest here at ease."

व्यास उवाच

इति सर्वान्समाध्यास यौतिमो भुनिवाट् ततः ॥ 15 ॥

गायत्री प्रार्थ्यामास भक्तिस: तकंधर: ।

नमो देयि महाविदो वेदमातः परात्परे ॥ 16 ॥

व्याहत्यादिमहामंत्ररेपे प्रणवरूपिण ।

सायावस्थात्मिके मातनीमो हूँकारक्सिपि ॥ 17 ॥

स्वाहास्थास्वरूपे त्वां नामीम सकल्थाद्यम् ।

भक्तकल्यलां देवीमवस्थायसाहीशणीम् ॥ 18 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King Janamejaya! Thus consoling the Brāhmaṇas, the Rsi Gautama began to worship the Gāyatri Devi with rapt devotional trance. "O Devi Gāyatri! Obesiance to Thee! Thou art the Great Vidyā, the Mother of the Vedas, Higher than the Highest; Thou art Vyārthiti represented by the Mantra 'Om Bhur Bhuvah Svah,' O Mother! Thou art the state of equilibrium, i.e., the Turīya; Thou art of of the Form of Hrim; Thou art Svāhā and Svadhā; Thou grantest the desires of the Bhaktas.

सर्ववेदितंस्वेहो सूर्यमंडल्यासीनि ॥ 19 ॥

प्रातर्कालां रक्तवर्णा मध्याङ़े युवर्ती पराम् ।

सायाङ़े कृष्णवाणां तां वृद्धां तिन्चे नामायह्म ॥ 20 ॥

Thou art the Witness of the three states, Jāgrat (waking), Svapna (dreaming) and Susupti (deep sleep). Thou art the Turīya and Saccidānanda Brahmā. O Devi! Thou resident in the Solar Orb and appearest as a ruddy girl in the morning, an youthful maiden at noon and a black old woman in the evening. O Devi! Obeisance to Thee! Now shew favour on us at this severe famine time when all the beings are well nigh on the way to destruction."

सर्वभूतगणे देयि क्षमस्य परमेश्वरि ।

इति स्तुता जगमाता प्रत्यक्षं दर्जनं ददी ॥ 21 ॥

पूर्णपांत्र ददौ तम्ये येन सात्यसर्वोपरणम् ।

उवाच मुनिवंसा सा यं वे कामा त्वमिच्छसि ॥ 22 ॥

Thus praised and worshipped, the World-Mother appeared and gave to the Rsi one vessel (cup) full to the brim by which every one can be fed and nourished. The Mother told the Muni: “This full vessel, given by me to you will yield whatever you wish.”

तस्य पूर्तिकरं पात्रं मया दन्तं भविष्यति ।

Book XII Chapter IX

इत्युक्चनांतदीधे देखी गायत्री परमा कला ॥ 2 3 ॥

अत्रानां राग्यासतमापिननाता: पर्वतीपामा: ।

षड़सा विविधा राजस्मृणानि विविधापि च ॥ 2 4 ॥

भूषणानि च दिव्यानि क्षीमाणि वसनानि च ।

यज्ञानं च समारंभा: पत्राजीण विविधापि च ॥ 2 5 ॥

यद्यदिषभूज्ञन्मुनेतस्य महात्मनः ।

तत्वर्व सर्वितं तस्माद्रायीभूणपराव: ॥ २६ ॥

Thus saying, the Devi Gāyatri, Higher than the Highest, vanished. Then, according to the wish of the Muni, came out from that cup, mountains of cooked rice, various curries and sweetmeats, lots of grass and fodder, silken clothings, various ornaments and various articles and vessels for sacrificial purposes. In fact whatever the Muni Gautama wished, that came out of the brimful cup, given by the Devi Gāyatri.

अथाहुय मुनी-मवांमैयनिराङ्गरीतमसदा ।

धनधान्यभूषानि वसनानि ददौ मुदा ॥ 27 ॥

गोग्रहिष्यादिषणवो निरीतः पूर्णपाततः ।

निर्मातान्यज्ञभागान्युक्रसुवप्रभृतीन्दौ ॥ 28 ॥

Then the Muni Gautama called the other Munis that came there and gave them wealth, grains, clothing, ornament, and the sacrificial ladles and spoons and cows and buffaloes for the sacrificial purposes.

ते सर्वे मिलिता यज्ञांधिक्रे मुनिवायकरतः ।

स्थानं तदेव भ्यिष्ठभवत्यवर्गसत्रिभम् ॥ 29 ॥

यक्तिकधित्रियु लोकेषु सुंदरं वस्तु इयरुते ।

तत्सर्वे तत्र निष्पत्रं गाययीद्तपात्रतः ॥ 30 ॥

The Munis then assembled and performed various yajñas. The place all round, then flourished and became so much prosperous that it looked like a second heaven. In fact whatever fair and beautiful there exist in the Trilokas, all came from the brimful cup given by the Devi Gāyatrī.

देवांगनासामा दारा: शोभोने भृषणपादिधि: ।

मृनयो देवसद्गा वस्त्रवेदनभूषणैः ॥ 31 ॥

नित्योस्वतः प्रव्वतुे मृनेराभ्रमपंडले ।

न रोगादिभयं किंचित्र च दैन्यमयं कवचित् ॥ 32 ॥

At this time the Munis, with sandalpaste all over

on their bodies, and decorated with very bright ornaments looked like the gods and their wives looked like goddesses. Daily uṣabs began to be held in in the Āśrama of Gautama. Nowhere were seen any diseases or dacoities and there was no fear from any such things.

स मुनेरोक्षमो जातः समन्ताध्छत्याजनः !

अन्ये च प्राणिणो ये दर्शि तेरप्रि तन समापता: ॥ 33 ॥

तांछा सर्वानुप्रोपायां दत्त्वा भयमधात्मवान् ।

नानाविद्यैम्हाग्रैर्विंधित्वकल्पितः सुगः ॥ 34 ॥

Gradually the Śārama's boundary extended to one hundred Yojanas (4 hundred miles). Hearing this greatness of Gautama, many persons came there from various quarters. And the Muni Gautama, too, gave them words, "cast away fear" and fed them.

सन्तोषं परमं प्रापुर्भनेश्व जनुर्यंशः ।

सभायां वृझहा भृयो जगी श्लोक महायशः ॥ 35 ॥

अहो अयं नः किल कल्पवादो

मनोराधान्यरयिति प्रतिहितः ।

नोचेदकाण्डे क्व हविवर्षा गा

सुदुर्लंभा यय तु जीवनारण ।। ३ ७ ॥

The Devas, on the other hand, became very much satisfied by the various Yajñas and extolled the Muni's greatness. So much so, that the famous Indra, the Lord of the Devas, came in the midst of the assembly and extolled his greatness, thus: "This Gautama has fulfilled all our wishes and has verily become a Kalpa Vrksa (celestial tree yielding all desires). If this man had not done such things, in this hard famine time, we would not have got the Havih offered in sacrifices and the prospect of our lives would have been at stake."

इन्ध ह्रद्धारु वर्षिण पुयोग सुनियुगान् ।

पुत्रवन्नानिरावुरार्थोपेने परिवर्तितः ॥ 37 ॥

गायश्या: परम स्थान चकाय मुनिसनमः ।

यत्र सर्वैमुनिवर्ः: पूज्यते जगद्धिका ॥ 38 ॥

त्रिकालं परया भक्ल्या पुरुषशरामर्भिः: ।

अद्यापि यत्र देवी सा प्रात्रबाला तु इय्यते ॥ 39 ॥

मध्याङ्गे युवती वृद्धा सायंकाले तु इय्यते ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

O King Janamejaya! Thus the Muni Gautama fed and nourished for twelve years all the Munis, like his sons and that place came to be recognised as the chief centre (the Head Quarters) of the Gāyatrī Devi. Even today, all the Munis perform with devotion the Puraṣacarannams and worship thrice the Bhagavatī Gāyatrī Devi. Even today the Devi is there seen as a girl in the morning, as a youthful maiden at noon, as an old woman in the evening.

तत्रैकदा समायातो नारदो मुनिस्तमः ॥ 40 ॥

रणायम्हर्तीं गायनायश्रना: परमानुणान् ।

निष्साद सभामध्ये मुनीनां भाषितताभनम् ॥ 41 ॥

Then, once on a time, Nārada, of best conduct, came there playing on his great lute and singing in tune the highest glories of Gāyatrī and took his seat in the assembly of the Munis.

गौतमादिभित्यनुच्चै: पूजितः शान्तमानसः ।

कथाक्राकर विविधा यगसो गौतमस्य च ॥ 4 2 ॥

ब्रह्माँ देवसदिसे देवगद् तव यद्यगः ।

जगौ बहुविधं स्वच्छं मुनियोषणजं परम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

Seeing the tranquil hearted Nārada coming there, Gautama and the other Munis received him duly and worshipped him with the Pādya and Arghya. In course of conversation he began to describe the glories of Gautama and said: "O Best of Munis! I have heard from the mouth of Indra, in the assembly of the Devas, your glories as to your supporting and feeding the pure-hearted Munis and I have come to see you.

शुवा शर्षीपतेर्विणी त्वां ग्रहुमहमातः ।

ध्यानेसि त्वं मुनिश्रिक्र जगद्वाप्रासदातः ॥ 44 ॥

इत्युक्लवा मुनिवर्ष तं गायसीसदनं यवे ।

ददर्गं जगद्यां तां प्रेमोतृष्लविकोचनः ॥ 45 ॥

By the Grace of Śrī Bhagavatī Gāyatrī Devī, you have now become blessed. There is no doubt in this." Thus saying, the Devarṣī Nārada entered into the temple of the Devī Gāyatrī and with eyes gladdened by love, saw the Devī there and offered

due hymns in praise of Her and then ascended to the Heavens.

तृहाव विधियद्वेर्ग जगाम विदिवं पुनः ।

अथ तन स्थिता ये ते ब्राह्मणा मुनिपोषितः ॥ 46 ॥

उत्कर्ष तु पुने: शुत्वा प्रयुवया खेदमागतः ।

यथाउस व न यशो भ्यात्कर्तेयं सर्वेविंहि ॥ 47 ॥

Here, on the other hand, the Brāhmaṇas that were fed by Gautama, became jealous at so much honour offered to Gautama and tried their best so that no further honour be paid to him. They further settled not to stay any longer in his Āśrama, when the next good harvest season comes. (Thus his glories will wane).

काले समाप्ते पट्ठाप्रिति सर्वैस्तु निश्छितम् ।

ततः कालेन क्रियताउपयपूर्वष्टिरपतारले ॥ 48 ॥

सुभिष्ठमभवत्सर्वदेशेषु नृपसतम् ।

श्रुत्वा वाता सुभिष्ठस्य मिलिततः सर्वविद्धवः ॥ 49 ॥

गौतमं शप्नयुधोगं हा हा राजन्यचित्रः ।

धन्यौ तेषां च पितारी ययोकस्थितिरंगुणी ॥ 50 ॥

O King! Some days passed when good rains fell and there was an abundance of crops everywhere and the famine ended. Hearing this, all the Brāhmins united, Alas! O King! to curse the Gautama. Oh! Their fathers and mothers are blessed in whom do not arise such feelings of jealousy! This all is the wonderful play of the powerful Time; it cannot be expressed by any person.

कालस्य महिमा राजवन्तुं केन हि शक्यते ।

गोर्निभिता माययेका मुचरुर्जैरतो नृप ॥ 51 ॥

जगाम सा च शालायां होभकाले मुनेतदा ।

हुंईणवैविरिता सा प्राणांस्तत्याज तल्हणे ॥ 52 ॥

O King! These Brāhmins created, by Māyā, an aged cow, who was to die and pushed her in the sacrificial hall of the Muni Gautama at the time of the Homa ceremony. Seeing that cow entering into the enclosure where the Homa was being performed, Gautama cried out “Hoom Hoom” when the cow fell there and died.

गौहानानेन दुहेनैतेवं ते चकुशूढ्रिंगः ।

होमं समायय मुनिसाडू विस्मयं परंप नतः ॥ 53 ॥

समाधिमीलिषः संश्रित्यामास कारणम् ।

Book XII Chapter IX

And the other Brāhmaṇas instantly cried out "Look! Look! The wicked Gautama has killed the cow." Seeing this inconceivable event, Gautama was greatly nonplussed and, completing his Homa ceremony, entered into Samādhi and began to think the cause of it.

कृतं सर्वे द्विःरेतिविति जाता नदैव सः ॥ 54 ॥

दूधार कोपं परमं पुलयंे मृकभिवत् ।

शशाप च ऋषीन्सर्वी-कोपंसरेक्तकोचन: ॥ 55 ॥

वेदमातरि गायक्यां तद्वापाने तमनोबेपे ।

भवतानुभुवा यूयं सर्वदा बाहणायभाः ॥ 56 ॥

Then, coming to know that this has been concocted by the Māyā of the Brāhmins, he became angry like Rudra at the time of dissolution; his eyes were reddened and he cursed the Rṣis, thus: \( ^{①} \) Oh vile Brāhmins! When you are ready to cause mischief to me unjustly then let you be averse to meditate and do the japam of the Devi Gāyatrī, the Mother of the Vedas.

वेरे वेदोराक्प्रेषु तद्वातांग सु तथैव च ।

भवतान्नुभुवा युवं सर्वदा बाहुपाधामः ॥ 57 ॥

शिव शिवस्य मेरे च शिवशासे तदेव च ।

भवतान्नुभुवा युवं सर्वदा बाहुपाधामः ॥ 58 ॥

For your this act, never you will be eager to perform any Vedic sacrificial acts or any action concerning thereof. There is no doubt in this. You will be always averse to the mantra of Śiva or the Tantra of Śiva.

भूलप्रकृत्या: श्रीद्व्यास्तद्वयाने तत्कधासु च ।

भवतानुभ्युखा युयं सर्वदो बाहुपानामभः ॥ 59 ॥

देवीमंत्रे तथा देल्या: स्थाने5नुधानकर्मणि ।

भवतानुभ्युखा युयं सर्वदो बाहुपानाभाः ॥ 60 ॥

देल्युस्तविद्धुशया देरीनामानुकौनीने ।

भवतानुभुखा युयं सर्वदो बाहुपानाभाः ॥ 61 ॥

देवीभक्तस्य सानिन्ध्ये देवीभक्ताब्ने तथा ।

भवतानुभुखा युयं सर्वदो बाहुपानाभाः ॥ 62 ॥

You will be always averse to Mūla Prakṛti Śrī Devī, to Her Dhyānam, mantra, to any conversation regarding Her; to the visiting of Her place or

Temple, to do worship and other ceremonies to Her, to see the Grand Festivals of the Devī, to singing the names and glories of the Devī, to sit before the Devī and to adore Her.

शिवोत्स्वरिद्धासां शिवभकस्य पूजने ।

भवतानुभुवा यूयं सर्वदा बाहाणाभ्मः ॥ 63 ॥

रूत्राक्षे विज्वपत्रे च तथा गुरूद्वे च भवमिन ।

भवतानुभुवा यूयं सर्वदा बाहाणाभ्मः ॥ 64 ॥

श्रीतसात्सद्वारा ज्ञानमार्गे तथैव च ।

भवतानुभुवा यूयं सर्वदा बाहाणाभ्मः ॥ 65 ॥

अद्वित्ञाननिद्धायां गर्शितान्यादितासभतः ।

भवतानुभुवा यूयं सर्वदा बाहाणाभ्मः ॥ 66 ॥

नित्यकर्माविश्रुधानेउधफिल्रोजादितसभतः ।

भवतानुभुवा यूयं सर्वदा बाहाणाभ्मः ॥ 67 ॥

स्वाध्यायाध्ययने चैव तथा प्रवचनेर्पि च ।

भवतानुभुवा यूयं सर्वदा बाहाणाभ्मः ॥ 68 ॥

गोदानादिष्य दानेषु पिछनाड्छु चैव हि ।

भवतानुभुवा यूयं सर्वदा बाहाणाभ्मः ॥ 69 ॥

कृष्णचोह्रायणे चैव प्रायधित्रं तथैव च ।

O vile Brāhmanas! You will be always averse to see the festivals of Śiva, to worship Śiva, to Rudrākṣa, to the Bel leaves, and to the holy Bhasma (ashes). You will be wholly indifferent to practise the right ways of living as presented in the Vedas and Smṛtis, to preserve your conduct good and to observe the path of knowledge to Advaita Jñānam, to practise restraint of senses and continence, to the daily practices of Sandhyā Vandanam, to performing the Agnihotra ceremonies, to the study of the Vedas according to one’s own Śākhā or to the daily studies thereof as to teach those things or to give, as gifts, cows, etc., or to perform the Śrāddhas of the fathers, etc., or to perform Krchra Cāndrāyana and other penances.

भवतान्नुभुवा यूयं सर्वेत बाहणाधानभः ॥ 70 ॥

श्रीदेवीभिन्नदेवेषु भढ़ापान्तिस्मान्यितः ।

गंखचक्राधितक्राध भवत बाहणाधानभः ॥ 71 ॥

O Vile Brāhmaṇas! As you are ready to do these mean things, you will have to suffer for this that you will desist from worshipping the Most

Adorable Śrī Bhagavatī Devī and that you will worship the other Devas with faith and devotion and hold on your bodies Śankha, Cakra and other signs.

कापालिकमातास्ता बौद्धरणास्ततः सदा ।

पाखंडाचारनित्ता भवत ब्राहणाधमाः ॥ 72 ॥

विरुभागुरुत्थावृकन्याविक्रियाणसा ।

भार्याविक्रियणस्तद्धवत ब्राहणाधमाः ॥ 73 ॥

वेदविक्रियान्तनृतीयिक्रियान्तिक्रियान्सा ।

धर्मविक्रियान्तद्धवत ब्राहणाधमाः ॥ 74 ॥

You will follow the Kāpālikas, Bauddha Śāstras and other heretics. You will sell your father, mother, brothers, sisters, sons and daughters and even your wives too! You will sell the Vedas, Tīrthas, and your Dharma. You will not feel ashamed in any way to sell all these.

पंचरात्रे कामगानेरे तथा कापालिके मते ।

बौद्धे श्रद्धातृय तृयं भवत ब्राह्मणाभ्याः ॥ ७ ७ ॥

मातृकन्यागामिश्र भारीनीगामिनस्तया ।

परस्तीलयदा: सर्वे भवत ब्राह्मणाभ्याः ॥ ७ ७ ॥

युषाकां वैशजाताश्र सिद्धय पुरुषास्तथा ।

मह्नशापवर्धायते भविष्यितं भवस्तमाः ॥ ७७ ॥

किं मया बहुनींतेन मूल्यकृतिरीक्षी ।

गायत्री परमा भूयातुष्यासु खलु कोपिता ॥ ७ ७ ॥

अंधुकाप्रिकुणेखुं पुथामकं स्थास्तव स्थिति: ।

You will certainly have faith in Kāpālika and Bauddha opinions, Pāncārātras and Kāma Śāstras. O vile Brāhmaṇas! You will not hesitate to go to your mother, daughters or sisters and you will always be licentious with others' wives and spend your time in that. This is not to you only but to the women and men, all that will come in your families. Let the Gāyatri Devī be always indignant with you and let you all go in the end to the Andhra Kūpa hells, etc.

यास उवाच

वार्दंद्रभीर्णं कृत्वाउ्यप्यमूषण जलं ततः ॥ 7 9 ॥

जगाम दर्शनार्थ च गाययाः: परमोलूक: ।

प्रणनाम महावेसी सार्थ देवी परातपर। ॥ 80 ॥

बाहाणनां कृति हुकुा सर्वा विजे चकार हं ।

अधापि तस्या वदनं स्मययुक्तं च इयते ॥ 81 ॥

Vyāsa said: O Janamejaya! Thus taking the water symbolising the true rules and laws of creation, and cursing the Brāhmanas, the Muni Gautama went hastily to see the Gāyatrī Devi and, on arriving at the temple there bowed down to Her. The Devi, too, became surprised to see their actions. O King! Even to day Her Lotus Face looks similarly astonished!

उवाच मुनिवर्ष तं स्यम्यानमुखांबुजा ।

भूजगार्थपितं दुर्ध विषायैवोपजायते ॥ 82 ॥

शाति कुरु महाभाग कर्मणो गतिरोरुर्गे ।

इति देवीं प्रणायथा ततोर्गात्स्वाओं प्रति ॥ 83 ॥

Then the Gāyatrī Devi told Gautama with amazement. \( ^{[1]} \)  “O Gautama! The venom of the snake does not become less if you feed the serpents with milk; so never mind all these things; the Karmas take their peculiar turns; it is hard to say when will happen what things.

तते विश्र: शापद्यविदिस्मतु वेदारणय: ।

गायकी विस्मुता सर्वैतस्तद्धृतिबाघवत् ॥ 84 ॥

ते सर्वेश मिलिला तु पशतापयुतान्तथा ।

प्रणेपुनिवर्षे तं दंडवतन्ति भृति ॥ 85 ॥

Now be peaceful. Do not be sorry." Hearing these words of the Devi, Gautama bowed down to Her and went thence to his own Śārama. Here, on the other hand, the Brāhmaṇas forgot everything due to the curse of Gautama, of the Vedas and the Gāyatrī Mantra. They then began to look at this event with wonder as unique and extraordinary.

नोचूः किंचन वावयं तु लज्जायधोगुवा: स्थितः ।

प्रसीदिति प्रसीदिति प्रसीदिति पुनः पुनः ॥ 86 ॥

प्रार्थयामासुर्यितः परिवार्यं मुनीश्वगम् ।

करणाणुपर्णेद्वयो मुनिसत्समुबाच ह ॥ 87 ॥

All united they afterwards repented and going before Gautama, fell prostrate at his feet. But they could not speak any word out of shame. Only they said frequently: "Be pleased, be pleased with us." When all the assembly of the Brāhmaṇas prayed to him for favour and grace, the Muni Gautama took pity on them and replied. My word will never turn out false.

Book XII Chapter IX

कृष्णावतारपर्यतं कुंभीपाके भवेस्थिति: ।

न मे वावस्य मृषा भूयादिधि जानीय सर्वथा ॥ ८ ८ ॥

ततः परं कलिरुगे घुवि जन भवैद्ध्व वाम् ।

मदुक्तं सर्वमेततु भवेदेव न चान्यथा ॥ ८९ ॥

मच्छापस्य विमोक्षार्ये युभाकं स्याद्यैषणा ।

तहिं सेव्यं सर्वेर्गार्यिपदंकजम् ॥ ९० ॥

You will have to remain in Kumbhipāka hell upto the time when Śrī Krṣṇa will take his incarnation. Then you will be born in the earth in the Kāli age and whatever I have uttered will exactly come unto you. And if you are in earnest to avert my curse then go and worship the Lotus Feet of Śrī Gāyatrī Devī. The is no other remedy.

व्यास उवाच

इति सर्वाधिसूचाश योगतो मुनिसत्तम: ।

प्रारघधिमति मत्वा तु चित्ते शान्ति जनाम हू ॥ ९१ ॥

एत्समाकाराणाङ्गजानमे कृष्णे तु धीमिति ।

कली युगे प्रवृत्ते तु कुंभीपाकानुं निराना: ॥ ९२ ॥

भूवि जाता ब्राह्मणाश्रा शपद्यभा: पुरा तु ये ।

संध्यार्थविद्योत्राश्रा गायबीभिन्तर्शिताः ॥ ९३ ॥

वेदभक्तिविहीत्रा धाराखंदमतापामि: ।

अनिन्होत्रादिस्तकर्मविश्यासहाविश्वर्तितः ॥ ९४ ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus dismissing the Brāhmaṇas, Gautama Muni thought that all these occurred as a result of Prārabdha Karma and he became calm and quiet. For this reason, after Śri Kṛṣṇa Mahārāja ascended to the Heavens, when the Kālī age came, those cursed Brāhmaṇas got out of the Kumbhi pāka hell and took their births in this earth as Brāhmins, devoid of the three Sandhyās, devoid of the devotion to Gāyatrī, devoid of faith in the Vedas, advocating the heretics' opinion and unwilling to perform Agnihotra and other religious sacrifices and duties and they were devoid of Svadhā and Svāhā.

मूलप्रकृतिमयवन्ता नैव ज्ञानी कर्हिंचित् ।

ततमुद्रांकिता: केचित्कामाचारता: परे ॥ 95 ॥

कापलिका: कौलिकाशु बौद्धा जैनासत्थापरे ।

पंडिता अपि ते सर्वे दुराचारप्रवर्तकाः ॥ 96 ॥

लंपदा: परदारेषु दुराचारपरायणा: ।

They forgot entirely the Unmanifested Mūla Prakṛti Bhagavatī. Some of them began to mark on their bodies various heretical signs, e.g., Taptamudrā, etc.; some became Kāpālikas; some became Kaulas; some Bauddhas and some Jainas. Many of them, though learned, became lewd and addicted to other's wives and engaged themselves in vain and bad disputations.

कुंभीपाकं पुनः सर्वे आयस्तिति निजकर्मिभः ॥ 97 ॥

तस्मालसर्वान्ति राजन्संसेव्या परपेधुर्गी ।

न विद्यापासना नित्या न शिवोपासना तथा ॥ 98 ॥

नित्या चोयासना शनैर्धा विना तु पतवध्यः ।

सर्वेपुक्तं समासेन यन्यूँ तत्वया उपन् ॥ 99 ॥

अतः परं गिरिणीयवर्णनं श्रणु सुन्दरम् ।

यत्वरं स्थानमादाया घुवनेश्वा भवारणेः ॥ 100 ॥

इति शीद्वीरागवते महापुराणो3हावशसाहस्यां सीहात्यायां

द्वादशसक्ने नवमो3ध्यायः ॥ 9 ॥ 11

For these, they will have to go again surely to the Kumbhipāka hell. So O King! Worship with your heart and soul Śrī Bhagavatī Parameśvarī Devi. The worship of Viṣṇu or Śiva is not constant (to be done everyday); only the worship of Śakti is to be constantly performed. For this reason whoever does not worship Śakti is sure to fall. Thus I have answered all your questions. Now I shall describe the highest and most beautiful place, Maṇdivīpa of the Primal Force Bhagavatī, the Deliverer from this bondage of world. Listen.

Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on

the cause of Śrāddha in other Devas than the

Devī Gāyatrī in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevītbhāgavatam

