CHAPTER XXV

On the Installation of the Devi in Ayodhyā and Benares

व्यास उवाच

गतलाउपोथो नृपश्रेष्ठो गृहं राज्ञ: सुहृदयुत: ।

शुशुज्ञमातरं प्राह प्रणम्य शोकसंकुलम् ॥ १ ॥

मातर्ने ते भवा पुत्र: संग्रामे निहतः किल ।

न पिता ते युवाजिज्च्र शपे ते चरणी तथा ॥ २ ॥

दुर्गया ती हृती संख्ये नावराधौ म्यात्र वै ।

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

अवर्यंभाविभावेषु प्रतिकारो न विद्यते ॥ ३ ॥

न गोकोउर तव्या कार्यों मूनपुत्रस्य मानिन ।

स्वकर्मवशगो जीवो घृतैके भोगान्युखासुखान् ॥ 4 ॥

Vyāsa said: The king Sudarśana, surrounded by his friends, on coming to the palace at Ayodhyā, bowed down to Līlāvatī, the mother of Śatrujit, and said: "O mother! I swear by touching your feet, that I have not killed in battle your son Śatrujit nor your father Yudhājit; it is the Devi Durgā that has killed them; I am not to be blamed a bit in this. O mother! You need not be sensitive in this; there is no remedy for what will inevitably come to pass; therefore you do not be sorry for the death of your son; you must know that the jīvas enjoy pleasure and pain as the results of their own Karmas.

दासोदयिति तव भो मातर्यथा मम मनोराम ।

तथा त्वयपि धर्मेत्र न येधोस्ति मनायपि ॥ 5 ॥

O mother! I am your servant; you are entitled to the same respect and worship as Manoranmā, my own mother; there is no difference whatsoever between her and you.

अवश्यमेव भोक्तयं कृत कर्म शुभाशुभम् ।

तस्मात्र शेचित्यं ते सुखे दुःखे कदाचन ॥ 6 ॥

O mother! One must bear the effects of one's Karma, good or bad; therefore when pleasure or pain arises, you should not be glad or otherwise.

दुःखे दुःख्याधिकान्येषसुखे एपलैसुखाधिकम् ।

आत्मानं शोकहर्षायां शत्रुघ्याधिव नार्येवेत् ॥ ७ ॥

When pain arises, more pain is said to be conceived and when pleasure arises, more pleasure is seen. But the learned say that man ought not to subject himself to excessive pleasure or pain.

दैवार्थीनिवर्षे सर्वे नात्माधीनें कदाचन ।

न ओकेन तदात्मानं ओषेयेमतिभाजरः ॥ ८ ॥

O mother! This whole world is under Fate, Destiny; nothing of it is yours. Therefore the intelligent persons ought not to grieve their hearts at any time with sorrow.

यथा दासमयी योषा नटदारीना प्रचेहते ।

तथा स्वकर्मविशगो देही सर्वत्र वत्ते ॥ 9 ॥

As the wooden dolls dance in a stage as danced by the actor, so the individual souls here work as the result of their past Karmas; there is no doubt in this.

अर्ह वनगतो मातनांभयं दुःख्यानसः ।

चितयन्स्वकृतं कर्म भोक्तव्यमिति वेधि च ॥ 10 ॥

O mother! I know that the effect of one's own Karma, must have to be borne; it is, on that account, that I never felt sorrow in my exile in the forest.

मृत्तो मातामाड़ोउत्रेव विधुरा जननी मम ।

भयातुरा गृहीत्वा मां निवंशी गहनं वनम् ॥ १ १ ॥

You are quite aware that my mother's father was killed here, and my mother, becoming very much afraid and sorrowful, took me and escaped to the forest.

लुंदिता तत्कर्मेर्मी वर्कहीना तथा कृता ।

पायेय च हतं सर्व बालपुका निताशया ॥ १ २ ॥

माता गृहीत्या मां प्राता भात्याजाग्यं गृति ।

विद्वलोरयं समायातस्वा धार्येक्राउतल ॥ १ ३ ॥

The robbers robbed us of everything save our clothes on our bodies; I was then very young; my mother was without any shelter; she carried me with his minister Vidalla and my helpless nurse to the hermitage of Bhāradvāja.

मृत्यिमधुपिंपन्तीभिद्धयाकृतः समंततः ।

पोषितः फलनीवारैर्वं तत्र स्थितास्वधः ॥ 14 ॥

There the kind hermit and his wife and the other wives of the hermits protected our lives in that forest, with the roots and fruits, that can be obtained there in that forest. Thus our time passed.

न दुःखं मे तदा हासीसुखं नाथ धनागमे ।

न वैरं न च मातस्यं मत चित्ते तु कहिंधित् ॥ 15 ॥

Mother! I had felt no pain then; nor do I feel pleasure at present, when wealth is flowing into me. What more to say, I have no feeling of jealousy or envy whatsoever in my mind.

नीवारभक्षणं श्रेष्ठ राजभोगायरन्ते पे ।

तद्वारी नरक याति न नीवाराशना: क्वविद्धि ॥ 16 ॥

O mother! Rather it is better, in my eyes, to subsist on roots and fruits than to enjoy kingdoms;

Book III Chapter XXV

for the kings go to hell; but the ascetics living on roots fruits never meet with that result.

धर्मेश्वारणं कार्यं पुरुषेण विजानता ।

संज्ञावैन्ट्रिवरार्य वै यथा न नरकं ब्रजेत् ॥ 17 ॥

The wise should undoubtedly practice Dharma and control their passions and thus save themselves from being led to hell.

मानुव्यं दुर्जनी मातः खोईप्रमिश्राते रुषे ।

आहारादि सुखं नूनं भवेत्सबाभु योगिषु ॥ 18 ॥

प्राय तं मातुषं देते कतिथ्य धर्मसाधनम् ।

व्यापीक्षप्रदे नृणां दुर्वर्भे चान्ययोनिषु ॥ 19 ॥

O mother! The human birth in this auspicious Bhāratvarsa is seldom obtained. The enjoyments in eating and drinking are possible in every womb, but it is highly incumbent on us when we have got the privilege of this human birth, to earn Dharma, leading to the salvation which can be very rarely attained in being born in other wombs."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्ता सा तदा तेन लीलावल्यतिलिज्ञता ।

पूरगोक्षे परित्यज्य तमाहाश्रविलोचना ॥ 20 ॥

सापराधार्यसम पुत्राई कृत्त पिता युधाजिता ।

हल्या मातामहं तेउत्र हृतं राज्यं तु येन वै ॥ 21 ॥

Vyāsa said: When Sudarśana had told thus, Lilāvatī became very abashed; she cast aside the sorrow for the death of her son, told him with tears in her eyes: "O my son Sudarśana! I am very much guilty on account of my father Yudhājit killing your mother's father and taking hold of the sovereignty of this kingdom.

न ते वारियटुं शक्ता तटाड़ं न सुतं मम ।

यलूतं कर्म तैनैव नारपाठीस्ति मे सुत ॥ 22 ॥

I could not then hinder my father and son; whatever unlawful evil and cruel deeds were then committed, all were done by my father Yudhājit. Therefore, my child, I am not to be made guilty in any way in these doings.

तो मृती खलुकीनैव कारणं त्वं तयोनै च ।

नाहं शोचामि तं पूत्रं सदा शोचामि तत्कृतम् ॥ 23 ।

Both my father and son were killed out of the wickedness of their own actions; how can you account for those wicked things? Child! I am not expressing sorrow at the death of my son; I have been pained by his doings.

पुत्र त्वमसि कल्याण धर्मिनी मे मनोराम ।

न क्रोधी न च शोको मे त्वयि पुत्र मन्यामि ॥ 24 ॥

कुरु राज्य महाभाग प्रजा: पालय सुळत ।

भगवत्या: प्रसादेन प्राप्नमेतद्रकंकम् ॥ 25 ॥

O noble souled one; You are my son; Manoramā is sister; Child! I am not at all offended with you nor am I the least sorry for your obtaining the kingdom; child! you are very fortunate; therefore you have obtained, by the grace of Bhagavatī, this kingdom without any enemies; now rules your subjects according to the prescribed rules of Dharma."

तदाकपयं चवो मातुनंत्वा तां नुपनंदनः ।

जगाम भवतं रयं यत्र पूर्वं मनोराम ॥ 26 ॥

न्यवस्तत्र गत्वा तु सर्वानाहुय मन्त्रिणः ।

देवज्ञानय पपछ्छ पुरुर्ते दिवसं रुणम् ॥ 27 ॥

सिंहासर्त तथा हिंमं कारयित्वा मनोहमम् ।

सिंहासने स्थितां देवी पूजायेथे सदास्यमूम् ॥ 28 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! The king Sudarśana heard Lilāvatī and bowed down at her feet. Then he went to the beautiful palace where Manoramā had previously gone and begun to live there. Inviting the ministers and the astrologers, he asked them what was the auspicious day and the auspicious moments, that he can establish Durgā Devi on a beautiful golden throne and he would worship Her.

स्थापवित्याउसने देवौं धार्यविकामपोहज्ञान् ।

राज्यं घड़ाकार्थियाय विश्य रागादिधि: कृतम् ॥ 29 ॥

“O ministers! First I will install on the throne the Devi, the Awarder of the four main objects of human pursuits (viz. Virtue, wealth, enjoyment and final beatitude) and then I will govern my kingdom like the kings Śri Rāma Candra and others.

पूजनीया स्ता देवो सर्वेनार्थिकैजंय: ।

माननीया शिवा शक्ति: सर्वकामार्थिसिद्धिदा ॥ 30 ॥

All the people of this city of Ayodhyā ought to worship this Auspicious Śakti, the Highest Energy, the Giver of all desires and Siddhis, and that is respected and adored by all.

इलुक्ता मन्निग्रास्ते तु चकुर्षे राजसासनम् ।

प्रास्ते कारयामासु: शिष्यिधि: सुमनेराम् ॥ 31 ॥

The ministers, on hearing his words, had a beautiful palace built by the engineers, artists and workmen and proclaimed in the city the king's proclamation.

प्रतिमां कारयित्वास्य मुहुर्तेक्ष शुभे दिने ।

द्विजानादुय वेद्वान्स्थाययामास मुपति: ॥ 32 ॥

Then the king Sudarśana had an image of the Devi nicely built and got that installed with the help of the Pundits, versed in the Vedas, on an auspicious day and at an auspicious moments.

इवनं विधित्यकृत्वा पूजयित्वास्य देवतान् ।

प्राप्तो मितिनान् देल्या: स्थाप्यामास भूमिपः ॥ 33 ॥

The intelligent king performed the worship and Homa ceremony, according to the prescribed rules, and thus finally settled the ceremony of invocation of the Deity into the new image and established it as an idol in the temple.

उत्सवस्तन संवृत्ती वादिताणों च नि:स्वर्नेः ।

बाङ्गापानां वेदोर्शेर्गरनैसृ विविधेर्नर् ॥ 34 ॥

O Janamejaya! There the soundings of the various drums and other musical instruments, the chanting of the Veda mantrams by the Brāhmanas, and sweet music was heard; and various sorts of festivities and rejoicings were celebrated.

व्यास उवाच

प्रतिष्ठाय शिवां देवीं विधिवेद्वादिविधि: ।

पूर्जां नानाधिं शां ज्चकारातिविधानतः। 35 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus completing the installation ceremony of the Durgā Devī by the Brāhmaṇas, versed in the Vedas, the king Sudarśana duly worshipped the image in various ways, etc.

कृत्वा पूर्वाविधिं शरा राज्यं प्रायः स्वर्वेषुकम् ।

विद्याता चाधिका देवी कौसलेषु बभूबह ७ ॥ ३६ ॥

Thus gaining his father's kingdom and worshipping the Devi, he and the Devi became celebrated throughout the kingdom.

राज्यं प्राय्य नृपः सर्वे सामंतकनृपायन ।

वशे चक्रेस्तिप्रिभान्यद्वर्मविर्जी नृपः ॥ ३७ ॥

The religious largehearted Sudarśana, on gaining his kingdom, brought all the other feudatory princes under his control by the sheer force of his religious character.

यथा रामः स्वाग्चेप्रष्टितीपस्य रघुयां।

प्रजानां वै सुखं तद्वन्यविद्धानि पत्थंपवत् ॥ 38 ॥

The subject became happy and got honour in the reign of Sudarśana, as they got before in the reigns of Dilipa, Raghu and Rāmacandra.

धर्मों वर्णाशमाणां च चतुष्यादभवतथा ।

नाधर्मे सन्ते चित्तं केभामपि महीतले ॥ 39 ॥

The virtue of all the citizens under Varnāśrama shone complete with all its four pādas; and there remained none in the world irreligious.

ग्रामे ग्रामे च ग्रासाद्धकु: सर्वे जनाधिपाः ।

देखा: पूजा तदा प्रीत्या कोसतैयु प्रवर्तिता ॥ 40 ॥

In villages after villages, the chief townsmen began to build temples, worship the Goddess there with all their jolliness. Thus everywhere in the Kosala kingdom spread the Devi worship.

मुबाहुरी कार्ययां तु तुणीय: प्रतिमां शुभान् ।

कारचित्वा च प्राप्तां स्वायभायाम पशित्तः ॥ 4 1 ॥

On the other hand, the king Subāhu established the Idol in Benares, had temples built and worshipped there the Devi.

तत्र तस्य जना: सर्वे प्रेमभक्तिपरायणा: ।

पूजां चकृर्विधानेन यथा विश्रेधारस्य ह ॥ 4 2 ॥

The inhabitants of Kāśī became then filled with devotion and intense love towards the Devi and duly worshipped Her, as they used to do to Śiva in the temple of Viśvañātha.

विद्याता सा बभूवा शुर्दिधी धरातले ।

देशे देरे महाराज तस्या भक्तिव्यवित्ति ॥ 43 ॥

Thus the Durgā Devi became very widely celebrated in this world. O king! Thus in different

Book III Chapter XXVI

countries, the devotion began to increase towards the Goddess.

स्वयं भारते लोके सर्ववर्णेु सर्वथा ।

भजनीया भवानी तु सर्वेयाभभवन्ता ॥ 44 ॥

The Devi Bhagavatī Bhāvānī became in every way an object to be worshipped and adored by all people and everywhere in Bhāratavarsa.

शक्तिभक्ततः सर्वे गानिनक्षावबुव्य ।

आगभोक्तैरव स्तोत्रैजपध्यानपरायणा: ॥ 45 ॥

The people began to recite slowly, meditate, and chant hymns as advocated by the Agamas constantly and became deeply attached to the Sakti worship and began to be looked upon with the highest honour by others.

नवराग्रेषु सर्वेषु चक्र: सर्वे विधानतः ।

अर्नंन हवनं यागं देह्या भक्तिपरा जना: ॥ 46 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागनते महापुराणे तृतीयस्कन्धे

पद्धविरोधोउध्याः: 11 25 11

O king! From that time all the people used to worship, perform Homa, ceremony and sacrifice duly in honour of the Devi in every Navarātri (for the first nine days of the bright half in the months of Āśvina and Caitra).

Here ends the Twenty Fifth Chapter on the installation of the Devi in Ayodhya and Benares in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevirbhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Vedā Vyāsa.

Book III Chapter XXVI

