[Ch 33 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king Suratha said: "O Muni! This Vaiśya is now become a friend of mine in this forest; he has been expelled from his home by his sons and wife and he has come lately here in this forest.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king Suratha said :-- “O Muni! This Vaiśya is now become a friend of mine in this forest; he has been expelled from his home by his sons and wife and he has come lately here in this forest.

[Ch 33 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He is now suffering very much from the bereavement of his family and has become very much troubled in his mind. He is not getting any peace whatsoever. I am also become like him and have become very distressed owing to my kingdom being robbed away. This thought, though really devoid of any substantial cause, is not leaving my heart now. Oh! My elephants and horses, now under my enemies, have become weak.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He is now suffering very much from the bereavement of his family and has become very much troubled in his mind. He is not getting any peace whatsoever. I am also become like him and have become very distressed owing to my kingdom being robbed away. This thought, though really devoid of any substantial cause, is not leaving my heart now. Oh! My elephants and horses, now under my enemies, have become weak;

[Ch 33 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My servants are suffering very much owing to my absence! My enemies will, within no time, squander away forcibly all my hoarded riches. This thought is not giving me any happiness; nay, I cannot get any sleep owing to this care and anxiety.
NEW CORR ENG ──► My servants are suffering very much owing to my absence! My enemies will, within no time squander away forcibly all my hoarded riches. This thought is not giving me any happiness; nay, I cannot get any sleep owing to this care and anxiety.

[Ch 33 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord! I know that this world is false as a dream; yet my mind is so deluded that I cannot make me quiet. Who am I? What are those horses and elephants to me? They are not my brothers, sons, nor friends; yet I feel very much for them and am troubled with their troubles. O Muni! I know these all are delusions; still I am not able to make mymind free from them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord! I know that this world is false as a dream; yet my mind is so deluded that I cannot make me quiet. Who am I? What are those horses and elephants to me? They are not my brothers, sons, nor friends; yet I feel very much for them and am troubled with their troubles. O Muni! I know these all are delusions; still I am not able to make my mind free from them.

[Ch 33 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This is very wonderful indeed! What is the cause of all this? O Lord! Nothing is veiled from your sight, you are fully able to solve all these doubts. Therefore, O Ocean of mercy! Kindly explain to me and this Viśya the cause of all this delusion."
NEW CORR ENG ──► This is very wonderful indeed! What is the cause of all this? O Lord! Nothing is veiled from your sight, you are fully able to solve all these doubts. Therefore, O Ocean of mercy! Kindly explain to me and this Vaiśya the cause of all this delusion.”

[Ch 33 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O King! When the King Suratha asked thus, the Muni in reply said to him the following words, full of wisdom, so that his delusion and sorrow might vanish.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! When the King Suratha asked thus, the Muni in reply said to him the following words, full of wisdom, so that his delusion and sorrow might vanish.

[Ch 33 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Muni said: “O King! I am telling you the cause of bondage as well the cause of bondage as well the cause of release of all the beings in this Universe. She is known as Mahā Māyā. She is the Mūlā Prakṛti, the state of equilibrium of the three Gunas, Sattva, Rajas and Tāmas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Muni said :-- “O King! I am telling you the cause of bondage as well the cause of release of all the beings in this Universe. She is known as Mahā Māyā. She is the Mūla Prakriti, the state of equilibrium of the three Guṇas, Sāttva, Rājas and Tāmas.

[Ch 33 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Even Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Indra, Varuna, Vāyu, and the other Devas, Gandharvas, Nāgas, Rāksasas, men, deer, animals, birds, trees and various kinds of creepers all are under Māyā; thus they are all bound; again they all get release when they are released by that Māyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Even Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Indra, Varuṇa, Vāyu, and the other Devas, Gandarbhas, Nagas, Rākṣasas, men, deer, animals, birds, trees and various kinds of creepers all are under Māyā; thus they are all bound; again they all get release when they are released by that Māyā.

[Ch 33 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► By Her is created all this world, moving and not moving, all the beings are caught in Her net and all are under the control of Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► By Her is created all this world, moving and not moving, all the beings are caught in Her net and all are under the control of Her.

[Ch 33 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You are a Kṣattriya; so Rajoguna preponderates in you and your heart is thus rendered impure. She, by Her Māyā, deludes even the minds of those who are Jūnāns or wise; you are but an ordinary man compared to them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You are a Kṣattriya; so Rājoguṇa preponderates in you and your heart is thus rendered impure. She, by Her Māyā, deludes even the minds of those who are Jñānins or wise; you are but an ordinary man compared to them.

[Ch 33 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Even Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa, though possessed of vast wisdom, still roam, under the sway of Māyā, in the three worlds completely deluded by their attachments to the sensual objects.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Even Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa, though possessed of vast wisdom, still roam, under the sway of Māyā, in the three worlds completely deluded by their attachments to the sensual objects.

[Ch 33 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! In the Satya Yuga, in ancient times Visnu Nārāyaṇa himself performed a very hard tapasyā in Śvetadvīpa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! In the Satya Yuga, in ancient times Viṣṇu Nārāyaṇa himself performed a very hard tapasyā in Śvetadvīpa.

[Ch 33 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He passed away full ten thousand years in meditation, with the object of attaining the unbroken everlasting Bliss and becoming steadfastly attached to Brāhma Vidyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He passed away full ten thousand years in meditation, with the object of attaining the unbroken everlasting Bliss and becoming steadfastly attached to Brahmā Vidyā.

[Ch 33 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Brahmā, too, became engaged in performing a tapasyā, meditating the Primordial Force, Ādyā Śakti, in a very wonderful solitary place for the cessation of delusion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Brahmā, too, became engaged in performing a tapasyā, meditating the Primordial Force, Ādyā Śakti, in a very wonderful solitary place for the cessation of delusion.

[Ch 33 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once on a time Vāsudeva Hari wanted to go to another place; he got up and started to see other places. Brahmā, also, left his place and started for another destination.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once on a time Vāsudeva Hari wanted to go to another place; he got up and started to see other places. Brahmā, also, left his place and started for another destination.

[Ch 33 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When they met each other in their way, each one asked the other "Who are you?" The Prajāpati answered: "I am the Creator Brahmā."
NEW CORR ENG ──► When they met each other in their way, each one asked the other, “Who are you?” The Prajāpati answered :-- “I am the Creator Brahmā.”

[Ch 33 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing thus the Brahmā's words, Viṣṇu said: "O You Stupid! I am Acyuta Viṣṇu; therefore I am the Creator of this world." You are inferior to Me as there is so much of Rajoguna in preponderance in you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing thus the Brahmā’s words, Viṣṇu said :-- “O You Stupid! I am Achyuta Viṣṇu; therefore I am the Creator of this world. You are inferior to Me as there is so much of Rājoguṇa in preponderance in you.

[Ch 33 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Know Me as the eternal Vāsudeva, preponderating in Satīva Guna. Do you not remember that I fought a dreadful battle for you and thus saved your life a short while ago. I slew the two Dānavas Madhu and Kaitabha when you were much distressed by them and took My refuge.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Know Me as the eternal Vāsudeva, preponderating in Sāttva Guṇa. Do you not remember that I fought a dreadful battle for you and thus saved your life a short while ago, I slew the two Dānavas Madhu and Kaiṭava when you were much distressed by them and took My refuge.

[Ch 33 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How then do you boast now! O Fool! Quit your this vain boasting now. In this wide world, there is none superior to Me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► How then do you boast now! O Fool! Quit your this vain boasting now. In this wide world, there is none superior to Me.”

[Ch 33 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rşi said: “Thus engaged in disputing with each other, their lips were quivering with anger and their eyes got red.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣi said :-- Thus engaged in disputing with each other, their lips were quivering with anger and their eyes got red.

[Ch 33 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When, Behold! there appeared suddenly between two disputants, a nectar-like white phallic emblem (Lüngam), wonderfully long and extensive.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When, Behold! there appeared suddenly between those two disputants, a nectar-like white phallic emblem (Liṅgam), wonderfully long and extensive.

[Ch 33 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then a voice, from without anybody, broke out in the Heavens and addressed Brahmā and Viṣṇu who were quarrelling thus?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then a voice, from without anybody, broke out in the Heavens and addressed Brahmā and Viṣṇu who were quarrelling thus!

[Ch 33 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whoever amongst you will be able to go to the other end of this Liṅgam whether beyond its top or below its bottom, he is certainly the superior of you two; let one of you therefore go down to Pātāla and let the other go up to you Heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whoever amongst you will be able to go to the other end of this Liṅgam whether beyond its top or below its bottom, he is certainly the superior of you two; let one of you therefore go down to Pātāla and let the other go up to the Heavens.

[Ch 33 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Leave off your useless disputations and take my word as proof. It is always advisable to select an umpire to decide such a quarrel as this that has sprung up between you two.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Leave off your useless disputations and take my word as proof. It is always advisable to select an umpire to decide such a quarrel as this that has sprung up between you two.

[Ch 33 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rsi said: O King! Hearing thus the divine word, both of them became ready and began energetically to measure the length of the wonderful Liṅgam that stood in front of them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣi said :-- O King! Hearing thus the divine word, both of them became ready and began energetically to measure the length of the wonderful Liṅgam that stood in front of them.

[Ch 33 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Viṣṇu went down to Pātāla and Brahmā went up to Ākāśa to measure the Liṅgam and thus to ascertain their superiority.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viṣṇu went down to Pātāla and Brahmā went up to Ākāśa to measure the Liṅgam and thus to ascertain their superiority.

[Ch 33 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Going down some distance Viṣṇu got tired and doing his best, when he not find out the end of the Liṅgam, he returned and remained at the desired meeting place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Going down some distance Viṣṇu got tired and doing his best, when he could not find out the end of the Liṅgam, he returned and remained at the desired meeting place.

[Ch 33 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the other hand, Brahmā was ascending to the skies when he got one Ketakī flower dropping from the head of the Lingam. He became over glad and returned also to the desired meeting place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the other hand, Brahmā was ascending to the skies when he got one Ketakī flower dropping from the head of the Liṅgam. He became over glad and returned also to the desired meeting place.

[Ch 33 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā became very much elated with vanity and when he returned, he at once showed that flower to Viṣṇu and spoke thus the false words:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā became very much elated with vanity and when he returned, he at once showed that flower to Viṣṇu and spoke thus the false words :--

[Ch 33 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Viṣṇu! This Ketakī flower has been obtained from the head of the Lingam. I have brought this to you simply that you would recognise it and be convinced in your heart.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Viṣṇu! This Ketakī flower has been obtained from the head of the Liṅgam. I have brought this to you simply that you would recognise it and be convinced in your heart.”

[Ch 33 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Brahmā, Viṣṇu saw the Ketakī flower and said: "O Brahmā! Who is your witness in this matter? He whose words are true, who is equal to all, who is intelligent, pure, and always of good conduct, he can be the witness in such matters of dispute.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Brahmā, Viṣṇu saw the Ketakī flower and said :-- “O Brahmā! Who is your witness in this matter? He whose words are true, who is equal to all, who is intelligent, pure, and always of good conduct, he can be the witness in such matters of dispute.”

[Ch 33 Verse 39-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā said: “Who will come now as witness from that far off place? This Ketakī flower is the witness; this will give evidence.” Thus saying, Brahmā requested Ketakī to give evidence; Ketakī soon replied thus to convince Viṣṇu. “O Viṣṇu! I was on the head of Mahādeva; Brahmā has brought me from there down to this place; you ought not therefore to have any doubt on this point.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā said :-- “Who will come now as witness from that far off place? This Ketakī flower is the witness; this will give evidence.” Thus saying, Brahmā requested Ketakī to give evidence; Ketakī soon replied thus to convince Viṣṇu. O Viṣṇu! I was on the head of Mahādeva; Brahmā has brought me from there down to this place; you ought not therefore to have any doubt on this point.

[Ch 33 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My word is the evidence; Brahmā has gone to the other end of the Liṅgam. Some devotee of Śiva put me on His head and Brahmā has got me down from there."
NEW CORR ENG ──► My word is the evidence; Brahmā has gone to the other end of the Liṅgam. Some devotee of Śiva put me on His head and Brahmā has got me down from there.

[Ch 33 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing thus the words of Ketakī, Viṣṇu was very much astonished and said this: “I cannot trust your word; if Mahā Deva comes and speaks this himself, then I can trust and take it as a proof.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing thus the words of Ketakī, Viṣṇu was very much astonished and said this :-- “I cannot trust your word; if Mahā Deva comes and speaks this Himself, then I can trust and take it as a proof.”

[Ch 33 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rṣi said: O King! The eternal Mahā Deva, hearing the words of Viṣṇu, spoke thus to Ketakī with great anger “O Liar! Do not utter such false words : You dropped down from My head and Brahmā while ascending up, picked you up on the way.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣi said :-- O King! The eternal Mahā Deva, hearing the words of Viṣṇu, spoke thus to Ketakī with great anger, “O Liar! Do not utter such false words; You dropped down from My head and Brahmā while ascending up, picked you up on the way.

[Ch 33 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now as you have told a lie, I will never take you; you are henceforth forsaken by Me." Brahmā was then very much put to shame; he bowed down to Viṣṇu; Mahā Deva, forsook the Ketakī flower from that date.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now as you have told a lie, I will never take you; you are henceforth forsaken by Me.” Brahmā was then very much put to shame; he bowed down to Viṣṇu; Mahā Deva, forsook the Ketakī flower from that date.

[Ch 33 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Such is the power of Māyā; when need to speak of other ordinary mortals!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Such is the power of Māyā; when Brahmā,

[Ch 33 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See! Viṣṇu, the Lord of Lakṣmī, is self-deluded and is always deceiving the Daityas for the welfare of the Devas, without any fear whatsoever of the sin that he is thereby incurring.
NEW CORR ENG ──► See! Viṣṇu, the Lord of Lakṣmī, is self-deluded and is always deceiving the Daityas for the welfare of the Devas, without any fear whatsoever of the sin that he is thereby iñcurring.

[Ch 33 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Though He is the Lord of all yet He has to take several incarnations in several wombs, forsaking the pleasures of the Heavens and fighting with the Daityas. O King! Viṣṇu is omniscient and He is the Lord of this world; specially
NEW CORR ENG ──► Though He is the Lord of all yet He has to take several incarnations in several wombs, forsaking the pleasures of the Heavens and fighting with the Daityas. O King! Viṣṇu is omniscient and He is the Lord of this world; specially

[Ch 33 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He is the only One, Supreme in the creation of the Gods. Now when Māyā exercises such a powerful influence on Viṣṇu, what wonder is there that the other ordinary beings would be deluded by Her?
NEW CORR ENG ──► He is the only One, Supreme in the creation of the Gods. Now when Māyā exercises such a powerful influence on Viṣṇu, what wonder is there that the other ordinary beings would be deluded by Her?

[Ch 33 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! That Highest Prakṛti draws away violently the hearts of the wise and drags them down into the ocean of world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! That Highest Prakriti draws away violently the hearts of the wise and drags them down into the ocean of world.

[Ch 33 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That Omnipresent Bhagavatī is ever the cause of bondage of all when She casts Her net of delusion and She is again ever the cause of liberation when She imparts Her knowledge to them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That Omnipresent Bhagavatī is ever the cause of bondage of all when She casts Her net of delusion and She is again ever the cause of liberation when She imparts Her knowledge to them.

[Ch 33 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King said: “O Brahma! What is the nature of Her? and what is the Supreme Force? What is the Cause of this creation? And where is Her highest place? Kindly narrate all these to me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King said :-- O Brāhmaṇ! What is the nature of Her? and what is the Supreme Force? What is the Cause of this creation? And where is Her highest place? Kindly narrate all these to me.

[Ch 33 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rşi said: “O King! She is beginningless; therefore She had no origin at any time; that Highest Devi is Eternal and She is always the Cause of all Causes. (How then can any other be powerful like Her).
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣi said :-- O King! She is beginningless; therefore She had no origin at any time; that Highest Devī is Eternal and She is always the Cause of all Causes. (How then can any other be powerful like Her).

[Ch 33 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! She resides in all the beings as the essential vital Force; deprived of that Force, every being is reduced a dead carcass.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! She resides in all the beings as the essential vital Force; deprived of that Force, every being is reduced to a dead carcass.

[Ch 33 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She is pervading as the Universal Force of Consciousness in all the beings. The form of this Śakti (Force) is the form made up of consciousness itself, the Brahma. (For the force of Fire is Fire itself; it is not seen in any other form).
NEW CORR ENG ──► She is pervading as the Universal Force of Consciousness in all the beings. The form of this Śakti (Force) is the form made up of consciousness itself, the Brahmā. (For the force of Fire is Fire itself; it is not seen in any other form).

[Ch 33 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her appearances and disappearances at times are simply for serving the purposes of the Gods. O King! Whenever the Devas and men worship Her, Ambikā makes Her appearance visible to destroy their pains and sufferings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her appearances and disappearances at times are simply for serving the purposes of the Gods. O King! Whenever the Devas and men worship Her, Ambikā makes Her appearance visible to destroy their pains and sufferings.

[Ch 33 Verse 58-60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She is not like the Devas, under the control of Daiva or Fate; She is not under the influence of Time (as both Fate and Time are created by Her). She puts always every being to action according to his capacity. Puruṣa is not the Doer; He is simply the Witness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She is not like the Devas, under the control of Daiva or Fate; She is not under the influence of Time (as both Fate and Time are created by Her). She puts always every being to action according to his capacity. Puruṣa is not the Doer; He is simply the Witness.

[Ch 33 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This whole Universe is the object seen. That Devi is the Mother of all this that is witnessed. She is the Manifested and She is the Unmanifested and She is the Effect also. She alone is the Actress and manifests thus the world and thus gives the colouring to the Puruṣa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This whole Universe is the object seen. That Devī is the Mother of all this that is witnessed. She is the Manifested and She is the Unmanifested and She is the Effect also. She alone is the Actress and manifests thus the world and thus gives the colouring to the Puruṣa.

[Ch 33 Verse 62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the Puruṣa is coloured thus, She destroys quickly these worlds. It is said that Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa are respectively the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of the world; but this is merely a statement; really they are merely instruments in Her hands.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the Puruṣa is coloured thus, She destroys quickly these worlds. It is said that Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa are respectively the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of the world; but this is merely a statement; really they are merely instruments in Her hands.

[Ch 33 Verse 63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhagavati has created them in reality for Her Pastime and stationed them in their respective posts. She has bestowed to them Her part manifestations, ॥.e., Sarasvati to Brahmā, Lakṣmī to Viṣṇu, and Girijā to Maheśa and has thus rendered them more powerful.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bhagavatī has created them in reality for Her Pastime and stationed them in their respective posts. She has bestowed to them Her part manifestations, i.e., Sarasvatī to Brahmā, Lakṣmī to Viṣṇu, and Girijā to Maheśa and has thus rendered them more powerful.

[Ch 33 Verse 64-133]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They, the lords of the Devas, always meditate and worship Her as Creatrix, Preservrix and Destructrix of this Universe. O King! I have thus described to you, as far as my intelligence and knowledge go, the holy greatness and the excellent glory of Her (in reality, I have not been able to come to the end of it). “Aim, Hrim, Klim Cāmundāyai bicche” is the (9) nine lettered mantra. Here ends the Thirty-third Clapter of the Fifth Book on the description of the greatness of the Devi in Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāpam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They, the lords of the Devas, always meditate and worship Her as the Creatrix, Preservrix and Destructrix of this Universe. O King! I have thus described to you, as far as my intelligence and knowledge go, the holy greatness and the excellent glory of Her (in reality, I have not been able to come to the end of it). “Aim Hrīm Klīm Cāmuṇḍāyai bicce” is the (9) nine lettered mantra. Here ends the Thirty-third Chapter of the Fifth Book on the description of the greatness of the Devī in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
