CHAPTER XXXIII

On the Greatness of the Devi

राजोवाच

मुने वैश्योउयम्युना बने मे शिरतां रातः ।

पूर्वद्वर्िरिंस्तोई प्राप्तोउर्र मम संभामम् ॥ १ ॥

The king Suratha said: "O Muni! This Vaiśya

is now become a friend of mine in this forest; he has been expelled from his home by his sons and wife and he has come lately here in this forest.

"कुटुब्बविरहेशणासी दुःविह्नोतीव दुर्भानः ।

Book V Chapter XXXIII

न शान्तिमुपायायेप तथैव मम साम्यतम् ।

गतराजस्य दुःखेन शोकातोंस्मि महामाते ॥'

निकाणर्ण च मे चिंता इद्यात्र निवर्तेत ।

हया मे दुबैलतः स्युः किं नजा: श्रवुरर्ग नातः ॥ २ ॥

He is now suffering very much from the bereavement of his family and has become very much troubled in his mind. He is not getting any peace whatsoever. I am also become like him and have become very distressed owing to my kingdom being robbed away. This thought, though really devoid of any substantial cause, is not leaving my heart now. Oh! My elephants and horses, now under my enemies, have become weak.

भृत्वरर्भेल्हा दुःखी जात: स्यतुग मवा विजा ।

कोशुर्धयं कार्यिन्ति चिपतोडिलताखणात् ॥ ३ ॥

इत्येवं चिन्तयानस्य च मे निद्रा तनी सुखम् ।

जानामीदं जगन्मिष्या स्वप्नवस्तमेवेच हि ॥ 4 ॥

My servants are suffering very much owing to my absence! My enemies will, within no time, squander away forcibly all my hoarded riches. This thought is not giving me any happiness; nay, I cannot get any sleep owing to this care and anxiety.

जान्तोरीय मनो घान्तं न स्वियं भवति प्रभो ।

कोई के3घा गना: के3मी न ते मे च सहोदारः ॥ 5 ॥

न पुत्रा न च मित्राणि येषां दुःखं दुनेति माम् ।

प्रभोउयिति जानाभि तथापि मम मानसः ॥ 6 ॥

O Lord! I know that this world is false as a dream; yet my mind is so deluded that I cannot make me quiet. Who am I? What are those horses and elephants to me? They are not my brothers, sons, nor friends; yet I feel very much for them and am troubled with their troubles. O Muni! I know these all are delusions; still I am not able to make mymind free from them.

मोहो नैवापसति किं तत्काणमढुतम् ।

स्वामित्यमसि सर्वतः सर्वसंशयनागक्त् ॥ 7 ॥

कारणं बृहि मोहस्य मासस्य च स्वामित्ये ।

This is very wonderful indeed! What is the

cause of all this? O Lord! Nothing is veiled from your sight, you are fully able to solve all these doubts. Therefore, O Ocean of mercy! Kindly explain to me and this Viśya the cause of all this delusion."

व्यास उवाच

इति पृष्ठस्तदा राजा सुमेधा मुनिसस्तमः ॥ 8 ॥

तमुवाच परं जानं शोकमोहित्यानगम् ।

Vyāsa said: “O King! When the King Suratha asked thus, the Muni in reply said to him the following words, full of wisdom, so that his delusion and sorrow might vanish.”

झरिग्वताव

भृगु राजन्यवश्यामि कारणं बन्धमोक्षयोः ॥ 9 ॥

महामाथीत विद्यालाया सर्वेयं प्राणिनामिक ।

The Muni said: “O King! I am telling you the cause of bondage as well the cause of bondage as well the cause of release of all the beings in this Universe. She is known as Mahā Māyā. She is the Mūlā Prakṛti, the state of equilibrium of the three Gunas, Sattva, Rajas and Tāmas.

बह्वा विष्णुसंशासन्सुराषड्वकर्णो5नितः ॥ १० ॥

सर्वे देवा मनुवाया नन्ववौरगाराक्षसाः ।

वृक्षाक्ष विविधा बल्ल्वः पशवो मृगपाक्षिणः ॥ १ १ ॥

मायाधीनाक्ष ते सर्वे भाजर्न बंधेमोक्षणेः ।

Even Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Indra, Varuna, Vāyu, and the other Devas, Gandharvas, Nāgas, Rāksasas, men, deer, animals, birds, trees and various kinds of creepers all are under Māyā; thus they are all bound; again they all get release when they are released by that Māyā.

तया सृष्टिमितं सर्वे जनस्थावरजंभम् ॥ १ २ ॥

तद्धगे वर्तेत नूनं मोहजारेतन यंत्रितम् ।

By Her is created all this world, moving and not moving, all the beings are caught in Her net and all are under the control of Her.

त्वं किंवानानुभेदेकः क्षत्रियो वसानउर्जितः ॥ 13 ॥

ज्ञानिनामपि चेतांमि मोहयत्वत्निरं हि स ।

You are a Kṣattriya; so Rajoguna preponderates

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

in you and your heart is thus rendered impure. She, by Her Māyā, deludes even the minds of those who are Jūnāns or wise; you are but an ordinary man compared to them.

क्रेशशासुरेवाठा झाने सत्यपि शेपतः ॥ 14 ॥

तेषि रागवशाल्लोके क्षमति परिणोहिताः ।

Even Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa, though possessed of vast wisdom, still roam, under the sway of Māyā, in the three worlds completely deluded by their attachments to the sensual objects.

पुरा सत्ययुगे रात्निथनुर्गरायण: स्वयम् ॥ 15 ॥

शेत्राधीयं समासादा चकार विवृतं तपः ।

O King! In the Satya Yuga, in ancient times Visnu Nārāyaṇa himself performed a very hard tapasyā in Śvetadvīpa.

वर्षाणामयुतं यावद् इद्यविद्याप्रसक्तये ॥ 16 ॥

अनश्यसुखायासी चिन्तयानस्ततः परम् ।

He passed away full ten thousand years in meditation, with the object of attaining the unbroken everlasting Bliss and becoming steadfastly attached to Brāhma Vidyā.

एकसित्धिजनै देये बह्ञाउपि परमाङुते ॥ 17 ॥

स्थिततपसि राजेन्द्र मोहस्य विनिवृतये ।

O King! Brahmā, too, became engaged in performing a tapasyā, meditating the Primordial Force, Ādyā Śakti, in a very wonderful solitary place for the cessation of delusion.

क्वाधिष्ठापुरोदेजसी खलोतमातिरहितः ॥ 18 ॥

तस्माहोत्समुदाय वगमान्यदिह्वशा ।

चतुर्मुंवोर पीजेन्द्र तदैव नि:सूतः खलात् ॥ 19 ॥

मितिली मार्गमध्ये तु चतुर्मुंखचतुर्ष्जी ।

Once on a time Vāsudeva Hari wanted to go to another place; he got up and started to see other places. Brahmā, also, left his place and started for another destination.

अन्योयं गुर्वन्ती ती करलं करलविमिति स्म च || 20 ||

बहा प्रोवारा ते देवं कर्ताई ज्ञान: किल ।

When they met each other in their way, each one asked the other "Who are you?" The Prajāpati answered: "I am the Creator Brahmā."

विष्णुस्तमाह घो मूर्खं जगत्कर्तांहमच्युतः ॥ 21 ॥

त्वं किंव्यान्वहीनोरिस्त्र नतोरुणमवमाश्रितः ।

Hearing thus the Brahmā's words, Viṣṇu said: "O You Stupid! I am Acyuta Viṣṇu; therefore I am the Creator of this world." You are inferior to Me as there is so much of Rajoguna in preponderance in you.

सत्वाशितं हिं मां विविट्र वासुदेवं सन्तानम् ॥ 22 ॥

माया तं रक्षितोदीव कृत्वा युद्धे सुदारुभणम् ।

शरणं मे समायातो दानवाभ्यां प्रपीडितः ॥ 23 ॥

मया तो निर्हती कामं दानवी मधुकैट्यपी ।

Know Me as the eternal Vāsudeva, preponderating in Satīva Guna. Do you not remember that I fought a dreadful battle for you and thus saved your life a short while ago. I slew the two Dānavas Madhu and Kaitabha when you were much distressed by them and took My refuge.

कर्व गर्वायसे मंद मोहोरयं त्वंस सामप्रम्भ ।। 24 ॥

न मतोघ्याधिकः कश्रिसंसारोभिन्यमातिरे ।

How then do you boast now! O Fool! Quit your this vain boasting now. In this wide world, there is none superior to Me.

ब्रह्मविद्याच

एवं प्रवद्यानी ती ब्रह्माविष्यु परस्परम् ॥ 25 ॥

सुकुरदोषी वेयमानी लोहिताओं बभूवतुः ।

The Rşi said: “Thus engaged in disputing with each other, their lips were quivering with anger and their eyes got red.

प्रावुर्बपूव सहसा तयोर्विद्वदमानयो: ॥ 26 ॥

मध्ये लिंग सुधाश्रं तिवपुतं दीर्भीमद्धुतम् ।

When, Behold! there appeared suddenly between two disputants, a nectar-like white phallic emblem (Lüngam), wonderfully long and extensive.

आकाशे तरसा तत्र वागुवाचागरीस्थि ॥ 27 ॥

तो संबोध्य महाभागी विवदन्ते परस्पत् ।

Then a voice, from without anybody, broke out in the Heavens and addressed Brahmā and Viṣṇu who were quarrelling thus?

ब्रहाविष्णो विवादं मा कुतःतां वां परस्पत् ॥ 28 ॥

लिंगस्यास्य परं पारमधस्तादुपरि ध्रुवम् ।

Book V Chapter XXXIII

यो याति युवयोमीय से श्रेष्ठी वां सदैव हि ॥ 29 ॥

एकः प्रमातु पातालयाकाशमपरो5दृना ।

Whoever amongst you will be able to go to the other end of this Liṅgam whether beyond its top or below its bottom, he is certainly the superior of you two; let one of you therefore go down to Pātāla and let the other go up to you Heavens.

प्रमाणे मे चव: कार्यं त्वक्या वादि निर्विक्यम् ।। 30 ॥

मध्यस्प: सर्वदा कार्यों विवादोउस्मिन्नयोरिष्ट ।

Leave off your useless disputations and take my word as proof. It is always advisable to select an umpire to decide such a quarrel as this that has sprung up between you two.

ऋषिकवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं दिव्यं सजीभूतों कृतोघमौ ॥ 3 1 ॥

जममतुमितुमप्रस्थ लिङ्गम्बुतदार्जनम् ।

The Rsi said: O King! Hearing thus the divine word, both of them became ready and began energetically to measure the length of the wonderful Liṅgam that stood in front of them.

पातालमामदिष्णुबंद्रासुघाकागसे व ॥32 ॥

परिमानुं मृतालिकुं स्वमहत्वविद्धुद्रे ।

Viṣṇu went down to Pātāla and Brahmā went up to Ākāśa to measure the Liṅgam and thus to ascertain their superiority.

विष्णुरीना क्रियहेशं श्रान्तः सर्वान्तया वतः ॥ 3 3 ॥

न प्राप्तनं स रिंगमाय रपितृवरा यथी स्थलम् ।

Going down some distance Viṣṇu got tired and doing his best, when he not find out the end of the Liṅgam, he returned and remained at the desired meeting place.

ब्रह्मासणछत्तश्छीर्ध पत्तिते केतकीद्वलम् ॥ 34 ॥

शिवस्य मस्तकताप्य परावृतो मुदापृतः ।

On the other hand, Brahmā was ascending to the skies when he got one Ketakī flower dropping from the head of the Lingam. He became over glad and returned also to the desired meeting place.

आगत्य तसरा जहा विणाये केतकीदलम् ॥ 35 ॥

दर्शपीथला च वितथमुवाच मदमोहितः ।

Brahmā became very much elated with vanity and when he returned, he at once showed that flower to Viṣṇu and spoke thus the false words:

लिङ्गस्य मस्तकाटेतदगुहितं केतकीदात्म् ॥ 36 ॥

अभिज्ञानाय चानीतं तत चित्तप्रणानाये ।

“O Viṣṇu! This Ketakī flower has been obtained from the head of the Lingam. I have brought this to you simply that you would recognise it and be convinced in your heart.

शूला तद्बहागणो वाक्यं बृद्धा च केतकीद्वम् ॥ 37 ॥

हरितं प्रत्युवाचेदं साही कः कथायपुना ।

यथार्थवादी मेघावी सदाचारः शुचि: समः ॥ 38 ॥

साही भवति सर्वैर विवादे सपुचिष्यते ।

Hearing these words of Brahmā, Viṣṇu saw the Ketakī flower and said: "O Brahmā! Who is your witness in this matter? He whose words are true, who is equal to all, who is intelligent, pure, and always of good conduct, he can be the witness in such matters of dispute.

ब्रहीावाच

दूरदेशात्समायाति साकी कः समये5रुना ॥ 39 ॥

यत्सर्व तद्वच: सेयं केतकी कथयिध्यति ।

इत्युक्त्वा प्रोत्त तत ब्रहणा केतकी सुकृष्म ॥ 40 ॥

वचनं प्रात तरसा शार्डिंणं प्रत्यवोध्यत् ।

शिवमूर्ति स्थितां ब्रह्मा गृहीत्वा यां समाताः ॥ 41 ॥

सद्रोहोउन के कत्वीस्थत्वया विजणो कदाचन ।

Brahmā said: “Who will come now as witness from that far off place? This Ketakī flower is the witness; this will give evidence.” Thus saying, Brahmā requested Ketakī to give evidence; Ketakī soon replied thus to convince Viṣṇu. “O Viṣṇu! I was on the head of Mahādeva; Brahmā has brought me from there down to this place; you ought not therefore to have any doubt on this point.

मग वाक्यं प्रमाणं हि बह्ञा पारबृतोउरह च ॥ 42 ॥

गृहीत्वा मां समयात: शिवभक्तैः समर्पिताम् ।

My word is the evidence; Brahmā has gone to the other end of the Liṅgam. Some devotee of Śiva put me on His head and Brahmā has got me down from there."

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

केतक्या वचनं श्रुला हरिराह स्मविश्व ।। 43 ॥

महादेव: प्रमाणं मे यद्यासी वचनं वदेत् ।

Hearing thus the words of Ketakī, Viṣṇu was very much astonished and said this: “I cannot trust your word; if Mahā Deva comes and speaks this himself, then I can trust and take it as a proof.”

ऋषिक्वाच

तदाकपर्यं हरेवाक्यं महादेव सनातनः ॥ 44 ॥

कृपितः केतकीं प्राह मिथ्यावादिनि मा वद ।

The Rṣi said: O King! The eternal Mahā Deva, hearing the words of Viṣṇu, spoke thus to Ketakī with great anger “O Liar! Do not utter such false words : You dropped down from My head and Brahmā while ascending up, picked you up on the way.

गच्छतो मध्यतः प्राणा पतिता मस्तकान्मय ॥ 4 5 ॥

भिथ्याधिपिणीय तयता मयां द सही ।

बह्ना लज्ञापरो भूत्वा ननाम मधुसूदनम् ॥ 4 6 ॥

शिशेन केतकी त्यथा तद्विताकुसुमेषु वै ।

Now as you have told a lie, I will never take you; you are henceforth forsaken by Me." Brahmā was then very much put to shame; he bowed down to Viṣṇu; Mahā Deva, forsook the Ketakī flower from that date.

एवं मायाकलं विद्ये जानिनामपि मोहदूम ॥ 47 ॥

अन्येधी प्राणिनां राजन्का बाता विषभं प्रति ।

O King! Such is the power of Māyā; when need to speak of other ordinary mortals!

दैवानां कार्यसिद्धार्थ सर्वदैव सापानिः ॥ 48 ॥

दैत्यान्वड्यवते घासु त्यक्त्वा पापघर्व हरि: ।

See! Viṣṇu, the Lord of Lakṣmī, is self-deluded and is always deceiving the Daityas for the welfare of the Devas, without any fear whatsoever of the sin that he is thereby incurring.

अवतात्करो देवो नानायोभिपु माध्वः ॥ 49 ॥

त्यक्वासउनन्द्युर्दं दैत्यैयुंद्धे वैवाकारोदिषुः ।

Though He is the Lord of all yet He has to take several incarnations in several wombs, forsaking the pleasures of the Heavens and fighting with the

Daityas. O King! Viṣṇu is omniscient and He is the Lord of this world; specially

नूनं मायाखलं चैतन्याध्वेप्रि जगदुगृति ॥ 50 ॥

सर्वेत्रे देकताकार्थि का वातों-न्यस्य भृपते ।

He is the only One, Supreme in the creation of the Gods. Now when Māyā exercises such a powerful influence on Viṣṇu, what wonder is there that the other ordinary beings would be deluded by Her?

ज्ञानिनामयि चेतांसि परमा प्रकृति: किल ॥ 51 ॥

बलादाकृष्य मोहाय प्रपछति महीपने ।

O King! That Highest Prakṛti draws away violently the hearts of the wise and drags them down into the ocean of world.

यया व्यानिद्र सर्वे भगवल्या चराबगम् ॥ 52 ॥

मोहाद्र जान्तद सेव बन्यमोक्षप्रदा सदा ।

That Omnipresent Bhagavatī is ever the cause of bondage of all when She casts Her net of delusion and She is again ever the cause of liberation when She imparts Her knowledge to them.

राजोवाच

भगवबृहि मे तस्य: खरूषं बलमुतमम् ॥ 53 ॥

उत्पत्तिकाणं चापि स्थानं परमकं च वत् ।

The King said: “O Brahma! What is the nature of Her? and what is the Supreme Force? What is the Cause of this creation? And where is Her highest place? Kindly narrate all these to me.

ऋरिष्टवाच

न चोत्पतिरनादित्वापुव तस्याः कदाचन ॥ 54 ॥

नित्यैव सा पा दैवी कारणानां च कारणम् ।

The Rşi said: “O King! She is beginningless; therefore She had no origin at any time; that Highest Devi is Eternal and She is always the Cause of all Causes. (How then can any other be powerful like Her).

वर्तते सर्वभूतेषु शक्ति: सर्वात्मना नृप ॥ ५५ ॥

गववच्छक्तिहीनस्तु प्राणी भवति सर्वथा ।

O King! She resides in all the beings as the

Book V Chapter XXXIII

essential vital Force; deprived of that Force, every being is reduced a dead carcass.

विष्छक्ति: सर्वभूतेषु रूपे तत्यासदेव है ॥ 5 6 ॥

आविष्यवित्तोगचौते देवानां कार्यसिद्धये ।

She is pervading as the Universal Force of Consciousness in all the beings. The form of this Śakti (Force) is the form made up of consciousness itself, the Brahma. (For the force of Fire is Fire itself; it is not seen in any other form).

यदा सुवर्तीत तां देवा मनुजाश्व विशेषाने ॥ 57 ॥

प्रभुभविति भृतानां दुःखानागय चाधिक्या ।

Her appearances and disappearances at times are simply for serving the purposes of the Gods. O King! Whenever the Devas and men worship Her, Ambikā makes Her appearance visible to destroy their pains and sufferings.

नानाङपधरा देही नानाशक्तिस्मतिता ॥ 58 ॥

आतिबर्षिति कार्यार्थ स्थेच्छया परमेक्षी ।

She assumes various forms and possesses various powers. That Highest Iśvarī comes down of Her free will to serve Her some purpose or other. देवाधीना न सा देही यथा सर्वे सुरा नृर ॥ 59 ॥

न कालक्षणा नित्यं पुरुषाध्वरातिनी ।

अकतां पुरुषो रहा दूर्घं सर्वरिंदर जगत् ॥ 60 ॥

She is not like the Devas, under the control of Daiva or Fate; She is not under the influence of Time (as both Fate and Time are created by Her). She puts always every being to action according to his capacity. Puruṣa is not the Doer; He is simply the Witness.

दूर्यस्य जननी सेव देवी सदसद्वातिका ।

पुरुषं रंजयलेका कृत्वा बढ़ाण्डनाटकम् ॥ 61 ॥

This whole Universe is the object seen. That Devi is the Mother of all this that is witnessed. She is the Manifested and She is the Unmanifested and She is the Effect also. She alone is the Actress and manifests thus the world and thus gives the colouring to the Puruṣa.

रॉजते पुरुषे सर्वे संहरल्पितरंहसा ।

तया निमितभपृताते ब्रदायिषणामहेक्षरा: ॥ 62 ॥

कल्पिता: सव्यकाव्येयु प्रेगता तीलात्य त्वयी ।

When the Puruṣa is coloured thus, She destroys quickly these worlds. It is said that Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa are respectively the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of the world; but this is merely a statement; really they are merely instruments in Her hands.

स्वांगे तेषु समारोष्य कृतातसे बल्वतरा: ॥ 63 ॥

दत्ताश्र शनकसदेभ्यो गीर्वेर्मीर्गिरिता सत्या ।

Bhagavati has created them in reality for Her Pastime and stationed them in their respective posts. She has bestowed to them Her part manifestations, i.e., Sarasvati to Brahmā, Lakṣmī to Viṣṇu, and Girijā to Maheśa and has thus rendered them more powerful.

ते तो ध्यापनि देयोगा: पुजपत्नि पर्ग मुदा ॥ 64 ॥

जात्या सर्वेश्रीं गर्जिके सृष्टिश्वितिनागरीनाय ।

एतते सर्वमाद्यातं देर्वीमाहात्ययुतमम् ।

मम बुद्धमनुसारेण नानं जानाभि भुपते ॥ 65 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीधीगानते महापुराणे पछामकल्पे

यर्षिवर्शो3यायः ॥ 133 ॥

They, the lords of the Devas, always meditate and worship Her as Creatrix, Preservrix and Destructrix of this Universe. O King! I have thus described to you, as far as my intelligence and knowledge go, the holy greatness and the excellent glory of Her (in reality, I have not been able to come to the end of it).

“Aim, Hrim, Klim Cāmundāyai bicche” is the (9) nine lettered mantra.

Here ends the Thirty-third Clapter of the Fifth Book on the description of the greatness of the Devi in Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāpam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

