[Ch 29 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Please hear attentively about the extraordinary boon that was given by Mahādeva, the God of gods, to the great warrior Raktabhja.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Please hear attentively about the extraordinary boon that was given by Mahādeva, the God of gods, to the great warrior, Raktabīja.

[Ch 29 Verse 2-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whenever a drop of blood from the body of that great warrior will drop on the surface of the earth, immediately will arise innumerable Dānavas, equal in form and power to him; thus the Deva Rudra granted the Demon the wonderful boon.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whenever a drop of blood from the body of that great warrior will drop on the surface of the earth, immediately will arise innumerable Dānavas, equal in form and power to him; thus the Deva Rudra granted the Demon the wonderful boon.

[Ch 29 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus elated with the boon, he entered into the battle-field with great force in order to kill Kālika with Ambikā Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus elated with the boon, he entered into the battlefield with great force in order to kill Kālikā with Ambikā Devī.

[Ch 29 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the Vaisṇavi Śakti, lotus-eyed seated on the bird Garuda, the Demon struck Her with a violent weapon (named Śakti).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the Vaiṣṇavī Śakti, lotus-eyed, seated on the bird Garuḍa, the Demon struck Her with a violent weapon (named Śakti).

[Ch 29 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She then baffled the weapon by Her club and hurled Sudarśana disc on the great Asura Raktabīja.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She then baffled the weapon by Her club and hurled Sudarśana disc on the great Asura Raktabīja.

[Ch 29 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus struck by the disc, blood began to ooze out from his body as the red stream of soft red sandstone comes out of a mountain-top.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus struck by the disc, blood began to ooze out from his body as the red stream of soft red sandstone comes out of a mountain-top.

[Ch 29 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Wherever on the surface of the earth drops of blood fell from his body, then and there sprang out thousands and thousands of demons like him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Wherever on the surface of the earth drops of blood fell from his body, then and there sprang out thousands and thousands of demons like him.

[Ch 29 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indrāni, the wife of Indra, became very angry and struck the terrible Raktabīja with his thunderbolt.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indrāṇi, the wife of Indra, became very angry and struck the terrible Raktabīja with his thunderbolt.

[Ch 29 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Streams of blood then began to ooze out form his body. No sooner the drops of blood fell from the Demon's body, than were instantaneously born from the blood many powerful Asuras, of similar forms, having weapons and hard to be conquered in battle.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Streams of blood then began to ooze out from his body. No sooner the drops of blood fell from the Demon’s body, than were instantaneously born from the blood many powerful Asuras, of similar forms, having similar weapons and hard to be conquered in battle.

[Ch 29 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmānī then becoming enraged stuck at him with the staff of Brahmā with greater force. Mahesvarī rent the Dānava asunder by striking him with Her trident.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmāṇī then becoming enraged struck at him with the staff of Brahmā with greater force. Māheśvarī rent the Dānava asunder by striking him with Her trident.

[Ch 29 Verse 12-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārasinjhi pierced the Asura with Her nails; Vārāhī struck at him with Her teeth. Then the Dānava becoming angry shot at them all with sharpened arrows and pierced them all. Thus when the Mātrkā Devīs were pierced by the club and other various weapons of that great Asura, they got very angry and pierced the Dānavas in return with shots of arrows. Kaumārī, too, struck at his breast with Her weapon, named Śakti. The Dānava then got angry and hurled on them multitude of arrows and began to pierce them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► pierced the Asura with Her nails; Vārāhī struck at him with Her teeth. Then the Dānava becoming angry shot at them all with sharpened arrows and pierced them all. Thus when the Mātrikā Devīs were pierced by the club and other various weapons of that great Asura, they got very angry and pierced the Dānavas in return with shots of arrows. Kaumārī, too, struck at his breast with Her weapon, named Śakti. The Dānavas then got angry and hurled on them multitude of arrows and began to pierce them.

[Ch 29 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The Caṇḍika Devi, getting angry, cut off his weapons into pieces and shot violently at him other arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The Caṇḍikā Devī, getting angry, cut off his weapons into pieces and shot violently at him other arrows.

[Ch 29 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Thus struck by severe blows, when blood began to flow in profuser quantities from his body, thousands and thousands of Dānavas resembling Raktabijā sprang out instantly from it.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Thus struck by severe blows, when blood began to flow in profuse quantities from his body, thousands and thousands of Dānavas resembling Raktabīja sprang out instantly from it.

[Ch 29 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So much so, that the heavens were all covered over with Raktabijtas that sprang up from the blood. They all covered all over their bodies with coats of armour, began to fight terribly with weapons in their hands.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So much so, that the heavens were all covered over with Raktabījas that sprang up from the blood. They all covered all over their bodies with coats of armour, began to fight terribly with weapons in their hands.

[Ch 29 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the Devas, seeing that innumerable Raktabijas were striking the Devi, became very much frightened and were distressed with sorrow.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the Devas, seeing that the innumerable Raktavījas were striking the Devī, became very much frightened and were distressed with sorrow.

[Ch 29 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They began to talk with each other with sorrowful countenances that thousands and thousands of huge bodied warriors were springing from the blood. These were all very powerful; so how could they be destroyed!
NEW CORR ENG ──► They began to talk with each other with sorrowful countenances that thousands and thousands of huge bodied warriors were springing from the blood. These were all very powerful; so how could they be destroyed!

[Ch 29 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In this battle-field there were now left only the Mātrikās, Kālikā, and Caṇḍikā. It would be certainly extremely difficult for them to conquer all these Dānavas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In this battlefield there were now left only the Mātrikās, Kālikā, and Caṇḍikā. It would be certainly extremely difficult for them to conquer all these Dānavas.

[Ch 29 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And if at that moment, Sumbha and Niśumbha were to join them with his army, certainly a great catastrophe would occur.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And if at that moment, Śumbha and Niśumbha were to join them with his army, certainly a great catastrophe would occur.

[Ch 29 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! When the Devas were thus extremely anxious, out of terror, Ambikā Devi said to the lotus-eyed Kālī: “O Cāmuṇḍā! Open out your mouth quickly, and no sooner I strike Raktabija with weapons, you would drink off the blood as fast as it runs out of his body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! When the Devas were thus extremely anxious, out of terror, Ambikā Devī said to the lotus-eyed Kālī :-- “O Cāmuṇḍā! Open out your mouth quickly, and no sooner I strike Raktabīja with weapons, you would drink off the blood as fast as it runs out of his body.

[Ch 29 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Instantly I will kill those Dānavas sprung form the blood with sharpened arrows, clubs, swords and Mūsalas; and you would then be able to devour them all at your will, and, then, roam in this field as you like.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Instantly I will kill those Dānavas sprung from the blood with sharpened arrows, clubs, swords and Muṣalas; and you would then be able to devour them all at your will, and, then, roam in this field as you like.

[Ch 29 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Large-eyed One! You would drink off all the jets of blood in such a way that not a drop of it escapes and falls on the ground.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Large-eyed One! You would drink off all the jets of blood in such a way that not a drop of it escapes and falls on the ground.

[Ch 29 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And then when they will all be devoured, no more Dānavas would be able to spring. Thus they will surely be extirpated; otherwise they will never be destroyed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And then when they will all be devoured, no more Dānavas would be able to spring. Thus they will surely be extirpated; otherwise they will never be destroyed.

[Ch 29 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Let me begin to strike blows after blows on Raktabija and you better drink off quickly all the blood, being intent on destroying the forces.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Let me begin to strike blows after blows on Raktabīja and you better drink off quickly all the blood, being intent on destroying the forces.

[Ch 29 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Cāmunḍaī Thus, the Dānavas being all exterminated, we will hand over to the Indra, the lord of the Devas, his Heavens without any enemy; and, thus, we can go peacefully and happily to our own places.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Camuṇḍe! Thus, the Dānavas being all exterminated, we will hand over to the Indra, the lord of the Devas, his Heavens without any enemy; and, thus, we can go peacefully and happily to our own places.”

[Ch 29 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! The Cāmunā Devī, of furious strength, hearing thus the Devi's words began to drink the jets of blood coming out of the body of Raktabija.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! The Cāmuṇḍā Devī, of furious strength, hearing thus the Devī’s words began to drink the jets of blood coming out of the body of Raktabīja.

[Ch 29 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi Ambikā began to cut the Demon's body into pieces and Cāmuṇḍā, of thin belly, went on devouring them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī Ambikā began to cut the Demon’s body into pieces and Cāmuṇḍā, of thin belly, went on devouring them.

[Ch 29 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Raktabīja, becoming angry, struck Cāmuṇḍā with her club. But though She was thus hurt severely, She drank off the blood and then devoured all the limbs thereof.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Raktabīja, becoming angry, struck Cāmuṇḍā with his club. But though She was thus hurt severely, She drank off the blood and then devoured all the limbs thereof.

[Ch 29 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Thus Kālīkā Devi drank off the blood of all other powerful wicked Dānava Raktabīja that sprang out of the blood. Ambikā thus destroyed them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Thus Kālikā Devī drank off the blood of all other powerful wicked Dānava Raktabījas that sprang out of the blood. Ambikā thus destroyed them.

[Ch 29 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus, all the Dānavas, created out of the blood were devoured; then, there was left, lastly, the real Raktabīja Ambikā Devi then cut him asunder into pieces by Her exe and thus killed him. Thus, when the dreadful Raktabīja was slain in the battle, the Dānavas fled away trembling with fear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus, all the Dānavas, created out of the blood were devoured; then, there was left, lastly, the real Raktabīja. Ambikā Devī then cut him asunder into pieces by Her axe and thus killed him. Thus, when the dreadful Raktabīja was slain in the battle, the Dānavas fled away trembling with fear.

[Ch 29 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Without any weapons, covered all over their bodies with blood, and void of consciousness they uttered dumb confounded “Alas! Alas! What has happened, what has happened.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Without any weapons, covered all over their bodies with blood, and void of consciousness they uttered, dumb confounded “Alas! Alas! What has happened, what has happened.”

[Ch 29 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus crying, they told their King Śumbha thus: "O King of Kings! Ambikā Devi has killed Raktabīja and Cāmuṇḍā has drunk off all their blood.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus crying, they told their King Śumbha thus :-- “O King of Kings! Ambikā Devī has killed Raktabīja and Cāmuṇḍā has drunk off all their blood.

[Ch 29 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The carrier (Vāhana) of Devi, the powerful ferocious Lion killed other powerful warriors and Kālī devoured the remaining soldiers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The carrier (Vāhana) of Devī, the powerful ferocious Lion killed other powerful warriors and Kali devoured the remaining soldiers.

[Ch 29 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the Dānavas! We have fled and come to you to give the news of the battle and to describe the wonderful doings of that Caṇḍikā Devi in the battle-field.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the Dānavas! We have fled and come to you to give the news of the battle and to describe the wonderful doings of that Caṇḍikā Devī in the battlefield.

[Ch 29 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! In our opinion, no one will be able to conquer that Lady, be he a Daitya, Gandharva, Asura, Yakṣa, Pannaga, Cāraṇa, Rāksāsa, or an Uraga.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! In our opinion, no one will be able to conquer that Lady, be he a Daitya, Dānava, Gandarbha, Asura, Yakṣa, Pannaga, Cāraṇa, Rākṣasa, or an Uraga.

[Ch 29 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King of Kings! The other Goddesses, Indrānī and others, have come to the battle, on their own carriers respectively and are fighting with various weapons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King of Kings! The other Goddesses, Indrāṇi and others, have come to the battle, on their own carriers respectively and are fighting with various weapons.

[Ch 29 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the Dānavas! The Dānava forces are all slain by them with the excellent weapons in their hands. Even Raktabīja has been slain in no time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the Dānavas! The Dānava forces are all slain by them with the excellent weapons in their hands. Even Raktabīja has been slain in no time.

[Ch 29 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That Lion, of indomitable prowess, killed the Rāksaṣas in the battle; The Devī alone is hard to conquer; how much more would it be impossible to conquer Her, when She has been joined with other goddesses.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That Lion, of indomitable prowess, killed the Rākṣasas in the battle; The Devī alone is hard to conquer; how much more would it be impossible to conquer Her, when She has been joined with other goddesses.

[Ch 29 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So consult with the ministers and do what is reasonable. In our opinion it is better to make treaty with Her and quit your cinnity.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So consult with the ministers and do what is reasonable. In our opinion it is better to make treaty with Her and quit your enmity.

[Ch 29 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Think over the fact that Lady destroyed all the Dānavas and at last drank off the blood of Raktabīja and at last killed him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Think over the fact that that Lady destroyed all the Dānavas and at last drank off the blood of Raktabīja and

[Ch 29 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What on earth can be more wonderful than this? O King! The Devi Ambikā killed all the other Daityas and Cāmunḍā devoured their blood, flesh, and all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What on earth can be more wonderful than this? O King! The Devī Ambikā killed all the other Daityas and Cāmuṇḍā devoured their blood, flesh, and all.

[Ch 29 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Considering all this, it is now better for us to serve the Devi Ambikā or fly away to Patāla. No more fighting is desirable.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Considering all this, it is now better for us to serve the Devī Ambikā or fly away to Pātāla. No more fighting is desirable.

[Ch 29 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She is not an ordinary woman; she is Mahā Māyā, there is not the least doubt in this. Only to serve the cause of the Gods, She has manifested Herself and is now destroying the Rāksasas' race.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She is not an ordinary woman; She is Mahā Māyā, there is not the least doubt in this. Only to serve the cause of the Gods, She has manifested Herself and is now destroying the Rākṣasaś race.”

[Ch 29 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Hearing thus, Śumbha got confounded by Kāla (Death), as his end was coming nigh, and said the following words, his lips quivering with anger.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Hearing thus, Śumbha got confounded by Kāla (Death), as his end was coming nigh, and said the following words, his lips quivering with anger.

[Ch 29 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "You are struck with fear; so you all take the refuge of Candikā or fly down to Pātāla; but I will kill Her with all my exertion and effort.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You are struck with fear; so you all take the refuge of Caṇḍikā or fly down to Pātāla; but I will kill Her with all my exertion and effort.

[Ch 29 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I conquered all the hosts of Devas and I have enjoyed their kingdoms; shall I now, out of the fear of one Lady, fly and enter into the Pātāla.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I conquered all the hosts of Devas and I have enjoyed their kingdom; shall I now, out of the fear of one Lady, fly and enter into the Pātāla.

[Ch 29 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► All my attendants, Raktabija and other heroes, are now slain in the battle and is it possible that I will now fly away out of the sake of preserving my life only.
NEW CORR ENG ──► All my attendants, Raktabīja and other heroes, are now slain in the battle and is it possible that I will now fly away out of the sake of preserving my life only.

[Ch 29 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See! The death of all the beings is ordained by Kāla and it is unavoidable. No sooner a being is born, he is liable to the fear of death.
NEW CORR ENG ──► See! The death of all the beings is ordained by Kāla and it is unavoidable. No sooner a being is born, he is liable to the fear of death.

[Ch 29 Verse 53-54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And if I cannot kill Her, I will not then return any more. O Best of warriors! Better stand on my side with all your forces and kill that Lady in no time, with sharp arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And if I cannot kill Her, I will not then return any more. O Best of warriors! Better stand on my side with all your forces and kill that Lady in no time, with sharp arrows.

[Ch 29 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nisūmbha said: "Today I will go to the battle and slaying that Kālīkā, will shortly return here with Ambikā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Niśumbha said :-- Today I will go to the battle and slaying that Kālikā, will shortly return here with Ambikā.

[Ch 29 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Do not think at all for that Lady; see my world-conquering strength and look at that weak woman; there is a vast difference.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Do not think at all for that Lady; see my world-conquering strength and look at that weak woman; there is a vast difference.

[Ch 29 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Cast aside your this great mental anxiety and trouble. Enjoy, O Brother, excellent things. I will bring that dignified Lady with all honours before you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Cast aside your this great mental anxiety and trouble. Enjoy, O Brother, excellent things. I will bring that dignified Lady with all honours before you.

[Ch 29 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! You ought not to go to the battle when I am alive. I will presently go to the fight and bring for you that Lady as a sign of our victory.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! You ought not to go to the battle when I am alive. I will presently go to the fight and bring for you that Lady as a sign of our victory.

[Ch 29 Verse 59-61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Thus saying, the younger brother, proud of his own strength went hurriedly to the battle-field, mounting on his big chariot. He was protected all over is body his coat of armour and he was well provided with various weapons and all other accoutrements of war. The bards began to sing hymns to him and various other propitious ceremonies were being performed. Here ends the Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of Raktabíja in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Thus saying, the younger brother, proud of his own strength, went hurriedly to the battlefield, mounting on his big chariot. He was protected all over his body by his coat of armour and he was well provided with various weapons and all other accoutrements of war. The bards began to sing hymns to him and various other propitious ceremonies were being performed. Here ends the Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of Raktabīja in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
