CHAPTER XXIX

On the Killing of Raktabija

यास उचाच

वरदानिभंदं तस्य दानवस्य शिवार्थितम् ।

अत्यब्धुततरं राज्यबुणु ततप्रबंधीयह्म् ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Please hear attentively about the extraordinary boon that was given by

Mahādeva, the God of gods, to the great warrior Raktabhja.

तस्य देहात्कर्विदुर्घदा पतति भूतते ।

सभ्यतन्ति दैत्यास्तदुपास्ततयात्राकमा: ॥ 2 ॥

असंख्याता महावीर्यां दानवा रक्तस्म्यवा: ।

प्रभर्विविति क्रंण दानोउसत्यबढ़तो वर: ॥ ३ ॥

Whenever a drop of blood from the body of that great warrior will drop on the surface of the earth, immediately will arise innumerable Dānavas, equal in form and power to him; thus the Deva Rudra granted the Demon the wonderful boon.

स तेन वरादानेन दर्पितः क्रोधसंयुतः ।

अध्यमानातसा संखले हन्तु देवीं सकालिकाम् ॥ 4 ॥

Thus elated with the boon, he entered into the battle-field with great force in order to kill Kālika with Ambikā Devi.

स दूर्वा वैषाणीं शक्ति गरुकीपरि संश्विताम् ।

गल्क्या जघान दैश्येन्द्रस्तां वै कमललोचनाम् ॥ 5 ॥

Seeing the Vaisṇavi Śakti, lotus-eyed seated on the bird Garuda, the Demon struck Her with a violent weapon (named Śakti).

गद्या वारयामास गर्फिकः सा शफिरसंयुता ।

आतडयच्च चक्रेण रक्तबीजं महापुरम् ॥ 6 ॥

She then baffled the weapon by Her club and hurled Sudarśana disc on the great Asura Raktabīja.

रधागतदेहानु बहु सुसाव शोणितम् ।

वज्राहतिरिः: श्रृगाधिरांरा इव गैरिका: ॥ 7 ॥

Thus struck by the disc, blood began to ooze out from his body as the red stream of soft red sandstone comes out of a mountain-top.

यत्र यत्र यदा भूमौ पतत्ति तर्कविद्वः ।

समुतस्थुस्तदाकारः पुरुषाश्र सहस्रशः ॥ 8 ॥

Wherever on the surface of the earth drops of blood fell from his body, then and there sprang out thousands and thousands of demons like him.

ऐ.झी तमसुं घोरं घजेशाणिबजघन च ।

रत्कबीजं कृधारिखा नि:ससार च शोगिणा ॥ 9 ॥

Indrāni, the wife of Indra, became very angry and struck the terrible Raktabīja with his thunderbolt.

ततस्तल्लजाज्ञाता रत्कीजा हानेकशः ।

तद्वीयोर्षच तदाकारा: सायुधा युद्धुदर्भेदः ॥ 10 ॥

Streams of blood then began to ooze out form his body. No sooner the drops of blood fell from the Demon's body, than were instantaneously born from the blood many powerful Asuras, of similar forms, having weapons and hard to be conquered in battle.

बह्वाणी बह्वायईन कृपिता हहनदभूभूम ।

माहेश्री त्रिगूलेने दाययामास दानवम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Brahmānī then becoming enraged stuck at him with the staff of Brahmā with greater force. Mahesvarī rent the Dānava asunder by striking him with Her trident.

नारसिंही नखाघातैरत विद्याथ महासुरम् ।

अहन्नुपडयातेन कुंद्रा तं गछासाधम् ॥ 12 ॥

कौभारी च त्वा शक्यता वसुस्येनमताडयत् ।

सोप्रि कुब्दः शगसारित्विंभेद निजीर्शेतु ता: ॥ 13 ॥

गदाशक्तिग्रहरितु मानु: सर्वो: पृथवसुयक् ।

शक्तयवं तशयातेर्विथ्युस्तत्यकोपितः ॥ 14 ॥

Nārasinjhi pierced the Asura with Her nails; Vārāhī struck at him with Her teeth. Then the Dānava becoming angry shot at them all with sharpened arrows and pierced them all. Thus when the Mātrkā Devīs were pierced by the club and other various weapons of that great Asura, they got very angry and pierced the Dānavas in return with shots of arrows. Kaumārī, too, struck at his breast with Her weapon, named Śakti. The Dānava then got angry and hurled on them multitude of arrows and began to pierce them.

तस्य सश्वाणि चित्रद्रेच चधिडका स्वशैर: जितः ।

जवानान्यैक्ष विशिष्ठेयं देवी कुविता भुगणम् ॥ 15 ॥

O King! The Caṇḍika Devi, getting angry, cut off his weapons into pieces and shot violently at him other arrows.

तस्व देहाच्च सुसाव कधिर बहुधा तु यत् ।

तस्मात्तस्वरुगाः शूरा: प्रगुतासन्सहस्वः ॥ १ ६ ॥

O King! Thus struck by severe blows, when blood began to flow in profuser quantities from his body, thousands and thousands of Dānavas resembling Raktabijā sprang out instantly from it.

Book V Chapter XXIX

रत्कबीजैर्गेब्ज्ञापतं द्वितीयसमुद्धेः ।

सत्रादै: सायुधैः कामं कुर्वैद्धरुद्धमद्धुन् ॥ 17 ॥

So much so, that the heavens were all covered over with Raktabijtas that sprang up from the blood. They all covered all over their bodies with coats of armour, began to fight terribly with weapons in their hands.

प्रहरंतक्ष तान्ट्यहा रक्तबीजान्नेकशः ।

यथभीतः सुगतेसंविधणणा: शोककर्षितः ॥ 18 ॥

Then the Devas, seeing that innumerable Raktabijas were striking the Devi, became very much frightened and were distressed with sorrow.

कंयमदा क्षयं दैत्या गमिध्यन्ति सहस्रणः ।

महाकाया महावीयीं दानवा तक्सम्बवाः ॥ 19 ॥

They began to talk with each other with sorrowful countenances that thousands and thousands of huge bodied warriors were springing from the blood. These were all very powerful; so how could they be destroyed!

एकैय चौड़काउग्रानित तथा काली च माततः ।

तृगाभिर्वानतः संबैं जेतलाः कटभेव तत् ॥ 20 ॥

In this battle-field there were now left only the Mātrikās, Kālikā, and Caṇḍikā. It would be certainly extremely difficult for them to conquer all these Dānavas.

निरूपभो वारश रूपभो वा सहसा बनसंकृतः ।

आगामधिति संग्रामे ततोउनर्थ महान्यचेत् ॥ 21 ॥

And if at that moment, Sumbha and Niśumbha were to join them with his army, certainly a great catastrophe would occur.

व्यास उवाच

एवं देवा भयोद्विनाड़ितातामापुर्महन्ताम।

यदा तदाधिक्वां प्राक काली कमललोचनाम ॥ 22 ॥

वायण्डे कृक विस्तीर्णे वदर्थे वलिता भृम्गे ।

मच्छसपातस्मघृतं कर्धिरं पिब सत्वा ॥ 23 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When the Devas were thus extremely anxious, out of terror, Ambikā Devi said to the lotus-eyed Kālī: “O Cāmuṇḍā! Open out your mouth quickly, and no sooner I strike

Raktabija with weapons, you would drink off the blood as fast as it runs out of his body.

भक्षयन्ती चर रणे दानवानघ कामतः ।

ह्निथ्वायि शरैस्तीक्षौर्णद्विसमुसलैस्तथा ॥ 24 ॥

Instantly I will kill those Dānavas sprung form the blood with sharpened arrows, clubs, swords and Mūsalas; and you would then be able to devour them all at your will, and, then, roam in this field as you like.

तथा कुरु विशालाश्रि यान तद्धिपरस्य च ।

बिदुर्मारं यथा भूयां न पतेदीप सम्पतन् ॥ 25 ॥

O Large-eyed One! You would drink off all the jets of blood in such a way that not a drop of it escapes and falls on the ground.

भक्ष्यमाणास्तद दैत्य व नोचल्यन्ति चापरे ।

एवमेभां क्षयो नूनं भविष्यति न चान्यथा ॥ 26 ॥

And then when they will all be devoured, no more Dānavas would be able to spring. Thus they will surely be extirpated; otherwise they will never be destroyed.

घातयिष्याम्यं दैत्यं लयं भक्षय च सत्वरा ।

विचन्ती क्षततं सर्वे चत्मानानर्शिसंक्षये ॥ 27 ॥

Let me begin to strike blows after blows on Raktabija and you better drink off quickly all the blood, being intent on destroying the forces.

इत्यं दैत्यमयं कृत्वा दत्ता राज्यं सुरातयम् ।

इज्ञाय सुसिंत्यं सर्वे गायिष्यायो यथासुखम् ॥ 28 ॥

O Cāmunḍaī Thus, the Dānavas being all exterminated, we will hand over to the Indra, the lord of the Devas, his Heavens without any enemy; and, thus, we can go peacefully and happily to our own places.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्ताप्रिक्वया देवी चामुपडा चण्डविक्रम।

पपी च हातर्ज सर्वे रक्तवीज्ञगरीरजम् ॥ 29 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Cāmunā Devī, of furious strength, hearing thus the Devi's words began to drink the jets of blood coming out of the body of Raktabija.

अधिका ते जयानागु खडूगेन मुस्लेन च ।

चखाद देशगकलांशुपुखा तान्कूगेशेरी ॥ 30 ॥

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

The Devi Ambikā began to cut the Demon's body into pieces and Cāmuṇḍā, of thin belly, went on devouring them.

सोरी कुब्द्री यद्याश्रीमुपुर्भां सम्पातयन् ।

तथापि सो परवायुः झलर्न तमपश्वसन् ॥ 31 ॥

Then Raktabīja, becoming angry, struck Cāmuṇḍā with her club. But though She was thus hurt severely, She drank off the blood and then devoured all the limbs thereof.

येऊ्ये कदिरवा: कूरा तर्फजीया महावलाः ।

तेपि निष्पातिताः सर्वे भक्षिता गतशोणिताः ॥ 32 ॥

O King! Thus Kālīkā Devi drank off the blood of all other powerful wicked Dānava Raktabīja that sprang out of the blood. Ambikā thus destroyed them.

कृत्रिमा भक्षिताः सर्वे सत्य स्थापाविकोसुरः ।

सोर्पि प्रपातितो हत्या खड्योनातिविखणिताः ॥ 33 ॥

रक्तबीजे हते रौद्र ये चान्ये दानवा रणे ।

पलायनं ततः कृत्वा गतातसे भयकमित्या: ॥ 34 ॥

Thus, all the Dānavas, created out of the blood were devoured; then, there was left, lastly, the real Raktabīja Ambikā Devi then cut him asunder into pieces by Her exe and thus killed him. Thus, when the dreadful Raktabīja was slain in the battle, the Dānavas fled away trembling with fear.

हाहिति विबुवंतसे रुभ्यं प्रोचुः सुविहृतः ।

स्टिरात्कन्देश्व श्वितानखा विवेलसः ॥ 35 ॥

Without any weapons, covered all over their bodies with blood, and void of consciousness they uttered dumb confounded “Alas! Alas! What has happened, what has happened.”

राजत्रविक्वा रक्तक्रीजोसी विनिपातितः ।

वापुपडा तस्य देहानु घपी सर्वे न गोशिताम् ॥ 36 ॥

Thus crying, they told their King Śumbha thus: "O King of Kings! Ambikā Devi has killed Raktabīja and Cāmuṇḍā has drunk off all their blood.

ये चान्ये दानवाः शूरा वाहनेनातिरेहास ।

सिंहेन नित्रतः सर्वे काल्या च भक्षिताः परे ॥ 37 ॥

The carrier (Vāhana) of Devi, the powerful

ferocious Lion killed other powerful warriors and Kālī devoured the remaining soldiers.

वयं त्वां कथितुं राजजगता युद्धरेषितम् ।

चारितं च तथा देव्या: संगमे परमाद्धान् ॥ 38 ॥

O Lord of the Dānavas! We have fled and come to you to give the news of the battle and to describe the wonderful doings of that Caṇḍikā Devi in the battle-field.

अजेवेयं महाराज सर्वथा देत्यन्दानेः ।

गन्धर्वसुग्यक्षेध उपगोरागसर्षे: ॥ ३ ९ ॥

O King! In our opinion, no one will be able to conquer that Lady, be he a Daitya, Gandharva, Asura, Yakṣa, Pannaga, Cāraṇa, Rāksāsa, or an Uraga.

अन्यास्त्रियाना तेव्य इन्द्राणीप्रमुखा धृगम् ।

व्यध्याना महाराज वदिर्विपद्यैताः ॥ ४ ० ॥

O King of Kings! The other Goddesses, Indrānī and others, have come to the battle, on their own carriers respectively and are fighting with various weapons.

ताथि: सर्व हृत सेन्यं दानवानां वरायुधैः ।

रक्तबीजोंपि राजेन्द्र तस्या दिविनपिततः ॥ 4 1 ॥

O Lord of the Dānavas! The Dānava forces are all slain by them with the excellent weapons in their hands. Even Raktabīja has been slain in no time.

एकाजपि दुःसहा देवी किं पुनस्ताधिर्यिता ।

सिंहोरिप हिन्द संग्रामे राक्षसान्यितमध्यः ॥ 42 ॥

That Lion, of indomitable prowess, killed the Rāksaṣas in the battle; The Devī alone is hard to conquer; how much more would it be impossible to conquer Her, when She has been joined with other goddesses.

अतो विचार्यं सचिवैर्विषुक्त नित्रधीयताम् ।

न वैरमवना युक्ते सन्धिरेव सुखप्रद: ॥ 43 ॥

So consult with the ministers and do what is reasonable. In our opinion it is better to make treaty with Her and quit your cinnity.

आध्रधीमेदतद्धिलं यवगी हन्न त्रास्तान् ।

रक्त्रीजोरिपि निहत: पौर्त तस्यापि शोगितिण् ॥ 44 ॥

Book V Chapter XXIX

O King! Think over the fact that Lady destroyed all the Dānavas and at last drank off the blood of Raktabīja and at last killed him.

अन्य निपातिता द्विण: संग्रामेप्रिक्वका नृप ।

चानुंदया च मांसं वै भवितं सकलं रणे ॥ 4 5 ॥

What on earth can be more wonderful than this? O King! The Devi Ambikā killed all the other Daityas and Cāmunḍā devoured their blood, flesh, and all.

वरं पातालगमनं तस्या: सेवा5थावा चरा ।

न तु युद्धं महाराज कार्यमंविकया सह ॥ 4 6 ॥

Considering all this, it is now better for us to serve the Devi Ambikā or fly away to Patāla. No more fighting is desirable.

न नारी प्राकृतता होया देकावार्यैसाधिनी ।

मार्येय प्रवला देरी क्षयन्तीयमुपचिता ॥ 47 ॥

She is not an ordinary woman; she is Mahā Māyā, there is not the least doubt in this. Only to serve the cause of the Gods, She has manifested Herself and is now destroying the Rāksasas' race.

व्यास उवाच

इति तेषां वचतल्यं श्रुचा कालविधोहितः ।

पुयुषुः प्रत्युवाचेदं शुचपः प्रसूक्रितात्पर: ॥ 48 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing thus, Śumbha got confounded by Kāla (Death), as his end was coming nigh, and said the following words, his lips quivering with anger.

शुभ्म उवाच

यूयं गच्छत पातालं शरणं वा भयातुतः ।

हनिष्यान्यहमदैय तां च तांश सपुवतः ॥ 49 ॥

"You are struck with fear; so you all take the refuge of Candikā or fly down to Pātāla; but I will kill Her with all my exertion and effort.

वित्ता सर्वानुसानाजी कृतावार्ज्यं सुयुकलम् ।

कथं नारीभदोघिनः पातालं प्रविश्याम्बून ॥ 50 ॥

I conquered all the hosts of Devas and I have enjoyed their kingdoms; shall I now, out of the fear of one Lady, fly and enter into the Pātāla.

निहत्य पार्वदानस्वान् रत्क्रीजमुखान् रणे ।

प्राणाजाणाय गच्छामि हिला किं विपुलं यशः ॥ 51 ॥

All my attendants, Raktabija and other heroes, are now slain in the battle and is it possible that I will now fly away out of the sake of preserving my life only.

मरणे त्विनिवार्ये श्राणिनां कालकल्पित्यम् ।

तद्यं जन्मोपोषन्तं त्यजेनको तुर्वर्णे यशः ॥ 52 ॥

See! The death of all the beings is ordained by Kāla and it is unavoidable. No sooner a being is born, he is liable to the fear of death.

निरूपभर्ते गतिय्यामि यशाकडो रणातिरे ।

हत्वा तामागतिथ्यामि नागतिथ्यमि चान्यथा ॥ 53 ॥

How can a man, then, out of fear of death, quit all his name and fame? O Niśumbha! I will now go immediately to the battle, mounting on my chariot and will return after slaying Her in battle. त्वं तु सेनायुतो वीर पाणिण्याहो भवस्य मे ।

तरसा तां गरेस्तीक्षौर्निरीं नय यमालये ॥ 54 ॥

And if I cannot kill Her, I will not then return any more. O Best of warriors! Better stand on my side with all your forces and kill that Lady in no time, with sharp arrows.

निरुभ्म सजाच

अहमदा इनिष्यामी पाला दुर्धी च कालिकाम् ।

आगमिष्याम्बट शीर्घे गृहीला तामथीविकाम् ॥ 55 ॥

Nisūmbha said: "Today I will go to the battle and slaying that Kālīkā, will shortly return here with Ambikā.

मा चित्तां कुक राजेन्द्र वसाकायस्तु कारणे ।

क्वेषा बाला क्व मे बाहुर्वीर विश्वशंकाम् ॥ 56 ॥

O King! Do not think at all for that Lady; see my world-conquering strength and look at that weak woman; there is a vast difference.

त्वक्वातिं विश्वां धानभूश्व योगानुभात्मान ।

आनयिष्यान्छे कामं मानिर्मी मानसंयुताम् ॥ 57 ॥

Cast aside your this great mental anxiety and trouble. Enjoy, O Brother, excellent things. I will bring that dignified Lady with all honours before you.

मायि तिश्रित ते राजन युर्फे गमनं रणे ।

गत्वाड्मानयिष्यामि तवार्थे वै जयधियम् ॥ 58 ॥

O King! You ought not to go to the battle when I am alive. I will presently go to the fight and bring for you that Lady as a sign of our victory.

ध्यास उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा भारतं ज्येषुं कनीयावलपहितः ।

रथाभास्थाय विपुलं सनझदः स्वबलावृतः ॥ 59 ॥

जगाम तस्मा तूर्णं संगरे कृतमंगलः ।

संस्तुतो बन्स्युतैंध सायुधः सपरिक्रतः ॥ 60 ॥

इति शीमद्वीभाग्यतो महापुराणो प्रह्मस्कन्धे

एकानोविशोर्धया: ॥61॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus saying, the younger brother, proud of his own strength went hurriedly to the battle-field, mounting on his big chariot. He was protected all over is body his coat of armour and he was well provided with various weapons and all other accoutrements of war. The bards began to sing hymns to him and various other propitious ceremonies were being performed.

Here ends the Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Fifth

Book on the killing of Raktabíja in

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

