CHAPTER XIII

On the Above Fight

इन्ट उवाच

साहर्भ कृतवान् राजा पूर्वे यत्कथितो मखः ।

वक्राणाय प्रतिज्ञातः पुर्जे कृत्वा पशुं ग्रियम् ॥ १ ॥

Indra said: “O Prince! The King Harisācandra promised before to Varuna that he would solemnise propitiation the great Naramedha sacrifice when he would offer his own son to be immolated.

गते तवि चिता पुत्र बद्धया यूरोउष्ण: पुनः ।

पर्जुं कृता महाबुद्धे वधिय्वित् व्यवाहुतः ॥ 2 ॥

O Prince! You are very intelligent; can't you grasp this idea that your father has become merciless due to his suffering in this illness and no sooner you go there than he will make you the victim and tie you to the sacrificial post when you will be slaughtered.

इर्थे निशिद्धस्तनुः श्रोक्षणामिततेजसा ।

स्थिततरनैव मायोगीमायया मोहितो भूषण। ॥ ३ ॥

The indomitable Indra thus prohibiting the son, began to stay there deluded by the Māyā of the great Mahā Māyā.

यदा पुनः पुनः शुत्वा पितरं रोगपीक्षितम् ।

गमनाय मति चके तदंद्रः प्रत्यधेययत् ॥ 4 ॥

O King! Thus whenever the prince heard of his father's severe illness, he wanted to go to his father, Indra repeatedly used to go to him and prevent him from doing so.

हरिश्रज्ञोस्तु:खातः: प्रम्बष्टु गुरुमन्तिके ।

स्थितं वसियमेकाने सर्वईं त्रिततन्तयम् ॥ 5 ॥

On the other hand, the King Harisācandra became very much afflicted, and, seeing his family Guru all-knowing well wisher Vasistha close by, asked him:

राजोवाच

भगवन्कि कौमध्य कातोर्जम विध्याकृत: ।

ग्राहि मां दुःख्यमनं महावधिधभ्यात्मूम् ॥ 6 ॥

“O Bhagavan! What am I to do now? I am now very impatient with his agonies of this disease and am very weak; besides I am very much afraid of it. Kindly give me a good advice and save me.

वसिष्य जवाच

श्रुण राजपुचायोर्जित रोगनार्ण प्रति स्तुतः ।

त्रयोद्वगविधाः पुत्रा: कवता धर्मसिंद्रहे ॥ 7 ॥

तस्माकर्ती सुतं कृत्वा यज्ञव मव्यपुत्नम् ।

Vasisṭṭha said: “O King! There is a good remedy for the cure of your disease. It is stated in the Śāstras that the sons are of thirteen kinds Aurasa, Kṣattraja, Datrima, Kṛtrima; etc.

इयं दत्वा यथोहिष्यानयवर ऋजौतमम् ॥ 8 ॥

एवं कृते मघे घृप रोगनाणो भविष्यति ।

वरणोर्जि प्रसातात्मा भविष्यति यथासुखम् ॥ 9 ॥

Therefore pay the reasonable price and buy one good Brāhmīn boy and perform your sacrifice with that boy. O King! Thus Varuna will be pleased and you will be cured of your disease."

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः श्रुत्वा राजा प्रोवाच भनिगणम् ।

अन्वेषय महावृद्धे विषयेध्वित्यन्तः ॥ 10 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of Vasisṭha the King Harisācandra addressed his minister: "O Minister-in-Chief! You are very sharp and intelligent, therefore you better try your best and seek in my kingdom a Brāhmin boy.

कदाचित्कोटपि लोपार्थी द्विति स्वसुतं पिता ।

सामान यं दन्त चायात्यार्थयेतेउसयो ॥ १ १ ॥

In case a poor Brāhmin be willing, out of love for money, to give over his son, then give him any amount he wants and bring his son.

सर्ववैय सामानेयो यज्ञों दिज्ञालकाः ।

न कार्यों कृपणा बुद्धिस्तवा मत्कार्यहेत ॥ १२ ॥

O Minister! By all means, bring a Brāhmīn boy for this sacrifice; in other words, do not be miserly or act lazily to perform my business.

प्रार्थीनयस्तवा पुर कस्यचिद्धिक्रजवादिनः ।

रूक्षेण देहि यज्ञार्थ कर्तेक्रोस्पी पशुः किल ॥ 13 ॥

You should pray to any Brāhmin thus: Take this money and give your son, who will be sacrificed in a sacrificial ceremony as a victim."

इति संबोधितस्तेन सचिवः कार्यहितः ।

अन्वेवयामास पुरे प्राये प्राये गई गईे ।। 14।।

Thus ordered, the minister sought for a Brāhmin boy in town after town, village after village, and house after house.

एवमन्वेघनस्तस्य विषये कर्धिदातुतः ।

निर्धनस्क्षितुशार्थीवर्जीगर्जिति नामतः ॥ 15 ॥

तस्य पुरं शुर्जःशेयं मध्यमं मन्रितस्तमः ।

अनयायाम दत्त्वयं प्रार्थितं तद्धनं तदा ॥ 16 ॥

Till, at last, he came to know that in his kingdom there was a poor distressed Brāhmīn named Ajigarta, who had three sons. Then the minister gave to the Brāhmīn that he wanted and purchased his second son named Śunahṣepha and brought him before the King. And handed him over to the King, saying that this Brāhmīn boy is fit for the sacrificial victim.

समानीय शुन:गेणं सचित्व: कार्यतत्पर: ।

राजे निवेदयामास पशुयोग्यं द्विज्ञातमम् ॥ 17 ॥

The King then gladly brought the best Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas for the performance of the sacrifice, and collected all the articles requisite for the purpose.

राज़सिनुपित्तसेन विज्ञानानीय सर्वतः ।

कारयामास संभारान्ये न्याख्यों वैद्यतिभान्ने ॥ 18 ॥

प्राख्ये तु मखे तत्र विश्वामिजो महापुनि: ।

बन्दे दूद्वा गुनःशेपं निविषये रुंद तदा ॥ 19 ॥

When the sacrifice was commenced, the great Muni Viśvāmitra, seeing Śunahṣepta tied, prohibited the King and said: "O King! Do not be so bold as to sacrifice this boy; let this boy be free.

राजन्ना साहसं कार्षीपुर्वैनं द्विज्ञालकम् ।

ग्रांथीयाम्यमुब्यम्युक्ते रेज्ञा यथिष्यति ॥ 20 ॥

O long-lived One! I am asking this thing from you to day and if you obey it, certainly it will do good to you.

कन्द्वर्यं शुन:गेपः करणा मां दुनोत्यपि ।

दयावान्य व जोन्ने कुक ने वचनं नृय ॥ 21 ॥

O King! This boy Śunahśepha is crying; his cries are paining my heart and I am feeling pity for him. Hear my word and free this boy out of mercy.

परदेश्य स्थायी स्वदेहं वे द्यापराः ।

ददति क्षत्रिया: पूर्व स्वर्गकामा: शुचित्रातः ॥ 22 ॥

Book VI Chapter XIII

See! The pure-hearted Kṣatriyas, in ancient days, used to sacrifice their own bodies and thus preserve others bodies, so that they might attain the Heavens.

तं स्वेदेहस्य स्थार्थं हौस दिजसुतं बलात् ।

पार्य मा कुरु राजैद्र दयावान्यव बालके ॥ २३ ॥

And now you are killing this Brāhmīn boy forcibly so that you may preserve your own body; judge how vicious is this your act! Be merciful to this boy.

सर्वेभां सूर्णी प्रीतिदेहे वेति स्वयं नृप ।

मुंचैनं बालकं तत्मात्रमाणं यदि वे बचः ॥ 24 ॥

O King! Everyone likes his own body to the same extent; you are feeling this yourself; therefore if you take my word, then quit this boy."

व्यास उवाच

अनतट्य च तद्रावयं राजा दुःखतुते भूणम् ।

न मुप्रोच मुनिसतम्पे चुकोपातील तापास: ॥ 25 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The King Harisācandra was ailing very much; hence he did not pay any heed to the Munis words and did not quit the boy.

उपदेशं ददी तस्मै शून:ओपाय कौलिकाः ।

मनं पाणधरस्वाय द्ववान्वेदवितमः ॥ 26 ॥

Thereupon the very fiery spirited Viśvāmitra became very angry with the King. Then Viśvāmitra, the son of Kauśika, the foremost of the knowers of the Vedas, shewed mercy on Śunahśépha and gave him the “Varuna Mantram.”

शुन:गोधोपि तं मन्यमसुक्रधकर्षितः ।

स्तुतस्येण चुकोण सेभ्यन्त वरणं भुणम् ॥ 27 ॥

Śunahśépha very much afraid to lose his life, earnestly repeatedly remembered Varuna and uttered that mantram in Pluta tone (lengthened or prolonged).

सुवर्ते मुनिपुरं ते जात्वा वै यादासां पति: ।

तत्रागत्य शुनःजैपं मुभोच करणाणंवः ॥ 28 ॥

रोगहीनं नृपं कृत्ता वकणः स्वगृहं ययी ।

विश्वामित्तु ते पुरं कृतवान्योचितं पुतेः ॥ 29 ॥

Varuna, too, the ocean of mercy, knowing that the Brāhmīn boy was praising him with hymns

came up to that spot and freed Śunahśepha from his bondage and freed the King also from his disease and went back to his own abode. Thus the Maharṣi Vīsvāmitra became very glad to rescue the Muni's son from the jaws of death.

न कृतं चर्चनं रज्ञा कौशिकस्य महात्मनः ।

गेशं द्धार मनसा राजापीर स गाशित्रः ॥ ३० ॥

The King Harisćandra did not observe the words of Viśvāmitra; hence the son of Gādhi harboured within his heart anger towards the King.

एकसित्म्यमये राजा ह्यास्कड़ो वयं नतः ।

सुकरं हृताकामसृत मध्य्याङे कौशिकांतरे ॥ 31 ॥

ब्रुद्धबाहायावेशेण विश्वाधिरेण वंशितः ।

सर्वेकं प्राणितं तस्य गृहीतं राज्यमुद्धुतम् ॥ 32 ॥

One day while the King Harisācandra was riding in a forest and three, at mid-day, on the banks of the river Kauśika, when he desired to kill a boar, Visvāmitra in the garb of an old Brāhmim asked from him everything that he had, including his dominion and thus cunningly took away everything from the King.

पीवितोत्री हरिश्रान्ये चक्रान्यो नयो भुणम् ।

वसिषुः कौफिंक प्राह वने प्रापतं वद्छया ॥ 33 ॥

The Maharşi Vasistha, seeing his Yajamāna Harisāandra suffering much, became wounded and felt pain in his mind.

क्षत्रियाभ्य पुर्वैद्रे वृया ब्राह्मणायेषभृत् ।

बक्रमां वृया किं त्व गर्वे बहसि दायिक ॥ 34 ॥

One day when he casually met Visāmitra in a forest, he said: "O wicked Kṣatriya! A disgrace to your family! You have in vain put on the garb of a Brāhmin; your religion is like a crane; you are full of vanity, you boast for nothing.

कस्मात्चया नृपक्षेहो यज्ञानो मायायसौ ।

अपराधं विना जाल्य गर्गिते दुःखमद्धून ॥ 35 ॥

The best of kings, Harisācanda is my protege; he is faultless; still, O Fool! Why are you giving him so much trouble. As you are religious as a crane is religious, so take your birth as a crane."

बकध्यानपो यस्मात्समार्चं वे वको भव ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

इति शगतो वसिष्ठेन कौशिकाः प्राह तं पुनः ॥ 3 6 ॥

त्वम्यादिभंवायुम्बन्यकोर्जं यावदेव हि ।

Visvāmitra, thus cursed by Vasistha, cursed Vasistha in return, and said “O Vasistha! As long as I will remain a crane, so long you also remain as Śarāli or Adi bird.

व्यास उवाच

एवं परस्यं दत्त्वा शापं तैं कौधपीक्षिति ॥ 37 ॥

अंडजी तरसा जाती सरस्याडीकबी भूति ।

Vyāsa said: O King! The two angry Munis thus cursed each other and the two were born as Crane and Śarāli or Ādi bird.

एकस्मियादे नीई कृत्वाउसी बकरूपभक् ॥ 38 ॥

विश्वासि: स्थितस्तत दिव्ये सरसि मानते ।

The crane Visvāmitra built its nest on top of a tree on the Mānasarovara lake and began to live there.

अन्यस्मियान्धे कृत्वा सिस्छी नीडमुतमम् ॥ 39 ॥

आडीकपधरस्तथावन्योन्ये द्वेशतत्ये ।

Vasistha, too, assumed the form of an Ādī bird, and built his nest on the top of another tree and lived there. Thus the two Rsis spent their days in full enmity towards each other.

दिवे दिवे तौ संग्रामं चक्रतु: क्रोधसंयुती ॥ 40 ॥

दुःखदं सर्वतैकानां कंदमानायुभी भृणम् ।

These two birds used to shrick so terribly loud that they became a nuisance to all; They fought daily with each other.

चंचपुघप्रहरितु नखायातैः परस्यम् ॥ 41 ॥

ज्वन्तू स्तिप्रिक्लजी पुधिताविव किंगुको ।

They used to strike each other with beaks and wings and claws and thus they were covered all over their bodies with cuts and wounds and they were smeared with blood.

एवं बहुति वर्षिण पक्षिस्पधारी मुनी ॥ 42 ॥

स्थिती तत्र महाराज शापपाशेन विन्त्तौ ।

They began to look like Kirinšuka trees. Thus the two Rsis, in the shape of birds, in their states of bondage, due to each other's curse, passed many years there.

राजोवाच

कर्थ मुक्ती भुनिश्रेष्ठी शपाब्धिस्छौकिणी ॥ 43 ॥

तन्यमावश्व विषूपं परं कीतूहलं हि मे ।

Janamejaya said: O Brāhmaṇa! Kindly tell me how Vaśistha and Kauśika, the two Rsis, became free from their curses; I am very curious to hear this.

व्यास उवाच

युध्यमानायृषी दूर्वा बढ़ा लोकपितामहः ॥ 44 ॥

तत्राजगमानिभिर्वैत: सर्वैद्यापरे: ।

Vyāsa said: Brahmā, the Grandsire of his subjects, came there with all the Devas, filled with mercy, on seeing those two Rṣis at war against each other.

तावाश्राय सगकतां युद्धते विविवार्च च ॥ 4 5 ॥

ग्रापं संमोच्यामास तयोः ब्रिंत परमयम् ।

Brahmā, the Lotus-seated, made them desist from such a fight, consoled them and freed both of them from each other's curse.

ततो जप्य: सुरा: सर्वे स्थानि तिष्यपानि पचम्: ॥ 46 ॥

सत्योर्के जगामाशु हेसाकडः प्रतपायन् ।

Then the Devas went back to their own abodes and the illustrious lotus-seated Brahmā went to the Satyaloka, seated on his Swan.

विश्वामीज्यायनृर्णी वसिष्य: स्वामयं नतः ॥ 47 ॥

मिथः स्नेह ततः कृत्वा प्रजापत्युपदेशतः ।

मैत्राबकर्निपाट्येचं कृतं युद्धमाकरणम् ॥ 48 ॥

कोशिकेन समं भूप दुःखदं च परमयम् ।

को नाम मानवो लोके देवो वा दानवोर्जी चा ॥ 49 ॥

Maharşi Vasisṭṭha and Viśvāmitra became then friends and were tied with bonds of affection at the advice of Brahmā; they went back to their own Āśramas. O King! Now see, that the Maharṣi Vasisṭṭha, the son of Mitrā-Varuna, fought for nothing with Viśvāmitra, so painful to both the parties. Who, then, amongst the human beings, the Dānavas or the Devas can conquer his Ahankāra (egoism) and be always happy?

अहंकारजयं कृत्वा सर्वदा सुख्याभयंते ।

तस्मात्राजँश्रतृष्टिमूद्रमतामपि तुर्नघा ॥ ५० ॥

Book VI Chapter XIV

Therefore the Citta-Šuddhi, the purity of the heart (that purity which imparts to man the blessedness of God-vision) is very difficult even for the high-souled persons; with the greatest caution and utmost effort one has to practise for that.

यलेन साधनीया सा तिष्ठिनं निरर्थकम् ।

तिंद्यानपत:सर्व यकिषिद्वमैसाधनम् ॥ 

श्रद्धान्र विविधा प्रोक्ता साचित्की राकसी तथा।

तापसी सर्वदेषु दैहिनां धर्मकमेषु ॥ 

साचित्की वृत्तीभ लोके यथोक्तपतदा सा ।

तदर्पभिलदा प्रोक्त राजसी विधिसंपुता ॥ 

तापसी त्वफला राजत्र तु कौदितिकी पुनः ।

कामाक्रोधायिभपृतानां जनानां नृपसनम् ॥ 51 ॥

To those persons, that are void of this Citta Śuddhi, it is all vain to go to places of pilgrimage, to make charities, to practise tapasyā, to be truthful; in fact, anything, which is the means to attain Dharma, becomes useless. O King! Śraddhā (Faith) is of three kinds: (1) Sātviki, (2) Rājasiki (3) Tāmasikī to all persons in all their religious matters. The Sātvik faith is the only one of the three that yields entire results; and it is very rare in this world. The Rājasik faith, done according to due rules, yields half the results thereof and the Tāmasik faith is fruitless and inglorious; the

Tāmasik faith arises with those persons that are overwhelmed with lust, anger, greed, etc.

वासनारहितं कृत्वा तिच्चनं श्वणादिना ।

तीर्थोदिषु वसेरित्यं दे्वीपुजन्तत्यरः ॥ 52 ॥

Therefore, O King! Keep to the company of the good and hear the Śāstras Vedānta, etc., and free the heart of worldly desires and then concentrate it to the worship of the Devi and live in a sacred place of pilgrimage.

देवीनामानि वचसा गृह्मत्या गुणान्तुवन् ।

ध्यायंस्तस्या: पदाभोजं कलितोषभ्यान्रिति: ॥ 5 3 ॥

एवं तु कुक्रतस्तस्य न कवाधिक्लतेर्भयम् ।

अनायायने संसारामच्छ्यते पातकी जनः ॥ 54 ॥

ड्रित श्रीमद्दीभागवते महापुराणे पशकल्यचे

त्रयोदगो5थायः 11 13 11

Men afraid and troubled with the defects of the Kaliyuga, should always take the name of the Devi, sing praises, and meditate on Her lotus feet. Thus the Jivas will not have any fear of Kali and the fallen vicious persons will easily be able to cross this ocean of the world and be frce. There is no doubt in this.

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the description of the battle between Ādi and Baka after the discourse Śunahśepha in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahāpurānam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XIV

