[Ch 13 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra said: “O Prince! The King Harisācandra promised before to Varuna that he would solemnise propitiation the great Naramedha sacrifice when he would offer his own son to be immolated.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra said :-- “O Prince! The King Hariścandra promised before to Varuṇa that he would celebrate for his propitiation the great Naramedha sacrifice when he would offer his own son as a victim to be immolated.

[Ch 13 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Prince! You are very intelligent; can't you grasp this idea that your father has become merciless due to his suffering in this illness and no sooner you go there than he will make you the victim and tie you to the sacrificial post when you will be slaughtered.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Prince! You are very intelligent; can’t you grasp this idea that your father has become merciless due to his suffering in this illness and no sooner you go there than he will make you the victim and tie you to the sacrificial post when you will be slaughtered.”

[Ch 13 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The indomitable Indra thus prohibiting the son, began to stay there deluded by the Māyā of the great Mahā Māyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The indomitable Indra thus prohibiting the son, he began to stay there deluded by the Māyā of the great Mahā Māyā.

[Ch 13 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Thus whenever the prince heard of his father's severe illness, he wanted to go to his father, Indra repeatedly used to go to him and prevent him from doing so.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Thus whenever the prince heard of his father’s severe illness, he wanted to go to his father, Indra repeatedly used to go to him and prevent him from doing so.

[Ch 13 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the other hand, the King Harisācandra became very much afflicted, and, seeing his family Guru all-knowing well wisher Vasistha close by, asked him:
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the other hand, the King Hariścandra became very much afflicted, and, seeing his family Guru all-knowing well-wisher Vaśiṣṭha close by, asked him,

[Ch 13 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Bhagavan! What am I to do now? I am now very impatient with his agonies of this disease and am very weak; besides I am very much afraid of it. Kindly give me a good advice and save me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Bhagavān! what am I to do now? I am now very impatient with the agonies of this disease and am very weak; besides I am very much afraid of it. Kindly give me a good advice and save me.”

[Ch 13 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vasisṭṭha said: “O King! There is a good remedy for the cure of your disease. It is stated in the Śāstras that the sons are of thirteen kinds Aurasa, Kṣattraja, Datrima, Kṛtrima; etc.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vaśiṣṭha said :-- “O King! There is a good remedy for the cure of your disease. It is stated in the Śāstras that the sons are of thirteen kinds; Aurasa, Kṣattraja, Datrima, Krītrima; etc.

[Ch 13 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore pay the reasonable price and buy one good Brāhmīn boy and perform your sacrifice with that boy. O King! Thus Varuna will be pleased and you will be cured of your disease."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore pay the reasonable price and buy one good Brāhmin boy and perform your sacrifice with that boy. O King! Thus Varuṇa will be pleased and you will be cured of your disease.”

[Ch 13 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of Vasisṭha the King Harisācandra addressed his minister: "O Minister-in-Chief! You are very sharp and intelligent, therefore you better try your best and seek in my kingdom a Brāhmin boy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the words of Vaśiṣṭha, the King Hariścandra addressed to his minister :-- “O Minister-in-Chief! You are very sharp and intelligent, therefore you better try your best and seek in my kingdom a Brāhmin boy.

[Ch 13 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In case a poor Brāhmin be willing, out of love for money, to give over his son, then give him any amount he wants and bring his son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In case a poor Brāhmin be willing, out of his love for money, to give over his son, then give him any amount he wants and bring his son.

[Ch 13 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Minister! By all means, bring a Brāhmīn boy for this sacrifice; in other words, do not be miserly or act lazily to perform my business.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Minister! By all means, bring a Brāhmin boy for this sacrifice; in other words, do not be miserly or act lazily to perform my business.

[Ch 13 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You should pray to any Brāhmin thus: Take this money and give your son, who will be sacrificed in a sacrificial ceremony as a victim."
NEW CORR ENG ──► You should pray to any Brāhmin thus :-- Take this money and give your son, who will be sacrificed in a sacrificial ceremony as a victim.”

[Ch 13 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus ordered, the minister sought for a Brāhmin boy in town after town, village after village, and house after house.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus ordered, the minister sought for a Brāhmin boy in towns after towns, villages after villages, and houses after houses.

[Ch 13 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Till, at last, he came to know that in his kingdom there was a poor distressed Brāhmīn named Ajigarta, who had three sons. Then the minister gave to the Brāhmīn that he wanted and purchased his second son named Śunahṣepha and brought him before the King. And handed him over to the King, saying that this Brāhmīn boy is fit for the sacrificial victim.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Till, at last, he came to know that in his kingdom there was a poor distressed Brāhmin named Ajīgarta, who had three sons. Then the minister gave to the Brāhmin that he wanted and purchased his second son named Śunahśepha and brought him before the King. And handed him over to the King, saying that this Brāhmin boy is fit for the sacrificial victim.

[Ch 13 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King then gladly brought the best Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas for the performance of the sacrifice, and collected all the articles requisite for the purpose.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King then gladly brought the best Brāhmins versed in the Vedas for the performance of the sacrifice, and collected all the articles requisite for the purpose.

[Ch 13 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the sacrifice was commenced, the great Muni Viśvāmitra, seeing Śunahṣepta tied, prohibited the King and said: "O King! Do not be so bold as to sacrifice this boy; let this boy be free.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the sacrifice was commenced, the great Muni Viśvāmitra, seeing Śunahśepha tied, prohibited the King and said :-- “O King! Do not be so bold as to sacrifice this boy; let this boy be free.

[Ch 13 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O long-lived One! I am asking this thing from you to day and if you obey it, certainly it will do good to you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O long-lived One! I am asking this thing from you today and if you obey it, certainly it will do good to you.

[Ch 13 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! This boy Śunahśepha is crying; his cries are paining my heart and I am feeling pity for him. Hear my word and free this boy out of mercy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! This boy Śunahśepha is crying; his cries are paining my heart and I am feeling pity for him. Hear my word and free this boy out of mercy.

[Ch 13 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See! The pure-hearted Kṣatriyas, in ancient days, used to sacrifice their own bodies and thus preserve others bodies, so that they might attain the Heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► See! The purehearted Kṣattriyas, in ancient days, used to sacrifice their own bodies and thus preserve otherś bodies, so that they might attain the Heavens.

[Ch 13 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And now you are killing this Brāhmīn boy forcibly so that you may preserve your own body; judge how vicious is this your act! Be merciful to this boy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And now you are killing this Brāhmin boy forcibly so that you may preserve your own body; judge how vicious is this your act! Be merciful to this boy.

[Ch 13 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Everyone likes his own body to the same extent; you are feeling this yourself; therefore if you take my word, then quit this boy."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Everyone likes his own body to the same extent; you are feeling this yourself; therefore if you take my word, then quit this boy.”

[Ch 13 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! The King Harisācandra was ailing very much; hence he did not pay any heed to the Munis words and did not quit the boy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! The King Hariścandra was ailing very much; hence be did not pay any heed to the Muni’s words and did not quit the boy.

[Ch 13 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thereupon the very fiery spirited Viśvāmitra became very angry with the King. Then Viśvāmitra, the son of Kauśika, the foremost of the knowers of the Vedas, shewed mercy on Śunahśépha and gave him the “Varuna Mantram.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thereupon the very fiery spirited Viśvāmitra became very angry with the King. Then Viśvāmitra, the son of Kuśika, the foremost of the knowers of the Vedas, shewed mercy on Śunahśepha and gave him the “Varuṇa Mantram.”

[Ch 13 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śunahśépha very much afraid to lose his life, earnestly repeatedly remembered Varuna and uttered that mantram in Pluta tone (lengthened or prolonged).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śunahśepha, very much afraid to lose his life, earnestly repeatedly remembered Varuṇa and uttered that mantram in pluta tone (lengthened or prolonged).

[Ch 13 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Varuna, too, the ocean of mercy, knowing that the Brāhmīn boy was praising him with hymns came up to that spot and freed Śunahśepha from his bondage and freed the King also from his disease and went back to his own abode. Thus the Maharṣi Vīsvāmitra became very glad to rescue the Muni's son from the jaws of death.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Varuṇa, too, the ocean of mercy, knowing that the Brāhmin boy was praising him with hymns came up to that spot and freed Śunahśepha from his bondage and freed the King also from his disease and went back to his own abode. Thus the Maharṣi Viśvāmitra became very glad to rescue the Muni’s son from the jaws of death.

[Ch 13 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King Harisćandra did not observe the words of Viśvāmitra; hence the son of Gādhi harboured within his heart anger towards the King.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King Hariścandra did not observe the words of Viśvāmitra; hence the son of Gādhi harboured within his heart anger towards the King.

[Ch 13 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One day while the King Harisācandra was riding in a forest and three, at mid-day, on the banks of the river Kauśika, when he desired to kill a boar, Visvāmitra in the garb of an old Brāhmim asked from him everything that he had, including his dominion and thus cunningly took away everything from the King.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One day while the King Hariścandra was riding in a forest and there, at midday, on the banks of the river Kauśik, when he desired to kill a boar, Viśvāmitra in the garb of an old Brāhmin asked from him everything that he had, including his dominion and thus cunningly took away everything from the King.

[Ch 13 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Maharşi Vasistha, seeing his Yajamāna Harisāandra suffering much, became wounded and felt pain in his mind.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Maharṣi Vaśiṣṭha, seeing his Yajamāna Hariścandra suffering much, became wounded and felt pain in his mind.

[Ch 13 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One day when he casually met Visāmitra in a forest, he said: "O wicked Kṣatriya! A disgrace to your family! You have in vain put on the garb of a Brāhmin; your religion is like a crane; you are full of vanity, you boast for nothing.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One day when he met casually with Viśvāmitra in a forest, he said :-- “O wicked Kṣattriya! A disgrace to your family! You have in vain put on the garb of a Brāhmin; your religion is like a crane; you ate full of vanity; you boast for nothing.

[Ch 13 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The best of kings, Harisācanda is my protege; he is faultless; still, O Fool! Why are you giving him so much trouble. As you are religious as a crane is religious, so take your birth as a crane."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The best of kings, Hariścandra is my client; be is faultless; still, O Fool! Why are you giving him so much trouble. As you are religious as a crane is religious, so take your birth

[Ch 13 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Visvāmitra, thus cursed by Vasistha, cursed Vasistha in return, and said “O Vasistha! As long as I will remain a crane, so long you also remain as Śarāli or Adi bird.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viśvāmitra, thus cursed by Vaśiṣṭha, cursed Vaśiṣṭha in return, and said :-- “O Vaśiṣṭha! As long as I will remain a crane, so long you also remain as Śarāli or Āḍi bird.”

[Ch 13 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! The two angry Munis thus cursed each other and the two were born as Crane and Śarāli or Ādi bird.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! The two angry Munis thus cursed each other and the two were born as Crane and Śarāli or Ādi bird.

[Ch 13 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The crane Visvāmitra built its nest on top of a tree on the Mānasarovara lake and began to live there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The crane Viśvāmitra built its nest on the top of a tree on the Mānasarovara lake and began to live there.

[Ch 13 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vasistha, too, assumed the form of an Ādī bird, and built his nest on the top of another tree and lived there. Thus the two Rsis spent their days in full enmity towards each other.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vaśiṣṭha, too, assumed the form of an Ādi bird, and built his nest on the top of another tree and lived there. Thus the two Ṛṣis spent their days in full enmity towards each other.

[Ch 13 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► These two birds used to shrick so terribly loud that they became a nuisance to all; They fought daily with each other.
NEW CORR ENG ──► These two birds used to shriek so terribly loud that they became a nuisance to all; they fought daily with each other.

[Ch 13 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They used to strike each other with beaks and wings and claws and thus they were covered all over their bodies with cuts and wounds and they were smeared with blood.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They used to strike each other with beaks and wings and nails and thus they were covered all over their bodies with cuts and wounds and they were smeared with blood.

[Ch 13 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They began to look like Kirinšuka trees. Thus the two Rsis, in the shape of birds, in their states of bondage, due to each other's curse, passed many years there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They began to look like Kiṃśuka trees. Thus the two Ṛṣis, in the shape of birds, in their states of bondage, due to each other’s curse, passed many years there.

[Ch 13 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya said: O Brāhmaṇa! Kindly tell me how Vaśistha and Kauśika, the two Rsis, became free from their curses; I am very curious to hear this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya said :-- “O Brāhmaṇa! Kindly tell me how Vaśiṣṭha and Kauśika, the two Ṛṣis, became free from their curses; I am very curious to hear this.”

[Ch 13 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Brahmā, the Grandsire of his subjects, came there with all the Devas, filled with mercy, on seeing those two Rṣis at war against each other.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Brahmā, the Grandsire of his subjects, came there with all the Devas, filled with mercy, on seeing those two Ṛṣis at war against each other.

[Ch 13 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā, the Lotus-seated, made them desist from such a fight, consoled them and freed both of them from each other's curse.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā, the Lotus-seated, made them desist from such a fight, consoled them and freed both of them from each other’s curses.

[Ch 13 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the Devas went back to their own abodes and the illustrious lotus-seated Brahmā went to the Satyaloka, seated on his Swan.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the Devas went back to their own abodes and the illustrious lotus-seated Brahmā went to the Satyaloka, seated on his Swan.

[Ch 13 Verse 47-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Maharşi Vasisṭṭha and Viśvāmitra became then friends and were tied with bonds of affection at the advice of Brahmā; they went back to their own Āśramas. O King! Now see, that the Maharṣi Vasisṭṭha, the son of Mitrā-Varuna, fought for nothing with Viśvāmitra, so painful to both the parties. Who, then, amongst the human beings, the Dānavas or the Devas can conquer his Ahankāra (egoism) and be always happy?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Maharṣi Vaśiṣṭha and Viśvāmitra became then friends and were tied with bonds of affection at the advice of Brahmā; they went back to their own Āśramas. O King! Now see, that the Maharṣi Vaśiṣṭha, the son of Mitrā-Varuṇa, fought for nothing with Viśvāmitra, so painful to both the parties. Who, then, amongst the human beings, the Dānavas or the Devas can conquer his Ahamkāra (egoism) and be always happy?

[Ch 13 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore the Citta-Šuddhi, the purity of the heart (that purity which imparts to man the blessedness of God-vision) is very difficult even for the high-souled persons; with the greatest caution and utmost effort one has to practise for that.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore the Chitta-Śuddhi, the purity of the heart (that purity which imparts to man the blessedness of God-vision) is very difficult even for the high-souled persons; with the greatest caution and utmost effort one has to practise for that.

[Ch 13 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► To those persons, that are void of this Citta Śuddhi, it is all vain to go to places of pilgrimage, to make charities, to practise tapasyā, to be truthful; in fact, anything, which is the means to attain Dharma, becomes useless. O King! Śraddhā (Faith) is of three kinds: (1) Sātviki, (2) Rājasiki (3) Tāmasikī to all persons in all their religious matters. The Sātvik faith is the only one of the three that yields entire results; and it is very rare in this world. The Rājasik faith, done according to due rules, yields half the results thereof and the Tāmasik faith is fruitless and inglorious; the Tāmasik faith arises with those persons that are overwhelmed with lust, anger, greed, etc.
NEW CORR ENG ──► To those persons, that are void of this Chitta Śuddhi, it is all vain to go to places of pilgrimage, to make charities, to practise tapasyā, to be truthful; in fact, anything, which is the means to attain Dharma, becomes useless. O King! Śraddhā (Faith) is of three kinds :-- (1) Sāttvikī, (2) Rājasikī and (3) Tāmasikī to all persons in all their religious matters. The Sāttvik faith is the only one of the three that yields entire results; and it is very rare in this world. The Rājasik faith, done according to due rules, yields half the results thereof and the Tāmasik faith is fruitless and inglorious; the Tāmasik faith arises with those persons that are overwhelmed with lust, anger, greed, etc.

[Ch 13 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O King! Keep to the company of the good and hear the Śāstras Vedānta, etc., and free the heart of worldly desires and then concentrate it to the worship of the Devi and live in a sacred place of pilgrimage.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O King! Keep to the company of the good and hear the Śāstras, Vedānta, etc., and free the heart of worldly desires and then concentrate it to the worship of the Devī and live in a sacred place of pilgrimage.

[Ch 13 Verse 53-54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Men afraid and troubled with the defects of the Kaliyuga, should always take the name of the Devi, sing praises, and meditate on Her lotus feet. Thus the Jivas will not have any fear of Kali and the fallen vicious persons will easily be able to cross this ocean of the world and be frce. There is no doubt in this. Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the description of the battle between Ādi and Baka after the discourse Śunahśepha in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahāpurānam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Men afraid and troubled with the defects of the Kālīyuga, should always take the name of the Devī, sing praises, and meditate on Her lotus feet. Thus the Jīvas will not have any fear of Kālī and the fallen vicious persons will easily be able to cross this ocean of the world and be free. There is no doubt in this. Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the description of the battle between Āḍi and Baka after the discourse on Śunahśepha in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahāpurāṇam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
