CHAPTER XVI

On the Conversation Between the Devi and Mahisa

व्यास उवाच

तेषां तद्वचनं शुत्वा क्रोधयुक्तो नराधिपः ।

दारूकं प्रह तत्सा रथमानय मेउद्धतुम्म ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing those words, the King Mahisa in anger addressed the charioteer Darūka: “Bring over my chariot quickly.

सहस्वखरसंयुक्ते पताकाध्वजभूषितम् ।

आयुधै: संसुतं शुधं सुचकं चाकुबक्रम ॥ २ ॥

That chariot is drawn by one thousand excellent horses, is bedecked with banners flags, and ensigns, is furnished with various arms and weapons, and is endowed with good wheels of a white colour, and beautiful poles in which the yoke is fixed.”

सूतोर्धि रथमानीर तमुवाच रत्यान्चितः ।

राजत्रवोउभ्यानीते हारि तिहिति भूषितः ॥ ३ ॥

The charioteer brought the chariot instantly and duly informed the king “O King! I have got the chariot ready at your door, your beautiful chariot, bedecked with beautiful carpets and various arms and weapons.”

सर्वायुधसमयुक्तो वरास्तरणसंयुक्तः ।

आनीर्ति तं रवं जात्वा दानवेंत्रे महावक्तः ॥ 4 ॥

मानुषं देहामस्थाय संग्रामं गन्तुमुढ़तः ।

विवायं मतसा चेति देवी मां प्रेक्ष्य दुर्भुंबम् ॥ 5 ॥

श्रूष्टिभं महिंचं नूनं विमता सा भविष्यत् ।

Hearing that the chariot had been brought, Mahīsa thought, the Devi might not care him, seen him ugly faced with a pair of horns and therefore

decided to assume a human shape and then go to the battle.

नारीणा च प्रिंयं रूपं तथा चातुर्यमित्यपि ॥ 6 ॥

तस्मादूर्षे च चातुर्यं कृत्वा यास्यामि तां प्रति ।

The beauty and cleverness are the delights of women; therefore I will go before Her, with a beautiful body and with all the cleverness and dexterities.

यथा मां दीक्ष्य सा बाला प्रेमयुक्ता भविष्यति ॥ 7 ॥

मामपि च तदैव स्थान्युखं नान्यस्करणतः ।

For I will never be delighted with anything but that woman looking at me with fondness and becoming passionately attached to me.

इति संचित्य मनसा दानवेत्रो महाकानः ॥ 8 ॥

त्यक्तन्त नात्राहिंरं कर्णे बधून पुरुषः शुभः ।

Thus thinking, the powerful King of the Demons quitted the buffalo appearance and assumed a beautiful human shape.

सर्वायुधधरः श्रीमांशुकापूर्णपृषितः ॥ 9 ॥

विद्यार्थरर: कान्त: पुरुषबाण इवारपर: ।

He put on beautiful ornaments, armpilates, etc., and wore divine clothes and had garlands on his neck and thus shone like a second Kandarpa, the god of Love.

रथोपथितः केयुरस्वर्यी बाणधन्धर्धः ॥ १० ॥

सेनापरिवृत्तो देईी जगाम मदागर्वितः ।

Taking, then, all the arrows and weapons, he mounted on the chariot, and, attended by his army, went to the Devi, elated with power and vanity.

मनोजं रूपमास्थाय मानिनीनां मनोहाम् ॥ १ १ ॥

तमागतं समालोक्य दैत्यनामधिरं नतं ।

बहुधिः संवृतं वीरैदेंकी शकुमवादत् ॥ १ २ ॥

The Devi blew Her conchshell when She saw Mahisāsura, the lord of the Dānavas, come before Her with a handsome appearance, tending to captivate the minds of mistresses and surrounded by many powerful and valiant warriors.

स शकुनिन्दं शूला जनविस्यवाकरम् ।

समीयमेवत देल्यातु तान्यावच हास्विक ॥ १ ३ ॥

देवि संसारचक्रेश्मवर्तीमानो जनः किल ।

नरो वास्य तथा नारी सुखं वांछिति सर्वथा ॥ १४ ॥

The King of the Demons heard the blow of the conchshell, wondrous to all, came up before the Devi and smilingly spoke to Her thus: O Devi! Whatever person there exists in this world, this wheel of Saṃsāra (the eternal round of births and deaths), be he or she a man or a woman, everyone always hankers after pleasure or happiness.

सुखं संयोगेनं नृणां नासंयोगे भवेदित्र ।

संयोगो बढुधा भिवस्तान्ब्यीनि श्युपाव है ॥ 15 ॥

And that pleasure is derived in this world by the combination of persons with each other; never is it seen where this combination is absent.

भेदानुभूगितितृत्यान्वभावोल्याननेकशः ।

तत्र प्रीतिभवानादौ कंश्वामि यथागति ॥ 16 ॥

Again this combination is of various kinds; I will mention them; Hear. Union is of various kinds according as it arises out of affection or out of natural consequences. Of these, I will now speak of unions coming out of affection, as far as my understanding goes.

भातापिक्षेस्तु पुत्रेय संयोगस्तुभम: स्मृतः ।

श्रानुभांत्र तथा योगः कारणान्याधयो मतः ॥ 17 ॥

The union that comes between father, mother and their sons arises out of affection; it is therefore good. The union between brother and brother is middling, for mutual interests of give and take are there between the two.

उत्तमस्य सुखत्यैव दातुल्यातुतः स्मृतः ।

तस्मादत्यसुखत्यैव प्रदातुराच्च मध्यमः ॥ १ ८ ॥

In fact, that union is considered as excellent which leads to happiness of the best sort and that union which leads to lesser happiness is known as mediocre.

नाविकानां तु संयोगः स्मृतः स्थापाविकी बुधैः ।

विविधायतृतिचानां प्रसङूरपितर्किनात् ॥ 19 ॥

The union amongst the sailors, coming from distant lands, is known as natural. They come on various errands concerning their varied interests.

अत्यल्युखदानुत्वाकनिष्ठोउयं स्मृते बुधैः ।

अत्युत्तमसृ संयोगः संसारे सुखुःखदः ॥ 20 ॥

This combination, because it offers the least amount of happiness, is considered as worst. The best union leads in this world to best happiness.

नारीपुरुषयोः काने समानवयसोः सदा ।

संयोगे च: समाध्यातः स एवात्युभम: सूतः ॥ 21 ॥

O Beloved! The constant union of men and women of the same age is considered as par excellence; for it gives happiness of the very best sort.

अत्यनुभमसुख्यैव दातृत्वास तथायित्यः ।

चातुर्वीरूपवेषाठीः कुलशीरिनगुणैस्वा ॥ 22 ॥

Both the parties, men and women, are elevated when they want to excel each other in their family connections, qualities, beauty, cleverness, dress, humility and propriety of conduct.

परस्परस्मुतर्कः कक्षते हि परस्यम् ।

तं चेक्कारोषि संयोगे वीरोग च मया सह ॥ 23 ॥

Therefore, O Dear! If you establish with me that conjugal relation, you will get, no doubt, all the excellent happiness.

अत्यनमसुख्यवैय प्राप्ति: स्थाने न संशय: ।

नानाविधानि रूपाणि कापीय संवेख्या दिये ॥ 24 ॥

इंत्रदाय: सुर्गा: सर्वे संभावे विजिता मया ।

रत्नानि यानि दिव्यानि भवनेत्रसिन्यामानुना ॥ 25 ॥

भूंभृव त्वं तानि सर्वांशि यथेथे देवैल ता यथा ।

Specially I will assume different forms at my mere will. All the Divine jewels and precious things that I have acquired after defeating Indra

Book V Chapter XVI

and the other Devas in battle, and others are lying in my palace; you can enjoy all of them as my queen consort or you can make a charity of them as you like.

पूरानी भवाछ त्वं सोरोप्रम तव सुवृदि ॥ 26 ॥

वैर त्वजेउई देवैस्तु तव वाक्यात्र संगयः ।

यथा त्व सुखामानोषि त्वादुः कराविणि वे ॥ 27 ॥

O Beautiful One! I am your servant; consequently, at your word, I will no doubt quit my enmity with the Devas. In short, I will do anything that leads to your pleasure and happiness.

आतापय विशालाहित्र त्वादुः प्रकटीमय ।

चिनं मे तव रूपेण मोहितं चाकभाषिधि ॥ 28 ॥

आतुरोर्सिम वरातोहे प्राप्तसे शरणं किल ।

O Sweet speaking One! O Large-eyed One! My heart is enchanted very much with your beauty; I will do, therefore, as you order me. O One having a broad hip! I am very much distressed; I now take refuge unto You.

प्रपत्रं पात्रि रंभोक कामबाणीः प्रपीडितम् ॥ 29 ॥

धर्माणामुत्तमो धर्मः शरणागतस्थानम् ।

O One having beautiful thighs! I am very much struck with the arrows of Cupid, and I am very much discomforted; therefore, save me. To protect one who has come under one's refuge is the best of all virtues.

त्वदीयोरम्यसितापरिग सेवकोउई कुशोदिर ॥ 30 ॥

मरानांतं चचः सत्वं नान्यथा प्रकतीमयहम् ।

O One of a somewhat whitish body! O One having a slender waist! I will spend the remaining portion of my life in serving you as your obedient servant. Never will I act contrary to your orders to the risk even of my life. Take this as literally true and do accordingly.

पाटी नतोउसि तत्विं गत्वका नानायुघानि ते ॥ 31 ॥

द्वां कुक विजगतालिं तत्पोत्रि काममार्गीः ।

I now throw aside all my weapons before Your feet; O Large eyed! I am very much distressed by the arrows of Cupid; dost Thou therefore shew Thy mercy on me.

जन्मप्रभृति चार्वीपि दैन्यं नाचरितं मया ॥ 32 ॥

बहादारीनीक्षागम्प्य त्वयि तिद्ध्यामवहम् ।

O Beautiful One! Never I showed my weakness to Brahmā and the other Devas; but today I acknowledge that before You. I have defeated Brahmā and others; they are fully acquainted with my prowess in the battle-fields.

चरितं मम जान्तिन रणे बहादाय: सुतः ॥ 33 ॥

सोप्रधृते तत्सोस्मि ममुचं एपय भामिनि ।

But, O Honoured Woman! Though I am so powerful, I now acknowledge myself as your servant. Better look at me and grant your mercy.

व्यास उवाच

इति बुवाणं तं दैत्वं देवी भगवती हिं सा ॥ 34 ॥

प्रहस्य सरित्यं वाक्ययुवाच करवर्गिनी ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Mahisa, the lord of the Daityas, having said so, that beautiful Bhagavati laughed loudly and spoke smiling:

देवयुवाच

नाहं पुरुविध्छामि परमं पुरुचं विजा ॥ 35 ॥

तस्य चेच्छास्महं दैत्य सुवामि सकर्तं जगत् ।

स मां पर्यति विश्वाता तस्यहं प्रकृति: शिवा ॥ 36 ॥

The Devi said: I do not desire any other body than the Supreme One! O Demon! I am His Willpower; I therefore create all these worlds. I am His Śivā (auspicious) Prakṛti (Nature); That Universal Soul is seeing Mc.

तसासीध्यवगादेव चैतन्यं मायि शाशून् ।

जड़ाई तस्य संयोगातप्रभावीम सचेतना ॥ 37 ॥

अयक्रान्तस्य सारिष्याद्वसश्रेतना यथा ।

न प्राप्यसुखवांछा मे कदाचिद्वि जायते ॥ 38 ॥

It is owing to His proximity that I am appearing as the Eternal Consciousness, manifesting Itself as this Cosmos. As irons move owing to the proximity of magents, I, too, though inert, owing to His proximity, work consciously.

मूक्रीत्यासि मन्दामन् वस्त्रीसंगं चिकीर्मिति ।

नरस्य बक्यनाथीय मृंखला कथी प्रक्रांतिति ॥ 39 ॥

I do not desire to enjoy the ordinary pleasures;

Śrimaddevibhāgavaam

you are very dull and stupid; there is no doubt in this, when you desire sexual union. For women are considered as chains to hold men in bondage.

लौहकद्धोरि मुच्येत क्रीबढ़ो नैव मुच्येत ।

किमिष्ठसि च मन्तात्मनुसागारस्य सेवनम् ॥ 40 ॥

Men bound up by iron chains can obtain freedom at any time, but when they are fastened by woman, they can never obtain freedom. O Stupid! You now want to serve the source of urine, etc.

गर्भ कुरु सुखाय त्वं शमासुख्यावयसि ।

नारीसई महुःखं जानिके त्वं विमुहासि ॥ 4 1 ॥

Take refuge under Peace; peace will lead you to happiness. Great pain arises from connection with women; you know this; then why are you deluded?

त्वज वैरं सुर्ः: सार्थं यथैंह विचारवानी ।

पातालं गच्छ वा कामं जीवितेच्छा यद्यस्ते ॥ 4 2 ॥

अथवा कुरं स्थांगं बलवत्यासि संग्रतम् ।

Better avoid your enmity with the Devas and roam over the world anywhere you like. Or, if you desire to live, go to Pātāla; or fight with Me. Know this for certain that I am stronger than you.

प्रेपितानई सुरैः सर्वस्वल नागाया दानव ~.43 ||

सत्यं वर्धायिं येनाच तस्या वचनसीहदम् ।

O Dānava! The Devas collected have sent Me here; I tell you this very truly; I am satisfied with you by your words of friendship; therefore dost thou fly away while you are living.

दर्शितं तेन तूषात्सि जीवनाल्य यथासुखम् ॥ 44 ॥

सतां सतपदीं भैत्री तेन मुंचामि जीवित･।

See! When words are uttered seven times amongst each other, friendship is established between saints.

मरणेच्छाशित चेषुद्धं कुर वीर यथासुखम् ॥ 45 ॥

हनिष्यामि महाबाहो त्यामहं नात्र संशयः ।

That has been done so amongst us; so there is friendship now between you and me; I won't take away your life. O hero! If you desire to die, fight gladly; O powerful one! I will, no doubt, kill you.

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्या वचः शुत्वा दानवः काममोहितः ॥ 4 6 ॥

उवाच शल्भाया वाचा मधुरं वचनं ततः ।

विघेभ्यं वरारोहे त्वां प्रहर्तुं वरानने ॥ 47 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing the Bhagavati's words, the Dānava, deluded by passion, began to speak in beautiful sweet words: O Beautiful One! Your body and the several parts thereof are very delicate and beautiful. A mere sight of such a lady make one enchanted.

कोमलां चास्त्रवर्गी नारी नार्विमोहिन् ।

जित्वा हरित्याईश लोकपालांश सर्वेशः ॥ 48 ॥

किं तव्या सह युद्धं मे युक्तं कमललोचने ।

Therefore, O Beautiful faced one! I fear very much to strike against your body. O Lotus-eyed One! I have subjugated Hari, Hara, the Lokapālas and the several other Devatās; I therefore ask whether it is proper for me to fight with you!

रोचते यदि चार्विंग विवाहं कुक मां पत्र ॥ 49 ॥

नोद्रहच्छ ययेहे ते ईंगे यस्मात्समागत ।

O Fair one! If you like, you marry and worship me, or you can return to your desired place whence you have come.

नाहं त्वां ग्रहर्थियां यतो मेत्री कृता त्वया ॥ 50 ॥

हितभुक्ते शुभं वाक्यं तस्मादुपच्छ यथासुद्यम् ।

You have declared friendship with me; I therefore do not like to strike any weapons on you. I have now spoken for your good and welfare. You can gladly go away.

का शोभा मे भवेदने ह्वा तां चालोरोचान् ॥ 51 ॥

स्वीहता बालहना च बहाहता दुरत्यया ।

O beautiful one! You are a fair woman with beautiful eyes; what fame shall I earn by killing you! O One of slender waist! Murdering a woman, a child, and a Brāhmin certainly makes the murderer liable to suffer the consequences thereof.

गृहीता त्वां गृहं नूनं गच्छामध्य वरानने ॥ 52 ॥

तथापि मे फलं न स्वादुताद्वीमासुखं कुतः ।

I will certainly carry you to day to my place without killing you. If I use force to you, I will

Book V Chapter XVI

not get happiness; for, in such cases, the application of force leads to no happiness.

प्रद्वीमि सुकौरि त्वां तिवनावतन्ते यतः ॥ 53 ॥

पुरुषस्य सुखं न स्यातुते कानतामुखांबुजात् ।

O One having good hairs! I salute before you and speak that a man can not be happy without the lotus face of a woman; similarly a woman cannot be happy without a man's lotus face.

तत्थेव हि नारीगां तत्समाच पुरुधं विज्ञा ॥ 54 ॥

संयोगे सुखबम्पूतिविधोगे चुःखमम्बतः ।

Where comes off the good combination between these two, then the highest pitch of happiness is conceived and pain arises on the disjunction thereof.

कान्तात्सि रूपसम्पत्रा सर्वीभरणभूषिता ॥ 55 ॥

चातुर्व त्वयि किं नास्ति यतो मां न भवस्यहो ।

True that you are well decked with ornaments all over your body but you seem wanting in cleverness; for you are not worshipping me. Who has advised you to renounce enjoyments?

तवोपविद्धे केनेवं भोपानां परिवर्जन् ॥ 56 ॥

वढित्राउसि प्रियालये वैशिण केनिविर्चह ।

मुख्यग्रह्मियमं कानते कुरु कार्य सुशोभनम् ॥ 57 ॥

सुखं तव ममापि स्यादिषहि विहिते किल ।

O Sweet speaking One! If this be true; then surely he is your enemy; he has deceived you. O Dear! Leave your this stubbornness and marry me; both of us shall then be happy. Visnu shines well with Kamalā, Brahmā looks splendid with Savitri, Rudra is well associated with Pārvatī and Indra with Saṃi, so I will shine well with you; there is no doubt in this.

विष्यानुक्स्या सहाप्राणित सावित्रा च सहासम्भः ॥ 58 ॥

रुद्रो धाति च पार्वील्या गश्या शतमखतस्तथा ।

का नारी पतितीना च सुखं प्रानोति शाश्रन् ॥ 59 ॥

येन त्वमसियमपार्थिति न करोषि परिते शुभम् ।

कामः क्वाता गतः कान्ते यस्वां बाणी: सुकोमपेः। 60 ।

मादनै: पञ्धिः: कामं न ताउविते मंदपृधि: ।

No woman can ever be happy without any good husband. And why are you not then, acknowledging me your husband even when you have got him. O Beloved! Where is now that Cupid of dull intellect? Why is he not troubling you with his maddening delicate five arrows?

मन्येउहमिव कामोपि दरावांस्वपि सुन्दरि ॥ 6 1 ॥

अबलेतीच म मवानाने न प्रेयाति मारणान्न ।

मनोभवस्य वैरं वा किमण्यस्ति मया सह ॥ 6 2 ॥

तेन च व्यव्यातालिंक न पुब्जति शिलीमुखान् ।

अथवा मेरुहितैर्वैवरिति उसौ कृपयज्ञः ॥ 6 3 ॥

सुखविद्यर्वसिभरनेत न्वयि न प्रहत्यपि ।

O Fair one! I think that Madana (the god of Love) out of his pity to you, seeing that you are very weak is not striking his arrows on you as he has done to me. O One looking askance! Or it may be that I have got some enmity with that Cupid; else why is he not shooting arrows at you? Or my enemies the Devas have advised the God of Love not to dart his arrows on you.

त्वक्ता में मृगशाराविष्ठ पढ़ातापार कीधस्यि ॥ 64 ॥

मंदोदरीव तन्त्यिं परित्यज्य रुर्णं नृपम् ।

अनुकूलं परितं पढ़ात्या चकारा शर्डे पतिम् ।

कामातं च यदा जाता मोहेन व्याकुलान्तरा ॥ 65 ॥

इति शीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणो पड़ामकन्क्रे

देवीचिते घोडशोप्रथाय: 11 16 11

O One of slender body! As Mandodari had to marry afterwards, when she became passionate, a hypocrite, and so she had to repent thinking that she had not married before a beautiful auspicious king, so I think, O One, having eyes like the young of a deer! You, too, will have to repent like her if you decline to marry me now.

Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter of the Fifth

Book in the conversation between the Devi

and Mahiṣasura in Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam,

the Mahāpurānam, of 18,000 verses, by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

