[Ch 16 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing those words, the King Mahisa in anger addressed the charioteer Darūka: “Bring over my chariot quickly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing those words, the King Mahiṣa in anger addressed the charioteer Darūka :-- “Bring over my chariot quickly.

[Ch 16 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That chariot is drawn by one thousand excellent horses, is bedecked with banners flags, and ensigns, is furnished with various arms and weapons, and is endowed with good wheels of a white colour, and beautiful poles in which the yoke is fixed.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► That chariot is drawn by one thousand excellent horses, is bedecked with banners, flags, and ensigns, is furnished with various arms and weapons, and is endowed with good wheels of a white colour, and beautiful poles in which the yoke is fixed.”

[Ch 16 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The charioteer brought the chariot instantly and duly informed the king “O King! I have got the chariot ready at your door, your beautiful chariot, bedecked with beautiful carpets and various arms and weapons.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The charioteer brought the chariot instantly and duly informed the king, “O King! I have got the chariot ready at your door, your beautiful chariot, bedecked with beautiful carpets and various arms and weapons.”

[Ch 16 Verse 4-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing that the chariot had been brought, Mahīsa thought, the Devi might not care him, seen him ugly faced with a pair of horns and therefore decided to assume a human shape and then go to the battle.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing that the chariot had been brought, Mahiṣa thought, the Devī might not care him, seeing him ugly faced with a pair of horns and therefore decided to assume a human shape and then go to the battle.

[Ch 16 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The beauty and cleverness are the delights of women; therefore I will go before Her, with a beautiful body and with all the cleverness and dexterities.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The beauty and cleverness are the delights of women; therefore I will go before Her, with a beautiful body and with all the cleverness and dexterities.

[Ch 16 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► For I will never be delighted with anything but that woman looking at me with fondness and becoming passionately attached to me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► For I will never be delighted with anything but that woman looking at me with fondness and becoming passionately attached to me.

[Ch 16 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus thinking, the powerful King of the Demons quitted the buffalo appearance and assumed a beautiful human shape.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus thinking, the powerful King of the Demons quitted the buffalo appearance and assumed a beautiful human shape.

[Ch 16 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He put on beautiful ornaments, armpilates, etc., and wore divine clothes and had garlands on his neck and thus shone like a second Kandarpa, the god of Love.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He put on beautiful ornaments, armplates, etc., and wore divine cloths and had garlands on his neck and thus shone like a second Kandarpa, the god of Love.

[Ch 16 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Taking, then, all the arrows and weapons, he mounted on the chariot, and, attended by his army, went to the Devi, elated with power and vanity.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Taking, then, all the arrows and weapons, he mounted on the chariot, and attended by his army, went to the Devī, elated with power and vanity.

[Ch 16 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi blew Her conchshell when She saw Mahisāsura, the lord of the Dānavas, come before Her with a handsome appearance, tending to captivate the minds of mistresses and surrounded by many powerful and valiant warriors.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī blew Her conchshell when She saw Mahiṣāsura, the lord of the Dānavas, come before Her with a handsome appearance, tending to captivate the minds of mistresses and surrounded by many powerful and valiant warriors.

[Ch 16 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King of the Demons heard the blow of the conchshell, wondrous to all, came up before the Devi and smilingly spoke to Her thus: O Devi! Whatever person there exists in this world, this wheel of Saṃsāra (the eternal round of births and deaths), be he or she a man or a woman, everyone always hankers after pleasure or happiness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King of the Demons heard the blow of the conchshell, wondrous to all, came up before the Devī and smilingly spoke to Her thus :-- O Devī! Whatever person there exists in this world, this wheel of Samsāra (the eternal round of births and deaths), be he or she a man or a woman, everyone always hankers after pleasure or happiness.

[Ch 16 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And that pleasure is derived in this world by the combination of persons with each other; never is it seen where this combination is absent.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And that pleasure is derived in this world by the combination of persons with each other; never is it seen where this combination is absent.

[Ch 16 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again this combination is of various kinds; I will mention them; Hear. Union is of various kinds according as it arises out of affection or out of natural consequences. Of these, I will now speak of unions coming out of affection, as far as my understanding goes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again this combination is of various kinds; I will mention them; Hear. Union is of various kinds according as it arises out of affection or out of natural consequences. Of these, I will now speak of unions coming out of affection, as far as my understanding goes.

[Ch 16 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The union that comes between father, mother and their sons arises out of affection; it is therefore good. The union between brother and brother is middling, for mutual interests of give and take are there between the two.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The union that comes between father, mother and their sons arises out of affection; it is therefore good. The union between brother and brother is middling, for mutual interests of give and take are there between the two.

[Ch 16 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In fact, that union is considered as excellent which leads to happiness of the best sort and that union which leads to lesser happiness is known as mediocre.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In fact, that union is considered as excellent which leads to happiness of the best sort and that union which leads to lesser happiness is known as mediocre.

[Ch 16 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The union amongst the sailors, coming from distant lands, is known as natural. They come on various errands concerning their varied interests.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The union amongst the sailors, coming from distant lands, is known as natural. They come on various errands concerning their varied interests.

[Ch 16 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This combination, because it offers the least amount of happiness, is considered as worst. The best union leads in this world to best happiness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This combination, because it offers the least amount of happiness, is considered as worst. The best union leads in this world to best happiness.

[Ch 16 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Beloved! The constant union of men and women of the same age is considered as par excellence; for it gives happiness of the very best sort.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Beloved! The constant union of men and women of the same age is considered as par excellence; for it gives happiness of the very best sort.

[Ch 16 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Both the parties, men and women, are elevated when they want to excel each other in their family connections, qualities, beauty, cleverness, dress, humility and propriety of conduct.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Both the parties, men and women, are elevated when they want to excel each other in their family connections, qualities, beauty; cleverness, dress, humility and propriety of conduct.

[Ch 16 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Dear! If you establish with me that conjugal relation, you will get, no doubt, all the excellent happiness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Dear! If you establish with me that conjugal relation, you will get, no doubt, all the excellent happiness.

[Ch 16 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Specially I will assume different forms at my mere will. All the Divine jewels and precious things that I have acquired after defeating Indra and the other Devas in battle, and others are lying in my palace; you can enjoy all of them as my queen consort or you can make a charity of them as you like.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Specially I will assume different forms at my mere will. All the Divine jewels and precious things that I have acquired after defeating Indra and the other Devas in battle, and others are lying in my palace; you can enjoy all of them as my queen consort or you can make a charity

[Ch 16 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Beautiful One! I am your servant; consequently, at your word, I will no doubt quit my enmity with the Devas. In short, I will do anything that leads to your pleasure and happiness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Beautiful One! I am your servant; consequently, at your word, I will no doubt quit my enmity with the Devas. In short, I will do anything that leads to your pleasure and happiness.

[Ch 16 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sweet speaking One! O Large-eyed One! My heart is enchanted very much with your beauty; I will do, therefore, as you order me. O One having a broad hip! I am very much distressed; I now take refuge unto You.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sweet speaking One! O Large-eyed One! My heart is enchanted very much with your beauty; I will do, therefore, as you order me. O One having a broad hip! I am very much distressed; I now take refuge unto You.

[Ch 16 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O One having beautiful thighs! I am very much struck with the arrows of Cupid, and I am very much discomforted; therefore, save me. To protect one who has come under one's refuge is the best of all virtues.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O One having beautiful thighs! I am very much struck with the arrows of Cupid, and I am very much discomforted; therefore, save me. To protect one who has come under one’s refuge is the best of all virtues.

[Ch 16 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O One of a somewhat whitish body! O One having a slender waist! I will spend the remaining portion of my life in serving you as your obedient servant. Never will I act contrary to your orders to the risk even of my life. Take this as literally true and do accordingly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O One of a somewhat whitish body! O One having a slender waist! I will spend the remaining portion of my life in serving you as your obedient servant. Never will I act contrary to your orders to the risk even of my life. Take this as literally true and do accordingly.

[Ch 16 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I now throw aside all my weapons before Your feet; O Large eyed! I am very much distressed by the arrows of Cupid; dost Thou therefore shew Thy mercy on me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I now throw aside all my weapons before Your feet; O Large eyed! I am very much distressed by the arrows of Cupid; dost Thou therefore show Thy mercy on me.

[Ch 16 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Beautiful One! Never I showed my weakness to Brahmā and the other Devas; but today I acknowledge that before You. I have defeated Brahmā and others; they are fully acquainted with my prowess in the battle-fields.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Beautiful One! Never I showed my weakness to Brahmā and the other Devas; but today I acknowledge that before You. I have defeated Brahmā and others; they are fully acquainted with my prowess in the battlefield.

[Ch 16 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But, O Honoured Woman! Though I am so powerful, I now acknowledge myself as your servant. Better look at me and grant your mercy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But, O Honoured Woman! Though I am so powerful, I now acknowledge myself as your servant. Better look at me and grant your mercy.

[Ch 16 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Mahisa, the lord of the Daityas, having said so, that beautiful Bhagavati laughed loudly and spoke smiling:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Mahiṣa, the lord of the Daityas, having said so, that beautiful Bhagavatī laughed loudly and spoke smiling :--

[Ch 16 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi said: I do not desire any other body than the Supreme One! O Demon! I am His Willpower; I therefore create all these worlds. I am His Śivā (auspicious) Prakṛti (Nature); That Universal Soul is seeing Mc.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī said :-- I do not desire any other body than the Supreme One! O Demon! I am His Will-power; I therefore create all these worlds. I am His Śivā (auspicious) Prakriti (Nature); That Universal Soul is seeing Me.

[Ch 16 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is owing to His proximity that I am appearing as the Eternal Consciousness, manifesting Itself as this Cosmos. As irons move owing to the proximity of magents, I, too, though inert, owing to His proximity, work consciously.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is owing to His proximity that I am appearing as the Eternal Consciousness, manifesting Itself as this Cosmos. As irons move owing to the proximity of magnets, I, too, though inert, owing to His proximity, work consciously.

[Ch 16 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I do not desire to enjoy the ordinary pleasures; Śrimaddevibhāgavaam you are very dull and stupid; there is no doubt in this, when you desire sexual union. For women are considered as chains to hold men in bondage.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I do not desire to enjoy the ordinary pleasures; you are very dull and stupid; there is no doubt in this, when you desire sexual union. For women are considered as chains to hold men in bondage.

[Ch 16 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Men bound up by iron chains can obtain freedom at any time, but when they are fastened by woman, they can never obtain freedom. O Stupid! You now want to serve the source of urine, etc.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Men bound up by iron chains can obtain freedom at any time, but when they are fastened by women, they can never obtain freedom. O Stupid! You now want to serve the source of urine, etc.

[Ch 16 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Take refuge under Peace; peace will lead you to happiness. Great pain arises from connection with women; you know this; then why are you deluded?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Take refuge under Peace; peace will lead you to happiness. Great pain arises from connection with women; you know this; then why are you deluded?

[Ch 16 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Better avoid your enmity with the Devas and roam over the world anywhere you like. Or, if you desire to live, go to Pātāla; or fight with Me. Know this for certain that I am stronger than you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Better avoid your enmity with the Devas and roam over the world anywhere you like. Or, if you desire to live, go to Pātāla; or fight with Me. Know this for certain that I am stronger than you.

[Ch 16 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Dānava! The Devas collected have sent Me here; I tell you this very truly; I am satisfied with you by your words of friendship; therefore dost thou fly away while you are living.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Dānava! The Devas collected have sent Me here; I tell you this very truly; I am satisfied with you by your words of friendship; therefore dost thou fly away while you are living.

[Ch 16 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See! When words are uttered seven times amongst each other, friendship is established between saints.
NEW CORR ENG ──► See! When words are uttered seven times amongst each other, friendship is established between saints.

[Ch 16 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That has been done so amongst us; so there is friendship now between you and me; I won't take away your life. O hero! If you desire to die, fight gladly; O powerful one! I will, no doubt, kill you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That has been done so amongst us; so there is friendship now between you and me; I won’t take away your life. O hero! If you desire to die, fight gladly; O powerful one! I will, no doubt, kill you.

[Ch 16 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing the Bhagavati's words, the Dānava, deluded by passion, began to speak in beautiful sweet words: O Beautiful One! Your body and the several parts thereof are very delicate and beautiful. A mere sight of such a lady make one enchanted.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing the Bhagavatī’s words, the Dānava, deluded by passion, began to speak in beautiful sweet words :-- O Beautiful One! Your body and the several parts thereof are very delicate and beautiful. A mere sight of such a lady makes one enchanted.

[Ch 16 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Beautiful faced one! I fear very much to strike against your body. O Lotus-eyed One! I have subjugated Hari, Hara, the Lokapālas and the several other Devatās; I therefore ask whether it is proper for me to fight with you!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Beautiful faced one! I fear very much to strike against your body. O Lotus-eyed One! I have subjugated Hari, Hara, the Lokapālas and the several other Devatās; I therefore ask whether it is proper for me to fight with you!

[Ch 16 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Fair one! If you like, you marry and worship me, or you can return to your desired place whence you have come.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Fair one! If you like, you marry and worship me, or you can return to your desired place whence you have come.

[Ch 16 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You have declared friendship with me; I therefore do not like to strike any weapons on you. I have now spoken for your good and welfare. You can gladly go away.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You have declared friendship with me; I therefore do not like to strike any weapons on you. I have now spoken for your good and welfare. You can gladly go away.

[Ch 16 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O beautiful one! You are a fair woman with beautiful eyes; what fame shall I earn by killing you! O One of slender waist! Murdering a woman, a child, and a Brāhmin certainly makes the murderer liable to suffer the consequences thereof.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O beautiful one! You are a fair woman with beautiful eyes; what fame shall I earn by killing you! O One of slender waist! Murdering a woman, a child, and a Brāhmin certainly makes the murderer liable to suffer the consequences thereof.

[Ch 16 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I will certainly carry you to day to my place without killing you. If I use force to you, I will not get happiness; for, in such cases, the application of force leads to no happiness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will certainly carry you today to my place without killing you. If I use force to you, I will not get happiness; for, in such cases, the application of force leads to no happiness.

[Ch 16 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O One having good hairs! I salute before you and speak that a man can not be happy without the lotus face of a woman; similarly a woman cannot be happy without a man's lotus face.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O One having good hairs! I salute before you and speak that a man cannot be happy without the lotus face of a woman; similarly a woman cannot be happy without a man’s lotus face.

[Ch 16 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Where comes off the good combination between these two, then the highest pitch of happiness is conceived and pain arises on the disjunction thereof.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Where comes off the good combination between these two, then the highest pitch of happiness is conceived and pain arises on the disjunction thereof.

[Ch 16 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► True that you are well decked with ornaments all over your body but you seem wanting in cleverness; for you are not worshipping me. Who has advised you to renounce enjoyments?
NEW CORR ENG ──► True that you are well decked with ornaments all over your body but you seem wanting in cleverness; for you are not worshipping me. Who has advised you to renounce enjoyments?

[Ch 16 Verse 56-57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sweet speaking One! If this be true; then surely he is your enemy; he has deceived you. O Dear! Leave your this stubbornness and marry me; both of us shall then be happy. Visnu shines well with Kamalā, Brahmā looks splendid with Savitri, Rudra is well associated with Pārvatī and Indra with Saṃi, so I will shine well with you; there is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sweet speaking One! If this be true; then surely he is your enemy; he has deceived you. O Dear! Leave your this stubbornness and marry me; both of us shall then be happy. Viṣṇu shines well with Kamalā, Brahmā looks splendid with Savitrī, Rudra is well associated with Parvatī and Indra with Śacī, so I will shine well with you; there is no doubt in this.

[Ch 16 Verse 58-60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No woman can ever be happy without any good husband. And why are you not then, acknowledging me your husband even when you have got him. O Beloved! Where is now that Cupid of dull intellect? Why is he not troubling you with his maddening delicate five arrows?
NEW CORR ENG ──► No woman can ever be happy without any good husband. And why are you not then, acknowledging me your husband even when you have got him. O Beloved! Where is now that Cupid of dull intellect? Why is he not troubling you with his maddening delicate five arrows?

[Ch 16 Verse 61-63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Fair one! I think that Madana (the god of Love) out of his pity to you, seeing that you are very weak is not striking his arrows on you as he has done to me. O One looking askance! Or it may be that I have got some enmity with that Cupid; else why is he not shooting arrows at you? Or my enemies the Devas have advised the God of Love not to dart his arrows on you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Fair one! I think that Madana (the god of Love) out of his pity to you, seeing that you are very weak is not striking his arrows on you as he has done to me. O One looking askance! Or it may be that I have got some enmity with that Cupid; else why is he not shooting arrows at you? Or my enemies the Devas have advised the God of Love not to dart his arrows on you.

[Ch 16 Verse 64-65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O One of slender body! As Mandodari had to marry afterwards, when she became passionate, a hypocrite, and so she had to repent thinking that she had not married before a beautiful auspicious king, so I think, O One, having eyes like the young of a deer! You, too, will have to repent like her if you decline to marry me now. Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book in the conversation between the Devi and Mahiṣasura in Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahāpurānam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O One of slender body! As Mandodarī had to marry afterwards, when she became passionate, a hypocrite, and so she had to repent thinking that she had not married before a beautiful auspicious king, so I think, O One, having eyes like the young of a deer! You, too, will have to repent like her if you decline to marry me now. Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the conversation between the Devī and Mahiṣāsura in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahāpurāṇam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
