[Ch 11 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: When the Devas retired from the battlefield, Śukrācārya addressed the Demons thus: O best of the Demons! Please hear, what had been told to me by Brahmañ in days of yore.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- When the Devas retired from the battlefield, Śukrācārya addressed the Demons thus :-- O best of the Demons! Please hear, what had been told to me by Brahmā in days of yore.

[Ch 11 Verse 2-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janārdana Visnu is coming here to slay all the Demons. He killed before Hiranyāksa, the king of the Asuras, in His Boar incarnation. He killed Hiranyakasipu by assuming His Man-Lion appearance; now too, he will kill all the Daityas, no doubt, with great enthusiasm.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janārdan Viṣṇu is coming here to slay all the Demons, He killed before Hiraṇyākṣa, the king of the Asuras, in His Boar incarnation. He killed Hiraṇyakasipu by assuming His Man-Lion appearance; now too, he will kill all the Daityas, no doubt, with great enthusiasm.

[Ch 11 Verse 4-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now my mantra force will not be of any avail before Śrī Hari. And without my help you will not be able to conquer the Devas. Therefore, O Demons wait for some time for me; I will start to-day to the presence of Śiva Mahādeva to obtain from him the Mantra Śakti.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now my mantra force will not be of any avail before Śrī Hari. And without my help you will not be able to conquer the Devas. Therefore, O Demons, wait for some time for me; I will start today to the presence of Śiva Mahādeva to obtain from him the Mantra Śakti.

[Ch 11 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I will return, as early as possible, getting the Mantras from Śri Mahādeva; and with the help of the power of those great Mantras I will be able to protect you thoroughly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will return, as early as possible, getting the Mantra from Śrī Mahādeva; and with the help of the power of those great Mantras I will be able to protect you thoroughly.

[Ch 11 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Daityas said: O best of the Munis! We are now defeated and our forces are well nigh exhausted; how will we be able to stay on this earth and expect your return for so long a time?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Daityas said :-- O best of the Munis! We are now defeated and our forces are well nigh exhausted; how will we be able to stay on this earth and expect your return for so long a time?

[Ch 11 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who were of great strength amongst us, they all are slain; now we are left very few in number. In this crisis it is not advisable and auspicious for us to remain here in this battlefield.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who were of great strength amongst us, they all are slain; now we are left very few in number. In this crisis it is not advisable and auspicious for us to remain here in this battlefield.

[Ch 11 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śukrācārya said: Better you all stay here until I return, getting the requisite Mantra; remain peaceful and engaged in asceticism.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śukrācārya said :-- Better you all stay here until I return, getting the requisite Mantra; remain peaceful and engaged in asceticism.

[Ch 11 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The heroes apply one or other of the following four measures:—conciliation, alliance, gifts and bribery, partitions and sowing dissensions and punishment or open according to the conditions of time, place, strength and circumstances. (10)
NEW CORR ENG ──► The heroes apply one or other of the following four measures :-- conciliation, alliance, gifts and bribery, partitions and sowing dissensions and punishment or open attack according to the conditions of time, place strength and circumstances.

[Ch 11 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Intelligent and well wishing persons do serve their enemies even in times of distress; but no sooner they find that tleir strength and army have increased, than they try at once to kill all their enemies.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Intelligent and well wishing persons do serve their enemies even in time of distress; but no sooner they find that their strength and army have increased, than they try at once to kill all their enemies.

[Ch 11 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now, therefore, pretend your meekness and allegiance and adopt peace and remain in your own place until my arrivel.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now, therefore, pretend your meekness and allegiance and adopt peace and remain in your own place until my arrival.

[Ch 11 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Demons! I will come back with the Mantra from Mahādeva. I will fight again with the Devas, by that veritable mantra power.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Demons! I will come back with the Mantra from Mahādeva. I will fight again with the Devas, by that veritable mantra power.

[Ch 11 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Thus firmly making up his mind to have the Mantra, Śukrācārya went to Mahādeva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Thus firmly making up his mind to have the Mantra, Śukrācārya went to Mahādeva.

[Ch 11 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Dānavas sent Prahlāda to the Devas for conciliation. The Devas regarded Prahlāda truthful and they all trusted on him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Dānavas sent Prahlāda to the Devas for conciliation. The Devas regarded Prahlāda truthful and they all trusted on him.

[Ch 11 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Prahlada witb Asuras addressed thus thc Devas with gentleness and humility.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Prahlāda with Asuras addressed thus the Devas with gentleness and humility.

[Ch 11 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Immortals! We all have abandoned weapons and armour. Now we desire to wear barks of trees and practise asceticism.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Immortals! We all have abandoned our weapons and armour. Now we desire to wear barks of trees and practise asceticism.

[Ch 11 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas took Prahlada’s words to be true and deserted from further fight; were freed of anxiety and felt all delighted.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devās took Prahlāda’s words to be true and deserted from further fight; were freed of anxiety and felt all delighted.

[Ch 11 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the Daitya’s leaving their weapons, the Gods desisted from battle, went to their respective places and freely gave themselves up to pleasures and amusements.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the Daitya’s leaving their weapons, the Gods desisted from battle, went to their respective places and freely gave themselves up to pleasure and amusements.

[Ch 11 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Daityas controlled themselves and practised asceticism in the KaSyapa’s hermitage, cxpecling the return of Sukracarya.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Daityas controlled themselves and practised asceticism in the Kaśyapa’s hermitage, expecting the return of Śukrācārya.

[Ch 11 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sukracarya went to Kaildsa and made respectful obeisance to the God Mahadeva. Mahadeva enquired of the cause of his coming.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śukrācārya went to Kailāsa and made respectful obeisance to the God Mahādeva. Mahādeva enquired of the cause of his coming.

[Ch 11 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sukracarya said: I ask for Mantras, O Deva! from you that are not possessed by Brhaspati, for the defeat of the Devas, and the victory of the Asuras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śukrācārya said :-- I ask for Mantras, O Deva! from you that are not possessed by Bṛhaspati, for the defeat of the Devas, and the victory of the Asuras.

[Ch 11 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyasa said: On hearing his words, the all knowing Sankara Siva began to think what He would do in this matter.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- On hearing his words, the all-knowing Śaṅkara Śiva began to think what He would do in this matter.

[Ch 11 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Certainly, this is with the revengeful object of attacking the Devas, for their defeat and for the victory of the Asuras that this Muni has come.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Certainly, this is with the revengeful object of attacking the Devas, for their defeat and for the victory of the Asuras that this Muni has come.

[Ch 11 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas ought to be protected by me; thus thinking, Sankara Mahesvara advised him an entirely difficult tapasya to practise.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas ought to be protected by me; thus thinking, Śaṅkara Maheśvara advised him an entirely difficult tapasyā to practise.

[Ch 11 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Full one thousand years he would practise tapasya with feet upwards and head downwards, he will have to inhale the smoke of burnt husk. Then he will get the Mantra and his desires will be fulfilled.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Full one thousand years he would practise tapasyā with feet upwards and head downwards, he will have to inhale the smoke of burnt husk. Then he will get the Mantra and his desires will be fulfilled.

[Ch 11 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That would be done; thus saying to Sankara, Sukracarya practised that excellent vow, peaceful and inhaling the smoke of husk to get that Mantra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That would be done; thus saying to Śaṅkara, Śukrācārya practised that excellent vow, peaceful and inhaling the smoke of husk to get that Mantra.

[Ch 11 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas came to know that Sukracarya is practing his vow and the Daityas have become arrogant. They then counselled.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas came to know that Śukrācārya is practising his vow and the Daityas have become arrogant. They then counselled.

[Ch 11 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And came to the conclusion, took up weapons and arms and went to the Daityas, ready to fight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And came to the conclusion, took up weapons and arms and went to the Daityas, ready to fight.

[Ch 11 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Daityas, seeing the Devas dressed in armour and holding weapons and coming from all sides, became very much afraid and anxious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Daityas, seeing the Devas dressed in armour and holding weapons and coming from all sides, became very much afraid and anxious.

[Ch 11 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Daityas, seeing this all on a sudden, were attacked with fear and began to address the Devas, proud with their army, in words, full of good meanings and morals.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Daityas, seeing this all on a sudden, were attacked with fear and began to address the Devas, proud with their army, in words, full of good meanings and morals.

[Ch 11 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devas? We have abandoned our arms; we are now armless; our spiritual guide is in his tapasyā, you gave us words of fearlessness; why then you have come now dressed in full armour and with armies to kill us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devas! We have abandoned our arms; we are now armless; our spiritual guide is in his tapasyā, you gave us words of fearlessness; why then you have come now dressed in full armour and with armies to kill us.

[Ch 11 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devas! Where is your truth. And where is your religion according to Śruti? It is stated in Śruti never to kill the weaponless, the fear stricken, and the refugees.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devas! Where is your truth. And where is your religion acccording to Śruti? It is stated in Śruti never to kill the weaponless, the fear stricken, and the refugees.

[Ch 11 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas said: You sent your good Śukrācārya, out of pretence to acquire the Mantras; your asceticism is veiled under a deceitful object. Therefore we will fight with you certainly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas said :-- You sent your good Śukrācārya, out of pretence to acquire the Mantras; your asceticism is veiled under a deceitful object. Therefore we will fight with you certainly.

[Ch 11 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Be ready now and dress yourself with your arms and ammunitions. “Lo! Whenever you get any loop hole in your enemies, catch hold of it and kill your enemy.” This is the eternal religion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Be ready now and dress yourself with your arms and ammunitions, “Lo! Whenever you get any loop hole in your enemies, catch hold of it and kill your enemy.” This is the eternal religion.

[Ch 11 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: 'On thus hearing the reply from the Devas, the Daityas after consideration quitted that place and fled away terror.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- On thus hearing the reply from the Devas, the Daityas after consideration quitted that place and fled away with terror.

[Ch 11 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And they took refuge under the Šukrācāryā's mother. She saw the Daityas very much fear- stricken and at once guaranteed to them protection from fear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And they took refuge under the Śukrācārya’s mother. She saw the Daityas very much fearstricken and at once guaranteed to them protection from fear.

[Ch 11 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The mother of Kāvya Sukrācārya said: Don't fear; don't fear; cast away fear. O Dānavas! In my presence, no fear can overtake you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The mother of Kāvya Śukrācārya said :-- Don’t fear; don’t fear; cast away fear. O Dānavas! In my presence, no fear can overtake you.

[Ch 11 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Asuras on hearing her words were free from anxiety and pain and remained in that hermitage, in no way now bewildered or agitated, though they had no arms.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Asuras on hearing her words were free from anxiety and pain and remained in that hermitage, in no way now bewildered or agitated, though they had no arms.

[Ch 11 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Here the Devas, seeing the Daityas flying away, pursued them and entering the hermitage were ready to kill the Daityas, not taking into account what strength they gained there. The mother of Šukra warned the Devas not to kill; but, inspite of her hindrance, they began to slay the Daityas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Here the Devas, seeing the Daityas flying away, pursued them and entering the hermitage were ready to kill the Daityas, not taking into account what strength they gained there. The mother of Śukrā warned the Devas not to kill; but, inspite of her hindrance, they began to slay the Daityas.

[Ch 11 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the Daityas thus attacked, the mother was furiously irritated and told them she would make all of them overpowered by sleep by her tapas strength, clarified intellectual force. Note: Is it by the asphyxiating gas? Or, by poisonous vapours or liquids?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the Daityas thus attacked, the mother was furiously irritated and told them she would make all of them overpowered by sleep by her tapas strength, clarified intellectual force. Note :--Is it by the asphyxiating gas? Or, by poisonous vapours or liquids?

[Ch 11 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So saying she sent the Goddess of sleep who at once overpowered the Gods and made them all lie down on the grounds senseless. Indra with the other Devas lay there dumb, and miserable.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So saying she sent the Goddess of sleep who at once overpowered the Gods and made them all lie down on the grounds senseless. Indra with the other Devas lay there dumb, and miserable.

[Ch 11 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On seeing Indra thus stupefied by sleep, the Bhagavān Viṣṇu told Indra to enter into His today. He would then carry him to another place and he will be better.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On seeing Indra thus stupefied by sleep, the Bhagavān Viṣṇu told Indra to enter into His body. He would then carry him to another place and he will be better.

[Ch 11 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra entered into the Viṣṇu's body; and, under His protection, he became free from sleep and fear. On seeing Indra thus sheltered by Viṣṇu and fearless, the mother of Kāvya spoke.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra entered into the Viṣṇu’s body; and, under His protection, he became free from sleep and fear. On seeing Indra thus sheltered by Viṣṇu and fearless, the mother of Kāvya spoke.

[Ch 11 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Indra! I will devour you with Viṣṇu to-day by my Tapas force. All the Devas will presently see all this and my extraordinary power. Note. B. Is it by making the earth go down, causing a fissure, thus engulfing the whole army? Or by blowing them up? Or by showering jets of poisonous gas or hot water or vapour from all sides.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Indra! I will devour you with Viṣṇu today by my Tapas force. All the Devas will presently see all this and my extraordinary power. N.B.: Is it by making the earth go down, causing a fissure, thus engulfing the whole army? Or by blowing them up? Or by showering jets of poisonous gas or hot water or vapour from all sides.

[Ch 11 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! No sooner the mother spoke thus, than both Indra and Viṣṇu were both stupefied under her magical spell, superior thought power, and a thorough learning of the art of warfare.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! No sooner the mother spoke thus, than both Indra and Viṣṇu were both stupefied under her magical spell, superior thought power, and a thorough learning of the art of warfare.

[Ch 11 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas, seeing them very much overpowered and bewildered, were greatly struck with wonder; they became desperate and began to cry aloud.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas, seeing them very much overpowered and bewildered, were greatly struck with wonder; they became desperate and began to cry aloud.

[Ch 11 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra, on hearing the Devas cry aloud, told Viṣṇu, O Madhusūdana! I am more bewildered in particular than yourself.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra, on hearing the Devas cry aloud, told Viṣṇu, O Madhusūdana! I am more bewildered in particular than yourself.

[Ch 11 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mādhava! No need of any further consideration. Before this wretch, inflated with pride by her tapasyā, burns us, better cause her death as early as possible.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mādhava! No need of any further consideration. Before this wretch, inflated with pride by her tapasyā, burns us, better cause her death as early as possible.

[Ch 11 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When thus requested by Indra who was very much perplexed, Bhagavān Viṣṇu quickly remembered his Sudarśana disc, casting aside the thought that it is hateful to kill a woman.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When thus requested by Indra who was very much perplexed, Bhagavān Viṣṇu quickly remembered his Sudarśana disc, casting aside the thought that it is hateful to kill a woman.

[Ch 11 Verse 54-55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The disc, the ever obedient weapon of Viṣṇu appeared instantly at his remembrance; and Viṣṇu, becoming angry as prompted by Indra held the disc in His hand, and, hurling it off on the Śukra's mother, severed off her head quickly. God Indra became very glad at this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The disc, the ever obedient weapon of Viṣṇu appeared instantly at his remembrance; and Viṣṇu, becoming angry as prompted by Indra held the disc in His hand, and, hurling it off on the Śukrā’s mother, severed off her head quickly. The god Indra became very glad at this.

[Ch 11 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas became free from sorrow, got very much pleased and heartily hailed victory to Hari and worshipped Him and began to chant His praises.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas became free from sorrow, got very much pleased and heartily exclaimed victory to Hari and worshipped Him and began to chant His praises.

[Ch 11 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra and Viṣṇu then became free from all troubles; but they began to fear that Bhrgu (Śukra's father) would curse terribly and without fail. Here ends the Eleventh Chapter in the Fourth Book of Srimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa, on Śukra's gong to Mahādeva to get the Mantra. Śrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra and Viṣṇu then became free from all troubles; but they began to fear that Bhṛgu (Śukrā’s father) would curse them terribly and without fail. Here ends the Eleventh Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrī mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa, on Śukrā’s going to Mahādeva to get the Mantra.
