CHAPTER XI

On Šukra's Going to Mahādeva to Get the Mantra

व्यास उवाच

तया गोतु येवेतु काव्यस्तान्यवुचार है ।

बहागा पूर्वेमुक्ते चब्बुणुळ्यं दानवोतमाः ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: When the Devas retired from the

battlefield, Śukrācārya addressed the Demons thus:

O best of the Demons! Please hear, what had been

told to me by Brahmañ in days of yore.

विष्णुर्वैलयो युक्तो हनिष्यिति जनार्दतः ।

वाराहरूपं संस्थाय विराण्याश्रो यथा हत: ॥ 2 ॥


यथा नृसिंहरूपेण हिरण्यकशिपुर्णतः ।

तथा सर्वान्कृतोत्साहो हनिष्यति न चान्यथा ॥ 3 ॥

Janārdana Visnu is coming here to slay all the Demons. He killed before Hiranyāksa, the king of the Asuras, in His Boar incarnation. He killed Hiranyakasipu by assuming His Man-Lion appearance; now too, he will kill all the Daityas, no doubt, with great enthusiasm.

न मे मन्वलं सप्यक्रतिभाति यथा हरिम ।

जेतुं यूयं समर्थः स्व मया जाताः सुरान्य ॥ 4 ॥

तस्माकालं प्रतिक्षध्यं क्रियन्तं दान्वोतम्पा ।

अहमदा महदोंदे मन्त्राथ प्रज्ञापि वे ॥ 5 ॥

Now my mantra force will not be of any avail before Śrī Hari. And without my help you will not be able to conquer the Devas. Therefore, O Demons wait for some time for me; I will start to-day to the presence of Śiva Mahādeva to obtain from him the Mantra Śakti.

प्राय मन्यान्महादेवाद्यापिध्यापि सामप्रतम् ।

युषमधं तान्यदास्यामि यथार्थ दानवोतमा: ॥ 6 ॥

I will return, as early as possible, getting the Mantras from Śri Mahādeva; and with the help of the power of those great Mantras I will be able to protect you thoroughly.

दैत्या ऊचुः

भार्जिताः कवं स्थातुं पृथिव्यां मुनिसत्तम ।

शक्ता भवामो.प्रयलत्सात्वाकलं प्र.दि.सिनुम् ॥ 7 ॥

The Daityas said: O best of the Munis! We are now defeated and our forces are well nigh exhausted; how will we be able to stay on this earth and expect your return for so long a time?

नित्ता बलिनः सर्वे केविष्छिष्टा हवनाः ।

नाद्य सुक्ताश्य संग्रामे स्थानुषेयं सुखावहः ॥ ८ ॥

Those who were of great strength amongst us, they all are slain; now we are left very few in number. In this crisis it is not advisable and auspicious for us to remain here in this battlefield.

शुक्र सचच

यावदई मन्त्रविद्यामानियाणि शक्रगत् ।

तावद्धविद्धः स्थाल्यं तपोयुक्तः: शामवितः ॥ 9 ॥

Śukrācārya said: Better you all stay here until I return, getting the requisite Mantra; remain peaceful and engaged in asceticism.

सामदानादयः प्रोक्ता विद्धाद्धः सभ्योचिताः ।

देशं कालं बलं वीरित्राला शफिंक बलं बुधैः ॥ १ ० ॥

The heroes apply one or other of the following four measures:—conciliation, alliance, gifts and bribery, partitions and sowing dissensions and punishment or open according to the conditions of time, place, strength and circumstances. (10)

सेवाउव समये काव्यां शज्जगा शुभकायया ।

स्वशकलुपयरे काले हन्तवासले मनीषिभि: ॥ 11 ॥

Intelligent and well wishing persons do serve their enemies even in times of distress; but no sooner they find that tleir strength and army have increased, than they try at once to kill all their enemies.

तद्वि चिनयं कृत्वा समापूर्वे छलेने वे ।

तिष्छयं स्विनैकेतैयुं मदागमतकांक्षया ॥ 12 ॥

Now, therefore, pretend your meekness and allegiance and adopt peace and remain in your own place until my arrivel.

प्राय्य मन्त्रान्महादेवादागमिष्ण्यामि दानावा: ।

युध्यामहे पुनर्वैवान्मानमारथाय वै कवम् ॥ 13 ॥

O Demons! I will come back with the Mantra from Mahādeva. I will fight again with the Devas, by that veritable mantra power.

इन्युकल्याथ धपुत्सेधो जगाम कृतनिध्यः ।

महावरं महारतं नन्द्रार्यं मुनिस्तमः ॥ 14 ॥

O King! Thus firmly making up his mind to have the Mantra, Śukrācārya went to Mahādeva.

दानावः प्रेयमामुः ग्रहादं सुरसप्रिधे ।

सत्यवादिनमध्यं सुगणं प्रत्ययप्रदम् ॥ १ ५ ॥

The Dānavas sent Prahlāda to the Devas for conciliation. The Devas regarded Prahlāda truthful and they all trusted on him.

प्रब्रादस्तु सुराग्राह प्रश्यावन्तो नृपः ।

असुरैः सहितस्तत्र वचनं नमतायुतम् ॥ १ ६ ॥

Vey सुरान्ग्राह प्रश्रयावनतो za: ।

असुरैः सहितस्तत्र वचनं नम्रतायुतम्‌ ॥ 16 ॥

Prahlada witb Asuras addressed thus thc Devas
with gentleness and humility.
Book IV Chapter XI

341

न्यस्तशस्त्रा वयं सर्वे निःसन्नाहास्तथैच च ।

देव्रैस्तपश्चरिष्यामः संवृता बल्कलैर्खुताः ॥ 17 ॥

O Immortals! We all have abandoned
weapons and armour. Now we desire to wear barks
of trees and practise asceticism.

प्रह्लादस्य बचः श्रुत्वा सत्याभिव्याहृतं तु तत्‌ ।

ततो देवा न्यवर्तन्त बिज्चरा मुदिताश्च ते ॥ 18 ॥

The Devas took Prahlada’s words to be true and
deserted from further fight; were freed of anxiety
and felt all delighted.

न्यस्तशस्त्रेषु दैत्येषु चिनिवृत्तास्तरदा सुराः ।

विश्रब्धाः स्वगृहानात्वा क्रीडासक्ताः सुसंस्थिताः ॥ 19 ॥

On the Daitya’s leaving their weapons, the Gods
desisted from battle, went to their respective places
and freely gave themselves up to pleasures and
amusements.

दैत्या दम्भं समालम्ब्य ATTA: ।

कश्यपस्याश्रमे वासं चक्रुः काव्यागमेच्छया ॥ 20 ॥

The Daityas controlled themselves and practised
asceticism in the KaSyapa’s hermitage, cxpecling
the return of Sukracarya.

काव्यो गत्वाऽथ कैलासं महादेवं प्रणम्य च ।

उवाच विभुना पृष्टः किं ते कार्यमिति प्रभुः ॥ 21 ॥

Sukracarya went to Kaildsa and made respectful
obeisance to the God Mahadeva. Mahadeva
enquired of the cause of his coming.

मन्त्रानिच्छाम्यहं देव ये न सन्ति बृहस्पतौ |

पराजयाय देवानामसुराणां जयाय च ॥22॥

Sukracarya said: I ask for Mantras, O Deva!
from you that are not possessed by Brhaspati, for
the defeat of the Devas, and the victory of the
Asuras.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छुत्वा बचनं तस्य सर्वज्ञः शङ्करः शिवः ।

चिन्तयामास मनसा किं कर्तव्यमत्तः परम्‌ ॥ 23 ॥

Vyasa said: On hearing his words, the all
knowing Sankara Siva began to think what He
would do in this matter.

सुरेषु द्रोहबुद्धयाऽसौ मन्त्रार्थमिह साम्प्रतम्‌ ।

पराप्तः काव्यो गुरुस्तेषां दैत्यानां विजयाय च ॥ 24 ॥

Certainly, this is with the revengeful object of
attacking the Devas, for their defeat and for the
victory of the Asuras that this Muni has come.

रक्षणीया मया देवा इति सञ्चिन्त्य शङ्करः ।

पुष्करं ब्रतमत्युग्रं तमुबाच महेश्वरः ॥25॥

The Devas ought to be protected by me; thus
thinking, Sankara Mahesvara advised him an
entirely difficult tapasya to practise.

पूर्ण वर्षसहस्त्रं तु कणधूममवाक्शिराः ।

यदि पास्यसि भत्रं ते तततो मन्त्रानवाप्स्यसि ॥ 26 ॥

Full one thousand years he would practise
tapasya with feet upwards and head downwards,
he will have to inhale the smoke of burnt husk.
Then he will get the Mantra and his desires will be
fulfilled.

Sasa प्रणम्येशं वाढमित्यब्रवीद्ठचः |

ad चराम्यहं देव त्वयाऽऽज्ञप्तः सुरेश्वर ॥ 27 ॥

That would be done; thus saying to Sankara,
Sukracarya practised that excellent vow, peaceful
and inhaling the smoke of husk to get that Mantra.

च्यात उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा शङ्करं काव्यश्चकार व्रतमुत्तमम्‌ |

धूमपानरत शान्तो मन्त्रार्थकृतनिश्चयः ॥ 28 ॥

तत्तो देवाः परिज्ञात्वा काव्धं ब्रतरतं तदा ।


दैत्यान्दम्भरतांश्चैव बभूवुर्मन्त्रतत्पराः ॥ 29 ॥

The Devas came to know that Sukracarya is
practing his vow and the Daityas have become
arrogant. They then counselled.

विचार्य मनसा सर्बे संग्रामायोद्यता नृप ।

ययुर्धुतायुधास्तत्र यत्र ते दानवोत्तमाः ॥ 30 ॥

And came to the conclusion, took up weapons
and arms and went to the Daityas, ready to fight.

तानागतान्समीक्ष्याथ सायुधान्दशितांस्तथा ।

आसंस्ते भयसंविगना दैत्या देवान्समंततः ॥ 31 ॥

The Daityas, seeing the Devas dressed in armour
and holding weapons and coming from all sides,
became very much afraid and anxious.

उत्पेतुः सहसा त्ते वै सन्नद्धान्मयकशिताः ।

अबुवन्बचनं तथ्यं ते देवान्बलदर्पितान्‌ ॥ 32 ॥

The Daityas, seeing this all on a sudden, were


attacked with fear and began to address the Devas,
proud with their army, in words, full of good
meanings and morals.

न्यस्तशस्त्रे भगवति आचार्ये व्रतमास्थिते ।

दत्त्वाभयं पुरा देवाः संप्राप्ता नो जिघांसया ॥ 33 ॥


O Devas? We have abandoned our arms; we are now armless; our spiritual guide is in his tapasyā, you gave us words of fearlessness; why then you have come now dressed in full armour and with armies to kill us.

सत्यं वः क्व गतं देया धर्मेध् सुतिनोदितः।

यस्ताश्चान् न हन्तव्या भीताक्ष प्राणं गताः ॥ 34 ॥

O Devas! Where is your truth. And where is your religion according to Śruti? It is stated in Śruti never to kill the weaponless, the fear stricken, and the refugees.

देश कलुः

भविद्धः प्रेपितः काव्यो मन्यार्थ कृहकेन च ।

तपो ज्ञान हिं युभाकं तेन युध्याम एव हि ॥ 35 ॥

The Devas said: You sent your good Śukrācārya, out of pretence to acquire the Mantras; your asceticism is veiled under a deceitful object. Therefore we will fight with you certainly.

सज्जा भवंतु युद्धाय संरक्षा: श्रक्षापाणय: ।

शुश्रिक्छ्रीण हन्तल्य एव धर्म: सनातन: ॥ 36 ॥

Be ready now and dress yourself with your arms and ammunitions. “Lo! Whenever you get any loop hole in your enemies, catch hold of it and kill your enemy.” This is the eternal religion.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छुला वचनं दैला विचारांचे च परस्यम् ।

पलायवनपर: सर्वे निर्भात भयविहृक्तः ॥ 37 ॥

Vyāsa said: 'On thus hearing the reply from the Devas, the Daityas after consideration quitted that place and fled away terror.

शरणं दानवा जगमुर्षितारते काव्यमात्तम् ।

दूधा तानतिस्ततानभयं च दूदावय ॥ 38 ॥

And they took refuge under the Šukrācāryā's mother. She saw the Daityas very much fear-

stricken and at once guaranteed to them protection from fear.

काव्यमातोवाच

न भेतल्यं न भेतल्यं भयं त्यजत दानावा: ।

मस्तप्रिधी वर्तमानारा भीभवितमूर्तिति ॥ 39 ॥

The mother of Kāvya Sukrācārya said: Don't fear; don't fear; cast away fear. O Dānavas! In my presence, no fear can overtake you.

तच्छूत्वा वचनं दैन्वा: सितास्तत्र नताव्याः ।

निरायुधा ह्रसंप्रांतास्ताजामवरेसुरा: ॥ 40 ॥

The Asuras on hearing her words were free from anxiety and pain and remained in that hermitage, in no way now bewildered or agitated, though they had no arms.

देवास्ताप्रिद्धुतान्बीक्ष्य दान्बांतरे पदानुगाः ।

अभिजमुः प्रसंष्ठ तानविचार्यं वतावतम् ॥ 41 ॥

तत्रागता: सुरा: सर्वे हेतुं द्वैत्यानमुघताः ।

वारिताः काव्यमात्राजपि जन्मुतानामश्रयितान् ॥ 4 2 ॥

Here the Devas, seeing the Daityas flying away, pursued them and entering the hermitage were ready to kill the Daityas, not taking into account what strength they gained there. The mother of Šukra warned the Devas not to kill; but, inspite of her hindrance, they began to slay the Daityas.

हन्यमानानुरैद्वया काव्यमानाउतिविधिता ।

उदाच सर्वान्निर्जित्साय तै करोभ्यदूम् ॥ 43 ॥

Seeing the Daityas thus attacked, the mother was furiously irritated and told them she would make all of them overpowered by sleep by her tapas strength, clarified intellectual force.

Note: Is it by the asphyxiating gas? Or, by poisonous vapours or liquids?

इतुकुला प्रोतता निद्रा तानागत्य पयात च ।

सेंत्र निद्रावणं याता देवा मुक्ववृत्तस्थितः ॥ 44 ॥

So saying she sent the Goddess of sleep who at once overpowered the Gods and made them all lie down on the grounds senseless. Indra with the other Devas lay there dumb, and miserable.

इन्हें निद्राजितं दृष्टवा दीन विद्याप्रभालत ।

मां तां प्रशिक्ष भई ते नये त्वां च सुरोतम ॥ 4 5 ॥

Book IV Chapter XI

On seeing Indra thus stupefied by sleep, the Bhagavān Viṣṇu told Indra to enter into His today. He would then carry him to another place and he will be better.

एवमुक्तस्तो विद्युं प्रविशेष पुरन्द्रः ।

निर्भयो गतिनिद्रश बभूव हरिरक्षितः ॥ 4 6 ॥

रहितं हरिणा दूर्वहा शकं तत्र गतवध्यम् ।

काव्यमाता ततः कुब्दा वचनं चेदमवबीत् ॥ 4 7 ॥

Indra entered into the Viṣṇu's body; and, under His protection, he became free from sleep and fear. On seeing Indra thus sheltered by Viṣṇu and fearless, the mother of Kāvya spoke.

मघवंल्चां भक्ष्यामि सायिन्धुं वे तपोबलात् ।

पुर्यातं सर्वदेवानामीदूगं मे तपोबलम् ॥ 48 ॥

O Indra! I will devour you with Viṣṇu to-day by my Tapas force. All the Devas will presently see all this and my extraordinary power.

Note. B. Is it by making the earth go down, causing a fissure, thus engulfing the whole army? Or by blowing them up? Or by showering jets of poisonous gas or hot water or vapour from all sides.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्ती तु तया देवी विधिग्वर्त्रे योगविदाया ।

अभिपूर्ती महात्मानी सत्यधी ती सम्बयपुत: ॥ 49 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! No sooner the mother spoke thus, than both Indra and Viṣṇu were both stupefied under her magical spell, superior thought power, and a thorough learning of the art of warfare.

विस्मतन्तु तदा देया दूरवा ततवित्वारिति ।

चढ़: किल्लिकलाखंदू ततसे दीनामतास: ॥ ५० ॥

The Devas, seeing them very much overpowered and bewildered, were greatly struck with wonder; they became desperate and began to cry aloud.

कोशमानानुसारनुद्धवा विशुं प्राह शचीपति: ।

विशेषेणाधिपभूतोरभ्य तलतो३हं मधुयुत्न । ५ १ । ॥

Indra, on hearing the Devas cry aloud, told Viṣṇu, O Madhusūdana! I am more bewildered in particular than yourself.

जहौनो तरसा विषयो यातनो न देहोरभो ।

तपसा दर्पितं दुर्गं मा विचारय भायव ॥ 52 ॥

O Mādhava! No need of any further consideration. Before this wretch, inflated with pride by her tapasyā, burns us, better cause her death as early as possible.

इन्युक्तो भगवान्विणुः शंकिम प्रथितेन च ।

चक्रे समसार तरसा धृणां त्यकल्याम धायदः ॥ 53 ॥

When thus requested by Indra who was very much perplexed, Bhagavān Viṣṇu quickly remembered his Sudarśana disc, casting aside the thought that it is hateful to kill a woman.

स्युतमारंत्रे सु सम्पादां चक्र विष्ण्यग्रानुम् ।

दधार च करे कुब्दो घधार्थ शकनोदितः ॥ 54 ॥

गृहीत्वा तक्नरे चक्र शिरोधिष्ठचेट रंहस ।

हतां दूद्धया तु तां शको मृवितक्षापचतदा ॥ 55 ॥

The disc, the ever obedient weapon of Viṣṇu appeared instantly at his remembrance; and Viṣṇu, becoming angry as prompted by Indra held the disc in His hand, and, hurling it off on the Śukra's mother, severed off her head quickly. God Indra became very glad at this.

देवाश्रातील सन्तुहा हरिं जय जयेति च ।

तुहुवुर्युतितः सर्वे संज्ञाता शिगतज्ञातः ॥ 56 ॥

The Devas became free from sorrow, got very much pleased and heartily hailed victory to Hari and worshipped Him and began to chant His praises.

इन्द्रविष्यू तुं जजाती तत्क्षणापूर्वद्वव्यव्यो ।

स्त्रीविधान्डकमानो तु भुगोः शापं दुरत्यम् ॥ 57 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीपागवते महापुराणे चतुर्बेकब्भे

एकावशो3थण: 11 17 11

Indra and Viṣṇu then became free from all troubles; but they began to fear that Bhrgu (Śukra's father) would curse terribly and without fail.

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter in the

Fourth Book of Srimaddevibhāgavatam,

the Mahā Purānam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa,

on Śukra's gong to Mahādeva

to get the Mantra.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

