CHAPTER XII

On Holding the Tripundra and Urdhvapundra

श्रीनारायण उवाच

देलपँ शृष्टु ततवर्दं भवमोद्धुलनं फलम् ।

सरास्यविधानं च सर्वकामफलप्रदम् ॥ १ ॥

क्रपिल्या: शकृत्वच्छं गृहीत्वा गगाने पत्न।

न क्रिलनं नापि कठिनं न वुर्धीं न चोषितम् ॥ २ ॥

Śrī Nārāyaṇa said: O Devarṣī Nārada! Hear now the great secret and the fruits of besmearing one's body with ashes, yielding all desire. The pure cowdung of the Kapila (brown) cow is to be taken up by the hand before it reaches the ground. It should not be like mire i.e., not like a liquid; it should not be also very hard nor should it emit a bad stench.

उपधीध: परित्यज्य गृह्रीयात्यितं यदि ।

पिंदीकृत्व शिवायन्यदी तलिष्येमूलगन्यितनः ॥ 3 ॥

आयाय वासासच्छाद्ध भस्माधाने विनिषक्षित् ।

सुकृते सुरुहे सुखे क्षालिले प्रोक्षिते सुभे ॥ 4 ॥

And in case if the cowdung that has already fallen on the earth, has to be taken, it should be scraped off from the top and bottom; make it into a ball and then burn it in a pure fire, repeating the principal mantra. Take the ash and tie it in a piece of cloth and keep it in a pot. The pot in which the ashes are to be kept should be nice and good, hard, clean and sprinkled over for purification.

विच्यस्य मंत्री मन्नेण पाते भयम् विनिश्विषेत् ।

तैजसं दारवं चाव मून्यं चैल्मेव च ॥ ५ ॥

अन्यढ़ा शोभनं शुखं भयमाधांर प्रकल्पयेत् ।

क्षीते चैवातिगुर्जे वा घनवद्धम्य निशिद्धित् ॥ ६ ॥

Uttering the principal mantra, one is to keep the ashes in the pot. The pot may be of metal, wood, earth, or cloth; or it can be kept in any other nice pot. The ashes can be kept in a silken bag where the mohurs are kept. In going to a distant land, the devotee can take the ashes himself or kept with his accompanying servant.

प्रशिक्षो भस्म गृह्मीयावलयं चानुचरोर्धि चा ।

न चायुकको दहात्र चाशुचितले विश्वेति ॥ 7 ॥

न संस्थूशेनु नीचार्गेने विश्वेत्र च लंचयेत् ।

तस्माद्विसतादाय विविण्युज्ञो मंत्रितम् ॥ 8 ॥

When it is to be given to somebody, it is to be given with both the hands; never with one hand. Never keep it in an unholy place. Never apply feet to the ashes, now throw it in an ordinary place nor ever cross it by your legs.

विष्णुतिणार्णविधि: स्मृतिग्रोत्तो मवेरितः ।

यदीयाचरणोपेनैव शिवतुल्यो न संशया: ॥ 9 ॥

गैहे: संपादितं भस्म वैदिकः शिवसिद्धि ।

भक्न्या परमम गहां गहां प्रगथित्वा तु पुजयेत् ॥ 10 ॥

Use always the ashes after purifying it with

Book XI Chapter XII

mantra. These rules of holding the Bhasma are according to the Smūtis. By holding Bhasma in this way, the devotee becomes, no doubt, like Śiva. The ashes, that the Vaidik devotees of Śiva prepare are to be taken with devotion.

तंजोक्तवर्भना सिद्धं भस्म तांत्रिकपुर्जकः ।

यत्र कुजापि दर्न चेतद्याहं नैव वैदिकः ॥ ११ ॥

शृहैः क्वाणिकैकविध यावलुष्टिपरैस्तु तत् ।

विषुपूर्ण धारयेद्रकल्या मनसाउपि न लंघयेत् ॥ १२ ॥

All can ask for that. But the ashes that the followers of the Tantra cult prepare, are taken by the Tántriks only; it is prohibited to the Vaidiks. The Śūdras, Kāpālikas, and other heretics (e.g., Jains, Buddhists) can use the Tripundrās. Never do they conceive in their minds that they would not take the Tripundra.

शूर्या विधीयते यस्मातत्चापी चित्तो भवेत् ।

वियुण्डूपाणं भवस्या तथा दोवारुतंनम् ॥ 13 ॥

डिंजः कुर्जाद्धि मंजेश तत्त्वापी पतितो भवेत् ।

उद्वूलन विमुकुँचे भवक्स्या नैवाचरान्ति ॥ १ ४ ॥

The holding on of Bhasma (ashes) is according to the Vedas. Therefore one who does not apply it falls down. The Brāhmanās must use the Tripundrās, repeating the mantra; and they are to besmear whole body with ashes; if they don't do so, they are surely fallen.

तेनां नास्ति विनिर्मांगः संसाराजन्मकोटिधि: ।

येन भस्मीत्मार्गेण धृतं न युतिपुज्ञ ॥ 15 ॥

तस्य विद्ध पुने जन्म निष्णलं सौकरं यथा ।

येबां घवुर्नुवाणां शिपुर्णेयुच निवासिव्यान् ॥ 16 ॥

He can never expect to get liberation even after kotī births who does not besmear his body with ashes devotedly and who does not hold the Tripundras. O Nārada! The vile man who does not hold Bhasma duly, know the birth of that man as futile as is the birth of a hog.

प्रशानस्वरुं तत्स्यात्र प्रेक्षेय पुण्यकृजनैः ।

धिरभ्रमरहितं भाल्व हियापामशिलालयम् ॥ 17 ॥

धिर्भनीशार्नं जन्म धिरिष्टापशिवायश्यम् ।

शिपुर्णुं वे विनिन्दन्ति निर्वंति शिवमेवे ते ॥ 18 ॥

Consider that body as a burning ground which does not bear the Tripundra marks. The virtuous man should not cast a glance at him even. Fie on that forehead which does not carry the Tripundra! Fie on that village which has not a single temple of Śiva! Fie on that birth which is void of the worship of Śiva! Fie on that knowledge which is void of the knowledge of Śiva. Know them to be the slanders of Śiva who mock at Tripundra. Those that put on the Tripundras, bear Śiva in their forehead.

शार्यात्न च चे भवल्या धार्यात्न तमेव ते ।

यथा कृशानुगृहितो भूधते न वितारते ॥ 19 ॥

अशोषयाधनेउपवें भस्महीनं शिवार्वनम् ।

उद्वूलनं विमुणई च श्रद्धया नार्चार्ति च ॥ 20 ॥

The Brāhmin who is Niragnik (without the holy fire) is not nice in every way. So if the worship of Śiva be not done with any Tripundra is not praiseworthy, even it be attended with abundance of other offerings. Those who do not besmear their bodies with ashes or who do not use the Tripuṇātras, get their previous good deeds converted into bad ones.

नैः पूर्वार्चितं सर्वे विवरितं भवेदपि ।

भस्मना वेदसंगेन विगुपुरूस्य च धारणम् ॥ 21 ॥

विना वेदोचिताचारं स्मातैस्वानवैकारणम् ।

कृतं स्वादुकृतं तेन श्रुतायश्रुतं भवेत् ॥ 22 ॥

Unless the Tripundra mark is taken up according to the Śāstras, the Vaidik Karmas (works) or those performed according to the Smṛtis prove injurious; the good works whatsoever done by any man count for nothing; the holy words heard seem as if unheard and the study of the Vedas counted as if not studied.

अधीनतान्योर्ति च विपुरुषुं यो न धारयेत् ।

वृथा वेदा ब्या यजा वृथा दानं वृथा तपः ॥ 23 ॥

वृथा ब्रतोषावासेन विपुरुषुं यो न धारयेत् ।

भमधारणाकं वक्तवा गृफीमिच्छिति यः पुभग् ॥ 24 ॥

विषयानेने नित्यत्वं कृते हात्मन्तो हि सः ।

स्वाघ सृष्टिक्लेनाह विपुर्णुक्य ए धारणम् ॥ 25 ॥

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

The study of the Vedas, Sacrifices, Charities, asceticisms, vows and fastings of that man, who does not use the Tripundra, all become fruitless. Without using Bhasma (ashes) if one wants lubrication, then that desire is equivalent to live after taking poison. There is no doubt in this. The Creator has not made the forehead vertically high nor round; but he has made it slightly slanting and curved fit to have the Tripundra.

सर्जे स ललहं हि तिरिगूर्ध्व न वर्तूल् ।

तिर्येखा: प्रदूष्यन्ते ललहं सर्वेहिहान् ॥ 26 ॥

तथापि मानवा मुखां न कुर्बति तियपुडकम् ।

न तद्वानां न तन्मोक्षं न तत्बानं न तत्तः ॥ 27 ॥

विना तिवंक्रसिणुपई च विघेण यदनुतिदान् ।

Making thus the forehead, the Creator wants, as it were, to inform everyone that every one ought it use Tripundra marks; the curved lines also are made visible for this purpose. Still the ignorant illiterate man does not put up the Tripundra. Unless the Brāhmanas use the curved Tripundras, their meditation won't be successful; they will not have liberation, knowledge, nor their asceticism would bear any fruit.

वेद्यस्याध्ययने शुह्रो नाथिकारी यथा भवेत् ॥ 28 ॥

निपुर्णेछुण विना विगो नाथिकारी शिवाबंने।

As the Śūdras have no right in the study of the Vedas, so the Brāhmanas have not any right to perform the worship of Śiva, etc., unless they use the Tripundras.

प्राइपुखप्ररणी हस्तौ प्रशाल्याचय पूर्ववेत् ॥ 29 ॥

ग्राणानायय संकल्य भस्मस्नांन समाचरेत् ।

आदाय भसितं शुद्धमिननोत्रासमूद्वम् ॥ 30 ॥

ईगानेत नृ मेत्रण स्वमूर्धिंत विनिश्वितेम् ।

तत आदाय तद्धस्म मुखे च पुरुषेण तु ॥ 31 ॥

अशोराखेन हृदये गुहो वामाह्वेन च ।

सहीजाताधिपानोने भस्प पादाद्धे क्षितेपे ॥ 32 ॥

सर्वाईं प्रणवेनैव मंत्रेणोद्धुलनं ततः ।

एतद्वानयेकं स्नानुभृदितं परमर्धिधि: ॥ 33 ॥

First of all, facing eastward, and washing hands and feet, he ought to make a resolve and then to

take a bath of the ashes mentally, controlling his breath. Then taking the ashes of the Agnihotra sacrifice he is to put some ashes on his own head, uttering “Iśāna” mantra. Then he is to recite the Puruṣa Sūkta Mantra and apply ashes on his face; with the Aghora mantra on his chest; with the Vāmadeva mantra, on his anus; with Sadyojāta mantra on his legs; and with the mantra Om, he is to besmear his whole body with ashes. This is called the bath of fire by the Munis.

सर्वकंमस्पृद्वयं कुर्मादादार्विदं बुध: ।

ततः प्रशल्य हस्तादीनुपम्पूग्य यथाविधि ॥ 34 ॥

तिर्विकिनपुर्णुं विकिता ललाहे हद्ये गले ।

पंचभिवंद्वाभिवर्षि कृतेन भसितेन च ॥ 35 ॥

So bring all the actions to a successful issue one is to take first of all this bath of fire. Washing his hands, then, he is to make Ācaman duly; and, according to the above-mentioned rules, he is to apply ashes on his forehead, heart, and all round the neck with the five mantras above-mentioned; or with each mantra he is to apply the Tripunāras.

धृतमेततिपुणई स्यात्सर्वकमंसु पावनम् ।

शुह्रैत्यजहस्तस्थं न धार्यं भम च कवचित् ॥ 36 ॥

भस्मना सानिहोहोग लिफलः कर्म सभावेत् ।

अन्यथा सर्वकर्माणि न कलिति कदाचन ॥ 37 ॥

Thus all wo ks are fructified and he gets the right to do all the Vaidik actions. The Śūdras, even, are not to use the ashes touched by the lowest classes. All the actions ordained by the Śāstras are to be done after being besmeared with ashes of the Agnihotra sacrifice; otherwise no action will bear any fruit.

सत्यं श्रीचं जयो होमसतीयं देवादिपुजनम् ।

तस्य व्यर्थमिद्ध सर्वे गलिष्णुर्षे न धारयेत् ॥ 38 ॥

निपुषुपूर्णिष्वयते यो रूपाक्षधर: शुचि: ।

स हाँति रोगतुरित्वाधिपूर्णक्षतत्कान् ॥ 39 ॥

समाप्नोति परं ब्रहा यतो नावर्ते पुनः ।

All his truth, purity, Japam, offering, oblations to the sacrifice, bathing in the holy place of pilgrimage, and worshipping the gods become

Book XI Chapter XIII

useless, who does not hold Tripunjña. No fear of disease, sins, famine, or robbers comes to the Brāhmins who use Tripunjña and rosary of Rudrāksa and thus remain always pure. In the end, they get the Nirvāna liberation.

स पोत्कपावन: शाढ़े पूर्णो विधेः सुरोरि ॥ 40 ॥

शाढ़े सत्रे जये होमे वैश्वदेवे सुरार्यने ।

धृतविष्यपुः पृतात्मा मृत्युज्यति मानवः ॥

भस्मधारणमाहाल्यं घ्योर्सि कवयामि ॥ 41 ॥

शी त्रिभद्वैभागवते महापुराणो एकारशरकन्ये

ब्रादशो३स्थायः ॥ 42 ॥

During the time of Śrāddhas (solemn obsequies

performed in honour of the manes of deceased ancestors) the Brahmins purify the rows where persons are fed; so much so that the Devas glorify them. One must use the Tripunāra marks before marks before one performs any Śrāddha, Japam sacrifice, offering oblations or worshipping the Viśvedevās; then one gets deliverance from the jaws of death. O Nārada! I am now speaking further of the greatness in holding the Bhasma; listen.

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the greatness in holding the Tripundra and Bhasma in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

