CHAPTER X

On Bhuvanakosa

श्रीनारायण ज्ञाव

हिरणये नाम वर्षं भगवान्कुमंरूपधूक् ।

आस्ते योगपति: सोउयमयीमणा पूज्य ईड़झते ॥ 1 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: In Hirapmaya Varṣa, the Bhagavān is remaining in the form of Kūrma, the Tortoise, as the Lord of Yoga. He is thus praised and worshipped by Aryamā, the Ruler of the Pitts.

अर्थमोक्षार

अं नभो भगवते अंकुपायार सर्वसंचचुणविशेषणाय नोपलक्षितस्थानाय नभो वर्षणे नभो धूपे नभो उवस्थानाय नमते ॥

यदुपमेतक्षिजमाययासंपित-

मर्धेबरूतं बहुत्पराक्तिम्न ।

संख्या न ययात्स्ययोपारनभानासै

नमतेउदययेरुकाणिणे ॥ २ ॥

Aryamā said: “Om namo Bhagavate Akūpārāya; (King of tortoises, sustaining the world.) Obisance to Thee, the Lord of all prosperities, in the form of Tortoise (Kūrma); Thou art built of Sattva Guna Incarnate; no one can make out where Thou dost dwell; Thou art not encompassed by Time; (Thou art in the Present, Past and Future); so obeisance to Thee. Thou dost pervade all things; we bow down to Thee. All are established in Thee; so obeisance to Thee. By Thy extraordinary Māyā (power) Thou hast made manifest this universe that is seen. This is Thy Form. It is by no means distinct from Thee. This Thy Form is seen in so many forms. So the true reality being not known like the mirage, these cannot be counted; really speaking, what is Thy form, no one can definitely say.

जाग्युजं चेवेद्वमण्डजांद्विं

चाराचं देवर्विपित्यभृतमैद्रिम् ।

शी: खं विजिति: शैलसरितम्पूरं

द्वीप्राहैल्पिधेय पकः ॥ 3 ॥

Thy beings generated by heat and moisture (said of insects and worms), those that are born of eggs,

from wombs and the plants and other moving, non-moving beings, the Devas, Rşis, Pitrş, Bhūtas, and these senses; the sky, the heavens, earth, mountains, rivers, ocean, islands, planets, and stars all these art thou and Thou alone. Thy name, form, and appearance, are as varied; and their numbers cannot be counted.

यसिभसंख्येवयिषेणवनामकाणुकती

कविषिभ: कल्पित्यम् ।

संख्या यया तत्ववृत्तास्पनीयते

तसै नमः सांख्यानिदर्जानय ते ॥ 4 ॥

Still, Kapila and others have determined their numbers, by the knowledge of which Thou canst become visible to the Eye of Knowledge. They form and nature are determined by these Sānkhyas ascertained by Kapila. So we bow down to Thee."

एवं स्तुविति देवेयामयां सह वर्धेयैः ।

गीयते चापि भजते सर्वभृतभवं प्रभुम् ॥ 5 ॥

तथोत्तेषु कुरयु भगवान्यज्ञपृक्षः ।

आदिवारातुकल्पोजी धरण्या पूज्यते सदा ॥ 6 ॥

Thus Aryamā, and the other rulers of the Varsa all united sing, praise, and worship the Bhagavān Kūrma Deva, the Controller of all and the Generator of all. All Hail to Thee! The Bhagavān Yajña Puruṣa is manifest in Uttara Kuru Maṇḍala in the form of Ādi Varāha.

संपूर्ण विधिवर्शें तद्वान्नास उर्द्राईहक्जा ।

भृति: स्तीति हरिं युवारागहं दैत्यमर्दनम् ॥ 7 ॥

The Earth Herself worships Him always. The Goddess Earth praises Hari, the Yajña Vārāha, the Destroyer of the Daityas and worships duly that Deva, with Her heart lotus, naturally devoted, rendered more devoted by Her attachment to the Lord.

भृत्वाच

अं नभो भगवते मन्तत्चलिङ्गाय

यज्ञक्रतवे महाध्यायवायाय

<table><tr><td>महावाराहाय नमः कर्म-शुक्लाय विद्यायाय नमसे ॥ 8 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>व्यस्य स्वरूपं कवयो विषधितो</td></tr><tr><td>गुणेषु दाक्षिव्व जातवेदस्म् ।</td></tr><tr><td>मथ्निति मथ्ना मनसा दिदुक्षवो</td></tr><tr><td>गृहं क्रिकार्थैर्नम इंग्रितानमे ॥ 9 ॥</td></tr></table>

The Goddess Earth spoke: “Om Namo Bhagavate Mantratattva Lingāya Yajñas Kratave” I bow down to the Bhagavān, the Great Boar; Thou art Om; Thy real form and nature can be known by only the Mantra and Tattva. Thou art Yajña and Kratu (sacrifices) incarnate; therefore all the great sacrifices are Thy limbs. Thou art the Three Yugas (there being no Yajña in the Satya Yuga) Thou art that which is left as Pure, after doing Karma (so as to be fit for performing Yajñas). So obeisance to Thee. The sages, versed in Jāna and Vijñāna say that Thou art hidden in the body and in the senses as fire is hidden in the wood. So they, ardent to see Thee, seek for Thee with a discriminative and dispassionate mind, judging karmas and their fruits; and then Thy Nature is revealed.

प्रत्यक्रिया हेत्वयनेशकर्तुभिमाया-

गुणैवैस्तुषिरीक्षितानये ।

अन्वीक्ष्यांगतिशग्रात्मबुद्धिद्धि-

निरस्तमायाकृत्ये नमो5स्तु ते ॥ 10 ॥

क्रौति विश्वश्वितिसंयमोदयं

यथेयिति नेतिमुनीक्षितुगीँ।

माया यथाउयो घमते तत्धार्थ

ग्राणो नमते गुणकर्मसाक्षिणे ॥ १ १  ॥

I bow down to Thee. Thy Form can be ascertained by the cause and effect of the Karmas and other Guñas of Māyā, sense objects, senses, actions, Devas, body, time, Ahankāra and others. I bow down to Thee. Those can see thus Thy form, whose mind is firmly established in Thee, by their discrimination and Yama, Niyama, etc., and who have abandoned all sorts of fickleness and changeability of their tempers. So obeisance to Thee. As iron goes attracted towards the magnet,

so Māyā dances before Thee with Her Guñas and Her works in the way of the creation, preservation and destruction of this universe; but Thou art totally indifferent to it.

प्रमध्य दैत्य प्रतिवारणं मृधे

यो मां ससाया जगादादिसुकरः।

कृत्वाउग्रद्टं निरगादुद्वतः ।

क्रीडविदेभः प्रगतास्तिस्त त विभूम ॥ 12 ॥

For the sake of the Jivas (embodied souls), desire comes to Thee, though Thou art not quite willing! Thou art the Witness of the Jivas and their Adṛṣṭa (the Fate). I bow down to Thee. The Yajña Varāha, the Cause of this universe, has lifted me up from the Rasātala and placing me on His big tusks, has come out from the Pralaya, the great ocean, after overpowering in battle His enemy, the powerful Daitya, like an elephant, I bow down to that Controller of all, to Thee.

किंभुचे वर्षे स्थिम्यगवर्ते द्वागर्यिं च सर्वेगम् ।

सीतागमं देयं श्रीहनुमानाविपुरुचं स्तीति ॥ 13 ॥

In the Kimpuruşa Varsa, the Bhagavān Ādi Puruṣa (the Prime Man), the Self-manifest and the Lord of all, is residing in the form of Rāma, the son of Dáśaratha and the joy of the heart of Sītā Devi.”

हनुमानुवाच

अं नो भगवते उत्तर्गलोकाय नम इति । आर्यलक्षण-ग्रीलताय नमः उपाशिक्तात्मने उपासिललोकाय नमः । साधुवादनिकरणाय नमो ब्रह्मणदेवाय महापुरुकाय महाभागाय नम इति ।

यनाधिशुष्तानुभवामेकं

स्वतेजसा ध्वस्तगृष्यवस्थम् ।

प्रत्यक्षु प्रशान्तं सुधियोगलभनं

हानामस्कं निरहं प्रपते ॥ 14 ॥ ॥

Śrī Hānumāna thus spoke: 'Om name Bhagavate Uttama Ślokāya.' I bow down to the Bhagavān, who art sung by the excellent verses, Purifying all. I bow down to Thee, the incarnate of modesty, good temper, vows and good sings; Thy mind is always under control; Thou dost imitate, as Thy nature is

Book VIII Chapter IX

good, the actions of all persons; obeisance to Thee. Thou art the Supreme Place to awards praise. Obeisance to Thee. Thou art Brahmanya Deva (in the creation of the universe), the high souled Persons Mahāpuruṣa Thou gettest the First Share, above all the persons! Thou art the One Tattva and That Alone, as established in the Vedānta. The holy realisation is the only guide to it. This Tattva dominates over all the Guṇas. It can never be an object. Only by pure intellect, It can be realised. There is no name, form of It. It is always beyond the pale of Ahankāra. I take refuge to this Tattva, the most Peaceful, with my body and mind. Thy incarnation in human shape in this world is not simply for killing Rāvaṇa but for giving instructions to the mortals.

भत्यवितारसित्वह मर्यशिक्षणं

सृत्रोत्ययैव न केवलं विषयैः ।

कृतोन्यथा स्याद्रसतः स्व आसनः

सीताकृतानि व्यसनानीश्रस्य ॥ 15 ॥

The contact with woman and the suffering thereof are very difficult to avoid; to give this lesson also He took this incarnation, He Who is merged in enjoying the Supreme Bliss of His Own Nature and He Who is the Lord of all, how can He suffer miseries in the bereavement of Sītā.

नवे स आत्माउत्मवतां सुहनमः

सन्धिलक्षितोक्यां भगवाव्यासुँवः ।

न स्थीकृतं कश्मलमपूर्वीत न

लक्ष्मणं चापि विहातुमईति ॥ 16 ॥

He is the best friend and the very Ātman of those who have conquered their minds and senses. Especially He is the receptacle of all the qualities and is in enjoyment of other divine extraordinary powers. So He is not attached to the worldly objects. How can the delusion due to His wife come and darken Him? and why will He send Lakṣmaṇa in exile? He is the Mahat Tattva and the Parama Purusa; so good birth, beauty, intelligence, oratory or good form nothing can please Him. Bhakti (devotion) can only attract Him.

न जन्म नृतं महतो न सीधारं

न वाक् न बुद्धिनक्तिलतोषहुतः ।

तैर्यदिषुर्धानपि नो वर्जीकसढ़कार

सख्ये बत लक्ष्मणात्रः ॥ 17 ॥

If that be not the case, then why will He, the elder of Lakṣmaṇa, the Bhagavān the son of Daśaratha make friendship with us, the wanderers of the forest and who are by nature, not the receptacles of any beauty, etc.

सुरोसुरो काव्यव्वा नरोउरनः

सर्वात्मना यः सुकृतानुभनम् ।

भजेत रामं मनुजाकृतिं हरिं

य उत्तरानवरकोशलानिद्वम् ॥ 18 ॥

So everyone, be he a Sura or Asura, man, or not man, should worship the Hari manifest in Rāma, in the human body with all his heart. He is so good that if any body worships Him even to a very small extent, He always considers it to be much; what more can be said than this that He took all the inhabitants of Kośala to Heaven!"

नारायण उवाच

एवं किंपुरुषे वर्षे सत्यसंधं दुबतान् ।

रामं राजीवप्रासं हनुमान्यानरोचनः ॥ १९ ॥

स्तौति गायति भक्ल्या च सम्पूजयति सर्वेश: ।

य एतख्युणायीच्छरं रामचन्द्रकाध्यानम् ॥ २० ॥

सर्वेधपाविश्युद्धात्मा याति रासमलोकातम् ।

इति श्रीदर्शीभागते महापुराणोउद्यमकचे

दर्शभोउधावः ॥ 21 ॥

Nārāyana said: Thus Hanumān, the best of monkeys, sings the praises and worships duly in Kimpuruṣa Varṣa, the lotus-eyed Rāma, truthful, and determined in his vows. He who hears this wonderful description of Rāma, is freed of all his sins and goes with his body pure to the abode of Rāma.

Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description of Bhuvanakosā in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

