CHAPTER XXII

On the Part Incarnations of the Several Devas

जनमेजय उवाच

किं कृतं पातकं तेन वालकेन पितामह ।

वञ्जातमाजो निहस्तलया तेने तुदातमना ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya asked: O grand father! What bad act did that child commit, that no sooner he was born than he was killed by Karīsa?

नारदोर्धि मुनिश्रेष्ठो ज्ञानवाभ्यांतलयः ।

कमेबेबिध्धि पार्थ कृतावन्बहावितमः ॥ २ ॥

Especially, Maharṣi Nārada is the the best amongst the Munis and foremost amongst the Brahmavids (Knowers of Brahma), always doing virtuous acts, and learned; why did he become the agent in this very sinful act?

कर्ता कार्यिता पापे तुल्यपापी स्मृती बुधीः ।

स कर्वं प्रेर्यायाम युनि: कर्म खलं तदा ॥ 3 ॥

Pundits declare that the doers and stimulators of any evil deed both are equally responsible; then how is it that Nārada, being the best of the Munis, instigated the wicked Kaṇisa to do this evil act!

संशयोर्धरं महान्पेत्र बृहि सर्वे सविसतम् ।

येन कर्मविषयकेन वालको तिथनं गतः ॥ ४ ॥

I am very much in doubt on this point. Kindly describe, in detail, the act that the child did as the result of which he had to meet with this fate of being killed.

ध्यास उवाच

नारदः कौतुकेश्री सर्वेत्रा कलहप्रियः ।

देवकावार्थीमागव सर्वेत्रच्छकार ह १। ५।।

Vyāsa said: the Devarṣi Nārada is always fond of seeing quarrels brought about amongst parties; he always likes thus to see the fun. Here specially to serve the gods' purpose he went to Kaṇīsa and incited him to such an act.

न चिष्याधायणे बुद्धिरुपैतस्य कदाचन ।

सत्यवक्ता सूरणा स कतवेय निततः शुचिः ॥ ६ ॥

Really he never intends to speak a lie; he is always truth speaking, pure hearted, and always ready to serve the gods.

एवं पद्ध बालकानेने जाता जाता निपातिताः ।

पद्ध नष्णा शापयोगेन सम्भय मरणं गताः ॥ ७ ॥

Thus the six sons were born to Devaki; and Karīsa, too, killed those six sons consecutively as they were born. These six sons named Sāgarbha, were killed just after their births, owing to their having been previously cursed.

श्रणु राजप्रवक्ष्यामि तेषां शापस्य काराणम् ।

स्वायंभुघैन्ते पुत्रा मौदोः घणमहावलः ॥ ८ ॥

O King! Hear why they were cursed before. In the reign of Sväyānbhūva Manu, were born to Urṇā, the wife of Maharṣi Marīci, the six powerful sons, all of a virtuous disposition.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

क्रणार्यों चैव भार्यायमासन्यर्मविचघणाः ।

बहाणं जहसुर्विध्य सुतां यथितमुचुतम् ॥ 9 ॥

शगाण तांस्तदा बहा दैत्ययोर्न विशलंच्यः ।

कालनैमिसुता जातासे चड्णभर्ग विशणरं ॥ 10 ॥

अवतारे परे ते तु हिरण्यक्रिपयोः सुता: ।

जातस्ते ज्ञानसंयुक्ताः पूर्वशापभयावृष्य ॥ 11 ॥

Once, on an occasion, the Prajāpati Brahmā, on seeing his daughter, became passionate, and was ready to hold sexual intercourse with her. At this, those six sons laughed at him. Brahmā cursed them saying “You all go quickly and take your births in the wombs of the asuras”. Therefore those six sons became the sons of Kālanemi in their first birth. At their second birth, they became the sons of Hiranyakasipu. This second time they had the fear of curse in their minds and therefore were born endowed with knowledge.

तमिमुक्समनि शनताछ तयडुकुः समाहिताः ।

तेनां प्रीते5पवद्बाद्धा घड्गाभाणां वरान्द्यै ॥ १ २ ॥

In this birth they became peaceful and, collecting all their energies, they began to practise austerities. Brahmā was pleased at this and asked the Sāgdarpha to take boons.

ब्रहोवाच

शला यूयं मया पूर्वं क्रोधयुक्तेन पुजकाः ।

तुऊसि यो महाभागा बुबैतु वाक्तिजं वरम् ॥ 13 ॥

Brahmā said: O my sons! I was, very angry to you before and cursed you; now I am very much pleased with you; ask boons from me that you all desire.

व्यास उवाच

ते तु शुत्वा वचस्त्यः ब्रह्णा: प्रीतमानसाः ।

ब्रहाणामबुद्बन्कामं सर्वे कार्यार्थतत्परा: ॥ १४ ॥

गर्भा ऊनुः

पितामहाशु तुढो5स देहि नो वाज्छतं वरम् ।

अवध्या देहतैः सर्वेमानवेश्ठ महोरैः ॥ १५ ॥

गव्यसिंस्द्वपतिभिवर्धो मापूरित्यामह ।

Vyāsa said: Hearing Brahmā's words, they were very glad and becoming very anxious to secure their

object of desire, said: O our grand sire! To-day thou art pleased unto us; now favour us with our desired boons. That we may be invulnerable to all the Devas, human beings, the big serpents the Gandharvas, and the Lord of Siddhas, (semi-divine beings supposed to be of great purity and holiness and said to be particularly characterised by eight supernatural faculties called Siddhis).

व्यास उवाच

तानुवाच तते ब्रहा सर्वेमेत्ब्रविष्यति ॥16॥

गछन्तु वो महाप्यागाः सत्यमेव न संगयः ।

Vyāsa said: Brahmā told them “what you have asked, you would certainly get; O blessed ones! better go now; my words will be found to be literally true. No doubt in this.

दत्वा वरं तते बह्मा मुविताने तदा भवन् ॥ 17 ॥

हिरण्यकसिंगपुः: कृष्टस्तानुवाच कृष्टज्ञः ।

यस्माड्रिक्राय मां पुत्रास्तोषिते बै पितामहः ॥ 18 ॥

वरेण प्रार्थितो:त्यर्थं बलन्तवो नतो:भवन् ।

युषामिषहिंपितः स्नेहस्ततो युषामेल्याजाग्यहम् ॥ 19 ॥

यूयं रज्जेत् पाताले पडूभणां विश्रुता भृति

Granting them boons, Brahmā went away; they then became very glad. O best of Kurus! Hiranya-kāśipu began to think “my sons now have pleased the Grandsire Brahmā and are now regardless of me” and got very angry and said: You all are become very proud on account of receiving boons; and since you have ceased your good feelings towards me I also henceforth cut off my connection with you. Now better go to Pātāla; you will be known in this world as Sadgarbha.

पताले निद्राविष्टारितसहुत् बहुवल्सग्न् ॥ 20 ॥

ततस्तु देवकीर्णर्षे वर्षे वर्षे पुनः पुनः ।

पिता च: कालेनेभेतुत तत्र कंको भविष्यति ॥ 21 ॥

स एव जातमाज्ञान् वो वधिष्यति सुदारुणः ।

At present you would be always involved in deep sleep and remain in Pātāla for many years; and when you will be born one after another in the womb of Devakī, then your father Kālanemi of previous birth will be born as Kanisa; and he would

Book IV Chapter XXII

be cruel hearted and surely kill you all, no sooner you be born.

व्यास उवाच

एवं शप्तस्तदा तेन नर्षें जातान्यून: पुनः ॥ 22 ॥

जंघान देवकीपुत्रान्यद्वारभांउछापनोदितः ।

Vyāsa said: Thus because they were cursed, they took their birth repeatedly and Karīsa, too, being urged on by the same curse, killed those sons of Devakī, the Śadgarbha, no sooner they were born.

शोशोः सदमास्तत्र देवकीभर्मन्सितः ॥ २३ ॥

विश्वसितश भयंोर्सती योगेन योगमायया ।

नतीशे गौहिणीपार्थ कृत्वा संकर्णी बलात् ॥ २४ ॥

पत्नतः पड्यो मापि लोकख्यालितं गतस्तत ।

In the seventh womb of Devakī, Ananta made his appearance. The featus in the womb was attracted by Yoga māyā and placed in the womb of Rohinī. But there was the rumour that there was miscarriage in the womb of Devakī in the fifth month; and this became known to the public.

कंसोरोपि ज्ञातलास्तर वेदकांगर्भपतान्न ॥ 25 ॥

मूंद प्राप स दुहात्मा शुत्वा वाता सुखावाहाम् ।

Kainsa came to know that there had been miscarriage. That wicked soul became exceedingly glad to hear this gladdening news.

अष्टमे देवकीर्णर्भ भगवान्साल्यतं पति: ॥ 26 ॥

उसास देवकायर्ध भागवततगाय च ।

And about this time the Bhagavān, the protector of the devotees appeared in the eighth womb of Devaki to serve the purpose of the gods and to relieve the load of the Earth.

राजोवाच

वसुदेव: कथयपांगः शेणांशस्थ तदारभवत् ॥ 27 ॥

हरेरांस्वथा प्रोक्तो भवता मुनिसनम ।

अन्य च वैउगा देवनां यत्र जातानस्तु तान्य वद ॥ 28 ॥

भारावतरणार्थे वै श्रितः प्रार्थन्यान्नय ।

The King said: O best of Munis! “You have described the part incarnations of (1) Kaśyapa as Vasudeva and (2) of Bhagavān Hari to relieve the burden of the Goddess Earth as prayed by Her; and (3) of Ananta Deva; but you have not described

the part incarnations of the other Devas. How the other Devas incarnated as their parts on this earth, kindly describe them now."

व्यास उवाच

सुराणामसुराणां च वे येउसा भृवि विश्रुतः ॥ 29 ॥

तानई संग्रवंश्यामि संबंधेपणं श्रणुष्य तान् ।

Vyāsa said: The part incarnations of Suras and Asuras on this earth, and their names I am now saying to you in brief; hear.

वसुरुदेवः कर्णवपोशे ठेवकी च तवास्टिति: ॥ 30 ॥

बलदेवस्वन्तंगो वर्तमानेयु तेषु च ।

योउसौ धर्मसुतः श्रीमात्रायण इति श्रुतः ॥ 31 ॥

तत्यांगो वासुदेवसु: विद्यामने युनी तदा ।

नरस्त्यानुजी यस्तु तत्यांगोउर्जन एव च ॥ 32 ॥

Vasudeva was the part incarnation of Káśyapa, Devakī was of Aditi, Baladeva, of Ananta; Vāsudeva Śri Krṣṇa, of Śrimān Nārāyaṇa; the son of Dharma existing even at that time in his physical body; Arjuna, of Nara, the younger brother of Nārāyaṇa.

युधिष्ठिरनु धर्मशील धार्थशेणी धामु इन्छुत ।

अधिश्यंशी ततः प्रोन्ती माठीयुगे महावृत्ति ॥ 33 ॥

Yudhiştihra was part incarnate of Dharma, Bhimasena, of Vāyu, the powerful twins of Mādri, Nakula and Sahadeva, of Asvinīkumāras?

सूर्याश: कर्ण आख्यातो धर्माशिवुः स्युतः ।

ग्रोगो बृह्मयनेरांशस्तमुत् शिवांगजः ॥ 34 ॥

The valiant hero Karna, born of Kunti, was part incarnate of the Sun, and the high minded Vidura, the knower of the Supreme Essence, was incarnate of Yama, the king Dharmarāja. Drona, the Ācārya of the Kurus and the Pāṇḍavas was the part incarnate of Bhaspati; and his son Asvāthamā was part incarnate of Rudra Deva.

सपूत्र: श्रोन्तुः प्रोक्तो गंगा भायां मता बुधे: ।

देवकन्तु समाख्यातो गन्यवंपतिरामे ॥ 35 ॥

Śantanu was the part incarnate of the Ocean; his wife, of the river Ganges in human form. It is stated in the Purāṇas that the king Devaka was part incarnate of the Lord of Gandharvas.

वसुभीष्मो विराटसु महज्ञा इति स्युतः ।

अर्षिष्य सुत्तो हौमो धृतगाषुः प्रकीर्तिनः ॥ ३६ ॥

महज्ञः कृपः प्रोफः: कृतवमां तथापर: ।

दुर्गंधनः कलेशंशः शकुनिं विद्ध द्वापरम् ॥ ३७ ॥

सोमपुत्र: सुवर्चिखः: सोमप्रकृतदाहतः ।

पावकांगीः पृष्टयुणः शिखडी राक्षसस्तथा ॥ ३८ ॥

सनत्कुमारस्थांगस्तु प्रयुन्तः परिक्षितिः ।

दूघदो वकणास्यांगे त्रीयदी च रासंगजा ॥ ३९ ॥

त्रीयदीतनया: पछ्र विश्वेश्वांगना: स्मृता ।

कुन्ति: सिद्धिद्वितिमरी मतिणाधिरारजना ॥ 40 ॥

कृष्णान्य-संस्था सर्वे देववारांगना: स्मृता ।

राजान्ध तथा सर्वे असुरा: शकनीदिता: ॥ 41 ॥

The Grand-father of the Kauravas, the foremost of the heroes, Bhīsma Deva was the incarnate of Vasu; Virāta, the Lord of Matsya was the part incarnate of Maruts; Dhṛtarāstra, of the Daitya Harīsa, the son of Arīsta Nemi; Krpa and Krta Varmā, of Maruts; Duryodhana, of Kali and Śakuni, of Dvāpara; Suvarcākhya Somapraru, of the son of the Moon; Dhṛṣtadyumna was part incarnate of Fire and Śikhandī of Rāksasa; Pradyumna was part incarnate of Sanatkumāra; the king Drupada was part incarnate of Varuna; Draupadī, of Lakṣmī; Draupadī's five sons, of Viśve-Devas; Kuntī was incarnate of Siddhi; Mādri, of Dhṛti; Gāndhāri, of Mati; the wives of Śri Kṛṣṇa were the heavenly public women; thus all the Devas came as their part incarnations, urged on by Indra.

हिरण्यकशिपोरेश: शिशुपाल उद्राहत: ।

वियवितर्जसाम्ब: शल्य: प्रब्राह द्रवपि ॥ 42 ॥

कालनैमित्रला कंसः केशी हवशिशास्त्रला ।

अग्रिष्टे बलिपुसन्त कुकृची गोकुले हतः ॥ 43 ॥

Amongst the Asuras, Śiśupāla was the incarnate of Hiranyakaśipu; Jarāsandha, of Vipracitti, Śalya, of Prahlāda; Karīsa, of Kālanemi and Keśī, of Haya Sīrā. The Asura named Arīṣṭa of the form of a cow that was killed by Krṣṇa was the son of Bali.

अनुहादो ध्युकेतुर्भगतानोय आक्सलः ।

लम्बः प्रणंवः संजातः खरोःसीधेनुको5भवत्। 44 ॥

Dhṛṣṭaketu was part incarnate of Anuhrādhā, Bhagadatta, of Bāskala; Pralamba, of Lamba; Dhenuka, of Khara.

वाराख्छ क्रिरोष्ठ धैल्पो परमदारुणी ।

मल्ली तावेव संजाती ख्याती चाण्यपुधिको ॥ 4 5 ॥

Cānūra and Muṣṭika, the two athletes, were part incarnates of Vārāha, and Kiśora, the two dreadful Daityas.

दितिपुजसत्धास्टिषो गजः कुकल्याधिधः ।

बलिपुजी बकी खाता बकस्तदनुः म्यूत: ॥ 46 ॥

यमो क्रतरला कामः क्रोधश्रवे चतुर्धकः ।

तेघामंगैस्तु संजातो इंगणपुत्रे महावलः ॥ 47 ॥

Kuvalaya, the elephant of Kañsha, was part incarnate of Arīṣṭa, the son of Diti. Vaki was the daughter of Bali, Vaka was her younger. The powerful son of Droṇa, Āsvatthāmā, though known as the part incarnate of Rudra, was really born of the four parts of Yama, Rudra, Cupidity and Anger.

अंगवतरणे पूर्वैतैयता राक्षसात्सा ।

जाता: सर्वे सुरांगास्ते ब्रितिभागतवताणे ॥ 48 ॥

पूतेषां कथितं राजनंशानतरणं नृप ।

सुराणां चासुराणां च पुराणेपु प्रकर्पितेन् ॥ 49 ॥

The Daityas and Rāksasas that were born to relieve the heavy burden of the Earth were all incarnates of Asuras. O king! I have thus narrated to you in order the incarnations of the Suras and Asuras, as they are stated duly in the Purāṇas.

यदा बढ़ायदो देवा: प्रार्थनार्थ हरि गतः ।

हरिणा स तदा दर्ती केशी खलु सितासिति ॥ 50 ॥

श्यामवर्णैततः कृष्ण: श्रोतः संकर्पणस्तथा ।

भारावतरणार्थ ती जातो देवांशमम्बी ॥ 51 ॥

When Brahma and the other Devas went to Visnu and prayed to Him, then Hari gave to Brahma one hair of a black colour and one hair of a white colour. The Bhagavān Sī Krṣna was born of that black hair and Sankarṣana Baladeva was born of the white hair. They were both the incarnations of Visnu.

Note. Here the black is the younger and the stronger; and they also represent the polarities. The Jivas are points of those hairs.

Book IV Chapter XXIII

<table><tr><td>अंशावतरणं चैतच्छूणोत भक्तिभावतः ।</td></tr><tr><td>सर्वेभपातिविमुक्तो मोते स्वजनैवृतः ॥ 52 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>इति श्रीमदैभागवते महापुराणो चतुर्बैकन्वे</td></tr><tr><td>द्वाविंशो5.धाया: ॥ 52 ॥</td></tr></table>

He who hears with devotion the story of these part incarnations, becomes freed of all sins and

passes away his time merrily, surrounded by his circle of friends; there is no doubt in this.

Thus ends the Twenty second Chapter in Fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa on the part

incarnations of the several Devas.

Book IV Chapter XXIII

