[Ch 22 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya asked: O grand father! What bad act did that child commit, that no sooner he was born than he was killed by Karīsa?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya asked :-- O grandfather! What bad act did that child commit, that no sooner he was born than he was killed by Kaṃsa?

[Ch 22 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Especially, Maharṣi Nārada is the the best amongst the Munis and foremost amongst the Brahmavids (Knowers of Brahma), always doing virtuous acts, and learned; why did he become the agent in this very sinful act?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Especially, Maharṣi Nārada is the the best amongst the Munis and foremost amongst the Brahmā-vids (Knowers of Brahmā), always doing virtuous acts, and learned; why did he become the agent in this very sinful act?

[Ch 22 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Pundits declare that the doers and stimulators of any evil deed both are equally responsible; then how is it that Nārada, being the best of the Munis, instigated the wicked Kaṇisa to do this evil act!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Pundits declare that the doers and stimulators of any evil deed both are equally responsible; then how is it that Nārada, being the best of the Munis, instigated the wicked Kaṃsa to do this evil act!

[Ch 22 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I am very much in doubt on this point. Kindly describe, in detail, the act that the child did as the result of which he had to meet with this fate of being killed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I am very much in doubt on this point. Kindly describe, in detail, the act that the child did as the result of which be had to meet with this fate of being killed.

[Ch 22 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: the Devarṣi Nārada is always fond of seeing quarrels brought about amongst parties; he always likes thus to see the fun. Here specially to serve the gods' purpose he went to Kaṇīsa and incited him to such an act.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- The Devarṣi Nārada is always fond of seeing quarrels brought about amongst parties; he always likes thus to see the fun. Here specially to serve the godś purpose he went to Kaṃsa and incited him to such an act.

[Ch 22 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Really he never intends to speak a lie; he is always truth speaking, pure hearted, and always ready to serve the gods.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Really he never intends to speak a lie; he is always truth speaking; pure hearted, and always ready to serve the gods.

[Ch 22 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus the six sons were born to Devaki; and Karīsa, too, killed those six sons consecutively as they were born. These six sons named Sāgarbha, were killed just after their births, owing to their having been previously cursed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the six sons were born to Devakī; and Kaṃsa, too, killed those six sons consecutively as they were born. These six sons named Ṣaḍgarbha, were killed just after their births, owing to their having been previously cursed.

[Ch 22 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Hear why they were cursed before. In the reign of Sväyānbhūva Manu, were born to Urṇā, the wife of Maharṣi Marīci, the six powerful sons, all of a virtuous disposition.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Hear why they were cursed before. In the reign of Svāyambhuva Manu, were born to Urṇā; the wife of Maharṣi Marīci, the six powerful sons, all of a virtuous disposition.

[Ch 22 Verse 9-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once, on an occasion, the Prajāpati Brahmā, on seeing his daughter, became passionate, and was ready to hold sexual intercourse with her. At this, those six sons laughed at him. Brahmā cursed them saying “You all go quickly and take your births in the wombs of the asuras”. Therefore those six sons became the sons of Kālanemi in their first birth. At their second birth, they became the sons of Hiranyakasipu. This second time they had the fear of curse in their minds and therefore were born endowed with knowledge.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once, on an occasion, the Prajāpati Brahmā, on seeing his daughter, became passionate, and was ready to hold sexual intercourse with her. At this, those six sons laughed at him. Brahmā cursed them saying “You all go quickly and take your birth in the wombs of the asuras.” Therefore those six sons became the sons of Kālanemi in their first birth. At their second birth, they became the sons of Hiraṇyakaśipu. This second time they had the fear of curse in their minds and therefore were born endowed with knowledge.

[Ch 22 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In this birth they became peaceful and, collecting all their energies, they began to practise austerities. Brahmā was pleased at this and asked the Sāgdarpha to take boons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In this birth they became peaceful and, collecting all their energies, they began to practise austerities. Brahmā was pleased at this and asked the Ṣaḍgarbha to take boons.

[Ch 22 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā said: O my sons! I was, very angry to you before and cursed you; now I am very much pleased with you; ask boons from me that you all desire.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā said :-- O my sons! I was very angry to you before and cursed you; now I am very much pleased with you; ask boons from me that you all desire.

[Ch 22 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Hearing Brahmā's words, they were very glad and becoming very anxious to secure their object of desire, said: O our grand sire! To-day thou art pleased unto us; now favour us with our desired boons. That we may be invulnerable to all the Devas, human beings, the big serpents the Gandharvas, and the Lord of Siddhas, (semi-divine beings supposed to be of great purity and holiness and said to be particularly characterised by eight supernatural faculties called Siddhis).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Hearing Brahmā’s words, they were very glad and becoming very anxious to secure their objects of desire, said :-- O our grand sire! Today thou art pleased unto us; now favour us with our desired boons. That we may be invulnerable to all the Devas, human beings, the big serpents the Gandarbhas, and the Lord of Siddhas, (semi-divine beings supposed to be of great purity and holiness and said to be particularly characterised by eight supernatural faculties called Siddhis).

[Ch 22 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Brahmā told them “what you have asked, you would certainly get; O blessed ones! better go now; my words will be found to be literally true. No doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Brahmā told them “What you have asked, you would certainly get; O blessed ones! better go now; my words will be found to be literally true. No doubt in this.”

[Ch 22 Verse 17-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Granting them boons, Brahmā went away; they then became very glad. O best of Kurus! Hiranya-kāśipu began to think “my sons now have pleased the Grandsire Brahmā and are now regardless of me” and got very angry and said: You all are become very proud on account of receiving boons; and since you have ceased your good feelings towards me I also henceforth cut off my connection with you. Now better go to Pātāla; you will be known in this world as Sadgarbha.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Granting them boons, Brahmā went away; they then became very glad. O best of Kurus! Hiraṇyakaśipu began to think “My sons now have pleased the Grandsire Brahmā and are now regardless of me” and got very angry and said :-- You all are become very proud on account of receiving boons; and since you have ceased your good feelings towards me I also henceforth cut off my connection with you. Now better go to Pātāla; you will be known in this world as Ṣaḍgarbha.

[Ch 22 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At present you would be always involved in deep sleep and remain in Pātāla for many years; and when you will be born one after another in the womb of Devakī, then your father Kālanemi of previous birth will be born as Kanisa; and he would be cruel hearted and surely kill you all, no sooner you be born.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At present you would be always involved in deep sleep and remain in Pātāla for many years; and when you will be born one after another in the womb of Devakī, then your father Kālanemi of previous birth will be born as Kaṃsa; and he would be cruel hearted and surely kill you all, no sooner you be born.

[Ch 22 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Thus because they were cursed, they took their birth repeatedly and Karīsa, too, being urged on by the same curse, killed those sons of Devakī, the Śadgarbha, no sooner they were born.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Thus because they were cursed, they took their births repeatedly and Kaṃsa, too, being urged on by the same curse, killed those sons of Devakī, the Ṣaḍgarbha, no sooner they were born.

[Ch 22 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the seventh womb of Devakī, Ananta made his appearance. The featus in the womb was attracted by Yoga māyā and placed in the womb of Rohinī. But there was the rumour that there was miscarriage in the womb of Devakī in the fifth month; and this became known to the public.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the seventh womb of Devakī, Ananta made his appearance. The foetus in the womb was attracted by Yoga māyā and placed in the womb of Rohiṇī. But there was the rumour that there was miscarriage in the womb of Devakī in the fifth month; and this became known to the public.

[Ch 22 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kainsa came to know that there had been miscarriage. That wicked soul became exceedingly glad to hear this gladdening news.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kaṃsa came to know that there had been miscarriage. That wicked soul became exceedingly glad to hear this gladdening news.

[Ch 22 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And about this time the Bhagavān, the protector of the devotees appeared in the eighth womb of Devaki to serve the purpose of the gods and to relieve the load of the Earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And at about this time the Bhagavān, the Protector of the devotee appeared in the eighth womb of Devakī to serve the purpose of the gods and to relieve the load of the Earth.

[Ch 22 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King said: O best of Munis! “You have described the part incarnations of (1) Kaśyapa as Vasudeva and (2) of Bhagavān Hari to relieve the burden of the Goddess Earth as prayed by Her; and (3) of Ananta Deva; but you have not described the part incarnations of the other Devas. How the other Devas incarnated as their parts on this earth, kindly describe them now."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King said :-- O best of Munis! “You have described the part incarnations of (1) Kaśyapa as Vāsudeva and (2) of Bhagavān Hari to relieve the burden of the Goddess Earth as prayed by Her; and (3) of Ananta Deva; but you have not described the part incarnations of the other Devas. How the other Devas incarnated as their parts on this earth, kindly describe them now.”

[Ch 22 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: The part incarnations of Suras and Asuras on this earth, and their names I am now saying to you in brief; hear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- The part incarnations of Suras and Asuras on this earth, and their names I am now saying to you in brief; hear.

[Ch 22 Verse 30-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vasudeva was the part incarnation of Káśyapa, Devakī was of Aditi, Baladeva, of Ananta; Vāsudeva Śri Krṣṇa, of Śrimān Nārāyaṇa; the son of Dharma existing even at that time in his physical body; Arjuna, of Nara, the younger brother of Nārāyaṇa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vāsudeva was the part incarnation of Kaśyapa, Devakī was of Aditi, Baladeva, of Ananta; Vāsudeva Śrī Kṛṣṇa, of Śrīmān Nārāyaṇa; the son of Dharma existing even at that time in his physical body; Arjuṇa, of Nara, the younger brother of Nārāyaṇa.

[Ch 22 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Yudhiştihra was part incarnate of Dharma, Bhimasena, of Vāyu, the powerful twins of Mādri, Nakula and Sahadeva, of Asvinīkumāras?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Yuidhiṣṭhira was part incarnate of Dharma, Bhimasena, of Vāyu, the powerful twins of Mādri, Nakul and Sahadeva, of Aśvinī-kumāras?

[Ch 22 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The valiant hero Karna, born of Kunti, was part incarnate of the Sun, and the high minded Vidura, the knower of the Supreme Essence, was incarnate of Yama, the king Dharmarāja. Drona, the Ācārya of the Kurus and the Pāṇḍavas was the part incarnate of Bhaspati; and his son Asvāthamā was part incarnate of Rudra Deva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The valiant hero Karṇa, born of Kuntī, was part incarnate of the Sun, and the high minded Vidura, the knower of the Supreme Essence, was incarnate of Yama, the king Dharmarāj. Droṇa, the Ācārya of the Kurus and the Pāṇḍavas was the part incarnate of Bṛhaspati; and his son Aśvatthāmā was

[Ch 22 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śantanu was the part incarnate of the Ocean; his wife, of the river Ganges in human form. It is stated in the Purāṇas that the king Devaka was part incarnate of the Lord of Gandharvas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śantanu was the part incarnate of the Ocean; his wife, of the river Ganges in human farm. It is stated in the Purāṇas that the king Devaka was part incarnate of the Lord of Gandarvas.

[Ch 22 Verse 36-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Grand-father of the Kauravas, the foremost of the heroes, Bhīsma Deva was the incarnate of Vasu; Virāta, the Lord of Matsya was the part incarnate of Maruts; Dhṛtarāstra, of the Daitya Harīsa, the son of Arīsta Nemi; Krpa and Krta Varmā, of Maruts; Duryodhana, of Kali and Śakuni, of Dvāpara; Suvarcākhya Somapraru, of the son of the Moon; Dhṛṣtadyumna was part incarnate of Fire and Śikhandī of Rāksasa; Pradyumna was part incarnate of Sanatkumāra; the king Drupada was part incarnate of Varuna; Draupadī, of Lakṣmī; Draupadī's five sons, of Viśve-Devas; Kuntī was incarnate of Siddhi; Mādri, of Dhṛti; Gāndhāri, of Mati; the wives of Śri Kṛṣṇa were the heavenly public women; thus all the Devas came as their part incarnations, urged on by Indra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Grand-father of the Kauravas, the foremost of the heroes, Bhīṣma Deva was the incarnate of Vasu; Virāṭa, the Lord of Matsya was the part incarnate of Maruts; Dhritarāṣṭra, of the Daitya Hamsa, the son of Aṛṣṭa Nemi; Kripa and Krita Varmā, of Maruts; Duryodhana, of Kali and Śakuni, of Dvāpara; Suvarcākhya Somapraru, of the son of the Moon; Dhṛṣṭadyumna was part incarnate of Fire and Śikhaṇḍī of Rāksasa; Pradyumna was part incarnate of Sanatkumāra; the king Drupada was part incarnate of Varuṇa; Draupadī, of Lakṣmī; Draupadī’s five sons, of Visve-devas; Kuntī was incarnate of Siddhi; Mādri, of Dhriti; Gāndhārī, of Mati; the wives of Śrī Kṛṣṇa were the heavenly public women; thus all the Devas came as their part incarnations, urged on by Indra.

[Ch 22 Verse 42-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Amongst the Asuras, Śiśupāla was the incarnate of Hiranyakaśipu; Jarāsandha, of Vipracitti, Śalya, of Prahlāda; Karīsa, of Kālanemi and Keśī, of Haya Sīrā. The Asura named Arīṣṭa of the form of a cow that was killed by Krṣṇa was the son of Bali.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Amongst the Asuras, Śiśupāla was the incarnate of Hiraṇyakaśipu; Jarāsandha, of Biprachitti, Śalya, of Prahlāda; Kaṃsa, of Kālanemi and Keśī, of Haya Śirā. The Asura named Aṛṣṭa of the form of a cow that was killed by Kṛṣṇa was the son of Bali.

[Ch 22 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Dhṛṣṭaketu was part incarnate of Anuhrādhā, Bhagadatta, of Bāskala; Pralamba, of Lamba; Dhenuka, of Khara.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Dhṛṣṭaketu was part incarnate of Anuhrādha, Bhagadatta, of Vāskala; Pralamba, of Lamba; Dhenuka, of Khara.

[Ch 22 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Cānūra and Muṣṭika, the two athletes, were part incarnates of Vārāha, and Kiśora, the two dreadful Daityas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Cāṇūra and Muśṭika, the two athletes, were part incarnates of Vārāha, and Kiśora, the two dreadful Daityas.

[Ch 22 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kuvalaya, the elephant of Kañsha, was part incarnate of Arīṣṭa, the son of Diti. Vaki was the daughter of Bali, Vaka was her younger. The powerful son of Droṇa, Āsvatthāmā, though known as the part incarnate of Rudra, was really born of the four parts of Yama, Rudra, Cupidity and Anger.
NEW CORR ENG ──► the elephant of Kaṃsa, was part incarnate of Aṛṣṭa, the sun of Diti. Vakī was the daughter of Bali, Vaka was her younger. The powerful son of Droṇa, Aśvatthāmā, though known as the part incarnate of Rudra, was really born of the four parts of Yama, Rudra, Cupidity and Anger.

[Ch 22 Verse 48-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Daityas and Rāksasas that were born to relieve the heavy burden of the Earth were all incarnates of Asuras. O king! I have thus narrated to you in order the incarnations of the Suras and Asuras, as they are stated duly in the Purāṇas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Daityas and Rāksasas that were born to relieve the heavy burden of the Earth were all incarnates of Asuras. O king! I have thus narrated to you in order the incarnations of the Suras and Asuras, as they are stated duly in the Purāṇas.

[Ch 22 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Brahma and the other Devas went to Visnu and prayed to Him, then Hari gave to Brahma one hair of a black colour and one hair of a white colour. The Bhagavān Sī Krṣna was born of that black hair and Sankarṣana Baladeva was born of the white hair. They were both the incarnations of Visnu. Note. Here the black is the younger and the stronger; and they also represent the polarities. The Jivas are points of those hairs.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Brahmā and the other Devas went to Viṣṇu and prayed to Him then Hari gave to Brahmā one hair of a black colour and one hair of a white colour. The Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa was born of that black hair and Śaṅkarṣaṇa Baladeva was born of the white hair. They were both the incarnations of Viṣṇu. Note here the black is the younger and the stronger; and they also represent the polarities. The Jīvas are points of those hairs.

[Ch 22 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He who hears with devotion the story of these part incarnations, becomes freed of all sins and passes away his time merrily, surrounded by his circle of friends; there is no doubt in this. Thus ends the Twenty second Chapter in Fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa on the part incarnations of the several Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He who hears with devotion the story of these part incarnations becomes freed of all sins and passes away his time merrily, surrounded by his circle of friends; there is no doubt in this. Thus ends the 22nd chapter in 4th book of Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam the Mahā Purāṇam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa on the part incarnations of the several Devas.
