CHAPTER XV

On the King Harisćandra

यास उवाच

प्रवृते सदने तस्य राज: पुत्रमहोत्सेवे ।

आजगाम तदा पाशी विव्येवधर: शुभः ॥ १ ॥

स्वस्तीतुक्नता नृप प्राह करणोड़ं निशागम ।

पुत्रो जाततसद्धार्थीय वजानेन नृपाणु माम् ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When there was going on in the King's palace, the grand festivities for the son's birth ceremonies, Varunā Deva came there in the holy Brāhmin form. "Let welfare be on you." Saying this, Varunā began to say: "O King! Know me to be Varunā. Now hear what I say.

सत्यं कुक वचो राजन्यग्रेफं भवता पुरा ।

बंधवर्यं तु गतं तेउघ बर्यानेन मे किल ॥ ३ ॥

इति तस्य वयं: शुचा राजा चिन्तां चकार है ।

कई हंमि मुतं जातं जलजेन समाननम् ॥ ४ ॥

O King! Your son is now born; therefore perform sacrifice in honour to me with your son. O King! Your defect of not having a son is now removed; so fulfil what you promised before." Hearing these words, the King began to think "Oh! Only one lotus-faced son is born to me; how can I kill it.

लोकापाल: समायातो विरुपवेषण वीर्वयान् ।

न देहलेलं कार्य सर्वथा शुभमिच्छता ॥ ५ ॥

On the other hand, the powerful Regent (Lokapāla) of one quarter is present in a Brāhmaṇa form; and it never behaves one to show disrespect to a Deva or to a man who wishes welfare to us.

पुत्रस्नेह: सुवुर्गछेध: सर्वेधा प्राणिधि: सदा ।

कि कौरिक कबं मे स्थानसुघं सन्ततिसम्बनम् ॥ 6 ॥

धैर्यमाल्व्य भृपालतरं नत्वा प्रतिपूज्य च ।

उवाच वचनं रूल्णां युक्ते विनयपूर्वेकम् ॥ 7 ॥

Again it is very difficult to root out the affection for a son; so what am I do now? How shall I preserve my happiness due to the birth of my son. The King, then, with patience bowed down to him and worshipped him duly and humbly spoke to him in beautiful words, pregnant with reason.

देवदेव तवानुर्जा करौमि करणानिधे ।

वेदोकेन विधानेन मखं च बहुव्रहिणम् ॥ ८ ॥

“O Deva of the Devas! I will obey your order no doubt and I will perform your sacrifice according to the Vedic rites and with profuse Dakṣinās (remuneration to priests, etc.).

पुत्रे जाते दण्डोत्क मर्मोवायो भवेरिता ।

मासेन शुद्ध्वेज्ञननी द्यमती तत्र कारणम् ॥ 9 ॥

But, when in a sacrifice, human beings are immolated as victims, both the husband and wife are entitled to the ceremony. Father purified on the tenth day and mother on the expiration of one month after the son's birth; so how can I perform the sacrifice until one month expires!

सर्वोत्तीस प्रवेतस्वं धर्मे जानासि शाशतम् ।

कृपा कुक त्वं वारीश श्रमस्व परमेश्वर ॥ 10 ॥

You are omniscient and the master of all the beings; and you know what is Nitya Dharma. So, O Varuna Deva! I want one month time; and shew mercy thus on me.

व्यास उवाच

इत्थुक्त्वु प्रचेतास्तं प्रत्युवाच जनाधिधम् ।

स्वस्ति नेत्रुल गाधिधा कुक कावीण पार्थिव ॥ 11 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The King Harisācandra saying thus, Varuna D:va spoke to the King! "O King! Welfare be unto you! Do your duties; I am now going back to my place.

आगमिध्यापि मासाने तट्यच्छं सर्वां तथा ।

कृत्योद्यानिकमाचारं पुरस्य नृपसभा ॥ १ २ ॥

इतुक्ना सत्श्याय वाचा राजानं याद्वां पति: ।

हरिश्छातो मूदं प्राप गत गरिजिन पार्विव: ॥ १ ३ ॥

O King! I will come again after one month. Better finish the natal ceremonies and the Nāmakarana ceremony regularly and then perform my sacrifice." O King! When Varuna Deva turned his back, the King began to feel happiness.

Šrimaddevīthāgavatam

कोटिः: प्रदरी गासता घटोफीईमपूरिता: ।

विपेघ्यो वेद्विद्वज्ञश तवैव तिलपर्वतन्ति् ।। १४ ॥

राजा पुत्रमुक्तं चूद्या सुख्याभ महनगर् ।।

नामास्य रोहितश्रैति चकारविधिपूर्वकम् ॥ १५ ॥

Then the King gave as gifts millions of cows, yielding plenty of milk and ornamented with gold, and mountains of Til, sesamums to the Brahmins versed in the Vedas and kept his name, with formal ceremonies as Rohitāśva.

पूर्णे माते ततः पाशी विप्रवेशेण भुपतेः ।

आजगाम गृहे सहो यजस्वेति बुबन्युडुः ॥ १६ ॥

बीक्ष्य तं नृपतिर्दैर्व विम्नगः शोकसागरे ।

प्रिणपत्य कृतातिलयं नसुवाय कृताज्ञति: ॥ १७ ॥

When one month became complete, Varuna Deva came again in a Brāhmin form and frequently said: "O King! Start the sacrifice just now." The King, on seeing the God of Waters, at once fell into an ocean anxieties and sorrows; he then bowed down and worshipping him as a guest, spoke to him with folded palms:

दिष्टा देव ल्यमायतो गृहं मे पार्वितं प्रभो ।

मखं क्रौमि वारीश विधियद्वृत्तिजत तब ॥ 18 ॥

अदन्तो न पशुः शलाघ्य इत्याहुर्बेदवादितः ।

तस्मात्तोद्वे तेर्दं क्रौरिणामि महामतघम् ॥ 19 ॥

“O Deva! It is to my great fortune that you have landed your feet at my place; O Lord! My house has been sanctified to day. O Deva! I will do, no doubt, your desired sacrifice according to the rites and ceremonies.” But see, the victims that have not their teeth come as yet are not fit for a sacrifice; so the versed Pandits say; so I have settled I would perform your great sacrifice, as desired by you, when the teeth will come out of my son.”

यास उवाच

इत्युक्तसेन वक्षणसेवीयुक्तवा ययावव । हरिश्छनो मूदं प्राय्य विकजहा गृहासभे ॥ 20 ॥ पुनर्दनीतादूबं जाता प्रवेता त्रिज़कपयान् । अजागमा गृहे तस्य कुरु कार्यमिति बुब्न् ॥ 21 ॥

Vyāsa said: O Lord of men! Hearing thus, Varuna spoke "Let it be so" and went away. The

King Harisācandra became glad and passed his days in enjoyments in his household. When the teeth of the child got out, Varuna knew it and came again in a Brāhmī garb in the palace and spoke “O King! Now commence my sacrifice.”

भूपालोर्पि जलाधीशं शैक्ष्य प्रापतं दिजाकृतीन् ।

प्राणायासनसमापेतै: पूजयामास सादम् ॥ 22 ॥

सतूला प्रोवाच चवनं विनयानतकंधरः ।

क्लोपि विविधित्कामं मरुं प्रवलद्धिणम् ॥ 23 ॥

Seeing the Brāhmin Varuna there, the King, too, bowed down and gave him a seat and showing all respects to him, worshipped him. He sang hymns to him and very humbly said with his head bent low: "O Deva! I will perform your desired sacrifice with plenty of Daksinās according to rites and ceremonies.

बालोउप्यकृतशीलोउं यमीकेशो न संभतः ।

यज्ञार्थे पशुकरणे मया वृद्धमुखाख्यून। ॥ 24 ॥

But the child's Cūdākarana (the ceremony of tonsure) is not yet done; so the hairs that were at the birth time are still there and the child cannot be fit for sacrifice as long as those hairs exist.

तावल्यमवर वारीग विधिं जानासि शाश्रतम् ।

कतव्य: सर्वथा यज्ञो मुपडन्तो तिशगोः कित्त ॥ 25 ॥

So I have heard from the elderly persons. O Lord of Waters! You know the Śāstric rules; kindly wait till the Cūdākarana is over. When the child will have his head shaven, I will certainly perform your sacrifice; there is no doubt in this."

तस्येति वचनं शूला प्रयोतः प्रात तं पुनः ।

प्रतारयसि मां राजनुः पुनरिंदं बुवन् ॥ 26 ॥

अपि ते सर्वसाम्पी वर्तैने तृपतेधुना ।

पुस्तन्हनिवद्धूतस्तं वंचरायेव सांप्रतम् ॥ 27 ॥

Hearing these words, Varuna spoke to him again: "O King! Why are you deceiving me like this so often? O King! Now you have all the materials ready for the sacrifice; only for your filial affection you are deceiving me.

क्षीरकर्षिविधि कृत्वा न कतिभिस मखं यदि ।

तदारूई दाहरणं शापं दास्ये कोपसम्पन्धितः ॥ 28 ॥

Book VII Chapter XV

अषा गच्छामि राजेन्द्र वचनात्तव मानद ।

न पूषा वचनं कार्यं त्वयेक्षतुकुलोद्धवि । २ ९ ॥

However, if, after the ceremony of tonsure, you do not perform my sacrifice, I will be angry and I will curse you. O King! I am going for the present; but see do not tell lies, being born in the family of Iksyāku."

इत्याभाष्य यवावाग्य प्रशेता नृपतेगृहात् ।

राजा परमसन्तुष्टो ननन्द भवने तदा ॥ 30 ॥

चूढाकरणकाल तु प्रमृते परमतस्ये ।

संघान्तसरमा पाशी भवनं नृपते: पुनः ॥ 31 ॥

Instantly Varuna disappeared; the King, too, felt himself happy in his household. When the ceremony of tonsure was commenced and grand festivities were hold, on the occasion Varuna soon came again to the King's palace.

यदोंके सुतमादाय रजी नृपतित्रिधरी ।

उपविष्ठ क्रियाकाले तदैव वरणो3ध्यगत् ॥ 32 ॥

कुरं कर्मेति विस्पटं चवनं कथयदुम् ।

विश्रूषपर: श्रीमान्यस्थ एव पायकः ॥ 33 ॥

The queen was then sitting before the King with the child in her lap when Varuna came up there. The Brāhmīn Varuna then appeared like a Flaming Fire and spoke to the King in clear voice: "O King! Start the sacrifice."

नुपतितरं समालोक्य बधूवातीव विहूलः ।

नमधाकर तं भीत्या कृतांलिपुट: परः ॥ 34 ॥

विधित्यन्त्रयित्या तं राजोवाच चिनीतावन् ।

स्वामिकार्यं करोमध्य मतुवस्य विधिपूर्वकम् ॥ 35 ॥

Seeing him, the King was confused with terror and with folded palms, quickly bowed down to him. After worshipping him duly, he very humbly said: "O Lord! Today I will perform your sacrifice."

वनत्यमर्तित त्वापि शृण्यैकमान विशो ।

युक्ते चेन्मन्यसे र्वामित्तद्व्वीति त्वात्रात् ॥ 36 ॥

But kindly hear with attention my saying and then do what is advisable. O Lord! If you approve of this as reasonable, I then open my heart to you.

ब्राह्मा: श्रवित्य वैश्यस्थो वर्गा तिज्ञातः ।

संस्कृताश्रान्यथा शूत्रा एवं वेदिविदो विद्यः ॥ 37 ॥

The three Varṇas Brāhmaṇas, Kṣattriyas, and Vaīśyas become Dvijas (twice-born) only when they are duly purified according to proper rules and ceremonies; without any such purifications they are certainly Śūdras.

तस्मादयं सुतो मेउष्ठ शूग्रवदृततैं तिशुः ।

उपनीतः क्रियाईः स्यादिति वेदेषु तिप्रिणः ॥ 38 ॥

So the Pandits versed in the Vedas declare. My child is now an infant only; so it is like a Śūdra. When his thread ceremony (Upanayana) will be performed, he will then be fit for the sacrifice; this the Veda Śāstras declare.

राजामेकादृषे वर्षे सदोपनवर्ग सूतम् ।

अष्टेय बाहाणानां च वैश्यानां द्वाद्यो किल ॥ 39 ॥

द्यसे यदि देवेश दीनं मां सेवकं तव ।

तदोपनीय कतार्तिम यपुना यमुभुतमम् ॥ 40 ॥

The Ksattiryas are so purified in their eleventh year; the Brāhmanas in their eighth year and the Vaiśyas in their twelfth year. So, O Lord of the Devas! If you feel pity for your this humble servant, then wait till the Upanayana ceremony is over, when I perform your grand sacrifice with my son.

लेकपालो5स धर्मत्र सर्वशास्त्र विश्रात् ।

मन्यसे यद्रचः सर्वं तद्वष्ण भवनं विषो ॥ 4 1 ॥

O Bibhu! You are the Lokapāla; especially you are conversant with all the Śāstric rules and have acquired the knowledge of Dharma. If you think my saying as true, then go to your home.

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः शुत्वा द्वावान् वादसां पति: ।

ओरित्युक्त्वा ययावाशु प्रस्ववदनो नृपः ॥ 4 2 ॥

गते५थ वकणो राजा बभूवातिपुर्दाचितः ।

सुखं प्राय्य सुतस्यैवं राजा मुदयमावर १ ॥ 4 3 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing these words, Varuna's heart was filled with pity and so he went away instantly, saying "let it be so." Varuna going away, the King felt very glad and the queen, knowing the welfare of the son became glad too,

चकार राजकायाणि हरिश्रान्तरत नृपः ।

कालेन बजता पुत्रो बधूव द्रशवाधिंकः ॥ 44 ॥


तस्योपवीतसमार्थी विष्णुतिसदूर्णी नृपः ।

चक्रात ब्राह्मणी: शिष्टैर्थित: सचिवैल्बना ॥ 4 5 ॥

Then the King gladly performed his state duties. After some time, the child grew ten years old. Consulting with the peaceful Brāhmanas as well as his ministers, he collected materials for the Upanayana ceremony befitting his position.

एकादशे सुतस्याव्ये ततवंधियधी नृप: ।

विद्यो विविधलाक्याँ चित्ते चिन्तानुः पुनः ॥ 46 ॥

वर्तमाने तथा कार्य उपनिते कुमारके ।

आजगामाव थकणो विघ्रवेधधरस्ताद ॥ 47 ॥

When the eleventh year was completed by his son, the King arranged everything for the thread ceremony but when his thoughts turned to Varuna's sacrifice, he became very sad and anxious. When the thread ceremony began to be performed, the Brāhmin Varuna came there.

तं बीक्ष्य पुस्तित्नृर्ण प्राणय पुस्त: स्थितः ।

कृतांजसिपुटः प्रीतः प्रत्युवाच सुत्तोमम् ॥ 48 ॥

देवदत्तोपवीतोउयं पगुयोगेयोर्सित मे सुतः ।

प्रसादात्म व मे गोको गतो वंधयापवादः ॥ 49 ॥

Seeing him, the King instantly bowed down and standing before him with clasped palms, gladly spoke to him: "O Deva! My son's Upanayana being over, now my son is fit for the victim in the sacrifice; and by your grace, my sorrow that was within me as not having a son, has vanished.

कर्तूमिष्ट्यार्थे यज्ञ प्रभृतवरदिष्णम् ।

समये शृणु धर्मे सत्यमढ़ ब्रवीम्यढ़म ।। ५० ॥

समावत्नकर्मती कारीध्यामी तवेपितम् ।

मभोपरि द्वयं कृत्वा तावचं क्षेतुमर्हिं ॥ ५१ ॥

I speak truly before you that, O Knower of Virtue! after some more time I have desired to perform yours sacrifice with plenty of Daksjnas. In fact, when the Samāvartan ceremony will be over, I will do as you like. Kindly wait till then."

वरुण उवाच

प्रतारयसि मां राजन्युघेभाकुतो भृशम् ।

युघुर्वैमितं कृत्वा युक्तिचुक्तो महामते ॥ ५२ ॥

गच्छायघ महाराज वचसा तव नोदितः ।

आगमिथायी समये समावर्तनंकर्मिण ॥ ५३ ॥

Varuna said: "O Intelligent One! You are very much attached to your son now and so by various reasonable plays of intellect, you are repeatedly deceiving me. However, I am going home today at your request but know certain that I will come again at the time of the Samāvartana ceremony.

Note: Samāvartana means the return home especially of a pupil from his tutor's house after finishing his course of study there.

इत्युक्त्वा प्रययी पाणी तमापृच्छ्य विश्राणे ।

राजा प्रभृदितः कार्य चकार च ययोतनम् ॥ 54 ॥

आगारं वकर्णे चूद्वा कुमारो3तिविधक्षणः ।

यजस्य समयं जाला तदा चिन्तानुरो3भवत् ॥ 55 ॥

O King! Thus saying, Varuna went away and the King became glad and began to perform duly his various duties. The prince was very intelligent; and as he used to see Varuna coming, now and then, at the time of the ceremonies, he became very anxious.

गोकस्य काराणं राजः पर्येष्छिदितस्ततः ।

जातवा3सत्यधामयुव्मनावगय मिति दधे ॥ 56 ॥

निश्रयं परमं कृत्वा समंय सचिवातमजः ।

प्रययो नगरातस्माशिरांत वनयमयसी ॥ 57 ॥

He then made enquiries outside hither and thither and came to know of his own being about to be killed and he desired to quit the house instantly. He then consulted with the minister's sons and came to a final conclusion and went out of the city to the forest.

गते पुरेत्र नृतः कामं दुःखितोर्भूद्धूर्णं तदा ।

प्रेयामास दृतान्ववितस्थान्येषणकामाया ॥ 58 ॥

एवं गते३व कालेउसी वक्षणतदपूर्णे गतः ।

राजानं गोकसंतपं कुर्य व्यमिति बुबन् ॥ 59 ॥

When the son had gone to the forest, the King became very much afflicted with sorrow and sent messengers in quest of him. When some time passed away, Varuna came to his house and spoke to the distressed King: "O King! Now perform your desired Sacrifice."

Book VII Chapter XVI

राजा प्रणय्य तं प्राह देवदेव करोमि किम् ।

न जाने क्वाथि पुत्रो मे गतलस्व धयाकुलः ॥ 60 ॥

सर्वत्र गिरितुर्मेषु मुनीनाग्यमेषु च ।

अन्वेषितो मे दूतैस्तु न प्रातो यादसाम्पते ॥ 6 1 ॥

The King bowed down to him and said: "O Deva! What shall I do now? My son has become afraid and has gone away. I do not know where he has gone. O Deva! My messengers have searched for him in difficult places in mountains, in the hermitages of the Munis, in fact, in all the places; but they have not been able to find him anywhere.

आज्ञापय महाराज किं करोमि गते सुते ।

न मे घोषोउस सर्वत्र भायद्योषस्तु सर्वथा ॥ 6 2 ॥

My son has left his home; order now what I can do. O Deva! You know everything; so judge I have got no fault in this matter. It is certainly luck and nothing else."

व्यास उवाच

इति भृपवचः श्रुत्वा प्रचेता: कृपितो भृशम् ।

शशाप च नृयं कौधाद्धितस्तु पुनः पुनः ॥ 6 3 ॥

नृपतेई त्वया यस्माद्वसा च प्रवंचितः ।

तस्माज्जतोदो याधिस्वां तुद्वतित्दाक्णः ॥ 6 4 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing these words of the King, Varuna became very much angry and when he saw that he was deceived so many times by the King, he then cursed, saying: "O King! As you have cheated me by your deceitful words, so you be attacked by dropsy and be severely pained by it,"

इति शणो महीपाल: कृपितेन प्रचेतसा ।

पीडितो5भूत्तदा राजा व्याधिनत दुःखदेन तु ॥ 65 ॥

एवं शण्वा नूप घाशी जगाम निजामास्यद् ।

राज प्राय मतुब्याधिं बभूवालीव दुःखतः ॥ 66 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवतमहापुराणे सतमतकम्भे

पडवशोप्रायः ॥ 67 ॥

Thus cursed by Varuna, the King was attacked with that disease and began to suffer much. Cursing thus, Varuna went back to his own place and the King was much afflicted with that terrible disease.

Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter in the Seventh

Book on the story of the King Hariścandra

in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam

of 18,000 verses by

Maharji Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XVI

