[Ch 26 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! When I asked him why this delusion overtook me, Maharṣi Nārada smiled and said: “O son of Parāśara! You are thoroughly acquainted with all the Purāṇas. Why then are you making this question about the cause of my Moha (delusion).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! When I asked him why this delusion overtook me, Maharṣi Nārada smiled and said :-- “O son of Parāśara! You are thoroughly acquainted with all the Purāṇas. Why then are you making this question about the cause of my Moha (delusion).

[Ch 26 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No embodied soul an exist in this Sarīśāra without this Moha. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, and the other Devas, Śaṅkara, Kapila and the other Rṣis, all these are surrounded by Māyā and are thus travelling in this path of Sarīśāra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► No embodied soul can exist in this Samsāra without this Moha. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, and the other Devas, Śanaka, Kapila and the other Ṛṣis, all these are surrounded by Māyā and are thus travelling in this path of Samsāra.

[Ch 26 Verse 4-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The people know me as a Jñāni; but I, too, am deluded like an ordinary man. I am now speaking to you as certain as anything my of previous history now. I was deluded by Māyā; hear it attentively. O Son of Vāsavī! Great troubles and pains felt by me before, due to this Moha, for my wife.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The people know me as a Jñānin; but I, too, am deluded like an ordinary man. I am now speaking to you as certain as anything my of previous history now. I was deluded by Māyā; hear it attentively. O Son of Vāsavī! Great troubles and pains were felt by me before, due to this Moha, for my wife.

[Ch 26 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One day Parvata and I, the two Devarşis, went out together from the Devaloka to see the excellent portion of the earth named Bhārata and came to the Mrtyuloka or the land of the mortals.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One day Parvata and I, the two Devarṣis, went out together from the Devaloka to see the excellent portion of the earth named Bhārata and came to the Martyaloka or the land of the mortals.

[Ch 26 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We then began to travel over various places and saw the places of pilgrimages and the holy places and the beautiful hermitages of the Munis.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We then began to travel over various places and saw the places of pilgrimages and the holy places and the beautiful hermitages of the Munis.

[Ch 26 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Before we went out from the Devaloka, we consulted with each other and entered into this agreement that we would not hide our feelings from each other, whether they be good or bad, while we would travel over the face of the earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Before we went out from the Devaloka, we consulted with each other and entered into this agreement that we would not hide our feelings from each other, whether they be good or bad, while we would travel over the face of the earth.

[Ch 26 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whether it be our desire to get food, or wealth or women for enjoyment, whatever arisen in the mind of any of us, we would express that freely amongst ourselves.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whether it be our desire to get food, or wealth or women for enjoyment, whatever arises in the mind of any of us, we would express that freely amongst ourselves.

[Ch 26 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus making an agreement, we went out in right earnest as Munis to travel over the face of this earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus making an agreement, we went out in right earnest as Munis to travel over the face of this earth.

[Ch 26 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus roaming all over the face of the earth, at the end of the summer season, when the rainy season commenced we came to the beautiful city of the King named Sañjaya.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus roaming all over the face of the earth, at the end of the summer season, when the rainy season commenced we came to the beautiful city of the King named Śañjaya.

[Ch 26 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King showed us great respect and worshipped us with devotion. Since then we remained for four months at his house.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King showed us great respect and worshipped us with devotion. Since then we remained for four months at his house.

[Ch 26 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► During the four months of the rainy season, the roads are always almost impassable; it is, therefore, wise to stay at one place. For eight months, the Dvijas should always remain abroad on some work or other. Thinking all these, we two began to stay in the house of the King Sañjaya.
NEW CORR ENG ──► During the four months of the rainy season, the roads are always almost impassable; it is, therefore, wise to stay at one place. For eight months, the Dvījas should always remain abroad on some work or other. Thinking all these, we two began to stay in the house of the King Śañjaya.

[Ch 26 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That liberal-minded King gladly and with respect kept us as his guests and tendered to us all our requirements. The King had a very beautiful daughter named Damayanti, with good teeth. The King ordered her take care of us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That liberal minded King gladly and with respect kept us as his guests and tendered to us all our requirements. The King had a very beautiful daughter named Damayantī, with good teeth. The King ordered her to take care of us.

[Ch 26 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That large-eyed princess, of great discrimination, was very energetic, day and night. She began to serve both of us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That large-eyed princess, of great discrimination, was very energetic, day and night. She began to serve both of us.

[Ch 26 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In due time she gave us water for our bath, excellent meat, food, towels for cleaning and rubbing our faces, in fact, everything what we desired.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In due time she gave us water for our bath, excellent meat, food, towels for cleaning and rubbing our faces, in fact, everything what we desired.

[Ch 26 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She kept ready for us whatever we desired, fans, seats, beds, whatever were necessary for us. Thus she began to serve. We were also engaged in the study of our Vedas and in those practises that were approved by the Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She kept ready for us whatever we desired, fans, seats, beds, whatever were necessary for us. Thus she began to serve. We were also engaged in the study of our Vedas and in those practises that were approved by the Vedas.

[Ch 26 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Dvaipāyana! I used to sing, then, with lute in my hands, the sweet lovely Sāma Gāyatri songs in tunes and good Svaras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Dvaipāyana! I used to sing, then, with lute in my hands, the sweet lovely Sāma Gāyatrī songs in tunes and good Svaras.

[Ch 26 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The princess herself appreciated the songs and when she heard these Sāma songs ravishing to one's mind, she became attached to me and showed signs of affection.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The princess herself appreciated the songs and when she heard these Sāma songs ravishing to one’s mind, she became attached to me and showed signs of affection.

[Ch 26 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Day by day the attachment towards me grew stronger. Seeing her attached to me, my mind also became attached to her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Day by day the attachment towards me grew stronger. Seeing her attached to me, my mind also became attached to her.

[Ch 26 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus that princess indulged in amorous sentiments towards me and began to make slight distinctions between the food and other things offered to me and Parvata.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus that princess indulged in amorous sentiments towards me and began to make slight distinctions between the food and other things offered to me and Parvata.

[Ch 26 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I got water for my bath and Parvata used to get cold water; I got nice curds when food was served to me whereas Parvata got only whey.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I got warm water for my bath and Parvata used to get cold water; I got nice curds when food was served to me whereas Parvata got only whey.

[Ch 26 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I got nice white bedding for myself to sleep on whereas Parvata had merely a dirty sheet to lie down. Thus the princess began to serve me with great love and devotion but not so she served Parvata. The fair lady began to look at me with eyes of love; not so towards Parvata.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I got nice white bedding for myself to sleep on whereas Parvata had merely a dirty sheet to lie down. Thus the princess began to serve me with great love and devotion but not so she served Parvata. The fair lady began to look at me with eyes of love; not so towards Parvata.

[Ch 26 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Parvata was very much surprised to see all this and thought within herself “What is this?” Parvata, then, asked me in private: “O Nārada! Speak out to me truly in detail.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Parvata was very much surprised to see all this and thought within himself, “What is this?” Parvata, then, asked me in private :-- “O Nārada! Speak out to me truly in detail.

[Ch 26 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The princess shews with much gladness and affection her deep love towards you; she serves you with dainty dishes but she behaves not so with me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The princess shews with much gladness and affection her deep love towards you; she serves you with dainty dishes but she behaves not so with me.

[Ch 26 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I therefore suspect when I see all these distinctions made between you and me, that the daughter of the King Sañjaya wants with her heart and soul to make you her husband. And you also want to make her your wife.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I therefore suspect when I see all these distinctions made between you and me, that the daughter of the King Śañjaya wants with her heart and soul to make you her husband. And you also want to make her your wife.

[Ch 26 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I have come to know this by signs and symptoms; for affection and love reigning inside can be made out by outward expressions of eyes and face.
NEW CORR ENG ──► 1 have come to know this by signs and symptoms; for affection and love reigning inside can be made out by outward expressions of eyes and face.

[Ch 26 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whatever this be, O Muni! Now speak truly to me; do never tell a lie. When we went out from the Heavens, we made out that agreement; now remember that."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whatever this be, O Muni! Now speak truly to me; do never tell a lie. When we went out from the Heavens, we made out that agreement; now remember that.”

[Ch 26 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada said: Thus questioned suddenly by Parvata, I became very much abashed and said: "O Parvata! This large-eyed princess ready to marry me and I am also very much attracted towards her."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- Thus questioned suddenly by Parvata, I became very much abashed and said :-- “O Parvata! This large-eyes princess is ready to marry me and I am also very much attracted towards her.”

[Ch 26 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Parvata heard all these, he became very much angry and uttered repeatedly “Fie! O Nārada! Fie O Nārada! First you swore on oath and then you deceived me afterwards. Therefore, O Deceiver of friends! I curse you and let your face become that of a monkey."
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Parvata heard all these, he became very much angry and uttered repeatedly, “Fie! O Nārada! Fie! O Nārada! First you swore on oath and then you deceived me afterwards. Therefore, O Deceiver of friends! I curse you and let your face become that of a monkey.”

[Ch 26 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the high souled Parvata cursed thus. the face turned immediately into that of a monkey, elongated and distorted.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the high-souled Parvata cursed thus, the face turned immediately into that of a monkey, elongated and distorted.

[Ch 26 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I did not excuse him, though he was my sister's son. I also got angry and cursed him "Certainly, your journey to the Heavens will be stopped. You will not be able to go to Heaven).
NEW CORR ENG ──► I did not excuse him, though he was my sister’s son. I also got angry and cursed him, “Certainly, your journey to the Heavens will be stopped. You will not be able to go to Heaven.

[Ch 26 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Parvata! When you cursed me so heavily for so trivial a fault of mine, I see you are very mean. Whatever it be, you will have to remain on earth so long."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Parvata! When you cursed me so heavily for so trivial a fault of mine, I see you are very mean. Whatever it be, you will have to remain on earth so long.”

[Ch 26 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this Parvata became very sad and went out of the city. My face became immediately like that of a monkey.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this Parvata became very sad and went out of the city. My face became immediately like that of a monkey.

[Ch 26 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The daughter of the King became very sorry to see my face thus distorted into that of a monkey. I did not see her glad as she was before; but her desire to hear my playing with my lute remained the same as before.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The daughter of the King became very sorry to see my face thus distorted into that of a monkey. I did not see her glad as she was before; but her desire to hear my playing with my lute remained the same as before.

[Ch 26 Verse 43-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O Muni! What happened next? How did you get yourself rid of your curse and how did you get your man like face? Whither did Parvata Rṣi go! When and how did you again re-unite with each other? Kindly describe all these to me in detail."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O Muni! What happened next? How did you get yourself rid of your curse and how did you get your man-like face? Whither did Parvata Ṛṣi go! When and how did you again re-unite with each other? Kindly describe all these to me in detail.

[Ch 26 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada said: “O Highly Intelligent One! What shall I say about the nature of Māyā?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- “O Highly Intelligent One! What shall I say about the nature of Māyā?

[Ch 26 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Parvata went away angrily, the daughter of the King began to serve me with greater care than before.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Parvata went away angrily, the daughter of the King began to serve me with greater care than before.

[Ch 26 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I remained there, though Parvata went away, and seeing my face monkey-like, I became very dejected and sorry and was specially troubled with the care and anxiety would happen to me hereafter?
NEW CORR ENG ──► I remained there, though Parvata went away, and seeing my face monkey-like, I became very dejected and sorry and was specially troubled with the care and anxiety what would happen to me hereafter?

[Ch 26 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King Sañjaya saw that his daughter Damayanti was slipping into her youth and asked the prime minister about her marriage.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King Śañjaya saw that his daughter Damayantī was slipping into her youth and asked the prime minister about her marriage.

[Ch 26 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He said: “The time of marriage of my dear daughter has now come; I will now marry her in accordance with due rites and ceremonies.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He said :-- “The time of marriage of my dear daughter has now come; I will now marry her in accordance with due rites and ceremonies.

[Ch 26 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now tell me particularly about a prince worthy of her, as we like, in beauty, qualifications, large-heartedness, calmness, patience and heroism and who is of a good family.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now tell me particularly about a prince worthy of her, as we like, in beauty, qualifications, largeheartedness, calmness, patience and heroism and who is of a good family.”

[Ch 26 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The minister said: "O King! There are many princes on the face of this earth, worthy in all respects, of your daughter.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The minister said :-- “O King! There are many princes on the face of this earth, worthy in all respects, of your daughter.

[Ch 26 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whomever you like, you can call on him and give him your daughter with elephants, horses, chariots wealth, gems and jewels."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whomever you like, you can call on him and give him your daughter with elephants, horses, chariots, wealth, gems and jewels.”

[Ch 26 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Damayanti, knowing the intention of his father informed the King of her own desire by her nurse and attendant.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Damayantī, knowing the intention of his father informed the King of her own desire by her nurse and attendant.

[Ch 26 Verse 54-56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The nurse went to the King and said: "When my father will sit at his ease and comfort you would go and speak to him in private that I am enchanted with the enchanting Nāda sound of the great lute played by Maharṣi Nārada and selected him as my bridegroom. No other person will be dear to me. O Father! Marry me with Nārada and thus fulfil my desire; O Knower of Dharma! I wo'n't marry anybody but Nārada.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The nurse went to the King and said :-- “When my father will sit at his ease and comfort you would go and speak to him in private that I am enchanted with the enchanting Nāda sound of the great lute played by the Maharṣi Nārada and have selected him as my bridegroom. No other person will be dear to me. O Father! Marry me with Nārada and thus fulfil my desire; O Knower of Dharma! I won’t marry anybody but Nārada.

[Ch 26 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Father! I am now merged in the Nāda-occan (sound ocean) of bliss, sweet and joyful, void of anything destructive of happiness, void of Nakra, alligators, and fishes, Timingala, etc. (injurious animals) and without any salty taste; my mind won't be satisfied with any other thing. Here ends the Twenty sixth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the description by Nārada of his own Moha in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Father! I am now merged in the Nāda-ocean (sound ocean) of bliss, sweet and joyful, void of anything destructive of happiness, void of Nakra, alligators, and fishes, Timiṅgala, etc. (injurious animals) and without any salty taste; my mind won’t be satisfied with any other thing.” Here ends the Twenty sixth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the description by Nārada of his own Moha in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa
