CHAPTER XXVI

On Nārada's Moha

व्यास उवाच

इति वे वचनं श्रुत्वा नारदः परमार्थिति ।

मागह च सितं कृत्वा पृष्ठन्तं मोहकारणम् ॥ १ ॥

नारद उवाच

पाराशयं प्राणात्र किं पृष्ठसि मुनिश्रयम् ।

संसारोप्रस्मित्विना मोहं कॉपि नास्ति शरीतच्न ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When I asked him why this delusion overtook me, Maharṣi Nārada smiled and said: “O son of Parāśara! You are thoroughly acquainted with all the Purāṇas. Why then are you making this question about the cause of my Moha (delusion).

बह्ना विष्णुस्तथा रुद्र: सनकः कपिलस्तथा ।

म.यया वेहिता: सर्वे भ्रमित भववर्तमैति ॥ 3 ॥

No embodied soul an exist in this Sarīśāra without this Moha. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, and the other Devas, Śaṅkara, Kapila and the other Rṣis, all these are surrounded by Māyā and are thus travelling in this path of Sarīśāra.

ज्ञानिनं मां जनो वेति प्रोतोर्भई सर्वीलोकवत् ।

श्रुणु मे पूर्ववृत्तानं प्रवतीम पुनीश्रितान् ॥ 4 ॥

दुःखं मया यथा पूर्वन्नुप्तां महत्तम् ।

स्वकृतेन च मोहेन भायर्वीं वासवीसुत् ॥ 5 ॥

The people know me as a Jñāni; but I, too, am deluded like an ordinary man. I am now speaking to you as certain as anything my of previous history now. I was deluded by Māyā; hear it attentively. O Son of Vāsavī! Great troubles and pains felt by me before, due to this Moha, for my wife.

एकादा पर्वतशहं देवलोकामहीतालम् ।

प्राणो विलोकनायीय भारतं खण्डुगतम् ॥ 6 ॥

One day Parvata and I, the two Devarşis, went out together from the Devaloka to see the excellent portion of the earth named Bhārata and came to the Mrtyuloka or the land of the mortals.

भ्रमती सहितल्यों पर्यन्ती तीर्थमण्डलम् ।

पावानिन च स्थानानि मुनीनामाप्रियाम्ब्छुम् ॥ ७ ॥

गर्पथं देवलोकानु कृत्वा पूर्व परस्यम् ।

चलिती समयं चेयं समपन्य निश्छयेन वे ॥ ८ ॥

We then began to travel over various places and saw the places of pilgrimages and the holy places and the beautiful hermitages of the Munis.

चितचूतिस्तुं वनक्या याकुरी यस्य जायते ।

गृभा वारप्रत्युभा वार्थि न गोलद्या कवाचन ॥ 9 ॥

Before we went out from the Devaloka, we consulted with each other and entered into this agreement that we would not hide our feelings from each other, whether they be good or bad, while we would travel over the face of the earth.

भोजनेच्छा धेपेच्छाउपि रतीच्छा वा भवेदेपि ।

यादृषी यस्य चित्ते तु ककवीरा परस्पतम् ॥ 10 ॥

Whether it be our desire to get food, or wealth or women for enjoyment, whatever arisen in the mind of any of us, we would express that freely amongst ourselves.

इच्चावां समयं कृत्वा स्वार्वभूलेकामगताः ।

एकवित्ती मुनीभूर्ती विचारन्ती यवेच्छ्वा ॥ 1 1 ॥

Thus making an agreement, we went out in right earnest as Munis to travel over the face of this earth.

एवं भ्रमनी लोकेंस्मिनीभाने सुभगगते ।

संजस्यय पुरं रत्यं समप्राणो नुपतेः पुनः ॥ 12 ॥

Thus roaming all over the face of the earth, at the end of the summer season, when the rainy season commenced we came to the beautiful city of the King named Sañjaya.

तेन सभ्यक्ती नक्षता गजा सभ्यातीय भृणम् ।

स्थिती तत्र गृहे तस्य चातुर्मार्थं महातपनः ॥ 13 ॥

The King showed us great respect and worshipped us with devotion. Since then we remained for four months at his house.

वार्षिकाशुतो मासा तुर्गमाः पथि सर्वेता ।

तस्पादेकत्र विवृष्टिः स्थानत्यमिति निश्रयः ॥ 14 ॥

अष्टी मासास्तु प्रवसेत्स्वा कार्यविश्रादुज्ञः ।

वर्षाकाले न गतन्व प्रवासे सुरुखमिछ्छता ॥ 15 ॥

During the four months of the rainy season, the roads are always almost impassable; it is, therefore, wise to stay at one place. For eight months, the Dvijas should always remain abroad on some work or other. Thinking all these, we two began to stay in the house of the King Sañjaya.

इति सखिल्य मनसा संजयस्य गृहे तथा ।

संस्थिती प्रातिरा त्राता कृतातिथ्यो महान्मान ॥  16 ॥

दययन्तीत विश्व्याता तस्य पुत्री महीपतेः ।

आज्ञाता परिचार्यां सुत्तरी सुन्दरी सुन्दरी ॥ 17 ॥

That liberal-minded King gladly and with respect kept us as his guests and tendered to us all our requirements. The King had a very beautiful daughter named Damayanti, with good teeth. The King ordered her take care of us.

विवेकज्ञ शिवगताक्षी राजपुत्री कृतोघाम ।

सेवनं सर्वकाले च व्यद्धाप्रभयोरि ॥ 18 ॥

That large-eyed princess, of great discrimination, was very energetic, day and night. She began to serve both of us.

स्नानार्थमूदंक काले भोजनं मृष्टमायतम् ।

मुखबासंलथा चान्यं यदिहे तद्वराति सा ॥ 19 ॥

In due time she gave us water for our bath, excellent meat, food, towels for cleaning and rubbing our faces, in fact, everything what we desired.

मनोप्रभिलिताकामानुभयोरिप कन्यका ।

व्यज्ञासरण्याद्वीराष्टिक्तानप्यक्क्यन्त ॥ 20 ॥

एवं संसेव्यमानौ तु स्थितौ राज्ञो गृहे किल ।

वेदात्ययवनसंगीलावायां वेदवते रती ॥ 21 ॥

She kept ready for us whatever we desired, fans, seats, beds, whatever were necessary for us. Thus she began to serve. We were also engaged in the study of our Vedas and in those practises that were approved by the Vedas.

अई वीर्णा को कृत्वा साधयित्या स्वोत्तमम् ।

गायनं साम सुस्वादमगां कर्णरासायनम् ॥ 22 ॥

O Dvaipāyana! I used to sing, then, with lute in my hands, the sweet lovely Sāma Gāyatri songs in tunes and good Svaras.

राजपुरी तु तच्छूला सामगानं मनोहरम् ।

बधूव मयि रागाखा प्रीतियुक्ता शिवगरद ॥ 23 ॥

The princess herself appreciated the songs and when she heard these Sāma songs ravishing to one's mind, she became attached to me and showed signs of affection.

दिने दिनेउनुगानोङ्सा मयि बुद्धिं गत:  परः ।

ममापि प्रीतितुक्तायां मनो जातं सृष्टापरम् ॥ 24 ॥

Day by day the attachment towards me grew stronger. Seeing her attached to me, my mind also became attached to her.

मम तस्य च सा कन्या भोजनाविषु कर्हिंघत् ।

अकरीदंतरं किंचित्सोभमेदं रसाचिता ॥ 25 ॥

Thus that princess indulged in amorous sentiments towards me and began to make slight distinctions between the food and other things offered to me and Parvata.

सनानायोष्जलं महां पर्वताय च शीतलम् ।

दधि महां तथा तके पर्वतायावकल्प्यत् ॥ 26 ॥

I got water for my bath and Parvata used to get cold water; I got nice curds when food was served to me whereas Parvata got only whey.

शयानस्तरणं शुभं मदर्थे पर्वकल्प्यत् ।

प्रीत्या परमया घट्वल्विताय न ताडूगम् ॥ 27 ॥

विलोक्यिति मां प्रेणा सुन्दरी न च पर्वतम् ॥

ततोउस्यासतादृषुं दृष्ट्या पर्वतः प्रेमकारणम् ॥ 28 ॥

I got nice white bedding for myself to sleep on whereas Parvata had merely a dirty sheet to lie down. Thus the princess began to serve me with great love and devotion but not so she served Parvata. The fair lady began to look at me with eyes of love; not so towards Parvata.

मनसा चिंतयामास किमेत्तिविति वियमतः ।

पप्रच्छ मां रहः सम्यवृष्टि नारद सर्वथा ॥ 29 ॥

Parvata was very much surprised to see all this and thought within herself “What is this?” Parvata, then, asked me in private: “O Nārada! Speak out to me truly in detail.

राजपुत्री त्वयि प्रेम क्रांतीि मुदिता भृणम् ।

द्वाति भृध्यभोज्यानि रेनोहयुक्ता समंततः ॥ 30 ॥

Book VI Chapter XXVI

The princess shews with much gladness and affection her deep love towards you; she serves you with dainty dishes but she behaves not so with me.

न तथा मायि भेघोउस नस्टेहं जनयत्समी ।

मन्ते त्वां पत्ति कर्तुं सर्वथा संजयात्मजा ॥ 3 1 ॥

I therefore suspect when I see all these distinctions made between you and me, that the daughter of the King Sañjaya wants with her heart and soul to make you her husband. And you also want to make her your wife.

तवापि तादूर्ग भावं जानामि लक्षणैरदूम् ।

नेत्रवक्स्विकार्तैश्ञा ज्ञावे त्रिजितकारणम् ॥ 32 ॥

I have come to know this by signs and symptoms; for affection and love reigning inside can be made out by outward expressions of eyes and face.

सत्यं बद न ते मिथ्यां वत्क्यं च्चनं मुने ।

स्वर्गतः समयं कृत्वा चक्तिलों संस्मारामुना ॥ 33 ॥

Whatever this be, O Muni! Now speak truly to me; do never tell a lie. When we went out from the Heavens, we made out that agreement; now remember that."

नारद उवाच

पृड़ोर्नं पर्वितेनैं कारणं तु हठाधवा ।

तदारई हौस्माकान्तः संजानेश्रावूब पुनः ॥ ३४ ॥

पर्वतैँना विगालासी पति मां कांपुशुधात ।

मभापि मानसो भावो वर्तितेस्वा विशेषतः ॥ ३५ ॥

Nārada said: Thus questioned suddenly by Parvata, I became very much abashed and said: "O Parvata! This large-eyed princess ready to marry me and I am also very much attracted towards her."

तच्छुला वचनं सत्यं पर्वतः कोपसंयुतः ।

मामुवाच मुविवर्ध विधिपिति पुनः पुनः ॥ 36 ॥

प्रथमं शपथान्कृत्वा वश्छितोड़े त्वया वतः ।

भव वान्तवक्रसन्तं शापाच्छ मम मिवमुक् ॥ 37 ॥

When Parvata heard all these, he became very much angry and uttered repeatedly “Fie! O Nārada! Fie O Nārada! First you swore on oath and then

you deceived me afterwards. Therefore, O Deceiver of friends! I curse you and let your face become that of a monkey."

इति शलस्तु तेनाई कुपितेन महात्मना ।

सहसा हृषये कृरः शाखामुभ्युखस्तदा ॥ 38 ॥

When the high souled Parvata cursed thus. the face turned immediately into that of a monkey, elongated and distorted.

मयासपि न कृता तस्मिन्मा तु भपीनीसुते ।

सोसि शलोजिकोबघौं मा स्यतं ते नाहि: किनत ॥ 39 ॥

I did not excuse him, though he was my sister's son. I also got angry and cursed him "Certainly, your journey to the Heavens will be stopped. You will not be able to go to Heaven).

स्वल्पेउपरोघे यम्यानां शतावानसि पर्वत ।

तस्मातवीय मन्दाम्मानुतोके स्थिति: किन ।। 40 ॥

O Parvata! When you cursed me so heavily for so trivial a fault of mine, I see you are very mean. Whatever it be, you will have to remain on earth so long."

पर्वतैनतु गततस्माङ्गरगाईमना धृगम् ।

अहं वान्तवक्सन्तु संज्ञाततक्षणादपि ॥ 4 1 ॥

At this Parvata became very sad and went out of the city. My face became immediately like that of a monkey.

दूर्धा में वानरं कूरं राजपुत्री विलक्षणा ।

विम्नान्तीव संज्ञाता वीणात्रशवणालासा ॥ 4 2 ॥

The daughter of the King became very sorry to see my face thus distorted into that of a monkey. I did not see her glad as she was before; but her desire to hear my playing with my lute remained the same as before.

व्यास उवाच

ततः किमभवद्वह्म-कर्थ शपो निवर्तितः ।

मानुगाय्य: पुजान्जोत भवान् हिं विधाविधि ॥ 4 3 ॥

पर्वतः क्व गतो भूयः सुझगो युवयोग्यत् ।

कदा पुत्र कर्थं सर्वे विस्तरेण बदस्य ह ॥ 44 ॥

Vyāsa said: O Muni! What happened next? How did you get yourself rid of your curse and how did you get your man like face? Whither did Parvata

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

Rṣi go! When and how did you again re-unite with each other? Kindly describe all these to me in detail."

नात्व उवाच

क्रिं क्रवीम महापाग मायायाश्ररितं महत् ।

दू:खितोई भूर्ग तत पवैते क्षिते गते ॥ 45 ॥

Nārada said: “O Highly Intelligent One! What shall I say about the nature of Māyā?

पुनः सेवापरास्वर्ष राज्ञुरी मामभवत् ।

गतेउथ पवैते कामं श्वित्तसत्रैव सचानि ॥ 46 ॥

When Parvata went away angrily, the daughter of the King began to serve me with greater care than before.

उर्दे दुःखात्रितो दीनतसथा वानरवमुख: ।

विशेषेण तु चिन्तातैः किं मे स्यादिति चिन्तयन ॥ 47 ॥

I remained there, though Parvata went away, and seeing my face monkey-like, I became very dejected and sorry and was specially troubled with the care and anxiety would happen to me hereafter?

संव्योद्ध सुत्तां ईद्या किंचित्यकद्योवनान् ।

विद्याहर्षे राजसुतामपूच्छत्थित्वे तदा ॥ 48 ॥

The King Sañjaya saw that his daughter Damayanti was slipping into her youth and asked the prime minister about her marriage.

विद्याहाकलः संग्रावः सुताया मम संग्रान् ।

वोरयं वरं मम बृहि राजपूत्रं सुसंतमन् ॥ 49 ॥

He said: “The time of marriage of my dear daughter has now come; I will now marry her in accordance with due rites and ceremonies.

रूपौदार्युर्णीयुक्ते शूरं सुकुलसंभवम् ।

विद्याई विधित्यानुतः कंरामे किल सामानम् ॥ 50 ॥

Now tell me particularly about a prince worthy of her, as we like, in beauty, qualifications, large-heartedness, calmness, patience and heroism and who is of a good family.

प्रधानस्वबजीराजन राजपुत्रा हुनेकशः ।

वर्तैते पृवि पुत्रासोे योग्यः सर्वगृणात्थिता ॥ 5 1 ॥

The minister said: "O King! There are many princes on the face of this earth, worthy in all respects, of your daughter.

थस्मिनुचिते राजेन्द्र तमाद्धय नृपात्मजम् ।

देहि कन्यां धनं भूरि हलत्यश्यत्संतुलम् ॥ 52 ॥

Whomever you like, you can call on him and give him your daughter with elephants, horses, chariots wealth, gems and jewels."

नारद जवाब

वितृछिकर्षितं ज्ञाना दयवंती तदा नृपम् ।

धात्या मुखेन वाक्यजा तुमुलाच रहः स्थितम् ॥ 53 ॥

Damayanti, knowing the intention of his father informed the King of her own desire by her nurse and attendant.

धात्युबाच

दमवनी महाराज पुत्री ते मामधाब्बीत् ।

पित्रं बृहि धारेयि वचनाने मुखाल्यित् ॥ 54 ॥

मया वृतोशं मेघावी नारदो महतीयुतः ।

नादधोहितया कामा नान्यः कोर्पि प्रियो मम ॥ 55 ॥

कुरु मे वार्षिक्तं तत्त विद्याईं मुनिना सह ।

नान्यं वरिष्ये धर्मत्र नरतं तु पतिं जिता ॥ 56 ॥

The nurse went to the King and said: "When my father will sit at his ease and comfort you would go and speak to him in private that I am enchanted with the enchanting Nāda sound of the great lute played by Maharṣi Nārada and selected him as my bridegroom. No other person will be dear to me. O Father! Marry me with Nārada and thus fulfil my desire; O Knower of Dharma! I wo'n't marry anybody but Nārada.

मरानाई नादिसंधी वै नकहीने रसात्मके ।

अक्षरे सुख्यमपूर्णे तिमिंगतिवर्जिति ॥ 57 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभगवाने महापुराणे भरत्कन्धे वर्धिजीशोअधावः 126 ।

O Father! I am now merged in the Nāda-occan (sound ocean) of bliss, sweet and joyful, void of anything destructive of happiness, void of Nakra, alligators, and fishes, Timingala, etc. (injurious animals) and without any salty taste; my mind won't be satisfied with any other thing.

Here ends the Twenty sixth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the description by Nārada of his own Moha in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XXVII

