CHAPTER I

On the Questions by Šaunaka and other Rsis

सर्वेचैत्यकर्णं तामाढां देवीं च धीम्रिच ।

बुद्धि या नः प्रचोदयात् ॥ १ ॥

I meditate on the beginningless Brahmāvidyā who is Sarvacaitanyarūpā, of the nature of all consciousness; may She stimu'ate our buddhi to the realisation of That (or who stimulates our buddhi in different directions).

शौनक उवाच

सृत सूत महाभाग धन्यो5सि पुरुचर्भेम ।

वद्धीतातत्वया सम्यक्षुगपासहिता: शुभा: ॥ 2 ॥

Saunaka said: O highly fortunate Sūta! O noble Sūta! You are the best of persons; you are blessed, inasmuch as you have thoroughly studied all the auspicious Purānas.

अश्वासु रुणपानि कृष्णेन मुनिनाउनच ।

क्रवितानि सुविद्यानि पतितानि त्यासाउनच ॥ 3 ॥

O sinless one! you have gone through all the eighteen Purānas, composed by Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana; these are endowed with five excellent characteristics and full of esoteric meanings.

Note: The characteristics are to make the mantras reveal to one's own self, to realise, to transfer to others the Sākti, force thereof, to prove the various manifestations of the several effects thereof, etc.,

पंचलक्षणयुक्तानि सहस्यानि मानत ।

त्वया ज्ञानानि सर्वाणि व्यासात्सत्यवतीसुतात् ॥4 ॥

अस्माकं पुण्ययोगेन प्राप्तस्त्वं क्षेत्रमुत्तमम् ।

दिव्यं विश्वसमं पुर्णयं कलित्योपविज्ञानम् ॥ 5 ॥

O sinless one! It is not that you have read them like a parrot, but you have thoroughly grasped the meaning of them all as you have learnt them from Vyāsa himself, the son of Satyavatī. Now it is our good merits that you have come at this divine holy excellent Viśvasan Kṣetra (place), free from any defects of the Kali age.

समाजोउंयुनीनाहिश्रोगुकामोरितपुण्यद्।

पुराणसहितां सूत बृह्हि लं नः समाहिताः ॥ ६ ॥

O, Sūta! These Munis assembled here are desirous to hear the holy Purāna Samhītā, that yields religious merits. So describe this to us with your mind concentrated.

दीधार्थपि सर्वत्र तापप्रथिवर्जितः ।

कथयात महापाना पुराणां ब्रह्मांमितम् ॥ ७ ॥

O all-knowing Sūta! Live long and be free from the threefold sorrows of existence. O highly fortunate one! Narrate to us the Purāṇa equivalent to the Vedas.

शोरेन्द्रिययुतः सूत नतः स्वादविश्वधानः ।

न शुण्वन्ति पुराणाति विशिता विधिता है ते ॥ ८ ॥

यथा सिंहैन्द्रियाढ़ादः पडूरसैः प्रतिपघते ।

तथा शोरेन्द्रियाढ़ादो वचोभिः सुधियां सूतः ॥ 9 ॥

O Sūta! Those persons that do not hear the Purāṇas, are certainly deprived by the Creator, though they have apparently the organ of hearing, of the power of tasting the sweet essence of words; because, the organ of hearing is gratified then and

then only when it hears the words of the wise men, just as the organ of taste is satisfied then and then only when it tastes the six kinds of rasas (flavour, taste) (sweet, sour, pangent, bitter, salty, and astringent). This is known to all.

अश्रिका: फणिनः कामं मुहुति हि नभोगुणैः ।

सकणों चे न शूच्योंते तयकणों: कवं च च ॥ 10॥

The serpents that are void of the organ of hearing are enchanted by sweet music; then why should not those persons that have the organs of hearing and are averse to hear the Purānas, be thrown under the category of the deaf?

अतः सर्वे दिज्ञा: सौम्य श्रनुकामा: स्माहिता:।

वर्तैत नैमिधारणये क्षेत्रे कलिभ्यादिताः ॥ १ १ ॥

येन केनाव्यपायेन कालातिवाहनं म्यून् ।

व्यसनैरित मुखाणां बुधानां शाखचितन्तः ॥ १ २ ॥

शाखापयि विविचाराणि जलयाद्युतानि च ।

(त्रिवधानि पुराणानि शाखानि विवधानि च ॥

विरोडाच्छल्युक्तानि गवांपर्वकानि च ॥ ११ )

नान्यांवादयुक्तानि हेतुर्मेत बृह्णित च ॥ १ ३ ॥

O Saumya! Hence all those Brāhmins, being distressed with the fear of this Kali, have come here to this Naimisāranya, eager to hear attentively the Purāṇas, and are staying here with this one object. Time must be spent away anyhow or other; those that are fools while away their times in sports and other evil practices and those that are learned pass away their times in meditating on the Śāstras; but these Śāstras are too vast and very varied; they contain Jalpas (debates or wrangling discussions to win over the opposite party), Vādas (sound doctrines to arrive at just conclusions), and various Arthavādas (explanations and assertions, recommending Vidhis or precepts by stating the good arising from its proper observance and evils arising from its omission and also by adducing historical instances for its support; praises and eulogies) and filled with many argumentations. And, amongst these Śāstras again, the Vedānta is the Sāttvik, the Mīmārinśās are the Rājaskī and the

Nyāya Śāstras with Hetuvādas, are the Tāmasik; so the Śāstras are varied.

साचिकं तत्र वेदान्तं मीमांसा राजसं मतम् ।

तामसं न्यायशासं च हेतुवादाभियंत्रितम् ॥ 14 ॥

तथैव च पुराणानि त्रिगुणानि कवानकं: ।

क्रियातिन त्वया सीयंं पंचलक्षणवर्ति च ॥ 15 ॥

तत्र भागवतं पुर्णं पंचमं वेदसंविमान् ।

क्रियतं चत्चया पूर्वं सर्वलक्षणसंगुन्त्र ॥ 16 ॥

उद्रेषाग्रतेण तदा कीर्तितं परमाद्धुतम् ।

मुक्तिपूर्व मुकुषाणां कामदं धार्यं तथा ॥ 17 ॥

विस्तेरण तदाख्याति पुराणोतममाद्वत् ।

श्रोतुकामा द्विजा: सर्वे दिख्यं भागवतं शुभम् ॥ 18 ॥

Similarily, the Purāṇas are of three kinds: (1) Sāttvik, (2) Rājaskī and (3) Tāmasik. O Saumya! (one of gentle appearance) you have recited those Purāṇas endowed with five characteristics and full of many narratives; of these, the fifth Purāṇa, (equivalent to the Vedas and with all the good qualities, the Bhāgavata yields Dharma and Kāma (religion and desires), gives liberation to those who desire for emancipation and is very wonderful; you mentioned this before but ordinarily; you did not dwell on this specially. Now these Brāhmāṇas are eager to hear gladly this divine auspicious Bhāgavata, the best of the Purāṇas; so kindly describe this in detail.

त्वं तु जानासि धर्मपू चौराणीं संहिता किल ।

कृष्णोत्तां गुरुभक्त्वालय्यकस्त्वगुणाद्ध: ॥ 19 ॥

श्रुतान्यनानि सर्वेत्र त्वन्युखात्रिय:सुतानि च ।

नैव तृतीन ज्ञानोउदा सुधपानेउभरा यथा ॥ 20 ॥

O knower of Dharma! By your faith and devotion to your Guru, you have become Sāttvik and thus have thoroughly known the Purāna Sanhitās spoken by Veda Vyāsa. O Omniscient one! Therefore it is that we have heard many Purānas from your mouth; but we are not satisfied as the Devas are not satisfied with the drinking of the nectar.

विसुभ्यां चित्तां सूत मुक्तिजैव कदाचन ।

विबन्भागवतं सहो नरो मुच्येत संकटात् ॥ 2 1 ॥

Book 1 Chapter II

O Sūta! Fie to the nectar even! as the drinking of nectar is quite useless in giving Mukti. But hearing the Bhāgavata gives instantaneous Mukti from this Samśāra or round of birth and death.

सूपापाननिमितं चल्हता यजा सहस्रणः ।

न गान्तिनधिणछाम: सूत सर्वत्मना वयम् ॥ 2 2 ॥

मखाना हि फलं स्वर्गे: स्वानीछ्यवर्णनं पुनः ।

एवं संसारचक्रेन्स्म्यमणं च निरंतरम् ॥ 2 3 ॥

विना जानेन सर्वत्रे नैव मृक्तः: कदाचन ।

प्रभाते कालचक्रेजत्र नरानां जिशुपालाके ॥ 2 4 ॥

O Sūta! we performed thousands and thousands of Yajñas for the drinking of the nectar (Amṛta), but never we got the full peace. The reason being that Yajñas lead to heaven only; on the expiry of the period of Punya (good merits, the heavenly life ceases and one is expelled, as it wet. from the Heavens. Thus, incessant sojourns in this wheel of

Saṃsāra, the constant rounds of births and deaths never end. O Knower of every thing! Thus, without Jñāna (knowledge, wisdom) Mukti never comes to men, wandering in this wheel of Time (Kālacakra) composed of the Gunas.

अतः सर्वसोपेते पुरयं भागवतं वद ।

पावनं भुक्तिवंतु गृह्धं मुधूधुर्णां सदा ग्रियम् ॥ 25 ॥

इति शीर्ददीभागवतं महापुराणे प्रथमस्करके शौनकप्रश्नो नाम

प्रथमोउथाय: 11 1 11

So describe this holy Bhāgavata, always beloved of the Mumuksus (those that desire Mukti), this secret work yielding liberation, holy and full of all sentiments (rasas).

Thus ends the First Chapter of the First Book on the questioning about the Purāna by Śaunaka and other Rāsis in the Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevīthāgāvatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book 1 Chapter II

