[Ch 1 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I meditate on the beginningless Brahmāvidyā who is Sarvacaitanyarūpā, of the nature of all consciousness; may She stimu'ate our buddhi to the realisation of That (or who stimulates our buddhi in different directions).
NEW CORR ENG ──► I meditate on the beginningless Brahmāvidyā who is Sarvacaitanyarūpā, of the nature of all-consciousness; May She stimulate our buddhi to the realisation of That (or who stimulates our buddhi in different directions).

[Ch 1 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Saunaka said: O highly fortunate Sūta! O noble Sūta! You are the best of persons; you are blessed, inasmuch as you have thoroughly studied all the auspicious Purānas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śaunaka said :-- “O highly fortunate Sūta! O noble Sūta! You are the best of persons; you are blessed inasmuch as you have thoroughly studied all the auspicious Purāṇas.

[Ch 1 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O sinless one! you have gone through all the eighteen Purānas, composed by Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana; these are endowed with five excellent characteristics and full of esoteric meanings. Note: The characteristics are to make the mantras reveal to one's own self, to realise, to transfer to others the Sākti, force thereof, to prove the various manifestations of the several effects thereof, etc.,
NEW CORR ENG ──► O sinless one! you have gone through all the eighteen Purāṇas composed by Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana; these are endowed with five excellent characteristics and full of esoteric meanings. Note :-- The characteristics are to make the mantras reveal to one’s own self, to realise, to transfer to others the Śakti, force thereof, to prove the various manifestations of the several effects thereof, etc.

[Ch 1 Verse 4-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O sinless one! It is not that you have read them like a parrot, but you have thoroughly grasped the meaning of them all as you have learnt them from Vyāsa himself, the son of Satyavatī. Now it is our good merits that you have come at this divine holy excellent Viśvasan Kṣetra (place), free from any defects of the Kali age.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sinless one! It is not that you have read them like a parrot, but you have thoroughly grasped the meaning of them all as you have learnt them from Vyāsa himself, the son of Satyavati. Now it is our good merits that you have come at this divine holy excellent Viśvasan Ksettra (place), free from any defects of the Kali age.

[Ch 1 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O, Sūta! These Munis assembled here are desirous to hear the holy Purāna Samhītā, that yields religious merits. So describe this to us with your mind concentrated.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sūta! These Munis assembled here are desirous to hear the holy Purāṇa Samhitā, that yields religious merits. So describe this to us with your mind concentrated.

[Ch 1 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O all-knowing Sūta! Live long and be free from the threefold sorrows of existence. O highly fortunate one! Narrate to us the Purāṇa equivalent to the Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O all-knowing Sūta! Live long and be free from the threefold sorrows of existence. O highly fortunate one! Narrate to us the Purāṇa equivalent to the Vedas.

[Ch 1 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sūta! Those persons that do not hear the Purāṇas, are certainly deprived by the Creator, though they have apparently the organ of hearing, of the power of tasting the sweet essence of words; because, the organ of hearing is gratified then and then only when it hears the words of the wise men, just as the organ of taste is satisfied then and then only when it tastes the six kinds of rasas (flavour, taste) (sweet, sour, pangent, bitter, salty, and astringent). This is known to all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sūta! Those persons that do not hear the Purāṇas, are certainly deprived by the Creator, though they have apparently the organ of hearing, of the power of tasting the sweet essence of words; because, the organ of hearing is gratified then and then only when it hears the words of the wise men, just as the organ of taste is satisfied then and then only when it tastes the six kinds of rasas (flavour, taste) (sweet, sour, pungent, bitter, salty, and astringent). This is known to all.

[Ch 1 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The serpents that are void of the organ of hearing are enchanted by sweet music; then why should not those persons that have the organs of hearing and are averse to hear the Purānas, be thrown under the category of the deaf?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The serpents that are void of the organ of hearing are enchanted by sweet music; then why should not those persons that have the organs of hearing and are averse to hear the Purāṇas, be thrown under the category of the deaf?

[Ch 1 Verse 11-13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Saumya! Hence all those Brāhmins, being distressed with the fear of this Kali, have come here to this Naimisāranya, eager to hear attentively the Purāṇas, and are staying here with this one object. Time must be spent away anyhow or other; those that are fools while away their times in sports and other evil practices and those that are learned pass away their times in meditating on the Śāstras; but these Śāstras are too vast and very varied; they contain Jalpas (debates or wrangling discussions to win over the opposite party), Vādas (sound doctrines to arrive at just conclusions), and various Arthavādas (explanations and assertions, recommending Vidhis or precepts by stating the good arising from its proper observance and evils arising from its omission and also by adducing historical instances for its support; praises and eulogies) and filled with many argumentations. And, amongst these Śāstras again, the Vedānta is the Sāttvik, the Mīmārinśās are the Rājaskī and the Nyāya Śāstras with Hetuvādas, are the Tāmasik; so the Śāstras are varied.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Saumya! Hence all these Brāhmins, being distressed with the fear of this Kali, have come here to this Naimisāraṇya, eager to hear attentively the Purāṇas, and are staying here with this one object. Time must be spent away anyhow or other; those that are fools while away their times in sports and other evil practices and those that are learned pass away their times in meditating on the Śāstras; but these Śāstras are too vast and very varied; they contain Jalpas (debates or wrangling discussions to win over the opposite party), Vadas (sound doctrines to arrive at just conclusions), and various Arthavādas (explanations and assertions, recommending Vidhis or precepts by stating the good arising from its proper observance and evils arising from its omission and also by adducing historical instances for its support; praises and eulogies) and filled with many argumentations. And, amongst these Śāstras again, the Vedānta is the Sāttvik, the Mimāmsas are the Rājasik and the Nyāya Śāstras with Hetuvādas, are the Tāmasik; so the Śāstras are varied.

[Ch 1 Verse 14-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Similarily, the Purāṇas are of three kinds: (1) Sāttvik, (2) Rājaskī and (3) Tāmasik. O Saumya! (one of gentle appearance) you have recited those Purāṇas endowed with five characteristics and full of many narratives; of these, the fifth Purāṇa, (equivalent to the Vedas and with all the good qualities, the Bhāgavata yields Dharma and Kāma (religion and desires), gives liberation to those who desire for emancipation and is very wonderful; you mentioned this before but ordinarily; you did not dwell on this specially. Now these Brāhmāṇas are eager to hear gladly this divine auspicious Bhāgavata, the best of the Purāṇas; so kindly describe this in detail.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Similarly, the Purāṇas are of three kinds :-- (1) Śattvik, (2) Rājasik and (3) Tāmasik. O Saumya! (one of gentle appearance) you have recited those Purāṇas endowed with five characteristics and full of many narratives; of these, the fifth Purāṇa, equivalent to the Vedas and with all the good qualities, the Bhāgavata yields Dharma and Kāma (religion and desires), gives liberation to those who desire for emancipation and is very wonderful; you mentioned this before but ordinarily; you did not dwell on this specially. Now these Brāhmaṇas are eager to hear gladly this divine auspicious Bhāgavata, the best of the Purāṇas; so kindly describe this in detail.

[Ch 1 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O knower of Dharma! By your faith and devotion to your Guru, you have become Sāttvik and thus have thoroughly known the Purāna Sanhitās spoken by Veda Vyāsa. O Omniscient one! Therefore it is that we have heard many Purānas from your mouth; but we are not satisfied as the Devas are not satisfied with the drinking of the nectar.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O knower of Dharma! By your faith and devotion to your Guru, you have become Sāttvik and thus have thoroughly known the Purāṇa Samhitās spoken by Veda Vyās. O Omniscient one! Therefore it is that we have heard many Purāṇas from your mouth; but we are not satisfied as the Devas are not satisfied with the drinking of the nectar.

[Ch 1 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sūta! Fie to the nectar even! as the drinking of nectar is quite useless in giving Mukti. But hearing the Bhāgavata gives instantaneous Mukti from this Samśāra or round of birth and death.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sūta! Fie to the nectar even as the drinking of nectar is quite useless in giving Mukti. But hearing the Bhāgavata gives instantaneous Mukti from this Samsāra or round of birth and death.

[Ch 1 Verse 22-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sūta! we performed thousands and thousands of Yajñas for the drinking of the nectar (Amṛta), but never we got the full peace. The reason being that Yajñas lead to heaven only; on the expiry of the period of Punya (good merits, the heavenly life ceases and one is expelled, as it wet. from the Heavens. Thus, incessant sojourns in this wheel of Saṃsāra, the constant rounds of births and deaths never end. O Knower of every thing! Thus, without Jñāna (knowledge, wisdom) Mukti never comes to men, wandering in this wheel of Time (Kālacakra) composed of the Gunas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sūta! we performed thousands and thousands of Yajñas for the drinking of the nectar (Amrita), but never we got the full peace. The reason being that Yajñas lead to heaven only; on the expiry of the period of punya (good merits, the heavenly life ceases and one is expelled, as it were from the Heavens. Thus incessant sojourns in this wheel of Samsāra, the constant rounds of births and deaths never end. O Knower of every thing! Thus, without Jñāna (knowledge, wisdom) Mukti never comes to men, wandering in this wheel of Time (Kālacakra) composed of the three Guṇas.

[Ch 1 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So describe this holy Bhāgavata, always beloved of the Mumuksus (those that desire Mukti), this secret work yielding liberation, holy and full of all sentiments (rasas). Thus ends the First Chapter of the First Book on the questioning about the Purāna by Śaunaka and other Rāsis in the Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevīthāgāvatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So describe this holy Bhāgavata, always beloved of the Mumukṣas (those that desire Mukti), this secret work yielding liberation, holy and full of all sentiments (rasas). Thus ends the first chapter of the first Skandha on the questioning about the Purāṇa by Saunaka and other Rishis in the Mahāpurāna Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
