CHAPTER XXXIX

On the Worship of the Devi

हिमालय उवाच

देवदेवि महेशानि करणासागरोप्रिके ।

ब्रहिं पूजाविंधि सम्ययथावद्धुना निजम् ॥ १ ॥

The Himālayas said: “O, Devi! O, Maheśvari! O Thou, the Ocean of Mercy! O World-Mother! Now describe in detail how Thy worship is conducted, the rules and ceremonies thereof.”

देस्यावच

वध्ये पूजाविर्धि राजत्रविकाया यथा प्रियम् ।

अत्यनक्षत्रया सार्थं शृणु यप्तर्णपार ॥ २ ॥

द्वितीया मम पूजा स्याद्वाहा चाध्यन्तरापि च ।

बाह्ञापि द्वितीय प्रोक्ता वैदिकी तान्ककी तथा ॥ ३ ॥

The Devi said: “O King of Mountains! I now describe to you the rites and ceremonies and the methods of My worship that are pleasing to Me. Hear it attentively and with faith. My worship is of two kinds: External and internal. The external worship is again twofold one is Vaidik, and the other is Tântrik.

वैविक्वचार्पि विविधा मृतिंभवेत्र भूरा ।

वैदिकी वैदिकः कार्यं वेदौक्षासम्पित्विः ॥ ४ ॥

तन्योक्तदीक्षाविद्युत तानिकसो संशिता भवेत ।

इर्थ पुजारुस्यं च न जात्वा विषातिकम् ॥ 5 ॥

The Vaidik worship is also of two kinds according to the differences in My forms. Those who are initiated in the Vedic Mantrams worship according to the Vedic rites and ceremonies and those who are initiated in the Tānrik Mantram worship; according to the Tānrik rites. That stupid man is entirely ruined and goes to Hell who knowing the secrets of worship, act contrary to them.

करोति यो नगो मुह: स पतत्येव सर्वथा ।

तत्र या वैदिक्ती ग्रोकता प्रथमा तां वाद्यामूँ।। ६ ॥

यन्मै साक्षात्यरं रूपं दूर्घवानसि भूप्रा ।

अनन्तर्गीर्वनवमनंतचरणं महत् ॥ ७ ॥

सर्वगतिसमायुक्त प्रेकं यत्यात्यम् ।

तदेव पूजयेत्रियं न मे ध्यावेत्यमेदोर्धि ॥ ८ ॥

First I will describe to you the Vaidik worship; hear. The highest Form of Mine that you saw before, with innumerable heads, innumerable eyes, innumerable feet, and the Illuminer of the intelligences of all the Jivas, endowed with all powers, Higher than the Highest, Very Grand, worship That, bow down to That and meditate on that. O Nogendra! This is the first form of worship that I describe to you.

इयोतत्यधान्याय: स्वरूपं कथितं ना ।

शान्तः समाहितमान दंभाहंकारवर्जितः ॥ 9 ॥

तत्यो भव तद्धाजी तद्वे शरणं जत्र ।

तदेव चेतसा पश्य जय ध्यायवर सर्वेद ॥ 10 ॥

With your senses controlled, peaceful, with a well concentrated mind, void of egoism and vanity, and devoted to That, perform sacrifices to That, take refuge of That, see That within the temple of your mind, and always recite Her name and meditate on That.

अनन्यथा प्रियनुभकपक्षता मुद्धावमाश्रितः ।

यहैपंज तयोत्नमीमेव परितेषाय ॥  १ १ ॥

इन्धं मानगुरुहते मोक्ष्यसे घवबन्यान्त ।

मत्यया वे मदासक्तचिता भक्तवग माताः ॥ १ २ ॥

Take hold of Me, and My ideas with one pointed loving devotion and please Me with the performance of sacrifices, austerities and gifts. By My Grace, you will no doubt be able to get the

Book VII Chapter XXXIX

Final Liberation. Whoever is entirely attached to Me, thinking Me as the Highest, is the foremost amongst the Bhaktas.

प्रतिजाने भवादस्मादुद्वाराम्यचिरेण तु ।

ध्याने कर्मयुक्तेक भक्तिज्ञाने वा पुनः ॥ १३ ॥

प्रायासं सर्वथा राजन तु केवलकर्मधि: ।

धार्मतंजयाते भक्तिभंक्वा संजायते परम् ॥ १४ ॥

I promise that I will certainly deliver him from this ocean of the world. O King of mountains! Meditation with Karma and Jñāna with Bhakti will lead one to Me. Only the work alone will fail to

get one to Me. O, Himavān! From Dharma arises Bhakti and from Bhakti arises the Highest Jñāna. श्रतिस्मतिभ्यामुदितं वतय धर्म: प्रक्रौतितं: ।

अन्याशेषण यः प्रोकतो धर्माधासः स उच्चते ॥ 15 ॥

सर्वत्रात्सर्वश्नकेतुं भगतो वेदः स्मृतिन्तः ।

अज्ञानस्य ममाभावादप्रमाणा न च शक्ति: ॥ 16 ॥

What are said in the Sruti and Smṛti Śāstras the Maharṣis take, that as the Dharma; and what are written in other Śāstras, they take them to be Dharmābhāsa (the Shadow or reflection of Dharma). Out of My omniscient and omnipotent Nature, the Vedas have come. Owing to the want of Ignorance in Me, the Vedas can never be invalidated.

सूतयश्छ्छुतेरथै गृहीत्वैच च सर्गिताः ।

मन्दादीनां शुतीनां च ततः प्रामाण्यमिष्चे ॥ १ ७ ॥

क्रविक्वाद्विसन्यार्थ कद्योषण परोत्तिम् ।

धर्म बदिति संगिस्तु नैव प्राङ्ठोर्सित विदैकः ॥ १८ ॥

The Smṛtis are formed out of the meaning of the Vedas; so the Smṛtis and Purāṇas, formed by Manu and the other Rṣis, are authoritative. In some places it is hinted that there other Śāstras than the Vedas, taking the Tantras indirectly into account. Although the matters relating to the Dharmas are mentioned therein, but as they are apparently contrary to the Śrutis, the Tantras are not accepted by the Vaidik Paṇdits.

अन्येयां शाखकर्णामानां प्रभवलतः ।

अज्ञानदोषदुर्ध्यातनुक्तेनां प्रमाणता ॥ 19 ॥

तस्मानमुबुधर्मार्थ सर्वथा वेदमाधयेत् ।

राजज्ञा च यथा लोक हृत्यने न कदाचन ॥ 20 ॥

The other Śāstra makers are marked with their ignorance; so their sayings cannot be authoritative. Therefore he must resort entirely to the Vedas who want the final liberation. As the king's order is never disobeyed amongst his subjects, so the Śruti, the Command of Mine, the Lord of all, can never be abandoned by men.

संक्षेपाना ममाना सा शुतिस्त्वाचा कवे नृभि: ।

मदानारक्षणार्थ तू बह्राक्षयित्यजातः ॥ 21 ॥

मया सुहास्ततो जेयं रहस्यं मे शुतेर्वचः ।

यदा यदा हिं धर्मस्य नतानिभविति भूधर ॥ 22 ॥

To Preserve My Commandments, I have created the Brāhmaṇa and the Kṣaṭtrīya castes. My secrets are all embodied in the Śrutis. For that reason, the words of the Śrutis are no doubt to be known and observed by the sages.

अभ्युव्यानमार्थस्य तत् वेभान्विभयंम् ।

देवदैत्यविभाग्याप्यत एवाभवदपु ।। 23 ॥

ये न कुर्वन्ति तद्मूं तच्छक्षार्थे मया सदा ।

सम्पादितास्तु नरकाक्षायो यच्छुवणाद्वेदो।। 24 ॥

O Mountain! When the Dharma (righteousness) declines and the Adharma (unrighteousness) reigns supreme, I then manifest Myself in the world as Sākambhāri, Rāma, Kṛṣṇa and others. Therefore, the Devas, the preservers of the Vedas, and the Daityas, the destroyers of the Vedas are classified.

यो वेदधर्मपुक्त्य धर्मन्यं समाशयेत् ।

राज प्रवासयेद्वेशाशिज्ञतेतान्धभिगः ॥ 25 ॥

ब्राह्यौर्ने च संभावाः पोक्त्याता न च द्विःः ।

अन्यानि यानि शास्त्राणि लोके.संस्मिनिविधापि च ॥ 26 ॥

Whoever does not practise according to the Vedas I have created many hells for their lessons. When the sinners hear of those hells, they get extremely terrified. The king should banish those stupid persons from his kingdom and the Brāhmins should not talk with them nor take them in their own lines nor when partaking of food, those who forsake the Vaidic Dharma and go for shelter to another Dharma.

श्रुतिस्मृतिविकृद्धानि तामसान्येव सर्वर्गः ।

वामं कपालकं चैव कौलकं भैरवामाः ॥ 27 ॥

The Śāstras that are extant, as contrary to the Śrutis and Smṛtis, are all Tāmasa Śāstras; Mahādeva has framed these Vāma, Kāpālaka, Kaulakas, Bhairva and such like Śāstras for fascinating the people; else He has no object in framing them.

शिशेन मोहनाथीय प्रणीते नान्यहेतुकः ।

द्वशगपाद्भुगोः शगपाद्धीचस्य च शगपत: ॥ 28 ॥

दर्षा ये ब्राह्मणवरा वेदमार्गविद्धिकृततः ।

तेषामुद्वर्णाथीय सेोपानक्रमतः सदा ॥ 29 ॥

गैवाङ्ग बैश्वावाङ्गे सीरा: शाकास्तवैव च ।

गाणपत्या आगमाङ्ग प्रपीताः शंकरेण तु ॥ 30 ॥

Those Brāhmaṇas that were burnt up by the curses of Dakṣa, Šukra, Dadhīci and were banished from the path of the Vedas, it is for delivering them, step by step that Mahādeva has framed the five Agamas, Śaiva, Vaiṣṇava, Śaura, Śākta and Gānapatya Śāstras.

तत्र वेदविकर्णोज्ञपुक्त एवं क्रचित्क्रिच् ।

विद्वैकस्तदुरहे तोषो न भवल्येव कर्हिंचित् ॥ ३ १ ॥

सर्वेथा वेदधिपत्रार्थे नाधिकारी द्विजो भवेत् ।

वेदाधिकारीनस्तु भवेचनाधिकारना ॥ ३ २ ॥

In those Tantra Sāstras there are some passages in conformity with the Vedas and there are other passages contradictory to the Vedas. If the Vaidik persons resort to passages in conformity with the Vedas, then there cannot arise any fault in them. The Brāhmins are not Adhikāris to those Tāntric texts that are contradictory to the Vedas. Those persons that have no claim to the Vedas can be Adhikāris to these latter texts.

तस्मासर्वप्रयत्नेन वैदिको वेदायाश्रयेत् ।

धर्मेण सहितं ज्ञानं परं बहा प्रकारशेचे ॥ 33 ॥

सर्वेषण: परित्यज्य मायेव शरणं गता: ।

सर्वभूतदायावन्तो मानाईकारवर्जिताः ॥ 34 ॥

मिच्छता मन्त्राणणा मनस्थानकक्षने ततः ।

संस्यासितो वनस्थाश्र गृहस्था ब्रह्माचारिणः ॥ 35 ॥

उपासते सदा भकत्या योगमैश्वरसांत्रितम् ।

Therefore the Vaidik a Brāhmaṇas should resort to the Vedas with all the care possible and make the Para Brahma of the nature of Jñāna manifest within them. The Sarinyāsins. Vānaprasthas, householders and Brāhmacārīs should give up all their desires and take refuge in Me; free from egoism and vanity, kind to all creatures, their hearts wholly given to Me and engaged in speaking out My places, with enrapt devotion. They always worship My Virāt (Cosmic) form, fmmersed in the Yoga called Aisvarya Yoga (Cosmic Yoga dealing with the glories, prosperity of god).

तेषां नित्यविशुक्तानामहमानजनं तमः ॥ 36 ॥

ज्ञानसूर्यक्राणेन नार्थायमि न संशयः ।

इन्थे वैदिक्नपूजायः प्रथायमा नगाधिप ॥ 37 ॥

I illumine the understanding with the Sun of My Consciousness, and I destroy the Darkness of Ignorance of those persons that are always engaged in practising Yoga with Me. There is no doubt in this. O Nagendra! Thus I have described in brief the methods and practices of the Vaidik Pūjā; now I will tell you the Tāntrīkī Pūjā; hear attentively.

स्वल्पमुक्ति संक्षेपादूदितीयाया अथो बुवे ।

मूर्ती वा स्व्यडिते वाथि तथा सुरैन्द्रमण्डले ॥ 38 ॥

जलेप्रथ वा बाणलिंगे नये वार्थि महापटे ।

तथा श्रीहृदयांभोजे ध्याता देहीं परातयम् ॥ 39 ॥

सगुणां ककराणुर्णा ततभीमकाणाकाणा ।

सौद्यैसारसीमां तां सर्वावयसुन्दरीम ॥ 40 ॥

शूज्ञरससम्पूर्णां सदा भक्तातर्कालातगम् ।

प्रसातसुभुजीभंवां चन्द्रखडिजिखिडनीम ॥ 41 ॥

पाणंकुशराभीतिधरामानन्द्रकपिणीम् ।

पुजयेतुपचारैछ यथावित्नानुसारतः ॥ 42 ॥

On an image, or clean plot of ground, or on the Sun or the Moon, in water, in Bāna Línga, in Yantra or on a cloth or in the lotus of heart, one is to meditate and worship the Blissful, Higher than the Highest, the Devi, Who creates this universe with the three Gunas Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, Who is filled with the juice of mercy, Who is blooming in youth, Whose colour is red like the rising Sun,

Book VII Chapter XL

Whose beauty overtops to the full, Whose all the limbs are exquisitely beautiful, Who is the sentiment of Love Incarnate, Who feels very much for the mental pain of Her Bhaktas, Who being pleased, manifests Herself before the Bhaktas on Whose forehead, the segment of the Moon shines incessantly, and Whose four hands hold goad, noose and the signs of fearlessness and to great boons.

यावदान्तरपुजायामधिकारो भवेत्र हि ।

तावद्धातुमिमां पूजां श्वेजजते तु तां त्यजेत् ॥ 4 3 ॥

आभ्यन्ततु तु या पूजा सा तु संविल्पतः स्मृतः ।

संविद्वेच परं कलपुर्पापित्रहितं मम ॥ 4 4 ॥

Until one is entitled to the internal worship, one should worship the external; never he is to abandon it. Worship is internal when one's heart gets diluted in Para Brahma, of the nature of the Universal Consciousness. O Mountain! Know My Consciousness (Samvit) to be My Highest Nature without any limitations.

अतः संविदि मदुपे चेतः स्थायं निराशयम् ।

संविद्युपतिरिक्तं तु मिथ्या मायामयं जगत् ॥ 4 5 ॥

अतः संसारनाश्य साक्षणीमात्मक्षिपणम् ।

भाववेकिंमनरैकेन योगयुक्तेन चेतसा ॥ 46 ॥

Therefore it is highly incumbent to attach one's hearts, free from other adjuncts, constantly to this Samvit. And what is more than this Samvit is this illusive world full of Māyā. So to get rid of this world one is to constantly meditate on Me, the Witness of all, the Self of all, with a heart full of devotion and free from any Sankalpa or desires.

अतः परं बाहुपूजाविस्तारः कव्यते मया ।

सावधानेने मनसा श्रुणु पर्वतस्तम ॥ 47 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे सदासकन्के

देवीनीतायामेकोनचत्वारिशोस्थाय: 11 39 11

O Best of Mountains! Now I will describe to you in detail the external form of worship. Hear attentively.

Here ends the Thirty-ninth Chapter of the Seventh

Book on the worship of the World-Mother in

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of

18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XL

