[Ch 9 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: "O Munis! When the excellent Tāmaši Śakti, the Goddess presiding over sleep came out from the eyes, mouth, nose, heart, etc. of the body of World-Guru Viṣṇu and rested in the celestial space, then the powerful Lord Viṣṇu began to yawn and got up.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said:--O Munis! When the excellent Tāmasi Śakti, the Goddess presiding over sleep came out from the eyes, mouth, nose, heart, etc., of the body of the World-Guru Viṣṇu and rested in the celestial space, then the powerful Lord Viṣṇu began to yawn and got up.

[Ch 9 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He saw the Prajāpati Brahmā, terrified and spoke to him in words, deep like rumbling in the clouds:
NEW CORR ENG ──► He saw the Prajāpati Brahmā, terrified and spoke to him in words, deep like rumbling in the clouds :--

[Ch 9 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Bhagavān Padmayone! What makes you come here, and leave your tapasya? Why do you look so terrified and anxious?”
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Bhagavān Padmayone! What makes you come here, and leave your tapasyā? Why do you look so terrified and anxious?”

[Ch 9 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, Brahmā said: "O Deva! Two very powerful and very terrible Daityas, Madhu Kaitabha sprung from the wax of thy ears approached to kill me, terrified thus, I have come to Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, Brahmā said: “O Deva! The two very powerful and very terrible Daityas, Madhu Kaiṭabha sprung from the wax of Thy ears approached to kill me; terrified thus, I have come to Thee.

[Ch 9 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So, O Lord of the Universe! O Vāsudeva! now I am quite out of senses and terrified; save me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► So, O Lord of the Universe! O Vāsudeva! now I am quite out of senses and terrified; save me.”

[Ch 9 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Visnu, then, said: "Now go and rest in peace, without any fear; let those two stupid, whose life has well nigh exhausted, come to me for battle; I will certainly kill them."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viṣṇu, then, said :-- “Now go and rest in peace, without any fear; let those two stupids, whose life has been well nigh exhausted, come to me for battle; I will certainly kill them.”

[Ch 9 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: "While Bhagavān Viṣṇu, the Lord of all the Devas, was thus saying, those two every powerful Dānavas, elated with pride, came up there, in their search for Brahma!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- While Bhagavān Viṣṇu, the Lord of all the Devas, was thus saying, those two very powerful Dānavas, elated with pride, came up there, in their search for Brahmā.

[Ch 9 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Munis! The two proud Daityas stood there in the midst of the Pralaya water without any thing to stand on and with calm attitude.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Munis! The two proud Daityas stood there in the midst of the Pralaya water without anything to stand on and with calm attitude.

[Ch 9 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They then spoke to Brahmā as follows: O You have fled and come here? You cannot escape. Go on and fight. I will kill You before this one.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They then spoke to Brahmā as follows :-- O You have fled and come here? You cannot escape. Go on and fight. I will kill You before this one.

[Ch 9 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then I will kill him also who sleeps on this bed of serpent. Either gives us battle or acknowledge yourself as our servant.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then I will kill him also who sleeps on this bed of serpent. Either give us battle or acknowledge yourself as our servant.

[Ch 9 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing their words, Janārdana Viṣṇu addressed them as follows: “O two Dānavas, mad for war! Come and fight with me as you like; I will surely curb your pride.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing their words, Janārdan Visnu addressed them as follows:-- “O two Dānavas, mad for war! Come and fight with me as you like; I will surely curb your pride.

[Ch 9 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O, two powerful ones! If you trust me, come and fight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O two powerful ones! If you trust me, come and fight”.

[Ch 9 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, the two Dānavas in the midst of that mass of water resting without any support, came up there to fight, with their eyes with anger.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, the two Dānavas in the midst of that mass of water resting without any support, came up there to fight, with their eyes rolling with anger.

[Ch 9 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Daitya, named Madu, became very angry, came up quickly to fight while Kaitabha remained where he stood.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Daitya, named Madhu, became very angry, came up quickly to fight while Kaiṭabha remained where he stood.

[Ch 9 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the hand-to-hand fight ensued between the two mad athletes; Bhagavān Hari and Madhu became tired; Kaitabha came up and began to fight. After that Madhu and Kaitabha joined and, blind with rage, began to fight again and again hand-to-hand with the very powerful Viṣṇu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the hand-to-hand fight ensued between the two mad athletes; Bhagavān Hari and Madhu became tired; Kaiṭabha came up and began to fight. After that Madhu and Kaiṭabha joined and, blind with rage, began to fight again and again hand to hand with the very powerful Viṣṇu.

[Ch 9 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And Bhagavān Brahmā and the Prime Force Ādyā Śakti witnessed this from the celestial Heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And Bhagavān Brahmā and the Prime Force Ādyā Śakti witnessed this from the celestial Heavens.

[Ch 9 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So the fight lasted for a long, long, time; yet the two Dānavas did not feel a bit tired; rather Bhagavān Viṣṇu became tired Thus five thousand years passed away. Hari then began to ponder over their mode of death.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So the fight lasted for a long, long, time; yet the two Dānavas did not feel a bit tired: rather Bhagavān Viṣṇu became tired. Thus five thousand years passed away; Hari then began to ponder over their mode of death.

[Ch 9 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He thought: "I fought for five thousands of years but the two formidable Dānavas have not been tired anything, rather I am tired; it is a matter of great surprise.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He thought :-- “I fought for five thousands of years but the two formidable Dānavas have not been tired anything, rather I am tired; it is a matter of great surprise.

[Ch 9 Verse 21-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing Bhagavān Hari thus sunk in cares, the two hanghy Dānavas sāoke to him with great glee and with a voice like that of the rumbling of cloud: "O Viṣṇu! If you feel tired, if you have no sufficient strength to fight with us, then raise your folded palms on your head and acknowledge that you are our servant; or if you can, go on fighting.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing Bhagavān Hari thus sunk in cares, the two haughty Dānavas spoke to him with great glee and with a voice like that of the rumbling of cloud :-- “O Viṣṇu ! If you feel tired, if you have no sufficient strength to fight with us, then raise your folded palms on your head and acknowledge that you are our servant; or if you can, go on fighting.

[Ch 9 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O intelligent one! We will take away your life first; and then slay this four-faced Brahmā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O intelligent one! We will take away your life first; and then slay this four-faced Brahmā”.

[Ch 9 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing the words of the two Dānavas, resting there without any support in the vast ocean, the high-minded Viṣṇu spoke to them in sweet consoling words: “See, O heroes! no one ever fights with one who is tired, afraid, who is weaponless, who is fallen and who is a child; this is the Dharma of the heroes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing the words of the two Dānavas, resting there without any support in the vast ocean, the high-minded Viṣṇu spoke to them in sweet consoling words :-- “See, O heroes! no one ever fights with one who is tired, afraid, who is weaponless, who is fallen and who is a child; this is the Dharma of the heroes.

[Ch 9 Verse 27-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Both of you fought with me for five thousands of years. But I am single handed; you are two, and both equally powerful and both of you took rest at intervals. I will, therefore, take rest for a while, and then fight you with certainly. Both of you are very powerful and very much elated in vanity. Therefore rest a while. After taking rest for a while I will fight with you according to the just rules of warfare.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Both of you fought with me for five thousands of years. But I am single handed; you are two, and both equally powerful and both of you took rest at intervals. I will therefore take rest for a while, and then fight with certainty. Both of you are very powerful and very much elated in vanity. Therefore rest a while. After taking rest for a while I will fight with you according to the just rules of warfare.”

[Ch 9 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Hari, the two chief Dānavas trusted and remained far aloof, ready to fight again.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Hari, the two chief Dānavas trusted and remained far aloof, ready to fight again.

[Ch 9 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now the four-armed Vāsudeva, seeing them at a sufficient distance, began to ponder in his mind thus: "How their death can be effected?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now the four-armed Vāsudeva, seeing them at a sufficient distance, began to ponder in his mind thus :-- “How their death can be effected?

[Ch 9 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thinking for a time, he came to know that they have been granted, by the Supreme Šakti Devi, death at their will (Icchāmrtyu); and, therefore, they are not getting tired.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thinking for a time, he came to know that they have been granted, by the Supreme Śakti Devī, death at their will (Iccāmrityu); and therefore they are not getting tired.

[Ch 9 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I fought so long with them uselessly; my labour went in vain. How then can I now fight, with this certain knowledge. Again if I do not fight, how these two Dānavas, elated with their boon and giving troubles to all, be destroyed?
NEW CORR ENG ──► I fought so long with them uselessly; my labour went in vain. How then can I now fight, with this certain knowledge. Again if I do not fight, how these two Dānavas, elated with their boon and giving troubles to all, be destroyed?

[Ch 9 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the boon is granted by the Devi, their death is also well nigh impracticable. Who wants his own death, even placed in very great distressed circumstances.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the boon is granted by the Devī their death is also well nigh impracticable. Who wants his own death, even placed in very great distressed circumstances.

[Ch 9 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Attacked by terrible diseases, reduced to indigent poverty no one wants to die; so how can it be expected that these two haughty Dānavas would want their death themselves?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Attacked by terrible diseases, reduced to indigent poverty no one wants to die; so how can it be expected that these two haughty Dānavas would want their death themselves?

[Ch 9 Verse 37-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, it is advisable me to take refuge of that Ādyā Śakti Devi, the giver of the fruits of all desires. No desires can ever be fructified unless She is thoroughly pleased. Thus thinking, Bhagavān Viṣṇu saw the beautiful Devi Yoga Nidrā Śivā, shining in the air. Then the supreme Yogī, Bhagavān Viṣṇu, of immeasurable spirit began to praise with folded palms that great Bhuvaneśvari Mahā Kālī, the giver of boons, for the destruction of the Dānavas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore it is advisable me to take refuge of that Ādyā Śakti, the giver of the fruits of all desires. No desires can ever be fructified unless She is thoroughly pleased. Thus thinking, Bhagavān Viṣṇu saw the beautiful Devī Yoga Nidra Śiva, shining in the air. Then the supreme Yogi, Bhagavān Viṣṇu, of immeasurable spirit began to praise with folded palms that great Bhuvaneśvarī Mahā Kāli, the giver of boons for the destruction of the Dānavas.

[Ch 9 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O Devi! I bow down to Thee; O Mahāmāyā, the Creatrix and Destructrix! Thou beginningless and deathless! O auspicious Caṇdike! The Bestower of enjoyment and liberation.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Devī! I bow down to Thee O Mahāmāyā, the Creatrix and Destructrix! Thou beginningless and deathless! O auspicious Chandike! The Bestower of enjoyment and liberation

[Ch 9 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I do not know Thy Saguna or Nirguna forms; how then can I know Thy glorious deeds, innumerable as they are. Today Thy undescribable prowess has been experienced by me, I being made senseless and unconscious by Thy power of sleep.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I do not know Thy Saguṇa or Nirguṇa forms; how then can I know Thy glorious deeds, innumerable as they are. To-day Thy undescribable prowess has been experienced by me, I being made senseless and unconscious by Thy power of sleep.

[Ch 9 Verse 42-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Being tried again and again by Brahmā with great care to bring me back to my consciousness, I could not become conscious, so much my senses were contracted down.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Being tried again and again by Brahmā with great care to bring me back to my consciousness, I could not become conscious, so much my senses were contracted down.

[Ch 9 Verse 44-45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! By Thy power, Thou didst keep me unconscious and Thou again hast freed me from sleep, and I also fought so many times. O giver of one's honour! Now I am tired; but Thou hast granted boon to the two Dānavas and therefore they are not getting tired.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! By Thy power, Thou didst keep me unconscious and Thou again hast freed me from sleep, and I also fought so many times. O giver of one’s honour! Now I am tired; but Thou hast granted boon to the two Dānavas and therefore they are not getting tired.

[Ch 9 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► These two Dānavas, puffed up with pride, were ready to kill Brahmā; and, therefore, I challenged them to fight with me and they too are fighting fiercely with me in this vast ocean.
NEW CORR ENG ──► These two Dānavas, puffed up with pride, were ready to kill Brahmā; and therefore I challenged them to fight with me and they too are fighting fiercely with me in this vast ocean.

[Ch 9 Verse 47-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But Thou hast granted them the wonderful boon that they will die whenever they will; and therefore I have now come to Thy refuge, as Thou protectest those that come under Thy shelter. Therefore, O Mother, the remover of the Devas' troubles! These two Dānavas are become exceedingly elated by Thy boon and I, too, am tired.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But Thou hast granted them the wonderful boon that they will die whenever they will; and therefore I have now come to Thy refuge, as Thou protectest those that come under Thy shelter. Therefore, O Mother, the remover of the Devaś troubles! These two Dānavas are become exceedingly elated by Thy boon and I, too, am tired.

[Ch 9 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore dost Thou hclp me now. See! those two sinners are ready to kill me; without Thy grace, what can I do now? and wnere to go ?'
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore dost Thou help me now. See! those two sinners are ready to kill me; without Thy grace, what can I do now? and where to go?”

[Ch 9 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus praised by the eternal Vāsudeva Jagannātha Hari, with humility and pranāms, the Devi Mahā Kālī, resting in the air, said smiling: "O, Devadva Hari! Fight again; O, Viṣṇu! These two heroes, when deluded by My Māyā, would be slain by you; I will delude them, certainly, by My side long glance; O, Nārāyaṇa! then slay quickly the two Dānavas, when conjured by My Māyā."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus praised by the eternal Vāsudeva Jagannātha Hari, with humility and pranams, the Devī Mahā Kāli, resting in the air, said smiling :-- “O Deva deva Hari! Fight again; O Viṣṇu! These two heroes, when deluded by My Māyā, would be slain by you; I will delude them certainly, by My side long glance; O Nārāyana! then slay quickly the two Dānavas, when conjured by My māyā”.

[Ch 9 Verse 52-56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: “Hearing these loving words of Bhagavatī, Bhagavān Viṣṇu went to the scene of battle in the middle of that ocean, when the two powerful Dānavas of serene tempers and eager to fight, became very glad on seeing Viṣṇu in the battle and said: “O four-armed one! we see your desire is very lofty indeed; well; stand! stand! now be ready for battle, knowing that victory or defeat is surely dependent on Destiny. You should think now thus: “Though it is geneally true that the more powerful one wins victory; but it also happens sometimes that the weak gets the victory by queer turn of Fate; see the high souled persons should not be gald at their victories, nor should express their sorrows at their defeat; so dont be glad, thinking, that you on many former occasions fought with many Dānavas who were your enemies, and got the victory; nor be sorry that now you are defeated by the two Dānavas.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Hearing these loving words of Bhagavatī, Bhagavān Viṣṇu went to the scene of battle in the middle of that ocean, when the two powerful Dānavas of serene tempers and eager to light, became very glad on seeing Viṣṇu in the battle and said :-- “O four-armed one! we see your desire is very lofty indeed; well stand! Stand! now be ready for battle, knowing that victory or defeat is surely dependent on Destiny. You should think now thus :-- Though it is generally true that the more powerful one wins victory; but it also happens sometimes that the weak gets the victory by queer turn of Fate; so the high souled persons should not be glad at their victories, nor should express their sorrows at their defeat; so don’t be glad, thinking, that you on many former occasions fought with many Dānavas who were your enemies, and got the victory; nor be sorry that now you are defeated by the two Dānavas”.

[Ch 9 Verse 57-59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► ‘Thus saying, the powerful Madhu Kaitabha came up to fight. Seeing this, Bhagavān Viṣṇu struck them immediately by fist with great violence; the two Dānavas, elated with their strength, struck Hari in return with their fists. Thus fighting went on vigorously.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, the powerful Madhu Kaiṭabha came up to fight. Seeing this, Bhagavān Viṣṇu struck them immediately by fist with great violence; the two Dānavas, elated with their strength, struck Hari in return with their fists. Thus fighting went on vigorously.

[Ch 9 Verse 60-61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Now seeing the two Dānavas of great powers, fighting on incessantly, Nārāyaṇa Hari cast a glance expressive of great distress, towards the face of the Devi Mahākalī. Seeing Viṣṇu thus distressed, the Devi laughed loudly and began to look constantly with eyes somewhat reddish and shot towards the two Asuras side-long glances, of love and amorous feelings which were like arrows from the Cupid.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now seeing the two Dānavas of great powers, fighting on incessantly, Nārāyana Hari cast a glance expressive of great distress, towards the face of the Devī Mahākāli. Seeing Viṣṇu thus distressed, the Devī laughed loudly and began to look constantly with eyes somewhat reddish and shot towards the two Asuras side-long glances, of love and amorous feelings which were like arrows from the Cupid.

[Ch 9 Verse 62-63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The two vicious Daityas became fascinated by the side-long glances of the Devi and took great pleasure in them; being extremely agitated by these amorous darts, looked with one steady gaze towards the Devi, of spotless lustre.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The two vicious Daityas became fascinated by the side-long glances of the Devī and took great pleasures in them; being extremely agitated by these amorous darts, looked with one steady gaze towards the Devī, of spotless lustre.

[Ch 9 Verse 64-66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhagavān Hari, too, saw the wonderful enchanting pastime of the Devi. Then Hari, perfectly expert in adopting means to secure ends, began to speak smiling and in voice like that of the rumbling cloud, knowing the two Dānavas enchanted by Mahāmāyā, thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bhagavān Hari, too, saw the wonderful enchanting pastime of the Devī. Then Hari, perfectly expert in adopting means to secure ends, began to speak smiling and in voice like that of the rambling cloud, knowing the two Dānavas enchanted by Mahāmāyā, thus :--

[Ch 9 Verse 67-68]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O two heroes! I am very glad at the mode of your fighting. So ask from me boons. I will grant that to you. I saw many Dānavas before, fighting; but never I saw them expert like you, nor I heard like this: I am therefore, very much satisfied by your such unrivalled powers. Therefore, O greatly powerful pair of Dānavas! I wish to grant both of you any boon that you want."
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- O two heroes! I am very glad at the mode of your fighting. So ask from me boons. I will grant that to you. I saw many Dānavas before, fighting; but never I saw them expert like you, nor I heard like this. I am therefore, very much satisfied by your such unrivalled powers. Therefore, O greatly powerful pair of Dānavas! I wish to grant both of you any boon that you want.

[Ch 9 Verse 69]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Seeing the Devi Mahāmāyā, the gladdener of the Universe, the two Dānavas felt themselves amorous; and, therefore, they became proud on hearing Viṣṇu's those words and told Viṣṇu, with their lotus-like eyes wide open, thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the Devī Mahāmāyā, the gladdener, of the Universe, the two Dānavas felt themselves amorous; and therefore they became proud on hearing Viṣṇu’s those words and told Viṣṇu, with their lotus-like eyes wide open, thus :--

[Ch 9 Verse 70-71]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Hari! what do you like to give us? We are not beggars; we do not want anything from you. O Lord of the Devas! Rather we will give you whatever you desire; we are donors; not receivers. So, O Vāsudeva! Hrṣikeśa! We are glad to see your wonderful fight; so ask from us any boon that you desire.'
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Hari! what do you like to give us? We are not beggars; we do not want anything from you. O Lord of the Devas! Rather we will give you whatever you desire; we are donors; not receivers. So O Vāsudeva! Hṛṣi Keṣa! We are glad to see your- wonderful fight; so ask from us any boon that you desire.

[Ch 9 Verse 72]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing their words, Bhagavān Janārdana said: "If you both are so much pleased with me, then I want this that both of you be killed by me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing their words, Bhagavān Janārdan said :-- “ If you both are so much pleased with me, then I want this that both of you be killed by me.”

[Ch 9 Verse 73-74]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Viṣṇu, Madhu Kaitābha became very much surprised and thinking “we are now cheated' remained for some time merged in sorrow. Then reflecting that there is water everwhere and solid earth nowhere, they said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Viṣṇu, Madhu Kaiṭabha became very much wondered and thinking “we are now cheated” remained for some time merged in sorrow. Then reflecting that there is water everywhere and solid earth nowhere, they said :--

[Ch 9 Verse 75-76]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O Janārdana Hari! We know that you are truthful; therefore, now we want this desired boon from you that you wanted to grant us before; now grant us this desired boon of ours. O Madhusūdana! We will be slain by you; but kill us, O Mādava! on a solid earth, free from any water; and thus keep your word.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “O Janārdana Hari! We know that you are truthful; therefore now we want this desired boon from you that you wanted to grant us before now grant us this desired boon of ours. O Madhusūdana! We will be slain by you; but kill us, O Mādhava! on a solid earth, free from any water; and thus keep your word.

[Ch 9 Verse 77]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śrī Bhagavān Hari laughed and remembering His Sudarśana disc, said: “O two highly fortunate ones! Verily, I will kill both of you on the vast solid spot without any trace of water.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śri Bhagavān Hari laughed and remembering His Sudarsan disc said :-- “O two highly fortunate ones! Verily, I will kill both of you on the vast solid spot without any trace of water.

[Ch 9 Verse 78]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, Devadeva Hari expanded His own thighs and showed to those Dānavas the vast solid earth on the surface of water and said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, the Devadeva Hari expanded His own thighs and showed to those Dānavas the vast solid earth on the surface of water and said :--

[Ch 9 Verse 79]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O two Dānavas! See, here is no water. Place your two heads here; thus, I will keep my word and you would keep you word."
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O two Dānavas! See, here is no water. Place your two heads here; thus I will keep my word and you would keep your word.”

[Ch 9 Verse 80]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, Madhu Kaiṭabha thought over in their minds and expanded their bodies to ten thousand Yojanas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, Madhu Kaiṭabha thought over in their minds and expanded their bodies to ten thousand Yojanas.

[Ch 9 Verse 81]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhagavān Viṣṇu Hari also extended his thighs to twice that amount. Seeing this, they were greatly surprised and laid their heads on the thighs of Viṣṇu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bhagavān Viṣṇu Hari also extended his thighs to twice that amount. Seeing this, they were greatly, suprised and laid their heads on the thighs of Viṣṇu.

[Ch 9 Verse 82]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Viṣṇu, of wonderful prowess, then cut off quickly with His Sudarāśna disc the two very big heads over His thighs.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viṣṇu of wonderful prowess, then cut off quickly with His Sudarsan disc the two very big heads over His thighs.

[Ch 9 Verse 83]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus, the two Dānavas Madhu Kaitabha passed away; and the marrow (meda) of them filled the ocean.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the two Dānavas Madhu Kaiṭabha passed away; and the marrow (meda) of them filled the ocean.

[Ch 9 Verse 84]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Munis! For this reason, this earth is named Medinī and the earth is unfit for eatable purpose.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Munis! For this reason, this earth is named Medinī and the earth is unfit for eatable purpose.

[Ch 9 Verse 85]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus I have described to you all that you asked. The sum and substance is this that the wise persons should serve Mahāmāyā with all their hearts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus I have described to you all that you asked. The sum and substance is this that the wise persons should serve Mahāmāyā with all thei hearts.

[Ch 9 Verse 86-88]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Supreme Śakti is worshipped by all the Devas. Verily, verily, I say unto you that this is decided, in all the Vedas and other Śastras that there is nothing higher than this Ādyā Śakti. Therefore this Supreme Śakti should be worshipped anyhow; either in Her Saguna form or in her Nirguna state. Thus ends the Ninth Chapter of the First Book on the killing of Madhu Kaitabha in the Mahāpurāna Srimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Supreme Śakti is worshipped by all the Devas. Verily verily, I say unto you that this is decided, in all the Vedas and other Śastras that there is nothing higher than this Ādyā Śakti. Therefore this Supreme Śakti should be worshipped anyhow; either in Her Saguṇa form or in Her Nirguṇa state. Thus ends the ninth Chapter of the first Skandha on the killing of Madhu Kaiṭabha in the Mahāpurana Śrimad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyās.
