CHAPTER IX

On the Killing of Madhu Kaitabha

सूत उवाच

यदा विनिर्नता नित्रा देहानस्य जगदगुगेः ।

नेत्रायनासिकाबाबूहदयेभ्यन्तक्षोरसः ॥ 1 ॥

निःसून्य गगाने तस्थौ तामधी शक्तिभतनाम ।

उदतिषज्ञगाथो जुभ्यमाण: पुनः पुनः ॥ 2 ॥

Sūta said: "O Munis! When the excellent

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Tāmaši Śakti, the Goddess presiding over sleep came out from the eyes, mouth, nose, heart, etc. of the body of World-Guru Viṣṇu and rested in the celestial space, then the powerful Lord Viṣṇu began to yawn and got up.

तदाउपर्यस्त्थतं तन भयरन्तं प्रजापतिम ।

उदाच च महातेजा मेघर्भारीया सिरा ॥ ३ ॥

He saw the Prajāpati Brahmā, terrified and spoke to him in words, deep like rumbling in the clouds:

विष्णुकावच

किमागतोप्रस भगवंत्सत्यक्वत्सा उपवा ।

कस्मार्चितातुगोप्रस त्वं भयाकुलितमानस: ॥ ४ ॥

“O Bhagavān Padmayone! What makes you come here, and leave your tapasya? Why do you look so terrified and anxious?”

ब्रह्मोवाच

त्वकर्णमलजी देव तैर्यो च मधुकैटभी ।

हंतुं मां सुमायाती घोरस्थी महाबली ॥ 5 ॥

Hearing this, Brahmā said: "O Deva! Two very powerful and very terrible Daityas, Madhu Kaitabha sprung from the wax of thy ears approached to kill me, terrified thus, I have come to Thee.

भयातयो: स्यायातस्त्वत्सार्थीं जगतयते ।

ग्राहि मां वासुदेवाठा भयत्रस्तं विचेतनम् ॥ 6 ॥

So, O Lord of the Universe! O Vāsudeva! now I am quite out of senses and terrified; save me."

विष्णुत्वाच

तिष्ठादि निर्भयो जातस्ती इनिष्प्याम्यहं किल ।

सुद्वायाजममुर्तूपौं मत्समीपं गतायुधो ॥ 7 ॥

Visnu, then, said: "Now go and rest in peace, without any fear; let those two stupid, whose life has well nigh exhausted, come to me for battle; I will certainly kill them."

सूत उवाच

एवं वदति देतेगे दानावी तो महावली ।

विश्चल्यानावंजे चोभो सुंगापौ मदार्थिहिं ॥ 8 ॥

Sūta said: "While Bhagavān Viṣṇu, the Lord of

all the Devas, was thus saying, those two every powerful Dānavas, elated with pride, came up there, in their search for Brahma!

निराधारी जले तन संस्थिति विनतज्जरो ।

तावूचतुर्दोव्नमती ब्रहाणं मुनिसदामा: ॥ 9 ॥

“O Munis! The two proud Daityas stood there in the midst of the Pralaya water without any thing to stand on and with calm attitude.

पतावित्वा समायातः सश्रियाय्य किं ततः ।

युढ़ं कुरु हनियावः पश्यतोर्येव सित्रिधे ॥ 10 ॥

They then spoke to Brahmā as follows: O You have fled and come here? You cannot escape. Go on and fight. I will kill You before this one.

पश्रादेनं हनियावः सर्पभोगोपरि स्थितम् ।

ल्यमढ़ कुंस मंग्रामं दासोउस्मिति च वा यद ॥ १ १ ॥

Then I will kill him also who sleeps on this bed of serpent. Either gives us battle or acknowledge yourself as our servant.

तद्धुत्वा वचनं विष्युस्तावुचा जनादनः ।

कुकृतां समरं कांम मया दानवपुत्र्वी ॥ १ २ ॥

Hearing their words, Janārdana Viṣṇu addressed them as follows: “O two Dānavas, mad for war! Come and fight with me as you like; I will surely curb your pride.

ह्रिथायीम मदं चाहं युवयोर्मन्तेयः किल ।

आगच्छतं महापार्णी अब्रद्धो चेढ़ां महावलि ॥ १३ ॥

“O, two powerful ones! If you trust me, come and fight.

सूत उवाच

शुत्वा तद्रचनं चोभी क्रोध्याकुललेचनौ ।

निराधारे जलस्थी च युद्धोषुक्तो बयुवत् ॥ 14 ॥

Hearing this, the two Dānavas in the midst of that mass of water resting without any support, came up there to fight, with their eyes with anger.

मयुध कुपितस्तत्र हरिणा सह संयुगम् ।

कर्तु प्रवतितस्तपुं कैटभस्तु तथा स्थितः ॥ 15 ॥

The Daitya, named Madu, became very angry, came up quickly to fight while Kaitabha remained where he stood.

Book I Chapter IX

बाहुयुद्धे तयोरासी-मल्लयोरिव मतचोः ।

शान्ते मधौ कैटपस्तु संग्राममक्रोतचा ॥ १६ ॥

पुनर्मधु: कैटभश्र ययुधातं पुन: पुनः ।

बाहुयुद्धे२ रागवटी विण्याना प्रभाविण्याना ॥ १७ ॥

Then the hand-to-hand fight ensued between the two mad athletes; Bhagavān Hari and Madhu became tired; Kaitabha came up and began to fight. After that Madhu and Kaitabha joined and, blind with rage, began to fight again and again hand-to-hand with the very powerful Viṣṇu.

प्रेक्षकस्तु तदा बढ़ा देवी चैवातरिक्षण ।

न ममस्तुस्तदा तो तु विज्युः सु लनमिमावान् ॥ 18 ॥

And Bhagavān Brahmā and the Prime Force

Ādyā Śakti witnessed this from the celestial

Heavens.

पड्वर्षेसह्वायणि यदा जातानि युक्प्रापा ।

हरिणा स्थितितं तत्र कारणं भरणं तयोः ॥ १९ ॥

So the fight lasted for a long, long, time; yet the two Dānavas did not feel a bit tired; rather Bhagavān Viṣṇu became tired Thus five thousand years passed away. Hari then began to ponder over their mode of death.

पड्वर्षसहस्वाणि मया युबं कृतं कित।

न श्रांति दानवी योगे श्रोतांर्दे चैनद्धुद्वम् ॥ २०॥

He thought: "I fought for five thousands of years but the two formidable Dānavas have not been tired anything, rather I am tired; it is a matter of great surprise.

क्व गत मे वलं शौर्यं कस्माच्चेमावनामयो ।

किमत्र कारणं चित्वं विचायं मसना त्विष्॥ २  १ ॥

Where has gone my :rowess? and what for the two Dānavas were not tired; What is the cause? This is a matter, now seriously to be thought over. हृति चैतागरं दूरवा हारं हर्यपरावृषी ।

क्रवतुस्ती मदोच्नाती मेघर्गंधीरनि:स्वनी ॥ 22 ॥

तव नोच्छेतं विष्णो यदि श्रांतोर सिद्धः ।

ब्रहिं दासोउसि वा नूनं कृत्वा शिरासि चांजसिन् ॥ 23 ॥

Seeing Bhagavān Hari thus sunk in cares, the two hanghy Dānavas sāoke to him with great glee and with a voice like that of the rumbling of cloud:

"O Viṣṇu! If you feel tired, if you have no sufficient strength to fight with us, then raise your folded palms on your head and acknowledge that you are our servant; or if you can, go on fighting.

नोचेड्यूढ़ कुरुब्याच समर्पोर्स महामते ।

हत्वा त्वां निर्भिन्याव: पुरुषं च चतुर्मुंखम् ॥ 24 ॥

O intelligent one! We will take away your life first; and then slay this four-faced Brahmā.

सूत उवाच

श्रुत्वा तद्धारितं विणुस्त्वोतस्तिम्मानोदोष्टी ।

उवाच वचनं श्लक्षणं सामपूर्व महामना: ॥ 25 ॥

हरिकवाच

श्रांत भीते त्यक्ताग्राघे पितते बातके तथा ।

प्रहरित न वीरासे धर्म एष सनातनः ॥ 26 ॥

Hearing the words of the two Dānavas, resting there without any support in the vast ocean, the high-minded Viṣṇu spoke to them in sweet consoling words: “See, O heroes! no one ever fights with one who is tired, afraid, who is weaponless, who is fallen and who is a child; this is the Dharma of the heroes.

पडुबर्वसहस्राणि कृतं युद्धे मया स्थित है ।

एको3ई भातरी वां च बलिन्ती सूग्री तथा ॥ 27 ॥

कृतं विश्रभाणं मध्ये युवाय्यां च पुनः पुनः ।

तथा विश्रभाणं कृत्वा युधेजई नात्र संगराः ॥ 28 ॥

तिष्ठता हि युवां तावद्वतंनी मदोकट्टी ।

विश्रभ्यहं कार्यिणीय युंदों ना व्यायमार्गतः ॥ 29 ॥

Both of you fought with me for five thousands of years. But I am single handed; you are two, and both equally powerful and both of you took rest at intervals. I will, therefore, take rest for a while, and then fight you with certainly. Both of you are very powerful and very much elated in vanity. Therefore rest a while. After taking rest for a while I will fight with you according to the just rules of warfare.

सूत जयात

इति श्रुत्वा वचस्तस्य विश्रब्धौ दान्वोतभी ।

संस्थिती दूरतस्तत्र संग्रामे कृतनिष्ठशी ॥ ३० ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Hearing these words of Hari, the two chief Dānavas trusted and remained far aloof, ready to fight again.

अतिनूरे च तो द्रह्या वासुदेवश्रुभुंजः ।

द्यथी च मनसा तत्र कारणं मरणे तयोः ॥ 31 ॥

Now the four-armed Vāsudeva, seeing them at a sufficient distance, began to ponder in his mind thus: "How their death can be effected?

चितनाज्ञानमुचत्रे देवीदन्तवग्वुधी ।

कामं वांक्षितमरणी न ममन्तुत्तत्स्तम्बी ॥ 32 ॥

Thinking for a time, he came to know that they have been granted, by the Supreme Šakti Devi, death at their will (Icchāmrtyu); and, therefore, they are not getting tired.

द्वया मया कृतं मुद्धं शमोउं मे द्वया गतः ।

क्रौयि च कर्थं युद्धमेवं ज्ञावा विविश्यम् ॥ 33 ॥

अकृते च तथा युद्धे कवयोत गयिष्यतः ।

विनाएं दुःखदी निचल दानवी वर्दर्विति ॥ 34 ॥

I fought so long with them uselessly; my labour went in vain. How then can I now fight, with this certain knowledge. Again if I do not fight, how these two Dānavas, elated with their boon and giving troubles to all, be destroyed?

भगवता वयं दुस्तदया सोप्रि च दुर्घटः ।

मरणं चेच्छया कामं दुःवितोर्नि न वांक्षिति ॥ 35 ॥

When the boon is granted by the Devi, their death is also well nigh impracticable. Who wants his own death, even placed in very great distressed circumstances.

रोग्यत्सोर्धि दीनोर्धि न मुभूर्वित कशन ।

कवोदोमी मदोनाती मतृकामी पथित्य : ।। ३६ ॥

Attacked by terrible diseases, reduced to indigent poverty no one wants to die; so how can it be expected that these two haughty Dānavas would want their death themselves?

नत्वा शरणं वाभि विशा शर्निक सुकामदाम् ।

विना तथा न सिद्धान्ति कामाः: सत्यक्षसत्रा ॥ 37 ॥

एवं संचिंत्यामानसु गाने संश्विता शिजाम् ।

अप्यसूद्राविन्यपूर्णेपनिर्नो मनोहामू ॥ 38 ॥

कृतासुस्तिरमेयाता तां च तुराव योगवित् ।

विनाशार्थ तयोस्तत्र वरदां घुवनेश्वरीम् ॥ 39 ॥

Therefore, it is advisable me to take refuge of that Ādyā Śakti Devi, the giver of the fruits of all desires. No desires can ever be fructified unless She is thoroughly pleased. Thus thinking, Bhagavān Viṣṇu saw the beautiful Devi Yoga Nidrā Śivā, shining in the air. Then the supreme Yogī, Bhagavān Viṣṇu, of immeasurable spirit began to praise with folded palms that great Bhuvaneśvari Mahā Kālī, the giver of boons, for the destruction of the Dānavas.

विष्यान्वाच

नमो देंवि महामाये सुहिंसंहारकारिण ।

अनादिदिन्धने चण्डि भुनीमुक्तिप्रदे शिवे ॥ 40 ॥

"O Devi! I bow down to Thee; O Mahāmāyā, the Creatrix and Destructrix! Thou beginningless and deathless! O auspicious Caṇdike! The Bestower of enjoyment and liberation.

न ते रूपं विश्वानामि सुगर्नि निर्गणं तथा ।

चरित्राणि कृते देवि संख्यातीलिति यानि ते ॥ 41 ॥

I do not know Thy Saguna or Nirguna forms; how then can I know Thy glorious deeds, innumerable as they are. Today Thy undescribable prowess has been experienced by me, I being made senseless and unconscious by Thy power of sleep.

अनुभुक्ता मा तेजदा प्रभावश्रातिषुर्देः ।

यदहं निद्रा लीन: संज्ञातोप्रय विवेलनः ॥ 42 ॥

बहुणा चातिवलेन वेधितोर्धि पुनः पुनः ।

न प्रयुद्ध: सर्वधारुं सढ्धोचितपत्रिद्रिवः ॥ 43 ॥

Being tried again and again by Brahmā with great care to bring me back to my consciousness, I could not become conscious, so much my senses were contracted down.

अचेनलं सम्पात: प्रभावातव चाधवेक ।

ल्या मुक: प्रबुद्धोर्धे युद्ध बहुधा कृतम् ॥ 44 ॥

श्रातोड़ न च तो श्रांती ल्या दनवरी वरी।

ब्रह्माणं हेतुभायातो दानवी मदार्थिती ॥ 45 ॥

O Mother! By Thy power, Thou didst keep me unconscious and Thou again hast freed me from sleep, and I also fought so many times. O giver of one's honour! Now I am tired; but Thou hast

Book I Chapter IX

granted boon to the two Dānavas and therefore they are not getting tired.

आहुतो च मया कामं ह्रद्वयु:द्वाय मानते ।

कृतं युद्धं महाधोरं मया ताभयं महाधरिं ॥ 46 ॥

These two Dānavas, puffed up with pride, were ready to kill Brahmā; and, therefore, I challenged them to fight with me and they too are fighting fiercely with me in this vast ocean.

मरणं बरदानं ते ततो जातं महाद्रतम ।

जात्वाहं गरणं प्रापतस्त्वामड शरणप्रदाम ॥ 47 ॥

साहाय्यं कुक मे मातः ख्वजोर्भं मुद्धकर्मण ।

दूर्ती ती बरादनेन तव देशातर्निजाने ॥ 48 ॥

But Thou hast granted them the wonderful boon that they will die whenever they will; and therefore I have now come to Thy refuge, as Thou protectest those that come under Thy shelter. Therefore, O Mother, the remover of the Devas' troubles! These two Dānavas are become exceedingly elated by Thy boon and I, too, am tired.

हंतु मापुताती पाणी किं कांगीम कव यासि च ।

इत्युक्ता सा तदा देवी सिताद्वैमुबाव च ॥ 49 ॥

Therefore dost Thou hclp me now. See! those two sinners are ready to kill me; without Thy grace, what can I do now? and wnere to go ?'

प्रणमन्तं जगत्राधं वासुदेवं सनातनम् ।

देवदेव हरे विष्णो कुरु युद्धे जुन: स्वयम् ॥ 50 ॥

वंवित्वा त्विगो शुगै हंल्वी व विमोहिते ।

मोहीयिण्यार्थहं नूनं दानवी यक्रवा दुणा ॥ 51 ॥

Thus praised by the eternal Vāsudeva Jagannātha Hari, with humility and pranāms, the Devi Mahā Kālī, resting in the air, said smiling: "O, Devadva Hari! Fight again; O, Viṣṇu! These two heroes, when deluded by My Māyā, would be slain by you; I will delude them, certainly, by My side long glance; O, Nārāyaṇa! then slay quickly the two Dānavas, when conjured by My Māyā."

जहि नारायणागु लं व म मारावियमोहिति ।

तच्छूला वचनं विष्णुस्त्वा: प्रीतिस्वान्वितम्। 52 ॥

संग्रामस्थलमासाठा तस्थो तत्र महाणे ।

तद्यापती च तं चींरी युद्धकामी महावली ॥ 53 ॥

वीक्ष्य विष्णुं स्थितं तत्र हर्षयुक्ती बयूवतुः ।

तिष्ठ सिष्ठ महाकाय कुरु युद्धे चतुर्भुं ॥ 54 ॥

दैवार्थीनी विद्विलाउंत्र नूनं जयपराजये ।

सबलो जयमाटपोति दैवाजयति दुबलैः ॥ 55 ॥

सर्वेवैव न कत्वेथी हर्शोगोंकी महात्मना ।

पुरा वे बह्यो दैत्या सिता दानवर्शिण ॥ 56 ॥

अधुना चाचनोः साधुं युध्यमानः पराधितः ।

Sūta said: “Hearing these loving words of Bhagavatī, Bhagavān Viṣṇu went to the scene of battle in the middle of that ocean, when the two powerful Dānavas of serene tempers and eager to fight, became very glad on seeing Viṣṇu in the battle and said: “O four-armed one! we see your desire is very lofty indeed; well; stand! stand! now be ready for battle, knowing that victory or defeat is surely dependent on Destiny. You should think now thus: “Though it is geneally true that the more powerful one wins victory; but it also happens sometimes that the weak gets the victory by queer turn of Fate; see the high souled persons should not be gald at their victories, nor should express their sorrows at their defeat; so dont be glad, thinking, that you on many former occasions fought with many Dānavas who were your enemies, and got the victory; nor be sorry that now you are defeated by the two Dānavas.”

सूत जयाच

इत्थुकल्चा ती महाबाङ् युद्धाय समुपस्थित्तो ॥ 57 ॥

वीक्ष्य विभ्युजीबानागुं मुहिना-दुकतकमीण ।

तावय्यतितक्लोमन्ती जप्तनुपुंदिहा हरिम् ॥ 58 ॥

एवं परस्यं जातं युद्धे परमदारुणम् ।

युध्यमानो महावीर्णे नृद्वा नारायणस्तदा ॥ 59 ॥

‘Thus saying, the powerful Madhu Kaitabha came up to fight. Seeing this, Bhagavān Viṣṇu struck them immediately by fist with great violence; the two Dānavas, elated with their strength, struck Hari in return with their fists. Thus fighting went on vigorously.

सूत उवाच

अपश्यत्समुखं देख्या: कृत्वा दीनां रुंग हरि: ।

तं वीक्ष्य तारुर्ण विद्युं करूणात्रसंयुन्तु।। 60 ॥

जहासातील तापाड़ी वीक्ष्याणा ततासुते ।

तो जघान कराढ़ीछ कामबाणीरिवापरे: ॥ 6 1 ॥

"Now seeing the two Dānavas of great powers, fighting on incessantly, Nārāyaṇa Hari cast a glance expressive of great distress, towards the face of the Devi Mahākalī. Seeing Viṣṇu thus distressed, the Devi laughed loudly and began to look constantly with eyes somewhat reddish and shot towards the two Asuras side-long glances, of love and amorous feelings which were like arrows from the Cupid.

मन्दिमतयुतैः कामं प्रेमभावयुतैनु ।

दूद्वा मुगुहुतः पापी देल्या वक्वं चिलोकान्म ॥ ६ २ ॥

विशेषमिति मवनाएं कामवाणातिरीक्षिति ।

. बीक्षमाणी स्थिती तत्र तां देवी विगतद्धप्रभाम ॥ ६३ ॥

The two vicious Daityas became fascinated by the side-long glances of the Devi and took great pleasure in them; being extremely agitated by these amorous darts, looked with one steady gaze towards the Devi, of spotless lustre.

हरिणासी च तदुर्दु देत्यस्तत्र चिकीर्षितम् ।

मोहिती तो परिज्ञाय भगवाक्यार्वितमः ॥ 64 ॥

उदारा ती ह्मन रणक्षणे मेघमभ्योरया गिरा ।

वंर वरयतां वौरीे व्यवयोर्यपिविहतः ॥ 65 ॥

ददामि परमप्रीतो युद्धेन युवयोः किल ।

दानवा वह्वो दृषा युध्यमाना मया पुरा ॥ 66 ॥

Bhagavān Hari, too, saw the wonderful enchanting pastime of the Devi. Then Hari, perfectly expert in adopting means to secure ends, began to speak smiling and in voice like that of the rumbling cloud, knowing the two Dānavas enchanted by Mahāmāyā, thus:

युवयो: सदृगः कोर्पि न दृष्टो न चे वे श्रुतः।

तस्मातुष्ठोत्रसम कामं वे निस्तुनेल बनेने च। ६७ ॥

भात्रोक्षा वांत्रितं कामं प्रपच्छापि महावलि ।

तच्छूता वचनं विणोः साधिभानीे ससगुतो ॥ 68 ॥

"O two heroes! I am very glad at the mode of your fighting. So ask from me boons. I will grant that to you. I saw many Dānavas before, fighting; but never I saw them expert like you, nor I heard like this: I am therefore, very much satisfied by your such unrivalled powers. Therefore, O greatly powerful pair of Dānavas! I wish to grant both of you any boon that you want."

सूत ज्ञाव

वीक्षमाणी महामायां जगदानन्दाकारिणीम् ।

तमून्तुकु कामातीं विद्युं कमलतोचनी ॥ 69 ॥

"Seeing the Devi Mahāmāyā, the gladdener of the Universe, the two Dānavas felt themselves amorous; and, therefore, they became proud on hearing Viṣṇu's those words and told Viṣṇu, with their lotus-like eyes wide open, thus:

हरेउनच च का वा वां त्वं किं ततुमिकेच्छ्चि ।

ददावतुत्न्यं देयेण दातातौ नौ न याचकी ॥ 70 ॥

प्रार्थय त्वं हृषीकेश मनोरभिलिपितं वम् ।

तुष्टी स्वस्तव युढ्रेण वासुवेदाब्धुतेन च ॥ 71 ॥

O Hari! what do you like to give us? We are not beggars; we do not want anything from you. O Lord of the Devas! Rather we will give you whatever you desire; we are donors; not receivers. So, O Vāsudeva! Hrṣikeśa! We are glad to see your wonderful fight; so ask from us any boon that you desire.'

तयोरतद्वचनं श्रुचा प्रत्युवाच जनादनं: ।

भवेतामघ मे तुटी मम बध्यापुभावपि ॥ 72 ॥

Hearing their words, Bhagavān Janārdana said: "If you both are so much pleased with me, then I want this that both of you be killed by me."

सूत जवाच

तच्छूवा वचनं विण्योदनवी चातिविसिति ।

वंचिताविति मन्त्रानी तस्थतुः शोकसंसुंची ॥ ७ ३  ॥

विचार्यं मनसा ती तु दानवी विद्युपूनुः ।

प्रेक्ष्य सर्वे जलमयं भृति स्थलविखर्जितान् ॥ ७ ४ ॥

Hearing these words of Viṣṇu, Madhu Kaitābha became very much surprised and thinking “we are

Book 1 Chapter IX

now cheated' remained for some time merged in sorrow. Then reflecting that there is water everwhere and solid earth nowhere, they said:

हरे योउयं वरो दत्तल्यथा पूर्वे जनदिन ।

सत्यवागासि देहेश देहि तं बाँछितं वरम् ॥ 75 ॥

निर्जैल विपुले देहे शनव मधुसूदन ।

बदायबालां तु भवत सत्यवाभ्यव माधा ॥ 76 ॥

"O Janārdana Hari! We know that you are truthful; therefore, now we want this desired boon from you that you wanted to grant us before; now grant us this desired boon of ours. O Madhusūdana! We will be slain by you; but kill us, O Mādava! on a solid earth, free from any water; and thus keep your word.

भूत्वा चक्रं तदा विष्णुस्तावुवाच हस्तहरि ।

हन्यद्ध वां महापानी निर्जले विपुले स्थले ॥ 77 ॥

Śrī Bhagavān Hari laughed and remembering His Sudarśana disc, said: “O two highly fortunate ones! Verily, I will kill both of you on the vast solid spot without any trace of water.

इल्युक्ता देवदेवेश ऊरू कृत्वास्त्रवितस्ते ।

दर्यामास तो तत निरन्तरं च जलोपरि ॥ 78 ॥

Thus saying, Devadeva Hari expanded His own thighs and showed to those Dānavas the vast solid earth on the surface of water and said:

नात्स्यत्र दानवौ वारि शिरासी मुक्तामिह ।

सत्यवागहमदीय भविष्यामि च तां तथा ॥ 79 ॥

"O two Dānavas! See, here is no water. Place your two heads here; thus, I will keep my word and you would keep you word."

तदाक्षयं वचस्तब्यं विधित्य मनसा च ते ।

वर्यमाससुदैं घोजनानां सहस्कम् ॥ 80 ॥

Hearing this, Madhu Kaiṭabha thought over in their minds and expanded their bodies to ten thousand Yojanas.

भगवानिदुगुणं चके जघनं विमित्ते तदा ।

शीर्ष सन्द्यातं तत्र जघने परमाढ़ते ॥ 81 ॥

Bhagavān Viṣṇu Hari also extended his thighs

to twice that amount. Seeing this, they were greatly surprised and laid their heads on the thighs of Viṣṇu.

रथांगेन तदा छिक्रे विष्णाना प्रभविष्णाना ।

जघनोपरि वेगेन प्रकृष्टे शिरसी तद्योः ॥ 82 ॥

Viṣṇu, of wonderful prowess, then cut off quickly with His Sudarāśna disc the two very big heads over His thighs.

गतानुपाणी तदा जातौ दानवी मधुकैटपी ।

सागर: सकलो व्यापतस्तदा वै मेदसा तयो : ॥ 83 ॥

Thus, the two Dānavas Madhu Kaitabha passed away; and the marrow (meda) of them filled the ocean.

मेदितीति ततो जातं नाम पुच्य्या: समंततः ।

अभव्या मुनिका तेन कारणेन मुनीश्वा: ॥ 84 ॥

O Munis! For this reason, this earth is named Medinī and the earth is unfit for eatable purpose.

इति वः कविंतं सर्वे वयुहोःप्रिम सुनिशितम् ।

महाविदा महामाया सेवनीया सदा बुधै: ॥ 85 ॥

Thus I have described to you all that you asked. The sum and substance is this that the wise persons should serve Mahāmāyā with all their hearts.

आताध्या परमा शफितः: सर्वेत्रीय सुगतुर्धेः ।

नातः परर्ते किंचिद्धिकं घुवनये ॥ 86 ॥

सत्यं सत्यं पुनः सत्यं वेदराश्ञाख्यिनिथः ।

पूजनीया परा शफितर्भिनुंगा सगुणारप्रबा ॥ 87 ॥

इति श्रीदेवीभागवते महापुराणे प्रथमकक्ये

तत्नोयाद्यः ॥ 88 ॥

The Supreme Śakti is worshipped by all the Devas. Verily, verily, I say unto you that this is decided, in all the Vedas and other Śastras that there is nothing higher than this Ādyā Śakti. Therefore this Supreme Śakti should be worshipped anyhow; either in Her Saguna form or in her Nirguna state.

Thus ends the Ninth Chapter of the First Book

on the killing of Madhu Kaitabha in the

Mahāpurāna Srimaddevībhāgavatam

of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi

Veda Vyāsa.

