CHAPTER VII

On the Ganges and the Varsas

श्रीनारायण खाच

निर्गे मेलं च पूर्वेना हुं चाहादयोगजेनः ।

सहस्वैरायती चोदिश्रसहचं पृथुचचकी ॥ १ ॥

जठरो देवकूटश्र तावेती नियदयकी ।

मेरेः पश्रिमतोउरी ही पवामानस्तबापः ॥ २ ॥

Nārāyaṇa saajda: Atindra and Kavadūta are the two mountains situated on the east of Sumeru; their dimensions towards the north are eighteen thousand Yojanas wide and two thousand Yojanas high. On the west of Meru, are situated the two famous lofty mountains Pavamāna and Pāriyātra; their length and height are well known.

पारियान्धश तो तावद्धिव्याती तुङविस्तरी ।

मेरेर्वेशिणात: ख्याती कैतासकरवीरकी ॥ 3 ॥

प्रागयाती पूर्ववृत्ती महापर्वततारजकी ।

एवं चोत्तरतो मेरोक्ष्रंभग्मकरी जिसी ॥ 4 ॥

On the south of Meru are situated the two lofty mountains Kailāsa and Karavīra. On the north, of the Sumeru mountain, are situated the mountains Śrīgagiri.

एन्हीश्रदिलेरासंखे: परिवृतो जिति: ।

युमेकः कांचवानिरिः परिपाजजविद्धाय ॥ 5 ॥

मेगेमूर्धिंन धातुर्हि पुरी पंकजजनम्: ।

मध्यात्रशेषकल्छेये दशासहचयजेपे: ॥ 6 ॥

Thus the golden Sumeru mountain, shines like the Sun, surrounded by these eight mountains. In the centre of the Sumeru, there is a Divine city built of the Creator Brahmā, ten thousand Yojanas in dimensions. The learned sages that know everything from the highest to the lowest, describe that as square in dimensions and all made of gold.

समानचतुरत्वं च शताकीभमयीं पुरीम् ।

वर्णवित्त महात्मानः परावारियेते बुधाः ॥ 7 ॥

तां पुरीमनुलोकानामशानामीशिं पतः ।

पूर्व: प्रख्यातसौवर्णत्स्पताश्र यथाविराम् ॥ 8 ॥

On the top of the Sumeru, are situated the world known eight golden cities, subservient to the

Brahmapuri, for the eight Lokapālas. The Lords of the four directions, east, west, north and south and of the four corners, north-east, northwest, south-west, south-east, occupy these.

यथाकपे सार्थपैनसूक्ष्यपिताः कृताः ।

मेरोनैव पूर्णी स्युर्भनोक्यमरावती ॥ 9 ॥

तेजोवती संयमनी तथा कृष्णांगनाउपर।

श्रद्धावती गन्यवती तथा चान्या महोदया ॥ 10 ॥

यग्रोवती च बह्छोरवहाद्यावतीं। यधाकमम् ।

The dimensions of each of these eight cities are two thousand Yojanas and a half. In fact, there are nine cities their including the Brahmapuri. Now hear the names of these nine cities in due order. The First is Manovati, the second is Amarāvatī, the third is Tejovati, next come in order Samyamani, Kṛṣṇāṅganā, Śraddhāvatī, Gandhavatī, and Mahodayā, the ninth is Yaśovatī. The Lords of the Puris are Brahmā, Indra, Fire and the other Dikpālas in due order.

तत्रेव यज्ञिलुभ्य विलणोर्गवत विणेः ॥ १ १  ॥

वामपदार्थुगतविनिधन्य च नारत ।

अंडोधैर्धभारंध्य मध्यासंविगत विदः ॥  १ २ ॥

भूर्ध-यवततोरं गंगा संविष्णत विषोः ।

लेकानामविलानां च पशादारिजलाकुला ॥ १ ३ ॥

इयं च साक्षाद्वावस्टी लोकेषु विश्रुता ।

When Viṣṇu Bhagavān assumed the Tri Vikrama Form in His Dwarf Incarnation and went at the sacrifice, to get back the Kingdom of the Heavens from the demon Bali, there was created one hole or cavity over this Bahmāṇḍa Katāha (skull) by the nails of the toes of that foot that went up towards his left; and through that cavity; the famous river Bhagavati Gaṅgā flowed on the top of those heavenly Kingdoms, the clear waters of which are ever ready to destroy the sins of the whole people. For this reason, She is known in the three Lokas as the Viṣnupadī manifested.

Book VIII Chapter VII

कालेन महता सा तु युगसाहस्केण तु ॥ 14 ॥

दिवो मूर्पन्मागल्य देयी देवनदीक्षी ।

यनघिष्णुपरं नाम स्थानं शैतोक्यविश्रुतम् ॥ 15 ॥

This took place long long ago, many thousand Yugas ago, a period difficult to determine. The Ganges fell first on the top of the Indra's Heavens, near place called Viṣṇudhāma, known in the three worlds.

अौतानपादियंत्रासे छुवः परमपावनः ।

भगवत्यद्युगतं पचकोषरजो द्वर्त् ॥ 16 ॥

अष्टायासे स राजर्षि: पदवीमचलां क्षितः ।

तत्र सपर्वेस्तस्य प्रभावज्ञा महागया: ॥ 17 ॥

प्रदक्षिणं प्रक्रमन्ति सर्वलोकहितेपलः ।

आर्यक्तिसी सिद्धिरयं तप्ता सिद्धिदायिनि ॥ 18 ॥

Here the pure-souled Dhruva, the son of Uttānapāda within his heart the lotus-feet of Śri Viṣṇu Bhagavān and exists still there taking refuge on that immovable position. There the high-souled Seven Rṣis, knowing the highest purifying influence of the Ganges, circumambulate the river, wishing for the welfare of all the Lokas.

आद्रिद्वने च शिरसा जटायुटीयितेन च ।

ततो विद्युपदोईवै नैकसाहस्कोटिपिः ॥ १९ ॥

विमार्तिकुले देवयानेउवतारी च स ।

चन्द्रप्रण्डलमाल्याय पर्ती ब्रह्मसघिनि ॥ 20 ॥

चतुर्धा विद्यामना सा ब्रह्मतोके च नारत ।

वतृर्भिनंमिभिर्वेदी चतूरिंगमिभिसुता ॥ 21 ॥

This is the great place where one gets success, and final liberation, the success-giving place of the ascetics and where the Munis with clots of hairs on their heads daily take their dip in the Ganges with the greatest pleasure and admiration. The Ganges flows thence from the Dhruva Maṇḍala, the abode of Viṣṇu, in Koṭis and Koṭis of Divine Channels, interspersed with many Vimānas or carriages, deluges the Candra Maṇḍala (the Moon Sphere), comes gradually to the Brahma Loka.

सरिता च नदीनां च पतिमेवान्यद्वता ।

सीता चालकनन्दा च चतुभेड़िते नामधि: ॥ 22 ॥

Here She is divided into the four channels, Sitā,

Alakanandā, Bhadrā, and Caturbhadrā and irrigating many countries, mountains, and forests ultimately falls in the oceans.

सीता च ब्रह्मदानाख्छतोष्यः क्षमाभृताम् ।

कैसराशिप्रानामा च प्रवलन्दी च स्वर्णदी ॥ 23 ॥

गंधमादनमूर्निह् पतिता पाणहारिणी ।

अन्तरेण तु भग्राक्षर्यं प्राच्यां समापता ॥ 24 ॥

The Sitā, the famous Dhārā, purifying all, while falling down from the Brahamolaka, passes round the mountains that form as it were the filaments of the flower-like Sumeru mountain, and falls on the top of the Gandhamādana range.

क्षारोदधिं नाता सा तु शुचटी देवपुजिता ।

ततो मात्यवतः भूगाद्धितीय परिपिनिति ॥ 25 ॥

ततो वेगवती भूत्वा केतुमालं समागता ।

चक्षुनांनी देवनदी प्रतीचां दिव्युपागत् ॥ 26 ॥

सरितां परिमायिष्ठा सा गंगा देवबन्दिता ।

ततस्वतीया धाग्त तु नाना छ्याता च नाद ॥ 27 ॥

Thence She, worshipped by the Devas, irrigates the Bhadrāśvavarṣa and falls eastward into the salt ocean. The second Dhārā (stream), named Cakṣu, getting out of the Mályavān range, gradually gains strength and assumes great force and flows by Ketumālavarṣa to the western ocean.

पुण्या चालकनन्द्य वै दक्षिणोनाक्षपुरात् ।

वनानि पिरिकृटानि समतिक्रय चालात् ॥ 28 ॥

हेमकुटं पिरिवरं प्राप्तास्तोष्टि निर्गता ।

अतिवेगवती भूत्वा भारतं चागता परा ॥ 29 ॥

The third Dhārā (stream), the very pure Alakanandā, getting out of the Brahma Loka, passes, through the Girikūta mountain and other forests, falls to Hemakūta; next She flows thorough the Bhārata Varsa and meets with the southern ocean. दक्षिणं जलधिं प्राणा तृतीया सा सरित्वा ।

यस्या: स्नानाय सरतां मनुजानां पदे पदे ॥ 30 ॥

No words can describe the glory and the purifying effect of this river; suffice it slay that those who march out to bathe in this river get at each of their steps, the fruits of doing the great sacrifices, Rājasūya and Aśvamedha, etc.

राजसूराधुमेधादिष्ठलं तु न हि दुर्लंभम् ।

ततश्रुर्धी धारा तु श्रुगवत्ववौतानुः ॥ 31 ॥

भूग्रधिधा संखवनी कुरून्यन्तयं चोतारान् ।

स्पूरं समनुप्रापत गंगा शैलोक्यपावनी ॥ 32 ॥

The fourth Dhārā of the Trailokyapāvani Gāngā Devī, named Bhadrā, falling from the mountain Śrīgavān, becomes swift and capacious, flows by the Northern Kuru country and satisfying the people there flows down into the ocean.

अन्ये नवाश्र नवश्र वर्षे वर्षेप सीत है ।

बहुशो मेकमदारप्रमुताश्रैव नारद ॥ 33 ॥

ततापि भारतं वर्षे कर्मक्षेत्रमुर्गति है ।

अन्यानि चारवर्षाणि भीमवर्षग्रद्विति च ॥ 34 ॥

Many other rivers, getting out from the mountains, Meru, Mandara and others, flow through the various Varsas or continents, but of all the Varsas, continents, this Bhārata Varsa is called the Karma Kṣetra (or the field of actions). The other eight Varsas, though on earth, give the pleasures of the Heavens. The reason for this is that when the period of the persons enjoyments in the Heavens cease, they come and take their births in the one or other of these eight Varsas.

स्वर्गिणा पुण्यशेषस्य भोगस्थानानि नारद ।

पुरुषाणां चायुतायुर्वैज्ञानां देवसर्पिभाः ॥ 35 ॥

पुरुषा नागसहवैद्योगिभः परिकल्पिताः ।

महासरीतसंगुतः कलजाऊा: सुखाजिताः ॥ 36 ॥

एकवर्षानेक चायुधावणभर्ःः सिक्योर्पि ॥ 37 ॥

जेतायुगसमः कालो वर्तेत सर्वदैव ॥ 37 ॥

शीत श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणोउद्यमकन्ये

सत्तोउध्ययः ॥ 37 ॥

The people here live for ten thousand years; their body is hard like thunderbolt and all are endowed with powers of Ayuta elephants. No one is satisfied with a little of the pleasures of sexes; so all men live happily with their wives, etc. It is not that the males alone are so happy; the females also are full of youth throughout their lives and become pregnant, when they are less than one year old. In short, the inhabitants of the Varsas enjoy for ever as the persons of Tretā Yuga do."

Hear ends the Seventh Chapter of the Eighth

Book or the story of the Ganges and the continents in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

