[Ch 7 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa saajda: Atindra and Kavadūta are the two mountains situated on the east of Sumeru; their dimensions towards the north are eighteen thousand Yojanas wide and two thousand Yojanas high. On the west of Meru, are situated the two famous lofty mountains Pavamāna and Pāriyātra; their length and height are well known.
NEW CORR ENG ──► and Devakūta are the two mountains situated on the east of Sumeru; their dimensions towards the north are eighteen thousand Yoyanas wide and two thousand Yoyanas high. On the west of Meru, are situated the two famous lofty mountains Pavamāna and Pāriyātra; their length and height are well known.

[Ch 7 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the south of Meru are situated the two lofty mountains Kailāsa and Karavīra. On the north, of the Sumeru mountain, are situated the mountains Śrīgagiri.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the south of Meru are situated the two lofty mountains Kailāsa and Karavira. On the north, again, of the Sumeru mountain, are

[Ch 7 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus the golden Sumeru mountain, shines like the Sun, surrounded by these eight mountains. In the centre of the Sumeru, there is a Divine city built of the Creator Brahmā, ten thousand Yojanas in dimensions. The learned sages that know everything from the highest to the lowest, describe that as square in dimensions and all made of gold.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the golden Sumeru mountain, shines like the Sun, surrounded by these eight mountains. In the centre of the Sumeru, there is a Divine city built of the Creator Brahmā, ten thousand Yoyanas in dimensions. The learned sages that know everything from the highest to the lowest, describe that as square in dimensions and all made of gold.

[Ch 7 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the top of the Sumeru, are situated the world known eight golden cities, subservient to the Brahmapuri, for the eight Lokapālas. The Lords of the four directions, east, west, north and south and of the four corners, north-east, northwest, south-west, south-east, occupy these.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the top of the Sumeru, are situated the world known eight golden cities, subservient to the Brahmapurī, for the eight Lokapālas. The Lords of the four directions, east, west, north and south and of the four corners, north-east, north-west, south-west, south-east, occupy these.

[Ch 7 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The dimensions of each of these eight cities are two thousand Yojanas and a half. In fact, there are nine cities their including the Brahmapuri. Now hear the names of these nine cities in due order. The First is Manovati, the second is Amarāvatī, the third is Tejovati, next come in order Samyamani, Kṛṣṇāṅganā, Śraddhāvatī, Gandhavatī, and Mahodayā, the ninth is Yaśovatī. The Lords of the Puris are Brahmā, Indra, Fire and the other Dikpālas in due order.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The dimensions of each of these eight cities are two thousand Yoyanas and a half. In fact, there are nine cities there including the Brahmapurī. Now hear the names of these nine cities in due order. The First is Manovatī, the second is Amarāvatī, the third is Tejovatī, next come in order Samyamanī, Kṛṣṇāṅganā, Śraddhāvatī, Gandhavatī, and Mahodayā, the ninth is Yaśovatī. The Lords of the Purīs are Brahmā, Indra, Fire and the other Dikpālas in due order.

[Ch 7 Verse 11-13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Viṣṇu Bhagavān assumed the Tri Vikrama Form in His Dwarf Incarnation and went at the sacrifice, to get back the Kingdom of the Heavens from the demon Bali, there was created one hole or cavity over this Bahmāṇḍa Katāha (skull) by the nails of the toes of that foot that went up towards his left; and through that cavity; the famous river Bhagavati Gaṅgā flowed on the top of those heavenly Kingdoms, the clear waters of which are ever ready to destroy the sins of the whole people. For this reason, She is known in the three Lokas as the Viṣnupadī manifested.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Viṣṇu Bhagavān assumed the Tri Vikrama Form in His Dwarf Incarnation and went at the sacrifice, to get back the Kingdom of the Heavens from the demon Vali, there was created one hole or cavity over this Brahmāṇḍa Kaṭāha (skull) by the nails of the toes of that foot that went up towards his left; and through that cavity, the famous river Bhagavatī Gaṅgā flowed on the top of those heavenly Kingdoms, the clear waters of which are ever ready to destroy the sins of the whole people. For this reason, She is known in the three Lokas as the Viṣṇupadī manifested.

[Ch 7 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This took place long long ago, many thousand Yugas ago, a period difficult to determine. The Ganges fell first on the top of the Indra's Heavens, near place called Viṣṇudhāma, known in the three worlds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This took place long long ago, many thousand Yugas ago, a period difficult to determine. The Ganges fell first on the top of the Indra’s Heavens, near the place called Viṣṇudhāma, known in the three worlds.

[Ch 7 Verse 16-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Here the pure-souled Dhruva, the son of Uttānapāda within his heart the lotus-feet of Śri Viṣṇu Bhagavān and exists still there taking refuge on that immovable position. There the high-souled Seven Rṣis, knowing the highest purifying influence of the Ganges, circumambulate the river, wishing for the welfare of all the Lokas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Here the pure-souled Dhruva, the son of Uttānapāda, observed within his heart the lotus-feet of Srī Viṣṇu Bhagavān and exists still there taking refuge on that immoveable position. There the high-souled Seven Ṛṣis, knowing the highest purifying influence of the Ganges, circumambulate the river, wishing for the welfare of all the Lokas.

[Ch 7 Verse 19-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This is the great place where one gets success, and final liberation, the success-giving place of the ascetics and where the Munis with clots of hairs on their heads daily take their dip in the Ganges with the greatest pleasure and admiration. The Ganges flows thence from the Dhruva Maṇḍala, the abode of Viṣṇu, in Koṭis and Koṭis of Divine Channels, interspersed with many Vimānas or carriages, deluges the Candra Maṇḍala (the Moon Sphere), comes gradually to the Brahma Loka.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This is the great place where one gets success, and final liberation, the success-giving place of the ascetics and where the Munis with clots of hairs on their heads daily take their dip in the Ganges with the greatest pleasure and admiration. The Ganges flows thence from the Dhruva Manḍala, the abode of Viṣṇu, in Koṭis and Koṭis of Divine Channels, interspersed with many Vimānas or carriages, deluges the Canḍra Maṇḍala (the Moon Sphere), comes gradually to the Brahmā Loka.

[Ch 7 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Here She is divided into the four channels, Sitā, Alakanandā, Bhadrā, and Caturbhadrā and irrigating many countries, mountains, and forests ultimately falls in the oceans.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Here She is divided into the four channels, Sītā, Alakanandā, Bhadrā, and Caturbhadrā and irrigating many countries, mountains, and forests ultimately falls in the oceans.

[Ch 7 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Sitā, the famous Dhārā, purifying all, while falling down from the Brahamolaka, passes round the mountains that form as it were the filaments of the flower-like Sumeru mountain, and falls on the top of the Gandhamādana range.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Sītā, the famous Dhārā, purifying all, while falling down from the Brahmāloka, passes round the mountains that form as it were the filaments of the flower-like Sumeru mountain, and falls on the top of the Gandhamādana range.

[Ch 7 Verse 25-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thence She, worshipped by the Devas, irrigates the Bhadrāśvavarṣa and falls eastward into the salt ocean. The second Dhārā (stream), named Cakṣu, getting out of the Mályavān range, gradually gains strength and assumes great force and flows by Ketumālavarṣa to the western ocean.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thence She, worshipped by the Devas, irrigates the Bhadraśvavarṣa and falls eastward into the salt ocean. The second Dhārā (stream), named Cakṣu, getting out of the Malyavān range, gradually gains strength and assumes great force and flows by Ketumālavarṣa to the western ocean.

[Ch 7 Verse 28-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No words can describe the glory and the purifying effect of this river; suffice it slay that those who march out to bathe in this river get at each of their steps, the fruits of doing the great sacrifices, Rājasūya and Aśvamedha, etc.
NEW CORR ENG ──► No words can describe the glory and the purifying effect of this river; suffice it to say that those who march out to bathe in this river get at each of their steps, the fruits of doing the great sacrifices, Rājasūya and Aśvamedha, etc.

[Ch 7 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The fourth Dhārā of the Trailokyapāvani Gāngā Devī, named Bhadrā, falling from the mountain Śrīgavān, becomes swift and capacious, flows by the Northern Kuru country and satisfying the people there flows down into the ocean.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The fourth Dhārā of the Trailokyapavanī Ganga Devi, named Bhadrā, falling from the mountain Śriṅgavān, become swift and capacious, flows by the Northern Kuru country and satisfying the people there flows down into the ocean.

[Ch 7 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Many other rivers, getting out from the mountains, Meru, Mandara and others, flow through the various Varsas or continents, but of all the Varsas, continents, this Bhārata Varsa is called the Karma Kṣetra (or the field of actions). The other eight Varsas, though on earth, give the pleasures of the Heavens. The reason for this is that when the period of the persons enjoyments in the Heavens cease, they come and take their births in the one or other of these eight Varsas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Many other rivers, getting out from the mountains, Meru, Mandara and others, flow through the various Varṣas or continents, but of all the Varṣas, continents, this Bhārata Varṣa is called the Karma Kṣettra (or the field of actions). The other eight Varṣas, though on earth, give the pleasures of the Heavens. The reason for this is that when the period of the personś enjoyments in the Heavens cease, they come and take their birth in the one or other of these eight Varṣas.

[Ch 7 Verse 35-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The people here live for ten thousand years; their body is hard like thunderbolt and all are endowed with powers of Ayuta elephants. No one is satisfied with a little of the pleasures of sexes; so all men live happily with their wives, etc. It is not that the males alone are so happy; the females also are full of youth throughout their lives and become pregnant, when they are less than one year old. In short, the inhabitants of the Varsas enjoy for ever as the persons of Tretā Yuga do." Hear ends the Seventh Chapter of the Eighth Book or the story of the Ganges and the continents in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. Šrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► The people here live for ten thousand years; their body is hard like thunderbolt and all are endowed with powers of Ayuta elephants. No one is satisfied with a little of the pleasures of sexes; so all men live happily with their wives, etc. It is not that the males alone are so happy; the females also are full of youth throughout their lives and become pregnant, when they are less than one year old. In short, the inhabitants of the Varṣas enjoy for ever as the persons of Tretā Yuga do. Hear ends the Seventh Chapter of the Eighth Book on the story of the Ganges and the continents in Srī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
