[Ch 3 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Suta said: O best of the Munis! I am now telling you the names of the Purāṇas, etc., exactly as I have heard from Veda Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati; listen.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- “O best of the Munis! I am now telling you the names of the Purāṇas, etc., exactly as 1 have heard from Veda Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati; listen.

[Ch 3 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Purāna beginning with “ma” are two in number; those beginning with “bha” are two; those beginning with “bra” are three; those beginning with “va” are four; those beginning respectively with “a” “nā”, “pa”, “ling”, “ga”, “kū” and “ska” are one each and (“ma” means Matsya Purāna, Mārkandeya Purāna; bha” signifies Bhavisya, Bhāgavat Purānas; “bra” signifies Brahma, Brahmāndā and Brahmavaivarta Purānas; “va” signifies Vāman, Vāyu, Viṣṇu and Varāha Purānas; “a” signifies Agni Purāna; “na” signifies Nārada Purāna; “pa” signifies Padma Purāna; “liṅg” signifies liṅga Purānam; “ga” signifies Garuda Purānam; “kā” signifies Kūrma Purāna and “ska” signifies Skanda Purānam. These are the eighteen Purānas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Purāṇa beginning with "ma" are two in number; those beginning with “bha” are two; those beginning with “bra" are three; those beginning with "va” are four; those beginning respectively with “A”, “na”, “pa”, “Ling”, “ga”, “kū” and “Ska” are one each and “ma” means Matsya Purāna, Mārkandeya Purāna; “Bha” signifies Bhaviṣya, Bhāgavat Purāṇas; “Bra” signifies Brahmā, Brahmāṇḍa and Brahmāvaivarta Purāṇas; “va” signifies Vāman, Vayu, Viṣṇu and Varaha Purāṇas; “A” signifies Agni Purāṇa; “Na” signifies Narada Purāna; “Pa” signifies Padma Purāna; “Ling” signifies Liṅga Purānam; “Ga” signifies Govinda Purāṇam; Kū signifies Kurma Purāna and “Ska” signifies Skanda Purānam. These are the eighteen Purāṇas.

[Ch 3 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Śaunaka! In the Matsya Purāṇa there are fourteen thousand ślokas; in the wonderfully varied Mārkāndeya Purāṇam there are nine thousand ślokas. In the Bhavisya Purāṇa fourteen thousand and five hundred ślokas are counted by the Munis, the seers of truth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Saunaka! In the Matsya Purāṇa there are fourteen thousand slokas; in the wonderfully varied Markandeya Purānam there are nine thousand slokas. In the Bhavisya Purāṇa fourteen thousand and five hundred slokas are counted by the Munis, the seers of truth.

[Ch 3 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the holy Bhāgavata there are eighteen thousand ślokas; in the Brahma Purāṇa there are Ayuta (ten thousand) Ślokas!
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the holy Bhāgavata there are eighteen thousand Ślokas; in the Brahmā Purāṇa there are Ajuta (ten thousand) Ślokas.

[Ch 3 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa there are twelve thousand one hundred Ślokas; in the Brahma Vaivarta Purānam there are eighteen thousand Ślokas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa there are twelve thousand one hundred Ślokas; in the Brahmā Vaivarta Purāṇam there are eighteen thousand Ślokas.

[Ch 3 Verse 7-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the Vāman Purāṇa there are Ajuta (ten thousand) Ślokas; in the Vāyu Purāṇaam there are twenty-four thousand and six hundred Ślokas; in the greatly wonderful Viṣṇu Purāṇa there are twenty-three thousand Ślokas; in the Agni Purāṇaam there are sixteen thousand Ślokas; in the Bhrat Nārada Purāṇaam, there are twenty-five thousand Ślokas, in the big Padma Purāṇa there are fifty-five thousand Ślokas; in the voluminous Liṅga Purāṇa eleven thousand Ślokas exist; in the Garuda Purāṇaam spoken by Hari nineteen thousand Ślokas exist; in the Kūrma Purāṇa, seventeen thousand Ślokas exist and in the greatly wonderful Skanda Purāṇa there are eighty-one thousand ślokas, O sinless Rṣis! Thus I have described to you the names of all the Purāṇas and the number of verses contained in them. Now hear about the Upa Purānas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the Vaman Purāṇa there are Ajuta (ten thousand) Ślokas; in the Vayu Purāṇam there are twenty-four thousand and six hundred Ślokas; in the greatly wonderful Viṣṇu Purāna there are twenty-three thousand Ślokas; in the Agni Purāṇam there are sixteen thousand Ślokas; in the Brihat Narada Purāṇam, there are twenty-five thousand Ślokas, in the big Padma Purāṇa there are fifty-five thousand ślokas; in the voluminous Liṅga Purāṇa eleven thousand ślokas exist; in the Garuḍa Purāṇam spoken by Hari nineteen thousand ślokas exist; iu the Kurma Purāṇa, seventeen thousand ślokas exist and in the greatly wonderful Skanda Purāṇa there are eighty-one thousand ślokas, O sinless Ṛṣis! Thus I have described to you the names of all the Purāṇas and the number of verses contained in them. Now hear about the Upa Purāṇas.

[Ch 3 Verse 13-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The first is the Upapurāna narrated by Sanat Kumarā; next comes Nārasinīha Purāna; then Nāradīya Purāna, Śiva Purāna, Purāna narrated by Durvāsā, Kāpila Purāna, Mānava Purāna, Auśanasa Purāna, Varuna Purāna, Kālikā Purāna, Sāmba Purāna, Nāndikeśvara Purāna, Saura Purāna, Purāna spoken by Parāśara, Āditya Purāna, Māheśvara Purāna, Bhāgavata and Vāsiṣṭha Purāna. These Upa Purānas are described by the Mahātmās.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The first is the Upapurāṇa narrated by Sanat Kumāra; next comes Narasimha Purāṇa; then Naradiya Purāṇa, Śiva Purāṇa, Purāṇa narrated by Durvasa, Kapila Purāṇa, Manava Purāṇa, Auśanasa Purāṇa, Varuṇa Purāṇa. Kalika Purāṇa, Samva Purāṇa, Nandi Keśwara Purāṇa, Saura Purāṇa, Purāṇa spoken by Parāśara, Āditya Purāṇa, Mahesvara Purāṇa, Bhāgavata and Vasiṣṭha Purāṇa. These Upa Purāṇas are described by the Mahatmas.

[Ch 3 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After compiling the eightcen Purānas, Veda Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati composed Mahābhārata, that has no rival, out of these Purānas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► After compiling the eighteen Purāṇas, Veda Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati composed Mahabharata, that has no rival, out of these Purāṇas.

[Ch 3 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At every Manvantara, in each Dvāpara Yuga, Veda Vyāsa expounds the Purānas duly to preserve the religion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At every Manvantara, in each Dvāpara Yuga, Veda Vyāsa expounds the Purāṇas duly to preserve the religion.

[Ch 3 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Veda Vyāsa is no other person than Viṣnu Hīmself; He, in the form of Veda Vyāsa, divides the (one) Veda into four parts, in every Dvāpara Yuga, for the good of the world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Veda Vyāsa is no other person than Viṣṇu Himself; He, in the form of Veda Vyāsa, divides the (one) Veda into four parts, in every Dvāpara Yuga, for the good of the world.

[Ch 3 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmanas of the Kali age are short lived and their intellect (buddhi) is not sharp; they cannot realise the meaning after studying the Vedas); knowing this in every Dvāpara Yuga Bhagavān expounds the holy Purāna Sanhitās.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brahmāṇas of the Kali age are shortlived and their intellect (Buddhi) is not sharp; they cannot realise the meaning after studying the Vedas; knowing this in every Dvāpara Yuga Bhagavān expounds the holy Purāṇa Samhitas.

[Ch 3 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The more so because women, Sūdras, and the lower Dvijas are not entitled to hear the Vedas; for their good, the Purānas have been composed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The more so because women, Śudras, and the lower Dvijas are not entitled to hear the Vedas; for their good, the Purāṇas have been composed.

[Ch 3 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The present auspicious Manvantara is Vaivasvata; it is the seventh in due order; and the son of Satyavati, the best of the knowers of Dharma, is the Veda Vyāsa of the 28th Dvāpara Yuga of this seventh Manvantara. He is my Guru; in the next Dvāpara Yuga Aśvatthāmā, the son of Dronā will be the Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Tne present auspicious Manvantara is Vaivasvata; it is the seventh in due order; and the son of Satyavati, the best of the knowers of Dharma, is the Veda Vyāsa of the 28th Dvāpara Yuga of this seventh Manvantara. He is my Guru; in the next Dvāpara, Yuga Asvatthama, the son of Drona will be the Veda Vyāsa.

[Ch 3 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Twenty-seven Veda Vyāsas had expired and they duly compiled each their own Purāna Saṃhitās in their own Dvāpara Yugas. སྐྱོབ་ཆུ: སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད། 1
NEW CORR ENG ──► Twenty-seven Veda Vyāsas had expired and they duly compiled each their own Purāna Samhitas in their own Dvāpara Yugas.

[Ch 3 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rṣis said: “O highly fortunate Sūta! kindly describe to us the names of the previous Veda Vyāsas, the reciters of the Purāṇas in the Dvāpara Yugas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣis said :-- “O highly fortunate Sūta! kindly describe to us the names of the previous Veda Vyāsas, the reciters of the Purāṇas in the Dvāpara Yugas.

[Ch 3 Verse 26-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: In the first Dvāpara, Brahmā Himself divided the Vedas; in the second Dvāpara, the first Prajāpati Vyāsa did the same; so Šukra, in the third, Brhaṣpati, in the fourth, Sūrya in the fifth; Yama, in the sixth; Indra, in the seventh; Vasiṣtha, in the eighth; Śarasvata Rṣi in the ninth; Tridhāṃā, in the tenth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- In the first Dvāpara, Brahmā Himself divided the Vedas; in the second Dvāpara, the first Prajapati Vyāsa did the same; so Śakra, in the third, Brihaspati, in the fourth, Surya in the fifth; Yama, in the sixth, Indra, in the seventh, Vasiṣṭha, in the eighth; Sarasvata Ṛṣi in the ninth, Tridhama, in the tenth;

[Ch 3 Verse 29-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Trivrṣa, in the eleventh; Bharadvāja, in the twelfth; Antarikṣa, in the thirteenth; Dharma, in the fourteenth; Eyaruni in the fifteenth; Dhananājaya, in the sixteenth; Medhātithi in the seventeenth; Vrāti, in the eighteenth; Atri, in the nineteenth; Gautama in the twentieth; Uttama, whose soul was fixed on Hari, in the twenty-first.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Trivṛṣa, in the eleventh, Bharadvāja, in the twelfth; Antariksa, in the thirteenth; Dharma, in the fourteenth; Evaruni in the fifteenth; Dhanañjaya, in the sixteenth; Medhatithi in tba seventeenth; Vrati, in the eighteenth; Atri, in the nineteenth; Gautama in the twentieth, Uttama, whose soul was fixed on Hari, in the twenty-first,

[Ch 3 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vājaśrava Vena, in the twenty second; his family descendant Soma in the twenty-third and Trpabindu, in the twenty-fourth; Bhārgava, in the twenty-fifth; Sākti in the twenty-sixth; Jātukarnya in the twenty-seventh and Krṣna Dvapiāyana became the twenty-eighth Veda Vyāsa in the Dvāpara Yugas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vājasravā Vena, in the twenty second; his family descendant Soma iu the twenty-third; Trinaviṇdu, in the twenty-fourth; Bhārgava, in the twenty-fifth; Sakti, in the twenty-sixth, Jātūkarṇya in the twenty-seventh and Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana became the twenty-eighth Veda Vyās in the Dvāpara Yugas.

[Ch 3 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus I have spoken of the 28 Veda Vyāsas, as I heard. I have heard the holy Śrimad Bhāgavat from the mouth of Kṛṣṇa Dvaippāyana.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus I have spoken of the 28 Veda Vyāsas, as I heard. I have heard the holy Śrimad Bhāgavat from the mouth of Kṛṣṇa Dvaipayana.

[Ch 3 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This removes all troubles, yields all desires, and gives Mokṣa and is full of the meanings of the Vedas. This treatise contains the essence of all the Śāstras and is dear always to the Murmuksus (those who want Mokṣa or liberation).
NEW CORR ENG ──► This removes all troubles, yields all desires, and gives Moksa and is full of the meanings of the Vedas. This treatise contains the essence of all the Śastras and is dear always to the Mamuksas (those who want Moksa or liberation).

[Ch 3 Verse 36-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O best Munis! Thus, compiling the Purāṇas Veda Vyāsa thought this Purāṇa to be the best; so (without teaching it to other persons) he settled that his own son, the high-souled Šuka Deva, born of Śrimaddevībhāgavatam the dry woods used for kindling fire (excited by attrition), having no passion for the worldly things, would be the fit student to be taught this Purāna and therefore taught him; at that time I was a fellow student along with Šuka Deva and I heard every thing from the mouth of Vyāsa Deva and realised the secret meanings thereof. This has happened through the grace of the merciful Guru Veda Vyāsa. Here ends the Third Chapter of Śrimaddevībhāgavatam on praising the Purānas and on each Vyāsa of every Dvāpara Yuga. Šrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► O best Munis! Thus, compiling the Purāṇas Veda Vyāsa thought this Purāṇa to be the best; so (without teaching it to other persons) he settled that his own son the high-sould Śuka Deva born of the dry woods used for kindling fire (excited by attrition), having no passion for the worldly things, would be the fit student to be taught this Purāṇa and therefore taught him; at that time I was a fellow student along with Śaka Deva and I heard every thing from the mouth of Vyāsa Deva and realised th« secret meanings thereof. This has happened through the grace of the merciful Guru Veda Vyāsa. Here ends the Third Chapter of Śrimad Devi Bhāgavatam on praising the Purāṇas and on each Vyāsa of every Dvāpara Yuga.
