CHAPTER XXIV

On the Stealing Away of Pradyumna

व्यास उवाच

प्रातनंद्रष्टे जातः पुत्रजन्महोस्वतः ।

किंबदंत्यथ कंसेन श्रुता चारामुखादपि ॥ १ ॥

ज्ञानाति बसुदेवस्य दारास्तत्र बसन्ति हि ।

पणवो दासवर्गश्र सर्वे ते नन्दगोकुले ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: On the other hand, there, at the house

Book IV Chapter XXIV

of Nanda, early in the next morning, commenced the grand birth day festivity. Karīsa came to know, afterwards, by his spies as well as by general rumour, that at Gokula, in the house of Nanda, a very joyous festival on a grand scale was being performed; he also know before hand that the other wives of Vasudeva, his animals and his servants were all staying at Nanda's residence in Gokula.

तेन शक्रासमाविशेषो गोकुलं प्रति भारत ।

नारेदनापि तसर्व कथितं काणं पुरा ॥ ३ ॥

गोकुले चे च नन्द्यास्तवल्यक्ष सुगीराजा: ।

देवकीकायुदेवाथा: सर्वे ते शत्रकः किल ॥ ४ ॥

O Bhārata! Thus all these gave reasons to Karīsa to suspect the place Gokula. Especially Nārada told him before that the residents, the cowherds at Gokula, Nanda and others, their wives, Devakī and Vasudeva were all Devas incarnate; and consequently they were his enemies.

इति नारदावक्येन बोधितो3सी कुलाधमः ।

जातः कोपमना राजकंकः परमपाकृत् ॥ 5 ॥

पूतना निहता तत्र कृष्णोनामिततेजसा ।

बको वत्सासुरस्थापि धैनुकक्ष महावलः ॥ 6 ॥

प्रलोबे नित्रतस्तेन तथा गोर्धधनीं धृत: ।

श्वैतिकामं कंसस्तु मेने मरणामात्नः ॥ 7 ॥

Thus being brought to more confidence by Nārada's words, that vicious Kaṇisa, the disgrace to his family, was very angry and sent there his demons Pūtanā, Baka, Vatsa, the great Asura, the powerful Dhenuka, Pralamba. They were all killed by Krṣna, of unsurpassable prowess. Śrī Krṣna held aloft also the hillock Gobhārdhāna (to protect the cow herds and cows etc.). Hearing all these, Kaṇisa became certain also of his own death.

तथा विनिरुतः केशी ज्ञाना कंसोरितुर्मानः ।

धनुर्गामियोग्य तात्यानेतु प्रजकमे ॥ ८ ॥ ॥

Lastly when the evil minded Karīsa heard that the Daitya Keśī was also slain, then he made arrangements for a sacrifice, known as Dhanuryajñā; and under this pretext wanted to bring over there at Mathurā the two brothers Krṣṇa and Balarāma.

अकूरं प्रेययामास कूरः पायमतितस्तदा ।

आनेतुं रामकृष्णो च व्यायामिनतिकमी ॥ 9 ॥

The evil minded Karīsa to effects the death of those two, Rāma and Krṣṇa, of unsurpassable prowess, sent Akrūra to Gokula to bring them over to Mathurā.

रथामोर्य योगाले गोकुलात्रादिनीसृत: ।

आगातो मदुयायां तु कंसाड्रेण स्थितः किन्त ॥ १ ० ॥

Akrūra, the son of Gāndinī, under the orders of Karīsa, went to Gokula and brought the two boys on a chariot to Mathurā.

तावागाल्य तदा तत धनुपर्गे च चकतुः ।

हत्वास्त्र वर्कक कामं गर्जा चाण्युधिकम् ॥ १ १ ॥

गलं च तोलग्लं चैव निवजायन हरित्वतः ।

जघान कंमं देदेशनः केशेघाकृष्य तीलाया ॥ १ २ ॥

On arriving at Mathurā, Rāma and Krṣṇa first broke the bow; killed Rajaka, the elephant Kuvalaya, Cāṇūra, Muṣṭika, Śala, Tośala and other athletes and warriors. Last of all, Hari, the Lord of the Devas, holding Kānsa by his hair, killed him with utmost ease.

यितरी मोचयित्वार्थ गतनुःखी चकार है ।

उप्रसोनय राज्यं तद्वादारिनिषुदूनः ॥ 13 ॥

The enemy-destroyer Kṛṣṇa removed the sorrows of his father and mother and released them from their prisons and gave over the kingdom of Mathurā to Ugrasena (the father of Kāṃsa.)

वसुदेवस्वीर्यत्र मौड़ीबन्यप्रवृकम् ।

कारयामास विधिध्वद् ततबच्छं महामना: ॥ 14 ॥

उपनीर्ति तदा ती तु गतौ सान्दीपनातयम् ।

विद्या: सर्वा: समध्यस्य मधुतयागती पुनः ॥ 15 ॥

The high minded Vasudeva, then, with the triple girdle made of Muñja grass, performed the Upanayana ceremonies (wearing the sacred thread round the body) of Rāma and Krṣna and made them accept the vow of Brahmacarya. They then departed to the hermitage of the holy Muni Sāndīpana to acquire knowledge) there, they returned quickly to Mathurā.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

जातौ द्वारणवर्षीयी कृतविद्यौ महावली ।

मयुरायां स्थिती वीरी सुतावानकडुतुघे: ॥ १ ६ ॥

The two sons of Anakadundubhi stayed there and on attaining their twelfth year, became proficient in all the branches of learning and became very powerful.

माफायसु जरायंधो जागात्यवघुःखितः ।

कृत्वा सै-न्यसामाजं स मवुगामगातः पुरीम् ॥ 17 ॥

That time Jārasāndha, being grieved at the killing of his son-in-law Karīsa, collected a strong and numerous army and marched to Mathurā.

स सप्तदशबारं तु कृष्णेन कृतत्विद्वान ।

जितः संगाममासाथ मधुयुर्गी निवासिना ॥ 18 ॥

Seventeen times Jāraśandha, the king of Magadha, attacked Mathurā and seventeen times he was defeated by ingenuity of that highly intelligent Śri Krṣna, who was of firm resolve and was then residing in Mathurā.

पश्चाच्य प्रेरिततेन स कालयवनाधिधः ।

सर्वेलैच्छाधिपः शुरो यदावानां भयंकरः ॥ १९ ॥

Lastly, Jarāsandha sent the Kalayavana (Black Yavana) to invade Mathurā. These Yavanas were brave and the lords of all Mlechas (untouchables) and extremely terrific to the Yādavas.

Note: Kalayavana—A king of Yavanas and enemy of Krṣna and an invincible foe of the Yādavas. Krṣna finding it impossible to vanquish him in the field of battle, cunningly decoyed him to the cave where Mucukunda was sleeping who burnt him down.

शुत्वा यवनमायानं कृष्ण: सर्वान्यवृत्तमान् ।

आनायच च तथा राममुबाच मधुमुदनः ॥ 20 ॥

भयं नोउस मसुचरं जासंधामकावलात् ।

किं कत्थं महाभाग यवन: समुपैति है ॥ 21 ॥

प्राणाजण प्रक्रतंत्य त्वक्का गेहं बलं धनम् ।

Yavana means a Greek, an Ionian; then any foreigner, or barbarian (the word is applied at present to a Mohammadan or a European also).

Hearing that Kāla Yavana was coming to attack the Yādavas, Krṣna the destroyer of Madhu, called all the Yādavas and Baladeva and addressed them thus: "O blessed ones! Now a cause of great terror

has appeared amongst us; Kāla Yavana is being sent by our powerful enemy Jarāsandha to attack Mathurā. Now what to do? It is better to save one's life by leaving aside all our homes, wealth and army.

सुखेन स्वीयते यत्र से दूरः: खतुं पैतृकः ॥ 22 ॥

सदोईगकारः काम किं ककौल्यं कुतलोचितम् ।

You should all know that is the place of our father and forefathers where we can safely and happily dwell; where there is a constant source of anxiety and uneasiness that, though the place of our fathers and forefathers, ought to be avoided; never ought any one to dwell there.

गैलसागरसाहित्रये स्थातयं सुखामिच्छता ॥ 23 ॥

यत्र वैरिभयं न स्वात्थतन्तं तय पिड़तैः ।

If you want to dwell at ease and comfort, you ought to dwell in that country or place which is adjacent to a sea or a mountain; where there is no fear from an enemy, the sages will always remain there.

गेशपत्थयं समाधित्य हौरे: स्वपिति सागरे ॥ 24 ॥

तबैय च भयान्द्रोतः कैतगते त्रिपुरादनः ।

See! The Bhagavān Hari, being afraid, as it were, of his enemy has taken refuge on the body of the thousand headed Śeṣa serpent as his sleeping place and is sleeping at ease and comfort on the ocean. It seems likely that the enemy of Tripura, the great Śiva is also dwelling on the Kailśa mountain.

तस्मात्रानेय स्वात्यमस्माभिः शुज्ञातिपि: ॥ 25 ॥

हारवलां गाथिमयाः सहिताः सर्वे एवे ।

We, too, are being constantly worried by our enemies here; therefore we ought not to live here any longer. We should all go to Dvārkā city with our friends, relatives and wealth.

कथिता गऊरेनाथ रथ्या द्वारवती पुरी ॥ 26 ॥

रैवातचलमात्रिये सिंयुकुले मनोहरा ।

Garuda, the king of the birds, has given us the detailed information of the city Dvārkā. That beautiful city is situated on the sea shore in the vicinity of the Raivataka mountain.

Book IV Chapter XXIV

यास उवाच

तच्छुला वचनं तध्यं सर्वे यादवपुज्ञाः ॥ २७ ॥

गानवा मति चकुः सकुदुवा: सवाहना: ।

Vyāsa said: The Yādava chiefs, hearing Śrī Krṣṇa's utterances fraught with their welfare, were ready to depart to that place Dvārāk, attended by their friends, relatives, and appurtenances.

शकटानि तशोटुषा वायवश महिषासना ॥ 28 ॥

धनपूर्णानि कृत्वा ते निर्युर्नगराढ़ः ।

They then collected their camels, mares, and buffaloes and filled their conveyances with wealth, gems and precious stones and marched out of their place.

रामकृष्णी पुरस्कृत्य सर्वे ते सपरिष्छदा: ॥ 29 ॥

उगे कृता प्रजा: सर्वीक्षितु: सर्वे यदूतमा: ।

Rāma and Krṣṇa went in front; the Yādavas and other subjects then marched in groups (several parties).

क्रतिविधिवर्षे: प्रापु: पुरी द्वारवर्ती किल ॥ ३० ॥

श्रलिधिभ: कारयामासजीणोंद्वारमाधाव: ।

Marching some days, they all reached Dvāravatī. Then the portions of the city that were dilapidated or destroyed, Śrī Krṣna had them repaired by engineers, artisans and craftsmen.

संस्थाय याद्वासंत्र तावतेि बलकेशो। ॥ ३। ॥

तसा मवुगामेल संस्थिति निर्जनां पुरीम् ।

Placing the Yādavas there, Keśava and Baladeva quickly returned to Mathurā and began to stay in that desolated city.

तदा तत्रैव सम्पाटो बलावान् ववनाधिधः ॥ 32 ॥

ज्ञालैन्मागतं कृष्णो निर्वंत्री नगराड़ीः ।

The extremely powerful king of the Yavanas arrived then at Mathurā. Śrī Krṣṇa knowing that the Yavana chief had come there, went out of the city.

पदातिरोधे तसायभुवतवन्य जनादिनः ॥ 33 ॥

पीताव्यधरः श्रीमान्रहस्मधूसून: ।

The Bhagavān Madhusūdana, the destroyer of the boastings of Asuras and other people, dressed in yellow robes, appeared on foot before the Kālayavana with smile on his lips.

तं दृष्ट्वा पुरतो यान्तं कृष्णं कमललोचनम् ॥ 34 ॥

यवनोदपि यदाती: सन्युक्षतोउगुतः खलः ।

Seeing the lotus eyed Krṣṇa before him, the treacherous Lord of the Varanas, pursued him on foot to catch hold of him.

प्रसुनी यत्र राजार्थमैयुकुन्दो महावलः ॥ 35 ॥

प्रयपी भभावांस्तर सकालयवनो हरि: ।

Where the powerful Rājarsī Mucukunda was sleeping soundly, the Bhagavān Hari led Kālayavana there.

तत्रैवांतदैय विद्यामूघुकुन्दं सभीज्य च ॥ 36 ॥

तत्रैव यवनः प्राप्तः सुपन्धृतमपश्यत् ।

There Śrī Krṣṇa, saw Mucukunda and vanished away at once; the king of the Yavanas on arriving there found the Rājarsī (the royal sage) there in deep sleep.

मत्वा तं वासुदेवं स पाटताताडवयूम् ॥ 37 ॥

प्रबुद्धः क्रोयत्ताक्षसन्तं ददाह महावलः ।

The wicked Yavana mistaking Mucukunda for Śrī Krṣṇa, gave him a good kick. The powerful king Mucukunda got up and was very angry; his eyes became red and reduced that vicious Yavana instantly into ashes.

तं दर्शया मुचुकुन्दो ४६ दर्शगं कामलेक्षणम् ॥ ३८ ॥

बासुदेवं सुदेवेशं प्रणाय्य प्रश्रित्यो वनम् ।

When Mucukunda burnt the Yavana, he saw the lotus-eyed Kṛṣṇa; he bowed down to that Supreme Deva, Vāsudeva, and went to forest.

जगाम द्वारकां कृष्णो बलदेवसपित्तः ॥ ३९ ॥

उप्रसेनं नृप कृत्वा विज्ञात्र यवारुचित् ।

Śrī Kṛṣṇa then went back to the city Dvārkā with Rāma and made Ugrasena there the king and began to enjoy at his will.

अहरुद्रक्रमणीं कामं शिरुपालत्यव्यवर्त् ॥ 40 ॥

राक्षसेन विवाहेन चके दारविधि इति: ।

At the marriage ceremony of Śisūpāla, at the palace of the king of Vidarbha, Janārdana Viṣṇu carried away by force Rukmini, the bride elect from the Swayamvara assembly (where the husband is self elected by the bride herself) and afterwards

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

married her according to the rule called Rāksasa Vidhi (one of the eight forms of marriage in Hindu Law in which a girl is forcibly seized and carried away after the defeat or destruction of her relatives in battle.)

ततो जांबबती सत्यां मित्रविद्धं च भामिनीम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

कालिन्दीलक्षणं भत्रीवान्नमिविंगुणम् ।

पृथक्यथक्समानीयाण्युपयेने जनाईनः ॥ 42 ॥

अष्टावेक महीपाल पल्यः परमर्शोभनाः ।

"Afterwards He brought also Jambavati, Satyabhāmā, Mitravindā, Kālindī, Laksmanā, Bhadrā, and auspicious Nāgnajitī (the daughter of the king Nagnajit) on various occasions and married them. O Lord of the earth! These eight women were the best and most beautiful of Śrī Krṣna's wives.

प्रभृत कविषणी पूत्र प्रवृानं चाक्रदर्शनम् ॥ 43 ॥

जातकर्मादिकं तस्य चकार मधुसूदनः ।

Rukmini first gave birth to the beautiful child Pradyumna and Śrī Krṣna performed the religious ceremony at the birth of his child.

इतोउसी सूतिकोगोहाच्छेरण बतौवसा ॥ 44 ॥

नीतश्व स्वपुरी बालो मायावत्से समर्पितः ।

Then the powerful Dānava named Śambara stole away the little baby from the lying-in-chamber and carried him to his own city and made him over under the charge of Māyāvatī.

वायुरेवो हतं वृष्टा पुरं शोकसम्पित्तः ॥ 4 5 ॥

जगाम शरणं देर्वी भक्तियुक्तेन चेतसा ।

Coming to know that His son had been stolen away, Śrī Krṣna became very much overpowered with sorrow and took the shelter of the Supreme Goddess, the Devi, with a heart full of devotion.

युस्मुराव्यो दैत्य लीलयैव यया हताः ॥ 46 ॥

ततोउसी योगमायायाकार परमां सुतितम् ।

वचोपि: परमेदोररक्षे: सत्वपै: शुषै: ॥ 47 ॥

Śrī Krṣna then began, to chant, in sweet auspicious tone, hymns in alphabet, conveying the highest meanings, in adoration of the Yoga Māyā, Who slew Vrtrāsura and other Daityas with ease and alacrity.

श्रीकृषा उवाच

मात्मंयातितस्या परितोषिता तयं

प्रारजन्मिन प्रमुभानिद्धिरर्धितात्रसि ॥

धर्मान्जन वद्रतीवराखण्डमध्ये किं

विस्मृती जननि ते त्वयि भक्तिभावः ॥ 48 ॥

“O Mother! I, in my former birth as the son of Dharma, appeased You by my ascetic practices in the hermitage of Badari and worshipped You with various offerings; O Mother! Have you now forgotten all my devotion to You?

सुतीगृहादयहूत: किमु बालको मे

केनापि शुद्यनसाध्यय कौतुकाढा ।

मानापहारकरणाय ममाछ नूनं

लज्जा तताया खलु भक्तजनस्य वुता ॥ 49 ॥

O Mother! Has any evil minded enemy stolen away my son from the lying-in chamber? Or have You Yourself done this to make a fun and see the amusement? It seems that some one of my enemies has done so to insult me; however, You, O Mother! ought not to put your devotee under this shameful condition.

दुर्गों महानिततरां नगरी सुगुपता ततापि

मेउस्ति सदां किल मध्यभागे ।

अन्तःपुरे च चित्रितं ननु सुतिंगेहं

बालो हतः खलु तथापि मयैव दोषात् ॥ 50 ॥

O Mother! This Dvārakā city is well guarded; a very strong fort is built in its middle and my place is in the midst of that; and the lying-in-chamber is again in the middle; I therefore must say that it is due to my bad luck that the child is stolen away!

नाहं गतः परपुरं न च याद्वाक्ष

स्थावती च नगरी किल वीरवर्षे: ।

माया तर्वे वननि प्रकटप्रभाव मे

बालकः परिक्तः कुहकेन केन ॥ 51 ॥

O Mother! I did not go to the house of my enemy; the Yādavas also did not go there; this city is guarded by valiant soldiers; then how is it, under what charm, the baby has been stolen? O Mother! Now I come to know that it is due to Your Māyā; such things are common due to Your Māyā in the three worlds.

Book IV Chapter XXIV

नो वेच्छई जननि ते चरितं सुगुपं

को वेद मन्दमतिरल्यविदेव देही ।

ब्वासी गतो मम थटैनं च बीक्षितो वा

हर्तार्थिके जवनिका तक कलियेतम् ॥ 52 ॥

O Mother! When I am ignorant of your deepest mysteries, how can there exist any one among the little minded Jivas that can know your doings? My watchmen could not see anything, where my child was taken away and who has stolen it. O Mother! I come to the conclusion that it is hidden behind the screen of Your Māyā.

चित्रं न तेउत्र पुरतो मम मातुगर्भो

नीतल्वायोर्धसमये किल मायायोर्सो ।

वं रोष्टिणी हलधरं सुचुवे प्रसिद्धं

दूरे स्थित पतिरपरा सिथूनं विनारपि ॥ 53 ॥

O Mother! It is not strange with You; to the chaste woman, Rohinī Devi, though situated at a great distance and not connected with any male persons, You, in the fifth month, moved away the son to my knowledge from the womb of my mother; and thus Baladeva was born to Rohinī. This is now known to all.

सृष्टि क्रोषि जगतामनुपालनं च

नारां नवैव पुरनव्यिनरां गुणीरन्तम् ।

को बेते टेउम्ब चरितं दुरितांतकारि

प्रायेण सर्वमिखिल विहितं त्वयैतत् ॥ 54 ॥

Mother! You are incessantly creating, preserving, and destroying this whole universe by the mixture of the three qualities. Who can know Your sin-destroying doings? Mother! There is no need of dwelling at length. Suffice it to say that You, no doubt, are doing all that is being done in this whole universe.

उत्पादा युज्ञननप्रभवं प्रमोदं दत्त्वा

पुर्नविर्हर्ज किल दुःखभागम् ।

त्वं क्रीडेस मुतलितैः खतु लैविद्वारेनीं

चेकक्षे यम् सुतापितरितवैंथा स्यात् ॥ 55॥

You first create the joy at the birth of a child; again You load us with heavy burden of sorrows due to the separation from that child; thus you are

always sporting; otherwise how my joy at the birth of my child would thus be rendered quite useless?

माताउस्य रोहिति भुर्ण कुरीव बाला

दुःखं तनोति मम सविधिपा सदैव ।

कई न वैस्ति ललितेउप्रमितभावा

मातस्वमेव शरणं भवपीढितानाम् ॥ 56 ॥

The mother of that child is always weeping like an ewe, straying from a flock; she is giving vent to her sorrows always to me; O Kind-hearted! Being thus endowed with illimitable prowess and understanding, do You not know my troubles! O Mother! You are the only source of consolation to one, suffering from the sorrows of this world. There is no doubt in this.

सीमा मुख्यस्य सुतजन्म तदीयनाणे

दुःखस्य देवि भवने विद्धया वदन्ति ।

तल्कि क्तोमि जननि प्रथमे प्रनटे पुरे

मगाठ इदरं स्मूटनाति मानः ॥ 57 ॥

O Goddess! The wise seers say that the birth of a child in any house is the highest bliss there, and the death of a child is the greatest sorrow that can befall to any house. Therefore, O Moher! What shall I do in this? What shall I say more than that my heart is going to burst, due to the disappearance of my child.

यजं कांतीय तव तुर्थिकां ततं वा

दैवं च पूजनमवाशित्वनुःखहा त्वम् ।

मातः सुतोउत्र यदि जीवित तर्गयाणु

त्वं वै क्षमा सकलोगोकविनाशना ॥ 58 ॥

O Mother! I will perform all the necessary sacrifices, take up vows, perform all sorts of worship to the entire satisfaction of the Great Fate (Ordainer of things); You be pleased to remove my sorrow. O Mother! If my son be alive, kindly shew him once to me. Mother! There is no other than You Who is fully capable to destroy this my pain and sorrow, raging in my heart.

ध्यास उवाच

एवं सुत्ता तादा देवी कृष्णोनाकित्यकर्मणा ।

प्रत्यक्षदर्शना भूत्वा तमुवाच जगदारुम् ॥ 59 ॥

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

Vyāsa said: He who brings into practice, things that are considered impracticable for the Devas and removes the load of the Goddess Earth with ease and alacrity, the same Saviour of world, Śri Krṣṇa thus chanted hymns in adoration of the Great Goddess. The Devī then became visible to him and said.

श्रीव्यवाच

शोकं मा कुरु देवेश शापोर्धं ते पुतानः ।

तस्य योगेन पुत्रसे शंबरेण हृती बतात् ॥ 60 ॥

O Lord of the Devas! Do not any longer be sorrowful and miserable; there had been a curse on you before; and, for that reason, the Daitya Śambara has stolen away your son by his demoniac magic.

अतन्ते योड्गो वर्षे हृत्वा तं शंबरं बतात् ।

आगमिष्यिति पुत्रसे मनुसाठार संशय: ॥ 6 1 ॥

Therefore, when your son will grow the sixteen

years age, then he will by My Grace, kill the Daitya perforce and will return to you. There is no doubt in this.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्त्वास्तर्धैं देवी चाक्षिका चण्डविकमा ।

भगवानपि पुरस्य श्रौकं त्यकत्वाभवत्सुशी ॥ 6 2 ॥

इति श्रीद्वीभागवते महापुराणो चतुर्धैकन्ये

चतुर्विंशोधावः ॥ 63 ॥

O king! Thus saying these words full of hope and confidence, the Great Goddess Candikā, of formidable prowess, disappeared. Krṣna too, quitted his sorrows, due to the bereavement of his child, and began to spend his time in happiness and peace.

Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter of the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyasa on the stealing away of Pradyumna.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

