[Ch 25 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! The mother became astonished to hear me. Becoming very anxious for a son, she began to speak to me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- OKing! The mother became astonished to hear me. Becoming very anxious for a son, she began to speak to me.

[Ch 25 Verse 2-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Child! The wife of your brother, the daughter Ambālika of Kāśtrāja, is a widow; she is very sorrowful; she is endowed with all auspicious signs and endowed with all good qualities; better cohabit with that beautiful young wife and get a child according to the tradition of the Śiṣṭas. Persons born blind are not entitled to kingdoms.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Child! The wife of your brother, the daughter Ambālikā of Kāśīrāj, is a widow; she is very sorrowful; she is endowed with all auspicious signs and endowed with all good qualities; better cohabit with that beautiful young wife and get a child according to the tradition of the Śiṣṭas. Persons born blind are not entitled to kingdoms.

[Ch 25 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore take my word and procreate a beautiful son and thus keep my honour." O Muni! Hearing the mother's words, I began to wait in Hastināpura till Ambālīkā, the daughter of Kāśirāja, finished her ablutions after menstruation.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore take my word and procreate a beautiful son and thus keep my honour. O Muni! Hearing the mother’s words, I began to wait in Hastināpura till Ambālikā, the daughter of Kāśīrāj, finished her ablutions after menstruation.

[Ch 25 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That King's daughter, of curling hair, came to me alone at her mother-in-law's order, and became very much abashed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That King’s daughter, of curling hairs, came to me alone at her mother-in-law’s order, and became very much abashed.

[Ch 25 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing me an ascetic with matted hair on my head and void of every love sentiments, perspiration came on her face; her body turned pale and her mind void of any love towards me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing me an ascetic with matted hairs on my head and void of every love sentiment, perspiration came on her face; her body turned pale and her mind void of any love towards me.

[Ch 25 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When I saw that lady trembling and pale beside me, I angrily spoke: "O One of beautiful waist! When you have turned out pale, considering your own beauty, let your son be of a pale colour."
NEW CORR ENG ──► When I saw that lady trembling and pale beside me, I angrily spoke :-- “O One of beautiful waist! When you have turned out pale, considering your own beauty, let your son be of a pale colour.”

[Ch 25 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying 1 spent there that night with Ambalikā. After enjoying her I took farewell from my mother and went to my place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying I spent there that night with Ambālikā. After enjoying her I took farewell from my mother and went to my place.

[Ch 25 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In due course, the two daughters of the King gave birth to two sons respectively, one blind and the other pale. The son of Ambikā was named Dhratāṣṭra; and the son of Ambālīkā was named Pāndu, as his colour was Pāndu (pale).
NEW CORR ENG ──► In due course, the two daughters of the King gave birth to two sons respectively, one blind and the other pale. The son of Ambikā was named Dhritarāṣṭra; and the son of Ambālikā was named Pāṇḍu, as his colour was pāṇḍu (pale).

[Ch 25 Verse 12-13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mother became absent-minded when she saw the two sons in those states. After one year she again called me and said: "O Dvaipāyana! These two persons are not so fit to become kings; therefore beget one more son beautiful and according to my liking.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mother became absent-minded when she saw the two sons in those states. After one year she again called me and said :-- “O Dvaipāyana! These two persons are not so fit to become kings; therefore beget one more son beautiful and according to my liking.”

[Ch 25 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When I consented, she became very glad and, in due course, asked Ambikā to embrace me and give birth to a son, endowed with extraordinary qualities, and fit to preserve the line worthy of the Kuru dynasty.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When I consented, she became very glad and, in due course, asked Ambikā to embrace me and give birth to a son, endowed with extraordinary qualities, and fit to preserve the line worthy of the Kuru dynasty.

[Ch 25 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The bride did not then say anything on account of her bashfulness. But when I went in the night time according to my mother's order, to the sleeping room, Ambikā sent to me a maid-servant of Victiravīrya, full of youth and beauty, and adorned with various ornaments and clothings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The bride did not then say anything on account of her bashfulness. But when I went in the night time according to my mother’s order, to the sleeping room, Ambikā sent to me a maid-servant of Vicitravīrya, full of youth and beauty, and adorned with various ornaments and clothings.

[Ch 25 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That maid-servant of beautiful hairs and of a swan-like gait adorned with garlands and red sandal paste, came to me with many enchanting gestures and making me take my seat on the cot, became herself merged in love sentiments.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That maid-servant of beautiful hairs and of a swan-like gait adorned with garlands and red sandal-paste, came to me with many enchanting gestures and making me take my seat on the cot, became herself merged in love sentiments.

[Ch 25 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! I became pleased with her gestures and amorous sports and passed the night, full of love towards her and played and cohabited with her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! I became pleased with her gestures and amorous sports and passed the night, full of love towards her and played and cohabited with her.

[Ch 25 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At last I gladly gave her the boon “O Fortunate One! Your child, begotten by me, will be endowed with all good qualities, will be of good form, will be conversant with all the essences of Dharma, calm and quiet and truthful."
NEW CORR ENG ──► At last I gladly gave her the boon, “O Fortunate One! Your child, begotten by me, will be endowed with all good qualities, will be of good form, will be conversant with all the essences of Dharma, calm and quiet and truthful.”

[Ch 25 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In due course, a child named Vidura was born to her. Thus I had three sons; and in my mind grew up Māyā and affection that these were my sons."
NEW CORR ENG ──► In due course, a child named Vidura was born to her. Thus I had three sons; and in my mind grew up Māyā and affection that these were my sons.

[Ch 25 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When I saw again those three sons, heroic and full of manliness, the only cause of my sorrow due to the bereavement of my son Śuka vanished away from my mind.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When I saw again those three sons, heroic and full of manliness, the only cause of my sorrow due to the bereavement of my son Śuka vanished away from my mind.

[Ch 25 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of Dvijas! Māyā is very powerful and extremely hard to be abandoned by those who are not masters of their senses; She enchants even the wise, though She does not possess any form nor any substratum nor any support.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of Dvījas! Māyā is very powerful and extremely hard to be abandoned by those who are not masters of their senses; She enchants even the wise, though She does not possess any form nor any substratum nor any support.

[Ch 25 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I could not find any peace, even in the forest, as my mind was attached to my mother and children. O Muni! My mind then began to oscillate like a pendulum and I remained sometime in Hastināpura and sometime on the banks of the Sarasvati. I could not stay in a certain fixed place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I could not find any peace, even in the forest, as my mind was attached to my mother and children. O Muni! My mind then began to oscillate like a pendulum and I remained sometime in Hastināpura and sometime on the banks of the Sarasvatī. I could not stay in a certain fixed place.

[Ch 25 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► By discrimination, the knowledge sometimes flashed in my mind: "Whose sons are these? The attachment is nothing by merely a delusion. On my death they would not be entitled to perform my śrāddha ceremony. There sons are begotten by ways and manners not sanctioned by Dharma; what happiness can they bring to me? O Muni! The powerful Māyā has caused this delusion in me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► By discrimination, the knowledge sometimes flashed in my mind :-- Whose sons are these? The attachment is nothing but merely a delusion. On my death they would not be entitled to perform my Śrāddha ceremony. These sons are begotten by ways and manners not sanctioned by Dharma; what happiness can they bring to me? O Muni! The powerful Māyā has caused this delusion in me.

[Ch 25 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What! Knowing this Sarinśara to be unreal. Alas! I have fallen into this well of Darkness of delusion." Thus I, repented when I thought over the matter deeply and when I was alone in a solitary place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What! Knowing this Samsāra to be unreal, Alas! I have fallen into this well of the Darkness of delusion. Thus I repented when I thought over the matter deeply and when I was alone in a solitary place.

[Ch 25 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When, subsequently, through the mediation of Bhīsma, the powerful Pāndu got the kingdom, I became pleased to see the prosperity of my son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When, subsequently, through the mediation of Bhīṣma, the powerful Pāṇḍu got the kingdom, I became pleased to see the prosperity of my son.

[Ch 25 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! This is also the creation of Māyā. The daughter of the King Śūrasena, named Kuntī, and the daughter to the King of Madra, named Mādrī became the two beautiful wives of Pāndu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! This is also the creation of Māyā. The daughter of the King Śūrasena, named Kuntī, and the daughter of the King of Madra, named Mādrī became the two beautiful wives of Pāṇḍu.

[Ch 25 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Pāndu was cursed by a Brāhmana that he would die if he cohabited with any woman; he therefore became dispassionate and quitting his kingdom, went to the forest with his two wives.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Pāṇḍu was cursed by a Brāhmaṇa that he would die if he cohabited with any woman; he therefore became dispassionate and quitting his kingdom, went to the forest with his two wives.

[Ch 25 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing Pandu gone to the forest I felt pain and went to my son who was staying his wives and consoling him, came to Hastināpura, where I held a conversation with Dhrāraśstra and then came back to the banks of the river Sarasvatī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing Pāṇḍu gone to the forest I felt pain and went to my son who was staying with his wives and consoling him, came to Hastināpura, where I held a conversation with Dhritarāṣṭra and then came back to the banks of the river Sarasvatī.

[Ch 25 Verse 35-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Pāndu in his forest life, got five sons of his wives by the Devas Dharma, Vāyu, Indra, and the twin Aśvins. Dharma, Vāyu, and Indra begat respectively of Kunti the three sons Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhimasena and Arjuna; and the two Aśvins begat of Mādri the two sons Nakula and Saha deva. Once Mādri, full of youth and beauty, was staying alone in a solitary place and Pāndu seeing her embraced her and due to the curse, died. When the funeral pyre was ablaze, the chaste Mādri entered into the fire and died a Satī. Kunti was prevented from doing so, as she was to nurse and look after her young children.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Pāṇḍu in his forest life, got five sons out of his wives by the Devas Dharma, Vāyu, Indra, and the twin Aśvins. Dharma, Vāyu, and Indra begat respectively of Kuntī the three sons Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīmasena and Arjuṇa; and the two Aśvins begat of Mādrī the two sons Nakulu and Sahadeva. Once Mādrī, full of youth and beauty, was staying alone in a solitary place and Pāṇḍu seeing her embraced her and due to the curse, died. When the funeral pyre was ablaze, the chaste Mādrī entered into the fire and died a Satī. Kuntī was prevented from doing so, as she was to nurse and look after her young children.

[Ch 25 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Munis then took the sorrowful Kunti, the daughter of Śūrasena, bereft of her husband to Hastināpur and handed her over to the high-souled Bhismā and Vidura.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Munis then took the sorrowful Kuntī, the daughter of Śūrasena, bereft of her husband to Hastināpur and handed her over to the high-souled Bhīṣma and Vidura.

[Ch 25 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When I came to hear this, my mind was greatly agitated to see the pain and pleasure that other people suffered. Bhisma, Vidura, and Dhrtarāstra began to nourish and support Yudhiṣthira and others as they considered them the sons of their dearest Pāndu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When I came to hear this, my mind was greatly agitated to see the pain and pleasure that other people suffered. Bhīṣma, Vidura, and Dhritarāṣṭra began to nourish and support Yudhiṣṭhira and others as they considered them the sons of their dearest Pāṇḍu.

[Ch 25 Verse 42-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The cruel and wicked sons of Dhrtaārāstra, Duryodhana and others united with each other and began to quarrel horribly with the sons of Pāndu Dronācārya came there accidentally and Bhīṣma treated him with great respect and requested him to stay in Hastināpura and educate the sons of Kuru.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The cruel and wicked sons of Dhritarāṣṭra, Duryodhana and others united with each other and began to quarrel horribly with the sons of Pāṇḍu. Droṇācārya came there accidentally and Bhīṣma treated him with great respect and requested him to stay in Hastināpura and educate the sons of Kuru.

[Ch 25 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Karna was the son of Kunti, when she was young and unmarried; and he was quitted by her no sooner he was born.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Karṇa was the the son of Kuntī, when she was young and unmarried; and he was quitted by her no sooner he was born.

[Ch 25 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The charioteer Sūta (or carpenter) Adhiratha found him in a river and nourished him. Kārpa was the foremost of the heroes and therefore the great favourite of Duryodhana. The enmity between Bhima and Duryodhana, etc., began to grow greater day by day.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The charioteer Sūta (or carpenter) Adhiratha found him in a river and nourished him. Karṇa was the foremost of the heroes and therefore the great favourite of Duryodhana. The enmity between Bhīma and Duryodhana, etc., began to grow greater day by day.

[Ch 25 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Dhrtarāstra, thinking the difficult situation of his children, fixed the residence of the sons of Pāndu at the Vāranāvata city so that the quarrels might die away.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Dhritarāṣṭra, thinking the difficult situation of his children, fixed the residence of the sons of Pāṇḍu at the Vāraṇāvata city so that the quarrels might die away.

[Ch 25 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Out of enmity, Duryodhana ordered his dear friend Purocana to build there a house of lac for the Pānḍavas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Out of enmity, Duryodhana ordered his dear friend Purocana to build there a house of lac for the Pāṇḍavas.

[Ch 25 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! When I heard that Kunti and her five sons were burnt in the lac-house, I became merged in the ocean of sorrows and thought that they were my grandsons. I was overwhelmed with sorrow and began to search after them in deep forests day and night till at last I found them in Ekacakrā city, lean and thin and very much distressed with sorrow.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! When I heard that Kuntī and her five sons were burnt in the lac-house, I became merged in the ocean of sorrows and thought that they were my grandsons. I was overwhelmed with sorrow and began to search after them in deep forests day and night till at last I found them in Ekacakrā city, lean and thin and very much distressed with sorrow.

[Ch 25 Verse 51-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I became very glad to see them and sent them soon to the city of the King Drupada. Wearing the deer's skin, they went there dejected with sorrow in the Brāhmīn's dress and stayed in the royal court.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I became very glad to see them and sent them soon to the city of the King Drupada. Wearing the deer’s skin, they went there dejected with sorrow in the Brāhmin’s dress and stayed in the royal court.

[Ch 25 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The victorious Arjuna shewed prowess and pierced the mark (the eye of the fish) and obtained Kṛṣṇā, the daughter of the King Drupada. By the order of the mother Kunti, the five brothers married her. O Muni! I became very glad to see that they were all married.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The victorious Arjuṇa shewed prowess and pierced the mark (the eye of the fish) and obtained Kṛṣṇā, the daughter of the King Drupada. By the order of the mother Kuntī, the five brothers married her. O Muni! I became very glad to see that they were all married.

[Ch 25 Verse 54-55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Pāndavas, then, accompanied by Pāncālī, soon went to Hastināpura. Dhṛtarāṣṭra then fixed Khāndavaprastha as the residence of the Pāndavas. Viṣṇu, the son of Vasudeva, then performed the Yajña with the victorious Arjuna and satisfied the Great Fire.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Pāṇḍavas , then, accompanied by Pāñcālī, soon went to Hastināpura. Dhritarāṣṭra then fixed Khāndavaprastha as the residence of the Pāṇḍavas. Viṣṇu, the son of Vāsudeva, then performed the Yajñā with the victorious Arjuṇa and satisfied the Great Fire.

[Ch 25 Verse 56-57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Pānḍavas next performed the Rājasūya sacrifice and that made me very glad. Seeing the affluence and prosperity of the Pānḍavas and the great assembly hall beautiful and exquisitely artistic, Duryodhana was burnt up, as it were, with malice and made arrangements for play in dice, very injurious in its consequences. Šakuni was expert in playing deceitfully and Yudhiṣṭhira the son of Dharma, was not expert in this play.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Pāṇḍavas next performed the Rājasūya sacrifice and that made me very glad. Seeing the affluence and prosperity of the Pāṇḍavas and the great assembly hall beautiful and exquisitely artistic, Duryodhana was burnt up, as it were, with malice and made arrangements for play in dice, very injurious in its consequences. Śakuni was expert in playing deceitfully and Yudhiṣṭhira the son of Dharma, was not expert in this play.

[Ch 25 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So Duryodhana made, Śakuni play for him and stole away all that Yudhīsthira had and insulted, at last, in the royal assembly, the daughter of Drupada, Yājñaseñ and gave her much trouble.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So Duryodhana made Śakuni play for him and stole away all that Yudhiṣṭhira had and insulted, at last, in the royal assembly, the daughter of Drupada, Yajñāsenī and gave her much trouble.

[Ch 25 Verse 59-60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Pāndavas then went with Pāncālī in an exile in the forest for twelve years. And I was very much grieved to hear this. O Muni! Though I know all about the Sanātana Dharma, yet I was deluded and merged in these worlds of pains and pleasures.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Pāṇḍavas then went with Pāñcālī in an exile in the forest for twelve years. And I was very much grieved to hear this O Muni! Though I know all about the Sanātan Dharma, yet I was deluded and merged in these worlds of pains and pleasures.

[Ch 25 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Who am I? To whom do these sons belong? My mind roams day and night on the thought of all these. O Muni! What shall I do?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Who am I? To whom do these sons belong? My mind roams day and night on the thought of all these. O Muni! What shall I do?

[Ch 25 Verse 62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And whether shall I go? I don't find happiness anywhere; my mind is, as it were, floating in a rocking machine and it is never being fixed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And whither shall I go? I don’t find happiness anywhere; my mind is, as it were, floating in a rocking machine and it is never being fixed.

[Ch 25 Verse 63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Best of Munis! You are all-knowing; solve my doubts so that my mental fever may be quietened and I may be happy. Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter on the cause of Moha of Vyāsa Deva asked before Nārada in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Best of Munis! You are all-knowing; solve my doubts so that my mental fever may be quietened and I may be happy. Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter on the cause of Moha of Vyāsa Deva asked before Nārada in Śrī Mad Devi Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
