CHAPTER XXV

On the Cause of Moha of Vyāsa

व्यास उवाच

वासवी चकिता जाता श्रुत्वा मे वाक्यमीद्वुभम् ।

दार्गेयी मगुवावेदे पुत्रार्थं भृगमातुगा ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The mother became astonished to hear me. Becoming very anxious for a son, she began to speak to me.

अवालिका वर्ध्यूंट्या काशिराजसुता सुत ।

भार्य विवित्रवैर्य स्थित्य शोकसंयुता ॥ 2 ॥

सर्वतक्षणासम्पत्रा रूपयौवनशालिनी ।

तत्वां जनय सई चं कृत्वा पुत्रं सुसमतम् ॥ 3 ॥

नांशो राजाधिकारी स्थानसमातूर्ध मनोहम ।

उत्पाद्य राजपुत्रां वचनान्मम मानद ॥ 4 ॥

O Child! The wife of your brother, the daughter Ambālika of Kāśtrāja, is a widow; she is very sorrowful; she is endowed with all auspicious signs and endowed with all good qualities; better cohabit with that beautiful young wife and get a child according to the tradition of the Śiṣṭas. Persons born blind are not entitled to kingdoms.

इसुच्छोई तदा मात्रा स्थितस्तत्र गजाछ्द्रे ।

यावदुतुमती जाता काशिराजसुता मुने ॥ ५ ॥

एकान्ते शयनागारे प्राप्ता सा मम सशिधौ ।

लज्जमाना सुकेशाना स्वश्रुवचनात्दा ॥ ६ ॥

Therefore take my word and procreate a

Book VI Chapter XXV

beautiful son and thus keep my honour." O Muni! Hearing the mother's words, I began to wait in Hastināpura till Ambālīkā, the daughter of Kāśirāja, finished her ablutions after menstruation.

दूद्या मां जटितं दान्तं तापसं सर्वर्जिन् ।

सा येवेदवदना जाता पणडुरा विमना भृगम् ॥ 7 ॥

That King's daughter, of curling hair, came to me alone at her mother-in-law's order, and became very much abashed.

कुणितोर्दं तदा दृष्टवा कामिनीं निशि सङ्गताम् ।

वेपमानां स्थितां पार्थं हाइबृहं तामहं रूपा ॥ ८ ॥

Seeing me an ascetic with matted hair on my head and void of every love sentiments, perspiration came on her face; her body turned pale and her mind void of any love towards me.

सूद्यात मां यदि नशेप पाण्डुवर्णी समावृता ।

अतस्ते तनय: पाण्डुर्भक्तिष्यति सुभत्येम ॥ 9 ॥

When I saw that lady trembling and pale beside me, I angrily spoke: "O One of beautiful waist! When you have turned out pale, considering your own beauty, let your son be of a pale colour."

इयुत्क्वा निति नैव विश्वो वातिकया युत: ।

भुक्वा तान्धिणि निवीतः स्थानामुच्छ्य मातम्न ॥ 10 ॥

Thus saying 1 spent there that night with Ambalikā. After enjoying her I took farewell from my mother and went to my place.

तत्सात्मयां सुती काले प्रमुतावस्थापाढुते ।

धृतग्रह्ध पाण्ड़ुश प्रथिती सव्यभूतुः ॥ 11 ॥

In due course, the two daughters of the King gave birth to two sons respectively, one blind and the other pale. The son of Ambikā was named Dhratāṣṭra; and the son of Ambālīkā was named Pāndu, as his colour was Pāndu (pale).

भाता में विमना जाता तदूगी बीक्ष्य ती सुती ।

ततः संवलस्यन्ते मामादूय तद़ोड़बबीत् ॥ १२ ॥

द्वीपाय सुती जाती राज्योयोनी न तादूशी ।

अन्यं मनोहरं पुत्रं समुत्पादय मे प्रियम् ॥ १३ ॥

Mother became absent-minded when she saw the two sons in those states. After one year she again called me and said: "O Dvaipāyana! These

two persons are not so fit to become kings; therefore beget one more son beautiful and according to my liking.

तथैति सा मया प्रोक्ता सुविता जननी तदा ।

अधिकको प्रार्थयामास सुतार्थें काल आगते ॥ 14 ॥

पुत्रि व्यासं समालील्य पुत्रमुचादयादूनम् ।

कुर्वेगस्प्य कतारं राज्यवोर्यं वारानने ॥ 15 ॥

When I consented, she became very glad and, in due course, asked Ambikā to embrace me and give birth to a son, endowed with extraordinary qualities, and fit to preserve the line worthy of the Kuru dynasty.

वधूर्तैज्ञान्यिता किंचिजोवाच वचन्ते तदा ।

गतोर्डं शयनागरे मातुलद्धचनारक्षिति ॥ १ ६ ॥

दासी विधित्रवीर्यस्य रूपयोवनसंयुता ।

प्रेशिताधिकया त्वत्र विधिचामशारावा ॥ १ ७ ॥

चन्दनात्कदेहा सा पुष्पमाताविष्यपिता ।

The bride did not then say anything on account of her bashfulness. But when I went in the night time according to my mother's order, to the sleeping room, Ambikā sent to me a maid-servant of Victiravīrya, full of youth and beauty, and adorned with various ornaments and clothings.

अयाता हावसंयुक्ता सुकेशी हंसगामिनी ॥ 18 ॥

पर्येक मां समावेश्य संस्थिता प्रेमसंयुक्ता ।

That maid-servant of beautiful hairs and of a swan-like gait adorned with garlands and red sandal paste, came to me with many enchanting gestures and making me take my seat on the cot, became herself merged in love sentiments.

प्रसोजईत त्वा तत्या दिलातेनाभवं सुने ॥ १९ ॥

राजी संकीक्षिति प्रेणा तथा सह मया भृशम् ।

O Muni! I became pleased with her gestures and amorous sports and passed the night, full of love towards her and played and cohabited with her.

वरो दस्त: पुनस्तस्ये प्रसजेन तु नारद ॥ 20 ॥

सुभगे भविता पुत्र: सर्वलक्ष्मणसंयुतः ।

सुकूप: सर्वेधमेंत्र: सत्यवादी रामे रतः ॥ 21 ॥

At last I gladly gave her the boon “O Fortunate

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

One! Your child, begotten by me, will be endowed with all good qualities, will be of good form, will be conversant with all the essences of Dharma, calm and quiet and truthful."

स तदा विदुरो जातक्रयः पुत्रा: सहाप्रवन्।

माया बुद्धि गता साधो परक्षेत्रद्वे मा ॥22 ॥

In due course, a child named Vidura was born to her. Thus I had three sons; and in my mind grew up Māyā and affection that these were my sons."

विस्मूतः शुकसम्बन्धी विगहः शोककारणम्।

दूद्वा तीन्यवसुतान्मार्य वीरान्य वैवीर्यममान्न्॥ 23 ॥

When I saw again those three sons, heroic and full of manliness, the only cause of my sorrow due to the bereavement of my son Śuka vanished away from my mind.

माया बलवती बह्दान्स्यजा हुकृतात्यभि: ।

अरूषा च निरालबा ज्ञानिनामपि मोहिनी ॥ 24 ॥

O Lord of Dvijas! Māyā is very powerful and extremely hard to be abandoned by those who are not masters of their senses; She enchants even the wise, though She does not possess any form nor any substratum nor any support.

मातिरे स्नेहस्वब्द्रं तथा पुत्रेषु स्यन्तुम् ।

न मे चिन्तं वने शान्तिणामानुविवत्तम ॥ 25 ॥

द्रोतारूढं मनो जातं क्वाधिद्धस्तिपुरे ।

पुनः सरस्वतीरिं न चैकत्र व्यवस्थिति: ॥ 26 ॥

I could not find any peace, even in the forest, as my mind was attached to my mother and children. O Muni! My mind then began to oscillate like a pendulum and I remained sometime in Hastināpura and sometime on the banks of the Sarasvati. I could not stay in a certain fixed place.

कट्यार्थिविर्तरव्यज्ञानं मानसे प्रतिभाषिति वे ।

कै.प्री पुत्र: क्व मोहोर्धेनं न श्राद्राहीं पुत्थये मे ॥ 27 ॥

व्यभियोद्वा: कि वे सुखदा: स्य सुना: किल ।

माया बलवती मोहं चितानोते हि मानसे ॥ 28 ॥

By discrimination, the knowledge sometimes flashed in my mind: "Whose sons are these? The attachment is nothing by merely a delusion. On my death they would not be entitled to perform

my śrāddha ceremony. There sons are begotten by ways and manners not sanctioned by Dharma; what happiness can they bring to me? O Muni! The powerful Māyā has caused this delusion in me.

जान्यमोहीधकूपेप्रियम्यतितोर्नं मृषा मुने ।

इत्यकुर्वं रहस्तार्यं कदार्थिन्युसमाहितः ॥ 29 ॥

What! Knowing this Sarinśara to be unreal. Alas! I have fallen into this well of Darkness of delusion." Thus I, repented when I thought over the matter deeply and when I was alone in a solitary place.

राज्य प्राप ततः पाणुबंलवार्यीध्यमयमतः ।

तदा मम मनो जातं प्रसर्नं सुताकरणात् ॥ 30 ॥

When, subsequently, through the mediation of Bhīsma, the powerful Pāndu got the kingdom, I became pleased to see the prosperity of my son.

कुन्ती माड़ी सुरुले ईपार्यँ तस्य बध्वतुः ।

शूरसेनसुता कुन्ती मूर्ताजसुतापरा ॥ 31 ॥

O Muni! This is also the creation of Māyā. The daughter of the King Śūrasena, named Kuntī, and the daughter to the King of Madra, named Mādrī became the two beautiful wives of Pāndu.

स शर्षे द्विजतः प्राय्य कामिनीहुवर्मसुतः ।

पाण्डुर्निवैद्याप्रास्त्यक्त्वा राज्यं वर्ग नतः ॥ 32 ॥

Pāndu was cursed by a Brāhmana that he would die if he cohabited with any woman; he therefore became dispassionate and quitting his kingdom, went to the forest with his two wives.

तदा मामाविशण्डोकः कुत्वा पुरं वने चैक्षतम् ।

गतोर्ड्र तत्र यजासौ मायांध्यां सह संस्थितः ॥ 33 ॥

तमाश्राय्य वने पाण्डुं पुनः प्राप्तो गजाड़्ये ।

धृतराष्ट्रं समाभाध्य ह्रागयं ब्रह्माजातटे ॥ 34 ॥

Hearing Pandu gone to the forest I felt pain and went to my son who was staying his wives and consoling him, came to Hastināpura, where I held a conversation with Dhrāraśstra and then came back to the banks of the river Sarasvatī.

क्षेत्रजान्यब्रुधुओन्स समुत्पाठ बन्धासे ।

धर्मती वायुतः शक्तादिष्यां पड़ पोडवान् ॥ 35 ॥

युधिष्ठिरो भीमसेन्नताधिवाजून इत्यपि ।

कुन्हीपुत्रा: समाख्याता धर्मानिलसुरीश्वा: ॥ 36 ॥

Book VI Chapter XXV

नकुतः सहदेवक्ष मद्राराजस्तुासुती । कदाचितुः रोहो मार्जी समालिंगय महीपाति: । 37 ।। मृतः शपालु मुनिधिः संरकृतो हतनुष्टयुपे । मार्जी तत्र सती भूत्वा प्रयिष्ठा पतिना सह ।। 38 ।।

Pāndu in his forest life, got five sons of his wives by the Devas Dharma, Vāyu, Indra, and the twin Aśvins. Dharma, Vāyu, and Indra begat respectively of Kunti the three sons Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhimasena and Arjuna; and the two Aśvins begat of Mādri the two sons Nakula and Saha deva. Once Mādri, full of youth and beauty, was staying alone in a solitary place and Pāndu seeing her embraced her and due to the curse, died. When the funeral pyre was ablaze, the chaste Mādri entered into the fire and died a Satī. Kunti was prevented from doing so, as she was to nurse and look after her young children.

स्थिता पुरयुता कुन्ती ज्वलिते जातवेदिस ।

मृनयः सुतसंयुक्तां गुरूसेनसुत्तां तदा ॥ 39 ॥

दुःखितां परिकहींना तामानिन्युर्गजसाछ्ये ।

समर्पिताशं श्रीभाय विद्युराय महात्मने ॥ 40 ॥

The Munis then took the sorrowful Kunti, the daughter of Śūrasena, bereft of her husband to Hastināpur and handed her over to the high-souled Bhismā and Vidura.

शूलाड़ं सुखदुःखाथ्यां पीडोतस्तु परातमिथः ।

भीभेण पालिताः पुत्रा: भण्डोर्शिति विविध्त ते ॥ 4 1 ॥

When I came to hear this, my mind was greatly agitated to see the pain and pleasure that other people suffered. Bhisma, Vidura, and Dhrtarāstra began to nourish and support Yudhiṣthira and others as they considered them the sons of their dearest Pāndu.

विद्युने तथा प्रीत्या धृतताष्ट्रण धीमता ।

दुर्घैधनादयलत्थय पुत्रा चे कृमानसाः ॥ 42 ॥

एकत्र स्थितिमाप्ता विरोधो चकुन्धादूनम् ।

ग्रेणाचार्यैस्तु सम्प्राप्तस्तर चीभेण मानितः ॥ 43 ॥

The cruel and wicked sons of Dhrtaārāstra, Duryodhana and others united with each other and began to quarrel horribly with the sons of Pāndu

Dronācārya came there accidentally and Bhīṣma treated him with great respect and requested him to stay in Hastināpura and educate the sons of Kuru.

अध्यापनाय पुत्राणां पुरे तत्मिश्रवासितः ।

कर्ण: कृत्वा परित्यन्तो जातमानः शिश्युद्वी ॥ 44 ॥

Karna was the son of Kunti, when she was young and unmarried; and he was quitted by her no sooner he was born.

सूतेन पालितो नदां प्राप्तशाधिर्येन ह ।

दुर्योधनप्रियक्षापूर्कर्णः शूरतमस्तथा ॥ 45 ॥

परस्यं विरोधेप्रधूदीमदुर्वीधनादिषु ।

धृतराष्ट्र सर्जित्य क्लेशं पुरेषु तेषु च ॥ 46 ॥

The charioteer Sūta (or carpenter) Adhiratha found him in a river and nourished him. Kārpa was the foremost of the heroes and therefore the great favourite of Duryodhana. The enmity between Bhima and Duryodhana, etc., began to grow greater day by day.

निवासं कल्यमावास भणद्धानां महात्मानम् ।

वितोधशमानयैव नगरे वारणावते ॥ 47 ॥

Dhrtarāstra, thinking the difficult situation of his children, fixed the residence of the sons of Pāndu at the Vāranāvata city so that the quarrels might die away.

दुर्योधिनेन तत्रैव ग्रैहाज्जतुगृहाणि वै ।

कारितानि च दिव्यानि प्रेष्म मित्रं प्रोचनम् ॥ 48 ॥

Out of enmity, Duryodhana ordered his dear friend Purocana to build there a house of lac for the Pānḍavas.

श्रुत्वा जतुगृहे दर्शन्याण्डवान्युथया सुतान् ।

पौत्रभावान्युनिश्रेष्ठ मनोर्धं व्यसनार्वे ॥ 49 ॥

शोक्तातुरे भृगं शून्ये चने पश्यत्रहिंशम् ।

दृहा मदैकचक्रायां पाश्वदा दुःखकर्शितः ॥ ५० ॥

O Muni! When I heard that Kunti and her five sons were burnt in the lac-house, I became merged in the ocean of sorrows and thought that they were my grandsons. I was overwhelmed with sorrow and began to search after them in deep forests day and night till at last I found them in Ekacakrā city, lean and thin and very much distressed with sorrow.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

ततस्तुष्टमनाश्रां जातः पार्थपिल्लोक्य च ।

प्रेरितात्मे मया तृर्णं द्वाद्यस्य तृरं प्रति ॥ 51 ॥

ते नातास्तत्र दुःखातां विग्रवेषधारः कृशाः ।

मृगचर्मपरीधानाः सभायां संस्थित्यात्त्व ॥ 52 ॥

I became very glad to see them and sent them soon to the city of the King Drupada. Wearing the deer's skin, they went there dejected with sorrow in the Brāhmīn's dress and stayed in the royal court.

कृत्वा पराक्रमे विज्युः स जिल्या दुर्बदामजाम् ।

चकूर्विवहां मानिया पड्वेय मातृबालयच: ॥ 53 ॥

The victorious Arjuna shewed prowess and pierced the mark (the eye of the fish) and obtained Kṛṣṇā, the daughter of the King Drupada. By the order of the mother Kunti, the five brothers married her. O Muni! I became very glad to see that they were all married.

दृष्टवा विवाहें तेषां तु मुदितोड़ं पूर्णं तव ।

ततो नागाद्धे प्रापता: याझात्यीसहिता मुने ॥ ५४ ॥

निवासं खाणवप्रस्थं धृतारोषुण कल्पयतम् ।

याणबजानां द्विजश्रेय वासुदेवसुतेन वै ॥ ५५ ॥

The Pāndavas, then, accompanied by Pāncālī, soon went to Hastināpura. Dhṛtarāṣṭra then fixed Khāndavaprastha as the residence of the Pāndavas. Viṣṇu, the son of Vasudeva, then performed the Yajña with the victorious Arjuna and satisfied the Great Fire.

ताँपित: पावकसत विध्युना सह जिध्युना ।

राजसूय: कृती यजस्तदारंडं मुहितो5पवन् ॥ 56 ॥

टूद्वात्रध विषयवे तेणा तथा मवकृतां सभाम् ।

दुयोंधनोर्जितसंतणे दुरोदरमथाकरोह् ॥ 57 ॥

The Pānḍavas next performed the Rājasūya sacrifice and that made me very glad. Seeing the affluence and prosperity of the Pānḍavas and the great assembly hall beautiful and exquisitely artistic, Duryodhana was burnt up, as it were, with malice and made arrangements for play in dice, very injurious in its consequences. Šakuni was expert in playing deceitfully and Yudhiṣṭhira the son of Dharma, was not expert in this play.

दुर्बूध्वेती शकुनिनरक्षण्डश धर्मंकः ।

हर्त राज्य धर्म सर्व याजसेनी च कलेर्षिता ॥ 58 ॥

So Duryodhana made, Śakuni play for him and stole away all that Yudhīsthira had and insulted, at last, in the royal assembly, the daughter of Drupada, Yājñaseñ and gave her much trouble.

वने झटारा वर्षिण याण्डवासले विवासिताः ।

पाङ्गालीसहितासने दुःखं मे जनितं भृणम् ॥ 59 ॥

एवं नारद संसारे सुखदुःखात्मके भृणम् ।

निम्नभोर्हं प्रभेषीव जानन्यमं सनातनम् ॥ 60 ॥

The Pāndavas then went with Pāncālī in an exile in the forest for twelve years. And I was very much grieved to hear this. O Muni! Though I know all about the Sanātana Dharma, yet I was deluded and merged in these worlds of pains and pleasures.

कोड़ं कस्य सुलासेधी का माता किं सुखं पुः।

येन मे इदयं मोहाद्धमतीति दिवानिगम. ॥ 6 1 ॥

Who am I? To whom do these sons belong? My mind roams day and night on the thought of all these. O Muni! What shall I do?

कि क्रोगि कव गच्छामि सन्तोषो नाथिच्छिति ।

दोलात्छं मनो मेउर चझतं न स्थिरं भवेत् ॥ 62 ॥

And whether shall I go? I don't find happiness anywhere; my mind is, as it were, floating in a rocking machine and it is never being fixed.

सर्वैतोरिस मुनिश्रेष्ठ सन्देहं मे निवर्तय ।

तथा कुरु सधारई स्वां सुखितो विनतर्जच: ॥ 63 ॥

इति शीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे फधरकन्चे

पद्धिशोधयाव: 11 25 11

O Best of Munis! You are all-knowing; solve my doubts so that my mental fever may be quietened and I may be happy.

Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter on the

cause of Moha of Vyāsa Deva asked

before Nārada in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam

of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi

Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XXVI

