CHAPTER XXXII

On Self Realisation Spoken by the Devi

श्रीव्यवाच

शृणवनू निर्जार: सर्वे व्याह्रत्या वचो मम ।

यथ्य श्रवणायोगे मदुप्तवं प्रघतते ॥ १ ॥

अहमेवास पूर्व तु तान्यतिकंचिज्ञापाधि ।

तदात्मकर्ण चितरसंविवरब्रढ़ीकनामकम् ॥ २ ॥

The Devi said: “Hear, Ye Immortals! My words with attention, that I am now going to speak to you, hearing which will enable the Jivas to realise My Essence. Before the creation, I, only I, existed; nothing else was existent then. My Real Self is known by the names Cit, Sambvit (Intelligence), Para Brahma and others.

अग्रतकर्ममितिरंध्यमनौपय्यमनायम् ।

तस्य काधित्वस्तः सिद्धा शक्तिमभियेति विश्वुत्ता || 3 ||

न सती सा नासती सा नोभयात्या विशोधतः ।

एतहितक्षणा काधित्वस्तुभूतात्स्ति सर्वेच ॥ 4 ||

My Atman is beyond mind, beyond thought, beyond any name or mark, without any parallel,

and beyond birth, death or any other change or transformation. My Self has one inherent power, called Māyā. This Māyā is not existent, nor non-existent, nor can it be called both. This unspeakable substance Māyā always exists (till the final emancipation or Mokṣa).

पातकस्योणतेवेयपूर्णांगोरिवे दीर्घिति: ।

चन्द्रस्य चन्द्रिकेवंव ममेवं सहना बुधा ॥ 5 ॥

Māyā can be destroyed by Brahma Jñāna; so it can not be called existent; again if Māyā does not exist, the practical world cannot exist. So, it cannot be called non-existent. Of course it cannot be called both, for it would involve contr: स्तोन. This Māyā (without beginning but with end at the time of Mokṣa) naturally arises as heat cones out of fire, as the rays come out of the Sun and as the cooling rays come out of the Moon.

तस्यां कर्माणि जीवानां जीवा: कालघु संचरे ।

अभेदेन विलनीना: स्यु: सुपुर्णो व्यबहारवत् ॥ 6 ॥

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

Just as all the Karmas of the Jivas dissolve in deep sleep (Susupti), so at the time of Pralaya or the General Dissolution, the Karmas of the Jivas, the Jivas and Time all become merged in one uniform mass in this great Māyā. United with My Śakti, I am the Cause of this world; this Śakti has this defect that it has the power of hiding Me, its Originator.

स्वागतेक्ष प्रस्मायोगादहुं बीजात्मतां गता ।

स्वाधारावरणात्स्या दोषचंचे च समागत् ॥ 7 ॥

I am Nirguna. And when I am united with my Śakti, Māyā, I become Saguna, the Great Cause of this world. This Māyā is divided into two, Vidyā and Avidyā. Avidyā Mayā hides Me; whereas Vidyā Mayā does not. Avidyā creates whereas Vidyā Mayā liberates.

वैतन्यस्य समायोगातिमित्तं च कथ्यते ।

प्रवृष्यिरणामाच समावार्थिन्युच्छे ॥ 8 ॥

Māyā united with Caitanya (Intelligence); i.e., Cidābhasā is the efficient cause of this Universe; whereas Māyā reduced to and united with five original elements is the material Cause of the Universe.

कैन्चितां तय इत्याहुस्तमः केचित्जई परे ।

जानं मायां प्रधानं च प्रकृति शक्तिमयज्ञान् ॥ 9 ॥

Some call this Māyā tapas; some call Her inert, material; some call Her knowledge; some call Her Māyā, Pradhāna, Prakṛti, Ajā (unborn) and some others call Her Śakti.

विरणर्ग इति तां ग्रुः शैरणास्विगारतः ।

अविष्यामिते प्रावृदितत्वाखिंघन्तकाः ॥ 10 ॥

The Śaiva authors call Her Vimarsā and the other Vedāntists call Her Avidyā; in short, this Māyā is in the heads of all the Pandits. This Māyā is called various in the Nigamas.

एवं नानाविष्यानि सूनीमानि निमादिषु ।

तस्या जडचं दृष्यत्वाज्ञाननाशाततोउसती ॥ 1 1 ॥

चैतन्यस्य न दृष्यत्वं दृष्यत्वं जडमेव तत् ।

स्वप्रकाशं च चैतन्यं न पेण प्रकाशितम् ॥ 1 2 ॥

That which is seen is inert; for this reason Māyā

is Jāda (inert) and as the knowledge it conveys is destroyed, it is false. Caitanya (Intelligence) is not seen; if It were seen, it would have been Jāda. Caitanya is self-luminous; not illumined by any other source. Were It so, Its Enlightener would have to be illumined by some other thing and so the fallacy of Anavasthā creeps in (an endless series of causes and effects).

अनवस्थादोषस्तावर स्थेनापि प्रकाशितम् ।

कर्मकंशिविरोध: स्यातमाताधीयवलस्यम् ॥ 13 ॥

प्रकाशमानमयैषां भासकं विद्ध पवेत ।

अन्तरच च नित्यतं सिद्धसंवित्नोमम ॥ 14 ॥

Again one thing cannot be the actor and the thing acted upon (being contrary to each other); so Caitanya be illumined by itself. So It is Self-luminous; and it illumines Sun, Moon, etc., as a lamp is self-luminous and illumines other objects. So, O, Mountain! This My Intelligence is established as eternal and everlasting.

जात्यविरूपुत्वादौ इयस्य व्यभिचातः ।

सिंवोटो व्यभिचार्य तानुभृतोरिति कर्हिंचि ॥ 15 ॥

The waking, dreaming and deep sleep states do not remain constant but the sense of 'I' remains the same, whether in waking, dreaming or deep sleep state; its anomaly is never felt. (The Bauddhas say that) The sense of intelligence, Jñāna, is also not felt; there is the absence of it; so what is existent is also temporarily existent.

यदि तस्यायनुभवस्ताईं येन साक्षिणा ।

अनुभूत: स एवात्र शिष्टः संविद्युः पुरा ॥ 16 ॥

अतएव च नित्यां प्रोक्ते सच्छास्काविद्धे: ।

आनन्दक्तता चास्या: परप्रेमायत्वतः ॥ 17 ॥

But (it can then be argued that) then the Witness by which that absence is sensed, that Intelligence, in the shape of the Witness, is eternal. So the Pandits of all the reasonable Śāstras declare that Samvit (Intelligence) is Eternal and it is Blissful the fountain of all love.

मा न भूद्र हिं भूयासिमिति प्रेमामतिन स्थितम् ।

सर्वस्यान्यस्य मिथ्यालाद्रसंगल सृष्टं मम ॥ 18 ॥

Book VII Chapter XXXII

अपरिक्ष्त्रातउपेवेमत एव मता मम ।

तच्च जानं नात्यधर्मों धर्मते जडतात्मन: ॥ 19 ॥

Never the Jivas or embodied souls feel ‘I am not’; but ‘I am’ this feeling is deeply established in the soul as Love. Thus it is clearly evident that I am quite separate from anything else which are all false. Also I am one continuous (no interval or separation existing within Me). Again Jñāna is not the Dharma (the natural quality) of Ātman but it is of the very nature of Ātman.

ज्ञान्य जडशेचलं न दूई न च मम्यति ।

चिद्वमैलं तथा नास्ति चितश्रिक हिं विधते ॥ 2 0 ॥

If Jñāna were the Dharma of Ātman, then Jñāna would have been material; so Jñāna is immaterial. If (for argument's sake) Jñāna be denominated as material, that cannot be. For Jñāna is of the nature of Intelligence and Ātman is of the nature of Intelligence. Intelligence has not the attribute of being Dharma. Here the thing Cit is not different from its quality (Cit).

तस्मातात्मानस्फ: सुवहणघ सर्वदा ।

सत्य: पूर्णप्रधर्मश्रं क्षेत्रजालविबर्जितः ॥ 21 ॥

स पुनः कामकर्मादि युक्ता स्वीयामयाय ।

पूर्वानुभूतसंस्काराकालकर्मविपाकतः ॥ 22 ॥

So Ātman is always of the nature of Jñāna and happiness; Its nature is Truth; It is always Full, unattached and void of duality. This Ātman again, united with Māyā, composed of desires and Karmas, wants to create, due to the want of discrimination, the twentyfour tattvas, according to the previous Sarīnskāras (tendencies), time and Karma.

अविवेकाच्च तत्व्य सिसुक्षावान्पजायते ।

अब्दिकुपूर्वे: सर्गोंर्व कवितने नगाधि ॥ 23 ॥

O Mountain! The re-awakening after Pralaya Susupti is not done with Buddhi (for then Buddhi is not at all manifested). So this creation is said to be effected without any Buddhi (proper intelligence).

एताद्वि यमया प्रोक्ते मम रूपमलोकिम् ।

अव्याकृतं तद्यवक्तं मायाशबलमित्यपि ॥ 24 ॥

प्रोच्यते सर्वशास्त्रेषु सर्वकारणकारणम् ।

तत्त्वनामिवृभृतं च सचिद्वान्त्विधप्रभु ॥ 25 ॥

O, Chief of the Immovables! The Tattva (Reality) that I have spoken to you is most excellent and it is my Extraordinary Form merely. In the Vedas it is known as Avyākṛta (unmodified), Avyakta (unmanifested) Māyā Śabala (divided into various parts) and so forth. In all the Śāstras, it is stated to be the Cause of all causes, the Primeval Tattva and Saccidānanda Vigraha.

सर्वकर्मविरीभृतमिच्छान्त्रक्रियाश्रयम् ।

ईंकाराम-नश्वायच्छं तदादित्तं तदुच्यते ॥ 26 ॥

Where all the Karmas are solidified and where Icchā Sakti, (will), Jñāna Sakti (intelligence) and Kriyā Śakti (action) all are melted in one, that is called the Mantra Hrim, that is the first Tattva.

तस्मादाकाग उत्प्र: शब्दतमाजरूपक: ।

भवेत्सप्रांतिको बायुतैजोकृतपात्मकं पुनः ॥ 27 ॥

जलं सतात्मकं पशुत्तातो न्यात्मिका धरा ।

गब्दिकुण आकाशो बायु: स्पर्शवात्रितः ॥ 28 ॥

गब्दस्यांरूपणुं तेज इतुच्छते बुधैः ।

गब्दस्यांरूपरसैरागो वेदगुणाः स्मृतः ॥ 29 ॥

गब्दस्यांरूपसाथी: पड्गुणा धरा ।

From this comes out Äkäša, having the property of sound, thence Vāyu (air) with ‘touch’ property; then fire with form, then water having ‘Rasa’ property; and lastly the earth having the quality ‘smell.’ The Pandits say that the ‘sound’ is the only quality of Äkäša; air has two qualities viz., sound and touch, fire has three qualities sound, touch, form; water has four qualities sound, touch, form, taste; and the earth has five qualities sound, touch, form, taste and smell.

तेष्यो3पबन्महतूर्षे यल्लिंगं परिच्छते ॥ 30 ॥

सर्वात्मकं तत्संप्रोकं सूक्ष्मदेडोउयमात्नः ।

अव्यक्ते कारणो देहः स चोक्तः पूर्वेमिव हि ॥ 31 ॥

यस्पिजगवृडीजरयं स्थितं लिंगोद्वयं यतः ।

Out of these five original elements, the allpervading Sūtra (string or thread) arose. This Sūtrātman (soul) is called the ‘Līnga Deha,’

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

comprising within itself all the Prānas; this is the subtle body of the Paramātman. And what is said in the previous lines as Avyakta or Unmanifested and in which the Seed of the World is involved and whence the Liṅga Deha has sprung, that is called the Causal body (Kāraṇa body) of the Paramātman.

ततः स्थूलानि भूतानि पञ़ीकरणामांत: ॥ 32 ॥

पञ़संख्यानि जायते ततुकास्त्वशोच्छते ।

पूवौक्तानि च भूतानि प्रत्येकं विभवेन्दिष्ठया ॥ 33 ॥

The five original elements (Apañcikrta called the five Tan Matras) being created, next by the Pañcikaraṇa process, the gross elements are created. The process is now being stated: O, Girijā! Each of the five original elements is divided into two parts; one part of each of which is subdivided into four parts.

एकैकं भागमेकस्य चतुर्धि विषनैहित्रे ।

स्वलेवरात्रिदायीगे योजनावघ उष्ठ ते ॥ 34 ॥

तत्कार्य च विगाड़देः स्थूलतेहोउपामानः ।

पझभृतस्वसन्त्रोंगे: श्रोत्रादीनों समुद्धतः ॥ 35 ॥

This fourth part of each is united with the half of four other elements different from it and thus each gross element is formed. By these five gross elements, the Cosmic (Virāt) body is formed and this is called the Gross Body of the God. Jñanendriyas (the organs of knowledge) arise from Sattva Guṇa of each of these five elements.

जानेन्द्रियाणं राजेन्द्र प्रत्येके मितिलेस्तु तैः ।

अनतः कर्णपोकं स्वादुप्तिभेदाच्छतुर्विधम् ॥ 36 ॥

यदा तु संकल्पविकल्यकृतयं

तद्धा घबेतनमन इत्यभिख्यम् ।

स्याद्वुद्धिसंत्र च यदा प्रवेति

सुनिश्रितं संशयहीनकर्ण ॥ 37 ॥

Again the Sattva Guṇas of each of the Jñanendriyas united become the Antahkaraṇāni. This Antahkarana is of four kinds, according as its functions very. When it is engaged in forming Sañkalpas, resolves, and Vikalpas (doubts) it is called ‘mind.’

अनुसंधानकर्ष तच्चितं च परिकीर्तितम् ।

अहैकुलात्मकवृष्टा नु तदहंकारतां गतम् ॥ 38 ॥

तेषां रजोर्जैज्ञातिन क्रमाकस्मिन्याणि च ।

प्रत्येकं मितितेतेसैनु प्राणो भवति पंचथा ॥ 39 ॥

When it is free from doubts and when it arrives at the decisive conclusion, it is called ‘Citta’; and when it rests simply on itself in the shape of the feeling ‘I’, it is called Ahanikāra. From the Rajo Guṇa of each of the five elements arises Vāk (speech), Pāni (hands) Pāda (feet), Pāyu (Anus) and Upastha (organs of generation)

इदि प्राणो गुद्रपानो नाभिस्वस्तु समानकः ।

कणद्वेशेगुव्यानः स्वाद्व्यानः सर्वेगरीगः ॥ 40 ॥

जानेनिद्वायिन पर्वेव पढ़ कर्मनिद्वायिन च ।

प्राणादिपढ़कं चैव धिया च सहितं मनः ॥ 41 ॥

Again their Rajo parts united give rise to the five Prānas (Prāna, Apāna, Samāna, Udāna and Vyāna.) the Prāna Vāyu resides in the heart; Apāna Vayu in the Arms; Samāna Vāyu resides in the Navel; Udāna Vāyu resides in the Throat; and the Vyāna Vāyu resides, pervading all over the body. My subtle body (Linga Deha) arises from the union of the five Jñāndērriyas, the five Karmendriyas (organs of action), the five Prānas and the mind and Buddhī, these seventeen elements.

एततृष्यं शरीरं स्यान्म पिलंगं यदुच्छते ।

तरा या प्रकृति: प्रोक्ता सा राजनिद्विषया सूता ॥ 42 ॥

सत्त्वीराका तु माया स्यादिविषाणिधिता ।

स्वाधयं या तु संग्रेस्ता मायेति निगघते ॥ 43 ॥

And the Prakṛti that resides there is divided into two parts; one is pure (Suddha Sattva) Māyā and the other is the impure Māyā or Avidyā united with the Guṇas. By Māyā is meant. She, who, without concealing Her refugees, protects, them When the Supreme Seif is reflected on this Śuddha Sattva, Māyā, He is called Iśvara. This Śuddha Māyā does not conceal Brahma, its receptacle; therefore She knows the All-pervading Brahma and She is omniscient, omnipotent, the Lady of all and confers favours and blessings on all.

Book VII Chapter XXXIII

तत्या यतृतीर्विंक्षे स्याद्विषबभूतस्य चोषितुः।

स ईशर: समाख्यात: स्वाशयरनावार्य: ॥ 44 ॥

सर्वै: सर्वकर्ता च सर्वानुहकाकर: ।

अविष्यायां तु यत्किचितृतीर्विंक्षे नगाधिप ॥ 45 ॥

When the Supreme Self is reflected on the Impure Māyā or Avidyā, ,Ie is called Jiva. This Avidyā conceals Brahma, Whose nature is Happiness; therefore this Jiva is the source of all miseries.

तदेव जीवसंत्रं स्यात्सर्वेतु:खाश्रयं पुनः ।

इयोग्यीहि संप्रोक्ते देइत्रवमविद्धता ॥ 46 ॥

देहरयाधिपानाव्याथभूत्रापत्रयं पुनः ।

प्रास्तु कराणात्मा स्यात्सुभादेही तु तैजसः ॥ 47 ॥

Both Iśvara and Jīva have, by the influence of Vidyā and Avidyā three bodies and three names. When the Jīva lives in his causal body, he is named Prajñā; when he lives in subtle body he is known as Taijasa; while he has the gross body, he is called Viśva.

स्वृत्वेही तु विश्वाख्यक्षित्य: परिकीर्तितः ।

एवमीगोर्षि संप्रोक्त ईशसूत्रविराद्पदेः ॥ 48 ॥

So when Iśvara is in His causal body, he is denominated Iśa; when He is in His subtle body, he is known as Sūtra; and when He is in His gross body, He is known as Virāt.

प्रथमो व्यहिष्पत्सु समष्टात्मा पर: स्मृतः ।

स हि सर्वेश्रः साक्षाजीवानुप्रहाकायया ॥ 49 ॥

करोति विविध विश्वं नानाभोगाशयं पुनः ।

मच्छक्तिप्रेतो नित्यं मयि राजन्यकल्पितः ॥ 50 ॥

डीत श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे सदमतस्कर्ये देवीपीतायां

द्वारिशोरभावः 11 32 11

The Jiva glories in having three (as above-mentioned) kinds of differentiated bodies and Iśvara glories in having three (as above-mentioned) kinds of cosmic bodies. Thus Iśvara is the Lord of all though he feels Himself always happy and satisfied, yet to favour the Jivas and to give them liberation (Mokṣa) He has created various sorts of worldly things for their Bhogas (enjoyments). This Iśvara creates all the Universe, impelled by My Brahma Śakti. I am of the nature of Brahma; and Iśvara in conceived in Me as a snake is imagined in a rope. Therefore Iśvara has to remain dependent on My Śakti.”

Here ends the Thirty-second Chapter of the Seventh

Book on Self-realization, spoken by the World Mother in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XXXIII

