CHAPTER XV

On the Fight between Yudhājit and Virasena

व्यास उवाच

संयुगे च सति तत्र धप्ययोराहवाय

सपुणतपशस्थयोः ।

कोधलोभवशयोः समं ततः

संबंधूत तुपुलसतु तिमर्दः ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When the war was declared, the two kings, excited by greed and anger, took up arms; and a dreadful encounter ensued.

संस्थितः स समरे धृताचपः

पार्थिव: पृथुल्बाद्रयुधार्जित् ।

संयुतः स्वबलवाह्नादि-

कैराह्वाय कृतनिश्छायो नृपः ॥ 2 ॥

On one side, King Yudhājit of long arms, surrounded by his own army, with bows and arrows came ready to fight.

वीरसेन इह सैन्यसंयुतः क्षात्रधर्मानुसूच स्वांगे ।

पुत्रिकात्मबहिताय पार्थिवः संरिस्थतः सूपपतेः समानेकाः॥ 3 ॥

On the other hand, the fiery Virasena, the second God of the Devas appeared in the battle, following a true Kṣatriya custom, on behalf his daughter'son.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

स बाणवृष्टि विससर्जे पार्थिवे

युधार्जितं वीक्ष्य रोगे स्थितं च ।

सिर्ते तिड्वानिव सोयवृष्टिधिः:

कोधान्वितः सत्यपात्रकमोउसी ॥ 4 ॥

Then that truthful king Virasena, seeing Yudhājit in battle, became very angry and hurled arrows on him, as a cloud rains on the mountain top.

तं वीरसेनो विशिष्टः शिलाशितः

सामावुणोदासुमार्मिज्ञानैः ।

चिच्छेद वाणीशु शिलीमुखानसौ

तेनैव मुक्तानित्वेभपातिनः ॥ 5 ॥

On being covered, as it were, by the sharp and swift arrows, sharpend on a stone slab hurled at him by Virasena, Yudhājit, too, quickly, shot arrows at Virasena and cut off all his arrows.

गराश्वतृगाणां सव्यपुवातियुब्दे

सुरनमुपनिसंर्वैशिक्तं चातिघोरम् ।

वित्तविद्यादुवैर्यगृतं व्योम सहः

पिशितमाशितुकामैः कामगृधातिविध्ध ।। 6 ।।

O King! A dreadful fight then ensued between the cavalries, the warriors on the elephants; and the Devas, men, and Munis began to witness this terrible battle with wonder and astonishment. Birds, vultures and crows, desirous to eat the flesh of the dead soldiers, flew in the air.

तमद्धुत क्षनलसिन्युर्नवह घोरा

ब्रैटैथ एव नर्यौतुर्मामाणम् ।

त्रासावहा नयनमार्गता नराणां

पाणात्मनों रविजगार्णचेब कामम् ॥ 7 ॥

Blood of elephants, horses and warriors, the bodies that lay dead, flowed in torrents awfully like rivers in that deadly battle ground. The torrent of blood excited fear amongst those who came to see it, as the river Vaitarani on the way to hell (the Lord of Death) is very fearful to the sinners.

कौणानि विषयपुलिने नरमलकानि

केशगवानि न विभांति यवैव सिध्नी ।

तुर्बीफलानि विहितानिवहृतकामी-

बालैयथा राविसुताप्रभवैश्च नूनम् ॥ 8 ॥

Human skulls were driven ashore by the current and they looked like so many hollow shells of gourds scattered there for the play of the boys on the banks of the Yamunā.

वीरं मृतं भृति गतं पतिंत रथाड़े

गृध: पतार्थमुपरि धमतीति मन्ये ।

जीवोउपस्यो निजागरीरमवेक्ष्य कानं

कांक्षल्यहो3तिविज्ञो5पि वृन: प्रवेधूम ॥ 9 ॥

When any warrior lay dead on the field, the vultures began to fly about in the air for devouring his flesh. It seemed then that the soul of the warrior beholding his beautiful body tried to reenter into his body, though he thought that it had become very inaccessible to him.

अजी हतोउपि नृवर: सुविमानरूढ:

स्वाक्षे स्थितां सुरवधुं प्रवदत्यभीटम् ।

पर्याप्तुना मम शरीरमदं पूर्णव्या

बाणाहतं निवितितं करभोक कानतम् ॥ 10 ॥

Some warrior on being slain in the battle instantly arose in a celestial car to the heavens and was seen addressing the celestial nymph, who came already within his embrace, thus “O one of beautiful thighs. Behold! how my beautiful body is lying on the earth below!”

एको हतस्त्र सिपुर्णे गतोउ-नार्तिश्छं

देवांगनां समाधिगम्य सुते विमाने ।

ताविरिष्या हुतवहे सुसमयदे हें जगाद

कान्तमवला सवला स्वक्रीया ॥ १ १ ॥

Another warrior thus slain got up in the heavens on a celestial car, came in possession of a celestial nymph and when he was sitting with her in the car, his former wife in the earth made herself a sati and burnt herself up in the funeral pyre, thus got a celestial body, came up to the heavens; and that chaste virtuous woman drew away perforce her own husband away from that celestial nymph.

युढे मृती च सुपटी दिवि संगती

ताव्यो-यशस्कनित्ती सह सम्याती ।

तत्रैव जान्तुरलं परमाहितास्त्रा-

वैकापासोर्धीवहृति कलाहाकुली च ॥ १२ ॥

Book III Chapter XV

Two warriors, went up, slew each other and lay down dead at the same time. They went up in the heavens at the same time and there began to quarrel with each other and fight with their weapons for one and the same celestial nymph.

क्रशिष्ठा समाधिन्य सुरांगनों दै

रूपाधिकां गुणवर्ती किल भक्तियुक्ता ।

स्वीयान् गुणान्यवित्तान्यवदंतवादसौ

तां प्रमदानयुचकार च योगयुक्तः ॥ 13 ॥

Some hero got in the heavens a nymph more lovely and beautiful than himself and he thus became very much attached and devoted to her. He began to describe his own heroic qualities and also to copy dotedly the qualities of his lover so that she might remain faithfully attached to him.

भौमं रजोस्त्रितितं दिवि संस्थितं च

च रात्रं चकात्र तर्शिंच च समावृष्णोशत् ।

मनं तदेच कर्शिरांकृत्यिधावकस्मात्-

प्रावैक्षेपू वरिय्यातिकानित्युः ॥ 14 ॥

Thus dust, arising from the dreadful encounter of the soldiers in the battlefield, rose up in the air and covered the sun. It appeared night. After a while that dust became absorbed in the blood below, and the sun appeared very red, reflected with the colour of the blood.

क्रश्टिप्रान्तरु गगनं किन्त देवकन्यां

सग्राप्य चार्वदनां किल भफिष्युक्ताम् ।

नांगीवकार चतुरो ब्रतानाश्भीतो

यास्यतयं मम वृथा ध्रुकुक्लशब्दः ॥ 15 ॥

Some Brahmacārī fought in the battle and was slain. He went up to the heavens; instantly a lovely-eyed Devakanyā, a celestial nymph desired to select him as a bridegroom with great devotion. But that clever man did not accept the offer, thinking that his vow of Brahmacarya would be thus broken.

संगमे संवृते तन युधाजित्यविधयिति: ।

ज्ञान यीरसेनें तं बाणौरतीक्षे: स दारणैः ॥ १ ६ ॥

नित्रतः स पपातोल्या तिज्वपूर्णं महीपत: ।

प्रभन्ते तद्वलं सर्व निरितं च चतुदिंहणम् ॥ १ ७ ॥

O King! Thus when the battle was deadly, king Yudhājit shot a sharp, dreadful arrow at Virasena

and severed his head from his body. Virasena lay dead on the battle field and his army was routed. The soldiers fled away from the battle.

मनोरमा हतं श्रुत्वा चितरं रणामुघिन ।

भयत्रसात्र शंजाता चितुर्वैरमनुस्मन् ॥ 18 ॥

हानियाति युधार्जिद्रे पुरं मम दुरागयः ।

गज्वलोभेन पाणात्मा सोति चित्तापरभबत् ॥ 19 ॥

Hearing that his father was slain in the battle, Manoramā became very terrified and anxious. She then began to think that the vicious wicked king Yudhājit will surely slay her son, for kingdom's sake and to satisfy his enemy with her father.

किं कांतीय बल गच्छायि पिता मे नित्हत रोगे ।

भर्ता चापि मृतोरईय पुत्रोउरं मण बालकः ॥ 20 ॥

What shall I do now? My father is slain in the battle. My husband is no more. My child is a minor today. Where shall I go?

लोपोरतीच च पापिष्ठतेन को न वशीकृत:।

किं न कुर्जानदायि: पाण पाणविसम्म: ॥ 21 ॥

Greed is very sinful; who is there that cannot be bought over by love of gold? and what vicious act can there be, that cannot be done when actuated by covetousness?

यितरं मातरं श्रानु-गुरू-न्यवजनबोधान् ।

हाँत लोभस्मायिष्टो जनो नात्र विचारणा ॥ 22 ॥

A greedy man does not hesitate to kill his father, mother, spiritual guide, friends and others. There is no doubt in this.

अभव्यभक्षणं लोभादाय्यागमन्त तथा ।

कोरोति किल तृष्णातां धर्मत्वागं तथा पुन: ॥ 23 ॥

It is the inordinate love of worldly things that makes a man eat what is held unclean in society, that makes a man approach a woman who is unapproachable, and it is greed that makes a man discard his own religion and become an apostate.

न सहायोर्सित मे कौहिज्ञारोउर महावल: ।

यद्याएरे सिता चाहं पालवामि सुतं शृष्म. ॥ 24 ॥

In this city I find none so powerful as I can remain there under his shelter and be able to rear up my child.

हते पुत्रे नृपेणाछ किं करिष्यामर्थे पुनः ।

न मे जाताजलि घुवने येन वे सूचित्या हाद्म् ॥ 25 ॥

What can I do if king Yudhājit slays my son? There is none in this world who can save me, and, counting on whose shelter, I can stay here without any anxiety.

साथि वैश्युता कामं सप्तनी सर्वीव भवेत् ।

लीलावती न मे पुत्रे भविष्यति दयावती ॥ 26 ॥

And this my co-rival wife Lilāvatī will always practise enmity with me. She will never shew mercy on my son.

युधाजिति समायाते न मे निःसरणं भवेत् ।

त्राला बालं सुत्तो सोउध कारागगरं नयिध्यति ॥ 27 ॥

When Yudhājit will arrive in this city, I will never be able to go out of it and he will today put my son in the prison on the pretext that he is a minor.

भूयते हि पुरेजेण मातुर्भर्गभतः शिष्यः ।

कृतेतः सप्तध यघात्कालसे सदा सप्तध ॥ 28 ॥

प्रविष्य चोदरं मातु: केरे कृत्वाउप्यकं पविम् ।

एकोनपत्रशापदि तेरे भवम्वमतो दिवि ॥ 29 ॥

I heard that, in days of yore, Indra entered the womb of his pregnant step-mother with a small thunderbolt in his hand and divided the foetus into seven parts with that weapon, again each of these seven into seven parts again, thus the forty nine Maruts were born in the Heavens.

सप्तवै गरलं दर्नं सपल्यानू नृपभार्याय ।

गर्भनग्राध्यमूढ्रिय एनृतेई मया श्रुतम् ॥ 30 ॥

जाततु बालकः पश्राहेहे विषयुतः किल ।

तेनासी सगरो नाम विल्यालो भुविमण्डले ॥ 31 ॥

I heard also that in ancient times one queen gave poison to destroy the foetus in the womb of her rival wife. When the child came out of the womb, he was celebrated by the name of Sagara (with poison) in this earth.

जीवमानो5थ भर्ती वे कैकेय्या नृपभार्यो।

रामः प्राजिति० ज्येषो भूतो उदारथो जृणः ॥ ३२ ॥

The husband was alive, and still his queen Kaikeyi banished the eldest son of his kings, Śri

Rāmcandra to the forest; and the king Daśaratha sacrificed his life for that very reason.

मन्त्रिणसत्ववशा कामं वे मे पुत्रं सुदर्शनम् ।

राजानं कर्कौकामा वै युधाजिहागगाछ ते ॥ 33 ॥

The ministers no doubt wanted before to install my son as the king; but now they are not independent; they have now yielded themselves to king Yudhājit.

न मे भाता तवा गुरो यो मां बच्यातुमोचेत् ।

महल्कटं च सम्पानं मवा शे दैवयोगतः ॥ 34 ॥

There is no brother of mine powerful enough to release me from my bondage; I see I have fallen into a great difficulty by the combination of unforeseen circumstances.

उद्यभः सर्वेधा कार्यः सिद्धिद्विविज्ञ जायते ।

उपायं पुरस्क्षार्थं करोमध्ये त्वरापित्ति ॥ 35 ॥

Though the success depends on Fate, still one should make an earnest effort. If one does not make any effort, fate also remains asleep. I will therefore soon make out a plan to save my son.

इति सड्धित्य सा बाला विदल्लं चातिमामिन् ।

निरुर्णं सर्वकार्थे विचर्यं मन्ववरोतमम् ॥ ३ ६ ॥

समाकृद्य तमेकांते प्रोवाच बहुदुःखिता ।

गृहीत्वा बालकं हते रन्ती दीनामनस ॥ ३ ७ ॥

मिता मे निहतः संख्ये पुत्रोद्यं बालकसत्ता ।

युधाजिद्वलवाजाजा कि विधेयं वदस्य मे ॥ ३ ८ ॥

O King! Thinking thus, that woman Manoramā called in private the best and very respectable minister Vidalla, v'ho was intelligent and expert in everything, and holding the hands of her son and weeping, said humbly in a depressed spirit "O Minister! My father is slain in the battle field, this my son is a minor, and Yudhājit is a powerful king; consider all these and tell me what 1 should do now?"

तामुबाच विदल्लोउसी नात्र स्थातव्यमेव च ।

गायिष्यो वने कांया बाराणस्या: पुनः किल ॥ 39 ॥

तत्र मे मातुलः श्रीमान्वरतै वलवतरः ।

सुबाहुरिति विद्यात्रो रक्षिता स भयिष्यति ॥ 40 ॥

The venerable minister Vidalla then said to the

Book III Chapter XV

queen Manoramā “It is never advisable for us to stay here. Soon we will go into the forests of Benares. There I have got my powerful uncle Subāhu. He is prosperous and has got a strong army. He will protect us.”

युधाजिश्नौत्कण्ठमनसा नगराइहि: ।

निर्णत्व रथामास्हा गत्नंव नात्र सोश: ॥ 41 ॥

"I will make the pretext that I am become very anxious for the king and therefore I am going out to see King Yudhājit and will go out of the city in my chariot. There is no doubt in this."

इल्पुता तेन सा रात्री गत्वा लीलावर्ती प्रति ।

उवाच चितरं ग्रहुं गछळम्यड सुलेचेच ॥ 42 ॥

इल्पुकला रथामहा सैरधीसंयुता तत ।

विद्वल्लेन च संयुक्ता नि:सुता नगराड़िः ॥ 43 ॥

Hearing, thus, the Vidalla's words, queen Manoramā went to Lālāvatī and said "O faireyed! Today I am going to see the father Yudhājit." Thus saying, she went out of the city in a chariot accompanied by her son, attendants and Vidalla.

सता हातार्तिलिकृणाय पितुः शोकसमाकृता ।

इदया युधाजितं भृपं पितरं गतजीवितम् ॥ 44 ॥

संस्कार्य च त्वयगुक्ता वेयमाना भयाकृता ।

दिवद्वेन संप्रापता राजी भागीरथीतदम् ॥ 45 ॥

Grieved at the loss of her father, fearful, distressed, and helpful fatigued, Manoramā saw Yudhājit and performed the cremation of her father Virasena; and, trembling with fear, got to the banks of the Ganges after two days' swift journey.

निवाटैर्पीष्टिता तत्र गृहीतं सकलं वसु ।

रथं चापि गृटीचला ते निरिता दस्यः शका: ॥ 4 6 ॥

रुदती सुतमादाय चाकवस्ता मनोराम ।

निर्वयी जाड्जीतीरे सैर्यीकरणविता ॥ 47 ॥

आरहा च भवाखीधगुबं सा भयाकृता ।

तीर्वां भागीर्याँ पुणवां यवी प्रिकटपर्वतम् ॥ 48 ॥

There the robbers, the Nişādas plundered all their riches and took the chariot and went away. Manoramā had only her clothings, that she wore, left to her. She began to weep, and, holding the hands of her attendant, went to the Ganges shore,

and being afraid crossed the river on a raft and went to the Citrakūta mountain.

भारह्वाजामं प्राप्ता त्वरया च भयाकृता ।

संवीक्ष्य तापसंसात्र संज्ञात निर्भयत तदा ॥ 49 ॥

That terrified Devi went to the hermitage of Bhāradvāja as early as possible. There she saw the ascetics and was relieved of her fear.

भुनीना सा ततः पृष्ठा काउसि कस्य परिग्रहः ।

कहैनात्र कर्थ प्राता सर्वे बृहि शुचित्मिते ॥ 50 ॥

Bhāradvāja asked, “O lotus-eyed! Who are you and whose wife are you? Why have you taken so much trouble to come here? Answer all these truly. देयी वा मानुषी वाउसि बालपुत्रा वने कर्ण ।

राज्यधेह वामोक भासि त्वं कमतेक्षेण ॥ 51 ॥

“O beautiful one! are you a Devi or a human being? your son is a very minor. Why have you come in this dense forest? It seems, as if you are deprived of your kingdom.”

एवं सा मुनिना घुहा नोवाच वरवर्धिनी ।

रुदती दुःखसंतना विदल्लं च समादिशत् ॥ 52 ॥

Thus asked by the best of the Munis, the beautiful Manoramā became very much afflicted with grief and began to weep; she could not speak anything herself and ordered Vidalla to inform the Muni all what had happened.

विद्वल्तस्तमुवाचें धूवसिंधन्योभतः ।

तस्य भावां धर्मपती नामा चेयं मनोरमा ॥ 53 ॥

सिंहेन नित्तौ राजा सुर्य्वंशी महावलः ।

पुत्रोर्धं नृवतेस्तस्य नान्मा चैव सुर्शनिः ॥ 54 ॥

Vidalla then said: Therefore was a king of Kosala, named Dhruvasandhi. She is the legal wife of that king. Her name is Manoramā. That powerful king of the Solar Dynasty was killed by a lion in a forest. This boy Sudarśana is his son.

अस्या पितास्तिध्याना दौहिजार्यं मृती रणे ।

युधार्जिद्वासार्जसरा संप्राणा विजने वने ॥ 55 ॥

The father of this Manoramā was very religious. He died fighting for the cause of his daughter's son. Now the present queen has become much afraid and has therefore come to this wild forest.

ल्यामेव शरणं प्राप्ता वालपुत्रा नृपात्मज्ञा ।

त्राता भव महाभाग त्वमस्या मुनिस्तम्म ।। ५६ ॥

The son of this woman is now a minor; he is now taking your refuge. O best of the Munis! Protect them.

आर्तैस्य स्थणे पुर्णयं यज्ञाधिकमुदाहतम् ।

भवततस्य दीनस्य विशेषफलतं स्मृत्तम् ॥ ५७ ॥

To give protection to any distressed person is to acquire merits higher than performing a sacrifice. Therefore to protect one who is very much afflicted with fear and who is helpless will have still higher merits.

ऋषिर्वाच

निर्भया वस कल्याणि पुरं पालय सुझते ।

न ते घयं विशालास्त्रि कर्तेयं शत्रुसम्भवम् ॥ ५८ ॥

Bhāradvāja said: “O beautiful one! Remain in this hermitage without any fear; rear up your son here. O auspicious one! There is no cause of fear here from your enemies.

पालयस्व सुर्त कान्तं राजा तेयं भविष्यति ।

नात्र दुःखं तथा शोक: कदाचित्मभविष्यति ॥ ५९ ॥

Better nourish and support your child. Your son

will surely be a king and if you remain in this hermitage, no sorrow or grief will overtake you.

व्यास उवाच

इक्युक्ता मुनिना रात्री सर्वथा सा समवभूव ह ।

उदरे मुनिना दसे वीतिशोका तदार्यसत् ॥ 60 ॥

Vyāsa said: When the great Muni Bhāradvāja said thus, the queen Manoramā became peaceful. The Muni gave them a cottage to live in and there they dwelt without any sorrow.

सैरधीसहिता तन विद्वलेन च संयुता ।

सुर्दर्नां पालयाना न्यवससा मनोराम ॥ 61 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयकन्धे

पडवरोअधाव: ॥ 62 ॥

Thus Manoramā dwelt obediently with her maid servant, liked by all. Vedalla also remained there and Manoramā began to nourish her child.

Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter on the Devi

Māhātmya and the battle between Yudhājit

and Virasena and the going away of

Manoramā to the forest in the Thrid

Book of Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

