[Ch 4 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: “On the king Pratipa, ascending to the Heavens, the tru!y hero-king Śantanu went out hunting tigers and other forest animals.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- On the king Pratīpa, ascending to the Heavens, the truly hero-king Śantanu went out a hunting tigers and other forest animals.

[Ch 4 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once, while he was roaming in the wilderness, on the banks of the Ganges, he saw a fawn-eyed well decorated beautiful woman.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once, while he was roaming in a wild wilderness, on the banks of the Ganges, he saw a fawn-eyed well decorated beautiful woman.

[Ch 4 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No sooner the king Śantanu saw him than he became addicted to her and thought within himself thus: “Certainly my father spoke of this beautiful faced woman who is looking a second Lakṣmī, endowed with beauty and youth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► No sooner the king Śantanu saw her than he became addicted to her and thought within himself thus :-- “Certainly my father spoke of this beautiful faced woman who is looking like a second Lakṣmī, endowed with beauty and youth.”

[Ch 4 Verse 4-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king could not rest satisfied simply with seeing the lotus-like face. The hair on his body stood on their ends and his heart was very much attracted to her. Gaṅgā Devī, too, knew him to be king Mahābhiṣa and became, in her turn, very much attached to him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king could not rest satisfied simply with seeing the lotus-like face. The hairs on his body stood on their ends and his heart was very much attracted to her. Gaṅgā Devī, too, knew him to be the king Mahābhisa and became, in her turn, very much attached to him.

[Ch 4 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She then went smiling towards the king. Seeing the blue-coloured lady looking askance at him. The king became very happy and consoled her in sweet words and said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► She then went smiling towards the king. Seeing the blue-coloured lady looking askance at him, the king became very happy and consoled her in sweet words and said :--

[Ch 4 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O one of beautiful things! Are you Devi, Manuṣi (human kind) Gandharvi; Yakṣi, daughter of Nāgas (serpents), or a celestial nymph?
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “O, one of beautiful thighs! Are you Devī; Mānusī (human kind) Gandharvī; Yakshī, the daughter of Nāgas (serpents), or a celestial nymph?

[Ch 4 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whoever you may be, O beautiful one! be my wife; your smiles, it seems, are brimful of love; so be my legal wife today.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whoever you may be, O beautiful one! be my wife; your sweet smiles, it seems, are brimful of love; so be my legal wife to-day.”

[Ch 4 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: “The king Śantanu could not recognise the lady to be Gaṅgā; but Gaṅgā knew that he is the king Mahābhiṣa and is born as Śantanu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- The king Śantanu could not recognise the lady to be Gaṅgā; but Gaṅgā knew that he is the king Mahābhisa and is born as Śantanu.

[Ch 4 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing the above words of the king, Gaṅgā, out of her previous affections, spoke out to the king, smiling :
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing the above words of the king, Gaṅgā, out of her previous affections, spoke out to the king, smiling :--

[Ch 4 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O king! I know that you are the son of the king Pratipa. Behold! Though it is inevitable that woman will get thier husbands, yet who is that beautiful lady that does not husband according to her liking and qualifications?
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O king! I know that you are the son of the king Pratīpa. Behold! Though it is inevitable that woman will get their husbands, yet who is that beautiful lady that does not husband according to her liking and qualifications?

[Ch 4 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But I can take you as my husband, if you make certain promise to me. Hear my resolve: afterwards I will marry you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But I can take you as my husband, if you make a certain promise to me. Hear my resolve afterwards I will marry you.

[Ch 4 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Whatever I will do, be it good or bad, auspicious or inauspicious, you must not hinder or interrupt me nor ever say that it is not to your liking and satisfaction.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Whatever I will do, be it good or bad, auspicious or inauspicious, you must not hinder or interrupt me nor ever say that is not to your liking and satisfaction.

[Ch 4 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whenever you will break this my resolve, I will instantly quit you and go to another place wherever I like."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whenever you will break this my resolve, I will instantly quit you and go to another place wherever I like.

[Ch 4 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► King Śantanu, then, said: "Well! That will be" and promised to the above effect; then Gangaś Devi recollected within herself Vasus' words and thought of the attachment of the king Mahābhiṣa and accepted Śantanu as her husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► king Śantanu, then, said :-- “Well! That will be” and promised to the above effect; then Gaṅgā Devī recollected within herself Vasuś words and thought of the attachment of the king Mahābhisa and accepted Śantanu as her husband.

[Ch 4 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus married to king Śantanu, the beautiful Gaṅgā in human form went to his abode. The king, on having got possession of her, began to enjoy in pleasant gardens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus married to the king Śantanu, the beautiful Gaṅgā in human form went to his abode. The king, on having got possession of her, began to enjoy in pleasant gardens.

[Ch 4 Verse 18-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The lady, too, appreciated his mental feelings and began to serve him to his satisfaction. Thus many years elapsed in lovely enjoyments and intercourses between couple who looked like Indra and his pair Saci; and they did not feel at all how the time passed. The lady endowed with all qualities and the clever king, well-versed in the art of loving, began to enjoy incessantly like Lakṣmī and Nārāyaṇa, in their divine palace. Thus many years passed when the lovely eyed lady became pregnant of the king Śāntanu's sperm and, in due time, gave birth to a son who was a Vasu. No sooner the son was born than Gaṅgā Devī threw it in the waters of the Ganges. Thus the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh sons were thrown successively into the waters.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The lady, too, appreciated his mental feelings and began to serve him to his satisfaction. Thus many years elapsed in lovely enjoyments and intercourses between the couple who looked like Indra and his pair Sacī; and they did not feel at all how the time passed. The lady endowed with all qualities and the clever king, well-versed in the art of loving, began to enjoy incessantly like Laksmī and Nārāyana, in their divine palace. Thus many years passed when the lovely eyed lady became pregnant of the king Śantanu’s sperm and, in due time, gave birth to a son who was a Vasu. No sooner the son was born than Gaṅgā Devī threw it in the waters of the Ganges. Thus the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh sons were threwn successively on the waters.

[Ch 4 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the king became very anxious and thought within himself: "What am I to do now? How my family be preserved?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the king became very anxious and thought within himself :-- “What am I to do now? How my family be preserved?

[Ch 4 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This my wife, incarnate of sin, has killed my seven sons; if I now desist her, she will instantly leave me and go away. Now this is the eighth pregnancy as desired by me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This my wife, incarnate of sin, has killed my seven sons; if I now desist her, she will instantly leave me and go away. Now this is the eighth pregnancy as desired by me.

[Ch 4 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now if I do not interrupt her, she will certainly throw my son in the Ganges. Whether a son will be born again or not is doubtful; and even if that be born, it is doubtful whether she will preserve that child; now what am I to do in this doubtful point? However I will try my best to continue the thread of my family line.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now if I do not interrupt her, she will certainly throw my son in the Ganges. Whether a son will be born again or not is doubtful; and even if that be born, it is doubtful whether she will preserve that child; now what am I to do in this doubtful point? However I will try my best to continue the thread of my family line.”

[Ch 4 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now, in due time, the Vasu who, having been influenced by his wife had stolen Vasistha's cow Nandinī, became born as the eighth son of Gaṅgā Devi; king Śantanu, seeing son fell unto Gaṅga's feet and said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now, in due time, the Vasu who, having been influenced by his wife had stolen Vaśistha’s cow Nandini, became born as the eighth son of Gaṅgā Devī; the king Śantanu, seeing this son fell unto Gaṅgā’s feet and said :--

[Ch 4 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O thin-bodied woman! I pray to you to give my life today; better nourish this my one son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O thin-bodied woman! I pray to you to give my life to-day; better nourish this my one son.

[Ch 4 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O beautiful one! You killed in succession my seven exceedingly beautiful sons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O beautiful one! You killed in succession my seven exceedingly beautiful sons.

[Ch 4 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O one of beautiful hips! I now fall at your feet. O beautiful one! save the life of this child of mine. If you ask from me any other thing today, even that be very rare, I will give it to you; but you better now keep the thread of my family line.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O one of beautiful hips! I now fall at your feet. O beautiful one! save the life of this child of mine. If you ask from me any other thing to day, even that be very rare, I will give it to you; but you better now keep the thread of my family line.

[Ch 4 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Pundits, versed in the Vedas, say that he who has no issues cannot go to Heaven; so, O beautiful one! Today I pray to you to keep the life of this my eighth son."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Pundits, versed in the Vedas, say that he who has no issues cannot go to Heaven; so, O Beautiful one! To-day I pray to you to keep the life of this my eighth son.”

[Ch 4 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Though thus spoken by Śantanu, Gaṅgā Devi was eager to take away the son to throw in the waters; the king became very sorrowful and angrily spoke out “O vile and vicious woman! What are you going to do?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Though thus spoken by Śantanu, Gaṅgā Devī was eager to take away the son to throw in the waters; the king became very sorrowful and angrily spoke out “O vile and vicious woman! What are you going to do?

[Ch 4 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Do you not fear hell! of what villain are you the daughter, that you are always doing this vicious deed? O Sinner! go away wherever you will or remain here as you like, it matters little; but my son will remain here.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Do you not fear hell! of what villain are you the daughter, that you are always doing this vicious deed? O Sinner! go away wherever you will or remain here as yon like, it matters little; but my son will remain here.

[Ch 4 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When you attempt to bring my family to extinction, what use is there in living with you?" When the king thus spoke to the woman who was ready to take away the son, she angrily spoke as follows:
NEW CORR ENG ──► When you attempt to bring my family to extinction, what use is there in living with you?” When the king thus spoke to the woman who was ready to take away the son she angrily spoke as follows :--

[Ch 4 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O King! When you have acted against my promise, my word is broken and my connection with you has stopped from today.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! When you have acted against my promise, my word is broken and my connection with you has stopped from to-day.

[Ch 4 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, I will take this son to the forest, where I will nourish him. I am Gāngā; to fulfil God's work I have come here. The high-souled Vasistha cursed before the eight Vasus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore I will take this son to the forest, where I will nourish him. I am Gaṅgā; to fulfil God’s work I have come here. The high-souled Vaśiṣṭha cursed before the eight Vasus :--

[Ch 4 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “Better be born as men”: they became very anxious; and seeing me they prayed: “O Sinless one! let you be mother of us all.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “Better be born as men”; they became very anxious; and seeing me they prayed :-- “O Sinless one! let you be mother of us all.”

[Ch 4 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O best of kings! I granted them what they desired! and then for the purpose of serving god's ends, I became your wife. Know this my history.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O best of kings! I granted them what they desired; and then for the purpose of serving god’s ends, I became your wife. Know this my history.

[Ch 4 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The seven Vasus already were born and were freed; now this is the last Vasu and he will remain here for sometime as your son."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The seven Vasus already were born and were freed; now this is the last Vasu and he will remain here for sometime as your son.

[Ch 4 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Śantanu! now take this son offered by Gāngā. Know this to be the Deva Vasu and enjoy the pleasure of having a son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Śantanu! now take this son offered by Gaṅgā. Know this to be the Deva Vasu and enjoy the pleasure of having a son.

[Ch 4 Verse 43-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Ohighly fortunate one! This son will be famous by the name of Gāngcya (Gānga's son) and will be the most powerful of all. O King! Today I will take this son to the place where I chose you as my husband; I will nourish him and when he attains his youth, I will return him to you. For, this son, if deprived of mother, will not be happy; nor will he live."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O highly fortunate one! This son will be famous by the name of Gāṅgeya (Gaṅgā’s son) and will be the most powerful of all. O King! To-day I will take this son to the place where I chose you as my husband; I will nourish him and when he attains his youth, I will return him to you. For, this son, if deprived of mother, will not be happy nor will he live.”

[Ch 4 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, Ganga's vanished with the son; king Śantanu became very sorrowful and passed away his time in his palace.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, Gaṅgā vanished with the son; the King Śantanu became very sorrowful and passed away his time in his palace.

[Ch 4 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king thought always of the separation from his wife and son and thus painfully governed his kingdom.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king thought always of the separation from his wife and son and thus painfully governed his kingdom.

[Ch 4 Verse 47-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus some time passed on, when, once on an occasion, king Śantanu went out a hunting and killed, with arrows, buffaloes, boar, and other wild animals and came to the banks of the Ganges.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus some time passed on, when, once on an occasion, the king Śantanu went out a hunting and killed, with arrows, buffaloes, boar, and other wild animals and came to the banks of the Ganges.

[Ch 4 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Here he saw with great wonder that a boy was playing with a great bow and was shooting arrows after arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Here he saw with great wonder that a boy was playing with a great bow and was shooting arrows after arrows.

[Ch 4 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king's attention was attracted towards the boy, but whether that was his or not, did not at all come to his mind.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king’s attention was more attracted towards the boy, but whether that boy was his or not, did not at all come to his mind.

[Ch 4 Verse 51-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Looking at his extraordinary feats, his agility in shooting arrows with ease and quickness his learning that can have no equal and his beautiful form, as if of Cupid, he became greatly surprised and asked him: "O Sinless one! whose son are you? The hero boy did not reply anything but went away shooting his arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Looking at his extraordinary feats, his agility in shooting arrows with ease and quickness, his learning that can have no equal and his beautiful form, as if of Cupid, he became greatly surprised and asked him :-- “O Sinless one! whose son are you?” The hero boy did not reply anything but went away shooting his arrows.

[Ch 4 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king thought within himself “Who is this boy? Whose son is he? What to do now? To whom shall I go now?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king thought within himself “Who is this boy? Whose son is he? What to do now? To whom shall I go now?”

[Ch 4 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus pondering, he recollected within himself and began to recite verses in praise of Gāngā; Gaṅgā, assuming her beautiful form as before, became visible to the king.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus pondering, he recollected within himself and began to recite verses in praise of Gaṅgā; Gaṅgā, assuming her beautiful form as before, became visible to the king.

[Ch 4 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing her, the king said: O Gaṅgā! Who is this boy that has just gone? Will you show him once more to me now?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing her, the king said :-- “O Gaṅgā! Who is this boy that has just gone? Will you show him once more to me now?”

[Ch 4 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Śantanu, Gaṅgā said: "O king of kings! He is your son, he is that eighth Vasu. So long I have nourished him and now I hand him over to you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Śantanu, Gaṅgā said :-- “O king of kings! He is your son, he is that eighth Vasu. So long I have nourished him and now I hand him over to you.

[Ch 4 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Suvrata! This is the great ascetic Gāgneya. He is the illustrious scion of your family. The glory of your line will be enhanced. I have taught him the whole science of archery.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Suvrata! This is the great ascetic Gāṅgeya. He is the illustrious scion of your family. The glory of your line will be enhanced. I have taught him the whole science of archery.

[Ch 4 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This pure son of your dwelt in the hermitage of Vasistha and has become versed in all the Vidyās and skilled in all the actions.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This pure son of yours dwelt in the hermitage of Vaśiṣṭha and has become versed in all the Vidyās and skilled in

[Ch 4 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Your this son knows everything that Jamadgni Paraśurāma knew. So, O King of Kings! Take now your son and be happy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Your this son knows everything that Jamadgni Paraśurām knew. So, O king of kings! Take now your son and be happy.

[Ch 4 Verse 60-61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, Gaṅgā gave him his son and vanished; the King also became very glad and embraced his son; he smelled his head and took him to his chariot and drove towards his own city.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, Gaṅgā gave him his son and vanished; the king also became very glad and embraced his son; he smelled his head and took him to his chariot and drove towards his own city.

[Ch 4 Verse 62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On returning to Hastināpur, the king held a great festival (utşab) in honour of the arrival of his son; he called all his astrologers and enquired what day was auspicious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On returning to Hastināpur, the king held a great festival (utsab) in honor of the arrival of his son; he called all his astrologers and enquired what day was auspicious.

[Ch 4 Verse 63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He then called all his subjects and ministers, did installed Gāngeya as the Crown Prince.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He then called all his subjects and ministers and installed Gāṅgeya as the Crown Prince.

[Ch 4 Verse 64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The religious Śantanu became very happy on making Gāngeya, the Crown Prince; he forgot the pains due to Gānga's bereavement.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The religious Śantanu became very happy on making Gāṅgeya, the Crown Prince; he forgot the pains due to Gaṅgā’s bereavement.

[Ch 4 Verse 65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: “Thus I have described to you the cause of the curse on Vasus, the birth of Bhisma from the womb of Gaṅgā, the union of Gaṅgā and Śantanu, etc.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- “Thus I have described to you the cause of the curse on Vasus, the birth of Bhīsma from the womb of Gaṅgā, the union of Gaṅgā and Śantanu, etc.,

[Ch 4 Verse 66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He who hears in this world this holy story of Gaṅgā's birth and the birth of the Vasu, is freed of all sins and gets mukti.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He who hears in this world this holy story of Gaṅgā’s birth and the birth of the Vasu, is freed of all sins and gets mukti.

[Ch 4 Verse 67]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Munis! I have described these meritorious holy accounts, as I heard from the mouth of Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Munis! I have described these meritorious holy accounts, as I heard from the mouth of Vyāsa.

[Ch 4 Verse 68-69]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Any body who hears this holy Śrimad Bhāgavatam, endowed with five characteristics and filled with various anecdotes, that came out of the mouth of Vyāsa, finds all his sins destroyed and attains peace and blessedness. O, Munis! Thus has been described completely to you this holy history. Thus ends the Fourth Chapter on the birth of the Vasus in the Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Any body who hears this holy Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, endowed with five characteristics and filled with various anecdotes, that came out of the mouth of Vyāsa, finds all his sins destroyed and attains peace and blessedness. O Munis! Thus has been described completely to you this holy history. Thus ends the fourth Chapter on the birth of the Vasus in the Mahāpurāna Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.
