CHAPTER IV

On the Birth of the Vasus

सूत उवाच

प्रतीपे5व दिवं याते शननु: सत्यविक्रमः ।

बधूव मृगयाशीलि निशन्यायाम्नुगाथः ॥ 1 ॥

Sūta said: “On the king Pratipa, ascending to the Heavens, the tru!y hero-king Śantanu went out hunting tigers and other forest animals.

स कदाचिद्धने घोरे गुजातीरे चरयुपः ।

दर्शं मृगशावक्षीं सुद्वीं चाकभूषणाम् ॥ 2 ॥

Once, while he was roaming in the wilderness, on the banks of the Ganges, he saw a fawn-eyed well decorated beautiful woman.

दूरहा तां गृपतिमंन: प्रिक्रोकैयं वरानना ।

रूपयौवनस्पम्पता साक्षालल्बभीरिवारपा ॥ 3 ॥

No sooner the king Śantanu saw him than he became addicted to her and thought within himself thus: “Certainly my father spoke of this beautiful faced woman who is looking a second Lakṣmī, endowed with beauty and youth.

पिवन्मुखांबुजं तस्या न नृतिमगमान्पः ।

इहरोभाबवरात्र व्यापचिति झवानय ॥ 4 ॥

महाधिपं साउभि मत्वा प्रेमयुक्ता बधूव ह ।

किंब्धिन-द्वित्यितं कृत्वा तस्यावयो नृपस्य च ॥ 5 ॥

The king could not rest satisfied simply with seeing the lotus-like face. The hair on his body stood on their ends and his heart was very much attracted to her. Gaṅgā Devī, too, knew him to be king Mahābhiṣa and became, in her turn, very much attached to him.

वीक्ष्य तामसितापाङ्गी राजा प्रीतमना भृणम् ।

उवाच मरुंर वाक्यं सांत्ययजलक्षया गिरा ॥ 6 ॥

She then went smiling towards the king. Seeing the blue-coloured lady looking askance at him. The king became very happy and consoled her in sweet words and said:

देही वा तां च बामोक मानुषी वा वरानने ।

गन्यवीं वाथ यक्षी वा नागकन्यप्रसगीव वा ॥ 7 ॥

“O one of beautiful things! Are you Devi, Manuṣi (human kind) Gandharvi; Yakṣi, daughter of Nāgas (serpents), or a celestial nymph?

थासि काउसि वरारोहे भावों मे भव सु-वृत्ति ।

प्रेमयुक्तिसेते त्वं धर्मपत्नी भवाएं मे ॥ 8 ॥

Whoever you may be, O beautiful one! be my wife; your smiles, it seems, are brimful of love; so be my legal wife today.

सूत उवाच

राजा तां नाभिज्ञानाति गड़ैयमिति निश्छिनम् ।

महाधियं समुतयं नृयं ज्ञानाति जाइबी ॥ 9 ॥

Sūta said: “The king Śantanu could not recognise the lady to be Gaṅgā; but Gaṅgā knew that he is the king Mahābhiṣa and is born as Śantanu.

पूर्वीप्रमसामोगाछ्छूला वाचं नृपस्य ताम ।

उवाच नारी राजानें सिमपूर्विंदिं वचः ॥ 10 ॥

Hearing the above words of the king, Gaṅgā, out of her previous affections, spoke out to the king, smiling :

स्व्यवाच

ज्ञानाति त्वां नृपश्रेष्ठ प्रतिपतानयं शुभम् ।

का न वार्ज्डति चार्वीर्ग भाविलास्तर्पुं पतिम् ॥ १ १ ॥

“O king! I know that you are the son of the king Pratipa. Behold! Though it is inevitable that woman will get thier husbands, yet who is that beautiful lady that does not husband according to her liking and qualifications?

वावक्योन नृपश्रेष्ठ कार्थिय पति किल ।

शृणु मे समयं राजन्नृणोगि त्वां नृपोतम ॥ 12 ॥

But I can take you as my husband, if you make certain promise to me. Hear my resolve: afterwards I will marry you.

यच्च कुर्यार्महं कार्यं शुर्णं च यदि वारजुषम् ।

न निषेध्या त्वया राजत्र चत्क्यं त्वाप्रियम् ॥ 13 ॥

O king! Whatever I will do, be it good or bad, auspicious or inauspicious, you must not hinder or interrupt me nor ever say that it is not to your liking and satisfaction.

यदा च त्वं नृपश्रेष्ठ न कत्थ्यासि मे वक्षः ।

तदा मुक्ल्चा गमिष्यामि येर्देशुंचे च मारिये ॥ 14 ॥

Whenever you will break this my resolve, I will instantly quit you and go to another place wherever I like."

सूला जन्म वसूनां सा प्रार्थनापूर्वकं कृदि ।

महाधिषय्य प्रेमाय विवर्धेर्व च जाहडी ॥ 15 ॥

तथेत्युक्ताउव सा देवी चकातर नृपति पतिन् ।

King Śantanu, then, said: "Well! That will be" and promised to the above effect; then Gangaś Devi recollected within herself Vasus' words and thought of the attachment of the king Mahābhiṣa and accepted Śantanu as her husband.

एवं वृता नृनूपाय कृत्री मानुषुक्तिपणी ॥ 16 ॥

नृपरित्य मन्दिरे प्राप्ता सुभगा वरवर्गिनी ।

नृपस्तितरां समासाश चिन्जीडोपवने शुभे ॥ 17 ॥

Thus married to king Śantanu, the beautiful Gaṅgā in human form went to his abode. The king, on having got possession of her, began to enjoy in pleasant gardens.

सार्थि ते रमयामास भावज्ञा वै सारुक्तना ।

न बुबोधि नृपः क्रीड-नात्न. वर्षगणानण १। १८ ॥

स तवा मृगलावाश्या रणचा रगतकतुर्वो।

सा सर्वगुणस्म्यज्ञा सेठीपि कामविचक्षणः ॥ १९ ॥

रेमाते मन्टरे दिव्ये न्यानारायणायिव ।

एवं गच्छिति काले सा द्वारा नुपलेतद्धा ॥ 20 ॥

गर्भ गड़ा वसुं पुरं सुपुवे चाक्लोचना ।

जानमात्रं सुतं वारि चिक्षेर्वेबं द्वितीयके द्वितीयके ॥ 21 ॥

तृतीयेद्व चतुर्धैद्व पझने पछ एच च ।

सपने या हते पुत्रे राजा चिंतापरो5पवत् ॥ 22 ॥

The lady, too, appreciated his mental feelings and began to serve him to his satisfaction. Thus many years elapsed in lovely enjoyments and intercourses between couple who looked like Indra and his pair Saci; and they did not feel at all how the time passed. The lady endowed with all qualities and the clever king, well-versed in the art of loving, began to enjoy incessantly like Lakṣmī and Nārāyaṇa, in their divine palace. Thus many years passed when the lovely eyed lady became pregnant of the king Śāntanu's sperm and, in due time, gave birth to a son who was a Vasu. No sooner the son was born than Gaṅgā Devī threw it in the waters of the Ganges. Thus the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh sons were thrown successively into the waters.

कि कौरोमध्यं वरीगे मे कधं सत्यतृष्यितो भृति ।

सत पुत्रा हता तूनमनवा पापकपया ॥ 23 ॥

Then the king became very anxious and thought within himself: "What am I to do now? How my family be preserved?

निवारापयि यदीमां चल्कता यास्यति सर्वथा ।

अत्यदोप्रं सुसूप्राप्तो गर्भों में मनसीलितिः ॥ 24 ॥

This my wife, incarnate of sin, has killed my seven sons; if I now desist her, she will instantly

leave me and go away. Now this is the eighth pregnancy as desired by me.

न वारयाम चेच्छा सर्वेथें जले श्रिपेत् ।

भविता वा न वा चाडो संग्योर्धे मभाबूतः ॥ 25 ॥

सम्भवेर्षि च दुह्यें रक्ष्येहा न रक्ष्येत् ।

एवं संग्यिते कार्य किं कर्तव्य मयाउघ्ना ॥ 26 ॥

वंशस्य रक्षणार्थ हिं यनः कार्यः परे मया ।

Now if I do not interrupt her, she will certainly throw my son in the Ganges. Whether a son will be born again or not is doubtful; and even if that be born, it is doubtful whether she will preserve that child; now what am I to do in this doubtful point? However I will try my best to continue the thread of my family line.


ततः काले यदा जातः पुत्रोउपमहाय वसुः ॥ 27 ॥

मुनेयैन् हता धेनुर्निदनी क्षीकितेन है ।

तं दृष्टवा नुपाति: पुत्रं तानुपावच पतनये ॥ 28 ॥

Now, in due time, the Vasu who, having been influenced by his wife had stolen Vasistha's cow Nandinī, became born as the eighth son of Gaṅgā Devi; king Śantanu, seeing son fell unto Gaṅga's feet and said:

दासोस्मि तव तन्विक्र प्रार्थयामि शुचिधिमते ।

पुत्रमेकं पुषायनें देहि जीवितमाद्ध मे ॥ 29 ॥

“O thin-bodied woman! I pray to you to give my life today; better nourish this my one son.

हिंसिता सन पुत्रा मे करोफ़्त रव्या शुणाः ।

अर्ध्य रक्ष सुश्रीण पतायि तक पाद्वो: ॥ 30 ॥

O beautiful one! You killed in succession my seven exceedingly beautiful sons.

अन्यहै प्रार्थित तेउरा द्वताय्य च दुर्लंमम् ।

बंगो मे रक्षणीयोउछा त्वया परमगोधने ॥ 31 ॥

O one of beautiful hips! I now fall at your feet. O beautiful one! save the life of this child of mine. If you ask from me any other thing today, even that be very rare, I will give it to you; but you better now keep the thread of my family line.

अपुत्रस्य गतिन्तरित स्वर्गे वैद्विवदो विवुः ।

तस्माद्व वराग्रेे प्रायंयान्यद्यं सुतम् ॥ 32 ॥

The Pundits, versed in the Vedas, say that he who has no issues cannot go to Heaven; so, O beautiful one! Today I pray to you to keep the life of this my eighth son."

इत्युक्तापि गृहीत्वा तं दया गन्तुं सम्युक्ता ।

तदा स कुपितो राजा तामुवाराशितू:खितः ॥ 33 ॥

पाणिषेத் किं करोमध्य निर्वाश विभेषे किम् ।

क्रांति यायकरणां त्वं पुरी यायरता सदा ॥ 34 ॥

Though thus spoken by Śantanu, Gaṅgā Devi was eager to take away the son to throw in the waters; the king became very sorrowful and angrily spoke out “O vile and vicious woman! What are you going to do?

यथेच्छं पच्छ हा तिष्ठ पुरो मे स्थीयातिषु ।

कि कौरीय तथा पाये वेशान्तकरायनग्न ॥ 35 ॥

Do you not fear hell! of what villain are you the daughter, that you are always doing this vicious deed? O Sinner! go away wherever you will or remain here as you like, it matters little; but my son will remain here.

एवं वदति घृपाले सा गृहीला सुर्त शिशुम् ।

गछ्छनीं वचनं कोपसंयुता तुमावाच है ॥ 36 ॥

When you attempt to bring my family to extinction, what use is there in living with you?" When the king thus spoke to the woman who was ready to take away the son, she angrily spoke as follows:

पुत्रकामा सुतं त्वेनं पालयामि वने गता ।

समयो मे पनीत्यामि चवनं हान्ययाकुतम् ॥ 37 ॥

“O King! When you have acted against my promise, my word is broken and my connection with you has stopped from today.

गड़ांगं मैं वैवजानीहि देवकायार्वीयमाताम् ।

वसवस्तु युरा शगता वसिष्ठेन महात्मना ॥ 38 ॥

Therefore, I will take this son to the forest, where I will nourish him. I am Gāngā; to fulfil God's work I have come here. The high-souled Vasistha cursed before the eight Vasus:

ज्वर्तु मानुषी योनिं स्थितां चित्तातुरासु माम ।

दूर्ध्वेदे प्रार्थयामासुर्जन्ती नो भवान्चे ॥ ३ ९ ॥

“Better be born as men”: they became very anxious; and seeing me they prayed: “O Sinless one! let you be mother of us all.”

तेभ्यो दत्ता वर्ग जाता पर्नीं ते नृपसत्तम ।

देवकाव्यार्थिविर्सिद्धार्थ जानीहि संभवो मम ॥ ४० ॥

O best of kings! I granted them what they desired! and then for the purpose of serving god's ends, I became your wife. Know this my history.

सप्त ते वसवः पुत्रा मुक्तः शापावृषेसु ते ।

क्रियन्तं कालमेकोउंच तव पुत्रो घोविष्यति ॥ 4 1 ॥

The seven Vasus already were born and were freed; now this is the last Vasu and he will remain here for sometime as your son."

गड़ादतमियां पूरं गृहाणं शन्नतो स्वयम् ।

वसुं देते विदित्वेने सुखं भूक्ष सुतोड़वम् ॥ 42 ॥

O Śantanu! now take this son offered by Gāngā. Know this to be the Deva Vasu and enjoy the pleasure of having a son.

गोगोधोयं महाभाग घबिव्यित्र बतायकः ।

अष्ठ तत नयामेयं यत्र त्वं वे मया वृतः ॥ 43 ॥

दास्यामि योवनं प्रानं पानवित्यात महीपते ।

न मातृहितः पुत्रे जीवेत्र च सुखी भवेत् ॥ 44 ॥

Ohighly fortunate one! This son will be famous by the name of Gāngcya (Gānga's son) and will be the most powerful of all. O King! Today I will take this son to the place where I chose you as my husband; I will nourish him and when he attains his youth, I will return him to you. For, this son, if deprived of mother, will not be happy; nor will he live."

इतुक्कनातदीय गुक्ता तं गृहीत्वा च बालकम् ।

राजा चातीव दु:खातं: संविध्यो निजमन्दिरे ॥ 45 ॥

Thus saying, Ganga's vanished with the son; king Śantanu became very sorrowful and passed away his time in his palace.

भार्थिरिकृतं दुःखं तथा पुत्रस्य चाढुतम् ।

सर्वदा चिन्तयत्रासते राज्यं कुर्वेमहीपति: ॥ 46 ॥

The king thought always of the separation from his wife and son and thus painfully governed his kingdom.

एवं गछति कालेश्व नुपतिभुगयां गता: ।

निधन्मनगगणान्वाणीमहिषान्मूकरानपि Ⅱ 47 Ⅱ

गंगातीमनुपाल: स राजा शन्तनुस्तदा ।

नदी सतिकाजलों दृष्टवा विमित्म: स महीपति: ॥ 48 ॥

Thus some time passed on, when, once on an occasion, king Śantanu went out a hunting and killed, with arrows, buffaloes, boar, and other wild animals and came to the banks of the Ganges.

ततापश्यन्तुकार्ते न मुंड्तं विशिषाळ्बहूत ।

आकृष्य च महाचार्य क्रीडन्ते सरितरते ॥ 49 ॥

Here he saw with great wonder that a boy was playing with a great bow and was shooting arrows after arrows.

तं वीक्ष्य विमित्तो राजा न सम ज्ञानाति किऊ्ज्ञान ।

नोतेलेपे स्मृति भूप: पुत्रोदरं मम वा त वा ॥ ५० ॥

The king's attention was attracted towards the boy, but whether that was his or not, did not at all come to his mind.

दृष्टवाद्यमानुर्यं कर्म बाणेषु ल्युहस्तात् ।

विद्यां वास्त्रिमां कर्णं तन्य वै स्मरसिश्मभ ॥ 51 ॥

पण्छ्छ विस्मितो राजा कस्य पुजोर्जस चानय ।

नोवाच किष्ठिक्छीरीउसी मुंचकिष्ठीमुखान्य ॥ 52 ॥

Looking at his extraordinary feats, his agility in shooting arrows with ease and quickness his learning that can have no equal and his beautiful form, as if of Cupid, he became greatly surprised and asked him: "O Sinless one! whose son are you? The hero boy did not reply anything but went away shooting his arrows.

अन्धार्थनंगर: सोडय राजा चिन्तालुतेरोभवत् ।

कोउं यम मुतेो वालः किं करोमि ग्रजामि कम् ॥ 53 ॥

The king thought within himself “Who is this boy? Whose son is he? What to do now? To whom shall I go now?

गड़ो तृत्वा भृपाल स्थितस्तत्र समाहितः ।

दर्शनं सा ददौ चाथ चारूकपा चथा पुरा ॥ 54 ॥

Thus pondering, he recollected within himself and began to recite verses in praise of Gāngā; Gaṅgā, assuming her beautiful form as before, became visible to the king.

दृष्टा तां चास्त्वर्मी वभावे नृपति: स्वयम् ।

कोउयं गड़े नृते वालों मन त्वं दर्शयानुना ॥ 55 ॥

Seeing her, the king said: O Gaṅgā! Who is this boy that has just gone? Will you show him once more to me now?"

गंगोवाच

पुत्रोयं तव गजेत्र रक्षितश्राम्यो वसु ।

ददामि तव हस्ते तु गंगोरोयं महातपः ॥ ५६ ॥

Hearing these words of Śantanu, Gaṅgā said: "O king of kings! He is your son, he is that eighth Vasu. So long I have nourished him and now I hand him over to you.

कौतिकांत कुलस्याय भविता तव सुस्तः ।

पाठितस्वविज्ञालावेदान्यनुवेदं च शाश्त् ॥ 57 ॥

O Suvrata! This is the great ascetic Gāgneya. He is the illustrious scion of your family. The glory of your line will be enhanced. I have taught him the whole science of archery.

वसिष्यायान्ने दिष्ट्य संस्थितोर्भ सुस्तल ।

सर्वविदायाधिनानः सर्वर्विशुक्रणतः सुधि: ॥ 58 ॥

This pure son of your dwelt in the hermitage of Vasistha and has become versed in all the Vidyās and skilled in all the actions.

यद्रे उमादन्योर्भसी तदैदायं सुस्तव ।

गृहाण गच्छ राजैंर सुखी भव नराधिप ॥ 59 ॥

Your this son knows everything that Jamadgni Paraśurāma knew. So, O King of Kings! Take now your son and be happy.

इन्युक्त्वांगतदीय गुजा तत्त्वा गुजा तत्त्वा ने ।

नूपनस्तु मुदा युक्तो बष्वानतिसुखान्तिच : ॥ 60 ॥

समालिथ्य सुते राजा समाधाय च मतकम् ।

समापेय चपुं जस्युं स प्रपक्रमे ॥ 61 ॥

Thus saying, Gaṅgā gave him his son and vanished; the King also became very glad and embraced his son; he smelled his head and took him to his chariot and drove towards his own city.

गत्वा गजाबुढ़ा राजा चकारोत्सवमुतम् ।

दैवर्षे च समाकृय पण्ड्छ च शुर्णं दिनम् ॥ 62 ॥

On returning to Hastināpur, the king held a great

festival (utşab) in honour of the arrival of his son; he called all his astrologers and enquired what day was auspicious.

समझाइत्य प्रजा: सर्वा: सचिवान्यर्वेशृ. शुभान् ।

यौवाराज्ये३४ गाज्ञैवं स्थाययामास पार्थिव: ॥ 6 3 ॥

He then called all his subjects and ministers, did installed Gāngeya as the Crown Prince.

इयूवा तं युवराजानं पुत्रं सर्विगुणान्यितम् ।

सुख्यास स धर्मातना न समसर च जाखदीम् ॥ 6 4 ॥

The religious Śantanu became very happy on making Gāngeya, the Crown Prince; he forgot the pains due to Gānga's bereavement.

सूत उवाच

एतद: कथितं सर्वे कारणं वः सुगापजम् ।

गाङ्गेयस्य तथोत्थिं जाहुबा: सम्भवं तथा ॥ 65 ॥

Sūta said: “Thus I have described to you the cause of the curse on Vasus, the birth of Bhisma from the womb of Gaṅgā, the union of Gaṅgā and Śantanu, etc.

गड़ावतरणं पुण्यं वसूनां सम्भवं तथा ।

यः शुणोति नरः पायामुच्यते नात्र संशया ॥ 6 6 ॥

He who hears in this world this holy story of Gaṅgā's birth and the birth of the Vasu, is freed of all sins and gets mukti.

पुर्णयं पविषमाख्यानं कथितं मुनिसत्तमाः ।

यथा मया श्रुतं व्यासात्युर्णगं वैदसंगितम् ॥ 67 ॥

O Munis! I have described these meritorious holy accounts, as I heard from the mouth of Vyāsa.

श्रीमद्धागवतं पुणयं नानाख्यानकबात्वितम् ।

द्वैपायनमुखोबूतं पछतक्षणगर्मयुन्त् ॥ 68 ॥

शुण्वतां सर्वेपाण्टेन शुण्वं सुखदं तथा ।

इतिहासमिदं पुण्यं काँतिंतं पृत्रिसत्तमाः ॥ 69 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागतते महापुराणे द्वितीयरकन्दे

सतुर्योधया: 11 4 11

Any body who hears this holy Śrimad Bhāgavatam, endowed with five characteristics and filled with various anecdotes, that came out of the mouth of Vyāsa, finds all his sins destroyed and attains peace and blessedness. O, Munis! Thus has been described completely to you this holy history.

Thus ends the Fourth Chapter on the birth of the Vasus in the Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.

