CHAPTER XXVII

On the Birth, etc., of Sävitri

शीनारायण उवाच

सुत्वाउनन सो3ध्यपति: संपूज्य विधिपूर्वकम् ।

ददर्गं तत्र तां देर्वीं सहस्वाकैसमप्रभात् ॥ 1 ॥

उवाच सा च राजानं प्रसन्ना सस्मिता सती ।

यथा माता स्वपुरं च छोतयंतीं दिशास्तिचथा ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Nārada! After having chanted

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

the above hymn to the Goddess Sāvitrī and worshipped Her in accordance with due rites and ceremonies, the king Āśvapati saw the Devī, effulgent like the lustre of thousand suns. She then smilingly told the king, as a mother to her son, whilst all the quarters were illumined with the lustre of Her body:

साविष्युवाच

जानाथ्यहं महाराज यते मनसि वांक्षितम् ।

वांक्षितं तव तल्याश्र सर्वं दास्यामि निश्रितम् ॥ 3 ॥

साखी कन्याभिलाथे च कोरिति तव कामिनि ।

त्वं प्रार्थयसि पुरं च भविष्यति क्रमेण च ॥ 4 ॥

Sāvitrī said: O King! I know your desire. Certainly I will give what you wife long for. Your chaste wife is anxious for a daughter, while you want a son. So, one after another, the desires of both of you will be fulfilled." Thus saying, the Devi went to the Brahma Loka.

इत्युक्ना सा तदा देवी बढ़ालोकं जगाम है ।

राजा जगाम स्वगृहं तत्कन्यासदी बघूबह है ॥ 5 ॥

आराधनाच्च साविश्य बघूब कमल पर।

साविशिति स तनाम चकाशधान्तिनुः ॥ 6 ॥

The King also returned to his house. First a daughter was born to him. As the daughter was born, as if a second Lakṣmī was born after worshipping Śāvitrī, the King kept her name as Śāvitrī.

कालेन सा वध्माला बघूव च हिते दिते ।

रूपयीवनसंपन्ना शुक्ले चंद्रकला यथा ॥ 7 ॥

सा वरं वरयामासे शुमसेनात्मजं तदा ।

सत्यवर्तं सत्यशीलं नानागुणसमप्रित्यमत् ॥ 8 ॥

As time rolled on, the daughter grew, day by day, like the phases of bright fortnight moon, into youth and beauty. There was a son of Dyumat Sena, named Satyavāna, always truthful, good natured and endowed with various other qualifications.

राजा तसे दूदी तां च रत्नप्रपणभूषिताम ।

सोर्पि सार्धं कौतुकेन तां गृहीत्वा गृहं यये ॥ 9 ॥

स च सच्चसरेजीते सत्यवास्त्यविक्रमः ।

जगाम फलकाछार्थं सर्श्यं चितुगज्ञा ॥ 10 ॥

The daughter chose him for her bridegroom. The King betrothed her with jewels and ornaments, to Satyavāna, who gladly took her home. After one year expired, the truthful vigorous Satyavāna gladly went out, by his father's command, to collect fruits and fuel.

जगगम साखी ततशुशासविकी दैवयोगतः ।

नियय दृक्षान्त्रैव प्राणांस्तालाया सववान् ॥ १ १ ॥

यमस्तं पुरूचं द्रुषु बब्द्रहृष्टिसमं पुने ।

गृहीता गमनं चके तत्यश्रापयथी सती ॥  १ २ ॥

The chaste Savitri, too, followed him. Unfortunately Satyavāna fell down from a tree and died. Yama, the God of Death, saw his soul as a Puruṣa of the size of one's thumb and took it and went away. The chaste Savitri began to follow Him.

पशुशानां सुदर्ती चूँगा यमः संयमानीपतिः ।

उवाच मधुरं साधसीं साधूनां प्रवरो महान् ॥ 13 ॥

The high souled Yama, the Foremost of the Sâdhus, seeing Savitri following Him, addressed her sweetly:

धर्मारा उवाच

अहो कव यासि सावित्र गृहीत्या मानुषों तनुम् ।

यदि यास्यसि कॉतेन साथि देंहे तदा त्यज ॥ 14 ॥

“O Śāvitrī! Whither are you going in your this mortal coil? If you like to follow after all, then quit your this body.”

गन्तुं मवॉन न शक्नोति गृहीत्वा पांच भौतिकम् ।

देहं च मम लोकं च नघरं नघर: सदा ॥ 15 ॥

भर्तुने पूर्णकालो वै बघुव भागते सति ।

स्वकर्मफलभोगार्थ सत्यवान्याति मदगुहम् ॥ 16 ॥

"The mortal man, with his transient coil of these five elements, is not able to go to My Abode. O Chaste One! The death time of your husband arrived; therefore Satyavāna is going to My abode to reap the fruits of his Karma.

कर्माण जायते जन्तुः कर्मांव प्रलीयते ।

सुखं दुःखं घयं शोकः कर्मांवे प्रगपीयते ॥ 17 ॥

कर्मणेज्ञे घरेज्ञजीव बहापूयः स्वकर्भाण ।

स्वकर्मण हरेदांसी जन्मादिरहितो घयेत् ॥ 18 ॥

स्वकर्मण सर्वसिद्धमपरत्वं लभेद्युवम् ।

लभेत्यवकर्माण विद्याणोः सालोक्यादिवतृष्टयम् ॥ 19 ॥

Book IX Chapter XXVIII

Every living animal is born by his Karma. He dies again through his life long Karma. It is his Karma alone that ordains pleasure, pain, fear, sorrows, etc., By Karma, this embodied soul here becomes Indra; by Karma he can become a Brahma's son. What more than this that Jiva, by his Karma, can be in Hari's service and be free from birth and death! By one's own Karma all sorts of Siddhis and immortality can be obtained; the four blessed regions as Viṣṇu's Sālokya, etc., also can be obtained by Karma.

सुरत्वं च मनुत्वं च राजेनूत्रतं लभेन्नर: ।

स्वकर्माण शिवार्तं च गणोग्रत तदैव च ॥ 20 ॥

कर्मण च मुनिंहन्तं तपरिवलं स्वकर्मण ।

स्वकर्माणक्षिवित्यं वैययतं च स्वकर्मण ॥ 21 ॥

कर्मणैव च लेख्छतं लभते नात्र संगय: ।

स्वकर्मण जजुष्मतं शैलत्वं च स्वकर्मण ॥ 22 ॥

कर्मण राश्रसत्वं च किन्तरत्वं स्वकर्मण ।

कर्मणैवाधिप्यतं च वृक्षतं च स्वकर्मण ॥ 23 ॥

कर्मणैव पशुत्वं च वनर्जीवी स्वकर्मण ।

कर्मणा शूज्जन्तुं कृमित्वं च स्वकर्मण ॥ 24 ॥

दैतेप्तवे दानवलमपुस्तं स्वकर्मण ।

इत्येततुक्वता साविजी विरातम स वै यम्: ॥ 25 ॥

ड्रिति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे नवमकचे

सप्तविंशोअषय: 11 27 11

What more than this that by Karma, a being becomes divine, human, or a King, or Śiva or Gangeśa! The state of Munindra, asceticism, Kṣattriyahood, Vaiśyahood, Mleccchahood, moving things, stones, Rākṣasahood, Kinnaras Kingship, becoming tree, beasts, forest animals, inferior animals, worms, Daityas, Dānavas, Asuras, all are fashioned and wrought by Karma and Karma alone." O Nārada! Thus speaking, Yama remained silent.

Here ends the Twenty-seventh Chapter of the Ninth

Book on the birth etc. of Śavitri in

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXVIII

