[Ch 27 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyana said: O Nārada! After having chanted Śrimaddevībhāgavatam the above hymn to the Goddess Sāvitrī and worshipped Her in accordance with due rites and ceremonies, the king Āśvapati saw the Devī, effulgent like the lustre of thousand suns. She then smilingly told the king, as a mother to her son, whilst all the quarters were illumined with the lustre of Her body:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Nārada! After having chanted the above hymn to the Goddess Sāvitrī and worshipped Her in accordance with due rites and ceremonies, the king Aśvapati saw the Devī, effulgent like the lustre of thousand suns. She then smilingly told the king, as a mother to her son, whilst all the quarters were illumined with the lustre of Her body :--

[Ch 27 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sāvitrī said: O King! I know your desire. Certainly I will give what you wife long for. Your chaste wife is anxious for a daughter, while you want a son. So, one after another, the desires of both of you will be fulfilled." Thus saying, the Devi went to the Brahma Loka.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sāvitrī said :-- “O King! I know your desire. Certainly I will give what you and your wife long for. Your chaste wife is anxious for a daughter, while you want a son. So, one after another, the desires of both of you will be fulfilled.” Thus saying, the Devī went to the Brahma Loka.

[Ch 27 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King also returned to his house. First a daughter was born to him. As the daughter was born, as if a second Lakṣmī was born after worshipping Śāvitrī, the King kept her name as Śāvitrī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King also returned to his house. First a daughter was born to him. As the daughter was born, as if a second Lakṣmī was born after worshipping Sāvitrī, the King kept her name as Sāvitrī.

[Ch 27 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As time rolled on, the daughter grew, day by day, like the phases of bright fortnight moon, into youth and beauty. There was a son of Dyumat Sena, named Satyavāna, always truthful, good natured and endowed with various other qualifications.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As time rolled on, the daughter grew, day by day, like the phases of bright fortnight moon, into youth and beauty. There was a son of Dyumat Sena, named Satyavāna, always truthful, good natured and endowed with various other qualifications.

[Ch 27 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The daughter chose him for her bridegroom. The King betrothed her with jewels and ornaments, to Satyavāna, who gladly took her home. After one year expired, the truthful vigorous Satyavāna gladly went out, by his father's command, to collect fruits and fuel.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The daughter chose him for her bridegroom. The King betrothed her with jewels and ornaments, to Satyavāna, who gladly took her home. After one year expired, the truthful vigorous Satyavāna gladly went out, by his father’s command, to collect fruits and fuel.

[Ch 27 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The chaste Savitri, too, followed him. Unfortunately Satyavāna fell down from a tree and died. Yama, the God of Death, saw his soul as a Puruṣa of the size of one's thumb and took it and went away. The chaste Savitri began to follow Him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The chaste Sāvitrī, too, followed him. Unfortunately Satyavāna fell down from a tree and died. Yama, the God of Death, saw his soul as a Puruṣa of the size of one’s thumb and took it and went away. The chaste Sāvitrī began to follow Him.

[Ch 27 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The high souled Yama, the Foremost of the Sâdhus, seeing Savitri following Him, addressed her sweetly:
NEW CORR ENG ──► The high souled Yama, the Foremost of the Sadhus, seeing Sāvitrī following Him, addressed her sweetly :--

[Ch 27 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Śāvitrī! Whither are you going in your this mortal coil? If you like to follow after all, then quit your this body.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sāvitrī! Whither are you going in your this mortal coil? If you like to follow after all, then quit your this body.

[Ch 27 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "The mortal man, with his transient coil of these five elements, is not able to go to My Abode. O Chaste One! The death time of your husband arrived; therefore Satyavāna is going to My abode to reap the fruits of his Karma.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The mortal man, with his transient coil of these five elements, is not able to go to My Abode. O Chaste One! The death time of your husband arrived; therefore Satyavāna is going to My Abode to reap the fruits of his Karma.

[Ch 27 Verse 17-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Every living animal is born by his Karma. He dies again through his life long Karma. It is his Karma alone that ordains pleasure, pain, fear, sorrows, etc., By Karma, this embodied soul here becomes Indra; by Karma he can become a Brahma's son. What more than this that Jiva, by his Karma, can be in Hari's service and be free from birth and death! By one's own Karma all sorts of Siddhis and immortality can be obtained; the four blessed regions as Viṣṇu's Sālokya, etc., also can be obtained by Karma.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Every living animal is born by his Karma. He dies again through his life long Karma. It is his Karma alone that ordains pleasure, pain, fear, sorrows, etc. By Karma, this embodied soul here becomes Indra; by Karma he can become a Brahmā’s son. What more than this that Jīva, by his Karma, can be in Hari’s service and be free from birth and death! By one’s own Karma all sorts of Siddhis and immortality can be obtained; the four blessed regions as Viṣṇu’s Sālokya, etc., also can

[Ch 27 Verse 20-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What more than this that by Karma, a being becomes divine, human, or a King, or Śiva or Gangeśa! The state of Munindra, asceticism, Kṣattriyahood, Vaiśyahood, Mleccchahood, moving things, stones, Rākṣasahood, Kinnaras Kingship, becoming tree, beasts, forest animals, inferior animals, worms, Daityas, Dānavas, Asuras, all are fashioned and wrought by Karma and Karma alone." O Nārada! Thus speaking, Yama remained silent. Here ends the Twenty-seventh Chapter of the Ninth Book on the birth etc. of Śavitri in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What more than this that by Karma, a being becomes divine, human, or a King, or Śiva or Ganeśa! The state of Munīndra, asceticism, Kṣattriyahood, Vaiśyahood, Mlechahood, moving things, stones, Rākṣasahood, Kinnaras, Kingship, becoming trees, beasts, forest animals, inferior animals, worms, Daityas, Dānavas, Asuras, all are fashioned and wrought by Karma and Karma alone. O Nārada! Thus speaking, Yama remained silent. Here ends the Twenty-seventh Chapter of the Ninth Book on the birth, etc., of Sāvitrī in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
