CHAPTER XLV

On Daksinā

श्रीनारायण उवाच

उनके स्वाहास्वधाख्यानं प्रशस्तं मधुरं परम् ।

वक्ष्यामि स्टिंषणाख्यानं सावधानो निशामय ॥ १ ॥

गोपी सुशील गोलेके पुर्णे उसीद्वेयसी दरेः ।

राघा प्रधाना सधीची धन्या मान्या मनोहार ॥ २ ॥

उत्तील सुंदरी रामा सुभगा सुदती सती ।

विद्यारती गुणारती चातिरूपवर्ती सती ॥ ३ ॥

Nārāyana said: The excellent, most sweet stories of Svāhā and Svadhā are told; now I will tell you the story of Daksjñā; hear attentively. In early days, in the region of Goloka, there was a good-natured Gopi named Suśilā, beautiful, Rādhā's companion and very dear to Śri Hari. She was fortunate, respected, beautiful, lovely prosperous, with good teeth, learned, well qualified and of exquisitely handsome form.

कल्यात कीभालंगी कांता कमललोचना ।

सुक्षीणी सुस्नी रथामा न्योधेपर्यिषित्ति ॥ 4 ॥

Her whole body was tender and lovely like Kalāvatī (one versed in 64 arts; moon) She was beautiful and her eyes were like water lilies. Her hips were good and spacious; Her breasts were full;

she was Śyāmā (a kind of women having colour like melted gold; body being hot in cold and cool in summer; of youthful beauty); as well She was of the Nyagrodha class of women (an excellent woman. Stanau Sukathinau Yasyā Nitambeca Viśalata. Madhye Krinābhavedyā Sānyagrodha parimandālā).

ईन्द्रास्यप्रसात्या रत्नालंकारभूषिता ।

श्वेतचंफकरणांना विवोष्टी भृगलोचना ॥ 5 ॥

Always a smile sweetened Her face; and that looked always gracious. Her whole body was covered with jewel ornaments. Her colour was white like the white campakas. Her lips were red like the Bimba fruits; Her eyes were like those of a deer.

कामाशबेबु निणुणा कामिनी हंसगामिनी ।

भावानुक्ता भावज्ञा कृष्णस्य प्रियभामिनी ॥ 6 ॥

Suśilā was very clever in amorous sciences. Her gait was like a swan. She was specially versed in what is called Premā Bhakti (love towards God). So She was the dearest lady of Śri Krṣṇa. And She was of intense emotional feelings.

Book IX Chapter XLV

सस्ता रसिका रासे रासेशस्य रसोसुका ।

उवासादिक्षणे कोडे तथायाः पुस्तः पुरा ॥ ७ ॥

संवभूवानप्रभुखी भयंेन मधुसूदनः ।

द्वुगा तथा च पुस्तों गोपौनीं प्रवरीतमाम् ॥ 8 ॥

She knows all the sentiments of love; she was witty humorous, and ardent for the love of Śri

Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of the Rāsa circle. She sat by the left side of Śri Kṛṣṇa in the presence of Rādhā. Śri Kṛṣṇa, then cast His glance on Rādhā, the Chief of

the Gopis and hung down His head through fear.

कामिनी रत्नतदानां रत्नतपंकजलोचनाम् ।

कोपेन कंपितागीं च कोपेन सुकृत्तितधारम् ॥ 9 ॥

रेगेन तां तु गच्छतीं विज्ञाय ततन्तनम् ।

विरोधभीति भागवानंतर्निं चकार सः ॥ 10 ॥

पलायंत च कांत च शांत सत्त्वं सुविध्राम् ।

विलोक्ष्य कंपिता गोवः सुशीलग्रासतो भिचा ॥ 11 ॥

Rādhā's face turned red; the two eyes looked like red lilies; all Her bodies began to quiver out of anger and Her lips began to shake. Seeing that state of Radhā, Bhagvān Śrī Krṣna dissappeared, fearing that a quarrel might ensue. Suśilā and other Gopīs seeing that the peaceful Krṣna of Sattvā Guṇa and of lovely form had dis appeared, began to tremble with fear.

विलोक्य लपटे तन गोपीनों लक्षकोटयः ।

युंराजिलयुगा भीता भक्तिन्यात्मकंधा: ॥ 12 ॥

रक्ष रक्षेलुर्फकंव्यो देबीमिति पुनः पुनः ।

वयुभवैन शरणं तत्याङ्गणपकें जे ॥ 13 ॥

Then one lakh Koti Gopis seking Kṛṣṇa absent and Rādhā angry, became very much afraid and bowing their heads down with devotion and with folded palms began to say fequently. ‘Rādeh! Protect us, protect us’ and they took shelter at Her feet.

त्रिलक्षकोटयो गोपा: सुदामादय एव च ।

व्युर्षयेन शरणं तत्याद्याङ्गे च नाद ॥ १४ ॥

पलायंतं च कांतं च विज्ञाय परमेश्वरी ।

पलायंती सहचरी सुगीलां च शणणा सा ॥ 15 ॥

O Nārada! Three lākh Gopas also including Sudāmā and other took shelter at the lotus feet of

Śrī Rādhā out of fear. Seeing, then, Krṣṇa absent and Her companion Suśilā running away, Rādhā cursed her thus:

अद्याप्यिति गोलोकं सा चेद्यातित गोपिका ।

सहो गयनमाओंण भयसाच्च भविष्यति ॥ १ ६ ॥

इत्येवमुक्त्वा तत्रैव देवदेवेश्वीरा क्या ।

रासेक्षी रासमध्ये रासेगामाजुहाव है ॥ १ ७ ॥

'If Suśilā' comes again to this Goloka, she will be reduced to ashes.' Thus cursing Her companion Suśilā out of anger, Rādhā, the Darling of the Deva of the Devas, and the Lady of the Rāsa circle went to the Rāsa circle and called on Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of the same.

नालोक्य परतः कृष्णं राशा विरहकातर।

युगकौटिरमं मेने क्षणपेँदन सुझत ॥ 18 ॥

हैं कृष्ण प्राणनाशेशगच्छ प्राणाधिकप्रिय ।

प्राणाधिश्छाद्वेरेण प्राण योति त्वया किना ॥ 19 ॥

Not being able to find out Śrī Krṣṇa, a minute appeared a yuga to Her and she began to say: O Lord of Prāṇas! O Dearer than My life! O Presiding Deity of my life! O Krṣṇa! My life seems to depart from Thy absence! Come quickly and shew Thyself to me.

स्वीराबं: पतिसीभायद्धोते च दिने दिने ।

सुखं च विपुलं व्यमातं सेवेद्वर्दनतः सदा ॥ 20 ॥

पतिथिकु: कुलस्वीणामधिद्धे: सदा गति: ।

परसंपरवरूपश्च पूर्तिमाभ्योगर: सदा ॥ 21 ॥

धार्मदः सुखदः शरणवीति: शाँति: सदा ।

O Lord! It is through the favour of one's husband that the pride of women gets increased day by day. Women's safeguards of happiness are their husbands. Therefore women, who are helpless creatures, ought always to serve their husbands according to Dharma. The husband is the wife's friend, presiding deity and the sole refuge and the chief wealth. It is through husbands that women derive their pleasures, enjoyments. Dharma, happiness, peace and contentment.

सम्पानैर्वीध्यमानश्व मानदो मानखंडनः ॥ 22 ॥

सारास्तारतः स्वामी कंयुन्ता कंयुन्ता: ।

न च भर्तु: समो कंयुर्वीधीविक्षुरु इयन्ते ॥ 23 ॥

If husbands are respected, wives are respected and if husbands are dishonoured, women are dishonoured too. The husband is the highest thing to a woman. He is the highest friend. There is no better friend than him.

भरणादेव भर्ती च पालनात्यतिन्कच्यते ।

शरीरिकाच स सवामी कामदः कांत उच्चते ॥ 24 ॥

बंधुश सुखद्धूद्वा च प्रीतिदानास्थि: सूना: ।

ऐपवर्धतान्दीशु क्षणेशास्त्राणनायकः ॥ 25 ॥

रतिदानाच्य सणः प्रियो नास्ति प्रियावर: ।

पुस्तु स्वामिनः शुक्राकजायते तेन स प्रियः ॥ 26 ॥

The husband is called Bhartā because he supports his wife; he is called Pati, because he preserves her; he is called Svāmī, because he is the master of her body; he is called Kānta because he bestows the desired things to her; he is called Bandhu, because he increases her happiness; he is called Priya, because he gives pleasure to her; he is called Iśa, because he bestows prosperity on her; he is called Prāneśvara, because he is the lord of her Prāna; and he is called Ramana, because he gives enjoyment to her. There is no other thing dearer than husband. The son is born of the husband; hence the son is so dear.

शतपुरातर: स्वामी कुलकानां विष: सदा ।

असलुलपुरता या कांति विज्ञानुमक्षमा ॥ 27 ॥

स्नानं च सर्वतीर्थेषु सर्ववैनुषे उद्धिषण ।

प्रादिष्णयं पृथिव्याश्र सर्वाणि च तपांसि च ॥ 28 ॥

सर्वाणिवेय नजातीम महान्तानि याचि च ।

उपोषणानि पुष्पानि यानि यांशि श्रुतानि च ॥ 29 ॥

गुरुसेवा विष्सेवा वेदसंवादिकं च यत ।

स्वामिन: पादसेवाया: कलं गहाँतने घोक्षिणि ॥ 30 ॥

The husband is dearer to a family woman than one hundred sons. Those who are born in impure families, cannot know what substance a husband is made up of. Taking baths in all the Tirthas, giving Dakṣinās in all the Yajñas (sacrifice), circumambulating round the whole earth, performing all austerities, observing all vows, making all great gifts, holy fastings, all that are dictated in the

Šāstras, serving the Guru, the Brāhmaṇas and the Devas all cannot compare to even one sixteenth part with serving faithfully the feet of the husband. The husband is the highest; higher than the Spiritual Teacher (Guru), higher than the Brāhmaṇas, higher than all the Devas.

गृकविप्रे-द्रवेषु सर्वेथ्य प्रतिभुः ।

विद्याटाता यथा पुंसां कुलजानां तथा प्रियः ॥ 31 ॥

As to man, the Spiritual Teacher who imparts the Spiritual Knowledge is the Best and Supreme, so to the women their husband are the best of all.

गोपीनां लक्षकोटींना गोपानां च तथैव च ।

बढ़ाईज्ञानारंख्यानां तत्रस्थानां तथैव च ॥ 32 ॥

विश्वादिगोलकांतानामीश्वरो यनुसावतुः ।

अई न जाने तं कांतं क्वीस्वभावो दुतयसः ॥ 33 ॥

Oh! I am not able to realise the glory of my Dearest, by Whose favour I am the Sole Ruler of one lakh Koti Gopīs, one lakh Kotī Gopas, innumerable Brahmāṇṇads, and all the things thereof, and all the lokas (regions) from Bhu (earth) to Goloka. Oh! The womanly nature is insurmountable.”

इतुसूतना राधिका कृष्णं तत दूधी स्थणिततः ।

कोरो प्रेणा सा राधा नावधान्येत चाबबीत् ॥ 34 ॥

दर्शनं देहि रामण दीना विरहुदुःविता ।

अथ सा दक्षिणा देवो धक्ता गोलोकतां मुने ॥ 35 ॥

Thus saying, Radhika began to meditate with devotion on Śrī Krṣna, Tears began to flow incessantly from Her eyes. She exclaimed “O Lord! O Lord! O Ramana! Shew Thyself to me. I am very much weak and distressed from Thy bereavement.”

सुचिरं च तपस्तचा विवेश कमलातनो ।

अथ देवादयः सर्वे ग्रं कृत्वा सुतुकम्प। ॥ 36 ॥

नालभंसे फलं तेषां विष्णणाः प्रव्यूर्विधम् ।

विधिप्रविदंनं श्रुत्वा देवादीचां जगत्यतिम् ॥ 37 ॥

Now the Dakṣinā Devi, driven out from Goloka, practised Tapasyā for a long time when She entered into the body of Kamalā. The Devas, on the other

Book IX Chapter XLV

hand, performed a very difficult Yajña; but they could not derive any fruit therefrom. So they went to Brahmā, becoming very sad.

द्यौची सुचिरं भकल्पा प्रत्योर्गमावप: सः ।

नारायण्ड भगवान्माहल्ब्यम्यां उद्धतः ॥ 38 ॥

विनिष्कृष्य मार्ल्वल्बर्गी बहुणो दक्षिणां दही ।

ब्रहा दही तां चत्राय पूर्णार्थं च कर्माणम् ॥ 39 ॥

यज्ञ: संपूञ्य विधित्यानों तुहाव तत्पा ।

Hearing them, Brahmā meditated on Viṣṇu for a long time with devotion. At last Viṣṇu gave Him a reply. Viṣṇu got out of the body of Mahā Lakṣmī a Martya Lakṣmī (Lakṣmī of the earth) and gave Her Daksīnā to Brahmā. Then with a view to yield to the Devas the fruits of their Karmas, Brahmā made over to the Yajña Deva (the Deva presiding the sacrifice) the Devī Daksīnā, offered by Nārāyaṇa, Yajña Deva, then, worshipped Her duly and recited hymns to Her with great joy.

तपकाचनवर्णाधं चन्द्रकौटिसमप्रभाण ॥ 40 ॥

उतीव कमनीयां च सुचर्यं सुमनोहराण ।

कमलायां कोमलांगी कमलायतलोचनाम ॥ 41 ॥

कमलासनपूज्चां च कमलांगसामुद्वाम ।

वहिषुर्द्वीर्णकाधानां विबेबोई सुदर्ती सतीम ॥ 42 ॥

विश्वर्गी कविरीभारं मालतीमाल्यसंयुन्तम् ।

ईपद्वायप्रसाधायां रत्नभूषणभूषितम् ॥ 43 ॥

सुवेधाकां च सुस्नातां सुनिनानसमोहिनीम् ।

कस्तूरीविद्युभि: सार्थे सुगन्धिचन्दनेयुभि: ॥ 44 ॥

सिंदुर्दिवुतान्येनाप्यलकाशः स्थलोज्जलम् ।

सुप्रगत्नतितंबाबा बृहच्छोगिपणयोधरम् ॥ 45 ॥

Her colour was like melted gold; her lustre equalled kotī Moons; very lovely, beautiful, fascinating; face resembling water lilies, of a gentle body; with eyes like Padma Palāsa, born of the body of Lakṣmī, worshipped by Brahmā, wearing celestial silken garments, her lips resembling like Bimba fruits, chaste, handsome; her braid of hair surrounded by Mālati garlands; with a sweet smiling face, ornamented with jewel ornaments, well dressed, bathed, enchanting the minds of the Munis, below the hair of her forehead the dot of

musk and Sindūra scented with sandalpaste, of spacious hips, with full breasts, smitten by the arrows of Kāma Deva (the God of Love). Such was the Daksīnā Devi.

कामदेवाधारस्णो कामवाणप्रीडिताम् ।

तां द्वुत्रा सपनीयं च यजो मृष्ठमावरा ह १। 4 6 ।।

पर्सी तामेव जग्राह विधिक्रवीधानपूर्वकम् ।

विद्यं वर्षगतं चैव तां गृतीत्वा तु निर्वेने ॥ 4 7 ॥

यजो रेमे मुदा युक्तो रामेणे रमया सह ।

गर्भ द्वारा सा देवी दिव्यं झादणवर्षकम् ॥ 4 8 ॥

Seeing Her, the Yajña Deva fainted. At last he married her according to due rites and ceremonies. Taking her to a solitary place, he enjoyed her for full divine one hundred years with great joy like Lakṣmī Nārāyaṇa. Gradually then Dakṣinā became pregnant. She remained so for twelve divine years.

ततः सुचाव पुरं च फलं वे सर्वकर्माणम् ।

परिणुर्गं कर्मिण च तत्युः फलदायकः ॥ 49 ॥ *

यजो दक्षिणाय साधु पूजेण च फलेन च ।

कर्मिणा फलदाता चेल्यं वेर्विद्व विदुः ॥ 50 ॥

Then she duly delivered a nice son as the fruit of Karma. When any Karma becomes complete, this son delivers the fruits of that Karma. Yajña Deva with His wife Dakṣinā and the above named Karmaphala, the bestower of the fruits of actions, gives the desired fruits to all their sacrificial acts and Karmas.

यज्ञः दक्षिणा प्राय पुरं च फलदायकम् ।

फलं ददी च सर्वेध्यः कर्मिणां चैव नारद ॥ 51 ॥

तदा देवादसन्तुः परिपूर्णमनोरधाः ।

स्वस्थाने ते ययुः सर्वे धर्मवेक्रादिद्धं श्रुन्त् ॥ 52 ॥

So the Paṇdits, the knowers of the Vedas, say. Really he, henceforth, began to give fruits to all the persons of their acts, with his wife Dakṣinā and son, the bestover of the fruits of the actions. The Devas were all satisfied at this and went away respectively to their own abodes.

कृत्वा कर्म च कर्ता च तूर्ण द्रवाच्य दक्षिणम् ।

तत्स्थणं फलमाणोति वैदैक्नकिंदं मुने ॥ 53 ॥

कर्मी कर्मिण पूर्णे च तत्स्थणे यदि दक्षिणम् ।

न द्वादाद्वाहाणेध्य्य ईवेनाज्ञानते५ध्या ॥ 54 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Therefore, the man who performs Karmas, generally known as Karma Kartās, should pay the Dakṣiṇā (the Sacrificial fee) and so he completes at once his actions. It is stated in the Vedas, that no sooner the Karma Kartā pays the Dakṣiṇā, than he obtains the fruits of his Karmas at once.

पूर्ते समतीते तु द्विशुणा सा भवेद्युवम् ।

एकारते व्यतीते तु सा क्रिकोटिगृणा सा ॥ ५ ५ ॥

त्रिरोत तच्छतगुणा सताहे द्विगुणा ततः ।

साले लक्षगुणा प्रोक्ता ब्राह्मणानां च यधते ॥ ५६ ॥

In case the Karma Kartā, after he has completed his acts, does not pay either through bad luck or through ignorance, any Daksinā to the Brāhmanas, its amount is doubled if a Muhūrta, passes away and if one night elapses, its amount is increased, to one hundred times. If three nights pass away, and the Daksinā not paid, the amount last brought forward, is increased again to hundred times; if a week passes, the last amount is doubled, and if one month passes away, the Daksinā is multiplied to one lakh times.

संवस्तेये सतीते तु सा प्रिकोटिणा भवेत् ।

कर्म तद्धमानानां सर्वे वै निष्णकं भवेत् ॥ 57 ॥

स च ब्राह्मवहारी च न कामहिंउगृचिनरः ।

दत्रिई व्याधियुक्तश्छ तेन यायेन पाताकी ॥ 58 ॥

If one year passes away, that is increased to ten millions of times and the Karma, also, bears no fruits. Such a Karma Kartā is known as taking away unfairly a Brāhmaṇa's property and is regarded as impure. He has no right to any further actions. For that sin, he becomes a pauper and diseased. Lakṣmī Devi goes away from his house, leaves him, cursing him severely.

तदुर्गहावाति लक्ष्मीश श्राणं दत्ता सुदारुणम् ।

पित्तो नैव गृह्विन्त तदर्श भाछदानपणि ॥ 59 ॥

एवं सुराक्ष तत्पूर्णा तद्धतामिनराहुलिम ।

दर्तं न दीयते दानं गृहीता नैव खाचते ॥ 60 ॥

So much so that the Pitps do not accept the Śrāddha, Tarpānam offered by that wretched fellow. So the Devas do not accept his worship,

nor the Fire accepts the oblations poured by him. If the person that performs sacrifices does not pay the sacrificial fee that he resolves to pay and he who accepts the offer does not demand the sum, both of them go to hell.

उभौ तौ नरके यातिश्छ्रज्जी यथा घटः ।

नार्यवेधज्ञानयेश्याचितशायि दक्षिणम् ॥ 61 ॥

भयंदेवहास्याभवही कुभ्यीपाके बजेद्युम् ।

वर्षलक्षं वसेत्न यमदूतेन ताडितः ॥ 62 ॥

But if the performer of the sacrifices does not pay when the priests demand the fee, then the Yajamāna (the performer of the sacrifices) only falls down to hell as the jar, severed from the rope, falls down. The Yajamāna (pupil) is denominated as a Brahmasvāpahārī (one who robs a Brāhmaṇa's property); he goes ultimately to the Kumbhīpāka hell.

ततो भवेत्स चांडालो व्याधियुक्तो दरिङ्कः ।

पातयेत्पुरुषान्सत एवांशु सरत जन्मतः ॥ 6 3 ॥

इत्येवे कथितं विध्र किं भूयः श्रोतुमिच्छसि ।

There he remains for one lakh years punished and threatened by Yama's messengers. He is then reborn as a Cāndāla, poor and diseased. So much so that his seven generations above and his seven generations below go to hell. O Nārada! Thus I have narrated to you the story of Daksjna. What more do you want to hear? Say.

नात्र उवाच

यत्कर्म दक्षिणाहीनं को धुंकते तत्कर्ते युने ॥ 65 ॥

सदाक्षणे कर्मणि च फलोव प्रवर्तेत ।

अदक्षिणा च यत्कर्म तद्युंजते च बलिभूने ॥ 66 ॥

Nārada said: O Best of Munis! Who bears the fruits of that Karma where no Dakṣinā is paid. Describe the method of worship that was offered to Dakṣinā by Yajña Deva. Nārāyaṇa said: Where do you find the fruit of any sacrifice without Dakṣinā? (i.e. nowhere.) That Karma only gets fruits where Dakṣināś are paid. And the fruits of the acts void of any Dakṣinā, Bali who lives in the Pātāla only enjoys; and no one else.

Book IX Chapter XLV

बल्ये तत्पदर्त च वामनेन पुरा मुने ।

उश्वीयित्य: शाब्द्रल्यमधब्दादानयेव च ॥ 6 7 ॥

वृषलीपतिविधाणां पूजा रूव्यादिक च यत ।

असद्धिकैः कृतं यम्भगुचेः पूजनं च यत् ॥ 6 8 ॥

गुरावधनकस्य कर्मं बलिपुंकने न संशयः ।

For, in olden times, it was ordained by Bāmana Deva that those fruits would go to the king Bali. All those pertain to Śrāddha not sanctioned by the Vedas, the charities made without any regard or faith, the worship offered by a Brāhmin who is the husband of a Vṛṣala (an unmarried girl twelve years in whom menstruation has commenced), the fruits of sacrifices done by an impure Brāhmaṇa (a Brāhmaṇa who fails in his duties), the worship offered by impure persons, and the acts of a man devoid of any devotion to his Guru, all these are reserved for the king Bali. He enjoys the fruits of all these.

दक्षिणायश्रय बद्धानं स्तोत्रे पूर्वाविधिकम् ॥ 69 ॥

तत्सर्वे कणवशाखोक्त प्रवक्ष्यामि निशामय ।

पुरा संप्राप्य तां वमः कर्मदक्षा च दक्षिणाम् ॥ 70 ॥

मुमोहायः स्वरेण पुत्थाव कामकाततः ।

O Child! I am now telling you the Dhyāna, Stotra, and the method of worship as per Kanva Śākhā of Dakṣinā Devī. Hear. When Yajña Deva, in ancient times got Dakṣinā skilful in action, he was very much fascinated by her appearance and being lovestricken, began to praise her: "O Beautiful One! You were before the chief of the Gopis in Goloka. You were like Rādhā; you were Her companion; and you were loved by Śrī Rādhā, the beloved of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

यत्र उवाच

पुरा गोलेकागीची त्वं गोपीनां प्रवरा रा ॥ 71 ॥

राधासमा तत्सखी च श्रीकृष्णप्रेयसी प्रिया ।

क्रान्तिकीपूर्णिमायां तु रासे राघा महोत्सवे ॥ 72 ॥

आविर्भूता दक्षिणांशालल्प्रथायां तेन दक्षिणा ।

पुरा त्वं च सुशीलख्या ख्याता शीलेन शोभने ॥ 73 ॥

लक्ष्मीद्वासोसमागाच्चं राधाशपाचच्छ दक्षिणा ।

गोलेकाक्चं परिघ्घाए मम भाग्यादुपस्थिता ॥ 74 ॥

In the Rāsa circle, on the Full Moon night in the month of Kārtik, in the great festival of Rādhā, you appeared from the right shoulder of Laksmī; hence you were named Dakṣinā. O Beautiful One! You were of good nature before; hence your name was Suśilā. Next you turned due to Rādhā's curse, into Dakṣinā. It is to my great good luck that you were dislodged from Goloka and have come here. कृपा कृक महाभागे मायेव स्वायिनं कृक ।

कर्मिणं कर्माणं देहि त्वयेव फलल सदा ॥ 75 ॥

त्वया विना च सर्वेयं सर्वे कर्म च निष्णलम् ।

त्वया विना तथा कर्म कर्मिणं च न शोभते ॥ 76 ॥

O highly fortunate One! Now have mercy on me and accept me as your husband. O Devi! You give to all the doers of actions, the fruits of their works. Without you, their karmas bear no fruit. So much so, if you be not present in their actions the works never shine forth in brilliant glory.

ब्रहाविष्यमूँहाग्रह विद्यालाद एच च ।

कर्मण्ड कष दातुं न सकताङ्छ तया विना ॥ 77 ॥

कर्मकी र्वयं ब्रह्मा फलक्षी महंक्षरः ।

यज्ञको विद्यूँहं त्वमेभां साराकाणि ॥ 78 ॥

फलदातु परं बह्ञ निरुणा प्रकृति: परा ।

स्वयं कृष्णाक्ष भगवान्च च शकत्स्वया सह ॥ 79 ॥

त्वमेव शक्ति: कांते मे शक्रज्ञमयिन जयनि ।

सर्वेकर्मणि शक्तोड़ं त्वया सह चरानने ॥ 80 ॥

Without Thee, neither Brahmā, nor Viṣṇu nor Maheśa nor the Regents of the quarters, the ten Dikpālas, can award the fruits of actions. Brahmā is the incarnate of Karma. Maheśvara is the incarnate of the fruits of Karmas; and I Viṣṇu myself is the incarnate of Yajñas. But Thou art the Essence of all. Thou art the Parā Prakṛti, without any attributes, the Para Brahma incarnate, the bestower of the fruits of actions. Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣna cannot award the fruits of actions without Thee.

इत्पुक्लवा च पुरस्तव्यी वज्धासित्युदेवता ।

तृहा बयूव सा देवी भेजे तं कामलकला ॥ 81 ॥

इर्वे च दक्षिणास्तोयंत्र वज्काले च यः पयेत् ।

फलं च सर्वयज्ञानां प्राप्तोने नात्र संशयः ॥ 82 ॥

O Beloved! In every birth let Thou be my Śakti. O Thou with excellent face! Without Thee, I am unable to finish well any Karma. O Nārada! Thus praising Dakṣinā Devi, Yajña Deva stood before Her. She, born from the shoulder of Lakṣmī, became pleased with His Stotra and accepted Him for Her bridegroom. If anybody recites this Dakṣinā stotra during sacrifice, he gets all the results thereof.

राजसूवे वाजपेये गोपेधनरमेधेक ।

अश्मये लंगरेच च विद्यापूजे यशकले ॥ 8 3 ॥

धवदे भूमिदे पूर्ते फलदे गजमेघके ।

लोहयजे स्वर्णसजे रत्वजे5व तापके ॥ 84 ॥

शिवयजे रुदयजे शकज्ञे च बंधुके ।

बूढी वसणवागे च कंडके वैरिमदों ॥ 85 ॥

शुचियजे धर्मवेज्ञे धर व पापमोचने ।

बहाणी कंबोगे च योवियगो च भघ्ने ॥ 86 ॥

If anybody recites this stotra in the Rajasūtya sacrifice, Vājapaya, Gomedha (cow sacrifice) Naramedha (man sacrifice), Aśvamedha (horse sacrifice), Lāngala Sacrifice, Viṣṇu Yajñā tending to increase one's fame, in the act of giving over wealth or pieces of lands, digging tanks or wells or giving fruits, in Gaja medha (elephant sacrifice), in Loha Yajñā (iron sacrifice), Svarna Yajñā (gold sacrifice), Ratna Yajñā (making over jewels in sacrifice), Tāmra Yajñā (copper), Šiva Yajñā, Rudra Yajñā, Śakra Yajñā, Bandhuka Yajñā, Varuna Yajñā (for rains), Kaṇḍaka Yajñā, for crushing the enemies, Śuci Yajñā, Dharma Yajñā, Pāpa mocana Yajñā, Brahmāni Karma Yajñā, the auspicious Prakṛti Yāga, sacrifices, his work is achieved then without any hitch or obstacle. There is no doubt in this.

तृतीयां च समारंभे इदं स्तोत्रं च यः पठेत् ।

निविदनेच तत्कर्मे सर्वे भवति निशितान्। ॥ 87 ॥

इदं स्तोत्रं च कारितं ध्यानं पूजाविधि श्रणु ।

शाल्यामे घरे वाथि दक्षिणां पूजवेत्सुर्धीः ॥ 88 ॥

The stotra, thus, is mentioned now; hear about the Dhyānam and the method of worship. First of all, one should worship in the Śālagrāma stone, or

in an earthen jar (ghata) Dakṣinā Devī. The Dhyānam runs thus:

लक्ष्मीद्वांससंभृतां दक्षिणां कमलाकलाम् ।

सर्वकमपु दक्षां च फललां सर्वकर्माणम् ॥ 89 ॥

विष्णोः शक्तिस्वक्पां च पूजितां वंदितां शुभाम् ।

शुद्धिदां शुद्धिक्पां च सुगीलां शुभवां भर्जे ॥ 90 ॥

“O Dakṣinā! Thou art sprung from the right

shoulder of Lakṣmī; Thou art a part of Kamalā;

Thou art clever (Dakṣa) in all the actions and Thou

bestowest the fruits of all the actions. Thou art the

Sakti of Viṣṇu, Thou art revered, worshipped. Thou

bestowest all that is auspicious; Thou art purity;

Thou bestowest purity, Thou art good natured.

ध्यात्वानेनैव वरां मूलेन पुत्रवेल्युर्धी: ।

दत्ता पाठादिकं देखे वेदोतनेनैव नार्त ॥ 91 ॥

उं० श्री कल्हीं हुई दक्षिणाये स्थात्रेत च विद्वक्षणः ।

पूजवेह्रिधिवन्द्रल्क्या दक्षिणां सर्वप्रृजिताम् ॥ 92 ॥

So I meditate on Thee" Thus meditating, the intelligent one should worship Dakṣinā with the principal mantra. Then with the Vedic Mantras, pādyas, etc. (offerings of various sorts) are to be offered. Now the mantra as stated in the Vedas, runs thus: 'Om Śrīm, Klim, Hrīm, Dāksināyaī Svāhā.' With this mantra, all the offerings, such as pādyas, syāhā. With this mantra, all the offerings, such as pādyas, arghyas, etc., are to be given, and one should worship, as per rules, Dakṣinā Devī with devotion.

इन्वेयं क्रवितं बह्याद्विणाख्यानयेव च ।

सुखदं प्रीतिंदे चैव फललं सर्वकंभणान् ॥ ९३ ॥

इदं च दक्षिणाख्यानं वः शुणोति समाहितः ।

अंगहीचं च तत्कर्मे न भवेद्धारते भुवि ॥ ९४ ॥

O Nārada! Thus I have stated to you the anecdote of Daksīnā. Happiness, pleasure, and the fruits of all karmas are obtained by this. Being engaged in sacrificial acts, in this Bhāratavarsa, if one hears attentively this Dhyānam of Daksīnā, his sacrifice becomes defectless.

अपुजो लभते सुरं निशितं च गुणान्वितम् ।

भार्याहीनो लभेढ़ार्यां सुगीलां सुंदरीं पराम् ॥ 95 ॥

Book IX Chapter XLV1

<table><tr><td>वरागेहां पुरवर्ती विनीतां प्रियवादिनीम् । पतितन्तां च सुक्ठां च कुलर्जां च वधूं वराम् ॥ 9 6 ॥ विद्याहीनो लभेद्रियां धनहीनो लभेद्रनम् । भूमिहीनो लभेद्रूर्षियं प्रजाहीनो लभेत्रजाम् ॥ 9 7 ॥ संकटे बंधुरिच्छेते विपत्ती बंधने तथा । गामलेकमिद्धे शुत्वा मुच्यते नात्र संशयः ॥ 9 8 ॥ हीति शीर्दैर्धेभागवाते महापुराणे वनमरकर्भ नादरानदायासंगवं वंचवानिरीओंस्थायः ॥ 4 5 ॥ 1

So much so that the man who has got no sons gets undoubtedly good and qualified sons; if he has no wife, he gets a best wife, good nature, beautiful, of slender waist, capable to give many

sons, sweet speaking, humble, chaste, pure, and Kulina; if he be void of learning, he gets learing; if he be poor he gets wealth; if he be without any land, he gets land and if he has no attendants, he gets attendants. If a man hears for one month this stotra iof Daksjna Devi, he gets over all difficulties and dangers, bereavements from frinds, troubles imprisonments, and all other calamities.

Here ends the Forty-fifth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the anecdote of Daksjna in the Mahā Purānam Śrimadevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XLV1

