[Ch 35 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O King! Hearing thus the Rsj’s words, the king Suratha and Vaśya, who were very distressed in their minds, became very much comforted and bowed down to the Muni with great humility and modesty.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the Ṛṣi’s words, the king Suratha and Vaiśya, who were very distressed in their minds, became very much comforted and bowed down to the Muni with great humility and modesty.

[Ch 35 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Their eyes expressed their gladness and their hearts were filled with loving devotion. Both of them, then, clever in speaking and of calm and quiet temper, began to address him with their folded hands.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Their eyes expressed their gladness and their hearts were filled with loving devotion. Both of them, then, clever in speaking and of calm and quiet temper, began to address him with their folded hands.

[Ch 35 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Bhagavan! We were passing our days in a very humble and distressed spot; we are today purified by your good words, just as the country was entered pure by Bhagiratha when he brought down the river Ganges here.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Bhagavān! We were passing our days in a very humble and distressed spot; we are today purified by your good words, just as the country was rendered pure by Bhagīratha when he brought down the river Ganges here.

[Ch 35 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The saints, adorned with purely good qualities, are incessantly engaged in doing good to others and how the people can be made happy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The saints, adorned with purely good qualities, are incessantly engaged in doing good to others and how the people can be made happy.

[Ch 35 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Intelligent One! Surely we have come to this auspicious Āśrama owing to our past good deeds (in previous births) and all our miseries are therefore brought to their ends today.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Intelligent One! Surely we have come to this auspicious Āśrama owing to our past good deeds (in previous births) and all our miseries are therefore brought to their ends today.

[Ch 35 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There are good many persons that roam in this world for their selfish ends; very few there exist like you who are always ready to do good to others. O Muni! True that I am very much distressed but this Vaśya is more distressed than me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There are good many persons that roam in this world for their selfish ends; very few there exist like you who are always ready to do good to others. O Muni! True that I am very much distressed but this Vaiśya is more distressed than me.

[Ch 35 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Both of us, very much afflicted by the miseries of world, have come gladly to your Śārama and are relieved of our bodily sufferings by your sight; and now, hearing your words, we are relieved also of our mental pain and sufferings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Both of us, very much afflicted by the miseries of the world, have come gladly to your Āśrama and are relieved of our bodily sufferings by your sight; and now, hearing your words, we are relieved also of our mental pain and sufferings.

[Ch 35 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brāhmaṇa! We are very much blessed and our objects have been gained by your nectar-like words; O Thou, the Ocean of mercy! You have purified us, out of your unbounded mercy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brāhmaṇa! We are very much blessed and our objects have been gained by your nectar-like words; O Thou, the Ocean of mercy! You have purified us, out of your unbounded mercy.

[Ch 35 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We are quite tired of this world; knowing this, do you lead us beyond this world by holding our hands and by initiating us with Mantrams.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We are quite tired of this world; knowing this, do you lead us beyond this world by holding our hands and by initiating us with Mantrams.

[Ch 35 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Best of Munis! We will first of all practise a very hard Tapasyā (asceticism) and worship Bhagavatī, the Awarder of happiness; then, seeing Her, we will go to our respective abodes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Best of Munis! We will first of all practise a very hard Tapasyā (asceticism) and worship Bhagavatī, the Awarder of happiness; then, seeing Her, we will go to our respective abodes.

[Ch 35 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now we expect the nine-lettered Mantram of the Devi from your mouth and practising the Navarātra warm we will fast and meditate on the Mantram. Note: The nine-lettered Mantram is “Om Mahisamardinayi Svāhā.” Instead of Om, any of the following may be used: “Hrim, Klim Aim, Strim, or Hūm mentioned in Śāradā Tilaka, Nārāyaṇī Tantra, or in Viśvasāra Tantra (see page 125 of Tantra Sāra).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now we expect the nine-lettered Mantram of the Devī from your mouth and practising the Navarātra varam we will fast and meditate on the Mantram. [Note :-- The nine-lettered Mantram is “Om Mahiṣamardinyai Svāhā.” Instead of Om, any of the following may be used :-- Hrīm, Klīm, Aim, Strīm, or Hūm mentioned in Sāradā Tilaka, Nārāyanī Tantra, or in Viśvasāra Tantra (see page 125 of Tantra Sāra ).]

[Ch 35 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! When the king and Vaiśya prayed thus to the Muni Sumedha, the best of that Munis, gave them the auspicious Mantram with its seed (Bīja) and as well what is to be meditated (Dhyāna).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! When the king and Vaiśya prayed thus to the Muni Sumedha, the best of the Munis, gave them the auspicious Mantram with its seed (Vīja) and as well what is to be meditated (Dhyān).

[Ch 35 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On getting the Mantram (with Rsi, Chanda, seed Sakti, and Devatā) duly, they welcomed the Muni and with his permission went to the holy bank of a river.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On getting the Mantram (with Ṛṣi, Chanda, seed Śakti, and Devatā) duly, they welcomed the Muni and with his permission went to the holy bank of a river.

[Ch 35 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Both of them were of delicate frames and both of them were fully determined; they went to a very solitary place and selected their place and took their seats there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Both of them were of delicate frames and both of them were fully determined; they went to a very solitary place and selected their place and took their seats there.

[Ch 35 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There they spent one month in repeating silently the Mantram and in chanting the three glorious deeds of Candī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There they spent one month in repeating silently the Mantram and in chanting the three glorious deeds of Caṇḍī.

[Ch 35 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In this short period of one month, they became very much attached to the lotus-feet of Bhavāni and their minds were also much pacified.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In this short period of one month, they became very much attached to the lotus-feet of Bhavānī and their minds were also much pacified.

[Ch 35 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They attended to no other business; only they used to go to the Muni once a day and bowing down before him they returned to their own seats of Kuśa grass and gave themselves up to the meditation of the Devi and always repeated silently their Matrams.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They attended to no other business; only they used to go to the Muni once a day and bowing down before him they returned to their own seats of Kuśa grass and gave themselves up to the meditation of the Devī and always repeated silently their Mantrams.

[Ch 35 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! One year thus passed away; they then abstained from taking fruits and subsisted on the leaves of trees.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! One year thus passed away; they then abstained from taking fruits and subsisted on the leaves of trees.

[Ch 35 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus engaged in meditation and asceticism they passed away another year sustaining themselves with dry leaves only.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus engaged in meditation and asceticism they passed away another year sustaining themselves with dry leaves only.

[Ch 35 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! When the two years thus passed, they got in their dreams the beautiful vision of the Goddess Bhagavatī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! When the two years thus passed, they got in their dreams the beautiful vision of the Goddess Bhagavatī.

[Ch 35 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They were very much delighted to see in their dreams the Ambikā Devi in red robes and decorated with various ornaments. They practised tapasyā in the third year with water as their only food.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They were very much delighted to see in their dreams the Ambikā Devī in red robes and decorated with various ornaments. They practised tapasyā in the third year with water as their only food.

[Ch 35 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus when they found that, after practising the tapas for three years, they could not see face to face the Devi they became very anxious to see the Devi and thought thus.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus when they found that, after practising the tapas for three years, they could not see face to face the Devī they became very anxious to see the Devī and thought thus :--

[Ch 35 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "When we have not been so fortunate as to see the Devi, Who art the Bestower of peace and happiness to the human beings, we will then leave our bodies, in deep distress and sorrow!"
NEW CORR ENG ──► “When we have not been so fortunate as to see the Devī, Who art the Bestower of peace and happiness to the human beings, we will then leave our bodies, in deep distress and sorrow!”

[Ch 35 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus thinking, the King prepared a beautiful triangular Kūndā (pit), firm and of one hand measure. Lighting a fire in that pit, the King began to cut off slices of flesh from his own body and offered them as oblations to the fire.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus thinking, the King prepared a beautiful triangular Kuṇḍa (pit), firm and of one hand measure. Lighting a fire in that pit, the King began to cut off slices of flesh from his own body and offered them as oblations to the fire.

[Ch 35 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Vaiśa, too, then did the same. O King! Both of them were very much excited and began to offer their blood as oblation to the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Vaiśya, too, then did the same. O King! Both of them were very much excited and began to offer their blood as oblation to the Devī.

[Ch 35 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi Bhagavatī, then, seeing then thus grieved, and that their hearts were overflowen with devotion towards Her, appeared direct before them and said thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī Bhagavatī, then, seeing them thus grieved, and that their hearts were over flown with devotion towards Her, appeared direct before them and said thus :--

[Ch 35 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O King! You are my favourite devotees; I am pleased with your Tapasyā; now ask whatever you desire; I will grant you that boon.” Then She spoke to the Vaiśya: “O Highly Fortunate One! I am pleased; ask without any delay any boon; I will grant that just now.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! You are my favourite devotees; I am pleased with your Tapasyā; now ask whatever you desire; I will grant you that boon. Then She spoke to the Vaiśya :-- “O Highly Fortunate One! I am pleased; ask without any delay any boon; I will grant that just now.”

[Ch 35 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of the Devi, the king Suratha was very much delighted and said thus: "O Devi! Grant me this boon that I be able today to conquer my enemies with my own power and that I may regain my kingdom." The Devi then spoke to him thus: "O King! Go to your own abode; your enemies are now enfeebled and will certainly be defeated. Note: The Devi, has now withdrawn Her own power from the enemies with which they were filled before. This is the result of the real sacrifice to the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the words of the Devī, the king Suratha was very much delighted and said thus :-- “O Devī! Grant me this boon that I be able today to conquer my enemies with my own power and that I may regain my kingdom.” The Devī then spoke to him thus :-- “O King! Go to your own abode; your enemies are now enfeebled and will certainly be defeated. (Note :-- The Devī has now withdrawn Her own power from the enemies with which they were filled before. This is the result of the real sacrifice to the Devī.)

[Ch 35 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Fortunate One! Your ministers will all come and prostrate themselves before your feet and will be obedient to you; you can now go back to your city and govern your subjects happily.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Fortunate One! Your ministers will all come and prostrate themselves before your feet and will be obedient to you; you can now go back to your city and govern your subjects happily.

[Ch 35 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Thus reign for Ayuta years (10,000 years) over your widely extended dominion; then when, you quit your body, you will again be born from Sūrya, and be known widely as Śavarni Manu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Thus reign for Ajuta years (10,000 years) over your widely extended dominion; then, when you quit your body, you will again be born from Sūrya, and be known widely as Sāvarṇi Manu.”

[Ch 35 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! The pure-natured Vaiśya said with folded hands: "O Devi! I have nothing to do with house, sons, nor wealth. O Mother! The house, wealth and sons, all these are so many sources of bondage to this world and are very transitory like dreams.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! The pure-natured Vaiśya said with folded hands :-- “O Devī! I have nothing to do with house, sons, nor wealth. O Mother! The house, wealth and sons, all these are so many sources of bondage to this world and are very transitory like dreams.

[Ch 35 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore give me knowledge so that my ties to this world be cut asunder. Persons who are devoid of knowledge, those fools are merged in this ocean of world. The wise never prefer this Sarināra; therefore they can cross this world."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore give me knowledge so that my ties to this world be cut asunder. Persons who are devoid of knowledge, those fools are merged in this ocean of world. The wise never prefer this Samsāra; therefore they can cross this world.

[Ch 35 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing this, the Mahāmāyā said to the Vaiśya, that stood in front of Her thus: "O Vaiśya! No doubt you will acquire knowledge."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing this, the Mahāmāyā said to the Vaiśya, that stood in front of Her thus :-- “O Vaiśya! No doubt you will acquire knowledge.”

[Ch 35 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus granting boons to them, the Devi then and there disappeared. After the Devi had disappeared, the King bowed down to the Muni, mounted on his horse and expressed a desire to go back to his kingdom.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus granting boons to them, the Devī then and there disappeared. After the Devī had disappeared, the King bowed down to the Muni, mounted on his horse and expressed a desire to go back to his kingdom.

[Ch 35 Verse 42-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Just at that time all his ministers and subjects came humbly before him, bowed down to him and standing before him with folded hands, said: "O King! Your enemies all had acted very sinfully; hence they were all slain in battle; you be pleased now to remain in your city, free from any enemy and govern your subjects.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Just at that time all his ministers and subjects came humbly before him, bowed down to him and standing before him with folded hands, said :-- “O King! Your enemies all had acted very sinfully; hence they were all slain in battle; you be pleased now to remain in your city, free from any enemy and govern your subjects.”

[Ch 35 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King, hearing thus, bowed down to the Muni and with his permission, started towards his kingdom, surrounded by his ministers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King, hearing thus, bowed down to the Muni and with his permission, started towards his kingdom, surrounded by his ministers.

[Ch 35 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On regaining his own kingdom, wife, relatives and kinsmen he began to enjoy the sea-girt earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On regaining his own kingdom, wife, relatives and kinsmen he began to enjoy the sea-girt earth.

[Ch 35 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the other hand, the Vaïsya became illumined with the Spiritual Knowledge and all his connections and attachments being completely severed, became free from all bondages. He became liberated in his life-time and travelled always from one place of pilgrimage to another and passed away his time in singing the glorious deeds of the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the other hand, the Vaiśya became illumined with the Spiritual Knowledge and all his connections and attachments being completely severed, became free from all bondages. He became liberated in his lifetime and travelled always from one place of pilgrimage to another and passed away his time in singing the glorious deeds of the Devī.

[Ch 35 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Thus I have described to you the most wonderful character of the Devi, what fruits were obtained by the King and the Vaiśya on their worshipping Her, how the Daityas were killed by Her and about her auspicious appearances on this earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Thus I have described to you the most wonderful character of the Devī, what fruits were obtained by the King and the Vaiśya on their worshipping Her, how the Daityas were killed by Her and about Her auspicious appearances on this earth.

[Ch 35 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Oh! Such is the glory of the Devi, leading to fearlessness amongst Her devotees. The mortal who hears constantly this excellent pure narrative of the Devi Bhagavatī, gets truly all the best and wonderful pleasures of this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Oh! Such is the glory of the Devī, leading to fearlessness amongst Her devotees. The mortal who hears constantly this excellent pure narrative of the Devī Bhagavatī, gets truly all the best and wonderful pleasures of this world.

[Ch 35 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No doubt anybody who hears this wonderful incident, will obtain knowledge, liberation, fame, happiness and purity.
NEW CORR ENG ──► No doubt anybody who hears this wonderful incident, will obtain knowledge, liberation, fame, happiness and purity.

[Ch 35 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The essence of all religious lies in this narration; therefore it leads, above all, to Dharma, Artha, Kāma, and Mokṣa (religion, wealth, desire and liberation). It grants all desires to human beings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The essence of all religions lies in this narration; therefore it leads, above all, to Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Mokṣa (religion, wealth, desire and liberation). It grants all desires to human beings.

[Ch 35 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: O Rṣis! The Maharṣī Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati, versed in all the departments to him this divine Sarñhitā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- O Ṛṣis! The Maharṣi Vyāsa, the son of Satyavatī, versed in all the departments of

[Ch 35 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The character of Caṇḍikā, the killing of the Daitya Sumbha, were thus narrated by the merciful Muni Veda Vyāsa. O Munis! I, too, have described to you the main points of this Purāṇa. Here ends the Thirty-fifth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the receiving of the boons by the King Suratha and the Vaiśya Samādhi in the Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam, the Maha Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa. ***
NEW CORR ENG ──► The character of Caṇḍikā, the killing of the Daitya Śumbha, were thus narrated by the merciful Muni Veda Vyāsa. O Munis! I, too, have described to you the main points of this Purāṇa. Here ends the Fifth Book. Here ends the Thirty-fifth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the receiving of the boons by the King Suratha and the Vaiśya Samādhi in the Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
