CHAPTER XXXV

On the King Suratha's Getting the Boons and on the Vaiśya Samādhi

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वय: श्रुत्वा दुःस्तिती वैश्यपार्थिवंति ।

प्रिणपत्य मुनिं प्रीत्या प्रश्रावनन्तीं प्रुगम् ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! Hearing thus the Rsj’s words, the king Suratha and Vaśya, who were very distressed in their minds, became very much comforted and bowed down to the Muni with great humility and modesty.

इर्शणोतृष्तनयनावृतुवार्म्यकोविदी ।

कृताज्ञिलपुटी शान्ती बफित्यणचेतोर्षि ॥ २ ॥

Their eyes expressed their gladness and their hearts were filled with loving devotion. Both of them, then, clever in speaking and of calm and quiet temper, began to address him with their folded hands.

भगव्याचितावष्ठ शान्ती दीनी शुचाचिति ।

तब सुक्सारस्वथा गड़वेव भगीरथः ॥ ३ ॥

साध्वः सभ्यवन्तीह परोयकृतितत्पराः ।

अकृकिमगुणागामः सुखद्वः सर्वदैर्वितान् ॥ ४ ॥

O Bhagavan! We were passing our days in a very humble and distressed spot; we are today purified by your good words, just as the country was entered pure by Bhagiratha when he brought down the river Ganges here.

पूर्वेण्ययुस्त्रैन प्राणतोर्यमाशय: शुभः ।

त्वावाष्प्यं महाभाग महादुःखविनाशकः ॥ 5 ॥

The saints, adorned with purely good qualities, are incessantly engaged in doing good to others and how the people can be made happy.

भवन्ति मानावा भूमौ बह्वः स्वार्थतयतः ।

परार्थसाधन दक्षा: कैकित्वसार्थ पिवारुगाः ॥ 6 ॥

O Intelligent One! Surely we have come to this auspicious Āśrama owing to our past good deeds (in previous births) and all our miseries are therefore brought to their ends today.

दुःवितोर्ध सुनिश्रे श्रेयोर्ध चातिपु:वितः ।

उभी संसारसंतनो तनाभ्रमपदे मुदा ॥ ७ ॥

There are good many persons that roam in this world for their selfish ends; very few there exist like you who are always ready to do good to others. O Muni! True that I am very much distressed but this Vaśya is more distressed than me.

दर्शनाटवे हैं विद्वानां दुःखमिहावयोः ।

देहर्ज मानसं वाक्यमश्वणदेव साम्पत्न ॥ ८ ॥

Both of us, very much afflicted by the miseries of world, have come gladly to your Śārama and are relieved of our bodily sufferings by your sight; and now, hearing your words, we are relieved also of our mental pain and sufferings.

ध्यानावारां कृतकृत्यी जाती सूकिसुपारासत् ।

पाविती भवता बहु-कृपया करणणार ॥9॥

O Brāhmaṇa! We are very much blessed and

Book V Chapter XXXV

our objects have been gained by your nectar-like words; O Thou, the Ocean of mercy! You have purified us, out of your unbounded mercy.

यूहाणास्मकरी साधो नय पारं भवाणीवात् ।

मनौ शंज्ञाविति ज्ञाला मन्त्रदोनेन संग्रदम् ॥ 10 ॥

We are quite tired of this world; knowing this, do you lead us beyond this world by holding our hands and by initiating us with Mantrams.

तपः कृत्यातिविषुले समायाध्य सुखप्रदाम् ।

संग्रण्य दर्शनं भूयो याच्यावो जिनजनित्रम् ॥ 11 ॥

O Best of Munis! We will first of all practise a very hard Tapasyā (asceticism) and worship Bhagavatī, the Awarder of happiness; then, seeing Her, we will go to our respective abodes.

वदनातल सम्राग्य देरीमन्ते नवाक्षगम् ।

स्पर्गं च करिष्यावो निर्गहारी धृततन्ते ॥ 12 ॥

Now we expect the nine-lettered Mantram of the Devi from your mouth and practising the Navarātra warm we will fast and meditate on the Mantram.

Note: The nine-lettered Mantram is “Om Mahisamardinayi Svāhā.” Instead of Om, any of the following may be used: “Hrim, Klim Aim, Strim, or Hūm mentioned in Śāradā Tilaka, Nārāyaṇī Tantra, or in Viśvasāra Tantra (see page 125 of Tantra Sāra).

व्यास उवाच

इति सञ्चोदितसाध्यां सुभेय मुनिसनमः ।

ददौ मन्त्र शुभं ताथ्यां ध्यानबीजुर्ज:सनम् ॥ 13 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When the king and Vaiśya prayed thus to the Muni Sumedha, the best of that Munis, gave them the auspicious Mantram with its seed (Bīja) and as well what is to be meditated (Dhyāna).

तै च प्राय युनेर्मंत्र समान्य नुरुदेवतां ।

जग्मनुर्धैश्यराजानी नदीतीरमनुत्तमम् ॥ 14 ॥

On getting the Mantram (with Rsi, Chanda, seed Sakti, and Devatā) duly, they welcomed the Muni and with his permission went to the holy bank of a river.

एकान्ते विजने स्थाने कृत्यासनपरिष्ठम् ।

उपविष्टी स्विगर्ज़ी तालतील कृणोदरी ॥ 15 ॥

Both of them were of delicate frames and both of them were fully determined; they went to a very solitary place and selected their place and took their seats there.

मन्त्रबाज्यती शान्ती चरित्रव्यपाठकते ।

निव्यनुर्मामेकं तु तत्र छायापरायणे ॥ 16 ॥

There they spent one month in repeating silently the Mantram and in chanting the three glorious deeds of Candī.

तयोर्मसतैनैव जाता ग्रीतिनुतमा ।

पदाम्बुजे भवान्यासु विश्या कृष्टिसत्वाणयतम् ॥ 17 ॥

In this short period of one month, they became very much attached to the lotus-feet of Bhavāni and their minds were also much pacified.

कदाचित्यादयोगीता मुनेस्तस्य महात्मनः ।

कृतप्रणामावगत्य तत्कृतछ्छ कुशासने ॥ 18 ॥

नान्यकार्यपरी क्वापि ध्युपतु: कदाचन ।

देवीध्यानपरि नित्यं जममन्त्रत सदा ॥ 19 ॥

They attended to no other business; only they used to go to the Muni once a day and bowing down before him they returned to their own seats of Kuśa grass and gave themselves up to the meditation of the Devi and always repeated silently their Matrams.

एवं जाते तदा पूर्णे तत्र संवत्सरे नृप ।

बध्ववृतः फलहारं त्वलत्वा पाणिज्ञो नृप ॥ 20 ॥

O King! One year thus passed away; they then abstained from taking fruits and subsisted on the leaves of trees.

वर्षमेकं तपस्तत्र चक्रतर्गैर्यपार्थिवी ।

गुखकपाणिजी दान्ती जपध्यानपाराणी ॥ 21 ॥

Thus engaged in meditation and asceticism they passed away another year sustaining themselves with dry leaves only.

पूर्णे वर्षेयुने जाते कदाचिद्धर्नंचे च तो ।

प्राप्तः स्वपमध्ये तु भगवत्या मनोहरम् ॥ 22 ॥

O King! When the two years thus passed, they got in their dreams the beautiful vision of the Goddess Bhagavatī.

रक्ताम्बराशं देर्वीं चाफभूषणभूषिताम् ।

कदाप्रिवृष्णितः स्वदेपेयपण्यज्ञान्द्विक्काम ॥ 23  ॥

वीक्ष्य स्वपे व अ ती देर्वीं प्रीतिवृत्ती बभूवतुः ।

जलाहारैस्वृत्तीये तु स्विती संवलसरे तु ती ॥ 24 ॥

They were very much delighted to see in their dreams the Ambikā Devi in red robes and decorated with various ornaments. They practised tapasyā in the third year with water as their only food.

एवं वर्षत्रयं कृत्वा ततन्ती वैश्यपार्थिवी ।

चक्रतुर्ली तदा चिन्तां चिन्ते एरंगनलासली ॥ 25 ॥

Thus when they found that, after practising the tapas for three years, they could not see face to face the Devi they became very anxious to see the Devi and thought thus.

प्रत्यक्षरूपं देवना न प्राप्त शान्तिन्दं नृणाम ।

देहत्यागं कार्यिक्यो दुःस्तिधो भुगमातुर्गे ॥ 26 ॥

"When we have not been so fortunate as to see the Devi, Who art the Bestower of peace and happiness to the human beings, we will then leave our bodies, in deep distress and sorrow!"

इति संचित्य नमसा राजा कुण्डे चकार है ।

त्रिजोर्ण सुविर्यं सौम्यं हस्तमाजप्रमाणतः ॥ 27 ॥

संस्थाय पावकं राजा तथा श्रेयो3तीभक्रिमान्

ग्राहावासी निर्ज मांसं छिल्चा छिल्चा पुनः पुनः ॥ 28 ॥

Thus thinking, the King prepared a beautiful triangular Kūndā (pit), firm and of one hand measure. Lighting a fire in that pit, the King began to cut off slices of flesh from his own body and offered them as oblations to the fire.

तथा वैश्योरीय दीपेजनी स्वामांस प्रापक्षिप्पताः ।

क्रीप्रेण वार्ति चापये द्वदुतुरी कृतोद्याए ॥ 29 ॥

The Vaiśa, too, then did the same. O King! Both of them were very much excited and began to offer their blood as oblation to the Devi.

तदा भगवती दत्ता प्रत्यक्षं दर्शनं ततोः ।

ग्रह ग्रंतििगोरद्धोती कृद्धया ती कुःवित्ती कृष्णम् ॥ 30 ॥

The Devi Bhagavatī, then, seeing then thus grieved, and that their hearts were overflowen with devotion towards Her, appeared direct before them and said thus:

श्रीद्व्यवाच

वरं वरय भो राजन् वने मनसि वांतिभान् ।

तृहा5ई तपसा तेउड घफ्नो5स त्वं मते माम ॥ 31 ॥

वैश्यं प्राह तदा देवी प्रसज्ञाई महामते ।

किं ते३भीई तद्वम्यघ्न प्राथयागु मनोपातनम् ॥ 32 ॥

“O King! You are my favourite devotees; I am pleased with your Tapasyā; now ask whatever you desire; I will grant you that boon.” Then She spoke to the Vaiśya: “O Highly Fortunate One! I am pleased; ask without any delay any boon; I will grant that just now.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छूता वचनं रजा तामुवाच मुदावितः ।

देहि मेऊढ़ निज नराचं हतशुबर्ब वन्ता ॥ 33 ॥

तमुवाच तदा देवी गच्छ राजजिंत्र गृह्म ।

शत्रवः क्रीणतच्चाले गविष्यन्ति पराजिताः ॥ 34 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of the Devi, the king Suratha was very much delighted and said thus: "O Devi! Grant me this boon that I be able today to conquer my enemies with my own power and that I may regain my kingdom." The Devi then spoke to him thus: "O King! Go to your own abode; your enemies are now enfeebled and will certainly be defeated.

Note: The Devi, has now withdrawn Her own power from the enemies with which they were filled before. This is the result of the real sacrifice to the Devi.

मन्थिपास्तु समागत ते पशिष्यित पादयोः ।

कुरु राज्यं मद्धापान नगरे सर्व यद्यापुकम् ॥ 35 ॥

O Fortunate One! Your ministers will all come and prostrate themselves before your feet and will be obedient to you; you can now go back to your city and govern your subjects happily.

कृत्वा राज्यं सुविशुतं वर्षाणामवुतं नृप ।

देहान्ते जन्य संप्राय्य सूर्याच्छ भविता मनुः ॥ 36 ॥

O King! Thus reign for Ayuta years (10,000 years) over your widely extended dominion; then when, you quit your body, you will again be born from Sūrya, and be known widely as Śavarni Manu.

Book V Chapter XXXV

यास उवाच

वैय्यस्तामयुवाविदं कृतांजलिपुटः गृषचि: ।

न मे गृहेण कार्यं वै न पुवेण धनेन वा ॥ 37 ॥

सर्वे बन्धकारं मातः स्वपलब्धशंरं सुकटम् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! The pure-natured Vaiśya said with folded hands: "O Devi! I have nothing to do with house, sons, nor wealth. O Mother! The house, wealth and sons, all these are so many sources of bondage to this world and are very transitory like dreams.

ज्ञान में देहि विश्वरं मोक्षदं बक्यपाराणम् ॥ 38 ॥

असारोर्स्थिश्छे संसारे मृढ़ा मज्जिति पाशाः ।

पीढ़ता: संतरीतीह तमाजेच्छलित संसृदिति ॥ 39 ॥

Therefore give me knowledge so that my ties to this world be cut asunder. Persons who are devoid of knowledge, those fools are merged in this ocean of world. The wise never prefer this Sarināra; therefore they can cross this world."

व्यास उवाच

तदाकर्णं महामाया वैश्यं प्रात पुरः स्थितम् ।

वैश्वयं तव जानं भविष्यति न संशयः ॥ 40 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing this, the Mahāmāyā said to the Vaiśya, that stood in front of Her thus: "O Vaiśya! No doubt you will acquire knowledge."

इति दत्वा वरं ताथ्यां तरेवितार्थीयत ।

अर्जीनं नतायां तु राजा तं मुनिसतमम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

प्राणय ह्यामास्हा गतमाय मनो दर्धे ।

Thus granting boons to them, the Devi then and there disappeared. After the Devi had disappeared, the King bowed down to the Muni, mounted on his horse and expressed a desire to go back to his kingdom.

तदैव तस्य सचिवास्त्रागाल्य नृपं प्रजाः ॥ 42 ॥

प्रणेभूर्विनयोपेतास्तमृषु: प्रांजलिस्थितः ।

राजसेन शगवः सर्वे पापाच्छ निर्हता रो ॥ 43 ॥

राज्यं निष्क्रौकं कृप कृक्व पुरमाधिस्तः ।

Just at that time all his ministers and subjects came humbly before him, bowed down to him and

standing before him with folded hands, said: "O King! Your enemies all had acted very sinfully; hence they were all slain in battle; you be pleased now to remain in your city, free from any enemy and govern your subjects.

तच्छुल्चा वचनं राजा नत्वा ते मुनिसत्तमम् ॥ 44 ॥

आपच्छा निर्वेयी तत मान्धिभः परिवारिति: ।

The King, hearing thus, bowed down to the Muni and with his permission, started towards his kingdom, surrounded by his ministers.

संग्राय च निजं राज्य दारात्मवजनबोधायन् ॥ 45 ॥

बुभुजे पृथिवीं सर्वां ततः सागरमेखलाम् ।

On regaining his own kingdom, wife, relatives and kinsmen he began to enjoy the sea-girt earth.

वैश्योर्षि ज्ञानमासादा पुक्तसर्ग: समन्तः ॥ 46 ॥

कालातिवाहनं तन मुक्तबन्धधकार है ।

तीर्थेयु विचरनायभ्यमालया गुणानथ ॥ 47 ॥

On the other hand, the Vaïsya became illumined with the Spiritual Knowledge and all his connections and attachments being completely severed, became free from all bondages. He became liberated in his life-time and travelled always from one place of pilgrimage to another and passed away his time in singing the glorious deeds of the Devi.

एतते कवितं देल्याश्रितं परमाढ़तुम् ।

आराध्यनकलापारिवरीयावद्धुपवैश्ययो: ॥ 48 ॥

दैत्यानां हननं प्रोक्ते प्रतुषांविसथा शुभः ।

O King! Thus I have described to you the most wonderful character of the Devi, what fruits were obtained by the King and the Vaiśya on their worshipping Her, how the Daityas were killed by Her and about her auspicious appearances on this earth.

एवंप्रभावा सा देवी भक्तानामभयप्रदा ॥ 49 ॥

यः शृणीति नरो निव्यमेतावल्यानुत्तमम् ।

संग्रापोति नरः सत्यं संसारसुखमद्धुतम् ॥ 50 ॥

Oh! Such is the glory of the Devi, leading to fearlessness amongst Her devotees. The mortal who hears constantly this excellent pure narrative

of the Devi Bhagavatī, gets truly all the best and wonderful pleasures of this world.

ज्ञानंद मोक्षंदं चैव कीतिंदं सुखदं तथा ।

पावनं श्वणानृप्मेतदाख्यानमदूनम ।। 51 ॥

No doubt anybody who hears this wonderful incident, will obtain knowledge, liberation, fame, happiness and purity.

अर्जालायंदं नृणां सर्वोर्भमेवातून ।

धार्मिकामोक्षाणां कारणं परं मतम् ॥ 52 ॥

The essence of all religious lies in this narration; therefore it leads, above all, to Dharma, Artha, Kāma, and Mokṣa (religion, wealth, desire and liberation). It grants all desires to human beings.

सूत उवाच

जनमेजयेन राज्ञासौ पृष्टः सत्यवतीसूतः ।

उवाच संहितां दिव्यो न्यासः सर्वांशत्चवित् ॥ 53 ॥

Sūta said: O Rṣis! The Maharṣī Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati, versed in all the departments to him this divine Sarñhitā.

चरितं चण्डिकावास्तु शुभदैत्यवधाश्रितम् ।

कथयामास भपावान्कृष्णः काकणीको मुपिनः ।

इति व: कथितः सारः पुराणानां मुनीधारा: ॥ ५४ ॥

इति श्रीमदौबीभावतं महापुराणे3शदासाहक्वां सहितायां

पत्रकन्चे पत्रविरोधध्या: 11 35 11

व्योमांकाध्विसंच्यातः 2090 श्लोकैक्यांसेन धीमता

श्रीमद्वीभागलतस्याय पडुमकन्य इग्रितः 11 5 II

समाप्तोउं घडुमः स्कन्यः

The character of Caṇḍikā, the killing of the Daitya Sumbha, were thus narrated by the merciful Muni Veda Vyāsa. O Munis! I, too, have described to you the main points of this Purāṇa.

Here ends the Thirty-fifth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the receiving of the boons by the King

Suratha and the Vaiśya Samādhi in the

Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam, the Maha Purānam,

of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi

Veda Vyāsa.

***
