CHAPTER IX

On the Divisions of the Continent

श्रीनारायण उवाच

हरिवर्ष च भपावान्हहरिः पापनाशनः ।

वर्तते योगयुक्तात्मा भक्तागुहाकारकः ॥ १ ॥

तस्य तद्धितं रूपं महाभागवतो3सुरः ।

पश्य-भक्तिभागयुक्तः स्तौति तद्वगुणतत्ववित् ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: In Harivarsa, the Bhagavān Hari is shining splendid as a Yogi in the form of Narasimha. The Mahā Bhāgavat (most devoted) Prahlāda, who knows the attributes of God worships and chants hymns with his whole hearted devotion, seeing that beautiful form, gladdening to all the people.

प्रहाद उवाच

उठ नामो भगवते नरसिंहाय नमस्तेजसे

आविर्याप्रियं वउदरंदु कर्मांशयान्

रंधय रंधय तमो ग्रास ग्रास उं० सहाहा ।

अभयं मामतानि भूयिष्ठः ।। २ ।।

स्वस्यन्त्य विध्धस्य खलः प्रसीदातं

ध्यान्तु भूतानि शिवं मिथो धिया ।

मानछ भई भजतादधोक्षेजे

आवेश्यन्तं नो मितिरयदैतुकी ॥ ३ ॥

Prahlāda spoke: “I bow down to Thee, the Bhagavān Narasinhā Deva. Thou art the Light of all Lights. Thy big teeth are like thunderbolts. Let

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

The manifest in Thy most terrible form. Let Thee destroy the desires of the people to do Karma and let Thou devour the great Ignorance (Ajñāna) the Moha (delusion) of the people. Thou art the receptacle of the Sattva, Raja and Tamo Gunas. Let myself be always free from any fear by Thy Grace. "Om Khraum!" Let this whole world rest completely in peace and happiness. Let the cheats quit their guiles and be pure and simple. Let all the people quit completely their animosities towards each other and think of their welfare. Let all the people be from making injuries to others and be peaceful; and let them have their control over their passions. Let our mind be completely free from desires and rest entirely and devotedly to Thy lotus-feet. Let us not be attached to sons, wives, wealth, house or to any other worldly objects. If there be any attachment, let it be to the objects dear to the Bhagavān. He who barely sustains his body and soul and controls himself completely, success is very near to him; not so to the persons that are attached to the sense.

मासगदातरामजवितचक्युपु

संगो यदि स्याद्वावस्थिपुय नः ।

यः प्राणयुच्या परितृष्ट आत्मावान्

सिद्धान्यदूगत तथेत्रिद्धिप्यः ॥ 4 ॥

The dirt of the mind, that is not washed away by bathing in the Ganges or by taking resource to the Tirthas, etc., is removed by the company of the devotees to the God and by their influence, hearing, thinking, and meditating on the attributes of the Bhagavān.

यत्सईत्ब्यं तिजवीर्वेधिभवं

तीर्थे मुुः: संस्यूगतां हि मानसम् ।

हृत्यजोउनःश्रुतिपिभर्तोउन्हजें को

को वै न सेवेत मुकुन्टविद्विमम् ॥ 5 ॥

So who is there that does not serve the Bhagavān! We who has got Niskāma Bhakti (devotion without regard to any fruits thereof) to the Bhagavān, to him come always the Devatā, Dharma and Jñāna and other higher qualities.

यस्यासित भक्तिभगवत्यकिंचना

सर्वैंगुणैतज समासते सुरा: ।

हरावभकस्य कुतो महद्रुगण

मनोरथेनासति धातवो बहिः ॥ 6 ॥

But he who indulges in various mental phantasms, without any Bhakti to the Bhagavān, he follows the worldly happiness that is certainly to be hated and never he gets Vairāgvam and other higher qualities).

हरित्र साक्षतद्भगवाक्येरिणामात्मा

इषाणामिव तोयमीभितमत् ।

हित्वा महांस्तं यदि सज़ते गृहे

तदा महत्च वयसां दंपतीनाम ॥ 7 ॥

As water is life to the fish, so the Bhagavān Hari is the self of all embodied beings and so He is to be specially prayed for. So if a high-souled person be attached to household happiness, without thinking of God, then his greatness dwindles into a trifling insignificance like the ordinary pleasure of man and woman when they are full of youth.

तस्माउ्जोगारविषादमन्युमान-

सूहाभवदैन्याधिमूलम् ।

हिहा गृहं संसुवितघकावलं

नृसिंहगवर्ध भजलां कुतो भयम् ॥ 8 ॥

So leave, at once, the home that is the source of Birth and Death and leave Trsṇā (thirst, desire), clinging to life, low-spiritedness, name, and fame, egoism, shame, fear, poverty and loss of one's honour and worship the Lotus-Feet of the Bhagavān Nṛsiniha Deva and be entirely fearless."

एवं दैत्यपितः सोउषि भक्तान्त्रदुनिर्भीजते ।

नृहरि पायमतंगहिर हत्यघावासिनम् ॥ 9 ॥

केतुमाले च वर्ष हैं भगवान्यमरूपयूढ़ ।।

आस्ते नद्वर्गेयानां पूजनीयश सर्वैद ॥ 10 ॥

Thus Prahlāda, the Lord of the Daityas, daily worships devotedly the Bhagavān Nṛsiniha, resplendent in his lotus heart, the death blow, the lion to all the elephant sins. In the Ketumāla Varṣa, the Bhagavān Nārāyana is reigning in the form of the Kāma Deva, the God of Love.

Book VIII Chapter IX

एतेनोपासते स्तोत्रजालेने च सामधिज्ञा ।

सा तद्वर्भैनाया सततं महतां मान्यदायिका ॥ १ १  ॥

The people there always worship Him. The daughter of Ocean, the Indirā Devi, who confers honour and glory to the Mahātmās is the presiding Deity of the Varṣa. She always worships the Kāma Deva with the following verses:

सोवाच

अः हृां हृां हृं अः नमो भगवते हृषीकेशगय सर्वगुणाविशेषै-बिलिशितायने आकृतीनां चितीनां चेतसां विशेषाणां चाधिपत्ये पोडणकलाय छेदोमयायात्रमयायामुतमयाया सर्वेमयाय महेशे ओजसे बलाय कांताय कामाय कामाय नमस्ते उथघत्र भृप्ता ।

सिध्यो व्रतैल्चां रूधीकेश्वरं स्वतो

ह्रागाख्य लोके पतिशागासतेउ-यम् ।

तासां न ते वे परिपार्यात्ययं

प्रियं धनायपुयि वतोउस्तवतः ॥ 12 ॥

The Lakṣmī Devi spoke: “Om, Hrām, Hrim, Hrūm, Om namo Bhagavate Hrṣikeśāya! Thou art the Bhagavān of the nature of Om. Thou are the Director, the Lord of the Senses; Thy Atman is the Highest and the Receptacle of all the good things. All the Karma Vṛttis, all the Jñāna Vṛttis, and effort and resolution and other faculties of the mind, act in their respective channels by Thy looking and by their being constantly practised in Thee. And the elements over which they get their masteries are subservient to Thy Laws. The mind and the other eleven Indriyas, and touch, taste and other five senses are but Thy parts. All the rites and ceremonies observed in the Vedas are found in Thee. Thou art the infinite store of all the the foodings of the Jivas. From Thee flows the Paramānanda, the Highest Bliss. Thou art All, Thou art the Substance, Purity incarnate; Thou art the Energy, the Strength manifest in all. Thou art the Finish of all the happiness and Thou art the Only One Substance, that can be desired by the people. So obeisance to Thee! This Thy Lordship is not dependent on any other body. The women that

know Thee, the Lord of all and worship other bodies for their husbands, those husbands can never save them, their lives, their wealth, progeny or other dear things as those are controlled by Kāla (Time) and Karma.

स वै पत्ति: स्वादुकृतोभयः स्वतः

समंततः पाति भयातुंः जनम् ।

स एक एवेतरथा मिथो भयं

नैवात्मलाभादिधि न्यन्ते परम् ॥ 13 ॥

So they can not be termed husbands at all; Thou art the Real Husband; and no other. For Thou art naturally fearless and Thou protectest in every way the persons that becomes afraid.

या तस्य ते पदारसोरहाईर्ण

न कामयेत्सास्त्रिलकामलपेतरा ।

तदेव रासीयितमतीयिततोर्धिता

यद्वनयात्बा भगवान्त्रापते ॥ 14 ॥

Thou art the Lord of all wealth; so no other is superior to Thee. How can then, they be independent whose happiness depends on others! The lady that desires to worship Thy lotus feet only and becomes subservient to no others, she attains all the desires.

मरुदापवेउजेसुरासुरादिस्तम्यंत

उंग तप ऐन्न्ये तिथयः तिथयः।

त्रहेत भवत्यादपरायणात्रा मां

विद्वत्यहित्बद्धया यातोर्जित ॥ 15 ॥

Again the lady who, desiring other desires than to get Thee, does not worship Thy louts feet, Thou fulfilled the desires of her too. But, O Bhagavān! When the period of enjoyment of these things ceases and when the objects of these enjoyments are destroyed, then she repents much due to the loss of those things. Brahmā, Mahādeva, the Suras and the Asuras practise hard Tapasyās to get me, impelled by their desires to attain the objects of sense enjoyments; but he only really gets me who worships and takes refuge of Thy louts feet only, for my heart is entirely attached to Thee.

स त्वं ममाधयच्छुत शीक्षित्य बंदितं

कार्विजुं यच्वदायीय सात्वताम ।

विषर्षि मां लक्ष्मवेणय मायया

क ईंडशयेहितमूँहिंतुं विषुः ॥ 16 ॥

So, O Acyuta! Kindly shew Thy Grace and put, on my head, Thy lotus palm, praised by the universal people that Thou placest on Thy Bhaktas. O Bhagavān! That Thou takest me in Thy Bosom is a sign of Thy Grace.

एवं कामं सुवंचेय वेलकबभुस्वलिपणम् ।

प्रजापतिनुखा वर्षनाथा: कामस्य सिद्धदे ॥ 17 ॥

त्यक्षे नाम वर्षे च मृति भगवतः पराम् ।

मात्यां देवागुरैर्वैधां मनु: सतीति निरंतरम् ॥ 18 ॥

No one can fathom the deeds of Thee, the Only Controller of all. Thus the Prajāpati and the Lords of that Varsa, worship the Bhagavān, the Friend of all, with a view to attain their respective desires and Siddhis. In Ramyak Varsa, the Matsya form of the Bhagavān is set up and consecrated. The Suras and the Asuras worship Him. The highly intelligent Manu always chant hymns to that Excellent Form thus: “Obeisance to Him who is the Life of all, the Essence and Strength of all, to that Great Fish Form, the Body Incarnate of Sattva Guna, who is of the nature of Om and Bliss.”

मनुकाव

अं० नमो मुख्यतमाय नमः सत्वाय

प्राणायोजसे बलाय महामल्याय नमः ।

अनन्दिकृशाखिलतोकामलकैर-

दृष्टपो विचारयुक्यन्तः निवारयुक्यन्तः।

Thou art the Lord of all the Lokapālas and of the form of the Vedas. Thou art within and without all this universe, moving and non-moving; still all the beings are unable to see Thy form. As the people bring under their control the wooden dolls, so Thou controlled the universe by the rules and prohibitions under the names of the Brāhmaṇas, etc.

स इंश्रस्तं च दुर्द वर्णं गवन् ।

नाना यथा दासमर्थी नरः त्रिव्यम् ।

ये लोकायाला: किल मससज्जरा

हिल्या यततो5पि पृथक् समेत्य च ।

पालु न रोग्हक्रिपदक्षतुष्यद:

सरीमुं रक्षाणुबदर इयूयते ॥ 20 ॥

Thou art the God. The Lokapālas, being overcome by the fever of jealousy and pride, become quite unable, either individually or collectively, to quit their jealousies and to protect the tripeds, quadrupeds, reptiles and snakes; so Thou art the God.

भवान् युगांतर्णव कर्मभालिनि

क्षौणीविमागोपधितीकरां नित्यम् ।

मया सहोहक्रम तेउज ओजसा

तस्मै जगतगागणात्मने नमः ॥ 21 ॥

Thou hadt upheld this earth along with me and with the medicinal plants and creepers; and Thou shewedest the highest luminous light in the great ocean, at the time of Pralaya, tossed with surging waves and didst roam there. Thou art the Self of all the beings in the universe.

एवं स्तीत च देवेशं मनु: पार्थिवस्तमः ।

मत्थवातरं देवेशं संशयच्छेदाकारकम् ॥ 2 2 ॥

So we bow down to Thee. Thou the Manu, the best of the mortal beings, used to praise the Bhagavān, who took His incarnation in the shape of the Fish, the Remover of all doubts.

ध्यानयोगेन देवस्य निर्घृताशेषकल्पय: ।

आते परिचरभ्यक्या महाभागवातनोम : ॥ 23 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे अश्मकक्ये भुवनकोशगवर्नि

नवनोउषयाः : ॥ 24 ॥

Manu, the foremost of the Bhāgavatas (the devotees) is reigning there in the service of the Fish Incarnation of the Bhagavān, with intense meditation and expurging all sins and with great devotion."

Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narration of the divisions of the continent in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VIII Chapter IX

