CHAPTER XLIV

On Svadhā

शीनारायण उवाच

शृणु नार्त वक्ष्यामि स्वधोपाख्यानमुतम् ।

विद्गणां च तृत्यितरं आद्धाराकफलवधेनम् ॥ १ ॥

सुर्धेरादौ विगुर्णानासर्ज जनतां विधि: ।

चतुरष्ठ भूतिमतर्सीशं तेजःस्वकीर्णीः ॥ २ ॥

Nāyāyana said: O Nārada! I will tell you now the excellent anecdote of Svadhā, pleasing to the Pitrs and enhancing the fruits of the Śrāddha ceremony when foods are offered to the Pitrs. Listen. Before the creation, the Creator created seven Pitrs. Four out of them are with forms and the other three are of the nature of Teja (light).

Note: Kavyavāhoanalah somo yamaścāryamā tathā, agnisīvāttāh barhiṣadah somāpā pīt devatāḥ. These seven Pitrs are according to the other Purānas.

श्रुा सप्तिगुणान् सुखक्यात्मानोहान् ।

आहारं ससुने तेनां आद्ध तपणपूर्वकम् ॥ 3 ॥

स्नानं तर्पणयरंतं श्राद्धे तु देवधुजनम् ।

आद्धिकं च सितंध्यान्तं विघाणां च श्रुते श्रुतम् ॥ 4 ॥

Seeing the beautiful and lovely forms of the Pitrs, He made arrangements for their food in the form of Śrāddhas and Tarpanas, etc. (funeral ceremony and peace-offerings), etc. (Śrāddha, solemn obsequies performed in honour of the manes of deceased ancestors.) Taking bath, performing Śrāddha ceremony upto Tarpanam (peace-offerings), worshipping the Devas and doing Sandhyā thrice a day these are the daily duties of the Brāhmaṇas.

नित्यं न कुयांची विप्राससंध्यं श्राद्तपंगण।

बलि वेट्यबनि सेठपि विषतीने ययोरगः ॥ ५ ॥

देसीसेवाहितीनच श्रीहरनेविद्युपं क

भस्मितं सृतकं तस्य न कर्महीश्न नारद ॥ ७ ॥

If any Brāhmaṇa does not perform daily the Trisandhyās, Śrāddha, Tarpana, worship and the reciting of the Vedas, he becomes devoid of fire like a snake without any poison. He who does not perform the devotional service of the Devi, who

eats food not offered to Śri Hari, who remains impure till death is not entitled to do any karma whatsoever.

बहा श्राद्धादिकं सुहा जगम पितृहैते ।

न प्राप्तुविति चितरो द्वर्ति बहाणादय: ॥ 7 ॥

सर्वे च जमयु: कृष्टिता: तिज्ञास्तु बहणण: सभाम् ।

सर्वे निवेदने चकृत्सेव जगतां विधिम् ॥ 8 ॥

Thus, introducing the Śrāddhas, etc., for the Pitṛs, Brahmā went to His own abode. The Brāhmaṇas went on doing the Śrāddhas for the Ptṛs, but the Pitṛs could not enjoy them and so they remained without food and were not satisfied. They all, being hungry and sad, went to the Council of Brahmā and informed Him everything from beginning to end.

ब्रह्मा च मानसी कन्यां सुखे तु मनोहगम् ।

रूपयीवनसंपांजी शतचंद्रसिन्धाननम् ॥ 9 ॥

विद्यार्ती गुणवतीमतिरूपवर्ती सतीम् ।

झतचेषकवाणीं रत्नप्रपणभूषितम् ॥ 10 ॥

Brahmā then created out of His mind one daughter very beautiful, full of youth and having a face lovely, as if equal to one hundred moons. That women was best in all respects whether in form, beauty, qualities or in learning. Her colour was white like the white Campaka flower and her body was adorned all over with jewel ornaments. This form was very pure, ready to grant boons, auspicious and the part of Prakṛti.

विश्युजां प्रकृतेरीं शसितां वरदां रुष्माम ।

स्वाधामिधां च सुर्तीं लक्ष्मीलक्षणारंसुतम् ॥ १ १ ॥

शतपघपदान्सतपादपचं च विष्तीम् ।

पत्नीं विगुणां पचास्वां पचजां पचलोचनाम् ॥ १ २ ॥

Her face was beaming with smiles; her teeth were very beautiful and her body shewed signs, of Lakṣmī (i.e., of wealth and prosperity) Her name was Svadhā. Her lotus-feet were situated on one hundred lotuses. She was the wife of the Pitrs. Her face resembled that of a lotus and Her eyes looked like water lilies. She was born of the lotus born Brahmā.

चितृध्यश्व ददौ बह्मा तुहेध्यस्तुष्टिशिपीम् ।

बाहाणानां चोपदेशं चकार योपनीयकम् ॥ 13 ॥

स्वधांतं मंमपुच्चार्य चितृध्यो देवमित्यपि ।

क्रमेण तेन विग्राका चित्र दानं ददुः पुरा ॥ 14 ॥

The Grand-father Brahmā made over that daughter of the nature of Tuṣṭi (Contentment) to the hands of the Pitṛs and they were satisfied. Brahmā advised the Brāhmanas privately that whenever they would offer any thing to the Pitṛs, they should offer duly with the mantra Svadhā pronounced at the end. Since then the Brāhmanas are offering everything to the Pitṛs, with the Mantra Svadhā uttered in the end.

स्वाहा शस्ता देववादे पितृवादे स्वधा स्मृता ।

सर्वेर दक्षिण शगला हतं चाम्पादिक्षणम ॥ 15 ॥

पित्तो देवता विगा मुनवो मनवस्तथा ।

पूजां चकुः स्वधां शगतां तुहुवः यमादात् ॥ 16 ॥

Svāha is laudable, when offerings are presented to the Gods and Svāha is commendable when offerings are made to the Pitṣ. But in both the cases, Dakṣinā is essential. Without Dakṣinā (sacrificial fee), all sacrifices are useless and worthless. The Pitṣ, Devatās, Brāhmaṇas, the Munis, the Manus worshipped the peaceful Svāha and chanted hymns to Her with great love.

देवावद्यः संतुहा: परिपूर्णमनोरधाः ।

विपाद्वध्य तिहत: स्वधाद्वी दोरण च ॥  १ ७ ॥

इन्येवं कार्वितं सर्वे स्वधोपाख्यानावेच च ।

सर्वेषां च तुहिकरं किं भूयः शोर्गमिष्ठसि ॥ 18 ॥

The Devas, Pitrs, Brāhmanas, all were pleased and felt their ends achieved when they got the boon from Svadhā Devī. Thus I have told you everything about Svadhā. It is pleasing to all. What more do you want to hear? Say. I will answer all your questions,

श्रीनार्त उवाच

स्वधापुजाधियानं च ध्यानं स्तोयं महामुने ।

श्रौतुपिच्छामि यत्नेन वदे वेदिवदां वर ॥ 19 ॥

Nārada said: O Thou, the Best of the knowers of the Vedas! O Muni Sattama! I want now to hear

Book IX Chapter XLIV

the method of worship, the meditation and the hymns of Svadhā Devi. Kindly tell me all about this.

नारायण उवाच

ध्यानं च स्तवनं बह्ञान्वेक्तं सर्वेगलगम् ।

सर्वे जानासि च कक्षं जातुमिष्छसि वृद्धदे। 2 0 ॥

गरत्कृष्णविदोर्धगं माघवां आढ़ावासरे ।

स्वयं संपूँच्य न्येनेन ततः शाद्धे समाचरेत् ॥ 2 1 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: You know everything about the all auspicious Dhyāna, Stotra, as stated in the Vedas; then why do you ask me again? However I will speak out this for the enhancement of knowledge. On the thirteenth day of the Dark Fortnight in autumn when the Maghā asterism is with the Moon and on the Śrāddha day.

स्वयं नाभ्यच्छं यो विषः कुर्बाद्वर्मिति: ।

न भवेकल्पाविस्तयं आब्रह्म त्यांच्या च ॥ 22 ॥

ब्रह्माणो मानसी कन्या शशल्स्यिवर्योवान् ।

पूज्या वे विपुर्वेदवानां आब्रदानां फलदां भजे ॥ 23 ॥

One should worship with care Svadhā Devī; then one should perform Śrāddha. If, out of vanity, a Brāhmin performs Śrāddha without first worshipping Svadhā Devī then he will never get the fruits of Tarpānam or Śrāddha. 'O Devī Svadhe! Thou art the mind-born daughter of Brahmā, always young and worshipped by the Piṭs. Thou bestowest the fruits of Śraddha.

इति ध्याना शिलाथा वा हाथवा मंगले घरे ।

दहायताघादिकं तस्ये मुनेतेनि शुनीं शुतम् ॥ 24 ॥

ऊं ईं ईं ईं कसी सधादेवैल्याहिते च महामुने ।

समुच्चार्थ च संयुज स्वुला तां प्रणमेदिद्विः ॥ 25 ॥

So I meditate on Thee. Thus meditating, the Brāhmīn is to pronounce the motto (mūla mantra) and offer the Pādyam, etc., on the Śalāgramā stone or on the auspicious earthen jar. This is the ruling of the Vedas. The motto is ‘Om Hrim, Śrim, Klīm, Svadhā Devyai Svāhā.’ She should be worshipped with this Mantra. After reciting hymns to the Devi, one is to bow down to the Svadhā Devi.

स्तोत्रं शृष्यु सुनिश्रष्ट श्रव्युप्र विश्रात् ।

सर्ववीक्षाप्रदं नृणां बह्वाणा यत्कृतं पुरा ॥ 26 ॥

O Son of Brahma! O Best of Munis! O Skilled in hearing! I now describe the stotra which Brahma composed at the beginning for the bestowal of the desired fruits to making. Listen.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

स्वयंोच्चारणायेगत रीर्थन्वारी भवेत्रः ।

मुच्यते सर्वोपपेधो वाजयेपकलं लभेत् ॥ 27 ॥

Nārāyana said: The instant the Mantra Svadhā is pronounced, can get at once the fruits of bathing in the holy places of pilgrimages. No trace of sin exists in him at that time; rather the religious merits of performing the Vājapeya sacrifice accrue to him.

स्वधा स्वधा स्वधेत्येवं यदि वारजयं सन्ते ।

आद्रव्य फलमाणिति वलेश्छ तर्पायच च ॥ 28 ॥

आद्रकाले स्वधातोयं यः शृणीत समाहितः ।

स लभेच्छाद्वर्भवृतं फलमेव न संशयः ॥ 29 ॥

‘Svadhā,’ ‘Svadhā,’ ‘Svadhā,’ thrice this word if one calls to mind, one gets the fruits of Śrāddha, Tarapanam, and Bali (offering sacrifices). So much so, if one hears with devotion during the Śrāddha time the recitation of the hymn of Svadhā, one gets, no doubt, the fruit of Śrāddha.

सद्य सद्य सद्योर्वे विनंस्य: यः पदेस्रः ।

प्रियां विवितीत स लभेतपाडी पुत्रुणान्वितात् ॥ 30 ॥

पितृणां प्राणतुल्या तं द्विजनैवनस्थिपणी ।

श्रद्धाविश्रादुर्वी दो भ्राद्धादीनां फलप्रद्धा ॥ 31 ॥

If one recites the Svadhā mantra thrice every time in the morning, midday and evening) every day, one gets an obedient, chaste wife begetting sons. The following is the hymn (Stotra) to Svadhā wife begetting sons. The following is hymn (Stotra) to Svadhā: 'O Devi Svadhe! Thou art dear to the Pitjs as their vital breaths and thou art the lives of the Brāhmaṇas. Thou art the Presiding Deity the of Śrāddha ceremonies and bestowest the fruits thereof.

निवार्यां सत्यस्प्रासि पुरुषस्पासि सुते ।

आविषर्वितितेभावौ सुधी च प्रलये तव ॥ 32 ॥

अंः वस्तिश्व नमः: स्वाहा स्थाया तं दक्षिणा तथा ।

निरूपिताश्रतुर्दैदे: प्रशस्ता: कर्भिगां पुनः ॥ 33 ॥

O Thou of good vows! Thou art eternal, true, and of the nature of religious merits. Thou appearest in creation and disappearest in dissolution. And this appearing and disappearing go on for ever. Thou art Svasti, Thou art Namaskāra (salutation); Thou art Svadhā. Thou art Daksīnā, Thou art the various woks as designated in the Vedas.

कर्मपूर्व्यंधिवेता ईशृरणे विनिर्मिताः ।

इन्वेवयुक्त्वा स बह्या बह्योगेके स्वसंसदि ॥ 34 ॥

तस्थो च महसा सघः स्वथा साविवर्भूव है ।

त्वा चितृष्यः प्रददौ तामेव कमलनान्म. ॥ 35 ॥

तां संप्राय वयुस्ते च पितरश्र प्रतर्पिताः ।

स्वधास्तोभिवरं पृथय वः शृणोति समाहितः ॥

स स्नातः सर्वतीर्थ्ये वांछितं फलमान्युवात् ॥ 36 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणो नवमस्कन्मे नारदनारायणसंवादे

स्वधोपाख्याने चतुब्रह्वारिणोउध्यायः ॥ 44 ॥

These the Lord of the world has Created for the success of actions. \( ^{3} \)  No sooner Brahmā, seated in His assembly in the Brahma Loka, reciting this stotra remained silent, then Śavdhā Devi appeared there all at once. When Brahmā handed over the lotus-faced Svadhā Devi over to the hands of the Piṭṭs, and they gladly took Her to their own abodes. He who hears with devotion and attention this stotra of Svadhā, gets all sorts of rich fruits that are desired and the fruits of bathing in all the Tirthas.

Here ends the Forty-fourth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the story of Svadhā Devi in the discourse between Nārada and Nārāyaṇa in the Mahā Purānam Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

