CHAPTER XLVII

On Manasā

शीनारायण उवाच

क्रवितं घट्रयुपाख्यानं बहापूर्णं यथागमम् ।

देवी मंगलस्थीं च तदाख्यानं निशामय ॥ १ ॥

तत्या: पूजादिकं सर्वे धर्मवेक्रेण यच्छुतम् ।

शुतिसंगमोपेबंटे सर्वेभं विद्यापार्थि ॥ 2 ॥

दक्षा या वर्तते चंडी कल्याणेषु च मंगला ।

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! I have now narrated the anecdote of Saṣṭhī as stated in the Vedas. Now hear the anecdote of Maṅgala Caṇḍī, approved of by the Vedas and respected by the literary persons. The Caṇḍī, that is very skilled in all auspicious works and who is the most auspicious of all good things, is Maṅgala Caṇḍīkā.

मंगलेषु च या द्वहा सा च मंगलचंडिका ॥ ३ ॥

पूज्या या वर्ते चंडी मंगलोउपि महीसुतः ।

Or the Caṇḍi who is an object of worship of Maṅgala (Mars), the son of carth and the bestower of desires is Maṅgala Caṇḍikā.

मंगलाधौटदौं या सा वे मंगलच्छिका ॥ 4 ॥

मंगले मनुवंयशु सदाडीघपारपाति: ।

तस्य पूज्यासीष्टदेवी तेने गंगलचंडिका ॥ 5 ॥

Or the Caṇḍi who is an object of worship of Maṅgala of the family of Manu who was the ruler of the whole world composed of seven islands and the bestower of all desires is Maṅgala Caṇḍi.

मृतिंभेदेन सा दुर्गा मूलप्रकृतिरीक्षी ।

कृपाल्पातित्यस्था योचितामिहद्धेता ॥ 6 ॥

प्रथमे पुक्तिता सा च रंकरेण पतारमता ।

विषुगस्य कंधे घोरे विष्णुना प्रेरितेन च ॥ ७ ॥

Or it may be that the Mūla Prakṛti, the Govern-ess, the Ever Gracious Durgā assumed the form of Maṅgala Caṇḍi and has become the Iṣta Devatā of women. When there was the fight with Tripurāśura, this Maṅgala Caṇḍi, iñgher than the highest was first worshipped by Mahādeva, stimulated by Viṣṇu, on a critical moment.

ब्रह्म-ब्रह्मोपदेशेन वुर्जिति च संकटे ।

आकाशायतिते याने दैर्वेन पातिते रूपा ॥ 8 ॥

ब्रहाविष्णुपिटिश्व दुर्गा तुहाव गंकरः ।

सा च मंगलबड़ी या बभूव रूपभेदतः ॥ 9 ॥

O Brāhmin! While the fighting was going on, a Daitya threw out of anger one car on Mahādeva

Book IX Chapter XLVII

and as that car was about to fall on Him, Brahmā and Viṣṇu gave a good advice when Mahādeva began to praise Durgā Devī at once.

उवाच पुरतः शंभोपर्यं नारतीति ते प्रभो ।

भगाव-वृषलपत्र सर्वैग्रासे पंचिष्यति ॥ 10 ॥

शुद्धाशिक्सवरूपाउँ पंचिष्यामि न संशयः ।

मायानमन च हतिणा सहायेन वृषयक्षे ॥ १ १ ॥

जहि दैत्वं स्वशुं च सुगणां पद्यातकम् ।

Durgā Devi that time assuming the form of Maṅgala Candaī appeared and said “no fear no fear, Bhagavān Viṣṇu will be Thy Carrier buffalo. I will be also Thy Śakti in the action and Hari, full of Māyā, will also help Thee. Thou better slayest the enemy that dispossessed the Devas.”

इत्युक्त्वांतहिता देवी शंभोः शिक्तबंभूव सा ॥ 12 ॥

विषयुत्तेन शक्रेश जयान तुमामपाति: ।

O Child! Thus saying, the Devi Mahāgala Cangī disappeared and She became the Śakti of Mahādeva. Then with the help of the weapon given by Visnu, the Lord of Umā killed the Asura.

मृनीर् पतिते दैते० सर्वे दैवा महर्षेः ॥ 13 ॥

युयु: संकरं देवं भक्तिभाव्यकंपर: ।

सदा: शिरसि संभोघु पुण्यवृष्टिबंपून है ॥ 14 ॥

बहा विद्युः संगुहो ददी तमे शुभाणियम् ।

बहाविद्युपविद्धः सुस्ततः संकरस्तथा ॥ 15 ॥

When the Daitya fell, the Devas and Rṣis began to chant hymns to Mahādeva with devotion and with their heads bent low. From the sky, a shower of flowers fell instantaneously on Mahādeva's head. Brahmā and Viṣṇu became glad and gave their best wishes to Him. Then ordered by Brahmā and Viṣṇu, Śankara bathed joyously.

पूजयामात नो कवया देवी मंगलचंडिकाम् ।

पाठायामंचमनीक्षे वरक्षे शिविधरिंचि ॥ 16 ॥

पुष्यचन्दिनवैदोर्धकैव्या नानावियैर्ने ।

छानौमैष्ठि महिषैर्वदेः पहिंभित्या ॥ 17 ॥

वस्तालंकारमाल्ये ध्यासे: पिछकौपि ।

मधुपिष्ठ सुधाभिष्ठ फलैनानिविषि ॥ 18 ॥

Then He began to worship with devotion the Devi Nāgala Cāndī with pādya, Arghya,

Açamaniya and various clothings. Flowers, sandal paste, various goats, sheep, buffaloes, bisons birds, garments ornaments, garlands, Pāyasa (a porparation of rice, ghee, mild and sugar), Piṣṭaka, honey, wine, and various fruits were offered in the worship.

संगीतैनैतैनैकीदीकृलवैनामकैनोंतः ।

ध्यारा माध्यंदीतोकेन ध्यानेन भक्तिपूर्वकम् ॥ 19 ॥

, दूदी ट्रव्याणि मूलेन मंत्रेणि च नारद ।

ऊं ढूँ क्लैर्नी सर्वेषुचले दैदिं मंगलचिषिके ॥ 20 ॥

Dancing, music, with instruments and the chanting of Her name and other festivals commenced. Reciting the Dhyāna as in Mādhyandina, Mahādeva offered everything, pronouncing the principal Radical Mantra. 'Om Hrim Śrim Klim Sarvapūjye Devi Māngala Candike Hum Phat Svāhā' is the twenty-one lettered Mantra of Māngala Caṇḍi. During worship, the Kalpa Vṛksa, the tree yielding all desires, must be worshipped.

हुं हुं पट्ट स्वाहायेक्रविश्रास्पो मनु: ।

पूः: कल्पतरश्वि भक्तानां सर्वकामदः ॥ 2 1 ॥

द्वशलक्षजपैने मंत्रसिद्धभ्रवेद्युम् ।

ध्यानं च श्यातां ब्रह्म-वेदोकर्त सर्वसंस्मत् ॥ 2 2 ॥

O Nārada! By repeating the Mantra ten lakhs of times, the Mantra Siddhi (success in realising the Deity inherent in the Mantra) comes. Now I am saying about the Dhyānam of Māngala Candi as stated in the Vedas and as approved by all. Listen.

देवीं घोडगवर्षिंग शरणसुशिव्यारीवनम् ।

विवोक्षीं सुदातीं शुज्धां शतस्पत्थिनाबनानम् ॥ 23 ॥

श्वेतचम्यकरणाणां सुनीलोराललोचनम् ।

जगढ़ाजी च दाखी च सर्वेध्यः सर्वसंवादम् ॥ 24 ॥

"O Devi Māngala Caṇdike! Thou art sixteen years old; Thou art ever youthful; Thy lips are like Bimba fruits, Thou art of good teeth and pure. Thy face looks like autumnal lotus; Thy colour is like white campakas; Thy eyes resemble blue lilies; Thou art the Preserver of the world and thou bestowest all sorts of prosperity.

संसारसारने घोरे ज्योतीक्णं स्वा भजे ।

देव्याङ्छ ध्यानसिवेलं स्तवनं श्यतां मुने । २ ५ ॥

Thou art the Light in this dark ocean of the world. So I meditate on Thee." This is the Dhyānam. Now hear the stotra, which Mahādeva recited before Her.

महावेद उवाच

रक्ष रक्ष जगमातर्दिव मंगलचधिके ।

हार्विके विष्वरों राशोईर्भगलकाडिके ॥ 26 ॥

हर्भेमंगलदक्षे च हर्भेमंगलदायिके ।

गुधे मंगलखे च रुभे मंगलचिडके ॥ 27 ॥

Mahādeva said: “Protect me, Protect me. O Mother! O Devi Maṅgala Caṇḍike! Thou, the Destroyer of difficulties! Thou givest joy and good. Thou art clever in giving delight and fortune. Thou the bestower of all bliss and prosperity! Thou, the auspicious, Thou art Maṅgala Caṇḍika.

मंगले मंगलाई च सम्वेकुलमूँले ।

सता मूबल्ले सर्वेभां मंगलालये ॥ 28 ॥

पूबे मंगलवारे च मंगलाभीढदेवे ।

पूजये मंगलभूपस्य मनुवंगस्य संततम् ॥ 29 ॥

Thou art Mahgalā, worthy of all good, Thou art the auspicious of all auspicious; Thou bestowest good to the good persons. Thou art worthy to be worshiped on Tuesday (the Māngala day); Thou art the Deity, desired by all. The King Māngala, born of Manu family always worships Thee.

मंगलाधिषादुपदैव मंगलानां च मंगले ।

संसारमंगलाधारे मोक्षर्मगलादायिनि ॥ 30 ॥

सारे च मुकूलाधारे पारे च सर्वकर्मणाम् ।

प्रतिमुकूलवारे च पूज्ये शुभमुखप्रदे ॥ 31 ॥

सतोजपानेन शंभुश्छ सुत्वा मुकूलवैडिकाम् ।

प्रतिमुकूलवारे च पूजां दत्त्वा नतः शिवः ॥ 32 ॥

Thou, the presiding Devi of Maṅgala; Thou art the repository of all the good that are in this world. Thou, the Bestower of the auspicious Mokṣa. Thou, the best of all; Thou, the respository of all good; Thou makest one cross all the Karmas; the people worship Thee on every Tuesday; Thou bestowest abundance of Bliss to all."

प्रथमे पूजिता देवी शिवेन सर्वमेपुक्ता ।

दितीये पूजिता सा च मुक्तेन प्रदेष च ॥ 33 ॥

तृतीये पूजिता भग्र मुक्तेलेन नृपेण च ।

चतुर्षे मुक्ते वारे सुन्दरिभि: प्रपूजिता ॥ 34 ॥

Thus praising Maṅgala Candiākā with this stotra,

and worshipping on every Tuesday, Śambhu departed. The Devi Sarva Maṅgalā was first worshipped by Mahādeva.

पंचमे मुक्लाकांक्षिनरैमीलचडिका ।

पूजिता प्रतिशयखे पृत्रशेयगुपजिता सदा ॥ 35 ॥

ततः सर्वत्र संपूजा बभूव परमेयरगी ।

देवेश्व पूर्तिंभिश्व मानवैर्मनिपुंने ॥ 36 ॥

Next she was worshipped by the planet Mars; then by the King Maṅgala; then on every Tuesday by the ladies of every household. Fifthly she was worshipped by all men, desirous of their welfare. So in every universe Maṅgala Caṇḍikā, first worshipped by Mahādeva, came to be worshipped by all. Next she came to be worshipped everywhere, by the Devas, Munis, Mānavas, Manus.

देव्याङ्ग मुकूलसोतं यः शुणोति समाहितः ।

तन्मूर्ते पवोत्थन न पवोत्थमूर्णम् ।

वर्यिते पुराणौश्रेय मुक्ते च चित्रे चित्रे ॥ 37 ॥

O Muni! He who hears with undivided attention this stotra of the Devi Maṅgala Caṇḍikā, finds no evils anywhere. Rather all good comes to him. Day after day he gets ons and grandsons and so his prosperity gets increased, yea, verily increased!

श्रीनारायण उवाच

उक्तं झ्योभाठ्यानं बहापुर्य यथागमम् ।

श्यातं मनसाठ्यानं यच्छुतं धर्मवक्ततः ॥ 38 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! Thus I narrated to you the stories of Saṣthi and Maṅgala Caṇḍikā, according to the Vedas. Now hear the story of Manasā that I heard from the mouth of Dharama Deva.

सा च कन्य भगवती कश्यपस्य च मानसी ।

तेनैव मनसा देवी मनसा या च दीव्यति ॥ 39 ॥

मनसा ध्यायते या च परमात्मानीश्वस्म ।

तेन सा मनसादेवी तेन योगेन दीव्यति ॥ 40 ॥

Book IX Chapter XLVII

Manasā is the mind-born daughter of Maharṣi Kaśyapa; hence she is named Manasā; or it may be She who plays with the mind is Manasā. Or it may be She who meditates on God with her mind and gets rapture in Her meditation of God is named Manasā.

आत्मारामा च सा देवौ वैष्णावी सिद्ध्योगिनि ।

विश्वगं च तत्स्तत्वा कृष्णस्य परमात्मनः ॥ 4 1 ॥

जरकाकशरीरं च दूषा यत्थीणीश्रः ।

गोपोपितर्नाय चऊे जरकाकरिति प्रधुः ॥ 4 2 ॥

She finds pleasure in Her Own Self, the great devotee of Visnu, a Siddha Yogini. For three Yugas She worshipped Śrī Krṣṇa and then She became a Siddha Yogini. Śrī Krṣṇa, the Lord of the Gopís, seeing the body of Manasā lean and thin due to austerities, or seeing her worn out like the Muni Jarat Kāru called her by the name of Jarat Kāru.

वांछितं च ददौ तद्ये कृपया च कृपानिधि: ।

पूजां च कारायामास चकार च स्वयं प्रधुः ॥ 4 3 ॥

स्वर्गे च नागलोके च पृथिव्यां ब्रह्मलोकतः ।

भूणं जगत्सु गौरी सा सुदरी च मनोहार् ॥ 44 ॥

Hence Her name has come also to be Jarat Kāru. Krṣṇa, the Ocean of Mercy, gave her out of kindness, Her desired boon; She worshipped Him and Śrī Krṣṇa also worshipped Her. Devi Manasā is known in the Heavens, in the abode of the Nāgas (serpents), in earth, in Brahmaloka, in all the worlds as of very fair colour, beautiful and charming.

जगद्रौतीत विद्यालात तेन सा पूजिता सती ।

शिवशिष्या च सा देवी तेन शैवी प्रक्रसितिंत ॥ 4 5 ॥

विष्णुभक्तावि शक्रद्धेणावी तेन क्रांतिता ।

She is named Jagad Gauri as she is of a very fair colour in the world. Her other name is Saivī and she is the disciple of Śiva. She is named Vaisnavī as she is greatly devoted to Viṣṇu.

नानानां प्राणारक्षित्री यजे पार्थितिस्तव च ॥ 46 ॥

नोगेश्वतीत विद्याता सा नागभिनीति च ।

विश संहनुनीगा या तेन विवहती स्युता ॥ 47 ॥

सिद्धियोगे हरात्राय तेन सा सिद्धयोगिनी ।

महात्रानं च योगं च मृतसंजीवनी पराम् ॥ 48 ॥

She saved the Nāgas in the Snake Sacrifice performed by Parīksit, she is named Nagesāvari and Nāga Bhagini and She is capable to destroy the effects of poison. She is called Visāhari. She got the Siddha yoga from Mahādeva; hence She is named Siddha Yogini; She got from Him the great knowledge, so she is called Mahā Jñānayutā, and as she got Mṛtasānijīvani (making alive the dead) she is known by the name of Mṛtasānijīvani.

महातानुवृता तां च प्रवर्तिने मन्निधिणः ।

आसतीकस्य भूगीर्य माता साउपि तपविद्यि ॥ 49 ॥

आसतीकमाता विज्ञाता जान्यां सुप्रतिहिता ।

प्रिया मुनेजैरकारोर्मुनीर्य महात्मनः ॥ 50 ॥

योगिनी विश्वपूज्यस्य जरकारकप्रियात ततः ।

जरकारकर्णदारीनी मनस स्विद्धयोगिनी ॥ 51 ॥

वैशणी नागपर्भिनी शैली नागेश्वरी तथा ।

जरकारकप्रियातसीकमात विषघरोते च ॥ 52 ॥

महात्रानयुता चैव सा देवी विश्वपूर्णिति ।

As the great ascetic is the mother of the great Muni Aštika, she is known in the world as Āštika mātā. As She is hte dear wife of the great high-souled Yogi Muni Jarat Kāru, worshipped by all, she is called as Jarat Kārupriya. Jaratkāru, Jagadgauri, Manasā, Siddha Yogini, Vaiṣnavi, Nāga Bhagini, Śaivi, Nāgeśvari, Jaratkārupriya, Āstikamātā, Viṣaharī, and Mahā Jīnānyautā these are the twelve names of Manasā, worshipped everywhere in the Universe.

इदार्तौतिन नामानि पूजाकाले तु यः पटेत् ॥ 53 ॥

तस्य नापायं नास्ति तस्य वंगोड़स्यच च ।

नापार्थीते च शयने नाप्यमते च मंद्रे ॥ 54 ॥

नागशोभे महादुर्गे नागवेडितप्रियते ।

इर्वे सोत्रे पंडित्वा तु मुच्यते नात्र संशयः ॥ 55 ॥

नित्यं पटेढ़ास्तं द्वृष्टा नावगर्धेः पलायते ।

He who recites these twelve names while worshipping Manasā Devi, he or any of his family has no fear of snakes. If there be any fear of snakes in one's bed, if the house be infested with snakes, or if one goes to a place difficult for fear of snakes or if one's body be encircled with snakes, all the

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

fears are dispelled, if one reads this stotra of Manasā. There is no doubt in this. The snakes run away out of fear from the sight of him who daily recites Manasā stotra.

द्वगलक्षनपैव स्तोभसिद्धभवैन्गणाम ॥ 56 ॥

स्तोभसिद्धभवैद्यस्य स विषं भोतुभीश्वर: ।

नारीश भूषणं कृत्वा स भवेभागवाहनः ॥ 57 ॥

नागासनो नागाल्यो महासिद्धो भवे-नर: ।

अंते च विष्णुना सार्ये क्रीड़त्येव द्विदानिशम् ॥ 58 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभगवते महापुरुषो नवम्मकर्ये नरदनारावशसंदार

सपतचारिशोस्थाय: 11 47 11

Ten lakhs of times repeating the Manasā mantra give one man success in the stotra. He can easily drink poison who attains success in this stotra. The snakes become his ornaments; they carry him even on their backs. He who is a great Siddha can sit on a seat of snakes and can sleep on a bed of snakes. In the end he sports day and might with Viṣṇu.

Here ends the Forty-seventh Chapter of the Ninth Book on Manasā's story in the Mahā Purānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vāysa.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

