CHAPTER II

On Cleaning the Body

श्रीनारायण उवाच

आचारहीन न पुनस्ति वेदा यद्यधीति: सह चड़िभरों: ।

छंटीयेनं पृथुलाले तयजीत नीई शकुन्ता इव जातपक्षाः ॥ १ ॥

बालो युद्धतं चोत्थया तत्सर्वं मन्यमाचरेत् ।

राजेनिरमायमो नु वेदायासं चोद्वयुधः ॥ २ ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: Even if a man studies the Vedas with six Ángas (limbs of the Vedas), he cannot be pure if he be devoid of the principle of right living (Sadācāra) and if he does not practise it. All that is in vain. As soon as the two wings of the young ones of birds appear, they leave their nests, so the chandas (the Vedas) leave such a man devoid of Sadācāra at the time of his death. The intelligent man should get up from his bed at the Brāhma muhūrta and should observe all the principles of Sadācāra. In the last quarter of night, he should practise in reciting and studying the Vedas.

क्रक्रिमकालं ततः कुयादिष्टेवानुचितनम् ।

योगी तु पूर्वमार्ण बहायनं समाचारते ॥ 3 ॥

जीववह्वीक्यता येन जायते तु नित्ततम् ।

जीवन्नृक्ण भवति तत्क्षणादेव नाद ॥ 4 ॥

Then for some time he should meditate on his Iṣṭa Deva (his Presiding Deity). The Yogi should meditate on Brahma according to the method stated before. O Nārada! If meditation be done as above, the identity of Jīva and Brahma is at once realised and the man becomes liberated while living.

पंचपंच उप:काल: सपतपंचाकाणेदय: ।

अष्टघच भवेताया: शेष: सूर्वोदय: स्मृतः ॥ 5 ॥

प्रातरलाय यः कुर्णविष्णुर्ने त्रिजासनम्: ।

नैक्रंत्यामिषुविक्षेपरातीत्याभ्यधिकं भुव: ॥ 6 ॥

After the fifty-fifth Danda (from the preceding sunrise i.e., 2 hours before the sunrise comes the Uśākāla; after the fifty seventh danda comes the Arunodayakāla; after fifty eighth Danda comes the morning time; then the Sun rises. One should get up from one's bed in the morning time. He should go then to a distance where an arrow shot at one stretch goes. There in the south-west corner he is to void his urines and faeces.

विषयूतेत्रि च कर्णस्थ आश्रम प्रथमे द्विजः ।।

निवीर्त पृष्ठतः कुयांद्वान्प्रथगृत्यस्थयोः ॥ 7 ॥

कृत्वा यजोपवीर्ते नु पृष्ठतः कंठलवित्ति ।

विषयूर्ते नु गृही कुयाल्कार्थं प्रयाग्रभी ॥ 8 ॥

Then the man, if he be a Brahmacārī, should place his holy thread on his right ear and the householder should suspend it on his neck only. That is, the Brahmacārī, in the first stage of his life should place the holy thread over his right ear; the householder and the Vānaprasthis should suspend the holy thread from the neck towards the back and then void their faeces, etc.

अन्नार्थय रुणैर्भूर्षिं शिरः प्रावृत्य वाससा ।

वाचं नियय्य यत्नेन ईविनशासवर्जितः ॥ 9 ॥

Book XI Chapter II

न फालकुई न जले न चितायां न पवैते ।

जीपिंदावाले कुयांत्र वस्पीक न शाङ़ले ॥ 10 ॥

न स सच्छेु गतीयु न गच्छत पथि स्थितः ।

संध्योरोभ्योजीय भोजने दंतधावने ॥ 1 1 ॥

He is to tie a piece of cloth round his head; and spread earth or leaves on the place where he will evacuate himself. He is not to talk then nor spit nor inhale hard. One is not to evacuate oneself in cultivated lands, that have been tilled, in water, over the burning pyre, on the mountain, in the broken and ruined temples, on the ant-hills, on places covered with grass, on road side, or on holes where living beings exists.

विद्यकारं च दैवे च तथा मूजपुरीययोः ।

उत्साहे मैधुने वापि तथा वै गुरुसत्रिधी ॥ १२ ॥

यागे दाने बहायपे होजी मौनं समावरेत् ।

देवता ऋषयः सर्वे पिगाशोरागलशतः ॥ १३ ॥

One ought to the do same while walking. One ought to keep silence during both the twilights, while one is passing urine or voiding one's faeces, or while one is holding sexual intercourse, or before the presence of one's Guru, during the time of sacrifice, or while making gifts, or while doing Brahma Yajñā. One ought to pray before evacuating, thus: "O Devas! O Rsis! O Piśacas! O Uragas! O Rāksasas!

इतो गछतुं भूतानि वहिभूमि कोयामहम् ।

इति संग्रायं पशुत् कुयाच्छीचं चयाविधि ॥ 14 ॥

वायवनी विभागदिव्यमाप: पश्यंस्तवैय ना: ।

न कदाचन कुर्जित विम्पत्रस्य विसर्जन् ॥ 15 ॥

You all who might be existing here unseen by me, are requested to leave this place. I am going to ease myself here duly." Never one is to void oneself while one looks at Vāyu (wind), Agni (fire), a Brāhmaṇa, the Sun, water or cow.

उदसुभुखो दिवा कुर्जात्री चेद्रक्षिणायुखः ।

तत आच्छाश विष्णूत्रं लोषुर्पणुताप्रिधिः ॥ १६ ॥

गृहीतलिंग उवाय स गच्छोत्रिसिधतः ।

पाते जलं गृहीत्वा तु गच्छेद्यत्र चैव हि ॥ १७ ॥

At the day time one is to turn one's face

northward and at the night time southward, while easing oneself and then one is to cover the faeces, etc., with stones, pebbles, leaves or grass, etc. Then he is to hold his genital organ with his hand and go to a river or any other watery place; he is to fill his vessel with water then and go to some other place.

गृहीत्वा भृत्तिकां कुलाच्छ्वतेनां ब्राह्मणसभाः ।

रत्नां पीर्ता तथा कृष्णा गृह्मीयुश्रावयर्षकाः ॥ 18 ॥

अथवा या यत्र दोरे सेव प्रग्राहा त्रिजोतमैः ।

अंतलोहदेवगृहाव्यैकावान्युभकोत्कगत् ॥ १९ ॥

कृतशीवाशिषाछ्च न प्रग्राहा: सव मृतिका ।

मूजानु त्रिदृष्णं शोचे मैधुने जितृगं स्मृतम् ॥ 20 ॥

The Brāhmana is to use the white earth, the Kṣatriya is to take the red earth, the Vaiśya is to use the yellow earth and the Śūdra is to apply the black earth and with that he is to cleanse himself. The earth under water, the earth of any temple, the earth of an anthill, the earth of a mouse hole, and the remnant of the earth used by another body for washing are not to be used for cleansing

purpose. The earth for cleansing faeces is twice as much as that used in case of urine clearance; in the cleansing after sexual intercourse this are much.

एका लिंगे केर तिच्य उपयोगैदुदयं भूमत् ।

मूत्रशीचं समाख्यातं शीचे नदादिषुगं भूमत् ॥ 21 ॥

विद्युशीहे लिंगदेतेु तु प्रद्यान्यक्तिकाद्यम् ।

पंचापाने दर्शकीमन्तु-न्ययोः सदामृतिकाः ॥ 22 ॥

In urine cleansing the earth is to applied in the organ of generation once, thrice in the hand. And in dirt clearing, twice in the organ of generation five times in anus, ten times in the left and seven times in both the hands.

वामापदा पुरस्कृत्य पशास्त्रिणाये च ।

प्रत्येकं च चतुर्वरं भूतिकां लेपयेत्सुर्धीः ॥ 23 ॥

एवं ग्रीषो गृहस्य्य द्विगुणं बढ़ाचारिणः ।

त्रिगुणं वानप्रस्थस्य यतीनां च चतुर्णेणु ॥ 24 ॥

Then apply earth four times first in the left feet and then on the right feet. The house holder should clear thus; the Brahmačari is to do twice and the Yatis four times.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

आद्रामलकमाना तु मृत्तिका शोचकर्मणि ।

प्रत्येके तु सदा प्राङ्गो नातो न्यूना कदाचन ॥ 25 ॥

एतद्विचा स्याधिदूर्शीचं तद्धर्य निजि कीतितम् ।

आतुरस्य तदर्यं तु मारभिश्यस्य तद्धर्यम् ॥ 26 ॥

सीश्रुणामशक्तानां बालनां शोचकर्मणि ।

यथा गंधक्षयः स्यानु तथा कुयार्वसंख्यकम् ॥ 27 ॥

At every time the quantity of wet earth that is to be taken is to be of the size of an Āmalakī fruit. never it is to be less than that. This is for the clearance in the day time. Half of these can be used in the night time. For the invalids, one-fourth the above measurements; for the passers-by, one-eighth the above dimensions are to be observed. In case of women, Śūdras, and incapable children, clearings are to be done till then when the offensive smell vanishes.

नीधलक्षयो यावतारवल्लीचे कियधिते ।

सर्वेभावेय वर्णानिमिवाह भगवान्मनु: ॥ 28 ॥

वामहस्तेन शौचं तु कुर्षाड़े दक्षिणेन न ।

नापेयो वामहस्तो नापेक्नर्य तू दक्षिण: ॥ 29 ॥

No numbers are to be observed. Bhagvān Manu says—for all the Varnas the clearing is to be done till then when the offensive smell vanishes. The clearing is to be performed by the left hand. The right hand is never to be used. Below the navel, the left hand is to be used; and above the navel the right hand is to be used for clearing.

शीचकर्मिग विज्ञो नान्यथा द्वितुर्पगृतः ।

जलपातं न गृह्गीयाधिण्योत्सर्जनं बुध: ॥ 30 ॥

गृह्मीयादि मोहेन प्रायश्रितं चरिततः ।

मोहात्राययवासेल्यसायत कृपाचीक्षायातनाः ॥ 31 ॥

जलहारक्षित्रात्र: स्थाततो जायाच्छ शुध्यति ।

The wise man should never hold his water pot while evacuating himself. If by mistake he catches hold of his waterpot, he will have to perform the penance (prāyaścitta). If, out of vanity or sloth, clearing be not done, for three nights, one is to fast, drinking water only, and then to repeat the Gāyatrī Mantra and thus be purified.

देशाकालुद्व्यशिक्तस्योपनतीश्र सर्वेशः ॥ 32 ॥

जात्या शीचं प्रकर्तीव्यमालस्यं नात्र धारयेत् ।

पुरीपोलजनें कुयादिरुंबूणान्द्वादशैव् तु ॥ 33 ॥

चतुरो मूरविश्वेशे नातो न्यूनान्कदाचन ।

In every matter, in view of the place, time and materials, one's ability and power are to be considered and steps are to be taken accordingly. Knowing all this, one should clear oneself according to rule. Never be lazy here. After evacuating oneself of faeces, one is to rinse one's mouth twelve times; and after passing urine and clearing, one is to rinse four times. Never less than that is to be done.

अधोभुवं तरः कृत्वा लयजेनं वामतः शनैः ॥ 34 ॥

आचम्य च ततः कृताईतधावनमादतात् ।

कंटक्रिक्षीतयुक्षोल्यं ब्रादगंगूलमजणम् ॥ 35 ॥

The water after rinsing is to be thrown away slowly downwards on one's left. Next performing Ācamana one is to wash one's teeth. He is to take a tiny piece, twelve Āngulas (fingers) long (about one foot) from a tree which is thorny and gummy.

कनिषिक्रावस्थलुं पूर्वार्थ कृतकूचंकम् ।

कर्जोदुबर्गी चृत: कदयो लोधयामकी ॥ 36 ॥

बदारिति दुमाश्रिति प्रोक्ता दंतप्रायने ।

अत्राहा व्यूहर्यंसे सोमो राजायमागत् ।

स मे पुरुं प्रक्षाल्येत तेजसा च भगेन च ॥ 37 ॥

The cleansing twig (for teeth) is thick like one's little finger. He is to chew the one end of it to form a tooth brush. Karañja, Udumbara (fig tree), Mango, Kadamba, Lodha, Campaka and Badarī trees are used for cleansing teeth. While cleansing teeth, one is to recite the following mantra: "O Tree! Wherein resides the Deity Moon for giving food to the beings and for killing the enemies! Let Him wash my mouth to increase my fame and honour!

आयुर्वलं यशो वर्च: प्रजा: पशु वर्भुनि च ।

बहाप्राज्चा च मेधो च त्वजो देहि वन्यन्ते ॥ 38 ॥

अभावे दंतकास्य प्रतिषिद्धदिवेषु च ।

अपां द्वारणगंडृषिविद्यानहत्धावनम् ॥ 39 ॥

रवेदिंने यः कुकते प्राणी दन्तस्य धावनम् ।

Book XI Chapter III

सविता भक्षितस्तेन स्वकुले तेन चातितम् ॥ 40 ॥


O Tree! Dost Thou please give me long life, power, fame, energy, beauty, sons, cattle, wealth, intellect, and the knowledge of Brahma." If the cleansing twig be not available and if there be any prohibition to brush one's teeth that day (say Pratipada day, Amāvasa, Saṣthi and Navami), take mouthfuls of water, gargle twelve times and thus cleanse the teeth.


प्रतिपद्दर्शषष्ठीषु नवम्येकादशीरवौ ।
दन्तानां काष्ठसंयोगाद्दहत्यासप्तमं कुलम् ॥ ४१॥

कृत्वालं पादशौचं ह्यमलमथ जलं
त्रिःपिबेद् द्विर्विमृज्य
तर्जन्याङ्गुष्ठवत्या सजलमभिमृशे-
न्नासिकारन्ध्रयुग्मम् ।
अङ्गुष्ठानामिकाभ्यां नयनयुगयुतं
कर्णयुग्मं कनिष्ठा-
ङ्गुष्ठाभ्यां नाभिदेशे हृदयमथ तले-
नाङ्गुलीभिः शिरांसि ॥ ४२॥

इति श्रीमद्देवीभागवते महापुराणेऽष्टादशसाहस्र्यां संहितायां
एकादशस्कन्धे शौचविधिवर्णनं नाम द्वितीयोऽध्यायः ॥ ११.२॥

If one brushes one's teeth with a twig on the new moon day, the first, sixth, ninth and eleventh day after the Full or New Moon or on Sunday, one eats the Sun (as it were, by making Him lose his fire), makes his family line extinct and brings his seven generations down into the hell. Next he should wash his feet and sip pure clean water thrice, touch his lips twice with his thumb, and then clear the nostrils by his thumb and fore finger. Then he to touch his eyes and ears with his thumb and ring finger, touch his navel with his thumb and little finger, touch his breast with his palm and touch his head with all his fingers.

Here ends the Second Chapter of the Eleventh Book on cleansing the several parts of the body in the Mahāpurānam Śrimadevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

