CHAPTER XX

On Devaki's Marriage

व्यास उवाच:

शृणु भारत वक्ष्यामि भारावतरणं तथा ।

कुरक्षेत्र प्रभासे च श्रपितं योगमायया ॥ १ ॥

यदुवंशे समुचितिथ्योगरिततेजसः ।

भूगृगाप्यतपेन महामायावलेन च ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O Bharata! I now narrate to you about the relief of the burden of the Earth, the destruction by the Yoga Māyā of the armies at Kuruksetra and Prabhāsa, the two sacred places, and about the birth, due to the curse of Bhru, of the Bhagavān Hari, of unparalleled prowess, under the influence of Mahāmāyā, in the race of Yadu. Now hear.

ऐक्षितिपासमुत्तारिनितिमिति मे पति: ।

मायया विहित्तो योगो विष्णोजेन्म धरातले ॥ 3 ॥

Viṣnu's taking birth in the world was effected under the circumstances caused by Yoga Māyā, to relieve the burden of the Earth; this is my opinion.

Note: Prabhāsa is a well-known place of pilgrimage near Dvārakā, in Gujarat.

एकं विश्रं नृप देवी सा ब्रह्माविष्युरापि ।

नर्तेबलिनं माया विगुणा न पराधिकमु ॥ 4 ॥

O king! When the Goddess Mahāmāyā, the Incarnate of the three qualities can make Brahmā, Viṣṇu and the other Devas dance incessantly as their Internal Controller, then what wonder, that She would appear charming to the other Jivas and make them dance incessantly, as woodon dolls.

गर्भवासोद्रदं वुःखं विष्णुस्नायुसंगुतम् ।

विष्योरापवितं सव्यरयया विगतलीलाया ॥ 5 ॥

All the troubles incurred in remaining in the womb, amidst the urine, excreta and tissues, She had brought to bear finally on Viṣṇu by Her ever famous Līlā (Divine Sport).

पुरा रायावततेर्धि निर्जरा वानसा: कृता: ।

विवितं ते यथा विद्युर्जु:ख्यापोगे मोहिताः ॥ 6 ॥

In days of yore, in Rāma incarnation, She, That Supreme Goddess made the Gods become monkeys and you know very well already, what an amount of trouble Bhagavān Viṣṇu had to undergo by the hard iron chain of bondage, “This is mine, this is I”, etc., imposed by Māyā.

अर्ह मेमिति पाशेन सुवृद्धेन नाराधि ।

योगिनो मुक्त्मंगाष मुक्रिकामा मुप्रहक्ष: ॥ 7 ॥

This Yogis who want final liberation and who have abandoned all their attachments and who want devotion, they worship the Supreme Goddess of the Universe, the Incarnate of Auspiciousness.

तामेव सुप्रपासने देर्वि विश्रेष्ठश्री शिवगम् ।

तद्धक्तिलेणलेशांश लेणलेशलवांगकम् ॥ 8 ॥

O king! Who will not serve Her? A trace of devotion towards Whom effects at once the salvation of the Jivas.

लब्धा सुनी घोबजंतुलां न सेवेत को जनः ।

भुवनेशीलेव वक्ने द्वातिति भुवनजयम् ॥ 9 ॥

If any human being utters simply the name "Bhuvaneśvari" (the Goddess of Universe) She gives him the three worlds; and if any one cries and utters for help "Save me," then the Goddess of the Universe, being unable to find anything that

Book IV Chapter XX

She can repay him as a fit recompense for his Utterance, becomes Herself indebted to that man. मां पातीत्यय चचसो देवाभावादुपगाधिता ।

विद्यार्थिवीत तस्या ऋे रूपे जानीहि पार्थिव ॥ 10 ॥

O King! Know Vidya (knowledge) and Avidyā (non-knowledge, spiritual ignorance, Iowner knowledge) Her two forms; Vidya gives liberation; Avidyā causes bondage.

विद्याभू मुचते जन्तुबंधते प्रविद्धया पुनः ।

ब्रहा विद्युघ हरूघ सर्वे तस्य वाजपानुः ॥ १ १ ॥

Brahmā, Viṣṇu Rudra, all these and their Avatāras are Her instruments and are under Her subjection, are if they as all fastened by a cord.

अवतारा: सर्वे एवं यन्थिता इव दामधि: ।

कदाचिच्च सुखं घुंफे वैकुण्डे श्रीसागरे ॥ 12 ॥

कदाचिलुकृते युद्धं दानवैर्विवतनरै: ।

हरि: कदाचिद्धान्यै वित्तान्यकरोत्ति च ॥ 13 ॥

कदाचिच्च तपस्तीत्र तीर्थे चरित सुमत ।

कदाचिच्छ्यने शेते योगानिद्रामुगाधिनः ॥ 14 ॥

The Bhagavān Hari sometimes resides in Vaikunthā, sometimes resides in the sea of milk and enjoys pleasures, sometimes fights with the powerful Dānavas, sometimes performs extensive sacrificial ceremonies sometimes performs severe asceticism and sometimes takes to deep sleep under the guidance of Yoga Māyā. Thus He never becomes free and independent.

न स्वतनः क्वाधिषच भगवान्यमुसूनः।

तथा बढ़ा तथा रूस्तलधेन्द्रो वरणो यमः ॥ 15 ॥

कुवेरीउनी सीन्द्र च हवाउन्ये सुरसनाः ।

मुन्यः सनकाध्यां ससिद्धायतलयाये ॥ 16 ॥

सर्वेप्रवारणगा नित्यं पशुतालीव नस्य च ।

O King! And like Viṣṇu, Brahmā, Rudra, the other Gods Indra, Varuna, Yama, Kubera, Agni, the Sun, Moon and other celestial gods, the Sanaka and other Munis, Vasisītha and other Rṣis, all are incessantly controlled by the Supreme Goddess, as if they are the dolls in the hands of a playing magician.

नसि प्रोता यथा गावो विवर्तिन वशानुपाः ॥ १ ७ ॥

तथैव देवता: सर्वा: कालपाशनियन्त्रिता: ।

All the Devas are controlled by the noose of Time, just as oxen are brought under control by men, by strings passed within their noses.

हर्षगोकारवो भावा निर्जित-ज्ञालसादय: ॥ १ ८ ॥

सर्वेणा सर्वेदा राजन्देहिनां देहर्शिंशतः ।

O King! Pleasure, pain, sleep lassitude, idleness, and other passions and feelings are always found inherent in every embodied being.

अभाग निर्जान: प्रोक्ता देवाशु प्रत्याकारकः ॥ १९ ॥

अभिप्रानताश्यतीनन्तेनुतगा:बवित् ।

उपतिर्धितिनागाख्या भावा वेशं नितन्तम् ॥ २० ॥

अभारसंत कंबं घाच्या निर्जीराक्य कंपु नः ।

The Devas are written down by authors in their books as not subject to death or decay; this statement is merely nominal and not real; for whoever is always subject to birth, growth, decay and death how can we call him immortal or beyond old age and death?

कंधे दुः:खाधिपूर्णा वा जायन्ते विद्योतमाः ॥ 21 ॥

कंधे देखा शक्त्वा व्यसने क्रीडनं कंधपू ।

Why do the Devas get into sorrows, and troubles? How can they be called gods? How can one enjoy when one is involved in a trouble?

क्षणातुवस्तिजाश्र इयुवतेर्जित्य संशय: ॥ 22 ॥

जलजानां च कीटानां गमकानां तथा पुन: ।

उपमा न कर्व चैघामायुधोजने मरा: स्मृता: ॥ 23 ॥

In this world, it is seen mosquitoes and other insects born from water die after a very short time; so, like these, the Devas at the expiry of their ordained life-period, die too. Then why not the Devas be treated like those insects? Why not shall we term them, "Mortal"?

ततो वर्षविश्रधारि शतावर्षायुपस्था ।

मनुष्या ह्रामरा देवास्तस्तमावृ हब्दा पर: सून्तः ॥ 24 ॥

रहस्तथा तथा विष्णु क्रमगक्ष भवन्ति हि ।

नश्यन्ति क्रमगक्षेव वर्द्धने चोत्तीसेनम् ॥ 25 ॥

Some human beings live one year; some other live upto one hundred years the Devas live longer than men; the life of the Prajāpati Brahmā exceeds those of the Devas; Rudra lives longer than

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Brahmā; and Viṣṇu lives longer than Rudra. All these are thus subject by turns to birth growth, and decay.

नूनं देह्वता नाणो मृतस्योरपितेच च ।

चक्रवद्यमणे राजनसर्वेणां नात्र संशयः ॥ 26 ॥

Those who are born, they die; those that die are again born. Thus O King! In this world all the Jivas, no doubt, move round and round like a wheel.

मोहजालावृतो जन्तुभूयते न कदाचन ।

मायायां विद्यानायां मोहजालां न नर्यति ॥ 27 ॥

The Jivas are deluded by the network of Moha (charms) and thus deluded. They can never gain final release. So long as Māyā exists in them, their delusion is not destroyed.

उत्स्युकाल उत्पत्ति: सर्वेषां नृप जायते ।

तथेव नागः करणाने ब्रह्मादीनां यथाकामम् ॥ 28 ॥

O King! At the time of creation Brahmā and all other things came into existence, in due order, and these will duly dissolve at the time of the Great Dissolution (the Pralaya)?

निमितं यस्तु यत्रागे स भावतितं तं नृप ।

नान्यथा नद्ववैकृतं विधिभान निर्मितं तु यत् ॥ 29 ॥

Whatever is the cause of destruction to any body here, that destroys the body in question. According to the Will Powers of the Supreme Goddess, whatever is created by Brahmā, no none can undo that. Know this as perfectly certain.

जन्माम्युजरायाशिपु:खं वा सुखमेव वा ।

ततथैव घनेत्कामं नान्यथे हविनियाँः ॥ ३० ॥

Know this the predestined law that the birth, death, old age, diseases, pain or pleasure overtake all the Jivas according to the perscribed order of Nature; never these laws fail to operate in their actions.

सर्वेधां सुखदी देवी प्रत्यक्षी शिशिभास्करो ।

न गयालित तयोः पीड़ा क्वचिन्छौरिसम्पया ॥ ३ १ ॥

See! The Devas that we see with our physical eyes, the Sun and Moon yield pleasure to all; still they suffer always troubles at the hands of their enemies (i.e. Rāhu and Ketu, i.e. there always take

place regularly solar and lunar eclipses, when they are in the ascending and descending nodes). This suffering is never removed.

भास्करस्य सुतो मन्दः क्षयी चन्दः कलंकवान् ।

पश्य राजन्विधः सूत्रं दूर्वार्च महतामपि ॥ ३ ३ ॥

The son of the Sun (Saturn) is always injurious to people; hence it is termed “Manda” (bad); the Moon was attacked with consumption and bears stain on his body (spots in the Moon disc). What to speak of ordinary men? The great men even are subject to the prescribed laws of Fate and Nature.

वेदकर्ता जगद्धतां बुद्धिद्रनु चतुर्मुखः ।

सोप्रियकिलवतांग्रापोनृष्यापुर्जीसरवतीन् ॥ 33 ॥

The Creator of the world, the four faced Brahmā is the author of the Vedas and awarder of Intelligence. He, too, on seeing Sarasvatī, his own daughter, was afflicted with passion.

शिवस्थापि मृता भार्यी सती रूपधा केलवम् ।

सोउभवदुःखसंततः कामार्तेऊ जानितां ॥ 34 ॥

When Sati, the wife of Śiva, left off Her mortal coil, Mahādeva, though He could remove the sorrows of all, was very much moved with passion and greatly afflicted.

कामानिन्दधदोहसु कालिंचां पत्ति: शिवः ।

साउपि रथामज्ञान जाता तरिद्वाधयगघुच ॥ 35 ॥

Then, being burnt very much as it were by the fire of passion, he threw himself down into the water of the river Kālindi; and the water of that river became black-coloured, as if burnt by the burning fire of the Sorrows of Śiva.

कामातों रयमाणसु ननः सोर्पि घुणोर्वम् ।

गतः प्राप्तोर्ध घपुणा शपः कामातुरो घुणम् ॥ ३६ ॥

पतत्वदीय ते लिङ़ं निर्ज्ञेजि घुणं किल ।

पयी चामुतवापी च दानवैर्पिभितं गुदे ॥ ३७ ॥

O King! When Mahādeva, being infatuated with Kāma, went into the forest of Bhrgu and becoming naked, began to copulate, the ascetic Bhrgu, seeing him in that state, exclaimed “O You are very shameless” and cursed Him thus: Let your penis drop off just now. Mahādeva, then to satisfy his

Book IV Chapter XX

thirst for passion, began to drink the water of the lake Amrta Vāpi, dug by the Dānavas.

इन्ट्रीपि च वृषो भूत्वा वाह्नत्वां गतः क्षितौ ।

आहायय वसंतोकस्य विषाणोर विवेकिनः ॥ 38 ॥

सर्वेन्त्रयं नांत कुत्र प्रघुगफितः कुतो गता ।

यदेम्पुगविज्ञानं न ज्ञातं हरिणा किल ॥ 39 ॥

Indra, too, the Lord of the Devas, turned into a bull and carried Viṣṇu on his back on the face of the earth. What to speak where the omniscience and omnipotence disappeared of Bhagavān Viṣṇu, Who is the First of all created beings and possessed of reason and discrimination? Oh! What a great wonder, that He could not know about the golden deer?

राजन्यायावलं पश्य रामो हि काममोहितः ।

रामो विरहसंतनो करोद शुभागतुः ॥ 40 ॥

योप्रच्छत्याद्वामूढः वयं गता जनकामजा ।

भक्षिता वा हता केन रुदयुचन्तरं ततः ॥ 4 1 ॥

Judge, O King! for yourself, the great power of Māyā, that even Rāma Candra was deluded by passion, and very much grieved for the separation from his dear wife Sītā, and wept much for Her. Greatly deluded, he began to cry aloud and ask the trees “where has gone My Sītā, the daughter of Janaka? Is she devoured by the rapacious animals? or whether is she stolen by some mischievous person?

लक्ष्मणाई मरिधामि कान्ताविरहूःश्रितः ।

त्वं चापि मम दुःखेन मरिष्यसि बनेउनुः ॥ 4 2 ॥

आवयोर्मर्ग जाला माता मम मार्थिति ।

गुरुभोउध्वितुःखातृः कर्थ जीवितुमहिति ॥ 4 3 ॥

O Brother Lakṣmaṇa! I am being consumed by the fire of separation from my beloved; I will commit suicide now; and you too will die due to the separation from me; our mother, too, would die when they will hear of our deaths; Śatrughna, too, will be very much afflicted at our death and will not hold his life.

सुभिमा जीवितं जहाग्यत्रयसनकर्जिता ।

पूर्णकामास्थ बैकैयी भवेत्युसमप्तिता ॥ 44 ॥

The mother Sumitrā, too, will destroy her life, being afflicted with her son's demise; and then Bharata's and his mother's desires will certainly be fulfilled.

हा सीते ब्क नगात्रसि त्वं मां बिहायु मसानुगा ।

एहोहि मुगावगशक्षि मां जीवय कुशोदरि ॥ 45 ॥

O Sita! I am very much moved by your separation; where have you gone, leaving me here! O dear-eyed, O one of thin waist! come; give life unto me!

किं करोमि वक गच्छामि वद्धीर्न च जीवितम् ।

समाशास्य दीनं मां प्रियं जनकनन्दिनि ॥ 46 ॥

What shall I do? Where shall I go? My life is entirely dependent on you, O daughter of Janaka! I am your darling? Now I am very much depressed owing to your separation. Please come and speak to me words of hope and courage.

एवं विलपता तेन रोपाणमिततेजस ।

वने वने च भ्रमता नैहिता जनकात्मजा ॥ 47 ॥

Though Rāma, of unequalled prowess, roamed about weeping from forest to forest, yet he could not fine out Sitā.

शरणय: सर्वलोकानां राम: कमललोचन: ।

गरणां वानराणां स गतो मायाशिमेहितः ॥ 48 ॥

सहायान् वानरान्कावा बकवभ बकणालयम् ।

जघान रावणं वीरं कृम्भकर्ण महोदरम् ॥ 49 ॥

He, who is the Refuge of all the worlds, the lotus-eyed Rāma, got entangled into the delusion of Māyā and had to take refuge Himself under the monkeys, and with their help, constructed the bridge across the ocean, crossed the ocean and was thus able to

kill the valiant warriors Kumbhakarna and Rāvaṇa.

आनीच च ततः सीतां गमो दिव्यमकात्यम् ।

सर्वैज्ञोप्रि हृतां मत्वा रावणेन दुर्गतमना ॥ ५० ॥

Then Rāma got back His Sītā before him but suspecting, since she had been stolen by the vicious Rāvaṇa, made her take an oath, though it is to be remembered that Rāma was all-knowing.

किं क्वीमि महाराज योगमायावलं महत् ।

यया विश्वामिदं सर्वे श्रामितं ध्रमते किल ॥ 51 ॥

Śrimaddevibhagavatam

O King! The power of Yoga Māyā is very great; what shall I speak of Her great power? This whole cosmos is always urged into activity by Her and thus goes rolling on and on incessantly.

एवं नानावतारोउर विष्णु: शापवर्श गत: ।

क्रांति विविधाश्रौ द्वैवाधानि: सदैव हि ॥ 5 2 ॥

Thus, in various incarnations, Bhagavān Viṣṇu was always under the influence of previous curse and also under the control of Destiny and had to do various functions incessantly.

त्वाहं क्रविध्यापि कृष्णयासपि विवेहितम् ।

प्रभवं मानुषे लोके देवकार्यांशसिद्धये ॥ ५३ ॥

O King! Now I will speak to you about the birth of Śrī Krṣna in the world for serving the purpose of gods and will narrate His Lilā.

कालिन्दीपुलिने रथे हासी-मधुवर्ने पुरा ।

लवणो मधुपुस्तु तत्रासीद्वावो वली ॥ 54 ॥

In days of yore, on the delightful banks of the river Kálindi, there was a place, called Madhuvana, where lived a powerful Daitya named Lavana, the son of Madhu.

द्विजानां दुःखदः पाथी बरादोन नार्थितः ।

नित्तोउसौ महाभाग लक्ष्मणास्यानुजेन वे ॥ ५५ ॥

शुक्रनेनाथ संग्रामे ते नित्रत्य मदोलकन्दम् ।

वासिता मयुगा नामी पुगी परमगोभना ॥ ५६ ॥

That wicked Demon was exceedingly arrogant, on getting a boon, and he used to give an enormous amount of trouble to the Dvias. Śatrughna, the younger of Lakṣmana, killed that uncontrollable Daitya and built a very beautiful city there and named it Mathurā.

स तन पुक्रारक्षी ई पुत्री शज्ञिपूर्वनः ।

निदेश्य राज्य मतिमाकाले प्रप्त दिवं गतः ॥ 57 ॥

The intelligent Sátrunha, the destroyer of enemies, installed his two lotus-eyed sons in that kingdom and, when his end came, went to Heaven.

सूर्यवैश्रश्वे तां तु यावादा: प्रतिवेषिति ।

मवूगं मुक्तिडां राजन व्यातितनाय: पुरा ॥ 58 ॥

Afterwards on the decline of the Solar race, the

Yādavas, born of the race of Yayāti, occupied that Mathurā city, giving salvation to all.

शूरसेनाधिधः शूरस्ताथभूमेदिर्वीपति: ।

माधुराळ्यूरसेनांशे बुधुने विषयातृष्य ॥ 59 ॥

O King! There reigned in Mathurā city one Yādava king, a valiant warrior, named Śūrasena; and he enjoyed all the pleasures of Mathurā.

तत्रोप्यः कश्यपोशः शापाच्छ वक्षाम्य वै ।

वसुदेवो5तिविख्यातः शूर्येनसुतस्तदा ॥ 60 ॥

Under the curse of Varuna, Vasudeva took his birth as the son of the renowned Sūrasena, as the part incarnate of Kaśyapa.

वैश्यवृत्तिरतः सो5प्न्युते विलिति माधवः ।

उउसेनो बमुवाच केसस्तत्यामजो महान् ॥ 61 ॥

He took up the profession of a Vaiśya and engaged himself in agriculture. And on the death of his father, the prosperous and wealthy Ugrasena became the King of Mathurā. The powerful Karīsa was the son of Ugrasena.

अदितिवेदकी जाता देवकस्य सुता तदा ।

शापाई वक्णस्याथ कक्यपानुगता किल ॥ 62 ॥

On the other hand, the King Devaka had a daughter born to him, named Devakī, the part incarnate of Aditi. She under the the curse of Varuna, followed Kaśyapa.

दत्ता सा वायुर्देवाय देवकेन महात्मना ।

विद्यार्थे रचिते तत्र वागभूग्राने तथा ॥ 63 ॥

The high souled King Devaka performed the marriage ceremony of his daughter Devaki with Vasudeva.

कंस कंस महाभाग देवकीगर्भसभ्यवः ।

अर्धास्तु सुतः श्रीमांस्व हन्ता भयिष्यति ॥ 64 ॥

When this marriage ceremony was over, a voice was heard from Heaven, saying: O furtunate Karīsa! The eighth son of this Devakī will take away your life.

तखूला वचनं कंसो विमितोउभूम्हाबलः ।

देववाचं तु तां मत्वा सत्यां चित्तमावम सः ॥ 65 ॥

The powerful Karīsa, hearing that voice from Heaven, was surprised and took it to be true and became very anxious.

Book IV Chapter XX

किं करोमीति संचिन्य विमर्गमकरोत्त्व ।

नित्तैनां न मे मृत्युभवेद्रैव सत्म्य ॥ 6 6 ॥

उपायो नान्यथा चास्मिकार्य मृत्युभयावहे ।

इयं चितृष्वसा पूज्या कर्थ हन्मीचिन्तन्त्य ॥ 67 ॥

Kañsa began to argue in his mind. Once he thought “I would to-day destroy her; then my death won’t take place; for I can’t see any other way of escape from this difficulty; again he thought, “she is my sister, daughter of my paternal uncle and therefore fit to be worshipped; how can I kill her!”

पूर्वविंशरायामास मरणं मेउस्वहो स्सा ।

पापेनापि प्रकर्तेमा देहरूषा विष्णित्धा ॥ 68 ॥

Lastly, he came to the final conclusion, thus “she is the cause of my death, though she is my sister,

fit to be worshipped; to kill her will not lead me to sin; for it is enjoyed by the wise: Do even a sin to avert one's own death."

प्रायश्धितेन पापस्य शृत्रद्धर्षिति सर्वथा ।

प्राणास्त्रा प्रकर्तेमा बुधैरधेनसा तथा ॥ 6 9 ॥

The sins can be remedied always by penances. Therefore to save one's life, by committing even a sinful act, ought to be done by the wise.

विधिन्य मनसा कंसः खड्यामादाय सत्यतः ।

जग्राह तां वरारोहां केशेष्वाकृष्य पापकृत् ॥ 70 ॥

कोशालखद्यापुङ्क्य हृतकामो दुराशयः ।

पश्यतां सर्वलोकानां नवोबां तां चकर्ष है ॥ 71 ॥

The vicious Kañsha thus arguing, holding the scabbard in his hand, drew from it the sword and dragged and caught hold of the newly married handsome woman by her to kill her before the presence of the public.

हन्यमानां च तां दृष्ट्वा हाहाकारो महानभूत ।

वसुदेवानुगा वीरा युद्धायोशकामुर्भिकः ॥  72 ॥

A cry of universal consternation and distress arose on all sides, seeing Kārīsa thus ready to kill Devaki; then the warriors, under Vasudeva, at once raised their bows and arrows, ready to fight.

भुड़ मुडौत प्रोबुस्ते ते तदादुत्साहास: ।

कृपया मोचयामासुरैदककी देवमातम् ॥ 7 3 ॥

These wonderfully valorous warriors loudly

exclaimed to Kāṃsa, “Leave Devakī at once” “Leave Devakī at once” and then they were finally able out of their mercy to release the Devamātā Devakī, from the hold of the vicious Kāṃsa.

तद्धुद्रमाभवद्धोरं वीगाणां च परस्यम् ।

वसुदेवहायानां केसेन च महात्मानां ॥ 74 ॥

वर्तमाने तथा युद्धे दारूणे लोमहरणे ।

कंसं निवारयामासुरुंद्धा चे यदुस्तमाः ॥ 75 ॥

पितृब्बसेयं ते वीर पूजनीया च बालिणा ।

न हन्तव्य त्वया वीर विवाहात्सवर्माने ॥ 76 ॥

Deadly battles ensued then between the powerful Karīsa and those valorous on Vasudeva's side.

Seeing the exceedingly terrible battle, the old Yādavas asked Karīsa to desist from such a battle and advised him thus. This Devakī is your sister; you ought to pay her respect. Did you not consider even for a moment that she is as yet a girl. O Hero! You ought not to kill her at the time of this joyous marriage ceremony.

श्रीहत्या दुःसहा वीर कांतिनी पापकृतमा ।

भृतभाषितमाजेण न कर्तेल्या विज्ञानता ॥ 77 ॥

O Valiant Warrior! The murder of a woman is intolerable! Destroyer of fame, and most heinous crime! You should also consider that learned persons ought not to commit such dastardly acts as the murdering of females, depending simply on a voice from heaven, a very ordinary thing!

अन्तर्हिंते केनापि गरुणा तव चास्य वा ।

उद्दितिंत कुतो न स्याढ्रानबंकरी विषो ॥ 78 ॥

It may be that some of your Vasudeva's enemy has uttered that harmful word, hiding himself from your sight. No reason can be shewn contrary to this.

यशसते विधाताय वसुदेवगृहस्य च ।

अरिण रचिता वाणी गुणमायाविदा नृप ॥ 79 ॥

We are of opinion that to ruin your name and to destroy the house of Vasudeva, some magician, expert in black magic, your enemy has framed this voice from Heaven.

विशेषेय विरस्वं भृत्वा भूतभूयितभायया ।

यशोमूर्तविधातार्थमुपायस्वरिणा कृतः ॥ 80 ॥

Šrimuddevibhāgavatum

O king! You are a hero; why do you fear the words of a devil. We firmly believe, there is no doubt, that this is done by your malicious enemy to ruin your name.

विद्युबसा न हतल्या विवाहसमये पुनः ।

भवितच्यं महाराज भवेच्च कथमन्यथा ॥ 8 1 ॥

O king! What is destined to take place, will take place; no one can stand against it otherwise. Therefore, at this marriage festivity, you ought never to kill this your respected sister.

एवं तैर्वीध्यमानोउसी निवृत्तो नाभवटादा ।

तदा तं वसुदेवोउपि नीतिज्ञः प्रत्यभावत ॥ 82 ॥

कॉस सत्यं ब्रवीयघु सत्यायारं जगतयम् ।

दायामि देवकीपुगन्त्यज्ञांसव सर्वेश: ॥ 83 ॥

O King Janamejaya! Though made to understand thus by the old wise Yādavas, the king Karīsa did not desist from his purpose; Śrī Vasudeva, versed in morals, told him “Karīsa! These three worlds are established on Truth. I say on Truth that I will hand over to you all my sons, born of the womb of Devakī, no sooner they are born.

जातं जातं सुतं तुध्यं न दायायाम यदि प्रभो ।

कृभपोपाक तदा घोरे पतंतु मम पूर्वज्ञः ॥ 84 ॥

And if I do not deliver to you all those sons, no sooner they are born, then all my forefathers will fall down into the hell called Kumbhipāka.

शून्याध शवर्न सर्व पौराय वे पुरःस्थितः ।

कचूले त्विततः कंसं साधु साधु पुनः पुनः ॥ 85 ॥

न मिया भाषते क्वापि वसुदेवो महाना: ।

कैंग मुंघ महाभाग स्तीह्यापातकं तथा ॥ 86 ॥

The descendants of Puru, that were present there, hearing his truthful words, praised him repeatedly and told Karīsa “Vasudeva is a high minded personage; he is surely not to tell a lie. Therefore, O Thou, blessed one! Now leave Devakī and be free from committing the murder of a woman.

एवं प्रविधितः कंसो यदुकूर्दैहानमिभः ।

क्रोधे तथस्त्वा स्थितस्तत्र सत्यवाक्यामोदितः ।

O king! Thus made to understand by the aged high minded Yādavas, the king Karīsa accepted the truthful words of Vasudeva and abandoned his anger.

ततो दुनुभयो नेवुर्वादिजाणि च सत्यम्: ॥ 87 ॥

जयग्वदस्तु सर्वेभामुपवस्तत्र संसदि ॥

Then the Dundubhis and other sounding instruments were sounded; and their sounds filled the place; and all repeatedly uttered jai, jai.

प्रसाध कंसं प्रतिमोच्य देर्वकाँ

महायशा: श्रासुतस्तदानीम् ।

जगाम गेहे स्वजानानुवृतो

नवोदया वीतभयस्तरी ॥ 88 ॥

इति श्रीमद्दैभीभगवते महापुराणे वर्जृकंकन्धे विशोभयाय ॥ 20 ॥

Then the famous Vasudeva, the son of Sūrasena, thus pleased the king Karīsa and freed Devaki; and, surrounded by his relatives, he went quickly without any fear to his own house, accompanied by Devaki.

Here ends the Twentieth Chapter in the Four Book of

Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of

18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa, on Devaki's marriage.

Šrimuddevibhāgavatum

