[Ch 20 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O Bharata! I now narrate to you about the relief of the burden of the Earth, the destruction by the Yoga Māyā of the armies at Kuruksetra and Prabhāsa, the two sacred places, and about the birth, due to the curse of Bhru, of the Bhagavān Hari, of unparalleled prowess, under the influence of Mahāmāyā, in the race of Yadu. Now hear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O Bharata! I now narrate to you about the relief of the burden of the Earth, the destruction by the Yoga Māyā of the armies Kurukṣettra and Prabhāsa, the two sacred places, and about the birth, due to the curse of Bhṛgu, of the Bhagavān Hari, of unparalleled prowess, under the influence of Mahāmāyā, in the race of Yadu. Now hear.

[Ch 20 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Viṣnu's taking birth in the world was effected under the circumstances caused by Yoga Māyā, to relieve the burden of the Earth; this is my opinion. Note: Prabhāsa is a well-known place of pilgrimage near Dvārakā, in Gujarat.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viṣṇu’s taking birth in the world was effected under the circumstances caused by Yoga Māyā, to relieve the burden of the Earth; this is my opinion. N. B. :-- Prabhāsa is a well-known place of pilgrimage near Dvārkā, in Gujerat.

[Ch 20 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! When the Goddess Mahāmāyā, the Incarnate of the three qualities can make Brahmā, Viṣṇu and the other Devas dance incessantly as their Internal Controller, then what wonder, that She would appear charming to the other Jivas and make them dance incessantly, as woodon dolls.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! When the Goddess Mahāmāyā, the Incarnate of the three qualities can make Brahmā, Viṣṇu and the other Devas dance incessantly as their Internal Controller, then what wonder, that She would appear charming to the other Jīvas and make them dance incessantly, as wooden dolls.

[Ch 20 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► All the troubles incurred in remaining in the womb, amidst the urine, excreta and tissues, She had brought to bear finally on Viṣṇu by Her ever famous Līlā (Divine Sport).
NEW CORR ENG ──► All the troubles iñcurred in remaining in the womb, amidst the urine, excreta and tissues, She had brought to bear finally on Viṣṇu by Her ever famous Leelā (Divine Sport).

[Ch 20 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In days of yore, in Rāma incarnation, She, That Supreme Goddess made the Gods become monkeys and you know very well already, what an amount of trouble Bhagavān Viṣṇu had to undergo by the hard iron chain of bondage, “This is mine, this is I”, etc., imposed by Māyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In days of yore, in Rāma incarnation, She, That Supreme Goddess made the Gods become monkeys and you know very well already, what amount of trouble Bhagavān Viṣṇu had to undergo by the hard iron chain of bondage, “This is mine, this is I,” etc., imposed by Māyā.

[Ch 20 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Yogis who want final liberation and who have abandoned all their attachments and who want devotion, they worship the Supreme Goddess of the Universe, the Incarnate of Auspiciousness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Yogis who want final liberation and who have abandoned all their attachments and who want devotion, they worship the Supreme Goddess of the Universe, the Incarnate of Auspiciousness.

[Ch 20 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Who will not serve Her? A trace of devotion towards Whom effects at once the salvation of the Jivas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Who will not serve Her? A trace of devotion towards Whom effects at once the salvation of the Jīvas.

[Ch 20 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If any human being utters simply the name "Bhuvaneśvari" (the Goddess of Universe) She gives him the three worlds; and if any one cries and utters for help "Save me," then the Goddess of the Universe, being unable to find anything that
NEW CORR ENG ──► If any human being utters simply the name “Bhuvaneśvarī” (the Goddess of Universe) She gives him the three worlds; and if any one cries and utters for help “Save me,” then the Goddess of the Universe, being unable to find anything that

[Ch 20 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Know Vidya (knowledge) and Avidyā (non-knowledge, spiritual ignorance, Iowner knowledge) Her two forms; Vidya gives liberation; Avidyā causes bondage.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Know Vidyā (knowledge) and Avidyā (non-knowledge, spiritual ignorance, lower knowledge) Her two forms; Vidyā gives liberation; Avidyā causes bondage.

[Ch 20 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā, Viṣṇu Rudra, all these and their Avatāras are Her instruments and are under Her subjection, are if they as all fastened by a cord.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, all these and their Avatāras are Her instruments and are under Her subjection, as if they are all fastened by a cord.

[Ch 20 Verse 12-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Bhagavān Hari sometimes resides in Vaikunthā, sometimes resides in the sea of milk and enjoys pleasures, sometimes fights with the powerful Dānavas, sometimes performs extensive sacrificial ceremonies sometimes performs severe asceticism and sometimes takes to deep sleep under the guidance of Yoga Māyā. Thus He never becomes free and independent.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Bhagavān Hari sometimes resides in Vaikunṭha, sometimes resides in the sea of milk and enjoys pleasures, sometimes fights the powerful Dānavas, sometimes performs extensive sacrificial ceremonies sometimes performs severe asceticism and sometimes takes to deep sleep under the guidance of Yoga Māyā. Thus He never becomes free and independent.

[Ch 20 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! And like Viṣṇu, Brahmā, Rudra, the other Gods Indra, Varuna, Yama, Kubera, Agni, the Sun, Moon and other celestial gods, the Sanaka and other Munis, Vasisītha and other Rṣis, all are incessantly controlled by the Supreme Goddess, as if they are the dolls in the hands of a playing magician.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! And like Viṣṇu, Brahmā, Rudra, the other Gods Indra, Varuṇa, Yama, Kuvera, Agni, the Sun, Moon and other celestial gods, the Sanaka and other Munis, Vaśiṣṭha and other Ṛṣis, all are incessantly controlled by the Supreme Goddess, as if they are the dolls in the hands of a playing magician.

[Ch 20 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► All the Devas are controlled by the noose of Time, just as oxen are brought under control by men, by strings passed within their noses.
NEW CORR ENG ──► All the Devas are controlled by the noose of Time, just as oxen are brought under control by men, by strings passed within their noses.

[Ch 20 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Pleasure, pain, sleep lassitude, idleness, and other passions and feelings are always found inherent in every embodied being.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Pleasure, pain, sleep, lassitude, idleness, and other passions and feelings are always found inherent in every embodied being.

[Ch 20 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas are written down by authors in their books as not subject to death or decay; this statement is merely nominal and not real; for whoever is always subject to birth, growth, decay and death how can we call him immortal or beyond old age and death?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas are written down by authors in their books as not subject to death or decay; this statement is merely nominal and not real; for whoever is always subject to birth, growth, decay and death how can we call him immortal or beyond old age and death?

[Ch 20 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Why do the Devas get into sorrows, and troubles? How can they be called gods? How can one enjoy when one is involved in a trouble?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Why do the Devas get into sorrows, and troubles? How can they be called gods? How can one enjoy when one is involved in a trouble?

[Ch 20 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In this world, it is seen mosquitoes and other insects born from water die after a very short time; so, like these, the Devas at the expiry of their ordained life-period, die too. Then why not the Devas be treated like those insects? Why not shall we term them, "Mortal"?
NEW CORR ENG ──► In this world, it is seen mosquitoes and other insects born from water die after a very short time; so, like these, the Devas at the expiry of their ordained life-period, die too. Then why not the Devas be treated like those insects? Why not shall we term them, “Mortal”?

[Ch 20 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Some human beings live one year; some other live upto one hundred years the Devas live longer than men; the life of the Prajāpati Brahmā exceeds those of the Devas; Rudra lives longer than Brahmā; and Viṣṇu lives longer than Rudra. All these are thus subject by turns to birth growth, and decay.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Some human beings live one year; some others live upto one hundred years, the Devas live longer than men; the life of the Prājāpatī Brahmā exceeds those of the Devas; Rudra lives longer than Brahmā; and Viṣṇu lives longer than Rudra. All these are thus subject by turns to birth, growth, and decay.

[Ch 20 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who are born, they die; those that die are again born. Thus O King! In this world all the Jivas, no doubt, move round and round like a wheel.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who are born, they die; those that die are again born. Thus O King! In this world all the Jīvas, no doubt, move round and round like a wheel.

[Ch 20 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Jivas are deluded by the network of Moha (charms) and thus deluded. They can never gain final release. So long as Māyā exists in them, their delusion is not destroyed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Jīvas are deluded by the network of Moha (charms) and thus deluded. They can never gain final release. So long as Māyā exists in them, their delusion is not destroyed.

[Ch 20 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! At the time of creation Brahmā and all other things came into existence, in due order, and these will duly dissolve at the time of the Great Dissolution (the Pralaya)?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! At the time of creation Brahmā and all other things came into existence, in due order, and these will duly dissolve at the time of the Great Dissolution (the Pralaya)?

[Ch 20 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whatever is the cause of destruction to any body here, that destroys the body in question. According to the Will Powers of the Supreme Goddess, whatever is created by Brahmā, no none can undo that. Know this as perfectly certain.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whatever is the cause of destruction to anybody here, that destroys the body in question. According to the Will Power of the Supreme Goddess, whatever is created by Brahmā, no none can undo that. Know this as perfectly certain.

[Ch 20 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Know this the predestined law that the birth, death, old age, diseases, pain or pleasure overtake all the Jivas according to the perscribed order of Nature; never these laws fail to operate in their actions.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Know this the predestined law that the birth, death, old age, diseases, pain or pleasure overtake all the Jīvas according to the prescribed order of Nature; never these laws fail to operate in their actions.

[Ch 20 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See! The Devas that we see with our physical eyes, the Sun and Moon yield pleasure to all; still they suffer always troubles at the hands of their enemies (i.e. Rāhu and Ketu, ॥.e. there always take place regularly solar and lunar eclipses, when they are in the ascending and descending nodes). This suffering is never removed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► See! The Devas that we see with our physical eyes, the Sun and Moon yield pleasure to all; still they suffer always troubles at the hands of their enemies (i.e., Rāhu and Ketu, i.e., there always take place regularly solar and lunar eclipses, when they are in the ascending and descending modes.) This suffering is never removed.

[Ch 20 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The son of the Sun (Saturn) is always injurious to people; hence it is termed “Manda” (bad); the Moon was attacked with consumption and bears stain on his body (spots in the Moon disc). What to speak of ordinary men? The great men even are subject to the prescribed laws of Fate and Nature.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The son of the Sun (Saturn) is always injurious to people; hence it is termed “Manda” (bad); the Moon was attacked with consumption and bears stain on his body (spots in the Moon disc). What to speak of ordinary men? The great men even are subject to the prescribed laws of Fate and Nature.

[Ch 20 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Creator of the world, the four faced Brahmā is the author of the Vedas and awarder of Intelligence. He, too, on seeing Sarasvatī, his own daughter, was afflicted with passion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Creator of the world, the four faced Brahmā is the author of the Vedas and awarder of Intelligence. He, too, on seeing Sarasvatī, his own daughter, was afflicted with passion.

[Ch 20 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Sati, the wife of Śiva, left off Her mortal coil, Mahādeva, though He could remove the sorrows of all, was very much moved with passion and greatly afflicted.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Sati, the wife of Śiva, left off Her mortal coil, Mahādeva, though He could remove the sorrows of all, was very much moved with passion and greatly afflicted.

[Ch 20 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then, being burnt very much as it were by the fire of passion, he threw himself down into the water of the river Kālindi; and the water of that river became black-coloured, as if burnt by the burning fire of the Sorrows of Śiva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then, being burnt very much as it were by the fire of passion, he threw himself down into the water of the river Kālindī; and the water of that river became black-coloured, as if burnt by the burning fire of the sorrows of Śiva.

[Ch 20 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! When Mahādeva, being infatuated with Kāma, went into the forest of Bhrgu and becoming naked, began to copulate, the ascetic Bhrgu, seeing him in that state, exclaimed “O You are very shameless” and cursed Him thus: Let your penis drop off just now. Mahādeva, then to satisfy his thirst for passion, began to drink the water of the lake Amrta Vāpi, dug by the Dānavas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! When Mahādeva, being infatuated with Kāma, went into the forest of Bhṛgu and becoming naked, began to copulate, the ascetic Bhṛgu, seeing him in that state, exclaimed “O You are very shameless” and cursed Him thus :-- Let your penis drop off just now. Mahādeva, then to satisfy his thirst for passion, began to drink the water of the lake Amrita Vapī, dug by the Dānavas.

[Ch 20 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra, too, the Lord of the Devas, turned into a bull and carried Viṣṇu on his back on the face of the earth. What to speak where the omniscience and omnipotence disappeared of Bhagavān Viṣṇu, Who is the First of all created beings and possessed of reason and discrimination? Oh! What a great wonder, that He could not know about the golden deer?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra, too, the Lord of the Devas, turned into a bull and carried Viṣṇu on his back on the face of the earth. What to speak where the omniscience and omnipotence disappeared of Bhagavān Viṣṇu, Who is the First of all created beings and possessed of reason, and discrimination? Oh! What a great wonder, that He could not know about the golden deer?

[Ch 20 Verse 40-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Judge, O King! for yourself, the great power of Māyā, that even Rāma Candra was deluded by passion, and very much grieved for the separation from his dear wife Sītā, and wept much for Her. Greatly deluded, he began to cry aloud and ask the trees “where has gone My Sītā, the daughter of Janaka? Is she devoured by the rapacious animals? or whether is she stolen by some mischievous person?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Judge, O King! for yourself, the great power of Māyā, that even Rāma Candra was deluded by passion, and very much grieved for the separation from his dear wife Sītā, and wept much for Her. Greatly deluded, he began to cry aloud and ask the trees “Where has gone My Sītā, the daughter of Janaka? Is she devoured by the rapacious animals? or whether is she stolen by some mischievous person?

[Ch 20 Verse 42-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brother Lakṣmaṇa! I am being consumed by the fire of separation from my beloved; I will commit suicide now; and you too will die due to the separation from me; our mother, too, would die when they will hear of our deaths; Śatrughna, too, will be very much afflicted at our death and will not hold his life.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brother Lakṣmaṇa! I am being consumed by the fire of separation from my beloved; I will commit suicide now; and you too will die due to the separation from me; our mother, too, would die when they will hear of our deaths; Satrughṇa, too, will be very much afflicted at our death and will not hold his life.

[Ch 20 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The mother Sumitrā, too, will destroy her life, being afflicted with her son's demise; and then Bharata's and his mother's desires will certainly be fulfilled.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The mother Sumitrā, too, will destroy her life, being afflicted with her son’s demise; and then Bharata’s and his mother’s desires will certainly be fulfilled.

[Ch 20 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sita! I am very much moved by your separation; where have you gone, leaving me here! O dear-eyed, O one of thin waist! come; give life unto me!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sītā! I am very much moved by your separation; where have you gone, leaving me here! O deer-eyed, O one of thin waist! come; give life unto me!

[Ch 20 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What shall I do? Where shall I go? My life is entirely dependent on you, O daughter of Janaka! I am your darling? Now I am very much depressed owing to your separation. Please come and speak to me words of hope and courage.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What shall I do? Where shall I go? My life is entirely dependent on you, O daughter of Janaka! I am your darling! Now I am very much depressed owing to your separation. Please come and speak to me words of hope and courage.

[Ch 20 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Though Rāma, of unequalled prowess, roamed about weeping from forest to forest, yet he could not fine out Sitā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Though Rāma, of unequalled prowess, roamed about weeping from forest to forest, yet he could not find out Sītā.

[Ch 20 Verse 48-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He, who is the Refuge of all the worlds, the lotus-eyed Rāma, got entangled into the delusion of Māyā and had to take refuge Himself under the monkeys, and with their help, constructed the bridge across the ocean, crossed the ocean and was thus able to kill the valiant warriors Kumbhakarna and Rāvaṇa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He, who is the Refuge of all the worlds, the lotus-eyed Rāma, got entangled into the delusion of Māyā and had to take refuge Himself under the monkeys, and with their help, constructed the bridge across the ocean, crossed the ocean and was thus able to kill the valiant warriors Kumbhakarṇa and Rāvaṇa.

[Ch 20 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Rāma got back His Sītā before him but suspecting, since she had been stolen by the vicious Rāvaṇa, made her take an oath, though it is to be remembered that Rāma was all-knowing.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Rāma got back His Sītā before him but suspecting, since she had been stolen by the vicious Rāvaṇa, made her take an oath, though it is to, be remembered that Rāma was all-knowing.

[Ch 20 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The power of Yoga Māyā is very great; what shall I speak of Her great power? This whole cosmos is always urged into activity by Her and thus goes rolling on and on incessantly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The power of Yoga Māyā is very great; what shall I speak of Her great power? This whole cosmos is always urged into activity by Her and thus goes rolling on and on incessantly.

[Ch 20 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus, in various incarnations, Bhagavān Viṣṇu was always under the influence of previous curse and also under the control of Destiny and had to do various functions incessantly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus, in various incarnations, Bhagavān Viṣṇu was always under the influence of previous curse and also under the control of Destiny and had to do various functions incessantly.

[Ch 20 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Now I will speak to you about the birth of Śrī Krṣna in the world for serving the purpose of gods and will narrate His Lilā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Now I will speak to you about the birth of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the world for serving the purposes of gods, and will narrate His Leelā.

[Ch 20 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In days of yore, on the delightful banks of the river Kálindi, there was a place, called Madhuvana, where lived a powerful Daitya named Lavana, the son of Madhu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In days of yore, on the delightful banks of the river Kālindī, there was a place, called Madhuban, where lived a powerful Daitya named Lavana, the son of Madhu.

[Ch 20 Verse 55-56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That wicked Demon was exceedingly arrogant, on getting a boon, and he used to give an enormous amount of trouble to the Dvias. Śatrughna, the younger of Lakṣmana, killed that uncontrollable Daitya and built a very beautiful city there and named it Mathurā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That wicked Demon was exceedingly arrogant, on getting a boon, and he used to give an enormous amount of trouble to the Dvijas. Satrughṇa the younger of Lakṣmaṇ, killed that uncontrollable Daitya and built a very beautiful city there and named it Mathurā.

[Ch 20 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The intelligent Sátrunha, the destroyer of enemies, installed his two lotus-eyed sons in that kingdom and, when his end came, went to Heaven.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The intelligent Satrughṇa, the destroyer of enemies, installed his two lotus-eyed sons in that kingdom and, when his end came, went to Heaven.

[Ch 20 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Afterwards on the decline of the Solar race, the Yādavas, born of the race of Yayāti, occupied that Mathurā city, giving salvation to all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Afterwards on the decline of the Solar race, the Yādavas, born of the race of Yayāti, occupied that Mathurā city, giving salvation to all.

[Ch 20 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! There reigned in Mathurā city one Yādava king, a valiant warrior, named Śūrasena; and he enjoyed all the pleasures of Mathurā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! There reigned in Mathurā city one Yādava king, valiant warrior, named Śūrasena; and he enjoyed all the pleasures Mathurā.

[Ch 20 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Under the curse of Varuna, Vasudeva took his birth as the son of the renowned Sūrasena, as the part incarnate of Kaśyapa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Under the curse of Varuṇa, Vāsudeva took his birth as the son of the renowned Śūrasena, as the part incarnate of Kaśyapa.

[Ch 20 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He took up the profession of a Vaiśya and engaged himself in agriculture. And on the death of his father, the prosperous and wealthy Ugrasena became the King of Mathurā. The powerful Karīsa was the son of Ugrasena.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He took up the profession of a Vaiśya and engaged himself in agriculture. And on the death of his father, the prosperous and wealthy Ugrasena became the King of Mathurā. The powerful Kaṃsa was the son Ugrasena.

[Ch 20 Verse 62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the other hand, the King Devaka had a daughter born to him, named Devakī, the part incarnate of Aditi. She under the the curse of Varuna, followed Kaśyapa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the other hand, the King Devaka had a daughter born to him named Devakī, the part incarnate of Aditi. She under the curse of Varuṇa, followed Kaśyapa.

[Ch 20 Verse 63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The high souled King Devaka performed the marriage ceremony of his daughter Devaki with Vasudeva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The high souled King Devaka performed the marriage ceremony of his daughter Devakī with Vāsudeva.

[Ch 20 Verse 64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When this marriage ceremony was over, a voice was heard from Heaven, saying: O furtunate Karīsa! The eighth son of this Devakī will take away your life.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When this marriage ceremony was over, a voice was heard from Heaven, saying :-- O fortunate Kaṃsa! The eighth son of this Devakī will take away your life.

[Ch 20 Verse 65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The powerful Karīsa, hearing that voice from Heaven, was surprised and took it to be true and became very anxious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The powerful Kaṃsa, hearing that voice from Heaven, was surprised and took it to be true and became very anxious.

[Ch 20 Verse 66-67]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kañsa began to argue in his mind. Once he thought “I would to-day destroy her; then my death won’t take place; for I can’t see any other way of escape from this difficulty; again he thought, “she is my sister, daughter of my paternal uncle and therefore fit to be worshipped; how can I kill her!”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kaṃsa began to argue in his mind. Once he thought “I would today destroy her; then my death won’t take place; for I can’t see any other way of escape from this difficulty,” again he thought, “She is my sister, daughter of my paternal uncle and therefore fit to be worshipped; how can I kill her!”

[Ch 20 Verse 68]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Lastly, he came to the final conclusion, thus “she is the cause of my death, though she is my sister, fit to be worshipped; to kill her will not lead me to sin; for it is enjoyed by the wise: Do even a sin to avert one's own death."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Lastly, he came to the final conclusion, thus “She is the cause of my death, though she is my sister, fit to be worshipped; to kill her will not lead me to sin; for it is enjoined by the wise :-- Do even a sin to avert one’s own death.”

[Ch 20 Verse 69]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The sins can be remedied always by penances. Therefore to save one's life, by committing even a sinful act, ought to be done by the wise.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The sins can be remedied always by penances. Therefore to save one’s life, by committing even a sinful act, ought to be done by the wise.

[Ch 20 Verse 70-71]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The vicious Kañsha thus arguing, holding the scabbard in his hand, drew from it the sword and dragged and caught hold of the newly married handsome woman by her to kill her before the presence of the public.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The vicious Kaṃsa thus arguing, holding the scabbard in his hand, drew from it the sword and dragged and caught hold of the newly married handsome woman by her hair to kill her before the presence of the public.

[Ch 20 Verse 72]
OLD OCR ENG ──► A cry of universal consternation and distress arose on all sides, seeing Kārīsa thus ready to kill Devaki; then the warriors, under Vasudeva, at once raised their bows and arrows, ready to fight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► A cry of universal consternation and distress arose on all sides, seeing Kaṃsa thus ready to kill Devakī; then the warriors, under Vāsudeva, at once raised their bows and arrows, ready to fight.

[Ch 20 Verse 73]
OLD OCR ENG ──► These wonderfully valorous warriors loudly exclaimed to Kāṃsa, “Leave Devakī at once” “Leave Devakī at once” and then they were finally able out of their mercy to release the Devamātā Devakī, from the hold of the vicious Kāṃsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► These wonderfully valorous warriors loudly exclaimed to Kaṃsa, “Leave Devakī at once” “Leave Devakī at once” and then they were finally able out of their mercy to release the Devamātā Devakī, from the hold of the vicious Kaṃsa.

[Ch 20 Verse 74-76]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Deadly battles ensued then between the powerful Karīsa and those valorous on Vasudeva's side. Seeing the exceedingly terrible battle, the old Yādavas asked Karīsa to desist from such a battle and advised him thus. This Devakī is your sister; you ought to pay her respect. Did you not consider even for a moment that she is as yet a girl. O Hero! You ought not to kill her at the time of this joyous marriage ceremony.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Deadly battles ensued then between the powerful Kaṃsa and those valorous warriors on Vāsudeva’s side. 75-76. Seeing the exceedingly terrible battle, the old Yādavas asked Kaṃsa to desist from such a battle and advised him thus. This Devakī is your sister; you ought to pay her respects. Did you not consider even for a moment that she is as yet a girl. O Hero! You ought not to kill her at the time of this joyous marriage ceremony.

[Ch 20 Verse 77]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Valiant Warrior! The murder of a woman is intolerable! Destroyer of fame, and most heinous crime! You should also consider that learned persons ought not to commit such dastardly acts as the murdering of females, depending simply on a voice from heaven, a very ordinary thing!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Valiant Warrior! The murder of a woman is intolerable! Destroyer of fame, and most heinous crime! You should also consider that learned persons ought not to commit such dastardly acts as the murdering of females, depending simply on a voice from heaven, a very ordinary thing!

[Ch 20 Verse 78]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It may be that some of your Vasudeva's enemy has uttered that harmful word, hiding himself from your sight. No reason can be shewn contrary to this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It may be that some of your Vāsudeva’s enemy has uttered that harmful word, hiding himself from your sight. No reason can be shewn contrary to this.

[Ch 20 Verse 79]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We are of opinion that to ruin your name and to destroy the house of Vasudeva, some magician, expert in black magic, your enemy has framed this voice from Heaven.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We are of opinion that to ruin your name and to destroy the house of Vāsudeva, some magician, expert in black magic, your enemy has framed this voice from Heaven.

[Ch 20 Verse 80]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Šrimuddevibhāgavatum O king! You are a hero; why do you fear the words of a devil. We firmly believe, there is no doubt, that this is done by your malicious enemy to ruin your name.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! You are a hero; why do you fear the words of a devil. We firmly believe, there is no doubt, that this is done by your malicious enemy to ruin your name.

[Ch 20 Verse 81]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! What is destined to take place, will take place; no one can stand against it otherwise. Therefore, at this marriage festivity, you ought never to kill this your respected sister.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! What is destined to take place, will take place; no one can stand against it otherwise. Therefore, at this marriage festivity, you ought never to kill this your respected sister.

[Ch 20 Verse 82-83]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King Janamejaya! Though made to understand thus by the old wise Yādavas, the king Karīsa did not desist from his purpose; Śrī Vasudeva, versed in morals, told him “Karīsa! These three worlds are established on Truth. I say on Truth that I will hand over to you all my sons, born of the womb of Devakī, no sooner they are born.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King Janamejaya! Though made to understand thus by the old wise Yādavas, the king Kaṃsa did not desist from his purpose; Śrī Vāsudeva, versed in morals, told him “Kaṃsa! These three worlds are established on Truth. I say on Truth that I will hand over to you all my sons, born of the womb of Devakī, no sooner they are born.

[Ch 20 Verse 84]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And if I do not deliver to you all those sons, no sooner they are born, then all my forefathers will fall down into the hell called Kumbhipāka.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And if I do not deliver to you all those sons, no sooner they are born then all my forefathers will fall down into the hell called Kumbīhpāka.”

[Ch 20 Verse 85-86]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The descendants of Puru, that were present there, hearing his truthful words, praised him repeatedly and told Karīsa “Vasudeva is a high minded personage; he is surely not to tell a lie. Therefore, O Thou, blessed one! Now leave Devakī and be free from committing the murder of a woman.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The descendants of Puru, that were present there, hearing his truthful words, praised him repeatedly and told Kaṃsa “Vāsudeva is a high minded personage; he is surely not to tell a lie. Therefore, O Thou, blessed one! Now leave Devakī and be free from committing the murder of woman.”

[Ch 20 Verse 87]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Thus made to understand by the aged high minded Yādavas, the king Karīsa accepted the truthful words of Vasudeva and abandoned his anger.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Thus made to understand by the aged high minded Yādavas the king Kaṃsa accepted the truthful words of Vāsudeva and abandoned his anger.

[Ch 20 Verse 87]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the Dundubhis and other sounding instruments were sounded; and their sounds filled the place; and all repeatedly uttered jai, jai.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the Dunduvis and other sounding instruments were sounded; and their sounds filled the place; and all repeatedly uttered jai, jai.

[Ch 20 Verse 88]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the famous Vasudeva, the son of Sūrasena, thus pleased the king Karīsa and freed Devaki; and, surrounded by his relatives, he went quickly without any fear to his own house, accompanied by Devaki. Here ends the Twentieth Chapter in the Four Book of Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa, on Devaki's marriage. Šrimuddevibhāgavatum
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the famous Vāsudeva, the son of Śūrasena, thus pleased the king Kaṃsa and freed Devakī; and, surrounded by his relatives, he went quickly without any fear to his own house, accompanied by Devakī. Here ends the 20th chapter in the 4th Adhyāya of Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa, on Devakī’s marriage.
