CHAPTER XXIV

On Hariscandra in the Burning Ghaṭa of Kāśī

शौनक उवाच

ततः किमकारोत्राजा चापड़ालस्य गृहे ततः ।

तद्वृष्टि सुतत्वयं त्वं पृष्ठतः सत्वरं हिि मे ॥ १ ॥

Śaunaka said: O Sūta! Now describe as quickly as you can in detail what the King Harisācandra did afterwards in the house of the Cāṇḍala.

सूत उवाच

विश्वामित्र नते विश्रे धषणचो हृद्यानसः ।

विश्वामित्रय नतुद्वयं दत्ता बद्यूधा नरेशमू ॥ 2 ॥

असत्यो यास्यसीत्युक्त्वा एड्डेनाताडयत्त्वा ।

दणडगुहारसंघनमतीव्याकुलेत्रदूसम ॥ 3 ॥

Sūta said: When Viśvāmitra went away, the mind of the Cāṇḍala was filled with joy. He already gave to Viśvāmitra that amount of jewels; so he tied now the King and, telling him “Do you now stand on the path of falsehood? began to beat him with sticks.

इखबन्धुविद्योगतर्भानीय निजपकरणो ।

निगड़े स्थापयित्वा तं स्वयं सूचाय पिज्ञतः ॥ 4 ॥

निगडस्थततो राजा वसंश्राण्डालपकरणे ।

अत्रपाने परित्यज्य सदा वै तद्गोचयत् ॥ 5 ॥

The King was already very much tired of the bereavements from his dear ones; now being beaten by the Cāndāla, his senses were lost. In this state the Cāndāla took him to his house and fastened him with a chain. Then the Cāndāla's troubles were over and he fell asleep. The King lived in the Chāndāla's house in that state fettered by a chain; but he did not take any food there.

तन्यी दीनमुखीं दृष्ट्या बालं दीनमुखं पुरः ।

मां सत्यत्सुखाविष्टा मोक्षायिष्टानी नौ नृपः ॥ 6 ॥

उपारचित्ते विधाय दच्चा विलं प्रतिश्रन् ।

रोदमानं सुतं वीक्ष्य मां च साधोधायिष्टिते ॥ 7 ॥

Incessantly he wept for his wife and son and others. “Alas! That thin lady, seeing the sad face of her son is now remembering me with a morose face. She is now perhaps thinking, with a grieved heart, that whenever the King will get the money, he will pay off the promised money to the Brāhimn and then will free us from this yoke of slavery.

ततापर्थं ब्रजामीति रुदंतं बालकं पुनः ।

तात तातेति भाषांत तथा सम्बोध्रायिषिति ॥ 8 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

न सा मां मृगाशाङ्गी वेति चापड़ालतां गतम् ।

राज्यनाशः सुईच्यागो भार्यान्तनयिक्वतः ॥ 9 ॥

Alas! When will that day come when will he see me and this crying child and speak with us. When the son will cry, saying I will go to my father; father! When will he come and speak with the child? That fawn-eyed gentle woman does not know that I am now placed under a Cāṇḍala. Alas I am deprived of my kingdom, friends; and I have sold away my wife and son; now I am bound in the chain of slavery of Cāṇḍala.

तत्रप्राप्तालत तेच्यमहो तु:ख्यप्यमरा ।

एवं स निवसत्रित्यं स्मरंश दयितां सुतम् ॥ 10 ॥

Alas! So many miseries have fallen on me all one after another." Thus thinking incessantly about his dear consort and son, the King passed his days in the house of that Cāndāla.

निनाय दिवसाजाजा चतुगे विधिपीढितः ।

अथाहि पछमे तेन निगाऊभोचितो नृपः ॥ ११ ॥

वाण्डालेनानुशिष्ट धृतरैलापहाणे ।

कुब्देन पर्कैवर्कैयैर्निर्भर्य च पुनः पुनः ॥ १ २ ॥

Four days passed; and on the fifth day the Cāndāla came there and rebuked the King with very harsh words and freed him from his fastenings and said: "Go to the burial ground and collect the clothing of the dead bodies.

कायगश्छ दक्षिणे भागे स्मशानं विद्यते महत् ।

तद्रस्मय यथान्यां न त्यायं तत्वया कविचत् ॥ 13 ॥

इमं च जर्जैं, दण्डें गृहीत्वा याहि मा विम्य।

वीरबाहोरयं दण्ड इति घोपस्व सर्वतः ॥ 14 ॥

There is a wide Śmaśāna (burial ground) on the southern part of Kāśī; go and protect that and whatever is due to you, justly take that; do not leave it. Take this Jarjara club and go there quickly. Say to all that you are the messenger of Virabāhu and this staff is his."

सूत उवाच

कर्मियोघ्रदय काले तु मृतवैलापहारकः ।

हरिश्छोरोभवहाजा गरणाने तद्धानानुः ॥ 15 ॥

चाण्डालेनानुशिष्टु मृतवैलापहारिणा ।

राजा तेन समादिष्टो जगाम शवमिन्दिम् ॥ 16 ॥

Sūta said: O Rṣis! Thus Hariścandra became a Cāndāla's servant and was engaged in collecting the cloths of the dead persons. Thus ordered by the Cāndāla, whose duty was to collect the rages of the dead bodies, the King went to the burial ground.

पुर्यस्तु दक्षिणे देशे विद्यानं भयानकम् ।

गशवान्यसमाकर्णि दुर्गन्थं बहुधूमकम् ॥ 17 ॥

ग्शगानं घोरस्वादं शिवाशतसमाकूलम् ।

गृधगोपायुसंकर्णी शबृन्दपरिवारित् ॥ 18 ॥

To the south of the city Kāśī, was situated the dreadful Śmaśāna, scattered over with the garlands of the dead, bad odours were emitting on all sides and it was covered all over with smoke. Hundreds of jackals were yelling there and the ground was being reverberated by their yells. Vultures, jackals and dogs were at many places dragging the dead bodies.

अश्वस्यंघातसंकीर्ण महादुर्गन्यसंकुलम् ।

अर्धद्धरणशाव्यानि विकसईतपंचिक्षिः ॥ १९ ॥

हर्सतीवाराम्यस्यकावयरेवं व्यवस्थितः ।

नानामुत्सुहरादं महाकोलाहलाकुलम् ॥ 20 ॥

At other places were scattered heaps of bones; the whole ground was covered with the putrid smell of the dead. At some places it seemed that from within the funeral pyre, the half-burnt dead bodies were laughing wildly with their teeth wide open from their mouths. Thus the dead bodies looked terrible when being placed under fire. Lots of dead bodies were brought there and there was a great tumultuous uproar made by the cries of their friends and relatives.

हा पुत्र मित्र हा बन्धो धारलंस एवाया भे ।

हायले भारिनेयहं हा मातुल पितामह ॥ 21 ॥

मातामह पित: पौत्र क्र नातो २येही झांधव ।

इति शब्दे: समाकाणीं भवेर: सर्वदैहिनम् ॥ 22 ॥

जलनामासवमापेद्वष्यपिति ध्यनिसंकुलम् ।

Oh! My son! My friend! My relative! My brother! My child! My dear wife! Oh! My cousin!

Book VII Chapter XXV

Oh! My grandfather! Oh! My father! My grandson! My acquaintance! Where hast thou gone leaving me here! Come once and let me have a sight of thee! With such dreadful sounds as these, the burial ground was being echoed.

Flesh, marrow, fat all were being burnt in the fire and a peculiar sound Son, Son was, being produced there and creating voidness in the minds of the people.

अनंडठटवटाग्बो। शेरो यत्र जायते ॥ 23 ॥

कल्यांतसद्गाकारं मशगर्न तलुवारुणम् ।

स राजा तन संग्रपाते दुःखादेवमशोचत ॥ 24 ॥

The fire was burning with a crackling noise. Thus the Śmaśāna looked very terrible as if the universe was being destroyed at the end of a Kālpa. The King Harisācandra arrived there; and, with extreme pain, he began to give vent to his sorrows.

हा ध्याना मजिलगो यूयं क्त तराझं कृतोचितान् ।

हा प्रिये तूम मे बाल मां वलवता मन्दभायकम् ॥ 25 ॥

बाहुपास्य च कोपेन गता यूयं क दूरतः ।

बिता धर्म मनुव्याणां जायते न सुभं कचित् ॥ 26 ॥

"My ministers, servants! Where are you all now? Where is kingdom that I got by a succession of inheritance! O my Son! O my dear wife! Where are you staying now, at what a long distance, leaving me here out of the Brāhmin's anger. Without Dharma man can never get auspicious fruits. So men should carefully earn Dharma.

यन्तते धारयेतस्मातुभको धार्मेव हि ।

इल्लें चिन्तयन्तत्र चाण्डालोत्के पुनः पुनः ॥ 27 ॥

मलेन दिधस्वर्गः शवानां दर्पेने जबन् ।

लकुटाकारकल्पक्ष धार्वक्षापि ततस्ततः ॥ 28 ॥

The King, whose body was covered with dust and dirt, thought thus repeatedly; and at last, remembering the Cāndāla's words, went out in

quest of the dead. Out of this eventful cares and anxieties, his body became lean like a stick; still he ran, to and fro, and calculated thus:

अस्मिख्व इदं मौल्यं शर्त प्रायवामि चाप्रतः ।

इदं मम इदं रात इदं चाण्डालकस्य च ॥ 29 ॥

इत्वेच चिन्तयत्राजा व्यवस्थां दुस्तां गतः ।

जौर्गैकपटसुगंधिकृतकंक्षापरिबूः ॥ 30 ॥

चिताभस्मरजीलनमुपखावृदारीधकः ।

नानामेदोर्वसामाजलिलपाण्यंगुलि: धस्न् ॥ 31 ॥

"This dead body will fetch for its price one hundred gold mohurs; out of this, this belongs to the King; this to me, and this to the Cāndāla." So he thought constantly and his state became awful. His face, arm, belly and feet and the other parts of body were all covered over with ashes and dust; the King wore a ragged cloth where hundred places were sewn over; his toes were all besmeared with all sorts of flesh, marrow, fat and other things.

नानाशवैदनकृतक्षिवृक्षितिपरायण: ।।

तदीयमाल्यसंरेषेतकृतमस्तकमण्डल: ॥ 32 ॥

न राजी न दिवा शेते हृहिति प्रवद्मनुडुः ।

एवं झाड्ग मासासून नीता वर्भशोणमा: ॥ 33 ॥

श्री श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणो सत्यमक्ये

चतुविंशोअवार: 11 24 11

He began to satisfy his hunger out of the food that was prepared for all sorts of dead bodies; and, taking their garlands, he encircled his head with them. Day and night he did not sleep and always, he sighted and sighed, crying, Alas! Alas! Thus one year passed away, as if it had been three hundred years.

Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter of the Seventh

Book on the stay of Harisācanda in the burning

ground in the Māhā Purānam,

Śrimaddevirbhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XXV

