CHAPTER V

On the Rudrāksam Rosaries

སྐོར་ཀྱི་བྱི

लक्षणं जपमालाया: श्रुणु वक्ष्यामि घणपूख ।

राजस्य मुखं ब्रह्मा बिंदू रूर इनीरितः ॥ १ । ॥

विधा: पुच्छं घबेल्वे योगमोक्षफलप्रदम् ।

पंचविंशातिशिपशबाईः पंचवबकैः सकटकैः ॥ २ ॥

रक्तवर्षै: सितर्दिशेक्र: कृतरेधिवर्दिंगते: ।

अश्वसूत्रं प्रकत्थितं गोपुच्छवलयाकृति ॥ ३ ॥

Íśvara said: “O Kārtikeya! Now I will speak how to count the Japam (repetition of the mantra) with the rosary. Hear. The face of Rudrāksam is Brahma; the upper summit point is Śiva and the tail end of Rudrāksam is Viṣṇu. The Rudrāksam has two-fold powers: It can give Bhoga (Enjoyment) as well as Mokṣa (Liberation). Then string or tie together, like a cow’s tail, and like the snake’s coiling a body,

twentyfive five faced Rudrāksa seeds, thorny and of red, white, mixed colours bored through and through. The rosary is to taper as a cow's tail tapers down.

वत्क्वं वत्केवण संयोज्य पुरुषं पुरुष्टेन योजयेत् ।

मेक्नूर्धर्मुक्तं कुयांतनूर्धै नागपाशकम् ॥ 4 ॥

एवं संग्रधितां मालां मन्त्रसिद्धिप्रदायिनीम् ।

प्रशाल्य गम्भोतेनं पंगण्येन चोपरि ॥ 5 ॥

In stringing the beads into a rosary, it should be seen that the flat face of one Rudrāksam is in front of the flat of another Rudrāksam; so the tail, the pointed end of one, must come in front of the tail or the narrower end of another. The Meru or the topmost bead of the string must have its face turned upwards and the knot should be given over that.

The rosary, thus strung, yeilds success of the Mantra (mantra-siddhi) When the rosary is strung, it is to be bathed with clear and scented water and afterwards with the Pañcagavya (cow-dung, cow urine, curd, milk, and ghee); then wash it with clear water and sanctify it with the condensed electrical charge of the Mantra.

ततः शिवाभसा क्षाल्य ततो मनगणान्यसेत् ।

स्यूषा शिवास्त्मनेण कवचेनावगुणदयेत् ॥ ६ ॥

मूलमनं न्यसेत्यशूल्यवैलकारोपेल्थ ।।

सद्योजातादिध: प्रोक्ष्य यावद्योत्रं रणम् ॥ 7 ॥

Then recite the Mantra of Śiva (Six limbed, with “Hūm” added and collect the rosaries. Then repeat over them the Mantra “Sadyojāta, etc., and sprinkle water over it one hundred and eight times.

मूलमन्तं सम्पुच्चार्य सुब्दुभूमी निधाय च ।

त्योपरि न्यसेताम्बं शिवं परमकारणम् ॥ 8 ॥

प्रतिष्ठिता भवेल्नाल सर्वकामलप्रदा ।

यस्य देवस्य चो मन्त्रस्ता तेनैवाधिपुजयेत् ॥ 9 ॥

भूदिन कण्ठे3थवा कर्ण नयेसुं जपणालिकाम् ।

राजक्षामालया चैवं जलव्यं निवतानतन ॥ 10 ॥

Then utter the principal mantra and place them on a holy ground and perform Nyāsa over it, i.e., think that the Great Cause Śiva and the World-Mother Bhagavatī have come on them. Thus make the Samskāra of the rosary (i.e., purify it) and you will find then that your desired end will be attained successfully. Worship the rosary with the Mantra of that Devatā for which it is intended.

कपटे भूदिन्द हृदि प्रते कर्णे बाहुयुगे प्रशवा ।

रूत्राक्षधारणं नित्यं भकल्पा परमया युतः ॥ ११ ॥

किमत्र बहुनेकेतन वर्णनेय पुनः पुनः ।

रूत्राक्षधारणं नित्यं तस्मादेततप्रायसये ॥ १२ ॥

One is to wear the Rudrāksa rosary on one's head, neck or ear and controlling one self, one should make japam with the rosary On the neck, head, breast, or the ears or one the arms, the rosary should he held with the greates devotion. What is the use in saying about it so often? It is highly meritorious and commendable to holds always the Rudrāksam.

स्नाने दाने जपे होमे वैश्वदेवे सुराब्ने ।

प्रायश्रित्त तथा श्राब्दे दीक्षाकाले विशेषतः ॥ 13 ॥

अरूक्षधरपे भूत्वा यत्किचित्कर्म बैंदिकम् ।

कुर्वीव्यम्रतु मोहेन नरके पत्तित धुळम् ॥ 14 ॥

Especially on such occasions as taking baths making gifts, making japams, performing the Homas, or sacrifices to Visve Devās, in performing the Pūjās of the Devas, in making Prāyaścittams (Penances), in the time of Śrāddha and in the time of initiation, it is highly necessary to hold Rudrāksam. A Brāhmin is sure to go to hell if he performs any Vaidik act without wearing any Rudrāksam. Note: It would be offering an insult to Śiva!.

रूत्राङ्ग धारयेन्मूर्तिन काफे सुरे केउं धवा ।

सुवर्णमिशिर्यांमिश्रं शुद्धे नार्थैधृतं शिजाम ।। 15 ।।

नाग्युचिधारीयदेवंस द्वा भक्रवैय धारयेत् ।

रूत्राङ्गतरनर्मभूतवाताद्यूतगृणान्यपि ।। 16 ।।

पुष्पलोकं गामिष्यात्नि पुनराष्ट्रितुर्लभम् ।

रूत्राङ्ग धारयन्याभं कुर्बंत्रपि च मानवः ।। 17 ।।

It is advisable to use the true Rudrāksam with gold and jewel, on the head, neck or one one's hand. Never use the Rudrāksam worn by another. Use Rudrāksam always with devotion; never use it while you are impure. Even the grass that grows with the air in contact with the Rudrāksa tree, goes verily to a holy region for ever. Jābāla Muni says in the Sruti; If a man wearing Rudrāksam commits a sin, he gets deliverance from that sin.

सर्वे तरिति पायानां जालालश्रुतिताह है ।

पशवो हि च क्रशक्षयाण्यातिरे क्रतान् ॥ 18 ॥

किमु ये धारायित्त स्म नरा क्रहक्षामालिकाम् ।

क्रहाश्र : शिरसा होको धार्यां क्रद्धरै: सदा ॥ 19 ॥

Even if animals hold Rudrāksam, they become Śiva; what of men! The devotees of Śri Rudra should always use at least one Rudrāksa on the head. Those great devotees, who with Rudrāksam on take the name of the Highest Self Śambhu, get themselves freed of all sorts of sins and pains.

ध्वंसनं सर्वद्वःखानां सर्वपार्विमोचन् ।

Book XI Chapter V

व्याहरित च नामानि ये शंभो: परमात्मन: ॥ 20 ॥

क्रश्रास्तोकृता ये च ते वै भागवतीतमा: ।

क्रश्रक्षायणं कार्य सर्वश्रेयोर्धिभर्भिनिः ॥ 21 ॥

Those who are ornamented with Rudrāksam are the best devotees. It is highly incumbent on those who want their welfare to wear Rudrāksam. Those who hold Rudrāksam on their ears, crown hair, neck, hands, and breast, get Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara under them as their Vibhūtis (manifestations, powers).

कर्णपोष शिखायां च कण्ठे हृते तथोदरे ।

महादेवश्र विद्युश्र बह्ना तेषां विभूताः ॥ 22 ॥

देवाण्ये तथा भक्ल्या खलुं रुहास्थापिताः ।

गोत्रवैश्र सर्वेभं कृटस्या मूलक्षिपणः ॥ 23 ॥

तेषां वैशमुक्तारच मुनवः सकल आये ।

श्रीवधर्मपर: शुद्धा: खलुं रुहास्थापिताः ॥ 24 ॥

The Devas and all those Rşis that started the Gotra, the Adipurusas (the first chief men in several families), held with reverence the Rudrākṣams. All the other Munis, that descended from their families, the ardent followers of Śrauta Dharma, the pure souled, held the Rudrākṣams.

श्रद्धा न जायते साक्षादेवसिद्धे विमृक्तिः ।

बहुना जन्मनामने महाविश्वसादि ॥ 25 ॥

रहक्षधाणे वांछा स्वभावादेव जायते ।

रहब्रास्य तु महात्म्यं जाबालैरादेण तु ॥ 26 ॥

पळवते मुनिभि: सर्वमैया पूत्र तवैय च ।

रहब्रास्य फलं चैव त्रिषु लोकेषु त्रिवहुम् ॥ 27 ॥

It may be, that many might not like at first to hold this Rudrāksam, the visible giver of liberation and so well written in the Vedas; but after many births, out of the Grace of Mahādeva, many become eager to take the Rudrāksams. The Munis that are the Jābala Sākhis are famous in expounding the inestimable greatness of Rudrāksams.

फलस्य दर्शनै पुणयं स्यगत्कोटिगुणं भवेत् ।

शताकोटिगुणं पुणयं धारणाल्बन्धे नतः ॥ 28 ॥

लक्षकोटिसहस्राणि लक्षकोटिसाजानि च ।

जपाच्य लभते निर्वं नात्र कार्यां विचारणा ॥ 29 ॥

The effect of holding Rudrāksams is well known in the three worlds. Punyam (great merit) arises

from the mere sight of Rudrāksams; ten million times the merit arises by its touch; and by wearing it, one hundred Koti times the fruit arisee and if one makes Japam every day, then one lakh koti times the punyam arises. There is no manner of questionings in this.

हते चोरिस कष्टे च कर्णवीभरतक तथा ।

रूत्राई धारयेधनु स रूही नान संशयः ॥ 30 ॥

अवध्यः: सर्वभूतानां रूद्रविद्ध चेरद्धिव ।

सुराणामसुराणां च वंदनीयो यथा शिकः ॥ 31 ॥

रूत्राध्यायी सततं वन्दनीयस्तथा नरैः ।

उच्छ्छो वा विक्रमेथो युत्तो वा सर्वपातकैः ॥ 32 ॥

He who holds in his hand, breast, neck, ears, head, the Rudrāksams, becomes an image of Rudra. There is no manner of doubt in this. By holding Rudrāksams, men become invulnerable of all the beings, become respected, like Mahā Deva, by the Devas and Asuras and they roam on the earth like Rudra.

मुच्यते सर्वपापेयो रूक्षास्य तु धारणात् ।

कण्ठे रूक्षामावध्य झापि वा प्रियते यदि ॥ 33 ॥

सोप्रीय पुक्तिमवाणीति किं पुनर्भानुपोधि सः ।

जपथानविरहीनोपि रूक्षां यदि धारयेत् ॥ 34 ॥

Even if a man be addicted to evil deeds and commits all sorts of sins, he becomes respected by all, on holding Rudrāksams. By this men are freed of the sin of taking Ucchiṣṭa and of all the other sins. Even if you suspend a Rudrāksam rosary on the neck of a dog and if that dog dies in that state, he gets liberation! Then what to speak of others!

सर्वेपार्थिविनिभूक: स याति परम गातिम् ।

एकं वाथि हिं हराङ्गं कृत्वा यलेन धारयेत् ॥ 35 ॥

एकर्विशतिमुद्धृत्य हरूतोके महीयते ।

अतः परं प्रवक्ष्यामि मूत्राक्षस्य पुनर्विधिम् ॥ 36 ॥

इति श्रीद्वैचीभाग्यते महापुराणे एकादशकन्ये

पशुपीउधावः 11 5 ||

By holding Rudrāksams, men even if they be devoid of Japam and Dhyānam, become freed of all sins and attain the highest state. Even if one holds merely one Rudrāksā speed purified and

surcharged with Mantra Śakti, he uplifts his twentyone generations, gets to Heaven and resides there with respect. I am speaking now further of the Greatness of Rudrāksam.

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the Rudrāksam rosaries in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

