CHAPTER IV

On the Hymn, Worship and Kavaca of Sarasvati

नारद उवाच

श्रुतं सर्वे मया पूर्वे त्वत्रमादासुधोपमम् ।

अधुना प्रकृतीनां च व्यस्तं वर्णये पूजनम् ॥ १ ॥

कस्याः पूजा कृता केन कर्बं मत्वैं प्रचारिता ।

केन वा पूजिता का वा केन का वा स्तुता प्रभे ॥ 2 ॥

तासां ततीत्र च ध्यानं च प्रपावं चरितं शुभम्।

काधिः केभ्यो वरो त्तस्तनो व्याख्यातुमंदीस ॥ 3 ॥

Nārada said: By your Grace I have heard everything very sweet like nectar, of the origin of things. Now may I ask you which Devi of these five Prakrti has been worshipped by what Mantra? and by whom? How has each of them been praised? and by whom? How has the worship of their Mūrtis (from) become prevalent in this world? What are the Stotram (hymn of praise), the

Dhyāna (meditation) glory and life of these? Also what sort of boon do each of the Devīs grant? and to whom? Kindly describe all those in detail.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

गणेशजननी दुर्गा राथा लक्ष्मी: सरस्वती ।

साविधि च सृष्टिवधी प्रकृति: पशुधा स्मृता ॥ 4 ॥

आसां पुजा प्रसिद्धा च प्रभाव: परमाद्धूतः ।

सुधोपमं च चरितं सर्वमङ्लकारणम् ॥ 5 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Child! Durgā, the mother of Gangeśa, Rādhā, Laksmī, Sarsavatī and Śavitri, these are the five Prakṛtis sprung directly from Mūla Prakṛti. The methods of their worship, wonderful glorious acts, excellent stotrams, and their lives, inculcating good to all, and sweet like nectar are all widely written in the Vedas,

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

Purānas, Tantras and other Śāstras. So there is no need to described them here again.

प्रक्रस्यांशः कलाश्र तासां च चरितं शुभम् ।

सर्व वक्ष्यामि ते बहुत्सावधानो निगायम १। ६ ।।

काली वसुन्नारा गड़ा घड़ी मुक्त्वचिष्ठका ।

तुलसी मनसा नित्रा स्वधा स्वाहा च दक्षिणा ॥ 7 ॥

Now I am describing in detail the auspicious characters of these that are sprung from the parts and Kalās of the Prakṛti. Hear attentively. Kālī, Vasundharā, Gaṅgā, Ṣaṣṭhī, Maṅgala Caṇḍikā, Tulasi, Manasā, Nidrā, Svāhā, and Dakṣinā, these are the parts of Prakṛti.

संक्षिप्तमासां चरितं पुणवं श्रुतिसुंदम् ।

जीवकर्मविपाकं च तच्च वक्ष्यासि सुंदुम् ॥ 8 ॥

दुर्गायश्रैव रायाया विस्तीर्ण चरितं महत ।

By and by I will describe, briefly, the meriting characters, and pleasant to hear. Along with these I will describe the Karmas of the Jivas, and the great exalted lives of Durgā and Rādhā. I am now describing Sarasvati's character.

तद्व्यश्राव्यक्षयामि संबंधकमतः श्रणु ॥ 9 ॥

आदौ सरस्वतीपुजा शीकृष्णोय निविन्मिता ।

यत्रमसादामुनिश्रि मुखीं भवति पिंहितः ॥ 10 ॥

Hear, O Muni! Śrī Krṣṇa introduced first in this Bhārata, the worship of the Devī Sarasvatī, the holder of Vīnā in Her hands, under whose influence, the hearts of illiterate stupid persons become illumined with knowledge.

आविश्नात यथा देवी वक्ततः कृष्णयोचितः ।

इयेय कृष्णं कामेन कामुकी कामकरणिणी ॥  १ १ ॥

स च विज्ञाय तद्वारं सर्वतः सर्वमातरम् ।

तामुवाच हितं सत्यं परिणामे सुखवहम् ॥ १ २ ॥

The amorous Devi Sarasvatī sprang from the end of the lips of Rādhā and so she desired to marry Krṣna out of amorous feelings. Śri Krṣna, the controller of the hearts of all, know it instantly and addressed the Mother of the people in true words proper to Her and beneficial to Her in the end.

श्रीकृष्ण उवाच

भज नारायणं साधिब मद्रंणं च चतुर्भुजम् ।

युवानं सुंदरं सर्वेगुणयुक्तं च मत्समम् ॥ 13 ॥

कामड़े कामिनीनां च तासां च कामपूरकम् ।

कोर्टिकंदपलावपर्यं लीलालंकृतमीप्रयम् ॥ 14 ॥

O Chaste One! The four-armed Nārāyaṇa is born from My parts; He is young, of good features and endowed with all qualifications; so much so, he is like Me. He is a Knower of amorous sentiments of women and He fulfils those desires; what to speak of His beauty, ten millions of the God of love are playing in His body.

कोते काँत व भां कृत्वा यदि स्यातुपिंद्छसि ।

त्वतो बलवती राथा न भई ते भविष्यति ॥ 15 ॥

यो यसामदु बलवान्वालिण तो3-दंख्य हिक्षणः ।

कर्थं परतान्यायित यदि स्वयमनीशरः ॥ 16 ॥

O Beloved! And if you desire to marry and remain with Me, that will not be of any good to you. For Rādhā is near to Me; She is more powerful than you. If a man be stronger than another, be can rescue one who takes his shelter; but if he be weaker, how can he then, himself weak, protect his dependant from others.

सर्वैशः सर्वेशास्ताउरां तथा बाधितुम्बमः ।

तेजसा मत्समा सा च रूपेण च गुणेच ७ ॥ १७ ॥

प्राणाधिष्युदेवी सा प्राणांस्वक्ते च कक्षमः ।

प्राणातीय प्रियः पुत्रः केभां वासित च कक्षा ॥ 18 ॥

Though I am the Lord of all, and rule all, yet I cannot control Rādhā. For She is equal to me in power, in beauty, in qualifications, equal to Me in every respect. Again it is impossible for Me to quit Rādhā for She is the presiding Deity of My life. Who can relinquish life? Though a son is very dear to his father, still it may be questioned, is he dearer than his father's life?

त्वं भरे गच्छ वैकुंट तव भई भविष्यति ।

पर्ति तमीशवर्ग कृत्वा मोदस्य सुचिरं सुखम् ॥ 19 ॥

लोपभोहकामाछेधामान्हैसावित्रिता ।

तेजसा त्वतस्या तक्षी रूपेण च गुणेन च ॥ 20 ॥

So, O Auspicious One! Go to the abode Vaikuntha; you will get your desires fulfilled there. You will get for your husband the Lord of Vaikuntha and you will live ever in peace and enjoy

Book IX Chapter IV

happiness Though Lakṣmī is residing there yet like you she is not under the control of lust, anger, greed, delusion and vanity.

तया सार्थ तव प्रील्या गश्वलकालं प्रयास्यति ।

गौरंच च हरिस्तुल्यं कार्यवित प्रदोरिति ॥ 21 ॥

प्रतिविशेषु तां पूजां महतीं गौरविक्तात् ।

मायस्य शुक्लपश्चायां विहायोंचे च सुदिति ॥ 22 ॥

मानवा मनवो देवा मुनीराश्रा मुभुब्बतः ।

She is also equal to you in beauty; qualities, and power. So you will live with her in great delight and Hari, the Lord of Vaikuntha, will treat both of you equally. Moreover, I say this in particular that in every universe, on the fifth day of the bright fortnight of the month of Mâgha, every year, the day when the learning is commenced, a great festival will be held and men, Manus, Devas, and the Munis desirous of liberation.

वस्वो योगिन: सिद्धा नागा शंवर्धिकास: ॥ 23 ॥

मद्रोण कार्यव्यान कर्ये केल्ये लयावधि ।

भक्तिकुताश्र दत्वा वै चोपचाराणि चोडश्र ॥ 24 ॥

करणयशालीक्रविधिना धानेन सत्वनेच च ।

Vasus, Yogis, Nāgas, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Rāksasas all will perform your worship with devotion in every Kalpa till the time of Mahā Pralaya comes. All are required to be Jitendriya (having their senses under control) and Samyamī (concentrating his mind, and with a religious vow) and they will invoke Thee on a jar or on books and then meditate according to what is stated in the Kanva Śākhā of Yajurveda and then worship and sing hymns to Thee.

जितौत्रिया: संवताङ्ठ घरे च पुस्तकेंप्रिय च ॥  २५ ॥

कृत्वा सुवर्णपुत्रिकां गंधर्वद्नचर्चितान् ।

कवचं ते ग्रीष्यन्ति कंठे वा दक्षिणे भुजे ॥ २६ ॥

Thy Kava (an armour; a mystical syllable སྟོ, སྟོ) considered as a preservative like armour) is written on the bark of the Bhūrja tree and then with eight kinds of scenls mingled with it is placed within a golden nut or ring named Māduli) and then hold on the neck or on the right arm.

पठिष्यिति च विद्रास: पूजाकाले च पूजिते ।

इन्युक्लेना पूजायामास तां देवी सर्वपूजितान् ॥ 27 ॥

ततस्तपूजनं चक्रुर्बेद्रविष्यणिरावादः ।

अनंतशुपयि धर्मघ्र सुनीऋ: सनकाद्ध: ॥ 28 ॥

सर्वे देवाश्र सुनयो नृपाश्र मानवादः ।

बभूव पूजिता निव्यं सर्वतोकः सरस्तची ॥ 29 ॥

The learned should recite Thy Stotras during worship. Thus saying, the Param Brahma Śri Kṣṇa Himself worshipped the Devi Sarasvatī. Since then, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa, Ananta Deva, Dharma, Sanaka and other Munīndras, all the Devas, Munis, all the kings and all the human beings are worshipping the Devi Sarasvatī. O Nārada! Thus the worship of the Eternal Devi is made extant in the three worlds.

नारद उवाच

पूजाधियानं कवचं धानं चापि निरंतरम् ।

पूजोपयुक्ते नैवेदो पुर्ण च चंदनादिकम् ॥ ३० ॥

वदे वैदिवादो श्रष्णी कौतुहलं मम ।

वतीते इदये शश्रकामिदं श्रुनिसुंदम् ॥ ३१ ॥

Nārada said: O Chief of the Knowers of the Vedas! Now describe to me the methods of worship, Dhyāna, Kavacam, hymns, the appropriate offerings of the Pūjā flowers, sandalpaste and other good things necessary in these worships and which are so sweet to hear. I am ever very eager and anxious to hear these.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

श्रणु नारद बक्षयामि कवणाग्योक्तफपद्धिति ।

जगमानु: सरस्वतः: पूजाविधिममविन्ति ॥ 32 ॥

माध्यस्य शूलकपछ्थगं विद्यारंभदिन्द्रपि च ।

पूर्वहिंह समयं कृत्वा ततार्थि संयतः शृधि: ॥ 33 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! I am now stating the method of worship of the Devi Sarasvatī, the Mother of the Worlds, according to Kanya Śākhā of the Yajurveda. Hear. On the day previous to the fifth day of the bright fortnight of the month of Māgha or the day of commencement of education, the devotee should control his senses, concentrate his mind and take his bath.

स्नाता निविक्रिया: कृत्वा घटे संस्थाय धनिततः ।

स्वीग्योक्तचिक्रियानेन तांत्रिकेनाणायव पुनः ॥ 34 ॥

गणिंशे पूर्वमध्यच्छं ततोःभीष्टा प्रपुजयेत् ।

ध्यानेन वक्ष्यमाणेन ध्यात्वा बाह्यघटे युवम् ॥ 35 ॥

ध्यात्वा पुनः घोडणोपचारेण पुजवेद्युतत् ।

Then he is to perform his daily duties and instal the jar (Ghata) with devotion and according to the Mantras of the Kanva Sākhā or the Tantra, as the case may be. He is to worship first on that Ghata (jar) Ganapati (Gaṇeśa), then meditate the Devi Sarasvatī as described below, invoke Her and again read the Dhyāna and then worship with Śodasopacāra (sixteen good articles offered in the worship).

पूजोपयुक्तनैवेघं यच्च वेदनिरूपितम् ॥ 36 ॥

विश्यामि सीम्य तर्निक्षिद्वाघाटीतं यथायामम् ।

O Good One! Now I am speaking, according to my knowledge, about the offerings as ordained in the Vedas or Tantras.

नवनीतं दिध क्षीरं लाजांक्षा तिललड्डुकम् ॥ 37 ॥

इश्मिषयुर्ग सृकलवर्ण पक्वगुरुं मधु ।

स्वतिकं शक्तीं सृकलधान्ययाक्षानमक्षानम् ॥ 38 ॥

अधिक्रज्यकल्पान्यस्य पूर्णे कृकल्पमोदकम् ।

घृतसैप्रवसंयुक्तं हृदिष्यानं यथोदितम् ॥ 39 ॥

वयगोधूपमूचपांना पिछकं घृतसंयुन्तम् ।

पिछकं स्वतितकस्यापि पक्वरंभाफतस्य च ॥ 40 ॥

परमातं च सपुतं मिष्ठातं च सुधोपमम् ।

नारकैलं तदुर्वकं कसेकं मूलमार्कम ।। 41 ॥

पक्वरंभाफलं चाक श्रीफलं बदरीफलम् ॥

कालदेशोद्वे चाकफलं शुकलं च संकृतम् ॥ 42 ॥

Hear. Fresh butter, curd, thickened milk, rice freed from the husk by frying, sweetmeats (Til Laddu) prepared of Til, sugar cane, sugarcane juice, nice Gud (molasses), honey, svastik, sugar, rice (not broken) out of white Dhāna, cipitak of table rice (Alocāl), white Modaka, Harivsyānna prepared of boiled rice with clarified butter and salt, Piṣṭaka of wheaten flour, Paramānna with ghee, nectar like sweetmeats, cocoanut, cocoanut water, Svastik Piṣṭaka, Svastik and ripe plantain Piṣṭaka, Kaseru

(root), Mūlā, ginger, ripe plantains, excellent Bel fruit, the jujube fruit, and other appropriate white purified fruits of the season and peculiar to the place are to be offered in the Pijā.

सुर्पोथे शुक्रलपुर्णे च सुर्पोथे शुक्रलचन्दनम् ।

नवीने शुक्रलवसचं च शोखं च सुन्दरं मुने ॥ 43 ॥

माल्चे च शुक्रलपुर्णाणां शुक्रलहांरं च भपणम् ।

याडूर्गं च शुर्णी ध्यानं प्रग्रस्यं श्रुतिसुरंम् ॥ 44 ॥

O Nārada! White flowers of good scent, white sandalpaste of good scent, new white clothes, nice conchshell, nice garlands of white flowers, nice white necklaces, and beautiful ornaments are to be given to the Devi. I say now the Dhyānam sweet to hear, of the Devi Sarasvatī according to the Vedas, capable to remove errors! Hear.

तत्रिबोधि मत्थाणि घमभंजनकारणम् ।

सस्वतीं शुक्रतवाणी ससितां सुमनोहान् ॥ 45 ॥

कोदिचन्द्रप्रभामुपुर्णश्रीवृत्तिवर्गता ।

वाद्रिगुर्द्वांगृधाकानां वीणामुसकाधारिणीम् ॥ 46 ॥

तनसारैद्रनिमणिनवभूषणभूषितान् ।

सुभूजितां सुगणरैब्द्विष्णिशवादिधि: ॥ 47 ॥

बंदे भक्णा वंदितां च मुर्नीद्रनुमानवे: ।

एवं धात्या च मूलेन सर्व दत्ता विवरणः ॥ 48 ॥

I hereby bow down to the Devi Sarasvati, of a white colour, of a smiling countenance and exceedingly beautiful, the lustre of whose body overpowers that of the ten millions of Moons, whose garment is purified by fire, in whose hands there are Viña and books, who is decorated with new excellent ornaments of jewels and pearls and whom Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara and the other Devas Munis, Manus and men constantly worship. Thus meditating the Devi, the intelligent persons should offer all articles, after pronouncing the root Mantra.

संसृय कवचं धृता प्राणमेईवद्धवि ।

येवां चेयमिष्टेकी तेषां निवल्धिका मुने ॥ 49 ॥

विद्यारोच च वर्धाने संवैषां पड़भीदिति ।

सर्वीप्यक्तं मृते च वैदिकार्धक्षरः ॥ 50 ॥

Then he is to hymn and hold Kavaca and make

Book IX Chapter IV

Sāṣṭāṅga prānāmas before the Devi. O Muni! Those whose Devi Sarasvatī is the presiding Deity, are not to be spoken of at all (i.e., they will naturally do all these things and with a greater fervour). Besides all should worship the Devi Sarasvatī on the day of commencement of education and every year on the Šukla Pañcamī day of the month of Māgha. The eight-lettered Mantra, as mentioned in the Vedas is the root Mantra of Sarasvatī. (Aim Klim Sarasvatyai namah).

वेयां वेनेवदेशेग वा तेषां स मूल एव च ।

सरस्वती चतुर्थ्वर्ते वहिज्ञायतंमेव च ॥ ५१ ॥

नक्ष्मीमावार्तिकं चैव मोठेयं कल्पयादरः ।

Or the Mantra to which each worshipper is initiated is his Mūlamantra (not Mantra). Or uttering the Mantra ‘Śrīm Hrim Sarasvatyai Svāhā,’ one is to offer everything to the Devi Sarasvatī. This Mantra is the Kalpa Vṛksa (i.e., the tree yields all desires).

पुना नारायणघोमं वाल्याकीये कृपानिधि: ॥ 52 ॥

प्रदटौ जाह्वतीरौ पुण्यक्षेत्र च भारते ।

भगूर्दंदी च शुकाय पुक्के सुर्यर्वधिं ॥ 53 ॥

चंत्रवर्णिभि मारीचो दटी वाक्यन्ते मुत ।

भूगोष्चैव दटौं तुहो बढ़ा वर्दिकाओं ॥ 54 ॥

आरतीकस्य जरकाफदर्दी क्षीरोदासिधी ।

विभांडाको दटी मेरो ऋष्यशुक्राय धीमते ॥ 55 ॥

Nārāyana, the ocean of mercy, gave in ancient times, this very Mantra to Vālmīki in the holy land Bhārata Varsa on the banks of the Ganges; next Bhrgu gave this Mantra on the occasion of solar eclipse to Maharṣi Śukrācārya on the Puṣkara Tīrtha; Mārīca gave to Brhaşpati on a lunar eclipse; Brahmā gave to Bhrgu in the Badarikā Śārama; Jaratkāru gave to Āstika on the shore of the Kṣiroda ocean; Vibhāndaka gave this to the intelligent Rṣyaśrīga on the Sumeru mountain.

शिव: कणाद्यनुवे गौतमाय दूदी मुत।

सूर्येन यात्रालस्याय तथा कालायानयाय च ॥ 56 ॥

गेप: पाणिगये चैव भगतूजाय धीमते ।

ददौ शाकटायनाय सुतले बलिसंसदि ॥ 57 ॥

Śiva gave this to Kaṇāda and Gautama, Sūrya gave to Yājñavalkya and Kātyāyana, Ananta Deva gave to Pāṇini, to the intelligent Bhāradvāja and to Śākatāyana in Bali's assembly in the Pātāla.

चतुर्वक्षानेपेव मंभ: सिद्धो भवेयुणम् ।

यदि स्यात्मंत्रसिद्धो हि बृहस्यतिसमो भवेत् ॥ 58 ॥

केवचं श्रणु विघ्रप्रे यर्त्नं ब्रहणा पुरा ।

विश्वश्रहा विश्वजयं भृगवे गंधमादने ॥ 59 ॥

If this Mantra be repeated four lakhs of times, all men attain success. And when they become Siddhas with this Mantra, they become powerful like Brhaşpati. In past times, the Creator Brahmā gave a Kavaca named Viśvajaya to Bhrgu on the Gandhamādana Mountain. I now speak of that. Hear.

भूगृकाव

ब्रह्म-ब्रह्माधिवों श्रेष्ठ ब्रह्माननिशयारत ।

सर्वत्र सर्वैन्नक सर्वैग, सर्वैपूजित् ॥ 60 ॥

सरस्वलापत्र कवचं बृहि विश्ववजं प्रभो ।

अयातायमां मंत्राणां समुहंसयुतं परम् ॥ 61 ॥

Once on a time Bhrgu asked Brahmā the Lord of all, and adored by all, thus: 'O Brahman! Thou art the foremost of those that know the Vedas; there is none equal to thee in matters regarding the knowledge of the Vedas; (so much so that there is nothing that is not known to thee; for all these have sprung from thee). Now say about the Viśvajaya Kavaca of the Devi Sarasvatī, that is excellent, without any faults and embodying in it all the properties of all the Mantras.

ब्रह्मोवाच

श्रुणु वास प्रवक्ष्यामि कवचं सर्वकामदम् ।

श्रुतिसारं श्रुतिमुखं श्रुतयुक्तं श्रुतिपूजितम् ॥ 62 ॥

उक्तं कृष्णेन गोतोकें महां वृद्धावने वने ।

रासेयरण विभुना रासे वै रासमंडले ॥ 63 ॥

Brahmā said: O Child What you have asked about the Kavaca of Sarasvati that is sweet to hear, ordained and worshipped by the Vedas, and the giver of all desired fruits, now hear of that. In the

very beginning, the all-pervading Śri Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of the Rāsa circle, mentioned this Kavaca to me in the holy Brūndāvana forest in the abode Goloka at the time of Rāsa in Rāsa Maṇḍala.

तनीय गोपनीयं च कल्यवृक्षसमं परम् ।

अशुतादुतमंत्राणां समूहैरच समान्वितम् ॥ 64 ॥

यद्वा भगावाक्छुकः सर्वैत्येषु पूरितः ।

यद्वा पठनादुब्बनुब्दिमांरच बृहस्पति: ॥ 65 ॥

पठनाद्वाणाहायमी कवीउे वाल्मको पुनिः ।

सावांभुचो मनुरुचेव यद्वृत्वा सर्वपूर्ति: ॥ 66 ॥

This is very secret; it is full of holy unheard, wonderful Mantras. Reading this Kavaca and holding it (on one's arm) Brhaşpati has become foremost in matters of intelligence; by the force of this Kavaca Śukrācārya has got his ascendancy over the Daityas; te foremost Muni Vālmīki has become eloquent and skilled in language and has become Kavindra and Svāyambhuna Manu; holding this Kavaca he has become honoured everywhere.

काणादो गोतम: काव्य: पाणिनि: शाकदायन: ।

प्रयं चकार यद्धुत्वा दक्षः काताययनः स्वयम् ॥ 67 ॥

धृत्वा वेदविषयानं च पुराणान्यविल्जलिन च ।

चकार लीलामाजेय कृष्णद्वीयानः स्वयम् ॥ 68 ॥

Kaṇāda, Gatama, Kanva, Pānini, Śākatāyana, Dakṣa, and Kātyāyana all have become great authors by virtue of this Kavaca; Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Veda Vyāsa made the classification of the Vedas and composed the eighteen Purāṇas.

शातातपश्च संवर्ते वरिष्ठश्व परागरः ।

यद्यत्व पठनदाय्यं यात्रवल्यप्रचकास : ॥ 69 ॥

ऋच्यगुंगो भरात्रज्ञशिसको देवलस्था ।

सैनीषिच्यो ययात्रिष्य धृत्वा सर्वेत्र पूर्णितः ॥ 70 ॥

Sātātapa, Samvarta, Vasiṣṭha, Paraśara nd Yājñavalkya had become authors by holding and reading this Sarasvatī Kavaca. Rṣyaśrīga, Bhāradvāja, Āstika, Devala, Jaigisavya, and Yayāti all were honoured everywhere by virtue of this Kavaca.

कवचस्यास्र विरेप्रेत्र ऋषिरेव प्रजापति: ।

स्वयं छंदश्छ बृह्नते देवता शारादंबिका ॥ 71 ॥

सर्वतत्त्वपरिज्ञानसर्वांशसाधनेयु च ।

कवितासु च सर्वसु विनियोगः प्रकर्पिति: ॥ 72 ॥

O Dvija! The Prajāpati Himself is the Rṣi of this Kavaca; Brhatī is its Chanda; and Śāradā Ambikā is its presiding Deity. Its application (Viniyoga) is in the acquisition of spiritual knowledge, in the fruition of any desires or necessities, in composing poems or anywhere wheresoever success is required.

श्री ईंी सरस्वरी स्वाहा शिरो से पातु सर्वतः ।

श्रीवाटद्वातरी स्वाहा भालों में सर्वद्वाजस्मु ॥ ७३ ॥

उं ही सरस्वली स्वाहिति श्रोत्रे पातु निरंतरम् ।

उं श्री ईंी भगवलै सरस्वली स्वाहा तद्यमं सद्वजुषं सद्वजुष् ॥ ७४ ॥

ऐं हुई वायादिध्यै स्वाहा नासां मे सर्वद्वत् ।

हीं विद्याधिष्ठातृदेवे स्वाहा चोर्धे सद्वज्ञि ॥ ७ 5 ॥

उं ई श्री हृं ब्राह्यी स्वाहिति दंर्वर्षिके सद्वज्ञ।

ऐमिवेलाक्षरो मंत्रो मम कंठे सद्वज्ञि ॥ ७ 6 ॥

उं ई श्री हाँग पुत ने प्रीवां स्कंधी ने भी सद्वालु ।

ऊं ट्रीं विद्याधिद्यारुंद्ये सद्वाह वखःसद्वादु ॥ ७ 7 ॥

ऊं ट्रीं विद्याधिर्यस्वा सहा मे पशु नाथिकाम् ।

ऊं ट्रीं कर्ती बाण्ये सद्वाहिते मम हस्तो सद्वादु ॥ 78 ॥

ऊं सर्ववर्गासिकाठे पादुव्यमे सद्वाउत् ।

ऊं वाणाधित्यादुनेवे सहावा सर्वे सद्वाउत् ॥ 79 ॥

May Śrīm Śrīm Sarasvatyaī Svāhā protect fully my head; Śrīm Vāgdevatāyai Svāhā, my forehead; On Śrīm Sarasvatyai Svāhā, my ears always Om Śrīm Śrīm Bhāgavatyai Sarasvatyai Svāhā always my eyes; Aim Śrīm Vāgvādinyai Svāhā, always my nose; Om Śrīm Vidyādhiṣṭhātrī Dēvyai Svāhā, my lips always; Om Śrīm Śrīm Brāhmyai Svāhā my rows of teeth; Aim, this single letter protect my neck; Om Śrīm Śrīm my throat; Śrīm, my shoulders, Om Śrīm Vidyādhiṣṭhātrī Dēvyai Svāhā, always my chest; Om Śrīm Vidyādhi Śvarūpāyai Svāhā my navel; Om Śrīm Klim Vanyai Svāhā my hands; Om Šarvavārnatmi Kāyai Svāhā my feet; and let Om Vāgadhiṣṭhātridevyai Svāhā protect all my body.

ॐ सर्वकण्ठवासिन्यै स्वाहा प्राच्यां सदावतु ।
ॐ सर्वजिह्वाग्रवासिन्यै स्वाहाग्निदिशि रक्षतु ॥ ८०॥

ॐ ऐं ह्रीं क्लीं सरस्वत्यै बुधजनन्यै स्वाहा ।
सततं मन्त्रराजोऽयं दक्षिणे मां सदावतु ॥ ८१॥

ऐं ह्रीं श्रीं त्र्यक्षरो मन्त्रो नैरृत्यां सर्वदावतु ।
ॐ ऐं जिह्वाग्रवासिन्यै स्वाहा मां वारुणेऽवतु ॥ ८२॥

ॐ सर्वाम्बिकायै स्वाहा वायव्ये मां सदावतु ।
ॐ ऐं श्रीं क्लीं गद्यवासिन्यै स्वाहा मामुत्तरेऽवतु ॥ ८३॥

ॐ ऐं सर्वशास्त्रवासिन्यै स्वाहैशान्यां सदावतु ।
ॐ ह्रीं सर्वपूजितायै स्वाहा चोर्ध्वं सदावतु ॥ ८४॥

ॐ ह्रीं पुस्तकवासिन्यै स्वाहाधो मां सदावतु ।
ॐ ग्रन्थबीजस्वरूपायै स्वाहा मां सर्वतोऽवतु ॥ ८५॥

Let Om Sarvakanṭhavāsinyai Svāhā protect my east; Let Om Svarvajibhāgra vāsinyai Svāhā, the South-east; Om Aim Hrīm Śrīm Klīm Sarasvatyai budhajananyai Svāhā, my South; Aim Hrīm Śrīm, this three lettered Mantra my South-west; Om Aim Jhibhagravāsinyai Svāhā, my West; Om Svarvam bikāyai Svāhā, my North west; Om Aim Śrīm Klīm Gadyavāsinyai Svāhā my North; Aim Sarvaśāstra vasinyai Svāhā, my North-east; Om Hrīm Sarvapujitayai Svāhā, my top; Hrīm Pustakavasinyai Svāhā my below and let Om Grantha vījasvarupāyai Svāhā protect all my sides. 

इति ते कथितं विप्र ब्रह्ममन्त्रौघविग्रहम् ।
इदं विश्वजयं नाम कवचं ब्रह्मरूपकम् ॥ ८६॥

पुरा श्रुतं धर्मवक्त्रात्पर्वते गन्धमादने ।
तव स्नेहान्मयाख्यातं प्रवक्तव्यं न कस्यचित् ॥ ८७॥

O Nārada! This Viśvajaya Kavaca of the nature of Brahmā and its embodied Mantra I have now spoken to you. I heard this before from the mouth of Dharma Deva in the Gaṇdhāmādana mountain. Now I speak this to you out of my great affection for you.

गुरुमभ्यर्च्य विधिवद्वस्त्रालङ्कारचन्दनैः ।
प्रणम्य दण्डवद्भूमौ कवचं धारयेत्सुधीः ॥ ८८॥

पञ्चलक्षजपेनैव सिद्धं तु कवचं भवेत् ।
यदि स्यात्सिद्धकवचो बृहस्पतिसमो भवेत् ॥ ८९॥

But never divulge this to anybody. One is worship one’s spiritual Teacher (Guru Deva) according to due rites and ceremonies with clothings, ornaments, and sandalpaste and then fall down prostrate to him and then hold this Kavaca. Repeating this five lakhs of times, one gets success and becomes a Siddha.

महावाग्मी कवीन्द्रश्च त्रैलोक्यविजयी भवेत् ।
शक्नोति सर्वं जेतुं च कवचस्य प्रसादतः ॥ ९०॥

इदं च कण्वशाखोक्तं कवचं कथितं मुने ।
स्तोत्रं पूजाविधानं च ध्यानं च वन्दनं शृणु ॥ ९१॥

इति श्रीमद्देवीभागवते महापुराणेऽष्टादशसाहस्र्यां
संहितायां नवमस्कन्धे सरस्वतीस्तोत्र-
पूजाकवचादिवर्णनं नाम चतुर्थोऽध्यायः ॥ ९.४॥

The holder of this Kavaca becomes intelligent like Brihaspati, eloquent, Kavīndras, and the conqueror of the three worlds, no sooner one becomes a Siddlha in this. In fact, he can conquer everything by virtue of this Kavaca. O Muni! Thus I have described to you this Kavaca according to Kāṇva Śākhā. Now I am speaking about the method of worship, Dhyāna and the praise of this Kavaca. Hear.

Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the hymn, worship and Kavaca of Sarasvatī Devī in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.