CHAPTER XI

On the Continents and Bhāratavarsa

श्रीनारायण जयाच

भारताखे च वर्षेर्मिवहमाधिर्विजुभः ।

तिहायि भवता चैव स्तवनं क्रियतेशनिज्ञम् ॥ १ ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: In this Bhāratavarsa (India) I am present, as the First of all, in the shape of the Man, at present existing before you. Let you praise Me incessantly thus:

नारद जयाच

अं० नमो भगवते उपशम्गीलायोपतानात्याय

नमोर्धिकचनलिताय ऋषिश्रभयान ननरानायणय

परमहंसरपमगुरेव आत्मारामाधिपतवे नमो नम इति ॥

कताईस्थ सगीद्वयु वो न बब्द्वते

न ह्यने देहगतोर्भि दैहिकः ।

ग्रह्ने रुश्यस्य गुणीर्वेब्यन्ते

तस्मै नो0सस्तिविश्त्कसाधिषणे ॥ 2 ॥

Nārada said: "Thou art the Bhagavān. Obeisance to Thee. Thou art completely free from attachment and envy and Thou art the incarnate of Dharma, Jñāna and Vairāgyam (Dispassion). No trace of Ahankara (egoism) is in Thee. Obeisance to Thee. Thou has't nothing of wealth; Thou art the foremost of the family of Rṣis; Thou art Nara Nārāyana. Thou art the Parama Hamsa (the highest class of ascetics and renouncers of the world). Thou art the Highest Guru; Thou art happy with Thyself and the Leader of all; I bow down to Thee. Thou art the Lord of all, yet not mixed in the work of creation. etc. Though Thou residest in every embodied being, yet no hunger and thirst can press Thee; though Thou art the Witness, yet Thy sight is not at disturbed by the proximity. Thou art not at all connected and no desires can come to Thee; Thou art the Witness.

इर्व हि योगेश्वर्योगैनुर्ण

हिरण्यभों भगवाझगाव यत ।

यदतंकाले त्वयि निर्णीय मनो

भवन्या दधीतोक्त्रतदुकलेवर: ॥ 3 ॥

So I bow down to Thee. This path of Yoga has come out of Thee and it is established in Thee. The Bhagavān Hīranyagarbha has given instructions on the cleverness in Yoga, thus: That leaving aside the egoism of this body, the seat of all evils. The people at last will take resort to the path of Bhakti and set their minds on Thee, Who art beyond the pale of the three Guṇas.

यदीहिकामुभिककामलंपद:

सुतेषु दारेषु धनेषु चिन्तन् ।

शंकेत विद्यानु-कलावसात्याडास्तन्य

यत्नः अम एव केवलम् ॥ 4 ॥

It, like the ignorant persons very much attached to this world as well as the next, the wise pass their time in the thoughts of their sons, wives, and riches and ultimately become very much pained on the destruction of this ugly body, persons versed in Jñāna and Vijñāna be afraid in the end of their separation from the body, then their study of the Śāstras and all their labours become labours merely, without any effect.

तत्र: प्रभो त्वं कुकलेवार्थिनां

त्वं मायावर्श्ममतामधोक्षज ।

भिश्राम येनागुं वयं सुर्दुर्धितं

विद्धेति योगं त्वयि नः स्वभावजम् ॥ 5 ॥

When such a thing occurs to the learned, then O Thou, the Subduer of the knowledge of senses! Thou. Thyself givest us instructions that we may easily think of Thee. Then this terrible clinging to this ugly body that Thy Māyā brings about and which it is very difficult to discard by other means, will leave us quickly.

एवं स्तीति सदा देवं नारायणनामयम् ।

नारदो मुनिशादूल: प्रज्ञातिबलसाप्रकु. ॥ 6 ॥

अस्मिन्मै पातवे वर्षे सरित्छेलान्तु संति हि ।

तान्यव्यथामि देवर्वे शृणुबेकीट्रामपानसः ॥ 7 ॥

Nārada, the seer of all, well qualified with the

Book VIII Chapter XI

knowledge of all the Tattvas, the foremost of the Munis, thus worships it and praises Nārāyana Who is unaffected by any of the Upādhis (and who corresponds to Nitya and Līlā.) (both Permanent and the Pastime-making). O Devarṣi! I now describe to you the rivers and mountains in Bhāratavarsa.

मतयो मंगलग्रयो मैनाकघ्र त्रिकटकः ।

ऋषभः कुटकः कोल्लः सहो देविनिरस्तथा ॥ 8 ॥

ऋध्यमकऊ ऋशीगेलो वैकटाउमदीन्हरूः ।

वारधिराश विंथ्यघ युक्तिभानुक्षपर्वतः ॥ 9 ॥

पारियाजस्तथा ऋणधिश्रकटुभिरिस्तथा ।

गोर्धनीने वैतकतः ककुणो नीलपर्वतः ॥ 10 ॥

गौरमुख्येड्रक्लौले गिरि: कामगिरिस्तथा ।

एते चानेउपसंख्याता गिरयो बहुपुण्यदः ॥ 11 ॥

Hear attentively. Malaya, Mahgalaprastha, Maināka, Citrakūta, Rṣabha, Kūtaka, Kolla, Sahya, Devagiri, Rṣyamūka, Śrīsaīla, Vyankāta, Mahendra, Vāridhāra, Vindhya, Śuktimān, Rksa, Pāriyātra, Droṇa, Citrakūta, Govardhana, Raivataka, Kakubha, Nīla, Gaurmukha, Indrakīla, Kāmagiri and many other mountains, that cannot be numbered.

तृतनुपदसरितः शतगोय सहस्वतः । यानायगहकसानावर्जनीनोकौरैरिपि ॥ 12 ॥ नाजयन्ति च पापानि विधियानि शरीरिणाम् ।

Great merits accure on seeing these mountains. Hundreds and thousands of rivers issue form these mountains. Drinking their waters, bathing in them and visiting them and singing their praises completely destroy the sins of mind, word and body.

तापूर्णी चन्द्रवेगा कृतमाला वटोदका ॥ 13 ॥

वेहायसी च कावेरी वेगा चैव पयस्विता ।

तुङ्भग्रा कृष्णवेगा शर्करावर्तका तथा ॥ 14 ॥

गोदावर्ती भीमार्थी निर्विक्यमा च पयोशिका ।

तायी रेवा च सुरसा नमेदा च सरस्वती ॥ 15 ॥

चर्पिवती च सिंधुश अंशणगो महान्दि ।

त्रशिषुक्न्या त्रिसमा च वेदस्पृतिर्मोहन्ती ॥ 16 ॥

कौषिफकी यमुना चैव मन्दाकिनी दृषद्रति ।

गोमती सरयू रोध्वती सरतवर्ती तथा ॥ 17 ॥

सुषोमा च शतगडुह चन्द्रभागा मरुद्धृधा ।

वित्तता च अभिक्षो च विश्वा चेति प्रक्रौतितः ॥ 18 ॥

Thy names of the rivers are: Tāmraparnī, Candravanīsā Kṛtamālā, Vatodakā, Vaihāyasī, Kāverī, Veṇā, Payasvini, Tungabhadrā, Krṣnaveṇā, Śarkarā, Vartakā, Godāvarī, Bhīmarathi, Nirbindhyā, Payoṣnikā, Tāpī, Revā, Surasā, Narmadā, Sarasvatī, Carmanvatī, and the Indus, Andha, and Sone, Rṣikulyā, Trisāmā, Vedasmrti, Mahānadī, Kauśikī, Yamunā, Mandākinī, Drṣadvatī, Gomati, Sarayū, Rogadvati, Saptavatī, Suṣomā, Śatadru, Candrabhāgā, Marudvrdhā Vitasā, Asiknī and Viśvā and many other rivers. आसिवर्षं लछाजनपुरुषे: स्वरवकर्मिः ।

शुक्ललोहितकृष्णाख्यैदिंद्यमानुवनारका: ॥ 19 ॥

Those persons that take their births in the Varsa enjoy the (Divya) Divine, human, and the lower enjoyments, as the effects of their Karmas, in accordance with their Sāttvik, Rājasik, and Tāmasik qualities.

भविति विधिधा भोगा: सर्वां च निवासिनाम् ।

यथावर्णिधानेनापवर्गे भवति स्थूटम् ॥ 20 ॥

All the inhabitants of this Varsa take their Sarinýasa, Vānaprasthas, etc., in accordance with the rules of their Varnas (castes) respectively and enjoy beatitudes as dictated (in their Śāstras). The Vedavādis (the propounders of the Vedas), the Rṣis, and the Devas declare that this Varsa is superior to all the other Varsas, as the Grace of God is easily obtained here.

एतदेव च वर्षस्य प्रधान्यं कार्यसिद्धितः ।

वर्देति मुनयो वेदवादिन: सर्वार्वासिनः ॥ 21 ॥

They say: Oh! What an amount of good works, the inhabitants of Bhārata Varsa did in their previous lives, that by their influence, the Bhagavān Hari has become pleased with them without their having any Sādhanās (good Yogic practices).

अहो अभियां किमकारी शोभनं

प्रसत्र एपांशिव्वतु स्वयं हरि: ।


यैज्ञेन लब्यं न्यु भारताजिरे

मुकुटसेवीपयिकं स्यूहा हिं नः ॥ 22 ॥

Therefore we also desire to have our births there, for there if we be born amidst the persons there, we would be able serve Hari, Mukunda in every way. What will severe austerities, gifts, sacrifices, and practising vows avail us? Even if we go to Heaven, what benefit we will derive there?

किं दुक्कर्नैः क्रतुभित्तपोबतै-

द्रानाविधिवां दुर्जयेन फल्यान ।

न यत्र नारायणपादपूब्जस्मृति:

प्रमुहास्तिणयरेन्द्रियोलबत् ॥ 23 ॥

Then we would never be able to bring our mind to the lotus-fect of the Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa. Our tastes for sense enjoyments would increase and we would be wholly deprived of Bhagavān. Far better it is to be born in this Bhārata Varsa as short-lived persons, than to acquire other places where one can live up to the period of Kalpa and then be reborn.

कल्यापुर्था स्थानजयालुपनर्भवात्

क्षणापुर्था भारतभूजयो वरम् ।

क्षणेन मत्थेन कृते मनस्विन:

संन्यस्य संगलभपयं पदं हरे: ॥ 24 ॥

For the intelligent people of Bhārata, getting this mortal coil can within a short period devote themselves to the Bhagavān Hari and be free from rebirth.

न यत्र वैकुण्ठकधासुधायणा

न साधयो भागवतातदाशया: ।

न यत्र यज्ञगमखा महोलवा:

सुंशलोको5पि न वै से संवेल्यात् || 25 ||

That place is never to be visited and served, even if that be Svarga Loka where the nectar-like ocean of the sayings of Vaikunthā are not heard; where there are no assemblages of saints who take refuge of the Lotus feet of Bhagavān; where the great sacrifices and festivities of the Bhagavān Viṣṇu are not celebrated.

प्राणा नृजातिं सिकृ है चे जंत्रोलो

ज्ञानिकायाज्य्वकलापसंभृताम् ।

न वे यतेरत्न पुनर्भावय ने ध्यो

वनीका इय यातिने बन्यम् ॥ 26 ॥

Those persons, that to do not try for Mokṣa, when they get human births and when they possess Jñāna, Kriyā (methods of doing sacrifices and other works for the help of Jñāna) and Dravya (materials for those sacrifices), are certainly like beasts and get themselves repeatedly entangled into bondage.

थै: शब्दया बर्हिंधि याणगो

हविनिर्तनिधि विधिमन्त्रवस्तुतः ।

एकः पृथवत्नामिभ्रात्ते मुता

गृह्जाति पूर्णे: स्वयमाशिंगा प्रभुः ॥ 27 ॥

सर्वे दिशत्यविंगमिथितो नृगां

नैवार्थीदो ययन्नर्यिता यतः ।

स्वयं विधाते भजतामनिच्छताः

मिच्छाधियानं निजापादपललम् ॥ 28 ॥

यद्य नः स्वांस्तुखालयोषितं

विद्यस्य पूर्तेस्य कृतस्य शोभनम् ।

तेनाजानोभे स्मृतिमज्ञान नः

स्वाद्धे हरिभर्जितं शं तनोति ॥ 

The people of Bhārata Varsa offer oblations to Indra and other deities, invoking their names separately, with proper rules (Vidhis), mantras, and purodāśa (a sacrificial oblation made of ground rice and offered in Kapālas or vessels); but the All sufficient Bhagavān Hari, the Giver of blessings accepts those very gladly.

True that He grants unto the people what they ask from Him; but He hardly gives anybody the Paramārtha, the Highest Goal. The reason being that the people ask again and again after receiving what they had asked. So He gives of Himself His own lotus-feet to those who, having abondened all their desires, worship Him and only with the idea of love. (1) Thus: We are living very happily in the Heavens as the fruit of the Iṣṭāpūrta that we performed fully; yet we want that we may also be born in Bhārata Varsa with our memory all renewed with the thought of the Bhagavān Hari. The Bhagavān residing in this Bhāratvarsa, awards the highest welfare to its inhabitants."

Book VIII Chapter XII

नतरायण उवाच

एवं स्वर्गगता देवाः सिद्धाश उपमर्थयः ।

प्रवर्तिन च माहात्ययं भारतस्य सुगोभनम् ॥ 29 ॥

जयद्धुपीयस्य चाही है उपद्धीपाः स्मृतः परे ।

हयमापार्थिशोधोद्धिः सारः: परिकस्तिपता: ॥ 30 ॥

Nārāyana said: O, Devarṣī! Thus the Devas of the Heavens, the Siddhas, the Highest Rṣis, sing the excellent merits of this Bhāratavarsa. There are the eight Upadvipas of this Jambudvīpa: When the sons of the King Sagara were searching for the footprints of the stolen horse (for Asvamedha sacrifice), they found these Upadvipas; so it is finitely stated.

स्वाणप्रस्थान्त्रिक आवतन्नरामाणकी ।

मन्त्रोपाखद्धरिंग: पाश्जन्यतशैव च ।। 31 ।।

सिंहतक्षेव लंकेति उपद्वीपाढ़े क्युतम् ।

जम्बुद्वीपस मानं हि कर्जितां विलतरेणा च ।। ३२ ॥

अतः परं प्रविश्यामि पल्बारिद्धीयपटकम् ॥ ३३ ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागते महापुराणोउद्यमकन्ये

एकावशोअधग: ॥ 34 ॥ 

The names of out and made these are: Svarṇaprastha, Candraśukra, Āvartana, Ramānaka, Mandaropākhya, Harīna, Pāñcajanya, and Ceylon. The length and breadth of Jambudvīpa have been described; now the other six Dvipas, Plakṣa and others will be described. Hear.

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Eighth Book on the discription of the continents and of Bhāratavarsa in the Mahāpurānam, Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VIII Chapter XII

