[Ch 11 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rşis said: O Sūta! Who is that King Purūravā? and who is the Deva girl Urvaśī? And how did that high-souled King Purūravā came into trouble?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣis said :-- “O Sūta! Who is that King Pururavā? and who is the Deva girl Urvaśī? And how did that high-souled King Pururavā come into trouble?

[Ch 11 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O, son of Lomaharṣana! Kindly describe now all these to me. We are now desirous to hear sweet words from the lotus of your mouth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O son of Lomaharṣaṇa! Kindly describe now all these to me. We are now desirous to hear sweet words from the lotus of your mouth.

[Ch 11 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sūta! Your words are sweeter and more full of juice than nectar even; so we are not satiated by hearing them as gods are not satiated with the drink of nectar.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sūta! Your words are sweeter and more full of juice than nectar even; so we are not satiated by hearing them as gods are not satiated with the drink of nectar.”

[Ch 11 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this Sūta said: O Munis! I am now telling you, as far as my in elligence goes, what I heard from the mouth of Śrī Vyāsa. Now hear that beautiful divine incident.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this Sūta said :-- O Munis! I am now telling you, as far as my intelligence goes, what I heard from the mouth of Śrī Vyāsa. Now hear that beautiful divine incident.

[Ch 11 Verse 5-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once upon a time the exceedingly beautiful dear wife of Brhaspati, named Tārā, full of youth and beauty, of the most beautiful limbs and intoxicated with pride went to the house of Candra Deva (the Moon), the yajamān (employer of priest Brhaspati at any sacrifice) of Brhaspati. Seeing Tārā of beautiful face like Moon, the Moon became very passionate; Tārā also fell amorous at the sight of Moon. Thus, both of them became very much passionately attached to each other.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once on a time the exceedingly beautiful dear wife of Brihaspati, named Tārā, full of youth and beauty, of the most beautiful limbs and intoxicated with pride went to the house of Candra Deva (the Moon), the yajamān (Employer of priest Brihaspati at any sacrifice) of Brihaspati. Seeing Tārā of beautiful face like Moon, the Moon became very passionate; Tārā also fell amorous at the sight of Moon. Thus both of them became very much passionately attached to each other.

[Ch 11 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then they, the Moon and Tārā, being smitten by the arrows of Cupid and intoxicated with amorous passions began their sexual intercourse with reciprocal feelings of passionate love. Some days passed in this state.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then they, the Moon and Tārā, being smitten by the arrows of Cupid and intoxicated with amorous passions began their sexual intercourse with reciprocal feelings of passionate love. Some days passed in this state.

[Ch 11 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhraspati, then, being distressed with the pangs of separation from his wife, sent his pupil to bring back Tārā; but Tārā was then submissive of Candra and therefore refused to go.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brihaspati, then, being distressed with the pang of separation from his wife, sent his pupil to bring back Tārā; but Tārā was then submissive of Candra and therefore refused to come.

[Ch 11 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brhaspati sent over and over again his pupil and when Candra Deva returned the messenger, Bhraspati became very angry and went personally to Candra's house and, spoke angrily to the Moon who was puffed up with arrogance and somewhat smiling:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brihaspati sent over and over again his pupil and when Candra Deva returned the messenger, Brihaspati became very angry and went personally to Candra’s house and spoke angrily to the Moon who was puffed up with arrogance and somewhat smiling :--

[Ch 11 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Moon! Why are you committing this vicious act, contrary to Dharma? Why are you keeping my beautiful wife in your house?
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Moon! Why are you committing this vicious act, contrary to Dharma? Why are you keeping my beautiful wife in your house?

[Ch 11 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I am your Guru; you are my client; O stupid! why are you enjoying your Guru's wife and keeping her in custody in your house?
NEW CORR ENG ──► I am your Guru; you are my client; O stupid! why are you enjoying your Guru’s wife and keeping her in custody in your house?

[Ch 11 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Do you not know that he who kills a Brāhmaṇa, who steals gold, who drinks, who goes to wife of one's Guru are Mahāpātakīs (great sinners) and those who keep company of these are the fifth Mahāpātakīs?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Do you not know that he who kills a Brāhman, who steals gold, who drinks, who goes to wife of one’s Guru are Mahāpātakis (great sinners) and those who keep company of these are the fifth Mahāpātakis?

[Ch 11 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, if you had enjoyed my wife, you are exceedingly vicious, blameable and a Mahāpātakī (great sinner); you are not fit to live amongst Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore if you had enjoyed my wife, you are exceedingly vicious, blameable and a Mahāpātaki (great sinner); you are not fit to live amongst the Devas.

[Ch 11 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O wicked one! Now I say that even now you better forsake Tārā, who is of a blue colour and whose look is askance; I won't go from here without having Tāra. And if you do not give back Tārā, then you are certainly with her and undoubtedly I will curse you.'
NEW CORR ENG ──► O wicked one! Now I say that even now you better forsake Tārā, who is of a blue colour and whose look is askance; I won’t go from here without having Tārā. And if you do not give back Tārā, then you are certainly with her and undoubtedly I will curse you.

[Ch 11 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Brhaşpati said so, Candra, the husband of Rohinī, spoke to his Guru Deva, who was very angry, sorry and afflicted at the separation from his beloved wife, thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Brihaspati said so, Candra, the husband of Rohiṇī, spoke to his Guru Deva, who was very angry, sorry and afflicted at the separation from his beloved wife, thus :--

[Ch 11 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "In this world, Brāhmins that know the Dharma Śāstras, that are devoid of anger, are fit to be worshipped; and those that are not so, they are objects of disrespect and not to be worshipped by all for their anger.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In this world, the Brāhmins that know the Dharma Śāstras, that are devoid of anger, are fit to be worshipped; and those that are not so, they are objects of disrespect and not to be worshipped by all for their anger.

[Ch 11 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O sindess one! The beautiful one will surely go to your house; what harm is there to you, if she waits here for a few days?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O sinless one! The beautiful one will surely go to your house; what harm is there to you, if she waits here for a few days?

[Ch 11 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She is staying here of her own accord to enjoy pleasures and will go back of her own will. One word more:
NEW CORR ENG ──► She is staying here of her own accord to enjoy pleasures and will go back of her own will. One word more :--

[Ch 11 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You gave out before this opinion of the Dharma Śāstra that as a Brāhmin though guilty of committing vicious deeds, becomes pure again by the practice of Karmas as enjoined in the Vedas, so a woman, too, though guilty of adultery, becomes pure again when she is again in the period of her menstruation.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- You gave out before this opinion of the Dharma Śāstras that as a Brāhman though guilty of committing vicious deeds, becomes pure again by the practice of Karmas as enjoined in the Vedas, so a woman, too, though guilty of adultery, becomes pure again when she is again in the period of her menstruation.

[Ch 11 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At these words of Candra Deva, Brhaspati, the Guru of the Devas, became exceedingly sorry and anxious and went back immediately to his own house, with a grievous heart, full of amorous feelings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At these words of Candra Deva, Brihaspati, the Guru of the Devas, became exceedingly sorry and anxious and went back immediately to his own house, with a grievous heart, full of amorous feelings.

[Ch 11 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After staying in his own house for some days, Brhaşpati, worn out with anxiety, came again quickly to the house of Candra; but, no sooner he was to enter the gate, he was stopped by the door-keepers; he became very angry and stopped at the gateway. And when he saw that Candra did not make his appearance, he became exceedingly angry and thought:
NEW CORR ENG ──► After staying in his own house for some days Brihaspati, worn out with anxiety, came again quickly to the house of Candra; but, no sooner he was to enter the gate, he was stopped by the door-keepers; he became very angry and stopped at the gate way. And when he saw that Candra did not make his appearance, he became exceedingly angry and thought :--

[Ch 11 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “Oh! What a wonder is this? this irreligious Candra, being my disciple, has done this vicious act and took by violence the wife of his Guru, who is reckoned as the mother; and I will now teach him a good lesson.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “Oh! What a wonder is this? this irreligious Candra, being my disciple, has done this vicious act and took by violence the wife of his Guru, who is reckoned as the mother; and I will now teach him a good lesson.”

[Ch 11 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Standing on the entrance, Bhraspati began to speak aloud: "O stupid, vicious, vilest of the Devas! Why do you now sleep in your inner room?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Standing on the entrance gate way Brihaspati began to speak aloud :-- “O stupid, vicious, vilest of the Devas! Why do you now sleep in your inner room?

[Ch 11 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Do return quickly my wife; else I will curse you at once. In case you do not bring me back my wife at once, I will now reduce you to ashes."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Do return quickly my wife; else I will curse you at once. In case you do not bring me back my wife at once, I will now reduce you to ashes.”

[Ch 11 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these foul words of Brhaspati, Candra Deva the king of the Dvijas, quickly came out of the house and said smiling:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these foul words of Brihaspati, Candra Deva the king of the Dvijas, quickly came out of the house and said smiling :--

[Ch 11 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Brāhmin! Why are you spending your stock of words for nothing? Thet all-auspicious lady, of a blue colour and looking askance, is not fit for you; therefore, take another comparatively uglier woman for your use. Ex-cedingly youthful and lovely woman like her is not fit for a beggar’s house.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Brāhmin! Why are you spending your stock of words for nothing? That all-auspicious lady, of a blue colour and looking askance, is not fit for you; therefore take another comparatively uglier woman for your use. Exceedingly youthful and lovely woman like her is not fit for a beggar’s house.

[Ch 11 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O stupid one! I see, you don't know anything about the Kāma Śāstra (the book that dwells on amorous passion); those wise men who are skilled in this Śāstra assign for the women, their lovers equivalent to their beauty in matters of amorous dealings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O stupid one! I see, you don’t know anything about the Kāma Śāstra (the book that dwells on amorous passion); those wise men who are skilled in this Śāstra assign for the women, their lovers equivalent to their beauty in matters of amorous dealings.

[Ch 11 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So, O stupid man! Go away wherever you like. I won't give you back your wife. Do whatever lies in your power. I won't return your wife.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So, O stupid man! go away wherever you like. I won’t give you back your wife. Do whatever lies in your power. I won’t return your wife.

[Ch 11 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When you have become passionate, your curse won't affect me in any way. This I say finally unto you: "O Guru! I will not give you back your wife; do what you wish."
NEW CORR ENG ──► When you have become passionate, your curse won’t affect me in any way. This I say finally unto you :-- “O Guru! I will not give you back your wife; do what you wish.”

[Ch 11 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus spoken by Candrā, Brhaspati became very anxious and angry; he then went away quickly to Indra's house.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus spoken by Candra, Brihaspati became vary anxious and angry; he then went away quickly to the Indra’s house.

[Ch 11 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing Guru Deva morose and sorry, the very liberal minded Indra Deva worshipped him duly with pādya, arghya, and Śacmanīya and asked: "O highly fortunate one! Why do you look so anxious?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing Guru Deva morose and sorry, the very liberal minded Indra Deva worshipped him duly with pādya, arghya, and Ācamanīya and asked :-- “O highly fortunate one! Why do you look so anxious?

[Ch 11 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O great Muni! Why are you grievous and sorry? You are my Guru; is it that you are insulted by any one in my kingdom; say freely.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O great Muni! Why are you grievous and sorry? You are my Guru; is it that you are insulted by any one in my kingdom; say freely.

[Ch 11 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► All the regents of the several quarters (the Lokapālas) and ali :he Deva armies are under your command.
NEW CORR ENG ──► All the Regents of the several quarters (the Lokapālas) and all the Deva armies are under your command.

[Ch 11 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara and other Devas are ready to lend you every assistance, no doubt. So say what is the cause of your anxiety?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvar and other Devas are ready to lend you every assistance, no doubt. So say what is the cause of your anxiety?”

[Ch 11 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Indra, Brhaşpati said: "Candra has stolen my beautiful-eyed wife. I asked for her, again and again, but that wicked soul is not returning me my wife at all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Indra, Brihaspati said :-- “Candra has stolen my beautiful-eyed wife. I asked for her, again and again, but that wicked soul is not returning me my wife at all.

[Ch 11 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the Devas! What am I to do now? You are my help and guide. O Śatakratu! You are the lord of the Devas; therefore, I pray to you with a very grievous heart, help me in this matter.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the Devas! What am I to do now? You are my help and guide. O Śatakratu! You are the lord of the Devas; therefore I pray to you with a very grievous heart, help me in this matter.”

[Ch 11 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, Indra said: “O knower of Dharma! Do not be sorry, O Suvrata! I am your servant. O highly intelligent one! Surely, I will bring you back your wife.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, Indra said :-- “O knower of Dharma! Do not be sorry. O Suvrata! I am your servant. O highly intelligent one! Surely I will bring you back your wife.

[Ch 11 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I will send a messenger and even then if Candra, mad with pride, does not return your wife, I will wage war on him and fight against him, with all our Deva armies."
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will send a messenger and even then if Candra, mad with pride, do not return your wife, I will wage war with him and fight against him, with all our Deva armies.”

[Ch 11 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus consoling Brhaşpati, Indra sent a very clever man, who was a good speaker and wonderful in his capabilities, to Candra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus consoling Brihaspati, Indra sent a very clever man, who was a good speaker and wonderful in his capabilities, to Candra.

[Ch 11 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The clever and wise messenger went to the Candra Loka (the region of the Moon) and spoke to Candra, the husband of Rohinī, thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► The clever and wise messenger went to the Candra Loka (the region of the Moon) and spoke to Candra, the husband of Rohiṇī, thus :--

[Ch 11 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Mahābhāga! Indra has sent me to you to communicate his message to you. So, O intelligent one! I will tell you what he was ordered me; hear.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Mahābhāga! Indra has sent me to you to communicate his message to you. So O intelligent one! I will tell you what he has ordered me; hear.”

[Ch 11 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "He said: "O, highly fortunate one! You know well Dharma and Niti Śāstra (the science of morals); the more so, because the virtuous Maharsi Atri is your father.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He said :-- “O highly fortunate one! You know well Dharma and Nīti Śāstra (the science of morals); the more so, because the virtuous Maharṣi Atri is your father.

[Ch 11 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Suvrata! You ought not to commit such blameable act. See, all beings should protect their own wives always without remaining idle to the best of their powers; therefore, no doubt, quarrels would ensue necessarily on that point.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Suvrata! You ought not to commit such blameable act. See, all beings should protect their own wives always without remaining idle to the best of their powers; therefore, no doubt, quarrels would ensue necessarily on that point.

[Ch 11 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sudhānidhi! as far as this point of protecting one's wife is concerned, your Guru Deva ought also to do his best. You ought to consider all persons like your own self.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sudhānidhi! as far as this point of protecting one’s wife is concerned, your Guru Deva ought also to do his best. You ought to consider all persons like your own self.

[Ch 11 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sudhākara! You have got twenty-eight exceedingly beautiful wives, who are the daughters of Dakṣa; why then do you desire to enjoy the wife of your Guru?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sudhākara! You have got twenty-eight exceedingly beautiful wives, who are the daughters of Dakṣa; why then do you desire to enjoy the wife of your Guru?

[Ch 11 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The beautiful Apsarās (celestial nymphs) Menakā and others are always residing in the Heavens; you can enjoy them to your heart's content; leave off the wife of your Guru.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The beautiful Apsarās (celestial nymphs) Menakā and others are always residing in the Heavens; you can enjoy them to your heart’s content; leave off the wife of your Guru.

[Ch 11 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In case any powerful man commits an unworthy act out of egoism, the illiterate ones would follow them; so the Dharma will decline.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In case any powerful man commits an unworthy act out of egoism, the illiterate ones would follow them; so the Dharma will decline.

[Ch 11 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O highly lucky one! Do such as does not lead, for nothing, quarrels amongst the gods and leave your Guru's wife, even though she is beautiful."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O highly lucky one! Do such as does not lead, for nothing, quarrels amongst the gods and leave your Guru’s wife, even beautiful.”

[Ch 11 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words from the messenger, the Moon (Candra Deva) became somewhat angry and, making gestures, replied to the messenger, as if to Indra, thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these words from the messenger, the Moon (Candra Deva) became somewhat angry and, making gestures, replied to the messenger, as if to Indra, thus :--

[Ch 11 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O mighty armed one! As you yourself are the lord of the Devas and the knower of Dharma, so your priest, too, has become like you; the heads of both of you are the same.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O mighty armed one! As you yourself are the lord of the Devas and the knower of Dharma, so your priest, too, has become like you; the head of both of you are the same.

[Ch 11 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You will find many that can shew their learning and give advice to others, but you will find always very rare such persons as will act themselves to their own advices when occasion arises and wants them to fulfil their own words.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You will find many that can show their learning and give advice to others, but you will find always very rare such persons as will act themselves to their own advices when occasion arises and wants them to fulfil their own words.

[Ch 11 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the Devas! All the persons take the opinion of the Sāstras framed by Brūspathi; then why the quarrel would ensue with me and the Devas when I am enjoying, according to his dictates, a woman who is herself willing?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the Devas! All the persons take the opinion of the Śāstras framed by Brihaspati then why the quarrel would ensue with me and the Devas when I an enjoying, according to his dictates, a woman who is herself willing?

[Ch 11 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See, also, that the rule in this world is might is right; all things go to the powerful man who can take by force; nothing falls to the lot of the weak; moreover, this woman is mine and that woman is of another, this false notion comes to those whose brains are weak.
NEW CORR ENG ──► See also, that the rule in this world is might is right; all things go to the powerful man who can take by force; nothing falls to the lot of the weak; moreover this woman is mine and that woman is of another, this false notion comes to those whose brains are weak.

[Ch 11 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Tārā is so much attached to me and is not at all attached to Brūspati, the above rule is applicable to me all the more; how then can I quit the lady so much attached to me, according to the laws of Dharma and the morals?
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Tārā, is so much attached to me and is not at all attached to Brihaspati, the above rule applicable to me all the more; how then can I quit the lady so much attached to me, according to the laws of Dharma and the morals?

[Ch 11 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You can see also, that happiness reigns in that family where the wife is according to the will of the husband; how, then, can household happiness exist when the lady of the house is always dissatisfied?
NEW CORR ENG ──► You can see also, that happiness reigns in that family where the wife is according to the will of the husband; how, then, can the household happiness exist when the lady of the house is always dissatisfied?

[Ch 11 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, household happiness of the Guru is impossible as Tārā is dissatisfied with Brhaspati since he enjoyed the wife of his younger brother Samvarta. Then the result comes to this, O thousand-eyed one! How have you come to be thousand-eyed! However that may be, you are the lord of the Devas; so you can do whatever you like.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore the household happiness of the Guru is impossible as Tārā is dissatified with Brihaspati since he enjoyed the wife of his younger brother Samvarta. Then the result comes to this, O thousand eyed one! How have you come to be thousand eyed! However that may be, you are the lord of the Devas; you can do whatever you like.

[Ch 11 Verse 62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O messenger! go and tell your lord of the Devas all that I have spoken; I will not return by any means that beautiful Tārā." When Cardna spoke thus, the messenger went back to Indra and communicated to him all that Cardna Deva had spoken.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O messenger! go and tell your lord of the Devas all that I have spoken; I will not return by any means that beautiful Tārā. When Candra spoke thus, the messenger went back to Indra and communicated to him all that Candra Deva had spoken.

[Ch 11 Verse 63-65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, Indra became angry and ordered all the Deva forces to be ready at once. Hearing this news of war, Šukrācārya, out of enmity to Bhraspati, went to Candra and spoke thus: "O highly intelligent one! Never return Tārā; in case war ensues between you and Indra, I will help you by my Mantra Śakti.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, Indra became angry and ordered all the Deva forces to be ready at once. Hearing this news of war, Śukrācārya, out of enmity to Brihaspati, went to Candra and spoke thus :-- “O highly intelligent one! never return Tārā; in case if war ensues between you and Indra, I will help you by my Mantra-Śakti.”

[Ch 11 Verse 66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the other hand, Bhagavān Śaṅkara, hearing of the vicious act of Candra's taking his Guru's wife, and knowing that Sukrācārya was the enemy of Brhaṣpati, came to the assistance of the Devvs.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the other hand, Bhagavān Śaṅkara, hearing of the vicious act of Candra’s, taking his Guru’s wife, and knowing that Śukracārya was the enemy of Brihaspati, came to the assistance of the Devas.

[Ch 11 Verse 67]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The great war, then, ensued between the Devas like the terrific war of Tārakāśura; it continued for many years.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The great war, then, ensued between the Devas like the terrific war of Tārakāsura; it continued for many years.

[Ch 11 Verse 68-69]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the grandfather Brahmā, seeing the great havoc in the lives of the Devas and Asuras, came there on his vāhan Hamsa, to secure peace and talked to Candra: “Quit the Guru’s wife; if not, I will call Viṣṇu and destroy all of you party.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the grandfather Brahma, seeing the great havoc in the lives of the Devas and Asuras, came there on his vāhan Hamsa, to secure peace and talked to Candra :-- “Quit the Guru’s wife; if not, I will call Viṣṇu and destroy all of you party.”

[Ch 11 Verse 70]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He also desisted the son of Bhru, Šukrācārya, saying: “O highly intelligent one! why has this wicked idea possessed your mind? Is it due to bad association?
NEW CORR ENG ──► He also desisted the son of Bhṛgu, Śukrācarya, saying :-- “O highly intelligent one! why has this wicked idea possessed your mind? Is it due to the bad association?”

[Ch 11 Verse 71]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Then Šukrācārya also told Candra, the lord of the medicinal plants, not to wage war and said: "Better quit you now the Guru's wife. Your father Maharṣi Arti has sent me to you for this purpose."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Śukrācārya also told Candra, the lord of the medicinal plants, not to wage war and said :-- “Better quit you now the Guru’s wife. Your father Maharṣi Atri has sent me to you for this purpose.”

[Ch 11 Verse 72]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Candra, then, hearing the strange words of Śukrācārya, returned to Brhaşpati his wife Tarā, though she was not satisfied with him and became herself pregnant.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Candra, then, hearing the strange words of Śukrācārya, returned to Brihaspati his wife Tārā, though she was not satisfied with him and became herself pregnant.

[Ch 11 Verse 73-74]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhaspati returned with joy to his house, accompanied by his wife; the Devas and Dānavas went awa v' to their respective places. Brahmā went to Brahamaloka and Śankara went to Kailāśa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brihaspati returned with joy to his house, accompanied by his wife; the Devas and Dānavas went away to their respective places. Brahmā went to Brahmaloka and Śaṅkara went to Kailāśa.

[Ch 11 Verse 75-76]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhraspati began to pass his time happily with his beautiful wife. Some days went away when the wife of Bhraspati, Tārā, gave birth to an all-auspicious son, having all the qualities of Candra, on an auspicious day and under the influence of an auspicious star; seeing this new-born child, Bhraspati gladly performed the natal ceremonies of the child.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brihaspati began to pass his time happily with his beautiful wife; Some days went away when the wife of Brihaspati, Tārā, gave birth to an all-auspicious son, having all the qualities of Candra, on an auspicious day and under the influence of an auspicious star; seeing this new-born child, Brihaspati gladly performed the natal ceremonies of the child.

[Ch 11 Verse 77-78]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing that a son is born to him, Candra sent a messenger to Brhaspati saying that 'that child is not his; but it is born out of the semen of mine: why, then, have you performed the natal ceremonies out of your own will?'
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing that a son is born to him, Candra sent a messenger to Brihaspati saying that “That the child is not his; but it is born out of the semen of mine; why, then, have you performed the natal ceremonies out of your own will?”

[Ch 11 Verse 79]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Candra's messenger, Bhraspati said: "No, this child is mine, no doubt, as he resembles quite like me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Candra’s messenger, Brihaspati said :-- “No, this child is mine, no doubt, as he resembles quite like me.”

[Ch 11 Verse 80]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Bhraspati said this, war a: an ensued. The Devas and Dānavas met ear^. cther again in battlefield; and councils of war were held.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Brihaspati said this, war again ensued. The Devas and Dānavas met each other again in battle field; and councils of war were held.

[Ch 11 Verse 81]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then, for the preservation of peace, Prajāpati Brahmā went there; and before all desisted the Devas and Dānavas, mad for war, and ready to fight against each other.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then, for the preservation of peace, Prajāpati Brahmā went there; and before all desisted the Devas; and Dānavas, mad for war, and ready to fight against each other.

[Ch 11 Verse 82-84]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā, then, asked Tārā: “O auspicious one! say truly whose child is this? O beautiful one! if you say truly, then this war resulting in the loss of so many lives, will cease.’ The Handsome Tārā, looking askance, lowered her head in shame and gently spoke to Brahmā “This is the Candra’s child’ and went inside. Candra Deva, then, became very glad and took the child, put down its name as Budha and carried it to his own house.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā, then, asked Tārā :-- “O auspicious one! say truly whose child is this? O beautiful one! if you say truly, then this war resulting in the loss of so many lives, will cease.” The handsome Tārā, looking askance, lowered her head with shame and gently spoke to Brahmā :-- “This is the Candra’s child” and went inside. Candra Deva, then, became very glad and took the child, put down its name as Budha and carried it, to his own house.

[Ch 11 Verse 85]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhagavān Brahmā, Indra and the other Devas went back to their respective places. All the spectators went also to t'teir own places whence they came.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bhagavān Brahmā, Indra and the other Devas went back to their respective places. All the spectators went also to their own places whence they came.

[Ch 11 Verse 86]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Munis! I have now described the birth of Budha as the son of Candra and in the womb of Brhaspati's wife, as I heard it from the mouth of Vyāsa Deva, son of Satyavati. Thus ends the Eleventh Chapter of the First Book on the birth of Budha in the Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Munis! I have now described the birth of Budha, as the son of Candra and in the womb of Brihaspati’s wife, as I heard it from the mouth of Vyāsa Deva, the son of Satyavatī. Thus ends the eleventh chapter of the 1st Skandha on the birth of Budha in the Mahāpurāṇa Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyās.
