CHAPTER XI

On the Birth of Budha

ऋषय कयुः

कोउसी पुरूसरा राजा कोर्वींगी देवकन्यका ।

कर्क कर्क्ट च सम्पानं तेन राजा महत्पन्ना ॥ १ ॥

The Rşis said: O Sūta! Who is that King Purūravā? and who is the Deva girl Urvaśī? And how did that high-souled King Purūravā came into trouble?

सर्वं कक्षानकं बृहि लोगमहर्षाजाधुना ।

श्रोतुकामा वयं सर्वे त्वन्युखाकचयुतं रसम् ॥ २ ॥

O, son of Lomaharṣana! Kindly describe now all these to me. We are now desirous to hear sweet words from the lotus of your mouth.

अभृतावि मिहा ते वाणी सूत रसात्मिका ।

न तृप्यापो वयं संर्वे सुधया च यधाउमरा: ॥ ३ ॥

Book I Chapter XI

O Sūta! Your words are sweeter and more full of juice than nectar even; so we are not satiated by hearing them as gods are not satiated with the drink of nectar.

सूत उवाच

शृणूघं मुनयः सर्वे कर्ण विहयं नमोरामम् ।

वश्याम्यं यथावृद्धा शुतां व्यासरोतमात् ॥ ४ ॥

Hearing this Sūta said: O Munis! I am now telling you, as far as my in elligence goes, what I heard from the mouth of Śrī Vyāsa. Now hear that beautiful divine incident.

गुरोस्तु दयिता भार्यां तात नोमेति विश्रुता ।

रूपयीवनयुक्ता सा चार्वीर्गी मदविष्ठता ॥ 5 ॥

गतैकतं द्वितीधोपाय वजामा नस्य भापिमी ।

दूषा च शशिगाउल्यं रूपयीवनशारीति ॥ 6 ॥

कामातुरस्तदा जातः शशी शशिगुर्षी प्रति ।

साउपि वीक्ष्य विधुं कामां जाता मदन्योक्षिति ॥ 7 ॥

Once upon a time the exceedingly beautiful dear wife of Brhaspati, named Tārā, full of youth and beauty, of the most beautiful limbs and intoxicated with pride went to the house of Candra Deva (the Moon), the yajamān (employer of priest Brhaspati at any sacrifice) of Brhaspati. Seeing Tārā of beautiful face like Moon, the Moon became very passionate; Tārā also fell amorous at the sight of Moon. Thus, both of them became very much passionately attached to each other.

ताव्योन्यं प्रेमयुन्तो स्मरातों च बध्वतुः ।

ताराशगरी मदोच्नारी कामबाणप्रधिति ॥ 8 ॥

रेमाते मदमती तो परमस्यहान्थिति ।

द्विताने कतिचित्तत्र जातातः समागणये ॥ 9 ॥

Then they, the Moon and Tārā, being smitten by the arrows of Cupid and intoxicated with amorous passions began their sexual intercourse with reciprocal feelings of passionate love. Some days passed in this state.

ब्रह्मस्तितुं दुःखात्तंततामानयितुं गृहम् ।

प्रेपयामास शिष्यं तु नायाता सा वर्जीकृतां ॥ १० ॥

Bhraspati, then, being distressed with the pangs of separation from his wife, sent his pupil to bring

back Tārā; but Tārā was then submissive of Candra and therefore refused to go.

पुनः पुनर्वेत्र शिष्यं परावर्तेत चन्द्रमाः ।

ब्रह्मस्तितरदा कुब्दो जगाम स्वयमेव हि ॥ १ १ ॥

गत्वा सोमगूरं तत वाच्यस्तिहराप्ती: ।

उवाच शशिनं कूबः: स्यमयानं मदाचित्यम् ॥ १ २ ॥

Brhaspati sent over and over again his pupil and when Candra Deva returned the messenger, Bhraspati became very angry and went personally to Candra's house and, spoke angrily to the Moon who was puffed up with arrogance and somewhat smiling:

किं कृतं कित श्रीतोगो कर्म धर्मविराहितम् ।

रक्षित मम भार्यैं सुदरी केन हेतुना ॥ 13 ॥

“O Moon! Why are you committing this vicious act, contrary to Dharma? Why are you keeping my beautiful wife in your house?

तव देह गुरुक्राहां यजमानोरिस्त सर्वथा ।

गुरुभार्यों कर्मे मूद भुक्ता किं स्थिताप्रवा ॥ 14 ॥

I am your Guru; you are my client; O stupid! why are you enjoying your Guru's wife and keeping her in custody in your house?

बह्रहा हेमहाती च सुराणो गुरुतत्याः ।

महापातकिनो होते तत्संसर्गि च पझमः ॥ 15 ॥

Do you not know that he who kills a Brāhmaṇa, who steals gold, who drinks, who goes to wife of one's Guru are Mahāpātakīs (great sinners) and those who keep company of these are the fifth Mahāpātakīs?

महापातकमुक्तस्त्वं दुराचारोsतिराईतः ।

न देवसदार्नाईस यदि भुक्तेयम्बना ॥ १६ ॥

Therefore, if you had enjoyed my wife, you are exceedingly vicious, blameable and a Mahāpātakī (great sinner); you are not fit to live amongst Devas.

मुखेमामसितापाङ्गैं न्याति सदनं मम ।

नोद्रक्ष्यामि दुरातन्न गुरुदाराप्राहीणम् ॥ 17 ॥

O wicked one! Now I say that even now you better forsake Tārā, who is of a blue colour and whose look is askance; I won't go from here without having Tāra. And if you do not give back

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

Tārā, then you are certainly with her and undoubtedly I will curse you.'

इत्येवं भायमाणं तमुवारा रोहिणीपति: ।

गृहं क्रीधेसमायुक्तं कान्ताविरहादु:वित्तम् ॥ 18 ॥

When Brhaşpati said so, Candra, the husband of Rohinī, spoke to his Guru Deva, who was very angry, sorry and afflicted at the separation from his beloved wife, thus:

इन्दुवाच

कोधाने तु दुरागाध्या बाहाणाः क्रोधर्विताः ।

पूजाई धर्मशास्त्रा वर्जी-मायास्तोर-म्यथा ॥ 19 ॥

"In this world, Brāhmins that know the Dharma Śāstras, that are devoid of anger, are fit to be worshipped; and those that are not so, they are objects of disrespect and not to be worshipped by all for their anger.

आगमियात सा कामं गृहं ते जरवर्गिनी ।

अत्रेव संस्थिता बाला का ते हानिरितान ॥ 20 ॥

O sindess one! The beautiful one will surely go to your house; what harm is there to you, if she waits here for a few days?

इच्छया संस्थिता चात्र सुखकामार्थिनी है सा ।

दिनानि कारितिश्रियला सच्छया चारामियति ॥ 21 ॥

She is staying here of her own accord to enjoy pleasures and will go back of her own will. One word more:

त्ववैवोदाडृतं पूर्वी धर्मशास्त्रानं तथा ।

न कही ड्युपति चोरण न विधो घेदकर्मण ॥ 22 ॥

You gave out before this opinion of the Dharma Śāstra that as a Brāhmin though guilty of committing vicious deeds, becomes pure again by the practice of Karmas as enjoined in the Vedas, so a woman, too, though guilty of adultery, becomes pure again when she is again in the period of her menstruation.

इतुक्तः शशिणा तत्र गुरुत्यन्तनु:खितः ।

जगाम स्वगृहं तृर्णा चिन्ताविष्टः: स्मातुतः ॥ 23 ॥

At these words of Candra Deva, Brhaspati, the Guru of the Devas, became exceedingly sorry and

anxious and went back immediately to his own house, with a grievous heart, full of amorous feelings.

दिनानि कवित्धित स्थित्वा चिन्तालुते गुरुः ।

यथावय गहं तस्य त्वरि तडीषधीपतिः ॥ 24 ॥

स्थितः क्षरा निश्चिदोर्भे सी श्ररेणे रूपास्थितः ।

नाजगाम शगरी तर चुकोपाति बृह्मपति: ॥ 25 ॥

After staying in his own house for some days, Brhaşpati, worn out with anxiety, came again quickly to the house of Candra; but, no sooner he was to enter the gate, he was stopped by the door-keepers; he became very angry and stopped at the gateway. And when he saw that Candra did not make his appearance, he became exceedingly angry and thought:

अयं मे शिष्यातं यातो गुरुभन्तीं तु मातरम् ।

जग्राह बलतोःदार्यीं शिक्षणीयो मयास्ट्रूना ॥ 26 ॥

“Oh! What a wonder is this? this irreligious Candra, being my disciple, has done this vicious act and took by violence the wife of his Guru, who is reckoned as the mother; and I will now teach him a good lesson.

उवाच वार्च कोपान्तु द्वारेशैश्यति बहि: ।

क्रिं गोरे घवने मंद पापाचार सुरायम ॥ 27 ॥

Standing on the entrance, Bhraspati began to speak aloud: "O stupid, vicious, vilest of the Devas! Why do you now sleep in your inner room?

देहि मे कामिनि ग्रीध नोचेछापं द्वाद्यमूम् ।

करीमि भस्मसानूं न द्वादसि प्रियां मम ॥ 28 ॥

Do return quickly my wife; else I will curse you at once. In case you do not bring me back my wife at once, I will now reduce you to ashes."

सूत उवाच

क्रूराणि चैवमादीनि भाषणानि बृह्मयतेः ।

श्रुत्वा डिजपति शीघ्रं निर्भी: सदनाद्वहि: ॥ 29 ॥

Hearing these foul words of Brhaspati, Candra Deva the king of the Dvijas, quickly came out of the house and said smiling:

तमुवाच हसनसोभः किमिदं बहु भापते ।

न ते योग्यासित्यापी सर्वलक्षणसंयुता ॥ 30 ॥

Book 1 Chapter XI

कुरूपा च स्वसुरुषी महाणान्यां सिद्धां द्विज ।

भिश्रुकास्य गृहे योग्या नेत्रुषीं वरार्थिनी ॥ 31 ॥

“O Brāhmin! Why are you spending your stock of words for nothing? Thet all-auspicious lady, of a blue colour and looking askance, is not fit for you; therefore, take another comparatively uglier woman for your use. Ex-cedingly youthful and lovely woman like her is not fit for a beggar’s house.

रातः स्वसूरुके कांते नायाः किल निगढते ।

त्वं न जानासि मंदासन-कामाण स्थिनिरिणीयम् ॥ ३ २ ॥

O stupid one! I see, you don't know anything about the Kāma Śāstra (the book that dwells on amorous passion); those wise men who are skilled in this Śāstra assign for the women, their lovers equivalent to their beauty in matters of amorous dealings.

यथेहं गच्छ दुर्बैद्ध नाहं दायमीय कामिनीम् ।

यच्छयं कुंक तकामं न देशा वरविनीम् ॥ 33 ॥

So, O stupid man! Go away wherever you like. I won't give you back your wife. Do whatever lies in your power. I won't return your wife.

कामातर्य च ते शापो न मां बाधितुमहिति ।

नई दंदे गुगे कांतां यथेच्छसि तथा कुक ॥ 34 ॥

When you have become passionate, your curse won't affect me in any way. This I say finally unto you: "O Guru! I will not give you back your wife; do what you wish."

सूत उवाच

इत्युक्तः शशिना चेज्यक्षिताभाग क्वाचित ।

जगाभ तरसा सच क्रोधयुक फश्वीपतेः ॥ 35 ॥

Thus spoken by Candrā, Brhaspati became very anxious and angry; he then went away quickly to Indra's house.

दूद्वा शतकतूतसर गुरं दुःशातुरं स्थितम् ।

पाठाय्योचमनीयाही: पूजयित्या सुसंस्थितः ॥ ३६ ॥

Seeing Guru Deva morose and sorry, the very liberal minded Indra Deva worshipped him duly with pādya, arghya, and Śacmanīya and asked: "O highly fortunate one! Why do you look so anxious?

प्रपछ्छ परमोदारस्ते तंथावस्थितं गुभम् ।

का चित्त ने महाभाग शोकातर्जित महामुपे ॥ 37 ॥

O great Muni! Why are you grievous and sorry? You are my Guru; is it that you are insulted by any one in my kingdom; say freely.

केनापयानितोजस त्वं मम राज्य गुरुक्छ मे ।

त्वद्धीनमिदं सर्व सैन्यं लोकाधिपेः सह ॥ 38 ॥

All the regents of the several quarters (the Lokapālas) and ali :he Deva armies are under your command.

बहुता विद्यूलस्य शंभुरे चान्ये देवस्तमाः ।

करिष्यिति च साहाय्यं शा चिता वद सांग्रतम् ॥ 39 ॥

Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara and other Devas are ready to lend you every assistance, no doubt. So say what is the cause of your anxiety?

गुरुकावाच

शशिनाउपहत भार्यां ताता मम सुलोचना ।

न ददाति स दुहात्मा प्रार्थितोरिपि पुनः पुनः ॥ 40 ॥

Hearing these words of Indra, Brhaşpati said: "Candra has stolen my beautiful-eyed wife. I asked for her, again and again, but that wicked soul is not returning me my wife at all.

किं कांगीर सुरैगान त्वयेव शरणं मम ।

साहाय्यं कुरु देवेश दुःखितोय शगतकते ॥ 41 ॥

O Lord of the Devas! What am I to do now? You are my help and guide. O Śatakratu! You are the lord of the Devas; therefore, I pray to you with a very grievous heart, help me in this matter.

इन्न उवाच

मा शोकं कुक धर्मून दासोर्सित तव सुक्त ।

आनविष्याम्यहं नृनं भार्यां तव महामते ॥ 42 ॥

Hearing this, Indra said: “O knower of Dharma! Do not be sorry, O Suvrata! I am your servant. O highly intelligent one! Surely, I will bring you back your wife.

प्रेक्षिते चेन्मया दृते न दास्यति मदाकुलः ।

ततो युद्धं क्रतिथामि देवसैन्मैः समावृष्तः ॥ 43 ॥

I will send a messenger and even then if Candra, mad with pride, does not return your wife, I will

wage war on him and fight against him, with all our Deva armies."

इत्याश्रास्य गुरु शक्रो दूर्ते वकृविच्ब्रणम् ।

प्रेययामास सोमाय वातार्शसिनमब्धुतम् ॥ 44 ॥

Thus consoling Brhaşpati, Indra sent a very clever man, who was a good speaker and wonderful in his capabilities, to Candra.

स नाला शिलोकों तु त्वरितः सुविध्वशणः ।

उवाच वचनेवैव वचनं रोहिणपतिभू ॥ 4 5 ॥

The clever and wise messenger went to the Candra Loka (the region of the Moon) and spoke to Candra, the husband of Rohinī, thus:

प्रेमतोर्जं महाभाग शक्रेण त्वां विवक्षाया ।

क्रथितं प्रभुणा चच्च तद्ववीम पहामते ॥ 46 ॥

“O Mahābhāga! Indra has sent me to you to communicate his message to you. So, O intelligent one! I will tell you what he was ordered me; hear.”

धर्मज्ञोसि महाभाग नीति ज्ञानासि सुजत ।

अत्रि: पिता ते धार्यमन्त्र न विरां कतुर्महसि ॥ 47 ॥

"He said: "O, highly fortunate one! You know well Dharma and Niti Śāstra (the science of morals); the more so, because the virtuous Maharsi Atri is your father.

भार्यां रृथा सर्वभृत्यैंथाशक्ति हृतिंहितः ।

तद्यं कलह: कामं भविता नात्र संशयः ॥ 48 ॥

Therefore, O Suvrata! You ought not to commit such blameable act. See, all beings should protect their own wives always without remaining idle to the best of their powers; therefore, no doubt, quarrels would ensue necessarily on that point.

यथा तव तथा तस्य वनः: स्याहारक्षणे ।

आत्मावलसर्वभूतानि विताय एवं सुधानिये ॥ 49 ॥

O Sudhānidhi! as far as this point of protecting one's wife is concerned, your Guru Deva ought also to do his best. You ought to consider all persons like your own self.

अत्यविंशनिसंख्यासे कामीच्यो दक्षजा: शृभा: ।

गुरुपली कर्थ बोधेतुं त्वमिच्छसि सुधानिधे ॥ 50 ॥

O Sudhākara! You have got twenty-eight exceedingly beautiful wives, who are the daughters of Dakṣa; why then do you desire to enjoy the wife of your Guru?

स्वर्ग सदा वसंत्या मेनकाटा मनोरामा: ।

भुक्ष्य ता सच्छया कामं मुंच पर्नीं गुरोरिध ॥ 5 1 ॥

The beautiful Apsarās (celestial nymphs) Menakā and others are always residing in the Heavens; you can enjoy them to your heart's content; leave off the wife of your Guru.

ईक्षरा यदि कुर्वर्ति जगुस्तितमहित्या ।

अज्ञानसुदुवर्तने तदा धर्मिक्यो भवेते ॥ 5 2 ॥

In case any powerful man commits an unworthy act out of egoism, the illiterate ones would follow them; so the Dharma will decline.

तस्मान्यंच महाभाग युगेः पत्नीं मनोरमाम् ।

कलहस्वल्यिमित्तोडा सुगणां न भवेदधा ॥ 53 ॥

Therefore, O highly lucky one! Do such as does not lead, for nothing, quarrels amongst the gods and leave your Guru's wife, even though she is beautiful."

सूत जवाच

सोम: शक्रवचः श्रुत्वा किंचित्कोधयसामालुतः ।

भंया प्रतिव्वतः प्राह शक्रकृतुं तत शगरी ॥ 54 ॥

Hearing these words from the messenger, the Moon (Candra Deva) became somewhat angry and, making gestures, replied to the messenger, as if to Indra, thus:

इंडुलावर

धर्मज्ञासि महावाहो देवानामधिधः स्वयम् ।

पुरोधायि च ते तत्पुरुवयोः सदूगी मति: ॥ 55 ॥

“O mighty armed one! As you yourself are the lord of the Devas and the knower of Dharma, so your priest, too, has become like you; the heads of both of you are the same.

परोपदेशे कृशला भवतीत बहवो जनाः ।

दुर्लंभस्तु स्थवं कर्ता प्राप्ते कर्मणि सर्वथा ॥ 56 ॥

You will find many that can shew their learning and give advice to others, but you will find always

Book 1 Chapter XI

very rare such persons as will act themselves to their own advices when occasion arises and wants them to fulfil their own words.

वार्थस्यप्रपीतं च शाखं गृह्टिन मावाः ।

को विरोधोउत्र देहेय कामवानां भवन्स्तवम् ॥ 57 ॥

O Lord of the Devas! All the persons take the opinion of the Sāstras framed by Brūspathi; then why the quarrel would ensue with me and the Devas when I am enjoying, according to his dictates, a woman who is herself willing?

स्वकीयं बलिनां सर्वे दुबलिनां न किंचन ।

स्वीया च परकीया च प्रभोज्यं मन्द्येतसाम || 58 ||

See, also, that the rule in this world is might is right; all things go to the powerful man who can take by force; nothing falls to the lot of the weak; moreover, this woman is mine and that woman is of another, this false notion comes to those whose brains are weak.

ताता मयनुक्ता च यथा न तु तथा गुर्ते ।

अनुस्ता कर्थ त्याज्या धर्मौतं न्यायतस्ताव ॥ 59 ॥

When Tārā is so much attached to me and is not at all attached to Brūspati, the above rule is applicable to me all the more; how then can I quit the lady so much attached to me, according to the laws of Dharma and the morals?

गृहार्थसु रक्तायां वित्तायां कक्ष भयते ।

वित्तनेय या जाता चकमोउनकामिनीम् ॥ 6 0 ॥

You can see also, that happiness reigns in that family where the wife is according to the will of the husband; how, then, can household happiness exist when the lady of the house is always dissatisfied?

न दास्येड़े घरागीहां गच्छ दूत वद स्वयम् ।

ईशोरोपि सहस्वाक्य यदिच्छसि कुकच्च तत् ॥ 6 1 ॥

Therefore, household happiness of the Guru is impossible as Tārā is dissatisfied with Brhaspati since he enjoyed the wife of his younger brother Samvarta. Then the result comes to this, O thousand-eyed one! How have you come to be thousand-eyed! However that may be, you are the

lord of the Devas; so you can do whatever you like.

सूत उवाच

इत्युक्तः शशिना दूत: प्रययौ शक्रसविधिम् ।

इन्यायच्छ तत्सर्वे यतुक्ते शीतरिभना ॥ 6 2 ॥

O messenger! go and tell your lord of the Devas all that I have spoken; I will not return by any means that beautiful Tārā." When Cardna spoke thus, the messenger went back to Indra and communicated to him all that Cardna Deva had spoken.

तृपाषाडपि तद्धुत्वा कोधयुक्तो बभूव ह ।

सेनोढोगे तथा चक्रे साहाय्यार्थ गृगोर्विभुः ॥ 63 ॥

शुक्रस्तु विग्रहं क्रूला गृहद्वेषात्तो ययो ।

मा दद्वस्वेति तं वाक्यमुवाच शर्जिनं प्रति ॥ 64 ॥

साहाय्ये ते कारिष्यामि मन्राशक्य महामते ।

भविता यदि संग्रामस्व चेह्रोग मारिष ॥ 65 ॥

Hearing this, Indra became angry and ordered all the Deva forces to be ready at once. Hearing this news of war, Šukrācārya, out of enmity to Bhraspati, went to Candra and spoke thus: "O highly intelligent one! Never return Tārā; in case war ensues between you and Indra, I will help you by my Mantra Śakti.

गड़ूस्तु तत्काथर्यं नुकुदाराधिमर्भान् ।

गृह्यग्रु भृगु मचा साहाय्यमकोनादा ॥ 66 ॥

On the other hand, Bhagavān Śaṅkara, hearing of the vicious act of Candra's taking his Guru's wife, and knowing that Sukrācārya was the enemy of Brhaṣpati, came to the assistance of the Devvs.

संग्रामसूनु तदा वृत्तो देवदानवयोईतम् ।

बहूनि तत्र वर्षिणि तातकासुर्यक्तिल १। 67 ॥

The great war, then, ensued between the Devas like the terrific war of Tārakāśura; it continued for many years.

देवासुरुक्ते युद्धे दृष्ट्या तत्र प्रितामहः ।

हंसाकडो जगामाशु तं देशं क्लेशगतांगरे ॥ 68 ॥

राकपति तदा प्राह मुंच भार्यों गृगेरिति ।

नोचेदिष्णुं समाहूय कंर्विधायि तु संक्षयम् ॥ 69 ॥

Then the grandfather Brahmā, seeing the great havoc in the lives of the Devas and Asuras, came there on his vāhan Hamsa, to secure peace and talked to Candra: “Quit the Guru’s wife; if not, I will call Viṣṇu and destroy all of you party.”

भूगं निवारयामास बह्ञा लोकपितामहः ।

किम्यायमितजिता संगदोभामहामते ॥ 70 ॥

He also desisted the son of Bhru, Šukrācārya, saying: “O highly intelligent one! why has this wicked idea possessed your mind? Is it due to bad association?

निशेधयामास ततो भपुस्तं चौषधीपतिन् ।

भूंच भार्यं गृगोरध विगाउई प्रेषितस्तव ॥ 7 1 ॥

"Then Šukrācārya also told Candra, the lord of the medicinal plants, not to wage war and said: "Better quit you now the Guru's wife. Your father Maharṣi Arti has sent me to you for this purpose."

सूत उवाच

द्विजारजसु तच्छुत्वा भृगोर्विनमदुतम् ।

ददी च ततिष्यां भार्यं गुरोगंर्षतां शुभाम ॥ 7 2 ॥

Candra, then, hearing the strange words of Śukrācārya, returned to Brhaşpati his wife Tarā, though she was not satisfied with him and became herself pregnant.

प्राय्य कान्ता गुरूईशः खगूहं मृदितो ययो ।

तते देवास्तते दैत्या ययुः खान्यन्याहान्यति ॥ 73 ॥

ब्रह्मा खरवतं प्रापः केलासं चाणि शक्रः ।

बृहस्यतितु सन्तुषः प्राप्य भार्यों मनोरामम् ॥ 7 4 ॥

Bhaspati returned with joy to his house, accompanied by his wife; the Devas and Dānavas went awa v' to their respective places. Brahmā went to Brahamaloka and Śankara went to Kailāśa.

ततः कातेन किवाता तारासुत सुतं शुभम् ।

सृदिते शुभनक्षेत्र तारापतिसमं गुणैः ॥ 75 ॥

दूध्वा पूत्रं गुरजाँत चकार विधिपूर्वकम् ।

जातकर्मादिकं सर्व प्रहृतेनारतमान्मा ॥ 76 ॥

Bhraspati began to pass his time happily with his beautiful wife. Some days went away when the wife of Bhraspati, Tārā, gave birth to an all-auspicious son, having all the qualities of Candra,

on an auspicious day and under the influence of an auspicious star; seeing this new-born child, Bhraspati gladly performed the natal ceremonies of the child.

भूतं चन्द्रसा जन्म पुरस्य मुनिसत्तामः ।

दूतं च प्रेयामास गुर्भ प्रति महामति: ॥ 77 ॥

न चायं त्व मुत्रोस्त मन वीर्यसमुद्धवः ।

कर्थं तृ कृतवाक्मां जातकर्मिहिकं विधिम् ॥ 78 ॥

Hearing that a son is born to him, Candra sent a messenger to Brhaspati saying that 'that child is not his; but it is born out of the semen of mine: why, then, have you performed the natal ceremonies out of your own will?'

तच्छुला वचनं तस्य दूतस्य च बृह्यस्ति: ।

उवाच मम पुत्रो मे सूर्णो नात्र संशयः ॥ 79 ॥

Hearing these words of Candra's messenger, Bhraspati said: "No, this child is mine, no doubt, as he resembles quite like me."

पुर्णर्विवादः संजातो मिलिता देवदानाः ।

युद्धार्थमागतासोपो समाजः समजायत ॥ 80 ॥

When Bhraspati said this, war a: an ensued. The Devas and Dānavas met ear^. cther again in battlefield; and councils of war were held.

तजागतः स्वयं बहुना शगतिकामः प्रजापति:।

निवारयामास मुखे संश्यतान् युद्धुदर्भन्त् ॥ 81 ॥

Then, for the preservation of peace, Prajāpati Brahmā went there; and before all desisted the Devas and Dānavas, mad for war, and ready to fight against each other.

तारां पश्चछ धर्मात्मा कस्यांत नतयः शुभे ।

सत्यं बद वरारोहे यथा कलेशः प्रशाप्यति ॥ 82 ॥

तमुवचासितापाङ्गी तजवानाउपयोगसुखी ।

चन्द्रस्येति शनैरन्तर्जाभू बरवर्धिती ॥ 83 ॥

जग्राह तं सुतं सोमः प्रहर्धेनंतालमना ।

नाम चक्रे बुध इति जगाम ख्यरुं पुत्र: ॥ 84 ॥

Brahmā, then, asked Tārā: “O auspicious one! say truly whose child is this? O beautiful one! if you say truly, then this war resulting in the loss of so many lives, will cease.’ The Handsome Tārā, looking askance, lowered her head in shame and

Book 1 Chapter XII

gently spoke to Brahmā “This is the Candra’s child’ and went inside. Candra Deva, then, became very glad and took the child, put down its name as Budha and carried it to his own house.

ययी ब्रह्मा सकंक धाम सर्वे देवा सर्वासवाः ।

यथागतं गतं सर्वे: सर्वंश: प्रेशकैर्जनैः ॥ 85 ॥

Bhagavān Brahmā, Indra and the other Devas went back to their respective places. All the spectators went also to t'teir own places whence they came.

कथितये बुधोत्पतिजनुरुक्षेत्रे च सोमतः ।

यथा श्रुता मया पूर्व व्यासात्स्यवतीसुतान् ॥ 86 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते प्रथमस्कन्धे बुधोत्पतिनीमैकारशोउध्यायः ।

O Munis! I have now described the birth of Budha as the son of Candra and in the womb of Brhaspati's wife, as I heard it from the mouth of Vyāsa Deva, son of Satyavati.

Thus ends the Eleventh Chapter of the First Book on the birth of Budha in the Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book 1 Chapter XII

