CHAPTER XXXII

On the King Surahta's Going to the Forest

जनमेजर उवाच

महिमा वर्णते सम्बन्धिकृतकायास्तव्या मुने ।

कैन चारात्रिता पूर्वं चरित्रजयोगतः ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: O Best of Munis! The glory of Caṇḍikā has been fully described by you. By whom was She worshipped in the ancient times after the reading and hearing of Her three glorious deeds (the killing of Madhu Kaṭṭabha, etc.)?

प्रसत्रा कस्य बरतृ देकेन प्राप्तं फलं महत् ।

आगाध्य कामादों देर्वीं कथायस्य कृपानिधे ॥ 2 ॥

उपासनाविधि बहास्तथा पूजाविधि वह ।

वित्तरेण महाभाग होमम्य च वित्तिं पुनः ॥ ३ ॥

Who was it that derived the best effects by worshipping the Devi, the Bestower of all desires? When and with whom was She pleased and then offered boons? O Ocean of mercy! Kindly narrate fully all these things to me. O Brāhmana! Describe

to me also the rules how the meditation, worship and Homa of the Great Devi are conducted.

सूत जतच

इति भूपवचः शुत्वा प्रीतः सत्वातीसुतः ।

प्रत्युवाच नृपं कृष्णो महामायापूजनम् ॥ 4 ॥

Sūta said: “O Rsis! Kṛṣna Dvaipāyana, the son of Satyavati, was very glad to hear these questions of Janamejaya and began to describe how the worship, etc., of the Mahā Māyā, the Devi Bhagavati are to be done.

व्यास उवाच

स्वातोचिष्ठन्तरे पूर्व सुर्यो नाम पाधिद्धः ।

बधूव परमोदारः प्रजापालनततरः ॥ 5 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! In days of yore in Svārocīṣa Manvantara there was a king, named Suratha, very liberal-minded and devoted to govern well his subjects.

सत्यवादी कर्मपोरो ब्राह्मणानां च पुत्रकः ।

गुरुभस्तितो नित्यं स्वदारयमने रतः ॥ 6 ॥

He was truthful, active and energetic, and devoted to his Guru; he always served the twice-born and he never used to hold any sexual intercourse except with his legal wife.

दानशीलोत्रविरोधी च धनुर्वैदकयागः ।

एवं पालयती राज्यं मेलछा: पर्वतावासिनः ॥ 7 ॥

He was generous, not liking to quarrel with anybody, and expert in the science of archery. While he was thus governing his kingdom, the Mleechas, the hill tribes, turned out his enemies.

बलाच्छुल्यमाप्रा: सैन्यं कृत्वा चतुर्विधम् ।

हृस्यध्रयपादातसिहातसे मदोकटा: ॥ 8 ॥

कोलाविद्यसिनः प्रापा: पृथ्वीमहणततया ।

सुध: सैन्यमादाय सम्पुखः सम्पघत ॥ 9 ॥

They destroyed the city of Kolā, became very haughty and turbulent and desired to conquer the whole earth by their sheer force. Thus accompanied by the great four-fold army elephants, chariots, cavalry and infantry they came to conquer the dominion of the King Suratha.

यूद्धं समभवद्धोरं तस्य तैरतिदाफणी: ।

मलैच्छानां तु बलं स्वल्यं ग्रासनुद्वलम्बुद्धूनि ॥ १० ॥

तथापि तैर्जितो युद्धे देवहात्राव गरपात्रः ।

भानश्छ स्वारुं प्राप्तः सुरक्षं तुर्मपिडतम् ॥  १ १ ॥

A dreadful fight then ensued between the King and the dreadful Mlecchas. O King! The Mleccha forces were not at all numerous whereas the king were large; still the Mlecchas were lucky to win the battle. The King, defeated, fled to his own city which was a strongly fortified place.

चितयामास मेधावी राजा नीतिविश्वधानः ।

प्रधानान्विमना दूष्ठा श्रुवृष्ठसमाधिशान् ॥ १ २ ॥

स्थानं गृहीता विमुले परीखतुर्विगटजत् ।

कालप्रतीक्षा कतैम्वा किं वा युद्धं वरं मतम् ॥ १ ३ ॥

The good King, wise in statesmanship when he saw that his ministers had gone over to the enemies' party, became very anxious and thought whether it was advisable for him to wait for a better opportunity, remaining within his own extensive city, well guarded by a strong wall and ditch or it would be better to fight on.

मक्रिणः श्रत्रवाणा मन्योयाना न ते किल ।

कि करोमौति मनसा भूपति: समचितयत् ॥ 14 ॥

The King thought also that it would not at all be advisable to consult with his ministers who were, then, under the control of his enemies; what then would he do under the circumstances?

कदाचिते गृहीत्वा मां पाणाचारा: पराशिता: ।

सुबुभो3प्र प्रदास्यन्ति तदा किं वा भविष्यति ॥ 15 ॥

Those vicious ministers could at any time deliver him to the hands of his enemies; what would then happen to him!

पापबुद्धिरु विश्वासो न कतंब्यः कदाचन ।

कि ते वै प्रकुर्बिनि चे लोभवगगना ना: ॥ 16 ॥

Those men, that are avaricious, can do anything in this world; therefore it would never be advisable to trust them.

घातरं पितरं मित्रं सुहृदं बांधवं तथा ।

गुरुं पूर्यं द्वितं ऋषि लोपाधिद्ध: सदा नर: ॥ 17 ॥

The people under the sway of greed commit

Book V Chapter XXXII

injury to their fathers, brothers, friends, acquaintances, their Gurus and the adored Brāhmanas.

तस्मायमा न कर्तव्यो विश्वासः सर्वेधाउपूना ।

मंत्रिवर्गेस्तिपापिषे त्रगुष्वसमाप्रशिने ॥ 18 ॥

When the ministers had joined with his enemies, they could well be classed with the vicious; no doubt in this. Never could they be trusted under the above circumstances.

इति सच्छित्य मनसा राजा परयातुर्भानः ।

एकाकी ह्वयामहा निर्जीगम युगत्ततः ॥ 19 ॥

असहायो३य निर्णय ल्हानं वनमाश्रितः ।

चिन्त्यामास मेधावी कव रोल्व्यं मया पुतः ॥ 20 ॥

Thus pondering over the matter, the King became absentminded, and, finding no remedy, went out of the city alone, mounted on a horse. The intelligent King, helpless, entered into a dense forest and thought where would he go now?

योजनप्रयमाते तु घुनेराभ्रमपुत्तमम् ।

जात्वा जगाम भूपालस्तापसस्य सुयेधसः ॥ 21 ॥

Knowing, then, that there was, at a distance of three Yojanas from that place, a hermitage of the great ascetic, the Sumedhā Rṣi, the King went there.

Note: A Yojana is a distance measuring four Krōsas or eight or nine miles.

बहुद्धसयायुक्ते नदीपुलिनसंश्रितम् ।

निर्वेलाशयादकौणी कोकिलतारवमिडतम् ॥ 22 ॥

शिणायाध्यवनगश्दाको भृगायुध्यतावत् ।

नीवातारभुपव्यकावों सुपुधफलपादायम् ॥ 23 ॥

O King! That hermitage was more beautiful than even the Heavens; it was on the bank of a river; various kinds of trees were there; it was frequented with wild animals having no enmity with each other; the whole place was echoed with the sounds of cuckoos.

होमधूमसुनघेन प्रीतिंदं प्राणिनां सदा ।

वेट्यविनस्माकान्तं स्वगाँदपि मनोहरम् ॥ 24 ॥

दूद्वा तामश्रयं नारा बभावसी मुवात्वितः ।

भयं त्यक्त्वा मिति चक्रे विश्रायाव ग्रिजान्ये ॥ 25 ॥

The students were studying and reverberating

the atmosphere with their Vedic chants; hundreds of herds of deer were running there; rice trees had grown there wildly at places and their harvests were collected at places; good flowery trees and others with delicious fruits were seen there; at places fragrant smells of oblations of ghee, etc., were coming; all these were delighting to any man who went or stayed there. The King Suratha was very glad to see that Śārama; he became fearless and wanted to stay there in the hermitage of the Brāhmin.

आसाज्य पादधे३ हुं जगाम दिव्यान्वितः ।

दूढ़ता ते पुनिभासीने सातच्छायसु संश्रितम् ॥ 26 ॥

Fastening his horse at the root of a tree, the King approached humbly to the Rşi, and saw that the Muni was seated on a deer skin under the shade of dense Sal trees.

भूगतिज्ञानसं शान्तं तस्माजितकृशं ऋतुम् ।

अधयापनं तिणाध्यो ऋदेशागक्षार्विहिनम् ॥ 27 ॥

He was peaceful, lean and thin by tapasyā. His stature was straight; and he was teaching his disciples and explaining to them the meaning of the Veda Śāstras.

रहितं क्रोधलोभाषदैद्धातीतं विमत्सम् ।

आत्मान्तारं सत्यवादिनं ग्रामसंयुतम् ॥ 28 ॥

He was void of anger, greed, etc., beyond all the dualities, without any jealousy, always devoted to the contemplation of his Self, truthful and full of peace.

तं वीक्ष्य भूपतिभूभी पपात् दण्डवन्ता ।

तद्यो3धुजालापूर्णनयनः प्रेमसंयुतः ॥ 29 ॥

जतिष्ठातिष भई ते तयुबाच तदा मृति: ।

शिष्यो ददो बूर्गी तस्ये गुरुणा नोदितस्तदा ॥ 30 ॥

Seeing him the King was filled with tears and prostrated before him and fell like a stick before him. The Muni, seeing him thus, asked him to get up and enquired about his welfare. A disciple then, at the sign of the Guru, gave him a kuśāsana, to take his seat.

उत्थाय नृपतिस्तस्यां समासीनस्तद्वाना ।

अर्धयपाढ़ाईं चक्रे सुभेय विधिपूर्वकम् ॥ 31 ॥

The King got up and at his permission took his seat on that kuśāsana; then the Muni worshipped the King duly by offering to him water to wash his feet, and Arghya (an offer of green grass, rice, etc).

पूच्छात्र कुतः प्रातः कस्वं चिंतापः कवम् ।

कवयवय यथाकामा संवृत्तं कारणं चिक्छ् ॥ 32 ॥

Then the Muni asked him “Who are you? What for are you come here? Why are you so anxious? Tell frankly all these that are not yet known to me.

किमागमनकृत्वं ते बृहि कार्य मनोगतम् ।

कनिषेय वार्तिड़न काममसाध्यमपि यतच ॥ 33 ॥

What do you want? Speak out your mind. Even if that be impracticable, I will no doubt try my best to accomplish your desired ends."

राजोबाब

सुरयो नाम राजाड़े शुभ्रभिश्र पश्रजितः ।

स्वक्त्वा राज्यं गृहं भाघामिंहे ते शरणं ततः ॥ 34 ॥

The King said: "O Muni! I am the King Suraha; defeated by my enemy, I have left my kingdom, palace, and wife and wife and have come to your refuge."

यदाझापयसे ब्रह्मस्तदं घन्सितपर: ।

कन्धियामि न मे जाता स्वद्यः: पृथिवीतले ॥ 35 ॥

O Brāhmaṇa! I am ready to do whatever you order me; on this surface of the earth there is no one but you who can protect me.

गुव्यो मे भयं घोरं प्राप्तोउम्यहु त्वतितकम् ।

ग्रायस् मुनिशादूलं शरणागततस्वल ॥ 36 ॥

Now I am very much terrified by my enemy; therefore I have come to you. O Muni! You protect those who come to seek your refuge; I have now come here to seek your shelter; so save me from this danger."

झशिकताव

निर्भयं त्रस रोजेन्द्र नात्र ते श्रवः किल ।

आगमिष्यन्ति बलिनो निश्चयं तपसो बलात् ॥ 37 ॥

The Maharṣi said: “O King! Stay here without

any fear; none of your enemies would be able to enter this hermitage by my power of tapasyā, even if they be very powerful.

नात्र हिंसा प्रकर्निया वनवृत्त्या नृपोतम ।

कर्तेयं जीवनं शस्तै-निंवारफलमुतकैः ॥ 38 ॥

O Best of Kings! You will not be allowed to kill animals here; you will have to sustain yourself on this wild rice, roots and fruits, etc., as the rules of the forest living permit.

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य चयः शुत्वा निर्भयः स नुपस्तदा ।

उवासाभप्र एवासी फलमूलाशनः शुधि: ॥ 39 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus hearing his words, the King began to live there, with all purity and without any fear, on roots and fruits.

कदाधित्य नुपस्तत्र शुक्ष्छ्छायां समाधितः ।

चिन्त्यामास चितातों गृह् एव गताशय: ॥ 40 ॥

राज्ये मे शुत्रधिः प्राप्तं सेन्द्रेः पायाते: सदा ।

संपीडिता: स्युतोंकास्तैतुंचारोरितोत्रिः ॥ 41 ॥

Once the King, while taking rest under the shade of a tree, while thinking of various things, thought of his own house thus: "My enemies have, no doubt, acquired my kingdom, but they are vicious and wicked, shameless Mlecchas and always addicted to sinful deeds; certainly they are tormenting my subjects.

गजाछ़ तुराग: सर्वे दुर्बलान भट्यवर्जितः ।

जाताः: स्युनीत्र सन्देशः: ग्रुशणा परीपितिहतः ॥ 4 2 ॥

My elephants and horses are not regularly getting their food and have all become powerless; certainly they are suffering very much from my enemies.

सेवका मम सर्वे ते शनुर्णां वश्चतिनतः ।

दुःखित एव जाताः स्युः पालिता ये यमा पुग ॥ 4 3 ॥

All the servants that were nourished by me before are now all suffering from troubles, having been subjected by my enemies.

धनं मे सुदुर्घारिसुद्वायपरे: परैः ।

द्वृतासवभुविष्यादिव्याने स्यामाग्रिगत किल ॥ 44 ॥

The wicked enemies are certainly squandering

Book V Chapter XXXII

away my hoarded wealth to bad immoral purposes in gambling, drinking and in revelling with prostitutes.

कोश्रार्यं कलिथन्ति व्यसनैः पायबुद्धः ।

न पाखदानपिणुणा नलैच्छास्ते मनिजणोपे में ॥ 45 ॥

Those Mleccchas and my ministers are always intent on vicious acts; they do not know who are the proper persons to be given charities; so they will no doubt exhaust away my coffers in doing sinful acts."

इति चिन्तापरो राजा वृक्षमूलस्थितो यदा ।

तद्वाजगाम वैश्यस्तु काश्रदातिपरस्तथा ॥ 46 ॥

While the King was thus meditating, seated at the root of a tree, there came one man of the Vaiśya caste looking very distressed.

यूरेण पुरतो दृष्टः पार्थे तजोपरेशितः ।

पणछ्त तं गूपः कोजीस कुण एवागातो वनम् ॥ 47 ॥

The King saw and instantly bade him take his seat beside him; then the King asked the Vaiśya: "O Noble One! Of what caste are you? Whence are you coming to this forest? What is your name? What for you look so pale and distressed? What calamity has befallen to you?

कोसि कमाव्छ दौनोसि सहितः शोकपीडितः ।

बृहि सर्वे महाभाग मैत्री साप्तपरीं मत ॥ 4 8 ॥

O Good One! Two persons become friends whenever they speak seven words amongst them; according to this rule I am your friend; tell me, therefore, truly all these things."

व्यास उवाच

तच्छुला वचनं रात्रसमुवाच विशोनम: ।

उविव्यय स्थिति भूत्वा मत्वा साधुसूसामात्म ॥ 49 ॥

Vyāsa said: The Vaiśya, hearing these words from the King, took his seat and felt himself much relieved and thinking that he has met with a saint, began to speak thus:

धैर्य उवाच

मिगाई धैर्यजातीयः समाधिनानि विश्रतः ।

धनवान्यर्मिनुण: सत्यवाननमुक: ॥ 50 ॥

"O my Friend! I belong to the Vaiśya caste; my name is Samādhi; I was rich, never I had my any jealousy towards anybody; always I used to speak truth and was devoted to religious acts.

पुत्रवृत्तरिंस्तरोई धनलुब्धीरसाधुधिः ।

'कृपणेति मियं कृत्वा त्यक्त्वा मायां सुदुस्त्यजाम् ।

स्वजनेच सर्वस्तः प्राणतोद्यिन वनागुरु वै ॥ 51 ॥

कोशिस त्वं भायवात्यामासि कथयस्य प्रियाधुना ।

My wife and sons are very greedy of money and are irreligious; so they cut off all their affections and connections with me, very difficult to cut though, and have driven me out of the house on the pretext that I am very miserly. Thus forsaken by my relatives, I have now come to this forest. You look to be a fortunate man; therefore kindly, O Dear One! give me now your introduction and oblige.

राजाधव

सुयो नाम राजाऊं हरसुधिभः पीडितोभवम् ॥ 52 ॥

प्राणोटिभ्य गतराज्योउर अमिनिधः परिवहितः ।

विद्या त्वमत्र मित्रं मे मिलितोसि विशोतम ॥ 53 ॥

The King said: “I am the King Suratha; lately I had a defeat from the dacoits; moreover my ministers deceived me; consequently I am deprived of my kingdom and have now come here. O Best of Vaśiyas! Fortunately you have come to me today as my friend.

सुखेन विहृतिथावो वनेत्र शुभपादेपे ।

गोके तव गहावृष्टे सस्थो भव विशोधनम ॥ 54 ॥

अत्रेच च यथाकामं सुखं तिह मया सह ।

We two will repose here gladly in this beautiful forest covered with trees. O Intelligent One! Now quite your sorrow; be calm and quiet and rest with me, at your leisure, here happily."

སྟོལ་ཀྱི་བྱི

कुटुर्बे मे निरालबं मया शीने सुखःखितम् ।

भविष्यिति च चिन्तातं व्याशिकोपेलपतिभन् ॥ 55 ॥

The Vaïsya said: "O King! My friends and relatives must have been helpless, very sorrowful

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

and they are distressed at my absence; they must have been troubled very much by diseases and misfortunes no doubt and have become very anxious.

भार्विद्रे सुखं नो वा पुरवेईे न वा सुखम् ।

इति चिन्तातुंरं चेते न वे शाप्यति भूयिपि ॥ 56 ॥

O King! I cannot remain quiet; my mind is being troubled with the thought how my wife and sons are spending their times now—in pain or happiness?

कटा उस्ये सुतं घायाँ गृहं स्वजनमेव च ।

स्वस्थं न मवनगो राजनूहिष्चिताकुलें भूश्म ॥57 ॥

I am always thinking when I would see again my sons, wife, relatives, friends, acquaintances and my house? I cannot make me calm and quiet."

राजोबाच

वैनिरस्तोत्र सि पुरावीरसद्धुर्जे: सूबालिजीः ।

तान्यूहा किं सुखें तेउघा घबिध्यति महामते ॥ 58 ॥

The King said: “O Intelligent One! What pleasure can you expect to see your wicked sons and treacherous relatives who have driven you out of your house?

हितकारी वर: श्रादुर्ःखादा: सुहदः कुतः ।

तस्माल्स्वं मनः कृत्वा विहार्त्व मया सह ॥ 59 ॥

Even the enemies are far better, provided they do good to us; what sorts of friends are they who impose on us afflictions and sorrows. Do you, therefore, make your mind calm and quiet and remain here in greatest peace and happiness."

ईपर उचाच

मनो मे न स्थरं राजन्मवत्यहा सुदुःखितम् ।

चिन्तायाज कुटुब्बस्य दुस्त्यजस्य दुरातमिधः ॥ 60 ॥

The Vaiśya said: “O King! Even those that are wicked and cruel cannot quit their relatives. Today my mind is greatly agitated with the thought of my relatives; I cannot remain quiet.”

राजोवाच

ममापि राजजं दुःखं दुनोति किल मानसम् ।

भृछाजोडा मुनि शान्ते शोकानाशमीक्षायम् ॥ 61 ॥

The King said: “My mind too, is incessantly troubled with the thought of my kingdom. Come; let both of us go to the Muni and ask him what is the medicine for the cure of these our mental agonies.”

व्यास उवाच

इति कृत्वा मार्ति तौ तु राजा वैय्यक्षु जमतुः ।

भूमि तौ विनयोपेते प्रधुं शोकस्य काराणम् ॥ 62 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! Thus making their determinations, they went humbly to the Muni to ask him what were the causes of their sorrows?

गत्वा ते प्रपिष्यताह् राजा ऋषिमनुत्तमम् ।

आर्याने सव्यगराने: शान्ते शान्तिम्युपगताः ॥ 63 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे पद्यकन्वभे

द्वार्षिणो5यायः 11 32 11

The King then went close to him and bowing down before him, took his seat and began to ask calmly and quietly the Muni who was sitting calm and serene.

Here ends the Thirty-second Chapter of the Fifth Book on the King Suratha's going

to the forest in the Mahāpurānam,

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

[1] 2017年1月1日

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

