[Ch 1 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Anamajeya asked: O Lord! I have heard all that you have described about the sweet nectar-like characteristics of the King of the Solar and the Lunar dynasties. Now kindly describe the real Tattva of the Virāt Form of the Great Devi and how She was worshipped in every Manvantara by the Regent of that Manvantara and the Kings thereof.
NEW CORR ENG ──► asked :-- “O Lord! I have heard all that you have described about the sweet nectar-like characters of the Kings of the Solar and the Lunar dynasties. Now kindly describe the real Tattva of the Virāṭ Form of the Great Devī and how She was worshipped in every Manvantara by the Regent of that Manvantara and the Kings thereof.

[Ch 1 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In what part of the year, and in which place, under what circumstances and in what form and with what Mantras was the Devi worshipped? I am very anxious to hear all this, O, Guru!, In fact, despite the gross forms of the Adya Saku, the Devi Bhagavati by concentrating attention to which, I can have the power to understand the subtle forms of the Devi and Lean get the highest good in this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In what part of the year and in which place, under what circumstances and in what form and with what Mantras was the Devī worshipped? I am very anxious to hear all this. O Guru! In fact describe the gross forms of the Ādyā Śakti, the Devī Bhagavatī by concentrating attention to Which, I can have the power to understand the subtle forms of the Devī and I can get the highest good in this world.”

[Ch 1 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Now hear: I am describing to you in 'detail' about the 'worship' of the 'Devī Bhagāvatī that leads of the 'welfare' of the 'Whole World;' the 'hearing' of 'which' or 'the 'practicle' of which enables one to get the highest 'good. In 'dily of yore,' the Devarṣi Narāda asked 'Nārāyāna' abhāli this very point; 'I will' how tell 'you what' the Bhagavān, the 'Prāmlagatār' of the 'Yogā Tāśva, advised Nāradā'.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Now hear. I am describing to you in detail about the worship of the Devī Bhagavatī that leads to the welfare of the Whole World; the hearing of which or the practice of which enables one to get the highest good. In days of yore, the Devarṣi Nārada asked Nārāyaṇa about this very point; I will now tell you what the Bhagavān, the Promulgator of the Yoga Tattva, advised Nārada.

[Ch 1 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once on a time the all.powerful Devarsi Nārada entitled with all the Yogic powers, and bogunpom the body of Brahma, was traveling all over this earth and came to the hermitage of the Rsi Narayana. Resting a while, and the troubles of the journey owed he bowed down to the Yogi Nārāyāda and asked Him what you ask me now.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once on a time the all powerful Devarṣi Nārada entitled with all the Yogic powers, and born from the body of Brahmā was travelling all over this earth and came to the hermitage of the Ṛṣi Nārāyaṇa. Resting a while, and the troubles of the journey over, he bowed down to the Yogi Nārāyaṇa and asked Him what you ask me now.

[Ch 1 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada said: O Deva Deva Mahādeva! O, Thou, the Ancient Puruṣa, the Excellent One! O Omniscient! O Thou, the Holder of the Universe! O Thou Who art the repository of the good qualities and Who art praised by all!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- O Deva Deva Mahādeva! O Thou, the Ancient Puruṣa, the Excellent One! 8-9. O Omniscient ! O Thou, the Holder of the Universe! O Thou Who art the repository of the good qualities and Who art praised by all!

[Ch 1 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Deva! Now tell me what is the ultimate cause of this Universe: whence has this Universe its origin? And how does it rest? To whom does it take refuge?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Deva! Now tell me what is the ultimate cause of this Universe: whence has this Universe its origin? And how does it rest? To whom does it take refuge?

[Ch 1 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Where does it dissolve in the time of Pralaya? Where do all the Karmas of these beings go to? And what Object is that whose knowledge destroys for ever the Māyā, the Cause of all this Moha (illusion)?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Where does it dissolve in the time of Pralaya? Where do all the Karmas of these beings go to? And what Object is that whose knowledge destroys forever the Māyā, the Cause of all this Moha (illusion)?

[Ch 1 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whose worship, what Japam, and Whose meditation in the lotus of heart are to be made, by which, O Deva! the knowledge of Paramātman rises in the heart, as the darkness of the night vanishes by the rising of the Sun.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whose worship, what Japam, and Whose meditation in the lotus of heart are to he made, by which, O Deva! the knowledge of Paramātman rises in the heart, as the darkness of the night vanishes by the rising of the Sun.

[Ch 1 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Deva! Kindly reply to these my question in such a clear manner as the ignorant people in this Sarhsāra can understand and get themselves across this ocean of Sarhsāra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Deva! Kindly reply to these my questions in such a clear manner as the ignorant people in this Samsāra can understand and get themselves across this ocean of Samsāra.

[Ch 1 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Thus asked by the Devarṣi, the ancient Nārāyana, the Best of the Munis, the great Yogi gladly spoke:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Thus asked by the Devarṣi, the ancient Nārāyaṇa, the Best of the Munis, the great Yogi gladly spoke :--

[Ch 1 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O Devarsī! Hear I will now speak to you all the Tattvas of this world, knowing which the mortal never falls into the illusion of this world."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devarṣi! Hear I will now speak to you all the Tattvas of this world, knowing which the mortal never falls into the illusion

[Ch 1 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Child! The original cause of this Universe is the Devi Mahā Māyā (the image of the Supreme Caityanya Para Brahma); this is the opinion of the Rśis, the Devas, Gandharvas, and other intelligent person.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Child! The original cause of this Universe is the Devī Mahā Māyā (the image of the Supreme Caitanya Para Brahmā); this is the opinion of the Ṛṣis, the Devas, Gandharvas, and other intelligent persons.

[Ch 1 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is written in the Vedas and other Sāstras that the Devi Bhagavatī, worshipped by all in the Universe, creates, preserves and destroys the Universe by the influence of Her three Gūnas. I now describe to you the nature of the Devi, worshipped by the Siddhas, Gandharvas and Rṣis, the mere remembering of Whom destroys all sins, and gives final liberation Mokṣa (and Dharma, Artha, and Kāma also).
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is written in the Vedas and other Śāstras that the Devī Bhagavatī, worshipped by all in the Universe, creates, preserves and destroys the Universe by the influence of Her three Guṇas. I now describe to you the nature of the Devī, worshipped by the Siddhas, Gandharbas and Ṛṣis, the mere remembering of Whom destroys all sins, and gives final liberation Mokṣa (and Dharma, Artha, and Kama also).

[Ch 1 Verse 19-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The powerful Svāyambhava Manu, the First, the husband of Śatarūpā, the prosperous and the Ruler of all the Manvantars worshipped the sinless Prajāpati Brahmā, his Father with due devotion and satisfied Him when the Grandsire of the Lokas, the Hiranyagarbha spoke to his son: “The excellent worship of the Devi should be done by you. By Her Grace, O Son, your work of creating worlds will be successful.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The powerful Svāyambhuva Manu, the First, the husband of Śatarūpā, the prosperous and the Ruler of all the Manvantaras worshipped the sinless Prajāpati Brahmā, his Father with due devotion and satisfied Him when the Grandsire of the Lokas, the Hiraṇyagarbha spoke to his son :-- The excellent worship of the Devī should be done by you. By Her Grace, O Son, your work of creating worlds will be successful.

[Ch 1 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus spoken by Brahmā, the Bibhu Svāyambhūva Manu, the Virāt incarnate, worshipped the World Mother with great austerities. And with his concentrated devotion, he satisfied the Devi Devesī and began to chant hymns to Her, the First-born, the Māyā, the Śakti of all, and the Cause of all causes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus spoken by Brahmā, the Bibhu Svāyambhuva Manu, the Virāṭ incarnate, worshipped the World Mother with great austerities. And with his concentrated devotion, he satisfied the Devī Deveśī and began to chant hymns to Her, the First-born, the Māyā, the Śakti of all, and the Cause of all causes.

[Ch 1 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Manu said: “Thou art Brahmā, the ocean of the Vedas, Kṛṣṇa, the abode of Laksmī, Purandara. I bow down again and again to Thee, the Deveśī, the Cuse of Māyā, the Cause of this Universe. Thou holdest śaṅkha (the conchshell), cakra, gadā, etc., in Thy hands and Thou residest in the heart of Nārāyaṇa; Thou art the Vedas incarnate, the World Mother, ‘the Auspicious One, bowed down by all the Deva, and the Knower of the Three Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Manu said :-- Thou art Brahmā, the ocean of the Vedas, Kṛṣṇa, the abode of Lakṣmī, Purandara. I bow down again and again to Thee, the Deveśī, the Cause of Māyā, the Cause of this Universe. Thou holdest śaṅkha (the conchshell), cakra, gadā, etc., in Thy hands and Thou residest in the heart of Nārāyaṇa; Thou art the Vedas incarnate, the World Mother, the Auspicious One, bowed down by all the Devas, and the Knower of the Three Vedas.

[Ch 1 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Thou, endowed with all powers and glory! O Mahāmāye! Mahābhāge! Mahodaye! (the Self-manifested). 'thou residest as the better half of Mahā Deva, end Thou dost all what are dear of Him. Thou art te most beloved of Nanda, the Cowherd (in the form of Mahā Māyā, the daughter who concealed Kṛṣṭa and slipped from the hands of Kamsa and gotup in the air and remained as Vindhyāvāsini; alo in the form of Śri Kṛṣṇa), Thou gavest much pleasure and wert the cause of all the festivities; Thou talest away the fear due to plague, etc., Thou art worshiped by the Devas. O Thou, the auspicious Bhagvatī! Thou art the welfare of all incarnate; Thou fructifiest the desires of all to success!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Thou, endowed with all powers and glory! O Mahāmāye! Mahābhāge! Mahodaye! (the Self-manifested). Thou residest as the better half of Mahā Deva, and Thou dost all what are dear to Him. Thou art the most beloved of Nanda, the Cow-herd (in the form of Mahā Māyā, the daughter who concealed Kṛṣṇa and slipped from the hands of Kaṃsa and got up in the air and remained as Vindhyāvāsinī; also in the form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa). Thou gavest much pleasure and wert the cause of all the festivities; Thou takest away the fear due to plague, etc.; Thou art worshipped by the Devas. O Thou, the auspicious Bhagavatī! Thou art the welfare of all incarnate; Thou fructifiest the desires of all to success!

[Ch 1 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou art the One to Whom all take refuge and Thou removest their all the dangers; O Thou, the three-eyed! Gaurī Nārāyaṇī! Obeisance to Thee. I bow down to that ocean of all brightness and splendour, without beginning or end, the One Consciousness, wherein this endless Universe rises and remains interwoven therein.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thou art the One to Whom all take refuge and Thou removest their all the dangers; O Thou the three-eyed! Gaurī! Nārāyanī! Obeisance to Thee. I bow down to that ocean of all brightness and splendour, without beginning or end, the One Consciousness, wherein this endless Universe rises and remains interwoven therein.

[Ch 1 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I bow down to the Devi, whose Gracious Glance enables Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara to do their respective works of creating, preserving, and destroying the Universe. O Devi! Thou art the Only One, whom all can bows, since the lotus-born Brahmā, terrified by the horrible Daityas, was freed by Thy prowess only.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I bow down to the Devī, whose Gracious Glance enables Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara to do their respective works of creating, preserving, and destroying the Universe. O Devī! Thou art the Only One, whom all can bow, since the lotus-born Brahmā, terrified by the horrible Daityas, was freed by Thy prowess only.

[Ch 1 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Bhagavati! Thou art modesty, fame, memory, lustre; Thou art Lakṣmī, Girijā, the daughter of Himālaya, Thou art Satī, the Dakṣa's daughter; Thou art the Sāvitrī the Mother of the Vedas, Thou art the intelligence of all and Thou art the cause of fearlessness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Bhagavatī! Thou art modesty, fame, memory, lustre; Thou art Lakṣmī, Girijā, the daughter of Himālayā, Thou art Satī, the Dakṣa’s daughter; Thou art the Sāvitrī the Mother of the Vedas, Thou art the intelligence of all and Thou art the cause of fearlessness.

[Ch 1 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So I now engage myself in reciting Thy Japam, Thy hymns and Thy worship. I meditate on Thee and see Thy form within my heart and hear Thy praises.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So I now engage myself reciting Thy Japam, Thy hymns and Thy worship. I meditate on Thee and see Thy form within my heart and hear Thy praises.

[Ch 1 Verse 34-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Be graciously pleased on mie, O Devi! It is by Thy Grace that Bhāthāti's the Revealer of the Four Vedas; Vīṣṇu is the Lord of Lakṣmī, Indira is the Lord of the Devas and of the three worlds; Varuna is the Lord of waters, Kubēra is the Lord of wealth, Yāma is 'the Lord of the dead, Nānrta is 'the Lord of the Rāksāsas, and Soniā is the Lord of the water element and praised by the three worlds. Therefore, O Auspicious World Mother! I bow down again and again to Thee."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Be graciously pleased on me, O Devī! It is by Thy Grace that Brahmā is the Revealer of the Four Vedas, Viṣṇu is the Lord of Lakṣmī, Indra is the Lord of the Devas and of the three worlds; Varuṇa is the Lord of waters, Kuvera is the Lord of wealth, Yama is the Lord of the dead, Nairrita is the Lord of the Rākṣasas, and Soma is the Lord of the water element and praised by the three worlds. Therefore, O Auspicious World Mother! I bow down again and again to Thee.

[Ch 1 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa, said: O. Child! When, Svāyambhaya Manu, the son of Brahma, chanted thus the hymns to the Ādyā, Śakī Bhagvatī Nārāyaṇī, She, became pleased, and spoke to him thus;
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Child! When Svayambhuva Manu, the son of Brahmā, chanted thus the hymns to the Ādyā Śakti Bhagavatī Nārāyanī, She became pleased and spoke to him thus :--

[Ch 1 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi said: "O'King, the Brahmā's son! I am pleased with your devoted worship and hymns; so ask' bōon from Me that you desire."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī said :-- “O King, the Brahmā’s son! I am pleased with your devoted worship and hymns; so ask boon from Me that you desire.”

[Ch 1 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Manu said: "O Devi! If Thou art graciously pleased, grant that my creation be finished without any hitch."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Manu said :-- “O Devī! If Thou art graciously pleased, grant that my creation be finished without any hitch.”

[Ch 1 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi said: 1. O: King: not King: By-My blessing, your work of creation will be completed without any obstruction.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī said :-- “O King of Kings! By My blessing, your work of creation will be completed without any obstruction.

[Ch 1 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And by your punyā (merits) they will no doubt multiply on and on. He who reads with devotion this hymn (stotra) composed by yōu, will get'sōns, fame and beauty in the world and, in the end, he will be entitled to get the Highest Place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And by your puṇya (merits) they will no doubt multiply on and on. He who reads with devotion this hymn (stotra) composed by you, will get sons, fame and beauty in the world and, in the end, he will be entitled to get the Highest Place.

[Ch 1 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The people will have powers unopposed by anybody, will get wealth and grains, will get victory everywhere, and happiness; and his enemies will be ruined.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The people will have powers unopposed by anybody, will get wealth and grains, will get victory everywhere and happiness; and his enemies will be ruined.”

[Ch 1 Verse 43-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: "O-Child! The Devī Bhagavati Ādyā Śakti 'granted thus the desired bodh to Śvāyambhava' Manu' and vardisheh away at' onte from his sight.' Then the powerful Mīnu, obtaining thus the boon, śāpākā to his father of father! Now give me a softāry phāte' where I canvorship' the Devī with sachchīsā and do him work of eating a good number of people.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- “O Child! The Devī Bhagavatī Ādyā Śakti granted thus the desired boon to Svāyambhuva Manu and vanished away at once from his sight.” Then the powerful Manu, obtaining thus the boon, spoke to his father :-- O Father! Now give me a solitary place where I can worship the Devī with sacrifices and do my work of creating a good number of people.

[Ch 1 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this the words of the son, the Prajapati, the Lord thought over the matter for a long time: "How this work would be done?" and the work
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing thus the words of the son, the Prajāpati, the Lord thought over the matter for a long time :-- “How this work would be done?

[Ch 1 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Alas! I have spent six endless time in this work of creation; but as yet nothing has been done. For the Earth, the receptacle of all the Jivas is submerged in water and has gone down to the Rasātala'. What is to be done to it? There is one hope and that is this:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Alas! I have spent an endless time in this work of creation; but as yet nothing has been done. For the Earth, the receptacle of all the Jivās is submerged in water and has gone down to the Rasātala. What is to be done now? There is only one hope and that is this :--

[Ch 1 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If the Bhagavān, the Primeval Person, under Whose Command I am engaged in this work of creation, helps me in this work of mine, no doubt it will be accomplished then and then only.” Here ends the First Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description of the worlds in the Mahāpurāṇam, Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- If the Bhagavān, the Primeval Person, under Whose Command I am engaged in this work of creation, helps me in this work of mine, no doubt it will be accomplished then and then only.” Here ends the First Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description of the worlds in the Mahāpurāṇam, Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
