CHAPTER I

On the description of the worlds

जनमेजय उवाच ।
सूर्यचन्द्रान्वयोत्थानां नृपाणां सत्कथाश्रितम् ।
चरितं भवता प्रोक्तं श्रुतं तदमृतास्पदम् ॥ १॥

अधुना श्रोतुमिच्छामि सा देवी जगदम्बिका ।
मन्वन्तरेषु सर्वेषु यद्यद्रूपेण पूज्यते ॥ २॥

Anamajeya asked: O Lord! I have heard all that you have described about the sweet nectar-like characteristics of the King of the Solar and the Lunar dynasties. Now kindly describe the real Tattva of the Virāt Form of the Great Devi and how She was worshipped in every Manvantara by the Regent of that Manvantara and the Kings thereof.


(शरीरेण च देवेशी पूजनीया फलप्रदा ।
येनैव मन्त्रबीजेन यत्र यत्र च पूज्यते ॥)
यस्मिन्यस्मिंश्च वै स्थाने येन येन च कर्मणा ।
देव्या विराट्स्वरूपस्य वर्णनं च यथातथम् ॥ ३॥

येन ध्यानेन तत्सूक्ष्मे स्वरूपे स्यान्मतेर्गतिः ।
तत्सर्वं वद विप्रर्षे येन श्रेयोऽहमाप्नुयाम् ॥ ४ ॥

In what part of the year, and in which place, under what circumstances and in what form and with what Mantras was the Devi worshipped? I am very anxious to hear all this, O, Guru!, In fact, despite the gross forms of the Adya Saku, the Devi Bhagavati by concentrating attention to which, I can have the power to understand the subtle forms of the Devi and Lean get the highest good in this world.

व्यास उवाच ।
शृणु राजन् प्रवक्ष्यामि देव्याराधनमुत्तमम् ।
यत्कृतेन श्रुतेनापि नरः श्रेयोऽत्र विन्दते ॥ ५॥

एवमेतन्नारदेन पृष्टो नारायणः पुरा ।
तस्मै यदुक्तवान्देवो योगचर्याप्रवर्तकः ॥ ६॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Now hear: I am describing to you in 'detail' about the 'worship' of the 'Devī Bhagāvatī that leads of the 'welfare' of the 'Whole World;' the 'hearing' of 'which' or 'the 'practicle' of which enables one to get the highest 'good. In 'dily of yore,' the Devarṣi Narāda asked 'Nārāyāna' abhāli this very point; 'I will' how tell 'you what' the Bhagavān, the 'Prāmlagatār' of the 'Yogā Tāśva, advised Nāradā'.

एकदा नारदः श्रीमान्पर्यटन्पृथिवीमिमाम् ।
नारायणाश्रमं प्राप्तो गतखेदश्च तस्थिवान् ॥ ७॥

तस्मै योगात्मने नत्वा ब्रह्मदेवतनूद्भवः ।
पर्यपृच्छदिमं चार्थं यत्पृष्टो भवतानघ ॥ ८॥

Once on a time the all.powerful Devarsi Nārada

entitled with all the Yogic powers, and bogunpom

the body of Brahma, was traveling all over this

earth and came to the hermitage of the Rsi

Narayana. Resting a while, and the troubles of the

journey owed he bowed down to the Yogi Nārāyāda

and asked Him what you ask me now. 

नारद उवाच ।
देवदेव महादेव पुराणपुरुषोत्तम ।
जगदाधार सर्वज्ञ श्लाघनीयोरुसद्गुण ॥ ९॥

Nārada said: O Deva Deva Mahādeva! O, Thou, the Ancient Puruṣa, the Excellent One! O Omniscient! O Thou, the Holder of the Universe! O Thou Who art the repository of the good qualities and Who art praised by all!

जाततस्त्वमाएं यत्ने चद्यथेमित्यम् ।

जगते कृत एवेदे कृतश्रेद प्रतिहितम् ॥ १० ॥

O Deva! Now tell me what is the ultimate cause of this Universe: whence has this Universe its origin? And how does it rest? To whom does it take refuge?

कुतीर्नं प्रापुवात्यालते कुत्र सर्वफलोद्य: ।

केन न्जाने मारीय मोहम्पनीशमानुयात् ॥ ११ ॥

Where does it dissolve in the time of Pralaya? Where do all the Karmas of these beings go to? And what Object is that whose knowledge destroys for ever the Māyā, the Cause of all this Moha (illusion)?

क्यास्त्रैय कि जयेन किं ध्यानेनात्महक्जे ।

प्रकाशे जातते देह सत्यस्कंदीयं यथा ॥ १२ ॥

Whose worship, what Japam, and Whose meditation in the lotus of heart are to be made, by which, O Deva! the knowledge of Paramātman rises in the heart, as the darkness of the night vanishes by the rising of the Sun.

एतद्रफन्नोरते देह बृहि सर्वमीक्षितः ।

यथा लोकस्तदोर्वतमासे खंत्रवैहि ॥ १३ ॥

O Deva! Kindly reply to these my question in such a clear manner as the ignorant people in this Sarhsāra can understand and get themselves across this ocean of Sarhsāra.

व्यास उवाच

एवं देवक्षिणा पृष्टः प्राणीने मुनिसनामः ।

नारायणो मुहायोगी प्रतिनंचा खचोउक्षिति ॥ १४ ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus asked by the Devarṣi, the ancient Nārāyana, the Best of the Munis, the great Yogi gladly spoke:

नारायण खचाच

भ्यु पृ द्विषिंध्वारा जगतस्तल्युभुभम् ।

येन ज्ञानेन मल्यों हि जायते न जगादूभे ॥ 15 ॥

"O Devarsī! Hear I will now speak to you all the Tattvas of this world, knowing which the mortal never falls into the illusion of this world."

जगतस्तल्यमिव्ये देही प्रोक्ता मवारपि हि ।

श्रविषिवेद्यान्यदैर्यैन्यंशायि मनीविभि: ॥ 16 ॥

O Child! The original cause of this Universe is the Devi Mahā Māyā (the image of the Supreme Caityanya Para Brahma); this is the opinion of the Rśis, the Devas, Gandharvas, and other intelligent person.

सा जगत्सुजते देदी तया च प्रतिपाल्यते ।

तया च नाज्यते सर्वीमित प्रोक्ते गुणज्यात् ॥ 17 ॥

तत्या: स्वस्यं वक्ष्याति देख्या: सिद्धर्विधितम् ।

स्मरतां सर्वपापनं कामदं मोक्षदं तथा ॥ 18 ॥

It is written in the Vedas and other Sāstras that the Devi Bhagavatī, worshipped by all in the Universe, creates, preserves and destroys the Universe by the influence of Her three Gūnas. I now describe to you the nature of the Devi, worshipped by the Siddhas, Gandharvas and Rṣis, the mere remembering of Whom destroys all sins, and gives final liberation Mokṣa (and Dharma, Artha, and Kāma also).

मनु: स्वायम्भुसस्त्वा: पशुपुत्र: प्रतपावान् ।

शतकायपातिः: श्रीमान्सर्वमन्तराधिप: ॥ 19 ॥

स मनु: पितर्ते देवं प्रजायतिमकल्यम् ।

भक्त्या पर्शवत्सूर्ते नसुगवातमधूः सुतम् ॥ 20 ॥

पुत्र पुरु तस्य कामों देवतायाभनुतमम् ।

तद्धसादेन ते तात प्रजासर्गः प्रसिद्धाति ॥ 21 ॥

The powerful Svāyambhava Manu, the First, the husband of Śatarūpā, the prosperous and the Ruler of all the Manvantars worshipped the sinless Prajāpati Brahmā, his Father with due devotion and satisfied Him when the Grandsire of the Lokas, the Hiranyagarbha spoke to his son: “The excellent worship of the Devi should be done by you. By Her Grace, O Son, your work of creating worlds will be successful.”

एसुभृतः प्रजास्हा मनुः स्वाममुखो विगट् ।

जगधोर्निं तदा देवीं तयत्सदायिदक्षिपुः ॥ 2 2 ॥

Book VIII Chapter I

तृटाय देवीं देवेशी समाहितमति: किल ।

आषां मायां सर्वशनिके सर्वकारणकारणम् ॥ २३ ॥

Thus spoken by Brahmā, the Bibhu Svāyambhūva Manu, the Virāt incarnate, worshipped the World Mother with great austerities. And with his concentrated devotion, he satisfied the Devi Devesī and began to chant hymns to Her, the First-born, the Māyā, the Śakti of all, and the Cause of all causes.

मनुरुवाच

नमो नमसे देवेशि जगत्कारणकारणे ।

गड़ुच्कमवादुस्ते नारायणद्धादिशिते ॥ 24 ॥

वेदमूर्ते जगमाततः कारणत्यानलिपि।

दैद्वयप्रमाणजे सर्वदैवनुते शिये ॥ 25 ॥

Manu said: “Thou art Brahmā, the ocean of the Vedas, Kṛṣṇa, the abode of Laksmī, Purandara. I bow down again and again to Thee, the Deveśī, the Cuse of Māyā, the Cause of this Universe. Thou holdest śaṅkha (the conchshell), cakra, gadā, etc., in Thy hands and Thou residest in the heart of Nārāyaṇa; Thou art the Vedas incarnate, the World Mother, ‘the Auspicious One, bowed down by all the Deva, and the Knower of the Three Vedas.

महेश्वित महाभागे महागाये महोदये ।

महाविद्विभावासे महाविद्विभाषूरि ॥ 26 ॥

गोपेम्रस्य प्रिये ज्येहे महानन्दे महोत्से ।

महागारीभङ्गे ननो देहादिपुजिते ॥ 27 ॥

O Thou, endowed with all powers and glory! O Mahāmāye! Mahābhāge! Mahodaye! (the Self-manifested). 'thou residest as the better half of Mahā Deva, end Thou dost all what are dear of Him. Thou art te most beloved of Nanda, the Cowherd (in the form of Mahā Māyā, the daughter who concealed Kṛṣṭa and slipped from the hands of Kamsa and gotup in the air and remained as Vindhyāvāsini; alo in the form of Śri Kṛṣṇa), Thou gavest much pleasure and wert the cause of all the festivities; Thou talest away the fear due to plague, etc., Thou art worshiped by the Devas. O Thou, the auspicious Bhagvatī! Thou art the welfare of

all incarnate; Thou fructifiest the desires of all to success!

सर्वभंगतमांगस्ये शिके सर्वार्थसाधिके ।

शरणे व्याकके गौरि नारायणि नमो3स्तु ते ॥ 28 ॥

यात्रोंदे यया विश्रयोगे प्रोतं च सर्वथा ।

चैतन्यमेकमादानारहिते तेजसां निधिम् ॥ 29 ॥

Thou art the One to Whom all take refuge and Thou removest their all the dangers; O Thou, the three-eyed! Gaurī Nārāyaṇī! Obeisance to Thee. I bow down to that ocean of all brightness and splendour, without beginning or end, the One Consciousness, wherein this endless Universe rises and remains interwoven therein.

बहा यदीक्षणासर्क कांतीत च हीर: सदा ।

पालयस्यपि विश्रेश: संहर्ता यदनुद्यगृहत् ॥ ३० ॥

मधुकैटमर्षभूतभयानं: पदार्थभवः ।

यथ्या: स्तवेन मुमुचे घोरिद्वभयाव्युधे: ॥ ३१ ॥

I bow down to the Devi, whose Gracious Glance enables Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara to do their respective works of creating, preserving, and destroying the Universe. O Devi! Thou art the Only One, whom all can bows, since the lotus-born Brahmā, terrified by the horrible Daityas, was freed by Thy prowess only.

लं कृही: कांति: स्थूति: कांति: कलमा सिंगिता सती ।

दाङ्गप्राणी वेदभागी सिंगद्धारी सदास भया ॥ 32 ॥

O Bhagavati! Thou art modesty, fame, memory, lustre; Thou art Lakṣmī, Girijā, the daughter of Himālaya, Thou art Satī, the Dakṣa's daughter; Thou art the Sāvitrī the Mother of the Vedas, Thou art the intelligence of all and Thou art the cause of fearlessness.

सतीष्ये त्वां च न नस्यासीय पूजयासि जयासि च ।

ध्यायामि भावये वीक्षे शोभ्ये देवि प्रसीद में ॥ 33 ॥

So I now engage myself in reciting Thy Japam, Thy hymns and Thy worship. I meditate on Thee and see Thy form within my heart and hear Thy praises.

बहुना वेदनिधि: कृष्णो लक्ष्यायास: पुरन्दर: ।

त्रिलोक्षिपति: पाशी यादसांपतितनम: ॥ 34 ॥


कुक्रेये निर्धिनायो5 ध्यामो ते: परेतराद् ।

नैसही रखसां नाय: सोमो जातो ह्यामेव: ॥ ३ ५ ॥

त्रितोकबंदी लोकौरि मांधामाजूस्थक्रविति ।

नमसे5सु पुनर्घैयो जगन्यातनैमो 'वमः ॥ ३ ६ ॥

Be graciously pleased on mie, O Devi! It is by Thy Grace that Bhāthāti's the Revealer of the Four Vedas; Vīṣṇu is the Lord of Lakṣmī, Indira is the Lord of the Devas and of the three worlds; Varuna is the Lord of waters, Kubēra is the Lord of wealth, Yāma is 'the Lord of the dead, Nānrta is 'the Lord of the Rāksāsas, and Soniā is the Lord of the water element and praised by the three worlds. Therefore, O Auspicious World Mother! I bow down again and again to Thee."

श्रीनारायण उवाच ।
एवं स्तुता भगवती दुर्गा नारायणी परा ।
प्रसन्ना प्राह देवर्षे ब्रह्मपुत्रमिदं वचः ॥ ३७॥

 Nārāyaṇa, said: O. Child! When, Svāyambhaya Manu, the son of Brahma, chanted thus the hymns to the Ādyā, Śakī Bhagvatī Nārāyaṇī, She, became pleased, and spoke to him thus;

देव्युवाच ।
वरं वरय राजेन्द्र ब्रह्मपुत्र यदिच्छसि ।
प्रसन्नाहं स्तवेनात्र भक्त्या चाराधनेन च ॥ ३८॥

The Devi said: "O'King, the Brahmā's son! I am pleased with your devoted worship and hymns; so ask' bōon from Me that you desire."

मनुरुवाच ।
यदि देवि प्रसन्नासि भक्त्या कारुणिकोत्तमे ।
तदा निर्विघ्नतः सृष्टिः प्रजायाः स्यात्तवाज्ञया ॥ ३९॥

Manu said: "O Devi! If Thou art graciously pleased, grant that my creation be finished without any hitch."


देव्युवाच ।
प्रजासर्गः प्रभवतु ममानुग्रहतः किल ।
निर्विघ्नेन च राजेन्द्र वृद्धिश्चाप्युत्तरोत्तरम् ॥ ४०॥

The Devi said: 1. O: King: not King: By-My blessing, your work of creation will be completed without any obstruction.

यः कक्षित्यदते स्तैंगं मंद्रकेशं तैलुर्गी सदा ।

तेनां विदा प्रजार्षिद्ध: क्षिती: कौलुद्वेः: क्षितु ॥ 41 ॥

And by your punyā (merits) they will no doubt multiply on and on. He who reads with devotion this hymn (stotra) composed by yōu, will get'sōns, fame and beauty in the world and, in the end, he will be entitled to get the Highest Place.

जायन्ते धनधान्यानि शक्तिरप्रहता नृणाम् ।
सर्वत्र विजयो राजन् सुखं शत्रुपरिक्षयः ॥ ४२॥

The people will have powers unopposed by anybody, will get wealth and grains, will get victory everywhere, and happiness; and his enemies will be ruined.

श्रीनारायण उवाच ।
एवं दत्त्वा वरान् देवी मनवे ब्रह्मसूनवे ।
अन्तर्धानं गता चासीत्पश्यतस्तस्य धीमतः ॥ ४३॥

अथ लब्धवरो राजा ब्रह्मपुत्रः प्रतापवान् ।
ब्रह्माणमब्रवीत्तात स्थानं मे दीयतां रहः ॥ ४४॥

यत्राहं समधिष्ठाय प्रजाः स्रक्ष्यामि पुष्कलाः ।
यक्ष्यामि यज्ञैर्देवेशं तत्समादिश माचिरम् ॥ ४५॥

इति पुत्रवचः श्रुत्वा प्रजापतिपतिर्विभुः ।
चिन्तयामास सुचिरं कथं कार्यं भवेदिदम् ॥ ४६॥

Nārāyaṇa said: "O-Child! The Devī Bhagavati Ādyā Śakti 'granted thus the desired bodh to Śvāyambhava' Manu' and vardisheh away at' onte from his sight.' Then the powerful Mīnu, obtaining thus the boon, śāpākā to his father of father! Now give me a softāry phāte' where I canvorship' the Devī with sachchīsā and do him work of eating a good number of people.

इति पुत्रवचः श्रुत्वा प्रजापतिपतिर्विभुः ।
चिन्तयामास सुचिरं कथं कार्यं भवेदिदम् ॥ ४६॥

Hearing this the words of the son, the Prajapati, the Lord thought over the matter for a long time: "How this work would be done?" and the work

सृजतो मे गतः कालो विपुलोऽनन्तसङ्ख्यकः ।
धरा वार्भिः स्तुता मग्ना रसं याताखिलाश्रया ॥ ४७॥

"Alas! I have spent six endless time in this work of creation; but as yet nothing has been done. For the Earth, the receptacle of all the Jivas is submerged in water and has gone down to the Rasātala'. What is to be done to it? There is one hope and that is this:

इदं मच्चिन्तितं कार्यं भगवानादिपूरुषः ।
करिष्यति सहायो मे यदादेशेऽहमाश्रितः ॥ ४८॥

इति श्रीमद्देवीभागवते महापुराणेऽष्टादशसाहस्र्यां
संहितायामष्टमस्कन्धे भुवनकोशप्रसङ्गे
देव्या मनवे वरदानवर्णनं नाम प्रधमोऽध्यायः ॥ ८.१॥
If the Bhagavān, the Primeval Person, under Whose Command I am engaged in this work of creation, helps me in this work of mine, no doubt it will be accomplished then and then only.”

Here ends the First Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description of the worlds in the Mahāpurāṇam, Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.