[Ch 6 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! On the Daitya Tāmra becoming unconscious, Mahisa became very angry and, raising his Gādā (club), came up before the Devas and said: "Devas! O Ye powerless like crows; wait; with one stroke of Gadā, I will kill you."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! On the Daitya Tāmra becoming unconscious Mahiṣa became very angry and, raising his Gadā (club), came up before the Devas and said :-- “Devas! O Ye powerless like crows; wait; with one stroke of Gadā, I will kill you.”

[Ch 6 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, the powerful Mahisa swollen with pride, seeing Indra before him mounted on his elephant, instantly struck him on his arms.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, the powerful Mahiṣa swelled with pride, seeing Indra before him mounted on his elephant instantly struck him on his arms.

[Ch 6 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra, again lost no time, and struck violently with his thunderbolt and cut the Dānava's Gādā into pieces, and came up very close, wanting to strike at him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra, again lost no time, and struck violently with his thunderbolt and cut the Dānava’s Gadā into pieces, and came up very close, wanting to strike at him.

[Ch 6 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mahisa, too, becoming very angry took up his lustrous sword and came to Indra to attack him with this weapon.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mahiṣa, too, becoming very angry took up his lustrous sword and came to Indra to attack him with this weapon.

[Ch 6 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► A fight then occurred between the two, terrible to all the Lokas and wonderful to the Munis, where various weapons were showered from both the sides.
NEW CORR ENG ──► A fight then occurred between the two, terrible to all the Lokas and wonderful to the Munis, where various weapons were showered from both the sides.

[Ch 6 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Demon Mahisa spread then his Sāmbhari Māyā, destructive to all the worlds and fascinating to the Munis.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Demon Mahiṣa spread then his Śāmvarī Māyā, destructive to all the worlds and fascinating to the Munis.

[Ch 6 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hundreds and hundreds of powerful buffalo-like appearances resembling Mahisa became, then, visible on the battle-field; they all began to kill the Deva forces with weapons in their hands.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hundreds and hundreds of powerful buffalo-like appearances resembling Mahiṣa became, then, visible on the battle-field; they all began to kill the Deva forces with weapons in their hands.

[Ch 6 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing this majic of the Dānava, Indra became thunderstruck and very much confounded with terror. Varuna, Kubera, the Lord of wealth, Yama, Fire, Moon, Sun, and other Devas all fled in terror. Indra then, being surrounded by the network of magic, began to call Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa in his mind.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing this magic of the Dānava, Indra became thunderstruck and very much confounded with terror. Varuṇa, Kuvera, the Lord of wealth, Yama, Fire, Moon, Sun, and other Devas all fled with terror. Indra then, being surrounded by the network of magic, began to call Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa in his mind.

[Ch 6 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At the instant when they were called in mind, Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa riding on respective conveyances Swan, Garuda, and Bull, came up there with best weapons in their hands for Indra's protection.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At the instant when they were called in mind, Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa riding on respective conveyances Swan, Garuḍa, and Bull, came up there with best weapons in their hands for Indra’s protection.

[Ch 6 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Visnu seeing the play of that fascinating magic hurled his bright discus, Sudarśana; and caused the magic to vanish at once.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viṣṇu seeing the play of that fascinating magic hurled his bright discus, Sudarśan; and caused the magic to vanish at once.

[Ch 6 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the three, the Creator, the Preserver, and the Destroyer, the Dānava Mahisa came up there with his Parigha (a club tipped with iron) weapon, desirous to fight with them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the three, the Creator, the Preserver, and the Destroyer, the Dānava Mahiṣa came up there with his Parigha (a club tipped with iron) weapon, desirous to fight with them.

[Ch 6 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the general Cikṣura, Ugrāśya, Ugravirya, Asilomā, Trinetra, Vāskala, Andhaka and other warriors came up fight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the general Cikṣura, Ugrāsya, Ugravīrya, Asilomā, Trinetra, Vāskala, Andhaka and other warriors came up to fight.

[Ch 6 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those proud Dānavas, clad in armour and mounted on chariots with bows in their hands besieged the Devas, like a tiger attacking an heifer.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those Proud Dānavas, clad in armour and mounted on chariots with bows in their hands besieged the Devas, like a tiger attacking an heifer.

[Ch 6 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then those Dānavas swollen with pride began to shower on arrows after arrows; the Devas, too, began to do the same, desiring to extirpate them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then those Dānavas swelled with pride began to shower on arrows after arrows; the Devas, too, began to do the same, desiring to extirpate them.

[Ch 6 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The General Andhaka, coming up to Hari, drew his bow with great force up to his ear and shot at him five sharp arrows tipped with poison.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The General Andhaka, coming up to Hari, drew his bow with great force up to his ear and shot at him five sharp arrows tipped with poison.

[Ch 6 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vāsudeva, the Destroyer of the enemies, cut off those arrows no sooner they came up before him; and He shot at the Dānavas five arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vāsudeva, the Destroyer of the enemies, cut off those arrows no sooner they came up before him; and He shot at the Dānavas five arrows.

[Ch 6 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Hari and the Dānava struck each other with various weapons and arrows, disēus, Mūsala, clubs, Śakti, and Paraśu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Hari and the Dānava struck each other with various weapons and arrows, swords, discus, Muṣala, clubs, Śakti, and Paraśu.

[Ch 6 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Here, on the other hand, the fight lasted for fifty days between Maheśa versus Andhaka; and it was a very close conflict, causing horripilation.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Here, on the other hand, the fight lasted for fifty days between Maheśa versus Andhaka; and it was a very close conflict, causing horripilation.

[Ch 6 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus severe fights ensued between Vāskala and Indra, Mahisa and Rudra, Trinetra and Yama, Mahā Hanu and Kubera, Asilomā and Varuna.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus severe fights ensued between Vāskala and Indra, Mahiṣa and Rudra, Trinetra and Yama, Mahā Hanu and Kuvera, Asilomā and Varuṇa.

[Ch 6 Verse 24-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Dānava Mahiṣa struck Garudā, the conveyance of Hari, with his club; Garuda, being very much distressed with the blow, sat down, gasping. Viṣṇu then comforted the powerful Garuda, the son of Vinatā and made him calm and quiet.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Dānava Mahiṣa struck Garuḍa, the conveyance of Hari, with his club; Garuḍa, being very much distressed with the blow, sat down, gasping. Viṣṇu then comforted the powerful Garuḍa, the son of Vinatā and made him calm and quiet.

[Ch 6 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Wanting to kill Andhaka, Janārdana became infuriated, and, drawing his bow made of horn, call Śārṇga, shot at him arrows after arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Wanting to kill Andhaka, Janārdana became infuriated, and, drawing his bow made of horn, call Śārṅga, shot at him arrows after arrows.

[Ch 6 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Dānava cut off all those arrows to pieces with his own mass of arrows. Then, becoming very angry, he shot fifty sharp arrows at Hari.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Dānava cut off all those arrows to pieces with his own mass of arrows. Then, becoming very angry, he shot fifty sharp arrows at Hari.

[Ch 6 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vāsudeva quickly made all those arrows useless and hurled Sudarśana Cakra with thousand spokes on the Dānava with great violence.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vāsudeva quickly made all those arrows useless and hurled Sudarśana Cakra with thousand spokes on the Dānava with great violence.

[Ch 6 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Andhaka thwarted this with his own discus and shouted aloud with such a great force that all the Devas became confused and confounded. Viṣnu's cakra being baffled, the Devas became distressed with grief and the Dānavas got elated.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Andhaka thwarted this with his own discus and shouted aloud with such a great force that all the Devas became confused and confounded. Viṣṇu’s Cakra being baffled, the Devas became distressed with grief and the Dānavas got elated.

[Ch 6 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the Devas thus grieved, Viṣṇu held alotī his Kaumodaki Gādā (club) and came hurriedly before the Dānava.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the Devas thus grieved, Viṣṇu held aloft his Kaumodakī Gadā (club) and came hurriedly before the Dānava.

[Ch 6 Verse 32-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hari stuck then with his Gādā on the Dānava's head, whereon he fell senseless on the ground. The hot-tempered Mahisa, seeing Andhaka senseless, bellowed aloud and, terrifying Hari, came up there Seeing him there, Vāsudeva made such a thundering noise with his bow string that the Devas became highly glad.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hari struck then with his Gadā on the Dānava’s head whereon he fell senseless on the ground. The hot-tempered Mahiṣa, seeing Andhaka senseless, bellowed aloud and, terrifying Hari, came up there. Seeing him there, Vāsudeva made such a thundering noise with his bow string that the Devas became highly glad.

[Ch 6 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the Bhagavān shot showers of arrows on Mahisa; and Mahīṣa, too, cut those arrows while they were seen in the air. O king! Then a very close fight ensued between the two. Keśava struck on the head of the Dānava with his club.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the Bhagavān shot showers of arrows on Mahiṣa; and Mahiṣa, too, cut those arrows while they were seen in the air. O king! Then a very close fight ensued between the two, Keśava struck on the head of the Dānava with his club.

[Ch 6 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus struck, he fell in a swoon on the ground and a general cry of distress arose amongst the Dānavas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus struck, he fell in a swoon on the ground and a general cry of distress arose amongst the Dānavas.

[Ch 6 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In a moment the Dānava got up again, free from trouble; he then struck again on Viṣnu's head with his Parigha (a club mounted with iron, a mace).
NEW CORR ENG ──► In a moment the Dānava got up again, free from trouble; he then struck again on Viṣṇu’s head with his Parigha (a club mounted with iron, a mace).

[Ch 6 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Struck by that mace, Janārdana lay senseless; Garuda seeing him thus unconscious, immediately took him away from the battle field.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Struck by that mace, Janārdan lay senseless; Garuḍa, seeing him thus unconscious, immediately took him away from the battle field.

[Ch 6 Verse 40-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Vispu thus fled, Indra and the Devas were much distressed with fear and began to cry aloud. Hearing the Devas cry, Śaṅkara became wrathful and, quickly coming before Mahisa, struck him with his trident (Śūla).
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Viṣṇu thus fled, Indra and the Devas were much distressed with fear and began to cry aloud. Hearing the Devas cry, Śaṅkara became wrathful and, quickly coming before Mahiṣa, struck him with his trident (Śūla).

[Ch 6 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The wicked Mahisa made his weapon ineffectual and bellowed aloud as he struck on the breast of Śaṅkara with his Śakti (a kind of missile).
NEW CORR ENG ──► The wicked Mahiṣa made his weapon ineffectual and bellowed aloud and struck on the breast of Śaṅkara with his Śakti (a kind of missile).

[Ch 6 Verse 43-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus wounded in his breast Śaṅkara diś not feel any pain; rather, with his eyes red with anger, He struck him again with Triśūla. Seeing Śaṅkara engaged with Mañṣa, Hari becoming conscious came again on the battle-fields.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus wounded in his breast Śaṅkara did not feel any pain; rather, with his eyes red with anger, He struck him again with Trisūla. Seeing Śaṅkara engaged with Mahiṣa, Hari becoming conscious came again on the battle-field.

[Ch 6 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the two powerful Deva chiefs, Hari and Hara, in the battle-field Mahisa became very much angry; he then assumed a buffalo body and wagging his big tail to and fro came in front of them with a desire to fight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the two powerful Deva-chiefs, Hari and Hara, in the battle-field Mahiṣa became very much angry: he then assumed a buffalo body and wagging his tail to and fro came in front of them with a desire to fight.

[Ch 6 Verse 47-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That terrible Mahisa of a huge body shook his horns and bellowed so deep like a thunder cloud that even the Devas got frightened. He began to hurl the huge mountain peaks with his two horns.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That terrible Mahiṣa of a huge body shook his horns and bellowed so deep like a thunder cloud that even the Devas got frightened. He began to hurl the huge mountain peaks with his two horns.

[Ch 6 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The two powerful Devas Hari and Hara, began to shoot at the Dānava deadly arrows after arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The two powerful Devas Hari and Hara, began to shoot at the Dānava deadly arrows after arrows.

[Ch 6 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing these two gods shower arrows upon him, Mahiṣa began to hurl mountains on them by his tail.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing these two gods shower arrows upon him, Mahiṣa began to hurl mountains on them by his tail.

[Ch 6 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Visņu cut off those mountains into hundred pieces by his arrows and struck at him instantly with his Cakra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viṣṇu cut off those mountains into hundred pieces by his arrow; and struck at him instantly with his Cakra.

[Ch 6 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Struck thus by Cakra, the Lord of the Dānavas fainted, but he instantly rose up with a human body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Struck thus by Cakra, the Lord of the Dānavas fainted, but he instantly rose up with a human body.

[Ch 6 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The mountain-like terrible Dānava with a club in his hand frightened the Devas and uttered grave sounds like those of rumbling rain clouds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The mountain-like terrible Dānava with a club in his hand frightened the Devas and uttered grave sounds like those of rumbling rain clouds.

[Ch 6 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing that, the Bhagavān Viṣṇu sounded a more terrible sound with his Pañcajanya Śaṅkha (conchshell).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing that, the Bhagavān Viṣṇu sounded a more terrible sound with his Pañchajanya Śaṅkha (conchshell).

[Ch 6 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing the sound of that conchshell, the Dānavas were struck with terror and the ascetic Rṣis and Devas became exalted with joy. Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the Deva Dānava fight in Śrimadevibhāgavatam the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Vedā Vyāsa. Šrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing the sound of that conchshell, the Dānavas were struck with terror and the ascetic Ṛṣis and Devas became exalted with joy. Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Fifth Skandha on the Deva Dānava fight in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam, of 18,000 versus by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
