CHAPTER VI

On the Deva Dāinava Fight

व्यास उवाच

तापेउध मृचिते दैत्य महिष्यः क्रोधसंयुतः ।

समुधस्य गरांं गुर्वीं देवानुपरणसाग मह ॥ १ ॥

तितंत्वच सुरा: सर्वे इन्यदं गदया किल ।

सर्वे बलिषुजः कामं बलहीनाः सदैव ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! On the Daitya Tāmra becoming unconscious, Mahisa became very angry and, raising his Gādā (club), came up before the Devas and said: "Devas! O Ye powerless like crows; wait; with one stroke of Gadā, I will kill you."

इत्युक्नवाउंगी नगान्हलं समप्राय मद्मार्वितः ।

ज्ञान गद्या तूर्णं बाहुधूले महापुर्षः ॥ ३ ॥

Thus saying, the powerful Mahisa swollen with pride, seeing Indra before him mounted on his elephant, instantly struck him on his arms.

सोप्रि वङ्गण धोगेण विच्छेद्वणु गदां च ताम् ।

प्रहृकौमास्वतीतो जगाम महिंश प्रति ॥ ४ ॥

Indra, again lost no time, and struck violently with his thunderbolt and cut the Dānava's Gādā into pieces, and came up very close, wanting to strike at him.

हयारिति कोपेन खड्गमादाव सुप्रभम् ।

ययचिन्द्र महावीर्वं प्रद्रत्यिज्ञ्वांतिकम् ॥ ५ ॥

Mahisa, too, becoming very angry took up his lustrous sword and came to Indra to attack him with this weapon.

बधूव च त्योयैंदूं वर्षलोकपयावहम् ।

आयुधैर्विंविद्धेस्त्र सुनिविसमयकारकम् ॥ ६ ॥

A fight then occurred between the two, terrible to all the Lokas and wonderful to the Munis, where various weapons were showered from both the sides.

चक्रानु तादा दैवो मायां मोहकर्ता किकल ।

शाभार्थी सर्वतोकन्धी भूनीनामपि मोहितैन् ॥ ७ ॥

The Demon Mahisa spread then his Sāmbhari Māyā, destructive to all the worlds and fascinating to the Munis.

कोटिओ गो महिष्यास्त्र तनुष्यास्त्याकमाः ।

ददृषु: सायुधा: सर्वे निर्णंतो देवाहितीम् ॥ ८ ॥

Hundreds and hundreds of powerful buffalo-like appearances resembling Mahisa became, then, visible on the battle-field; they all began to kill the Deva forces with weapons in their hands.

माथवा विल्यास्तत्र दृष्टवा तां दैत्यविमितिम् ।

बभूपातिनघयोढ़िनो मायां मोहकर्ग किल ।। ९ ।।

वरणोपि सुसंग्रस्तलथेव धन्यानवकः ।

यमो हुताशनः सूर्वः शीतरिणमर्थायतुः ॥ १ ० ॥

Seeing this majic of the Dānava, Indra became thunderstruck and very much confounded with terror. Varuna, Kubera, the Lord of wealth, Yama, Fire, Moon, Sun, and other Devas all fled in terror. Indra then, being surrounded by the network of magic, began to call Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa in his mind.

पलायनयरा: सर्वे बध्धुर्मिहिता: सुरा: ।

ब्रह्मविष्णुमदेशानां स्मरणं चकुकृत्या: ॥ १ १ ॥ ॥

तत्राजमुख काजेशा: सुतमात्रा: सुगोतमा: ।

इसताख्यैवृषाकडाखतुकामा वरायुधा: ॥ 12 ॥

At the instant when they were called in mind, Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa riding on respective conveyances Swan, Garuda, and Bull, came up there with best weapons in their hands for Indra's protection.

शीरितां मोहैर्नी दृष्टा सुदर्जनयोज्जलम् ।

मुगोच ततेजसैव माया सा विलयं गता ॥ 13 ॥

Visnu seeing the play of that fascinating magic hurled his bright discus, Sudarśana; and caused the magic to vanish at once.

शैक्ष्य तान्योषसतर सृधिश्वल्प्त्तलिणि: ।

योयुकामः समादाय परिघं समुपाद्रवत् ॥ 14 ॥

Seeing the three, the Creator, the Preserver, and the Destroyer, the Dānava Mahisa came up there with his Parigha (a club tipped with iron) weapon, desirous to fight with them.

महिषाण्डो महावीरः सेनानीशक्षुरस्तथा ।

उयायश्छीप्रवीर्थ शुद्वुर्वुद्धकामुकाः ॥ 15 ॥

असितेमा जिनेश्वं बाक्लतधक एव च ।

एते चान्ये च बह्वो योद्धकामा विविनेयुः ॥ 16 ॥

Then the general Cikṣura, Ugrāśya, Ugravirya, Asilomā, Trinetra, Vāskala, Andhaka and other warriors came up fight.

सन्द्रध दृतचापासे रथाकडा मदोद्धता: ।

परिवहु: सुगत्सर्वान्यका इव सुवत्सकान् ॥ 17 ॥

Those proud Dānavas, clad in armour and mounted on chariots with bows in their hands besieged the Devas, like a tiger attacking an heifer.

बाणपृष्टि ततश्रकादनिवा मदार्थविताः ।

सुगशापि तथा चकुः परस्परजिधासेवः ॥ 18 ॥

Then those Dānavas swollen with pride began to shower on arrows after arrows; the Devas, too, began to do the same, desiring to extirpate them.

अत्यको हरिसासाघ पत्रबाणापिऊलशितान् ।

मुपोच विषसपिद्धधान्कणीकृष्टामहावलम् ॥ १९ ॥

The General Andhaka, coming up to Hari, drew his bow with great force up to his ear and shot at him five sharp arrows tipped with poison.

वासुदेवोउपसम्प्रापतान्विशिज्ञानगृहीस्तदा ।

चिच्छेदे तानपुनः पड्न मुमोन सिंगुनानः ॥ 20 ॥

Vāsudeva, the Destroyer of the enemies, cut off those arrows no sooner they came up before him; and He shot at the Dānavas five arrows.

तयोः परस्यं सुद्धं बभूव हरिदैत्ययोः ।

बाणासिचकमुसलरोगदाराक्षिपश्धये: ॥ 21 ॥

Then Hari and the Dānava struck each other with various weapons and arrows, disēus, Mūsala, clubs, Śakti, and Paraśu.

महेशोध्यकायोर्दुंदं तुगुर्न लोमहर्भणम् ।

पडाणरिद्नपर्यर्त वधूच च परस्यम् ॥ 22 ॥

Here, on the other hand, the fight lasted for fifty days between Maheśa versus Andhaka; and it was a very close conflict, causing horripilation.

इन्द्रबाष्कलयो तद्धन्सिद्धासुरक्रदयो: ।

यमत्रिजेयोस्तद्नसहहानुधनेशयो: ॥ 23॥

Thus severe fights ensued between Vāskala and Indra, Mahisa and Rudra, Trinetra and Yama, Mahā Hanu and Kubera, Asilomā and Varuna.

असित्मोवकरणायोर्पुंद परमदृतकर्णम् ।

गरुडं गटया दैत्यो जयान हरिवाहनम् ॥ 24 ॥

स गदापातिखाज्ञानै नि:श्रसत्रवित्रहिति ।

शौरितं दक्षिणेनागुं हतेन परिसांत्वयम् ॥ 25 ॥

स्थिरं चकार देवेशेगे वैनंतय महावलम् ।

समाकृष्य धनुः शणई मुगोच विशिष्ठान्बून् ॥ 26 ॥

The Dānava Mahiṣa struck Garudā, the conveyance of Hari, with his club; Garuda, being very much distressed with the blow, sat down, gasping. Viṣṇu then comforted the powerful Garuda, the son of Vinatā and made him calm and quiet.

अत्यंकोपरि कोपेन हनुतकामो जनादनः ।

दायावेपि च तान्वाणांश्छिद्धे स्वर्गे: शितः ॥ 27 ॥

Wanting to kill Andhaka, Janārdana became infuriated, and, drawing his bow made of horn, call Śārṇga, shot at him arrows after arrows.

पडाणिद्वर्दरी कोभाज्ञान च शिलाशिति: ।

वासुदेवोपि नासूनुर्णे वंचविख्या शरोतमान् ॥ 28 ॥

The Dānava cut off all those arrows to pieces

Book V Chapter VI

with his own mass of arrows. Then, becoming very angry, he shot fifty sharp arrows at Hari.

झकं मुगोच बेगेन सहसारं मुडर्गन् ।

त्यन्के सुर्दर्गनं दुरात्स्वचेकम प्यबारयत् ॥ 29 ॥

Vāsudeva quickly made all those arrows useless and hurled Sudarśana Cakra with thousand spokes on the Dānava with great violence.

ननाद च महाराज देवतन्मोहयत्रिव ।

दूध्वा तु विफलं जातं चढ़े देवस्य शाईपुः ॥ 30 ॥

Andhaka thwarted this with his own discus and shouted aloud with such a great force that all the Devas became confused and confounded. Viṣnu's cakra being baffled, the Devas became distressed with grief and the Dānavas got elated.

जम्भु: शोकं सुरा: सर्वे जहरुदैरनावसता ।

वासुदेवोकि रासा दूर्धा देवावछूष्ठा उज्ञान । 31 ।

Seeing the Devas thus grieved, Viṣṇu held alotī his Kaumodaki Gādā (club) and came hurriedly before the Dānava.

गदां कोमोदकीं धृत्वा दानवं सम्पात्रवत् ।

तं ज्ञानातिवेगेन मूर्टिन मायावित्र नहीं: ॥ 32 ॥

स गदाउभितो मूमी निपयातातिमूचितः ।

तं तथा पतितं वीक्ष्य ह्वायरितिकोपानः ॥ 33 ॥

आजगाम यानाथे ज्ञायव्रतिराजितैः ।

वासुदेवीपि तं सुखा समायानं क्रामतिवतम् ॥ 34 ॥

Hari stuck then with his Gādā on the Dānava's head, whereon he fell senseless on the ground. The hot-tempered Mahisa, seeing Andhaka senseless, bellowed aloud and, terrifying Hari, came up there Seeing him there, Vāsudeva made such a thundering noise with his bow string that the Devas became highly glad.

वापस्वानितदं चोर्धे चकार नद्यन्सुरान् ।

शरब्धरि चकारायु भगवान्महिषपरि ॥ 35 ॥

सोप्रि चिच्छेद बाणौधैस्ताऊरानगभरेत्तान ।

तयोरुंद्रमभूरतज्ञयरस्यभगवाहम् ॥ 36 ॥

Then the Bhagavān shot showers of arrows on Mahisa; and Mahīṣa, too, cut those arrows while they were seen in the air. O king! Then a very close fight ensued between the two. Keśava struck on the head of the Dānava with his club.

गदया ताड्यामास केशवो मस्तकोपरि ।

स गदाधिरहो भूर्भि पपानोत्यां सूमूर्हितः ॥ 37 ॥

Thus struck, he fell in a swoon on the ground and a general cry of distress arose amongst the Dānavas.

हाहाकागो महानासीसैन्ये तस्य सुदारणः ।

स विहाय चवधां दैनो मुक्तितुंदितः पुनः ॥ 38 ॥

In a moment the Dānava got up again, free from trouble; he then struck again on Viṣnu's head with his Parigha (a club mounted with iron, a mace).

गृहीत्व परिघं शीर्षं जयान मयुर्मुदनम् ।

परिश्रेणाहत्सेन मुर्जीमप जनदानं: ॥ 39 ॥

Struck by that mace, Janārdana lay senseless; Garuda seeing him thus unconscious, immediately took him away from the battle field.

मृद्धितं तमुबाहाणु जगाम भकडो रणात् ।

परावृते जगत्राधे दे्वा इन्द्रपुरोगमाः ॥ 40 ॥

भयं प्रगुः मुडुःखातांश्रुकृषुश रणात्रों ।

कंदरमानासुरान् वीक्ष्य संकाः: शुलभून्ता ॥ 41 ॥

When Vispu thus fled, Indra and the Devas were much distressed with fear and began to cry aloud. Hearing the Devas cry, Śaṅkara became wrathful and, quickly coming before Mahisa, struck him with his trident (Śūla).

महिषं तत्सास्थेय त्राहरोषसंयुतः ।

सोर्धि शर्फि मुणोचाथ शंकस्योरिसि क्रुद्यम ॥ 42 ॥

The wicked Mahisa made his weapon ineffectual and bellowed aloud as he struck on the breast of Śaṅkara with his Śakti (a kind of missile).

ज्ञर्जे स च वुहात्या वंधविता शिशुलकम् ।

शक्रौरोषि तदा पीक्षां न प्रणोरस तीक्षितः ॥ ४३ ॥

तं ज्ञान श्रिगृतेन कोपादरुगतोचनः ।

संलनं शंकरं दृष्ट्या महिषेश्न दुरात्मा ॥ ४४ ॥

Thus wounded in his breast Śaṅkara diś not feel any pain; rather, with his eyes red with anger, He struck him again with Triśūla. Seeing Śaṅkara engaged with Mañṣa, Hari becoming conscious came again on the battle-fields.

आजगाम दहरितवचकत्वा मुहां प्रहारजाम ।

महिषस्तु तदा वैश्य संग्रगते हरिगंकारे ॥ 4 5 ॥



युद्धकामी महावीर्वीं चक्रगुल्धरी वरी ।

कोपयुक्तो बंभावासी दूद्या ती समुयागती ॥ 46 ॥

Seeing the two powerful Deva chiefs, Hari and Hara, in the battle-field Mahisa became very much angry; he then assumed a buffalo body and wagging his big tail to and fro came in front of them with a desire to fight.

जगाम संमुखसतावल्संधामार्थ महापुबः ।

माहिषं वपुरास्थाय धुवन्युच्छं समुकटन ॥ 47 ॥

चकार चैपरं नई आसयवमतरनपि ।

धु-वढ्छंगी महाकायो दाकणो जलदो यथा ॥ 48 ॥

That terrible Mahisa of a huge body shook his horns and bellowed so deep like a thunder cloud that even the Devas got frightened. He began to hurl the huge mountain peaks with his two horns.

भृगभयं पर्पताट्यूढ़ग्रशिक्षेय प्रयामुकटन ।

द्वृता ती तु महावीर्वीं दानवं देहवसनों ॥ ४ ९ ॥

The two powerful Devas Hari and Hara, began to shoot at the Dānava deadly arrows after arrows.

चक्रतुबाणवृष्टि च दानवोपरि दाफाम् ।

कुबाणीय बाणवृष्टि तो दूद्या हरितही हरि: ॥ 50 ॥

Seeing these two gods shower arrows upon him, Mahiṣa began to hurl mountains on them by his tail.

चिवेष प्रिरिश्रंगां तु पुच्छेनावूल्य दाफणम् ।

आपतन्ते प्रिंरि वैश्य भपावान्सावतां पति: ॥ 51 ॥

Visņu cut off those mountains into hundred

pieces by his arrows and struck at him instantly with his Cakra.

विशिष्टोः शताया चेके चक्रेणाणु जयान तम् ।

हरिचक्रान्तः संखेय मूच्छांमाप स दैत्यवर्ध् ॥ 52 ॥

Struck thus by Cakra, the Lord of the Dānavas fainted, but he instantly rose up with a human body.

उतस्थी च क्षणाङ्नं मानुपं वयुराधितः ।

गदायामिमहीघोगे दानवः पर्वतोपयः ॥ 53 ॥

The mountain-like terrible Dānava with a club in his hand frightened the Devas and uttered grave sounds like those of rumbling rain clouds.

मेघवादं ननादोच्यैपरिचयमगनायि ।

तच्छूदा भगवानिष्युः पोचजस्यं समुञ्जलम् ॥ 54 ॥

Hearing that, the Bhagavān Viṣṇu sounded a more terrible sound with his Pañcajanya Śaṅkha (conchshell).

पूरयामास तरसा शब्दं कर्तुं खरस्वम् ।

तेन शब्देन शंख्यय भवमताश्र दानावाः ।

बषव्युप्टिता देवा ऋषयश तपोधनाः ॥ 55 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पत्रमकन्ने भटोःशायः ॥ 6 ॥ 11

Hearing the sound of that conchshell, the Dānavas were struck with terror and the ascetic Rṣis and Devas became exalted with joy.

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the Deva Dānava fight in Śrimadevibhāgavatam the

Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣī Vedā Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

