CHAPTER X

On the Offences Caused to the Earth and Punishments thereof

नारद जवाच

भूमिदानकृतं पुण्यं पायं तदूरणेच च ।

परभूर्तणात्यपं परकुके खतने तथा ॥ १ ॥

अंबुबाच्यां भयुतनने वीरीय त्याग एव च ।

दीपादिष्यापनात्यपां श्रोतृमिच्छामि यन्ततः ॥ 2 ॥

अन्यदा पृथिवीजन्यं पापं यत्न्छ्छयते परम् ।

यदस्ति तन्त्रीताकरं वद वेदिविदां चर ॥ 3 ॥

Nārada said: I am now desirous to hear about the merits acquired by making gifts of land, the demerits in stealing away lands, digging wells in other's wells, in digging earth on the day of Ambuvāci, in casting semen on earth, and in placing lamps and lights on the surface of the earth as well the sins when one acts wrongly in various other ways on the surface of the earth and the remedies thereof.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

वित्तिस्तमाशूरियं च यो द्वात्ति च भारते ।

संध्यापृताय विघ्राय स याति शिवमंदिरम् ॥ 4 ॥

भूमिं च सर्वसभ्याड़ां बाङ्गाय द्वात्ति च ।

भूमिरेणुप्रमाणाद्वमंते विध्णुपदे स्थितिः ॥ 5 ॥

Śrī Nārāyana said: If one makes a gift of land in this Bhārata of the measure of a Vitasī (a long span measured by the extended thumb and little finger) to a Brāhmaṇa who performs Sandhyā three times a day and is thus purified, one goes and remains in Śiva Loka (the abode of Śiva). If one gives away in charity a land full of corn to a Brāhmín, the giver goes and lives in Viṣṇu Loka in the end for a period measured by the number of dust particles in the land.

ग्रामं भूर्षिं च धान्यं च बाहाणाय द्वताति यः ।

सर्वेपाणाडिनिमुन्तो चोभौ देवौपुर: स्थितौ ॥ 6 ॥

भूमितानं च तत्काले य साधुशानुपोदते ।

स च प्रयाति वैकुंठे मिज्ञोग्रसम्पित्वतः ॥ 7 ॥

If one presents a village, a plot of land, or grains to a Brāhmin, both the giver and receiver, become freed of their sins and go to the Devi Loka (the

abode of the Devi). Even if one be present when a proposal for a gift of land is being made in says 'This act is good,' one goes to Vaikunṭha with one's friends and relatives.

स्वत्नां परत्तां वा बढ़ाप्ति हेतु नः ।

स तिष्ठित कालसूत्रे यावच्छंदिवाकारी ॥ 8 ॥

तत्पुरपीरप्रपृत्तिभूमितीः : श्रिया हतः ।

पुर्वौनो दरिष्ठ धारे पाति च रौरचम् ॥ 9 ॥

He remains in the Kālasūtra hell as long as the Sun and Moon exist, who takes back or steals away the gift to a Brāhim, offered by himself or by any other body. Even his sons, grandsons, etc., become destitute of lands, prosperity, sons, and wealth and remain in a dreadful hell named Raurava.

गवां मार्ग विनिष्ण्य यश सस्यं द्वताति च ।

दिव्यं वर्षगतं चैव कुम्भीपाके च त्रिहिति ॥ १० ॥

गोई तडागं निष्क्य मार्गे सस्यं द्वताति यः ।

स तिहस्विसपे च यावदिद्विश्रतुदंश ॥ ११ ॥

If one cultivates the grazing land for the cows and reaps therefrom a harvest of grains, one remains for one hundred divine years in the Kumbhipāka hell. If one cultivates any enclosure for cows or tanks and grows grains on them, one remains in the Asipatra hell for a period equivalent to fourteen Indra's falls.

पंचपिंडाननुद्व्य परकृपे च स्नाति यः ।

ग्राटोति नरकं चैव स्नानं निष्कलमेव च ॥ १२ ॥

कामी भूमी च रहस्य वीर्यैलागं करतीय तः ।

भूमिसेपुप्रमाणं च वर्ष तिहिति तैरवे ॥ १३ ॥

One who bathes in another's tank without taking off five handfuls of earth from it, goes to hell and one's bath is quite ineffectual If anybody, out of his amorous passion casts his semen privately on the surface of the ground, he will have to suffer the torments of hell for as many years as are the numbers of dust particles on that area.

अंबुवाच्यां घुकरणं यः करोति च मानवः ।

स याति कृमिवर्गं च स्थितत्सत चतुरुंगम् ॥ १४ ॥

परकीये लुपकूपे कृपं युकः करोति यः ।

पृक्रिणयां च लुपायां पृक्रिणी द्वाति यः ॥ 15 ॥

If anyone digs ground on the day of Ambuvāci, one remains in hell for four Yugas. If, without the permission of the owner of a well or tank, a stupid man clears the old well or tank and digs the slushy earth from the bottom, his labour goes in vain.

सर्व फल परस्येव ततकुंड़े झतेज्च स: ।

तत्र तिहिति संतन्तो यावदिर्द्राश्रतुर्ज ॥ १६ ॥

परकीये तडागे च पंकमुबुल्य चोन्मुक्ते ।

रेणुप्रमाणवर्ष च ब्रह्यलोके वसंसरः ॥ १७ ॥

The merit goes to the real owner. And the man who laboured so much goes to Tapta Kuṇḍa Naraka for fourteen Indra's life-periods. If any one takes out five handfuls of earth from another's tank, when he goes to bathe in it, he dwells in Brahma Loka for a period of years amounting to the number of particles in those handfuls of earth.

पित्रं पित्रे भूमिपान्तीन प्रदाय च मानवः ।

श्राद्धे करोति यो युवो नरकं याति निश्छितम् ॥ 18 ॥

भूमी दीर्घ योउपयिति स चोधः सदानजनम् ।

भूमी शंखं च संस्याय कुछं जन्मांतरे लभेत् ॥ 19 ॥

During one's father's or grandfather's Śrāddha ceremony, if one offers pīnda without offering any food (pīnda) to the owner of the soil, the Śrāddha performer goes certainly to hell. If one places a light (Pradīpa) directly on the earth without any holding piece at the bottom, one becomes blind for seven births; and so if one places a conch-shell on the ground (Śaṅkha), one becomes attacked with leprosy in one's next birth.

मुक्तां माणिक्यहीरी च सुवर्णं च माणिं तथा ।

पंच संस्थायदेवुभूमी स चाधि: सतजान्मु ॥ 20 ॥

शिवलिंग शिवामर्चा च सत्यपंपति भूतले ।

गतान्यन्तं यावत्कृमिभबः स तिहति ॥ 21 ॥

If any body places pearls, gems, diamonds, gold and jewels, the five precious things on the ground he becomes blind. If one places the phallic emblem of Śiva, the image of Śivānī, the Sālagrāma stone on the ground, he remains for one hundred Manvantaras to be eaten by worms.

गुंखं घंत्र शिलातोंवं पुर्णं च तुलसीदलम् ।

यशार्पविति भूमौ च स लिहेत्रकें धुवम् ॥ 22 ॥

Book IX Chapter XI

जपामालां पुष्पमालां कपूरं रोचनं तथा ।

यो मूढ्धाप्रयेद्यूमी स याति नरकं धुवम् ॥ २३ ॥

Conchshells, Yantras (diagrams for Śakti worshippers), the water after washing Śilās (stones) i.e. Caraṇāṃtrā, flowers, Tulasī leaves, if placed on the ground, lead him who places these, verily to hells. The beads, garlands of flowers, Gorocana, (a bright yellow pigment prepared from the urine or bile of a cow), and camphor, when placed on the ground, lead him who places so to suffer the torments of hell.

भूमी चन्द्रकाषं च रुद्राक्षं कुरुभूलकम् ।

संस्थाय्य भूमी नरके वसेमन्यन्तराधि ॥ 24 ॥

पुस्तक यसूत्रं च भूमी संस्थायपेन्नः ।

न घबेढ़िप्रधोगेची च तस्य जन्माते जनि: ॥ 25 ॥

ब्रहाहत्यासमं पापमिष्टे वै लभते ध्रुवम् ।

ग्रविष्युर्न घसूत्रं पूज्चं च सर्ववर्गकैः ॥ 26 ॥

The sandal wood, Rudraksa mālā, and the roots of Kuśa grass also, if placed on the ground, lead the doer to stay for one manvantara in the hell. Books, the sacred Upanayana threads, when placed on the ground make the doers unfit for Brāhmin birth; rather he is involved in a sin equivalent to the murder of a Brāhmin. The sacred Upanayana thread when knotted and rendered fit for holding, is worth being worshipped by all the castes.

सर्ज कृत्वा तु यो भूमिं क्षीरिंग न हि सिज्ञिति ।

स याति ततभूमिं च संतपः: सपतजमसु ॥ 27 ॥

One ought to sprinkle the earth with curd, milk, etc., after one has completed one's sacrifices. If one fails to do this, one will have to remain for seven births in a hot ground with great torment.

भृक्ये प्रहणे यो हिं करोति खननं घुवः ।

जमान्तरे महापापी हांगहीनो भवेद्युबम् ॥ 28 ॥

भवनं यत्र सर्वेषां भूमितेन प्रकर्पितिं ।

कार्यपी कश्यपस्येयमला स्थितरूपतः ॥ 29 ॥

विश्वंभरा धारणाच्छनंतान्तनस्वकलिपणे ।

पृथिवी पृथुकन्यालाब्रिस्तृतत्वामहामुने ॥ 30 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे नवमरकन्चे

दरगमोड्यावः 11 10 11

If one digs the earth when there is an earth-quake or when there is an eclipse, that sinner becomes also devoid of some of his limbs in his next birth. O Muni! This earth is named Bhūmi since She is the abode of all; she is named Kāśyapī since she is the daughter of Kaśyapa; is named Viśvambharā, since she supports the Universe; She is named Ananta, since she is endlessly wide; and She is named Prithviī since she is the daughter of the King Prthu, or she is extensively wide.

Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the offences caused towards the surface of the earth and punishments there of in hells in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevirbhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XI

