CHAPTER I

On Tríśrā's Austerlities

རྟོགས ཆུན:

सूत सूत महाभाग मिहं ते वचानामुना ।

न तृपता: सभे वयं पीला ह्रीपालन कृतं शुभम् ॥ १ ॥

The Rsis (of the Naimisa forest) addressed Sūta (fondly): O highly Fortunate One! Your nectar-like words are very sweet. We are not satiated with what you have described to us as the auspicious saying of Dvaipāyana Vyāsa.

पुनस्त्वां ग्रुधिष्ठाक्ष: कवां पौराणिकांी शुभाम् ।

वैदेश कथितां रचां प्रसिद्धां पपपातिणीम् ॥ 2 ॥

O Sūta! We desire to ask you again to narrate to us the auspicious saying of this Purāna, beautiful, famous, and sin-destroying and authorised by the holy Vedas.

द्वगासुर इति ख्यातो वीर्यांस्त्वयुतासकः ।

स कर्थ नित्रतः संख्ये वासवेन महात्मना ॥ 3 ॥

Viśvakarmā had a son, named Vītrāśara, who was very well known, and very powerful. How was it that he had been slain by the high-souled Indra? Viśvakarmā was a powerful Brāhmin and belonged to the gods' party; his son was stronger.

त्वहा वै सुर्यक्षीयस्त्युजो बलवतः ।

शक्रेन प्रातिज: कस्मादुर्घडधोपनिर्भाजतः ॥ 4 ॥

How was it that he had been killed by Indra! The Devas are born of the Sativa qualities; men are born from the Räjasic qualities; and all the birds, etc., are born of the Tāmasic qualities.

देवा: सत्त्वगुणोत्थमा मानुपा राजसा: स्मृता: ।

तिर्वेछस्तामसा: प्रोक्ता: पुराणाममवादिषिथ: ॥ ५ ॥

वितोपो3त्र महान्यमाति नूनं शतमघेन ह ।

छलेने बलवान्यूत्र: श्रकेन ग्विनिपातितः ॥ 6 ॥

This is the opinion of the Pandits, versed in the Purāṇas and Āgamas. But in this act of slaying Vītrāsura, a great contradiction arises; for the powerful Vītra was killed merely under a pretext by Indra, the performer of the hundred sacrifices, and endowed with Satva qualities.

विष्यु: प्रेरित्यित तत्र स तु सचल्यर: परः ।

प्रविष्ट: पविमध्ये स छन्दान भपात्यभू: ॥ ७ ॥

साँदि विधाय स होयं मन्त्रितोजरी महावलः ।

हरिथ्यां सत्यमुतुर्ज उतकेनेन ग्रातितः ॥ ८ ॥

And Indra was prompted to do so by Viṣṇu, the head of those who possess Satīva qualities; while Viṣṇu himself entered in disguise into the thunderbolt so that he could kill Vṛtra. The powerful Vṛtra entered into a treaty and kept himself peaceful when Indra and Viṣṇu violated truth and treacherously killed him by Jalaphena (the watery foams).

कृतमिच्छेण हरिणा किमोत्स्तृत साहस्म् ।

महान्तोर्षि च मोहेन बँकिताः पापबुद्धः ॥ ९ ॥

O Sūta! The great wonder is this: That Indra and Viṣṇu turned out so bold as to forsake the truth. This, then, is (therefore very clear that the

high souled persons become deluded and act sinfully.

अन्यायवर्तीनोउत्थर्ष भवन्ति सुरास्तमाः ।

सदाचारेण युक्ति देया: शिष्टाच्यमानता: ॥ 10 ॥

एवं विशिष्टधर्मेण शिष्टलं कीईरां पुनः ।

The Heads of the Devas act very wrongly; they are reckoned as polite simply because they observe the mere outward forms of good conduct as approved by the Śāstras. How can the mere observance is outward forms constitute politeness?

हत्वा वृयं तु विश्वस्तं श्रकेना छचना पुनः ॥ १ १ ॥

प्राणं पापफलं नो वा ब्रह्मतासमुद्वय् ।

किं च त्वया पुग प्रोक्ते चुवासुप्यध: कृतः ॥ १ २ ॥

श्रीद्वया श्री तत्त्वाथि चितं मोहयतीह नः ।

Had Indra, who killed in disguise Vṛtra relying on his words, to suffer any punishment for the sin that he incurred in killing a Brāhmaṇa? It was told by you before that Vṛtra had been slain by the Devi Bhagavati; but the general belief is that Indra killed him. Our minds are puzzled on this point. (So clear our doubts on this point.)

सूत उवाच

श्रणन्तु मुनयो वृर्तं चूत्रासुर्याध्रवम् ॥ 13 ॥

यथेनेण च सम्पानं दुःखं हृत्यासमुद्वम् ।

Sūta said: O Munis! Hear the incident of the killing of Vṛtrāsura and the punishment that Indra had to suffer due to his sin of Brahmahatya (killing a Brāhmin.)

एवमेव पुरा पृष्टो व्यासः सत्यवतीस्तुः ॥ १४ ॥

पारतीक्षितेन राज्ञपि स व्यदाह् च तद्बुद्वे ।

This question was asked by the King Parikshit and replied by Vyāsa, the son of Satyavatī. I will tell you what Vyāsa had told before.

जनभेजय उवाच

कर्ते चूरासुरः पूर्व हृते मघवाता मुने ॥ 15 ॥

सहायं विद्युभासादा छवना सात्चिकेन ह ।

कंव च देया निहतो दैत्योउसी केन हेतुना ॥ 16 ॥

कवेमोकवधो द्वाभ्यां कृतः स्यामुपिनुर्गाव ।

Janamejaya asked: "O Best of Munis! How was

it that in former days Indra, endowed with the Sattva qualities, killed Virṭrasura, with the aid of Viṣṇu? And how and why was it that he was killed again by the Goddess Bhagavati? O Lord of Munis! How could one body be killed by the two; our curiosity has been excited to hear the truth,

तदेतच्छोतुमिच्छामि परं कौतृत्ति हि मे ॥ 17 ॥

महतां चरितं भृणवक्को विरज्येत मानवः ।

कथयामादोषचं त्वं वृत्रासुर्वधाशितम् ॥ 18 ॥

What man is there that does not like to hear any more of the glorious deeds of the high-souled persons! Kindly narrate to us the slaying of Vṛtra by the Devi Bhagavatī.

व्यास उवाच

धन्योप्रसि राजसत्व बुद्धिदीयुंगी

जाता पुराणश्रवणोस्तिसादारा।

पीतावप्रभुतं देवेवास्त्रुं सर्वेशा

पाने विद्याण: प्रभवन्ति वै पुनः ॥ 19 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! You are blessed, since your taste to hear the events of Purāna has grown so much; the Devas even get their thirst for drinking nectar; but when quenched, they do not like to drink any more.

दिने दिने ते उधिकाभक्तिभाव:

कथासु राजनमूनीयकांति: ।।

श्रोता यदैकप्रवण: श्यानीत

वक्ता तदा प्रतिमाना ब्रवीति ॥ 20 ॥

O King! Your name and fame are widely spread. Your Bhakti (devotion) to the Purānas is growing more and more daily. A speaker gets very much delighted when his audience hears him with undivided attention.

युद्धे पुरा वासवद्व्रयोर्ध्रेदे प्रसिद्धे च तथा पुराणे ।

दुखं सुरेन्द्रता तथैव लब्धं हृता सिंगुं ल्यामुपायमेवे ॥ 21 ॥

O Lord of the earth! The fight between Vītra and Vāsava that occurred in days of yore is famous in the passages of the Vedas and the Purānas; as well as the suffering that Indra had to encounter as his punishment when he had killed the innocent son of Viśvakarmā.

Book VI Chapter I

चित्र किमत्र नृपते हरिवजर्भूट्वां

चछ्छ्वाता विनिर्तस्विशिरोउव चुनः ।

मायावलेन मुनवोर्धि विमोहिताते

चकूश्र तिंच्यमिन्शं किल पापभीता: ॥ 22 ॥

O King! The Munis, who fear sin very much, commit yet blameable act under Māyā; then what wonder is there that Viṣṇu, and Indra would kill Triśirā and Vṛtra merely under a plea.

विष्यु: सदैव कपटेन जायान

दैत्यानस्तातमूर्तिरपि मोहमवाय कामम् ।

कोन्योरित तां भगवर्ती मनसाउपि जेतुं

शक्कः समस्तजनमोहकर्ती भगवानीम् ॥ 23 ॥

When Viṣṇu, the incarnate of Sattva qualities, gets deluded by Māyā and kills deceitfully the Daityas always, then how can you expect any other man to conquer even mentally the Mahā Māyā Bhavānī, Who deludes all the beings!

मत्थादिवीयिषु सहस्वयुगेषु सदा:

साक्षान्वल्पि यथा विनीयोजितोउ ।

नारायणो नरसखो भगवाननंतः कार्य

कोति विहिताविहितं कदाचित् ॥ 24 ॥

O King! It is undet the compulsion of this Māyā that the Bhagavān, the Infinite, the friend of Nara, Nārāyaṇa, takes incarnations in thousands and thousands of Yugas in this Saṃsāra as Fish, etc., and does deeds sometimes lawful and sometimes unlawful.

देई धर्न गृदामिदं स्वजना मदीयं

पुत्रा: कलत्रमिति मोहमुपेय स्वर्वः ।

पुर्णयं कोत्यथ च पापचयं क्रौत्ति

मायागृपीरित्वलैर्विकेक्लीकृता यत् ॥25 ॥

The Devas and men, being confounded by his Māyā, become upset and disordered and say “that this body, wealth, house, sons, wife and relatives are all mine” and being thus deluded sometimes do virtuous and sometimes sinful deeds.

न जातु मोहं शपितुं नरः क्षमः

क्रश्रुद्विद्धपून परावराधित् ।

विमोहितल्लिचित्भेवेर मूलतो

वर्गीकृतात्या जगातीले भृगम् ॥ 26 ॥

O King! There is not even one, on the surface of this earth, though he may be well versed in finding out cause and effect, the knowledge of the high and low, that can be free from this Great Delusion; he is from the very beginning tied up by the three Guñas of this Māyā and thus remains under Her control.

अथ तौ मायया विद्यावासो मोहिती भुगम् ।

जठनुगुर्भचाना वूत्रं स्वार्थसाधनतत्यति ॥ 27 ॥

This explains that Viṣṇu and Indra both were deluded by Māyā and engaged in fulfilling their own selfish ends. They killed Vṛtārsāra under a pretext.

तदई संग्रवक्षया वृत्तानमवनीपते ।

कारणं पूर्वैतस्य चूत्रसावयोर्पिधः ॥ 28 ॥

त्वषा प्रजापतिहार्तीद्विशेषो महातपाः ।

देवानां कार्यकर्ता च निपुणो ब्राह्मणप्रियः ॥ 29 ॥

O King! Hear! I am now describing to you the cause of enmity between Indra and Vṛtra. Viśvakarma, the Prajāpati, was the great architect of the Gods, he was skilled, he was superior amongst the gods, a great ascetic and endeared by the Brāhmins.

स पुरं वे हैं विज्ञारसमि-ट्रेशेपातिकलामुक्त ।

विश्वस्तोवि विद्यालां तान्मा रूपेण मोहनम् ॥ 30 ॥

विधि: स वदनै: श्रेष्ठ्यंरोत मनोहैः ।

विभर्भिश्रानि कार्याणि मुखैः समकोनमुपिनः ॥ 31 ॥

वेदान्केन सेधोक्षितु सुरा वैकेन सोप्रवित् ।

तृतीयेन दिणुः सर्वां युगपच्छ निरीक्षते ॥ 32 ॥

He had enmity with Indra; and out of this enmity he created a son, very beautiful and named him Triśirasa Visvārūpa. That son had three faces very beautiful and lovely. Visvārūpa performed three different functions with his three different faces; with one, he used to study the Vedas, with the second he used to drink nectar (wine), and with the third he used to see simultaneously all the directions.

त्रिशिरा भोगमूलुच्य तपश्ठेक सुद्धकम् ।

तपस्वी स मुदुद्वितो धार्यमेव समाश्रितः ॥ ३३ ॥

Śrimaddevaibhāgavatam

Triśirā renounced the pleasures of the world and began to practise a hard tapasyā; he became a great ascetic, gentle, restrained in his passions and entirely devoted to his religion.

पश्रानिर्नाधनं काले पादपात्र निवेशनम् ।

जलमध्ये निवासं च इेमन्ते शिशिरे तथा ॥ 34 ॥

He practised Pañcāgni Sādhana in the summer season, tying his feet upwards on the branch of a tree with his head downwards; he remained in dew in the cold season, and, under water in the winter season.

निराहरो जितालामाउसी तत्कसर्वपरिष्रहः ।

तपृधारा मेघावी दुकर्न मन्दबुद्धिधि: ॥ 35 ॥

Thus he abstained from food and conquered his self and, forsaking all the worldly connections, practised a very hard tapasyā; very difficult, indeed, for those who are of dull intellects.

तं च दृष्ट्वा तपस्तं त्रैवदाम शवीधिति: ।

विवाद्यमानात्र शक्रोयं मायमधृति ॥ 36 ॥

दृष्ट्वा तस्य तपो वीर्यं सत्यं चाभिततेजसः ।

चिन्ता च महती प्राप हार्षिणं पाकाशासन: ॥ 37 ॥

विद्यांयान्तिक्षिरा मायमं शातिययति ।

नोपेध्यः सर्वेधा शत्रुवैर्यमानवले गुधैः ॥ 38 ॥

Indra became very sad and dispirited to see him practise such a Tapasyā and thought of the means so that he might not acquire his Indraship. The Pakaśāsaṇa Indra remained always very anxious to see the energetic penance practised by that ascetic of unbounded glory and his steady attachment towards it.

तस्मायुपायः कतव्यस्तपोनायाय साम्यन्तम् ।

कामस्तु तपतां श्रुः कामात्रश्यति वै तपः ॥ 39 ॥

He thought thus: “This Trīśārā is becoming stronger day by day with his penace, so he will kill me. The wise never look an enemy with indifference whose strength daily becomes greater and greater.”

तवैवाहा प्रकर्तेयं भोगास्तको भवेहाय ।

इति संचित्व मनसा बुद्धमान्वलमदैः ॥ ४० ॥

It is now my urgent duty to invent means on how to baffle his Tapasyā and he at last settled

that lust is the great enemy of asceticism; the practice of devout austerities is destroyed completely by lust; so I must try this very day that some how the Muni becomes attached to worldly lusts and enjoyments.

आज्ञायलोउपसरस्लाव्युप्रज्ञतोभने ।

उर्वेर्गी पेनकां रभां घृतावी च तिलोत्तमाण ॥ 41 ॥

The intelligent Indra, thinking thus, called the Apsarās Urvaśī, Menakā, Rambhā, Ghṛtāci, and Tilottamā and others proud of their beauties so that they might seduce Triśirā, the son of Viśvakarmā.

समाहुधावीच्छक्रतातादा रूपभार्थितः ।

प्रियं कुर्वयं मे सर्वा: कार्येडा समुपस्थिते ॥ 42 ॥

“O Apsarās! I have now got a very grave task to fulfil; all of you help me in this respect. A great enemy of mine, difficult to conquer is practising penance with his self-controlled.

यतो मेघा महाकछुस्तपत्थित दुर्जेः ।

कार्य कुक्त नष्ट्धप्रे पतोभयत माधिरम् ॥ 43 ॥

Start at once and with your dress suited to various amorous gestures and try hard to seduce him. Be all well with you; seduce him and remove the fever of my heart.

श्रृगार्वेर्वेर्विविद्योर्गैर्वैद्समुद्वेः ।

प्रतोभयत भई वः शमवधं ज्वरं मम ॥ 44 ॥

O Apsarās! What more shall I say, I am restless since I have heard of his strength in performing such hard austerities.

असत्योड़ महापभातस्य जाला तपोकलम् ।

बलवानासनं मेउदा प्रतीर्थ्यावितर्धितः ॥ 45 ॥

O Weak Ones! That powerful ascetic may acquire my place and thus dispossess me; this fear has possessed me.

भयं मे समुपायातं ब्रिणं नाशयतत्वालतः ।

उपकुर्बन्तु सहिताः कार्येउघ समुपस्थिते ॥ 46 ॥

Therefore destroy my fear as quickly as possible. This is the task now given to you; get united and do this good to me."

तच्छुत्वा वचनं नार्यं कच्छूत प्रणाताः पुनः ।

मा घयं कुक्र देवेश यतिव्यामः प्रतोधेने ॥ 47 ॥


The Apsarās, hearing him, bowed down and said: "O Lord of the Devas! Do not be afraid! We will try our best to seduce him.

यथा न स्वाद्धयं तस्मातथा कार्यं महातुँते ।

नृसर्गतीतिद्वारैंडु मुनेतस्व प्रतोभने ॥ 48 ॥

O highly Lustrous One! For the enticing away of the Muni, we will do all the things, dancing, music, and other amorous gestures and practices, that will discard your fear.

कटाईसूढ़भेदैंड मोहर्यिता मुनि विभो ।

तोतुएं वरामसाकं करिष्यामो नियन्तितम् ॥ 49 ॥

O King of the Gods! We will unsettle the mind of the Muni by our side glances and passionate gestures and postures, delude and tie him and then bring him under our control.

व्यास उवाच

इत्याभाव्य हरिं नायों ययुङ्धिरासोंउतिकम् ।

कुर्ट-न्यो विविधाभ्यावा-कामगाखोचितानपि ॥ ५० ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! Thus saying, the Apsarās went to Tríśirā and began to exhibit various amorous gestures and postures as stated in the Kāma Śāstra.

गायन्यस्तालभेदैस्ता नृत्यन्त्य: पुरतो मुनेः ।

तं प्रलोभायतुं घकुन्निभाबान् वर्गाना ॥ ५१ ॥

They began to sing sometimes, sometimes to dance in tune with musical measures before the Muni. In short, they practised various amorous gestures to entice him away.

नारायस्य तपोराशिर्यानां विद्धवन् ।

इन्द्रियाणि वरेगे कृता मुकान्यविधि: स्थितः ॥ 52 ॥

But that asecting, blazing with the fire of Tapas, did not notice even the Asparās' various attempts; rather he kept all his senses under control and remained like a deaf, dumb, and blind man.

दिनानि कातिचितस्यार्थविस्त्यामो चे ।

कृत्वीय गाननृत्यादि प्रपड़ानतिमोहादून । ५३ ॥

In that lovely hermitage of the Muni, the Apsarās sang and danced ravishingly and remained a few day there.

न चचाल यदा कामं ध्यानाच्च त्रिसारा मुनि: ।

परावृष्य तदा देव्यः पुनः शकमुपस्थिततः ॥ ५४ ॥

कृताझलिपुटा: सर्वा देवराजमधावुब्न् ।

श्रान्त दीन भघवस्ता त्विबर्णद्वना भृणम् ॥ ५५ ॥

But when they saw that the Muni Trísirā did not swerve a bit from his meditative posture they returned tired, distressed to Indra and all, very fearful, began to address Indra with folded hands: "O King! We tried our best and we could not in any way make the Muni unsteady, very hard to surmount."

देवदेव महागर जयल्छ प्रमः कृतः ।

न स शक्यो दुर्गाधर्षे धियांच्वालियुं विभो ॥ ५६ ॥

उयायोऊनः प्रकर्तेल्यः सर्वेथा पाकशासन ।

नास्याके बल्मेतांस्मितापसे विजितेनिद्रये ॥ ५७ ॥

O Pākaśāsana! Please invent other means; we could not make the self-controlled Muni move away an inch from his position; it is our good luck that that high-souled Muni, an incarnate of blazing fire has not cursed us!"

दिष्ठा वयं न शपता: स्म यदनेन महात्मना ।

भुनीना वहितृल्येन तपसा डोतितेन हि ॥ ५८ ॥

Then dismissing the Apsarās, the evil-minded and dull Indra began to devise means, though totally unlawful on how to kill that good Muni.

विसृज्यावास: शक्रश्रितन्यास मन्दधी: ।

तस्वीव च कवीपायं पापवद्धिरसाध्यमन्ति ॥ 59 ॥

विसृज्य लोकतलज्ञां से तथा पापचयं भूगाम् ।

चकार पापबुद्धि तु तद्धाय महीतये ॥ 60 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वैधीपागतते महापुराणे षटचक्ये

प्रभातोर्षया: 11 7 11

O King! That Indra abandoned all shame, and fear of sin and ultimately came to a highly blameable and sinful conclusion how to kill him.

Here ends the First Chapter of the Sixth Book on Trísirā's austerities in Śrimaddevivbhāgavatam the

Maḥa Purāṇam, of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

