[Ch 1 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rsis (of the Naimisa forest) addressed Sūta (fondly): O highly Fortunate One! Your nectar-like words are very sweet. We are not satiated with what you have described to us as the auspicious saying of Dvaipāyana Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣis (of the Naimiṣa forest) addressed Sūta (fondly) :-- O highly Fortunate One! Your nectar-like words are very sweet. We are not satiated with what you have described to us as the auspicious sayings of Dvaipāyana Vyāsa.

[Ch 1 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sūta! We desire to ask you again to narrate to us the auspicious saying of this Purāna, beautiful, famous, and sin-destroying and authorised by the holy Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sūta! We desire to ask you again to narrate to us the auspicious sayings of this Purāṇa, beautiful, famous, and sin-destroying and authorised by the holy Vedas.

[Ch 1 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Viśvakarmā had a son, named Vītrāśara, who was very well known, and very powerful. How was it that he had been slain by the high-souled Indra? Viśvakarmā was a powerful Brāhmin and belonged to the gods' party; his son was stronger.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viśvakarmā had a son, named Vritrāsura, who was very well known, and very powerful. How was it that he had been slain by the high-souled Indra? Viśvakarmā was a powerful Brāhmin and belonged to the godś party; his son was stronger.

[Ch 1 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How was it that he had been killed by Indra! The Devas are born of the Sativa qualities; men are born from the Räjasic qualities; and all the birds, etc., are born of the Tāmasic qualities.
NEW CORR ENG ──► How was it that he had been killed by Indra! The Devas are born of the Sattva qualities; men are born from the Rājasic qualities; and all the birds, etc., are born of the Tāmasic qualities.

[Ch 1 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This is the opinion of the Pandits, versed in the Purāṇas and Āgamas. But in this act of slaying Vītrāsura, a great contradiction arises; for the powerful Vītra was killed merely under a pretext by Indra, the performer of the hundred sacrifices, and endowed with Satva qualities.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This is the opinion of the Pundits, versed in the Purāṇas and Āgamas. But in this act of slaying Vritrāsura, a great contradiction arises; for the powerful Vritra was killed merely under a pretext by Indra, the performer of the hundred sacrifices, and endowed with Sattva qualities.

[Ch 1 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And Indra was prompted to do so by Viṣṇu, the head of those who possess Satīva qualities; while Viṣṇu himself entered in disguise into the thunderbolt so that he could kill Vṛtra. The powerful Vṛtra entered into a treaty and kept himself peaceful when Indra and Viṣṇu violated truth and treacherously killed him by Jalaphena (the watery foams).
NEW CORR ENG ──► And Indra was prompted to do so by Viṣṇu, the head of those who possess Sattva qualities; while Viṣṇu himself entered in disguise into the thunderbolt so that he could kill Vritra. The powerful Vritra entered into a treaty and kept himself peaceful when Indra and Viṣṇu violated truth and treacherously killed him by Jalaphena (the watery foams).

[Ch 1 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sūta! The great wonder is this: That Indra and Viṣṇu turned out so bold as to forsake the truth. This, then, is (therefore very clear that the high souled persons become deluded and act sinfully.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sūta! The great wonder is this :-- That Indra and Viṣṇu turned out so bold as to forsake the truth. This, then, is therefore very clear that the high souled persons become deluded and act sinfully.

[Ch 1 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Heads of the Devas act very wrongly; they are reckoned as polite simply because they observe the mere outward forms of good conduct as approved by the Śāstras. How can the mere observance is outward forms constitute politeness?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Heads of the Devas act very wrongly; they are reckoned as polite simply because they observe the mere outward forms of good conduct as approved by the Śāstras. How can the mere observance of outward forms constitute politeness?

[Ch 1 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Had Indra, who killed in disguise Vṛtra relying on his words, to suffer any punishment for the sin that he incurred in killing a Brāhmaṇa? It was told by you before that Vṛtra had been slain by the Devi Bhagavati; but the general belief is that Indra killed him. Our minds are puzzled on this point. (So clear our doubts on this point.)
NEW CORR ENG ──► Had Indra, who killed in disguise Vritra relying on his words, to suffer any punishment for the sin that he incurred in killing a Brāhmaṇa? It was told by you before that Vritra had been slain by the Devī Bhagavatī; but the general belief is that Indra killed him. Our minds are puzzled on this point. (So clear our doubts

[Ch 1 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: O Munis! Hear the incident of the killing of Vṛtrāsura and the punishment that Indra had to suffer due to his sin of Brahmahatya (killing a Brāhmin.)
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- O Munis! Hear the incident of the killing of Vritrāsura and the punishment that Indra had to suffer due to his sin of Brahmahatyā (killing a Brāhmin).

[Ch 1 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This question was asked by the King Parikshit and replied by Vyāsa, the son of Satyavatī. I will tell you what Vyāsa had told before.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This question was asked by the King Pārikṣit and replied by Vyāsa, the son of Satyavatī. I will tell you what Vyāsa had told before.

[Ch 1 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya asked: "O Best of Munis! How was it that in former days Indra, endowed with the Sattva qualities, killed Virṭrasura, with the aid of Viṣṇu? And how and why was it that he was killed again by the Goddess Bhagavati? O Lord of Munis! How could one body be killed by the two; our curiosity has been excited to hear the truth,
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya asked :-- O Best of Munis! How was it that in former days Indra, endowed with the Sattva qualities, killed Vritrāsura, with the aid of Viṣṇu? And how and why was it that he was killed again by the Goddess Bhagavatī? O Lord of Munis! How could one body be killed by the two; our curiosity has been excited to hear the truth.

[Ch 1 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What man is there that does not like to hear any more of the glorious deeds of the high-souled persons! Kindly narrate to us the slaying of Vṛtra by the Devi Bhagavatī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What man is there that does not like to hear any more of the glorious deeds of the high-souled persons! Kindly narrate to us the slaying of Vritra by the Devī Bhagavatī.

[Ch 1 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O King! You are blessed, since your taste to hear the events of Purāna has grown so much; the Devas even get their thirst for drinking nectar; but when quenched, they do not like to drink any more.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! You are blessed, since your taste to hear the events of Purāṇa has grown so much; the Devas even get their thirst for drinking nectar; but when quenched, they do not like to drink any more.

[Ch 1 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Your name and fame are widely spread. Your Bhakti (devotion) to the Purānas is growing more and more daily. A speaker gets very much delighted when his audience hears him with undivided attention.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Your name and fame are widely spread. Your Bhakti (devotion) to the Purāṇas is growing more and more daily. A speaker gets very much delighted when his audience hears him with undivided attention.

[Ch 1 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the earth! The fight between Vītra and Vāsava that occurred in days of yore is famous in the passages of the Vedas and the Purānas; as well as the suffering that Indra had to encounter as his punishment when he had killed the innocent son of Viśvakarmā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the earth! The fight between Vritra and Vāsava that occurred in days of yore is famous in the passages of the Vedas and the Purāṇas; as well as the suffering that Indra had to encounter as his punishment when he had killed the innocent son of Visvakarma.

[Ch 1 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The Munis, who fear sin very much, commit yet blameable act under Māyā; then what wonder is there that Viṣṇu, and Indra would kill Triśirā and Vṛtra merely under a plea.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The Munis, who fear sin very much, commit yet blameable acts under Māyā; then what wonder is there that Viṣṇu, and Indra would kill Triśirā and Vritra merely under a plea.

[Ch 1 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Viṣṇu, the incarnate of Sattva qualities, gets deluded by Māyā and kills deceitfully the Daityas always, then how can you expect any other man to conquer even mentally the Mahā Māyā Bhavānī, Who deludes all the beings!
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Viṣṇu, the incarnate of Sattva qualities, gets deluded by Māyā and kills deceitfully the Daityas always, then how can you expect any other man to conquer mentally even the Maha Māyā Bhavāni, Who deludes all the beings!

[Ch 1 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! It is undet the compulsion of this Māyā that the Bhagavān, the Infinite, the friend of Nara, Nārāyaṇa, takes incarnations in thousands and thousands of Yugas in this Saṃsāra as Fish, etc., and does deeds sometimes lawful and sometimes unlawful.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! It is under the compulsion of this Māyā that the Bhagavān, the Infinite, the friend of Nara, Nārāyana, takes incarnations in thousands and thousands of Yugas in this Samsāra as Fish, etc., and does deeds sometimes lawful and sometimes unlawful.

[Ch 1 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas and men, being confounded by his Māyā, become upset and disordered and say “that this body, wealth, house, sons, wife and relatives are all mine” and being thus deluded sometimes do virtuous and sometimes sinful deeds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas and men, being confounded by his Māyā, become upset and disordered and say “that this body, wealth, house, sons, wife and relatives are all mine” and being thus deluded sometimes do virtuous and sometimes sinful deeds.

[Ch 1 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! There is not even one, on the surface of this earth, though he may be well versed in finding out cause and effect, the knowledge of the high and low, that can be free from this Great Delusion; he is from the very beginning tied up by the three Guñas of this Māyā and thus remains under Her control.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! There is not even one, on the surface of this earth, though he may be well versed in finding out cause and effect, the knowledge of the high and low, that can be free from this Great Delusion; he is from the very beginning tied up by the three Guṇas of this Māyā and that remains under Her control.

[Ch 1 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This explains that Viṣṇu and Indra both were deluded by Māyā and engaged in fulfilling their own selfish ends. They killed Vṛtārsāra under a pretext.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This explains that Viṣṇu and Indra both were deluded by Māyā and engaged in fulfilling their own selfish ends. They killed Vritrāśūra under a pretext.

[Ch 1 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Hear! I am now describing to you the cause of enmity between Indra and Vṛtra. Viśvakarma, the Prajāpati, was the great architect of the Gods, he was skilled, he was superior amongst the gods, a great ascetic and endeared by the Brāhmins.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Hear! I am now describing to you the cause of enmity between lndra and Vritra. Viśvakarmā, the Prajāpati, was great architect of the Gods, he was skilled, he was superior amongst the gods, a great ascetic and endeared by the Brahmiṇs.

[Ch 1 Verse 30-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He had enmity with Indra; and out of this enmity he created a son, very beautiful and named him Triśirasa Visvārūpa. That son had three faces very beautiful and lovely. Visvārūpa performed three different functions with his three different faces; with one, he used to study the Vedas, with the second he used to drink nectar (wine), and with the third he used to see simultaneously all the directions.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He had enmity with Indra; and out of this enmity he created a son, very beautiful named him Triśiraska Visvarūpa. That son had three faces very beautiful and lovely. Visvarūpa performed three different functions with his three different faces; with one, he used to study the Vedas, with the second he used to drink nectar (wine), and with the third he used to see simultaneously all the directions.

[Ch 1 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śrimaddevaibhāgavatam Triśirā renounced the pleasures of the world and began to practise a hard tapasyā; he became a great ascetic, gentle, restrained in his passions and entirely devoted to his religion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Triśirā renounced the pleasures of the world and began to practise a hard tapasyā; he became a great ascetic, gentle, restrained in his passions and entirely devoted to his religion.

[Ch 1 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He practised Pañcāgni Sādhana in the summer season, tying his feet upwards on the branch of a tree with his head downwards; he remained in dew in the cold season, and, under water in the winter season.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He practised Pañcāgni-Sādhan in the summer season, tying his feet upwards on the branch of a tree with his head downwards; he remained in dew in the cold season, under water in the winter season.

[Ch 1 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus he abstained from food and conquered his self and, forsaking all the worldly connections, practised a very hard tapasyā; very difficult, indeed, for those who are of dull intellects.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus he abstained from food and conquered his self and, forsaking all the worldly connections, practised a very hard tapasyā; very difficult, indeed, for those who are of dull intellects.

[Ch 1 Verse 36-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra became very sad and dispirited to see him practise such a Tapasyā and thought of the means so that he might not acquire his Indraship. The Pakaśāsaṇa Indra remained always very anxious to see the energetic penance practised by that ascetic of unbounded glory and his steady attachment towards it.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra became very sad and dispirited to see him practise such a Tapasyā and thought of the means so that he might not acquire his Indraship. The Pākasāśana Indra remained always very anxious see the energetic penance practised by that ascetic of unbounded glory and his steady attachment towards it.

[Ch 1 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He thought thus: “This Trīśārā is becoming stronger day by day with his penace, so he will kill me. The wise never look an enemy with indifference whose strength daily becomes greater and greater.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► He thought thus :-- “This Triśirā is becoming stronger day by day by his penance, so he will kill me. The wise never look an enemy with indifference whose strength daily becomes greater and greater.”

[Ch 1 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is now my urgent duty to invent means on how to baffle his Tapasyā and he at last settled that lust is the great enemy of asceticism; the practice of devout austerities is destroyed completely by lust; so I must try this very day that some how the Muni becomes attached to worldly lusts and enjoyments.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is now my urgent duty to invent means how to baffle his Tapasyā and he at last settled that lust is the great enemy of asceticism; the practice of devout austerities is destroyed complete by lust; so I must try this very day how the Muni becomes attached to worldly lust and enjoyments.

[Ch 1 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The intelligent Indra, thinking thus, called the Apsarās Urvaśī, Menakā, Rambhā, Ghṛtāci, and Tilottamā and others proud of their beauties so that they might seduce Triśirā, the son of Viśvakarmā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The intelligent Indra, thinking thus, called the Apsarās Urvaśī, Menakā, Rambhā, Ghritācī, and Tilottamā and others proud of their beauties so that they might seduce Tri’sirā, the son of Vi’svakarmā.

[Ch 1 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Apsarās! I have now got a very grave task to fulfil; all of you help me in this respect. A great enemy of mine, difficult to conquer is practising penance with his self-controlled.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Apsarās! I have now got a very grave task to fulfil; all of you help me in this respect. A great enemy of mine, difficult to conquer, is practising penance with his self-controlled.

[Ch 1 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Start at once and with your dress suited to various amorous gestures and try hard to seduce him. Be all well with you; seduce him and remove the fever of my heart.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Start at once and with your dress suited to various amorous gestures and try hard to seduce him. Be all well with you; seduce him and remove the fever of my heart.

[Ch 1 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Apsarās! What more shall I say, I am restless since I have heard of his strength in performing such hard austerities.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Apsarās! What more shall I say, I am restless since I have heard of his strength performing such hard austerities.

[Ch 1 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Weak Ones! That powerful ascetic may acquire my place and thus dispossess me; this fear has possessed me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Weak Ones ! That powerful ascetic may acquire my place and thus dispossess me; this fear has possessed me.

[Ch 1 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore destroy my fear as quickly as possible. This is the task now given to you; get united and do this good to me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore destroy my fear as quickly as possible. This is the task now given to you; get united and do this good to me.

[Ch 1 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Apsarās, hearing him, bowed down and said: "O Lord of the Devas! Do not be afraid! We will try our best to seduce him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Apsarās, hearing him, bowed down and said :-- “O Lord of the Devas! Do not be afraid! We will try our best to seduce him.

[Ch 1 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O highly Lustrous One! For the enticing away of the Muni, we will do all the things, dancing, music, and other amorous gestures and practices, that will discard your fear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O highly Lustrous One! For the enticing away of the Muni, we will do all the things, dancing, music and other amorous gestures and practices, that will discard your fear.

[Ch 1 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King of the Gods! We will unsettle the mind of the Muni by our side glances and passionate gestures and postures, delude and tie him and then bring him under our control.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King of the Gods! We will unsettle the mind of the Muni by our side glances and passionate gestures and postures, delude and tie him and then bring him under our control.”

[Ch 1 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O King! Thus saying, the Apsarās went to Tríśirā and began to exhibit various amorous gestures and postures as stated in the Kāma Śāstra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Thus saying, the Apsarās went to Triśirā and began to exhibit various amorous gestures and postures as stated in the Kāma Sāstra.

[Ch 1 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They began to sing sometimes, sometimes to dance in tune with musical measures before the Muni. In short, they practised various amorous gestures to entice him away.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They began to sing sometimes, sometimes to dance in tune with musical measures before the Muni. In short, they practised various amorous gestures to entice him away.

[Ch 1 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But that asecting, blazing with the fire of Tapas, did not notice even the Asparās' various attempts; rather he kept all his senses under control and remained like a deaf, dumb, and blind man.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But that ascetic, blazing with the fire of Tapas, did not notice even the Apsaraś various attempts; rather he kept all his senses under the control and remained like a deaf, dumb, and blind man.

[Ch 1 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In that lovely hermitage of the Muni, the Apsarās sang and danced ravishingly and remained a few day there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In that lovely hermitage of the Muni, the Apsarās sang and danced ravishingly and remained a few days there.

[Ch 1 Verse 54-55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But when they saw that the Muni Trísirā did not swerve a bit from his meditative posture they returned tired, distressed to Indra and all, very fearful, began to address Indra with folded hands: "O King! We tried our best and we could not in any way make the Muni unsteady, very hard to surmount."
NEW CORR ENG ──► But when they saw that the Muni Triśirā did not swerve a bit from his meditative posture they returned tired, distressed to Indra and all, very fearful, began to address Indra with folded hands :-- “O King! We tried our best and we could not in any way make the Muni unsteady, very hard to surmount.

[Ch 1 Verse 56-57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Pākaśāsana! Please invent other means; we could not make the self-controlled Muni move away an inch from his position; it is our good luck that that high-souled Muni, an incarnate of blazing fire has not cursed us!"
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Pākaśasana! Please invent other means; we could not make the self-controlled Muni move away an inch from his position; it is our good luck that that high-souled Muni, an incarnate of blazing fire have not cursed us!”

[Ch 1 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then dismissing the Apsarās, the evil-minded and dull Indra began to devise means, though totally unlawful on how to kill that good Muni.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then dismissing the Apsarās, the evil-minded and dull Indra began to devīse means, though totally unlawful, how to kill that good Muni.

[Ch 1 Verse 59-60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! That Indra abandoned all shame, and fear of sin and ultimately came to a highly blameable and sinful conclusion how to kill him. Here ends the First Chapter of the Sixth Book on Trísirā's austerities in Śrimaddevivbhāgavatam the Maḥa Purāṇam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! That Indra abandoned all shame, and fear of sin and ultimately came to a highly blameable and sinful conclusion how to kill him. Here ends the First Chapter of the Sixth Book on Triśirā’s austerities in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam the Mahā Purāṇam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
