CHAPTER XXVI

On the Sorrows of Hariscandra

सूत उवाच

ततो5थ भूपति: प्रह राजीं स्थित्या हाधोगुखः ।

अत्रोपधिष्यशां वाले पापस्य पुरतो मम ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: The King Harisācandra with his face bent low thus said to the Queen: "O Young One! I am a great sinner, otherwise why shall I be ready to do this heinous act! However now sit before me.

शिरते छेदीथ्यामि हन्तु शक्नीते चेतकर: ।

पूर्वमुक्ता समुधाय खद्रां हन्तु गतो नृपः ॥ 2 ॥

If my hand be capable to kill you, then it will cut off your head." Thus saying, the King took the axe and moved forward to cut her.

न जानाति नृपः पर्नीं सा न जानाति भूपतिम् ।

अववीद्भूगुःखातां स्वमृत्युमिफकांक्षती ॥ ३ ॥

As the King did not recognise her as His Queen, so the Queen did not recognise him as Her husband, the King. So the Queen, being very much strained with sorrow, began to utter with a view to court her death.

स्वयाच

चाण्डाल शृषु मे वाक्यं किंचित्चं यदि मन्यसे ।

भृतसितछित मे पुत्रो नातिपूरे बक्षि: पुत्रत् ॥ 4 ॥

तं द्वहामि हर्त यावदानयित्या त्वांतिकम् ।

तावत्पतीक्ष्नतां पछायसिना शाततस्य मान् ॥ 5 ॥

O Cāndāla! It you like, I say something; hear my son is dead and is lying close to the outer skirts of the city. Wait till I bring my child before you and do his burning ceremonies. Next you can cut me off by your axe."

तेनाथ बाढमित्युक्न्या प्रेषिता बालकं प्रति ।

सा जगामातिछुःखातिं विलपन्ती सुदारुभणम् ॥ ६ ॥

भार्यां तस्य नरेन्रस्य सर्वेद्धे हिं बालकम् ।

हा पुर हा वस्न शिशणे इत्येवं वदती मुड़ः ॥ ७ ॥

कृष्ण विश्वाणं मलिना पांसुप्वस्तगिरोहा ।

प्रभानाभूमिमागच स्वां प्याप्याविशण्डूवि ॥ ८ ॥

The King said: "Very well; let that be," and gave her permission to go to her dead son. The Queen, emaciated and pale, her body being covered all over with dust arrived at the burning ground and taking her dead son, bitten by a serpent, on her lap cried out loudly O Son! O my Child! O my young Son!" and referring to her husband said: "O King! See, to day, the sad condition of your son, lying on the ground, as his bed.

राजप्रद स्ववाल्ते त पश्यसीह महीतले ।

यमागं स्वसखिधिर्दे डुशद्धिता मृतम् ॥ 9 ॥

My son went to play with other boys and, bitten by a cruel poisonous serpent, left his life." Hearing the pitiful cry of that helpless woman, the King Harisćandra went to the dead and took off the cover of his face.

तत्या विलापगर्धं तमाकषर्षे स नाराधिप: ।

गशवर्धिधिमगतव वक्षमताशिपतच्च ॥ 10 ॥

Due to the long exile and the difficulties thereof, the Queen was changed altogether in her outer form, so the King could not recognise her weeping as his wife.

तां तथा हृदर्ती भार्वा नाभिज्ञानाति भूमिपः ।

चिरप्रवाससंस्तंता पुनर्जतामिवबालम् ॥ 1 1 ॥

Book VII Chapter XXVI

साउपि तं चाफकेशानंतं पुगे दृष्ट्वा जाटालकम् ।

नाथ्यजानावृषवरं शुक्वबुक्तवचोयमम् ॥ १२ ॥

On the other hand the King, too, had not the curled hair on his head as before; it has turned into matted hair and his skin especially has become like the bark of a dried tree; so the Queen could not make out the King also. The King then noticed all the King-making auspicious signs on the several limbs of that dead boy, poisoned all over and lying on the ground and began to think thus:

भूमी निवित्ते बालं बृद्धास उर्गीविधपीडितम् ।

नरेन्द्रलक्षणोपेतमचिंशवदतीं वृभः ॥ १३ ॥

अस्य पूर्णेन्दुवढ़कं शुभभूजसम्बजपम् ।

दर्पिण्यतिमोतुक्रकपोल्युगगोषितम् ॥ १४ ॥

नीलाकेशान्तुक्रवितात्यासान्दार्यमितर्शिणः ।

राजीवसरुपुं नेत्रे अंग्रेति विवर्षकतोपोम् ॥ १५ ॥

विशालवक्षा दीर्घक्षी दीर्घबाहूनतांकाः ।

विशालपादो गम्भीर: सुक्ष्मांगुल्यवर्शीधर: ॥ १६ ॥

गुणालपादो गम्भीरताभिकन्नतकंधरः ।

The face of the child is very beautiful like the Full Moon, nowhere, there is any scar nor anything like this; the nose is high; the two cheeks are clean like a mirror and specious; the hairs are blue, curling, similar, long and waving, the two eyes are widely expanded like a full blown lotus, the two lips are red like Bimba fruits; the chest is wide and spacious, the eyes are stretched up to the ears; the arms are extending up to the knees; the shoulders are elevated; the legs are elongated, yet god-like like a lotus stem; the appearance is grave, the fingers are fine, yet strong enough to hold the world; the navel is deep and the region of the shoulders elevated.

अहो कई नोरूत्रय कर्यायेप कुले शिगुः ॥ 17 ॥

जातो नीतः कृतलोने कालपाणागुरावमना ।

Certainly this boy was born in a royal family. Alas! What a pain is this! The cruel Death has reduced him to this state!

मूल उवाच

एवं दूर्वाउध तं बालं मातुरंके प्रसारितम् ॥ १ ८ ॥

स्मृतिमध्यापतो राजा हाहेत्वश्रुपयापातयत् ।

सो3प्युबाच च वतयो मे दुशामेतामुपापातः ॥ १९ ॥

नीतो यदि च योगेण कृतांतैतान्यनो वर्णम् ।

विचारयित्या राज्ञसी हीक्षीश्रस्तथा स्थितः ॥ 20 ॥

ततो राजी महादुःखावेशादिद्मभाषत ।

Sūta said: Thus looking carefully that boy in the lap of his mother from his head to foot, the King Hariścandra got back to his ancient recollections. He recognised the boy to be his and wept aloud repeating the words Oh! Oh! The tears flowed from his eyes and he said: "This is my boy that has been reduced to this state! Oh! The cruel Fate!" Though the boy is dead, yet the King remained bewildered for a moment. The queen then spoke out of terrible pain: "O Child! What sin is that which has caused this dire calamity, I cannot imagine!"

गत्सुवाच

हा वस्त कस्य पाणस्य त्वध्यानादिरं महत् ॥ 21 ॥

दुःख्यमपतितं घोरं तदूरं नोपलभ्यते ।

हा नाथ राजन्यवता मापनायस्य सुर्ध:वितान् ॥ 22 ॥

कमिन्मांस्यीयते स्थाने विश्वधरं केम हेतुना ।

राज्यनाश: सुहृत्त्यागो भार्यान्तयविक्रयः ॥ 23 ॥

हरिश्रस्यर राजर्षे: किं विध्यातः कृते तया ।

इति तत्या वचः श्रृता राजा स्थानच्युतस्तद ॥ 24 ॥

प्रत्यधिप्रानय देवीं तां पुत्रं च तिथर्थ नगत् ।

"O my Husband! O King! I am extremely worried of pains and troubles; leaving me thus, how is and where you are passing away your time in a calm, quiet state! O Fortune! It is You that has brought about the loss of the Rājarsī Harisācandra's dominion, the separation from his friends and what more, you have caused his wife and son to be sold! Has he done so much mischief to you!" Hearing her cries, the King's patience gave way and he came to recognize the Devi and the son and exclaimed 'She is my wife and dead boy is my son. Oh! What a series of troubles. one coming after another.

कट्टे मयैव पत्नीय बालक्रशीय मे सूतः ॥ 25 ॥

ज्ञाला पपात सन्तपो मूढांमितिजागम है ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

सा च तं प्रत्यिभूतया तामवस्थामुपगतम् ॥ 26 ॥

भूष्टिन सिपपातातां निश्रेशा धरणीतले ।

वेतनां प्राय्य राजेत्रो राजपनी च ती समम् ॥ 27 ॥

वितलेपतु: सुसंतन्ती शोकभारेण पीक्षिति ।

Being overpowered with extreme trouble and pain, the King fell unconscious on the ground; the Queen, too, looking at the King's state, fell motionless, and, void of senses, no sooner she recognised him as the King Hariścandra. Some time after, the King and Queen both got back at the same time their consciousness and, with great sorrow and agony, began to lament.

राजोवाच

हा वस्स सुकुमार्ते ते वदन्तं कृष्णतालकम् ॥ 28 ॥

पश्यतो मे पुर्यं दीनं हृदयं किं न दीयते ।

तात तातेति मधुरं बुवाणं स्वयमागतम् ॥ 29 ॥

उपगुहा कदा बव्ये वस्य वस्मिते सीह्यात् ।

The King said: “O Child! Why my heart does not rend to thousand pieces, seeing to day your gentle face pale lifeless, that was once beautiful with curls of hairs! O Rohita! When will you come to me saying in a sweet voice ‘Father! Father!’ When shall I address you affectionately ‘Oh my child! Oh my child!’ embracing you within my breast!

कस्य जानुपणितेन पिंगेन त्रिस्तिरेपना ॥ 30 ॥

मन्तीरीयमुसंतं त्वांगं मतलेष्यित ।

न वार्तं मम ससभुतं मनो ह्वदयनन्दन ॥ 31 ॥

मयाउसि पिटुमापित्या दिक्षितीय नेय सकुतत् ।

गतं राज्यमग्रेये मे सबान्धवधनं महत् ॥ 32 ॥

हीनदेवाइग्रसेन चृछो मे तनयस्ततः ।

अहं महातिद्रस्य पुरस्याननयड्जनम् ॥ 33 ॥

निरीक्षत्रघ चोरेण विशेषाणधिकृतोर्युना ।

Whose tawny coloured dust on his knees will spoil my clothes, lap and my body! O Delightful Son! I have sold you as if an ordinary thing, though I am your father. As yet my pleasure of having a son is not satisfied. Owing to the mockery of the mean Fate, my unbounded kingdom, friends, and abundance of riches all have vanished away!

Finally I had one son and that too is now in the jaws of death! Oh! With what an amount of terrible pain I am being burnt up to day when I am seeing the lotus-face of my son, smitten by a serpent and lying dead on the ground!"

एवमुक्ता तमादाय वालकं बाध्यगद्धः ॥ 34 ॥

परिष्क्ण च निश्छोटो मूच्छैया निपयात ह ।

ततलं पतितं दूद्या शैल्या चैवमधित्यत् ॥ 35 ॥

अयं स पुरुषव्यापः स्वरेणीवोपल्वयते ।

विद्रज्ञनमनश्छीरे हरिश्छ्ञो न सशेणः ॥ 36 ॥

तवास्य नासिका तुझा तिलपुष्योपाण सृषा ।

Thus speaking in a voice choked with feelings and with tears in his eyes, as soon as he was going to take his boy in his lap, he fell senseless on the ground. Seeing the King lying on the ground, Śaivyā thus thought: “Such is His voice as makes me certain that He is the King Hariścandra, the best of men and the delighter of the learned men’s hearts.

दन्ताश मुकुलप्रख्या: ख्यातकीर्तमैहान्म: ॥ 37 ॥

श्रणतानमानतः कम्याछोर्वं स नरेश्वः ।

विद्यार पूरशोकं सा पश्यन्तीं पतितं पतिभ् ॥ 38 ॥

प्रद्वा वित्सिता दीना भर्तपुरातिरीपीडिता ।

वीक्षन्ती सा तदारूपनमूर्छेना धरपीतले ॥ 39 ॥

प्रायः चेतश्र शनकैः सा गरुदरमभात ।

His teeth are like those of the famous Hariścandra just like to Mukul and his nose is elevated and soft like the Tila flower. But if he be Hariścandra, how is it that he has come to this burning ground!" Thus thinking, while she looked at the King, leaving for the moment the sorrow for his son, joy, pain and surprise attacked her heart simultaneously; and she, in that state, fell down unconscious on the ground. Then gradually regaining consciousness she spoke in a pitiful voice: "O Fortune! You have caused to the King who was once like an Immortal, the loss of his kingdom, friends, and even the sale of his wife and son. And now you have transformed him into a Cāndāla! You are merciless, religionless, void

Book VII Chapter XXVI

of any justice as to what is just and what is unjust. You are shameless.

धित्मत्वों देह ह्राकरण निर्मयादि जुगुपिति ॥ 40 ॥

येनायममग्रखो नीते राजा श्याकताम् ।

राज्यनगो सुहृत्यागं भार्यानतयिक्रवम् ॥ 41 ॥

प्राथिवताउपि येनाङ् चाण्डलोपं कृते ग्रुप: ।

नाङ् पर्यापति ने छत्र सिंहुसन्माथापि च ॥ 42 ॥

वायाख्याने वाउपि कोयं विधिविषयेः ।

यथायस्य जस्तः पूर्वे राजानो भृच्चतां गताः ॥ 43 ॥

स्वोतरीयै: प्रकृत्यिति विराजकं महीतलम् ।

So fie on you! O King! Where are gone today that royal umbrella, that throne, that Câmara, and that pair of fans on you both sides! Oh! What is this transformation caused by the Vidhātā (the Ordainer of Fate)! When the high-souled King used to travel, all the kings used to remove as His servants the dust of the roads by their clothing! Oh! Is He the same King of Kings, Hariścandra who is roaming in this unholy burning ground, burdened too much by his load of sufferings!

सोउंयं कालसंलेनने घटीपदनितने ॥ 44 ॥

भृतनिमाल्यसुर्जातलैन्यकेशसुर्जाभे

वसानिथ्यंदंसृष्यकमाणदलमिष्ठत ॥ 4 5 ॥

भस्मागतार्थद्धार्थस्थमज्ञासंघघुभीषणे ।

Oh! Innumerable human skulls are lying here; the small earthen posts (brought for the purification of the bodies of the dead) are lying scattered close to each; the garlands of flowers for the dead, being intertwined with the hairs of the dead, are presenting a grim spectacle! The ashes, charcoals, half-burnt dead bodies, bones, and marrows all arranged one over another make the place more hideous. The marrows of the dead bodies have come out and are dried up by the sun.

गृधरोपामयुनाद्रतें पुरुष्धूरविद्धर्मे ॥ 46 ॥

चितापुभायावतये नीलीकृतदितान्ते ।

कृपाणास्यादनमुदा संप्रकृतीनशारे ॥ 47 ॥

चरत्यविधे यजनैः शरणाने दुःखपीडितः ।

एवमुक्त्वा ए सिंलिष्य कपटे राजे नृपायबा ॥ 48 ॥

कई शोकसमाविष्टा विल्लापात्रौय गिरा ।

राजन्स्वनो5थ तत्थं वा यदेतन्यन्ते भवान् ॥ 49 ॥

तत्कल्यतां महाभाग मनो वे मुहाते मन ।

At places, vultures, and Šakunis are crying hideously and the crows and other birds, eager to eat flesh, are roaming to and fro. All the quarters of the sky are looking blue with the smoke, arising out of the burning of the dead. The Rāksasas are constantly roaming hither and thither, gladly feasting on the human flesh. Is the King passing his days thus in this place? Alas! Oh! What a painful thing is this!" The daughter of the King, Šaivyā, was overpowered with an awful sorrow; and clasping the neck of the King, began to lament again, in a pitiful voice. "O King! You have spoken that you are a Cāndāla. Is this a dream? Or a Reality? O King! If it be true you are a slave of the Cāndāla, then say to me; my mind is being deluded very much! (i.e., I cannot indulge this idea).

यदोतैदं धर्मत्र नास्ति धर्मे सहायता ॥ 50 ॥

तथैव विषदेवादिपुजने सत्यापतने ।

नास्ति धर्म: कुतः सर्वे नार्जवे नानुगसंता ॥ 51 ॥

यत्र त्व धर्मपनः स्वाराज्याद्वशेपितः ।

O Knower of Dharma! You have shewn your great zeal towards Dharma; and, for that reason, you are displaced from your royal throne! Now if such help comes out of worshipping the Brāhmins and the Devas, then Dharma cannot stand and, along with it, the truth, simplicity and harmlessness cannot exist."

सूत उवाच

इति तत्या चच: शूला नि: श्रव्योष्णं समुद्ध: ॥ 52 ॥

कथयामास तत्वंये यथा प्राप्त: श्वापकात्म ।

रुदित्वा सा तु सुविरं नि: श्रव्योष्णं सुवृ:क्षिता ॥ 53 ॥

स्वपुत्रमरणं भीरुर्थंथालनं न्ववेदयत ।

Sūta said: Hearing these words from the thin Śaivyā, the King took a heavy sigh and then described to her in detail with tears flowing on his neck, how he got the Cāndāla state. The fearful Queen became very much pained to hear all this and having a deep sigh, described, as it was, how her son died.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

शुत्वा राजा तथा वाक्यं निपपात महीत्ते ॥ 54 ॥

मृतपुरं समानीय निद्धाया विलिहन्युः ।

हरिश्छन्धपो प्रह् शैल्यां गद्रद्वा गिरा ॥ 55 ॥

कुर्ब्व स्वामिन: प्रेथ्यं छेदीथला शिरो मम ।

स्वामिड्रोहे न तेरस्त्वा माउस्मो भव भूपते ॥ 56 ॥

माउस्मचं तल राजेन्द्र परजोहस्तु पातकम् ।

O, hearing this, the King fainted and fell unconscious on the ground. Then regaining gradually his consciousness, he began to kiss, with his tongue, the face of his dead son. Śaivyā then said in a choked voice: "Now sever off my head and obey your master's word." O King! You will be saved then as having kept your truth; and your master's order would be carried out.

पुस्ताकर्ण राजा तु पपात घुवि मृष्टितः ॥ 57 ॥

क्षणेन चेतनां प्रायः विल्लतायातितुःश्रितः ।

Hearing this, the King fainted and fell down senseless. Getting up conscious in a moment, he began to weep bitterly."

राजोवाच

कयं प्रिये त्वया प्रोकं चवनं त्वतिनिषुतम् ॥ 58 ॥

यदारकयं भवेद्रुक्ते तत्कर्म क्रियते कवम् ।

The King said: "O Beloved! How have you uttered such cruel words? How can I execute that which is hard even to utter!

पल्युवाच

मया च पूक्तिता गौरी देवा विग्रास्तवैव च । ५९ ॥

भविष्यसि पतित्वं मे ह्यान्सिज्ञानि प्रभो ।

श्रुत्वा राजा तत्व वाक्यं निपपात महीत्ते ॥ 60 ॥

भृगस्य पुरस्य तदा चुचुवढ़ पुःशितो मुखम् ।

Śaivyā said: ‘O Lord! I have worshipped the Devi Gaurī and other Devas and the Brāhmins; so, with their mercy, i will get you as my husband in my future birth. Hearing this, the King again fell down instantly on the ground; getting up immediately, he was overpowered with sorrow and began to kiss the face of the dead son.

राजोवाय

प्रिये न रोचते दीर्घं कालं ललेगं मयासीशतुम् ॥ 6 1 ॥

नात्यवतीस्य तत्वीं एयय मे मन्दभायताम् ।

चाण्डालोनानुज्ञातः प्रवेध्ये ज्वलनं यदि ॥ 6 2 ॥

चाण्डालादासां तायये पुतरण्य-वतवमनि ।

The King said: "O Dear! I wo'nt be able to suffer any longer for a long time. But, O thin-bodied One! See, I am so very unfortunate that I have no command even over my heart. If I enter into the fire without the permission of the Cāndāla, then I will have to become again the slave of a Cāndāla in my future birth. Think it over.

नरकं च परं प्रायः खेदं प्रायमाथि दाहणम् ॥ 63 ॥

तापं प्रायमापि संग्राय महातीरवरीरे ।

मानस्य दुःखजलधी वरं प्राणीर्वियोजनम् ॥ 64 ॥

एकोंपि बालको योउभापतीईगकर: सुतः ।

After that I will have to go to the hell and be tormented there. But this too I find beneficial to me. Rather I will go to the hell Mahā Raurava and there suffer for a long time the torments of the hell, yet I do not like to live a little longer when my boy, the continuer of my family, has left his life out of the queen fancies of the Great Time and I be merged in the sorrows for my son.'

मन देवतायुवोगेन मृत: सोर्पि वकरीसा ॥ 65 ॥

कर्थ प्राणानिवमुंचामि परायतोजीम इगृतेः ।

तथापि दुःखबालुवाचव्यामि तु निजां ततुम् ॥ 66 ॥

My bodys is now at the command of the Cāndāla. How can I in this state quit my life without his permission. If I leave my body, I will be indebted to him and I will have to suffer in hell. Let this be so; still I will leave off my body, the receptacle of all these pains and troubles.

त्रैलोके मानित सदुःखं नानिपशवने तथा ।

वैतरण्यां कृतस्तद्धापुरां पुराविलले ॥ 67 ॥

सोर्ड सुतारगीरेणादीयामने हुतागने ।

Nowhere, in the Trilokī, is any pain like that felt in the demise of a son, not in crossing the Vaitaranī nor in the Asipratravanam! So I will now throw myself on the burning fire along with the dead body of my son.

निपतिथामि त्वन्हिंष श्नत्थां तन्मातुभूमि ॥ 68 ॥

न चक्चयं त्वया किंचिदातः कमललोचने ।

Book VII Chapter XXVII

मम वाक्यं च तत्वीरि निवधोत्रहात्मानसा ॥ 69 ॥

अनुज्ञानात्र श पछ्छ तं विषयेण सृष्टिसमे ।

So, O Thin-bodied One! You should now excuse me, i.e., do not prevent me. O Sweet-smiling One! I now permit you to go back to the house of the Brāhmim.

यदि दतं यदि हुतं गुचो यदि लोषिता: ॥ 70 ॥

संभामः परलोकें मे निजपुत्रेणे चेल्च्या ।

इह लोके कुतस्त्वेतद्विव्यति समीधितम् ॥ 71 ॥

If ever I have given in charity riches, offered oblation to the fire, and given satisfaction to my superiors then, in the other world, I will get you and my son. But there is no such chance now in this world.

यन्या हस्ता किश्रिद्रसि तां शुचित्यमे ।

अशोषुर्भ क्तसर्वं भ्रन्तव्यं मम यास्यतः ॥ ७२ ॥

राजपनीति गर्जण नावड़ेयः स मे द्विजः ।

सर्वयनेन तोयः स्यात्यामी दैवतवच्छुषे ॥ ७३ ॥

O Sweet-smiling One! If ever I had given you offence while conversing or making jokes with you, now at the time of my parting, excuse them all. O Auspicious One! Never despise the Brāhmīn out

of your pride as a Queen. Look on your master as a Deva and try all your best to satisfy him."

राज्यवाच

अहमध्यत्र राजर्षे निपतिथे हुतागने ।

दुःखभागसहादेव सह यास्यामि वे त्यया ॥ 7 4 ॥

त्याय सह मम अंशो मानं नान्यथा भवेत् ।

सह स्वर्गे च नरकं त्वया पोक्ष्यामि मानन्द ॥ 7 5 ॥

श्रुता राजा तदोवाच एवममतु पतित्रते ।

इति शीगदैवीभागवते महापुराणे सनस्मकन्ये हरीक्षन्नोषाल्ञाने

श्वविंशोद्यथा: 11 26 11

The Queen said: “O Rājarsī! I will also throw myself on the burning fire. O Deva! I will not be able to carry on this burden, so I will accompany You. It is better for me to accompany you; so there will not be otherwise. O Giver of Honour! I will enjoy with You heaven or suffer with You in the hell.” Hearing this, the King said: “O Chaste One! Do as you please.”

Here ends the Twenty-sixth, Chapter of the Seventh Book on the narration of the sorrows of Hariścandra in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

[Illegible Text]

Book VII Chapter XXVII

