CHAPTER I

On the Questions put by Janamejaya Regarding Krṣṇa's Incarnation

जनमेज उवाच

वासवेय मुनिश्रेष्ठ सर्वज्ञानिधो5नय ।

प्रशुभिष्ठामर्थे स्वागिरसमाकं कुर्वतर्पनि ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: O Vāsaveya! the Chief amongst the Munis, the Ocean of all knowledge, O the Sinless One! the Lord and Well Wisher of our families, I come to you with a mind to ask you certain questions.

Note: Vāsavi is the name of the mother of Vyāsa.

गुरुसेनसुतः श्रीमानसुदेशः प्रतापयान् ।

श्रुतं मया हरिरयेय पुत्रभावमवाप्तवान् ॥ 2 ॥

देवानामपि पुर्वोर भुप्रान्मा चानककुंद्धिः ।

कारागारे कंधे बब्दः कंस्यस्य धर्मतन्तः ॥ 3 ॥

I heard of yore, but I do not know why was that illustrious son of Sūrasena, that powerful Anakadundubhi, (1) the pious and illustrious Vasudeva, the father of Śrī Krṣna, the incarnation of the God Hari Himself, and who was worshipped even by the Gods, thrown into prison by Karīnsa?

Note: Anakadundubhi is the epithet of Vasudeva, father of Śrī Krṣna, since at Vasudeva's birth, drums called Ānakas and Dundubhis were resounded in the sky.

देवक्या भार्येया सार्थ किमागः कृतावनसौ ।

देवक्या बालप्रदकस्य विनाशछा कृतः पुनः ॥ 4 ॥

तेन कैसेन कस्माढ़े ययातिकुलजेन च ।

कारागरे कर्ज जन्य बासुदेवस्य वै हरेः ॥ 5 ॥

What faults had he and his wife Devaki

committed? Why that Karīsa, the descendant of Yayāti, killed the six infant sons of Devakī? And for what reason did the God Śrī Hari incarnate Himself as the son of Vasudeva in the prison house of Karīsa?

गोकुले च कर्वं नीते भगवान्सत्वां चितः ।

गतो जन्मान्तरं कस्मात्सित्ते निगडे स्थिति ॥ 6 ॥

How was that Lord of the Universe, Śrī Bhagavān, and the Ruler of the Yādava clan, taken to Gokula? Why was He, born of a Kṣattriya family, generally recognised as of the Gopāla (cowherd) clan?

देवक्रीमदुर्वेदो च कृष्णस्यामिततेजसः ।

कर्थ न मोचिती वृद्धौ पितर्ते हरिणासुना ॥ ७ ॥

जगत्कर्तु समर्थेन स्थितेन जनकोदरे ।

प्रात्कनं किं तयोः कर्म दुविंत्रयं महात्माथि: ॥ ८ ॥

Why were His father Vasudeva and mother Devaki thrown into prison? And why did not Śri Krṣna, of indomitable prowess, and capable to create and preserve the worlds, could release instantly, father and mother from their imprisoned state?

जन्म वै वासुदेवस्य यत्रासीतयामतः ।

के ते पुराङ्ठा का बाला या कंसेन विधोधिता ॥ 9 ॥

शिलायानिर्माता योनि जाना ताख्छुजा पुनः ।

गाह्रस्थ्च च हरैशूँहि बहुभायांस्य चान्च ॥ 10 ॥

I cannot conceive that the so-called Fate could have any influence on such high souled persons, the father and mother of the Supreme Being, Śrī Krṣṇa; who were those sons of Vasudeva that were

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

killed by Karīsa? And who was that girl child who when struck by Karīsa on a slab of stone, instantly rose up above the sky, assuming the form of Aṣtabhujā, the eight armed Goddess? O Sinless One! Kindly explain unto me how did Śrī Hari manage to perform the house-holder's duties, when he had married the several wives? and what were those glorious deeds that he did in His this incarnation and how did he finally pass away from his mortal physical coil?

क्रार्याणि त्रन तान्येव देहल्याणं च तस्य वे ।

क्रिवन्दना क्षुतं चतम्बनो मोहस्थतीव मे ॥ ११ ॥

My mind sinks into an ocean of confusion, when I hear of the several things done by Śrī Hari; some times I find the deeds, not capable of beings done by any other than the Supreme Being Himself and sometimes I hear of deeds that can be done by an ordinary man. And, therefore, I cannot decide whether Vāsudeva was the Incarnation of God or an ordinary being. Be pleased to remove these doubts from my mind and describe the life of Vāsudeva in its true light.

वर्तिते वासुदेवस्य त्वामख्याहि यवातयम् ।

ननारायणी देवौ पुराणावृषिस्तमी ॥ १२ ॥

In days of yore, the two sons of Dharma were the two best amongst the Rşis, and were the Devas Nara and Nārāyāna.

धर्मपुत्री महात्मानी तपशेत्रतुस्तमम् ।

यी भूनी बहुवर्षाणि पुणये बदरिकाओंम ॥ १३ ॥

निर्वाही त्रित्तामती नि:सूष्टी जितपद्धुणी ।

विष्णोगौरी जानस्येने तपश्रेतुक्तमम् ॥ १४ ॥

They were very high souled persons and they performed severe austerities for long extending years. They were born as part incarnations of Visnu; and, for the good of the world, did they, in the Badarikśrama, perform penances, controlling their six passions, and free from desires.

त्योरंगशताती हि विज्युक्णी महावलि ।

प्रसिद्धो मुनिभि: प्रोत्नी सर्वेत्रेनैरादिषि: ॥ १ ५ ॥

The all-knowing sages Nārada and others say

that the well known Arjuna and Śrī Krṣṇa of indomitable prowess were the two part incarnations of those ancient Munis Nara and Nārāyaṇa.

विद्यामगरीतौ तो कर्थ दैहान्तरं गतौ ।

ननारावाणदी देह्वी पुनः कृष्णाजुनी कवम् ॥ १ ६ ॥

How came those two Devas Nara and Nārāyaṇa to be born in the two bodies of Krṣna and Arjuna, though they did not relinquish their previous bodies!

यो चक्रतुलपश्ठोयं मुक्लवर्धं मुनिसतमो ।

ती कंयं प्राप्तुदैही प्राप्तवोगो महातपो ॥ 17 ॥

And also when those two Munis had attained liberation, their goal in their Yogas, by performing severe penances, how could they again be born in other bodies!

शूर: स्वधर्मान्थितु देहान्ते क्षवियस्तु स: ।

गुणाचातो मृतो वो वे स गुहे प्राहणी भवेत् ॥ 18 ॥

ब्राह्मणो निः:सृष्टः शान्तो भवेरोगाड्मुपचले ।

विपरीतिमंद भाति नरनारायणे च ते ॥ 19 ॥

If any Śūdra dies performing his own religion, he takes up a Vaiśya body in his next incarnation; if any Vaiśya die so, he takes up a Kṣattriya body and a Kṣattriya when adhering to his own rites and ceremonies, dying takes up a Brāhmaṇa body in his next incarnation. And if a Brāhma in be free desires and resorts to the path of peace, when he dies, he becomes free from incarnations and is saved from this disease of getting into the world.

तपसा शोक्तितानी शिक्षी ती कंचयुत: ।

केन ती कर्मण शान्ती जाती शगेघन वा पुनः ॥ 20 ॥

बाहाणी शक्तियों जाती कारणं तन्मुने वद ।

याद्वानां विनाशँध ब्रह्माणाविति श्रुतः ॥ 21 ॥

Now the reverse seems to take place in the case of Nara nad Nārāyaṇa. In spite of withering up their bodies by hard penances, they took up Kṣattriya bodies. Under what influence of Karma, did they take up birth when they were Yogis? Or might they, the Brāhmins, become Kṣattriyas owing to some curse? Whatever it may be, kindly remove my doubts, explaining to me their causes.

Book IV Chapter I

कृष्यामयि हि गाध्यार्थी: शापेनैव कुलक्षयः ।

प्रधुनहर्ण चैव शंबेरण कर्थ कृतम् ॥ 22 ॥

It is heard that the Yādava clan suffered destruction through the curse of a Brāhmaṇa and in spite of Śrī Kṛṣṇa being the incarnation of the Supreme Being, his family died of the effect of curse from Gāndhārī.

वर्तमाने वासुदेवे देवदेवे जनाईने ।

पुरस्य सूतिकगोहादूरणं चातितुर्धेन् ॥ 23 ॥

How was it that Pradyumna was stolen away by Sambara, the lord of the Asuras; and for what purpose when Vāsudeva, the Deva of the Devas was present, how was it that his son was stolen away from the lying-in room? This seems impossible.

द्वाराकादुर्भायश्रै हरिवेशमाहूरत्ययात् ।

न ज्ञातं वायुदेवेन तत्कथं दिव्यचक्षुया ॥ 24 ॥

Why did not Vāsudeva see, with His inner vision, the stealing away of his son from the impregnable walls of His fortress like mansion in Dwārkā? (And could thus have prevented this!)

संदेहोरयं महान्वब्धिसः-सन्देहं कृष्ण प्रभो ।

वत्नल्यो बासुदेवस्य दस्यिष्लुक्तित हातः ॥ 25 ॥

स्वर्गेते देवदेवे तु तत्कर्थं मुनिसत्तभ ।

संग्यो जायते ब्रह्धिश्चांतोलनकारकः ॥ 26 ॥

O Munī! After Vāsudeva had gone to Heaven, his wives were plundered by the dacoits on the way. I am very much in doubt on this point. Also I cannot understand why did this event take place just after His translation to Heaven?

विष्णोर्गः समुद्धतः शौरिभूभाराकृत् ।

सं कबी भयगुरात्यं भयाचयत्बना जनादंः ॥ 27 ॥

द्वारवर्यां गत साधो सर्वेन्यः समुद्धरूपः ।

अवतारो हरेः प्रोक्तो भूभारहरणाय वै ॥ 28 ॥

Again how was Śrī Krṣṇa, who was Viṣṇu's Full incarnation, born into this world to take of vicious load of this earth, and to destroy the evil-doers, terrified and He fled through the fear of Jārāsandha, evacuated His kingdom of Mathurā and went with his armies and friends to Dwārkā?

पाणत्मनां विनाशाय धर्मसंस्थापनाय च ।

तत्कथं बायुर्वेदेन चौरात्ते न विगातिताः ॥ 29 ॥

Vāsudeva came here to destroy the evil miscreants and to conserve the religion; how then did He not, as He was all knowing, previously kill those dacoits, who afterward stole and plundered His wives?

यैहृता वासुदेवस्य पत्थ: संर्तुतिहा श्र: ।

सेनातके किं न विज्ञाता: सर्वज्ञं सत पुन: ॥ 30 ॥

भीमब्रोजणधः कामं भूभारुणे मत: ।

अंचित्रा महात्मानः पाण्ड्वा धर्मतन्तरः ॥ 31 ॥

Was it, that He, being Omniscient did not know those dacoits? He protected the Pāndavas, no doubt, who were high souled, righteous and virtuous; but I cannot understand how did He consider the high souled virtuous persons like Bhīsma, Drona and others as loads of earth and slay them.

कृष्णभक्ताः सदाचारा युधधिषुपुगेनामः ।

ते कृत्वा राजसूयं च यज्ञार्जं चियानतः ॥ 32 ॥

दक्षिणा विधाय दत्ता ब्राह्मणेयोर्जितानतः ।

पांबुज्ञान्तु देवांशा यासुदेवक्षिता मुने ॥ 33 ॥

घोरं दुःखं कव प्राप्ताः कव गतं सुक्तं च तत् ।

किं तत्यापं महारौदं येन ते पीक्षितः सदा ॥ 34 ॥

The devotees of Śri Kṛṣṇa, observing good customs, conducts and practices, Yudhiṣthira and his brothers performed the Rājasūya sacrifice, according to rules, giving various offering to the Brāhmins and depended entirely on Vāsudeva; still, O Muni! they suffered terrible hardships; whither were their virtuous deeds by this time? what horrible sins did they commit that they had to suffer pains and troubles in the assembly.

त्रीपदी च महाभागा वेदीभट्यात्मपृत्रिता ।

रामांगजा च साध्यी च कृष्णभक्तिशुता तथा ॥ 35 ॥

The highly merited Draupadī arose from the midst of sacrificial fire and is born of the part of Lakṣmī, pure and devoted to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

सा कथे दुःखमतुलं प्राप चोरं पुनः पुनः ।

दुःशासनेन सा केशे गृहीता पीडिता भृणम् ॥ 36 ॥

रजस्वला सभायां तु नीता भीतैकवाससा ।

विश्वानगरे दासी जाता मत्थस्य सा पुनः ॥ 37 ॥

How did such a glorious woman meet with incomparable terrible pains often and often; how could she be caught hold of by her hair on her head by Duhśāsana; and carried to the royal assembly, when she was in her menses and extremely terrified and harassed?

धर्पिता कीच्चेताथ रूटती कुरी यथा ।

हता जयद्रेशेना क्रेद्यानप्रतिद्र: सिद्धता ॥ 38 ॥

मोचिता पाणढ़ेः पड़्धाद्वलविद्धमौतामिभः ।

पूर्वेजन्मकृतं पारं किं तदोन च पीक्षिता: ॥ 39 ॥

How did she come to be a slave of Matsya Rāja in his kingdom Virāt, and though actually crying aloud like a female osprey (eagle) she was highly insulted by Kīcaka! Alas! how could Draupadī be stolen away by Jayadratha, though latterally released by the Pāndavas.? What evil deeds did the Pāndavas commit in their previous births, that they had to befall under so many telling difficulties?

इःखान्येनकान्यापतासे कथयाछ महामते ।

रातमूयं क्रतूवरं कृत्वा ले मम पूर्वतंः ॥ 40 ॥

O high minded Muni! My ancestors performed the Rājasūya sacrifice; and still they fell under so many serious difficulties. Kindly explain the cause of these to me.

युःखं महर्ते प्रापता: पूर्वेजन्मकृतेन वै ।

देवांशानां कर्थे तेषां संग्योउरं महान्द्र सै ॥ ४ १ ॥

If it be urged, that they suffered so many serious calamities, due to their actions in their former lives, that seems impossible. Because they are born of the Devas; thus arises my doubt; be pleased to explain to me.

सदाचारितु कौतोवैभिण्ड्रोणादयो हता: ।

छलेन धतलापार्थ ज्ञानानैर्नशं जगत् ॥ 4 2 ॥

Again how the Pāṇḍavas, the sons of Kuntī, of good conduct, and knowing the illusory nature of the world, why did they, out of pretence kill Bhīsma, Drona and others?

प्रेरिता वासुदेवेन पापे घोरे महात्मना ।

कुलं क्षयितवंतते हरिणा परमात्मना ॥ 4 3 ॥

This appears a riddle to me that these Pāṇḍavas were led to the extermination of their race, being inspired by Hari Vāsudeva, to this horrible act.

वरं भिश्रान्तं साधो नीवारैर्प्रिंतं वरम् ।

योधात्र हत्या लोभेन शिल्लेन जीवनं वरम् ॥ 44 ॥

Rather to live on begging alms and to live on rice, growing wild or without cultivation, or to live as an artisan or artist than to kill the valiant warriors unlawfully in a battle, simply out of voluptuous greed.

विच्छ्छस्लु त्या यंगो रक्षितो मुनिसत्ता ।

समुतया सुतानागु गोलकाछ्छनाशनान् ॥ 4 5 ॥

O Best of the Munis! You have preserved this extirpated race by producing the Goloka sons (i. e. sons born by other persons of women after their husbands are dead) of indomitable prowess.

सोउपेवेल तु कालेन विरातदनयासुतः ।

तापस्वस गले सर्षे न्यस्तबाङ्धधद्धुतम् ॥ 46 ॥

And why did my honoured father, born of Uttara in this respected family, encircle a snake round the neck of a Brāhmin ascetic?

न कोर्पि बाहाणं ईहे क्षयिष्य सुकोद्धवः ।

तापसं योनसंयुक्ते पिया किं तत्कृतं मुने ॥ 47 ॥

एतेर-यैशु सन्देशैर्षिकलं मे मनोधुना ।

सिंधं कुरु पितः साधो सर्वोजीसि दयापिति ॥ 48 ॥

No body, born of a Ksattriya family, shews sings of hatred and jealousy towards a Brāhmīn. Is it that my father shewed such feeling to that ascetic, who took the vow of silence!

इति शीमद्वैभागवो चतुर्वैकवन्ये जनोजवप्रसनो

नाम प्रथमोउधाय: ॥ 49 ॥

O Best of the munis ! These things and lots of others are troubling my mind with many grave doubts. O merciful saint! You know every thing; be kind enough to quell this the disturbed state of my mind.

Thus ends the First Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavata Mahā Purāna of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Book IV Chapter II

