CHAPTER XI

On the Sarpa Yajña

सूत उवाच

गतप्राणं तु राजानं बालं पुत्रं समीक्ष्य च ।

चक्छुधं मन्त्रिण: सर्वे परलोकस्य सहिक्ञाः ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: “O Munis! seeing now the king lifeless, and his son a mere boy, the ministers themselves performed all his funeral ceremonies.

गज्ञातिरे उत्पटेईं भस्मप्रयं मतीपतिन् ।

अगुर्भिश्राधिष्युक्तायां चितायामध्येपघ्न् ॥ 2 ॥

First, they burned the king on the banks of the Ganges without uttering any Mantra, as his death was an accidental one due to snake bite.

दुर्भगेय मृतस्यास चक्छीशोर्धर्वेहिकीम् ।

क्रियां पुरोहितास्तव येदमन्नेश्विधानतः ॥ ३ ॥

ददुद्वानाति विघुघेयो गा: सुवर्णं यथोवितम् ।

अत्रे बहुविधं तत्र वस्थानि विद्वधानि च ॥ ४ ॥

Afterwards they had an effigy of the king made of kuśa grass and placed it on a funeral pyre and burned it, with sandal and scented wood. The priest then performed and completed his funeral obsequies, repeating duly the Vedic mantras, and distributed various things in charities to the Brāhmins, together with sufficient quantity of gold, and varieties of food and clothings so that the king may attain heaven.

सुभूद्रौं सुतं बालं प्रजानां प्रीतिबर्धनम् ।

सिंहासने शुभे तत मनिष्य: संन्येशरान् ॥ 5 ॥

पौरा जानपदा लोकाश्छकुस्तं नृवर्ति शिष्णुम् ।

जनमेजवनामां राजलक्षणसंयुन्तम् ॥ 6 ॥

Next, on an auspicious moment, the ministers installed the child prince on the throne that gladdened the hearts of the subject and all the populace of the city, towns, and villages acknowledged the child prince as Janamejaya, endowed with all royal qualities as their king.

धारेयी शिक्षयामास राजनिद्वानि सर्वशैः ।

दिने दिने वर्धमानः स बभूव महामति: ॥ 7 ॥

The Dhātreyī gave all instructions to the king about his duties. The child prince gradually grew in years and became endowed with great intellect.

प्राप्ते चैकाट्वो वर्षे तस्मै कुलपुरोहतः ।

यथोचितां ददी विहां जग्राह स यथोचिताम् ॥ 8 ॥

When Janamejaya became eleven years old, the family priest initiated him duly with the Gāyatrī mantra and he also studied it duly.

धनुर्वैंद कृपः पूर्णे द्वारवस्मे सुसंकृतम् ।

अनुनीय यथा ग्रौण: कर्णाय घानीयं यथा ॥ 9 ॥

Then Krpācārya taught him perfectly the science of archery (Dhanurveda) as Dronācārya taught Arjuna and Parasurāma taught Karna.

सम्प्रातिविधो बलवान्भूव दुरतिकमः ।

धनुवैद तथा वेदे पारमः परमार्थिवि् ॥ 10 ॥

धर्मशास्थिकुलः सत्यवादी जितेन्द्रयः ।

चकार ताखं धर्मात्मा पुरा धर्मसुतो यथा ॥ 11 ॥

Janamejaya learnt by and by all the sciences and became very powerful and indomitable to his enemies as he was skilled in the science of archery, he was similarly in the other branches of the Vedas. Truthful, self-controlled, religious, king Janamejaya acquired full knowledge in the Dhārmśāstras (philosophies and law books) and Arthasāstras (economics) and governed his kingdom like the Dharma's son Yudhiṣṭhira.

ततः: सुवर्णमांही राजा काशिपितः किल ।

वपुह्मां शुभां कन्यां ददौ पराशिताय च ॥ 12 ॥

स तां प्राण्यासितापाङ्गी मुमुंटे जनमेवयः ।

काशिराजतुर्गा कान्ता प्राय राजा यथा पुरा ॥ 13 ॥

विश्वत्रवीयों मुदुः सुभ्रां च यथाज़्नः ।

विज्ञहा महीपालो वनेपुचवनेषु च ॥ 14 ॥

तया कमलपत्राध्या शच्या शतक्रतुर्था ।

The king of Kāśī gave his all-auspicious daughter Vapuṣṭamā in marriage to king Janamejaya, wearing golden coat of armour. King Janamejaya, with the beautiful Vapuṣṭamā casting sidelong looks, looked very happy as was the king Victiravīrya, when he got for his wife the daughter of Kāśirāja and also when Arjuna got his Subhadrā. Then the king began to enjoy his lotus-eyed Vapuṣṭamā in forest, and gardens like Śatakratu and Śacī.

प्रजातस्य सुसंतुथा बभवुः सुखालिताः ॥ 15 ॥

मन्थिणः कर्मकुलाशक्षुः कार्याणि सर्वेण: ।

The able ministers conducted satisfactorily the reins of government; and the subject, well governed passed away their time with cheerful hearts.

एतस्मिवेक काले तु मुनिरक्तेकानामकः ॥ 16 ॥

तक्षेकण परिक्षितही हरितनापुर्मम्यन्ता ।

वैरस्यापिति को3स्य प्रकुर्बादिति चित्यन् ॥ 17 ॥

परीक्षित्सुं मत्वा तं नृपं समुपगानतः ।

In the meanwhile, a Muni, named Uttanika, being much troubled by Takṣaka, thought who could help him in his taking revenge on Takṣaka and, seeing King Parikṣit's son the king Janamejaya a proper person came to Hastinā to the king and spoke out thus:

कार्याकार्य न ज्ञानास समये नृपसत्तम ॥ 18 ॥

अकर्तेल कोरोष्य कर्तव्य न करोपि वे ।

“O good king! Thou dost not know when to do a thing that ought to be done; Thou art doing at present what ought not to be done; and thou art not doing what should be done now. There is nothing of anger or energy within Thee;

किं त्वां सम्रायायम्य्यातनामर्न सितद्वामम् ॥ 19 ॥

अर्वैत्रमन्तेज्ज बालचेहासम्पिन्ति ।

Thou dost things as a child does; so Thou dost

not know the meaning of the Śāstras nor dost Those know Thy former ememy; so what shall I pray before Thee?"

जनमेजय उवाच

किं कैरं न मया जातं न किं प्रतिकृतं मया ॥ 20 ॥

तद्व त्वं महाभाग क्रोगीय घटन्तरम् ।

Hearing this Janamejaya said: “O highly fortunate one! I do not know who is my enemy; what wrong is there to be redressed? Please speak out what I am to do.”

उन्हेंक उवाच

पिता ते नितहो घृप्त तझकेण दुरात्मना ॥ 21 ॥

मन्त्रिणस्तं समाहूय पृष्छस्य पित्नाशनम् ।

Uttanāka said: “O king! the wicked Takṣaka killed Thy father; ask about the death of Thy father from Thy councillors.”

सूत उवाच

तच्छूत्वा वचनं राजा पप्रच्छ मन्त्रिस्तमान् ॥ 22 ॥

ऊपुर्वे तिज्ञापाने दुः: सर्पेण वै मूतः ।

Sūta said: Hearing these words, King Janamejaya asked his ministers. They replied “Thy father died out of the snake Takṣaka’s bite.”

जन्मेव जयान

शाणोउत्र काणघा नृत्रा: शणस्य मुनिना किल ॥ २३ ॥

तक्षकस्य तु को दोषो बृहि मे मुनिसतम ।

Then the king spoke: “The cause of my father’s death is the Brāhimin’s curse; what is the fault of Takṣaka in this matter; please say.”

उनके जवाच

तक्षकेण धर्न दच्चा कशपय: संविज्ञातितः ॥ 24 ॥

न स किं तक्षको हैरी पिटुहा तव धपुते ।

Uttanka said: “It was Taksaka that gave abundance of wealth to Kāśyapa who was coming to cure Thy father of Taksāka’s poison and made him desist from his purpose; so, O King! Is not that Taksāka, then, Thy father’s great enemy and his slayer?”

भार्यां रोः पुरा भृप ददा सर्पेण सा मृता ॥ 25 ॥

अविवाहिता तु मुनिना जीविता च पुनः प्रिया ।

O King! In former days, when Pramadvāra, the dearest wife of the Muni Ruru, died of snake bite in her unmarried state, Ruru made her alive again.

रूपानीय कृता तत्र प्रतिता चातितारुणा ॥ 26 ॥

यं यं सर्वे प्रपुर्वामि तं तं हन्यायुधेन वै ।

But Ruru made the promise “whichever serpent I will see, I will take away its life by striking it with a club.”

एवं कृत्वा प्रतिज्ञा स शस्त्रपाणी क्रस्तदा ॥ 27 ॥

व्यचरत्थिवर्षी राजत्रिपन्तम्यांनितस्तत ।

एकादा स वने घोरं डुपुर्णं जरसात्यन्ति ॥ 28 ॥

अपयदंडुभुव्यम्य हन्तुं तं समुपाययी ।

अभ्यहसूचिति विग्रस्तमुवाचाध शुकुषभः ॥ 29 ॥

नायपाटीपि ते विध्र ककमानामारभित्र सि ।

O King! Thus making the resolve, he began to kill snakes wherever he found, with his club, and thus, in his course of travel all round the earth, he saw within a forest an aged terrible water-snake (Dhonda serpent) and immediately lifted his club to kill it and angrily struck a blow on it, when the snake replied: "O, Brahmina! Why are you striking me thus? I have not caused any offence to you."

रूरकाचय

प्राणिप्रिया में दयिता द्वा सर्पेणा सा मृता ॥ ३० ॥

प्रतिज्ञं तदा सर्पे रु:खितेन मया कृता ।

Ruru said: "O serpent! My dearest wife died of snake bite; since then I have made this resolve, under great provocation and sorrow, to kill snakes."

इण्डुप सचाच

नाहं एरामाति तेज्ये वै वे दुर्गति घुर्जामाः ॥ 31 ॥

गरीससमयोगेन न मां हिंसितुर्महैस ।

Hearing thus, the water-snake Dundubha replied: "I do not bite; those who bite are a different class of snakes; simply on account of my bearing a body similar to them that you will strike me is not quite proper."

उनंक उवाच

श्रुत्वा तां मानुर्षी वाणी सपैणोक्तां मनोहारूम ॥ 32 ॥

क्रः पूच्छ कोर्सि त्वं कस्माङ्डुषभतां गतः ।

Hearing these beautiful humane words from the mouth of a serpent, Ruru asked: "Who are you? Why have you become this Dundubha snake?"

सर्प उवाच

बाङ्गणोर्डं पुरा विश्र सखा मे खगामाधिधः ॥ 33 ॥

विज्ञो धर्मभृता शेछः सत्यवादी जितेंद्रियः ।

The snake replied: “O Brāhmaṇa! I was formerly a Brāhmin; there was a friend of mine named Khyās, very religious, truthful and self-controlled. स मया वशित्रो मीढ़ांतिसर्यं कृता च तत्णिकम् ॥ 34 ॥ घयं च प्रापितोस्तथंमिनोहोत्रगृहे स्थितः ।

Once he was staying in his Agnihotra room and I foolishly terrified him much by placing before him an artificial snake created by me of the leaves of trees.

तेन भीतेन शगतोर्ज विहृतेनितिवेपिन ॥ 35 ॥

पव सर्पी मन्दखुदे येनाहं धर्पितस्तवा ।

He became so much bewildered with fear and shuddered so terribly that he at length cursed me saying—“O one of blunt intellect! As you have terrified me by this snake, having no poison, so you better be a snake of that type.”

मया प्रसादितोत्यर्थं सर्पेणासी त्रिजानेनः ॥ ३६ ॥

मायुवाचा तक्रोधात्रिकंचिछानीमवाया च ।

Immediately I turned into a snake and when I much entreated that Brāhmana, his anger abated a little and he said again:

रूते मोचिता शाप्यत्थाय सर्प भविष्यति ॥ ३७ ॥

प्रमतेसु सुती नृनिमिति मां सेोझबीढ़तः ।

“O snake! Pramati’s son Ruru will no doubt free you of this curse.” I am that snake; and you are also that Ruru; now hear my words in conformity with Dharma. The highest Dharma of the Brahmanā is non-killing.

सोउई सर्वा रूक्तव्च च श्रणु मे परमं वच: ॥ 38 ॥

अहिंसा परमो धर्म विज्ञाणां नात्र संशय: ।

दया सर्वैर कर्तव्या बाहाणेन विज्ञानता ॥ 39 ॥

यज्ञाद्यव्य विघ्रेत्र न हिंसा याजिकी मता ।

There is no doubt in this. The wise Brāhmaṇas

ought to show mercy to all. No harm of killing is to be committed any where except in Yajña (sacrifice); killing is only allowed in a Yajña; for, at the sacrifice, the animal killed attains the highest goal; hence killing in sacrifice is not reckoned as an act of killing."

उनंक उवाच

सरपोतेर्विनिपुन्तो ब्राहणोउसी रुस्तत: ॥ 40 ॥

कृत्वा तस्य च शापांतं परित्यक्तं च हिंसनम् ।

Uttanka said: "That Brāhmaṇa was then freed of the serpent body; and Ruru, too, desisted from killing since then.

विवाहिता तेन बाला मृता सड़ीविता पुनः ॥ 41 ॥

कदनं सर्वसपाणां कृते वैरामनुस्मन ।

O King! Ruru gave life back to that girl and married her but even then, remembering the former enmity he killed the snakes.

त्वं तु बैरं समुन्यस्य वत्से पजोर्धध च ॥ 42 ॥

विमन्युर्षतिक्षे चितृपातकेषु वै ।

But, O chief of Bharata's family! Thou art staying without any care, without any anger to the snakes and without any revenge to the previous wrong.

अन्तरिक्षे मृतस्तातः स्नानदानविवर्षितः ॥ 43 ॥

तस्योद्मारं च जौत्रा कुरू हत्वारा पवगान् ।

पितृर्दीं न जानाति जीवेत्रव मृतो हि सः ॥ 44 ॥

युर्गितसे पितृस्तावधावताना हनियक्षि ।

O king of kings! Thy father died high up in the air without any bath or charity due to be done at the time of death. So rescue thy father by killing 'is enemies, the snakes. That son is dead, through living, who does not consider the act of his father's enemy as inimical. Until Thou dost kill the snakes, Thy father's enemies, Thy father's hell life will not be freed.

अध्मायदायियं कृता कुरे यजं नृपोतम ॥ 4 5 ॥

सर्पसत्रं महाराज पितुवेदमनुसम्न ।

O King! Now remember the wrong done to Thy father and perform the sacrifice to the Great

Mother, denominated as the Sarpa Yajña (the sacrifice of snakes).”

सूत उवाच

इति तस्य वच: श्रुता राजा जन्मेजयस्तदा ॥ 46 ॥

नेशम्यामशुपानं च चकारातीव दुःखितः ।

धिष्ठकामासु सुदुर्द्वैदैर्था मानकस्य वे ॥ 47 ॥

Sūta said: Hearing the words of Uttanka, king Janamejaya sadly wept and shed tears and thought within himself: "Alas! Fie to me! I am a great stupid; hence, I feel myself proud but in vain.

पिता यस्य गति घोरां प्रापतः पत्रगपीडितः ।

अशाहं मख्यामध्य करोयपचिति मितुः ॥ 48 ॥

हत्वा सर्पानस्विष्यो दीयमाने विभावरो ।

Where can his honour be whose father, bitten by a snake, has gone down to hell. Now, I will, no doubt, commence the Sarpa Yajña and ensure the destruction of all the snakes in the blazing sacrificial fire and thus deliver my father from hell."

आहूय मन्त्रिणः सर्वान् राजा वचनमबवीत् ॥ 49 ॥

कुर्वन्तु यजसभारं यशाहं मन्त्रिसतामः ।

Thus coming to a conclusion, he called all his ministers and said: O ministers! Better make arrangements duly for a great sacrifice.

गृज्ञातीर गुणां भूमि मापयित्वा डिजोजनः ॥ 50 ॥

कुर्वन्तु मण्डपं स्वस्था: शगत्साधं मनोहर्म ।

Have a suitable holy site on the banks of the Ganges, selected and measured by the Brāhmanas and have a beautiful sacrificial hall built up on one hundred pillars and prepare a sacrificial alter within this.

वेदो यज्ञस्य कर्तेल्या ममाठा सचिवा: खतु ॥ 51 ॥

तद्गाले विवेयो के सर्वसः सवित्रतः ।

O Ministers! When all these preliminaries will be completed, I will commence with great eclât the great Sarpa Yajnâ (sacrifice of snakes).

तक्षकस्तु पशुस्त्र होतोतंको महापुर्नि: ॥ 52 ॥

शीघ्रमहावृत विश्रा: सर्वजा वेद्यारणाः ।

In that Yajña, the snake Takṣak will be the animal victim; and Uttanka, the great Muni, will

be the sacrificial priest; so invite early the all-knowing Brāhmaṇas, versed in the Vedas.

सूत जवाच

मन्थिणस्तु तदा चक्रभूषिवाक्येर्विवक्षणः ॥ ५३ ॥

यज्ञस्य सर्वसंभारं वेद्यैं यज्ञस्य विस्तृताम् ।

हवेने वर्ताने तु सपाणिं तस्कको गतः ॥ ५४ ॥

इन्द्र प्राति भवातोर्ह नाहि मामिति चारबेति ।

भव्यतीतं समाङ्गस्य स्वासने सचिवेश्य च ॥ ५५ ॥

दूदावभयमत्यर्थं निभयो भव पत्रग ।

Sūta said: Thus at the command of the king, the able ministers collected all the materials of the sacrifice and prepared a big sacrificial altar. When the oblations were offered on the sacrificial fire, calling on the snakes, Takṣaka became greatly distressed with fear and took refuge of Indra saying. "Save my life." Indra, then, gave hope to Takṣaka, trembling with fear, and made him sit on his Śasna, encouraged him with words "No fear" O! snake do not fear any more.

तमिह्राणरं जात्वा मुनिद्रताभयं तथा ॥ ५६ ॥

उत्तोंकोढ्रवुद्धिवः संदें कृत्वा निमन्याण् ।

स्मृतस्तदा तक्षेकण यायावरकुलोद्धः॥ ५७ ॥

आस्तीको नाम धर्माना जरकास्तुमी पुनि: ।

तत्रायाय मुनेवालस्तुषाय जनमेवगम् ॥ ५८ ॥

राजा ततचंयामास दृष्टवा बालं सुर्पडितम् ।

Muni Uttanka, seeing that Taksaka had taken Indra's protection and that Indra had given him hopes of "no fear", called on Takṣaka with Indra to come to fire with an anxious heart; Takṣaka, then, seeing no other way, took refuge of the greatly religious Astik, the son of the Muni Jarat Kāru, born of the family of Yāyāvara. The Muni's son Āstika came to the sacrificial hall and chanted hymns in praise of Janamejaya; the king, too, seeing the Muni boy greatly learned worshipped him and said: What for have you come?

अर्धिचिता नृपस्तं तु छंद्यामास वाजिछतेः ॥ ५९ ॥

स तुं चवे महाभाग यज्ञोरयं विनरपिलित ।

"I will give you what you desire." Hearing this,

Ästika prayed: "O, highly enlightened one! Let you desist from this sacrifice."

सत्यबद्धो नृपस्तेन प्राधितछा पुनस्तथा ॥ 60 ॥

होमं चिवर्तैवामास सर्पाणां मुनिवाक्यन्तः ।

भारतं आव्यामास वैशंपायन विस्तारात् ॥ 61 ॥

श्रुतायिप्नुपति: कामंनशगतिमभिजामिवान् ।

व्यासंपूच्छभूषातोममगान्ति:कर्थपवेत्। 62 ॥

मनोरितद्धृतं कामा किं कारोमि वद्वय मे ।

पिता मे दुर्भगस्वैय मृत: पार्थसुतात्मजः ॥ 63 ॥

The truthful king, prayed thus again and again, stopped the Sarpa Yajña to keep the Muni's word. Vaiśampāyana then recited the whole of Mahābhārata to the king to cheer up his heart. But the king, hearing the whole Mahābhārata could not find peace and asked Veda Vyāsa "how can I get peace; my mind is constantly being burned with sorrows; say what am I to do? I am very miserable; hence my father Parikṣit, the son of Abhimanyu has died an unnatural death.

क्षत्रियाणां महाभाग संग्रामे मरणं वरम् ।

रणे वा मरणं व्यास गृहं वा विधिपूर्वकम् ॥ 64 ॥

मरणं च चितुर्मेंभूदन्तरिक्षे मृतोउवशः ।

शान्त्यपायं वद्वसाय त्वं च सत्यवतीसून ॥ 65 ॥

यथा स्वर्गे बजेदार्यू पित्ता मे दुर्गिंत गतः ॥ 66 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवतेः द्वितीयस्कन् एकावशोउध्याः ॥ 11 11 ॥

O lucky one! See that a Kṣatriya's death in a deadly battlefield or in an ordinary battle is praiseworthy; even his death in his own house, if followed up according to natural laws and Vidhis (rules) is commendable; but my father did not get such a death; under the Brāhmaṇa's curse why did he, quite senseless, quit his life high up in the air? O son of Satyavati! Now advise me so that my father who is now in hell can again go up to the heavens, and that my heart may find its way to peace."

Thus ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Second Book on the "Sarpa Yajñā" in the Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevībhagavatam of 18,000 verses.

