CHAPTER XXII

On the Rules of Vaiśvadeva

श्रीनारायण उवाच

अथात: श्रूयतां ब्रह्म-यैश्वरवेदेवियधानकम् ।

पुरुषशीर्षसीन ममापि स्मृतिमागतम् ॥ १ ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! In connection with this Puraścaranam it comes now to my memory about the rules concerning the Vaiśva Deva worship (An offering made to the Viśvadevās; an offering to all deities made by presenting oblations to fire before meals).

देववज्जे ब्रह्मज्ञो भूतयज्ञलवैव च ।

पितृवज्ञो मनुष्यस्य यज्छीव तु पंचमः ॥ 2 ॥

पंचमुता गृहस्यस्य चूल्ली पोषपुष्प्यकर: ।

कण्डणी घोत्कुंभछ्छ तेषां पापस्य श्रानते ॥ 3 ॥

न चुल्ल्वा नायसे पाने न भूमौ न च खरपि ।

वैश्ववेदं प्रकृबीत कुपडे वा स्थक्तिजीय पि ॥ 4 ॥

Hear. The five yajñās are the following: (1) The Deva yajña, (2) Brahma yajña, (3) Bhūta yajña, (4) Pitr yajña, and (5) Manusya yajña. Fireplace, the pair of stone pestles, brooms (for sweeping, etc.), sieves and other house-hold things of the sort, wooden mortars (used for cleansing grains from husk) and water-jars, these five are the sources of evils inasmuch as they are the means of killing. So to free one's self from the above sins, one is to sacrifice before the Vaiśvadeva. Never offer oblations of Vaiśvadeva on hearths, on any iron vessel, on the ground or on broken tiles. They are to be offered in any sacrificial pit (Kundā) or on any sacrificial altar.

न पाणिना न गूर्णेन न च मेध्याजिनादिधि: ।

मुखंनेपधमेदर्भिन मुखादेव व्याजायत ॥ 5 ॥

पुटकेन भवेद्वाधिः: सूर्णेण धननाशनम् ।

पाणिगा मृत्युमानोति कर्मसिद्धमुर्भेतु त् ॥ 6 ॥

Do not fire the hearth by fanning with hands, with winnowing baskets, or with holy deer skin, etc., but you can do so by blowing by your mouth. For the mouth is the origin of fire. If the fire be ignited by clothes, one is liable to get disease; if by winnowing baskets, then less of wealth comes; if by hands, one's death ensues. But if it be done by blowing, then one's success comes. (There is the danger of catching fire.)

फलैर्दैर्प्रधैर्पु: कुर्बी-मूल्याकाटिकादिधि: ।

अलाथे येन केनारी काछुमूलुर्णादिधि: ॥ 7 ॥

जुबुलासर्पिभध्यन्ते तैलक्षाराविबर्जितम् ।

द्वधातकं वा यपासानं तद्भावेध्मसापि वा ॥ 8 ॥

गुर्के: पर्बुपिते: कुडी उच्छेशेन दिषां वर्गी ।

रक्षेर्शिर्तां वाति क्षरं हुवा ज्ञलयध: ॥ 9 ॥

One should sacrifice with curd, ghee, fruits, roots and vegetables, and water and in their absence with fuel, grass, etc., or with any other substances soaked with ghee, curd, Pāyasā or lastly with water. But never with oil or with salty substances. If one performs the Homa with dry or stale substances, one is attacked with leprosy; if anybody performs Homa with leavings of other food he becomes subdued by his enemy; if one does so with rude and harsh substances, he becomes poor and if one does with salty substances, he meets with a downward course, gets degraded in position and honour.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

अंगताभ्यमपिश्रांस्तु निर्हेचोत्ततोउलत्।

जुड़याजीद्वयवेदे तु न क्षाराविद्विभिश्रिन् ॥ 10 ॥

अक्त्वा वैश्वदेवं तु यो घुंके भूद्धपीईजः ।

स मूढो नरके याति कालसूममवाक्शिराः ॥ 11 ॥

You can offer oblations to Vaishadeva with burning coals and ashes from the north side of the fire of the hearth after the preparation of the meals. But you should never offer sacrifices with salty things. The illiterate Brāhmaṇa who eats before offering oblations to Vaishadeva goes headlong downwards into the Kāla Sūtra hell.

शाकं वा यदि वा पनं मूलं वा यदि वा फलम् ।

संकल्पयेद्यात्रां तेनान्यो जुड़यादयि ॥ 12 ॥

अकृते वैश्यदेवे तु पिश्री पिश्वाधीयमानाते ।

उद्धूल्य वैश्यदेवार्थ पिश्वां दत्ता विसर्जेयत् ॥ 13 ॥

Whatever food that you are intending to prepare, whether they be vegetables, leaves, roots or fruits, offer oblations to Vaísvádeva with that if, before the Homa be performed of Vaiśvadeva, any Brahmacāri comes, then take off, for the Homa, first something; and then give to the beggar and satisfy him and tell him to be off.

वैश्वदेवकृतं दोर्ध शक्तो पिछ्छूयंपोहितुम् ।

न तु पिछ्धुकृतं दोर्ध वैश्वदेवो व्यपोहिते ॥ १४ ॥

वतिश्र ब्रह्मावी च पव्वात्रावस्यामिनावुपौ ।

तयोरमदत्वा तु घुकत्वा चान्चायणं चेते ॥ 15 ॥

For the Brahmacārī mendicant can remove any defects that may occur to Vaiśvadeva but Vaiśvadeva is unable to remove any defects that may occur regarding the mendicant Brahmacārī. Both the Paramahansa or Brahmacārī mendicant are the masters of the prepared food (Pakkānnna); so when anybody takes one's food without giving to any of these two, if they happen to come there, he will have to make the Cāndrāyaṇa (religious or expiatory penance regulated by the moon's age, that is, waxing or waning).

वैश्वादेवानंतरं च गोग्रासं प्रतिपादायेत् ।

तहिधानं प्रवक्ष्यापि शपुं देवार्थिपूजित् ॥ १६ ॥

सुराभिर्वेषायी माता निट्य विधपुपदे स्थिता ।

गोग्रासं च मया दर्तं सुरभे प्रतिगृह्ञात्मा ॥ १७ ॥

O Nārada! After the offering given to Vaiśvānara, one is to offer Gogrāsa, that is, mouthfuls of food to the cows. Hear now how that is done. The mother Surabhi, the beloved of Viṣṇu, is always stationed in the region of Viṣṇu (Viṣṇupada); so O Surabhi! I am offering you mouthfuls of food. Accept it.

गोभ्यस्य नम ऋत्येव पूर्णं कृत्वा गवेउर्धेत् ।

गोग्रासेन तु गोमाता सुरिध: संग्रसीदिति ॥ 18 ॥

ततो गोदोहनं कालं निषेछेवे वृहांगणे ।

अतिथियंय भपनागो गृहात्यतिनितर्ते ॥ 19 ॥

“Salutation to the cows,” saying this, one is to worship the cows and offer food to them. Hereby Surabhi, the Mother of the cows, becomes pleased. After this, one is to wait outside for a period that is taken to milch a cow, whether any guests are coming.

स तस्ये दुक्छृतं दत्ता पुण्यमादाय गच्छिते ।

माता पिता गुरुभांतित प्रजा दासः समाधितः ॥ 20 ॥

अभ्यागतो3तिथिश्चार्पिनरेते पोच्या उदाहातः ।

एवं ज्ञात्वा तु यो मोहारा करोति गृहाश्रमम् ॥ 21 ॥

तत्पर नायं न तु पगे लोको भवति धर्मतः ।

यत्कलं सोमयोगेन प्राप्नोति धनवान्दिक्रः ॥ 22 ॥

For if any guest goes back disappointed from any house without any food; he takes away all the punyams (merits) of the house-holder and gives him back his own sin. The house-holder is to support mother, father, Guru, brother, son, servants, dependants, guests, those that have come, and Agni (Fire). Knowing all these, he who does not perform the functions of the house-hold is reckoned as fallen from his Dharma both in this world and in the next.

सत्यक् पंचमहावर्षेदिरिक्तरेन चाप्यान्ति ।

अथ प्राणानिहोरं तु वक्ष्यामि मुनिपुंगव ॥ 23 ॥

यज्ञाला मुच्यते जंतुर्जनममूलुजारिद्धिः ।

परित्रानेन मुच्यते नरा: पाताककिलिबर्धि: ॥ 24 ॥

विधिभा मुच्यते येन मुच्येत स ऋणजायात् ।

कुलान्युद्रते विज्ञे नरकानेकविशणि ॥ 25 ॥

सर्वप्रकफलाप्राति: सर्वलोकेषु गच्छति ।

The poor house-holder gets the same fruit by

Book XI Chapter XXII

performing these five Mahā Yajñas that a rich Brāhmaṇa gets by performing the Soma Yajña. O Best of the Munis! Now I am talking of the Prānāgni Hotra or about taking food, knowing the rules of which makes a man free from birth, old age and death and from all sorts of sins. He who takes his food according to proper rules, is freed of the threefold debts, delivers his twenty one generations from the hells, obtains the fruits of all the Yajñas and goes unhampered to all the regions of the righteous.

हनुंडुंकिमपरिणीमं पंधानसंजकम् ॥ 26 ॥

वायुर्ज्ञा मंघदर्शनं चबुर्णत्यद्वीर व ॥

Think of the belly as Aranī or the piece of wood for kindling the fire (by attrition), think of the mind as the churning rod, and think of the wind as the rope, and then kindle the fire, residing in the belly; the eyes are to be considered as the sacrificer, (the Adhvaryu), and consider fire in the belly as the result of churning.

तर्नीनमध्यमागुँसहान्यातृर्निति विशेप्ति ॥ 27 ॥

मध्यमानामिकागुँर्शयनस्यातृर्निति विशेप्ति ।

कनिष्ठगनामिकागुँर्श्यनस्य तदन्तेगम् ॥ 28 ॥

कनिष्ठातर्जन्यगुँर्श्यतस्यातृर्निति विशेप्ति ।

सर्वागृलैहीतावांं समानस्यानुक्ति विशेप्ति ॥ 29 ॥

स्वाहांतान्यणवाधांश्च नाममांशंच चे पेत्तु ।

In this fire of the belly, one is to offer oblations for the satisfaction of Prāna, etc., the five deities. First of all offer oblations to the Prāna Vāyu with food taken by the forefinger, middelfinger and thumb; next offer oblations to the Apāna Vāyu with the thumb, middle finger and the nameless (anāmā) finger; next offer oblations to the Vyāna Vāyu (breath) with the thumb, nameless finger and the little finger; next offer oblations to the Udāna Vāyu with the thumb, forefinger and the little finger and lastly offer oblations to the Samāna Vāyu with food taken by all the fingers. At the same time repeat respectively the mantras:

"Om Prānāya Svāhā,"

"Om Apānāya Svāhā,"

"Om Samānāya Svāhā,"

"Om Udānāya Svāhā,"

"Om Vyānāya Svāhā."

मुखे चाहवनीयस्तु हदयो गाईपलकः ॥ 30 ॥

नाथी च दक्षिणानि: स्याद्ध: सभ्यावस्यबी ।

वाग्योता प्राण उद्याता चक्षुरध्वरुरैव च ॥ 31 ॥

मनो बह्रा भवेच्छोत्रामानीप्रथान एव च ।

अहंकार: पशुण्चात्र प्रणव: पय इरितम् ॥ 32 ॥

बुद्धिरूप पत्ती संप्रोक्ता वद्यीनो गृहाश्रभी ।

उरो वेदित्यु रोपायि दर्पा: स्युश सुखौ कर्ते ॥ 33 ॥

Within the mouth, there is the Āhavanīya fire; within the heart, there is the Gārhaṇatya fire; in the navel, there is the Dakṣināgni fire; below the navel, there is the Sabhyāgni fire and below that there is the Āvasathyāgni fire. Think thus. Next consider the Speech as the Hotā, the Prāna as the Udgāthā, the eyes as the Addhvaryu, the mind as the Brahmā, the ears as the Hotā and the keeper of the Agni, the Ahankāra (egoism) as beast (Paśu), Om Kāra as water, the Buddhi (intellect) of the house-holder as the legal wife, the heart as the sacrificial altar, the hairs and pores as the Kuśa grass, and the two hands as the sacrificial ladles and spoons (Sruk and Sruva.)

प्राणायंसरच ने ऋषी रूमवर्ग: शुधार्थिनकः ।

देवतादित्य एवात गायजीच्छंद उच्छते ॥ 34 ॥

प्राणाय च तथा स्वाहा मंत्रांत कौरीवेदीप ।

इदामादित्येवाय न ममेति वदेदिप ॥ 35 ॥

Then think of the colour of the Prāna mantra as golden the fire of hunger as the Rsi (seer), Sūrya (the sun) as Devatā, the chandas as Gāyatrī and Prāṇāya Svāhā as the Mantra uttered; also repeat “Idamādītyadevāya namah” and offer oblations to the Prāna.

अपानमान्य तथा गोक्षीरायलाकृति: ।

श्रद्धानिऋषिरेवात्र सोभो वै देवता स्मृता ॥ 36 ॥

उशिकर्दतलापतपानव सहोल्पी कौनीरेत् ।

सोभायेदं च न मेल्यत्रोः परिकीर्ति: ॥ 37 ॥

The colour of the Apāna mantra is milk white.

Śrimaddevibbāgavatam

Śraddhāgni is the Rṣi, the Moon is the Devatā, Uṣnik is the chandas, and “Apānāya Svāhā,” “Idam Somāya na namah” are the mantras.

व्यानमानस्य चाख्यातोंबुजवणों हुताशन: ।

ऋषिफेति देवतापिनन्तुष्टु पंड इरित् ॥ 38 ॥

व्यानाय व तथा स्वाहाज्ञपवेदं व मानेत्यति ॥

उदानमानस्य तथा शक्रभोपस्वर्णकः ॥ 39 ॥

ऋषिपिण: स्मायल्यो वायुवै देवता स्मृतः ।

ब्रुतौच्छदं आखातामुदानाय च पूर्वत् ॥ 40 ॥

वायवे चेदं न मम एवं चैवोच्चरेद्विक्र: ।

The colour of the Vyāna mantra is red like red lotuses; the fire Deity Hutāsana is the Rṣi. the fire is the Devatā, Anuṣṭup is the chandas, “Vyānáya Svāhā” and “Idamagyne na namah” are the mantras. The colour of the Udāna mantra is like that of the worm Indra Gopa; fire is the Rṣi; Vāyu is the Devatā, Bṛhatī is the chandas; “Udānáya Svāhā” and “Idam Vāyave na namah” are the mantras.

समानवायुपन्यस्य विधुघुर्णं विलपक: ॥ 41 ॥

इस्त्रिणिन: समास्यातः पर्जन्यो देवता मतः ।

पंपिक्षच्छ: समास्यातं समानाय च पूर्ववत् ॥ 42 ॥

पर्जन्यायदैदमित्युक्त्वा घट्थी चेषातुत् विशेषत् ।

The colour of the Samāna mantra is like

lightning; Agni is the Rsi; Parjanya (the rains, water) is the Devatā; Pankti is the chanda; "Samānāya Svāhā" and "Idam Parjanyāya na namah" are the mantras.

वैश्वानोर महानिनस्त्रविर्षे परिकीर्तितः ॥ 43 ॥

गायबीख्छे आख्यातं देवस्त्वाता भवेदेपि ।

स्वाहितो मन आख्याताः परमात्मा उच्छरेत् ॥ 44 ॥

इरं त न मय चेल्वे वांतं प्राणानिग्होरोक्रम ।

O Nārada! Thus offering the five oblations to the five breaths, next offer oblations to the Ātman; the Bhīṣana Vahni is the Rṣi; the Gāyatrī is the chanda; the Self is the Devatā; “Ātmane Svāhā,” and “Śalamātmane na namah” are the mantras.

एतज्ञाता विधिं कृत्वा इद्धभ्याय करणते ॥

प्राणानिहोत्रविद्यों संक्षेपात्कर्धिता हि ते ॥ 4 5 ॥

श्री श्रीमहैभीगानते महापुराणे एकादशसकन्ये

द्विशीघधानः 11 22 11

O Nārada! He who knows this Homa of Prānāgnīhotra attains the state of Brahmā. Thus I have spoken to you in brief the rules of the Prānāgnī hotra Homa.

Here ends the Twenty-second Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the rules of Vaiśvadeva in the Mahāpurānam Śrimadevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibbāhāvatam

