[Ch 3 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā said: “We were very much astonished not to find water where our beautiful air craft landed us. We saw earth resonated with the sweet cooings of cuckoos, filled with beautiful fruit-laden trees, forests and gardens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā said :-- “We were very much astonished not to find water where our beautiful aeroplane landed us. We saw earth resonated with the sweet cooings of the cuckoos, filled with beautiful fruit-laden trees, forests and gardens.

[Ch 3 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Big rivers, wells, tan's, ponds, water-springs, small pools, women, men all were there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Big rivers, wells, tanks, ponds, water-springs, small pools, women, men all are there.

[Ch 3 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next we saw, in front of us, a nice city enclosed by a divine wall, containing many sacrificial halls and various palacial buildings and magnificent edifices.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next we saw, in front of us, a nice city enclosed by a divine wall, containing many sacrificial halls and various palatial buildings and magnificent edifices.

[Ch 3 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Oh! We thought "It is Heaven! What a great wonder! Who built this?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► Oh! We thought :-- It is Heaven! What a great wonder! Who built this?

[Ch 3 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next we saw, “A king looking like a Deva is going out on a hunting excursion in the forest. Devi Ambikā, Whom we saw before, is staying on the chariot. In an instant, our air craft, propelled by air got high up above the sky and reached in the twinkling of an eye at a lovely place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next we saw a king looking like a Deva is going out on a hunting excursion in the forest. The Devī Ambikā, Whom we saw before, is staying on the chariot. In an instant, our aeroplane, propelled by air got high up above the sky and reached in the twinkling of an eye at a lovely place.

[Ch 3 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We saw there a divine Nandana garden. There Surabhi, the cow of plenty, was staying under the shade of the Pārijāta tree.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We saw there a divine Nandana garden. There Surabhi, the cow of plenty, was staying under the shade of the Parijāta tree.

[Ch 3 Verse 9-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Close by her, there was an elephant having four tusks; and Menakā and other hosts of Apsarās were there with their various gestures and postures, playing, dancing and singing. There were hundred of Yakṣas, Gandharvas, Vidyādharas within that Mandāra garden playing and singing. Within this there was the Lord Śatakratu with Śaci, the daughter of Pulomā.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Close by her, there was an elephant having four tusks; and Menaká and other hosts of Apsarās were there with their various gestures and postures, playing, dancing and singing. There were hundred of Yakṣas, Gandharbhas, Vidyādharas within that Mandāra garden playing and singing. Within this there was the Lord Satakratu with Śacī, the daughter of Pulomā.

[Ch 3 Verse 12-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next we saw with great wonder, Varuna, the lord of the aquatic animals, Kubera, Yama, Sūrya (sun), fire and the other Devas; then we, saw that in our front, Indra the Lord of the Devas, was coming out from a well decorated city. He was there situated in his palanquin, calm and quite and carried by men. Then the car, where we were situated, began to get up high in the sky, and in the twinkling of an eye, we reached Brahmaloka, that is saluted by all the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next we saw with great wonder, Varuṇa, the lord of the aquatic animals, Kuvera, Yama, Sūrya (sun), fire and the other Devas; then we saw that in our front, Indra the Lord of the Devas, was coming out from a well decorated city. He was there situated in his palanquin, calm and quiet and carried by men. Then the car, where we were situated, began to get up high in the sky, and in the twinkling of an eye, we reached Brahmā loka, that is saluted by all the Devas.

[Ch 3 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There Sambhu and Keśava were greatly bewildered to see Brahmā of that place. In the council hall of Brahmā, the Vedas with their Angas, the serpents, hills, oceans and rivers were seen.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There Śambhu and Keśava were greatly bewildered to see Brahmā of that place. In the council hall of Brahmā, the Vedas with their Aṅgas, the serpents, hills, oceans and rivers were seen.

[Ch 3 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing all these, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara asked me: "O Four-faced one! Who is this eternal Brahma?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing all these, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara asked me :-- “O Four-faced one! Who is this eternal Brahmā?

[Ch 3 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I replied: “I do not know who is this Brahmā? Who am I? and who is He? why has this error come over me? You, too, also are gods: so you can better ponder over it.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► I replied :-- I do not know who is this Brahmā? Who am I? and who is He? why has this error come over me? You, too, also are gods so you can better ponder over it.”

[Ch 3 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next our car, going with the swiftness of mind went, in the twinkling of an eye, to the beautiful all auspicious Kailāśa mountain, surrounded by bliss-giving Yakṣas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next our car, going with the swiftness of mind went, in the twinkling of an eye, to the beautiful all auspicious Kailāśa mountain surrounded by bliss-giving Yakṣas.

[Ch 3 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It was beautiful by the Mandāra garden, resonated with the sweet cooings of Šukas and cuckoos and the sweet sounds of lutes and small drums and tabors.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It was beautified by the Mandāra garden, resonated by the sweet cooings of Śukas and cuckoos and the sweet sounds of lutes and small drums and tabors.

[Ch 3 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When we reached there, we saw the five-faced, three-eyed Bhagavān Śaśī Śekhara, with ten hands, wearing tiger skin, and the upper garment of the elephant skin. He was, then, getting out of his abode, riding on a bull.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When we reached there we saw the five faced, three-eyed Bhagavān Śashi Śekhara, with ten hands, wearing tiger skin, and the upper garment of the elephant skin. He was then, getting out of his abode, riding on a bull.

[Ch 3 Verse 23-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► His two sons, the great heroes, Gangeśa and Kārtikeya, beautifully adorned, were attending Him as His bodyguards. Nandi and all other hosts were following Him, chanting victories to Him. O, Muni Narāda! we were greatly surprised to see another Śaṅkara, surrounded by the Mātrkās. So much so, that perplexed with doubts, I sat down there. Next our air craft went on with the force of wind; and in an instant reached the abode of Vaikuntha, the amusement court of Lakṣmī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► His two sons, the great heroes, Ganeśa and Kārtikeya, beautifully adorned, were attending Him as His body guards. Nandi and all other hosts were following Him, chanting victories to Him. O Muni Narāda! we were greatly wondered to see another Śaṅkara, surrounded by the Matrikās. So much so, that perplexed with doubts, I sat down there. Next our aeroplane went on with the force of wind; and in an instant reached the abode of Vaikuṇṭha, the amusement court of Laksmī.

[Ch 3 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sūta! There at Vaikutha, we saw a wonderful manifestation of power. Our companion Viṣṇu was greatly surprised to see that excellent city.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sūta! There at Vaikuṇṭha, we saw a wonderful manifestation of power. Our companion Viṣṇu was greatly surprised to see that excellent city.

[Ch 3 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We saw there four-armed Viṣṇu, of the colour of Ātasi flower, wearing yellow garments, adorned with divine ornaments, sitting on Garudā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We saw there four-armed Viṣṇu, of the colour of Ātasi flower, wearing yellow garments, adorned with divine ornaments sitting on Garuḍa.

[Ch 3 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Laksmī Devī is fanning wonderful chowry to Him. Struck with wonder at the sight of the eternal Viṣṇu, we took our seats on the car and looked at one another's face.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Lakṣmī Devī is fanning wonderful chowry to Him. Struck with wonder at the sight of the eternal Viṣṇu, we took our seat on the car and looked at one another’s face.

[Ch 3 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “Next the baloon ascended with the swiftness of wind; and, in the twinkling of an eye, reached to the ocean of nectar, the Sudhā-Sāgara, with waves playing sweetly on it.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next the balloon ascended with the swiftness of wind; and, in the twinkling of an eye, reached to the ocean of nectar, the Sudhā-Sāgar, with waves playing sweetly on it.

[Ch 3 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This ocean Sudhā Sāgara is filled with aquatic animals and agitated with ripples. We saw and went along and came to a very wonderful place called the Maṇi Dvīpa (the island of gems) in the midst of the Ocean.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This ocean Sudhā Sāgara is filled with aquatic animals and agitated with ripples. We saw and went along and came to a very wonderful place called the Maṇi Dvīpa (the island of gems) in the midst of the Ocean.

[Ch 3 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It was adorned with Mandāra and Parijāta and other heavenly flower trees (plants?), with various beautiful carpets, with variegated trees Aśoka, Vakula, Ketaki, Campaka, Kuruvaka, etc., adorned with lustrous gems and pearls.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It was adorned with Mandāra and Pàrijāta an other heavenly flower trees (plants?), with various beautiful carpets, with variegated trees Aśoka, Vakula, Ketakī, Champaka, Kuravaka, etc., adorned with lustrous gems and pearls.

[Ch 3 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It was resonated with the sweet coings of the cuckoos and the humming sounds of bees; and it presented the sight of a sweet harmonious music playing there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It was resonated with the sweet cooings of the cuckoos and the humming sounds of bees; and it presented the sight of a sweet harmonious music playing there.

[Ch 3 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Sitting on our air craft, we saw, from a distance, within that Dvīpa, a beautiful cot known as Śivākāra (i.e. whose four legs represent Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, etc, and whose top portion represents Sadā Śiva) looking like a rainbow, with exquisitely beautiful carpet spread over it and decked with various gems and jewels and inlaid with pearls.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sitting on our aeroplane, we saw, from a distance, within that Dvīpa, a beautiful cot known as Śivākāra (i.e. whose four legs represent Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, etc., and whose top portion represents Sadā Śiva looking like a rainbow, with exquisitely beautiful carpet spread over it and decked with various gems and jewels and inlaid with pearls.

[Ch 3 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We saw a Divine Lady, sitting on the cot, wearing a red garment and a garland of red cloth and bedewed with red sandal paste. Her eyes were dark-red; that beautiful faced red-lipped lady looked more beautiful than ten millions of lightnings and ten millions of Lakṣmīs and lustrous like the Sun.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We saw a Divine Lady, sitting on the cot, wearing a red garment and a garland of red cloth and bedewed with red sandal paste. Her eyes were dark-red; that beautiful faced red-lipped lady looked more beautiful than ten millions of lightnings and ten millions of Lakṣmīs and lustrous like the Sun.

[Ch 3 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Bhagavatī Bhuvanesvari was sitting with a sweet smile on Her lips and holding in Her four hands noose, goad, and signs indicating as if She was ready to grant boons and asking Her devotees to discard all fear. We never saw before such a form.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Bhagavatī Bhuvaneśvarī was sitting with a sweet smile on Her lips and holding in Her four hands noose, goad, and signs indicating as if She was ready to grant boons and asking Her devotees discard all fear. We never saw before such a form.

[Ch 3 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Even the birds of that place repeat the mystic incantation Hrim and serve that Lady, Who is of the color of the rising Sun, all-merciful, and in the full bloom of youth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Even the birds of that place repeat the mystic incantation Hrim and serve that Lady, Who is of the colour of the rising Sun, all merciful, and in the full bloom of youth.

[Ch 3 Verse 42-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That lotus-faced smiling lady was adorned with all the beauties of Nature. Her high breasts defied the lotus bud. She was holding various jewelled ornaments e.g. armplates, bracelets, diadems, etc.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That lotus-faced smiling lady was adorned with all the beauties of Nature. Her high breasts defied the lotus bud. She was holding various jewelled ornaments, e.g., armplates, bracelets, diadems, etc.

[Ch 3 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her lotus-face looked exceedingly beautiful with jewelled earrings of the shape of the Śī Yantra (yantra of Tripurā Sundari). Hrllekhā and other Deva girls were surrounding Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her lotus-face looked exceedingly beautiful with jewelled ear-rings of the shape of the Śrī Yantra (yantra of Tripurā Sundarī). Hrillekhā and other Deva girls were surrounding Her.

[Ch 3 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There were Sakhiś on the four sides-always chanting hymns to Maheśvari, the Lady of the world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There were Sakhis on the four sides -- always chanting hymns to Maheśvarī, the Lady of the world.

[Ch 3 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She was surrounded on Her all sides by Ananga kusuman and other Devis. She was sitting in the middle of the Satkona (six angled) Yantra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She was surrounded on Her all sides by Ananga kusuma and other Devīs. She was sitting in the middle of the Satkona (six angled) Yantra.

[Ch 3 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We were all amazed at the sight of this. Wonderful Form never seen before and we thought: "Who is this Lady? What is Her name? We know nothing of Her, from such a distance."
NEW CORR ENG ──► We were all wondered at the sight of this Wonderful Form never seen before and we thought :-- “Who is this Lady? What is Her name? we know nothing of Her, from such a distance.”

[Ch 3 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus, while we were gazing at Her, that four-armed Lady became gradually thousand eyed, with thousand hands and thousand feet; so it seemed to us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus while we were gazing at Her, that four armed Lady became gradually thousand eyed, with thousand hands and thousand feet; so it seemed to us.

[Ch 3 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Nārada! We became very much embarrassed with guubts and thought within ourselves “Is She Apsarā (nymph) or a Gandharva daughter or any other Deva Gīrī? Who is She?” At this juncture Bhagvān Viṣṇu saw closely the sweet smiling Devi and by his intelligence came to a definite conclusion and spoke to us:
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Nārada! We became very much embarrassed with doubts and thought within ourselves “Is She Apsarā (nymph) or a Gandharva daughter or any other Deva Girl? who is She ?” At this juncture Bhagavān Viṣṇu saw closely the sweet smiling Devī and by his intelligence came to a definite conclusion and spoke to us :--

[Ch 3 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "This is the Devi Bhagavatī Mahāvidyā Mahā Māyā, undecaying and eternal; She is the Full, the Prakṛti; She is the Cause of us all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “This is the Devī Bhagavatī Mahāvidyā Mahā Māyā, undecaying and eternal; She is the Full, the Prakriti; She is the Cause of us all.

[Ch 3 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Devi is inconceivable to those who are of dull intellect; only the Yogis can see Her by their Yoga-powers. She is eternal (Brahma) and also non-eternal (Māyā). She is the Will-force of the Supreme Self. She is the First Creatrix of this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This Devī is inconceivable to those who are of dull intellects; only the Yogis can see Her by their Yoga-powers. She is eternal (Brahmā) and also non-eternal (Māyā). She is the Will-force of the Supreme Self. She is the First Creatrix of this world.

[Ch 3 Verse 53-54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Devi with wide eyes, the Lady of the Universe, has produced the Vedas. The less-fortunate persons cannot worship Her. During the time of Pralaya, She destroys all the Universe, draws within Her body all the subtle bodies (Linga-Śarīras), and plays. O two Devas! At present She is residing in the form of the Seed of the Universe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This Devī with wide eyes, the Lady of the Universe, has produced the Vedas. The less-fortunate persons cannot worship Her. During the time of Pralaya, She destroys all the Universe, draws within Her body all the subtle bodies (Liṅga-Sarīras), and plays. O two Devas! At present She is residing in the form of the Seed of the Universe.

[Ch 3 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Behold! On Her sides are seen duly all the Vibhūtis (manifestations of powers). They are all adorned with divine ornaments and anointed with divine scent and are serving Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Behold! On Her sides are seen duly all the Vibhūtis (manifestations of powers). They are all adorned with divine ornaments and anointed with divine scents and are serving Her.

[Ch 3 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brahman! O Śaṅkara! Today we are blessed and highly fortunate that we have got the sight of this Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brahmān! O Śaṅkara! To-day we are blessed and highly fortunate that we have got the sight of this Devī.

[Ch 3 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The tapasyās (asceticisms) that we practised of yore have yielded to us this fruit. Else why Bhagavatī has shown so carefully Her own form?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The tapasyā (asceticisms) that we practised of yore have yielded to us this fruit. Else why Bhagavatī has shown so carefully Her own form?

[Ch 3 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who are highly meritorious by tapasyās and gifts of abundant wealth, those high souled persons are able to see this all-auspicious Bhagavatī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who are highly meritorious by tapasyās and gifts of abundant wealth, those high souled persons are able to see this all-auspicious Bhagavatī.

[Ch 3 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The person attached to sensual objects can never see Her. It is She that is the Mūlā Prakṛti, united with the Cīdānanda Person.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The person attached to sensual objects can never see Her. It is She that is the Mūlā Prakriti, united with the Cidānanda Person.

[Ch 3 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is She that creates this Brahmanāṇa and exhibits it to the Paramātmā (the Supreme Self). O two Devas!
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is She that creates this Brahmānda and exhibits it to the Paramātmā (the Supreme Self). O two Devas!

[Ch 3 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This whole Universe and all the Seers and Seen and other things contained therein owe to Her as their sole cause. She is the Māyā, assuming all forms; She is the Goddess of all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This whole Universe and all the Seers and Seen and other things contained therein owe to Her as their sole cause. She is the Māyā assuming all forms; She is the Goddess of all.

[Ch 3 Verse 62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Where is I myself! Where are the Devas! Where are Laksmī and the other Devis! We cannot compare to one-hundred thousandth part of Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Where is I myself! Where are the Devas! Where are Laksmī and the other Devīs! We cannot compare to one-hundred thousandth part of Her.

[Ch 3 Verse 63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is this all-excellent Lady, Whom I saw in the great Ocean when She reckoned Me who was a baby then with greatest gladness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is this all-excellent Lady, Whom I saw in the great Ocean when She reckoned Me who was baby then with greatest gladness.

[Ch 3 Verse 64-65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In former days, when I was sleeping on the cot made of immoveable fixed leaves of a banyan tree and licking my toe, making it enter within my mouth and playing like an ordinary baby, this Lady rocked my gentle body to and fro on the banyan leaves, singing songs like a Mother. Śrimaddevībhāgavatam Now I recollect all what I felt before at Her sight and recognise that She is the Bhagavatī. These very things I now communicate to you. Hear attentively that She is this Lady and She is our Mother. Thus ends the Third Chapter of the Third Book on seeing the Devi in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In former days, when I was sleeping on the cot made of immoveable fixed leaves of a banyan tree and licking my toe, making it enter within my mouth and playing like an ordinary baby, this Lady rocked my gentle body to and fro on the banyan leaves singing songs like a Mother. Now I recollect all what I felt before at Her sight and recognise that She is the Bhagavatī. These very things I now communicate to you. Hear attentively that She is this Lady and She is our Mother.” Thus ends the third chapter of the Third Skandha on seeing the Devī in the Mahā Purāṇam Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyās.
