CHAPTER III

On Seeing the Devi

बहावाच

विवानं तम्नोवेगं यत्र स्थानान्तरे गतम् ।

न जलं तत्र पश्यामो विक्सिताः: म्यो वयं तदा ॥ १ ॥

वृक्षा: सर्वकला रध्याः कोकिलारायमिडिताः ।

मही महीधराः कामं वनान्युवचनानि च ॥ 2 ॥

Brahmā said: “We were very much astonished not to find water where our beautiful air craft landed us. We saw earth resonated with the sweet cooings

of cuckoos, filled with beautiful fruit-laden trees, forests and gardens.

नार्थंष पुरुषाश्रैव पशवश सरित्रा ।

वाय्यः कृपास्तडागाश्र पल्ल्वानि न निर्व्रौरः ॥ 3 ॥

Big rivers, wells, tan's, ponds, water-springs, small pools, women, men all were there.

पुरतो नगरं रभ्ये दिव्यप्राकारमिडतम् ।

यज्ञालासमायुक्तं नानाह्यर्विराजतम् ॥ 4 ॥

Next we saw, in front of us, a nice city enclosed by a divine wall, containing many sacrificial halls and various palacial buildings and magnificent edifices.

प्रत्यभिज्ञा तत जाताउप्रत्यमाकं प्रेक्ष्य तत्पुम् ।

स्वरांघिमिति केनासी निर्मितैस्ति महाद्धतुम ॥ 5 ॥

Oh! We thought "It is Heaven! What a great wonder! Who built this?"

राजानं देवसङ्गुशं जञनं मृगवांं चने ।

अस्माधिः संश्सिता शूद्य विमानोपर चाधिका ॥ 6 ॥

क्षणाच्छचाल गाने विमानं पवनैरितम् ।

मुह्तीझा ततः प्राप्त देशे चान्ये मनोहरे ॥ 7 ॥

Next we saw, “A king looking like a Deva is going out on a hunting excursion in the forest. Devi Ambikā, Whom we saw before, is staying on the chariot. In an instant, our air craft, propelled by air got high up above the sky and reached in the twinkling of an eye at a lovely place.

नन्दं च वनं तत्र दृष्यसामधिकतम् ।

पारितातरूच्छायासंशिता सुराभि: स्थिता ॥ 8 ॥

We saw there a divine Nandana garden. There Surabhi, the cow of plenty, was staying under the shade of the Pārijāta tree.

चतुर्दैनो गजस्तव्या: समीपे समवस्थितः ।

अपसरसां तत्र वृद्वानि मेनकापृष्टीनीच च ॥ ९ ॥

क्रीडिति विविधेघविर्यानानुल्यसन्त्रवितः ।

गन्धर्वां: शतशस्तनय सूचा विद्याधारसत्या ॥ 10 ॥

मन्दारावाटिकामध्ये गायन्ति च रस्तित च ।

दूर: शतक्रतुरस्तर पौलोन्या सहित: प्रभुः ॥ 11 ॥

Close by her, there was an elephant having four tusks; and Menakā and other hosts of Apsarās were there with their various gestures and postures, playing, dancing and singing. There were hundred of Yakṣas, Gandharvas, Vidyādharas within that Mandāra garden playing and singing. Within this there was the Lord Śatakratu with Śaci, the daughter of Pulomā.”

वर्य तु विक्षिताओंस्या दृष्ट्वा गैविष्यं त्वा ।

यादःपति कुबेरे च यमं सूर्वे स्थिभावसुम् ॥ 12 ॥

वित्तोक्य विक्षिताओंसास्य वयं तत्र सुरात्स्थितान् ।

तदा विनिरितोराजा पुरात्स्यात्सुमण्डितात् ॥ 13 ॥

देवराज इवाक्षीभ्यो नरवाहुावरनी स्थितः ।

विमानस्या वयं तृच्चाचल तत्सागतम् ॥ 14 ॥

बह्रातोकं तदा दिव्यं सर्वदेवमस्कृतम् ।

तत्र ब्रह्माणमालोक्य विक्सिती हरकेशजी ॥ 15 ॥

Next we saw with great wonder, Varuna, the lord of the aquatic animals, Kubera, Yama, Sūrya (sun), fire and the other Devas; then we, saw that in our front, Indra the Lord of the Devas, was coming out from a well decorated city. He was there situated in his palanquin, calm and quite and carried by men. Then the car, where we were situated, began to get up high in the sky, and in the twinkling of an eye, we reached Brahmaloka, that is saluted by all the Devas.

सभायां तत्र वेदाङ्ग सर्वे साङ्गः स्वलिपणः ।

सागतः सत्तिश्व पर्वतः पत्रगोगतः ॥ १ ६ ॥

There Sambhu and Keśava were greatly bewildered to see Brahmā of that place. In the council hall of Brahmā, the Vedas with their Angas, the serpents, hills, oceans and rivers were seen.

मामुचतुशुर्जेक्नः कोरंयं बह्ञा सन्तानः ।

ताववोचमहं नैव जाने सृष्टिपरितं पतिम् ॥ 17 ॥

Seeing all these, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara asked me: "O Four-faced one! Who is this eternal Brahma?"

कोड़ं कॉरंक किमर्थ वा फमोरंयं मन चेष्टी ।

क्षणाद्ध विमानं तच्चवालासु मनोजवम् ॥ 18 ॥

I replied: “I do not know who is this Brahmā? Who am I? and who is He? why has this error come over me? You, too, also are gods: so you can better ponder over it.”

कैलासशिप्रहे प्राप्त रथे च्यक्षगणान्ति ।

मन्दारवादिकारये कीराकोकितकृजिते ॥ १९ ॥

Next our car, going with the swiftness of mind went, in the twinkling of an eye, to the beautiful all auspicious Kailāśa mountain, surrounded by bliss-giving Yakṣas.

वीणामुजरवोघुः नातिदे सुखदे शिवे ।

यदा प्राप्त विमानं तन्त्रैव सदनान्धुषान् ॥ 20 ॥

It was beautiful by the Mandāra garden,

Book III Chapter III

resonated with the sweet cooings of Šukas and cuckoos and the sweet sounds of lutes and small drums and tabors.

निरनीं भगवाठबंभुरुंभाकडसिलोचनः ।

पशान्नो दर्शपुंकः कृतसोमाधिशेषतः ॥ 21 ॥

व्याङ्चमंपरीधानो नाजचर्मतरीयकः ।

पाणिण्वर्ती महावीरी गाजाननषढाननो ॥ 22 ॥

शिशेन सह पुत्री ह्री उजमानी विसेतुः ।

When we reached there, we saw the five-faced, three-eyed Bhagavān Śaśī Śekhara, with ten hands, wearing tiger skin, and the upper garment of the elephant skin. He was, then, getting out of his abode, riding on a bull.

नन्दिप्रभृतः सर्वे गणायधा बराश्र ते ॥ २३ ॥

वश्यादं प्रयुंजना जजन्ति शिवपुरुषा: ।

तं वीक्ष्य शुक्रं चान्यं विस्मितास्तत्र नारद । २४ ॥

मातृभि: संग्याविष्टसत्राहं न्यवसं मुने ।

क्षणात्समादुगिरेः शूर्णामानं वातरहंसा ॥ २५ ॥

बैकुँठसदनं प्राणेन रामायणमन्दिन्यम् ।

असभ्याया विभूतिक्ष तत्र वृष्टा मया सुत ॥ २६ ॥

His two sons, the great heroes, Gangeśa and Kārtikeya, beautifully adorned, were attending Him as His bodyguards. Nandi and all other hosts were following Him, chanting victories to Him. O, Muni Narāda! we were greatly surprised to see another Śaṅkara, surrounded by the Mātrkās. So much so, that perplexed with doubts, I sat down there. Next our air craft went on with the force of wind; and in an instant reached the abode of Vaikuntha, the amusement court of Lakṣmī.

विस्तिषये नदा विद्युईया तत्पुर्मुत्तमम् ।

सदनाएं ययो तावद्धोरः कमलतोचनः ॥ 27 ॥

O Sūta! There at Vaikutha, we saw a wonderful manifestation of power. Our companion Viṣṇu was greatly surprised to see that excellent city.

असनीकुमुभामाशः पीतिवासाशुर्भुः ।

द्विज्ञाजाधिकड्श द्विधायरणभूषितः ॥ 28 ॥

We saw there four-armed Viṣṇu, of the colour of Ātasi flower, wearing yellow garments, adorned with divine ornaments, sitting on Garudā.

वीज्यानस्तद लक्ष्या कामिन्या चामरे रुषः ।

तं वीक्ष्य विमिता: सर्वे वयं विगुणं सन्तानम् ॥ 29 ॥

Laksmī Devī is fanning wonderful chowry to Him. Struck with wonder at the sight of the eternal Viṣṇu, we took our seats on the car and looked at one another's face.

परस्यरं निरीक्षितः स्थितास्तमिन्य वरायने ।

ततश्रघाल ततसा विमानं वातरंहसा ॥ 30 ॥

“Next the baloon ascended with the swiftness of wind; and, in the twinkling of an eye, reached to the ocean of nectar, the Sudhā-Sāgara, with waves playing sweetly on it.

सुधासमुद्र: सम्पातो मिद्धारिमहोमिनान् ।

यादोगणसमाकीर्णंशलूतीधिविराशितः ॥ 31 ॥

This ocean Sudhā Sāgara is filled with aquatic animals and agitated with ripples. We saw and went along and came to a very wonderful place called the Maṇi Dvīpa (the island of gems) in the midst of the Ocean.

मन्द्रापरित्राताठीः पादर्परित्रोगिधतः ।

नानास्तरणासंसुनी नानाधिविविधित्र: ॥ 32 ॥

मुक्ताद्यापरिक्षित्हो नानाद्यापिराजितः ।

अंगोकबकुलाखेध यूबेः कुरबकादिधिः ॥ 33 ॥

It was adorned with Mandāra and Parijāta and other heavenly flower trees (plants?), with various beautiful carpets, with variegated trees Aśoka, Vakula, Ketaki, Campaka, Kuruvaka, etc., adorned with lustrous gems and pearls.

संयुत सर्वतः सौभ्यैः केतकीचंफकैनृतः ।

कोकितगारसंयुहो दिव्यानभ्रमनितः।। 34 ॥

It was resonated with the sweet coings of the cuckoos and the humming sounds of bees; and it presented the sight of a sweet harmonious music playing there.

द्विरेषातिरणत्काररित्रुतः परमाद्धुतः ।

तत्स्म्नीये शिवाकार: पर्यडूः सुमन्तोहः ॥ 35 ॥

रत्नालखचितो3रथर्व नानारत्नविशरिताः ।

दृष्ठो3स्माथिविमानस्थैतूतः परिमधिकतः ॥ 36 ॥

"Sitting on our air craft, we saw, from a distance, within that Dvīpa, a beautiful cot known as

Śivākāra (i.e. whose four legs represent Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, etc, and whose top portion represents Sadā Śiva) looking like a rainbow, with exquisitely beautiful carpet spread over it and decked with various gems and jewels and inlaid with pearls.

नानास्तरणसंछत्र इंज्ञापसम्पिततः ।

परैंक्रूप्ररे तस्मिनुपिधित रंगना ॥37 ॥

रकमाल्यविरधरा रकमायानुपेपना ।

सुरक्नयना कान्ता विद्युक्तोदिसमप्रभा ॥ 38 ॥

We saw a Divine Lady, sitting on the cot, wearing a red garment and a garland of red cloth and bedewed with red sandal paste. Her eyes were dark-red; that beautiful faced red-lipped lady looked more beautiful than ten millions of lightnings and ten millions of Lakṣmīs and lustrous like the Sun.

सुचाक्रवदना रक्तन्दच्छद्विराजिता ।

साकोठाधिका कान्ता सूर्याविंबनिभाषिता ॥ 39 ॥

वरपाणाङ्गणाधिष्टया शीभुवनेक्षी ।

अटुधूर्वां द्वा सा सुद्वी सितम्पृष्णा ॥ 40 ॥

The Bhagavatī Bhuvanesvari was sitting with a sweet smile on Her lips and holding in Her four hands noose, goad, and signs indicating as if She was ready to grant boons and asking Her devotees to discard all fear. We never saw before such a form.

ईंकारजपनिश्रैत् पहिक्यैदेनिवेलिता ।

अरणा करणामृतिं: कुमारी नवरीवारि ॥ 41 ॥

Even the birds of that place repeat the mystic incantation Hrim and serve that Lady, Who is of the color of the rising Sun, all-merciful, and in the full bloom of youth.

सर्वश्रुत्रावेषाठा मन्दासितमुखांबुजा ।

उद्यानीनुकचढ़द्विनर्जितांभोजकुद्यमला ॥ 42 ॥

नानामिगणगालीभूषणीरणशेपाचिता ।

कन्कोगकेन्यूरिकीटपरिशीधिता ॥ 43 ॥

That lotus-faced smiling lady was adorned with all the beauties of Nature. Her high breasts defied the lotus bud. She was holding various jewelled ornaments e.g. armplates, bracelets, diadems, etc.

कनकच्छीचकताटंकविटंकवदनांबुजा ।

हल्लेखा घुवनेगीति नामजापयराधेय: ॥ 4 4 ॥

Her lotus-face looked exceedingly beautiful with jewelled earrings of the shape of the Śī Yantra (yantra of Tripurā Sundari). Hrllekhā and other Deva girls were surrounding Her.

सखीद्वे: स्तुता नित्यं घुवनेगी महेश्वी ।

हृल्लेखाधामयकन्याधिः परियेहिता ॥ 4 5 ॥

There were Sakhiś on the four sides-always chanting hymns to Maheśvari, the Lady of the world.

अनंगकुसुमाढाधिर्देवीधिः परियेहिता ।

देवी घट्कोपणमध्यसा यत्राजोपरि स्थता ॥ 46 ॥

She was surrounded on Her all sides by Ananga kusuman and other Devis. She was sitting in the middle of the Satkona (six angled) Yantra.

दूबहा तां विमसा: सर्वे वयं तन स्थताभवन् ।

केयं काना च किं नान न जानोगोजर संस्किता ॥ 47 ॥

We were all amazed at the sight of this. Wonderful Form never seen before and we thought: "Who is this Lady? What is Her name? We know nothing of Her, from such a distance."

सहस्वनयन रामा सहस्वकरसंयुता ।

सहस्वदन्त नया भाति दुरादसंगयम् ॥ 48 ॥

Thus, while we were gazing at Her, that four-armed Lady became gradually thousand eyed, with thousand hands and thousand feet; so it seemed to us.

नापसरा नापि नार्थर्वीं देवांगना किल ।

इति संगयामापासरत्र नारद संस्थतः ॥ 49 ॥

तदारसी भगवान्विगूरैद्वा तां चाहहासिनीय ।

उवाचांवां स्वविज्ञानाकृत्वा मनसि निशयम् ॥ 50 ॥

O Nārada! We became very much embarrassed with guubts and thought within ourselves “Is She Apsarā (nymph) or a Gandharva daughter or any other Deva Gīrī? Who is She?” At this juncture Bhagvān Viṣṇu saw closely the sweet smiling Devi and by his intelligence came to a definite conclusion and spoke to us:

एषा भगवती देही सर्वेधा कारणं हि नः ।

महाविद्या महामाया पूर्णं प्रकृतित्वया ॥ 5 1 ॥

Book III Chapter III

"This is the Devi Bhagavatī Mahāvidyā Mahā Māyā, undecaying and eternal; She is the Full, the Prakṛti; She is the Cause of us all.

दुर्जंवास्यन्धियां देखी योगमाया दुर्जाया ।

इच्छा पातनतः कामं निव्यानियस्यक्षिपणि ॥ 52 ॥

This Devi is inconceivable to those who are of dull intellect; only the Yogis can see Her by their Yoga-powers. She is eternal (Brahma) and also non-eternal (Māyā). She is the Will-force of the Supreme Self. She is the First Creatrix of this world.

दुरात्यास्त्यभायेछुः देवी विध्धधी शिला ।

वेदमार्ची विशालाखी सर्वेमामादिरीघी ॥ ५३ ॥

एषा संहृच सकल विध्धं क्रीविति सक्षये ।

तिज्ञानि सर्वजीवानां स्वशगरी तिथेयच च । ५४ ॥

This Devi with wide eyes, the Lady of the Universe, has produced the Vedas. The less-fortunate persons cannot worship Her. During the time of Pralaya, She destroys all the Universe, draws within Her body all the subtle bodies (Linga-Śarīras), and plays. O two Devas! At present She is residing in the form of the Seed of the Universe.

सर्ववीजमयी होया राजते साम्पतं सुर्ति ।

विश्वमतःस्थिता:पार्थिप्यरताकोदिग:क्रमात् 5 5 ॥

Behold! On Her sides are seen duly all the Vibhūtis (manifestations of powers). They are all adorned with divine ornaments and anointed with divine scent and are serving Her.

दिव्याभरणभुपाक्ढां दिव्यान्यानुपेलपना: ।

परिचर्यापरा: सर्वो: पर्यतां ब्दशगझूरी ॥ ५६ ॥

O Brahman! O Śaṅkara! Today we are blessed and highly fortunate that we have got the sight of this Devi.

धात्या वयं महाभागाः कृतकृता: स्म साम्यान् ।

यदत्र दर्शनं प्राप्ते भगवतः स्वयं तिवद्न ॥ ५७ ॥

The tapasyās (asceticisms) that we practised of yore have yielded to us this fruit. Else why Bhagavatī has shown so carefully Her own form?

तपसत्तं पुरा यत्नात्यदें फलमुपनाम् ।

अन्यथा दर्शनं कुत्र भवेदसामकामदारत् ॥ 58 ॥

Those who are highly meritorious by tapasyās and gifts of abundant wealth, those high souled persons are able to see this all-auspicious Bhagavatī.

पर्यतिं पुण्यपुज्ञा ये ये वद्यान्यासप्त्विनः ।

रागिणो नैव पश्यति देर्वी भगवर्ती शिवान् ॥ 59 ॥

The person attached to sensual objects can never see Her. It is She that is the Mūlā Prakṛti, united with the Cīdānanda Person.

मूलभूकितेर्वेधा सदा पुरुषसंगता ।

बह्ञाण्ड दर्णयेत्यां कृत्वा वे परमात्मे ॥ 60 ॥

It is She that creates this Brahmanāṇa and exhibits it to the Paramātmā (the Supreme Self). O two Devas!

ग्रहासी नृव्यमखिलं बह्ञाण्डे देवता: सुर्गे ।

तस्यैया कारणं सर्वां माया सर्वेशुं शिजा ॥ 6 1 ॥

This whole Universe and all the Seers and Seen and other things contained therein owe to Her as their sole cause. She is the Māyā, assuming all forms; She is the Goddess of all.

व्वाहं वा वव सुरा: सर्वैं सभ्याहा: सुयोक्षितः ।

लक्षोर्जेन तुलामस्या न भवामः कंधंचन ॥ 6 2 ॥

Where is I myself! Where are the Devas! Where are Laksmī and the other Devis! We cannot compare to one-hundred thousandth part of Her.

सैपा वर्गाना नाम या वे दूहा महानंचे ।

बालभावे महादेवी दोलर्वतील मां मुदा ॥ 63 ॥

It is this all-excellent Lady, Whom I saw in the great Ocean when She reckoned Me who was a baby then with greatest gladness.

गयनं वदपत्रे च पर्यकै सुस्थिते दूदं ।

पादांगुरुं करे कृत्वा निवेशय मुखधकुं जे ॥ 64 ॥

लेलिहनं च क्रीडत्नमनेकैबलंचष्टिकैः ।

रमाणं कोमलांगं बटपत्रुंटे स्थितम् ॥ 65 ॥

In former days, when I was sleeping on the cot made of immoveable fixed leaves of a banyan tree and licking my toe, making it enter within my mouth and playing like an ordinary baby, this Lady rocked my gentle body to and fro on the banyan leaves, singing songs like a Mother.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

<table><tr><td>गायन्ती दोलयन्ती च बालभावान्मयि स्थिते ।</td></tr><tr><td>सेयं सुनिश्रितं ज्ञातं जातं मे टर्सानंदित्व ॥ 6 6 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>कामं नो जननी सेघा श्युणु तं प्रवदायम्बरु ।</td></tr><tr><td>अनुभूतं मया पूर्वं प्रत्यभिभूता समत्धिता ॥ 6 7 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>इति श्रीमद्देशभागतते महापुराणते तृतीवत्कन्यें</td></tr><tr><td>तृतीयो5ध्याय: 11 3 11</td></tr></table>

Now I recollect all what I felt before at Her sight

and recognise that She is the Bhagavatī. These very things I now communicate to you. Hear attentively that She is this Lady and She is our Mother.

Thus ends the Third Chapter of the Third Book on seeing the Devi in the Mahā Purānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

