[Ch 16 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! When Varuna went away, the King was very much laid down with that dropsy and daily his pains began to increase and he began to suffer extreme pains. O King! The prince, on the other hand, heard, in the forest, of the illness of his father and filled with affection, wanted to go to his father.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! When Varuṇa went away, the King was very much laid down with that dropsy and daily his pains began to increase and he began to suffer extreme pains. O King! The prince, on the other hand, heard, in the forest, of the illness of his father and filled with affection, wanted to go to his father.

[Ch 16 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► A year had passed away and the prince desired very gladly to go to his father and see him. Knowing this, Indra came there. He came instantly in the form of a Brāhmin and with favourable arguments desisted the prince, who was about to go to his father.
NEW CORR ENG ──► A year had passed away and the prince desired very gladly to go to his father and see him. Knowing this, Indra came there. He came instantly in the form of a Brāhmin and with favourable arguments desisted the prince, who was about to go to his father.

[Ch 16 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra said: “O Prince! It seems you are silly; you know nothing of the difficult state policies. Therefore it is that you are ready to go, out of ignorance, to your father.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra said :-- “O Prince! It seems you are silly; you know nothing of the difficult state policies. Therefore it is that you are ready to go, out of sheer ignorance, to your father.

[Ch 16 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Fortunate One! If you go there, your father will get his sacrifice, where a human victim is to be offered, performed by the Vedic Brāhmaṇas and your flesh will be offered are oblations to the blazing Fire. O Child! The souls of all the beings are very dear; it is for that reason, for the sake of soul, that sons, wife, wealth and jewels are all dear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Fortunate One! If you go there, your father will get his sacrifice, where a human victim is to be offered, performed by the Vedic Brāhmaṇas and your flesh will be offered are oblations to the blazing Fire. O Child! The souls of all the beings are very dear; it is for that reason, for the sake of soul, that sons, wife, wealth and jewels are all dear.

[Ch 16 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, though you are his dear son, like his soul, yet he will certainly have you killed and get Homas offered, to free himself from the disease. O Prince! You ought not to go home now; rather when your father dies, you would certainly go there and inherit your Kingdom."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, though you are his dear son, like his son, yet he will certainly have you killed and get Homas offered, to free himself from the disease. O Prince! You ought not to go home now; rather when your father dies, you would certainly go there and inherit your Kingdom.”

[Ch 16 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Thus hindered by Vāsava, the prince remained in that forest for one year more. But when the prince again heard of the severe illness of his father, he wanted again to go to his father, resolved to court the death of his ownself.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Thus hindered by Vāsava, the prince remained in that forest for one year more. But when the prince again heard of the severe illness of his father, he wanted again to go to his father, resolved to court the death of his ownself.

[Ch 16 Verse 12-13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra also came there in the form of a Brāhmaṇa and, with reasonable words, repeatedly advised him not to go there. Here, on the other hand, the King Hariścandra became very much distressed and, troubled by the disease and asked his family priest Vasīṣṭha Deva: “O Brāhmaṇa! What is the sure remedy for the cure of the disease?”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra also came there in the form of a Brāhmaṇ and, with reasonable words, repeatedly advised him not to go there. Here, on the other hand, the King Hariścandra became very much distressed and troubled by the disease and asked his family priest Vaśiṣṭha Deva :-- “O Brāhmaṇa! What is the sure remedy for the cure of the disease?”

[Ch 16 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vasistha, the Brahma\( ^{2} \)'s son, said: "O King! Purchase on son by giving his value; then perform the sacrifice with that purchased son and you will be free from the curse. O King! The Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas, say that sons are of ten kinds, of whom the son, purchased by paying its proper value, is one of them. So buy one son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vaśiṣṭha, the Brahmā’s son, said :-- “O King! Purchase one son by giving his value; then perform the sacrifice with that purchased son and you will be free from the curse. O King! The Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas, say that sons are of ten kinds, of whom the son, purchased by paying its proper value, is one of them. So buy one son.

[Ch 16 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There will very probably be within your kingdom a Brāhimn who might sell, out of avarice, his son. In that case Varuna Deva will certainly be pleased and grant your happiness." Hearing these words of the high-souled Vasiṣṭha, the King became glad and ordered his minister to look after such a son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There will very probably be within your kingdom a Brāhmin who might sell out of avarice, his son. In that case Varuṇa Deva will certainly be pleased and grant your happiness.” Hearing these words of the high-souled Vaśiṣṭha, the King became glad and ordered his minister to look after such a son.

[Ch 16 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There lived in that King's dominion one Brāhim, named Ajjgarta, very poor; he had three sons. The minister spoke to him to purchase his son: "I will give you one hundred cows; give one son of your for the sacrifice."
NEW CORR ENG ──► There lived in that King’s dominion one Brāhmin, named Ajigarta, very poor; he had three sons. The minister spoke to him to purchase his son :-- “I will give you one hundred cows; give one son of yours for the sacrifice.

[Ch 16 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You have three sons named respectively Sunahpuccha, Sunahṣepa and Šunolāngūla. Give me out of them one son and I will give you one hundred cows as his value. Ajīgarta was very much distressed for want of food; so when he heard the proposal, he expressed his desire to sell his son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You have three sons named respectively Śunahpucca, Śunahśepha and Śunolangula. Give me out of them one son and I will give you one hundred cows as his value.” Ajigarta was very much distressed for want of food; so when he heard the proposal, he expressed his desire to sell his son.

[Ch 16 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He thought that his eldest son was the rightful person to perform funeral obsequies and offer Pinda and he therefore did not spare him. The youngest son, too, be did not spare also, as he considered that his own.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He thought that his eldest son was the rightful person to perform funeral obsequies and offer Piṇḍa and he therefore did not spare him. The youngest son, too, he did not spare also, as he considered that his own.

[Ch 16 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At last, he sold his second son for the price of one hundred cows. The King then bought him and made him the victim for the sacrifice. When that boy was fastened to the sacrificial post, he began to tremble and very much distressed with sorrow began to cry. Seeing this, the Munis cried out in a very pitiful tone.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At last, he sold his second son for the price of one hundred cows. The King then bought him and made him the victim for the sacrifice. When that boy was fastened to the sacrificial post, he began to tremble and very much distressed with sorrow began to cry. Seeing this, the Munis cried out in a very pitiful tone.

[Ch 16 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the King gave permission for the immolation of that boy, the slaughterer did not take weapons to slaughter him. He told that he would never be able to kill the boy, since he is crying in a very pitiful tone. When he thus withdrew himself from his work, the King then asked his councillors:
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the King gave permission for the immolation of that boy, the slaughterer did not take weapons to slaughter him. He told that he would never be able to kill the boy, since he is crying in a very pitiful tone. When he thus withdrew himself from his work, the King then asked his councillors :--

[Ch 16 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Devas! What ought to be done now?” Sunahśepa then began to cry in a very pitiful voice; the people present there began to discuss and there arose a great noise on the affair.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- O Devas! What ought to be done now? Śunahśepha then began to cry in a very pitiful voice; the people present there began to discuss and there arose a great noise on the affair.

[Ch 16 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Ajgarta stood up in the midst of the assembly and spoke: "O King! Be patient; I will fulfil your desire. I am desirous of wealth and if you give me double the amount, I will slay immediately the victim; and you can complete early your sacrifice. O King! He who is hankering after money, can always entertain feelings of enmity even towards his own son. There is no doubt in this."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Ajigarta stood up in the midst of the assembly and spoke :-- “O King! Be patient; I will fulfil your desire. I am desirous of wealth and if you give me double the amount, I will slay immediately the victim; and you can complete early your sacrifice.” O King! He who is hankering after money, can always entertain feelings of enmity even towards his own son. There is no doubt in this.

[Ch 16 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O King! Hearing those words of Ajigarta, Hariścandra gladly spoke to him: “I will immediately give you another hundred excellent cows.” Hearing thus, the son’s father, avaricious of wealth, immediately resolved and became ready to slay his son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing those words of Ajigarta, Hariścandra gladly spoke to him :-- “I will immediately give you another hundred excellent cows.” Hearing thus, the son’s father, avaricious of wealth, immediately resolved and became ready to slay his son.

[Ch 16 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► All the councillors seeing the father ready to slay his son, were struck with sorrow and began to lament exclaiming “Alas! This wretch, a disgrace to his family, is now ready to kill his own son. Oh! We never saw before such a cruel vicious person. This Brāhmīn must be a Demon in a Brāhmīn body!
NEW CORR ENG ──► All the councillors seeing the father ready to slay his son, were struck with sorrow and began to lament exclaiming “Alas! This wretch, a disgrace to his family, is now ready to kill his own son. Oh! We never saw before such a cruel vicious person. This Brāhmin must be a Demon in a Brāhmin body!

[Ch 16 Verse 35-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Fie on you! O Cāndāla! What a vicious work are you now going to do? What happiness do you derive by slaying the son, the jewel of jewels, only to get some wealth? O Sinner! It is stated in the Vedas that the soul takes its birth from one's body; so how are you going to slay your soul! When the hue and cry arose in the assembly, Viśvāmitra, the son of Kauśika, went to the King and, out of pity, said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Fie on you! O Cāṇḍāla! What a vicious work are you now going to do? What happiness do you derive by slaying the son, the jewel of jewels, only to get some wealth? O Sinner! It is stated in the Vedas that the soul takes its birth from one’s body; so how are you going to slay your soul!” When the hue and cry arose in the assembly, Viśvāmitra, the son of Kauśika, went to the King and, out of pity, said :--

[Ch 16 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Śunaḥṣepa is very piteously crying; so let him be free; and then your sacrifice will be complete and you will be free of your disease.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Śunahśepha is very piteously crying; so let him be free; and then your sacrifice will be complete and you will be free of your disease.

[Ch 16 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There is no virtue like mercy and there is no vice like killing (Hinsā). What is written about killing animals in the sacrifice, is only meant for the persons inclined to sensual objects and to give them a stimulus in that direction.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There is no virtue like mercy and there is no vice like killing (Himsā). What is written about killing animals in the sacrifice, is only meant for the persons inclined to sensual objects and to give them a stimulus in that direction.

[Ch 16 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! He who wants his own welfare and who wants to preserve his own body ought not to cut another's body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! He who wants his own welfare and who wants to preserve his own body ought not to cut another’s body.

[Ch 16 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He who pities equally all the beings, gets contended with a trivial gain and subdues all his senses; God is soon pleased with him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He who pities equally all the beings, gets contended with a trivial gain and subdues all his senses; God is soon pleased with him.

[Ch 16 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! You should treat all the Jivas like yourself and thus always spend your life, so dear to all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! You should treat all the Jīvas like yourself and thus always spend your life, so dear to all.

[Ch 16 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You desire to preserve your body by taking away the life of this boy; similarly why would he not try to preserve his own body, the receptacle of happiness and pleasure.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You desire to preserve your body by taking away the life of this boy; similarly why would he not try to preserve his own body, the receptacle of happiness and pleasures.

[Ch 16 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! You have desired to kill this innocent Brāhmin boy; but he will never overlook this enmity of yours done in previous lives.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! You have desired to kill this innocent Brāhmin boy; but he will never overlook this enmity of yours done in previous lives.

[Ch 16 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If anybody kills another willingly, though he has got no enmity with him, then the one that is killed will certainly kill afterwards the slayer.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If anybody kills another willingly, though he has got no enmity with him, then the one that is killed will certainly kill afterwards the slayer.

[Ch 16 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► His father, out of greed for money, is deprived of intellect and so has sold away his son. The Brāhim is certainly very cruel and sinful. Therefore is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► His father, out of greed for money, is deprived of intellect and so has sold away his son. The Brāhmin is certainly very cruel and sinful. There is no doubt in this.

[Ch 16 Verse 47-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When one goes to Gayā or one performs an Asvamedha sacrifice or when one offers a blue bull (Nīla Vṛṣbha), one does so on the consideration that one would desire to have many sons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When one goes to Gayā or one performs an Aśvamedha sacrifice or when one offers a blue bull (Nila Vṛṣabha), one does so on the consideration that one would desire to have many sons.

[Ch 16 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Moreover the King has to suffer for one-sixth of the sins committed by anyone in his Kingdom. Therefore is no doubt in this. Therefore the King ought certainly to prohibit any man when he wants to do a sinful act.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Moreover the King has to suffer for one-sixth of the sins committed by anyone in his Kingdom. There is no doubt in this. Therefore the King ought certainly to prohibit any man when he wants to do a sinful act.

[Ch 16 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Why then did you not prevent this man when he desired to sell his son? O King! You are the son of Trísanku; especially you are born in the Solar line of Kings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Why then did you not prevent this man when he desired to sell his son? O King! You are the son of Triśaṅku; especially you are born in the Solar line of Kings.

[Ch 16 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So how have you desired, being born an Āryā, to do an act becoming an An-Āryā (non-āryan). If you take my word and quickly free this Brāhmin boy, you will certainly derive virtue in your body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So how have you desired, being born an Āryā, to do an act becoming an An-Āryā (non-aryan). If you take my word and quickly free this Brāhmin boy, you will certainly derive virtue in your body.

[Ch 16 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Your father was converted into a Cāndāla by a curse but I sent him in his very body to the Heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Your father was converted into a Cāṇḍāla by a curse but I sent him in his very body to the Heavens.

[Ch 16 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And you are well acquainted with this fact. Therefore, O King! Keep my word out of your love for that. This boy is very pitifully crying; so free him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And you are well acquainted with this fact. Therefore, O King! Keep my word out of your love for that. This boy is very pitifully crying; so free him.

[Ch 16 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I pray this from you in this your Rājasūya sacrifice and if you do not keep my word, you will incur the sin of not keeping any word.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I pray this from you in this your Rājasūya sacrifice and if you do not keep my word, you will iñcur the sin of not keeping my word.

[Ch 16 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Do you not realise this? O King! You will have to give anything that a man wants from you in this sacrifice; but if you do otherwise, sin will attack you, no doubt."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Do you not realise this? O King! You will have to give anything that a man wants from you in this sacrifice; but if you do otherwise, sin will attack you, no doubt.

[Ch 16 Verse 56-58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O King! Hearing these words of Kauśika, the King Hariścandra spoke thus: “O son of Gādhi! I am suffering very much from the dropsy; I will not be able therefore to free him. You can pray for some other thing. You ought not to throw obstacles in this my sacrifice.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing these words of Kauśika, the King Hariścandra spoke thus :-- O son of Gādhi! I am suffering very much from the dropsy; I will not be able therefore to free him. You can pray for some other thing. You ought not to throw obstacles in this my sacrifice.

[Ch 16 Verse 59-60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Viśvāmitra became very angry at this, and, seeing the Brāhmin boy very distressed, became sorrowful and mourned very much. Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Seventh Book on the story of Śunahṣepa in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viśvāmitra became very angry at this, and seeing the Brāhmin boy very distressed, became sorrowful and mourned very much. Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Seventh Book on the story of Śunahśepha in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
