CHAPTER XVI

On Sunahšepa Freed and Harisćandra Lured

भास उवाच

गतेउद वरणो राजा रोगेणातीव पीडितः ।

दु:खादू:खंचं परंपाय व्यथितोरंभूदपूर्णं तदा ॥ १ ॥

कुमारोउसी चने कृष्णा चितरं रोगपीडितम् ।

गयनाय मर्ति राजंशकार स्नेहयक्ति: ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When Varuna went away, the King was very much laid down with that dropsy and daily his pains began to increase and he began to suffer extreme pains. O King! The prince, on the other hand, heard, in the forest, of the illness of his father and filled with affection, wanted to go to his father.

संवत्से ब्यतीते तु चितरं उद्युमादगत् ।

गन्तुकामं तु तं ज्ञाला शक्रस्ताजगमा ॥ 3 ॥

वासवस्तु ततं रूपं कृत्वा विगप्रथ सत्वर: ।

वारयामास युक्रवा वै कुमारं गन्तुयुक्तम् ॥ 4 ॥

A year had passed away and the prince desired very gladly to go to his father and see him. Knowing this, Indra came there. He came instantly in the form of a Brāhmin and with favourable arguments desisted the prince, who was about to go to his father.

इत्र उवाच

राजपुर न जानासि राजनीति सुवुर्णंभाम् ।

अतः कोरोष मूढस्वं गमानय मर्ति वृथा ॥ ५ ॥

Indra said: “O Prince! It seems you are silly; you know nothing of the difficult state policies. Therefore it is that you are ready to go, out of ignorance, to your father.

पिता तव महाभाग ब्राह्मणैर्वद्वारयैः ।

कारयिष्यति होमं ते ज्वलितेउथ विषायासी ॥ 6 ॥

आत्मा हिं वल्पभस्तत सर्वैधां प्राणिनां खलु ।

तदर्थे वल्पभाः सन्ति पुत्रदारधनादयः ॥ 7 ॥

O Fortunate One! If you go there, your father will get his sacrifice, where a human victim is to be offered, performed by the Vedic Brāhmaṇas and your flesh will be offered are oblations to the blazing Fire. O Child! The souls of all the beings are very dear; it is for that reason, for the sake of soul, that sons, wife, wealth and jewels are all dear.

आत्मनो देहशक्षां हृता त्वां वल्पभु सुतम् ।

इर्वनं कारयिल्वास्तरी रोगभुक्तो भविष्यति ॥ 8 ॥

तस्पाच्चा न नात्चयं राजपुत्र चितुग्रुं ।

मृते चितरी गन्तव्यं राज्यांं सर्वथा पुनः ॥ 9 ॥

Therefore, though you are his dear son, like his soul, yet he will certainly have you killed and get Homas offered, to free himself from the disease. O Prince! You ought not to go home now; rather when your father dies, you would certainly go there and inherit your Kingdom."

एवं निर्वेधितस्तत वासवेने नृपातकाः ।

वनमध्ये स्थितः कामं पुनः संवस्तरं नृपः ॥ 10 ॥

अवनन्ते दुःखितं शुवा हरिश्छ्रं तदातमतः ।

गनानय मति चक्रे मरणे कृतनिश्रधः ॥ 11 ॥

O King! Thus hindered by Vāsava, the prince remained in that forest for one year more. But when the prince again heard of the severe illness of his father, he wanted again to go to his father, resolved to court the death of his ownself.

तृपाष्ट्र द्विज्ञरेण तजगान्य च रोहितम् ।

निवारयामास सुतं युक्तिवाब्यैः पुनः पुनः ॥ 12 ॥

ह्रशिह्रज्ञोरिन्दुःखातों वसिषे स्वपुरोहितम् ।

प्रपच्छ रोगनागास तजोपांगे सुनिश्छितम् ॥ 13 ॥

Indra also came there in the form of a Brāhmaṇa and, with reasonable words, repeatedly advised him not to go there. Here, on the other hand, the King Hariścandra became very much distressed and, troubled by the disease and asked his family priest Vasīṣṭha Deva: “O Brāhmaṇa! What is the sure remedy for the cure of the disease?”

तमाह बढ़ाण: पुत्रो यजं कुक नृपोतम ।

क्रयक्रीति नृप्रेण शापमोक्षो भविष्यति ॥ 14 ॥

पुत्रा द्वारधिधा: प्रोक्ता बाढ़ाणैर्वेद्वारपातैः ।

उ्व्येषणानीय तस्मात्चं पुत्रं कुक नृपोतम ॥ 15 ॥

Vasistha, the Brahma\( ^{2} \)'s son, said: "O King! Purchase on son by giving his value; then perform the sacrifice with that purchased son and you will be free from the curse. O King! The Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas, say that sons are of ten kinds, of whom the son, purchased by paying its proper value, is one of them. So buy one son.

वकणोर्ष प्रपत्र: सन्मुखकारी भयिष्यति ।

लेभाल्कोर्ष प्रिक्तः पुत्र प्रदास्यति सवग्रहः ॥ 16 ॥

एवं प्रभोत्ति राजा वासिंहीन महात्मना ।

प्रधानं प्रेरयामास तद्वेलषणकायया ॥ 17 ॥

There will very probably be within your kingdom a Brāhimn who might sell, out of avarice, his son. In that case Varuna Deva will certainly be pleased and grant your happiness." Hearing these words of the high-souled Vasiṣṭha, the King became glad and ordered his minister to look after such a son.

अजीगानों द्विजः क्रश्छादिषये तस्य भूपते:।

तत्यसांश्र प्रयः पुत्रा निर्भिन्य विशेषतः ॥ 18 ॥

प्रधानेनाव्यसी पृष्टः पुत्रादं वुक्लैते द्विजः ।

गवां शर्त ददामिति देहि पुत्र मखाय बै ॥ 19 ॥

There lived in that King's dominion one Brāhim, named Ajjgarta, very poor; he had three sons. The minister spoke to him to purchase his son: "I will give you one hundred cows; give one son of your for the sacrifice."

शून:पुच्छः शुन:शेपः शुनोलंगूल इत्यमी ।

तेषामेकतमं देहिं ददामि तु गवां शनम् ॥ 20 ॥

अजीगतैस्तु तत्कृष्णा क्षुधया पीक्षितो कृष्णम् ।

पुत्रं च कतम् तेन्यो विजैतुं वै मनो दूधे ॥ 21 ॥

You have three sons named respectively Sunahpuccha, Sunahṣepa and Šunolāngūla. Give me out of them one son and I will give you one hundred cows as his value. Ajīgarta was very much distressed for want of food; so when he heard the proposal, he expressed his desire to sell his son.

Book VII Chapter XVI

कार्यादिकारिणं ज्येष्ठे मत्वा नासावदादासुमु।

कनिष्ठं नायद्वात्माता मर्मे इतिवादिति ॥ 22 ॥

मध्यमं च शुन:शेपं ददी गवां शतेन च ।

आनिनाय पशुं चके नमधेे नराधिप: ॥ 23 ॥

He thought that his eldest son was the rightful person to perform funeral obsequies and offer Pinda and he therefore did not spare him. The youngest son, too, be did not spare also, as he considered that his own.

रुदन्ते दुःखितं दीनं वेयमानं भृशातुम् ।

युःे बब्द्रं निरीक्षयानुं चुक्रुर्णमुन्यस्तदा ॥ 24 ॥

गामिवाय पशुं चक्रे नरमेधे नराधिप: ।

गामिना नादद शर्षं तमालंभयितुं शिष्यम् ॥ 25 ॥

At last, he sold his second son for the price of one hundred cows. The King then bought him and made him the victim for the sacrifice. When that boy was fastened to the sacrificial post, he began to tremble and very much distressed with sorrow began to cry. Seeing this, the Munis cried out in a very pitiful tone.

नाहं हितुस्तुं दीनं हटन्तं करणं भृशम् ।

हनियामी खलोपार्थीमिव्युताचाप्यसी ताद ।। २६ ॥

इत्युक्त्वा विरारामासी कर्मणो दुकादाय ।

राजा समासादः प्राह किंकं कल्यमिति डिजा: ॥ 27 ॥

When the King gave permission for the immolation of that boy, the slaughterer did not take weapons to slaughter him. He told that he would never be able to kill the boy, since he is crying in a very pitiful tone. When he thus withdrew himself from his work, the King then asked his councillors:

जातः किलकिलाणवीे जनानां कौभातां तताः ।

कन्दमाने शुन:गेपे सभावां भूशम्बदुतम् ॥ 28 ॥

“O Devas! What ought to be done now?” Sunahśepa then began to cry in a very pitiful voice; the people present there began to discuss and there arose a great noise on the affair.

अजीर्गतैलदोत्याय तमुवाच नृपोतमम् ।

राजकानं करीत्यामि तवाहुं सुश्वरो भव ॥ 29 ॥

वेतनं द्विषुणे देहि हनियमीय पशुं किल ।

कर्तेल्य मद्यकावं वै मया तेउद्ध धनार्थिना ॥ 30 ॥

दुःश्रिततस्य धनार्थस्य सदोउम्या प्रमुचते ।

Then Ajgarta stood up in the midst of the assembly and spoke: "O King! Be patient; I will fulfil your desire. I am desirous of wealth and if you give me double the amount, I will slay immediately the victim; and you can complete early your sacrifice. O King! He who is hankering after money, can always entertain feelings of enmity even towards his own son. There is no doubt in this."

व्यास उवाच

तच्छूला वचनं तत्थ हरिश्छन्नो मुदावित्वः ॥ 31 ॥

तमुवाच ददायष्ण गवांं शतमनुत्तमम् ।

तदाकष्यं पिता तत्प्य पुरं हन्तुं समुधतः ॥ 32 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! Hearing those words of Ajigarta, Hariścandra gladly spoke to him: “I will immediately give you another hundred excellent cows.” Hearing thus, the son’s father, avaricious of wealth, immediately resolved and became ready to slay his son.

लोपेभेनाकुलचित्तोउसी शामिषे कृतनिश्रधः ।

समुचाते च तं दृष्ट्वा जना: सर्वे समासदः ॥ 33 ॥

चृकुर्ण्युंगुंजुःखातं हाहैते जानुर्देवः ।

विशणारोयं महापापी कृक्रमर्भ डिजाङ्गकृति: ॥ 34 ॥

यत्सयं स्वसुतं हन्तुयुहतः कुलपासनः ।

All the councillors seeing the father ready to slay his son, were struck with sorrow and began to lament exclaiming “Alas! This wretch, a disgrace to his family, is now ready to kill his own son. Oh!

We never saw before such a cruel vicious person. This Brāhmīn must be a Demon in a Brāhmīn body!

विरुकापड़ाल किमितेने पापकर्म विकार्षिंतम् ॥ 35 ॥

हत्वा सुतं धर्म प्राय के सुखं ते भविष्यति ।

अतमा वै जायते पुरु अंगाई वेदभाषितम् ॥ 36 ॥

तकर्थ यापबुद्धे त्वयात्यानं हन्तुमिच्छसि ।

एवं कोलाहलं तत्र जाते कुशिकनन्दनः ॥ 37 ॥

समीर्धे नृपतेगेना तनुवाच द्वापर: ।

Fie on you! O Cāndāla! What a vicious work are you now going to do? What happiness do you

derive by slaying the son, the jewel of jewels, only to get some wealth? O Sinner! It is stated in the Vedas that the soul takes its birth from one's body; so how are you going to slay your soul! When the hue and cry arose in the assembly, Viśvāmitra, the son of Kauśika, went to the King and, out of pity, said:

विश्वामित्र उवाच

राजत्रमुं गुन्नःजीयं कदतं पृशुवर्ध:वित्तम् ॥ 3 8 ॥

क्रतुर्वे भविता पूर्णों रोगनाग्रष्ठ सर्वथा ।

O King! Śunaḥṣepa is very piteously crying; so let him be free; and then your sacrifice will be complete and you will be free of your disease.

दयासमं नास्ति पुण्यं पारं हिंसानं नहि ॥ 39 ॥

राशिणा रोचनार्थय नोहनेयं विचारय ।

There is no virtue like mercy and there is no vice like killing (Hinsā). What is written about killing animals in the sacrifice, is only meant for the persons inclined to sensual objects and to give them a stimulus in that direction.

आत्मवेहस्य रक्षार्थ परवेदिनक्तान् ॥ 40 ॥

न कतिथं महाराज सर्वेतः शुभमिच्छता ।

O King! He who wants his own welfare and who wants to preserve his own body ought not to cut another's body.

द्वयाया सर्वेक्षेतु सन्तुष्ये येन केन च ॥ 41 ॥

सर्विन्योपशताया च तन्यवतायु जगतयति: ।

He who pities equally all the beings, gets contended with a trivial gain and subdues all his senses; God is soon pleased with him.

आत्मावत्सर्वेष्टितु चिन्तनीयं नृपोतम ॥ 42 ॥

जीवितलयं प्रियं नूनं सर्वेषां सर्वेदा किल ।

O King! You should treat all the Jivas like yourself and thus always spend your life, so dear to all.

त्यमिष्ठस सुखं कर्तु देहं हृता तवभुं द्विजम् ॥ 43 ॥

कयं नेच्छेदसी देहं रवितृं स्वसुखास्वदम् ।

You desire to preserve your body by taking away the life of this boy; similarly why would he not try

to preserve his own body, the receptacle of happiness and pleasure.

पूर्वेजन्मकृतं बैरं नानेन सह ते नृप ॥ 44 ॥

येनागुं हेतुकामस्वं द्विजुपुं निरागसम् ।

O King! You have desired to kill this innocent Brāhmin boy; but he will never overlook this enmity of yours done in previous lives.

यो यं हृति विज्ञा वैं स्वकाम: सत्त पुनः ॥ 4 5 ॥

हंतारं हृति तं प्राय जानं जननान्तरे ।

If anybody kills another willingly, though he has got no enmity with him, then the one that is killed will certainly kill afterwards the slayer.

जनकोःस्य सुवृहात्म योगसौ ते समर्थितः ॥ 46 ॥

स्वामजी धानलोभेने पापाचार: सुवृदांति: ।

His father, out of greed for money, is deprived of intellect and so has sold away his son. The Brāhim is certainly very cruel and sinful. Therefore is no doubt in this.

एष्टया बहवः पुना यदोकोर्पि गया प्रजेत् ॥ 47 ॥

यजेत चाध्यमेने नील वा वृषमुत्पुजेत ।

देशमध्ये च यः क्रौक्षतापकर्म समाचरेत् ॥ 48 ॥

When one goes to Gayā or one performs an Asvamedha sacrifice or when one offers a blue bull (Nīla Vṛṣbha), one does so on the consideration that one would desire to have many sons.

पश्रांगतस्य पापस्य राजा पुंक्ते न संगयः ।

निषेधनीयो राजासो पार्य कर्तुं समुद्धतः ॥ 49 ॥

Moreover the King has to suffer for one-sixth of the sins committed by anyone in his Kingdom. Therefore is no doubt in this. Therefore the King ought certainly to prohibit any man when he wants to do a sinful act.

न तिषिद्धस्वया कस्मात्यूत्र विक्रेतमुधतः ।

सूर्ववैशें समुपराजिशंकृतनयः सृषः ॥ ५० ॥

Why then did you not prevent this man when he desired to sell his son? O King! You are the son of Trísanku; especially you are born in the Solar line of Kings.

आर्यस्वनार्यत्कर्म कर्नीमच्छस पाधिय।

मोचनान्युनिपुत्रस्य करणाद्वचनस्य मे ॥ 51 ॥

Book VII Chapter XVII

So how have you desired, being born an Āryā, to do an act becoming an An-Āryā (non-āryan). If you take my word and quickly free this Brāhmin boy, you will certainly derive virtue in your body.

तब दैहे सुखं राजन्मविष्यत्यविराणात् ।

वित्त ते शापयोगेन चापड़ातलमुपानतः ॥ 52 ॥

Your father was converted into a Cāndāla by a curse but I sent him in his very body to the Heavens.

मयास्ती तेन दैहेत स्वलोंकं प्रपितः किल।

तेनैव प्रतियोगेन कुरु मे वचनं वरू ॥ 53 ॥

मुंबैने बालकं दीनं क्रतं घृषगातुम् ।

And you are well acquainted with this fact. Therefore, O King! Keep my word out of your love for that. This boy is very pitifully crying; so free him.

याचितोरसि मया नूनं संशोरिस्याजस्यरे ॥ 54 ॥

प्रार्थनार्थगतं दोयं कथं ज्च नावबुळ्यसे ।

I pray this from you in this your Rājasūya sacrifice and if you do not keep my word, you will incur the sin of not keeping any word.

प्रार्थितं सर्वेत देयं मङडास्मिश्रपतन ॥ 55 ॥

अन्यथा पापमेव स्थानत राजत्र संशयः ।

Do you not realise this? O King! You will have to give anything that a man wants from you in this

sacrifice; but if you do otherwise, sin will attack you, no doubt."

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः शुत्वा कौशिकस्य नृपोतमः ॥ 56 ॥

प्रत्युवाच महाराजः कौशिकं मुनिसतमम् ।

जलोदरेण गायेव दुःस्तितोईं घृगं मुने ॥ 57 ॥

तस्मार मोच्यायेमन्यानुप्रायं कौशिक।

न तथा विश्रहः कार्यः कार्येस्मिन्म सर्वथा ॥ 58 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! Hearing these words of Kauśika, the King Hariścandra spoke thus: “O son of Gādhi! I am suffering very much from the dropsy; I will not be able therefore to free him. You can pray for some other thing. You ought not to throw obstacles in this my sacrifice.”

तच्छुत्वा वचनं राज्ञी विश्वामिज्ञोतिकोपनः ।

बधूव दुःखसंततो वीक्ष्य दीनि द्विजातयम् ॥ 59 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे सत्यनकन्दे

शोडगोडधायः ॥ 60 ॥

Viśvāmitra became very angry at this, and, seeing the Brāhmin boy very distressed, became sorrowful and mourned very much.

Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Seventh Book on the story of Śunahṣepa in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XVII

