CHAPTER XX

On the Son Born of Mare by Hari

जनमेजय उवाच

संस्थायोर्धं महानत्र जातमास: शिशुस्तथा ।

मुभ: केन गृहीतेजसायेकाकी विजने वरे ॥ 1 ॥

का गतितस्य बालस्य जाता सत्यवतीसुत ।

व्याप्रिसिंहाविद्धिर्दिसैरमूहौतो नातिवालक: ॥ 2 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Bhagavan! A great doubt has arisen in my mind on this subject. Who was it that took away that son, when both Lakṣmī and Nārāyana left it, in that forlorn state, in a forest without any person there to look after?

व्यास उवाच

लक्ष्मीनारायणौ ततस्मात्त्थानाच्च areal यदा |

Wee तत्र चम्पाख्यः प्राप्तो विद्याधरः किल ॥ 3 =

fama: कामिन्या सहितो नृप ।

मदनालसया कामं क्रीडमानो सदूच्छया ॥ 4 ॥

Vyisa said: O King! No sooner Laksmi and
Narayana departed from that place, one
Vidyadhara, named Campaka, mounting on a
beautiful celestial car came there on his free will,
sporting with a woman named Madanalasa.

विलोक्य तं शिशुं भूमावेकाकिनमनुत्तमम्‌ |

देवपुत्रप्रतीकाशं रममाणं यथासुखम्‌ ॥ 5 ॥

Therc they saw that one lovely child, cxquisitely
beautiful like a Deva’s son, was playing alone as
it liked.

विमानात्तरसोत्तीर्य चम्पक्रस्तं शिशुं जवात्‌ ।

जग्राइ च मुदं प्राप निधिं प्राप्य यथाऽधनः ॥ 6 ॥

They then, quickly descended from their chariot
and picked it up. Vidyadhara became very glad as
a beggar becomes glad, when he gets a hoard of
jewels.

गृहीत्वा चम्पकः प्रादाददेव्यै त॑ मदनोपमम्‌ |

मदालसायै तं बालं जातमात्रं मनोहरम्‌ ॥ 7 ॥

सा गृहीत्वा शिशुं प्रेम्णा सरोमांचा सविस्मया ।

मुखं चुचुम्ब बालस्य कृत्वा तु हदये भृशम्‌ ॥ 8 ॥

On taking that newly born beautiful child likea
Cupid, Campaka gave it to the Devi Madanalasa.
Madanalasd took it and became very much
astonished; and her hairs stood at their ends.

आलिंगितश्चुंबित्तश्च ततयाऽसौ प्रीतिपूर्वकम्‌ ।

उत्संगे च कृतस्तन्व्या पुत्रभावेन भारत ॥ 9 ॥

She clasped it to her bosom and kissed it
frequently. O Bharata! Taking that child on her
lap as if her own child, Madanilasa embraced it
and kissed it and got the highest happiness.

कृत्वांके तौ समारूढौ fort दम्पती मुदा । `

पत्तिं पप्रच्छ चार्वङ्गी प्रहस्य मदनालसा ॥ 10 ॥
कस्यायं बालकः कान्त त्यक्तः केन च कानने ।
पुत्रोऽयं मम देवेन दत्तरू्यंबकधारिणा ॥ 11 ॥

Then both of them took that child and mounted

on the car. The lean Madanalasi then laughingly

queried: “O Lord! Whose child is this? Who has

left it in this forest? It seems to mc Maha Deva,

desirous to give me a son, has given it unto me.”
चम्पक उवाच

प्रिये गत्वाऽद्ट पूच्छेयं शक्रं सर्वज्ञमाशु वै ।

देवो वा दानवो वापि गन्धर्वो वा शिशुः किल ॥ 12 ॥

Campaka said: “T will just now go and ask the
all-knowing Indra whose child is this, whether it
is of a Deva, Danava or Gandharva.

तेनाज्ञप्तः करिष्यामि पुत्रं प्राप्तं वनादमुम्‌ ।

अपृष्ट्वा मैव कर्तव्यं कार्य किंचिन्मया धुवम्‌ ॥ 13 ॥

If he orders, I will purify this child found thus
in this forest by the Veda Mantrams and then accept
it as my own.

इत्युक्त्चा तां गृहीत्वा तं विमानेनाथ चम्पक ।

ययौ शक्रपुरं पूर्ण हर्षेणोत्फुल्ललोचनः ॥ 14 ॥

Itis not advisable to do a thing suddenly without
knowing all the details.” Thus saying to his wife
Madanalasa, Campaka went with a gladdened heart
hurricdly to the city of Indra child in his arms.

प्रणम्य पादयोः प्रीत्या चम्पकस्तु शचीपतिम्‌ ।

Freer बालकं प्राह कृतांजलिपुटः स्थितः ॥ 15 ॥

Campaka gladly bowed down at the feet of Indra
and gave him all the information he knew about
the child and stood af one side with folded hands
and spoke.

देवदेव मखा लब्धस्तीर्थे परमपावने ।

कालिंदीतमसासंगे बालकोऽसं स्मरप्रभः ॥ 16 ॥

“O Lord of the Devas! I have got this child,
beautiful as Cupid, in the sacred place of pilgrimage
at the confluence of the Yumund and the Tamasa.

कस्यायं खालकः कान्तः कथं त्यक्तः शचीपते ।

आज्ञा चेत्तव देवेश Hass बालकं सुतम्‌ ॥ 17 ॥

O Lord of Sact! Whose child is this? and why
did they forsake it there? If you kindly permit, I

‘| will take this child as my own son.

अतीव सुन्दरो बालः प्रियाया वल्लभः सुतः ।
कृत्रिमस्तु सुतः प्रोत्त्ो धर्मशास्त्रेषु सर्वथा ॥ 18 ॥
Book VI Chapter XX

663

= child is very beautiful and like very much

by my wife, it is also the rule Jaid down in the
Sastras that one can accept any child as the Krtrima
son. Therefore it is my carnest desire that I purify
this child by the Veda Mantrams and take it legally
as my Own son.”

इन्द्र sara

पुत्रोऽयं बासुदेखस्य वाजिरूपधरस्य ह ।

SASS महाभाग लक्ष्या जातः परन्तपः ॥ 19 ॥

Indra said: “O Highly Fortunate One! Bhagavan
Vasudeva, assuming the form of a horse, has
produced this child out of the womb of Kamala in
the form of a mare.

उत्पादितो भगवता कार्यार्थी किल बातकः ।

दातुं नुपयते नूनं व्यातिलतयाय च ॥ 20 ॥

He intends to give over he child, capable to destroy enemies to Turvasu, the son of Yayāti, and thus will get a great purpose achieved by the child.

ह्रिणा प्रेति: सोड़ा राजा परमधार्मिकः ।

आगाधिष्यित पुत्रार्थ तीर्थं तत्स्मिनमोरे ॥ 21 ॥

That King, very religious, will be sent by Hari today and he will come for the child in that beautiful sacred place of pilgrimage.

तावच्च गच्छ तत्रैय गृहीत्वा वालकं शुभम् ।

यावत्र याति नृपतिर्गीर्तुं हृतिपोतः ॥ 22 ॥

You better go back as early as possible and keep the child there as it was before till that king comes to that spot at the instance of the Devadeva Vişnu.

गला त्र विमुचैनं विलम्बं मा कृधा वर ।

अरुह्वा वाककं राजा कुःविताक्ष भविष्यति ॥ 23 ॥

तस्माच्यमकु मुंचैनं राजा प्राप्नोतु पुरकम् ।

एकवैरीत नामानंशं खलातः स्यातृष्यिवतीते ॥ 24 ॥

Do not waste a minute more. The King will be very sorry if he does not find the child there. Therefore O Campaka! Quit the attachment that you have for this child. You should know that this child will be famous in this earth as Ekavīra (only one hero).”

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वच: शूला चम्पकल्याचित्वतः ।

जगाम पुत्रमादाय स्थले तत्सिमन्हीपते ॥ 25 ॥

मुभोच वाकलं तत्र यत्र पूर्व स्थितो हृष्युत् ।

आक्रह्मव्यवियानं तु ययौ स्वाश्रमभणडलम् ॥ 26 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus hearing the Indra's words, Campaka took the child and went back immediately to the spot whence he picked it up and keeping the child there as it laid, mounted on his car and went to his abode.

तदैव कमालाकान्ती लक्ष्या सह जानरुकः ।

विमानवरमार्कडो जगाम रूपति प्रति ॥ 27 ॥

At that instant, the husband of Lakṣmī, the Lord of the three worlds, went to the King, mounted on His car, beaming with effulgent rays.

दृष्टसदा तेन युंण विज्युः

सुभुगतस्त्र विभागमुखात् ।

जहर्ष राजा हरिद्यर्नेन पपात

भूमौ खलु टण्डवच्च ॥ 28 ॥

When the Bhagavān was descending from His aerial car, the King Turvasu was very glad to see Him and bowed down and laid himself prostrate on the ground.

उत्तिष्य वसतीह हरि:

पत्नत्थाशयद्धिमगतं व्यभक्तम् ।

सोउध्युस्को वासुदेवे पुरःखं

तृधार भनशा मुखरीकृतोय ॥ 29 ॥

The Bhagavān, then, comforted the King, his own devotee, and said “Get up, my child! Do away with your mental distress.” The King also eagerly and full of devotion, began to utter verses in praise of the Bhagavān.

देवाधिर्देवालितलोकानाथ

कृपानिधे लोकाणी रमेश ।

मन्द्रव मे ते किल दूरर्नं

यत्सुदुर्नंय योगिजरैतलव्यम् ॥ 30 ॥

“O Lord of Rama! You are the presiding Deity of the Devas; Lord of the whole worlds, Ocean of Mercy and Giver of advice to all men. O Lord! Your sight is very rare even to the Yogis; being

myself of a very slow dull intellect; I have been fortunate enough to see you. O Lord! This shews Your mercy.

ये नि:स्युहाने विषयरैपतास्तेषां

त्वदीयं खलु दर्शनं स्यात् ।

आशापारोड़ं भपावझनन्त योगयो

न ते दर्शनि देवदेवे ॥ 31 ॥

इति स्तुतसेन नृपेण विष्युत्स-

माह वाक्येन सुधामयेन ।

यूर्णीष राजनमनसैधितं ते

ददामि तुहतत्परा तवेति ॥ 32 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O Bhagavān! O Infinite One! Those who are free from my desires and free from any attachment to worldly things, they alone are entitled to see Thee. O Deva of the Devas! I am bound in thousand and one desires. I am quite unfit to see Thee. There is no doubt in this.”

ततो नृपतं प्रणिपत्य पादपोः

प्रोवाच विश्णुं पततः स्थितं च ।

तपस्तु ततं हि मया सुतार्थं

पुरं द्रद्वात्मासमं गुरोे ॥ 33 ॥

When Turvasu, the best of the kings, praised thus, Bhagavān Viṣnu became pleased and began to speak in the following pleasant words: "O King! I am pleased with your asceticism; now ask your desired boon; I will grant it immediately."

भुत्वा नृपप्रार्थिनमाधिदेवतस्माद्

राजनाममोधवाक्यम् ।

ययातिसूनो ब्रज तेउत्र तीर्थे

कलिंदकन्यातमासप्रमईे ॥ 34 ॥

The King bowed down again to the feet of Viṣṇu and said: "O Murārī! For the sake of a son, I have practised this tapasyā; grant me a son like my Self."

मयाउघ पुत्रस्तु यवेधितस्तते

तत्रैव मुक्तोउर्यमितमृष्मवाः ।

तक्ष्याः प्रमुत्तो मम चीयंजछा

कृतस्तवार्थंश यहाण राजन् ॥ 35 ॥

Nārāyaṇa, the First-born of the Devas, hearing this King's request spoke to him in infallible words: "O son of Yayāti! Go to the confluence of the

Yamunā and Tamasā. For you I have kept there today a son as you like and of indomitable prowess.

भुत्वा हरेलांक्यमतीव गूटं

सन्तुष्णितः प्रवभूव राजा ।

हरित्यु तद्वतीत वरं जगाम

वैकुण्ठलोकं समाया युतछ ॥ ३६ ॥

O King! That child is begotten by me in the womb of Laksmī." The King became very glad to hear the sweet pure words of the Bhagavān. Thus granting him the boon, Visnu went with Ramā to Vaikuntha.

गते हरी सोउध यवातिस्तूर्नं

यावनुद्धातत्येवे नारा ।

प्रेमान्वित्तस्त्र सुतोर्शित्य यत्र

वचो निशण्येति जनादनस्य ॥ 37 ॥

The King Turgvasu, the son of Yayāti, hearing these words, became exceedingly gladdened in his heart aid mounting on a chariot, whose speed cannot be checked, went to the spot where lay the child.

स तत्र गत्वाउतिमनोहरं तं

द्वर्गी बालं भृवि खेलमानम् ।

मुखे निवेश्यैककरणे कृत्वा

शल्बणं घवांगुष्यन्यस्त्वः ॥ 38 ॥

The king, of extraordinary genius, went there and saw that the exceedingly beautiful child, catching hold of his toe by one of his soft hands was sucking it by his mouth and was playing on the ground.

तं वीक्ष्य पुत्रं मदनसखलं

नारायणाणों कमलाप्रभुतम् ।

हरिप्रभावं हरिवर्मनामा

हर्षिपुक्ललाननपह्ज़ो3भूत् ॥ 39 ॥

गृह्न-सुवेगात्करपह्ज़णाभ्यां

बन्धूव प्रेमणर्षानसन्देहः ।

मूधै-न्युपाधाय मुतावित्तोउसी

नन्देर राजा सुतमालिंगन् ॥ 40 ॥

The child was born of Nārāyaṇa out of the womb of Kamalā. Therefore it resembled like Him. On looking at that beautiful lovely child, the famous

Book VI Chapter XX

King Harivarma's face got cheered up with the intensest delight. The King took it up with both of his hands and got merged in the Ocean of Bliss and taking gladly the scent of its head embraced it happily.

मुखं समीक्ष्यातिमनोहरं

त्यवाच नेगम्बुनिकद्धकण्डः ।

दतो3सि देवेन जनादेन्नेन

मात्रा हि पुजायममुद्ध:खभीतेः ॥ 41 ॥ ॥

ततं मया पुत्र तपत्स्वार्थे

सुसुकरं वर्षगतं च पूर्णम् ।

तेनैव गुहैन रमाधिप्रयेण

दन्तोसि संसारमसुखोदाया ॥ 42 ॥

On looking at the beautiful lotus-face of the child, the King, choked with tears from his eyes and with feelings of joy said: "O Child! Nārāyaṇa has given me, the child jewel in you; so save me from the terrors of the hell named Put, O Child! For full one hundred years I have practised a very hard tapsayā for the sake of you. Pleased with that, the Lord of Kamalā has given you to me for the happiness of my worldly career.

भाता प्या त्वां तनुं गदर्थ

त्यक्ता गता सा हूरिणा सभेतना।

धन्या तु सा या प्रहसंतमके

कृत्वा सुतं त्वां मुदितान्ना स्यात् ॥ 4 3 ॥

Your Mother Ramā Devī has forsaken Her own child for the sake of me and has gone away with Hari. O Child! That Mother is blessed whose face beams with joy by seeing the smiles in your lotus-face.

त्वमेव संसारस्मुठ्रौकाक्पः

कृतः पुत्र लक्ष्मीयेण ।

इत्येवमुक्त्वा नृपति: सुत्त

तं मुदा समादाय ययौ गृहाय ॥ 44 ॥

O Delighter of my heart! The Lord of Ramā, the Deva of the Devas, has made you, as it were, to serve as a boat for me for crossing to the other side of this Ocean of World." Thus saying, the King took the child and gladly went home.

पुरीसमीपे नृपयागतं तमाकर्णवं

सर्वे सचिवास्तु रातः ।

ययु: सर्मीने नृपतेश लोकाः

सोपायनास्ते सपुरोहिताश ॥ 4 5 ॥

Knowing that the King had come very close to his city, the King's Minister and the city people, the subjects came forward with the priest and many other presents and offerings.

बंदीजना यायनकाश्वे सुर्जा:

समाययु संमुख्यायु गजाः ।

नृप: पुरं प्राय्य पुरः समागतं जनें

समाश्राय वाक्येश्ठ दृष्ट्या ॥ 4 6 ॥

The bards, singers and Sūtas came in front of the King. The King as he entered into his city looked affectionately on his subjects and gladdened their spirits by enquiries of welfare.

संपूक्ति: पौराजनेन राजा

विवेश पुत्रेण युतो नगरायम् ।

मार्गेषु लाजैः: कुसुमैः समन्ताद्र-

कौर्येमाणो नृपतिक्रामा ॥ 47 ॥

Then worshipped by the citizens, the King entered into the city with his child. As the King went along the royal, the subjects showered on his head the flowers and fried rice.

गृहं समुद्धं सचिवेः समतः

सुतं समावाय मुदा कारायाम् ।

तग्नैं ददौ चाथ सुतं मनोजं

सद्धःप्रमुतं च मनोपेभावम् ॥ 48 ॥

Then taking the child by his two arms, the King entered into his prosperous palace with his ministers. The king next handed over the newly-born lovely child, as beautiful as Cupid, to the hands of his queen.

तत्री गृहीत्वारभिन्चं तनुर्ज

पप्रच्छ राजानमनित्तता सा ।

राज-कुन्तडीध सुतः सुज्ञान

ग्रातलस्या मन्यथतुल्यक्ष: ॥ 49 ॥

The good queen took the child and asked the king: "O King! Whence have you got this new born child as fascinating as the God of Love? Who has given this child to you? O Lord! Speak quickly.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

<table><tr><td>केनैष दस्तः कक्षयाणु कान्तचेतो मटीयं प्रहतं सुनेन ।नुपस्तदोषाय मुदावित्तोस्तीप्रिये येसोन सुतो हि महामू ॥ 50 ॥तोलाधिक दस्तः कमलासमुच्योजनादांगोशेप्रदमतीनस्तबः ।सा तं गृहीला मुदमपा राज्ञीराजा चक्रातीलयमदुक्तं च ॥ 51 ॥</td></tr></table>

This child has stolen away my mind." The King gladly replied: "O Beloved! The Lord of Kamalā, the Ocean of Mercy has given me this child; O Quick-eyed One! This child is born of Nārāyana's part and out of the womb of Kamalā. O Devi! This child has strength, energy, patience, gravity and all other good qualities." Then the queen took the child in his arms and got the unbounded bliss.

ददी च दानं किल याचक्रेयो

गीतानि वाहानि बहुनि नेयुः ।

कृत्वोलवं भूपतिरात्मजस्य

नार्मेकरीरिते चकार विश्रुतम् ॥ 52 ॥

Great festivities began to be performed in the palace of the King Turvasu. Charities were given to those that wanted; music and singing of various sorts were performed. In this ceremony for the sake of his child, the king Turvasu put the name of the child as “Ekavīra.”

सुखं च संप्राप्तय मुदावित्तो5सौ

नन्द देवाधिपतुल्ववीधि: ।

पुरं हरे रूपगुणानुकर्यं संग्राय

वंशस्य ऋषणाच्छ मुक्तः ॥ 53 ॥

Getting thus the child equivalent in form and qualities to Hari, the powerful Indra-like king became happy and freed from his debt due to his family line, became very cheerful and glad.

इति सकलसुराणामीशेणार्थितं

तं सकलनुणगणाकां पुत्रमासाठ राजा ।

विविधभ्युखविनोदैर्भियांश सेव्यमाने

व्यहरत निजगेहे शकतृत्यप्रतायः ॥ 54 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते माहपुराणे

षष्टकन्ये विशोरायाः ॥ 55 ॥

O King! The king, powerful like his enemies, began to enjoy in his own palace with his all-qualified child, that was given to him by Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of the Devas. He was always served by his dear wife and all sorts of pleasure and he felt himself enjoying as a King would do.

Here ends, the Twentieth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the son born of mare by Hari, in the Mahāpuranam in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

