[Ch 20 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya said: O Bhagavan! A great doubt has arisen in my mind on this subject. Who was it that took away that son, when both Lakṣmī and Nārāyana left it, in that forlorn state, in a forest without any person there to look after?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya said :-- “O Bhagavān! A great doubt has arisen in my mind on this subject. Who was it that took away that son, when both Lakṣmī and Nārāyaṇa left it, in that forlorn state, in a forest without any person there to look after?”

[Ch 20 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyisa said: O King! No sooner Laksmi and Narayana departed from that place, one Vidyadhara, named Campaka, mounting on a beautiful celestial car came there on his free will, sporting with a woman named Madanalasa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► said :-- O King! No sooner Lakṣmī and Nārāyaṇa departed from that place, one Vidyādhara, named Champaka, mounting on a beautiful celestial car came there at his free will, sporting with a woman named Madanālasā.

[Ch 20 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therc they saw that one lovely child, cxquisitely beautiful like a Deva’s son, was playing alone as it liked.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There they saw that one lovely child, exquisitely beautiful like a Deva’s son, was playing alone as it liked.

[Ch 20 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They then, quickly descended from their chariot and picked it up. Vidyadhara became very glad as a beggar becomes glad, when he gets a hoard of jewels.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They then, quickly descended from their chariot and picked it up. Vidyādhara became very glad as a beggar becomes glad, when he gets a hoard of jewels.

[Ch 20 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On taking that newly born beautiful child likea Cupid, Campaka gave it to the Devi Madanalasa. Madanalasd took it and became very much astonished; and her hairs stood at their ends.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On taking that newly born beautiful child like a Cupid, Champaka gave it to the Devī Madanālasā. Madanālasā took it and became very much astonished; and her hairs stood at their ends.

[Ch 20 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She clasped it to her bosom and kissed it frequently. O Bharata! Taking that child on her lap as if her own child, Madanilasa embraced it and kissed it and got the highest happiness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She clasped it to her bosom and kissed it frequently. O Bhārata! Taking that child on her lap as if her own child, Madanālasā embraced it and kissed it and got the highest happiness.

[Ch 20 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then both of them took that child and mounted on the car. The lean Madanalasi then laughingly queried: “O Lord! Whose child is this? Who has left it in this forest? It seems to mc Maha Deva, desirous to give me a son, has given it unto me.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then both of them took that child and mounted on the car. The lean Madanālasā then laughingly queried :-- “O Lord! Whose child is this? Who has left it in this forest? It seems to me Mahā Deva, desirous to give me a son, has given it unto me.”

[Ch 20 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Campaka said: “T will just now go and ask the all-knowing Indra whose child is this, whether it is of a Deva, Danava or Gandharva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Champaka said :-- I will just now go and ask the all-knowing Indra whose child is this, whether it is of a Deva, Dānava or Gandharva.

[Ch 20 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If he orders, I will purify this child found thus in this forest by the Veda Mantrams and then accept it as my own.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If he orders, I will purify this child found thus in this forest by the Veda Mantrams and then accept it as my own.

[Ch 20 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Itis not advisable to do a thing suddenly without knowing all the details.” Thus saying to his wife Madanalasa, Campaka went with a gladdened heart hurricdly to the city of Indra child in his arms.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is not advisable to do a thing suddenly without knowing all the details. Thus saying to his wife Madanālasā, Champaka went with a gladdened heart hurriedly to the city of Indra with that child in his arms.

[Ch 20 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Campaka gladly bowed down at the feet of Indra and gave him all the information he knew about the child and stood af one side with folded hands and spoke.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Champaka gladly bowed down at the feet of Indra and gave him all the information he knew about the child and stood at one side with folded hands and spoke,

[Ch 20 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Lord of the Devas! I have got this child, beautiful as Cupid, in the sacred place of pilgrimage at the confluence of the Yumund and the Tamasa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Lord of the Devas! I have got this child, beautiful as Cupid, in the sacred place of pilgrimage at the confluence of the Jumnā and the Tamasā.

[Ch 20 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of Sact! Whose child is this? and why did they forsake it there? If you kindly permit, I ‘ will take this child as my own son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of Śacī! Whose child is this? and why did they forsake it there? If you kindly permit, I will take this child as my own son.

[Ch 20 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► = child is very beautiful and like very much by my wife, it is also the rule Jaid down in the Sastras that one can accept any child as the Krtrima son. Therefore it is my carnest desire that I purify this child by the Veda Mantrams and take it legally as my Own son.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► child is very beautiful and liked very much by my wife; it is also the rule laid down in the Śāstras that one can accept any child as the Kritrima son. Therefore it is my earnest desire that I purify this child by the Veda Mantrams and take it legally as my own son.”

[Ch 20 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra said: “O Highly Fortunate One! Bhagavan Vasudeva, assuming the form of a horse, has produced this child out of the womb of Kamala in the form of a mare.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra said :-- O Highly Fortunate One! Bhagavān Vāsudeva, assuming the form of a horse, has produced this child out of the womb of Kamalā in the

[Ch 20 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He intends to give over he child, capable to destroy enemies to Turvasu, the son of Yayāti, and thus will get a great purpose achieved by the child.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He intends to give over the child, capable to destroy enemies to Turvasu, the son of Yayāti, and thus will get a great purpose achieved by the child.

[Ch 20 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That King, very religious, will be sent by Hari today and he will come for the child in that beautiful sacred place of pilgrimage.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That King, very religious, will be sent by Hari today and he will come for the child in that beautiful sacred place of pilgrimage.

[Ch 20 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You better go back as early as possible and keep the child there as it was before till that king comes to that spot at the instance of the Devadeva Vişnu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You better go back as early as possible and keep the child there as it was before till that king comes to that spot at the instance of the Devadeva Viṣṇu.

[Ch 20 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Do not waste a minute more. The King will be very sorry if he does not find the child there. Therefore O Campaka! Quit the attachment that you have for this child. You should know that this child will be famous in this earth as Ekavīra (only one hero).”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Do not waste a minute more. The King will be very sorry if he does not find the child there. Therefore O Champaka! Quit the attachment that you have for this child. You should know that this child will be famous in this earth as Ekavīra (only one hero).

[Ch 20 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Thus hearing the Indra's words, Campaka took the child and went back immediately to the spot whence he picked it up and keeping the child there as it laid, mounted on his car and went to his abode.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Thus hearing the Indra’s words, Champaka took the child and went back immediately to the spot whence he picked it up and keeping the child there as it laid, mounted on his car and went to his abode.

[Ch 20 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At that instant, the husband of Lakṣmī, the Lord of the three worlds, went to the King, mounted on His car, beaming with effulgent rays.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At that instant, the husband of Lakṣmī, the Lord of the three worlds, went to the King, mounted on His car, beaming with effulgent rays.

[Ch 20 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the Bhagavān was descending from His aerial car, the King Turvasu was very glad to see Him and bowed down and laid himself prostrate on the ground.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the Bhagavān was descending from His aerial car, the King Turvasu was very glad to see Him and bowed down and laid himself prostrate on the ground.

[Ch 20 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Bhagavān, then, comforted the King, his own devotee, and said “Get up, my child! Do away with your mental distress.” The King also eagerly and full of devotion, began to utter verses in praise of the Bhagavān.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Bhagavān, then, comforted the King, his own devotee, and said, “Get up, my child! Do away with your mental distress.” The King also eagerly and full of devotion, began to utter verses in praise of the Bhagavān.

[Ch 20 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Lord of Rama! You are the presiding Deity of the Devas; Lord of the whole worlds, Ocean of Mercy and Giver of advice to all men. O Lord! Your sight is very rare even to the Yogis; being myself of a very slow dull intellect; I have been fortunate enough to see you. O Lord! This shews Your mercy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of Ramā! You are the presiding Deity of the Devas; Lord of the whole worlds, Ocean of Mercy and Giver of advice to all men. O Lord! Your sight is very rare even to the Yogis; being myself of a very slow dull intellect; I have been fortunate enough to see you. O Lord! This shews Your mercy.

[Ch 20 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O Bhagavān! O Infinite One! Those who are free from my desires and free from any attachment to worldly things, they alone are entitled to see Thee. O Deva of the Devas! I am bound in thousand and one desires. I am quite unfit to see Thee. There is no doubt in this.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O Bhagavān! O Infinite One! Those who are free from any desires and free from any attachment to worldly things, they alone are entitled to see Thee. O Deva of the Devas! I am bound in thousand and one desires. I am quite unfit to see Thee. There is no doubt in this.

[Ch 20 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Turvasu, the best of the kings, praised thus, Bhagavān Viṣnu became pleased and began to speak in the following pleasant words: "O King! I am pleased with your asceticism; now ask your desired boon; I will grant it immediately."
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Turvasu, the best of the kings, praised thus, Bhagavān Viṣṇu became pleased and began to speak in the following pleasant words :-- “O King! I am pleased with your asceticism; now ask your desired boon; I will grant it immediately.”

[Ch 20 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King bowed down again to the feet of Viṣṇu and said: "O Murārī! For the sake of a son, I have practised this tapasyā; grant me a son like my Self."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King bowed down again to the feet of Viṣṇu and said :-- “O Murāri! For the sake of a son, I have practised this tapasyā; grant me a son like my Self.”

[Ch 20 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa, the First-born of the Devas, hearing this King's request spoke to him in infallible words: "O son of Yayāti! Go to the confluence of the Yamunā and Tamasā. For you I have kept there today a son as you like and of indomitable prowess.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa, the First-born of the Devas, hearing this King’s request spoke to him in infallible words :-- “O son of Yayāti! Go to the confluence of the Yamunā and Tamasā. For you I have kept there today a son as you like and of indomitable prowess.

[Ch 20 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! That child is begotten by me in the womb of Laksmī." The King became very glad to hear the sweet pure words of the Bhagavān. Thus granting him the boon, Visnu went with Ramā to Vaikuntha.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! That child is begotten by me in the womb of Lakṣmī.” The King became very glad to hear the sweet pure words of the Bhagavān. Thus granting him the boon, Viṣṇu went with Ramā to Vaikuṇṭha.

[Ch 20 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King Turgvasu, the son of Yayāti, hearing these words, became exceedingly gladdened in his heart aid mounting on a chariot, whose speed cannot be checked, went to the spot where lay the child.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King Turvasu, the son of Yayāti, hearing these words, became exceedingly gladdened in his heart and mounting on a chariot, whose speed cannot be checked, went to the spot where lay the child.

[Ch 20 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king, of extraordinary genius, went there and saw that the exceedingly beautiful child, catching hold of his toe by one of his soft hands was sucking it by his mouth and was playing on the ground.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king, of extraordinary genius, went there and saw that the exceedingly beautiful child, catching hold of his toe by one of his soft hands was sucking it by his mouth and was playing on the ground.

[Ch 20 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The child was born of Nārāyaṇa out of the womb of Kamalā. Therefore it resembled like Him. On looking at that beautiful lovely child, the famous King Harivarma's face got cheered up with the intensest delight. The King took it up with both of his hands and got merged in the Ocean of Bliss and taking gladly the scent of its head embraced it happily.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The child was born of Nārāyaṇa out of the womb of Kamalā. Therefore it resembled like Him. On looking at that beautiful lovely child, the famous King Harivarmā’s face got cheered up with the intensest delight. The King took it up with both of his hands and got merged in the Ocean of Bliss and taking gladly the scent of its head embraced it happily.

[Ch 20 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On looking at the beautiful lotus-face of the child, the King, choked with tears from his eyes and with feelings of joy said: "O Child! Nārāyaṇa has given me, the child jewel in you; so save me from the terrors of the hell named Put, O Child! For full one hundred years I have practised a very hard tapsayā for the sake of you. Pleased with that, the Lord of Kamalā has given you to me for the happiness of my worldly career.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On looking at the beautiful lotus-face of the child, the King, choked with tears from his eyes and with feelings of joy said :-- “O Child! Nārāyaṇa has given me, the child jewel in you; so save me from the terrors of the hell named Put. O Child! For full one hundred years I have practised a very hard tapasyā for the sake of you. Pleased with that, the Lord of Kamalā has given you to me for the happiness of my worldly career.

[Ch 20 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Your Mother Ramā Devī has forsaken Her own child for the sake of me and has gone away with Hari. O Child! That Mother is blessed whose face beams with joy by seeing the smiles in your lotus-face.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Your Mother Ramā Devī has forsaken Her own child for the sake of me and has gone away with Hari. O Child! That Mother is blessed whose face beams with joy by seeing the smiles in your lotus-face.

[Ch 20 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Delighter of my heart! The Lord of Ramā, the Deva of the Devas, has made you, as it were, to serve as a boat for me for crossing to the other side of this Ocean of World." Thus saying, the King took the child and gladly went home.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Delighter of my heart! The Lord of Ramā, the Deva of the Devas, has made you, as it were, to serve as a boat for me for crossing to the other side of this Ocean of World.” Thus saying, the King took the child and gladly went home.

[Ch 20 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Knowing that the King had come very close to his city, the King's Minister and the city people, the subjects came forward with the priest and many other presents and offerings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Knowing that the King had come very close to his city, the King’s Minister and the city people, the subjects came forward with the priest and many other presents and offerings.

[Ch 20 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The bards, singers and Sūtas came in front of the King. The King as he entered into his city looked affectionately on his subjects and gladdened their spirits by enquiries of welfare.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The bards, singers and Sūtas came in front of the King. The King as he entered into his city looked affectionately on his subjects and gladdened their spirits by enquiries of welfare.

[Ch 20 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then worshipped by the citizens, the King entered into the city with his child. As the King went along the royal, the subjects showered on his head the flowers and fried rice.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then worshipped by the citizens, the King entered into the city with his child. As the King went along the royal road, the subjects showered on his head the flowers and fried rice.

[Ch 20 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then taking the child by his two arms, the King entered into his prosperous palace with his ministers. The king next handed over the newly-born lovely child, as beautiful as Cupid, to the hands of his queen.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then taking the child by his two arms, the King entered into his prosperous palace with his ministers. The king next handed over the newly-born lovely child, as beautiful as Cupid, to the hands of his queen.

[Ch 20 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The good queen took the child and asked the king: "O King! Whence have you got this new born child as fascinating as the God of Love? Who has given this child to you? O Lord! Speak quickly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The good queen took the child and asked the king :-- “O King! Whence have you got this new born child as fascinating as the God of Love? Who has given this child to you? O Lord! Speak quickly.

[Ch 20 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This child has stolen away my mind." The King gladly replied: "O Beloved! The Lord of Kamalā, the Ocean of Mercy has given me this child; O Quick-eyed One! This child is born of Nārāyana's part and out of the womb of Kamalā. O Devi! This child has strength, energy, patience, gravity and all other good qualities." Then the queen took the child in his arms and got the unbounded bliss.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This child has stolen away my mind.” The King gladly replied :-- “O Beloved! The Lord of Kamalā, the Ocean of Mercy has given me this child; O Quick-eyed One! This child is born of Nārāyaṇa’s part and out of the womb of Kamalā. O Devī! This child has strength, energy, patience, gravity and all other good qualities.” Then the queen took the child in her arms and got the unbounded bliss.

[Ch 20 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Great festivities began to be performed in the palace of the King Turvasu. Charities were given to those that wanted; music and singing of various sorts were performed. In this ceremony for the sake of his child, the king Turvasu put the name of the child as “Ekavīra.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Great festivities began to be performed in the palace of the King Turvasu. Charities were given to those that wanted; music and singing of various sorts were performed. In this ceremony for the sake of his child, the king Turvasu put the name of the child as “Ekavīra.”

[Ch 20 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Getting thus the child equivalent in form and qualities to Hari, the powerful Indra-like king became happy and freed from his debt due to his family line, became very cheerful and glad.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Getting thus the child equivalent in form and qualities to Hari, the powerful Indra-like king became happy and freed from his debt due to his family line, became very cheerful and glad.

[Ch 20 Verse 54-55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The king, powerful like his enemies, began to enjoy in his own palace with his all-qualified child, that was given to him by Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of the Devas. He was always served by his dear wife and all sorts of pleasure and he felt himself enjoying as a King would do. Here ends, the Twentieth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the son born of mare by Hari, in the Mahāpuranam in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The king, powerful like his enemies, began to enjoy in his own palace with his all-qualified child, that was given to him by Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of all the Devas. He was always served by his dear wife and all sorts of pleasures and he felt himself enjoying as a King would do. Here ends the Twentieth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the son born of mare by Hari, in the Mahāpurāṇam in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
