CHAPTER XIV

On Gangiā, as the Wife of Nārāyaṇa

नारद उवाच

लक्ष्मी: सरस्वती रोगा तुलसी विश्वापावनी ।

एता नारायणस्यैव चतस्वश्र प्रिया झृति ॥ 1 ॥

गंगा जगाम वैकुण्टमिद्वोर व श्रुतं मया ।

कर्थ सा तस्य पली च बव्यूविति च न श्रुतम् ॥ 2 ॥

Nārada said: O Lord! Gaṅgā, Laksmī, Sarasvatī, and the world purifying Tulasi, these four, are dearest to Nārāyaṇa. Out of these, Gaṅgā went did the region of Goloka to Vaikuntha. So I have heard. But how did She come to be the wife of Nārāyaṇa. I have not heard. Kindly describe this.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

गंगा जगाम वैकुण्ठं तत्यक्षाजगतां विधिः ।

गतचोबाच तया सार्य प्रणाय जगदीक्षगम् ॥ 3 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: Brahmā came from Goloka to the region of Vaikuntha accompanied by Gaṅgā.

ब्रह्मोचच

राधा कृष्णांगसंभृत ता देवी इवरूषिणी ।

नव्यौवनसंपत्रा सुगीता सुंदरी वरा ॥ ४ ॥

गुड़सत्त्वस्क्या च कोर्धाहंकारवर्जिता ।

तदांगसंभवा नान्यं वृणोतीयं च तं चिता ॥ ५ ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Brahmā said to Nārāyaṇa: O Lord! Gaṅgā, born of the bodies of Rādhā and Krṣṇa, full of youth, modest, extraordinarily beautiful, of pure Śuddha Sattva, and void of anger and egoism, does not like to marry anyone save Thee as She is born of Thee.

त्रातिमानिनी राशा सा च तेजस्विनी वरा ।

स्मुचुक्ता पातुर्मिमां भीतरें चुद्धिपूर्वकम् ॥ 6 ॥

विवेश चरणाधोजे कृष्णस्य परमात्मतः ।

सर्वेग लोकं शुक्क दृष्ठासहमगतं तद ॥ 7 ॥

But Rādhā is of a very proud nature and very wrathful. She was even ready to drink up Gaṅgā. But Gaṅgā at once and intelligently took refuge into the feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. So the whole Goloka became void of water.

गोलेके वयं कृणश्छ सर्वेचुतांतप्राप्तये ।

स्वतितात्मा सर्वैषं ज्ञाताशिप्राप्तयेच च ॥ 8 ॥

बहिष्ठकार गंगां च पादांगुष्टनखात्रातः ।

दत्तावस्ये राधिकामांगे भृगिवला च गोलका ॥ 9 ॥

Seing this, I have come here to know in particular the whole history of the case. Then Śrī Krṣna, the Knower and the Ruler of the hearts of all, came to know my heart and instantly caused Gaṅgā to issue from His toe and handed Her over to me. I bowed down to Śrī Krṣna and now I have come with Gaṅgā to Thee.

प्राणय तां च राधेशं गृहीत्वासज्ञाम प्रभो ।

गाधवैण विवाहेन गृहाणोमां सुरेश्यीम ॥ १० ॥

सुरेशेषु रसिको रसिकयं समागता ।

त्वं रन्तं सुभु देवेश क्षीरन्तं क्षीचित्यं सही चि । । । । । ।

Now Thou dost marry the Suresvarī Gaṅgā according to the Gāndharva rule of marriage. As Thou art a Deva of taste and humorous in the assembly of the Devas, so Gaṅgā is. As Thou art a gem amongst the males, so She is the gem amongst the females.

विद्याधाव विदर्धेन संगमो गुणावाभ्यरे ।

उपस्थिता स्वयं कन्यां न गृह्नतीह यः पुभान् ॥ 12 ॥

तं विहाय महालक्ष्मी रहा याति न संशयः ।

यो भवेत्यंडितः सोअपि प्रकृति नावमन्तये ॥ 13 ॥

And the union of a humorous man with a

humorous woman is exceedingly pleasant. Now marry this Lady who has come of Her own accord to Thee. Śrī Mahā Lakṣmī becomes annoyed with one who dest not marry a woman who has come spontaneously. There is no doubt in this. The wise men do never insult the Prakṛti.

. सर्व प्राकृतिका: पुंस: कामीम्ब: प्रकृते: कला ।

त्वमेव भगवात्रायो निर्गुण: प्रकृते: पर: ॥ 14 ॥

अधोई प्रिपुः: कृष्णो योर्धर्पोने चतुर्भुःकः ।

कृष्णवामांतर्भभूत बधूत राधिका पुरा ॥ 15 ॥

All the Puruṣas (males) are born of Prakṛti and all the females are parts of Prakṛti. So Prakṛti and Puruṣa are both inseparable and verily one and the same. So these two should never insult each other. (If Thou sayest that Gaṅgā is attached to Kṛṣṇa; how canst Thou marry Her. He reply is) As Śrī Kṛṣṇa is beyond the attributes and beyond Prakṛti, so Thou also above Prakṛti. The one-half of Srī Kṛṣṇa is two armed; the other half of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is four-armed.

दक्षिणांश: स्वयं सा च बामांश कमला तथा ।

तेनैयं त्वां चुणोत्येव यतस्त्वदेहर्भयना ॥ १ ६ ॥

एकांगं चैव क्षीपुंसोयंधा प्रकृतिपृष्णे ।

उद्वेयमुक्चना धाता तां तं समर्थ जगाम सः ॥ १ ७ ॥

Rādhā has appeared from the left side of Śrī Krṣṇa. He Himself is the right half and Padmā is His left-half. (As there is no difference between Rādhā and Kamalā so there is no difference between Śrī Krṣṇa and Thee. Therefore as Gaṅgā is born of Thy body, she wants to marry Thee. As Prakṛti and Puruṣa are really one and the same without any difference, so the males and females are one.

गाध्रवैण विवाहेन तं जग्राह हरि: स्वयम् ।

नारायण: करं ध्रुत्वा पुष्पचंदनचर्धिनम् ॥ 18 ॥

रेमे यापतिस्तत्र गंगया सहितो मुता ।

गंगा पृथ्वीं गता या सा स्वस्थानं पुर्नगतता ॥ १९ ॥

Thus speaking to Nārāyaṇa, Brahmā handed Gāngā over to Nārāyaṇa and went away. Nārāyaṇa, then, married Gāngā smeared with sandal paste and

Book IX Chapter XV

flowers, according to the rules of the Gandharva marriage. The Lord of Lakṣmī then spent his time happily in enjoyment with Gaṅgā. Gaṅgā had to go to the earth (under the Bhāratī's curse) and afterwards returned to Vaikunṭha.

निर्माता विष्णुपादाङ्गातेन विष्णुपदीति च ।

मूछ्णी संप्राप सा देनेी नवसंगमलोल्या ॥ २० ॥

रसिका सुखसंगोगाउसिकेश्वरसूता ।

तां बुधा दुःशिता वाणी पदाया वर्जितासपि च ॥ २१ ॥

As Gāngā appeared from the feet of Viṣṇu, She denominated Viṣṇupadī. Gāngā Devī was very much overpowered with enjoyment in Her first intercourse with Nārāyaṇa; so much so that She remained, motionless. Thus Gāngā spent the days happily with Nārāyaṇa. Sarasvatī's jealousy towards Gāngā did not disappear. though She was advised by Lakṣmī Devī not to do so. Sarasvatī cherished incessantly the feeling of jealousy

towards Gāngā. But Gāngā had not the least feeling of jealousy towards Sarasvatī.

नियमीर्धिति ता वाणी न च गंगा सरस्वतीम् ।

गंगा श्रणाय कोपेन भारते च हरिपिया ॥ 22 ॥

गड़या सह तस्यैव तित्यो भार्यां रायपतेः ।

सार्यं तुल्या पश्चाच्च चरक्षाभवम्पनुः ॥ 23 ॥

ड्रित श्रीमद्वीभागतं महापुराणे वनस्कंधे

चतुद्वीगोरध्याः: 11 14 11

At last, one day, when vexed too much, Gaṅgā became angry and cursed Sarasvatī to take Her birth in Bhārata. So Lakṣmī, Sarasvatī and Gaṅgā were the wives of Nārāyaṇa. Lastly Tulasī became the wife of Nārāyaṇa. So the number of wives of Nārāyaṇa amounted to four.

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter in the Ninth Book on the story of Gaṅgā becoming the wife of Nārāyaṇa

in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of

18,000 verse by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XV

