CHAPTER XXXI

On Yama's Giving the Sakti Mantra to Sāvitrī

श्रीनारायण उवाच

ग्रौकृकारीर्नं शुचा साधित्वी यमवक्रतः ।

साशूनीरा सपुल्का यमं पुनरावचा सा ॥ १ ॥

Nārāyana said: O Nārada! Hearing thus the supreme nature of Mūla Prakṛti from Dharmarāja Yama, the two eyes of Śāvitrī were filled with tears of joy and her whole body was filled with a thrill of rapture, joy and ecstasy.

सास्थ्यवाच

शकतेक्लीर्तीनं धर्मे सकलेढ़ारकारणम् ।

श्रोग्नां चैव वक्तुर्ण जनमृत्युजारहम् ॥ २ ॥

She again addressed Yama: O Dharmarāja! To sing the glories of Mūla Prakṛti is the only means of saving all. This takes away the old age and death of both the speaker and the hearer.

दानवानां च सिद्धानां तपसां च परं पदम् ।

योगानां चैव वेदानां कौतर्ने सेवनं विषयो ॥ ३ ॥

मुक्तिचयमारलं च सर्वसिद्धाल्येव च ।

श्रीगर्भिसेवकरसैव कलां नाईहि चोडगीम् ॥ ४ ॥

भजामि केन विधिना वद वेदविद्धं वर ।

गुणकर्मविपाकं च श्रुतं नृणां मनोहारम् ॥ ५ ॥

कर्मगुणविषाकं च तन्ते व्याख्यानुर्महिं ।

This is the Supreme Place of the Dānavas, the Siddhas, the ascetics. This is the Yoga of the yogins and this is studying the Vedas of the Vaidikas. Nothing can compare even to one-sixteenth of the sixteenth parts of the (full) merits of those who are in Śakti's Service; call it Mukti, immortality, or attaining endless Siddhis, nothing can come to it. O Thou, the Foremost of the Knowers of the Vedas!

I have heard by and by everything from Thee. Now describe to me how to worship Mūla Prakṛti and what are the ends of Karmas, auspicious and inauspicious.

इत्युक्त्वा च सती बह्ञाभित्नभावतकंधार ॥ 6 ॥

गुहाव धर्मरां च वेदोकनेत सवने च ।

Thus saying, the chaste Sāvitrī bowed down her head and began to praise Yama in stotras according to the Vedas.

साविश्याच

तपसा धर्माराध्य पृकले भासकर: पुरा ॥ 7 ॥

धर्म सूर्वे: सुतं प्राप धर्मारं नन्यामहम् ।

समता सर्वभृतेषु यस्य सर्वस्य साक्षणः ॥ 8 ॥

अतो यवामशमनमिति तं प्रणामामहम् ।

She said: “O Dhamarājan! The Sun practised of yore very hard austerities at Puṣkara and worshipped Dharma. On this, Dharma Himself became born of Sūrya as his son. And Thou art that son of Sūrya, the incarnation of Dharma. So I bow down to Thee.

येन्त्रछ कृतो विश्रे सर्वेधां जीविनां परम् ॥ 9 ॥

कामातुर्वं कालेन ते कृतातं नाम्याह्मृ ।

विषिति दई दंडाय पापिनं गृधिद्धते ॥ 10 ॥

नामपि ते दंडधरं वः शगता सर्वीजीविनम् ।

Thou art the Witness of all the Jivas; Thou seest them equally; hence Thy name is Samana. I bow down to Thee. Sometimes Thou by Thy own will takeest away the lives of beings. Hence Thy name is Kṛtānta. Obeisance to Thee! Thou holdest the rod to distribute justice and pronounce sentence on them and to destroy the sins of the Jivas; hence Thy name is Dānḍadhara; so I bow down to Thee.

Note: Any Jiva, in course of his travelling towards Mukti, can expect to pass through the stage Yamaship; and if he pleases, he can become a Yama.

विश्वो च कल्यलेव वः सर्वेषु च संततम् ॥ ११ ॥

अलीय दुनिवार्य च तं कालं प्रणामायहम् ।

तपसी ब्रह्मितोः वः संयमी संजितेन्रियः ॥ १२ ॥

At all times Thou destroyest the universe. None can resist Thee. Hence Thou art named Kāla; so

obeisance to Thee! Thou art an ascetic, devoted to Brahma, self-controlled, and the distributor of the fruits of Karmas to the Jivas; Thou restrainest Thy senses. Thou art called Yama. Therefore I bow down to Thee.

जीवानां कर्मफिलुदरं यमं प्रणामाध्यमू ।

स्वात्मागसु सर्वजैन मित्रं पुण्यकृतां भवेत् ॥ 13 ॥

पाधिनां कलेशोदो यस्ते पुण्यं मित्रं ननामध्यम् ।

यज्ञन्म ब्रहणोंउशेन जल्लतं ब्रह्मतेसा ॥ 14 ॥

Thou art delighted with Thy Own Self; Thou art omniscient; Thou art the Tormentor of the sinners and the Friend of the Virtuous. Hence Thy name is Punya Mitra; So I bow down to Thee. Thou art born as a part of Brahmā; the fire of Brahma is shining through Thy body.

यो ध्यायिति परं ब्रह तमीर्ण प्रणामाधसून ।

इतुसुत्वा सा च सावित्री प्रणात्या यमं पुने ॥ 15 ॥

यमस्तां शक्तिभवजं कर्मपाकमुवाच ह ।

Thou dost meditate on Para Brahma, Thou art the Lord. Obeisence to Thee!" O Muni! Thus praising Yama, She bowed down at the feet of Him. Yama gave her the mantra of Mūla Prakrti. How to worship Her and He began to recite the fruition of good Karmas.

इर्वे म्याहकं नित्यं प्रातरल्याय यः पठेत् ॥ १ ६ ॥

यमात्त्य भयं नाति स्वर्यावग्युच्छेत ।

महापापी यदि पठेत्रित्यं पशितसमार्थितः ॥

यमः करोति सगुर्द्धं कायव्यूहेत निश्छिन्न ॥ १ ७ ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागते महापुराणे नवमलक्ये

एकविशेषोस्थावः ॥ 31 ॥

O Nārada! He who recites these eight hymns to Yama early in the morning, getting up from his bed, is freed of the fear of death. Rather he becomes freed of all his sins. So much so, that even if he be a veritable awful sinner and if he recites daily with devotion this Yamāṣtakam, Yama purifies him thoroughly.

Here ends the Thirty-first Chapter of the Ninth Book on the Yama's giving Sakti Mantra to Sāvitri in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXXII

