[Ch 6 Verse 1-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya said: O Muni! How did Maharsi Cyavana make these with twin Devas drink Soma and how his words came out to be true. Human strength is insignificant compared to Indra's strength. Indra forbade the physicians, the Asvins, to drink the Soma juice. How then could the Muni give the right thereof. This is very wonderful. Therefore, O Thou, devoted to Dharma! O Lord! Describe in detail the doings of this Maharsi Cyavana. I am very anxious to hear it.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya said :-- “O Muni! How did Maharṣi Cyavana make these twin Devas drink Soma and how his words came out to be true. Human strength is insignificant compared to Indra’s strength. Indra forbade the physicians, the Aśvins, to drink the Soma juice. How then could the Muni give the right thereof. This is very wonderful. Therefore, O Thou, devoted to Dharma! O Lord! Describe in detail the doings of this Maharṣi Cyavana. I am very anxious to hear it.”

[Ch 6 Verse 4-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! In that famous sacrificial ceremony solemnised by of the King Śaryāti, Cyavana Rṣi did wonderful feats. O Bharata! I am now narrating to you his entirely wonderful character. Hear it attentively. Maharṣi Cyavana, illustrious like the Devas, began to enjoy with a cheerful mind and gladdened heart, with his beautiful wife Sukanyā who was like a Deva Kanyā. Now, once on an occasion, the wife of Śaryāti became very anxious and trembling said to her husband weeping: "O King! You have betrothed your daughter to the blind Muni Cyavana; now it is your duty to go and enquire whether the daughter is living or is dead. O Lord! What is my beautiful daughter doing with that husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! In that famous sacrifice of the King Śaryāti, Cyavana Ṛṣi did wonderful feats. O Bharata! I am now narrating to you his entirely wonderful character. Hear it attentively. Maharṣi Cyavana, illustrious like the Devas, began to enjoy with a cheerful mind and gladdened heart, with his beautiful wife Sukanyā who was like a Deva Kanyā. Now, once on an occasion, the wife of Śaryati became very anxious and trembling said to her husband weeping :-- “O King! You have betrothed your daughter to the blind Muni Cyavana; now it is your duty to go and enquire whether the daughter is living or is dead. O Lord! What is my beautiful daughter doing with that husband.

[Ch 6 Verse 8-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Please go just now to the Muni's Āśrama and see about it. O Rājarsī! I always burn in pain and agony when I think of her. She must have become very lean and thin due to the troubles of Tapasyā; please bring her quickly here to my presence. She is suffering an everlasting pain from having an aged blind husband; and it is quite likely she has become very lean and thin. I am anxious, therefore, to see my daughter lean and thin who is wearing barks of trees as her dress.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Please go just now to the Muni’s Āśrama and see about it. O Rājarṣi! I always burn in pain and agony when I think of her. She must have become very lean and thin due to the troubles of Tapasyā; please bring her quickly here to my presence. She is suffering an everlasting pain from having an aged blind husband; and it is quite likely she has become very lean and thin, I am anxious, therefore, to see my daughter lean and thin who is wearing barks of trees as her dress.”

[Ch 6 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śaryāti said: “O broad-eyed One! I am going gladly just now to see my dear daughter and that Muni of severe vows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śaryāti said :-- “O broad-eyed One! I am going gladly just now to see my dear daughter and that Muni of severe vows.”

[Ch 6 Verse 12-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Thus saying to his wife, distressed with sorrow, the King Śaryāti mounted on his chariot and quickly went towards the Śārama of the Cyavana Muni. On reaching there, he saw the Maharṣi Cyavana like a Deva's son. Seeing his body like that of a Deva, the King became bewildered and began to think thus: "What! Has my daughter done such an ugly act, blameable in the society! That Muni was very calm and quiet, penniless and very old; my daughter, perhaps, being overpowered with passion, killed him and has taken, no doubt, another husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Thus saying to his wife, distressed with sorrow, the King Śaryāti mounted on his chariot and quickly went towards the Āśrama of the Cyavana Muni. On reaching there, he saw the Maharṣi Cyavana like a Deva’s son. Seeing his body like that of Deva, the King became bewildered and began to think thus :-- “What! Has my daughter done such an ugly act, blameable in the society! That Muni was very calm and quiet, penniless and very old; my daughter, perhaps, being overpowered with passion, killed him and has taken, no doubt, another husband.

[Ch 6 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is indeed difficult to control the God of Love, armed with his flowery bow; the period of youth is moreover very hard to conquer. So this daughter impelled by lust has thrown a dreadful stigma on the clear name of the family of the great Manu. Fie on him whose daughter in this world is of a vicious character! It seems that daughter are born for the expiation of all the sins committed by their fathers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is indeed difficult to control the God of Love, armed with his flowery bow: the period of youth is moreover very hard to conquer. So this daughter impelled by lust has thrown a dreadful stigma on the clear name of the family of the great Manu. Fie on him whose daughter in this world is of a vicious character! It seems that daughters are born for the expiation of all the sins committed by their fathers.

[Ch 6 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But what an unjust act have I committed for my own selfish ends? It is highly incumbent on every father to betroth his daughter with every care possible to a bridegroom suitable in every respect; but I did not do it and now have got the fruits equivalent to my doing.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But what an unjust act have I committed for my own selfish ends? It is highly iñcumbent on every father to betroth his daughter with every care possible to a bridegroom suitable in every respect; but I did not do it and now have got the fruits equivalent to my doing.

[Ch 6 Verse 20-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If I kill my daughter, vicious and unchaste, I will incur sin due to killing a woman and moreover my daughter. I am the cause of this stain on Muni's line of descent. On the one hand, the scandal on one is very powerful; and the affection for a daughter is strong on the other, what am I to do now?" The King became merged in deep thoughts. At this time Sukyanā accidentally saw her father thus drowned in anxious thoughts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If I kill my daughter, vicious and unchaste, I will iñcur sin due to killing a woman and moreover my daughter. I am the cause of this stain on Muni’s line of descent. On the one hand, the scandal on one is very powerful; and the affection for a daughter is strong on the other. What am I to do now?” The King became merged in deep thoughts. At this time Sukanyā accidentally saw her father thus drowned in anxious thoughts.

[Ch 6 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing him, Sukanyā instantly came to her father's side and asked the King in sweet affectionate words.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing him, Sukanyā instantly came to her father’s side and asked the King in sweet affectionate words.

[Ch 6 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! How is it that your face has become so pale with anxious thoughts, seeing the Muni sitting in front of you, a young man with lotus-eyes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! How is it that your face has become so pale with anxious thoughts, seeing the Muni sitting in front of you, a young man with lotus-eyes.

[Ch 6 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Father! What are you thinking? You belong to the famous Manu's family; besides, you are a high-minded man; you ought not to be sad so suddenly; come quickly and bow your head down before my husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Father! What are you thinking? You belong to the famous Manu’s family; besides, you are a high-minded man; you ought not to be sad so suddenly; come quickly and bow your head down before my husband.

[Ch 6 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the daughter's words, the King became impatient with anger and began to speak to her:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the daughter’s words, the King became impatient with anger and began to speak to her :--

[Ch 6 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O Daughter! Where is that aged blind ascetic Muni Cavana and who is this youth intoxicated with lust? A great doibt has arisen in my mind.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Daughter! Where is that aged blind ascetic Muni Cyavana and who is this youth intoxicated with lust? A great doubt has arisen in my mind.

[Ch 6 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Vicious Soul! Have you slain that Cyavana Muni and engaged yourself in such a sinful act? O You, a Disgrace to your family! Have you accepted another husband out of your desire of lust?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Vicious Soul! Have you slain that Cyavana Muni and engaged yourself in such a sinful act? O You, a Disgrace to your family! Have you accepted another husband out of your desire of lust?

[Ch 6 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My mind has become very much troubled on not seeing that Muni in this Śārama. O vicious One! Now I do't see the Muni; but instead of him, I see this bright person. And thus it is on account of your sinful behaviour that my mind is drowned in the ocean of cares.
NEW CORR ENG ──► My mind has became very much troubled on not seeing that Muni in this Āśrama. O vicious One! Now I don’t see the Muni; but instead of him, I see this bright person. And thus it is on account of your sinful behaviour that my mind is drowned in the ocean of cares.

[Ch 6 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then hearing her father's words, Sukanyā smiled and gladly took him at once to her husband and said: "O Father! He is your son-in-law; He is the same Cyavana Muni; there is no doubt here. The twin Aśvins have given him this beautiful lustre and lotus-like eyes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then hearing her father’s words, Sukanyā smiled and gladly took him at once to her husband and said :-- “O Father! He is your son-in-law; He is the same Cyavana Muni; there is no doubt here. The twin Aśvins have given him this beautiful lustre and lotus-like eyes.

[Ch 6 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Šrimaddevībhāgavatam The two Ašvini Kumāras came accidentally to my Āśrama and out of mercy no doubt they have made Cyavana such a nice young man.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The two Aśvini Kumāras came accidentally to my Āsrama and out of mercy no doubt they have made Cyavana such a nice young man.

[Ch 6 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! I am not your that daughter that will do a vicious act as you think, beguiled by this beautiful form of the Muni. Father! Bow down before the Cyavana Muni. Ask him and he will tell you everything."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! I am not your that daughter that will do a vicious act as you think, beguiled by this beautiful form of the Muni. Father! Bow down before the Cyavana Muni. Ask him and he will tell you everything.”

[Ch 6 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing thus the daughter's words, the King went instantly to the Muni and bowed down before him and asked him affectionately thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing thus the daughter’s words, the King went instantly to the Muni and bowed down before him and asked him affectionately thus :--

[Ch 6 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King said: “O Son of Bhrgu! How have you got your eyes back? Where has your old age gone? Kindly narrate all your details as early as possible. O Brāhmaṇa! Seeing your exquisitely beautiful form, a great doubt has arisen in me; so tell me everything in detail; I will be very glad, no doubt.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King said :-- “O Son of Bhṛgu! How have you got your eyes back? Where has your old age gone? Kindly narrate all your details as early as possible. O Brāhmaṇa! Seeing your exquisitely beautiful form, a great doubt has arisen in me; so tell me everything in detail; I will be very glad, no doubt.”

[Ch 6 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Cyavana said: "O King! The two Aśvins, the physicians of the Gods, came here on their own account and have done me this good out of their mercy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Cyavana said :-- “O King! The two Aśvins, the physicians of the Gods, came here on their own account and have done me this good out of their mercy.

[Ch 6 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Owing to the benefit thus received, I have granted them the boon that I will make them drink the Soma juice in the Agniṣtoma Yajñā of the King Śaryāti.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Owing to the benefit thus received, I have granted them the boon that I will make them drink the Soma juice in the Agniṣṭoma Yajña of the King Śaryāti.

[Ch 6 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus I have got these beautiful eyes and the new youth; therefore, O King! Collect yourself and sit in the holy sacrificial seat.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus I have got these beautiful eyes and the new youth; therefore, O King! Collect yourself and sit in the holy sacrificial seat.”

[Ch 6 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the Brāhmin Cyavana Muni spoke thus, the King Śaryāti and his dear wife sat with greatest pleasure and began to talk on auspicious topics with the high-souled Muni.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the Brāhmin Cyavana Muni spoke thus, the King Śaryāti and his dear wife sat with greatest pleasure and began to talk on auspicious topics with the high-souled Muni.

[Ch 6 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the Bhārgava consoled the King and said I will perform your sacrifice; please collect all the necessary materials.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the Bhārgava consoled the King and said I will perform your sacrifice; please collect all the necessary materials.

[Ch 6 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I have promised to the Asvins that certainly I will make them drink the Soma juice. Therefore, O King! I will have to carry that out in your sacrifice.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I have promised to the Aśvins that certainly I will make them drink the Soma juice. Therefore, O King! I will have to carry that out in your sacrifice.

[Ch 6 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! If Indra be angry, I will stop him by my Tapas face and in the Agniśtoma Yajñā I will make the Aśvins drink Soma.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! If Indra be angry, I will stop him by my Tapas force and in the Agniṣṭoma Yajña I will make the Aśvins drink Soma.

[Ch 6 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Śaryāti, the lord of the earth, then gladly approved the proposals of Cyavana Muni. The King then shewed respect to the Muni and, with a pleasant attitude of mind, returned to his city with his wife, all the while talking of the Muni in the way.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Śaryāti, the lord of the earth, then gladly approved the proposals of Cyavana Muni. The King then shewed respects to the Muni and, with a pleasant attitude of mind, returned to his city with his wife, all the while talking of the Muni on the way.

[Ch 6 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On a good auspicious day he, possessed of enormous wealth and prosperity, prepared an excellent place for the performance of the sacrifice.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On a good auspicious day he, possessed of enormous wealth and prosperity prepared an excellent place for the performance of the sacrifice.

[Ch 6 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Muni Cyavana then invited Vasistha and other respectable Munis and initiated the King Saryāti for the performance of the sacrifice.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Muni Cyavana then invited Vaśiṣṭha and other respectable Munis and initiated the King Śaryāti for the performance of the sacrifice.

[Ch 6 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At the commencement of the sacrifice, Indra and the other Devas and the two ASvins all came to the sacrifice to drink Soma.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At the commencement of the sacrifice, Indra and the other Devas and the two Aśvins all came to the sacrifice to drink Soma.

[Ch 6 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the ASvins, Indra became afraid and asked the other Devas, "Why have the ASvins come here?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the Aśvins, Indra became afraid and asked the other Devas, “Why have the Aśvins come here?”

[Ch 6 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They are the physicians and, therefore, never fit to drink Soma. Who has brought them hither at this great Agnistoma Sacrifice?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► They are the physicians and, therefore, never fit to drink Soma. Who has brought them hither at this great Agniṣṭoma Sacrifice?

[Ch 6 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas remain all silent. Cyavana Muni then became ready to offer Soma to the Asvins and Indra immediately stopped him saying: "They are already prohibited to drink Soma as a sacrificial share; so do not accept the vessel of Soma for them."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas remained all silent. Cyavana Muni then became ready to offer Soma to the Aśvins and Indra immediately stopped him saying :-- They are already prohibited to drink Soma as a sacrificial share; so do not accept the vessel of Soma for them.

[Ch 6 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Cyavana then said: "O Lord of Śaci! These are the Sūrya's sons; tell, then, truly why these are rendered unfit to drink Soma. They are not of mixed blood; they are born of the legal wife of Sūrya Deva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Cyavana then said :-- “O Lord of Śacī! These are the Sūrya’s sons; tell, then, truly why these are rendered unfit to drink Soma. They are not of mixed blood; they are born of the legal wife of Sūrya Deva.

[Ch 6 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the Devas! What is the fault, then, of the Aśvins, the physicists, that they be prohibited to drink Soma juice.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the Devas! What is the fault then, of the Aśvins, the physicians, that they be prohibited to drink Soma juice.

[Ch 6 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Please reply. O Indra! This point must be settled by all the Devas here. I have promised to make them drink the Soma juice in this sacrifice.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Please reply. O Indra! This point must be settled by all the Devas here. I have promised to make them drink the Soma juice in this sacrifice.

[Ch 6 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► To keep my word I have initiated the King in this sacrifice. I will have my word fulfilled; there is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► To keep my word I have initiated the King in this sacrifice. I will have my word fulfilled; there is no doubt in this.

[Ch 6 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Indra! They have given me my youth and bestowed my eyes and have done me great good. I will also do good to them to my best."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Indra! They have given me my youth and bestowed my eyes and have done me great good. I will also do good to them to my best.”

[Ch 6 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra said: “The Devas have appointed these Devas their Physicians; therefore they are looked down upon in the society; so they are unfit to drink Soma. You need not make them drink Some.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra said :-- “The Devas have appointed these Devas their Physicians; therefore they are looked down upon in the society; so they are unfit to drink Soma. You need not make them drink Soma.”

[Ch 6 Verse 60-61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Cyavana spoke: “O Indra! You have adulterated yourself with Athalyā; why are you, then, giving vent to your anger thus in vain. You have treacherously murdered Vṛtāsura; it is it is quite inappropriate for a vicious person like you to say that the Aśvins cannot have the right to drink Soma. This is quite impossible." O King! On the springing of this dispute, no body spoke to Indra. The illustrious Bhārgava, then, made them accept the Soma juice. Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Seventh Book on granting the Aśvins the right to drink the Soma juice in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa. Śrimaddevbībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► Cyavana spoke :-- “O Indra! You have adulterated yourself with Ahalyā; why are you, then, giving vent to your anger thus in vain. You have treacherously murdered Vritrāsura; it is quite inappropriate for a vicious person like you to say that the Aśvins cannot have the right to drink Soma. This is quite impossible.” O King! On the springing of this dispute, no body spoke to Indra. The illustrious Bhārgava, then, made them accept the Soma juice. Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Seventh Book on granting the Aśvins the right to drink the Soma juice in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
