CHAPTER VI

On the Asvins Getting the Right to Drink Soma

जनमेव जय जय

यवयनेक कथं वैद्यों ती क्रतौ सोमपाधिनो ।

वचनं च कर्ण सत्यं जातं तस्य महातयनः ॥ १ ॥

मानुष्यस्य वर्तं कौरुपदेवाजवर्तं प्रति ।

निधिद्धौ भिपब्जौ तेन कृतौ तौ सामपाधिनो ॥ २ ॥

धर्मनिष्ठी तताश्रयं वित्तरेणा वद प्रभो ।

चारितं च्यवनस्याङ श्रोतुकामो5स्म वसंधा ॥ ३ ॥

Janamejaya said: O Muni! How did Maharsi Cyavana make these with twin Devas drink Soma and how his words came out to be true. Human

strength is insignificant compared to Indra's strength. Indra forbade the physicians, the Asvins, to drink the Soma juice. How then could the Muni give the right thereof. This is very wonderful. Therefore, O Thou, devoted to Dharma! O Lord! Describe in detail the doings of this Maharsi Cyavana. I am very anxious to hear it.

यास उवाच

निशगाय महाराज चरितं परमादुतम् ।

च्यवन्य मखे तत्मभूक्ष्योतर्भूथि भारत ॥ 4 ॥

सुकन्यां सुन्दरीं प्रायः च्यवन: सुरसक्षिणः ।

विवहार प्रसातमा देवकन्यामिवापर: ॥ 5 ॥

कदाचिद्ध शगवतिषभार्य चिंतातुरा भुगम् ।

पर्ति प्राह वेयमाना वचनं रहती प्रिया ॥ 6 ॥

राज्युत्री तथा दत्ता मुनयेड्याय कानने ।

भुता जीविते वा सा तु उह्छ्या संख्या तथा ॥ 7 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! In that famous sacrificial ceremony solemnised by of the King Śaryāti, Cyavana Rṣi did wonderful feats. O Bharata! I am now narrating to you his entirely wonderful character. Hear it attentively. Maharṣi Cyavana, illustrious like the Devas, began to enjoy with a cheerful mind and gladdened heart, with his beautiful wife Sukanyā who was like a Deva Kanyā. Now, once on an occasion, the wife of Śaryāti became very anxious and trembling said to her husband weeping: "O King! You have betrothed your daughter to the blind Muni Cyavana; now it is your duty to go and enquire whether the daughter is living or is dead. O Lord! What is my beautiful daughter doing with that husband.

मष्ठ नाथ मुनेस्तावदास्मे उद्युमदात् ।

कि कांती सुकान्या सा प्राय नार्य तथाविधम् ॥ 8 ॥

पुर्षिदुःखेन राजर्षे दरधान्सि सर्वेश हृदि ।

तापानय विश्राताखीं तपःशामां मदन्तिके ॥ 9 ॥

प्रजामि सर्वथा पुर्गि क्रगांशी वल्कलावृताम् ।

अंधों पतिं समासाठ दुःखभाजं कृगोदरिभ् ॥ 10 ॥

Please go just now to the Muni's Āśrama and see about it. O Rājarsī! I always burn in pain and agony when I think of her. She must have become very lean and thin due to the troubles of Tapasyā; please bring her quickly here to my presence. She is suffering an everlasting pain from having an aged blind husband; and it is quite likely she has become very lean and thin. I am anxious, therefore, to see my daughter lean and thin who is wearing barks of trees as her dress.

श्वास्तिकाव

गच्छामोह विशालाधिक सुक्रवो रेडुमादरात् ।

घियमुप्री वरातोहे मुनि तं संशितान्तम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Śaryāti said: “O broad-eyed One! I am going gladly just now to see my dear daughter and that Muni of severe vows.

व्यास उवाच

एवमुकत्वा तु शयिति: कामिनी शोकसंकुलाम् ।

जगाम रथामहाच स्वरिताश्रमं मुने: ॥ 12 ॥

गत्वासप्रसामसीपे तु तमपश्यन्हीपितः ।

नवयीवनसममर्जे देवपुत्रोपमं पुनिम् ॥ 13 ॥

तं चितोकव्यागराकां विस्तयं नृपतर्गतः ।

किं कृतं कृत्तिसतं कर्म पुथा लोकविर्गहितम् ॥ 14 ॥

निर्होजसी मुनिकुढ़ल्चनयाअय: पति: कृतः ।

कार्मपीडितया कामं प्रशांतोःप्यतिनिर्भिनः ॥ 15 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus saying to his wife, distressed with sorrow, the King Śaryāti mounted on his chariot and quickly went towards the Śārama of the Cyavana Muni. On reaching there, he saw the Maharṣi Cyavana like a Deva's son. Seeing his body like that of a Deva, the King became bewildered and began to think thus: "What! Has my daughter done such an ugly act, blameable in the society! That Muni was very calm and quiet, penniless and very old; my daughter, perhaps, being overpowered with passion, killed him and has taken, no doubt, another husband.

दुःसहोर्धं युष्यधन्व विगोशेण च योवते ।

कुले कलंकः सुमहाननया मानवे कुतः ॥ 16 ॥

यिचक्स्य जीवित लोके ययव्युजी हे कुलिता ।

सर्वपार्यैसु दुःखाय पुत्री भवति देहिनान् ॥ 17 ॥

It is indeed difficult to control the God of Love, armed with his flowery bow; the period of youth is moreover very hard to conquer. So this daughter impelled by lust has thrown a dreadful stigma on the clear name of the family of the great Manu. Fie on him whose daughter in this world is of a vicious character! It seems that daughter are born for the expiation of all the sins committed by their fathers.

मया त्वनृचितं कर्म कृतः स्वार्थेत्य सिद्धे।

युद्धायांधाय या दत्ता पुरी सर्वांन्मान किल ॥ 18 ॥

Book VII Chapter VI

कन्या योग्याय दात्याय पिता सर्वांत्मना किल ।

तातृगं हि फलं प्राप्तं यातृगं वै कृतं मच ॥ 19 ॥

But what an unjust act have I committed for my own selfish ends? It is highly incumbent on every father to betroth his daughter with every care possible to a bridegroom suitable in every respect; but I did not do it and now have got the fruits equivalent to my doing.

हन्मि चेच्छा तनयं वु:शीलां पापाकीर्णिन् ।

स्त्रीहृता युस्तरा स्याने तथा युया विशेषतः ॥ 20 ॥

मनुवर्गस्तु विद्याला: सकलंकः कृते मया ।

लोकापवादो वलवानुस्पताज्ञा स्नेहग्रंघतला ॥ 21 ॥

किं कंभौमिति विजात्यो यदा मनः स पार्थिवः ।

सुकन्यथा तदा देवादुर्वाईशताकृतः पिता ॥ 22 ॥

If I kill my daughter, vicious and unchaste, I will incur sin due to killing a woman and moreover my daughter. I am the cause of this stain on Muni's line of descent. On the one hand, the scandal on one is very powerful; and the affection for a daughter is strong on the other, what am I to do now?" The King became merged in deep thoughts. At this time Sukyanā accidentally saw her father thus drowned in anxious thoughts.

सा दूध्दा तं जगामाशु सुकन्या वितृत्तिके ।

गत्वा पगच्छ भूपालं प्रेमपूर्तिनामसा ॥ 23 ॥

Seeing him, Sukanyā instantly came to her father's side and asked the King in sweet affectionate words.

किं विचारयसे राजाँक्ष्ताव्याकृत्तितान्नः ।

उपविष्ट मुनि वीक्ष्य युवानमबुजेक्षणम् ॥ 24 ॥

O King! How is it that your face has become so pale with anxious thoughts, seeing the Muni sitting in front of you, a young man with lotus-eyes.

राष्ट्रीक पुरुषव्यार्ध प्रणमस्य पत्ति मम् ।

मा विषादं नृपश्रेष्ठ सरोतं कुरू मानव ॥ 25 ॥

O Father! What are you thinking? You belong to the famous Manu's family; besides, you are a high-minded man; you ought not to be sad so suddenly; come quickly and bow your head down before my husband.

व्यास उवाच

इति पुत्रा वचः शुवा श्यांति: कौधीषितः ।

प्रोचा चवनं राजा पुरःस्थां तनयं ततः ॥ 26 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the daughter's words, the King became impatient with anger and began to speak to her:

ताजीवाच

क्व मुनिश्रयन: पुत्रि वृद्धोंधतापयोतम: ।

कोउंये बुवा मदोभन्तः सन्तेढोज महामान ॥ 27 ॥

"O Daughter! Where is that aged blind ascetic Muni Cavana and who is this youth intoxicated with lust? A great doibt has arisen in my mind.

मुनि: किं निततः पापे त्वया दृष्टुताकारिण ।

नृतानोउसी पति: कामावत्कृत: कुलविनारिणि ॥ 28 ॥

O Vicious Soul! Have you slain that Cyavana Muni and engaged yourself in such a sinful act? O You, a Disgrace to your family! Have you accepted another husband out of your desire of lust?

सोड़ई चिन्तातुरतं न पष्णायाङ्ममंशित्यम् ।

किं कृतं दुक्छृतं कर्म कृत्वादार्विति किल ॥ 29 ॥

निम्पनोड़ं दुराचारे शोकाक्यों त्वकृतो3पुना ।

दूधैर्वेने पुरुषं दिव्यमदूद्वा च्यवनं मुनिम् ॥ 30 ॥

My mind has become very much troubled on not seeing that Muni in this Śārama. O vicious One! Now I do't see the Muni; but instead of him, I see this bright person. And thus it is on account of your sinful behaviour that my mind is drowned in the ocean of cares.

विद्यस्य तनुपाचाण्यु सा भूत्वा चचनं पितुः ।

गृहीत्वानीय पितरं भूर्तीतकमादरात् ॥ 31 ॥

च्यवनोउसी भूमितला जामात ते न संशयः ।

अधिष्यामीद्रुग: कानतः कृतः कमलतोवनः ॥ 32 ॥

Then hearing her father's words, Sukanyā smiled and gladly took him at once to her husband and said: "O Father! He is your son-in-law; He is the same Cyavana Muni; there is no doubt here. The twin Aśvins have given him this beautiful lustre and lotus-like eyes.

यदृष्छयाज्ञ संप्राणती नस्मावाब्धमे मम ।

ताप्यां कर्णणया नूनं च्यनस्तादृष्ण: कृतः ॥ 33 ॥

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

The two Ašvini Kumāras came accidentally to my Āśrama and out of mercy no doubt they have made Cyavana such a nice young man.

नाहं तब सुता तात तथा तथा पापकरिणी ।

यथा त्वं मन्यसे राजन्मुखी क्वसंगेशे ॥ 34 ॥

प्राणा त्वं मुनिं राजन्मार्विं च्यवनं पितः ।

अगृष्टि कारणं सर्व कथायिति वित्तम् ॥ 35 ॥

O King! I am not your that daughter that will do a vicious act as you think, beguiled by this beautiful form of the Muni. Father! Bow down before the Cyavana Muni. Ask him and he will tell you everything."

इति श्रुचा वचः पुचा: श्रवीत्स्वतितस्तदा ।

प्रणानाम पुन्ति तत्र नाला पप्रच्छ सादरम् ॥ 36 ॥

Hearing thus the daughter's words, the King went instantly to the Muni and bowed down before him and asked him affectionately thus:

राजोबाव

कथयस्य स्वपृतांतं भागवायु यथोचितम् ।

नयने च कर्व प्राप्ते कव रगत ते जरा पुनः ॥ 37 ॥

संशयोर्ध महामेऋति रूपं दृष्ट्वातिपुत्रम् ।

वद विस्तत्ते बढ़ाव्छूलाड़े सुखामपुभम् ॥ 38 ॥

The King said: “O Son of Bhrgu! How have you got your eyes back? Where has your old age gone? Kindly narrate all your details as early as possible. O Brāhmaṇa! Seeing your exquisitely beautiful form, a great doubt has arisen in me; so tell me everything in detail; I will be very glad, no doubt.”

च्यवन उत्तरा

नास्त्यावत्र सम्पाती देवानां भिपजाजूषी ।

उपकारः कृतसाध्यो कृपया नृपास्तम ॥ 39 ॥

Cyavana said: "O King! The two Aśvins, the physicians of the Gods, came here on their own account and have done me this good out of their mercy.

मया ताययां वरो द्त उपकारस्य होते ।

करिष्यामि मखे राजो भवतीं सोमपार्थिति ॥ 40 ॥

Owing to the benefit thus received, I have granted them the boon that I will make them drink

the Soma juice in the Agniṣtoma Yajñā of the King Śaryāti.

एवं मया वयः प्राप्तं लोधने विमले तथा ।

स्वस्थो भव महाराज संविश्रासनरे गुधे ॥ 4 1 ॥

Thus I have got these beautiful eyes and the new youth; therefore, O King! Collect yourself and sit in the holy sacrificial seat.

इत्युक्तः स तु विश्रिण सभार्य: पृथिवीपति: ।

सुखोपथिह: कल्याणी: कवाध्यके महात्मना ॥ 42 ॥

When the Brāhmin Cyavana Muni spoke thus, the King Śaryāti and his dear wife sat with greatest pleasure and began to talk on auspicious topics with the high-souled Muni.

अर्थीन भापीव: प्राह राजानं परिसांत्वयन् ।

याजविष्यापि राजस्वां संभागानुपकल्यय ॥ 43 ॥

Then the Bhārgava consoled the King and said I will perform your sacrifice; please collect all the necessary materials.

मया प्रश्रितुं ताथवां कत्लैंथो सोमपी युवाम् ।

तत्कर्तैंयं नृपश्रेष्ठ तव प्रोज्ञपितिवरो ॥ 44 ॥

I have promised to the Asvins that certainly I will make them drink the Soma juice. Therefore, O King! I will have to carry that out in your sacrifice.

इन्द्र निवारियधामि कूब्द्र तेजाबेलेन वै ।

पायियधामि राजेन्द्र सोयं सोममखे तव ॥ 4 5 ॥

O King! If Indra be angry, I will stop him by my Tapas face and in the Agniśtoma Yajñā I will make the Aśvins drink Soma.

ततः परमसन्तुषः शर्षाति: पृथिवीपति: ।

च्यवन्य महाराज तृताक्यं प्रत्यपूजन्त् ॥ 46 ॥

संमान्य च्ववनं राजा जगाभ नगरं प्रति ।

सभार्थ्वातिसन्तुष: कुर्वेल्वातिं मुने: किल ॥ 47 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Śaryāti, the lord of the earth, then gladly approved the proposals of Cyavana Muni. The King then shewed respect to the Muni and, with a pleasant attitude of mind, returned to his city with his wife, all the while talking of the Muni in the way.

प्रशास्तोर्शनि महीये सर्वकाममपुटिभान् ।

कार्यायमास शर्शितैर्वंत्रायतनमुतमम् ॥ 48 ॥

Book VII Chapter VI

On a good auspicious day he, possessed of enormous wealth and prosperity, prepared an excellent place for the performance of the sacrifice.

समानीय मुनीन्युखान्वसिष्टमुखानसी ।

भार्यो वाजयामास च्यवन: पृथिवीपिति् ।। ४९ ॥

The Muni Cyavana then invited Vasistha and other respectable Munis and initiated the King Saryāti for the performance of the sacrifice.

वितते तु तथा यजे देवा: सर्वे सवासवा: ।

आजमुखाशिकी तन सोमार्थिपुजमन्तुः ॥ 50 ॥

At the commencement of the sacrifice, Indra and the other Devas and the two ASvins all came to the sacrifice to drink Soma.

इत्रस्तु शंकितस्तव वीक्ष्य तावधिगावृषी ।

पग्रष्ठ च सुरान्सर्विक्मतेो सुपगतां ॥ 51 ॥

Seeing the ASvins, Indra became afraid and asked the other Devas, "Why have the ASvins come here?

चिक्सिकसी न सोमाहाँ केनानीताविहित च ।

नावुद्वमासतत्र राजस्तु वितते मखे ॥ 52 ॥

They are the physicians and, therefore, never fit to drink Soma. Who has brought them hither at this great Agnistoma Sacrifice?"

अग्रहाच्छ्ववनः सोममधिज्ञोंदेवसोस्तव ।

ग्राहकतं वारयामास मा गृहाणैतयोह्न ॥ 53 ॥

The Devas remain all silent. Cyavana Muni then became ready to offer Soma to the Asvins and Indra immediately stopped him saying: "They are already prohibited to drink Soma as a sacrificial share; so do not accept the vessel of Soma for them."

तमाह च्यवन्तरत कथमोते रवे: सुते।

न प्रहाई च नास्तवी बृहि सर्व शचीपते ॥ 54 ॥

Cyavana then said: "O Lord of Śaci! These are the Sūrya's sons; tell, then, truly why these are rendered unfit to drink Soma. They are not of mixed blood; they are born of the legal wife of Sūrya Deva.

न संकरी समुवर्धो धर्मपत्नीसुतो रहेः ।

केन दोशेण देवेन्द्र नाहों सेमं विषयली ॥ 55 ॥

O Lord of the Devas! What is the fault, then, of

the Aśvins, the physicists, that they be prohibited to drink Soma juice.

निर्णयोउर मखे शक कतिथ्वः सर्वेद्वतैः ।

ग्राह्यिण्याम्बहं सोमं कृती तौ सोमपो मया ॥ 56 ॥

Please reply. O Indra! This point must be settled by all the Devas here. I have promised to make them drink the Soma juice in this sacrifice.

प्रेरितोउसी मया राजा मखाय मघवान्कित ।

एतदर्थ कक्रियामि सन्यं मे वनं विषो ॥ 57 ॥

To keep my word I have initiated the King in this sacrifice. I will have my word fulfilled; there is no doubt in this.

अभ्यापुकृतं शक्र यथा दर्तं नवं वयः ।

तस्मात्युपकातरतु कंतवः सर्वथा मया ॥ 58 ॥

O Indra! They have given me my youth and bestowed my eyes and have done me great good. I will also do good to them to my best."

इन्व जवाच

चिकित्सकी कृतावेति नास्वी निदिति सुर्गै: ।

उभावेति न सोमाई मां गृहाणैलयोर्भून ।। ५९ ॥

Indra said: “The Devas have appointed these Devas their Physicians; therefore they are looked down upon in the society; so they are unfit to drink Soma. You need not make them drink Some.”

च्छवन उवाच

अहल्याजार संवच्छ कॉपं चाठा निर्वर्कम् ।

खुञ्ज किं हिं ती सत्यौं न सोमाहौं सुतामकजी ॥ 60 ॥

एवं विवादे समुपस्थिते च

न कोर्पि वाचं तमुवाच भूप ।

ग्रहं तवोभार्वितिमन्तेजाः

संग्रहवायास तोवावेलेन ॥ 61 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागते महापुराणे सतमककन्ने

पशो3भाव: 11 6 11

Cyavana spoke: “O Indra! You have adulterated yourself with Athalyā; why are you, then, giving vent to your anger thus in vain. You have treacherously murdered Vṛtāsura; it is it is quite inappropriate for a vicious person like you to say that the Aśvins cannot have the right to drink Soma.

This is quite impossible." O King! On the springing of this dispute, no body spoke to Indra. The illustrious Bhārgava, then, made them accept the Soma juice.

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Seventh Book on granting the Aśvins the right to drink the Soma juice in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevbībhāgavatam

