CHAPTER XV

On the Slaying of Bidjalākṣa and Asilomā

यास उवाच

तौ तया निह्तौ शुत्वा महिषो विस्मयान्वतः ।

प्रेययामास दैतेयांस्तद्धार्थं महात्बलान् ॥ १ ॥

असिलोमपिब्डाताबम्पमुखान्. युद्धुदम्बित् ।

सै-येन महत युक्तान्यायुधान्यपरिच्छिदान् ॥ 2 ॥

ते तत्र ददूर्दैर्वीं सिंहस्योपरि संस्थिताम् ।

अशदाशुभुजां दिव्यां खड्गखेटकधारिणीम् ॥ 3 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the two Demons slain by the Devi, Mahisāśura became very much amazed and sent the powerful Asilomā and Bidālāksa and the other Dānavas to the battle to kill the Devi. The Dānavas, all very skilled in the art of warfare, marched out for battle, fully equipped with weapons and clad in armour, and

Book V Chapter XV

well attended by vast army. They arrived there and saw the Divine Mother with eighteen hands taking Her stand on a lion, with axes and shields in Her hands.

असिलोमाउगतो गत्वा तामुवाच ह्स्त्रिक्ष

विन्यावन्तः शगान्तो देवीं दैत्यवधोत्तात् ॥ 4 ॥

The calm-tempered Asilomā appeared before the Devi ready to kill the Daityas, saluted Her and smilingly said:

असिलोमोवाच

देवि बूहि वच: सत्यं किमर्थसिंह सुन्दरि ।

आगतासि किम्बवं वा हिंस दैवास्त्रियगमः ॥ 5 ॥

O Devi! Why have You come here? and what for You are killing these faultless Daityas? O Beautiful One! Tell all these to me truly. We will make treaty with you.

कारण कथायदा त्वं त्वया सक्यं करोम्यस् ।

काछ्जं मणिरलातिन भाजपातिन वराशि च ॥ 6 ॥

Take gold, jewels, pearls and any other excellent things that you like and retire from the field as early as passible.

यानीच्छसि वरातोहे गृहीत्वा गच्छ माधिसम् ।

किमर्थं युद्धकामासि दुःखसन्तापवर्धनम् ॥ ७ ॥

Why do you like this warfare tending to increase misery; the wise persons say that it leads to the destruction of all happiness.

कवयवित्त महात्मानो युद्धं सर्वसुखापदम् ।

कोमपेजरीत ते देहे पुर्णापातासहे भुगम् ॥ ८ ॥

Your body is very delicate; it cannot bear the stroke of flowers even; then why are you suffering the stroke of weapons on your bodies; I am very much puzzled to think these things.

क्रियर्ष शाखसंपातानसहीति विरितिमये ।

बागुदीयर फलं शगत्ति: सततं सुखावेयनम् ॥ ९ ॥

See! The cleverness is judged when peace is the result thereof; for it leads always to happiness.

तकिषायं दुःखहुर्ने संग्रामं कर्तिमिष्ठसि ।

संसारोउ सुरुं प्राहुं दुःखं हेयमिति स्थिति: ॥ १० ॥

Then why are you liking to fight which will lead only to pain and suffering. Happiness is only

to be had and pain is to be avoided; this is the rule.

तत्सुंई त्रिविंध प्रोक्ते निव्यानित्यप्रभेदतः।

आमजानं सुखं नित्यमनित्वं भोगतं स्युतम् ॥ ११ ॥ 

O Devi! That happiness is again of two kinds: Permanent and transitory. The pleasure that comes out of the knowledge of Ātmaṇjāna is permanent and that which is derived from enjoyments is transitory; these who know truly the Veda Śāstra, they avoid this transitory pleasure of enjoyments.

नाशामकं तु तत्यायं वेदग्राहाश्रियैतकैः ।

सौगतानां मतं चेत्वं त्वीकरोयि वरानने ॥ १२ ॥

तथापि यौवनं प्राप्य भुघ्व भोगान्तुसान् ।

पताकीकस्य सन्देहो यदि तेस्ति कुणोदिरि ॥ 13 ॥

If you follow the opinion of the Mimānśasakas and do not believe in the existence of future births, even then you ought not to fight; when you have got this youthful age, you ought to enjoy the excellent pleasures in this world. O One of lean stomach!

स्वर्गभोगपरा नित्यं भव भाभिमि भृतले ।

अनित्य यौवनं दैहे झालेति सुकृतं चोर्त ॥ 14 ॥

And if you doubt in the existence of the other worlds after death, even then you ought to desert from fighting and perform, in this life, such actions as will lead you to the attainment of Heavens.

परोपतपर्नं कार्य वर्जनीयं सदा बुद्धे: ।

असिरोधेन कतिथ्यं धर्मार्थकामसेवन् ॥ १५ ॥

This fully developed womanhood is transient; knowing this do virtuous actions always; the wise ones always avoid tormenting others; thus one ought to perform things not contradictory to Dharma, Artha and Kāma.

तस्मामपि कत्थापि माते धर्मे सदा कुः ।

अपराध विंना दैत्यान्क्मवानारयसेप्रिक्के ॥ 16 ॥

Therefore, O Auspicious One! Do You also things virtuous always. O Mother! Why are you killing these Daityas without any cause? There is, again, the feeling of mercy; the lives again of all are dependent on Truth.

दया धार्मिक्य देहोर्सित सने प्राणा: प्रकीर्तिता:।

तस्माद्या तथा सत्यं रक्षणीयं सदा बुधैः ॥ 17 ॥

कारणं चद सुश्रोगि दानवानां चधे तव ।

Therefore the sages always preserve piety, mercy and Truth. O Beautiful One! Then what is the use in Your killings these Demons? Please say explicitly on this point.

देव्यग्राव

त्वया पृष्ट महाबाहो किमर्थमित्व चागता ॥ 18 ॥

तन्दे समप्रवक्षापि हनने च प्रयोजनम् ।

The Devi said: O Powerful one! Hear why I have come here and why I am killing the Daityas? I answer your question on the above points.

विवरापि सदा दैत्य सर्वलोकेषु सर्वदा ॥ 19 ॥

व्यायायीचे च पृतानां पृथसी साक्षिक्षिपि ।

O Demon! I, though merely a spectator, always go about all over the world, seeing the justices and injustices done by the several souls there.

न मे कदापि भोपोच्छा न लोगेने न च वैहिता ॥ 20 ॥

धार्यार्थ विचाराययर संसारे साधुरक्षणम् ।

Never I possess any desire of enjoyment, nor have I greed for anything, nor have I enmity with any creature.

त्रतमितनुं नियतं पालयामि निजं सदा ॥ 21 ॥

सामुन्ता रक्षणं कार्य हन्तवा येप्रमाधावः ।

Only to preserve the virtue and religion and to keep up the righteous, I roam over the worlds. This is My vow and I always adhere to it. To preserve the good and to put down the evil doers is My duty.

देवरसंक्षणं कार्यमवतारैरेनेकशः ॥ 22 ॥

युगे युगे तानेवाहामवताराभिर्भरिं च ।

Many Avañaras are to take their incarnations, cycles after cycles, to preserve the Vedas; therefore I incarnate Myself in yugas after yugas.

महिषस्तु दुराचारो देवान्वे हृतुमुचतः ॥ 23 ॥

ज्ञात्याई नदायार्थ भोः प्राणात्रिय ताक्षसामुना ।

Now the wicked Mahisa is ready to destroy the Devas; seeing this, I have come hereto kill him.

तं हनिष्ये दुराचारं सुरग्रुं महावलम् ॥ 24 ॥

गच्छ वा तिष कामं ल्व सत्यमेदनुदाहून।

I tell you verily that I will slay that vicious powerful Mahisāsura, the enemy of the gods. Knowing this, you remain a depart, as you desire. बूहि वा ते दुरात्मानं राजानं महिषीस्तुम् ॥ 25 ॥

किमान्यान्येषयस्य स्वयं युद्धे कुरूब ह ।

Or you can go to Mahisa, that impious son of a she-buffalo, and say what is the use in sending other Asuras to the battle; he can come himself and fight.

सन्धिकृत्पमिछास्त सित्त जास्तव मया सह ॥ 26 ॥

सर्वे गछन्तु पालातं वैरं तवक्ता यथासुतम् ।

If your king likes to make a treaty, then let him avoid his enmity with the Devas and go down to the Patāla.

देवद्रव्यं तु यक्स्विवद्भुतं जित्वा रोण सुतम् ॥ 27 ॥

तदाचा यान्तु पातालं प्रकृदो वयं तिहिति ।

Let him return to the Devas whatever he has taken perforce from them and go to the Patāla, where Prahlāda is residing.

व्यास उवाच

तद्धृत्वा वचनं देख्या अस्तिलोमा पुरःस्थिता ॥ 28 ॥

विद्वालासं महावीरं पघ्छ्छ प्रीतिपुर्वेकम् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the Devi's words, Asilomā asked gladly, before the Devi, the powerful Asura Bidālākshya:

अस्तिलोगोवाच

शुतं तेउढ विडालाक्षयं भवान्यां कवितं च चत् ॥ 29 ॥

एवं गते किं कर्त्वोय विग्रहः सन्धिरेव वा ।

Well, Būjalāksya! You have heard just now all what the Devi has said; now are we to observe treaty for declare war. What are we to do under the circumstances?

विश्वालाक्य उवाच

न सन्धिकामोर्स नृयोर्भिमानी

युढ़े न मृत्युं निवर्त हि जान्न ।

दृष्टा हातान्येरत तथाउस्मादैवं

है कॉंसितक्रमितुं समर्धेः ॥ 30 ॥

Book V Chapter XV

Bidālāksya said: Our king knows full well that his death will certainly take place in the battle; knowing this, he is not willing to make peace, out of his egoism and vanity. He is seeing before him daily the deaths of the Dānavas and still he has sent us to battle. Who can overcome the destiny?

“दुः:साध्य एवारित्वर् सेवकानां

धर्मे: सदा मानविवर्लितानाम् ।

आज्ञापरणां बशवर्तिकानां

पाझ्ञालिकानामिव सूत्रभेदात् ॥"

गत्वा ककं तस्य पुरस्त्वया च

मयास्पि वक्च्यमिदं कठोरण ॥ 31 ॥

The duty of a servant is a very difficult one; he will have to be always submissive and obedient, without caring the least for his own self-respect; just as the dancing dolls are completely under the hands of the actors and their movements vary according to the pulling of the wires employed in making them dance.

गच्छन्तु पातालमितघ सर्वे

दन्वास्य रन्तानि धर्न सुराणण ।

"प्रियं हि वक्तव्यमसत्येवेन न

च प्रियं स्यादितकृतु चाणितम् ॥

सत्यं प्रियं नो भवतीह कामं

मौनं तते बुद्धिमतां प्रतिश्छिन् ।”

न फल्यावक्येः प्रतिविधानीयो

राजा तु वैरिसिति नीतिशासून् ॥ 32 ॥

How can we then go to our master and say hard words as he would give away to the Devas all the gems and jewels and go down to Pātāla with other Dānavas. One considers it one's duty to speak pleasant words though untrue; true words cannot be beneficial; true and at the same time beneficial words are very rare in this world; at such critical cases, one ought to remain silent.

न नूनं तर मतन्थं हितं वा वकुमाद्वात् ।

ग्रुं बार्थि गते राजा कोयपुको भविष्यति ॥ 33 ॥

Especially heroes ought never to excite their kings by useless words; this is the essence of politics. We should never go and advise our king

with eagerness what is best or to ask advice from him about such things; the king would then certainly be very angry.

इति सच्छित्य कल्लेय युद्ध प्राणस्य संशये ।

स्वामिकार्य परं मत्वा मरणं तृणतस्था ॥ 34 ॥

Therefore we ought to do our duties to the king, even if our lives be at stake. To consider our lives as nothing and to fight for our king are what is best for us.

व्यास उवाच

इति सर्किष्य ती वीरी संस्थिती युद्धतत्परी ।

धनुबाणधारी तत्र सत्रद्वी रथसङ्गती ॥ 35 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus thinking, the two heroes then wore their coats of armour, mounted on their chariots and, with bows and arrows in their hands, became ready for fight.

प्रधाने तु बिडालाश्म: सन दाणानुमोगेश ह ।

असिलोगा स्थितो दूरे प्रेशकः परमाखिति ॥ 36 ॥

First Bādālāksya shot seven arrows; the great warrior Asilomā stood aloof at a distance as a mere witness.

चिछ्छेते तांतधा प्राप्तानीवका खशैर: शगान ।

विद्वालायं त्रिभिबार्णीज्ञान च शिलाहिति: ॥ 37 ॥

The Divine Mother cut off those arrows to pieces with Her arrows, no sooner they reached Her, and then shot at Bādālāksya three arrows sharpened on stone.

ग्राय वाण्याध्यां दैत्य: पपात समारांगे ।

मृहितो5ध ममारगरु दानवो दैवयोगतः ॥ 38 ॥

The demon Bādālāksya fell sensless by these arrows on the battlefields and after a short while died, as if ordained by Fate.

बिडालाशूं हर्ते बृद्धवा रणे शक्तिशाल्यतः ।

असिलोमा धनुष्याणि: संश्वितो युद्धतपर: ॥ 39 ॥

Seeing Bādālakṣya thus dead, Asilomā took up his bows and arrows and came up, for fight. The hero, then, raising his left hand, said briefly, thus:

क्रधै सक्यं करं कृत्ता तानुशच चिन्ते वचः ।

देवि ज्ञानामि मरणं दानवानां दुरात्मनाम् ॥ 40 ॥

तथापि युद्धं कतैलं पराधीनेन वे मया ।

महिषो मन्दयुद्धिक्र त्र नाजाति प्रियाधिके ॥ 4 1 ॥

"O Devi! I know that death is inevitable to the Dānavas; still I am ready to fight; for I am dependent; and Mahiṣa is of very dull intellect; he cannot make any distinction between what is really good and what is merely pleasant.

तद्यो नैव कत्क्यं हितं चैवाधिरमं मा ।

मतैवं वीरधर्मेण शुभं वा.प्यशुभं भवेत ॥ 42 ॥

दैवमेव परं मये धिक्यौकसमयकम् ।

पत्नित दानवास्तूर्ण तव जाणहता भृति ॥ 43 ॥

I will never speak before him unpleasant words, though beneficial. Rather I will sacrifice my life in the battlefield than advise him anything, be that auspicious or inauspicious.

इतुल्बता शाख्यिं स चकार दानवोतमः ।

देवी चिच्छेते तान्वाणीरुपातंति निजानिति ॥ 4 4 ॥

The Dānavas are being killed no sooner they are shot at by your arrows; seeing this I consider Fate superior to all.

अन्यैर्विष्याथ तं तृणमिसलोमानगायूरैः ।

बीक्षिताप्रमरसैधुः कोपपुणान्ना तदा ॥ 4 5 ॥

गुर्णुः दानवः कामं बाणैर्वेब्रतुः किल ।

स्ववुद्धीयधारः स प्रपुस्तः किंगुको यथा ॥ 46 ॥

Prowess does not lead to any success; Fie on one's prowess! Thus saying, the Demon began to shower arrows after arrows on the Devi; the Devi, too, cut them to pieces with Her own arrows before they came to Her; and, becoming angry, soon pierced him with arrows. The Devas witnessed this sight from above.

असिलोमा गदां गुर्वीं लौहीमुचाय्य वेगतः ।

दूराव चीछकां कोपालिंस्ते भूर्टि जघान द ॥ 47 ॥

The body of the Demon was then covered with cuts and wounds; blood began to flow from them; the Demon consequently began to shine like the jovial Kinśuka tree.

सिंहोपि नखत्थातैस्तं द्वारा भुर्जाते ।

अगणस्य गदायातं कृते तेन बलीयास ॥ 48 ॥

Asilomā then lifted aloft his heavy iron club

and ran after Candikā and hurt the lion on his head with anger.

उत्पल तत्सा दैत्यो गदायाणिः सुदारुणिः ।

सिंहमूर्दिन समाकष्ठ जायन गदायांबिकाम् ॥ 49 ॥

Not caring at all this severe stroke of the club inflicted by that powerful Demon, the lion tore asunder his arms with his claws.

कृतं तेन प्रहारं तु वढ्यस्चा विश्रापणे ।

खदुरेन शिताधोगेश गिरिश्छ्छेद कण्ठतः ॥ 50 ॥

Then that dreadful Demon leapt with club in his hand and got up the shoulder of the lion and hit the Devi very hard.

छिले शिरसि दैलेन्द्र: परपात तरसा शिता।

हाहाकारो महानासीलैन्ये तस्य दुरात्मनः ॥ 51 ॥

O King! The Devi, then, baffled the hit and cut off the Demon's head with Her sharp axe.

जय देवीति देवतानं त्रुहुर्षुर्गवाद्विकवाम ।

देवदुवुभयो नेतुर्गुश्र नृप किकराः ॥ 52 ॥

The head being thus severed, the Demon was thrown on the ground with great force; seeing this, a general cry of distress arose among his soldiers.

मित्तो दानवी वीध्य पतितो च राजांगो ।

निह्ता: सैनिका: सर्वे तत्र केसरीणा बलात् ॥ 53 ॥

The Devas shouted aloud “Victory to the Devi” and chanted hymns to Her. The drums of the Devas resounded and the Gandharvas began to dance in great joy.

भक्षिताक्ष तथा केचित्रिज्ञेशं तरुणं कृमम् ।

भन्ना: केचित्रता मन्दा महिंधं प्रति दुःखिता ॥ 54 ॥

Seeing the two Demons thus lying dead on the battlefield, the lion killed some of the remaining forces by his sheer strength and ate up others, and made the battle field void of any persons. Some fled away in great distress to Mahisāsura.

चुकुगू कनुदृष्टि जाहि जाहिति भाषणैः ।

असिलोमविद्धालाख्यौ निर्हती नृपसत्तम ॥ 5 5 ॥

अन्ये ये सैनिका राजन्सिद्धेन भक्षिताश्रु ते ।

एवं बुबन्तो राजानं तदा चक्रकु शेजम्मू ॥ 56 ॥

The fugitives began to cry aloud “Save us, save us” and said, “O King! Asilomā and Bīdalākṣya

Book V Chapter XVI

are both slain; and those soldiers that remained were eaten up by the lion." Thus they told and plunged the King in an ocean of dire distress.

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तेषां महिषो रुर्मनास्तदा ।

वधूव चित्ताकृलितो विमान दुःखसंयुतः ॥ 57 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पश्रमकक्रचे

पडवशो3ध्याः: 11 15 11

Hearing their words, Mahisa became absent minded through pain and grief and began to think over the matter with great anxiety.

Here ends the Filteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the slaying of Bídalākṣa and Asilomā in

Srimaddevithbagavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter XVI

