[Ch 15 Verse 1-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the two Demons slain by the Devi, Mahisāśura became very much amazed and sent the powerful Asilomā and Bidālāksa and the other Dānavas to the battle to kill the Devi. The Dānavas, all very skilled in the art of warfare, marched out for battle, fully equipped with weapons and clad in armour, and well attended by vast army. They arrived there and saw the Divine Mother with eighteen hands taking Her stand on a lion, with axes and shields in Her hands.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing the two Demons slain by the Devī, Mahiṣāsura became very much amazed and sent the powerful Asilomā and Viḍālākṣa and the other Dānavas to the battle to kill the Devī. The Dānavas, all very skilled in the art of warfare, marched on for battle, fully equipped with weapons and clad in armour, and we attended by a vast army. They arrived there and saw the Divine Mother with eighteen hands taking Her stand on a lion, with axes and shield in Her hands.

[Ch 15 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The calm-tempered Asilomā appeared before the Devi ready to kill the Daityas, saluted Her and smilingly said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► The calm-tempered Asilomā appeared before the Devī ready to kill the Daityas, saluted Her and smilingly said :--

[Ch 15 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devi! Why have You come here? and what for You are killing these faultless Daityas? O Beautiful One! Tell all these to me truly. We will make treaty with you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devī! Why have You come here? and what for You are killing these faultless Daityas? O Beautiful One! Tell all these to me truly. We will make treaty with you.

[Ch 15 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Take gold, jewels, pearls and any other excellent things that you like and retire from the field as early as passible.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Take gold, jewels, pearls and any other excellent things the you like and retire from the field as early as passible.

[Ch 15 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Why do you like this warfare tending to increase misery; the wise persons say that it leads to the destruction of all happiness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Why do you like this warfare tending to increase misery; the wise persons say that it leads to the destruction of all happiness.

[Ch 15 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Your body is very delicate; it cannot bear the stroke of flowers even; then why are you suffering the stroke of weapons on your bodies; I am very much puzzled to think these things.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Your body is very delicate; it cannot bear the stroke of flowers even; then why are you suffering the stroke of weapons on your bodies; I am very much puzzled to think these things.

[Ch 15 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See! The cleverness is judged when peace is the result thereof; for it leads always to happiness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► See! The cleverness is judged when peace is the result thereof; for it leads always to happiness.

[Ch 15 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then why are you liking to fight which will lead only to pain and suffering. Happiness is only to be had and pain is to be avoided; this is the rule.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then why are you liking to fight which will lead only to pain and suffering. Happiness is only to be had and pain is to be avoided; this is the rule.

[Ch 15 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devi! That happiness is again of two kinds: Permanent and transitory. The pleasure that comes out of the knowledge of Ātmaṇjāna is permanent and that which is derived from enjoyments is transitory; these who know truly the Veda Śāstra, they avoid this transitory pleasure of enjoyments.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devī! That happiness is again of two kinds :-- Permanent and transitory. The pleasure that comes out of the knowledge of Atmajñān is permanent and that which is derived from enjoyments is transitory; these who know truly the Veda Śāstra, they avoid this transitory pleasure of enjoyments.

[Ch 15 Verse 12-13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If you follow the opinion of the Mimānśasakas and do not believe in the existence of future births, even then you ought not to fight; when you have got this youthful age, you ought to enjoy the excellent pleasures in this world. O One of lean stomach!
NEW CORR ENG ──► If you follow the opinion of the Mimāmsakas and do not believe in the existence of future births, even then you ought not to fight; when you have got this youthful age, you ought to enjoy the excellent pleasures in this world. O One of lean stomach!

[Ch 15 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And if you doubt in the existence of the other worlds after death, even then you ought to desert from fighting and perform, in this life, such actions as will lead you to the attainment of Heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And if you doubt in the existence of the other worlds after death, even then you ought to desert from fighting and perform, in this life, such actions as will lead you to the attainment of Heavens.

[Ch 15 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This fully developed womanhood is transient; knowing this do virtuous actions always; the wise ones always avoid tormenting others; thus one ought to perform things not contradictory to Dharma, Artha and Kāma.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This fully developed womanhood is transient; knowing this do virtuous actions always; the wise ones always avoid tormenting others; thus one ought to perform things not contradictory to Dharma, Artha and Kama.

[Ch 15 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Auspicious One! Do You also things virtuous always. O Mother! Why are you killing these Daityas without any cause? There is, again, the feeling of mercy; the lives again of all are dependent on Truth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Auspicious One! Do You also things virtuous always. O Mother! Why are you killing these Daityas without any cause? There is, again, the feeling of mercy; the lives again of all are dependent on Truth.

[Ch 15 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore the sages always preserve piety, mercy and Truth. O Beautiful One! Then what is the use in Your killings these Demons? Please say explicitly on this point.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore the sages always preserve piety, mercy and Truth. O Beautiful One! Then what is the use in Your killing these Demons? Please say explicitly on this point.

[Ch 15 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi said: O Powerful one! Hear why I have come here and why I am killing the Daityas? I answer your question on the above points.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī said :-- O Powerful one! Hear why I have come here and why I am killing the Daityas? I answer your question on the above points.

[Ch 15 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Demon! I, though merely a spectator, always go about all over the world, seeing the justices and injustices done by the several souls there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Demon! I, though merely a spectator, always go about all over the worlds, seeing the justices and injustices done by the several souls there.

[Ch 15 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Never I possess any desire of enjoyment, nor have I greed for anything, nor have I enmity with any creature.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Never I possess any desire of enjoyment, nor have I greed for anything, nor have I enmity with any creature.

[Ch 15 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Only to preserve the virtue and religion and to keep up the righteous, I roam over the worlds. This is My vow and I always adhere to it. To preserve the good and to put down the evil doers is My duty.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Only to preserve the virtue and religion and to keep up the righteous, I roam over the worlds. This is My vow and I always adhere to it. To preserve the good and to put down the evil doers is My duty.

[Ch 15 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Many Avañaras are to take their incarnations, cycles after cycles, to preserve the Vedas; therefore I incarnate Myself in yugas after yugas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Many Avataras are to take their incarnations, cycles after cycles, to preserve the Vedas; therefore I incarnate Myself in yugas after yugas.

[Ch 15 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now the wicked Mahisa is ready to destroy the Devas; seeing this, I have come hereto kill him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now the wicked Mahiṣa is ready to destroy the Devas; seeing this, I have come here to kill him.

[Ch 15 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Or you can go to Mahisa, that impious son of a she-buffalo, and say what is the use in sending other Asuras to the battle; he can come himself and fight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Or you can go to Mahiṣa, that impious son of a she-buffalo, and say what is the use in sending other Asuras to the battle; he can come himself and fight.

[Ch 15 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If your king likes to make a treaty, then let him avoid his enmity with the Devas and go down to the Patāla.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If your king likes to make a treaty, then let him avoid his enmity with the Devas and go down to the Pātāla.

[Ch 15 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Let him return to the Devas whatever he has taken perforce from them and go to the Patāla, where Prahlāda is residing.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Let him return to the Devas whatever he has taken perforce from them and go to the Pātāla, where Prahlāda is residing.

[Ch 15 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the Devi's words, Asilomā asked gladly, before the Devi, the powerful Asura Bidālākshya:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the Devī’s words, Asilomā asked gladly, before the Devī, the powerful Asura Viḍālākṣa :--

[Ch 15 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Well, Būjalāksya! You have heard just now all what the Devi has said; now are we to observe treaty for declare war. What are we to do under the circumstances?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Well, Viḍālākṣa! You have heard just now all what the Devī has said; now are we to observe treaty or declare war. What are we to do under the circumstances?

[Ch 15 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bidālāksya said: Our king knows full well that his death will certainly take place in the battle; knowing this, he is not willing to make peace, out of his egoism and vanity. He is seeing before him daily the deaths of the Dānavas and still he has sent us to battle. Who can overcome the destiny?
NEW CORR ENG ──► said :-- Our king knows full well that his death will certainly take place in the battle; knowing this, he is not willing to make peace, out of his egoism and vanity. He is seeing before him daily the deaths of the Dānavas and still he has sent us to battle. Who can overcome the destiny?

[Ch 15 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The duty of a servant is a very difficult one; he will have to be always submissive and obedient, without caring the least for his own self-respect; just as the dancing dolls are completely under the hands of the actors and their movements vary according to the pulling of the wires employed in making them dance.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The duty of a servant is a very difficult one; he will have to be always submissive and obedient, without caring the least for his own self-respect; just as the dancing dolls are completely under the hands of the actors and their movements vary according to the pulling of the wires employed in making them dance.

[Ch 15 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How can we then go to our master and say hard words as he would give away to the Devas all the gems and jewels and go down to Pātāla with other Dānavas. One considers it one's duty to speak pleasant words though untrue; true words cannot be beneficial; true and at the same time beneficial words are very rare in this world; at such critical cases, one ought to remain silent.
NEW CORR ENG ──► How can we then go to our master and say such hard words as he would give away to the Devas all the gems and jewels and go down to Pātāla with other Dānavas. One considers it one’s duty to speak pleasant words though untrue; true words cannot be beneficial; true and at the same time beneficial words are very rare in this world; at such critical cases, one ought to remain silent.

[Ch 15 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Especially heroes ought never to excite their kings by useless words; this is the essence of politics. We should never go and advise our king with eagerness what is best or to ask advice from him about such things; the king would then certainly be very angry.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Especially heroes ought never to excite their kings by useless words; this is the essence of politics. We should never go and advise our king with eagerness what is best or to ask advice from him about such things; the king would then certainly be very angry.

[Ch 15 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore we ought to do our duties to the king, even if our lives be at stake. To consider our lives as nothing and to fight for our king are what is best for us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore we ought to do our duties to the king, even if our lives be at stake. To consider our lives as nothing and to fight for our king are what is best for us.

[Ch 15 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Thus thinking, the two heroes then wore their coats of armour, mounted on their chariots and, with bows and arrows in their hands, became ready for fight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Thus thinking, the two heroes then wore their coats of armour, mounted on their chariots and, with bows and arrows in their hands, became ready for fight.

[Ch 15 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► First Bādālāksya shot seven arrows; the great warrior Asilomā stood aloof at a distance as a mere witness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► First Viḍālākṣa shot seven arrows; the great warrior Asilomā stood aloof at a distance as a mere witness.

[Ch 15 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Divine Mother cut off those arrows to pieces with Her arrows, no sooner they reached Her, and then shot at Bādālāksya three arrows sharpened on stone.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Divine Mother cut off those arrows to pieces with Her arrows, no sooner they reached Her, and then shot at Viḍālākṣa three arrows sharpened on stone.

[Ch 15 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The demon Bādālāksya fell sensless by these arrows on the battlefields and after a short while died, as if ordained by Fate.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The demon Vidālāksa fell senselss by these arrows on the battle-field and after a short while died, as if ordained by Fate.

[Ch 15 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing Bādālakṣya thus dead, Asilomā took up his bows and arrows and came up, for fight. The hero, then, raising his left hand, said briefly, thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing Viḍālākṣa thus dead, Asilomā took up his bows and arrows and came up, for fight. The hero, then, raising his left hand, said briefly, thus :--

[Ch 15 Verse 40-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O Devi! I know that death is inevitable to the Dānavas; still I am ready to fight; for I am dependent; and Mahiṣa is of very dull intellect; he cannot make any distinction between what is really good and what is merely pleasant.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “O Devī! I know that death is inevitable to the Dānavas; still I am ready to fight; for I am dependent and Mahiṣa is of very dull intellect; he cannot make any distinction between what is really good and what is merely pleasant.

[Ch 15 Verse 42-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I will never speak before him unpleasant words, though beneficial. Rather I will sacrifice my life in the battlefield than advise him anything, be that auspicious or inauspicious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will never speak before him unpleasant words, though beneficial. Rather I will sacrifice my life in the battle-field than advise him anything, be that auspicious or inauspicious.

[Ch 15 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Dānavas are being killed no sooner they are shot at by your arrows; seeing this I consider Fate superior to all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Dānavas are being killed no sooner they are shot at by your arrows; seeing this I consider Fate superior to all.

[Ch 15 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Prowess does not lead to any success; Fie on one's prowess! Thus saying, the Demon began to shower arrows after arrows on the Devi; the Devi, too, cut them to pieces with Her own arrows before they came to Her; and, becoming angry, soon pierced him with arrows. The Devas witnessed this sight from above.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Prowess does not lead to any success; Fie on one’s prowess! Thus saying, the Demon began to shower arrows after arrows on the Devī; the Devī, too, cut them to pieces with Her own arrows before they came to Her; and, becoming angry, soon pierced him with arrows. The Devas witnessed this sight from above.

[Ch 15 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The body of the Demon was then covered with cuts and wounds; blood began to flow from them; the Demon consequently began to shine like the jovial Kinśuka tree.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The body of the Demon was then covered with cuts and wounds; blood began to flow from them; the Demon consequently began to shine like the jovial Kimsuka tree.

[Ch 15 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Asilomā then lifted aloft his heavy iron club and ran after Candikā and hurt the lion on his head with anger.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Asilomā then lifted aloft his heavy iron club and ran after Caṇḍikā and hurt the lion on his head with anger.

[Ch 15 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Not caring at all this severe stroke of the club inflicted by that powerful Demon, the lion tore asunder his arms with his claws.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Not caring at all this severe stroke of the club inflicted by that powerful Demon, the lion tore asunder his arms with his claws.

[Ch 15 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then that dreadful Demon leapt with club in his hand and got up the shoulder of the lion and hit the Devi very hard.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then that dreadful Demon leapt with club in his hand and got up the shoulder of the lion and hit the Devī very hard.

[Ch 15 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The Devi, then, baffled the hit and cut off the Demon's head with Her sharp axe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The Devī, then, baffled the hit and cut off the Demon’s head with Her sharp axe.

[Ch 15 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The head being thus severed, the Demon was thrown on the ground with great force; seeing this, a general cry of distress arose among his soldiers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The head being thus severed, the Demon was thrown on the ground with great force; seeing this, a general cry of distress arose among his soldiers.

[Ch 15 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas shouted aloud “Victory to the Devi” and chanted hymns to Her. The drums of the Devas resounded and the Gandharvas began to dance in great joy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas shouted aloud “Victory to the Devī” and chanted hymns to Her. The drums of the Devas resounded and the Gandarbhas began to dance in great joy.

[Ch 15 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the two Demons thus lying dead on the battlefield, the lion killed some of the remaining forces by his sheer strength and ate up others, and made the battle field void of any persons. Some fled away in great distress to Mahisāsura.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the two Demons thus lying dead on the battlefield, the lion killed some of the remaining forces by his sheer strength and ate up others, and made the battlefield void of any persons. Some fled away in great distress to Mahiṣāsura.

[Ch 15 Verse 55-56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The fugitives began to cry aloud “Save us, save us” and said, “O King! Asilomā and Bīdalākṣya are both slain; and those soldiers that remained were eaten up by the lion." Thus they told and plunged the King in an ocean of dire distress.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The fugitives began to cry aloud, “Save us, save us” and said, “O King! Asilomā and Viḍālākṣa are both slain; and those soldiers that remained were eaten up by the lion.” Thus they told and plunged the King in an ocean of dire distress.

[Ch 15 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing their words, Mahisa became absent minded through pain and grief and began to think over the matter with great anxiety. Here ends the Filteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the slaying of Bídalākṣa and Asilomā in Srimaddevithbagavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing their words, Mahiṣa became absent minded through pain and grief and began to think over the matter with great anxiety. Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the slaying of Viḍālākṣa and Asilomā in Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
