CHAPTER XVIII

On the Union of Śaṅkhacūḍa with Tulasi

नारायण ज्ञाच

तुलसी परितृघा च सुचाय भृह्मानसा ।

नवयीवनसंपत्रा बृध्यजवसंगाना ॥ १ ॥

चिश्रेप पंचबाणश्र पढ़ बाणांश्र तां प्रति ।

पूषायुघ्न सा दर्शा पूषचेदनचर्चित्ति ॥ २ ॥

Nārāyana said: Thus highly pleased, Tulasī went to sleep with a gladdened-heart. She the daughter of Vṛsadhvaja, was then an her blooming youth and while asleep, the Cupid, the God of five arrows, shot at her five arrows (by which one gets enchanted and swooned). Though the Devi was smeared with sandal paste and She slept on a bed strewn with flowers, her body was felt as if being burnt.

पुलकाधितसर्वाँजी कंपितारक्लोचना ।

क्षणं सा गृछकता प्राप क्षणं मुढ़ीमवाग व् ॥ 3 ॥

क्षणमुहित्नातं प्राप क्षणं तंत्रा सुखाखतम् ।

क्षणं च दह्नं प्राप क्षणं प्राप प्रसन्ततम् ॥ 4 ॥

क्षणं सा चेतनां प्राप क्षणं प्राप विष्णवणताम् ।

Out of joy the hairs stood on their ends all over her body; her eyes were reddened and her body began to quiver. Sometimes She left uneasiness, sometimes dryness; sometimes She got faint; sometimes drowsiness and sometimes again pleasantness; sometimes she became conscious, sometimes sorrowful.

त्रिभूतंती क्षणं तल्पाद्धर्त्ती निकटे क्षणम् ॥ 5 ॥

घर्मती क्षणमुद्वगाधिवसती क्षणं पुनः ।

क्षणमेव समुद्वगात्युषाय पुनरेव सा ॥ 6 ॥

Sometimes she got up from her bed; sometimes she sat; and sometimes she fell again to sleep. The flower-bed, strewn with sandalpaste, appeared to

her full of thorns; nice delicious fruits and cold water appeared to her like poison.

पुष्पचेदन्तत्वं च तद्वध्वारितिकंटकम् ।

विषधारि सुखं दिख्य सुंदरं च फलं जलम् ॥ ७ ॥

निलयं च विलाकारं सुक्ष्मवस्वं हुताशनः ।

सिंदुपयकं चैव जगतुल्यं च दुःखदम् ॥ ८ ॥

Her house appeared to her like a hole in a ground and her fine garments seemed to her like fire. The mark of Sindūra on her forehead appeared, as it were, a boil, a sore. She began to see in her dreams that one beautiful, well clothed, humorous, young man with smile in his lips, appeared to her.

क्षणं ददर्शं तंत्रायां सुवेयं पुर्वं सती ।

सुन्दरं च युवानं च सस्मितं रसिकेश्वरम् ॥ 9 ॥

चन्दोर्नीक्षितसर्वाँं रनभूषणभूषितम् ।

आप्छेदंत माव्यवंति पिंबतं तन्युखांबुजम् ॥ 10 ॥

His body was besmeared with sandal-paste and decked with excellent jewels; garlands of forest flowers were suspending from his neck. Coming there, he was drinking the honey of her lotus face. He was speaking on love themes and on various other sweet topics.

कथवंतं रतिकथां बृहतं मधुरं पुढ़ः ।

संभृक्तवंत तल्पे च समापिल्वधंतीपितन् ॥ १ १ ॥

पुरेनेव तु गछतंलागघ्छतं च सज्रिधौ ।

यांतं क्व यासि प्राणेगश तिहोत्येवमुाच ॥ १ २ ॥

As if he was embracing amorously and enjoying the pleasures of intercourse. After the intercourse he was going away; again he was coming near. The lady was addressing him 'O Darling! O Lord of my heart! Where do you go. Come close.'

पुरंक्षे चेतनां प्राय्य विल्लाला पुनः पुनः ।

एवं सा यौवनं प्राय्य तस्थी तत्रैव नारद ॥ 13 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

गंखचूढो महायोगी जैगीष्ण्यान्नोहारम् ।

कृष्णारंत्रे च संग्राय कृत्वा सिद्धू तु पुरुष्चे ॥ १ ४ ॥

Again when she became conscious, she began to lament bitterly. Thus on entering in her youth, the Devi Tulasi began to live in the hermitage of Badari (Plum fruit, It may signify womb. Those who visit Badari are not to enter again to any womb). On the other hand the great Yogi Śaṅkhacūḍa obtained the Krṣna Mantra from Maharṣi Jaigīṣavya and got siddhi (success) in Puskara Tirtha (sacred place of pilgrimage where one crosses the world).

कवचं च गले बद्धया सर्वमंगलमंगलम् ।

बहाणछ वरं प्राय दधे मनसि वाँतिहत् ॥ 15 ॥

आज्ञा बहण: सोप्रि बदरी च समावयी ।

आगच्छंतं गैखच्छं ददर्शं तुलसी मुने ॥ 16 ॥

नवयीवनसंपंज कामदेवसमप्रभम् ।

སྟेतेतचंकवर्गभं त्वन्यपणभूषित् ॥ 17 ॥

Holding on his neck the Kavaca named Sarvamāngalamaya and obtaining the boon from Brahmā as he desired, he arrived at Badari, by Brahmā's command. The signs of the blooming youth had just begun to be visible in the body of Śankhacūḍa as if the God of Love incarnated in his body; his colour resembled that of white Campakas and all his body was decked with jewelled ornaments.

श्रत्यावर्णिच्न्रास्य शर्येकजलोचनम् ।

त्वसारविन्दिमणीयिनानस्यं मनोहनम् ॥ 18 ॥

त्वकुषडल्युमेन गंडस्थलिगतजन् ।

पारिजाताप्रूसनानां मालावर्ते च सुमितम् ॥ 19 ॥

कस्तूरीकुंकुमारुक्ते सुर्गधिचन्दनात्रितम् ।

His face resembled the autumnal full moon; his eyes were extended like the lotus leaves. The beautiful form was seen to sit in an excellent aerial car, made of pearls and jewels. Two jewel earrings, nice and elegant, suspended up to his cheek; his neck was adorned with Pārijāta flower garlands; and his body was smeared with Kumkum and scented sandal-paste.

सा द्वृषा सक्रियावेनं मुखमाच्छात याससा ॥ 20 ॥

सस्मिता तं निरीक्षेति सकटाक्षं पुनः पुनः ।

बभूवातिनममुखी नवसंगमलजिता ॥ 21 ॥

गरविदुविनिडीकस्वमुखैदुविराजिता ।

अमूल्यरत्निभाग्यावकावलिसंपुता ॥ 22 ॥

मणित्रसारतिनमणिवर्णमंजीरंजिता ।

दधतीं कवीभारं भालनीमाल्यसंपुतम् ॥ 23 ॥

O Nārada! Seeing Śaṅkhacūda coming near to her. Tulasi covered her face by her clothings and she, with a smiling countenance, cast repeatedly sidelong glances on him and bent her head low abashed in the expectation of a free intercourse. How beautiful was that clear face of her! It put down the autumnal moon in the background. The invaluable jewelled ornament were on her toes. Her braid of hair was surrounded by sweet scene Mālatī garlands.

अमूल्यत्निर्माणमाकृतिकुंकल । 

चित्रकुंडल्यमेन गंडस्थलविराजता ॥ 24 ॥

रत्नेत्रसारहोण सनमध्यस्लोजवला ।

रत्नकंकणकेपुराणंकृपणभूषिता ॥ 25 ॥

रत्नांगुलीयकेंदिर्येंगुल्यावलिराजिता ।

द्वुत तो ललितां रव्यां सुगीलां सुंदरी सतीम् ॥ 26 ॥

उवास ततमापीय तु मभुंरं तामुबाच सः ।

The invaluable jewelled wonderful earrings like the shape of a shark were hanging up to her cheek. Extraordinarily beautiful necklaces were seen being suspended to the middle of her breasts and added to the beauty thereof; on her arms and hands were jewelled bangles and conch ornaments; jewelled armlets and on fingers excellent jewelled rings were seen. O Muni! Seeing that lovely beautiful chaste woman of good nature, Śaṅkhacūdā came to her and taking his seat addressed her as follows:

गंखच्छ उवाच

का तां वंक्य च कन्या च धन्या मान्या च घोपिताम् ॥ 27 ॥

का तां मानिन कल्याणि सकंकल्याणाद्विनि ।

मौनीभूते किंकरे मां संभाषां कुक सुवर्ति ॥ 28 ॥

'O Proud One! O Auspicious One! Who are you? Whose daughter are you? You took fortunate

Book IX Chapter XVIII

and blessed among women. I am you silent slave. Talk with me."

इत्येवं वचनं शुत्वा सकामा वामलोचना ।

सस्मिता नववद्वना सकामां तमुवाचा सा ॥ 29 ॥

That beautiful eyed Tulasī, full of love, replied to Śankhacūḍa with smiling countenance and face bent low:

तुलस्यवाच

धर्मेश्वजसुताउई च तपस्यायां तपोवेन ।

तपस्विन्यहं तिहामि करलं चछ्छ यथासुखम् ॥ 30 ॥

कामिनी कुलजातां च रहस्येकाकिनी सतीम् ।

न पृष्ठति कुले जात तुरेवे मे शुती शुतम् ॥ 31 ॥

"I am the daughter of the great king Vṛṣdhvaja. I have come to this forest for tapasyā and am engaged in this. Who are you? What business have you to talk with me? You can go away wherever you like. I have heard in the Śāstras that persons born of a noble family never speak with ladies of a respectable family in privacy.

लंघोटोसत्कुले जातो धर्मशास्थावर्जितः ।

येनाङुत: शुतैरधः स कामीच्छिति कामिनीम् ॥ 32 ॥

आपाताममुतां मत्तामन्तकां पुकपस्य तात् ।

विषकुंभाकारल्पाममुतास्या च सन्ततम् ॥ 33 ॥

हदये क्षुतयागसो शग्रन्यामृत्याषिणीम् ।

स्वकार्यपित्तिचम्प्ते तत्परां सन्ततं च तम् 34 ॥

Only those that are lewd, void of any knowledge in the Dharma Sāstras, void of the Vedic knowledge and who are not Ku linas, like to speak with women in privacy. And those women, too, that look externally beautiful but very passionate and the Death of males, who are sweet tongued but filled with venom in their hearts, those who are sweet externally but like a sword internally, those that are always bent in achieving their own selfish ends and those that become obedient to their husbands for their own selfish ends otherwise behaving as they like, those that are filled inside with dirty things and outside looking pleasant in their faces and eyes, whose characters are pronounced as

defiled, what intelligent learned and noble-minded man can trust them?

कार्योंर्व सातियिणामध्यवैवारणां सदा ।

स्वातमलिनरूपां च प्रसजवदतेक्षणणा ॥ 35 ॥

श्रुती पुर्णो यासां च चरित्रमतिनुषिति ।

तासु को विश्वसेन्द्रातः प्रजावांश दुर्गायः ॥ 36 ॥

Those women do not discriminate who are their friends or who are their enemies; they want always new persons. Whenever they see a man well dressed, they want to satisfy their own passions. And they pretend with great care that they are very chaste.

तासों को वा रिपुर्मिंग प्रार्थयिति नवं नवम् ।

द्वृा सुवेय पुरुषमिच्छन्त हृदय सेवा ॥ 37 ॥

बाहो स्वार्थ सतीचं च ज्ञापयन्ती प्रयन्ततः ।

गश्वत्कामा च राया च कामाधाया मनोहरा ॥ 38 ॥

They are vessels of passion; they always attract the minds of others and they are very enthusiastic in satisfying their own just. They verbally shew that they want other men to go away but at hearts, feelings for intercourse remain preponderant; whenever they see their paramours in private, they laugh and become very glad but externally their shame knows no bounds.

बाहो छलावेदवन्ती ख्वातर्षिभुगनासा ।

कांतं इसती रहसि बाहोउतीव सुलजिता ॥ 39 ॥

मानिनी भैयुनाभावे कोपना कलहांतुगा ।

सुप्रीता भूरिसंभोगात्वल्यमैथुनदुःखिता ॥ 40 ॥

When they do not have their intercourse with their paramours, they become self-conceited; their bodies burn with anger and they begin to quarrel. When their passions are satisfied fully, they become glad and when there is a deficiency in that, they become sorrowful.

सुप्रिधात्यछीततीयादाकांक्षन्ती च मानसे ।

सुन्दरं रसिकं कांतं युवानं गृणिनं सदा ॥ 4 1 ॥

सुतात्यरामधिसन्हे कुबेनी तसिकोपरि ।

प्राणाधिक प्रियनमं संभोगकुशलं प्रियम् ॥ 42 ॥

For the sake of good and sweet food and cold drinks, they want beautiful young persons,

Šrimaddevibbāgavatam

qualified and humorous. They consider witty young persons clever in holding intercourses, more dearly than their sons.

पश्यन्ती पितुतुल्यं च वृद्धं वा बैयुनाक्षमम् ।

कलहं कुबौति शश्वतेन सार्थं सुकोपाने ॥ 4 3 ॥

वचसा भक्ष्यतीं ते सर्ग आयुषिवोल्बणम् ।

दुःसाहस्वलचा च सर्वदोषाश्रया सदा ॥ 4 4 ॥

And if that beloved one becomes incapable or aged, then he is considered as an enemy. Quarrels and anger then ensue. They devour these men as serpents eat rats. They are boldness personified and they are the source of all evils and voice.

बहाविष्णुशिवाहीनां सु:ास्या मोहूकरणी ।

तपोमागांगील शरणवमोक्षात्राकादिका ॥ 4 5 ॥

हरेंपक्तिष्यवहिता सर्वमायाकर्यिका ।

संसाराकामगारे च शरणविभागडलिपणि ॥ 46 ॥

Even Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa remain deluded before them. They cannot find out any clue of their minds. They are the greatest obstacle in the path of tapasyā and the closed doors for liberation. Devotion to Hari cannot reach those women. They are the repositories of Māyā and they hold men fast by iron chains in this world.

इज्जालकल्पा च मिथ्या च सद्णकधीण।

विषयी बाहासीद्यमयो3ूमपितुकृसितम् ॥ 47 ॥

नानाविण्यप्रयुवानामाधारं मलसंयुक्ति ।

दुर्गीधिद्योसंयुक्ते रक्तारकमसंकृतम् ॥ 48 ॥

They are like magicians and false like dreams. They enchant others by external beauty; their lower parts are very ugly and filled with excrements, faeces, of foul scent and very unholy and smeared with blood.

मायास्ता मायिनां च विधाना निमिता पुरा ।

विषयका मुप्रूष्णाममूष्ट्राया उपाधियांत्तम ।। ४ ९ ॥

इत्युक्ता तुलनी तं तु विरया च नारव ।

सस्मतः शंखचूढ्छ प्रवक्तुभुपचक्रमे ॥ ५० ॥

The Creator Bhagavān has created them as such, the Māyā to the Māyāvīs and the venom to those who want liberation, and as invisible to those that want to have them." Thus saying Tulasi stopped.

O Nārada! Śaṅkhacūḍa, then smilingly addressed her as follows:

गंखचूड़ जवाच

त्वया यत्क्रियतं देवि न च सर्वमिलीकम् ।

किंचितत्यमलीकं च किंचिन्मन्ति निशामय ॥ 51 ॥

निर्भितं द्विवधं धारा स्कीरूपं सर्वीमेतृन् ।

कृता कर्ण वातवंचे च प्रग्रस्चा च प्रग्रसितम् ॥ 52 ॥

O Devi! What you have spoken is not wholly false; partly it is true and partly it is false. Now hear. The Creator has created this all-enchanting female form into two parts. One is praiseworthy and the other is not.

लक्ष्मी सरवही दुर्गा सावित्री पतिअक्रिकता ।

सृष्टिमुत्रस्वल्पा च आषा सृष्टिविनिति ॥ 53 ॥

एतासामांगलच च स्त्रीलयं वास्तवं मयूनम् ।

तत्प्रासयं यगोलयं सर्वमंगलकारकम् ॥ 54 ॥

He has created Lakṣmī, Sarasvatī, Durgā, Śāvitrī, and Rādhā and others as the primary causes of creation; so there are the prime creations. Those women that are born of their parts, are auspicious, glorious, and much praiseworthy.

गतत्का देवहुती स्वधा सलाहा च दक्षिणा ।

छायावती गौहेणी च करणानी शकी तथा ॥ 55 ॥

कुबेरस्य च पनी या प्रत्यद्वितिश्छ दितिलिता ।

लोगमुहानस्या च कोटपी तुल्ही तथा ॥ 56 ॥

अह्यातःशंदी मेना ताग मंदोदरी तथा ।

दयमंती वेद्वतरा नाङ्ग च मनसा तथा ॥ 57 ॥

पृष्टिशूलिः सूमितिधा कालिका च सुभूयतः ।

षही मंगलचंडी च मूर्तिशु धर्मकामिनी ॥ 58 ॥

स्वस्ति: श्रद्धा च शांतिशु कांति: क्षांतिस्तवायात ।

निद्रा तंत्र श्रुतिप्यासा संख्या राविंदिनानि च ॥ 59 ॥

संपतिभूतितिकीति च क्रिका शोषा प्रभा शिका ।

यत्क्रीवं च संभृतमुक्तां तु तुये तुये ॥ 60 ॥

Śatarūpā, Devahūti, Svadhā, Dakṣinā Chāyāvatī, Rohinī, Varunāni, Śacī, the wife of Kubera, Diti, Aditi, Lopāmuḍrā, Anasūyā, Kautabhi (Kotari), Tulasī, Ahalyā, Arundhatī, Menā, Tārā, Mandodari, Damayanti, Vedavatī, Gaṅgā, Mānasā, Puṣṭi, Tuṣṭi, Smṛti, Medhā, Vasundharā, Ṣaṣthī, Mangalacandī, Mūrti, wife of

Book IX Chapter XVIII

Dharma. Svasti, Śraddhā; Śānti, Kānti, Kṣānti, Nidrā; Tandrā, Kṣudhā, Pipāsā, Sandhyā, Rātri, Divā, Sampatti, Dhṛti, Kirti, Kriyā, Šobhā, Prabhā, Śivā, and other women born of the Prime Prakṛtis, all are excellent in every Yuga.

कलाकलोशकं च स्ववैर्शयादिकमेव च ।

तद्वप्राश्व विश्वेषु पुंडुलीकपेवेच च  ॥61 ॥

सच्यधानं यदूयं यद्युक्तं च प्रभावतः ।

तदुतमं च विश्वेषु साध्योक्तं प्रश्रसितम् ॥ 62 ॥

The prostitutes of the heavens are also born of the above women in their parts and parts of parts. They are not praiseworthy in the universe; they are all regarded as unchaste women. Those women that are of Sattva Guṇas are all excellent and endowed with influence. In the Universe they are good, chaste and praiseworthy.

तहास्तवं च विज्ञं प्रवर्तिते मनिधिण: ।

राजोकं स्नापोकं कलगु विधिं स्मृत्ति ॥ 63 ॥

मध्यमा रसस्थांशास्तारु भोगेण लोलूण: ।

मुखसंभोगव्यथा श्वकार्वे निरता: सदा ॥ 64 ॥

This is not false. The Paṇḍits declare them excellent. Those that are of Rajo Gunas, and Tamo Gunas are not so praiseworthy. Those women that are of Rajo Gunas are known as middling. They are always fond of enjoyments, yield of them, and always ready to achieve their own ends.

कवटा मोहकारिणयो धार्यक्षियुक्ता: सहा ।

राजोकपस्य साख्यीत्माने नैवोपजायते ॥ 6 5 ॥

इंद मध्यमकर्ण च प्रवर्तिन मनीषिणः ।

तमोकर्ण दुनिवार्यमधम तिदिकुरुधा: ॥ 6 6 ॥

These women are generally insincere, delusive, and outside the pale of religious duties. Therefore they are generally unchaste. The Pandits consider them as middling. Those women that are of Tamo Guñas are considered as worst.

न पृष्ठति कुले जातः पंडितश परतिख्यम् ।

निर्विने निर्विले वासपि रहस्यपि परिस्थम् ॥ 67 ॥

आपच्छायि तलसीमापमाज्ञा ब्रह्माणो3पुता ।

गांधवैण विवाहेन त्वां ग्रहीध्यापि गोभने ॥ 68 ॥

Those born of noble families can never speak

with other wives in a private place or when they are alone. By Brahmā's command I have come to you. O Fair One! I will marry you now according to the Gandharva method. My name is Śaṅkhacūḍa. The Devas fly away from me out of terror. Before I was the intimate Sakha (friend) of Śri Hari, by the name of Sudāmā.

अह्मेव शंखच्छुंे देवविद्वाकारकः ।

दनुवंश्य विशेषेण सुदामातई हरे: पुरा ॥ 6 9 ॥

अहमघरु योगेषे गोपोशपि पार्वदेषु च ।

अभुना दानवैद्योर्धर तथित्यागश प्रापत: ॥ 70 ॥

Now, by Rādhikā's curse I am born in the family of The Dānavas. I was a Pārisad (attendant) of Śrī Krṣna and the chief of the eight Gopas. Now, by Rādhikā's curse I am born as Śaṅkhacūda, the Indra of the Dānavas.

जातिस्मरोड़ं जानापि कृष्णायंप्रभावतः ।

जातिस्मरा त्वं तुलसी संभुत्ता हरिणा पुगा ॥ 71 ॥

त्वमेव रात्रिकाकोपाज्जातप्रेय भारते भुवि ।

त्वां संभोक्नुपुतुकोई नालं राधाभयान्तः ॥ 72 ॥

By Śrī Kṛṣṇa's grace and by His mantra, I am Jātismarā (know of my past births). You, too, are Jātismarā Tulasi. Śrī Kṛṣṇa enjoyed you before. By Rādhikā's anger, you are now born in Bhārata. I was very eager to enjoy you then; out of Rādhikā's fear I could not.

इत्येवमुक्त्वा स पुमान्विरराम महापुने ।

सस्मितं तुलसी तुहा प्रवक्तुपघकमे ॥ ७ ३ ॥

Thus saying, Śankhacūda stopped. Then Tulasī gladly and smilingly replied: “Such persons (like you) are famous in this world; good women desire such husband.

तुलसुवाच

एवंविधो बुधो नित्यं विश्वेषु च प्रशास्तः ।

कान्तमेविंधी कांता शणविद्धति कामतः ॥ ७ ४ ॥

त्यव्याङ्मयुना सत्यं विचारोण पराजिता ।

स निंदितशाण्युग्चियं: पूर्णांத் लिया जितः ॥ ७ ५ ॥

Really, I am now defeated by you in argument. The man who is conquered by woman is very impure and blamed by the community. The Pitr



Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Lokas, the Devas Lokas, and the Gandharva Loka, too, look upon men, overpowered by women, as mean, despicable.

निद्रिति चितते देवा बाधवा: क्षीजितं नरम् ।

क्षीजितं मनसा माता पिता भाता च निदिति ॥ 76 ॥

शुज्धो विधो उद्धाने जातके मुतके यथा ।

भूमिचो ब्रादगहोर वैश्य: पडडणाहतः ॥ 77 ॥

गृही मासेन वेदेषु मातृवढ़ीनंसकरः ।

अशुचि: क्षीजितः शुक्रश्चिताद्रनकालाः ॥ 78 ॥

Even father, mother, brother, etc., hate them mentally It is said in the Vedas that the impurities during birth and death are expiated by a ten days observances for the Brāhmāṇas, by twelve days observances for the Kṣattriyas, by fifteen days, observances for the Vaiśyas and by one month's observances for the Śūdras and other low castes. But the impurity of the man who is conquered by women cannot by expiated by any other means except (his dead body) being burned in the funeral pyre.

न गृह्न्तीच्छा तस्य चित्र: चिष्ठतर्पिण्।

न गृह्न्तेव देशंश तस्य पुष्पजलादिकम् ॥ 79 ॥

किं वा जानेन तपसा जपहीमप्रपुर्जनैः ।

किं विद्याच च यशसा कृशिभिर्यं मनो हतम् ॥ 80 ॥

The Pitjs never accept willingly the pindas and offerings of water (Tarpanas) offered by the women-conquered men. So much so that the Devas even hesitate to accept flowers, water, etc., offered by them on their names.

विद्याभभावज्ञानार्थ मता तं च परीक्षितः ।

कृत्वा परीक्षां कान्तस्य वृणोति कामिनी वरम् ॥ 8 1 ॥

वराय गुणहीनाय वृद्धायाजनिते तथा ।

दरित्राय च मुख्याय रोगिणे कृत्तिस्ताय च ॥ 8 2 ॥

Those whose hearts are entirely subdued by men, do not acquire any fruits from their knowledge, Tapasyā, Japam, five sacrifices, worship, learning and fame. I tested you to ascertain your strength in learning. It is highly advisable to choose one's husband by examining his merits and defects.

अत्पताकोपयुक्ताय वास्त्वंतदुर्मुखाय च ।

पंगहे चांगहीनाय चांधाय वधीराय च ॥ 83 ॥

जडाय चैव मुकाय कर्तीबतुल्याय पाधिये ।

ब्रहात्यां लभेस्तोषि यस्कन्यां प्रदाति यः ॥ 84 ॥

गतांतय गृणिणे चैव यूने च विदुषेपि च ।

साधवे च सुतां दत्त्वा दशयकफलं लभेत् ॥ 85 ॥

यः कन्याणलं कृत्वा कांतीय विहिकम्य ।

विक्रेता धानलोघेन कुम्भीपातं स गच्छति ॥ 86 ॥

Sin equivalent to the murder of a Brāhmīn is committed if one give in marriage one's daughter to one void of all qualifications, to an ole man, to one who is ignorant, to a poor, illiterate, diseased, ugly, very angry, very lame, devoid of limbs, deaf, dumb, inanimate like, and who is impotent. If one gives in marriage a daughter to a young man of good character, learned, well qualified and of a peaceful temper, one acquires the fruits of performing ten horse sacrifices. If one nourishes a daughter and sells her out of greed for money, one falls to the Kumbhipāka bell.

कन्यामुझे पुरीर्ष च तत प्रश्रति पातकी ।

कृमिभिर्दिगतः काकैयांविद्रश्रादुर्दुरि ॥ 87 ॥

तद्ते व्याधिरंसुतः क सणेजन्म निश्रितम् ।

विक्रीणाति मांसभारं वह्वलेव दिवानिजग् ॥ 88 ॥

इन्वेयपुक्ला तुलसी विरात्म तपोनिधे ।

That sinner drinks the urine and eats the excrements of that daughter, remaining in that hell. For a period equal to the fourteen Indra's life-periods they are bitten by worms and crows. At the expiry of this period, they will have to be born in this world of men as diseased persons. In their human births they will have to earn their livelihood by selling flesh and carrying flesh."

ब्रहोावच

किं कारोषि शुक्रचुड संवादमनया सह ॥ 89 ॥

गाधर्शन विवाहेन तं चास्या ग्रहणं कृम् ।

पुस्तेष्वसि रत्नं तं क्षीषु रत्ने स्वितं मी ॥ 90 ॥

Thus saying, when Tulasi stopped, Brahma appeared on the scene and addressed Śaṅkhacūda: O Śaṅkhacūda! Why are you spending uselessly

Book IX Chapter XIX

your time: in vain talks with Tulasi? Marry her soon by the Gāndharva method. As you are a gem amongst males, so She is a gem amongst females.

विद्यायाव विदधेन संगमो गुणावम्यन्ते ।

निविंधीभुसुं राजकी वा त्यजति दुर्वभम् ॥ 9 1 ॥

योप्रियोभुसुखत्यागी स पशुनांन संशयः ।

कि परीक्षसि त्वं कांतमीघुंगे गुणिनं सहि ॥ 9 2 ॥

देवानामसुराणां च दानवानां विमर्दकम् ।

It is a very happy union between a humorous lover and a humorous beloved. O King! Who despises the great happiness when it is at one's hand! He who forsakes the pleasure is worse than a beast in this world. O Tulasī! And what for are you testing the nobly qualified person who is the tormentor of the Devas, Asuras and Dānavas.

यथा लक्ष्मीश लक्ष्मीश यवा कृष्णे च राधिका ॥ 9 3 ॥

यथा मयि च साविजी घवानी च भवे यथा ।

यथा धरा वगहे च दक्षिणा च यद्धस्थे ॥ 94 ॥

यावोउरेनसूया च दमवंती यथा नले ।

रौहिणी च यथा चंडे यथा कामे रात्र: सती ॥ 95 ॥

यावादिवित: क्ययपे च वसिष्ठेज्ञंधती सती ।

यावाङ्ह्या गौतने च देववृतिंश कदौ ॥ 96 ॥

यथा वृह्यस्ती तात्र शतरूपा मनी यथा ।

यथा च दक्षिणा यजे यथा स्वाहा हुताशने ॥ 97 ॥

यथा शपी महैरे च यथा पृष्टिरोगेश ।

देवसेना यथा स्कन्दे धर्मे भूतिंयां सती ॥ 98 ॥

सौभाग्या सुप्रिया त्वं च रोखचुँ तथा भव ।

अनेन सार्थ सुचितं सुदैरा च सुदैरि ॥ 99 ॥

O Child! As Laksmī Devi is of Nārāyaṇa, as Rādhikā is of Krṣṇa; as is My Śāvitrī, as Bhava's is Bhavānī, as Boar's is Earth, as Yajñā's is Dakṣinā, Atri's Anasūyā, Gautama's Ahalyā, Moon's Rohinī, Brhaṣpati's Tārā, Manu's Śatarūpā, Kandarpa's Rati, Kaśyapa's Aditi, Vasisṭha's Arundhatī, Karddama's Devahūti, Fire's Svāhā, Indra's Śacī, Gangeśa's Puṣti, Skanda's Devasenā, and Dharma's Mūrti, so let you be the dear wife of Śankhacūḍa. Let you remain with Śankhacūḍa, beautiful as he is, for a long time, and enjoy with him in various places as you like.

स्वाने स्थाने विहारं च ययेच्छं कुक संतन्ति ।

पश्रात्राण्यसि गोलोकै श्रीकृष्णं पुनरेव च ।

चतुरुर्षत च वैकुंटे शंखचुरुं मृते सति ॥ १०० ॥

श्रिति श्रीमहैर्षीभागवते महापुराणे

नवमस्कन्देप्रादशीरध्वाया: 11 18 11

When Śaṅkhacūḍa will quite his mortal frame, you would go to Goloka and enjoy easily with the two-armed Śrī Krṣṇa, and in Vaikunṭha with the four-armed Krṣṇa and with great gladness."

Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the union of Saṅkhacūḍa with Tulasi in the Mahāpurāṇaṃ Śrimaddevirbhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XIX

