[Ch 18 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyana said: Thus highly pleased, Tulasī went to sleep with a gladdened-heart. She the daughter of Vṛsadhvaja, was then an her blooming youth and while asleep, the Cupid, the God of five arrows, shot at her five arrows (by which one gets enchanted and swooned). Though the Devi was smeared with sandal paste and She slept on a bed strewn with flowers, her body was felt as if being burnt.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- Thus highly pleased, Tulasī went to sleep with a gladdened-heart. She, the daughter of Vṛṣadhvaja, was then in her blooming youth and while asleep, the Cupid, the God of five arrows, shot at her five arrows (by which one gets enchanted and swooned). Though the Devī was smeared with sandal paste and She slept on a bed strewn with flowers, her body was felt as if being burnt.

[Ch 18 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Out of joy the hairs stood on their ends all over her body; her eyes were reddened and her body began to quiver. Sometimes She left uneasiness, sometimes dryness; sometimes She got faint; sometimes drowsiness and sometimes again pleasantness; sometimes she became conscious, sometimes sorrowful.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Out of joy, the hairs stood on their ends all over her body; her eyes were reddened and her body began to quiver. Sometimes She felt uneasiness, sometimes dryness; sometimes She got faint; sometimes drowsiness and sometimes again pleasantness; sometimes she became conscious, sometimes sorrowful.

[Ch 18 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sometimes she got up from her bed; sometimes she sat; and sometimes she fell again to sleep. The flower-bed, strewn with sandalpaste, appeared to her full of thorns; nice delicious fruits and cold water appeared to her like poison.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sometimes she got up from her bed; sometimes she sat; and sometimes she fell again to sleep. The flower-bed, strewn with sandal-paste, appeared to her full of thorns; nice delicious fruits and cold water

[Ch 18 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her house appeared to her like a hole in a ground and her fine garments seemed to her like fire. The mark of Sindūra on her forehead appeared, as it were, a boil, a sore. She began to see in her dreams that one beautiful, well clothed, humorous, young man with smile in his lips, appeared to her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her house appeared to her like a hole in a ground and her fine garments seemed to her like fire. The mark of Sindūra on her forehead appeared, as it were, a boil, a sore. She began to see in her dreams that one beautiful, well clothed, humorous, young man with smile in his lips, appeared to her.

[Ch 18 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► His body was besmeared with sandal-paste and decked with excellent jewels; garlands of forest flowers were suspending from his neck. Coming there, he was drinking the honey of her lotus face. He was speaking on love themes and on various other sweet topics.
NEW CORR ENG ──► His body was besmeared with sandal-paste and decked with excellent jewels; garlands of forest flowers were suspending from his neck. Coming there, he was drinking the honey of her lotus face. He was speaking on love themes and on various other sweet topics.

[Ch 18 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As if he was embracing amorously and enjoying the pleasures of intercourse. After the intercourse he was going away; again he was coming near. The lady was addressing him 'O Darling! O Lord of my heart! Where do you go. Come close.'
NEW CORR ENG ──► As if he was embracing amorously and enjoying the pleasures of intercourse. After the intercourse he was going away; again he was coming near. The lady was addressing him, “O Darling! O Lord of my heart! Where do you go. Come close.”

[Ch 18 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again when she became conscious, she began to lament bitterly. Thus on entering in her youth, the Devi Tulasi began to live in the hermitage of Badari (Plum fruit, It may signify womb. Those who visit Badari are not to enter again to any womb). On the other hand the great Yogi Śaṅkhacūḍa obtained the Krṣna Mantra from Maharṣi Jaigīṣavya and got siddhi (success) in Puskara Tirtha (sacred place of pilgrimage where one crosses the world).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again when she became conscious, she began to lament bitterly. Thus on entering in her youth, the Devī Tulasī began to live in the hermitage of Badari (Plum fruit, it may signify womb. Those who visit Badari are not to enter again in any womb). On the other hand the great Yogi Śaṅkhacūḍa obtained the Kṛṣṇa Mantra from Mahaṛṣi Jaigīṣavya and got siddhi (success) in Puṣkara Tīrtha (sacred place of pilgrimage where one crosses the world).

[Ch 18 Verse 15-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Holding on his neck the Kavaca named Sarvamāngalamaya and obtaining the boon from Brahmā as he desired, he arrived at Badari, by Brahmā's command. The signs of the blooming youth had just begun to be visible in the body of Śankhacūḍa as if the God of Love incarnated in his body; his colour resembled that of white Campakas and all his body was decked with jewelled ornaments.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Holding on his neck the Kavaca named Sarvamangalamaya and obtaining the boon from Brahmā as he desired, he arrived at Badari, by Brahmā’s command. The signs of the blooming youth had just begun to be visible in the body of Śaṅkhacūḍa as if the God of Love incarnated in his body; his colour resembled that of white Champakas and all his body was decked with jewelled ornaments.

[Ch 18 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► His face resembled the autumnal full moon; his eyes were extended like the lotus leaves. The beautiful form was seen to sit in an excellent aerial car, made of pearls and jewels. Two jewel earrings, nice and elegant, suspended up to his cheek; his neck was adorned with Pārijāta flower garlands; and his body was smeared with Kumkum and scented sandal-paste.
NEW CORR ENG ──► His face resembled the autumnal full moon; his eyes were extended like the lotus leaves. The beautiful form was seen to sit in an excellent aerial car, made of pearls and jewels. Two jewel earrings, nice and elegant, suspended upto his cheek; his neck was adorned with Pārijāta flower garlands; and his body was smeared with Kumkum and scented sandal-paste.

[Ch 18 Verse 20-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Nārada! Seeing Śaṅkhacūda coming near to her. Tulasi covered her face by her clothings and she, with a smiling countenance, cast repeatedly sidelong glances on him and bent her head low abashed in the expectation of a free intercourse. How beautiful was that clear face of her! It put down the autumnal moon in the background. The invaluable jewelled ornament were on her toes. Her braid of hair was surrounded by sweet scene Mālatī garlands.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Nārada! Seeing Śaṅkhacūḍa coming near to her, Tulasī covered her face by her clothing and she, with a smiling countenance, cast repeatedly sidelong glances at him and bent her head low abashed in the expectation of a fresh intercourse. How beautiful was that clear face of her! It put down the autumnal moon in the background. The invaluable jewelled ornament were on her toes. Her braid of hair was surrounded by sweet scented Mālatī garlands.

[Ch 18 Verse 24-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The invaluable jewelled wonderful earrings like the shape of a shark were hanging up to her cheek. Extraordinarily beautiful necklaces were seen being suspended to the middle of her breasts and added to the beauty thereof; on her arms and hands were jewelled bangles and conch ornaments; jewelled armlets and on fingers excellent jewelled rings were seen. O Muni! Seeing that lovely beautiful chaste woman of good nature, Śaṅkhacūdā came to her and taking his seat addressed her as follows:
NEW CORR ENG ──► The invaluable jewelled wonderful earrings like the shape of a shark were hanging up to her cheek. Extraordinarily beautiful necklaces were seen being suspended to the middle of her breasts and added to the beauty thereof; on her arms and hand were jewelled bangles and conch ornaments; jewelled armlets and on fingers; excellent jewelled rings were seen. O Muni! Seeing that lovely beautiful chaste woman of good nature, Śaṅkhacūḍa came to her and taking his seat addressed her as follows :--

[Ch 18 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► 'O Proud One! O Auspicious One! Who are you? Whose daughter are you? You took fortunate and blessed among women. I am you silent slave. Talk with me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Proud One! O Auspicious One! Who are you? Whose daughter are you? You look fortunate and blessed among women. I am your silent slave. Talk with me.”

[Ch 18 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That beautiful eyed Tulasī, full of love, replied to Śankhacūḍa with smiling countenance and face bent low:
NEW CORR ENG ──► That beautiful eyed Tulasī, full of love, replied to Śaṅkhacūḍa with smiling countenance and face bent low :--

[Ch 18 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "I am the daughter of the great king Vṛṣdhvaja. I have come to this forest for tapasyā and am engaged in this. Who are you? What business have you to talk with me? You can go away wherever you like. I have heard in the Śāstras that persons born of a noble family never speak with ladies of a respectable family in privacy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “I am the daughter of the great king Vṛṣadhvaja. I have come to this forest for tapasyā and am engaged in this. Who are you? What business have you to talk with me? You can go away wherever you like. I have heard in the Śāstras that persons born of a noble family never speak with ladies of a respectable family in privacy.

[Ch 18 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Only those that are lewd, void of any knowledge in the Dharma Sāstras, void of the Vedic knowledge and who are not Ku linas, like to speak with women in privacy. And those women, too, that look externally beautiful but very passionate and the Death of males, who are sweet tongued but filled with venom in their hearts, those who are sweet externally but like a sword internally, those that are always bent in achieving their own selfish ends and those that become obedient to their husbands for their own selfish ends otherwise behaving as they like, those that are filled inside with dirty things and outside looking pleasant in their faces and eyes, whose characters are pronounced as defiled, what intelligent learned and noble-minded man can trust them?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Only those that are lewd, void of any knowledge in the Dharma Śāstras, void of the Vedic knowledge and who are not Kulīnas, like to speak with women in privacy. And those woman, too, that look externally beautiful but very passionate and the Death of males, who are sweet tongued but filled with venom in their hearts, those who are sweet externally but like a sword internally, those that are always bent in achieving their own selfish ends and those that become obedient to their husbands for their own selfish ends otherwise behaving as they like, those that are filled inside with dirty things and outside looking pleasant in their faces and eyes, whose characters are pronounced as defiled, what intelligent, learned and noble-minded man can trust them?

[Ch 18 Verse 34-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those women do not discriminate who are their friends or who are their enemies; they want always new persons. Whenever they see a man well dressed, they want to satisfy their own passions. And they pretend with great care that they are very chaste.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those women do not discriminate who are their friends or who are their enemies; they want always new persons. Whenever they see a man well dressed, they want to satisfy their own passions. And they pretend with great care that they are very chaste.

[Ch 18 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They are vessels of passion; they always attract the minds of others and they are very enthusiastic in satisfying their own just. They verbally shew that they want other men to go away but at hearts, feelings for intercourse remain preponderant; whenever they see their paramours in private, they laugh and become very glad but externally their shame knows no bounds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They are the vessels of passion; they always attract the minds of others and they are very enthusiastic in satisfying their own lust. They verbally shew that they want other men to go away but at hearts, feelings for intercourse remain preponderant; whenever they see their paramours in private, they laugh and become very glad but externally their shame, knows no bounds.

[Ch 18 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When they do not have their intercourse with their paramours, they become self-conceited; their bodies burn with anger and they begin to quarrel. When their passions are satisfied fully, they become glad and when there is a deficiency in that, they become sorrowful.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When they do not have their intercourses with their paramours, they become self-conceited; their bodies burn with anger and they begin to quarrel. When their passions are satisfied fully, they become glad and when there is a deficiency in that, they become sorrowful.

[Ch 18 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► For the sake of good and sweet food and cold drinks, they want beautiful young persons, Šrimaddevibbāgavatam qualified and humorous. They consider witty young persons clever in holding intercourses, more dearly than their sons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► For the sake of good and sweet food and cold drinks, they want beautiful young persons, qualified and humorous. They consider witty young persons clever in holding intercourses, more dearly than their sons.

[Ch 18 Verse 43-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And if that beloved one becomes incapable or aged, then he is considered as an enemy. Quarrels and anger then ensue. They devour these men as serpents eat rats. They are boldness personified and they are the source of all evils and voice.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And if that beloved one becomes incapable or aged, then he is considered as an enemy. Quarrels and anger then ensue. They devour these men as serpents eat rats. They are boldness personified and they are the source of all evils and vices.

[Ch 18 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Even Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa remain deluded before them. They cannot find out any clue of their minds. They are the greatest obstacle in the path of tapasyā and the closed doors for liberation. Devotion to Hari cannot reach those women. They are the repositories of Māyā and they hold men fast by iron chains in this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Even Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa remain deluded before them. They cannot find out any clue of their minds. They are the greatest obstacle in the path of tapasyā and the closed doors for liberation. Devotion to Hari cannot reach those women. They are the repositories of Māyā and they hold men fast by iron chains in this word.

[Ch 18 Verse 47-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They are like magicians and false like dreams. They enchant others by external beauty; their lower parts are very ugly and filled with excrements, faeces, of foul scent and very unholy and smeared with blood.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They are like magicians and false like dreams. They enchant others by external beauty; their lower parts are very ugly and filled with excrements, faeces, of foul scent and very unholy and smeared with blood.

[Ch 18 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Creator Bhagavān has created them as such, the Māyā to the Māyāvīs and the venom to those who want liberation, and as invisible to those that want to have them." Thus saying Tulasi stopped. O Nārada! Śaṅkhacūḍa, then smilingly addressed her as follows:
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Creator Bhagavān has created them as such, the Māyā to the Māyāvis and the venom to those who want liberation, and as invisible to those that want to have them.” Thus saying Tulasī stopped. O Nārada! Śaṅkhacūḍa, then smilingly addressed her as follows :--

[Ch 18 Verse 51-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devi! What you have spoken is not wholly false; partly it is true and partly it is false. Now hear. The Creator has created this all-enchanting female form into two parts. One is praiseworthy and the other is not.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “O Devī! What you have spoken is not wholly false; partly it is true and partly it is false. Now hear. The Creator has created this all-enchanting female form into two parts. One is praiseworthy and the other is not.

[Ch 18 Verse 53-54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He has created Lakṣmī, Sarasvatī, Durgā, Śāvitrī, and Rādhā and others as the primary causes of creation; so there are the prime creations. Those women that are born of their parts, are auspicious, glorious, and much praiseworthy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He has created Lakṣmī, Sarasvatī, Durgā, Sāvitrī and Rādhā and others as the primary causes of creation; so there are the prime creations: Those women that are born of their parts, are auspicious, glorious and much praiseworthy.

[Ch 18 Verse 55-60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śatarūpā, Devahūti, Svadhā, Dakṣinā Chāyāvatī, Rohinī, Varunāni, Śacī, the wife of Kubera, Diti, Aditi, Lopāmuḍrā, Anasūyā, Kautabhi (Kotari), Tulasī, Ahalyā, Arundhatī, Menā, Tārā, Mandodari, Damayanti, Vedavatī, Gaṅgā, Mānasā, Puṣṭi, Tuṣṭi, Smṛti, Medhā, Vasundharā, Ṣaṣthī, Mangalacandī, Mūrti, wife of Dharma. Svasti, Śraddhā; Śānti, Kānti, Kṣānti, Nidrā; Tandrā, Kṣudhā, Pipāsā, Sandhyā, Rātri, Divā, Sampatti, Dhṛti, Kirti, Kriyā, Šobhā, Prabhā, Śivā, and other women born of the Prime Prakṛtis, all are excellent in every Yuga.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śatarūpā, Devahūtī, Svadhā, Svāhā, Dakṣiṇā Cāyāvatī, Rohiṇī, Varunānī, Śacī, the wife of Kuvera, Diti, Aditi, Lopāmudrā, Anasūyā, Kauṭabhī (Koṭarī), Tulasī, Ahalyā, Arundhatī, Menā, Tarā, Mandodarī, Damayantī, Vedavatī, Gaṅgā, Manasā, Puṣṭi, Tuṣṭi, Smriti, Medhā, Kālikā, Vasundharā, Saṣṭhī, Mangalacaṇdī, Mūrti, wife of Dharma. Svasti, Śraddhā; Śānti, Kānti, Kṣānti, Nidrā, Tandrā, Kṣudhā, Pipāsā, Sandhyā, Rātri, Divā, Sampatti, Dhriti, Kīrtī, Krīyā, Śobhā, Prabhā, Śivā, and other women born of the Prime Prakritis, all are excellent in every Yuga.

[Ch 18 Verse 61-62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The prostitutes of the heavens are also born of the above women in their parts and parts of parts. They are not praiseworthy in the universe; they are all regarded as unchaste women. Those women that are of Sattva Guṇas are all excellent and endowed with influence. In the Universe they are good, chaste and praiseworthy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The prostitutes of the heavens are also born of the above women in their parts and parts of parts. They are not praiseworthy in the universe; they are all regarded as unchaste women. Those women that are of Sāttva Guṇas are all excellent and endowed with influence. In the universe they are good, chaste and praiseworthy.

[Ch 18 Verse 63-64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This is not false. The Paṇḍits declare them excellent. Those that are of Rajo Gunas, and Tamo Gunas are not so praiseworthy. Those women that are of Rajo Gunas are known as middling. They are always fond of enjoyments, yield of them, and always ready to achieve their own ends.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This is not false. The Pandits declare them excellent. Those that are of Rājo Guṇas, and Tāmo Guṇas are not so praiseworthy. Those women that are of Rājo Guṇas are known as middling. They are always fond of enjoyments, yield to them, and always ready to achieve their own ends.

[Ch 18 Verse 65-66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► These women are generally insincere, delusive, and outside the pale of religious duties. Therefore they are generally unchaste. The Pandits consider them as middling. Those women that are of Tamo Guñas are considered as worst.
NEW CORR ENG ──► These women are generally insincere, delusive, and outside the pale of religious duties. Therefore they are generally unchaste. The Pandits consider them as middling. Those women that are of Tāmo Guṇas are considered as worst.

[Ch 18 Verse 67-68]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those born of noble families can never speak with other wives in a private place or when they are alone. By Brahmā's command I have come to you. O Fair One! I will marry you now according to the Gandharva method. My name is Śaṅkhacūḍa. The Devas fly away from me out of terror. Before I was the intimate Sakha (friend) of Śri Hari, by the name of Sudāmā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those born of noble families, can never speak with other wives in a private place or when they are alone. By Brahmā’s command I have come to you. O Fair One! I will marry you now according to the Gandharba method. My name is Śaṅkhacūḍa. The Devas fly away from me out of terror. Before I was the intimate Śakhā (friend) of Śrī Hari, by the name of Sudāmā.

[Ch 18 Verse 69-70]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now, by Rādhikā's curse I am born in the family of The Dānavas. I was a Pārisad (attendant) of Śrī Krṣna and the chief of the eight Gopas. Now, by Rādhikā's curse I am born as Śaṅkhacūda, the Indra of the Dānavas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now, by Rādhikā’s curse I am born in the family of the Dānavas. I was a Pāṛṣad (attendant) of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the chief of the eight Gopas. Now, by Rādhikā’s curse I am born as Śaṅkhacūḍa, the Indra of the Dānavas.

[Ch 18 Verse 71-72]
OLD OCR ENG ──► By Śrī Kṛṣṇa's grace and by His mantra, I am Jātismarā (know of my past births). You, too, are Jātismarā Tulasi. Śrī Kṛṣṇa enjoyed you before. By Rādhikā's anger, you are now born in Bhārata. I was very eager to enjoy you then; out of Rādhikā's fear I could not.
NEW CORR ENG ──► By Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s grace and by His mantra, I am Jātismarā (know of my past births). You, too, are Jātismarā Tulasī. Śrī Kṛṣṇa enjoyed you before. By Rādhikā’s anger, you are now born in Bhārata. I was very eager to enjoy you then; out of Rādhikā’s fear I could not.”

[Ch 18 Verse 73]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, Śankhacūda stopped. Then Tulasī gladly and smilingly replied: “Such persons (like you) are famous in this world; good women desire such husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, Śaṅkhacūḍa stopped. Then Tulasī gladly and smilingly replied :-- “Such persons (like you) are famous in this world; good women desire such husbands.

[Ch 18 Verse 74-75]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Really, I am now defeated by you in argument. The man who is conquered by woman is very impure and blamed by the community. The Pitr Lokas, the Devas Lokas, and the Gandharva Loka, too, look upon men, overpowered by women, as mean, despicable.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Really, I am now defeated by you in argument. The man who is conquered by woman is very impure and blamed by the community. The Pitri Lokas, the Deva Lokas, and the Gandharba Loka, too, look upon men, overpowered by women, as mean, despicable.

[Ch 18 Verse 76-78]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Even father, mother, brother, etc., hate them mentally It is said in the Vedas that the impurities during birth and death are expiated by a ten days observances for the Brāhmāṇas, by twelve days observances for the Kṣattriyas, by fifteen days, observances for the Vaiśyas and by one month's observances for the Śūdras and other low castes. But the impurity of the man who is conquered by women cannot by expiated by any other means except (his dead body) being burned in the funeral pyre.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Even father, mother, brother, etc., hate them mentally. It is said in the Vedas that the impurities during birth and death are expiated by a ten days observances for the Brāhmaṇas, by twelve days observances for the Kṣattriyas, by fifteen days observances for the Vaiśyas and by one month’s observances for the Śūdras and other low castes. But the impurity of the man who is conquered by women cannot be expiated by any other means except (his dead body) being burned in the funeral pyre.

[Ch 18 Verse 79-80]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Pitjs never accept willingly the pindas and offerings of water (Tarpanas) offered by the women-conquered men. So much so that the Devas even hesitate to accept flowers, water, etc., offered by them on their names.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Pitris never accept willingly the piṇḍas and offerings of water (Tarpaṇas) offered by the women-conquered men. So much so that the Devas even hesitate to accept flowers, water, etc., offered by them on their names.

[Ch 18 Verse 81-82]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those whose hearts are entirely subdued by men, do not acquire any fruits from their knowledge, Tapasyā, Japam, five sacrifices, worship, learning and fame. I tested you to ascertain your strength in learning. It is highly advisable to choose one's husband by examining his merits and defects.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those whose hearts are entirely subdued by men, do not acquire any fruits from their knowledge, Tapasyā, Japam, fire sacrifices, worship, learning and fame. I tested you to ascertain your strength in learning. It is highly advisable to choose one’s husband by examining his merits and defects.

[Ch 18 Verse 83-86]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sin equivalent to the murder of a Brāhmīn is committed if one give in marriage one's daughter to one void of all qualifications, to an ole man, to one who is ignorant, to a poor, illiterate, diseased, ugly, very angry, very lame, devoid of limbs, deaf, dumb, inanimate like, and who is impotent. If one gives in marriage a daughter to a young man of good character, learned, well qualified and of a peaceful temper, one acquires the fruits of performing ten horse sacrifices. If one nourishes a daughter and sells her out of greed for money, one falls to the Kumbhipāka bell.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sin equivalent to the murder of a Brāhmin is committed if one gives in marriage one’s daughter to one void of all qualifications, to an old man, to one who is ignorant, to a poor, illiterate, diseased, ugly, very angry, very harsh, lame, devoid of limbs, deaf, dumb, inanimate like, and who is impotent. If one gives in marriage a daughter to a young man of good character, learned, well qualified and of a peaceful temper, one acquires the fruits of performing ten horse sacrifices. If one nourishes a daughter and sells her out of greed for money, one falls to the Kumbhīpāka hell.

[Ch 18 Verse 87-88]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That sinner drinks the urine and eats the excrements of that daughter, remaining in that hell. For a period equal to the fourteen Indra's life-periods they are bitten by worms and crows. At the expiry of this period, they will have to be born in this world of men as diseased persons. In their human births they will have to earn their livelihood by selling flesh and carrying flesh."
NEW CORR ENG ──► That sinner drinks the urine and eats the excrements of that daughter, remaining in that hell. For a period equal to the fourteen Indra’s life-periods they are bitten by worms and crows. At the expiry of this period, they will have to be born in this world of men as diseased persons. In their human births they will have to earn their livelihood by selling flesh and carrying flesh.”

[Ch 18 Verse 89-90]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, when Tulasi stopped, Brahma appeared on the scene and addressed Śaṅkhacūda: O Śaṅkhacūda! Why are you spending uselessly your time: in vain talks with Tulasi? Marry her soon by the Gāndharva method. As you are a gem amongst males, so She is a gem amongst females.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, when Tulasī stopped, Brahmā appeared on the scene and addressed Śaṅkacūda :-- O Śaṅkhacūḍa! Why are you spending uselessly your time in vain talks with Tulasī? Marry her soon by the Gandharba method. As you are a gem amongst males, so She is a

[Ch 18 Verse 91-92]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is a very happy union between a humorous lover and a humorous beloved. O King! Who despises the great happiness when it is at one's hand! He who forsakes the pleasure is worse than a beast in this world. O Tulasī! And what for are you testing the nobly qualified person who is the tormentor of the Devas, Asuras and Dānavas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is a very happy union between a humorous lover and a humorous beloved. O King! Who despises the great happiness when it is at one’s hand! He who forsakes the pleasure is worse than a beast in this world. O Tulasī! And what for are you testing the nobly qualified person who is the tormentor of the Devas, Asuras and Dānavas.

[Ch 18 Verse 93-99]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Child! As Laksmī Devi is of Nārāyaṇa, as Rādhikā is of Krṣṇa; as is My Śāvitrī, as Bhava's is Bhavānī, as Boar's is Earth, as Yajñā's is Dakṣinā, Atri's Anasūyā, Gautama's Ahalyā, Moon's Rohinī, Brhaṣpati's Tārā, Manu's Śatarūpā, Kandarpa's Rati, Kaśyapa's Aditi, Vasisṭha's Arundhatī, Karddama's Devahūti, Fire's Svāhā, Indra's Śacī, Gangeśa's Puṣti, Skanda's Devasenā, and Dharma's Mūrti, so let you be the dear wife of Śankhacūḍa. Let you remain with Śankhacūḍa, beautiful as he is, for a long time, and enjoy with him in various places as you like.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Child! As Lakṣmī Devī is of Nārāyaṇa, as Rādhikā is of Kṛṣṇa; as is My Sāvītrī, as Bhava’s is Bhavānī, as Boar’s is Earth, as Yajña’s is Dakṣīṇā, Atri’s Anasūyā, Gautama’s Ahalyā, Moon’s Rohiṇī, Brihaspati’s Tārā, Manu’s Śatarūpā, Kandarpa’s Rati, Kaśyapa’s Aditi, Vaśiṣṭha’s Arundhatī, Karddama’s Devahūti, Fire’s Svāhā, Indra’s Śacī, Gaṇeśa’s Puṣṭi, Skanda’s Devasenā, and Dharma’s Mūrti, so let you be the dear wife of Śaṅkhacūḍa. Let you remain with Śaṅkhacūḍa, beautiful as he is, for a long time, and enjoy with him in various places as you like.

[Ch 18 Verse 100]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Śaṅkhacūḍa will quite his mortal frame, you would go to Goloka and enjoy easily with the two-armed Śrī Krṣṇa, and in Vaikunṭha with the four-armed Krṣṇa and with great gladness." Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the union of Saṅkhacūḍa with Tulasi in the Mahāpurāṇaṃ Śrimaddevirbhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Śaṅkhacūḍa will quit his mortal frame, you would go to Goloka and enjoy easily with the two-armed Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and in Vaikuṇṭha with the four-armed Kṛṣṇa and with great gladness. Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the union of Śaṅkhacūḍa with Tulasī in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahaṛṣi Veda Vyāsa.
