CHAPTER VI

On the Coming in this World of Lakṣmi, Gaṅgā and Sarasvati

श्रीनारायण उवाच

सरस्वती तु वैकुणे स्वयं नारायणितिके ।

गंगागणेपं कलहात्कल्या धारते सरित् ॥ १ ॥

पुण्यदा पुण्यक्या च पुण्यतीर्थस्ट्रविषी ।

पुण्यविद्धिनिवेल्या च स्थिति: पुण्यवर्ता मुने ॥ 2 ॥

तपस्विनां तपोक्या तपस: फल्राविषी ।

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! Sarasvatī lives always in Vaikuntha close to Nārada. One day a quarrel arose with Gaṅgā, and by Her curse, Sarasvatī came in parts as a river here in this Bhārata. She is reckoned in Bhārata as a great sanctifying holy and merit-giving river. The good persons serve Her always, residing on Her banks. She is the Tapasyā and the fruit thereof of the ascetics.

कृतपायेप्रदाहाव जलदिन्स्वल्पिणी ॥ 3 ॥

ज्ञानासरक्यतीतोये मृता ये मानाव भुवि ।

तेषां स्वितिक्षे वैकृपते सुचिरं हरिसंसदि ॥ 4 ॥

भारते कृतपाद्ध स्नाला तत्र च ஞीलाय ।

मुच्यते सर्वपापेचो विज्ञुलोके वसेप्तिचरम् ॥ 5 ॥

She is like the burning fire to the sins of the sinners. Those that die in Bhārata on the Sarasvatī waters with their full consciousness, live for ever in Vaikuntaha in the council of Hari. Those that bathe in the Sarasvatī waters, after committing sins, become easily freed of them and live for a long, long time in Viṣṇu-Loka.

चातुप्तिमयं चौपनास्यामक्षयायां दिनक्षेये ।

व्यतीपाते च ग्रहणो-व्यस्मिनुप्यदितेप च ॥ 6 ॥

अनुर्पेण यः स्नातो हेतुना शब्दाप्रति या ।

साक्त्यं लभते नूनं वैकुण्ठे स हरेरिप ॥ 7 ॥

If one bathes even once in the Sarasvati waters, during Cāturnāśya (a vow that lasts four months), in full moon time, in Aksyayā or when the day ends, in Vyatipāta Yoga, in the time of eclipse or on any other holy day or through any other concomitant cause or even without any faith and out of sheer disregard, one is able to go to Vaikuntha and get the nature of Śrī Hari.

सरसतीमानुं तत मासमेकं च यो जयेत ।

महामूर्षे: कर्षीग्रंण स भवेत्रात्र संशय: ॥ 8 ॥

नित्यं सरस्वतीतोये यः स्नायाम्बुंडयरः ।

न गर्भवासं कुकते पुनेये स मानवः ॥ 9 ॥

If one repeats the Sarasvati Mantra, residing on the banks of the Sarasvati, for one month, a great illiterate can become a great poet. There is no doubt in this. Once shaving one's head, if one resides on the banks of the Sarasvati, daily bathes in it, one will have not to meet with the pain of being again born in the womb.

इत्वेल क्रवितं क्रिविद्धार्ते गुणाकीतनम् ।

सुखदं कामदं सारं घृय: किं श्रौतुभिद्धसि ॥ 10 ॥

O Nārada! Thus I have described a little of the unbounded glories of Bhārata that give happiness ad the fruits of all desires.

Book IX Chapter VI

सूत उवाच

नारायणवचः शुचा नारदो मुनिसनमः ।

पुनः पपछ्छ संदेहमियं शौनक सत्यम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Sūta said: O Śaunaka! The Muni Nārada hearing thus, asked, again at that very moment to solve his doubts. I am now speaking of that. Hear.

नारंद उवाच

कर्षे सरस्वती देरी गंगाशापेन भारते ।

कलया कलहैनेव बभूव पुण्यदा सरित् ॥ १ २ ॥

श्रवणे श्रुतिसाराणां बधते कौतुकं मम ।

कथापृतेने मे गृति: केन श्रेयस तृयते ॥ १ ३ ॥

Nārada said: O Lord! How did the Devi's Sarasvatī quarrel with the Devi Gāngā and how did she by Her curse turn out in India, into a holy river in giving virtues? I am becoming more and more eager and impatient to hear about this critical incident. I do not find satiety in drinking your nectar-like words. Who finds satiety in getting his good weal?

कर्थ शशाप सा गंगा पुक्तितां तां सरस्वतीम् ।

सा तु सत्वस्कृपा या पुण्यदा सुखदा सदा ॥ 14 ॥

तेजस्विच्यौद्रैयोर्विकारणं श्रुस्तिपूदरम् ।

सुदुर्लंभं पुराणेषु तन्ये व्याख्यातुमहसि ॥ 15 ॥

Why did Gāngā curse Sarasvatī, worshipped everywhere. Gāngā is also full of Sattva Gūnas. She always bestows good and virtue to all. Both of them are fiery and it is pleasant to hear the cause of quarrels between these two. These are very rarely found in the Purānas. So you ought to describe that to me.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

शूण् नारद वक्ष्यामि कक्षामेतां पुरातनीम् ।

यस्या: शवणामाजेण सर्वीयपात्मुचणे ।। १६ ।।

तक्ष्मी सरस्वती गंगा विष्णोः साधिक्याः सहा ।

प्रेणा समासतालित्रिंति सन्त हरिसिधी ॥ १७ ॥

Nārāyana said: Hear, O Nārada! I will describe that incident, the hearing of which removes all the sins. Lakṣmī, Sarasvatī and Gaṅgā, the three wives of Hari and all equally loved, remain always close to Hari.

चकार सैकदा गंगा विण्योगंसुखिनरीक्षणम् ।

ससिता च सकामा च सकाठक्षं पुनः पुनः ॥ 18 ॥

विश्वगेक्षा तद्वयं निरीक्ष्य च क्षणं ततं ।

क्षभां चकार तदद्वृष्टा लक्ष्मीनँव सरस्कती ॥ 19 ॥

One day Gaṅgā cast side-long glances frequently towards Nārāyaṇa and was eagerly looking at Him, with smile on Her lips. Seeing this, the Lord Nārāyaṇa, startled and looked at Gaṅgā and smiled also. Lakṣmī saw that, but she did not take any offence. But Sarasvati became very angry.

बोधायामास पशा तां सचल्वा च समिता ।

क्रोधायिष्ठा च सा वाणी न ग्रांता बभूव ह ॥ 20 ॥

उवाच वाणी भतिरं रत्नाया रत्नलोचना ।

कुपिता कामवेने शश्रत्यसूतिताधा ॥ 21 ॥

Padmā (Lakṣmī) who was of Sattva Guṇa, began to console in various ways the wrathful Sarasvatī; but she could not be appeased by any means. Rather Her face became red out of anger; she began to tremble out of her feelings (passion); Her lips quivered; and She began to speak to Her husband.

सरस्वतुवाच

सर्वेत्र समताबूद्धि: सुदूर्ते: काभिनी प्रति ।

धर्मिछाय सरिष्ठ्य विवर्गति खलस्य च ॥ 2 2 ॥

ज्ञातं सीभायमधिकं गेरायां ते गद्धार ।

कमतायां च तत्तूर्ण न च किंचिन्मायि प्रभो ॥ 23 ॥

The husband that is good, religious, and well qualified looks on his all the wives equally; but it is just the opposite with him who is a cheat. O Gadādhara! You are partial to Gaṅgā; and so is the case with Laksmī. I am the only one that is deprived of your love.

गंगाया: पश्चया सार्थ प्रीतिश्राति सुसंगता ।

क्ष्मां चकार तेतेदे विपरीतं हरिप्रिया ॥ 24 ॥

कि जीवनने मे3देव दुर्भगायाश्रं शप्रानम् ।

निष्कर्ते जीवनं तत्या या पत्थुः प्रेमवंचिता ॥ 25 ॥

It is, therefore, that Gāngā and Padmā are in love with each other; for you love Padmā. So why shall not Padmā bear this contrary thing! I am only unfortunate. What use is there in holding my life?

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

त्वां सर्वे सत्वरूपं च चे वद्रति मनीषिण: ।

ते च मुखां न वेदज्ञा न जानीति मति तत ॥ 26 ॥

Her quite illiterate; they have not the least knowledge of the Vedas. They are quite impotent to understand the nature of your mind.

सरस्वतीवचः शुत्वा द्वृषा तां कोपसंयुताम् ।

मनसा च समालोक्य स जगाम वहीःसभाम् ॥ 27 ॥

गते नारायणे गंगामुवाच निर्भयं रूप ।।

वाग्रधिष्ठादुवैसी सा वाक्यं श्वणतुष्करम् ॥ 28 ॥

O Nārada! Hearing Sarasvati's words and knowing that she had become very angry, Nārāyaṇa thought for a moment and then went away from the Zenana outside. When Nārāyaṇa had thus gone away, Sarasvati became fearless and began to abuse Gaṅgā downright out of anger in an abusive language, hard to hear:

है निलेन्जे है सामोने स्वामीयर्न कोरीक विम ।।

अधिक स्वामीसीभाग्यं विज्ञापितुमिच्छयति ॥ 29 ॥

मानचूर्णं कारिवामी तवादा हरिस्विधरी ।

किं कारिवाति ते कान्तो ममैवं कांताल्वणे ॥ ३० ॥

“O Shameless One! O Passionate One! What pride do you feel your husband? Do you like to show that your husband loves you much? I will destroy your pride to-day. I will see to-day, it will be seen by others also, what your Hari can do for you?”

इत्येवमुक्चना गंगायाः केले ग्रहीतुमुभाता ।

वारयामास तां पचा मध्येडरं समाश्रिता ॥ ३ १ । ॥

शगणार याणी तां पचां महावलवती सती ।

वृक्षरूपा सरिद्वा भविष्यासि न संशयः ॥ ३ २ ॥

विपरीतं ततो द्वुहा किंचिछो वक्तुमईसि ।

संतिष्ठिति समाप्तध्ये यथा वृक्षो यथा सत्ति ॥ 33 ॥

Saying thus Sarasvatī rose up to catch hold of Gaṅgā by Her hairs violently. Padmā intervened to stop this. Sarasvatī became very violent and cursed Lakṣmī: 'No doubt you will be turned into a tree and into a river.' In as much as seeing this undue behaviour of Gaṅgā, you do not step forward to speak anything in his assembly, as if you are a tree or a river.

गर्पा श्रुत्वा तु सा देवी न गशाप चुकोप है ।

तत्रेव दुःरिता तस्वी घाणी धृत्वा कोरण चे ॥ 34 ॥

Padmā did not become at all angry, even when she heard of the above curse. She became sorry and, holding the hands of Sarasvatī, remained silent.

असन्तुष्त तु तां तुघुं कोपप्रकृतिताधरम् ।

उदारा भंग तां तेद्वी घरां चारक्तलोचनम् ॥ 35 ॥

श्रीगंगोवाच

ल्यमुत्पुज महोत्रा च पद्य किं के कार्थविस ।

दु:शील मुख्य नष्टा नित्यं वाचालक्षिपणि ॥ 36 ॥

Then Gāngā became very angry; Her lips began to quiver frequently Seeing the mad fiery nature of the red-eyed Sarasvati, she told Lakṣmī: 'O Padme! Leave that wicked foul-mouthed woman.

What will she do to me?

वागधिष्ठी देवीयं सततं कलहप्रिया ।

यावती योग्यता चास्या यावती शक्तिरेव च ॥ 37 ॥

तथा कांगेु वादं च मया साधं च दुर्मुखी ।

स्ववलं यन्मय बलं विज्ञापियुभिच्छिति ॥ 38 ॥

जानन्तु सर्वे तुभयोः प्रभावं विद्मिं सति ।

She presides over speech and therefore likes always to remain with quarrels. Let Her shew Her force how far can she quarrel with me. She wants to test the strength of us. So leave Her. Let all know to-day our strength and prowess.'

इत्येवमुक्त्वा सा देही वाण्ये गर्भा द्वादविति ॥ 39 ॥

सतिलक्ष्मा भवतु सा या त्वां च शपाण च ॥ 40 ॥

अधोमर्त्यं सा प्रयतु सांति यद्रैय पाधिन: ॥ 40 ॥

कली तेचां च पाबानि ग्रहीध्यति न संशय: ।

Thus saying, Gangā became ready to curse Sarasvatī and addressing Lakṣmī, said: O Dear Padmā! As that woman has cursed you to become a river, so I too curse her, that she, too, be turned into a river and she would go to the abode of men, the sinners, to the world and take their heaps of sins."

इत्येवं वचनं श्रुता तां शगण परस्कती ॥ 41 ॥

त्वमेव यास्यसि मही पारिपायं लिभध्यसि ।

एतसिन्नन्तरे तत्र भगवानाजगम है ॥ 42 ॥

Book IX Chapter VI

चतुर्भुज्धतृपिंक्ष पार्वैद्ध चतुर्भुजैः ।

सरस्वती कें धुला वास्यामास वक्षसि ॥ 4 3 ॥

Hearing this curse of Gaṅgā, Sarasvati gave her curse, ‘You, too, will have to descend into the Bhurloka (the world) as a river, taking all the sins of the sinners.’ O Nārada! While there was going on this quarrel, the four-armed omniscient Bhagavān Hari came up there accompanied by four attendants of His, all four-armed, and took Sarasvatī in His breast and began to speak all the previous mysteries.

वोधयामास: सर्वैं: सर्वैं जानं पुरातनम् ।

भुत्वा रहस्यं तासां च शापस्य कलहस्य च ॥ 44 ॥

उवाच दु:वित्तालाङ्ग वार्चं सामविक्ती विषुः ।

Then they came to know the cause of their quarrels and why they cursed one another and all became very sorry. At that time Bhagavān Hari told them one by one:

श्रीभगवानुवाच

लक्ष्म तं कलया गच्छ धार्यक्षजगूहं शुणे ॥ 45 ॥

अयोनिसंभवा भूमी तस्य कन्या भविष्यसि ।

तत्रेव दैवदोषण वृक्षतचं लधियस्थि ॥ 46 ॥

मदंशस्यासुर्येव शंखचुंखर्य कामिनि ।

भृत्वा पशुछ्च मतलनी भविष्यसि न सशयः ॥ 47 ॥

O Laksmi! Let you be born in parts, without being born in any womb, in the world as the daughter in the house of the King Dharma-dhvaja. You will have to take the form of a tree there, out of this evil turn of fate. There Śakhacūḍa, the Indra of the Asuras, born of my parts will marry you. After that you will come back here and be my wife as now.

त्रैलोक्यपावनीनामा तुलसीति च महापाशते ।

कतवा च सरिद्वारं शीर्ष गछ्छ वतानने ॥ 48 ॥

भारतं भारतीशापात्राना पचावती भव ।

गंगे यास्यसि पक्षात्चमंगेन विश्वपावनो ॥ 49 ॥

There is no doubt in this. You will be named Tulasī, the purifier of the three worlds, in Bhārata. O Beautiful One! Now go there quickly and be a river in your parts under the name Padmāvatī.

भारतं भारतीग्रांगायात्पायाद्वाय पाणिनम् ।

भगीरथस्य तपसा तेन नीता सुकल्पिते ॥ 50 ॥

नान्मा भागीरथी पृत्ता भविष्यसि महीतले ।

मदंगस्य समुद्रस्य जायगाजये ममात्राय ॥ 51 ॥

O Gange! You will also have to take incarnation in Bhārata as a river, purifying all the worlds, to destroy the sins of the inhabitants of Bhārata. Bhagiratha will take you there after much entreating and worshipping you; and you will be famous by the name Bhāgirathī, the most sanctifying river in the world.

मत्कलांशस्य भूपस्य शंगनेतोक्ष सुरेश्वरि ।

गंगागपेन कलया भारतं गच्छ भारति ॥ 52 ॥

कलहस्य फलं भूक्ष्य सप्तनीयां सहाच्छुते ।

स्वयं च बह्रासदने बह्वणः कामिनी भव ॥ 53 ॥

There, the Ocean born of my pats, and the King Śāntanu also born of my parts will be your husbands. O Bhāratī! Let you go also and incarnate in part in Bhārata under the curse of Gaṅgā. O Good-natured One! Now go in full Aśnas to Brahmā and become His wife.

गंगा यातु शिवस्थानमत्र पद्वैल त्रितुत ।

शगीत च क्रोधश्रिता मद्धता सत्वधीपि ॥ 54 ॥

महासाधी महाभागा सुगीला धर्मवारीणि ।

यदंगकलया सर्वा धर्मध्रौश्छ पत्रिततः ॥ 55 ॥

Let Gāngā go also in Her fullness to Śiva. Let Padmā remain with Me. Padmā is of a peaceful nature, void of anger, devoted to Me and of a Sāttvika nature. Chaste, good-natured, fortunate and religious woman like Padmā are very rare. Those women that are born of the parts of Padmā are all very religious and devoted to their husbands.

शतंकतपः सुगीताश्र प्रतिविश्वेषु पूजिताः ।

तिचोः भार्थविश्छशीताश्र प्रयो भूयाश्र योधाः ॥ 56 ॥

धूयं वेदविकन्धात्र न होते मंगलप्रदाः ।

सीधुंचच्च गृहे येधां गृहिणां सौविशः पुणम् ॥ 57 ॥

They are peaceful and good-natured and worshipped in every universe. It is forbidden, nor, opposed to the Vedas, to keep three wives, three servants, three friends of different natures, at one

place. They never conduce to any welfare. They are the fruitful sources of all jealousies and quarrels. Where, in any family females are powerful like men and males are submissive to females, the birth of the male is useless.

निष्णतं च जन्म तेषामुर्भं च पदे पदे ।

मुंदे दुहा योगिनुद्य यस्य झी कनहर्धिण ।। ५८  ॥

अरप्यं तेन गोतस्यं महापरयं गृहाद्धारम् ।

जलानां च स्थालानां च फलनां प्राधितेवे च ॥ ५९ ॥

सत्तं सुलभा तत्र न तेषां गृह एव च ।

At his every step, he meets with difficulties and bitter experiences. He ought to retire to the forest whose wife of foul-mouthed, of bad birth and fond of quarrels. The great forest is better for him than his house. That man does not get in his house any water for washing his feet, or any seat to sit on, or any fruit to eat, nothing whatsoever; but in the forest, all these are not unavailable.

वरमन्नी चैवतिहिंहस्यन्ता सचिषी सुखम् ॥ 60 ॥

ततोप्रि दुःखं पुंसां च दुःखसीप्रिषी धुवम् ।

व्याधिज्ञाला विष्जाला वरं पुंसां वरानते ॥ 6 1 ॥

Rather to dwell amidst rapacious animals or to enter into fire than remain with a bad wife. O Fair One! Rather the pains of the disease or venom are bearable, but the words of a bad wife are hard to bear. Death is far better than that.

दृष्टकीर्णां मुख्जाला मरणादितिच्छते ।

पुंसां च क्षीत्रितां चैव भमांतं शौचमधुवम् ॥ 6 2 ॥

यदहि कुलते कर्म न तस्य फलभामपवेत् ।

निर्दितोउ परैवेर सर्वेथा तरकं बजेत् ॥ 6 3 ॥

Those that are under the control of their wives, know that they never get their peace of mind until

they are laid on their funeral pyres. They never see the fruits of what they daily do. Then have no fame any where, neither in this world nor in the next. Ultimately the fruit is this: that they have to go to hell and remain there.

यश: कॉलिंविद्वीने यो जीवजरिय मृतते हि सः ।

बह्वीनां च सप्लतीनां नेकत्र श्रवेश स्थिति: ॥ 64 ॥

एकभार्य: सुखी नैव बहुभार्य: कदाचन ।

गच्छ गंगे शिवस्थानं बह्वाथ्यानं सरस्तिति ॥ 65 ॥

His life is verily a heavy burden who is without any name or fame. Never it is for the least good that many co-wives remain at one place. When, by taking one wife only, a man does not become happy, then imagine, how painful it becomes to have many wives. O Gange! Go to Śiva. O Sarasvatī! Go to Brahmā.

अत्र तिष्ठनु मदनोहे सुगीतना कमलालया ।

सुसाध्या यस्य पत्नी सुगीता च पतिततः ॥ 66 ॥

इह स्वर्गे सुखं तस्य धर्मो मोक्षः परत्र च ।

पतितज्ञा यस्य पत्नी च मुक्तः: शुचि: सुखी ॥ 67 ॥

जीवन्मृतौ3शुचिरुंःखी दुः:शीलनापतिरेव च ॥ 68 ॥

इति श्रीमदेशीभागवते महापुराणे नवमत्कम्पे ष्ठटी3वादाः ॥ 6 ॥

Let the good-natured Kamalā, residing on the lotus remain with Me. He gets in this world happiness and Dharma and in the next Mukti whose wife is chaste and obedient. In fact he is Mukta, pure and happy whose wife is chaste; and he whose wife is foul-natured, is rendered impure, unhappy and dead whilst he is living.

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the coming in this world of Laksmi, Gaughā and Sarasvati in the Mahāpurānam Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam of

18 000 verses by Maharvi Veda Vāśa

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

