CHAPTER XXI

On the Sorrows of Harisćandra

सूत उवाच

एतस्मिन्नरते प्राणत विश्वामिजे महातपः ।

अन्तकेन समः क्रूष्टो धर्न सर्व याचितु हदा ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! At this moment, the Muni Viśvāmitra, endowed with his power of tapas, came up there, very energy as if the God of Death, to ask of his wealth.

तमातोलंच हरिश्रान: परपात भुवि मूर्दितः।

स वारीण तपाध्यूक्ष राजानामिदमवबीत् ॥ 2 ॥

उत्तिष्ठोत्ति राजेन्द्र स्वां दद्वेश्छदक्षिणाम् ।

ऋणं धारयतां दुःखमहान्यदिन वर्धेत ॥ 3 ॥

Seeing him Hariścandra fallen thus senseless on the ground, Viśvāmitra, then, began to sprinkle water on his body. O King! The man who is involved in a debt his troubles increase day by day. So get up and pay your promised Dakṣinā.

आणाययान: स तदा हिमगीतेत वारीणा ।

अवाय्य चेतनां राज विश्वामिवमेव्य च ॥ 4 ॥

पुनर्भौं सभायेदे हाय क्रोधं ययौ मुनि: ।

सभाशयस्य च राजानं वाक्यमात हिंजीतमः ॥ 5 ॥

The King, thus sprinkled with water, cold as snow, regained his consciousness; but, seeing Visvāmitra, he fainted again. At this, the Dvija Visvāmitra consolet him and angrily spoke to him thus:

विश्वासित्र उवाच

दीयतां दक्षिणा सा मे यदि दीयमेवक्षेसे ।

सत्येनाकं: प्रतपति सत्ये तिष्ठिति मेदिवि ॥ 6 ॥

सत्ये चोकाः परो धर्मे: स्वर्गः सत्ये प्रतिष्ठितः ।

“O King! If you want to maintain your steadiness, give, then my Dakṣinā. Look! It is Truth that makes the Sun shine; It is the Truth that has stationed this Earth in its position; what to speak more, even the Svarga is established on Truth; so the greatest Dharma lies in Truth.

अधोपेधसहं सु तस्यं च तुलया धृतम् ॥ 7 ॥

अश्धोपेधसह्याद्धि सत्यमेकं विशिष्यते ।

अथवा किं ममेतेन प्रोक्रेनान्तिप्र प्रयोजनम् ॥ 8 ॥

If the fruit of the thousand Asvamedhas be held in one pan and Truth be held on the other pan of the balance, then Truth outweighs the thousand horse sacrifices or what need I to speak all about this!

मदीयां दक्षिणां राजन दास्यति भवान्यदि ।

अस्ताचलगते हर्कि ग्रण्यामि त्यामतो धूमम् ॥ 9 ॥

इन्युक्ना स ययी विघ प्रा जाचीम्द्यातृः ।

दुःखीभूतोउवनी निःस्वो नृसंगं सुविनाउर्दितः ॥ 10 ॥

O King! If you fail to give my Dakṣinā before the Sunset, I will, no doubt, curse you. Saying this, Viśvāmitra went away. The King also became very terrified. The wealthless King was pained by the words of the Munī; but he was more troubled with the thought how he would pay him and keep to Truth.

सूत उवाच

एतस्मिन्नरो तत्र ब्राह्मणो वेदपारगः ।

ब्रह्मणैबहुभि: सार्थ निर्वयी स्वगृहाद्रिः ॥ 11 ॥

ततो राजी तु तं दूद्वा आयांतं तापसं चित्यत् ।

उवाच वाक्यं राजानं धर्मार्थसहितं तदा ॥ 12 ॥

त्रयाणामयि वर्णानं चिता बाहाणं उद्यन्ते ।

चितुरद्यं हि पुर्णे प्रतील्यं न संग्रयः ॥ 13 ॥

तस्मादयं प्रार्थनीयो धनार्थमिति मे मति: ।

Sūta said: O Rṣis! At this time, a Brāhmīn, skilled in the Vedas, with many other Brāhmīns, started out of his house, at that very place. The queen, then seeing the Brāhmīn ascetic close by, addressed the King in words reasonable and in accordance with the Dharma, O Lord! A Brāhmīn is considered the father of the other three Varnas (i. e., Kṣattriyas, Vaiśyas, and Śūdras) and a son can certainly take the father's things; so it is my intention that you beg your wealth from this Brāhmīn.

Book VII Chapter XXI

राजोवाच

नाहं प्रतिग्रहं कांक्षे क्षत्रियोर्हं सुमध्यमे ॥ 14 ॥

याचनं खलु विघाणां क्षत्रियाणां न विहते ।

गृहर्ि विघो घनानां पूजनीयोर्स्त सर्वदा ॥ 15 ॥

तस्मादुग्नरै याव्यः स्यात्स्विधायां विशेषत: ।

The King said: “O One of thin waist! To beg suits the Brāhmanas; it is prohibited to the Kṣattriyas; I being a Kṣattriya do not wish to take anything as gift.” The Brāhmins are the Gurus of all the Varnas. So they are always to be respected. It is not proper to beg from a Brāhmin; especially the Kṣattriyas never ask anything from the Brāhmins; it is totally prohibited.

यजनाध्ययनं दानं क्षत्रियस्य विधीयते ॥ 16 ॥

शरणागतानामययं प्रजानां प्रतिपालनम् ।

न चायेवं तु चकच्छं देहिती कृपणं चचः ॥ 17 ॥

ददामीचेय मे देवि हदये निहित चतः ।

अर्जित कृत्रचिद्धन्वं ब्राह्माणया ददायमम् ॥ 18 ॥

Offering oblations, study, gift and the governing of subjects and protecting those that take refuge is the Dharma of the Kṣattiryas but they would never, never, ask any other man “Give, give,” and utter these words indicative of humility O Devi! The words “I am giving you” are impressed within my heart; so I will earn money from some other source and give that to the Muni.

पल्युवाच

काल: समविषयक: परिघवसमामानाद: काल: ।

काल: करोति पुरुषं दातारं याचितारं च ॥ 19 ॥

विशेषा विद्या राजा कुब्दोनालिवसीमा ।

राज्याविरस्तः सीख्याच पश्य कालस्य वेधिए् ॥ 20 ॥

The Queen said: “O King! Time keeps some men in one and the same state; again it throws others into troubles; Time it is that give respect to one and again it is Time that gives disrespect to others, Time it is that makes one a donor and it is the same Time that makes another a beggar. See even the Rsi Viśvāmitra, learned and endowed with the strength of Tapasa, becoming angry has deprived you of your kingdom and happiness and

has thus done quite an irreligious act in the shape of tormenting others. You can now judge in this the wonderful workings of Time."

राजोवार

असिना तीक्ष्याधोगे वरं निहा हित्य काता ।

न तु मानं परित्यज्य देहि देवीनि पार्थितम् ॥ 21 ॥

क्षयिगोर्भ महाभागे न याचे किंचिद्यद्वहम् ।

द्वात्मि वारुं तिन्चं हिं पुजवीयाँतिजं धनम् ॥ 22 ॥

The King said: “I would rather cut off my tongue into two pieces by a sharp sword than I would quit my Kṣattrīya pride; and I would never be able to utter the words ‘Give, give,’ O Forunate One! I am a Kṣattrīya; so I never ask anything of anyone. I always say that, by the strength of my arms, I will earn money and pay off my debt.”

पत्युवाच

यदि ते हि महाराज याचितुं न क्षमं मनः ।

अहं तु न्यायाती दत्ता देदेरिपि सवासबेः ॥ 23 ॥

अहं शास्या च पल्या च रथ्या चैव महावृते ।

मन्मौल्यं संगृहीत्वाय गुर्वंधे: संगृदीयात्म ॥ 24 ॥

The Queen said: “O King! Indra and the other Devas have given me over duly to your hands. So I am your religious (legal) wife; especially I have got education and I ought to be protected. Therefore O Luminous One! If you do not like to beg then you can sell me and pay off your Dakṣinā.”

एतद्वावस्यमुपश्यत हरिश्रउते महीपति: ।

कई कदमिती प्रोष्य विललापावितु: बित्त : II 25 ||

भार्यां च भयः प्राहेदं क्रिस्तां वचनं मम ।

विश्रणापानिदन्यत्वासीचलमुपयास्यसि Ⅱ 26 ||

The King Harisācandra became grieved very much to hear these words and lamented, saying "O What a painful thing is this! What a painful thing is this!" His wife again spoke: "O King! Will we, afterwards, be burnt by the fire of curse from a Brāhmin and thus lowered very much? So keep my word now."

न युत्रतैलोनं च महद्धेतोनं राजस्थेतोनं च भोगहेतोः ।

दद्वस युवंधितो मया तं स्वस्वतं तं स्वस्त कंकव ॥ 27 ॥

इति शीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे सनमककभे इरिक्रजीपालयाने

एकविशो3ध्याः ।। 28 ।। 

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

You are selling me, not because that you are infatuated with desire for gambling nor you are deprived of all knowledge by enjoyments in worldly things nor you are selling me owing to avert the danger of your kingdom. It is that you are selling me to pay off the debt to your Guru. So

nothing sinful a fault will be incurred by you. So sell me and keep to Truth and the fruits thereof." Here ends the Twenty-first Chapter of the Seventh Book on the description of the sorrows of Hariścandra in the Mahāpurānam, Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

