CHAPTER XIV

On Trísańku's Going to the Heavens

व्यास उवाच

विविच्य मनसा कृत्वं गाधिम्युतुर्महताप: ।

प्रकल्प्य यज्ञसंगात्म्युनीनामंत्रयसन्ति ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Setting in his mind what to do, the great ascetic Viśvāmitra collected all the materials necessary for the sacrifice and invited all the Munis.

मुसयस्तं यज्ञं जात्वा विश्वामित्रनिमन्त्रतः ।

नातातः सर्वे पृवैते वसिष्ठेन निवारिताः ॥ 2 ॥

Thus invited by Viśvāmitra, the Munis became informed all about the sacrifice; but, owing to the fact that the Muni Vasisṭṭha prevented them, none of them went to the sacrifice.

गाधिमुस्त्रताजय विन्याश्रातितूःखितः ।

आजगामाग्रयं तत्र यत्रात्रौ नृपति: स्थितः ॥ 3 ॥

तमाह कौगिकः कुळ्ठी वसिष्ठेन निवारिताः ।

नात्ता ब्राह्मणाः सर्वे यज्ञां नृपसन्म ॥ 4 ॥

When Viśvāmitra, the son of Gādhi, came to know this, he became very anxious and very sad and came to this King Trīśanku and sat. The Maharṣi Kauśika then became angry and said: "O King! Vasīṣṭha preventing, the Brāhmins have all refused to come to the sacrifice.

पश्य मे तपस: सिंद्धि यथा त्वां सुरस्पधनि ।

प्राप्यामि महागत वार्तिहतं ते कोरोम्यम् ॥ 5 ॥

इत्युक्चा जलमायादा हस्तेन मुनिसतमः ।

ददौ पुरुषं तदा तस्मै गायत्रीजयसम्बन् ॥ 6 ॥

But, O King! See my power of tapasyā; I will immediately fulfil your desires; I will instantly send you to the Heavens, the abode of the Gods." Thus saying, that Muni took water in his hand and repeated the Gāyatrī Mantram. He gave to the King all the Punyams (merits) that he collected for himself up to then.

दत्त्वा3थ सुकृतं राजे तमुवाच महीपतिम् ।

यथेहं गच्छ राजर्षे जिविष्यमतंद्रितः ॥ 7 ॥

पुर्ण्येन मय राजेन्द्र बहुकालाजितेन च ।

याहि शक्रपुरीं प्रीतः स्वास्ति तेजस्तु सुरालये ॥ 8 ॥

Giving him thus all the Punyams, he spoke to the King: "O King! Throw away all idleness and go to the abode of the Gods you wanted to go. O King of Kings! Gladly go to the Heavens by the power of all the merits collected by me for a long time and let you fare well there."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तवित विग्रेड शिर्फुकत्सता ततः ।

उत्पात यथा पक्षी वेगावंत्सपो बलात् ॥ 9 ॥

Vyāsa spoke: O King! When the King of the Vipras, Viśvāmitra, spoke thus, the King Triśanku, by virtue of the Muni's Tapas, got high up in the air without any delay like a quick flying bird.

उत्पत्थ नगोर राजा गतः शक्रभूर्ति यदा ।

दृष्टी देवगणीस्त्र कुर्धश्रांतलवेषणाक् ॥ १० ॥

कथितोउली सुरैद्य कॉउद्यमायित सत्वरः ।

गगने देववादा यो दुरुर्गः क्षयचाकृति: ॥ ११ ॥

Thus getting up and up, when the King reached the abode of Indra. The Devas, seeing the terrible Cāndāla-like appearance of Trisanku, spoke out to Indra: "Who is this person coming like a Deva with a violent speed in the air?

सहसोत्थाय शक्रत्नपर्यनुकाध्यम् ।

जाला शिर्णंकुमपि स निर्भन्थर तसास्वबीत् ॥ 12 ॥

शपच क्व समायासि देवलोके जुग्यमितः ।

याहि शीर्घं तते भृपी नात्र स्थातुं त्वयीवित्तम् ॥ 13 ॥

Why does he look like a Cāndāla and is so firecooking?" Hearing thus, Indra got up at once and saw that one, the meanest of the human beings and knowing him to be Trísānku reproachingly said to him: "You are a Cāndāla, quite unfit for the Devaloka; so where are you going? You ought not to remain here; so go immediately back to the earth."

इतुक्तः स्वक्षिततः स्वाराष्ट्रिकोपामित्रकर्शन । निपयात्त तदा राजा क्षीणपुरयो यद्धासप्रः ॥ 14 ॥ पुनश्छुकोश भूपालो विश्वामिवेति चासकृत् । पतामि सर्व दुःखात्तं स्वर्यान्धवलितमायुगग् ॥ 15 ॥

O Destroyer of the enemies! Indra speaking thus, the King dropped from the Heavens and, like a Deva whose merits had been exhausted, fell down immediately. Tríśañku then cried out frequently "O Viśvāmitra! O Viśvāmitra! Being displaced from the Heavens I am now falling very violently; so save me from this trouble."

तस्य तत्कमित्तं राजपन्ततः कौशिको भूति: ।

शुत्वा तिक्षिति होावय पतन्तं वीक्ष्य भूपतिन् ॥ १६ ॥

वचनात्तस्य तनैव स्थितोउसी गाने नृप ।।

भुनेस्तपःप्रभावेण चतिलोत्तिप सुरालयात् ॥ 17 ॥

O King! Hearing his cry and seeing him getting down, Viśvāmitra said: "Wait, Wait." Though displaced from Heaven, the King by virtue of the Muni's Tapas, remained stationed at that place in the middle of the air.

विश्वाधिजोपय: स्यूहा चकोल्टिं शुविस्ताप् ।

वियातुं नृत्ता युंडि सर्वगलोकं द्वितीयकम् ॥ १ ८ ॥

Vísvāmitra then began to do Ācāmana (sip water) and commenced his great Sacrifice to create another new creation and a second Svargaloka (Heaven).

तस्योदायं तथा ज्ञाता स्वितस्तुं ज्योपिति: ।

तत्राजगाना सहसा मृति प्रति तु गाधिजम् ॥ १९ ॥

Seeing his resolve, the Lord of Śacī became very anxious and eagerly came to the son of Gādhi without the least delay and said:

किं ब्रह्मिकते साधो कस्माकोपसमाकृतः ।

अरने सुक्षा मुनिश्रेष्ठ बृष्टि किं करवाणि ते ॥ २० ॥

“O Brāhmaṇa! What are you going to do? O Saint! Why are you so very angry? O Muni! There is no necessity to create new creation. Order now what I am to do.

कौशिक जवाच

स्वं निवासं महीपालं च्युतं लब्द्ववनादिषो ।

नयस प्रीतिवोर्गेन प्रिशंकुं चातिदुःखितम् ॥ 21 ॥

Vísvāmitra said: “O Lord of the Devas! The King Trísānku has become very miserable to have a fall from the Heavens. Therefore this is now my intention that you gladly take him to your own abode.”

व्यास उवाच

तस्य तं निश्रयं ज्ञाला तृपाषडितीशक्ति: ।

ततो बलं विवितोयभोपित्युवाच वास्वः ॥ 22 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Indra was thoroughly aware of his determined resolve and very powerful asceticism; so he accepted to do according to his word, out of terror.

विष्यहेदे नृपं कृत्वा विमानवरसंश्वितम् ।

आपुष्छ्य कौणीक्ष शक्रोजगमवित्रपुरीं तद ॥ 23 ॥

The Lord Indra then gave the King a bright and divine body and made him take his seat in an excellent car and taking leave Kauśika went with the King to his own abode.

गते शक्र तु वै वर्गरि शिवकुसहिते ततः ।

विश्वासि: सुरुं प्राय स्वास्थे सुख्येतेपवत् ॥ 24 ॥

Vísvāmitra became glad to see Triśanku go to the Heavens with Indra and remained happy in his own Śārama.

हरिश्छोउल सत्यूला विश्वामिजोपकारकम् ।

यितुः खर्यमं कामं मृदितो राज्यम-वशगत् ॥ 25 ॥

The King Harisācranda, now hearing that his father has gone to Heaven by virtue of his Tapas, began to govern his kingdom with a gladdened heart.

अयोध्यापित: कीडों चकार सह भारय।

रूपयीवनचातुर्युत्क्या प्रीतिसंयुत: ॥ 26 ॥

The King of Ayodhyā began then to live constantly with his clever wife, full of youth and beauty. Thus time passed away; but the beautiful wife did not become pregnant.

अत्तिकाले युवती न सा गर्भवर्ती हृष्णत् ।

तदा चिन्तानुरो राजा बभूवातीव दुःखितः ॥ 27 ॥

The King became very sorry and thoughtful. He then went to the holy hermitage of Vasistha and bowing down informed him of his mental agony due to his getting no son.

Book VII Chapter XIV

वसिष्ठस्यामां गत्वा प्रणम्य शिरसा मुनिन् ।

अनपत्यल्वजां चिन्तां गुरवे समवेदवत् ॥ 28 ॥

दैवज्ञोरिति भवान्कामं मन्त्रविद्यार्थिगरातः।

उपायं कुक धर्मत्र संततैर्मे मानद ॥ 29 ॥

“O Knower of Dharma! You are skilled in the Science O Mantrams. Especially you know everything of Daiva (Fate). So, O Giver of honour! Do for me so that I get a son. O Best of Brāhmins! There is no salvation for one who has not got any son, you are well aware of this.

अपूत्रस्य गतिनीर्ति जानासि द्विजसत्ता ।

कस्मातुप्रेषसे जाननुःखं मम च शक्तिमान् ॥ 30 ॥

कतर्विकारित्वचे धन्या चे शिशुं लालयन्ति हि ।

मन्दभायोर्धमनिंश पित्तयामि द्विवानिशम ॥ 31 ॥

Then why do you overlook my case when you can remove my sorrow. Even these sparrows are blessed who nourish their offsprings. And I am so very unfortunate that, day and night, I am immersed in cares and anxieties, due to my not having any son."

व्यास उवाच

इत्याकर्ण्यं मुनिसत्यस्य निर्वेदमिश्रितं वचः ।

संचित्य मनसा सम्यतभूयाच चियेः सुतः ॥ 32 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing these pitiful utterances of the King, Vasiṣtha thought over in his mind and spoke to him everything in particular.

वसिष्य उवाच

सत्यं बृषे महाराज संसारोप्रम्ब विहते ।

अनपत्यत्वजं दुःखं यतथा दुःख्यमुद्रत् ॥ ३३ ॥

तस्याच्यपि राजेन्द्र वरणं यात्यां पतिम् ।

समाराधय यनेन स ते कार्य कारिष्यति ॥ 34 ॥

Vasistha said: O King! True you have spoken that in this world there is no other sorrow more pain giving than the state of not having any issue. Therefore, O King! you worship with great care the water-god Varuna. He will crown your efforts with success.

वक्तणाद्धिको नासित देवः सन्तानदायकः ।

तमाराधय धर्मिह कार्यसिद्धर्भविध्वति ॥ 35 ॥

दैर्व पुरुषकारश माननीयाविमो नृपि: ।

उद्योग विना कार्यसिद्ध: संजायते कवम् ॥ 36 ॥

There is no other god than Varuna to grant sons. So, O Virtuous One! Worship Him and you will get success. Both Fate and Self-exertion are to be respected by men; how can success come unless efforts are made.

न्यायतस्तु नरैः कार्य उद्यमस्तचदर्गिधि: ।

कृते तत्मभ्यवेस्तिपद्रानन्यथा नुपसत्तभ ॥ 37 ॥

इति तस्य वचः श्रुत्वा गुरोरमिततेजसः ।

प्रणाय्य निर्वयी राजा तपसे कृतनिष्ठाय: ॥ 38 ॥

O King! Men who realise the Highest Truth should make efforts, guided by just rules; success comes to those who work; else never one is to expect success." Hearing these words of the Guru, of unbounded energy, the King made a fixed resolved and bowing himself down, went away to practise tapasyā.

गंगातीरे शुषे ख्याने कृतपदासने नृप: ।

ध्यायमार्णधरं चित्ते चराग दुर्घरं तपः ॥ 39 ॥

एवं तप्यस्ततस्य प्रचेता दृष्टिगोचर: ।

कृपयाद्धभूमहात्रा प्रसभ्युर्षकंजः ॥ 40 ॥

On the banks of the Ganges, in a sacred place, seated on Padmāsana, the King became merged in the meditation of the God Varuna with noose in his hand and thus practised severe asceticism. O King! When he was doing this, the god Varuna took pity on him and gladly came before his sight.

हरिश्रद्रमुवाचेदं वचनं यादसां पति: ।

वरं वरय धर्मत्र तुढोरमि तपसा तव ॥ 4 1 ॥

Varuna, then, spoke to the King Hariścandra: "O Knower of Dharma! I am glad at your tapasyā. So ask boons from me."

राजोवाच

अनयलोर्यसि देतेशे पूर्व देहे सुखप्रदम् ।

ऋणत्रयापहातार्थिमुद्यामोउं घया कृतः ॥ 42 ॥

नृपस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा प्रगल्यं दुःखितस्य च ।

सिमपूर्व ततः पाशी तमहा पुरतः स्थितम् ॥ 43 ॥

The King said: "O God! I am without any son; give me a son, who will give me happiness and

will free me from the three debts that I owe to the Devas, the Pitrs and the Rsis. Know that with that object I am doing this Tapasyā." Then the God Varuna, hearing these humble words of the sorrowful King, smiled and said.

སྒྲགས་སྐབས

पुत्रो यदि भवेत्राजनपुर्णी मनसि वाक्छतः ।

सिद्धे कार्य ततः पशुतिकं कार्थिस मे पिश्म ॥ 44 ॥

यदि त्वं तेन तुप्रेणा मां यजेधाविर्यिकतः ।

पशुबन्धोने तेनैव द्वामि नृपते वरम् ॥ 45 ॥

“O King! If you get your desired well-qualified son, what will you do for me to my satisfaction? O King! If you perform a sacrifice in honour of me and fearlessly sacrifice your son there like an animal, I will then grant you your desired boon.”

राजोवाच

देव मे मासुं घट्यच्च योष्येर्दं जलाधिम् ।

परुं कृत्वा सुतं पुरं सत्यमेतदूब्बीमि ते ॥ ४६ ॥

वंटयत्वे परमं दु:ख्यासहां भृवि मानत ।

शोकाकिनियमनं नृणां तस्मादेहि सुतं शुभम् ॥ ४७ ॥

The King: “O Deva! Free me from this state of sonlessness; O Water God! When my son will be born, I will do your sacrifice with my son as an animal in that. This I speak truly to you. O Giver of honour! There is no suffering more unbearable than this one: not to have any son; so grant me a good son so that all my sorrows be vanished.”

वरूण उवाच

भविष्यति सुतः कामं राजनच्छ गृहाय वै ।

स्वयं तद्वचने कार्य व्यद्धवीषि ममात्रतः ॥ 48 ॥

Varuna said: “O King! You will get a son as you desire; go home; but see what you have spoken before be fulfilled and turned true.”

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तो वकर्णोनासी हरीक्षान्त्री गृहं ययै ।

भार्यावी कवयामास वृत्तांं वदानजम् ॥ 49 ॥

तस्य भार्यार्गतं पूर्णे बभूवातिसमनोहरम् ।

पटुरात्री गुभा शैल्या धर्मपन्ती पतितता ॥ 50 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing these words from Varuṇa, Hariścandra went back and told everything about his getting the boon to his wife. The King had one hundred exquisitely beautiful wives of whom, Śaivyā was the lawful wife and queen and was very chaste.

काले गतेश्व सा गर्भे द्वारा वरवर्णिनी ।

बभूव मुदितो राजा श्रुत्वा दोहद्वेहितम् ॥ 51 ॥

कार्यायास विधिवल्संक्कारावृष्यतित्वा ।

मासेख द्वामे पूर्णे सुखेव सा गुधे दिने ॥ 52 ॥

After some time, that wife became pregnant and the King became very glad to hear this and her longings in that state. The King performed all her purificatory ceremonies, and when ten months were completed, and on an auspicious Nakṣatra and on an auspicious day, she gave birth to a son, like that of a Deva son.

तारायद्वलोपेते पूत्रं देवसुतोपम् ।

पुत्रे जाते नृपः स्नाला श्राङ्गणे: परिवहितः ॥ 53 ॥

चकार जातकर्मादीन् ददौ दानानि भूग्रिंशः ।

राजशातिपुमोदोःभृत्युजन-व्यमसुक्रद्वः ॥ 54 ॥

On the birth of his son, the King, surrounded by the Brāhmins, performed his ablutions and first of all performed the natal ceremonies and distributed innumerable jewels and much wealth; and the King's joy knew no bounds at that time.

बभाव परभोदाएं धनधान्यसमितितः ।

विशेषदानसंयुक्तो गीतवादिरसंकुलः ॥ 55 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवर्गेमाहुपुणे सतमकचे

चतुर्वैगोउवाः: 11 14 11

The liberal King gave away, in special charities, wealth, grains, and various jewels and lands and had the performance of music, dancing and other things.

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the going to Heavens of Trísañku and the commencement of Harisācanda's narrative in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XV

