[Ch 14 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Setting in his mind what to do, the great ascetic Viśvāmitra collected all the materials necessary for the sacrifice and invited all the Munis.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Settling in his mind what to do, the great ascetic Viśvāmitra collected all the materials necessary for the sacrifice and invited all the Munis.

[Ch 14 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus invited by Viśvāmitra, the Munis became informed all about the sacrifice; but, owing to the fact that the Muni Vasisṭṭha prevented them, none of them went to the sacrifice.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus invited by Viśvāmitra, the Munis became informed all about the Sacrifice; but, owing to the fact that the Muni Vaśiṣṭha prevented them, none of them went to the sacrifice.

[Ch 14 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Viśvāmitra, the son of Gādhi, came to know this, he became very anxious and very sad and came to this King Trīśanku and sat. The Maharṣi Kauśika then became angry and said: "O King! Vasīṣṭha preventing, the Brāhmins have all refused to come to the sacrifice.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Viśvāmitra, the son of Gādhi, came to know this, he became very anxious and very sad and came to the King Triśaṅku and sat. The Maharsi Kauśika then became angry and said :-- “O King! Vaśiṣṭha preventing the Brāhmins have all refused to come to the sacrifice.

[Ch 14 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But, O King! See my power of tapasyā; I will immediately fulfil your desires; I will instantly send you to the Heavens, the abode of the Gods." Thus saying, that Muni took water in his hand and repeated the Gāyatrī Mantram. He gave to the King all the Punyams (merits) that he collected for himself up to then.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But, O King! See my power of tapasyā; I will immediately fulfil your desires; I will instantly send you to the Heavens, the abode of the Gods.” Thus saying, that Muni took water in his hand and repeated the Gāyatrī Mantram. He gave to the King all the Puṇyams (merits) that he collected for himself up to then.

[Ch 14 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Giving him thus all the Punyams, he spoke to the King: "O King! Throw away all idleness and go to the abode of the Gods you wanted to go. O King of Kings! Gladly go to the Heavens by the power of all the merits collected by me for a long time and let you fare well there."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Giving him thus all the Puṇyams, he spoke to the King :-- “O King! Throw away all idleness and go to the abode of the Gods you wanted to go. O King of Kings! Gladly go to the Heavens by the power of all the merits collected by me for a long time and let you fare well there.”

[Ch 14 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa spoke: O King! When the King of the Vipras, Viśvāmitra, spoke thus, the King Triśanku, by virtue of the Muni's Tapas, got high up in the air without any delay like a quick flying bird.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa spoke :-- O King! When the King of the Vipras, Viśvāmitra, spoke thus, the King Triśaṅku, by virtue of the Muni’s Tapas, got high up in the air without any delay like a quick flying bird.

[Ch 14 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus getting up and up, when the King reached the abode of Indra. The Devas, seeing the terrible Cāndāla-like appearance of Trisanku, spoke out to Indra: "Who is this person coming like a Deva with a violent speed in the air?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus getting up and up, when the King reached the abode of Indra, the Devas, seeing the terrible Cāṇḍāla-like appearance of Triśaṅku, spoke out to Indra :-- “Who is this person coming like a Deva with a violent speed in the air?

[Ch 14 Verse 12-13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Why does he look like a Cāndāla and is so firecooking?" Hearing thus, Indra got up at once and saw that one, the meanest of the human beings and knowing him to be Trísānku reproachingly said to him: "You are a Cāndāla, quite unfit for the Devaloka; so where are you going? You ought not to remain here; so go immediately back to the earth."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Why does he look like a Cāṇḍāla and is so fierce-looking?” Hearing thus, Indra got up at once and saw that one, the meanest of the human beings and knowing him to be Triśaṅku, reproachingly said to him :-- You are a Cāṇḍāla, quite unfit for the Devaloka; so where are you going? You ought not to remain here; so go immediately back to the earth.

[Ch 14 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Destroyer of the enemies! Indra speaking thus, the King dropped from the Heavens and, like a Deva whose merits had been exhausted, fell down immediately. Tríśañku then cried out frequently "O Viśvāmitra! O Viśvāmitra! Being displaced from the Heavens I am now falling very violently; so save me from this trouble."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Destroyer of the enemies! Indra speaking thus, the King dropped from the Heavens and, like a Deva whose merits had been exhausted, fell down immediately. Triśaṅku then cried out frequently “O Viśvāmitra! O Viśvāmitra! Being displaced from the Heavens I am now falling very violently; so save me from this trouble.”

[Ch 14 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Hearing his cry and seeing him getting down, Viśvāmitra said: "Wait, Wait." Though displaced from Heaven, the King by virtue of the Muni's Tapas, remained stationed at that place in the middle of the air.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Hearing his cry and seeing him getting down, Viśvāmitra said :-- “Wait, wait.” Though displaced from Heaven, the King by virtue of the Muni’s Tapas, remained stationed at that place in the middle of the air.

[Ch 14 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vísvāmitra then began to do Ācāmana (sip water) and commenced his great Sacrifice to create another new creation and a second Svargaloka (Heaven).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viśvāmitra then began to do Ācaman (sip water) and commenced his great Sacrifice to create another new creation and a second Svargaloka (Heaven).

[Ch 14 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing his resolve, the Lord of Śacī became very anxious and eagerly came to the son of Gādhi without the least delay and said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing his resolve, the Lord of Śacī became very anxious and eagerly came to the son of Gādhi without the least delay and said :--

[Ch 14 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Brāhmaṇa! What are you going to do? O Saint! Why are you so very angry? O Muni! There is no necessity to create new creation. Order now what I am to do.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Brāhmaṇa! What are you going to do? O Saint! Why are you so very angry? O Muni! There is no necessity to create another new creation. Order now what I am to do.”

[Ch 14 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vísvāmitra said: “O Lord of the Devas! The King Trísānku has become very miserable to have a fall from the Heavens. Therefore this is now my intention that you gladly take him to your own abode.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viśvāmitra said :-- “O Lord of the Devas! The King Triśaṅku has become very miserable to have a fall from the Heavens. Therefore this is now my intention that you gladly take him to your own abode.”

[Ch 14 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Indra was thoroughly aware of his determined resolve and very powerful asceticism; so he accepted to do according to his word, out of terror.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Indra was thoroughly aware of his determined resolve and very powerful asceticism; so he accepted to do according to his word, out of terror.

[Ch 14 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Lord Indra then gave the King a bright and divine body and made him take his seat in an excellent car and taking leave Kauśika went with the King to his own abode.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Lord Indra then gave the King a bright and divine body and made him take his seat in an excellent car and taking leave of Kauśika went with the King to his own abode.

[Ch 14 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vísvāmitra became glad to see Triśanku go to the Heavens with Indra and remained happy in his own Śārama.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viśvāmitra became glad to see Triśaṅku go to the Heavens with Indra and remained happy in his own Āśrama.

[Ch 14 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King Harisācranda, now hearing that his father has gone to Heaven by virtue of his Tapas, began to govern his kingdom with a gladdened heart.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King Hariścandra now hearing that his father has gone to Heaven by virtue of his Tapas, began to govern his kingdom with a gladdened heart.

[Ch 14 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King of Ayodhyā began then to live constantly with his clever wife, full of youth and beauty. Thus time passed away; but the beautiful wife did not become pregnant.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King of Ayodhyā began then to live constantly with his clever wife full of youth and beauty. Thus time passed away; but the beautiful wife did not become pregnant.

[Ch 14 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King became very sorry and thoughtful. He then went to the holy hermitage of Vasistha and bowing down informed him of his mental agony due to his getting no son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King became very sorry and thoughtful. He then went to the holy hermitage of Vaśiṣṭha and bowing down informed him of his mental agony due to his getting no son.

[Ch 14 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Knower of Dharma! You are skilled in the Science O Mantrams. Especially you know everything of Daiva (Fate). So, O Giver of honour! Do for me so that I get a son. O Best of Brāhmins! There is no salvation for one who has not got any son, you are well aware of this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Knower of Dharma! You are skilled in the Science of Mantrams. Especially you know everything of Daiva (Fate). So, O Giver of honour! Do for me so that I get a son. O Best of Brāhmins! There is no salvation for one who has not got any son; you are well aware of this.

[Ch 14 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then why do you overlook my case when you can remove my sorrow. Even these sparrows are blessed who nourish their offsprings. And I am so very unfortunate that, day and night, I am immersed in cares and anxieties, due to my not having any son."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then why do you overlook my case when you can remove my sorrow. Even these sparrows are blessed who nourish their offsprings. And I am so very unfortunate that, day and night, I am immersed in cares and anxieties, due to my not having any son.

[Ch 14 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing these pitiful utterances of the King, Vasiṣtha thought over in his mind and spoke to him everything in particular.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing these pitiful utterances of the King, Vaśiṣṭha thought over in his mind and spoke to him everything in particular.

[Ch 14 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vasistha said: O King! True you have spoken that in this world there is no other sorrow more pain giving than the state of not having any issue. Therefore, O King! you worship with great care the water-god Varuna. He will crown your efforts with success.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vaśiṣṭha said :-- “O King! True you have spoken that in this world there is no other sorrow more painsgiving than the state of not having any issue. Therefore, O King! you worship with great care the water-god Varuṇa. He will crown your efforts with success.

[Ch 14 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There is no other god than Varuna to grant sons. So, O Virtuous One! Worship Him and you will get success. Both Fate and Self-exertion are to be respected by men; how can success come unless efforts are made.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There is no other god than Varuṇa to grant sons. So, O Virtuous One! Worship Him and you will get success. Both Fate and Self-exertion are to be respected by men; how can success come unless efforts are made.

[Ch 14 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Men who realise the Highest Truth should make efforts, guided by just rules; success comes to those who work; else never one is to expect success." Hearing these words of the Guru, of unbounded energy, the King made a fixed resolved and bowing himself down, went away to practise tapasyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Men who realise the Highest Truth should make efforts, guided by just rules; success comes to those who work; else never one is to expect success.” Hearing these words of the Guru, of unbounded energy, the King made a fixed resolve and bowing himself down, went away to practise tapasyā.

[Ch 14 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the banks of the Ganges, in a sacred place, seated on Padmāsana, the King became merged in the meditation of the God Varuna with noose in his hand and thus practised severe asceticism. O King! When he was doing this, the god Varuna took pity on him and gladly came before his sight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the banks of the Ganges, in a sacred place, seated on Padmāsan, the King became merged in the meditation of the God Varuṇa with noose in his hand and thus practised severe asceticism. O King! When he was doing this, the god Varuṇa took pity on him and gladly came before his sight.

[Ch 14 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Varuna, then, spoke to the King Hariścandra: "O Knower of Dharma! I am glad at your tapasyā. So ask boons from me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Varuṇa, then, spoke to the King Hariścandra :-- “O Knower of Dharma! I am glad at your tapasyā. So ask boons from me.”

[Ch 14 Verse 42-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King said: "O God! I am without any son; give me a son, who will give me happiness and will free me from the three debts that I owe to the Devas, the Pitrs and the Rsis. Know that with that object I am doing this Tapasyā." Then the God Varuna, hearing these humble words of the sorrowful King, smiled and said. སྒྲགས་སྐབས
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King said :-- “O God! I am without any son; give me a son, who will give me happiness and will free me from the three debts that I owe to the Devas, the Pitris and the Ṛṣis. Know that with that object I am doing this Tapasyā.” Then the God Varuṇa, hearing these humble words of the sorrowful King, smiled and said.

[Ch 14 Verse 44-45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O King! If you get your desired well-qualified son, what will you do for me to my satisfaction? O King! If you perform a sacrifice in honour of me and fearlessly sacrifice your son there like an animal, I will then grant you your desired boon.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! If you get your desired well-qualified son, what will you do for me to my satisfaction? O King! If you perform a sacrifice in honour of me and fearlessly sacrifice your son there like an animal, I will then grant you your desired boon.

[Ch 14 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King: “O Deva! Free me from this state of sonlessness; O Water God! When my son will be born, I will do your sacrifice with my son as an animal in that. This I speak truly to you. O Giver of honour! There is no suffering more unbearable than this one: not to have any son; so grant me a good son so that all my sorrows be vanished.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King :-- “O Deva! Free me from this state of sonless-ness; O Water God! When my son will be born, I will do your sacrifice with my son as an animal in that. This I speak truly to you. O Giver of honour! There is no suffering more unbearable than this one, not to have any son; so grant me a good son so that all my sorrows be vanished.”

[Ch 14 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Varuna said: “O King! You will get a son as you desire; go home; but see what you have spoken before be fulfilled and turned true.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Varuṇa said :-- “O King! You will get a son as you desire; go home; but see what you have spoken before be fulfilled and turned true.”

[Ch 14 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Hearing these words from Varuṇa, Hariścandra went back and told everything about his getting the boon to his wife. The King had one hundred exquisitely beautiful wives of whom, Śaivyā was the lawful wife and queen and was very chaste.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Hearing these words from Varuṇa, Hariścandra went back and told everything about his getting the boon to his wife. The King had one hundred exquisitely beautiful wives of whom, Śaivyā was the lawful wife and queen and was very chaste.

[Ch 14 Verse 51-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After some time, that wife became pregnant and the King became very glad to hear this and her longings in that state. The King performed all her purificatory ceremonies, and when ten months were completed, and on an auspicious Nakṣatra and on an auspicious day, she gave birth to a son, like that of a Deva son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► After some time, that wife became pregnant and the King became very glad to hear this and her longings in that state. The King performed all her purificatory ceremonies, and when ten months were completed, and on an auspicious Nakṣatra and on an auspicious day, she gave birth to a son, like that of a Deva son.

[Ch 14 Verse 53-54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the birth of his son, the King, surrounded by the Brāhmins, performed his ablutions and first of all performed the natal ceremonies and distributed innumerable jewels and much wealth; and the King's joy knew no bounds at that time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the birth of his son, the King, surrounded by the Brāhmins, performed his ablutions and first of all performed the natal ceremonies and distributed innumerable jewels and much wealth; and the King’s joy knew no bounds at that time.

[Ch 14 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The liberal King gave away, in special charities, wealth, grains, and various jewels and lands and had the performance of music, dancing and other things. Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the going to Heavens of Trísañku and the commencement of Harisācanda's narrative in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The liberal King gave away, in special charities, wealth, grains, and various jewels and lands and had the performance of music, dancing and other things. Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the going to Heavens of Triśaṅku and the commencement of Hariścandra’s narrative in the Mahā Purāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
