CHAPTER XXIV

On Dhūmralocana

व्यास उवाच

देल्यासद्धचनं श्रुत्वा से दृतः प्राह विविसतः ।

किं बूढ़े रुचिरणाष्ट्र क्षीस्वभावाद्धि साहास्ता ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The messenger was thunderstruck with Devi's words and said: "O Beautiful Lady! What art Thou speaking? It seems that Thou dost no think on this matter, owing to Thy feminine nature.

इन्हादा चिर्षिता येन देवा दैत्यलाशअउपरे ।

तं कयं समरे देँवे जेतुनिष्छ्वसि पाधिनी ॥ २ ॥

O Devi! Thou art boasting in vain; how canst Thou expect to conquer Śumbha in a battle when he was conquered Indra and other Devas and many other Dānavas?

त्रैतोक्ये तात्पूर्णो नासित यः शुर्णं समरे जयेत् ।

का तवं कमलपत्रासित तस्यागो युधि संग्रतम् ॥ ३ ॥

O Lotus-eyed One! There is no hero in the three worlds that can conquer Sumbha in battle; Thou seemest to be a mere trifle before that King of Demons in a face-to-face fight.

अविरवार्य न चत्कयं चत्वयं क्वाणि सून्दरि ।

बलं स्वपर्योजिता चत्क्यं समयोत्रितम् ॥ 4 ॥

O Fair One! Nowhere ought to be said any words without being thought over; one must weight the one's own and other's might and then speak accordingly.

त्रैतौक्यापित्रितः शृष्यस्तव रूपेण गोहितः ।

त्वां च प्रार्थयेत राजा कुक्र तस्येशितं प्रिये ॥ 5 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

The King Šumbha, the Lord of the three worlds, enchanted by Thy fascinating beauty, is desirous of Thee; therefore dost Thou fulfill his desires and become his beloved wife.

स्वक्तम मुर्षस्वभारे लं समान्य वचनं मम ।

भज सुभ्यं निर्युभ्यं वा हितमेतद् ब्बीपि ते ॥ 6 ॥

Thou better now abandonest Thy illiterate nature and worshippest Šumbha or Niśumbha; I am speaking for Thy good; so keep my words.

शूज्ञ: सर्वेथा सर्वैं: प्राणिधिः: परथा मुदा ।

सेवनीयो बुद्धिमद्धिन्नानामुनीभे ससः ॥ ७ ॥

The amorous love sentiment is the best of nine prevailing sentiments. Therefore every intelligent being ought to cherish with gladness this amorous feeling.

नागमिष्यसि चेद्राले संकूद्रः पृथिवीपति: ।

अन्यान्ताकान्योथ वलाज्येथिति साम्यान् ॥ ८ ॥

And if Thou, O Weak girl! dost not go to Sumbha, then that Lord of the Earth will become very angry and will order his servants to take Thee perforce before him.

कैशोलाकृष्य ते नूनं दानवा बलदायिताः ।

त्वां निय्थिति वामोक ततसा शुंभसब्धिधी ॥ 9 ॥

O Fair One! Those proud Demons will carry Thee by holding Thy hair before Šumbha; there is no doubt in this.

स्वतलजां रक्ष तत्वंभी साहसं सर्वेथा त्यज ।

मातिता गच्छ ततार्थे मानपात्र यंतोत्रि वे ॥ १० ॥

O thin bodied One! Bener forego Thy boldness in every way and keep Thy self-respect. Thou art the object of respect and admiration and so should go before him.

वव युद्धे निशितेबीण: वव सुखं तिलसृजम् ।

सारासारं परिच्छेध कुक मे वचनं पटु ॥ १ १ ॥

भवं शुभ्यं निषुभयं वा लब्धाजिस परमं शुभम् ।

What difference is there between the fight which makes one's body liable to cuts and wounds by sharp arrows and pleasures that arise out of sexual intercourse! These are like the two opposite poles; therefore judge what is useless and what is

useful and keep my good advice. Thou shalt be exceedingly happy if Thou servest Šumbha or Niśumbha.

देव्यवाच

सत्यं दूत महाभाग प्रवक्तुं निपुणो हासि ॥ १२ ॥

निशुभ्यभूषी जानाभि बलर्वेनीविति धुवम् ।

प्रतिजा मे कृता बाल्याद्यथा सा कर्व भवेत् ॥ १३ ॥

The Devi spoke: 'O Messenger! You are fortunate; you are well trained to speak out truth; I know full well that Śumbha and Niśumbha are strong. Still out of my childish nature, the promise that I made before I cannot undo it.

तस्मादुहि निष्यूभं च गुभ्यं वा बलवततम् ।

विता युद्धं न ने भर्ता भविता कोउपि सीघडान् ॥ 14 ॥

Therefore speak to the powerful Śumbha or Niśambha that none can be my husband simply from his beauty. Without defeating Me in battle no one marry Me.

वित्ता में तरस का कंर रंगहुतु सामघत् ।

युढ़ेच्छया समावातां विद्धि माबलतं चूर ॥ 15 ॥

So conquer Me soon and marry Me as you like. Though of a weaker sex, I have come here to fight; know this as certain.

युढ़ं दैहि समर्थोस सीतभर्म समाचर ।

विशेषि मम गुताव्येन्यातालं भवळ माधिसम् ॥ 16 ॥

Therefore if you be capable, fight and do the duty of a warrior. And if you be terrified by seeing my trident or if you want your life, quit the Heavens and this earth and go down to Pātāla without any delay.

विदिवं च धरा त्यक्वा जीवितेच्छा यद्यति ते

इति दूत बदलु चं नाला स्वपतिमादगत् ॥ 17 ॥

O Messenger! Go just now to your master and tell him sweetly these words. Then that powerful Lord of the Dānavas will judge what ought to be done.

स विचार्यं यथा युक्तं कार्त्थिति महावलः ।

संसारे दूतधार्मोंयं यत्सत्यं भाषणं किल ॥ 18 ॥

ज्ञाने पर्यो च धर्मत्र तथा लं कुम भ चित्रम् ।

O Knower of Dharma! To speak out truth before

Book V Chapter XXIV

an enemy, before one's own master is certainly the duty of a messenger in this world; therefore go quickly and tell him what are verily true.

व्यास उचाच

अथ तद्वचनं शुत्वा नीतिमढ़तसंयुतम् ॥ 19 ॥

हैतुयुक्त प्राणचं च चित्मितः प्रययी ततं ।

गत्वा दैत्यपर्ति तृता चिवाएं च पुनः पुनः ॥ 20 ॥

प्राणय पादयोः प्रद्धः प्रत्युवाच नृचं च तम् ।

राजनीतिमयं वाक्यं यदुपूर्वि प्रियं वचः ॥ 21 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The messenger was quite surprised to hear the bold words, though full of reason and morals, of the Devi, puffed up by the vanity of Her strength and departed. Coming to the Lord of Daityas, the messenger bowed down before his feet and told him sweet words, full of morals, in a very humble way after pondering over and over again what he would say.

दूत उवाच

सत्यं प्रियं च चल्यं तेन चित्तायरो हहाम ।

सत्यं प्रियं च राजेन्द्र चवनं दुर्वर्भ किल ।। 22 ॥

The messenger said: O King! Words, true and the same time sweet, ought to be spoken before one's master; but these are very rare in this world.

अधियं वदतां कामां राजा कुयतेति सर्वथा ।

सायात्कृत: समायाता कस्य वा किंकलाजवलि ॥ 23 ॥

On the other hand, if unpleasant words be spoken, the King gets very angry. So I am very anxious now. O King! Whether that lady is weak or strong, whence has She come, whose wife is She, I have not been able to ascertain all these.

न ज्ञानोगेचं किंचितिकं बलीमि विचेहितम् ।

युद्धकामा मया द्वा गर्यिता कटुपभाषिणी ॥ 24 ॥

How then can I say about Her conduct? But, on seeing that harsh speaking woman, I have come to understand this much that She is exceedingly haughty and has come to fight.

तया यत्कक्षितं स्यन्तकृष्णुव महामते ।

मया वाल्यास्त्रितियं कृता पूर्वं विज्ञोदतः ॥ 25 ॥

O King! You are very intelligent; therefore

judge what ought to be done after hearing only what that lady has told me to speak to you.

सखौनीं पुत्तः काम विद हं प्रति सर्वथा ।

यो मां युद्धे जयेद्धा दर्षे च विधुँतीते में ॥ 26 ॥

तं वरीचायम्हे कामां पर्तिं समवलं किल ।

न मे प्रतिज्ञा मिथ्या सा कर्तेल्या तृपसत्ति ॥ 27 ॥

That Lady said: “In days of childhood, while I was playing, out of my childish nature, I promised before my comrades that I would marry that valiant warrior who would defeat me thoroughly in a battle and thus curb My pride. O best of kings! You are religious; so you ought to make My word turn out false.

तस्याद्धूब्द्वास धर्मत्र जित्वा मां स्ववर्गं कृतः ।

तथेति व्याह्त्रत वाक्यं श्रुलाउंहं सपुपगततः ॥ 28 ॥

Bring Me under your control by defeating Me in a battle." O King! Hearing these words I have returned; now do whatever you like.

यथेच्छसि महाराज तथा कुक्र तव प्रियम् ।

सा युद्धर्व कृतमति: सायुधा सिंहगामिनि ॥ 29 ॥

निश्छला वर्तेत पूय यद्योग्यं तद्धिपयातम् ।

That Lady is determined to fight and is waiting there, firmly mounted on a lion, and with various weapons in Her hands. Now judge and do what is best.

व्यास उवाच

इत्याकपयं चचनस्तस्य सुप्रीयस्य नाराधिः ॥ 30 ॥

पूषच्छ घातरं शूरं समीपस्यं महावलम् ।

Vyāsa said: “O King! Hearing thus the words of Sugrīva, the king Śumbha asked his hero brother Nísumbha who was close by.

गृभ्र उवाच

घातः किमत्र कर्तेल्यं बृहि सत्यं महामते ॥ 31 ॥

नार्यका योदयुकामापत्स समाढ्यवित समानुम् ।

अहं गच्छामि संग्रामे लं वा गच्छ बलान्धितः ॥ 32 ॥

यद्रोचते निर्गुभाधु तत्कर्तेनंच मया किल ।

O Brother! You are intelligent; speak out truly what ought to be done now? The lovely woman is challenging us to fight. Shall I go to fight or you would go with forces? I will do whatever you say.

<table><tr><td>निरुभूम उवाच</td></tr><tr><td>न मया न त्वया वीर गतन्ध्यं रणामूर्पिति ॥ 3 3 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>प्रेयमव्म महागरा त्वितं धूपलोचनम् ।</td></tr><tr><td>स गत्वा तां रोय चित्वा गृहीत्वा चारक्लोतवाग्य ॥ 3 4 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>आगमिष्यति शुभ्योउत्र विवाह: संविद्यितात् ।</td></tr><tr><td>Nisūmbha said: O King! It is not proper that you or I would go to the battle field. Better send Dhūnralocana to the field quickly. Let that hero go there and defeat that beautiful Lady and bring Her here. You can then marry Her.</td></tr></table>

व्यास उवाच

<table><tr><td>तिश्रिया वचस्तस्य शुष्पो धातुः कनीयसः ॥ 35 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>कोपातसंप्रयवामास पार्थस्यं धूप्तोचनम् ।</td></tr></table>

Vyāsa said: Hearing thus his younger brother's words, Śumbhā filled with anger, instantly sent Dhūmralocana who was close by to battle.

शृष्म उवाच

<table><tr><td>धूपतोचन गछासु सैन्येन महता3प्रत्: ॥ 36 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>गृहीतास3नय तां मुर्धा स्ववीयंमदोहिताम्।</td></tr><tr><td>देवे वा दानवो वाउपि मनुष्यो वा महावल: ॥ 37 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>तत्याधिण्रातां प्राप्तो हेत्व्यतस्ता तथा ।</td></tr></table>

Śumbha said: “O Dhuñmalocana! Take a vast army and go at once to the battle-field and bring that stupid Lady, vainly boasting of Her strength. If any Deva, Dānava or any other powerful human being take Her side, kill him instantly.

तत्यार्थवर्तिनी काली हवा संगुहा तां पुन: ॥ 38 ॥

गीधमत्र समागच्छ कृत्वा कार्यमन्तुजम् ।

स्थपीया त्वया साखी मुंडतीं घुद्यागरणा ॥ 39 ॥

Slay Her companion the Goddess Kālī and bring Her too. Do all these responsible duties and return quickly. That Chaste Lady is to be protected by all means. The body of that thin Lady is very delicate; so shoot arrows at Her very carefully and see that they are not sharp.

यत्नेन महता वीर यदुदेहा कृणोदरी ।

तत्सहायश्छ हत्वय ये एंग राश्वाणयाः ॥ 40 ॥

सर्वथा सा न हन्तव्या रक्षणीया प्रयन्ततः ।

But kill those that will help Her with weapons

in their hands. Try your best to protect Her, never to kill Her.

व्यास उवाच

इत्यादिष्टस्तव त्राता तस्या ध्रुपलोचनः ॥ 4 1 ॥

प्रणय युंभं सैन्येन वृतः शीर्धं ययो रणे ।

असाधूनां महस्वाणं घघ्टा तेपां वृतस्तथा ॥ 4 2 ॥

स ददर्श ततो देर्वी रयोघवनसंशिताम् ।

Vyāsa said: “O King! No sooner ordered thus by the king, Dhūmralocana bowed down to the king, and, accompanied by sixty thousand Dānava forces, quickly went to the battlefield and saw there that the Lady was sitting in a beautiful garden.”

दृष्टा तां भुगाशाङ्गी विनयेन सम्वित्तः ॥ 4 3 ॥

उवाच च्चनं शल्बगं हेतुमद्रभूषिव्मा ।

भ्यु तैये महाभागे शुभस्वविद्धरातुः ॥ 4 4 ॥

Seeing that deer-eyed Lady, Dhūmralocana began to address Her with great humility and in sweet words full of reason and goodness. O Devi! O highly Fortunate One! Hear! Śumbha is very much distressed owing to Thy absence.

दूतं प्रेषितवान्यार्थं त्व नीतिथगारः ।

स्वभंभपवीदानः सामपूर्वं लयि स्वयम् ॥ 45 ॥

नेतासगत्य वचः प्रोक्त विषतीतं वराने ।

Lest there be any break in the love sentiments, that King, a wise statesman, sent a messenger with instructions to speak Thee in sweet and suitable terms; but, O fair One! That messenger, on arriving before the King had told all the contrary words.

वचसा तेन मे भर्ता चिन्ताविष्टमान नृप: ॥ 46 ॥

बंभूव रसमार्गे सुंभ: कामविमोहित: ।

O Knower of love sentiments! Hearing thus the messenger's words, my lord Śumbha, sick with love, has become immersed in cares an anxieties. That messenger had not been able to realise the true meaning of Thy words.

सूनेत तेन ने सात हेतुगर्भ वचस्वल ॥ 47 ॥

यो मां जयित संग्रामे यदुक्तं काटिनं वचः ।

O honourable Lady! “The sentence uttered by Thee “He who will conquer me in battle” is full

Book V Chapter XXIV

of deep meanings; he was stupid; hence he could not realise the meaning of the word “battle” intended by Thee.

न ज्ञातसेन संग्रामो ब्रिविधः खलु मानिनि ॥ 4 8 ॥

रतिजोअलासाइज प्रापत्रे देववर्भितः ।

रतिजल्यवि यामोगे शग्रोत्स्मात्र: स्मृतः ॥ 4 9 ॥

सुखदः प्रथमः कानते दुःखद्धारिजः स्मृतः ।

ज्ञानाम्बं वरात्रेे भवत्या मानसं कित् ॥ 5 0 ॥

रतिसंगमभावसे हृदये परिवर्तेत ।

इति जन्मं विदित्या मां तलत्कारां नराधिप: ॥ 51 ॥

प्रेयमायाम सुभोउघ बलेन महान3उतून ।

O Beautiful One! “Battle” means two different things according to persons for whom it is intended; it is of two kinds—One out of excitement and another out of sexual intercourse. With Thee, the sexual intercourse is intended; and with any other enemy, excitement in a real fight is meant. Out of these, the fight of sexual intercourse is full of sweetness and the fight with enemies is painful. O Beautiful One! I know Thy intentions fully. In Thy heart reigns that fight of sexual intercourse. Knowing me as expert in these affairs, the king Šumbha has sent me today to Thee with a vast army.

चतुरासि महाभागे शृणु मे वचनं मृदु ॥ 52 ॥

भज सुभयं जितोकों देवदर्पिनहाईपम् ।

पुतजी प्रिया भूत्वा भूख्व भोगननुचमम् ॥ 53 ॥

O highly Fortunate Lady! Thou art clever and shrewd; hear my gentle words; serve Śumbha, the lord of the three worlds, the destroyer of the Deva's pride. Thou wilt be the dearest queen-consort and enjoy the best pleasures.

उर्वति तां महाबाहुः शुभम्: कामवलार्थवित् ।

विविचाकृतः हावांस्वे संप्रिय भावाकार्थियों ॥ ५४ ॥

The powerful Śumbha knows the real meaning of the fight of sexual intercourse; so he will easily conquer Thee. When Thou wilt shew various amorous gestures, he will also show his feelings.

भविष्यति कारिकेकयं तव नैं नासांखिणी ।

एवं संगार्योगेन पतिमं परमार्थवित् ॥ 55 ॥

जिवा तां सुकुषायायां पशिज्ञानो कर्णिष्ठिति ।

रक्तद्रोहां नखायातैर्दैनंश खण्डताथगम् ॥ 56 ॥

स्वेदविक्त्वां प्रभनां तां संविधास्यति भूपति: ।

भविता मानसः कामो रतितंभागजनम् ॥ 57 ॥

And the Kālika Devi, your companion will remain with Thee as a helping mate in your vital pleasure. The lord of the Daityas, expert in the science of love, will certainly conquer Thee engaged in amorous fight and will lay Thee stretched on a soft bedding and will make Thee tired; he will make Thy body covered with blood by striking with nails and he will bite Thy lips to pieces; then Thou wilt perspire profusely and will cease fighting. Thus Thy mental desire for fight—sexual intercourse—will be satisfied.

दर्शनाड्रण एवाले सुभ्म: सर्वान्तम प्रिये ।

वचनं कुर मे पथ्यं हितकृष्णविष येशन्तम् ॥ 58 ॥

O Beloved! At Thy mere sight Śumbha will be completely subject to Thee. Therefore dost Thou keep my sweet and beneficial words.

जय शुभं भणाध्यधं माननीयात्मानिनि ।

मद्भाग्याश्र ते नृनं हृत्यवृद्धिणश्र शे ॥ 59 ॥

Thou art an honourable Lady; and Thou wilt be highly honoured by all if Thou merriest Śumbha. Those are certainly very unfortunate who like fighting with weapons. O Beloved! The sexual intercourse is always favourite to Thee; therefore it is not worthy of Thee to fight with weapons.

न तद्योसि कान्ते चंख सदा सुत्तवल्लभे ।

अंगोंके कुर राजानं पाद्वाताविकासिन् ।

बकुलं सीधुसेंकेन तथा कुरबक कुरु ॥ ६० ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे वैदीमहान्ये

चतुर्विंशोस्थाः ॥ 61 ॥

Therefore dost Thou make the king free of sorrows by pouring on him Thy mouth nectar and by making his heart bud forth by Thy kicking, as Bakula and Kurubaka trees blossom forth when drenched with mouth nectar and Aśoka trees gets blossomed by the kicking of woman.

Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the description Dhimralocana giving the news in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

