CHAPTER VIII

On the Description of the Origin and the Form of the Devi

व्यास उवाच

तरसा ते5थ संग्राम्य वैकुंद विद्युवल्पभम् ।

ददुगु: सर्वशोगसहा विद्यगृद्विवारज्ञिन। ॥ 1 ॥

सरोवारीसरित्रिक्षा संयुतं सुखदं शुभम् ।

हंससारसचकाढ़ेः कुजार्द्रिक्ष शिवाजिनम् ॥ 2 ॥

चंयकागोककक्रामन्यारव्यकुलावरे: ।

मल्लकातिलकाप्रातयुतेः कुरबकादिभि: ॥ 3 ॥

Vyāsā said: Soon the Devas reached Vaikuntha, protected by Viṣṇu; they at once began to look at the exquisite indescribable beauty of the place. At intervals they saw nice lovely divine houses, shining and appearing very splendid; pools and lakes were seen in front of them beautified with Kalhāra lotus flowers. They began to see, at other places, rivers flowing; swans, cranes, Cakravākas and other aquatic birds were swimming there easily and warbling lovely sounds.

कोकितारावसादोः शिशडेंनूरतिष्ठतः ।

भ्रमरावरम्येश दिव्येकपवनेयुन्ति ॥ ४ ॥

At other places again, beautiful gardens came to their sight adorned exquisitely by Campaka, Asoka, Mandāra, Bakula, Āmrataka, Tilaka, Kurubaka and Mallikā and various other flower trees, the cuckoos were seen cooing melodiously,

bees humming gently and peacocks dancing beautifully.

सुनन्दान्वनाडीध पार्वैर्भक्तित्वरः ।

संसृवाईद्धूर्त भक्तान्यभव्यतिभि: ॥ 5 ॥

प्रासदै तन्तब्धितः काऊनैश्रिभागिष्ठतः ।

अभितिरहैरिजाद्धः संयुतं शुभमसचके: ॥ 6 ॥

There were Viṣṇu's Pārṣadas or attendants, Sunanda, Nandana, and others; they were so much devoted to their master that there hearts never become attached to any other thing; so they were devotedly singing His praises and chanting His hymns with undivided attention. In the centre was situated the golden palace of Hari, towering to heavens, the rooms and quadrangles were all charming; at places, they were bedecked with gems and jewels and adorned with various paintings. There was the Divine Seat in the centre, composed wholly of gems and jewels; and Viṣṇu was occupying this place.

नायाद्रिद्वैरान्यर्वैर्यन्द्रिसरोगणीः ।

राज्ञत क्रिनरै: गश्छत्ककदोनोहैः ॥ ७ ॥

There were dancing the Apsarās (celestial nymphs) and the Devas, Gandharvas, and Kinnaras were singing in melodious tunes.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

सुनिभिश्र तथा शान्तैर्वैदपाठकृतादौः ।

सुर्जाद्धः श्रुतिसूर्जेश्ठ मणिडतं सदनं होः ॥ 8 ॥

Those who love the chanting of the Vedas, such calm-tempered Munis were reciting the Vedic Sūktas and thus highly extolled Him.

ते च विद्यगृहं प्राय्य द्वारपाली सृष्णाकृतीं ।

वीधेमोचुर्जनिविजयो हेमयहिष्टयी त्रिचिति ॥ 9 ॥

The two lovely gate-keepers Jaya and Vijaya were waiting at the entrance gate with golden sticks in their hands; the Devas coming nigh the city of Viṣṇu caught sight of them and said:

गतैकी3प्युष्योमीये निवेदयुतं सगतान् ।

द्वारस्यान्वहान्द्वारीनील्याणुदर्सनेलालतान् ॥ 10 ॥

"Any of you may go and inform Viṣṇu that Brahmā, Rudra, and the whole host of gods are waiting at His door to see Him."

व्यास उवाच

विवसन्तुचः शुत्वा गावत्ध विणुपसित्रों ।

सर्वान्समगतान्देवान्पगम्योवाच सत्वर ॥ १ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing their words, Vijaya went away at once to Viṣṇu; and, saluting Him, informed Him of the arrival of the Devas.

विजय उवाच

देवंदेव महाराज रमाकान सुरारिह्न ।

समगातः सुरा: सर्वेत्रारि निष्ठिति वि विषो ॥ 12 ॥

Vijaya said: O Lord! Thou destroyest the enemies of the gods; hence Thou art the most worshipped of them. O Lord of Rama! The whole hosts of gods have come and are waiting at Thy door.

ब्रह्मा रुद्रलयंद्रिक्ष वर्जण: पावको यमः ।

सुर्बनि ने देवावस्यैरल्यामसरा दर्जानिधिनः ॥ १३ ॥

O Bibhu! Brahmā, Rudra, Indra, Varuna, Fire and Yama and other gods, anxious to see Thee, are all praising Thee by proper hymns.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छुवा खचनं विद्याप्रिवजस्य सपापति: ।

निर्विगाम गृहानुर्ण सुरान्समिधिकोस्वः ॥ १४ ॥ ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing Vijaya's words, Viṣṇu, the

Lord of Ramā became very anxious and soon went out of his room to see the Devas.

गत्वा बीध्य हर्पिंद्वान्त्रास्थान्युकमक्रिणतान् ।

प्रीतिप्रवाणया वृद्धया प्रीणवामास दुःवितान् ॥ 15 ॥

प्रणेपुले सूरा: सर्वे देवदेवे जनादनम् ।

नुयुद्धुः सुरारिध्ने वारिभर्देविनिश्रितम् ॥ 16 ॥

देवा ऊचुः

देवदेव जगाधाय सृष्टिश्वयन्तकाकर ।

द्वासिस्मो महाराज जाहि नः शरणभगतम् ॥ 17 ॥

Hari came up to them and seeing the Devas waiting at the doors very morose and tired, cheered them up by casting a favourable glance full of affection and love. The gods bowed down and praised hymns to Jagannātha the Deva of the Devas, the enemy of the Daityas and revealed in the Vedas. O Deva of Devas! Thou art the Creator, Preserver, and the Destroyer of the worlds; Thou art the ocean of mercy and the sole refuge of this Universe; O Lord! We have come to Thee as our Great Refuge; therefore dost Thou save us from the present difficulty. Thus praised by the gods,

विष्यान्वाच

विश्नान् निजांना: सर्वें कुर्जानं कवयंतु वः ।

आसमेषु क्रियर्व वै मितितानः समुपानतः ॥ 18 ॥

Viṣṇu said: O Immortals! Take your respective seats and speak how are you all? Why have you all in a body come here?

चितानुतः कर्व जाता विष्णणा दौन्यानसतः ।

ब्रह्मडेण सहिताः कार्य प्रवृत् सत्वम् ॥ १९ ॥

Why are you so much depressed and worn out with cares? Why do you look so melancholy? Say soon for what purpose you with Brahmā and Rudra have come here.

देवा ऊचुः

महिषेण महाराज पीडिताः पायकर्माण ।

असाध्योनातिदुढेन वरतूदेतने पायिना ॥ 20 ॥

The Devas said: "O Lord! The Asura Mahiṣa is very cruel and wicked; always addicted to vicious acts; now that most sinful Dānava has

Book V Chapter VIII

become very much puffed up with pride and is tormenting us always."

यजभागासी धुंकने बाह्योः प्रतियादितान् ।

अभसा मितिरुर्भु घमन्ति च भयानुतः ॥ 21 ॥

What more shall we say than this, he is appropriating to himself the share of the Yajñas performed by the Brāhmins; we are, therefore, terror-stricken and are wandering in mountains and fastnesses.

वरतूनेन धातुः स दुर्जयो मधुसूदन ।

तमाच्चां राणेंण प्राणा ज्ञाला तत्कार्योपरिब्य ॥ 22 ॥

O Destroyer of Madhu! He has become unconquerable due to his being granted the boon; considering, therefore, the gravity of our situation we have taken refuge unto Thee.

समर्पेसि समुद्रुतै दैत्यमायाविशारत ।

कुक कृष्ण कथोपायां तस्य दानवमदाने ॥ 23 ॥

O Kṛṣṇa! Thou art acquainted with all the tricks and Māyā of the Daityas; therefore Thou art capable to kill them.

धाता तसै वरी दते ह्वायधोत्रिस नरै: कित ।

का कृती लेवेथिति बाला या ह्यन्ता गर्भे एने ॥ 24 ॥

Therefore Thou alone art able to deliver us from the present difficulty; be pleased, therefore; to devise means for that purpose. The Creator Brahmā has granted him this boon that the demon could not be killed by any man; therefore we are asking you where can we get a female who will be able to kill that hypocrite in battle.

उमा मा वा जयी विदा का समर्थन्य धानते ।

महिष्यसातिदुर्ध्य  वरतदानकलादपि ॥ 25 ॥

Mahīsa has turned out very wicked on the strength of that boon; say, therefore, who amongst Umā, Laksmī, Śacī, or Vidyā or any other woman will be able to kill him.

विधिन्य बुद्धा यत्सर्वे मरणमायाय कारणम् ।

कुरु कार्य च देवानां भक्तवलस्त पृधार ॥ 26 ॥

Therefore, O Gracious One to faithful worshippers and attendants! Thou art the Preserver of this world; now devise specially the cause of his death and carry out the purpose of the gods."

व्यास उवाच

श्रुत्वा तद्वचनं विध्यास्नानुवाच हसचित्व ।

युद्धं कृतं पुरास्माथिसतथापि न पृते होसी ॥ 27 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Viṣṇu, on hearing their words, spoke smiling “we fought before; but this Asura could not at that time be killed.

अष्ट सर्वसुगणां वे तेजोपी रूपसमयदा ।

उत्पत्रा चेहतुरोहा सा द्यन्ता एगे वन्ता ॥ 28 ॥

Hence if some beautiful female Deity be now created out of the collective energy and form of the Śaktis of each of the Devas, then that Lady would be able easily to destroy that Demon by sheer force.

ह्यारि वरतूनं च मायाशतविशगदम् ।

हन्तु योग्या भवेत्रागी सक्योर्गेनिंर्मिता हि नः ॥ 29 ॥

The Lady Deity then sprung from the collective energy of ours, would at once be able to destroy that Mahisa, elated on his getting the power, though he is skilled in hundreds of Māyās (magics).

प्रार्थिन्तु च तेजौगान्यवीयेरमाकं तथा पुनः ।

उत्पर्शैतेक्षे तेजौगैरेजेजारीर्षभवैशया ॥ ३० ॥

आयुधानि वयं द्वा: सर्वं म्हडुपोगमाः ।

तस्यैं सर्वांणि दिव्यानि विगुतावीति याचि ॥ ३१ ॥

Therefore ask ye now all, with your wives respectively, boons from that portion which resides in you all in the form of Fiery Energy, that the collected energy thus manifested may assume the from of a Lady. We will then offer unto Her, all the Divine weapons, the tridents, etc., that belong to us.

सर्वायुधधरा नारी सर्वतेज:सम्यित्ता ।

हनिष्यति दुरान्यानं ते पार्थ मदार्थविंन्म ।। ३२ ॥

That Deity, then, full of energy and with all the weapons in Her hands would kill that wicked Demon, vicious and swelled with vanity.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तविति देवेशे बढ़ाणो बदनाततः ।

स्वयमेवोद्धपी तेजोराशिष्ठातील दुःसहः ॥ 33 ॥

Vyāsa said: On Viṣṇu, the Lord of the Devas, saying thus, came out spontaneously, at once, of the face of Brahmā, the brilliant fiery energy, very difficult to conceive.

त्क्तवर्णं शुभाकां पदारागमिणिपुम् ।

किंघिष्ठतीततवाणेणं मरिफाजलमिफितृदान् ॥ 34 ॥

That energy looked red like gems and pearls, hot, at the same time, a little cool, having a beautiful form, and encircled by a halo of light.

निःसृतं हरिणा दृष्टं हेण च महात्मना ।

विमित्ती तो महाराज कंप्यतुरुककमो ॥ ३५ ॥

O King! The high-souled Hari and Hara, of mighty valor, were astonished to see this Fire, emitted from Brahmā.

शूक्रस्य शरीगत् नि:सुतं महद्धूतम् ।

तीयवर्णिभूतीजं दुर्दर्ग भटानं म्हत् ॥ ३६ ॥

Next came out of the body of Śankara, His fiery spirit, quite in abundance and very wonderful to behold; it was silvery white, terrible, unbearable, and incapable of being seen even with difficulty.

भयंकरं च दैत्यानां दैत्यानां विस्मयप्रदम् ।

घोरकरं निरिग्रष्टं तमोगुणमिवापरम् ॥ 37 ॥

ततें विश्वगुरीतृ नेजोराशिमिवापगम् ।

नीलं सत्त्वगुणोमेत प्रादुरास महाद्वुति ॥ 38 ॥

It extended like a mountain and looked horrible as if the incarnation of the Tamo Guṇa like another Tamo Guṇa (Śiva is the incarnation of Tamo Guṇa that destroys everything). It was very surprising to the Devas and very fearful to the Daityas. Next a dazzliug light of blue colour emanated from the body of Viṣṇu.

ततश्रैस्त्रशीरानु चित्रकरूपं दुरासदम् ।

आविरासीतुसंवृतं तेजः सर्वेगुणात्मकम् ॥ 39 ॥

The light that came out of the body of Indra was hardly bearable, of a beautiful variegated colour, and comprised in itself the three qualities.

कुर्वयमद्धीनां शरोरिथः: सर्वतः ।

निश्छाकाम महतैजो वक्णस्य तथेच च ॥ 40 ॥

Thus masses of lights came out respectively from Kubera, Yama, Fire and Varuna.

अन्येधो देव देवानां शरीरभेधोस्तिषायम् ।

निरितं तन्महतेजो राशिरासीन्होज्जलः ॥ 41 ॥

तं दृष्टवा विमताः सर्वे देवा विद्यापुर्णोगाः ।

तेजोराशि महाद्विद्धे महापचलमिवापगम् ॥ 42 ॥

The other Devas, too, gave their shares of fiery lights, very lustrous and splendid. Then these all united into a great Mass of Fire and Light. Like another Himālayan mountain shone full their lustrous Divine light; Viṣṇu and the other Devas were all extremely surprised to see this.

पश्चतां तत्र देवानां तेतःपुड्वसमूद्वा ।

बभूवातिवारा नारी सुन्दरी विस्मयपदा ॥ 43 ॥

While the Devas were thus looking steadfastly on that Fire, an exquisitely handsome Lady was born out of it, causing excitement and wonder to all.

विरुगना सा महातलबीः सर्वदेवगरीरा ।

अष्टादशुपत्रा रम्या त्रिवर्गा विश्यामौहिने ॥ 44 ॥

This Lady was Mahā Lakṣmī; composed of the three qualities, of the three colours, beautiful, and fascinating to the universe.

छेतानान कृष्णेनत्र सेरत्धारयपल्ला ।

ताप्यपीलातन कान्ता दिव्यमूषणभूषिता ॥ 45 ॥

Her face was white, eyes were black, her lips were red and the palms of her hands were copper-red. She was adorned with divine ornaments.

अष्टादिषुना देती सहसधुजमण्डिता ।

सम्पृतासुरनायास तेजोराशिसमुद्वा ॥ 46 ॥

The Goddess was now manifest with eighteen hands, though She had a thousand hands (in Her unmanifested state). Now She became manifest out of the mass of fire, for the destruction of the Asuras.

जनमेवय उवाच

कृष्ण देव महाभाग सर्वत्र मुनिस्तम ।

विस्तं बृहि तस्यास्वं शरीरस्य समुद्धम् ॥ 47 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Best of the Munis! O Kṛṣṇa! You are highly fortunate and you are all-knowing. Kindly describe, in detail, the birth of Her body.

एकीभृतं च सर्वेयं तेकः किं वा पृथविस्वलम् ।

अज्ञानि चैव तस्यास्तु सर्वतेजोभयानि च ॥ 48 ॥ ॥

O Deva! Please say whether the energies of all the gods united into one or remained separate? Whether Her body and Her limbs were all luminous.

Book V Chapter VIII

भिवभाणविधानेन जातान्यंशानि यानि तु ।

भुखनासक्षिभेदेन सर्वैकभवानि च ॥ 49 ॥

Was it that Her face, nose, eyes, etc., and all other parts of Her body were created out of the different fires respectively or whether was it that those limbs were fashioned when the different fires blended into one huge mass?

खृष्टि तहित्तरं व्यास शरीग्रभुगुद्वम् ।

वधूव यस्य देवस्य तेजसोड़ं यददुन्ति ॥ 50 ॥

आयुधाभरणादीनि दत्तानि वैयंथा यथा ।

सत्वरं श्रौतकामोप्रिय तव्याद्वंजिनितम् ॥ 51 ॥

Describe, in detail, the origin of the body and the several limbs thereof; also inform me the limbs that were produced out of the corresponding Deva's fiery part; as well tell me the several ornaments and several weapons given by the several Devas respectively. I am very desirous to hear all these from your lotus-like mouth.

न हि तृत्याद्यई बहन-सुधायसर्वे पिचन् ।

चरितं च महातल्य्यास्त्वमुखाधोपजिन:सुतन् ॥ 52 ॥

O Brāhmaṇa! Hearing from your lotus-like mouth the life and doings of Mahā Lakṣmī, the sweet juice as they are, I am as yet not satiated (and am desirous to hear more).

सूत उवाच

इति तस्य वचः शुत्वा रात्रः सत्यवतीसुत ।

उवाच मधुरं वावयं प्रीणयाद्वितः भूषितम् ॥ 5 3 ॥

Sūta said: Veda Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati, hearing his words addressed him in the following sweet words:

व्यास उवाच

शृणु राजन्महाभाग विस्तरेण इवीमि ने ।

यथामिति कुरक्षेष्ठ तस्या देहसमुद्वम् ॥ 54 ॥

"O Best of Kurus! Very fortunate you are. I will describe in detail, to the best of my understanding, the origin of Her body.

न ब्रह्मा न हरि: साहित्य मूर्तो न च चायसः ।

याथानाथेन तृप्तं वर्फुभीगः कदाचन ॥ 55 ॥

Even Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Mahēśa and Ir.īra are

never competent enough to describe Her form properly.

कर्ष जानाम्यहं देल्या यदुर्ण यायुर्णं चतः ।

वाचारम्पणामांत ततुव्येति ब्रवीमि यत् ॥ 56 ॥

As I already told you that She sprung at the instant the word was spoken, how then can I ascertain the form or likeness of the Devi.

सा निवा सर्वदैवासते देवाकार्यांसिद्धये ।

नानाक्या तेकरका जायते कार्यांगीतात् ॥ 57 ॥

She is constant, She is always existent; though She is one, yet She assumes different forms for the fulfilment of the Deva's ends, whenever their positions become serious.

यथा नटो रंगगती नानाक्पो भवत्यसौ ।

एकल्पव्यभावोशि लोकैरान्वेतेचे ॥ 58 ॥

तथैषा देवकायांधीम्वापरि स्वलीला ।

क्रोतीत बहुकूपणि निरुणा सुगणानि च ॥ 59 ॥

Though the actor is one, yet for the entertainment of the spectators, he assumes different forms in the stage, so the Nirgunā Devi, though formless, assumes in Her pastime, many different forms of Sāttvik, Rājasik or Tāmasik qualities, to fulfill the Deva's purposes.

कार्यकर्मानुसारेण नामानि प्रवर्तिन हि ।

धात्वर्विणुपुक्तानि गौणानि सुबहृद्वपि ॥ 60 ॥

There are various names given to Her, according as the works done by Her vary immensely in their natures, just as the meanings of one root vary, some being principal and some secondary, according to the meanings and objects they convey.

तदै बुद्धानुसारेण प्रबंधीयि नराधिप ।

यथा तेज:सुद्धुभूत रूपं तत्या मनोहतम् ॥ 61 ॥

O King! I will now describe to you, as far as my knowledge goes; the Excellent Form that came out of that mass of Celestial Light.

शुक्रस्य च यतेजसेन तन्मुखपूजम् ।

शुतिचर्षे शुभाकामजावतं महत्तम् ॥ 62 ॥

Her grand beautiful white lotus-like face was created out of the fiery energy of Śaṅkara.

केशातस्यास्त्वासिन्मधाय्यनेतेज्ञापवम् ।

वक्राग्राशितिरीधों वै भेवरणों मनोहरा: ॥ 63 ॥

Śrimaddevatbhāgavatam

Her glossy black beautiful hairs of the head, overhanging to the knees, were formed out of the light of Yama; these all came to a fine pointed end.

नयन्नितियं तस्या जज़े पाचकतेजसा ।

कृष्णा रन्के तथा श्रेते वर्णत्रयविष्यिष्मि ॥ 64 ॥

Her three eyes came out of the energy of Fire; the pupils of those eyes were of a black colour; the middle parts were of a white colour and the ends were red.

वके सिचो कृष्णवर्णे संन्यायेलेलजा घुबो ।

जाते देवया: सुतेजस्के कामस्य धनुषीव ते ॥ 65 ॥

The two eyebrows of the Devi were black and came out of the spirit of Sandhyā (twilights); they were nicely curved and were looking spirited, like the bow of the Cupid and they were shedding, as it were cooling rays.

वायोधु तेजसा शस्ती श्रवणौं संवभूवतुः ।

नाति दीर्घों नातिहुस्यो दोताविघ मनोभुचः ॥ 66 ॥

From the light of Vāyu (air), Her two ears were created; they were not very long, nor very short, beautiful like the swinging seat (rocking chair) of the God of Love.

तततुष्यमसाकारा नासिका सुमनोहरा ।

संज्ञात सिन्यधरणों वे धनदस्य च नेसना ॥ 67 ॥

Her nose was fashioned out of the fire of Kubera, the Lord of wealth; it looked like the til flower, glassy and exquisitely charming.

दन्ता: शिखारिणः रूक्षणा: कुन्द्यासदूषा समाः ।

संज्ञान सुभा राजन्जागपर्येन तेजता ॥ 68 ॥ ॥

O King! Her pointed rows of glossy and brilliant teeth, looking like gems, came out of the energy of Dakşa; they looked like the Kunda flowers.

अधश्रातिरात्कोअस्या: संज्ञातोउक्तपतेसा ।

उत्तोहस्तथा रच्यः कार्तिकेयस्य तेसना ॥ 69 ॥

Her lower lip was deep red and it came out of the fire of Aruna (the charioteer of the Sun); Her beautiful upper lip came out of the energy of Kārtika.

अष्टादिपुर्जाकारा बाहवो विधानुतेसना ।

वसूनां तैससंगुल्यो रत्कवर्णास्तधारभव् ॥ 70 ॥

Her eighteen hands came out of the Tejas of Viṣṇu and Her red fingers came out of the Tejas of the Vasus.

सीयेन तेससा जातं सतनयोयुंममुत्तमम् ।

रेट्रेशणास्यास्तधा मयं जांत विवतिसंमुन्तम् ॥ 71 ॥

Her breasts came out of the energy of Soma and Her middle (navel) with three folds was created out of the spirit of Indra.

जंघोरू वकणस्याय तेजसा सम्बध्वतुः ।

त्रितंबः स तु संजातो विपुलत्नेसा भवः ॥ ७ २ ॥

Her thighs and legs were from Varuna and Her spacious loins came out from Earth.

एवं नारी शुभाकाता सरूपा सुस्या भृपाम् ।

समुच्या तथा रात्वसंज्ञाराशिमस्पूद्वा ॥ ७ ३ ॥

तां दृष्ट्वा सुवु सर्वांगी सुदर्ती चाक्लोचनाम् ।

मूदं प्रपु: सुगा: सर्वे महिषेण प्रपीडिताः ॥ ७ ४ ॥

O King! Thus from the various Tejas, contributed by the Devas, that Heavenly Lady came out. Her body and the several parts thereof were beautiful; Her form was incomparably graceful and the voice was exquisitely sonorous and lovely. The Devas, oppressed by Mahisāsura, became overpowered with joy seeing this well decorated Devi, having beautiful eyes and teeth, and charming in all respects.

विष्णुस्त्वाह सुरान्सर्वान्पूषणान्यायुधानि च ।

प्रवच्छुं तृष्णायर्य देहा: सर्वांगी साम्यान् ॥ 75 ॥

स्वायुधेभ्यः समुभाघ तेजोयुक्तानि सत्त्या: ।

समपर्यन्तु सर्वेउघ द्वेये नानायुधानि वे ॥ 76 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पद्रमलक्ये देवय:

स्वरूपोद्वये नागायुभोउद्यायः ।। 77 ।।

Viṣṇu then addressed all the Devas to give all their auspicious ornaments and weapons, He said: "O Devas! Better give, all of you the various arms and weapons, endowed with strength, created out of your own weapons and give them all to day to the Devi.

Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the description of the origin and the form of the Devi in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter IX

