CHAPTER III

On Vindhya's Obstructing the Sun's Course in the Heavens

सूत उवाच

एवं समुपदिष्ययं देविष: परम: स्वार्द ।

ज्ञापा ब्रह्मणो लोके स्टैर्यारी महापुनि: ॥ 1 ॥

गते मुनिवरे विक्यश्रितां लोभेउनपार्विनीम् ।

नैव शर्ति स लेभे च सदानःकृतशोच्न: ॥ 2 ॥

Sūta said: “O Rṣis! Thus advising, the Devarsi, the great Jñāni and Muni going wherever he likes, went to the Brahmaloka. After the Muni had gone, the Vindhya became immersed in great anxiety and, becoming always very sorrowful, could not get peace.

कर्ण किं त्वत्र मे कार्य कर्ण मेर्ने जयाम्यहम् ।

नैव शार्ति लक्षे नापि सासस्यं मे मानसे भवेत् ॥ 3 ॥

विगृताहं च मानं च चिकुके काँर्ति च चिकुकलम् ।

चित्बलं मे पीतर्ब चिक्त् स्मृतं पुर्वैर्महात्यपि:।

एवं तिवतयानस्य विक्यस्य मतस सुकटम ॥ 4 ॥

प्रदृष्टिता मति: कार्य कर्तेल्ये दोषकारिणि ।

“What shall I do now so as to overthrow Meru? Until I do that, I won’t be able to get the peace of my mind or my health. The highsouled persons always praised me for my enthusiasm and energy. Fie to my energy, honour, fame and family! Fie to my strength and heroism! O Rsis! With all these cogitations in his mind, Vindhya came finally to this crooked conclusion:

मेरुद्रक्षिणां कुर्वक्रियमेवे दिवाकाः ॥ ५ ॥

सग्रहर्शगणोगेपतः सदा दूयत्थयं नतः ।

तत्या मार्गस्य सोरोधे क्रतियामि निजः क्रैः ॥ ६ ॥

“Daily the Sun, stars and planets circumambulate round the Sumeru; hence Sumeru is always so arrogant; now if I can resist the Sun’s course in the heavens be my peaks, He will not be able to circumambulate round the Sumeru.

तदा निरुद्धो द्युमिण: परिकामेलक्षं नगम् ।

एवं मार्गे निर्द्रुं तु मया दिनकरस्य च ॥ ७ ॥

भनन्दो दिव्यनगो भनिष्यति विनिश्रितम् ।

एवं निश्रित्य विद्यारिः: तं सुशन्वधे घड़ीः ॥ ८ ॥

महोजनैः शुक्रवैः सर्वे व्याय व्यवस्थितः ।

कदोद्येषित भायत्वांने तोथियिष्याम्यहं कदा ॥ 9 ॥

एवं संश्वितानमत्थ सा व्यतीयाय गर्शेरी ।

If I can do this, certainly I will be able to curb the Sumeru in his pride. Thus coming to a conclusion, Vindhya raised his arms that were the peaks high up to the heavens and blocking the passage in the Heavens remained so and passed that night with great uneasiness and difficulty, thinking when the Sun would rise and he would obstruct His passage.

प्रभात विमलं जउे दिशा वितिमिता: कौं: ॥ 10 ॥

कुर्वन्स निर्नोतो भानुद्वयावीद्ये सिरो ।

प्रकाशलेस मिवलं नभो भानुकरै: शुर्षे: ॥ 11 ॥

विकासं नलिनी भेजे मीलनं च कुमुद्रती ।

स्वानि क्राविणि सर्वे च लोका: समुपतिथ्ये ॥ 12 ॥

At last, when the morning broke out, all the quarters were clear. The Sun, destroying the darkness, rose in Udaya Giri. The sky looked clear with His rays; the lotus, seeing Him, blew out with joy; while the excellent white water-lilies, at the bereavement of the Moon, contracted their leaves and closed as if at the separation of one's lover, gone to a distant place.

हृयं कव्यं भृत्तलिंद देवानां च प्रवधान् ।

प्राक्षपताक्षम्याङ्धविभाने विश्वां पति: ॥ 13 ॥

The people began to do their own works on the appearance of the day; the worship of the gods, the offerings to the Gods, the Homas and the offerings to the Pitrs were set a going on (in the morning, afternoon and evening respectively).

एवं प्रप्ती त्वानपौरी समाश्रय विवोधिनीम् ।

जल्लेति चित्रकालीनविरहादिव कामिनीम् ॥ 14 ॥

भास्कोरप्र कुमानोश्र दिलं नूनं विहाय च ।

यायमां गौतु ततत्सुर्ण प्रतये कमलाकरः ॥ 15 ॥

न शशाकायातो गौतु ततोउनुक्योज्ञपत् ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

The Sun marched on in His course. He divided the day into three parts, morning, mid-day, and after-noon. First of all he consoled the eastern quarter which seemed like a woman suffering from the bereavement of her lover; then he consoled the south earten corner; then as He wanted to go quickly towards the south, His horses could not go further. The charioteer Aruṇa, seeing this, informed the Sun what had happened.

अनुकलवाच

भानो मानोजते विध्यो निवस्य गर्न विध्ना : ॥ १ ६ ॥

स्पधौते मेकणा प्रेमुस्वतदृत्तां च प्रद्रक्षिणम् ।

Aruṇa spoke: “O Sun! The Vindhya has become very jealous of the Sumeru as You circumambulate round the Sumeru Mountain daily. He has risen very high and obstructed your course in the Heavens, hoping that you would circumambulate round him. He is thus vying with the Sumeru Mountain.

सूत उवाच

अनुकाव्ययाकरण्यं सविता ह्रास चितयन् ॥ 17 ॥

अहो गाननामों5पि कथ्यते चातिविस्तयः ।

प्रायः शुर्णेन किं कुर्पातुवध्ये वर्चनि स्थितः ॥ 18 ॥

निर्भेद्धो नो वार्षिमागों देघे कि बलवतनम् ।

Sūta said: O Rsis! Hearing the words of Aurna, the charioteer, the Sun began to think thus: "Oh! The Vindhya is going to obstruct My course! What can a great hero not do, when he is in the wrong path? Oh! My horses' motions are stopped to-day! The fate is the strongest of all (Because Vindhya is strong to-day by Daiva, therefore he is doing this).

गुहाबाहुपहल्यप्रे यः क्षणं नावतिंहते ॥ १९ ॥

स विशं रकूद्यमार्गेरिक कैके करोत विधिर्बलैं ।

एवं च मार्गे संरकूद लोका: सर्वे च सेभूरा: ॥ 20 ॥

नावविदन्त शरणं कर्तव्यं नावयघत ।

Even when eclipsed by Rāhu (the ascending node) I do not stop for a moment even; and now obstructed in My passage, I am waiting here for a

long time. The Daiva is powerful; what can I do? The Sun's course having been thus obstructed, all from the Gods to the lowest became helpless and could not make out what to do.

चित्रगुप्ताद्यः सर्वे कालं जानन्ति सूर्तेः ॥ 21 ॥

स कढ़ो विश्यभिगग आहो देवविषययः ।

यदा निकढ़ः सदिता मिगिगा स्पर्धया तदा ॥ 22 ॥

नष्टः स्वाहास्यधाकारो नष्टप्रायमपूजगत् ।

Citragupta and others ascertain their time through the Sun's course; and that Sun is now rendered motionless by the Vindhya mountain! What a great adverse fate is this! When the Sun was thus obstructed by the Vindhya out of his arrogance, the sacrifices to the Devas, the offerings to the Pitrs all were stopped; the world was going to rack and ruin.

एवं च पश्ड्या लेका दाहिषणायात्तर्वे च ॥ 23 ॥

निद्रामीलिनक्षुक्ता निशगामेव प्रपेदिते ।

प्राचस्घोत्त्राह्छा तीक्षतापप्रतिपाति: ॥ 24 ॥

भुता नहाछ भनाछ श्विनगामभज्ञज्ञा: ।

The people that lived on the west and south had their nights prolonged and they remained asleep. The people of the east and the north were scorched by the strong rays of the Sun and some of them died; some of them lost their health and so forth.

हाहामृतं जगतवर्षे स्वधाकल्यविवर्जितम् ।

देवा: सेंद्रा: सपहिंद्रना: किं कुमं इंतिवादिन: ॥ 25 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे दशमकन्धे देवीमाहार्ये

दृतीयोअव्या: 11 3 11

The whole earth became devoid of Śrāddhas and worships and a cry of universal distress arose on all sides. Indra and the other Devas became very anxious and began to think what they should do at that moment.

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Tenth Book on the obstruction of the Sun's course by the Vindhya

Mountain in the Mahā Purānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

Book X Chapter IV

