[Ch 3 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: “O Rṣis! Thus advising, the Devarsi, the great Jñāni and Muni going wherever he likes, went to the Brahmaloka. After the Muni had gone, the Vindhya became immersed in great anxiety and, becoming always very sorrowful, could not get peace.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- O Ṛṣis! Thus advising, the Devarṣi, the great Jñanī and Muni going wherever he likes, went to the Brahmaloka. After the Muni had gone, the Bindhya became immersed in great anxiety and becoming always very sorrowful, could not get peace.

[Ch 3 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “What shall I do now so as to overthrow Meru? Until I do that, I won’t be able to get the peace of my mind or my health. The highsouled persons always praised me for my enthusiasm and energy. Fie to my energy, honour, fame and family! Fie to my strength and heroism! O Rsis! With all these cogitations in his mind, Vindhya came finally to this crooked conclusion:
NEW CORR ENG ──► What shall I do now so as to overthrow Meru? Until I do that, I won’t be able to get the peace of my mind or my health. The highsouled persons always praised me for my enthusiasm and energy. Fie to my energy, honour, fame and family! Fie to my strength and heroism! O Ṛṣis! With all these cogitations in his mind, Bindhya came finally to this crooked conclusion :--

[Ch 3 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “Daily the Sun, stars and planets circumambulate round the Sumeru; hence Sumeru is always so arrogant; now if I can resist the Sun’s course in the heavens be my peaks, He will not be able to circumambulate round the Sumeru.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “Daily the Sun, stars and planets circumambulate round the Sumeru; hence Sumeru is always so arrogant; now if I can resist the Sun’s course in the heavens by my peaks, He will not be able to circumambulate round the Sumeru.

[Ch 3 Verse 7-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If I can do this, certainly I will be able to curb the Sumeru in his pride. Thus coming to a conclusion, Vindhya raised his arms that were the peaks high up to the heavens and blocking the passage in the Heavens remained so and passed that night with great uneasiness and difficulty, thinking when the Sun would rise and he would obstruct His passage.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If I can do this, certainly I will be able to curb the Sumeru in his pride.” Thus coming to a conclusion, Bindhya raised his arms that were the peaks high up to the heavens and blocking the passage in the Heavens, remained so and passed that night with great uneasiness and difficulty, thinking when the Sun would rise and he would obstruct His passage.

[Ch 3 Verse 10-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At last, when the morning broke out, all the quarters were clear. The Sun, destroying the darkness, rose in Udaya Giri. The sky looked clear with His rays; the lotus, seeing Him, blew out with joy; while the excellent white water-lilies, at the bereavement of the Moon, contracted their leaves and closed as if at the separation of one's lover, gone to a distant place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At last, when the morning broke out, all the quarters were clear. The Sun, destroying the darkness, rose in Udaya Giri. The sky looked clear with His rays; the lotus, seeing Him, blew out with joy; while the excellent white water-lilies, at the bereavement of the Moon, contracted their leaves and closed as if at the separation of one’s lover, gone to a distant place.

[Ch 3 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The people began to do their own works on the appearance of the day; the worship of the gods, the offerings to the Gods, the Homas and the offerings to the Pitrs were set a going on (in the morning, afternoon and evening respectively).
NEW CORR ENG ──► The people began to do their own works on the appearance of the day; the worship of the gods, the offerings to the Gods, the Homas and the offerings to the Pitris were set a going on (in the morning, afternoon and evening respectively).

[Ch 3 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Sun marched on in His course. He divided the day into three parts, morning, mid-day, and after-noon. First of all he consoled the eastern quarter which seemed like a woman suffering from the bereavement of her lover; then he consoled the south earten corner; then as He wanted to go quickly towards the south, His horses could not go further. The charioteer Aruṇa, seeing this, informed the Sun what had happened.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Sun marched on in His course. He divided the day into three parts, morning, midday, and afternoon. First of all he consoled the eastern quarter which seemed like a woman suffering from the bereavement of her lover; then he consoled the south eartern corner; then as He wanted to go quickly towards the south, His horses could not go further. The charioteer Aruṇa, seeing this, informed the Sun what had happened.

[Ch 3 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Aruṇa spoke: “O Sun! The Vindhya has become very jealous of the Sumeru as You circumambulate round the Sumeru Mountain daily. He has risen very high and obstructed your course in the Heavens, hoping that you would circumambulate round him. He is thus vying with the Sumeru Mountain.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Aruṇa spoke :-- “O Sun! The Bindhya has become very jealous of the Sumeru as You circumambulate round the Sumeru Mountain daily. He has risen very high and obstructed your course in the Heavens, hoping that you would circumambulate round him. He is thus vying with the Sumeru Mountain.”

[Ch 3 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: O Rsis! Hearing the words of Aurna, the charioteer, the Sun began to think thus: "Oh! The Vindhya is going to obstruct My course! What can a great hero not do, when he is in the wrong path? Oh! My horses' motions are stopped to-day! The fate is the strongest of all (Because Vindhya is strong to-day by Daiva, therefore he is doing this).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- O Ṛṣis! Hearing the words of Aruṇa, the charioteer, the Sun began to think thus :-- “Oh! The Bindhya is going to obstruct My course! What can a great hero not do, when he is in the wrong path? Oh! My horseś motions are stopped to-day! The fate is the strongest of all (Because Bindhya is strong today by Daiva, therefore he is doing this).

[Ch 3 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Even when eclipsed by Rāhu (the ascending node) I do not stop for a moment even; and now obstructed in My passage, I am waiting here for a long time. The Daiva is powerful; what can I do? The Sun's course having been thus obstructed, all from the Gods to the lowest became helpless and could not make out what to do.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Even when eclipsed by Rāhu (the ascending node) I do not stop for a moment even; and now obstructed in My passage, I am waiting here for a long time. The Daiva is powerful; what can I do?” The Sun’s course having been thus obstructed, all from the Gods to the lowest became helpless and could not make out what to do.

[Ch 3 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Citragupta and others ascertain their time through the Sun's course; and that Sun is now rendered motionless by the Vindhya mountain! What a great adverse fate is this! When the Sun was thus obstructed by the Vindhya out of his arrogance, the sacrifices to the Devas, the offerings to the Pitrs all were stopped; the world was going to rack and ruin.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Citragupta and others ascertain their time through the Sun’s course; and that Sun is now rendered motionless by the Bindhya mountain! What a great adverse fate is this! When the Sun was thus obstructed by the Bindhya out of his arrogance, the sacrifices to the Devas, the offerings to the Pitris all were stopped; the world was going to rack and ruin.

[Ch 3 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The people that lived on the west and south had their nights prolonged and they remained asleep. The people of the east and the north were scorched by the strong rays of the Sun and some of them died; some of them lost their health and so forth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The people that lived on the west and south had their nights prolonged and they remained asleep. The people of the east and the north were scorched by the strong rays of the Sun and some of them died; some of them lost their health and so forth.

[Ch 3 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The whole earth became devoid of Śrāddhas and worships and a cry of universal distress arose on all sides. Indra and the other Devas became very anxious and began to think what they should do at that moment. Here ends the Third Chapter of the Tenth Book on the obstruction of the Sun's course by the Vindhya Mountain in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The whole earth became devoid of Śrāddhas and worships and a cry of universal distress arose on all sides. Indra and the other Devas became very anxious and began to think what they should do at that moment. Here ends the Third Chapter of the Tenth Book on the obstruction of the Sun’s course by the Bindhya Mountain in the Mahā Purāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
