CHAPTER XV

On the Dispassion of Suka and the Instructions of Bhagavati to Hari

श्रीगृक उवाच

नाहं गृहं कार्च्यामि दुःखदं सर्वथा पितः ।

बागुरासईगं नित्यं बचनं संवर्देशिन् ॥ १ ॥

Hearing these words of Vyāsa Deva Šuka Deva said: “O Father! I do not like at all to take to a householder’s life; as I see clearly that it fastens men, as a cord fastens animals, and is a source of incessant pain. O Father! Where can you expect happiness from a householder who is always loaded with anxiety how and whence to get wealth?

धनचित्तातुरागं हि क्व सुखं तात इय्यते ।

स्वजनैः खलु पीड्वाने निर्याने तोलुपा जना: ॥ 2 ॥

Those, who have greed for wealth, oppress their poor relatives, even; and extort money. Even one who is the lord of the three worlds, who is their Indra, he also is not so happy as a beggar, that has no desires. See, then, who else can be happy in this world?

इन्रीपि न सुखो तादूयापुगो भिशुभिन:सूढ़ः ।

को3-यः स्यादितृ संसारे त्रिलोकीविषये सति ॥ 3 ॥

Whenever an ascetic is seen to practise severe asceticism, Indra, the lord of the Devas becomes anxious and sorry, and raises various obstacles in his way. See, also, that Brahmā is not happy with his big sarisāra (his creation which is his house).

तर्वतं तापसं दूद्वा मव्वा दुःख्तोप्रबत् ।

विद्यान्बहविधान्यर कोर्तित च दिव्यसितः ॥ 4 ॥

Bhagavān Viṣṇu, though He has got His beautiful Kamalā, the presiding Deity of all wealth and prosperity, is always suffering, since.

ब्रहासि न सुखी विणुलैर्मी प्राय मनोरामम् ।

खेदं प्राप्नोति सततं संग्रामेसुरैः सह ॥ 5 ॥

करोति विपुलान् यन्त्रान्यश्रति दुक्षुम् ।

रापातिराति श्रीमान्कस्यास्ति विपुलं सुखम् ॥ 6 ॥

He is incessantly engaged in fighting with the Asuras; and though He is the husband of Lakṣmī and full of prosperity, He practises, almost, every now and then, terrible asceticism with great care and earnestness.

शक्रूरोर्पि सदा दुःखी भवत्येव च वेवश्रहम् ।

तपश्वर्यों प्रकृबाणीते दैत्ययुक्कर: सदा ॥ 7 ॥

So who else is there, who is possessed of constant happiness? I know also Bhagavān Śaṅkara, too, suffers incessant troubles and has to fight against the Daityas.

कदाचित्र सुखी शैते धनवानपि लोतूप: । निर्यन्त्र कवं तता सुखं प्राप्नोत मानव: ॥ 8 ॥

So, then, O Father: how can a poor householder be happy when the rich householder cannot sleep happily, with his constant care for wealth.

जानत्रिप महाभाग पुरं वा वीर्यम्भवम् ।

नियोक्ष्यस महागोरे संसारे दुःखदे सदा ॥ 9 ॥

O highly fortunate one! Knowing full well this truth of the world, why are you plunging me, your son, in this terrible Sarīsāra, full of pains and agonics.

जनमुदःखं जगदुःखं दुःखं च मरणे तथा ।

गर्भावसे पुनईःखं विश्रामुगमये तिथः ॥ 10 ॥

O Father! What shall I say to you about the miseries of the world! There is pain in birth, pain

Book 1 Chapter XV

in old age, pain in death, and pain in the life in the womb full of urines and faeces; but the pain, arising from desire and greed, is more terrible than all the pains mentioned above; and then, the pains experienced while asking for them are greater than the pangs of death.

तस्मातिरणर वृ:खं तृणालोभासमुद्वम् ।

यात्रायां परमं दुःखं सरणादिप मान्द च ॥ 11 ॥

Alas! There is no other way for the Brāhmins to earn their livelihood than to accept gifts from others.

प्रतिग्रहधना विषा न बुद्ध्वलजीवना: ।

पराणा परमं दुःखं मरणं च दिने दिने ॥ 12 ॥

Therefore, Brāhmins have to suffer daily death-like pangs in having to wait in expectation from others; can there be anything more regrettable than this?

पटिता सकलावेद्वज्ञशाम च समंततः ।

गत्वा च धर्निज़ो कर्मती सुती: सर्वात्मना बुधे: ॥ 13 ॥

एकोदारस्य का चिन्ता पत्रमूलकलादिधि: ।

चेन केनाव्यपानेय संतुर्धा च प्रपूर्वेने ॥ 14 ॥

The Brāhmaṇa, studying all the Vedas and Dharma Śāstras and acquiring wisdom, have got at last to go to the rich and praise them (in expectation of some money) carefully. O Father! if one does not become a householder, then what care is there to feed one's own belly?

भावां पुत्रास्तथा पौरा: कुटुवे विपुले सति ।

प्रूरणार्थ महदुःखं क्व सुखं चितरद्धून ॥ 15 ॥

If there be contentment in the mind, anyhow the belly can be filled with leaves, roots and fruits; but if there be wife, sons and grandsons and many dependent relatives, then to feed them all, much trouble and anxiety are experienced.

योगाराष्ट्र बद मम जानगारहं सुखाकरम् ।

कर्मकाष्ठेउलित तान नसेई कदाचन ॥ 16 ॥

So how can you expect, O Father! perfect happiness in the world? So teach me, O Father! the Sāstras on Yoga and eternal truth that will give perfect happiness; no advice in Karma Kānda (the series of actions) will bring me pleasure.

वद कर्मक्षयोपायं प्रारब्धं सच्छित् तथा ।

वर्तमानं चया नयेत्तिबिधं कर्म मूलजम् ॥ 17 ॥

Now advise me how the karmas can be exhausted; how the root of the three sorts of karmas, Sañcita, Prārabdha, and Vartamāna, giving torments of birth, death etc., the Avidyā, the great ignorance, can be destroyed?

जलौकेव सदा नारी कौर्य विचितिति वै ।

मूर्खेस्तु न विज्ञानाति मोहितो भवचेषितेः ॥ 18 ॥

The fools do not understand how the women suck the blood out of persons like leeches, for they get themselves deluded by their gestures and postures?

भोगैर्वींथं धरने पूर्णं मनः कुटितभाषणैः ।

कांता हरति सर्वेयं कः सेनतसाङ्गोउपरः ॥ १९ ॥

निद्रासुखलिनाणर्थे मूर्खेतु दारसंग्रहम् ।

करीति बिंचितो धागा दुःखाय न सुखाय च ॥ २० ॥

The lady of the house, whom the people call kāntā, the beautiful one, steal away the semen virile, the strength and energy in the way of giving them happiness as sexual intercourse, and their minds and wealth and everything by their crooked love conversations; so see what greater thief can there be than a woman? In my opinion, those that are ignorant are certainly deluded by the Creator; they accept wife to destroy their own pleasure of happiness.

सूत उवाच

एर्वविधानि वाक्यानि श्रुना व्यास: शुक्रस्य च ।

संग्राप महर्ती विन्तां किं करोमीत्संशरणम् ॥ 21 ॥

They can never understand that women can never be the source of pleasure; they are the source of all miseries." Hearing these words of Šuka, Vyāsa became merged in the deep sea of care and anxieties, thinking what to do then.

तस्य सुखदुरधूनी लोचनादुःखजानि च ।

वेयपृधु शगीरेभदूर्तानि प्राप मनस्तथा ॥ 22 ॥

The incessant tears of pain flowed from his eyes; his whole body began to shiver and his mind became too much worried.

शोचंत पितरं मृद्वा दीनं शोकपरित्युतम् ।

उवाच पितरं व्यासं विस्मयोगुक्ललोचनः ॥ 2 3 ॥

Seeing this distressed and sorrowful state of his father, Sukadeva, with eyes full of wonder, said: Oh! What a power has Māyā got!

आहो माघावलं चोर्धं चनोह्यत पिच्छतम् ।

वेत्ततस्य च कतरिं सर्वैंं वेदसिमित् ॥ 24 ॥

"Oh! He, whose words are accepted by all, with great love and care, as equivalent to the Vedas, who is the author of the Vedānta Darśana, and before whom nothing is veiled in ignorance, Oh! that greatest Pundit, the knower of all the Tattvas, is now deluded by Māyā!

न जाने का च सा माया किंक्रिवलासाउतील वृढ़का ।

या मोहर्यति विहांतं व्यासं सत्यवतीसुन्तम् ॥ 25 ॥

Oh! what is that Māyā who has been able to delude Vyāsa Deva, the son of Satyavati, so skilled in the knowledge of Brahma Vidyā; I also do not know how, with what great care, one is to practise Sādhānā towards Her.

पुराणानां च वक्ता यो निर्माता भारतस्य च ।

वियाभाकर्ता वैद्यानां सोउपि मोहमुपायातः ॥ 26 ॥

Alas! He who has composed eighteen Mahāpurānas and the great Mahābhārata, who has divided the Vedas in four parts, the same Veda Vyāsa has today been deluded by the power of Māyā! What to speak of other persons!

तां याथि शरणं देखीं या मोह्यति दैं जगत् ।

ब्रहाविष्णुहार्दीछ कवाद-न्येषां च कीवीर्णी ॥ 27 ॥

कोउविति त्रिषु लोकेषु यो न मुहाति मायया ।

यन्मोहं गमिता: पूर्वे ब्रहाविष्णुहारदयः ॥ 28 ॥

Oh! Māyā has deluded Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara and others and the whole universe; then who is there in the three worlds that is not fascinated by Her influence! I, therefore, take refuge unto the Internal Governess, the Devi Mahā Mayā.

अही बलमहो वीर्यं देया खलु विनिर्मितम् ।

वायदेव वर्ग नीत: सर्वेन ईश्वः प्रभुः ॥ 29 ॥

Oh! what wonderful power She wields? By her

own Magic power, She has kept God even under Her control, who is omniscient and the Controller of all.

विषयशंभचो व्यास इते पौराणिका जगुः ।

सोर्पि गोहाणवे यमने भन्योते वीणयथा ॥ 30 ॥

The Pundits, who know the Purānas say, that Vyāsa Deva is born of the part of Viṣṇu; but, see the wonder, that he is today plunged in the sea of delusion like a merchant whose ship has been wrecked.

अशुपार्तं करोत्यवि विवर्जा: प्राकृतो यथा ।

अहो मायावत् चैतदुर्भूत्वर्ज पधिडतिरि ॥ 31 ॥

Alas! How great is the wonderful power of Māyā! The all-knowing Vyāsa is today under the control of Māyā and is weeping like an ordinary man! So, I have come to the firm conclusion that the wise Pundits are incapable to surpass the strength of Māyā. What a great error arises through the power of Māyā!

कोउयं कोई कव் चेह कौकुंगोउयं घमः किल ।

पढ़युतात्मके देहे चितापुँजेते वासना ॥ ३ २ ॥

See! indeed!! Who is he and who am I? What for we have come here? There is no certainty, nothing whatsoever, about that. And, see, also, how he has got the nice idea of “father” on his body and the idea of “his son” in my body, that are composed of five elements.

बलिष्ठा खलु मावेयं मायिनामपि मोहिनी ।

यथाप्रभभूत: कृष्णोपि कौती रोन्दि बिजः ॥ 33 ॥

This is now quite evident to me that, when the Brāhmin Maharṣi Krṣna Dvaipāyana is weeping under the influence of Māyā, She is the strongest of all; even those who are skilled in the great Māyā fall under Her prey.'

तां नत्वा मनसा देहों सर्वकारणकारणाम् ।

जनन्नीं सर्वदेवानां ब्रहादौन्ती तर्धधरीम् ॥ 34 ॥

पितरं प्राह दीनं तं शोकाणंवपरित्युतम् ।

अशतींभवो व्यासं हेतुमद्वचन शुभम् ॥ 35 ॥

"Then Šuka Deva bowed down mentally to the Devi, Mahā Māyā, who is the Creatrix of Brahmā

Book I Chapter XV

and the other Devas and who is the Controller of them all; and then began to speak the following auspicious words pregnant with reason, to his father Vyāsa Deva, greatly distressed and plunged in the sea of sorrows:

श्रीगृक उवाच

पाराग्यरं महाभाग सर्वेधा बोधः स्वयम् ।

क्रि शोकं कुभरे स्वामित्य ययात्रः प्राकृतो नः ॥ ३६॥

"O Father! you are exceedingly fortunate, for you are the son of the high souled Parāśara and you yourself are the instructor of real truth, the tattva jñāna, to all persons; so, O Lord! why are you giving vent to sorrows, like an ordinary bewildered man?

अश्रातं तय प्रोज्ञास्य न जाने पूर्वेज्ञमति ।

कोउई कस्वं महाभाग विभ्ञानोयं महामति ॥ 37 ॥

O Mahābhāga! why are you plunging yourself in this great error, though you are a high souled personage! See, it is quite true that now I am born as your son; but this I do’n't know what relation existed between you and me in my previous birth.

कुरु धैर्य प्रयुध्यस्य मा विषादे मन: कृधा: ।

मोहजालियां मत्ता मुख ओके महात्मे ॥ 38 ॥

So, O highly intelligent one! Open your eyes of wisdom, and be patient; do not throw yourself, in vain, in the sea of sorrows.

शुधातिवृत्तिश्वेधन न पुरवर्गेन न ।

पियासा जलपानेय वाती नैवामवेक्षणात् ॥ 39 ॥

All this universe is like a net of delusion; knowing this, abandon all your grief; why are you feeling yourself so much weak and distressed, for your attachment towards your son? Hunger is satisfied by eating something, and thirst is satisfied by the drinking of water; hunger is not satisfied by seeing the son.

प्राणं सुखं सुर्पोचन कर्णर्ज अवणेन च ।

स्तीसुखं तु सिद्धां नूनं प्रोक्त्रं किं कलामे ते ।। ४० ॥

So the organ of scent is satisfied by smelling sweet scents; and the organ of hearing is satisfied

by hearing sweet music; and when thirst arises to enjoy women, that is satisfied only by sexual intercourse; but what satisfaction can a son give? So what shall I do to you be remaining as your son? The son, in fact, is not the cause of any satisfaction to one's self.

अजीगतैंत पुत्रोपि हितेश्रियर भयुजे ।

पशुकामाय यज्ञार्थ दत्तो मौल्येन सर्वथा ॥ 41 ॥

For this reason, in ancient days, the poor Brāhmin Ajigarta gave his son to the king Hariścandra, for necessary equivalent price in money, who wanted a man for his sacrifice where human beings are to be sacrificed as victims.

सुखानां साधनं ग्रह्यं धनानसुखसमुचव्यः ।

धनमजंव लोपेब्रौतुगोई कि करोमध्यम् ॥ 42 ॥

In fact, those things that are urgently required as necessities give happiness; and all these articles can be obtained by wealth; so if you want to enjoy happiness, then earn money; of what use shall I be to you as your son?

मां प्रबोधय बुद्धाया त्वं देवज्ञोसि महामते ।

यथा मुच्येयमवर्ते गर्भवासपयान्यानुने ॥ 4 3 ॥

O Muni! you can see subtle things and you are greatly intelligent; so I pray to you, to look upon me as your son and open my eyes of wisdom, that I can be free forever from this womb of birth.

दुर्लंभं मापुं जन्म कार्भैभ्याविहान ।

ततायि बाङ्गाल्यां वै दुर्लंभं चोतमो कृते ॥ 44 ॥

बन्दीड़मिति मे बुद्धिनंपसर्पिति चित्ता ।

संसारावासनालते निविधा बुद्धागमिति ॥ 45 ॥

O Sinless one! To get a human birth in this land of Karma (in India) is very difficult; again to get a Brāhmín birth is extremely rare; so when I have got this so very rare birth, why shall I spend my time in vain? O Father! Though I have served many spiritual teachers, fraught with wisdom, for many years, yet the firm idea “I am, as it were, bound up in this net of Saṃsāra” the notion covered with dark darkness of ignorance, caused by desires, this net Saṃsāra does not leave me.”

सूत उवाच ।
इत्युक्तस्तु तदा व्यासः पुत्रेणामितबुद्धिना ।
प्रत्युवाच शुकं शान्तं चतुर्थाश्रममानसम् ॥ ४६॥

व्यास उवाच ।
पठ पुत्र महाभाग मया भागवतं कृतम् ।
शुभं न चातिविस्तीर्णं पुराणं ब्रह्मसम्मितम् ॥ ४७॥

When the son Śuka Deva of extraordinary power and intelligence spoke thus, Vyāsa saw that his son was strongly inclined to take to the fourth Śārama, that of Sarinnyāsa and spoke thus: "O Son! If your mind has become so, then read Bhāgavat Purāna, composed by me, highly auspicious, voluminous, and the second Vedas."

कन्या द्वारा तत्रैव पछतक्षणसंयुन्तम् ।

सर्वेषां च पुराणानां भूषणं मम संमन्त् ॥ 48 ॥

In this you have the chapters on Creation (Sarga) and secondary creation (Upa sarga) etc., the five characteristics as in other Purāṇas and it is subdivided into twelve Skandhas. Hearing of this Bhāgavata brings up to the mind that Brahma alone is real and all the universe is unreal and knowledge both intuitive and indirect springs up. For this very reason, the Bhāgavata treatise is considered as the ornament of the Purāṇas.

सदसज्ञानिविज्ञानं श्रुतमायोग जायते ।

येन भागवतेनैह तपट चंह महामते ॥४९ ॥

वटपत्रशयानाय विणयो बालस्विणे ।

कैनात्रिय बालभावेन विमितोंर्ह विद्यतमन ॥ 50 ॥

Therefore, O highly intelligent one! you better study this Purāna. O Child! In days of yore, at the end of a Kalpa, Bhagavān Hari was lying, as a small Child on a floating leaf of a banyan tree, and was thinking thus:

क्रिम्बों केन न्येण कर्थे जानामि चाचित्वम् ।

क्रूनेवं चित्यमानयं मुकुंदाय महामने ॥ 51 ॥

“Who is the Intelligent One that has created me a small child? What is His object? Of what stuff am I made of? and how am I created? whence can I know all this?”

श्लोकाधेन तथा प्रोक्तं भगवत्याउक्तियार्थम् ।

सर्वे खलिद्वमेवाहं नान्यद्विति समातनम् ॥ 52 ॥

At this moment the Devi Bhagavatī Who is all Caitanya, seeing the high-souled Bhagavān Hari musing thus, spoke out in the form of a celestial voice in the following half-stanza:

तद्धो विध्गाना पूर्वं सविज्ञातं मन्यविधि ।

कैनोक्ता वागियं सद्या चित्तयामास चेतसा ॥ 53 ॥

"All this that is seen is I Myself; there is existent nothing other that is eternal". Bhagavān Viṣṇu, then, began to think deeply the above celestial voice:

कथं वेधि प्रवक्तांरं हीपुंसी वा नपुंसकम् ।

इति चिन्तापप्रवेन धृतं भागवतं हृदि ॥ 54 ॥

“Who has uttered this word, pregnant of truth, to me? How shall I come to know the speaker, whether that is female, or male or a hermophrodite?”

युन: पुन: कृतोल्यास्तमिश्रेवालस्तचेतस ।

वटपत्रे शावना: सत्रभूचित्तासमपित्रतः ॥ 55 ॥

Pondering over this for a long time, when he could not come to a definite conclusion, he began to repeat (make japam) frequently that word of Bhagavatī with a whole heart.

तदा शान्ता भगवती प्रज्ञास चतुर्भुजा ।

गंखचक्रानादपवारायुधरा शिका ॥ 56 ॥

विद्यावंधरा देयीं विद्याध्यमणभूति ।

संयुता सपुनीभिश्र सखीभि: स्वविष्युनिति: ॥ 57 ॥

When Hari, lying on a banyan tree leaf, became very anxious to know what the above words implied, then the all-auspicious Devi Bhagavati with a beautiful face, calm and quiet appearance, appeared before Bhagavān Viṣṇu, of unrivalled splendour, in the form of Mahā Laksmi, who is all of Sattva Guṇa, surrounded by Her Vibhūtis, Her manifestations of attendants).

प्रादुर्बंभृव तस्याघे शिक्षणोरिततेजसः ।

मन्दहायां प्रयुज्ञाना महातर्कशी: शुभानना ॥ 58 ॥

Her smiling companions of the same age, decked with ornament, and wearing divine clothings, and

Book 1 Chapter XVI

holding each in their four divine hands, conch shell, disc, club, and lotus.

सूत जवाच

तां तथा संशित्वा दृष्ट्वा हुदये कमलेक्षणः ।

विसितः सलिले तस्मिनिराटारां मनोरामम् ॥ 59 ॥

तिरभूतितरबा बुद्धिमिति: कीर्ति: स्मृतिभूति: ।

श्रद्धा मेया स्वया स्वाहा क्षुया निद्रा दया गति: ॥ 60 ॥

गृहि: गृहि: क्षमा रज्ञा कृष्मा नन्द्र च शक्तय: ।

संस्थिता: सर्वतः पार्थमाहात्यः पृथकपुथकम् ॥ 61 ॥

The lotus eyed Viṣṇu was very much surprised to see that beautiful Devī, standing without anything to rest on that water; He saw that on four sides of the Devī, were staying Rati, Bhūti, Buddhī, Mati, Kirti, Smṛti, Dhrī, Śraddhā, Medhā, Svadhā, Svāhā, Kṣudhā. Nidrā, Dayā, Gati, Tuṣṭi, Puṣṭi, Kṣamā, Lajjā, Jṛmbhā Tandrā and other personalised forces, each possessing a clear distinct form, and endowed with a clear distinct feeling.

वरायुधरा सर्वां नानाभूषणभूषितः ।

मन्त्रमाताकृत्तिता भृक्ताहारविरापिताः ॥ 6 2 ॥

In the hands of them all were divine weapons; in their necks, necklaces and garlands of Mandāra flowers; and all the limbs of their bodies were decorated with divine ornaments.

तं शूद्या ताक्य सर्वीक्ष्य तम्भिकेषायिः जले ।

विस्मयाविषहद्वयः सवम्बुप जनादनः ॥ 6 3 ॥

Seeing in that one mass of ocean the Devi Lakṣmī and Her Śaktis, Bhagavān Janārdana, the soul of all, became greatly astonished and thought within Himself thus: “What is this? Is this Māyā

that I am witnessing?

चिन्तयामास सर्वात्मा द्रव्यमोउतिविधित्मतः ।

कृतोपावा: स्विः: सर्प: कृतोर्डं वटतत्यम्:। 64 ॥

अस्पिकज्ञापवे धोरे न्याधोः: कवमुषितः ।

केनाहं स्वापितोःस्यय शिशुं कृत्वा शुभाकृति: || 65 ॥

Whence have appeared these women? and whence have I come here, lying on this banyan leaf? How has the banyan tree come to existence in this banyan leaf? How has the banyan tree come to existence in this one mass of ocean? And who is it, that has placed me here in the form of a child? Is this my Mother? Or Is this some Māyā that can create impossible things?

మేరు వన్ని నే న మా మా మ మాలి వుదు?

ర్రోన్ ఉనిచ్చణు దరే మ ఉన్ ఉన్నా ॥ 66 ॥

క్రీ మ మా వన కేత్వం గన్తలు మ న వ కల్పిచే ।

సేనమామజ నిత్య వలాగుబాజరేక్రి: ॥ 67 ॥

క్రీతి క్రిందేశ్రిగాగంతే మాగురాగే క్రమాకాత్త

पत्रशो3.149: 11 15 11

Why has She made Herself manifest before me now? Or Is there some hidden motive that She has appeared thus? What ought I to do now? Or shall I go to some other place? Or shall I continue remaining here in this form of the child, silent and with vigilance.

Thus ends the Fifteenth Chapter of the First Book

on the dispassion of Suka and the instructions of

Bhagavati to Hari in the Mahāpurāna

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book 1 Chapter XVI

