CHAPTER XXIII

On the Killing of Śaṅkhacāḍḍa

श्रीनारायण उवाच

शिवस्तत्वं समाकपयं तत्वज्ञानविशारादः ।

यथी स्वयं च समरे स्वागपैः सह नारद ॥ 1 ॥

शड़चूद्रः शिवं चूढ़ा विमानादवस्कृच च ।

ननाम पर्या भवक्ना शिरसा दंडवद्धुवि ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyana said: Śiva, versed in the knowledge of the Highest Reality, hearing all this, went himself with His whole host to the battle. Seeing Him, Śankhacūḍa alighted from his chariot and fell prostrate before him. With great force he got up and, quickly putting on his armour he took up his huge and heavy bow case.

तं प्रणय च वेगेन विमानमार्गहे सः ।

तूर्णं चकार सजाई धनुर्जीग्रह दुर्दहम् ॥ ३ ॥

शिवदानवयोयुँदं पूर्णमब्छरतं पुरा ।

न बधुवतृन्योनं बढ़ीज्ययराजयी ॥ ४ ॥

Then a great fight ensued between Śiva and Śaṅkhacūḍa for full one hundred years but there was no defeat nor victory on either side. The result was stalemate. Both of them, Bhagavān and the Dāṇava quitted their weapons.

न्यस्तशक्ष्ठ भगवान्यस्तशक्ष्ठ दानवः ।

रथस्य: शंखद्धुड्ठ हुवस्थो वृषभध्वजः ॥ ५ ॥

दानवानां च शतकम्पूदतं च बधूत है ।

रणो वे वे युता: संधुर्जिव्यामास तान्विभु: ॥ 6 ॥

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

Śankhacūda, remained on his chariot and Mahādeva role on His Bull. Hundreds and hundreds of Dānavas were slain. But extraordinarily endowed with divine power, Śambhu restored to life all those of His party that were slain.

पृतस्मित्रोंते चुद्धबाहुण: परमातुरः ।

आगत्य च रणश्वामयुवाच दानवेश्वभ । ७ ।।

In the meanwhile, an aged Brāhmaṇa, very distressed in his appearance, came to the battlefield and asked Śaṅkhacūda, the King of Dānavas:

युद्धबाहुण उवाच

रेहि शिक्षां च राजेन्र मही विधाय संग्रन्म ।

त्वं सर्वस्म्यदां दाता यन्मे मनसि वांछितम् ॥ 8 ॥

निरीहाय च वृद्धाय दृषिताय च संग्रम्न ।

पशुत्वां कविध्यामि पुः सत्यं च कुर्किति ॥ 9 ॥

"O King! Grant me what I beg of you; you give away in charity all sorts of wealth and riches; give me also what I desire; give me, a Brāhmin, something also. I am quite peaceable aged Brāhmin, very very thirsty. Make your Promise first and then I will speak to you what I desire.

Note: The Brāhmins only are fit for receiving frauds and cheatings.

ओमित्युवाच राजेंद्र: प्रसजवदनेक्षणः ।

क्रवाचार्थी जनश्रादामित्युवाचातिमायया ॥ 10 ॥

तच्छुवा कवचं दिव्यं जग्राह हरिसे च ।

शुकृष्डस्य रूपेण जगाम तुरुसी प्रति ॥ 11 ॥

The King Śaṅkhacūḍa, with a gracious countenance and pleasing eyes swore before him that He would give him what he would desire. Then the Brāḥim spoke to the King with great affection and Māyā: 'I am desirous of your Kavaca (amulet).' The King, then, gave him the Kavaca (the amulet, mantra written on a Bhurja bark and located in a golden cup). Bhagavān Hari (in the form of that Brāḥim) took that Kavaca and, assuming the form of Śaṅkhāḍūḍa came to Tulasi.

गत्वा तस्यां मायया च वीर्याधानं चकार च ।

अथ शंभूरि: शूलं जग्राह दानवं प्रति ॥ 12 ॥

ग्रीभमध्यात्मान्तैषडूल्यान्निशाखोपम्।

तृनीवार्ये च दुर्वर्भमवर्धे वैरिताक्तम् ॥ 13 ॥

Coming there, He made His Māyā (magic) manifest and held sexual intercourse with her. At this time Mahādeva took up the Hari's trident-aiming at the king of the Dānavas. The trident looked like the Mid-day Sun of summer, flaming like a Pralaya fire, It looked irresistible and invincible as if quite powerful to kill the enemies.

तेजसा चक्रतूल्यं च सर्वशलासारकाम।

शिवकेशगवोरान्वुदईं च भयंकर्म ॥ 14 ॥

In brilliance it equalled the Sudarśana Cakra (disc) and it was the chief of all the weapons. No other body then Śiva and Keśava could wield such a weapon.

धनु:सहरं दैर्घेंण प्रयोन शतहस्तकम् ।

सर्जीवं ब्रह्मार्यं च नित्यक्रमनिर्दिगम् ॥ 15 ॥

संहर्तुं सर्वबह्रासलं यत्वीयालीया ।

चिश्रप तोलने कृत्वा शंखचुढ़े च नारद ॥ 16 ॥

राजा चारं परित्यज्य श्रीकृष्णचरणायुजम् ।

ध्यानं चकार भकल्या च कृत्वा योगासनं चिया ॥ 17 ॥

And everybody feared that but Śiva and Keśava. In length it was one thousand Dhanus and in width it was one hundred hands. It seemed lively, of the nature of Brahma, eternal and not capable to be noticed, whence and how it proceeded. The weapon could destroy, by its own free Lilā (Will) all the worlds. When Śiva held it aloft the aiming at Śaṅkhacāḍa, He hurled it on him, the King of the Demons quitted his bows and arrows and with mind collected in a yoga posture, began to meditate on the lotus-feet of Śri Kṛṣna with great devotion.

गूलं च भ्रमणं कृत्वा पपात दानवोपरि ।

चकार भयसातं च सर्श चाव लीलया ॥ 18 ॥

राजा धृत्वा दिव्यकर्ण किंशोरं गोपवेकम् ।

दिपुर्ज मृलहिंस्त रतनभूषणभूषितम् ॥ 19 ॥

रत्नेहसाराविमर्शो वेहितं गोपवकादिधि: ।

गोलोकाद्यातं यानमाहरोह पुरं यद्ये ॥ 20 ॥

At that moment. the trident, whirling round fell on Śaṅkhacūda and easily burnt him and his chariot to ashes. He, then, assuming the form of a two-

Book IX Chapter XXIV

armed Gopa, full of youth, divine, ornamented with jewels, holding flute, mounted on a Divine Chariot, surrounded by kōtis and kōtis of Gopas who came there from the region of Goloka, whose bodies were built up of excellent jewels, and Śankhacūda then went up to the Heavens (Goloka, where Śri Vrndāvana is located is located in the middle).

नाला ननाम शिरसा स राश्राकृष्णायोभुने ।

भवल्या च चरणाधोजं रासे वृद्धावने चे ॥ २ १ ॥

सुदामानं च तो सूद्वा प्रसज्वदनैक्षणी ।

क्रेडे चक्रतुरलंते प्रेणान्तिषारिसंसुतो ॥ २२ ॥

He went to Vrndāvana, full of Rasas (sentiments) and bowed down at the lotus feet of Rādhā Krṣṇa with devotion. Both of them were filled with love when they saw Sudāmā, and, with a gracious countenance and joyful eyes, they took him on their laps. On the other hand the Śūla weapon came with force and gladness back again to Krṣṇa

अथ शुलं च वेगेन प्रययी तं च साद्यम् ।

अत्थिधिः: शाखच्छूत्थ संखजातितर्बेवृह ॥ 23 ॥

नानाप्रकास्वेण शश्वभूता सुरावेने ।

प्रश्नरं संखतोयं च देवानां प्रीतिदं परम् ॥ 24 ॥

The bones of Śaṅkhacūḍa, O Narada! were transformed into conch-shells. These conch-shells are always considered very sacred and auspicious in the worship of the Devas. The water in the conch-shell is also very holy and pleasing to the Devas. What more than this, that the water in the conch-shell is as holy as the water of any Tritha.

तीर्वीयस्यल्पं च पवित्रं शंभुना विना ।

गंखगढ़ो बपेढ़ात तक लक्ष्मी: सुसंश्रियरा ॥ 25 ॥

स सन्तः सर्वतीर्थ्यु घः सन्तः गैखवारिणा ।

गंखो हेरंरधिहानं चत्र गैखतन्तो हरि: ॥ 26 ॥

This water can be offered to all the Gods but

not to Śiva. Wherever the conch-shell is blown, there Lakṣmī abides with great pleasure. If bathing be done with conch-shell water, it is equivalent to taking bath in all the Tīrthas. Bhagavān Hari resides direct in the conch-shell.

तत्रैव वसते लक्ष्मीद्वीभूतममूकलम् ।

स्लीणां च संख्याधनिभः श्रुज्ञाणा च विशेषतः ॥ 27 ॥

भीता कहा याति लक्ष्मीतत्यल्वाल्यद्यतः ।

शिवर्ष पदानवं हृता शिवालोकं जगाम ह ॥ 28 ॥

Where Śaṅkha is placed, there Hari resides. Lakṣmī also resides there and all inauspicious things fly away from there. Where the females and Śūdras blow the Śaṅkhas, Lakṣmī then gets vexed and, out of terror, She goes away to other places. O Nārada! Mahadeva, after killing the Dānava, went to His own abode.

प्रहृही वृषभासुक: स्वर्गीषु सम्बतु: ।

सुरा: स्वविषयं प्रापु: परमानंदसंपुतः ॥ 29 ॥

नेदुईदुघमयः स्वर्गे जगृर्गी-वर्गीक्रिर्भतः ।

बधूर पुण्यवृष्टिश्वास्योर संततम् ।

प्रशसीसुः सुगतं च मुनी-न्रप्रवरादः ॥ 30 ॥

इति शीमदौरिभागवाते महापुराणो नवमस्कन्धे

नयोविरोगोअध्याः ॥ 31 ॥

When He gladly went away on His Vehicle, on the Bull's back, with His whole host, all the other Devas went to their respective places with great gladness. Celestial drums were sounded in the Heavens. The Gandharvas and the Kinnaras began to sing songs. And showers of flowers were strewn on Śiva's head. All the Munis and Devas and their chiefs began to chant hymns to Him.

Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter of the Nineth

Book on the killing of Śaṅkhacūda in

Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXIV

