CHAPTER XIII

On Urvaśi and Purūravä

सूत उवाच

सुधुने तु दिवं याते राज्यं चके पुरुत्वाः ।

सुगणछ सुरूपछ प्रजारंजनततरः ॥ 1 ॥

प्रतिहाने पुरे न्ये राज्यं सर्वनमकृतम् ।

चकार सर्वेधर्जः प्रजास्थणतात्यः ॥ 2 ॥

Sūta said: O Maharsis! When king Sudyumna had gone up to heavens, the religious king Purūravā, endowed with great beauty and many qualities, and able to please the minds of his subject began to govern his kingdom well, according to Dharma, with his heart intent on governing his people.

मन्तः सुगुप्तस्त्यासौर्यराजाधिन्नता तथा ।

सर्वेकौत्सहागिक्र ऋषुशणैकतक्षोतमा ॥ ३ ॥

No body knew what his counsel was, but he was very clever in knowing others' counsels. He was always highly energetic and his lordly power was great.

सामदानादाय: सर्वे बर्गगातस्य भुपते: ।

वर्गाङ्गमान्वधर्मव्यान्कुर्विज्ञा उशगास ह ॥ 4 ॥

The four methods of warfare, (1) conciliation, (2) giving gifts, (3) sowing dissensions and (4) war, were fully under his control. He saw that his subject practised religion according to Varṇāśrama (colours and stages of life), and thus he began to govern his kingdom.

यज्ञां क्रविष्यांश्रके स राजा बुद्धिदक्षान् ।

द्रानाति च पविश्राणि द्वादव्य नाराधपः ॥ 5 ॥

Purūravā, the lord of men, performed various sacrifices with abundance of Dakṣinās (sacrificial fees) and also gave away much in various charities, causing great wonder and astonishment.

तस्य रूपगुर्णैदार्यशीतरूशिविक्रमान् ।

शुवार्वेशी वर्गभूता चकमे ते नतरिप्पि ॥ 6 ॥

His extraordinary beauty and qualities, liberality and good nature, his unbounded wealth and prowess made Apsarā Urvasi (celestial nymph)

think of him often and she wanted him to satisfy her.

बहुशाणाथित्ता सा मानुर्षे तोकामीस्थिता ।

गृणिनं ते नृपं मत्वा वरयायाम मानिनि ॥ 7 ॥

Some time passed when that proud Urvaśī had to descend on this earth, due to a curse pronounced on her by a Brāhmīn; and she chose king Purūravaśī as her husband, thinking him to be endowed with all the qualities.

समयं चेयुंग कृत्वा स्थिता तत्र वराङ्गना ।

एतावुर्णाकी राजस्यती रक्षस्य मान्द ।। ८।।

She then addressed the king and made the following contract: "O king, giving honour due to every body! I keep these two young sheep in trust and deposit with you; kindly look after these and, then, my honour will be preserved by you.

घृतं मे भक्षणं नित्यं नान्यत्किचघुपाशनम् ।

नेक्षे त्वां च महात्राज ननमन्यत्र मैथुन्ता ॥ ९ ॥

O King! I will take ghee daily and nothing else for my food; and there is one word more; O King! Let me! not see you naked, except when you hold sexual intercourse.

भाषाधंत्रस्यं राजन् यदि मनो भविष्यति ।

तदा त्वल्बा गाथिषामि सलमेतदुबीयम्हम् ॥ 10 ॥

O king, I say this truly, that, in case there be any breach in this contract I will instantly leave you and go away." The king accepted this contract of Urvāsī.

अज्ञीकृतं च तत्रात्रा कामिन्या भाषितं तु यत् ।

स्थिता भाषणबंधेन प्रशानानुश्रकामयया ॥ १ १ ॥

Urvāsi, too, remained there according to the above contract and also with a view to pass away period of her curse.

रेमे तदा स भृपाले लीनो वर्षगणान्बृह्न ।

धर्मकमिक खल्वचो वोर्शेगया मद्योहितः ॥ 12 ॥

During this time the king was fascinated with the love of Urvaśī and became so very much attached to her, that he left all his duties and dharma

Book 1 Chapter XIII

and remained long for many, many years in enjoying Urvaśī.

एकधितस्तु संजातस्तन्यनस्को महीपति: ।

न शणाक तया हीनः क्षणमपत्यितेपहितः ॥ 13 ॥

The king's mind was so deeply absorbed in her, that he could not remain alone without her, even for a moment.

एवं वर्षेणान्ते तु स्वार्थ्य पाकशासनः ।

उर्वेशी नानातां द्वृष्टा गंधर्वानाह् देवराद् ॥ 14 ॥

Thus many years passed away, when, once upon a time, Indra, the lord of the Devas, not seeing Urvaśī, asked the Gandharvas and said:

उर्वेगोभान्यरधं भो नाभ्वर्ग सर्व एव है ।

द्वतोरणी गृहातस्य घपुतेः समये किल ॥ 15 ॥

“O Gandharvas! Better go and steal away the two young sheep in a proper time from the palace of Purūravā, and then bring Urvaśi here.

उर्शगीर्णित्त स्थानं मदीयं नारितीयते ।

येन केनाप्यपायेन तामानयत कामिनीम् ॥ १६ ॥

My Nandana garden is now void of all beauty without Urvaśi; so bring the lady here anyhow or other."

इत्युक्तासेउथ नार्यवां विश्वासुपुरोगमा ।

ततो नाचा महागाठे तमसि प्रत्युपस्थिते ॥ १७ ॥

Thus spoken by Indra, Viśvāvasu and other Devas went to Purūravā's palace; and when it was dark in the night, and when Purūravā was holding sexual intercourse with Urvaśi, stole away the two young sheep.

जहुस्तावुर्णते देवा रमामणं वितोकस्य तम् ।

चक्रवतुस्तवा ती तु हिद्यामाणी विहायसा ॥ 18 ॥

They, when being carried away in the sky, cried out so piteously, that Urvaśī came to hear that as if of her two sons, and angrily spoke to the king:

उर्वेशी ततुपाकर्णे क्रान्ततं सुनायेरि ।

कृपितोबाच राजनं समयोउयं कृते मया ॥ १९ ॥

“O king! Now the contract that I made with you is verily fulfilled! It is that I placed my implicit confidence in you that this my misfortune has befallen me.

नष्टाङ्गे तव विश्वासाद्यूब्छती चोरैमंगरणे ।

राजनुससमावेती स्व किंहि शेष चित्रया स्म : ॥ 20 ॥

हतो3स्यहं कुनाथेन नपुंसा वीरामिनना ।

उरणों मे गती चाहा सदा प्राणिप्रिये मा ॥ 21 ॥

See! the thieves are stealing away the two sheep, my sons as they were! How then are you sleeping here like a woman? Alas! I am ruined in having an impotent husband who vainly boasts of his prowess!

एवं विलव्यामानां तां द्वृह्वा राजा विलोहित ।

नान एव यदो तृर्णं पृष्ठतः पृथिवीपितः ॥ 22 ॥

Where are my two young sheep today that are dearer to me than my life? Thus seeing Urvaśī wailing, king Purūravā, the Lord of the Universe, ran after the Gandharvas instantly without any sense as it were, left in him, naked.

विद्युराकशिता तत्र न्यार्वैनुंवरेयपनि ।

ननप्रन्तसता द्रूषो भूपतितन्नाकामया ॥ 23 ॥

त्वक्लेवोगी गता सर्वे नयशं: पर्य पार्थिव: ।

ननगे जग्राह ती शांती जगाम स्वगृहं प्रति ॥ 24 ॥

The Gandharvas, then, cast rays of lightning in that room, and Urvaśī, willing to leave, saw the king naked when the Gandharvas left the two young sheep there and went away. The tired king brought the two sheep back to his house in that naked state.

तदोर्कर्णी गतां दृष्ट्वा विल्लतापातिबु:खितः ।

नर्न वीक्ष्य पतिं नारीगतता सा वरवर्गिनो ॥ 25 ॥

Then Urvaśī, too, seeing the husband naked, went away immediately to the Deva loka. Seeing Urvaśī going away, the king wailed very much with a very grievous heart.

क्रन्दन्स देशदेशेषु बधाम नृपति: स्वयम् ।

तचित्तो विहृतः शोषोन्विशः काममोहितः ॥ 26 ॥

Then, being very much bewildered by the bereavement of Urvaśī, with his senses beyond control, and deluded by passion, wandered about in various countries, crying and giving vent to sorrow.

ध्रमवै सकासं पृथ्वीं कुरुक्षेये द्वर्गे ताम ।

दूर्ध्या संहृष्टवदनः प्राह सूर्त नृपोतमः ॥ 27 ॥

Thus, wandering all over the globe, he came once to Kuruksetra and saw Urvaśī; then with a gladdened face said: "O beloved! Wait, wait for a moment; my mind is all absorbed in you; it is quite innocent and submissive to you.

अयं जाये तिछ धोरे न त्यतुर्मटिंस ।

मा त्व त्वन्मरं कांत कांगा चाध्यनागमम् ॥ 28 ॥

स देड़ोरयं पतचस देिथ दूरं हतस्वया ।

खाद्वेयंचे वृका: काकावत्वया त्यचं करोय तत् ॥ 29 ॥

So you ought not to forsake me in such a dire difficult time. O Devi! For the sake of you, I have travelled very far. O Beautiful one! The body that you embraced before, will now, forsaken by you, fall here and will be devoured by crows and wolves and other carnivorous animals.”

एवं विलपमानं ते राजानं ग्राह चोर्वींग ।

इंलिखत कृपण श्रांत कामाति विवर्गं घृणम् ॥ 30 ॥

Seeing the king, tired and passion stricken, greatly distressed and with a very sorrowful heart and wailing.

उर्वेश्यवाच

मूर्यो5सि नृपशादूल जानं कुत्र गतं तव ।

व्वायि सख्यं न च स्त्रीणां वृकापामिव पार्थिं ॥31॥

Urvaśī spoke out: O king! You are certainly a quite senseless man; whither has gone your extraordinary knowledge now? O king! Do you not know that the pure unalloyed love of woman cannot

take place with any other as the love of a wolf cannot fall on any man.

न विश्वाशो हि कतिथः स्त्री चौरेषु पार्थिवेः ।

गृहं नष्ठ सुखं भुक्षव मा विषवादे नः कृबा: ॥ 3 2 ॥

Therefore, earthly men ought never to trust a bit women and thieves. So, go back to your palace and enjoy the pleasures of the kingdom; do not drown your mind further in sorrows."

इत्येवं बोधिता राजा न विवेदातिमोहितः ।

दुःखं च परमं प्रापतः स्थितीपानेद्यनितः ॥ 33 ॥

King Purūravaś, though thus brought to senses by Urvaśī, was so much fascinated by her love that his heart did not feel any consolation; rather he felt indescribable pain, being held up in bondage by the love of Urvaśī.

सूत उवाच

इति सर्वे समाख्यानप्रवैशीचरितं महत् ।

वेदे वित्तारितं चैततसंक्षेपात्क्रवितं मया ॥ 34 ॥

इति शीमद्वैपागवते महापुराणे प्रव्यमकन्ये

त्रयोदरीक्षायाः ॥ 35 ॥ 

O Munis! Thus I have described to you the character of Urvaśī; it is described, in detail, in the Vedas; I have stated this in brief.

Thus ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the First Book of the characters of Urvaśī and Purūravaś in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

