[Ch 13 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: O Maharsis! When king Sudyumna had gone up to heavens, the religious king Purūravā, endowed with great beauty and many qualities, and able to please the minds of his subject began to govern his kingdom well, according to Dharma, with his heart intent on governing his people.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- O Maharṣis! When the king Sudyumna had gone up to heavens, the religious king Pururavā, endowed with great beauty and many qualities, and able to please the minds of his subjects began to govern his kingdom well, according to Dharma, with his heart intent on governing his people.

[Ch 13 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No body knew what his counsel was, but he was very clever in knowing others' counsels. He was always highly energetic and his lordly power was great.
NEW CORR ENG ──► No body knew what his counsel was, but he was very clever in knowing otherś counsels. He was always highly energetic and his lordly power was great.

[Ch 13 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The four methods of warfare, (1) conciliation, (2) giving gifts, (3) sowing dissensions and (4) war, were fully under his control. He saw that his subject practised religion according to Varṇāśrama (colours and stages of life), and thus he began to govern his kingdom.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The four methods of warfare, (1) con-ciliation, (2) giving gifts, (3) sowing dissensions and (4) war, were fully under his control. He saw that his subjects practised religion according to Varnāśram (Colours and stages of life), and thus he began to govern his kingdom.

[Ch 13 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Purūravā, the lord of men, performed various sacrifices with abundance of Dakṣinās (sacrificial fees) and also gave away much in various charities, causing great wonder and astonishment.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Pururavā, the lord of men, performed various sacrifices with abundance of Dakṣiṇās (sacrificial fees) and also gave away much in various charities, causing great wonder and astonishment.

[Ch 13 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► His extraordinary beauty and qualities, liberality and good nature, his unbounded wealth and prowess made Apsarā Urvasi (celestial nymph) think of him often and she wanted him to satisfy her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► His extra-ordinary beauty and qualities, liberality and good nature, his unbounded wealth and prowess made the Apsarā Urvaśī (celestial nymph) think of him often and she wanted him to satisfy her.

[Ch 13 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Some time passed when that proud Urvaśī had to descend on this earth, due to a curse pronounced on her by a Brāhmīn; and she chose king Purūravaśī as her husband, thinking him to be endowed with all the qualities.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Some time passed when that procud Urvaśī had to descend on this earth, due to a curse pronounced on her by a Brāhmin; and she chose the king Pururavā as her husband, thinking him to be endowed with all the qualities.

[Ch 13 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She then addressed the king and made the following contract: "O king, giving honour due to every body! I keep these two young sheep in trust and deposit with you; kindly look after these and, then, my honour will be preserved by you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She then addressed the king and made the following contract :-- “O king, giving honour due to every body! I keep these two young sheep in trust and deposit with you; kindly look after these and, then, my honour will be preserved by you.

[Ch 13 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! I will take ghee daily and nothing else for my food; and there is one word more; O King! Let me! not see you naked, except when you hold sexual intercourse.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! I will take ghee daily and nothing else for my food; and there is one word more; O king! Let me not see you naked, except when you hold sexual intercourse.

[Ch 13 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king, I say this truly, that, in case there be any breach in this contract I will instantly leave you and go away." The king accepted this contract of Urvāsī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king I say this truly, that, in case there be any breach in this contract I will instantly leave you and go away.” The king accepted this contract of Urvaśī.

[Ch 13 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Urvāsi, too, remained there according to the above contract and also with a view to pass away period of her curse.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Urvaśī, too, remained there according to the above contract and also with a view to pass away the period of her curse.

[Ch 13 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► During this time the king was fascinated with the love of Urvaśī and became so very much attached to her, that he left all his duties and dharma and remained long for many, many years in enjoying Urvaśī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► During this time the king was fascinated with the love of Urvaśī and became so very much attached to her, that he left all his duties and dharma and remained long for many, many years in enjoying Urvaśī.

[Ch 13 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king's mind was so deeply absorbed in her, that he could not remain alone without her, even for a moment.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king’s mind was so deeply absorbed in her, that he could not remain alone without her, even for a moment.

[Ch 13 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus many years passed away, when, once upon a time, Indra, the lord of the Devas, not seeing Urvaśī, asked the Gandharvas and said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus many years passed away, when, once on a time, Indra, the lord of the Devas, not seeing Urvaśī, asked the Gandarbhas and said :--

[Ch 13 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Gandharvas! Better go and steal away the two young sheep in a proper time from the palace of Purūravā, and then bring Urvaśi here.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Gandarbhas! Better go and steal away the two young sheep in a proper time from the palace of Pururavā, and then bring Urvaśī here.

[Ch 13 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My Nandana garden is now void of all beauty without Urvaśi; so bring the lady here anyhow or other."
NEW CORR ENG ──► My Nandana garden is now void of all beauty without Urvaśī; so bring the lady here any how or other.”

[Ch 13 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus spoken by Indra, Viśvāvasu and other Devas went to Purūravā's palace; and when it was dark in the night, and when Purūravā was holding sexual intercourse with Urvaśi, stole away the two young sheep.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus spoken by Indra, Viśvāvasu and other Devas went to Pururavā’s palace; and when it was dark in the night, and when Pururavā was holding sexual intercourse with Urvaśī, stole away the two young sheep.

[Ch 13 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They, when being carried away in the sky, cried out so piteously, that Urvaśī came to hear that as if of her two sons, and angrily spoke to the king:
NEW CORR ENG ──► They, when being carried away in the sky, cried out so piteously that Urvaśī came to hear that as if of her two sons, and angrily spoke to the king :--

[Ch 13 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O king! Now the contract that I made with you is verily fulfilled! It is that I placed my implicit confidence in you that this my misfortune has befallen me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O king! Now the contract that I made with you is verily fulfilled! It is that I placed my implicit confidence on you that this my misfortune has befallen on me;

[Ch 13 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See! the thieves are stealing away the two sheep, my sons as they were! How then are you sleeping here like a woman? Alas! I am ruined in having an impotent husband who vainly boasts of his prowess!
NEW CORR ENG ──► See! the thieves are stealing away the two sheep, my sons as they were! How then are you sleeping here like a woman? Alas! I am ruined in having an impotent husband who vainly boasts of his prowess!

[Ch 13 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Where are my two young sheep today that are dearer to me than my life? Thus seeing Urvaśī wailing, king Purūravā, the Lord of the Universe, ran after the Gandharvas instantly without any sense as it were, left in him, naked.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Where are my two young sheep to-day that are dearer to me than my life?” Thus seeing Urvaśī wailing, the king Pururavā, the lord of the Universe, ran after the Gandharvas instantly without any sense as it were, left in him, naked.

[Ch 13 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Gandharvas, then, cast rays of lightning in that room, and Urvaśī, willing to leave, saw the king naked when the Gandharvas left the two young sheep there and went away. The tired king brought the two sheep back to his house in that naked state.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Gandharvas, then, cast rays of lightning in that room, and Urvaśī, willing to leave, saw the king naked when the Gandharvas left the two young sheep there and went away. The tired king brought the two sheep back to his house in that naked state.

[Ch 13 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Urvaśī, too, seeing the husband naked, went away immediately to the Deva loka. Seeing Urvaśī going away, the king wailed very much with a very grievous heart.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Urvaśī, too, seeing the husband naked, went away immediately to the Devī loka. Seeing Urvaśī going away, the king wailed very much with a very grievous heart.

[Ch 13 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then, being very much bewildered by the bereavement of Urvaśī, with his senses beyond control, and deluded by passion, wandered about in various countries, crying and giving vent to sorrow.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then, being very much bewildered by the bereavement of Urvaśī, with his senses beyond control, and deluded by passion, wandered about in various countries, crying and giving vent to sorrow.

[Ch 13 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus, wandering all over the globe, he came once to Kuruksetra and saw Urvaśī; then with a gladdened face said: "O beloved! Wait, wait for a moment; my mind is all absorbed in you; it is quite innocent and submissive to you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus, wandering all over the globe, he came once to Kurukṣettra and saw Urvaśī; then with a gladdened face said :-- “O beloved! Wait, wait for a moment; my mind is all absorbed in you; it is quite innocent and submissive to you.

[Ch 13 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So you ought not to forsake me in such a dire difficult time. O Devi! For the sake of you, I have travelled very far. O Beautiful one! The body that you embraced before, will now, forsaken by you, fall here and will be devoured by crows and wolves and other carnivorous animals.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► So you ought not to forsake me in such a dire difficult time. O Devī! For the sake of you, I have travelled very far. O Beautiful one! The body that you embraced before, will now, forsaken by you, fall here and will be devoured by crows and wolves, and other carnivorous animals.”

[Ch 13 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the king, tired and passion stricken, greatly distressed and with a very sorrowful heart and wailing.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the king, tired and passion stricken, greatly distressed and with a very sorrowful heart and wailing,

[Ch 13 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Urvaśī spoke out: O king! You are certainly a quite senseless man; whither has gone your extraordinary knowledge now? O king! Do you not know that the pure unalloyed love of woman cannot take place with any other as the love of a wolf cannot fall on any man.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Urvaśī spoke out :-- “O king! You are certainly a quite senseless man; whither has gone your extraordinary knowledge now? O king! Do you not know that the pure unalloyed love of women cannot take place with any other as the love of a wolf cannot fall on any man.

[Ch 13 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, earthly men ought never to trust a bit women and thieves. So, go back to your palace and enjoy the pleasures of the kingdom; do not drown your mind further in sorrows."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore the earthly men ought never to trust a bit to women and thieves. So go back to your palace and enjoy the pleasures of the kingdom; do not drown your mind further in sorrows.”

[Ch 13 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► King Purūravaś, though thus brought to senses by Urvaśī, was so much fascinated by her love that his heart did not feel any consolation; rather he felt indescribable pain, being held up in bondage by the love of Urvaśī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► king Pururavā, though thus brought to senses by Urvaśī, was so much fascinated by her love that his heart did not feel any consolation; rather he felt indescribable pain, being held up in bondage by the love of Urvaśī.

[Ch 13 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Munis! Thus I have described to you the character of Urvaśī; it is described, in detail, in the Vedas; I have stated this in brief. Thus ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the First Book of the characters of Urvaśī and Purūravaś in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Munis! Thus I have described to you the character of Urvaśī; it is described, in detail, in the Vedas; I have stated this in brief. Thus ends the thirteenth chapter of the 1st Skandha of the characters Urvaśī and Pururavā; in the Mahāpurānam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
