[Ch 11 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nanamejaya said: O Intelligent One! Did the prince Trisanku free himself afterwards of the curse inflicted on his by the Muni Vasistha.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya said :-- “O Intelligent One! Did the prince Triśaṅku free himself afterwards of the curse inflicted on him by the Muni Vaśiṣṭha.”

[Ch 11 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Satyavrata, cursed by Vasīṣṭha, was transformed into a demonaical state (Piśācatva); but he became a great devotee of the Devi and passed away his time in that Śārama.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Satyavrata, cursed by Vaśiṣṭha, was transformed into a demoniacal state (Piśācatva); but he became a great devotee of the Devī and passed away his time in that Āśrama.

[Ch 11 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One day he repeating slowly the nine-lettered Mantram of the Bhagavati, wished to perform the Puraścarana ceremony (repeating the name of a deity attended with burnt offerings, oblations, etc.) of the said Mantra, came to the Brāhmins, bowed down to them with great devotion and purity and said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► One day he repeating slowly the nine-lettered Mantram of the Bhagavatī, wished to perform the Puraścaraṇa ceremony (repeating the name of a deity attended with burnt offerings, oblations, etc. ) of the said Mantra, came to the Brāhmins, bowed down to them with great devotion and purity and said :--

[Ch 11 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O venerable gods of the earth! Kindly hear me; I with my head bowed down pray to you, that you all be my priests (Rtvijs).
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “O venerable gods of the earth! Kindly hear me; I with my head bowed down pray to you, that you all be my priests (Ritt-vigs).

[Ch 11 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You are all versed in the Vedas; so kindly do for me duly the Homa ceremony equal to one tenth part of Japam, for my success.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You are all versed in the Vedas; so kindly do for me duly the Homa ceremony equal to one-tenth part of Japam, for my success.

[Ch 11 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brāhmaṇas! My name is Satyavrata; I am a prince; you ought to do this work for me for my welfare."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brāhmaṇas! My name is Satyavrata; I am a prince; you ought to do this work for me for my welfare.”

[Ch 11 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus hearing the prince's words the Brāhmaṇas said: "O Prince! You are cursed by your Guru and you are now turned into a demonaical state.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus hearing the prince’s words the Brāhmaṇas said :-- “O Prince! You are cursed by your Guru and you are now turned into a demoniacal state.

[Ch 11 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You have now no right to the Vedas; especially you are now in the Piśāca state; it is blamed by all the persons; so now you are not fit to be initiated into the ceremony.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You have now no right to the Vedas; especially you are now in the Piśāca state; it is blamed by all the persons; so now you are not fit to be initiated into the ceremony.”

[Ch 11 Verse 9-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My father has forsaken me; I am banished from the kingdom; again, by the Guru's curse, I have got this Piśaca's state; I therefore can't decide what to do." The prince, then, collecting fuel, prepared the funeral pits for himself, remembered the Caṇḍikā Devī and repeating Her Mantram, resolved to jump into the fire.
NEW CORR ENG ──► My father has forsaken me; I am banished from the kingdom; again, by the Guru’s curse, I have got this Piśāca state; I therefore can’t decide what to do.” The prince, then, collecting fuel, prepared the funeral pile for himself, remembered the Candikā Devī and repeating Her Mantram, resolved to jump into the fire.

[Ch 11 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Lighting the pyre in front, the prince bathed and standing, with clasped palms, began to chant the hymns to Mahā Māyā before entering into the fire.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Lighting the pyre in front, the prince bathed and standing, with clasped palms, began to chant the hymns to Mahā Māyā before entering into the fire.

[Ch 11 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this moment, the Devi Bhagavatī, knowing that the prince was ready to burn himself, came instantly to the sport on the back of the lion, by the aerial route. She manifested Herself before him and spoke in a voice deep like a rain-cloud.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this moment, the Devī Bhagavatī, knowing that the prince was ready to burn himself, came instantly to the spot on the back of the lion, by the aerial route. She manifested Henself before him and spoke in a voice deep like a rain-cloud.

[Ch 11 Verse 15-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O Virtuous One! What is all this? What have you settled all these? Never throw yourself in fire; be patient. O Fortunate One! Your father is now aged; he will give you his kingdom and will go to the forest for tapasyā; therefore, O Hero! Do leave your depression of spirits. O King! To-morrow the ministers of your father will come to you to take you there. By My Grace, your father will install you on the throne and, in due time, he will conquer his desires and will go undoubtedly to the Brahmaloka.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Virtuous One What is all this? What have you settled all these? Never throw yourself in fire; be patient. O Fortunate One! Your father is now aged; he will give you his kingdom and will go to the forest for tapasyā; therefore, O Hero! Do leave your depression of spirits. O King! Tomorrow the ministers of your father will came to you to take you there. By My Grace, your father will install you on the throne and, in due time, he will conquer his desires and will go undoubtedly to the Brahmā loka.”

[Ch 11 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O Fortunate One! Thus saying, the Devi vanished at that spot; the prince, too, desisted from his purpose of entering into the fire.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O Fortunate One! Thus saying, the Devī vanished at that spot; the prince, too, desisted from his purpose of entering into the fire.

[Ch 11 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the meanwhile, the high-souled Nārada went to Ayodhyā and at once informed everything to the King. The King became very sad and began to repent very much, hearing the son's resolve to burn himself.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the meanwhile, the highsouled Nārada went to Ayodhyā and at once informed everything to the King. The King became very sad and began to repent very much, hearing the son’s resolve to burn himself.

[Ch 11 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The virtuous King, grieved at heart, for his son, said to his ministers: "You all are aware of the turning out of my son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The virtuous King, grieved at heart, for his son, said to his ministers :-- “You all are aware of the turning out of my son.

[Ch 11 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I have forsaken my intelligent son Satyavrata; though he was very spiritual and worthy to get the kingdom; yet, at my command, he instantaneously went to the forest.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I have forsaken my intelligent son Satyavrata; though he was very spiritual and worthy to get the kingdom; yet, at my command, he instantaneously went away to the forest.

[Ch 11 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Void of wealth, he, practising forgiveness, passed his time in study, particularly in spiritual knowledge; but Vasiṣṭha Deva cursed him and made him like a Piśāca.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Void of wealth, he, practising forgiveness, passed his time in study, particularly in spiritual knowledge; but Vaśiṣṭha Deva, cursed him and made him like a Piśāca.

[Ch 11 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Very much distressed by pain and sorrow, he was ready to burn himself but the Mahā Devi preventing him, he desisted from this purpose.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Very much distressed by pain and sorow, he was ready to burn himself but the Mahā Devī preventing him, he desisted from this purpose.

[Ch 11 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So go hurriedly and, consoling my powerful eldest son, bring him at once to me. I am now calm and quiet and of a retiring disposition; so I am determined to practise tapasyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So go hurriedly and, consoling my powerful eldest son, bring him at once to me. I am now calm and quiet and of a retiring disposition; so I am determined to practise tapasyā.

[Ch 11 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My son is now capable to govern the subjects; I will now install my son on the throne and retire to the forest. So he gladly sent his ministers to his son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► My son is now capable to govern the subjects; I will now install my son on the throne and retire to the forest.” So he gladly sent his ministers to his son.

[Ch 11 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The ministers, too, gladly went there and consoled the prince and, with respect, brought him to the Ayodhyā city.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The ministers, too, gladly went there and consoled the prince and, with respect, brought him to the Ayodhyā city.

[Ch 11 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing Satyavrata with matted hair on his head, with dirty clothes, and thin and worn out with cares, the King began to think within himself “Oh! What a cruel act have I done, though I know everything about religion, in banishing my intelligent son, quite fit to govern my kingdom.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing Satyavrata with matted hair on his head, with dirty clothes, and thin and worn out with cares, the King began to think within himself “Oh! What a cruel act have I done, though I know everything about religion, in banishing my intelligent son, quite fit to govern my kingdom.”

[Ch 11 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus thinking, he embraced his son by his arms and consoling him, made him sit by his throne. The King, versed in politics, then began to speak gladly with suffocated feelings of love, to his son sitting by the side of him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus thinking, he embraced his son by his arms and consoling him, made him sit by his throne. The King, versed in politics, then began to speak gladly with suffocated feelings of love to his son sitting by the side of him.

[Ch 11 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Son! Your highest duty is to keep your mind always on religion and to respect the Brāhmins. Never speak falsely anywhere nor follow any bad course in any way.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Son! Your highest duty is to keep your mind always on religion and to respect the Brāhmins. Never speak falsely anywhere nor follow any bad course in any way.

[Ch 11 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Rather the words of the spiritual good persons ought to be fully observed; the ascetics ought to be worshipped. Senses must be controlled and the wicked cruel robbers are certainly to be slain.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Rather the words of the spiritual good persons ought to be fully observed; the ascetics ought to be worshipped. Senses must be controlled and the wicked cruel robbers are certainly to be slain.

[Ch 11 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Son! For one's success, one should consult with one's ministers and keep that as secret by all means.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Son! For one’s success, one should consult with one’s ministers and keep that as secret by all means.

[Ch 11 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Any enemy, howsoever insignificant he may be, a clever King should never overlook him. The ministers, if they be attached to other masters and if they come round afterwards, don't trust them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Any enemy howsoever insignificant he may be, a clever King should never overlook him. The ministers, if they be attached to other masters and if they come round afterwards, don’t trust them.

[Ch 11 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Spies should be kept to watch friends and foes alike. Shew your living regards to the religion always, and make charitable gifts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Spies should be kept to watch friends and foes alike. Show your living regards to the religion always, and make charitable gifts.

[Ch 11 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One ought not to argue in vain and always avoid the company of the wicked. O Son! You should worship the Maharsis and perform various sacrifices.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One ought not to argue in vain and always avoid the company of the wicked. O Son! You should worship the Maharṣis and perform various sacrifices.

[Ch 11 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Never trust women, those who are inordinately addicted to women, and the gamblers. Never is it advisable to be addicted too much to hunting.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Never trust women, those who are inordinately addicted to women, and the gamblers. Never is it advisable to be addicted too much to hunting.

[Ch 11 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Always shew your back to gambling, drinking, music and to the prostitutes and try to make your subjects follow the same.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Always shew your back to gambling, drinking, music and to the prostitutes and try to make your subjects follow the same.

[Ch 11 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Early in the morning at the Brāhma Muhūrta every day you should get up from your bed and bathe and perform other analogous duties.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Early in the morning at the Brahmā Muhūrta everyday you should get up from your bed and bathe and perform other analogous duties.

[Ch 11 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Son! Be initiated by the Guru in the Devi Mantra and worship with devotion the Supreme Force, the Bhagavatī. Human birth is crowned with success by worshipping Her Lotus Feet.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Son! Be initiated by the Guru in the Devī Mantra, and worship with devotion the Supreme Force, the Bhagavatī. Human birth is crowned with success by worshipping Her Lotus Feet,

[Ch 11 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Son! He who performs once the great Pūjā of the Mahā Devi and drinks the Caraṇāṃtā water (water with which Her feet are worshipped) has never to enter again in the womb of his mother; know this as certain.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Son! He who performs once the great Pūjā of the Mahā Devī and drinks the Caraṇāmrita water (water with which Her feet are worshipped) has never to enter again in the womb of his mother; know this as certain.

[Ch 11 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That Mahā Devī is all that is seen and She Herself is again the Seer and Witness, of the nature of Intelligence. Filled with these ideas, rest fearless like the Universal Soul.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That Mahā Devī is all that is seen and She Herself is again the Seer and Witness, of the nature of Intelligence. Filled with these ideas, rest fearless like the Universal Soul.

[Ch 11 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Do your daily (Naimittik occasional) duties, go to the Brāhimn's assembly and calling on them ask the conclusions of the Dharma Śāstras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Do your daily Naimittik (occasional) duties, go to the Brāhmin’s assembly and calling on them ask the conclusions of the Dharma Śāstras.

[Ch 11 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas and Vedāntas, are objects of venerations and must be worshipped.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas and Vedantas, are objects of venerations and must be worshipped.

[Ch 11 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Give, then, them always according to merits, cows, lands, gold, etc. Do'nt worship any Brāhmin who is illiterate.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Give, then, them always according to merits, cows, lands, gold, etc. Don’t worship any Brāhmin who is illiterate.

[Ch 11 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Don't give to illiterates more than their belliful wants. O Child! Never trespass Dharma, out of covetousness, and remember always not to insult ever after wards any Brāhmanas, The Brāhmins are the cause of the Kṣattriyas, the more so they are the terrestrial gods; honour them with all your care! In this never flinch from your duties.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Don’t give to illiterates more than their belliful wants. O Child! Never trespass Dharma, out of covetousness, and remember always not to insult ever afterwards any Brāhmaṇas. The Brāhmins are the cause of the Kṣattriyas, the more so they are the terrestrial gods; honour them with all your care! In this never flinch from your duties.

[Ch 11 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Fire comes out of water; the Ksatriyas come out of the Brāhmans; iron comes out of stones. The powers of these flow then that clash dies away in the source.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Fire comes out of water; the Kṣattriyas come out of the Brāhmaṇas; iron comes out of stones. The powers of these flow everywhere. But if there be any clash between one thing and its source, then that clash dies away in the source.

[Ch 11 Verse 52-53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Know this as quite certain. The King who wants his own welfare and improvement must by gift and humility shew his respect especially to the Brāhmins. Follow the maxims of morality as dictated in the Dharma Śāstras. Amass wealth according to rules of justice and fill the treasury. Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Seventh Book about the story of Triśanku in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Know this as quite certain. The King who wants his own welfare and improvement must by gift and humility shew his respect especially to the Brāhmins. Follow the maxims of morality as dictated in the Dharma Śāstras. Amass wealth according to rules of justice and fill the treasury. Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Seventh Book about the story of Triśaṅku in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
