CHAPTER XI

On Trísainku

जनमेजय उवाच

वसिष्ठेन च रणतोउसी विशंकुभूपते: सुतः ।

कर्थं शणाधिनिर्भुक्तसन्ये बृहि महामते ॥ १ ॥

Nanamejaya said: O Intelligent One! Did the prince Trisanku free himself afterwards of the curse inflicted on his by the Muni Vasistha.

व्यास उवाच

सत्यव्रतस्तथा शगत: विश्याचत्यमावतावान् ।

तस्मिवेत्रावासमे तस्थी देवीभक्तिपरायण: ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Satyavrata, cursed by Vasīṣṭha, was transformed into a demonaical state (Piśācatva); but he became a great devotee of the Devi and passed away his time in that Śārama.

क्वार्विष्यपतिस्त्र जल्वा मन्थ नवाक्षरम् ।

होभार्थ बाहुणान्त्वा प्रणायोबार चपित्तः ॥ 3 ॥

One day he repeating slowly the nine-lettered Mantram of the Bhagavati, wished to perform the

Puraścarana ceremony (repeating the name of a deity attended with burnt offerings, oblations, etc.) of the said Mantra, came to the Brāhmins, bowed down to them with great devotion and purity and said:

भूमिदेवाः शुणुत्यं वै वचनं प्रगतस्य मे ।

ऋलिजो मम सर्वैत्रि भवतः प्रभवन्तु है ॥ ४ ॥

“O venerable gods of the earth! Kindly hear me; I with my head bowed down pray to you, that you all be my priests (Rtvijs).

जपस्य च द्वगीशेन होमः काव्यों विधानतः ।

भवाद्धः कार्यसिद्धार्थ बेर्विविद्धः कृपापरेः ॥ ५ ॥

You are all versed in the Vedas; so kindly do for me duly the Homa ceremony equal to one tenth part of Japam, for my success.

सत्यवतोर्भं युपतेः पुत्रो क्रद्धाविद्धांरतः ।

कार्य मन विधात्यां सर्वेथा सुखहेतवे ॥ 6 ॥

Book VII Chapter XI

O Brāhmaṇas! My name is Satyavrata; I am a prince; you ought to do this work for me for my welfare."

तच्छुला ब्राह्मणास्तत्र तमूचुरंगपेतः सुतम् ।

ग्रातस्तं गुर्भाग प्रातर्न प्रिणाचलं त्वयासुभुना ॥ 7 ॥

Thus hearing the prince's words the Brāhmaṇas said: "O Prince! You are cursed by your Guru and you are now turned into a demonaical state.

न यागहुँर्षि सत्माच्चं वैद्यवन्धितकातः ।

प्रियालवमनुग्रणतं सर्वलोकेषु गहिंगम ॥ 8 ॥

You have now no right to the Vedas; especially you are now in the Piśāca state; it is blamed by all the persons; so now you are not fit to be initiated into the ceremony.

व्यास उवाच

तिश्रणम्य चद्रस्तेधां राजा दुःखमवाग इ ।

धिर्जीवितादिं मेउढ़ किं करोरि चने सित्तः ॥ 9 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing them, the prince got very sad not dejected and thought “Fie on my life! What shall I do now in living even in the forest. पिता चाहं परितक्तः शतक्ष शुकण भुशम् ।

राज्यदृष्टः प्रियाचलमुज्ञापतः क्रोगेम किम् ॥ 10 ॥

तदा पृथुत्तां कृत्वा चितां काहैनुपातज्ञः ।

संस्मार चण्डिकां देवीं प्रवेशमनुचित्यन्त्य ॥ 11 ॥

My father has forsaken me; I am banished from the kingdom; again, by the Guru's curse, I have got this Piśaca's state; I therefore can't decide what to do." The prince, then, collecting fuel, prepared the funeral pits for himself, remembered the Caṇḍikā Devī and repeating Her Mantram, resolved to jump into the fire.

सूचता देर्ती महामारा चित्ता प्रवलितां पुरः ।

कृत्वा स्नावा प्रवेश्याँ स्थितः प्रांजितसघातः ॥ 12 ॥

Lighting the pyre in front, the prince bathed and standing, with clasped palms, began to chant the hymns to Mahā Māyā before entering into the fire.

त्राला भगवती तं तु मुर्कामं मतीपतिन् ।

आजगाम तदाकामां प्रत्यक्षं तस्य चात्रातः ॥ १३ ॥

दत्ताथ दर्शनं देती तमुवाच रुपात्मजम् ।

सिंहाक्वा महाराज मेघांभीर्या गिरा ॥ १४ ॥

At this moment, the Devi Bhagavatī, knowing that the prince was ready to burn himself, came instantly to the sport on the back of the lion, by the aerial route. She manifested Herself before him and spoke in a voice deep like a rain-cloud.

देश्याच

किं ते व्यवसितं साधो हताशो गा तनुं त्यज ।

सियो भव महाभाग पित्त ते जरसाधितः ॥ 15 ॥

राज्यं दत्ता वयं तुर्थ्य मन्तातित तपसे किल ।

विषादं त्यज है वीर परधोड़हीन भुपते ॥ 16 ॥

नेतुं त्वामगमिष्यन्ति सचिवाड़ प्रितुस्त्व ।

मत्स्यात्त्यिता च स्वामधिषिच्य नृपासे ॥ 17 ॥

वित्ता कामं बहुतोकं गमिष्येव प्रश्रयः ।

"O Virtuous One! What is all this? What have you settled all these? Never throw yourself in fire; be patient. O Fortunate One! Your father is now aged; he will give you his kingdom and will go to the forest for tapasyā; therefore, O Hero! Do leave your depression of spirits. O King! To-morrow the ministers of your father will come to you to take you there. By My Grace, your father will install you on the throne and, in due time, he will conquer his desires and will go undoubtedly to the Brahmaloka.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्ता तं तदा देही तत्रेवांतत्पयिति ॥ 18 ॥

राजपुत्रो विरितो मरणात्यवाकततः ।

Vyāsa said: O Fortunate One! Thus saying, the Devi vanished at that spot; the prince, too, desisted from his purpose of entering into the fire.

अयोध्यायां तद्गाल्य नारदेन महात्मना ॥ १९ ॥

यृत्तांतः कथितः सर्वां रोहे सत्वरामवित्तः ।

श्रूला राजार्थे पुरस्य तं तथा मरणोषादम् ॥ 20 ॥

In the meanwhile, the high-souled Nārada went to Ayodhyā and at once informed everything to the King. The King became very sad and began to repent very much, hearing the son's resolve to burn himself.

खेददामाधाय मनसि शुणोच बहुधा नृपः ।


सचिवानाह धर्मात्मा यूत्रशोकपरिप्लुतः ॥ 21 ॥

ज्ञातं भवद्धित्युयं युजस्य मच चेहितम् ।

The virtuous King, grieved at heart, for his son, said to his ministers: "You all are aware of the turning out of my son.

त्यन्तो मया वने धीमायुग: सत्यवते मा ॥ 22 ॥

आज्ञासौ गतः सदो राज्याहुं: परमार्थवित् ।

I have forsaken my intelligent son Satyavrata; though he was very spiritual and worthy to get the kingdom; yet, at my command, he instantaneously went to the forest.

स्थिततनैद्व विज्ञाने धनहीनः क्षमात्वितः ॥ 23 ॥

वसिष्ठेन तथा शगतः विशासवसृषः कृतः ।

Void of wealth, he, practising forgiveness, passed his time in study, particularly in spiritual knowledge; but Vasiṣṭha Deva cursed him and made him like a Piśāca.

सो5ढ़ दुःखेन संतप प्रवेषुं च हुताशनम् ॥ 24 ॥

उक्तः श्रीमहादेवा निषिद्धः संस्थितः पुनः ।

Very much distressed by pain and sorrow, he was ready to burn himself but the Mahā Devi preventing him, he desisted from this purpose.

तस्मावराष्ठन्तु तं शीघ्रं जेश्धुरं महावलम् ॥ 25 ॥

आश्राय स्वचैत्रत तत्सैवान्वसित्व ।

अभिविष्य सुतं राज्य औरसं पालनक्षमम् ॥ 26 ॥

वनं भार्यामि शान्तोउहं तपसे कृतनिष्ठतः ।

So go hurriedly and, consoling my powerful eldest son, bring him at once to me. I am now calm and quiet and of a retiring disposition; so I am determined to practise tapasyā.

इतुलक्वा मन्त्रिणः सवत्नोषयामास पार्थिवः ॥ 27 ॥

तद्यैवानयान्यहि हि प्रीतिप्रवणमानसः ।

My son is now capable to govern the subjects; I will now install my son on the throne and retire to the forest. So he gladly sent his ministers to his son.

ते गत्वा ते सभाशयाय मन्त्रिणः पार्थिवात्मम् ॥ 28 ॥

अयोध्यायां महात्मानं मानपूर्वे समानयन् ।

The ministers, too, gladly went there and

consoled the prince and, with respect, brought him to the Ayodhyā city.

इद्धला सत्यन्तं राजा दुर्वतैं मलिनांबरम् ॥ 29 ॥

जटापूट्यं कूरं चिन्तानुपवित्यन्ति ।

किं कृत निरुक्तं कर्म मया पुत्रे विवासितः ॥ 30 ॥

राज्यहंशातिमेधावी जानता धर्मनिश्वाम् ।

Seeing Satyavrata with matted hair on his head, with dirty clothes, and thin and worn out with cares, the King began to think within himself “Oh! What a cruel act have I done, though I know everything about religion, in banishing my intelligent son, quite fit to govern my kingdom.”

इति संचित्य मनसा तमालिंसय महीपितः ॥ ३१ ॥

आसने स्वसमीपस्ये समाधान्योपवेशगत् ।

उपविष्टं सुतं राजा प्रेमपूर्वमुवाच ह ॥ ३२ ॥

प्रेमपादादय वाचा नीतिशास्बविशारदः ।

Thus thinking, he embraced his son by his arms and consoling him, made him sit by his throne. The King, versed in politics, then began to speak gladly with suffocated feelings of love, to his son sitting by the side of him.

राजोवाच

पुरु धर्मे मति: कार्यां माननीया मुखोद्वा: ॥ 33 ॥

न्यायगतं धनं प्राहं स्थणीया: सदा प्रजा: ।

नासलं व्वाणि वत्कलं नामर्गे गमनं क्वचित् ॥ 34 ॥

“O Son! Your highest duty is to keep your mind always on religion and to respect the Brāhmins. Never speak falsely anywhere nor follow any bad course in any way.

शिष्योक्ते प्रकतिथां पूजनीयास्पत्थितयनः ।

हन्तया दस्यवः कृता इन्द्रियाणां तथा जयः ॥ 35 ॥

Rather the words of the spiritual good persons ought to be fully observed; the ascetics ought to be worshipped. Senses must be controlled and the wicked cruel robbers are certainly to be slain.

कतैंवं कार्यसिद्धार्थ राज्ञ पुत्र सदैव हि ।

मन्त्रस्तु सदैवा गोप्य: कतैंव्य: सचिविः सह ॥ 36 ॥

O Son! For one's success, one should consult with one's ministers and keep that as secret by all means.

Book VII Chapter XI

नोप्रेष्योरूपोर्षि कृतिना सिंपु: सर्वात्मना सुत ।

न विश्वशेत्यासराकें सचिवं च तथानतम् ॥ 37 ॥

Any enemy, howsoever insignificant he may be, a clever King should never overlook him. The ministers, if they be attached to other masters and if they come round afterwards, don't trust them.

चारा: सर्वे योक्त्या: शगूमिपेयु सर्वथा ।

धर्मे मति: सदा कामी दानं द्वाण्च नियास: ॥ 38 ॥

Spies should be kept to watch friends and foes alike. Shew your living regards to the religion always, and make charitable gifts.

शुक्रवादो न कतंचीय दुर्गसंगं च वजंयेत् ।

यश्या विधिधा यज्ञा: पूजनीया मतृषेय: ॥ 39 ॥

One ought not to argue in vain and always avoid the company of the wicked. O Son! You should worship the Maharsis and perform various sacrifices.

न विश्वेतिस्थं क्वापि क्षेषापुतर्ततं नन् ।

अत्यादारो न कर्तेलो मृगायायां कदाचन ॥ 40 ॥

Never trust women, those who are inordinately addicted to women, and the gamblers. Never is it advisable to be addicted too much to hunting.

घृते मटे तथा गेये नूनं वारवघुपु च ।

स्वयं तद्धिमुखी घ्यात्याजास्तेभ्यघ्र श्वयेत ॥ 41 ॥

Always shew your back to gambling, drinking, music and to the prostitutes and try to make your subjects follow the same.

ब्राहो मुटुर्ते कलिवमुर्थानं सर्वथा सदा ।

स्नानादिके सर्विविधि विधाया विधित्यन्ता ॥ 42 ॥

Early in the morning at the Brāhma Muhūrta every day you should get up from your bed and bathe and perform other analogous duties.

पशास्त्रक: परां पूर्वां भवल्या कुयांस्तुदीक्षितः ।

पृत्रैतज्ञन्मसफल्व पराशकः पदार्चेन्म ॥ 4 3 ॥

O Son! Be initiated by the Guru in the Devi Mantra and worship with devotion the Supreme Force, the Bhagavatī. Human birth is crowned with success by worshipping Her Lotus Feet.

सकूलकृत्वा महापूर्णां देवोपादलनं पिबन् ।

न जातु जननीर्षे गघ्छेदिति विनिश्रधः ॥ 44 ॥

O Son! He who performs once the great Pūjā of

the Mahā Devi and drinks the Caraṇāṃtā water (water with which Her feet are worshipped) has never to enter again in the womb of his mother; know this as certain.

सर्वे दूर्यं महादेवी ग्रहा साकी च सेव हि ।

इति तद्धावभरित्सिहोत्रिभयंवेतसा ॥ 4 5 ॥

That Mahā Devī is all that is seen and She Herself is again the Seer and Witness, of the nature of Intelligence. Filled with these ideas, rest fearless like the Universal Soul.

कृत्वा निविधिं सम्यगंतंवं सदसि डिजान् ।

समादूय च प्रष्टयो धर्मगस्त्विनिणयः ॥ 46 ॥

Do your daily (Naimittik occasional) duties, go to the Brāhimn's assembly and calling on them ask the conclusions of the Dharma Śāstras.

संपूच ब्राह्णान्यूज्ञान्येद्वेलांगपारगान् ।

गोपृष्टिप्यादिकं च देवं पाञेषु सर्वदा ॥ 47 ॥

The Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas and Vedāntas, are objects of venerations and must be worshipped.

अविद्धान्वाजणः कोर्पि नैव पूज्य कदाचन ।

आहारादिर्विक नैव देवं मुख्याय कर्हिंचि ॥ 48 ॥

Give, then, them always according to merits, cows, lands, gold, etc. Do'nt worship any Brāhmin who is illiterate.

न वा लोपाचत्या पुत्र कर्तेल्य धर्मतैरंचन् ।

अतः परं न कतळी क्वचिषिप्रावमाननम् ॥ 49 ॥

ब्राह्मण भूमिद्विष्ठा माननीयाः प्रयन्ततः ।

कारणं क्षिवाणां च द्विजा एव न संशयः ॥ 50 ॥

Don't give to illiterates more than their belliful wants. O Child! Never trespass Dharma, out of covetousness, and remember always not to insult ever after wards any Brāhmanas, The Brāhmins are the cause of the Kṣattriyas, the more so they are the terrestrial gods; honour them with all your care! In this never flinch from your duties.

अन्योर्धनिर्बंबाण: श्रन्मरणो लोहमुचित्यम् ।

तेषां सर्वजंन तैल: स्वासु योगिनु शग्रामति ॥ 51 ॥

Fire comes out of water; the Ksatriyas come out of the Brāhmans; iron comes out of stones. The

powers of these flow then that clash dies away in the source.

तस्मात्राता विशेषेण माननीया मुखोद्वतः ।

यानेन विनयेनैव सर्वेया भूतिभिच्छत ॥ 52 ॥

दण्डनीति: सदा कार्य धर्मशास्त्रास्तार: ।

कोशस्य संग्रहः कार्यों नूनं न्यायगतस्य ह ॥ 53 ॥

इत शीमदैर्धीभागवते महापुराणे सनमकन्मे

एकारशोस्थाया: 11 11 11

Know this as quite certain. The King who wants

his own welfare and improvement must by gift and humility shew his respect especially to the Brāhmins. Follow the maxims of morality as dictated in the Dharma Śāstras. Amass wealth according to rules of justice and fill the treasury.

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Seventh Book about the story of Triśanku in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

