CHAPTER XXII

On Sudarśana's Marriage

व्यास उवाच

शुत्वा सुतावाक्यमर्निंततामा

नृपांश गत्वा नृपतिंर्गाद।

ब्रजंतु कामं शिवसिण पृथा:

शो वा विवाहं किल संविधाये ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Then, on hearing her daughter's words, that high souled king of Bcnares, Subāhu, came to the spot where the kings were staying and said. "O kings! Now you can go to your own camps; tomorrow I will perform my daughter's marriage ceremony.

भव्यापि येचानि यवास्यपतिनि

गृह्छु सर्वे माय सुप्रसतः ।

भो भाचि कार्य किल मण्डपेउत्र

समेल्य सर्वेत्रि संविधेयम् ॥ 2 ॥

Let you all be pleased with me and graciously accept the food and drink, given by me. Tomorrow let you all come here and perform my daughter's marriage ceremony.

नाताति युनी किल मण्डपेउद्ध

कातीय किं भूपतयोउ कामम् ।

प्रातः समाध्यास्य सूतां नियेष

गच्छुं तस्माधित्रविरिधा पूधः ॥ 3 ॥

O Kings! My daughter is not coming to day to this hall of Swayanīvara; what can I do now; I will console her and bring her here tomorrow. Therefore do you all go now to your own camps respectively."

न विद्याहे बुद्धिमतां निवासीमे

कृपा विधेया सततं ह्वाप्पे ।

विधाय तां प्रातार्हानयिध्ये

सुत्तं तु गच्छेतु नृपा यवेधम् ॥ 4 ॥

Intelligent persons should not quarrel with the members of their own family. But they should

always shew kindness towards their own sons and daughters who are under their protection. However, I will make my daughter understand and bring her tomorrow morning. You may all go now to your places as you desire.

इच्छापणं वा परिचित्य तिने

प्रातः कौरिष्याय संविहारण।

सर्वै: समोवान नृपै: समेतेः

स्वयंवर: सर्वमेतन कार्य: ॥ 5 ॥

Tomorrow morning we will settle about the pledge, whether by choice or by fulfilling a promise, that requires strength, and have marriage celebrated; or better you all together would decide what mode of Swayamvara is to be adopted."

श्रुवा नृपास्तेविचर्यं विविद्वा चवो ययु स्वानि निकेतनानि ।

विधाप्य पार्थे नगरस्य रक्षां चुकः क्रिया मध्यदिन्दौतिहा ॥६॥

The kings heard Subāhu and trusted him. Then seeing that the city is well guarded on all sides, they went to their own camps and performed their midday duties.

सुबाहुर्यार्यजैन: समेतश्रकार कार्याणि विवहाकाले । 
पुर्वी समायुर गृहे सुगुपते पुरोहितैर्विद्वार्वं वरिःः ॥ ७ ॥
स्नानादिके कर्म वरस्य कृत्वा विवाहभूषाकरणं तबैवा ।
आनायय वेदैरप्रिते गृहे वे तस्याहांगं भूमपितिक्रता ॥ ८ ॥

King Subāhu on his side began to perform all the duties regarding the marriage of his daughter, after duly consulting with all the chief members of the family. At the appointed time of marriage he brought his daughter in a well concealed and guarded chamber, had the bathing ceremony of the bridegroom elect performed by the priests, versed in the Vedas, and had him well dressed and did other requisite things. Then he bθugh the

Book III Chapter XXII

bridegroom in the house, made him seat on a Vedi (platform) and duly worshiped him.

सविष्टं चाचमनीयमर्थे वस्त्रद्वरं गायभ कुण्डले ते ।

समर्थं तस्ये विधिध्वजरेरे एल्वलुत्तादामहीसतचः ॥ 9 ॥

Then the large-hearted king gave to the bridegroom seat, Ācamaniya (water for rinsing the mouth and such articles of food as require rinsing one's mouth after eating them), Arghya (articles for worshipping deservedly, Pādyam. e.g. water for washing the feet with an offer of green grass, rice, etc. made in worshipping a God or a Brāhmaṇa), the two silken cloths and sheet, cows, and two ear-rings and then wanted to give Sudarāna his daughter.

सोउध्यातीलवर्मदानचेताः

श्राणा चिन्ताश मनोरायाः।

कन्यां सुकेशीं निधिकन्यकासमां

मेने तदाउसनामनुत्तं च ॥ 10 ॥

The high minded Sudarśana accepted all the offerings given by the king. Seeing this, Manoramā was relieved of her anxiety. Manoramā began to think that beautiful and well adorned daughter as if the daughter of Kubera (the God of wealth) and thanked herself and thought as if all her duties were over.

सूपूजितं घृष्णवल्बदानैर्वीनतमं

तं सचिवासन्तान् ।

निन्युश ते कोतुकमण्डपात-ं

मुद्रात्वान तीतभवा श्रवे ॥ 11 ॥

Then the royal ministers carried gladly and fearlessly the beautiful Sudarśana, worshipped with ornaments and clothings, in a good nice carriage to the centre of the amusement court.

समापन्धूषां विधिविद्धिता:

सिवध्र तां रास्तुर्गतं सुयाने ।

आपीय निव्यूवेरसंश्रियानं

चतुक्युक्ते किल मण्डधे चे ॥ 12 ॥

On the other hand, the elderly female members, who knew all about the prescribed rules, performed the dressing of the princess in a befitting manner

and placing her in a beautiful conveyance took her before the bridegroom elect, in the marriage hall, where there was the platform regularly built.

अर्जिन समाधाय पुरोहितः स

हुत्वा यथावच्च तर्दतारणे ।

आद्राव यत्ती कृतकौतुकों तु

वधूवरी प्रेममुती निकामम् ॥ 13 ॥

लाजाविसर्गे विधित्वाद्धाय

कृत्वा हुताशस्य प्रदक्षिणं च ।

ती चक्रतूलतयथोचितं सल्पवै

वियानं कुलगोजजातम् ॥ 14 ॥

The Sacred Fire was then lit, the royal priest began to perform the Homa ceremony duly; when the amusement ceremony of the bridegroom and bride united in love was duly performed, the priest called them there. After this the bridegroom and bride performed duly the Lājā Homa ceremony and circumambulated the Sacred Fire. Thus all the ceremonies, befitting the gotra and family, were all fully performed according to the prescribed rules.

स तद्वाद्य चाश्युर्जा रथानां

सुभूषितं चापि शरीचसंयुतम्।

द्वौं तृने-त्रस्तु सुर्जनाय

सुर्जितं पारिबर्हे विवाहे ॥ 15 ॥

मदोक्तटान्मेविष्यतिश्रु

गजानिगरेः श्रीगमामानदेहान् ।

गर्ते सपादे नृस्पन्नवेउसी

नृदावय प्रेमयुतो नृपेजः ॥ १६ ॥

दासीशतं काऊनभूषितं च

कोर्णकानां च गर्न सुचाफ।

समर्पयामास वराय राजा

विवाहकाले भृदितोउनृवेलम् ॥ 17 ॥

Then the king Subāhu, excited by feelings of love, in the marriage time, gave to prince Sudarśana the following presents: well adorned two hundred chariots, with horses and the arrow cases filled with arrows, one hundred and twenty five elephants, dressed with golden ornaments, looking like so many mountains, one hundred beautiful female

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

elephants and one hundred maid servants, all dressed in golden ornaments.

अदात्यनुदांससह्वयेकं

सर्वायुधे: सम्प्रतभूषित च ।

त्वानि वासांसि यथोचितानि

दिव्यानि चित्राणि तथा3.5विकानि ॥ 18 ॥

ददी पुनवासगृह्णीत तस्मै

न्यायणि दीर्घणि विविचितानि ।

सिन्धूद्वानां तुरगोत्मानाम-

दात्सहस्वितयं सुगयम् ॥ 19 ॥

क्रमेलकानां च शततयं वै

प्रत्यादिश्मादारभृतां सुचाक ।

शतद्धवे वै शकटोतमानां

तम्ै ददी धान्यसे प्रपृत्तिम ॥ 20 ॥

The king gave the bridegroom also one thousand servants well adorned, bearing the complete set of all sorts of weapons, many gems and jewels, clothings, nice variegated woolen clothes, beautiful capacious rooms to live in, and two thousand excellent horses born in the Sindhu country, three hundred good camels able to carry sufficient loads, and two hundred carriages, filled with grains, etc.

मनोरांग राजसुतां प्रणाथ्य जगाद

वावयं विहिताझलिं: पुरः।

दासोउम्म तं राजसुतं वरिष्ठे

त्वदूषि यत्स्यानु मनोगत ते ॥ 21 ॥

Then the king bowed to the king's daughter Manoramā and with clasped hands, said: "O royal daughter! I am now become your servant; now kindly say what is your desire?"

तं चाक्रावयं निजगाद सापि

स्वत्स्यतु ते भूप कुलस्य वृद्धि:।

सामानिताङ्गे मम सुनेवे त्वया


दत्ता यातो रत्नवरा स्वकन्या ॥ 22 ॥

Hearing these beautiful words of the king, Manoramā said: “O king! all good to you and let your family increase in sons and grandsons. You have increased my honour by giving in marriage your daughter (jewel) to my son. I have no other desire than to see your welfare constant and

increase in your family, posterity and prosperity.

न बन्दिपुत्री नृप माणधी वा

सतीभीढ़ किंचां खरजनं महतमू।

सुमेकृतुल्यस्तु कृत: सुतोछ्धे मे

सम्बन्धिना घूपतितोनामे ॥ 23 ॥

O king! You are the chief amongst the kings. You have made my son great and strong like the Sumeru mountain by giving him your daughter in marriage. You are high and my related. I am not the daughter of a panegyrist or a bard; how can I then praise you for this noble act of yours."

अहो5तिचित्रं नृपतेश्रित्रं

परं पवित्र तत किं वद्यात् ।

यद्धशजायम सुताय मेउहा

दत्ता तव्या पृज्यसुता वरिष्ठा ॥ 24 ॥

वनाधिवासाय किलाधानाय पिता विहीनाय विलेत्यकाय ।

सर्विनिषान्यमुपर्नीस्थाय क्रलगानायार्थविचितानि ॥25 ॥

O king! Your character is wonderful and pure. What more shall I say to you than this that you all, in the face of many other kings, have given your daughter to my son in marriage, who is banished from his kingdom, is deprived of his father and living in the forest, pennyless, armyless, subsisting himself on roots and fruits only.

समानवित्तेउव कुले बले

च द्वाताति पूर्णे नृपतिश्र ध्रवः।

न कोउपि मे भूपसुतेउधौहिने

गुणान्वितां रूपवर्ती च द्वात् ॥ 26 ॥

In these cases the kings as a rule make relations with those only, who are their equals in rank and position, of noble families of equal grade, having forces and wealth equal to each other. No other king would have offered his beautiful well-qualified daughter in marriage to my prince who is without any wealth.

वैरं तु सर्वै: सह संविधाय

नृपर्विरिष्छेबलसंसुतेक्षा ।

सुदर्शनायाथसुतासंपिता मे

किं कर्णेय धैर्यमिदं त्वदीयम् ॥ 27 ॥

Book III Chapter XXII

O king! On your this act, all the other kings, holding great influence and possessing armies, have turned out your enemies. I being a woman am unable to describe the amount of patience in you."

निग्याय वाक्यानि नृपः प्रहुः

कृताझ्लिवांक्यमुवाच भूयः।

गृहाण राज्यं मम सुप्रसिद्धं

भवामि सेनापतित्वा गहाम् ॥ 28 ॥

The King Subāhu of Benares, hearing the sweet words of Manoramā was highly pleased and, with folded hands, began to say. “O Devi you better take my this celebrated kingdom; I will become the commander of your forces and will try my best of guard this city.”

नोचेतद्धर्य प्रतिगृहा चात्र

सुतान्वितो राज्यफलानि भूश्व ।

विद्यार वाराणायिकानिवासं

वने पुरे वासमती ने भरेत्रि ॥ 29 ॥

Or you can take half of my kingdom and remain here with your son. It is not my desire that you leave this Benares and go and live in the forest.

नृपान्तु संलेवे रूपान्तिवता

वै गत्वा कारिष्य प्रथमं तु सान्त्वनम्।

ततः परं झावपरावुपायी

नोचेततो युद्धमहं कारिष्य ॥ 30 ॥

जयाजयी दैववगरी तथापि

धर्मे जयो नैव कृतोउध्यभं ।

तेषां किलाधार्मवांत नृपाणां

कर्थं भविष्यत्यनुचितन्ति नै ॥ 31 ॥

The kings have become very offended; I will first try to appease them; if they be not satisfied, I will adopt the means of “gift” or sowing dissensions amongst them; and even, if, in that, I fail, I will ultimately take to war. O Devi! Victory or defeat is under the hands of the Destiny; still victory comes to those who are in the right path and defeat to those who are in the wrong path. How then can the victory arise to those sinful kings?”

आकार्य तूद्धारियमवैच्छ

जगाद वास्यं हितकारकं तम् ।

मनोरा मानमवाय

तस्माल्यर्वित्ना मोदयुता प्रसवा ॥ 32 ॥

Hearing the king's words, pregnant with meaning, Manoramā felt herself highly respected; and, with a cheerful heart, said the following good words.

राजिक्छवं ते3स्तु कुरुच्य राज्यं

त्यक्त्वा भयं त्वं स्वसुतै: समेतः ।

सुतो5पि मे नृनयावाय राज्यं

साकेतपुर्गं प्रचिष्यतीह ।। 33 ॥

"O king! let all good come on you! you better discard all fear and reign with your sons here; my son Sudarśana, too, will become the king of Ayodhyā by the Grace of Śri Bhagavatī Bhuvaneśvarī, the Supreme Cause of the innumerable worlds, and will roam in this world; there is no doubt in this.

विसर्जीव्यामाजिसच्या नन्तु

शिवं भवानी तव संविधास्यति ।

न काउपि चिन्ता मम भूप

वर्तैत सँश्रितन्येना परमाधिकवों है ॥ 34 ॥

May Bhagavati Bhavāni bring all good unto you; now kindly permit us to depart to our homes, O king! I always contemplate the Highest Goddess Ambikā; and I have no time to indulge in other thoughts.

दोषा गता विविधवाक्यपदै

रसातैरन्योन्यभाषणपदैर्मुतीपमैशु ।

प्रातनुंप: समाधिणाय कृतं विराहुं

रोषान्विता नगराब्धागतास्तथोचुः ॥ 35 ॥

Thus, on various subjects, Manoramā and the king Subāhu began to talk with each other, causing satisfaction to both like nectar, when the morning broke out.

अर्धैव त नुपकलंकधरं च हत्या बालं

तथैव किल तं न विवाहायोगम् ।

गृह्छीम तां शणिकालां नृपरेशु लक्ष्मीं

लज्जामवाय्य निजसहं कर्ध जजम् ॥ 36 ॥

The kings, knowing, early in the morning, that the princess had been given away in marriage,

became very much enraged and went out of the city and began to discuss with one another.

"We will kill today the king Subāhu, the disgrace amongst the kings as well that boy Sudarśana totally unfit to marry the princess, and take away the kingdom and the princess Śaśikalā. How can we return to our homes, with this severe disgrace, stamped on our heads.

भूरपंतु तृर्वीन्पित्रकित वाद्यामान-

उद्यवसनानिभषवित् मूद्बुशवदा: ।

गीतध्विनं च विविधं निगमवनं च

मन्यामहे नृपतिनाज कृती विवाहः ॥ 37 ॥

Hear, O kings! the sound of the drums, mrdangas, other instruments; the sounds of the conchshells have even been overpowered. Hark! the various musical sounds and the chanting of the Vedas. It is then certain that the King Subāhu has finished the marriage ceremony of his daughter Śaśikalā with Sudarśana.

अस्मात्यानं वचनैविधिप्वच्चकार

वेवाहिकेन विधिना करपीड़नं वे ।

कर्तेल्यमघ किमहो प्रविचितन्त्यनु

भृपा: परस्यमिति च समर्थयन्ति ॥ 38 ॥

Oh! This king has deceived us with his words and performed the marriage ceremony, according to ordinary religious rules.

एवं वदसु नृपतिषय कन्याकाया:

कृत्वा विवाहविधमप्रतिमप्रभाव: ।

भूपातिमन्यविद्यागु जगाम राजा

कारीपति: स्वसुद्देः प्रशितम्भावेः ॥ 39 ॥

Now O king! decide unanimously what to do and come to a definite conclusion."

When the kings were thus discussing, the king of Benares, of indomitable prowess, the king Subāhu, after finishing his daughter's marriage, came there with his famous friends to invite them.

आगच्छं च तं दूर्वा रुण का काणीपति तत ।

नोचू: किंघ्रिवी कौभार्यानैनाभाय संस्थिति ॥ 40 ॥

Seeing the King of Benares present, all the other

kings did not utter a single word, but they remained silent, beaming with anger.

स गता प्रणिपलाह कृताज्ञतिरभाषत ।

आगन्तव्यं नृपैः सर्वैर्नितानर्थ गृहे मम ॥ 4 1 ॥

Subāhu then approached to the kings, bowed down, and, with folded hands, said: "Be kind enough to come to my house for dinner.

कन्यास्ती चृतो भूप: कि कंलीम हिताहितम् ।

भवद्धिस्तु शुभः कार्यां महान्तो हि दुसावलः ॥ 42 ॥

O kings! My daughter Śaśikalā after all has selected Sudarśana; I could not help in this. You are all kind and noble; therefore you all be peaceful and let the matter drop."

तिश्राम्य वचस्तस्य नृपा: क्रोधारिण्लुतः ।

प्रत्युचुर्भनमसाधि: स्वरूई नृपते ब्रज ॥ 43 ॥

The kings hearing him were filled with rage and said, “We have all taken food; our desires have been fulfilled; you better now go back to your own home.”

कुरु कार्यिण्यशेणामि यथेथे सुकृतं कृतम् ।

नृपा: सर्वे प्रपालत्वा स्वानि स्वानि गृहाणि च ॥ 44 ॥

सुवाहुपि तध्यूला जागम शंकितो गृहम् ।

किं कार्यिन्ति संविना: कोधयुक्ता नृपोतमा: ॥ 45 ॥

You behaviour with us is all right and proper; now do your other duties and let the kings go back to their homes." Hearing these words of the kings, the king of Benares was very much terrified and returned home, thinking that the kings were all filled with rage and might do serious harm to him. Thus he began to pass away his time in dire anxiety.

गते बतस्मिन्महीपालाध्राकुछ्ध समयं पुनः ।

रुद्ध्वा माणं ग्रहीधाम कन्या हत्वा सुरुर्जनम् ॥ 46 ॥

Then the king Subāhu disappeared; the kings united made this resolve that they would block the passage of Sudarśana, kill him, and take the girl away.

केन्चोनुः किमस्माकं हृत तेन नृपेण वे ।

दृष्ट्वा तु कौतुकं सर्व गतियमायि यथागतम् ॥ 47 ॥

Some of these kings rather: said: "What is the

Book III Chapter XXIII

use in killing the king's son. We will all go willingly to see the fun."

इत्युक्चता ते नृपा: सर्वे मार्मामाक्रय संस्थिता: ।

चक्रासोरकार्याणि सुबाहुः स्वगृहं नतः ॥ 48 ॥

इति श्रीमदैर्भोगवाते महापुराणे दृतीयकन्ये

द्वाविंशो5स्थायः ॥ 49 ॥

Thus the kings went and remained blocking the path of Sudarśana; and the king Subāhu, on returning home, began to make arrangements for the departure of the bridegroom and the bride.

Thus ends the Twenty second Chapter on Sudarśana's marriage in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharasi Veda Vyāsa.

Book III Chapter XXIII

