[Ch 20 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: Brahmā, then putting Śiva to the task of killing Śaṅkhacūḍa went to His own abode. The other Devas returned to their homes. Here under the beautiful Vata tree, on the banks of the river Candrabhāgā, Mahādeva pitched His big tent and encamped.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- Brahmā, then putting Śiva to the task of killing Śaṅkhacūḍa went to His own abode. The other Devas returned to their homes. Here under the beautiful Baṭa tree, on the banks of the river Candrabhāgā, Mahādeva pitched His big tent and encamped

[Ch 20 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Himself, to get the victory of the Devas. He, then, sent Citaratha, the Lord of the Gandharvas, as a messenger to Śaṅkhacūda, the Lord of the Dāṇavas. By the command of Mahādeva, Citaratha went to the city of the king of Daityas, more beautiful than Indra's place and more wealthy than the mansion of Kubera.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Himself to get the victory of the Devas. He then sent Citraratha, the Lord of the Gandharbhas, as a messenger to Śaṅkhacūḍa, the Lord of the Dānavas. By the command of Mahādeva, Citraratha went to the city of the king of Daityas, more beautiful than Indra’s place and more wealthy than the mansion of Kuvera.

[Ch 20 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The city was five yojanas wide and twice as much in length. It was built of crystals of pearls and jewels. There were roadways on all sides. There were seven trenches, hard to be crossed, one after another, encircling the city. The city was built of countless rubies and gems, brilliant like flames.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The city was five yojanas wide and twice as much in length. It was built of crystals of pearls and jewels. There were roadways on all sides. There were seven trenches, hard to be crossed, one after another, encircling the city. The city was built of countless rubies and gems, brilliant like flames.

[Ch 20 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There were hundreds of roadways and markets and stalls, in the wonderful Vedais (raised platforms) built of jewels. All around were splendid palacial buildings of traders and merchantmen, filled with various articles
NEW CORR ENG ──► There were hundreds of roadways and markets and stalls, in the wonderful Vedis (raised platforms) built of jewels. All around were splendid palatial buildings of traders and merchantmen, filled with various articles.

[Ch 20 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There were hundreds and kotis of beautiful buildings, adorned with various ornaments and built of variegated red stones looking like Sindūras. Thus he went on and saw, in the middle, the building of Śankhacūda, circular like the lunar sphere.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There were hundreds and koṭis of beautiful buildings, adorned with various ornaments and built of variegated red stones looking like Sindūras. Thus he went on and saw, in the middle, the building of Śaṅkhacūḍa, circular like the lunar sphere.

[Ch 20 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Four ditches all filled with fiery flames, encircled one after another, his house. So the enemies could not in any way cross them; but the friend could easily go there. On the top were seen turrets, built of jewels, rising high to the heavens. The gate-keepers were watching the twelve gates.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Four ditches all filled with fiery flames, encircled one after another, his house. So the enemies could not in any way cross them; but the friend could easily go there. On the top were seen turrets built of jewels, rising high to the heavens. The gate-keepers were watching the twelve gates.

[Ch 20 Verse 12-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the centre were situated lakhs and lakhs of excellent jewel built houses. In every room there were jewelled steps and staircases and the pillars were all built of gems, and jewels, and pearls. Puspadanta (Citraratha) saw all this and then went to the first gate and saw one terrible person, copper coloured, with tawny eyes, sitting with a trident in his hand and with a smiling countenance. He told he had come as a messenger and got his entrance.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the centre were situated lakhs and lakhs of excellent jewel built houses. In every room there were jewelled steps and staircases and the pillars were all built of gems and jewels, and pearls. Puṣpadanta (Citraratha) saw all this and then went to the first gate and saw one terrible person, copper coloured, with tawny eyes, sitting with a trident in his hand and with a smiling countenance. He told he had come as a messenger and got his entrance.

[Ch 20 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus Citraratha went one after another to all the entries, not being prohibited at all though he told that he had come as a messenger on war service. The Gandhara reached one after another, the last door and said: O Door keeper! Go quickly and inform the Lord of the Dānavas all about the impending war.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus Citraratha went one afer another to all the entries, not being prohibited at all though he told that he had come as a messenger on war service. The Gandharbha reached one after another, the last door and said :-- “O Door keeper! Go quickly and inform the Lord of the Dānavas all about the impending war.”

[Ch 20 Verse 17-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the messenger had spoken thus, the gatekeeper allowed him to go inside. Going inside, the Gandhara saw Śaṅkhacūda, of an excellent form, seated in the middle of the royal assembly, on a golden throne. One servant was holding on the king's head an umbrella, decked with divine excellent gems, the inner rod of the umbrella being made up of jewels, and decorated with expanded artificial flowers made of gems.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the messenger had spoken thus, the gate-keeper allowed him to go inside. Going inside, the Gandarbha saw Śaṅkhacūḍa, of excellent form, seated in the middle of the royal assembly, on a golden throne. One servant was holding on the king’s head an umbrella, decked with divine excellent gems, the inner rod of the umbrella being made up of jewels, and decorated with expanded artificial flowers made of gems.

[Ch 20 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The attendants were fanning him with beautiful white cāmaras; he was nicely dressed, beautiful and lovely and adorned with jewel ornaments. He was nicely garlanded, and wore fine celestial garments. Three Koti Dānavas were surrounding him; and seven Koti Dānavas, all armed, were walking to and fro.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The attendants were fanning him with beautiful white cāmaras; he was nicely dressed, beautiful and lovely and adorned with jewel ornaments. He was nicely garlanded, and wore fine celestial garments. Three Koṭi Dānavas were surrounding him; and seven Koṭi Dānavas, all armed, were walking to and fro.

[Ch 20 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Puspadanta was thunderstruck when he saw thus the Dānava, and he addressed him thus: "O King! I am a servant of Śiva; My name is Puspadanta; hear what Śiva has commanded me to tell you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Puṣpadanta was thunderstruck when he saw thus the Dānava and he addressed him thus :-- O King! I am a servant of Śiva; My name is Puṣpadanta; hear what Śiva has commanded me to tell you.

[Ch 20 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► 'You better now give back, to the Devas, the rights that they had before'. The Devas went to Śri Hari and had taken His refuge. Śri Hari gave over to Śiva one Śāla weapon and asked the Devas to depart. At present, the three eye' Vedva is residing under the shade of a Vāta tree in the banks of the Puspabhadrā river.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You better now give back, to the Devas, the rights that they had before. The Devas went to Śrī Hari and had taken His refuge. Śrī Hari gave over to Śiva one Śūla weapon and asked the Devas to depart. At present, the three eyed Deva is residing under the shade of a Baṭa tree on the banks of the Puṣpabhadrā river.

[Ch 20 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He told me to speak this to you, 'Either give over to the Devas their rights, or fight with me.' Please reply and I will speak to Him accordingly.' Śankhacūḍa, hearing the messenger's words laughed and said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► He told me to speak this to you, “Either give over to the Devas their rights, or fight with me. Please reply and I will speak to Him accordingly.” Śaṅkhacūḍa, hearing the messenger’s words laughed and said,

[Ch 20 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Tomorrow morning I will start, ready for war. Better go away to-day." The messenger went back to Śiva and replied to Him accordingly. In the meantime the following personages joined Śiva and remained seated on excellent aerial cars, built of jewels and gems. The following were the persons:
NEW CORR ENG ──► “Tomorrow morning I will start, ready for war. Better go away today.” The messenger went back to Śiva and replied to Him accordingly. In the meantime the following personages joined Śiva and remained seated on excellent aerial cars, built of jewels and gems. The following were the persons :--

[Ch 20 Verse 30-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Skanda, Virabhadra, Nandī, Mahākāla, Subhadraka, Visālakṣa, Bāṇa, Pīngalākṣa, Vikampana, Virūpa, Vikrtī, Manibhadra, Baṣkāla, Kapilāksa, Dirgha Danṣṭra, Vikata, Tāmralocana, Kālakāntha, Balībhadra, Kārajīva, Kuṭicara, Balonmatta, Ranaślagho, Durjaya, Durgama, (these eight Bhairavas), eleven Rudras, eight Vasus, Indra, the twelve Ādityas, fire, moon, Viśvakarmā, the two Aśvins, Kubera, Yama, Jayanta, Nala Kūbara, Vāyu, Varuna, Budha, Maṅgala, Dharma, Śanī, Iśāna, the powerful Kāmadeva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- Skanda, Vīrabhadra, Nandī, Mahākāla, Subhadraka, Viśālākṣa, Bāṇa, Piṅgalākṣa, Vikampana, Virūpa, Vikriti, Maṇibhadra, Vāskāla, Kapilākṣa, Dīrgha Daṅgṣṭra, Vikaṭa, Tāmralocana, Kālākaṇṭha, Balībhadra, Kālajīhba, Kuṭīcara, Balonmatta, Raṇaślāghī, Durjaya, Durgama, (these eight Bhairavas), eleven Rudras, eight Vasus, Indra, the twelve Ādityas, fire, moon, Viśvakarmā, the two Aśvins, Kuvera, Yama, Jayanta, Nala Kūbara, Vāyu, Varuṇa, Budha, Mangala, Dharma, Śanī, Iśāna, the powerful Kāmadeva.

[Ch 20 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Ugradanṣtrā, Kotarā, Kaitabhi, and the eight armed terrible Devī Bhadrakālī. Kālī wore the bloody red clothings and She smeared red sandal paste all over Her body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Ugracaṇdā, Koṭarā, Kaiṭabhī, and the eight armed terrible Devī Bhadrakālī. Kālī wore the bloody red clothings and She smeared red sandal paste all over Her body.

[Ch 20 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Dancing, laughing; singing songs in tune, very jolly, She bids He devotees discard all fear, and terrifies the enemies. Her lip is terrible, lolling, and extends to one Yojana. On Her eight arms She holds conch, disc, lotus, axe, skin, bow and arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Dancing, laughing; singing songs in tune, very jolly, She bids Her devotees discard all fear, and terrifies the enemies. Her lip is terrible, lolling, and extends to one Yojana. On Her eight arms She holds conch, disc, mace, lotus, axe, skin, bow and arrows.

[Ch 20 Verse 40-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She was holding in Her hands, the bowl shaped human skull; that was very deep and one Yojana wide. Her trident reached up to the Heavens; Her weapon called Śakti (dart) extended to one Yojana. Besides there were Mudgara (mace), Musala (club), Vajra (thunderbolt), Kheta, (club), brilliant Phalaka (shield), the Vaiṣṇava weapon, the Varuna weapon, the Āgneyāstra (the fire weapon), Nāgapaśa (the noose of serpents), the Nārāyaṇāstra, the Gandharva's weapons, the Brahma's weapons, the Gadudāstram, the Pārjanayāstram, the Pāśupatāstram the Jrmbhanāstram the Pārvatāstram, the Maheśvarāstram, the Vāyyavāstram, and the Sanmohanam rod and various other infallible divine weapons. Besides hundreds of other divine weapons were with Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She was holding in Her hands, the bowl shaped human skull; that was very deep and one Yojana wide. Her trident reached up to the Heavens; Her weapon called Śakti (dart) extended to one Yojana. Besides there were Mudgara (mace), Musala (club), Vajra (thunderbolt), Kheta (club), brilliant Phalaka (shield), the Vaiṣṇava weapon, the Varuṇa weapon, the Āgneyāstra (the fire weapon), Nāgapāśa (the noose of serpents), the Nārāyaṇāstra, the Gandharva’s weapons, the Brahmā’s weapons, the Gaḍuḍāstram, the Pārjanayāstram, the Pāśupatāstram, the Jrimbhañāstram, the Pārvatāstram, the Maheśvarāstram, the Vāyavyāstram, and the Sanmohanam rod and various other infallible divine weapons. Besides hundreds of other divine weapons were with Her.

[Ch 20 Verse 44-45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Three Kotis of Yoginis and three Kotis and a half of terrible Dākinis were attending Bhadrakālī. Bhūtas, (demons) Pretas, Piśācas, Kuṣmāṇḍas, Brahma Rāksasas, Rāksasas, Vetālas, Yakṣas and Kinnaras also were there in countless numbers. At this time Kārtikeya came there and bowed down to his father Mahādeva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Three Koṭis of Yoginīs and three Koṭis and a half of terrible Dākinīs were attending Bhadrakālī. Bhūtas, (demons) Pretas, Piśācas, Kusmāṇdas, Brahma Rākṣasas, Rākhṣasas, Vetālas, Yakṣas and Kinnaras also were there in countless numbers. At this time Kārtikeya came there and bowed down to his father Mahādeva.

[Ch 20 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He asked him to take his seat on His left side and asked him to help. Then the army remained there in military array. On the other hand, when Śiva's messenger departed, Śaṅkhacūḍa went to the zenana and informed Tulasi of the news of an impending war.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He asked him to take his seat on His left side an asked him to help. Then the army remained there in military array. On the other hand, when Śiva’s messenger departed, Śaṅkhacūḍa went to the zenana and informed Tulasī of the news of an impending war.

[Ch 20 Verse 48-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No sooner She heard than her throat and lips and palate became dried. She then with a sorrowful heart spoke in sweet words: "O my Lord! O my Friend! O the Ruler of My life! Wait for a moment and take your seat on My heart.
NEW CORR ENG ──► No sooner She heard than her throat and lips and palate became dried. She then with a sorrowful heart spoke in sweet words :-- “O my Lord! O my Friend! O the Ruler of My life! Wait for a moment and take your seat on My heart.

[Ch 20 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Instil life in Me for a moment. Satisfy My desire of human birth. Let me behold you fully so that my eyes be satisfied. My breath is now very agitated. I saw by the end of the night one bad dream. Therefore I feel an internal burning.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Instil life in Me for a moment. Satisfy My desire of human birth. Let me behold you fully so that my eyes be satisfled. My breath is now very agitated. I saw by the end of the night one bad dream. Therefore I feel an internal burning.”

[Ch 20 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus at the words of Tulasī, the king Śaṅkhacūda finished his meals and began to address her, in good and true words, beneficent to her:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus at the words of Tulasī, the king Śaṅkhacūḍa finished his meals and began to address her, in good and true words, beneficent to her :--

[Ch 20 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O My Lady! It is Kāla (the time) that brings out these various combinations by which the Karmic fruit is enjoyed; it is Kāla that awards auspicious and inauspicious things; this Kāla is the Sole Master to impart pain, fear, and good and bad things. Kāla is the Sole Master to impart pain, fear, and good and bad things.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O My Lady! It is Kāla (the time that brings out these various combinations by which the Karmic fruit is enjoyed; it is Kāla that awards auspicious and inauspicious things; the Kāla is the Sole Master to impart pain, fear, and good and bad things.

[Ch 20 Verse 54-55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Trees grow up in time; their branches, etc., come out in time; flowers appear in time and fruits come out in time. Fruits are ripened in time and after giving the fruits, they die out also in time. O Fair One! The universe comes into existence in time and dies away in time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Trees grow up in time; their branches, etc., come out in time; flowers appear in time and fruits come out in time. Fruits are ripen in time and after giving the fruits, they die out also in time. O Fair One! The universe comes into existence in time and dies away in time.

[Ch 20 Verse 56-57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer of the universe, are creating, preserving and destroying the worlds with the help of time. Time guides them in every way. But the Highest Prakṛti is the God of Brahma, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa (i.e., the Creatrix of Time).
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer of the universe, are creating, preserving and destroying the worlds with the help of time. Time guides them in every way. But the Highest Prakriti is the God of Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa (i.e., the Creatrix of Time).

[Ch 20 Verse 58-59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Highest Prakrti, the Highest God is creating, preserving and destroying this universe. She makes the Time dance. By Her mere Will, She has converted Her inseparable Prakrti into Māyā and is thus creating all things, moving and unmoving. She is the Ruler of all; the Form of all, and She is the Highest God.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This Highest Prakriti, the Highest God is creating, preserving and destroying this universe. She makes the Time dance. By Her mere Will, She has converted Her inseparable Prakriti into Māyā and is thus creating all things, moving and unmoving. She is the Ruler of all; the Form of all, and She

[Ch 20 Verse 60-62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► By Her is being done this creation of persons by persons, this preservation of persons by persons, and this destruction of persons by persons. So you better now take refuge of the Highest Lord. Know it is by Her command the wind is blowing, by Her command the Sun is giving heat in due time, by Her command Indra is showering rain; by Her command, Death is striding over the beings; by Her command Fire is burning all things and by Her command the cooling Moon is revolving.
NEW CORR ENG ──► By Her is being done this creation of persons by persons, this preservation of persons by persons, and this destruction of persons by persons. So you better now take refuge of the Highest Lord. Know it is by Her command the wind is blowing, by Her command the Sun is giving heat in due time, by Her command Indra is showering rains; by Her command, Death is striding over the beings; by Her command fire is burning all things and by Her command the cooling Moon is revolving.

[Ch 20 Verse 63-64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She is the Death of death, the Time of time, Yama of yama (the Good of death), the Fire of fire and the Destroyer of the destroyer. So take Her refuge. You cannot find and fix who is whose friend in the world; so pray to Her, the Highest Go, Who is the Friend of All.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She is the Death of death, the Time of time, Yama of yama (the God of death), the Fire of fire and the Destroyer of the destroyer. So take Her refuge. You cannot find and fix who is whose friend in the world; so pray to Her, the Highest God, Who is the Friend of All.

[Ch 20 Verse 65-66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Oh! Who am I? And who are you either? The Creator is the combiner of us two and so He will dissociate us two by our Karma. When difficulty arises, the ignorant fools become overwhelmed with sorrow; but the intelligent Pandits do not get at all deluded or become distressed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Oh! Who am I? And who are you either? The Creator is the combiner of us two and so He will dissociate us two by our Karma. When difficulty arises, the ignorant fools become overwhelmed with sorrow; but the intelligent Pundits do not get at all deluded or become distressed.

[Ch 20 Verse 67-68]
OLD OCR ENG ──► By the Wheel of Time, the beings are led sometimes into happiness; sometimes into pain. You will certainly get Nārāyana for your husband; for which you practised Tapas before, in the hermitage of Badarī (the source of the Ganges, the feet of Viṣṇu). I pleased Brahmā by my Tapasyā and have, by his boon, got you as my wife.
NEW CORR ENG ──► By the Wheel of Time, the beings are led sometimes into happiness; sometimes into pain. You will certainly get Nārāyaṇa for your husband; for which you practised Tapas before, in the hermitage of Vadari (the source of the Ganges, the feet of Viṣṇu). I pleased Brahmā by my Tapasyā and have, by his boon, got you as my wife.

[Ch 20 Verse 69-70]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But the object for which you did your Tapasyā, that you may get Hari as your husband, will certainly be fulfilled. You will get Govinda in Vrndāvana and in the region of Goloka. I will also go there when I forsake this, my Demon body. Now I am talking with you here; afterwards we will meet again in the region of Goloka. By the curse of Rādhikā, I have come to this Bhārata, hard to be attained.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But the object for which you did your Tapasyā, that you may get Hari as your husband; will certainly be fulfilled. You will get Gobinda in Vrindābana and in the region of Goloka. I will also go there when I forsake this, my Demon body. Now I am talking with you here; afterwards we will meet again in the region of Goloka. By the curse of Rādhikā, I have come to this Bhārata, hard to be attained.

[Ch 20 Verse 71-72]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You, too, will quit this body and, assuming the divine form will go to Śrī Hari. So, O Beloved! You need not be sorry." O Muni! Thus these conversations took them the whole day and led them to the evening time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You, too, will quit this body and, assuming the divine form will go to Śrī Hari. So, O Beloved! You need not be sorry.” O Muni! Thus these conversations took them the whole day and led them to the evening time.

[Ch 20 Verse 73]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king of the demons, Śaṅkhacūḍa then slept with Tulasi on a nicely decorated bed, strewn with flowers, and smeared with sandal paste, in the Ratna Mandir (temple built of jewels.) This jewel temple was adorned with various wealth and riches.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king of the demons, Śaṅkhacūḍa then slept with Tulasī on a nicely decorated bed, strewn with flowers, and smeared with sandal paste, in the Ratna Mandir (temple built of jewels.) This jewel temple was adorned with various wealth and riches.

[Ch 20 Verse 74-75]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The jewel lamps were lighted. Śaṅkhacūda assed the night with his wife in various sports. The thin bellied Tulasi was weeping with a very sorrowful heart, without having taken any food. The king, who knew the reality of existence, took her to his breast and appeased her in various ways.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The jewel lamps were lighted. Śaṅkhacūḍa passed the night with his wife in various sports. The thin bellied Tulasī was weeping with a very sorrowful heart, without having taken any food. The king, who knew the reality of existence, took her to his breast and appeased her in various ways.

[Ch 20 Verse 76-78]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What religious instructions he had received in Bhāndjira forest from Śri Kṛṣṇa, those Tattvas, capable to destroy all sorrows and delusions, he now spoke carefully to Tulasī. Then Tulasī's joy knew no bounds. She then began to consider everything as transient and began to play with a gladdened heart.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What religious instructions he had received in Bhānḍīra forest from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, those Tattvas, capable to destroy all sorrows and delusions, he now spoke carefully to Tulasī. Then Tulasī’s joy knew no bounds. She then began to consider, everything as transient and began to play with a gladdened heart.

[Ch 20 Verse 79-80]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Both became drowned in the ocean of bliss; and the bodies of both of them were filled with joy and the hairs stood on their ends. Both of them, then, desirous to have amorous sports, joined themselves and became like Ardhanārīśvara and so one body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Both became drowned in the ocean of bliss; and the bodies of both of them were filled with joy and the hairs stood on their ends. Both of them, then, desirous to have amorous sports, joined themselves and became like Ardhanāriśvara and so one body.

[Ch 20 Verse 81-82]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As Tulasi considered Śankhacūda, to be her lord, so the Dānava King considered Tulasi the darling of his life. They be came senseless with pleasurable feelings arising out of their amorous intercourses. Next moment they regained their consciousness and both began to converse on amorous matters.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As Tulasī considered Śaṅkhacūḍa, to be her lord, so the Dānava King considered Tulasī the darling of his life. They became senseless with pleasureable feelings arising out of their amorous intercourses. Next moment they regained their tenaciousness and both began to converse on amorous matters.

[Ch 20 Verse 83-84]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus both spent their time sometimes in sweet conversations, sometimes laughing and joking, sometimes maddened with amorous sentiments. As Śaṅkhaçūḍa was clever in amorous affairs, so Tulasī was very expert. So none felt satiated with lov affairs and no one was defeated by the other. Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the war preparations of Śaṅkhaçūḍa with the Devas in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus both spent their time sometimes in sweet conversations, sometimes laughing and joking, sometimes maddened with amorous sentiments. As Śaṅkhacūḍa was clever in amorous affairs, so Tulasī was very expert. So none felt satiated with love affairs and no one was defeated by the other. Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the war preparations of Śaṅkhacūḍa with the Devas in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
