CHAPTER IX

On the Origin of the Sakti of the Earth

नारद उवाच

देव्या निमेषमानेगे बहाणः पात एव च ।

तस्य पातः प्राकृतिकः प्रलयः परिकीर्तितः ॥ १ ॥

Śrī Nārada said: In the twinkling of an eye of the Devi, the Pralaya takes place; and in that very time also the Brahmanāga (cosmos) is dissolved, which is called the Pralaya of Prakṛti.

प्रलये प्राकृते चोक्ता ततग्रद्धा वसुंधरा ।

जल्लुर्जाति विश्वासि सर्वें लीना: परात्मिनि ॥ 2 ॥

वसुंधरा तितोभूना कुजारासा च तिहिति ।

सुर्धैर्विधानसमये सासउविभूना कर्थे पुनः ॥ 3 ॥

कर्थं बधुव सा धन्या मान्या सर्वाश्रया जया ।

तस्याश्रु जनकधनं वद मंगलकारकम् ॥ 4 ॥

During this Pralaya, the Devi Vasundhara (Earth) disappears; the whole world is deluged with

Book IX Chapter IX

water and all this appearance of five elements called Prapañca vanishes in the body of Prakṛti. Now where does Vasundharā (Earth), thus vanished, reside? And how does She again appear at the beginning of the creation! What is the cause of her being so much blessed, honoured and capable to hold all and victorious. So tell about Her birth, the source of all welfare.

श्रीनारायण उचाच

सर्वांदिषुही सर्वैंचां जन्य देव्या इति श्रुति: ।

आविष्यर्वित्तरोधाव: सर्वैपु प्रत्ययेषु च ॥ 5 ॥

श्रुयतां वसुधाजन सर्वेमंगलकारण् ।

विजन्निधकरं पायनाश्नं पुणवधर्नम् ॥ 6 ॥

Śrī Nārāyana said: O Nārada! So it is heard that the Earth appears at the very outset of the creation. Her appearance and disappearance so occur in all the Pralayas. (This earth) the manifestation of the great Śakti, sometimes becomes manifest in Her and sometimes remains latent in Her (the Śakti). It is all the will of that Great Śakti.

अहो केचिद्धद्रतिति मधुकैटभमेदसा ।

बधूव वसुया धन्या तिद्धकद्मातः श्रणु ॥ ७ ॥

कचतुरती पुरा विश्यु तुही युब्देन तेजसा ।

आवां बधो न यजोर्वाँ पायसा संवृतेति च ॥ ८ ॥

Now hear the anecdote of appearance (birth) of the earth, the cause of all good, the source of destruction of all calamities, the destroyer of sin and the cause of furtherance of one's religious merits. Some say that this earth has come out of the marrow of the Daityas, Madhu and Kaitabha, but that is not the fact. Hear now the real fact. Those two Daityas were greatly pleased with Viṣṇu's valour and prowess in the fight between them and Viṣṇu; and they said: 'Kill us on that part of the earth which is not under water.'

तयोर्जविकालो न प्रत्यक्षा साभवेल्सकुटम् ।

ततें बघ्रव मेदक्ष प्रमाणानंतरं तयोः ॥ 9 ॥

मेदितीति च विज्यातेलुक्तभेतमन्तं शपु ।

जल्योता कृता पूर्वे वधिता मेघला ययातः ॥ 10 ॥

From their words it is evident that the earth was

existent during their life-time but she was not visible. After their death, the marrow came out after their bones. Now hear how the name ‘Medini’ came to be applied to the earth. She was taken out of the water, and the marrow came to be mixed with the earth.

कथयामि ते तत्नम सार्थकं सर्वभंगतम् ।

पुरा श्रुतं यच्छ्युक्तं धर्मवक्याच्छ पुक्के ॥ ११ ॥

महाविदारूपीरस्य जलस्थस्य चिंतं सूकृतम् ।

मनो बधूव कालेन सर्वगीत्यापकं धुवम् ॥ १ 2 ॥

It is on account of this mixing that she is called Medinī. Now I will tell you what I heard before in Puśkara, the sacred place of pilgrimage, from the mouth of Dharma Deva, about the origin of earth, approved by the Śrutis, consistent, and good. Hear. When the mind of Mahā Virāt, merged in water, expanded all over his body, it entered into every pore of his body.

तच्च प्रविष्ट सर्वेषां तल्लोमां विवेषु च ।

कालेन महता पश्रापूर्व वसुधा मुने ॥ १३ ॥

प्रत्येक प्रतिलोमां च कुपेषु संस्थिता सदा ।

आविभूता तितिपुता सजला च पुनः पुनः ॥ १४ ॥

Next the Mahāpthrīvi or the Great Earth appeared at the time of Pañci Karana (mixing of one-half of each of the elements with one-eighth of each of the other four elements). This Mahāpthrīvi was broken into pieces and placed in every pore. It is this differentiated earth that appears during creation and disappears during Pralaya.

आविभूता सृष्टिकाले तज्जलोयपुरपश्चिता ।

प्रल्ले च तितोभृतां जलस्याध्यंतरे स्थिता ॥ 15 ॥

प्रतिविशेषु वसुधा शैल्काननसंयुता ।

सतवसागासंसुक्ता सन्तदीपसम्पित्वा ॥ 16 ॥

From this mind, concentrated in every pore of the body of Mahā Virāt, is born this earth, after a long interval. In every pore in the skin of this Virāt Puruṣa there is one earth. She gets manifested and she disappears.

हेभाद्रिंभेसर्वगुता ग्रहचंत्राकर्मेयुता ।

बह्वीधियुणिवाहीढ़ी सुरैलैक्स्तदात्राय ॥ 17 ॥

पुण्यतीर्थसमातुत्ता पुण्य भारतसंयुता ।

कांचनीभूमिसंयुक्ता सत्यवर्मसमित्वता ॥ 18 ॥

पातालसपं तत्थसतुद्यर्दे ब्रह्योकतः ।

धुवलोकऊ नतेव सर्व विश्वचे तन ते ॥ 19 ॥

This occurs again and again. When she appears, she floats on the water; and when she disappears, she gets merged in the water. There is this earth (world) in every universe; and along with her, there are mountains, forests, seven oceans, seven islands, Suneru mountain, the Moon, the Sun and other planets, Brahmaloka, Viṣṇuloka (the abode of Viṣṇu) Śiva loka and the regions of the other Devas, sacred places of pilgrimage, the holy land of Bhāratavarsa, the Kāñcani Bhūmi, seven heavens, seven Pātālas or nether regions, on the above Brahmaloka, and Dhruvaloka.

पूर्व सर्वाणि विश्वापि पृथिव्यां तर्पितानि च ।

नशारीय च विश्वासि सर्वाणि कृत्रिमणि चि ॥ 20 ॥

प्रलये प्राकृते चैव ब्रजण्य प्रिनपाते ।

महाविराडाविरुशी सृष्टः कृष्णे चात्मना ॥ 21 ॥

This law holds good in every world in every universe. So every universe is the work of Māyā and thus it is transient. At the dissolution of Prakṛti, Brahmā falls, Again when creation takes place, the Maha Virāt appears from Śrī Krṣṇa, the Supreme Spirit.

नित्यो च स्थितिपुरजी क्राक्राकलेश्रेः सह ।

निवायधिष्ठाद्वेजी सा वागहे पूजिता सुरैः ॥ 22 ॥

मृनिभिन्नैपिधिरीर्णविदिभेय च ।

विष्योरैर्हरूपस्य पत्नी सा शुतिसंमता ॥ 23 ॥

तन्त्रगे मंगलो जेयो घटेगे गंगालामजः ।

Eternal is this flow of creation, preservation and destruction; eternal is this flow of time, Kāṣthā; eternal is this flow of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa, etc. And eternal is this flow of Vasundharā who is worshiped in the Vārāha Kalpa by the Suras, Munis, Vipras, Gandharvas, etc. The Śruti says that the Presiding Deity of this eternal earth is the wife of Viṣṇu in His boar-form. Maṅgala (Mars) is the son of that earth and Maṅgala's son is Ghaṭeśa.

नाद उवाच

पूर्विता केन रूपेण वाराहे च सुर्वमेही ॥ 24 ॥

वाराहे चेव वाराही सर्वे: स्वांक्षया सती ।

मूलपुकृतिसंपृतां पंचीकरणागर्ति: ॥ 25 ॥

Nārada said: In what form was the Earth worshipped by the Devas in Vārāha Kalpa. The Vārāhi, the receptacle of all things, moving and non-moving, how did she appear, by what method of Pañcī Karana, from the Mūlaprakrti?

तत्या: पूजायिषानं चायध्यशोर्ध्यमेकग: ।

भंगलं भंगल्याचि जन व्यास वद प्रभो ॥ 26 ॥

What is the method of her worship in this Bhūrloka and in the Heavens (Svarloka). Also tell me, O Lord! in detail, the auspicious birth of Maṅgala (Mars).

नारायण उवाच

वाराहे च वराहँ झडाणा संस्कृत: पुरा ।

उद्धारा मही हत्वा हित्यवाङ्ग सरातलात् ॥ 27 ॥

जले तां सायायामास पदपत्रं यथा हुते ।

तत्रैव निर्मेमे बढ़ा विश्वं सर्वे मनोहम् ॥ 28 ॥

Nārāyaṇa spoke: In ancient days, in the Vārāha Kalpa, Varāha Deva (the boar incarnation) when entreated and praised by Brahmā, killed the Daitya Hiranyākṣa and rescued the earth from the nether regions Rasātala. He then placed the earth on the waters where she floated as the lotus leaf floats on water. In the meantime Brahmā began to fashion the wonderful creation on the surface of the earth.

सूघ्रा तदीय देरीं च सकानां कामुको हरि: ।

बाराहरूपी भगवान् कोदिष्यंसमप्रभः ॥ 29 ॥

कृत्वा रतिकलों सर्वी भूर्ति च सुमनेहागम् ।

क्रीडां चकार रहसि दिव्यवर्षमहर्निगम् ॥ 30 ॥

Bhagavān Hari, in His boar from and brilliant like ten million suns saw the beautiful and lovely appearance of the presiding deity of the earth, possessed of amorous sentiments. He then assumed a very beautiful form, fit for amorous embraces. They then held their sexual intercourse and it lasted day and night for one Deva year.

Book IX Chapter IX

सुखसंभोगसंस्थगान्मूर्ही सा प्राप सुंदरी ।

विद्याधाया विद्यान्न संगमोजित्सुखप्रदः ॥ 31 ॥

विद्यान्तदारांसलेशविद्बुबुघे न दिवानिगम ।

वर्षते चेतनां प्राय कामी तत्याज कामुकीम् ॥ 32 ॥

The beautiful Earth, in the pleasant amorous plays, fainted away; for the intercourse of the lover with the beloved is exceedingly pleasant. And Visnu, too, at the same time was very much exhausted by the pleasant touch of the body of the Earth. He did not become conscious even how days and nights passed away.

पूर्वेक्यं वराहं च द्वारा स च लील्या ।

पूजां चक्कार तां देवीं ध्याला च धरणीं सतीम् ॥ 33 ॥

धूर्वेर्दीधु नैवेहो: सिंवृरेत्रलुवेपे: ।

वरई: पुधैधु वतिलिभ: संपुज्योवाला तां हौरे: ॥ 34 ॥

When full one year passed away, they got back their senses and the amorous man then left his hold of the loved. He assumed easily his former Boar form and worshipped Her as the incarnate of the Devi, with incense, lights, offerings of food, with vermilion (Sindur, red-powder), sandal-paste, garments, flowers and various other offerings of food, etc.

श्रीभगवानुवाच

सर्वाधारा भव शुभे सर्वै: संपूजिता सुखम् ।

भृनिभिन्निधिर्वैः सिद्धिकु धनावतिधिः: ॥ 35 ॥

He then said: O Auspicious One! Let Thou becest the receptacle of all things. All the Munis, Manus, Devas, Siddhas, and Dānavas, etc., will worship Thee with pleasure and willingness.

अंबुबाचीत्यानादिती गृहारंप प्रवेग्ने ।

वार्पीतडागारामचे च गृहे च कृषिकर्मिण ।। ३६ ॥

तव पूजां करिष्यित मद्रोग सुरावय: ।

मुंदा ये न करिष्यिति यास्यति नरकं च ते ॥ ३७ ॥

On the day the Ambuvāci ceremony closes, on the day when the house construction, i.e., the foundation is laid, on the day when the first entry is made into the newly built houses, when the digging of the well or tank commences, and on the day when tilling the ground commences, all will

worship Thee. Those stupid fools that will not observe this, will certainly go to hell.

वसुधोबाच

वहामि सर्वे वाराहरूधेणाई तवाजया ।

लोलामाजेण भगवन्विश्वं च सचाराचम् ॥ 38 ॥

मुक्ता शृक्ति हरेरचा शिवलिंग शिवा तथा ।

गंखं प्रदीपं यंत्र च माधिक्यं हीरकं तथा ॥ 39 ॥

यजसूत्रं च पुर्णं च पुस्तकं तुलसीदलम् ।

जपालांगे पुर्णमालां कर्णूरं च सुवर्णकम् ॥ 40 ॥

गोरोचनं चंदनं च शणसुघाम्बतं तथा ।

एतान्वोबुगस्फात्कं हित्यत् च भगवज्यूम् ॥ 41 ॥

The Earth spoke: “O Lord! By Thy command I will assume the form of Vārāhi (female boar) and support easily on my back this whole world of moving and non-moving things, but the following things, pearl, small shells, Śālagrāma, (a black stone, usually round, found in the river Gaṇḍaki, and worshipped as a type of Viṣṇu), the phallus or emblem of Śiva, the images of the goddesses, conch-shells, lamps (lights), the Yantras, gems, diamonds, the sacred upanayana threads, flowers, books, the Tulasi leaves, the bead (Japa mālā), the garland of flowers, gold, camphor, Gorocanā (bright yellow pigment prepared from the urine or bile of a cow), Sandal, and the water after washing the Śālagrāma stone, I will not be able to bear. I will be very much pained in case I were to bear these on Me.”

श्रीभगवानुवाच

इत्यापतेतिन वे मूदा अर्पिध्यथित सुंदरि ।

यास्यति कालसूत्रे ते लिख्ये वर्षेगतं त्वयि ॥ 42 ॥

इत्येवमुक्लवा भगवान् विरसाम च नारद ।

बभूव तेन गर्घणे तेजस्वी मंगलगढ़ः ॥ 43 ॥

Śrī Bhagavān said: “O Fair One! The fools that will place the above articles on Thy back will go to the Kālasūtra hell for one hundred divine years.” O Nārada! Thus saying, the Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa remained silent. Now the Earth became pregnant and the powerful planet Mars was born.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

पूजां चकुः पृथिव्याश्र ते सर्वे चात्रया होः ।

कव्यशाखोक्त्यायने तुष्वुरुषु सत्वेन ते ॥ 4 4 ॥

ददुमूलेन मंत्रेण नैवेहादिकमेव च ।

संस्तुता विषु लोकेषु पूजिता सा बभूव ह ॥ 4 5 ॥

By the command of Śrī Hari, all began to meditate on Earth according to what is mentioned in Kāṇavāsākhā and began to praise Her. Offerings of food were given, uttering the root Mantra. Thus became extant all over the three worlds Her worship and praise.

नारद उवाच

किं ध्यानं सत्वं तस्या मूलमांत्रं च किं बव् ।

गूदं सर्वीपुराणेषु श्रीतुं कौतूहलं मम ॥ 4 6 ॥

Nārada said: O Bhagavān! Very sacred is the meditation, hymn and the root Mantra of the Earth. I am very anxious to hear them Kindly describe it detail.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

आदौ च पृथिवी देवी चराहेण च पृजिता ।

ततो हि ब्रह्णा पक्षान्युक्तिता पृथिवी तत् ॥ 47 ॥

ततः सर्वैभूनीऋ मनुष्यमानवादिधि: ।

ध्यानं च स्तवनं मंत्रं शृणु वक्ष्यामि नारद ॥ 48 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: The Earth was first worshipped by Varāha Deva; next She was worshipped by Brahmā. Next She was worshipped by all the Munis, Devas, Manus and men. O Nārada! Now hear the Dhyāna, praise and Mantra of the Devi Earth.

अंट हीं शी क्लीं वसुधार्ये स्वाहैत्यनेन

मंत्रेण विद्याना पूजिता पुरा ।

श्रतपंक्कवाणीशा श्रतच्छंदीनिभानाम् ॥ 49 ॥

चन्दोतिखासवर्षिं रत्नभूषणभूषितात् ।

रत्नाधारां रत्नभाषां रत्नाकरसम्यन्तात् ॥ 50 ॥

वहिक्षुर्द्रांशुकाधानां ससितां दंवितां भजे ।

ध्यानेनानेन सा देही सर्वैंश पूरिताउपबत् ॥ 51 ॥

स्तवनं शृणु विघ्रें कवणशाल्योकमेव च ।

The Earth was first worshipped by Bhagavān Viṣṇu with this root Mantra (mūla mantra). ‘Om Hrim Śrim Klīm. Vasundharāyai Svāhā.’ Next He

said: 'O Devi Earth! O Thou Smiling One! I worship Thee, who art worshipped by the three worlds, whose colour is white like white lotus, whose face is beautiful like the autumnal moon, who art the Store-house of all gems and jewels, and who has put on a raiment purified by fire. All then began to worship Her with this Mantra.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

जये जये जलाधारे जलगीले जलघे ॥ 52 ॥

यजसूकजारे त्वं जयं देहि जयाहे ।

मंगले मंगलाधारे मांगव्ये मंगलघे ॥ 53 ॥

मंगलार्य मंगलेशे मंगले देहि मे भवे ।

सर्वाधारे च सर्वेz सर्वशक्तिस्मवित्ते ॥ 54 ॥

Śrī Nārāyaṇa said: Now hear the hymn sung before Her according to Kāṇva Sākhā: O Thou, the Giver of Victory! Holder of water! Endowed with water, full of victory; Consort of the Boar Incarnation, Carrier of victory! Bestow victory on me. O Thou Auspicious One! The Store-house of all good, O Thou incarnate of all auspiciousness! Bestower of good, Thou, the Source of all good to bestow all sorts of welfare! Bestow all things that are good and auspicious to me in this world.

सर्वकामप्रदे देवि सर्वेहं देवे हे भवे ।

पुण्यवस्तरे पुण्यानां वीजरूपे सन्तानि ॥ 55 ॥

O Thou! The Receptacle of all, the Knower of all, all powerful, the Bestower of all desires, O Devi Earth! Give me the fruits that I desire.

पुण्याश्रये पुण्यवतामालये पुण्यदे भवे ।

सर्वसर्यालये सर्वसर्यालये सर्वसर्यदे ॥ ५६ ॥

O Thou! Who art all merits Thou, the Seed of all religious merits, O Thou, the Eternal, the receptacle of all religious merits, the home of all religious persons, Thou bestowest merits to all.

सर्वसभ्यहं काले सर्वसर्यात्मिके भव ।

भूमे भृमिपसर्वसैव भृमिपलापराणे ॥ 57 ॥

भूमिपानां सुखकरे भूमिं देहि च भूमिते ।

इर्व स्तौत्रे महापुर्ण प्रातनस्थाय यः पठेत् ॥ 58 ॥

O Thou! The Store-house of all grains, enriched with all sorts of corns, Thou bestowest harvests to

Book IX Chapter X

all; Thou takest away all the grains in this world and again Thou producest all corns of various kinds here. O Earth! Thou art all-in-all to the landlords, the Best Source of refuge and happiness. O Bestower of lands! Give me lands. The above hymn yields great religious merits.

कोटिटनमसु स भवेढ्रलान्यमुपिधेखरः ।

भूमिदानकृतं पुर्णं लध्यते पठनाजन्नैः ॥ 59 ॥

भूमिदानहरायापानुच्छते नात्र संशयः ।

He becomes the sovereign of the whole earth for millions and millions of births who rising early in the morning reads this stotra. Men who read this acquire merits due to giving away lands as gifts.

अंबुवाचीभूक्रपापापास मुच्छते धुवम् ॥ 60 ॥

अन्यकूपे कृपयवननयापास मुच्छते धुवम् ।

परभूमिहृतायपान्युच्छते नात्र संशयः ॥ 6 1 ॥

भूमौ वीयैन्यापणवादुभूमौ दीपादिस्थापनात् ।

पायेन मुच्छते सोउषि स्तोत्रस्य पठनानुने ॥ 6 2 ॥

People become certainly freed of their sins, if they read this stotra, who take back the lands after making them as gifts, who dig earth on the day of Ambuvāci, who dig wells without permission on another's well, who steal other's lands, who throw their semen on earth, who place lamps on the earth.

अध्वेपिश्रतं पुचेल स्नात नारं संशवः ।

भूमिद्वेया महास्तोत्रं सर्वेकल्याणकारकम् ॥ 63 ॥

इति श्रीवेदौभागवते महापुराणे नवमसक्ये नवमोर्धधावः । 9 ।

Religious merits, equivalent to one hundred horse sacrifices accrue from reading this stotra. There is no doubt in this. This stotra of the great Devi is the source of all sorts of welfare and auspiciousness.

Here ends the Nineth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the origion of the Šakti of the earth in Śrimadevīthāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter X

