CHAPTER X

On the Phase of Karma

जनमेजय उवाच

काँधर्ते चरितं बह्रच्छकम्याछुतकर्मण: ।

स्थानधंगस्तथा दुःखप्रापितरुक्ता विशेषतः ॥ १ ॥

यत्र देवाधित्यम्य महिमान्तीव वर्गितः ।

Janamejaya said: O Brāhmana! You have described in detail the wonderful character of Indra, his displacement from his Heavens, and his suffering many hardships and at the same time, you have described very widely the greatness of the Highest Goddess of the world.

सन्तेशोत्र मणायित्ति यच्छक्रोपि महातापः ॥ 2 ॥

देवाधिपत्यमासाद दुःसई दुःखमवभूत ।

But one doubt has arisen in my mind that Indra was very powerful and when he got the lordship over the Devas, which means in other words that no trouble would pain him, how was it that he had to feel pain and agony?

मखानां तु शर्त कृत्वा प्राप्तं स्थानमनुत्तमम् ॥ ३ ॥

देवेशलं च सम्याथ चष्टः स्थानादरी कथम् ।

He got the Lordship of the Devas and his highest position by performing one hundred Horse Sacrifices; how was it, then, that he was again displaced from that position?

तृत्तसर्वे समावश्य कारणं करणानिधे ॥ 4 ॥

सर्वेज्ञसि मुनिश्रेष्ठ पुराणानां प्रवर्तैक: ।

नावाख्यं महाति किडिध्छिष्ये च ब्रह्माद्यान्वे ॥ 5 ॥

तस्माकुक महाभाग मस्मदेशपनेतदान् ।

O Ocean of mercy! Kindly explain to me the causes of all those. You know everything; you are the best of the Munis and the maker of the Purānas; I am your devoted disciple; therefore nothing there can be that cannot be mentioned to me. So, O highly fortunate One! Kindly remove my doubts. Sūta said:

सूत उवाच

इति पृष्टः स रज्ञा वै तदा सत्यवतीसुतः ॥ 6 ॥

तमाहातिप्रसज्ञात्मा यथानुकम्पुन्तम् ।

Thus asked by Janamejaya, Vyāsa, the son of Satyavatī gladly spoke, in due order, the following words:

व्यास उवाच

निवोधि नृपतिश्रेष्ठ कारणं परमाद्धुतम् ॥ ७ ॥

कर्मपतु सिधा प्रोक्ता गतिलतत्वविद्धं वरेः ।

सढ़ितं वर्तैमानं च प्रात्क्यातिति भेदतः ॥ ८ ॥

अनेकजन्मसङ्गतां प्राक्तनं सढ़ितं स्मृतम् ।

सात्चिकं राजसं कर्मं तामसं त्रिविधं पुनः ॥ ९ ॥

गुणं वास्यणुर्णे घूप सढ़ितं बहुकालिकम् ।

अवश्यये वोक्त्व्ये युक्ते तुकृतं तथा ॥ १० ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hear, then the causes that are certainly very wonderful. The seers say that Karma is of three kinds: Sañcita (accumulated), Vartamāna (present) and Prārabdha (commenced). Each of these is again subdivided into three, Sāttvik, Rājasik, and Tāmasik. The accumulated effects of Karmas done in many past lives is called Sañcita, O King! The effects of this Sañcita Karma, be it auspicious or inauspicious, be it for a long or for a short time, must have to be enjoyed by the beings, whether they be good or bad.

जन्मजन्पि जीवानां सझितानां च कर्मणम् ।

नि:शेषसुखं शयो नापूकल्पकौटितरैलि ॥ १ १ ॥

क्रियमाणं च यत्कर्म वर्तेमांत तदुच्यते ।

देहं गाय शुभं वार्थ विरा हुर्णभं वा समाचरेत् ॥ १ २ ॥

सड्धितानां पुनर्मीट्यात्समाहूल क्रियान्किल ।

देहात्मचे च समये कालः प्रेयतीव तत ॥ १ ३ ॥

प्राखं कर्म विज्ञेयं भोगात्रस्य क्षय: स्मृतः ।

प्राणिभि: खलु भोकल्य प्राखं नात्र संगयः ॥ १ ४ ॥

This Sañcita Karma done by the embodied beings in several previous births, can never be totally exhausted even in hundred Koti Kalpas without their being enjoyed. The Karma that is being done by a Jiva and that has not as yet been completed, that is called Vartamāna Karma. The

Book VI Chapter X

Jivas do this Vartamāna Karma, auspicious or inauspicious, in their present embodiments. At the time of birth, a part of the Sañcita Karma, the soul takes up for fructification. This part of Sañcita Karma is called Prārabdha Karma. This exhausts only when its effects have been fully borne out by the embodied soul. The beings cannot but bear the effects of this Prārabdha Karma.

पुरा कृतानि राजेन्द्र हाणुभानि सुभानि च ।

अवश्यमेव कर्माणि भोक्त्यानीति निश्रयः ॥ १ ५ ॥

देवैर्मनुधैरसुर्यैक्षान्यर्विक्सरै: ।

कर्मव हि महाराज देहारभस्य कारणम् ॥16 ॥

कर्मप्रेये जन्मानगः प्राणिनां नात्र संग्रयः ।

ब्रहा विष्णुरूपया रूर इन्द्राद्धा सुरास्तथा ॥ १ ७ ॥

दानवा यक्षानभ्यां: सर्वे कर्मवर्गा: किल ।

अन्यथा देहसम्बन्धः कर्थं भवति भूपते ॥ १८ ॥

कारणं यस्तु भोगस्य देविनः सुखुःखयोः ।

O King! Know this for certain that the effects of merits or demerits done previously must be borne by anybody, be he a Deva, or a man, or an Asura, or a Yakṣa or a Gandharva. The acts done previously go to from the new births of all beings. When the Karma gets exhausted, then no more birth takes place. There is no doubt in this. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Indra and the other Devas, the Dānavas, Yakṣas, Gandharvas, all are under the control of this Karma. O King! Were it not so, how could they get bodies that are the cause of the enjoyment of pain and pleasure of all the beings.

तसादानेवकजनोल्यसघ्रितानां च कर्माणम् ॥ १९ ॥

मध्ये योग: समापाति कस्यचित्कालपाकतः ।

तत्राख्यशानुपयं करोति च यथा तथा ॥ 20 ॥

पापं करोति मनुजस्तथा देवाद्योपि च ।

Therefore, O King! Out of the Sañcita Karmas done in many previous births, some Karmas get ripe in due time and they manifest themselves; those manifested Sañchita Karmas are called Prārabdha Karmas (those that are being enjoyed by an individual in the present birth). Impelled by this Prārabdha Karma, the Devas and the human

beings, all do meritorious act as well as sinful acts. Thus Indra out of his past meritorious acts attained his Indraship, and, out of his past sinful acts, committed the sin Brahmahatyā and so he was dislodged from his Indraship. What doubt can exist here?

तथा नारायणो राजसर्ध धर्मज्वृषी ॥ 21 ॥

जातौ कृष्णाजुंनी काममंशी नारायणस्य तौ ।

पुराणपीठिकेशं वे भुनिभः परिकीर्तित ॥ 22 ॥

O King! So Nara and Nārāyana, the sons of Dharma, had to take births out of their previous Karmas; again Arjuna and Krṣṇa were born out of their Kārmic effects as part incarnations of this Nara and Nārāyana. The Munis describe this Karma as the basis of the Purānas.

देवांग स तु विज्ञेयो यो भवेदिष्याप्रिक: ।

नानुषि: कुकते काव्यं नास्हो रुद्रमवंने ॥ 23 ॥

नावेदिंगो द्वाल्यत्रं नाविष्यु: पृथिवीपतिः ।

इन्रातन्येनैमाहिष्ठोगोपन्दातिं पृपते ॥ 24 ॥

Know that he is born of a Deva who is very wealthy and prosperous; he who is not born of the part of a Muni, never writes any spiritual treatise on Jāna or Knowledge; he who is not born of Rudra, never worships Rudra; who is not born of a Deva never distributes rice in charity; he who is not born of Śri Viṣṇu, never becomes the king and lord of the earth. O King! The embodied souls derive their bodies certainly from Indra, Agni, Yama, Viṣṇu, and Kubera.

प्रभुत्वं च प्रभावं च कोर्भे चैव पराक्रमम् ।

आदाय क्रियते नूनं शरीरमिति निश्रयः ॥ 25 ॥

यः क्रशैदुवलल्लितेके भायवानय भोगतान् ।

विद्धावान्दावनाय वार्पि स देवांशः प्रयक्षते ॥ 26 ॥

Indra presides over lordship, Agni presides over energy, Yama presides over anger, and Viṣṇu presides over strength. He who is powerful fortunate, enjoying many enjoyments, learned, charitable, is said to be born of a Devāniśa.

तक्षेते समाख्यात: पाण्डवा: पृथिवीपते ।

देवांगो वासुदेवोर्षि नारायणसमघृति: ॥ 27 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

O Lord of the earth! Similarly the Pāṇḍavas and Vāsudeva who was as glorious as Nārāyana were born of Devārīñas.

शरीरं प्राणिनां नूनं भाजनं सुखदुःखयोः ।

शरीरी प्रानुयाकामं सुखदुःखमन्तेनम् ॥ 28 ॥

O King! Know this as quite certain that the bodies of the Jivas are the receptacles of pains and pleasures; and the embodied souls (Jivas) experience alternately pleasure and pain. No Jiva is independent; he is always under the Great Fate.

देही नासि वशः कोप्रिधे द्वधानीः सदेव हिं।

जननं मरणं दुःखं सुखं प्राप्नोति चावशः ॥ 29 ॥

He experiences birth, death, pleasure and pain, not out of his self will, but compelled and guided, as it were, by the unseen Fate. O King! How very strong is that Fate can easily be judged by the following.

पाण्डवास्ते वने जाता: प्राप्तास्तु स्वहं पुनः ।

स्वाबुबलतः पश्रात्रजमूयं कृततमम् ॥ 30 ॥

The Pānḍavas were born in forest; then they went to their own homes. They performed the Great Rājasūya Sacrifice by Virtue of their own strength.

वनवासं पुनः प्राता बहुतुःखकरं परम् ।

अज्ञेन तपस्तर्ण दुक्करं हृद्रजितैरिधः ॥ 31 ॥

After this they had to suffer their exiles in forest a much greater and more terrible hardship indeed! Next Arjuna performed a very hard asceticism when the Devas, not self-controlled, became pleased and granted him an auspicious boon.

सन्तुईतु सुरैदर्ते वरदानं पुनः शुभम् ।

नरदेहकृतं पुण्यं कव नगे वनवासजम् ॥ 32 ॥

Still he could not extricate himself from the hands of the terrible hardship; nowhere could be found the fruits of the merits acquired in the past when he was afterwards remaining in exile in his human body in the forest!

नरदेहे तपस्तं चोर्धं बदरिकाभ्ये ।

नाजुनस्य शरीर तत्कलदं सव्यपूव ह ॥३३ ॥

The severe tapasyā that he did in the Badarikāśrama in his past incarnation as Nara, the

son of Dharma, did not bear any fruit in his Arjuna births.

प्राणिजां देहसाब्प्ये गहना कर्मणे गति: ।

दुर्जेमा सर्वथा देदैमान्वानां तु का कथा ॥ 34 ॥

Mysterious and inexplicable are the ways and means of Karma with which the bodies of the several beings are concerned. How could men get an idea of it when the Devas themselves are at a loss to solve it.

वासुदेवोदीपि संज्ञानः कारागारेस्तिसंकटे ।

नीतोउसी बसुदेवेन नन्दोगय्य गोकुलम् ॥ 35 ॥

एकादशैव वर्षिणि संस्थितस्तन भारत ।

पुनः स ममुंगा गत्वा जयानोदमुर्त बलत् ॥ 36 ॥

Bhagavān Vāsudeva had to take his birth in the prison, a very critical and dangerous place; he was then carried by Vasudeva to the milkman Nanda's abode at Gokula; he remained there eleven years and thence came back to Mathurā where he killed by force Kamsa, the son of Urgasena.

मोचयामास पितरी बच्चानदूषगुद्ध:खिल्ती ।

उउमेनं च राजानं चक्रात मथुगपुरे ॥ 37 ॥

जगाम द्वारवयंं स मेलळराजभयातूनः।

सर्वे भाविवशात्कृष्ण: कृतवान्यीकर्ष महत् ॥ 38 ॥

Then he released his sorrowful father and mother from the bonds of prison and made Ugrasena, the King of the Mlechcas; thus Śrī Janārdana Krṣna performed many great and heroic deeds, being impelled by Fate.

कृत्वा कार्याण्येन्कानि द्वारवलां जनादनं ।

देहं त्यक्त्वा प्रभासे तु सकुटुब्यो दिवं गतः ॥ 39 ॥

Then he left his mortal coil at Prabhāsa, a place of pilgrimage, along with his relatives and acquaintances and then ascended to his Vaikuntha abode.

पुत्र: पौत्राशु सुहदो भततेरो जामयस्तथा ।

प्रभासे याद्वा: सर्वे विग्रप्रापत्थयं गताः ॥ ४० ॥

एवं ते कथिता राजकर्मणो गहना गति: ।

वासुदेवोरिपि व्याधाय बाणेन निर्भयं नतः ॥ ४१ ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे प्रचलक्ये

दशगोउध्याः ।। 42 ॥

Book VI Chapter XI

All the Yâdavas, sons, grandsons, friends, brothers, sisters and ladies of the houses all died under the curse of a Brāhmin. O King! I have thus described to you the inexplicable ways of Karma.

What more shall I say then the fact that Vāsudeva was killed by the arrows of a hunter!

Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the phase of Karma in the Mahāpurānam Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XI

