[Ch 10 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: O Risīs! On that very day when the Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam Brāhmīn Kaśyapa went out of his house, Takṣaka, knowing the king Parikṣit cursed, assumed an aged Brāhmīn's form and went out of his abode. The serpent Takṣaka met Brāhmīn Kaśyapa on the way.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- “O Ṛṣis! On that very day when the Brāhmin Kaśyapa went out of his house, Takṣak, knowing the king Parīkṣit cursed, assumed an aged Brāhmin’s form and went out of his abode. The serpent Takṣak met the Brāhmin Kaśyapa on the way.

[Ch 10 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the Brāhmīn, versed in the Mantras, Takṣaka asked him “Where are you going so in haste, and what for are you taking this trouble?”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the Brāhmaṇa, versed in the Mantras, Takṣak asked him “Where are you going so in haste, and what for are you taking this trouble?”

[Ch 10 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus questioned, Kaśyapa replied: "I heard that the serpent Taksaka will bite king Parikṣit; therefore, I am going in haste to king Parikṣit to cure him of the serpent's poison.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus questioned, Kaśyapa replied :-- I heard that the serpent Takṣak will bite the king Parīkṣit; therefore I am going in haste to the king Parīkṣit to cure him of the serpent’s poison.

[Ch 10 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I know the mantra (mystic verse) that can destroy the effect of poison. If his life-period is not exhaust, I will certainly give him back his life.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I know the mantra (mystic verse) that can destroy the effect of poison. If his life-period is not exhausted, I will certainly give him back his life.

[Ch 10 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Taksaka then said: "O Brāhmīn! I am that Takṣaka; I will bite him and take away his life. So you better desist. Will you be able to treat him whom I bite; certainly you will not."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Takṣak then. Said :-- “O Brāhmaṇa! I am that Takṣak; I will bite him and take away his life. So you better desist. Will you be able to treat him whom I bite; certainly you will not.”

[Ch 10 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kaśyapa said: “O chief of snakes! When you will bite the king who has been cursed by the Brāhmin, I will no doubt make him alive by the power of my mantra.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kaśyapa said :-- “O chief of snakes! When you will bite the king who has been cursed by the Brāhmaṇ, I will no doubt make him alive by the power of my mantra.”

[Ch 10 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Taksā said: 'O, chief of Brāhmins! If you have so thought that you will make the king alive after I bite him, then shew me your strength before hand. O sinless one! I will bite this Nyagrodha tree (the Indian fig-tree); just now make it alive."
NEW CORR ENG ──► said :-- “O chief of Brāhmaṇas! If you have so thought that you will make the king alive after I bite him, then shew me your strength before hand. O sinless one! I will bite this Nyagrodha tree (the Indian fig-tree); just now make it alive.”

[Ch 10 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kaśyapa said: “Certainly, I will make this tree alive, that will be burnt away by the venom of your teeth.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kaśyapa said :-- “Certainly I will make this tree alive, that will be burnt away by the venom of your teeth.”

[Ch 10 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: The snake Takṣaka then bit the tree, which was reduced to ashes; and asked Kaśyapa to bring back that tree to life.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- “The snake Takṣak then bit the tree, which was reduced to ashes; and asked Kaśyapa to bring back that tree to life.”

[Ch 10 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the tree reduced to ashes by the fire of venom of the snake, he collected all the ashes and said: "O highly venomons serpent.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the tree reduced to ashes by the fire of venom of the snake, he collected all the ashes and said :-- “O highly venomous serpent.

[Ch 10 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See today the power of my mantra. Behold! While you are witnessing, I will enliven this tree."
NEW CORR ENG ──► See to-day the power of my mantra. Behold! While you are witnessing, I will enliven this tree.

[Ch 10 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus the great mantra-knower Kaśyapa took water in his hand, and impregnating it with mantra power, sprinkled the water on the ashes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the great mantra-knower Kaśyapa took water in his hand, and impregnating it with his mantra power, sprinkled the water on the ashes.

[Ch 10 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Immediately, on the sprinkling of the mantra saturated water, the Nyagrodha tree got back its life as before. Takṣaka became greatly astonished to see the tree enlivened again and said to Kaśyapa: "O cheif of Brāhmin! What is your object in taking so much pain? Speak out what you want and I will fulfil your desires."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Immediately, on the sprinkling of the mantra saturated water, the Nyagrodha tree got back its life as before. Takṣak became greatly astonished to see the tree enlivened again and said to Kaśyapa :-- “O chief of Brāhmaṇs! What is your object in taking so much pains? Speak out what you want and I will fulfil your desires.”

[Ch 10 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kaśyapa said: “O chief of serpents! Knowing the king cursed, I am going to do good to him by my knowledge and to get in return abundant wealth.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kaśyapa said :-- “O chief of serpents! Knowing the king cursed, I am going to do good to him by my knowledge and to get in return abundant wealth.”

[Ch 10 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, Taksaka said: “I will give you the amount of wealth that you desire; take that and go back to your house, and let my desire be also fulfilled.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, Takṣak said :-- “I will give you the amount of wealth that you desire; take that and go back to your house, and let my desire be also fulfilled.”

[Ch 10 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kaśyapa, the knower of the highest state, heard Takṣaka's words and pondered in his mind again and again. "What is to be done now?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kaśyapa, the knower of the highest state, heard Takṣaka’s words and pondered in his mind again and again. “What is to be done now?

[Ch 10 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If I take this wealth and go back to my house, my name and fame will not be known in this world, simply for my greed; but if the king be made alive again, my undying fame, abundant wealth, and greatest Punyam will accrue to me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If I take this wealth and go back to my house, my name and fame will not be known in this world, simply for my greed; but if the king be made alive again, my undying fame, abundant wealth, and greater Puṇyam will accrue to me.

[Ch 10 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again fie to that wealth with which there is no fame; so one must try one's best to preserve one's fame. King Raghu, in ancient days, gave away everything of his to the Brāhmins for fame; King Hariścandra and Kārṇa did not hesitate a bit to give away endless property. There is one point again to take into account, how can I trifle away the matter, seeing the king burnt up by the venomous fire?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again fie to that wealth with which there is no fame; so one must try one’s best to preserve one’s fame. The king Raghu, in ancient days, gave away everything of his to the Brāhmaṇas for fame; the king Haṛṣcandra and Karṇa did not hesitate a bit to give away endless property. There is one point again to take into account, how can I trifle away the matter, seeing the king burnt up by the venomous fire?

[Ch 10 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If I can bring back the king's life, everyone will become happy. If the kingdom be without its king, the subject will, no doubt, be ruined.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If I can bring back the king’s life, everyone will become happy. If the kingdom be without its king, the subjects will, no doubt, be ruined.

[Ch 10 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So, following the king's death, sin will also incur on me due to the ruin of the subject; and infamy will come on my head that I am a very greedy man."
NEW CORR ENG ──► So, following the king’s death, sin will also iñcur on me due to the ruin of the subjects; and infamy will come on my head that I am a very greedy man.”

[Ch 10 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus meditating in his mind, the highly intelligent Kaśyapa began to meditate, and plunged himself in Dhyāna; he, thereby, came to know that the king's life period was spent up.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus meditating in his mind, the highly intelligent Kaśyapa began to meditate, and plunged himself in Dhyān; he thereby came to know that the king’s life period was spent up.

[Ch 10 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus knowing the king's death imminent, the virtuous Kaśyapa took the desired wealth from Takṣaka and returned home.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus knowing the king’s death imminent, the virtuous Kaśyapa took the desired wealth from Takṣak and returned home.

[Ch 10 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus making Kaśyapa to retire to his house on the seventh day, Taksaka went on to Hastināpur to bring death and destruction on to Parikṣit. When he went close to the city, he heard that King Parikṣit was staying on the upper storey of the palace; and the palace had been preserved by various gems, mantras, herbs and plants.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus making Kaśyapa to retire to his house on the seventh day Takṣak went on to Hastināpur to bring death and destruction on to Parīksit. When he went close to the city, he heard that the king Parīksit was staying on the upper story of the palace; and the palace had been preserved by various gems, mantras, herbs and

[Ch 10 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Takṣaka became very anxious; and fearing, lest the curse of the Brāhmins, will fall on his head, became very much agitated and thought. “How shall I now enter the palace? How can I cheat this stupid hypocrite vicious king, cursed by the Brāhmin, who causes troubles to the Brāhmins.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Takṣak became very anxious; and fearing, lest the curse of the Brāhmaṇas, will fall on his head, became very much agitated and thought. “How shall I now enter the palace? How can I cheat this stupid hypocrite vicious king, cursed by the Brāhmaṇa, who causes troubles to the Brāhmaṇas.

[Ch 10 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Not a single man has taken birth in the Pāndava family ever since that has coiled a dead serpent round the neck of an ascetic Brāhmīn.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Not a single man has taken birth in the Paṇḍava family ever since that he coiled a dead serpent round the neck of an ascetic Brāhmin.

[Ch 10 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king has committed a very heinous crime and knowing the course of time to be infallible, has placed sentries on all sides of the palace and has ascended to the top-most story of the building, thinking thereby to deceive Death and is staying in a peaceful mind. How can then he be smitten, in accordance with the Brāhimin's word?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king has committed a very heinous crime and knowing the course of time to be in fallible, has placed sentries on all sides of the palace and has ascended to the top-most story of the building, thinking thereby to deceive Death and is staying in a peaceful mind. How can then he be smitten, in accordance with the Brāhmaṇa’s word?

[Ch 10 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king, of dull intellect, knows not that death cannot be prevented; for that reason he has placed guards and sentinels round the building, and himself has got up the house and is happily whiling away his time; but he is quite ignorant that when Fate “Who can never be violated, ordains the death, how can it be prevented, though thousands of attempts are made to thwart it?
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king, of dull intellect, knows not that death cannot be prevented; for that reason he has placed guards and sentinels round the building, and himself has got up the house and is happily whiling away his time; but he is quite ignorant that when Fate who can never be violated, ordains the death, how can it be prevented though thousands of attempts are made to thwart it?

[Ch 10 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This scion of Pānḍu family that his death is at hand and yet wants to live and therefore is staying 'in his own place with a tranquil mind.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This scion of Paṇdu family knows that his death is at hand and yet wants to live and therefore is staying in his own place with a tranquil mind.

[Ch 10 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king ought now to make charities and do other meritorious works; it is only by acts of Dharma that disease is destroyed and life is prolonged.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king ought now to make charities and other meritorious works; it is only by acts of Dharma that disease is destroyed and life is prolonged.

[Ch 10 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And if that be not the object then a dying man ought to take bath, to make charities and to await his time of death; he thereby attains heaven; otherwise hell is inevitable.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And if that be not the object then a dying man ought to take bath, to make charities and to await his time of death; he thereby attains heaven; otherwise hell is inevitable.

[Ch 10 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king committed great sin in the act of causing pain and trouble to the Brāhmīn or other similar acts and, therefore, death is so close that the Brāhmīn's curse has fallen thus on his head. Is there no such Brāhmīn who can make him understand this; or the Creator has ordained his death now as inevitable."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king committed great sin in the act of causing pains and trouble to the Brāhmin or other similar acts and therefore death is so close that the Brāhmin curse has fallen thus on his head. Is there no such Brāhmin who can make him understand this; or the Creator has ordained his death now as inevitable.”

[Ch 10 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus meditating, the chief serpent made other serpents following him assume the form of ascetic Brahmins and gave them roots and fruits to be taken to the king.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus meditating, the chief serpent made other serpents following him assume then form of ascetic Brāhmaṇas and gave them roots and fruits to be taken to the king.

[Ch 10 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The serpent Takṣaka himself entered within the fruits in the form of an insect. Then the ascetic serpents took the fruits and quickly went out of the place. They came to the palace where Parikṣit was resting.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The serpent Takṣak himself entered within the fruits in the form of an insect. Then the ascetic serpents took the fruits and quickly went out of the place. They came to the palace where Parīksit was resting.

[Ch 10 Verse 44-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing them, the guards asked: "What for have you come here?" Hearing this, We are coming from the hermitage to prolong the life of the hero king the son of Abhimanyu and the son of the Pāndava family, by chanting the mantras of the Atharvavedas, and we want to have an interview with the king; now you better go and inform the king that some Munis have come to see you. We will sprinkle water on him and give him some sweet fruits and then depart.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing them, the guards asked :-- “What for have you come here?” Hearing this, “We are coming from the hermitage to prolong the life of the hero king, the son of Abhimanyu and the son of the Pāṇḍava family, by chanting the mantras of the Atharvavedas, and we want to have an interview with the king; now you better go and inform the king that some Munis have come to see you. We will sprinkle water on him and give him some sweet fruits and then depart.

[Ch 10 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We have never come across such gatekeepers in the family of Bharata as disallow ascetic Muni visitors to go and see the king.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We have never come across such gatekeepers in the family of Bharat as disallow the ascetic Muni visitors to go and see the king.

[Ch 10 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We will ascend to the place where the Pariksit is staying and we will bless him, and wish him long life; we will communicate to him our orders and then depart to our own places."
NEW CORR ENG ──► We will ascend to the place where the Parīksit is staying and we will bless him, and wish him long life; we will communicate to him our orders and then depart to our own places.”

[Ch 10 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūtā said: Hearing these words, the sentinels spoke as perviously ordered by the king, as follows:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūtā said :-- Hearing these words, the sentinels spoke as previously ordered by the king, as follows :--

[Ch 10 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Brāhmins! We think verily you won’t be able to have an interview with the king today; you, all ascetics can come tomorrow to this palace. O Munis! Owing to the Brāhmīn’s curse, the king has built this place; then it follows, as a matter of course, that the Brāhmins are not allowed to get up to the palace.” Then the serpents, in the form of the Brāhmins, spoke:
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Brāhmaṇas! We think verily you won’t be able to have an interview with the king to-day; you, all ascetics can come to-morrow to this palace. O Munis! Owing to the Brāhmaṇa’s curse, the king has built this place; then it follows, as a matter of course, that the Brāhmaṇas are not allowed to get up to the palace.” Then the serpents, in the form of the Brāhmaṇas, spoke :--

[Ch 10 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O good sentinels! Then take these roots and fruits and offer them to the king and communicate to him our blessings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “O good sentinels! Then take these roots and fruits and offer them to the king and communicate to him our blessings.”

[Ch 10 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The sentinels went to the king, and informed him of the arrival of the ascetic Brāhmins. The king replied: “Bring here the roots and fruits offered by them and ask what for they have come.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The sentinels went to the king, and informed him of the arrival of the ascetic Brāhmaṇas. The king replied :-- “Bring here the roots and fruits offered by them and ask what for they have come.

[Ch 10 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Give them my pranāms; today I cannot meet with them; let them come tomorrow morning."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Give them my pranāms; to-day I cannot meet with them; let them come to-morrow morning.”

[Ch 10 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The sentinels went to the ascetics and got from them their roots and fruits and offered them with great respect to the king.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The sentinels went to the ascetics and got from them their roots and fruits and offered them with great respect to the king.

[Ch 10 Verse 56-58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the serpents in the guise of the hypocrite Brāhmins went away, the king took those fruits and spoke to his ministers: “Take these fruits and let all my friends eat them. I will take only this one fruit given by the Brāhmins and will eat it.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the serpents in the guise of the hypocrite Brāhmins went away, the king took those fruits and spoke to his ministers :- “Take these fruits and let all my friends eat them. I will take only this one fruit given by the Brāhmaṇas and will eat it.”

[Ch 10 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Saying this, the Uttarā's son Pariksit gave away fruits to the friends and took one ripe fruit for himself, broke it and saw within it a very fine copper-coloured black eyed insect.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Saying this, the Uttarā’s son Parīksit gave away fruits to the friends and took one ripe fruit for himself, broke it and saw within it a very fine copper-coloured black eyed insect.

[Ch 10 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this, the ministers were astonished; the king Śrimaddevībhāgavatam spoke to them: "The sun has set; so there is no further chance of any fear from any poison today.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this the ministers were astonished; the King spoke to them :-- “The sun has set; so there is no further chance of any fear from any poison to-day.

[Ch 10 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I speak then today, fearing the Brāhmin's curse, "Let this insect bite me." Thus, saying the king took the insect and placed it on his neck.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I speak then to-day, fearing the Brāhmaṇ’s curse, let this insect bite me.” Thus saying the king took that insect and placed it on his neck.

[Ch 10 Verse 62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That Takṣaka in the form of an insect, when placed, during sunset, on the neck by the king, immediately assumed the form of the terrible Kāla (Death), coiled round the king and bite him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That Takṣak in the form of an insect, when placed, during the sun-set, on the neck by the king, immediately assumed the form of the terrible Kāla (Death), coiled round the king and beat him.

[Ch 10 Verse 63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The ministers were greatly surprised and began to weep and cry with great pain and sorrow.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ministers were greatly surprised and began to weep and cry with great pain and sorrow.

[Ch 10 Verse 64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing that terrible serpent, the ministers, overwhelmed with terror, fled away on all sides. The guards cried out loudly. A terrible out-cry was raised on all sides.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing that terrible serpent, the ministers, overwhelmed with terror, fled away on all sides. The guards cried out loudly. The terrible out-cry was raised

[Ch 10 Verse 65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Uttarā's son, king Parikṣit, coiled by the serpent, saw that all his efforts were rendered fruitless, and remained silent and held fast to his patience.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Uttarā’s son, the king Parīksit, coiled by the serpent, saw that all his efforts were rendered fruitless, and remained silent and held fast to his patience.

[Ch 10 Verse 66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► From the mouth of the serpent Taksaka the terrible venomous flames came out burning all and immediately killed the king.
NEW CORR ENG ──► From the mouth of the serpent Takṣak the terrible venomous flames came out burning all and immediately killed the king.

[Ch 10 Verse 67]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus taking away the life of the king, Taksaka went up in the celestial atmosphere; the people then saw that the serpent was ready as if to burn the world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus taking away the life of the king, Takṣak went up in the celestial atmosphere; the people then saw that the serpent was ready as if to burn the world.

[Ch 10 Verse 68]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king fell down lifeless like a burnt tree; and all the persons cried out seeing the king dead. Thus ends the Tenth Chapter of the Second Book on the death of the king Parikşit in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses. Śrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king fell down lifeless like a burnt tree; and all the persons cried out seeing the king dead. Thus ends the tenth Chapter of the Second Skandha on the death of the king Parīksit in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.
