CHAPTER X

On the Death of Pariksit

सूत उवाच

तस्मिचेव दिने नामा तक्षकस्तं नृपोत्तमम् ।

गर्शतं जात्वा गृहातूर्णि निःसून: पुरुषोत्तम ॥ १ ॥

वृद्धदाक्षायणवेधेण तक्षकः पथि निरितः ।

अपयथकर्णयं यार्गे जजन्ते नृपति प्रति ॥ २ ॥

Sūta said: O Risīs! On that very day when the

Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam

Brāhmīn Kaśyapa went out of his house, Takṣaka, knowing the king Parikṣit cursed, assumed an aged Brāhmīn's form and went out of his abode. The serpent Takṣaka met Brāhmīn Kaśyapa on the way.

तमपृष्ठ्यप्रागोउसी बाहुणं मन्त्रवादिन् ।

वन भर्मात्मवित्ती याति कि च कार्य चिकारीति ॥ 3 ॥

Seeing the Brāhmīn, versed in the Mantras, Takṣaka asked him “Where are you going so in haste, and what for are you taking this trouble?”

कथय उवाच

परीक्षितं नृपश्रेष्ठं तक्षकष्ट प्रध्यक्षिति ।

तगाई त्वरितो यामि नृपं कतुंमपज्ञतम् ॥ ४ ॥

Thus questioned, Kaśyapa replied: "I heard that the serpent Taksaka will bite king Parikṣit; therefore, I am going in haste to king Parikṣit to cure him of the serpent's poison.

मनोजिति मम विघ्रंत्र विनपाशकर: कित।

जीविध्याम्बरुं ते वे शीवित्यो३पुना कित ॥ ५ ॥

I know the mantra (mystic verse) that can destroy the effect of poison. If his life-period is not exhaust, I will certainly give him back his life.

तक्षक उवाच

अर्हे स पत्रगो बह्यांस्तं धक्षयामि महीपतिम् ।

निवर्तीस्य न जानस्तंच मवा दूर्ध चिकिस्तिमु। ॥ 6 ॥

Taksaka then said: "O Brāhmīn! I am that Takṣaka; I will bite him and take away his life. So you better desist. Will you be able to treat him whom I bite; certainly you will not."

कल्पय ज्ञाच

अहं दृ त्वया सर्पं नृपं शगतं तिज्ञेन वै ।

जीवयथ्याम्यस्ते कामं मन्त्रलेन वै ॥ ७ ॥

Kaśyapa said: “O chief of snakes! When you will bite the king who has been cursed by the Brāhmin, I will no doubt make him alive by the power of my mantra.”

तक्षक उवाच

यदि तं जीवितुं यासि मया दईं नृपोतमम् ।

मन्त्रणिकं बत विध्र उर्थय त्वं ममानच ।। ८ ॥

चक्ष्यायेने च न्यप्रों विषदैदुष्पितय हे ।

Taksā said: 'O, chief of Brāhmins! If you have so thought that you will make the king alive after I bite him, then shew me your strength before hand. O sinless one! I will bite this Nyagrodha tree (the Indian fig-tree); just now make it alive."

क्रवप उवाच

जीविधेये तवया दर्द दूर्ध वा परगोतम ॥ 9 ॥

Kaśyapa said: “Certainly, I will make this tree alive, that will be burnt away by the venom of your teeth.”

सूत उवाच

अद्वास्तरणो वृक्षं भयसासच्च चकार तम् ।

उवाच क्रस्यं भूयो जीवयैनं द्विज्ञानम् ॥ १० ॥

Sūta said: The snake Takṣaka then bit the tree, which was reduced to ashes; and asked Kaśyapa to bring back that tree to life.

दूर्वा भस्मीकृतं वृक्षे प्रपनेन विश्वानिना ।

सर्वे भस्म समाहार्य कार्ययो वाक्यमब्रतीन् ॥ १ १ ॥

Seeing the tree reduced to ashes by the fire of venom of the snake, he collected all the ashes and said: "O highly venomons serpent.

पश्य मन्त्रबलं मेउषा न्यायीधं पश्रजीगत ।

जीवयामव्य दृष्ट्रं वै पश्यतस्ते महाविष १। १२।।

See today the power of my mantra. Behold! While you are witnessing, I will enliven this tree."

इत्पुक्नता जलमादाय करणयो मन्त्रवितमः ।

सिषेच भमसार्शं तं महिन्तैयेव वारिणा ॥ १३ ॥

Thus the great mantra-knower Kaśyapa took water in his hand, and impregnating it with mantra power, sprinkled the water on the ashes.

तद्धारिसेचनाजातो न्यप्रीध: पूर्वविद्युभः ।

विसयं तक्षकः प्राणो दूर्वा तं जीवितं नगम् ॥ 14 ॥

तमाह क्रस्यं नाग: किमर्थे ते परिश्रभः ।

सम्पाद्यामि तं कामं बृहि वाद्व वाज्छतम् ॥ 15 ॥

Immediately, on the sprinkling of the mantra saturated water, the Nyagrodha tree got back its life as before. Takṣaka became greatly astonished

to see the tree enlivened again and said to Kaśyapa: "O cheif of Brāhmin! What is your object in taking so much pain? Speak out what you want and I will fulfil your desires."

कथपय उवाच

वित्तार्थी नृपति मत्वा शपतं घरम गिन:सुतः ।

गृहादं चोपकर्तु विद्या नृपतसनाम् ॥ 16 ॥

Kaśyapa said: “O chief of serpents! Knowing the king cursed, I am going to do good to him by my knowledge and to get in return abundant wealth.”

तक्षक जवाच

वित्तं गृहाण विश्रं प्रयाविद्धचस पार्थिवात् ।

द्वातिम स्वगृहं याहि सकामोड़ं भवायन्तः ॥ 17 ॥

Hearing this, Taksaka said: “I will give you the amount of wealth that you desire; take that and go back to your house, and let my desire be also fulfilled.”

सूत उवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य कश्यप: परमार्थवित् ।

चित्तयामास मनसा किं कतमीय पुनः पुनः ॥ १८ ॥

Kaśyapa, the knower of the highest state, heard Takṣaka's words and pondered in his mind again and again. "What is to be done now?

धर्म गृहीत्वा स्वगृहं प्रधामीय चाहंहु पुनः ।

भविष्यति न मे कीसिलिके लोभसामाशयात् ॥ 19 ॥

जीवितेअ द्यूपरेगेछे कौसिं: स्याद्वतला मम ।

धनप्रापितिश्छ बहुधापवेत्युर्षं च जीवनात् ॥ 20 ॥

If I take this wealth and go back to my house, my name and fame will not be known in this world, simply for my greed; but if the king be made alive again, my undying fame, abundant wealth, and greatest Punyam will accrue to me.

स्थणीयं यय कामां त्रिभयं यशमा विना ।

सर्वेयं रघणा पूर्वे दर्त विधाय कीर्ते ॥ 21 ॥

ह्रिंश्छ्रौण क्रानि क्रौर्व्यं बहुविस्तम ।

उदेक्षेयं कर्वे घृपं दहामानं विधापिन्न ॥ 22 ॥

Again fie to that wealth with which there is no fame; so one must try one's best to preserve one's

fame. King Raghu, in ancient days, gave away everything of his to the Brāhmins for fame; King Hariścandra and Kārṇa did not hesitate a bit to give away endless property. There is one point again to take into account, how can I trifle away the matter, seeing the king burnt up by the venomous fire?

जीवितेड़ा म्या राजि सुखु सर्वेजनस्य च ।

अराजके प्रजानाशो भविता नात्र संग्रव: ॥ 23 ॥

If I can bring back the king's life, everyone will become happy. If the kingdom be without its king, the subject will, no doubt, be ruined.

प्रजानाशस्य पापे मे भविष्यत मृते नृते ।

अपकीर्णिति लोकैक्य धनतोभाद्धविषयिति ॥ 24 ॥

So, following the king's death, sin will also incur on me due to the ruin of the subject; and infamy will come on my head that I am a very greedy man."

इति संसुित्व मनसा धानं कृता स कश्य ।

गतायुर्ष च नुपर्ति ज्ञतावान्युद्धिनमतः ॥ 25 ॥

Thus meditating in his mind, the highly intelligent Kaśyapa began to meditate, and plunged himself in Dhyāna; he, thereby, came to know that the king's life period was spent up.

आसप्रमूल्य जगनं ज्ञाला ध्यानेन कशयः ।

गृहं ययौं स धर्मात्मा धनमादाय तऋकान् ॥ 26 ॥

Thus knowing the king's death imminent, the virtuous Kaśyapa took the desired wealth from Takṣaka and returned home.

निवल्वें कशयपं सर्पः मद्वतः सूचन् ।

हैतुकानी जगामायु नगरं नागसाछ्यम् ॥ 27 ॥

शुश्राव नागरम्यांते प्रापादस्यं परीक्षितम् ।

मणिमन्त्रीधेः कामं रक्ष्यागमतिन्हिन् ॥ 28 ॥

Thus making Kaśyapa to retire to his house on the seventh day, Taksaka went on to Hastināpur to bring death and destruction on to Parikṣit. When he went close to the city, he heard that King Parikṣit was staying on the upper storey of the palace; and the palace had been preserved by various gems, mantras, herbs and plants.

चिन्ताविष्टसदा नागो विश्राणपथवाकुल: ।

चित्तयामास योगेन प्रविश्रयं गृहं कवम् ॥ 29 ॥

वंचायामि कर्थे चैन राजानं पापकारिणम् ।

विप्रशपाद्धतं मूर्द विपूधीदाकरं गडम् ॥ 30 ॥

Takṣaka became very anxious; and fearing, lest the curse of the Brāhmins, will fall on his head, became very much agitated and thought. “How shall I now enter the palace? How can I cheat this stupid hypocrite vicious king, cursed by the Brāhmin, who causes troubles to the Brāhmins.

पाण्डवानां कुले जातः को3पि नैतादृषो भवेत् ।

तापसस्य गले येन मतः सर्पि निवेशितः ॥ 31 ॥

Not a single man has taken birth in the Pāndava family ever since that has coiled a dead serpent round the neck of an ascetic Brāhmīn.

कृत्वा विमर्हितं कर्म जानन-कालगति नृपः ।

रक्षकाम्यने कृत्वा ग्रासादमधिगमाय च ॥ ३२ ॥

मृत्युं वझ्यतो राजा वतंतैउघ तिराकुलः ।

तं कंधे धक्षयिष्यामि विग्रावास्येन चोदितः ॥ 33 ॥

The king has committed a very heinous crime and knowing the course of time to be infallible, has placed sentries on all sides of the palace and has ascended to the top-most story of the building, thinking thereby to deceive Death and is staying in a peaceful mind. How can then he be smitten, in accordance with the Brāhimin's word?

न जानाति च मन्दात्मा मरणं हृधिवर्तमम् ।

तेनासी शक्तान्याय शीधास्त्रीडा मोदते ॥ 34 ॥

यदि वे विकित्तो मृतुर्दैविनामिततेजसा ।

स कयं परिवर्तितं कृतेर्जैस्तु कोदिधि: ॥ 35 ॥

The king, of dull intellect, knows not that death cannot be prevented; for that reason he has placed guards and sentinels round the building, and himself has got up the house and is happily whiling away his time; but he is quite ignorant that when Fate “Who can never be violated, ordains the death, how can it be prevented, though thousands of attempts are made to thwart it?

पाण्डवस्य च दायादो जानम्नुं गतं नृपः ।

जीवने मतिमायायय स्थितः स्थाने निर्वाकृः ॥ 36 ॥

This scion of Pānḍu family that his death is at hand and yet wants to live and therefore is staying 'in his own place with a tranquil mind.

दानपुण्यादिकं राजा कतुर्महिति सर्वथा ।

धर्मेण हृन्ते व्याधिर्यान्यु शाश्धतं भवेत् ॥ 37 ॥

The king ought now to make charities and do other meritorious works; it is only by acts of Dharma that disease is destroyed and life is prolonged.

नोचेम्नुच्छिति कृत्वा स्नानदानादिक क्रिया: ।

मरणं स्वर्गलोकाय नरकायान्याया भवेत् ॥ 38 ॥

And if that be not the object then a dying man ought to take bath, to make charities and to await his time of death; he thereby attains heaven; otherwise hell is inevitable.

डिजरीडाकृतं पापं पृथायास्य च भुपतेः ।

विश्रणास्यता धोर आसञ्च मरणे किल ॥ 39 ॥

न कोईपि ब्राह्मणः पार्थिं य एन प्रतिविधेयते ।

वैस्या विहितो मृत्युगिवार्यन्तु सर्वथा ॥ 40 ॥

The king committed great sin in the act of causing pain and trouble to the Brāhmīn or other similar acts and, therefore, death is so close that the Brāhmīn's curse has fallen thus on his head. Is there no such Brāhmīn who can make him understand this; or the Creator has ordained his death now as inevitable."

इति सईचल सपुर्ती सचानगाफिकरे तैश्वतन् ।

कृत्वा तापसवेशांस्ताप्राहीणतोस्पर्जगमान् ॥ 41 ॥

फलमूलातिकं गृह्य रात्रे नागोयं तक्षतः ।

स्वयं च कौटरूपेण फलमध्ये ससार है ॥ 42 ॥

Thus meditating, the chief serpent made other serpents following him assume the form of ascetic Brahmins and gave them roots and fruits to be taken to the king.

निर्णासते तदा नागाः फलान्यादाय सस्वतः ।

ते राजाभवर्ग प्रायः स्थिताः प्रापासदास्रिधौ ॥ 43 ॥

The serpent Takṣaka himself entered within the fruits in the form of an insect. Then the ascetic serpents took the fruits and quickly went out of the place. They came to the palace where Parikṣit was resting.

स्थाकासापासान्यूद्वा पण्यूष्टसीच्कर्मिभित् ।

क्रयुक्ते भूपति श्रुं प्राप्ता: स्मोडा तपोवान् ॥ 44 ॥

अधिमन्युस्तुं चौर कुलाकं चाफडर्णेन् ।

परिवर्धितुं प्राणता मनैराशवंरील्पा ॥ 45 ॥

निवेदयध्यं राजानं दर्जान्धारितामानुनीन् ।

कृत्याधिषेकान्यास्यामोदचाचादफलानिचा ॥ 46 ॥

Seeing them, the guards asked: "What for have you come here?" Hearing this, We are coming from the hermitage to prolong the life of the hero king the son of Abhimanyu and the son of the Pāndava family, by chanting the mantras of the Atharvavedas, and we want to have an interview with the king; now you better go and inform the king that some Munis have come to see you. We will sprinkle water on him and give him some sweet fruits and then depart.

भारतानां कुले क्वापि न दृषा द्वारशकाः ।

न मुतं तापसानां तु राज्ञासद्धर्न किल ॥ 47 ॥

We have never come across such gatekeepers in the family of Bharata as disallow ascetic Muni visitors to go and see the king.

आरोहामो वयं तन यत्र राजा परीक्षितः ।

आशीरिपिर्वैधिवैर्ने दत्ताना: प्रवजामहे ॥ 48 ॥

We will ascend to the place where the Pariksit is staying and we will bless him, and wish him long life; we will communicate to him our orders and then depart to our own places."

सूत उवाच

इत्याकपयं चरन्तेधां तपासना तु रक्षका: ।

प्रत्यचुस्तानिज्ञान्मत्वा निदेशें धपतेयैधा ॥ 4 9 ॥

Sūtā said: Hearing these words, the sentinels spoke as perviously ordered by the king, as follows:

नाठ बो दर्शनें विगा रोजः स्याहिति नो मति: ।

शः सर्वातपरिस्त त्वाणतव्यं नृपालये ॥ 5 0 ॥

अनारोहसृ प्रसादो विगाणां मुनिसनमाः ।

विश्रणापयान्द्रात्रा विहितोस्ति न संशया: ॥ 5 1 ॥

“O Brāhmins! We think verily you won’t be able to have an interview with the king today; you, all ascetics can come tomorrow to this palace. O Munis! Owing to the Brāhmīn’s curse, the king has built this place; then it follows, as a matter of course, that the Brāhmins are not allowed to get up to the palace.” Then the serpents, in the form of the Brāhmins, spoke:

तदोचुस्तानथो विशा: फलमूलजलानि च ।

विग्राणिषघ्रा गड़ेल प्राह्यन्तु सुरुस्का ॥ 5 2 ॥

“O good sentinels! Then take these roots and fruits and offer them to the king and communicate to him our blessings.

ते नत्वा नूपति प्रोषुस्तापसानानातुझना: ।

राजोचाच नयखे वै फलमूलादिक च यत् ॥ 5 3 ॥

The sentinels went to the king, and informed him of the arrival of the ascetic Brāhmins. The king replied: “Bring here the roots and fruits offered by them and ask what for they have come.

पृष्छधं तपासाकार्यं प्रततगामनं पुरः ।

प्रणार्म कवधधं मे नाट्य सन्तर्गिं मम ॥ ५४ ॥

Give them my pranāms; today I cannot meet with them; let them come tomorrow morning."

ते गतावंद सभादाय फलमृताविकं च यत् ।

राजे समयेयामासुर्वैमानपुन:सम् ॥ ५५ ॥

The sentinels went to the ascetics and got from them their roots and fruits and offered them with great respect to the king.

गतेषु तेषु नागेषु विषयेषावृतेषु च ।

फलान्यादाय राजासी सचिवानिदप्रबतीन् ॥ ५६ ॥

मुहदो भायन्त्य कल्योतिन सर्वैशः ।

अद्याद्धे चैकमेतेई फलं विज्ञापितं महत् ॥ ५७ ॥

इनुकुलता तकलं दंचा सुहृद्धशोतगसुतः ।

को कृत्वा फलं पक्वं ददार नुपति स्वयम् ॥ ५८ ॥

When the serpents in the guise of the hypocrite Brāhmins went away, the king took those fruits and spoke to his ministers: “Take these fruits and let all my friends eat them. I will take only this one fruit given by the Brāhmins and will eat it.”

विदारिति फलं राजा तत्र क्रिमिरभूद्गु ।

स कृष्णान्वनस्ताजो दृष्टो घुपतिना स्वयम् ॥ ५९ ॥

Saying this, the Uttarā's son Pariksit gave away fruits to the friends and took one ripe fruit for himself, broke it and saw within it a very fine copper-coloured black eyed insect.

तं दृष्ट्वा नृपति प्राह सचित्रात्विमितानाय ।

अस्तमध्येति सविता विषाद्व न मे भयम् ॥ 60 ॥

At this, the ministers were astonished; the king

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

spoke to them: "The sun has set; so there is no further chance of any fear from any poison today.

अङ़ीकरोमि तं शापं कृमिको मां दुशल्यम् ।

एवमुक्ल्वा स राजेज्ये प्रीवायां संन्येवेश्यन्ति ॥ 6 1 ॥

I speak then today, fearing the Brāhmin's curse, "Let this insect bite me." Thus, saying the king took the insect and placed it on his neck.

अरल्यातेदिवानायेधृत: कण्ठेउधकीटकः ।

तक्षकस्तु तदा जातः कालरूपी भयानका ॥ 6 2 ॥

That Takṣaka in the form of an insect, when placed, during sunset, on the neck by the king, immediately assumed the form of the terrible Kāla (Death), coiled round the king and bite him.

राजा संवेहितस्तेन  व्यंशप्रीय महीपति: ।

मान्थणे विषयमं प्रपाता रक्तदूभुशुर्जु: स्थिता ॥ 63 ॥

The ministers were greatly surprised and began to weep and cry with great pain and sorrow.

प्रोरूपमर्हि वीक्ष्य दुबुवुले भयादिताः ।

चुकुर्णू श्रक्रका: सर्वे हाहाकारो महानभूत ॥ 64 ॥

Seeing that terrible serpent, the ministers, overwhelmed with terror, fled away on all sides. The guards cried out loudly. A terrible out-cry was raised on all sides.

येहितो भोपिभोगेन विनवहबुणीरुकः ।

नोवाच नृपति: किंचित्र चचालोतरासुतः ॥ 65 ॥

Then Uttarā's son, king Parikṣit, coiled by the serpent, saw that all his efforts were rendered fruitless, and remained silent and held fast to his patience.

उत्थिताउनिशाखा घोरा विषवा तक्षकानन्त।

प्रजज्ञाल नृरं त्वाशु गतप्राणं चकार है ॥ 66 ॥

From the mouth of the serpent Taksaka the terrible venomous flames came out burning all and immediately killed the king.

हत्वा उशु जीवित राजसलक्षो गमने गतः ।

जगह्धधं तु कवर्णं ददुशुस्तं जना इह ॥ 67 ॥

Thus taking away the life of the king, Taksaka went up in the celestial atmosphere; the people then saw that the serpent was ready as if to burn the world.

स पपात नज्ञागो राजा दध्य इव दूम: ।

कुकुर्ण्छा जना: सर्वे मृतं दृष्ट्वा नाराधिम् ॥ 68 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभगवते द्वितीयकन्ये परीक्षिनगां नाम

दशगो3ध्वय: 11 10 11

The king fell down lifeless like a burnt tree; and all the persons cried out seeing the king dead.

Thus ends the Tenth Chapter of the Second

Book on the death of the king Parikşit in the

Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of

18,000 verses.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

