CHAPTER X

On the History of the King Suratha

श्रीनारायण उवाच

सतमो मनुराख्यातो मनुर्वैक्स्वतः प्रभु: ।

श्राद्वेदः परानन्दभोक्ता मान्यस्तु भूभुजाम् ॥ १ ॥

स च वैद्यस्तमनुः परेदेखा: प्रसादतः ।

तथा तत्तपसा चैव जातो मन्वन्तराधिथः ॥ २ ॥

Nārāyana said: Now the Seventh Manu is the

Book X Chapter X

Right Hon'ble His Excellency the Lord Vaivasvata Manu Śrāddha Deva, honoured by all the kings, and the Enjoyer of the Highest Bliss, Brahmanāanda. I will now speak of this seventh Manu. He, too, practised austerities before the Highest Devi and by Her Grace, got the sovereignty of the earth for one Manvantara.

अष्टमो मनुग्रव्यतः सावर्णिः: प्रथितः क्षिति ।

स जन्मांतर आराध्य देवीं तद्रलाभकतः ॥ 3 ॥

जातो मन्वन्तरपति: सर्वोजान्यपूजितः ।

महापराकमो धीते देदीभक्तपरायण: ॥ 4 ॥

The Eighth Manu is the Sun's son, known as Sāvarni. This personage, a devotee of the Devi, honoured by the kings, gentle, patient, and powerful king Sāvarni worshipped the Devi in his previous births; and, by Her boon, became the Lord of the Manvantara.

नारद उवाच

कर्थं जन्मातरे तेन मनुना२५ार्थनं कृतम् ।

देवयः पृथिव्युद्वायास्तमामाख्यातुमहसि ॥ 5 ॥

Nārada said: O Bhagavan! How did this Śāvami Manu worship in his previous birth the earthen image of the Devī. Kindly describe this to me.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

देववंशसमुद्धुते राजा स्वारोचिषे5-ते ।

सूराधो नाम विद्यातो महावलपातकामः ॥ 6 ॥

गुणग्राही धनुधीगी मान्यः श्रेषः कवि: कृती ।

धनसंग्रहकर्ता च दाता याचकमणडले ॥ 7 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Nārada! This Eighth Manu had been, before, in the time of Svārocisa Manu (the second Manu), a famous king, known by the name of Suratha, born of the family of Caitra, and very powerful.

अरीणां मदौने मानी सर्वांस्त्रकुलले कवी ।

तस्यैकदा बप्युत्ने कोलाविध्यंसिनो नृपा: ॥ 8 ॥

ग्रावः सैन्यस्तिहाः परिवार्यैन्पूजिताः ।

रूपुभूमर्ति तस्य राजो मानधनस्य हि ॥ 9 ॥

He could well appreciate merits, clever in the science of archery, amassed abundance of wealth,

a generous donor, a very liberal man and he was created pot and honoured by all. He was skilled in all arts of warfare with weapons and indomitable in crushing his foes.

तदा स सुर्यो नाम राजा सैन्यसमावृतः ।

निर्वयी नगात्स्वीयास्वरोग्युनिवर्भेः ॥ 10 ॥

तदा स समरे राजा सुर्यः श्रगृधिप्रितः ।

अमार्यैर्ग्रिपिश्रेश्व तस्य कोरगतं धनम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Once on a time, some of his powerful enemies destroyed the city of Kolā, belonging to the revered king and succeeded in besieging his capital wherein he remained Then the king Suratha, the conqueror of all his foes went out to fight with the enemies but he was defeated by them.

हर्ते सर्वप्रेतेषण तत्धजतयत भूमिपः ।

निष्काशिषक्ष नगरात्स राजा परमयुषितः ॥ 12 ॥

जगागमुभगवाह्याहु गुगवागयतेच नवम् ।

एकाकी विज्ञानेउपवे बघामोर्षृतामानसः ॥ 13 ॥

Taking advantage of this opportunity, the king's ministers robbed him of all his wealth. The illustrious king then went out of the city and with a sorrowful heart rode alone on his horse on the plea of having a game and walked to and fro, as if, absent-minded.

मुनेः कस्यचिद्यात्य स्वाक्षमं श्रतामानसः ।

प्रश्रानंतुसंयुक्तं मुनिशिष्यभगर्यैतून् ॥ १४ ॥ ॥

उदाय कंचिकालं स राता परमप्रीभने ।

आधमे मुनिवर्धस्य दीर्घंडुः सुभेधस् ॥ १ ५ ॥

The king, then, went to the hermitage of the Muni Sumedhā, who could see far-reaching things (a Man of the Fourth Dimensions). It was a nice, quite Śārama, surrounded by quiet and peaceful animals and filled with disciples. There in that very sacred Śārama, his heart became relieved and he went on living there.

एकता स महीपालो मुर्ने पुत्रावसानके ।

काले गत्वा प्रणायाशु प्रपछ्छ विनयान्वितः ॥ 16 ॥

मुने मम मनोयुःखं झायते चाधिसंभवम् ।

ज्ञाततत्स्थ पूर्वेल निष्प्रास्य च संततम् ॥ 17 ॥

One day, when the Muni finished his worship,

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

etc., the king went to him and saluted him duly and humbly asked him the following: "O Muni! I am suffering terribly from my mental pain. O Deva on the earth! Why I am suffering So much though I know everything, as if I am quite an ignorant man.

शुवृषिवर्षितस्यावि हतास्पस्य सर्वशः ।

तथायि तेषां मनसि ममत्वं जायते सृष्टम् ॥ 18 ॥

किं कौरीचि वयं राज्यात्मि कवं शर्मल्ये मुने ।

त्वदनुप्रहमागसे वद वेदविद्धां वर ॥ 19 ॥

After my defeat from my enemies, why does my mind become now compassionate towards who stole away my kingdom. O Best of the knowers of the Vedas! What am I to do now? Where to go? How can I make me happy? Please speak on these. O Muni! Now I am in want of your good grace.

मुनिवाच

अकर्णये महीपाल महाङ्गयंकरं परम् ।

देवीमाहात्मवमुले सर्वकामपूर्व परम् ॥ 20 ॥

जगन्मयी महामाया विष्णुबहाहूरेज्ञा ।

सा बलादपह्लैय वंजूना मानसानि हि ॥ 21 ॥

The Muni said: “O Lord of the earth! Hear the extremely wonderful glories of the Devi that have no equal and that can fructify all desires. She, the Mahā Māyā, Who is all this world, is the Mother of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa.

मोहाय प्रतिसंच्छेदिति जानीहि भूमिप ।

सा सुजल्यिष्ठलं विश्वसं सा पाल्यति संद्धि ॥ 22 ॥

संहोर हरूलेण संहल्पेव भूमिप ।

कामदारी महामाया कालगविद्रंत्यथा ॥ 23 ॥

O King! Know verily that it is She and She alone, that can forcibly attract the hearts of all the Jivas and throw them in dire utter delusion. She is always the Creatrix, Preservix and Destructrix of the Universe in the form of Hara. This Mahāmāyā fulfills the desiree of all the Jivas and She is known as the insurmountable Kālārāti. She is Kāli, the Destructrix of all this universe and

विश्वसंहितिणी काली कमला कमलाल्या ।

तस्यां सर्वे जाजजातं तस्यां विश्वं प्रतिहितम् ॥ 24 ॥

लवोभ्यति तस्यां च तस्मातैव परात्यरा ।

तस्या देल्या: प्रसादघ्र यस्योपरि भवेकृप ।

स एव मोहमत्येति नान्यथा धरणीपते ॥ 25 ॥

श्रौं भीमदैवीभागवते गतापुराणे दर्गमकल्ये

दर्शमीध्यान: 11 10 11

She is Kamalā residing in the lotus. Know that this whole world rests on Her and it will become dissolved in Her. She is therefore, the Highest and Best. O King! Know, verily, that he alone can cross the delusion (Moha) on whom the Grace of the Devi falls and otherwise no one can escape from this Anādi Moha."

Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the anecdote of the King Suratha in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

