CHAPTER I

On the Questions by Šaunaka and other Rsis

सर्वेचैत्यकर्णं तामाढां देवीं च धीम्रिच ।

बुद्धि या नः प्रचोदयात् ॥ १ ॥

I meditate on the beginningless Brahmāvidyā who is Sarvacaitanyarūpā, of the nature of all consciousness; may She stimu'ate our buddhi to the realisation of That (or who stimulates our buddhi in different directions).

शौनक उवाच

सृत सूत महाभाग धन्यो5सि पुरुचर्भेम ।

वद्धीतातत्वया सम्यक्षुगपासहिता: शुभा: ॥ 2 ॥

Saunaka said: O highly fortunate Sūta! O noble Sūta! You are the best of persons; you are blessed, inasmuch as you have thoroughly studied all the auspicious Purānas.

अश्वासु रुणपानि कृष्णेन मुनिनाउनच ।

क्रवितानि सुविद्यानि पतितानि त्यासाउनच ॥ 3 ॥

O sinless one! you have gone through all the eighteen Purānas, composed by Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana; these are endowed with five excellent characteristics and full of esoteric meanings.

Note: The characteristics are to make the mantras reveal to one's own self, to realise, to transfer to others the Sākti, force thereof, to prove the various manifestations of the several effects thereof, etc.,

पंचलक्षणयुक्तानि सहस्यानि मानत ।

त्वया ज्ञानानि सर्वाणि व्यासात्सत्यवतीसुतात् ॥4 ॥

अस्माकं पुण्ययोगेन प्राप्तस्त्वं क्षेत्रमुत्तमम् ।

दिव्यं विश्वसमं पुर्णयं कलित्योपविज्ञानम् ॥ 5 ॥

O sinless one! It is not that you have read them like a parrot, but you have thoroughly grasped the meaning of them all as you have learnt them from Vyāsa himself, the son of Satyavatī. Now it is our good merits that you have come at this divine holy excellent Viśvasan Kṣetra (place), free from any defects of the Kali age.

समाजोउंयुनीनाहिश्रोगुकामोरितपुण्यद्।

पुराणसहितां सूत बृह्हि लं नः समाहिताः ॥ ६ ॥

O, Sūta! These Munis assembled here are desirous to hear the holy Purāna Samhītā, that yields religious merits. So describe this to us with your mind concentrated.

दीधार्थपि सर्वत्र तापप्रथिवर्जितः ।

कथयात महापाना पुराणां ब्रह्मांमितम् ॥ ७ ॥

O all-knowing Sūta! Live long and be free from the threefold sorrows of existence. O highly fortunate one! Narrate to us the Purāṇa equivalent to the Vedas.

शोरेन्द्रिययुतः सूत नतः स्वादविश्वधानः ।

न शुण्वन्ति पुराणाति विशिता विधिता है ते ॥ ८ ॥

यथा सिंहैन्द्रियाढ़ादः पडूरसैः प्रतिपघते ।

तथा शोरेन्द्रियाढ़ादो वचोभिः सुधियां सूतः ॥ 9 ॥

O Sūta! Those persons that do not hear the Purāṇas, are certainly deprived by the Creator, though they have apparently the organ of hearing, of the power of tasting the sweet essence of words; because, the organ of hearing is gratified then and

then only when it hears the words of the wise men, just as the organ of taste is satisfied then and then only when it tastes the six kinds of rasas (flavour, taste) (sweet, sour, pangent, bitter, salty, and astringent). This is known to all.

अश्रिका: फणिनः कामं मुहुति हि नभोगुणैः ।

सकणों चे न शूच्योंते तयकणों: कवं च च ॥ 10॥

The serpents that are void of the organ of hearing are enchanted by sweet music; then why should not those persons that have the organs of hearing and are averse to hear the Purānas, be thrown under the category of the deaf?

अतः सर्वे दिज्ञा: सौम्य श्रनुकामा: स्माहिता:।

वर्तैत नैमिधारणये क्षेत्रे कलिभ्यादिताः ॥ १ १ ॥

येन केनाव्यपायेन कालातिवाहनं म्यून् ।

व्यसनैरित मुखाणां बुधानां शाखचितन्तः ॥ १ २ ॥

शाखापयि विविचाराणि जलयाद्युतानि च ।

(त्रिवधानि पुराणानि शाखानि विवधानि च ॥

विरोडाच्छल्युक्तानि गवांपर्वकानि च ॥ ११ )

नान्यांवादयुक्तानि हेतुर्मेत बृह्णित च ॥ १ ३ ॥

O Saumya! Hence all those Brāhmins, being distressed with the fear of this Kali, have come here to this Naimisāranya, eager to hear attentively the Purāṇas, and are staying here with this one object. Time must be spent away anyhow or other; those that are fools while away their times in sports and other evil practices and those that are learned pass away their times in meditating on the Śāstras; but these Śāstras are too vast and very varied; they contain Jalpas (debates or wrangling discussions to win over the opposite party), Vādas (sound doctrines to arrive at just conclusions), and various Arthavādas (explanations and assertions, recommending Vidhis or precepts by stating the good arising from its proper observance and evils arising from its omission and also by adducing historical instances for its support; praises and eulogies) and filled with many argumentations. And, amongst these Śāstras again, the Vedānta is the Sāttvik, the Mīmārinśās are the Rājaskī and the

Nyāya Śāstras with Hetuvādas, are the Tāmasik; so the Śāstras are varied.

साचिकं तत्र वेदान्तं मीमांसा राजसं मतम् ।

तामसं न्यायशासं च हेतुवादाभियंत्रितम् ॥ 14 ॥

तथैव च पुराणानि त्रिगुणानि कवानकं: ।

क्रियातिन त्वया सीयंं पंचलक्षणवर्ति च ॥ 15 ॥

तत्र भागवतं पुर्णं पंचमं वेदसंविमान् ।

क्रियतं चत्चया पूर्वं सर्वलक्षणसंगुन्त्र ॥ 16 ॥

उद्रेषाग्रतेण तदा कीर्तितं परमाद्धुतम् ।

मुक्तिपूर्व मुकुषाणां कामदं धार्यं तथा ॥ 17 ॥

विस्तेरण तदाख्याति पुराणोतममाद्वत् ।

श्रोतुकामा द्विजा: सर्वे दिख्यं भागवतं शुभम् ॥ 18 ॥

Similarily, the Purāṇas are of three kinds: (1) Sāttvik, (2) Rājaskī and (3) Tāmasik. O Saumya! (one of gentle appearance) you have recited those Purāṇas endowed with five characteristics and full of many narratives; of these, the fifth Purāṇa, (equivalent to the Vedas and with all the good qualities, the Bhāgavata yields Dharma and Kāma (religion and desires), gives liberation to those who desire for emancipation and is very wonderful; you mentioned this before but ordinarily; you did not dwell on this specially. Now these Brāhmāṇas are eager to hear gladly this divine auspicious Bhāgavata, the best of the Purāṇas; so kindly describe this in detail.

त्वं तु जानासि धर्मपू चौराणीं संहिता किल ।

कृष्णोत्तां गुरुभक्त्वालय्यकस्त्वगुणाद्ध: ॥ 19 ॥

श्रुतान्यनानि सर्वेत्र त्वन्युखात्रिय:सुतानि च ।

नैव तृतीन ज्ञानोउदा सुधपानेउभरा यथा ॥ 20 ॥

O knower of Dharma! By your faith and devotion to your Guru, you have become Sāttvik and thus have thoroughly known the Purāna Sanhitās spoken by Veda Vyāsa. O Omniscient one! Therefore it is that we have heard many Purānas from your mouth; but we are not satisfied as the Devas are not satisfied with the drinking of the nectar.

विसुभ्यां चित्तां सूत मुक्तिजैव कदाचन ।

विबन्भागवतं सहो नरो मुच्येत संकटात् ॥ 2 । ॥

Book 1 Chapter II

O Sūta! Fie to the nectar even! as the drinking of nectar is quite useless in giving Mukti. But hearing the Bhāgavata gives instantaneous Mukti from this Samśāra or round of birth and death.

सूपापाननिमितं चल्हता यजा सहस्रणः ।

न गान्तिनधिणछाम: सूत सर्वत्मना वयम् ॥ 2 2 ॥

मखाना हि फलं स्वर्गे: स्वानीछ्यवर्णनं पुनः ।

एवं संसारचक्रेन्स्म्यमणं च निरंतरम् ॥ 2 3 ॥

विना जानेन सर्वत्रे नैव मृक्तः: कदाचन ।

प्रभाते कालचक्रेजत्र नरानां जिशुपालाके ॥ 2 4 ॥

O Sūta! we performed thousands and thousands of Yajñas for the drinking of the nectar (Amṛta), but never we got the full peace. The reason being that Yajñas lead to heaven only; on the expiry of the period of Punya (good merits, the heavenly life ceases and one is expelled, as it wet. from the Heavens. Thus, incessant sojourns in this wheel of

Saṃsāra, the constant rounds of births and deaths never end. O Knower of every thing! Thus, without Jñāna (knowledge, wisdom) Mukti never comes to men, wandering in this wheel of Time (Kālacakra) composed of the Gunas.

अतः सर्वसोपेते पुरयं भागवतं वद ।

पावनं भुक्तिवंतु गृह्धं मुधूधुर्णां सदा ग्रियम् ॥ 25 ॥

इति शीर्ददीभागवतं महापुराणे प्रथमस्करके शौनकप्रश्नो नाम

प्रथमोउथाय: 11 1 11

So describe this holy Bhāgavata, always beloved of the Mumuksus (those that desire Mukti), this secret work yielding liberation, holy and full of all sentiments (rasas).

Thus ends the First Chapter of the First Book on the questioning about the Purāna by Śaunaka and other Rāsis in the Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevīthāgāvatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book 1 Chapter II

CHAPTER II

On the Question by Šaunaka and Other Rşi

श्रीसूत उवाच

ध्योउहमतिभायोउहं पाचितोउहं महात्मिभः ।

यस्यूं सुमहल्पणं पुराणं वेदविश्रन् ॥ १ ॥

तदई संप्रवक्ष्यासि सर्वश्रुत्यवंसमतम् ।

रहस्यं सर्वीगाकाणामागमानामनुतनम् ॥ 2 ॥

Śrī Sūta said: “I am highly fortunate; I consider myself blessed and I am purified by the Mahātmās (high souled persons); inasmuch as I am questioned by them about the highly meritorious Purāṇa, famous in the Vedas. I will now speak in detail about this Purāṇa, the best of the Āgamas, approved of by all the Vedas and the secret of all the Śāstras.

नत्वा तत्पदपूर्जनं सुल्तिलितं मुक्तिपूर्दं योगिनां

ब्रह्माष्टीय सेवितं सुल्तिलेपेत्यैवं पुनी-त्रै: सव।

वध्यायच्छ सविस्तरं बहुतरं श्रीमनुषाणातमं

भवस्या सर्वसालयं भगवतीनाम्न प्रसिद्धं द्विजा: ॥ 3 ॥

O Brāhmins! I bow down to the gentle lotus feet, known in the three Lokas, of the Devi Bhagavatī, praised by Brahmā and the other devas Viṣṇu, Maheśa and others, meditated always by the

Munindras and which the Yogis contemplate as their source of liberation. Today I will devotedly describe, in detail and in plain language, that Purāna which is the best of all the Purānas, which gives prosperity and contains all the sentiments (rasas) that a human being can conceive, the Śrimad Devi Bhāgavatam.

या विश्वोथिपीयते श्रुतिथय शक्ति: सदास उदा पा सर्वज्ञा भवबन्धशितिपुणा सर्वांगेशे संस्थिता ।

दुर्जेया सुवुरुतमधिष्ठु मुनिभिश्योनास्यदं प्रपित्त प्रत्यक्षा भवतीह सा भावर्ती सिद्धिप्रदा स्थास्तवा ॥ ॥ ॥

May that Highest Primal Śakti who is known as Vidyā in the Vedas; who is omniscient, who controls the innermost of all and who is skilled in cutting off the knot of the world, who cannot be realised by the wicked and the vicious, but who is visible to the Munis in their meditation, may that Bhagavatī Devi give me always buddhi fit to describe the Purāṇa!

सृष्टाव्याडिलं जगदिदं सदसत्यवल्पं

शक्तया स्वया त्रिगृया परिपाति विधम् ।

संह्य कल्यसमये रमते तथैका

तां सर्वविश्वजन्नीं मनसा स्मारमि ॥ 5 ॥

I call to my mind the Mother of all the worlds who creates this universe, whose nature is both real (taking gross, practical point of view) and an unreal (taking a real point of view), preserves and destroys by Her Rājasik, Sāttvik and Tāmasik qualities and in the end resolves all these into Herself and plays alone in the period of Dissolution—at this time, I remember my that Mother of all the worlds.

बहा सुवत्यखिलमेतिविति प्रसिद्ध

पौराणिकैकु कवलं खलु वेवेदिविछः ।

विष्णोस्तु नाथिकमले किल तस्य जन्म

तैत्कमेव सुजते न हि स स्वतर्नः ॥ 6 ॥

विष्णुस्तु शोशप्यने स्वपतीति काले

तत्राभिपयमुकुले खलु तस्य जन्म ।

आधारातं किल गतोउत्र सहस्वतीलः

सम्बोध्यतं स भगवान् हि कर्थ सुपारि: ॥ 7 ॥

It is commonly known that Brahmā is the creator of this universe; and the knowers of the Vedas and the Purāṇas say so; but they also say that Brahmā is born of the navel-lotus of Viṣṇu. Thus, it appears that Brahmā cannot create independently. Again, Viṣṇu, from whose navel lotus Brahmā is born, lies in Yoga sleep on the bed of Ananta (the thousand-headed serpent) in the time of Pralaya; so how can we call Bhagavān Viṣṇu who rests on the thousand headed serpent Ananta, as the creator of the universe?

एकाणंवस्य सलिलं रसकपेवे पात्र

विना न हि रसचिशिरसि कचित् ।

या सर्वभूतिवये किल शक्तिप्रा तां

सर्वभूतजनर्नी शरणं गतोउम्मि ॥ 8 ॥

योगनिद्वापीलिताक्षं, विश्युं दृष्टवांबुजे स्थितः ।

अजस्तुषार यां देतीं तामई शरणं जजे ॥ 9 ॥

Again, the refuge of Ananta is the water of the

ocean Ekārṇava; a liquid cannot rest without a vessel; so I take refuge of the Mother of all beings, who resides as the Śakti of all and thus is the supporter of all; I fly for refuge unto that Devi who was praised by Brahmā while resting on the navel lotus of Viṣṇu who was lying fast in Yoga Nidrā. त आया सगुणां मायां मुक्तिदां निर्णुणां तथा । वक्षेय पुर्णामवित्रं भृणवंतु मुनवसित्वर ॥ 10 ॥

O Munis! meditating on that Māyā Devi who creates, preserves and destroys the universe who is known as composer of the three gunas and who grants mukti, I now describe the whole of the Purāṇas; now you all better hear.

पुर्णापुन्तं पुर्णं शीम्द्रागवताधिभू ।

अष्टार्ण सहस्वाणि रुलोकास्तत्र तु संस्कृता: ॥ 1 1 ॥

स्कन्धा द्वारण चैवात्र कृष्णोन विहिता: शुभा: ।

त्रिशर्ते पूर्णमध्याया अष्टार्णसुता: स्मृता ॥ 1 2 ॥

The Purāṇa Śrimad Bhāgavat (Devi Bhāgavat) is excellent and holy; eighteen thousand pure Ślokas are contained in it. Bhagavān Krṣṇa Dvaipāyana has divided this Purāṇa into twelve auspicious Skandhas (Books) and three hundred and eighteen chapters.

विश्रिति प्रथमे तत्र द्वितीये द्वार्थीवे तु ।

श्रिण्चैव तृतीये तु चतुर्षं पंचविश्रिति: ॥ 13 ॥

पंचश्रितणताधयाया: पंचमे परिकीर्तिता: ।

एकत्रिशता चष्टे चत्वारिणच्च सदमे ॥ 14 ॥

अष्टे ततचसंख्याक्रं पंचाशत्रवमे तथा ।

त्रयोद्ग तु संप्रोक्ता द्रामे मुनिना किल ॥ 15 ॥

तथा चैकाईशक्क्ये चतुर्विंशतितीरिता ।

चतुदीर्श चाध्याया द्वारणे मुनिसत्ताः ॥ 16 ॥

Twenty chapters compose the first skandha; twelve chapters in the second Skandha; thirty chapters in the third Skandha; twenty-five chapters in fourth Skandha, thirty-five, in the fifth; thirty-one, in the sixth; forty, in the seventh; twenty-four, in the eighth; fifty chapters in the ninth; thirteen, in the tenth; twenty-four in the eleventh and fourteen chapters are contained in the twelfth

Book I Chapter II

Skandha. O Munis! Thus the Dvaipāyana Muni has arranged his chapters in each Skandha.

एवं संख्या समाख्याता पुराणेSस्मिन्महात्मना।

अष्टादशसह्वीया संख्या च परिकीर्तिति ॥ 17 ॥

सर्गंश प्रतिसर्गश्छ शंको मन्वंतराणि च ।

वंशानुचरितं चैव पुराणं पंचलक्षणम् ॥ 18 ॥

Thus, the Mahātmā Veda Vyāsa has divided this Bhāgavata Purāṇa into so many Skandhas and into so many chapters; and that the number of verses is eighteen thousand is already stated. That is denominated as Purāṇa which contains the following five characteristics: (1) Creation of the universe, (2) Secondary creation, (3) Dynasties (4) Manvantaras and (5) The description of Manus and other kings.

निर्गुण या सदा नित्या व्यापिका विकृता शिका ।

योगमायाजतिलाधारासुतीयायाचसचित्यां ॥ 19 ॥

Śivā is beyond Prākṛtic attributes, eternal and ever omnipresent; She is without any change, immutable, unattainable but by yoga; She is the refuge of the universe and Her nature is Turīya Caityanya.

तस्यासु सात्चिको शक्ति राजसी तामसी तथा ।

महातल्यीं सरस्वती महाकालीति ता: सिक्यः ॥ २०॥

Mahā Laksmī is Her Sāttvikī Śakti; Sarasvatī is Her Rājasik Śakti and Mahā Kālī is Her Tāmasik Śakti; these are all of feminine forms.

तासां तिसुर्णा शक्तिनां देवांगीकारलक्षणः ।

सुख्यर्थे च समायात्यः सर्गः शाखल्यिगारहः ॥ 21 ॥

हरित्रुद्रिणक्रज्णां सम्यूचितस्ततः स्मृता: ।

पातनोत्नतिनागार्थं प्रतिसर्गः स्मृता हिं सः ॥ 22 ॥

The assuming of bodies by these three Śaktis for the creation of this universe is denominated as “Sarga” (creation) by the high-souled persons (Mahārpuruṣa), skilled in Śāstras. And the further resolution of these three Śaktis into Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa for the creation, preservation, and destruction of this universe is denominated (in this Purāṇa) as Pratisarga (secondary creation).

सोमपूर्वौंद्वानां च राजां वंशप्रकीर्तनम् ।

हिरण्यकशिष्यादीनां वंशाते परिकीर्तितः ॥ 23 ॥

The description of the kings of the solar and lunar dynasties and the families of Hiranyakāśipu and others is known as the description of the lineages of kings and their dynasties.

स्वायंभुव्युक्तानं च मन्त्रां परिवर्णन् ।

कालसंख्या तथा तेषां तत्मन्वंतराणि च ॥ 24 ॥

The description of Sväyambhuva and, other Manus and their ruling periods is known as Manvantaras.

तेषां वंशानुकबनं वंशानुचरितं स्युतम् ।

पंचलक्षणयुक्तानि भवति मुनिसत्तमः ॥ 25 ॥

And the description of their descendants is known as the description of their families. (Thus these are the five characteristics in the Purānas.) O best of Munis! all the Purānas are endowed with these five characteristics.

स्मादतर्षणं च तवा भारतं मुनिना कृतम् ।

इतिहास इति प्रोक्ते पछ्रयं वेदसंमतम् ॥ 26 ॥

So is Mahābhārata written by Veda Vyāsa, characterised by these five things. This is known as the fifth Veda and Ithāsa (history). In this are something more than one lakh sklaks."

गैरोक उवाच

कानि तानि पुराणानि बृहि सूत सविस्तन् ।

कतिसंख्यानि सर्वेज झोतुकामा वयं तिथि ॥ 27 ॥

कलिकालविधिता: सभो नैमिचारणयवासिन: ।

बह्वाणात्र समादिष्टाधक्ते तत्त्वा मानेमयम् ॥ 28 ॥

कथितं तेन नः सर्वानाछंचेतस्य पुक्तः ।

नेमि: संगीयिते यत्र स देश: पावन: स्मृत ॥ 29 ॥

कलेस्तत्र प्रवेशो न कदाचित्मंचविषयिति ।

तावतिछतु तत्रैव यावत्सत्ययुगं पुनः ॥ 30 ॥

Śaunaka said: O Sūta! What are those Purāṇas and how many verses are contained in each? Speak all these in detail in this holy Kṣetra; we, the residents of Naimisāranya are all very eager to hear this. (Why we call ourselves as the residents of

Naimiśārayya, hear; you will realise then that no other place exists in this Kali age for hearing the holy discourses on religion):—When we were afraid of the Kali age, Brahmā gave us a Manomaya Cakra (wheel) and said to all of us:—Follow this wheel, go after it and the spot where the felly of the wheel will become thin (so as to break) and will not roll further, that country is the holy place; Kali will never be able to enter there; you all better remain there until the Satya age comes back. Thus, according to the saying of Brahmās we have got orders to stay here.

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य गृहीत्वा तक्रधानकम् ।

चालविश्रिंतसूर्णं सर्वेडगतिद्वृक्षया ॥ 3 1 1 ॥

Oh, hearing the words of Brahmā, we went out quickly keeping the wheel go on, our object being to determine which place is best and holiest.

प्रेलाया चालयंघकं नेपि: शीणोंद्र पश्वतः ।

तेनैदं नैमियं प्रोक्ते क्षेत्रं परपयावनम् ॥ ३२ ॥

When we came here, the belly of the wheel become thin and shorn before my eyes; hence, this Kṣetra is called Naimiṣa; it is the most sanctifying place.

कलियुवेगो नैवात्र तस्मात्स्थानं कृते मया ।

युनिधि: सिद्धसंधैधु कलिषितीर्मेहात्यिधि: ॥ 33 ॥

Kali cannot enter here; hence the Mahātmas, Munis and Siddhas, terrified by the Kali age, have followed me and resorted to this place.

पशुहीना: कृता यज्ञा: पुरोडासाधिधि: किल ।

कालातिवाहनं कार्य वाललत्ययुगानाम : ॥ 34 ॥

We have performed yajñas with Purodāśa (clarified butter as is offered in oblation to fire), here no animals are sacrificed; now we have no other important work to do except to pass our time here until the arrival of Satyayuga.

भाययोगेन संप्रान: सुत तं चारा सर्वथा ।

कथयाठ पुराणे हि पावनं बढ़ासंगतम् ॥ ३ 5 ॥

O Sūta! we are extremely fortunate in all respects that you have come here; purify us today by

narrating to us the names of the Purāṇas equivalent to the Vedas.

सूत शुषूषवः सर्वे चत्का त्वं मतिमानय ।

निष्योगारा वयं नृनमेकरिनासत्येव च ॥ ३६ ॥

O Sūta! you are also a learned orator; we, too, are ardent listeners, with no other works to bother our heads; narrate to us today the auspicious holy Bhāgavata Purāna.

त्वं सूत भव दीर्घसुस्तापजयविवर्षतः ।

कथंवाया पुराणं हि पुरयं भागवतं शिवम् ॥ 37 ॥

O Sūta! Long live you; and no ailings, internal, external, or from the Devas torment you (this is our blessing to you).

यत्र धर्मार्थकमानां वर्णनं विधिपूर्वकम् ।

विद्यां प्राय्य तथा मोक्षः कवितो मुनिना किल ॥ 38 ॥

द्वीपायने मुनिना कवितं यच्च पावनम् ।

न तृयामो वयं सूत कवां श्रुवा मनोरामम् ॥ 39 ॥

सकलनुणणणानामेकमारं पवित्र-

मविलभुवन्यमानुनीटववाद्विविधितम् ।

निविलमलमाणानां नारणकृतकामकर्दं

प्रकटय भगवता नामयुक्ते पुराणम् ॥ 40 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे प्रवभवकर्ये

द्वितीयो5थायः 11/21

We have heard that in the most santifying Purāṇa, narrated by Maharsi Dvaipāyana, all about Dharma (religion), Artha (wealth) and Kāma (desires) are duly described as well the acquiring of Tattvajñāna and liberation are also spoken of. O Sūta! our desires are not satisfied the more we hear of those beautiful holy words. Now describe to us the highly pure Śrimad Devī Bhāgavatam where all the Lilās (the dramatic acts) of the Mother of the three worlds, purifying the sins, adorned with all the qualifications are described as yielding all the desires like the Kalpa Vṛkṣa (the celestial tree yielding all desires).

Thus ends the Second Chapter of the First Book on the description of the Purāṇa (the text) in Mahā Purāṇa Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahraṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book 1 Chapter III

CHAPTER III

On praising the Purāṇas and on each Vyāsa of Every Dvāpara Yuga

सूत उवाच

शृणवंतु संप्रवक्ष्यामि पुराणानि मुनीश्रा: ।

यथाश्रुतानि तत्वेन व्यासात्सल्यवतीसुगत् ॥ १ ॥

Suta said: O best of the Munis! I am now telling you the names of the Purāṇas, etc., exactly as I have heard from Veda Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati; listen.

मद्यं मद्यं चैव द्वजयं वचतुष्यम् ।

अनामिलिगतुक्स्वानि पुराणाति पृथवस्थूथम् ॥ 2 ॥

The Purāna beginning with “ma” are two in number; those beginning with “bha” are two; those beginning with “bra” are three; those beginning with “va” are four; those beginning respectively with “a” “nā”, “pa”, “ling”, “ga”, “kū” and “ska” are one each and (“ma” means Matsya Purāna, Mārkandeya Purāna; bha” signifies Bhavisya, Bhāgavat Purānas; “bra” signifies Brahma, Brahmāndā and Brahmavaivarta Purānas; “va” signifies Vāman, Vāyu, Viṣṇu and Varāha Purānas; “a” signifies Agni Purāna; “na” signifies Nārada Purāna; “pa” signifies Padma Purāna; “liṅg” signifies liṅga Purānam; “ga” signifies Garuda Purānam; “kā” signifies Kūrma Purāna and “ska” signifies Skanda Purānam. These are the eighteen Purānas.

चतुर्दैशसहं च मत्यमाठं प्रकीर्तिन् ।

तथा ग्रहसहं तु मार्केचेयं महाद्वान् ॥ ३ ॥

चतुर्दैश सहस्राणि तथा पंचशतानि च ।

भविष्य परिसंख्यातं मुनिभिसत्चदर्शिधि: ॥ 4 ॥

O Śaunaka! In the Matsya Purāṇa there are fourteen thousand ślokas; in the wonderfully varied Mārkāndeya Purāṇam there are nine thousand ślokas. In the Bhavisya Purāṇa fourteen thousand and five hundred ślokas are counted by the Munis, the seers of truth.

अष्टादशसहं वै पुर्णं भागवतं किल ।

तथा चावुतसंख्याकं पुराणं ब्रह्मसंक्रम ॥ 5 ॥

In the holy Bhāgavata there are eighteen thousand ślokas; in the Brahma Purāṇa there are Ayuta (ten thousand) Ślokas!

ब्राद्रौल सहस्वाणि ब्रह्मांडं च राजपीधकम् ।

तथाठादशसाहतं ब्रह्मवैतमेव च ॥ 6 ॥

In the Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa there are twelve thousand one hundred Ślokas; in the Brahma Vaivarta Purānam there are eighteen thousand Ślokas.

अयुतं वामनाखं च वायवयं घटुगतिन च ।

चतुर्वैशतिसंखानतः सह्वाशिन तु शौनक ॥ ७ ॥

जयोविशोनिसाहंतं वैणयं परमाद्यसूनम् ।

चतुर्विंशतिसाहंतं वाराहं परमाढूनम् ॥ ८ ॥

घोडणैस सह्वाशिन पुराणे चारिनसिंत्रितम् ।

पंचविंशतिसाहंतं नारंद परमं मतनम् ॥ ९ ॥

पडुपत्रशात्साहं पशावाखं विवृतं मतम् ।

एकादारमसूहाशिणचरिनगाखंचातिविस्तनम्।० ॥

एकोनविंशत्साहं गारूई हरिभावितम् ॥

सपदासुसहचं च पुराणं कुमंभावितम् ॥ १ १ १ ॥

एकाशीतिसहस्वाणि स्कन्दाख्ये परमातुम् ।

पुराणाख्या च संख्या च वित्तरेण गयतनया: ॥ १ २ ॥

In the Vāman Purāṇa there are Ajuta (ten thousand) Ślokas; in the Vāyu Purāṇaam there are twenty-four thousand and six hundred Ślokas; in the greatly wonderful Viṣṇu Purāṇa there are twenty-three thousand Ślokas; in the Agni Purāṇaam there are sixteen thousand Ślokas; in the Bhrat Nārada Purāṇaam, there are twenty-five thousand Ślokas, in the big Padma Purāṇa there are fifty-five thousand Ślokas; in the voluminous Liṅga Purāṇa eleven thousand Ślokas exist; in the Garuda Purāṇaam spoken by Hari nineteen thousand Ślokas exist; in the Kūrma Purāṇa, seventeen thousand Ślokas exist and in the greatly wonderful Skanda Purāṇa there are eighty-one thousand ślokas, O sinless Rṣis! Thus I have described to you the names of all the Purāṇas and the number of verses

contained in them. Now hear about the Upa Purānas.

तवैवोपुराणानि शृणवंतु ऋषिस्तमाः ।

सन्तकुमारं प्रवमं नारसिंहं ततः परम् ॥ 13 ॥

नार्तीयं शिवं चैव दीवासममनुत्तमम् ।

काविष्मतंच चैव तथा चौशनसं स्मृत्तम् ॥ 14 ॥

वाक्ण कालिकाख्य च संयं नेटिकृतं शुभम् ।

सौरं पाराश्रापोक्नाथित्यं चातिविस्तम् ॥ 15 ॥

माहेश्वं भागवतं वासिषं च सविस्तमम् ।

एतान्यपुर्णणान कंक्षितानि महात्मिथः ॥ 16 ॥

The first is the Upapurāna narrated by Sanat Kumarā; next comes Nārasinīha Purāna; then Nāradīya Purāna, Śiva Purāna, Purāna narrated by Durvāsā, Kāpila Purāna, Mānava Purāna, Auśanasa Purāna, Varuna Purāna, Kālikā Purāna, Sāmba Purāna, Nāndikeśvara Purāna, Saura Purāna, Purāna spoken by Parāśara, Āditya Purāna, Māheśvara Purāna, Bhāgavata and Vāsiṣṭha Purāna. These Upa Purānas are described by the Mahātmās.

अष्टाद्य पुराणानि कृत्वा सत्यवतीसुतः ।

भारताख्यानमतुलं चके ततुष्वहितम् ॥ 17 ॥

After compiling the eightcen Purānas, Veda Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati composed Mahābhārata, that has no rival, out of these Purānas.

मन्तनीयु सर्वेषु द्वारे द्वारे युगे ।

प्रातु:करोति धर्मार्थी पुराणानि यवार्थिति ॥ 18 ॥

At every Manvantara, in each Dvāpara Yuga, Veda Vyāsa expounds the Purānas duly to preserve the religion.

द्वारे द्वारे विद्यायिसरणे सर्वदा ।

वेदमेकं स बहुधा कुकते हिताकायया ॥ 19 ॥

Veda Vyāsa is no other person than Viṣnu Hīmself; He, in the form of Veda Vyāsa, divides the (one) Veda into four parts, in every Dvāpara Yuga, for the good of the world.

अत्यापुशोरन्यबुद्धीश विग्राज्ञाला कलावय ।

पुराणसिंहितं पुण्यां कृतेत्रसी युगे युगे ॥ 20 ॥

The Brāhmanas of the Kali age are short lived

and their intellect (buddhi) is not sharp; they cannot realise the meaning after studying the Vedas); knowing this in every Dvāpara Yuga Bhagavān expounds the holy Purāna Sanhitās.

कौगुग्रहिज्ञवंभून्ता न वेदशवय मन्ता ।

तेभाये दिताथाव पुराणानि कृतानि च ॥ 21 ॥

The more so because women, Sūdras, and the lower Dvijas are not entitled to hear the Vedas; for their good, the Purānas have been composed.

मवन्तरे सदमोऋ उगुधे वैव्यवताधिघ ।

अर्धाविंगतिम प्राते द्वापरे मुनिसस्तभः ॥ 22 ॥

व्यास: सव्यवतीसूनुर्गमे धर्मवितभः ।

एकोनिशनसांगपते झीलियांसी पंधिष्यति ॥ 23 ॥

The present auspicious Manvantara is Vaivasvata; it is the seventh in due order; and the son of Satyavati, the best of the knowers of Dharma, is the Veda Vyāsa of the 28th Dvāpara Yuga of this seventh Manvantara. He is my Guru; in the next Dvāpara Yuga Aśvatthāmā, the son of Dronā will be the Veda Vyāsa.

अत्तितासु ताव यायासा: सप्तविंगतिरिव च ।

पुराणसंहितास्तेस्तु कथितास्तु युग युगे ॥ 24 ॥

Twenty-seven Veda Vyāsas had expired and they duly compiled each their own Purāna Saṃhitās in their own Dvāpara Yugas.

སྐྱོབ་ཆུ:

སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད། 1

वक्तारसु पुराणानां झालेरे झाले युगे ॥ 25 ॥

The Rṣis said: “O highly fortunate Sūta! kindly describe to us the names of the previous Veda Vyāsas, the reciters of the Purāṇas in the Dvāpara Yugas.

सूत जवाच

झापे प्रथमे व्यस्ता: स्वयं वेदा: स्वरंभुवा ।

प्रजापतिद्वितीये तु झापे व्यासकार्यकृत् ॥ 26 ॥

तृतीये चोशना व्यासश्रुतुर्थे तु बृह्मस्ति: ।

पंचो समिता व्यासः घडे मृत्युस्तथापे ॥ 27 ॥

मघवा सतमे प्राप्ते वसिष्ठस्वष्टभे स्मुतः ।

सारस्वतस्तु नवमे विधामा द्रगभे तथा ॥ 28 ॥

Book 1 Chapter III

Sūta said: In the first Dvāpara, Brahmā Himself divided the Vedas; in the second Dvāpara, the first Prajāpati Vyāsa did the same; so Šukra, in the third, Brhaṣpati, in the fourth, Sūrya in the fifth; Yama, in the sixth; Indra, in the seventh; Vasiṣtha, in the eighth; Śarasvata Rṣi in the ninth; Tridhāṃā, in the tenth.

एकादोर्शे 8 त्रिभुःो भरुताजस्ततः परम् ।

त्रयोदरु चोतिश्रो धर्मश्रापि चतुद्रें || 29 ॥

प्रत्यास्फीर: पंचद्वरो घोडेग तु घनख्यः ।

घेपातिधि: सप्तद्वे उत्री ह्राद्यतो तथा ॥ 30 ॥

अत्रिकोनविष्ठे5श गौतमस्तु ततः परम् ।

उतमढ़ेक्रविंशे5 ह्वर्तमा परिकर्पिततिः ॥ 31 ॥

Trivrṣa, in the eleventh; Bharadvāja, in the twelfth; Antarikṣa, in the thirteenth; Dharma, in the fourteenth; Eyaruni in the fifteenth; Dhananājaya, in the sixteenth; Medhātithi in the seventeenth; Vrāti, in the eighteenth; Atri, in the nineteenth; Gautama in the twentieth; Uttama, whose soul was fixed on Hari, in the twenty-first.

देनो वाजश्रवश्रद्धि सेमोमुण्यायनत्या ।

दूर्णविद्रुपता व्यासो भारीवस्तु ततः परम् ॥ 32 ॥

ततः शक्तिज्ञतुकर्णवैः कृष्णबैषायनस्ततः।

अधारिशितसंख्येवं कथिता या मय शुता ॥ 33 ॥

Vājaśrava Vena, in the twenty second; his family descendant Soma in the twenty-third and Trpabindu, in the twenty-fourth; Bhārgava, in the twenty-fifth; Sākti in the twenty-sixth; Jātukarnya in the twenty-seventh and Krṣna Dvapiāyana became the twenty-eighth Veda Vyāsa in the Dvāpara Yugas.

कृष्णद्वीपावनीतेचीके पूर्णं च मया श्रुतम् ।

शीम्द्रागवर्त पुण्यं सर्वेदुःखीधनारणम् ॥ 34 ॥

Thus I have spoken of the 28 Veda Vyāsas, as I heard. I have heard the holy Śrimad Bhāgavat from the mouth of Kṛṣṇa Dvaippāyana.

कामदं मोक्षंदं चैव वेदाध्यपरिक्षहितम् ।

सर्वानमरसायां मुभुबुर्णा सदा प्रियम् ॥ 35 ॥

This removes all troubles, yields all desires, and gives Mokṣa and is full of the meanings of

the Vedas. This treatise contains the essence of all the Śāstras and is dear always to the Murmuksus (those who want Mokṣa or liberation).

व्यासेन कृत्वार्तिरुर्धे पुर्णणे

गुकाय पुत्राय महात्मने यत ।

वैराययुक्ताय च पाठितं वै

विज्ञाय चैवारिणसंचनाय ॥ 36 ॥

श्रुतं मया तत तथा गृहीतं

यथार्थविद्वासामुपुतानीग्रतः ।

पुराणगृहां सकलं समेतं

गृगेः प्रसादात्करणानिधेश्ध ॥ 37 ॥

सूतेन पृष्टः सकलं जगाद

द्वैपायनस्तत्र पुणाणुहाम ।

अयोनिजेनादुतल्पद्धिदान वै

श्रुतं मता तत्र महाप्राघवम् ॥ 38 ॥

शीमद्वागवतामराधिपललावादाहरः सतमाः।

संसाराणवद्विगाहासिलनं संहर्ताकामः शुकः ।

नानाखानसालयं श्रुतिपुटैः प्रेणान्डशुणोद्धूतं ।

तच्छूत्वा न विमुछते कलिभयादेवायिधः कः क्षितौ

|| 39 ||

पाणीयानपि वेदधर्मरितृतः स्वाचारहीनाणशो,

व्याजेनापि शृणोति यः परिमंद्धी श्रीमनुर्णणोतमम् ।

भुक्ल्वा भोगकलापमय तिषुले देहावसानेउपलतं

योगिप्रायमवानुपयाद्वावतीनामांकितं सुंदरम् ॥ 40 ॥

या निर्गुंगा हरितरातिभिर्यलनध्या

विद्या सतां प्रियतमानोयं समाधिगाया ।

सा तस्य चितकुहरे प्रक्रतौरित भावं

यः संगुणोति सतते तु सतीपुर्णणम् ॥ 41 ॥

संग्राप्य मानुष्यचं सकलाङ्गयुक्तं

पोते भवाणर्वजलोत्तणाय कामम् ।

संग्राप्य वाचकमहां न शुणोति मुकः सो

वक्षितो:२ विधित्य सुखदं पुराणम् ॥ 42 ॥

यः प्रायः कर्णवृगतं पदुभानुपवे

रागी शुणोति सन्तं च परपावदान् ।

सर्वार्थैंदं रसनिधि विमलं पुराणं

नष्टः कृतो न शुणुते भुवि मंदवुद्धिः ॥ 4 3 ॥

इति शीन्दौबीभागतं महापुराणे प्रश्मकंधे तृतीयोडधावः ॥ 3 1 1

O best Munis! Thus, compiling the Purāṇas Veda Vyāsa thought this Purāṇa to be the best; so (without teaching it to other persons) he settled that his own son, the high-souled Šuka Deva, born of

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

the dry woods used for kindling fire (excited by attrition), having no passion for the worldly things, would be the fit student to be taught this Purāna and therefore taught him; at that time I was a fellow student along with Šuka Deva and I heard every

thing from the mouth of Vyāsa Deva and realised the secret meanings thereof. This has happened through the grace of the merciful Guru Veda Vyāsa.

Here ends the Third Chapter of Śrimaddevībhāgavatam on praising the Purānas and on each Vyāsa of every Dvāpara Yuga.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER IV

On the Excellency of the Devi

སྐབས་ཆུང་

सीय व्यासस्य भार्यायां कस्यां जातः सुतः शुकः ।

कर्थ वा कीद्वगो येन पतिरेतं सुसंहिति ॥ १ ॥

The Rsis said: O Šaunaka! How was Šuka Deva born? Who studied these Purāna Sarhītās; by which wife of Vyāsa Deva? and How?

अयोनिजस्यवा प्रोकतस्तवा चारिज्ञ: शुकः ।

संदेहोरस्ति मात्रानत कवयाए महामते ॥ २ ॥

O highly Intelligent one! You have just spoken that Šuka Deva was not born from womb, in the natural way; he was born of the dry pieces of wood for Homa sacrifice.

गर्भयोगी श्रुत: पूर्व शुको नाम महाताप ।

कयं च पहितं तेन पुराणं बहुवित्तम् ॥ 3 ॥

But we heard before that the great ascetic was Yogi even in his mother's womb, so a great doubt comes to our minds. You better remove that today; how he studied also these Purāṇas, as vast in their nature; say this.

सूत उवाच

पुरा सरस्वतीरीय व्यास: सचवतीसुतः ।

आये कलिकों तु दृष्ट्या विस्मयमानाः ॥ 4 ॥

Sūta said: In long— past days Satyavati's son Veda Vyāsa, while in his own hermitage on the banks of the river Sarasvatī, was greatly surprised to see a pair of Cūtakas (sparrows).

जात्मात्र शिष्ट्रा नीडे मुक्तण्डे मनोह्म ।

तामायं शुभसर्वाई पिच्छांकुरविज्ञान ॥ 5 ॥

He saw the pair putting frequently, the food into the beak of their young one, just born of the egg, of beautiful body, red mouth, and greasy body.

तो तु भव्यार्थीमतंरं तती शयपरायणी ।

शिगोश्रशुटे भव्यं शिपर्नो च पुन: पुन: ॥ 6 ॥

They did not care at all for their own hunger and toil; all they were caring for is to nurture their young one.

अंगेनांगानि बालस्य घर्षेती मुदावित्यो ।

चुंबंती च मुखं प्रेणा कलविको शिकारीः शुभम् ॥ 7 ॥

He said also that the pair are rubbing their bodies over the young one's body and kiss lovingly its mouth feeling the highest pleasure.

वीक्ष्य प्रेमान्दुतं तत वाले चटकयोलता ।

व्यासहिंतातूनः कामं मनसा समवित्यन्ति ॥ 8 ॥

Seeing this wonderful affection of the two sparrows towards their young, Veda Vyāsa became very anxious and thought over the following in his mind.

तिराभापि वरोम पुत्रे समभिलक्षते ।

किं चित्रं यमनुवाणां सेवाकलमभीयात्मा ॥ 9 ॥

Oh! What wonder is there, when the birds have so much filial affection towards their child, that men, who want services from their sons, would show their affection towards their sons!

किमेती चटको भाय्य विवाहं सुखधान् ।

वित्रय सुवित्री स्यातां द्रुह्वा वधा मुखं शुभम् । १० ॥

अथवा वाधेक प्राने परिवर्ग कार्यिति ।

पुत्र: परमधिनिषुः पुणवार्थ कलविकेयो: ॥ १ १ ॥

This pair of sparrows will not perform the happy marriage of their young one and will not see the face of their son's wife; nor when they will grow old, that their child would become very religious and serve them to attain great merits in Heaven.

Book 1 Chapter IV

अर्जीयताउधवा जूवं पितरी तर्पियन्ति ।

अथवा प्रेतकायाणी कार्यिति यथाविधि ॥ 12 ॥

Nor do they expect that their child would earn money and satisfy them; nor the child would perform Śrāddha when they would be in the next world; nothing of all these.

अथवा किं गयाङ्राद्र गत्वा संवितार्थिति ।

नीतोलसगं च विधिव्युक्रविधिति वालकः ॥ 13 ॥

संसारोत्र समास्यालां सुव्रानामुन्तां सुखम् ।

पुरगायधिरियों लालनं न विशेषतः ॥ 14 ॥

Nor will the child perform the Śrāddha ceremony at Gayā; nor will the child offer the oblation of a blue bull on the day of offering the sacrifice to its ancestor (the bull is then let loose and held sacred); yet the pair of sparrows have so much affection towards their yung one! Oh! in this world to touch the body of the son, especially to nurture the sons, is the highest happiness in life.

अपूत्रस्य गतिन्तस्ति स्यर्गों नैव च नैव च ।

पुराद्व-त्यतराशित परलोकस्य साधनम् ॥ 15 ॥

"There is no prospect in the birth of the sonless; never, never will Heaven be his. Without son, there is none other who can be of help in the next world.

म्वात्रिभिश्र पुनिनिधार्मभोगस्लेषु पाणितम् ।

पुरावल्यर्गमाणोति नापुजसु कंधच्न ॥ १ ६ ॥

Thus in the Dharma Śāstras, Manu and other Munis declare that the man who has sons goes to Heaven and the sonless one can never go to Heaven.

दूरयतेत्र समक्षं ततानुभानेन साधयते ।

पुरवान्युच्छे पाणाद्वादावक्यं च शाशून् ॥ 17 ॥

The man possessing a son is entitled to the Heavenly pleasures can be vividly seen, rather than imagined. The man with son is freed from sins; this is the word of the Vedas.

आतुरो मृत्युकालेपि भूमिश्यागतो नरः ।

करीति मनसा चिंतां दुरिक्ष: पुर्वबित्रः ॥ 18 ॥

The sonless man becomes very much distressed even at the time of death and while lying on bed that is ground at that time, mournfully thinks:

धर्न मे विपुलं गेहे प्याजीण विविधानि ।

माँद्रं सुवर्धे चैतकोंस्य स्यामी भविष्यति ॥ 19 ॥

'This all my vast wealth, various things, this my beautiful house, who will enjoy all these'?

मृत्युकाले मनसत्य वुःखेन भ्रमते यतः ।

अतोउस्य दुर्गतिन्नं भ्रातिचितस्य सर्वथा ॥ 20 ॥

एवं बहुविधां चिन्तां कृत्वा सत्यवतीमुतः ।

निःश्य बहुधा चोणं विमानः सवम्पवृह ॥ 21 ॥

"When the sonless man is thus perplexed in his mind at the time of his death and becomes restless, then it is sure that his future career is full of misfortunes; unless one's mind is calm and serene at the time of death, he can never attain a good goal.

विषार्वं मनसात्वर्थ कृत्व मनसि निश्रयम् ।

जगाम च तपस्तनुं मेभवर्तसित्रधी ॥ 22 ॥

Thus, thinking variously, Satyavati's son Veda Vyāsa sighed heavily and became unmindful.

मनसा चिन्तयामास के देवं समुपास्महे ।

वरप्रदानिजपुं वार्त्छतार्धेदं तथा ॥ 23 ॥

He thought of various plans and at last, coming to a definite conclusion, went to the Sumeru mountain to perform tapasyā. On reaching there, he thought which Deva he will worship!

विष्णुं रई सुरेन्द्र वा बढ़ाणं वा दिवाकरम् ।

गयोगें कार्तिकेंचं च पाबकं वाक्णं तथा ॥ 24 ॥

Visnu, Śiva, Indra, Brahmā, Sūrya, Gaṇeśa, Kārtikeya, Agni, or Varuna? 'Who will grant him boon quickly and thus satisfy his desires.

एवं चित्तयतस्तस्य नारदो मुनिसतमः ।

यज्छया सामयातो वीणाणिण: समाहितः ॥ 25 ॥

While thus cogitating in his mind, came there the Muni Nārada, of one mind with lute in hand, accidentally in his course of travels.

नं दूर्वा परमप्रीति व्यासः सत्यवतीसुतः ।

कृत्वाउ्यमासनं त्वाप प्रपछ्छ कुगलं मुनिम् ॥ 26 ॥

श्रूतायक्ष कुगलप्रधर्ने पपछ्छ मुनिसतमः ।

विंतानुर्गोसि क्रमाच्चं द्वैपायन बदस्य मे ॥ 27 ॥

Seeing Nārada, the Satyavati's son Veda Vyāsa gave him a hearty welcome, with great gladness,

offering his Arghya and  \( \overline{A}san \)  (seat) and asked about his welfare. Hearing this question of welfare, then  \( \overline{Narada} \)  Muni spoke: “O Dvaipāyana! Why do you look so care worn! First speak this out to me”.

व्यास उवाच

अपूत्रस्य गतिनोंसित न सुखं मानसे ततः ।

तदर्थं दुःखितश्राईं चिंतयामि पुनः पुनः ॥ 2 8 ॥

Veda Vyāsa said: The sonless man has no goal; therefore there is no happiness in my mind; I am always anxious to get a son and therefore, I am very sorry.

तपसा तोषायमध्य ढ के देवं वांतित्थर्वम् ।

इति सितातुरो3मध्य त्वामहं शरणं गत: ॥ 29 ॥

Today my mind is sorely troubled with one idea, which Deva I may satisfy by my tapasyā, who will grant me my desires; now I take your refuge.

सर्वेज्ञीस महर्षे त्वं कथायाणु कृपानिधे ।

के देवे शरणं याथि यो मे पुत्र प्रदास्यति ॥ 30 ॥

O merciful Maharsī! You are omniscient; say this quickly; which Deva I will take for my refuge, who will grant me a son.

सूत उवाच

इति व्यासेन पृष्टस्तु नारदो वेवलिन्युति: ।

उवाच परया प्रीत्या कृष्ण प्रति महानानः ॥ 31 ॥

Sūta said: Thus questioned by Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Veda Vyāsa, the high souled Nārada Muni, well versed in the Vedas, became very glad and spoke thus:

नात्र उवाच

पाराशयं महाभाग यचं पृष्ठसि मामिह ।

तेनावर्थ पुगा पृष्टः पिजा मे मधुसूदनः ॥ 32 ॥

O highly fortunate Parāśara's son. The question that you have asked me today was formerly asked by my father to Nārāyaṇa.

ध्यानचंच च हरिं दृष्टवा पिता मे विस्मयं गतः ।

पर्येष्छत देवेशं शीनार्थ जगतः पतिम् ॥ 33 ॥

कोस्तुभोद्धासितं दिव्यं शंखचकमादाधरम् ।

पीतायरं चतुर्वाई श्रीवत्सांकितवक्षस्मम् ॥ 34 ॥

कारणं सर्वतैकानां देवेदेवं जगढुभम् ।

वासुदेवं जगत्राशं तत्यमानं महत्नः ॥ 35 ॥

Nārāyana Vāsudeva, the Deva of the Devas, the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of the Universe, the husband of Lakṣmī, the four-armed, wearing yellow garment, holding conchshell, discus, club and with the mark Śrivatsa (a mark or curl of hair on the heart of Viṣṇu) adorning His breast and decorated with Kaustubham, the Divinity Himself, became merged in great Yoga.

ब्रहोवाच

देवदेव जगत्राध भृतःधयधवतूभो ।

तस्थारसि कस्मार्चं किं ध्यासि जनंदन ॥ 36 ॥

विसयोउं प्रं मापत्थर्व तं स्वडजगतां प्रभुः ।

ध्यानयुक्तोसि देवेश किंछ चित्रमतः परम् ॥ 37 ॥

At this my Father became greatly surprised and said: 'O Janārdana! Thou art the Deva of the Devas; the Lord of the Present, the Past and the Future, the Lord of this Universe; why art thou meditating in Yoga? And what is it that Thou art meditating? O best of the Devas! Thou art the Lord of the entire Universe and yet Thou art now merged in deep meditation. At this I am greatly surprised (my surprise is not without foundation; Thou canst Thyself see). What more wonderful than this can happen?'

त्वप्राधिकमलाज्ञतः कर्तीडमप्रिललय ह ।

त्वतः को:प्रधिको:प्रलयत तं देवें बूहि मापते ॥ 38 ॥

O Lord of Rama! I am sprung from the lotus from thy navel and have become the Lord of this whole universe; who is there in this universe that is superior to Thee; kindly say this to me.

जात्यामहं जगत्राश त्यामादि: सर्वकारमण।

कर्ता पालयिता हर्ता सभधः सर्वकार्यकृत् ॥ 39 ॥

O Lord of the world! Thou art the Origin of all, the Cause of all causes, the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer and the capable Doer of all actions.

इच्छया ते महाराज सुजाम्यहमिंदं जगत् ।

हर: संहरते काले सोप्रि ते चवने सदा ॥ 40 ॥

O Mahārāja! at Thy will, I create this whole

Book 1 Chapter IV

universe and Rudra destroys in due time this world. He is always under Thy command.

सूर्यं घमिति चाकाशे वायुवाँति शुभाशुभ: ।

अन्निस्तपति पर्जन्यो वर्षतीश ल्वाड़गया ॥ 4 1 ॥

O Lord! By Thy command the Sun roams in the sky; the wind blows in various auspicious or inauspicious ways and the fire is giving heat and the cloud showers rain. I don't see in the three Lokas any one superior to Thee.

तं तु ध्यायसि के देवे संग्रोधोयं महान्मा ।

तन्तः परं न पश्यामि देखे वे भुवनत्रये ॥ 4 2 ॥

कृपा कृत्वा वद्वसाड़ा भन्नोश्म तत सूत्रात ।

महता नैव गोष्ये हिं प्रापः किःत्रिविति सूति: ॥ 4 3 ॥

Then whom art Thou .meditating while being questioned by his very intelligent son Śuka Deva! not born in the usual way from womb, Dvaipāyana expounded all the secret excellent meanings of the Purāna and, thereby, I also came to know them also. O saintly persons! Thus Śuka Deva, sincerely earnest to cross this endless bottomless ocean of Sarīsāra, tasted of the wonderful fruits of the Veda, the Kalpa tree, this Śrīnad Bhāgavata with its numerous stories and anecdotes with great eagerness and intense pleasure. Oh! Who is there in this world that is not freed from this terror of Kali, after he has heard this Bhāgavata. Even if the greatest sinner, void of the right ways of living and Ācāra as ordained in the Vedas, hears on a pretence this excellent Devi Bhāgavaa, the chief of the Purāṇas, he enjoys all the great enjoyments of this world and in the end attains the eternal place occupied by Yogis. She who is rare, in Her Nirguna aspect, to even Hari and Hara, who is very dear as Tattva Vidyā to the Jñānins, whose real nature can be realised only in Samādhi, She resides always in the cavity of the heart of the hearers of the Bhāgavata Purāṇa. He who getting the all-qualified human birth and getting the reciter of this Purāṇa, the boat to cross, as it were, this world, does not hear this blissful Purāṇa, he is certainly deprived

by the Creator. How is it! That the wayward dull-headed persons, getting the vicious ears, can hear always the faults and calumnies of others, that are entirely useless, and can not hear this pure Purāṇa that contains the four Vargas: Dharma, Artha, Kāma, and Mokṣa?

Returning to Nārada's dialogue with Dunipaar Sūta continued: This is my main point of doubt. O One of good vows! I am thy devotee; be merciful to me and speak this to me. There is almost nothing that is secret to Mahāpurūyas; this is a well-known fact, said.

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य हरित्राह प्रजापतिम् ।

ग्रणयुधेकमाना बह्यास्वां बलीमि मनोगानम् ॥ 44 ॥

Recolying to Brahmā, Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa spoke: “O Brāhman! I now speak out my mind to you; listen carefully.

यद्यि त्वा शिरां मां च श्वस्तिषुर्धोत्काराणम् ।

ते जानंति जना: सर्वे सदेवासुभामनुपा: ॥ 4 5 ॥

स्पष्टा त्व पालकश्राईहःश्र: संहाराकारः ।

कृता: शक्येति संतकैः क्रियते वेदपारगैः ॥ 46 ॥

Though the Devas, Dānavas and men and all the lokas know that You are the Creator, I am the Preserver and Rudra is the Destroyer, yet it is to be known that the saints, versed in the Vedas, have come to this conclusion by inference from the Vedas that the creation, preservation and destruction are performed by the creative force, preservative force and destructive force.

जगत्सुकनं शफिस्त्रविय तिष्ठत राजसी ।

साचिकी मयि रूद्र च तामसी परिकीर्तिता ॥ 47 ॥

तया विरहितस्तव न तत्कर्मकरणे प्रभु: ।

नाहं पातयित्थुं शक्तः संहर्तुं नासि शंकतः ॥ 48 ॥

The Räjasik creative force residing in you, the Sättvik preservative force residing in me, and the Tāmasik destructive force residing in Rudra are the all-in-all. When these Saktis become absent, you become inert and incapable to create, I to preserve and Rudra, to destroy.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

तद्धीना वयं संवै वतांभः सततं विभो ।

प्रत्यक्षे च चपोक्षे च वृद्धांतं श्युगु सुहत ॥ 49 ॥

ग्रेथे स्वविधि पर्यंके पतन्तो न संशय: ।

तद्धीनः सदोत्तिषे काले कालवर्ग गतः ॥ 50 ॥

O intelligent Suvrata! We all are always under that Force directly or indirectly; hear instances that you can see and infer. At the time of Pralaya, I lie down on the bed of Ananta, subservient to that Force; again I wake up in the time of creation duly under the influence of Time.

तस्थात्रासितं तद्धीनो5स्पर्वं सदा ।

कदाचित्सह लक्ष्या च विहर्तीय यथासुखम् ॥ 51 ॥

कदाचिषदानंः सादूं संगमं प्रक्रोधयहम् ।

दारणं देहदामं सर्वलोकाभयंकर्म ॥ 52 ॥

I am always subservient to that Mahā Śakti; (under Her command) I am engaged in Tapasyā for a long time; (By Her command) sometime I enjoy with Laksmī; some time I fight battles, terrible to all the Lokas, with the Dānavas, involving great bodily troubles.

प्रत्यक्षे तव धर्मे तस्मिचेकार्वीवे पुरा ।

पश्वबर्महस्राणि बाबुघुळ्द मया कृतम् ॥ 5 3 ॥

तौ कर्णमलजी दुष्टी दानवो मदगविली ।

देव देव्या: प्रसादेन निह्ती मधुकैकरी ॥ 5 4 ॥

O Knower of Dharma! It was before Your presence that I fought hand to hand for five thousand years, before Your sight on that one great ocean in long-past days with the two demons Madhu and Kaitabha, sprung form the wax of my ear, maddened with pride; and by the grace of the Devi, successfully killed the two Dānavas.

तदा तथा वान न क्रि जातं कारणं तु परायरम् ।

शक्तिकंच महाभाग किं पृष्ठसि पुनः पुनः ॥ 55 ॥

‘O highly fortunate one! you realised then the great Śakti, higher than the highest and the cause of all causes; then why are you asking again and again that question.

यदिष्ठ पुस्तो भूत्वा विचरायी महागघे ।

कच्छपः कोलसिंहशु वामनश्र युगे युगे ॥ 56 ॥

By the will of that Śakti, I have got this idea of man and roam on the great ocean; yuga after yuga,

I assume by Her will, the Tortoise, Boar, Man-Lion, and Dwarf incarnations.

न कस्यापि प्रियो लोके तिरयोग्योनु संचवः ।

नाभवं संच्छया वामवसाहाधिपु योगिनु ॥ 57 ॥

No one likes to take birth in the womb of inferior animals (especially birds). Do you think that I willingly take unpleasant births as in the womb of boars, tortoise, i.e., certainly not.

विद्यार लक्ष्या सह संविद्धारं

को याति मल्यापितु हीनयोगिनु ।

गर्धयां च मुक्चना गरुडासनस्थ:

कोरीय युद्ध विपुलं स्वतंत्रः ॥ 58 ॥

What independent man is there who abandons the pleasurable enjoyment with Laksmī and takes birth in inferior animals as fish, etc. or leaves his seat on the seat of Gaduda and becomes engaged in great war conflicts.

पुरा पुरस्पेज शिरो मदीयं

गतं धनुत्वमेखलान्त्वच चारि ।

त्वया तदा वार्जिशिरो गृहीत्या

संयोजितं शिल्यवरणं भूय: ॥ 59 ॥

O Svaayambhu! In ancient days you saw before your eyes that my head was cut off when the bowstring suddenly gave way; and then you, brought a horse's head and by that help, the divine artist Viśvakarmā, stuck that on to my headless body.

ह्याननेँर्भे परिकीर्तितश

प्रत्यक्ष्मेतनत लोककर्तै।

विडंदनेयं किल लोकमध्ये

कर्थ भवेदात्यपरो यदि स्यत् ॥ 60 ॥

O Brahma! Since then I am known amongst men by the name of “Hayagriva”. This is well-known to you. Now say, were I independent, would such ignominy have happened to me?

तस्मातई स्वतोज्ञासि शकल्यधीनीजासि सर्वथा ।

तामेव शक्ति सन्तं छायायाम च निरंतनम् ॥ 6 1 ॥

नात: परर्ते किंचिरज्ञानामि कमलोद्धव ।

Never. Therefore, I am not independent; I am in every way under that Sakti. O Lotus-born!

Book 1 Chapter V

I always meditate on that Šakti; and I do not know any other than this Šakti.

नारद उवाच

इल्युक्ते विष्णुना तेन पदायोनेस्तु सक्रियो ॥ 62 ॥

तेन चाध्यहमुक्तोप्रिम तदेव मुनिपुंगाव ।

तस्माच्चमपि कल्याण पुरुषाध्यापितहतेते ॥ 63 ॥

अर्शगर्भ द्वर्भोजे भज वैदीपादिबुजम् ।

सर्वे दास्यति सा देवी यद्योद्धं भवेत्ति ॥ 64 ॥

Narada said: Thus spoke Viṣnu to Brahmā. O muni Veda vyāsa! Brahmā spoke these to me. So you too, better mediate in the lotus feet of Bhagavatī calmly in the lotus of your heart for the

success of your idea. That Devi will give you all that you wish.

सूत उवाच

नारदैनैवमुक्तसु व्यास: सत्ववतीसुतः ।

देवीपादाङ्कनिष्णाततसपरे प्रवयी गिरी ॥ 65 ॥

इति शीमद्दैभागवते महापुराणे शयमकल्भं चतुवर्धीयायः ॥ 4 ॥ 11

Sūta said: At these words of Nārada, Satyavati's son Veda Vyāsa went out to the hills for tapasyā, trusting the lotus feet of the Devi as the all-in-all in this world."

Thus ends the Fourth Chapter of the First Book on the excellency of the Devi in the Mahapurāna Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.

Book 1 Chapter V

CHAPTER V

On the Narrative of Hayagriva

སྐྱོབ་ཆུང་

सुतास्माके मनः कामं मनः संशयसागरे ।

यथोकतं महाद्धार्थं जगाध्रिस्याककाम् ॥ १ ॥

The Rşis said: “O Sūta! Our minds are merged in the sea of doubt, hearing your this most wonderful saying, surprising to the whole world.

यन्मूद्रों माधवस्यापि गते देहात्युनः परम् ।

इयप्रीयलतं जातः सर्वकर्ता जनवर्दनः। 2 ॥

The head of Janārdana Mādhava, the Lord of all, was severed out of His body! And He was afterwards known as Hayagriva, the horse-faced! Oh! what more wonder can there be than this?

वेदो:प्रि सतीतं वं नित्यं देवा: सर्वैं यदाश्रयाः ।

आदिद्वेलो जगाश्रावः सर्वकारणकारणः ॥ 3 ॥

तत्यापि वदन्त छिड़ दिवशोगात्कथं तदा ।

तत्सर्व कंकथायुं त्वं विज्ञतरेण महामते ॥ ४ ॥

Whom the Vedas even praise, all the Devas rest on Whom, Who is the Cause of all causes, the Ādi Deva Jagannātha (the Lord of the universe), Oh! how is it that His head came to be severed! O, highly intelligent one! Describe all this in detail."

सूत जवाच

श्रुवंतु मुनवः सर्वे सावधाना: समंततः ।

चरितं देवेदेवस्य विद्याणो: परमन्तेजसः ॥ 5 ॥

कदाचिद्धारणं शुब्दं कृत्वा देवे: सनाततः ।

द्रशवर्षसहस्राणि परिश्रांतो जनदानं: ॥ 6 ॥

Sūta said: “O Munis! Hear all attentively the glorious deeds of the supremely energetic Viṣṇu, the Deva of the Devas. Once upon a time the eternal Deva Janārdana became tired after the terrible continuous battle for ten thousand years.

समे देेशे शुभे स्थाने केताल पचासनं विषुः ।

अवलंब्य धनुः सच्यं कंदवेगे धराशिवलम् ॥ ७ ॥

दर्चा भारं धनुक्रोत्या निद्राग्य सपातिनः ।

श्रांतत्वाहैदयोगारच जातसत्रातिनिर्दितः ॥ ८ ॥

तदा कालेन क्रिवता देवा: सर्वे सर्वास्वाः ।

बढ्रोणसहिताः सर्वे चजं कर्तुं समुद्धातः ॥ ९ ॥

After this the Lord Nārāyaṇa seated Himself on Padmāsana (a kind of posture) in some lonely place on a level plot of ground and placing his head on the front of his bow with the bow strung and placed erect on the ground fell fast asleep. Viṣṇu, the Lord of Ramā, was exceedingly tired and thus he fell soon into deep sleep. At this time, Indra and the

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

other Devas, with Brahmā and Maheṣā began a sacrifice.

गता: सर्वेअध वैकुंठ द्वषुं देवं जनादन् ।

देवाकार्यार्थसिद्धार्थ मवतानामिधा प्रभुम् ।। ० ।।

अष्टहा तु तदा तत्र ज्ञानुद्धा विनोलये ते ।

यत्रास्ते भगवाविच्यणुर्जमुस्तत्र तदा सुरा: ।। १। ।।

Then they, for the sake of success in Deva's work, went to the region of Vaikuntha to meet with the Deva Janārdana, the Lord of sacrifices. There, the Devas, not finding Viṣṇu, came to know by their Dhyāna (meditation) where Bhagvān Viṣṇu was staying and thither they went.

द्वसृगते तलेगानं योगानिद्राशं गतम् ।

विचेतनं विषुं विषुं त्रासांचक्रिे सुरा: ॥ 12 ॥

They saw that Lord Viṣṇu, the Deva of the Devas was lying unconscious, being under the arms of Yoganiḍrā (the yogic sleep).

स्वतेषुं सर्वदेवेषुं निद्रासुपते जानताते ।

चित्तामुप: सुरा: सर्वे ब्रह्मरूपगीरामा: ॥ 13 ॥

Therefore, they took their seats there. Seeing the Lord of the universe asleep, Brahmā, Rudra and the other Devas became anxious.

तानुवाच ततः शकः किं कत्थं सुरोत्तमाः ।

निद्रापनः कवं कार्यक्षित्यं सुरोत्तमाः ॥ 14 ॥

Indra then addressed the Devas: “O best of the Suras! Now what is to be done! How shall we awaken Bhagavān from His sleep? Now think of the means by which this can be effected.”

तनुषाच तता संभुर्नित्राम्भोजस्त दूर्णणम् ।

कार्य चैव प्रकर्तेयं व्रास्य सुरसत्तमः ॥ 15 ॥

Hearing Indra's words Śambhu said: "O good Devas! Now we must finish our sacrificial work. But if the sleep of Bhagavān be disturbed, He would get angry."

उत्पादिता तदा वधी ब्रह्माण परमेऊना ।

तथा धर्मायैत् तत ध्रवुर्षोर्ध धराशित्यम् ॥ १६ ॥

भक्षितोउे ततदानिजनं गायिष्यत सातसनम् ।

तदा निर्वायिन्तोउसी देवदेवो भविष्यति ॥ 17 ॥

Hearing Śaṅkara's words, Paramesṭhī Brahmā created Vamrī insects (a sort of white ants) so that

they might eat up the forepart of the bow that was lying on the ground causing the other end rise up and thus break His sleep.

देवकायरं तदा सर्वे भविष्यति न संशयः ।

स बर्षी संदिदेशाय देवदेवः सनातनः ॥ 18 ॥

Thus the Deva's purpose will, no doubt, be fulfilled. Thus settling his mind, the eternal Deva Brahmā ordered the white ants Vamris to cut the bow string.

तमुबाच तदा वर्षी देवेदेवस्य मापतेः ।

निद्राभंगः कबं कार्यों देवस्य जगतां गुरोः ॥ 19 ॥

Hearing this order of Brahmā, Vamrī spoke to Brahmā, thus: “O Brahman! How can I disturb the sleep of the Devadeva, Lord of Lakṣmī, the World Guru?

निद्राभंगः कवाधेटो दंपत्योः प्रीतिभेदनम् ।

शिशुभगतविपेदघ ब्रहहास्यामं स्युन्त् ॥ 20 ॥

To rouse one from one's deep sleep, to interrupt one in one's speech, to sever love between husband and wife, to separate a child from one's mother, all these are equivalent to Brahmahatya (murdering a Brāhmaṇa).

तत्कधे देवेदेवस्य क्रोगिम सुखनाशनम् ।

कि फल भक्षणादेव येन पापं करोम्यद् ॥ 21 ॥

सर्वे: स्वार्थवर्गो तोकाः कुन्ते पातकं किल ।

तस्मादं कतिथामि स्वार्थमेव प्रभक्षणम् ॥ 22 ॥

Therefore, O Deva! how can I interrupt the happiness of sleep of the Devadeva? And what benefit shall I derive by eating the bowstring, so that I may incur this vicious act? But a man can commit a sin if there be any interest of his; I am ready to eat this, if I get a personal interest.'

ब्रहीवाच

तव भागं कार्थ्यामो मखमध्ये यथा श्रुण ।

तेन त्वं कुक्र कार्यं नो विध्णु बोधय माधिरम् ॥ 23 ॥

Brahmā said: We will give you, too, share in this our Yajñā sacrifice) so hear me; do our work and rouse Viṣṇu from His sleep.

होमकर्मिग पार्थे च हविद्वान्तयिति ।

तते भागं विज्ञानीहि कुरु कार्यं त्वार्थिता ॥ 24 ॥

Book I Chapter V

During the time of performing Homa whatever ghee will fall outside the Homa-Kuṇḍa (the sacrificial pit) will fall to your share; so be quick and do this."

सूत उवाच

इत्युक्ता बह्वाणा वधी द्युभोउं त्वार्पिता ।

चखादा संस्थितं भूमी विमुक्ता ज्या तदासभवत् ॥ 25 ॥

Sūtā said: Thus ordered by Brahmā, the Vamri insect soon ate away the fore end of the bow that rested on the ground.

प्रत्यंचायां विमुक्तायां भूक्ता कोटिस्तथोत्तरा ।

गब्दः समभवद्योरसंलेन प्रस्ना: सुरास्ताद ॥ 26 ॥

ब्रह्मांडं कृष्णितं सर्वे वसुधा कंपिता तदा ।

समूत्राक्र सपुहितगल्सूक्र आजलंबलः ॥ 27 ॥

ववुवर्तातावा चोग्रा: पर्वताश्व चकपिंशे ।

उल्कापाता महोत्पाता बध्वुरुं:खर्गसिनः ॥ 28 ॥

Immediately the string gave way and the bow went up; the other end became free and a terrible sound took place. The Devas became afraid; the whole universe got agitated; the earth trembled. The sea became swollen; the aquatic animals became startled; violent wind blew; the mountains shook; ominous meteors fell.

दिशो योरताशासनसूर्वॉप्यन्तोतोपवत् ।

चिनामपु: सुरा: सर्वे कि भविष्यति तुदिंदि ॥ 29 ॥

The quarters assumed a terrific aspect; the Sun went down the horizon. In the time of distress the Devas became anxious what evil might come down. एवं चित्तयाते तेषां भूर्ग विष्णो: सकुंडलः ।

गत: समुकुटः क्वापि देवदेवस्य तापासे: ॥ 30 ॥

O ascetics! while the Devas were thus cogitating, the head with crown on it of the Devadeva Visnu vanished away; no body knew where it fell.

अंभकारे तदा योरे शाले बह्वाहरी तदा ।

शिरोहीनं शरीरं तु ददुशाले विलक्षणम् ॥ 31 ॥

When the awful darkness disappeared, Brahma and Mahadeva saw the disfigured body of Vishu with its head off.

दूद्वा कर्बं विष्णोले विश्विता: सुरसत्ता: ।

चितासागरमनाङ्ग रूकुः शोकाकर्शिताः ॥ 32 ॥

हा नाथ किं पूषो जातमत्यछूतममानुषम् ।

वैशसं सर्वैद्वानां देवैद्व सनातन ॥ 33 ॥

मायेवं कस्य देवस्य यया तेउश शिरो हतम् ।

अच्छेश्वलमेषोडीस अप्रदाहोसि सर्वदा ॥ 34 ॥

Seeing that headless figure of Viṣṇu they were greatly surprised; they were drowned in the ocean of cares and, overwhelmed with grief, began to weep aloud O Lord! O Master! O Devadeva! O Eternal one! what unforeseen extraordinary mishap occurred to us today! O Deva! Thou canst not be pierced nor cut asunder, nor capable of being burnt; how is it then that Thy head has been taken away! Is this the Māyā (magic) of some Deva? O all pervading one!

एवंनेत त्वयि विषो मरिष्यन्ति च देवता: ।

कौदुगस्त्वयि नः स्नेहः स्यार्थेनैव रुदामहे ॥ 35 ॥

नायं विद्य: कृतो दैत्यैपं ब्रह्मैं च ग्रासै: ।

देवैव कृत: कस्य दूषणं च रयापते ॥ 36 ॥

The Devas cannot live when Thy condition is thus; we do not know what affection dost Thou have towards us. We are crying because of our selfish ends; perhaps this therefore has occurred. The Daityas, Yakṣas, or Rākṣasas have not done this; O Lord of Lakṣmī! Whose fault will we ascribe this to? The Devas themselves have committed this loss to themselves!

पराधीनाः सुराः सर्वे किं कुम्: कव्व जजाम च ।

शरणं नैव देवेश सुराणां मुकृदेवतसम् ॥ 37 ॥

न चेषा सात्विकी माया राजसी न च तामसी ।

यया छिड़ं शिरस्तेउ मायोरस्य जयतदुरुः ॥ 38 ॥

क्रंदयानांस्तदा दूर्वहा देवाधिष्ठवपुरीमान् ।

ब्रह्मासितस्तदोबाच समयवेदवितमः ॥ 39 ॥

रहितेन महाभागाः क्रंदितेन तथापि किम् ।

उपायक्षात्र कर्तेब्यः सर्वथा बुद्धिगोभरः ॥ 40 ॥

देवं पुरुषकारशे देवेशमसुगतयुभी ।

उपायक्ष विधात्ययो देवाकलतिं सर्वथा ॥ 41 ॥

O Lord of the Devas! The Devas are now dependent! They are under Thee. Now where are we to go? What are we to do? There is none to save the dull stupid Devas!

At this juncture, seeing Śiva and the other Devas crying, Brhaşpati, supremely versed in the Vedas, consoled them thus: O highly fortunate one! what use there will be in thus crying and repenting? it ought you now to consider the means that you should adopt to redress your calamities. O Lord of the Devas! Fate and one's own exertion and intelligence are equal; if the success come not through Fate (luck or chance) one is certainly to show one's prowess and merit.

इन्न उवाच

दैवमेव परं मन्ये धिवकीरूमवनंकम् ।

विद्यापरि शिरिछनं सुगणां चैव पश्यताम् ॥ 42 ॥

Indra said: Fie to your exertion when, before our eyes, the head of Bhagavān Viṣṇu Himself has been carried off! Fie, Fie to your prowess and intelligence! Fate is in my opinion, the supreme.

ग्रद्योवाच

अवश्यमेव भोक्त्यं कालेनपादितं च यत् ।

शुभं वाय्यशुभं वायि दैवं को5तिमकैयुतः ॥ 4 3 ॥

Brahmā said: Whatever, auspicious or inauspicious, is ordained by Daiva (Fate), everyone must bear that; no one can go beyond the Daiva.

देहवान्युखदुःखानां भोक्ता नैवात्र संशयः ।

यथा कालावशाल्युक्ति शिरो से शंभुना पुरा ॥ 44 ॥

When one has taken up a body, one must experience pleasure and pain; there is no manner of doubt in this. See, in long-past days, by the irony fo Fate, Śambhu severed my head.

तबैव तिनगातघ माढ़ेवस्य शापतः ।

तबैवाहा हरेमूँया पतितो लवणांभसि ॥ 4 5 ॥

His generative organ, too, dropped down through curse. Similarly, Hari's head has, today, fallen into the salt ocean.

सहस्वभासंग्रामितू:खं चैव श्वापिते: ।

स्वागद्धंशस्तथा वासः कमले मानसे सेर ॥ 46 ॥

By the influence of time, Indr., the Lord of Śacī, had thousand genital marks over his body, was

expelled from Heaven and had to live in the Mānas sarovar in the lotuses and had to suffer many other miseries.

एते दुःखस्य भोक्तारः केन दुःखं न भुज्यते ।

संसारोंप्रियन्महाभागास्तर्यमाछ्ठोकं त्यजंतु वै ॥ 47 ॥

चितयंतु महामावां विद्यावेर्वीं सनातनीम् ।

सा विधायसित नः कार्यं निर्थिणा प्रकृति: परा ॥ 48 ॥

बग्रविद्वां जगद्धार्जी सर्वैंण जनर्नी तथा ।

यथा सर्वांविद्य ल्यानं जैतोक्यं सचाराचम् ॥ 49 ॥

O Glorious ones! When such personages have suffered pains, then who else is there in the world, that does not suffer! so, you all cease sorrows and meditate on the Eternal Mahāmāyā; who is the Mother of all, who is the supporter of all, who is of the nature of Brahmavidyā (the Supreme Knowledge) and who is beyond the Gunas, who is the Prime Prakṛti, and who pervades the three Lokas, the whole universe, moving and unmoving; She will dispense our welfare.

सूत जावा

इल्युक्लवा वे सूगत वेधा निगमानादिदेश ह ।

देहयुक्तान्स्थितानये सुकायार्थिसिद्धदेय ॥ ५० ॥

Sūta then said: Thus saying to the Devas Brahmā ordered all the Vedas, that were incarnate there in their forms, for the successful issue of the Deva's work.

स्तुवंतु परमां देहीं ब्रहिवहां सन्तानीम् ।

गृहाज्ञी च महामायां सर्वेकार्यार्थसाधानीम् ॥ 51 ॥

Brahmā said: “O Vedas! Now go on and chant hymns to the Sacred Eternal Highest Devi Mahāmāyā, who is Brahmavidyā, who brings all actions to their successful issues, who is hidden in all forms.”

तच्छूता वचनं तस्य वेदा: सर्वाज्ञूचना: ।

तुषुवुज्ञनायनां तां महामायां जगस्थितम् ॥ 52 ॥

Hearing His words, the all-beautiful Vedas began to chant hymns to Mahāmāyā who can be comprehended by Jñāna, and who pervades the world.

Book 1 Chapter V

वेदा कमुः

नमो देयि महामाये विश्वोर्यक्तरे ऐशे ।

निर्णी सर्वभृतौण मातः शंकरकामे ॥ ५३ ॥

The Vedas said: “Obeisance to the Devi! to the Mahāmāya! to the Auspicious One! to the Creatrix of the Universe! We bow down to Thee, who is beyond the Gunas, the Ruler of all the Beings!

तं भूमि: सर्वभृतानां प्राण: प्राणवर्तां तथा ।

धी: श्री: काँति: क्षमा शांति: श्रद्धा मेघा धृति: स्थूति: ॥ 54 ॥

O Mother! Thou givest to Śaṅkara even His desires. Thou art the receptacle of all the things; Thou art the Prāna of all the living beings; Thou art Buddhī, Lakṣmī (wealth), Śobhā, Kṣamā (forgiveness), Śānti (peace); Śraddhā (faith), Medhā (intellect), Dhṛti (fortitude), and Smṛti (recollection).

त्यंमुटीयोउंधीमात्रासे गाठयी व्याहितिजा ।

जया च विश्वा धाती लज्ञा कौति: सूहा दया ॥ 55 ॥

Thou art the Bindu (m) over the Pranava (om) and thou art of the nature of semi-moon; Thou art Gāyatri; Thou art Vyārthiti; Thou art Jayā, Vijayā, Dhātri (the supportress) Lajjā (modesty) Kirti (fame); Icchā (will) and Dayā (mercy) in all beings.

त्वां संसृमोप्रथ पृचनप्रवर्मविधानद्वर्शं

द्वारास्युतां जननीं जानान् ।

विद्यां शिवां सकललोकहितां वेरणयां

वारबीजावसानिपुणां घवनाशकर्जीम् ॥ 56 ॥

बदा हुः शीरिसहस्वने-बारवहिक्युयां, घुवनाधिनायाः ।

ते चल्कृताः संति ततो न मुख्या

माता यतस्तं चिंशरजोगमानाम् ॥ 57 ॥

O Mother! Thou art the nerciful Mother of the three worlds, Thou art the adorable auspicious Vidyā (knowledge) benefit ing all the lokas; Thou destroyest the Universe and Thou skilfully resisted (hidden) in the Bija mantras. Therefore, we are praising Thee. O Mother! Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Indra, Sūrya, Fire, Sarasvatī and other regents of the Universe are all Thy creation; so none of them is superior to Thee. Thou art the Mother of all the things, moving and non-moving.

सकलभूवनमेताकर्तुकामा यदा त्वं

सुजसि जननि देवान्विण्युभूरजामुख्यान् ।

स्थितितयजननं तै: कार्यस्येकरूपा

न खलु तव कर्धधिद्वि संसारलेगः ॥ 58 ॥

न ते रूपं वेनुं सकलभवुने कोर्पि निपुणो

न नानां संख्या ते कधिरुभिट योग्योस्ति पुरुषः ।

यद्वल्यं कीलालं कलवितुमगक्तः स तु नरः

कर्थ पारावाराकलनचतुः: स्यादृतमति: ॥ 59 ॥

O Mother! When Thou dost will to create this visible Universe, Thou createst first Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara and makest them create, preserve and destroy this universe; but Thou remainest quite unattached to the world. Ever Thou remainest constant in Thy one form.

न देवानां मध्ये भगवति तवांनतविषयं

विज्ञानात्येकोर्षि लमिषु घुवनेकासिं जननी ।

कर्थ मिथ्या विश्वं सकलपरि चैका रचरसि

प्रमाणं तैतम्यिश्रामवचनं देय विहितम् ॥ 60 ॥

No one in this Universe is able to know Thy nature; nor there is any body who can enumerate Thy names. How can he promise to jump across the illimitable ocean, who can not jump across an ordinary well.

निरीहैसासि त्व निश्विलजगतां कारणमहो

चरितं ते चित्रं भगवतिं मनो नो व्यथयति ।

कर्केकारं वाच्यः सकल्निमागोपोचरगुणप्रभावः

स्वं यस्मात्यव्यपि न जानासि परमम् ॥ 6 1 ॥

O Bhagavati! No one amongst the Devas even knows particularly Thy endless power and glory. Thou art alone the Lady of the Universe and the Mother of the world.

न किं जानासि तवं जननि मधुजिन्मीतपन्ति शिवे

किं वा जात्वा विविविषयि शर्फिक मधुजितः ।

हरेः किंवा मातनुंरिततिरेषा बलतवी भवतः।

पादाङ्ठे भजननिषुणे क्वसितु वुरित् ॥ 62 ॥

The Vedas all bear testimony how thou alone hast created all this unreal and fleeting universe. O Devi! Thou without any effort and having no desires hast become the cause of this visible world,

Śrimaddevibbāgavatam

thyself remaining unchanged. This is a great wonder. We cannot conceive this combination of contrary varieties in one. O Mother! How can we understand thy power, unknown to all the Vedas even, when thou thyself dost not know thy nature! We are bewildered at this.

उदेश का चेयं तल सुस्ममूढ़े तिथिवयमा

हरैमूढ़ों नाशो मतमिह महाश्रयंजनकम् ।

महदुःखं मातल्वमसि जननछ्छेदकुशला

न जानीमो मोलीघिधटनिवलंबः कवमभूत् 1163 II

जात्वा दोर्षं सकलसुत्तापादितं देखि चित्ते

किंवा विष्णावमरजिनंत दुकृषतं पातिते ते ।

विष्णोर्गों कि समराजिनतः कोपयलोंजितिवाण्छेन्तु

मातस्तव विलसितं नैव विष्ठउत्र भावम् ॥ 64 ॥

O Mother! It is that thou dost know nothing about the falling off of the Viṣṇu's head! Or knowingly thou wanted to examine Viṣṇu's prowess. Is it that Hari incurred any heinous sin. How can that be! Where is sin to thy followers who serve Thee! O Mother! Why art Thou so much indifferent to the Devas! It is a great wonder that the head of Viṣṇu is severed! Really, we are merged in great misfortunes. Thou art clever in removing the sorrows of Thy devotees. Why art Thou delaying in fixing again the head on Viṣṇu's body.

किं वा द्वैल: समरविजितैस्तीर्धेशे सुग्रये

घोरं तत्वा भगवति वरं लक्ष्वविद्धभंत्वा ।

अन्तर्धानं गतिमतभुना विष्णुगरीषं भवानि

सूई किंवा वित्तिशिरसं खापुरेव विनोदः ॥ 65 ॥

सिंधोः पुर्या रोषिता किं त्वमाएँ,

कस्मादेतां प्रेक्षेस नावहीनाम् ।

क्षंत्रवस्ते खोजाजातपराधो

व्यृत्यायैने मोदितां तां कुरुच्च ॥ 66 ॥

O Devi! Is it that Thou taking offence on the gods hast cast that on Viṣṇu! or was it that Viṣṇu became proud and to curb that, Thou hast played thus! or is it that the Daityas, having suffered defeat from Viṣṇu went and practised severe tapasyā in some beautiful holy place, and have got some boons; and so Viṣṇu's head has thus fallen off!

Or is it, O Bhagavati! that Thou wert very eagerly interested to see Viṣṇu's headless body and, therefore, Thou hast seen thus! O Prime Force! Is it that Thou art angry on the daughter of the Sindhu (ocean); Lakṣmī Devī! Else, why hast Thou deprived Her of Her husband? Lakṣmī is born as a part of Thine; So Thou oughtst to forgive Her offence.

Therefore dost Thou gladden Her by giving back Her husband's life.

एते सुगत्स्वां सत्तं नमिति

कार्येषु मुख्याः प्रयितप्रभावाः ।

गोकाण्वीतात्पर येवे दिवानुत्थाप्य

देवं सकलाधिनायम् ॥ 6 7 ॥

The principal Devas, engaged in Thy service, always makes their praṇāmas (bow down) to Thee; O Devi! Beest Thou kind enough and make alive the Deva Viṣṇu, the Lord of all and crossest us across this ocean of sorrows. O Mother! We cannot make out anything whatsoever where Hari's head has gone.

मूधांगतः क्वाम्ब हरेनं विद्यो,

नान्यो2स्त्युपायः खलु जीवनेउघ।

यथा सुधा जीवनकर्मदेख़ा

तथा जगज्जीवितद्धासि देयि ॥ 68 ॥

We have no other protectress than Thee who canst give back His life? O Devi Thou give life to the whole world as the nectar gives life to all the Devas."

सूत उवाच

एवं सुत्ता तदा देवी गुणातीता महेश्वी ।

प्रसाा परम माया बदेः सांगैषु सामगैः ॥ 69 ॥

Süta said: Thus praised by the Vedas with their Angas, with Sāmagānas (the songs from the Sāma Veda), the Nirgunā Maheśvari Devī Mahāmāyā became pleased.

तानुवान तदा वाणी चाकाश्या शरीरिणी ।

देवान्याति सुरुखे: शब्दैज्ञानंवंकरी शृणा ॥ 70 ॥

मा कुर्वयं सुगाईशंतां स्वस्थानिष्ठंतु चामपः ।

सुतात्रई निभागे: कामं संगुशास्येन न संशय: ॥ 71 ॥

Book I Chapter V

Then the auspicious voice came to them from the Heavens, gladdening all, and pleasing to the ears though no form was seen: "O Suras! Do not care anything about it; you are immortal (what fear can you have ?) Come to your senses. I am very much pleased by the praise sung by the Vedas.

यः पुण्यानपुरे लोके सतीलोतं मामकी सुत्तिम्।

पदिष्यित सदा भपत्ना: सर्वां-कामानवाप्नुयात् ॥ 72 ॥

There is no doubt in this. Amongst men, whoever will read this my stotra with devotion, will get all what he desires.

शृणोति वा स्तोत्रमिदं मदीयं

भक्ता विक्रांतं सततं नोे थः ।

विमुक्तुःखः स भवेत्सुखी च

वेदोक्तमेतानु वेदतुल्यम् ॥ 73 ॥

Whoever will hear this: devotedly, during the three Sandhyās, will be freed from troubles and become happy. When this stotra has been sung by the Vedas, it is equivalent to the Vedas."

शुण्वतु कारणं चाहा यद्यातं वदनं हैः ।

अकारणं कर्थ कार्य संसारेउत्र भविष्यति ॥ 74 ॥

उदधेत्नयां विष्णु: संश्वित्यांतिके प्रियाम् ।

जहास वदनं बीक्ष्य तस्यास्तत्र मनोराम्म ॥ 75 ॥

Does anything take place in this world without any cause? Now hear why Hari's head was cut off. Once upon a time, seeing the beautiful face of His dear wife Lakṣmī Devī, Hari laughed in presence of Her.

तया जातं हरिन्नं ककं मां हसति प्रभुः ।

विकरी हरिणा हुई मुखं मे केन हेतुना ॥ 76 ॥

विनारि कारणेनाहा ककं हास्यस्य सम्भव: ।

सप्तवीव कृता तेन मये5-न्या वरवर्षिनी ॥ 77 ॥

At this Lakṣmī Devi came to understand that "He has seen surely something ugly in my face and, therefore, He laughed; otherwise why my Husband would laugh a: seeing me. But what reason can there be to see ugliness in my face after so long a time. And why shall He laugh without seeing something ugly, without any cause. Or it may be, He has made some other beautiful woman as my co-wife."

ततः कोयपुता जाता महालक्षी तमोगुणा ।

तामसी तु तदा शक्तिस्तया देहे समाविशण् । 78 ॥

केनचिकालयोगेन देवकायार्थसिद्धये ।

प्रविष्टा तामसी शक्तिस्तस्य देहैतिहाणा । 79 ॥

तामस्याविदेशेहा सा चुकोपातिशयं तदा ।

शनकैः समुवाचेदमिदं पत्तु ते शिरः ॥ 80 ॥

स्तीसभावाच्च भाविवाकालयोगद्धिनितः ।

अविवाचं ताद दत्तः शापः स्वसुखानाश्नः ॥ 81 ॥

Thus arguing variously in her mind, Mahā Lakṣmī gradually got angry and Tamo guna slowly possessed Her. Then, by turn of Fate, in order that gods' work might be completed, very fierce Tamas Śakti entered into her body. She got very angry and slowly said; "Let Thy head fall off". Thus, owing to feminine nature and the destiny of Bhagavān, Lakṣmī cursed without any thought of good or bad, causing Her own suffering.

सप्तनीसम्पवं दुःखं वैध्यवादीपकं चित्ति ।

विधित्व मनसेत्युक्ते तामसी गफिल्योगतः ॥ 82 ॥

By the Tamasī Śakti possessing Her, she thought that having a co-wife would be more painful than Her widowhood and thus she cursed Him.

अनुत्ते नासंस माया मुख्त्वमातिलोभता ।

अशोंचं निव्यवर्ष च स्थाणं वोणा: स्वभावजाः ॥ 83 ॥

सशीर्षं वापुरेवं तं कौरोमद्य यथा पुरा ।

शिरो5स्य शापायोगेन निमर्गनं लवणांबुधी ॥ 84 ॥

Falsehood, vain boldness, craftiness, stupidity, impatience, over-greediness, impurity, and harshness are the natural qualities of women. Owing to that curse, the head of Vāsudeva has fallen into the salt ocean. Now I will fix the head on His body as before.

अन्यच्छ कारणं किक्रिक्षतते सुरसतमाः ।

भवतां च महक्रायं भविष्यति न संशयः ॥ 85 ॥

O Sura Sattamas! There is another cause, also, regarding this affair. That will bring you great success.

पुरा दैत्यो महाबाहुर्दयीशेस्तिविश्रुतः ।

पतश्रके सरस्वत्यास्तीरि परमहाकर्णम् ॥ 86 ॥

In ancient days a famous Daitya, named

Hayagrīva practised severe tapasyā on the bank of the Sarasvātī river.

जपत्रेकाक्षरं मनं मायावीजात्यकं मम ।

निराहारो जितातामा च सर्वभोगाविर्वर्जितः ॥ 87 ॥

ध्यायमां ताम्यीं शर्निके सर्वभूषणभूषिताम् ।

एवं वर्षेसहचं च तपश्छेक्रतिद्राकृणम् ॥ 88 ॥

“Abandoning all sorts of enjoyments, with control over his senses and without any food, the Daitya did Japam of (repeated) one syllabled Māyā-Bija-mantra and, meditating the form of the Tāmasī Sākti of Mine, adorned with all ornaments, practised very terrible austerities for one thousand years.

तदाईं तामसे रूपं कृत्वा तत्र समगाता ।

दर्शनै पुरतस्तव्य ध्यातं तत्तेन याङ्गम् ॥ 89 ॥

I, too, went to the place of austerities in My Tāmasī form, meditated by the Daitya and appeared before him.

सिंहोपारि स्थिता तत्र तमावों द्वाप्तिचा ।

वरं बृहि महाभाग ददापि तव सुघत ॥ 90 ॥

There, seated on the lion's back, feeling compassion for his tapasya I spoke to him: "O glorious One! O one of good vows! I have come to grant boon to Thee!"

इति श्रुत्वा वचो देल्या दानवः प्रेमपूर्तिनः ।

प्रदक्षिणं प्राणां च चकार त्वरितस्तदा ॥ 91 ॥

सूद्वा करा मदीयं स प्रेमोरूललविलोचनः ।

हर्षाशुपुर्णनयनस्तुषा स च मां ताद ॥ 92 ॥

Hearing the words of the Devi, the Daitya instantly got up and falling down with devotion at Her feet, circumambulated Her. Looking at My form, his large eyes became cheerful with feelings of love and filled with tears; shedding tears, then, he began to chant hymns to Me.

हव्यास विज्ञा

नमो देखे महामाये सुशिष्यन्तकारिण ।।

भक्तानुप्रहचतुः कामदे मोक्षेदे शिशे ॥ 9 3 ॥

Hayagrīva said: “Obeisance to the Devi Mahāmāye! I bow down to Thee, the Creatrix, the Preserver, and the Destructrix of the universe!

धराम्बुतेज:पवनखपछानां च कारणम् ।

त्वं गान्यस्करणाणां कारणं स्पर्शिष्वदयोः ॥ 94 ॥

Skilled in shewing favour to Thy devotees! Giver of the devotee's desires! Obeisance to Thee! O Thou, the giver of liberation! O Thou! The auspicious one! I bow down to Thee. Thou art the cause of the five elements—earth, water, fire, air, and Ākāśa! Thou art the cause of form, taste, smell, sound and touch.

प्राणं च रसना चक्षुरलवछोत्रिमिंद्याणि च ।

कर्मेन्द्रियाणि चान्यानि तन्तः सर्वं महेश्वरि ॥ 95 ॥

O, Maheśvarī! the five Jñāneendriyas (organs of perception) eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and skin and the five organs of action Kamrendriyas: hands, feet, speech, arms, and the organ of generation are all created by Thee."

श्रीद्व्युवाच

किं तेउभीष्टं वरं कृहि वांडितं यद्याति मत् ।

परितृष्टास्थि भस्त्रा ते तपसा चाद्धुतेन च ॥ 96 ॥

‘The Devi said: “O child! I am very much satisfied with your wonderful tapasyā and devotion. Now say what boon do you want. I will give you the boon that you desire.

हयायीत उवाच

यथा मे मरणं मातर्नं भवेत्तथा कुरु ।

भवेयममयो गोरी तथाउजयः सुगुरुः ॥ 97 ॥

Hayagriva said: “O Mother! grant me that boon by which death will not come to me, and I shall be invincible by the Suras and Asuras, I may be a Yogi and immortal.

श्रीद्व्यवाच

जातस्य हि ध्रुं मृत्युधूरं जन्म मृतस्य च ।

मर्यादा चेयुर्गी लोके भयेच्च कथमान्या ॥ 98 ॥

एवं त्वं निश्रयं कृत्वा मरणो राक्षसोतम ।

वंरं वयर चेहै ते विचार्यं मनसा किल ॥ 99 ॥

The Devi said: “Death brings in birth and birth brings in death; this is inevitable. This order of things is extant in this world; never its violation

Book I Chapter V

takes place. Obest of the Rākṣasas! Thus knowing death sure, think in your mind and ask another boon."

हयसीय उवाच

हयसीवाचे मे मुलुर्नीयस्माजगदिष्के ।

इति मे वांछितं कामं पुरास्व मनोगतम् ॥ १०० ॥

Hayagriva said: “O Mcther of the universe! If it be that Thou art not willing at all to grant me immortality, then grant me this boon that my death may not occur from any o:her than from one who is horse-faced. Be merciful and grant me this boon that I desire.”

श्रीव्यवाच

गृहं गच्छ महाभाग कुरू राज्यं वधासुखम् ।

हयप्रीवापुते मृत्यूनं ते नूनं भविष्यति ॥ 101 ॥

O highly fortunate one: “Go home and govern your kingdom at your ease; death won’t occur to you from any other beings then from one who is horse-faced.”

इति दच्चा वरं तस्मा अन्तधार्नं मत तथा ।

मूंद परीमको प्राय सोषि स्थभवां गतः ॥ 102 ॥

स पीड्यति द्रुहाना मुनी-वेटांधा सर्वेगः ।

न कोर्पि विहते तस्य हंताउघ च्युनजये ॥ 103 ॥

तसाधीर्थे हृदयायर्य समुद्धल मनोहरम् ।

देईउत्र विहोगे विश्लोस्त्वा संयोजयित्वि ॥ 104 ॥

Thus granting the boon, the Devi vanished. Becoming very glad on getting this boon, Hayagriva went to his residence. Since then the wicked Daitya is troubling very much all the Devas and Munis. There is none in the three worlds to kill him. So let Viśvakarmā take a horse's head and fix it on the headless body of Viṣṇu.

हयप्रीयोद्ध भगवान्द्रनियर्त तनामसून् ।

पाधिष्ठ दानवे कूरं देवानां त्रितकायया ॥ 105 ॥

Then Bhagavān Hayagrīva will slay the vicious wicked Asura, for the good of the Devas.'

सूत उवाच

एवं सुरांस्तदाभाव्य शवर्गी । विरामा ह ।

देवास्तदातिसंतुहास्तमूचुदैविशिल्यनम् ॥ 106 ॥

Sūta said: “Thus speaking to the Devas, Bhagavati Śarvānī remained silent.

देवा ऊचुः

कुक कार्य सुराणां वै विद्योः शीर्षिधियोजनम् ।

दानवप्रवरं दैत्वं हरण्योहो हनियिति ॥ 107 ॥

The Devas became very glad and spoke this to Viśvakarmā: “Kindly do this Deva work and fix Viṣṇu’s head. He will become Hayagriva and kill the indomitable Dānava.”

सूत उवाच

इति श्रुना वचसेनं चल्हा चातिल्वात्यित ।

वाजिशर्षे चक्रतिणु खदुर्गेन सुरासिद्धी ॥ 108 ॥

विषणोः शरीरे तेनागु योजितं वाजिमस्तकम् ।

हदयीवो हरिजातो महामायाप्रसात: ॥ 109 ॥

Sūta said: Hearing these words, Viśvakarmā quickly cut off with his axe, the head of a horse, brought it before the Devas and fixed it on the headless boy of Viṣṇu. By the grace of Mahāmāyā, Bhagavān became horse-faced or Hayagriva.

क्रियता तेन कातेन दानवो मदाद्यपितः ।

निहततसरा संख्रे देवानां विपुतेजासे ॥ 110 ॥

य इदं शृभागत्यानं शृग्वतिन पृहिं गानतः ।

सर्वेदुःखविनिभृतकासे भवति न संशयः ॥ 111 ॥

महात्मायाचरितब्र उपविंग पापनाशनम् ।

पठतां शप्यतां चैव सर्वसंपत्तिकारकम् ॥ 112 ॥

ड्रि श्रीमदेवीपाणते प्रश्मरकंधे इर्शयीजिताकारकंनं नाम

पत्रप्रोस्थाय: 11 5 11

Then, a few days after, Bhagavān Hayagrīva killed that proud Dānava, the Deva's enemy, by sheer force. Any man, hearing this excellent anecdote, becomes freed, certainly of all sorts of difficulties. Hearing or reading Mahāmāyā's glorious deeds, pure and sin destroying, gives all sorts of wealth."

Thus ends the Fifth Chapter of the First Book

on the description of the narrative of

Hayagrīva in the Mahā Purāna

Śrimadāvevībhagavatam of

18,000 verses.

CHAPTER VI

On the Preparation for War by Madhu Kaṭṭabha

སྐབས་ཆུང་

सोम्य यच्च तव्या प्रोक्ते शोरैयूंद महापाँवे ।

मधुकैदभयो: साद्ध पत्रुवर्षसहस्कम् ॥ १ ॥

The Rsi said: “O Saumya! Just now you have spoken of the fight for five thousand years, in that great ocean, between Bhagavān Śauri and Madhu Kaitabha.

कस्माती दानवौ जातौ तस्म्येकाणवै जले ।

महावीर्वी दुराधर्षों देर्वेरिप सुदुर्जरी ॥ 2 ॥

कयं तावसुरी जातौ कवं च हरिणा हतौ ।

तदाचक्रय महाप्रात्र चरितं परमाब्धुतम् ॥ 3 ॥

How was it that the two greatly powerful Dānavas, invincible of the Devas came to be born there? And why did Bhagavān Hari kill them? O highly intelligent one! Kindly describe that greatly wonderful event.

श्रोतुकामा वयं संर्वे त्वं तत्ता च बहुभुतः ।

दैवाच्यात्रैव सुझातः संयोगछा तथायवोः ॥ 4 ॥

We all are extremely eager to hear it, and you are the great Pundit and speaker, present before us. It is our good luck that we have come across you here.

मूर्वीय सह संयोगो विषादपि सुडुर्जः ।

विज्ञेन सह संयोगः सुधाससमः स्मृतः ॥ ५ ॥

जीविति पगवः सर्वे खादिति मेईयन्ति च ।

जानन्ति विष्याकारं व्यावायसुखमढुतम् ॥ 6 ॥

As the contact with the illiterate is very painful, so the contact with the literate is very happy like nectar. The animals in this world live like illiterates; they eat, call for their nature, void urine and faeces, and know wonderfully well the sexual intercourse. न तेषां सदसऊर्जानं विवेको न च मोक्षदः ।

यगुषित से सभा जैया थेणां न अवगादतः ॥ 7 ॥

भगादा: पशव: केचिज्ञानंति आवणं सुखम् ।

अशोजाः फणिनश्रैव मुभुक्तनिद्धपात्नः ॥ 8 ॥

Only they want discriminative knowledge of

right and wrong, of the real and unreal, and a knowledge of discrimination, leading to Mokṣa or final liberation; this is the only point of difference. Therefore, persons that have no liking to hear of Bhāgavata and books like it, are like beasts; there is no doubt in this. Behold! Deer and some other animals can enjoy well the sense of hearing like men; and the serpents, though wanting in the organ of hearing, become charmed quite like men, as if tasting the pleasure of hearing sweet sounds.

पंचानार्मिदेशणां वै शुणे अश्वरादणें ।

श्वणादासुर्विज्ञानं दर्शनाधिचरतंजनम् ॥ 9 ॥

श्वर्ण विश्धिं प्रोक्र सान्तिकं राजतं तथा ।

तामसं च महाभागाः सुजोक्तं निश्रयान्ति ॥ 10 ॥

सात्चिकं वेदेशासादि साहित्यं चैव राजसम् ।

तामसं युद्धवातां च परदोषप्रकाशनम् ॥ 11 ॥

Verily out of the five organs of perception the organ of hearing and the organ of sight are benefiting, for the knowledge of things arises from hearing and the heart is pleased by seeing. Therefore the Pundits divide in three classes, the objects of hearing, as: (1) Sāttvik, (2) Rājasik and (3) Tāmasik. The Vedas and other Śāstras are Sāttvik; the literature (śāthiya) is the Rājasik and war news and finding fault with others is Tāmasik.

सार्विक विविध प्रोक्त प्रज्ञाविद्वृष पणिकृतेः ।

उत्तम मध्यमं चैव तथैवाप्रमित्यत् ॥ 12 ॥

उत्तमं मोक्षकर्तवे स्वर्गदं मध्यमं तथा ।

अध्यं मोगदं प्रोक्ते निर्णय विहितं बृदी: ॥ 13 ॥

साहित्यं चैव जिविंयं स्वीयायां चोतमं स्मुतम् ।

मध्यमं वारयोषायां परोक्षायां त्वासधमम् ॥ 14 ॥

The wise persons again subdivide the Sāttvik in three sub-classes: good, middling and worst. That which gives Mokṣa is good or excellent; that which gives Heavens is middling and that which gives this worldly pleasure is worst. In the same way,

Book 1 Chapter VI

the literature (sāhitya) is of three kinds: That which describes the people to live with their legitimate wives is the best; which describes about prostitutes is the middling; and that which makes people live with other's wives is the worst.

तामर्स विविधं जैयं विद्धद्रिः: गास्बलर्शिभि: ।

अततात्यिन्युद्धे यततुतनमुदाहतम् ॥ 15 ॥

मध्यमं चापि विश्वेशातंडवानं तथात्रिभि: ।

अध्यं मेर्विनिमंतं तु विवादे कलहे तथा ॥ 16 ॥

The seers of śāstras, the learned men divide the subjects of the Tāmasik hearing into three classes: That in which fight with the enemies is described is best; where the fight, es of the Pāndavas, with the enemies out of hatred, ill-feeling, is described is middling; and that whore fighting is described without any cause is worst.

तदत्र ब्रवाणं मुख्यं पुराणस्य महान्ते ।

बुद्धिप्रवर्नं पूर्णं ततः पायपणारनम् ॥ 17 ॥

तदाख्याकि महावृष्टे कथां पोराणिकों शुभाम् ।

श्रुतां द्विपावनाम्बूर्व सर्वांधीय प्रसाधिनीम् ॥ 18 ॥

Therefore, O highly intelligent one! Hearing the Purānas is far superior to hearing other śāstras, for thereby sins are destroyecī, intellect is incased and Punyam (good merits) is stored. So, O intelligent one! Kindly describe to us, the Purānas, fulfilling all the requirements of life, that you heard before from the mouth of Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana". Hearing these words of the Rsi.

सूत उवाच

यूयं धन्या महाभागा धन्योड़ं पृथिवीत्ते ।

दोषां श्रवणबुद्धिद्ध प्रभि करणे किल ॥ 19 ॥

Suta said: “O, highly ‘ortunate ones! When you all are desirous to hear the Purānas and I am ready to tell them, then both of us are blessed on the surface of the earth.

पूरा चैकाणंये जाते विलीने घुवनत्रये ।

गोषयकंसुले चे देवेरेने जानदेने ॥ 20 ॥

विष्णुकर्णमिलोद्धूतो दानवौ मधुकैटभौ ।

महाबाली च तो दैत्यी विवृद्धौ सागरे जले ॥ 21 ॥

क्रीडमानी स्थिती तत्र विश्रतातिवस्ततः ।

तावेकदा महाकावी क्रीडासन्तो महापाँले ॥ 22 ॥

In days of yore, in the time of Pralaya (universal dissolution) when the three lokas and the entire universe dissolved in water, when the Devadeva Janārdana was lying asleep in the bed of Ananta, the thousand-headed serpent, arose from the wax of the ear of Bhagavān Viṣu, the two very powerful Daityas Madhu and Kaṭābha; they grew in the waters of the ocean and played around in the waters and thus passed some of their time.

सितमावाप्तृशिते भातताविव संश्रिता ।

नाकारणं घबेल्कार्यं सर्वत्रैषा परम्परा ॥ 23 ॥

आधेयं तु विनाशारं न तिष्ठति कर्धंचन ।

आधाताधेघभावसृ भाति नो चित्नोगोचः ॥ 24 ॥

Once upon a time, when the two huge bodied Dānavas were playing with each other like two brothers, they thought that the general rule of the universe is that no effect takes place without a cause and nothing can rest without the receptacle thereof.

क्व तिष्ठिति जलं चेदे सुखल्पं सुविस्तम।

केन सृष्टे कर्थे जातं मनावावाजुले स्थिति ॥ 25 ॥

आवां वा कथमुपत्रजी केन वोत्पादितावृषी ।

पित्तौ क्वेति विज्ञानं नास्ति कमां तथावयोः ॥ 26 ॥

But we cannot understand what is our receptacle or who is resting on us. Whereon rests this pleasant expanse of wide ocean? Who was it that created this? How was this created? Why are we living here merged within the water? Who created us? and who are our father and mother. Nothing of all these we know.

सूत उवाच

एवं कामयमानी तौ जामतूनं विविहायम् ।

उवाच कैटभस्तम मधुं पार्थे स्थितं जले ॥ 27 ॥

Thus thinking, when they could not come to any conclusion, Kaitabha spoke to Madhu, beside him, within the waters:

कैटय जवाच

मधो वामत्र सलिले स्थानुं शक्तिम्हाल्वा ।

वर्तैे धातरचा कारणं सा हि हे मे मता ॥ 28 ॥

“O brother! It seems to me the great immovable force that makes us rest in this water is the cause of all.

त्या ततिभिदं तोयं तदाधारं च तिहिति ।

सा एव परया देवी कारणं च तबावयोः ॥ 29 ॥

This whole mass of water, too, pervaded by that force, rests on that; that Highest Devi must be the Cause of us."

एवं विबुध्यामानी तो चिंतालिष्टी यदासुरो ।

तदाकागे शुत तान्यां बारवीक्षं सुमनोहरम् । 30 ॥

When the two Asuras, merged in this thought, understood this, they heard in the air the beautiful Vāgbīja (the seed mantra of Vāk, the speech, the Devi Sarasvati).

गृहीतं च तततायाम्य ततयाथ्यासो पूढ़: कृतः ।

तदा सौदामनी दूषा ताथ्यां तंघो चौधित्या भूभा ॥ 31 ॥

ताया विचारितं तत्र मोजेयं नासे शर्याः।

तबा ध्यानिर्दं रुई गाने सपुर्ण किन्त ॥ 32 ॥

निर्गहारी जितात्मानो तन्नत्की स्माहिति ।

वभूवर्त्यविर्धित्वंव जपध्यानपरायणी ॥ 33 ॥

They then began to pronounce repeatedly the Vākbija mantra and practised it with the great steadfastness. Next they saw, risen high up in the air, the auspicious lightning and thought that certainly our mantra that we are repeating has made Herself visible in this form of light and thus we have seen certainly in the air, the saguna form (form with attributes) of Sarasvatī, the goddess of Speech. Thus thinking in their minds they, without any food, with their minds controlled, constantly thought of that, with their whole mind collected on that, and repeating and meditating the mantra became one with that.

एवं वर्षहच्छं तु तान्यां तनं महतप: ।

प्रसात्रा परमा शक्तिजाता सा परम तयोः ॥ 34 ॥

खिनी ती दानवी दृष्ट्या तपसे कृतनिश्छाये ।

तयोन्नुग्राहायि वागुवाचाशरीतिथि ॥ 35 ॥

वं वां वांछितं दैत्यो वृतं परमर्मतम् ।

ददामि परितुहा3स्मि युवोत्सपता किल ॥ 36 ॥

Thus they passed one thousand years in practising that great tapas; when the Highest Ādyā

Sakti became pleased with them and seeing the two dānavas, steadfast in the practice of Tapas, tired, addressed them, invisibly in the way of celestial voice thus: "O two Dānavas! I am exceedingly pleased with your tapasyā; so ask boon whatever you desire; I will grant it."

सूत जवाच

इति शुवा तु तां वाणी दानवा घतुस्तदा ।

स्वेच्छया मरणं देदि वरं नी देदि सुवते ॥ 37 ॥

Hearing, then, the celestial voice, thus: the two Dānavas said: "O Devi! O Suvrate! Grant us that we will die when we will."

वागुवाच

वांतिडत मरणं देदीय भवेढ़ा मनुसवात ।

अजेयी देवदैत्यक्ष प्रातारे नात्र संगशः ॥ 38 ॥

Hearing this, Vāgdevī said: “O two Dānavas! Certainly, by My grace, you two will die when you will and you two brothers will be invincible of all the Suras and Asuras. There is no doubt in this.

सूत उवाच

इति दत्तवरी देया दानवी मदर्दर्षिति ।

चक्रतः सारगे क्रीडां यदोतरणामवित्ति ॥ 39 ॥

कालेन क्रियता विषा दानवाध्यां यदृष्छया ।

दृषः प्रजायतिर्ब्रीहा पशासनगतः प्रभुः ॥ 40 ॥

Sūta said: When the Devi granted them this boon, the two Dānavas, puffed up with pride, began to play with the aquatic animals in the ocean. O Brāhmins! Some days thus passed away when the two powerful Dānavas saw the Brahmā, the Prajāpati, seated on the lotus of the navel of Hari.

इद्यत तु मुदितावास्ता युद्धकामी महत्वली ।

तम्पतुस्तव तत्र युद्धे नी देहि सुतन ॥ 41 ॥

Doubt came on their minds and they told him with a view to fight: "O Suvrata! either fight with us, or leave off this lotus seat and go any where you like.

नोचेत्यं परित्यज्य ययेहं गछ माधिरम् ।

यदि त्व निर्वर्ताशास्त्र कव योग्ये शुभमासनम् ॥ 42 ॥

वीरभोग्यमिदं स्थानं कतारोसि स्थ जारुणं चै ।

तयोरिति वचः शुत्वा चित्तमाप प्रजापति: ॥ 43 ॥

Book 1 Chapter VII

दृष्टा च दालिनौ वीरो किं करोमीति तापस: ।

चिताधिस्तदा तस्थी चितव्यमनसा तदा ॥ 4 4 ॥

इति शीमद्वीभागतै महापुराणे क्र.पण्यकन्ने भ्वो3.पश्रयः ॥ 6 1 ॥

If you be so weak, this auspicious lotus seat is not fit for you. For this should be enjoyed by the heroes. So if you be a coward, leave it quickly. Hearing these words of the Dānavas, Prajāpati,

engaged in the practise of Tapasyā, saw the two great powerful heroes and began to think anxiously 'What should be done now' and waited there."

Thus ends the Sixth Chapter of the First Book on the preparation for war by Madhu Kaitabha in the Mahāpurāna Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam by Maharṣī Veda Yyāsa.

Book I Chapter VII

CHAPTER VII

On the Praise of the Devi

सूत उतार

तौ वीक्ष्य बलिनी बह्या तदोपायान्धितयत् ।

सामदानभिवादीशं युद्धोतानसंरक्षिति ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: Seeing the two Dānavas very powerful, Brahmā, the knower of all the śāstras, thought of the means Sāma, Dāma, Bheda, Dāndā (conciliation, gifts, (bribe, or sowing dissensions and war or punishment); which of these four he should apply.

न जानेई वर्ल नुन्नमेतोवांं यथात्यम् ।

अजाने तु वले कामं नैव युद्धे प्रशस्यते ॥ 2 ॥

He thought thus: I do not know their strength and it is not advisable to enter into war without knowing their strength.

सूति क्रौमि चेददा दुव्योर्मदमतयो: ।

प्रकाशित भवेधूनं निवर्तेल मया स्वयम् ॥ 3 ॥

वधिष्यति तदैको3पि निवर्तेले प्रकाशिते ।

दानं नैवाए योगेवा वा भेदः कावो मया कवम् ॥ 4 ॥

Again, if I offer praises to them puffed up with pride, it will be simply displaying my own weakness; and when they will come to know this, only one of them will be sufficient to kill me and this they will do certainly. To offer bribes is not also advisable; and how can I sow dissensions.

विष्णु प्रवोधायमद्ध शेषे शूरतं जनादनम् ।

वतुर्भूत्रं महावीरं दुःखहा स भविष्यति ॥ 5 ॥

Therefore, it is best that I should rouse the four-armed Janārdana Viṣṇu, who is very powerful, from his sleep on the thousand, headed Ananta serpent. He will remove my difficulties.'

इति संचित्य मनसा पदानालगतो$3बजः ।

जगाम गरणं विष्णुं मनसा दुः:खानगकम् ॥ 6 ॥

तुहाव योधनार्थ नं तुभी: सप्वोधपर्नेहीम् ।

नारायणं जगन्धार्थ निस्पये योगनिद्रया ॥ 7 ॥

Thus thinking in his mind, Bhagavān Brahmā, the lotus-born remained in the tubular stalk of the lotus from Viṣṇu's navel and thence took refuge mentally of Viṣu, the remover of difficulties and began to chant auspicious hymns composed of various metres to Jagannātha Nārāyaṇa, involved in deep Yogandārdā (meditative sleep).

ब्रह्मोचच

दीनानाथ हरे विध्यो वामानोत्रि माधव ।

भक्तानिरहद्यूर्पिकेग सर्वावास जानचते ॥ 8 ॥

अत्यांमिभवेयायात्मन् वासुदेव जानयते ।

दुह्यानिरागेनैकायाजित चक्रनाद्धर ॥ 9 ॥

He said: “O Refuge of the poor! O Hari! O Viṣṇu! O Vāmana! O Mādava, Thou art the Lord of the universe and omnipresent. O Hṛṣikeśa! Thou removest all the difficulties of Thy devotees; therefore leave your Yoganidrā and get up. O Vāsudeva! O Lord of the Universe! Thou resistest within the hearts of all and knowest their desires. O Thou, holder of the disc and club! Thou always destroyest the enemies of Thy devotees.

सर्वत्रे सर्वतीकेश सर्वशक्तिस्मयिति ।

उत्तिष्ठान्ति देवेशु दुःखानाशन पाहि मण् । ।० ॥

O Omniscient One! Thou art the lord of all the lokas and all-powerful; no one can know what is Thy form; O Lord of the Devas! Thou art the

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

destroyer of all pains and sufferings! So get up and protect me.

विश्वभर विशालाक्ष पुण्यप्रवणकीर्तन ।

जगाओने निराकार सर्गसिध्यलताकार 11 11 ॥

O Protector of the Universe! nothing is concealed from Thy eyes! Every one becomes pure by hearing and chanting Thy name. Thou art Nirākāra (without any form); yet Thou createst, preserve and destroyst the Universe.

इमौ दैत्यी महाराज हेतुकामी मदोद्धतों ।

न जानास्यखिलाधार कर्म मां सकटे गतन् ॥ 12 ॥

O Cause of the world! O Supporter of all; Thou art shining as king of kings over all and yet Thou dost not understand that the two Dānavas, puffed up with pride have become ready to kill me.

उपेक्षेस्त्रिषु:खात्रं यदि मां शरणं गतन् ।

पालतक्लं महाविष्णो निरायारं भवेत्तः ॥ 13 ॥

If thou dost neglect me, seeing me very much distressed and under your protection then Thy name as Preserver will become quite useless."

एवं स्तुतोर्षि भगवात्र युवोध यदा हरि: ।

योगानिरासमाक्रान्तस्तदा बढ़ा हार्धितयाद् ॥ 14 ॥

नूनं शक्तिसमाक्रांतो विज्णनिद्रावर्गे नतः ।

जजागार न धर्माता कि कौरोमध्य दु:खितः ॥ 15 ॥

हैतुकामावृषी प्राणी दानवी घटगविति ।

कि कारोमि कव नष्ठाधि नास्ति मे शरणं कवचित् ॥ 16 ॥

Thus praised, when Viṣṇu did not get up, Brahmā thought that “Bhagavān Viṣṇu is now surely under the influence of sleep of the Primal Force Ādyā Śakti and is not therefore getting up; what am I do now, thus distressed! These two Dānavas, elated with pride are ready to kill me; now what am I to do and where shall I go? I don’t find anybody who can protect me any where.”

इति संघिंव मनसा निष्यां प्रतिपच च ।

तृहाव योगिनाई तामेकाप्रद्धवस्थितः ॥ 17 ॥

विवार्यं मनसाप्रयेचं शफिर्मे स्थमे भगा ।

यथा इतेनतो विष्णु: कृतोस्ति सर्वदार्षितः ॥ 18 ॥

Thus thinking, Brahmā came to the conclusion and decided to chant hymns to Yoga Nidrā Herself with one pointed heart. Discussing in his mind, He

thought that that Ādyā Śakti (the Prime Force) which kept Bhagavān Viṣṇu, senseless and motionless would alone be able to save him.

व्यसुर्यान त जानाति गुणाऊष्ट्र दिकानितु ।

तथा हरिं जानाति निद्रामीतिलतोचनः ॥ १९ ॥

न जहाति यतो निद्रां बहुधा स नृतोप्रयतो ।

मन्ये नास्य बये निद्रा निद्रावयं बशीकृतः ॥ 20 ॥

यो यस्य वशमापात्रः स तस्य किंकतः किल।

तस्माच्च योगनिद्रेयं स्वामिनी मापतेईः ॥ 21 ॥

As a dead man cannot hear any sound so Hari, merged in deep sleep, knows not anything. When I have praised Him so much and when He has not awakened, then it is certain that sleep is not under Hari, but Hari is under sleep, and he who is under another becomes his slave; so this Yoga Nidrā is now exercising Her control over Hari.

सिंधुजाया अधि वर्षे यथा स्थामी वर्षोतुतः ।

नूनं जनदिंदं सर्वे भगवत्या वशीकृतम् ॥ 22 ॥

Again she, too, who brought Hari under control, that daughter of the Kṣira (milk) ocean is now under the control of Yoga Nidrā; so it seems that that Bhagavatī Mahāmāyā has brought the whole Universe under Her control.

अर्ह विगुस्तसा शम्भुः सावित्री च रामायुगा ।

सर्वे वयं वरेगे यस्या नात्र किंचिविडारणा ॥ 23 ॥

Whether it be Myself, or Viṣṇu or Śambhu, or Śāvitrī or Ramā or Umā, all are under Her control; there is nothing to be doubted here?

हरिर्यावश: शेते यधान्य: प्राकृतो जनः ।

यथापिभूतः कावातर्गिकलान्येभगहतानगः। 24 ॥

What to speak of other high souled persons! Now I will chant hymns to Yoga Nidrā, under whose influence Bhagavān Hari even is lying, under deep sleep, inert like an ordinary man.

स्तीमध्य योगिन्हि वै यया मुक्तो जनादनः ।

घटथिषाति युद्धे च वासुदेवः सनातनः ॥ 25 ॥

When the eternal Vāsudeva Janārdana will be dispossessed by Her, He will no doubt fight with the Dānavas.

इति कृत्वा मर्ति ब्रह्मा पचनालस्थितस्तदा ।

तुहाव योगिनांतं ति शिक्षोगोपेरिणु संशित्यान् ॥ 26 ॥

Book I Chapter VII

Thus deciding, Bhagavā Brahmā, seated on the tubular stalk of the lotus, began to chant hymns to Yoga Nidrā, residing on the body of Viṣṇu, thus.

ब्रह्मोवाच

देवि ल्यमस्य जगतः किल कारणं हि

जातं मया सकलेवेद्वयोभिपन्य ।

यदिष्युग्यिखललोकाविवेकाकर्ता

निद्रावर्ष च गामितः पुरुषोत्मोउढ् 11 27 11

को बेव ते जननि मोहविलासलीलां

मूढोउस्मदं हरिरयं विवराश्छ शेते ।

ईंद्रक्तया सकलभूममनोनिवासे

विद्वनामो विबुध्यकौटिपु निर्गुणाया:। 28 ॥

Brahmā said: “O Devi! I have come to understand on the authority of all the words of the Vedas, that Thou art the only One Cause of this Universal Brahmāṇḍa. The more so when Thou hast brought the best Puruṣa Viṣṇu, endowed with discrimination above all beings, under the control of sleep, then the above remark is self-evident.

O Thou, the Player in the minds of all beings! O Mother! I am extremely ignorant of the knowledge of Thy nature; when Bhagavān Hari is sleeping inert by Thy power, then who is there amongst Koṭis and Koṭis of wise men, who can understand completely the Pastime, Lilā, full of Māyā of Thine, who art beyond the Gunas.

सांख्या वर्तित पुरुषं प्रकृति व यां

तां चैतन्यभावरितां जनातँ कर्मीम ।

किं तातूणासि कल्यज्ञ जगन्धिवास-

श्रीतत्यातिवहितो विहोतस्त्वयाउचि 129 ॥

नात्यं तनोय सगुण विविधप्रकारं

नो वेति कोर्पि तव कृत्यविधानयोग् ।

ध्यार्योत यां मुनिणा निवतं विकालं

संध्येति नाम परिकल्य युणान्यवाति ॥ 30 ॥

The Sānkhyā philosophers say that the Puruṣa (the male aspect of Śakti) is the pure, conscious being and that Thou art the Prakṛti, without any consciousness, material inert, Creatrix of the universe; but, O Mother! art Thou really inert like that? Never like that; had it been like that, how is

it that Thou hast made Bhagavān Hari, the receptacle of the world quite unconscious like this? O Bhavānī! Thou, being beyond the Guṇas art displaying like a dramatic performance these various dramatic plays by the conjunction with the three Guṇas. It is Thy three qualities, Sattva, Rajas and Tamas that the Munis meditate every day in the morning mid-day, and evening, the three Sandhyās; but no one is aware of Thy ways of doings.

बुद्धिहिं बोधकरणा जानता सदा त्वं

श्रीशासि देवि सन्त सुखदा सुराणाम् ।

कीर्तिस्वा मित्युक्ती किल कांतितेय

शब्दा रतिश्व सकलेषु जनयु मातः ॥ 31 ॥

नातः परं किल वितर्कशर्गतः

प्रमाणं प्राप्तं मया यदिह़ दुःगति गतेन ।

त्वे चात्र सर्वर्जानां जननीति सर्व

निद्रालुतां वित्तता हरिणज्ञ दृष्टम् ॥ 32 ॥

O Devi! Thou art of the nature of the judgment and understanding giving rise to knowledge of all the beings in the Universe; Thou art always the Śri (wealth and prosperity) giving pleasures to the Devas. O Mother! Thou art reigning in all as Kirti (fame), Mati (intellect), Dhrti (fortitude), Kānti (beauty) Śraddhā (faith) and Rati (enjoyment). O Mother! Now I am put to great difficulties and therefore, I have got eye witness of Thy nature; no need of further reasoning and discussing about it.

लं देवि वेदिविदुषामपि दुर्विभाव्या

वेदोर्पि नृन्मवित्राणताया न वेद ।

यस्मात्वदुब्रमयी श्रुतितपुवाना

प्रत्यक्षमेव सकलं तव कार्येति ॥ 33 ॥

I have now known that verily, verily Thou art the only Mother of all the worlds as Thou hast brought Hari under the influence of sleep. O Devi! Now when it is evident that all the worlds, etc., have come from Thee, then the Vedas have also come from Thee; what doubt is there? So the Vedas, too, do not know fully Thy nature; for the effect can never know its cause.

कते चरित्रमखिलं भृति वेद

धीमाज्ञहं हरिंचे च भवो न सुरासलास०-२ ।।

ज्ञातुं क्षमाशु मुनयो न मामतायाजाशु

दुर्बीच्य एल महिमा तव सर्वतोके ॥ 34 ॥

So, it is very true that Thou art incomprehensible of the Vedas. O Mother! When I, Hari, Hara and the other Devas and my son Nārada and other Munis have not able to realise Thy nature fully, then who else can be so intelligent in this world that will realise all Thy nature? So, Thy glory is beyond the speech of all beings.

यजेसु देय यदि नाम न ते वद्रति

स्वाहिते वेदविद्युचो हवने कृतेश्वि ।

न प्रापुवंति सततं मखभाणोघं

देवास्मेवम विबुधेघवि वृत्तिदासि ॥ 35 ॥

O Devi! If, in the place of sacrifice, the ritualists, the knowers of the Vedas, do not utter Thy name Svāha, then the Devas, participants of the offerings in Yajīna, do not get their share, however hundreds of oblations be offered; so Thou art also the giver of sustenance allowances to the Devas.

ग्राता वयं भगवाति प्रवयं त्वया

वै देवारिसंभवभगदायुना तथैव ।

भौतोरास्म दैवि वरदे शरणं गतोरस्म

घोरं निरीक्ष्य मधुना सह कैटभं च ॥ ३६ ॥

O Bhagavati! In previous Kalpas, Thou hadst saved me terrified from the fear of the Dānavas. O Devi Varade! now, too, I am terrified at the sight of the terrible forms of Madhu and Kaitabha and take Thy refuge.

ने वेति विधापुरभुना मम

दुःखमेतजाने त्यायात्मविशणीकृतदेश्यिः ।

मृचाविद्वेमयाव जहि दानवेंशी

यूँत्रोते तव कुरुच महानुभावे ॥ 37 ॥

O high-minded one! Now I thoroughly see that by Thee, by Thy power Yoganidrā the whole body of Bhagavān Viṣṇu is senseless; but how is it that Thou dost not realise my sufferings. So, either dost thou leave possession of this Ādi-Deva, or destroy Thyself these two Dānavendras—dost of either of the two as Thou likest.

जानांति चे न तव देवि परं प्रभावं

ध्यायांति ते हरित्रावयि मंदधिचना: ।

ज्ञातं मयासऊ जानन प्रकटं प्रपाणं

यदिष्ण्यत्वित्तगं विवशगोस शेते ॥ 38 ॥

O Devi! Those that do not know Thy extraordinary powers, those stupid ones meditate Hari, Hara, etc. But, O Mother! By Thy grace, I realise today, as eye-witness, that Viṣṇu even is today lying unconscious in deep sleep, totally senseless of anything outside by Thy force.

सिन्धूद्वायि न हरि प्रतिवोधितुं

वै शक्ता पति तव यशानुगमघ शक्त्या ।

मन्ये तवया भगवति प्रसर्भे स्यायि

प्रस्वापिता न बुबुधे विश्वगीक्षांते ॥ 39 ॥

O Bhagavati! Now, when Kamalā, the daughter of Sindhu is unable to rouse Her husband Hari, by her effort, or rather Thou hast made Her, too, perforce, sleep unconsciously, it seems she is without any effort and does not know anything of what is going on outside.

धन्यात एव भृवि भक्तिपरास्त्राणी

त्वक्लास-यदेवभजनं त्वयि लीनभावाः ।

कुर्विति देवि भजनं सकलं निकामं

जात्वा समस्तजननीं किलन कामधेनुम् ॥ 40 ॥

O Devi! Verily those are blessed who worship Thy lotus feet with their whole heart full of devotion and without any hope of getting rewards, abondoning the worship of other Devas and knowing Thee as the Creatrix of the whole world and the giver of all desires.

धिकांतिकीर्तिण्यपहित्नगुपाद्यसेत

विष्णोगुणास्तु परित्य तगत: क्व चाछ ।

वंदीकृतो हरिस्ती ननु निव्यासउ

शक्यता तवेव भगतयतिमानत्वातः ॥ 41 ॥

Alas! now the intelligence beauty, fame, and all good qualities have forsaken Hari and fled away to some unknown quarters. O Bhagavati! Thou art really adorable in the three worlds for, by Thy power of Yoganidrā, Hari has been kept in prison, as it were, in this way.

Book 1 Chapter VII

त्वं शफित्वे जगतामवित्वल्पभावा

त्वार्मिति च सकलं खलु भावमात्रम् ।

तं क्रीडसे निविविनिमित्मोज्ञाने

नाट्ये यथा विह्तते स्वकृती नटो वे ॥ 42 ॥

O Mother! Thou art the Śakti of all this universe and endowed with all prowess and energy; all other things are Thy creation. As a dramatic player, though one, plays in the 'heatre, assuming many forms, so Thou, too, being one, playset always in this charming theatre of world, created by Thy Gunas, in various forms.

विष्णुस्वया प्रक्रतिः प्रथम् युगादी

दत्ता च शक्तिस्मला खलु पालनाय ।

ग्रातं च समर्वसितं विवशीकृतोडा

यूत्रोते तत तथाप्रया कलोषि नृन्म ॥ 4 3 ॥

मुह्यात्रा मां भपवाति प्रविनाशितुं

घेत्रेच्छाति ते कृक एवां पहित्य मोन्म ।

कस्मादिमो प्रकटिती किल कालकणी

यहा भवानि ह्मितुं नु किमिच्छसे माम || 44 ॥

ज्ञातं मया तत विजेहितम्बुतं वै

कृत्वांस्त्रिजां जापिट परमे स्वतंगा ।

लीनं कांपी सकल किल मां

तवैय हेतुं त्वमिच्छसि भवानि किमग्र तिचग्म ॥ 45 ॥

O, Mother! Thou, in the beginning of the Yugas, dost manifest first the Visupu form and givest him the pure Sattvik Śakti, free from any obscuration and thereby madest Him preserve the Universe; and now it is Thyself that hast kept Him thus unconscious; therefore, it is an undoubted fact that Thou art doing whatever Thou willest, O Bhagavatī! I am now in danger; if it be Thy desire not to kill me, then dost break the silence, look on me and show Thy mercy. O Bhavānī! If it be not Thy desire to kill me, then why hast Thou created these two Dānavas, my death incarnate; or is it that Thou wantedest to put me to ridicule. I have come to know of Thy wonderful acts; Thou createst this whole Universe, and Thyself remaining aloof, plays always and in the time of Pralaya resolvest everything again into Tbæ.

कामं कुरुच वधमघ मयेव

मातनुःखं ने मे पराणं जगदिबके५२।

कर्ता त्वयैव विहितः प्रथम्

स चार्यं दैत्यातृते४य मृत् तृत्ययगो गरिष्ठम् ॥ 46 ॥

Therefore, O Bhavānī, what wonder is there, that Thou wouldst want to kill me in this way? But, O Mother! I wont feel any pain if Thou willingly killest me but this is to my great dishonour that being given power over these beings, I would then be made an object to be killed by the Daityas; this, indeed, is hard to me.

उत्तिषु देखे कुक रूपमिहाड़ुतुं

तं मां वा त्वमी जक्ति यथेछ्यिस बाललीतो ।

नोचेर्यबोधय हरि निर्भनैदोर्धी

यस्त्वलाथयमेदोर्धिति कल कार्वजात्मा ॥ 47 ॥

So, O Thou Lilāmayī like a sportive girl! get up! O Devi! assumest the wonderful form Thyself and kiliest me or the two Daityas, as Thou willest; or rouse Hari who will then kill 'he Daityas. All these are in Thy hands."

सूत जचाच

एवं सुत्ता तदा देवी तामसी तन येधसा ।

नि:सूत्य हरिदिकृतुं संस्थिता पार्थतस्तदा ॥ 48 ॥

त्यक्चलांगानि च सर्वाणि विधागोतृतेजस: ।

निर्भाता योगनिद्रा सा नाशाय च तयोस्ता ॥ 49 ॥

विस्यंदितशरीरोसरी यदा जातो जनादनः ।

धाता परमिकां प्राप्तो मुदं दृष्ट्वा हरि ततः ॥ 50 ॥

इति शीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणो प्रथमकक्रभे विद्यप्रबोषो नाम

सरनाभिश्याः ॥ 7 ॥

Sūta said: “Thus praised by Brahmā, the Nidrā Devi (the goddess of sleep), of the nature of Tamo Gunas, quitted the body of Bhagavān Hari and stood by him. When thus left completely by the Devi Yoga Nidrā, of unequalled brilliance and splendour, for the destruction of Madhu Kaitabha, Viṣṇu began to move his body and at this Brahmā became very glad.

Thus ends the Seventh Chapter of the First Book on the praise of the Devi, in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevi bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPER VIII

On Deciding Who is to be Worshipped

སྐོབ་ཆེན་

संदेहोउर महाभाग कथायां तु महादुतः ।

वेदगास्पूराषीश निश्रितं तु सदा बुधे: ॥ १ ॥

ब्रह्मा विद्युः्छ रछश प्रसे देवा: सनातना: ।

न तः परतं किंचिद्वह्नाष्ट्रप्रेस्ममहापते ॥ 2 ॥

The Rsis said: “O highly fortunate one! A great doubt has arisen on your statement. This is ascertained by all the wise men as written in the Vedas, Purāṇas and other Śāstras that Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara, these three Devas are eternal. None is superior to them in this Bhamāṇḍa.

बहा सुजित लोकान्वे विष्ण: पालविहितं जगत् ।

रू: संसृत्ते काले जय एतेज कराणम् ॥ 3 ॥

एका मृतिंल्यो देवा बढ़ाविष्णमहेक्षारः ।

रंज:सच्ततप齋िष्ठ संयुताः कार्यकताः ॥ 4 ॥

Brahmā creates all the beings, Viṣṇu preserves and Maheśvara destroys all in due time. These are the causes of creation, preservation and destruction. The Trinity Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa are really one form, indeed, Trinity in Unity and Unity in Trinity. Being endowed respectively with Sattva, Raja and Tamo Guṇas they do their respective works.

तेनां मध्ये हरि: श्रेष्ठ माधवः पुरुषोत्तमः ।

आदिद्वेलो जगत्राश: समर्थ: सर्वकर्मिषु ॥ 5 ॥

Amongst these, again, Purusottama Ādideva Jagannātha Hari, the husband of Kamalā is the best; for he is capable of doing all the actions; no other than the Viṣṇu, of unrivalled prowess is so capable.

नान्यः कोर्पीस समर्वोर्जित विष्णोतरुतन्तेसः ।

स कर्थ स्वायित स्वामी विवरणो यो-भायया ॥ 6 ॥

How is it, then that Yogamāyā has overpowered Hari with sleep and made him altogether senseless? O highly fortunate one! whither did, then, go that extraordinary self-knowledge and power, etc. of Hari while alive?

क्व गर्त तस्य विज्ञानं जीवतश्छीनिछतं कुतः ।

संदेहोरोयं महाभाग कथारव्य यथागृभम् ॥ ७ ॥

This is our greatest doubt; so kindly advise us that our this doubt be removed and our well being be thus ensured.

का सा शक्ति: पुरा प्रोक्ता यथा विद्यार्जितः प्रभुः ।

कुतो जाता कर्थ शक्ता का शक्तिर्वं सूतत ॥ ८ ॥

यस्तु सर्वेश्वो तिथयार्जुंदोयो जगतुहः ।

परमात्मा परानन्द सचिवदानन्दविधहः ॥ 9 ॥

सर्वकृतसर्वभृतस्व हाविज सर्वनः शुण्रितः ।

स कर्व निद्रया नीतः परन्त्रय परावतरः ॥ 10 ॥

What is that Śakti? Which you mentioned to us before as well by whom Viṣṇu is conquered? Whence is She born? What is the power of that Śakti and what is Her nature? O Suvrata! explain to us these fully.

How was it that Yogamāyā overpowered with sleep the Highest Deity Bhagavān Viṣṇu who is everlasting-intelligence bliss! who is the God of all, the Guru of the whole world, the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer, who is omnipresent, an incarnate of purity and holiness and beyond Rajoguna; how was such a personage brought under the control of sleep?

एताद्धार्यभृतो हि सन्दोहो न : परंतप ।

छिथि ज्ञानासिन सूत व्यासशिष्य महामते ॥ १ १ ॥

O Sūta! You are very intelligent and the pupil of Vyāsa Deva; destroy our this doubt by the sword of wisdom.

सूत उवाच

क: सन्देहं भिनन्चेनं जैतोक्ये सगचरे ।

मुह्यिति मुनयः कामं बढ़ापुरा: सनातना: ॥ १ २ ॥

नारः कानिलश्री प्रणेत्रस्मिनस्तमाः ।

किं ब्रवीम महाभागा दुर्घेटप्रस्मिन्यर्ने ॥ १ ३ ॥

Hearing this, Sūta said: “O highly fortunate rhunis! There is none in the three Lokas who can

Book 1 Chapter VIII

clear your this doubt; the mind-born sons of Brahmā, Nārada, Kapila and other eternal sons get bewildered by these questions; what can I, then, say on this very difficult point!

देवेषु विष्ण: कथितः सर्पिः: सर्पिःतः 1

यतो विराडिदं सर्वमुत्यत्रं सचराचरम् ॥ 14 ॥

ते सर्वे समुपासन्ते नत्वा देवं परात्परम् ।

नारायणं इद्यौकेशं गासुदेवं जनादनम् ॥ 15 ॥

तवा केचिच्महादेवं गंकरं श्रीशोख्यम् ।

त्रिजेत्रं पड्ववलयं च शूलपाणीं शूच्यजम् ॥ 16 ॥

तथा वेदेयुं सर्वेषुं गीतं नाना त्रिवम्बकम् ।

कर्पिदंने पड्ववरयं गौरौद्धार्धधारिणम् ॥ 17 ॥

कैलासावसान्तरं सर्वेश्णिक्समर्थवन्तम् ।

भृतवृद्धतुं देवं दक्षयतप्रियातकम् ॥ 18 ॥

तया सूर्ये वेदविदः सायंभगर्दिते दिने ।

मध्याहे तु महाभागा सुत्विति विविधेः सर्वेः ॥ 19 ॥

यथा वेयुए सर्वेषु सूर्यापासनुतमम् ।

परामातैति विद्यातं नाम तस्य महामतः ॥ 20 ॥

See, some persons call Bhagavān Viṣṇu omnipresent, the preserver of all and the best of all the Devas; according to them all this universe-moving and non-moving, is created by Viṣṇu; they bow down before the Highest Nārāyaṇa Hrṣikeśa Janārdana Vāsudeva and worship Him, whereas others worship Mahādeva Śaṅkara, having Gaurī for the other half of his body, endowed with all powers, residing in Kailāśa, surrounded by hosts of bhūtas, that destroyed the Dakṣa's sacrifice, who is mentioned in the Vedas as Śaśišekhara (having moon on his forehead), with three eyes and five faces and holding trident in his hand and known as Vṛṣadhaja and Kapārddi. O highly intelligent ones! There are some other persons, that know the Vedas and worship the Sun every day in the morning, midday and in the evening with various hymns.

अन्नि: सर्वत्रे वेदेयु सन्तुतें वेदिवर्गतः ।

इन्द्रशापि जितोकेशो कर्णश्र तावाप: ॥ 21 ॥

In all the Vedas, it is stated that the worship of the sun is excellent and they have named the high-souled sun as Paramātnā (the Highest Deity). Whereas there are other Vedavits (the knowers of

the Vedas) who worship the Devas, Fire, Indra, and Varuna.

यथा गंगा प्रवाहैश बन्धिभः वरित्तंते ।

तबैव सर्वदेवेषु विष्णु: प्रोत्तो महर्षिभः ॥ 22 ॥

But the Maharsis say, that as Ganga Devi (the river Ganges), though one, is expressing Herself by many channels, so the one Viṣṇu is expressing in all the Deva forms. Those who are big Pundits, declare perception, inference, and verbal testimony as the three modes of proofs.

श्रीपेवेह पूर्व प्रमाणानि पतिवानि सूपधिजुतः ।

प्रत्यक्षं चानुभानं च शाखं चैव तृतीकम् ॥ 23 ॥

चत्वार्यवैतरे प्राहुक्रपमानयुतानि च ।

अर्थपरिन्युतान्यन्ये पछ प्रप्रमुंहाधियः ॥ 24 ॥

सदा परीशिकाक्षीव प्रवदन्ति मनीविणः ।

एतेः प्रमाणोईनंय वद्बहा परमं च तत ॥ 25 ॥

The Naiyāyik Pundits add to the above three, a fourth proof which they call upamā, resemblance, similitude and some other intelligent Pundits add another fifth proof called Arthāpatti, an inference from circumstances, presumption, implication. It is deduction of a matter from that which could not else be; it is assumption of a thing, not itself perceived but necessarily implied by another which is seen, heard or proved; whereas the authors of the Purāṇas add two other, called Sākṣī and Aitijhya, thus advocating seven modes of proofs. Now the Vedānta Śāstra says that the supreme being (Param Brahma), the Prime cause of the Universe, cannot be comprehended by the above-mentioned seven proofs.

तिरतक्रश्रात कर्तेबी बुद्ध्वा चैवागमेच न ।

निश्यासिकया युक्त्या विवार्यं च पुनः पुनः ॥ 26 ॥

Therefore, first of all, adopt the reason leading to sure belief, the Buddhi, according to the words of the Vedas and discriminate and discuss again and again and draw your inference about Brahma.

प्रत्यक्षनस्तु विज्ञानचित्रं मतिमतां सदा ।

दृष्टान्नेपि सन्तं शिष्टमानानुसारिणा ॥ 27 ॥

And the intelligent person should adopt what is

Šimaddevibhāgavatam

seen by perception as self-evident and what is inferred by the observance of good conduct.

विद्धांसोप्रि वदन्त्येवं पुराणै: परिणीयते ।

ड्रहिणे सृष्टिशफ्रड हरी पालनशक्तिता ॥ 28 ॥

हरे संहारशक्तिश्र सूर्ये शक्ति: प्रकाशिका ।

धराधरणशक्तिश्र शेषे कूर्मे तथैव च ॥ 29 ॥

साउदा शक्ति परिणता सर्वसीमना प्रतिहिता ।

The wise persons say, and it is also stated in the Puranas, that the Prime Force is present in Brahmā as the Creative Force; is present in Hari as the Preservative Force; is present in Hara as the Destructive Force; is present in Kūrma (tortoise) and in Ananta (the thousand-headed Snake) as the earth supporting Force; is present in fire as the Burning Force, is present in air as the moving Force, and so is present everywhere in various manifestations of forces.

वहाशक्तिस्वा बह्यौ समीरे प्रेरणात्मिका ॥ 30 ॥

शिबोर्पि शबतां याति कुण्डलिन्या विवर्जितः ।

शक्तिहीनसु यः कविचदसमयेः स्मृते बुधैः ॥ 31 ॥

एवं सर्वेन भूतैषु स्थावेपु चेपु च ।

ब्रवाहित्संवर्षयन्तं ब्रह्मोडप्रस्मिनहातपाः ॥ 32 ॥

शक्तिजीतु तु निंद्यं स्याङ्तुमात्रं चराचरण् ।

अशकाः शुशुविजये गमने भोजने तथा ॥ 33 ॥

In this whole Universe, whoever he may be, all are incapable of any action if he be deprived of his force; what more than this, if Śiva be deprived of Kula Kunḍalini Śakti, He becomes a lifeless corpse; O great ascetic Rṣis! She is present everywhere thus in every thing in this universe from the highest Brahma to the lowermost blade of grass, all moving and non-moving things. Verily everthing becomes quite inert, if deprived of force; whether in conquering one's enemies, or in going from one place to another or in eating—one finds oneself quite incapable, if deprived of force.

एवं सर्वेगता शक्ति: सा ब्रहोति विविच्छते ।

सोपाय्या विविधे: सन्यनिवार्याँ सुधिया सदा ॥ 34 ॥ विद्याँ च सातिक्यों शक्तिस्तया हीनो5यकर्मेकृता । द्विणे राजसीं शक्तियां दीना ह्यादृष्टिकृता ॥ 35 ॥

शिके च तामसी शक्तिस्तया संहारकारकाः।

Thus the omnipresent Śakti, the wise call by the name of Brahma. Those who are verily intelligent should always worship Her in various ways and determine thoroughly the reality of Her by every means. In Viṣṇu, there is the Śatīvki Śakti; then He can preserve; otherwise He is quite useless; so in Brahmā there is Rājasī Śakti and He creates; otherwise He is quite useless; in Śiva, there is Tāmasī Śakti and He destroys; else He is quite useless.

इन्यूढ़ो मनसा सर्वे विवार्य च पुनः पुनः ॥ ३६ ॥

शक्ति: कांति बढ़ापड़ा सा वै पालयतेशल्म,।

इच्छय संहूरल्यो जगदेतच्चारचम् ॥ ३७ ॥

न विभूर्णं हरः शक्रो न बढ़ा न च पायका।

न सूर्वी वक्षणः शकः: स्वे रेव कार्यं कर्बेचन ॥ ३८ ॥

Thus, arguing again and again in one's mind, everyone should come to know that the Highest Ādyā Śakti by Her mere will creates and preserves this Universe and She it is who destroys again in time the whole Brahmānda, moving and non-moving; no one is capable to do his respective work be he Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Indra, Fire, Sun, Varuna or any other person whatsoever; verily all the Devas perform the respective actions by the use of this Ādyā Śakti.

तथा युक्त हि कुर्येति स्वानि कार्याणि ते सुरः ।

सैव कारणकार्येषु प्रत्यक्षेणावम्पते ॥ ३ १ ॥

That She alone is present in cause and effect and is doing every action, can be witnessed vividly.

सरुणा निर्गुणा सा तु दिषा प्रोक्ता मनीविधि: ।

सरुणा राशिधि: सेवा निर्गुणा तु विराशिधि: ॥ 40 ॥

The intelligent ones call that Sakti twofold; one is Sagunā and the other is Nirgunā. The people, attached to the senses and the objects, worship the Sagunā aspect, and those who are not so attached worship the Nirgunā aspect.

धार्यविक्रमामेणा सवामीन स निराकुला ।

द्वाति वहितान्कामान्यूजिता विचारिपूर्वकम् ॥ 4 । ॥

Book I Chapter IX

That conscious Sakti is he Lady of the fourfold aims of life, religion, wealth, desires, and liberation. When She is worshipped according to the rules, She awards all sorts of desires.

न जानीत जना मुहास्तां सदा माययतुतः ।

जानन्तोप्रि नरा: कैचिन्योह्यंति परानपि ॥ 4 2 ॥

पोषकता: स्वोतार्थ वै पार्शक्षानि पृथक्ययक् ।

The worldly persons, charmed by the Māyā of this world, do not know Her at all; some persons know a little and charm others; whereas some stupid and dull-deaded Pundits, impelled by Kali, start sects of heretics, Pāsundas for the sustenance of their own bellies.

प्रवर्तेयिति कलिना प्रेरिता मन्द्वेसतः ॥ 43 ॥

कलावस्मिन्द्रभाग नानाधेवसूम्यिततः ।

नान्ये युग तथा धर्मों वेदवाहाः कंधवंच ॥ 44 ॥

O highly fortunate Munis! In no other Yugas were found acts as prevelent in this Kali Yuga, based on various different opinions and altogether beyond the pale of the Vedic injunctions.

विष्णुश्रत्यसायुंगो तपो वर्णयनेकशः ।

बद्याहारखयो देवा ध्यारंतः कमपि ध्यूम ॥ 4 5 ॥

कामयाना: सदा कामं ते ग्रयः सर्वदैव हि ।

वर्जित यज्ञान्विवधान्ब्वाहियामुहेशुशः ॥ 4 6 ॥

Behold again, if Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa be the supreme Deities, then why do these three Devas meditate on anot'er One beyond speech, beyond mind and practise, for years, hard austerities; and why do they perform yajñas (sacrifices) for their success in creation, preservation, and destruction?

ते शै सफिं परां देरी बढ़ाढ़ायां परपातिमकान् ।

ध्यार्योत मनसा नित्यं नित्यां मत्वा सनातनीम् ॥ 47 ॥

They know, verily, the Highest Supreme Being,

Brahmanī Devī Śakti eternal, constant and therefore they meditate Her always in their minds.

तस्म्यक्तिस् सदा सेव्या विद्धिद्रः कृतलिश्रधः ।

निश्रयः सर्वशताकाणां जातव्यो मुनिस्तस ॥ 4 ॥ ॥

Therefore the wise man, knowing this firmly, should serve in every way the Highest Śakti. O Munis! This is the settled conclusion of all the Śāstras.

कृष्णाच्छुतं मया चैततेने ज्ञातं तु नारवात् ।

पितुः सकाशातनोपि बहुणा विश्यावक्रवतः ॥ 49 ॥

I have heard of this great hidden secret from Bhagavān Krṣna Dvaipāyana. He heard it from Nārada, and Nārada heard it from his own father Brahmā.

न श्रोत्थ न मंतव्यमन्येधां वचनं बुधैः ।

गवित्ते सदा सेव्या विद्धिद्वः कृतनिश्रधः ॥ 50 ॥

Brahmā heard this from Viṣṇu. O Munis! it is well that the wise even should not hear or think anything to the contrary from other sources; they should with their concentrated heart serve the Brahma Sanātani Śakti.

प्रत्यक्षमपि ग्रहस्यागत्क्य यिवेहितम् ।

अतः सर्वेषं घृतेषु जाताया शक्तिरेव हि ॥ ५१ ॥

इति श्रीमदेशीभगवते महापुराणे प्रथमकक्योडग्नोडधायः ।।८।।

It is clearly witnessed in this world that if there be any substance wherein this conscious Sākti does not exist, that becomes inert, quite useless for any purpose. So know this fully that it is the Highest Divine Mother of the Universe that is playing here, residing in every being."

Thus ends the Eighth Chapter of the First Book on deciding who is to be worshipped in the

Mahāpurāna Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

Book I Chapter IX

CHAPTER IX

On the Killing of Madhu Kaitabha

सूत उवाच

यदा विनिर्नता नित्रा देहानस्य जगदगुगेः ।

नेत्रायनासिकाबाबूहदयेभ्यन्तक्षोरसः ॥ 1 ॥

निःसून्य गगाने तस्थौ तामधी शक्तिभतनाम ।

उदतिषज्ञगाथो जुभ्यमाण: पुनः पुनः ॥ 2 ॥

Sūta said: "O Munis! When the excellent

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Tāmaši Śakti, the Goddess presiding over sleep came out from the eyes, mouth, nose, heart, etc. of the body of World-Guru Viṣṇu and rested in the celestial space, then the powerful Lord Viṣṇu began to yawn and got up.

तदाउपर्यस्त्थतं तन भयरन्तं प्रजापतिम ।

उदाच च महातेजा मेघर्भारीया सिरा ॥ ३ ॥

He saw the Prajāpati Brahmā, terrified and spoke to him in words, deep like rumbling in the clouds:

विष्णुकावच

किमागतोप्रस भगवंत्सत्यक्वत्सा उपवा ।

कस्मार्चितातुगोप्रस त्वं भयाकुलितमानस: ॥ ४ ॥

“O Bhagavān Padmayone! What makes you come here, and leave your tapasya? Why do you look so terrified and anxious?”

ब्रह्मोवाच

त्वकर्णमलजी देव तैर्यो च मधुकैटभी ।

हंतुं मां सुमायाती घोरस्थी महाबली ॥ 5 ॥

Hearing this, Brahmā said: "O Deva! Two very powerful and very terrible Daityas, Madhu Kaitabha sprung from the wax of thy ears approached to kill me, terrified thus, I have come to Thee.

भयातयो: स्यायातस्त्वत्सार्थीं जगतयते ।

ग्राहि मां वासुदेवाठा भयत्रस्तं विचेतनम् ॥ 6 ॥

So, O Lord of the Universe! O Vāsudeva! now I am quite out of senses and terrified; save me."

विष्णुत्वाच

तिष्ठादि निर्भयो जातस्ती इनिष्प्याम्यहं किल ।

सुद्वायाजममुर्तूपौं मत्समीपं गतायुधो ॥ 7 ॥

Visnu, then, said: "Now go and rest in peace, without any fear; let those two stupid, whose life has well nigh exhausted, come to me for battle; I will certainly kill them."

सूत उवाच

एवं वदति देतेगे दानावी तो महावली ।

विश्चल्यानावंजे चोभो सुंगापौ मदार्थिहिं ॥ 8 ॥

Sūta said: "While Bhagavān Viṣṇu, the Lord of

all the Devas, was thus saying, those two every powerful Dānavas, elated with pride, came up there, in their search for Brahma!

निराधारी जले तन संस्थिति विनतज्जरो ।

तावूचतुर्दोव्नमती ब्रहाणं मुनिसदामा: ॥ 9 ॥

“O Munis! The two proud Daityas stood there in the midst of the Pralaya water without any thing to stand on and with calm attitude.

पतावित्वा समायातः सश्रियाय्य किं ततः ।

युढ़ं कुरु हनियावः पश्यतोर्येव सित्रिधे ॥ 10 ॥

They then spoke to Brahmā as follows: O You have fled and come here? You cannot escape. Go on and fight. I will kill You before this one.

पश्रादेनं हनियावः सर्पभोगोपरि स्थितम् ।

ल्यमढ़ कुंस मंग्रामं दासोउस्मिति च वा यद ॥ १ १ ॥

Then I will kill him also who sleeps on this bed of serpent. Either gives us battle or acknowledge yourself as our servant.

तद्धुत्वा वचनं विष्युस्तावुचा जनादनः ।

कुकृतां समरं कांम मया दानवपुत्र्वी ॥ १ २ ॥

Hearing their words, Janārdana Viṣṇu addressed them as follows: “O two Dānavas, mad for war! Come and fight with me as you like; I will surely curb your pride.

ह्रिथायीम मदं चाहं युवयोर्मन्तेयः किल ।

आगच्छतं महापार्णी अब्रद्धो चेढ़ां महावलि ॥ १३ ॥

“O, two powerful ones! If you trust me, come and fight.

सूत उवाच

शुत्वा तद्रचनं चोभी क्रोध्याकुललेचनौ ।

निराधारे जलस्थी च युद्धोषुक्तो बयुवत् ॥ 14 ॥

Hearing this, the two Dānavas in the midst of that mass of water resting without any support, came up there to fight, with their eyes with anger.

मयुध कुपितस्तत्र हरिणा सह संयुगम् ।

कर्तु प्रवतितस्तपुं कैटभस्तु तथा स्थितः ॥ 15 ॥

The Daitya, named Madu, became very angry, came up quickly to fight while Kaitabha remained where he stood.

Book I Chapter IX

बाहुयुद्धे तयोरासी-मल्लयोरिव मतचोः ।

शान्ते मधौ कैटपस्तु संग्राममक्रोतचा ॥ १६ ॥

पुनर्मधु: कैटभश्र ययुधातं पुन: पुनः ।

बाहुयुद्धे२ रागवटी विण्याना प्रभाविण्याना ॥ १७ ॥

Then the hand-to-hand fight ensued between the two mad athletes; Bhagavān Hari and Madhu became tired; Kaitabha came up and began to fight. After that Madhu and Kaitabha joined and, blind with rage, began to fight again and again hand-to-hand with the very powerful Viṣṇu.

प्रेक्षकस्तु तदा बढ़ा देवी चैवातरिक्षण ।

न ममस्तुस्तदा तो तु विज्युः सु लनमिमावान् ॥ 18 ॥

And Bhagavān Brahmā and the Prime Force

Ādyā Śakti witnessed this from the celestial

Heavens.

पड्वर्षेसह्वायणि यदा जातानि युक्प्रापा ।

हरिणा स्थितितं तत्र कारणं भरणं तयोः ॥ १९ ॥

So the fight lasted for a long, long, time; yet the two Dānavas did not feel a bit tired; rather Bhagavān Viṣṇu became tired Thus five thousand years passed away. Hari then began to ponder over their mode of death.

पड्वर्षसहस्वाणि मया युबं कृतं कित।

न श्रांति दानवी योगे श्रोतांर्दे चैनद्धुद्वम् ॥ २०॥

He thought: "I fought for five thousands of years but the two formidable Dānavas have not been tired anything, rather I am tired; it is a matter of great surprise.

क्व गत मे वलं शौर्यं कस्माच्चेमावनामयो ।

किमत्र कारणं चित्वं विचायं मसना त्विष्। २ १ १ ॥

Where has gone my :rowess? and what for the two Dānavas were not tired; What is the cause? This is a matter, now seriously to be thought over. हृति चैतागरं दूरवा हारं हर्यपरावृषी ।

क्रवतुस्ती मदोच्नाती मेघर्गंधीरनि:स्वनी ॥ 22 ॥

तव नोच्छेतं विष्णो यदि श्रांतोर सिद्धः ।

ब्रहिं दासोउसि वा नूनं कृत्वा शिरासि चांजसिन् ॥ 23 ॥

Seeing Bhagavān Hari thus sunk in cares, the two hanghy Dānavas sāoke to him with great glee and with a voice like that of the rumbling of cloud:

"O Viṣṇu! If you feel tired, if you have no sufficient strength to fight with us, then raise your folded palms on your head and acknowledge that you are our servant; or if you can, go on fighting.

नोचेड्यूढ़ कुरुब्याच समर्पोर्स महामते ।

हत्वा त्वां निर्भिन्याव: पुरुषं च चतुर्मुंखम् ॥ 24 ॥

O intelligent one! We will take away your life first; and then slay this four-faced Brahmā.

सूत उवाच

श्रुत्वा तद्धारितं विणुस्त्वोतस्तिम्मानोदोष्टी ।

उवाच वचनं श्लक्षणं सामपूर्व महामना: ॥ 25 ॥

हरिकवाच

श्रांत भीते त्यक्ताग्राघे पितते बातके तथा ।

प्रहरित न वीरासे धर्म एष सनातनः ॥ 26 ॥

Hearing the words of the two Dānavas, resting there without any support in the vast ocean, the high-minded Viṣṇu spoke to them in sweet consoling words: “See, O heroes! no one ever fights with one who is tired, afraid, who is weaponless, who is fallen and who is a child; this is the Dharma of the heroes.

पडुबर्वसहस्राणि कृतं युद्धे मया स्थित है ।

एको3ई भातरी वां च बलिन्ती सूग्री तथा ॥ 27 ॥

कृतं विश्रभाणं मध्ये युवाय्यां च पुनः पुनः ।

तथा विश्रभाणं कृत्वा युधेजई नात्र संगराः ॥ 28 ॥

तिष्ठता हि युवां तावद्वतंनी मदोकट्टी ।

विश्रभ्यहं कार्यिणीय युंदों ना व्यायमार्गतः ॥ 29 ॥

Both of you fought with me for five thousands of years. But I am single handed; you are two, and both equally powerful and both of you took rest at intervals. I will, therefore, take rest for a while, and then fight you with certainly. Both of you are very powerful and very much elated in vanity. Therefore rest a while. After taking rest for a while I will fight with you according to the just rules of warfare.

सूत जयात

इति श्रुत्वा वचस्तस्य विश्रब्धौ दान्वोतभी ।

संस्थिती दूरतस्तत्र संग्रामे कृतनिष्ठशी ॥ ३० ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Hearing these words of Hari, the two chief Dānavas trusted and remained far aloof, ready to fight again.

अतिनूरे च तो द्रह्या वासुदेवश्रुभुंजः ।

द्यथी च मनसा तत्र कारणं मरणे तयोः ॥ 31 ॥

Now the four-armed Vāsudeva, seeing them at a sufficient distance, began to ponder in his mind thus: "How their death can be effected?

चितनाज्ञानमुचत्रे देवीदन्तवग्वुधी ।

कामं वांक्षितमरणी न ममन्तुत्तत्स्तम्बी ॥ 32 ॥

Thinking for a time, he came to know that they have been granted, by the Supreme Šakti Devi, death at their will (Icchāmrtyu); and, therefore, they are not getting tired.

द्वया मया कृतं मुद्धं शमोउं मे द्वया गतः ।

क्रौयि च कर्थं युद्धमेवं ज्ञावा विविश्यम् ॥ 33 ॥

अकृते च तथा युद्धे कवयोत गयिष्यतः ।

विनाएं दुःखदी निचल दानवी वर्दर्विति ॥ 34 ॥

I fought so long with them uselessly; my labour went in vain. How then can I now fight, with this certain knowledge. Again if I do not fight, how these two Dānavas, elated with their boon and giving troubles to all, be destroyed?

भगवता वयं दुस्तदया सोप्रि च दुर्घटः ।

मरणं चेच्छया कामं दुःवितोर्नि न वांक्षिति ॥ 35 ॥

When the boon is granted by the Devi, their death is also well nigh impracticable. Who wants his own death, even placed in very great distressed circumstances.

रोग्यत्सोर्धि दीनोर्धि न मुभूर्वित कशन ।

कवोदोमी मदोनाती मतृकामी पथित्य : ।। ३६ ॥

Attacked by terrible diseases, reduced to indigent poverty no one wants to die; so how can it be expected that these two haughty Dānavas would want their death themselves?

नत्वा शरणं वाभि विशा शर्निक सुकामदाम् ।

विना तथा न सिद्धान्ति कामाः: सत्यक्षसत्रा ॥ 37 ॥

एवं संचिंत्यामानसु गाने संश्विता शिजाम् ।

अप्यसूद्राविन्यपूर्णेपनिर्नो मनोहामू ॥ 38 ॥

कृतासुस्तिरमेयाता तां च तुराव योगवित् ।

विनाशार्थ तयोस्तत्र वरदां घुवनेश्वरीम् ॥ 39 ॥

Therefore, it is advisable me to take refuge of that Ādyā Śakti Devi, the giver of the fruits of all desires. No desires can ever be fructified unless She is thoroughly pleased. Thus thinking, Bhagavān Viṣṇu saw the beautiful Devi Yoga Nidrā Śivā, shining in the air. Then the supreme Yogī, Bhagavān Viṣṇu, of immeasurable spirit began to praise with folded palms that great Bhuvaneśvari Mahā Kālī, the giver of boons, for the destruction of the Dānavas.

विष्यान्वाच

नमो देंवि महामाये सुहिंसंहारकारिण ।

अनादिदिन्धने चण्डि भुनीमुक्तिप्रदे शिवे ॥ 40 ॥

"O Devi! I bow down to Thee; O Mahāmāyā, the Creatrix and Destructrix! Thou beginningless and deathless! O auspicious Caṇdike! The Bestower of enjoyment and liberation.

न ते रूपं विश्वानामि सुगर्नि निर्गणं तथा ।

चरित्राणि कृते देवि संख्यातीलिति यानि ते ॥ 41 ॥

I do not know Thy Saguna or Nirguna forms; how then can I know Thy glorious deeds, innumerable as they are. Today Thy undescribable prowess has been experienced by me, I being made senseless and unconscious by Thy power of sleep.

अनुभुक्ता मा तेजदा प्रभावश्रातिषुर्देः ।

यदहं निद्रा लीन: संज्ञातोप्रय विवेलनः ॥ 42 ॥

बहुणा चातिवलेन वेधितोर्धि पुनः पुनः ।

न प्रयुद्ध: सर्वधारुं सढ्धोचितपत्रिद्रिवः ॥ 43 ॥

Being tried again and again by Brahmā with great care to bring me back to my consciousness, I could not become conscious, so much my senses were contracted down.

अचेनलं सम्पात: प्रभावातव चाधवेक ।

ल्या मुक: प्रबुद्धोर्धे युद्ध बहुधा कृतम् ॥ 44 ॥

श्रातोड़ न च तो श्रांती ल्या दनवरी वरी।

ब्रह्माणं हेतुभायातो दानवी मदार्थिती ॥ 45 ॥

O Mother! By Thy power, Thou didst keep me unconscious and Thou again hast freed me from sleep, and I also fought so many times. O giver of one's honour! Now I am tired; but Thou hast

Book I Chapter IX

granted boon to the two Dānavas and therefore they are not getting tired.

आहुतो च मया कामं ह्रद्वयु:द्वाय मानते ।

कृतं युद्धं महाधोरं मया ताभयं महाधरिं ॥ 46 ॥

These two Dānavas, puffed up with pride, were ready to kill Brahmā; and, therefore, I challenged them to fight with me and they too are fighting fiercely with me in this vast ocean.

मरणं बरदानं ते ततो जातं महाद्रतम ।

जात्वाहं गरणं प्रापतस्त्वामड शरणप्रदाम ॥ 47 ॥

साहाय्यं कुक मे मातः ख्वजोर्भं मुद्धकर्मण ।

दूर्ती ती बरादनेन तव देशातर्निजाने ॥ 48 ॥

But Thou hast granted them the wonderful boon that they will die whenever they will; and therefore I have now come to Thy refuge, as Thou protectest those that come under Thy shelter. Therefore, O Mother, the remover of the Devas' troubles! These two Dānavas are become exceedingly elated by Thy boon and I, too, am tired.

हंतु मापुताती पाणी किं कांगीम कव यासि च ।

इत्युक्ता सा तदा देवी सिताद्वैमुबाव च ॥ 49 ॥

Therefore dost Thou hclp me now. See! those two sinners are ready to kill me; without Thy grace, what can I do now? and wnere to go ?'

प्रणमन्तं जगत्राधं वासुदेवं सनातनम् ।

देवदेव हरे विष्णो कुरु युद्धे जुन: स्वयम् ॥ 50 ॥

वंवित्वा त्विगो शुगै हंल्वी व विमोहिते ।

मोहीयिण्यार्थहं नूनं दानवी यक्रवा दुणा ॥ 51 ॥

Thus praised by the eternal Vāsudeva Jagannātha Hari, with humility and pranāms, the Devi Mahā Kālī, resting in the air, said smiling: "O, Devadva Hari! Fight again; O, Viṣṇu! These two heroes, when deluded by My Māyā, would be slain by you; I will delude them, certainly, by My side long glance; O, Nārāyaṇa! then slay quickly the two Dānavas, when conjured by My Māyā."

जहि नारायणागु लं व म मारावियमोहिति ।

तच्छूला वचनं विष्णुस्त्वा: प्रीतिस्वान्वितम्। 52 ॥

संग्रामस्थलमासाठा तस्थो तत्र महाणे ।

तद्यापती च तं चींरी युद्धकामी महावली ॥ 53 ॥

वीक्ष्य विष्णुं स्थितं तत्र हर्षयुक्ती बयूवतुः ।

तिष्ठ सिष्ठ महाकाय कुरु युद्धे चतुर्भुं ॥ 54 ॥

दैवार्थीनी विद्विलाउंत्र नूनं जयपराजये ।

सबलो जयमाटपोति दैवाजयति दुबलैः ॥ 55 ॥

सर्वेवैव न कत्वेथी हर्शोगोंकी महात्मना ।

पुरा वे बह्यो दैत्या सिता दानवर्शिण ॥ 56 ॥

अधुना चाचनोः साधुं युध्यमानः पराधितः ।

Sūta said: “Hearing these loving words of Bhagavatī, Bhagavān Viṣṇu went to the scene of battle in the middle of that ocean, when the two powerful Dānavas of serene tempers and eager to fight, became very glad on seeing Viṣṇu in the battle and said: “O four-armed one! we see your desire is very lofty indeed; well; stand! stand! now be ready for battle, knowing that victory or defeat is surely dependent on Destiny. You should think now thus: “Though it is geneally true that the more powerful one wins victory; but it also happens sometimes that the weak gets the victory by queer turn of Fate; see the high souled persons should not be gald at their victories, nor should express their sorrows at their defeat; so dont be glad, thinking, that you on many former occasions fought with many Dānavas who were your enemies, and got the victory; nor be sorry that now you are defeated by the two Dānavas.”

सूत जयाच

इत्थुकल्चा ती महाबाङ् युद्धाय समुपस्थित्तो ॥ 57 ॥

वीक्ष्य विभ्युजीबानागुं मुहिना-दुकतकमीण ।

तावय्यतितक्लोमन्ती जप्तनुपुंदिहा हरिम् ॥ 58 ॥

एवं परस्यं जातं युद्धे परमदारुणम् ।

युध्यमानो महावीर्णे नृद्वा नारायणस्तदा ॥ 59 ॥

‘Thus saying, the powerful Madhu Kaitabha came up to fight. Seeing this, Bhagavān Viṣṇu struck them immediately by fist with great violence; the two Dānavas, elated with their strength, struck Hari in return with their fists. Thus fighting went on vigorously.

सूत उवाच

अपश्यत्समुखं देख्या: कृत्वा दीनां रुंग हरि: ।

तं वीक्ष्य तारुर्ण विद्युं करूणात्रसंयुन्तु।। 6० ॥

जहासातील तापाड़ी वीक्ष्याणा ततासुते ।

तो जघान कराढ़ीछ कामबाणीरिवापरे: ॥ 6 1 ॥

"Now seeing the two Dānavas of great powers, fighting on incessantly, Nārāyaṇa Hari cast a glance expressive of great distress, towards the face of the Devi Mahākalī. Seeing Viṣṇu thus distressed, the Devi laughed loudly and began to look constantly with eyes somewhat reddish and shot towards the two Asuras side-long glances, of love and amorous feelings which were like arrows from the Cupid.

मन्दिमतयुतैः कामं प्रेमभावयुतैनु ।

दूद्वा मुगुहुतः पापी देल्या वक्वं चिलोकान्म। ६ २ ॥

विशेषमिति मवनाएं कामवाणातिरीक्षिति ।

. बीक्षमाणी स्थिती तत्र तां देवी विगतद्धप्रभाम। ६ २३ ॥

The two vicious Daityas became fascinated by the side-long glances of the Devi and took great pleasure in them; being extremely agitated by these amorous darts, looked with one steady gaze towards the Devi, of spotless lustre.

हरिणासी च तदुर्दु देत्यस्तत्र चिकीर्षितम् ।

मोहिती तो परिज्ञाय भगवाक्यार्वितमः ॥ 64 ॥

उदारा ती ह्मन रणक्षणे मेघमभ्योरया गिरा ।

वंर वरयतां वौरीे व्यवयोर्यपिविहतः ॥ 65 ॥

ददामि परमप्रीतो युद्धेन युवयोः किल ।

दानवा वह्वो दृषा युध्यमाना मया पुरा ॥ 66 ॥

Bhagavān Hari, too, saw the wonderful enchanting pastime of the Devi. Then Hari, perfectly expert in adopting means to secure ends, began to speak smiling and in voice like that of the rumbling cloud, knowing the two Dānavas enchanted by Mahāmāyā, thus:

युवयो: सदृगः कोर्पि न दृष्टो न चे वे श्रुतः।

तस्मातुष्ठोत्रसम कामं वे निस्तुनेल बनेने च। ६७ ॥

भात्रोक्षा वांत्रितं कामं प्रपच्छापि महावलि ।

तच्छूता वचनं विणोः साधिभानीे ससगुतो ॥ 68 ॥

"O two heroes! I am very glad at the mode of your fighting. So ask from me boons. I will grant that to you. I saw many Dānavas before, fighting; but never I saw them expert like you, nor I heard like this: I am therefore, very much satisfied by your such unrivalled powers. Therefore, O greatly powerful pair of Dānavas! I wish to grant both of you any boon that you want."

सूत ज्ञाव

वीक्षमाणी महामायां जगदानन्दाकारिणीम् ।

तमून्तुकु कामातीं विद्युं कमलतोचनी ॥ 69 ॥

"Seeing the Devi Mahāmāyā, the gladdener of the Universe, the two Dānavas felt themselves amorous; and, therefore, they became proud on hearing Viṣṇu's those words and told Viṣṇu, with their lotus-like eyes wide open, thus:

हरेउनच च का वा वां त्वं किं ततुमिकेच्छ्चि ।

ददावतुत्न्यं देयेण दातातौ नौ न याचकी ॥ ७ ७ ॥

प्रार्थय त्वं हृषीकेश मनोरभिलिपितं वम् ।

तुष्टी स्वस्तव युढ्रेण वासुवेदाब्धुतेन च ॥ ७ ७ ॥

O Hari! what do you like to give us? We are not beggars; we do not want anything from you. O Lord of the Devas! Rather we will give you whatever you desire; we are donors; not receivers. So, O Vāsudeva! Hrṣikeśa! We are glad to see your wonderful fight; so ask from us any boon that you desire.'

तयोरतद्वचनं श्रुचा प्रत्युवाच जनादनं: ।

भवेतामघ मे तुटी मम बध्यापुभावपि ॥ 72 ॥

Hearing their words, Bhagavān Janārdana said: "If you both are so much pleased with me, then I want this that both of you be killed by me."

सूत जवाच

तच्छूवा वचनं विण्योदनवी चातिविसिति ।

वंचिताविति मन्त्रानी तस्थतुः शोकसंसुंची ॥ ७ ३ १ ॥

विचार्यं मनसा ती तु दानवी विद्युपूनुः ।

प्रेक्ष्य सर्वे जलमयं भृति स्थलविखर्जितान् ॥ ७ ४ ॥

Hearing these words of Viṣṇu, Madhu Kaitābha became very much surprised and thinking “we are

Book 1 Chapter IX

now cheated' remained for some time merged in sorrow. Then reflecting that there is water everwhere and solid earth nowhere, they said:

हरे योउयं वरो दत्तल्यथा पूर्वे जनदिन ।

सत्यवागासि देहेश देहि तं बाँछितं वरम् ॥ 75 ॥

निर्जैल विपुले देहे शनव मधुसूदन ।

बदायबालां तु भवत सत्यवाभ्यव माधा ॥ 76 ॥

"O Janārdana Hari! We know that you are truthful; therefore, now we want this desired boon from you that you wanted to grant us before; now grant us this desired boon of ours. O Madhusūdana! We will be slain by you; but kill us, O Mādava! on a solid earth, free from any water; and thus keep your word.

भूत्वा चक्रं तदा विष्णुस्तावुवाच हस्तहरि ।

हन्यद्ध वां महापानी निर्जले विपुले स्थले ॥ 77 ॥

Śrī Bhagavān Hari laughed and remembering His Sudarśana disc, said: “O two highly fortunate ones! Verily, I will kill both of you on the vast solid spot without any trace of water.

इल्युक्ता देवदेवेश ऊरू कृत्वास्त्रवितस्ते ।

दर्यामास तो तत निरन्तरं च जलोपरि ॥ 78 ॥

Thus saying, Devadeva Hari expanded His own thighs and showed to those Dānavas the vast solid earth on the surface of water and said:

नात्स्यत्र दानवौ वारि शिरासी मुक्तामिह ।

सत्यवागहमदीय भविष्यामि च तां तथा ॥ 79 ॥

"O two Dānavas! See, here is no water. Place your two heads here; thus, I will keep my word and you would keep you word."

तदाक्षयं वचस्तब्यं विधित्य मनसा च ते ।

वर्यमाससुदैं घोजनानां सहस्कम् ॥ 80 ॥

Hearing this, Madhu Kaiṭabha thought over in their minds and expanded their bodies to ten thousand Yojanas.

भगवानिदुगुणं चके जघनं विमित्ते तदा ।

शीर्ष सन्द्यातं तत्र जघने परमाढ़ते ॥ 81 ॥

Bhagavān Viṣṇu Hari also extended his thighs

to twice that amount. Seeing this, they were greatly surprised and laid their heads on the thighs of Viṣṇu.

रथांगेन तदा छिक्रे विष्णाना प्रभविष्णाना ।

जघनोपरि वेगेन प्रकृष्टे शिरसी तद्योः ॥ 82 ॥

Viṣṇu, of wonderful prowess, then cut off quickly with His Sudarāśna disc the two very big heads over His thighs.

गतानुपाणी तदा जातौ दानवी मधुकैटपी ।

सागर: सकलो व्यापतस्तदा वै मेदसा तयो : ॥ 83 ॥

Thus, the two Dānavas Madhu Kaitabha passed away; and the marrow (meda) of them filled the ocean.

मेदितीति ततो जातं नाम पुच्य्या: समंततः ।

अभव्या मुनिका तेन कारणेन मुनीश्वा: ॥ 84 ॥

O Munis! For this reason, this earth is named Medinī and the earth is unfit for eatable purpose.

इति वः कविंतं सर्वे वयुहोःप्रिम सुनिशितम् ।

महाविदा महामाया सेवनीया सदा बुधै: ॥ 85 ॥

Thus I have described to you all that you asked. The sum and substance is this that the wise persons should serve Mahāmāyā with all their hearts.

आताध्या परमा शफितः: सर्वेत्रीय सुगतुर्धेः ।

नातः परर्ते किंचिद्धिकं घुवनये ॥ 86 ॥

सत्यं सत्यं पुनः सत्यं वेदराश्ञाख्यिनिथः ।

पूजनीया परा शफितर्भिनुंगा सगुणारप्रबा ॥ 87 ॥

इति श्रीदेवीभागवते महापुराणे प्रथमकक्ये

तत्नोयाद्यः ॥ 9 ॥

The Supreme Śakti is worshipped by all the Devas. Verily, verily, I say unto you that this is decided, in all the Vedas and other Śastras that there is nothing higher than this Ādyā Śakti. Therefore this Supreme Śakti should be worshipped anyhow; either in Her Saguna form or in her Nirguna state.

Thus ends the Ninth Chapter of the First Book

on the killing of Madhu Kaitabha in the

Mahāpurāna Srimaddevībhāgavatam

of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi

Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER X

On the Śiva's Granting Boons

རྟོགས་ཆུ།

सूत पूर्व त्वया प्रोकं व्यासेन्यातितेजसा ।

कृत्वा पुगणमिखलं सुकायाध्यायितं सुभम् ॥ १ ॥

व्यासेन तु तपस्त्वा कथमुत्वातितः शुकः ।

विस्तरं बृहि सकलं चय्वुतं कृष्णातत्क्या ॥ २ ॥

The Rsis said: O Sūta! You told before, that Vyāsa Deva, of unrivalled spirit, composed all the purānas and taught them to his own son Śuka Deva; but how did Vyāsa Deva, who was incessantly engaged in tapasyā, procreate Śuka? Describe to us in detail what you heard direct from Krṣṇa Dvaippāyana Vyāsa.

सूत उवाच

प्रवृक्ष्यामि युकोल्पितं च्यासात्सल्यवतीसुन्ता ।

यथोतयनः शुकः साक्षाधोनीनां प्रवरो मुनि: ॥ 3 ॥

Sūta said: O Rṣis! Hear how Śuka Deva, the best of the Munis and the foremost of the Yogis, was born of Vyāsa Deva, the Satyavati's son.

मेञ्गुंगे महायये व्यास सत्यवतीसुतः ।

तपश्वारा सेठत्यूं पुत्रार्य कृतनिश्रवः ॥ 4 ॥

On the very beautiful summit of Mount Meru, Vyāsa, son of Satyavati, firmly determined, practised very severe austerities for the attainment of a son.

जपत्रेकाकारं मन्ये वार्वीजं नारदाच्छुतम् ।

ध्यायगरां महामायां पुरकामतपोनिधिधः ॥ 5 ॥

Heaving heard from Nārada, he, the great ascetic, repeated the one syllabled mantra of Vāk and worshipped the Highest Māhāmāyā with the object of getting a son.

अनर्पेमैतसा वायोत्तिहास्य चायायम् ।

वीर्यण समिति: पुत्रो मम भ्यावितिभि स ७ ॥ 6 ॥

He asked, Let a son be born to me as pure and as spirited and powerful as fire, air, earth, and Ākāśa.

अतिहास ताहात्रः शतसंवत्सरं प्रभु ।

आराधयन्महादेवं तथैव च सदाशिवम् ॥ 7 ॥

शफि: सर्वत्र पूर्बेति विचार्यं च पुनः पुनः ।

अशगतो निवहते लोकै शक्तिसुं परिपूजते ॥ 8 ॥

He thought over in his mind that the man possessed of Śakti is worshipped in this world and the man-devoid of Śakti is censured here, and thus came to the conclusion that Śakti is therefore worshipped every where; and, therefore, worshipped. Bhagavān Maheśvara coupled with the auspicious Aḍyā Śakti and spent away one hundred years without any food.

यत्र पवंतभुंगे वै कर्णिकारवनाडुते ।

क्रीक्षिति देवता सर्वे मुनवश्छ तपोरिकाः ॥ 9 ॥

आदित्या वसवो रुघा मनतशाश्रिता तथा ।

वसांति मुनयो यय वे चान्य बढ़ावितमाः ॥ 10 ॥

तत्र हेमनरिः शुंगे संगीतध्यनिनिति ।

तप्रधारा धर्मात्या वासः सत्यवतीसुः ॥ 11 ॥

He began his tapasya on that mountain summit which was ornamented with the garden of Karnikāra, where all the Devas play, and where live the Munis highly ascetic, the Ādityas, Vasus, Rudras, Marut, the two Āśvins, and the other mindful Āsīs, the knowers of Brahma and where the Kinnaras always resound the air with their songs of music, etc., such a place Vyāsa Deva preferred for his tapasyā.

ततोउस्य तेजसा व्यार्थ निश्रं सर्वे चाचारम् ।

अनिवर्ण जटा जाता पाराशयेथ्य दीपितः ॥ 12 ॥

ततोउस्य तेज आतव्य भवमपरा रथीपितः ।

तुरासाई तदा दूरवा भयत्रसं क्षमातुम् ॥ 13 ॥

उवाच भगवान् रूहो मघवन्तं तथास्थितम् ।

The whole universe was pervaded with the spirit of asceticism of the intelligent Parāśara's son Vyāsa Deva; and the hair of his head were clotted and looked tawny, of the colour of flames. Seeing the fire of his asceticism, Indra, lord of Śacī, became exceedingly terrified.

Book I Chapter X

गंकर उगाच

क्रविभ्रंघा शीतीउस किं दुःखं ते सुरोष्ध ॥ १४ ॥

अभर्षे नैव कर्त्यस्तापसेषु कदाचन ।

तपश्रुति मुनयो जात्या मां शफित्संगुतम् ॥ १५ ॥

न त्वेतेश्टतिभच्छिति तापास: स्वर्वेथि हि ।

इतृक्तवचनः शक्रस्तमुवाच वृष्यजम् ॥ १६ ॥

कस्मातपत्ययित आयासः कोः:वैस्तय मनोगतः ।

Bhagavān Rudra, seeing Indra thus afraid, fatigued and morose, asked him: "O Indra, why do you look so fear-stricken today? O Lord of the Devas! What is the cause of your grief? Never show your jealousy and anger to the ascetics; for the mindful ascetics always practise severe asceticism with a noble object and worship Me, knowing Me to be possessed of the all powerful Śakti; they never want ill of anybody."

शिव उवाच

पाराणार्यैतु पुत्रार्थी तपश्रतिर दुक्षगम् ॥ 17 ॥

पूर्णविर्गतं जातं द्वायम्ब तृतं शुभम् ।

When Bhagavān Rudra said this, Indra asked him: "What is his object?" At this, Śaṅkara said: "For the attainment of a son, Parasāra's son is practising so severe austerities; now one-hundred years is being completed;

सूत उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा वासवं रुजी दयया मुदितानn: ॥ 18 ॥

गत्वा ऋषिसमीयं तु तमुवाच जगदगुरुः ।

उत्तिष्ठ वासवीपुत्र पुस्ते भविता सृष्म: ॥ 19 ॥

सर्वतेजोवयो जानी कौतिलतां तावान्यः ।

अखिलस्य जनस्यात्रय वतलभवने सुतः सदा । 20 ॥

भविष्यति गृणैः पूर्णे: सान्विकेः सत्यविक्मः ।

I will go to him, and give him today the auspicious boon of a son." Thus speaking to Indra, Bhagavān Rudra, the Guru of the world, went to Vyāsa Deva and, with merciful eyes, said: "O sinless Vāsavi's son! Get up; I grant to you the boon, that you will get a scn very fiery, luminous and spirited like the five elements fire, air, earth, water and Ākāśa, the supreme Jñāni, the store of

all, auspicious qualities, of great renown, beloved to all, ornamented with all Sāttvik qualities, truthful and valorous."

सूत उवाच

तदाकर्ष वच: रूल्धगं कृष्ण्यैवान्सतदा ॥ 21 ॥

शूलपाणिं नमस्कृत्य जगामाङ्गप्रमातन ।

स गतास3प्रममेवागु बहुवर्षभातुः ॥ 22 ॥

अश्वसित्तं गृही मंभार्थानि चिकारीवा ।

मंधनं कुवंततस्य चिते चित्तभरस्तद ॥ 23 ॥

Hearing these sweet words of Bhagavān Śulapāni Maharṣī Krṣna Dvaipāyana bowed down to Him and went back to his own hermitage. Tired with the labour of penance for many years, he wanted to kindle fire by rubbing two fuels (Aranjī) with each other. While doing this, the high souled man suddenly began to think strongly in his mind about procreating a son.

प्रादुर्बंभूर सहसा सुतोत्पत्ती महात्मनः ।

मंधानारिभसोयोगानमंधनाच्छ समुद्धतः ॥ 24 ॥

He thought: “Will it be that my son will be born as this fire is produced by the friction of the two churning sticks?

पावकस्य यथा तत्कल्बं मे स्यात्सुखोद्धः ।

पुत्रारिभस्तु व्याख्याता सा ममाढ़ न विद्धते ॥ 25 ॥

I have not got the wife, which the Pundits designate as “Putrārani”, the youthful wife endowed with beauty, born of a noble family, the chaste one I have not got with me.

तरणी रूपसम्यमा कुलोल्या पतितात ।

कर्षे करीमि कान्ता च पादयोः शृंखलासामू ॥ 26 ॥

But the wife, though chaste and fit to beget a son, is undoubtedly a chain to both the legs; so how can I get such a one for my wife?

पुत्रोपाददासक्षं च पातित्वरे सदा स्थितान् ।

पतित्वतार्पि दक्षतार्थि रूपवतयि कामिनी ॥ 27 ॥

सदा बंधनरूपा च सेव्छामुखविधायनि ।

शिवोर्धि पर्वति तिथ्मं कामिनीपागसंयुतः ॥ 28 ॥

This is known to all that a chaste wife, though clever in doing all household duties, beautiful and giving happiness to one's desires, is yet always a

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

sort of bondage. What more than this, that the ever Bhagavān Maheśvara is always under the bondage of woman. How, then, knowing and hearing all these, I can accept this difficult householder's life?

कवं कंपोम्बं चात्र दुर्वटं च गुहाङ्मम ।

एवं चिंतयतस्तस्य घृताची दिख्यक्तिपणि ॥ 29 ॥

While he was thinking thus, the extraordinarily beautiful Apsarā Ghrtāci fell to his sight, close to him in the celestial air.

प्राप्ता दृष्टियं तत्र समीपे गगने स्थिता ।

तं घृष्ट्या चझुलायांगीं समीपस्थां वत्पासगम् ॥ ३० ॥

Though Vyāsa Deva was a Brahmacārī (holding in control the secret power of generation) of a very high order, yet seeing suddenly the agile Apsarā (“a celestial nymph”) coming close to him and looking askance at him, he became soon smitten with the arrows of cupid and feeling himself distressed, began to think what shall I do in this critical moment.

पञ्जाणपरीतांगस्नृपीमासीद्युत्त्रतः ।

चित्तवामास च तता दिकं करोयद्य संकंटे ॥ ३ १ ॥

धर्मस्य पुरतः प्राप्ते कामभावे दुरासते ।

अङ्गीकरोंम यदोनां वंचनार्थमिहागताम् ॥ ३ २ ॥

हंसिथ्यित महात्मानस्तायसा मां तु चिद्धलम् ।

तपस्तप्ता महाघोरं पूर्णवर्षगतं तिह्न । ३ ३ ॥

दूर्वाज्ञप्तां च विवश: कर्थे जातो महातपा: ।

कामं निद्विष भवतु यदि स्यादतुलं सुखम् ॥ ३ ४ ॥

गृहस्थाश्रमसंभृतं सुखदं पुरकामदम् ।

स्वारंद च तथा प्रोक्तं जानिनां मोक्षदं तथा ॥ ३ 5 ॥

न भविष्यति तनूनमनया देयकन्यया ।

नारदाच्च मया पूर्व श्रुतमस्ति कथानकम् ।

यथोर्वंशिगशो राजा परभूतः पुस्त्वतः ॥ 36 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे प्रथमकन्चे

दरमांसध्याः ।। ११ ११ ॥।

Unbearable amorous feelings now have come to me; now if I take this celestial nymph, knowing that Dharma is ewerwhere looking, and woman has come to take away my precious fire of spirit acquired by my tapasyā, then I will be laughed at by the high-souled ascetic Munis, who will think that I have lost my senses altogether. Alas! Why I who have practised for one hundred years the most terrible ascetism, have become so powerless by the mere sight of this Apsarā! The Pundits declare the household life as the source of getting son, one's heart's desire and the source of all happiness; so much so that it leads all the virtuous souls to the pleasures of Heaven, and cr'dains Mokṣa (liberation) to those who are Jñānis; and if I get such unrivalled happiness from this householder's life, I can have this Deva Kanyā (the celestial nymph) though blameable. But again that happiness will not occur to me through her; there is no doubt in this. So how can I take her. I heard from Nārada how, in ancient days, a king name Purūravā, fell under the clutches of Urvaśī and ultimately felt great pain, being defeated by her. Thus ends the Tenth Chapter on Śiva's granting boon in the Mahāpurāṇa Śrimadevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XI

On the Birth of Budha

ऋषय कयुः

कोउसी पुरूसरा राजा कोर्वींगी देवकन्यका ।

कर्क कर्क्ट च सम्पानं तेन राजा महत्पन्ना ॥ १ ॥

The Rşis said: O Sūta! Who is that King Purūravā? and who is the Deva girl Urvaśī? And how did that high-souled King Purūravā came into trouble?

सर्वं कक्षानकं बृहि लोगमहर्षाजाधुना ।

श्रोतुकामा वयं सर्वे त्वन्युखाकचयुतं रसम् ॥ २ ॥

O, son of Lomaharṣana! Kindly describe now all these to me. We are now desirous to hear sweet words from the lotus of your mouth.

अभृतावि मिहा ते वाणी सूत रसात्मिका ।

न तृप्यापो वयं संर्वे सुधया च यधाउमरा: ॥ ३ ॥

Book I Chapter XI

O Sūta! Your words are sweeter and more full of juice than nectar even; so we are not satiated by hearing them as gods are not satiated with the drink of nectar.

सूत उवाच

शृणूघं मुनयः सर्वे कर्ण विहयं नमोरामम् ।

वश्याम्यं यथावृद्धा शुतां व्यासरोतमात् ॥ ४ ॥

Hearing this Sūta said: O Munis! I am now telling you, as far as my in elligence goes, what I heard from the mouth of Śrī Vyāsa. Now hear that beautiful divine incident.

गुरोस्तु दयिता भार्यां तात नोमेति विश्रुता ।

रूपयीवनयुक्ता सा चार्वीर्गी मदविष्ठता ॥ 5 ॥

गतैकतं द्वितीधोपाय वजामा नस्य भापिमी ।

दूषा च शशिगाउल्यं रूपयीवनशारीति ॥ 6 ॥

कामातुरस्तदा जातः शशी शशिगुर्षी प्रति ।

साउपि वीक्ष्य विधुं कामां जाता मदन्योक्षिति ॥ 7 ॥

Once upon a time the exceedingly beautiful dear wife of Brhaspati, named Tārā, full of youth and beauty, of the most beautiful limbs and intoxicated with pride went to the house of Candra Deva (the Moon), the yajamān (employer of priest Brhaspati at any sacrifice) of Brhaspati. Seeing Tārā of beautiful face like Moon, the Moon became very passionate; Tārā also fell amorous at the sight of Moon. Thus, both of them became very much passionately attached to each other.

ताव्योन्यं प्रेमयुन्तो स्मरातों च बध्वतुः ।

ताराशगरी मदोच्नारी कामबाणप्रधिति ॥ 8 ॥

रेमाते मदमती तो परमस्यहान्थिति ।

द्विताने कतिचित्तत्र जातातः समागणये ॥ 9 ॥

Then they, the Moon and Tārā, being smitten by the arrows of Cupid and intoxicated with amorous passions began their sexual intercourse with reciprocal feelings of passionate love. Some days passed in this state.

ब्रह्मस्तितुं दुःखात्तंततामानयितुं गृहम् ।

प्रेपयामास शिष्यं तु नायाता सा वर्जीकृतां ॥ १० ॥

Bhraspati, then, being distressed with the pangs of separation from his wife, sent his pupil to bring

back Tārā; but Tārā was then submissive of Candra and therefore refused to go.

पुनः पुनर्वेत्र शिष्यं परावर्तेत चन्द्रमाः ।

ब्रह्मस्तितरदा कुब्दो जगाम स्वयमेव हि ॥ १ १ ॥

गत्वा सोमगूरं तत वाच्यस्तिहराप्ती: ।

उवाच शशिनं कूबः: स्यमयानं मदाचित्यम् ॥ १ २ ॥

Brhaspati sent over and over again his pupil and when Candra Deva returned the messenger, Bhraspati became very angry and went personally to Candra's house and, spoke angrily to the Moon who was puffed up with arrogance and somewhat smiling:

किं कृतं कित श्रीतोगो कर्म धर्मविराहितम् ।

रक्षित मम भार्यैं सुदरी केन हेतुना ॥ 13 ॥

“O Moon! Why are you committing this vicious act, contrary to Dharma? Why are you keeping my beautiful wife in your house?

तव देह गुरुक्राहां यजमानोरिस्त सर्वथा ।

गुरुभार्यों कर्मे मूद भुक्ता किं स्थिताप्रवा ॥ 14 ॥

I am your Guru; you are my client; O stupid! why are you enjoying your Guru's wife and keeping her in custody in your house?

बह्रहा हेमहाती च सुराणो गुरुतत्याः ।

महापातकिनो होते तत्संसर्गि च पझमः ॥ 15 ॥

Do you not know that he who kills a Brāhmaṇa, who steals gold, who drinks, who goes to wife of one's Guru are Mahāpātakīs (great sinners) and those who keep company of these are the fifth Mahāpātakīs?

महापातकमुक्तस्त्वं दुराचारोsतिराईतः ।

न देवसदार्नाईस यदि भुक्तेयम्बना ॥ १६ ॥

Therefore, if you had enjoyed my wife, you are exceedingly vicious, blameable and a Mahāpātakī (great sinner); you are not fit to live amongst Devas.

मुखेमामसितापाङ्गैं न्याति सदनं मम ।

नोद्रक्ष्यामि दुरातन्न गुरुदाराप्राहीणम् ॥ १ १ ॥

O wicked one! Now I say that even now you better forsake Tārā, who is of a blue colour and whose look is askance; I won't go from here without having Tāra. And if you do not give back

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

Tārā, then you are certainly with her and undoubtedly I will curse you.'

इत्येवं भायमाणं तमुवारा रोहिणीपति: ।

गृहं क्रीधेसमायुक्तं कान्ताविरहादु:वित्तम् ॥ 18 ॥

When Brhaşpati said so, Candra, the husband of Rohinī, spoke to his Guru Deva, who was very angry, sorry and afflicted at the separation from his beloved wife, thus:

इन्दुवाच

कोधाने तु दुरागाध्या बाहाणाः क्रोधर्विताः ।

पूजाई धर्मशास्त्रा वर्जी-मायास्तोर-म्यथा ॥ 19 ॥

"In this world, Brāhmins that know the Dharma Śāstras, that are devoid of anger, are fit to be worshipped; and those that are not so, they are objects of disrespect and not to be worshipped by all for their anger.

आगमियात सा कामं गृहं ते जरवर्गिनी ।

अत्रेव संस्थिता बाला का ते हानिरितान १ 20 ॥

O sindess one! The beautiful one will surely go to your house; what harm is there to you, if she waits here for a few days?

इच्छया संस्थिता चात्र सुखकामार्थिनी है सा ।

दिनानि कारितिश्रियला सच्छया चारामियति ॥ 21 ॥

She is staying here of her own accord to enjoy pleasures and will go back of her own will. One word more:

त्ववैवोदाडृतं पूर्वी धर्मशास्त्रानं तथा ।

न कही ड्युपति चोरण न विधो घेदकर्मण ॥ 22 ॥

You gave out before this opinion of the Dharma Śāstra that as a Brāhmin though guilty of committing vicious deeds, becomes pure again by the practice of Karmas as enjoined in the Vedas, so a woman, too, though guilty of adultery, becomes pure again when she is again in the period of her menstruation.

इतुक्तः शशिणा तत्र गुरुत्यन्तनु:खितः ।

जगाम स्वगृहं तृर्णा चिन्ताविष्टः: स्मातुतः ॥ 2३ ॥

At these words of Candra Deva, Brhaspati, the Guru of the Devas, became exceedingly sorry and

anxious and went back immediately to his own house, with a grievous heart, full of amorous feelings.

दिनानि कवित्धित स्थित्वा चिन्तालुते गुरुः ।

यथावय गहं तस्य त्वरि तडीषधीपतिः ॥ 24 ॥

स्थितः क्षरा निश्चिदोर्भे सी श्ररेणे रूपास्थितः ।

नाजगाम शगरी तर चुकोपाति बृह्मपति: ॥ 25 ॥

After staying in his own house for some days, Brhaşpati, worn out with anxiety, came again quickly to the house of Candra; but, no sooner he was to enter the gate, he was stopped by the door-keepers; he became very angry and stopped at the gateway. And when he saw that Candra did not make his appearance, he became exceedingly angry and thought:

अयं मे शिष्यातं यातो गुरुभन्तीं तु मातरम् ।

जग्राह बलतोःदार्यीं शिक्षणीयो मयास्ट्रूना ॥ 26 ॥

“Oh! What a wonder is this? this irreligious Candra, being my disciple, has done this vicious act and took by violence the wife of his Guru, who is reckoned as the mother; and I will now teach him a good lesson.

उवाच वार्च कोपान्तु द्वारेशैश्यति बहि: ।

क्रिं गोरे घवने मंद पापाचार सुरायम ॥ 27 ॥

Standing on the entrance, Bhraspati began to speak aloud: "O stupid, vicious, vilest of the Devas! Why do you now sleep in your inner room?

देहि मे कामिनि ग्रीध नोचेछापं द्वाद्यमूम् ।

करीमि भस्मसानूं न द्वादसि प्रियां मम ॥ 28 ॥

Do return quickly my wife; else I will curse you at once. In case you do not bring me back my wife at once, I will now reduce you to ashes."

सूत उवाच

क्रूराणि चैवमादीनि भाषणानि बृह्मयतेः ।

श्रुत्वा डिजपति शीघ्रं निर्भी: सदनाद्वहि: ॥ 29 ॥

Hearing these foul words of Brhaspati, Candra Deva the king of the Dvijas, quickly came out of the house and said smiling:

तमुवाच हसनसोभः किमिदं बहु भापते ।

न ते योग्यासित्यापी सर्वलक्षणसंयुता ॥ 30 ॥

Book 1 Chapter XI

कुरूपा च स्वसुरुषी महाणान्यां सिद्धां द्विज ।

भिश्रुकास्य गृहे योग्या नेत्रुषीं वरार्थिनी ॥ 31 ॥

“O Brāhmin! Why are you spending your stock of words for nothing? Thet all-auspicious lady, of a blue colour and looking askance, is not fit for you; therefore, take another comparatively uglier woman for your use. Ex-cedingly youthful and lovely woman like her is not fit for a beggar’s house.

रातः स्वसूरुके कांते नायाः किल निगढते ।

त्वं न जानासि मंदासन-कामाण स्थिनिरिणीयम् ॥ ३ २ ॥

O stupid one! I see, you don't know anything about the Kāma Śāstra (the book that dwells on amorous passion); those wise men who are skilled in this Śāstra assign for the women, their lovers equivalent to their beauty in matters of amorous dealings.

यथेहं गच्छ दुर्बैद्ध नाहं दायमीय कामिनीम् ।

यच्छयं कुंक तकामं न देशा वरविनीम् ॥ 33 ॥

So, O stupid man! Go away wherever you like. I won't give you back your wife. Do whatever lies in your power. I won't return your wife.

कामातर्य च ते शापो न मां बाधितुमहिति ।

नई दंदे गुगे कांतां यथेच्छसि तथा कुक ॥ 34 ॥

When you have become passionate, your curse won't affect me in any way. This I say finally unto you: "O Guru! I will not give you back your wife; do what you wish."

सूत उवाच

इत्युक्तः शशिना चेज्यक्षिताभाग क्वाचित ।

जगाभ तरसा सच क्रोधयुक फश्वीपतेः ॥ 35 ॥

Thus spoken by Candrā, Brhaspati became very anxious and angry; he then went away quickly to Indra's house.

दूद्वा शतकतूतसर गुरं दुःशातुरं स्थितम् ।

पाठाय्योचमनीयाही: पूजयित्या सुसंस्थितः ॥ ३६ ॥

Seeing Guru Deva morose and sorry, the very liberal minded Indra Deva worshipped him duly with pādya, arghya, and Śacmanīya and asked: "O highly fortunate one! Why do you look so anxious?

प्रपछ्छ परमोदारस्ते तंथावस्थितं गुभम् ।

का चित्त ने महाभाग शोकातर्जित महामुपे ॥ 37 ॥

O great Muni! Why are you grievous and sorry? You are my Guru; is it that you are insulted by any one in my kingdom; say freely.

केनापयानितोजस त्वं मम राज्य गुरुक्छ मे ।

त्वद्धीनमिदं सर्व सैन्यं लोकाधिपेः सह ॥ 38 ॥

All the regents of the several quarters (the Lokapālas) and ali :he Deva armies are under your command.

बहुता विद्यूलस्य शंभुरे चान्ये देवस्तमाः ।

करिष्यिति च साहाय्यं शा चिता वद सांग्रतम् ॥ 39 ॥

Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara and other Devas are ready to lend you every assistance, no doubt. So say what is the cause of your anxiety?

गुरुकावाच

शशिनाउपहत भार्यां ताता मम सुलोचना ।

न ददाति स दुहात्मा प्रार्थितोरिपि पुनः पुनः ॥ 40 ॥

Hearing these words of Indra, Brhaşpati said: "Candra has stolen my beautiful-eyed wife. I asked for her, again and again, but that wicked soul is not returning me my wife at all.

किं कांगीर सुरैगान त्वयेव शरणं मम ।

साहाय्यं कुरु देवेश दुःखितोय शगतकते ॥ 41 ॥

O Lord of the Devas! What am I to do now? You are my help and guide. O Śatakratu! You are the lord of the Devas; therefore, I pray to you with a very grievous heart, help me in this matter.

इन्न उवाच

मा शोकं कुक धर्मून दासोर्सित तव सुक्त ।

आनविष्याम्यहं नृनं भार्यां तव महामते ॥ 42 ॥

Hearing this, Indra said: “O knower of Dharma! Do not be sorry, O Suvrata! I am your servant. O highly intelligent one! Surely, I will bring you back your wife.

प्रेक्षिते चेन्मया दृते न दास्यति मदाकुलः ।

ततो युद्धं क्रतिथामि देवसैन्मैः समावृष्तः ॥ 43 ॥

I will send a messenger and even then if Candra, mad with pride, does not return your wife, I will

wage war on him and fight against him, with all our Deva armies."

इत्याश्रास्य गुरु शक्रो दूर्ते वकृविच्ब्रणम् ।

प्रेययामास सोमाय वातार्शसिनमब्धुतम् ॥ 44 ॥

Thus consoling Brhaşpati, Indra sent a very clever man, who was a good speaker and wonderful in his capabilities, to Candra.

स नाला शिलोकों तु त्वरितः सुविध्वशणः ।

उवाच वचनेवैव वचनं रोहिणपतिभू ॥ 4 5 ॥

The clever and wise messenger went to the Candra Loka (the region of the Moon) and spoke to Candra, the husband of Rohinī, thus:

प्रेमतोर्जं महाभाग शक्रेण त्वां विवक्षाया ।

क्रथितं प्रभुणा चच्च तद्ववीम पहामते ॥ 46 ॥

“O Mahābhāga! Indra has sent me to you to communicate his message to you. So, O intelligent one! I will tell you what he was ordered me; hear.”

धर्मज्ञोसि महाभाग नीति ज्ञानासि सुजत ।

अत्रि: पिता ते धार्यमन्त्र न विरां कतुर्महसि ॥ 47 ॥

"He said: "O, highly fortunate one! You know well Dharma and Niti Śāstra (the science of morals); the more so, because the virtuous Maharsi Atri is your father.

भार्यां रृथा सर्वभृत्यैंथाशक्ति हृतिंहितः ।

तद्यं कलह: कामं भविता नात्र संशयः ॥ 48 ॥

Therefore, O Suvrata! You ought not to commit such blameable act. See, all beings should protect their own wives always without remaining idle to the best of their powers; therefore, no doubt, quarrels would ensue necessarily on that point.

यथा तव तथा तस्य वनः: स्याहारक्षणे ।

आत्मावलसर्वभूतानि विताय एवं सुधानिये ॥ 49 ॥

O Sudhānidhi! as far as this point of protecting one's wife is concerned, your Guru Deva ought also to do his best. You ought to consider all persons like your own self.

अत्यविंशनिसंख्यासे कामीच्यो दक्षजा: शृभा: ।

गुरुपली कर्थ बोधेतुं त्वमिच्छसि सुधानिधे ॥ 50 ॥

O Sudhākara! You have got twenty-eight exceedingly beautiful wives, who are the daughters of Dakṣa; why then do you desire to enjoy the wife of your Guru?

स्वर्ग सदा वसंत्या मेनकाटा मनोरामा: ।

भुक्ष्य ता सच्छया कामं मुंच पर्नीं गुरोरिध ॥ 5 1 ॥

The beautiful Apsarās (celestial nymphs) Menakā and others are always residing in the Heavens; you can enjoy them to your heart's content; leave off the wife of your Guru.

ईक्षरा यदि कुर्वर्ति जगुस्तितमहित्या ।

अज्ञानसुदुवर्तने तदा धर्मिक्यो भवेते ॥ 5 2 ॥

In case any powerful man commits an unworthy act out of egoism, the illiterate ones would follow them; so the Dharma will decline.

तस्मान्यंच महाभाग युगेः पत्नीं मनोरमाम् ।

कलहस्वल्यिमित्तोडा सुगणां न भवेदधा ॥ 53 ॥

Therefore, O highly lucky one! Do such as does not lead, for nothing, quarrels amongst the gods and leave your Guru's wife, even though she is beautiful."

सूत जवाच

सोम: शक्रवचः श्रुत्वा किंचित्कोधयसामालुतः ।

भंया प्रतिव्वतः प्राह शक्रकृतुं तत शगरी ॥ 54 ॥

Hearing these words from the messenger, the Moon (Candra Deva) became somewhat angry and, making gestures, replied to the messenger, as if to Indra, thus:

इंडुलावर

धर्मज्ञासि महावाहो देवानामधिधः स्वयम् ।

पुरोधायि च ते तत्पुरुवयोः सदूगी मति: ॥ 55 ॥

“O mighty armed one! As you yourself are the lord of the Devas and the knower of Dharma, so your priest, too, has become like you; the heads of both of you are the same.

परोपदेशे कृशला भवतीत बहवो जनाः ।

दुर्लंभस्तु स्थवं कर्ता प्राप्ते कर्मणि सर्वथा ॥ 56 ॥

You will find many that can shew their learning and give advice to others, but you will find always

Book 1 Chapter XI

very rare such persons as will act themselves to their own advices when occasion arises and wants them to fulfil their own words.

वार्थस्यप्रपीतं च शाखं गृह्टिन मावाः ।

को विरोधोउत्र देहेय कामवानां भवन्स्तवम् ॥ 57 ॥

O Lord of the Devas! All the persons take the opinion of the Sāstras framed by Brūspathi; then why the quarrel would ensue with me and the Devas when I am enjoying, according to his dictates, a woman who is herself willing?

स्वकीयं बलिनां सर्वे दुबलिनां न किंचन ।

स्वीया च परकीया च प्रभोज्यं मन्द्येतसाम || 58 ||

See, also, that the rule in this world is might is right; all things go to the powerful man who can take by force; nothing falls to the lot of the weak; moreover, this woman is mine and that woman is of another, this false notion comes to those whose brains are weak.

ताता मयनुक्ता च यथा न तु तथा गुर्ते ।

अनुस्ता कर्थ त्याज्या धर्मौतं न्यायतस्ताव ॥ 59 ॥

When Tārā is so much attached to me and is not at all attached to Brūspati, the above rule is applicable to me all the more; how then can I quit the lady so much attached to me, according to the laws of Dharma and the morals?

गृहार्थसु रक्तायां वित्तायां कक्ष भयते ।

वित्तनेय या जाता चकमोउनकामिनीम् ॥ 6 0 ॥

You can see also, that happiness reigns in that family where the wife is according to the will of the husband; how, then, can household happiness exist when the lady of the house is always dissatisfied?

न दास्येड़े घरागीहां गच्छ दूत वद स्वयम् ।

ईशोरोपि सहस्वाक्य यदिच्छसि कुकच्च तत् ॥ 6 1 ॥

Therefore, household happiness of the Guru is impossible as Tārā is dissatisfied with Brhaspati since he enjoyed the wife of his younger brother Samvarta. Then the result comes to this, O thousand-eyed one! How have you come to be thousand-eyed! However that may be, you are the

lord of the Devas; so you can do whatever you like.

सूत उवाच

इत्युक्तः शशिना दूत: प्रययौ शक्रसविधिम् ।

इन्यायच्छ तत्सर्वे यतुक्ते शीतरिभना ॥ 6 2 ॥

O messenger! go and tell your lord of the Devas all that I have spoken; I will not return by any means that beautiful Tārā." When Cardna spoke thus, the messenger went back to Indra and communicated to him all that Cardna Deva had spoken.

तृपाषाडपि तद्धुत्वा कोधयुक्तो बभूव ह ।

सेनोढोगे तथा चक्रे साहाय्यार्थ गृगोर्विभुः ॥ 63 ॥

शुक्रस्तु विग्रहं क्रूला गृहद्वेषात्तो ययो ।

मा दद्वस्वेति तं वाक्यमुवाच शर्जिनं प्रति ॥ 64 ॥

साहाय्ये ते कारिष्यामि मन्राशक्य महामते ।

भविता यदि संग्रामस्व चेह्रोग मारिष ॥ 65 ॥

Hearing this, Indra became angry and ordered all the Deva forces to be ready at once. Hearing this news of war, Šukrācārya, out of enmity to Bhraspati, went to Candra and spoke thus: "O highly intelligent one! Never return Tārā; in case war ensues between you and Indra, I will help you by my Mantra Śakti.

गड़ूस्तु तत्काथर्यं नुकुदाराधिमर्भान् ।

गृह्यग्रु भृगु मचा साहाय्यमकोनादा ॥ 66 ॥

On the other hand, Bhagavān Śaṅkara, hearing of the vicious act of Candra's taking his Guru's wife, and knowing that Sukrācārya was the enemy of Brhaṣpati, came to the assistance of the Devvs.

संग्रामसूनु तदा वृत्तो देवदानवयोईतम् ।

बहूनि तत्र वर्षिणि तातकासुर्यक्तिल १। 67 ॥

The great war, then, ensued between the Devas like the terrific war of Tārakāśura; it continued for many years.

देवासुरुक्ते युद्धे दृष्ट्या तत्र प्रितामहः ।

हंसाकडो जगामाशु तं देशं क्लेशगतांगरे ॥ 68 ॥

राकपति तदा प्राह मुंच भार्यों गृगेरिति ।

नोचेदिष्णुं समाहूय कंर्विधायि तु संक्षयम् ॥ 69 ॥

Then the grandfather Brahmā, seeing the great havoc in the lives of the Devas and Asuras, came there on his vāhan Hamsa, to secure peace and talked to Candra: “Quit the Guru’s wife; if not, I will call Viṣṇu and destroy all of you party.”

भूगं निवारयामास बह्ञा लोकपितामहः ।

किम्यायमितजिता संगदोभामहामते ॥ 70 ॥

He also desisted the son of Bhru, Šukrācārya, saying: “O highly intelligent one! why has this wicked idea possessed your mind? Is it due to bad association?

निशेधयामास ततो भपुस्तं चौषधीपतिन् ।

भूंच भार्यं गृगोरध विगाउई प्रेषितस्तव ॥ 7 1 ॥

"Then Šukrācārya also told Candra, the lord of the medicinal plants, not to wage war and said: "Better quit you now the Guru's wife. Your father Maharṣi Arti has sent me to you for this purpose."

सूत उवाच

द्विजारजसु तच्छुत्वा भृगोर्विनमदुतम् ।

ददी च ततिष्यां भार्यं गुरोगंर्षतां शुभाम ॥ 7 2 ॥

Candra, then, hearing the strange words of Śukrācārya, returned to Brhaşpati his wife Tarā, though she was not satisfied with him and became herself pregnant.

प्राय्य कान्ता गुरूईशः खगूहं मृदितो ययो ।

तते देवास्तते दैत्या ययुः खान्यन्याहान्यति ॥ 7३ ॥

ब्रह्मा खरवतं प्रापः केलासं चाणि शक्रः ।

बृहस्यतितु सन्तुषः प्राप्य भार्यों मनोरामम् ॥ 7 4 ॥

Bhaspati returned with joy to his house, accompanied by his wife; the Devas and Dānavas went awa v' to their respective places. Brahmā went to Brahamaloka and Śankara went to Kailāśa.

ततः कातेन किवाता तारासुत सुतं शुभम् ।

सृदिते शुभनक्षेत्र तारापतिसमं गुणैः ॥ 75 ॥

दूध्वा पूत्रं गुरजाँत चकार विधिपूर्वकम् ।

जातकर्मादिकं सर्व प्रहृतेनारतमान्मा ॥ 76 ॥

Bhraspati began to pass his time happily with his beautiful wife. Some days went away when the wife of Bhraspati, Tārā, gave birth to an all-auspicious son, having all the qualities of Candra,

on an auspicious day and under the influence of an auspicious star; seeing this new-born child, Bhraspati gladly performed the natal ceremonies of the child.

भूतं चन्द्रसा जन्म पुरस्य मुनिसत्तामः ।

दूतं च प्रेयामास गुर्भ प्रति महामति: ॥ 77 ॥

न चायं त्व मुत्रोस्त मन वीर्यसमुद्धवः ।

कर्थं तृ कृतवाक्मां जातकर्मिहिकं विधिम् ॥ 78 ॥

Hearing that a son is born to him, Candra sent a messenger to Brhaspati saying that 'that child is not his; but it is born out of the semen of mine: why, then, have you performed the natal ceremonies out of your own will?'

तच्छुला वचनं तस्य दूतस्य च बृह्यस्ति: ।

उवाच मम पुत्रो मे सूर्णो नात्र संशयः ॥ 79 ॥

Hearing these words of Candra's messenger, Bhraspati said: "No, this child is mine, no doubt, as he resembles quite like me."

पुर्णर्विवादः संजातो मिलिता देवदानाः ।

युद्धार्थमागतासोपो समाजः समजायत ॥ 80 ॥

When Bhraspati said this, war a: an ensued. The Devas and Dānavas met ear^. cther again in battlefield; and councils of war were held.

तजागतः स्वयं बहुना शगतिकामः प्रजापति:।

निवारयामास मुखे संश्यतान् युद्धुदर्भन्त् ॥ 81 ॥

Then, for the preservation of peace, Prajāpati Brahmā went there; and before all desisted the Devas and Dānavas, mad for war, and ready to fight against each other.

तारां पश्चछ धर्मात्मा कस्यांत नतयः शुभे ।

सत्यं बद वरारोहे यथा कलेशः प्रशाप्यति ॥ 82 ॥

तमुवचासितापाङ्गी तजवानाउपयोगसुखी ।

चन्द्रस्येति शनैरन्तर्जाभू बरवर्धिती ॥ 83 ॥

जग्राह तं सुतं सोमः प्रहर्धेनंतालमना ।

नाम चक्रे बुध इति जगाम ख्यरुं पुत्र: ॥ 84 ॥

Brahmā, then, asked Tārā: “O auspicious one! say truly whose child is this? O beautiful one! if you say truly, then this war resulting in the loss of so many lives, will cease.’ The Handsome Tārā, looking askance, lowered her head in shame and

Book 1 Chapter XII

gently spoke to Brahmā “This is the Candra’s child’ and went inside. Candra Deva, then, became very glad and took the child, put down its name as Budha and carried it to his own house.

ययी ब्रह्मा सकंक धाम सर्वे देवा सर्वासवाः ।

यथागतं गतं सर्वे: सर्वंश: प्रेशकैर्जनैः ॥ 85 ॥

Bhagavān Brahmā, Indra and the other Devas went back to their respective places. All the spectators went also to t'teir own places whence they came.

कथितये बुधोत्पतिजनुरुक्षेत्रे च सोमतः ।

यथा श्रुता मया पूर्व व्यासात्स्यवतीसुतान् ॥ 86 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते प्रथमस्कन्धे बुधोत्पतिनीमैकारशोउध्यायः ।

O Munis! I have now described the birth of Budha as the son of Candra and in the womb of Brhaspati's wife, as I heard it from the mouth of Vyāsa Deva, son of Satyavati.

Thus ends the Eleventh Chapter of the First Book on the birth of Budha in the Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book 1 Chapter XII

CHAPTER XII

On the Birth of Purvāravā

सूत उवाच

ततः पुरत्वा जते इतायां कथयामि वः ।

ब्रधुपुज्ञसित्यर्मत्या यजकृहानत्परः ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: “O Maharsis! The son of the above mentioned Budha is the greatly religious Purūravā, of a very charitable disposition, and always ready to perform sacrificial acts; he was born of a kṣatriya woman named Ila; and I will now describe how this Purūravā was born of Ila and Budha—kindly listen.

सुधुने नाम भृपाल सत्यवादी जितेन्द्रियः ।

सैपवं ह्यमासुहा चचार मृगवां वने ॥ 2 ॥

In days of yore, there was a king named Sadyumna, very truthful and highly capable in keeping his senses under control.

युतः कतिययामार्वैर्शिंग ह्राकरुपडतः ।

धनुराजगवं बद्ध्या वाणसघं तथावृदुम् ॥ 3 ॥

स प्रभसंद्वानोहेषेह हन्यमानो रूकन्युगान् ।

गशांहा सूकारांशेय खड्गांहा गवयांशना ॥ 4 ॥

गरणभानिर्धांशे साम्भरावनतुककुटान् ।

निन्नमेश्यान्यूराजा कुमारवन्मारिश्न । 5 ॥

Once upon a time, wearing beautiful earrings, with extraordinary bow named  \( \overline{A} \) jagab and holding the arrow-case full of arrows on his back, he went out on hunt to a forest, riding on a horse, born of

the country Sindhu, surrounded by a few of his ministers. Going about in the regions of forest, the king got for this šikār, buck, hare, boar, rhinoceros, bison, buffalo, young elephant, Srimar deer, wild fowl and various other animals fit for sacrificial purposes; thus, he went on deep into the interior of the forest.

मेरोर्धस्तले दिख्यं मंदारुद्यगतिज्ञान ।

अशोकलतिकाकीर्णं बकुलैरधवासितम् ॥ 6 ॥

सालैस्तालैस्तमालैश उंपकै: पनसैस्तथा ।

आधै-सिंधियुधैकैது माध्यविपणबधान् ॥ 7 ॥

दारिभैनिरिकेलैकु कदलीखणमिडतम् ।

यूथिकामातलौकुन्दपुयवल्लीसामयातून ॥ 8 ॥

This divine forest was adorned with rows of Mandāra trees and situated at the bottom of Mount Sumeru. Various trees and flowers were spreading the beauty of the forest all around; at places were Aśoka creepers, Vakula, Sāl, Tāl, Tamāl, Campak, Panasa, mangoe, Nīp, Madhūka, pomegranate, cocoanut, Yūthikā, plantain, kunda creeper, and various other trees and flowers; at some other places the bowers formed of Mādhavī creepers enhanced the beauty and shed the lustre all around.

इसकापरवकालीर्ग कौचकम्यनिर्वादित् ।

भ्रमारलितारां वर्न सर्वसुखावहम् ॥ ९ ॥

There were lakes and reservoirs of water in the forest filled with swans, kārandavas, and other aquatic birds. The bamboo trees on their banks becoming filled with air were emitting sweet musical sounds; and at many places of that all blissgiving forest, there were bees—humming sweetly and delighting the minds of people there.

इद्वा प्रपुतितो राजा सुधुभः सेवकेनैतुः ।

दृश्यामुप्यित्यानीक्ष्य कोकितारावमिषडान्। 110 ॥ प्रविष्ठस्तर राजर्षि: क्लौवमाय क्षणाततः ।

अष्टोपि वब्वा जातर्श्रितावि स भूपतिः ॥ 11 ॥

Now, the Rājarsī Pradyumna became highly gladdened in his heart to see his interior of the forest, resonated with the cooing of the cuckoos and beautified by various lovely flowers; and no sooner he entered there than he was turned into a female and his horse, also, turned into a mare; the king, then, became seriously anxious.

किमेदोदिति चित्तार्थियमानः पुनः पुनः ।

दुःखं बहुतरं प्राप्त सुबुर्णने जजवायित्व ॥ 12 ॥

He began to think over and over again “what is this? How has this come to pass?” and became very ashamed and sorry and pondered over thus: “What am I to do now?

किं करौपि कव यासि गृहं क्षीभावसंगृतः ।

कवं राज्यं कार्ययापि केन वा चंचितो हृहम् ॥ 13 ॥

How can I in this woman condition go back to my house and how shall I govern my kingdom? Alas! Who has deceived me thus!".

སྐྱོབ་ཆུལ་

सूताश्यमिदं प्रोक्त त्वया यल्लोमहर्षण ।

सुसूमनः क्षीत्यमाप्रो भूपतिर्वसाधिभः ॥ 14 ॥

Hearing these astounding words of Süta, the Rsis said: "O Süta! You have mentioned that king Sudyumna equal to god has been turned into a woman; this is very strange, indeed!

किं तत्कारपाणचक्षव वने तत्र मनोहरे ।

किं कृतं तेन राजा च विस्तरं वद सुवत् ॥ 15 ॥

Therefore, O Suvrata! What is the reason of his being turned into a mare? Kindly describe fully what that beautiful king did in the forest ?”

सूत उवाच

एक्वा निरिगं रड्यूमय: स्नकादय: ।

दिग्गे वितिमारभासा: कुर्वन्तः समुगामन् ॥ 16 ॥

तर्पिक्ष समये तर शड़रः प्रमद्धयुतः ।

क्रीडासत्ता महादेवी विश्वला कामिनी शिवा ॥ 17 ॥

उस्तंगे संश्यता भर्तूं रममाणा मन्तोरा ।

तात्विलोक्यांविका देवी विश्वला जीडिता भृपणम ॥ 18 ॥

भर्तुक्लासमुत्थाय वक्षमादाय पर्यंधात् ।

लज्जाविष्ठा सितान तत व्येमानातिमानिनि ॥ 19 ॥

ऋषयोरि तयोर्वीक्ष्य प्रसंगं रममाणयोः ।

परिवृत्य ययुस्तर्ण नरनारायणाओम्म ॥ 20 ॥

Sūta said: Once upon a time, Śaṅaka and other Rṣis went to this forest to pay a visit to Śaṅkara, illuminating the ten quarters by their holy aura. But then Bhagavān Śaṅkara was in amorous dealing with Śaṅkari. The beautiful Devi Ambikā was then naked and sitting on the lap of Śaṅkara and therefore became very much ashamed at their sight; She got up hurriedly, and putting on her cloth, remained there shuddering, with great shame and sensitiveness. The Rṣis, also, seeing them engaged in amorous dealings, went away quickly to the hermitage of Nara Nārāyaṇa.

ह्रीयुतां कामिनी वीक्ष्य प्रोवाच भपवान् हर: ।

कर्थ लज्जातुरासि लं सुखं ते प्रक्रोधायम् ॥ 21 ॥

"Then Bhagavān Śankara, seeing Śankari too much sensitive, said: "Why are you so much bashful and shy?

अर्धप्रपति यो महात्युपान्को प्रिय वरानने ।

वंचं च प्रविश्योदतल वे योगिद्धविष्यति ॥ 22 ॥

I am doing just now what will give you pleasure. O Beautiful one! Whoever male will enter from today and hereafter, within the precincts of this forest, will be instantly converted into a woman."

इति शपतं वनं तेन ये जानीत जना: वक्तित् ।

वर्जवंर्गीह ते कामं वनं दोषसमुद्धिन्त ॥ 23 ॥

O Munis! Though the forest gave all delights to all, yet, having this defect, all the persons that know of this curse, carefully avoid the forest.

सुबुधनस्तु तद्धानानप्रविष्ट सचिवः सह ।

तवैव क्षीत्वामपत्रसै: सहैति न संशय: ॥ 24 ॥

Book 1 Chapter XII

No sooner did the King Sudyumna enter into the forest, out of ignorance, than he, as well his attendants, were instantly turned into women; there could be no doubt in this.

चिताचिधः स राजर्दिनं जगाम गृहं डिवा ।

विचार बहितस्माइत्रनेशादितस्ततः ॥ 2 5 ॥

The king became overpowered with great care and anxiety and did not go back, out of shame, to his palace; but he began to wander to and fro on the outskirts of that forest.

इलेति नाम संग्रामं झीवे तेन महात्यना ।

विवरसंतस संग्रामो बुध: सोममुती युवा ॥ 26 ॥

झीभि: परिवृतां तांतु दृष्टवा कांतां मनोरामा ।

हावभावकलायुक्तो चकमे भगवान् युध: ॥ 27 ॥

साधि तं चकमे कांतं बुधे सोमसुतं पतिम् ।

संयोगस्तत्र संज्ञाततरयो प्रेमण परमस्परम् ॥ 28 ॥

He became known afterwards as woman Ila. Now, once, on an occasion, Budha, while he was wandering at his will, came up there and seeing the beautiful Ila with her gestures and amidst the pastures surrounded by women, became passionately attached towards her; and Ila, too, seeing the beautiful Budha, the son of Candra Deva, became desirous to have him as her husband. They became so very much tied in love towards each other, that intercourse took place there.

स तस्यां जनयामास पुरुर्वसमातजम् ॥ 29 ॥

Thus Bhagavān Budha generated, in the womb of Ila, Purāravā; and Ila gave birth, in due time, to son Puruvāvā in that forest.

सोउप्रसृतु सुत काला चिंताविषहा वने स्थिता ।

संस्मार स्वकुलाचार्य वरिकेषु मुनिसनमम् ॥ 30 ॥

She then, with an anxious heart, recollected, while in the forest, her (rather his), family priest Vasistha Deva.

स ततोरस्य दूर्गा दूर्वा सुबुनस्य कृपापित्वतः ।

अतोषयन्महोदं शंकरं लोकशंकरम् ॥ 31 ॥

Now then Vasisṭha Deva, seeing the distressed condition of king Sudyumna became affected with pity and pleased Mahādeva, Śaṅkara, the most auspicious Deva of all, by hymns and praises.

तस्मै स भगावान्तुतः प्रदरी वाश्छतं वरम् ।

वसिष्ठः प्रार्थ्यमास पुंस्चं रास्त्र प्रियस्य च ॥ 32 ॥

When Bhagavān Śaṅkara wanted to grant him the boon that he desired, Vasiṣṭha Deva wanted that king would be turned again into man as before.

शक्रस्तुं निजां वाचमृतां कुर्वैश्वावा ह ।

मासे पुगांतु भविता भासं क्री भूपितः किल ॥ 33 ॥

At this Bhagavān Śankara said, in recognition of His promise, that the king Sudyumna would be alternately one month a man and the second month a woman and so on.

इर्थ प्रायः वरं राता जगाम स्वगृहं पुन ।

घ्रके राज्यं स धर्मतव सशिस्यायन्युग्रहत् ॥ 34 ॥

क्रीलैं तिच्छित हृद्येषु पुंस्ते राज्यं प्रशासित च ।

प्रजातस्विमस्पृद्धिना नाथवन्तन्द्रशीतिम ॥ 35 ॥

Thus, by the favor of Vasiṣṭha Deva, king Sudyumna got this boon and returned to his kingdom and began to govern it. When he used to be turned into a woman, he used to remain in the interior, and when he used to become a man, he governed his kingdom. At this the subject became very anxious and did not welcome the king as they used to do before. Some days passed away in this way when the prince Purāvraā grew up into manhood.

काले तु यौवनं प्राप्त: पुरः पुरुर्वास्तदा ।

प्रतिष्ठं पूर्णतिस्त्वसी दत्ता राज्यं चंवं ययो ॥ 36 ॥

Then king Sudyumna gave over to him the kingdom and made him the king of the new capital named Pratishān; and started out to an hermitage to perform tapasyā.

गत्वा तत्मिन्वने रथे नानादुमसभाकुले ।

नारदान्मन्मासाहा नवाक्षमनुतमम् ॥ 37 ॥

He went to a beautiful forest, variegated with all sorts of trees, and got from the Devarsī Nārada the excellent mantra of the Bhagavatī Devī, consisting of nine letters.

जजाप मन्नमत्यर्धे प्रभपूर्तिमानस: ।

परितृष्टा तदा देकी सगुणा तारिणी शिवा ॥ 38 ॥

सिंहाकृत्वा स्थिता चाग्रे दिव्यलथा मनोरमा ।

वाक्णीयानसंमता मदायृष्णितलोचना ॥ 39 ॥

He began to repeat it incessantly, with heart filled with love. Thus some days passed away when the all-auspicious Devi Bhagavatī, the Saviour of the whole Universe, became pleased with king and appeared before the king, assuming the divine beautiful form, composed of attributes, intoxicated with the drink, and with eyes rolling with pride, and riding on vāhana, the lion.

इद्वा तां दिव्यकपां च प्रेमाकुलितलोचनः ।

प्रणम्य शिरसा प्रीला तुलाय जगद्धिककाम्। 4 0 ॥

Seeing this divine form of the Mother of the Universe, the king Ilā (in this form) bowed down before Her with eyes filled with love and gladly praised Her with hymns thus:

इलोवाच

दिव्यं च ते भगवित प्रथितं

स्वकरं पूरं यमा सकललोकहितानुकपूम ।

वंदे त्वद्धिकमलं सुरसंभयेल्य

कामपूं जननि चाधि विमुक्तिचं च ॥ 4 1 ॥

को वेति तेज्य पृथि मर्मतन्त्रिणकर्म

मुह्यिति यज मुनयश सुराङ सर्वे ।

रेध्येमितिवल्लं कृपणे दया च

दूर्वैव देयि सकलं किल विस्तमयो मे ॥ 42 ॥

“O Bhagavatī! What a fortunate being I am! That I have seen today the extraordinary world renowned benignant form of Thine granting grace and benefit to all the Lokas, I, therefore, bow down to Thy lotus-feet, granting desires and liberation, and served by the whole host of the Devas. O Mother! What mortal is there on this earth, who can fully comprehend Thy glories when all the Devas and Munis get bewildered in trying to know of them.

गंभूर्वीर: कमलजो मघया रविष्ठ

वित्तेशवाद्विकाण: परवन्ध उसमे: 1

जानंति नैव सर्वसोर्धि हि ते प्रभावं

बुध्येक्शं तव गृणानगुणो मनुष्यः ॥ 43 ॥

O Devi! I am thoroughly astonished to see Thy glories and Thy compassion towards the destructsed and poor and helpless people. How can a human

being, who is devoid of attributes comprehend Thy attributes when Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Indra, Candra (moon), Pavana (wind), Sūrya, Kubcra, and the eight Vasus know not Thy powers.

जानाति विद्याप्रियतशुतितम्ब साक्षात्चां

सान्चिकीमुदीधजां सकलार्थदां च ।

को गतसर्ग हर उमा किल तामसी त्वां

वेदंचिके न तु पुनः खतु निर्णीणं त्वाम् ॥ 44 ॥

O Mother! Bhagavān Viṣṇu, of unrivalled brilliance, knows Thee as a part of Thine only, as Kamalā of Sattva Gunas and giving one all one's desires; Bhagavān Brahmā knows Thy part only as the form made of Rajo Guna and Bhagavān Śaṅkara knows Thee as Umā only made of Tamo Guna; but, O Mother! none of them knows Thy turiya form, transcending all the Gunas.

ब्वाहां सुमेदासितप्रियमप्रभाव:

क्वायं त्वातिनिपुणो मीय सुप्रसादः ।

जाने भवानि चरितं करणासमेतें

यत्सेवाकांड्य दयसे त्वयी भावयुक्तान् ॥ 4 5 ॥

‘O Mother! where is my humble self, that is of very dull intellect and powcrless, and where is Thy extremely propitious serenity and graciousness! Indeed such a gracious favour on me is certainly beyond expectation. Therefore, O Bhavānī! I have come to realise, in particular, that Thy heart is full of unbounded mercy; for Thou dost certainly feel compassion for these Bhaktas that are full of Bhakti towards Thee.

ब्रुतस्त्वया हरिसरी यनजेशयापि

नैवाचरत्यपि मूरं मधुमुदन्तः ।

पार्दी तावादिपुस्पः किल पायकेन

कृत्वा कांतीच च कोरा रुष्पी पंचिजी ॥ 46 ॥

O Mother! what more shall I say than this, that Bhagavān Madhusūdana Vīsṇu, though married to Kamalā, born from only a part of Thine, considers Himself unfit for Her and is, therefore not happy; then the fact that He, the Ādi-Puruṣa gets his feet champooed by Kamalā merely corroborates the fact that He wants His feet to become pure and all

Book I Chapter XII

auspicious to the world by the holy touch of Kamalā's hands.

वांछल्यहो हरिरशोक इवातिकामं

पाठहित प्रभृवित: पुरुष: पुराण: ।

तां लं करोषि क्षिता प्रपातं च पादे

दृष्ट्वा पति सकलदेवनुतं स्मरात्मे ॥ 47 ॥

O Mother! It seems to me that the ancient Purusa Bhagavān Viṣṇu wants gladly to be kicked by Thee like Aśoka tree, for his own improvement and pleasure; and, therefore it is that Thou dost want, as if Thou hast become angry to kick (beat with one's legs) Thy husband, stricken by Smara (cupid, love) and worshipped by all the Devas, who lies prostrate below Thy feet.

वक्षःस्वये वससि देयि सदैव ततय

पर्यकावसुवारिते विषुलेजनिगते ।

सौद्यानीव सुचने सुविधिषिते च

कि ते न वाहनमसौ जगदीक्षोतेपि ॥ 48 ॥

O Devi, when Thou always resided on the calm broad chest, as if on a great cot, adorned beautifully of Bhagavān Visnu, as lightning in deep dense blue clouds, then it is without doubt that He, becoming the Lord of the Universe, has surely become Thy vāhana (vehicle) (on account of carrying Thee on His breast).

तं चेज्जहासि मधुमुदनमंव

कोपार्वैवार्थिनोरीय स भवेकित्कल शक्तिकहीन: ।

प्रत्यक्षेमेव पुर्वे स्वजनार्थजिति

शान्तं श्रियोज्ञतमताव्यगृतीवियुक्ति ॥ 49 ॥

O Mother! If Thou forsakest Madhusūdana, out of wrath, He becomes at once powerless and is not worshipped by anybody; for it is seen everywhere that persons, though calm and serene, if devoid of Śrī (wealth and power) are forsaken by their relatives as reduced to a state having no qualities.

ब्रहादय: सुराणा न तु किं युवल्यो

ये त्वतदाम्बुजमहर्निगामाश्रवन्ति ।

मन्ये त्वर्वे विहितः खलु ते पुगांसः ।

किं वर्णायासि तव गत्थिमन्तनार्वीर्यं ॥ 50 ॥

O Mother! I am not to be ignored by Thee, on

account of my being a woman, for was it not the fact, that Brahmā and the other Devas who always take shelter of Thy lotus feet, had not all to assume once youthful feminine forms, while in Manjdivpa, and I know this surely that Thou again didst make them of male forms. Therefore, O Thou of unbounded power! What shall I describe about Thy power? Indeed, there is great doubt in my mind whether Thou are masculine or feminine?

तं नपुमात्र च पुमानिति मे चिकल्पो

या कास्तिस देवि सगुणा नन् निर्गुणा या ।

तां नवा नामायि सततं किल भावायुक्तो

वाड़ाधि भक्तिभचतां त्विय मातरंतु ॥ 51 ॥

O Devi! Whoever Thou mayst be, whether with attributes on transcending the attributes, whether male or female, I always bow down to Thee, with heart full of devotion towards Thee. O Mother! I want that I may have one unflinching devotion, towards Thee in my final state.

सूत उवाच

इति स्तुला महीपालो जगाम शरणं तदा ।

परितृषा ददो देदी तन सायुज्यमात्मिन ॥ 52 ॥

सुबुण्नस्तु ततः प्राप वर्ध परमकं स्थितम् ।

तत्या देव्या: प्रसादेन मुनीनामपि दुर्विभम् ॥ 53 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागते प्रवमस्कन्चे सुबुण्नस्तुतिनीम

ब्राद्योरोधयाः ।। 12 ॥

Sūta said: “Thus praising the Devi, king Sudyunna, in the form of the feminine Ila, took refuge of the World Mother; and the Devi, becoming greatly pleased, gave to the king, then and there, union with Her own Self. Thus the king got the highest steady place, so very rare even to the Munis, by the grace of the Prime Force, the Devi Brahmanayī.

Thus ends the Twelfth Chapter of the First Book on the birth of Purūravaḥ, in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER XIII

On Urvaśi and Purūravä

सूत उवाच

सुधुने तु दिवं याते राज्यं चके पुरुत्वाः ।

सुगणछ सुरूपछ प्रजारंजनततरः ॥ 1 ॥

प्रतिहाने पुरे न्ये राज्यं सर्वनमकृतम् ।

चकार सर्वेधर्जः प्रजास्थणतात्यः ॥ 2 ॥

Sūta said: O Maharsis! When king Sudyumna had gone up to heavens, the religious king Purūravā, endowed with great beauty and many qualities, and able to please the minds of his subject began to govern his kingdom well, according to Dharma, with his heart intent on governing his people.

मन्तः सुगुप्तस्त्यासौर्यराजाधिन्नता तथा ।

सर्वेकौत्सहागिक्र ऋषुशणैकतक्षोतमा ॥ ३ ॥

No body knew what his counsel was, but he was very clever in knowing others' counsels. He was always highly energetic and his lordly power was great.

सामदानादाय: सर्वे बर्गगातस्य भुपते: ।

वर्गाङ्गमान्वधर्मव्यान्कुर्विज्ञा उशगास ह ॥ 4 ॥

The four methods of warfare, (1) conciliation, (2) giving gifts, (3) sowing dissensions and (4) war, were fully under his control. He saw that his subject practised religion according to Varṇāśrama (colours and stages of life), and thus he began to govern his kingdom.

यज्ञां क्रविष्यांश्रके स राजा बुद्धिदक्षान् ।

द्रानाति च पविश्राणि द्वादव्य नाराधपः ॥ 5 ॥

Purūravā, the lord of men, performed various sacrifices with abundance of Dakṣinās (sacrificial fees) and also gave away much in various charities, causing great wonder and astonishment.

तस्य रूपगुर्णैदार्यशीतरूशिविक्रमान् ।

शुवार्वेशी वर्गभूता चकमे ते नतरिप्पि ॥ 6 ॥

His extraordinary beauty and qualities, liberality and good nature, his unbounded wealth and prowess made Apsarā Urvasi (celestial nymph)

think of him often and she wanted him to satisfy her.

बहुशाणाथित्ता सा मानुर्षे तोकामीस्थिता ।

गृणिनं ते नृपं मत्वा वरयायाम मानिनि ॥ 7 ॥

Some time passed when that proud Urvaśī had to descend on this earth, due to a curse pronounced on her by a Brāhmīn; and she chose king Purūravaśī as her husband, thinking him to be endowed with all the qualities.

समयं चेयुंग कृत्वा स्थिता तत्र वराङ्गना ।

एतावुर्णाकी राजस्यती रक्षस्य मान्द ।। ८।।

She then addressed the king and made the following contract: "O king, giving honour due to every body! I keep these two young sheep in trust and deposit with you; kindly look after these and, then, my honour will be preserved by you.

घृतं मे भक्षणं नित्यं नान्यत्किचघुपाशनम् ।

नेक्षे त्वां च महात्राज ननमन्यत्र मैथुन्ता ॥ ९ ॥

O King! I will take ghee daily and nothing else for my food; and there is one word more; O King! Let me! not see you naked, except when you hold sexual intercourse.

भाषाधंत्रस्यं राजन् यदि मनो भविष्यति ।

तदा त्वल्बा गाथिषामि सलमेतदुबीयम्हम् ॥ 10 ॥

O king, I say this truly, that, in case there be any breach in this contract I will instantly leave you and go away." The king accepted this contract of Urvāsī.

अज्ञीकृतं च तत्रात्रा कामिन्या भाषितं तु यत् ।

स्थिता भाषणबंधेन प्रशानानुश्रकामयया ॥ १ १ ॥

Urvāsi, too, remained there according to the above contract and also with a view to pass away period of her curse.

रेमे तदा स भृपाले लीनो वर्षगणान्बृह्न ।

धर्मकमिक खल्वचो वोर्शेगया मद्योहितः ॥ 12 ॥

During this time the king was fascinated with the love of Urvaśī and became so very much attached to her, that he left all his duties and dharma

Book 1 Chapter XIII

and remained long for many, many years in enjoying Urvaśī.

एकधितस्तु संजातस्तन्यनस्को महीपति: ।

न शणाक तया हीनः क्षणमपत्यितेपहितः ॥ 13 ॥

The king's mind was so deeply absorbed in her, that he could not remain alone without her, even for a moment.

एवं वर्षेणान्ते तु स्वार्थ्य पाकशासनः ।

उर्वेशी नानातां द्वृष्टा गंधर्वानाह् देवराद् ॥ 14 ॥

Thus many years passed away, when, once upon a time, Indra, the lord of the Devas, not seeing Urvaśī, asked the Gandharvas and said:

उर्वेगोभान्यरधं भो नाभ्वर्ग सर्व एव है ।

द्वतोरणी गृहातस्य घपुतेः समये किल ॥ 15 ॥

“O Gandharvas! Better go and steal away the two young sheep in a proper time from the palace of Purūravā, and then bring Urvaśi here.

उर्शगीर्णित्त स्थानं मदीयं नारितीयते ।

येन केनाप्यपायेन तामानयत कामिनीम् ॥ १६ ॥

My Nandana garden is now void of all beauty without Urvaśi; so bring the lady here anyhow or other."

इत्युक्तासेउथ नार्यवां विश्वासुपुरोगमा ।

ततो नाचा महागाठे तमसि प्रत्युपस्थिते ॥ १७ ॥

Thus spoken by Indra, Viśvāvasu and other Devas went to Purūravā's palace; and when it was dark in the night, and when Purūravā was holding sexual intercourse with Urvaśi, stole away the two young sheep.

जहुस्तावुर्णते देवा रमामणं वितोकस्य तम् ।

चक्रवतुस्तवा ती तु हिद्यामाणी विहायसा ॥ 18 ॥

They, when being carried away in the sky, cried out so piteously, that Urvaśī came to hear that as if of her two sons, and angrily spoke to the king:

उर्वेशी ततुपाकर्णे क्रान्ततं सुनायेरि ।

कृपितोबाच राजनं समयोउयं कृते मया ॥ १९ ॥

“O king! Now the contract that I made with you is verily fulfilled! It is that I placed my implicit confidence in you that this my misfortune has befallen me.

नष्टाङ्गे तव विश्वासाद्यूब्छती चोरैमंगरणे ।

राजनुससमावेती स्व किंहि शेष चित्रया स्म : ॥ 20 ॥

हतो3स्यहं कुनाथेन नपुंसा वीरामिनना ।

उरणों मे गती चाहा सदा प्राणिप्रिये मा ॥ 21 ॥

See! the thieves are stealing away the two sheep, my sons as they were! How then are you sleeping here like a woman? Alas! I am ruined in having an impotent husband who vainly boasts of his prowess!

एवं विलव्यामानां तां द्वृह्वा राजा विलोहित ।

नान एव यदो तृर्णं पृष्ठतः पृथिवीपितः ॥ 22 ॥

Where are my two young sheep today that are dearer to me than my life? Thus seeing Urvaśī wailing, king Purūravā, the Lord of the Universe, ran after the Gandharvas instantly without any sense as it were, left in him, naked.

विद्युराकशिता तत्र न्यार्वैनुंवरेयपनि ।

ननप्रन्तसता द्रूषो भूपतितन्नाकामया ॥ 23 ॥

त्वक्लेवोगी गता सर्वे नयशं: पर्य पार्थिव: ।

ननगे जग्राह ती शांती जगाम स्वगृहं प्रति ॥ 24 ॥

The Gandharvas, then, cast rays of lightning in that room, and Urvaśī, willing to leave, saw the king naked when the Gandharvas left the two young sheep there and went away. The tired king brought the two sheep back to his house in that naked state.

तदोर्कर्णी गतां दृष्ट्वा विल्लतापातिबु:खितः ।

नर्न वीक्ष्य पतिं नारीगतता सा वरवर्गिनो ॥ 25 ॥

Then Urvaśī, too, seeing the husband naked, went away immediately to the Deva loka. Seeing Urvaśī going away, the king wailed very much with a very grievous heart.

क्रन्दन्स देशदेशेषु बधाम नृपति: स्वयम् ।

तचित्तो विहृतः शोषोन्विशः काममोहितः ॥ 26 ॥

Then, being very much bewildered by the bereavement of Urvaśī, with his senses beyond control, and deluded by passion, wandered about in various countries, crying and giving vent to sorrow.

ध्रमवै सकासं पृथ्वीं कुरुक्षेये द्वर्गे ताम ।

दूर्ध्या संहृष्टवदनः प्राह सूर्त नृपोतमः ॥ 27 ॥

Thus, wandering all over the globe, he came once to Kuruksetra and saw Urvaśī; then with a gladdened face said: "O beloved! Wait, wait for a moment; my mind is all absorbed in you; it is quite innocent and submissive to you.

अयं जाये तिछ धोरे न त्यतुर्मटिंस ।

मा त्व त्वन्मरं कांत कांगा चाध्यनागमम् ॥ 28 ॥

स देड़ोरयं पतचस देिथ दूरं हतस्वया ।

खाद्वेयंचे वृका: काकावत्वया त्यचं करोय तत् ॥ 29 ॥

So you ought not to forsake me in such a dire difficult time. O Devi! For the sake of you, I have travelled very far. O Beautiful one! The body that you embraced before, will now, forsaken by you, fall here and will be devoured by crows and wolves and other carnivorous animals.”

एवं विलपमानं ते राजानं ग्राह चोर्वींग ।

इंलिखत कृपण श्रांत कामाति विवर्गं घृणम् ॥ 30 ॥

Seeing the king, tired and passion stricken, greatly distressed and with a very sorrowful heart and wailing.

उर्वेश्यवाच

मूर्यो5सि नृपशादूल जानं कुत्र गतं तव ।

व्वायि सख्यं न च स्त्रीणां वृकापामिव पार्थिं 13 11

Urvaśī spoke out: O king! You are certainly a quite senseless man; whither has gone your extraordinary knowledge now? O king! Do you not know that the pure unalloyed love of woman cannot

take place with any other as the love of a wolf cannot fall on any man.

न विश्वाशो हि कतिथः स्त्री चौरेषु पार्थिवेः ।

गृहं नष्ठ सुखं भुक्षव मा विषवादे नः कृबा: ॥ 3 2 ॥

Therefore, earthly men ought never to trust a bit women and thieves. So, go back to your palace and enjoy the pleasures of the kingdom; do not drown your mind further in sorrows."

इत्येवं बोधिता राजा न विवेदातिमोहितः ।

दुःखं च परमं प्रापतः स्थितीपानेद्यनितः ॥ 33 ॥

King Purūravaś, though thus brought to senses by Urvaśī, was so much fascinated by her love that his heart did not feel any consolation; rather he felt indescribable pain, being held up in bondage by the love of Urvaśī.

सूत उवाच

इति सर्वे समाख्यानप्रवैशीचरितं महत् ।

वेदे वित्तारितं चैततसंक्षेपात्क्रवितं मया ॥ 34 ॥

इति शीमद्वैपागवते महापुराणे प्रव्यमकन्ये

त्रयोदरीक्षायाः ॥ 13 ॥ 11

O Munis! Thus I have described to you the character of Urvaśī; it is described, in detail, in the Vedas; I have stated this in brief.

Thus ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the First Book of the characters of Urvaśī and Purūravaś in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER XIV

On the Birth of Šuka Deva and on the Duties of Householders

सूत उवाच

दूद्धा तामसिताप्रांशी व्यासश्रिंतापरो भवत् ।

क्रिक कारोम न मे योगा देवकन्येयमपसः ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: “O Maharjsis! (Now hear the main topic). Seeing the dark-blue lady looking askance at him, Vyāsa Deva thought: “Indeed! What is to be done now? This Devakanyā Apsarā Ghtrāci is not fit for my household.”

एर्व त्रितयमानं तु दूद्वा व्यासं तदापसतः ।

भयभीता हिं संजाता शागं मां विवुजेदयम् ॥ 2 ॥

Then, seeing Vyāsa Deva thus thoughtful, the Apsarā thought that the Muni might curse him and got terrified.

सा कृतासंथ शुकीरूपं निर्णत भयविह्ठत ।

कृष्णसु विस्मयं प्राणते विहर्गी तां चिलोकवन् ॥ 3 ॥

Confounded by terror, she assumed the form of a Šuka bird and fled away; Vyāsa, too, became greatly surprised to see her in the form of a bird.

कामसू देहे व्यासस्य दर्शनादेव संगतः ।

मनो3तिविमितं जातं स्वयोगत्रेषु विक्सितः ॥ 4 ॥

Book 1 Chapter XIV

The moment Vyāsa saw the extraordinary beautiful form of Ghrtāci, the Cupid entered then, in his body, and his mind was filled with the thought of sweet feminine form and was gladdened and all his body was thrilled with pleasure so that the hair of the body stood on their ends.

स तु दीर्थेण महता निर्युक्तमानं सुनि: ।

न शशाक नियंचुं च स व्यास: प्रमृतं मनः ॥ 5 ॥

Muni Vyāsa Deva tried his best and exerted his power of patience to its utmost, but failed to control his restless mind to enjoy the woman. Though he was very energetic, and he tried repeatedly to control his heart, enchanted with the beautiful form of Ghrtači, yet he could not, as due to a state of things pre-ordained by God, control his mind.

बहुगी गृहाणांचे च पृताच्या मोहितं मनः ।

भाविवावेश विशृते व्यास्याविततेजसः ॥ 6 ॥

At this state, when he was rubbing the firesticks to get the sacred fire, (two pieces of wood used in kindling the fire) his seed (semen) fell upon the Arani (the two pieces of wood used in kindling the sacred fire).

मथनं कुवर्तसत्य मुनेरानिचिकारींया ।

उपण्यायेव सहसा तस्य शुकमथापत् ॥ ७ ॥

But he did not take any notice of that, and he went on rubbing the firesticks when arose from that Arapi the wonderfully beautiful form of Suka Deva, looking like a second Vyāsa.

सोअविधित्य तथा पातं मम-थारिणायिव च ।

तस्माधुकः स्पडुतो व्यासाकृतिमनोहरः ॥ 8 ॥

This boy, born of Arani fuel, looked there brilliant like the blazing fire of the sacrificial place, whereon of ghee are poured.

विसमयं जान्यबाल: संजातस्तदारणवज: ।

यथाछरे समिद्धोरनिभांगित रहनेय दीपितान् ॥ 9 ॥

Seeing that son, Vyāsa Deva was struck with great wonder and thought thus: "What is this? How is that this son is born without any woman"

यासस्तु सुतामालोक्य विस्तयं परमं गतः ।

किमेत्तदिति संचिंत्य वरूदानाच्छवस्य वै ॥ 10 ॥

तेजोरूपी सुको जातोउपरणिणर्भस्मपवः ।

द्वितीयोनिर्विलासर्थ दीथमानः स्वतेजसा ॥ ११ ॥

Thinking for a while, he came to the conclusion, that this had certainly come to pass as the result of boon granted to him by Śiva. No sooner the fiery Šuka Deva, was born of Aranī, he looked brilliant, like fire, by his own tejas (spirit).

विलोकायामात तदा यासस्तु मृदितं सुतम् ।

दिव्येन तेजसा युक्तं गाईपत्यमिवायम् ॥ 1 2 ॥

At that time Vyāsa Deva began to look with one steady gaze the blissful form of his son as a second Gārhapatya Fire, brilliant with the Divine fire.

गड़ानंः स्नाययामास समागत्य गिरिस्तदा ।

पुष्यवृष्टिस्तु खाज्जाता शिशोभपरित तापस ॥ 13 ॥

O hermits! The river Ganges came there from the Himalayas and washed all the inner nerves of the child Šuka Deva, by her holy waters and showers of flowers were poured on his head.

जातकर्मादिके चक्रे व्यासस्तस्य माहतमः ।

देवदुर्भयो नेनुन्नुतुशासरोगणा: ॥ 14 ॥

जगुर्नीचर्पतयो मुदिताते दिवुद्धवः ।

विश्वासुर्गारद्ध त्रंबुरः शुकसंभवे ॥ 15 ॥

Vyāsa Deva next performed all the natal ceremonies of the high-souled child; the celestial drums were sounded and celestial nymphs began to dance and the lords of the Gandharvas Visāvasu, Nārada, Tumburu and others began to sing with great joy for the sight of the son.

तुह्युर्भूदिता: सर्वे देवा विद्याप्रतशा ।

दूर्धा व्यासुरुं दिव्यमरपीनार्थसभमम् ॥ 16 ॥

All the Devas and Vidyātharas began to chant hymns with gladdened hearts at the sight of the divine form, the son of Vyāsa, born of Aranī.

अन्तरिष्ठापताथीवं शपुः कृष्णारिनं शुभम् ।

कर्मडतुतथा दिव्यः शुक्रवर्षा द्विजोतमः ॥ 17 ॥

O twice born ones! Then were dropped down from the sky the dinine rod (Daṇḍa), Kamandalu, and the antelope skin.

सदा: वदुचो वाले जातमाज्ञोतिर्दीयान् ।

तस्योपनवं चके व्यासो विद्धाविधानित् ॥ 18 ॥

No sooner the extraordinarily brilliant Śuka Deva was born than he grew up, and Vyāsa Deva, who is master of endless learning and of how to impart them to others, performed the son's Upanayana ceremony.

उत्पत्रमात्रं ते वेदा: सरहस्या: सर्मेग्रहः ।

उपत्यमूँहात्मानं यथास्य सित्तं तथा ॥ १९ ॥

No sooner the child was born than all the Vedas with all their secrets and epitomes began to flash in the mind of Šuka Deva, as it reigned in Vyāsa Deva.

यतो रूई शुकीरूपं घृताच्या: सम्भवे तदा ।

शुक्रोत नाम पुरस्य चकार मुनिसस्तभः ॥ 20 ॥

O Munis! Bhagavān Vyāsa Deva gave the name of the child as Śuka as during the moment of this birth he saw the form of Ghrācī in the form of the Śuka bird.

ब्रह्म्यतिभुपाधायां कृत्वा व्यासुस्तस्तव ।

ज्ञानि ब्रह्मचर्य चकार विधिपुर्कम् ॥ 21 ॥

Śuka then accepted Brhaşpati as his guru and began devotedly, with his whole head and heart to perform duly the Brahmacarya vow (the life of studentship and celibacy).

सोउधीय निविलान्येवासारह्याससंप्रहान ।।

धर्मशाखणि सर्वांनी कृत्वा गुरुकुले गुकः ॥ 22 ॥

गुरव दक्षिणां दत्ता समावृत्तो मुनिनस्ता ।

आजगाम वितृः पार्श्ध कृष्णद्विष्यावनस्व ॥ 23 ॥

Muni Śuka remained in the house of his Guru and studied the four Vedas with their secrets and epitomes and all the other Dharma śāstras and gave Dakṣinā to the Guru duly according to proper rules, and returned home to his father Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana.

दूद्वा व्यासः शुकः प्राणं प्रेणतोवाया सर्वभ्रमम् ।

आलिलिंग मुडुप्राणि मृद्धिन तस्य चकार ह् । २४ ।।

Seeing his son Śūka, Vyāsa Deva got up and received him with great love and honour and embraced him and took the smell of his head.

पण्ड्छ कुगलं व्यासतस्थी चाध्यवनं गृधिः ।

आश्रास्य स्थापयामास शुकं ततप्रमे शुभे ॥ 25 ॥

The holy Vyāsa asked about his welfare and

about his studies and requested him to stay in that auspicious Śārama.

दारकर्मे तत्तो व्यासः शुकस्य पर्यंचितयत् ।

कन्यां मुनिसुता कान्तामपृष्छदतिवेगवान् ॥ 26 ॥

Vyāsa then thought of Sūka's marriage and he became anxious and began to enquire where a beautiful girl of a Muni can be found.

शुक्र प्रात सुतं व्यासो वैदोर्धीतत्ववासव्य ।

धर्मशाखाणि सर्वाणि कुक भायां महामते ॥ 27 ॥

And he spoke to his son: O highly intelligent one! You have now studied all the Vedas and Dharma Śāstras.

गहैर्य्यं च समासाठ्यं चत देवान्यिनुनाय ।

त्रणानोचय मां पुत्र प्राय्य दारान्मनोरमान् ॥ 28 ॥

Therefore, O sinless one! better marry now. O son! Take a beautiful wife, and leading a householder's life, worship the Devas and Pitts, and free me from debt.

अपुत्रस्य गतिनर्ििति स्वर्गों नैव च नैव च ।

तस्मात्युरु महाभाग कुरुक्यादा गृहामम् ॥ 29 ॥

There is no other way for isueless persons; he can never go to heaven; so, O highly fortunate son of mine! Now; enter into the life of a householder and make me happy.

कृता गृहाश्रमं पुरु सुखितं कुक मां गृह।

आगा मे महती पुरु पूरयव महामते ॥ 30 ॥

तपस्त्वा महागेरे प्राप्तोरिस त्वयपीनिजः ।

देवकर्णी महाप्राज पाहि मां पितरं गृह् ॥ 31 ॥

O highly intelligent one! I have big expectations from you; now try to fulfill them. O greatly wise Śuka! After a very severe asceticism, I have got you who are verily a Deva born without any womb. I am, therefore, your father; save me."

सूत जवाच

इति वादिनमध्यागे प्रापतः प्राह गुहकस्तदा ।

विरतः: सोउतित्कतं तं साक्षातिवतमात्मान: ॥ 32 ॥

When Vyāsa spoke thus to Śuka, making him sit close by, the highly dispassionate Śuka at once made out that his father was terribly attached to the world and replied:

Book 1 Chapter XIV

मूत उवाच

किं त्व वदसि धर्मत्र वेद्यास महामते ।

तत्वेन शाधि शिष्य मां त्वद्जां करावणयतम् ॥ 33 ॥

"O knower of Dharma! you have, by the power of your great intelligence, divided Veda into four parts; why are you, therefore, advising me so now? I am your disciple; so give me true advice. Certainly, I will obey your order."

व्यास उचाच

त्वर्यं यतपत्नं मया पूत्र शतं समा: ।

प्रातस्तं चातिडुःखेन शिवत्यातायनेन च। 34 ॥

At this Vyāsa Deva said: “O son! I have got you after I had performed very severe tapasyā, for one hundred years, and worshipped Bhagavān Śankara, with the sole object of having you.

द्वाति तव चिन्ते नु प्रार्थियात्यात्र घपातिम्।

मुखं घुब्ब महाप्राप्त प्राय्य यौविनमुताम् ॥ 35 ॥

O highly wise one! I will ask some king and will give you sufficient wealth for your family expenses. So that you, having attained this much desired youth, enjoy the householder's life."

शुक उवाच

किं सूखं मानुषे लोके बृहि तात निरामयम् ।

दुःखविद्धे सुखं प्रात्रा न वदति सुखं किल ॥ ३६ ॥

Hearing these words of the father, Šuka Deva said: "O father! Kindly say this to me what pleasure is there on this earth that is not mixed with pain. The happiness, that is mixed with pain, is not called happiness by the wise.

स्वयं कृत्वा महाभाग घवामि तड्गानुगः ।

मुखं किं पतनस्य स्त्रीजस्य विशेषतः ॥ 37 ॥

O highly fortunate one! when I will marry, I will become certainly submissive to that woman; see then how happiness can be possible to one who is dependent: especially to one, dependent on one's wife.

क्वाराधिदयि मुचेल लोकग्रादियमिनतः ।

पुरवर्धर्निबद्धस्तु न विमृष्येत कर्हिंचित् ॥ 38 ॥

विप्पूत्रसभ्यो देहो नारीणां तन्मयसंख्या ।

कः प्रीति तत्र विघेत्र विबुधः कर्तमिष्ठति ॥ 39 ॥

Rather freedom can be obtained one day when one is tied to an iron or wooden pillar; but never freedom will come to that man who is tied by his wife and children. As the body of man is full of urine and faeces, so is the body of the woman.

अयोनिजोर्द विभर्षे योनो मे कौष्टिगी मितः ।

न वांठायमहाप्रोष पीय नोवेव समुद्धम् ॥ 40 ॥

The more so, when I am born of no womb, how can I find happiness there; not only in this birth, but in my previous birth, too, I had no desire to be born of any womb.

विद्युपं किमु वांछामि चक्कवातामुपुडमदुतम् ।

आत्मातामघ पृथोर्नि च भवत्यतिलिपुः ॥ 4 1 ॥

How can I desire now to enjoy the pleasure of urines and faeces in face of the bliss of self that has got no other bliss equal to it? The high-souled persons, that find pleasure in their selves, never go after the sensual pleasures of the objects of enjoyments?

प्रवर्ष पठिता वेदा मवा विस्तारिताक्ष है ।

हिंसामायते पठिता: कर्ममांगप्रवर्तका: ॥ 4 2 ॥

When I studied first, the Vedas in detail, it struck me that the Vedas dealt with the Śāstra of Karmamārga (the way of action); and it is all full of Hirnśa (injury to others).

ब्रह्मधातिगृक: प्राप्न: सोर्धि मनो गृहाणैव ।

अविष्याग्रस्तद्व: कर्थ तारायितुं क्षम: ॥ 43 ॥

Then I took Brhaşpati as my Guru to shew me the way to true wisdom; but soon I found that he, too, was attacked with the dreadful disease of Avidyā (ignorance) and plunged in the terrible ocean of world, full of Maÿā. So it became quite clear to my mind, how could he save me?

गेगमुक्तो यथा वैदा: परतोगचिकित्सकः ।

तथागुर्मुपुक्षोर्ग गृह्वशोर्यं विह्वब्ना ॥ 44 ॥

If the physician be diseased himself, how can he effect cures to other diseases? When I am desirous of liberation, how can I get it from a Guru who is himself deeply attached to the world; how

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

can such a one treat my case to free me, from the disease of attachment to this world?

कृत्वा प्रणायं गुरवे तत्समीपपुणातः ।

ग्राहि मां तत्त्ववोरोने भर्ति संसारासपेतः ॥ 4 5 ॥

संसारोरन्मन्त्राधोरे प्रभणं नभचजवत् ।

न च विश्रमणं क्वापि सूर्येल्वे दिवानिजी ॥ 4 6 ॥

It would be merely a farce. I bowed: down to the Guru and now I am come to you to save me, frightened by this terrible serpent of Samśāra. Day and night the Jivas travel in this awful wheel of Samśāra, this constellation of Zodiac; they are moving like the Sun and never get any rest. Of father! If we discuss about the truth of Ātman, we will at once find that there is no trace of happiness in this Samśāra.

किं सुखं तत संसारे निधनत्वविराणात् ।

भूदानं सुखबुद्धितु विद्यु कौटसुतं यथा ॥ 47 ॥

As the worms enjoy pleasures in the midst of faeces, so the ignorant persons find pleasures in this Sarisāra.

अर्थीय वेदेशाखिणि संसारे राणिणागुथे ।

तेन्यः घरो न मूर्दोर्सित सधार्णं श्राश्यकुरंः ॥ 4 8 ॥

Those who have studied the Vedas and other Śāstras and yet are attached to the world, are certainly deluded and blind like horses, pigs and dogs; no one is more stupid and ignorant than those persons.

मानयुं दुर्लिंग प्राय वेहराशालयधीत्य च ।

बय्येय वदि संसरो को विमुघेत मानवः ॥ 49 ॥

Getting this extremely rare human birth and studying the Vedānta and other Śāstras, if they be attached to this world, then who are the men that will attain freedom? What more wonder can you find in this world than the fact that persons, attached to wives, sons and houses; are denominated as Pundits?

नात: परर्तं लोके कविधिदार्थवीमद्धुतम् ।

पुरवारगृहासक्तः पशिडत: परित्यिते ॥ 50 ॥

That man who is not bound by this Saṃsāra, composed of the three Guṇas of Māyā, is Pundit;

that man is intelligent and he has understood the real import of the Śāstras.

न बाध्यते यः संसारे नो मायानुगीक्षिति: ।

स विहान्स च मेधावी शाखायरं गते हि सः ॥ 5 1 ॥

What use can there be in studying the Śāstras, in vain, that teach how to bind men more firmly in this Saṃsāra, full of Māyā. That Śāstra ought to be studied, which tells how a man would be liberated.

किं ब्यासीयवन्नेनान्र दूर्वधंकारेण च ।

पदितवं तदेवायु, मोचयेद्धावक्ष्यानात् ॥ 52 ॥

गृह्मत पुरुषं यस्मादगृहं तेन प्रकर्गितम् ।

कव सुगुं बच्यानगारे तेन भीतोउरम्बं तिथः ॥ 53 ॥

The house is called “Gṛha” because it catches hold of a man firmly. So what happiness can you expect from the house which is like a prison? O father! I am therefore afraid.

येउकृया मन्त्रमतो विधिना मृचिताक्षु चे ।

ते प्राय्य मानुषं जन्म पुनर्बिं चित्यन्तु ॥ 54 ॥

Those Pundits are certainly stupid and they are certainly deceived by the Creator, who having the birth even of men, become again imprisoned.

व्यास उवाच

न गृहं बंधनागरं बंधने न च कारणम् ।

मनसा यो विनिपुक्तो गृहस्थो5 पिथुच्छे ॥ 55 ॥

Hearing these words of Šuka, Vyāsa spoke as follows: "O Son! The house is never a prison, nor is it the cause of any bondage; the householder whose mind is unattached, can get Mokṣa, in spite of his being such.

-यागपतधनः कुर्वं-वेदोक्ते विधित्कामत् ।

गृहस्योरि विमुघेते श्रादुकृतसत्यवाक्युति: ॥ ५६ ॥

Truthful, holy, earning wealth by just means and performing, according to rules the rites and ceremonies, as stated in the Vedas and doing Śrāddhas duly, a householder can certainly get Mokṣa.

Book 1 Chapter XIV

इद्वारागी यतिश्रेय वानप्रथ्यो मतस्तितः ।

गृहस्त्यं समुपासन्ते मध्याहातितकमे सदा ॥ 57 ॥

श्रद्धया चार्वदानेन वाचा स्नृतया तथा ।

उपकुर्विंन्त धर्मथा गृहासभनिवासिनः ॥ 58 ॥

See a man who is a Brahmaçarī, who is an ascetic, who is a Vānaprasthī or follows any other method or vow, all have got to worship the householder after mid-day. The religious householder, too; welcomes them all, with sweet words, and gives them food, with great love and respect, and thus does them an amount of good.

गृहासभालयो धर्मों न दृष्टो न च चे श्रुतः ।

वसिष्ठादिषितायर्यैज्ञानिथि: समुपाशितः ॥ ५९॥

For this reason the householder's stage is the most excellent of all; I have not seen or heard of any other Śārama superior to it. For this reason Vasisṭha and other Śācāryas resorted to householder's life, in spite of their being endowed with great wisdom. O highly fortunate one! If one performs duly the rites and ceremonies of the Vedas, there is nothing that is impracticable to him.

किमसाध्ये महाभाग येदोक्तानि न कृतेतः ।

स्वर्ग मौढ़ो च सज्जन्य यद्याङ्ठति तद्वयेत् ॥ 6 0 ॥

Be it birth in a good family, or the enjoyment of heavens say, or be it Mokṣa, whatever desires, it is fructified to success. Also there is no such rule that one will have to remain in one and in the same Śārama throughout his life.

आश्रमात्यामं चघेक्षिति धर्मविदो विदुः ।

तस्मादान्म समाधाय कुक कर्मपत्यन्त्रिटः ॥ 6 1 ॥

The Pundits who know Dharma say that pupils can go from one Śārama to another. Therefore, O child! accept Agni (the householder's fire) and try your best to do unremittingly your duties.

देवानिवन्नमनुवांधं सनल्यं विधिवसूनु ।

पुत्रमुत्वाघ धर्मे संयोज्च गृहाभे ॥ 6 2 ॥

O Son! Enter into a householder's life and appease the Devas, Pitrş and men; procreate sons and enjoy the pleasures of household life.

त्वक्त्वा गृहं वंन तत्वा कतर्जिसे ततमुतमम् ।

वानप्रस्थामं कृत्वा संन्यासं च ततः परम् ॥ 63 ॥

When old age will come, quit the house and take up the Vānaprasthāśrama (the third stage) and go to a forest and perform the excellent vows and then take up the dharma of the Saṃnyāsa (renunciation of everything).

इन्द्रियाणि महाभाग माढकानि सुनिश्छिन् ।

अदारस्य दुरन्तानि पछ्रेय मनसा सह ॥ 64 ॥

O Fortunate one! He who does not take a wife, is certainly maddened by these indomitable five organs of action, five organs of senses and mind.

तस्माहारामुकृबीत तज्जयाय महामते ।

वाधकैत तप आतिष्टेति शाखोदितं वचः ॥ 65 ॥

Therefore, the makers of the Śāstras say, that to save oneself from the pernicious influences of these vicious senses, one is to take wife during his youth time and then be engaged in performing tapasyā during his old age.

विश्वामिचे महाभागसतप: कृत्वास्तिदुक्रगम् ।

ग्रीण वर्षसहस्वाणि निर्वाहो रोतिःत्रय: ॥ 6 6 ॥

मोहित्रघ महातेजा वदे मेनकवा स्थितः ।

गकुन्तला समुच्या पुत्री तद्धीवंजा रुष्मा ॥ 67 ॥

O fortunate one! In days of yore, the fiery Rājarsi Viśvāmitra practised very severe tapasyā without any food for three thousand years, and thought he was very strong and shining like fire, he was fascinated by the charm of the celestial nymph Menakā. And an auspicious daughter was born from the womb of Menakā by Viśvāmitra.

दृष्टवा द्वासुस्तां कार्लिं पिता मम परागरः ।

कामबाणादितः कन्यां तां जमाहोदुर्भे स्थितः ॥ 68 ॥

My father Pariśāra, though a great ascetic, was struck with Cupid's arrows at the sight of the daughter of a fisherman, named Kālī and accepted her in the boat.

बढ्राउपि स्कसुतां दूर्वया पढ़बाणप्रपीडितः ।

धावमानछ क्रेश गृहितछ निवारितः ॥ 69 ॥

What more than this, that Brahmā seeing his own daughter Sandhyā was struck by passion and

ran after her, when Bhagavān Rudra Deva made him unconscious by his Hurūkāra sound and made Brahmā desist form the attempt.

तसाचचमपि कल्याण कुरु मे वचनं हितम् ।

कुलजां कन्यकां वृत्वा वेदवर्मा समाश्रय ॥ ७० ॥

इति श्रीद्वैभागवते महापुराणे प्रथमस्कन्धे

चतुर्वशी3ध्याय: 11 1 4 11

So, O fortunate one! Take my word pregnant of good issues and marry a lady, born of a good family, and follow the path presented in the Vedas." Thus ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the First Book on the birth of Šuka Deva and the duties of householders in the Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XV

On the Dispassion of Suka and the Instructions of Bhagavati to Hari

श्रीगृक उवाच

नाहं गृहं कार्च्यामि दुःखदं सर्वथा पितः ।

बागुरासईगं नित्यं बचनं संवर्देशिन् ॥ १ ॥

Hearing these words of Vyāsa Deva Šuka Deva said: “O Father! I do not like at all to take to a householder’s life; as I see clearly that it fastens men, as a cord fastens animals, and is a source of incessant pain. O Father! Where can you expect happiness from a householder who is always loaded with anxiety how and whence to get wealth?

धनचित्तातुरागं हि क्व सुखं तात इय्यते ।

स्वजनैः खलु पीड्वाने निर्याने तोलुपा जना: ॥ 2 ॥

Those, who have greed for wealth, oppress their poor relatives, even; and extort money. Even one who is the lord of the three worlds, who is their Indra, he also is not so happy as a beggar, that has no desires. See, then, who else can be happy in this world?

इन्रीपि न सुखो तादूयापुगो भिशुभिन:सूढ़ः ।

को3-यः स्यादितृ संसारे त्रिलोकीविषये सति ॥ 3 ॥

Whenever an ascetic is seen to practise severe asceticism, Indra, the lord of the Devas becomes anxious and sorry, and raises various obstacles in his way. See, also, that Brahmā is not happy with his big sarisāra (his creation which is his house).

तर्वतं तापसं दूद्वा मव्वा दुःख्तोप्रबत् ।

विद्यान्बहविधान्यर कोर्तित च दिव्यसितः ॥ 4 ॥

Bhagavān Viṣṇu, though He has got His beautiful Kamalā, the presiding Deity of all wealth and prosperity, is always suffering, since.

ब्रहासि न सुखी विणुलैर्मी प्राय मनोरामम् ।

खेदं प्राप्नोति सततं संग्रामेसुरैः सह ॥ 5 ॥

करोति विपुलान् यन्त्रान्यश्रति दुक्षुम् ।

रापातिराति श्रीमान्कस्यास्ति विपुलं सुखम् ॥ 6 ॥

He is incessantly engaged in fighting with the Asuras; and though He is the husband of Lakṣmī and full of prosperity, He practises, almost, every now and then, terrible asceticism with great care and earnestness.

शक्रूरोर्पि सदा दुःखी भवत्येव च वेवश्रहम् ।

तपश्वर्यों प्रकृबाणीते दैत्ययुक्कर: सदा ॥ 7 ॥

So who else is there, who is possessed of constant happiness? I know also Bhagavān Śaṅkara, too, suffers incessant troubles and has to fight against the Daityas.

कदाचित्र सुखी शैते धनवानपि लोतूप: । निर्यन्त्र कवं तता सुखं प्राप्नोत मानव: ॥ 8 ॥

So, then, O Father: how can a poor householder be happy when the rich householder cannot sleep happily, with his constant care for wealth.

जानत्रिप महाभाग पुरं वा वीर्यम्भवम् ।

नियोक्ष्यस महागोरे संसारे दुःखदे सदा ॥ 9 ॥

O highly fortunate one! Knowing full well this truth of the world, why are you plunging me, your son, in this terrible Sarīsāra, full of pains and agonics.

जनमुदःखं जगदुःखं दुःखं च मरणे तथा ।

गर्भावसे पुनईःखं विश्रामुगमये तिथः ॥ 10 ॥

O Father! What shall I say to you about the miseries of the world! There is pain in birth, pain

Book 1 Chapter XV

in old age, pain in death, and pain in the life in the womb full of urines and faeces; but the pain, arising from desire and greed, is more terrible than all the pains mentioned above; and then, the pains experienced while asking for them are greater than the pangs of death.

तस्मातिरणर वृ:खं तृणालोभासमुद्वम् ।

यात्रायां परमं दुःखं सरणादिप मान्द च 11 1 11

Alas! There is no other way for the Brāhmins to earn their livelihood than to accept gifts from others.

प्रतिग्रहधना विषा न बुद्ध्वलजीवना: ।

पराणा परमं दुःखं मरणं च दिने दिने ॥ 12 ॥

Therefore, Brāhmins have to suffer daily death-like pangs in having to wait in expectation from others; can there be anything more regrettable than this?

पटिता सकलावेद्वज्ञशाम च समंततः ।

गत्वा च धर्निज़ो कर्मती सुती: सर्वात्मना बुधे: ॥ 13 ॥

एकोदारस्य का चिन्ता पत्रमूलकलादिधि: ।

चेन केनाव्यपानेय संतुर्धा च प्रपूर्वेने ॥ 14 ॥

The Brāhmaṇa, studying all the Vedas and Dharma Śāstras and acquiring wisdom, have got at last to go to the rich and praise them (in expectation of some money) carefully. O Father! if one does not become a householder, then what care is there to feed one's own belly?

भावां पुत्रास्तथा पौरा: कुटुवे विपुले सति ।

प्रूरणार्थ महदुःखं क्व सुखं चितरद्धून ॥ 15 ॥

If there be contentment in the mind, anyhow the belly can be filled with leaves, roots and fruits; but if there be wife, sons and grandsons and many dependent relatives, then to feed them all, much trouble and anxiety are experienced.

योगाराष्ट्र बद मम जानगारहं सुखाकरम् ।

कर्मकाष्ठेउलित तान नसेई कदाचन ॥ 16 ॥

So how can you expect, O Father! perfect happiness in the world? So teach me, O Father! the Sāstras on Yoga and eternal truth that will give perfect happiness; no advice in Karma Kānda (the series of actions) will bring me pleasure.

वद कर्मक्षयोपायं प्रारब्धं सच्छित् तथा ।

वर्तमानं चया नयेत्तिबिधं कर्म मूलजम् ॥ 17 ॥

Now advise me how the karmas can be exhausted; how the root of the three sorts of karmas, Sañcita, Prārabdha, and Vartamāna, giving torments of birth, death etc., the Avidyā, the great ignorance, can be destroyed?

जलौकेव सदा नारी कौर्य विचितिति वै ।

मूर्खेस्तु न विज्ञानाति मोहितो भवचेषितेः ॥ 18 ॥

The fools do not understand how the women suck the blood out of persons like leeches, for they get themselves deluded by their gestures and postures?

भोगैर्वींथं धरने पूर्णं मनः कुटितभाषणैः ।

कांता हरति सर्वेयं कः सेनतसाङ्गोउपरः ॥ १९ ॥

निद्रासुखलिनाणर्थे मूर्खेतु दारसंग्रहम् ।

करीति बिंचितो धागा दुःखाय न सुखाय च ॥ २० ॥

The lady of the house, whom the people call kāntā, the beautiful one, steal away the semen virile, the strength and energy in the way of giving them happiness as sexual intercourse, and their minds and wealth and everything by their crooked love conversations; so see what greater thief can there be than a woman? In my opinion, those that are ignorant are certainly deluded by the Creator; they accept wife to destroy their own pleasure of happiness.

सूत उवाच

एर्वविधानि वाक्यानि श्रुना व्यास: शुक्रस्य च ।

संग्राप महर्ती विन्तां किं करोमीत्संशरणम् ॥ 21 ॥

They can never understand that women can never be the source of pleasure; they are the source of all miseries." Hearing these words of Šuka, Vyāsa became merged in the deep sea of care and anxieties, thinking what to do then.

तस्य सुखदुरधूनी लोचनादुःखजानि च ।

वेयपृधु शगीरेभदूर्तानि प्राप मनस्तथा ॥ 22 ॥

The incessant tears of pain flowed from his eyes; his whole body began to shiver and his mind became too much worried.

शोचंत पितरं मृद्वा दीनं शोकपरित्युतम् ।

उवाच पितरं व्यासं विस्मयोगुक्ललोचनः ॥ 2 3 ॥

Seeing this distressed and sorrowful state of his father, Sukadeva, with eyes full of wonder, said: Oh! What a power has Māyā got!

आहो माघावलं चोर्धं चनोह्यत पिच्छतम् ।

वेत्ततस्य च कतरिं सर्वैंं वेदसिमित् ॥ 24 ॥

"Oh! He, whose words are accepted by all, with great love and care, as equivalent to the Vedas, who is the author of the Vedānta Darśana, and before whom nothing is veiled in ignorance, Oh! that greatest Pundit, the knower of all the Tattvas, is now deluded by Māyā!

न जाने का च सा माया किंक्रिवलासाउतील वृढ़का ।

या मोहर्यति विहांतं व्यासं सत्यवतीसुन्तम् ॥ 25 ॥

Oh! what is that Māyā who has been able to delude Vyāsa Deva, the son of Satyavati, so skilled in the knowledge of Brahma Vidyā; I also do not know how, with what great care, one is to practise Sādhānā towards Her.

पुराणानां च वक्ता यो निर्माता भारतस्य च ।

वियाभाकर्ता वैद्यानां सोउपि मोहमुपायातः ॥ 26 ॥

Alas! He who has composed eighteen Mahāpurānas and the great Mahābhārata, who has divided the Vedas in four parts, the same Veda Vyāsa has today been deluded by the power of Māyā! What to speak of other persons!

तां याथि शरणं देखीं या मोह्यति दैं जगत् ।

ब्रहाविष्णुहार्दीछ कवाद-न्येषां च कीवीर्णी ॥ 27 ॥

कोउविति त्रिषु लोकेषु यो न मुहाति मायया ।

यन्मोहं गमिता: पूर्वे ब्रहाविष्णुहारदयः ॥ 28 ॥

Oh! Māyā has deluded Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara and others and the whole universe; then who is there in the three worlds that is not fascinated by Her influence! I, therefore, take refuge unto the Internal Governess, the Devi Mahā Mayā.

अही बलमहो वीर्यं देया खलु विनिर्मितम् ।

वायदेव वर्ग नीत: सर्वेन ईश्वः प्रभुः ॥ 29 ॥

Oh! what wonderful power She wields? By her

own Magic power, She has kept God even under Her control, who is omniscient and the Controller of all.

विषयशंभचो व्यास इते पौराणिका जगुः ।

सोर्पि गोहाणवे यमने भन्योते वीणयथा ॥ 30 ॥

The Pundits, who know the Purānas say, that Vyāsa Deva is born of the part of Viṣṇu; but, see the wonder, that he is today plunged in the sea of delusion like a merchant whose ship has been wrecked.

अशुपार्तं करोत्यवि विवर्जा: प्राकृतो यथा ।

अहो मायावत् चैतदुर्भूत्वर्ज पधिडतिरि ॥ 31 ॥

Alas! How great is the wonderful power of Māyā! The all-knowing Vyāsa is today under the control of Māyā and is weeping like an ordinary man! So, I have come to the firm conclusion that the wise Pundits are incapable to surpass the strength of Māyā. What a great error arises through the power of Māyā!

कोउयं कोई कव் चेह कौकुंगोउयं घमः किल ।

पढ़युतात्मके देहे चितापुँजेते वासना ॥ ३ २ ॥

See! indeed!! Who is he and who am I? What for we have come here? There is no certainty, nothing whatsoever, about that. And, see, also, how he has got the nice idea of “father” on his body and the idea of “his son” in my body, that are composed of five elements.

बलिष्ठा खलु मावेयं मायिनामपि मोहिनी ।

यथाप्रभभूत: कृष्णोपि कौती रोन्दि बिजः ॥ 33 ॥

This is now quite evident to me that, when the Brāhmin Maharṣi Krṣna Dvaipāyana is weeping under the influence of Māyā, She is the strongest of all; even those who are skilled in the great Māyā fall under Her prey.'

तां नत्वा मनसा देहों सर्वकारणकारणाम् ।

जनन्नीं सर्वदेवानां ब्रहादौन्ती तर्धधरीम् ॥ 34 ॥

पितरं प्राह दीनं तं शोकाणंवपरित्युतम् ।

अशतींभवो व्यासं हेतुमद्वचन शुभम् ॥ 35 ॥

"Then Šuka Deva bowed down mentally to the Devi, Mahā Māyā, who is the Creatrix of Brahmā

Book I Chapter XV

and the other Devas and who is the Controller of them all; and then began to speak the following auspicious words pregnant with reason, to his father Vyāsa Deva, greatly distressed and plunged in the sea of sorrows:

श्रीगृक उवाच

पाराग्यरं महाभाग सर्वेधा बोधः स्वयम् ।

क्रि शोकं कुभरे स्वामित्य ययात्रः प्राकृतो नः ॥ ३६॥

"O Father! you are exceedingly fortunate, for you are the son of the high souled Parāśara and you yourself are the instructor of real truth, the tattva jñāna, to all persons; so, O Lord! why are you giving vent to sorrows, like an ordinary bewildered man?

अश्रातं तय प्रोज्ञास्य न जाने पूर्वेज्ञमति ।

कोउई कस्वं महाभाग विभ्ञानोयं महामति ॥ 37 ॥

O Mahābhāga! why are you plunging yourself in this great error, though you are a high souled personage! See, it is quite true that now I am born as your son; but this I do’n't know what relation existed between you and me in my previous birth.

कुरु धैर्य प्रयुध्यस्य मा विषादे मन: कृधा: ।

मोहजालियां मत्ता मुख ओके महात्मे ॥ 38 ॥

So, O highly intelligent one! Open your eyes of wisdom, and be patient; do not throw yourself, in vain, in the sea of sorrows.

शुधातिवृत्तिश्वेधन न पुरवर्गेन न ।

पियासा जलपानेय वाती नैवामवेक्षणात् ॥ 39 ॥

All this universe is like a net of delusion; knowing this, abandon all your grief; why are you feeling yourself so much weak and distressed, for your attachment towards your son? Hunger is satisfied by eating something, and thirst is satisfied by the drinking of water; hunger is not satisfied by seeing the son.

प्राणं सुखं सुर्पोचन कर्णर्ज अवणेन च ।

स्तीसुखं तु सिद्धां नूनं प्रोक्त्रं किं कलामे ते ।। ४० ॥

So the organ of scent is satisfied by smelling sweet scents; and the organ of hearing is satisfied

by hearing sweet music; and when thirst arises to enjoy women, that is satisfied only by sexual intercourse; but what satisfaction can a son give? So what shall I do to you be remaining as your son? The son, in fact, is not the cause of any satisfaction to one's self.

अजीगतैंत पुत्रोपि हितेश्रियर भयुजे ।

पशुकामाय यज्ञार्थ दत्तो मौल्येन सर्वथा ॥ 41 ॥

For this reason, in ancient days, the poor Brāhmin Ajigarta gave his son to the king Hariścandra, for necessary equivalent price in money, who wanted a man for his sacrifice where human beings are to be sacrificed as victims.

सुखानां साधनं ग्रह्यं धनानसुखसमुचव्यः ।

धनमजंव लोपेब्रौतुगोई कि करोमध्यम् ॥ 42 ॥

In fact, those things that are urgently required as necessities give happiness; and all these articles can be obtained by wealth; so if you want to enjoy happiness, then earn money; of what use shall I be to you as your son?

मां प्रबोधय बुद्धाया त्वं देवज्ञोसि महामते ।

यथा मुच्येयमवर्ते गर्भवासपयान्यानुने ॥ 4 3 ॥

O Muni! you can see subtle things and you are greatly intelligent; so I pray to you, to look upon me as your son and open my eyes of wisdom, that I can be free forever from this womb of birth.

दुर्लंभं मापुं जन्म कार्भैभ्याविहान ।

ततायि बाङ्गाल्यां वै दुर्लंभं चोतमो कृते ॥ 44 ॥

बन्दीड़मिति मे बुद्धिनंपसर्पिति चित्ता ।

संसारावासनालते निविधा बुद्धागमिति ॥ 45 ॥

O Sinless one! To get a human birth in this land of Karma (in India) is very difficult; again to get a Brāhmín birth is extremely rare; so when I have got this so very rare birth, why shall I spend my time in vain? O Father! Though I have served many spiritual teachers, fraught with wisdom, for many years, yet the firm idea “I am, as it were, bound up in this net of Saṃsāra” the notion covered with dark darkness of ignorance, caused by desires, this net Saṃsāra does not leave me.”

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

<table><tr><td>सूत उवाच</td></tr><tr><td>इत्युक्तस्तु तदा व्यास: पुत्रेणामितबुद्धिना।</td></tr><tr><td>प्रत्युवाच शुक्र शान्तं चतुर्बाधिममानासम् ॥ 46 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>व्यास उवाच</td></tr></table>

<table><tr><td>पठ पुरु महाभाग मया भागवर्त कृतम्।</td></tr><tr><td>शुभं न चातिविस्तीर्णं पुराणं बढ़ासंभितम् ॥ 47 ॥</td></tr></table>

When the son Śuka Deva of extraordinary power and intelligence spoke thus, Vyāsa saw that his son was strongly inclined to take to the fourth Śārama, that of Sarinnyāsa and spoke thus: "O Son! If your mind has become so, then read Bhāgavat Purāna, composed by me, highly auspicious, voluminous, and the second Vedas."

कन्या द्वारा तत्रैव पछतक्षणसंयुन्तम् ।

सर्वेषां च पुराणानां भूषणं मम संमन्त् ॥ 48 ॥

In this you have the chapters on Creation (Sarga) and secondary creation (Upa sarga) etc., the five characteristics as in other Purāṇas and it is subdivided into twelve Skandhas. Hearing of this Bhāgavata brings up to the mind that Brahma alone is real and all the universe is unreal and knowledge both intuitive and indirect springs up. For this very reason, the Bhāgavata treatise is considered as the ornament of the Purāṇas.

सदसज्ञानिविज्ञानं श्रुतमायोग जायते ।

येन भागवतेनैह तपट चंह महामते ११४९ ॥

वटपत्रशयानाय विणयो बालस्विणे ।

कैनात्रिय बालभावेन विमितोंर्ह विद्यतमन ॥ 50 ॥

Therefore, O highly intelligent one! you better study this Purāna. O Child! In days of yore, at the end of a Kalpa, Bhagavān Hari was lying, as a small Child on a floating leaf of a banyan tree, and was thinking thus:

क्रिम्बों केन न्येण कर्थे जानामि चाचित्वम् ।

क्रूनेवं चित्यमानयं मुकुंदाय महामने ॥ 51 ॥

“Who is the Intelligent One that has created me a small child? What is His object? Of what stuff am I made of? and how am I created? whence can I know all this?”

श्लोकाधेन तथा प्रोक्तं भगवत्याउक्तियार्थम् ।

सर्वे खलिद्वमेवाहं नान्यद्विति समातनम् ॥ 52 ॥

At this moment the Devi Bhagavatī Who is all Caitanya, seeing the high-souled Bhagavān Hari musing thus, spoke out in the form of a celestial voice in the following half-stanza:

तद्धो विध्गाना पूर्वं सविज्ञातं मन्यविधि ।

कैनोक्ता वागियं सद्या चित्तयामास चेतसा ॥ 53 ॥

"All this that is seen is I Myself; there is existent nothing other that is eternal". Bhagavān Viṣṇu, then, began to think deeply the above celestial voice:

कथं वेधि प्रवक्तांरं हीपुंसी वा नपुंसकम् ।

इति चिन्तापप्रवेन धृतं भागवतं हृदि ॥ 54 ॥

“Who has uttered this word, pregnant of truth, to me? How shall I come to know the speaker, whether that is female, or male or a hermophrodite?”

युन: पुन: कृतोल्यास्तमिश्रेवालस्तचेतस ।

वटपत्रे शावना: सत्रभूचित्तासमपित्रतः ॥ 55 ॥

Pondering over this for a long time, when he could not come to a definite conclusion, he began to repeat (make japam) frequently that word of Bhagavatī with a whole heart.

तदा शान्ता भगवती प्रज्ञास चतुर्भुजा ।

गंखचक्रानादपवारायुधरा शिका ॥ 56 ॥

विद्यावंधरा देयीं विद्याध्यमणभूति ।

संयुता सपुनीभिश्र सखीभि: स्वविष्युनिति: ॥ 57 ॥

When Hari, lying on a banyan tree leaf, became very anxious to know what the above words implied, then the all-auspicious Devi Bhagavati with a beautiful face, calm and quiet appearance, appeared before Bhagavān Viṣṇu, of unrivalled splendour, in the form of Mahā Laksmi, who is all of Sattva Guṇa, surrounded by Her Vibhūtis, Her manifestations of attendants).

प्रादुर्बंभृव तस्याघे शिक्षणोरिततेजसः ।

मन्दहायां प्रयुज्ञाना महातर्कशी: शुभानना ॥ 58 ॥

Her smiling companions of the same age, decked with ornament, and wearing divine clothings, and

Book 1 Chapter XVI

holding each in their four divine hands, conch shell, disc, club, and lotus.

सूत जवाच

तां तथा संशित्वा दृष्ट्वा हुदये कमलेक्षणः ।

विसितः सलिले तस्मिनिराटारां मनोरामम् ॥ 59 ॥

तिरभूतितरबा बुद्धिमिति: कीर्ति: स्मृतिभूति: ।

श्रद्धा मेया स्वया स्वाहा क्षुया निद्रा दया गति: ॥ 60 ॥

गृहि: गृहि: क्षमा रज्ञा कृष्मा नन्द्र च शक्तय: ।

संस्थिता: सर्वतः पार्थमाहात्यः पृथकपुथकम् ॥ 61 ॥

The lotus eyed Viṣṇu was very much surprised to see that beautiful Devī, standing without anything to rest on that water; He saw that on four sides of the Devī, were staying Rati, Bhūti, Buddhī, Mati, Kirti, Smṛti, Dhrī, Śraddhā, Medhā, Svadhā, Svāhā, Kṣudhā. Nidrā, Dayā, Gati, Tuṣṭi, Puṣṭi, Kṣamā, Lajjā, Jṛmbhā Tandrā and other personalised forces, each possessing a clear distinct form, and endowed with a clear distinct feeling.

वरायुधरा सर्वां नानाभूषणभूषितः ।

मन्त्रमाताकृत्तिता भृक्ताहारविरापिताः ॥ 6 2 ॥

In the hands of them all were divine weapons; in their necks, necklaces and garlands of Mandāra flowers; and all the limbs of their bodies were decorated with divine ornaments.

तं शूद्या ताक्य सर्वीक्ष्य तम्भिकेषायिः जले ।

विस्मयाविषहद्वयः सवम्बुप जनादनः ॥ 6 3 ॥

Seeing in that one mass of ocean the Devi Lakṣmī and Her Śaktis, Bhagavān Janārdana, the soul of all, became greatly astonished and thought within Himself thus: “What is this? Is this Māyā

that I am witnessing?

चिन्तयामास सर्वात्मा द्रव्यमोउतिविधित्मतः ।

कृतोपावा: स्विः: सर्प: कृतोर्डं वटतत्यम्:। 64 ॥

अस्पिकज्ञापवे धोरे न्याधोः: कवमुषितः ।

केनाहं स्वापितोःस्यय शिशुं कृत्वा शुभाकृति: || 65 ॥

Whence have appeared these women? and whence have I come here, lying on this banyan leaf? How has the banyan tree come to existence in this banyan leaf? How has the banyan tree come to existence in this one mass of ocean? And who is it, that has placed me here in the form of a child? Is this my Mother? Or Is this some Māyā that can create impossible things?

మేరు వన్ని నే న మా మా మ మాలి వుదు?

ర్రోన్ ఉనిచ్చణు దరే మ ఉన్ ఉన్నా ॥ 66 ॥

క్రీ మ మా వన కేత్వం గన్తలు మ న వ కల్పిచే ।

సేనమామజ నిత్య వలాగుబాజరేక్రి: ॥ 67 ॥

క్రీతి క్రిందేశ్రిగాగంతే మాగురాగే క్రమాకాత్త

पत्रशो3.149: 11 15 11

Why has She made Herself manifest before me now? Or Is there some hidden motive that She has appeared thus? What ought I to do now? Or shall I go to some other place? Or shall I continue remaining here in this form of the child, silent and with vigilance.

Thus ends the Fifteenth Chapter of the First Book

on the dispassion of Suka and the instructions of

Bhagavati to Hari in the Mahāpurāna

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book 1 Chapter XVI

CHAPTER XVI

On Šuka's desiring to go to Mithilā to See Janaka

व्यास उवाच

दूद्वा तं विमितं देदं शयानं वटपत्रके ।

उदारा समितं वात्मवं विल्यो कि विमितां हुशिति। १ ।।

Vyāsa spoke: "Then Devi Mahā Lakṣmī, seeing the Deva Janārdana lying on a banyan leaf and

surprised, spoke to him, smiling: "O Viṣṇu! Why are you becoming so much astonished?

महाग्रकान्या: प्रभावेण त्वं भ विम्युतावानुगा ।

प्रभवे प्रलये जाते भूत्वा भूत्वा पुनः पुनः ॥ 2 ॥

Before this, since times immemorial (without any beginning) there had been many dissolutions

(Pralayas); and many Srṣtis (creations); and at the beginning of every creation You came first into existence and every time I was united with you; but now You have forgotten me under the spell of that Mahā Śakti.

निरुणा सा परा शक्ति: सुगुषत्स्त त्वासप्रमूम् ।

सात्विकी किलयाशक्तिर्वांगक्ति शर्तिक्यमायिकाम। 3 ॥

That Highest Mahā Śakti is transcendent of all Guṇas; but you and I are with Guṇas. Know me as the Śakti, all of Sattva Guṇas widely known as Mahā Lakṣmi.

त्वत्राभिकमलावृद्धहा भविष्यति प्रजापति: ।

स कर्ता सर्वैलोकस्य रजोगुपाममित्वः ॥ 4 ॥

After this the Prajāpati Brahmā, full of Rajo Guṇas, the creator of all the Lokas, will come into existence from your navel lotus and will create the three worlds.

स तदा तप आस्थाय प्राय्य शक्तिमनुतमाम् ।

रजसा रक्तवर्षोढ़ कार्थिति जगतव्यम् ॥ 5 ॥

Then he will perform severe tapasyā and acquire the excellent power to create, and will create the three worlds by his Rajo Guṇa.

सगुणान्यझभृतौँँ समुताघ महामिति: ।

इन्द्रिणणिरिद्योगोँँँ मन:पूर्वान्समंततः ॥ 6 ॥

That highly intelligent Prajāpati will create first, the five Mahābhūtas (great elements), all endowed with Gunas and then create mind with sensory organs and the presiding deities of the senses, and thus with all the ingredients, fit for creation, will create all the worlds.

करियाति ततः सर्ग तेन कतां स उच्छे ।

विश्वास्याय महाभाग तवं वै पालयिता तथा ॥ 7 ॥

Therefore, He is denominated by all as the Creator of Brahmāṇḍa. O highly fortunate one! You will be the Preserver of this Universe.

तद्युष्वोर्धयदेशाज्च कोंधादुओं विधियात् ।

तपः कृत्वा महावोरो प्राय शक्ति तु तामसीम् ॥ 8 ॥

When the Prajāpati Brahmā will be angry at the beginning of the creation on his four mind-born sons, Rudra Deva will appear.

कल्पांते सेठपि संहतां भविष्यित महामते ।

तेनाहं तक्षाप्याता सात्प्रकां त्वमवेहि माम् ॥ 9 ॥

He will appear then from the centre of his eyebrows. On being born, this Rudra Deva will practice very severe tapasyā and will get the Sarhīhara Śakti, which is all of Tamo Guṇa and at the end of the Kalpa will destroy all this universe of five elements. O highly intelligent one! So I have come to you for this work of creation, etc.

स्वायोर्धे त्वत्स्मीपत्था सदार्डं मधुमुदून ।

हदये ते कृतावासा भवामि सन्तं किल ॥ 10 ॥

So take me to you as your Vaispavi Śakti full of Sattva Guṇa. O Madhusūdana! I will take refuge at your breast and will remain always with you."

विष्णुकाव्य

श्लोकस्यार्थं मवा पूर्वे श्रुतं देवि सुकुळासम् ।

तत्केनोकं चारगेहे रहस्यं परमं शिवम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Hearing all this, Bhagavān Viṣṇu spoke: “O Beautiful Devi! The half stanza was ere long heard by me, in clear words; by whom was that spoken? तन्मे बृहि वरागेहे संग्रायोयं वरानने ।

निर्भीने हि यथा रद्यं तत्सरामि पुन: पुन: ॥ १ २ ॥

Kindly speak to me on this great auspicious secret first. For, a great doubt has come and possessed my mind. What more shall I say than this that as a poor man always thinks of wealth, so I am thinking of that again and again."

व्यास उवाच

विष्णोस्तद्वचनं शुचा महातर्षशी: सितान्तान।

उवाच परया प्रील्य वचनं चाहल्हासिनी ॥ 13 ॥

Hearing these words of Viṣṇu, the Devi Mahā Lakṣmī smilingly said with great affection: "O Strong and Energetic one! I am now speaking in detail on this; listen.

महालक्षीरवाच

श्रणु श्रौरे वचो मेउषा सुर्गणाउहं चतुर्भुजा ।

मां जानासि न जानासि निरुणां सरुणालायम् ॥ 14 ॥

O Four-armed one! It is because I have come to you with form and endowed with Gunas that you

Book I Chapter XVI

have come to know me; but you have not known that Ādyā Śakti, the Prime force, transcending all the Guṇas, though. She is the substratum of all the Guṇas.

त्वं जानीहि महाभाग तथा तत्यकटीकृतम् ।

पुर्णं भागवतं विद्धि वेदसारं शुभावहम् ॥ 15 ॥

O highly fortunate one! That Devi Bhagavatī, transcendant of all the Guṇas, uttered that all auspicious, highly sanctifying semi-stanza, the essence of all the Vedas.

कृपां च महतीं मन्ये देह्या: शतुनिष्यून ।

यया प्रोकं परं गुहां हिताय तव सुमत ॥ 16 ॥

O destroyer of the enemies! I think that there is the highest grace of that Highest Śakti on you, that She spoke the greatest secret to you for your benefit.

ल्याणीयं सूदा चित्रे न विस्मायं कदाचन ।

सारे हि सर्वशिकाणां महाविदायाक्रतिणम् ॥ 17 ॥

O one performing good vows! know those words uttered by Mahāvidyā, as the essence of all the Śāstra.

नात: परं वैदित्ययं वर्ते पृवनत्रये ।

प्रियोस खलु देव्यास्त्वे तेन ते व्याक्तं वचः ॥ 18 ॥

So firmly retain them within your heart; never forget them. There is no other thing, save that, worth being known in earnest. Because you are most beloved by the Devi! That she has spoken this to you."

व्यास उवाच

इति श्रुत्वा वचो देव्या महालक्ष्म्याशुर्भुंजः ।

द्याग द्वये नित्यं मत्वा मंगमनुतमम् ॥ 19 ॥

कालेन क्रिवता तत्र तताधिकमलोद्धवः ।

ब्रह्मा दैत्यभयान्तस्तो जगाम शरणं हरेः ॥ 20 ॥

ततः कृत्वा महायुवं हृत्वा तो मधुकैकर्णो ।

जजाय भयाविष्यु: श्लोकाप्रविष्याद्धसूम्। 21 ॥

जपन्तं वासुतेवं च दृष्ट्वा देवः प्रजापति: ।

प्रपछ्छ परमप्रीतः कछ्ज्ञः कमलपातितम् ॥ 22 ॥

Hearing these words of the Devi Mahā Lakṣmī, the four-armed Bhagavān took that semi-stanza as a Mantra to be repeated in right earnest within his

mind and cherished that forever within his heart. After some time, Brahmā, born of the lotus of the navel of Viṣṇu, became afraid of the two Daityas, Madhu and Kaitabha, took refuge of Bhagavān Viṣṇu; Viṣṇu killed the two demons and began to do distinctly the japam of the semi-stanza. Brahmā, born of the lotus, then asked Viṣṇu with a gladdened heart:

किं तं जपसि देदेश त्वतः को3पधिकोरित वे ।

यत्स्याता पुष्ठरीकाक्ष प्रीतीस जनादीक्षा ॥ 23 ॥

“O Lord of the Devas! what japam are you doing? Lotus eyed! Is there any other body more powerful than you? O, Lord of the Universe! whom do you think and thus feel yourself so happy?”

हरिक्वाच

मयि त्वयि च या शफि: क्रियाकारणलक्षणा ।

विचार्य महाभाग या या भागवर्ती शिला ॥ 24 ॥

Hearing Brahmā, Bhagavān Hari said: “O highly fortunate one! Think out yourself once of the Primordial Force, the auspicious Bhagavati Ādyā Śakti who is reigning every where as the cause and effect and you will be able to understand everything.

यस्याधारे जगत्सर्वे लिछत्यत्र माणवे ।

साकारा या महाग्रात्क्रमेया च सनातनी ॥ 25 ॥

यया विमुज्ञते विश्वं जगदोत्चवारचम् ।

सैया प्रसावा वरुना गुणं भवति मुक्चे ॥ 26 ॥

सा विद्या परमा मुक्तेतुभूता सनातनी ।

संसारवन्योत्त्रेषु शैव सर्वेषेधेषी ॥ 27 ॥

My presiding Deity is that immeasurable eternal Mahā Śakti Brahmamayī; in whose Śakti, as a receptacle on this ocean rests the whole Universe; I am thinking of that, by which is created (often and often) this entire Universe, moving and non-moving. When Devi Bhagavatī, the giver of boons, become graciously pleased, human beings become freed of this bondage of Saṃsāra; and again that highest Eternal Wisdom, the cause of Mukti, becomes the source of bondage to this world, of those who are deluded by Her.

अर्ह च त्विडलं विश्वं तत्याश्रच्छक्तिस्तम्बमम् ।

विद्धि ब्रहासन्सद्धः कतन्ध्य: सर्वद्वान्त्र 11 28 ॥

ग्लोकोर्टन तया प्रोकर्ते तई भागवतं किल।

वित्तो भविता तस्य द्वागपाटी युगे तथा ॥ 29 ॥

She is the Iśvari of the Iśvaras of this universe. O Brahmā! You, I and all other things of the entire Universe are born of the Cit Sakti (the power of consciousness) of Her and Her alone; there is no manner of doubt in this. The semi-stanza by which She has sown within me the seed of Bhāgavata will get expanded by the beginning of the Dvāpara Yuga.

व्यास उवाच

ब्रह्मा संगृतीत च विज्ञोस्तु नाधिपङ्ग्रे ।

नारदाय च तेनौक्ते पुरायामितनुद्ये ॥ 30 ॥

नारदेन तथा महां दर्त हि मुनिना पुरा ।

मगा कृतमिदे पूर्णा ब्राह्मव्यक्तिवस्तम् ॥ 31 ॥

While Bhagavān Brahmā was resting on the navel lotus of Viṣṇu, He got the seed of Bhāgavata. Then He gave it to His own son Nārada, the best of the Munis. Nārada gave it to me and I have expanded that into twelve Skandhas.

तत्वठव्य महापाया पुराणं ब्रह्मांतिमत् ।

पडलक्षणयुक्त च देल्याशितमुत्तम्म ।। 32 ॥

तत्वज्ञानसोपेतं सर्वेमामुत्तमम् ।

धर्शगत्बसम् पुरयं वेदार्थेनोरबृहितम् ।। 33 ॥

ब्रासुरवधोपेने नानाख्यानकथायुम् ।

ब्रहायिद्वानिधानं तु संसाराणवित्ताकम् ॥ 34 ॥

Therefore, O Mahābhāga! You now study this Bhāgavata Purāṇa, equal to the Vedas and endowed with five characteristics. In this the wonderful glorious deeds and life of the Devi Bhagavatī, the hidden meanings of the Vedas and the wisdom, the truth are all described; hence this is the best of all the Purāṇas and sanctifying like the Dharma Śāstra. It is the substratum of Brahma Vidyā; therefore, if men study this, they will easily cross this sea of world; and those that are stupid and deluded get pleasure in hearing the death of Vṛtrāsura and many other narrations that are interspersed in this book.

गृहाण तं व महाभाग योग्योर्षि मतिमन्तः ।

पुर्णं भागवतं नाम पुर्णा पुरुषर्षि ॥ 35 ॥

Therefore, O Mahābhāga! hear this sanctifying Bhāgavata Purānam and retain it firmly within your heart. O best of persons! You are the foremost of those that are intelligent; so you are worthy to read this Purāna.

अश्वासनस्त्राणां रुलोकानां कुरु संग्रहम् ।

अज्ञाननाशनं दिव्यं ज्ञानभासकरणोक्षम् ॥ 36 ॥

सुखदं शणितं धन्यं दीर्घनुष्यकरं शिजम् ।

भुणक्तां पठतां चेदं पुवर्गनिवर्धनम् ॥ 37 ॥

शिष्योयं मय मधांमा लोमहर्षणसभवः ।

पढिष्यित तव्या सार्ये पुर्णारी संहितां रुभाम् ॥ 38 ॥

Eighteen thousand Ślokas are in that Purāṇa and you better get them by heart; for if any body reads or hears this Purāṇa, fit to be praised in every way, all-auspicious, capable to increase posterity by the addition of sons and grandsons, giving long life, happiness and peace, he sees the Sun of Wisdom, resting in his breast and dispelling all darkness of ignorance.”

सूत उवाच

इत्थुक्ते तेन पुत्राय महं घ चक्रितं किल ।

मया गृहीत तत्सर्वे पुराणं चातिवित्यम् ॥ ३९ ॥

Thus speaking to his son Śuka Deva, Krṣna Dvaipāyana, my Guru, taught us the Purāṇa and thought it was voluminous. I got the whole of it by heart. Śuka studied the Purāṇa and stayed in Vyāsa's Śāśrama.

शुको3धीत्य पुराणं तु स्थितो व्यासाओमे शुणे ।

न लेभे शर्मे धर्मात्मा ब्रह्मात्मन इवापरः ॥ 40 ॥

But he was naturally dispassionate like Sanat Kumāra, etc., the mind-born sons of Brahmā; therefore he could not get peace in studying the contents of the Purāṇa which deal with Karma Kānda (actions) fit for the householders.

एकांतरेसी विकलः स गृान्य इव लक्ष्यते ।

नात्यन्तभोजनासक्तो नोणवासतस्तथा ॥ 4 । ॥

He remained in a solitary place, his heart being troubled very much. He appeared, as if, with his

Book 1 Chapter XVI

heart void. He did not mind much for his food and he did not fast also.

विन्तार्थि शुक्रं सूद्या व्यासः प्राह सुतं प्रति ।

किं पुत्र चिंचलं निवर्त कस्माछ्योरोसि मान्त १ ४ २ १ ॥

Once Vyāsa Deva seeing his son Śuka Deva so thoughtful, said: O Son! What do you think constantly? And why are you troubling yourself so much?

आसे सं ध्यानपरो तिथ्यमृणप्रत इवाधनः ।

का चित्ता वर्तेत पुर मयि तते तु तिष्ठिति ॥ 4 3 ॥

Like an impoverished man, entangled in debt, you are always disturbed by your thoughts. O child! When I your father is living, what for do you care? Leave aside your inmost sorrows and be happy.

सुर्षं भूक्व यथाकामं मुड़ शोकं मनोगतम् ।

ज्ञानं चिन्तय शाखोर्जे विज्ञाने च माति कुंह ।। ४४ ॥

Cast off all other thoughts and think of the wisdom contained in the Śāstras and try your best to acquire Vijñāna, the essence of wisdom.

न चेभ्यनसि ते शान्तिवंच्या मम सुवत ।

गच्छ त्वं विधितां पुरा पातितां जनकेन ह १ 4 5 ॥

O Suvrata! If you do not get peace by my words then go, at my word to Mithilā, the city of the king Janaka.

स ते मोहं महाभाग नागशियन्ती घपाति: ।

जनको नाम धर्मात्मा विदेहः सत्यसागरः ॥ 46 ॥

O Mahābhāga! That king Janaka, who is liberated while living, whose soul is religious and who is the ocean of truth will cut asunder the net of your delusion.

तं गत्वा तृपति पुर्र सन्तेई रखं निवर्ती ।

वर्जाध्यमाणां धार्मिलं पृष्छ पुर्र ययातयम् ॥ 47 ॥

O Son! Go to the king and question him on Varnāśrama Dharma (Dharma relating to caste and stages of life) and remove your doubts.

जीवन्युक्तः स राजार्थवैह्यानमितः शुचि: ।

तव्यवक्तितिगान्तश योगी योगिप्रयः सदा ॥ 48 ॥

That royal sage Janaka, the greatest Yogi, the knower of Brahma and liberated while living, is of pure soul, truth speaking, of a calm and quiet heart and always fond of Yoga."

सूत जवाच

ततलुत्वा वचनं तस्य व्यासस्यामिततजसः ।

प्रत्युवाच महातेजा: शुक्रधारिणसभ्यम्: ॥ 49 ॥

दम्भोर्धे किल धर्मात्म्यमिति चित्ते ममाधुन्ता ।

जीवमुक्तो विदेहछा राज्य शगतिर सुदार्वितः ॥ 50 ॥

Hearing these words of Vyāsa Deva, the highly spirited Sūka Deva of unrivalled energy replied: "O virtuous one! Your word can never turn out false; but when I hear that king Janaka is gladly governing his kingdom still he is liberated while living, and disembodied while he has body—this your word appears to me quite contradictory like light and darkness at one and the same place and time, and seems that these two epithets simply indicate vanity and nothing else.

वस्यापुर इवापारी राजसरी जनकः पितः ।

कुर्बेन्राज्चं विद्धेः किं सन्दोहोयं ममाद्धुतः ॥ ५ १ ॥

O Father! This is my greatest doubt how can the royal sage Janaka govern his kingdom, being disembodied. It appears that your word about Janaka is quite false as the son of a barren woman.

उद्यमिष्यामर्थे घृपं विदेहं नृपसतमम् ।

कर्धं जितृति संसारे पचपत्रमिवंभसि ॥ 5 2 ॥

सन्दोहोयं महांस्तात विदेहे परिवर्ते ।

मोक्षः किं वदतां श्रेष सीगतानामिवापरः ॥ 5 3 ॥

O Father! I have now got a desire to see the disembodied king Janaka; for my mind is plunged in great doubt how can he remain in saṃsāra unattached like a lotus leaf in water? O Greatest Orator! Is the liberation of Janaka according to Buddhistic doctrines or like the opinions of the materialistic Cārvākas! O highly intelligent one! How can the royal sage Janaka, in spite of his being a householder, quit the usages of his senses? I cannot comprehend this.

कर्थ पुक्रभयुक्तं स्थादुकृतं च कृतं कवम् ।

व्यवहारः कर्थ त्याज्य इत्रिग्राणी महामते ॥ 54 ॥

How can the things enjoyed by him appear to him, as if, unenjoyed and and how can his doings be his non-doings?

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

माता पुत्रसदा भार्यां भारिनी कुलटा तथा ।

घेदापेदे: कर्थं न स्याछ्योतन्मृतका कवम् ॥ 55 ॥

How can the ideas of mother, wife, son, sister, prostitutes and various persons having different relations, arising within him vanish again altogether? And if that be not the case, how can his Jivannuktahood be possible?

कटु क्षारं तथा तीक्षा कवायं चिष्येच च ।

सना यदि जानाति भुंके भोगाननुतमान् ॥ 56 ॥

If his taste be present of pungent, sour, astringent, bitter, and sweet things, then it is clear that he is enjoying all the most excellent things.

श्रीतोथापुखदं खादिपरित्रानं यदा भवेत् ।

मुक्ता कींदपूरी तात सन्देहो5यं ममादूतः ॥ 57 ॥

O Father! This is my greatest wonder and doubt, that if he has got the sense of heat and cold, pleasure and pain, how can he be a Jivannukta?

श्रनु मिवपरिज्ञानं वैरं प्रीतिकरं सदा ।

व्यवहीरे परे तिष्टकर्थ न कुकते नृपः ॥ 58 ॥

That king is thoroughly expert in reigning his kingdom; how then the ideas of enemy, friend, taste and distaste, remaining absent in him, he can govern his state?

चौरं वा तापसं वाथि समानं मन्यते कवम् ।

असमा यदि बुद्धि: स्यानुस्तत ताईं कौरीणि ॥ ५९ ॥

How can he look with the same eyes a thief and an ascetic? And if he makes any distinction, how then is his liberation effected?

दृष्टपूर्वीं ने मे क्रिछ्जलीवन्नृक्ष धूपति: ।

गंकेवं महती तात गृहे मुक्तः कर्थ नृपः ॥ 6 0 ॥

I have never seen such a man, that is liberated while living and at the same time an expert king in governing his subjects. For these reasons, great doubt has arisen in me. I cannot understand how can king Janaka be liberated, while he is remaining in his house?

दिद्धया महती जाता शुत्वा तं भूपति तथा ।

संदेश्विनिरुत्वचर्य नख्याभि विधित्वां प्रति ॥ 6 1 ॥

इति शीमदौंभिगावते महापुराणे प्रव्यमस्क्ये

घोडगोळप्याः: 11 16 11

Whatever it be, I desire now greatly to see him after his Jīvannukthaobod; so I desire to go to Mithilā to solve my doubts."

Thus ends the Sixteenth Chapter of the First Book on Šuka's desiring to go to Mithilā to see Janaka,

in the Mahapurāna Śrimaddevibhāgavatam

of 18,000 verses.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER XVII

On Śuka's Self-control

सूत उवाच

इत्युक्चा पितरं पुत्र: पायदो: पतितः शुकः ।

बद्धार्जिलस्वाचेदं गन्तुकामो महामना: ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: Thus speaking to his father about his intention to go to Mithilā, the high-souled Šuka Deva fell prostrate at his feet and with folded palms said:

आपृष्ठे त्वां महाभाग प्राहुं ते वचनं मया ।

विद्वेहान्त्रदूमिच्छामि पालिताङ्गनकेन तु ॥ २ ॥

बिना दार्इं केयं राज्यं करीते जनकः किल ।

धर्मे न वर्तते लोको दरड़शेज भवेढ़ादि ॥ ३ ॥

"O highly fortunate one! Your word must be obeyed by me; now I desire to see, as you say, the

kingdom of Janaka; kindly give me permission. O father! Again the doubt is coming within me how the king Janaka is governing his kingdom without sentencing anybody? And if there be no punishment within his kingdom, no one will remain in the path of virtue.

धार्मेय कारणं एण्डो मन्त्रविद्धितः सदा ।

स कर्व वर्तैत तात संशयोर्जं महान्मय ॥ ४ ॥

It is for the sake of preserving religion that Manu and the other sages have always prescribed for punishment; how, then, religion can be preserved without inflicting punishment?

Book I Chapter XVII

मम माता तिवयं वंध्या तद्ध्वाति विचौढ़ितम् ।

पृच्छामि त्वां महाभाग गच्छामि च परंतय ॥ 5 ॥

O Mahābhāga! What you have spoken to me appears to me true like the sentence “My mother is barren.” So, O destroyer of foes! Permit and I will start for Mithilā.”

सूत उवाच

तं दूध्या गन्तुकामं च शुकं सत्यवतीसुतः।

आलिंसयोबाच पुत्रं तं ज्ञानिं नि:सूद्धे दूढम् ॥ 6 ॥

Seeing the greatly wise son Śuka, void of any desires, earnestly anxious to go to Mithilā, gave him a cordial embrace and said:

व्यास उचाच

स्वस्त्यस्तु शुक दीर्घिंपर्व पुर महामते ।

सत्यां वायो प्रदत्ता मे गछ्छ तात यथासुखम् ॥ 7 ॥

O highly intelligent son Śuka! Peace be on you! Have a long life. O child! Speak truly before me and go.

आगतल्यं पुनर्गंता ममाश्रममन्तुम् ।

न कुत्राचि च गतल्यं ल्या पुत्र कथघन ॥ 8 ॥

O son! Say that after going to Mithilā you will come back again to this Śārama; never that you will go anywhere else.

सुखं जीवामि पुत्राईं दूध्वा ते मुखपढ़ज्ञम् ।

अपश्यन्तु:खमाप्तोम प्राणतस्वमसि मे सुत ॥ 9 ॥

O son! Seeing the lotus face of yours, I am passing my days happily; if I do not see you, I will suffer extreme pain. What more than this, that your are my life and soul.

दूद्या तं जनकं पुत्र सन्देईं विनिवलयं च ।

अत्रागत्व सुखं तिष्ठ वेटाध्ययनतत्पर: ॥ 10 ॥

I am saying, therefore, after seeing Janaka and clearing your doubts come here again and remain at peace, and study the Vedas.

सूत उवाच

इत्युक्तः सोअभिवाघार्य कृत्वा चैव प्रदक्षिणाम् ।

चलितसतसाउतोव धनुर्भक्तः शगे तथा ॥ १ १ ॥

Vyāsa having spoken thus, Šuka bowed down and circumambulated his most worshipful father,

and went out; he began to walk very fast like an arrow, leaving the bow, and when it has left the bow.

समप्रयविधित्योर्शूलोकांश्व विज्ञानिणः ।

वनानि पादपांश्वि क्षेत्राणि फलितानि च ॥ १ २ ॥

तापसांस्त्यमानांश्य याजकान्दीक्षयान्वितान्।

योगाभ्यासरातान् योगिवानुप्रस्थान्यकिनसः ॥ १ ३ ॥

गैरावागुणतांक्षेय सीराळक्ताक्षेय शेथानान् ।

वीक्ष्य नानाविधान्याभुगवामातिसम्यानुयिनः ॥ १ ४ ॥

On his journey he saw various countries, various classes of persons, earning money, various gardens and forests, various trees; in some places he saw fields with green grains and grains standing on them; at others, he saw ascetics practising asceticism, and initiated Yājñiks (performing yajñas or sacrifices); in some places he saw yogis practising yoga, the high souled Vānaprasthis (in the third stage of life) residing in the forest, and at others he saw devotees of Śiva, Śakti, Gangeśa, Sūrya and Viṣṇu and many others. Thus he went on in his journey, in great wonder, towards his destination.

वर्धेद्वेने मेहं च समुल्ल्य महामतिः ।

हिमाचलं च वर्षेण जगाम स्थिधलां प्रति ॥ १ ५ ॥

In his passage he crossed Meru in two years and the Mount Himālayas in one year and then reached the city of Mithilā.

प्रविष्टो मथिता मध्ये पश्य-सर्वोद्धतुत्तमाम् ।

प्रजात्र सुखिता: सर्वा: सदाचारा: सुर्मस्थिता: ॥ 16 ॥

Going there he found the place full of wealth, corn, grain, etc. and all prosperities and the people were all very happy and they observed the rules of conduct as in the Śāstras.

भूजा निवारितसत्र कस्मयन सभागतः ।

किं ते कार्य बद्यक्तेति पृहस्नेन न चाबवीत् ॥ 17 ॥

निःसूच नगरात्रास्थितः स्थाणुरिवारलः ।

विसितोतिशंसन्सथी वचो नोवार किछ्ठान ॥ 18 ॥

When he was about to enter into the city, the guard in front of the gate stopped him, asking “who are you? Sir.” “What for are you come here?”

When the guard asked him thus, he replied nothing and went away to a distance and with great wonder could not help laughing in his mind and remained motionless like a statue.

प्रतीहार उवाच

शूति मुकोर्सि कि बह्वानिकमर्थ लल्हिगताः ।

चलनं च विना कार्य न भवेदिति मे मति: ॥ १९ ॥

At this the guard said: “O Brāhmīn! Why have you remained silent? Kindly say what for you have come here? I know this well that no body goes anywhere without having something to do?

राजात्रया प्रवेष्ट्यं नारोस्तम्स्वा हित्र ।

अज्ञात्कुलशीलस्य प्रवेशेगे नात्र सर्वथा ॥ 20 ॥

The king has forbidden strangers whose parentage and character are unknown. Therefore, O, Brāhmin! Every one has to take the king's permission before he goes into the city.

तेजस्वी भासि नो नृनं ब्राह्मणो वेदद्वितम् ।

कुलं कार्य च मे वृहि ययेथे गछ्ठ माटन ॥ 21 ॥

It seems that you are a very energetic Brāhmīn and that you know the Vedas; so O giver of honour! speak out to me your object-in-view and go into the city as you like."

युक उवाच

यद्यमातोउस्यत्र ततूषांतं वचनात्व ।

विद्रैत्नारं रईु प्रदेशोय चत्र तुरुर्भः ॥ 2२२ ॥

मोहोरयं मम दुर्दुँदः: समूलल्य मितिद्वम् ।

राजनं रडुकामोर्डं पर्यटन्सपुयाततः ॥ 2 3 ॥

Hearing these words of the guard, Šuka Deva began to say: “I have come to see the city of Videha Janaka; but now I see that persons like me find great difficulty to enter here; so O Gatekeeper! I have got the answer from you. I was a great fool that I was so much deluded that to see the king I crossed many countries and over topped the two mountains and have come here.

वशितोई स्वयं पित्रा दूषणं कस्य दीयते ।

शामितोई महाभाग कर्मणा या महीते। 124 ॥

O Mahābhāga! What blame can I put on others?

It is my father that has deluded me; or my karma done in my previous birth is now making me wander about.

धनाग पुरुषस्ये परिघमणकारणम् ।

सा में नास्ति तथायत्र सम्राणतीम्य भ्रमातिल्ल १ २ ५ ॥

Alas! In this world greed for money is the sole cause to make a man knock about; but I have not got that even; my erroneous idea brought me so far.

निरागस्य सुखं नित्यं यदि मोहे न मज्जति ।

निरागोर्भं महाभागा मानोर्धिम्यमोहासगारे ॥ 26 ॥

I now realise that a man, having no desires, gets constant happiness if he be not plunged in the net of delusion; else he cannot have any such. O Mahābhāga! Though I have no desire of anything, yet I am plunged in the sea of Moha.

क्व मेर्स्थिति कवेयं पटुवां च समुपगत ।

परिश्रमकर्त किं के चँक्षितो विधिता किल ॥ 27 ॥

Alas! Where is Meru? and where is Mithilā (a great distance intervenes) I have walked so great a distance on foot; alas! this is this the result of my so long a journey!

प्रार्थकिं कित बोत्कर्युंशं वाय्यवासरुष्णम् ।

उषामसतुओं नित्यं कारायलेव सर्वथा ॥ 28 ॥

Therefore I am thoroughly convinced that the Creator has deceived me. One must have to suffer for his Prärabdha karma, be it auspicious or inauspicious. One must make one's effort, being always under the control of this Law of Karma always puts a man into different actions.

न तीर्थे न च वेदोउत्र यद्यमिभू मे शमः ।

अप्रवेश: पुरे जातो विद्वेते नाम भृपति: ॥ 29 ॥

This place is not a Tiratha (holy place) nor there are the Vedas personified here, that I have taken so much pains and trouble to come here--only there is one thing here and that is the king Janaka; but there is no chance to see him even; for I have not been able to enter even within his kingdom."

इत्युकत्वा विरायामारु मौनीभूत इव स्थितः ।

ज्ञातो हि प्रतिहारेण जानी कांश्वाद्धिजोतम: ॥ 30 ॥

Book I Chapter XVII

सामपूर्वमुवाचासी तं क्षता संस्थितं मुनिन् ।

गच्छ भो यत्र ते कार्य यथेहं डिवजस्तान ॥ 31 ॥

अपराधो मम बह्यान्यिवारितावानहम् ।

तल्हतनंच महाभाग विमुफतानां क्षमावलम् ॥ 32 ॥

Thus saying, Šuka remained silent and began to stay as one who has taken the vow to remain silent. The guard then took him to be a very wise Brāhmin and spoke in sweet words: “O Brāhmin! Go to the place, as you like, where you have got your work. O Brāhmin! I stopped you; so please excuse me for any offence incurred by me. Free persons like you have mercy alone as their greatest strength.”

शुक उवाच

के तेस दूषणं क्षत: परतनोरित सर्वेला ।

प्रभुकार्य प्रकर्तेचं सेवकेन यथोचितम् ॥ 33 ॥

भूमदूषणं चात्र यदहं रक्षितस्त्वया ।

चोराशुपरितानं कर्तव्यं सर्वेबा बुद्धेः ॥ 34 ॥

Hearing this Šukā Deva said: “What is your fault? you are dependent on another; the servant ought to obey the words of his master and serve him by all means; and there is no fault of the king, too, in your not allowing me to enter; for the wise persons ought to ascertain by all means, whether the newcomers are enemies or thieves?

मदैव सर्वेबा दोषो वर्दं सुमुपानतः ।

गानं परपौहे वल्यतुतायश्छ कारणम् ॥ 35 ॥

Hence when I am quite a stranger suddenly come to this place, that the fault is wholly mine. Every person knows that it is lowering oneself to go to another's house."

प्रतीहार उवाच

किं सुर्ख डिज किं दुःखं किं कार्ये रुषमिच्छता ।

कः: श्रवृहितकर्तों को बूहि सर्वे ममादा वै ॥ ३६ ॥

The guard then said: “O great Brāhmīn! What is happiness? and what is pain? what ought to be done to by your well-wisher? who is your enemy? and who is your benefactor? Now advise me on all these points.”

शुक उवाच

द्वैविध्यं सर्वलोकेषु सर्वत्र विद्धियो जनः ।

रागी चैव विरागी च तद्योक्ष्ता दिषा पुत्र :। ३७ ॥

Hearing this Šuka Deva said: “Everywhere men are divided, as far as their internal natures are concerned, into two classes; they are called attached or unattached, And the minds of these two classes are again of two kinds.

विरागी विधितः कामं ज्ञातोज्ञात्व मध्यमः ।

रागी च दिविविधः प्रोक्तो मूर्तखं चतुरस्तथा ॥ 38 ॥

The “attached” man is stupid and cunning and the “unattached” is sub-divided into three classes knowing, unknowing and middling.

चातुर्वं दिविध प्रोक्त शास्त्रज मतिंतं तथा ।

मतिस्तु दिविधा लोक युक्तायुक्तिति सर्वथा ॥ 39 ॥

The cunning man is divided again into two classes: Whether his cunningness is according to the dictates of Śāstras or arising from his intellect. Again intellect is sub-divided into two whether it is Yukta (one-pointed) or Ayukta (Diverted).

प्रतीहार उवाच

यदुक्ते भवता विद्वार्थजोर्हे हिज्ञोतम ।

तत्सर्वे विस्तेणाएँ यथार्थं वद सतम ॥ 40 ॥

The guard spoke: “O Learned one! I cannot understand what you say; so explain them to me what they mean.”

शुक उवाच

रागो यथासिति संसारे स रागीत्युच्छे धुवम् ।

दुःखं बहुविधिं तस्य सुखं च विधिं पुनः ॥ 41 ॥

Šuka Deva said: “Those who are attached to this world are said to be “attached” persons. These attached persons feel frequently various pleasures and pains.

धनं प्राय्य सुतान्दारामानं च विवयं तथा ।

तद्वायय महदुःखं भवलेवय इणे झणे ॥ 4 2 ॥

When they get wives, sons, wealth, honour, rise, etc., they get pleasure; and if they do not get any of these they feel at every moment intense pain.

कार्य तस्य सुखोपायः कर्तव्ये सुखसाधनम् ।

तस्यातीतः स विज्ञेयः सुखविषर्ने क्रौतिं चः ॥ 4३ ॥

Now the attached person sought to take such means as will secure them the pleasure of this world; so whoever acts against those means are denominated as breakers of their happiness and so they are enemies; and whoever, sides in their acquiring pleasures are denominated as their friends.

सुखोर्यादिता मित्र रागयुक्त्य सर्वथा ।

चतुरो नैव मुहोत मूढ़ो: सर्वेन मुहाति: ॥ 44 ॥

Of these, the attached but at the same time cunning man does not get confounded and bewildered by them; whereas stupid attached man gets always bewildered everywhere.

वित्कन्यात्मरक्य सुखोकानलेवनम् ।

आत्मानुचितनं चैव वेतान्तस्य च चिन्तनम् ॥ 45 ॥

The man that is dispassionate and engaged in determining the “self” dwells in a solitary place, meditates on “self”, finds pleasure in studying the Vedānta Śāstras and feels pain in all the topics on worldly affairs.

दुःखं तदेततसर्व हि संसारकधनादिकम् ।

शत्रवो बह्वस्तस्य विज्ञस्य शुभमिच्छतः ॥ 4६ ॥

कामः क्रीधः प्रमाद्धु श्रवो विधिधः स्मृतः ।

बज्यु: सन्तोष एवायन नानो5स्ति घुवनत्रये ॥ 47 ॥

The wise man that wants his real welfare and is averse to the worldly enjoyments finds that he has many enemies: lust, anger, palaces, etc., are his so many enemies. Contentment is his only friend in the three lokas and so one is his real self."

सूत उवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य मत्ता तं ज्ञानिं दिजम् ।

क्षता प्रवेश्यामास कक्षां चातिमनोरामम् ॥ 4 8 ॥

Hearing these words of Šuka Deva, the watchman considered Šuka Deva a very wise man and soon led him to a very beautiful compartment.

नगरं बीक्षामण: संस्वैविध्यजनसंकुलम् ।

नानाविषिग्रद्याखों क्रविक्रक्याकराम्क। ॥ 4 9 ॥

Šuka Deva then began to see that the town was

full of three sorts of men, good, middling, and bad; and the shops were filled with various articles of merchandise.

रागदेष्युतं कामालोभमोहाकुतं तथा ।

विवदसुजनाकर्णि वसुपुर्ण महतम् ॥ 50 ॥

The many things were being incessantly purchased and sold there. Whithin that town, filled with many men, money and all sorts of wealth and prosperities, almost everywhere were seen instances of attachment, hatred, lust, anger, greed, vanity and delusion; at some parts there were seen persons quarrelling with each other.

पश्यन्स त्रिविंशल्लोकान्यासरत्राजमन्दिरम् ।

प्रात: परमतेजस्वी द्वितीय इव भास्कर: ॥ 51 ॥

निवारितश तत्र प्रतीत्रिण काहवत् ।

तत्रैव च श्विता द्वारि मोक्षेमवानुचित्यम् ॥ 52 ॥

Seeing thus the three sorts of persons, the highly energetic Śuka, blazing like a second Sun, went to the royal palace when the gateman stopped him. He stood there like a log of wood and began to meditate on “Mokṣa” (Liberation).

छायायामाते चैव सम्वर्गी महातपाः ।

ध्यानं कृता तथैकान्तै स्थितः स्थाणुरिवाचणः ॥ 53 ॥

तं मुहुतौदुगाम्पत राज्ञोमात्य: कृतांजस्ति: ।

प्रावेशपत्ततः कक्षां द्वितीयां राजवेग्नभः ॥ 54 ॥

He began to think the light and darkness as same; the greatly ascetic Sūka became merged in Dhyāna (meditation) and remained at one place motionless. In an instant, a royal minister came out and saluting him with folded hands, took him to a second compartment. Here the minister showed him beautiful divine gardens. adorned nicely with rows of divine trees bearing fruits and gave him a good reception and took him to a very beautiful palace.

तत्र दिख्यं मनोरयं पुष्पितं दिव्यापदाप् ।

तद्रने दर्शियला तु कृत्वा चातिधिस्तिकम्प। ५ ५ ॥

वारमुख्यः सिक्यसन्त्र राजसेवापरायणः ।

गीतवादिकुशला: कामशाखियारादः ॥ ५ ६ ॥

ता आदिष्य च सेवार्य शुक्रस्य मन्रिस्तमतः ।

सितां: सदानात्समाङ्गासपुरः स्थितस्तदा ॥ 57 ॥

Book 1 Chapter XVIII

पुस्ति: परया भत्त्या ताधिभः स्तीभियंधाविति ।

इंगकालोपयपने नानाञेनातितोषित: ॥ 58 ॥

The minister next ordered the public women, in royal service, expert in music and playing with instruments, and skilled in Kāma-Śāstra (the science of amorous dealings) to attend on Śuka Deva and went out of the palace. Śuka, the son of Vyāsa, remained there Those prostitutes then prepared various dishes, suited to the time and place, and sought the satisfaction of Śuka and then worshipped him duly with greatest devotion.

ततो3न्त:पुर्वासियस्तथात:पुरकाननम् ।

रमं सन्दर्शयामासुरुज्ञना: काममोहिताः ॥ 5 9 ॥

Those ladies, then, residing within the four walls, became enamoured to see the beauty of Śuka Deva and showed him the gardens that existed in the inner compound.

स युवा रूपवाक्यांती मुंघाषी मनोरम: ।

यूद्या ता मुणुः सर्वार्ते च कामविवरणम् ॥ 60 ॥

Śuka was young and beautiful; over this he was extremely lovely, of nice limbs; his speech was soft and gentle; so he looked like a second Cupid (the god of love); all the ladies, struck with Cupid's arrows, lost their consciousness.

तितौंदियं मुनि मत्ता सर्वा: पर्यवंतरन्त।

आणयेस्तु शुक्राता मातुभाव्यमकल्पयत् ॥ 6 1 ॥

Then recovering, they considered Šuka Deva to be the great controller of passions and began to serve him with great care. The pure minded Šuka, born of Arani, looked on them like his mother.

आत्मारामो तितक्रोधो न हृद्यति न तथ्यति ।

पर्यंस्तासां विकारांशं स्वस्थ एवं स तिथ्यवान् ॥ 62 ॥

Šuka, finding pleasure in self and the controller of anger was not pleased or displeased with anything; so though he saw that the ladies were disturbed with amorous feelings, he remained quite undisturbed, calm and quiet.

तस्यै शय्यां सुर्यायं च द्वनुर्पंयै: सुरसंकृताम् ।

पराध्यांस्तरणोपेतां नानोपस्कारसंवृतःम् ॥ 63 ॥

The ladies, then prepared a very nice bed whereon Šuka Deva would sleep; it was spread over with nice clean bed sheet; many nice pillows were placed.

स कृत्वा पादशैर्चं च कुशपाणिरतर्दितः ।

उपाय्य पशिषा सन्थां ध्यानमेवान्पयत ॥ 64 ॥

He, then, washed his feet and with vigilance, put on his finger the ring prepared of Kuśa grass, and completing his evening Sandhyā, became merged in Dhyāna.

यामकें स्थितो ध्याने सूचाय पतदन्तरम् ।

सुत्वा यामद्वयं तत्र ओदलितन्तः शुकः ॥ 65 ॥

Meditating on Supreme Brahma for three hours (one Prahara), slept for 6 hours of the night.

पाछात्यं यामिनीयामं ध्यानमेवाव्यपत् ।

स्नाता प्रात:क्रिया: कृत्वा पुनरास्ते समाहितः ॥ 66 ॥

ड्रति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे प्रवासक्यचे

स्नतद्गोउध्याः :// 17 // /

Then at the Brāhma muhūrta (one hour preceding the sunrise) he took his bath and completing his morning duties, became immersed in Samādhi (inner enlightenment) and sat at ease.

Thus ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the First Book on Suka's displaying his self-control amidst the

women of the palace of Mithilā in the Mahāpurāna

Śrimaddevirbhāgavatam by Veda Vyāsa.

Book 1 Chapter XVIII

CHAPTER XVIII

On Janaka's instructions to Šuka Deva

सूत उवाच

शुत्वा तमागतं राजा मन्त्रिभ: सहितः शुधि: ।

पूर: पूरीहितं कृत्वा गुरूपूत्रं समाध्यगात् ॥ 1 ॥

कृत्वा:डर्णी नृप: सत्यवर्तासनमनुतनमम् ।

पूर्णच्छकुशलं गां च विनिवेदो घयस्विनीम् ॥ 2 ॥

स च तां नृपपूजां वै प्रत्यगृह्धादयाविति ।

पूर्णच्छ कुशलं गेउं स्वं निवेद्न निरातमयम् ॥ 3 ॥

Sūta said: "Maharsis! When the king Janaka heard of the arrival of Šuka Deva, the son of his Guru, he took his priest before him and attended

by his ministers came before him in pure spirit. Then he duly worshipped Śuka, offering him Pādya, Arghya and an excellent seat, and a cow, yielding milk and then enquired about his walfare.

कृत्वा कुणलसंप्रसन्पुरविष्टे सुखासने ।

शुक्के व्याससुतं शान्तं पर्यंच्छत पार्थिव: ॥ 4 ॥

Suka Deva accepted duly all the things offered by the king; and informed him of his well-being and asked the king in return, of his welfare and took his seat at ease on the Asana. The king Janaka asked the son of Vyāsa, full of peace:

किं निमितं महाभाग नि: स्मूरुवच च मां प्रति ।

जातं हागामं बृहि कार्यं तन्मुनिस्तम ॥ 5 ॥

“O Mahābhāga Muni Sattama! You are devoid of any attachment and you have no desires. May I enquire why such a person as your honored self has come to me.”

शुक उवाच

व्यासेनेतो महाराज कुक दारपरिश्रहम् ।

सर्वेभामाभाणां च गृह्वाथाम उतमः ॥ 6 ॥

मया नांगीकृतं वाक्यं मत्वा बन्धु गुरोरपि ।

न बस्योरस्तीलित तेनेतोच्छततृकताव्युन: ॥ 7 ॥

Šuka Deva said: “O great king! my father told me thus: “O child, take a wife; for the householder’s life is the best of all the ašramas but I thought that will be the source of my bondage to this world and therefore, did not obey his word, though he was my highest Guru.” He then again said to me:

शून स्त्रियमनं मत्वा स मुनिसतमः ।

उवाच वचनं तखं मिथिलां गच्छ मागूचः ॥ 8 ॥

"If one takes a household life, it does not at once follow that he will be held in bondage"; yet I did not agree to that. Then the Muni, thinking me still to be in some doubt, spoke this word of advice to me:

याज्योर्जित जनकस्तत्र जीवमुनीं नराधिः ।

विदेही लोकविदितः पाति राज्यमंकटकम् ॥ 9 ॥

"O Son! Do not be sorry; go to Mithilā and have your doubts solved. There my disciple king Janaka,

is governing his kingdom without any source of danger. He is Jīvanamukta (liberated while living) and is free from the ideas of body, etc., so everybody knows.

कुर्वं नराजं तथा राजा मायापार्थीनं बध्ये।

त्व विषयेक कर्व पुत्र वनवृत्ति: परन्तप ॥ 10 ॥

When that royal sage, Janaka, though governing his kingdom, is not seen tied up by Māyā, then O Son! why are you afraid of this Sarinśāra, when you are living this forest life."

पृथ्य तं नृपशालूंल त्वज मोहं मनोगतम् ।

कुक दारानमहाभाग पृष्ठ बा धूपति च तम् ॥ १ १ ॥

सन्देह ते मनोजातं कवियधिति पार्थिवः ।

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तत्थ मागेहि ततसा सुत ॥ 12 ॥

"Thefore, O Mahābhāga! Trust me and marry; and in case you doubt very much, then go and see king Janaka; ask him and remove your doubts. He will certainly solve your doubts. But, O son! After hearing him, come again quickly to me."

सभीकतोई महाराज तत्पुरे च तद्वारा ।

मोक्षकामोउसि राजेन्द्रवृष्टि कृत्वं ममानय ॥ 13 ॥

O king! When my father spoke thus, by his permission I have come now to your capital. O king! I don't want any thing, save Mokṣa (liberation); therefore O Sinless one! Kindly advise what am I to do, so that I attain Mokṣa.

तपस्तीक्षितेचांशु स्वाधायस्तीक्षेयवनम् ।

जानं वा बद राजेन्द्र मोक्षे प्रति च कारणम् ॥ 14 ॥

O Lord of kings! Practising asceticism, going to the holy places of pilgrimage, holding vratas (vows), performing sacrifices, studying the Vedas, or earning wisdom, whatever is the cause of Mokṣa, kindly say that."

जनक उवाच

श्रणु विशेषा कर्तेयं मोक्षामार्गश्रितेन यत् ।

उपनीतेो वसेद्योतै वेद्यमासाय वे गुरी ॥ १ ५ ॥

Hearing this, Janaka said: "O son of my Guru! I am telling what ought to be done by the Brāhmins, following the path of Mokṣa; listen.

Book I Chapter XVIII

अधीतय वेदवेदोतान्टत्ता च गुरुदक्षिणाम् ।

समावृतस्तु गाह्रस्वये सदारो निवसेन्मुनि: ॥ १ ६ ॥

नान्यवृत्तिस्तु सन्तोभी निराणीरतकल्पयः ।

अनिर्दोजादिकर्माणिकुवर्णः सत्यवाक्युचि: ॥ १ ७ ॥

पूत्र पौत्रं समासाङ्ग वानप्रस्थापनं वसेत् ।

तपसा घकिपूपुक्त्वा भावां पुरं निवेश्य च ॥ १ ८ ॥

सर्वाननीन्याधान्यामानन्यांगोप यधिवत् ।

वसेत्पूर्णिभे शान्तः शुट्दे वैराग्यमभवे ॥ १ ९ ॥

After having the holy thread, a Brāhmīn should live in the house of his Guru to study the Vedas, the Vedāntas and pay the Dakṣinā (the fee) to the Guru according to rules; he will then return home and marry and enter into the householder's life; he should lead a life of contentment, be free from desires, sinless and truthful and earn his livelihood with a pure heart and according to the sanction of justice and conscience. He is to perform the Agnihotra and other sacrifices; and after getting sons and grandsons, he is to leave his wife under the care of his son and then to take the life of a Vānaprastha (third stage of life). That Brāhmin, the knower of Dharma, must practise tapasyā and become master of his six passions (enemies); and when he gets disgusted with the world and when the Vairāgyam (dispassion) will arise within him, he would enter into the fourth Āśrama. For, the man is first to enter into the householder's life; and when he will be quite dispassionate towards the world, he will then have a right to take the Āśrama of Sarinnyāsa (renunciation).

वित्कत्याधिकारोस्ति संन्यासे नान्यथा ख्वचित् ।

वेदवाक्यमिदं तव्यं नान्यथेति मितिमं ॥ 20 ॥

A course contrary to this can never entitle one to the Āśrama of Sarinyāsa. This is the beneficial word of the Vedas and it must hold true; it cannot be false; this is my firm belief.

शुक्राध्वाविरिंहो सैस्कारा वेदबोधिता: । चत्वारिण्यरुहास्थय प्रोक्तानतर महात्मिभः ॥ 21 ॥ अधी च मुक्तिकामय प्रोक्ता: ग्रामदादयः। आश्रमादाश्रमं गच्छेदिति शिष्टानुगासनम् ॥ 22 ॥

O Śuka! In the Vedas are mentioned forty-eight Saṃskāras (consecrations; purificatory rites); out of which the learned Mahātmās have reserved forty Saṃskāras for the householders and the last eight Saṃskāras (śama, Dama, etc.) for the Saṃnyāsins. And this good usage is heard to come down from very ancient times. A Brāhmīn ought to complete his previous Śāramas successively and then enter into the succeeding Śārama.”

श्रीशुक उवाच

उत्पत्रे इदि वैराये ज्ञानविज्ञानसम्पये ।

अवश्यमेव वस्तव्यमाभ्येषु वनेषु वा ॥ 23 ॥

Šuka said: “If the pure Vairāgyam (dispassion) arising out of knowledge and wisdom (Jñāna and Vijñāna) already arises (before taking to the Grhastha Āśrama), is it still necessary to pass through householder’s life, Vānaprastha life, etc., or is one entitled then to take up at once the Saṃyāsa Āśrama, quit everything and reside in the forest?”

जनक उवाच

इन्द्रियाणे बलिष्ठानि न नियुक्तिन मानद ।

अपवस्य प्रकृतीत विकारांस्ताननेकग: ॥ 24 ॥

भोजनेखां सुखेखां न गयेच्छायाम जय च ।

यती भृत्वा कर्थ कुर्गधिकारो समुपस्थिते ॥ 25 ॥

दुर्जरं वासनाजलं न ग्रान्तिपुयाति वे ।

अतस्तछमानाधय क्रमेण च परित्यन्ते ॥ 26 ॥

Janaka said: O! One giving honour to the Śāstras and Gurus! Though the powerful passions seem to be under control in the period of unripened Yoga (the imperfect yogic state), yet one ought not to trust them; for, it is generally seen, many imperfect Yogins find themselves disturbed by one or other of the senses. If the mind of one who has already entered into the Sarinyāsa Āśrama gets perturbed in his course, then, how can he, you can see this for yourself, satisfy desires of eating good things, sleeping nicely, seeing his son, or wishing any other desires, knowing them to lead to his degradation?

He is then in a very serious state. The net of desires is very difficult to be conquered by men; that can never die out. Therefore, to put an end to them, the advise is to cut them slowly and slowly.

རྒྱོ་སྐད་ བཅོལ་ བཀྱིག་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོམ་ བཅོལ་ བཅོ

Book 1 Chapter XVIII

pure and quiet, all the things then become fully pure, O Brāhmīn!

प्रम-सर्वेषु तीर्थेषु सात्वा स्नाता पुन: पुनः ।

निर्नंत न मनो यावत्नावत्सर्वं निरर्थकम् ॥ 38 ॥

If going often and often to all Tirathas and bathing there, do not make one's heart pure and holy, then all one's troubles are taken in vain.

न रेहो न च जीहान नैंद्रियाणि परंतय ।

मन एव मनुष्याणां कारणं कन्धमोक्षतः ॥ 39 ॥

O Destroyer of enemies! It is the mind that is the cause of bondage or freedom; and not the body, nor the Jivātmā (the embodied soul), nor the senses.

गुस्तो मुक्तः सदैवात्मा न वै कथेते कहिधित् ।

कन्धामौक्षी मनःसंश्यी तम्मछ्ठते प्रणायिति ॥ 40 ॥

The Self or Âtman is always pure consciousness and is ever free; so, truly speaking, it can never be bound. Bondage and freedom reside only in the mind; so, when the mind gets peace, the bondage of Sarisāra is also at an end.

श्रग्निमयुतसीनो भेदा: सर्वे मनोगता: ।

एकात्मवे कर्वं भेद सम्पवेद्रुतलैर्गन्ता ॥ 41 ॥

He is an enemy, he is a friend, he is neither an enemy nor a friend, all these different thoughts reside in the mind and arise out of duality; how can the ideas of differences exist, when everything has become all one pervading self?

जीवो बहा सदैवाहं नात्र कार्या विचारणा ।

भेदबुद्धिस्तु संसारे वर्तेनागा प्रवर्ते ॥ 4 2 ॥

Jiva is Brahma; I am that Brahma and nothing else; there is nothing to be discussed here. It is owing to the dualities that monism appears not clear and differences between Jiva and Brāhmin arise.

अविद्धियं महाभाग विहा चैतबिजनन् ।

विद्याविद्य च विज्ञेय सर्वैद्व विद्याणीः ॥ 4 3 ॥

O Mahābhāga! This difference is due to Avidyā and by which this difference vanishes, that is termed Vidyā.

This difference between Vidyā and Avidyā ought to be always kept in view, by those that are clever.

विनास्तरपं हि छायायां ज्ञाते च कयं सुखम् ।

अविदाया विना तद्धकयं विद्यां च वेति चे ॥ 44 ॥

How can the pleasure from the cooling effect of the shadow, be felt, if the heating effect of the rays of the Sun be not previously experienced? So, how Vidyā is to be experienced if Avidyā be not felt before?

युणा युणेय् वत्तेय् पृतानि च तथैव च ।

इन्द्रियाणीग्रिद्यार्थ्यु को दोषस्तत्र चातम्नः ॥ 4 5 ॥

Sattva, Rajas and Tamo Gunas reside naturally in things, made of Gunas; and the five principal elements reside naturally in substances made up of elements; so the senses reside naturally in thier own forms, etc., so how can there be any stain to the Atman which is unattached?

मयादा सर्वस्थार्थं कृता वेदेयु सर्वश: ।

अन्यथा धर्मानगः स्थानसीगतानामिवानय च ४ 6 ॥

Yet to teach humanity, the high souled persons preserve always with greatest care the respect of the Vedas. If they do not do this, then, O, Sinless One! the ignorant persons would act lawlessly according to their wishes, like the Cārvākas; and Dharma will become extinct.

धर्मानगो विनतः स्यातुणांचारोस्तितर्जितः ।

अन्तो वेद्रादिष्ठने मार्गेण गच्छतां रुषुम् ॥ 47 ॥

When Dharma will become extinct, the Varṇāśrama will gradually die out; so the well-wishers should always follow the path of the Vedas.

श्रीगृक त्वाच

संदेहो वर्तैते राजत्र निवर्तीत मे वक्षित् ।

भवता कार्यितं यतच्छुण्वतो मे नाराय १। ४८ ॥

Šuka said: 'O King! I have now heard all that you have said; still my doubt remains; it is not solved.

वेद्यार्थे पहिंसा स्याद्यार्थवहृता हि सा ।

कर्थ पुक्तिछो धर्मे वेदोक्नो बत पूर्णते ॥ ४ १ ॥

O King! In the Dharma of the Vedas, there is Himsā (act of killing and injuring); and we hear that there is much of Adharma (sin) in the above Hirnsā.

प्रत्यक्षेण त्वनाचारः सोमपानं नराधिप ।

यनृता हिंसनं तद्धृद्धरणं चामियस्य च ॥ 50 ॥

सीत्रामपणे तथा प्रोक्तः प्रत्यक्षेण सुराग्रहः ।

धृतक्रीडा तथा प्रोक्ता हतानि विविधापनि च ॥ 51 ॥

So how can the Dharma of the Vedas give Mokṣa? O King! One can see before one's eyes that the drinking of Soma rasa, the killing of animals, the eating of fish and flesh and so are advised in the Vedas; so much so that in the sacrificial ceremony named Sautrāmana the rule of drinking wine and many other vratas are clearly mentioned; even gambling is advised in the Vedas.

भूवतेस्प पुरा ह्रासीच्छशर्विद्नुंपोभाम: ।

यज्ञ धर्मपेते निवं वदान्यः सत्यसंगरः ॥ 52 ॥

So how can Mukti be obtained by following the Veda Dharma? It is heard that, in ancient times, there was a great king, named Śaśabindu, very religious, truthful, and performing sacrifices, very liberal; he protected the virtuous, and chastised those that were wicked and going astray.

गोता च धर्मेसूनां शास्ता चोत्थथामिनम् ।

यज्ञश्र वित्तितसेन बहचो भूरित्दिक्षणः ॥ ५३ ॥

He performed many Yajñas, where many cows and sheep were sacrificed according to the rules of the Vedas and abundant Dakṣinās (sacrificial fees) were presented to every one that performed their parts in the sacrifices.

चर्पोणं घर्वेते जातो विक्षायात्मसः पुनः ।

मेधांतुष्णावनाजाता नदी चर्मप्वतां शुभा ॥ 54 ॥

In these sacrifices, the hides of the cows that were sacrificed as victims, were heaped to such an enormous extent that they looked liked a second Vindhyācala mountain. Then the rains fell and the dirty water coming out of that enormous heap of skins flowed down and gave rise to a river which was thence called the Carmanvatī river.

सोरी श जात दिवं यातः कीतरिस्याचला भृथि ।

एवं धर्मेषु वेदेषु न मे बुद्धिः प्रतन्ते ॥ 55 ॥

And what a wonder? That cruel king left behind

him an ineffaceable fame and went to Heavens. Whatever it may be, it can never come to my head that I should perform the Veda Dharma, filled with so many acts of killing and cruelties.

खीसीने सदा भोगे सुखामानोति मानवः ।

अतापे कुःखामन्तं जीवान्युक्तः कबं भवेत् ॥ 56 ॥

Again, when the man find pleasure in sexual intercourse and when they do not have that intercourse, they experience pain, how can you expect such persons to attain liberation."

जनक उवाच

हिंसा यतेषु प्रत्यक्षा साउहिंसा परिक्लीर्तिता ।

उपाधियोगातो हिंसा नान्यथेति विविणीधः ॥ 57 ॥

Janaka said: “The killing of animals in a sacrificial ceremony is not killing; it is known as Ahimsā, for that himsā is not from any selfish attachment; therefore, when there is no such sacrifice and the animals are killed out of selfish attachment. Then that is real himsā; there is no other opinion in this.

यथा चैधनसंयोगात्नरी धूमः प्रवर्तेत ।

तद्धिणीगताश तस्मिजिध्यान्तव विषपाति चे ॥ 58 ॥

Smoke arises from a fire when fuell is placed in it; and smoke is not seen when no fuel is added. So, O Munisattama! The himsâ, as prescribed in the Vedas, is free from all blemishes, selfish attachment, etc., and therefore, it is unblameable.

अंहिसां च तथा विद्धि वेतेकां गृहिनस्तम ।

राशिणां साथि हिंक्षेत निः:सूछाणां न सा माता ॥ 59 ॥

So it follows the himsā committed by persons attached to objects, is the real himsā; that can be blamed, but the himsā of those persons who have no desires is not that sort of himsā.

अराणेण च चत्कर्मे तत्याङ्डकारवर्जितम् ।

अकृतं वेदे विहासेः प्रवहिते मनीधिणः ॥ 60 ॥

Therefore, learned men that know the Vedas declare that the himsā done by the dispassionate persons, with their hearts free from egoism, is no hirsā done at all.

Book 1 Chapter XIX

गृहस्थानां तु हिंसेव या यजे द्विजसत्तम ।

अंगोंण च यकमं तथाउढ़कारवर्जितम् ॥ 61 ॥

साईसैव महाभाग मुभुकुर्णा जितात्मनाम् ।

इति शीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणो प्रथमस्कन्ये

अशासरीअथायः ॥ 1 18 ॥

O Dvija! Really speaking, the killing of animals done by the householder attached to senses and their objects, and done under their impulses can be taken into account as a real act killing; but, O

Mahābhāga! of those whose hearts are not attached to anything, of those self-controlled persons desirous of moksa, if they do an act of Hirnśa out of a sense of duty, with no desires of fruits and with their hearts free from egoism, that can never be reckoned as a real act of killing.

Thus ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the First Book on Janaka's giving instructions on truth to Šuka Deva in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam by Veda Vyāsa.

Book 1 Chapter XIX

CHAPTER XIX

On Šuka's Marriage

श्रीशुक उवाच

सन्दहोर्यं महाराज वर्तैत हृदये मम ।

मायामार्ये वर्तैनानः स कर्थे निस्युहो भवेत् ॥ १ ॥

Śrī Šuka said: O king! This great doubt arises in my mind, how a man can be free from desires and the rewards of their actions, when he lives in the midst of this Samsāra, that is all full of Māyā? शाख्जानं च संग्राम्य नित्यान्त्यविचारणम् ।

त्वजते न मनो मोहं स कर्थ मुच्यन्ते नः ॥ 2 ॥

When even by the acquiring of wisdom of the Śāstras and the capability to judge which is real and which is unreal, the delusion of the mind is not dispelled until one resorts to the practise of Yoga, how then can freedom from desires and liberation come to a householder?

अन्तर्नातं तमपुरुष्तुं शाखाप्रोधो पी न क्षमः ।

यथा न स्थवति तमः कृतया दीपवातां ॥ 3 ॥

The darkness of a room is not destroyed by the mere mention of lamp, light; so the wisdom acquired by reading the Śāstras can never dispel the darkness of delusion that reigns in the inside of a man.

अश्रैहः सर्वभूतेषु कतिथः सर्वदा बुधैः ।

स कर्थ राजशान्दूत गृहस्थय भवेतथा ॥ 4 ॥

O lion of kings! If one wants Moksā, one ought not to commit any act of revenge or injury or killing any being; how can this be possible to a householder?

चित्तेषणा न ते शांता तथा राज्यसुखेषणा ।

जयेषणा च संग्रामे जीव्यनुकः कर्थ भवेः ॥ 5 ॥

Your desires to acquire wealth, to enjoy royal pleasures and to get victory in battle have not subsided; how then can you be a Jīvannukta?

चोरेषु चीर्वबुद्धिसे साधुबुद्धिस्तु तापसे ।

स्वपरत्वं तवाप्यतित विदेहस्वयं कंयं नृप ॥ 6 ॥

O king! You consider yet a thief, thief and a saint, saint; you consider a man as your relative or other than that; these ideas have not vanished from you; how then can you be called Vidéha?

कटुतीक्षाकाव्यानसात्यान्तैस सुभागुभान् ।

गुभेषु रमते चित्तं नागुभेषु तथा नृप ॥ ७ ॥

जागत्यदनपुर्यिष्ठा तव राजन्यवर्ति ॥

अवस्थान्तु यथाकालं तुरीया तु कर्थे नृपः ॥ ८ ॥

O king? You feel the pungent, bitter, astringent, sour tastes and the like; you feel good and bad rasas respectively; you become glad when success comes to you and you feel sorrow when you happen to fail; and you experience the three states, waking, dreaming, and deep sleep as an ordinary man does, how then can you be called to attain the Turiya (fourth) state? May I ask:

पदात्यधर्यमोक्षा सर्वे वै शरणा मम ।

स्वायम्बं चैव सर्वेयं मन्यसे त्वं न मन्यसे ॥ १ ॥

“Whether you cherish this idea that all these infantries, cavalries, chariots, and that all these elephants are mine; I am the lord of all the wealth

and things"? Or whether you do not cherish this idea?

प्रिष्टमसि सदा राजन्मृदितो विमानास्था ।

मालायां च तथा सपें समुद्रक्स्व गुपोतम ॥ १ ० ॥

O king! I think you eat sweet and good things, and, at times, feel pleasure and, at other times, feel pain! So, O King! How can you look on the garland of flowers and the snake as one and the same?

विमुक्तभु भवेत्राजनसमलोश्रमकांचनः ।

एकात्मवृष्टि सर्वेत्र चितृकृत्यर्कवैजुतु ॥ १ १ ॥

O king! He who is a Muktapuruṣa considers a lump of earth, a piece of stone, and gold as of one and the same value; he considers everything to be the same Ātman and does good to all the beings.

न मेघा साते चिनां गृह्वाराविषु कवचित् ।

एकाकी निःसूष्ठोज्चर्वे चेपियमिति मे मितः ॥ १२ ॥

Whatever that may be, I do not find any pleasure at present with houses, wife, etc., or with anything, in fact. What my heart's desire is that I roam alone always without any desires in my heart.

निःसूष्ठो निर्मेमः शगतः चप्रमूलफलाग्नः ।

भूगवहित्रियाभि निर्द्रंचो निष्यग्रहः ॥ १ ३ ॥

Therefore, I like not to have any companion; to be free from any attachment and to be peaceful, and calm; I do not wish to accept anything from anybody; I will forego all pleasures and pain from cold, warmth, etc., and I will sustain my life on roots, fruits and leaves, obtained without any effort and will roam, as I like, like a deer.

किं मे गुहेश विलेने भार्याय च सुरूपया ।

विरागमनसः कामं गुणातीतस्य पार्थिव ॥ ११ ४ ॥

When I have not got the least attachment to the household life and when I am beyond all the attributes, what necessity have I then of house, wealth or a suitable wife?

चित्यसे विविधाकारं नानागराममालूनम् ।

दंघोउं किल ते पाति विमुक्तोउस्मिति पापसे । १ ५ ।

And when you think of various things with loving heart, and yet say that you are a Jivanmukta, that is nothing but a mere vanity of yours!

कदाचिष्छजत्रा चिंता धनत्रा च कदाचन ।

कदाचिस्त्री-न्यत्रा चिंता निश्छितो-सि कदा नृप ॥ १६ ॥

O king! When you think and become anxious about your enemies, about your wealth or sometimes about your army, how then can you be said to be free from cares?

वैखानसा ये मुग्वो मिताहागा जितब्रतः ।

तेर्पि मुह्यिति संसारो जानंतीय हास्तवताम् ॥ 17 ॥

What more can be said than the fact that many Munis, eating moderately and controlling their senses, and leading an anchorite's life, and knowing the unreality of the world, fall victim to the Māyā!

तव वंशसमुत्थानां विदेहा इति भूपते ।

कुटिलं नाम जानीहि नान्यथेति कदाचन ॥ 18 ॥

विद्धायीय यवामूर्षतुं जनमाधिस्तु दिवाकरः ।

लक्ष्मीयोरं दरिद्रश नाम तेशं निर्वाकम् ॥ 19 ॥

Then what need there is to talk of you? O King! know that the hereditary the title “Videha” to your line of kings indicates downright insincerity; nothing can be other than this as the name “Vidyā Dhara” (holder of knowledge) is applied to an illiterate man; as the name “Divākara” (sun) is given to a born-blind man, as the name “Lakṣmīdhara” (holder of wealth) is given to even a poor man, as these names are quite useless to me.

तब यंजीद्ध्वा ये ये शुक्ता: पूर्वे मया नृपा: ।

विदेश द्वारा तिथ्याता नामतः कर्मोत ने ॥ 20 ॥

निमिनामाभवद्धज्ञा पूर्वे तक कुले नृप ।

यज्ञार्थं स तु राजर्षिविसिध्छं स्वगुरु मुनिम् ॥ 21 ॥

I have heard that the kings of your family who were your predecessors were called “Videha” in name only and not in deed. O king! In your family there reigned a king named “Nimi.” Once on a time that royal sage invited his Guru Vasistha to perform a sacrifice, when Vasistha said:

तिमंत्रयामास तदा तमुवाच नृपं सुनि: ।

निर्विशितीय सूत्राढे देयेउद्राणयुन किल ॥ 22 ॥

कृत्वा तस्य मखं पूर्णं कार्चियाम ततायि वै ।

Book 1 Chapter XIX

तावलूकच्य राजेंउर सभारं तु शनैः शनैः ॥ 23 ॥

"I am already invited by Indra, the lord of the Devas, to perform his sacrifice; so O king! let me first finish his work; I will then take up your work. Better go on collecting the sacrificial materials till my that work is complete."

इत्युक्त्वा निवंयी सोउध महैउद्वजने सुनि: ।

निविर्यां गुरु कृत्वा चक्रात मखमुतमम् ॥ 24 ॥

Thus saying, Vasiṣṭha went away to perform Indra's sacrifice; on the other hand, the royal sage Nimi selected another priest and made him his Guru and began his sacrifice.

तच्छूत्वा कुपिनोउत्यर्ध वसिषेहो युपति पुनः ।

शशाप च पतत्वष्ठ देहस्ते गुरुलोपक १२५ ॥

Hearing all this, Mahrsi Vasistha became angry and cursed him thus: "O forsaker of your Guru! For the crime of forsaking your Guru, let thy body be destroyed today!"

राजापि तं शशापाय त्वापि च पतत्यवम् ।

अन्यो-न्यशापात्यितीत तावेव च मया श्रुतम् ॥ 26 ॥

At this, the royal sage, too, cursed Vasiṣṭha in his turn “Let your body fall off also.” Then the bodies of both the persons fell.

विदेहेन च राजैंक कवा शणतो गुरुः स्वयम् ।

विनोद इव मे चिते विभाति नृपसत्तम ॥ 27 ॥

But, O king! this curiosity came to my mind, the royal sage, whose body fell before, cursed his own Guru afterwards."

जनक खाच

सत्यमुक्ते ल्या नात्र मिथ्या किंचिविदं मतम् ।

तथापि शृणु शिधेत्र गुर्भर्मे सुर्जितः ॥ 28 ॥

Janaka said: “O Lord of Brāhmins! what you have said is, in my opinion, all quite true; nothing is false. Still hear. Know what my most worshipful Guru Deva has spoken to me is, in fact, true (and nothing else).

प्रितृ: संगे परित्यज्य त्वं वर्ग नानुतिमछिति ।

मृगै: सह सुसंबन्धो भविता ते न संशयः ॥ 29 ॥

महापूर्तिन सर्वत्र निःसंग: क्व भविष्यति ।

आहाराषी सदा चिन्ता निश्रितः स्या: कर्थ मुने ॥ 30 ॥

You are now intending to quit the company of your father and go to the forest; well and good! but even then you will undoubtedly have the company of deer etc., see, also, that when the five elements, earth, water, air, etc., are present, encompassing everywhere, how, then, can you expect to be free from all companions? So, O Muni! when you will have to think always of your food, how, then, can you be said to be free from all cares?

दण्डार्विनक्ता वित्ता यथा तव वनरेपि च ।

तथैव राज्यचित्ता में चित्यानयन्य वा न वा ॥ ३ १ १ ॥

विकल्पोषहस्तं वै दूरदेशमुपानतः ।

न मे विकल्पसन्दोः निविकल्पोषिस सर्वथा ॥ ३ २ ॥

Again, even if you go to the forest, you will have to think there also for your staff, deer skin, etc., so you can take my case, too, of thinking of my kingdom, whether I think or not, as your thinking of staff, deer skin etc., your heart is tainted with Vikalpa Jñāna (knowledge of doubt, duality etc.); and therefore you have come here from a far-off country. But my heart is free from any such doubt and I am remaining quite cheerful here.

मुखं स्वपिति विज्ञाई मुखं भंजापि सर्वेता।

न वद्योरमीति बुद्धणाई सर्वदैव सुखी मुने ॥ ३३ ॥

O, best of Brāhmins! I have not got any doubt whatsoever on any point, and, therefore, I take my food and go to sleep with great pleasure. “I am not bound up by this world” this idea gives me constant happiness of the highest degree.

लं गु दुःखी सदैवासि बढ़ोड़मिति गुश्ठा ।

इति शर्ज़ा परित्यज्य सुखी भव समाहितः ॥ 34 ॥

But you consider that you are bound and, therefore, you feel always constant pain. So leave off your idea that you are bound, and be happy.

देहोरंचे मन बचोरोस्ति न मेमोति च मुन्ता ।

तथा धर्न गृहं राज्यं न ममेति च निश्रयः ॥ 35 ॥

"This body is mine" this knowledge leads to my bondage; "and this body is not mine" this knowledge leads to freedom so know this verily that all this wealth, kingdom, etc., are not mine."

सूत उवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य शुकः प्रीतमना5पबत् ।

आपृच्छ्नं तं जगामाशु व्यासस्याममुत्तम् ॥ 36 ॥

आगच्छतं सृतं दूर्वा व्यासोपि सुखामावतान् ।

आतिलयाधाय मूधानं पप्रच्छ कुगलं पुनः ॥ 37 ॥

Sūta said: “Hearing these words of the royal sage, Śuka Deva became exceedingly glad and pronounced “Sādhu” “Sādhu” (true saint, indeed true saint, well said!) and went away without any delay to the pleasant Śārama of Vyāsa. Vyāsa, too, seeing his son come back, became very glad and embraced him and took the smell of his head and asked about his welfare again.

स्थितस्ताओंभे राथे पितुः पार्थे समाहितः ।

वेदाध्यवसनमयः सर्वशास्त्रविशारदः ॥ 38 ॥

जनकस्य दर्शा दूद्या राजस्यस्य महान्यनः ।

स निवृत्ति परां प्राव्य पितुताश्रसर्शस्थितः ॥ 39 ॥

पितृपूर्णा सुभगा कन्या पीर्वरी नाम सुद्धरी ।

गुकऊधार पन्ती तां योगमार्शस्थितीय पि ॥ 40 ॥

Then Šuka Deva, well conversant with all the Śāstras and ever ready in studying the Vedas, sat by the side of his father, with an enlightened mind, in his lovely Śāśrama and thinking of the state of the high-souled Janaka in his kingdom, began to feel the highest peace. Though Šuka adopted the path of Yoga, yet he married the daughter of a Muni, named Pivari, very beautiful, fortunate, and enhancing the glory of her father's family.

स तस्यां जननामास पुर्जांशुतृर एहि ।

कृष्णं गौरुष्धं चैव भूरि देवक्षूनं तथा ॥ 4 1 ॥

कन्यां कीर्ति सुभृतघा व्यासपुत्र: प्रतापवान् ।

ददी विश्वाजपुत्रा त्वयुहाय महात्मने ॥ 4 2 ॥

अगृहस्त सुतः श्रीमान्बहादन्तः प्रतापवान् ।

ब्रह्म: पृथिवीपाल: शुककन्यासमुद्धव: ॥ 4 3 ॥

कालेन किवता तत्र नावद्ययपदेशतः ।

ज्ञानं परमकं प्राय योगामार्थिनुतम् ॥ 4 4 ॥

पुरे तर्यं निधायाय गते बदिरिकामम् ।

मायाकौजोपदेशेन तस्य ज्ञानं निरर्गलम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

Then were born first the four sons named Krṣna, Gauraprabha, Bhūri, and Devaśruta out of the

sperm of Śuka ad the ovum of Pīvarī; and next a daughter was born named Kīrtī of them. Vyāsa's son Śuka, endowed with the fire of asceticism gave the daughter Kīrtī in marriage in due time with the high-souled Anūha, the son of Vibhārja. As time passed on, a son was born of the womb of Kīrtī and the sperm of Anūha, a son who became the powerful king Brahmadatta, the knower of Brahma and endowed with wealth and prosperity. Some time elapsed when Anūha, the son-in-law of Śuka Deva, getting from Nārada the Māyābjja and highest knowledge of Yoga handed over his kingdom to his son and went to the hermitage of Badarīkā and became liberated.

The Devarṣi Nārada gave him the mantra, the bija of Māyā; and by the influence of that mantra and by the grace of the Devi, the knowledge of the Supreme Brahma, arose in him without any obstacle and gave him liberation,

नारदस्य प्रसादेन ज्ञातं सहो विमुक्तिम् ।

कैतासिगाङ्गेरे गये त्यक्त्वा सई पिटु: शुकः ॥ 46 ॥

On the other hand Šuka Deva, always averse to any company left his father and went to the beautiful mountain Kailāśa. He began to meditate on the unmoving Brahma and thus remained there.

ध्यानास्थाय विपुलं चित्य: संभराड्युपूढः।

उत्पाता निर: श्रृगासिनिद्ध च परमां गतः ॥ 47 ॥

After some time the highly energetic Śuka Deva attained Siddhi (supernatural powers) Aṇimā, Laghimā, etc., rose up high in the air from the top of the mountain and began to roam there, and then he appeared like a second Sun.

आकाशगो महातेजा विराजा यथा रवि: ।

गिरे: शूर्जे हित्रा जातं गुरुक्योत्पत्ने तदा ॥ 48 ॥

उर्याता बह्वो जाता: गृह्माकाकागोंपं भवत् ।

अन्तरिक्षे यथा वायु: सृत्यमानः सुरर्षिभः ॥ 49 ॥

When Šuka arose from the peak, it severed into two and various ominous signs became visible. When Šuka Deva, appearing like a second Sun by the dazzling brilliancy of his body, suddenly

Book I Chapter XIX

vanished away like air and became diluted in the Paramātman, entering into everything and became invisible, then the Devarṣis began to chant hymns to him.

तेजसाप्रतिवाराज्ये द्वितीय इव भास्कर: ।

यासस्तु विरहाक्रांत: क्रेद्युघेति चासृक्त् ॥ 50 ॥

गिरेः श्रुते गतस्तत्र सुको ययं स्थितोप्रथन्त ।

क्रैवमानं तदा दीनं व्यासं मत्वा भ्रामकुलम् ॥ 51 ॥

On the other hand, Vyāsa Deva became very much distressed with the separation from his son and cried out frequently “Oh, my son! Alas! my son Where are you gone ?” and went to the summit of the mountain where Śuka did go and wept bitterly. Then Śuka Deva, who was then residing as the Parmātman, the Internal controller of all the beings and with all the beings, knowing Vyāsa Deva as very much fatigued, distressed, and crying, spoke out as an echo from the mountains and trees thus: “O Father! There is no difference between you and me, considered in the light of Ātman; then why are you weeping for me ?”

सर्वभूतगत: साक्षी प्रतिशब्दमतान्ता ।

तत्राधापि पिंरे: शुर्ज प्रतिशब्द सुर्जोपेचित् ॥ 52 ॥

Even today the above echo is clearly heard (almost daily). Seeing Vyāsa Deva grieved very much for the separation from his son and always crying

रूदंत तं समालक्ष्य व्यासं शक्रमस्थित् ।

पुरु प्रेतेत भापन्तं विहरेते पश्रिलतृष्न् ॥ 53 ॥

शिवसत्त समालय पराणार्यमेवाधेयन्त ।

व्यास शोकों मा कुक त्वं पुत्रले योगचितमः ॥ 54 ॥

"Oh! my son! Oh! my son!" Bhagavān Maheśvara came there and consoled him saying O Vyāsa Deva! your son is the foremost of the Yogis; he has attained the highest state, so very rare to the ordinary persons that are not self controlled. So do not be sorry any more.

परमां गतिमापयो तृतीभ चाकृततानिधः ।

त्यशगोकोनकतिथ्यत्वयागोंकविज्ञातना ॥ 55 ॥

कीर्विते विवृता जाता तेन पुत्रेण चानय ।

O Sinless One! when you have realised the Brahma-tattva, then you ought not to express any sorrow for your Suka who is now stationed in that Brahman. Your fame is now unrivalled, only on account of your having got a son like him."

व्यास उवाच

न गोको याति देयेन कि कंकामे जागतले ॥ 56 ॥

अनुके लोचने मेउछ पुत्रदर्जनलासले ।

Vyāsa Deva said: “O Lord of the Devas! O Lord of the world! What am I to do now? my grief does not quit my heart anyhow or other. My eyes are as yet satisfied in seeing my son; they like still to see the son.”

महादेव उवाच

छायां ऋष्यसि पुरस्य पार्थ्थवां सुमनेहामू ॥ 57 ॥

तां वीक्ष्य सुनिशाषूत शोकें जलि परंतप ।

Hearing these sorrowful words of Vyāsa, Bhagāvan Mahādeva said: "O Muni Śārdūla! I grant this boon to you that you will see the form of your son abiding in shadow, very beautiful, by the side of you.

सूत उवाच

तदा दर्शणं व्याससृतु छायां पुरस्य सुप्रभाम् ॥ 58 ॥

दच्या वरं हरत्समै तेजांतत्थीयत ।

अन्तहिंत महावेदे व्यासः स्वाभ्रमम्यान्त् ॥ 59 ॥

शुक्रस्य विरहेशणायि तपतः परमदू:खितः ॥ 60 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे प्रमतकचं

एकोपविष्ठोअधानः ॥ 19 ॥

O Destroyer of enemies! Now abandon your grief by seeing that shadow form of your son." When Bhagavān Maheśvara said so, Vyāsa began to see the bright shadow form of his son."

Granting thus the boon, Bhagavān Mahādeva vanished then and there. When He vanished away, Vyāsa became very much distressed with sorrow for the bereavement of his son and returned with a heavy heart to his own hermitage.

Thus ends the Nineteenth Chapter of the First Book

on the description of the marriage of Śuka in the

Mahāpurāna Śrimaddeviḥhāgavatam

of 18,000 verses.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XX

On Vyāsa Doing his Duties

ऋषय कचुः

गुकस्तु परमां सिद्धिमापातवान्देवस्तम ।

किं चकार ततो व्यासस्तजो बृहि सविस्तस्म। ॥ १ ॥

The Rsis said: “O Sūta! What did Veda Vyāsa do, when the highest Yogī Śuka, Deva-like, acquired all the excellent supernatural powers? Kindly describe all these in detail.”

सूत उवाच

शिष्या व्यासस्य वेण्यासन्वेर्ण्यासपरायणा: ।

आज्ञामादाय ते सर्वे गताः पूर्वे महीतले ॥ 2 ॥

असितो देवलछीव वैर्शयायन एव च ।

जैमिनिशु सुमन्तुश गता: सर्वे तपोधानः ॥ 3 ॥

Hearing this question, Sūta spoke: “O Rsis! Vyāsa already had with him many disciples Asita, Devala, Vaiśampāyana, Jaimini, Sumantu and others, all engaged in the study of the Vedas.

तानेतावीक्ष्य पुत्रं च लोकांतरितमयत् ।

व्यास: शोकसमाज्ञान्तो गमनायाक्रोन्यमिति ॥ 4 ॥

सस्मार मतसा व्यासतां निषादसुतां रुषामा ।

मातरं जाइबीतीर मुक्तां शोकसमयित्मानि ॥ 5 ॥

सूत्वा सत्यवर्ती व्यासस्तवक्ता तं पर्वतीतनाम् ।

आजगाम महातेजा जान्मस्थानं स्वकं मुनि: ॥ 6 ॥

After their studies were over, they all went out to propagate Dharma on the earth. Then Vyāsa, seeing that the disciples went to the earth and his son Śuka Deva had gone to the next world, became very much distressed with sorrow and wanted to go to some other place. He then decided to go to his birth place and went to the banks of the Ganges and there remembered his auspicious mother Satyavati, forsaken by him before, very sorrowful, and the daughter of a fisherman. He then quitted that heaven-like mountain, the source of all happiness and came to his own birth place.

द्वीप प्रायाथ यप्रच्छ वक्त यत सा वरानना ।

नियाब्रत समाच्छुद्रत्या त्राङे तु कन्यका ॥ 7 ॥

Reaching the island where he was born, he enquired the whereabouts of the beautiful faced, the fisherman's daughter as well the wife of a king. The fishermen replied that their king had given her in marriage to the king Santanu.

दासराजोर्षि सम्पूज्य व्यासं प्रीतिपुरःसरम् ।

स्वागतेनाभिमल्कृत्य प्रोवाच विहितांजसितः ॥ ॥ ॥

Then king of fishermen, seeing Vyāsa there, gladly worshipped him and gave him a cordial welcome and spoke with folded palms, thus:

दासराज उवाच

अष्टा मे सफलं जन्म पार्वितं न कुलं मुने ।

देवानामपि दुर्वेशं यजजतं तत हर्भनम् ॥ 9 ॥

O Muni! When I have become so fortunate as to see you, rare even to the Devas, then my birth has been sanctified today and you have purified my family.

यद्यमागतोरसि चं तद्वृष्टि हिज्ञसतम ।

अधि द्वारा धर्म पुत्रान्तद्वारभमिदं विधो ॥ 10 ॥

O Brāhmī! Kindly say what for have you come? My wife, son and all my riches and every other thing that I have are at your disposal.

सरस्वत्यासटे रये चकाराधमपटुकण ।

व्यासस्तपःसभायुक्तवैवास सभाहितः ॥ 11 ॥

Thus hearing the history of his mother Satyavati, Vyāsa erected an Śārama on the beautiful banks of the river Sarasvatī and remained there in tapasyā with an enlightened mind.

सत्यवस्या: सुत्ती जाती श्रंतनोरमितयुतेः ।

मत्वा ती प्रातरी व्यास: सुखामप चने स्थितः ॥ 12 ॥

Some time elapsed when the highly energetic Śantanu got through his wife Satyavati two sons. Vyāsa Deva considered them as his two brothers and became very glad, though he himself used to live in the forest.

चित्रायगदः प्रवमजी रूपवाख्छतृतापनः ।

बधूव नृपतेः पुत्रः सर्वलक्षणसंयुतः ॥ 13 ॥

Book 1 Chapter XX

विश्वरियर्नामासौ द्वितीयः समाजायत ।

सोर्पि सर्वगुणोपेतेः शंनतः: सुखवर्धिनः ॥ 14 ॥

गांगेय प्रथमस्तस्य महावीरो वलाधिकः ।

तवैव ती सुती जाती सत्यव्यां महावलो ॥ 15 ॥

The first son of king Santanu was Citrāngada, endowed with all auspicious qualities, exceedingly beautiful, and tormenting his foes; the second son was Victiravirya; endowed with all qualities. King Śantanu became very happy to get these children. Santanu had one son before through his wife Gaṅgā; he was a great hero and very powerful; and the two sons of Satyavati were equally powerful.

शंनुस्तान्सुतन् वीक्ष्य सर्वेक्षणार्येयुतन् ।

अमस्ताज्यमात्यानं देघादीनां महामानः ॥ १६ ॥

The high souled Śantanu now seeing the three sons, all endowed with all auspicious qualities, began to think that the Devas were incapable to defeat him.

अथ कालेन कियता शंतनुः कालपरयात् ।

तत्वाव तेई धर्मात्मा देही जीर्णमिवंबगम् ॥ 17 ॥

After some time, the religious Śantanu quitted his worn-out body as a man quits his clothes worn out in due time.

कालधर्माने राजि भीमश्रके विधानतः ।

ग्रंकावाणि सर्वाणि दानानि विधधानि च ॥ 18 ॥

After king Śantanu had ascended the heavens, the energetic Bhīsma performed duly his funeral obsequies and gave various things in charity to the Brāhmins.

चित्रांदतं ततो राजे स्वाययामास वीर्यान् ।

स्वयं न कृतान्न राज्यं तस्मादेवताओंपवत् ॥ १९ ॥

He did not accept the kingdom himself; but placed Cittāṅgada on the throne and became known by the name of Devavrata (truthful in vow like the Devas).

चित्रांगदस्तु वीर्थेण प्रमत: परशु:खदः ।

वधूव बलवान् वीर: सत्यव्यतावस: शृष्टि: । २० ॥

The pure souled Cittāngada, born of Satyavati became so much powerful. by sheer force of his

arms, and became so great a hero that the enemies felt endless troubles.

अधैकदा महावाहु: सैन्येन महता वृत: ।

प्रचारा वनोईगान्यप्रथनवयान्याना रूक्त् ॥ 21 ॥

चिग्रांगवतु गन्थवाँ दूर्वहा तं मार्गं नृपम् ।

उत्ततरितिकं भूमैर्विमानवरामाशितः ॥ 22 ॥

Now once on an occasion, the greatly powerful Citrāngada, surrounded by a great army went on a hunting excursion to the forest in quest of rule, deer etc., when the Gandharva Citrāngada seeing the king on the way, alighted from his chariot.

तजाभूच्च महुद्धूदं तयोः सरुषार्थीयोः ।

कुरुक्षेत्रे महास्थाने जीर्ण वर्षणि तापासः ॥ 23 ॥

O ascetics! A fierce battle then ensued for three years on that sacred and wide expanse Kuruksetra between the two heroes, both equally powerful.

इन्द्रतोकमावाण्यु नार्यशेण हतो गो ।

भीष्म: शुत्वा चकाशगृ तस्यीयेदैहिक्त तदा ॥ 24 ॥

गांगेयः कृतशोकस्तु मन्त्रिधिः परिवारितः ।

विधिचत्रवीर्यनामानं राज्येशं च चकार ह ॥ 25 ॥

In the battle, king Citrāngada, the son of Śantanu, was slain by the Gandharva Citrāngada and went up to Heavens. Bhīṣma, born of the womb of Gaṅgā, hearing the above news, expressed his sorrows and, being surrounded by the ministers completed all the funeral obsequies and installed Victiravīrya on the throne.

मन्त्रिभिव्रिंधिता पशुवतुर्भनिश्र महामधिनः ।

स्वपुत्रं राज्यां दूर्वा पुत्रगोकहतासपि च ॥ 26 ॥

सत्यवलसित्नुहा बधून वरवर्धिनी ।

व्यासोपि भारतं श्रुत्वा राजानं मुहितोउभवत् ॥ 27 ॥

Beautiful Satyavati became very much agitated by the death of her son; but when the ministers and the high-souled spiritual teachers consoled her, she become glad when she saw that her youngest son became king. Vyāsa Deva, too, felt himself exceedingly glad to hear that his youngest brother had been made king.

यौविन्दे परम प्राप्तः सत्यव्यतः सुतः शुभः ।

चकार चिन्तां भीभोपेय विद्वाहर्ष कनीयसः ॥ 28 ॥

After some time when the all-auspicious, Satyavati's son Victiravīrya attained his youth, Bhīsma began to think of his marriage.

काशिरासनुतितरतः सर्वल्बणासंपुत् ।

तेन राजा विवाहार्थे स्थापिताश्र स्वयंवरे ॥ 29 ॥

At this time the king of Kási (Kásiñaj) called an assembly Swayamvara (where the kings are invited and the bride selects the bridegroom) for the marriage of her three daughters, endowed with all auspicious qualities, at one and the same time.

राजानो राजपुत्राश्र समाहृता: सहसणः ।

इच्छात्वयंवार्यां वे पूज्यमाना: समाप्ताः ॥ 30 ॥

Thousands and thousands of kings and princes from various countries were invited there in the assembly; and, worshipped duly, they went and decorated the hall.

तन श्रीभो महातेजास्ता जहार बलेन वे ।

निर्मल्य राजकं सर्वे रथेनैकेन वीर्यन्ति ॥ 31 ॥

स चित्या पार्थिवान्स्विलोश्रादाय महायः ।

बाहुर्वीर्ण तेजस्वी हासासद गजाछ्यम् ॥ 32 ॥

At that time the highly energetic fiery Bhisma alöne, mounting on his chariot, attacked the infantry and cavalry, and defeated all the kings assembled there, and perforce carried away the three daughters of Kâśirâja and took them to Hanstināpur.

मातृवृद्धिनीवच्छ पुरीवच्छित्यक्ति ।

तिः: समानयामास कन्यका वालोमतोचना : ॥ 33 ॥

सत्यवल्ये निवेशागु हित्रानाछ्य सवलः ।

दैवज्ञावेदिवडुः पर्यपृष्छचृषं दिनम् ॥ 34 ॥

Bhīṣma behaved towards those three daughters as if they were mothers, sisters or daughters and informed Satyavati without any delay of everything that had happened.

कृत्वा विद्वासंभांत तदा चै भातरं निजम् ।

विचित्रविरीर्ध विश्रं विद्वाहस्ति ता यदा ।। 35 ।।

Then he called for the astrologers and Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas and enquired about the auspicious day for their marriage.

तदा ज्येषो3प्यावरेदे कन्यका जाड्वीभुतम् ।

लज्जमानासितायांगी तिसुणां चाक्लोचना ॥ 36 ॥

When the day was fixed and when every preparation was made, the religious Bhīsma wanted Victivāriya to marry them. At this time, the eldest daughter, beautiful-eyed spoke out modestly to the Ganga's son Bhīsma:

गंगापुर कुकश्रेष धर्मेत कुत्वरीपक ।

मया स्वयंवरे गाल्वो वृतोरिति मतना नृपः ॥ 37 ॥

"O Gaṅgā's son, the illustrious son of your family and the best of the Kurus! You are the best knower of Dharma; therefore, what more shall I say to you. In the Svayamvara assembly I mentally selected Śālva and it struck me that he, too, looked on me with a very loving heart towards me.

वृताङ़े तेन रात्रा वे चित्ते प्रेमसाङ्गले ।

यथायोग्यं कुरुकषाड़ कुलस्याय परतम् ॥ 38 ॥

तेनाहं वृतपूर्वांसि त्वं च धर्मभृतां वर ।

वलवानसि गाङ्गेय यवेच्छसि तथा कृष्ण ॥ 39 ॥

So, O tormentor of foes? Now do what is fit for that sacred family; O Ganga's son! Not only you are extraordinarily powerful but you are also the foremost of the religious. Śalva mentally wanted to marry me; now do as you like".

सूत उवाच

एवमुक्तस्या तत्र कन्याया कुरुनन्दनः ।

अपुब्छट्बाहाणान्दूबान्मातरं सचिवासंथा ॥ 40 ॥

सर्वेषां मनमात्राय गाज्ञेयो धर्मवितमः।

गच्छेति कन्यकां प्राह यथाकचि वरानने ॥ 41 ॥

विसर्जित्रा सा तेन गता शाल्यानिकेतन ।

उवाच तं वरागेहा राजानं मनसेर्वितम् ॥ 42 ॥

When the eldest daughter spoke thus, Bhīsma asked the aged Brāmins, ministers and his mother what ought to be done now and, taking the opinions of all, spoke to that daughter: "O beautiful one! You can go wherever you like." Thus saying, Bhīsma released her. Then the beautiful daughter of Kāśirāja went to the house of Śāvarāja and expressed to him her heart's desire:

Book 1 Chapter XX

வின்புஞ்சிவ மிஷியை எவனறக்கை தம்மை:

அாளாதியை மஞ்சான் நஞ்சாளங் கர்ம ம 43 11

O great king! Knowing me attached to yourself, Bhisma has quitted me according to the laws of Dharma; I have, therefore, come to you now; marry me.

ஐய்பீனி तனைனன் ஷவாமி நுணனாம் ।

பின்பைசீய மவர் மூட் யவன்் ஈரை சர்சை: 11 44 11

O best of the kings! I will be your legal wife, for already I used to think you as my husband and you, too, must have thought me your wife."

गाल्व उवाच

गृहीता त्वं वराग्रेः श्रीभेण पर्यतो मा ।

रंदे संस्थापिता तेन न ग्रहीघे करं तदा ॥ 45 ॥

śālva replied as follows: “O beautiful one! When Bhīsma caught hold of your arm before me and took you to his chariot, then I won’t marry you.

योर्दिष्ठा च कः कन्यां गृह्माति मतिभावरः ।

अतोहं न ग्रहीयामि त्यक्तां भीभेण मायुत् ॥ 46 ॥

You can say yourself what intelligent man can marry a woman touched by another? Therefore I won't marry you, though Bhīsma has quitted you, in the light of a mother."

रुदती विलपंती सा त्यक्ता तेन महात्मना ।

पुरभिध्मं समात्य रुदती चेदमब्रवीत् ॥ 47 ॥

Hearing these words of Śālva, the daughter of Kāsīrāja wept bitterly; yet Śālva quitted her. Therefore, finding no other way, she went back to Bhīsma weeping, and said as follows.

शल्यो मुक्ता तथा वीर न गृह्धाति गृह्गण माम् ।

धर्मज्ञोसि महाभाग मरिथ्यायन्यथा हाहम् ॥ 48 ॥

“O great warrior! Śalva did not consent to marry me, as you first took me to the chariot and afterwards left me. So, O Mâhâbhâga! You better look to Dharma and marry me, as you know best what is Dharma. If you do not marry me, I will certainly quit my life.”

भीम उवाच

अन्यक्तिं कां बलं वै गृह्वीय वरवर्णिन ।

चित्तं वं वरागेहे जज शीधे विराकुला ॥ ४ १ ॥

Hearing her words Bhisma said: "O, beautiful one! How can I accept you, when your mind has become attached towards another. So, O fair one! You better go back soon to your own father with a calm, clear mind.

तयोक्ता सा तु भीक्षेण जागम वनमेव हि ।

तप्यक्रान्त विजने तीर्थं परमपावने ॥ ५० ॥

When Bhima said thus, that daughter of Kāśirāja did not go back, out of sheer shame, to her father's house, but went to a forest and in a greatly solitary place of pilgrimage began to practise asceticism.

इे धार्यं चातिस्पाटके तस्य राज्ञे बध्ववतुः ।

अम्बालिका चाधिक्या च काजिराजसन्ते शुणे ॥ ५ १ ॥

Now the other two daughters of Kāśīrāja, beautiful and all-auspicious Ambālikā and Ambikā became the wives of king Vicitroavīrya.

राज विविचवीर्योंजी ताप्यां सह मुताकलः ।

रेमे नानाविद्यार्थे गृहे चोपवने तथा ॥ 52 ॥

Thus the powerful king Vicitroavīrya began to enjoy various pleasures in the palace and in the gardens and thus passed his time.

वर्षिण नव राजेत्रः कुर्वैन् कीईां मनोरामा ।

प्राणासी मरणं घ्यो गृहीते राज्यक्ष्मण ॥ 53 ॥

For full nine years king Vicitroavīrya enjoyed the sexual pleasures and became attacked with consumption and fell into the jaws of death.

मृते पुत्रेजितु:खातां जाता सत्यवती तदा ।

कारयामास पुत्रस्य प्रेताक्रविणी मन्त्रिभि: ॥ 54 ॥

Hearing the death news of her son Victravīrya, Satyavati became very sorry and surrounded by her ministers, performed his funeral obsequies.

शीघ्रमाह तदैकान्ते ववनं चातिदुःवित्ता ।

राज्यं कुरु महाभाग विमुते संगन्तोः सुत ॥ 55 ॥

श्रातुभार्यं गृहाण लं वंगे च परिष्रक्ष्य ।

यथा न रागशमायाति ययातैर्शि इत्युत ॥ 56 ॥

Then she spoke privately to Bhisma with a

grievous heart: “O highly fortunate son! now you better govern your father’s kingdom and see that the family of Yayāti does not become excit. So better take your brother’s wife and try your best to continue your family line.”

भीम उवाच

प्रतिज्ञा मे श्रुता मात: पित्रर्षे या मया कृता ।

नाहं राज्यं कतिथ्यामि न चाहं उतरसंग्रहम् ॥ 57 ॥

Bhisma then said: “O Mother! Did you not hear of the promise that I already made before my father? So I can not ever marry and govern the kingdom.” Hearing these words of Bhisma, Satyavati became anxious.

सूत उवाच

तदा चित्तातुरा जाता कर्थं वंरणो भवेदिति ।

नात्साम्दि सुरं महं सुमुपसे हाराजके ॥ 58 ॥

She began to think as follows: “How now the continuity of the family be kept! And it is not advisable to remain idle when the kingdom has become kingless; no happiness can be derived in this state.

गाङ्गेशस्तापुबाटेचं मा स्थितां कुरु भामिन।

पूरं विविजरीवीर्य क्षेत्रजं चोपपाद्य ।। ५९ ॥।

Thus thinking, she became exceedingly distressed. Then Gaṅgā's son, Bhīṣma spoke to her: "O respected one! Do not worry your mind with cares; now take steps so as to secure a son from Victiravīrya's wife.

कुतीनं द्विजामहुव वध्या सह नियोजय ।

नात्र दोषोर्पतित वेदेपि कुलतर्जाविर्धी कित्ति १ ६० ॥

Call some best Brāhimn, born of a good family and unite him with Vicitravīrya's wife.

पीयं चैव सुमत्या राज्यं देिहु गृधित्यितं ।

अहं च पालिय्यामि तस्य ग्रासनमेव हि ॥ 6 1 ॥

तच्छुला वचनं तस्य कानीनं स्वसुतं मुनिन् ।

जगाम मनसा व्यासं द्वीयानमकल्यम् ॥ 6 2 ॥

There is no fault, as far as I know, in doing thus to keep up the family line. O sweet smiling one! Thus having begotten the grandson, give him this kingdom; I will also obey his commands."

स्मृतमाजस्तो व्यास आजगाम स तापस: ।

कृत्वा प्राणं भाजेश थ संस्थितो दीर्दिमान्मुर्नि: ॥ 63 ॥

Hearing these reasonable words of Bhīsma, Satyavati remembered her own son, the sinless Vyāsa Deva, who was born to her during her virginity. As soon as Vyāsa was remembered, the great ascetic and effulgent like the sun, came there and bowed down to his mother.

भीधेण पूजितः कामं सत्यव्यथा च मानितः ।

तस्थी तत्र महतोज तिथुमो3निनिवार्षपः ॥ 64 ॥

The highly energetic Vyāsa was then worshipped duly by Bhīsma and welcome by Satyavatī and began to rest there like a smokeless fire.

तमुवाच मुनिं माता पुत्रमुयादधानुना ।

क्षेत्र विविचजीरंस्य मुन्द्रं तव वीर्यम् ॥ 65 ॥

The mother Satyavatī, then spoke to the chief Muni: “O son! Now procreate a beautiful son from your sperm and the ovum of Vicitravirya’s wife.”

व्यास: शुत्वा वयं मातुरावलावस्यमन्यत ।

ओमित्युक्त्वा स्थितस्तत्र ऋतुकालमधित्यात् ॥ 66 ॥

Hearing the mother's words, Vyāsa considered them as Veda's injunction and thought they must be obeyed and promised before her that he must obey and and fulfil her orders. He remained there, waiting for the menstruation period.

अधिका च यदा स्नात नारी ऋतुमती तदा ।

संगं प्रायय मुने: पुत्रमुतार्धं महावलम् ॥ 67 ॥

जन्मान्यं च सुतं वीक्ष्य दुर्जिता सत्यवत्यपि ।

ढितीयं च बधूमाह पुत्रमुत्यादयायु वै ॥ 68 ॥

When the due period of menstruation arrived, Ambikā bathed and had a sexual intercourse with Vyāsa and begot a very powerful son, but a blind one (since she closed her eyes at the sight of Vyāsa during her intercourse). Seeing the son born blind Satyavati became exceedingly sorry; she, then, asked her other son's wife: "go soon and get a son born of you in the aforesaid manner."

अन्तुकातेक्षे अमुपाने व्यासेन सह सरिता ।

तथा चांबालिका राजौ गर्भ नारी द्वारा सा ॥ 69 ॥

Book 1 Chapter XX

सोर्पि पोड़ुः सुतो जातो राज्ययोग्यो न समतः ।

पूजार्थे प्रियामास वर्षान्ने च पुनर्वधून् ॥ ७० ॥

आहूय च ततो व्यासं संप्राध्यं मुनिसत्तमम् ।

प्रियामास राते सा शवनागारनुचनम् ॥ ७१ ॥

When the menstruation period arrived, Ambālikā during the night time went to Vyāsa and mixed and became pregnant. In due time a son was bron; that child became of a very pale colour; so Satyavati thought the new child, too, unfit for the kingdom; therefore at the end of the year again asked her son's wife Ambālikā to go to Vyāsa. She asked Vyāsa also for the same purpose and sent Ambālika to his bedroom. But Ambālika became afraid, and could not go herself but sent her maid servant for the purpose.

न तात च घधूस्तन प्रेधा संप्रेधित तथा ।

तस्यां च विदुरो जातो दास्यां धर्मश्रतः शुभ: ॥ 7 2 ॥

Thus from the womb of the maid servant the high souled Vidura was born, having Dharma'a parts and the most auspicious towards all.

एवं व्यासेन ते पुत्रा धृतराष्ट्रदयख्वः ।

उत्पादिता महावीरा वोशरक्षणतेईसे ॥ 7 3 ॥

एतद्धः रवंमाख्यातं तत्थ वेशसमुद्धवम् ।

व्यासेन रश्रित्ते वंशो भातृधर्मविद्धरान्वतः ॥ 7 4 ॥

डीत श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणोउद्धरसासाहक्वां सहितायां

प्रथमस्कन्चे विशोज्याय: ॥ 20 ॥

वेदादौडूक्षितिमितै: ( 1 1 8 4 ) सार्थै: रश्नोकै: सवितस्तम् ।

देवीभागवतस्यां प्रथमस्कन्य उंग्रितः ॥ 1 ॥

समाप्तोउं प्रथम: स्कन्धः ।

Thus Vyāsa begot three very powerful sons Dhrtarāstra, Pāndu and Vidura for the continuity of the family line. O sinless Mahrsis! Thus I have described to you my Guru Vyāsa Deva, who knows well all the Dharmas, kept up the continuity of his family and how he begot sons in the womb of his brother Vicitravīrya's wives, according to the laws of Dharma, to keep up a family.

Thus ends the Twentieth Chapter of the First Book as well as the First Skandha on Vyāsa doing his duties in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

***