CHAPTER I

On Tríśrā's Austerlities

རྟོགས ཆུན:

सूत सूत महाभाग मिहं ते वचानामुना ।

न तृपता: सभे वयं पीला ह्रीपालन कृतं शुभम् ॥ १ ॥

The Rsis (of the Naimisa forest) addressed Sūta (fondly): O highly Fortunate One! Your nectar-like words are very sweet. We are not satiated with what you have described to us as the auspicious saying of Dvaipāyana Vyāsa.

पुनस्त्वां ग्रुधिष्ठाक्ष: कवां पौराणिकांी शुभाम् ।

वैदेश कथितां रचां प्रसिद्धां पपपातिणीम् ॥ 2 ॥

O Sūta! We desire to ask you again to narrate to us the auspicious saying of this Purāna, beautiful, famous, and sin-destroying and authorised by the holy Vedas.

द्वगासुर इति ख्यातो वीर्यांस्त्वयुतासकः ।

स कर्थ नित्रतः संख्ये वासवेन महात्मना ॥ 3 ॥

Viśvakarmā had a son, named Vītrāśara, who was very well known, and very powerful. How was it that he had been slain by the high-souled Indra? Viśvakarmā was a powerful Brāhmin and belonged to the gods' party; his son was stronger.

त्वहा वै सुर्यक्षीयस्त्युजो बलवतः ।

शक्रेन प्रातिज: कस्मादुर्घडधोपनिर्भाजतः ॥ 4 ॥

How was it that he had been killed by Indra! The Devas are born of the Sativa qualities; men are born from the Räjasic qualities; and all the birds, etc., are born of the Tāmasic qualities.

देवा: सत्त्वगुणोत्थमा मानुपा राजसा: स्मृता: ।

तिर्वेछस्तामसा: प्रोक्ता: पुराणाममवादिषिथ: ॥ ५ ॥

वितोपो3त्र महान्यमाति नूनं शतमघेन ह ।

छलेने बलवान्यूत्र: श्रकेन ग्विनिपातितः ॥ 6 ॥

This is the opinion of the Pandits, versed in the Purāṇas and Āgamas. But in this act of slaying Vītrāsura, a great contradiction arises; for the powerful Vītra was killed merely under a pretext by Indra, the performer of the hundred sacrifices, and endowed with Satva qualities.

विष्यु: प्रेरित्यित तत्र स तु सचल्यर: परः ।

प्रविष्ट: पविमध्ये स छन्दान भपात्यभू: ॥ ७ ॥

साँदि विधाय स होयं मन्त्रितोजरी महावलः ।

हरिथ्यां सत्यमुतुर्ज उतकेनेन ग्रातितः ॥ ८ ॥

And Indra was prompted to do so by Viṣṇu, the head of those who possess Satīva qualities; while Viṣṇu himself entered in disguise into the thunderbolt so that he could kill Vṛtra. The powerful Vṛtra entered into a treaty and kept himself peaceful when Indra and Viṣṇu violated truth and treacherously killed him by Jalaphena (the watery foams).

कृतमिच्छेण हरिणा किमोत्स्तृत साहस्म् ।

महान्तोर्षि च मोहेन बँकिताः पापबुद्धः ॥ ९ ॥

O Sūta! The great wonder is this: That Indra and Viṣṇu turned out so bold as to forsake the truth. This, then, is (therefore very clear that the

high souled persons become deluded and act sinfully.

अन्यायवर्तीनोउत्थर्ष भवन्ति सुरास्तमाः ।

सदाचारेण युक्ति देया: शिष्टाच्यमानता: ॥ 10 ॥

एवं विशिष्टधर्मेण शिष्टलं कीईरां पुनः ।

The Heads of the Devas act very wrongly; they are reckoned as polite simply because they observe the mere outward forms of good conduct as approved by the Śāstras. How can the mere observance is outward forms constitute politeness?

हत्वा वृयं तु विश्वस्तं श्रकेना छचना पुनः ॥ १ १ ॥

प्राणं पापफलं नो वा ब्रह्मतासमुद्वय् ।

किं च त्वया पुग प्रोक्ते चुवासुप्यध: कृतः ॥ १ २ ॥

श्रीद्वया श्री तत्त्वाथि चितं मोहयतीह नः ।

Had Indra, who killed in disguise Vṛtra relying on his words, to suffer any punishment for the sin that he incurred in killing a Brāhmaṇa? It was told by you before that Vṛtra had been slain by the Devi Bhagavati; but the general belief is that Indra killed him. Our minds are puzzled on this point. (So clear our doubts on this point.)

सूत उवाच

श्रणन्तु मुनयो वृर्तं चूत्रासुर्याध्रवम् ॥ 13 ॥

यथेनेण च सम्पानं दुःखं हृत्यासमुद्वम् ।

Sūta said: O Munis! Hear the incident of the killing of Vṛtrāsura and the punishment that Indra had to suffer due to his sin of Brahmahatya (killing a Brāhmin.)

एवमेव पुरा पृष्टो व्यासः सत्यवतीस्तुः ॥ १४ ॥

पारतीक्षितेन राज्ञपि स व्यदाह् च तद्बुद्वे ।

This question was asked by the King Parikshit and replied by Vyāsa, the son of Satyavatī. I will tell you what Vyāsa had told before.

जनभेजय उवाच

कर्ते चूरासुरः पूर्व हृते मघवाता मुने ॥ 15 ॥

सहायं विद्युभासादा छवना सात्चिकेन ह ।

कंव च देया निहतो दैत्योउसी केन हेतुना ॥ 16 ॥

कवेमोकवधो द्वाभ्यां कृतः स्यामुपिनुर्गाव ।

Janamejaya asked: "O Best of Munis! How was

it that in former days Indra, endowed with the Sattva qualities, killed Virṭrasura, with the aid of Viṣṇu? And how and why was it that he was killed again by the Goddess Bhagavati? O Lord of Munis! How could one body be killed by the two; our curiosity has been excited to hear the truth,

तदेतच्छोतुमिच्छामि परं कौतृत्ति हि मे ॥ 17 ॥

महतां चरितं भृणवक्को विरज्येत मानवः ।

कथयामादोषचं त्वं वृत्रासुर्वधाशितम् ॥ 18 ॥

What man is there that does not like to hear any more of the glorious deeds of the high-souled persons! Kindly narrate to us the slaying of Vṛtra by the Devi Bhagavatī.

व्यास उवाच

धन्योप्रसि राजसत्व बुद्धिदीयुंगी

जाता पुराणश्रवणोस्तिसादारा।

पीतावप्रभुतं देवेवास्त्रुं सर्वेशा

पाने विद्याण: प्रभवन्ति वै पुनः ॥ 19 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! You are blessed, since your taste to hear the events of Purāna has grown so much; the Devas even get their thirst for drinking nectar; but when quenched, they do not like to drink any more.

दिने दिने ते उधिकाभक्तिभाव:

कथासु राजनमूनीयकांति: ।।

श्रोता यदैकप्रवण: श्यानीत

वक्ता तदा प्रतिमाना ब्रवीति ॥ 20 ॥

O King! Your name and fame are widely spread. Your Bhakti (devotion) to the Purānas is growing more and more daily. A speaker gets very much delighted when his audience hears him with undivided attention.

युद्धे पुरा वासवद्व्रयोर्ध्रेदे प्रसिद्धे च तथा पुराणे ।

दुखं सुरेन्द्रता तथैव लब्धं हृता सिंगुं ल्यामुपायमेवे ॥ 21 ॥

O Lord of the earth! The fight between Vītra and Vāsava that occurred in days of yore is famous in the passages of the Vedas and the Purānas; as well as the suffering that Indra had to encounter as his punishment when he had killed the innocent son of Viśvakarmā.

Book VI Chapter I

चित्र किमत्र नृपते हरिवजर्भूट्वां

चछ्छ्वाता विनिर्तस्विशिरोउव चुनः ।

मायावलेन मुनवोर्धि विमोहिताते

चकूश्र तिंच्यमिन्शं किल पापभीता: ॥ 22 ॥

O King! The Munis, who fear sin very much, commit yet blameable act under Māyā; then what wonder is there that Viṣṇu, and Indra would kill Triśirā and Vṛtra merely under a plea.

विष्यु: सदैव कपटेन जायान

दैत्यानस्तातमूर्तिरपि मोहमवाय कामम् ।

कोन्योरित तां भगवर्ती मनसाउपि जेतुं

शक्कः समस्तजनमोहकर्ती भगवानीम् ॥ 23 ॥

When Viṣṇu, the incarnate of Sattva qualities, gets deluded by Māyā and kills deceitfully the Daityas always, then how can you expect any other man to conquer even mentally the Mahā Māyā Bhavānī, Who deludes all the beings!

मत्थादिवीयिषु सहस्वयुगेषु सदा:

साक्षान्वल्पि यथा विनीयोजितोउ ।

नारायणो नरसखो भगवाननंतः कार्य

कोति विहिताविहितं कदाचित् ॥ 24 ॥

O King! It is undet the compulsion of this Māyā that the Bhagavān, the Infinite, the friend of Nara, Nārāyaṇa, takes incarnations in thousands and thousands of Yugas in this Saṃsāra as Fish, etc., and does deeds sometimes lawful and sometimes unlawful.

देई धर्न गृदामिदं स्वजना मदीयं

पुत्रा: कलत्रमिति मोहमुपेय स्वर्वः ।

पुर्णयं कोत्यथ च पापचयं क्रौत्ति

मायागृपीरित्वलैर्विकेक्लीकृता यत् 125 ॥

The Devas and men, being confounded by his Māyā, become upset and disordered and say “that this body, wealth, house, sons, wife and relatives are all mine” and being thus deluded sometimes do virtuous and sometimes sinful deeds.

न जातु मोहं शपितुं नरः क्षमः

क्रश्रुद्विद्धपून परावराधित् ।

विमोहितल्लिचित्भेवेर मूलतो

वर्गीकृतात्या जगातीले भृगम् ॥ 26 ॥

O King! There is not even one, on the surface of this earth, though he may be well versed in finding out cause and effect, the knowledge of the high and low, that can be free from this Great Delusion; he is from the very beginning tied up by the three Guñas of this Māyā and thus remains under Her control.

अथ तौ मायया विद्यावासो मोहिती भुगम् ।

जठनुगुर्भचाना वूत्रं स्वार्थसाधनतत्यति ॥ 27 ॥

This explains that Viṣṇu and Indra both were deluded by Māyā and engaged in fulfilling their own selfish ends. They killed Vṛtārsāra under a pretext.

तदई संग्रवक्षया वृत्तानमवनीपते ।

कारणं पूर्वैतस्य चूत्रसावयोर्पिधः ॥ 28 ॥

त्वषा प्रजापतिहार्तीद्विशेषो महातपाः ।

देवानां कार्यकर्ता च निपुणो ब्राह्मणप्रियः ॥ 29 ॥

O King! Hear! I am now describing to you the cause of enmity between Indra and Vṛtra. Viśvakarma, the Prajāpati, was the great architect of the Gods, he was skilled, he was superior amongst the gods, a great ascetic and endeared by the Brāhmins.

स पुरं वे हैं विज्ञारसमि-ट्रेशेपातिकलामुक्त ।

विश्वस्तोवि विद्यालां तान्मा रूपेण मोहनम् ॥ 30 ॥

विधि: स वदनै: श्रेष्ठ्यंरोत मनोहैः ।

विभर्भिश्रानि कार्याणि मुखैः समकोनमुपिनः ॥ 31 ॥

वेदान्केन सेधोक्षितु सुरा वैकेन सोप्रवित् ।

तृतीयेन दिणुः सर्वां युगपच्छ निरीक्षते ॥ 32 ॥

He had enmity with Indra; and out of this enmity he created a son, very beautiful and named him Triśirasa Visvārūpa. That son had three faces very beautiful and lovely. Visvārūpa performed three different functions with his three different faces; with one, he used to study the Vedas, with the second he used to drink nectar (wine), and with the third he used to see simultaneously all the directions.

त्रिशिरा भोगमूलुच्य तपश्ठेक सुद्धकम् ।

तपस्वी स मुदुद्वितो धार्यमेव समाश्रितः ॥ ३३ ॥

Śrimaddevaibhāgavatam

Triśirā renounced the pleasures of the world and began to practise a hard tapasyā; he became a great ascetic, gentle, restrained in his passions and entirely devoted to his religion.

पश्रानिर्नाधनं काले पादपात्र निवेशनम् ।

जलमध्ये निवासं च इेमन्ते शिशिरे तथा ॥ 34 ॥

He practised Pañcāgni Sādhana in the summer season, tying his feet upwards on the branch of a tree with his head downwards; he remained in dew in the cold season, and, under water in the winter season.

निराहरो जितालामाउसी तत्कसर्वपरिष्रहः ।

तपृधारा मेघावी दुकर्न मन्दबुद्धिधि: ॥ 35 ॥

Thus he abstained from food and conquered his self and, forsaking all the worldly connections, practised a very hard tapasyā; very difficult, indeed, for those who are of dull intellects.

तं च दृष्ट्वा तपस्तं त्रैवदाम शवीधिति: ।

विवाद्यमानात्र शक्रोयं मायमधृति ॥ 36 ॥

दृष्ट्वा तस्य तपो वीर्यं सत्यं चाभिततेजसः ।

चिन्ता च महती प्राप हार्षिणं पाकाशासन: ॥ 37 ॥

विद्यांयान्तिक्षिरा मायमं शातिययति ।

नोपेध्यः सर्वेधा शत्रुवैर्यमानवले गुधैः ॥ 38 ॥

Indra became very sad and dispirited to see him practise such a Tapasyā and thought of the means so that he might not acquire his Indraship. The Pakaśāsaṇa Indra remained always very anxious to see the energetic penance practised by that ascetic of unbounded glory and his steady attachment towards it.

तस्मायुपायः कतव्यस्तपोनायाय साम्यन्तम् ।

कामस्तु तपतां श्रुः कामात्रश्यति वै तपः ॥ 39 ॥

He thought thus: “This Trīśārā is becoming stronger day by day with his penace, so he will kill me. The wise never look an enemy with indifference whose strength daily becomes greater and greater.”

तवैवाहा प्रकर्तेयं भोगास्तको भवेहाय ।

इति संचित्व मनसा बुद्धमान्वलमदैः ॥ ४० ॥

It is now my urgent duty to invent means on how to baffle his Tapasyā and he at last settled

that lust is the great enemy of asceticism; the practice of devout austerities is destroyed completely by lust; so I must try this very day that some how the Muni becomes attached to worldly lusts and enjoyments.

आज्ञायलोउपसरस्लाव्युप्रज्ञतोभने ।

उर्वेर्गी पेनकां रभां घृतावी च तिलोत्तमाण ॥ 41 ॥

The intelligent Indra, thinking thus, called the Apsarās Urvaśī, Menakā, Rambhā, Ghṛtāci, and Tilottamā and others proud of their beauties so that they might seduce Triśirā, the son of Viśvakarmā.

समाहुधावीच्छक्रतातादा रूपभार्थितः ।

प्रियं कुर्वयं मे सर्वा: कार्येडा समुपस्थिते ॥ 42 ॥

“O Apsarās! I have now got a very grave task to fulfil; all of you help me in this respect. A great enemy of mine, difficult to conquer is practising penance with his self-controlled.

यतो मेघा महाकछुस्तपत्थित दुर्जेः ।

कार्य कुक्त नष्ट्धप्रे पतोभयत माधिरम् ॥ 43 ॥

Start at once and with your dress suited to various amorous gestures and try hard to seduce him. Be all well with you; seduce him and remove the fever of my heart.

श्रृगार्वेर्वेर्विविद्योर्गैर्वैद्समुद्वेः ।

प्रतोभयत भई वः शमवधं ज्वरं मम ॥ 44 ॥

O Apsarās! What more shall I say, I am restless since I have heard of his strength in performing such hard austerities.

असत्योड़ महापभातस्य जाला तपोकलम् ।

बलवानासनं मेउदा प्रतीर्थ्यावितर्धितः ॥ 45 ॥

O Weak Ones! That powerful ascetic may acquire my place and thus dispossess me; this fear has possessed me.

भयं मे समुपायातं ब्रिणं नाशयतत्वालतः ।

उपकुर्बन्तु सहिताः कार्येउघ समुपस्थिते ॥ 46 ॥

Therefore destroy my fear as quickly as possible. This is the task now given to you; get united and do this good to me."

तच्छुत्वा वचनं नार्यं कच्छूत प्रणाताः पुनः ।

मा घयं कुक्र देवेश यतिव्यामः प्रतोधेने ॥ 47 ॥

Book VI Chapter I

The Apsarās, hearing him, bowed down and said: "O Lord of the Devas! Do not be afraid! We will try our best to seduce him.

यथा न स्वाद्धयं तस्मातथा कार्यं महातुँते ।

नृसर्गतीतिद्वारैंडु मुनेतस्व प्रतोभने ॥ 48 ॥

O highly Lustrous One! For the enticing away of the Muni, we will do all the things, dancing, music, and other amorous gestures and practices, that will discard your fear.

कटाईसूढ़भेदैंड मोहर्यिता मुनि विभो ।

तोतुएं वरामसाकं करिष्यामो नियन्तितम् ॥ ४ १ ॥

O King of the Gods! We will unsettle the mind of the Muni by our side glances and passionate gestures and postures, delude and tie him and then bring him under our control.

व्यास उवाच

इत्याभाव्य हरिं नायों ययुङ्धिरासोंउतिकम् ।

कुर्ट-न्यो विविधाभ्यावा-कामगाखोचितानपि ॥ ५० ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! Thus saying, the Apsarās went to Tríśirā and began to exhibit various amorous gestures and postures as stated in the Kāma Śāstra.

गायन्यस्तालभेदैस्ता नृत्यन्त्य: पुरतो मुनेः ।

तं प्रलोभायतुं घकुन्निभाबान् वर्गाना ॥ ५१ ॥

They began to sing sometimes, sometimes to dance in tune with musical measures before the Muni. In short, they practised various amorous gestures to entice him away.

नारायस्य तपोराशिर्यानां विद्धवन् ।

इन्द्रियाणि वरेगे कृता मुकान्यविधि: स्थितः ॥ 52 ॥

But that asecting, blazing with the fire of Tapas, did not notice even the Asparās' various attempts; rather he kept all his senses under control and remained like a deaf, dumb, and blind man.

दिनानि कातिचितस्यार्थविस्त्यामो चे ।

कृत्वीय गाननृत्यादि प्रपड़ानतिमोहादून । ५३ ॥

In that lovely hermitage of the Muni, the Apsarās sang and danced ravishingly and remained a few day there.

न चचाल यदा कामं ध्यानाच्च त्रिसारा मुनि: ।

परावृष्य तदा देव्यः पुनः शकमुपस्थिततः ॥ ५४ ॥

कृताझलिपुटा: सर्वा देवराजमधावुब्न् ।

श्रान्त दीन भघवस्ता त्विबर्णद्वना भृणम् ॥ ५५ ॥

But when they saw that the Muni Trísirā did not swerve a bit from his meditative posture they returned tired, distressed to Indra and all, very fearful, began to address Indra with folded hands: "O King! We tried our best and we could not in any way make the Muni unsteady, very hard to surmount."

देवदेव महागर जयल्छ प्रमः कृतः ।

न स शक्यो दुर्गाधर्षे धियांच्वालियुं विभो ॥ ५६ ॥

उयायोऊनः प्रकर्तेल्यः सर्वेथा पाकशासन ।

नास्याके बल्मेतांस्मितापसे विजितेनिद्रये ॥ ५७ ॥

O Pākaśāsana! Please invent other means; we could not make the self-controlled Muni move away an inch from his position; it is our good luck that that high-souled Muni, an incarnate of blazing fire has not cursed us!"

दिष्ठा वयं न शपता: स्म यदनेन महात्मना ।

भुनीना वहितृल्येन तपसा डोतितेन हि ॥ ५८ ॥

Then dismissing the Apsarās, the evil-minded and dull Indra began to devise means, though totally unlawful on how to kill that good Muni.

विसृज्यावास: शक्रश्रितन्यास मन्दधी: ।

तस्वीव च कवीपायं पापवद्धिरसाध्यमन्ति ॥ 59 ॥

विसृज्य लोकतलज्ञां से तथा पापचयं भूगाम् ।

चकार पापबुद्धि तु तद्धाय महीतये ॥ 60 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वैधीपागतते महापुराणे षटचक्ये

प्रभातोर्षया: 11 7 11

O King! That Indra abandoned all shame, and fear of sin and ultimately came to a highly blameable and sinful conclusion how to kill him.

Here ends the First Chapter of the Sixth Book on Trísirā's austerities in Śrimaddevivbhāgavatam the

Maḥa Purāṇam, of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER II

On the Birth of Vṛtrāsura

यमस उवाच

अथ स लोभमुपोत्थ सुराधिध:

सामधिग्य गजानसनंस्थितः।

क्रिशिरसं प्रति दृष्यमितस्तदा

मुनियपश्यदीयपराक्रम् ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: The extremely covetous Indra, then, mounted on his Airāvata elephant and determined to kill the Muni.

तमधिवीक्ष्य दृझासनसंस्थित

जितारीरं सुममाधिवर्गं गतम् ।

रविविभावसुसत्रिभभोजसा

सुर्पतिः परमापदमभ्यगत् ॥ 2 ॥

He went to him and saw him immersed in deep Samādhi, firmly seated in his posture and with his speech controlled. At that time, a halo of light emanated from his body and he looked like a second Sun and a blazing fire. Indra became very sad and dejected when he saw that.

कथमसौ विविनटनुमहो

मया मुनिरपायमति किल सम्मतः।

रिपुर्यं सुसमिद्धिनोपोकल:

कथपुषेय इहासनकामुकः॥ 3 ॥

Indra then thought within himself thus: "Oh! Can I slay this Muni, free from any vicious inclinations, and endowed with the power of Tapas, blazing like a fire! This is quite against the Dharma.

इति विविन्य पविं परमायुधं

प्रतिमुभोच मुनि नासि स्थितम् ।

श्रशिवाकास्त्रिभ्यमाणुगं

श्रिशरां सुरासंघपति: स्वयम् ॥ 4 ॥

But, Alas! He wants to usurp my position; how can I, then, neglected such an enemy? Thus cogitating, Indra hurled at the Muni his swift-going, infallible thunderbolt, the Muni remaining engaged in his penance and shining like the Sun and Moon.

तदधिच्यातहतः स ध्यातले किल

पयात ममार च तापसः ।

शिखारिणः शिखारं कुलिशादितं

निपिततं धृति चाडूतद्रौनम् ॥ 5 ॥

तं निहल्य मुदामप

सुरेश्युकुरुंस मुनयसु सर्यस्तः ।

हा हातेते भूगमातर्नित्यतः

किं कृतं शतमद्वतं पाधिता ॥ ६।।

विनापराधं तपसां निश्रहतः श्रवीपिति: पायमितैतृतात्मा ।

फलं कितायां तरसा कृतस्य प्रामोतु पाणे हननोढ़ल्य ॥ ७ ॥

The ascetic, struck thus, fell on the ground and died, like a mountain peak struck by thunder falling on the ground and presenting a wonderful sight. Indra became very glad when he killed the Muni; but the other Munis then cried aloud: "Oh! We are killed! Alas! What a crime has Indra committed today! Oh! The vicious Indra has killed today this jewel amongst the Munis without any offence! Let, then, this sinner reap the fruits of his sinful act without any delay."

तं निहन्य ततसा सुरारजो

निजांगाम निजमन्दिरमाणु ।

स हतोउप विराज महाना

जीवमान इव तेजतां निधि: ॥ 8 ॥

तं दृष्ट्या पातितं धूमौ जीवन्तमवि बुझरा ।

चिन्तामापातिखांगाः किं वा जीवेदयं पुनः ॥ 9 ॥

Indra, then, went back soon to his own abode; on the other hand, the high-souled Muni, though killed, looked as it were, living by the lustre of his own body. Indra, then, seeing him lying like a living man thought that the Muni might get alive and so became very sad.

विषयप्र यमसाउजीव तक्षाणं पुतः स्थितम् ।

मप्वा बीक्ष्य तं प्राह स्क्वास्यैसुर्णं चः ॥ १० ॥

तक्षिजिधि शिरास्यस्य कुरुब बचनं मम् ।

मा जीवतु महातेजा भाति जीविज्व सत्यम् ॥ ११ ॥

इत्याकपर्थे बवस्तस्य तक्षोवाच विगहाय् ।

While he was thus arguing in his mind, he saw before him a wood cutter named Takşa and began to speak to him for his own selfish ends thus “O

Book VI Chapter II

Artisan! Cut all the heads of this Muni and keep my word; this highly lustrous Muni is looking as if it were alive; therefore; if you sever his heads, he cannot be alive." Takṣa then cursed him and spoke thus.

तहीवाच

महास्कन्यो भृणां भालित परपूर्ण तपोक्षिति ॥ 12 ॥

ततो नाहं करीष्यामि कार्यमेताद्वारहितम् ।

त्वया वे निर्वितं कर्म कृती सद्विवर्गितम् ॥ 13 ॥

उहं विधेमि पापाद्रे पुनर्यैव च मारणे ।

भृतोर्धं सुनिसरस्येव शिरसः कृतनेन किम् ॥ 14 ॥

भयं किं तेत्र संजारं पाकशासन कंध्यताम् ।

"O King of the Devas! The neck of this Muni is very hard and therefore cannot be severed; my axe is not at all fit for this work. Specially I cannot do such a blameable act." You have done a very heinous crime, quite against the law of the good persons; I fear sin; I will not be able to cut the heads of a dead man. This Muni is lying dead; what use is there in severing his head again? O Pakaśāsana! The killer of the demon Pāka! Why do you fear in this?"

इन्र उवाच

सजीव इव देहोउम्याभाति विश्यादुक्ति: ॥ 15 ॥

तस्माधिपेमि मा जीवेमुनि: शत्रुयं मम।

Indra said: “O Artisan! This Muni is my dire enemy. Life seems to be still lingering in his body; his body is still lustrous, I fear if the Muni be alive again!”

तक्षोवाच

नात्र किं जपसे विद्धनूरेणानेन कर्मणा ॥ १६ ॥

ऋषिपुत्रिमं दृत्वा बढ़ादृत्याभयं न किम् ।

Taksā told: “Do you not feel shame in doing this heinous crime, when you know everything? Do you not fear God for the crime of killing a Brāhmin?”

इन्व उवाच

प्रायश्रितं कर्त्रियाम पशुलापक्षयाय वै ॥ १७ ॥

शुत्रु सर्वथा बध्यघृछनेतापि महामते ।

Indra said: “I will make Prāyaścitta (penance) afterwards for the washing away of my sins; but my duty at present is to kill my enemy. O Fortunate One! The wise men, clever in polity, say that enemies must be killed by any excuse whatsoever.”

तक्षेताव

त्वं लोभापितृतः पार्यं क्रतिभि मवयवितृह ।। १ १ ॥

तं चिनाउंह कर्थ पायं करोति चद् त विधो ।

Taksa then replied: "O Maghavan! You are doing this sinful deed out of your avarice; but, O Lord! I have no cause whatsoever; how then without any cause, can I engage myself in such a vicious act?"

मखेषु खतु भागं ते कारिथामि सदैव हि ॥ 19 ॥

शिर: पशोस्तु ते भागं चेउ दास्यति मानवाः ।

शृल्केनानेन तिद्धि त्वं शिरायस्य कृक प्रियम् ॥ 20 ॥

Indra said: “O Takṣan! I will allot a share to you wherever there will be a sacrifice. The human beings will invariably offer to you the head of the animal killed at any sacrifice. Now cut his head according to this rule.

व्यास उवाच

एतच्छुत्वा महेन्द्रस्य वचनस्थां पुद्यान्वितः ।

कुठारेण शिरास्यस्य चकर्तं सुचुकेन हि ॥ 21 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! That Takṣa became very glad when he heard thus from Indra and struck off the heads of the Muni with his very strong axe.

छित्रानि जीण श्रिंधिणि पिततानि यदा भृति ।

तेभ्यस्तु पक्षिणः क्षिशुं विधिनेषुः सहसृशः ॥ 22 ॥

O powerful King! When the three heads, thus severed, fell to the ground, thousands and thousands of birds came out of those heads in quick succession.

कलर्विकासिततिरयस्तबैव च कर्मिंजला: ।

पृथक्युष्विनिषेन्तुमुंखतस्तसा तदा ॥ 23 ॥

The three groups of birds Kalavinikas, Tittiris and Kapiñjalas come out very rapidly from the three heads in due succession.

येन वेदात्यापीते स्म योमं च पिवतो तथा ।

तस्माद्वक्रतिकलोयेनुः सर्व एव कपिंजपताः ॥ 24 ॥

येन सर्वा दिशः कामं पिबपित्रव निरीक्षते ।

तस्मातु तितिरास्तव नि:सुतासितमपतेजसः ॥ 2 5 ॥

The Kapīnjala birds came out of that mouth that used to chant the Vedas and used to drink Soma; the Tittri birds came out of that mouth that used to see all the quarters as if it drank them; and the Kalavinika birds came out of that face that used to drink one.

यत्सुरारं तु तद्वक्तं तस्मातुं चटकाः किल।

विनिषेन्तृस्थिगिरस एवं ते विहाग नृप ॥ 26 ॥

Indra became very glad to see the birds thus coming out of his mouths and went back at once to his Heavens.

एवं विनिःसुतान्यूहा तेभ्यः शक्रसद्णडज्ञान् ।

मुमोद मसता राजझगाम विविदं पुनः ॥ 27 ॥

O King! No sooner Indra went back, than Taksa came back to his own house and felt himself very pleased to receive his share of sacrificial things.

गते शके तु तहापि स्यगृहे तस्या यये ।

यज्ञभां परं लब्धया मुदायम गमीते ॥ 28 ॥

On returning to his home, Indra thought that he had done his duty in slaying his powerful enemy.

इन्हो5थ स्वगृहं गत्या हत्वा शनुं महावलम् ।

मेने कृताधीयमानां ब्रहाहत्यामित्यन्ति ॥ 29 ॥

It did not pass in his mind that he had committed the Brahmatahyā sin (i. e., that he had killed a Brāhmin.

तं श्रुत्वा नितहां त्वहा पूरं परमधार्मिकम् ।

चुकोपातीव मनसा वचनं चेदमब्रबीत् ॥ 30 ॥

अनागसं मुनि वयमात्पूरं नितहावामः ।

तस्मातृत्वादियथामि तद्धार्थ सुतं पुनः ॥ 31 ॥

When Viśvakarmā heard that his virtuous son had been killed, he became very angry (in his mind) and said that as Indra had killed his qualified son engaged in asceticism without any offence, he would create another son to kill Indra.

सुगा: परभुंगु मे वीर्य तपसघ्र बलं तथा ।

जानातु सर्वे पाणात्या सकृतार्थ फलं मृत्ति ॥ 32 ॥

इलुक्न्वास्त्रिनं जुहावाय मनैराधवर्षणोदिति: ।

पुरम्योत्पादनाथीय त्वहा मोधेसमाकुक: ॥ 33 ॥

Let the Devas see his strength and power of

Tapasyā and let Indra, too, reap the far-reaching effects of his own Karma. Thus saying, Viśvakarmā, distressed with anger, offered oblations in the sacrificial Fire, reciting Mantram from the Atharvan Vedas, with the objects of producing a son.

कृते ह्रोमेउर्धात्रं तु सन्दीपाच्य विभावसोः ।

प्रादुर्बंभृव तसा पुरुष: पाचकोपम: ॥ 34 ॥

When Homa was per formed for eight nights consecutively, a man came out of that burning fire, as if he was the Incarnate of Fire itself.

तं दूरद्वाउं सुतं तद्धा तेजोबतस्पमवित्तम् ।

वेगात्यक्रतिटं वहैर्दीयमानमिवानलम् ॥ 35 ॥

उवाच वचनं तद्धा सुतं वीक्ष्य पुरः स्थितम् ।

इउत्रागो विवर्धेय प्रतापातपसे मा ॥ 36 ॥

Seeing the lustrous son before him, come out of the fire and endowed with power and energy, Viśvakarmā said “O Indra’s enemy! Grow by my power of asceticism.”

इत्युक्ति चवने त्वहा मोधप्रज्यलितेन च ।

सोउर्वर्तित दिंल सहज्वा वैश्वानरसमघुति: ॥ 37 ॥

When Viśvakarmā spoke these words, burning with anger, that brilliant fiery son began to grow, towering high above the Heavens.

जातः स पर्वताकारः कालमनुसम्मः स्वादः ।

किं कंरापीनि तं प्राह पितरं परमातुम् ॥ 38 ॥

कुक मे नामकं नाथ कार्य कथय सुठत ।

चितातुरोरिस कमानवं वृहि मे गोकाकारणम् ॥ 39 ॥

Within a moment that man looked a second God of Death and appeared like a mountain and shone like the God Himself. Then he spoke to his own father Vísvakarmā, who was very distressed “O Father! Put my name. Pray, what use can I be to you? Why do you look so aggrieved and anxious; please explain to me all the causes.

नाशयाम्यद्ध ते गोकामिति मे बतमाहितम् ।

तेने जातेन किं भूय: पिता भवति दुःवितः ॥ 4 0 ॥

I make a firm vow to-day that I will remove the cause of your sorrow. Father! Of what avail is that son to his father when he is not able to remove his sorrows!"

Book VI Chapter III

पिवामी सागरं सहाङ्गणीयामि धराधरान् ।

उर्धंतं वारायमध्य तर्पिं तिम्पतेजसम् ॥ 41 ॥

हन्मीन्द्र ससुरं सहो ययं वा देवलान्तम् ।

क्षिपामी सागरे सर्वान्समुवाट्य च मेदिनीम् ॥ 42 ॥

O Father! Shall I drink the ocean or crumble the mountain to dust or shall I obstruct the passage of the rising Sun or shall I kill Indra, Yama, or the other host of Devas or shall I root out the earth and throw it with all beings into the ocean?"

इत्याकर्णं वचस्तस्य त्वध पुरस्य पेणतम् ।

प्रत्युवाचातिमुदितस्तं सुतं पर्वतोपमम् ॥ 43 ॥

कृषिनात्यानुपानुया समाधठकौंस पुरक।

तस्माद्वुरं इति खलातं तत नाम भयिष्यति ॥ 44 ॥

O King! Hearing thus the sweet words of his son, Viśvakarmā gladly told his mountain like son "O my Son! You are now capable to save me from troubles (Vṛjna) hence you are named Vṛtra."

धाता तत महाभाग्र सिंगतरा नाम तापस: ।

त्रीण तस्य च शीर्षिणि ह्रामवन्दीर्विति च ।। ४५ ॥

वेदवेद्यान्त्वज्ञः सर्वविद्याविशारत: ।

संस्थिततपसि प्राविश्लोकीविमयप्रदे ॥ 46 ॥

गलेगु तृ हतः सोउढा वज्ञातेन सांगतम् ।

विनासप्रायं सहसा छिज्ञानि मस्तकानि च ॥ 47 ॥

O highly Fortunate One! Your brother, named Triśirā, was a great ascetic; his three faces were all very strong. He was thoroughly conversant with the Vedas and the Vedangas and well versed in all the other knowledges. He remained always engaged in practising asceticism, surprising to the three worlds. Indra killed my qualified son with his thunderbolt; that wicked soul severed the three heads without any offence.

तस्मात्वं पुरुषव्याप्र जहि शकं कृतासम् ।

ब्रह्मल्यापृतं पार्थ निश्चयं दुमाँति शकम् ॥ 48 ॥

Therefore, O Best of beings! Kill that vicious, shameless, doceful, wicked Indra, guilty of the sin Brahmatahyā.

इत्युक्चा च तदा त्वषा पुरशोकसमाकुलः ।

आयुधानि च दिव्यानि चकार विवधानि च ॥ 49 ॥

O King! Thus saying, Viśvakarmā very much confounded with the breavement of his son, created various divine weapons.

ददावमें सहसाक्षधाय प्रवलानि च ।

खद्गणुलमदाणिक्तोमरमुखानि वै ॥ 50 ॥

शगई धनुस्ताव बाण पत्रिं पडिणं तथा ।

चक्र दिव्यं सहसारं सुदर्गतरमग्रभम् ॥ 51 ॥

तृणीरी चाक्षयी दिव्यी कवचं चातिसुन्दम् ।

रधं मेघप्रतीकाशं चूदं भारसहं जवम् ॥ 52 ॥

He prepared weapons specially suited to kill Indra, the best axes, tridents, clubs, Saktis, Tomaras and bows made of horns and arrows, Parighas, Pattisās, divine discus like the Sudarśana Cakra, two divine inexhaustible arrow cases with arrows, nice Kavaca, very substantial air-like swift-going chariot looking like a cloud and capable to carry great loads; all these he created and gave over to his son.

युद्धोपकरणं सर्वे कृत्वा पुत्रय पार्थिव ।

दत्वासोड़ी प्रेरयामास त्यहा क्रोधसमित्वतः ॥ 53 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणी भच्छक्ये

दितीयोउधाय: 112 11

O King! Viśvakarma, the best of architects, excited by anger, made ready all the equipments necessary for war and gave them to his son Vītrāsura and sent him to kill Indra.

Here ends the Second Chapter of the Sixth Book on the birth of Vītrāsura in the Mahā Purānam

śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter III

CHAPTER III

On the Deva Defeat and on Vṛtrā's Tapasyā

ध्यास उवाच

कृतपरिस्त्ययनो चूजो ब्राह्मणैर्वेदारगरैः ।

निर्जगाम रथाठको हन्तु शर्मे महावल: ॥ १ । ॥

तदैव राक्षसाः कृगरा: पुरा देवपराधित्रिताः ।

समाजमूँश सेवार्थ वृत्रे ज्ञाला महावलम् ॥ 2 ॥

इन्द्रतास्तु तं दूर्व युद्धाय तु समागतम् ।

वेगादाग्य वृत्तान्ते शगशमुस्तस्य चौधितम् ॥ 3 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Having the Svastyayana

ceremony (a performance of rite to secure welfare or avert calamity) performed by the Brāhmaṇas versed in the Vedas, the powerful Vṛtra mounted on his chariot and started to kill Indra, the King of the Gods. The Dānavas that were previously defeated by the Devas now knowing Vṛtrāsura to be powerful, came up to him to serve his cause. The messengers of Indra, when they saw him ready for battle, hurriedly came to Indra and informed him all about his doings and other matters connected with it.

व्यास उवाच

स्वामिड्छीघमिड्याति चुत्रो नाम रिपुस्तव ।

बलावान्यंदने रूक्षत्स्वघु। चोल्यातिड़: किल ॥ 4 ॥

The messengers said: “O Lord! Vísvākarmā, having been very much grieved his son being slain, got very angry and by Abhicāra process (an incantation with a design to injure or magic spells or charms used for a malevolent purpose) has created a son in order to kill you.

अभिचारो नागार्थ तर क्रोधाचितेन वै ।

पुरवाताधितिजेत दुःसहो राक्षसैयुतेः ॥ 5 ॥

That indomitable Vṛtāsura is now your powerful enemy; mounting on his chariot he is coming here to fight with you, surrounded by other Asuras.

यत्नं कुम महाभाग शीघ्रमायाति साम्यतम् ।

मेकमन्दसङ्ग्राणी घोराष्ठप्रतिहाकण: ॥ 6 ॥

O highly Fortunate One! This enemy of yours is high as the mountain Meru; he is now coming hurriedly to you, making a terrible noise; guard yourself carefully."

तृतीयम्बन्तरे तत्र भीता देद्वाणा घृष्णम् ।

आगतावोषु: सुर्पतिे शुर्पवन्ते दूतभाषितम् ॥ 7 ॥

O King! While Indra was hearing the messengers, the Devas came there panic-stricken and terrified and said:

गणा कछुः

मथवन्द्रपितिमचाति भवन्ति श्रिद्धगालये ।

बहूनि भयशंसीनि पक्षिणां विस्तानि च ॥ 8 ॥

The Gāṇas said: O Lord of the Suras! Ominous signs are being seen in the houses of the Gods; the birds are making sounds, very inauspicious and foreboding a great calamity.

काकगूगास्तथा शेयनाः केकाढा दाफणा: खणा: ।

रूदन्ति विकृतः शब्दैरूकारैर्षवंनोरपि ॥ 9 ॥

Crows, vultures, herons, falcons, and other ugly inauspicious birds are crying and making hoarse sounds on the tops of houses.

चीचीकृधीति निर्वादातुळ्वित विहणा भुगम् ।

वाहानां च नेत्रेषो जलधारा: पतंत्यध: ॥ 10 ॥

Other birds are making incessantly harsh sounds like chichi kochy. The carriers of the several Devas are weeping and shedding tears always.

श्रूयतेजितमहाऊढ्वो कट्टितां निशगसु च ।

गक्षसीनां महाभाग भवनोपरि दाहणः ॥ 1 1 ॥

O highly Fortunate One! On the tops of houses are heard very loud and very dreadful sounds of the crying Rāksasīsī at dead of night.

प्रपतिति ध्वजास्तूर्ण विना वातेन मान्द ।

प्रभवतिन महोतात दिवि धूभ्यन्तरिक्षतः ॥ 1 2 ॥

O Giver of honour! The flags on the chariots are falling to the ground without any trace of wind. Thus ominous signs are being visible on earth and in the air.

कृष्णाम्बरधारा नार्यँ घमतिन च गृहे गृहे ।

यान्तु यान्तु गृहातपुणं कुर्सेचो विकृतानना: ॥ 13 ॥

O King of the Devas! The ugly faced women, wearing black clothes, are roaming from house to house and always repeating “Leave the house, and go away at once.”

राजी स्वत्पेषु कानानां सुतानां निजमन्दिरे ।

केशोल्छूनित राक्यसो भीवयन्यो भुणतुगा: ॥ 14 ॥

The Deva women while sleeping in their own temples are seeing in their dreams that terrible Rāksasīs, coming to them are cutting away their hair on their heads and are frightening them.

एर्वस्थितानि देवेशे भूक्रीणलाकायरस्तथा ।

गोमायवो रुदौतिम्न निशायां घबनांगणे ॥ १ ५ ॥

O Indra of the Devas! The inauspicious signs

Book VI Chapter III

like these and earthquakes and the falling of the meteors are taking place. The jackals come in the courtyard of houses at night and yell horrible heartrending sounds.

सराटानां च जालानि प्रभवन्ति गृहे गृहे ।

अज्ञप्रसूगरणादीनि दुर्विमितानि सर्वश: ॥ 16 ॥

Lizards are moving always in the rooms and the several limbs of our bodies are shaking and thus making very inauspicious signs.

व्यास उवाच

इति तेषां वचः शुत्वा चिन्ताभाग सुरोश्रः ।

बृहस्यति समाहुय पघछ च मनोगतम् ॥ 17 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing their words, Indra became very anxious and called Brūspathi, the Deva Guru, and asked him:

इन्न उवाच

ब्रह्मीकुमुत योगीण निमिन्तीन भवन्ति वे ।

वाताश्र दाराणा वाँन प्रपतैलुकता: खतः ॥ 18 ॥

Indra spoke: O Brāhmaṇa! Very inauspicious signs are being made visible; dreadful winds are blowing and stars are falling from the skies; what are all these?

सर्वेज्ञसि महाभाग समर्पे बिटनाशने ।

बुद्धिमाज्ञास्ततचज्ञो देवतानां गुरुस्तबा ॥ १९ ॥

O Intelligent One! You are very wise and versed in the Śāstras and the Guru of the Devas; you are omniscient and know very well how to remedy the evils.

कुरु शान्ति विधानज्ञ शत्रुळ्यविधधायिनीम् ।

यथा मे न भवेदुवुःखं तथा कार्यं विधीयतान् ॥ 20 ॥

Therefore perform the rites by which enemies can be killed; do such as our miseries be all averted.

बृह्म्यतिकावा

किं कारीम सहसाक्ष त्यवाउढ दुकृतं कृतम् ।

अनागसं मुनि हृता किं फलं समुपार्जित् ॥ 21 ॥

Bhaspati said: “O Thousand eyed! What shall I do? You have committed shortly a heinous crime; you killed that innocent Muni and so you have earned a very bad Kārmic effect.”

अत्युगं पुण्यपायानां फलं भवति सत्वम् ।

विद्यार्थ खतु कतल्वं कार्य तद्धृतिमिष्छत ॥ 22 ॥

Very violent sins and good deeds produce their effects very quickly. It is, therefore, highly incumbent on those that desire for their own welfare, to take up any work with great discretion.

परोतपातनं कर्म न कर्तव्यं कदाचन ।

न सुखं विदंते प्राणी परपीडापरायण: ॥ 23 ॥

It is never advisable to do any action that leads to the tormenting of others. Never do they find happiness who give pain to others.

मोहाल्लोभाद्बहावल्या कृता शक्र तव्याद्धपुना ।

तस्य पापस्य सहसा फलनेतनुपागतम् ॥ 24 ॥

O Indra! You have committed Brahmahatya, under the influence of greed and delusion; now suddenly has appeared the fruit of that act.

अवध्य: सर्वैद्यानां जातोउरी घुवसंज्ञकः ।

हंतुं त्वां स समायाति दानवैबहुभिवर्धतः ॥ 25 ॥

आयुधानि च सर्वाणि चजतुल्यानि सायल ।

त्वष्टा दत्तानि दिव्यानि गृहीता समुपचित्यतः ॥ 26 ॥

समागच्छति तुर्धौर्ष त्याहकः प्रतपावान् ।

देवेन्द्र प्रत्यं कुर्वेगाय मनुष्यंविष्यति ॥ 27 ॥

O King of the Suras! This Vītra Asura is born invulnerable to all the Devas. That powerful indomitable Asura chief is now coming, mounted on a chariot, to kill you, surrounded by the other Dānavas and taking with him the Viśvakarmāmade divine arms and weapons equal to thunderbolt. He is coming like a second Kāla, as it were to destroy the whole Universe. There is none in this Triloka, capable to kill him; and his death will not also take place.

कोलाहलसदा जातसदा बुवती वाक्यतो ।

गन्थवाँ: क्रिस्ता यक्षा मुनयक्षा तपोधानः ॥ 28 ॥

While Brhaşpati was thus speaking, a great tumultuous uproar rose at once. The Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Yakṣas, Munis and other Immortals began to fly away from their quarters.

सदानीय विद्यार्थवामाः सर्वे पलायिताः ।

तददूध्या महाद्यर्थ्यं शक्रश्रितापरायण: ॥ 29 ॥

Śrimadvevibhāgavatam

आज्ञाप्यमास तदा सेनेचोगाय संवेकान् ।

आनयक्षे वसुसुझनाशित्री च दिवाकरम् ॥ 30 ॥

पूर्णं च भर्ग वार्तु कुवेरं वरणं यमम् ।

विनानेषु समाकृष्ठ सायुभतः । 31 ॥

Indra seeing the Devas flying away became very anxious and gave orders at once that all subservient to him must be ready at once for battle; they must go and call the Vasus, the Rudras, the twin Aśvīns, the Ādītas, Pūsā, Bhaga, Vāyu, Kubera, Varūṇa, Yama and the other Devas to come there at once. The enemy is well nigh; so let all the Devas come on their Vimānas quickly there."

समागळन्तु तसा शुज्याती समाप्तम ।

इत्याज्य भुस्तितः समाक्रहा गजोतमम् ॥ 32 ॥

ब्रह्मस्तितं पुरीधाय निर्गतो निजमन्दितात् ।

तथैव विश्वश: सर्वे रखं रखं महामासिकता: ॥ 33 ॥

Thus ordering, Indra mounted on the Airāvata elephant and taking the Sura Guru in front started from his own temple. The other Devas mounted on their respective carriers and, firmly resolved to fight, started with all their arms and weapons.

युद्धाय कृतसंकल्पा निविद्युः शाखापाय: । यूत्रोध दानवैयुक्तः सम्प्राप्तो मानसोत्तम् ॥ 34 ॥

On the other hand, Vīrtāsura, surrounded by the Demons, came up to the beautiful mountain, adorned with trees, on the north side of the Mānasarovara Lake.

पर्वतं देहतावासं रयं पादपशोभित् ।

इन्द्रोपयाग्य संग्रामं चकार मानसोत्ते ॥ 35 ॥

Indra, too, came there with Brhaṣpati in front and attended by all the other Devas to that mountain, north of the Mānasa Lake and began to fight.

पर्वते देहतायुक्तो वाचस्मितपुर: सरः ।

तत्राभूद्राकर्ण युद्धे वृत्रवासवयोस्ता ॥ 36 ॥

A dreadful fight, then, ensued between Vṛtra and Indra with clubs, swords. Parighas, Pāśas, arrows, Šaktis, Parśus and other weapons.

गदासिपर्विः: पारुषैबिणीः शफित्मर्षधि: । मानुषेण प्रमाणेन संग्रामः शरादं शतम् ॥ 37 ॥

The terrible fight lasted for full one hundred human years, terrifying to the self-controlled Rsis and all the human beings.

बधुप दयदो नृगामुर्षीणं भावितात्मान् ।

वक्तानः प्रधारं भननस्ततो वायुगणः किल ॥ 38 ॥

Varuna first turned his back; then Vāyu, then Yama, the Sun and Moon and then Indra fled from the battlefield.

ततो विभावसुः शक्रः सर्वे ते निरांगा शणत् ।

पलायनपरान्दूर्वा देवानिंद्रयुगोगमान् ॥ 39 ॥

वृत्रोप्र चितरं प्रागादाशमस्यं मुदाद्वित्यम् ।

प्रणाय प्राष्त ल्यहारा चितृः कार्य मया कृतम् ॥ 40 ॥

देवा चिनिर्जिताः सर्वे संद्रा: समरसंश्विताः ।

विद्रुतासे गताः स्थानं यथा सिंहान्युग गताः ॥ 41 ॥

Seeing Indra and the other Devas flying away, Vṛtrāsura came to the hermitage and there bowed down to his father who looked very glad; and he said: "O Father! I have carried out your orders; Indra and all the other Devas are defeated in the battle; as elephants and deer fly away seeing a lion, so the Devas all fled away to their respective abodes.

इन्रः पदातिरामन्यायो3नीत गजोतमः ।

ऐरातकौउं भगवन्यूषण श्रिदोतमम् ॥ 42 ॥

I have taken the Airāvata, the best of elephants, away from Indra who fled away on foot. O Bhagavan! I have brought the elephant here. Kindly accept it.

न हताते मवा तसाद्युक्त भीतागरणम् ।

आज्ञापय पुनस्तत किं कंतीय तवैषितम् ॥ 43 ॥

O Father! It is not advisable to kill a man who is terrified, therefore I did not kill them. Now kindly order anything else that I may fulfil your desires.

निर्जर निर्भातः सर्वे भयभीताः क्षमातुाः ।

इंडोउधैरावतं लव्क्ता भयभीतः पलायितः ॥ 44 ॥

All the Devas fled away from the battle-field, very much tired and terrified; and what more to say than this that Indra, too, fled, leaving his elephant on the field."

Book VI Chapter III

व्यास उवाच

इति पुरवचः शुत्वा ल्यहा प्राह मुतावितः ।

पुरवानच्छ जातो5सि सफलं मम जीवितम् ॥ 45 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Visvākarmaī became very glad to hear his son's words and said: "To-day I can rightly say that I have got my son and that my life is successful."

त्वरात्रं पातितः पुर्र गतो मे मानसो जरः ।

निश्रलं से मनो जातं दूध्या दीर्थ तवाद्धुतम् ॥ 46 ॥

“O son! To-day you have sanctified me; my cares and worries are abated; my mind is also calm to see your wonderful prowess.

शृणु वक्ष्यामहं पुरा हिते तेउद निशामय ।

तपः कुरु महाभाग सावधानः स्थिरासनः ॥ 47 ॥

O Child! Now hear attentively what I say. O highly intelligent One! Now carefully sit in your steady posture (Sthirāsana) and practise Tapasyā.

विश्वासो वेर कलैकः कंभावित्याकासना: ।

शत्रुसे छलकर्ताउसिन नानाभेदिविशारादः ॥ 48 ॥

Never trust anybody; Indra is now your enemy, ever ready to find your faults and clever in sowing dissensions between you and your well-wishers.

तपसा प्रायते लक्ष्मीतपसा राज्यमुतमम् ।

तपसा बलवृष्टि: स्यासंग्रोम विजयसन्ता ॥ 49 ॥

O Son! Tapasyā is not an ordinary thing; Lakṣmī (prosperity) is obtained thereby; excellent kingdoms, increase of vigour, and victories in battles are obtained.

आराध्य दृष्टिणं देखे लब्ध्वा वरमनुतमम् ।

जहिं ग्रहं दुनारं ब्रहहत्यासमावृतम् ॥ 50 ॥

Therefore worship Hiranyagarbha and get excellent boons from him; then kill this vicious Indra, guilty of the sin Brahmahatyā.

साधान: स्थिती भूत्वा दात्तारं घत्र शंक्रम।

वात्रिजतं स वरं देद्यातस्तुण्ट्धतुरान्तः ॥ 51 ॥

Worship the auspicious Creator calmly and carefully. The four-faced Brahmā then will be pleased and grant you your desired boon.

तोषायिता विश्योर्नि ब्रह्णायामितीजासम् ।

अविनाशिल्यमासाठ जहि शकं कृतानगसम् ॥ 52 ॥

First please the Creator of indomitable prowess, from whose womb has sprung all this Universe, and get, then, immortality from Him. Then kill that guilty Indra, my enemy.

वैरं मनसि मे पुरा वर्तैत सुतधातजम् ।

न शान्तिमनुगच्छानि न स्वयासि सुखतेह ॥ 53 ॥

तापसो मे हत: पुजो निराग: पापन्य नय: ।

न विद्यामि सुखं घुर तं मामुद्धर दुःवितम् ॥ 54 ॥

O Son! My feeling of enmity due to the killing of my son reigns always in my mind; I cannot go to sleep peacefully nor do I get peace in any way. The vicious Indra killed my son; O Vṛtra! What more shall I say to you; I am merged in the ocean of sorrows; save me."

व्यास उवाच

तदाकर्णवं चितुर्वावस्यं वृत्रः क्रोयुत्नस्तदा ।

अज्ञामादाय च चितुर्जीगम तपसे मुदा ॥ 55 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus hearing his father's words, Vṛtṣāśura became inflamed with anger and, getting his permission, set out gladly to practise Tapasyā.

नस्यामदनमासाठ युण्यां देवधूनीं शुभाम् ।

सात्वा कुणासं कृता संसिंखतुं चित्यसानः ॥ 56 ॥

He then went to the Gandhamādāna mountain and performed his bath in the holy and auspicious river Mandākini, and, preparing a Sthirāsana, took his seat in the Kuśā grass, to practise the tapasyā.

त्वक्तात्रं वारिणां च योगाध्यापसपतयः ।

ध्यार्विश्वभुर्ज चित्र सेपोर्विष्टः स्थितयसे ॥ 57 ॥

He left off gradually taking his food, then subsisted on water only and remained engaged in Yoga; and, seated in Sthirāsana, meditated incessantly on Prajāpati, the Creator of this Universe.

मथवा तं तपस्वन्तं जात्या चितानुतेः छभुत् ।

गन्धर्वानीत्रयमास विदार्थं पाकगासनः ॥ 58 ॥

यक्षांश प्रवगान्सर्पणिक्रजरानमितीजसः ।

विद्याधरान्यसरो देवदूताननैकश:॥ 59 ॥

उपायासे: कृता: सम्यक्तपोद्धनाय माधिथि: ।

न चचाल तते ध्यानाच्छु: परमतापस: ॥ 60 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पश्छलक्ने तृतीयोअध्याय: ॥ 3 । ॥

Indra, on the other hand, knowing Vītrāsura engaged in tapasyā, became very anxious and sent to him Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Pannagas, Kinnaras, Vidyādharas, Apsarās and other Deva messengers, all of unbounded vigour to create obstacles in his austerities. These Gandharvas and other Devas Yonis, expert in exercising magical spells, tried

many ways and means and various gestures and postures to create disturbances in his penance; but that great ascetic Vītra, the son of Viśvakarmā, did not swerve a bit from his meditative state.

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Sixth Book on the defeat of the Deva army and on Vītra's tapasyā in the

Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

[Unreadable]

Šrimaddeviḥbhāgavatam

CHAPTER IV

On the Defeat of the Devas by Vrtra

व्यास उवाच

निर्नतासे परावृतास्त्रीविध्नकारः सुरा: ।

निराणा: कार्यसंसिद्धो तं दृष्ट्वा दृढ्चतेस्मा ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Suras that wanted to create hindrance in Vītra's tapasyā, seeing him firmly resolved, became disappointed in the fulfilment of their objects and returned to their own abodes."

जाते वर्षेगते पूर्णं बझा लोकपितामहः ।

तत्राजगाम तरसा हंसाकछ्धतुर्मुंखः ॥ 2 ॥

आगत्य तमुवाचैदं लक्षुः पुरु सुखी भव ।

स्वतन्त ध्यानं वं हूई द्वतायि तत वधीऊन्तम ॥ 3 ॥

Thus full one hundred years passed away. The four-faced Brahmā, the Gandsire of the Lokas, came there mounted on his carrier the Swan, and said: "O Vītra! Be happy; now quit your meditation and ask boon; I will grant you the boon that you choose.

तमसा तेऊढा तुओस्मि तां दूढ्वा चातिकर्हितम् ।

वंरं वरय घरं ते मनोशितर्षितं तव ॥ 4 ॥

O Child! Your body has become very lean and thin through your penance. I am now very pleased to see your this very hard tapasyā. Welfare be to you. Now ask the boon that you desire."

व्यास उवाच

चूरस्तदार्तिचित्रशर्ती पुरातो निशाय

वाचे सुधासमसरां जारंदेककर्तुः।

संत्यव्य योगकलनां सहसोदितिछत्

संज्ञातहर्षनयान्थुकलाकलाप: 11 5 || 1

पाटी प्रणाय शिरासा प्रणायाधिधातुः

बढ़ाजिल: पुत एव समाससाद।

प्रोबाच तं सुवरूत तस्पा प्रपर्थ

प्रेणासतिरान्द्वसिरा विवनेन नमः || 6 ||

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the clearly distinct nectar like sweet words of the Creator Brahmā, Vṛtha shed tears of joy and suddenly stood up. And going to him, bowed down gladly before His feet, and, with folded hands, spoke to Him, Who is desirous to grant him boons, in a tremulous voice:

प्राप्त मया सकलदेवपर्द प्रभोडा

यहर्भैनं तव सुकुलैभगभू जातम् ।

वाज्छाजसि नाव मनसि प्रवणे दुरापा

तां प्रवबीयि कमलासन वैसि भावम् ॥ 7 ॥

“O Lord! To-day I have been fortunate to see Thee who art generally seen with great difficulty; and I have acquired thus the posts of all the Devas; O Lotus-seated One! I have got an insatiable desire burning within me. Thou art omniscient, Thou knowest everything; still I am speaking out my mind.

भृत्युंघ मा भवतु मे किल

लोहाकाशुणकार्डरिंशनिचर्यपरेशु शकैः ।

खूँद्र प्रयातु मम वीर्यमैताव

युढे यस्माद्वासी सवलैनरपैजेयः ॥ 8 ॥

O Lord! Grant that my death does not occur with iron, wood, dry or wet substances or with bamboos or any other weapons and let my strength and valour be increased very much in the battle;

Book VI Chapter IV

for, then, I will be unconquerable by all the Devas with all their armies.

व्यास उवाच

इन्यं सप्पार्थितो ब्रह्मा तमाह प्रहसप्रिव ।

ज्ञिष्ठ गच्छ भर्ते ते वाक्तितं सफलं सदा ॥ 9 ॥

न शुक्रेन पर नाईरँग न पायणेने दाहणा ।

भविष्यिति च ते मृत्युरिति सर्व ब्वीयमहूम् ॥ 10 ॥

ज्ञित दत्वा वरं बह्वा जगमा घुवनं परम् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus prayed for, Brahmā said to him smiling: "O Child! get up; I grant that your desired boon will always be fulfilled; now go to your own place Your death wo'nt occur with dry or wet substances or with stones or wood. I say this truly unto you." Thus granting the boon, Brahmā went to His Brahmaloka.

युसन्तु तं वरं लब्धया मुदितः स्वगृहं ययौ ॥ १ १ ॥

शगसं विगुरो तद्धवनं महापतिः ।

त्वषा तु मुदितः प्राप्त पुत्र प्राप्तवरं तदा ॥ १ २ ॥

स्वस्ति तेजसु महाभाग जहि शक्रं सिंगु मम् ।

हूला गच्छ विश्रिसो हन्तारं पापसंयुन्तम् ॥ १३ ॥

Vītra, too, became very glad on receiving his desired object, and returned to his own abode. The highly intelligent Vītra informed the father about the boon granted to him; Viśvakarmā become very glad to hear it. He said, “O highly fortunate One! Let all bliss and good fortune come unto you; kill Indra, my greatest enemy. Go and kill the murderer of my son Triśirā, the vicious Indra and return to me.

भव लं विद्वगाशीगः सम्याय विकयं रोगे ।

मगाधि छिपि विवृलं पुरनाशसमुद्ववम् ॥ 14 ॥

Be victorious in the battle and became the Lord of all the Devas and remove my mental agony due to the killing of my son.

जीवतो वाक्यकरणात्यशहे धृरिभोजनात् ।

गयायां चिपडदानाच्छ विधिभः पुत्रस्य पुत्रत ॥ 15 ॥

तस्मातुप्र मापात्यधे दुःखं नागितुमहित्र ।

त्रिश्रा मम चित्तानु नापसर्पति कर्हिचित् ॥ 16 ॥

A son becomes then really a son when he obeys the commands of his father and when he feeds

plentifully good many people on the Śrāddha day (after his father's death) and when he offers Pindā at Gayā. Therefore, O Son! Keep my words and try to remove my sorrows.

सुशीलः सत्यवाटी च तापयो वेद्यितमः ।

अपराधं विना तेन निरतः पापबुद्धिना ॥ 17 ॥

Know this as certain that Triśirā vanishes from my mind. Triśirā was very truthful, amiable and good-natured; he was an ascetic and foremost amongst the Vedic scholars. The wicked Indra killed my dear son without any offence."

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः श्रुत्वा वृत्रः परमदुर्जयः ।

रथमाङ्ठा तस्ता निजर्जाम पितुर्णैतृत्ति ॥ १ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the father's words, that extremely Vītrāsura mounted on his chariot and quickly got out of his father's house.

रणतदुन्धपिनिर्याँ सज्ञानं महाकलम् ।

कारयित्या प्रयाणं स चकार मदार्थिकं: ॥ १९ ॥

The proud Asura, then, marched to the battle, accompanied with his vast army, to the sounding of the conchsells and war drums.

निर्यंयी नवसंयुक्तः सेवकानिति संवद्न् ।

हत्वा शक्र प्रश्रीध्यामि सुरात्यमकंटकम् ॥ 20 ॥

Vītrā, versed in politics and morals, exhorted his soldiers before marching and said : “To-day we will kill Indra and possess the kingdom of the Immortals, freed of all enemies.”

इत्युक्त्वा निर्वगामायु स्वरी-ययरिवारितः ।

महता सैन्यान्देन भीषयत्रमवारतीम् ॥ 21 ॥

O King! Thus, accompanied by his soldiers, and raising a tremendous war-cry terrifying to the Devas, the Asura set out for battle.

तमागच्छनमात्राय तुराषाडपि सत्वः ।

सेनोष्ठांगे भयत्रस्तः कार्यवामास भारत ॥ 22 ॥

सर्वानाहुय ततसा लोकपालानिर्दभः ।

युद्धाद्धी प्रेयनस्वर्ण-व्योत्तत महावृत्ति: ॥ 23 ॥

O Bhārata! The King of the Devas, knowing that the Asura is quite at hand, became overwhelmed with terror and ordered at once the

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

soldiers to be ready for the battle and called quickly all the Lokapālas and sent them all for the battle.

पृध्यूई ततः कृत्वा संस्थितः पाकशासनः ।

तत्राजगाम वेगतु चूवः परबलादर्दिनः ॥ 24 ॥

देवदानवयोस्तावलभ्यामस्तमुतोःघवत् ।

वृत्रासवयो: संख्ये मनसा विजर्विषणोः ॥ 25 ॥

The highly lustrous Indra, the tormentor of the foes, arrayed his troops in order according to Grdhra Vyūha (the method in which the vultures arrange themselves while flying) and stayed there. On the other hand Vṛtra, the slayer of enemies, dashed unto that place with all swiftness.

A dreadful fight then ensued between the Devas and Dānavas; the two parties each, desirous to get victory over the other, fought awfully hard.

एवं परस्यं युद्धे सन्दीपे भयदे भृगम् ।

आकृतं देवता: प्रगुदैत्याशु परमां मुद्धू ॥ 26 ॥

तोभरैर्पिंद्यालेशं खद्धरैः परगुपिडुर्शैः ।

जन्यः परमयं देवदैवा: स्वस्ववरायुधैः ॥ 27 ॥

When the blaze of the battle fire rose to a very high pitch, the Devas dropped with sorrow while the Asuras became excited with joy. The Devas and Dānavas struck each other with Tomaras, Bhindipālas, axes, Parasūs, Patiṣas, and various other weapons.

एवं युद्धे वर्तमाने दारुको लोमहर्षेगे ।

गऊ क्रजाह सहसा वृढ़: क्रीभप्रमन्तिन: ॥ 28 ॥

अपावूल्य मुखे क्रिपला स्थितो चूवः शतकतुम् ।

मुक्तिडेपृभ्नहाराज पूर्ववैरमनुस्मर् ॥ 29 ॥

When the dreadful battle rose to a high pitch causing horripilation, Vītra became very angry and suddenly caught hold of Indra and denuding him of all clothes and armors swallowed him; he, then, remembering his former enmity, became very glad and stayed there.

गढ़े प्रतलेख वड्रेण सम्ब्धान्ता निर्जासताद ।

चुक्रुगु: परपातांतरे हा ग्रकौति मुदुघुँ; ॥ 30 ॥

अपावृते मुखे गढ़े म्रांक्र जाता सर्वे दिवैकास: ।

ब्रह्मास्ति प्रणायोयुदीन व्यक्षितचेतसः ॥ 31 ॥

किं कतल्वे द्विजश्रेष्ठ त्वमसाकं गुरः परः ।

ग्राको प्रस्ततु चुवेण रक्षिते देवतांतरिः ॥ 32 ॥

When Indra was thus devoured by Vītra, the Devas were overwhelmed with terror and cried out frequently, with great distress: "O Indra! O Indra! All the Devas became very dejected and grieved in their hearts to see Indra denuded of his armour and clothes in the belly of Vītra and bowed down to Brhaspati and said: "O Indra of the Brāhmaṇas! You are our best Guru; what are we to do now? Though the gods tried their best to save Indra, still Vītra has devoured him.

विना शक्रेन किं कुर्भ: सर्वे हीनपातकामः ।

अधिचारं कुक विषो सत्वः शक्रमुक्ते ॥ 33 ॥

We are all powerless, what can we do without Indra? O Lord! Perform quickly magic spells (Abhicāra process) which will lead to our Indra's liberation."

ब्रह्मस्तिवलाच

किं कर्तव्यं सुरा: शिक्षो मुखमयेप्रति वासवः ।

वृजीणतमादितो जीवप्रतिन कोढ़ीतर तेपोः ॥ 34 ॥

Brhaspati said: "O Suras! The king of the gods is swallowed by Vṛtra, he has been quite disabled; but Indra is living in his bowels; attempt therefore must be made that he comes out while living.

व्यास उवाच

देवाधिंतातुरा: सर्वे सुरासाई तथाकृतम् ।

दृष्टवा विमृष्य तसा चकुर्बनं विमुक्तचे ॥ 35 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! The Devas became very anxious to see Indra in that plight and took all the ways and means carefully how he might be freed.

असुर्जत महास्तचां तृपिमकां रिपुताशिनीम् ।

ततो विजूभ्यमाण: स व्यावृतस्यो बभूव ह ॥ 36 ॥

Then they created a state tending to cause yawning, very powerful and irresistible and calculated to destroy one's enemy.

विजृष्मयाणास्य ततो बृत्रस्यास्यदापतत् ।

स्वाज्ञान्यपि संबिध्य निष्कान्तो बलस्मुरुव: ॥ 37 ॥

Vīrtāsura then yawned and his mouth got widely opened and extended. In the meanwhile Indra, the destroyer of one's enemies strength, contracted all

Book VI Chapter IV

his limbs and came out of the expanded mouth of the Asura and fell down.

ततः प्रभृति लोकेषु ज्ञीपक्का प्राणिसंस्थता ।

जहुशुश सुरा: सर्वे शर्क इयूदा विनिर्मितम् ॥ 38 ॥

Since that time, this state of yawning has become prevalent amongst the beings. The Devas were all glad to see Indra thus come out.

ततः प्रवृत्ते युद्धे त्वोलोकभयप्रदम् ।

वर्षाणामयुतं यावहूफणं लोमहर्षणम् ॥ 39 ॥

When Indra thus got out, he fought again with Vītra for 10,000 years (Ayuta years). The fight was very dreadful, causing horripilation.

एकतश्ठा सुरा: सर्वे युद्धाय समुपस्थिता: ।

एकतो बतलांस्त्वादुः संग्रामे समवर्तेत ॥ 40 ॥

On one side all the Devas joined in the battle; on the other side, the pre-eminently powerful Vītra, the son of Viśvakarmañ fought.

यदा व्यक्तित रणे चुचो वरमदावृतः ।

पराजितस्तदा शक्रसंज्ञे सात्य चर्षितः ॥ 41 ॥

विवध्ये मघवा युद्धे ततः प्राय्य पराजयम् ।

विवादमगमन्टेवा दृष्टवा शक्रे पराजितम् ॥ 42 ॥

जगमूस्वक्तवा रांग सर्वे देवा इन्द्रपुरोभागः ।

गृहीतं देवसदनं चुवेणागत्य रंहसा ॥ 43 ॥

When Vītrāsura got more and more energy in the battle, Indra became gradually dwindled and was at last defeated. Indra became very much grieved when he found himself defeated; the Devas also were very dejected to see this. Indra and the other Devas quitted the battle-field and fled away.

देवोहानानि सविणि धुंकाउसी दानवो बलात् ।

ऐरावतोदपि दैत्येन युहितोसी गजोत्तमः ॥ 44 ॥

Vītrāsura too, quickly arrived and occupied the Heavens. Vītra began to enjoy by force the Heavenly gardens and took the Airāvatā elephant. विमानानि च सर्वाणि गृहीतानि विशांपते ।

उच्चे: श्वला ह्ववयो जाततस्तय वरे गते ॥ 45 ॥

कामयेनु: पारिजातो गणशासरां सतां ।

गृहीतं रत्नायां नुं तेन त्वसुतुने ह १। 46 ॥

O King! The Asura, the son of Tvaṣṭā, took away all Vimānas (the self-moving chariot of

gods), Uccaisārava, the best of horses, the heavenly cow, the giver of all desires, the Pārījāta tree, the Apsarās, and all other jewels of the Heavens.

स्थानधारा: सुरा: सर्वे निरिवुरुंगे संस्थिताः ।

दुःखमापु: परिध्धा चक्रभागासुरालयात् ॥ 47 ॥

चूत्र: सुरपूदं प्राय० बभूव मद्रार्वितः ।

त्वधातरीन सुखं प्राय० मुमोद सुतसंयुतः ॥ 48 ॥

The Devas, on the other hand, deprived of their shares in sacrifices and driven away from their Heavens, suffered very much. Vṛtāsura became puffed up with vanity, when he got possession of the Heavens. Viśvakarma, too, became very happy at that time and began to enjoy pleasures along with his son.

अमंत्रयिन्द्रतं देवा सुनिधि: सह भारत ।

कि कतव्यमिति प्रायो विवित्य भयमोहिति: ॥ ४ १ ॥

जमु: कैतासमवर्त सुरा: शक्रममवित्रतः ।

महावेदं प्रणाभ्योचु: प्रहा: प्रांजलयो भृगाम् ॥ 50 ॥

देवदेव महादेव कृपामित्यो महेश्व ।

सहासमान्यभधीतांतु वृज्योगतिपराजितान् ॥ 51 ॥

O Bharata! The Devas, then, united with the Munis and they began to consult about their own welfare. When the Devas took Indra with them and went to Mahā Deva in the Mount Kailāśa and bowed down to His feet very humbly and, with folded hands, spoke thus: "O Deva of the Devas! O Mahā Deva! Thou art the Mahesvara and the unbounded Ocean of Mercy! We are defeated by Vṛtrasura and we are very much terrified.

गृहीतं देवसदनं तेन देव कवीरमा ।

कि कतक्यमतः शम्भो बृहि सर्व शिवाय नः ॥ 52 ॥

Save us, O Śambhu! Thou dost good to all the beings; dost thou tell us, therefore, truly what are we to do now when that powerful Dānava has dispossessed us of our Heavens.

कि कुर्ज: कव च भच्छाम: स्थानप्रदा महेश्व ।

दुःखस्य नाएगवच्छामो विजानोषायामीक्षा ॥ 53 ॥

O Maheśa! Now dislodged, where are we to go? We are not finding any remedy by which our miseries can be destroyed.

साहायें कुक भूतेश व्यथिता: स्म कुपानिधे ।

यूत्र जहि मदोसित्कं वदानबलाहिपो ॥ 5४ ॥

O Bhūta Bhāvana! We are very much pained; helps us; O merciful One! That Vītrāsura has become intoxicated with vanity due to his being granted the boon. Therefore destroy him."

शिरा खचा

ब्रहाणं पुतः कृत्वा बयं सर्वे हरेः क्षयम् ।

गत्वा समेत्य तं विधुं चित्तयामो वधीडामम् ॥ 55 ॥

Śaṅkara said: “O Devas! We will keep Brahmā in the front and let all of us go to the residence of Hari and there consult with Him how to destroy this unruly Vṛtra.

स शफक्ष छलज्ञे बलवानुविद्मन्तः ।

शरणयछ दयाधिछ्धा वासुदेवो जनादनः ॥ ५६ ॥

The Janārdana Vāsudeva is fully capable to do all actions. He is powerful, knower of pretexts, highly intelligent, ocean of mercy, and fit to be asked by all for protection.

विना तं देवदेवेगं नार्थसिद्धमविष्यति ।

तस्मात्त च गतन्यं सर्वेकार्यार्थसिद्धदे १ 57 ॥

Without Him, the Deva of the Devas, no success is possible in any action. Therefore all of us ought to go there for the success in our undertaking.

व्यास उवाच

इति सखिल ते सर्वे बहा शकः सशंकतः ।

जभुपिंक्षिणः क्षयं देया: शरणपे भक्तवललम्। 5 8 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! Thus settling their plan of action, Indra and other Devas took Śankara and

Brahmā with them and went to the abode of Hari, who protects all and is gracious to His devotees.

नत्वा विद्युपदं देवास्तुषुवु: परमेश्वरम् ।

हरि पुरुषसूक्ति वेवोत्नन जगतुकम् ॥ 59 ॥

They, then, began to chant Puruṣasūkta hymns to Him and thus they praised the God Hari, the Guru of this Universe.

प्रत्यक्षोः भृज्ञगाथत्सेति स कमलापति: ।

समान्य च सुत्रान्वविन्युवाच उप:स्थितः ॥ 60 ॥

किमागता: स लोकेशा हरबहामन्विता ।

कारणं कथायधं च: सर्वेधां सुसत्तमाः ॥ 61 ॥

The Janārdana Hari, the Lord of Kamalā, then, appeared before them and, after showing his respect, addressed them thus: O Lord of the several Lokas! What have brought you all together with Brahmā and Śaṅkara hither? O best of Suras! Please tell me the reason of your coming here.

व्यास उवाच

इति शुत्वा हरेर्वाक्यं नोचुदैवा सभापितम् ।

चित्तविषहा: स्थिता: ग्रायः सर्वे प्राजलवस्तथा ॥ 62 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे पशवल्ये

चतुर्वाँस्थायः ॥ 4 ॥

Vyāsa said: "O King! Thus hearing Hari's words, the Devas could not reply anything; rather almost all of them remained with an anxious look with their hands folded, overwhelmed with cares. Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the efeat of the Devas by Vṛtra in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Vyāsa said: “O King! Thus hearing Hari’s words, the Devas could not reply anything; rather almost all of them remained with an anxious look with their hands folded, overwhelmed with cares. Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the efetat of the Devas by Vītra in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER V

On Praising the Devi

व्यास उवाच

तथा चिन्तातुर्गन् वीक्ष्य सर्वान्सर्वांतित्त्वित् ।

प्राह प्रेमभरोद्धान्तान्माधवो मेदिनीपते ॥ १ ॥

विष्णुर्वाच

क्रि मौन्माश्रिता युयं बुवंतु कारणं सुराः ।

सदस्व्राउपि तच्छुत्वा यतिच्ये तत्रिवारये ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of Lakṣmī, and the knower of the essences of all subjects, seeing the Devas extremely attached to him and anxious, spoke to them thus: O Suras! Why have you kept silent? Tell me why you have all come, let it be good or bad, tell me; I will try to remove your miseries.

Book VI Chapter V

देश ऊचुः

किम्भातं तव विषो स्थि लोकेषु वर्तते ।

सर्वे वेद भवान्कार्यं किं पृष्ठसि पुनः पुनः ॥ ३ ॥

त्वया पूर्वे बलिर्बंदः शगडो देवाधिपः कृतः ।

वामनं वपुताश्याय क्रान्तं तिभुचनं पदे ॥ ४ ॥

The Devas said: “O Lord! Is there any thing unknown to you in this Trilokī; You know everything; why then art Thou asking us again and again? In ancient times You in your Dwarf incarnation overspread the three worlds by Your three feet and thus bound the King Bali in his own premises and gave of sovereignty over the Devas to Indra.

अमृतं त्वाहुतं विजणो दैत्याश्र विविपतिततः ।

त्वं प्रपुः सर्वदैवानां सर्वापहित्विवारणो ॥ 5 ॥

O All Pervading One! It is You who deluded the Daityas and procured nectar for the Devas, and it is You who sent them to the house of Death. Therefore, O Lord! You are the one and only one that is capable in warding off all the evils that befall on the Devas.

विष्णुस्वाच

न भेतल्यं सुरावरा वेच्युपायं सुसंमतम् ।

तद्धाय प्रवक्ष्यामि येन सौख्यं भविष्यति ॥ 6 ॥

Thus hearing the Devas' words, Viṣṇu said: "O Suras! You need not fear; I know one remedy, approved by all, by which that Daityas might be killed so that you would be happy. I am now giving it out to you.

अवश्यं क्रपाँयि मे भवतां हितामात्मा ।

बुद्ध्वा बलेन चार्थेन येन केन छलेन वा ॥ 7 ॥

Your welfare, your benefit must be looked at by me whether by the exercise of my intelligence or by using my prowess, by wealth, by pretext or by any other means whatsoever.

उपाया: खलु चत्वार: कवितास्त्वर्शिभि: ।

सामावय: सुढ़लेवे दुर्दैसु विशेषतः ॥ 8 ॥

Four means, viz., conciliation, gifts, sowing discord, or punishment are mentioned by the wise

statesmen to be applied to friends and specially to the enemies.

बहाणास्थ वयो दत्सलपास़ारतीधेतन च ।

दुर्जल्यं च संप्रातं वरत्नप्रभावतः ॥ 9 ॥

Brahmā was worshipped by Vṛtra with severe austerities and He granted boons and it is due to the influence of that favour that this Asura has become so indomitable.

अजेवः सर्वैभृतानां त्वधुं समुपपादितः ।

ततो बलेन वृद्धिं स प्रातः परपुरंबतः ॥ 10 ॥

दु:साध्योजसी सुरा: शकुर्विना सामप्रातरणम् ।

प्रलोभ्य वर्जगामयेयं हन्तव्यस्तु ततः परम् ॥ 11 ॥

The more so that Viśvakarmā created him from the sacrificial fire; it is through all these causes that the Demon Vṛtṣārusa, the conqueror of the enemies' stronghold, has grown up so very powerful that he can hardly be conquered by any being.

गच्छध्यं सर्वान्यर्वा यत्रासित बलवन्तः ।

साम तस्य प्रपुंजभयं तत एनं विजेषध्य ॥ 12 ॥

O Suras! First peace must be negotiated with him; then deceive him, otherwise the enemy will be very difficult to conquer. First entice him and bring him under control; then kill him.

संगम यणवान्कूला विश्वास्य समयेन हि ।

मित्रत्वं च समाधाय हेतल्यः प्रबलो रिपुः ॥ 13 ॥

Now take the Rsis and Gandharvas with you and go where the powerful enemy Vītrāsura is residing and make a treaty with him; thus he will be conquered.

अनुव्यः संप्रदेक्ष्यायि वज्रमय्य वरायुधम् ।

साहाय्यं च कर्तियासि शक्रस्पहां सुगतमाः ॥ 14 ॥

Swear on oath and accede to the terms he proposes and thus create faith in him; then cultivate friendship with him; lastly, when time will come, kill that powerful enemy.

समयं च प्रतीक्ष्यं सर्वैवायुप: क्षये ।

मरणं विबुधास्तस्य नान्यथा सम्पत्थिति ॥ 15 ॥

O Suras! I will also enter, unseen by anybody, into the excellent weapon of Indra, his thunderbolt

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

and will help him in due time. Wait till the period of his longevity expires; otherwise his death will never take place.

गच्छधर्मविधि: सार्थ नाथवां: कपटावुता: 1

इंज्ञण सह मित्रत्वं कुर्वर्ध वाक्यवादानतः ॥ १ ६ ॥

Now go to that Asura, with Gandharvas and Rsis and cunningly cultivate friendship between him and Indra, by conciliatory words; when he begins thus to put his confidence, then deceive him. I will enter hidden into the strong well-covered thunderbolt.

वथा स याति विश्रासं तथा कार्य प्रतारणम् ।

गुप्तोई संपवेक्ष्यामि परिवं संघादितं इदम् ॥ १ ७ ॥

When Indra will come to know that the Demon has put complete faith in him, he will hurl his thunderbolt against him and thus the enemy will be killed and not otherwise.

विश्रभं मधवा श्रगु हनिष्वित न चान्यथा ।

विश्रास्य कृते पार्थ पंकृता शक्रस्तु पुरुषः ॥ १ ८ ॥

O Lord of the Devas! Do not consider for the present the act of treachery that you will commit: take my help and kill that wicked Demon with thunderbolt.

मस्तहायोख वज्जेण शान्तीव्यति पापिनम् ।

न तोषो3त्र उले शगी जाठ्यमेव प्रकुर्जत: ॥ १९ ॥

To practise hypocrisy with an hypocrite is not considered a sin; specially no powerful enemy can be killed only by the well known rules applicable to warriors, without any deceit.

नान्यथा बलवान् वध्यः शूरधर्मेण जायते ।

वामनं रूपमाधाय यमात्यं बक्षितो बक्षितः ॥ 20 ॥

I also deceived, before, Bali, with my dwarf body and again I deceived all the Demons by showing myself as a beautiful woman; therefore to practise deceit with a strong deceitful enemy is never considered a sin.

कृत्वा च भोहिणीवे दैव्या: सर्वेपि वक्षिताः।

पबंतः सहिताः सर्वे देवीं भगवर्ती शिक्षाम् ॥ 2 1 ॥

Know this. O Devas! Now you all conjointly worship the Devi Bhagavatī with Mantras and

prayers and take Her shelter; the Yoga Māyā, then, will help you.

गच्छधं शरणं भावै: स्तोजमनैः सुरोतमाः ।

साहायं सा योगमाया भवतां संशियास्यति ॥ 22 ॥

वन्दामहे सदा देवीं सात्चिकों प्रकृति पराग ।

सिद्धिदां कामवां कामां दुरापामकृतात्मधिः ॥ 23 ॥

We too, worship that Devi, the Highest Prakrti, the Incarnate of pure Satva Guna, Who grants success, bestows us all our desires, Who is Herself the object of desires, and Who is never realised by any except by those Yogis, self-controlled pure men.

इंत्रोर्षि ता समाराध्य हनिष्यति सिंगुं गे।

मोहित्री सा महामाया मोहलिययात दानवम् ॥ 24 ॥

Indra, too, will certainly be able to kill his enemy in battle if he worships Her; for the Mahā Māyā, the Creatrix of Delusion, will, when worshipped, delude that Demon.

मोहितो मायाव युः सुखसाधो भविष्यति ।

प्रसवायां परांवायां सर्व साधयं भविष्यति ॥ 25 ॥

Thus deluded by Her Māyā, Vītrāsura will easily be killed by him; there is no doubt in this, what more do you want than this that everything will be successfully accomplished when the Devi Ambikā is propitiated and gets well pleased.

नोचेमनोराथावादिनं कंस्याय विधायिति ।

अन्त्यामिवस्कपा सा सर्वकारणकारण ।। 26 ॥

She regulates the hearts of all and is the Cause of all causes. Without Her worship no one's desires can be expected to be accomplished.

तस्मातां विश्वजन्नीं प्रकृति परमातृतः ।

भज्ञं सात्विकेभर्ते: श्रनुजागय सतमाः ॥ 27 ॥

Therefore, O Best of Suras! Worship the Universal Mother, the Prakrti Devi with greatest devotion and with greatest purity for the destruction of your enemy.

पुरा मवाउपि संगाम कृत्वा परम दारभणम् ।

पढ़वर्षसहस्राणि नितही मधुकैटफी ॥ 28 ॥

See! In days of yore, I fought for five thousand years, dreadfully with the two Demons Madhu and Kaíṭabha and then killed them.

Book VI Chapter V

स्तुता मया तदात्यर्थ प्रससा प्रकृति: परा ।

मोहिती ती तदा देवी छलेन च मया हतो ॥ 29 ॥

विप्रलक्षी महाबाहू दानवो मदार्थिति ।

तथा कुलघं प्रकृतेनैर्जनं भावस्यभुतः ॥ 30 ॥

I worshipped, then, the Mahā Māyā, the Highest Prakrti; She was thus pleased and deluded the two Asuras; thus the two powerful Asuras puffed up with vanity were deluded and thus I could kill those terrible Daityas under a pretext.

सर्वेधा कार्यसिद्धि सा कार्यसिंत सुरोतमाः ।

एवं ते दत्तमतयो विद्याना प्रभविष्यानुना ॥ 31 ॥

Therefore, O Suras! You, too, worship that Highest Prakṛti with the greatest devotion; She will then surely fulfill your desires."

जम्पुते मेसीखारं मन्त्राद्रामपिडतम् ।

एकाने संश्चिता देवाः कृत्वा ध्यानं जयं तपः ॥ 32 ॥

गुह्युर्जंगता धार्जी सृष्टिसंहाराकिरणिभू ।

भक्काममुद्रामंबां संसाराक्लेशनाशिनीम् ॥ 33 ॥

O King! When the intelligent Visnu enlightened thus the Devas, they went to the top of the Mount Sumeru, adorned with the Mandāra trees, remaining at a secluded place, recited slowly Her Mantrams and thus engaged in asceticism and meditation, began to chant hymns and praise that Universal Mother, the Holder of the world, the Remover of all worldly ailings and the Creatrix, Preservrix and Destructrix of the world and the Bestover of all desires to Her devotees.

देश ऊचुः

देव प्रसिद परिपाहि सुगन्मतान्

चूगसूगे रामरे परिपीक्षितांश ।

दीनानिताशनपरे परमार्थतचे

प्राप्तिस्वर्दिकमलं गरणं सदैव ॥ 34 ॥

The Devas said: "O Devi! Be graciously pleased unto us! O Thou, the Destructrix of the afflictions of the distressed! We have taken refuge unto Thy lotus-feet. We have been defeated by Vṛtrāsura in the battle, we are very much oppressed and afflicted.

त्वं सर्वविश्वजननी परियलायमान्

पूत्रानिवासितपितातिपुसंकेतप्रम्न् ।

मातनं तेउस्वविदितं भुवनयेप्रप

कस्मादुपेक्षासि सुरानसुपत्रतान् ॥ 35 ॥

O Thou, the Highest Reality! O Thou, the Mother of the whole Universe! Protect us as a Mother protects her child; we are fallen into this difficulty arising from our enemies.

त्रैलोक्यमेतदिज्वलि विहितं त्वयेव

ब्रहा हरि: पशुपतित्वल वासत्नोल्या: ।

कुर्वन्ति कार्यमिहलं स्वलग्न न ते ते

धूभंगचालनवशगतिहूरतिं कामम् ॥ 36 ॥

O Mother! Nothing is hidden from Thy knowledge in the three worlds. Why art Thou taking no notice of us, that are being tormented by the Asuras! O Mother! Thou createst, preservest, and destroyest the three worlds; Brahma, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa are created by Thy mere will and are doing all Thy works.

माता सुताम्यरिघावत्यियाति दीनान्

गीतिस्ववैय रचिता प्रकटापशयान् ।

कस्मात्र पालयसि देखे विनापराधानस्मार-

स्वदर्शिशरणाकरणारासाढे ॥ 37 ॥

O Mother! They are not independent; by the contraction of Thy eye-brows, they are directed and enjoy all the pleasures. The Mother protects her sons afflicted with various difficulties and dangers, even when they are found guilty of various offences. It is Thou that hast made this rule; then why, O Merciful! Art Thou not protecting us who are quite innocent and whom Thou dost know as having taken refuge unto Thy lotus-feet.

नूनं मन्दधिबजानपदाय: किलेले

थक्ति विहाय विषये सुखभोगलुखाः ।

नेमे कटाक्षविषया इति चेच चैया सिंतः

सुते जनकर्तौरं चापि दृष्टा ॥ 38 ॥

O Devi! If Thou thinkest that we forget Thee, being too much attracted by the enjoyments that Thou hast been pleased to confer unto us and therefore we are proper not to be looked upon with

Śrimaddevibhāgavatum

Thy merciful eyes, we would say that this is quite true; but, O Mother! Nowhere is seen such a feeling of a Mother to Her child; we are no doubt, objects of Thy mercy and favour always.

दोषो न नोउज जनानि प्रतिभागिति चित्ते

यते विहाय भजनं विषवे निममना: ।

मोहल्यवा विरचितः प्रभवल्यसी

नततमात्मल्याबककणे दयसे कर्थ न । ३ ९ ॥

Besides there is no fault of us in this matter, O Mother! that we do not worship Thee and become immersed in sensual enjoyments; for Thy creation, the Moha (delusion) is very powerful and deludes us. O Mother! Thou art naturally Merciful! Knowing these, why art Thou not showing mercy unto us.

पूर्वं त्वया जननि दैत्यपतिवर्षितिष्ठो

व्यापादितो महिष्करणधरः किताबजी ।

अस्मकृते सकललोकभयवाहोउसौ

ब्रुं कवं न भवदं विधुप्तोषि मातः ॥ 4 0 ॥

O Devi! Thou hadst killed before in battle, for our sake, the powerful Daitya Chief Mahiśāsura, very terrible to all the beings. Then why art not Thou, O Mother! killing this dreadful Vṛtrāsura?

गुभमलाउसतिवलावानुजो निरुभमस्ती

भातौ तदनुगा निहता हतौ च ।

दृत्र तथा जहि खलं प्रबलं द्याएँदे मन्ते

विमोह्य तथा न भवेढ्याएँसी ॥ 4 1 ॥

O Mother! Thou hadst killed the two brother Daityas, Śumbha and Niśumbha, extraordinarily powerful, and the other Daityas that followed them; O Thou, the embodiment of mercy! Similarly destroy now this deceitful strong Vṛtrāśura. O Mother! Delude this proud Asura so that he could not manifest, in the least, his power.

त्वं पालयाद्ध विबुधानसुरेण मातः

सन्तापिनानिततां भयविक्छलांश ।

नान्यो5ति को3पि भुवनेषु सुर्गात्रिंहता यः

क्लेशजालयिखलं निवदैत्स्वजास्कता ॥ 4 2 ॥

We are very much troubled by the Asuras and overwhelmed with terror from them; Thou savest

us; for there is no other in the three worlds that can by his own force remove the sorrows and sufferings of the Devas.

यूत्र देदा तव यदि प्रथिता तथापि

जहोनामृषु जननुःखकरं खरं च ।

पापात्समुद्धर भवानि शरैः पुनाना

नोचेत्यायतीत तमो ननू दृष्टवृद्धि: ॥ 43 ॥

O Mother! Though Thou hast shown favour towards Vṛtra, now dost kill him soon, whose nature is cruel and tormenting to others. O Bhavānī! Better dost Thou save him from sin by Thy holy arrows. Otherwise that vicious. Asura will surely enter into the hideous Hell.

ते प्रापिता: सुरवनं विद्धुपारयो ये हत्या

राणेपि विशिष्टः किल पाचितास्ते ।

त्राता न किं निरसयातभवाह्याद्रों

यच्छत्रवोप्र न कि किं विहित्रंसि शूजम् ॥ 44 ॥

It is for his welfare that Thou oughtest to kill him. Those that had been before enemies of the Gods, Thou didst purify them by weapons in the battle-field and hadst sent them to the Nandana Garden in the Heavens. O Thou, the Mercy personified! Was it not that Thou didst not save them from hell? Then why art not Thou killing this Vītrāsura!

जानीमहै सिपुरसी तब सेवको न

प्रायेण पीडवति नः किल पाभवूद्धि: ।

यस्तावकसिर्वह भवेद्यमरानसी

किन्चल्यादंकजरात्वनु पीडवेझा ॥ 45 ॥

We know this for certain that the Asura is Thy enemy, not Thy servant; for that mischievous soul is giving us trouble. O Mother! How can he be Thy servant and devotee who torments the Devas that are always engaged in worshipping Thy lotus feet. O Mother! How can we perform Thy worship?

कुर्म: कवं जननि पुजनमह ते उम्ब

पुष्पादिके तव विनिर्मितेय वयमात् ।

मन्त्रा वयं च सकलं यगर्जित्रकर्णं

तस्माद्वानि चरणे प्रणता: स्म नूनम् ॥ 46 ॥

Book VI Chapter V

The flowers and other acticles used in worship all are created by Thee; especially we and the Mantras, in fact, everything is the manifestation of Thy power. Therefore, O Bhavānī! We worship Thee by laying ourselves prostrate on Thy feet. Best Thou pleased.

वन्यास्त एव मनुजा हि भवतीत भक्या

पार्वेब्जं तव भवाधिव्यतेषु पोतम् ।

वं योगिनोर्षि यनसा सततं स्मरिते

मोक्षार्थिनो विनतारणविकारमोहाः ॥ 47 ॥

Those men are blessed that worship with devotion Thy lotus feet for crossing this ocean of world. O Devi! Those Yogins that want final liberation and forsake therefore all attachments, vikāras and delusions, even they attain success then only when they meditate Thy lotus feet.

वे यात्रिकाः सकलवेदिविदोंरि नूनं

त्वां संस्मरिति सत्ततं किल हीमकाले ।

स्वाहां तु तृतीजननीनमुरुंधाणां भृध:

स्वधां पितुनाणस्य च तृप्तिकेतुम् ॥ 48 ॥

Those that are great Sacrifices and know best the essence of the Vedas, even they when they offer oblations to the sacrifice, utter “Svāhā” that is cheering to the Devas and “Svadhā” very consoling to the Pitts; thus they always think of Thee (for “Svāhā and Svadhā” are Thy names only).

मेधाउस कान्तिस प्राणत्नस प्रसिद्धा

ब्रैद्धस्वमेव शिरादायंकी नराणाम ।

सर्वे त्यमेव विषधं वघवन्येउस्मिन्

कृत्वा द्वारासे भक्तां कृपया सदैव ॥ 49 ॥

O Mother! Thou art the retentive power and memory. Thou art the beauty, Thou art the peace, Thou art the Buddhist (intellect) well know to clarify men's minds; and Thou art the prosperity and wealth of all these three worlds. O Devi! Those that worship Thee, Thou givest them, out of mercy, those wealth in some way or other."

व्यास उवाच

एवं स्तुता सुरैद्वी प्रव्यक्षा सारभवत्ता ।

चारूकपधारा तन्वी सर्वभिरणभूषिता ॥ 5 50 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! Thou worshipped by the Devās, the Devi Bhagavatī appeared before them in a very beautiful form, thin, adorned with all ornaments.

पाणाङ्गशराभीतिलसद्वाहुचतुध्या ।

शालिकीपाकाजालरशनावब्द्रसल्किदः ॥ 51 ॥

Her two hands holding a noose, and goad, and the other two hands making signs to discard all fear and ready to grant boons; Her loins very beautiful, girdled with a gold band with small bells pending and making sweet tinkling sounds; Her feet with anklets (ornaments) making sweet sonorous sounds with tiny tinkling bells.

कलकधरीया कान्ता ब्वणलकर्णपुत्रु ।

चन्द्रखण्डसमाबद्धरलमौलिवराजिता ॥ 52 ॥

मन्दिमास्तारविन्दाया नेत्रबरविभूषिता ।

पारजिताप्रसूनान्छनीलवभसमप्रभा ॥ 53 ॥

Her voice was exceedingly sweet and lovely, Her forehead was adorned with the crescent of the Moon and on Her head was glittering a diadem of jewels, Her lotus-face adorned with sweet soft smiles and with Her three beauteous lotus-eyes looking like Indibaras Her body was of a red colour like the Pārijāta flowers and Her limbs were marked with red sandal-paste.

रकाध्वयपीधाना रकचन्दनचर्धित ।

प्रसादमुपुर्धी देवी कर्णगारससागरा ॥ 54 ॥

सर्वेयुक्त्रावेषाढ्या सर्वद्वितारिध; पत्र ।

सर्वांजा सर्वकर्जी च सर्वाधिष्ठान्कारिणी ॥ 55 ॥

सर्वेवदान्तसिंस्दा सच्चिदान्दिक्षणी ।

प्रणीपुस्ता समालोक्य सुरा देवी पुरःस्थितान् ॥ 56 ॥

तानाहु प्रणतान्दा किं कः कार्य ब्रवनु भाम ।

She was dressed in a red attire. The Devi looked well pleased, like an ocean of infinite mercy, wearing complete dress suited to happy interviews, the Creatrix of all this Cosmos, the Highest, the Knower of all, the Directrix of all, and the Great Upholder of all. She looked like an embodiment of the Truth of all Vedāntas and the Incarnate of

Śrimaddevibhagavatam

ever Existence, Intelligence, Bliss, the Mahā Devi Bhagavati Bhuvaneśvari. The Devas all bowed down before Her standing in front of them. The Mother then spoke: “What business have you got here? Speak to Me.”

देवा ऊनुः

मोहैर्यैं नि सुं चुरं देवानामितिदुःखदूम ॥ 57 ॥

यथा विश्वसते देवांस्तथा कुरु विमोहितम् ।

आयुधे च बलं देहि हतः स्याधेन वा सिुः ॥ 58 ॥

The Devas said: “O Bhagavatī! Vṛtrāsura is tormenting much the Devas; Bewitch him. O Devi! Do such as he can trust the Devas; and impart then strength on our weapons such as he can be killed.”

ध्यास उवाच:

तथेयुक्त्वा भगवती तत्रैवान्तथीयत ।

स्वानि स्वानि विकेतानि जभुदैवा मुदाविता: ॥ ५९ ॥

इति श्रीमदैबीभागवते महापुराणो पशुरकम्बे देवीमाहात्मये

पत्रभोउवाय: 11 5 11

Vyāsa said: “O King! That will be done”, Saying thus, the Devi departed then and there. The Devas became very glad and returned respectively to their abodes.

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the praising of the Devi by the Devas in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhaigavatam

CHAPTER VI

On Vrtrasura Slain

व्यास उवाच

पूर्व प्राप्तवरा देवा ऋष्यवघु तपोधना: ।

जम्पु: सर्वे च संमेऋ चूत्रस्याममुत्तम् ।

ददुशूलत तं वृयं ज्वलनामि तेजसा ॥ १ ॥

धक्ष्यन्तीमव लोकास्ती-ग्रास्त्तमिव चामरान् ।

ऋष्योय दय ततोघ्येल चूजभूचुः। प्रियं वचः ॥ २ ॥

देवकायाँधीयद्व्यर्थे सायमकृतं रसात्मकम् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus getting the boons from the Devi, the Devas and the Rsis blazing with their asceticism, all united and consulted with each other; then they went to the excellent Āśrama of Vṛtra. There they saw Vṛtra in a sitting posture and with his own Tejas (fiery spirit in him) as if ready to burn the three worlds and to devour all the Devas. The Rsis, then, spoke to Vṛtra the sweet words full of sentiments for the serving of the Devas' ends, according to the principle of conciliation.

རྟོགས་ཆུང་

སྟོན་སྟན་མཆུགས་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོད་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོན་སྟོད་སྟོ

Book VI Chapter VI

practises enmity with another, get happiness; this has been ascertained by the wise.

संधामासिका: शूरान्यशंसिति न पधिडता: ॥ 8 ॥

युद्धं शूझारचतुरा झूत्रमार्थविधाताकम् ।

पृष्यैरिति न योद्वयं किं पुनर्निशितः शरैः ॥ 9 ॥

युद्धे विजयसन्देहो निश्रयं बाणताडनम् ।

It is only those brave warriors, that found taste in warfare, that approve of battles; but the wise that are expert in amorous enjoyments do not like battle as destroying the sensual enjoyments; they do not like fighting with flowers even; what to say with sharpened arrows! In a battle, the victory is doubtful but the shooting of arrows is certain.

दैवार्थीनिर्दे विश्वं तथा जयपराजयी ॥ 10 ॥

दैवार्थीनाथिति जाला न योद्धल्यं कदाचन ।

This world is dependent on Fate (Daiva, i. e. dependent on the cosmic rulers or deities or Devas of the Universe), so is victory or defeat.

कातेश्व शोजनं स्नानं श्रणयायां शवनं तथा ॥ ११ ॥

परिचर्यापरा भायां संसारे सुखसाधनम् ।

So knowing this, one ought never to fight. Bathing in proper time, taking food and sleeping in fixed times and having a chaste serving wife, these are the means towards happiness in this world.

किं सुखं युध्यतः संखेये बाणवृष्टिभयजूते ॥ 12 ॥

खडपाणतातिरीउे च त्वापउरातिसुखुपरे ।

While in warfares, shooting terrible arrows and striking with fierce axes take place; what happiness can there possible exist? Rather the enemy finds pleasure there.

संग्रामे मरणात्वर्गसुखप्राप्तिरिति सूकटम् ॥ 13 ॥

प्रलोभनवरं वावक्यं नोदनार्थे निर्यक्तम् ।

There is a saying that death in battles leads one to Heaven, but this is merely an enticing statement, inciting one to war! Really it is fruitless.

छित्वा देहं व्यथा प्राय्य शुगालकरादिषिः ॥ 14 ॥

पृशत्यवर्गसुखवर्गिक को वां वांळिति मन्दीः ।

Supposing that happiness comes ultimately to those who pain their bodies by being shot with

arrows and who allow their carcasses being devoured by the crows and jackals, then no man, even of dull understanding, will like this, what to speak of intelligent persons!

सख्य भवतु ते वूत्र ग्रंक्षण मल स्त्र निव्यदा ॥ १५ ॥

अवाप्यसि सुखं त्वं च शक्रशापि नितन्तम् ।

Therefore, O Vītra! Let everlasting peace and friendship be established between you and Indra; both of you in that case will derive everlasting peace and happiness.

वयं च तापासः सर्वे गन्धर्वांशि निजाभे ॥ 16 ॥

सुखावासं गमिष्यामः शान्ते बैरेस्पृत्रेव वाम् ।

Moreover if the enmity between you terminates from this instant, then we, the ascetics and Gandharvas will, no doubt, be able to remain in our own respective Asrams with great comfort.

संग्रामे युव्योर्गिते वर्तीनाते द्विवानिणम् ॥ 17 ॥

पीड़ान्ते मुनय: सर्वे नान्यतः किज्ञान नतः ।

O Powerful Hero! Owing to incessant wars between you and Indra, the Munis, Gandharvas, Kinnaras and beings are all day and night, suffering very much.

सर्वेर्गा शान्तिकामानां सख्यायिष्ठामहे वयम् ॥ १ ॥ ॥

मुनवस्त्वं च शक्रश्र प्राप्नवन्तु सुखं किल ।

For the happiness of all peace loving persons, we, the Munis, the residents of the forest, earnestly desire that there be formed friendship between you two. We desire that you, Indra and all the Jivas get happiness.

मध्यस्थाश्रु वयं यून युवयेः सत्यकारणे ॥ 19 ॥

गर्षय कार्यविज्ञान प्रयेजयामो विधः पित्रम् ।

O Vītrā! We stand as mediators in this treaty between you and Indra; we will make each party swear on oath and thus make it conducive to the happiness of both.

ग्रास्तु सगधाकृत्वा यथोक्तांश तयात्रः ॥ 20 ॥

चित्रं ते प्रीतिसंयुक्तं कार्वितु तु साय्यन्तम् ।

Indra will now swear on oath before you on the terms that you will dictate and thus will make your heart cheerful.

सत्याधारा धरा नूनं सलैने च दिवाकाः ॥ 2 1 ॥

तपत्ययं ययाकालं वायुः सलैने वायवा ।

Know this verily that this earth stands on Truth, the sun rises for the sake of Truth, the winds blow all along for Truth and the boundless ocean never oversteps its limit for Truth.

उद्वनाविगि मवाँदिं सलैनेव न मुड़जिति ॥ 2 2 ॥

तस्माललेन सख्यं वां घाववष्टा यथासुखम् ।

एकत्र शयनकीडा जलकेलिं: सुखासनम् ॥ 2 3 ॥

युवाभ्यां संवेशा कार्य कर्तव्य मेल्यमेच च ।

Therefore let your friendship, be established on Truth. Thus tied together by bonds of friendship let you two sleep, play, make sports in water and sit together happily.

व्यास उवाच:

महर्विवचनं श्रुत्वा तानुवाच महापति: ॥ 24 ॥

अवश्यं भगवन्तो मे माननीयात्मतविस्वतः ।

Vāśa said: O King! Hearing the Maharsi's words, the highly intelligent Vītra began to say: "O Rsis! You are possessed with knowledge and many other qualifications and you are ascetics; you are therefore to be respected by me.

घवन्तो मुपयः स्वापि न मिष्याविदितो भृगम् ॥ 25 ॥

सदाचाग: सुशान्ताश्र न विद्युशलकारणम् ।

You are the Munis and therefore you never speak anywhere falsehood; your conduct is good and you practise rites and ceremonies; you are calm; therefore you do not know the causes of pretexts.

कृतवैरी शेड सत्को कामुके च गतलिषि ॥ 26 ॥

निर्जैजे वैय कत्नेयं सख्यं मतिमता सदा ।

The intelligent should never cultivate friendship with a knave, licentious persons who is of understanding, an infamous, and a shameless person, specially if he be an enemy.

निर्जैजोयं दुगचारो बहुहा लपेर: शकः ॥ 27 ॥

न विश्वासातु कतिथ्यः सर्ववैवेदुगे जले ।

This vicious Indra is shameless, deceitful, licentious, and the killer of a Brāhmaṇa, therefore no faith can ever be placed on such persons.

भवन्तो निपुणा: सर्वे न श्रोहमतवः सदा ॥ 28 ॥

अनस्विभ्रासु शान्तलाचितानामसित्वादिनाम् ।

You are saints and added with all good qualifications; therefore your minds never play in the mischievous thoughts of others; it is because your heart is calm and quiet that you cannot understand the minds of the deceitful and treacherous; therefore you ought never to stand as mediators between any two persons.

मुनय ऊचुः

जनुः कृतस्य भोक्ता वै शुभस्य त्वशुभस्य च ॥ 29 ॥

ग्रेहं कृत्वा कुतः शान्तिमानुयावघतेनः ।

विश्वासघातकर्तानो नरकं बाति निश्रयम् ॥ 30 ॥

दुःखं च समवामोति नूनं विश्वासघातकः ।

निष्कृतिविद्धहरुणां सुरापानां च निष्कृति: ॥ 31 ॥

विश्वासघातिनां नैव मिच्रद्रोहकृतामपि ।

समयं बृहि सर्वेत्र यथा ते चेतोस पुर्णम् ॥ 32 ॥

तेनैव समयेनाए सचिः: स्यानुभयो: किल ।

The Munis said: “O King! All the creatures certainly enjoy the fruits of their Karmas, whether good or bad; how then, can persons, of perverted intellect, obtain peace when they do mischief to others. The treacherous persons certainly go to hell and suffer miseries always. The slayers of Brāhmaṇas and the drunkards may get liberation; but never the faithless and those who go against their friends get off free; these will have to suffer undoubtedly in the hells. Therefore, O Knower of all things! Give out clearly what is going on exactly in your mind and the exact terms that you want; and the treaty will be made between you and Indra exactly according to those terms.

यूत्र उवाच

न शुष्केण न चार्जेन नाप्यना न च द्राकणा ॥ 33 ॥

न बजेण महाभाग न द्विति निशि नैव च ।

वध्यो भवेय चिश्रितः शकस्य सह देवतैः ॥ 34 ॥

एवं मे रोजते सक्थः शक्केण सह नान्थया ।

Vītra said: “O highly fortunate Munis! I can enter into a treaty of peace with Indra only on the

Book VI Chapter VI

condition that Indra with all the other Devas will not kill me in day or in night with any dry or liquid substance or with wood, stone, or thunderbolt and on no other terms.

व्यास उवाच

ऋष्यसन्तं तदा प्रजुबाँबिमयेच खपतुः ॥ 35 ॥

समयं श्रावयामासुस्ताजीय सुंशघम् ।

इत्रोप्रि शरणधोत्तरा चकार विगातज्ञः ॥ 36 ॥

साधिधा यावकं कृत्वा सुनीनां सक्रियों किल ।

युस्तु वचनैस्तस्य विश्वासमगमतदा ॥ 37 ॥

वपूव मिववच्छेके सहचयपरायण: ।

Vyāsa said: “O King! The Rṣis then gladly accepted his word and brought Indra and recited to him the terms of the treaty of peace. Indra, then, swore, on oath, before the Munis with Fire as the Witness that he would comply with the terms of the treaty and was thus freed from his heavy thoughts and felt that he had been rid of a fever. Vṛtra, then, relied on Indra’s words, became his friend, and began to live, play and enjoy with him.

कदाचिश्वंने चोगी कदाचिश्दन्यादने ॥ 38 ॥

कदाचिशदुवेदेसरी मोद्याने विचरेतुः ।

एवं कृते च संधाने चुत्र: प्रभृवितोप्रवत् ॥ 39 ॥

शकोप्रिय बधकामस्तु तदुपायान्त्रित्यत् ।

रंधानेची समुवित्नस्तदासीम्यवा भृणग् ॥ 40 ॥

They felt pleasure by their union and began to roam some times in the Nandana Garden, sometimes in the Gandha Mādana, sometimes on the shores of oceans. Vītra was very much delighted when they were thus united in friendship; but Indra watched him to find his faults; thus sometime passed.

एवं चितयन्तस्य काल: समविश्वतैन ।

चिश्रासं परपं प्राप वृत्रः शक्रेस्तितरणो ॥ 41 ॥

एवं कतिचिद्वद्वानि गतानि समये केतु ।

चृस्य मणोपायाम्नसीड़ोप्रधचितन्ति ॥ 42 ॥

A few years passed away after the treaty had been concluded. And the straight-forward Vītra began to place very much confidence on Indra; but Indra meditated on the means how to kill him.

त्वैहिकदा सुर्त प्राह विश्वस्तं पाकगासने ।

पुर्र चूर महाभाग शृणु मे वचनं हित्म ।। ४३ ॥

न विश्वासतु कतव्यः कृतवौर कधवंन ।

मध्या कृतवैरसंत स्वाउसूयापर: पौः ॥ 44 ॥

लोभान्मतो ब्रेपत: परदुःखोत्सवाचितः ।

परदारलपटः स पायबुद्धः प्रताकः ॥ 45 ॥

रंधान्ये की श्रीहरागो मायादारी नेपतादारीः ।

One day Viśvakarma, knowing that his son Vṛtāśura placed implicit confidence on Indra, called his son and said: "O my son Vṛtra! Hear my good words, See, it is never advisable to trust anybody with whom there has arisen once the enmity. Indra is your greatest enemy; he always intends evil to you; therefore do not trust him any more. Indra is never to be trusted, who is always covetous, inimical, rejoicing at others' sufferings, licentious and addicted to others' wives; vicious, deceitful, finding faults with others, always jealous, a juggler, and puffed up with vanity.

यः प्रशिक्षोदो मातुर्गभीच्छेदे चकार ॥ ४ ४ ६ ॥

सपत्कृतः सपत्कृतः कंद्रनामनानुतः ।

O Child! What more shall I say than this fact that villain, without fearing sin, easily entered into the womb of his mother and cut the crying child in the womb into seven pieces and then each seventh part again into seven parts, thus altogether into forty-nine parts.

तस्मात्युत्र न कत्नीय विश्वासस्तु कर्धंचन ॥ 47 ॥

कृतपायस्य का लज्जा पुनः पुत्र पुत्र कर्दितः ।

Therefore O my son! He is never to be trusted on any account. He who is always addicted to vicious never feels shame in perpetrating again another crime."

व्यास उवाच

एवं प्रवीधितः पित्रा वचनैहैतुसंयुतेः ॥ 48 ॥

न बुधोध ततु वुत आसाम्रभग्नः किल ।

स कदाचित्समुझ्नने तपाप्यन्महासुरुम् ॥ 49 ॥

संध्याकाल उपायुने मुहूर्तीति दारुणे ।

ततः सझित्य मघवा वरदानं महात्मानाम् ॥ 50 ॥

Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam

संध्येयं वर्तेत रौद्रा न तारिभिंद्वसो न च ।

हन्त्योरयं यया चाहा बलैनेव न संशयः ॥ 51 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Vṛtra's death time drew nigh; hence he could not take his father's words as auspicious, though he was warned by his father in words full of meaning. One day, in the evening time, at a very inauspicious dreadful moment, Indra saw Vṛtra on the shore of an ocean and began to think of the boon granted by Brahmā to the Asura thus: "Now this is the terrible evening time; this cannot be called day nor can it be called night, and this demon is also here alone in this solitary place; it is advisable therefore to effect his death by force, there is no doubt in this.

एकाकी विजने चार संप्राप्त: समयोचितः ।

एवं विचार्यं मनसा सम्मार हरिमध्ययम् ॥ 52 ॥

तजाजगाम भयावानुरूपय: पुर्वशेत्तमः ।

वज़मध्ये प्रविश्यसी संविधानो भयावाहरि: ॥ 53 ॥

इज्जे बूबिंदं चक्रातगृ तदा चूवयं प्रति ।

इति संचिंव्य मनसा कर्थ हन्यां रिंगुं गे ॥ 54 ॥

अजेदं संखांव सर्वदैवेक्षे दानवैस्थाव ।

यदि वृत्र न हन्यम्य वझविव्या माडावलम् ॥ 55 ॥

न श्रोगे मन नृन स्यासस्थां रिपुत्णगत् ।

Thus arguing in his mind, Indra remembered the Undecaying Soul Hari. Bhagavān, the Best of Puruṣas came there, unseen by anybody, and entered into the thunderbolt; Indra quickly collected himself to kill Vṛtrāsura; but he thought how he could slay this Demon, unconquerable in the battle; and if he did not slay his enemy then by deceit, then his enemy would continue to live, and it would be possible for him to get his own welfare.

अपां केने तदापश्यत्समूरे पवतीतोपम् ॥ 56 ॥

नायं रुष्को न चाह्रौदयं न च शखमिदं तथा ।

अपां केने तदा शकने जग्राह किल लीया ॥ 57 ॥

परां शर्िक न समतर भवत्वा परमया दुतः ।

मृत्तमात्रा तत देवी स्वांगं केने न्याधायपत् ॥ 58 ॥

घड़े तदावृतं क्षिं प्रकार हतस्विनुम् ।

फेनावृत्ते पर्यिं तन शक्रशिक्षेप ते प्रति ॥ 59 ॥

While he was thus thinking, he saw the foam of

the waters of the ocean as big as a mountain; thinking that foam not to be dry nor wet and considering that foam not to be any weapon, he easily took that foam and instantly remembered with a heartful devotion the Highest Force Bhuvaneśvarī. On Her remembrance, the Bhagavati infused Her part into that foam and the thunderbolt, instilled with the force of Nārāyaṇa, was covered, too, by that foam.

सहसा निपपातायु वज्ञाहत इशचलः ।

यासवस्तु प्रहात्मा बभूव निहते तदा ॥ 60 ॥

त्रयपक्षे महेन्द्र तमसुर्निविधेस्तदैः ।

Indra, then, hurled the thunderbolt covered with foam on Vṛtra; and the Demon, thus struck, instantly fell down like a mountain. When Vṛtrāsura was thus killed, Indra became very glad; the Rsis began to praise him with various hymns.

हतगुरु प्रहृत्ता कासवः सह द्वैशैः ॥ 6 1 ॥

देर्वीं संपुज्यामास यदसाद्धादो तिथु: ।

प्रसाद्यामास तदा स्तोत्रनंनिधिवेरिधि ॥ 6 2 ॥

देवोहानो परागरंकः प्रसाद्यमकतोद्धरि: ।

पदारामायमी भूति स्थायमायाम सायक: ॥ 6 3 ॥

त्रिकालं महर्ती पूजां चक्रः सर्वेशि पिनर्जितः ।

तदारभूषिति देवानां श्रीदेवी कुलदेवम् ॥ 6 4 ॥

Indra, then, with all the other Devas worshipped the Devi, through Whose Grace the enemy had been killed and they praised Her with various hymns. The image of the Bhagavati, the Supreme Sakti was built of ruby and installed in the Nandana Garden. O King! Since then all the Devas used to worship the Devi thrice a day, morning, midday and evening and since then the Śrī Devi became the tutelary deity of the Gods.

विष्णुं विष्वज्ञश्रेषुं पूजयामास चासव: ।।

तातो हते महावीयें घूत्र देवभयबूजे ॥ 65 ॥

प्रववी च शिगो वायुर्जक्षुदैवतासता ।

हते तत्स्मनार्थवाँ यक्षाराक्षसिक्रातः ॥ 66 ॥

Indra worshipped then Viṣṇu also, the Highest of the Gods. When the terrible powerful Vītrāsura was killed, the auspicious wind began to blow

Book VI Chapter VII

gently; the Devas, Gandharvas, Rākṣasas, and Kinnaras began to roam with great joy.

इत्थं बुकः पराशतिभूप्रयेतयुपत्नेनतः । तया कृतविमोहाच्छ शोक्षण सहसा हतः ॥ 67 ॥ ततो वृत्रसिद्धानीति देयी लोकेषु गीयते । शोक्षण निहतत्वाच्छ शोक्षण हत उच्छते ॥ 68 ॥ द्वी तैमादैदीभागतते महापुराणे भदकल्पं चक्टोर्धयाः ॥ 6 ॥

Vrtrasura was deluded by the Maya of Bhagavati, and Her force entered into the foam;

hence Indra was capable to kill him suddenly and it is, for this reason, that the Devi, the Goddess of the world, is known in the three worlds as "Vrtranihantri," the slayer of Vrtra. But at the first sight Indra killed him by means of the foam; hence the people say that Vrtra was killed by Indra.

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the slaying of Vrtrasura in the Mahapurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

CHANDED VII

Book VI Chapter VII

CHAPTER VII

On Indra's Disguise in the Mānasa Lake

व्यास उवाच

अथ तं पत्तितं दूर्वा विद्याप्रिद्याणुरीं चयो ।

मनसा शकमानस्तु तस्य हत्याकृतं भयम् ॥ १ ॥

इउरीपि भयसन्त्यने चयाविद्वरुर्गि ततः ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Now seeing Vṛtra slain, Viṣṇu, the Deva of the Devas, went to Vaikuntha; but, with this fear reigning supreme in his mind that it was He that virtually slew him. Indra, too, then became afraid of the sin committed by him and returned to his Heavens.

मृनयो धयसंविज्ञान हृषभविश्रहते रिपी ॥ 2 ॥

किमसाधिप: कृतं पापं यदसी वक्षितः किल।

मृनीग्वडो ब्या जातः सुरोरास्य च संगमात् ॥ 3 ॥

अस्माकं वचनाद्वयो विश्वासगमित्कल ।

सिक्षापशातिनः सङ्ग्राद्यं विश्वासभातका: ॥ 4 ॥

The Munis, too, became very anxious and thought what great sin they have committed in cheating Vītrāsura. It is the company of Indra that now made their name “Munis” as meaningless. The Munis thought thus: “Oh! Vītra on our words trusted Indra and we have thus turned out to-day traitors in company with that traitor Indra.

धिराये ममता पापमूलेवमवर्धकृत् ।

वदस्माधिष्णलं कृत्वा गणधैर्विचितोउरुप: ॥ 5 ॥

भन्कुद्वुद्धिद्वाता च प्रेरकः पापकामिणाम् ।

पापभावस भवेकूनं पशुकतां तथैव च ॥ 6 ॥

Attachment and affection is the cause of all mischief. Fie on that attachment! It is, as it were, tied by the cord of affection that we had sworn falsely on oath and thus deceived Vītra. Those that deliberately guide others to do vicious acts or those that advise or incite others to do sinful acts or those that side with the sinners certainly partake of the fruits of the sin committed.

विष्णुभातपि कृतं पापे वस्नात्यमवापतवान् ।

बड़े प्रविष्य येभतो पातितः सत्त्वमूर्तिना ॥ 7 ॥

Visnu, too, committed the sin, though he had Sattva Guna in preponderance, when he entered into the thunderbolt and thus helped Indra in killing Vītra.

नूनं स्वार्थपर: प्राणी न पाणात्यसमग्रुते ।

हरिण हरिसंगेन सर्वेया दुष्कृतं कृत्तम् ॥ 8 ॥

झावेव स्तः पदाधर्नां झावेव निधनं गतो ।

प्रथमश्रु तुरीयश्र यो सितोकंया तु दुर्वर्भौ ॥ 9 ॥

अर्थकामी प्रगतर्ती झी सर्वेयं सम्पतौ प्रियो ।

धर्माधर्मिति यावादो दर्भोउयं महतामपि ॥ 10 ॥

It seems that henceforth the people, when selfish, wont hesitate of commit afterwards any sinful act when they will see that Bhagavān Viṣṇu could have done, in concert with Indra, such a vicious thing. Of the four virtues Dharma, Artha, Kāma, and Mokṣa, Dharma and Mokṣa are very rare in the

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

three worlds. Artha (wealth) and Kāma (desires) are everywhere recommended as excellent and therefore held very dear; Dharma is now merely in name and is the cause of the vanity of the Pandits (no one now really practises Dharma with devotion).

पुनायोर्पि मनस्तापमेवं कृत्वा पुन: पुन: ।

जमुः स्वानाभानेव विमनस्का हतोघाः ॥ १ १ ॥

Thus arguing, the Munis became very much afflicted in their minds and went back to their own hermitages respectively, broken-hearted and absent-minded.

त्वधा तु निहतं श्रुत्वा पुत्रमिश्रेन भात ।

कोद दुःखसंततो निर्वेदमयामनुः: ॥ १२ ॥

O Bharata! Hearing of the death of his son by Indra, Viśvakarmā wept very much and he become disgusted very much with the affairs of the world. यत्रासी पतितस्तत्र गत्वा वीक्ष्य तथा गतम् ।

संस्कारं कारयामास विधियव्यालर्गीककम् ॥ १३ ॥

He went to the place where lay his son Vīrta and became pained very much to see him that state; and he performed his cremation and other funeral obsequies according to the prescribed rules.

स्नाताउस्य सलिलं दत्ता कृत्ता चैवीध्वंदैहिकम् ।

शणपाँत्र स शक्रातः पाधिष्ठं मिश्रयातकम् ॥ 14 ॥

यथा मे निहतः पुःः प्रतोष्य शयदीभूशम् ।

तंद्योरीय महदुःखं प्राप्नोति विधिनिमितम् ॥ 15 ॥

He then bathed, performed his Tarapanam (peace-offering) and funeral ceremonies due to a person in the first year of his death. Then his heart became afflicted with sorrow and he cursed the vicious Indra saying that as Indra had killed his son, enticing him by falsely swearing on oath, so Indra, in his turn would suffer a heavier suffering, to be inflicted by Vidhi (the Great Creator of Universe).

इति शल्या सुरेशाने त्वथा तापसम्पतिजः ।

मेगो: शिख्यास्थाय तपतरेने सुतुष्कतम् ॥ 16 ॥

O King! Thus cursing Indra, Viśvakarmā, very much afflicted due to the loss of his son, went to the top of the Mountain Meru and began to practise a hard tapasyā.

जनमेजय उवाच

हत्वा त्वाष्ट्र सुशोष्ठक कामवस्थामावपतवान् ।

सुखं वा दुःख्येवाठी तन्ये बृहि पितामह १ १ ७ ॥

Janamejaya said: O Grandsire! First tell me what happiness or pain did Indra derive by killing Vītra, the son of Tvaṣṭā.

व्यास उवाच

किं पृष्ठसि महाभाग संदेहः कीनुशस्तव ।

अवश्यमेव भोक्त्यं कृतं कर्म शूभागुभम् ॥ 18 ॥

बलिष्ठेईर्वेलिवीय सत्यं वा बहु वा कतम् ।

सर्वैथैव हि भोक्त्यां संदेवासुरमानुषैः ॥ 19 ॥

गक्रायेत्यं मतितंता हरिणा वृत्रयान्तिने ।

प्रविष्टो३ पर्व विवणुः सहायः प्रत्यपहत ॥ 20 ॥

Vyāsa said: O fortunate One! What are you asking? and what is the nature of your doubt? The fruit of one's Karma is certainly to be enjoyed, whether it be auspicious or inauspicious. Be he weak or strong. Be he a Deva, an Asura or a human being, everyone in fact, will have to suffer for one's Karma, good or bad, to its full extent, whether it be done a little or too much. See! It was Viṣṇu that gave advise to Indra and entered into his thunderbolt and helped him when Indra was ready to kill Vītrā; but when there had been Indra's difficult time, Viṣṇu did not help Indra in any way.

येता येता येता येता येता येता येता येता येता येता येता येता येति

यिता माता तथा भार्यां भाता वार्य सहोदरः ॥ 22 ॥

सेवको वार्षि भित्र वा पुरुईव तक्षीरसः ।

Therefore, O King! It is clear that when one's time is favourable, everybody turns out friends; but when Fate turns adverse, nobody is seen to come forward to help. When Fate is against anybody, one's father, mother, wife or brother, servant, friend or one's own son becomes quite incapable to help anybody.

प्रतिकूलो गते दैवे न कोउध्येति महायानाम् ॥ 23 ॥

भोक्ता पापस्य पुण्यस्य कर्ता भवति सर्वथा ।

वृत्रं हत्वा गता: सर्वे नित्तेजस्क: जश्वीपति: ॥ 24 ॥

Book VI Chapter VII

गैपुस्ते विद्वाणा: सर्वे ब्रह्मेत्थबुखबऊनैः ।

The man, who does good or bad acts, suffers for his deeds. When Vītra was killed, everyone went back to their respective homes; but Indra, the Lord of Śacī, became very much deprived of his energy and brilliancy due to the sin of his killing a Brāhmīn; all the Devas, then, blamed him as a Brahmaghātaka (the killer of a Brāhmīn).

को नाम शपथान्कृता सत्यं दृत्वा वचः पुनः।। 25 ॥

जिधांस्ति सुविश्रन्तं भृति विग्रतवमापतन्त् ।

They talked further that no other body would have been able to even indulge the idea of killing a Muni who was an intimate friend and who placed full confidence on him when Indra had sworn on oath that he would be a friend to Vītra.

देवगोहादा सुरोहाने नास्वर्पर्ण समापाने ॥ 26 ॥

सर्वत्रैव कथा तस्य विस्तारमागतिकल ।

किं कृतं तुकृतं कर्मं शोकणाङ्ग विधास्तां ॥ 27 ॥

यूयं छलेन विश्वस्तं पुनिभिश्र प्रगतिरत् ।

वेदप्रमाणमूलुच्य स्वीकृतं सीगतं मत् ॥ 28 ॥

O King! Everywhere then there was this gossip in the assemblages of the gods, in their gardens, at the meetings of the Gandharvas that Indra had deceived Vītra who had relied on him, on the words of the Munis and then killed him by pretext, and so had done, indeed, a horrible crime. Indra had now forsaken the eternal proofs of the Vedas; and he had become a Bauddha; therefore he could have easily killed Vītra.

वदयं नित्रतः श्रुवृष्चित्यास्तिसाहसान् ।

को नाम वचनं दत्ता विपरीतमायारेने् ॥ 29 ॥

विना शक्र हरिं कासिप व्यासउं विनिपातितः।

ग्रवीवा: कवाधान्याः समाजेविषयवगृणम् ॥ 30 ॥

गृशवोद्रोषि विविधाः स्वकर्जितानिकाकाः ।

No other body, save Visnu and Indra, could have acted contrary to their words, as clearly evidenced by the manner in which Vītra had been killed. These remarks, similar to those mentioned above, became everywhere current and Indra heard all of them, tending to his own disgrace.

यस्य कीर्तितंता लोके चित्रस्थैव कुजीवितम् ॥ 31 ॥

यं दूद्वा पथि पच्छन्तं शगु: स्मेपुर्षी घबेत् ।

इन्द्रयुंनोरि गवार्षि: पतितः कीर्तिंक्षायत् ॥ 32 ॥

O King! Fie on that man's life that is blamed everywhere! Fie on that man whose fame has been marred amongst the people. Such a person becomes laughed at by his enemies, when seen by them on the way. The royal saint Indradyumna (Rajarsī) was made to get down, though sinless, from Heavens when his good deeds expired.

स्वगंदकृतयापोउसी यापकृतिकं न याचते ।

स्वल्यप्रापेधपि रुणे ययाति: पत्ति: किल ॥ 33 ॥

Why, then, would not vicious persons be made to descend? The king Yayāti had to get down from Heavens for his very little fault and had to pass eighteen Yugas in the form of a crab.

नृप: कक्रंति प्राणो सुगान्हाद्योर नु ।

भृगुपलिनिगच्छेदाद्भगवान्दिरिच्छुतः ॥ 34 ॥

What more can be said than the fact that even the Bhagavān Acyut Hari had to take several incarnations in the wombs of boar, crocodile, etc., out of the curse from a Brāhmin, due to his cutting off the head of the wife of Bhrgu.

ब्रह्माणायनशोयैनी संजातो मक्रावितृषु ।

विष्णुश्व यामनो भूत्वा याचनार्थ बलेगुरु ॥ 35 ॥

गतः किमपरं दुःखं प्रापोनिते दुकृती नरः ।

रामोर्पि बनवासेषु सीताविर्भूतं बहु ॥ 36 ॥

दुःखं च प्रापतवान्योरं भ्रुगुणायेन भारत ।

Though omnipresent, yet he had to take the appearance of a dwarf and had to beg from the King Bali's palace. What more troubles and miseries than this can be inflicted on those that had sinned viciously. O Ornament of Bharata! Rāmacandra, too, had to experience, due to the curse of Bhṛgu, terrible miseries on the bereavement of Sītā Devī.

तर्षेडोपि ब्रह्मत्यालुतं प्रायं महद्वयम् ॥ 37 ॥

न स्वास्थ्य प्राप गेहेउसी सर्वसिद्धुमन्धिते ।

Similarly Indra, too, for his sin of killing a Brāmin, was so much terrified that he could not

Srimaddevibhagavatam

get his healthy condition though he remained in his own house, endowed with all sorts of prosperity and wealth.

पोलोगी तं सभाहीनं वृष्ट्वा प्रोवाच वासवम् ॥ 38 ॥

निः श्रान्तं भयत्रसं नद्यसं निवेतसम ।

किं प्रभोडघ भयातोंस पृतसे दाक्णो स्पुः ॥ 39 ॥

Seeing, then, Indra lustreless, knowledgeless, almost void of consciousness, and overwhelmed with fear, his wife Śacī, the daughter of Pulomā, spoke to him thus: "O Lord! Your dreadful enemy has been killed; why are you, then, sighing so much, being afflicted with so much terror? O Lord! You have destroyed your enemy; then why are you so much anxious?

का चित्रा वतीर कान्त तव शुकुनिषुव्न ।

कर्माच्छोचर लोकेश नि: श्वस्याकृता यथा ॥ 40 ॥

नायोर्जित बलावाऊछ्यैन चितापरो भवान् ।

Why are you then so much remorseful and drawing such deep heavy sighs like an ordinary man? I am not seeing any other powerful enemy of yours; then, why do you look so anxious and bowed down with cares, as if you look quite unconscious.

इन उवाच

नारातिर्वल्यामेप्रति न शोत्तिं सुखं तथा ॥ 4 1 ॥

ब्रहाहत्याभ्यमद्वारात्र विषधेपि सततं गुहे ।

न नंदनं सुखकरं नामृतं न गृहं वनम् ॥ 4 2 ॥

Indra said: “O Devi! True that I have no other powerful enemy, yet I do not find peace nor any happiness. I fear for the sin Brahmahatya in my house. O Devi! This Nandana Garden, the city of Kubera, the lord of riches, this nectar forest, the sweet music of the Gandharvas, the beautiful dance of the Apsarās, all these now do not give the least pleasure to me.

गन्थवर्णी तथा गेयं नृत्यमत्सरां पुनः ।

न त्वं सुखकार नाती नाना च सुर्योक्षितः ॥ 4 3 ॥

न तथा कामधेनुश देववृक्षः सुखप्रदः ।

किं करोगि कव गच्छापि कव रामं मम जायते ॥ 4 4 ॥

इति त्रिपातप: कान्ने न लघे सुखामतमि ।

What more can I say than this that the beautiful Lady like you, most beautiful amidst the three worlds, and other beautiful ladies, the Heavenly cow, the Mandāra tree (one of the five trees of the celestial region), the Pārjjāta trees (the flower tree), the Santāna tree, the Kalpa tree (yielding all desires) and the Haricandana (saffron tree) and others cannot give pleasure to me. What to do, where to go, so that I get happiness, O Beloved! This thought makes me uneasy. And so I am not able to get happiness in my own thought.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा वचनं शक्रः प्रियां परमकतगाम् ॥ 45 ॥

निजांगाम गृहान्यदो मानसं सर उत्तमम् ।

पचानाले प्रविष्टोजसी भयातंः शोककर्षितः ॥ 46 ॥

न प्राजागत देवेन्रस्विभिभृतुं कल्यपैः ।

प्रतिछ्छजो वस्वास्यपुं चेधान इवोरगः ॥ 47 ॥

असहायसुर्जाराक्षैद्विचन्तातिं विकलेनिद्रयः ।

ततः प्रगटे देवेत्रे ब्रहाहत्याभयादिंते ॥ 48 ॥

सुराक्षितानुराघासवृत्यात्राशभवजय ।

Vyāsa said: Thus speaking to his most distressed wife, Indra got out of his house and went to the exceedingly beautiful lake, named Mānasarovara. Indra there entered into the tubular stalk of the lotus, his body becoming very lean and thin out of the fear and sorrow. Nobody could recognise him as he was overpowered by his terrible sin. He then began to behave himself, as regards fooding and enjoying, like a snake; and he became overelmed with thought, helpless, and his organs were out of order. He remained hidden in the water.

When Indra, the king of the Devas, thus fled away out of the fear of his Brahmahatyaś sin, the other Devas became very anxious; everywhere. Various evil signs manifested themselves.

त्रश्य: सिद्धार्थवाँ भयातांशभावन्यूगम ॥ 49 ॥

अराजक जगतस्यर्विभूगतमुपदयै: ।

The Rsis, Siddhas and Gandharvas were very much panic-stricken, as various disturbance and

Book VI Chapter VII

violent symptoms covered all over the world without any king.

अवर्णर्ग तत जातं पृथिवी क्षीणविभा ॥ 50 ॥

विच्छन्नोतासो नदा: सारंयनुद्वाकिन वे ।

Grains began to grow very scanty, due to want of rains; the streams were almost dry and very little water was there in tanks.

एवं त्वराजके जाते देवता मुनवसताः ॥ 51 ॥

विवार्यं नहुषं चकुः शक्रे सर्वे दिवाकीसः ।

In such a state of anarchism, all the inhabitants of the celestial regions, the Devas and Rsis consulted and intalled the king Nahuṣa in the place of Indra.

संग्रणत ननुगे राजा धर्मिको5पि रजोकलात् ॥ ५२ ॥

वभूव विषयासन्कः पछत्रवाणशराततः ।

O King! Nahuṣa, though virtuous, came, under the sway of Rajoguna, influenced by lust and thus he got very much addicted to worldly enjoyments.

अस्पारोभिवृतः क्रीडवैद्योवानेषु भात्र ॥ ५३ ॥

गऊपत्नीगुणात्युत्वा चकमे तां स पाधिवः ।

He began to amuse himself in the Garden of Paradise, surrounded by the Apsarās or celestial nymphs. One day he heard of the excellent qualifications of Śaci Devī, the wife of Indra, and desired to acquire her.

त्रषीन्ति किम्पितृणी नोपणछति पां किल ॥ ५४ ॥

भवाद्रैढ्रामपे: सर्वै: कृतोर्ध्रं वासवसित्वः ।

प्रेयध्यं सूग: कामं सेवार्थे मय ने शरणीम् ॥ ५५ ॥

प्रियं चेभ्य कत्लैयं सर्वेथा मुनवोभरतः ।

Then he spoke to the Rsis: The Devas and you, united, have installed me in the office of Indra; but why does not the Indrānī, (the wife of Indra) come to me so long? If you want to do what I like, then quickly bring Śacī here before me for my gratification.

अर्हिमीउद्ध उद्धवानों तोकानां च तथेश्वः ॥ 56 ॥

आगच्छुतु शची मढ़ा क्षिप्रमढ़ा निवेशनम् ।

I am now Indra and therefore the god of the Devas and all the worlds; therefore bring to-day quickly Indrānī to my house.

इति तस्य वच: श्रुत्वा देया देवार्यतया ॥ 57 ॥

गत्वा चितातुगा: प्रोषु: पौलेनांपी प्रणातासतः ।

इन्द्रपलि दुराचारी ननुष्तत्वामिहे छाति ॥ 58 ॥

कुपितो3स्मानुवाचेदं प्रेषघधं जचीमिह ।

किं कुमैस्तद्धीना: स्म येनैउ्ठरं पुतः कितः ॥ 59 ॥

Hearing thus the words of the king Nahuṣa the Devas and Devarṣis became anxious and went to Śacī, and, with their heads bowed down, spoke thus: "O Wife of Indra! The wicked Nahuṣa is nowdesiring you; he became angry and told us to send you to him quickly; O Devi! We have made him Indra and are therefore under him; what shall we do now under these circumstances?

तत्कृष्टा तुम्ना देवी कुर्यतिनुपावर च ।

रक्ष मां नहुपाद्वह्छांतलास्मि शरणं गता ॥ 60 ॥

Śacī, the wife of Indra, hearing their words, became absent-minded and spoke to Brhaspati, thus: "O Brahmaṇa! I now take refuge unto you."

ब्रह्मतिकावा

न भेत्यलं त्यया देये नहुषानायाभौहितात् ।

न त्वां दाययामहं वसेल त्यकत्वा धर्म सततानम् ॥ 6 1 ॥

शरणागतामताँ च यो द्वाति नराधमः ।

स एव नरकं याति यावदायुभत्संवलम् ।

स्वस्था भव पृष्ठुशोणि न त्यम्रे त्वां कदाचन ॥ 62 ॥

इति श्रीगदैवीभागतं महापुराणे घटकच्चे

सत्तोर्ध्याच: 11 7 11

Brhaspati said: “O Devi! Do not be afraid of Nahuṣa; he has been deluded by Moha. O Child! I wo’nt forsake the eternal religion and thus I wo’nt give you over to the hands of Nahuṣa. No doubt that wretch suffers the severest torments in Hell to the end of Pralaya (the Great Dissolution) who quits and hands over the distressed person under one’s refuge to another. O Good One! Be comfortable; I will never forsake you.”

Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Sixth

Book on Indra's living in disguise in the

Mānas Lake in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER VIII

On Śaci's Praising the Devi

व्यास उवाच

नहुषस्त्वध तां शुत्वा गुरोस्तु शरणां गताम् ।

चुळोधे भयबाणात्तैनत्मागिरिसमाशु वै ॥ १ ॥

देवानाहांगीरिस्तुरुर्नतव्योर्धं यमा बिल।

स इन्द्राणीं गृहे गृहों स्थतिति मया श्रुतम् ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing that the wife of Indra had taken refuge under Brhaspati, the King Nahuṣa became very angry with Brhaspati and spoke to the Devas: “O Devas! I hear that the stupid son of Angirasa has given protection to Indra and has kept her in his house; I will therefore kill him quickly.”

इति तं कुपितं दूद्धवा देवा: सर्विपुरोगमाः ।

अबुबवुघर्य घोरं सामपूर्वे बचस्ताद ॥ 3 ॥

क्रोधें संहर राजेन्द्र त्वज पापामर्ति प्रभो ।

Seeing the terrible Nahuṣa thus angry, the Devas and Rṣis consoled him and said: O King of kings! Do not be angry; quit this vicious motive of yours.

निर्विति धर्मशास्त्रिय पददात्राथिमर्शनम् ॥ 4 ॥

शक्रफल्नी सदा साध्यौ जीक्याने पतौ पुत्रः ।

See, the Rşis, in all the Dharma Śāstras, have declared the holding of illicit connection with others' wives as a very heinous crime and have blamed it very much. You can consider that the daughter of Pulomā is always chaste, devoted to her husband and very good-natured.

कवमर्थे पर्ति कुवांत्सुभग्राजित्यितता ॥ 5 ॥

त्रितौकीशस्वमधुना शास्ता धार्मय वै किये ।

त्वापुर्णोर्धभातिहेत्नदा नर्येवृत्रा ध्यून ॥ 6 ॥

How can she, when her husband is alive, take another husband? O Lord! You are now the Lord of the three worlds and hence the Defender of Faith and Religion; and if a person like you acts irreligiously, all the subjects will then go to annihilation.

सर्वथा प्रभुणा कार्य शिष्टाचारस्य रक्षणम् ।

वारमुख्यश्र शतशो वस्तैउत्र शचीसमाः ॥ 7 ॥

One who is a Lord should always observe the rules of good conduct. Besides there are many other celestial woman in this Heaven as beautiful as Śacī; you can satisfy your thirst with them.

रतिस्तु कारणं प्रोक्ते शूक्रात्रस्य महात्माथि: ।

रसहानिर्बलात्कारे कृते सति तु जायते ॥ 8 ॥

Mutual love is recognised by the wise as the true originator of amorous dealings; ravishing a women by force destroys all amorous sentiments.

उभयोः सद्गं प्रेप यदि पार्थवसन्ति ।

तदा वे सुखसम्यतिनभयोगेकपजायते ॥ 9 ॥

तत्सामूद्रविमं भूंच पदरातरामप्रर्शने ।

सढ़ावं कुरु देवेत्र पदं प्रापोजीयन्तुनामम् ॥ 10 ॥

O King! And if the mutual love be similar and equal in all respects, then comes the true happiness; you have now got the post of Indra; therefore quit this idea of holding illicit connection with other's wives and indulge in other good thoughts.

ऋद्धिश्यन्तु यापेन पुण्येनातिविधर्धानम् ।

तस्मायपं परित्यज्य समन्ति कुक पार्थिव ॥ १ १ १ ॥

Demerits destroy prosperity and merits increase it. Therefore, O King! Leave all these bad thoughts and make your heart take a good turn and be happy.

नरुप उवाच

गौतमस्य यदा भृक्ता द्वारा: शक्रिण देवतः ।

वाचसपतेतु सोमेन कव यूयं संशित्यातस्तदा ॥ 12 ॥

Nahuṣa said: “O Devas! Where were you all when Indra stole away the wife of Gautama and when the Moon stole away the wife of Bhraspati?

परोधेदेने कुगलाः प्रभवन्ति नराः किल ।

कर्ता चैवोपेटध्च च दुर्वंप: पुरुषो भवेत् ॥ 13 ॥

मामागच्छुत स देवी हितं स्याद्धुत हि वः ।

एतस्य: परमं देवाः सुखमेवं भविष्यति ॥ 14 ॥

It is easy to give advice to others but to act according to that is very rare in this world. O Devas! Let the qualified Devi come to me; you will derive much benefit from it and the Devi, too,

Book VI Chapter VIII

will get Her highest happiness; there is no doubt in this.

अन्यथा न हि तुध्येड़ं सत्यामेतदुखवीमि वः ।

विन्याड़ा बताड़ापि तमाशु प्रापयित्विह ॥ 15 ॥

I tell you truly that in no other way I will be satisfied; bring Indrānī here quickly, whether by good words or by force.

इति तस्य वचः श्रुत्वा देवाढ्य मुनवस्तथा ।

तमूचुशातिसंत्रता नहुषं मदन्तातून ॥ 16 ॥

इत्राणीभानीयधामा: सामपूर्वे त्वातिकम् ।

इन्युक्ना ते त्वा जमयुढ़स्यातिनिकेतानम् ॥ 17 ॥

The Devas and Munis heard the words of the king Nahuṣa, smitten by the Cupid's arrows, got terrified and said: "We will bring Indrānī to you by gentle words." Saying thus, they went to the house of Brhaspati.

व्यास उवाच

ते गत्वांगिरसः पूरं प्रोषुः प्रांजलयः सुराः ।

जानीमः शरणं प्राप्तामिंग्रणी तव वेप्यनि ॥ 18 ॥

सा देवा नटुषामाषा वासवोउरी कृतोतयतः ।

वृणीत्विं वरगोहा परिलेल वरवर्गिनी ॥ 19 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Devas, going to the house of Brhaṣpati, spoke thus with folded hands: O Guru! We know that Indrānī has taken shelter in your house; we will have to hand her over today to the king Nahuṣa, for we all united have made over the post of Indra to Nahuṣa. Let this beautiful Lady now choose and worship him.

ब्रह्मयितः सुरानाह तत्कृत्वा दाक्षा वचः ।

नाहं त्यध्ये तु पौलोमीं सतीं च सशणगात्मा ॥ 20 ॥

Hearing these awful words of the Devas, Brhaspati said to them: "O Devas! This chaste woman, devoted to her husband, has now taken my shelter; therefore I can never part with her."

देवा कचुः

उयायोद्यः प्रकर्तेथो येन सोउष प्रसीदिति ।

अन्यथा कोपसंयुक्तो तुरात्याधे पविष्यति ॥ 21 ॥

The Devas said: "O Guru! Kindly advise thence—if you do not part with Śacī Devī—how the king

Nahuṣa is to be pleased; if he becomes angry, it will then by very difficult to please him."

गुरुकाव

तत्र गत्वा शर्षी घृष्यं प्रतोष्य बसया घृष्यम् ।

कोरुतु समयं बाला पति जाला मृतं भजे ॥ 22 ॥

Brhapsati said: "O Devas! Let Śacī now go to Nahuṣa, and tempt him with enticing words and make this condition that when her husband's death will be known to her, she will then accept Nahuṣa as her husband.

इन्हे जीवित मे कान्ते कवम्ययं कोरोयहम् ।

अन्वेषणाधि नात्वयं मया तस्य महात्मनः ॥ 23 ॥

How could she accept another husband when her husband was alive. Therefore let her now go in quest of her high-souled husband.

इति सा समयं कृत्वा वंचल्यिता च भूपतिम् ।

भतुर्णनये यन्ते कगोतु मम वाक्यतः ॥ 24 ॥

Let Sāci thus make condition with him and, thus deceiving him, let her try her best to bring back her husband.

इति सच्छित्य ते सर्वे बृत्यासिपुर्णेगामः ।

नहुर्ष सहित जगमुर्दिस्त्या दिवौकसः ॥ 25 ॥

O King! Then, after coming to this conclusion, Bhraspati and other Devas went with Indrānī to the king Nahuṣa.

तानागातानस्मीक्ष्याह तदा कृमिवमासवः ।

जहर्ष च मुदायुक्तस्तां बीक्ष्य मुदितोजबीत् ॥ 26 ॥

Seeing them come, especially looking at Indrānī, the artificial king Nahuṣa became very glad and said to Indrānī:

अशास्त्र यासवः कान्ते भत्र भां चाक्तोचने ।

पतित्वे सर्वतीकस्य पूच्योड़ं विहितः सुरैः ॥ 27 ॥

'O Beloved Today I am become the real Indra. O beautiful eyed One! Worship me as your husband; see the Devas now have made me to be worshipped by all the gods.

इत्युक्ता सा नृपं ग्रह येयमाना त्राययुता ।

वरामिछ्यायरं राजस्कलतः प्राण सुरेश्व ॥ 28 ॥

किंचित्यालं प्रतीक्ष्वस्य यावत्बूर्व विविणयम् ।

इंत्रोरस्तीन न वार्तस्तीन सन्नेहो मे हुदि स्थितः ॥ 29 ॥

When Nahuṣa spoke thus, the Devi Śaci became filled with great shame; she began to tremble and said to the king: "O Lord of the Devas! I desire to ask a boon from you. Better wait till I ascertain whether Indra is dead or alive, there is this doubt in my heart whether he lives or whether he is dead.

ततस्त्वा समुप्यास्ये कृत्वा निश्यामतानि ।

तालक्यमस्य राजेन्द्र सत्यमेतदूखबीति ते ।। ३० ॥

O King of kings! Let me, first of all, clear my doubts. Kindly excuse me and wait till then. I tell this truly that after I ascertain the fact, I will worship you.

न हि विज्ञाने शक्रो नह कि का वच वा गतः ।

एवमुक्तः स इन्द्रायणा ननुषः प्रीतिनाभभूत् ॥ ३ १ ॥

I do not know else." When Śacī Devi spoke thus, Nahusa became very glad and saying "let it be so" dismissed her.

व्यम्बनसल तां देवीं तथेयुक्णवा मुदावितः।

सा विमुहा नृपेशागु नाला प्राह सुरानस्ती ॥ ३ २ ॥

Thus having received permission from the King to depart, Śaci hurriedly went to the Devas and spoke to them to try their best to bring Indra back as soon as possible.

इन्स्यायामये चलं कुस्ताङ्म कृतोघाम: ।

शुना तद्रचनं देव इन्द्राण्या रसवछ्छिं १ ३ ३ १ ॥

O King! Hearing these sweet and holy words of Indrānī, the Devas intently consulted with each other how they could get back Indra.

मन्यामासुरोकापा: शकाश्वं नृपसत्तम ।

ते नाला वैष्णवां धाय तुड्वुः परमेश्वर ॥ 34 ॥

They then went to Vaikuntha and began to praise with hymns the original Deva, the God Viṣṇu, the Lord of the Universe, king to those that seek His refuge.

आदिदेवें जनान्वां शरणागतवत्सलम् ।

क्रशुक्षीनं समुद्धिना वाक्यं वाक्यविशपातः ॥ 35 ॥

The Devas, skilled in speaking, spoke to Viṣṇu with a very troubled heart: "O Lord! Indra, the Lord of the Devas, is very much troubled with his sin Brahmatahyā.

देवदेवः सुर्पतिबंहाहल्याप्रवीडितः ।

अद्रुयः सर्वभृताना क्वापि तिष्ठति वास्मः ॥ 36 ॥

Where is he staying now, invisible to all the beings? O Lord! He is overcome with the sin Brahmatahyā by killing Vṛtra, the best of the Brāhmins.

त्वप्रिया नितते विश्र ब्रह्माव्यातुः प्रभो ।

त्व गतिरातस्य भगवत्रमाकं च तथेव हि ॥ 37 ॥

We ask your skilful and intelligent advise. O Lord! You are the sole refuge of him as well as of us. We are now involved in a great difficulty. Kindly shew us the way how we, as well as Indra, can get out of this difficult crisis."

राहि नः पर्यावपात्नोर्हं तस्य विनिदित्रा ।

देवानां वचनं शूला कातरं विद्युग्बबीत् ॥ 38 ॥

Hearing the pitiful words of the Devas, Viṣṇu said: Let Indra perform the ASvamedha sacrifice (Horse sacrifice) for the purification of his sins.

यज्ञातमध्येने शक्रापयिनुचने ।

पुष्पेन हयमेघेन पाचितः पाकशासनः ॥ 39 ॥

By this Yajña, that can destroy all sins, Indra will be purified and he will regain his Indraship; there is no doubt in this.

पुनेथिति देवानाभिम्रत्वमुकौभयः ।

हयमेघेन सन्तुहा देवी श्रीजाद्विषका ॥ 40 ॥

The more so because the Devi, the Universal Mother, will be pleased with his Horse sacrifice and will destroy all his sins, Brahmatahyā and others.

ब्रह्मात्यादियापनि नागशियल्यसंशयम् ।

यस्या: स्मरणागयोग पायाजलां तिनर्यति ॥ 41 ॥

किं पुनर्विजीमेनेन तर्जीत्यर्थ कृतेन च ।

Lo! Merely remembering Her destroys heaps of sins; and, if by this Horse sacrifice, She is pleased, what wonder is there that sins of a more grave nature would be destroyed!

इन्द्राणी कृकृतावित्य भगवताय: प्रयुजनम् ॥ 42 ॥

आराधनं शिवायास्तु सुखकारी भविष्यति ।

नहुणेपि जगनानुगर्भाया मोहितः किल ॥ 43 ॥

विनार्णं स्वकृतेनागु यामिष्यलेनासा सुरा: ।

पाचितश्राधयेनेन तुर्याडिवे भैबवम् ॥ 44 ॥

Book VI Chapter VIII

And let Indrānī worship Bhagavatī daily; happiness will undoubtedly be gained by worshipping that most Auspicious One! By this the King Nahusa will be particularly deluded by the World Mother and will then be quickly destroyed by the sin committed by himself. And Indra, purified by Aśvamedha, will soon regain his position and all his wealth.

प्रायस्यचिरकालेन स्वामसन्ननुम् ।

ते तु श्रुत्वा शृणां वाणी विश्वागरिततेजसः ॥ 4 5 ॥

जम्पुस्ते इंशमिनीयं यशतरे पाकशासनः ।

तमाश्राव सुरा: शक्र बृह्मस्पितुगेनाम: ॥ 46 ॥

कारयामासुराखिलं हयमेधं महाकानून ।

विभयज बहाहत्यां तु वृक्षेषु च नरीषु च ॥ 47 ॥

पर्वतेषु पृथिध्यां च क्लीषु चेवाधिपदिषु: ।

O King! Thus hearing the sweet beneficial words of Viṣṇu of indomitable prowess, the Devas went to the spot, where resided Indra. Brhaspati and the other Devas consoled the distressed Indra and made him celebrate duly in right order, the Horse sacrifice the greatest of all sacrifices. Indra then distributed his sin Brahmahattyā amongst the trees, rivers, mountains, women, and the earth.

तां विमुस्य च भृतेषु विषयाः पाकशासनः ॥ 4 8 ॥

विज्ञः सम्भुद्रयः कालाकक्षी चित्तो जले ।

अदृष्यः सर्वभृतानां घप्नानाले व्यतिष्ठत ॥ 49 ॥

देवालुं निरिता: स्थाने कृत्वा कार्य निद्दुन्तम् ।

Thus casting aside his sin on all the above things, Indra became again free from his sin, and, getting rid of his fever and uneasiness, abided by the time and remained there invisible in the tubular stem of the lotus. Doing that wonderful act, the Devas

started from there and reached their own abodes.

पौलोमी तु गुरु प्राह दुःस्तिता विरहाकुला ॥ 50 ॥

कृतयज्ञोरपि मे भर्ता किमयुर्शय: पुरन्दः ।

कयं उद्धरे प्रियं स्वामित्समुपारं वद्रव से ॥ ५ १ ॥

The daughter of Puloma, suffering from her breeavements of Indra, spoke then to Brhaspati with great sorrow: "O Lord! Why is my husband still invisible to me, when he has performed the

Aśvamedha sacrifice? Kindly shew me the way how I do can get a sight of him."

ब्रह्मतिहाव

त्वमाराधय पौलोमि देहीं भगवर्ती शिवाण ।

द्रांशियक्षिति ते नार्यं देही विनतकल्पम् ॥ 52 ॥

Bhraspati said: “O Devi! Worship the most Auspicious Bhagavati; surely She will make your husband sinless and you will see him.”

आराधिता जान्याद्री नयुर्धे वारयेधिति ।

मोहायिता नृपं स्थानतालयिषति चाधिका ॥ 53 ॥

The Devi Ambikā, the Upholdress of the Universe, will desist the King Nahuṣa from doing the wrongful act and it is She that will delude him by Her Māyā and get his downfall from the Heavens.

इतुकृता सा तदा तेन पुणेतानया नृप ।

जग्राह मन्त्र विधिवद्धुरोदैव्या: ससाधनम् ॥ 54 ॥

विद्यां प्राय पुरोदैंकी देईी शीभुवनेश्रीम् ।

सव्यागाध्यायमास बलिषुणार्चैंः शुर्षे: ॥ 55 ॥

O King! When Brhaspati spoke thus, Śacī Devi got initiated by him in the Devi Mantram, capable to secure success in any undertaking. Thus getting the Mantram from her Guru, She began to worship the Devi Bhuvanesvari duly with flowers, sacrificial victims and other necessary articles for worship.

त्यक्तान्यभोगसंभार तापसीवेधारिणी ।

चकार पुर्जनं देह्या: प्रियदर्शनलासमा ॥ 56 ॥

कालेन क्रियता तुहा प्रत्यक्षं दर्शनं दही ।

सीम्यरूपधारा देही वरदा हंसवाहित्री ॥ 57 ॥

Thus Indrānī, with a view to see her husband, performed the worship of the Devi; she quitted all the articles of enjoyment and luxury and assumed the garb of an ascetic; thus some time passed away, when the Devi was pleased and appeared before her on the back of a swan, in Her peaceful form, ready to grant boons to Indrānī.

कोटिरूप्यैमिताकाण चन्द्रकोटिपुरीताल । विद्युक्तोदिसमानाभा चतुर्वैदसमयिता ॥ 58 ॥

She looked, then, fiery like thousands of Moons; Her lovely beauty appeared in rays like thousands and thousands of fixed lightnings. The four Vedās personified began to praise Her in hymns from the four sides.

पाणांकुशाभयवरान्द्धती निजबाहुषि: 1

आपातलिङ्वी सख्यो भूभागालां च विभक्ती ॥ 59 ॥

Her two hands were adorned with a noose and a goad, and Her two other hands made signs to grant boons and to discard all fear. The Vajjayanti garland of clear crystal-like gems suspended from Her neck up to Her feet.

प्रसत्रमेरवदना लोचनवयृषिता ।

आवह्याकोटजनना कंरणागृतसागरा ॥ 6 0 ॥

Her face was adorned with smiles and signs as if she would grant favours. She had three eyes and was the ocean of mercy and the Mother of all the Jivas from a worm up to Brahmā.

अंतक्रोटिवहाण्डवानीवका परमेश्वी ।

सीयानन्तसैयुक्तसन्तव्यविराजता ॥ 6 1 ॥

सर्वेश्री च सर्वजा कुर्त्यक्षास्त्रिपी ॥

तभापुबाप प्रसन सा श्रकपर्नी कृतोघामपु ॥ 6 2 ॥

मेघर्भभीराष्ट्रेन मुदमाद्वतीं घृष्णा ।

Her two heavy breasts were filled with unbounded ocean of necter-like juice of Peace and Mukti. She was the Goddess of innumerable worlds, the Goddess of all and the Highest, endowed with all the knowledge and the Incarnate of the Undecaying and Immovable Brahma. The Devi, then, began to address Śaṃ, the wife of Indra, in pleasant words and in voice deep like a rolling thunder.

देख्यावाच

वरं वरय सुशोषी वाजिछंज शक्रवल्पे ११ ६३ ११

ददायध्य प्रसत्रात्सि प्रवृत्ता सुभृर्ण तवया ।

वराद्राई समायाता दर्जनें सहर्न न मे ॥ ६४ ॥

अनेककोटिज्ञानोयापुणवर्षोहिति लपयते ।

The Devi said: O Darling to Indra! Better now ask your desired boon. I am much pleased with your worship. O Beautiful One! I have come here

to grant you boon. To see Me is not an easy task; by the collected merits, acquired in thousands and thousands of births one is able to See Me.

इलुक्ता सा तदा देवी तामह प्रणत गुरु: ॥ 65 ॥

शक्रपती भगवर्ती प्रसर्जा परमेश्वीम् ।

वाऊषामि दर्शनं मात: पत्यु: परमदुर्लंभम् ॥ 66 ॥

नसुषाद्वमाणं च स्वपट्राणणं तथा ।

Hearing the words of the Devi, Śaci Devi, the wife of Indra, fell prostrate before Her feet and began to speak to the Highest Goddess, the Bhagavati, Who seemed graciously pleased: "O Mother! I now desire from Thee, that I may see my husband whom I attained after great difficulty, that I be freed from the fear arising out of King Nahuṣa and I want that Indra be reinstated as Indra as he was before.

देश्वाच

गछ्छ त्वमनया दूत्या साद्धं श्रीमानसं सर: ॥ 67 ॥

यत्र मे भूतिंरवता विश्वकामाधिभ्य मता ।

तत्र पश्यसि शक्र कं त्व दुः पित्ति भगविष्ठतम् ॥ 68 ॥

मोह्रियायामि राजानं कालेन क्रियात पुनः ।

The Devi said: “O Lady of the Devas! Better go with this My messenger (Dūtī) to Mānasarovara; there is installed My fixed form, named Viśvakāmā. You will see your Indra staying there very sorrowful and overwhelmed with terror. I will delude the King Nahuṣa within a very short period.

स्वस्था भव विशालाक्र कांगीम तव चौरितम् ॥ 69 ॥

भंशियद्वीम प्रभुलं मोहितं विद्वासान्न ।

O large-eyed One! Be calm and quiet; I will fulfil your desires; soon I will delude that king and deprive him of the seat of Indra.

व्यास उवाच

देवीदूती तां गृहीता शक्रिन्ती ल्याचित्वा ॥ 70 ॥

प्रायवासास साक्रिस्थे स्वयतयु: परयेक्षीय ।

सा दूद्वा तं पर्ने वाला सुरेंगं गुप्तसंस्थितम् ।

मुदितास मुक्तरं वीक्ष्य बहुकातभिवाडितुम् ॥ 71 ॥

इति श्रीमदैधीगवाते महापुराणे घटकल्भे शकदर्शनें

नामाग्रोगेस्थाय: 11 8 11

Book VI Chapter IX

Vyāsa said: The wife of Indra accompanied the messenger of the Devi and quickly reached the presence of her husband Indra. She was very pleased to see her long-wished for husband, in the state of disguise.

Here ends the Eight Chapter of the Sixth Book on the praising of the Bhagavati by the wife of Indra and on getting the sight of Indra in the Mahāpurānam, Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter IX

CHAPTER IX

On Indra's Getting the Fruits of Bramahatyā and on the Downfall of the King Nahusa

यास उवाच

तां वीक्ष्य विपुलापांगी रहुः शोकसमपित्ताम् ।

आखण्डपत: प्रियां भाषां विस्मितछात्रावतीन्तां ॥ १ ॥

कर्मप्रगाता कानते कशं ज्ञातस्या ह्रहाम् ।

दुर्जेय: सर्वभृतानां संशित्योज्ञि शुभानने ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: Indra was quite surprised to see in this state of solitude his dear wife Śaci, large-eyed and overwhelmed with much sorrow and spoke thus: “O Beloved! I am remaining here alone in this desolate place unnoticed by all the Jivas; O Auspicious fezed One! How have you come to know this! And how is it that you have come here!

शुख्याच

देव देया: प्रसादेन ऋतातोरस्था भयानित है ।

पुस्तत्या: प्रसादेन प्राप्तास्थि त्वां दिवस्पते ॥ ३ ॥

Śaci said: “O Lord of the Devas! I have been able to know this place where you are staying by the grace of Bhagavati’s Feet and I will get you back by Her grace.

नहुषो नाम राजर्षि: स्थापितो भवदासने ।

त्रिदर्शीर्यनिधिश्रेश व स मां बधाति नित्यशः ॥ 4 ॥

The Devas and Munis all united and have installed the King Nahuṣa in your throne. That fellow says “O fair One! I am now made the King Indra; therefore you worship me as your husband.”

पर्ति मां कुक्च चार्विक्र तुसासहं सुराधिपम् ।

एवं वदति मां पापम किं ककोमी वलाईन ॥ 5 ॥

And thus oppresses me always. O Destroyer of other's strength! That vicious one speaks to me thus; I am weak; What can I do to him?"

इन खाया

कालाकांक्षी वराग्रेः संश्चितोस्म यदच्छ्या ।

तथा त्वमपि कल्याणि सुश्विधं स्यमनः कुक् ॥ 6 ॥

Indra said: “O Beautiful One! I am now here waiting for the proper opportunity; O auspicious One! You should also make your mind calm and remain there, and wait for the proper time.”

व्यास उवाच

इतुच्छा तेन सा देखी पतिनातिषूर्शसिता ।

निःश्रमेहाह तं शक्रे वेभमानाउतिछुःखिता ॥ ७ ॥

कर्थ तिहे महाभाग यापात्मा मां कशानुगाम् ।

कंत्रिष्यिति मदोन्मनो खरदानेन गर्जितः ॥ ८ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! After Indra had spoken thus, Śacī Devī became sorrowful, drew a deep sigh and, trembling, said: "O Fortunate One! How can I stay there? That vicious man, puffed up with vanity and proud of his position will forcibly bring, me under his control.

देवांश्र मुनयः सर्वे मापुच्छनुद्याकुलाः ।

तं भगव स्करारोहे देवराजं स्मारातुम् ॥ 9 ॥

The Devas and Munis say this to me out of his fear: "O Beautiful One! The Lord of the Devas is now very much distressed with the arrows of the Cupid; therefore go and worship him."

ब्रह्म्यस्ति श्रवुन वाडवो बलवर्जितः ।

कर्थ मां रक्षितुं शक्तो भयंदेवानुप: सदा ॥ १ ० ॥

O Tormentor of foes! How can the Brāhmin Brhaspati protect me, being himself powerless and under the control of the Devas.

तस्मार्थिताउन्सित महती नार्यंदं शरावर्धिति ।

अनावा किं करिष्यामि विपरीत विधौ विषो ॥ 11 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

O Lord! This is now my grave anxiety; I am a weak woman, having none to protect me and therefore always under the guidance of a man.

नार्यस्यहं न कुलटा लच्चिन्तास्तिपतिता ।

नास्ति से गर्शणं तय यो मां क्षिति दुःखितान् ॥ १२ ॥

Fate is now against me; how can I keep myself religious? I am a chaste woman, devoted to my husband; I have got no shelter there; who will protect me when I fall into misery!

इन्न उवाच

उपायं प्रबंधीयघ तं कुकच्य वरानते ।

शीलं ते दुःखिते काले परित्रांत भविष्यति ॥ १३ ॥

Indra said: “O Beautiful One! I will now tell you one means which, if you adopt, will no doubt preserve your character in times of crisis.

पेरण रहिता नारी न भवेच्च पतितजा ।

उपार्थे: कोदिधि: काम विभवित्सान्तीचलां ॥ 14 ॥

Woman cannot preserve their chastity when they are protected by others by thousand and one means; for lust penetrates into their restless minds and carries them to impure ways.

शीतलेव हि नारीणां सदा रक्षति पापतः ।

तस्मालं शीलमाखाय स्थित भव सुचिचिस्ते ॥ 15 ॥

It is the good and pure character that preserves a woman from a vicious course; therefore O Smiling One! You adopt this good conduct and character and remain steady in your place.

यदा त्वां नहुर्णे राजा बलादाकर्षयैल्वतः ।

तदा त्वं समयं कृत्वा गुर्णं वचंच भूपमिति ॥ 16 ॥

एकाने ततसमीपे त्वं गत्वा वद मदालसे ।

ऋषियाने दिव्येन मायुषैहि जगतवे ॥ 17 ॥

In case that deceitful wicked King Nahuṣa shows his violence upon you, then take time and secretly cheat him, O Madālase! Go to him when there will be no other body present and say: "O Lord of the world! Please come to me on a conveyance carried by the Rṣis (great ascetics), I will then be very delighted and gladly yield myself to you; this is certainly my vow.

एवं तव वरो प्रीता भविष्यामीति मे ब्रतम् ।

इति तं बद सुशोणिता तु परिमोहितः ॥ 18 ॥

O Beautiful One! When you will say thus, that King, blin.Jed by passion, will engage the Munis for the carriers of his conveyance.

कामाधि: स मुनी-याने योजविष्यति पार्थिवः।

अवरथे तापसो घूरं शागवद्यां कंरिति ॥ १९ ॥

The ascetics, then, will be angry and curse him; the Munis will certainly burn him by the fire of their wrath; and the Divine Mother will no doubt help you.

साहायंं जगद्धका ते कार्यिति न संशय: ।

जगद्धावादस्तु: सडूटं न कदाचन ॥ 20 ॥

He who remembers the lotus-feet of the Ambikā Devi never meets with any difficulties; and if there arises any difficulty, know certainly that it is for his immeasurable benefit.

यदि जायेत तत्वाथि जेयं तत्वलये किल ।

तस्मात्सर्वप्रयनेन मणिह्वीधावासिनीम् ॥ 21 ॥

भज लें घुवरेजानीं गुरुबाव्यानुसारतः ।

Therefore worship, with your whole heart, the Mother of the Universe, Who resides in the jewelled island (Mani Dvipa) according to the words of the Guru Brhaspati.

व्यास उवाच

इत्याख्याता शची तेन जगाम नटुबं प्रति ॥ 22 ॥

तशेसुकत्वास्तिविश्रस्ता भाविकार्यं कृतोक्षाम ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the Indra's words, Śaci Devi said: "Let it be so" and went to Nahuṣa, filled with confidence and inspiration to carry on the future work.

नसृषस्ता समातोलय मृदुत्तो वाक्यमब्रवीत् ॥ 23 ॥

स्वागतं सत्यबचनैस्त्वद्धीनीजस्मि कामिन ।

दासोर्जं तत स्वलेन पालितं वचनं तथा ॥ 24 ॥

यद्गाता समीपे मे तुहो:5मि मितभाषिधि ।

Nahusa was very glad to see Śaci Devī and spoke thus: "O Sweet-speaking One! Are you all right? I am now completely yours; you have fulfilled my word; therefore I say truly that I am your servant. "O Gentle-speaking One! When you have come to me, know that I am very glad."

Book VI Chapter IX

न च ग्रीडा तव्या काव्याँ भवतं मां भज सुंमिते ॥ 25 ॥

कार्य बद विशालासिक्र कार्थ्यामि तव प्रियम् ।

“O Smilling One! Do not feel any shame before me. I am now your devotee; worship me. O large eyed One! Speak out what is that dear thing that I can do for you? I will carry that out at once.

शब्यवाच

सर्व कृते त्वया कार्य मम कृमियसावस ।। २६ ॥

मनेराधोजित मे देव शृणु चित्रेधुना विभो ।

वास्छितं कृक कल्याण त्वक्षागाड़मतः परम् ॥ 27 ॥

Śacī said: “O Lord Vāsava! You have done all the works; now I have got one desire to ask from you, kindly fulfil this and then I will be yours. O One full of auspiciousness! Now fulfil my desire. I am speaking this to you.”

ब्रवीमि मानसोसाहं लें त कृतीमहाहिंसि ।

कार्य तं बहुि चज्ञस्य कपोम तव जाडितुम् ॥ 28 ॥

अलभ्यमयि दायासि तृभ्यं सुषुं वदस्य माम् ।

Nahusā said: “O Thou, having a face sweet like the Moon! Speak out your desire; I will carry it out. O Beautiful One with nice eye brows! Even if that be unattainable, I will give that to you.”

शल्यवाच

कयं ब्वीयि राजेन्द्र प्रत्ययो नासित मे तत ॥ 29 ॥

गपयं कुरु राजेन्द्र यत्करीय प्रियं तत ।

राजानः सत्यवचसो दुर्विभा एव भूतते ॥ 30 ॥

पशुवद्वीयोर्न्हे राज्ञालास सत्येन यंत्रितम् ।

कृते चेद्धक्तिहे भूप सदा ते शयर्सितीं ॥ 31 ॥

भविष्याति तृताभवू के सत्यमेतनुचो मन ।

ŠaCI said: “O King of Kings! I cannot trust you; Swear on oath that you will fulfill my desire. O King! A truthful King is very rare on this earth; I will speak out my desire when I will be convinced that you are bound by truth. O King! When you will fulfil my desire, I will always remain under your control; this I speak truly to you.”

नहुय उवाच

अवश्यमेव कर्तेल्यं वचनं तव सुन्दारि ॥ 32 ॥

शपामि सुकृतेनाहं यज्ञदानकृतेन वे ।

Nahuṣa said: "O Beautiful One! On all the

sacrifices and gifts that I have ever made, I swear, on all my merits, that I will certainly carry out your word."

शच्याच

इन्द्रस्य हरयो वाहा गजश्रेय रथस्तथा ॥ 33 ॥

गरड़ी वासुदेवस्य यमस्य मिहिषस्तथा ।

वृषभः शुक्रस्यायि बह्जाणो वरवापति: ॥ 34 ॥

मयूरः कारितिकेयस्य गतास्यस्य तु मुपकः ।

इच्छान्यहमपूर्वे वै वाहानं ते सुराप्रिय ॥ 35 ॥

यत्र विष्णोनं करूस्य नासुराणां न सूक्षाम।

बहुतं त्वां महाराज मुनवः संशितबताः ॥ 36 ॥

सर्वे शिविकव्या राजज्ञतादूम मय वाजिडऊम् ।

सर्वदेवाधिकं त्वां वे जानापि वसुपाधिपि ॥ 37 ॥

तेन ते तेजसो बूदिं याज्ञायमतान्त्रता ।

Śacī said: “Indra has got for his vehicles the horse Ucaisāvā, the Airāvata elephant and the chariot; Vāsudeva has got his vehicle Garudā; Yama has got his buffalo; Śaṅkara his Bull; Brahmā his Swan; Kārtika has got his peacock and Ganeśa has got his mouse. But now, O Lord of the Devas! I want to see your vehicle, never witnessed before; I went to see the Munis and the great ascetics, observing vows, to be your vehicle; this is not Viṣṇu’s, Rudra’s nor of the Devas, and Rāksasas. O King! Let the Munis carry your conveyance, this is my ever burning desire. O King of this earth! I know you the highest of all the Devas; let your glory and splendor increase ever and ever; this is the intense desire reigning in my heart.”

यास जावा

तत्यासतुझचनं श्रुत्वा ग्रहस्य ज्ञानवृबलः ॥ 38 ॥

मोहितस्तु महादेव्या कृतं मोहेन तक्थापण ।

उवाच वचनं घृपः संस्तुवन् वासविश्रिया ॥ 39 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing Śaci's words, Nahuṣa, weak in intellect, laughed and beguiled by the Māyā of Bhagavatī began to praise her and said at once: "O Beautiful One! Truly you have made a nice suggestion of my vehicle.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

नहुण उवाच

सत्यपुर्ने त्वाया तपिव वाहनं कविरं मय ।

कर्णिष्यामि सुकेशान्ते वचनं तव सर्वथा ॥ 40 ॥

न ह्यल्यार्वीं भवति यो वाहा-कुकते पुनीन ।

अहमाक्रहु यानेन त्वामेधायि शुचिश्मिते ॥ 41 ॥

O One having luxuriant hairs! I will soon carry out your words. O Sweet-smiling One! Whoever is effeminate and of weak virility, he is never able to engage the Munis as his carriers; no doubt, my unbounded strength will be rendered manifest when I come to you on a vehicle carried by the Munis.

सतर्षेयी मां बक्ष्यिति सर्वे देवर्षेयरता ।

समर्थे विजु लोकेषु ज्ञाला में तपसा5चिकम् ॥ 42 ॥

What wonder is there that the seven Rsis (the seven stars of the constellation Great Bear) and all the Devarsis would carry me, knowing me as the most capable and superior in all the three worlds by virtue of my sheer asceticism?

व्यास उवाच

इल्युक्ला तां सुसन्तुओं विससर्जे हरिप्रियम् ।

मृनीनाहूय सर्वसत्तानित्युवाच सम्पातितः ॥ 4 3 ॥

नतृष उवाच

अहमिंद्रीउषा भो विष्ञा: सर्वशक्तिसम्पतितः ।

कार्यमत्र प्रकुवन्तु भवन्तो शिवगतस्मयाः ॥ 44 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The King Nahuṣa became very pleased and dismissed Śacī Devī. He, then, with a heart flamed with passion, called the Munis and said: "O Munis! I am now become Indra and endowed with all powers thereof; therefore you all do my work without being at all surprised.

इन्सारसं भया प्राप्त नेन्नारणी मापुर्मिति च ।

आकारिता च मां बृते प्रेमपूर्वमिदं चः ॥ 45 ॥

मुनियानेन देेवेन्र माग्यरिंह सुराधि १

देवदेव महाराज मतिथयं कुरु मान्त १४६ ॥

I have got the seat of Indra but Indrañi is not coming to me. I called her to my presence and when I informed her of my desire, She had spoken to me with affection the following words: "O Indra of the Devas! O Giver of one's honour! Better come

to me on a vehicle carried by the Munis and do thus the one thing for me that I like."

एतकार्यं मुनिश्रेष्ठा ममायन्तं दुरामवम् ।

भवाद्रस्तु प्रकर्तेयं सर्वेवे दयातुर्भि: ॥ 47 ॥

O Maharsis! To carry out this task is, indeed, difficult for me; therefore do you all unite and, out of mercy, do this for me in all its completeness.

मनो दहिते मे कामः शक्रभन्त्यां प्रतितन् ।

भबन्तः शरणं मे3डा कुक्छं कार्यमद्धुतम् ॥ 48 ॥

My heart is being always burnt, as I am very much attached to the wife of Indra; so I take refuge unto you to do this wonderful work for me.

अगतिरूपुखातस्य शुत्वा वाव्यमसत्करम् ।

अंगीचक्रुं श वावित्वात्कृपया परमर्षेः ॥ 49 ॥

Though this request was very indecent and greatly humiliating yet the Munis agreed to it, out of pity, and also impelled, as it were, by the great Fate.

अड़ीकृतोय तात्रये मुनिपित्तचदर्दिधिनः ।

मूरं प्राप नृप: कामं पौलेगीकृतमानसः ॥ ५० ॥

आकृहु शिवकां रायां संश्वित्तल्यापातिनः।

वाहाहृकृता मुनीन्द्वल्यापरं संपर्टि चाब्वीत् ॥ ५१ ॥

When the Great Seers, the Munis consented to this proposal, the King, whose heart was very much attached to the daughter of Pulomā, became very glad and getting on the beautiful vehicle carried by the Munis, told them, move on quickly (Sarpa, Sarpa).

कामातंः सोउम्यगानुक पानेत नुभिमसतकम् ।

अगसितं तापसछेले लोपामुजायितं तदा ॥ 52 ॥

वातातिपश्यकर्तारं समुद्रस्यापि शोषकम् ।

कशाया ताड्वयास पर्वाणग्राहताः ॥ 53 ॥

Then the King Nahuṣa, getting very much impassioned, touched with his feet the heads of the Munis, and, being as it were smitten by the arrows of cupid, began to whip frequently the Rsi Agastya, the best of the ascetics, who devoured the Rākṣasa Vātāpi, who was the husband of Lopāmundā and who drank out the ocean, saying move on, move, on (Sarpa, Sarpa—another meaning of which is Snake).

इज्ञात्थितचित्तोजसी सर्वेति प्रबुबन्यूनिम ।

तं शगाणय मुनिः कुब्दः कशाणातमनुस्मन् ॥ 54 ॥

Book VI Chapter IX

The Muni, then, became very angry, on being thus whipped, and cursed him saying: "O Wicked One! As you are whipping me, saying Sarpa, Sarpa, so go and remain in the dense forest as a huge snake.

सपों भव दुराचार वने घोरव्युमहान् ।

बहुवर्षसूद्वाराय यत्र करलेगो महान्येवत् ॥ 55 ॥

विविर्थसि वीर्ण पुनः स्वर्गमाव्यसि ।

दूद्वा युधिष्ठिं नाम तव मोक्षो भविष्यति ॥ 56 ॥

प्रश्नानामुन्तं श्रुला धर्मपुत्रमुखाततः ।

When many years will elapse and when you will crawl on your own limb and suffer intense troubles, after that you will again come to heaven. You will be free from the curse when you will see the King Yudhisthira and hear from him the answers to several questions."

व्यास उवाच

एवं शप्त: स राजर्षि: स्तुला तं पुनिसतामम् ॥ 57 ॥

स्वार्यपात सहसा सरोक्षघधोरोभवत् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus cursed, the King Nahusa began to chant hymns to that best of the Munis, and, while praising, fell from the Heavens and instantly turned into a snake.

ब्रह्मपतिततां गता ततसा मानसं प्रति ॥ 58 ॥

इन्याय सर्ववृत्तां कथयामास विस्तरात् ।

तच्छूता मघवा रासः स्वानीत्यव्यवादिकम् ॥ 59 ॥

मृदितो5भून्हाराज स्थितस्तत्रे वास्तः ।

Bhraspati, then, quickly went to the Mānasarovara Lake and informed Indra everything in detail. Indra became very glad on hearing in detail of the downfall of the King Nahuṣa from Heaven and remained there gladly.

देवाधु मुनयो दूर्वा ननुयं पत्तें पुर्वि ॥ 60 ॥

जयसु: सर्वेशि तरैव यजैरः सरसि स्थितः ।

When the Devas and Munis saw this downfall into the earth of Nahuṣa, they all went to the Lake Mānasarovara where Indra was staying.

नामश्राय सुरा: सर्वे मुनिभि: सहितास्तव ॥ 6 1 ॥

सर्पे समानयामासुर्पानपूर्व जशीपतिन ।

They then all encouraged Indra and honoured him by bringing him back to the Heavens.

समागत ततः शंक़ा सर्वे ते मुनवः सुराः ॥ 62 ॥

स्थापवित्वा उसने पशुतदायिकें दयुः शिवम् ।

All the Devas and Rsis installed Indra on the throne and then performed the inauguration ceremony of the all auspicious Devī.

इन्होर्धि स्वासं न प्राय शन्या सह सुरालये ॥ 63 ॥

चित्रोंके नन्दने रये कानने प्रेमयुक्ता ।

On getting back his own throne. Indra, too, began to sport in the beautiful Nandana Garden with his dear consort Śacī, in the home of the Devas.

व्यास उवाच

एविमंद्रण सम्यानं दुःखं परमदाकणम् ॥ 64 ॥

ह्हलाउपूरं कामकर्ण विश्वश्वयं महापुभिन् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Indra had to suffer such severe hardships on account of his slaying the Maharṣi Viśvarāpu, the Lord of the Asuras.

पुरन्देव्या: प्रसादेन स्वस्थानं प्राप्तावधुप ॥ 65 ॥

एतते स्वामाख्यातं वृत्रासुर्वाध्राश्यम् ।

यस्युधोई त्वया राजकानानकमनुतनम् ॥ 66 ॥

Subsequently through the grace of the Devi, he got back his own seat. O King! Thus I have narrated before you to my best, this excellent story of the killing of Vṛtrāsura and thus have answered your question. O Ornament of the Kuru family! The fruits will be exactly according to the Karma done.

यारुशं कुकते कर्म तारुणं फलमाण्यान् ।

अवयपेवे भोक्त्यं कृतं कर्म शुभाशुभम् ॥ 67 ॥

इति श्रीदेवीभागवते महापुराणे घरकल्भे दुवबधो नाम

नवमो5वाय: 11 9 11

The effects of the Karma done must be borne whether they be auspicious or inauspicious. (So Indra had to suffer for his Karma, the killing of a Brāhmaṇa)

Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Sixth Book on

Indra's getting the fruits of his killing a Brāthmana

and on the downfall of the King Nahusā

from the Heavens in the Mahāpurāṇaḥ

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER X

On the Phase of Karma

जनमेजय उवाच

काँधर्ते चरितं बह्रच्छकम्याछुतकर्मण: ।

स्थानधंगस्तथा दुःखप्रापितरुक्ता विशेषतः ॥ १ ॥

यत्र देवाधित्यम्य महिमान्तीव वर्गितः ।

Janamejaya said: O Brāhmana! You have described in detail the wonderful character of Indra, his displacement from his Heavens, and his suffering many hardships and at the same time, you have described very widely the greatness of the Highest Goddess of the world.

सन्तेशोत्र मणायित्ति यच्छक्रोपि महातापः ॥ 2 ॥

देवाधिपत्यमासाद दुःसई दुःखमवभूत ।

But one doubt has arisen in my mind that Indra was very powerful and when he got the lordship over the Devas, which means in other words that no trouble would pain him, how was it that he had to feel pain and agony?

मखानां तु शर्त कृत्वा प्राप्तं स्थानमनुत्तमम् ॥ ३ ॥

देवेशलं च सम्याथ चष्टः स्थानादरी कथम् ।

He got the Lordship of the Devas and his highest position by performing one hundred Horse Sacrifices; how was it, then, that he was again displaced from that position?

तृत्तसर्वे समावश्य कारणं करणानिधे ॥ 4 ॥

सर्वेज्ञसि मुनिश्रेष्ठ पुराणानां प्रवर्तैक: ।

नावाख्यं महाति किडिध्छिष्ये च ब्रह्माद्यान्वे ॥ 5 ॥

तस्माकुक महाभाग मस्मदेशपनेतदान् ।

O Ocean of mercy! Kindly explain to me the causes of all those. You know everything; you are the best of the Munis and the maker of the Purānas; I am your devoted disciple; therefore nothing there can be that cannot be mentioned to me. So, O highly fortunate One! Kindly remove my doubts. Sūta said:

सूत उवाच

इति पृष्टः स रज्ञा वै तदा सत्यवतीसुतः ॥ 6 ॥

तमाहातिप्रसज्ञात्मा यथानुकम्पुन्तम् ।

Thus asked by Janamejaya, Vyāsa, the son of Satyavatī gladly spoke, in due order, the following words:

व्यास उवाच

निवोधि नृपतिश्रेष्ठ कारणं परमाद्धुतम् ॥ ७ ॥

कर्मपतु सिधा प्रोक्ता गतिलतत्वविद्धं वरेः ।

सढ़ितं वर्तैमानं च प्रात्क्यातिति भेदतः ॥ ८ ॥

अनेकजन्मसङ्गतां प्राक्तनं सढ़ितं स्मृतम् ।

सात्चिकं राजसं कर्मं तामसं त्रिविधं पुनः ॥ ९ ॥

गुणं वास्यणुर्णे घूप सढ़ितं बहुकालिकम् ।

अवश्यये वोक्त्व्ये युक्ते तुकृतं तथा ॥ १० ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hear, then the causes that are certainly very wonderful. The seers say that Karma is of three kinds: Sañcita (accumulated), Vartamāna (present) and Prārabdha (commenced). Each of these is again subdivided into three, Sāttvik, Rājasik, and Tāmasik. The accumulated effects of Karmas done in many past lives is called Sañcita, O King! The effects of this Sañcita Karma, be it auspicious or inauspicious, be it for a long or for a short time, must have to be enjoyed by the beings, whether they be good or bad.

जन्मजन्पि जीवानां सझितानां च कर्मणम् ।

नि:शेषसुखं शयो नापूकल्पकौटितरैलि ॥ १ १ ॥

क्रियमाणं च यत्कर्म वर्तेमांत तदुच्यते ।

देहं गाय शुभं वार्थ विरा हुर्णभं वा समाचरेत् ॥ १ २ ॥

सड्धितानां पुनर्मीट्यात्समाहूल क्रियान्किल ।

देहात्मचे च समये कालः प्रेयतीव तत ॥ १ ३ ॥

प्राखं कर्म विज्ञेयं भोगात्रस्य क्षय: स्मृतः ।

प्राणिभि: खलु भोकल्य प्राखं नात्र संगयः ॥ १ ४ ॥

This Sañcita Karma done by the embodied beings in several previous births, can never be totally exhausted even in hundred Koti Kalpas without their being enjoyed. The Karma that is being done by a Jiva and that has not as yet been completed, that is called Vartamāna Karma. The

Book VI Chapter X

Jivas do this Vartamāna Karma, auspicious or inauspicious, in their present embodiments. At the time of birth, a part of the Sañcita Karma, the soul takes up for fructification. This part of Sañcita Karma is called Prārabdha Karma. This exhausts only when its effects have been fully borne out by the embodied soul. The beings cannot but bear the effects of this Prārabdha Karma.

पुरा कृतानि राजेन्द्र हाणुभानि सुभानि च ।

अवश्यमेव कर्माणि भोक्त्यानीति निश्रयः ॥ १ ५ ॥

देवैर्मनुधैरसुर्यैक्षान्यर्विक्सरै: ।

कर्मव हि महाराज देहारभस्य कारणम् ॥ १ १ ॥

कर्मप्रेये जन्मानगः प्राणिनां नात्र संग्रयः ।

ब्रहा विष्णुरूपया रूर इन्द्राद्धा सुरास्तथा ॥ १ ७ ॥

दानवा यक्षानभ्यां: सर्वे कर्मवर्गा: किल ।

अन्यथा देहसम्बन्धः कर्थं भवति भूपते ॥ १८ ॥

कारणं यस्तु भोगस्य देविनः सुखुःखयोः ।

O King! Know this for certain that the effects of merits or demerits done previously must be borne by anybody, be he a Deva, or a man, or an Asura, or a Yakṣa or a Gandharva. The acts done previously go to from the new births of all beings. When the Karma gets exhausted, then no more birth takes place. There is no doubt in this. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Indra and the other Devas, the Dānavas, Yakṣas, Gandharvas, all are under the control of this Karma. O King! Were it not so, how could they get bodies that are the cause of the enjoyment of pain and pleasure of all the beings.

तसादानेवकजनोल्यसघ्रितानां च कर्माणम् ॥ १९ ॥

मध्ये योग: समापाति कस्यचित्कालपाकतः ।

तत्राख्यशानुपयं करोति च यथा तथा ॥ 20 ॥

पापं करोति मनुजस्तथा देवाद्योपि च ।

Therefore, O King! Out of the Sañcita Karmas done in many previous births, some Karmas get ripe in due time and they manifest themselves; those manifested Sañchita Karmas are called Prārabdha Karmas (those that are being enjoyed by an individual in the present birth). Impelled by this Prārabdha Karma, the Devas and the human

beings, all do meritorious act as well as sinful acts. Thus Indra out of his past meritorious acts attained his Indraship, and, out of his past sinful acts, committed the sin Brahmahatyā and so he was dislodged from his Indraship. What doubt can exist here?

तथा नारायणो राजसर्ध धर्मज्वृषी ॥ 21 ॥

जातौ कृष्णाजुंनी काममंशी नारायणस्य तौ ।

पुराणपीठिकेशं वे भुनिभः परिकीर्तित ॥ 22 ॥

O King! So Nara and Nārāyana, the sons of Dharma, had to take births out of their previous Karmas; again Arjuna and Krṣṇa were born out of their Kārmic effects as part incarnations of this Nara and Nārāyana. The Munis describe this Karma as the basis of the Purānas.

देवांग स तु विज्ञेयो यो भवेदिष्याप्रिक: ।

नानुषि: कुकते काव्यं नास्हो रुद्रमवंने ॥ 23 ॥

नावेदिंगो द्वाल्यत्रं नाविष्यु: पृथिवीपतिः ।

इन्रातन्येनैमाहिष्ठोगोपन्दातिं पृपते ॥ 24 ॥

Know that he is born of a Deva who is very wealthy and prosperous; he who is not born of the part of a Muni, never writes any spiritual treatise on Jāna or Knowledge; he who is not born of Rudra, never worships Rudra; who is not born of a Deva never distributes rice in charity; he who is not born of Śri Viṣṇu, never becomes the king and lord of the earth. O King! The embodied souls derive their bodies certainly from Indra, Agni, Yama, Viṣṇu, and Kubera.

प्रभुत्वं च प्रभावं च कोर्भे चैव पराक्रमम् ।

आदाय क्रियते नूनं शरीरमिति निश्रयः ॥ 25 ॥

यः क्रशैदुवलल्लितेके भायवानय भोगतान् ।

विद्धावान्दावनाय वार्पि स देवांशः प्रयक्षते ॥ 26 ॥

Indra presides over lordship, Agni presides over energy, Yama presides over anger, and Viṣṇu presides over strength. He who is powerful fortunate, enjoying many enjoyments, learned, charitable, is said to be born of a Devāniśa.

तक्षेते समाख्यात: पाण्डवा: पृथिवीपते ।

देवांगो वासुदेवोर्षि नारायणसमघृति: ॥ 27 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

O Lord of the earth! Similarly the Pāṇḍavas and Vāsudeva who was as glorious as Nārāyana were born of Devārīñas.

शरीरं प्राणिनां नूनं भाजनं सुखदुःखयोः ।

शरीरी प्रानुयाकामं सुखदुःखमन्तेनम् ॥ 28 ॥

O King! Know this as quite certain that the bodies of the Jivas are the receptacles of pains and pleasures; and the embodied souls (Jivas) experience alternately pleasure and pain. No Jiva is independent; he is always under the Great Fate.

देही नासि वशः कोप्रिधे द्वधानीः सदेव हिं।

जननं मरणं दुःखं सुखं प्राप्नोति चावशः ॥ 29 ॥

He experiences birth, death, pleasure and pain, not out of his self will, but compelled and guided, as it were, by the unseen Fate. O King! How very strong is that Fate can easily be judged by the following.

पाण्डवास्ते वने जाता: प्राप्तास्तु स्वहं पुनः ।

स्वाबुबलतः पश्रात्रजमूयं कृततमम् ॥ 30 ॥

The Pānḍavas were born in forest; then they went to their own homes. They performed the Great Rājasūya Sacrifice by Virtue of their own strength.

वनवासं पुनः प्राता बहुतुःखकरं परम् ।

अज्ञेन तपस्तर्ण दुक्करं हृद्रजितैरिधः ॥ 31 ॥

After this they had to suffer their exiles in forest a much greater and more terrible hardship indeed! Next Arjuna performed a very hard asceticism when the Devas, not self-controlled, became pleased and granted him an auspicious boon.

सन्तुईतु सुरैदर्ते वरदानं पुनः शुभम् ।

नरदेहकृतं पुण्यं कव नगे वनवासजम् ॥ 32 ॥

Still he could not extricate himself from the hands of the terrible hardship; nowhere could be found the fruits of the merits acquired in the past when he was afterwards remaining in exile in his human body in the forest!

नरदेहे तपस्तं चोर्धं बदरिकाभ्ये ।

नाजुनस्य शरीर तत्कलदं सव्यपूव ह १३३ ॥

The severe tapasyā that he did in the Badarikāśrama in his past incarnation as Nara, the

son of Dharma, did not bear any fruit in his Arjuna births.

प्राणिजां देहसाब्प्ये गहना कर्मणे गति: ।

दुर्जेमा सर्वथा देदैमान्वानां तु का कथा ॥ 34 ॥

Mysterious and inexplicable are the ways and means of Karma with which the bodies of the several beings are concerned. How could men get an idea of it when the Devas themselves are at a loss to solve it.

वासुदेवोदीपि संज्ञानः कारागारेस्तिसंकटे ।

नीतोउसी बसुदेवेन नन्दोगय्य गोकुलम् ॥ 35 ॥

एकादशैव वर्षिणि संस्थितस्तन भारत ।

पुनः स ममुंगा गत्वा जयानोदमुर्त बलत् ॥ 36 ॥

Bhagavān Vāsudeva had to take his birth in the prison, a very critical and dangerous place; he was then carried by Vasudeva to the milkman Nanda's abode at Gokula; he remained there eleven years and thence came back to Mathurā where he killed by force Kamsa, the son of Urgasena.

मोचयामास पितरी बच्चानदूषगुद्ध:खिल्ती ।

उउमेनं च राजानं चक्रात मथुगपुरे ॥ 37 ॥

जगाम द्वारवयंं स मेलळराजभयातूनः।

सर्वे भाविवशात्कृष्ण: कृतवान्यीकर्ष महत् ॥ 38 ॥

Then he released his sorrowful father and mother from the bonds of prison and made Ugrasena, the King of the Mlechcas; thus Śrī Janārdana Krṣna performed many great and heroic deeds, being impelled by Fate.

कृत्वा कार्याण्येन्कानि द्वारवलां जनादनं ।

देहं त्यक्त्वा प्रभासे तु सकुटुब्यो दिवं गतः ॥ 39 ॥

Then he left his mortal coil at Prabhāsa, a place of pilgrimage, along with his relatives and acquaintances and then ascended to his Vaikuntha abode.

पुत्र: पौत्राशु सुहदो भततेरो जामयस्तथा ।

प्रभासे याद्वा: सर्वे विग्रप्रापत्थयं गताः ॥ ४० ॥

एवं ते कथिता राजकर्मणो गहना गति: ।

वासुदेवोरिपि व्याधाय बाणेन निर्भयं नतः ॥ ४१ ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे प्रचलक्ये

दशगोउध्याः ।। १ १ १ ॥

Book VI Chapter XI

All the Yâdavas, sons, grandsons, friends, brothers, sisters and ladies of the houses all died under the curse of a Brāhmin. O King! I have thus described to you the inexplicable ways of Karma.

What more shall I say then the fact that Vāsudeva was killed by the arrows of a hunter!

Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the phase of Karma in the Mahāpurānam Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XI

CHAPTER XI

On the Dharma

जनमेजय उवाच

भारावतरणाधारी कथितं जन्म कृष्णायो ।

संशोधोर्ध विज्ञश्रेष्ठ हदये मम तिष्ठातः ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: O King of the Brāhmaṇas! You said that Rāma and Kṛṣṇa took their incarnations to relieve the burden of earth.

पृथिवी गोस्वक्सेण बढ़ाणं शरणं गता ।

द्वापरानेस्तिरिनाउउर्ते गुरुभापरूमफीऊता ॥ 2 ॥

One great doubt arises in my mind on this point. At the end of the Dvāpara Yuga, the Earth, burdened and oppressed very much, assumed, in anguish, the form of a cow and took refuge under Brahmā.

वेधसा प्रार्थितो विद्युः कमलपातिरीक्ष्रः ।

भूभगोरत्नणार्थी साधूनां रक्षणाय च ॥ ३ ॥

भगवान्भारत खणड़े देखे: सह जनादनः।

अवतारं गृहाणगु वसुदेवगृह विषो ॥ ४ ॥

Brahmā, then, went with the Earth to Visnu, the Lord of Laksmī, and thus prayed “O Bibhu! Let You, with all the other gods, incarnate soon on earth at the house of Vasudeva to relieve the Earth of Her load, as well as to protect the righteous.”

एवं सम्प्राधितो धाता भगावान्देवकसीत ।

वधूव सह रामेण भूभातोत्तायय वे ॥ ५ ॥

When Brahmā thus prayed, the Bhagavān Viṣṇu incarnated as the son of Devaki, along with Balarāma to lessen the burden of the Earth.

क्रियानुतिरितो भारो हत्वा दुशाननेकाः ।

जात्वा सर्वानुप्राचान्याप्रद्धिप्रभिक्र पी 6 ॥

And, in fact, he relieved to a certain extent, the Earth by killing many vicious persons and many wicked and irreligious Kings.

हतो भीभो होते ग्रोगो विराटो दुप्रदस्तथा ।

बाईकः सोमदन्तघ कर्णाँ वैकर्तनस्तथा ॥ ७ ॥

But, along with that, Bhisma, Drona, Virāta, Drupada, Somadatta, and Karna, the son of the Sun were killed.

वैतृपितत धनं सर्वे हताश हरियोषितः ।

कथं न नारीगता द्वये चे स्थिताः पृथिवीतले ॥ ८ ॥

आभीराश्रकानेच्छाविभावा कोटिशस्तथा ।

भारावतरणं क्रितन्तक्ते कृष्णेन धीमता ॥ ९ ॥

But, See! that those who plundered afterwards His riches, and stole away the wives of Hari, those crores of Ābhiras, Śakas, Mlecchas, and Niśādas and other vicious people remained alive; and how could it, then, be said that the Earth was relieved when Kṛṣṇa did not kill those people!

सन्देशेधं महाभाग न निवर्तितं चितन्तः ।

कलावस्मिन्भुना: सर्व: पश्यतः पाणिश्रायः ॥ 10 ॥

O Fortunate One! When I see all the people in this Kali Yuga addicted to sinful acts, this great doubts is not going out of my mind (how the Earth had been relieved of Her load).

व्यास उवाच

राजन् यास्मिनुगे वार्यक्रजा भवति कालतः ।

नान्यथा तद्विवृनं युगधार्डत्र कारणम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! As the Yuga changes, so the people changes in course of time. Nothing can after its course, for this is caused by the Yuga Dharma (the Dharma peculiar to each Yuga). Therefore if all the subjects that are considered wicked and vicious according to the law of the Yuga Dharma, then this creation would be

destroyed; hence Kṛṣṇa killed only those Dānavas and vicious Kṣatriyas that were really the burden of Earth.

ये धर्मपहिका जीवालते से सत्ययुगेप्रवन् ।

धर्मार्थसिका ये तु ते वै श्रोतायुर्पवन् ॥ 12 ॥

धर्मार्थकामरसिका द्वारे चाधवन् युगे ।

अर्थकामपात: सर्वे कलावस्मिन्यवानि हि ॥ 13 ॥

O King! The persons that are devoted to religion take their births in the Satya Yuga; those that are fond of religion and wealth they become manifest in the Tretā Yuga; those that like Dharma (religion), Artha (wealth) and Kāma (desires) they are born in the Dvāpara Yuga, and those that dote on wealth and lust, they are seen in the Kali Yuga.

युगाधमेनु राजेन्द्र न याति व्यत्थवं पुनः ।

कालः कलिति धर्मेश हृधार्थम च चे पुनः ॥ 14 ॥

O King! Know this as certain that these characteristics, peculiar to each Yuga, never very; and know this too, that Time, the Lord of Dharma and Adharma, is always present.

राजोबाच

ते तु सत्ययुगे जीवा भवतिन धर्मतयरा: ।

कुरु तरेष्ठ महाभाग सिहिंते पुण्यभाविन: ॥ १ ५ ॥

त्रेतायुगे द्वारे वा ये दानवतकारका: ।

वर्त्ने मुना: श्रेधा: कुत्र बृहि विमाभू ॥ १६ ॥

The King said: O Intelligent One! Where are those pious persons now that were born as high-souled religious persons in the Satya Yuga; where are those Munis now who were devoted to charity in the Trētā or Dvāpara Yuga?

कलावछ दुराचारा येउ सन्ति गतायनाः ।

आधे युगे कव यास्यिति पाथिधा देवेनिन्दकाः ॥ 17 ॥

एत्सर्वे समाचक्षव विस्तरेण महामते ।

सर्वथा श्रोतुकामोत्रसम यदेतद्वमैरिणयम् ॥ 18 ॥

Again where will go those shameless and merciless persons, that are being seen now in this Kali Yuga, these vicious creatures that revile their own Gurus? O Highly Intelligent One! I am very eager to know how these religious matters are brought to a decision and settlement; kindly

describe to me in detail all these secret truths.

व्यास उवाच

ते वै कृतयुगे राजनस्मधवंतीह मानवाः ।

कृत्वा ते पुण्यकर्माणि देवलोकान् जज्जित वे ॥ १९ ॥

ब्राह्माण: क्षत्रिया वैश्यः गुत्राक्रं नृपसत्तम ।

स्वधर्पितता याति लोकाकर्मवितानिकल ॥ 20 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Persons, born in the Satya Yuga, that perform acts of merit, go to the Deva Loka. O King! The Brāhminns, Kṣatriyas, Vaiśyas and Śūdras, if they remain in their own spheres and if they be devoted to religious acts, go to their respective spheres, earned by their meritorious deeds.

सर्व दया तथा दानं स्वदारामन्तं तथा ।

अउहोः सर्वभूतेषु समता सर्वेनानुषु ॥ 21 ॥

By virtue to truth, mercy, charity, going to one's own wives, not injuring animals, and having no jealousy and showing mercy equal towards all, by practising these universal forms of religious, even the lowest castes e.g., washermen and others all go to the Paradise.

एततसाधारणं धर्म कृत्वा सत्ययुगे पुनः ।

स्वर्गे यांतीते वर्णा धर्मते जतकादच: ॥ 22 ॥

So in the Trētā and Dvāpara Yuga's men go to Heaven by virtue to their merits, earned in practising their own Dharmas; but in this Kali Yuga persons addicted to vicious acts go to terrible hells and remain there till the end of the Kali Yuga when they will be again born in this earth.

तथा त्रैतायुगे राजन्नापरेक्ष युगे तथा ।

कलावसियम्युगे पाया नरकं याति मानावः ॥ 23 ॥

ताविताक्रिति ते तत यावत्स्याबुगयर्षयः ।

पुनश्र मानुषे लोके भवन्ति भूयि मानावः ॥ 24 ॥

O King! When the Satya Yuga begins and the Kali Yuga ends, at this junction time, the virtuous high-souled persons descend from Heaven and are born on this earth; and when the Kali begins and the Dvāpara ends, the vicious souls come on the earth again from their hells. O King! Know this as the course of Time; it never becomes otherwise.

Book VI Chapter XI

सदा सत्ययुगस्यादि: कलेरंतछ प्राधिव । तदा स्वर्गीयुपयकुतो जायने किल मानवाः ॥ 25 ॥ यदा कलियुगस्यादिद्वीपरस्य क्षसस्तथा । नरकात्यापिन: सर्वे भवन्ति भृति मानवाः ॥ 26 ॥ एवं कालसमाचारो नान्यधारेभृक्टादाचन । तस्माकतिलरसक्ती तस्मिन्तु तादृषी प्रजा ॥ 27 ॥

See, then, that the Kali Yuga tends to do vicious things and the people, therefore, become vicious. At times, the birth of beings takes place otherwise than the laws of Yugas, out of the strange combinations of Fate (i.e., good persons are seen in the Kali and vicious persons are seen in the Satya).

कदाप्रिद्धवोगातु प्राणिनां व्यतयो भवेत् ।

कती वे साधयः कंचिद्वापरे सम्पवन्ति ते ॥ 28 ॥

तथा जेतायुगे कंचित्केचित्सत्ययुगे तथा ।

द्वृध: सत्ययुगे ये तु ते भवन्ति कलावति ॥ 29 ॥

For this reason those that do meritorious acts in the Kali Yuga are born as men in the Dvāpara; so the Dvāpara good persons take their births as men in the Tretā; and the Tretā good persons are born as men in the Satya Yuga, Again those who are vicious in the Satya Yuga become persons of the Kali Yuga.

कृतकर्मप्रभावेण प्रापुत्वंसुसुखानि च ।

पुनश्छ तातूश कर्म कुर्वन्ति युगभावतः ॥ 30 ॥

The Jivas suffer miseries on account of their own bad Karmas; they again suffer more miseries by doing over and over again those bad Karmas by virtue of the Yuga Dharma.

जनमेजय उवाच

युगधार्मान्हभाग बृहि सर्वानीशेषतः ।

वस्मिन्वी यात्रणो धर्मों जातुप्रिक्छामि ने तथा ॥ ३ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: O Bhagavan! Describe particularly the details of the Yuga Dharma. I am now very desirous to hear which Dharma is for which Yuga?

यास उवाच

निवोध नृपशालूंल दृष्टान्ते ते ब्वीयाम्हन् ।

साधून्यमपि चेतासि युगभावाद्वर्वति हि ॥ 32 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! I will now shew to you by example the influence of the religion peculiar to each Yuga; hear it attentively. O King! The hearts even of sanits are quite disturbed by the Yuga Dharma.

पितृर्वंषा ते गरोन्ट्र बुद्धिविष्याहेलने ।

कृता वै कलिना राजन्यमंज्य महात्मनः ॥ 33 ॥

See! Your father was a religious and high-souled monarch; still the wicked Kali defiled his mind and prompted him to do an act very insulting, to a Brāhmaṇa.

अन्यथा क्षत्रियो राजा यथातिकुलसम्भवः ।

तापसस्य नाले सर्प मृतं कस्यदायोजयत ॥ 34 ॥

Otherwise would he, being a renowned prince amongst the Kṣatriyas and a descendant of Yayāti, thus go and encircle a snake round the throat of an ascetic Brāhmin?

सर्वे युगवलं राजन् वैदित्यं विज्ञानता ।

प्रयत्नेन हि कर्तव्यं धर्मकां विशेषतः ॥ 35 ॥

Therefore, O King! All actions are being influenced by the Yuga Dharma. The Pandits, also recognise this. If you try your best to perform any religious act, even then the Yuga Dharma would prevail, yet you would be able to perform to a certain extent, a part of your intention.

नूनं सत्ययुगे राजन्बाहूण वेदयपाराः ।

परागकच्यन्तरता देरीदर्भनलासाः ॥ 36 ॥

गायत्रीगणवासना गायत्रीध्यानकारिणः ।

गायत्रीजपसंसत्ता मायावीजैकाजपिनः ॥ 37 ॥

O King! In the Satya Yuga, the Brāhmins were versed in the Vedas, always devoted to worship the Highest Force, with an ardent desire to see the Devi; they were devoted to Gāyatrī with Pranava, devoted to the meditation of Gāyatrī, always reciting silent Gāyatrī, and the Māyāvīja Mantram, the chief mantram.

ग्रामे ग्रामे परावाया: ग्रासादकरणोतुका: ।

स्वकर्मनिततः सर्वे सत्याशिवदायित्वतः ॥ 38 ॥

In every village, the Brāhmins were very eager to erect temples of the Devi Mahā Māyā Ambikā

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

and were truthful and pure and devoted to their own respective works.

प्रत्युक्तकर्मनितरासतत्त्ब्ज्ञानविश्राताः ।

अभवस्त्रियात्मतत प्रजाभरणाततमतः ॥ ३९ ॥

The Ksatriyas, skilled in the science of the highest knowledge, were ever engaged in doing things ordained by the Vedas and were always intent in protecting well their subjects.

वैश्यास्तु कृचिवाणिज्ञानोसेवानिरास्तसा ।

गृह्म: सेवायासरत पुण्ये सत्ययुगे नृए ॥ 40 ॥

पराम्बापुजानास्ता: सर्वे वर्णा: परे युगे ।

तथा जेतायुगे किश्छिन्ना धर्मेव संश्स्थिति: ॥ 4 1 ॥

ह्रापे च विशेषेण न्यूना सत्ययुगस्थिति: ।

The Vaiśyas did their cultivation and trade and the Śūdras always served the other three castes. Thus, in the Satya Yuga, all the Varṇas (castes) were devoted to the worship of the Devi Ambikā, the Highest Śakti; but in the Tretā Yuga, the observance of the religion declined a little and in the Dvāpara, it declined very much.

पूर्वे रोक्षसा राजसैले कर्ती ब्राह्मण: सून्ता: ॥ 42 ॥

पाखणद्धरिता: प्रायो भवन्ति जनवझका: ।

असत्यवादिन: सर्वे वेद्यभिविर्वर्तिता: ॥ 43 ॥

दाधिष्का लोकवतुरा मानिनो वेद्वर्तिता: ।

गृह्मसेवायर: केविश्रानाधर्मवर्तका: ॥ 44 ॥

O Ornament of Indra! Those who were Rāksasas before, they become the Brāhmins of the Kali Yuga; they are the flowers of atheists, deceptors of men, untruthful, without any Vedas, devoid of the Vedic practices, arrogant, cunning, egoistic, and capable only to serve the Śūdras.

वेदन्पित्राकाः कृतः वर्धभश्चातिवाज्ञाः ।

यथा यथा कालिवर्द्धि याति राजसंतथा तथा ॥ 45 ॥

Some of them try to find fault with the Sanātana Dharma and are the promulgators of various other creeds, wicked, fallen from their religion and given to much talking.

धर्मेस सत्यमुलस्य क्षयः सर्वात्माना भवेत् ।

तवैव क्षत्रिय वैश्या: शुग्रृछ्ध धर्मवर्षिताः। १४ ६ ॥

O King! As Kali gets stronger, so the true religion declines and ultimately dies; and, in that

proportion, the Kṣatriyas, Vaīsyās and Śūdras are also devoid of their religion.

असत्यवादितः पापास्तथा वर्णैताग करती ।

गृह्धभर्यात विधा: प्रतिश्रहपरायण: ॥ 47 ॥

भविष्यन्ति कर्ती राज्य वुगे शूद्धितः किल।

कामाचारा: सिंध्यः कामातेभोर्मास्पित्वाः ॥ 48 ॥

When Kali will be in full swing, the Ksatriyas, Vaiśyas and Śūdras would all be untruthful, vicious; the Brāhmins will act like Śūdras and will accept other's gifts. O King! The women in the Kali Yuga would be very passionate, avaricious and ignorant.

पापा मिथ्याधिवाद्विः: सदा क्लेशराता नृप ।

स्वभरुंछका निव्यं धर्मभाणपिडता: ॥ 49 ॥

भवन्येवंधिधा नार्य: पापिच्छा कली युगे ।

They would be very powerful and insolent, wilful, vicious and untruthful and so would be a source of pain to the society. They would think themselves vainly religious and learned and would be always ready to impart religious instructions and deceive their own husbands and be exceedingly vicious.

आहास्युद्धा नृपते चित्नगुव्रिद्धु जायते ॥ 50 ॥

शुद्धे चित्ते प्रकाशः स्वादुमेस्य नृपसतम् ।

O King! Our minds are purified by the food that we take; when our minds are pure, the Light of Dharma shines clearly.

ब्रुतसंकदोषेण जायते धर्मसंक: ॥ 51 ॥

धार्थस्य संकरे जाते नृनं स्वादुर्गसंकर: ।

एवं कतिवुगे घृप सर्वेधर्मिवर्षिति ॥ 52 ॥

स्ववर्णधर्मावर्शिता न कुजायुपनघते ।

महान्तो5पि च धर्मज्ञ अधर्म कृकेते नृप ॥ 53 ॥

कलिस्वभाव राषेय परिहायों न केनिधित ।

The customs and practices of Varna and Asrama Dharma get intermixed with each other and so arises the fault of Dharma Sañkara (i.e., mixture of the several parts of religion with each other). When the Dharma Sañkara creeps in, the Varna Sañkara is seen (i. e., purity in blood and other matters of birth are lost). Thus, in the Kali Yuga,

Book VI Chapter XI

all the Dharmas will gradually die out and ultimately nothing will be heard about one's own religion. O King! In this Yuga even the religious high-souled persons will be found to do irreligious acts! The nature of Kali is so; nobody will be able to quit it.

तस्मादत्र मनुष्याणां स्वभावापयाकरिणा, ॥ 54 ॥

निकृकृतिं हिं राजेन्द्र सामान्योपायालो भवेत् ।

O King! Thus, in this age, men naturally commit vicious things; with ordinary means, therefore, no one becomes able to extricate from the worst vicious habits.

जनमेव जवाच

भगवान्वर्वधर्मे सर्वशास्त्रविशगत ॥ 55 ॥

कलावधर्मबहुले नराणां का गतिभवैत् ।

यद्यस्ते तदुपायश्छेद्यया तं वदस्य मे ॥ 56 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Bhagavan! You know all and you are versed in all the Sāstras; what will be the fate of so many persons in this Kali Yuga? If there be any path, kindly describe it to me.

व्यास उवाच

एक एव महाराज तसेपायो5लित नापर: ।

सर्वदोषनितसाखे ध्यायेदेघाद्यबुजम् ॥ 57 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! There is only path and none other which can save a man from the sin of Kali; and that is this: The Jivas must meditate on the lotus-feet of the Highest Devi for the purification of all their faults and sins.

न संत्याथिन तार्विति यावती शक्तिरस्ति है ।

नाम्न देहया: पापवहुते तस्माद्वीति कुतो नृण ॥ 58 ॥

अशेगीपि यवाग्र लीलायोद्वारितं यदि ।

कि कि ददाति तक्त्रानुं समर्थ न हरादयः ॥ 59 ॥

O King! There is so much strength in Her Sin-destroying Name, that the amount of sin in this world falls much less in proportion to that. Where, then, is the cause of fear? Her Name, uttered at random, even in an unconscious state, bestows so much unspeakable results that even Hari, Hara and others have not the capacity to know that.

प्रायशिजनं तु पायानां श्रीद्वीभामसंस्मृति: ।

तस्माकलिभयात्राजन्युगवछेत्र वसेत्रः ॥ 60 ॥

निरन्तरं पतायाया नामसंस्मरणं चेर्त् ।

O King! The mere remembrance of the name of Śrī Devi is an atonement for a multitude of sins; then it behaves that every man, afraid of the Kali Yuga, residing in a place of pilgrimage, ought to remember incessantly the Name of the Highest Deity.

छिला भिला च प्रतिन हल्ला सर्वीदं जन्तु ॥ 61 ॥

देवीं नमिति भकल्या यो न स पार्थिविलायते ।

रह्यं सर्वशास्त्राणां मया राजसुद्वीरितम् ॥ 62 ॥

विमुर्ध्यैतदडोगेश भज देयीपदाम्बुजकम् ।

Even if anybody cuts, pierces, and kills all the beings in this whole world, he won't be touched with the sins, if he bows down, with devotion, before the Devi. O King! I have narrated to you all the secret truths of all the Sāstras. Consider all these fully and always worship the lotus-feet of the Devi.

अजचां नाम गायर्षी जपन्ति निशित्ता जना: ॥ 63 ॥

महिमानं न जान्ति मायाया वैभवं महत् ।

All men are reciting silently the Japan called the Ajapā Gāyatrī; still they don't know the glory of it; such is the powerful influence of Māyā.

गयर्षी ब्राह्मणाः सर्वे जानपित् हृदयान्ते ॥ 64 ॥

महिमानं न जानंते मायाया वैभयं महत् ।

एतत्बर्षे समाख्यातं यत्पृष्टे तत्वया नृप ॥ 65 ॥

युगभयंव्यस्थायां किं भूयः शोभुपिछ्सि ।

इति श्रीमद्वीभागगते महापुराणे पश्वकन्ये एकारणीःप्रयाः: 111 ।

All the Brāhmanas are reciting in the depth of their hearts the Gāyatī Mantram, yet they do not know the glory of it (otherwise they would have been liberated); such is the great influence of Māyā. O King! I have described to you all that you asked me about the Yuga Dharmas; what more do you want to hear?

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Sixth Book on the ascertainment of Dharma in the Mahā Purānam,

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER XII

On the War Between Âṭi and Baka

राजोवाच

तीर्थिनं भृति युणयानि बृहि मे भुनिसतम ।

गम्यानि मानवैदैक्षेः क्षेत्राणि सरितस्तथा ॥ 1 ॥

फलं च यावुर्ण यत्र तीर्थेयुं स्नानदानतः ।

विधिं तु तीर्थयात्रायां नियमाशु विशेषतः ॥ 2 ॥

The King said: O Best of Munis! Tell me the names of the holy places of pilgrimage on the surface of this earth, the holy Kṣetras and the holy rivers; what are the fruits acquired in bathing there and in making charitable gifts as well; also what are the rules the journeys and acts there are to be conducted?

व्यास उवाच

यगु गजप्रवह्यायि तीबीति विधिधानि च ।

येषु तीर्थेषु दैवीनां प्रगस्तान्यायानि च ॥ ३ ॥

Vyāsa said: Hear, I am describing to you various Tirthas or places of pilgrimage as well as those that are highly extolled as the best places favourite to the Devi.

नदीना जाख्वी श्रेष्ठा ययुना च सरस्वती ।

नंम्दा गण्डकी सिंधुर्गोंमती तमसा तथा ॥ 4 ॥

कावेरी चन्द्रभाग च पुण्या वेत्रवती गृभा ।

चर्पवर्ती च सरसूतापी साधमती तथा ॥ 5 ॥

एताक्ष कथिता राजन्याक्ष शताश: पुनः ।

तासां समुहानः पुण्या: स्वल्पपुण्या हानिक्षाः ॥ 6 ॥

Amongst the rivers the following are reckoned as chief and holy: The Ganges, Yamunā, Sarasvatī, Narmadā, Gaṇḍaki, Sindhu, Gomaṭī, Tamasā, Cavery, Candrabhāgā, Vetravaṭi, Carmanvatī, Sarayu, Tāpi, and Sābhramatī. Besides these, there are hundreds of rivers on the surface of this earth; of them, those that fall into the ocean, they are holier and those that heve not reached the ocean, are less holy.

सपूत्रागतां तः पुराया: सर्वद्वीधवास्तु आः ।

मास्यद्वं श्रावणादौ ताक्ष सर्वा जरकल्पः ॥ ७ ॥

Of those rivers that fall into the ocean, those

that always flow with great current, they are comparatively lower; but in the two months Śrāvana and Bhādra (15th july—15th September) all the rivers are considered as if they are during their menstruation periods; at this time also some rivers carry water to the rains just sufficient to supply the villagers with water.

भवन्ति वृद्धियोगेन प्रायवात्रिहास्तथा ।

पुक्जरं च कुरूक्षेत्र धर्मपरंयं सुपावनम् ॥ ८ ॥

प्रभासं च प्रयागं च नैमिभारणयमेव च ।

विश्रुतं चाबुंतारणयं शैलाक्ष पावनासला ॥ ९ ॥

श्रीशैलक्ष सुमेकक्ष पवंती गन्धमादनः ।

सारोसि चैव पुणवानि मानसं सर्वविश्रुतम् ॥ १० ॥

तथा विद्युसरः श्रेष्यम्बोरं नापा वापनम् ।

आश्रमातृ तथा पुणया मुनीनां भावितातमान् ॥ १ १ ॥

विश्रुतनु सदा पुणयः ख्वातो बदकौतक्रशमः ।

ननारायणी चय नेपाते ती भुनी तपः ॥ १ २ ॥

O King! The following are the famous places of pilgrimages calculated to bestow merits: Puškara, Kuruksëttra, the holy Dharmānarya, Prabhāsa, Naimisāranya, and Arbudāranya. O King! Of the mountains, the following are considered as sacred: Śrīśaila, Sumeru, Gandhamādana; of the lakes, the following are very holy and very famous: Mānasarovara. Bindusarovara, and Akṣoda; these are the chief lakes. To those Munis that meditate on their Ātman, all the hermitages are sacred; still the hermitage of Badri is always considered very sacred and the most celebrated; here Nara and Nārāyaṇa, the two famous Munis, practised their asceticism.

वामनाओम आखाता: शतव्याश्रमस्ता ।

येन वयं तपस्ततं तस्य नानान्तिविष्ठुते ॥ 13 ॥

The Vāmanāśrama and Śatayūpāśrama are also well known; thus every hermitage is named after the Muni that practised asceticism there.

एवं पुरयाति स्थानाति हुसंख्यातानि भूतले ।

मुनिभि: परितीतानि पवानाति महीपते ॥ 14 ॥

Book VI Chapter XII

Thus innumerable holy places on the surface of the earth are mentioned by the Munis as tending to sanctify the hearts of the persons.

ययु स्थानेषु सर्वेत्र देवीस्थानानि भूपते ।

दर्शनात्यापहात्रिणि वसंति निययेन च ॥ 15 ॥

At all these holy places, the Devi is worshiped in special sites consecrated to Her. All the sins are destroyed by their mere sight.

कथायिभि तान्यो प्रसंगेन च कानिधित् ।

तैशीति नृप द्यानि त्रतानि च मखालया ॥ 16 ॥

The devotees of the Devi stay there, with rules obeyed. I will mention after words some of these places in the course of my narrations. O Best of kings! Going to these holy places, charity, vow, sacrifices, asceticism and good acts all depend on one another.

तपोसि पुण्यकर्माणि साधेष्ठाणि महीपते ।

इत्यगृद्धि क्रियागृद्धि मन:गृद्धिमपेक्ष्य च ॥ १ ७ ॥

The holy places of pilgrimages, asceticism, and observance of vows depend on the purity of the articles (Dravya Śuddhi), on the purity and one pointedness of actions (Kriyā Śuddhi) and on the purity of the heart (Citta Śuddhi).

पावनानि हि तीर्थानि तपांसि च ज्ञानि च ।

क्वाचिद्व्यशुद्धिः: स्यातिक्याशुद्धिः क्वाचन ॥ 18 ॥

दुर्लीभा मतस: शुद्धि: सर्वैंगा सर्वैरा नृप ।

मतसृ उच्छलं राजन्नेकविषयाशितम् ॥ 19 ॥

कर्ण शुद्ध भवेत्राज्ञानाभावस्माशितम् ।

Some may attain, at times, the Dravya Śuddhi and Kriyā Śuddhi; but every one finds it very difficult and, indeed, rarely get the Citta Śuddhi. O King! This mind always tries to seek shelter with various objects and is, therefore, always restless. How, then, can the purity of mind be effected with ease, when it is occupied with all sorts of thoughts on various objects.

कामक्रोधौ तथा लोपो ह्राईकांगे मदस्तथा ॥ 20 ॥

सर्वोदिकारा होते तपस्तीध्वतेषु च ।

अहिंहा सात्यमतरेयं श्रीचर्मिद्विनिषादः ॥ 21 ॥

स्वधोपायलंन राजसर्वतीर्थेलमप्रयम् ।

नित्यकर्मपरित्याणान्मार्गे संसर्गदोषतः ॥ 22 ॥

Cupidity, anger, greed, pride, and egoism, these bring about all sorts of obstacles in the holy places of pilgrimages, in practising tapasyā and in observing vows. O King! Non-injury, truthfulness, non-stealing, chastity and purity, controlling of sense, and observing one's own religion, all these bring about the fruits of the labour in visiting all tirthas. They bestow fruits that can be obtained by visiting all the tirthas. During one's pilgrimage, one forsakes one's Nitya Karma (daily duties) and one has to come in contact with various persons.

व्यर्थ तीर्थोपगर्न पापमेवावशिष्यते ।

क्षालयनि हि तैशानि सर्वथा देह्जे मलम् ॥ 23 ॥

मानसं क्षालितुं तानि न सम्बानि वे नृप ।

गक्तानि यदि चेतानि गंगातीरित्वासिनः ॥ 24 ॥

Hence one's journey becomes fruitless; rather it becomes a source of sin. The waters of the sacred places can only wash the outside dirts and the impurities of the physical bodies; they can never wash the impurities of their inner minds. Were it the fact that the waters of the tirthas could purify their minds, why was it, then, that the Munis, residing on the banks of the Ganges, and devoted to God, ever indulged themselves with feelings of jealousy and enmity against each other.

मुनीयो ग्रोहसंयुक्ताः कथं सूभभवितेशुशः ।

वसिष्ठसूचग्र: प्रहूा विश्वामित्रयः किल 125 ॥

रागोष्यरतः सर्वे कामकोधाकुतः सदा ।

चितगृद्धिमयं तीर्थे गंगादिष्योस्तिषावनम् ॥ 26 ॥

The humble Munis like Vasistha, and the Rsis like Visvāmitra were always entangled in love and hatred and they were over impatient with anger. Therefore it is evident that the internal purification, the purification of heart, the bathing in the Jñāna Gangā flowing within, no doubt removes more the dirt than the Ganges and other places of pilgrimages.

यदि स्थावैयोगेन क्षालय्वतीतांर मतम् ।

विशेषेण तु सर्वसंगे ज्ञानसिद्धस्य भृपते ॥ 27 ॥

O King! No doubt this fact must be admitted

on all hands that one's impurity of mind is washed away if by the strange combination of Fate, one comes in intimate contact with a man possessed of the Divine Knowledge.

न वेदा न च शाखाणि न रतानि तपांसि न ।

न मखा न च दानानि चित्युढ्रेस्तु कारणम् ॥ 28 ॥

O King! The Vedas or Śāstras, vows or austerties, sacrifices or gifts none can purify the heart.

वसिष्ठो बहाणः पुत्रो वेदविद्धाविशारदः ।

रागद्वीपालिजः कामं गड़्गातीसमाधिकः ॥ 29 ॥

See! Vasisṭha, the son of Brahmā, though versed in the Vedas and residing on the banks of the Ganges, was under the control of love, hatred and other infirmities.

आडीबकं महायुद्धे विश्वाधिमत्रविश्छयो: ।

जाते निरर्थकं द्विषहेवानां विस्मयप्रदम् ॥ 30 ॥

Out of the enmity of Viśvamitra and Vasiṣṭha, arose the great battle named Ādi Bāka, astonishing even to the Gods.

विश्वाधिमेजे बकस्तत्र जातः परमातमासः ।

शप्तः स तु वसिष्ठेन हरीशंद्रस्य काणगण् । ३१ । ॥

क्रीणिकेन वसिष्ठोषि शप्तवो5डीहैमाफकृतः।

शापादाडीबाकी जाती ती मुनी विश्वद्धभी ॥ ३२ ॥

निवासं प्रपतुस्तीत तापसी धर्मतसरी ।

चक्रतुदीर्गणे युद्ध नखचघुगताङ्गे: ॥ ३३ ॥

In this, the ascetic Visvāmitra was cursed by Visistha, on account of some curse in connection with the king Harisācandra and had to take his birth as a crane (Baka). The Rṣi Vasistha was cursed also by Visvāmitra and was born as a bird named Śarāli.

वर्षाणामयुतं यावतावृषी रोषसंयुतो ।

युयुधाते मदोवनारी सिंहास्थि परस्यम् ॥ 34 ॥

Thus the two powerful Rṣis were born as Āḍi Baka and lived years (ayuta) terribly, out of anger, they faught with their nails and beaks like two maddened lions.

राजोवाच

कथं ती मुनीशादूर्ती तापसी धर्मतन्तरी ।

परस्यरं वैरपरी संजातों केन हेतुना ॥ 35 ॥

शपं परस्यरं केन कारणेन महामती ।

दत्तवंती मिथ: वलेशकाकारके दुःखदो नृणाम् ॥ 36 ॥

The King asked: O Muni! Why were the two Maharsis, the two great ascetics and devoted to religion, involved in enmity with each other? Both of them were intelligent; how was it that they knowing the act of cursing to be a source of pain to men, cursed each other so painfully?

व्यास उवाच

हरिंशंत्री नृपश्रेष्ठसिंग्कृतनयः पुरा: ।

वधूव रविवर्शीयो रामचन्द्रस्य पूर्वंज: ॥ 37 ॥

Vyāsa said : O King! In former times, there was born in the solar dynasty a king Harisācandra, the son of Trisānku; he was the best of the kings and reigned before Rāmcandra.

अनपत्य: स रार्जविंकर्णाय महात्कानु ।

प्रतियतः पुरकामो नरभेधं दुरासवम् ॥ 38 ॥

That King had no issue and therefore promised to Varuna! “O Lord of water and ocean! If I get a son born to me, I will perform a sacrifice, called Naramedha, where I will sacrifice my son for your propitiation.”

वर्णास्तस्य सन्तुषो वत्रस्य तियमे कृते ।

दधारा गर्भ न्रास्तु घायां परममुदरी ॥ 39 ॥

Varuna was very pleased with the king when he made such a vow; and the exquisitely beautiful queen held the foetus in the womb.

राज बधूव सन्तुषो इद्वा घाथां सदोहाद् ।

चकार विधिवक्तमं गर्भसंक्राकारकम् ॥ 40 ॥

Seeing his wife in the family way, the king was very pleased and performed all the purificatory ceremonies pertaining to the foetus in the womb.

सुवृते तनयं नारी सर्वतक्षणसंयुतम् ।

मूदं प्राप नृपस्तत्र पुत्रे जाते विश्रापोते ॥ 41 ॥

कृतवाझातकर्मादि संक्रताविधिमुत्तमम् ।

ददौ हिरण्यं गा दोर्धीब्राहीणेधो विश्रतः ॥ 42 ॥

O King! When the queen was delivered of a son endowed with all auspicious signs, the king Hariścandra was very glad and performed duly all the Jāta Karma (natal) ceremonies and distributed

Book VI Chapter XII

as charity big sums of gold and many cows giving good quantities of milk.

जन्मोत्सर्वेस्तिवंसूते गेहे वै यादरां पति: ।

आजगम महाराज विग्रवेषधरस्तथा ॥ 4 3 ॥

When the festivities on the birth of the child were celebrated in the palace on a grand scale, Varuna, the Lord of Waters, assuming the form of a Brāhmin, came up there.

पृत्रित: पार्थिवेनाय दत्ता विधिवदासनम् ।

कार्य पृष्टेउक्रवीतुवयं वकणोउस्मिति भूपनिम् ॥ 44 ॥

कुर्य नई सुर्त कृत्ता पशुं परमपावनम् ।

सत्यवाप्यर चार्जे संकल्यस्तु तस्य क्रा: ॥ 4 5 ॥

तच्छुत्वा वचनं राजा विह्नोतिन्यथाकृतः ।

संसन्याधिं नृपः प्राह वकर्णं सकृतांजलिः ॥ 4 6 ॥

The King, too, honoured him duly with seat and worshipped him regularly and asked him about his purpose, when Varuna spoke to him: "O King! I am Varuna, the Lord of Waters; you promised before that you would perform Naramedha sacrifice where you would sacrifice your son; now do those things and keep your words true." The King became very much confused and was very much pained at heart. He then checked his mental feelings of pain and spoke to the Deva Varuna, with folded hands:

स्वामिकारीय ते परं सर्वेश विधिपूर्वकम् ।

भया ते यद्धितिज्ञां भवामि सत्यवागम् ॥ 47 ॥

पूर्णं मासे विगुक्छेते धर्मपन्ती सुरोतम् ।

वियुक्छायां तु भायायां कतंव्य: सपुर्णसुंवः ॥ 48 ॥

“O Lord! I will do the sacrifice duly and fulfil the promise that I made before you and keep my word. But, O Best of the Devas! My legal wife will be pure from her Sūtikā Śaucaka after one month, when I will perform the Narendraah sacrifice.”

इतूनेके वचने राजा वक्षण: स्वगृहं गतः ।

राजा बभूव संनुह: क्षितिधिश्तानुसत्यना ॥ 49 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of the king Hariścandra, Varuna returned to his own abode; the King also became glad, but he was somewhat anxious for fear of the destruction of the child.

पूर्णे मासि पुनः पाशीं परीक्षार्थं नृपालये ।

आजगमा द्विजो भूत्वा सुवेचः सुवुभपाकः ॥ 50 ॥

When one month was complete, the sweet-speaking Varuna, the holder of the noose, assuming the form of a very pure Brāhmīn, again came there to the palace of the king to examine him.

कृताहीं गुखावीसीने भृपतिस्ते सुरोतमम् ।

उवाच चिनयोपेते हेतुभपं चचस्तदा ॥ ५१ ॥

असंस्कृत सुर्त स्वामिन् यूपे बधभाति तं कवम् ।

The King worshipped him duly and gave him the seat to sit and spoke, with humility, the following reasonable words: "O Lord! My son is not yet purified; how can he be tied to the sacrifice post for being immolated?

संस्कृत्य क्षत्रियं कृत्वा पत्रे3र्हे यज्नुपतम् ॥ 52 ॥

द्वसे यदि देय त्वं ज्ञाला दीनं स्वसेवकम् ।

असंस्कृतस्य बालस्य नाधिकारोर्सित कुक्षित्च ॥ 53 ॥

Therefore I will perform that sacrifice when the boy becomes cleansed after a purificatory rite and becomes a Ksatriya. O Deva! If you know me as your humble servant, have mercy on me; I will then consider myself as blessed. See! The children, not passed through purificatory rites, are not entitled to any act; therefore wait for some time longer."

वरूण उवाच

प्रतायसि राजेन्द्र कृत्वा समयम्भातः ।

दुर्वयजस्तव जानामि सुत्नेवेहो ह्युप्रिणः ॥ 54 ॥

Varuna said: “O King! You are deceiving me and putting off the time longer and longer; I now see that you were issueless before and now that you have got a son, you are bound up in an indissoluble tie of affection for a son.

गृहं मन्त्रामे धृपाल वचनातव कोमालत् ।

क्रियल्कालं प्रतीक्ष्यात्मगामियमाति ने गृहम् ॥ 55 ॥

Whatever, it be, I now go back to my home at your pitiful request; I will wait for some time longer and I will come again.

भवित्यं तथा तत तदा सत्यवचो3स्तितम् ।

अन्यथा त्वयि मुंचामि कोयं ग्रासमन्त्रितम् ॥ 56 ॥

O child! Let you then be true to your words; if it be otherwise, I will surely curse you and thus give vent to my angry feelings."

राजोबाच

समावर्तनकर्मान्ते सर्वथा यादासम्पते ।

कृत्वा पूवप्पुं युउे यजिष्ये विधिपूर्वकम् ॥ 57 ॥

The King said: “O Lord of the Waters! After the completion of the Samāvartan ceremony (a pupil’s return home after finishing his holy study). I will duly sacrifice my son at the great Naremadha sacrifice; there is no doubt.”

व्यास उवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं राजो सरणः प्रीतमानसः ।

तथेयुक्त्वा ययौ तूर्णं गुप्सतु सुश्वितोप्रभव् ॥ 58 ॥

Vyāsa said: Varuna was very pleased at the King's words and quickly went back saying "Let it be so." The king also became comforted.

रोहिताख्य झील ख्यातः सुततस्य विवृद्धिमान् ।

संजातश्रुतः सर्वविद्यानां च विगारादः ॥ 59 ॥

On the one hand, the king Harisācandra's son became widely known by the name of Rohita; and as he got older, he became gradually versed in all the science and became very clever and intelligent.

यजस्य कारणं तेन ज्ञातं सर्व सवितस्तम् ।

भयंभीतस्ततः सोर्पि मत्वा मरण्यामतमः ॥ 6० ॥

कृत्वा पतावर्न वीरो गतोउसी गिरिपह्नं ।

अगाध्ये नृपतिस्थाने स्थितस्तत भयातुः ॥ 6 1 ॥

That boy then came to know by degrees the cause of the sacrifice in full detail; and knowing that his death is quite certain, became very afraid and quickly fled away from the King and went and stayed in caves of mountains with a fearful heart.

प्राप्ते कातेय शरणो यजार्थी नृपतैगृहम् ।

गत्या तमाह भूयालं कुक्र चर्म शिग्यांते ॥ 62 ॥

प्रश्नाववदो रजा तमाह व्यथित्रियः ।

किं कौरीय नतः क्वापि सुतो मे सुसतम्भा ॥ 63 ॥

Then, when the proper time came, Varuna came up there to the royal palace, desirous to have the sacrifice and spoke to the King thus: "O King!

Now the prescribed time has come; therefore perform the sacrifice that you have resolved to celebrate." The King was very much pained to hear this and spoke with a very sad appearance: "O Best of the Devas! What can I do now? My son has fled away out of the fear of his life; I do not know his whereabouts."

श्रुत्वा तद्धवर्न राजः कुपितो यादसांपति: ।

ग्रणारा तं नृयं कोपादस्वलवादिन्दं भुगम् ॥ 64 ॥

जतोदारभिधो व्याधिर्देह भवतु ते नृप ।

यतः प्रतानिराश्रहं कृत्वा कपटयपिहत ॥ 65 ॥

Varuna became very angry at these words and cursed him thus: "O Lair! You are an hypocrite pundit; therefore you deceived my frequently. Let therefore the disease dropsy come and attack your body."

इति शप्ता ययी धाम यकं पाणधान्ता ।

राज चिन्तानुस्तस्थी भवने व्याधिपीक्षितः ॥ 66 ॥

Varuna, the Holder of the noose, cursing thus, went back to his own abode. The King was attacked with that disease, remained in his own residence, afflicted with cares and anxieties.

यद्धान्तिव्यापीते राजा रोगेण शापजेन ह ।

तदा शुश्राव पुत्रोरि पितरं व्याधियोंहितम् ॥ 67 ॥

Rohita, the son of the king Harisācandra, heard about the severe illness of his father when he was very much tormented with that disease, as the curse of Varuna.

पाधिकः प्राह पुत्रं हि पिता ते भृगुर्ज:खितः ।

जतोदरविकरणे शापजेने नृपातज १ ६ ८ ॥

विनहं जीविते तेउदा व्याजातस्य दुर्पते ।

यच्यत्वा पितरं दुःखं प्राप्तोरसि पिरिगाढूम ॥ 69 ॥

One day a traveller told him: "O son of the King! Your father is very ill with dropsy, due to the curse, and is very sorry. Certainly your brain has turned wrong; vain is your coming in this world; you have passed your life to no purpose, for you are staying still in this mountain cave, abandoning your sorrowful father. Certainly you are a bad disobedient son; what use is there in your keeping up this body?

Book VI Chapter XIII

क्रमनेन शरीरण प्राप्ते ते जम्नः फलम् ।

देहदं दुःखितं कृत्वा स्थितोउर्यव सृताधम १ ७ ० १

प्राणास्त्यान्य: पितुः कार्यं सत्यझोपेति निश्रधाः।

त्वदर्थे दुःखितो राजा क्रंदति व्याधिरपीडतः १ ७ १ १ १

What purpose will be served by your both? When you have got this body, you have abandoned that father and are staying in this solitary cave. Know this as certain that to sacrifice one's life is the duty of a good and obedient son; therefore what more shall I say now than this that your father the king Hariśchandra ailing from a severe illness is very sorry for you and is always weeping.

व्यास उवाच

तदाकर्णे वचस्तध्यं पांथिकादूमरंयुतम् ।

यदा चक्रे मनो गन्तुं युई तातं व्यथातुम् ॥ 7 2 ॥

तदा विश्रवपुर्णूंत्या वासावस्तमुपागमत् ।

रहः प्राह हितं वास्यं दयावानिव भारत ॥ 7 3 ॥

मूर्डोर्स सजपुरु तं यमानय मर्ति वृथा ।

कोरोष चितरं सद्ध न जानासि व्यथायुम् ॥ 7 4 ॥

इति शीमद्वीघागवतो महापुराणी पशलकम्ये

ब्रादशोस्थाय: 11 12 11

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing from the passerby these good words, the prince Rohita wanted to go to his sorrowful father attacked with disease when Indra assuming a Brāhmin form came up to him and began to speak to him when he was alone like one who was filled with mercy. O Son of a King! You are a fool; are you not positively acquainted with the fact that your father is in trouble; why then do you intend in vain to go there?"

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter on the cause of the war between Āḍi and Baka in the Sixth Book of the Mahāpurānam of Śrimaddevīthāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XIII

CHAPTER XIII

On the Above Fight

इन्ट उवाच

साहर्भ कृतवान् राजा पूर्वे यत्कथितो मखः ।

वक्राणाय प्रतिज्ञातः पुर्जे कृत्वा पशुं ग्रियम् ॥ १ ॥

Indra said: “O Prince! The King Harisācandra promised before to Varuna that he would solemnise propitiation the great Naramedha sacrifice when he would offer his own son to be immolated.

गते तवि चिता पुत्र बद्धया यूरोउष्ण: पुनः ।

पर्जुं कृता महाबुद्धे वधिय्वित् व्यवाहुतः ॥ 2 ॥

O Prince! You are very intelligent; can't you grasp this idea that your father has become merciless due to his suffering in this illness and no sooner you go there than he will make you the victim and tie you to the sacrificial post when you will be slaughtered.

इर्थे निशिद्धस्तनुः श्रोक्षणामिततेजसा ।

स्थिततरनैव मायोगीमायया मोहितो भूषण। ॥ ३ ॥

The indomitable Indra thus prohibiting the son, began to stay there deluded by the Māyā of the great Mahā Māyā.

यदा पुनः पुनः शुत्वा पितरं रोगपीक्षितम् ।

गमनाय मति चके तदंद्रः प्रत्यधेययत् ॥ 4 ॥

O King! Thus whenever the prince heard of his father's severe illness, he wanted to go to his father, Indra repeatedly used to go to him and prevent him from doing so.

हरिश्रज्ञोस्तु:खातः: प्रम्बष्टु गुरुमन्तिके ।

स्थितं वसियमेकाने सर्वईं त्रिततन्तयम् ॥ 5 ॥

On the other hand, the King Harisācandra became very much afflicted, and, seeing his family Guru all-knowing well wisher Vasistha close by, asked him:

राजोवाच

भगवन्कि कौमध्य कातोर्जम विध्याकृत: ।

ग्राहि मां दुःख्यमनं महावधिधभ्यात्मूम् ॥ 6 ॥

“O Bhagavan! What am I to do now? I am now very impatient with his agonies of this disease and am very weak; besides I am very much afraid of it. Kindly give me a good advice and save me.

वसिष्य जवाच

श्रुण राजपुचायोर्जित रोगनार्ण प्रति स्तुतः ।

त्रयोद्वगविधाः पुत्रा: कवता धर्मसिंद्रहे ॥ 7 ॥

तस्माकर्ती सुतं कृत्वा यज्ञव मव्यपुत्नम् ।

Vasisṭṭha said: “O King! There is a good remedy for the cure of your disease. It is stated in the Śāstras that the sons are of thirteen kinds Aurasa, Kṣattraja, Datrima, Kṛtrima; etc.

इयं दत्वा यथोहिष्यानयवर ऋजौतमम् ॥ 8 ॥

एवं कृते मघे घृप रोगनाणो भविष्यति ।

वरणोर्जि प्रसातात्मा भविष्यति यथासुखम् ॥ 9 ॥

Therefore pay the reasonable price and buy one good Brāhmīn boy and perform your sacrifice with that boy. O King! Thus Varuna will be pleased and you will be cured of your disease."

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः श्रुत्वा राजा प्रोवाच भनिगणम् ।

अन्वेषय महावृद्धे विषयेध्वित्यन्तः ॥ 10 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of Vasisṭha the King Harisācandra addressed his minister: "O Minister-in-Chief! You are very sharp and intelligent, therefore you better try your best and seek in my kingdom a Brāhmin boy.

कदाचित्कोटपि लोपार्थी द्विति स्वसुतं पिता ।

सामान यं दन्त चायात्यार्थयेतेउसयो ॥ १ १ ॥

In case a poor Brāhmin be willing, out of love for money, to give over his son, then give him any amount he wants and bring his son.

सर्ववैय सामानेयो यज्ञों दिज्ञालकाः ।

न कार्यों कृपणा बुद्धिस्तवा मत्कार्यहेत ॥ १२ ॥

O Minister! By all means, bring a Brāhmīn boy for this sacrifice; in other words, do not be miserly or act lazily to perform my business.

प्रार्थीनयस्तवा पुर कस्यचिद्धिक्रजवादिनः ।

रूक्षेण देहि यज्ञार्थ कर्तेक्रोस्पी पशुः किल ॥ 13 ॥

You should pray to any Brāhmin thus: Take this money and give your son, who will be sacrificed in a sacrificial ceremony as a victim."

इति संबोधितस्तेन सचिवः कार्यहितः ।

अन्वेवयामास पुरे प्राये प्राये गई गईे ।। ४।।

Thus ordered, the minister sought for a Brāhmin boy in town after town, village after village, and house after house.

एवमन्वेघनस्तस्य विषये कर्धिदातुतः ।

निर्धनस्क्षितुशार्थीवर्जीगर्जिति नामतः ॥ 15 ॥

तस्य पुरं शुर्जःशेयं मध्यमं मन्रितस्तमः ।

अनयायाम दत्त्वयं प्रार्थितं तद्धनं तदा ॥ 16 ॥

Till, at last, he came to know that in his kingdom there was a poor distressed Brāhmīn named Ajigarta, who had three sons. Then the minister gave to the Brāhmīn that he wanted and purchased his second son named Śunahṣepha and brought him before the King. And handed him over to the King, saying that this Brāhmīn boy is fit for the sacrificial victim.

समानीय शुन:गेणं सचित्व: कार्यतत्पर: ।

राजे निवेदयामास पशुयोग्यं द्विज्ञातमम् ॥ 17 ॥

The King then gladly brought the best Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas for the performance of the sacrifice, and collected all the articles requisite for the purpose.

राज़सिनुपित्तसेन विज्ञानानीय सर्वतः ।

कारयामास संभारान्ये न्याख्यों वैद्यतिभान्ने ॥ 18 ॥

प्राख्ये तु मखे तत्र विश्वामिजो महापुनि: ।

बन्दे दूद्वा गुनःशेपं निविषये रुंद तदा ॥ 19 ॥

When the sacrifice was commenced, the great Muni Viśvāmitra, seeing Śunahṣepta tied, prohibited the King and said: "O King! Do not be so bold as to sacrifice this boy; let this boy be free.

राजन्ना साहसं कार्षीपुर्वैनं द्विज्ञालकम् ।

ग्रांथीयाम्यमुब्यम्युक्ते रेज्ञा यथिष्यति ॥ 20 ॥

O long-lived One! I am asking this thing from you to day and if you obey it, certainly it will do good to you.

कन्द्वर्यं शुन:गेपः करणा मां दुनोत्यपि ।

दयावान्य व जोन्ने कुक ने वचनं नृय ॥ 21 ॥

O King! This boy Śunahśepha is crying; his cries are paining my heart and I am feeling pity for him. Hear my word and free this boy out of mercy.

परदेश्य स्थायी स्वदेहं वे द्यापराः ।

ददति क्षत्रिया: पूर्व स्वर्गकामा: शुचित्रातः ॥ 22 ॥

Book VI Chapter XIII

See! The pure-hearted Kṣatriyas, in ancient days, used to sacrifice their own bodies and thus preserve others bodies, so that they might attain the Heavens.

तं स्वेदेहस्य स्थार्थं हौस दिजसुतं बलात् ।

पार्य मा कुरु राजैद्र दयावान्यव बालके ॥ २३ ॥

And now you are killing this Brāhmīn boy forcibly so that you may preserve your own body; judge how vicious is this your act! Be merciful to this boy.

सर्वेभां सूर्णी प्रीतिदेहे वेति स्वयं नृप ।

मुंचैनं बालकं तत्मात्रमाणं यदि वे बचः ॥ 24 ॥

O King! Everyone likes his own body to the same extent; you are feeling this yourself; therefore if you take my word, then quit this boy."

व्यास उवाच

अनतट्य च तद्रावयं राजा दुःखतुते भूणम् ।

न मुप्रोच मुनिसतम्पे चुकोपातील तापास: ॥ 25 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The King Harisācandra was ailing very much; hence he did not pay any heed to the Munis words and did not quit the boy.

उपदेशं ददी तस्मै शून:ओपाय कौलिकाः ।

मनं पाणधरस्वाय द्ववान्वेदवितमः ॥ 26 ॥

Thereupon the very fiery spirited Viśvāmitra became very angry with the King. Then Viśvāmitra, the son of Kauśika, the foremost of the knowers of the Vedas, shewed mercy on Śunahśépha and gave him the “Varuna Mantram.”

शुन:गोधोपि तं मन्यमसुक्रधकर्षितः ।

स्तुतस्येण चुकोण सेभ्यन्त वरणं भुणम् ॥ 27 ॥

Śunahśépha very much afraid to lose his life, earnestly repeatedly remembered Varuna and uttered that mantram in Pluta tone (lengthened or prolonged).

सुवर्ते मुनिपुरं ते जात्वा वै यादासां पति: ।

तत्रागत्य शुनःजैपं मुभोच करणाणंवः ॥ 28 ॥

रोगहीनं नृपं कृत्ता वकणः स्वगृहं ययी ।

विश्वामित्तु ते पुरं कृतवान्योचितं पुतेः ॥ 29 ॥

Varuna, too, the ocean of mercy, knowing that the Brāhmīn boy was praising him with hymns

came up to that spot and freed Śunahśepha from his bondage and freed the King also from his disease and went back to his own abode. Thus the Maharṣi Vīsvāmitra became very glad to rescue the Muni's son from the jaws of death.

न कृतं चर्चनं रज्ञा कौशिकस्य महात्मनः ।

गेशं द्धार मनसा राजापीर स गाशित्रः ॥ ३० ॥

The King Harisćandra did not observe the words of Viśvāmitra; hence the son of Gādhi harboured within his heart anger towards the King.

एकसित्म्यमये राजा ह्यास्कड़ो वयं नतः ।

सुकरं हृताकामसृत मध्य्याङे कौशिकांतरे ॥ 31 ॥

ब्रुद्धबाहायावेशेण विश्वाधिरेण वंशितः ।

सर्वेकं प्राणितं तस्य गृहीतं राज्यमुद्धुतम् ॥ 32 ॥

One day while the King Harisācandra was riding in a forest and three, at mid-day, on the banks of the river Kauśika, when he desired to kill a boar, Visvāmitra in the garb of an old Brāhmim asked from him everything that he had, including his dominion and thus cunningly took away everything from the King.

पीवितोत्री हरिश्रान्ये चक्रान्यो नयो भुणम् ।

वसिषुः कौफिंक प्राह वने प्रापतं वद्छया ॥ 33 ॥

The Maharşi Vasistha, seeing his Yajamāna Harisāandra suffering much, became wounded and felt pain in his mind.

क्षत्रियाभ्य पुर्वैद्रे वृया ब्राह्मणायेषभृत् ।

बक्रमां वृया किं त्व गर्वे बहसि दायिक ॥ 34 ॥

One day when he casually met Visāmitra in a forest, he said: "O wicked Kṣatriya! A disgrace to your family! You have in vain put on the garb of a Brāhmin; your religion is like a crane; you are full of vanity, you boast for nothing.

कस्मात्चया नृपक्षेहो यज्ञानो मायायसौ ।

अपराधं विना जाल्य गर्गिते दुःखमद्धून ॥ 35 ॥

The best of kings, Harisācanda is my protege; he is faultless; still, O Fool! Why are you giving him so much trouble. As you are religious as a crane is religious, so take your birth as a crane."

बकध्यानपो यस्मात्समार्चं वे वको भव ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

इति शगतो वसिष्ठेन कौशिकाः प्राह तं पुनः ॥ 3 6 ॥

त्वम्यादिभंवायुम्बन्यकोर्जं यावदेव हि ।

Visvāmitra, thus cursed by Vasistha, cursed Vasistha in return, and said “O Vasistha! As long as I will remain a crane, so long you also remain as Śarāli or Adi bird.

व्यास उवाच

एवं परस्यं दत्त्वा शापं तैं कौधपीक्षिति ॥ 37 ॥

अंडजी तरसा जाती सरस्याडीकबी भूति ।

Vyāsa said: O King! The two angry Munis thus cursed each other and the two were born as Crane and Śarāli or Ādi bird.

एकस्मियादे नीई कृत्वाउसी बकरूपभक् ॥ 38 ॥

विश्वासि: स्थितस्तत दिव्ये सरसि मानते ।

The crane Visvāmitra built its nest on top of a tree on the Mānasarovara lake and began to live there.

अन्यस्मियान्धे कृत्वा सिस्छी नीडमुतमम् ॥ 39 ॥

आडीकपधरस्तथावन्योन्ये द्वेशतत्ये ।

Vasistha, too, assumed the form of an Ādī bird, and built his nest on the top of another tree and lived there. Thus the two Rsis spent their days in full enmity towards each other.

दिवे दिवे तौ संग्रामं चक्रतु: क्रोधसंयुती ॥ 40 ॥

दुःखदं सर्वतैकानां कंदमानायुभी भृणम् ।

These two birds used to shrick so terribly loud that they became a nuisance to all; They fought daily with each other.

चंचपुघप्रहरितु नखायातैः परस्यम् ॥ 41 ॥

ज्वन्तू स्तिप्रिक्लजी पुधिताविव किंगुको ।

They used to strike each other with beaks and wings and claws and thus they were covered all over their bodies with cuts and wounds and they were smeared with blood.

एवं बहुति वर्षिण पक्षिस्पधारी मुनी ॥ 42 ॥

स्थिती तत्र महाराज शापपाशेन विन्त्तौ ।

They began to look like Kirinšuka trees. Thus the two Rsis, in the shape of birds, in their states of bondage, due to each other's curse, passed many years there.

राजोवाच

कर्थ मुक्ती भुनिश्रेष्ठी शपाब्धिस्छौकिणी ॥ 43 ॥

तन्यमावश्व विषूपं परं कीतूहलं हि मे ।

Janamejaya said: O Brāhmaṇa! Kindly tell me how Vaśistha and Kauśika, the two Rsis, became free from their curses; I am very curious to hear this.

व्यास उवाच

युध्यमानायृषी दूर्वा बढ़ा लोकपितामहः ॥ 44 ॥

तत्राजगमानिभिर्वैत: सर्वैद्यापरे: ।

Vyāsa said: Brahmā, the Grandsire of his subjects, came there with all the Devas, filled with mercy, on seeing those two Rṣis at war against each other.

तावाश्राय सगकतां युद्धते विविवार्च च ॥ 4 5 ॥

ग्रापं संमोच्यामास तयोः ब्रिंत परमयम् ।

Brahmā, the Lotus-seated, made them desist from such a fight, consoled them and freed both of them from each other's curse.

ततो जप्य: सुरा: सर्वे स्थानि तिष्यपानि पचम्: ॥ 46 ॥

सत्योर्के जगामाशु हेसाकडः प्रतपायन् ।

Then the Devas went back to their own abodes and the illustrious lotus-seated Brahmā went to the Satyaloka, seated on his Swan.

विश्वामीज्यायनृर्णी वसिष्य: स्वामयं नतः ॥ 47 ॥

मिथः स्नेह ततः कृत्वा प्रजापत्युपदेशतः ।

मैत्राबकर्निपाट्येचं कृतं युद्धमाकरणम् ॥ 48 ॥

कोशिकेन समं भूप दुःखदं च परमयम् ।

को नाम मानवो लोके देवो वा दानवोर्जी चा ॥ 49 ॥

Maharşi Vasisṭṭha and Viśvāmitra became then friends and were tied with bonds of affection at the advice of Brahmā; they went back to their own Āśramas. O King! Now see, that the Maharṣi Vasisṭṭha, the son of Mitrā-Varuna, fought for nothing with Viśvāmitra, so painful to both the parties. Who, then, amongst the human beings, the Dānavas or the Devas can conquer his Ahankāra (egoism) and be always happy?

अहंकारजयं कृत्वा सर्वदा सुख्याभयंते ।

तस्मात्राजँश्रतृष्टिमूद्रमतामपि तुर्नघा ॥ ५० ॥

Book VI Chapter XIV

Therefore the Citta-Šuddhi, the purity of the heart (that purity which imparts to man the blessedness of God-vision) is very difficult even for the high-souled persons; with the greatest caution and utmost effort one has to practise for that.

यलेन साधनीया सा तिष्ठिनं निरर्थकम् ।

तिंद्यानपत:सर्व यकिषिद्वमैसाधनम् ॥ 51 ॥

श्रद्धान्र विविधा प्रोक्ता साचित्की राकसी तथा।

तापसी सर्वदेषु दैहिनां धर्मकमेषु ॥ 1 ॥

साचित्की वृत्तीभ लोके यथोक्तपतदा सा ।

तदर्पभिलदा प्रोक्त राजसी विधिसंपुता ॥ 2 ॥

तापसी त्वफला राजत्र तु कौदितिकी पुनः ।

कामाक्रोधायिभपृतानां जनानां नृपसनम् ॥ 3 ॥

To those persons, that are void of this Citta Śuddhi, it is all vain to go to places of pilgrimage, to make charities, to practise tapasyā, to be truthful; in fact, anything, which is the means to attain Dharma, becomes useless. O King! Śraddhā (Faith) is of three kinds: (1) Sātviki, (2) Rājasiki (3) Tāmasikī to all persons in all their religious matters. The Sātvik faith is the only one of the three that yields entire results; and it is very rare in this world. The Rājasik faith, done according to due rules, yields half the results thereof and the Tāmasik faith is fruitless and inglorious; the

Tāmasik faith arises with those persons that are overwhelmed with lust, anger, greed, etc.

वासनारहितं कृत्वा तिच्चनं श्वणादिना ।

तीर्थोदिषु वसेरित्यं दे्वीपुजन्तत्यरः ॥ 52 ॥

Therefore, O King! Keep to the company of the good and hear the Śāstras Vedānta, etc., and free the heart of worldly desires and then concentrate it to the worship of the Devi and live in a sacred place of pilgrimage.

देवीनामानि वचसा गृह्मत्या गुणान्तुवन् ।

ध्यायंस्तस्या: पदाभोजं कलितोषभ्यान्रिति: ॥ 5 3 ॥

एवं तु कुक्रतस्तस्य न कवाधिक्लतेर्भयम् ।

अनायायने संसारामच्छ्यते पातकी जनः ॥ 54 ॥

ड्रित श्रीमद्दीभागवते महापुराणे पशकल्यचे

त्रयोदगो5थायः 11 13 11

Men afraid and troubled with the defects of the Kaliyuga, should always take the name of the Devi, sing praises, and meditate on Her lotus feet. Thus the Jivas will not have any fear of Kali and the fallen vicious persons will easily be able to cross this ocean of the world and be frce. There is no doubt in this.

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the description of the battle between Ādi and Baka after the discourse Śunahśepha in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahāpurānam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XIV

CHAPTER XIV

On the Birth of Vasisṭha from Mitrā Varuṇa

जनमेजय उवाच

मैत्रावक्षिणित्यूर्ते नाम तस्य मुने: कथम् ।

विशिष्य सहभागा ब्रह्मास्तनुजस्य ह 11 11

किमसौ कर्मतों नाम प्राप्तवान्युपालनस्तथा ।

ब्रृहि मे वदतां श्रेष्ठ कारणं तस्य नाममम् ॥ 2 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Bhagavan! Maharsi Vasistha was the mind-born son of Brahma; how is it then that you have named him as Maitra Vārunī." Is it that he got this name by some action or by some Gunas? Kindly tell me the origin of this name, O Best of speakers!

व्यास उवाच

निवोधे नृपतिश्रेष्ठ बसिष्ठो ब्रहण: सुतः ।

निश्रणापातनुं त्यकत्वा पुर्जनाती महावृत्ति: ॥ 3 ॥

मिंत्राकरणायोर्यमातन्यातनाय विश्रुतम् ।

मैत्राकरणिरित्यस्थितलोकें सर्वत्र पार्थिव ॥ 4 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! It is quite true that illustrious Vasiṣṭha was the noble son of Brahmā but he had to quit that body due to the curse of the King Nīmi and he had to take a second body from Mitrā Varunā; hence he is named in this world as Maitrā-Varunī.

Śrimaddevīthāgavatam

राजोबाच

क्रमाच्छयत: स ध्यांत्या राजा बढ्धात्माजो भूति:।

चिवप्रेमतभूर्नि लनगो राजा: शापो3तिदाक्ण: ॥ 5 ॥

अनागासं भूर्नि राजा किममती शणतवानुभे ।

कारणं ववं धर्मज तत्स शापस्य मुक्तत: ॥ 6 ॥

The King said: O Bhagavan! How was it that the religious Vasisṭṭha, the best of the Munis, the son of Brahmā was cursed by the King? Oh! The Munis have to suffer the dreadful curse of Kṣatriya kings! This seems very wonderful to me. O Knower of Dharma! Why did that king curse the innocent Muni? I am very curious to hear the cause of this; kindly tell me the cause of the curse.

ध्यास उवाच

कारणं तु मया प्रोक्त तव पूर्वं विनिश्छितम् ।

संसारोत्रं विभिन्धितो राजन्मायागृपे: किल । ७ ।।

Vyāsa said: O King! I told you already in particular all the causes of these. This Sarisāra is pervaded by the three Gunas of Māyā, Sattva, Raja and Tama.

धर्मं करोतु घपालछान्तु तापासतपः ।

सर्वेधां तु युणीर्विद्धे नोज्जलं तद्वदेविद्ध ।। 8 ॥

Whether the kings practise their Dharma or the ascetics practise their tapas all their actions are interpenctrated with these Gunas; therefore they can not shine so brightly.

कार्यक्रोधायिपभूताश्र राजानो भुभवत्शा ।

लोभात्कारसंयुक्तश्रान्ति दृशं तयः ॥ 9 ॥

The Kings, Munis performed very severe penances and austerities under the influence of lust, anger, greed and Ahanikāra.

भवन्ति क्षत्रिया राजऋजोगुपममावृता: ।

ब्राह्माणतु तथा राजऋ कोप्रि सचलसंयुतः ॥ 10 ॥

O King! All, whether they be the Ksatriyas or the Brāhmanas, who perform their sacrifices overpowered with this Rajo Guna, really, none of them performs these actions guided by Sattva Guna.

क्रधिणास्त्री सिंिः शणसतेन शणो मुनि: पुनः।

दुःखादुदुःखतरं प्राप्तावृषाबिप विधर्वेलात् ॥ ११ ॥

The King Nimi; was cursed by the Rsi and the Rsi was cursed again by the King Nimi; thus they met with greater clamities and painful sufferings, the fruits from the hands of the powerful Fate.

प्रत्यगुद्धिकः द्विकार्याद्धमैनसः शुद्धिकजल्ला ।

दुर्लैभा प्राणिनां धृप संसारे त्रिगुणात्मके ॥ 12 ॥

O King! In this world of the three Gunas, it is very difficult for the beings to get the Dravya Śuddhi; Kriyā Śuddhi, and the pure effulgent Citta Śuddhi.

परणाकिष्ठभावोर्धे नोल्लंधः केनचित्ववित्।

यस्यानुग्रहमिच्छेता मोचयलेवे तं क्षणात् ॥ 13 ॥

O King! Know this as the influence wielded by the Highest Śakti, the Mother of this Universe. Nobody is able to overstep it; but he, whom She favours, can cross in a moment this world, bounded by the three Gunas.

महान्तोपि न मुच्यते हरिच्छाहरादयः ।

पामता अर्पि मुच्यते यथा सत्यद्वितादयः ॥ 14 ॥

What more can be said than the fact that Hari, Hara, and Brahmā and the other Gods cannot free themselves without Her grace.

तस्यान्तु हृदयं कोर्पि न वैति भूवनये ।

तथापि भक्तव्येयं भवत्येव सुनिश्छान् ॥ 15 ॥

Moreover, the sinners like Satyavrata and others become free when Her Grace comes upon them.

तस्मात्तद्धिकासयेता दोषिन्मैलनाय च ।

रागदंभाविदृष्णा चेसा भक्तिन्त्रिणी भवेत् ॥ 16 ॥

Nobody in these three worlds can know what reigns in Her mind; again, this is also a certain fact that She gets Herself bound by Her own will to Her devotees.

इक्ष्वाकुकुलसभ्युते निमिनीय नराधियः ।

रूपवानुणसम्यजो धर्मजो लोकेंत्रकः ॥ 17 ॥

Therefore it is extremely desirable that one should have recourse to Sattvikī devotion for the complete removal of faults and sins.

सत्यवादी द्वापरी याजको ज्ञानवश्छूँचः ।

ब्राद्यासनयो धीमान्यजापालनतः ॥ 18 ॥

And as the devotion with attachment and vanity

Book VI Chapter XIV

is always injurious to men, therefore it is highly beneficial to quit it; there is no doubt in this.

पुरं निवेशगायास गौतमाश्रमसिद्धो ।

जयं तु पुरसंत्र च बाङ्पाणानां हिताय सः ॥ १९ ॥

बृद्धस्तस्य समुद्वधा यजेवमिति राजसी ।

यजेन बकुकालेन दक्षिणासंयुतेन च ॥ 20 ॥

O King! There was a king named Nimi, born of the family of Iksyaku. He was beautiful, well qualified, virtuous, truthful, charitable, endearing to his people, a sacrificer, of pure conduct and manners, ready to govern his subjects, intelligent and endowed with knowledge.

इक्ष्वकृतु चितरं दृष्ट्या वप्रकावयि पार्थिव ।

कारयामास सम्भार यथोहिह्म महात्माभि: ॥ 21 ॥

For the benefit of the Brāhmaṇas, that high-souled king established a city named Jayantupur in close vicinity to their hermitage of Gautama.

भूगुर्भगिरसं चैव घामदेवं च गौतमम् ।

वसिष्टं च पुलस्यं च ऋषीसीय पुलतं क्रतुम् ॥ 22 ॥

Thus some time passed when this Rājasik idea arose in his mind that “I will perform a sacrifice extending for a good many years when I will give exhorbitant Dakṣinās (remunerations to the priests and Brāhmins).”

मृनीनामन्यायमास सर्वत्रान्वेधारगान् ।

यजविद्याप्रिणीश्छा तापसान् वेदवित्मान् ॥ 23 ॥

Getting permission from his own father Iksyāku, he began to collect all the ingredients necessary for the sacrifice, as advised by the high-souled persons.

राजा सम्पृतसभापः संपुज्य गुभात्मन्तः ।

वरिषहं प्राह धर्मजी विवेचेन सम्पतिजः ॥ 24 ॥

He invited the all-knowing Munis and ascetics, versed in the Vedas and in conducting sacrifices, e.g., Bhrgu, Agirā, Vāmadeva, Gautama, Vasiṣṭha, Pulastya, Ricka, Pulaha, Kratu and others, all well-versed in the Vedas.

यजेयं मुनिशाष्टूल याजयस्य कृपानिधे ।

गुरुस्ते सर्वैतनासि कार्य मे कुरु समाप्ति ॥ 25 ॥

यजीपकरणं सर्वे समानीते सुरंस्कृतम् ।

पत्रवर्षेसहंत्रे तु दीक्षां कान्टी मतिष्ठ मे ॥ 26 ॥

Then that religious King Nimi, collecting all the materials necessary for sacrifice worshipped his own Guru Vasistha and then spoke to him (the Guru) with great humility, O Best of Munis! I will perform a sacrifice; kindly perform this my sacrificial act; you are my Guru and therefore you know everything; so do this sacrifice for me. All the articles for this purpose are brought and cleansed.

यास्मिन् चमे समाराध्या देवी श्रीजगद्यिका ।

तन्गीत्यर्थमहं चरं कारीय विधिपूर्वकम् ॥ 27 ॥

तच्छूलासी निमेबांक्यं वसिषः प्राह भूपतिम् ।

इउरेणाई चृत: पूर्वे यथार्थ नृपसत्तम ॥ 28 ॥

O Guru! Know that for five thousand years I mean to be engaged in this sacrifice, this is my Sankalpa (will). I will worship the Goddess Ambikā in this sacrifice and for Her satisfaction I am arranging for it according to the prescribed rules. Hearing the King Nimi's words, Vasistha said: "O Best of Kings! Indra, the King of the Devas, has already selected me for his sacrificial ceremony.

पशास्थिकमयं कर्तुभुच्छ: पाकाशासन: ।

स दीक्षां गमितो देवः पत्रवर्षशतामिकाम् ॥ 29 ॥

Now Indra is ready to do the sacrifice for there propitiation of the Highest Śakti and I have initiated him for five hundred years.

तस्माच्यन्तरं तावरूतितालय पराधिव ।

इन्द्रसेवे समाप्तेउकृताकार्यं दिव्यस्ते: ॥ 30 ॥

आगमिष्याम्यहं राजतंलावचं प्रतिपालय ।

Therefore, O King! You will have to wait till I complete the Indra's Yajña. After fully completing all his works, I will come here. Therefore, O King! Wait till then.

राजोवाच

मया निमन्त्रताश्रान्ये मृनयो यत्राकाणत् ॥ 31 ॥

सम्भाता सम्भुतः सर्वे पालयामि कर्थ गुरो ।

इक्ष्वाकृणं कुले बढ्यानुरुस्त्वं वेदवित्यमः ॥ 32 ॥

The King said: "O Best of Munis! I have already invited other Munis for this sacrifice and have

collected all the materials; how, then can I wait for you? O Brāhmaṇa! You are the foremost of those versed in the Vedas and you are the family Guru of the noble Iksvāku.

कथं तत्कलाउढ़ा मे कार्यमृघतो गन्नुमारु। वै।

न ते भूकें डिजश्रेष्ठ यदुत्सृज्य मडं मम ॥ 33 ॥

गतालीय धरलोभेन लोगकृतिलचेतनः ।

निवारितोरी राजा त जगामेमूरयं गृतः ॥ 34 ॥

How is it, then, avoiding my work you are ready to go elsewhere O Best of Brāhmins! Under the uncontrollable greed of wealth you have lost all senses and you are ready to go away without doing my work. This does not behave you.

राजाप्रिय विमान भूत्वा गौतमं प्रत्यपूजयत् ।

इयाज हिमवत्थई सागरस्य समीपतः ॥ 35 ॥

दिश्षणा बहुता दत्ता विधेधेभी पढ़कर्भिपि ।

निमिना पडशास्ही दीक्षा तक कृता नृप ॥ 36 ॥

O King! Though thus tempted by the King Nimi, the Rṣi Vasiṣṭha went to the Indra's sacrifice. The King, too, became absent minded and selected for the sacrifice the Rṣi Gautama.

क्रलिज: पृक्तिजः कामं घर्मोर्भिमूंदायुतः ।

गक्रवत्रे समापेत तु पडवर्षशतामके ॥ 37 ॥

He then commenced his sacrificial ceremony close to the ocean by the side of the Himalayan range and gave profusely the Dakṣinās.

आजगाम वसिष्ठस्तु राज्ञ: सर्वदिष्ठस्या ।

आगात्य संस्थितसन्त्र दर्शनार्थ नृत्यय च ॥ 38 ॥

तदा राजा प्रमुतन्त्र निद्रायोपहतें घृष्णम् ।

नासौ प्रवोधितो घृत्यैनांगतन्तु मुनि नृपः ॥ 39 ॥

The King Nimi was engaged in this sacrificial act for five thousand years. In this the Rttvis (pricests) were worshipped with sufficient wealth and cows; they were extremely glad.

वसिष्यस्य तनो मन्यः प्रादुर्भूतोउद्यमानतः ।

अर्शनानामिस्तर चुकोप मुनिसनामः ॥ 4० ॥

Then, when the five hundred years extending sacrifice of Indra was completed, the Rsi Vasistha came to see the King Nimi's sacrifice and waited there to see the King.

शपां च दत्तवांतसमै राते मन्युवर्ग शत: ।

यस्मात्चं मां गुर्भ त्यक्त्वास्यनुर्भामात्मनः ॥ 4 1 ॥

The king was then asleep; so the servants did not awake him from his sleep; and the King did not come to the Rşi. Feeling insult at this, the Maharşi Vasiṣṭha became infuriated with rage.

दीक्षितोंपत्र बतानंद मावमद्वारा याधिव ।

वारितोपि मया तमाप्रिदुर्भरूतच पशिव्यसि ॥ 4 2 ॥

पतिवेदं शरीरं ते विदेहो भव भूपते ।

Not seeing the King, he become very angry; and, subject to this, he cursed the King; when I am your lifelong Guru, especially when I prohibited you and you have forsaken me and selected another Guru and by your sheer force you are initiated, then be devoid of your body. Let your body fall off to-day.

व्यास उवाच

इति तद्धावहतं श्रुवा राजस्तु परिचारका: ॥ 4 3 ॥

सखः प्रबोधायामासुर्पिनामुः प्रकोपितम् ।

Vyāsa said: The King's attendants, hearing thus the curse given by Vasiṣṭha went to the King, instantly awoke him from his sleep and informed him that the Rṣi Vasiṣṭha not seeing him, became very angry. The King Nimi, quite sinless, went then to the angry Vasiṣṭha and humbly spoke to him the following reasonable words, pregnant with meaning.

कुपितं तं समायान्य तथा विगतकल्यप: ॥ 44 ॥

उवाच बचनं रलक्षणं हेतुतपर्षे च युक्तिमत् ।

मम दोषो न धर्मत्र नतस्त्वं तृष्णयाकुल: ॥ 45 ॥

हित्वा मां वयानां वे प्राधितोजीप मया भुगम् ।

न लज्जसे द्विजश्छ कुला कर्म जुगुयितम् ॥ 46 ॥

O Knower of Dharma! I am your Yajamāna; though I repeatedly requested you to perform my sacrifice, yet you quitted me out of the covetuousness and went somewhere else. I cannot be charged with any fault. You are the foremost of Brāhmīns; and knowing that contentment is the substance of your Dharma, you did not feel ashamed to do this blameable act.

Book VI Chapter XIV

संतीपे ब्राह्मणश्रेश जानन्यमंत्य निश्रयम् ।

पुत्रोजस ब्रहणः साक्षातृदेवदोर्गविसमः ॥ 47 ॥

You are the son of Brahmā; and, being versed in the Vedas and Vedāṅgas, you are yet unaware of the subtle and very difficult nature of the Brāhminic religion.

न वेल्स विग्रधार्यस्य गर्ति सूक्ष्मां दुरत्यव्यम् ।

आत्मदोषं यमे श्रात्या घृषा मां शणुपुचतः ॥ 4 8 ॥

Now you want to cast your own fault on my shoulders and you are trying in vain to curse me. Anger is more to be blamed than Cāndāla!

त्याज्यसु सुर्जनैः कोध्यश्रांतादिधिको यतः ।

वृथा कोधपरितेन मयि शपः प्रपातितः ॥ 49 ॥

The wise men should overcome it by all means. When you, infuriated with rage, have been able to curse me for nothing, then I now curse you.

त्वागि च पतत्वढ़ दैहे3यं क्रीभयंतुः ।

एवं शणे मुनी राजा राजा च मुनिना तथा ॥ 50 ॥

"Let your this body, inflamed with anger, drop off." O King! Thus the King cursed the Muni and the Muni cursed the King; and both of them were, therefore, very sorry.

परस्यं प्राय्य शगयं दुःशित्तौ तो बभूवतुः ।

वसिष्ठत्वतिचित्नातर्ते बढ़ापां शरणं गताः ॥ 51 ॥

निवेदयामास तथा शापं भपूकृत महत् ।

Vasisṭha then became troubled with cares and took shelter with Brahmā and informing him about the great curse given by the King Nimi said: "Father! The King has cursed me saying "Let your body fall off today. Now the great trouble due to the falling off of the body has arisen. What am I to do now?"

वसिष्ठ उवाच

राजा शणोप्रियम देशोउयं पतत्वच तवेते वे ॥ ५२ ॥

किं करोति चितः प्राप्त कई काव्यप्रापतजम् ।

अन्यदेहसुमुतपत्ते जनकं वद सांप्रतम् ॥ ५३ ॥

O Father! Kindly tell me from whom shall I take my birth and take such means as I can get a body like what I have now.

तथा मे देहसंयोगः पूर्वल्समपचताम् ।

यादूर्ग संगामेतिस्मदेहे तजास्तु तस्तितः ॥ ५४ ॥

Also by Your unbounded power, do so that I can retain the knowledge in that body as I have at present; You are fully competent to do this.

समर्पोर्सि महाताज प्रसादं कतुर्महींस ।

वसिष्य स्वचः शुवा बहा प्रोबाव तं सुनाम ॥ 55 ॥

भिजारक्षणयोतेजस्यं प्रविश्य स्थितो भव ।

तस्माद्योगिजः काले भविता त्वं न संगयः ॥ 56 ॥

पुनदेई समासाध धर्मपुन्तो भविष्यस ।

भूतात्मा वेदवित्कामं सर्वत्र सर्वपूजितः ॥ 57 ॥

O King! Hearing thus the words of Vasisṭha, Brahmā spoke thus to dear son: Go and enter into the Tejas (essence) of Mitrā Varuna and remain contented; then you will get, in due time, a body not born of any womb and you will be again religious, truthful, knower of the Vedas, all-knowing and worshipped by all; there is no doubt in this.

एवमुक्तस्तदा पिता प्रयये वक्तालयम् ।

कृत्वा प्रद्रिष्णं प्रीत्या प्रणय च पितामहम् ॥ 58 ॥

When Brahmā said this, the Maharṣi Vasisṭha bowed down to the Grand Sirc and circumambulating him, went to the abode of Varuna.

विवेश स तयोदैहि मित्रावरणयोः किल ।

जीवाशेषन वसिष्ठोर्ध त्यक्त्वा देहमनुतनम् ॥ 59 ॥

Then the quitted his excellent body; and, with his subtle body, the part of his Jiva entered into the body of Mitrā Varuna.

कदापितृसुंशी राजानगता वरणालयम् ।

यदुच्छया वरातोहा सर्वीगणसमावृता ॥ 60 ॥

दूर्धा तामपतरं दिव्यां रूपवीबनसंर्तुना ।

जातौ कामातुरी देवौ तदा तामूचतुर्पे ॥ 61 ॥

विवशी चाफसर्वाङ्गी देवकन्यां मनोरामम् ।

आवां त्यमनवधारी यद्यस्व मामकूली ॥ 62 ॥

विहरस्य यथाकामं स्थानेउभिव्यर्बिणिन ।

तथोक्ता सा ततो देवी ताथ्यां तत्र स्थितावरणा ॥ 63 ॥

Then once on a time Urvaśī, exquisitely beautiful and lovely, surrounded by her comrades,

went wilfully into the abode of Varuna. Mitrā-Varuṇa, the two Devas became very passionate to see that Apsarā (the celestial nymph) endowed with youth and beauty and being enchanted with the arrows of cupid, and, being senseless, addressed to the Deva Kanyā Urvaśī, beautiful in all her parts, thus: "O Lovely One! Seeing you, we are very much troubled with the arrows of cupid; O Beautiful One! Select us and remain and enjoy here at your pleasure."

कृत्वा भावं स्थितं देवी मिवाकरणायोरुं ।

सा गृहीता तयोभांवं संस्थिता चाक्टर्शनि ॥ 64 ॥

When they said thus, Urvaśi became attached to them; and, under their control, began to stay in the house of Mitrā Varuna.

तयोस्तु पत्तितं वीर्यं कुभेमे दैवादनाङ्गते ।

तस्माजातौ मुनी राजन्द्रावेलातिमन्तो ॥ 6 5 ॥

When Urvaśī began to remain there, strongly attached to them, the semen of Mitrā Varuna dropped in an uncovered jar.

अगस्ति: प्रधमस्तत्र वसिष्छुधापरस्खा ।

विग्रावकरणोवीर्णताप्याम्बुधिसन्ती ॥ 6 6 ॥

And the two beautiful sons of the Rāsis were born out of that; Agasti was the first child and Vasistha

the second. Thus, out of the semen of Mitrā Varuna, the two ascetics were born.

प्रथमस्तु वनं प्राणो वाल एव महातपाः ।

इर्ववाकुस्तु वसिष्ठं तं वालं बबे पुरोहितम् ॥ 67 ॥

The first Agasti turned out a great ascetic in his childhood and resorted to forest; Iksvāku the best of Kings, selected Vasisṭha as his family priest.

वंशस्याय सुखाखं तं पालयामाय पार्थित ।

विशेषणे युनि ज्ञाला प्रील्या युक्तो कंपूव ह ॥ 6 8 ॥

O King! Iksvāku, the best of Kings, nursed him for the welfare of his own line; the more so, because to know that he was the Muni Vasiṣṭha; and thus he was very pleased with him.

एत्ते सर्वमाख्यारं वसिष्ठस्य च कारणम् ।

गणाद्रौतरग्रामतिभ्रावकर्णयो: कुले ॥ 69 ॥

श्रित शीमद्वीभागवते महापुर्याचे भटकल्म्ये

चतुर्वी3क्यानः 11 14 11

Janamejaya! Thus I have described to you about the getting of another body by Vasistha, due to the curse of Nimi, and have also described his re-birth in Mitrā-Varuṇa's family.

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the birth of Vasistha from Mitrā Varuna in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XV

On Nimi's Getting Another Body and on the Haihayas

जनमेजय उवाच

देहप्रापितर्वसिष्ठस्य कथिता भवता किल ।

निमि: कथं पुनदैईं प्राप्ताविनिति मे वद ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: “The getting back of another similar body by Vasiṣtha is certainly described by you. Now tell me how the King Nimi got another body.”

व्यास उवाच

वसिष्ठेन च सम्पादन: पुनंदेहो नराधिप ।

निमिना न तथा प्राणो देहः शपादन्तमम् ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Rsi Vasistha only got back his body; but the King Nimi did not get back his body what had been cursed by Vasistha."

यदा शगतो बसिस्ठन तदा ते बाहाणा: क्रतौ ।

ऋलिजो ये वृत्ता राजत से वसे समर्पितदान् ॥ 3 ॥

कि कतंव्यमाहोठेउमाधिः शापद्धभो महीपति: ।

अभियन्त्रे तवस्पूर्णं दीक्षागुकछ्ध धार्पिकः ॥ 4 ॥

कि कतंव्य कार्यमेतिद्वरीतमधूलिकल ।

अवर्यभाबिषायत्वाद्वगभाः स्म निवारणे ॥ 5 ॥

मंत्रैबंहुविद्धैर्दैंह तत तस्य महात्यनः ।

रक्षित धारायामासु: किंचिद्वल्यसनसंतुम्न ॥ 6 ॥

गन्धीमाल्यैश्व विवधिः पूज्यमानं पुरुधुँघुः ।

मन्यग्रसता प्रतिष्य भर्विक्षतरं सुप्रजितम् ॥ 7 ॥

The priests engaged at the sacrifice by Nimi began to consider, when the Rsi Vasistha cursed

Book VI Chapter XV

him, in the following way: Oh! What a wonderful thing is this? Before the sacrifice is complete, the King Nimi has been cursed; this is against what we had expected; What can we do? What is inevitable must come to pass; how can we thwart it? By various Mantrams, they kept alive the body of the King in which breathing was still going on a little; and they prevented the body from decaying by worshipping the body with various Mantra Śaktis and kept it in a stationary state.

समाप्ते च क्रतौ तत देवा: सर्वे समाप्ततः ।

ब्रह्विधभस्तु सुत्ता: सर्वे सुप्रीताधाभवतूघ १ ८ ११

When the sacrificial ceremony was completed, the Rsis began to praise the gods with hymns whereon the Devas became pleased and came to that spot.

विद्रतामु पुनिधि: स्तोर्शनिर्विशणात्मानबुबन् ।

प्रसानः स्म महीपाल वरं वरय सुन्ति ॥ 9 ॥

यज्ञानेने राजर्ष वरं जन्म विधीयते ।

देवदेहं नृदेहं वा चते मनसि वार्धितुम् ॥ 10 ॥

When the Munis informed the Devas fully of the condition of the King's body, the Devas spoke to the sorrowful King thus: "O performer of good vows! We are all pleased with your sacrifice; now ask boons from us." O King! You ought to get an excellent birth as the fruit of performing this sacrifice.

दूरा: कामी युधास्ते भूतूलोके यथासुखम् ।

एवमुक्तो निमेरासा सन्तुष्टसन्तुवाच हू ॥ 11 ॥

So ask what body, the body of a Deva or of a man, you desire? Or you can ask, if you like, for another similar body, that your priest Brhaşpati has got quitting his first body whereby he has become proud aud is now staying in the Loka of Yama.

न द्रेे मम बाळ्ठआरित सर्वदैव विनश्धे ।

बासो मे सर्वेत्तचानां दृष्टावस्तु सुरोत्तमाः ॥ १२ ॥

नेत्रेषु सर्वभृतानां वायुभृतशाख्याहम् ।

ऐवभुक्ताः सुरास्तत्र निमेरात्मामबुबन् ॥ १३ ॥

O King! At these words the King Nimi was very glad and spoke to them thus: "O Devas! I

have no aspiration for the body that is always liable to destruction; I therefore want to reside on the top of the eyelids of all the beings.

प्रार्थय त्वं महाराज देदों सर्वेश्वरिं शिवान् ।

मखेनानेन सन्तुहा सा तेरेभीत विभार्यति ॥ 14 ॥

Therefore I ask this boon that I be able to move in the shape of Vāyu (air) on the top of the eyes of all the beings."

स देवेशेवमुक्तस्तु प्रार्थयामास देवतान् ।

स्तोरैन्नानिविदिरिद्वीधरैक्ना गदुद्वा गिरा ॥ 15 ॥

Thus said, the Devas spoke to the soul of Nimi: "O King! Pray to the most auspicious Deity, the Devi, the Highest Goddess.

प्रसता सा तदा देखी प्रत्यक्षं एर्निं नदी ।

कोदिसूर्यप्रतीकारां कर्ण लावण्यदीपितम् ॥ 16 ॥

She has been pleased with this sacrifice; therefore your prayer will certainly by granted." Hearing thus, the King began to pray with various hymns with intense devotion, in tremulous voice, the Devi.

इत्था प्रमुहिता: सर्वे कृतकृत्याश्रये चेतिस ।

प्रसाओं देहतायां राजा बहे वरं नृप ॥ 17 ॥

The Devi became pleased and appeared before him. Seeing shining like a crore of suns and looking exceedingly lovely and beautiful, all the persons there became very happy.

ज्ञानं तद्विमन्ते देहि येन मोहोभे भवेदीय ।

नेत्रेषु सर्वभृतानां निवासो मे भवेदिति ॥ 18 ॥

They began to think themselves as very blessed and as having done all what they had to do. Knowing the Devi Bhagavatī pleased, the King asked this boon from her: "O Devi! Give me that knowledge, pure and simple, whereby final liberation is obtained.

ततः प्रसना देवेगी प्रोवाच जगद्धिक्वा ।

ज्ञानं ते विमतं भूवात्याख्यास्वावेगश्वतः ॥ 19 ॥

नेत्रेषु सर्वभूतानां निवासोर्पिय भविष्यति ।

निमिभं यान्ति चक्षिं चलकृतीनेव दैहिन् ॥ 20 ॥

तव वासामासनिभिमा मानाव: पशवसत्या ।

पतंगाश्र भविष्यन्ति पुनश्रानिमिभा: सुरा: ॥ 21 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Also, I may be able to reside on the top of the eyes of all the beings." The Devi, the Lord of the Devas, the Mother of the World being highly pleased, said thus: "O King! At the expiry of this your Prārabdha Karma, you will acquire pure knowledge and you will reside on the tops of the eyes in the shape of Vāyu, and through your residing there the beings will twinkle; i. e., open and close their eyes.

इति दत्ता वरं तस्मै तदा श्रीवदेवता ।

आमान्य च भूनी-सर्वात्रैर्वतान्त्रिंगभवत् ॥ 22 ॥

The men, beasts, and birds will twinkle due to your residing there; but the Immortals will always remain with a steadfast gaze; they will not twinkle." Thus granting him the boon, and addressing all the Munis the Bhagavati, the Highest Deity, disappeared.

अन्तर्दितां देव्यां तु मुनवस्त्र संश्रिताः ।

विचित्य वित्तिवलर्वे निवेईं सपाहतून ॥ 23 ॥

When the Devi disappeared from their sight, the Munis then thought much and they took the body of the King Nimī to churn it duly.

अर्शिणि तत्र संस्थाय मर्मधुम्न्यन्तत ।

मनहोर्मैमहानम: पुरहेतीनिराय ॥ 24 ॥

For the sake of getting a son from Nimi, the high-souled Munis performed Homa ceremony (oblations to the fire) and placing the piece of wood Aranī on his body began to utter Mantrams and churned his body.

उरणयां मध्यमानायां पुत्र: प्रादूरभूत्ता ।

सर्वतक्षणसंपत्रः साखारिभिरिवापरः ॥ 25 ॥

When the woods were thus churned, a son, endowed with all auspicious signs, looking like a second Nimi, was born to them.

उरणया मदानज्ञाततस्मामिथितिरिति सूतः ।

येनायं जनकाज्ञतारनेतासौ जनकोप्रस्ति ॥ 26 ॥

As this son was born due to the churning of the Aranis, the boy was named Mithi, and as it came out of the body of Janaka, the boy was named Janaka. O King!

विद्वेस्तु निमिजोंते यस्मात्स्मातद्वये ।

सयुद्धतान्तु राजानो विदेहा इति कर्जिति: ॥ 27 ॥

As the King Nimi lost his body, i. e., became Videha through the curse of Vasistha, all his descendants were known as Videha. Thus the son of Nimi was well known as the King Janaka.

एवं निविमुती राजा प्रधिलो जनको०भवत् ।

नगरी निवित्त तेन रंगगातीरे मनोहरा ॥ 28 ॥

He built a beautiful city on the banks of the Ganges; the city became famous also by his name (Janakapuri).

विधिलेति सुविद्याला गोपुरवृतलर्मयुता ।

धनधान्यसमायुत्ता हड़शालाविराजिता ॥ 29 ॥

The King Janaka beautified this city with many forts, arcades, markets and many nice buildings and palaces; and his city was full of wealth and grains.

वैंशसिन्योर्नि राजानलसे सर्वे जनकासखा ।

विख्याता ज्ञानि: सर्वे विदेयुः परिकीर्तितः ॥ 30 ॥

O King! All the Kings of this line became famous by the name of Janaka and all were endowed with the Supreme knowledge and known as Vidcha.

एत्ते क्रथितं राजमिमेराख्यान्मुत्तमम् ।

गणाधस्य विदेहत्वं विस्तरावुदितं मया ॥ 31 ॥

O King! I have now described to you the story of the King Nimi who got disembodiedness (Videhatva) out of the curse.

राजोबाच

भगवान्यवता प्रोक्ते निविषणायस्य कारणम् ।

श्रुत्वा सन्देशमाप्चं मनो मेउतीच चझतम् ॥ 32 ॥

The King said: O Bhagavan! You have described the cause why the King Nimi was cursed; my mind has grown very doubtful and restless on hearing it.

वसिष्ठो जहाणश्रेष्ठो राज्छीव पुरोहितः ।

पुत्र: पढ़ूजयोनेस्टु राजा शगतः कवं मुनि: ॥ 33 ॥

The Rsj Vasistha was the son of Brahmā and the best of the Brāhmins; especially he was the royal priest; how has it, then, that he was cursed by the King!"

Book VI Chapter XV

गृहं च ब्राह्मणं जाला निमिनान न कृता क्षमा ।

यजकमें शुभं कृल्या कर्थे क्रोधपुभाताः ॥ 34 ॥

Why did not the King Nimi forgive him as he was Guru and a Brāhmīn? Why he became angry, when he performed such a great, auspicious sacrifice?

जात्वा धर्म्य विज्ञानं क्वधिष्वाकुसभ्यः।

क्रोधय्य वर्षामपश: शपतवान्द्वारा गुर्भम् ॥ 35 ॥

He was born of the family of Iksvāku and he knew well the truths of the religion; then how was it that he became subject to anger and cursed his own Guru Brāhmin.

व्यास उवाच

क्षमास्तितुर्णभा राजन्नाणिभिर्जितातमिभः ।

क्षमावानुवर्णी लोक सुसमर्थी विशेषतः ॥ 36 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! It is very hard and rare for the persons not possessed of self-restraint to forgive; especially when one is fully capable, it is very rare to find one in the three worlds, who can forgive.

सर्वसंगयरित्यागी मुनिशंवृतु तापसः ।

निद्राक्षुधौर्वितंचा च योगाप्यासे सुनिहितः ॥ 37 ॥

कामः कोधस्तथा लोगो हृहंकारश्रुधंकः ।

दुर्जया देहमध्यस्था तपवस्तेन सर्वथा ॥ 38 ॥

He who has forsaken all attachments and has conquered hunger and sleep and is always engaged in the Yoga practices, even that ascetic Muni is not capable to conquer completely lust, anger and greed and Aharñkara, etc., the passions raging in the mortal coil.

न पूतपूर्वे: संसारे न चैव वर्तैल्पुना ।

भविता न पुमाकशिष्ठी जवेत रिपुभिनम् ॥ 39 ॥

None existed before in this whole world who conquered his passions! None exists now and none will be born ever-after. Hardly will be seen any in this earth, or the Heavens, or the Loka of Brahmā or in Vaikuntha, even in Kailāśa, that has conquered completely his passions?

न वर्षर्ने च भूतोके ब्रहातोके हरे: पदे ।

कैतलासे नेद्रुग: क्रिश्वो जयेत रिपुनीमान् ॥ 40 ॥

What can be said in regard to the ordinary mortals of this earth when the sons of Brahmā, the Maharsis, ascetics, Rṣis are all pierced by the Sattva, Rajas, or Tamo Gunas.

मुनीयो ब्रह्मपुगश्छ तथा उ-ये ताप्यसोनमाः ।

तेउपि गुणजयाविद्वा: किं पुनर्भानव भृति ॥ 4 1 ॥

कपित: संख्येजिता च योगाभ्यासतः शृषि: ।

तेनापि देवयोगाद्ध प्रद्धानः सगरात्मजः ॥ 4 2 ॥

Behold! The Rṣi Kapila was the Knower of Śānkhya and always engaged in his Yoga practises and he was a pure and holy soul; yet, by strange combinations of Fate, he became angry and burnt to ashes the sons of the King Sagara.

तस्मात्राजर्हकारासंजातं भुवनत्रयम् ।

कार्यकारणाबान्तु तद्विवृक्तं कर्थ भवेत् ॥ 43 ॥

ब्रह्मा गुणतयाविष्ठी विद्युश्रीवार शड़ूः ।

प्रभविति शरीरेषु तेषां यावातः पृथवस्यधूक ॥ 44 ॥

मानवानां च का वातां सत्त्वेकांतलव्यस्ति ।

गुणानां सड़ूरी राजनसर्वेन समविश्वतः ॥ 45 ॥

कदाचित्सचवुद्धि: स्याकदाचिद्रजस: कित ।

कदाचित्नमसो बुद्धिः समभावः कदाचन ॥ 46 ॥

O King! Out of Aharikāra, these three worlds are created; therefore this world and Aharikāra are related to each other as effect and cause; how then the Jivas that are born of this Sarisāra can extricate themselves from this Aharikāra? Brahmā, Visnu and Maheśa are also pierced by those three Gunas; different feelings are seen in their different bodies. Therefore it need hardly be said that the manifestation of the pure Sattva Guna alone is not to be seen in any of the human beings; for the three Gunas reside in a mixed way in all persons. Sometimes the Sattva preponderates; sometimes the Rajas and sometimes the Tamas preponderates. Sometimes they reside together, the three balancing one other.

निर्गुण: परमात्माउनी निर्गुण: परमोउध्यः ।

अलक्ष्य: सर्वसत्तानामप्रियः सनातनः ॥ 47 ॥

O King! Only that Eternal Highest Puruṣa is undecaying and untainted and can hardly be measured or seen by all the beings.

Sirmaddevibhagavatam

तवैव परम शक्तिनिर्गुणा बहासंश्रित्या ।

दुर्जेना चात्यमतिभि: सर्वभूतत्यवशिशिति: ॥ 48 ॥

परमात्मतरतश शक्तिर्वायौरस्यं सदैव हि ।

अभिनं तदुपूर्जाल्या मुच्यते सर्वदोषतः ॥ 49 ॥

That Highest Soul, the Highest of the High, is Nirguna (void of the three Gunas); and She who resides in all the beings and is hardly knowable by the small intellectual persons, that Highest Śakti, the Incarnate of Brahma, is also Nirgunā (void of attributes).

तज्ञानादेव मोक्षः स्यादिति वेदान्तर्हिक्षाः ।

यो वेद स विगुक्तोर्यिन्मसंसारे विगुणायकें ॥ 5० ॥

Paramātmā (the Highest Soul) and the Highest Force are also One; their Forms are not different. When such a knowledge arises, then the Jivas can be free from all sins and faults and blemishes.

जाने तु दिवियो प्रोन्न शादिकं प्रथमं स्मृतः ।

वेदशास्त्रार्थविज्ञानान्त्वेदेवृद्धिव्योगे ॥ ५१ ॥

"From that knowledge comes the liberation," this is sounded in the Vedānta Śāstra like Dīndima Śabda (thousands of small drums).

विकल्पातत्र बहवो भवन्ति मतिकल्पिता: ।

कृतकंकल्पिता: केचिसुतकंकल्पिता: परे ।

वितर्कैविधमोयत्निविधमवतुविद्धग्रंता ।

बुद्धिशाज्ञाननाग: प्राणिनां परिकीर्तितः ॥

अनुभवाखं द्वितीयं तु जानं तदुतर्दभं नृप ॥ 52 ॥

He, who comes to know That, is freed from the endless cycle of birth and death composed of the three Gunas; there is no doubt in this. O King! Knowledge is of two kinds: The first is considered as coming from sound; this comes out of the knowledge of the meaning of the Vedas by the help intellect. But this is full of fancies, agreements and doubts some of which are bad and some are good. The beings are led into errors by these discussions; errors cause destruction of intellect; and when the intellect is gone, the knowledge also goes away with it.

तत्वा प्रायये तस्य वेतुः संगो यदा भवेत् ।

गब्द्रज्ञानात्र कार्यस्य सिद्धभंवित भारत ॥ 53 ॥

Whereas the second kind of knowledge comes from intention or feeling within the depths of hearts and brain and it is called aparokṣa Jñāna. This knowledge is very rare to the beings. When one comes in contact with a Sad-Guru (a good teacher), then one gets this Aparokṣa Jñāna. From the sound knowledge, no successful result can issue; and, therefore it cannot give Aparokṣa Jñāna.

तस्मातानुपथवन्तां सम्भावत्यतिमानुपम् ।

अन्तर्गतं तम्यछेतुं गाख्दबोधोहि ति न क्षमः ॥ 54 ॥

Hence great effort is to be made for getting this Aparokṣa Jñāna. O King! As darkness cannot be destroyed merely by talking of light, without lighting any lamp, so the knowledge of sound merely cannot destroy the darkness of the inside.

यथा न न्ययति तमः कृतया दीपवर्तेना ।

तत्कर्म यद्य बंधाय सा विद्या या विमुकने ॥ 55 ॥

आयासायापरं कर्म विद्धात्यान शिल्पवैणुम् ।

शीलं परित्तत्वं च कोभापावः क्षमा धृति: ॥ 56 ॥

That Karma (action) is called True Karma which does not lead to bondage, and that Knowledge is the True Knowledge which leads to liberation. Other actions are only meant for one's own selfish enjoyments and other knowledge are merely the skill in arts. Good behaviour, doing good to others, having no anger, forgiveness, patience, and contentment are the best brilliant fruits of True Knowledge.

सन्तोषधीत विद्याय: परिपाकोउस्तं कलम् ।

विद्यार तत्सा वारपि योगाय्यसेन धुपते ॥ 57 ॥

O King! Without knowledge, without asceticism, and without the Yoga practises, the lust and other passions can never be destroyed.

विता कामाविरुगयां नैव नाशः कदाचन ।

“मन्तु चछलं राजन्स्वधावादितुगंहम् ।

तड़ण: सर्वां प्राणी विविधो भुचनत्रय ॥ १ ॥ ॥'

कामाकोधायो भावाश्रितज्ञ: परिकीर्तितः ॥ ५८ ॥ ॥

The minds of the Jivas are naturally restless and without control; all the beings are completely under the sway of their minds; thus they roam on the surface of the earth as good, middling and bad.

Book VI Chapter XVI

ते तदा न घबन्चेव यदा दे निर्वितं मन: ।

तस्मातृ निमिना राजक क्षमा विहिता मुनी । ५५ ॥

Lust, anger, etc., originate from this mind; and when mind is conquered, then those feelings can no more arise.

वथा ययातिना पूर्व कृता शुक्र केतागति ।

भूगुपुजेश शनातेपि ययातिनंभरमनाः । ६० ॥

O King! Therefore it was that Yayāti forgave when Šukrācārya did wrong before. The King Nimi could not forgive Vasiṣṭha in the same way. Yayāti, the best of kings, though cursed by Šukrācārya, the son of Bhrgu, did not curse in return but he took upon himself the old age.

न शशाप मुनि क्रोधाजरां रावा गृहीतान् ।

क्रश्रतौयो भवेतक्रश्रतूरो भवति पार्थिवः ॥ 6 1 ॥

O King! Some kings are naturally peaceful, whereas some other kings are wicked by their nature. Therefore, in this matter, whose fault is this, how can we ascertain?

स्वभावभेदाङ्गुपते कस्य दोयो5उ करल्यते ।

हैह्या भारीबान्यूर्ध धनतोभान्युरोहितान् ॥ 62 ॥

See! In ancient times the Haihayas, out of their greed of wealth, and being thus insensible destroyed completely, out of anger, the Brāhim priests of the family of Bhrgu.

बाहाणान्युततः सर्वाश्रीष्छु कौभ्यृष्टिताः ।

पातकं पुकृतः कृत्वा ब्रह्महात्यामुद्धवम् ॥ 63 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पश्वरकन्धे पश्वदर्शोस्थायाः 115 I

What more than this that those Ksatriyas did not consider the sin Brahmahatya; rather out of their dire anger, they cut to pieces the sons of those Brāhmaṇas, that were in embryos in their mother's wombs.

Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the Nimi's getting of another body and the beginning

of the story of Haihayas, in the Mahāpurānam

Srimaddevirbhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī

Veda Vyāsa.

CHANDINI VVI

Book VI Chapter XVI

CHAPTER XVI

On the Haihaya and the Bhārgavas

जनमेव जय वाच

कुले कस्य समुत्यजः क्षत्रिया हैह्याश्रु ते ।

ब्रहाहत्ययमनतुच्य निजकनुर्पार्शंशय ते ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: In whose family were born those Ksatriya Haihayas that killed in ancient times the Bhārgavas, regardless of the sin incurred in killing a Brāhmīn?

वैरस्य कारणं तेषां किं मे वृष्टि पितामह ।

निमितेन विना कोर्धं कर्वं कुर्वीत सत्तमाः ॥ 2 ॥

O Grandsire! Never do the good persons become angry without a serious cause; therefore kindly state why they got angry.

वैरं पुरोहितः सार्थ कम्यातेभवमाजवत ।

तान्यहेतोहाँ तईत्रं क्षत्रियाणां भविष्यति ॥ 3 ॥

How was the enmity caused between them and the priests? As far as I can think, the cause is not so simple a one as led to this enmity between the Kṣatriyas and the priests.

अन्यथा बाह्याणान्यूचान्कं जन्तुनासास: ।

बाहुजा बलवन्तोषि पापभीता: कबं न ते ॥ ४ ॥

Otherwise why then would they slay the offenseless Brāhmins, fit to be worshipped; and how was it that the Kṣatriyas, though they were so very powerful, did not fear to commit a sin.

स्वल्येपराधे को हृन्याइडावन्धसिवर्षभः ।

सन्देहो मे मुनिश्रेष्ठ कारणं वतुभूर्मिंस ॥ ५ ॥

O Muni! Can any Kṣatriya Chief kill a Brāhmín, worthy of the highest respect, merely on a trifling cause! Describe to me, then, how this happen. A great doubt has thus arisen in my mind.

सूत उवाच

इति पृष्टस्तदा तेन राजा सत्यवतीसुतः ।

उवाच परमप्रीतः कथां संम्युच चेतसा ॥ 6 ॥

Sūta said: “O Rṣis! Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati, became very pleased when he was asked this question by Janamejaya, and, recollecting the

whole course of events regarding the Haihayas, began to narrate it.

व्यास उवाच

श्रृणु पारीक्षिते वार्ता क्षत्रियाणां पुरातनीम् ।

आश्रयंकीर्णी सम्पविदितां च पुत मा ॥ 7 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O son of Parikṣit! I will now narrate that wonderful story of old that I know fully; now hear this very attentively.

कार्लीवीयिति नामानप्रकृद्वयः पृथिवीपिति: ।

सहस्वावहुबलेवानर्जुने धर्मतत्पर: ॥ 8 ॥

In ancient times there was a King named Kārtavīryārjuna of the family of Haihaya. He was of thousand hands, powerful, and always ready to observe religious duties.

दत्तायेम्य शिष्योरूपद्धतातो हेरिति ।

सिद्ध: सर्वांदि: शातकी घपुर्णा याज्य एव सः ॥ 9 ॥

He was the incarnation of Hari, and the disciple of Maharṣī Dattātreya and the worshipper of the Supreme Force (Ādyā Śakti.) He was well known as a perfect adept in the Yoga practices and of a very charitable disposition.

यज्ञा परमधिभुः सदादानपरायणः ।

ददै वितं भूगुयोत्री कृत्वा यज्ञानेकश: ।। ० ।।

But this King was the client of the Brāhmins of the Bhārgava clan. He was always devoted to performing sacrifices, exceedingly religious, and always engaged in making gifts.

धनिनस्ते द्विजा जाता धृगवो नृदा दन्तः ।

हयारत्समुद्धाकावा: सञ्ञातः प्रथिता भृति ॥ १। ॥

So many a time did he perform the great sacrifices and gave a profuse quantities of wealth to the Bhārgavas.

स्वयंते नृपशर्भेते कातवीयार्थुने पुनः ।

हैहया निर्भाना जाताः कालेन महता नृप ॥ १२ ॥

Due to the gifts and presents of Kārtavīrya, the Bhārgava priests became possessed of many horses, and gems and jewels and so become wealthy and prosperous on the surface of this earth.

धनकार्य समुचर्य हैह्यानां कदाचन ।

याचिष्णावोर्धिभिजमुस्तान्यभूग्रते हैहया नृप ॥ १३ ॥

O King! When Kārtavīryāryuna, the best of Kings, left the mortal coil and got up to Heavens his descendants become entirely void of any wealth by the indomitable influence of Time.

विनरं कंशिथाः कृत्वास्पयाचंतः चंन बहु ।

न दुसुलेस्तिलोषानां नासिन नारसीलाविदाः: ॥ 14 ॥

Now, on a certain occasion, the Haihayas had to perform certain actions which necessitated a vast sum of money; they came to the Bhārgavas and humbly prayed for a very large amount of wealth.

भूमी च निवधुः कौचिद्युभावो धनुभतम् ।

दुः कौचिद्विज्ञाने जाला क्षयितयो भवम् ॥ 15 ॥

कृत्वा स्वानोरंर उव्यं ब्राह्मणा भयविद्धताः ।

त्वक्वासउसबामव्यु:सर्वैभूगवत्सृणायास्टिनाः ॥ 16 ॥

But the Brāhmins, out of their greed of money, replied they had no money and thus they did not give any money whatsoever. Rather the Bhārgavas thought that the Haihyavas would perforce take their wealth, and, fearing thus, some of them buried all their valuables underneath the ground; and others gave as charities to the Brāhmanas.

याज्ञांश दुःस्तानन्धुर्वा न द्रवुर्णभेमिततः ।

पतयित्वा गतः सर्वे निरितुर्गानुप्राशितः ॥ 17 ॥

The greedy Bhārgavas, bewildered with fear, thus transferred all their properties elsewhere, quitted their homes and fled away to mountains and other places.

ततसे हेययास्तात दुःखिता: कार्यांगीराल् ।

भृगुणामाघमाजामुर्द्रैवाथी झनियर्षिभः ॥ १ १ ॥

The greedy Brāhmins did not give any wealth to their Yajamānas (their clients) though they saw them very much distressed; but they fled a away out of fear to mountains and fastnesses where they found shelter.

भूग्रूलु निर्मातानीश्य शूर्यास्यक्ता गृहान्य ।

चखतुभूर्तलं तत्र उद्यार्थं हैहाया भुगग् ॥ 19 ॥

At last the Haihayas, the best of the Kṣatriyas, became very sorry till, at last, for the sake of their good actions, they went to the Bhārgavas' houses for the sake of money and found they had quitted

Book VI Chapter XVI

their homes and fled away; their houses were all vacant.

ཕྒྱལ་ཆེན་པོད་པའི་ ཡིན་ ཆེན་པོད་ མུམ་ མུམ་ མུམ་ མུམ་ མུམ་ མུམ་ མུམ་ མུ

दूरुग: क्षयिता: सर्वे तिह्नं श्रवकर्शिता: 11 20 11

Then they began to dig underneath their houses for money and some got the money thus. Then the Kṣatriyas began to labour hard and got hordes of money from underneath the ground.

यत्र तत्र समुत्पत्रं भृत्रि रुद्धं महीतलात् ।

तदा ते पार्थभागस्वबाहाणनां गृहागययि ॥ 21 ॥

Next they raided upon other Brāhmanas houses and dug and excavated and searched for more money.

निर्भीघ हेत्या उल्यं द्रवुरूपं नतिल्यस्या ।

जाढ़ाणाशुकुसु: सर्वे भीताङ्ग शरणं गताः ॥ 22 ॥

The Brāhmins were helpless and, crying, all took their refuge, out of fear, under the Bhārgavas.

अतिथिन्त्यु विग्राणं भवनात्रियूतं बहु ।

निजनुस्ताङ्गे: कोयाइडावाऊरणगातान् ॥ 23 ॥

The Kṣatriyas made an exhaustive search of the Brāhmanas' houses and got lots of money. They then charged the Brāhmanas as having had spoken falsehood and they became very angry, and killed

the Brāhmaṇas with arrows who took their refuge.

ययुस्ते निरितुर्गोषु घन वै भुगवः स्थिताः ।

आभार्वितुक्ततंशश्छीव महीयमात् ॥ 24 ॥

O King! The Haihayas were so very angry at that time that they went wherever the Bhārgavas to their shelter and cut asunder the foetus in the wombs of their Bhārgavas' wives and thus they roamed all over on the surface of the earth.

प्राप्तान्याप्तान्यभूम्नसार्थिन्धन्निशितः शरेः ।

आशालयुद्धानपरानबमन च पातकम् ॥ 25 ॥

Wherever they saw any Bhārgava, be he a minor, or a youth or a old man, at once they killed him with sharp arrows, disregarding the sin Brahmahatyā.

एवमुग्वायद्यमानेषु भागविष्य वास्ततः ।

हनु-यार्थश्र नारीणां गृहीत्वा हेत्वा भृश्म. ॥ 26 ॥

When the Bhārgavas were thus all killed, then

they caught hold of their wives that were pregnant and destroyed their wombs.

रूकुस्ताः त्रिवः कामं कुर्वं इव दुः प्रिद्धता ।

गर्भाई कृत्तित यासां क्षत्रियः पापनिश्छये: ॥ 27 ॥

When the vicious Ksatriyas thus destroyed the lives in their wombs, the helpless women began to cry like the awe-stricken ewe.

अन्येयातुङ्ग तान्द्रतानुभगवतीथैवांतिनः ।

मुंचंतुं क्षत्रिया: क्रोधं ब्राह्मणेषु भयावहान् ॥ 28 ॥

Then the other Munis, the inhabitants of the sacred places of pilgrimages, seeing the Haihaya Kṣatriyas inflamed with anger, said: "O Kṣatriyas! Quit your terrible anger towards the Brāhmins."

अयुक्तभेतदारखं भवद्धिः: कर्म गहितम् ।

यदृगभीन्युग्रत्नीना निन्हनुः क्षितयर्षभः ॥ 29 ॥

"Being the best of the Kṣatriyas, you are killing the foetus in the wombs of the pregnant Brāhmana ladies! you are doing, no doubt, a very vicious and unjustifiable act!

अत्यमुपययपानानामैहैव फलमाठ्यगुत ।

तस्माज्जनुपितं कर्म तत्कन्धं भूतिधिक्छत ॥ 30 ॥

You should know that an act, very bad or very good, bears fruit in the life; therefore those that seek their welfare should entirely omit this exceedingly hateful and vicious act."

तानादूर्दैह्वा: कुन्द्दा मुनीनय द्वारपान् ।

भवतः साध्यः सर्वे नार्थज्ञ: पापकर्मणम् ॥ 31 ॥

Then the exceedingly angry Haihayas told the merciful ascetics: "You all are saints; therefore you do not know the real import of what are called vicious acts.

एभिद्धौं धनं सर्वे पूर्वजानां महात्यनाम् ।

वड्यित्वा छतापिभूमर्भां पाटच्छरैरिव ॥ 32 ॥

Those Bhārgavas, thoroughly dexterous in cunning pursuits, deceived our largehearted forefathers and stole away all their goods and jewels, as thieves do with a passerby on a road. एते प्रतात्का दंभातसूज्ञा बक्कुचनम् ।

उत्पत्रे च महाकार्य प्राणायित विनयेन ने ॥ 33 ॥

Srimaddevithagavatam

न दुः प्रार्थित विज्ञा: पादवुद्ध्यापि याचिता: ।

नार्नीलविद्धि: सत्या दु:वितान्ति बैक्ष्य याजकान् ॥ 34 ॥

These Bhārgavas are cheats, vain persons and their persuasions are like herons. A great act had to be done by us and we wanted money at 25 per cent interest with all the becoming humility; yet they did not give us the money; rather seeing on their face their clients distressed and sorrowful they spoke that they had no money, and then they remained silent.

धन प्राणं कृतारीयांत्रक्षितं केन हेतुना ।

न कृता: क्रतव: किं सैतर्दं चाधिषु भूरिणः ॥ 35 ॥

True, they got all their money from Kārtavirya; but it may be questioned why they stored it? Why did not they perform sacrifices with that? Why did not they give sufficient money to the other priests (Yāyakas) that did the sacrifices.

न सडितलयं विश्रभु एयं ब्वायि कदाचन ।

यट्वयं विधियद्वेयं भोक्त्वं च घयासुखम् ॥ ३६ ॥

इव्ये चौराभयं प्रोक्त तथा राजभयं दिज्ञा: ।

वेहैर्भयं महाचोरं तथा धृतिमयं महत् ॥ 37 ॥

Never should any Brāhimin hoard his money; he should give that in charity and enjoy at his pleasure. O Twice-born! In amassing wealth, there exist three fears: Fear from the thieves and robbers, fear from the King, fear from dreadful fire accidents, and especially great terrible fear from the cheats. This is the nature of wealth; it leaves its preserve. See, moreover, when a hoarder of money dies, he certainly has to quit it.

येन केनायुपायेन धनं त्यजति श्रक्षणम् ।

अथवाउसी मृती याति उन्ये त्यस्वना हासूनिम् ॥ 38 ॥

If a wealthy man, before dying, performs sacrifices and other good pious acts by his earned money, then he gets certainly good states in future; otherwise, he quite his wealth, to no purpose and earns a bad state in his future life; there is no doubt in this.

पादवूढ़णा तयासमाधि: प्राणितं विनावादितः ।

त्यापि तोभर्वतिद्योईं दर्ज नः पुरोहितः ॥ ३ ९ ॥

We humbly wanted to pay a quarter interest and

asked money for the performance of a great act; yet they, the greedy ones, were doubtful about our promise; and though our priests, they did not give us the money.

दानं भोगसता शानगो धान्य गतिरीटुर्गी ।

दानभोगी कृतीनां च नाश: पाणत्मनां किल ॥ 40 ॥

O Maharsis! Gifts, enjoyment and destruction, these are the three courses which any wealth has to pass through; those persons that have done good deeds, enjoy their wealth and give as charities and thus they make a good and real use of their money; and of those that are vicious, their wealth goes away in ruin and to no purpose.

न दाता न च यो भोका कृपणो गृणिततसरः ।

राज्ञानी सर्वेथा दण्डो वंचको झुःखण्डरूतः ॥ 41 ॥

He who does not enjoy wealth goes away in ruin and to no purpose. He who does not enjoy nor give in charities but is only clever in hoarding and who is miser, the Kings punish him by all means, that man who cheats himself and who suffers only pains and miseries.

तस्माद्धर गृह्नेतान्यंचकान्बहणाध्यान् ।

हन्तुं समुद्धाता: सर्वे न क्रोद्ध्यं महात्मिथि: ॥ 42 ॥

For that reason, we are now ready to kill those Brāhmins, the vilest of men, the cheats, though they are our Gurus. O Maharjs! You are great persons; therefore you do not be angry after you have come to know all these."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा हेतुमद्धावर्थ नताश्रास्य मुनीनव ।

विवेरूछ्छ विधिन्याना भ्युग्रातरानेकर: ॥ 43 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus consoling the Munis, with reasonable words, the Haihayas began to roam about, in search of the wives of the Bhārgavas.

भयातां भृगुपत्यन्तु हिमवन्तं धाराध्यम् ।

प्रभिरेते इत्थश्छ वेपमाना: कृगा भृगम् ॥ 44 ॥

एवं ते हैहैर्यैधिधा: पीडिता धनकामकै: ।

निह्ताश्व यथाकामं संरब्धे पापकर्मिभः ॥ 45 ॥

The Bhārgava wives very much distressed with fear and became very lean and thin. They fled away

Book VI Chapter XVII

to the Himālayan Mountain weeping, and crying, and trembling with fear.

लोभ एवं मनुष्याणां देइसंस्थो महापितुः ।

सर्वे:खाकाः: प्रोनोः दुःखदः प्राणनाशकाः ॥ 46 ॥

Thus the Bhārgavas were being killed by those vicious greedy Haibayas, infuriated with anger, and as they liked.

सर्वेभायस्य मूलं हि सर्वेत् तृषायान्यितः ।

वितोभकृतिकवर्णानां सर्वातैः कारणं तथा ॥ 47 ॥

O King! This greed is the greatest enemy of a man, residing in his own body; this greed is the root of all evils, of all sins. Life is in danger due to this covetousness.

लोभाच्चतिन्त धर्म वै कुलभर्म तवैव ति ।

मातरं घातरं हाँति चितरं बाँधवं तथा ॥48 ॥

It is due to this greed that quarrels ensue amongst the several castes, the Brāhmins, etc., and that the human beings are very much troubled with thirst after wordily enjoyments.

गृहं मित्रं तथा भार्यां पुरं च भपितीं तथा ।

लोपायिहो न कि कुयादुक्ल्यं पायपोहितः ॥ 4 9 ॥

कोधात्कामादंकाराल्लोभ एव महापुरिः ।

प्रणोत्यखाति लोभेन किं पुनः: स्यादावृताम् ॥ 50 ॥

This greed makes a man forsake all his religious rites and long existing customs and observances of his family; and it is due to this avarice of gold that men kill their fathers, mothers, brothers, friends, Gurus, sons, acquaintances, sisters, and sisters-in-law and others.

पूर्वज्ञाने महाराज धर्मज्ञा: सत्यथे स्थिता ।

पाण्डवा: कौरावार्थवे लोपेने निधनं गता: । ५ १ । ॥

Really when a man is bent on avarice, nothing heinous remains to him that can not be done by him. This greed is a more powerful enemy than anger, lust and egoism.

यत्र भीमाश्र प्रोगाश्र कृपः कर्णश्र बाहिकः ।

भीमसेनो धर्मपुत्रसत्येवाजुनकेशजी ॥ 52 ॥

O King! Men abandon their lives for their greed; what more can be said than this? So one should be always alert on this.

तथापि युद्धमतुग्रं कृतं तैक्ष प्रत्यमम् ।

कुटुब्बकदतं भूरि कृतं लोपानुर्गैरह ॥ 53 ॥

O King! Your forefathers, the Pāndavas and Kauravas, were all religious and they followed the path of virtue and goodness. Yet they all were ruined simply for this greed.

हते प्रोणो हते भीमत्थेव पांडवात्मना: ।

भातर: पितर: पुत्रा: सर्वे वै नित्ता रणे ॥ 54 ॥

See! The dreadful fight and separation amongst the relatives took place where there were the high-souled persons like Bhīsma, Droṇa, Krpācārya, Karna, Bahlika, Bhimasena, Yudhishira, Arjuna, and Keśava, only through the avaricious feelings. In this battle Bhīsma, Droṇa and the sons of Pāndavas were all slain; the brothers and fathers were all slain in battle.

तत्सालोपाभिभूषानु कि न कुयोरितः किल ।

हैर्दैर्निंहता: सर्वे भुगव: पापवृद्धिभि: ॥ 55 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागते महापुराणे पठरकन्ये

पोडणोउथायः ॥ 16 ॥

Thus what improper acts and mischiefs can there be that cannot be committed when the human minds are overpowered by this greed? O King! The vicious Haihayas slew the Bhārgavas all through this avarice.

Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the incidents preliminary to the Haihaya and Bhārgava affairs in the Mahāpurānam Srimaddevībhāgāvatam by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XVII

CHAPTER XVII

On the Continuance of Bhrgu Family

जननेजय उवाच

कर्षे ताश तिज्यः सर्वा धूगूणां कुःखासगात् ।

मुक्ते वंश: पुनसेवां बाह्याणानां तिथ्यो:पवत् ॥ 1 ॥

Janamejaya said: Munis! How did the Bhārgava wives cross this endless sea of troubles and how

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

was the family of Bhrgu re-established on the surface of this earth?

हहदीः किं कृतं कार्यं हृत्वा तान्बाहाणानपि ।

क्षप्रिवैलीभसंयुक्ते: पापाचारैर्वदेस्व तत् १२ ११

And what did the greedy Haihayas, the vilest of the Kṣatriyas, do after they killed the Bhārgavas? Describe all these in detail and satisfy my curiosity.

न तृत्तिरिति मे ब्रह्मपिबतरते कथापनुम् ।

पादनं शुभदं नृणां परलोके फलप्रदम् ॥ 3 ॥

O Thou, Ocean of austerities! I am not satisfied with the drink of your nectar-like words, very holy and leading to happiness in this world and to good merits in the next.

व्यास उवाच

शृणु राजन्यवक्ष्यामि कक्षां पापप्रणाशिनीम् ।

यथा स्थित्युता भुक्ता दुव्रातन्यादुल्ययात् ॥ 4 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! I will now narrate to you the sin destroying virtuous story how the Bhārgava wives crossed their great hardships and the ocean of troubles, very difficult to cross.

भूगुपन्यो यदा राजन्टिम्बन्ते भिरीं गताः ।

भयत्रसता विभनागा हृद्धे: पीडिता भृणम् ॥ 5 ॥

The Bhārgava wives, when they were very much harassed by the Haihayas, went to the Himālayas, overwhelmed with terror and disappointment.

गौरिं तत सुसंस्थाय पृभ्मवीं सतितस्ते ।

उदोषणपराधकुनिश्रयं मरणं प्रति ॥ 6 ॥

There on that mountain they erected an earthen image of Śri Gauri Devi by the banks of the Ganges and worshipped Her and, firmly resolved to die, began to fast.

स्वने गत्वा तदा देयी प्राह ताः प्रमदोत्तमाः ।

युभातु मध्ये कस्याधिछ्धविता चोकतः पुभान् ॥ ७ ॥

The Devi Jagadambikā appeared to those religious women in their dreams and said: "A son will be born of My essence to one of you from one of her thighs; that son will redress all your wants."

मद्राशगतिस्त्रिभ्रप्र: स वः कार्य विधायस्ति ।

इत्यादिश्य परांवां सा पशुधात्नहिताउभवत् ॥ 8 ॥

जागृतास्तु ततः सर्वा मुद्यापुर्वरंगनाः ।

कार्धितसां भयोहिता कामिनी चतुत भृणम् ॥ 9 ॥

दधारा चोरणीकेन नर्ष सा कुलवृद्धये ।

पलायनपरा दृष्टा क्षतिवेब्जिहाणी यदा ॥ 10 ॥

Thus speaking, the Devi Bhagavati disappeared. Those women when they woke up were very glad; one of them that appeared very clever, becoming very much anxious out of the fear of the Kṣatriyas,

preserved the foetus in one of her thighs for the propagation of the family. Her body become luminous; she then fled, overwhelmed with terror. विहूला तेजसा वुक्ता तदा ते दुडवुर्भुंग ।

गृहातां बध्यतां नारी सभार्य वाति सक्ता ॥ 11 ॥

The Kṣatriyas, seeing that Brāhmaṇī, came quickly upon her and said: "See! This pregnant Bhārgava wife is flying away hastily; size her and take away her life."

इति बुवंत: सम्पाता: कामिनी खड्यापणयः ।

सा भयातां तु तान्यद्वा करोद समुपगानत् ॥ 12 ॥

Thus saying, all of them raised their axes, and pursued her. Then that woman seeing them coming, wept out of fear.

गर्भस्य त्रक्षणार्थ सा चुकोशातिभयातुग्र ।

रुदती मातरं शुत्वा दीनों प्राणविजर्जितम् ॥ 13 ॥

नित्यारां कंदयानां क्षत्रियेंशुशतायितम् ।

गृहीतायिति सिंहेन् सभार्थी हरिणी यथा ॥ 14 ॥

साशुनैजां वेयमानां संकुळ्य बालकस्तदा ।

भित्चोते निर्जनामागु गर्भे: सूरं इवापर: ॥ 15 ॥

She cried, out of terror, for the preservation of the child in her womb; and the child seeing her mother helpless and distressed, trembling with fear and with tears in her eyes having no one to protect her and awfully oppressed by the Kṣatriyas as if a pregnant deer has been attacked by a lion and is crying about, angrily burst out of the thigh of his mother, and quickly came out like a second Sun.

मुखान्द्रशीः क्षिवरणां जेजसः बालकः शुभः ।

दर्जान्जातकस्यागु सर्वे जाता विलेचान्चः ॥ 16 ॥

बधभुपर्गितिरुपिंगे जन्माधा इव क्षिवसाः ।

That good looking boy took away the power of

Book VI Chapter XVII

sight of those Kṣatriyas by his brilliant lustrous light; so sooner the Haihayas saw that boy than they got blind.

चिततं मनसा सर्वैः किमेत्तदिति साम्पतम् ॥ 17 ॥

सर्वे चशुर्दिवीना यज्ञाताः स्म बालदर्शनात् ।

ब्राह्मणास्तु प्रभावो3यं सतीततबलं मह्न ॥ 18 ॥

Like those that are born blind; they then began to roam in the caves of mountains and thought within themselves, what an evil turn of Fate had overtaken them! They thought thus: "Oh! The mere sight of that boy has turned us blind; what a great wonder is this! Certainly this is due the influence of the Brāhminī wife; this is, no doubt, the great effect of her virtue of chastity.

शणाढ़ा मोषसङ्कूला: किं कार्थिन्त दुःखिता: ।

इति सझित्य मनसा नेत्रहीना नितशया: ॥ १९ ॥

We have greatly oppressed the Bhārgava women. They have become very sorry and distressed; now we cannot tell what more evils do these women, of true resolve, inflict on us?"

बाहुपति ग्रणरो जगमूर्हिया गतचेतनस: ।

प्रणेमुस्तां भयवस्तां कृताझतिपुराधुत अ ते 20 ॥

कच्छौंनीं भयोद्धिना वृत्यर्थं ब्रह्मियर्षभाः ।

प्रसीद सुभगे मातः सेवकातसे वयं किल्च । २१ । ॥

कृतापराधा रंभोक क्रसिया: पायबुद्धयः ।

Thus pondering, those Ksatriyas deprived of their eyes, helpless, and their minds bewildered, took refuge of those Brāhmin ladies. The ladies, seeing them again come, were the more terrified; but those Ksatriyas bowed down before them with folded hands for the restoration of their sights and said: "O Mother! We are your servants. Be gracious unto us. O Auspicious Ones! We are vicious Ksatriyas; O Mother! What an amount of offence we have committed to you. O Beautiful Ones! We have become blind, no sooner we have seen you.

रूर्पान्तव तन्वीग जाता: सर्वे विलोजना: ॥ 22 ॥

मुखं ते नैव पर्यामो जन्मांदा इयं भामिति ।

अबुतु ते तपोर्वीव किं कुर्म: पापाकाशिण: ॥ 23 ॥

अगर्ण ते प्रपत्रा: सभे देहि चक्षिंय मानदे ।

O Angry Ones! No more we can see your lotus-like faces, as if we are born blind; O Mother! The spirit of your asceticism is so very wonderful! We are sinners; therefore by no means we can get our sight; therefore we have taken refuge unto you all; better give us back our eyesight and preserve our honour.

अभ्यतं मरणागुर्ग कृपां कर्तू ल्याईसि ॥ 24 ॥

पुनर्दिष्णवानेन सेवकान्धसियान्कृत ।

उपरम्य च गच्छेम सहिताः पापकर्मणः ॥ 25 ॥

अतः परं न कतव्यापीरुंगं कर्म कर्हिंति ।

भार्यावणां तु सर्वेशं सेवकाः स्यो वयं किल ॥ 26 ॥

O Mother! Blindness is more dreadful than death; therefore do you show your mercy on us. Be pleased unto us and restore our eyesights and make us your slaves; no sooner we get back our sights, we will cease from these vicious acts and go to our homes. In future, we will never commit such heinous acts; from today we all become servants of the Bhārgavas and we will serve them.

अज्ञानाकृष्टा पार्थ श्रंलवं तत्वायधुना ।

वैरं नात परं स्वायि भपुर्णिभः श्रंलियः सह ॥ 27 ॥

Forgive all our sins that we committed unconsciously; we promise that, in future, there will no more be any enmity between the Bhārgavas and Kṣatriyas.

कर्तेब्यं रणधेः सभ्यवर्तित्वयं तु हेतुवेः ।

सपुत्रा भव सुशोण प्रपाता: सभे वर्ध चे ते ॥ 28 ॥

प्रसादं कुक कल्याणि न द्विष्याम: कदाचन ।

O good-looking Ones! You pass your days happily with your sons; we ever bow down before you. O Auspicious Ones! Be graciously pleased unto us; no more we will cherish any inimical feelings towards you.

व्यास उवाच

इति तेशं वचः श्रुत्वा ब्राह्मणी विस्मयान्वित्त ॥ 29 ॥

तानाह प्रणतानुः:स्थानाश्रास्य गतलोचनान् ।

गृहीता न यया इष्टिकुंभाक़ क्षत्रियाः क्रिति ॥ 30 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Bhārgava lady heard their words and was thunderstruck and seeing those

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Kṣatriyas bowing down before her, blind and distressed, consoled them and said: "O Kṣatriyas I have not taken away your sights nor am I displeased in any way with you.

नाहं क्षापित्ता सत्यं कारणं श्यूलात्य यत् ।

अयं च भागीवो नृन्मूक्न: कृपितोउघ चः ॥ 31 ॥

चक्षुर्य तेन युवाके सन्धिभातिन कश्वात ।

स्वधिर्वित्त राज्ञाला गर्भेयावगीय क्षिवरेः ॥ 32 ॥

अनासो घोमपरांस्तायसाध्नकायया ।

गर्भानिय वया यूयं भृगृश्चिन्तु पुकाः ॥ 33 ॥

Now hear what is real cause. This child of Bhārgava, born of my thigh, is exceedingly angry towards you and has therefore made your eyesight still and to no purpose. For the greed of wealth, you have slain the close relatives of this boy, those that were quite innocent and virtuous ascetics and you have slain their children that were in their mother's wombs; this boy come to know all those things.

तदार्यमूषणा गर्भों मया वर्षेगतं धृत: ।

पडंगश्राजिलो वेदो गृहीतोउनेन चोजना ॥ 34 ॥

O children! When you were slaying the children of the Bhārgavas in their mothers' wombs, I then bore within my thighs this child for one hundred years.

गर्भेत्यनायि बालेने घुण्यांशिवबुद्दे ।

सोर्पि पितृवतधान्नं कौधेघौं हेतुमिच्छति ॥ 35 ॥

This son of mine though as yet in the womb has mastered all the Vedas within so very short a time for the propagation of the Bhārgava clan.

भगवत्या: प्रसादेन जातोउं यम बालकाः ।

तेजसा यस्य दिव्येन चधूर्षि युभितिन च ॥ 36 ॥

तस्मातैर्व सूत मेउदा याचर्ये तिवन्यातिवा: ।

प्रधिपातेन तुहोउसी दृष्टि वः प्रतिमोक्षिति ॥ 37 ॥

Now this Bhārgava son is infuriated with anger for your slaying his father and is now ready to kill you all. My son! Whose divine effulgence has destroyed your eyesights, is born in grace of the Highest Goddess, the Bhagavatī Bhuvanesāvari; therefore do not consider this boy as an ordinary

being. Now bow down with humility before this my son Auryva (born from the thighs); this son may be pleased by your bowing down and may retire your you eyesight.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छृत्वा वचनं तत्या हैहयात्तुद्वृक्ष तम् ।

प्रणेपुर्विच्योपेता ऊकर्ने भुविसतमम् ॥ 38 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of the Brāhmim lady, the Haihayas began to praise the boy with hymns. With great humility, they bowed down to the best of the Munis, born of the thighs.

स सन्तुषी बक्याला तानुगाव चिवक्षुपः ।

गळ्छशं स्वगृहान्युपा मामाखानकृतं वचः ॥ 39 ॥

अवर्यभाधियभालते भवन्ति देवनिर्मिताः ।

नात्र शोकस्तु कतिथ्वः पुकर्णे विज्ञानता ॥ 40 ॥

The Rşi Aurvya, then, became pleased and spoke thus to the Haihayas who were deprived of their eyesight: "Better go back to your own homes. O Kings! And read these following words derived from my this story.

पूर्ववद्धुरेष्य: सर्वे प्राप्नवन्तु यथासुखम् ।

जर्जु वियातक्रीधा भवन्ति यथासुखम् ॥ 41 ॥

Whatever is inevitable and created by the hands of gods must come to pass. Knowing this, no one ought to be sorrowful on any such matters.

इति तेन समादिष्ठ हृदयाः प्राप्तलोचना: ।

ओरीबाभंग्रय जपमुते सदन्तिन यथासचि ॥ 42 ॥

बाहाणी ते सुत दिव्यं गृहीचा स्वामयं नात ।

पालयामास भूपाल तेजबिचनमतन्त्रित ॥ 43 ॥

Let you all regain your eyesight as before and forego your anger and go to your own homes respectively at your own will. Let the Rşis, too, get peace and happiness as before." When the Maharṣi Aurva ordered thus, the Haihayas got back their eyesight and went at their leisure to their own homes, on the other hand the Brāhimin lady went to her own hermitage, with her Divine-spirited child and began to nourish him.

एवं ते क्रियतं राजन्यगृणा तु विनाशनम् ।

लोपाधिष्टेः क्षत्रियेश्य न्यकृतं पातक किलि ॥ 44 ॥

Book VI Chapter XVII

O King! Thus I have described to you the story of the killing of the Bhārgavas and how the Kṣatriyas, actuated by greed, did so very vicious acts.

जनमेव जयात

शुतं मया महतकर्म क्षत्रियाणां च दाक्णम् ।

कारणं लोभ एवात्र दुःखद्धीयभोसृतः सः ॥ 4 5 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Ascetic! Hearing this exceedingly heart-rending act of the Kṣatriyas, I come to know, that greed is the sole cause of it and both the parties had suffered so much, simply out of this insatiable greed.

किंचिन्युभिह्छायि संशयं वासरीसुत ।

हैहवासे तकं नाना छलाता भुवि नृपातकनः ॥ 46 ॥

O King of Munis! I want to ask you one more question in regard to this point. How the sons of the Kings came to be known Haihayas in this world?

यदोसु याद्वा: कामं भरतद्वभरातसक्षा ।

हैहयः कोर्पि राजाउभूतेभां योग प्रतिक्ति: ॥ 47 ॥

Amongst the Kṣatriyas, some are called Yādavas for they were descended from the family of Yadu; some were known as Bhārata, for they were descended from Bharata.

तद्रं श्रोत्थिच्छामि कारणं कर्णानिये ।

हैहयासे कंब जाता: श्रियाय: केन कर्मणा ॥ 48 ॥

But was come king named Haikhayas born before in their family or were they known as such on account of other actions? I desire to hear of it. Kindly describe this to me and oblige.

हैहयानां समुत्पति शृणं भूप सविस्तरान् ।

पुरातनां सुपुणयं च कवां पापप्रणाशिनीम् ॥ 49 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! I am describing in detail to you of the origin of the Haithayas. Hear. The sins are destroyed and the merits accure on hearing this story.

कस्मिंश्रित्यमये भृप सूर्यपुः सुशोभनः ।

रंवेतीत च विद्यालोत रूपव्यानमितुर्षः ॥ 50 ॥

उन्यैः श्रवसामकहा ह्यन्तं मनोहर्म ।

जगाम विद्यासुदर्ने वैकुण्ट भार्करात्मजः ॥ 51 ॥

भगवद्धर्नाकांक्षी ह्यास्कडो यद्यानतः ।

हन्यस्तु तदा द्रुही लक्ष्याजी रचिनन्दनः ॥ 52 ॥

O King! Once on a time Revanta, the son of the Sun, very beautiful and of boundless lustre, was going to Viṣṇu in Vaikuntha, mounted on the beautiful Ucaisārvā, the jewel of the horses. When he was going on horseback with a desire to see the God Viṣṇu, the Goddess Lakṣmī saw that child of the Sun.

रमा वीक्ष्य हर्ष दिख्यं घातरं सागरो.द्वयम् ।

रूपेण विमिता तस्य तस्यी सर्पिततोचना ॥ 53 ॥

The Goddess Lakṣmī, born out of the churning of the ocean, on looking at the beautiful appearance of her brother Horse, also born out of the churning of the ocean, became very much astonished and steadily gazed on him.

भगवानपि तं दूद्वा ह्यास्कं मनोहम ।

आगच्छतं रां बिणुः पुरच्छ प्रणायातपुः ॥ ५४ ॥

को3प्रभायाति चार्विकृ ह्यास्के इवापरः ।

स्मरतेजसन्तुः कान्ते मोह्यन्ति भुवन्त्रयम् ॥ ५५ ॥

The Bhagavān Viṣṇu, capable to show both favour and disfavour, saw the beautiful Revanta, of good figure, coming on horseback; and lovingly asked Lakṣmī: “O Beautiful One! Who is coming here on horseback, as it were, enchanting to the three worlds!”

प्रेक्षमाणा तदा लक्ष्मीतचित्चता दैवयोगतः ।

नेावच वचनं किंचिन्यूहापि च पुनः पुनः ॥ 56 ॥

At that time, the Goddess Lakṣmī was accidentally looking intently on the horse; so she did not reply, though repeatedly asked by the Bhagavān.

व्यास उवाच

अशस्तभर्ति वीक्ष्य कामिनीमितिगोहताम ।

पर्यंर्ती परमप्रेमा चझुलाईं च चझुलाम ॥ 57 ॥

The Lakṣmī Devī, always restless, was very much intent on the horse and was enchanted and She was looking steadily with great affection on the horse.

तामास भपावानुकूदः किं पयसि सुलोचने ।

मोहिता च हरिं दूर्व्या पूर्ण तैवाधिभायसे ॥ 58 ॥

Seeing this, the Bhagavān became angry and said: "O Beautiful-eyed One! What you are looking at so intently?

स्वयं तमसे यस्माद्रमा तस्माद्वित्यति ।

चढ़लत्वाच्छलतेचेयं सर्वैधैव न संशय: ॥ 59 ॥

प्राकृता च यथा नारी नूनं भवति चंचला ।

तथा तथामी कल्याणि स्थिति येन वक्तवान् ॥ 60 ॥

Are you so much enchanted with the sight of the horse that you are not speaking to me a single word, though I am repeatedly asking you so often! You lovingly dwell on all the objects; hence your name is Rama; your mind is also very restless, therefore you would be known as Cañcalā Devi (the restless Devi). O Auspicious One! You are restless like ordinary women; you can never stay steadily for a certain time at any one place.

तं हं दयं तस्मीपत्था समीक्ष्य यदि मोहिता ।

वड्वा भव ब्यामोक मत्वलोकें.निदाड़णो ॥ ६ १ ॥

While sitting before Me, you are enchanted with the sight of a horse; then you be born as a mare in that world of men, full of dreadful troubles, on the surface of the earth."

शूनि शला तया देवी हरिणा दैवयोगत ।

रोटि वेघमाना सा भयभीताउतिच्छि.7.6.2 ॥ 6.2 ॥

The Goddess Lakṣmī became very much affrightened at the sudden curse given by Hari, a matter as it were ordained by the Devas, and began to cry aloud, shuddering with pain and sorrows.

तमुवाच स्यानार्थ शाङ्गुता चाह्ताक्षिति ।

प्राणम्य शिरसा देर्वे स्वपर्ति विनयान्यिता ॥ 6 3 ॥

देवदेव जगत्राथ करणाकर केवार ।

Laksmī Devi, then of sweet smiles, frightened, bowed down with great humility to her own lord Nārāyaṇa and said thus: "O Deva of the Devas! O Govinda! You are the Lord of this world and the Ocean of mercy.

स्वल्पप्रपायो गोविन्द कस्माच्छायं ददात्मे में ॥ 64 ॥

न कदाचित्यमाय गृहः क्रीधरते हीगुणः प्रभो ।

कव गतस्ते मयि नेहः सहजी ने तु नधरः ॥ 65 ॥

O Keśava! Why have you inflicted on me so dreadful a curse for such a minor fault of mine! O Lord! I never saw you before so very angry; Alas! Where has now gone that affection, so natural and undying, that you showed towards me!

वज़पातनसु जगत्री वै कतवीयो न सुडुजनें ।

सदारड़ं वरयोग्यां ते शापयोग्या कबं कृत्ति ॥ 66 ॥

O Lord! It is not proper to hurl a thunderbolt on one's own relations; but it is advisable to cast it on the enemies.

प्राणांस्त्व्यामि गोविन्द प्रप्यतोउघ ताव्यातः ।

कर्थ जीवे त्वया हीना विरहान्तन्तातिपा ॥ 67 ॥

प्रसादं कुरु देवेशु शापाद्यमासूल्याफाणत ।

कंदा भुक्ता समीयं ते प्राप्नोमि सुखदं विभो ॥ 68 ॥

I am always fit for receiving boons from you. Why have you made me now an object, fit for curse. O Govinda! I will quit this life in your presence. I will never be able to live, separated from You. O Lord! Be graciously pleased and say when shall I be free this dreadful curse and regain Your happy companion?

हरिकाव

यदा ते भविता पुत्र: पृथिव्यां मस्मय: प्रिये ।

तदा मां प्राय तद्वीये भुविता त्वं भविष्यां ॥ 6 9 ॥

इति श्रीद्वीभागवते महापुराणे पुर्वरूब्ये

सावदशीउवायः ॥ 10 ॥ 11

The Bhagavān said: 'O Devi! When you will get a son in the world like me, you will no doubt come again to be my companion.

Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter on the continuance of the family of Bhgru in the Sixth Book in the Mahāpurānam, Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

of 18,000 verses by Maharsi

Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XVIII

CHAPTER XVIII

On the Origin of the Haithayas

जनमेजय उवाच

इति शला भगवता सिस्युजा कोयोगतः ।

कर्थ सा वडवा जाता रवेतेन च किं कुम्न ।। १ ।।

कस्मिन्नोर्जधिजा देयी बडवास्तणयिरणी ।

संस्थितेकाकिनी बाला परोशिवतिका यथा ॥ 2 ॥

Janamejaya said: How did the Goddess Lakṣmī, the daughter of the ocean, come to be born as a mare, when cursed by the Bhagavān in His moment of anger, and what did Revanta do at that time? In what country was the Devi born as a mare and how did She pass Her time alone like one whose husband had gone abroad."

कालं किंवांतायुष्पित्युक्ता पतिना राम ।

संस्थिता विननेउपये किं कृतं च तथा पुनः ॥ ३ ॥

O Muni! How long and in what forest unfrequented by persons did she pass her time, thus deprived of the companion of her husband and what did she do at that time?

समागमं कदा प्राप्ता वासुदेवस्य सिंधुजा ।

पुत्रः कंक्ष तथा प्राप्तो नारायणविशुक्त्या ॥ 4 ॥

एतद्वक्तताम्यैश कवयस्य सविस्तरण ।

श्रोतकामोदासि विघ्रें कवाण्ड्यानमनुतम् ॥ 5 ॥

When was she reconciled with her husband Vāsudeva? and how did she get a son, when she lived in a state of separation from her husband. O best of Āryas! I am very curious to hear this excellent story. So describe this in full details to me.

सूत उवाच

इति पृथस्तदा व्यासः परीक्षितनयेन वै ।

कथयामास भो विधा: कथामोतां सुविस्तग्न ॥ 6 ॥

Sūta said: “O Rṣis! Thus questioned by Janamejaya, the Dvaipāyana Muni began to recite the story in its full details.”

त्यास उवाच

शूणु राजप्रव्यक्षामि कक्षा पौराणिकीं शुभाम् ।

पावर्ती सुखदां कर्णें शिशदास्वसंयुतान् ॥ 7 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! I will now describe to you the pleasing story of the Purāṇas in a clear distinct language; hear.

रेर्वतस्तु रमां चूद्वा शणतं देवेन कामिनीम् ।

भयत: प्रयती इतात्रणय ज्ञानां पतिन् ॥ 8 ॥

Revanta, the son of the Sun, became terrified to see Vāsudeva, the Deva of the Devas cursing the Lakṣmī Devi and, after bowing down to Janārdana, the Lord of the world, went off.

चितुः सकाशं त्वरितो वीक्ष्य कोपं जगत्यतः ।

निवेद्यामास कर्णां भापकताव स शपाजम् ॥ 9 ॥

Seeing the anger of Viṣṇu, the Lord of the world, he went quickly to his father and informed him of the curse delivered by Nārāyaṇa to the Goddess Lakṣmī.

यु:वित्ता सा रमा देही प्रणाय जगदीशून् ।

आज्ञापा मानुषं लोकं प्रापता कमललोचना ॥ 10 ॥

And the Lakṣmī Devi, the lotus-eyed, thus cursed, got the permission of Nārāyaṇa and with a grieved heart bowed down to him and came down to the world of mortals.

सूर्यपन्न्या तपस्तवं चत्र पूर्वे सुदारुभणम् ।

त्रैव सा ययावाग्यु बढ़ावरूपधारिणी ॥ १ १ १ ॥

She took the form of a mare and went to the spot where the wife of the Sun (named Chāyā) practised her asceticism in ancient times.

कालिंदीतमासांगे सुपाणांक्ष्य चोते ।

सर्वकामप्रदे स्थाने सुप्रत्यवनमणिकते ॥ १२ ॥

The place was the confluence of the river Kālindī and the Tamasā, and decorated with lovely forests and trees situated north of the mountain named Suparṇāksa, yielding all desires.

तत्र स्थिता महादेवे शक्रुंर वार्धिश्वतम् ।

दूधौ चैकेन मनसा शुलिनं चन्द्रश्रेखम् ॥ १३ ॥

पद्धानं दार्णवुं गरीद्रद्धधारिणम् ।

कर्षूरीगैदहाभं नीलकर्णे जिलोचनम् ॥ १४ ॥

व्याजिनर्धे देयं गजचर्भतृयिकम् ।

कपालमालाकर्तितं नाग्यज्ञोपवीर्तिनम् ॥ 15 ॥

There she meditated with her whole heart the auspicious Mahādeva Śānkara, the Giver of all desires, thus: That Mahādeva is holding the Triśūla (the trident) on his arms; His forehead is adorned with beautiful cooling semi-Moon; He has five faces, each face having three eyes; His throat is coloured blue; He has ten arms; His body is white like camphor; He wears a tiger's skin; His upper garment is of elephant's skin; and snakes are his holy thread; He is holding the one-half of the body of Gauri and his neck is adorned with garlands of human skulls.

सागरस्य सुता कृत्वा हरीकंप मनोहारम् ।

तस्मिन्तीर्ण रामदोयी चकार दुखंर तपः ॥ 16 ॥

The Goddess Lakṣmī, the daughter of the ocean assuming the form of a mare, thus practised severe asceticism in that place of pilgrimage.

ध्यायमाना परं देवे दैवार्यं समुपार्थिता ।

दिव्यं वर्षेहरहं तु गतं तत्र महीपते ॥ 17 ॥

O King! With a feeling of intense dispassion (Vairāgyam) towards the worldly things, She spent the divine one thousand years in the meditation of Mahādeva, the God of the Gods.

ततस्तृषी महोदेवो व्यापकाहिकलोचनः ।

प्रत्यक्षो3 पृमहेशानः पावर्तीसहितः प्रभुः ॥ 18 ॥

After that period, the Highest Lord Mahādeva, mounting on His bull, came there with His consort Pārvatī and appeared before the Lakṣmī Devi perceptible by his eyes.

तत्रैल सभण: शम्भुस्तामाह हरिवल्पभाम् ।

तप्यस्तीं महाभागामधिजीरूपधारिणीम् ॥ 19 ॥

किं तप्यसी कल्याणि जग्मातरंद्वय से ।

सर्वार्थद: पतिरसंज्ञिति सर्वलोकाधियायक: ॥ 20 ॥

हूरं त्वल्वाजघ मो कम्पतलीषि देखे जगतयितम् ।

वायुरुदेवे जगताथं धुक्तिपुक्तिप्रदायकम् ॥ 21 ॥

Appearing thus with His host of His own persons, He then spoke to Lakṣmī, dear to Hari, now practising asceticism in the form of a mare,

“O Auspicious One! You are the Mother of this whole Universe and your Husband is the Creator of these worlds and is capable to give all desires. Why are You, then, practising asceticism, when He is present? What is the cause of this? O Devi! Why are You praising hymns to me, instead of to Vāsudeva Śrī Hari, Who is capable to yield enjoyments and final liberation, and Who is the Preserver and the Lord of this world.

वेदोर्भेच्चनं कार्य नानीर्णं देऊत पति: ।

नान्यस्मर्वेधा भावः कर्तेयः कहिधित्वस्त्रिध् । २२ ॥

O Devi! Work should be done according to the authority of the Vedas; it is stated in the Vedas that the husband is the lord of a woman; therefore it is never advisable to fix one's mind entirely on another person.

पतिगुभुवर्षा क्रौणां धर्म एव सन्तानतः ।

यादुशस्तादुश: सेव्यः सर्वथा शुभकाम्या ॥ 23 ॥

The eternal Dharma of women is to serve their husbands; whether the husband be a saint or a sinner, the woman, desirous of her welfare, should serve her husband in every way.

नारायणसु सर्वेंभां सेव्यो योग्य: सर्वेहि ।

तं व्यक्त्वा देवेदेशेंण किं मां ध्यायसि सिंगुषे ॥ 24 ॥

O Daughter of the Ocean! Your husband Nārāyana is fit to be served by all and He is capable to yield all desire. Why are you then worshipping Me, and leaving the Lord of the Goloka, the Deva of the Devas."

लक्ष्मीत्वाच

आगुतीय मेहशान शताप्ताई पतिना शिव ।

मां समुद्धूर देवेश शगाद्यमहाविनधि ॥ 25 ॥

Lakṣmī said: “O Deva of the Devas! O Seat of Auspiciousness! I know that You are soon pleased with Your servant. My husband has cursed me. O Ocean of mercy! Kindly save me from this curse.

तदोर्भे हरिण शम्भो शगानुग्रहकारणम् ।

विज्ञाने मया कामं दयावुक्तेन विश्याना ॥ 26 ॥

यदा ते भविता पुत्रस्तदा शगप्य मोक्षाणम् ।

भविष्यति च वैकुण्ठवाससे कमलालये ॥ 27 ॥

Book VI Chapter XVIII

O Śambhu! When I informed my husband of my mental agonies, graciously and mercifully He then pointed out how I might be freed of this curse thus: “O Kamale! When Your son will be born, then You will be freed of this curse and will, no doubt, come back and live in this Heaven of Vaikuntha.”

इत्युक्ताड़ं तपस्तपुभागताउसि तपोवेने ।

आराधितो मया देख लें सर्वांधीप्रदायकः ॥ 28 ॥

Thus spoken, I have come in this hermitage to make tapas and to worship Thee, knowing that Thou art the Bhagavān, the Lord of Bhavānī, the Lord of all and the Giver of all desires.

पतिसंगं विना पूयं देवेदेल लपे कथम् ।

स तु तिष्ठित तैकुपते तवल्का वामामानासम् ॥ 29 ॥

O Lord of the Devas! How can I get a son without the intercourse of My husband? Though I am guiltless, my husband has forsaken me and is living in Vaikuntha.

वरं मे दिहे देवेश यदि तुहोस शक्रूर ।

तब तस्य द्विधा भावो नास्ति नूनं कवाचन ॥ ३० ॥

O Maheśvara! Thou art doing good to all persons; and if Thou art pleased with me, then grant me a boon.

मयेतद्विराजाकान्त ज्ञातं पत्यु: पुरो हर ।

यत्सं घोजसी पुनर्वेंगसी स तं नालस्य संशयः ॥ ३१ ॥

O Lord! I know full well that there is no distinction between Him and Thee. O Lord of Girijā! This truth I have come to learn from my husband. O Hara! You are the same thing that He is and what is He is the same as You; there is not the least doubt in this.

एकलं च मवा सात्वा मवा ते स्मरणं कृतम् ।

अन्यथा मम दोषसत्वामाश्रंत्या भवेचित्ध्वि ॥ ३२ ॥

O Thou, full of auspiciousness! Recognising the Sameness without any distinction between Him and Thee, I am meditating on Thee. Had it been otherwise, then I would certainly have been guilty when I take Thy refuge and meditate on Thee.

शिव उवाच

कर्थ प्रान्तस्यार्य देवि यम तस्य च सुन्दारि ।

ऐक्यपाठो हरेनूने सत्यं मे वद सिंधुजे ॥ 33 ॥

śaṅkara said: “O Devi, the daughter of the Ocean! Tell truly before me how you have been able to realise the identity between Him and Me.

एकलं च न जानीन देवाशु मुनवस्था ।

ज्ञानिनो वेदतचत्ज्ञा: कृतकर्णिकृता: किति ॥ 34 ॥

The Devas, Munis and the Maharsis, versed in the Vedas, get their understandings baffled by wrong argumentations and never realise the identity without any difference between us.

मद्रुता वासुदेवस्य निवंका बह्वरसता ।

विष्णुभक्तासु बह्वो मम निद्वापरायणा: ॥ 35 ॥

Almost everywhere you will perceive that many of my devotees blame me. Specially in this Kali Yuga due to the influence of Time, this happens to a very great extent in many cases.

भवन्ति कालपेदेन कली देय विशेषतः ।

कर्थं जातस्वया भरे दुर्जीय हुकृततामिधः ॥ 36 ॥

सर्वेथा तैव्यभावसु हेरमेन च दुर्णंभः ।

O Auspicious One! Let that go! How have you come to know this matter, which is difficult even for the liberal-minded persons to comprehend. Know that this perception of the identity between me and Hari is very rare."

व्यास उवाच

इति सा शपभुना पृष्ठा तुईन हरिवल्णा ॥ 37 ॥

चुत्तां तत्य विज्ञां प्रवत्कुपचक्रमे ।

शिवं प्रति तमा तन प्रसवब्रदना भृगम् ॥ 38 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When Mahādeva asked thus with great pleasure, the Devi Kamalā, the darling of Hari, gladly replied the essence of the matter to Mahādeva.

लक्ष्मीकावा

एकदा देवदेवेश विष्णुधानंपरो रहः ।

दृष्टो मया तपः कुर्वेम्यासनगते यदा ॥ 39 ॥

Lakṣmī said: “O Deva of the Devas! One day Bhagavān Viṣṇu, seated in the Padmāsana posture, was immersed in deep meditation.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

तदारूई विस्मिता देखें तमपृष्छं परिते किल ।

प्रबुद्धे सुप्रसई च जाला विस्तयपूर्वकम् ॥ 40 ॥

देवदेव जगाओय यदारूई निर्णिताजणवाला ।

मध्यमानातुरैदैर्वै: सर्वैक्षेहाविद्धि: प्रभो ॥ 41 ॥

वैशिक्तादा मया सर्वे पत्तिकामनया तदा ।

वृतसर्वे सर्वेदेशेषः श्रेडोर्सीति विलिश्रयात् ॥ 42 ॥

I was very much astonished at this. When His meditation was over and when He was in a pleasant mood, I asked Him with great humility, O Deva of the Devas! I know that You are the Lord of the world and Master of this whole Universe; when Brahmā and the other Devas were united and churned the great ocean, I came out of the waters and looked all around to know who is the superior one whom I can select as my husband and then, thinking You as the superior to all the Devas, I accepted You as my husband. Now whose meditation You are doing again?

तं कं ध्यायसि सर्वैण संग्रोधोर्ग महाम्म।

प्रियोसि कैटभारे मे कवयस्व मनोगतम् ॥ 43 ॥

A great doubt has thus occurred in my mind. O Lord! You are my most Beloved; now disclose to me your innermost desire and thought.

विष्णुकाव

शृणु कान्ते प्रवक्ष्यायि यं ध्यायामि सुरोतमम् ।

आगुतोंचे महैजानं निरिज्ञाल्वलर्भ हृदि ॥ 44 ॥

Visnu said: “O Beloved! Hear now, whom I am meditating. I am meditating in the lotus of My heart that Mahādeva Maheśvara, the Highest of all the Devas.

क्रताविर्वेदेवेलो मां ध्यायल्यमितविक्रमः ।

ध्यायामर्ह च देवेशं शुक्रूरं विमुगन्तकम् ॥ 45 ॥

Mahādeva, the Deva of the Devas of indomitable prowess, sometimes meditates on Me and sometimes I meditate on the Lord of the Deva, Śaṅkara, the Destroyer of Tripurā.

शिवस्थादि प्रियः प्राणः शकुर्भरुत् तथा मम् ।

उभयोरंतं नास्ति सिधः संसक्तचेतसोः ॥ 46 ॥

I am dear to Śiva as his life is dear to him and Śankara is similarly dear to me. The hearts of us

both are attached to each other in the most secret way possible; therefore there is not the least difference betwixt us both.

नरकं याति ने नूनं ये दिषिति महेश्वम् ।

भक्ता मय विशालाहिंस सत्यमेतदुबीयमह्म। ॥ 47 ॥

O large eyed One! Those men who being my devotees hate Śankara, certainly go to hell. I speak this very truly unto you."

इत्युक्ते देवदेवेन विद्यानु प्रभविष्यानु ।

एकाने कित पृष्ठेन मया शैलसुताधिप्र १। ४ 8 ॥

O Maheśvara! When I asked him this question when he was all alone, that Deva of the Devas, the Highest Viṣṇu thus said to me.

तस्पाचां वत्लभं विधोज्ञेता ध्यातवती हुहम् ।

तथा कुर्म मेहैगान यथा मे प्रियर्समः ॥ ४९ ॥

Therefore I am meditating on You, knowing that You are His beloved. O Maheśa! Now find out means by which I can mix with My husband."

व्यास उवाच

इति श्रियो वचः श्रुत्वा प्रत्युवाच महेश्वः ।

तामाश्रय द्रिवैर्वल्वैर्वेधार्थं वायवक्रोविद्ध: ॥ 50 ॥

स्वस्था भव पृथुशीणि तुर्जोड़ं तरास तत ।

समागमते पतिना भविष्यिति न संशयः ॥ 51 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Mahādeva, skilled in speech, hearing thus the words of Lakṣmī, consoled Her with sweet and said: "O Beautiful; I am pleased with Your tapasyā; soon You will come in contact with Your tapasyā; soon You will come in contact with Your husband.

अत्रैव ह्यक्सेषण भगवाङ्गुरीश्र: ।

आगमिष्यित ते कामं पूर्ण कर्तुं मयेरितः ॥ 52 ॥

There is not the least doubt in this. When I will send the Bhagavān, the Lord of the world, He will come before you in the shape of a horse, to satisfy your desires.

तत्याई प्रेरिय्यामि तं देवं मधुसुदनम् ।

यथास्त्री हयरूकोण त्यामेघित मदातुः ॥ 53 ॥

I will send the Madhusūdana, the Deva of the Devas, in such a manner, as he will come in the form of a horse, passionately attached to you.

Book VI Chapter XIX

पुत्रसे भविता सुभ्रु नारायणसमः श्रित्ति ।

भविष्यति स भूपालः सर्वलोकनामस्कृतः ॥ 54 ॥

O One of good eye brows! Thus you will get a son equivalent to Nārāyaṇa; and the son will be the King on this earth and will be undoubtedly worshipped by all.

सुतं प्राय महाभागे चं तेन पतिना सह ।

ग्नानाति देवि वैकृतं प्रिया तस्य भविष्यसि ॥ 55 ॥

O fortunate One! After you get your son, you will go to Vaikuntha with Nārāyaṇa and will reside there as His Beloved.

एकवीरित नानाउसी ख्यातिं यास्यिते ते सुतः ।

तस्मातु हैहयो वंशो भृवि विस्तारमेयिति ॥ ५६ ॥

Your son will be famed by the name of Ekavíra; and from him will propagate the Haihaya dynasty on the earth. O Kamale! You were blind by prosperity, and, becoming passionate, you forgot the Devi Paramesvári, residing in your heart.

पन्तु विस्मृतासि त्व हृदित्यां परभेवुभीम् ।

मदीधा मन्तिचना च तेन ते फलमीडृष्णम् ॥ 57 ॥

Therefore you have experienced such a result. Therefore, to expiate that sin, take Her refuge by all means.

अतस्तदोषगतिवर्ध हृदित्यां परदेवताम् ।

ग्रणं याहि सर्वात्माघवेन जलधेः सुते ॥ 58 ॥

अन्यथा तव चित्तं तु कर्थं गच्छेद्वयोगे ।

O Devi! If your heart remained attached to the

Highest Devi the blissful Bhagavatī, your heart would never have got attached to the Ucceāisravā horse."

व्यास उवाच

इति दत्त्वा वरं देख्ये भगवाऊळलजायति: ॥ 59 ॥

अंतधार्न गतः साक्षानुद्यम सहितः शिवः ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus granting boons to Lakṣmī Devī, He with his consort Umā vanishes away in her presence.

सापि तत्रैव चार्वेड़ी संसित्या कमलासना ॥ 60 ॥

ध्यान्ती चरणाम्पोजे देखा: परमशोभन् ।

देवासुरशिरोलनिधूर्धनखमपडलन् ॥ 61 ॥

प्रेमगहद्वा वाचा तुहाव च पुरुभुर्दुः ।

प्रतीक्षामाणा भतरिंं द्वरूक्षपरं हरिम् ॥ 62 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे

फरककन्नेडाश्वगर्भाश्वा: ॥ 1 7 8 ॥

Kamalā Devi, lovely in all respects, whose toe nails are always rubbed by the gems on the coronets of the Devas, began to meditate on the lotus-feet of Ambikā and in expectation of his beloved Hari, in the shape of a horse, praised and chanted hymns frequently to the Highest Goddess, in words choked with feelings of intense love.

Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Sixth Book

on the origin of the Haihaya Dynasty in the

Mahapurānam Śrimaddevivbhāgavatam of

18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XIX

CHAPTER XIX

On the Haihayas Born of a Mare

यास उवाच

तस्यै दृत्वा वरं ग्रामुः कैलासं त्वितो घयी ।

रम्यं देवगपौजुष्मपसंपोधिष्णु मपिडतम् ॥ १ ॥

तत्र गत्वा चित्रकर्ण गर्ण कार्यविशारतम् ।

प्रेयभागत वैकुंटे लक्षनीकार्यांविसघ्ये ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus granting the boon to the Goddess Laksmī, Śambhu quickly returned to the lovely Kailāśa, adorned with Apsarās (celestial nymphs) and frequented and served by the Gods. He then despatched his expert attendant Citrarūpa

to Vaikuntha to bring the purpose of Laksmī to a successful issue.

शिव उवाच

चित्रकर वह त्रि गत्या बहुत त्वं चतवान्यम ।

यथाउसौ वु:शित्तां पत्नीं विगोकोां च करिष्यति ॥ 3 ॥

He said to him thus: “O Citrarūpa! Go to Hari and speak to him on my behalf that He would go and remove the sorrows of His distressed and bereaved wife and thus make Her comfortable.”

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

इयुस्तीष्चरूकोप्र धनर्जम त्वार्पितः ।

वैकुण्ड परं स्थानं वैश्वावैश गर्णैवृत्ति ॥ 4 ॥

Thus ordered, Citarāupa started immediately and reached at once Vaikuntha, the highest place, covered all over by the Vaisnavas.

नानादुमगणाकीणं वाणीशतिवारजितम् ।

संवृत्ते इसकारंडव्यूर्णकोंकिकेलः ॥ 5 ॥

उच्यमासादर्युक्ते पताकामिलडुक्तम् ।

नृत्यगीत्कलापूर्ण मन्दारुद्रमसंयुतम् ॥ 6 ॥

The place was diversified with lots of various trees, with hundreds of lovely lakes, and echoed with sweet lovely sounds of swans, Kārandavas, peacocks, parrots, cuckoos and various other birds and adorned with beautiful places, decked with flags and banners. It was filled with charming dancing, music and other artistic things.

ब्रुतुलाशीकतितकवच्यमकातिविधिषिडान् ।

कृकितैर्विहानां तु कर्णाहादकरैयुतम् ॥ 7 ॥

There were the lovely Bakula, Asoka, Tilaka, Campaka and other trees; and the beautiful tree Mandāra looked beautiful and shed all around the sweet fragrance of its sweet flowers for a long distance.

संवैश्य भवनं विल्योहृं:स्थी प्राह ग्रणाय च ।

जयविजवयानानी वेजरणी स्थितावृषी ॥ 8 ॥

Thus seeing the lovely nice palace of Viṣṇu and the two doorkeepers Jaya and Vijaya standing with canes in their hands.

वित्रलय उवाच

भो निवेद्यतं शीधं हरये परमात्मने ।

दूतं प्रातं हरस्यात प्रेरित सुर्णपाणिणा ॥ 9 ॥

Cirtaratha bowed down to them and said: "Well! You go quickly and inform the Supreme Soul Hari that a messenger has come under the orders of the Bhagavān Śūlapānī and is now waiting at His doors."

तच्छूत्वा वचनं तस्य जय: परमबुद्धिमान् ।

गत्वा हरिं प्रण्याह कृतांजलिपुटः पुरः ॥ 10 ॥

देवदेव रमाकान्त करणाकर केशव ।

दारि तिष्ठित दृतोउत्र शक्रृत्यस्य समाप्ताः ॥ 1 1 ॥

Hearing his words, the intelligent Jaya went to Hari and, with folded hands, said: "O Thou Ocean of Mercy! O Keśava! O Lord of Rama! O Deva of the Devas! A messenger has come from the Lord of Bhavānī and is waiting at the doors.

आजायय प्रवेहल्यो न वेति गरूछध्वज ।

विजरकपरोउधारित न जाने कार्यगीरमू। १ १ २ ॥

I do not know on what important business he has come. Please order whether I will bring him before You are not.

इत्याकरणं हरि: प्राह जयं प्रजातकारण: ।

प्रवेशयात करूस्य भृत्वं समपसंश्रितम् ॥ १ ३ ॥

On hearing the Jaya's words, Hari, aware of the inner feelings, knew at once the cause and said: "O Jaya! Bring before me the messenger come from Rudra."

इत्याकरणें जयस्टूर्ण गत्वा तं परमाद्धतम् ।

एहीत्याकारयामास जयः शक्रसेवकम् ॥ 14 ॥

Thus hearing, Jaya called the Śiva's servant, of a graceful form, and brought him to the presence of Janārdana.

प्रवेशितो जयेनाथ चित्रस्पतशक्रातिकः ।

प्रणय दण्डविष्णु कृतंजलिपुर: स्थितः ॥ 15 ॥

Citrarāpa, of variegated appearance, prostrated himself flat before Him in the form of a stick and stood up and remained with folded hands.

दूर्यत तं चित्तमां प्राप भगवानारकड्यजः ।

वित्रकरणशं रणभो: सेवकं विनयान्यितम् ॥ 16 ॥

The Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa, Whose carrier is Garuda, saw that servant of Śiva, of variegated appearance and full of all humility, and became very much astonished.

प्रपछ्छ तं सितं कृत्वा चित्रकर्ण रपापितः ।

कुगलं देवदेवस्य सकुटुबल्य चानय ॥ 17 ॥

The Lord of Kamalā then smiled and asked Citrarūpa; “O Pure One! Is it all well with Mahādeva, the Lord of the Devas and his other families and attendants? On what business has He sent you here? What does He want me to do? Or tell me if I have to do any other business of the gods.”

Book VI Chapter XIX

दूत उवाच

कस्माचं प्रशितोउस्यत्र हूंहि कार्य हृस्य किम् ।

अथवा देवतानां च किंचित्कार्यं समृत्यितम् ॥ 18 ॥

The messenger said: "O Thou, the Knower of all that is within one's heart! There is nothing in this world hidden from Your knowledge; when is that which I will say unknown to you!

किम्भातां ततावसीह संसारे गरुकघवज ।

वर्तमानं जिकालान्त वदई प्रब्बीयि वै ॥ १९ ॥

प्रेपितोउसि यदेवात्र विजृन्तु त्वां जनादंत ।

हर्यय ववनात्रावयं प्रब्बीय पत्थि प्रथे ॥ 20 ॥

तेनेक्रमेतेईयोगो भायां ते कमलालया ।

तपत्पति कार्तिवंतमासमझमे विभो ॥ 21 ॥

O Thou, the Knower of present, past and future! I am now saying to you what Sambhu has told me to inform You. He has said: "O Lord! The Goddess Lakṣmī is Your dear consort. She, the daughter of the Ocean, and the Bestower of all success, though an object fit to be meditated by Yakṣas, Kinnaras, Naras and Immortals, is now undergoing severe penance at the confluence of Kalindi (the Yamunā, the daughter of Kalinda) and the Tamasā.

हरीकाप्यात देवी सर्वांशसिद्धादयिनि ।

ध्यातुं योग्यप्रमरणैमानैवंशैक्रिकर्निः : १२२ ॥

What is there in the three worlds that can be happy without that Mother of the worlds and the Giver of all desire? O Lotus-eyed One! What pleasure do You feel in abandoning Her?

विता तथा नर: को3पि सुखभागी भवेद्वीय ।

तां स्वक्ना पुण्डकीक्रक्ष प्राणोपि किं सुखं हरे ॥ 23 ॥

दुबैलोर्पि सिंचं घाति निर्णयोने जानयते ।

विनासपराधं च विधो किं तत्का जगदीक्षी ॥ 24 ॥

O All-pervading One! Even he who has no riches or who is very weak maintains his wife; then why have You, being the Lord of the worlds, forsaken your wife, without any offence, Who is worshipped by the whole universe. O Lord of the world! What advice shall I give to You? He whose wife suffer in the world, is blamed by his enemies.

दुःखं प्राप्तोनि संसारे यस्य भायां जगदानुगो ।

धितकस्य जीवितं लोके निविदां त्वरिणवृते ॥ 25 ॥

सकामा विषयतेज्ठ दृष्टवा तां दुःवितां भृणग् ।

त्वां विषयुंचे च मया हरिस्थोति दिवानिभग्न् ॥ 26 ॥

O Omnipresent One! Fie on his such a life! O Lord of the worlds! Your enemies' desires are satisfied when they see Her very miserable. They are laughing and mocking and saying: "O Devī, Keśava has now forsaken you; you can spend happily your time with us now.

रामं रामय देवेशेण त्वदुत्मकुगतां कृते ।

सर्वतक्षणस्मप्रजां सुगीतां च सुरुविणीम् ॥ 27 ॥

Therefore, O Lord of the Devas! Bring that Lady back unto your palace and place Her unto your lap, Who is of good demeanour, beautiful, per excellence and endowed with all auspicious signs.

सुखितो भव तां प्राय वतलभां चाहहासिनीम् ।

कान्ताविरहर्नं दुर्दं स्मारमहमानुतः ॥ 28 ॥

O Deva! Accept, please, your sweet-smiling wife and be happy. Though I am at present not in bereavement of my dear wife, yet when I remember my former state of bereavement, I feel very much trouble.

मम भाषां मृता विद्यो दक्षयत्रे सती यदा ।

तदारई दुः: सर्भे दुःखं भुक्तान्त्वेजक्षण ।। 29 ॥

O Lotus-eyed One! When Satī Devi, my beloved Wife, quitted Her life, in Dakṣa's house, I felt unbearable pain.

संसारोप्रिस्त्र: कोर्पि माभूमत्स्वरुगोपर: ।

मनसाउकरं गोकं तस्य विरहपीक्षितः ॥ 30 ॥

O Keśava! Let no other body in this world suffer such pain. I now remember only the suffering and mental agonies that I felt on Her bereavement; I do not give it out to others.

कालेन महता प्राप्ता मया निरितुता पुनः ।

तपस्त्वान्तिडु: साध्यां या दाया तु रूपप्रदधे ॥ 31 ॥

After a long time, practising severe Tapasyā (asceticism) I got Her back in the form of Girijā, who felt herself burnt up as it were by the anger She felt on account of censure cast on Me in the Dakṣa's house and thus gutted Her life.

हरे किं सुखामपत्रं त्वया संत्यज्य कामिनीम् ।

एकाकी तिष्ठता कालं सहस्ववससात्यकम् ॥ 32 ॥

O Murāri! What happiness you have felt in forsaking your dear wife and in remaining thus alone for one thousand years. Console your fortunate young wife with good teeth and bring her back to your place.

गत्थाश्य महाभागं समानय निजालयम् ।

माभूतकोपीड़ं संसारे विमुक्तो सम्या तथा ॥ 33 ॥

कृत्वा तुगतर्ष तं चजातकामलालायम् ।

उत्पाद उपमायुधसंतामानय शुच्चिमिताम् ॥ 34 ॥

O Bhagavān! Lastly, the Lord Bhavānī, the Originatrix of these worlds, told me to speak thus to you: “O Destroyer of Kāṃsa! Let nobody remain even, for a moment, without Lakṣmī, the Highest Goddess. O Long-lived One! You better assume the form of a horse and go and worship her. Then have a child of yours in the womb of your sweet-smiling wife and bring her back to your house.

व्यास उवाच

हरिचाकर्णे तुढ़कयं चित्रस्पय भारत ।

तथेत्युक्तला तु तं दूतं प्रेय्यामास शुक्रम् ॥ ३ ५ ॥

Vyāsa said: O Ornament of Bharata's race! Hearing thus the words of Citrarūpa, Bhagavān Hari told that he would do what Śaṅkara had told him to do and thus sent the messenger back to Śaṅkara.

गते दूतेश भगावान्वैकुपठाकामसंयुतः ।

जगाम धृत्वा तजायु वाजिकण मनोहम ॥ 36 ॥

यत्र सा वडवासको कृत्वा तपति सिंधुजा ।

विषयुक्ते एगमासघटा तपाणयन्द्रयीं स्थितम् ॥ 37 ॥

The messenger departing, Hari assumed the form of a beautiful horse and immediately left Vaikuntha with a passionate intent for the place where Lakṣmī was staying in the form of a mare and practicing her austerities. Coming there, he saw that the Devi Bimala was staying in the form of a mare.

साउपि तं बीक्ष्य गोविन्दं ह्यरूषधरं पतिम ।

जाला वीक्ष्य स्थिता साध्यी विमिता साशुलोचना ॥

तस्यासु सड़मसतत्र प्रजुतो मन्यथातंयो: ।

कालिंदौतमसासेगे पावने लोकविश्रुते ॥ 39 ॥

The mare, too, seeing the horse form of her husband Govinda, recognised him and, chaste as she was, remained there with astonishment and tears in her eyes. Then those two copulated on the famous confluence.

सभार्थ सा तदा जाता बड्वा हरिवल्लभा ।

सुख्रे सुन्दरं बालं तदैव सा गुणोतत्त् ॥ 40 ॥

तामाह भगवान्वाक्यं ग्रहस्य समयाश्रितम् ।

त्वजाठ वाडवं देढे पूर्वदेहा भवाडुना ॥ 41 ॥

The wife of Hari, in the shape of a mare became pregnant and, in due time, gave birth to a beautiful well qualified child. The Bhagavān then graciously smiled on her and spoke in words suited to the time.

गामिष्याः स्वदैकुप्ठमावां कृत्वा निजं वपुः ।

तिष्ठत्व कुमारोर्धं त्वया जातः सुलोचने ॥ 42 ॥

“O Dear! Now quit this mare form and assume your former appearance. O Lovely-eyed One! Let both of us assume our own forms and go to Vaikuntha; and let your child remain in this place.”

लक्ष्मीत्वाच

स्वेदेहसभयं पुरं कर्थे त्रिला जाम्यहम् ।

स्टेह: युडुस्त्वज: कामं स्वातकरस्य सुरुषैय १ ४३ ॥

Lakṣmī said: “O Lord! How can I go leaving here this child, born of my womb. It is very difficult to quit the attachments for one’s own child.

का गति: स्यादोयमान्य-बालास्यास्य नदीते ।

अनाव्यस्यास्यर्थय विजने-त्यन्तानेहि ॥ 44 ॥

Know this, O Lord! O High-souled One! This child is young and of small body; therefore it is quite incapable to protect itself. If I forsake it on the bank of this river, it will be an orphan, what will happen to it then?

अनाश्रयं सुतं व्यक्त्वा कवं पन्तुं मनो भग ।

समर्थे स्वयं स्वामिभ्येवद्युजलोचन ॥ 45 ॥

O Lotus-eyed One! My mind is now in full

Book VI Chapter XX

attachment tecwards it. How can I quit this helpless child and go?"

दिव्यदेही ततो जातो लक्ष्मीनारायणाबूषो ।

विमानवरसंविद्धी सृत्यमानी सुरैदिंवि ॥ 46 ॥

When Lakṣmī and Nārāyaṇa resumed their divine bodies and mounted on the excellent Vimānas, the Devas began to praise them with hymns.

गन्तुकामं पति प्राह कमला कमलापतिम् ।

गृहाणेमं सृतं नाव गईं शक्ताभिम हाहिपत्न् ॥ 47 ॥

When Nārāyaṇa expressed his desire to go, Kamalā said: "O Lord! You better take this child; I am unable to forsake it.

प्राणधीयोनित मे पुःः कान्तां त्वतनुषः प्रभो ।

गृहीत्वैंन गमिच्यायो वैकुणं मधुयुदन ॥ 48 ॥

O Lord! O Slayer of Madhu! This child is dearer to me than my life; see its body resembles exactly like you. Therefore we would take this child with us to Vaikuntha."

हरिकवाच

मा विषादं प्रिये कर्तुं ल्यमहाँस वरान्ने ।

तिछल्वरं सुखेनात्र श्रह्मा मे विहिता तिच्छ ॥ 49 ॥

कार्य किम्पिय वामोक वर्तैने महद्धूद्मत् ।

निबोधि कवयामध्य सुतस्यात्र विमोचने ॥ 50 ॥

Hari spoke: “O Dear! You need not be sorry; let this child remain here happily; I have arranged for its preservation and safety. O Beautiful One! There is a great act to do in this world.

तुर्वेसुर्नाय विद्यातो ययातितनुजो घुवि ।

हरिवर्षिति पित्रास्थ वक्ते नाम सुविश्रुन्ति ॥ 51 ॥

That will be executed by your child. For this

reason I am leaving it here. I am now describing to you the above story.

स राजा युककामोड्ठ तपत्सपति पावने ।

तीर्धे वर्षगतं जातं तत्थ वे कुर्जततप: ॥ 52 ॥

The famous King Yayāti had a son named Turvasu; his father kept his name as Hari Varmā; he is known by this name.

तत्यर्थे तिमितः पुत्रे मयात्यं कमलालये ।

तत्र नाला तृपं सुधु प्रेरियधामि सामुळम् ॥ 53 ॥

That king is now practising asceticism for getting a son for one hundred years in a place of pilgrimage. O Lakṣmī! I have begot this son for him. I will go there and send the King here.

तस्मै दास्यामघुं पुंत्रु प्रकामायर कामिनी ।

गृहीता स्वगृहं राजा प्रायिध्यिति बालकम् ॥ 54 ॥

O Beautiful-faced One! I will give this son to that King, desirous of an issue. He will take this son and go back to his house.

व्यास उवाच

इत्याश्य चिया पवां कृत्वा रक्षां च बातके ।

विमानवरमाह्छा प्रययो चियया सह ॥ 55 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे घटस्कन्ये

एकोनिविशोअयाः ॥ 179 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus consoling his beloved, whose abode is in the Lotus and placing the child there in that position, He mounted on an excellent car with Lakṣmī and went to Vaikuntha. Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the origin of Haihayas from a mare in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XX

CHAPTER XX

On the Son Born of Mare by Hari

जनमेजय उवाच

संस्थायोर्धं महानत्र जातमास: शिशुस्तथा ।

मुभ: केन गृहीतेजसायेकाकी विजने वरे ॥ 1 ॥

का गतितस्य बालस्य जाता सत्यवतीसुत ।

व्याप्रिसिंहाविद्धिर्दिसैरमूहौतो नातिवालक: ॥ 2 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Bhagavan! A great doubt has arisen in my mind on this subject. Who was it that took away that son, when both Lakṣmī and Nārāyana left it, in that forlorn state, in a forest without any person there to look after?

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

<table><tr><td>ध्यास उवाच</td></tr><tr><td>लक्ष्मीनारायणी तस्मान्यानाच्छ चलिती यदा।तदैव तत्र चम्याख्य: प्राप्तो विद्याधर: किल ॥ 3 ॥विभानवरामाकडः कामिन्या सहितो नृप ।मदन्तालसया कामं क्रीडामानो यदृष्छया ॥ 4 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>Vyāsa said: O King! No sooner Lakṣmī and Nārāyaṇa departed from that place, one Vidyādhara, named Campaka, mounting on a beautiful celestial car came there on his free will, sporting with a woman named Madanālaśā.विलोक्य त शिषुं भूमावेकाकित्मन्तुभम् ।देवपुत्रकीकांग रममाणं यथासुखम् ॥ 5 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>There they saw that one lovely child, exquisitely beautiful like a Deva&#x27;s son, was playing alone as it liked.विमानातसोतीयं चम्पकस्तं शिषुं जवात् ।जग्राह च मुंद प्राप निर्धि प्रायय यवाधधानः ॥ 6 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>They then, quickly descended from their chariot and picked it up. Vidyādhara became very glad as a beggar becomes glad, when he gets a hoard of jewels.गृहीता चम्पकः प्रादोईये तं मदनोपामम् ।मदालसाये तं बालं जतामात्र मनेहारम् ॥ 7 ॥सा गृहीता शिक्षुं प्रेमणा सरोमांचा सल्सियम।मुखं चुचुभ्य बालस्य कृत्वा तु हदये भृणम् ॥ 8 ॥On taking that newly born beautiful child like a Cupid, Campaka gave it to the Devi Madanālasā. Madanālasā took it and became very much astonished; and her hairs stood at their ends.आलिंगिनाशुंविक्षा तयासो प्रीतिपुर्कम्।उलमेने च कृतस्तन्या पुत्रभावेन भारत ॥ 9 ॥She clasped it to her bosom and kissed it frequently. O Bhārata! Taking that child on her lap as if her own child, Madanālasā embraced it and kissed it and got the highest happiness.कृत्वांके ती सामार्फही विमानं द्यमती मुत।पर्ति पघच्छ चार्वेड़ी प्रहस्म मदानतासा ॥ 10 ॥कर्यार्य वालकः कान तकः केन च कानने।पुनीउंप मम देेवेन दत्तस्यबकापाणि ॥ 11 ॥Then both of them took that child and mounted</td><td>on the car. The lean Madanālasā then laughingly queried: “O Lord! Whose child is this? Who has left it in this forest? It seems to me Mahā Deva, desirous to give me a son, has given it unto me.”चम्पक उवाचप्रिये नाल्डायं पृष्ठेयं ग्रहं तक नर्वेमागृ है।देवो वा दानवो वाथि ग्रायं वा शिशु: किल ॥ 12 ॥Campaka said: “I will just now go and ask the all-knowing Indra whose child is this, whether it is of a Deva, Dānava or Gandharva. तेनात्रान: कार्थियाम पुत्र प्राप्तं वनादमुम्।अग्रवृहा नैव कर्तैवं कार्य किंचिन्यमा धुवम् ॥ 13 ॥If he orders, I will purify this child found thus in this forest by the Veda Mantrams and then accept it as my own.इन्युक्ता तो गृहीता ति विन्मानेबच भयम् ।ययौ शक्रपुरं पूर्ण हर्शेगोकुल्ललोचनः ॥ 14 ॥It is not advisable to do a thing suddenly without knowing all the details.” Thus saying to his wife Madanālaśā, Campaka went with a gladdened heart hurriedly to the city of Indra child in his arms.प्रणाय पाटयोः प्रीत्या घमक्कुरु श्रवीपतिम् ।निवेश्चालं क्रग्द कृतंजलिपुर: स्थितः ॥ 15 ॥Campaka gladly bowed down at the feet of Indra and gave him all the information he knew about the child and stood at one side with folded hands and spoke.देवदेव मया लब्धस्तीर्वे परमपावने ।कालिद्वीतमासांगे बालकोउंयं स्मारभः ॥ 16 ॥“O Lord of the Devas! I have got this child, beautiful as Cupid, in the sacred place of pilgrimage at the confluence of the Yumnā and the Tamasā.कल्यां बालकः कानतः कयं तकः शर्षीपते ।आज्ञा चेतव देवेश कुर्दैई बालकं सुतम् ॥ 17 ॥O Lord of Śacī! Whose child is this? and why did they forsake it there? If you kindly permit, I will take this child as my own son.अतीव सुन्त्री बाल: प्रियाया वतलभः सुतः ।कत्रिमस्तु सुतः प्रोक्तो धर्माश्रेषु सर्वथा ॥ 18 ॥</td></tr></table>

Book VI Chapter XX

This child is very beautiful and like very much by my wife; it is also the rule laid down in the Sastras that one can accept any child as the Krtima son. Therefore it is my earnest desire that I purify this child by the Veda Mantrams and take it legally as my own son."

इन उवाच

पुत्रोउं यासुदेवस्य वाजिकपधारस्य ह ।

हैहवोउं महाभाग लक्ष्मा जातः परन्तः ॥ 19 ॥

Indra said: “O Highly Fortunate One! Bhagavān Vāsudeva, assuming the form of a horse, has produced this child out of the womb of Kamalā in the form of a mare.

उत्पादितो भगवता कार्यार्थी किल बातकः ।

दातुं नुपयते नूनं व्यातिलतयाय च ॥ 20 ॥

He intends to give over he child, capable to destroy enemies to Turvasu, the son of Yayāti, and thus will get a great purpose achieved by the child.

ह्रिणा प्रेति: सोड़ा राजा परमधार्मिकः ।

आगाधिष्यित पुत्रार्थ तीर्थं तत्स्मिनमोरे ॥ 21 ॥

That King, very religious, will be sent by Hari today and he will come for the child in that beautiful sacred place of pilgrimage.

तावच्च गच्छ तत्रैय गृहीत्वा वालकं शुभम् ।

यावत्र याति नृपतिर्गीर्तुं हृतिपोतः ॥ 22 ॥

You better go back as early as possible and keep the child there as it was before till that king comes to that spot at the instance of the Devadeva Vişnu.

गला त्र विमुचैनं विलम्बं मा कृधा वर ।

अरुह्वा वाककं राजा कुःविताक्ष भविष्यति ॥ 23 ॥

तस्माच्यमकु मुंचैनं राजा प्राप्नोतु पुरकम् ।

एकवैरीत नामानंशं खलातः स्यातृष्यिवतीते ॥ 24 ॥

Do not waste a minute more. The King will be very sorry if he does not find the child there. Therefore O Campaka! Quit the attachment that you have for this child. You should know that this child will be famous in this earth as Ekavīra (only one hero).”

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वच: शूला चम्पकल्याचित्वतः ।

जगाम पुत्रमादाय स्थले तत्सिमन्हीपते ॥ 25 ॥

मुभोच वाकलं तत्र यत्र पूर्व स्थितो हृष्युत् ।

आक्रह्मव्यवियानं तु ययौ स्वाश्रमभणडलम् ॥ 26 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus hearing the Indra's words, Campaka took the child and went back immediately to the spot whence he picked it up and keeping the child there as it laid, mounted on his car and went to his abode.

तदैव कमालाकान्ती लक्ष्या सह जानरुकः ।

विमानवरमार्कडो जगाम रूपति प्रति ॥ 27 ॥

At that instant, the husband of Lakṣmī, the Lord of the three worlds, went to the King, mounted on His car, beaming with effulgent rays.

दृष्टसदा तेन युंण विज्युः

सुभुगतस्त्र विभागमुखात् ।

जहर्ष राजा हरिद्यर्नेन पपात

भूमौ खलु टण्डवच्च ॥ 28 ॥

When the Bhagavān was descending from His aerial car, the King Turvasu was very glad to see Him and bowed down and laid himself prostrate on the ground.

उत्तिष्य वसतीह हरि:

पत्नत्थाशयद्धिमगतं व्यभक्तम् ।

सोउध्युस्को वासुदेवे पुरःखं

तृधार भनशा मुखरीकृतोय ॥ 29 ॥

The Bhagavān, then, comforted the King, his own devotee, and said “Get up, my child! Do away with your mental distress.” The King also eagerly and full of devotion, began to utter verses in praise of the Bhagavān.

देवाधिर्देवालितलोकानाथ

कृपानिधे लोकाणी रमेश ।

मन्द्रव मे ते किल दूरर्नं

यत्सुदुर्नंय योगिजरैतलव्यम् ॥ 30 ॥

“O Lord of Rama! You are the presiding Deity of the Devas; Lord of the whole worlds, Ocean of Mercy and Giver of advice to all men. O Lord! Your sight is very rare even to the Yogis; being

myself of a very slow dull intellect; I have been fortunate enough to see you. O Lord! This shews Your mercy.

ये नि:स्युहाने विषयरैपतास्तेषां

त्वदीयं खलु दर्शनं स्यात् ।

आशापारोड़ं भपावझनन्त योगयो

न ते दर्शनि देवदेवे ॥ 31 ॥

इति स्तुतसेन नृपेण विष्युत्स-

माह वाक्येन सुधामयेन ।

यूर्णीष राजनमनसैधितं ते

ददामि तुहतत्परा तवेति ॥ 32 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O Bhagavān! O Infinite One! Those who are free from my desires and free from any attachment to worldly things, they alone are entitled to see Thee. O Deva of the Devas! I am bound in thousand and one desires. I am quite unfit to see Thee. There is no doubt in this.”

ततो नृपतं प्रणिपत्य पादपोः

प्रोवाच विश्णुं पततः स्थितं च ।

तपस्तु ततं हि मया सुतार्थं

पुरं द्रद्वात्मासमं गुरोे ॥ 33 ॥

When Turvasu, the best of the kings, praised thus, Bhagavān Viṣnu became pleased and began to speak in the following pleasant words: "O King! I am pleased with your asceticism; now ask your desired boon; I will grant it immediately."

भुत्वा नृपप्रार्थिनमाधिदेवतस्माद्

राजनाममोधवाक्यम् ।

ययातिसूनो ब्रज तेउत्र तीर्थे

कलिंदकन्यातमासप्रमईे ॥ 34 ॥

The King bowed down again to the feet of Viṣṇu and said: "O Murārī! For the sake of a son, I have practised this tapasyā; grant me a son like my Self."

मयाउघ पुत्रस्तु यवेधितस्तते

तत्रैव मुक्तोउर्यमितमृष्मवाः ।

तक्ष्याः प्रमुत्तो मम चीयंजछा

कृतस्तवार्थंश यहाण राजन् ॥ 35 ॥

Nārāyaṇa, the First-born of the Devas, hearing this King's request spoke to him in infallible words: "O son of Yayāti! Go to the confluence of the

Yamunā and Tamasā. For you I have kept there today a son as you like and of indomitable prowess.

भुत्वा हरेलांक्यमतीव गूटं

सन्तुष्णितः प्रवभूव राजा ।

हरित्यु तद्वतीत वरं जगाम

वैकुण्ठलोकं समाया युतछ ॥ ३६ ॥

O King! That child is begotten by me in the womb of Laksmī." The King became very glad to hear the sweet pure words of the Bhagavān. Thus granting him the boon, Visnu went with Ramā to Vaikuntha.

गते हरी सोउध यवातिस्तूर्नं

यावनुद्धातत्येवे नारा ।

प्रेमान्वित्तस्त्र सुतोर्शित्य यत्र

वचो निशण्येति जनादनस्य ॥ 37 ॥

The King Turgvasu, the son of Yayāti, hearing these words, became exceedingly gladdened in his heart aid mounting on a chariot, whose speed cannot be checked, went to the spot where lay the child.

स तत्र गत्वाउतिमनोहरं तं

द्वर्गी बालं भृवि खेलमानम् ।

मुखे निवेश्यैककरणे कृत्वा

शल्बणं घवांगुष्यन्यस्त्वः ॥ 38 ॥

The king, of extraordinary genius, went there and saw that the exceedingly beautiful child, catching hold of his toe by one of his soft hands was sucking it by his mouth and was playing on the ground.

तं वीक्ष्य पुत्रं मदनसखलं

नारायणाणों कमलाप्रभुतम् ।

हरिप्रभावं हरिवर्मनामा

हर्षिपुक्ललाननपह्ज़ो3भूत् ॥ 39 ॥

गृह्न-सुवेगात्करपह्ज़णाभ्यां

बन्धूव प्रेमणर्षानसन्देहः ।

मूधै-न्युपाधाय मुतावित्तोउसी

नन्देर राजा सुतमालिंगन् ॥ 40 ॥

The child was born of Nārāyaṇa out of the womb of Kamalā. Therefore it resembled like Him. On looking at that beautiful lovely child, the famous

Book VI Chapter XX

King Harivarma's face got cheered up with the intensest delight. The King took it up with both of his hands and got merged in the Ocean of Bliss and taking gladly the scent of its head embraced it happily.

मुखं समीक्ष्यातिमनोहरं

त्यवाच नेगम्बुनिकद्धकण्डः ।

दतो3सि देवेन जनादेन्नेन

मात्रा हि पुजायममुद्ध:खभीतेः ॥ 41 ॥ ॥

ततं मया पुत्र तपत्स्वार्थे

सुसुकरं वर्षगतं च पूर्णम् ।

तेनैव गुहैन रमाधिप्रयेण

दन्तोसि संसारमसुखोदाया ॥ 42 ॥

On looking at the beautiful lotus-face of the child, the King, choked with tears from his eyes and with feelings of joy said: "O Child! Nārāyaṇa has given me, the child jewel in you; so save me from the terrors of the hell named Put, O Child! For full one hundred years I have practised a very hard tapsayā for the sake of you. Pleased with that, the Lord of Kamalā has given you to me for the happiness of my worldly career.

भाता प्या त्वां तनुं गदर्थ

त्यक्ता गता सा हूरिणा सभेतना।

धन्या तु सा या प्रहसंतमके

कृत्वा सुतं त्वां मुदितान्ना स्यात् ॥ 4 3 ॥

Your Mother Ramā Devī has forsaken Her own child for the sake of me and has gone away with Hari. O Child! That Mother is blessed whose face beams with joy by seeing the smiles in your lotus-face.

त्वमेव संसारस्मुठ्रौकाक्पः

कृतः पुत्र लक्ष्मीयेण ।

इत्येवमुक्त्वा नृपति: सुत्त

तं मुदा समादाय ययौ गृहाय ॥ 44 ॥

O Delighter of my heart! The Lord of Ramā, the Deva of the Devas, has made you, as it were, to serve as a boat for me for crossing to the other side of this Ocean of World." Thus saying, the King took the child and gladly went home.

पुरीसमीपे नृपयागतं तमाकर्णवं

सर्वे सचिवास्तु रातः ।

ययु: सर्मीने नृपतेश लोकाः

सोपायनास्ते सपुरोहिताश ॥ 4 5 ॥

Knowing that the King had come very close to his city, the King's Minister and the city people, the subjects came forward with the priest and many other presents and offerings.

बंदीजना यायनकाश्वे सुर्जा:

समाययु संमुख्यायु गजाः ।

नृप: पुरं प्राय्य पुरः समागतं जनें

समाश्राय वाक्येश्ठ दृष्ट्या ॥ 4 6 ॥

The bards, singers and Sūtas came in front of the King. The King as he entered into his city looked affectionately on his subjects and gladdened their spirits by enquiries of welfare.

संपूक्ति: पौराजनेन राजा

विवेश पुत्रेण युतो नगरायम् ।

मार्गेषु लाजैः: कुसुमैः समन्ताद्र-

कौर्येमाणो नृपतिक्रामा ॥ 47 ॥

Then worshipped by the citizens, the King entered into the city with his child. As the King went along the royal, the subjects showered on his head the flowers and fried rice.

गृहं समुद्धं सचिवेः समतः

सुतं समावाय मुदा कारायाम् ।

तग्नैं ददौ चाथ सुतं मनोजं

सद्धःप्रमुतं च मनोपेभावम् ॥ 48 ॥

Then taking the child by his two arms, the King entered into his prosperous palace with his ministers. The king next handed over the newly-born lovely child, as beautiful as Cupid, to the hands of his queen.

तत्री गृहीत्वारभिन्चं तनुर्ज

पप्रच्छ राजानमनित्तता सा ।

राज-कुन्तडीध सुतः सुज्ञान

ग्रातलस्या मन्यथतुल्यक्ष: ॥ 49 ॥

The good queen took the child and asked the king: "O King! Whence have you got this new born child as fascinating as the God of Love? Who has given this child to you? O Lord! Speak quickly.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

<table><tr><td>केनैष दस्तः कक्षयाणु कान्तचेतो मटीयं प्रहतं सुनेन ।नुपस्तदोषाय मुदावित्तोस्तीप्रिये येसोन सुतो हि महामू ॥ 50 ॥तोलाधिक दस्तः कमलासमुच्योजनादांगोशेप्रदमतीनस्तबः ।सा तं गृहीला मुदमपा राज्ञीराजा चक्रातीलयमदुक्तं च ॥ 51 ॥</td></tr></table>

This child has stolen away my mind." The King gladly replied: "O Beloved! The Lord of Kamalā, the Ocean of Mercy has given me this child; O Quick-eyed One! This child is born of Nārāyana's part and out of the womb of Kamalā. O Devi! This child has strength, energy, patience, gravity and all other good qualities." Then the queen took the child in his arms and got the unbounded bliss.

ददी च दानं किल याचक्रेयो

गीतानि वाहानि बहुनि नेयुः ।

कृत्वोलवं भूपतिरात्मजस्य

नार्मेकरीरिते चकार विश्रुतम् ॥ 52 ॥

Great festivities began to be performed in the palace of the King Turvasu. Charities were given to those that wanted; music and singing of various sorts were performed. In this ceremony for the sake of his child, the king Turvasu put the name of the child as “Ekavīra.”

सुखं च संप्राप्तय मुदावित्तो5सौ

नन्द देवाधिपतुल्ववीधि: ।

पुरं हरे रूपगुणानुकर्यं संग्राय

वंशस्य ऋषणाच्छ मुक्तः ॥ 53 ॥

Getting thus the child equivalent in form and qualities to Hari, the powerful Indra-like king became happy and freed from his debt due to his family line, became very cheerful and glad.

इति सकलसुराणामीशेणार्थितं

तं सकलनुणगणाकां पुत्रमासाठ राजा ।

विविधभ्युखविनोदैर्भियांश सेव्यमाने

व्यहरत निजगेहे शकतृत्यप्रतायः ॥ 54 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते माहपुराणे

षष्टकन्ये विशोरायाः ॥ 20 ॥

O King! The king, powerful like his enemies, began to enjoy in his own palace with his all-qualified child, that was given to him by Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of the Devas. He was always served by his dear wife and all sorts of pleasure and he felt himself enjoying as a King would do.

Here ends, the Twentieth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the son born of mare by Hari, in the Mahāpuranam in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXI

On the Installation of Ekavira

भ्यास उवाच

जातकर्मादि संक्कारांक्रहार नृपतिस्तव ।

दिने दिने जगमाग्यु वृद्धिं बालः सुलातिलतः ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! In the meanwhile the King Turvasu performed the Jātakarma (a religious ceremony performed at the bātrakha (a child) and other ceremonies of the child. The boy was nurtured duly and began to grow older day to day.

यूर: सेसारंज प्राय सुरुखूद्ववम् ।

इष्णयविधोक्षं च मेने तेन महात्मना ॥ २ ॥

The King began to enjoy his worldly life on getting this son and thought within himself that

the boy had freed him from the three debts due to the Fathers, the Rşis and the Devas.

घड़ेअप्राणतं तस्य कृत्वा मासि यथाविधि ।

तृतीयेघ तथा वर्षे चुडाकरणमुतमम् ॥ ३ ॥

Next, in the sixth month, the King performed the Annaprāsana ceremony (putting the boiled rice in the mouth of the child) and in the third year performed regularly his Cūdākarana (the ceremony of the first tonsure) ceremony.

चकार ब्राह्माणज्वे: मनुष्य विविधर्धर्धर्धर्धर्धर्धर्धर्धर्धर्धर्धर्धर्धर्धर्धर्धर्धर्न

गोर्धिश्व विविधेद्रीनैर्यचकानितततायि १ ४ १ ॥

He distributed on those occasions various

Book VI Chapter XXI

articles, wealth and cows to the Brāhmaṇas and other articles to various other mendicants and made them glad.

वर्षे चैकादृषे तस्य मौजीबन्धनकार्मे वै ।

कार्यिता धनुर्वैद्याध्ययत पार्थि १ ५ १

In the eleventh year, he performed the boy's holy thread (Upanayana) ceremony and tying the girdle made of a triple string of Muñja grass and put the boy to learn archery.

अधीनवेदे पुरं तं राजधर्मविशारादम् ।

दूद्वा तस्याधिकेवाय मिति चढ़े जनाधियः ॥ 6 ॥

Next when the boy passed off proficiently in the study of the Vedas and in learning the kingly duties, the King desired to instal him on the throne.

पुधाकंयोगसंयुक्ते दिवसे नृपसत्तमः ।

कारयामास संभारनाश्चिकार्यादगत् ॥ 7 ॥

The King Turvasu then collected with great care all the necessary articles for installation in an auspicious day, the combination of Pusyā asterism and Arka Yoga.

द्वितानाद्य वैद्वान्यर्वैशास्त्रविद्धश्रणत् ।

अभियेषेक चकाराते विधियन्त्स्वतानजस्य ह ॥ 8 ॥

He called then the Brāhmins, well versed in the Vedas and in the Śāstras, and became ready, in accordance with due rites, to perform the installation ceremony of the prince.

जलमानीय तीर्थेभ्यः सागरेष्यघु पार्थिवः ।

स्वयं चकार विधिवर्भेबिके रुष्पे दिन ॥ 9 ॥

Waters were brought from various sacred places of pilgrimage and from the several oceans and on an auspicious day the King performed himself the installation of his son.

धर्म दचावा विशेष्यो राज्ये पुत्रे निवेश्य स ।

जगाम वन्मेवाशु स्वर्गकाम: स भूपति: ॥ 10 ॥

When the ceremony was over the King gave away hoardes of wealth to the Brāhmins and giving the charge of his kingdom to his son, he went to the forest with a desire to ascend to the Heavens.

एकौरीं नृपं कृत्ता सम्पान्य सचिवानय ।

भार्येया सह भूपालः प्रयिवेश जयं शी ॥ ११ ॥

Thus placing Ekavīra on the throne, the King Turvasu shewed respects to his ministers, and, controlling his senses went to the forest accompanied by his wife.

मैनाकशिखरे राजा कृत्वा तर्तीयमाघमम् ।

निर्वं यत्रकलहाराश्रिन्यायास पार्वतीम् ॥ १ २ ॥

On the top of the Maināka mountain he took up the vow of Vānaprastha and sustaining his life on leaves and fruits began to meditate Pārvatī.

एवं स नुपतिः कृत्वा दिष्ठोत सह भार्याय ।

मृतोउसी बासलं लोकं गतः पुष्पेक कर्मण ॥ १ ३ ॥

इत्रलोकं पिता प्राप्त इति शुलासंह हैहयः ।

चकार वेदनिर्दिकं कर्म वैशोर्ध्वेदितिबम् ॥ १ ४ ॥

. Thus when his Prārabdha Karma ended, he left his mortal coil with his wife and went by virtue of his good deeds to the Indraloka. Hearing that the King had ascended to Heavens, his son Ekavīra Haihaya performed his funeral ceremonies according to the rules laid down by the Vedas.

कृतीतता: क्रिया: सर्वा: पितु: पार्थिवन्दनः ।

राज्य चकार मेघायी पिंगा दर्त सुसमान् ॥ 15 ॥

The King's son, the intelligent Haihaya, performed, one after another, all the ceremonies due and began to govern the kingdom which was free enemies.

एकवीरोअ धर्मैः प्रायः राज्यमन्तमम् ।

बुधुजे विधित्याभोगसचिवेशु सुमानितः ॥ 16 ॥

The virtuous King Ekavīra remained duly obedient to his ministers after he got possession of his kingdom and began to enjoy all the best things.

एकसिंन्दिवसं राजा मनियुर्भेः समन्वितः ।

जगाम जाइवीतीरे ह्यास्ड़ः प्रतायवान् ॥ 17 ॥

The powerful Kings one day went on horseback to the banks of the Ganges with the minister's son.

संपश्यन्यादपात्याफीकिलालापसंयुतान् ।

पुष्यितान्तसंयुक्तान्यदुपार्शिविराजितान् ॥ 18 ॥

Roaming about, he found there the boughs of trees had assumed a very graceful appearance, with loads of fruits, echoed with the sweet voice of the cuckoos and with the humming of the bees.

भुनीनामाश्रामन्स्थ्यानेद्यविनिरनादितान् ।

होभधूमातृताकाशाम्भागावसमातृत् ।। १९ ॥

Close by were the hermitages of the Munis, where the bucks were skipping about and at other places the Vedas were being chanted. The smoke was seen rising from the altars, where oblations were being offered and appeared to form like a black canopy in the Heavens.

केदाराखिलसमपबवानोषिकाभि: सुर्धितान् ।

प्रकुलपढ़ जारामार्कुकुर्जांश मनोरमान् । 20 ॥

Full ripe grains were enhancing the beauty of the fields and the cowherdesses were merrily watching the fields. Places of recreations adorned with full blown lotuses and beautiful groves were attracting the attention of the victiors.

प्रश्माणा: प्रियालांस्तु घमफलान्यनसूमान् ।

बकुलासिलकाधीयान्दारांश प्रधुलितान् ॥ 21 ॥

The various trees, Priyāla, Campaka, Panasa, Bakula, Tilaka, Kadamba and Mandāra, and others were adorned with fruits, stealing away the minds of the people.

शालांस्तालमालांश जम्बुचृतकद्यबकान ।

सूब्ध्छज्ञाहकीतोये प्रकुललं शतपत्रकम् ॥ 22 ॥

At other places, other trees Sāla, Tamāla, Jack, Mango, Kali Kadamba, etc., stood gracefully. Next when the King went to the Ganges water, he saw the gay beautiful full blown lotuses were spreading their fragrant scents all around.

पढ़ुं जं चातिन्याठ्यामपश्यद्वनीपति: ।

द्रिंक्षेण जलजस्याय पार्शुं कमललोचनाम् ॥ २३ ॥

कनकाथां सुकर्शीं च कम्बुयीवां कुशोदरीम् ।

विवोहीं सुन्दरी किंचित्समुखान्युपयोर्यम् ॥ 24 ॥

सुसारां चातसर्वांशीमयपयल्कन्यकां नृपः ।

रुदती तां सखीं नयत्वा विहूलां दुःखपीक्षिताम् ॥ 25 ॥

साशुनंत्री कन्दमानां विजने कुररीमिव ।

संर्वेश्व सरा पच्छ्छ कन्यकां शोकाकारणम् ॥ 26 ॥

सुर्से बृहि काउसि तं कस्य पुत्री शुभानने ।

नार्यादी वेदकन्यात्र कर्थे तिविंषि सुन्दारि ॥ 27 ॥

On the right side of these lotuses, he saw a lotus-eyed girl. She was shining like the gold, her

beautiful hairs were long and curling; her throat was like a Kambu, belly thin, lips like the Bimba fruits, several other limbs well built and graceful, breasts riene a little, nose beautiful and all her body was exquisitely lovely; that lady just blooming into youth was suffering bereavements from her comrades and was very distressed and seemed bewildered. She was crying like an ewe in a dense lonely forest. Seeing her, the King asked her what was the reason of her sorrows? "O Cuckoo-voiced One! You are as yet a girl; who has left you alone in this state?"

कथेक्रौकिनी वाले त्यत्ता केन पिक्सवरे ।

पतितेच वय गता: कान्ते पिता वा बृहि समाप्ति ॥ 28 ॥

किं ते दुःखमारतषु कथयाठा मपातिंके ।

कोरीमि दुःखनागं ते सर्वदीय कृणेशेटि ॥ 29 ॥

O Sweet One! Tell me where is your husband now or where is your father? O One looking askance! What is your trouble; explain it to me. C thin-bellied One! I will, no doubt, remove all your sorrows and troubles.

न राज्ये मम तर्विकृ पीडां कोउपि कोरल्यम् ।

न धर्षे चौराजं कानेत न राक्षसधयं तथा ॥ ३० ॥

मायि शासति पभाणते नोर्याता दाक्णा भुवि ।

भयं न व्याप्रसिंहेच्छो न भयं कंसचिछद्वेत ॥ ३ १ ॥

O fair-bellied One! I will, no doubt, remove all your sorrows and troubles. O fair-limbed One! In my dominion nobody ever gives trouble to any other body. O lovely One! There is no fear in my kingdom from thieves or Rāksasa; or any fear from any serious dangerous calamities on this earth, fear from lions, tigers or any other dangers while my sway is predominant.

वद्य वामोक कर्मात्चं वित्यपं जाइक्रवीते ।

कोषीय जगहीनात्रन कि के दुःखं वद्यव मे ॥ 32 ॥

O One of beautiful thighs! Why are you crying on this lonely bank of the Ganges? Tell me what is your pain?

हन्यहं दुख्यत्युं प्राणिनां पृथिवीतले ।

दैंदं च मानुषं कानते ज्ञातेतनमाज्ञुतम् ॥ 33 ॥

Book VI Chapter XXI

O Pure One! I can remove the pains and miseries, even of a serious nature, of men, whether they come from the Deva or human sources; and this is my principal vow.

विशाललोचने वृहि क्रोगेम तव चिन्तितम् ।

इत्युक्ते वचने राजा श्रुत्योवाच मुखुस्वना ॥ 34 ॥

शृणु राजेन्द्र बक्षयामि मम शोकस्य कारणम् ।

विवितिरात्रितः प्राणी कर्थं र्वतीत भूपते ॥ 35 ॥

O Large-eyed One! Speak what is your inmost desire; I will carry it out instantaneously." When the king thus spoke, that beautiful woman spoke in gentle words: "O King! Heart the cause of my sorrows.

प्रवंधीय महावाहो यदर्थ र्वती त्वाह्म ।

तर राजादान्येगे शगाजा परभधार्मिकः ॥ ३६ ॥

O King! Why will the people cry, to no purpose, unless calamities come before them? O Mighty-armed One! I now tell you why I am weeping.

भ्यो नाम महाराज: संतानरहितो भृभम् ।

तस्य भयंां सुविख्याता रुक्मरेडोत नामतः ॥ 37 ॥

O King! There was a very religious King named Rabhya in another province that is not yours. At first he had no issue. He had a very beautiful wife named Rukmarekhā.

सुरूपा चतुरा साध्वी सर्वलक्षणसंयुता ।

अपुत्रा दु:वित्ता कान्तमिव्युवारा वुन: पुन: ॥ 38 ॥

कें जीवितेन मे नाय धिन्युवा जीविते मय ।

वंध्याया: सुख्तीनाया हुप्रयुवा धरातले ॥ 39 ॥

She was clever, chaste and endowed with all auspicious qualities. But isuseless as she was, she remained very sorry and, in a remorseful tone, she spoke to her husband Raibhya: "O Lord! I am barren; I have no sons; I am therefore a very unhappy creature. My life is in vain; what use is there in my living?

इत्येवं भार्याय भूप प्रेरितो मख्युतमम् ।

चक्का ब्राह्मणांस्त्रानारुव विधिवतदा ॥ 40 ॥

When the queen thus spoke very distressedly, the king called the Brāhmaṇas, versed in the Vedas, and began to perform an excellent sacrificial ceremony, in due accordance with the Vedic rules.

With a desire to get a son, he made many presents in profuse quantities.

पुरकामो धर्म भूरि ददावध यथोदितम् ।

हूयमाने धृतेत्यर्थे पावकादितिसुपभत् ॥ 4 1 ॥

When copious quantities of ghee were offered as oblations, there arose, from the fire, a girl beautiful in all respects and endowed with all auspicious signs.

अविर्बंभूव चार्वीनी कन्यका शुभलक्षणा ।

विवोषीं सुदतीं सुधूः पूर्णचन्द्रिनिभानना ॥ 4 2 ॥

कनकाभा सुकेशाना तस्याणिता मुदुः ।

सुरकानयना तत्वी रक्तयादाला भुगम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

Her teeth were very nice, eyebrows very lovely, face enchanting like a Full Moon, the lustre of the body lovely and of a golden colour; her hairs were fine and curling, her lips like the Bimba flowers; her hands and face were of a red colour; her eyes were red like lotus and her limbs were soft and gentle.

हुतापानातस्पूद्धता होजा सा स्वीकृता ततः ।

होता प्रोवार याजनं गृहीत्या ता सुभ्यमान् ॥ 44 ॥

राज-न्यूजीं गृहाणेमां सर्वतक्षणास्युतान् ।

एकावलीव सभ्यन्तां हृदयानाद्युताशन्त् ॥ 45 ॥

When the girl arose from the fire, the priest (Hotā) took that lean and thin lady of a nice waist by her arms and presented her to the King and said: "O King! Accept this daughter, endowed with all auspicious signs.

नामनोकबाली लोक खलाता पूत्री भविष्यति ।

सुवित्तो भव भृपाल पुत्रा पुत्रसमानया ॥ 46 ॥

सन्तोयं कुर राजेन्द्र दत्ता देवेन विद्याना ।

होतुवांक्यं पुर शुक्षा युद्धता तो कन्यकों रुभणम् ॥ 47 ॥

When Homa was being performed, the daughter came up like the garland Ekāvalī; therefore this girl became famous in this world by the name Ekāvalī. O Ruler of the earth! Take this girl, resembling a son and be happy. O King! Visnu, the Deva of the Devas, has given you this Jewel, this daughter; so be contented."

जग्राह भयमीती होरा दुत्ता सुर्मंभतम् ।

गृहीरः नृपतिस्तां तु ददी पल्यै वरानानम् ॥ 48 ॥

अभाव्य रुक्मेरख्ये गृहाग सुभगे सुर्गतम् ।

सा तां कमलपत्राङ्गी प्राय कन्यां मनोरामम् ॥ 49 ॥

Hearing thus the words of the priest, the King saw this good looking girl and with gladdened heart took the beautiful daughter from his hands. Thus with that lovely daughter he went to his wife Rukmarekhā and said: "O Beautiful One! Take this daughter." The queen Rukmarekhā felt the pleasures of having a son when she got in her arms lotus eyed beautiful daughter.

जहर्षं पृदिता राजी पुरं प्राय्य यथा सुखम् ।

चकात मूब्तं कर्मे जातकर्मिटिकं शुभम् ॥ 50 ॥

The King next performed the natal and other ceremonies of the daughter and did all other acts as if she had been a son to him duly in accordance with the rules.

पुरजन्मस्मुर्नं यत्नसर्वे विधित्वन्तः ।

समाय च मखं राजा द्विजेष्यो दक्षिणा शुभाम् ॥ ५ १ ॥

The King performed his own sacrificial ceremonies and gave away lots of Dakṣinās to the Brāhmins and dismissed them and became very glad.

दत्वा विसृज्य विघे-त्रानूदं प्राप महीपति: ।

द्विते दिते सितापार्यो पुरुबढ्छ्वा घृष्टां बभौ ॥ 52 ॥

That beautiful girl was nursed and cared after like a son and she grew older day by day. The Queen Rukmarekha was very gladdened to get her. मुदं च परमां प्राप नृपभार्य सुतान्विता ।

उसवस्तिद्रेत तस्य प्रवृतः सुतन्यमनः ॥ 53 ॥

On that very day the birth day festival was performed as on the occasion of the birth of a son. And that daughter grew older, very affectionate and dear to all.

युनी पुत्रसमास्त्यर्वे बभूव बल्लभा किल ।

रातो मनिस्तुत चाहं सुखुदे मन्यधाकृते ॥ 54 ॥

O Lovely one! You are a king and intelligent too; I will describe to you all the details; Hear. I am the daughter of the minister to that King.

यगोतवी च मे नाम स्यानं वय आवयोः ।

वयय्याउं कृता राजा मीडिनाय तया सह ॥ 55 ॥

स्वत सहचरी जाता प्रेयुक्ति द्विताग्रियम् ।

My name is Yásovati. That daughter and I look alike and of the same age. Therefore the king has

made me her comrade. I spend my time day and night always with her as her constant dear companion.

एकावली गंधर्विति यत्र पचानि पश्यति ॥ 56 ॥

तत्र सा साते बाला नान्यस सुखमापुवात् ।

सुद्रें जाड्वीतीरे भवन्ति कमलान्यपि ॥ 57 ॥

स्मभाण तत्र याता मत्स्मिता सखीयुत ।

Ekāvalī likes very much to remain and sport wherever she finds sweet scented lotuses; at other places she does not find happiness. At the distant banks of the Ganges many lotuses grow; therefore Ekāvali goes there with great pleasure to that place with me and her other fellow mates.

मया निविदितं राज्यजी ते कमलाकान् ॥ 58 ॥

प्रेक्षमाणाउतितूरे सा प्रयाति निर्जिने बने ।

निषेधितास दयाजसी गृहे कृत्वा जलागयान् ॥ 59 ॥

One day I told the King that Ekāvali used to go daily to a distant solitary forest to see the lotus-lake. Then the King addressed her not to go and he got a lake built within the compounds of his palace and planted many lotus seeds therein.

कमातन् वापयित्वाश्व पुधितान्ध्रमरातुतान्।

तथापि निर्वीये बाला कमलास्तचतेना ॥ 60 ॥

Gradually the lotuses began to blossom and the bees came there to drink honey. Still she used to go outside in search of lotuses. Then the King sent armed guards to accompany her.

तदा राजा स्थापना: प्रेरिता: शरक्षापाय: ।

एवं स्थापता तन्बी मत्सेता सखीयुता ।

मौड़ाथँ जाइतीनेते विन्यमाठित याति च ॥ 61 ॥

इति श्रीद्वेभावते महापुराणे कथलकम्ये

एकविंशोराधयः ॥ 21 ॥ 11

Thus that thin-bodied daughter of the King used to go daily to the banks of the Ganges for play, guarded by armed soldiers, accompanied by myself and other companions. Again when the sporting was over, she used to return to the palace.

Here ends the Twenty-first Chapter on the Sixth Book on the installation of Ekavīra and the birth of Ekāvali in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XXII

CHAPTER XXII

On Stealing away Ekāvali

यगोकल्याच

प्रातरूथाय नत्वंची चलिता च सखीयुता ।

चामरैंकीयमाना सा रक्षिता बहुरक्षिभि: ॥ 1 ॥

Yasovati spoke: “O King! One day Ekāvali got up early in the morning and went to the banks of the Ganges, accompanied by her companions; they began to fan her with a chowrie.

सायुघ्रोतिसन्द्रैः सहिता वरविणी ।

क्रीडार्थयन्र राजेन्द्र संग्रता नतिनीं शुभाम् ॥ 2 ॥

The armed guards accompanied her. Slowly she went where there were the lotuses in order to sport with them.

अहमध्यना सार्यें गंगातीरे समागता ।

अस्पोरिभः स्रोता च कमतेः क्रीकामाना ॥ 3 ॥

I, too, went with her playing with the lotuses to the banks of the Ganges and both of us began to play with lotuses with the Apsarās.

एकावली तथा चाहें जाते क्रीकापर यदा ।

सहसैय तद्धउद्यातो दानवो बलसयुंतः ॥ 4 ॥

कालकेनृतीति छात्रो राक्षसैर्वहुभियुंत: ।

परिचासिन्याचावपाणातोमरयाणिधा: ॥ 5 ॥

When both of us were deeply engaged in the play, then one powerful Dānava, named Kālāketu, came up there suddenly with many Rāksasas armed with parighas, swords, clubs, bows, arrows and tomaras and many other weapons.

इद्य चैकावली तेन रूपयीवनशणितिने ।

द्वितीया कामपत्नीव क्रीऊमाना सुपंकजैः ॥ 6 ॥

Ekāvali was playing with the best lotuses when Kalaketu saw her in that state, blooming with beauty and youth as if like Rati, the Goddess of Love.

मयोकैकावली राजकॉर्ज दैत्व: सम्पाततः ।

गछचोः रक्षपालानां मध्ये पढ़जलोचने ॥ ७ ॥

O King! I then spoke to Ekāvali: "Look! Who is this Daitya that has come here unexpectedly; O Lotus-eyed One! Let us go into the central part of our armed guards.

विमुर्षवें सडी चाऊँ त्वरवेग नते भयात् ।

मध्ये वे सैनिकानां तु सायुधानां गुणतयज ॥ ८ ॥

कालकेतुतु तां द्ववा गोहिनीं मदन्तुतः ।

गदां गुर्गी गृहीना तु धायमानः समगतः ॥ ९ ॥

रक्षकानूतः कृत्वा जग्राहुंबलोचनम् ।

त्रसां वेयुवंसुक्तां कैद्यानां कृणोदरीम् ॥ 10 ॥

O King! My companion and myself consulting thus, went out of fear immediately into the centre of the armed guards. Kālaketu was seized with the arrows of Cupid, and no sooner he looked at that beautiful young lady than he, with a very big club in his hand, hurriedly came to us, drove away the guards, and took away my lotus eyed companion, of thin waist. Then the young lady, helpless began to tremble and cried aloud.

लकेनो मां गृहाणैते मा चोक्तोर्धि दानवः ।

न मां जग्राह कामार्तैरां गृहीत्वा विनि:सुतः ॥ 11 ॥

Seeing this, I spoke to the Dānava: Leave her and take me. The passionate Dānava did not take me but he went away, taking my companion.

तिउ तितिउे घामोने रक्षकासां महाबलम् ।

प्रतिथध्य तु संग्रामं चकुर्गविस्यकाकरम् ॥ 12 ॥

The guards exclaimed: “Wait, wait; do’t fly away with the girl; we are giving you a good lesson.” Thus saying, they made the powerful Dānavas stop and both the parties engaged in a very terrible conflict, astounding to all.

त्ययापि राक्षसा: कृतः सर्वतः राक्षयापायः ।

युयुधू रक्षैकः सार्थं स्वामिकार्यं कृतोदायः ॥ 13 ॥

The followers of the Dānavas, more cruel and all fully armed began at once to fight with great enthusiasm for their Master's cause.

संग्रामस्तु तदा जातः कारणकेतोस्ताय गे।

निह्त्य रक्षकानसर्वानृहीत्वेनां महावलः ॥ 14 ॥ ॥

Kälaketu himself began to fight afterwards terribly and killed the guards. He, then, with his followers, carried away my companion towards his own city.

युक्तो राक्षससैयेन निर्जनाय पुरं प्रति ।

वीध्य तां कर्तीं बालां गृहीतां दानवेत नु ॥ 15 ॥

I, too, followed my companion, when I saw her thus carried away by the Dānava and crying out of fear.

पृछतोई गत तत यत्र नीता सखी माम ।

विकोर्गिती यथा सा मां पश्येतिि घतदानुगा ॥ 16 ॥

I also walked crying aloud by those tracks as would enable my Sakhi to see me. She, too, seeing me, became somewhat consoled.

साथी मागलां तीक्ष्य विक्रीलस्याध्यन्ता ।

गताउई तत्सयीपे तु तामाभाष्य पुन: पुनः ॥ 17 ॥

सा मां प्रायातितुःखात्तं सत्मयवेदसामुकूला ।

कप्टे गृहीत्वा मां भूप करोद भृपुगःश्रिता ॥ 18 ॥

Crying out repeatedly I approached her. She was already very distressed and when she saw me, she clasped me closely around my neck, perspiring and stunned and, becoming more distressed, cried aloud.

स मामाह कालकेतुः प्रीतिपूर्वमिदं वचः ।

समाधासय भीर्तं वं सहीं चझललोचन्त्य। ॥ १९ ॥

Kālaketu then shewed his liking for me and told that my quick-eyed companion was very afraid and that I might comfort her.

प्राप्तं ममाह नगरं देर्वलोकसमं प्रिये ।

दासोस्मि तब तथा हि कस्माकत्टसि कातग ।। २० ।।

कवयैनों सखी तेउघ सत्यथा भव सुलोचने ।

He told me thus: “O Dear! My city is like the Deva’s abodes; you vill soon be able to go there. From today I become your slave, bound by love. Do not cry thus distressedly; be comforted.” In these words he told me to comfort my dear companion.

इत्युक्क्वा मां सखी पार्थे सामायेप्य यथोत्तमे ॥ 21 ॥

जगाम तरसा दुह: पुरे स्वस्य मनोहरे ।

सै-येन महता युक्तः प्रफुल्वद्वनोबुकः ॥ 22 ॥

Thus speaking, that villain made both of us mount on the beautiful chariot and making us sit by his sides went gladly and quickly to his own beautiful palaces, followed by his army.

एकावली तथा मां च संस्थाध्य धवले गुहे ।

राक्षसानुहरक्षार्थी कल्यामास कोदिगः ॥ 23 ॥

That Demon placed both of us in a beautiful house white washed and mirror-like and kept hundreds and thousands of Rāksasas to watch and protect us.

दितीये दिवसे सेठ्य मनुपदाच रहो नृप ।

प्रबोधय सखी वालां गोचेंती विहातुगन् ॥ 24 ॥

On the second day he called me in private: “Your companion is very much distressed on the bereavement from her father and mother and is lamenting; make her understand and console her.” पत्नी मे भव सुशोणि सुखं भूंख्य वथेयितम् ।

राज्यं तद्वीर्यं चन्द्राये सेवकोंड़ं सदा तव ॥ 25 ॥

राज्यं तद्वीर्यं चन्द्राये सेवकोंड़ं सदा तव ॥ 25 ॥

He told me to speak the following words to my companion: "O One of beautiful hips! Be my wife and enjoy as you like. O One with a face beautiful like the Moon! This kingdom is yours; ever I am your obedient slave."

पुनरुक्ते मया वाय्वं श्रुवा तद्धारितं खतम् ।

नाहं क्षतप्रद्धि वक्तु त्वमेना कथय प्रभो ॥ 26 ॥

Hearing his unbearable harsh words I said: "O Lord! I will not be able to speak her these words, disagreeable to her. You better speak this yourself."

इतुक्ते चचने दुष्टो मदतक्षतामतमतः ।

उवाच विनयादोंत सर्वी क्षामोदरिं पित्रायू ॥ 27 ॥

क्रूगोदरी त्वया मन्यो निश्रिनोति तमोभारि ।

तेन मे दूरवं कानते हतं ते वर्गतां गतम् ॥ 28 ॥

तेनाहं तव दासोउदा कृतोउस्मीति विनिश्रयः ।

भज मां कामबाणेन पीषितं विवर्गं भृगम् ॥ 29 ॥

When I spoke thus, that wicked Dānava struck by the arrows of Cupid began to speak gently to my dear companion of thin belly, thus: "O Dear One! To day you have successfully cast on me the Vaśikarana Mantra (one of the Tāntrik processes by which a lover is made to come under subjection); O Beloved! Therefore it is that my heart is stolen and so much brought under your subjection; this has converted me into a veritable slave of yours; then know this as certain that I am your slave; O

Book VI Chapter XXII

Sweet One! I am very much troubled by the Cupid's arrows and I am semi-unconscious; therefore O Lean-bellied One! Worship me.

यौवनं याति रंभोच चछ्जलं दुर्णपं तथा ।

सफलं कुरु कल्याणि पर्निं मां परिस्पष्य च। ३० ॥

O One of beautiful thighs! This youth is a very rare and transient thing; O Auspicious One! Now embrace me as your husband and make your youth a veritable success."

एकावल्युवाच

पित्राड़ं कल्पिता पूर्व दातुं गरासुताय वै ।

हैहयस्टु महाभागः स मया मनसा सुत: ॥ 31 ॥

Ekāvali said: “O Fortunate One! My father wanted to hand me over to a prince named Haihaya; I also mentally adopted him as my husband.

क्यमन्यं भवे कान्तं लव्क्वा धर्मे सनातनम् ।

कन्यामर्ग विहाराव बेलिस शास्त्रविन्दिशुम् ॥ 32 ॥

You are certainly aware of the Śāstras; how can I now abandon the eternal religion and the virtue of a woman and take up another husband.

यस्मै द्वापिता कामं कन्या ते पतिमानुयात् ।

परन्ताना सदा कन्या न स्वतन्त्र कदाचन ॥ 33 ॥

The girl must accept him to whom the father betrothes. The girl is under every circumstances dependant.

इत्युक्तोप्रि तथा पापी विराराम न मोहितः ।

न मुमोच विशालाईं मां च पार्थित्यांत तथा ॥ 34 ॥

Never do they get any independence." Though Ekāvalī said thus, the vicious Daityas struck by Cupid's arrows, did not desist and did not leave me and that larged-eyed companion.

पातालविदः तस्य पुरं परमसूक्टे ।

तशसे रक्षितं दुर्गं मफित्तं परिषदायून् ॥ 35 ॥

His city lies in Pātāla and is a very dangerous place; always it is guarded by Rāksasas and surrounded by a moat; inside is built a beautiful and strong fort.

तत्र तिहिति दुःखातां सखी मे प्राणवल्लभा ।

तेनाहं विरोहाना रारतीमि सुखूःत्रिका ।। ३६ ॥।

Now my dear companion, the queen of my heart,

is staying there with a grievous heart and I am here wandering hither and thither very much troubled on account of her bereavements."

एकरीर तवाच

कर्थ ल्यम संप्राणा पुरातस्य तुरामनः ।

विस्ययो मे महान्न तत्वं बृहि वरानने ॥ 37 ॥

Ekavīra said: “O Beautiful-faced One! How have you been able to get away from the city of that wicked demon and how have you been able to come here? I am perfectly at my wit’s end.

त्वया च कथितं वाक्यं सदित्यं भाति भाविने ।

हैहयाथें कलित्या सा प्रियेति मन साम्यान् ॥ 38 ॥

Say quickly all these. O Proud One! I doubt your words; the father of your dear companion resolved to give his daughter to Haihaya in marriage; now I am that Haihaya.

हैहयो नाम राजार्जं नान्योर्जित पृथिवीपितः ।

मद्यं कथिता सा किं सखी तव सुलोचना ॥ 39 ॥

I am the King by that name, on this earth; there is no other King by the name of Haihaya. Is it that your dear companion is meant for me?

एतन्ये संगयं सुचु छेतुभाईस भाधिनि ।

अहं तानानिध्यामि तं हत्या राक्षसाधमम् ॥ 40 ॥

O Bhāminī (passionate woman)! Remove my doubts; I will kill that villain Rāksasa and bring just now your dear companion; there is no doubt in this.

स्वयं दर्शय मे नस्य यदि ज्ञानासि सुझते ।

राङे निवेदितं किं वा तत्विचे चातितुःखिता ॥ 4 1 ॥

O One of good vows! Shew me that place, if it be known to you. Has any body informed her father that She is suffering from so many troubles?

यस्यैष बल्लभ पुत्री न किं ज्ञानिते तां हेत्म।

नोष्टाम: किं कृतसेनैत ततो मोर्चहतेलें ॥ 42 ॥

Has her father come to know that her daughter has been stolen and carried away? And has he made my effort to rescue her from the hands of that villain Rāksasa?

वन्दीकृता सुर्गा ज्ञाला कयं तिहित सुखितः ।

असमर्थां नृप: किं वा कारणं बृहि सत्वम् ॥ 43 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Is it that the King is calm and quiet, knowing that his daughter has been kept in prison? Or is it that he is unable to free her from bondage? Say quickly all these things before me.

स्वया प्रेपहतं चेते गुणानुक्नवा हामानुपान् ।

सख्या: पडूकपगक्षिक कृत: कामवशो भूषण् ॥ 44 ॥

O Lotus-eyed One! You have captivated my mind by describing the extraordinary qualities of your dear companion and have made me passionate too.

कटा पश्यामि तां कान्तां मोचवित्वाजित्सुक्रटत् ।

इति मे इदयं चाढ़ करोत्पतिमनोरध्य् ॥ 45 ॥

Alas! When will it be that I will free my beautiful beloved from the greatest perilous situation and shall see her face and her eyes, beaming with joy.

ब्रह्मे न पमानोपायं पुरे तस्मातितुर्णे ।

कर्थं त्वमाता तस्मात्स्कृटादर तद्धर ॥ 46 ॥

O Sweet speaking One! Say, by what means I can go to that impassable city. How have you been able to come from there?"

यशोत्पल्यबाच

बालभावान्यमा मज्नो भगवत्वा विशां पते ।

प्राणोस्तित ब्राह्मणातिस्स्द्यासकीज्यान्यपूर्विके ॥ ४७ ॥

Yasovatī said: “O King! In my early age I got the Mantram of the Devi Bhagavatī with its seed Mantram (mystic syllable involving in it the power connoted by the Devi) and how to meditate it.

तत्वास्थितया रात्रनयाय चित्ते विचारितम् ।

आराध्यायी सत्तं चपिडकां चचडविक्रमम् ॥ 48 ॥

While I was in the Dānava's place I thought out that juncture I would worship the powerful Caṇdikā who gives instantaneously one's own desires.

सा देही सेविता कामं बन्यमोक्षं कार्तियत ।

भक्तानुकाम्पी नार्फ्ति: समथाँ सर्वसाधने ॥ 49 ॥

If I worship that Śakti, That fructifies all desires, That is all mercy to Her Bhaktas, certainly She will free my dear companion from this her bondage.

या विश्व सुचने शक्या पालत्यवैल सा पुनः ।

कल्याने संहृत्येव सिनाकारा निराश्रया ॥ 5० ॥

Though She is really without form, yet She, without anybody's help, by Her own force, She is creating, preserving, and at the end of the Kalpa, destroying this Universe.

इति सझित्य मनसा देखी विश्रेष्ठशी शिवाय।।

ध्याता रक्ताध्वरों सौम्यां सुरुकन्यन्तां हुदि ॥ 51 ॥

संस्मृत्य मनसा रूपे मन्त्रजाययात्राभवम् ।

उपासिता मया देही मासमेकं स्माधित्य ॥ 52 ॥

Oh! She is very wonderful indeed! Thus thinking I began to meditate that auspicious red-robed and red-eyed Devi, the Lady of the Universe, and recollected mentally Her form and repeated silently Her Bijā Mantram.

स्वनेप मम समायात भक्तिभावेन तेणिता ।

भाग्रहभृता याचा किं सुताउसीति चिण्डका ॥ 53 ॥

उत्तिष याहि तरसा गज्ञातिरं मनोहाम् ।

आगमिष्यति ततासी हैहयो नृपयुगवः ॥ 54 ॥

When I meditated thus for merely one month. Candikā Devi became, through my devotion, manifest to me in my dreams and began to speak in sweet nectar-like words: "You are now asleep; go quickly to the beautiful banks of the Ganges.

एकबीरी महाबाहु: सर्वेशुविद्यदिनः ।

दत्तावेशेण मन्यनो महाविद्धाभियः परः ॥ 55 ॥

दन्तोदसैसोदी सततं मापुणसोडेनिषिततः ।

मध्यासक्तमितिंनंव मप पूजापरायण: ॥ 56 ॥

The enemy destroyer, the powerful Ekavira, the greatest of all the kings, will come there. Dattātreya, the Great Lord of the Munis, has given him my Mantra named Mahāvidyā; the King also constantly worships me devotedly with that.

माथेव सर्वभूतेषु ध्यायज्ञते च मत्यतः ।

स ते दुःखविनारां वै करीस्थिति महापतिः ॥ 57 ॥

मासुतो विहरंतत तव जाता भविष्यते ।

हत्वा तं ग्रासं घोरो भोविष्यति मानिनिथि ॥ 58 ॥

His mind is constantly attached to Me and he constantly worships Me. What more to say then this fact that the king, extremely to Me, meditates on Me as the internal controller of all beings. That intelligent son of Lakṣmī will come for sport to

Book VI Chapter XXIII

the banks of the Ganges and will remove all your sorrows.

एकावलमेकवरी: सर्वशाखविशारदः ।

पशुतार्वे पति: कार्यस्विया राजसुतः शुभः ॥ 59 ॥

इत्युक्चलांतदीये देवी प्रबुद्धार्ज तदेव हिं ।

क्रायितं स्वपन्तुत्तनं देल्याशूनार्यन्त तथा ॥ 60 ॥

That king Ekavira, versed in all the Sāstras will kill the Rāksasas in a dreadful battle and will rescue Ekāvali. So now you pay heed to my word. Lastly, She told me that her companion should marry that beautiful King, endowed with all auspicious qualifications." Thus saying, She disappeared and I instantly woke up.

प्रसत्रदान जाता श्रुत्वा सा कमलेक्षण।

विशेषेण च सन्तुहा मामुवाच शुचिस्ता ॥ 6 1 ॥

Then I informed my lotus-eyed dear Sakhi all the details of my dream as well my worshipping the Devi; hearing this, her lotus-face beamed with joy and gladness.

गच्छ तन त्यारयुना कुरु कार्य मम प्रिये ।

सत्यावल्या भगवती साउंवों मोक्षे विधायस्ति ॥ 62 ॥

That sweet-smiling Ekāvalī very gladly told me "O dear Companion! Go at once for our success."

That truth-speaking Bhagavatī Ambikā Devi will release us from our bondage.

इत्पाज्ञात तथा चाहे सख्या वे प्रेमयुक्त्या ।

मत्वोसरणं घुक्ते तस्मात्स्थानताद नृप ॥ 63 ॥

O King! When my dear companion ordered me thus, I thought it proper, as also dictated to me in my dream, to go out and soon I did it.

चालिताड़ः ततः शीर्घ माहतेवीप्रसादतः ।

भाग्रानं शीर्घगतिमघा प्राप्ता नृपात्मज ॥ 64 ॥

O King! Due to the grace of the Great Devi, I came to know the way and I also got the quick motion.

इत्येलक्रवितं सर्वे कारणं मम दुःखजम् ।

कसलं कस्य सुतश्रौति वद् वीर यद्य तथा ॥ 65 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पशत्कम्बे

श्राविशोश्याः ॥ 22 ॥

Thus I have described to you the cause of my sorrow. O Hero! Who are you, whose son are you? Speak truly to me.

Here ends the Twenty-second Chapter in the Sixth Book on the narration to Haihaya the stealing away of Ekavali in Srimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XXIII

CHAPTER XXIII

On the War Between Haihaya and Kālaketu

व्यास उवाच

तस्यास्तु वचनं श्रुत्वा रमापुत्र: प्रतपावान् ।

प्रकुल्ववदानीभोजरतामुावा विश्यामपे ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! That powerful son of Lakṣmī, Haihaya, became very glad to hear these words of Yāsovati and said:

राजोवाच

रामोह सर्वस्या पृष्टो वृत्तान्तो विशदाब्धर: ।

हेहयोर्दं चैकबौरिनामा सिन्धुसुतानुतः ॥ 2 ॥

“O One of beautiful thighs! Hear in reply to your query: I am Haihaya, the son of Laksmī, and I am known in this world by the name of Ekavīra.

मनो मे यच्च्या नूनं परतनंर कृताङ्कृते ।

किं कंरोमि क्व गच्छामि विरेशुणातिपीक्षितः ॥ 3 ॥

प्रथमं रूपमार्थातं सर्वैलोकातिरां त्वया ।

तेन मे विहृतं जातं कामबाणाहतं मनः ॥ 4 ॥

ततस्तस्या गुणा: प्रोक्तास्तैतु चित्तं हुतं पुनः ।

यत्व्योक्ते पुत्वाक्वयं तेन मे विम्वमोटभवत् ॥ 5 ॥

Now you have made my mind dependent. What am I to do now? where to go? Thus distressed with bereavement from your dear companion, my mind is struck with Cupid's arrows and is confounded with her extraordinary beauty that you just now described. Next your described her qualifications and my mind is ravished.

एकावल्या वचः प्रोक्ते दानवाठो मया वृतः ।

हैह्यसतं चिना नान्यं वृष्णोर्मीति विनिश्रयः ॥ 6 ॥

तेन वाक्येन तत्वांशि भूत्यो3हमधुना कृतः ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Again when you described before me what she uttered in the presence of the Rākṣasa, I am struck with great wonder. Your dear companion Ekāvali said before the vicious Dānava Kālaketu “I have already selected the King Haihaya. I will not select any other than him, this is my firm resolve.” These words have converted me into her slave.

त्यया तस्याः चुकेशान्ते बृह्ि विक करवाणि याम ॥ ७ ॥

स्थानं तस्य न जानामि राक्षसस्य दुरात्मनः ।

O sweet-haired One! Say now that service can I do to you both? I am not acquainted with that wicked demon's palace; never I went to his city. गतिमों नास्ति गमने पुरे ताकिम्युलोचने ॥ ८ ॥

वद मां तव शिलागलिश तत्र प्रापयितुं क्षमा ।

O Fair-eyed One! Say how I can go there; for you are the only one that can lead me there. Therefore take me quickly to that place where your beautiful dear companion is staying."

प्राययाणु सखी ते सा यत्र तिहिति सुन्दरी ॥ ९ ॥

हत्वा तं राक्षसं कूरं मोचविष्यामी संग्रतम् ।

विश्वशो गोकसन्तंला रावसुघौत तव प्रियम् ॥ १० ॥

Your dear companion, the daughter of the King is very much afflicted with sorrow; soon I free her, by destroying that cruel Rāksasa. There is no doubt in this. O Auspicious One! I will rescue your dear companion and bring her to the city of yours and hand her over to her father.

विषुक्तुःखां कृत्वास्तु प्रापियथामि ते पुम् ।

पिंचे चास्या: प्रदास्यामि कन्याभेकावतीमहम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Then that King, the enemy destoryer, will perform the marriage ceremony of his daughter. I think this is the desire of your heart.

पश्रादिवार्हे कतिजसी राजा पुत्रमा: परन्तः ।

एवं ते मनसः कामो मम चापि प्रियवेदे ॥ १२ ॥

O Sweet-speaking One! Know that that is also my desire. O Beautiful One! Now that desire will be fulfilled by your efforts.

भविष्यति स सम्पूर्णे: साधनेन तवायुना ।

उपशयु गुरुं तस्य पश्य मे तंखे पशक्रमम् ॥ १३ ॥

Show me quickly that place and see my prowess.

O One with a face beautiful like the Moon! It seems that you will be able to do my work.

यथा हनिम दुराचारं परदायराहाकम् ।

तथा कुरु प्रिंवं कर्तु शक्तिसि वरवर्षिनि ॥ 14 ।

मार्ग दर्शय तस्याद पुरस्य दुरांमस्य च ।

Soon do such as I can kill that wicked demon, who steals others wives. Now show me the way to the impassable city of that Rākṣasa.

व्यास उवाच

तत्रिश्णा प्रियं वावयं पुदिता च यशोक्ती ॥ १ ५ ॥

तमुबाव चमापुत्रं गमनोपायमात्रत ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the sweet words of the prince, Yásovati became very glad and gently began to speak out how he could go to the demon's city.

मद्रं गृहाण राजेन्द्र भगवतासु सिद्धिदम् ॥ 16 ॥

द्रास्थियाति सत्याप दुर्गे गछसपतिलनम् ।

“O King! Take the success-giving Mantra of Bhagavatī and I would then be able to show you today the city guarded by Rāksasas.

सज्जो भव महाभाग गमानय यमा सह ॥ 17 ॥

सैन्येन महता युक्तस्तय वृद्धे भविष्यति ।

कालकेनुर्महावीरो ग्रासैर्वतिभिश्रुतः ॥ 18 ॥

O King! Better arrange to take your vast army with you; for you will have to fight no sooner you go there. Kālaketu is personally a great warrior surrounded by Rākṣasas of great power and strength.

तस्मामन्तं गृहीत्वा तं बज तत्र मया सह ।

दूर्णशिवायामे ते माणे पुरस्यायव दुरातन्तः ॥ १९ ॥

Therefore be initiated in the Mantram of Śrī Bhagavatī and accompany me. So you will surely be successful. I will show you the way to the city of that Demon.

हत्वा तं पापकर्माणी मोचयागु च मे सखीम् ।

श्रुत्वा तद्वचनं वीरो मन्त्रप्रग्राह सत्यतः ॥ 20 ॥

द्नात्रयेहद्वयोगग्राप्ताज्ञानिवसाराख्यभात् ।

योगेश्वीमहाम्बनं जित्योकीतिलकाधियम् ॥ 21 ॥

तेन सर्वन्ता जाता सर्वान्तक्षारिता तथा ।

तया सह जगामायु पुरं तस्य सुदुर्मनम् ॥ 22 ॥

Book VI Chapter XXIII

Slay that vicious and vilest of the Rākṣasas and rescue my dear companion." Hearing thus, Haihaya was duly initiated into the great Mantram of Yogēsvari, named Trilokitilaka Mantra (Hrim Gauri Rudradayite Yogēsvari Hum Phat Svāhā is the Yogēsvari Mantra), by Maharṣi Dattātreya, accidentally come there (as if ordained by Fate), the chief of Jñāmins (the Gnostics), that is conducive to the welfare of the beings. Thus by the influence of the Mantram the King got the power of knowing all things and going everywhere with unobstructed speed.

रक्षितं राक्षसौधौर: पातालमिव पत्रगैः ।

यगोवत्वा च सैयेन मत्ता संसुत्तो युप: ॥ 23 ॥

Then the King Haihaya quickly went with Yaśvatī to the impassable city of the Rākṣasas, accompanied by a vast army.

तमायांतं समालोक्य दृतास्तव भयातुतः ।

क्रोगान्तोभिययु: पाशुं कालकेतोतस्त्रसिन ॥ 24 ॥

The city was surrounded by snakes and guarded by the terrible Raksasas like the city of Pātāla. The messengers of the Rāksasa, seeing the King coming, were struck with terror and crying aloud quickly went to Kālāketu.

तमुचु: सहसा गत्वा राक्षसं काममोहितम् ।

एकावलीसीपर्यक्ष कुर्बर्ते विव्यान्द्रह्न् ॥ 25 ॥

Kālāketu, struck with Cupid's arrows, was sitting beside Ekāvalī and was speaking many modest words when the messenger went there suddenly and said:

दूता क्युः

राजन् योगेवर्ती नारी कामिन्या: सड्घारिणी ।

आयाति सह सैन्येन राजपुत्रेण संयुता ॥ 26 ॥

“O King! The attendant of this lady Yasovatī is coming here with a prince and an army.

जयन्तो वा महाराज कार्तिकेयोदयवा नु किम् ।

आगच्छति बलोन्मन्तो वाहिणीसहितः किल ॥ 27 ॥

O King! We cannot tell exactly whether the prince is the son of Indra, named Jayanta or Kārikeya. After all, puffed up with the strength of his army, he is coming here.

संयतो भव राजेन्द्र संग्राम: समुपस्थितः ।

देवपुत्रेय युध्यस्य त्वज वा कमलेक्षणाम् ॥ 28 ॥

O King! The battle is imminent; now make your arrangements fully and carefully; fight with the son of a Deva or abandon this lotus-eyed Lady.

इतो दूरैं5ति सैन्यं तद्वीजनययाततः ।

सज्जो वब महीपाल दुर्बुधि घोषायगु चै ॥ 29 ॥

O King! At a distance of three Yojanas from this place, he is staying with his army. Now equip yourself and quickly declare the war by blowing the war trumps etc.

व्यास उवाच

तेषां तद्वचं भूत्वा राक्षसः क्रोभूम्त्रितुतः ।

राक्षसान्प्रेयामास सत्यान्त्यबलान्वडून् ।। ३० ॥

गच्छधं राक्षसा: सर्वे सम्युखा: गरक्षाणयः ।

तानाज्य कालकेतु: पूघछ प्रणायास्ति: ॥ ३। ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the messenger's words, Kālāketu, the King of the Demons, became overwhelmed with anger and at once sent many powerful Rāksasas, holding all sorts of weapons and spoke out to them: "O Rāksasas! With weapons in your hands, go before them quickly."

एकावर्ती समीपत्थां विश्वगं भुगुत्:वितान् ।

कोउभयागित तत्वद्रिक्त पिता ते वापर: पुवान् ॥ 32 ॥

Ordering them thus, Kālāketu asked in sweet words Ekāvali who was in front and very distressed. O Thin-bellied One! Who is coming here? Is he your father or any other man coming with his army to release you. Speak this to me truly.

त्वदर्शे सैन्यसंयुक्तो बृहि सर्व कुशोवित् ।

पिता ते यदि सम्प्रायो नेतुं त्वां विरहातुः ॥ 33 ॥

जाला ते पित्तं सत्यबसंग्रामं न करोयहम् ।

आनस्तिया गृहे पुर्जा रनैवर्केक्षेईये: शुधे: ॥ 34 ॥

If your father comes here to take you back, being very much distressed with your bereavement, I will never fight with him, if I come to know this truly; rather I will bring him to my house and worship him with the excellent horses, gems and jewels and clothing. Really I will show my full hospitality duly to him when he comes here.

Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam

क्रौति तस्य चातिथ्यं गृहे प्राप्तस्य सर्वेथा ।

अन्येक्षोदि सम्पान्तलं हन्नि निशितः शरेः ॥ 35 ॥

And if any other person comes, then I will take his life by the sharpened arrows; there is no doubt in this. Know this as certain whoever comes here for your rescue is brought by the hand of Death to me.

आनीतः किकल काने परागया महात्मना ।

तस्माद्व विज्ञालाङ्कि कोउम्यागती मंदधीः ॥ ३६ ॥

अज़ाला मां दुराधर्ष काललर्भ महावल्न ।

Therefore, O Large-eyed One! Say who is this fool that is coming, not knowing me as the powerful and unconquerable Kāla (Death).”

एकावल्युवाच

न जानेड़ं महाभाग कोउयमायाति सत्वतः ॥ 37 ॥

न मेजिल विदितः कोर्पि सित्यात्यावत बच्चे ।

नयं पिता मे न प्राता कोउपयोगेस महावत: ॥ 38 ॥

किम्बधिमह घ्यातात नाहं वेद विनिश्रवम् ।

Ekāvali said: “O Highly Fortunate One! I do not know who is this coming to this side with a violent speed. O King! How can I know that when I am in this state of confinement in your house. This man is not my father nor my brother. Some other powerful man is coming here. I do not know exactly what for he is coming.

दैत्य उवाच

एव वदन्यमी दूता वयस्या ते यशोक्ति ॥ 39 ॥

समानीय च तं वीरामानतेित कृतोदाया ।

वव गता सा सखी कानते विद्यथा कार्यविशेषि ॥ 40 ॥

नान्यः कोउपि ममातिरीयं मे प्रतिवलो भवेत् ।

The Demon said: "My messengers say that your comrade Yaśovati has take with her that warrior and is coming to this side with great energy. Where has your clever companion gone now? O Lotus-eyed! There is no enemy in the three worlds strong enough to fight against me."

व्यास उवाच

तृलमिश्रजंते दृतास्तान्ये वै समानातः ॥ 4 1 ॥

ते हीबुल्साति शीता: कालकेतुं गृहे स्थितम् ।

किं सत्योर्जेसि महात्राज समीपे सैन्यमागतम् ॥ 4 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Just then other messengers hurriedly came there terrified and spoke to Kālāketu who had been staying in the house, thus: "O King! The army has come quite close to the city and how are you staying in the house, calm and quiet?

निरीच्छ नगरातूर्ण सैयेन महता वृतः ।

इति तेषां वचः श्रुत्वा कालकेतुर्महावलः ॥ ४३ ॥

Better march out of the city with your vast army as early as possible." The powerful Kālaketu, then, hearing their words, mounted on the chariot and quickly went out of his city.

यथामहु त्वत्ते निर्वीयं स्वपुराद्धि: ।

एकवीरोप्रि सहसा ह्यामकड़ः प्रतापवान् ॥ 44 ॥

The King Haihaya, on the other hand, suffering from the bereavements of his dear lady, suddenly came there mounted on horseback.

आगतस्तत कामी-या विशेषो समाकुलः ।

युढ़ं तवोर्भूतत्र चूत्रवासवयोरि ॥ 45 ॥

The terrible fight ensued then and there between the two and each one struck the other with sharpened weapons and the quarters all around blazed with their glitterings and clashings.

गस्तार्वेबंधा मुक्तैरादीपतिद्वानतम् ।

वर्तीमाने तदा युद्धे कातताणां भयावहे ॥ ४ ४ ॥

When the terrible fight was going on, Haihaya, the son of Lakṣmī, struck Kālaketu, the King of the Daityas with a very powerful club (Gadā).

गदादा ताउवामास दैर्वं सिन्धुसुतासुतः ।

स गतासुः पतातेल्यां वज्ञात हजावलः ॥ 47 ॥

Thus struck by the Gadā, the Lord of the Daityas fellon the ground like a mountain, struck by lightning, and died.

पतातिवासा ततः सर्वे गछसा भयपीडिताः ।

यशोवर्ती ततो गत्वा वेगादेकावर्ती ततं ॥ 48 ॥

उवाच मभुतं वाणी विश्वितां पुदिता भुगम् ।

All the Rāksasas fled away on all sides, struck with terror. Yásovati went then very hurriedly with a gladdened heart to Ekāvali and began to speak to her in terms of surprise and in sweet words:

एष्ठाति नृपपुत्रेण दानवोरभौ निपातितः ॥ 49 ॥

एकबीर्ण धीरेण युद्धं कृत्वा सुदारुभणम् ।

Book VI Chapter XXIII

O Dear! O Dear! Come, Come; the great warrior, the prince Ekavīra has killed the Lord of the Daityas in a dreadful battle. That King in now waiting, tired in the midst of his soldiers.

स्कन्यावोरप्रयौरा रावा निश्तवधा क्षमातृः ॥ ५० ॥

दार्णं कांक्षागाले क्षुतकपगुषतव ।

पश्य तं कुटिलापाक्रि मनोभयवसம் नृमम् ॥ ५१ ॥

He has already heard from me about your beauty and qualities; and now he is expecting to see you. O One Looking askance! Now satisfy your eyes and mind by seeing that King who is like the Cupid.

कथिता तं वयं मपूर्व तस्याएे जाइक्रवीते ।

पूर्णीगुराः संज्ञानतेनासी विश्रातुाः ॥ ५२ ॥

यांक्षित तां चारुकर्ण उद्धू नृपतिनन्दनः ।

When I described to him before on the banks of the Ganges your beauty and qualifications, he got enamoured of you and now he is suffering from bereavement and wants to see you.

सा तस्य वचनं शुचा गमनाय मनो दरे ॥ ५३ ॥

तज्जमाता भृणं भीत्या कोभागं प्रादया तथा ।

Thus, hearing, Ekāvali determined to go to him and as she yet unmarried, she became abashed and afraid.

कां तत्थ मुचंघे ऋष्ये कुमारी ह्वारगा भृगणे ॥ 54 ॥

स मां गृहुति कामार्ते इंति चितातुकला सती ।

She thought how could she see the prince as she was unmarried. It might be that be being passionate would catch her by her arms.

यगोवत्या युता तत्र नर्यान्तित्या ययों ॥ 55 ॥

कन्यावारोत्तिनालेना मलिनावस्थापिति ।

Thus, troubled with thought, that daughter of the King, with a sad look, and wearing poor clothes, Ekāvali went with Yaśovatī on a palanquin, carried on men's shoulders.

तामागतं विशालास्थीं इद्वा राजसुतेप्रबवीत् ॥ 56 ॥

रूर्नं देहि तन्विंग तृविंचे नवेचे मभ ।

Seeing that large-eyed daughter of the King coming there, the prince said: "O Beautiful One! My two eyes are very thirsty to see you. Satisfy my eyes and mind by shewing yourself to me.

कामातुरं च तं बीक्ष्य तां च लज्ञाभरावुतामू ॥ 57 ॥

नीतिजा शिष्यभाज्ञा तनुवाच यथोवती ।

राजपुर विपात्ययस्यावेयंतं दातुपिच्छति ॥ 58 ॥

एपारपि लद्धगा नूनं घविता संगमस्तव ।

Seeing the prince passionate and the King's daughter very much abashed, Yásovati, who knew the rules of modesty, thus spoke to the prince: "O Prince! The father of my dear companion expressed a desire to betroth her to your hands. She is also obedient to you. Therefore your meeting will certainly take place.

कालं प्रतीक्ष्य राजेन्र नयैनी चितृरतिनकम् ॥ 59 ॥

स विदाक्रियिकी कृत्वा दास्यतीति विदिक्षयः ।

O King! Wait; take her to her father; and he will perform duly the marriage ceremony and betroth her to your hands. Know this to be quite certain."

स तस्या वचनं तध्यं मत्वा सैन्यसमित्वतः ॥ 60 ॥

समेते कामिनीभ्यां तु ययौ तत्सितृताश्रमम् ।

The King took her words to be quite just and true and taking those two ladies went with his army to the house of the father of Ekāvalī.

राजपूर्वी तथायातां शुत्वा प्रेमसमित्वतः ॥ 61 ॥

प्रययौ सम्युवल्पूर्णं सचिवः परिवेशितः ।

Ekāvali's father became very glad and cheerful to learn that his daughter was coming and, accompanied by his ministers, went hurriedly to her. बहुभिविर्वसैनैंद्य तृत्री सा महिनान्वारा ॥ 62 ॥

यगोवत्या तु चुत्तान: कथितो विस्तारतुना: ।

After a long time the King saw his daughter in poor clothings and became highly pleased. Yašovatī then described in detail all what happened before the King.

एकवीरं मिलित्वादसौ रूहमानीय चादगत् ॥ 63 ॥

पुण्येऋढ़ कारयामास विवाहं विधिपूर्वकम् ।

The King then with his minister brought with great love, courtesy and gentleness Ekavira to his house and on all auspicious day performed the marriage ceremony of him with Ekāvalī, in accordance with due ceremonies and rites.

पारिषहू ततो दत्त्वा संपुज्य विधित्वतदा ॥ 64 ॥

पूर्वी विसर्जयामास यथोवत्या समवितात् ।

Then the King gave away many clothings, ornaments, jewels, and articles for fitting a house and many other things and worshipped duly and sent his daughter together with Yaśovatī away with the King Haihaya.

एवं विवाहे संवृते रमापुत्रो मुद्रावित्तः ॥ 65 ॥

पूर्ण प्राय० बद्धन्योगत्बुभुजे प्रियवा समम् ।

Thus the marriage ceremony was performed and the son of Laksmī gladly returned to his house and began to enjoy many pleasures with his wife. Then,

in course of time, in the womb of Ekāvali the King Haishaya got a son named Kṛtavírya.

बभूत तत्या: पुरस्तु कृतवीयांमिथ: कित।

तत्सुतः कार्तवीयांसृ वंगोउयं कथितो मया ॥ 66 ॥

इति श्रीमदैशीभागते महापुराणे पश्चकन्चे जयोविरोगे उध्याः पितः 123।

The son of this Kṛtavīrya is known as Kārtavīrya. O King! Thus I have narrated to you the origin of the Haihaya dynasty.

Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter in the Sixth Book on the battle of Haihaya and Kalaketu in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER XXIV

On Vikṣepa Śakti

राजोवाच

भार्वेरस्न्युखीभोजाध्छृते दिव्यक्रायरास्म ।

न तृत्यिमीयाच्छाम विश्वस्नु सुधया सम्म ॥ १ ॥

The King Janamejaya said: O Bhagavān! I am not satiated with the drink of the divine sweet nectar-like words coming out of your lotus mouth. विश्वसिमदायाखनं कथितं भवता मम् ।

हैहयानां समुपतिन्सितात्रम्यमप्रदा ॥ २ ॥

You have described to me in detail the wonderful and variegated story of the origin of the Haihaya dynasty; but, O Muni! There has arisen in my mind a curiosity to know something more on this subject.

परं कौतुहलं मेउत्र यदिषुणुः कमलापति: ।

देवदेवो जगाधावः सुहित्स्थ्यंतकाकाः ॥ ३ ॥

सोउपवर्षभावामपत्रो भगवाह्नरित्यन्तुः ।

परतनः कर्थ जातः स्वतनः पुरुषोतमः ॥ ४ ॥

See the Bhagavān Viṣṇu, the Lord of Lakṣmī, the Deva of the Devas, the Ruler of this whole Universe and the Cause of the Creation, Preservation and Destruction; yet that Best of Puruṣas Śrī Bhagavān had to assume a horse form. He is undecaying and independent, how then He came to be dependent?

एतन्ने संशयं बह्यउ्छेतुभहींस संग्रितम् ।

सर्वज्ञस्वं मुनिश्रेष्ठ बृहि वृत्तानमढुतम् ॥ 5 ॥

Clear this doubt of mine. O Best of Munis! You are omniscient; therefore satisfy my curiosity by describing this wonderful event.

व्यास उवाच

शृणु राजन्यवक्ष्यामि संदेश्यास्य निर्णयम् ।

तथा श्रुतं मया पूर्वं नारदामुनिसतमात् ॥ 6 ॥

बहाणो मानसः पुत्रो नारदो नाम तापसः ।

सर्वैत्रः सर्वेगः शान्तः सर्वैताकप्रियः क्रकिः ॥ 7 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hear what I heard of yore from Nārada how this doubt was removed. The mind born son of Brahmā, Maharṣi Nārada got powers to go everywhere by virtue of his Tapas, could know everything, was of a calm and quiet nature, dear to all and he was a poet.

स चैकदा मुनिश्रेष्ठी विचरन्युधिवीमिमम् ।

वाद्यन्महर्ती वीर्णां स्वरातनसम्यित्नम् ॥ 8 ॥

ब्रह्धधतरात्रीना सामानं घेदाननेकाः ।

गायनायश्रममुत संग्रातोउध मामाश्रमम् ॥ 9 ॥

On one occasion he went out on tour round the world, playing with his lute in time with Svara and Tāna. One day he came to my Āśrama, singing many things concerning Brhat Rathantara Sāma Veda and the sweet nectar-like Gāyatrī, the Giver of Liberation.

Book VI Chapter XXIV

शयाप्रासं महातीर्थं सरस्वल्या: सुपावनम् ।

निवासं मुनिमुख्यानां शर्मदं ज्ञानं तवा ॥ 10 ॥

O King! There was a very sacred place of hermitage, beaming as it were with happiness and self-knowledge, named Śamyāprāsa, on the banks of the river Sarasvatī. There was situated my hermitage.

तमागतमहं प्रेश्य बढ़ापुरं महावृतिम् ।

अध्य्यात्यार्दिकं सर्व कृत्वावन्चैराविकम् ॥ ११ ॥

Seeing the lustrous Nārada Rṣi, the son of the Grand Sire Brahmā, coming, I get up and offered him duly Pāḍya (water to wash his feet) and Argha (offerings of worship), etc., and worshipped him.

अध्य्याएविधि कृत्वा तस्यानन्थितस्य च ।

उपविष्ट: समीपेड़ं मुनेनरमितजेस: ॥ 12 ॥

दूष्वा विश्विमगं शान्ते नारतं ज्ञानपादम् ।

तमपुरुषहं राजन्यरुहोड़ं त्वायेघून ॥ 13 ॥

When that Muni of indomitable lustre took his seat on the Asana, I sat beside him. When I found Nārada, the Giver of Knowledge, at rest and quiet, I duly asked him the very same question that you have asked me just now.

असारेर्स्सितु संसारे प्राणिनां किं सुखं पुने ।

न पश्यामि विनिश्रित्य कदाचित्वकुचित्वस्थिति ॥ १४ ॥

O Best of Munis! What happiness is there on the beings taking their birth in this world. I never found it in any place or in any concern, this I can say positively.

ड्री पे जातो जनन्याहं संत्यक्तस्तक्षणादपि ।

अनाङ्गयो वने वृद्धि प्रापतः कर्मपुसारतः ॥ १५ ॥

Still why do the high minded persons do Karma, fascinated by the enchantments of the world. Look! I was born in an island.

तपस्तपं मया घोरां पवैते बहुवार्षिकम् ।

पुसकामेन देवर्षं शड़रः सपुपासितः ॥ १६ ॥

Just after my birth, my mother forsook me. Helpless, I grew in the forest as my Karma allowed. Next I performed a very severe tapasyā before Mahādeva, the Deva of the Devas, on the mountain with a dosire to have a son.

ततो मया शुक्र: प्राप्त: पुत्रे ज्ञानवतं चर: ।

पाठितसून मया सम्यवेदात्मां सार आदितः ॥ १ ७ ॥

As a fruit of that I got Suka as my son, the foremost of the Gnostics, and taught him completely the essence of the Vedas from the beginning to the end.

स त्यकता में गतः: क्वाथि मृन्ति विरहातुम् ।

लोकाल्लोकानांर साधो वचनातव जोधितः ॥ 18 ॥

O Devarsī! When my son got wisdom from you, he left this world even when I became very distressed on his bereavement and wept aloud and he went away to the next world.

ततोड़े नुवस्नतल्यवबा मेरे महापितिभि ।

मातरं मनसा कृत्वा संग्राम: कृकर्जानम् ॥ 19 ॥

पुत्रस्नेहादिततरां कृशांग: शोकसंयुतः ।

जाननिष्येति संसारं मायावागनियन्त्रितः ॥ 20 ॥

Very much afflicted for the parting of my son, I abandoned the great Mountain Meru. I got very lean due to the absence of my dear son whom I loved very much; and becoming very distressed and knowing this whole world to be an illusion, remembered my mother and went to the Kuru Jāṅgala district, as if bound up and controlled by the snares of Māyā.

तत्तो राजा वृतां जात्वा मातरं वासवीं शुभाम् ।

स्थितोउत्रैवाक्षमं कृत्वा सरस्वल्याप्रातटे शुभे ॥ 21 ॥

When I heard that the King Śāntanu had married my mother, I built my hermitage on the holy banks of the Sarasvati and remained there.

गैतनुः स्वर्गितं प्राणते विपुरा जननी स्थिता ।

पुर्वदययुत साखी धीभेण प्रतिपातिता ॥ 22 ॥

When the King Śāntanu went to the next world, my chaste mother remained with two sons. At that time Bhīṣma looked after their sustenance and maintained them.

चित्रांगदः कृती राजा गंगापुरेण धीमता ।

कालेन सोःपि मे प्राता मृतः कामसम्बृति: ॥ 23 ॥

The intelligent Ganga's son Bhīsma Deva installed Cītrāngāda on the throne. A short while after this, Cītrāngada, too, looking like a second

Cupid and extremely lovely, went to the jaws of death.

ततः सत्यवती माता निममना शोकासागर ।

चित्रानंद मृतं पुत्रं रूतेद भृशमातृना ॥ 24 ॥

The mother Satyavatī was drowned in the sorrows for his son Cittāṅgada and began to weep for him.

संग्राटोड़ महाभाग्र जातव तां दुःखितां सतीम् ।

आश्रासिता मायात्यर्षी भीभेण च महात्मना ॥ 25 ॥

विश्वसीर्यल्पणे वीर्वीवान्यधिवीपितः ।

कृतो भीभेण भाता वे क्षीराज्यविपुढ़न ॥ 26 ॥

O King! Knowing my mother in that sorrowful condition, I went to her. Bhīṣma and I then consoled her with hopeful words. Bhīṣma Deva was averse to marrying and then becoming a King; and, therefore, he installed again the younger brother, the powerful Victiravirya on the throne.

कारिज्ञानसुत रये विनियन पृथिव्योपतीन ।

भीम्पोनापीय स्वबलात्कन्यके इे समर्पिते ॥ २७ ॥

O King! Bhīṣma defeated by his own prowess the kings and brought the two daughters of the Kings Kāśtrāja and handed them over to Satyavati, so that she might give them over to Victiravīrya.

सत्यवर्यै रुषे काते विवाहः परिक्षित्रणः ।

श्रातूर्षित्वत्रीयस्य तताईं सुक्षितो3प्रभम् ॥ 28 ॥

Then, on an auspicious day, and in an auspicious Lagna (moment) when the marriage ceremony of my brother Victiravriya was performed, I became glad.

पुनः सोर्पि मुते प्राता यक्षणा पीक्षितो घृषणम् ।

अनपलो युवा धन्वी माता मे दुःखिताउभवत् ॥ 29 ॥

My brother, a good archer, was shortly afterwards attacked with consumption and thus he died without any issue.

कारीशरावसुरु वे तु मृतं इयूधा परित तदा ।

पतिन्तमाधमपैरे भागीयो संबंचपूवत्: ॥ 30 ॥

ते ऋचतुः सर्ती श्रशूं रुद्तीं भुणुः:खिताम् ।

पतिना सहगामित्यी भविष्यावो हुतागरे ॥ 31 ॥

पूत्रेण सह ते श्रशू स्वर्गे गतालअल नन्दने ।

सुखेन विहीएयावः पतिना सह संयुते ॥ 32 ॥

At this my mother became very sad and dejected. Seeing the husband dead, the two daughters of Kāsirāja became ready to preserve their religion of chastity and said to their mother-in-law, sorrowful and weeping: "We two shall accompany our husband and become Satī (i.e., burnt up with our husbands). O Devi! We will go to the Heaven with your son.

निवारिते तदा माता व्यक्षी तस्मानमहोद्यान् ।

स्नेहभावं समाश्रित्य भीभवस्य वचनात्ता ॥ 33 ॥

गांगेशेन च माता गे संमंत्र्य च परस्पत् ।

कृत्यीधर्वैहिक सर्व सैम्युतेई नगताछ्चे ॥ 34 ॥

We, the two sisters united, will enjoy with him in the Nandana Garden. The mother was very much attached to them and with the permission of Bhisma Deva, very affectionately made them desist from this great attempt.

स्मृतमास्त्रु मात्रा वै नात्वा भार्यं मनोगतम् ।

तत्सेवागतश्रहं नगरं नागसाढूमम् ॥ 35 ॥

When all the funeral obsequies of Victiravīrya were over, my mother consulted with Bhīsma and remembered me in Hastināangara.

प्रणाय्य मातर्ग मुन्नीं संश्वितोदय कृताङ्जसि: ।

तामबूदं सुतलांगी पूत्रगोकेन कर्जितगम् ॥ 36 ॥

मातत्स्वया किमाहुतो मनसाउं तपस्थिति ।

आजापय महत्वायं दासोर्पिम कवाणीय किम ॥ 37 ॥

As soon as she remembered me, immediately I knew her mental feelings and hurriedly came to Hastināṅagara and, with my head bowed, fell prostrate before her feet, and with folded hands addressed my mother who was very much inflamed with the fire of sorrow for the death of her son, thus: O Mother! Why have you called me here mentally? I see you are very much dejected; I am your servant; order me what I can do for you.

तब मे तीर्थे परं मातदेवघ प्रधित: परः ।

आगताश्रितितश्रात्र वृक्ति कृत्यं तव प्रियम् ॥ 38 ॥

O Mother! You are my greatest place of pilgrimage and you are my highest deity; I am very anxious since I have come here; say that what you desire.

Book VI Chapter XXIV

यास उवाच

इत्युक्स्वाहं स्थितस्तत मातुर्ये यदा मुने ।

तदा सा मामुवार्वेदे एप्यन्ती भीष्ममत्के ॥ 39 ॥

पुत्र तेउष घृतो घाता पीडित्ता राज्यक्षणा ।

तेनाहं दु:स्तिता जाता वंशच्छेदभ्यादित् ॥ 40 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O Best of Munis! When I said thus and waited before her, then she looked at Bhisma standing close by and said: “O Child! Your brother died of consumption; therefore I am very sorrowful, lest the family becomes extinct.”

तस्मावचघ मेधावियमातृतः स्माधिन ।

गांगेययय मतेनात्र गाराश्यर्धीसिद्धे ॥ 41 ॥

O Intelligent One! For the continuance of the line, then, with the permission of the Ganga's son, I have called you here today by the Samādhi Yoga. कुर्व स्थापय नहं तं शनतोनीभकारणात् ।

स्म मं दुःखतः कृष्ण यंशछेदोद्ध्वादुद्रतुम् ॥ 42 ॥

O son of Parāśara! you re-establish the name of Śāntanu that is going now to be well nigh extinct.

काशिराजसुते धार्ये धातुस्तव यदीयसः ।

साधोर्विश्वशिर्यसि रूपशैवनभूषिति ॥ 43 ॥

O Vyāsa Deva! Relieve me soon from this sorrow of mine, lest this line be extinct. There are the two daughters of Kāśirāja, honest and good and endowed with youth and beauty.

ताध्यां संगम्य मेधाविन्युजीर्यादनकं कुक ।

तब तंब भारतं वर्णन तारयेघोर्जित कहिंचित् ॥ 44 ॥

O Highly Intelligent One! Better you cohabit with them and save the family of Bharata by begetting sons. You will not be touched with any sin.

व्यास उवाच

इति मातुर्विः: श्रुत्वा जाताश्रितानुते हाहम्।

लज्जाया३कुलचितस्तावम्बूवं चिन्याततः ॥ 4 5 ॥

मात: पापात्रिकं कर्म परादतारमिश्मनम् ।

ज्ञाला धार्मियं सम्यककारीम कक्षमादगत् ॥ 46 ॥

तथा ययीयसो प्राणवर्णु: कन्या प्रक्रक्रितिता ।

व्यधिचारं कंकं कुयामधीत्य निर्मानान्हम् ॥ 47 ॥

Vyāsa said: O Devarṣi! Hearing the mother's

words, I became very anxious and humbly told her with great shame: "O Mother! To touch another's wife is a very sinful act; knowing well the path of Dharma, how can I willingly and intentionally violate that?

अन्यायेन न कतैन्वं सर्वेथा कुलतर्शणम् ।

न तरतिन हि संसारातिवस्तः पापाकारिणः ॥ 48 ॥

So also, the Maharsis say: That the wife of a younger brother is like a daughter. Studying all the Vedas, how can I do this blame-worthy and adulterous act?

लेकानामुपदेष्टा यः पुराणानां प्रवर्तैकः ।

स कर्ष कृत्तिसं कर्म मूला कुर्णम्हाद्धून ॥ 49 ॥

पुनरुक्तो हाहं मात्रा कट्टवा भृग्यान्तिके ।

पुत्रशोकांतिततपाया वैराश्रणकाकायया ॥ 50 ॥

To preserve a line of family by illegal ways is never to be done; for then the fathers of the sinners can never cross this ocean of world. How can he, who is the spiritual preceptor of all, and the writer of all the Purāṇas, do this act knowingly which is awfully strange and very bad and nasty in its nature.

पारास्थरं न ते दोशो वचनान्मय पुत्रक ।

गुरुणां वचनं तथ्यं सदोषमपि मानवः ॥ 51 ॥

My mother was very much plunged into the sea of sorrows for the breavement of her son; so to preserve the family, She came again to me, weeping and said: "O son of Parāśara! If you follow my words, you wo'nnt incur any sin.

कर्तेब्यमविचार्यैंव शिष्टाचारप्रमाणतः ।

वचनं कुक मे पुत्र न ते दोषोजित मानच ॥ 52 ॥

O Child! If the reasonable words of the Gurus be even faulty, one should obey them according to the tradition of the Śiṣṭas. Therefore, O Child! Keep my word and preserve my honour; no sin will touch you.

पुत्रस्य जनने कृत्वा सुखितीं कुक माताम् ।

विशेषेण तु संततां मन्त्रं शोक्षाणघे सुते ॥ 53 ॥

O Child! Think very well. Your mother is very sorry and is immersed in the ocean of afflictions; therefore it is your paramount duty to make her

happy by begetting child for the continuance of the family."

इति तां द्ववर्ती शुचा तदा सुरवर्तीसुतः ।

मामुवाच विशेषेच: सूक्ष्यधर्म्य सिपर्ये ॥ 554 ॥

द्वीपायन विचारोउन न कत्व्यस्त्वयानउन ।

मातुर्वंचनमादाय विहरस्य यथासुखम् ॥ 55 ॥

Hearing my mother speaking to me thus, Bhisma, the Ganga's son, the expert in finding out truth in fine points with regard to Dharma, said to me: "O Dvaipāyana! You are wholly sinless; you ought not therefore to argue on this point; obey your mother as she says and be happy."

व्यास उवाच

इति तत्य वचः शुत्वा मातुश प्रार्थनं तथा ।

नि:शंकोई तत जातः कार्यं तस्मिक्युपियिति ॥ 56 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing his words and my mother's request, I decided to do this very hateful act with a fearless heart without any suspicious.

अधिकवायां प्रवृतो3हयुत्मत्वां मुदा निशि ।

परिव विमनसायां तु तापसे कृत्तिसे घूर्णम् ॥ 57 ॥

ग्राला मया सा सुक्षोणी प्रसंगे प्रथमे तथा ।

संश्रसे भविता पुत्रे यतते नेत्रे निर्मितले ॥ 58 ॥

When Ambikā finished her ablutions after menstruation, I gladly cohabited with her in the

night; but that young lady seeing my ugly ascetic form, was not attachment to me; I then cursed that beautiful woman thus: "As you closed your eyes at the first cohabitation with me, your son will be born blind."

हितीये है मुनिश्रेष्ठ पुर्यो मात्रा रह: पुनः ।

भविष्यति सुतः पुःः काशिरासुस्तोदे ॥ ५९ ॥

मयोक्ता जननी तत श्रीदायमपुंल वह ।

विनेजो भविता पुत्रो मातः शापान्मेव है ॥ 60 ॥

O Muni! On the second day my mother enquired me when I was alone: "O Dvaipāyana! Will there be born a son of the daughter of Kāśrāja? I then bowed my head with shame, and told "Mother! The son will be born blind, through my curse."

तया निर्भीत्सतरन कठोरवचसा मुने ।

कर्थ पुत्र त्वया ग्रपः पुत्रसेउयो भविष्यति ॥ 61 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे श्वरक्ये

वर्गविंशोअष्ण: 11 24 11

O Muni! The mother then rebuked me harshly "O Child! Why did you curse that the son of Ambikā would be born blind?"

Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the description of Vikṣepa Śakti in the

discourse between Vyāsa and Nārada in the

Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXV

On the Cause of Moha of Vyāsa

व्यास उवाच

वासवी चकिता जाता श्रुत्वा मे वाक्यमीद्वुभम् ।

दार्गेयी मगुवावेदे पुत्रार्थं भृगमातुगा ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The mother became astonished to hear me. Becoming very anxious for a son, she began to speak to me.

अवालिका वर्ध्यूंट्या काशिराजसुता सुत ।

भार्य विवित्रवैर्य स्थित्य शोकसंयुता ॥ 2 ॥

सर्वतक्षणासम्पत्रा रूपयौवनशालिनी ।

तत्वां जनय सई चं कृत्वा पुत्रं सुसमतम् ॥ 3 ॥

नांशो राजाधिकारी स्थानसमातूर्ध मनोहम ।

उत्पाद्य राजपुत्रां वचनान्मम मानद ॥ 4 ॥

O Child! The wife of your brother, the daughter Ambālika of Kāśtrāja, is a widow; she is very sorrowful; she is endowed with all auspicious signs and endowed with all good qualities; better cohabit with that beautiful young wife and get a child according to the tradition of the Śiṣṭas. Persons born blind are not entitled to kingdoms.

इसुच्छोई तदा मात्रा स्थितस्तत्र गजाछ्द्रे ।

यावदुतुमती जाता काशिराजसुता मुने ॥ ५ ॥

एकान्ते शयनागारे प्राप्ता सा मम सशिधौ ।

लज्जमाना सुकेशाना स्वश्रुवचनात्दा ॥ ६ ॥

Therefore take my word and procreate a

Book VI Chapter XXV

beautiful son and thus keep my honour." O Muni! Hearing the mother's words, I began to wait in Hastināpura till Ambālīkā, the daughter of Kāśirāja, finished her ablutions after menstruation.

दूद्या मां जटितं दान्तं तापसं सर्वर्जिन् ।

सा येवेदवदना जाता पणडुरा विमना भृगम् ॥ 7 ॥

That King's daughter, of curling hair, came to me alone at her mother-in-law's order, and became very much abashed.

कुणितोर्दं तदा दृष्टवा कामिनीं निशि सङ्गताम् ।

वेपमानां स्थितां पार्थं हाइबृहं तामहं रूपा ॥ ८ ॥

Seeing me an ascetic with matted hair on my head and void of every love sentiments, perspiration came on her face; her body turned pale and her mind void of any love towards me.

सूद्यात मां यदि नशेप पाण्डुवर्णी समावृता ।

अतस्ते तनय: पाण्डुर्भक्तिष्यति सुभत्येम ॥ 9 ॥

When I saw that lady trembling and pale beside me, I angrily spoke: "O One of beautiful waist! When you have turned out pale, considering your own beauty, let your son be of a pale colour."

इयुत्क्वा निति नैव विश्वो वातिकया युत: ।

भुक्वा तान्धिणि निवीतः स्थानामुच्छ्य मातम्न ॥ 10 ॥

Thus saying 1 spent there that night with Ambalikā. After enjoying her I took farewell from my mother and went to my place.

तत्सात्मयां सुती काले प्रमुतावस्थापाढुते ।

धृतग्रह्ध पाण्ड़ुश प्रथिती सव्यभूतुः ॥ 11 ॥

In due course, the two daughters of the King gave birth to two sons respectively, one blind and the other pale. The son of Ambikā was named Dhratāṣṭra; and the son of Ambālīkā was named Pāndu, as his colour was Pāndu (pale).

भाता में विमना जाता तदूगी बीक्ष्य ती सुती ।

ततः संवलस्यन्ते मामादूय तद़ोड़बबीत् ॥ १२ ॥

द्वीपाय सुती जाती राज्योयोनी न तादूशी ।

अन्यं मनोहरं पुत्रं समुत्पादय मे प्रियम् ॥ १३ ॥

Mother became absent-minded when she saw the two sons in those states. After one year she again called me and said: "O Dvaipāyana! These

two persons are not so fit to become kings; therefore beget one more son beautiful and according to my liking.

तथैति सा मया प्रोक्ता सुविता जननी तदा ।

अधिकको प्रार्थयामास सुतार्थें काल आगते ॥ 14 ॥

पुत्रि व्यासं समालील्य पुत्रमुचादयादूनम् ।

कुर्वेगस्प्य कतारं राज्यवोर्यं वारानने ॥ 15 ॥

When I consented, she became very glad and, in due course, asked Ambikā to embrace me and give birth to a son, endowed with extraordinary qualities, and fit to preserve the line worthy of the Kuru dynasty.

वधूर्तैज्ञान्यिता किंचिजोवाच वचन्ते तदा ।

गतोर्डं शयनागरे मातुलद्धचनारक्षिति ॥ १ ६ ॥

दासी विधित्रवीर्यस्य रूपयोवनसंयुता ।

प्रेशिताधिकया त्वत्र विधिचामशारावा ॥ १ ७ ॥

चन्दनात्कदेहा सा पुष्पमाताविष्यपिता ।

The bride did not then say anything on account of her bashfulness. But when I went in the night time according to my mother's order, to the sleeping room, Ambikā sent to me a maid-servant of Victiravīrya, full of youth and beauty, and adorned with various ornaments and clothings.

अयाता हावसंयुक्ता सुकेशी हंसगामिनी ॥ 18 ॥

पर्येक मां समावेश्य संस्थिता प्रेमसंयुक्ता ।

That maid-servant of beautiful hairs and of a swan-like gait adorned with garlands and red sandal paste, came to me with many enchanting gestures and making me take my seat on the cot, became herself merged in love sentiments.

प्रसोजईत त्वा तत्या दिलातेनाभवं सुने ॥ १९ ॥

राजी संकीक्षिति प्रेणा तथा सह मया भृशम् ।

O Muni! I became pleased with her gestures and amorous sports and passed the night, full of love towards her and played and cohabited with her.

वरो दस्त: पुनस्तस्ये प्रसजेन तु नारद ॥ 20 ॥

सुभगे भविता पुत्र: सर्वलक्ष्मणसंयुतः ।

सुकूप: सर्वेधमेंत्र: सत्यवादी रामे रतः ॥ 21 ॥

At last I gladly gave her the boon “O Fortunate

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

One! Your child, begotten by me, will be endowed with all good qualities, will be of good form, will be conversant with all the essences of Dharma, calm and quiet and truthful."

स तदा विदुरो जातक्रयः पुत्रा: सहाप्रवन्।

माया बुद्धि गता साधो परक्षेत्रद्वे मा 122 ॥

In due course, a child named Vidura was born to her. Thus I had three sons; and in my mind grew up Māyā and affection that these were my sons."

विस्मूतः शुकसम्बन्धी विगहः शोककारणम्।

दूद्वा तीन्यवसुतान्मार्य वीरान्य वैवीर्यममान्न्। 23 ॥

When I saw again those three sons, heroic and full of manliness, the only cause of my sorrow due to the bereavement of my son Śuka vanished away from my mind.

माया बलवती बह्दान्स्यजा हुकृतात्यभि: ।

अरूषा च निरालबा ज्ञानिनामपि मोहिनी ॥ 24 ॥

O Lord of Dvijas! Māyā is very powerful and extremely hard to be abandoned by those who are not masters of their senses; She enchants even the wise, though She does not possess any form nor any substratum nor any support.

मातिरे स्नेहस्वब्द्रं तथा पुत्रेषु स्यन्तुम् ।

न मे चिन्तं वने शान्तिणामानुविवत्तम ॥ 25 ॥

द्रोतारूढं मनो जातं क्वाधिद्धस्तिपुरे ।

पुनः सरस्वतीरिं न चैकत्र व्यवस्थिति: ॥ 26 ॥

I could not find any peace, even in the forest, as my mind was attached to my mother and children. O Muni! My mind then began to oscillate like a pendulum and I remained sometime in Hastināpura and sometime on the banks of the Sarasvati. I could not stay in a certain fixed place.

कट्यार्थिविर्तरव्यज्ञानं मानसे प्रतिभाषिति वे ।

कै.प्री पुत्र: क्व मोहोर्धेनं न श्राद्राहीं पुत्थये मे ॥ 27 ॥

व्यभियोद्वा: कि वे सुखदा: स्य सुना: किल ।

माया बलवती मोहं चितानोते हि मानसे ॥ 28 ॥

By discrimination, the knowledge sometimes flashed in my mind: "Whose sons are these? The attachment is nothing by merely a delusion. On my death they would not be entitled to perform

my śrāddha ceremony. There sons are begotten by ways and manners not sanctioned by Dharma; what happiness can they bring to me? O Muni! The powerful Māyā has caused this delusion in me.

जान्यमोहीधकूपेप्रियम्यतितोर्नं मृषा मुने ।

इत्यकुर्वं रहस्तार्यं कदार्थिन्युसमाहितः ॥ 29 ॥

What! Knowing this Sarinśara to be unreal. Alas! I have fallen into this well of Darkness of delusion." Thus I, repented when I thought over the matter deeply and when I was alone in a solitary place.

राज्य प्राप ततः पाणुबंलवार्यीध्यमयमतः ।

तदा मम मनो जातं प्रसर्नं सुताकरणात् ॥ 30 ॥

When, subsequently, through the mediation of Bhīsma, the powerful Pāndu got the kingdom, I became pleased to see the prosperity of my son.

कुन्ती माड़ी सुरुले ईपार्यँ तस्य बध्वतुः ।

शूरसेनसुता कुन्ती मूर्ताजसुतापरा ॥ 31 ॥

O Muni! This is also the creation of Māyā. The daughter of the King Śūrasena, named Kuntī, and the daughter to the King of Madra, named Mādrī became the two beautiful wives of Pāndu.

स शर्षे द्विजतः प्राय्य कामिनीहुवर्मसुतः ।

पाण्डुर्निवैद्याप्रास्त्यक्त्वा राज्यं वर्ग नतः ॥ 32 ॥

Pāndu was cursed by a Brāhmana that he would die if he cohabited with any woman; he therefore became dispassionate and quitting his kingdom, went to the forest with his two wives.

तदा मामाविशण्डोकः कुत्वा पुरं वने चैक्षतम् ।

गतोर्ड्र तत्र यजासौ मायांध्यां सह संस्थितः ॥ 33 ॥

तमाश्राय्य वने पाण्डुं पुनः प्राप्तो गजाड़्ये ।

धृतराष्ट्रं समाभाध्य ह्रागयं ब्रह्माजातटे ॥ 34 ॥

Hearing Pandu gone to the forest I felt pain and went to my son who was staying his wives and consoling him, came to Hastināpura, where I held a conversation with Dhrāraśstra and then came back to the banks of the river Sarasvatī.

क्षेत्रजान्यब्रुधुओन्स समुत्पाठ बन्धासे ।

धर्मती वायुतः शक्तादिष्यां पड़ पोडवान् ॥ 35 ॥

युधिष्ठिरो भीमसेन्नताधिवाजून इत्यपि ।

कुन्हीपुत्रा: समाख्याता धर्मानिलसुरीश्वा: ॥ 36 ॥

Book VI Chapter XXV

नकुतः सहदेवक्ष मद्राराजस्तुासुती । कदाचितुः रोहो मार्जी समालिंगय महीपाति: । 37 ।। मृतः शपालु मुनिधिः संरकृतो हतनुष्टयुपे । मार्जी तत्र सती भूत्वा प्रयिष्ठा पतिना सह ।। 38 ।।

Pāndu in his forest life, got five sons of his wives by the Devas Dharma, Vāyu, Indra, and the twin Aśvins. Dharma, Vāyu, and Indra begat respectively of Kunti the three sons Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhimasena and Arjuna; and the two Aśvins begat of Mādri the two sons Nakula and Saha deva. Once Mādri, full of youth and beauty, was staying alone in a solitary place and Pāndu seeing her embraced her and due to the curse, died. When the funeral pyre was ablaze, the chaste Mādri entered into the fire and died a Satī. Kunti was prevented from doing so, as she was to nurse and look after her young children.

स्थिता पुरयुता कुन्ती ज्वलिते जातवेदिस ।

मृनयः सुतसंयुक्तां गुरूसेनसुत्तां तदा ॥ 39 ॥

दुःखितां परिकहींना तामानिन्युर्गजसाछ्ये ।

समर्पिताशं श्रीभाय विद्युराय महात्मने ॥ 40 ॥

The Munis then took the sorrowful Kunti, the daughter of Śūrasena, bereft of her husband to Hastināpur and handed her over to the high-souled Bhismā and Vidura.

शूलाड़ं सुखदुःखाथ्यां पीडोतस्तु परातमिथः ।

भीभेण पालिताः पुत्रा: भण्डोर्शिति विविध्त ते ॥ 4 1 ॥

When I came to hear this, my mind was greatly agitated to see the pain and pleasure that other people suffered. Bhisma, Vidura, and Dhrtarāstra began to nourish and support Yudhiṣthira and others as they considered them the sons of their dearest Pāndu.

विद्युने तथा प्रीत्या धृतताष्ट्रण धीमता ।

दुर्घैधनादयलत्थय पुत्रा चे कृमानसाः ॥ 42 ॥

एकत्र स्थितिमाप्ता विरोधो चकुन्धादूनम् ।

ग्रेणाचार्यैस्तु सम्प्राप्तस्तर चीभेण मानितः ॥ 43 ॥

The cruel and wicked sons of Dhrtaārāstra, Duryodhana and others united with each other and began to quarrel horribly with the sons of Pāndu

Dronācārya came there accidentally and Bhīṣma treated him with great respect and requested him to stay in Hastināpura and educate the sons of Kuru.

अध्यापनाय पुत्राणां पुरे तत्मिश्रवासितः ।

कर्ण: कृत्वा परित्यन्तो जातमानः शिश्युद्वी ॥ 44 ॥

Karna was the son of Kunti, when she was young and unmarried; and he was quitted by her no sooner he was born.

सूतेन पालितो नदां प्राप्तशाधिर्येन ह ।

दुर्योधनप्रियक्षापूर्कर्णः शूरतमस्तथा ॥ 45 ॥

परस्यं विरोधेप्रधूदीमदुर्वीधनादिषु ।

धृतराष्ट्र सर्जित्य क्लेशं पुरेषु तेषु च ॥ 46 ॥

The charioteer Sūta (or carpenter) Adhiratha found him in a river and nourished him. Kārpa was the foremost of the heroes and therefore the great favourite of Duryodhana. The enmity between Bhima and Duryodhana, etc., began to grow greater day by day.

निवासं कल्यमावास भणद्धानां महात्मानम् ।

वितोधशमानयैव नगरे वारणावते ॥ 47 ॥

Dhrtarāstra, thinking the difficult situation of his children, fixed the residence of the sons of Pāndu at the Vāranāvata city so that the quarrels might die away.

दुर्योधिनेन तत्रैव ग्रैहाज्जतुगृहाणि वै ।

कारितानि च दिव्यानि प्रेष्म मित्रं प्रोचनम् ॥ 48 ॥

Out of enmity, Duryodhana ordered his dear friend Purocana to build there a house of lac for the Pānḍavas.

श्रुत्वा जतुगृहे दर्शन्याण्डवान्युथया सुतान् ।

पौत्रभावान्युनिश्रेष्ठ मनोर्धं व्यसनार्वे ॥ ४१ ॥

शोक्तातुरे भृगं शून्ये चने पश्यत्रहिंशम् ।

दृहा मदैकचक्रायां पाश्वदा दुःखकर्शितः ॥ ५० ॥

O Muni! When I heard that Kunti and her five sons were burnt in the lac-house, I became merged in the ocean of sorrows and thought that they were my grandsons. I was overwhelmed with sorrow and began to search after them in deep forests day and night till at last I found them in Ekacakrā city, lean and thin and very much distressed with sorrow.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

ततस्तुष्टमनाश्रां जातः पार्थपिल्लोक्य च ।

प्रेरितात्मे मया तृर्णं द्वाद्यस्य तृरं प्रति ॥ 51 ॥

ते नातास्तत्र दुःखातां विग्रवेषधारः कृशाः ।

मृगचर्मपरीधानाः सभायां संस्थित्यात्त्व ॥ 52 ॥

I became very glad to see them and sent them soon to the city of the King Drupada. Wearing the deer's skin, they went there dejected with sorrow in the Brāhmīn's dress and stayed in the royal court.

कृत्वा पराक्रमे विज्युः स जिल्या दुर्बदामजाम् ।

चकूर्विवहां मानिया पड्वेय मातृबालयच: ॥ 53 ॥

The victorious Arjuna shewed prowess and pierced the mark (the eye of the fish) and obtained Kṛṣṇā, the daughter of the King Drupada. By the order of the mother Kunti, the five brothers married her. O Muni! I became very glad to see that they were all married.

दृष्टवा विवाहें तेषां तु मुदितोड़ं पूर्णं तव ।

ततो नागाद्धे प्रापता: याझात्यीसहिता मुने ॥ ५४ ॥

निवासं खाणवप्रस्थं धृतारोषुण कल्पयतम् ।

याणबजानां द्विजश्रेय वासुदेवसुतेन वै ॥ ५५ ॥

The Pāndavas, then, accompanied by Pāncālī, soon went to Hastināpura. Dhṛtarāṣṭra then fixed Khāndavaprastha as the residence of the Pāndavas. Viṣṇu, the son of Vasudeva, then performed the Yajña with the victorious Arjuna and satisfied the Great Fire.

ताँपित: पावकसत विध्युना सह जिध्युना ।

राजसूय: कृती यजस्तदारंडं मुहितो5पवन् ॥ 56 ॥

टूद्वात्रध विषयवे तेणा तथा मवकृतां सभाम् ।

दुयोंधनोर्जितसंतणे दुरोदरमथाकरोह् ॥ 57 ॥

The Pānḍavas next performed the Rājasūya sacrifice and that made me very glad. Seeing the affluence and prosperity of the Pānḍavas and the great assembly hall beautiful and exquisitely artistic, Duryodhana was burnt up, as it were, with malice and made arrangements for play in dice, very injurious in its consequences. Šakuni was expert in playing deceitfully and Yudhiṣṭhira the son of Dharma, was not expert in this play.

दुर्बूध्वेती शकुनिनरक्षण्डश धर्मंकः ।

हर्त राज्य धर्म सर्व याजसेनी च कलेर्षिता ॥ 58 ॥

So Duryodhana made, Śakuni play for him and stole away all that Yudhīsthira had and insulted, at last, in the royal assembly, the daughter of Drupada, Yājñaseñ and gave her much trouble.

वने झटारा वर्षिण याण्डवासले विवासिताः ।

पाङ्गालीसहितासने दुःखं मे जनितं भृणम् ॥ 59 ॥

एवं नारद संसारे सुखदुःखात्मके भृणम् ।

निम्नभोर्हं प्रभेषीव जानन्यमं सनातनम् ॥ 60 ॥

The Pāndavas then went with Pāncālī in an exile in the forest for twelve years. And I was very much grieved to hear this. O Muni! Though I know all about the Sanātana Dharma, yet I was deluded and merged in these worlds of pains and pleasures.

कोड़ं कस्य सुलासेधी का माता किं सुखं पुः।

येन मे इदयं मोहाद्धमतीति दिवानिगम. ॥ 6 1 ॥

Who am I? To whom do these sons belong? My mind roams day and night on the thought of all these. O Muni! What shall I do?

कि क्रोगि कव गच्छामि सन्तोषो नाथिच्छिति ।

दोलात्छं मनो मेउर चझतं न स्थिरं भवेत् ॥ 62 ॥

And whether shall I go? I don't find happiness anywhere; my mind is, as it were, floating in a rocking machine and it is never being fixed.

सर्वैतोरिस मुनिश्रेष्ठ सन्देहं मे निवर्तय ।

तथा कुरु सधारई स्वां सुखितो विनतर्जच: ॥ 63 ॥

इति शीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे फधरकन्चे

पद्धिशोधयाव: 11 25 11

O Best of Munis! You are all-knowing; solve my doubts so that my mental fever may be quietened and I may be happy.

Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter on the

cause of Moha of Vyāsa Deva asked

before Nārada in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam

of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi

Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XXVI

CHAPTER XXVI

On Nārada's Moha

व्यास उवाच

इति वे वचनं श्रुत्वा नारदः परमार्थिति ।

मागह च सितं कृत्वा पृष्ठन्तं मोहकारणम् ॥ १ ॥

नारद उवाच

पाराशयं प्राणात्र किं पृष्ठसि मुनिश्रयम् ।

संसारोप्रस्मित्विना मोहं कॉपि नास्ति शरीतच्न ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When I asked him why this delusion overtook me, Maharṣi Nārada smiled and said: “O son of Parāśara! You are thoroughly acquainted with all the Purāṇas. Why then are you making this question about the cause of my Moha (delusion).

बह्ना विष्णुस्तथा रुद्र: सनकः कपिलस्तथा ।

म.यया वेहिता: सर्वे भ्रमित भववर्तमैति ॥ 3 ॥

No embodied soul an exist in this Sarīśāra without this Moha. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, and the other Devas, Śaṅkara, Kapila and the other Rṣis, all these are surrounded by Māyā and are thus travelling in this path of Sarīśāra.

ज्ञानिनं मां जनो वेति प्रोतोर्भई सर्वीलोकवत् ।

श्रुणु मे पूर्ववृत्तानं प्रवतीम पुनीश्रितान् ॥ 4 ॥

दुःखं मया यथा पूर्वन्नुप्तां महत्तम् ।

स्वकृतेन च मोहेन भायर्वीं वासवीसुत् ॥ 5 ॥

The people know me as a Jñāni; but I, too, am deluded like an ordinary man. I am now speaking to you as certain as anything my of previous history now. I was deluded by Māyā; hear it attentively. O Son of Vāsavī! Great troubles and pains felt by me before, due to this Moha, for my wife.

एकादा पर्वतशहं देवलोकामहीतालम् ।

प्राणो विलोकनायीय भारतं खण्डुगतम् ॥ 6 ॥

One day Parvata and I, the two Devarşis, went out together from the Devaloka to see the excellent portion of the earth named Bhārata and came to the Mrtyuloka or the land of the mortals.

भ्रमती सहितल्यों पर्यन्ती तीर्थमण्डलम् ।

पावानिन च स्थानानि मुनीनामाप्रियाम्ब्छुम्। ७ ७ ॥

गर्पथं देवलोकानु कृत्वा पूर्व परस्यम् ।

चलिती समयं चेयं समपन्य निश्छयेन वे ॥ ८ ॥

We then began to travel over various places and saw the places of pilgrimages and the holy places and the beautiful hermitages of the Munis.

चितचूतिस्तुं वनक्या याकुरी यस्य जायते ।

गृभा वारप्रत्युभा वार्थि न गोलद्या कवाचन ॥ 9 ॥

Before we went out from the Devaloka, we consulted with each other and entered into this agreement that we would not hide our feelings from each other, whether they be good or bad, while we would travel over the face of the earth.

भोजनेच्छा धेपेच्छाउपि रतीच्छा वा भवेदेपि ।

यादृषी यस्य चित्ते तु ककवीरा परस्पतम् ॥ 10 ॥

Whether it be our desire to get food, or wealth or women for enjoyment, whatever arisen in the mind of any of us, we would express that freely amongst ourselves.

इच्चावां समयं कृत्वा स्वार्वभूलेकामगताः ।

एकवित्ती मुनीभूर्ती विचारन्ती यवेच्छ्वा ॥ 1 1 ॥

Thus making an agreement, we went out in right earnest as Munis to travel over the face of this earth.

एवं भ्रमनी लोकेंस्मिनीभाने सुभगगते ।

संजस्यय पुरं रत्यं समप्राणो नुपतेः पुनः ॥ 12 ॥

Thus roaming all over the face of the earth, at the end of the summer season, when the rainy season commenced we came to the beautiful city of the King named Sañjaya.

तेन सभ्यक्ती नक्षता गजा सभ्यातीय भृणम् ।

स्थिती तत्र गृहे तस्य चातुर्मार्थं महातपनः ॥ 13 ॥

The King showed us great respect and worshipped us with devotion. Since then we remained for four months at his house.

वार्षिकाशुतो मासा तुर्गमाः पथि सर्वेता ।

तस्पादेकत्र विवृष्टिः स्थानत्यमिति निश्रयः ॥ 14 ॥

अष्टी मासास्तु प्रवसेत्स्वा कार्यविश्रादुज्ञः ।

वर्षाकाले न गतन्व प्रवासे सुरुखमिछ्छता ॥ 15 ॥

During the four months of the rainy season, the roads are always almost impassable; it is, therefore, wise to stay at one place. For eight months, the Dvijas should always remain abroad on some work or other. Thinking all these, we two began to stay in the house of the King Sañjaya.

इति सखिल्य मनसा संजयस्य गृहे तथा ।

संस्थिती प्रातिरा त्राता कृतातिथ्यो महान्मान ॥ १ ६ ॥

दययन्तीत विश्व्याता तस्य पुत्री महीपतेः ।

आज्ञाता परिचार्यां सुत्तरी सुन्दरी सुन्दरी ॥ ७ ॥

That liberal-minded King gladly and with respect kept us as his guests and tendered to us all our requirements. The King had a very beautiful daughter named Damayanti, with good teeth. The King ordered her take care of us.

विवेकज्ञ शिवगताक्षी राजपुत्री कृतोघाम ।

सेवनं सर्वकाले च व्यद्धाप्रभयोरि ॥ १ १ ॥

That large-eyed princess, of great discrimination, was very energetic, day and night. She began to serve both of us.

स्नानार्थमूदंक काले भोजनं मृष्टमायतम् ।

मुखबासंलथा चान्यं यदिहे तद्वराति सा ॥ १९ ॥

In due time she gave us water for our bath, excellent meat, food, towels for cleaning and rubbing our faces, in fact, everything what we desired.

मनोप्रभिलिताकामानुभयोरिप कन्यका ।

व्यज्ञासरण्याद्वीराष्टिक्तानप्यक्क्यन्त ॥ 20 ॥

एवं संसेव्यमानौ तु स्थितौ राज्ञो गृहे किल ।

वेदात्ययवनसंगीलावायां वेदवते रती ॥ 21 ॥

She kept ready for us whatever we desired, fans, seats, beds, whatever were necessary for us. Thus she began to serve. We were also engaged in the study of our Vedas and in those practises that were approved by the Vedas.

अई वीर्णा को कृत्वा साधयित्या स्वोत्तमम् ।

गायनं साम सुस्वादमगां कर्णरासायनम् ॥ 22 ॥

O Dvaipāyana! I used to sing, then, with lute in my hands, the sweet lovely Sāma Gāyatri songs in tunes and good Svaras.

राजपुरी तु तच्छूला सामगानं मनोहरम् ।

बधूव मयि रागाखा प्रीतियुक्ता शिवगरद ॥ 23 ॥

The princess herself appreciated the songs and when she heard these Sāma songs ravishing to one's mind, she became attached to me and showed signs of affection.

दिने दिनेउनुगानोङ्सा मयि बुद्धिं गत:  परः ।

ममापि प्रीतितुक्तायां मनो जातं सृष्टापरम् ॥ 24 ॥

Day by day the attachment towards me grew stronger. Seeing her attached to me, my mind also became attached to her.

मम तस्य च सा कन्या भोजनाविषु कर्हिंघत् ।

अकरीदंतरं किंचित्सोभमेदं रसाचिता ॥ 25 ॥

Thus that princess indulged in amorous sentiments towards me and began to make slight distinctions between the food and other things offered to me and Parvata.

सनानायोष्जलं महां पर्वताय च शीतलम् ।

दधि महां तथा तके पर्वतायावकल्प्यत् ॥ 26 ॥

I got water for my bath and Parvata used to get cold water; I got nice curds when food was served to me whereas Parvata got only whey.

शयानस्तरणं शुभं मदर्थे पर्वकल्प्यत् ।

प्रीत्या परमया घट्वल्विताय न ताडूगम् ॥ 27 ॥

विलोक्यिति मां प्रेणा सुन्दरी न च पर्वतम् ॥

ततोउस्यासतादृषुं दृष्ट्या पर्वतः प्रेमकारणम् ॥ 28 ॥

I got nice white bedding for myself to sleep on whereas Parvata had merely a dirty sheet to lie down. Thus the princess began to serve me with great love and devotion but not so she served Parvata. The fair lady began to look at me with eyes of love; not so towards Parvata.

मनसा चिंतयामास किमेत्तिविति वियमतः ।

पप्रच्छ मां रहः सम्यवृष्टि नारद सर्वथा ॥ 29 ॥

Parvata was very much surprised to see all this and thought within herself “What is this?” Parvata, then, asked me in private: “O Nārada! Speak out to me truly in detail.

राजपुत्री त्वयि प्रेम क्रांतीि मुदिता भृणम् ।

द्वाति भृध्यभोज्यानि रेनोहयुक्ता समंततः ॥ 30 ॥

Book VI Chapter XXVI

The princess shews with much gladness and affection her deep love towards you; she serves you with dainty dishes but she behaves not so with me.

न तथा मायि भेघोउस नस्टेहं जनयत्समी ।

मन्ते त्वां पत्ति कर्तुं सर्वथा संजयात्मजा ॥ 3 1 ॥

I therefore suspect when I see all these distinctions made between you and me, that the daughter of the King Sañjaya wants with her heart and soul to make you her husband. And you also want to make her your wife.

तवापि तादूर्ग भावं जानामि लक्षणैरदूम् ।

नेत्रवक्स्विकार्तैश्ञा ज्ञावे त्रिजितकारणम् ॥ 32 ॥

I have come to know this by signs and symptoms; for affection and love reigning inside can be made out by outward expressions of eyes and face.

सत्यं बद न ते मिथ्यां वत्क्यं च्चनं मुने ।

स्वर्गतः समयं कृत्वा चक्तिलों संस्मारामुना ॥ 33 ॥

Whatever this be, O Muni! Now speak truly to me; do never tell a lie. When we went out from the Heavens, we made out that agreement; now remember that."

नारद उवाच

पृड़ोर्नं पर्वितेनैं कारणं तु हठाधवा ।

तदारई हौस्माकान्तः संजानेश्रावूब पुनः ॥ ३४ ॥

पर्वतैँना विगालासी पति मां कांपुशुधात ।

मभापि मानसो भावो वर्तितेस्वा विशेषतः ॥ ३५ ॥

Nārada said: Thus questioned suddenly by Parvata, I became very much abashed and said: "O Parvata! This large-eyed princess ready to marry me and I am also very much attracted towards her."

तच्छुला वचनं सत्यं पर्वतः कोपसंयुतः ।

मामुवाच मुविवर्ध विधिपिति पुनः पुनः ॥ 36 ॥

प्रथमं शपथान्कृत्वा वश्छितोड़े त्वया वतः ।

भव वान्तवक्रसन्तं शापाच्छ मम मिवमुक् ॥ 37 ॥

When Parvata heard all these, he became very much angry and uttered repeatedly “Fie! O Nārada! Fie O Nārada! First you swore on oath and then

you deceived me afterwards. Therefore, O Deceiver of friends! I curse you and let your face become that of a monkey."

इति शलस्तु तेनाई कुपितेन महात्मना ।

सहसा हृषये कृरः शाखामुभ्युखस्तदा ॥ 38 ॥

When the high souled Parvata cursed thus. the face turned immediately into that of a monkey, elongated and distorted.

मयासपि न कृता तस्मिन्मा तु भपीनीसुते ।

सोसि शलोजिकोबघौं मा स्यतं ते नाहि: किनत ॥ 39 ॥

I did not excuse him, though he was my sister's son. I also got angry and cursed him "Certainly, your journey to the Heavens will be stopped. You will not be able to go to Heaven).

स्वल्पेउपरोघे यम्यानां शतावानसि पर्वत ।

तस्मातवीय मन्दाम्मानुतोके स्थिति: किन ।। 40 ॥

O Parvata! When you cursed me so heavily for so trivial a fault of mine, I see you are very mean. Whatever it be, you will have to remain on earth so long."

पर्वतैनतु गततस्माङ्गरगाईमना धृगम् ।

अहं वान्तवक्सन्तु संज्ञाततक्षणादपि ॥ 4 1 ॥

At this Parvata became very sad and went out of the city. My face became immediately like that of a monkey.

दूर्धा में वानरं कूरं राजपुत्री विलक्षणा ।

विम्नान्तीव संज्ञाता वीणात्रशवणालासा ॥ 4 2 ॥

The daughter of the King became very sorry to see my face thus distorted into that of a monkey. I did not see her glad as she was before; but her desire to hear my playing with my lute remained the same as before.

व्यास उवाच

ततः किमभवद्वह्म-कर्थ शपो निवर्तितः ।

मानुगाय्य: पुजान्जोत भवान् हिं विधाविधि ॥ 4 3 ॥

पर्वतः क्व गतो भूयः सुझगो युवयोग्यत् ।

कदा पुत्र कर्थं सर्वे विस्तरेण बदस्य ह ॥ 44 ॥

Vyāsa said: O Muni! What happened next? How did you get yourself rid of your curse and how did you get your man like face? Whither did Parvata

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

Rṣi go! When and how did you again re-unite with each other? Kindly describe all these to me in detail."

नात्व उवाच

क्रिं क्रवीम महापाग मायायाश्ररितं महत् ।

दू:खितोई भूर्ग तत पवैते क्षिते गते ॥ 45 ॥

Nārada said: “O Highly Intelligent One! What shall I say about the nature of Māyā?

पुनः सेवापरास्वर्ष राज्ञुरी मामभवत् ।

गतेउथ पवैते कामं श्वित्तसत्रैव सचानि ॥ 46 ॥

When Parvata went away angrily, the daughter of the King began to serve me with greater care than before.

उर्दे दुःखात्रितो दीनतसथा वानरवमुख: ।

विशेषेण तु चिन्तातैः किं मे स्यादिति चिन्तयन ॥ 47 ॥

I remained there, though Parvata went away, and seeing my face monkey-like, I became very dejected and sorry and was specially troubled with the care and anxiety would happen to me hereafter?

संव्योद्ध सुत्तां ईद्या किंचित्यकद्योवनान् ।

विद्याहर्षे राजसुतामपूच्छत्थित्वे तदा ॥ 48 ॥

The King Sañjaya saw that his daughter Damayanti was slipping into her youth and asked the prime minister about her marriage.

विद्याहाकलः संग्रावः सुताया मम संग्रान् ।

वोरयं वरं मम बृहि राजपूत्रं सुसंतमन् ॥ 49 ॥

He said: “The time of marriage of my dear daughter has now come; I will now marry her in accordance with due rites and ceremonies.

रूपौदार्युर्णीयुक्ते शूरं सुकुलसंभवम् ।

विद्याई विधित्यानुतः कंरामे किल सामानम् ॥ 50 ॥

Now tell me particularly about a prince worthy of her, as we like, in beauty, qualifications, large-heartedness, calmness, patience and heroism and who is of a good family.

प्रधानस्वबजीराजन राजपुत्रा हुनेकशः ।

वर्तैते पृवि पुत्रासोे योग्यः सर्वगृणात्थिता ॥ 5 1 ॥

The minister said: "O King! There are many princes on the face of this earth, worthy in all respects, of your daughter.

थस्मिनुचिते राजेन्द्र तमाद्धय नृपात्मजम् ।

देहि कन्यां धनं भूरि हलत्यश्यत्संतुलम् ॥ 52 ॥

Whomever you like, you can call on him and give him your daughter with elephants, horses, chariots wealth, gems and jewels."

नारद जवाब

वितृछिकर्षितं ज्ञाना दयवंती तदा नृपम् ।

धात्या मुखेन वाक्यजा तुमुलाच रहः स्थितम् ॥ 53 ॥

Damayanti, knowing the intention of his father informed the King of her own desire by her nurse and attendant.

धात्युबाच

दमवनी महाराज पुत्री ते मामधाब्बीत् ।

पित्रं बृहि धारेयि वचनाने मुखाल्यित् ॥ 54 ॥

मया वृतोशं मेघावी नारदो महतीयुतः ।

नादधोहितया कामा नान्यः कोर्पि प्रियो मम ॥ 55 ॥

कुरु मे वार्षिक्तं तत्त विद्याईं मुनिना सह ।

नान्यं वरिष्ये धर्मत्र नरतं तु पतिं जिता ॥ 56 ॥

The nurse went to the King and said: "When my father will sit at his ease and comfort you would go and speak to him in private that I am enchanted with the enchanting Nāda sound of the great lute played by Maharṣi Nārada and selected him as my bridegroom. No other person will be dear to me. O Father! Marry me with Nārada and thus fulfil my desire; O Knower of Dharma! I wo'n't marry anybody but Nārada.

मरानाई नादिसंधी वै नकहीने रसात्मके ।

अक्षरे सुख्यमपूर्णे तिमिंगतिवर्जिति ॥ 57 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभगवाने महापुराणे भरत्कन्धे वर्धिजीशोअधावः 126 ।

O Father! I am now merged in the Nāda-occan (sound ocean) of bliss, sweet and joyful, void of anything destructive of happiness, void of Nakra, alligators, and fishes, Timingala, etc. (injurious animals) and without any salty taste; my mind won't be satisfied with any other thing.

Here ends the Twenty sixth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the description by Nārada of his own Moha in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XXVII

CHAPTER XXVII

On Nārada's Marriage

नारद उवाच

तत्पूर्यां वचनं श्रुच्या राजा धार्मीमुखाततः ।

भार्यां प्रीवाच कैकैकीं समीपरथ्यां सुलोचनाम् ॥ १ ॥

राजोबाच

यदुक्ते वचनं कानते धाय्या तत्पुं त्वया श्रुतम् ।

दृतोर्ज नारदः कामं मुनिवर्नारवक्रवभाक् ॥ २ ॥

Nārada said: On hearing these words of her daughter from her nurse, the King addressed the queen Kaikeyī, of lovely eyes, standing close by, thus: “Have you heard what the nurse has said? Damayantī has mentally chosen the monkey-faced Nārada as her husband.

किसिदं दितितं पुर्या बुद्धिद्वीन विवेष्टितम् ।

कथमस्मै मया देरा कन्या हरिमुखाय सा ॥ ३ ॥

व्यासौ चिक्षुः कुरूपः कव दायवनी मामताया ।

विपरीतिमंद कार्य न विधेयं कदाचन ॥ ४ ॥

What has she thought? Whatever it be, it is no doubt, an act of great foolishness. His face is monkey-like; how can I betroth my daughter to him? Where is an ugly beggar Nārada? And where is my daughter Damayanti? The marriage between them is quite unjust; never it should take place.

तामेकाने सुकेशाने निवारय हदासुतान् ।

युक्ना युनिरतां मुभ्यां शास्त्रवृद्धानुसारया ॥ 5 ॥

O Beautiful One of good hairs! Better call her before you in private and shew her reasons approved of the Śāstras and of the aged persons and make her desist from such a rash course."

इति भनुरंचः शुत्वा जननी तामधावयित् ।

वन ते रूपं मुनि: वक्तावी नावतस्यो5धन: पुनः १६ ॥

कर्मे गोहमवालाओंसि चिशुक्रे चतुग पुनः ।

On hearing her husband's words, the mother of Damayanti called her in private and said: "O Child! Where is your this beautiful face? And where is the monkey-like face of Nārada? You are smart

and quick; how have you been, then, deluded by such a Moha?

लताकोमलदोहा त्वं भयस्कक्षतनुस्थयम् ॥ 7 ॥

वातां वानरवक्रेण कर्थं युक्ता तत्वानघे ।

का प्रीति: कुलिते पुंस भविष्यति शृचिभिते ॥ 8 ॥

O Child! You are the daughter of a king! Your body is gentle like a creeper. And Nārada always besmears his body with ashes; so his body is very rough.

वरस्ते राजपुओंस्तु मा कुरू त्वं घावा हुवम् ।

चिता ते दुःख्यामोति श्रुता धार्मीयुखाद्धचः ॥ 9 ॥

O Spotless One! How will you change your words with him? Why do you shew your attachment to an ugly person? What pleasure do you feel thereby?

लनां बबूलचुळेण कोमालां मालतीलाताम ।

दूर्वा कथम मनः खेदं चतुरस्य न पच्छति ॥ 10 ॥

You would be married to a beautiful prince; never follow this rash course; your father is very sorry to hear these from your nurse.

दारसेंकाय ताम्बुतीदालानि कोमालानि कः ।

ददाति भ्रभणाधय मूर्खोंपि धरणीतले ॥ 11 ॥

O One of soft body! Judge this yourself, what intelligent man is there that is not sorry at the soft Málatí creeper entwining a thorny tree? Even a stupid silly man would never feed a camel, that likes thorns, with soft betel-leaves.

बीक्ष्य त्वां कारसंलनां नारदस्य समीपतः ।

विवाहे वर्तमाने तु क्य चेते न द्वहिति ॥ १२ ॥

कुमुळेउ समं वातां न रचिं जनयन्ततः ।

आमरणातु कंब कालाः शपित्वल्यलाजमुना ॥ 13 ॥

When your marriage time arrives, say yourself, who will not be sorry to see you going to Nārada and embracing him by his arms! Nobody likes to speak with an ugly-faced one; how will you be able to spend your time with him till you death!"

<table><tr><td>नारद उवाच</td></tr><tr><td>इति मातुर्विः: शुत्वा दयवन्ती भुशातुगा ।</td></tr><tr><td>मार्गे प्राह तन्त्र्वीं माय सा कृतनिद्धया ॥ 14 ॥</td></tr></table>

Nārada said: On hearing the mother's words, the gentle Damayanti, with her mind intently fixed on me, spoke to her mother, very much depressed in her spirits.

किं मुखेन च रूपेण मूर्दीय च धनेन किम ।

किं राज्येनाविदध्यस्य रसमागचिदोउस्य च ॥ 15 ॥

“O Mother! What good face and beautiful form will avail, who is not in the path of love and who is quite ignorant of amorous feelings and sentiments! हरिण्योउपि वने ध्या या नोदेन विमोहिताः ।

मात: प्राणान्यच्छिन विध्यूर्षानुपाशुवि ॥ 16 ॥

And what will the wealth and kingdoms of that unskilled illiterate person avail! The deer, that roam in the forest, getting enchanted by the Nāda (sound) Rasa, give up their lives even to the singers. So they are fortunate.

नात्यो वैनि यां विधां मातः सत्यवशतिकाम् ।

तृतीयः कोर्जीय नो वेह ऐशिवान्यः पुण्याक्लि ॥ 17 ॥

But fie to the persons who are illiterate and void of feelings of love! O Mother! Nārada Rsi is well conversant with the science of music with seven Svaras. No other man save Mahā Deva knows this.

भूद्रीय सह संबासो मरणं तल्बणे क्षणे ।

रूपवास्यनवांसत्याचे गुणतीने नर: सदा ॥ 18 ॥

Living with an illiterate person is courting death at every moment. One devoid of qualifications should be always avoided, by all means, though he be wealthy and of a beautiful form.

धिकृदीकी मूर्ख भृपाले वृथा गर्वसम्पन्नित ।

गुणजे भिशुके श्रेष्ठा बचनात्सुखदायिनी ॥ १९ ॥

Fie on the friendship with kings that are illiterate and puffed up with vain arrogance! A well-qualified man, be he even a beggar, is fare better to be cultivated friendship with. Leaving other circumstances out of account, even to change words with such a well qualified man, makes one highly delighted.

स्वत्जो प्राभवित्कामं भूर्भान्जानभेदभाव् ।

दुर्लंभः पुरुषश्राद्धासजो दुर्बतोर्जीय चै ॥ २० ॥

The man is very rare in this world, though he be weak, if he be well versed in the science of music and if he knows Svara, Grāma, Mūrchanā and be skilled in eight sentiments of love.

Note: Svara-Šadaja, Rṣabha, Gāndhāra, Madhyama, Pañcama, Dhaviata and Nīṣada. Grāma□the gradual increase and decrease in Svaras. Mūrchanā—the rising of sounds, an intonation; a duly regulated rise and fall of sounds conducting the air and the harmony through the keys in a pleasing manner; changing the key or passing from one key to another; modulation; melody.

यथा न्याति कैतलासं गड़ा चैव सरस्वती ।

तथा न्याति कैतलासं स्वराजानविशारादः ॥ 21 ॥

The man versed in the knowledge of Svara leads one to the Heaven of Kailāśa as the rivers Ganges and Sarasvatī by their own merits lead one to Kailāśa.

स्वरामाने तु यो बेद से द्वेो मानुषोर्षि सन् ।

सतधेदे न यो बेद से यजु सुराखधि ॥ 22 ॥

There is not the least doubt in this. He is a Deva in his human body who knows the Svara measure; and he who does not know the Svara and its seven grades is a beast though he has a human form—he who finds no delight when he hears the tune regulated by Mūrchanā and the seven Svaras.

मूर्भानातामागतं तु शुवा मोदं न याति यः ।

स पशु: सर्वेधा जेयो हरिणा: पशुचो न हि ॥ 23 ॥

Do not consider the deer as beasts for they get enchanted when they hear the musical notes. The venomous snakes, though they have no ears, get delighted to hear the enchanting Svara Nāda by their eyes.

वरं विषधरः सर्वः शुचा नादं मनोहर्म् ।

अश्रोजोरपि मूदे याति चिक्सकाण्ड्धि मानवान् ॥ 24 ॥

They even are to be praised; but fie on those human beings who have ears but who do not find any delight when they hear the Nāda!

बालोर्धि सुस्वयं गेयं श्रुत्वा मुदितमानसः ।

Book VI Chapter XXVII

जायते किन्तु ते वृद्धा न जानन्ति धिनस्तु तान् ॥ 2 5 ॥

The little children feel intense pleasure to hear the music, but fie, on those elders who are void of this musical sentiments!

विता में किं न जानाति नारदस्य गुणान्बृद्न ।

डितीय: सामगो नासि तिथु लोकेषु ततस्म: ॥ 26 ॥

Does not my father know that Nārada Rsi is ornamented with many qualifications? Who is there in the three worlds like him in singing the Sāma songs!

तस्मादसौ मया नूनं वृत: पूर्वं समागमात् ।

पशुच्छापवशाज्जातो वानारस्यो युणाकर: ॥ 27 ॥

For this very reason, indeed! I have already selected him as my husband; afterwards, due to a curse, the Muni, the ocean of qualifications, got his face changed into that of a monkey. The Kinnaras, skilled in the science of music, have their faces horse-like; but are they not dear to all?

किंसरा न प्रिया: कस्य भर्वित तुरागना: ।

गानविद्धासमायुक्ता: किं मुखेने वरेण है ॥ 28 ॥

चितरं बृहि ये मातर्कृतीयं मुनिसनमः ।

तस्माचसप्राङ्ट लयक्वा देवैत तस्मै च मां मुता ॥ 29 ॥

What business have they to get good faces? They enchant the Devas even by their sweet ravishing songs. O Mother! Kindly tell my father I have already chosen Nārada as my husband. Therefore let him deliver me to his hands, without making any further requests in this matter."

नारद जवाच

इति पुत्रा: वच श्रुत्वा राजी रोजे न्यवेदयत् ।

आग्रहं सुदरी ज्ञाला सुताया नारदे मुने । ३० ॥

विवाहं कुरु राजेन्द्र दयवन्त्या: शुभे दिवे ।

मुनिना स च सर्वजी वृत्तोउसी मनसाउनया ॥ ३१ ॥

Nārada said: On hearing the words of her daughter Damayanti, that unblamable pure queen knowing her attachment deep towards me, spoke to the King thus: "O King! Now celebrate in an auspicious day and on an auspicious moment the auspicious marriage of Damayanti; the daughter

has said that she has already selected Nārada as her bridegroom and it cannot be otherwise."

नारद जवाच

इति संचोदिति राज्या संजय पुरिवधीपति: ।

चकार विधित्यवस्त्वं विधिं वेबाहिकं ततः ॥ 32 ॥

Thus prompted by the queen, the King Sañjaya performed the marriage ceremony of her daughter in accordance with due rites and customs and in an exceedingly becoming manner.

एवं दारगई कृत्वा वानरास्यः परंतप ।

स्वितस्तत्रैव मनसा दहामानेन चान्यम् ॥ 33 ॥

O Rsj! Thus I entered into the married life and remained there though my heart constantly burned with the thought of my monkey-face.

यद्यान्छद्धज्ञानुसं सेवार्यं मम सत्रिषी ।

अभयं दुखसन्तादस्ताद३हं वानानानः ॥ 34 ॥

दयमन्ती तु मां बीक्ष्य प्रकृललवदानीबुजा ।

शाकं वानरवकल्याज चकार कवाचन ॥ 35 ॥

Whenever the princess used to come to me for my service, I used to get tormented with the remembrance of my monkey-face; but her face beamed with gladness whenever she saw me; never she became sorry nor dejected, even for a moment, to see my face monkey-like.' Thus time passed on.

एवं गच्छति काले तु सहसा पर्बती सुविः ।

कुर्वेस्तीधान्येकानि उर्दुं मा समुपगातः ॥ 36 ॥

मयातिमानिनः प्रेणा पूर्तक्रष्ण यवाबिधि ।

आसीन आसने दिव्ये वीक्ष्य मां कु:क्षितो छभूत् ॥ 37 ॥

One day the Muni Parvata suddenly came there, after making his sojourn to many places of pilgrimages. I showed him a great respect and gladly loved him and greeted him duly; he got himself seated in an excellent Asana and became very sorry to see me. I am his uncle and have entered into a married life; my face has become monkey like.

कृतदारं वानरास्यं दीनं द्वितानुं घृभग् ।

दयावाम्पायुचेदं पर्वती मातुलं कृपग् ॥ 38 ॥

Therefore I am very much depressed in spirits and worried with the sad thought and has become lean and thin.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

मया नारद कोपान्चें शप्तोउसि मुनिसत्तम ।

निष्कृति तस्य शापस्य क्रोपेमद्ध निशममा ॥ 39 ॥

Seeing this he was over whelmed with pity. He then said: "O Muni! The curse that I cast on you before out of my anger, I now withdraw.

भव तं चाफछदनो मम पुष्पेन नारत ।

दूद्वा रावसुतां चिते कृमा जाता माभुना ॥ 40 ॥

“Hear. O Maharṣi! Let your face be by my merits, again as good as it was before; I now feel pity for the daughter of the King.”

नारद उवाच

मथाउपि प्रवर्ण चित्रं कृत्वा शुवाउस्य भाषितम् ।

अनुप्रहः कृतः सघतस्तस्य शापस्य तत्बणात् ॥ 41 ॥

भाषीमेव तवायस्तु गमनं सुरस्वयिन ।

शापस्यानुग्रहः कामं कृतोउयं पर्वताभुना ॥ 42 ॥

Hearing thus, my heart also became gentle and instantly with a view to free him of my curse, I said: "Let your journey to the Heavens be re-established. I now make this special favour on you as regards my curse on you before."

नारद उवाच

जातोड़ं चाक्वद्वी वचनात्तस्य यप्यतः ।

राजपूर्णी तुं संतुहा मातरं प्राह सत्वम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

मातले सुयुखी जातो जामाता च महावृत्ति: ।

वचनावलवल्याह युक्तशापो युनेरपृत् ॥ 4 4 ॥

O Dvaipāyana! At his word, before our sight, my face became exceedingly handsome as it was before. The princess Damayanti became very glad and instantly she went to the mother and said: "O Mother! At the words of Parvata, the great Muni, the curse of your son-in-law has been removed and his face his become handsome as before and the lustre of his body has also increased.

तच्छुला वचनं राश्या कथितं ततृ राजनि ।

ययौ उहुं मुनि तन संवयः प्रीतिमांस्तदा ॥ 45 ॥

धनं समार्थितं राजा सन्तुँरेन तदा महत ।

महं च पागिजीयाय पारिहर्द महात्मना ॥ 46 ॥

The queen was very much filled with ecstasy and joy at Damayanti's words and went hurriedly and informed the King. The King Sañjaya gladly

went at once to see the Muni. The great King became very glad and gave lots of wealth, gems and jewels to me and my nephew Parvata as a dowry.

एत्ते सर्वमार्थात यत्नं यत्पुरातनम् ।

मायाया बलमाहान्यं ह्यनुभृतं यथा मया ॥ 47 ॥

O Dvaipāyana! Thus I have described to you my old story how I felt the strong influence of Māyā.

संसारोप्रिम्नमहाभाग मायागुणकृतेंउन्ते ।

तनुष्येसुखी नासिन न भूतो न घधिष्यति ॥ 48 ॥

O Fortunate One! Owing to the illusory nature of the Gunas, like a magic, no embodied being in this world could have been happy before, or he is happy now or he will be happy hereafter.

कामकोधी तथा लोभो मतसरो ममता तथा ।

अहंकारो मदः केन जिताः सर्वे महावलाः ॥ 49 ॥

Lust, anger, greed, jealousy, attachment, egoism, and vanity, each one of these is very powerful; nobody is able to conquer these.

सत्वं जलतमहीशे गुणाल्य शुभे किल ।

कारणं प्राणिज्ञां देहसंभवे सर्वेधा मुने ॥ 50 ॥

O Muni! The three Gunas Sattva, Rajas and Tamas are the entire causes of the coming into this bodily existence of every being.

कर्मिश्रित्यमये यास वनेई विष्णाना सह ।

गछ्छान्यविनोदेन सभीभां गमितः क्षणात् ॥ 51 ॥

O Dvaipāyana! Once I was passing with Bhagavān Viṣṇu, laughing and joking, making merriments through a forest, when suddenly I was transformed into a woman.

राजवनील्यापत्रो मायावलियोगेहितः ।

पुत्र: प्रभुता बढ़ोो गेहे तस्य पुरस्य ह १ ५2 १।

Next I became the wife of a king enchanted by Māyā, I remained in his house and gave birth to many children.

यास उवाच

संशयोदयं महान्याधो श्रुत्वा ते वचनं किल ।

कर्थ नारील्यमापत्रलं सुने ज्ञानवान्यूगम् ॥ 53 ॥

Vyāsa said: "O Devarsi! A great doubt has now

Book VI Chapter XXVIII

arisen in my mind at your word. O Muni! You are very wise; how then did you get womanhood; how again did you regain your manhood?

कथं च पुरुषो जातो बृहि सर्वमेणैषतः ।

कर्थ पुत्रात्पदाय जाताः कस्य राजो गृहेउज्ञान । ५४ ।।

Who was the king at whose house you stayed and how did you give birth to children; describe fully and satisfy my curiosity.

एतदाखहि चरितं मायावहमहद्धुतम् ।

मोहितं च यथा सर्विमिदं स्थावरर्गेनम् ॥ ५५ ॥

Describe to me, now the nature of Māyā, extremely wonderful, by which this entire universe, moving and non-moving, all are enchanted.

न तृषिमधिमछामि शुर्बंस्तव कथामतम् ।

सर्वीम्थान्योत्चं च सर्वसैर्यवनारानम् ॥ ५६ ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवतो महापुराणे घरेरकन्चे

सत्त्विंशोभ्ययः ॥ 20 ॥

O Muni! Though I have heard your nectar-like words, capable to remove all the doubts, embodying the essence of all the Śāstras, yet I am not fully satiated.

Here ends the Twenty-seventh Chapter of the Sixth Book on the marriage of Nārada and his face getting transformed into that of a monkey in Śrimaddevi-bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

CHADTED VVUIII

Book VI Chapter XXVIII

CHAPTER XXVIII

On Nārada's Getting Feminine Form

नारद खाया

निशायय मुनिश्छि गढ़तो मम सत्कथाम् ।

मायावलं सुदुर्जये मुनिश्चिर्यानिवतनोः ॥ १ ॥

Nārada said: “O Thou whose only wealth consists in asceticism! I am now describing to you all those good stories; hear attentively. O Muni! This Māyā and Her Power are incomprehensible even by those who are the foremost amongst the Yogins.

मायया मोहितं सर्वे जगत्थावरजंगमम् ।

बह्नादिस्त्वायपत्नसया दूर्विभाव्यया ॥ 2 ॥

कदाविसत्यलोकाढ़े धैतड़ीपे मनोहरे ।

गतोउई दूर्णनाकांशी हरेरुद्रतकर्णः ॥ 3 ॥

वादयम्हर्ती वीणां स्वतानविष्यितान् ।

गायनं गायमानस्तु साम सप्तवरात्वितम् ॥ 4 ॥

This whole Universe, moving and non-moving, from Brahmā to the blade of grass, is enchanted by that Unborn and Incomprehensible Māyā; therefore no one can escape from the hands of that Māyā. One day I wanted to see Hari, of wonderful deeds, and went out with lute in my hand from Satyaloka, to the lovely Śvetta Dvipa (the residence of Viṣṇu) singing the beautiful Sāma hymns in tune with the seven Svaras.

दृष्टो मया देववेदशुक्रमाणिगंदाधर: 1

कोस्तुभोद्वासितेरको मेयश्यामश्रतुर्षुज: ।। ५ ॥

I saw there Gādādhara, the Deva of the Devas, with four arms holding disc in one of his hands. He resembled a newly-formed rain-cloud of Śyāma colour. He was illumined with the lustre of the Kaustubha jewel in his breast. He was wearing an yellow apparel.

पीताम्बरपीधानी पुकुटाजुदराजितः ।

लक्ष्म्या सह विलासिन्या क्रीड्यामनी मुदा युत् ।। ६ ॥

बीक्ष्य मां कमला देदी गतातर्पांमन्सितात् ।

सर्वेलक्षणमम्पा सर्वेभूषणभूषिता ॥ 7 ॥

His head was beaurified with a lustrous crown. Thus the Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa was playing in amorous movements with the daughter of the ocean, fully capable to give one delight and enjoyment. Seeing me, the lovely Devi Kamalā, dear to Vāsudeva, full of youth and beauty, decorated with ornaments, endowed with all auspicious signs, superior to all the woman, went away at once (to another room) from the presence of Janārdana.

नारीर्ण प्रवरा कान्ता रूपयैवनगविता ।

सुप्रिया वासुदेवस्य वरचामीकरप्रभा ॥ 8 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

अन्तर्गूहं गतां दृष्ट्वा सिस्भुजां व्यझ्ञान्विताम् ।

मया पृष्ठो देवदेवो वनमाली जगतमृषुः ॥ 9 ॥

The breast of Laksmī Devi was becoming visible even through the cloth thrown over it; therefore she went hurriedly to the inner compartment. Seeing this I asked Janārdana, the Deva of the Devas, the Lord of the worlds, and holding a garland of forest grown flowers—thus: "O Bhagavān! O Slayer of Mura! O Padmanābha! Why has Kamalā Devi, the Mother of all the Lokas, on seeing me coming here, gone out of Your presence.

भगन्देवेवेग पवनाभ सुरारिह्न ।

कंध च मा गता शृह्या माभागच्छतननितकान् ॥ 10 ॥

नाहं विटो न वा धृतैः तापसोड़ं जगदगुरुते ।

नितेनिद्वो सिताकोधो जितमायो जनदिन ॥ 11 ॥

O Lord of the worlds! I am not a rogue nor a cheat; I have conquered my passions and am become an ascetic; I have conquered even Māyā. Therefore O Deva! What is the cause of the departure of the Kamalā Devi from here? Kindly explain this to me.

नारद उवाच

निशम्य वचनं किश्रिद्वर्युक्ते जनादनः ।

उवाच मां सित्त कृत्वा वीणावम्भुर्गो सिगम ॥ 12 ॥

Nārada said: "O Dvaipāyana! Hearing my words, expressive of my pride, Janārdana smiled and spoke to me in words sweet like the sound of a lute:

विष्यूकवाच

नार्देश्विधा नीतिनं स्थात्ययं कदाचन ।

पर्ति विज्ञान्यसाधिये कस्यचिधोषया कवचित् ॥ 13 ॥

“O Nārada! The rule in such cases is this: The wife of any man whatsoever ought not to stay before any other male outsider than her husband. माया सुरुजंया विद्यत् योगिरिभिजितमन्तः ।

सांख्यविर्द्वर्नैगहरेत्पापसेक्षा विलेत्रियः ॥ 14 ॥

O Nārada! It is very hard to conquer Māyā; even those, who by Prānāyāma have conquered their Prāna Vāyu, their organs of senses and their

food, even those Sānkhya Yogins and the Devas are not able to conquer Māyā.

देवेश्व मुनिगार्तूल यच्चयोक्तं चवो5पुंना ।

वित्तमादोस्म यतित्व नैवं वाच्यं कदाचन ॥ 15 ॥

The words that you have just now uttered that you have conquered Māyā are not fit to come out of your mouth; for by your knowledge of music, it seems that you are enchanted with the sounds of the music.

नाहे शिलो न वा बह्या जेतुं तां प्रभवोर्याजम् ।

मुभ्य: सनकाधायं कस्वं कें-ग्रे क्षमा जरे ॥ 16 ॥

Brahmā, I, Śiva, and the other Munis, none of us has been able as yet to conquer that Unborn Māyā; how, then, can it be possible that you or any other man can conquer that Māyā!

देवदेहं नृद्रें वा तिर्येन्द्रधापि वा ।

विषय्यातः शगीरं च स क्रकं तां जदेवदाम ॥ 17 ॥

वियुतन्तों कर्म भायां जेतुं शकः: पुभाम्यन्ते ।

वेदविद्योगविद्यानि सर्वजैं विज्ञानेत्रिज्ञ: ॥ 18 ॥

Any embodied being' be he a Deva, a human being, or a bird, no one is able to conquer that Māyā Unborn. Whoever is endowed with the three Gunas, be he a knower of the Vedas, or a Yogin, or conqueror of his passions, or all knowing, is not able to conquer Māyā.

कालोपीय तस्य कर्ण हि रूपधीन: स्वरूपकृत ।

तड़गे वर्तते देही विद्धान्यूर्षोंदा मध्यमः ॥ १९ ॥

The Great Time (Kāla) though formless, is one form of Māyā and fashions this universe. All the Jīvas are subservient to this Kāla, be he a good literary person, or of a mediocre nature, or an illiterate brute.

कालः क्रोतीत धर्में कदाचिद्धिकलं पुनः ।

स्वभावात्कर्मीत वारप्र दुर्जं सत्य चेहितम् ॥ 20 ॥

This Kāla sometimes makes even a religious man that kiwos Dharma confounded and eluded; so you know the nature of Māyā is very incomprehensible and Her ways mysterious.

Note: This Kāla is of the fourth dimension, time and space.

Book VI Chapter XXVIII

नारद उवाच

इत्युक्चा विराते विद्यगृहं विस्मयमानस: ।

तमवुवं जगत्रार्थ वासुदेवं सनातनम् ॥ 21 ॥

रमापते कंधेक्णा माया सा कौनूशी पुनः ।

किंयद्रुला कवसंस्थानां कस्याधाता बदल्य मे ॥ 22 ॥

O Dvaippāyana! Thus saying, Viṣṇu stopped. I was greatly astonished and asked that Eternal Vāsudeva, the Deva of the Devas, the Lord of the World, “O Lord of Rama! What is the form of Māyā? How is She? What is measure of Her strength? Where She resides? Whose substratum is She? Kindly tell these to me.

प्रक्रामोःप्रिय तो मारां द्रशायुग मृतीधर ।

जातुपिछ्णति तां सम्यव्यसादं कुक मापते ॥ २३ ॥

O Preserver of the Universe! I am greatly desirous to see Māyā; Shew Her to me quickly. O Lord of Rama! I am very eager to know Māyā. Be graciously pleased to describe to me the glory of Māyā."

विष्यु उवाच

त्रिगुणा साउष्टितधारा सर्वत्रा सर्वसम्मता ।

अवेबान्दिकरणा च सर्वे व्याय्य स्थिता जगत् ॥ 24 ॥

Viṣṇu said: Māyā resides everywhere throughout this whole Universe; Her nature consists of the three Guṇas; She is the substratum of all; She is omniscient, and acknowledged by all; invisible, and of diverse forms.

दिद्धा यदि ते चितने नरतारोहणं कृक ।

गरड़े मनमोतेष्ठा गच्छावोरन्य सामप्रम्न ॥ 2 5 ॥

दर्शचिधामि ते मावां दुर्जयामिततामधि: ।

दूद्वा तां ब्रहापुरं तव मा विश्वादे मन: कृधा: ॥ 2 6 ॥

O Nārada! If you want to see Māyā, then come quickly and mount with me on Garuda; we both will go elsewhere and I will shew you that Māyā, invincible by those who have not conquered themselves.

इत्युक्त्वा देवेदोवो मां सम्मार विनतास्तुमः ।

सूतमात्रस्तु गृहस्तदाग्याद्विरसिधी ।। 27 ।।

आगतं गरई वीक्ष्य आरुरोह जनदानं: ।

समातोष्य च मां पुहुं गमनाय कृतादर: ॥ 28 ॥

O Son of Brahmā! Do'n't be depressed when you see Māyā. Thus saying, Janārdana Hari remembered Garuda and instantly he came to Hari. Janārdana mounted on him and gladly made me also get up on his back and took me with Him.

चलिता विनतापुरो वैकुणवाद्राव्युवेगान् ।

प्रेरितो यत्र कृष्णेन गनृकामेन काननम् ॥ 29 ॥

महावानिन विद्यानि सारांसि सरितस्तथा ।

पुरुषामाकराईश खेटखर्षोगेत्रजान् ॥ 30 ॥

मुनीनामाश्रमात्यमायावार्थीड सुमनोहराः ।

पल्बलानि विशालानि हृद्यान्यूबन्धपूर्वितान् ॥ 31 ॥

भुगाणों च वराहाणां वृन्दान्यथलोक्य च ।

गतावारां कान्यकुळसरीयं गरडासनी ॥ 32 ॥

तत्र न्ययं सरो दिव्यं दृष्टि युब्जमपिडतम् ।

ईसकारणडवाकीर्णं चक्रवाकोपशीघितम् ॥ 33 ॥

नानावर्षीं. प्रफुल्लेशं पूज्ञैभरात्रितम् ।

गृचि मिछाजलं भूक्रयूधनाद्विराजितम् ॥ 34 ॥

मामाह भगवान् वीक्ष्य तडागं परमाबुदूनम् ।

स्पर्धकं चोद्योः क्रीं मिछे वार्ति विशेषतः ॥ 35 ॥

श्रीभगवानुवाच

पश्य नातर गर्भीरं सर: सारसनाहितम् ।

सर्वकं पशूकैश्छत्रं स्वच्छनीरामूर्तिम्न ॥ 36 ॥

In a moment Garuda, went, at his command, with the speed of wind to the forest where the Bhagavān desired to go. Mounting on Garuda we passed and saw on our way beautiful forests, nice lakes, rivers, towns, villages, huts of cultivators, towns close to the mountain, huts for cow-keepers in cowsheds, the beautiful hermitages of the Munis, lovely Jhils, tanks and lakes beautified with big lotuses, flocks of ewes, packs of wild boars, etc., till, at last, we came to a place close to Kanauj. I saw there a beautiful divine tank; nice lotuses blossomed there, spreading their sweet fragrance all around; the bees were making lovely humming noise and ravishing away the minds of men; various flowers, lilies, etc., were beautifying the place; Geese, Kāranḍavas, and Cakravākas and other acquatic fowls were playing with their cackling

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

noise, the water was very sweet like milk; the tank was defying, as it were the ocean. Seeing such a wonderful tank, the Bhagavān told me: "O Nārada! See, how beautiful is this deep tank with its clear waters, and adorned all over with lotuses! The sweet voiced flamingoes are roaming on the lake making lovely sounds!

अत्र स्नाला गमिष्याव: कान्यकुळं पुतेताम् ।

इत्युक्नवा गकडादिषु मापुतनार्थ व्यतारथत् ॥ 37 ॥

We will bathe in this tank and then go to the city Kanauj. Thus saying, He made me descend quickly from Garuda and He himself also got down. शिवस्य भगवांस्त जग्राह मम तर्जीम् ।

त्वुवनसोरं वृद्यस्तीरं मामवनतघुः ॥ 38 ॥

Then the Bhagavān smilingly caught hold of my fore finger and repeatedly praising the glory of the tank took me to its bank.

विश्रवा तद्यागे तु नित्याक्ष्यये मनोहरे ।

मातुवाच मुने स्नाने कुल त्वं विमले जले ॥ 39 ॥

We rested a while on the cool umbrageous beautiful bank when Śrī Bhagavān said: "O Muni! Better bathe you first in this tanks; next I will bathe in this very holy pool of water.

पशुवाहं क्रौथ्यामि तडागेत्रिसन्त्युपावने ।

साधुपामिव चेतोसि जलाति निर्मालिति च ॥ 40 ॥

O Nārada! Look! Look! How clear crystallike is the water of this pool like the heart of a saint; see how it smells also fragrantly in contact with the lotuses on it."

सुरपंपीति परारैसैनु पड्ज्ञानां विशेषतः ।

इत्युङोड़ं भगवता मुक्लवा शीणं भूगाबिनम् ॥ 41 ॥

When the Bhagavān spoke thus to me; I kept my lute and deer skin aside and gladly went to the edge of the tank.

स्नानाय कृतधीस्तीर गतः प्रेमस्मिततः ।

पाटी प्रशल्य हतौं च शिखां बद्धया कुग्याहम् ॥ 42 ॥

Washing then my hands and feet I tied my hair lock and, taking Kuśa grass, I performed my Acamana and, purifying myself, began to bathe myself in that tank.

कृताचय शुश्चितोये स्नातवान्सि तजले ।

यदा तस्मिजले ग्ये स्नातोर्दं पश्यतो हरेः ॥ 43 ॥

विद्यार यौरकं रूपं प्राप्त क्षीतवमनुतमम् ।

हरिपूरीत्वा वीणां मे तथा कृष्णात्रिनं शुभम् ॥ 44 ॥

While I was bathing, Hari was looking at me; by the time I took a dip, I saw that I quitted my male form and got a beautiful female form. Hari took away, then, my deer skin and mounting on Garuda went away in a moment to His own residence.

आक्रह्य गरुकं तुर्णं जगाम स्वगृहं क्षणात् ।

ततोर्कं क्षीत्मवपत्रश्राकृष्णपृष्णपितः ॥ 4 5 3 ॥

ततक्षणान्मनसो जाता पूर्वदैष्टस्य विस्मृतिः ।

विस्मृतोर्जी जगजाधो महती विस्मृता पुनः ॥ 4 6 ॥

Getting the female form and decorated with excellent ornaments, my memory of my previous male form vanished at once; I forgot all about my famous lute and forgot also Jagannātha, the Deva of the Devas.

संग्राय मोहितीकर्ता तडागाशिरांत बहिः ।

अपर्थ नलिनीजुई सरसतिभुतचलादम् ॥ 47 ॥

किमेत्तदिति मनसाकरं विसमयं गुहुः ।

एवं चित्तयानस्य नारीकरणस्य मे ॥ 48 ॥

I then came out of the tank in that enchanting woman form, saw the pool of water filled with clear limpid water and adorned with lotuses. Seeing that, I began to think: "What is this?" and I became very much astonished.

सहसा द्ववर्ष प्राप्तस्तर तालधजवो नृपः ।

गजाश्रवदू-दैक्षं संयुतो रथसंस्थितः ॥ ४१ ॥

युवा भूषणसंवीता देह्वानिव मन्थः ।

बीक्ष्य मां भूपतितस्त रिद्विष्यूषणभूषितम् ॥ 50 ॥

While I was thus meditating in my woman form, a king, named Tāladhvaja, came there, all on a sudden, on a chariot, accompanied by numerous elephants and horses. The King looked like a second Cupid; he was decorated with various ornaments on his various limbs; he was just entering into his youth and he looked very enchanting.

Book VI Chapter XXIX

राकाचन्द्रमुखीं योषां विस्मयं परमं गतः ।

पण्ड्छ कार्मिक कल्याणि कस्य पुत्री सुरस्य वा ५ ५ १ ॥

The King saw me at once and looking at me decked with divine ornaments and my moon-like face, was greatly astonished and asked me: "O Kalyānī! Who are you?

मानुष्य च वा काने नायर्वस्योरास्य च ।

एकानिकी कवं बाला रूपयीवनभूषिता ॥ ५२ ॥

Are you the daughter of a man or a Nāya (serpent) or of a Gandharva or a Deva? I see you are now in your youth; why are you alone here?

विवाहिता5थ कन्या वा सत्यं वद सुलोचने ।

किं पश्यसि सुकेशाने तडागेसिमनुभ्यधेम ॥ ५३ ॥

O Lovely-eyed! Has any fortune person married you? Or are you still unmarried? Speak all these

truly to me. O Fair-haired One! What are you looking at in this tank?

विकार्थिक्त पिकालापे बूहि मन्यभोगेहिनी ।

भुंश्व भोगान्मारलाभ्रि मया सह कृणोदरि ।

वार्जिहानात्मसा नूतं कृत्वा मां परितुसामम् ॥ 54 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे भशुककन्धेडणाविंशो3धायक:128।

O One enchanting, as it were, like the Cupid! What is your desire? Say, O Slanting-eyed! My mind is ravished to hear your cuckoo-like voice. O One of thin waist! Choose me as your husband and enjoy various excellent things as you like."

Here ends the Twenty-eighth Chapter of the Sixth Book on Nārada's getting the feminine form in the Māhapurānam Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Veda Vyāsa.

[1] 2014年1月1日

Book VI Chapter XXIX

CHAPTER XXIX

On Nārada Again a Man

नारद उवाच

इत्युक्तोड़ं तदा तेन राजा ताताधउनेच च ।

विश्यग्य मनसाठल्यर्थ तमुवाच विशांपते ॥ १ ॥

राजत्राहं विज्ञानापि पूत्री कल्येति निश्रयम् ।

पित्तौ क्व च मे केन स्थापिता च सरोदरे ॥ 2 ॥

किं करोमि क्व नच्छामि कवं मे सुकृतं भवेत् ।

निरूपास्त्रसि राजेन्द्र चिंतनामि चिकीर्षितम् ॥ 3 ॥

Nārada said: “O Dvaipāyana! When the King Tāladhvaja asked me thus, I thought over earnestly and said thus: “I do not know whose daughter I am; nor do I know quite certainly where are my father and mother; one man placed me here on this tank and has gone away, whither I do not know.

दैवमेव वरं राजनास्त्रव प्रौर्भं मम ।

धर्मज्ञोंसि महीपाल यथेच्छसि तथा कुरु ॥ 4 ॥

तद्धीनाउमवहं भूप न मे कोयसित पालकः ।

न पिता न च माता च न स्थानं च बान्यवः ॥ 5 ॥

O King! I am now an helpless orphan; what shall I do now? Where to go? What to do by which I can have my welfare? I am all the while thinking on these. O King! The Destiny is powerful; I have not the least control over it; you know Dharma and you are a King. Do now as you like.

इत्युक्तेपरी मया राजा बधूव मदनातुरः ।

मां निरीक्ष्य विगालाहर्षी सेवकांनिव्युबारा हूं ॥ 6 ॥

नरायानमानयखे चतुबाँहुं मनोहर्म ।

आरोहणाधेमस्यन्तु कौशेगंबारवेहितम् ॥ 7 ॥

O King! Do nourish me; I have no father, no mother, nor any acquaintances and friends; there is no place for me also to stand on; therefore I am now your dependant."

मूढास्तरणावंयुक्ते मुक्ताजलविभूषितम् ।

चतुरयं विशालं च मुवर्णपित्ति शृभम् ॥ 8 ॥

तस्य तद्वानं श्रुत्वा भूत्या: सत्वरागयिनः ।

आनिन्यु: शिविकां दिव्यां मद्यं वस्त्ववेहितम् ॥ 9 ॥

आरूक्षोर्धृ तदा तस्यां तस्य प्रियचिक्तीयां ।

When I spoke thus, the King looked at my face and became love-stricken for me; he then tole his attendants to bring an excellent rectangular and spacious palanquin to be carried on four men's shoulders, gilt and adorned with jewels and pearls, where soft sheets were spread inside and covered all over with silken cloths. Instantly the servants went away and brought for me a beautiful palanquin.

मृदितोउसी गृहे नील्या मां तदा पृथिवीपति: ॥ 10 ॥

विद्वाहिविधाना राजा शुभे लगने शुभे दिते ।

उपयेमे च मां तत्र हुतभूवसाधिते ततः ॥ 11 ॥

I got on it to serve the best wishes of the King. The King also gladly took me home. In an auspicious day and in an auspicious moment he married me in accordance with due rites and ceremonies on the presence of the Holy Fire.

तस्याहं वल्लभा जाता प्राणेधोउपि गरीयती ।

सोभायम्युद्रतीर्वेवं नाम त्रकृतं मम ॥ 12 ॥

I became dearer to him than even his own life and the King, with great fondness, kept my name as Saubhāgya Sundarī.

त्यभागो मया सार्थं सुख्याप महीपति: ।

नानाभोगिवलासीः कामगलाश्ठोदिततंथा ॥ 13 ॥

The King then began to sport with me amorously according to the rules of the Kāma Śāstra in various ways and with great enjoyments and pleasures.

राजकायाणि संलब्ज क्रीक्षास्तो द्विविणम् ।

नासौ विवेद गछ्ठंत कारं कामकलारतः ॥ 14 ॥

उद्यानेषु च रधेषु वाणीषु च गृहेषु च ।

ह्यर्थेषु वर्गैलेषु दीर्घिकासु वासुर च ॥ 15 ॥

He then left all his kingly duties and state affairs and he began to remain day and night with me deeply immersed in amorous sports; so much his mind was merged in me in these plays that he could not notice the long time that passed away in the interval.

वारणीयदार्तोर्सी विह्र-कानने शुधे ।

विसुक्य सर्वकायिणि मदधीने बषूव ह ॥ १६ ॥

He used to drink the Vārunī wine and, forsaking all the state affairs, began to enjoy me in nice gardens, beautiful lakes, lovely palaces, beautiful houses, excellent mountains and enviable forests and became completely subservient to me.

व्यासाई तेने संसक्ता क्रीडास्वर्गीकृता ।

स्मृतावाम्बूर्वेदेह न पुंभावं मुनिनवम च ॥ १ ७ ॥

O Dvaipāyana! Being incessantly engaged with the King in amorous sports and remaining obedient to him, my previous body, male ideas, or the birth of Muni nothing whatsoever came in my memory.

मदीवार्य पतिर्वाँषाउं पत्नीषु चित्रा सती ।

पडुताङ्गी विलाससा सफलं जीवितं मम ॥ १ ८ ॥

इति चिंतयती तत्मन्येमवन्द्धा दिवानिगम् ।

क्रीडासत्ता सुखे लुक्यां त चैथता वरणवर्तिनि ॥ १ ९ ॥

I remained always attached to him, being obedient to him with a view to be happy and I constantly thought over “that this King is very much attached to me, I am his dearest wife to all others; always he thinks of me, I am his chief consort, capable to give him enjoyment.”

विस्मृतं बढ्धारिजानं बढ़ानानं च ग्राशन्तम् ।

धर्मग्रापरिज्ञानं तदासत्कामना: स्थिता ॥ 20 ॥

My mind became entirely his and I completely forgot the eternal Brahmanjāāna and the knowledge of the Dharma Śāstras.

एवं विहृतस्तत्र वर्षिण इतद्रौये तु ।

गतानि क्षणवक्तामकीडास्तस्मय मे मुने ॥ 21 ॥

O Muni! Thus engaged in various amorous sports, twelve years passed away as if a moment and I could not perceive that.

जाता भर्षेति चाहे मुद्रं प्राप नृपस्तदा ।

कारयामास विधितदर्भसंराकारमं च ॥ 22 ॥

Then I became pregnant; and the King became very glad and performed all the ceremonies pertaining to my impregnation and holding of the child in my womb.

अपूष्ठहोईर जाग प्रीणयमां पुनः पुनः ।

नाङुवं लज्जमानाउं नृपं प्रीतमना भृगण ॥ 23 ॥

In order to satisfy me, the King used to ask me always what things I liked; I used to be very much abashed; seeing this, the King used to be still more glad.

संपूर्णे द्वगमे मासि पुत्रो जातस्तती मम ।

गुधेउढ़ हान्द्रभलनन्तरावलान्विते ॥ 24 ॥

बभूव नृपतौहि पुत्रजनमहोत्सव: ।

राजा परमसन्तुषो बभूव सुतजनमतः ॥ 25 ॥

Ten months thus passed away and in an auspicious Lagna and when the asterism was favourably strong, I gave birth to a son; the King became very glad and great festivities were held on the birth ceremony of the child.

Book VI Chapter XXIX

सुतकाने सुतं वीक्ष्य राजा सुदमवाप्त है ।

अई भूमिपतेश्रासं प्रिया भार्यों परंतप ॥ 26 ॥

ततो वर्षद्धाते वै पुनर्भार्म मया धृत: ।

द्वितीयस्तु सुतो जातः सर्वलक्षणसंयुतः ॥ 27 ॥

O Dvaipāyana! When the period of the birth-impurity was over, the King saw the face of the child and was greatly delighted; I then became the dearest wife of the King. Two years after again I became impregnated; the second auspicious son was born.

सुध्येति सुतस्याय नाम चके नृपस्तदा ।

वीरवर्मिति ज्येषुस्य बाहागीः प्रेरितस्तवयम् ॥ 28 ॥

एवं द्वादण पुत्राध प्रमृत्ता भृतमंसता: ।

मोहितोई तदा तेषां प्रीत्या पालनलालने ॥ 29 ॥

The King gave the name Sudhanvā to the second son and on the authority of the Brāhmins, kept the name of the eldest son as Viravarmā. Thus I gave birth to twelve sons, in due course of time, to the King's great liking; and I was engaged in rearing up those children and thus I remained enchanted.

पुनरष्ट सुतः काले काले जाताः सुरूपिणः ।

गाईस्वयं मे ततः पूर्ण समवर्ष सुखसाधानम् ॥ 30 ॥

तेषां दारिक्रिया: कालं कृता राजा यथोतिथिता ।

सुर्पाधिश्र तथा पुरैः परिवारो महानभूत् ॥ 31 ॥

Again in due course, I gave birth to eight sons; thus my household was filled with happiness. The King performed the marriage ceremonies of all those children duly and befittingly; and our family became very large with sons and their wives.

ततः पौत्रादिस्म्प्रतालेश पिं कीतास्वातिवतः ।

आसबानासोपोरात मोहबुद्धिकरा भूर्णम ॥ 32 ॥

कदाचित्सुखमैष्यवं कदाचिदचुदुःखमद्धुतम् ।

पुत्रेषु रोगजित्ने देहसंतनायककामू ॥ 33 ॥

Then I had some grandsons and they increased my attachment and the consequent delusion with their all sorts of playful sports. Some times I felt happy and prosperous and sometimes I felt pain and sorrow when my sons fell ill.

परस्यें कदाचित् विरोधोःभृन्तुसहणः ।

पुत्राणां वा वधूनां च तेन सन्तापसम्भवः ॥ 34 ॥

Then my body and mind became very much troubled with sorrows. Again the quarrels amongst my sons and my daughters-in-law, brought terrible pain and remorse in my mind.

सुखदुःखात्मके घोरे मिथ्याचारकरे भृणग ।

संकल्पजिति क्रुंट मनोरड़ं मुनिसत्तम ॥ 35 ॥

विस्मूतं पूर्वविज्ञानं शास्त्रज्ञानं तथा गतम् ।

योषाभावे विलोनोरई गृहकार्येषु सर्वथा ॥ 36 ॥

O Best of Munis! Thus I was greatly immersed in the terrible ocean of these imaginary thoughts, sometimes happy and sometime painful, and I forgot my previous knowledge and the knowledge of the Śāstras. I was merged in the thought of myself being a woman and lost myself entirely in doing the household affairs.

अहंकारसु संजातो भूर्ण मोहविद्यकैः ।

एते के बलिनः पुत्रा: सूपायः सुकुलसभ्याः ॥ 37 ॥

एते पुत्रा: सुसन्धज्ञा: मौडौति मम वैश्मसु ।

ध्यार्यई खलु नारीणां संसोरोस्मिजों घृणम् ॥ 38 ॥

I began to think that “I have so many daughters-in-law; so many powerful sons of mine are playing together in my house; Oh! I am fortunate and full of merits, amongst women” and thus my egoistic pride increased.

नारदोर्भं भगवता वशितो मायया किल ।

न कदाचिन्यायोर्वे चिन्तितं मनसा किल ॥ 39 ॥

राजप्नौ शुभावारा बहुपुरा परितता ।

धन्यादर्भ किल संसारे कृषीर्वे मोहितस्तद्वर्भ ॥ 40 ॥

अथ काक्षिवृपः कामं तूरदेशाधिपो महान् ।

अरातिभावामपत्र: पतिता सह मान्द Ⅱ 41 ॥

Not for a moment even occurred the thought that I had been Nārada; the Bhagavān had deceived me by His Māyā. O Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana! I was deluded by Māyā and passed away my time in the thought “that I am the king’s wife, chaste and of good conduct, following good Ācāra; I have so many sons and grandsons; I am blessed in this Sarhsāra and that I am so happy and prosperous.”

कृत्वा सैन्यसमाधोगे रथेशु धागधौतुम् ।

आजगाम कान्यकुको पुरे युद्धमित्यत् ॥ 42 ॥

Šrimadievibhāgavatam

वेहितं नगर तेन राजा सैन्ययुतेन च ।

मम पुत्रश्र धौत्रश्र निर्मात नगरातच ॥ 4 3 ॥

One powerful king of a distant country turned out an inveterate enemy of my husband and came to the city of Kanauj to fight with my husband, accompanied by chariots, and elephants and the fourfold army.

संधामासुभुतस्तत्र कृततरीतेन पुत्रकैः ।

हता रणे सुता सर्वे वैरिणा कालवोगतः ॥ 44 ॥

राजा भगस्तु संग्रामावर्ताः स्वगृहं पुनः ।

शुतं मया मृततः पुत्रा: संग्रामे भृगदाकणे ॥ 45 ॥

That enemy besieged the city with his army; my sons and grandsons went out and fought valiantly with him but owing to the great Destiny, the enemies killed all my sons. The King retreated and returned to his palace.

स हत्वा मे सुतान्यौजान्तो राजा बलान्वितः ।

कंद्रमाना हईं तत्र नाता समरमण्डले ॥ 46 ॥

Next I heard that powerful King killed all my sons and grandsons and had gone back to his country with his army. I then hurriedly went to the battle-field, crying loudly.

दूर्धा तान्यतितान्यूग्राम्यौत्रांशु दुर्बपीडिता ।

विललापाहामायुष्मछोकसागरसंवेदो ॥ 47 ॥

हा पुका: क्व सात मेउदा हा हतामि दुरात्मा ।

दैवेनातिवलिछेन दुविरणातिपाधिन ॥ 48 ॥

O Long-lived One! Seeing my sons and grandsons lying on the ground, in that horrible and distressed state, I became merged in the ocean of sorrows and lamented and wept loudly and wildly "O my Sons! Where have you gone leaving me thus? Alas! The pernicious Fate is very dominant, and very panisgiving and indomitable.

एतस्मिन्ते तत्र भगवान्यभ्युद्नः ।

कृत्वा रूपं द्विजस्यागद्वुद्धः परमशोभनः ॥ 49 ॥

सुसासा वेविलकामं मतस्मीये समागतः ।

मामुचाचातिदीनों संकन्द्यानां रणाधिरे ॥ 50 ॥

It has killed me to-day." By this time, the Bhagavān Madhusūdana came to me there in the garb of a beautiful aged Brāhmīn. His dress was

sacred and lovely; it seemed he was versed in the Vedas. Seeing me weeping distressedly in the battle-field he said:

ब्राहण उवाच

किं विवीदासि तन्यांग घमोउंप्र फकटीकृतः ।

भोहेन कोकिलालाये परित्यज्ञहात्मके ॥ 51 ॥

“O Devi! O cuckoo-voiced One! It seems you are the mistress of a prosperous house and you have got husband and sons! O thin-bodied One! Why are you thus lamenting and feeling yourself distressed!

का लं कक्याः सुता: केज्यी चिंतयामालिं परम् ।

उत्तिष रोन्द नं कल्पा क्वस्पा भव सुलोचने ॥ 52 ॥

All this is simply illusion caused by Moha; think; who are you? whose sons are these? Now think of your best hereafter; Do'nt weep, get up and be comfortable, O Good-eyed one?

स्नानं च तिलदानं च युजाणं कुक कामिनि ।

पतलिकानातां च मयादारक्षणाय वै ॥ ५३ ॥

कर्तव्य सर्वेश तीर्थे स्नाते तु न गृहे कवचित् ।

मृतानां किल कब्नूतां धर्मशाखविनिणयः ॥ ५४ ॥

O Devi! To shew respect to your sons, etc., gone to the other worlds, offer them water and Til. The friends of the deceased ought to take their bath in a place of pilgrimage; never they should bathe in their houses. Know this as ordained by Dharma."

नात्व उवाच

इत्युकला तेन विशेषय कुद्रेन प्रतिवोधिता ।

उचिताउई नृपेणाय युक्ता बन्युभिपरावृतां ॥ 55 ॥

अग्रतो तिज़करणेण भगवान्भूतभावनः ।

चलिताऊँ तत्सनुर्ण तीर्थ परमपावनम् ॥ 56 ॥

Nārada said: O Dvaipāyana! When the old Brāhmin thus addressed me, I and the King and other friends got up. The Bhagavān Madhusūdana causing this creation, in the form of a Brāhmana, led the way and I followed him quickly to that sacred place of pilgrimage.

हरिमाँ कृपया तत्र पुंतीर्थ सरसि प्रपुः ।

नीलाउङ्ग भगवाविष्णाईजरूपी जनदांदः ॥ 57 ॥

Book VI Chapter XXX

स्नानं कुरु तडागोस्मिन्यावने नगगामिनि ।

त्वज शोके क्रियाकालः पुजागणं च निर्यकंम् ॥ 58 ॥

The Viṣṇu Bhagavān, the Lord Janārdana Hari, in the form of a Brāhmin, kindly took me to the tank named Puritīrtha (male tīrtha) and said: “O One going like an elephant! Better take your bath in this tank; forego your sorrows that are of no use; now the time has arrived to offer water to you sons.

कोटिगस्ते भूता: पुत्रा जन्यजनसमुद्धावः ।

पितर: पतयक्षेध भात्तो जामयस्तथा ॥ 59 ॥

Better think that you had millions of sons born to you in your previous births and for that your millions of sons and daughters lost their lives; you had millions of fathers, husbands, and brothers and you lost them again; O Devi! Now tell me for whom you will now grieve?

केवां दुःखं त्वया कार्यं म्रप्रेस्मिनानसोद्धवे ।

विवधे स्वप्नदूरुते तापदे देहिनामि ॥ 6 0 ॥

All these, then, are merely phenomena; this world is full of delusion, false like a mirage and dream-like; the embodied souls, simply get pains and sorrows and nothing else."

नारद उवाच

इति तस्य वचः श्रुत्वा तीर्थे पुरुषसंज्ञेक ।

प्रविष्टा सन्तुकामारई प्रेरिता तत्र विध्गुना ॥ 6 1 ॥

मज्जनादेव तीर्थेषु पुमाझातः क्षणाद्वि ।

हरीर्णीणां कें कृत्वा विश्वतसीरे स्वदेश्वान् ॥ 6 2 ॥

Nārada said: On hearing his words, I went to

bathe in that Punitritha, as ordered by him. Taking a dip, I found that, in an instant, I became a man; the Bhagavān Hari, in his own proper form, was standing on the edge with a lute in his hand."

उन्मज्ज च मया तीरे शूधः कमललोचनः ।

प्रत्यधिज्ञा तदा जाता मम चिते द्विजोतम ॥ 63 ॥

O Brāhmīn! When getting out of the water, I came to the bank and saw the lotus-eyed Kṛṣṇa, pure consciousness then flashed in my heart.

संचिंत्तितं मया तत्र नारदोःहमिहानतः ।

हरिणा सह क्षीभांवं प्राणो मायाविमोहितः ॥ 64 ॥

Then I thought that “I am Nārada; I have came to this place and being deluded by the Maÿā of Hari, I got the female form.”

इति चिन्तापश्रहं चवा जानसदा हरि: ।

मामाह नारतगघ्छ किं कारीष जले सिचत: ॥ 65 ॥

विस्मतेहं तदा स्यत्वा स्त्रीभावं द्वारभुं भुगम् ।

पुन: पुरुषायश्व समयः: केन हेतुना ॥ 66 ॥

ड्रौते श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे घटस्कचे

एकौनविशो3ध्याय: 11 29 11

When I was thinking thus, Hari exclaimed “O Nārada! Get up; what are you doing, standing in the water?” I was astonished; and, recollecting my feminine nature, very severe indeed, began to think why I was again transformed into a male form.

Here ends the Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the Nārada's getting again his male form in the Mahāpurāṇaṃ Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XXX

CHAPTER XXX

On the Glory of Mahā Māyā

नारद उवाच

मां बृह्वा नारदं विश्व विश्वमितोउसी महीधपति: ।

क्व गता मम भार्यों सा कुतोउवं मुनिसस्तम: ॥ १ ॥

वित्तलाप नृप्सतत्र हा प्रियेति मुकुँदुः ।

क्व गता मां परित्यज्य विलयन्ते विलयोगियम् ॥ २ ॥

Nārada said: “O Best of Munis! The King was greatly astonished to see me dip in the tank in a female figure and get up from the tank in a male

figure and thought. Where is my dearest wife? And how is this Nārada Muni suddenly come here! The King, not seeing his wife, lamented very much and cried frequently O my dear Wife! Where have you gone, leaving me here thus."

विता तां विपुलओणीच बृथा मे जीवितं गृहम् ।

राज्य कमलपत्राशिक्र किं करोमि शुचिभित्मे ॥ ३ ॥

न प्राणा मे बहिर्यान्ति विरहेण तवाधुना ।

गतो वै प्रीतिध्यमैस्तु तवामृते प्राणधारणात् ॥ ४ ॥

Without you, O One of spacious hips! My life, palace and kingdom, all, are quite useless. O Lotus-eyed one! What shall I do? O Smilling One! Why is not my life getting out of my body, suffering thus from thy separation? Without you, my sentiment of love has left me for ever.

विल्यामि विशालासिंह वेहि प्रवृत्तरं प्रियम् ।

क्व गता सा मायि प्रीतिवार्षभूद्यमयंगे ॥ 5 ॥

O Large-eyed One! Now I am lamenting for you, O Dear! Better give me your sweet reply; the love that you expressed at our first union, where has it gone now?

निमाना कि जले सुचृष्ठीक्षिता मत्स्यकच्छधेः ।

गृहीता वकृणेनाशु मम दोषाण्ययोगतः ॥ 6 ॥

धन्या सुचासर्वर्शि या त्वं पुत्रैः समागता ।

अकृतिमस्तु पुरेशुं नेत्रतेरेप्रतभाषिशि ॥ 7 ॥

O One with good eyebrows! Are you sunk in the water and have you given up your life? Or are you devoured by fishes or crocodiles? Or are you carried away by Varuna, the Deva of the waters, to my great misfortune? O One of beautiful limbs!

न युकमधुना व्यमां विहाय तिथिदंय गता ।

विलपन्ते पति दीनं पुत्रसनेहन यन्धिता ॥ 8 ॥

उभयं मे गतं काने पुत्रस्तं प्राणवल्लभे ।

तथापि मरणं नातित झुःवितत्य मृष्णं प्रिये ॥ 9 ॥

You are blessed, as you have gone away with your sons; O sweet-speaking One! Your affection for them was not artificial. Is it right for you to go up to the Heavens, attached by affection for yours sons, leaving me your distressed husband alone, thus weeping for your separation?

कि कारीम वक्ता मच्छामि रोगो नारित महीत्ते ।

रामाविरहर्जे दुः:खुखानाति सूचनन्दनः ॥ 10 ॥

O Dear! I have lost both, you and my sons; yet death is not carrying me away; O! How hard is my lot! What to do? Where to go? Rāma is not now in this world. He knew what was the pain caused by the separation from one's dearest wife.

विधिना निहुर्णान्र विवरीतं कृतम्भ्युवि ।

द्यपत्योर्मरणं भिन्नं सर्वथा समाचितयो: ॥ १ १ १ ॥

Oh! The cruel Fate has ordained very unwisely with great inconsistency the periods of parting from one another at different periods; when their minds and all other things are exactly the same in all circumstances of pleasure and pain.

उपकारस्तु नारीणां भूतिभर्वित्र: किल ।

यदुर्फे धर्मशक्षेषु ज्जलनं पतिनां सह ॥ १ २ ॥

एवं विलयमानं तं राजानं भगवाहर्य: ।

निवारयामास तदा चवनैयुक्तिक्योजितः ॥ 13 ॥

The practise of Satī (burning with one's deceased husband), as ordained by the Munis, is certainly for the good of the chaste women; but it would have been good no doubt, were there such practises allowed for the men to burn themselves with their deceased wives." Bhagavān Hari then spoke to the lamenting King in reasonable words and consoled him thus:

श्रीभगवानुवाच

क्रिक विवादिति राजेन्द्र स्व यत ते प्रियाङ्गन ।

न श्रुत किं स्व्य शास्त्र न कृतोतयी झुयाययः ॥ १ ४ ॥

"O King! Why are you thus troubling yourself with pain and sorrow? Where has gone your dearest wife? Have you not heard anything of Śāstras? or Have you not taken any shelter of any wise man!

का सा कतस्तंच स्व योगोय विवेयाः कौहुगस्तल ।

प्रवाहरूप संसारे नृणां नौतततापिव ॥ १ ५ ॥

Who was your wife? Who are you? Of what nature was your union and disunion and where did it take place? The union of wives and sons in this Saṃsāra is momentary like the meetings of persons on boats, while crossing a river.

गृहे गच्छ नृपश्रेष्ठ बुधा ते कहितेन किम् ।

संशोधाग्र विशोधाग्रुं देवधानि: सदा गुणान् ॥ 16 ॥

O King! Now go home, there is no use in your weeping thus in vain; the union and disunion of men are always under the control of Fate, the Daiva; therefore the wise should not lament for them.

अनया सह ते राजनसंयोगसिद्ध संवृतः ।

भुक्ता तथा विशालाक्षी सुंदरी तनुष्यमा ॥ 17 ॥

Book VI Chapter XXX

O King! Your union with the woman took place here; and now you have lost that beautiful, thin-bodied, large-eyed woman here also.

न दृष्टी पित्तावस्यास्त्वया प्राप्ता सरोवरे ।

काककालीप्रेसोन यद्भूतं ततथा गतम् ॥ 18 ॥

Her father and mother you have not seen; you have got her like what is heard in the story of the crow and the Tāla fruit; as you got her wonderfully, so you have lost her wonderfully.

मा शोकें कुरं राजेन्द्र कातोस्तिवृतिकमः ।

कालयोगी समासादा घूब्ध्व भोगानूहे यथा ॥ 19 ॥

यथाउउगता तगा सा तु तथैव वरविण्नी ।

यथा पूर्व तथा तत्र कष्ट कार्य कुरु प्रभो ॥ 20 ॥

O King! Do not grieve; Time cannot be ruled over; go home and enjoy yourself subservient to Time. That beautiful woman has gone away in the manner she came to you; you ought to do your stately affairs in the way as you used to do before as the ruler of all.

रूदितेन त्वाठीय नागमिष्यति कामिनी ।

दृथा शोचसि पृथ्वीश योगयुक्तो भवाछ्ञान ॥ 21 ॥

भोगः कालवशादेति तथैव प्रतिवाति च ।

नात्र शोकस्तु कत्होये निष्क्ले भवकल्मिन ॥ 22 ॥

O King! Consider that if you weep day and night, that woman will never return; why then are you giving vent to your sorrows in vain? Go now and have recourse to the path of the Yoga and thus while away your time.

नैकत्र सुखसंयोगो दुःखयोगस्तु नैकतः ।

यदिकायन्वकानां भ्रमणं सुखदुःखयोः ॥ २३ ॥

The enjoyable things come in course of time and they go away again in due course; therefore in this world of no gain whatsoever, the wise should never lament. Continuous pleasure or continuous pain does not always take place; pleasure and pain are never steady; they rotate always like a rotary instrument.

मन: कृत्वा सिंधां भृपु केतार्चं घ्यासुखम् ।

अथवा नस्य दायादे वर्न सेवस्य समीप्रणि ॥ 24 ॥

Therefore, O King! Make your mind calm and

a rotary instrument. Therefore, O King! Make your mind calm and quiet and rule happily your kingdom; or make over the charge of the kingdom to your sons and retire to the forest.

दुर्लभो मानुषो देहः प्राणिता क्षणधर्मग्रः ।

तस्मिन्नाते तु कतिथ्यं सर्वेश्वात्मसाधानम् ॥ 25 ॥

This human body is seldom obtained; it is frail; therefore getting that body it is advisable to practise the realisation of the Supreme.

विद्धोपस्थसरो राजन्यगुधोपितु वर्तते ।

ज्ञानं मानुपदेहे वै नान्यासु च कुयोगीम् ॥ 26 ॥

O King! This organ of generation and this tongue reside also with the beasts, the peculiarity of human body is that knowledge can be realised in it; not in any other inferior births.

तस्मादुपच्छ गृह्टवक्त्वाशोके कान्तामुकुद्वम् ।

मायेयं भगवत्यास्तु यया सम्मोहितं जगत् ॥ 27 ॥

Therefore leave your home, leave your sorrows for your wife; all this is the Māyā of Bhagavān; by Her the world is deluded."

नात्य उवाच

इत्युक्तो हरिणा राजा प्रणयम कमलापतिम् ।

कृत्वा सनाविषिधं सम्यजगाम तिजमतिर्यम् ॥ 28 ॥

Nārada said: Bhagavān Hari speaking thus, the King bowed down to Him, the Deva of the Devas and finishing the bathing duties returned to his home.

दत्ता राज्यं स्वपौत्राय प्राय पिवैदंमढुतम् ।

वर्नं जगाम भूपालस्तच्ज्ञानयाव च ॥ 29 ॥

He then became possessed of dispassion and discrimination and making over the charge of his kingdom to his grandsons retired to the forest and realised the Supreme Knowledge.

गते राजन्यई वीक्ष्य भगवनमाधोक्षजम् ।

तमकुबं जगताथं हस्तां मां पुन: पुन: ॥ 30 ॥

When the King went away, the Bhagavān began to laugh and laugh, seeing me again and again. I then told him “O Deva! You have deceived me.

विश्रितोई त्वया देह ज्ञातं मायावलं महत् ।

स्माराम चरितं सर्वे क्रीदेहे चक्तृत मया ॥ 31 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

I now come to know how great is the power of Māyā. O Janārḍana! Now I remember all that I did in my feminine form.

यूहि मे देवेदेयेन प्रविष्ठोई सरोये ।

वित्तं पूर्वविज्ञानं स्नानादेव कर्थे है ॥ 32 ॥

Tell me, O Hari! O Deva of the Devas! How I lost my previous consciousness, when I got down into the tank and bathed in it.

शोभिर्हें समासाद्ध मोहितोर्जे जगद्युगे ।

पर्ति ग्रण्य नृपश्रेष्ठ पुरुलोभी वासवं यथा ॥ 33 ॥

O Lord of the world! Why was I enchanted, when I got the female form and when I got the King as my husband like Śaci's getting Indra.

मनस्तदेव तिच्चतं देहः स च पुरातनः ।

लिंगं तदेव देहेश स्युतेनीश: कर्थ है ॥ 34 ॥

The same mind I had; the old Jīvātmā was there and the previous subtle body was there; how, then, I lost their memories?

विस्मयोर्ध महान्योज ज्ञानगांश प्रति प्रभो ।

कयवधा रमाकान कारणं परमं च यत् ॥ 35 ॥

O Lord! Give out the cause of it and clear my doubts; a great doubts has arisen in my mind.

नारीदेहं भवा प्राथ्य मुक्ता भोगा हुचनेकरः ।

सुपारपांत कृति निव्य विधिहीनं च कोवाजम् ॥ 36 ॥

Many enjoyments I had in my female form, drinking liquor and other prohibited things I tasted; O Slayer of Madhu! What is the cause of all these?

मया तदेव न ज्ञातं नारदोड़भिति सुकटम् ।

जानाभ्यद्य यथा सर्वे विकिति न तथा त्वा ॥ 37 ॥

I could not know then that I was Nārada, as I now recognise clearly what I was in and what I did in my female form. Say the Why of all these things.

विष्णुर्वाच

पर्य नारद् यायावी विलासतोर्प महामते ।

देहेषु सर्वेन्तूनां द्राणेवा हुधलेकशः ॥ 38 ॥

Visnu said: "Know, O Intelligent Nārada! That all this is merely the Pastime of Māyā. There are many states going on in the bodies of all the living beings.

जाग्रत्वपनमुचुलिहा तुरीया देहिनां द्वणा ।

तथा देहान्तरे प्रापते सन्देहः कौणुगः पुनः ॥ ३ १ ॥

The embodied beings have got their waking, dream, deep sleep and Turiya (beyond all the three above mentioned) states; then why you doubt that when there is another body, there would be also the change in the states?

सुगतो नरो न जानाति न शृणोति वदत्यपि ।

पुनः प्रवृद्धो जानाति सर्व ज्ञातमशेषतः ॥ 40 ॥

When a man sleeps, he knows not anything, he does not hear anything; but when he gets awake, he again comes to know everything completely.

निद्रा चाल्यते चिंतं भवन्ति स्वतमस्पषाः ।

नानाविधा मनोभेदो मनोभावा हुनेकशः ॥ 41 ॥

The Citta gets itself moved by sleep; then mind gets different states by dreams and there arises a variety of feelings.

गजों में हनुभावाति न शकतोरमि सलायने ।

कि कंकीम न ये सीनींच यज भख्यास सकर: ॥ 42 ॥

A mad elephant is coming to kill me, and I am not able to fly away; what to do? Where to go? There is no place where I can quickly go: thus, in dreams, there arise different mental states.

वितामहं स्वाने पश्यति स्वगृहात्मान् ।

संयोगसन्तेन वातां च भोजनं सह मयने ॥ 4३ ॥

Sometimes we see in dreams that our departed grandfathers are come in our houses. I am seeing them, talking with them and I am dining with them.

प्रकुबः खलु जानाति स्वपे दुर्भे सुखासुखम् ।

भ्युला सर्वे जनेभ्यस्तु विस्ताराव्रदत्यपि ॥ 44 ॥

Whatever pain and pleasure are felt in dreams, when they awake, they know of what happened in their dreams and can also describe in details, recollecting what had been happened.

स्वपे कोप्रि न जानाति भ्रमोर्धिति निश्रयः ।

यथा तर्वेय विभयो मायाया दुर्गम: किल ॥ 4 5 ॥

O Nārada! Know the power of Māyā incomprehensible as the things seen in dreams cannot be certainly known that all those are false.

नाहं नारद ज्ञानापि पारम्परमुद्यंम ।

गुणानां किल मायाया नैव शाम्यानं घचज: ॥ 46 ॥

Book VI Chapter XXX

O Muni! Neither I, nor Šambhu, nor Brahmā can measure the power wielded by Māyā and Her three Guṇas, very hard to fathom.

கொலு சாள்து சுழல்பேழமானவே மறடே: ஒந: 1

మామాగురాగినాన న కంజువి పలేద్ద 147 11

How, then, can any ordinary mortal know them! Therefore, O Nārada! None is able to fathom the Māyā.

गुणारयकृतं सर्वे जगत्थावाज्जूमम् ।।

विना गुणैन संसारो वर्तते किंचिद्वाद्वः ॥ 48 ॥

उहं सत्वप्रधानोउसि रजतसमसप्तितः ।

न कदाचित्रिभर्षिणीं भावामि घुवनेश्र: ॥ 49 ॥

This world, moving and non-moving, is fashioned out of the triple Gunas of the Māyā; nothing whatsoever can exist without them. The predominant Guna in Me is Sattva; but Rajas and Tamas exist in me; being the Lord of this world, I cannot override the three Gunas.

तथा बहा पिता तेउत्र रजोमुख्यः प्रकीर्तितः ।

तम:सत्त्वसाम्युक्ति न ताध्यामुक्ति: किलि ॥ 50 ॥

So your father, Brahmā, is predominant in Rajo Guna; but Sattva and Tamas never leave Him.

शिवस्तथा तमोमुख्यो रजःसत्त्वसाम्यात् ।

गुणत्रयिवहीनस्तु नैव कोउपि मया शुतः ॥ 51 ॥

Our Mahā Deva is predominant in Tamo Guna, but Sattva and Raja are always with him. Therefore, no being can exist as separate from the three Gunas; this point I have settled in Śruti.

तस्मानोहो न कतिथ्व: संसारोत्रिस्मनुनीश ।

माया विवितिपेलुरासेपरे परमदुष्टे ॥ ५२ ॥

Therefore, O Lord of the Munis! Quit this endless Moha for the world, caused by Māyā, and very hard to get over and worship Bhagavatī, Who is of the nature of Brahman.

दूषा माया त्वयास्त्रीयं भुक्ता भोगा हुंचनेकशः।

किं पृष्छासि महाभाग तत्यश्रहीरात्मद्धुतम् ॥ 53 ॥

श्रित श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे भश्छकन्ये

प्रिंशोर्यावाः : 11 30 ॥

O Intelligent One! Now you have seen the power of Māyā; and you have enjoyed many things produced by Māyā and you have realised the extremely wonderful nature of Her. Then why do you ask me further on this point?

Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Sixth Book on

the glory of Mahā Māyā in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XXX

CHAPTER XXXI

On Mahā Māyā

व्यास उवाच

निर्णाय महाराज ब्वीपि विश्वादक्षगम् ।

माहात्म्यं खतु मायाया नारतानुं मया श्रुन्तु ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! I am now recounting the detailed glory of Māyā, heard by me from Nārada.

मया पुनर्मुंपि: पृष्टो नारद: सर्ववितिमः ।

श्रुत्वा कर्णं मुनेतस्य नारोदेहसमुद्धवम् ॥ 2 ॥

Again I asked sage Nārada who is the most omniscient of all, after hearing the story of that sage in the female body.

ब्रह् नारद पश्रात्रिक कथितं हरिणा तदा ।

क्व तात्ध जगत्राधो भवता सह माधयः ॥ 3 ॥

O Nārada! Tell me! What did Hari say at that time? Where did Mādhava the lord of the universe go along with you?

नारद उवाच

इत्युक्चा भगवांस्तस्मितडागेगतिनोहरे ।

आहक्रा गरड़ नन्तु वैकुण्ठे च मनो दधे ॥ 4 ॥

Nārada said: After saying thus, in that beautiful lake, the lord made up his mind to go to Vaikuntha, mounting on Garuda.

मामुवाच समाकानो यथेह गच्छ नारद ।

एहि वा मन लोकं त्वं यथा कहित तथा कुभ ॥ 5 ॥

Mahāvisnu, the consort of Lakṣmi, told me. O Nārada! go as you wish. Or come to my world. Do as you wish.

ब्रह्मलोककृतश्रह्मापृष्छच मधुसूदनम् । भगवानपि देवेशरासत्कणारूक्षासनः ॥ 6 ॥ वैकृष्टमयमातृष्णं भगाभिर्य यथासुखम् । ततोड़ं चितुसदन्तं गतो याते जनादंने ॥ 7 ॥

After taking leave of Madhusūdana, I went to Brahmaloka. Viṣṇu the lord of Devas, seated on Garuda, went to Vaikuntha quickly, in a happy manner after directing me. When Janārdana was gone, I went to the region of my father (i.e., Brahmā).

चिंतयन्मकलं दुःखं सुखं च परमाद्धुतम् ।

गत्वा प्रणाय्य चितरं स्थितो यावत्पूर: चितृः ॥ 8 ॥

तावत्पृधो मुने चित्रा बीक्ष्य चिन्तानुर्ते मुम् ।

Thin king about all the wonderful miseries and the joys undergone, I went to my father and after prostrating to him, stood before him.

ब्रहोयाच

क्व गतो5स महाभाग कस्मार्थितानुः सुत ॥ 9 ॥

स्वयं नैवादा पश्यामि मानते मुवितस्तम ।

Then seeing me tormented by thoughts, my father Brahmā asked: O great one! Where had you gone? Son! Why are you troubled by thoughts?

केनापि वंचितोसि तवं चूदं या किंचिद्धुद्धुम् ॥ 10 ॥

विषणं गतवित्रानं पशयामि त्वां कंबे सुत ।

O great sages! I do not see your mind happy today. You have been deceived by some body. Or you have seen some wonder.

नारद उवाच

इति पृषस्तदा पित्रा बूस्यां समुपवेश्य च ॥ ११ ॥

तमबुंचं स्ववृत्तानं मायावलसमुद्वम् ।

वंचितोर्जमितः कामं विल्याना प्रभविष्यान् ॥ १२ ॥

O Son! How can I see you sad and devoid of discrimination?

Nārada said: Thus I was asked by my father. I sat on the seat.

I told him my story arising out of the power of Māyā. O father! I have been cheated by the powerful Mahāvisnu.

हीभावझूमितः कार्य वर्षाणि सुबह्न्यति ।

अनुभूत महदुःखं पुत्रशोकसुभुंद्वम् ॥ 13 ॥

I was made to attain the state of a woman for many many years. Extreme misery arising out of death of son was experienced by me.

प्रवोधितोड़ः तैनैव मुटुवावयामुनेन च ।

पुनः सरोबेर सन्ताव जातोड़ं गरादः पुणम् ॥ 14 ॥

I was instructed by him by nectarine sweet words about my real nature. Again after taking bath in that tank. I became a man (the old) Nārada.

किमेतत्कारणं बहान् यन्मोहमगां तदा ।

विस्युतं पूर्वविज्ञानं तन्यवसतसा कृत: ॥ 15 ॥

O Brahman! What is the reason that I attained delusion at that time? Earlier knowledge was forgotten. I became identified with that female form, so quickly.

एतन्यायावलं बह्रात जानेउई दुत्पत्यम् ।

ज्ञानात्विकर्त जातं मृतं मोहस्य विस्मुटम् ॥ 16 ॥

O Brahman! This is the strength of Māyā, which is difficult to cross. It is beyond my understanding. It destroyed all my knowledge. It was a clear cause of delusion.

अनुभूतं मया सम्यज्ञातं सर्वे शुभाशुभम् ।

कर्थं त्वं तिजातंस्तत तनुपायं वद्यव मे ॥ 17 ॥

I experienced it (power of Māyā) well. All good and bad were known. Of father! How did you attain victory over it? Tell me that clue.

नात्व उवाच

विज्ञतोउरी माया धाता प्रीतिपुर्वितः पनम् ।

मामुवाच स्मितं कृत्वा विगत मे वासवीर्तु ॥ 18 ॥

O Muni! When my Father learnt the cause of my cares, he smiled and spoke to me in sweet words:

ब्रहोवाच

दुर्जंथ्या सुरैः सर्वैर्जनिधिश्र महात्यमिथः ।

तापसैज्ञान्यैक्श्य योगिधि: पवनागरैः ॥ १९ ॥

न हांता सर्वथा जातुं गुक्तो मायां महावलम् ।

विष्णुजांतु न रणक्रहा तथा रंगभुभमापतिः ॥ 20 ॥

"O Child! The Devas, the high-souled Munis, the wise ascetics and the Yogis subsisting on air only are not able to conquer this Māyā. O Nārada!

Book VI Chapter XXX

The power of Māyā is so very great that I, Viṣṇu and Sāmbhu, the Lord of Umā, none are able to know Her power.

दूरंगा सा महामाया सृधिश्वत्यंतकारिणी ।

कालकर्मव्यापावाहीद्विपित्तकारणैवृत्ता १ 2 1 १

That Mahāmāyā is creating, preserving and dissolving this world by Time, Karma, and Nature and other efficient causes.

गोकं मा कुक भेधार्थित्त प्रायामाहावले ।

न चैव विसयः कावीं वयं सर्वे वियोहिताः ॥ 2 2 ॥

O Child! Know Her to be inconceivable and unapproachable. O Intelligent One! Do not be sorry nor should you be surprised about Māyā's great strength, for we all are deluded by Her."

नारद उवाच

चित्युक्तस्तदा व्यास तमापृष्छ्छा नात्मयः ।

आगतोउम्यय पश्य-वै तीर्थीनि च वारीण चे ॥ २३ ॥

O Dvaipāyana! Thus advised by my Father, my wonder disappeared. I then asked permission of my Father Padma Yoni (Lotus-born) and went out on tour round the sacred places of pilgrimages and on my way, seeing by and by the chief Tirthas, I have now come here.

तस्मात्रविमीय सत्यज्य मोहं कोरवानाजम् ।

काल्बयं सुखासीय: स्थानेउस्मिकुरु सत्तम ॥ 24 ॥

अवश्यमेव पोक्तयं कृतं मुणगुपम् ।

निश्छय हृदये कृत्वा विवारस्य यथासुखम् ॥ 25 ॥

Therefore, O Muni! Dost thou relinquish your sorrows for the extinction of the Kuru's family and remain here and pass your time in great joy and happiness. One must bear the fruits of one's Karma, good or bad; knowing this fully roam at your will wherever you like.

व्यास उवाच

इल्युक्ला नारदो राजनातो मां प्रतिवोध्य च ।

'अर्ह तत्चित्यन्याक्यं चतुर्भ मुनिना तत् ॥ 26 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Maharṣi Nārada thus kindling knowledge in me, went away; I also thought over his words.

स्थितः सरस्वतीरो करेले सारखते वरे ।

कालातिकाहन्योरत्कृतं भागवतं मया ॥ 27 ॥

On the banks of the river Sarasvati, I composed this Devi Bhāgavat to pass away my time during the excellent period of Sārasvata Kalpa.

पुराणमुक्तां भृप सर्वसंशयनाशनम् ।

नानाख्यानसमयमुक्ते वेद्यामाणयसंश्रिन् ॥ 28 ॥

This Purānam is excellent; it is composed on the authority of the Vedas; all doubts are removed by it; many nice events are narrated here.

सन्दोड़ोत्र न कतिथ्वः सर्वांश युपसत्तम् ।

यधेत्रजातिकः क्रौश्यांचाती उदार्यों के ॥ 29 ॥

कृत्वा नर्तेने कामं चेख्छाया यशवर्तीनम् ।

तथा नर्तेने माया जान्स्थावरणंजमम् ॥ 30 ॥

Therefore, O King! Not the least doubt should be entertained. As a magician makes the wooden dolls dance in his hands at his will, so this world-enchanting Māyā is making this world, moving and non-moving, dance from Brahmā down to the blades of grass and all human beings.

ब्रह्मातिवर्षपर्वतं सदेवासुरमानुपम् ।

पञ्चैद्रियसमापुर्न मन्त्रिभान्तुरवर्तीन् ॥ 31 ॥

O King! Know Māyā's triple Guñas to be the cause of the this mind consisting of five organs of senses, that follows the Citta (mind, Buddhi and Ahankāra).

गुणान्तु कारणं राजनर्वेंां सर्वेथा प्रयः ।

कार्यकारणसंयुक्ते भवातीति विविधास्यः ॥ 32 ॥

भिन्रभित्रव्यभावास्ते गुणा मायासमूद्वतः ।

शान्तो घोरस्तथा मृद्धक्यन्तु विविधा चत: ॥ 33 ॥

तत्समेत: पुगाजित्यं ताईहितः कर्णं भवेत् ।

न भवत्येव संसार रहितस्तुषि: पटः ॥ 34 ॥

Actions arise from the causes thereof; there is no doubt in this; what doubt, then, there can arisen that all these creatures of different temperaments will come out of the different Gunas of Mayā. Peaceful, terrible and stupid become the persons in contact with the Maÿic Gunas.

तथा गुर्गीक्षिभिंडीनी न देहौति विविश्रयः ।

देवदेहो मनुष्यो वा तिरशो वा नाराधि १३ ५ ॥

Šrimuddevibhāgavatam

गुर्णीविंहितो न स्यान्पृद्धितीना घटो यथा ।

बहा विषूमत्या करूस्यधामी गुणागधाः। ३ ३ ६ ॥

कदाचिद्धीतीयुक्तास्ते त्याउप्रीतयुतः पुनः ।

तथा विषादयुक्तासे भवति न गुणयोगतः ॥ ३ ७ ॥

How, then, can they exist, bereft of them? As the cloth cannot exist without threads, so the embodied beings cannot exist in the world without the triple Gunas of Māyā. There is no doubt in this. As a pot cannot be made without clay, so these bodies, Devas, human or blinds cannot be created without the Gunas. Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva, too, are possessed of those three Gunas and therefore they become sometimes happy and satisfied, sometimes unhappy and dissatisfied and sometimes they become sad and remorseful as they are then under the influence of one Guna or the other.

इदा कदावित्तस्यस्वरा शान्त: सामाधिमान्।

प्रीतियुक्ति भवेत्सर्वभेतु ज्ञानसंयुतः ॥ 38 ॥

पुनः सच्चिवीरान्सु रजोगुणसाम्यातु: ।

तदा भवेद्योरोकरूप: सर्वेत्रग्रीतिसंपुतः ॥ 39 ॥

यदा तमोगुणाविष्टे बाहुल्येन भवेढ़िधिः: ।

तदा विषादसम्पत्रो गृहो भवित नान्यथा ॥ 40 ॥

Brahmā happens at times to be full of wisdom and knowledge, his temper peaceful, sweet and pleasant; and his soul rapt in Samādhi, when he becomes possessed of Sattva Guṇa; again when he is void of Sattva and filled with Rajo Guṇa, His temper becomes unpleasant and his appearance gets dark and awful everywhere; and when he becomes grossly Tāmasic, He becomes sorrowful and bereft entirely of intelligence.

माधवोप्रि सदा सत्त्वसंश्रितः सर्वथा भवेत् ।

यदा शगत: प्रीतिवृष्ठने भवेक्रानसर्विन्त: ॥ 41 ॥

स एव रज्ञाप्रियव्याप्रीसिनंसुन्तो भवेत् ।

घोरछ सर्वभूतेषु गुणाधीनो रामपति ॥ 42 ॥

Vísnu, when resting in Sattva, becomes peaceful, sweet-tempered, and full of knowledge; when Rajo Gunā preponderates in Him, He becomes void of sweetness and becomes awful to all the beings.

रुद्रापि सचस्युक्तः प्रीलिमाङ्गनिलामाभ्यते ।

राजीनिधितिः सोअप्रि योरः प्रीतिविचिति: ॥ 43 ॥

तमोगुणयुतः सोअपि मुहो विषायदुभयते ।

एते यदि गुणाधीना बह्याविष्युहारदय: ॥ 44 ॥

सुर्विंगीज्ञद्वासतद्वासमावेशपवा अप्रि ।

मन्वादध३ ये प्रोक्ताश्रतुदैशगुणे युगे ॥ 45 ॥

Rudra becomes, too, peaceful and pleasant under the Sattva Guna, awful and void of sweetness under the Rajo Guna, and becomes sad and stupid under the Tamo Guna. O King! When Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara and the solar and lunar Kings, the fourteen lords of Manvantaras, Manu and other are under the control of the magic Gunas, what to speak of other ordinary mortals, men and the other Jivas. अन्येघं चैव का वातां संसारोस्मिन्योपेत्तम ।

मायाधीनं जानतस्यं सदेवासुरामानुम् ॥ 46 ॥

तस्मात्राज कतन्य: संदेहोत्र कदाचन ।

देही मायापराधीनश्रेते तदनुगानुगः ॥ 47 ॥

The whole world is under the control of Māyā; the Devas, men and all other beings. None should doubt on this point. All the embodied beings labour under the directions of Māyā; never can they work independently.

सा च माया परे तत्वे संविदूरोप्रि सर्वदा ।

तद्यपीन प्रेरिता च तेन जीवेषु सर्वदा ॥ 48 ॥

This Māyā is again always residing in the Highest Essence, the Samvit or the Universal Pure Consciousness. Thus Māyā is dependent on the Highest Goddess, Who is of the nature of Samvit, and, stimulated by Her, resides in the hearts of all the Jivas.

ततो मायाविशिष्ठां तां संविद्धे परमेश्वीम् ।

मायेश्वी भगवती सचिव्यान्द्रक्षणिणी ॥ 49 ॥

Therefore one ought to meditate, worship and bow down before the Bhagavati, the Creatrix of Māyā and Who is of the nature of Sarivīt, Pure Existence, Intelligence and Bliss.

ध्यायेतशास्त्रप्रपेच्च प्रणमेच्च जपेद्वि ।

तेन सा सदया भृत्वा मोचयत्येव देहैन्नि ॥ 50 ॥

Thus She becomes gracious and merciful and

Book VI Chapter XXX

liberates the Jivas, giving them Her realisation and drawing together Her own Māyā away from them.

स्वायायां संहत्येव स्वानुभूतिप्रदानतः ।

भुवनं खतु माया सत्यदीक्षरी तस्य नायिका ॥ 51 ॥

भुवनेगी ततः प्रोक्ता देवो शैलोक्यसून्दरी ।

This whole cosmos is nothing but Māyā and the Consciousness (Sarivīt) of the nature of Brahman is the Lord of Māyā. For this reason that Beautiful One in the triple worlds, the Devi Bhagavatī is known by the name Bhuvaneśvarī, the Great Lady of the worlds.

तदूये यदि सर्के स्याचित्चतं भूयिपते सदा ॥ 5 52 ॥

मायया किं भवेत्तनत सदसद्धुतया नृप ।

O King! If the Jivas can fix their hearts on that Samvit, then Māyā, born of the real and unreal, is quite unable to do any harm to them.

तस्मान्यायानिरासार्थ नान्यदे देवतान्तरण ॥ 53 ॥

सभर्थे तु वित्त देवों सचिवदानंरक्षिपशिण ।

तभोराशि नागरियुं रुक्त नैव तमो भवेत् ॥ 54 ॥

किन्तु भानुपभाचन्द्रविद्युविद्विपभाद्यः ।

No other Deva than the Bhuvaneśvari, of the nature of pure existence, intelligence and bliss is able to remove this Māyā. O King! Darkness cannot destroy darkness; the Sun, Moon, Lightning or Fire can destroy it.

तस्मामावेश्वीमवां स्वप्रकाशं तु संविदम् ॥ 55 ॥

आताधयेद्वितिज्ञा मायागुणनिवृत्तये ।

इति सम्वहूसया उज्यातं चूवासुर्वधादिकम् ॥ 56 ॥

Therefore it is highly incumbent on us to worship the Lady of Māyā, the Sarīvatī, the Mother with a cheerful heart to remove the Māyā and Her Guṇas. O King! Now I have narrated to you all the events concerning the killing of Vṛtrāsura that you asked.

यत्पूरं राजशान्तैन किमन्यच्छौतुमिच्छिस ।

पूर्वार्थोंदंय पुराणस्य कविषतस्तव सूत्रत ॥ 57 ॥

यत्र देयास्तु मडिमा विस्तरेणोपादितः ।

एतद्रहस्यं श्रीमान्तै देवं यस्य कस्यचित् ॥ 58 ॥

What more do you want to hear now. O One devoted to vows! I have now described the first half of that Purāṇa, which describes in detail the glory of Śrī Devi Bhagavatī. This Purāṇa, the secret of this Mother of the whole Universe, is not to be disclosed indiscriminately to anybody.

देशं भक्ताय शान्ताय देवीभक्तिताय च ।

शिषाया ज्येषुरुाया युभभक्त्युता च ॥ 59 ॥

Those that are peaceful, self-restrained, devoted, and possessed of Bhakti to the Devi, the disciples that are devoted to their Gurus and the eldest son, those are the fit recipients thereof.

इदमविलकबाना सारभृतं पुराणं

निश्वलनिमानतुल्यं सरमणानुनिविद्धम् ।

पदति परभावाहा: शुणोतीह भक्ल्या स

भवति धरावान्दे ज्ञानवामान्वोउरा १ ६० ॥

इति श्रीदैर्शिभागवते महापुराणो घरकन्ये

भगवतीमाहान्ये एकत्रिंशोउध्या ।। ३१ ।।।

वेदाठवसुभूमखेदी: (1884) यद्योर्मकृतै: शुभै: ।

देवीभागवतत्याय चरकक्यः समापनावन् ॥

।। सामानोयं बष्टः कक्नः ॥

Whoever reads, or hears with greatest devotion this Mahāpurānam, equivalent to the Vedas, fraught with sound proofs and the essence of all talks, becomes, in this world, possessed of great wealth, becomes wise and passes his time in the greatest happiness. There is no doubt in this.

Here ends the Thirty-first Chapter on the Sixth Book

on the glory of Māyā in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgāvatam of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

***