一

CHAPTER I

On the Solar and Lunar Kings

सूत उवाच

शुत्वैतां तापसाहिष्यां कथां राजा मुद्रावित्रतः ।

व्यासं पप्रच्छ धर्मात्मा परीक्षितसुतः पुनः ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said : Glad to hear the excellent divine stories of the Solar and Lunar races. The virtuous King Janamejaya, the son of Parikṣit, again asked:

जनमेव जयाच

स्वामिन्युंचायंना च राजां वंशस्य विहतम् ।

तथा सोमाव्यवानां च श्रोक्रामोउसि सर्वथा ॥ 2 ॥

कवयानय सर्वत्र कथां पापपूर्णाशिनीम् ।

चरितं भूपतीना च चितस्ताईशपोहोयोः ॥ ३ ॥

ते हि सर्वे पशाशिफभक्ता इति मया शुतम् ।

देवीभक्तस्य चितरं शृणवन्नोजसि विरक्तिभाक् ॥ 4 ॥

“O Lord! I am now very eager to hear the increase of the two lines of Kings. O Sinless One! You know everything. So kindly describe, in detail, the pure histories, capable to destroy sins, of the kings and their characters. The kings of the Lunar and the Solar races were great Bhaktas of the Highest Śakti, Śri Bhagavati Devi; this I have heard. O Muni! Who wants not to hear further on the glorious anecdotes of the Bhaktas of the Śri Devi?

इति राजर्षिण पृष्ठी व्यास: सत्यवतीसुतः ।

तमुवाच मुनिश्रेषः प्रसन्वदनो मुनि: ॥ 5 ॥

When the Rājarsi asked thus, the Muni Krṣna

Dvaipāyana, the son of Satyavati began to narrate gladly the several deeds of the Kings.

व्यास उवाच

निशामय महाराज विस्तारादृते मप ।

सोमसूर्यान्वयनां च तथाउन्ये समुद्धम ॥ 6 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! I am now narrating to you in detail the origin, etc., of the Lunar and the Solar dynasties as well as of other kings in their connection. Hear attentively.

शिष्योनाभिसारोजाडे ब्रहासभूच्छतुरनाः ।

तपस्तत्वा समाराध्य महावैदीं सुवुर्भाम् ॥ 7 ॥

तया दत्तवो धाता जगल्हनुं समुद्धातः ।

नागकन्मानुर्षी सृष्टि कर्तुं लोकपितामहः ॥ 8 ॥

The four-faced Brahma sprang from the navel of Visnu; engaged in practising Tapasyā, he began to worship the Mahā Devi Durgā, extremely hard to conceive. Mahā Devi, pleased at his worship, granted boon to Brahma; Brahma, the Grandsire of all the Lokas on thus getting the boon, became ready to create the world; but he could not create all on a sudden the human beings.

विद्यार्थ बहुधा चिते सुह्यर्थं चतुरानतः ।

न विस्तारं जगमाग्यु रचितापि महात्मना ॥ 9 ॥

सरबर्ग मानासान्युझानसर्वेश्वाग्रजापति: ।

मरीचिरंगिराउविश्र बसिष्यः पुलहः क्रतुः ।

पुलस्यश्रोति विद्याता: सप्तैते मानासा: सुता: ॥ 10 ॥

Though the creation was eternally fashioned by the Parmātmā Bhagavati, the four-faced Brahmā thinking over in his mind variously, could not quickly spread it out and accomplish it as a veritable fact. Therefore He, the Prajāpati, first created mentally the seven mind-born sons. These were known by the names of Marici, Atri, Anigirā, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vasiṣṭha.

रूदे तोषात्मुजो2प्युर्सगात्रादो2पवत् ।

दक्षांगुगताय4-2प्यैय मानस: सनकादय: ॥ ११ ॥

वागंगुहाइक्षपन्ती जाता स्वर्गीमुन्तरी ।

वीरिणी नाम विख्याता पुगणेषु महीपते ॥ १२ ॥

असिक्षिति च नान्मा सा यस्यां जातोअथ नादरः।

देवर्षिप्रवरः कामं बढ़णो मानस: सुतः ॥ 1 3 ॥

Next sprang Rudra from the anger of Prajāpati, Nārada from his lap; Dakṣa from his right thumb. Thus Sanaka and the other Rṣi were also his mind bornson. O King! The wife of Dakṣa was born from the left thumb of Prajāpati; this all-beautiful daughter is well known in all the Purāṇas by the name of Virinī and Asiknī. Nārada, the chief of the Devarsis, was born, on some other occasion in her womb.

जननेजय उवाच

अत्र मे सैरयो बहुत् वघुकं भवता चचः ।

वीरियां नराटे जातो दक्षाविति महातपः ॥ १ ४ ॥

कयं दक्षस्य पन्चां तु वीरियां नराटे पुनि: ।

जातो हि बहुण: पुत्रो धर्मसंतपासोनमः ॥ १५ ॥

विचित्रमिद्याग्रतां भवता नारदस्य च ।

दक्षाजन्माय भार्थायां तद्वरव सवित्तम् ॥ १६ ॥

Janamejaya said: O Brahman! A great doubt arises in me to hear that the great ascetic Nārada was born of Dakṣa in the womb of Virinī. The Muni Nārada indeed, was the son of Brahmā; moreover he was the foremost of the ascetics and especially endowed with the knowledge of Dharma; how, then, can he be born of the womb of the Dakṣa's wife Virinī. Well, if that be so, then describe, in detail, that wonderful story of the birth of Nārada in the womb of Virinī.

पूर्वद्रेहः कथं मुक्तः शापात्कस्य महात्मना ।

नारदेन बहुजेन कस्माज्ञन्म कृतं मुने ॥ 17 ॥

O Muni! Under whose curse, the high-souled Nārada, though very wise, had to leave his first body and be born again.

व्यास उवाच

ब्रहणासौ समाविष्टो दक्ष: सृष्टथर्मादितः ।

प्रतः सूजेते सुभुगं शुद्धितोः स्वयंपुं च ॥ १ ॥ ॥

ततः पझसह्वांश्र उनयामास वीर्यन्ति ।

दक्षः प्रजापतेः पुत्रान्वीरिणयं बलवत्तग्न ॥ 19 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King, Brahmā, the Self-born, with a view to create offspring, ordered first Dakṣa: “Go and multiply innumerable children for the increase of the world.” Thus ordered by his father, the Prajāpati Dakṣa produced five thousand powerful and heroic sons in the womb of Virinī.

दूर्वहा तातारः: पुत्रान्सर्वान्वर्यिषयुप्रजाः ।

उवाच प्रहस-वाचं देविषि: कातनोदितः ॥ 20 ॥

भूवः प्रपाणमाताला सहुकामाः प्रजाः कथम् ।

लौकानां हास्यतां यूयं गमिष्यव न संशयः ॥ 21 ॥

पृष्विथ्या वै प्रपाणं तुं जात्वा कार्यः समुधामः ।

कृतो3सी सिद्धिमायाति नान्यथेति विनिश्रयः ॥ 22 ॥

Seeing all the sons of Dakṣa, desirous to multiply, the Devarsī Nārada, urged on, as it were, by Fate, began to laugh at them. How do you desire to multiply when you know not the dimensions and capacity of earth; so you will, no doubt, be put to ridicule and laughter. Rather, if you proceed on work, knowing beforehand the earth's capacity, your efforts will be fruitful. Other wise, your attempt will, no doubt, end in failure.

वातिगण वत युयं वै यद्धान्ताव भुवलस्तम् ।

सभुघातः प्रजा: कर्तुं कर्थ सिद्धिर्भविष्यति ॥ 23 ॥

Alas! You are awfully illiterate! Not knowing the dimensions of the world, you are ready to multiply your progeny; how, then, can you meet wit success!

व्यास उवाच

नारदेनैवमुक्तासे हर्षशा देवयोगतः ।

अन्योन्यमूचः सहसा सत्यगाह मुनि: किल ॥ 24 ॥

Book VII Chapter 1

जाला प्रमाणमुख्यांस्तु सुखं सक्ष्यामड़े प्रजा: ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing, all on a sudden, these words, Haryaśva and other sons began to speak with each other “What this Muni has told, is very true.” Let us then ascertain the earth’s dimensions; we can easily multiply afterwards.

इति संचिन्य ते सर्वे प्रयाता: प्रेक्षितुं पुच: ॥ 2 5 ॥

तलं सर्वे परितुतं वचनात्रादस्य च ।

प्राययं केचित्रतः कामं दक्षिणस्यां तथायरे । २६ ॥

प्रतीच्यानुतरस्यां तु कृतोत्साहा: संमततः ।

दक्ष: पुजानान्द्व्य वा पीडितस्तु शुचा धृष्णम् । २७ ॥

Thus saying, they all went out to reconnoitre the earth. Thus excited at Nārada's words, some went eastward, some southwards, some towards the north and some went to west all simultaneously and, as they liked, to make a survey of the earth. When the sons went away, Dakṣa became exceedingly sorry on their absence.

अन्यानुत्पाद्यामास प्रजार्थ कृतनिध्रयः ।

तेपि तनोघातः कर्तु प्रजार्थयुधमं सुत्ति ॥ 28 ॥

नारदः प्राह तान्द्वया पूर्वे यद्वचनं भूति: ।

बालिशा बत यूयं वै यद्धताला भुवः किल ॥ 29 ॥

प्रमाणं तु प्रजाः कर्तुं प्रवृत्ता: केन हेतुतः ।

शुवा वायवं मुनेतेर्पि मत्वा सर्व विमोहिताः ॥ 30 ॥

जमु: सर्वे यथापूर्वे भातरक्षितितास्ताव ।

तान्सुतान्यस्थितान्द्वहा दक्षः कोवसमन्त्रिनः ॥ 31 ॥

शणाप नारदे रोषाच्यशोकसमूढ़वात् ।

Bent again on multiplying, he begat other sons; those sons again wanted to procreate. Seeing them, Nārada again laughed and said: "Alas! What fools are you! Not knowing the dimensions of the earth, why are you ready to procreate?" They were deluded by Nārada's words, took them as true, and went out as their elder brothers did. Not being able to see those sons, Prajāpati Dakṣa became very sorrowful for them and cursed Nārada in rage.

दर्श उवाच

नासिला मे सुता यस्यास्तमाश्रयावपूर्वि ॥ 32 ॥

पायोनानेन दुर्बुद्धे गर्भावसं प्रजेति च ।

पुत्रो मे भव कामं तं चतो मे धर्षिता: सुतः ॥ 33 ॥

Dakṣa said: “O Evil-minded One! You have destroyed my sons; so be yourself destroyed; you will have to be born in the womb for your sin in causing the death of my sons; you have caused my sons to go abroad; so you must be born as my son.

इति शपतस्तो जातो वीरियणां नारदो मुनि: ।

पहिर्धूंधोरूपजल्कन्य वीरिष्यामिति नः श्रुन्ति ॥ 34 ॥

Thus cursed by Dakṣa, Nāradā had to take his birth in the womb of Virinī. I heard also that the Prajāpati Dakṣa begat afterwards sixty daughters in her womb.

शोकें विहाय पुजाणां दक्षः परमधर्मवित् ।

तासां जयोद्वा प्रादात्करणयाय महात्मने ॥ 35 ॥

द्वा धर्माय सोमाय सलविशंगित भुपते ।

दे चैव भृगवे प्रादाचलतरोप्रत्येभिने ॥ 36 ॥

दे चैवांगिरसे कन्ये तर्वेबांगिरसे पुनः ।

तासां पुत्राक्ष योगाक्ष देवाक्ष दानवासला ॥ 37 ॥

जाता बलसमायुक्ता: परस्परियोक्षतः ।

रागद्वान्विततः सर्वे परस्परिविरितः ।

सर्वे मोहावृताः शूरा हृषयबन्तिमाधिनः ॥ 38 ॥

इति शीदैवीभगवते महापुराणे सतमास्कन्ये

प्रभवोउध्याय: 11 1 11

O King! Dakṣa, the great knower of Dharma, then gave up the sorrows for his sons and married his thirteen daughters to the high-souled Kaśyapa, ten daughters to Dharma, twenty-seven daughters to the Moon, two to Bhrgu, four to Ariṣṭanemi, two to Krśāśva and the remaining two to Aṅgirā. Their sons and grandsons, the Devas and Dānavas, became powerful but antagonistic towards each other. All of them were heroes and very Māyāvīs; so, deluded by greed and jealousy, they quarrelled amongst each other.

Here ends the First Chapter in the Seventh Book on the beginning of the narrative of the Solar and the Lunar lines of kings in the Mahā Purānam Śrīmadveṭbīhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER II

On the Piercing of the Eyes of Cyavana Muni

जनमेव जय चाच

मामाख्याहि महाभाग राजां वंर्णे सवित्तग्न ।

सूवी-नवयमुत्तानां धर्मज्ञानां विशेषतः ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: O Highly Fortunate One! Kindly narrate in detail the spread of the families of those kings in the Solar line who were born and who were especially endowed with the knowledge of Dharma.

व्यास उचाच

शृण भारत वक्ष्यापि रविवंशस्य विस्तरम् ।

यथा श्रुतं मया पूर्वे नारदाप्रविस्तमान् ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O Bhārata! I now speak to you exactly what I heard of yore, from Nārada, the best of the Rṣi, how the Solar race spread.

एकादा नारदः श्रीमान्सरत्याल्पतेरे रुषे ।

आजागामाओं पुण्ये विचार-संदेषच्छया मुनिनः ॥ 3 ॥

प्रणाथ्य शिरसा यादी तस्योः संशित्यतस्ता ।

तततस्वासनं दत्ता कृत्वाहर्णणमधारतृ ॥ 4 ॥

Once, on an occasion, the Muni Śrimān Nārada, on his tour, came at his will to my holy hermitage on the beautiful banks of the Sarasvati river. On seeing him I bowed down at his feet and then remained standing before him.

विविधत्पूर्ववित्या ततुष्कावान्चनं तिवद् ।

पातितोई भूमिश्रेष्ठ पूज्यस्यामानेने चे ॥ ५ ॥

I then gave him a seat and worshipped him with great esteem. I then said to him: "O Best of Munis! You are worshipped by the whole universe; my retreat is sanctified by your coming.

कथां कथय सर्वत्र राज्ञां चरितसंयुतान् ।

राजानो ये समाख्याताः सपतेप्रतिम्मानोः कुले ॥ 6 ॥

तेषामुवर्तितुला चरितं परमाद्धुतम् ।

श्रोत्कामोउम्यहं ब्रह्म-सुर्ववैशस्य विशतरम् ॥ 7 ॥

O All-knowing One! Kindly narrate the histories of the Kings that were famous in the family of the seventh Manu; they were unequalled as far as their

origin was concerned and their characters as well wonderful. Therefore I am very eager to know, in detail, the history of the Solar race.

समाजालाई मुनिश्रेष्ठ समास्यामसुर्वकम् ।

इति पृष्टो मया राजत्रादः परमार्थवित् ॥ 8 ॥

उवाच प्रहसन्धितः समाभाष्य मुद्राउ-वयम् ।

O Muni! Describe shortly or in detail as the circumstances may require." O King! When I made this question, Nārada, the knower of the Highest Reality, gladly smiled, and, addressing me, began to describe the history of the Solar race.

नारद उवाच

श्रणु सत्यवतीसूने राजां वेगमन्तुनम् ॥ 9 ॥

पावनं कर्णिकुखदं धर्मानाविद्धियतूनम् ।

बहाा पूर्वे जगत्कर्ता नाधियंकजसभ्यः ॥ १ ० ॥

विष्णोरिति पुराणेषु प्रसिद्धः परिकीर्तितः ।

सर्वतः सर्वकर्तासी स्वधभूः सर्वशिक्षणम् ॥ १ १ ॥

तपस्तवा स विश्वाता वर्णिणाम्बुतं पुरा ।

सृष्टिकामः जिलो ध्याना प्राप्य सक्रिनमुतनाम् ॥ १२ ॥

युज्ञतुर्पाद्यायास माननाशुभतक्षणान् ।

Nārada said: O son of Satyavati! The history of the royal families is very holy and pleasant to hear; the more so when they are heard, one acquires Dharma and wisdom; therefore do you hear. In ancient times, Brahmā sprang from the navel-lotus of Viṣṇu and created the world. This is well-known in every Purāṇa. That self born, all-powerful, all-knowing, the Doer of all, the Universal Soul practised Tapas in ancient times for Ayuta (ten thousand) years. By virtue of that Tapas, He got special powers to create the world. He meditated on the Auspicious Mother, and getting from Her the excellent powers, He created first the mind-born sons, all endowed with auspicious signs.

मतीश्व: प्रयिततक्षेपाभवल्छिरूकर्गी 11 13 11

तस्य पुत्रोत्त्रिविखाताः: कर्णय: सर्वेस्मात: ।

Book VII Chapter II

Of them, Marici became well known in this act of creation. His son Kaśyapa was respected by all and he was of great celebrity.

यदोदरील तत्यासन्यार्यां द्वसुस्ता: किल 114 14

देवा: सर्वे समुदाया दैत्य द्वक्षा प्रवाना: 1

पशव: पक्षिणश्व तस्मात्यस्थितु काययपी ॥ 15 ॥

देवानां प्रधितः सूर्यां विश्वस्वाजाम तस्य तु ।

He had thirteen views, all daughters of Dakṣa Prajāpati. The Devas, Daityas, Yakṣas Pannagas, beasts and birds all sprang from him. Therefore this creation is called the Kāśyapī creation. Amongst the Devas, the Sun is specially famous; his other name is Vivasvān.

तस्य पुत्र: स विख्यातो वैवस्यतमनुर्पे: ॥ 16 ॥

तस्य पुत्रतदीक्ष्वाकु: सूर्यवेगिविदयर्न: ।

नवाभवनुस्तासस्य मनोरिद्वाकुपूर्वजाः ॥ 17 ॥

तेषां नामानि राजेन्द्र शृष्णुधैकमन्ता: पुनः ।

इक्ष्वाकुर्व ताभाग्यो धूर: शयातिरेव च ॥ 18 ॥

नरिथन्तस्था प्रश्रुर्जगी विद्धु सपना: ।

कलष्ठ पृषध्छ नवैते मानवा: स्मृता: ॥ 19 ॥

इक्ष्वाकुस्तु मनो: पुत्र: प्रयम: संमाजवात ।

त्यय पूजराते चारीज्ञेछो विकूक्षितार्यवान् ॥ 20 ॥

नवानां वंशवित्तरां संक्षेपण निशापाय ।

ग्रूरणां मनुपुवाणां मनोरंतरजन्मान् ॥ 21 ॥

नाभागस्य तु पुत्रोभूद्वंशीयः प्रतपावान् ।

His son was named Vaivasvat Manu; he was a famous king. Besides, Manu had nine more sons. Iksvāku was the eldest. Their names are :(1) Nābhāga, (2) Dhṛṣṭa, (3) Śaryāti, (4) Narisyanta, (5) Prāṃśu, (6) Nrga, (7) Diṣṭa, (8) Karūsa, and (9) Rṣadhara. Iksyāku, the son of Manu was born first. He had one hundred sons, and Vikukṣi was the wise and the eldest of these. I am now narrating how the nine sons, born afterwards of Manu, spread their families. Ambarīṣa was the son of Nābhaṇa; he was very truthful, powerful, and religious.

धर्मः स्वसंधः प्रजापानन्तनतः ॥ 22 ॥

धृत्यु धर्धकं क्षत्र बह्यभूतमजायत ।

स्रैमागकातं स्मयबह्याकर्मेत तथा ॥ 23 ॥

He always governed his subject justly. Dhārṣṭaka

was the son of Dhṛṣṭa; though he was a Kṣaṭtriya, he attained to Brāhmanaphood. He was naturally weak in fighting; always he was engaged in the works relating to the Brāhmanas.

गर्धातैतलनयक्षापूवतनों नाम विश्रुतः ।

सुकन्या च तथा पुत्री कप्लतावणयसंपुता ॥ 24 ॥

च्चवनाय सुता दत्ता राज्ञाधंाय सुन्दी ।

मुनि: सुतोच्नो जाततस्वा: शीतनुर्णेन ह् ॥ 25 ॥

विद्धितो रविपुत्राध्यामश्रिध्यात्मिन त श्रुतम् ।

Ānarta was the well known son and Sukanyā was the beautiful daughter of Saryāti. The King Saryāti gave his beautiful daughter in marriage to the blind Cyavana Rsi; but the Rsi, though blind, got his beautiful eyes again by the good character of the daughter. We heard that the Asvins, the Twins, the sons of the Sun, gave him back his eyesight.

जनमेव ज्ञवा

संदेहोर्ड महान्द्रकृ-काव्यायो कवित्तस्या ॥ 26 ॥

यज्ञात मुनेयेऊन्याद यदा युयी सुलोचना ।

कृकूपा गुणहीना वा नारी लक्षणवर्जिता ॥ 27 ॥

पुत्री यदा भवेत्रजा ततंधाय प्रवच्छति ।

जात्वार्धं सुमुखी कस्माहतवाव्युपसतमः ॥ 28 ॥

कारणं बृहि मे बहान्नुगाढोरित्य सर्वदा ।

Janamejaya said: O Brāhmaṇa! How is it that the King Śaryāti married his lovely-eyed daughter Sukanyā to the blind Cyavana Muni? I have got a great doubt on this point. The King gives his daughter in marriage to a blind person, if she be deformed, ill-qualified, or void of female signs. But the daughter, in this case was beautiful. How then Śaryāti, the Chief of Kings, gave over his daughter, knowing that the Rṣi was blind? O Brāhmaṇa! I am always an object of favour to you; so explain to me the cause of it.

सूत उवाच

इति राजा चकः शुत्वा परीक्षितसुनस्य वै ॥ 29 ॥

द्वैपायन: प्रसजात्या तमुवाच हरिसज्ञ ।

Sūta said: Glad to hear these words of Janamejaya, the Muni Dvaippāyna smilingly said:

<table><tr><td>व्यास उवाच</td></tr><tr><td>वैवस्वतसुतः श्रीमाङ्गधातिनिधा माधिवः ॥ 30 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>तस्य क्लीणां सहस्वाणि चत्वार्यसन्यप्रिक्राः।</td></tr><tr><td>राजपुच्यः सरूपाधु सर्वेलक्षणसयुतः ॥ 31 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>पत्थः प्रेमयुतः सर्वः प्रिया रातः सुर्मंततः ॥</td></tr><tr><td>Saryāti, the son of Vaivasvata, had four thousand married wives. All of them were endowed with auspicious signs and beautiful, all of them were daughters of kings. They all were very obliging and dear to their husbands.</td></tr><tr><td>एका पूत्री तु तासां वै सुकन्या नाम सुन्दरी ॥ 32 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>चितुः प्रिया च मातृणां सर्वांसां चाह्हासिंत ।</td></tr></table>

But, out of all of these, the King had only one daughter exceptionally lovely and beautiful. The father and all the mothers loved exceedingly that sweet-smiling daughter.

<table><tr><td>नगगातिन्हेरुप्रभूतरो</td><td>मानससधिभभ</td><td>॥ 33 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>ब्रद्रासोपानमर्गे च स्वच्छयानीयपृत्तिम् ।</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>

Not very far off from the city, there was a beautiful lake of clear waters, like the Mānasasarovara lake. A Ghāt way (steps made of stones) descended into the lake.

<table><tr><td>हंसकारंखवाकीर्णं चक्रवाकोपोर्णिभत् ॥ 34 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>दात्यूढ़सारसाकीर्णं सरपेध्वीर्णाणतून् ।</td></tr></table>

<table><tr><td>Swans Kārandavas, Cakravākas, Datyūhas,, Sārasas and other birds used to play on its waters. पछधा कमलोपेतं चछ्रीकासुसंवित्न ।। 35 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>पार्थंतछ द्रुमाकीर्णं वेहितं पादपैः सृषेः ।</td></tr><tr><td>सलैलसामलै: सरलै: पुरागागोकमधिडन् ।। 36 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>वटाधव्यकंदोंढे कदलीखण्डराजित्न ।</td></tr><tr><td>जंबीरैर्बिंजपूरेंछ खड़ैरैः पनसैलथा ।। 37 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>कमुकैन्निकेलैंकु केतकैः कांचनुदैः ।</td></tr><tr><td>युधिकाजालकें: गुधे: संवृंत मलिलकाणीः ।। 38 ॥</td></tr></table>

Five varieties of lotuses were there in full bloom, bees were humming there all around. Various trees, Śala, Tāmāla, Sarala, Punnāgas, Aśokas, Banyans, Peepuls, Kadambas, rows of banana trees, Jambiras, dates, Panasas, betelnut tree, cocoanut trees, Ketakas, Kāñcanas, and other various beautiful trees encircled round the lake. Within

these, the white Yāthikās, Mallikās, and other creepers and shrubs were seen beautifying the scenery.

जंब्याप्रतिनिणीभिश्र करंजकुटजायुत् ।

पलाशनिवल्यदिविवल्यानलकमपिडत् ॥ 39 ॥

बभूव वोकिलावा: केकास्वनिवारजित्न् ।

तस्मारीय गुधे देरेगे पादपानां गणायुते ॥ 40 ॥

भागवंश्यवन: शान्ततावास: संश्विता मुनि: ।

Especially there were, amongst them, jack trees, mango trees, tamarind trees, Karanjas, Kutakas, Palāsas, Neem trees, Khadiras, Bel trees, and Āmalaki trees; and peacocks were sounding their notes, cuckoos were cooing their beautiful voices. Close to that place, there was, in a sacred grove covered over by trees, staying Cyavana Muni, the Bhrgu's son, of a tranquilled mind, and the chief of the ascetics.

जालाउसी विजर्भ स्थान तपसेने समाहितः ॥ 4 1 ॥

कृत्वा दुवासने मौनमाधाय जित्नातकतः ।

इन्द्रियाणि च संयम्य त्यक्ताहारतपोनिधि: ॥ 4 2 ॥

जलपानादिरितो ध्यायज्ञाने पराधिकम् ।

सवल्मीको3पवद्धजल्लताभि: परिवहितः ॥ 4 3 ॥

Thinking the place lovely and free from any obstacles, the Muni took his firm seat there and, collecting all his thought within himself, took the vow of non-speaking and controlling his breath became engaged in practising tapasyā. Restraining his senses and foregoing eating and drinking, that Muni constantly meditated on Bhagavatī of the nature of Sat, Cit and Ānanda. O King! While he was thus meditating, the anthill grew up round and covered his body and nice creepers covered that also all round.

कालेन महता राजनसामाकर्णी चिपीलिके:।

तथा स संवृतो धीमानुत्पण्ड इव सर्वतैः ॥ 44 ॥

कदाचित्म स्मीपालः कामिनीगणसंवृतः ।

आजगाम सरी राजन्वहतुमिदमुतामम् ॥ 45 ॥

O King! Long intervals passed away and it was covered over with ants; so much so that that intelligent Muni was covered entirely and looked

Book VII Chapter II

like a heap of earth. O King! Once the King Śaryāti wanted to play in an artificial wilderness and came there to the lake with his wives.

श्यापिति: सुन्दरीवृदंसयुतः सलिलेउमले ।

क्रीडासनो महीपालो बधूव कमलाकरे ॥ 46 ॥

सुकन्या वनमासाधा विजहार सखीवृता ।

सुमनांसि विधिन्यन्ती चझताना चझलोगम ॥ 47 ॥

Śaryāti became at once deeply engaged in playing on the clear waters of the lake, surrounded by the beautiful females. On the other hand, the quick beautiful daughter Sukanyā, picking up flowers here and there with her companions also began to play.

सर्वाभिरयासंयुक्ता राणचरणान्युपा ।

घंकमभागा वलकीच क्ववनस्य समादद्त् ॥ 48 ॥

Dressed in ornaments, Sukanyā walked to and fro; her anklets making a beautiful tinkling sound, till she came to the ant-hill of Cyavana Rsi.

क्रीडासभोपविष्ठा वरवीक्यास समीपतः ।

दर्शं गायस्य रथे वे ख्योते इव ज्योतिगे ॥ 49 ॥

किमेतादिति संचित्य समुद्रुं मनो दूधे ।

गृहीता कंटकं तीक्षा त्वसागण कृगोदरी ॥ 50 ॥

She sportingly sat close to that ant-hill and instantly saw a shining substance inside through that, like fireflies. “What is this?” She thought and wishing to take it, took a thorn and became very eager to prick it up.

सा बृद्धया मुनिना बाला समीपस्था कृतोद्धगा ।

विवारन्तो सुकेशान्ता मन्थध्येवेक कामिने ॥ 51 ॥

Slowly she went close to it and no sooner she got ready to prick it, than the Muni saw the beautiful, good-haired daughter as if to one's liking.

तां बीक्ष्य सुत्ती तत क्षामकण्ठसोपोर्दिति: ।

ताभाषावत कल्याणि किमेदोदिति भारणि : ॥ 52 ॥

The ascetic Bhārgava, seeing that auspicious nice lady with nice teeth, spoke out in a feeble voice: "What are you doing? O thin-bellied One! I am an ascetic; better go away from here.

दूरं गच्छ शिलालाक्ष तापसोर्शे घरानने ।

मा भिंदस्वाघ वर्षीक कणटकेन कृशोदिर ॥ 53 ॥

You have got such big-eyes, yet you do not see me. I therefore forbid you in your this attempt; do not pierce the anthill with a thorn.

तेनेदे प्रोष्ट्यमानापि सा धारस्य ने शुणोति वै ।

किमु खल्सिदमितुस्कृता निर्विधेत्यल लोचेन । ५४।।

Though prevented, the daughter could not hear his words and asking “what was that?” pierced his two-eyes with thorns.

दैवेन नोदिता भिन्चा जागम नृपकन्यका ।

क्रीड़नी शंकमाना स किं कृतं तु मवेति च ॥ 55 ॥

Thus impelled by Fate, the princess sportingly pierced his eyes; but she suspected and thought "What have I done?"

चुकीधि स तथा विद्वानेः परममन्युभान् ।

वेदनाध्वितिः कामं पतिरापं जगाम ह ॥ 56 ॥

गकृष्मूरनिरोधोमे भूलैमिकानां तु तक्षणात् ।

विशेषेण तु भपस्य सामानस्य समंततः ॥ 57 ॥

गजोष्ट्रतुगगाणां च सर्वेषां प्राणिनां तदा ।

ततो क्रूंदे गकृम्भुत्रे गर्शितिदुःवित्तोभवत् ॥ 58 ॥

Thus becoming afraid she returned from that spot. His two eyes being pricked, the great Muni exceedingly pained, became very wrathful; he incessantly gave vent to sorrows and remorse, being restless with pain. At that instant it happened that the king, ministers, soldiers, elephants, horses, camels, so much so that all the beings that were there, had all their evacuations (passing their urines and faeces) stopped. Seeing thus happened all on a sudden, the King Śaryāti was very much pained and became very anxious.

सैनिकः कथितं तस्ये शकुन्मूत्रनिरोधनम् ।

चिन्तयामास भूपालः कारणं दुःखसम्पदे ॥ 59 ॥

All the soldiers came to the King and informed him of the stoppage of their evacuations. The King thought over the cause why this had happened.

विश्विष्यह ततो राजा सैनिकान्यवजनासंखा ।

गृह्माग्य चिन्तातैः केनेदे दृष्टतु कृतम् ॥ 60 ॥

Cogitating thus, the King returned home. Becoming very much troubled with cares and anxieties, He asked his soldiers and kinsman “Who amongst you has done such an heinous act?”

<table><tr><td>सरसः पश्रिमे भागे वनमध्ये महातपाः ।</td></tr><tr><td>ध्यवनस्तापसरत्न तपश्रति दुक्षगम् ॥ 6 1 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>केनाययपकृतं तत्र तायसेग्रितस्मगभे ।</td></tr><tr><td>तस्मातीघा समुत्पत्रा सर्वेषामिति निश्रधः ॥ 6 2 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>तपोवृद्धस्य वृद्धस्य वरिष्ठस्य विगेषतः ।</td></tr><tr><td>केनाययपकृतं मन्ये भागवस्य महात्मनः ॥ 6 3 ॥</td></tr></table>

On the west side of the lake the Maharsi Cyavana is practising the great tapasyā in the midst of the forest; I think some one has done mischief to that king of ascetics, blazing like a fire; and therefore we are overcome with this disease. The high-souled aged son of Bhrgu has become specially proficient in his asceticism and has become supreme; I think someone must have injured him.

ज्ञातं वा यदि वाज्ञातं तस्यैंद फलमुत्तमम् ।

कैक्षु दुहैः कृतः तस्य हेतनं तापस्यस्य ह् १।64 ॥

Though I do not know who is that mischievous person that has shown him contempt or like that, this our state at present clearly shews that this is the fit punishment of that."

इति पृड़सामुक्ते सैनिका वेदनादिततः ।

मनोवाक्कायजितेन न विवोउपकृतं ववम् ॥ 65 ॥

इति श्रीमद्दैभीभागवते महापुरुषो सतमन्कन्धे

हितीयोउवायः 112 11

Hearing this, the soldiers said: None of us has committed any mischief by word, mind or body; we know this very well.

Here ends the Second Chapter of the Seventh Book on the piercing of the eyes of Cyavana

Muni in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam the Mahā

Purānam, of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER III

The King Śaryāti's Giving His Daughter in Marriage to Cyavana Muni

यास उवाच

इति पप्रच्छ तान्सर्वाज्ञा चिन्ताकुलतस्तथा ।

पर्यष्छ्छसूढ़ाद्री सामान ओरातनाउपि च ॥ १ ॥

पीड्वामानं जनं बीक्ष्य पितर्ते दुःखितं तथा ।

विश्चित्य शूलभेदे सा सुकान्या चेदमब्रवीत् ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus the King, troubled with cares, asked his soldiers, in an angry mood. Next he asked his friends in sweet words. The princess, seeing his father and his soldiers sorrowful, thought of her piercing the two eyes of the Muni with a thorn and thus spoke to the King:

वने मया पित्तस्त वल्यीको क्रीभावृतः ।

क्रीड़ल्या सुद्वो दृष्टिश्छद्वयसमित्वः ॥ 3 ॥

"O Father! While sporting in that forest, I came to see a very hard anthill covered with creepers and shrubs wherein I found two holes.

तत्र खडोतद्वीर्णत्नोतीषी वीक्षिते मा ।

सूच्या विद्रे महाराज पुनः खडोतरांका ॥ 4 ॥

O King! Through those small openings, I saw the two shining things as if they were fireflies and thinking them so I pierced them with thorns.

जलविक्ना तदा सूची मया द्वाहा पितः किल ।

हाहेति च श्रुतः शब्दो मन्तो वल्पीकमध्यतः ॥ 5 ॥

तदाहं विक्सिता राजन्किमेति दर्शका ।

न जाने किं मया विद्धं तस्मिन्वल्यीकमण्डले ॥ 6 ॥

At this time a faint voice I heard coming from that anthill. “Oh! I am killed!” I then took out my thorns and found them wet with water. “What is this! I asked myself and was thunderstruck with fear; but I could not know that what I pierced in that anthill.”

राजा शुत्वा तु शयिति: सुकन्यावचनं मूढु ।

मुनेतद्धोर्न नात्वा वर्चीक किंग्रमप्यभात् ॥ ७ ॥

Hearing these gentle words of his daughter, the King Śaryāti thought that that act had no doubt insulted the Muni and went at once to the anthill.

ततापयतपोकूद्ध च्यवनं दुःखतं धूगम् ।

स्कोटयामास वर्चीक मुनिवेदाबृतं ततः ॥ ८ ॥

He broke the anthill that covered the Muni and saw the suffering Cyavana aged in practising Tapasyā, very much in pain.

Book VII Chapter III

प्रणाथ्य देडवब्दूमौ राजा तं भागर्वं प्रति ।

तृधाव विनयोपेतस्मुवाच कृताजुस्ति: ॥ 9 ॥

पुर्या मम महाभाग क्रीडीर्या दुकृतं कृतम् ।

अज्ञानाढूलया बढ़ान्हुत तन्धनुर्महींस ॥ 10 ॥

The King prostrated flat before the Muni and then with folded hands, praised him with hymns and humbly said to him: "O Intelligent One! My daughter has done this wrong act while sporting; therefore O high-souled One! What she had done unknowingly, do you forgive out of your own high-heartedness and liberality.

अकोधिता ही मुनयो घर्वतीति मया श्रुन्ति ।

तस्माचमयि बालायाः क्षेतुमहींस संग्रन्न ॥ 11 ॥

I have heard that the ascetics are always void of anger; therefore now you have to forgive this daughter of the offence and thus shew your kindness.

व्यास उवाच

इति शुत्वा वचस्तस्य च्यवनो वाक्यमब्रवीत् ।

विन्योपानंतं चूद्वा राजानं दुःखितं घृष्णम् ॥ १२ ॥

Vyāsa said: The Maharṣi Çyavana, hearing thus the King's words and specially seeing his humble and distre:sed nature, said:

च्यवन उवाच

राजत्राई क्वार्चिद्धे क्रोपि मेधोभयपवी ।

न ययाजदीथ ग्रणतस्तं दुहिता पीडने कृते ॥ १३ ॥

नैसे पीडा समुदायम मम चाह निरागरास: ।

तेन पापे न जानामि दुःखितस्तं महीपते ॥ १४ ॥

“O King! I never was angry a bit; your daughter had pained me; yet I am not angry and have not cast on her any curse; you better see, that I am innocent; much pain is felt by me due to my eyes being pricked. O King! It seems that you are sorry and troubled for that sin.

अपराधं परं कृत्वा देवीभकस्य को जनः ।

सुखं लभेत यदपि भवेत्नात शिवः स्वयम् ॥ 15 ॥

Who can acquire happiness in this world who has committed a great offence to a Bhakta of the Devi, in spite he gets even Śiva as his Protector.

कि कारोम महीपाल नेत्रहीनो जरावुतः ।

अन्यस्य परिचर्यां चकः कर्तिष्यात पार्थिवः ॥ 16 ॥

O King! On the one hand, I am now worn out by old age, and then, on the other hand, I am deprived of my eyes; what shall be now my means? Please say, who will take care of the blind man?

राजोवाच

सेवका बहूवः सेवां कर्तिथित त्वातिशम्भ ।

क्षमस्व पुनिराष्ट्रैल स्वल्पक्रोषा हि तपासः ॥ 17 ॥

The King said: “O Muni! The anger of the ascetics is transient; you are in practice of your tapasyā; so your anger is a thing of impossibility. So kindly forgive the offence of the daughter. I have got many persons who will incessantly take care of you.”

च्यन्त उवाच

अन्धोर्ह निर्जनी राजसंतपतर्णुं कक्ष क्षमः ।

त्वदीयः सेवकाः किं के तक्रिथन्ति मम प्रिग्यम् ॥ 18 ॥

Cyavana said: "O King! There is none of my relations with me; then I am now made blind; how shall I go on with my tapasya? I do not think that your servants will take care of me.

क्षमाप्यसि चैनம் त्वं कुं कुं मे वचनं नृप ।

देहि मे परिचर्याँई कन्यां कलमलोचनम् ॥ 19 ॥

तुध्ये-उनया महाराज युथा तव महानते ।

करिष्यामि पत्थहांह सा मे सेवां करिष्यति ॥ 20 ॥

O King! If you think it your duty to please me, then do my word, give me your lotus-eyed daughter to serve me and take care of me. O King! I will be very glad if I acquire your daughter; she will serve me when I will be engaged in my tapasyā.

एवं कुते सुखं मे स्थानच वैव भविष्यति ।

सन्तुई ययि राजेन्र सैनिकानां न संशयः ॥ 21 ॥

विश्वित्व मनसा भूप कन्यातानं समाचर ।

न चात्र दूषणं किंचितापासोउहं यतन्ततः ॥ 22 ॥

O King! This, if observed, will satisfy me and all the troubles that are now with you and your army will no doubt disappear. O King! Think and grant me your daughter to me, you will not incur any sin nor any fault.

व्यास उवाच

श्यातिवर्चनं शुत्वा मुनेश्रितातुरोःपवत् ।

न दास्येउपयवा दास्ये किंचिज्ञोवाच भात । २३ ॥

Vyāsa said: O Bharata! Hearing thus the Muni's words, the King Śaryāti was immersed in care and could not say anything whether he would or would not give over his daughter to him.

कवेमंधाय वृद्धाय कुरूपाय सुतामिमान् ।

देवक-योगमां दत्ता सुखी स्यामानस्पमवान् ॥ 24 ॥

The King thought, “my daughter is very fair like a Devakanyā and this Muni is aged, ugly and specially he is blind; how then can I be happy if I give over my daughter to him.

को वात्मन: सुखार्थीय पुत्रा: संसारतं सुखम् ।

इतेतैल्यमिति: पाणो जानत्रिय शुभाणुभम् ॥ 25 ॥

Who is there so stupid and vicious that knowing his good and bad, he for his own selfish happiness wants to deprived his beautiful daughter of the enjoyments of her married life.

प्राय सा च्यवनं सुधूः पञ्जवाणगरित्ति ।

अर्थं वृद्धे पति प्राय कं कलं नयिध्यति ॥ 26 ॥

How will that fair eyebrowed daughter of mine pass her days happily in the company of this aged Muni when she will be overpowered by passion.

यौवने दुर्जेय: कामो विशेषेण सुरूपया ।

आमतुल्यं पति प्राय किंयु वृद्धं विलोचनम् ॥ 27 ॥

गौतमं तापसं प्राय रूपवीवनसंरुता ।

अहल्या वासेवेनाणु वक्षिता वरवर्गिनी ॥ 28 ॥

The more so when the young beautiful ladies are not able to conquer their passions though possessed of husbands of their own standard and liking, how then can my daughter conquer her passion on getting this old blind husband! The exquisitely beautiful Ahalyā married Gautama; but, seeing the youthful beauty of that lovely lady, Indra deceived her and took away her chastity.

ग्राता च पतिता पशुज्ञाता धर्मविपर्यम् ।

तस्माद्वतुर्ने चे दुःखं न द्वाद्वि सुकंत्यकम् ॥ २९ ॥

Till at last, her husband Gautama finding that action contrary to Dharma, cursed him. Now

through the severe curse of that Brahmarṣi many troubles many arise; so I cannot in any case give my daughter Sukanyā over to him.

इति संचित्य श्रान्तिविभ्ना: स्वगृहं यथो ।

सचिवांश समादाय मन्चे क्रोस्तिश्वितः ॥ ३० ॥

Thus thinking and absent-minded the King went back to his home and, being very distressed, called his ministers to form a council.

भो मिन्णो बुवल्पा कि कत्वेलं मायापुना ।

पुत्री देवारण विधाय भोक्त्यं चुःखेवा न ॥ ३१ ॥

विचारायधं मिलिता हितं स्यामय वे कवम् ।

O Ministers! What am I to do now? Is it advisable to give over my daughter to the Muni? Or is it better to suffer these pains? Judge and say what is the best course for me."

मन्त्रिण कचुः

किं बुभोर्यसम्भृतराज संकंठेगतिनुतारये ॥ ३२ ॥

दुर्भागाय सुकन्यैषा कर्थे देवासितमुन्नरी ।

The Ministers said: “O King! What shall we say in this critical juncture? How can you bestow your exceedingly beautiful daughter to that ugly unfortunate ascetic?

व्यास उवाच

तदा चिन्ताकुलं वीध्य पितरं मज्जान्सादा ॥ 33 ॥

सुकन्या त्वितिगतं जाला प्रहस्येदमुवाच ह ।

चितः कसम्बुद्वानचं चितन्याकृतितेज्व्य: ॥ 34 ॥

मकृतते कु:खसिंविनो विषणवादनोअ सि ।

Dvaippāyna said: At this moment, seeing her father and ministers troubled very much with care, Sukanyā understood at once everything by signs and hints; she then smilingly said to her dear father: "O Father! Why are you looking so sad with cares? Perhaps you are very much troubled and sad for me.

अहं गाला मुनिं तत्र समाश्रास्य भयार्दितम् ॥ 35 ॥

करिष्याम प्रसत्र तमात्यदानेन वे सितः ।

इति राजा वचः शुत्वा भाषितं वत्कुकन्याय ॥ 36 ॥

तामुवाय प्रसताला सचिवानां च श्रवताम् ।

O Father! I have pained that Muni; so I will go

Book VII Chapter III

and console him; what more than this that I will give up myself at his feet and please him." Hearing these words of Sukanyā, the King spoke to her very gladly before all the ministers.

कयं पुत्र त्वमंध्य परिचर्यं चनेउक्ता ॥ 37 ॥

क्रियसि जरातंस्य क्रोधनस्य विशेषतः ।

“O Daughter! The Cyavana Muni is blind, aged and of a worn figure, especially of a very irritable temper; and you are a mere girl; how will you be able to serve him in that dreadful forest?

कवमन्याय चानेन रूपेण रतिस्त्रिभाण् ॥ 38 ॥

तद्योय वरया प्रस्तद्वाहा सुखवांछया ।

You are like Rati in beauty and loveliness; how can I bestow my daughter to that aged worn out, blind Muni for my own pleasure!

पिता पूर्वी प्रदातव्या वयोज्ञानितेवावता च ॥ 39 ॥

धनधान्यसमुद्धाय नान्धाय कदाचन ।

The father marries the daughter to him who has got relations, who is a proper age, strong, who has got unequalled grains and wealth, gems and jewels; never to a man void of wealth.

व्व ते रूप विशालाक्षि व्वसौं वृद्धो वनेचरः ॥ 40 ॥

कयं देवा मया पुत्री तस्मै चातिवराय च ।

O broad-eyed One! You are exquisitely handsome; and that ascetic is very old; see what an amount of difference lies between you two. The Muni, moreover, has past his marriageable age; so how can I give over my daughter.

उठजे निवर्ते वासो यस्य नित्यं मनोहरे ॥ 4 1 ॥

कमधेनुवगवश्रिक कल्पनीये मय तव ।

O Lotus-eyed! You always dwell in beautiful places; how can I now make you dwell for ever in thatched huts?

मरणों में वरे प्राणं सैनिकानां तबैव च ॥ 4 2 ॥

न ते प्रदामांधाय रोचते पिकभापिण ।

O Cuckoo voiced one! Rather will I and my soldiers die than to bestow you to that blind husband.

भवितयं भवलेव एंयै नैव त्याज्यम्हम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

सुविधा भव सुश्रेणि न दास्येऊन्याकर्हिंचित ।

Let whatever come it may, I will never lose patience; therefore, O One of good hips! Be quiet. I will never give you to that blind man.

राज्यं त्रिष्ठुं वा यातु दैहेडेयं च तदीये मे ॥ 44 ॥

न त्वां दास्यास्छई तम्पै नेह्रानीय बालिके ।

O my Daughter! I do'nt care a straw whether my kingdom and my body live or die, but I will never be able to give you over to the ascetic."

सुकन्या तं तदा प्राह श्रुत्वा तद्धचनं पितुः ॥ 45 ॥

प्रसवद्वतानीत स्नेहायुक्तिमितं वचः ।

Hearing thus the father's words, Sukanyā began to speak with a glad face the following sweet and gentle words:

सुकन्योवाच

न मे चिंता पित: कार्यं दौड़े मां मुनयेरुध्न । ४ ४ ६ ॥

सुखं भवतुं सर्वैषां लोकानां मकृतेन है ।

संवशियाभि सन्तुषा पति परमपावनम् ॥ ४७ ॥

भक्न्या परमया चाधि वृद्धि च विजने वने ।

सतीधार्यात चाहं चार्थिमा सुसंमतम् ॥ ४८ ॥

न भोगेच्छाउसि ने तात सत्यर्थ चित्तं मानाव ।

"O Father! Do not trouble yourself for nothing with cares on my account. Give me over now to that best of Munis; then all the persons will be happy, no doubt. I will derive my intense pleasure there in that dense forest by serving with intense devotion my old husband, who is very holy. I have got not the least inclination towards these worldly enjoyments which are the sources of all troubles for nothing. My heart is now quiet. Therefore, O Father! I will become a chaste wife to him and act according to his liking."

यास उवाच

तब्धुर्वा भाषितं तस्य मन्निणो विस्तयं गताः।। ४ १ ॥

राजा च परमप्रीतो जगाम मुनिसप्रिधो ।

गत्वा प्रणय्य शिरसा तमुवाच तोत्पधन् ॥ 50 ॥

स्वामिन्यूहाण पूर्वी मे सेवार्थ विंधितद्विषो ।

इन्युक्त्वाप्रमै ददी पूर्णी विवाहविद्धिना नृपः ॥ 51 ॥

प्रतिगृहा मुनिनः कन्या प्रसजो भागवीक्षणवत् ।

पारिवह्नं न जग्रह दीयमानं नृपेण ह ॥ 52 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

कन्यामेवाग्रहीत्कामं परिचरार्थमात्मनः । प्रसजेडसिमनुनी जातं सैरिकतनां सुखं तदा । ५३ ।। राजश्व परमाहुादः संज्ञातस्तक्षणाद्वि । दत्त्वा पुत्रीं यदा राजा गमनाय गृहं प्रति ॥ ५४ ।। मर्ति चकात तन्वंनी तदोवाच नृपं सुता ।

Vyāsa said: O King! The Ministers were greatly amazed on hearing these words and the King also become greatly pleased and took her to the presence of the Muni. Going before him, he bowed down to the Muni and said: "O Lord! Please accept duly this daughter for your Sevā." Thus saying, the King betrothed his daughter to him according to rules. Cyavana Muni also become very glad to receive her. The Muni took the daughter willingly for his Sevā but refused other dowries that the King presented. Thus the Muni became pleased; immediately the soldiers began to evacuate and were very glad. Seeing this, the King's heart became filled with joy. When the King, thus finishing the betrothal ceremony of his daughter wanted to return home, the thin bodied princess then told her father:

सुकन्योवाच

गृहाण मम वासांसि प्रपणानि च मे चितः ॥ 55 ॥

बल्कलं परिधानाय प्रपच्छाजिनमुन्तमम् ।

वेयं तु मुनिपत्नीना कृत्वा तपसि सेवनम् ॥ 56 ॥

करिष्यामि तथा तात यथा ते कौतिंरच्छुता ।

भविष्याति भुवः पुढ़े तथा स्वर्ग साताले ॥ 57 ॥

परतोककरुप्यायहं चरिष्यामि दिवानिरगम् ।

दरवांधाय च बुद्धाय सु-तरीं युवती तु माम् ॥ 58 ॥

चिन्ता त्वया न कर्तव्य शनिनाशसमुद्धता ।

अकन्यती वसिष्ठस्य धर्मपनी यथा भृति ॥ 59 ॥

तर्वेहाई भविष्यामि नात्र कार्या विचारणा ।

Sukanyā said: “O Father! Take away all my ornaments and clothing and give me for my use an excellent dear skin and one bark. O Father! I will dress myself like the wives of Munis and serve my husband in such a way as will bring to you the unparalleled undying fame in Heaven, Earth and

the Nether regions; also I will serve my husband's feet so that I can derive the highest happiness in the next world. I am now full of youth, especially beautiful; do not think a bit that as I am wedded to an aged ascetic, that my character will be spoilt. As Vasiṣṭha's wife Arundhati has attained celebrity in this world, so also I will attain success; there is no doubt in this.

अनसूया यथा साखी भार्यांत्रेः प्राणिता भृति ॥ 60 ॥

तर्वेहाई भविष्यामि पुत्री कर्जितकी ततः ।

सुकन्यावचनं श्रुत्वा राजा परमधर्मवित् ॥ 61 ॥

दत्वास्त्रिनं करोदणु वीक्ष्य तां चाहसृहासीनि ।

त्यलव्या भूषणवासांसि मुनिवेषधरां सुतान् ॥ 62 ॥

विवर्णवदनो भूत्वा स्थिततरत्रेव पार्थिवः ।

राज्ञ: सर्वी: सुतां दृष्टवा वर्कलाजिनधारिणीम् ॥ 63 ।

रूकदृष्टिशणोकांतत विमाना इवाधवन्त ।

तामापुरच्छा महीपालो मन्द्रिभि: परिवारितः ।

ययी स्वनगरं राजन्मुक्ता पूर्णे शुच्ञार्थिताम् ॥ 64 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे सत्यमकन्धे

तृतीयोउधायः 11 3 11

As the chaste wife Anasūyā of Maharṣi Attri has become widely known in this world so will I be known also and establish your fame. The exceedingly religious King, hearing all these words of Sukanyā, gave her decr skin and all other articles wanted. The King could not help weeping, when he saw that his daughter had dressed herself like the daughter of a Muni. He stood fixed, very sad, on that very spot. All the queens were exceedingly filled with sorrow to see the daughter dressed in bark and deer-skin. Their hearts quivered and they began to weep. O King! Then the King Śaryāti bade goodbye to the Muni, leaving there his daughter. He went with a grievous heart and returned to his own city, accompanied by the ministers.

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Seventh Book on the bestowing of the daughter of the King Śaryāti to the Cyavana Muni in Śrimaddevitbhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsā.

Book VII Chapter IV

CHAPTER IV

On Sukanyā and the Aśvīns

व्यास उवाच

गते राजनि सा बाला पतिसेवापरायण।

बधूव च तधारुनीर्ना सेवेधे धर्मतसरा ॥ 1 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When the King Śaryāti departed, that virtuous lady devoted her time in serving her husband, and the Fire.

फलान्यादाय स्वानूनि मूलानि विविधानि च ।

ददौ सा मुनये बाला परिसेवापरायण ॥ 2 ॥

पर्ति तपोदकेनागृ स्वायधित्वा मृगत्वचा ।

परिवेश्य शुभायां तु तुच्यां स्थापितवल्यपि ॥ 3 ॥

तितान् यवकुशगानेय पौकल्य कमण्डतुम् ।

त्युवाच तिवकर्म कुरुच मुनिसत्ता ॥ 4 ॥

She gave to the Muni for his food various delicious roots and fruits. She made him bathe with warm water; then making him put on the deer skin, she made him sit on the Kuśāsana. (Seat made of the Kuśa grass.) Next she used to place in his front Kuśa, Til and Kamandalu and speak to him “O best of Munis! You are now to perform your daily rites (Nitya Karma).”

तमुत्थाय करे कृत्वा समापते नियतकर्भिन ।

दूर्यां वा संस्ते बाला घतरिं संन्येशशत् ॥ 5 ॥

When the Nitya Karma was finished, the lady used to catch him by his hand and make him sit on another seat.

पशुतादानीय पव्वानि फलानि च नृपात्मज ।

भोजयामास च्यवनं नीवारात्रं सुसंस्कृत् ॥ 6 ॥

Next the princess brought fresh ripe fruits and cooked rice, grown without cultivation and gave to the Muni for his food.

सुक्नवंत पति तृणत दुत्वा3प्रमन्मादात् ।

पश्राच्च पूरं प्रयाणि दटौ चारतसंयुता ॥ 7 ॥

When the husband finished his meals, she gave him devotedly water for cleansing his mouth; then washing his hands and feet gave him the betelnuts and pān leaves.

गृहीतमुखवासं तं संवेश्य च शुभासने ।

गृहीत्नाजी शरीरस्य चकार साधनं ततः ॥ 8 ॥

Next he made him sit on an excellent seat, and with his permission, performed her own bodily purifications.

फलाहांर स्वयं कृत्वा पुर्जनांचा च सश्रिधो ।

प्रोवाच प्रणयोपेता किमाजापयसे प्रभो ॥ 9 ॥

She then, used to eat the remnants, fruits and roots of the dishes of her husband; and coming next to her husband addressed him affectionately “O Lord! Order me what can I do now for you?

पादस्यहान्ते नेउष्ठ क्रोगेय यदि मन्यसे ।

एवं सेवापान नित्यं कपूर पतितलग्न ॥ 10 ॥

If you like, I may champoo your legs and feet"; thus every day that princess devotedly spent her time in serving her husband.

सार्य होमावसाने सा फलान्याह्य सुन्दरी ।

अर्पयामास मुनवे स्वाजून च पूरून्च ॥ 11 ॥

At evening when the Homa ceremony was finished, she collecting delicious and soft fruits presented to him to eat.

ततः शेभाणि खुचुसे प्रेमयुक्ता तद्वान्या ।

सूयशणितरणं कृत्ता शाययामास तं पूदा ॥ 12 ॥

With his permission she, then, ate that were left of the fruits; next she prepared bedding soft to the touch and gladly made him sleep on it.

सुते सुखं प्रिये कान्ता पादसंहानं तदा ।

चकार पृच्छती धर्म कुतस्थाणं कुशोदरी ॥ 13 ॥

When his dear husband thus laid himself on the bed, she champooed his feet and legs and in the interval, asked him about the religious duties of the chaste wives of the family.

पादसंहानं कृत्वा निशि शफित्सरायण ।

निद्रितं च मुनि नात्वा सुवाया चरणातिके ॥ 14 ॥

गुची प्रतिहितं बीक्ष्य तालवृतेन भामिति ।

कुवाणी शैनितं वायुं सिवेषे स्वपति सदा ॥ 15 ॥

Śrimaddevithāgavatam

When the Muni fell asleep in the night, she devotedly laid herself close to his feet and slept. During the summer season when her husband was perspiring, the lady used to fan him with cool breeze. She took off his troubles and thus served her husband.

हैमंते कामहंभारं कृत्वादिभिजलनं पुरः ।

स्थापयिता तथाउपृच्छसुखं तेउसीति चासकृत् ॥ 16

In the cold season, she collected firewood and lit them before him and used to ask him frequently "O Muni! Are you feeling pleasure in this?"

बाहो मुहूर्ते चोलाया जलं पात्र च मृतिकाम् ।

समर्पयित्वा शोचार्थी समुत्थाय पति क्रिया ॥ 17 ॥

स्थानादूरे च संस्थाय दूरं नाला स्थितभक्ति ।

कृतग्रेषचं पति ज्ञाला गत्या जग्राह तं पुनः ॥ 18 ॥

That lady, dear to her husband, used to get up from her bed in the Brāhma Muhūrta before Sunrise, next made her husband get up and took him some short way off and there made him sit for calling on nature. She kept ready water and earth and stood in readiness at a suitable distance apart.

आनीयाममव्यगा चोपवेश्यासने रुषे ।

भुज्जलाथा च श्रबाल्प पादास्य यथाविधि ॥ १९ ॥

दत्वाचमपात्रं तु दन्तधावनमाहत् ।

सत्यं दलकाई च यथोक्ते नृपनिद्वनी ॥ २० ॥

चक्राशोषु जलं शूढ़े समानीते सुपावनम् ।

स्नानार्थ जलमाहूलय पघछ्छ प्रणायचिता ॥ २१ ॥

किमाजापयसे बढ़ान्तुतं थै दन्तधावनम् ।

उथोटके सुसमयं कुक सन्तां समन्वकम् ॥ २२ ॥

Knowing that he had finished his calls for nature, she took him back to the Asrama and washed his hands and feet with water duly making him sit on a convenient Asana. She then gave to him the pot for Acamana and then began to collect fuel. She used to bring pure clear water and made it hot; then she asked her husband fondly "O Husband! Have you finished cleaning your teeth? Warm water is ready; may I bring it to you? You better bathe with that, uttering your Mantrams.

वर्तते होमकालोउयं सन्यापा पूर्वां प्रवर्तते ।

विधिवघद्वानं कृत्वा देवतापुजनं कृफ ॥ 23 ॥

एवं कन्या पर्ति लक्ष्या तप्तविशमर्पमिदिता ।

नित्यं पर्यंचराग्रीत्या तपसा नियमेन च ॥ 24 ॥

The time is now for performing the morning Sandhyā and for performing Homa. Do the Homa regularly and worship the Devas." The princess, whose nature was pure and clean as anything, kept herself engaged daily in serving her husband, Cyavana Muni, with perfect gladness, austerity, and observing all the rules duly.

अन्नीनामितीधीनं च गुरूप्यां कुर्वीत सदा ।

आराध्यामास मुदा च्यवनं सा शुभानना ॥ 25 ॥

Thus that beautiful-paced princess worshipped gladly Cyavana Muni, serving Fire and the guests daily.

कर्मिश्रिक्षय काले तु रविज्ञाविशान्यभी ।

च्यवनत्याभाप्यायो क्रीघानी समाराती ॥ 26 ॥

Then, once, on an occasion, the Asvin twins, the sons of Sūrya came sporting and at their pleasure, close to the hermitage of the Cyavana Muni.

जले सत्ताव तु तां कन्यां निवृत्ता स्वाध्यमं प्रति ।

गच्छतीं चारुकसर्वीं रविवुगवायपर्यतम् ॥ 27 ॥

At that time the princess, beautiful in all respects, was returning home after her bath in a pure clear stream and came to the sight of the two Aśvins.

तां नुह्या देकक्यां तां गत्वा चांतिकामदात् ।

कचतुः समधिद्वून नास्यावलियोगेहिति ॥ 28 ॥

Being enchanted by her extraordinary lovely beauty, they thought she might be a Deva Kanyā, quickly went to her and fondly questioned her: "O slow moving One like an elephant! Look! We are the sons of Devas; we have come to you to ask some question.

क्षणं तिड् वरागेहे प्रडुं त्वां गजगामिनि ।

आगां देवसुती प्राप्ती बृहि सत्यं शुचिसिते ॥ 29 ॥

O Excellent One! Wait for a moment; we request thus to you. O Sweet-smiling One! Please answer our questions truly and properly."

Book VII Chapter IV

पूरी कसय पति: कसे के कथमुहानमागता ।

एकाकिनी तद्योर्यम्बन्नानार्थे चारकोचोचे ॥ 30 ॥

द्वितीय श्रीराघाभासि कांवा कमलतोचने ।

इच्छामसु वयं ज्ञातु तत्चवामाखीह शोभने ॥ 31 ॥

O Lovely-eyed! Whose daughter are you? Who is your husband? Why have you come here alone to bathe in this tank? O Lotus-eyed! You seem to be a second Lakṣmī; O Beautiful One! We want to know-something; please reply exactly.

कोमती चरणी कान्ते स्थिती भूमावानुक्ती ।

हदये कुरतः पीड़ां चलर्ते चललोचने ॥ 32 ॥

O Beloved! Your feet are exceedingly gentle; why have you not put on any shoes; why are you walking barefooted? Our hearts are being troubled to see you walking thus barefooted?

विमानाहासि तर्वीण कांध पढ़्यां जयस्वः ।

अनावृतात्र तविपि किमर्थे गमान तव ।। 33 ॥

O Thin bodied One! Your body is very soft that you ought to have gone in car; why are you thus walking on foot and in such an ordinary dress in this forest?

दारीशितसमयुक्ता कयं न त्व विनिर्मिता ।

राजपुत्रप्रसा वासि वद सर्व चरानेने ॥ 34 ॥

Why have not hundreds of maid-servants accompanied you? O lovely faced One! Speak truly whether you are a princess or an Apsarā.

धन्या भाता यतो जाता धन्योजी जनकस्तव ।

वक्तू त्वां नैव शगतो च भर्तुभार्य त्वाना ॥ 35 ॥

O Sinless One! Blessed is your mother from whom you are born; blessed is your father. Specially the person with whom you are married, we are unable to describe his fortune.

देवलोकाधिका भूमिर्ये चैव सुतोचने ।

प्रचलंड्गरणतेउ द्य स्माववति भूतलम् ॥ ३६ ॥

O Lovely eyed! This earth is being sanctified by the movements of your feet; consequently this garden is now purer today than the Devaloka.

सीभाग्याद्य मृगा: कामं ये त्वां एपवित् वे वे ।

ये चान्ये पक्षिणः सर्वे भूरिये चातिरियातना ॥ 37 ॥

Boundless is the fortune of these deer and birds

who can see you whenever they like; what more can we say than this that this forest is rendered very pure.

सत्यार्जत तब चात्यर्थ सत्यं बृहि सुतोचने ।

पिता कल सपी: क्वासी ग्रहुधिज्ञात्स सादर ॥ 38 ॥

O Fair One with fair eyes! It is needless to praise your beauty; speak truly who is your father and who is your husband; we like very much to see them.

व्यास उवाच

तयोरिति वचः श्रुत्वा राजाकन्याजितिपुस्ति ।

तत्वुवाच जयाक्रान्ता देव्युजी नृपात्मजा ॥ 39 ॥

गर्जाप्तितनयं मां वां विज्ञं भार्यां मुनेत्रि ।

च्यवनस्य सर्ती कान्ता पिंग द्रतां चयुच्छया ॥ 40 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! On hearing their words, the exquisitely beautiful princess bespoke to the twin Devas with much bashfulness: "I am the daughter of Sāryāti; father has given me over, under the directions of the Daiva, to the Maharṣi Cyavana.

पतिरधोर्षिति मे देखे वृद्धशातीव तापसः ।

तस्य सेवामहोत्रयं करोमि प्रीतमानसा ॥ 4 1 ॥

I am his chaste dear wife; the Maharṣi is staying in this very place. O Twin Devas! My husband is a blind ascetic and he is very aged. I gladly serve him day and night according to the rules of chastity amongst women.

को युवा किंभिह्यातो परीतिरीक्षित चाओं ।

तजागल प्रकुस्तमाओं चाछा पावनम् ॥ 42 ॥

Who are you? And why have you come here? My husband is staying in the Asrama; kindly come and sanctify the Asrama."

तदाकरणं वचो दसावुचतुस्तां नाराधि ।

कर्थ त्वमसि कल्याणि विंत्रा दत्ता तपविचेने ॥ 43 ॥

O King! The two Aśvins heard her and said: "O Auspicious One! Why has your father betrothed you, such a gem, to an old ascetic?

धानसोर्पस्मिनोहेशे विद्युल्लीसादामी यथा ।

न देखेवधि तूल्य हि तल दृष्टास्ति पभामी ॥ 44 ॥

लं दिव्यांवरायेयासि सोभसे नाजिनैवृता ।

सर्वाभरणसंयुक्ता नीलालकवर्धिधी ॥ 45 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

It is very strange. Indeed! In this solitary forest you are shining like a steady lightning; what more can we say than this that we hardly find a beautiful lady like you, even in the Devaloka! Alas! The Deva dress and a full set of ornaments and blue dyes look well on you; this deer-skin and barks of trees in no way fit you.

अहो विधेईकलितं विवेहितं

यद्रच रफ्मोक वने विश्वीदिस ।

विशालानेउन्यमितं पति प्रिये

मुर्नि समासाछ जाततूरं भृणम् ॥ 46 ॥

वृथा वृतलेन पृष्ठं न शोभसे

नवं वयः प्राय्य मुनेत्यपिछते ।

मनोभवेनाशु शगः सुर्मंधिताः

पत्ति कसिन्यतितीदुशस्तव ॥ 47 ॥

O Beautiful One! Your eyes are very large; yet the Creator has given you a blind husband; specially a very aged one; and you are wearing away by constantly dwelling with your blind husband in this forest. What more can be wrong for the Creator than this? O deer-eyed One! In vain you have selected him for your husband.

त्यमेधभार्यों नवरोयान्याचिता

कृतासि धात्रा ननू मंदबुद्धिना ।

न वैनमहैस्यसितायतेक्षणो पत्ते

त्यमर्थ कुरु भारकोचने ॥ 48 ॥

At this period 'of your and beauty it does not look at all well to see you with your blind husband. You are versed in dancing and music; but your husband is blind and aged; when in dancing you will shoot your darts of love, on whom then, will those arrows fall?

यूथेव ते जीविकेम्बनुजेशणे

पर्ति च सम्पाय्य मुनिं गतेक्षणम् ।

वने निवासं च तथासजिनांवर-

प्रधारणं योग्यतं न मवमहे ॥ 49 ॥

O large-eyed One! Oh! The Creator is certainly of a very little understanding! Else why would he have made you, so full of youthful vitality, the wife of a blind man? O lovely-eyed One! You are never fit for him; select another husband.

अतो5नवद्योग्यभयोस्त्वमेकं

वरं कुरुध्यावहिता सुलोचने ।

किं यौविनं मानिनि संक्रोपेथि

द्वथा सुर्दि सुन्दरी सेवमाना ॥ 50 ॥

O Lotus-eyed One! Your husband is not only blind but an ascetic; so your life is quite useless; we do not consider it fit that you reside in this forest and put on this bark and deer-skin. O dark-eyed One! Your body and every limb thereof is very beautiful; judge well and make one amongst us your husband.

किं सेवसे5भाग्यविजितं तं

सापुस्तां पोषणार्थणाथम् ।

त्वकत्वा भुनीं सर्वसुखापवर्जितं

भजानवहायंगुभयोरूत्वमेकम् ॥ 51 ॥

O Proud One! Why are you being so very beautiful, spending your youth in vain in serving this Muni? No good signs are visible in this Muni; he cannot maintain nor protect you even; why are you, then, serving him in vain? O spotless One! Leaves at once this Muni, quite incapable in giving any sort of pleasure, and marry one of us.

लं नन्दने चैत्रध्ये चने च

कृष्णव कानते प्रथितं विहाराम ।

अन्नेय भूद्रुने कर्थ हिं कारतं

विजेच्चे मानिनि मानहीन् ॥ 5 2 ॥

O Beloved! Then you will enjoy in the Nandana Kānana or in the forest of Caitraratha. O Proud One! How will you spend your time with the aged husband, being brought to so much humiliation and without any dignity and self-respect.

भूपात्मजा तर्व शुभ्नक्षणा च

जानासि संसारविद्धारभावम् ।

भायेत्र हीना विजने वनेत्र

कालं कवं वाहस्ये चृषा च ॥ 53 ॥

You are endowed with all auspicious signs; moreover you are a princess; you are not ignorant of all enjoyments in this world; why then you like to live such an unfortunate life in vain in this forest? O Princess! Your face is exceedingly beautiful;

Book VII Chapter V

your eyes are wide and your waist is thin. Your voice is sweet like a cuckoo.

तस्माद्रजस्य चिकभाविणि चाक्ववले

एकं झ्योत्सव सुखाय विशालानेते ।

देवालयेषु च कुशोदिरं पृथ्व

भोगोरत्थत्वा मुनि जरठमाणू नृपैंश्रुपत्रि ॥ 54 ॥

Who is more beautiful than you? Quite now your aged ascetic husband and marry one of us for your happiness; then you will be able to enjoy excellent celestial things in the heavens.

किं ते सुखं चात्र वने सुकेशि

ब्रुद्रेन सार्थ विजने मृगाशि ।

सेवा तर्पाधस्य नवं चयछ्न

किं ते मर्तं भूपतिषुवि दुःखम् ॥ 55 ॥

O good-haired one! What pleasure can you derive by your staying in this forest with your blind husband! O deer-eyed One. It is very painful for

you to serve at this young age of yours, to remain in this forest and serve this aged man. O Princess! Is it that you like troubles and nothing else.

नववयः सुखोभोगसमीहितं

चटुलपक्ष्मधरे वराविधिन ।

शशिमुखि त्वमतीव सुकोमतत

फलजनाहरणं तव नोचिनम् ॥ 56 ॥

शीत श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणो सत्यमरक्ये

चतुर्वी5ध्याः: 11 4 11

O One with a face lovely like the Moon! We see that you are of a very soft body; so to collect water fruits is never a duty fit for you."

Here ends the Fourth Chapter in the Seventh Book on the conversation between the two Aśvins and the

Princess Sukanyā in Śrimaddeviḥhāgavatam, the

Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses, by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter V

CHAPTER V

On Cyavana's Getting His Youth

यास उवाच

तयोस्तूद्रावितं श्रुत्वा वेयमाना नृपात्मवा ।

धैर्यमालंख्य तौ तत्र बथाये पितभाषिणी ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing their words, the princess began to tremble; but holding on patience she spoke to them in reserved terms thus:

देवौ वां रविष्युजी च सर्वजी सुरुसमतो ।

सर्ती मां धर्मोहितां च नैवं वदितुमईः ॥ २ ॥

"You are the sons of Sūrya and you are the acknowledged deities amongst the gods; specially you know everything, I am a chaste virtuous woman. You ought not to speak to me in the above manner.

विज्ञा दत्ता सुरप्रेष्ठ मुनवे योगाधर्मिणे ।

कयं चेष्ठधीय तं मार्ग पुंड्रतरीगणसेवितम् ॥ ३ ॥

श्रडणसं सर्वलोकस्य कर्मसाक्षी दिवाकरः ।

क्रयपाच्चैव सम्पूर्ति नैवं भाषितुमईः ॥ ४ ॥

O Twin Devas! Father has betrothed me to the Muni practising the Yoga Dharma; besides I am chaste; how can I behave like a prostitute! This

Sun is the Witness of the actions good or bad of all people; He is therefore looking on our actions also. Besides you both are born in the family of the high-souled Kaśyapa.

कुलकन्या पर्चितं चलकत्या कवम्यां भजेजरम् ।

असारोउस्मिन्त संसरो जानंतं धर्मपिर्यम् ॥ 5 ॥

यथेच्छं गच्छतं देवौ शपां दास्यामि वान्नयो ।

सुकान्याद्रं च शपतिः पतिभक्तिपरायण ।। 6 ॥

Thus it is utterly wrong for you to utter such (irreligious and infamous) words. You know well the course of Dharma, what is religious and what is irreligious in this world which has got nothing substantial; how can a family woman leave her husband and serve another? Go wherever you like, O Sinless Devas! I am the daughter Sukanyā of the King Śaryāti, devoted to my husband. Otherwise I will curse you,”

व्यात उवाच

जूल्याकार्यं वचस्तस्य नास्त्वी विन्सितो भूगुम् ।

तावबूतां पुनस्त्वेजां शंकमानौ भयं मुने: ॥ 7 ॥

राजपुत्र प्रसत्री तु धर्मेण वरवर्गिनि ।

वरं वरय सुश्रोषि दास्यावः श्रेयसे तव ॥ 8 ॥

Vyāsa said: O Bhārata! Hearing these words, the Aśvīns were greatly surprised, and, afraid of the Muni, spoke again: “O Princess! We are very much pleased to see your chastity; therefore, O Beautiful Woman! Ask boon from us; we will grant for your welfare.

जानीहि प्रमदे नूनमावां देहिभिषयते ।

युवानं रूपसम्यत्र प्रकुर्बय पत्ते तव ॥ 9 ॥

O honoured Woman! We, the physicians of the gods, will certainly make your husband exceedingly beautiful and young.

ततख्यायामासंक पतिमेकतमं वुणु ।

समानरूपदेहानां मध्ये चातुर्पयिच्छते ॥ 10 ॥

सा तदोर्वदंचनं शुत्वा विक्सिता स्वपति तदा ।

गलोबारच तयोबाक्यं ताथयापुकर्तं यद्धतुम् ॥ 11 ॥

O Smart and Intelligent One! When we three will be exactly the same in figure, age and lustre! you better can make one us your husband." Hearing their words Sukanyā became greatly amazed and went to her own husband and spoke everything what they, the God's physicians, said.

सुकन्योचार

स्वामिन्यूयुक्ती देवी सम्पाती च्यवान्याने ।

दृष्टी मया विद्यदौंने नासली भूगुनन्दन ॥ १२ ॥

Sukanyā said: “O Husband! The Aśvins, the Sūrya’s sons, have come close to our Āśrama. I have seen the two Devas and their bright bodies.

वीक्ष्य में चास्वसईर्दी जातौ कामातुरवृष्णे ।

क्रवितं घवर्न स्वामियन्ति ते नवत्येवनम् ॥ 13 ॥

दिव्यदेहं कल्प्यवहशुक्यन्तं मृनिं किल ।

एतेन समयेनाङ्त तं शृणु तं मयोदितम् ॥ 14 ॥

समावयवक्षरं च करियावः परितं तल ।

तत्र जयाणामयमाके परितेकतमं वृषु ॥ 15 ॥

Seeing me beautiful they were overpowered with passion and told me. “We will, be sure, make your blind husband, young, bright and give him two eyes again; but you will have to make one condition. Hear it: Your husband will be exactly

like us and you will have to select your husband amongst three of us."

तच्छूवाउह्मिहायाता प्रहुं त्वां कार्यम्बुद्धान् ।

कि कतन्यवमतः साधो बृह्यास्म-कार्यसंकटे ॥ १ ६ ॥

O Holy One Hearing this as strange, I now come to inform you. Now judge and say what I am to do now.

देवयायाउपि दुर्जिया न जाने कपटं तयोः ।

यद्राजाय सर्वेत्र तत्कारोमि तद्वीक्षितम् ॥ 17 ॥

The Deva's Māyā is very difficult to comprehend; the more so, when I do not know their intentions! O Omniscient One! I will act as you desire."

च्यवन उवाच

गच्छ कान्तेउषा नास्त्वी वचनान्मय सुवते ।

आनास्य समीपं मे शीघं देवाधिपचर्ये ॥ १८ ॥

क्रियतात्मागु तद्वाक्यं नात्र कार्या विचारणा ।

Cyavana said: “O Beloved! Go just now, at my word, to the Aśvins and bring them, O auspicious One! before me. What more shall I say than this: Go and observe, what they say, as early as possible. There is no need to think over this matter.”

व्यास उवाच

एवं सा समनुसात तत्र नावा बचोउझवीत् ॥ १९ ॥

क्रियतामागु नासकी समयेन सुतेतमी ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus getting the permission from her husband, Sukanyā went immediately to them and said: "O Aśvins! You are the chief gods; now do as you say. I agree to observe what you desire."

तच्छूचा चाश्रिणी वाययं तस्याती तत्र चागती ॥ 20 ॥

उचतू ततवपुरी तां पतिस्तव शिशलपः ।

रूपार्थं च्यवनस्पूर्ण ततोउम्म: प्रविशेग्र ह ॥ 21 ॥

Hearing her words, the two Devas then went to the Muni's Aśrama and told the princess: "Let your husband enter in the midst of the water. The aged Cyavana Muni went down quickly in the midst of waters to attain a good form.

अधिनावपि पश्रान्त्रविष्टी सर उत्तमम् ।

ततस्ते निःसृतात्मासारसस्तक्षणात्वयः ॥ 22 ॥

Book VII Chapter V

Next the two Aśvins entered into the water of that tank. A few minutes after, the three persons came out of the tank.

तुल्यरूपा दिव्यदेहा युवानः सदुगाः किल ।

दिव्यकुष्ठतन्यभावाशा: समानावयवास्तताः। 2 3 11

All were equally bright, equally beautiful, equally young and their limbs were decorated equally with earrings and various other ornaments. तेउबुचनाहिता: सर्वे वृषीध वरवर्धिनि ।

अस्माकभीक्षिति भईे पत्ते त्वमलानाने ॥ 24 ॥

यमस्नावधिका प्रीतस्ते वृषुध्व वराने ।

They all spoke simultaneously: “O Auspicious One! There is no other woman beautiful like you, especially your face is very clean and fair; therefore select any one of us three as your husband. O Fair One! Whomever you love most, choose him.

व्यास उतच

सा दृष्ट्वा तुल्यक्रपत्नास्मानवयसस्ता ॥ 25 ॥

एकस्वारामूल्यवेधोंकी-वे देवसुतोपायन् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Sukanyā then saw their bodies are equally bright and beautiful; not the least difference is to be found in beauty, age, voice and dress.

सा तु संशयापात्रा बीक्ष्य तान्सद्धगुक्तीन् ॥ 26 ॥

अजानाती पति संम्यन्त्याकुता समन्वितन्त् ।

She became doubtful on seeing their equal appearances. The princess, not being able to distinguish her husband, became very anxious and thought:

किं कंपोक प्रयस्तुल्याः कं कुणोभि न वेषण्डव्छ् ॥ 27 ॥

पत्ति देवसुता होते संशोय पतितास्म्यहम् ।

“What am I to do now? Whom to choose? They are exactly the same. I cannot distinguish who is my real husband?

इउजलादिंमं सभ्यदोषाभ्यामिक कलित्यम् ॥ 28 ॥

कर्तेल किं किया चाचा मरणं समुपानातम् ।

This may be the magic set up by the two Aśvins. However, I am put to a great crisis. I won't ever select another who is not my husband.

न मया पतिमुसूझ बरणीयः कर्धंचन ॥ 29 ॥

देवसत्यापुनिकः कक्षिद्वित्येभा मम धरणा ।

Therefore my death is well nigh; what to do now? The third form seen now may be also a Deva's son."

इति संचित्व मनसा परां विधेश्धां शिवान् ॥ 30 ॥

दस्ये भगवती देर्वी तुधाव च कृणोदरी ।

Thus cogitating, she resolved to meditate on the Highest Prakrti, the Lady of the Universe, the most Auspicious One. Then the thin-bellied princess began to sing the hymns of the Bhagavatī.

सुकन्योवाच

शरणं त्वां जगमातः प्राणतप्रेम भृणतु:खिता ॥ 31 ॥

रक्ष मेउषा सतीधर्मं नामृमि चरणी तव ।

Sukanyā said: “O World-Mother! Under most painful circumstances I take refuge; preserve my chastity; I bow down to thy feet.

नम: पद्योद्धृदे देविनः नः शंकरात्वणे ॥ 32 ॥

विष्णुपिये नयो नलिम्य वेदमातः सरस्वति ।

इदं जगच्चया मुंई सर्वे स्थावारजमाम् ॥ 33 ॥

पासि लविमदम्यथा तथाान्ति सलोकानाले ।

O Devi! Salutations to Thee, born of lotus. O Thou, the dear consort of Śañkara! Salutations to Thee. O Thou favourite to Viṣṇu, O Mother of the Vedas! O Sarasvatī! Salutations to Thee. Thou hast created the world, moving and unmoving; Thou art preserving it without being least excited; again Thou art swallowing it for the peace and well-being of all.

ब्रह्मविष्णुमहेशानां जननी त्वं सुर्मेमता ॥ 34 ॥

बुद्धिद्वासि सल्मानां ज्ञानिनां मोक्ष्यत सदा ।

What more, Thou art the Most Worshipful Mother of Brahmā, Visju, and Maheśa. Thou always illumined the understanding of the illiterate and Thou always grantest liberation to the Jñāins.

अज्ञा तं प्रकृति: पूर्णी पृंक्षपियदर्शना ॥ 35 ॥

भृक्तिमुक्तिप्रदास्ति त्व प्राणिनं विश्वतदानम् ।

अज्ञानं दुःखदा कामा सत्त्वानां मुखसाधानं ॥ 36 ॥

सिद्धिद्वा योगिनामंब जयदा कीर्तिंदा पुनः ।

Thou art the Prime Prakṛti in fulness and the Beloved of the Prime Puriṣa. Thou grantest Bhukti

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

(enjoyment) and Mukti (freedom) to the souls that are cleansed and pure; Thou givest pain to those that are entirely void of knowledge and Thou grantest happiness to those that are endowed with Satva Guna. O Mother! Thou bestowet Siddhi (the success, the eight supernatural powers), fame, and victory to the Yogis!

शरणं त्वं प्रवासास्मि विस्तयं घरमं नाति ॥ 37 ॥

पर्ति दृषीव मे मातर्मनास्मिछोकासारते ।

देवाभ्यां रचितं कूटं कं बुणोमि विमोहिता ॥ 38 ॥

पर्ति दृषीय सर्वेत्रे विदित्वा मे सतीत्रतम् ।

Being merged in an ocean of bewilderment, I come now to take refuge unto Thee. O Mother! The two Devas are playing hypocrisy with me; thus puzzled I ca'nt fix my mind whom to select; therefore I am merged in an ocean of sorrow. Save me by shewing my real husband. O Omniscient One! Knowing my vow of chastity dost Thou enlighten me to so that I can know my husband.

व्यास उवाच

एवं सुत्ता तदा देखी तथा त्रिपुसुन्दरी ॥ 39 ॥

इदयेप्रस्थानसदा ज्ञानं दद्वावधु सुखोदयम् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus pleased by the Sukanyā's prayers, the Devi Tripura Sundarī then imparted to her the pleasant Sattva Jñāna (knowledge pertaining to Sattva Guna).

निश्रित्य मनसा तुल्यवयोरूपधार्यसाति ॥ 40 ॥

प्रसभीम्य तु तात्मवर्चिब बाला स्वकं पतिन् ।

She then looked again at the three personages, and though they were similar in appearance and beauty, instantly she recognised mentally her husband and chose him.

ब्रुतेश द च्यवने देवो ननष्ट्री तो बभूवतुः ॥ 4 1 ॥

सतीभर्षे समालोक्य संप्रीति ददतुर्वेम् ।

When Sukanyā selected the Muni Cyavana, the two Devas became greatly pleased to see that.

भगवतः प्रसादेन प्रसत्री तौ सुरोत्तमो ॥ 42 ॥

सुनिमामंत्र तसा गमनायोहात्वाषी ।

The two Devas were pleased by the grace of

Bhagavati; they were further pleased to see the Dharma of chastity and granted her the boon.

लब्धा तु च्यवनो रूपं नेत्रे भार्याँ च यौवनम् ॥ 43 ॥

द्वी3वबीभ्मतोजास्ती नासत्याविद्वे वचः ।

उपकान: कृतोउयं मे युवाभ्यां सुस्सत्मी ॥ 44 ॥

किं बबीम सुखं प्राप्तं संसारोस्मिन्तुने ।

प्राथ भार्यी सुक्रिजानतो कु:ख मे पेभवद्वल्हम् ॥ 45 ॥

They then bade good-bye to Cyavana and were ready to start to their own place when Cyavana being very much pleased to get through their grace, his beauty, youth and wife, interrupted them, saying "O high-minded Devas! You have done much good to me. I used to feel pain every day, in spite of my having this wife having good hairs!

अनस्य चातिकुब्छ्य भोगहीनस्य कानने ।

युवाभयं नयने द्रते यौवन्तं रूपमद्धुतम् ॥ 46 ॥

सम्पादितं ततः किंचिवुक्नुर्गमहं बुवे ।

But owing to your mercy, I cannot describe how happy I am now in this world of woes and troubles. I was very aged and blind and was without any enjoyment but it is you that coming to this forest have brought to me eyes, youth and exquisite beauty. Therefore, O twin Devas! I desire to do something good to you in return.

उपकारिति मित्र थो नोपकुर्णत्कर्धचन ॥ 47 ॥

तं धियासून नरं देवी भवेच्च ऋणवान्युवि ।

तस्मादां वाहितं कैकिवहानुभिच्छाम साम्यन्ति ॥ 48 ॥

Fie on him, who does not return anything for the good that he has received from a beneficent friend. That man remains indebted for ever in this world; therefore I am desirous to give your two now whatever you want.

आत्माने क्रणभोक्षारा देवेशी नृतनस्य च ।

प्रार्थितं वां प्रतास्यामि यदत्पश्य सुगतुर्भेः ॥ 49 ॥

बुबाबां वां मनोदिष्टं प्रीतोरिस सुकुतेन वाम् ।

O twin Devas! Even if the Devas or the Asuras find it difficult to attain, I will give that to you to free myself of the debt I owe to you. I am greatly pleased at your good deed; therefore be kind enough to speak out whatever you desire."

Book VII Chapter VI

སྟན་པ་ཀྱི་ཀྱི་སྟན་པའི་རྒྱལ་མཚོགས་ཀྱི་སྟན་པ་ཀྱི་སྟན་པ་ཀྱི་སྟན་པ་ཀྱི་སྟན་པ་

मुने पितु: प्रसादेन सर्वे नो मनसेशित्मा ॥ 51 ॥

उत्काठा सोमपानस्य वर्तैं नी सुरैः सह ।

भिपजाविति देेवेन निपिडूची चमसघट्रे ॥ 52 ॥

They began to consult with each other, and spoke to the Muni Cyavana who was seated with Sukanya beside him: "O Maharsī! We have got all our desires by the grace of Father! Still it is difficult for us to drink some libation along with the other Devas and we thirst after that very strongly.

गढ़ेगा वित्ते चेउ ब्रहणः कनकावले ।

तस्माचमपि धर्मे यदि शफेर्स ताप्त ॥ 53 ॥

कार्यमेतिद्ध्र कत्थंव वाज्छतं नी सुसंतम्न ।

At the great sacrifice of Brahmā in the Golden Mountain (Kanakācala), Indra, the King of the Devas, ordered us not to drink Soma, as we were physicians.

तृतिड्राय वां बह्न-कुरु वां सोमपायिति ॥ ५४ ॥

विपासाउ्तित सुयुषाया तन्तः समुपायास्यति ।

Therefore, O Knower of Dharma! O Ascetic! You will certainly do us a great favour if you can make us drink the Soma juice; we would be very glad and have our desires satisfied."

च्यवनस्तु तयोः प्राह तच्छुत्वा वचनं मुचु ॥ 55 ॥

यदहं रूपसमयजो वयसा च सम्पिततः ।

Thus hearing the words of the Aśvins, Maharṣi Cyavana gladly spoke to them the following gentle words.

कृतो भवद्ध्वां वृद्धः सन्थायां च प्रणताविति ॥ 56 ॥

तत्माद्युवां कतिष्यामि प्रीत्याङ्ग सेभापयिति ।

O Twin Devas! I was blind and aged; but now I am become a young and beautiful man, and it is by your grace that I have got back my wife.

मिषातो देवराजस्य सत्यमेततुब्बीध्मसून ॥ 57 ॥

राजसूनं चितते यजे शर्जरोरितयहुतेः ।

Therefore I speak this truly before you that at the great sacrifice of the lustrous King Śaryāti, I will gladly make yōu drink the Soma in the presence of Indra, the King of the Devas.

इत्याकरणं वचो रहही ती विद्ध प्रति जममनुः ॥ 58 ॥

च्यवनस्तां गृहीतासु तुं नागामाशमपडतम् ॥ 59 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागते महापुराणे सतमकन्थे

पत्रजीयान: 11 5 11

Hearing these words of the Muni, the twin Aśvins were greatly pleased and went back to the world of the Devas. And the Muni Cyavana, too, returned to his own Āśrama with his wife Sukanyā.

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Seventh Book on

the getting of youth by Cyavana Muni in

Śrimaddevībhāgāvatam the Mahā Purānam of

18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter VI

CHAPTER VI

On the Asvins Getting the Right to Drink Soma

जनमेव जय जय

यवयनेक कथं वैद्यों ती क्रतौ सोमपाधिनो ।

वचनं च कर्ण सत्यं जातं तस्य महातयनः ॥ १ ॥

मानुष्यस्य वर्तं कौरुपदेवाजवर्तं प्रति ।

निधिद्धौ भिपब्जौ तेन कृतौ तौ सामपाधिनो ॥ २ ॥

धर्मनिष्ठी तताश्रयं वित्तरेणा वद प्रभो ।

चारितं च्यवनस्याङ श्रोतुकामो5स्म वसंधा ॥ ३ ॥

Janamejaya said: O Muni! How did Maharsi Cyavana make these with twin Devas drink Soma and how his words came out to be true. Human

strength is insignificant compared to Indra's strength. Indra forbade the physicians, the Asvins, to drink the Soma juice. How then could the Muni give the right thereof. This is very wonderful. Therefore, O Thou, devoted to Dharma! O Lord! Describe in detail the doings of this Maharsi Cyavana. I am very anxious to hear it.

यास उवाच

निशगाय महाराज चरितं परमादुतम् ।

च्यवन्य मखे तत्मभूक्ष्योतर्भूथि भारत ॥ 4 ॥

सुकन्यां सुन्दरीं प्रायः च्यवन: सुरसक्षिणः ।

विवहार प्रसातमा देवकन्यामिवापर: ॥ 5 ॥

कदाचिद्ध शगवतिषभार्य चिंतातुरा भुगम् ।

पर्ति प्राह वेयमाना वचनं रहती प्रिया ॥ 6 ॥

राज्युत्री तथा दत्ता मुनयेड्याय कानने ।

भुता जीविते वा सा तु उह्छ्या संख्या तथा ॥ 7 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! In that famous sacrificial ceremony solemnised by of the King Śaryāti, Cyavana Rṣi did wonderful feats. O Bharata! I am now narrating to you his entirely wonderful character. Hear it attentively. Maharṣi Cyavana, illustrious like the Devas, began to enjoy with a cheerful mind and gladdened heart, with his beautiful wife Sukanyā who was like a Deva Kanyā. Now, once on an occasion, the wife of Śaryāti became very anxious and trembling said to her husband weeping: "O King! You have betrothed your daughter to the blind Muni Cyavana; now it is your duty to go and enquire whether the daughter is living or is dead. O Lord! What is my beautiful daughter doing with that husband.

मष्ठ नाथ मुनेस्तावदास्मे उद्युमदात् ।

कि कांती सुकान्या सा प्राय नार्य तथाविधम् ॥ 8 ॥

पुर्षिदुःखेन राजर्षे दरधान्सि सर्वेश हृदि ।

तापानय विश्राताखीं तपःशामां मदन्तिके ॥ 9 ॥

प्रजामि सर्वथा पुर्गि क्रगांशी वल्कलावृताम् ।

अंधों पतिं समासाठ दुःखभाजं कृगोदरिभ् ॥ 10 ॥

Please go just now to the Muni's Āśrama and see about it. O Rājarsī! I always burn in pain and agony when I think of her. She must have become very lean and thin due to the troubles of Tapasyā; please bring her quickly here to my presence. She is suffering an everlasting pain from having an aged blind husband; and it is quite likely she has become very lean and thin. I am anxious, therefore, to see my daughter lean and thin who is wearing barks of trees as her dress.

श्वास्तिकाव

गच्छामोह विशालाधिक सुक्रवो रेडुमादरात् ।

घियमुप्री वरातोहे मुनि तं संशितान्तम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Śaryāti said: “O broad-eyed One! I am going gladly just now to see my dear daughter and that Muni of severe vows.

व्यास उवाच

एवमुकत्वा तु शयिति: कामिनी शोकसंकुलाम् ।

जगाम रथामहाच स्वरिताश्रमं मुने: ॥ 12 ॥

गत्वासप्रसामसीपे तु तमपश्यन्हीपितः ।

नवयीवनसममर्जे देवपुत्रोपमं पुनिम् ॥ 13 ॥

तं चितोकव्यागराकां विस्तयं नृपतर्गतः ।

किं कृतं कृत्तिसतं कर्म पुथा लोकविर्गहितम् ॥ 14 ॥

निर्होजसी मुनिकुढ़ल्चनयाअय: पति: कृतः ।

कार्मपीडितया कामं प्रशांतोःप्यतिनिर्भिनः ॥ 15 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus saying to his wife, distressed with sorrow, the King Śaryāti mounted on his chariot and quickly went towards the Śārama of the Cyavana Muni. On reaching there, he saw the Maharṣi Cyavana like a Deva's son. Seeing his body like that of a Deva, the King became bewildered and began to think thus: "What! Has my daughter done such an ugly act, blameable in the society! That Muni was very calm and quiet, penniless and very old; my daughter, perhaps, being overpowered with passion, killed him and has taken, no doubt, another husband.

दुःसहोर्धं युष्यधन्व विगोशेण च योवते ।

कुले कलंकः सुमहाननया मानवे कुतः ॥ 16 ॥

यिचक्स्य जीवित लोके ययव्युजी हे कुलिता ।

सर्वपार्यैसु दुःखाय पुत्री भवति देहिनान् ॥ 17 ॥

It is indeed difficult to control the God of Love, armed with his flowery bow; the period of youth is moreover very hard to conquer. So this daughter impelled by lust has thrown a dreadful stigma on the clear name of the family of the great Manu. Fie on him whose daughter in this world is of a vicious character! It seems that daughter are born for the expiation of all the sins committed by their fathers.

मया त्वनृचितं कर्म कृतः स्वार्थेत्य सिद्धे।

युद्धायांधाय या दत्ता पुरी सर्वांन्मान किल ॥ 18 ॥

Book VII Chapter VI

कन्या योग्याय दात्याय पिता सर्वांत्मना किल ।

तातृगं हि फलं प्राप्तं यातृगं वै कृतं मच ॥ 19 ॥

But what an unjust act have I committed for my own selfish ends? It is highly incumbent on every father to betroth his daughter with every care possible to a bridegroom suitable in every respect; but I did not do it and now have got the fruits equivalent to my doing.

हन्मि चेच्छा तनयं वु:शीलां पापाकीर्णिन् ।

स्त्रीहृता युस्तरा स्याने तथा युया विशेषतः ॥ 20 ॥

मनुवर्गस्तु विद्याला: सकलंकः कृते मया ।

लोकापवादो वलवानुस्पताज्ञा स्नेहग्रंघतला ॥ 21 ॥

किं कंभौमिति विजात्यो यदा मनः स पार्थिवः ।

सुकन्यथा तदा देवादुर्वाईशताकृतः पिता ॥ 22 ॥

If I kill my daughter, vicious and unchaste, I will incur sin due to killing a woman and moreover my daughter. I am the cause of this stain on Muni's line of descent. On the one hand, the scandal on one is very powerful; and the affection for a daughter is strong on the other, what am I to do now?" The King became merged in deep thoughts. At this time Sukyanā accidentally saw her father thus drowned in anxious thoughts.

सा दूध्दा तं जगामाशु सुकन्या वितृत्तिके ।

गत्वा पगच्छ भूपालं प्रेमपूर्तिनामसा ॥ 23 ॥

Seeing him, Sukanyā instantly came to her father's side and asked the King in sweet affectionate words.

किं विचारयसे राजाँक्ष्ताव्याकृत्तितान्नः ।

उपविष्ट मुनि वीक्ष्य युवानमबुजेक्षणम् ॥ 24 ॥

O King! How is it that your face has become so pale with anxious thoughts, seeing the Muni sitting in front of you, a young man with lotus-eyes.

राष्ट्रीक पुरुषव्यार्ध प्रणमस्य पत्ति मम् ।

मा विषादं नृपश्रेष्ठ सरोतं कुरू मानव ॥ 25 ॥

O Father! What are you thinking? You belong to the famous Manu's family; besides, you are a high-minded man; you ought not to be sad so suddenly; come quickly and bow your head down before my husband.

व्यास उवाच

इति पुत्रा वचः शुवा श्यांति: कौधीषितः ।

प्रोचा चवनं राजा पुरःस्थां तनयं ततः ॥ 26 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the daughter's words, the King became impatient with anger and began to speak to her:

ताजीवाच

क्व मुनिश्रयन: पुत्रि वृद्धोंधतापयोतम: ।

कोउंये बुवा मदोभन्तः सन्तेढोज महामान ॥ 27 ॥

"O Daughter! Where is that aged blind ascetic Muni Cavana and who is this youth intoxicated with lust? A great doibt has arisen in my mind.

मुनि: किं निततः पापे त्वया दृष्टुताकारिण ।

नृतानोउसी पति: कामावत्कृत: कुलविनारिणि ॥ 28 ॥

O Vicious Soul! Have you slain that Cyavana Muni and engaged yourself in such a sinful act? O You, a Disgrace to your family! Have you accepted another husband out of your desire of lust?

सोड़ई चिन्तातुरतं न पष्णायाङ्ममंशित्यम् ।

किं कृतं दुक्छृतं कर्म कृत्वादार्विति किल ॥ 29 ॥

निम्पनोड़ं दुराचारे शोकाक्यों त्वकृतो3पुना ।

दूधैर्वेने पुरुषं दिव्यमदूद्वा च्यवनं मुनिम् ॥ 30 ॥

My mind has become very much troubled on not seeing that Muni in this Śārama. O vicious One! Now I do't see the Muni; but instead of him, I see this bright person. And thus it is on account of your sinful behaviour that my mind is drowned in the ocean of cares.

विद्यस्य तनुपाचाण्यु सा भूत्वा चचनं पितुः ।

गृहीत्वानीय पितरं भूर्तीतकमादरात् ॥ 31 ॥

च्यवनोउसी भूमितला जामात ते न संशयः ।

अधिष्यामीद्रुग: कानतः कृतः कमलतोवनः ॥ 32 ॥

Then hearing her father's words, Sukanyā smiled and gladly took him at once to her husband and said: "O Father! He is your son-in-law; He is the same Cyavana Muni; there is no doubt here. The twin Aśvins have given him this beautiful lustre and lotus-like eyes.

यदृष्छयाज्ञ संप्राणती नस्मावाब्धमे मम ।

ताप्यां कर्णणया नूनं च्यनस्तादृष्ण: कृतः ॥ 33 ॥

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

The two Ašvini Kumāras came accidentally to my Āśrama and out of mercy no doubt they have made Cyavana such a nice young man.

नाहं तब सुता तात तथा तथा पापकरिणी ।

यथा त्वं मन्यसे राजन्मुखी क्वसंगेशे ॥ 34 ॥

प्राणा त्वं मुनिं राजन्मार्विं च्यवनं पितः ।

अगृष्टि कारणं सर्व कथायिति वित्तम् ॥ 35 ॥

O King! I am not your that daughter that will do a vicious act as you think, beguiled by this beautiful form of the Muni. Father! Bow down before the Cyavana Muni. Ask him and he will tell you everything."

इति श्रुचा वचः पुचा: श्रवीत्स्वतितस्तदा ।

प्रणानाम पुन्ति तत्र नाला पप्रच्छ सादरम् ॥ 36 ॥

Hearing thus the daughter's words, the King went instantly to the Muni and bowed down before him and asked him affectionately thus:

राजोबाव

कथयस्य स्वपृतांतं भागवायु यथोचितम् ।

नयने च कर्व प्राप्ते कव रगत ते जरा पुनः ॥ 37 ॥

संशयोर्ध महामेऋति रूपं दृष्ट्वातिपुत्रम् ।

वद विस्तत्ते बढ़ाव्छूलाड़े सुखामपुभम् ॥ 38 ॥

The King said: “O Son of Bhrgu! How have you got your eyes back? Where has your old age gone? Kindly narrate all your details as early as possible. O Brāhmaṇa! Seeing your exquisitely beautiful form, a great doubt has arisen in me; so tell me everything in detail; I will be very glad, no doubt.”

च्यवन उत्तरा

नास्त्यावत्र सम्पाती देवानां भिपजाजूषी ।

उपकारः कृतसाध्यो कृपया नृपास्तम ॥ 39 ॥

Cyavana said: "O King! The two Aśvins, the physicians of the Gods, came here on their own account and have done me this good out of their mercy.

मया ताययां वरो द्त उपकारस्य होते ।

करिष्यामि मखे राजो भवतीं सोमपार्थिति ॥ 40 ॥

Owing to the benefit thus received, I have granted them the boon that I will make them drink

the Soma juice in the Agniṣtoma Yajñā of the King Śaryāti.

एवं मया वयः प्राप्तं लोधने विमले तथा ।

स्वस्थो भव महाराज संविश्रासनरे गुधे ॥ 4 1 ॥

Thus I have got these beautiful eyes and the new youth; therefore, O King! Collect yourself and sit in the holy sacrificial seat.

इत्युक्तः स तु विश्रिण सभार्य: पृथिवीपति: ।

सुखोपथिह: कल्याणी: कवाध्यके महात्मना ॥ 42 ॥

When the Brāhmin Cyavana Muni spoke thus, the King Śaryāti and his dear wife sat with greatest pleasure and began to talk on auspicious topics with the high-souled Muni.

अर्थीन भापीव: प्राह राजानं परिसांत्वयन् ।

याजविष्यापि राजस्वां संभागानुपकल्यय ॥ 43 ॥

Then the Bhārgava consoled the King and said I will perform your sacrifice; please collect all the necessary materials.

मया प्रश्रितुं ताथवां कत्लैंथो सोमपी युवाम् ।

तत्कर्तैंयं नृपश्रेष्ठ तव प्रोज्ञपितिवरो ॥ 44 ॥

I have promised to the Asvins that certainly I will make them drink the Soma juice. Therefore, O King! I will have to carry that out in your sacrifice.

इन्द्र निवारियधामि कूब्द्र तेजाबेलेन वै ।

पायियधामि राजेन्द्र सोयं सोममखे तव ॥ 4 5 ॥

O King! If Indra be angry, I will stop him by my Tapas face and in the Agniśtoma Yajñā I will make the Aśvins drink Soma.

ततः परमसन्तुषः शर्षाति: पृथिवीपति: ।

च्यवन्य महाराज तृताक्यं प्रत्यपूजन्त् ॥ 46 ॥

संमान्य च्ववनं राजा जगाभ नगरं प्रति ।

सभार्थ्वातिसन्तुष: कुर्वेल्वातिं मुने: किल ॥ 47 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Śaryāti, the lord of the earth, then gladly approved the proposals of Cyavana Muni. The King then shewed respect to the Muni and, with a pleasant attitude of mind, returned to his city with his wife, all the while talking of the Muni in the way.

प्रशास्तोर्शनि महीये सर्वकाममपुटिभान् ।

कार्यायमास शर्शितैर्वंत्रायतनमुतमम् ॥ 48 ॥

Book VII Chapter VI

On a good auspicious day he, possessed of enormous wealth and prosperity, prepared an excellent place for the performance of the sacrifice.

समानीय मुनीन्युखान्वसिष्टमुखानसी ।

भार्यो वाजयामास च्यवन: पृथिवीपिति् ।। ४९ ॥

The Muni Cyavana then invited Vasistha and other respectable Munis and initiated the King Saryāti for the performance of the sacrifice.

वितते तु तथा यजे देवा: सर्वे सवासवा: ।

आजमुखाशिकी तन सोमार्थिपुजमन्तुः ॥ 50 ॥

At the commencement of the sacrifice, Indra and the other Devas and the two ASvins all came to the sacrifice to drink Soma.

इत्रस्तु शंकितस्तव वीक्ष्य तावधिगावृषी ।

पग्रष्ठ च सुरान्सर्विक्मतेो सुपगतां ॥ 51 ॥

Seeing the ASvins, Indra became afraid and asked the other Devas, "Why have the ASvins come here?

चिक्सिकसी न सोमाहाँ केनानीताविहित च ।

नावुद्वमासतत्र राजस्तु वितते मखे ॥ 52 ॥

They are the physicians and, therefore, never fit to drink Soma. Who has brought them hither at this great Agnistoma Sacrifice?"

अग्रहाच्छ्ववनः सोममधिज्ञोंदेवसोस्तव ।

ग्राहकतं वारयामास मा गृहाणैतयोह्न ॥ 53 ॥

The Devas remain all silent. Cyavana Muni then became ready to offer Soma to the Asvins and Indra immediately stopped him saying: "They are already prohibited to drink Soma as a sacrificial share; so do not accept the vessel of Soma for them."

तमाह च्यवन्तरत कथमोते रवे: सुते।

न प्रहाई च नास्तवी बृहि सर्व शचीपते ॥ 54 ॥

Cyavana then said: "O Lord of Śaci! These are the Sūrya's sons; tell, then, truly why these are rendered unfit to drink Soma. They are not of mixed blood; they are born of the legal wife of Sūrya Deva.

न संकरी समुवर्धो धर्मपत्नीसुतो रहेः ।

केन दोशेण देवेन्द्र नाहों सेमं विषयली ॥ 55 ॥

O Lord of the Devas! What is the fault, then, of

the Aśvins, the physicists, that they be prohibited to drink Soma juice.

निर्णयोउर मखे शक कतिथ्वः सर्वेद्वतैः ।

ग्राह्यिण्याम्बहं सोमं कृती तौ सोमपो मया ॥ 56 ॥

Please reply. O Indra! This point must be settled by all the Devas here. I have promised to make them drink the Soma juice in this sacrifice.

प्रेरितोउसी मया राजा मखाय मघवान्कित ।

एतदर्थ कक्रियामि सन्यं मे वनं विषो ॥ 57 ॥

To keep my word I have initiated the King in this sacrifice. I will have my word fulfilled; there is no doubt in this.

अभ्यापुकृतं शक्र यथा दर्तं नवं वयः ।

तस्मात्युपकातरतु कंतवः सर्वथा मया ॥ 58 ॥

O Indra! They have given me my youth and bestowed my eyes and have done me great good. I will also do good to them to my best."

इन्व जवाच

चिकित्सकी कृतावेति नास्वी निदिति सुर्गै: ।

उभावेति न सोमाई मां गृहाणैलयोर्भून ।। ५९ ॥

Indra said: “The Devas have appointed these Devas their Physicians; therefore they are looked down upon in the society; so they are unfit to drink Soma. You need not make them drink Some.”

च्छवन उवाच

अहल्याजार संवच्छ कॉपं चाठा निर्वर्कम् ।

खुञ्ज किं हिं ती सत्यौं न सोमाहौं सुतामकजी ॥ 60 ॥

एवं विवादे समुपस्थिते च

न कोर्पि वाचं तमुवाच भूप ।

ग्रहं तवोभार्वितिमन्तेजाः

संग्रहवायास तोवावेलेन ॥ 61 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागते महापुराणे सतमककन्ने

पशो3भाव: 11 6 11

Cyavana spoke: “O Indra! You have adulterated yourself with Athalyā; why are you, then, giving vent to your anger thus in vain. You have treacherously murdered Vṛtāsura; it is it is quite inappropriate for a vicious person like you to say that the Aśvins cannot have the right to drink Soma.

This is quite impossible." O King! On the springing of this dispute, no body spoke to Indra. The illustrious Bhārgava, then, made them accept the Soma juice.

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Seventh Book on granting the Aśvins the right to drink the Soma juice in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevbībhāgavatam

CHAPTER VII

On the Asvins Drinking the Soma cup

ध्यास उवाच

द्रते ग्रहे तु राजेन्द्र वासवः कुपितो भृणम् ।

प्रोवाच च्यवन्त तन दर्शनबलमात्मतः ॥ १ ॥

मा बढ़ावन्यो मयाद्वामियां त्वं कतुर्महसि ।

विध्यामि दिषं तं त्वां विश्वरूपमिवापरम् ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When the vessel filled with the Soma juice was given to the two Aśvins, Indra became very angry and showing his strength, spoke thus to the Muni Cyavana. “O Brāhmaṇa! Never will you be able to endow him with such a high honour. When you have shown towards me your enmity, I will kill you, no doubt, exactly like Viśvarūpa.”

च्यवन उवाच

मावमंस्या महात्मानी रूपद्रविषणवर्चौ ।

यो चक्रतुर्मी मयवन्युदारकमिवायपरम् ॥ ३ ॥

त्रते तां विबुधाश्राये कवं वाददते ग्रहम् ।

अंशभावपि देदेन्द्र देवी विद्धि परन्ती ॥ ४ ॥

Cyavana said: “O Indra! Do not insult the two high-souled Asvins. They have given me beauty, youth and lustre and made me look like a second Deva. O Lord of the Devas! Just as the other Devas can take the vessel of Soma excluding you, so the two powerful Asvins can do the same towards you.

इन उदय

भिपजी नाहंतः कामं ग्रहं येते कंक्षेचन ।

यदि दिल्सिय मन्त्रान्न शिरणछेद्यायिय सांग्रतम् ॥ 5 ॥

Indra said: “They are the physicians; so they cannot in any way have the right to accept the Soma cup. I will just now sever your head.”

व्यास उवाच

अनानुद्य तु तुढाक्यं वासवस्य च भागंवः ।

प्रहं तु प्राहयामास भतसंधित्व नं भृणम् ॥ 6 ॥

Vyāsa said: O Ornament to the race of Bharata!

At these words of Indra, the Muni made the Asvins accept the Soma cup, thus highly insulting, as it were, Indra and not taking any notice of his words.

सोमपात्रं वटा तान्यां गृहीतं तु पिपायमा ।

समीयेक वलापिष्टेव इयं चवनमब्बित् ॥ ७ ॥

आभ्यामर्थाय सोमां तं ग्राहीत्ययसि चेत्स्वयम् ।

वज्जं तु प्रहिष्यामि विश्वरूपमिवायम् ॥ ८ ॥

When the two Aśvins accepted the cup with a desire to drink the Soma thereof, the powerful Indra saw it and said: "If you make them drink Soma out of your own necessity, I will hurl thunderbolt on your head exactly in the same way as I did towards Viśvarāpū."

वासवेदैवमुक्तसु भार्थश्रातिराविंतः ।

जग्राह विधित्वत्सोममाधिश्छ्यामतिभूयन्ति ॥ 9 ॥

The Muni became violently angry at this and made the Aśvins drink the Soma according to due rites and ceremonies.

इन्होरिण प्राक्षित्कोपाद्धजमर्चे ख्यमायुधम् ।

पश्यतां सर्वैदेवानां सूर्यकोटिममुष्पम् ॥ 10 ॥

प्रेरितं चाणर्शि प्रैक्ष्य च्यवनस्तपास ततः ।

स्तंभयामास वज्जं स ग्राकस्यामिततेजसः ॥ 11 ॥

Indra, too, angrily hurled thunderbolt on him in the presence of all the Devas. The weapons shed lustre like million Suns. Seeing the thunderbolt hurled on him, the powerful Muni made the Indra's thunderbolt stand stock still by virtue of his Tapas.

Book VII Chapter VII

कृत्यया स महाबाहुरिंहं हन्तुमिहोत्थः ।

जुहावानी शृतं हृद्यं मनेण मुनिससना: ॥ 12 ॥

तत्र कृत्या ससुन्धया च्यवनस्य तपोवलात् ।

प्रबलः पुरुषः कृरी बृहकाक्यो महासुरः ॥ 13 ॥

The powerful Muni then adopted black magic to kill Indra and offered oblations of clarified butter and grains, purified by Mantrams, in the Fire. By the Tapas of Cyavana, of unbounded lustre, there sprang from the sacrificial hearth Krtyā (A female deity to whom sacrifices are offered for destructive and magical purposes). And out of Krtyā originated a very strong person, very cruel and of huge body, a great Demon.

मटो नाम महावोरो भयदः प्राणिनाम्हि ।

शरीरे पर्वताकारसीधारदोषुं घयानकः ॥ १४ ॥

चतरक्षायता दंद्युं योजनानां शर्त शन्मू ।

इते त्वस्य दर्शना बचपुदर्शयोजनाः ॥ 15 ॥

The horrible Demon, named Mada, was terrifying to all the beings. His body was huge like a mountain, teeth very sharp and terrible. Four teeth were hundred Yojanas long each, and his other teeth were ten Yojanas long.

बाहू पर्वतसिक्षानायाती क्ररूर्गीनों ।

जिङ्धा तु भीषणा कृता लेलिहाना नभस्तलम् ॥ 16 ॥

His arms were like mountains, very long and fierce, tongue, horrible, rough and so very long that it reached up to the heavens.

श्रील तु गिरियुकुमा काटिना भीषणा घुणम् ।

नखा व्यानपत्रख्यतः केनाश्रातीव भीषणाः ॥ 17 ॥

His throat was like a mountain peak hard and of a furious appearance; nails resembled tiger's, hair is horrible.

शरीरं कजलाभ च तस्य चारयं भयानकम् ।

नेत्रे दावानलग्रख्ये भीषणेउतिभयानके ॥ 18 ॥

His body was jet black like lamp black; face very terrible, eyes bright like the conflagration fire and awful.

हनुरोका स्थिता तस्य भूमावेका दिवं गता ।

एवंविधः सपुचमो मदो नाम बहुनगु: ॥ 19 ॥

One of his jaws touched the ground and the other

touched the heaven. Thus was born the Demon, named Mada of hug form.

तं विलोक्य सुगा: सर्वे भयमाजामूर्तेमा ।

इन्द्रिपि भयसंज्ञतो यूद्वाय न मनो दधे ॥ 20 ॥

Looking at him, the Devas became suddenly frightened; Indra, too, got very much terrified at the sight of him and did not want to have any more fight. दैत्योर्पि वदने कामं वज्ञमात्य संस्थितः ।

ध्यानं नभो घोरपृटिष्सित्व जगतवर्ग्य ॥ 21 ॥

The Demon swal owed Indra's thunderbolt, looked at the sky, and stood up as if to swallow at once the whole Universe.

स भक्षयिष्यन्सैनुक्दः शनक्रतुभुपार्वत् ।

चुकूगुशु सुग: सर्वे हा हातः: स्मेति संशित्यः ॥ 22 ॥

इत्रः सर्पितबाहुतु मुभुक्षुर्वेग्रमेतिकात् ।

न शशाक पचिं तत्स्मप्रतूत् पाकमासनः ॥ 23 ॥

He became infuriated with rage and pursued Indra to devour him. Seeing this, the Devas cried aloud: "Alas! We are disabled by Mantrams and the outerhood thought he wanted to do so.

वज्रस्तः सुरैणास्तवी बीक्ष्य कालसाधिमम् ।

सस्मार मनसा तत्र गुर्भ समयकोविदम् ॥ 24 ॥

The Lord of the Devas, then, with thunderbolt in his hand, looked on the Demon as Death personified and remembered his Guru, skilled in the knowledge which is the proper time to perform a certain thing.

सरणाद्वाजगामायु बृह्म्यतिहदार्थी: ।

गुरुस्तत्मयं दूद्वा विमतिसदुर्ग मत् ॥ 25 ॥

The liberal-minded Brhaspati knowing the time of imminent danger, and that he is remembered by Indra, at once came to the spot.

विद्यार्थ मनसा कृत्यं तभ्याच गर्जपतिम् ।

दुःसाध्योरयं महाम-नैस्वयं वज्जेण वासव ॥ 26 ॥

He then judged what to do in the present crisis and told Indra: "O Indra! This cannot be averted even by Mantrams; what to speak of of thunderbolt! असुरी मदसंसृत्य यजकुष्ठात्समूषित्वतः ।

तपोबतमुषे: सम्यकन्यबन्य महावल ॥ 27 ॥

This powerful Asura Mada has arisen from the sacrificial hearth by virtue of the Tapas of the Cyavana Muni. The Muni's power is especially felt here. O Lord of the Devas! Nobody, You, I, nor any other Deva will be able to resist him. Know this.

अनिवार्य हुयं शजुस्ववा देखैतथा प्रथा ।

गरणं याहि देतेश च्यवनस्य महात्मनः ॥ 28 ॥

Even Brahmā cannot thwart the anger of one who is devoted to the Śakti, the Highest Force; Cyavana is the Bhakta of the Highest Śakti. So no other body is able to defeat him.

स निवारविता नूतं कृत्यामात्मकृतां किल ।

न विवारवितुं शक्ताः शक्तिभक्तधं ववित् ॥ 29 ॥

He is the man himself to take back the Krtyā that he has originated. There is no doubt in this. So it is better for you now to take the shelter of the Muni."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तो गुरणा शक्रसदागच्छनुपिं प्रति ।

प्रणाय शिरसा नप्रस्तमुवाच भयास्वितः ॥ 30 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus from his Guru, Indra went to the Muni and bowed down shuddering, before him.

भ्रमस मुनिशाष्टूल शमयासुरमुच्छात् ।

प्रसजो भव सर्वैल वचनं ते कौण्यमूढ् ॥ 31 ॥

सोमाहर्षिक्षिनवेतावरूपभृति भारी ।

भविष्यतः सत्यमेतद्धो विध प्रसीद मे ॥ 32 ॥

O Muni! Forgive me and stop the Asura from his intention to slay the Devas. O All knowing One! Be pleased, I will keep your words. O Bhārgava! The two Aświns will, from this day, have the right to drink the Soma juice. This I speak out to you in truth. O Brāhmana! Be graciously pleased unto me.

मिथ्या ते नोह्यो होय भवत्वेल लोपोन ।

जाने त्वमपि धर्मत्र मिथ्या नेव कार्यस्थि ॥ 33 ॥

सोमपार्विश्नोलौ तल्कृतौ च सदैव हि ।

भविष्यतक्षा शपतिं: कॉर्तिल्ते विपुला भवेत् ॥ 34 ॥

मया यद्रिकृतं कर्म सर्वथा मुनिसन्तम ।

परीक्षार्य तु त्विद्यं तव वीर्घकाशनम् ॥ 35 ॥

O Ascetic! Your intention will never be baffled. Especially I know you to be a knower of Dharma; so, you will never be able to make your word swerve from truth. The two ASvins will, by your grace, be able to drink always the Soma cup; and the King Saryatis fame will also know no bounds. O Muni! Know that what I have done is simply to test your prowess in Tapas.

प्रसादं कुक मे बहान्यदं संहर चोत्थितम् ।

कल्पणं सर्वदैवानां तथा घृते विधीयतान् ॥ 36 ॥

O Brāhmaṇa! Now do this favour to me and take back your, this Demon Mada sprung from your sacrificial hearth and thus do good to all the Devas. There is no doubt in this.

एवमुक्तसु शक्रेना चव्बनः परमार्थवित् ।

संजहार तपःकोपसमुपवं चितीधजम् ॥ 37 ॥

देवमाधाय्य संविन्न भार्थवसु मदं ततः ।

व्यभजल्लीषु पानेपु घृतेषु भुगायासु च ॥ 38 ॥

Thus spoken piteously by Indra, Cyavana, who knew the Highest Reality, drew back within himself the anger arising from the enmity with Indra. Then the Maharṣi Cyavana consoled the Devas that were very much perplexed and anxious out of terror of the Demon named Mada and divided the Asura into four parts (1) female sex, (2) drinking, (3) gambling and (4) hunting animals.

मदं विज्ञज्य देवेन्द्रप्राधास्य चकित्तं भिया ।

संस्थाय च सुरात्मवान्यं तस्य व्यावर्तिन् ॥ 39 ॥

When Mada was thus divided into four parts, the terror stricken Devas felt themselves relived and saved and got consoled.

ततस्तु संस्कृतं सोयं वास्वाय महात्मने ।

अधिष्यां सर्वेधर्तमाय पाययासम सर्पिनः ॥ 40 ॥

Cyavana then placed the Devas in their respective stations and completed the sacrifice. At last, the religious Bhārgava made first Indra and then the two Aśvins drink the Soma Cups.

एवं तो च्चवनेनायाविश्रुनी तदिपुत्रकी ।

विहिती सोमपी राजन-सर्वथा तपसो बलत् ॥ 4 1 ॥

सरसद्वीप विश्यातां जाते पूर्यविमणिकात् ।

आश्रमसु पुनेः सम्यक्युविध्वां विश्वतो5पवत् ॥ 4 2 ॥

Book VII Chapter VIII

O King! Thus Cyavana had the Aśvins their Soma Cups by virtue of his power of Tapas. Theue the tank with the sacrificial post Yūpa became famous and the Muni's Aśrama also was renowned and honoured in all respects on the surface of the earth.

श्यांतिराति संतुहो हाभवतेन कर्मण ।

यजं समाय्य नगरे जगाम सचिवेद्युं: ॥ 4 3 ॥

The King Śaryāti, too, became very glad at this sacrifice and completing the sacrifice returned with his ministers to his city.

राज्यं चकार धर्मज्ञो मनुपुरुः प्रतपायन् ।

आन्तरितस्य पुत्रोभूदानतरिद्धतेनोर्षवत् ॥ 4 4 ॥

The Manu's son, the powerful religious King Śaryāti governed his kingdom, free from any obstacles or other enemies. He had one son named Ānarta; and Ānarta had a son named Revata born to him.

सोउतः समुद्रे नगरी विमियांर कुशस्थतीम् ।

आस्थितो घृताक्रिययानानतौदीनरिदम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

Revata built the city of Kuśasthali in the midst of the ocean and began to live there. He enjoyed all the things in the countries named Ānarta and others.

तस्य पुरगतं जते ककुषिषजोष्ठमुतनम् ।

पूत्री च त्वेति नाना सुन्दरी शुभलक्षण ॥ 46 ॥

Revata had one hundred sons of whom Kakudmi was the eldest and of pure character. He had one daughter very beautiful named Revatī, endowed with all auspicious qualities.

वरयोग्या यदा जाता तदाराजा च रेततः ।

चिन्तयामास राजेन्द्रो राजपुत्रान्कुलोद्धवान् ॥ 47 ॥

When the daughter reached a marriageable age, the King began to think where he could get a prince of a good noble family.

रेततं नाम च गिरिमाश्रितः पृथिवीपति: ।

चकार राज्यं बलवानानंतैनु नराधिधः ॥ 4 8 ॥

That powerful King began to govern his people Anartas, with his headquarters at the Raivata hill. विधिन्य पनसा राजा कृस्ये देवा यम सुता ।

गाला पृष्ठथामि बहाण्यं सर्वत्रं सुर्पृजितम् ॥ 49 ॥

इति सश्रित्यं युपाल: सुतामादाय रेवतीम् ।

बहालोकं जगामाशु प्रडुकाम: चितामहम् ॥ 50 ॥

“Whom to betroth this daughter,” the King thought and settled that he would go to Brahmā and ask him, the venerable omniscient Prajāpati, worshipped by the Devas. Thus the King went with his daughter Revatī to the Brahmaloka.

यत्र देवाङ्ग यज्ञा श्रद्धासि पर्वतासथा ।

अध्यय: सरिताशीय दिध्यकरणयः स्थितः ॥ 51 ॥

There the Devas, Yajñas, Vedas, mountains, oceans and rivers all were shining with luminous bodies.

त्रश्य: सिद्धान्यर्वाः प्रजाग्राणास्तथा ।

तस्थु: प्रांजलयः सर्वे सुव्रन्तघु पुरातना: ॥ 52 ॥

इति श्रीमदैर्शिभाग्रते महापुराणो सत्यनकन्ये

सप्तमोउध्याः ॥ 7 ॥ 11

There the eternal Rsis, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Pannages and Čarṇapas were singing hymns to Brahmā, standing with folded hands.

Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Seventh Book on the twin Aśvīns (trinking the Soma Cup in Srimaddevībhāgava) am, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

|

Book VII Chapter VIII

CHAPTER VIII

On the King Revata and the Solar Dynasty

जनमेक्य उवाच

संगयो5यं महान्ब्रह्मावर्तैं मप मानते ।

ब्रह्मलोकगतो राजा रेवतीरंसुक्ता स्वयम् ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: O Brāhmaṇa! The King was a Kṣattriya; how could he go himself with his

daughter Revati to the Brahmaloka (the abode of Brahmā)? I entertain a great doubt on this point.

मया पूर्वे शूनं कृत्कनं ब्रह्मोण्यः कबान्ते ।

ब्राह्मणो ब्रह्माधिष्यन्तो ब्रह्लोकमवान्युन्त ।। २ ॥

राजा कर्वं गततरतर रेवतीसंयुतः स्वयम् ।

सत्योकें3तिद्यूपरे भूर्नैकादिति संशयः ॥ ३ ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

I heard of yore while conversing about matters connected with the Brāhmins, that the Brāhmin only who self-restrained and the knower of Brahman could alone go to the Brahmaloka. The Satyaloka is very hard for the worldly people to go; so I doubt how the king could have gone with Revatī from the Bhūrloka to the Satyaloka.

भृत: स्वर्गमवाणोति सर्वग्रासेषु निरणयः ।

मानुषेण तु देते बहतफोके गति: कथम् ।

Man, when he discards his body, can go to the Heavens. So is recited in all the Śāstras. How then, people, while, in their human bodies can go to the Brahmaloka.

खर्गाल्युनः कर्थ लोके मानुषे जायते गति: ॥ 4 ॥

एतन्ने संगयं विद्रेश्तेनुमहिंस संग्रान् ।

यथा गता गतस्तत्र प्रयुकामः प्रजापतिन् ॥ 5 ॥

So cut asunder my doubts how the King Revata could go to the Brahma loka to ask the Prajāpati on certain matters.

व्यास उवाच

मेरोस्तु शिजारे राजन्सर्वें लोका: प्रतिभिताः ।

इन्ट्रलोको वाहिलोको या च संबमपी पूर्णी ॥ 6 ॥

तवैव सत्यलोकश्र केलासक्ष तथा पुनः ।

वैकुण्डछु पुनस्तत्र वैष्णवं पदमुच्यते ॥ 7 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! On the top of the mountain Sumeru, are located the Indra's heavens called Amarāvatī (the abode of the Immortals) the Samyamani city of Yama, the Satyaloka, the Vahniloka, the Kailāsa, Vaikuntha the abode of Viṣṇu and others.

यथाजुनैः शकलोके गतः पार्थों धनुधरः ।

पशु वर्षाणि कौतोनः स्थितस्तत्र सुरालये ॥ 8 ॥

मानुपेणिव देहेन वासवस्य च सविष्टी ।

तथेवायैरिध भूपानतः ककुल्वयमुपुजा: किल ॥ 9 ॥

The great archer Arjuna, the son of Prthā, went to the Indraloka and spent five years there. In ancient times, the Kings Kakuttha and others went to Indraloka, in their human bodies.

स्वलोकानतः पशाद्विधाशी महाकावतः ।

जित्वेन्सदनं प्राय सँस्थितास्तत्र कामतः ॥ 10 ॥

महाधिषः पुरा राजा ब्रह्मलोकं गतः स्वाद् ।

आगच्छतीं नृयो गंगामपर्यच्चातिसुन्दीय ॥ १ १ ॥

Even the powerful Daityas used to conquer the Indraloka and resided there at their will and pleasure. In ancient times, when the sovereign of the earth, the King Mahābhisa went to the Brahmaloka, the most beautiful Gāngā also was coming to the Brahmaloka.

वायुर्नांबरम्यस्तु दैवादपहतं नृप । किंचित्रान्ना नृपेणाय दृष्टा सा सुन्दरी तथा ॥ १२ ॥ सितं चकार कामातैः सा च किंचिज्जहास् वै ।

ब्रहणा तौ तदा दृष्टी शणतो जाती वसुंधगम् ॥ १३ ॥

On the way the King saw Her. O King! Accidentally at that time her clothing were cast aside by the wind; the King saw her partly in her naked state, and, overpowered with lust, smiled; Gāngā also smiled. Seeing the states of them, Brahmā instantly cursed them; and they had to come in this world and take their births.

बैकुण्ठेडीप सुरा: सर्वे पीडिता देत्यदानये: ।

गत्वा हरि जनगाथयमलुच्कमलायातिम् ॥ 14 ॥

सन्देहो नात्र कन्धेल: स्वांगा नृपसतम ।

गयाम: सर्वेर्पि लोका: सूर्मनिवानों नारीधि ॥ 15 ॥

All the Devas, when oppressed by the Dānavas, went to Vaikuntha and sang hymns to Hari, the Lord of Kamalā. O King! Men can go to all the Lokas; in fact those high-souled men that perform Yajñas or severe asceticisms and thus have acquired great merits, those performers of Sacrifices and ascetics surely go to the Heavens.

अव्ययं कृतपुर्णनां तापसानां नाराधि ।

पुण्यसूद्राव एवारा गमने कारणं नृप ॥ 16 ॥

तथैव यजमानानां यजेन भाषितात्मनाम् ।

O King! It is only the abundance of good merits that is the only cause of going to Heavens. So you ought not to entertain any doubts on this.

जनमेव अन्य

रेवातो रेवाती कन्यां गृहीत्वा चाहलोचनाम् ॥ 17 ॥

बह्वालेकं गत: पश्ञाक्के कृतं तेन धृषुज्ञ।

Book VII Chapter VII

ब्रद्गण किं समादिष्ट कम्पै दत्ता सुता पुनः ॥ 18 ॥

तल्पवं विस्तारबुद्धान्काय त्वं मामधान्ना ।

Janamejaya said: O Muni! The King Revata went with his daughter Revatī to the Brahmaloka; but what did he do when he went there? What did Brahmā order him? And to whom did the King betroth his daughter, when ordered by Brahmā? O Brāhmanā! Speak out all these in details to me now.

व्यास उवाच

निशामय महीपाल राजा रेवतक: किल ॥ 19 ॥

पुर्या वरं परिषुं बढ़ालोकं नातो यदा ।

आवर्तमाने गान्यर्य स्थितो लक्ष्यक्षणः क्षणम् ॥ 20 ॥

भृणवत्रतृयद्धृघाता सभायां तु सकन्यकः ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hear. When the King went to Brahmaloka to ask about the proper bridegroom of his daughter, there was going on singing and music; so he waited a while to find an opportunity when the assembly would have a leisure; but he was so very pleased with music that he could not desist from hearing it till the end.

समाप्ते तत्र नाभ्यई प्रणाय्य परमेध्वरम् ॥ 21 ॥

हर्षीयिता सुता तस्ये साधिपार्यं न्यदेवत् ।

When the music was finished, the King bowed down to Brahmā and showed him his daughter and informed Him of his intention.

राजोवाच

वर्ग कथय देदेग कन्येय मप चुकिता ॥ 22 ॥

देया कस्मै मया ब्रह्न्यूषु त्वां समुपागतः ।

बहवो राजपुत्रा मे वीक्षिताः: कुलसंपवाः: ॥ 23 ॥

कर्मधीछ्य मेमः कामं नोपातिष्ठित चक्रतम् ।

The King said: “O Deva! This good daughter is mine; now kindly say who will be her bridegroom. O Brahmā! To whom shall I betroth this daughter? I have come to you to ask on this point. I have searched for many princes and seen also a good many of them and none of them is to my liking and so my mind is not at rest.

तस्माचां देवदेवेश प्रष्ट्रभागातोउस्मह्मूं ॥ 24 ॥

तद्वात्राय सर्वैत्र योग्यं राजसुतं वरम् ।

कुलीनं बलवन्तं च सर्वतक्षणसंयुतम् ॥ 25 ॥

दातातं धर्मशीलं च राजयुं समाधिरा ।

O Lord of Devas! Therefore I have come to you. Kindly select one bridegroom for her. He is to be a Kulina (of good family), powerful, religious, liberal, and a prince endowed with all auspicious qualities. This is my prayer."

ध्यास उवाच

तदाकरणं जगत्कर्तों बेचनं नृपतेस्तदा ॥ 26 ॥

तमुवाच हसन्वाययं यद्धवो कालस्य पयंवम् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Brahmā, the lotus born, the Creator of the world, hearing these words, laughed, thinking that a very long interval had passed away. He then said:

ब्रहीावाच

राजपूत्रास्वया राजन्वरं ये हृदये कृतः ॥ 27 ॥

प्रस्ता: कालेन वे सर्वे सिवपूर्णैवबाधायः ।

O King! The princes that you thought would become the bridegroom of your daughter, all died; their sons and grandsons and their friends even have all passed away.

सप्तविंशरामोड़हीय द्वारस्तु प्रवर्तते ॥ 28 ॥

वंशजासे मृताः सर्वे पुरी दैर्वैर्वितुक्ति ।

सोमवर्शी.द्वावस्तर तथा राज्य प्रणास्ति हु ॥ 29 ॥

उप्रमेने इति ख्यातो मयुगाधिपति: किल ।

The twenty-seventh Manvantara of the Dvāpara Yuga is now going on, so none of the princes of your family are now existing. The Daityas sacked the King of Mathurā, is reigning in that place.

ययातिवंशसम्पृतो राजा माधुयमण्डले ॥ 30 ॥

उद्यनेतान्मतः कंस: सुरुद्धी महाबलः ।

दैन्येश: पितरं सोर्धि कारागारे न्येशगवत् ॥ 31 ॥

स्वयं राज्यं चकातसौ नृपाणां मदगवितः ।

मेदिती चातिभातां ब्रहाणं गरणं गता ॥ 32 ॥

दुष्टाराज्यसैन्यानां भारणांतिसमाकुला ।

अंगावततर्णं तत्र गतिद्त सुसततमैः ॥ 33 ॥ ॥

He belongs to the illustrious lunar family of Yayāti. His son, the powerful Karīsa, born of a

Dānava, began to do injuries always to the Devas; he threw his own father to the prison. Becoming very haughty, he began to govern himself the countries of other kings and began to tyrranise over the subjects. O King! The Earth became so much troubled by the armies of the wicked Demon Kings, that She became quite unable to bear further loads. So She went to seek refuge to Brahmā.

वासुदेव समुपघः कृष्णः कमललोचनः ।

देवक्वां देवसुधिण्यां योउसी नारायणोयुः नि 3 4 1 ||

तपश्वार दुःसाध्ये धर्मपुः: सन्तानतः ।

संगतीरां नसुरखा: पुण्ये बदिरिकाभेमे ॥ 3 5 ॥

Brahmā and the other Devas then began to say: "O Earth! To remove your burdens, the lotus-eyed Nārāyaṇa will incarnate Himself as part incarnation in the form of Śri Krṣṇa. He who is Nārāyaṇa practised in ancient times, as the son of Dharma, a very severe asceticism, in company with his brother Nara in the sacred hermitage of Badarī.

सोउवतीर्णं यदुकुले वासुदेवोप्र विश्रुतः ।

तेनासी नितहः पापः केसः कृष्णोस सन्ति ॥ 36 ॥

Now this very Deva is born in the great family of Yadu in the womb of Devakī by Vasudeva and is now celebrated by the name of Vāsudeva."

उप्रसेनाय राज्यं वै दर्तं दल्या खलं सुतम् ।

कंसस्य श्रुगुरः पापो ज्ञासंधी महावलः ॥ 37 ॥

O King! He has slain that vicious wicked Kanisa and has installed Ugrasena in his place. The very powerful Jarāsandha, the vicious King of Magadha, is the father-in-law of Karīsa. On hearing the death of his son-in-law, he became in infuriated with rage came to Mathurā, and raged a terrible war.

अगत्य मवृरा कोधाचकार संरं पूरा ।

कृष्णोनासी सितः संख्ये जरासीधे महावलः ॥ ३ ८ ॥

प्रेयवायास युद्धाय सवलं यवंन ततः ।

शुवायानं महूलूरं ससैच्यं यवतानिधपम् ॥ ३ ९ ॥

Vāsudeva defeated in a battle that Jarāsandha, proud of his mighty valour. Though defeated, Jarāsandha sent Kālayavana with his host of army to fight again with Krṣṇa. Bhārgava Vāsudeva,

when he heard that the King of Yavanas arrived, sent away all the members of his family and the Yādavas to Dvārkā and began to wait with his brother Balarāma for the Yavana King. Then he went alone to the camp of Yavana and led him away to a mountain cave where was sleeping the King Mucukunda and had then the Yavana King slain by Mucukunda.

कृष्णसुं मदुगतं त्यकत्वा पुरुरं द्वारवतीमगात् ।

प्रभानां तां पुरीं कृष्ण: शिलियपि: सह मंसी: ।

कार्यामास दुगांखी हडुशालाविमणिद्धात् ।

जीणोंद्वारं पुरः कृत्वा वासुदेवः प्रापवान् ।

उउसेनं च राजानं चकार वारणवर्तिनम् ॥ १ ॥

याद्वान्स्थाप्यामास द्वारलयं यदुतमः ।

वासुदेवस्तु तजाछ वर्तते बान्यदेः सह ॥ 4 0 ॥

Kṛṣṇa then went to Dvārkā. The city of Dvārkā was then in a dilapidated condition. Kṛṣṇa brought together the artists and got built exquisitely the beautiful palaces, forts, and markets and stalls, etc., and so added to the beauty of the place. That Vāsudeva, of mighty prowess, thus improving the city, made Ugrasena the King of that place; and Kṛṣṇa is now waiting there with his friends.

तस्याप्र: स विश्वगतो बलदेचो हलायुधः ।

गेशांगो मुसली बीगे वरोसंसु तव संमतः ॥ 4 1 ॥

His elder brother Baladeva, the carrier of the plough, is celebrated. Thus he with Muśala in his hands is a great warrior and the part incarnation of Ananta Deva.

संकर्षणाय देहागुण कन्यां कमललोचनाम् ।

रेकर्ती बलभघ्राय विवाहविधिना ततः ॥ 42 ॥

He is the fit bridegroom of your daughter. So give your daughter in marriage, without any delay, according to the rules of the marriage ceremony to Sankarşana Balabhadra.

दत्वा पुत्री तृपक्ष्र पाछ्छ लं बदारिकाओमम् ।

तपस्तनुं सुरातमं पावनं कामदं नृणम् ॥ 43 ॥

After giving your daughter in marriage, go to the hermitage of Badari and practise tapasyā. That sacred retreat is the (park) recreation ground of the

Book VII Chapter VIII

Devas, holy and yielding to human beings the objects of their desires.

व्यास उवाच

इति राजा समादिष्ठी ब्रह्माण पच्योनिना ।

जगाम तसरा राजन्द्राकों कन्यायन्ति: ॥ 44 ॥

ददौ तां बलदेवाय कन्यां वै शुभतक्षणाम् ।

ततसस्त्वा तपस्तीत्रं नृपति: कालपर्ये ॥ 45 ॥

जगाम तिःदशावासं त्यक्त्वा देहं सरित्ते ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus ordered by the lotus-born Brahmā, the King went to Dvārakā with his daughter. Reaching there he gave over his all auspicious daughter in marriage to Baladeva duly according to the rules and regulations. At last, according to Brahmā's injunction, he became engaged in severe austerities in the Badarikāśrama and, when the time of death arrived, left off his mortal coil on the banks of the river and went to the world of Gods.

जनमेव जवाच

भगवान्महाद्धार्थ भवता समुदाहतम् ॥ 46 ॥

रेवतस्तु चित्यतन्त्र ब्रह्मलोके सुतावंतः ।

युगानां तु गतं तत्र शनमघोत्रं चिकल ॥ 47 ॥

कन्या कुद्धा न संज्ञात तरका वाजिततां नु किम ।

एतावंतं तथा कालमायुः पूर्ण तयोः कवम् ॥ 48 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Bhagavan! You have uttered one wonderful thing. One hundred and eight Yugas passed away when the King of Revata with his daughter was deeply absorbed in hearing music in the Brahmaloka yet neither the good King nor the daughter did get sufficiently old. How could this be! How could they have lived so long! Were their longevities ordained to be such a long period!

यास उवाच

न जरा श्रुतिपासा वा न मृतूनं भयं पुनः ।

न तु लाना: प्रभवति ब्रह्मलोके सद्धान्य ॥ 49 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Brahmaloka is not touched by any vice nor sin; old age, hunger, thirst or fear of death nothing exists there; nor is there any other cause by which weariness comes. So what

doubt there can be that the people there will be long-lived, free from old age and death!

मेहं गतस्य शयिते: सन्ती राक्षसैहिता ।

गता: कुसास्यती लक्चल भवभीता इतस्ततः ॥ 50 ॥

मनोक्ष क्ष्वतः पुत्र उन्यको वीर्यवंततः ।

इक्षाकुपिति विद्यानतः सूर्येशंगकस्तु सः ॥ 51 ॥

When the King Śaryāti went up to the Heavens, his sons were all destroyed by the Rāksasas; those that remained, they, terrified left Kuśasthalī and fled on all sides. Vaivāsvata Manu sneized; owing to that, came out of his nose one powerful son; his name was Iksvāku.

वंशार्थ तय आतिरुक्छेरीं छायाला निरंतरम् ।

नारदस्योपदेशेन प्रायः दीक्षामनुतमम् ॥ 52 ॥

तस्य पुत्रगतं रावजिश्वकांकीरिति विश्रुतम् ।

विकृक्षिः प्रथमस्तेषां व्रतवीर्यमन्त्रितः ॥ 53 ॥

He spread the Solar dynasty and became celebrated. Getting excellent initiation from the Maharsi Nārada, he began to meditate the Devi constantly and practised severe tapasyā for the spread of his race. O King! Ikyāvāu had one hundred sons; Vūkṣṭiṣṭiṣṭiṣṭiṣṭiṣṭiṣṭiṣṭiṣṭiṣṭiṣṭiṣṭiṣटि.

अयोभ्यायां स्थिति राजा इक्यावुर्गिति विश्वतः ।

शकुनिमुभुक्ता: पुत्र: पंचागघृतवलतर: ॥ ५४ ॥

उत्तरायपदोशस्य रथिततः कृततः किल ।

Ikyāvāu became king and lived in Ayodhyā. He sent his fifty sons, the powerful Śakuni and others to Uttarāpatha (Eastern) provinces for governing those countries.

दक्षिणस्यां तथा राज्ञानिद्रासतेन ते सुता: ॥ 55 ॥

चत्वारिणशापाठी च रक्षणार्थ महात्मना ।

अन्यी द्वौ संस्थिती पार्थे सेवार्थ तस्य घूपते: ॥ 56 ॥

इति श्रीमद्धैर्षिगागते महापुराणे सप्तमकन्दोर्धुगोस्थाव: ॥ 8 ॥ 11

That high-souled monarch hath sent also other eight sons to govern the countries in the South. (Western). O King! He kept the remaining two sons by his side for his own service.

Here ends the Eight Chapter of the Seventh Book on

the story of the King Revata and the spread of the

Solar dynasty in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevī-bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER IX

On the Story of Kākustha and on Māndhātā

व्यास उवाच

कदापिद्रष्टाकशाड़े विकृक्षिं पृथिवीपति: ।

आज्ञायवसतसंभुको मांसमानय सत्त्वम् ॥ १ ॥

मेरयं शाळ्यार्थभूना वने गत्वा सुतादरात् ।

इत्युक्तोउसी तथेत्याशु जगाम वनमस्त्रभृत् ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Once on a time, the time for Aṣṭaka Śrāddha (the funeral ceremony in honour of the departed) arrived. Seeing this, the King Iśvāku ordered his son Vikukṣi: “O Child! Go immediately to the forest and bring carefully pure sanctified meat for the Śrāddha purpose; see, that there be no neglect of duty. Thus ordered, Vikukṣi instantly went to the forest equipped with arms.

गत्या ज्ञान बाणी: स वराहान्युकारान्यगान् ।

शगर्शधारि परिश्रोतो बभूवाथ बुभूश्रितः ॥ 3 ॥

विम्मृता चाहका तत्प शगं चादद्वी वने ।

गंपं निवेदवामास पिधे मांसमन्तनम् ॥ 4 ॥

He hunted in the forest lots of boars, pigs, deer, and hare. But he was so very tired with his journey in the forest and got so hungry that he forgot everything about the Asṭaka Śrāddha and ate one hare there in the forest. The remaining excellent meat he brought and handed over to his father.

प्रोक्षाय समानीत मांतं दृष्ट्या गुरुस्तदा ।

अनहिंमिति नज्ञाना चुकोप मुनिसत्तमः ॥ 5 ॥

When that meat was brought to be sprinkled for purification, the family priest Vasistha, on seeing it, at once came to know that some portion had already been eaten and it was the remaining part.

भुक्तशंत्रु न आद्रे प्रोक्षणीयमिति स्थिति: ।

राझे निवेदयामास वसिष्ठः पाकदूषणम् ॥ 6 ॥

The leavings of food are not fit for the sprinkling purpose; this is the Śāstric rule. Vasiṣṭha informed the King of this defect in the food.

पुत्रस्य कर्म तन्त्राला भूपतिंगुभोदितम् ।

चुकोप विधित्योपातं देशाप्रिः:सारयस्ततः ॥ 7 ॥

In accordance with the Guru's advice, the King coming to know thus the violation of the rule by his son, became very angry and banished his son from his kingdom.

शग्राद इति विद्यतो नाना जातो नृपात्मजः ।

गतो वने शग्रादस्तु चितृकोपादसंधमः ॥ 8 ॥

वय्ने वर्तयक्लं नीतावान्यमंतलर: ।

The prince became known from that time as Śaśāda; he did not become the least sorry for his father's anger; he went to the forest and gladly remained there.

चितपुरंने राज्य प्राणतं तेन महात्मना ॥ 9 ॥

शशाद्रवककोरात्रामयोधायाः पति: स्वयम् ।

He gladly passed his time absorbed in religion and sustained his life on forest fruits and roots. After sometime when his father died, he inherited his kingdom.

यज्ञाननेकशः पूर्णांशकार सर्यतुटे ॥ 10 ॥

शशाद्रयाभवत्सुः ककुल्य इति विशुतः ।

तस्यैव नामभेदाड़े इंद्रवाहः पुरंवयः ॥ 11 ॥

On becoming the King of Ayodhyā, Śaśāda had only one son; he became famous in the three lokas by the name of Kakutsha. He was known also by other names Indravāha and Puranājaya.

जनमेव जयार

नामधेदः कर्थ जातो राजपुरस्य चानप्र ॥

कारणं बृहि मे सर्वे कर्मणा येन चाधवत् ॥ 12 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Holy One! How and why was the prince named Kakutsha. Why was he known by the two other names? Speak all this to me.

व्यास उवाच

शगादे सर्वाती राजा ककुल्य इंत्ति चाभवत् ।

राज्य चकार धर्मज्ञ: विपुर्वीमार्थ बलात् ।

एतसिभजतेरे देवा दैन्यैः सर्वे पराजितः ॥ 13 ॥

जगमुक्तिलोकाप्रियत विज्ञा ग्रणमाव्यव्यम् ।

तान्योवाच महाविष्युक्तदा देवान्सनातनः ॥ 14 ॥

Book VII Chapter IX

Vyāsa said: O King! When Śaśāda went to the Heavens, Kakutstha became king. That religious king then began to govern the country of his father and grandfather with an authority supported by a powerful arm. At this time the Devas suffered a defeat from the Dānavas and took refuge to Viṣṇu, the Infallible and the Lord of the three worlds. The eternal great Viṣṇu full of intelligence and bliss then addressed the Devas:

विष्णुराच

पाणिण्याहं महीपालं प्रार्थवन्तु शाशाद्वान् ।

स हनिष्यति वे दैत्यानंभामे सुरसतम १ १ ५ ॥

आगथीयति धर्मोसा साहाय्यार्थ धनुधरः ।

पराशनैः प्रसादेन सामर्थं तस्य चालुम् ॥ १ ६ ॥

Visṇu said: “O Devas! Go and pray to the King Śaśāda. He will be your ally and kill all the Demons. That King is religious; especially he is a worshipper of the Highest Śakti. He is good archer and will come to help you. His strength is immense.

हरे: सुवचनादेवा ययु: सर्वे सवासवा: ।

अलोध्यायां महात्राज शगतदानंय प्रति ॥ 17 ॥

तानगतान्युराजाज पूजयामास धर्मतः ।

पण्छलामाने राजा प्रयोजनमतिई: ॥ 18 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Indra and the other Devas hearing the nectar like words of Hari went to Ayodhyā, to Kakuttsha, the son of Śaśāda. Seeing the Devas at his palace, the king worshipped them duly and with great care; and he asked them why they had come there.

राजोवाच

ध-योड़ं पावितशामि जीवितं सक्लं मम ।

यदागत्य गृहे देवा ददुक्षा दर्जानं महत् ॥ १९ ॥

ब्रुवंतु कृत्यं देयेशा दुःसाध्यमपि मानतेः ।

करिष्ठामि महत्कार्य सर्वेधा भवतां महत् ॥ २० ॥

The King said: O Devas! When you have favoured me by your presence here, I am blessed and sanctified; my life is crowned with success. Say what I can do for you; I will carry it out even if it be very hard for me to perform."

देवा कचुः

साहाय्यं कुरा राजेन्द्र सखा भव शर्पीपतेः ।

संग्रामे जय दैत्येंग्रानुर्जांशिक्रदारीपि ॥ २१ ॥

पराशक्तप्रसादेत वुतर्भे नासित ते क्वचित् ।

विष्णुना प्रेरिताश्वेमानातस्व सक्रियो ॥ २२ ॥

The Devas said: “O Prince! Please help and back us and defeat the Daityas, invincible by the Devas and form an alliance with Indra. O King! By the grace of the Highes Sakti, you have nothing unattained anywhere; so we have come to you by the order of Viṣnu.”

पंजीवाच

पाणिग्राहो भावमयद्ध दैवानां सुरसतमाः।

इन्द्रे मे वाहनं तन भवेहादि सुपाधिपः ॥ 23 ॥

The King said: "O Devas! I can back you and become your ally if Indra carries me on his back in the time of war.

संग्रामं तु कार्वियामि देवैर्वैकृतोर्धपुना ।

आक्रड़ोंर नायियाभि सत्योतद्वयोम्हमू ॥ 24 ॥

I will fight nor with the Daityas but for the Devas; but I will go to the battle-field on Indra's back; this I speak to you truly.

तदोषुर्वास्व देवा: कर्तव्ये कार्यम्बद्धुतम् ।

पत्र भव नरेन्द्रस्य त्वक्वल जलजा शर्चापते ॥ 25 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King The Devas then spoke to Indra: "O Lord of Śacī! It is now your bounden duty to do this; so quitting shame, be a carrier to this king."

लज्जमानरलत शक्र: प्रेरितो हरिण भुगम् ।

वधूव वृषभस्तूर्णं क्रस्येवापरो महान् ॥ 26 ॥

Indra got ashamed very much, but being requested frequently by Hari, at last assumed the appearance of a bull like the great Bull of Śiva.

तमाहरोह राज्ञसौ संधामगानाय वे ।

चित्रा: कुकुदि येनाय कुकुर्म्यसेन चापवल ॥ 27 ॥

The King mounted on that bull to go to the war; he fought while taking his seat on the hump on the shoulders of the bull (Kakuda); therefore he was named Kakustha.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

इन्ही वाहः कृतो येन तेन नामेन्द्रवाहकः ।

पुरो जितातृ दैवानां तेनभुच्छ पुरंजय: ॥ 28 ॥

जिवा दैवाभ्यदावाहुर्धनं तेषां प्रतचान् ।

पप्रच्छ चैवं राजर्षेति सख्यं बभूव ह् ॥ 29 ॥

The King was carried by Indra on his back hence he was named Indravāha; he conquered the Dānavas in battle; hence he was called Puranājaya. The powerful King defeated the Dānavas and gave away all their wealth to the Devas. He bade farewell to the Devas and returned to his own kingdom. Thus the alliance was formed with Indra.

कुतुस्थोक्षातिविख्यातो नृपतिसत्य संशजाः ।

काकुत्स्था भृति राजानो बभूवुर्बुईविश्रतः ॥ ३० ॥

O King! Kakuttsha became very celebrated on this earth; his descendants became kings and were known as Kakutsthas and were all very famous here on this Earth.

कुकुत्स्थ्याभवतुजो धर्मपत्न्यो महावलः ।

अनेन विश्रुतस्तस्य पृषुः पुत्रछा वीर्यान् ॥ 31 ॥

Kakutstha had one powerful son, named Kakutstha by his legal wife; Kakutstha had the son Prthu, of mighty prowess.

विष्योगेर्य मसूतः साक्षात्यरागतिन्पदाचंकः ।

विश्रधित्यु विज्ञेय: पृथोः पुत्रो नराधिणः ॥ 32 ॥

Prthu was the part incarnation personified of Visnu, and worshipper of the feet of the Supreme Śakti. His son was Visāvarandhi; he became king and governed the kingdom.

चन्द्रस्तस्य सुतः श्रीमात्राजा शंकरः स्मृतः ।

तत्सुती युवानश्रस्तु तेजस्वी बलवततः ॥ 33 ॥

His son was Candra; he came to be king, governed his subject and multiplied very much his issues.

ग्रावन्ती युवनाश्रय जजे परमधार्मिकः ।

ग्रावर्ती निमिति तेन पुरी शक्रपुरीसामा ॥ 34 ॥

Yuvanāśva was one of his sons; he was very powerful and spirited. Śavanta was the son of Yuvanāśva; he was very religious. He built a nice city named Śāvanti like the Paradise of Indra.

ब्रह्मधस्तु पुत्रोःभूष्ठावर्तेस यहातनः ।

कुलवायाथः सुतस्तस्य बभूव पृथिवीपति: ॥ 35 ॥

ध्रुभुभागा हतो देत्यसंतनासी पृथिवीतले ।

ध्रुभुभारोति विल्यालां नाम प्रभातिविश्रुन्ति ॥ 36 ॥

Brihadasâva was the son of the high-souled Śāvanta; he had a son Kuvalayâśva. He became the Lord of the earth by the power of his arms. He killed Dhundu Dānava; so he was very much celebrated by the name of Dhundumâra.

पुत्रसत्यय दुर्बाश्रनु पालायामास मेदैनीम् ।

दूदाश्रय सून: श्रीमान्वर्थ श्रुत कीर्तिन: ॥ 37 ॥

निकुभभत्सूनु: प्रोन्नो बयूपू पृथिवीपितः ।

वर्णाश्धी निकुम्भस्य कृशाश्रस्तय वे सूनः ॥ 38 ॥

His son Drḍhāśva; he governed the earth; His son was Śrimān Haryāśva. His son was Nikumbha; he became the King. Nikumbha had his son Varhaṇāśva. Kriśāśva was his son.

प्रसेनशिकृष्णाश्रय बलवानसत्यविक्रमः ।

तस्य उपो महापाणो यौवनार्थिति विश्रतः ॥ 39 ॥

His son was the powerful Paseanjit; his son's prowess knew no bounds. Parasenajit had the fortunate son Yauvanāśva.

यौवनाश्रुतः श्रीमान्यांधातेति महीपति: ।

अष्टोत्तमसहं तु प्रासादा येन निर्मितः ॥ 40 ॥

O fortunate One! The son of Yauvanāśva was Śrimān Māndhātā; he became the Lord of the Earth and for the satisfaction of the Devi Bhagavatī had one thousand and eight palaces built in Benares and in the other chief places of pilgrimages.

भगवत्यान्तु तुर्धध्यं महातीध्यु मानद ।

मातृगर्भे न जातो:सावुर्वज्ञो जनकोदो ॥ 41 ॥

नि:सारितस्ततः पुः: कृषिं मिन्चा मिछु: पुनः ।

Māndhāṭā was not born of his mother's womb but was born in the belly of his father. Then the ministers tore asunder the belly of his father and got him out.

राजोबाच

न शुतं न च दृष्टं वा भवता तदुदाहतम् ॥ 42 ॥

असंभावं महाभाग तस्य जन यथोदितम् ।

विस्तेण वद्यवाहा मंधातुर्जन्माकरणम् ॥ 43 ॥

राजोदेर यथोतयः पुत्र: सर्वांगसुन्दरः ।

Janamejaya said: O fortunate One! What you

Book VII Chapter IX

said was never seen nor heard ever before since. This sort of births is highly improbable. How was that beautiful son born in the belly of his father? Describe this in detail and satisfy my curiosity.

यास उचाच

यौवनाश्रीउपच्यो5पूरज्ञा परमधामिक: ॥ 44 ॥

भार्थिणां च शर्त तस्य बथूव नृपतैनृप ।

राजा चित्तापर: प्रायश्रित्त्यामास निवल्यः ॥ 45 ॥

अपत्यर्थं यौवनाश्री कुःवित्तनु वर्न गतः ।

ग्रहीणामाओंपुण्ये निर्विलणः स च पार्थिवः ॥ 46 ॥

मुगोच कु:वित्तः श्रासांतोपासनां च पश्यतान् ।

दूद्वा तुं कुःवित्त विग्रा बभ्यूढ़ा कृपालतः ॥ 47 ॥

तमूच्ज्रांणा राजकन्समाख्छोचिति पार्थिति ।

किं ते दुःखं महाराज बृह्नि सत्यं मनोतमान् ॥ 48 ॥

प्रतीकारं क्रियामो दुःखस्य तत्व सर्वथा ।

Vyāsa said: O King! The King Yauvanāśva had one hundred queens; yet he had no issues. The King always thought much about his son. Once the King, sorry and desirous of a son, went to the holy retreats of the Rṣis. On arriving there, he began frequently to respire heavily before the ascetics. The Rṣis became filled with pity on seeing his sorrowful condition. O King! The Brāhmins then said to him: O King! Why are you thus sorrowful and distressed? What is your sorrow that is troubling your heart? Speak truly. We will surely redress your grievance.”

यौवानश उवाच

राज्यं धनं सदश्रश्छ वर्णैतं मुनयो मम ॥ ४ १ ॥

भायाणी च शर्त शुर्द्रं वर्तैत विशादप्रभम् ।

Yauvanāśva said: “O Munis! I have got the kingdom, wealth, excellent horses, one hundred illustrious chaste wives.

नारातिक्षु लोकेषु कोउध्यस्त बलवानाम ॥ ५० ॥

आज्ञाकास्तु सामंतत खर्तैने मन्थिणतस्ता ।

I have no enemies in the three worlds; no one is stronger than me. All the Kings and ministers are obedient to my call.

एकं सन्तानजं दुःखं नान्यतश्यामि तापसा: ॥ ५१ ॥

अपुत्रस्य गतिनार्िित स्थगों नैव च नैव च ।

तस्याच्छोभापि विघेज्ञानः सन्तानार्थे भृगतं ततः ॥ ५२ ॥

वेद्रगात्वारितच्ज्ञातपासधा कृतघ्रभाः ।

But O Ascetics! I have no son; this my sonless states is the only cause of my pain and sorrow. It has marred all my happiness. See! The persons that have no son cannot in any way go to Heavens. Therefore I am always being pained for this. You all are ascetic; you have taken great pains to learn the essence of the Veda Śāstras.

इर्हि सन्तानकामस्य वृक्तां ज्ञाला दिशिणुं मे ॥ 53 ॥

कुर्वन्तु मम कार्य वै कृष्णो चन्दिति तपायाः ।

So kindly order me what sacrifice is fit for me to have a son. O Ascetics! If you any pity for me, kindly perform this good work for me."

व्यास उवाच

तच्छूला वचनं राजः कृपया पूर्णमानसः ॥ 54 ॥

कारयामासुर्वयास्तस्येशिभिन्द्रवेतानम् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the words of the King, they were all filled with pity; and, with fullness of mind, made him to perform the sacrifice whose presiding deity was Indra.

कलगः स्थापितस्तत्र गतपूर्णास्तु वादधैः ॥ 55 ॥

मन्त्रितो वेदनार्थे घुर्जार्थ तस्य प्रपृतः ।

For the sake of the King, that he may get a son born to him, they had a jar filled with water by the Brāhmins and purified and charged that jar with the Vedic Mantrams.

राजा तर्डासूनं प्रविष्टसूचितो निशि ॥ 56 ॥

विज्ञानूद्वा शयानान्स पपी मन्त्रजलं स्वयम्।

The King got thirsty in the night and entered in the sacrificial ground; seeing the Brāhmins asleep, the King himself drank that water, surcharged with the Mantram.

भार्थ्योंर संकृतं विश्रमेमन्त्रित विधिनोद्युक्तम् ॥ 57 ॥

पीतं राजा तृषान्तेन तद्धानान्वुषोतम् ।

The Brāhmins consecrated and kept that water apart, according to due rules, surcharging with Mantrams, for the wife of the King; but the King,

getting thirsty, himself drank that water unconsciously.

སྟུང་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐྱོང་ཀྱི་སྐྱོང་ཀྱི་སྐྱོང་ཀྱི་སྐྱོང་

प्रश्रब्छूते रूपे केन पीते जलमिति बिज्ञा: 1

राजा पीते विदित्वा ते नात्वा दैवबलं भक्ति। ५ ९ ॥

Next morning the Brāhmins seeing the jar of water empty, were started very much with fear; the Brāhmins then asked the King: Who drank the water?

श्रौं सामायमासुरीतासे मुनयो गृहान् ।

गर्भे द्वारा नृपतिस्तन्ते मन्बलाद्धि ॥ 60 ॥

ततः काले स उतयः कुझिं भिन्तास्य दक्षिणाम् ।

When they came to know that the King himself drank the water, the Munis thought this to be an act of Daiva (Fate) and completing the sacrifice returned to their abodes. Then the King became pregnant by the power of the sacrificial Mantrams.

पूरं निष्कासयामापूर्णेनितस्य भूपतेः ॥ 6 1 ॥

देवानां कृपया तत्र न ममार महीपितः ।

After some time, the son became fully

developed. Then the King's minister, cutting his right bowel, got the son out. Out of the God's favour, the King did not die.

कं धास्यति कुमारोयं मन्निणध्छुकर्णभूगम् ॥ 62 ॥

तद्वेरे देशिनीं प्रादान्मां धातेत्यवद्बृढ़ः ।

सोउभवढ़लावाजाजा मान्याता पृथिवीपति: ।

तदुर्नसित्तु भूपाल कथिता तव विहरान् ॥ 63 ॥

श्रौत श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणो सत्यमकन्धे

नवमो3ध्याः ।। 9 ।।

When the ministers were troubled with the thought whose milk the child will suck, then Indra spoke out the child would drink (Mān Dhātā) my forefinger and gave his finger into the child's mouth. For that reason his name was Māndhātā. Thus I have described in detail the origin of Māndhātā.

Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the story of Kākutstha and the origin of Māndhātā in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER X

On Satyavrata

व्यास उवाच

वधूव चक्रवर्ती स नृपति: सत्यसंगर: ।

मांधाता पृथिवीं सर्वमिजयद्वृत्तीश्व: ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! That King Mānthāthā, true to his promise, conquered one after another the whole world and became the paramount sovereign of all the other emperors and got the title 'Sārvabhauma' (Sovereign of all the earth).

दयवोदय भयत्रता ययुर्गिश्रिष्ठासु च ।

इन्टेनणस्य कृतं नाम जसहसूयिति स्कुटम् ॥ 2 ॥

O King! What more to speak of Mándhāta's influence at that time than this that all the robbers, struck with his terror, all fled to the mountain caves. For this reason, Indra gave him the title 'Trasadasyu.'

तस्य बिन्दुभती भार्यां शगत्थिदो: सुताभवत् ।

पतित्रता सुल्णा च सर्वलक्षणसंयुता ॥ 3 ॥

तस्यानुयाद्वयामास मांधाता ही सुतौ नृप ।

पुकुत्सं सुविख्यातं मुचुकुन्दं तथापपम् ॥ 4 ॥

He married Bindumati, the daughter of Sāsāvindu. Her limbs were proportioned and perfect and so she was very beautiful. Mándhātā had by that wife two sons: (1) the famous Purukustha and (2) Mucukunda.

पुकुत्सातातोउपय: पुरः परमधार्थिकः ।

पितृपतिचरताशुपदूर्वद्धविशस्तादायकः ॥ 5 ॥

Purukustha had his son Anaranya; this prince was celebrated by the name of Brhadaśva. He was very religious and deeply devoted to his father.

हर्यक्षतस्य पुत्रोभपूद्वामैकः परमार्थवित् ।

तस्यात्मजक्षित्यावभूद्रणतास्य चात्मयः ॥ 6 ॥

His son was Haryaśva; he was religious and knew the Highest Reality. His son was Tridhanvā; his son was Aruna.

Book VII Chapter X

अनुषय सुतः श्रीमान्स्यवत् इति श्रुतः ।

सोःभूदित्बधारः कामो मंदात्मा ह्यिततोतुः ॥ 7 ॥

स यापात्मा विध्धपार्यं हतवान्कामपोहितः ।

विवाहै तस्य विधनं स चकार नृपतेः सुतः ॥ 8 ॥

Aruna's son was Satyavrata; he was very avaricious, lustful, wicked and wilful. Once one an occasion that vicious prince, overpowered by lust, stole away the wife of one Brāhmīn and so created an hindrance in his marriage.

मितिला ब्राह्मणात्मत राजानामरणं नृप ।

क्रपुर्णें सुखुःखात्तां हा हातः स्मेति चासकृत् ॥ 9 ॥

O King! The Brāhmins, united in a body, came to the King Aruṇa, bewailing and lamenting and uttered repeatedly: Alas! We are ruined!

पूछ्छ राजा तात्प्रापनुःवितानुस्वारसिनः ।

किं कृतं मम पुत्रेण भवताययुर्भे बिज्ञा : ॥ १ ० ॥

The King addressed to the grieved subjects, the Brāhmins: “O Brāhmins! What harm his been done to you by my son.”

तिश्रण्य द्विजा वाक्यं राजो विनयपूर्वकम् ।

तदोयुस्त्वरणं विषा कृतागरीवंचना घृष्टम ।। १। १।।

Hearing thus the good words of the King, the Dvijas, versed in the Vedas, repeatedly blessed him and said:

बाहाणा ऊचुः

राजस्व सुतेनाए विवाहे प्रहता किल ।

विवाहिता विग्रकन्या जलेन वलिनावं ।। १२ ॥

O King! You are the foremost of the powerful. So your son is like you. Today he has forcibly stolen away during the marriage ceremony a Brāhimin daughter already given over in marriage."

व्यास उवाच

श्रुत्वा तैशा वचस्तव्यं राजा परमधार्मिकः ।

पुत्रमाह वृथा नाम कृते ते दुर्कमर्गा ॥ 13 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The highly religious King hearing the words of the Brāhmins, took them to be true and said to his son: "O One of evil understanding! You have rendered today your name useless by perpetrating this evil act.

गच्छ दूरं सुमन्दात्मनुराचार गृहान्मा ।

न स्थातव्यं तव्या पाप विषये मम सर्वेश ॥ 14 ॥

O Vicious One! Get away from my house! O Sinner! You will never be able to live in my territory!"

कुपितं पितरं प्राह कव गच्छामीति के मुहुः ।

अकृतसमयोवाच भधाकैः सह वर्तेय ॥ 15 ॥

धपचय कृतं कर्म द्विद्वारापहारणम् ।

तस्मातैः सह संसर्ग कृत्वा तिह यथासुखम् ॥ 16 ॥

Seeing his father angry, Satyavrata repeatedly said: "Father! Where shall I go?" He said: "Live with the Cāndālas. You have stolen a Brāhmīn's wife and so have acted like a Cāndāla.

नाई पुत्रेप पुत्रार्थी त्वया च कुलपांसन ।

यथेई राज दुहात्यन्तीर्निजाः कृतत्स्वया ॥ 17 ॥

Go and live with them happily. O Disgrace to your family! I do't like to get issues through you; you have obliterated this family's name.

स निश्रय विमुवांवयं कुपितस्य महात्मनः ।

निश्रकाम पुतात्मास्तारा धघचान्ययी ॥ 18 ॥

So, Sinner go wherever you like. Hearing thus the words from his angry father, Satyavrata instantly quitted the house and went to the Cāndālas.

सत्यसत्सदा तत्र धपाकैः सह वर्तै।

धनुबाणधरः श्रीमान्कवची कर्णालायः ॥ 19 ॥

The prince, wearing his coat of armour and holding bows and arrows, began to spend away his time with the Cāndālas; but he could not get out of his breast his feeling of sympathy and mercy.

यदा निष्कासितः पिता कृपितेन महात्मना ।

गुणानाश वसितेन प्रेरितोस्ती महापिति: ॥ 20 ॥

When he was banished by his liberal angry father, the Guru Vasishta instigated the King to the above purpose.

तस्माल्यद्रतस्तस्मिन्धपत्र कोधसंसुत: ।

वसिषे धर्मशास्त्रेन निवारणपरादुमुखे ॥ 21 ॥

Satyavrata was therefore angry with Vasistha, inasmuch as he, versed in the Dharma Śāstras, did not dissuade the father from banishing his son.

केन्धितकारोगंथ पिता तस्य महीपति: ।

पुर्णार्थेजी तपस्तपुं पुरं व्यक्त्या बनं गतः ॥ 2 2 ॥

His father, then, owing to some inexplicable cause, quitted the city and, for the sake of his son, went to the forest to practise austerities.

न वर्षा नत तस्मिव्यये पाकाशासनः ।

सा द्वारण राजेन्द्र तेनाधर्मेण सर्वथा ॥ 23 ॥

O King! Owing to that sinful act, Indra did not rain at in his kingdom for twelve years.

विश्वामित्तदा दारांसतिमस्तु विषये नृप ।

संभ्यस्य कौशिकीतेरे चचार विपुलं तपः ॥ 24 ॥

O King! Just then Viśvāmitra, too keeping his wife and children in that kingdom, began to practise severe austerities on the banks of the river Kauśikī.

कातात तत संजाता भार्यां वे कौशिकस्य ह ।

कुट्वम्भरणायीय दुःखिता वरवर्गिनी ॥ 25 ॥

बालकान्बुध्याक्रांतान्तस्तदः पश्यतीं भृणम् ।

यामानांश्र नीवाराकरणम पत्रिता ॥ 26 ॥

चिन्यामाम दुःखाती तोकान्बीक्ष्य क्षुणतान् ।

युगे नासित पुरे हादा कं याचे वा कालीक किम् ॥ 27 ॥

न मे प्रातास्ति पुत्राणां पतिमें नास्ति सक्रियों ।

स्टंति बालकाः कामं घिछूरे जीवन्यदा थे ॥ 28 ॥

धनहीनों च मां त्यक्ता तपस्तपुं गत: पति: ।

न ज्ञानाति सम्बोभि दुःखितां धनवर्जितान् ॥ 29 ॥

The beautiful wife of Kuśika then fell into great trouble how she could maintain the family. All the children, pained with hunger, began to cry, begging for Nivāra rice food. The chaste wife of Kauśika became very much troubled in seeing all this. She thought, seeing the children hungry. “Where am I to go now and from whom to beg, and what to do, inasmuch as the King was not then staying in the Kingdom.

बालानां परर्ण के कनरोय पतिता दिना ।

मरिष्यन्ति सुना: सर्वे कुधाय भीडिता भूणम् ।। 30 ॥

एकं सुर्ट तु विक्रीय रबेण किया पुनः ।

पालयामि सुतान्यानेप के विहितो विधि: ॥ 31 ॥

The husband is not also near; so who would protect my children? The boys are incessantly crying. Fie therefore to my life!" She thought also

thus: "My husband has left me in this penniless state; we are suffering for want of money. He does not know these, though he is quite able. Save my husband, who else will support my sons?

सर्वेषां भाग्यं नाङ्धा युक्ते मम विधपर्ये ।

कालस्य कालनायाहं विक्रीणागय तावताम्बम् ॥ 32 ॥

They will all die now of starvation. I might sell one of my sons, whatever I get out of that, I can support the others; this is now my highest duty.

हृदयं कठिनं कृत्वा संचिन्य मनस सती ।

सा दर्भरज्ञा व्यट्याय गले पुत्रं विनिर्मिता ॥ 33 ॥

I ought not to do otherwise and kill all my children; so I will now sell one of my sons to support the others." Thus hardening her mind, she

मृत्यु तलि ही भुवि भुवि भुवि भुवि भुवि भुवि भुवि भुवि भुवि भुबी

मृपिनपनी गते बज्द्या मध्यमं पुत्रमौरमू ।

गोष्व सरणाध्याये गृहीत्वा चलिता गृहात् ॥ 34 ॥

The Muni's wife, for the sake of the other children, fastened the middle son by a cord and got out of her house.

दूद्वा सत्यव्रतेनातां तासयी गोकसंयुता ।

पण्ड्छ पूर्वातितां तु किं चिकोर्षिस गोभेने ॥ 35 ॥

The prince Satyavrata saw her distressed with pain and sorrow and asked: "O Beautiful One! What are you now going to do? Who are you?

रूर्तं बालकं कपड़े बदूट्यां नयसि कवानुना ।

किमर्थे चारभर्वांगि सत्वं बृष्टि ममाप्रतः ॥ 36 ॥

This boy is crying; Why have you tied him by a rope round his neck? O Fair One! Speak out truly to me the cause of all this."

སྐྱོད་པའིབ་སྟན་བཟན

विश्वामित्रय भावार्त्रं पुत्रोजयं मे नृपात्रज ।

विकेतुभीरसं कामां गमिष्य विषये सुतम् ॥ 37 ॥

अत्रं नारिति पतिर्वेल्चा नारतलनुं नृप वक्षित् ।

विक्रीणामि क्षुधात्रैंन शेषस्य भरणाय दै ॥ 38 ॥

The Rşi's wife said: "O Prince! I am the wife of Viśvāmitra. These are my sons. I am now going, for want of food, to sell one of these out of my own accord. O King! My husband has gone away to practise tapasyā; I do not know where he has

Book VII Chapter X

gone. There is no food in the house; so I will sell one to support the other sons."

राजोवाच

पत्तितः खू पुत्रं दास्यामि भरणं तव ।

तावदेव पतिसेउत्र वनाच्छैवागमिथिति ॥ ३ ९ ॥

Satyavrata said: “O Chaste One! Save your children. I will bring to you your articles of food from the forest till your husband does not come here.”

यूक्षे तावशामाथागे धस्यं किंशिरितरतम् ।

बन्ययिता गमिथ्यामि सत्यमेततुर्वीयमम् ॥ 40 ॥

इत्युक्ता सा तदा तेन रात्रा कोशिककामिनी ।

विद्वंधे तनयं कृत्वा जगमाभ्रमपण्डलम् ॥ 41 ॥

Daily I will fasten some food on a tree close by your Śārama. This I speak truly." The wife of Visvāmitra, hearing these words of the prince, freed the child of the fastening and took him to her Śārama.

सोउभवहालो नाम गतलव्यान्महातपः ।

सा तु स्वस्याम्पे गत्या मुमोद बालकैवृत्ता ॥ 42 ॥

The child was named afterwards as Gālava, due to his being fastened by the neck. He became a great Rsi afterwards. The Viśvāmitra's wife then felt great pleasure in her home, surrounded by her children.

स्वयस्तुम् बक्न्या च कृपया च परित्युतः ।

विश्वाधियस्य च मुनेः कलत्र नद्वषपार ह ॥ ४३ ॥

Filled with regard, and mercy, Satyavrata duly performed his task and provided daily the family of Viśvāmitra with their food.

वने सितानामृगान्त्वा वराहामहिषांस्त्वा ।

विश्वाधियत्रनाप्यापो मांसं पुवेळ वर्धंध हु ॥ 4 4 ॥

He used to hunt wild boars, deer, buffaloes, etc; and used to take their flesh to the place where used to dwell the wife of Visvāmitra and the children and tie that up to an adjoining trees.

त्रषिष्पती गृहीता तन्मांं पुत्रान्याततः ।

निर्वृति परमां प्राप प्रायव भक्यमन्तुलमम् ॥ 45 ॥

The Rṣi's wife used to give those to her children. Thus getting excellent food, she felt very happy.

अयोध्यां चैव राज्यं च तथैवात:पुरं पुंनि: ।

गते तनुं गुरे तास्मवासिषः पर्यक्षतः ॥ 46 ॥

Now when the King Aruṇa went for tapasyā to the forest, the Muni Vasistha carefully guarded the Ayodhyā city, and the palace and the household.

सत्यव्रतोसि धर्मांना ह्रातिह्वगगाईहः ।

वितुर्जातं समासाया यगुन्नवतावाने ॥ 47 ॥

सत्यव्रतो हाकस्पाच्छ कस्यचित्काराणाङ्गः ।

वसिष्ठे चार्थिकं मन्थुं धारयामास्त्र निव्याद् ॥ 48 ॥

Satyavrata, too, used to sustain his livelihood daily by hunting, according to his father's order; and abiding by Dharma, lived in the forest outside the city. Satyavrata cherished always in his heart, for some cause, a feeling of anger towards Vasiṣṭha. When his father banished his religious son, Vasiṣṭha did not prevent his father.

त्वम्यानं वने विज्ञा धार्मिर्धे च प्रियं सुन्तः।

न वारयामास भूनिर्विशेषः कारणेन है ॥ 49 ॥

पाणिग्रहणमान्जाणां निष्ठा स्यात्सदामे पदे ।

जानत्रसि स धर्माति विग्रदार्यस्पिष्ठे ॥ 50 ॥

This is the cause of Satyavrata's anger. Marriage does not become valid until seven footsteps are trodden (a ceremony); so the stealing away of a girl within that period is not equivalent to stealing away a Brāhmin's wife. The virtuous Vasistha knew that; yet he did not prevent the King.

कर्मिभ्रशिविरसोरन्पे पुणाभावे महीपति: ।

वसिष्ठस्य च गां दोर्धीयमयशूनमध्यागम ॥ 51 ॥

One day the prince did not find anything for hunting; he saw in the forest the cow of Vasistha giving milk. Very much distressed by hunger, the King killed the cow like a dacoit, partly out of anger and partly out of delusion.

तां जयान कुधात्रैनु कोधायोहाच्छ दस्युन्त ।

युङ़े बबंधे तन्मांसं नीत्वा स्वयमभक्षन्त् ॥ 52 ॥

ऋषिपनी सुतान्बतिभोजयामास तन्तद ।

गंकमाना भुगयेति न गोरिति च सुझत ॥ 53 ॥

He fastened part of the flesh to that tree for the wife of Visvāmitra and the remainder he ate

himself. O One of good vows! The Viśvāmitra's wife did not know that to be beef and thought it to be deer's and so fed her sons with that.

वसिष्ठसुत हतां दोर्धी ज्ञाला कुब्द्रसमक्षवी।

दुरात्मिके कृतं पार्य धेनुवातार्थयाचवर्ष ॥ 54 ॥

Now when Vasistha came to know that his cow been killed, he was inflamed with anger and spoke to Satyavrata “O Vicious One! What a heinous crime have you committed, like a Piśāca, by killing the cow?”

एवं ते शंकवः कृता: परंतु त्वरिताक्षय: ।

गोवधात्रहरणान्तियुः क्रोतानथा भूगण ॥ 55 ॥

For the killing of the cow, the stealing of a Brāhmīn's wife and the fiery anger of your father, for these three crimes, let there come out on your head three Śankus or three marks of leprosy as the signs for your crimes.

शिर्याकृपरित नामान वै भृवि ख्यानौ भविष्यात् ।

प्रिशाचरूपयात्मानं दर्शयन्सर्वेदिकानम् ॥ ५६ ॥

From this day you will be widely known by the name of Trišanku and you will shew your Piśāca form to all the beings."

यात्र उवाच

एवं शण्तो वसिष्ठेन तदा सत्यबतो नृपः ।

चचार च तपस्तीत तस्मिनेबाश्रमे स्थितः ॥ 57 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The prince Satyavrata thus cursed by Vaisiṣṭha remained in that retreat and practised severs tapasyā.

कस्माचिद्यमुपिज्ञातु प्राय मंत्रमन्तमम् ।

ध्यायभगवती देखीं प्रकृति परभां शिवान् ॥ 58 ॥

शीत श्रीवैदीभागवते गहापुराणे सत्यमक्क्ये

वशामीस्थाय: 11 10 11

But he got from a Muni's son the excellent Mantram of the Highest auspicious Devi Bhagavatī and became merged in the contemplation of that. Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the story of Satyavrata in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgvatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER XI

On Trísainku

जनमेजय उवाच

वसिष्ठेन च रणतोउसी विशंकुभूपते: सुतः ।

कर्थं शणाधिनिर्भुक्तसन्ये बृहि महामते ॥ १ ॥

Nanamejaya said: O Intelligent One! Did the prince Trisanku free himself afterwards of the curse inflicted on his by the Muni Vasistha.

व्यास उवाच

सत्यव्रतस्तथा शगत: विश्याचत्यमावतावान् ।

तस्मिवेत्रावासमे तस्थी देवीभक्तिपरायण: ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Satyavrata, cursed by Vasīṣṭha, was transformed into a demonaical state (Piśācatva); but he became a great devotee of the Devi and passed away his time in that Śārama.

क्वार्विष्यपतिस्त्र जल्वा मन्थ नवाक्षरम् ।

होभार्थ बाहुणान्त्वा प्रणायोबार चपित्तः ॥ 3 ॥

One day he repeating slowly the nine-lettered Mantram of the Bhagavati, wished to perform the

Puraścarana ceremony (repeating the name of a deity attended with burnt offerings, oblations, etc.) of the said Mantra, came to the Brāhmins, bowed down to them with great devotion and purity and said:

भूमिदेवाः शुणुत्यं वै वचनं प्रगतस्य मे ।

ऋलिजो मम सर्वैत्रि भवतः प्रभवन्तु है ॥ ४ ॥

“O venerable gods of the earth! Kindly hear me; I with my head bowed down pray to you, that you all be my priests (Rtvijs).

जपस्य च द्वगीशेन होमः काव्यों विधानतः ।

भवाद्धः कार्यसिद्धार्थ बेर्विविद्धः कृपापरेः ॥ ५ ॥

You are all versed in the Vedas; so kindly do for me duly the Homa ceremony equal to one tenth part of Japam, for my success.

सत्यवतोर्भं युपतेः पुत्रो क्रद्धाविद्धांरतः ।

कार्य मन विधात्यां सर्वेथा सुखहेतवे ॥ 6 ॥

Book VII Chapter XI

O Brāhmaṇas! My name is Satyavrata; I am a prince; you ought to do this work for me for my welfare."

तच्छुला ब्राह्मणास्तत्र तमूचुरंगपेतः सुतम् ।

ग्रातस्तं गुर्भाग प्रातर्न प्रिणाचलं त्वयासुभुना ॥ 7 ॥

Thus hearing the prince's words the Brāhmaṇas said: "O Prince! You are cursed by your Guru and you are now turned into a demonaical state.

न यागहुँर्षि सत्माच्चं वैद्यवन्धितकातः ।

प्रियालवमनुग्रणतं सर्वलोकेषु गहिंगम ॥ 8 ॥

You have now no right to the Vedas; especially you are now in the Piśāca state; it is blamed by all the persons; so now you are not fit to be initiated into the ceremony.

व्यास उवाच

तिश्रणम्य चद्रस्तेधां राजा दुःखमवाग इ ।

धिर्जीवितादिं मेउढ़ किं करोरि चने सित्तः ॥ 9 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing them, the prince got very sad not dejected and thought “Fie on my life! What shall I do now in living even in the forest. पिता चाहं परितक्तः शतक्ष शुकण भुशम् ।

राज्यदृष्टः प्रियाचलमुज्ञापतः क्रोगेम किम् ॥ 10 ॥

तदा पृथुत्तां कृत्वा चितां काहैनुपातज्ञः ।

संस्मार चण्डिकां देवीं प्रवेशमनुचित्यन्त्य ॥ 11 ॥

My father has forsaken me; I am banished from the kingdom; again, by the Guru's curse, I have got this Piśaca's state; I therefore can't decide what to do." The prince, then, collecting fuel, prepared the funeral pits for himself, remembered the Caṇḍikā Devī and repeating Her Mantram, resolved to jump into the fire.

सूचता देर्ती महामारा चित्ता प्रवलितां पुरः ।

कृत्वा स्नावा प्रवेश्याँ स्थितः प्रांजितसघातः ॥ 12 ॥

Lighting the pyre in front, the prince bathed and standing, with clasped palms, began to chant the hymns to Mahā Māyā before entering into the fire.

त्राला भगवती तं तु मुर्कामं मतीपतिन् ।

आजगाम तदाकामां प्रत्यक्षं तस्य चात्रातः ॥ १३ ॥

दत्ताथ दर्शनं देती तमुवाच रुपात्मजम् ।

सिंहाक्वा महाराज मेघांभीर्या गिरा ॥ १४ ॥

At this moment, the Devi Bhagavatī, knowing that the prince was ready to burn himself, came instantly to the sport on the back of the lion, by the aerial route. She manifested Herself before him and spoke in a voice deep like a rain-cloud.

देश्याच

किं ते व्यवसितं साधो हताशो गा तनुं त्यज ।

सियो भव महाभाग पित्त ते जरसाधितः ॥ 15 ॥

राज्यं दत्ता वयं तुर्थ्य मन्तातित तपसे किल ।

विषादं त्यज है वीर परधोड़हीन भुपते ॥ 16 ॥

नेतुं त्वामगमिष्यन्ति सचिवाड़ प्रितुस्त्व ।

मत्स्यात्त्यिता च स्वामधिषिच्य नृपासे ॥ 17 ॥

वित्ता कामं बहुतोकं गमिष्येव प्रश्रयः ।

"O Virtuous One! What is all this? What have you settled all these? Never throw yourself in fire; be patient. O Fortunate One! Your father is now aged; he will give you his kingdom and will go to the forest for tapasyā; therefore, O Hero! Do leave your depression of spirits. O King! To-morrow the ministers of your father will come to you to take you there. By My Grace, your father will install you on the throne and, in due time, he will conquer his desires and will go undoubtedly to the Brahmaloka.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्ता तं तदा देही तत्रेवांतत्पयिति ॥ १ १ ॥

राजपुत्रो विरितो मरणात्यवाकततः ।

Vyāsa said: O Fortunate One! Thus saying, the Devi vanished at that spot; the prince, too, desisted from his purpose of entering into the fire.

अयोध्यायां तद्गाल्य नारदेन महात्मना ॥ १९ ॥

यृत्तांतः कथितः सर्वां रोहे सत्वरामवित्तः ।

श्रूला राजार्थे पुरस्य तं तथा मरणोषादम् ॥ 20 ॥

In the meanwhile, the high-souled Nārada went to Ayodhyā and at once informed everything to the King. The King became very sad and began to repent very much, hearing the son's resolve to burn himself.

खेददामाधाय मनसि शुणोच बहुधा नृपः ।

Śrimadaveivbhāgavatam

सचिवानाह धर्मात्मा यूत्रशोकपरिप्लुतः ॥ 21 ॥

ज्ञातं भवद्धित्युयं युजस्य मच चेहितम् ।

The virtuous King, grieved at heart, for his son, said to his ministers: "You all are aware of the turning out of my son.

त्यन्तो मया वने धीमायुग: सत्यवते मा ॥ 22 ॥

आज्ञासौ गतः सदो राज्याहुं: परमार्थवित् ।

I have forsaken my intelligent son Satyavrata; though he was very spiritual and worthy to get the kingdom; yet, at my command, he instantaneously went to the forest.

स्थिततनैद्व विज्ञाने धनहीनः क्षमात्वितः ॥ 23 ॥

वसिष्ठेन तथा शगतः विशासवसृषः कृतः ।

Void of wealth, he, practising forgiveness, passed his time in study, particularly in spiritual knowledge; but Vasiṣṭha Deva cursed him and made him like a Piśāca.

सो5ढ़ दुःखेन संतप प्रवेषुं च हुताशनम् ॥ 24 ॥

उक्तः श्रीमहादेवा निषिद्धः संस्थितः पुनः ।

Very much distressed by pain and sorrow, he was ready to burn himself but the Mahā Devi preventing him, he desisted from this purpose.

तस्मावराष्ठन्तु तं शीघ्रं जेश्धुरं महावलम् ॥ 25 ॥

आश्राय स्वचैत्रत तत्सैवान्वसित्व ।

अभिविष्य सुतं राज्य औरसं पालनक्षमम् ॥ 26 ॥

वनं भार्यामि शान्तोउहं तपसे कृतनिष्ठतः ।

So go hurriedly and, consoling my powerful eldest son, bring him at once to me. I am now calm and quiet and of a retiring disposition; so I am determined to practise tapasyā.

इतुलक्वा मन्त्रिणः सवत्नोषयामास पार्थिवः ॥ 27 ॥

तद्यैवानयान्यहि हि प्रीतिप्रवणमानसः ।

My son is now capable to govern the subjects; I will now install my son on the throne and retire to the forest. So he gladly sent his ministers to his son.

ते गत्वा ते सभाशयाय मन्त्रिणः पार्थिवात्मम् ॥ 28 ॥

अयोध्यायां महात्मानं मानपूर्वे समानयन् ।

The ministers, too, gladly went there and

consoled the prince and, with respect, brought him to the Ayodhyā city.

इद्धला सत्यन्तं राजा दुर्वतैं मलिनांबरम् ॥ 29 ॥

जटापूट्यं कूरं चिन्तानुपवित्यन्ति ।

किं कृत निरुक्तं कर्म मया पुत्रे विवासितः ॥ 30 ॥

राज्यहंशातिमेधावी जानता धर्मनिश्वाम् ।

Seeing Satyavrata with matted hair on his head, with dirty clothes, and thin and worn out with cares, the King began to think within himself “Oh! What a cruel act have I done, though I know everything about religion, in banishing my intelligent son, quite fit to govern my kingdom.”

इति संचित्य मनसा तमालिंसय महीपितः ॥ ३१ ॥

आसने स्वसमीपस्ये समाधान्योपवेशगत् ।

उपविष्टं सुतं राजा प्रेमपूर्वमुवाच ह ॥ ३२ ॥

प्रेमपादादय वाचा नीतिशास्बविशारदः ।

Thus thinking, he embraced his son by his arms and consoling him, made him sit by his throne. The King, versed in politics, then began to speak gladly with suffocated feelings of love, to his son sitting by the side of him.

राजोवाच

पुरु धर्मे मति: कार्यां माननीया मुखोद्वा: ॥ 33 ॥

न्यायगतं धनं प्राहं स्थणीया: सदा प्रजा: ।

नासलं व्वाणि वत्कलं नामर्गे गमनं क्वचित् ॥ 34 ॥

“O Son! Your highest duty is to keep your mind always on religion and to respect the Brāhmins. Never speak falsely anywhere nor follow any bad course in any way.

शिष्योक्ते प्रकतिथां पूजनीयास्पत्थितयनः ।

हन्तया दस्यवः कृता इन्द्रियाणां तथा जयः ॥ 35 ॥

Rather the words of the spiritual good persons ought to be fully observed; the ascetics ought to be worshipped. Senses must be controlled and the wicked cruel robbers are certainly to be slain.

कतैंवं कार्यसिद्धार्थ राज्ञ पुत्र सदैव हि ।

मन्त्रस्तु सदैवा गोप्य: कतैंव्य: सचिविः सह ॥ 36 ॥

O Son! For one's success, one should consult with one's ministers and keep that as secret by all means.

Book VII Chapter XI

नोप्रेष्योरूपोर्षि कृतिना सिंपु: सर्वात्मना सुत ।

न विश्वशेत्यासराकें सचिवं च तथानतम् ॥ 37 ॥

Any enemy, howsoever insignificant he may be, a clever King should never overlook him. The ministers, if they be attached to other masters and if they come round afterwards, don't trust them.

चारा: सर्वे योक्त्या: शगूमिपेयु सर्वथा ।

धर्मे मति: सदा कामी दानं द्वाण्च नियास: ॥ 38 ॥

Spies should be kept to watch friends and foes alike. Shew your living regards to the religion always, and make charitable gifts.

शुक्रवादो न कतंचीय दुर्गसंगं च वजंयेत् ।

यश्या विधिधा यज्ञा: पूजनीया मतृषेय: ॥ 39 ॥

One ought not to argue in vain and always avoid the company of the wicked. O Son! You should worship the Maharsis and perform various sacrifices.

न विश्वेतिस्थं क्वापि क्षेषापुतर्ततं नन् ।

अत्यादारो न कर्तेलो मृगायायां कदाचन ॥ 40 ॥

Never trust women, those who are inordinately addicted to women, and the gamblers. Never is it advisable to be addicted too much to hunting.

घृते मटे तथा गेये नूनं वारवघुपु च ।

स्वयं तद्धिमुखी घ्यात्याजास्तेभ्यघ्र श्वयेत ॥ 41 ॥

Always shew your back to gambling, drinking, music and to the prostitutes and try to make your subjects follow the same.

ब्राहो मुटुर्ते कलिवमुर्थानं सर्वथा सदा ।

स्नानादिके सर्विविधि विधाया विधित्यन्ता ॥ 42 ॥

Early in the morning at the Brāhma Muhūrta every day you should get up from your bed and bathe and perform other analogous duties.

पशास्त्रक: परां पूर्वां भवल्या कुयांस्तुदीक्षितः ।

पृत्रैतज्ञन्मसफल्व पराशकः पदार्चेन्म ॥ 4 3 ॥

O Son! Be initiated by the Guru in the Devi Mantra and worship with devotion the Supreme Force, the Bhagavatī. Human birth is crowned with success by worshipping Her Lotus Feet.

सकूलकृत्वा महापूर्णां देवोपादलनं पिबन् ।

न जातु जननीर्षे गघ्छेदिति विनिश्रधः ॥ 44 ॥

O Son! He who performs once the great Pūjā of

the Mahā Devi and drinks the Caraṇāṃtā water (water with which Her feet are worshipped) has never to enter again in the womb of his mother; know this as certain.

सर्वे दूर्यं महादेवी ग्रहा साकी च सेव हि ।

इति तद्धावभरित्सिहोत्रिभयंवेतसा ॥ 4 5 ॥

That Mahā Devī is all that is seen and She Herself is again the Seer and Witness, of the nature of Intelligence. Filled with these ideas, rest fearless like the Universal Soul.

कृत्वा निविधिं सम्यगंतंवं सदसि डिजान् ।

समादूय च प्रष्टयो धर्मगस्त्विनिणयः ॥ 46 ॥

Do your daily (Naimittik occasional) duties, go to the Brāhimn's assembly and calling on them ask the conclusions of the Dharma Śāstras.

संपूच ब्राह्णान्यूज्ञान्येद्वेलांगपारगान् ।

गोपृष्टिप्यादिकं च देवं पाञेषु सर्वदा ॥ 47 ॥

The Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas and Vedāntas, are objects of venerations and must be worshipped.

अविद्धान्वाजणः कोर्पि नैव पूज्य कदाचन ।

आहारादिर्विक नैव देवं मुख्याय कर्हिंचि ॥ 48 ॥

Give, then, them always according to merits, cows, lands, gold, etc. Do'nt worship any Brāhmin who is illiterate.

न वा लोपाचत्या पुत्र कर्तेल्य धर्मतैरंचन् ।

अतः परं न कतळी क्वचिषिप्रावमाननम् ॥ 49 ॥

ब्राह्मण भूमिद्विष्ठा माननीयाः प्रयन्ततः ।

कारणं क्षिवाणां च द्विजा एव न संशयः ॥ 50 ॥

Don't give to illiterates more than their belliful wants. O Child! Never trespass Dharma, out of covetousness, and remember always not to insult ever after wards any Brāhmanas, The Brāhmins are the cause of the Kṣattriyas, the more so they are the terrestrial gods; honour them with all your care! In this never flinch from your duties.

अन्योर्धनिर्बंबाण: श्रन्मरणो लोहमुचित्यम् ।

तेषां सर्वजंन तैल: स्वासु योगिनु शग्रामति ॥ 51 ॥

Fire comes out of water; the Ksatriyas come out of the Brāhmans; iron comes out of stones. The

powers of these flow then that clash dies away in the source.

तस्मात्राता विशेषेण माननीया मुखोद्वतः ।

यानेन विनयेनैव सर्वेया भूतिभिच्छत ॥ 52 ॥

दण्डनीति: सदा कार्य धर्मशास्त्रास्तार: ।

कोशस्य संग्रहः कार्यों नूनं न्यायगतस्य ह ॥ 53 ॥

इत शीमदैर्धीभागवते महापुराणे सनमकन्मे

एकारशोस्थाया: 11 11 11

Know this as quite certain. The King who wants

his own welfare and improvement must by gift and humility shew his respect especially to the Brāhmins. Follow the maxims of morality as dictated in the Dharma Śāstras. Amass wealth according to rules of justice and fill the treasury.

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Seventh Book about the story of Triśanku in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XII

On Vasistha's Course on the Trisāniku

व्यास उवाच

एवं प्रवोधितः पित्रा त्रिशंकुः प्रगतो नृपः ।

तथेति पितरं प्राह प्रेमपतृत्याद्या पिता ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus giving the advice to his son, the King Triśanku was excited with feelings of love and, in a choked voice, said to his father that he would fulfil what he had been ordered.

विप्रापात्रय मन्त्रान्वेक्षास्थिवगताद्न् ।

अधिषेक्षाय संभारात्कार्यामास सत्वम् ॥ 2 ॥

The King then called the Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas and Mantrams, and had all the materials for installation collected quickly.

सलिले सर्वतीर्थानं समानाय्य विश्रापितः ।

प्रकृतीश्र समाहुय सामन्ताभ्युपतितंस्या ॥ 3 ॥

He brought the waters from all the sacred place of prigrimages; he then called together with great respect all the kings.

पूर्णेयेई विधितचत्स्मै ददावासनुपतमम् ।

अभिविष्य सुत राज्ये त्रिशंकुं विधिवित्ति ॥ 4 ॥

On a sacred day, the father installed his son on the throne and gave him, in accordance with due rites and ceremonies, the royal throne.

तृतीयसाम्थां पुण्यं ज्याह भार्याय सुतः ।

वने त्रिशयाग्कृते चचार दुक्षं ततः ॥ 5 ॥

The King then adopted with his wife the third Vānaprastha stage of life and practised a severe tapasyā on the banks of the Ganges.

काले प्रपते ययी स्वर्ग पूजितस्बद्गरीयि ।

इज्ञासनसमीपस्थो राजा रविवस्ता ॥ 6 ॥

Then in due course of time the King went to the Heavens. There he began to shine like a second Sun by the side of Indra, respected by all the gods.

राजोवाच

पूर्वं भगवता प्रोक्तं कथायोगेन सम्रंपत् ।

सत्यव्रतो वसिष्ठेन शगतो दोर्धायिधात्रिकल ॥ 7 ॥

कुपितेन विगारचलं प्रपितेगे गुरुणा ततः ।

कर्थं सुकः विगारचत्वादिव्येतलंशयः प्रभो ॥ 8 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Bhagavan! You spoke before in course of conversation that Satyavrata was cursed by Vasistha on the killing of his cow to become a Piśāca; how then he got himself freed of this curse. There is a doubt on this point. Kindly clear it and oblige. Satyavrata was cursed; hence pronounced unfit to succeed to the throne.

न सिंहासनयोयो हि भयंच्छायसपित्रतः ।

मुनिना मोचितः शापात्केनान्येन च कर्माणा ॥ 9 ॥

एतनैः बृहि विशर्षे शापमोक्षणाकाराणम् ।

आनीतस्तु कर्ष विश्रा स्वगृहे ततुष्णाकृति: ॥ 10 ॥

How was the Muni, by what actions, was he freed of the curse? How could the father bring back to his home his son of the form of a Piśāca? O Viprarṣi! Kindly narrate to me how the Muni was freed of his curse.

Book VII Chapter XII

व्यास उवाच

वसिष्ठेन च शलोउसौ सहा: शैराचतां गतः ।

दुर्षेध्धातिरुद्धर्षः सर्वलोकप्रयंकरः ॥।१।॥

यदेवोपासिता देही भक्न्या सत्यवतेने है ।

तया प्रसव्या राजनिद्व्यदेहः कृततः क्षणात् ॥ १२ ॥

Vyāsa said: Cursed by Vasiṣṭha, Satyavrata became then and there transformed into a Piśāca, very ugly, violent and terrible to all; but when he worshipped the Devi with devotion, immediately the Devi gave him a beautiful divine body.

प्रिशाचत्वं गतं तस्य पारं चैव क्षयं गतम् ।

विषयामा चातितेजस्वी संभृतस्तकृष्यगुत् ॥ 13. ॥

विशेषोप्रि प्रसात्या जातः शफिष्यसदातः ।

पितासपि च कंभूबास्य प्रेमयुक्तत्वगुळ्हा ॥ 14 ॥

By the grace of the Devi, his sins were all washed away and his Piśāca form vanished. Satyavrata, then, freed from his sins became very much vigorous and energetic. Vasiṣṭha also became pleased with him, blessed thus by the Supreme Force; and so was his father, too.

रात्यं शणास धर्मात्मा मृते चितरि पार्थिति ।

ईंजे च विधियैयर्वेईवेद्वेती सतातनीम् ॥ 15 ॥

When his father died, the virtuous Satyavrata became King, governed his subjects and performed various sacrifices and worshipped, too, the Eternal Mother of the Gods.

तस्य पुत्रो बभूवाय हीरुधानः सुगोपनः ।

सक्षणे: ग्रास्किनिर्दैः संवृत्तगतिसुन्द्रः ॥ १६ ॥

O King! Trišanku had a very beautiful son born to him, named Hariścandra, endowed in all his limbs with auspicious signs.

युवराजं सुतं कृत्वा विशंकृ: पृथिवीपितः ।

मानुषेण शरीरेण स्वर्गे भोक्तु मनो द्वे ॥ 17 ॥

The King Trišanku wanted to make his son Yuvarāja (the Crown prince) and then in his that very body while living, enjoy the Heavens.

वसिष्ठसाश्रयं माता प्रणाय विधिवर्षुः ।

उदाच वचनं प्रीतः कृतार्जिनपुद्रतदा ॥ १ ८ ॥

The King went to the Āśrama of Vasiṣtha and

gladly asked him, with folded palms, bowing down before him duly.

राजोवाच

ब्रहुपत्र महाभाग सर्वेन्यविशारद ।

विज्ञिति मे सुमनसा श्रोतुमर्हिति तापस ॥ 19 ॥

“O Ascetic! You are the son of Brahmā, versed in all the Vaidik Mantrams; so you are exceedingly fortunate; now I beg to inform you one thing; hear it gladly.

इच्छा मेउषा सम्यपना खर्लीकसुखाय च ।

अनेवैर शर्जिणे भोगान्भोतुभमातुबान् ॥ 20 ॥

I now desire to enjoy the happiness of the Heavens and all the enjoyments of the Devas, while I am in this body.

अप्यापेधिष्ठ संसासः क्रीडितुं नन्दने बने ।

देवगन्धर्वांगना च झोतखं मधुरं किल ॥ 21 ॥

To enjoy in the Nandana Garden, to live with the Apsarās and to hear the sweet music of the Devas and the Gandharvas, these ideas now have taken a strong hold of my heart.

ययाजय त्वं मदजेनागु तादुर्गेन महामुने ।

यधानेन शनैरिण बस लोकें विशिष्टिण् ॥ 22 ॥

Therefore, O Great Muni! Engage me in such a sacrifice as will enable me, in this very body to live in the Svarloka.

समर्पोर्स मुनिश्रिक कुरु कार्य ममाधान ।

प्रपयाणु मघं कृत्वा देवलोकं दुगासद् ॥ 23 ॥

O Muni! You are fully competent to do this; therefore be ready for this. Have the sacrifice done and let me have quickly the Devaloka, so difficult to be obtained!

वसिष्य उवाच

राजन्मान्यद्रत्न र्वर्गे वास सुदुर्भिः ।

मृत्यक्ष हिं धुवं सर्ग: कथितः: पुण्यकर्माण ॥ 24 ॥

तस्माड्धिपेम सर्वत्र दुर्वभाव्य मनोरथान ।

अपसरीधिष्ठ संवारो जीवमानस्य दुरर्भिः ॥ 25 ॥

कुक घ्यान्महाभाग मृत: स्वर्गमवोभ्यसि ।

Vasistha said: "O King! It is exceedingly hard to live in the Heavens while in this mortal body.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

The departed only live in the Heavens by their merits, this is a known fact. Therefore, O Omniscient One! Your desire is hard to be attained. I am afraid of this. O King! The living men can hardly enjoy the Apsarās. Therefore, O Blessed One! Do the sacrifice first. Then, when you leave this body, you will go to the Heavens."

व्यास उवाच

इत्याकाण्यं वचस्तस्य राजा परमदुभानः ॥ 26 ॥

उवाच वचनं घृयो वसिषं पूर्वीरितम् ।

न त्वं यावजसे बहुत-गवविशेषाण्च मां वहि ॥ 27 ॥

अन्यं पुरोहितं कृत्वा यध्येउई क्रिकल साम्यानम् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! The Maharṣī Vasistha was already angry with the King; therefore when he spoke these words, the King heard and became absent-minded. He again spoke to the Maharṣi: “O Brāhmaṇa! If you do not allow me to do the sacrifice, on account of your haughtiness, I will have the sacrifice performed now by another priest.

तद्धूला वचनं तस्य वसियुः कोपसंयुतः ॥ 28 ॥

शशाप भूपति चेति चापड़तलो भव दुपते ।

अनेन त्वं शरीरेण श्रघचो घन सत्वम् ॥ 29 ॥

स्वांकृतन्त पायिष सुरपीधवदूषित ।

बह्यपनीहीद्धिज्ञ राममांगीविदूषक ॥ 30 ॥

न ते स्वर्गाति: पाप मृतस्पायी कर्धचन ।

Vasistha became very angry at the words of the King and cursed him: "O evil-minded One! Be as soon as possible a Cāndāla in this body. You have committed acts by which your path to the Heaven is obstructed. You have stolen a Brāhmins wife, and defiled the path of religion; you have killed the Surabhi Cow and you are a libertine. Therefore, O Sinner! Never you will go to the Heavens, even after your death."

यमस उवाच

इत्युक्तो गुहाण राजांक्षिगुकस्तक्षणादिं ॥ 31 ॥

तत्र तेन शरीण वभूव भुधचाकृति: ।

कुण्डवैज्ञमये चाधि जाते तस्य च तक्षणात् ॥ 32 ॥

देहे चन्दनान्यश्र विगन्यो हृषयचत्वा ।

नीलबर्णैर्ध सझाते दिव्ये पीताब्रते तनौ ॥ 33 ॥

गजवणोंरभवहैंः शापातस्य महात्मनः ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing these harsh words from the Guru, Triśanku became immediately Cāndāla in that very body. His golden earrings became turned into iron; the sweet sandal smell over his body smelled like faeces; his beautiful yellow clothes became blue, the colour of his body became like that of an elephant, due to his curse.

शकल्युपासकारोधेण फलमेततधूव्य ॥ 34 ॥

तस्माश्रीशक्तिभक्तो हि नावामान्यः कदाचन ।

O King! Those who are the worshippers of the Supreme Force can produce such things when they are angry; there is not the slightest doubt in this. Therefore one ought never to insult any devotee of the Supreme Force.

गायकीजपनिष्ठे हि वसिष्ठो मुनिसतपः ॥ 35 ॥

दृष्टा निंदा निजं द्रैहं त्रा जानु दुष्पावणतान् ।

न जगाम गृहे दीनो वन्मेवाधितो यद्ये ॥ 36 ॥

The Muni Vasistha is always engaged in repeating silently the Gāyatrī of the Devi. So what wonder is there that the body of the King will be reduced to such a wretched state by his rage.

चित्तनायामत दुःखात्तिचरंग़ः शोकबिढ़तः ।

कि कतीपि बल चतछापि द्रेहो मेठतीवर्भिति: ॥ 37 ॥

The King Triśanku became very sorry to see his ugly body; he did not go home; rather he remained in the forest in that form and poor dress.

कर्तव्यों नैव पर्यामि येन मे दुःखसंक्षयः।

गृहे पच्छायि चेतुग्र: पीक्षितोउ घावियत ॥ 38 ॥

He began to think, distressed with sorrow and overpowered with misery: “My body is now blameable to the extreme, so what to do and where to go in this wretched state! I find no remedy to exhaust all my sufferings.

भार्वाद्धि शुच्चं सूद्ध्वा नार्थिकारं क्रियत् ।

सचिवा नादिर्ध्योत वीक्ष्य मार्मीवृणु पुनः ॥ 39 ॥

ज्ञातयो बन्युवर्गश सजुतो न भविष्यति ।

सर्वस्लत्क्त्रय मे नूनं जीवितात्मारणं वतम् ॥ 40 ॥

If I go home, my son will be, no doubt, very

Book VII Chapter XII

much pained with sorrow. My wife, when she will see my Cāndāla appearance, she went accept me; my ministers will not regard me as they used to do before.

विश वा भक्षियलाउढ़ पतिला वा जलागेवे ।

कृत्वा वा कणठवाग़ं च दैह्यवागं करोम्यहम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

My friends and relations, when they will come to me, will not serve me with the former care. So it is far better to die than to live, thus despised.

जनौ वा जलिते देंं जुहोम विधिव्यद्वलात ।

कृत्वा वाज्ञनं प्राणांसत्याजीय दृषिलाभ्यूम ॥ 4 2 ॥

I will drink poison or drown myself in waters or hang myself. Or I will burn myself in the funeral pyre duly or I will quit this blameable life by starvation.

आसहत्या भवेकूनं पुनर्जन्मिन जन्मिन ।

श्रचत्वं च गार्ण श्रह्यादीषाद्वेदयि ॥ 4 3 ॥

पुर्निधार्यं भृपालश्रोता समर्पितयत् ।

आसाहत्या न कतैव्या सर्वैव यमार्धुत्न ॥ 4 4 ॥

But, Alas! I will be guilty of suicide; so again due to this sin I will be born a Cāndāla and I will be again cursed. Thus thinking, the King again thought that at present he ought not to commit suicide by any means.

भोक्त्वयं स्वकृतं कर्म देहेनानेन कानने ।

भोगेनास्य विषाकस्य भविता सर्वेधा क्षयः ॥ 45 ॥

"I will have to suffer for my Karma; and, after due suffering, this Karma will be exhausted. So I will suffer in this forest for my Karma in this my body.

प्रात्यकर्माणं भोगादन्यथा न क्षयो भवेत् ।

तस्मावयाउन घोक्तव्यं कृतं कर्म शुभागुभम् ॥ 46 ॥

Without the enjoyment of the fruits, the past actions can never die out; therefore all actions done by me, auspicious or inauspicious, I will enjoy or suffer in this place.

कुर्वेपुणवश्रमाध्यागे तीर्थानां सेवानं तथा ।

सरणं चाधिकायास्तु साधूनां सेवन्त तथा ॥ 47 ॥

Always to remain close to a holy Śārama, to wander in holy places of pilgrimage, to remember

the Devi Ambikā, and to serve the saints will now be my duties.

एवं कर्महयं नूनं कारिच्यापि वने वसन् ।

भाययोगाकदाचितचतु भवेत्साधुसमागनः ॥ 48 ॥

Thus I will no doubt exhaust all my actions, residing in this forest; then, if chance permits, and if I meet with a saintly person, all my intentions will be crowned with success.

इति संचित्य मनसा तयक्ता स्वनगरं नृपः ।

गड़ातीर गतः कामं गोशंचतवे संस्थितः ॥ 49 ॥

हरिंडीडरन्त द्रावा पितृः गोपाय्य कारणम् ।

दुःखितः सचिवांस्तत्र प्रेययामास पार्थिवः ॥ 50 ॥

Thus thinking, the King quitting his city went to the banks of the Ganges and repenting very much, remained there on the Ganges. The King Hariścandra came to know the cause of his father's curse and with a sorrowful heart sent ministers to him.

सचिवास्त्र गताल्गु तपुचुः प्रशयाचिताः ।

प्रणाय भधचाकारं नि:श्रसन्ते मुडुपुंहुः ॥ 51 ॥

राजन्युगेन ते नूनं प्रेषितान्समुपगतान् ।

अवेहि सचिवास्त्वं नो हरिश्छोज्ञान स्थितान् ॥ 52 ॥

Like a Cāndāla, the King was respiring frequently; at this time the ministers went to him and bowing humbly, said: "O King! Your son has ordered us to come here; we have come at his command; we are the ministers of the King Hariścandra.

युवराजसुतः प्राह यतच्छुणुच नराधिपः ।

आनयखे नृपे युवं संमान्य चितरं मम ॥ 53 ॥

Know this verily, O King! Kindly hear what the Crown Prince has said: "Go and bring my Father here without any delay."

तस्माझाजनसामाष्ठ राखं प्रति गत्थवधः ।

सेवां सर्वे कारियन्ति सचिवाश्र प्रजासना ॥ 54 ॥

Therefore, O King! Cast aside your mental agonies and come to the city. The ministers, the subjects all will be always at your service.

गुरु प्रसातद्विषाम्भः स यथा तु द्वेत वै ।

प्रसाधोसी महातेवा दुःखस्यन्तं कार्थिति ॥ 55 ॥

We will all try our best to please Vasiṣṭha, so that he may favour you. And that greatly illustrious Muni being pleased will certainly remove your sorrows quickly.

इति पुत्रेण ते राजकन्थितं बहुधा किल ।

तस्माद्रमन्मेवायु रोचतां निजस्वानि ॥ 56 ॥

O King! Thus your son has spoken to us many words; so now be pleased to go to your own abode.

ध्यास उवाच

इति तेषां नृपः श्रुत्वा भाषितं श्रपचाकृति: ।

स्वपूरं गमनायासी न मति कृतावन्दः ॥ 57 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! That Cāndāla-like King, hearing even their words thus, did not consent to go back to his house.

तानुवाच तटा वाक्यं ब्रन्तु सचिवा: पुम् ।

गाला पुरं महाभागा बुवैतुं वचनाच्च मे ॥ ५८ ॥

नागमिष्याम्यं पुत्र कुरे जयमन्तिनतः ।

Rather he told them: “Ministers, go back, all of you to the city; and at my word, tell my son that I won’t go back to my house. Better leaving off all idleness, you better govern the Kingdom carefully.

मानयन्बाहाणान्देवान्यजन्यज्ञतेजकाः ॥ ५९ ॥

नाहं भुधचवेण गहिनेन महात्माधि: ।

आगाधिष्यायोटायां सर्व गच्छुं गाधिरम् ॥ 6० ॥

Shew your respect specially to the Brāhmins and perform various sacrifices and worship the Devas. I do not like in this blameable Cāndāla form to go to the city of Ayodhyā with the high-souled ones;

so you all go back to Ayodhyā without any further delay.

पुरं सिंहासने स्थाय द्विश्रन्ह महावलम् ।

कुर्वर्त राज्यकर्माणि यूयं तत्र मामज्ञा ॥ 6 1 ॥

Instal, at my order, my powerful son Harisācandra on the throne and do all these stately duties."

इत्यादितास्तते नुं कनढुश्रातून यूणम् ।

सचिवा निर्येयुस्तुर्णं नत्वा तं च वजानप्रम् ॥ 62 ॥

When the ministers heard thus the King ordering them, they began to cry very much, and, bowing down, they went away early out of the hermitage.

अयोध्यायुपगात्य पुर्णेरूढ़ि विधिपुर्णकम् ।

अधिषेकं तत्व चकुर्हिरिश्रद्रस्य मूर्टि ते ॥ ६३ ॥

On coming back to Ayodhyā they regularly installed on a sacred day the King Harisācanda with Abhiṣeka water, purified with Mantrams.

अधिष्टितस्तु तेत्यसी सचिवाश्र पुनाया ।

राज्यं चकात घर्भिशु: पितर्त चित्तयन्मृगम् ॥ 64 ॥

श्री श्रीमदैर्षिगायतो महापुराणो सत्नराकन्धे

ब्रदासीअव्याः ॥ 12 ॥

Thus the powerful virtuous Harisācranda, on being installed on the royal throne by the command of the King, remembered always his father and began to govern his Kingdom with his ministers according to the dictates of Dharma.

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the description of Vasisṭha's curse on Trisānku in

the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER XIII

Visvāmitra Helping Trisanku

राजोबाच

हरिश्रज: कृत्तो राजा सचिवैर्युपशासनात् ।

त्रिशंकुस्तु कर्थ मुक्तस्तस्माच्छांडालदेहतः ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: O Muni! I see that at the command of the King, the ministers installed Hariścandra on the royal throne; but how Triśanku got rid of his Cāndāla body, kindly say.

मृती वा बनमध्ये तु गड़त्रातैर परित्युतः ।

गरुणा वा कृपरां शापात्तस्माद्वीभित्तः ॥ 2 ॥

एतदुक्त्रांतमिखलं कथयस्य ममाप्रतः ।

चरितं तस्य रूपतेः श्रोतुकामो5सि मर्वथा ॥ 3 ॥

Was it that he bathed in the holy waters of the Ganges and lived in the forest and when he died he was freed of the curse; or was it that the Guru Vasistha favored him by his grace and freed him of the curse? O best of Rşis! I am extremely eager to hear the life of the King therefore kindly describe to me in detail his wonderful career.

Book VII Chapter XIII

म्यास उवाच

अभियक्ति सूतं कृत्वा राजा सन्तुष्यानसः ।

कालातिक्रमणं तत्र चकार चिन्तयच्छवाम् ॥ 4 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The King became gladdened in his heart to instal his son on the throne and began to pass his days in that forest in the meditation of Bhagavatī Bhavānī.

एवं गच्छति काले तु तपस्त्वा स्माहितः ।

दूई द्वारानुस्तादौश्य तद्धगात्कौशिको मुपिनः ॥ 5 ॥

Thus some time passed when Viśvāmitra, the son of Kuśika, completing his course of Tapasyā with an intent mind returned to his home to see his wife and sons.

आगात्य स्वजनं दृष्ट्या सुशित्यां मुदामपतावान् ।

भार्यं पच्छ्च मेधावी स्थितामप्रे सपर्यां ॥ ६ ॥

दुर्धिके तु कर्थ काललस्वा नीतः सुनीचेने ।

अरब विज्ञ विषय बाला: पालिता: केन तद्धः ॥ ७ ॥

On coming back to his house, the intelligent Muni found his sons and other members of family happy and well conditioned, became very glad and when his wife came to him for his service, asked her: "O Fair-eyed One! How did you spend your time in days of famine? There was nothing whatsoever of the stock of rice, etc., in the house; how then did you nourish these days? Please speak to me.

अर्ह तपसि संनढ़ो नागतः शृषु सुन्दार ।

किं कृतं तु तयवा कान्ते विना इव्येण गोपने ॥ ८ ॥

मया चिन्ता कृतत तत्र शुत्वा दुर्भिश्रमद्धुतम् ।

नागतोर्दं विचार्वैर्व कि कार्चियासि निधंनः ॥ ९ ॥

O Fair One! I was very busy with my austerities, I could not therefore come to you and see my boys; how then, O Beloved, and what measure did you resort to for their maintenance? O good and aucipious One! When I heard of the dire famine, I thought then 'I have no wealth; so what shall I do if I go there?'

अहम्यातिवामोक भीडितः कुध्या वने ।

प्रशिक्ष्तीभावेन कुर्जचिष्छ्वयाणाले ॥ १० ॥

श्रच्चं निरितं दूर्वहा कुध्या भीडितो भृगम् ।

महानसं परिजाय भक्यार्थं समुपस्थितः ॥ १ १ ॥

Thus thinking I did not come then. O Beautiful One! At that time, one day I was very hungry and being very much tired I entered into the house of a Cāṇḍāla, with the object of stealing. On entering the house I found the Cāṇḍāla sleeping; then being extremely distressed with hunger, I entered into his kitchen if I could find anything there."

यदा भाषडं समुद्धाय पवखं श्रन्तुजामिषम् ।

गृह्ठामि भक्षणाध्यय तदा दृष्टभु तेन वै ॥ 12 ॥

When the dishes were sought and turned, and when I was going to take cooked dog's flesh I immediately fell into the sight of that Cāṇḍāla.

पृष्टः कसलं बयं प्राणो गृहे मे निशि साद्यम् ।

ब्रृहि कार्य किमर्थं त्वमुद्वादयसि पाडकम् ॥ 13 ॥

इतुक्तः: धघ्चेनाहं कुध्या पीडितो भृगम् ।

तमवोचं सुकेशान्तं कामं गद्रद्वा सिति ॥ 14 ॥

ब्राह्मणोड़ महाभाग तापसः कुध्यादितः ।

चौराभावमनुपातो भक्यं पश्यामि थांडके ॥ 15 ॥

He asked me very affectionately “Who are you? Why have you entered here at this hour of night? Why are your looking after the dishes? Speak what you want.” O Beautiful One! When the Cāndāla asked me these questions, I was very much pressed by hunger and I spoke out my wants in a tremulous voice: O Fortunate One! I am an ascetic Brāhmin; very much pained by hunger I have entered your house stealthily and am looking out for some eatables from your cooking pots.

चीराबेने सम्पाठोःस्म्यतिथिस्ते महामते ।

क्षुधितोस्ति सद्वस्वातां मोरमयिषि सुरस्कृतम् ॥ 16 ॥

शपस्तु वचः शुत्वा मामुवाव सुनिश्छान् ।

भक्षं मा कुर्व वर्णाध्य जानीहि शप्चतावम् ॥ 17 ॥

O Intelligent One! I am now your guest in the form of a thief; I am now specially very hungry; so I will now eat your cooked meat; kindly permit me. Hearing these words, the Cāndāla spoke to me in words authorised by the Śāstras: "O One of the Superior Varna! Know this to be the house of a Cāndāla; so never eat that flesh.

दुर्भेयं खतु मानुभ्यं ततप्रिय च द्विज्ञन्ता ।

द्विजल बाहाणलं च दुर्भेयं वैसि किं नहि ॥ 18 ॥

Širičaddevibhāgavatam

The human birth is very rare in this words; then again to be born a Dvija is more difficult; and to get Brāhmaṇa hood again in the Dvijas is exceedingly difficult.

युहाहाते न कतिथः सर्वथा लोकमिष्ठता ।

अग्राहा मनुना प्रोक्ताः कर्मेणा सत चांत्यजाः ॥ १९ ॥

Are you not aware of this? They ought never to eat the defiled food who desire to attain to the Heavens; owing to Karma, the Maharṣi Manu has denominated the seventh caste as Antyaja and has discarded them altogether.

त्याच्योर्ड कर्माण विश्व शुच्यो नात्र संशयः ।

निवार्यायि मध्याच्चां न तोभेनांसया द्विज ॥ २० ॥

वर्णसंकटादोषोउं मा यातु चां द्विजोन्म ।

So, O Brāhmīn! I am now by my actions turned into a Cāndāla and so forsaken by all; there is no doubt in this. I am forbidding you so that this fault of Varṇa Śaṅkara may not suddenly attack you."

विश्वामिन उवाच

सत्वं वदसि धर्मत्र मतिस्ते विश्वांत्वम् ॥ २१ ॥

तथाप्यापदि धर्मस्य मुक्षमागरं ब्वीयामृम् ।

Vísvāmitra said: “O Knower of Dharma! What you are speaking is quite true; though a Cāndāla, your intelligence is very clear; hear, I will now speak to you the subtleties of the Dharma in times of danger.

देहस्य रक्षणं कार्य सर्वथा यदि मान्द 1122 ॥

पायस्याने पुनः कार्य प्रायश्छत विगुज्द्रे।

O Giver of respect! Always and by all means it is advisable to keep up the body; if sin be thereby incurred, one ought to perform Prāyaścitta (penance) for its purification when the time of danger is over.

दुर्गतिन्तु भवेन्यापदानपादि न चापादि ॥ 23 ॥

मरणाख्छ्यितत्याव नरको नात्र संशयः ।

But if one commits sin when the time is not one of danger, one gets degraded; not so in the time of danger. The man that dies out of hunger, goes to hell, no doubt.

तस्माख्यापहरणं कर्तव्यं शुभमिष्ठता ॥ 24 ॥

तेनाहं चौर्यमिंग दौहं रक्षेप्रव्यर्थत्वा ।

Therefore every man seeking for his welfare must satisfy his hunger. Therefore I intend to steal for preserving my body. O Cāndāla! See!

अवर्धेगे च चौर्वेग वत्यापं कथितं बुधै: ॥ 25 ॥

यो न वर्धेति पर्नीवस्तु तकैय वधिष्यति ।

The sin, incurred in stealing during famine, which the Paṇdits have declared, goes to the God of rains until he does not pour forth rain.

विश्रामित्र उवाच

इत्युक्ते वचने कानते पर्ने-यः सहसाप्तन्ति ॥ 26 ॥

यानाद्धरितस्ततिभधारीयरिपकाश्रितः ।

O Beloved! Just when I spoke these words, the God of Rains began to pour forth rain so desired by all, like that coming out of the elephant's trunk. मृदितोई धर्न वीक्ष्य वर्षते विद्युता सह ॥ 27 ॥ तदारई तदारूई त्यक्वा नि:सूतः परया मुदा ।

When the clouds thus poured forth rains with the glitterings of the lightnings, I felt very glad and left the house of the Cāndāla.

कवय लं वरोहैं कालो नीतल्या कवम् ॥ 28 ॥

कान्तारे परमः क्रूरः क्षयकृत्याणिनीह ।

O Beautiful One! Now speak out to me how did you behave in that famine time, so terrible to all the beings."

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः शुल्या पतिमाह प्रियंवदा ॥ 29 ॥

यथा श्यु मया नीतः कालः परमदाक्णः ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the above words of the husband, the sweet-speaking lady spoke: "Hear, how I passed my time in times of famine." गते त्वयि मुनिश्रेश दुर्भिशं समुपागतम् ॥ 30 ॥

अत्राष्ट्र पुक्रका: सर्वे बच्छुश्रातितूःखिता: ।

“O Muni! After you had gone to practise tapasyā, the dire famine raged; and my sons, exhausted of hunger, became very anxious for food. शुधितान्वालकान्वीक्ष्य नीलायार्थ वने चे ॥ 31 ॥ शांताउर्द चिन्तयाविष्टा किंक्रिप्रापां फलं तथा ।

Book VII Chapter XIII

I became very anxious to see the sons hungry; I then went out to the forest in quest of wild rice; and I got some fruits.

एवं च कतिथित्मासा नीवारेणातिवाहिता: ॥ 32 ॥

तदपावे यवा कानत चितितत मनसा पुनः ।

Thus I spend some months by collecting the rice growing wildly in the forest; then in times these

also could not be got and I became again anxious.

न विश्वा किल दुर्भिक्षनेवारा नापि कानने ॥ 33 ॥

न वृक्षेषु पलान्यामुने मूलानि धरातले ।

The Nivāra rice, too, is now not available; and nothing is obtained also by begging; there are no fruits on the trees and no roots are found under the earth.

धुघाया पीडिता बाला रूदिति भृगमातृतः ॥ 34 ॥

कि कंपीय वर नख्यमि किं र्वदीय क्षुधादितान् ।

The sons are crying in agony of hunger. What to do? And where to go? What am I to say now to the hungry boys?

एवं विधिन्थ मनसा निश्यस्तु मया कृतः ॥ ३ ५ ॥

पुत्रमेकं ददायघ कर्मीचिद्धन्नि किन्त ।

गृहीत्वा तस्य मोल्यं तु तेन उद्येण बालकान् ॥ ३ ६ ॥

पालयेईं कृष्णात्रैन्तु नान्योपायोर्यित पालने ।

शूनि संचीधेन मसना युप्रोजंद प्रहितो मया ॥ ३ ७ ॥

विक्रवार्य महाभाग कंद्रमानो भूशगतुः ।

कन्द्मानं गृहीतैर्वेनं निर्णोताई गतत्रया ॥ ३ ८ ॥

Oh God! Thus thinking on various ways, I at last came to this conclusion that I would sell one of my sons to a rich man and whatever price I can fetch, with that I will preserve the lives of the others sons. O Dear! Thus thinking, I became ready and went out. O Fortunate One! Then this boy began to cry aloud and became very distressed; yet I was so shameless that I took the crying boy and got out of my Asrama.

तदा सत्यवातो मांग मामुढीक्ष्य भूशातुगम् ।

पूछछ स च राजर्षि: कस्माइंदिति बालकः ॥ 39 ॥

तदारूं तनुबादेवे ववनं मुनिससना ।

विक्रियार्थ नीयतेउसी बालकोउछा मय नृप ॥ 40 ॥

At this time one Rājarsi Satyavrata seeing me

very distressed, asked me “O One of good vows! Why is this boy weeping?”

श्रुत्वा मे वचनं नजा द्यारूईद्यस्ततः ।

मामुवाया गृहं गृहि गृहीतैर्ने कुमारकम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

भोजनार्थे कुमाराणामायिर्य विहितं तव ।

प्रापयिष्याम्यहं नित्यं यावन्मुनिसमागमः ॥ 4 2 ॥

O Muni! I spoke to him “To-day I am going to sell this boy.” The King’s heart became overfilled with pity, and spoke to me: “Take back to your Āśrama this boy.” Daily I will supply you with meat for the food of your boys until the Muni returns home.”

अह्यमहिन भृपातो वृघेश्सिम्नुगसूकरान् ।

विध्यस्य याथि हत्वाउसौ प्रत्यहं ददयावित्तः ॥ 43 ॥

तेवेव बालका: कानत पालिता तुविनार्थित् ।

वसिष्ठेनार शगतोउरी भृपतितिमं कारणत् ॥ 44 ॥

O Muni! The King from that time used to bring, with great pity, daily the flesh of deer and boar killed by him in the forest and he used to tie that on this tree." O Beloved! Thus I could protect my sons in that fearful ocean of crisis; but that King was cursed by Vasistha only for my sake.

कस्मिहिष्ठिवसे मांसं न प्रातं तेन कानने ।

हता दोर्धी वसिषुस्य तेनासौ कुपिति भूनि: ॥ 45 ॥

त्रिशंकृपिति भपस्य कृतं नाम महात्मना ।

कुपितेन वधाद्वैतोधाण्डालक्ष झुको तृप: ॥ 46 ॥

One day that King did not get any meat in the forest; so he slaughtered the Kāma Dhenu (the cow giving all desires) of Vasistha and the Muni became therefore very angry with him. The high-souled Muni, angry on account of the killing of his cow, called the King by the name of Trisanku and made him a Cāndāla.

तेनाहं दुःविता जाता तस्य दुःखेन कौशिक ।

श्रपचलमसौ प्राणो मल्लुते नुपनन्दनः ॥ 47 ॥

येन कंनाप्यायेच भवता नृपतेः किल ।

तस्माद्रक्षा प्रकर्तेथा तस्मा प्रबलेन ह् ॥ 48 ॥

O Kauśika! The prince turned into a Cāndāla because he came forward to do good to me, so I am very sorry for his sake." So it is your urgent

duty to save the King from his terrible position by any means or by the influence of your powerful Tapasya."

व्यास उवाच

इति भार्थिविधः शुल्चा कौशिको मुनिसत्तमः ।

तमामू कामिनी दीनों सांतलपूर्वमैरित्यद् ॥ 49 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing these words from his wife the Muni Kaūśika consoled her and said:

विश्रामित्र उवाच

मोचायिषम प्रे ते शापाधुरं कमलतोचने ।

उपकारः कृती येन कान्ताराखित्रातसि ये ॥ 50 ॥

विद्यापोबलेनंह कार्चिे चुःखस्थानम् ।

“O Lotus-eyed One! I will free the King of his curse, who saved you at that critical moment; what more than this that I promise to you that I will remove his sufferings whether it be by my learning or it be by my Tapas.”

इत्याशय एवियां तत्र कौशिकः परमार्थवित् ॥ 51 ॥

चिन्त्यामास रूपतः कर्थ स्यादुःखानाग्न।

Thus consoling his wife at that moment, Kauśika, the Knower of the Highest Reality, began to think how he could destroy the pains and miseries of the King.

संविमुर्श्य मुनिनस्त जगाम यत्र पार्थिव: ॥ 52 ॥

त्रिशंकृ: पत्रवर्णे दीन: संस्थितः: शयपाब्धाति: ।

Thus thinking, the Muni went to the King Triśañku, who was staying at that time very humbly in a village of the Cāndālas, in the garb of a Cāndāla.

आपच्छतं मुनि दुर्ध्या विमितोंउसौ नराधिपः ॥ 53 ॥

दणखत्रिपणतोल्यों पादयोतरासा मुने: ।

गृहीत्वा तं केरं भूपं पतितं कौशिकस्तदा ॥ 54 ॥

उद्याप्योवाच वचनं सांतवपूर्व दिजोनम: ।

मतूते तं व्य मौघाल शतोर्जी सु पनिना सतः ॥ 55 ॥

वांछिते ते कौर्यामि बृहि किं करावण्यहम् ।

Seeing the Muni coming, the King was greatly astonished and instantly threw himself before his feet like a piece of stick. Kauśika raised the fallen King and consoling him said: "O King! You are cursed, on my account, by the Muni Vasiṣṭha. I

will, therefore, fulfil your desires. Now speak what I am to do."

राजोवाच

मया संग्राधितः पूर्व वासिष्ठो मखहतेवे ॥ 56 ॥

मां याजय मुनिश्रष्ठ क्रोंमि मखुपुतमम् ।

यथेछे कुर विग्रेंछे यथा स्वर्ग जजाम्यमू ॥ 57 ॥

The King said: "With a view to perform a sacrifice I prayed to Vasistha that "I would perform a sacrifice, kindly do this for me."

अनेनैव शारीरण शक्तलोकं सूखालयम् ।

कोपे कृत्वा वसिष्ठोजी माफाहिति सुदुपमे ॥ 58 ॥

मानुषेण हि देहेत वर्गवासः कृतस्व ।

पुनर्भयोक्तो भगवान्यर्वगलुळेच नाचय ॥ 59 ॥

“O Muni! Do that sacrifice, by which I can go to the Heavens in this my present body. Vasistha became angry and said: “O Villain! How can you go and live in the Heavens in this your human body?” I was very anxious to go to the Svarga (Heaven) so I again spoke to him:

अन्यं पुरोहितं कृत्वा यध्येउईं यसुभुतमम् ।

तदा तेनैव शगतोउईं चाण्डलोण भव पाम ।। 60 ॥

इत्येतत्क्थितं सर्वे कारणं शापसंभवम् ।

मम दुःखविनाशय सपर्वोसि मनुनीश ।। ६। ॥

इन्युक्णा विरयामासी राजा दुःखक्राजिंदतः ।

कौशिकोर्जीय निराकर्तुं शापं तन्य व्यक्तिवत् ॥ ६२ ॥

इति श्रीवेदौभीगावते महापुरुषो सतमस्करभे

योदादोक्याय: 11 13 11

“O Sinless One! I will then have the excellent sacrifice done by another priest.” Hearing this, Vasiṣṭha Deva cursed me, saying “Be a Cāndāla.” O Muni! Thus I have described to you all about my curse. You are the one quite able to remove now my grievance.” Distressed in pain an agony, the King informed him and became quiet. Viśvāmitra, too, thought how he could free him of his curse.

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the coming of Viśvāmitra to Triśañku in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XIV

CHAPTER XIV

On Trísańku's Going to the Heavens

व्यास उवाच

विविच्य मनसा कृत्वं गाधिम्युतुर्महताप: ।

प्रकल्प्य यज्ञसंगात्म्युनीनामंत्रयसन्ति ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Setting in his mind what to do, the great ascetic Viśvāmitra collected all the materials necessary for the sacrifice and invited all the Munis.

मुसयस्तं यज्ञं जात्वा विश्वामित्रनिमन्त्रतः ।

नातातः सर्वे पृवैते वसिष्ठेन निवारिताः ॥ 2 ॥

Thus invited by Viśvāmitra, the Munis became informed all about the sacrifice; but, owing to the fact that the Muni Vasisṭṭha prevented them, none of them went to the sacrifice.

गाधिमुस्त्रताजय विन्याश्रातितूःखितः ।

आजगामाग्रयं तत्र यत्रात्रौ नृपति: स्थितः ॥ 3 ॥

तमाह कौगिकः कुळ्ठी वसिष्ठेन निवारिताः ।

नात्ता ब्राह्मणाः सर्वे यज्ञां नृपसन्म ॥ 4 ॥

When Viśvāmitra, the son of Gādhi, came to know this, he became very anxious and very sad and came to this King Trīśanku and sat. The Maharṣi Kauśika then became angry and said: "O King! Vasīṣṭha preventing, the Brāhmins have all refused to come to the sacrifice.

पश्य मे तपस: सिंद्धि यथा त्वां सुरस्पधनि ।

प्राप्यामि महागत वार्तिहतं ते कोरोम्यम् ॥ 5 ॥

इत्युक्चा जलमायादा हस्तेन मुनिसतमः ।

ददौ पुरुषं तदा तस्मै गायत्रीजयसम्बन् ॥ 6 ॥

But, O King! See my power of tapasyā; I will immediately fulfil your desires; I will instantly send you to the Heavens, the abode of the Gods." Thus saying, that Muni took water in his hand and repeated the Gāyatrī Mantram. He gave to the King all the Punyams (merits) that he collected for himself up to then.

दत्त्वा3थ सुकृतं राजे तमुवाच महीपतिम् ।

यथेहं गच्छ राजर्षे जिविष्यमतंद्रितः ॥ 7 ॥

पुर्ण्येन मय राजेन्द्र बहुकालाजितेन च ।

याहि शक्रपुरीं प्रीतः स्वास्ति तेजस्तु सुरालये ॥ 8 ॥

Giving him thus all the Punyams, he spoke to the King: "O King! Throw away all idleness and go to the abode of the Gods you wanted to go. O King of Kings! Gladly go to the Heavens by the power of all the merits collected by me for a long time and let you fare well there."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तवित विग्रेड शिर्फुकत्सता ततः ।

उत्पात यथा पक्षी वेगावंत्सपो बलात् ॥ 9 ॥

Vyāsa spoke: O King! When the King of the Vipras, Viśvāmitra, spoke thus, the King Triśanku, by virtue of the Muni's Tapas, got high up in the air without any delay like a quick flying bird.

उत्पत्थ नगोर राजा गतः शक्रभूर्ति यदा ।

दृष्टी देवगणीस्त्र कुर्धश्रांतलवेषणाक् ॥ १० ॥

कथितोउली सुरैद्य कॉउद्यमायित सत्वरः ।

गगने देववादा यो दुरुर्गः क्षयचाकृति: ॥ ११ ॥

Thus getting up and up, when the King reached the abode of Indra. The Devas, seeing the terrible Cāndāla-like appearance of Trisanku, spoke out to Indra: "Who is this person coming like a Deva with a violent speed in the air?

सहसोत्थाय शक्रत्नपर्यनुकाध्यम् ।

जाला शिर्णंकुमपि स निर्भन्थर तसास्वबीत् ॥ 12 ॥

शपच क्व समायासि देवलोके जुग्यमितः ।

याहि शीर्घं तते भृपी नात्र स्थातुं त्वयीवित्तम् ॥ 13 ॥

Why does he look like a Cāndāla and is so firecooking?" Hearing thus, Indra got up at once and saw that one, the meanest of the human beings and knowing him to be Trísānku reproachingly said to him: "You are a Cāndāla, quite unfit for the Devaloka; so where are you going? You ought not to remain here; so go immediately back to the earth."

इतुक्तः स्वक्षिततः स्वाराष्ट्रिकोपामित्रकर्शन । निपयात्त तदा राजा क्षीणपुरयो यद्धासप्रः ॥ 14 ॥ पुनश्छुकोश भूपालो विश्वामिवेति चासकृत् । पतामि सर्व दुःखात्तं स्वर्यान्धवलितमायुगग् ॥ 15 ॥

O Destroyer of the enemies! Indra speaking thus, the King dropped from the Heavens and, like a Deva whose merits had been exhausted, fell down immediately. Tríśañku then cried out frequently "O Viśvāmitra! O Viśvāmitra! Being displaced from the Heavens I am now falling very violently; so save me from this trouble."

तस्य तत्कमित्तं राजपन्ततः कौशिको भूति: ।

शुत्वा तिक्षिति होावय पतन्तं वीक्ष्य भूपतिन् ॥ १६ ॥

वचनात्तस्य तनैव स्थितोउसी गाने नृप ।।

भुनेस्तपःप्रभावेण चतिलोत्तिप सुरालयात् ॥ 17 ॥

O King! Hearing his cry and seeing him getting down, Viśvāmitra said: "Wait, Wait." Though displaced from Heaven, the King by virtue of the Muni's Tapas, remained stationed at that place in the middle of the air.

विश्वाधिजोपय: स्यूहा चकोल्टिं शुविस्ताप् ।

वियातुं नृत्ता युंडि सर्वगलोकं द्वितीयकम् ॥ १ ८ ॥

Vísvāmitra then began to do Ācāmana (sip water) and commenced his great Sacrifice to create another new creation and a second Svargaloka (Heaven).

तस्योदायं तथा ज्ञाता स्वितस्तुं ज्योपिति: ।

तत्राजगाना सहसा मृति प्रति तु गाधिजम् ॥ १९ ॥

Seeing his resolve, the Lord of Śacī became very anxious and eagerly came to the son of Gādhi without the least delay and said:

किं ब्रह्मिकते साधो कस्माकोपसमाकृतः ।

अरने सुक्षा मुनिश्रेष्ठ बृष्टि किं करवाणि ते ॥ २० ॥

“O Brāhmaṇa! What are you going to do? O Saint! Why are you so very angry? O Muni! There is no necessity to create new creation. Order now what I am to do.

कौशिक जवाच

स्वं निवासं महीपालं च्युतं लब्द्ववनादिषो ।

नयस प्रीतिवोर्गेन प्रिशंकुं चातिदुःखितम् ॥ 21 ॥

Vísvāmitra said: “O Lord of the Devas! The King Trísānku has become very miserable to have a fall from the Heavens. Therefore this is now my intention that you gladly take him to your own abode.”

व्यास उवाच

तस्य तं निश्रयं ज्ञाला तृपाषडितीशक्ति: ।

ततो बलं विवितोयभोपित्युवाच वास्वः ॥ 22 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Indra was thoroughly aware of his determined resolve and very powerful asceticism; so he accepted to do according to his word, out of terror.

विष्यहेदे नृपं कृत्वा विमानवरसंश्वितम् ।

आपुष्छ्य कौणीक्ष शक्रोजगमवित्रपुरीं तद ॥ 23 ॥

The Lord Indra then gave the King a bright and divine body and made him take his seat in an excellent car and taking leave Kauśika went with the King to his own abode.

गते शक्र तु वै वर्गरि शिवकुसहिते ततः ।

विश्वासि: सुरुं प्राय स्वास्थे सुख्येतेपवत् ॥ 24 ॥

Vísvāmitra became glad to see Triśanku go to the Heavens with Indra and remained happy in his own Śārama.

हरिश्छोउल सत्यूला विश्वामिजोपकारकम् ।

यितुः खर्यमं कामं मृदितो राज्यम-वशगत् ॥ 25 ॥

The King Harisācranda, now hearing that his father has gone to Heaven by virtue of his Tapas, began to govern his kingdom with a gladdened heart.

अयोध्यापित: कीडों चकार सह भारय।

रूपयीवनचातुर्युत्क्या प्रीतिसंयुत: ॥ 26 ॥

The King of Ayodhyā began then to live constantly with his clever wife, full of youth and beauty. Thus time passed away; but the beautiful wife did not become pregnant.

अत्तिकाले युवती न सा गर्भवर्ती हृष्णत् ।

तदा चिन्तानुरो राजा बभूवातीव दुःखितः ॥ 27 ॥

The King became very sorry and thoughtful. He then went to the holy hermitage of Vasistha and bowing down informed him of his mental agony due to his getting no son.

Book VII Chapter XIV

वसिष्ठस्यामां गत्वा प्रणम्य शिरसा मुनिन् ।

अनपत्यल्वजां चिन्तां गुरवे समवेदवत् ॥ 28 ॥

दैवज्ञोरिति भवान्कामं मन्त्रविद्यार्थिगरातः।

उपायं कुक धर्मत्र संततैर्मे मानद ॥ 29 ॥

“O Knower of Dharma! You are skilled in the Science O Mantrams. Especially you know everything of Daiva (Fate). So, O Giver of honour! Do for me so that I get a son. O Best of Brāhmins! There is no salvation for one who has not got any son, you are well aware of this.

अपूत्रस्य गतिनीर्ति जानासि द्विजसत्ता ।

कस्मातुप्रेषसे जाननुःखं मम च शक्तिमान् ॥ 30 ॥

कतर्विकारित्वचे धन्या चे शिशुं लालयन्ति हि ।

मन्दभायोर्धमनिंश पित्तयामि द्विवानिशम ॥ 31 ॥

Then why do you overlook my case when you can remove my sorrow. Even these sparrows are blessed who nourish their offsprings. And I am so very unfortunate that, day and night, I am immersed in cares and anxieties, due to my not having any son."

व्यास उवाच

इत्याकर्ण्यं मुनिसत्यस्य निर्वेदमिश्रितं वचः ।

संचित्य मनसा सम्यतभूयाच चियेः सुतः ॥ 32 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing these pitiful utterances of the King, Vasiṣtha thought over in his mind and spoke to him everything in particular.

वसिष्य उवाच

सत्यं बृषे महाराज संसारोप्रम्ब विहते ।

अनपत्यत्वजं दुःखं यतथा दुःख्यमुद्रत् ॥ ३३ ॥

तस्याच्यपि राजेन्द्र वरणं यात्यां पतिम् ।

समाराधय यनेन स ते कार्य कारिष्यति ॥ 34 ॥

Vasistha said: O King! True you have spoken that in this world there is no other sorrow more pain giving than the state of not having any issue. Therefore, O King! you worship with great care the water-god Varuna. He will crown your efforts with success.

वक्तणाद्धिको नासित देवः सन्तानदायकः ।

तमाराधय धर्मिह कार्यसिद्धर्भविध्वति ॥ 35 ॥

दैर्व पुरुषकारश माननीयाविमो नृपि: ।

उद्योग विना कार्यसिद्ध: संजायते कवम् ॥ 36 ॥

There is no other god than Varuna to grant sons. So, O Virtuous One! Worship Him and you will get success. Both Fate and Self-exertion are to be respected by men; how can success come unless efforts are made.

न्यायतस्तु नरैः कार्य उद्यमस्तचदर्गिधि: ।

कृते तत्मभ्यवेस्तिपद्रानन्यथा नुपसत्तभ ॥ 37 ॥

इति तस्य वचः श्रुत्वा गुरोरमिततेजसः ।

प्रणाय्य निर्वयी राजा तपसे कृतनिष्ठाय: ॥ 38 ॥

O King! Men who realise the Highest Truth should make efforts, guided by just rules; success comes to those who work; else never one is to expect success." Hearing these words of the Guru, of unbounded energy, the King made a fixed resolved and bowing himself down, went away to practise tapasyā.

गंगातीरे शुषे ख्याने कृतपदासने नृप: ।

ध्यायमार्णधरं चित्ते चराग दुर्घरं तपः ॥ 39 ॥

एवं तप्यस्ततस्य प्रचेता दृष्टिगोचर: ।

कृपयाद्धभूमहात्रा प्रसभ्युर्षकंजः ॥ 40 ॥

On the banks of the Ganges, in a sacred place, seated on Padmāsana, the King became merged in the meditation of the God Varuna with noose in his hand and thus practised severe asceticism. O King! When he was doing this, the god Varuna took pity on him and gladly came before his sight.

हरिश्रद्रमुवाचेदं वचनं यादसां पति: ।

वरं वरय धर्मत्र तुढोरमि तपसा तव ॥ 4 1 ॥

Varuna, then, spoke to the King Hariścandra: "O Knower of Dharma! I am glad at your tapasyā. So ask boons from me."

राजोवाच

अनयलोर्यसि देतेशे पूर्व देहे सुखप्रदम् ।

ऋणत्रयापहातार्थिमुद्यामोउं घया कृतः ॥ 42 ॥

नृपस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा प्रगल्यं दुःखितस्य च ।

सिमपूर्व ततः पाशी तमहा पुरतः स्थितम् ॥ 43 ॥

The King said: "O God! I am without any son; give me a son, who will give me happiness and

will free me from the three debts that I owe to the Devas, the Pitrs and the Rsis. Know that with that object I am doing this Tapasyā." Then the God Varuna, hearing these humble words of the sorrowful King, smiled and said.

སྒྲགས་སྐབས

पुत्रो यदि भवेत्राजनपुर्णी मनसि वाक्छतः ।

सिद्धे कार्य ततः पशुतिकं कार्थिस मे पिश्म ॥ 44 ॥

यदि त्वं तेन तुप्रेणा मां यजेधाविर्यिकतः ।

पशुबन्धोने तेनैव द्वामि नृपते वरम् ॥ 45 ॥

“O King! If you get your desired well-qualified son, what will you do for me to my satisfaction? O King! If you perform a sacrifice in honour of me and fearlessly sacrifice your son there like an animal, I will then grant you your desired boon.”

राजोवाच

देव मे मासुं घट्यच्च योष्येर्दं जलाधिम् ।

परुं कृत्वा सुतं पुरं सत्यमेतदूब्बीमि ते ॥ ४६ ॥

वंटयत्वे परमं दु:ख्यासहां भृवि मानत ।

शोकाकिनियमनं नृणां तस्मादेहि सुतं शुभम् ॥ ४७ ॥

The King: “O Deva! Free me from this state of sonlessness; O Water God! When my son will be born, I will do your sacrifice with my son as an animal in that. This I speak truly to you. O Giver of honour! There is no suffering more unbearable than this one: not to have any son; so grant me a good son so that all my sorrows be vanished.”

वरूण उवाच

भविष्यति सुतः कामं राजनच्छ गृहाय वै ।

स्वयं तद्वचने कार्य व्यद्धवीषि ममात्रतः ॥ 48 ॥

Varuna said: “O King! You will get a son as you desire; go home; but see what you have spoken before be fulfilled and turned true.”

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तो वकर्णोनासी हरीक्षान्त्री गृहं ययै ।

भार्यावी कवयामास वृत्तांं वदानजम् ॥ 49 ॥

तस्य भार्यार्गतं पूर्णे बभूवातिसमनोहरम् ।

पटुरात्री गुभा शैल्या धर्मपन्ती पतितता ॥ 50 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing these words from Varuṇa, Hariścandra went back and told everything about his getting the boon to his wife. The King had one hundred exquisitely beautiful wives of whom, Śaivyā was the lawful wife and queen and was very chaste.

काले गतेश्व सा गर्भे द्वारा वरवर्णिनी ।

बभूव मुदितो राजा श्रुत्वा दोहद्वेहितम् ॥ 51 ॥

कार्यायास विधिवल्संक्कारावृष्यतित्वा ।

मासेख द्वामे पूर्णे सुखेव सा गुधे दिने ॥ 52 ॥

After some time, that wife became pregnant and the King became very glad to hear this and her longings in that state. The King performed all her purificatory ceremonies, and when ten months were completed, and on an auspicious Nakṣatra and on an auspicious day, she gave birth to a son, like that of a Deva son.

तारायद्वलोपेते पूत्रं देवसुतोपम् ।

पुत्रे जाते नृपः स्नाला श्राङ्गणे: परिवहितः ॥ 53 ॥

चकार जातकर्मादीन् ददौ दानानि भूग्रिंशः ।

राजशातिपुमोदोःभृत्युजन-व्यमसुक्रद्वः ॥ 54 ॥

On the birth of his son, the King, surrounded by the Brāhmins, performed his ablutions and first of all performed the natal ceremonies and distributed innumerable jewels and much wealth; and the King's joy knew no bounds at that time.

बभाव परभोदाएं धनधान्यसमितितः ।

विशेषदानसंयुक्तो गीतवादिरसंकुलः ॥ 55 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवर्गेमाहुपुणे सतमकचे

चतुर्वैगोउवाः: 11 14 11

The liberal King gave away, in special charities, wealth, grains, and various jewels and lands and had the performance of music, dancing and other things.

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the going to Heavens of Trísañku and the commencement of Harisācanda's narrative in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XV

CHAPTER XV

On the King Harisćandra

यास उवाच

प्रवृते सदने तस्य राज: पुत्रमहोत्सेवे ।

आजगाम तदा पाशी विव्येवधर: शुभः ॥ १ ॥

स्वस्तीतुक्नता नृप प्राह करणोड़ं निशागम ।

पुत्रो जाततसद्धार्थीय वजानेन नृपाणु माम् ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When there was going on in the King's palace, the grand festivities for the son's birth ceremonies, Varunā Deva came there in the holy Brāhmin form. "Let welfare be on you." Saying this, Varunā began to say: "O King! Know me to be Varunā. Now hear what I say.

सत्यं कुक वचो राजन्यग्रेफं भवता पुरा ।

बंधवर्यं तु गतं तेउघ बर्यानेन मे किल ॥ ३ ॥

इति तस्य वयं: शुचा राजा चिन्तां चकार है ।

कई हंमि मुतं जातं जलजेन समाननम् ॥ ४ ॥

O King! Your son is now born; therefore perform sacrifice in honour to me with your son. O King! Your defect of not having a son is now removed; so fulfil what you promised before." Hearing these words, the King began to think "Oh! Only one lotus-faced son is born to me; how can I kill it.

लोकापाल: समायातो विरुपवेषण वीर्वयान् ।

न देहलेलं कार्य सर्वथा शुभमिच्छता ॥ ५ ॥

On the other hand, the powerful Regent (Lokapāla) of one quarter is present in a Brāhmaṇa form; and it never behaves one to show disrespect to a Deva or to a man who wishes welfare to us.

पुत्रस्नेह: सुवुर्गछेध: सर्वेधा प्राणिधि: सदा ।

कि कौरिक कबं मे स्थानसुघं सन्ततिसम्बनम् ॥ 6 ॥

धैर्यमाल्व्य भृपालतरं नत्वा प्रतिपूज्य च ।

उवाच वचनं रूल्णां युक्ते विनयपूर्वेकम् ॥ 7 ॥

Again it is very difficult to root out the affection for a son; so what am I do now? How shall I preserve my happiness due to the birth of my son. The King, then, with patience bowed down to him and worshipped him duly and humbly spoke to him in beautiful words, pregnant with reason.

देवदेव तवानुर्जा करौमि करणानिधे ।

वेदोकेन विधानेन मखं च बहुव्रहिणम् ॥ ८ ॥

“O Deva of the Devas! I will obey your order no doubt and I will perform your sacrifice according to the Vedic rites and with profuse Dakṣinās (remuneration to priests, etc.).

पुत्रे जाते दण्डोत्क मर्मोवायो भवेरिता ।

मासेन शुद्ध्वेज्ञननी द्यमती तत्र कारणम् ॥ 9 ॥

But, when in a sacrifice, human beings are immolated as victims, both the husband and wife are entitled to the ceremony. Father purified on the tenth day and mother on the expiration of one month after the son's birth; so how can I perform the sacrifice until one month expires!

सर्वोत्तीस प्रवेतस्वं धर्मे जानासि शाशतम् ।

कृपा कुक त्वं वारीश श्रमस्व परमेश्वर ॥ 10 ॥

You are omniscient and the master of all the beings; and you know what is Nitya Dharma. So, O Varuna Deva! I want one month time; and shew mercy thus on me.

व्यास उवाच

इत्थुक्त्वु प्रचेतास्तं प्रत्युवाच जनाधिधम् ।

स्वस्ति नेत्रुल गाधिधा कुक कावीण पार्थिव ॥ 11 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The King Harisācandra saying thus, Varuna D:va spoke to the King! "O King! Welfare be unto you! Do your duties; I am now going back to my place.

आगमिध्यापि मासाने तट्यच्छं सर्वां तथा ।

कृत्योद्यानिकमाचारं पुरस्य नृपसभा ॥ १ २ ॥

इतुक्ना सत्श्याय वाचा राजानं याद्वां पति: ।

हरिश्छातो मूदं प्राप गत गरिजिन पार्विव: ॥ १ ३ ॥

O King! I will come again after one month. Better finish the natal ceremonies and the Nāmakarana ceremony regularly and then perform my sacrifice." O King! When Varuna Deva turned his back, the King began to feel happiness.

Šrimaddevīthāgavatam

कोटिः: प्रदरी गासता घटोफीईमपूरिता: ।

विपेघ्यो वेद्विद्वज्ञश तवैव तिलपर्वतन्ति् ।। १४ ॥

राजा पुत्रमुक्तं चूद्या सुख्याभ महनगर् ।।

नामास्य रोहितश्रैति चकारविधिपूर्वकम् ॥ १५ ॥

Then the King gave as gifts millions of cows, yielding plenty of milk and ornamented with gold, and mountains of Til, sesamums to the Brahmins versed in the Vedas and kept his name, with formal ceremonies as Rohitāśva.

पूर्णे माते ततः पाशी विप्रवेशेण भुपतेः ।

आजगाम गृहे सहो यजस्वेति बुबन्युडुः ॥ १६ ॥

बीक्ष्य तं नृपतिर्दैर्व विम्नगः शोकसागरे ।

प्रिणपत्य कृतातिलयं नसुवाय कृताज्ञति: ॥ १७ ॥

When one month became complete, Varuna Deva came again in a Brāhmin form and frequently said: "O King! Start the sacrifice just now." The King, on seeing the God of Waters, at once fell into an ocean anxieties and sorrows; he then bowed down and worshipping him as a guest, spoke to him with folded palms:

दिष्टा देव ल्यमायतो गृहं मे पार्वितं प्रभो ।

मखं क्रौमि वारीश विधियद्वृत्तिजत तब ॥ 18 ॥

अदन्तो न पशुः शलाघ्य इत्याहुर्बेदवादितः ।

तस्मात्तोद्वे तेर्दं क्रौरिणामि महामतघम् ॥ 19 ॥

“O Deva! It is to my great fortune that you have landed your feet at my place; O Lord! My house has been sanctified to day. O Deva! I will do, no doubt, your desired sacrifice according to the rites and ceremonies.” But see, the victims that have not their teeth come as yet are not fit for a sacrifice; so the versed Pandits say; so I have settled I would perform your great sacrifice, as desired by you, when the teeth will come out of my son.”

यास उवाच

इत्युक्तसेन वक्षणसेवीयुक्तवा ययावव । हरिश्छनो मूदं प्राय्य विकजहा गृहासभे ॥ 20 ॥ पुनर्दनीतादूबं जाता प्रवेता त्रिज़कपयान् । अजागमा गृहे तस्य कुरु कार्यमिति बुब्न् ॥ 21 ॥

Vyāsa said: O Lord of men! Hearing thus, Varuna spoke "Let it be so" and went away. The

King Harisācandra became glad and passed his days in enjoyments in his household. When the teeth of the child got out, Varuna knew it and came again in a Brāhmī garb in the palace and spoke “O King! Now commence my sacrifice.”

भूपालोर्पि जलाधीशं शैक्ष्य प्रापतं दिजाकृतीन् ।

प्राणायासनसमापेतै: पूजयामास सादम् ॥ 22 ॥

सतूला प्रोवाच चवनं विनयानतकंधरः ।

क्लोपि विविधित्कामं मरुं प्रवलद्धिणम् ॥ 23 ॥

Seeing the Brāhmin Varuna there, the King, too, bowed down and gave him a seat and showing all respects to him, worshipped him. He sang hymns to him and very humbly said with his head bent low: "O Deva! I will perform your desired sacrifice with plenty of Daksinās according to rites and ceremonies.

बालोउप्यकृतशीलोउं यमीकेशो न संभतः ।

यज्ञार्थे पशुकरणे मया वृद्धमुखाख्यून। ॥ 24 ॥

But the child's Cūdākarana (the ceremony of tonsure) is not yet done; so the hairs that were at the birth time are still there and the child cannot be fit for sacrifice as long as those hairs exist.

तावल्यमवर वारीग विधिं जानासि शाश्रतम् ।

कतव्य: सर्वथा यज्ञो मुपडन्तो तिशगोः कित्त ॥ 25 ॥

So I have heard from the elderly persons. O Lord of Waters! You know the Śāstric rules; kindly wait till the Cūdākarana is over. When the child will have his head shaven, I will certainly perform your sacrifice; there is no doubt in this."

तस्येति वचनं शूला प्रयोतः प्रात तं पुनः ।

प्रतारयसि मां राजनुः पुनरिंदं बुवन् ॥ 26 ॥

अपि ते सर्वसाम्पी वर्तैने तृपतेधुना ।

पुस्तन्हनिवद्धूतस्तं वंचरायेव सांप्रतम् ॥ 27 ॥

Hearing these words, Varuna spoke to him again: "O King! Why are you deceiving me like this so often? O King! Now you have all the materials ready for the sacrifice; only for your filial affection you are deceiving me.

क्षीरकर्षिविधि कृत्वा न कतिभिस मखं यदि ।

तदारूई दाहरणं शापं दास्ये कोपसम्पन्धितः ॥ 28 ॥

Book VII Chapter XV

अषा गच्छामि राजेन्द्र वचनात्तव मानद ।

न पूषा वचनं कार्यं त्वयेक्षतुकुलोद्धवि । २ ९ ॥

However, if, after the ceremony of tonsure, you do not perform my sacrifice, I will be angry and I will curse you. O King! I am going for the present; but see do not tell lies, being born in the family of Iksyāku."

इत्याभाष्य यवावाग्य प्रशेता नृपतेगृहात् ।

राजा परमसन्तुष्टो ननन्द भवने तदा ॥ 30 ॥

चूढाकरणकाल तु प्रमृते परमतस्ये ।

संघान्तसरमा पाशी भवनं नृपते: पुनः ॥ 31 ॥

Instantly Varuna disappeared; the King, too, felt himself happy in his household. When the ceremony of tonsure was commenced and grand festivities were hold, on the occasion Varuna soon came again to the King's palace.

यदोंके सुतमादाय रजी नृपतित्रिधरी ।

उपविष्ठ क्रियाकाले तदैव वरणो3ध्यगत् ॥ 32 ॥

कुरं कर्मेति विस्पटं चवनं कथयदुम् ।

विश्रूषपर: श्रीमान्यस्थ एव पायकः ॥ 33 ॥

The queen was then sitting before the King with the child in her lap when Varuna came up there. The Brāhmīn Varuna then appeared like a Flaming Fire and spoke to the King in clear voice: "O King! Start the sacrifice."

नुपतितरं समालोक्य बधूवातीव विहूलः ।

नमधाकर तं भीत्या कृतांलिपुट: परः ॥ 34 ॥

विधित्यन्त्रयित्या तं राजोवाच चिनीतावन् ।

स्वामिकार्यं करोमध्य मतुवस्य विधिपूर्वकम् ॥ 35 ॥

Seeing him, the King was confused with terror and with folded palms, quickly bowed down to him. After worshipping him duly, he very humbly said: "O Lord! Today I will perform your sacrifice."

वनत्यमर्तित त्वापि शृण्यैकमान विशो ।

युक्ते चेन्मन्यसे र्वामित्तद्व्वीति त्वात्रात् ॥ 36 ॥

But kindly hear with attention my saying and then do what is advisable. O Lord! If you approve of this as reasonable, I then open my heart to you.

ब्राह्मा: श्रवित्य वैश्यस्थो वर्गा तिज्ञातः ।

संस्कृताश्रान्यथा शूत्रा एवं वेदिविदो विद्यः ॥ 37 ॥

The three Varṇas Brāhmaṇas, Kṣattriyas, and Vaīśyas become Dvijas (twice-born) only when they are duly purified according to proper rules and ceremonies; without any such purifications they are certainly Śūdras.

तस्मादयं सुतो मेउष्ठ शूग्रवदृततैं तिशुः ।

उपनीतः क्रियाईः स्यादिति वेदेषु तिप्रिणः ॥ 38 ॥

So the Pandits versed in the Vedas declare. My child is now an infant only; so it is like a Śūdra. When his thread ceremony (Upanayana) will be performed, he will then be fit for the sacrifice; this the Veda Śāstras declare.

राजामेकादृषे वर्षे सदोपनवर्ग सूतम् ।

अष्टेय बाहाणानां च वैश्यानां द्वाद्यो किल ॥ 39 ॥

द्यसे यदि देवेश दीनं मां सेवकं तव ।

तदोपनीय कतार्तिम यपुना यमुभुतमम् ॥ 40 ॥

The Ksattiryas are so purified in their eleventh year; the Brāhmanas in their eighth year and the Vaiśyas in their twelfth year. So, O Lord of the Devas! If you feel pity for your this humble servant, then wait till the Upanayana ceremony is over, when I perform your grand sacrifice with my son.

लेकपालो5स धर्मत्र सर्वशास्त्र विश्रात् ।

मन्यसे यद्रचः सर्वं तद्वष्ण भवनं विषो ॥ 4 1 ॥

O Bibhu! You are the Lokapāla; especially you are conversant with all the Śāstric rules and have acquired the knowledge of Dharma. If you think my saying as true, then go to your home.

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः शुत्वा द्वावान् वादसां पति: ।

ओरित्युक्त्वा ययावाशु प्रस्ववदनो नृपः ॥ 4 2 ॥

गते५थ वकणो राजा बभूवातिपुर्दाचितः ।

सुखं प्राय्य सुतस्यैवं राजा मुदयमावर १ ॥ 4 3 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing these words, Varuna's heart was filled with pity and so he went away instantly, saying "let it be so." Varuna going away, the King felt very glad and the queen, knowing the welfare of the son became glad too,

चकार राजकायाणि हरिश्रान्तरत नृपः ।

कालेन बजता पुत्रो बधूव द्रशवाधिंकः ॥ 44 ॥

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

तस्योपवीतसमार्थी विष्णुतिसदूर्णी नृपः ।

चक्रात ब्राह्मणी: शिष्टैर्थित: सचिवैल्बना ॥ 4 5 ॥

Then the King gladly performed his state duties. After some time, the child grew ten years old. Consulting with the peaceful Brāhmanas as well as his ministers, he collected materials for the Upanayana ceremony befitting his position.

एकादशे सुतस्याव्ये ततवंधियधी नृप: ।

विद्यो विविधलाक्याँ चित्ते चिन्तानुः पुनः ॥ 46 ॥

वर्तमाने तथा कार्य उपनिते कुमारके ।

आजगामाव थकणो विघ्रवेधधरस्ताद ॥ 47 ॥

When the eleventh year was completed by his son, the King arranged everything for the thread ceremony but when his thoughts turned to Varuna's sacrifice, he became very sad and anxious. When the thread ceremony began to be performed, the Brāhmin Varuna came there.

तं बीक्ष्य पुस्तित्नृर्ण प्राणय पुस्त: स्थितः ।

कृतांजसिपुटः प्रीतः प्रत्युवाच सुत्तोमम् ॥ 48 ॥

देवदत्तोपवीतोउयं पगुयोगेयोर्सित मे सुतः ।

प्रसादात्म व मे गोको गतो वंधयापवादः ॥ 49 ॥

Seeing him, the King instantly bowed down and standing before him with clasped palms, gladly spoke to him: "O Deva! My son's Upanayana being over, now my son is fit for the victim in the sacrifice; and by your grace, my sorrow that was within me as not having a son, has vanished.

कर्तूमिष्ट्यार्थे यज्ञ प्रभृतवरदिष्णम् ।

समये शृणु धर्मे सत्यमढ़ ब्रवीम्यढ़म ।। ५० ॥

समावत्नकर्मती कारीध्यामी तवेपितम् ।

मभोपरि द्वयं कृत्वा तावचं क्षेतुमर्हिं ॥ ५१ ॥

I speak truly before you that, O Knower of Virtue! after some more time I have desired to perform yours sacrifice with plenty of Daksjnas. In fact, when the Samāvartan ceremony will be over, I will do as you like. Kindly wait till then."

वरुण उवाच

प्रतारयसि मां राजन्युघेभाकुतो भृशम् ।

युघुर्वैमितं कृत्वा युक्तिचुक्तो महामते ॥ ५२ ॥

गच्छायघ महाराज वचसा तव नोदितः ।

आगमिथायी समये समावर्तनंकर्मिण ॥ ५३ ॥

Varuna said: "O Intelligent One! You are very much attached to your son now and so by various reasonable plays of intellect, you are repeatedly deceiving me. However, I am going home today at your request but know certain that I will come again at the time of the Samāvartana ceremony.

Note: Samāvartana means the return home especially of a pupil from his tutor's house after finishing his course of study there.

इत्युक्त्वा प्रययी पाणी तमापृच्छ्य विश्राणे ।

राजा प्रभृदितः कार्य चकार च ययोतनम् ॥ 54 ॥

आगारं वकर्णे चूद्वा कुमारो3तिविधक्षणः ।

यजस्य समयं जाला तदा चिन्तानुरो3भवत् ॥ 55 ॥

O King! Thus saying, Varuna went away and the King became glad and began to perform duly his various duties. The prince was very intelligent; and as he used to see Varuna coming, now and then, at the time of the ceremonies, he became very anxious.

गोकस्य काराणं राजः पर्येष्छिदितस्ततः ।

जातवा3सत्यधामयुव्मनावगय मिति दधे ॥ 56 ॥

निश्रयं परमं कृत्वा समंय सचिवातमजः ।

प्रययो नगरातस्माशिरांत वनयमयसी ॥ 57 ॥

He then made enquiries outside hither and thither and came to know of his own being about to be killed and he desired to quit the house instantly. He then consulted with the minister's sons and came to a final conclusion and went out of the city to the forest.

गते पुरेत्र नृतः कामं दुःखितोर्भूद्धूर्णं तदा ।

प्रेयामास दृतान्ववितस्थान्येषणकामाया ॥ 58 ॥

एवं गते३व कालेउसी वक्षणतदपूर्णे गतः ।

राजानं गोकसंतपं कुर्य व्यमिति बुबन् ॥ 59 ॥

When the son had gone to the forest, the King became very much afflicted with sorrow and sent messengers in quest of him. When some time passed away, Varuna came to his house and spoke to the distressed King: "O King! Now perform your desired Sacrifice."

Book VII Chapter XVI

राजा प्रणय्य तं प्राह देवदेव करोमि किम् ।

न जाने क्वाथि पुत्रो मे गतलस्व धयाकुलः ॥ 6० ॥

सर्वत्र गिरितुर्मेषु मुनीनाग्यमेषु च ।

अन्वेषितो मे दूतैस्तु न प्रातो यादसाम्पते ॥ 6 1 ॥

The King bowed down to him and said: "O Deva! What shall I do now? My son has become afraid and has gone away. I do not know where he has gone. O Deva! My messengers have searched for him in difficult places in mountains, in the hermitages of the Munis, in fact, in all the places; but they have not been able to find him anywhere.

आज्ञापय महाराज किं करोमि गते सुते ।

न मे घोषोउस सर्वत्र भायद्योषस्तु सर्वथा ॥ 6 2 ॥

My son has left his home; order now what I can do. O Deva! You know everything; so judge I have got no fault in this matter. It is certainly luck and nothing else."

व्यास उवाच

इति भृपवचः श्रुत्वा प्रचेता: कृपितो भृशम् ।

शशाप च नृयं कौधाद्धितस्तु पुनः पुनः ॥ 6 3 ॥

नृपतेई त्वया यस्माद्वसा च प्रवंचितः ।

तस्माज्जतोदो याधिस्वां तुद्वतित्दाक्णः ॥ 6 4 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing these words of the King, Varuna became very much angry and when he saw that he was deceived so many times by the King, he then cursed, saying: "O King! As you have cheated me by your deceitful words, so you be attacked by dropsy and be severely pained by it,"

इति शणो महीपाल: कृपितेन प्रचेतसा ।

पीडितो5भूत्तदा राजा व्याधिनत दुःखदेन तु ॥ 65 ॥

एवं शण्वा नूप घाशी जगाम निजामास्यद् ।

राज प्राय मतुब्याधिं बभूवालीव दुःखतः ॥ 66 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवतमहापुराणे सतमतकम्भे

पडवशोप्रायः ॥ 175 ॥

Thus cursed by Varuna, the King was attacked with that disease and began to suffer much. Cursing thus, Varuna went back to his own place and the King was much afflicted with that terrible disease.

Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter in the Seventh

Book on the story of the King Hariścandra

in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam

of 18,000 verses by

Maharji Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XVI

CHAPTER XVI

On Sunahšepa Freed and Harisćandra Lured

भास उवाच

गतेउद वरणो राजा रोगेणातीव पीडितः ।

दु:खादू:खंचं परंपाय व्यथितोरंभूदपूर्णं तदा ॥ १ ॥

कुमारोउसी चने कृष्णा चितरं रोगपीडितम् ।

गयनाय मर्ति राजंशकार स्नेहयक्ति: ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When Varuna went away, the King was very much laid down with that dropsy and daily his pains began to increase and he began to suffer extreme pains. O King! The prince, on the other hand, heard, in the forest, of the illness of his father and filled with affection, wanted to go to his father.

संवत्से ब्यतीते तु चितरं उद्युमादगत् ।

गन्तुकामं तु तं ज्ञाला शक्रस्ताजगमा ह 13 ॥

वासवस्तु ततं रूपं कृत्वा विगप्रथ सत्वर: ।

वारयामास युक्रवा वै कुमारं गन्तुयुक्तम् ॥ 4 ॥

A year had passed away and the prince desired very gladly to go to his father and see him. Knowing this, Indra came there. He came instantly in the form of a Brāhmin and with favourable arguments desisted the prince, who was about to go to his father.

इत्र उवाच

राजपुर न जानासि राजनीति सुवुर्णंभाम् ।

अतः कोरोष मूढस्वं गमानय मर्ति वृथा ॥ ५ ॥

Indra said: “O Prince! It seems you are silly; you know nothing of the difficult state policies. Therefore it is that you are ready to go, out of ignorance, to your father.

पिता तव महाभाग ब्राह्मणैर्वद्वारयैः ।

कारयिष्यति होमं ते ज्वलितेउथ विषायासी ॥ 6 ॥

आत्मा हिं वल्पभस्तत सर्वैधां प्राणिनां खलु ।

तदर्थे वल्पभाः सन्ति पुत्रदारधनादयः ॥ 7 ॥

O Fortunate One! If you go there, your father will get his sacrifice, where a human victim is to be offered, performed by the Vedic Brāhmaṇas and your flesh will be offered are oblations to the blazing Fire. O Child! The souls of all the beings are very dear; it is for that reason, for the sake of soul, that sons, wife, wealth and jewels are all dear.

आत्मनो देहशक्षां हृता त्वां वल्पभु सुतम् ।

इर्वनं कारयिल्वास्तरी रोगभुक्तो भविष्यति ॥ 8 ॥

तस्पाच्चा न नात्चयं राजपुत्र चितुग्रुं ।

मृते चितरी गन्तव्यं राज्यांं सर्वथा पुनः ॥ 9 ॥

Therefore, though you are his dear son, like his soul, yet he will certainly have you killed and get Homas offered, to free himself from the disease. O Prince! You ought not to go home now; rather when your father dies, you would certainly go there and inherit your Kingdom."

एवं निर्वेधितस्तत वासवेने नृपातकाः ।

वनमध्ये स्थितः कामं पुनः संवस्तरं नृपः ॥ 10 ॥

अवनन्ते दुःखितं शुवा हरिश्छ्रं तदातमतः ।

गनानय मति चक्रे मरणे कृतनिश्रधः ॥ 11 ॥

O King! Thus hindered by Vāsava, the prince remained in that forest for one year more. But when the prince again heard of the severe illness of his father, he wanted again to go to his father, resolved to court the death of his ownself.

तृपाष्ट्र द्विज्ञरेण तजगान्य च रोहितम् ।

निवारयामास सुतं युक्तिवाब्यैः पुनः पुनः ॥ 12 ॥

ह्रशिह्रज्ञोरिन्दुःखातों वसिषे स्वपुरोहितम् ।

प्रपच्छ रोगनागास तजोपांगे सुनिश्छितम् ॥ 13 ॥

Indra also came there in the form of a Brāhmaṇa and, with reasonable words, repeatedly advised him not to go there. Here, on the other hand, the King Hariścandra became very much distressed and, troubled by the disease and asked his family priest Vasīṣṭha Deva: “O Brāhmaṇa! What is the sure remedy for the cure of the disease?”

तमाह बढ़ाण: पुत्रो यजं कुक नृपोतम ।

क्रयक्रीति नृप्रेण शापमोक्षो भविष्यति ॥ 14 ॥

पुत्रा द्वारधिधा: प्रोक्ता बाढ़ाणैर्वेद्वारपातैः ।

उ्व्येषणानीय तस्मात्चं पुत्रं कुक नृपोतम ॥ 15 ॥

Vasistha, the Brahma\( ^{2} \)'s son, said: "O King! Purchase on son by giving his value; then perform the sacrifice with that purchased son and you will be free from the curse. O King! The Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas, say that sons are of ten kinds, of whom the son, purchased by paying its proper value, is one of them. So buy one son.

वकणोर्ष प्रपत्र: सन्मुखकारी भयिष्यति ।

लेभाल्कोर्ष प्रिक्तः पुत्र प्रदास्यति सवग्रहः ॥ 16 ॥

एवं प्रभोत्ति राजा वासिंहीन महात्मना ।

प्रधानं प्रेरयामास तद्वेलषणकायया ॥ 17 ॥

There will very probably be within your kingdom a Brāhimn who might sell, out of avarice, his son. In that case Varuna Deva will certainly be pleased and grant your happiness." Hearing these words of the high-souled Vasiṣṭha, the King became glad and ordered his minister to look after such a son.

अजीगानों द्विजः क्रश्छादिषये तस्य भूपते:।

तत्यसांश्र प्रयः पुत्रा निर्भिन्य विशेषतः ॥ 18 ॥

प्रधानेनाव्यसी पृष्टः पुत्रादं वुक्लैते द्विजः ।

गवां शर्त ददामिति देहि पुत्र मखाय बै ॥ 19 ॥

There lived in that King's dominion one Brāhim, named Ajjgarta, very poor; he had three sons. The minister spoke to him to purchase his son: "I will give you one hundred cows; give one son of your for the sacrifice."

शून:पुच्छः शुन:शेपः शुनोलंगूल इत्यमी ।

तेषामेकतमं देहिं ददामि तु गवां शनम् ॥ 20 ॥

अजीगतैस्तु तत्कृष्णा क्षुधया पीक्षितो कृष्णम् ।

पुत्रं च कतम् तेन्यो विजैतुं वै मनो दूधे ॥ 21 ॥

You have three sons named respectively Sunahpuccha, Sunahṣepa and Šunolāngūla. Give me out of them one son and I will give you one hundred cows as his value. Ajīgarta was very much distressed for want of food; so when he heard the proposal, he expressed his desire to sell his son.

Book VII Chapter XVI

कार्यादिकारिणं ज्येष्ठे मत्वा नासावदादासुमु।

कनिष्ठं नायद्वात्माता मर्मे इतिवादिति ॥ 22 ॥

मध्यमं च शुन:शेपं ददी गवां शतेन च ।

आनिनाय पशुं चके नमधेे नराधिप: ॥ 23 ॥

He thought that his eldest son was the rightful person to perform funeral obsequies and offer Pinda and he therefore did not spare him. The youngest son, too, be did not spare also, as he considered that his own.

रुदन्ते दुःखितं दीनं वेयमानं भृशातुम् ।

युःे बब्द्रं निरीक्षयानुं चुक्रुर्णमुन्यस्तदा ॥ 24 ॥

गामिवाय पशुं चक्रे नरमेधे नराधिप: ।

गामिना नादद शर्षं तमालंभयितुं शिष्यम् ॥ 25 ॥

At last, he sold his second son for the price of one hundred cows. The King then bought him and made him the victim for the sacrifice. When that boy was fastened to the sacrificial post, he began to tremble and very much distressed with sorrow began to cry. Seeing this, the Munis cried out in a very pitiful tone.

नाहं हितुस्तुं दीनं हटन्तं करणं भृशम् ।

हनियामी खलोपार्थीमिव्युताचाप्यसी ताद ।। २६ ॥

इत्युक्त्वा विरारामासी कर्मणो दुकादाय ।

राजा समासादः प्राह किंकं कल्यमिति डिजा: ॥ 27 ॥

When the King gave permission for the immolation of that boy, the slaughterer did not take weapons to slaughter him. He told that he would never be able to kill the boy, since he is crying in a very pitiful tone. When he thus withdrew himself from his work, the King then asked his councillors:

जातः किलकिलाणवीे जनानां कौभातां तताः ।

कन्दमाने शुन:गेपे सभावां भूशम्बदुतम् ॥ 28 ॥

“O Devas! What ought to be done now?” Sunahśepa then began to cry in a very pitiful voice; the people present there began to discuss and there arose a great noise on the affair.

अजीर्गतैलदोत्याय तमुवाच नृपोतमम् ।

राजकानं करीत्यामि तवाहुं सुश्वरो भव ॥ 29 ॥

वेतनं द्विषुणे देहि हनियमीय पशुं किल ।

कर्तेल्य मद्यकावं वै मया तेउद्ध धनार्थिना ॥ 30 ॥

दुःश्रिततस्य धनार्थस्य सदोउम्या प्रमुचते ।

Then Ajgarta stood up in the midst of the assembly and spoke: "O King! Be patient; I will fulfil your desire. I am desirous of wealth and if you give me double the amount, I will slay immediately the victim; and you can complete early your sacrifice. O King! He who is hankering after money, can always entertain feelings of enmity even towards his own son. There is no doubt in this."

व्यास उवाच

तच्छूला वचनं तत्थ हरिश्छन्नो मुदावित्वः ॥ 31 ॥

तमुवाच ददायष्ण गवांं शतमनुत्तमम् ।

तदाकष्यं पिता तत्प्य पुरं हन्तुं समुधतः ॥ 32 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! Hearing those words of Ajigarta, Hariścandra gladly spoke to him: “I will immediately give you another hundred excellent cows.” Hearing thus, the son’s father, avaricious of wealth, immediately resolved and became ready to slay his son.

लोपेभेनाकुलचित्तोउसी शामिषे कृतनिश्रधः ।

समुचाते च तं दृष्ट्वा जना: सर्वे समासदः ॥ 33 ॥

चृकुर्ण्युंगुंजुःखातं हाहैते जानुर्देवः ।

विशणारोयं महापापी कृक्रमर्भ डिजाङ्गकृति: ॥ 34 ॥

यत्सयं स्वसुतं हन्तुयुहतः कुलपासनः ।

All the councillors seeing the father ready to slay his son, were struck with sorrow and began to lament exclaiming “Alas! This wretch, a disgrace to his family, is now ready to kill his own son. Oh!

We never saw before such a cruel vicious person. This Brāhmīn must be a Demon in a Brāhmīn body!

विरुकापड़ाल किमितेने पापकर्म विकार्षिंतम् ॥ 35 ॥

हत्वा सुतं धर्म प्राय के सुखं ते भविष्यति ।

अतमा वै जायते पुरु अंगाई वेदभाषितम् ॥ 36 ॥

तकर्थ यापबुद्धे त्वयात्यानं हन्तुमिच्छसि ।

एवं कोलाहलं तत्र जाते कुशिकनन्दनः ॥ 37 ॥

समीर्धे नृपतेगेना तनुवाच द्वापर: ।

Fie on you! O Cāndāla! What a vicious work are you now going to do? What happiness do you

derive by slaying the son, the jewel of jewels, only to get some wealth? O Sinner! It is stated in the Vedas that the soul takes its birth from one's body; so how are you going to slay your soul! When the hue and cry arose in the assembly, Viśvāmitra, the son of Kauśika, went to the King and, out of pity, said:

विश्वामित्र उवाच

राजत्रमुं गुन्नःजीयं कदतं पृशुवर्ध:वित्तम् ॥ 3 8 ॥

क्रतुर्वे भविता पूर्णों रोगनाग्रष्ठ सर्वथा ।

O King! Śunaḥṣepa is very piteously crying; so let him be free; and then your sacrifice will be complete and you will be free of your disease.

दयासमं नास्ति पुण्यं पारं हिंसानं नहि ॥ 39 ॥

राशिणा रोचनार्थय नोहनेयं विचारय ।

There is no virtue like mercy and there is no vice like killing (Hinsā). What is written about killing animals in the sacrifice, is only meant for the persons inclined to sensual objects and to give them a stimulus in that direction.

आत्मवेहस्य रक्षार्थ परवेदिनक्तान् ॥ 40 ॥

न कतिथं महाराज सर्वेतः शुभमिच्छता ।

O King! He who wants his own welfare and who wants to preserve his own body ought not to cut another's body.

द्वयाया सर्वेक्षेतु सन्तुष्ये येन केन च ॥ 41 ॥

सर्विन्योपशताया च तन्यवतायु जगतयति: ।

He who pities equally all the beings, gets contended with a trivial gain and subdues all his senses; God is soon pleased with him.

आत्मावत्सर्वेष्टितु चिन्तनीयं नृपोतम ॥ 42 ॥

जीवितलयं प्रियं नूनं सर्वेषां सर्वेदा किल ।

O King! You should treat all the Jivas like yourself and thus always spend your life, so dear to all.

त्यमिष्ठस सुखं कर्तु देहं हृता तवभुं द्विजम् ॥ 43 ॥

कयं नेच्छेदसी देहं रवितृं स्वसुखास्वदम् ।

You desire to preserve your body by taking away the life of this boy; similarly why would he not try

to preserve his own body, the receptacle of happiness and pleasure.

पूर्वेजन्मकृतं बैरं नानेन सह ते नृप ॥ 44 ॥

येनागुं हेतुकामस्वं द्विजुपुं निरागसम् ।

O King! You have desired to kill this innocent Brāhmin boy; but he will never overlook this enmity of yours done in previous lives.

यो यं हृति विज्ञा वैं स्वकाम: सत्त पुनः ॥ 4 5 ॥

हंतारं हृति तं प्राय जानं जननान्तरे ।

If anybody kills another willingly, though he has got no enmity with him, then the one that is killed will certainly kill afterwards the slayer.

जनकोःस्य सुवृहात्म योगसौ ते समर्थितः ॥ 46 ॥

स्वामजी धानलोभेने पापाचार: सुवृदांति: ।

His father, out of greed for money, is deprived of intellect and so has sold away his son. The Brāhim is certainly very cruel and sinful. Therefore is no doubt in this.

एष्टया बहवः पुना यदोकोर्पि गया प्रजेत् ॥ 47 ॥

यजेत चाध्यमेने नील वा वृषमुत्पुजेत ।

देशमध्ये च यः क्रौक्षतापकर्म समाचरेत् ॥ 48 ॥

When one goes to Gayā or one performs an Asvamedha sacrifice or when one offers a blue bull (Nīla Vṛṣbha), one does so on the consideration that one would desire to have many sons.

पश्रांगतस्य पापस्य राजा पुंक्ते न संगयः ।

निषेधनीयो राजासो पार्य कर्तुं समुद्धतः ॥ 49 ॥

Moreover the King has to suffer for one-sixth of the sins committed by anyone in his Kingdom. Therefore is no doubt in this. Therefore the King ought certainly to prohibit any man when he wants to do a sinful act.

न तिषिद्धस्वया कस्मात्यूत्र विक्रेतमुधतः ।

सूर्ववैशें समुपराजिशंकृतनयः सृषः ॥ ५० ॥

Why then did you not prevent this man when he desired to sell his son? O King! You are the son of Trísanku; especially you are born in the Solar line of Kings.

आर्यस्वनार्यत्कर्म कर्नीमच्छस पाधिय।

मोचनान्युनिपुत्रस्य करणाद्वचनस्य मे ॥ 51 ॥

Book VII Chapter XVII

So how have you desired, being born an Āryā, to do an act becoming an An-Āryā (non-āryan). If you take my word and quickly free this Brāhmin boy, you will certainly derive virtue in your body.

तब दैहे सुखं राजन्मविष्यत्यविराणात् ।

वित्त ते शापयोगेन चापड़ातलमुपानतः ॥ 52 ॥

Your father was converted into a Cāndāla by a curse but I sent him in his very body to the Heavens.

मयास्ती तेन दैहेत स्वलोंकं प्रपितः किल।

तेनैव प्रतियोगेन कुरु मे वचनं वरू ॥ 53 ॥

मुंबैने बालकं दीनं क्रतं घृषगातुम् ।

And you are well acquainted with this fact. Therefore, O King! Keep my word out of your love for that. This boy is very pitifully crying; so free him.

याचितोरसि मया नूनं संशोरिस्याजस्यरे ॥ 54 ॥

प्रार्थनार्थगतं दोयं कथं ज्च नावबुळ्यसे ।

I pray this from you in this your Rājasūya sacrifice and if you do not keep my word, you will incur the sin of not keeping any word.

प्रार्थितं सर्वेत देयं मङडास्मिश्रपतन ॥ 55 ॥

अन्यथा पापमेव स्थानत राजत्र संशयः ।

Do you not realise this? O King! You will have to give anything that a man wants from you in this

sacrifice; but if you do otherwise, sin will attack you, no doubt."

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः शुत्वा कौशिकस्य नृपोतमः ॥ 56 ॥

प्रत्युवाच महाराजः कौशिकं मुनिसतमम् ।

जलोदरेण गायेव दुःस्तितोईं घृगं मुने ॥ 57 ॥

तस्मार मोच्यायेमन्यानुप्रायं कौशिक।

न तथा विश्रहः कार्यः कार्येस्मिन्म सर्वथा ॥ 58 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! Hearing these words of Kauśika, the King Hariścandra spoke thus: “O son of Gādhi! I am suffering very much from the dropsy; I will not be able therefore to free him. You can pray for some other thing. You ought not to throw obstacles in this my sacrifice.”

तच्छुत्वा वचनं राज्ञी विश्वामिज्ञोतिकोपनः ।

बधूव दुःखसंततो वीक्ष्य दीनि द्विजातयम् ॥ 59 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे सत्यनकन्दे

शोडगोडधायः ॥ १ ७ ॥

Viśvāmitra became very angry at this, and, seeing the Brāhmin boy very distressed, became sorrowful and mourned very much.

Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Seventh Book on the story of Śunahṣepa in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XVII

CHAPTER XVII

On Śunahṣepa Freed and Hariścandra Lured

व्यास उवाच

क्टंतं वालकं वीक्ष्य विश्वामित्रो द्यातुः ।

शुना:गेप्यावाचेदं नाला पार्थंसितुःखितुम् ॥ १ ॥

मन्त्र प्रचेतसः पुत्र मयोक्ते मनसा स्मान् ।

जपतस्तल कल्याणं भविष्यति ममात्रया ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When Viśvāmitra saw that the boy was crying very pitifully, he went to him with a merciful heart and said: "O Child! I am giving you the Varūṇa Mantra; recollect this within your mind and if you go on repeating that Mantra silently, you will certainly fare well."

विश्वामित्रवचः श्रुत्वा शुन:गेपः शुचाकुलः ।

मन्त्र जजाप नमसा कौशिकोकर्तं स्मूटाङ्गस् ॥ 3 ॥

जपतस्तत्र तस्याशु प्रचेताल्तु कृपाकाः ।

प्रतुर्बंष्प्र सहसा प्रसोजे नृपवालके ॥ 4 ॥

The sorrowful Śunāhsepa, hearing thus from Viśvāmitra, began to repeat silently in his mind the above Mantra, clearly pronouncing each letter. O King! No sooner Śunāhsepa repeated that Mantra than the kind-hearted Varṇa came suddenly before the boy, greatly pleased with him.

दूर्श्वा तमागतं सर्वे विम्वयं परयं गता: ।

तुषुवर्कंचा देवं मुदिता दर्शनेन ते ॥ 5 ॥

राज़तित्थिमतः पादौ प्रणनाम क्रानुतः ।

बद्धांजसिपुटो देखे तुहाव पुरतः स्थितम् ॥ 6 ॥

Everyone in the assembly became thoroughly surprised to see Varuna Deva come there and they all became glad and chanted hymns in honour of him. The diseased Harisācranda was also thoroughly surprised, fell to his feet, and with folded palms began to sing hymns to Varuna, standing before him.

हशिश्र उवाच

देवदेव कृपासिस्त्यो पाणात्मार्डे सुमंदधी: ।

कृतापरायः कृपणः पाचितः परमेछिता ॥ 7 ॥

मया ते पुरकामेन दुःखसंस्थेन हेतनम् ।

कृतं क्षमायं प्रभृणा कोउपराधः सुखमेंते: ॥ 8 ॥

Hariscandra said: “O Deva of the Devas! I am very vicious; my intellect is much defiled; I am a sinner before you; O Merciful One! Now shew your mercy and sanctify this humble self I was very much troubled on not having a son; so I had disregarded your words; now shew your mercy on me; what offence can cling to him whose intellect is already out of order?

अर्थों दोष न जानाति तस्यात्यूत्राधिंना मया ।

विश्रितस्तर्वे देवदेवे धीतेन नरकाद्धिणे ॥ 9 ॥

अपूत्रस्य गतिनोंस्ति स्यगों नेव च नैव च ।

भौतोड़े तेन वाक्येन तमभाते हेलनं कृम् ॥ 10 ॥

A beggar does not see his own faults; I am also in want of a son; so I could not see my defects. O Lord! Being afraid of the terrors of hell, I have deceived you. Those, who are sonless, cannot find rest anywhere. Especially he is barred from the Heavens. Being terrified by this dictate of Śāstra, I have shown disregard to your words.

नात्रस्य दूषणं चिन्तयं नृनं ज्ञानवता विषो ।

दू:क्षितोड़े रुकामात्नो वक्षितः स्वसुतेन हु ॥ ११ ॥

न जानेड़े महाराज युगो मे क्व नतः प्रभो ।

वड्थिवता वने भीतो मरणानां कृपानिधे ॥ १२ ॥

O Lord! You are wise and I am ignorant; especially I am extremely afflicted by this terrible disease; I am also deprived of my son; so you ought

not to take my notice of my faults. O Lord! I do not know where my son has gone; O merciful One! Perhaps he, being afraid of his life, has fled away to some forest.

प्रयती रजिरणं दंत्वा गृहीतो तिज्बालकाः ।

यज्ञोरयं क्रौतपुंजेण प्रायम्बस्त तुच्ये ॥ 13 ॥

दर्शर्न तव सम्याय गतं दुःखं मयाबुद्गम् ।

जलोदकृतं सर्व प्रसले त्वयि साम्यान् ॥ 14 ॥

For your satisfaction, I have now commenced your sacrifice with this purchased boy; I gave an equivalent value and I have purchased this boy. O Deva of the Devas! You sight only has taken away my infinite troubles; now if your be pleased, I can be free of my this disease dropsy and my troubles will all be over.

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः शुत्वा ग्रहो नेगातुरस्य च ।

दयावान्देवदेशेशः प्रत्युवाच नृपोत्तमम् ॥ १ ५ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of that diseased King, Varuna, the Deva of Hearing thus the words of that diseased King, Varuna, the Deva of the Devas, took pity on him and thus spoke.

वरण जवाच

मुख्र राजबुन्तःजीपं सुवक्तं मां भूशानुम् ।

यज्ञोरयं परिपूर्णेते रोगमुक्तो भवात्मना ॥ 16 ॥

Varuna said: “O King! Śunahśepha is uttering hymns of praise to me; he has become very distressed; so quit him. Your sacrifice, too, is now completed; now let you be free from your present disease.”

इत्पुक्ल्वा वक्रणस्तूर्णे राजानं विरक्जं तथा ।

चकार पयन्तां तत्र सद्य्यानां सूर्मस्थितम् ॥ 17 ॥

वियुक्तेकरीं दिजः पाणगहकर्णेन महात्मान।

जयगब्दस्ततस्तत्र संजातो मघप्रपढ़े ॥ 18 ॥

Thus saying, Varuna, freed the King of his disease in the presence of all his councillors; the King became of a beautiful body and got himself completely cured and shone bright before the

Book VII Chapter XVII

assembly. Shouts of victory arose from the midst of the sacrificial ground when the Brāhmin boy was freed of his bonds of rope, by the mercy of the high-souled Deva Varuna.

राजा प्रमृदित: सद्यो रोगामुक्ति सुदारुकणत् ।

यूपान्मुक्त: शुनःशेपो बभूवातीव संस्थितः ॥ १९ ॥

राजा तिबमं मदं पूर्णं चकार विनयान्वितः ।

शुनःशेपस्तदा सभ्यानित्युवाच कृतांजसि: ॥ 20 ॥

The King became very glad on his, being recovered immediately from his disease and Śunahśepha, too, became free from his anxiety and pacified when he got himself liberated from his being immolated on the sacrificial post. Then the King Hariścandra completed his sacrifice with great modesty. Afterwards Śunahśepa addressed the councillors with folded palms and said:

भो भो सभ्या: सुधर्मेजा बुवंतु धर्मिनिधस्य ।

वेटगश्बनुसरणे यथावंवादिनः किन १ 2 1 १

पुत्रोई यस्य सर्वज्ञ: पिता मे केजेउक्त: परम् ।

भवतां वचनातस्य शरणं प्रजाजाम्यहम् ॥ 22 ॥

इल्पुके वचने तत्र सभ्यः प्रोषुः परस्पतम् ।

“O Councillors! You know well the Dharma; O Speakers of truth! Kindly specify according to the dictates of the Vedas. O Omniscient ones! Whose son am I now? Who is my most respectful father? Please deliver your judgement and I will take his refuge. When Śunahśépsha spoke thus, the members of the assembly began to speak to each other

सभ्या ऊनुः

अजीपत्नस्य पुत्रोर्ध वक्ष्यान्यस्य भवेदोर्ध ॥ 23 ॥

अंगादंगात्समुद्गुपाः पातितसतेन भक्तितः ।

अन्यस्य कस्य पुत्रोर्ध सप्रथवेदिति निश्रयः ॥ 24 ॥

"The boy must be of Ajgarta; whose else can he be? This boy is born of the limbs of Ajigarta; and he has nursed him according to his might. So he must be his son; whose else can he be?"

तच्छ्वा वामदेवस्तु तानुवाच समाप्तः ।

विमीर्तितन तातेन उद्वलोभातुः किता ॥ 25 ॥

पुत्रोयं धनदातुहा ग्रात्सतत्र न संशयः ।

अथवा बकणार्येष पाणान्युत्तो3रत्यनेन वै ॥ 26 ॥

Vāma Deva then told the people of the assembly "The father of the boy sold his son for money; the King purchased him. So he can be said as the son of the King; or he may be called son of Varuna, in as much as he freed him from his rope bondage.

अत्रवाता भयत्राता तथा विद्याप्रद्धु चः ।

तथा वित्पद्रशैव पढ़ौते पितर: स्मृतः ॥ 27 ॥

For, he who nourishes another with food, who saves one from one's fear, who protects one by giving money, who bestows learning to anybody and he who gives birth to any of the above five classes of persons can be called his father.

त्वा केचितिपतुः प्राषुः केचिद्धान्स्वाधारे ।

वकरणास्थिति संवादे निर्णयं न चयषुत ते ॥ 28 ॥

इर्थं सन्देशमापत्रे वसिष्ठो वाक्यमवृक्षित् ।

सभ्यानिववदतरत्न सर्वनंः सर्वपूजितः ॥ 29 ॥

श्रणुध्यं घो महाभागा निर्णयं श्रुतिसमन्तम् ।

O King! Thus some one turned out to be in favour of Ajigarta, some other in favour of the King; but nobody came to any definite conclusion. When matters stood in this doubtful condition, the omniscient all-respected Vasistha Deva addressed the disputing members thus: "O high-souled Ones! Kindly hear what the Srutis say on this point.

निःस्क्रेने नव द्वि पिश्रिकीतोरयं सून: शिशु: ॥ ३० ॥

सव्यान्यस्तु गततस्य तदैव धनसंप्रहत् ।

ह्रश्छान्स्य संकानत: पुरुषिसी क्रांत एव च ॥ ३१ ॥

यूपे बच्दो यदा ग्राहा तत्वा तस्व न वै सुतः ।

When the father has cut off his filial attachment and has sold his son, his fatherly connection has ceased then. No doubt this boy was purchased by the King Harisācandra. But when the King fastened him to the sacrificial post, he cannot be called as the father.

वक्रणासु स्तुतोउनेने तेन तुईने मोक्ति: ॥ 32 ॥

तस्माजार्य महाभागा हृसी पुत्र: प्रवेतसः ।

यो यं सतीत महामनः: सोउपि तुहो द्वतात च ॥ 33 ॥

धर्न प्राणान्यरुजाज्यं तथा मोहं निजैधितस्तम् ।

Again when this boy singing hymns in honour of Varuna, he being glad freed him of his

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

bondage, so Varuṇa cannot be called his father. For whoever praises a god by the great Mantras, that Deva becomes pleased with him and gives him wealth, life, cattle-kingdom and even final emancipation.

कोशिकस्य सुतक्षायं गरिष्टे येन रक्षितः ॥ 3४ ॥

मनं त्रल्या महावीर्थे वरुणस्यातिसङ्गूरे ।

Rather Viśvāmitra saved the boy by giving him in his critical moment the powerful great Mantra of Varuna; hence the boy can be called as the son of Viśvāmitra and of none else.

व्यास उवाच

श्रुत्वा वाक्यं वसिष्ठस्य वाक्यमुचः सभासदः ॥ 35 ॥

विश्वामिसनु जग्राह तं के दक्षिणे तदा ।

एहि पुरू गृहं मे त्विमयुक्वता प्रेमप्रति: ॥ 36 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the words of Vasiṣṭha, all the members of the assembly gave their unanimous consent and Viśvāmitra with his heart filled with love, exclaimed “O Son! Come to my house.” And caught hold of his right hand.

शुन:शेपो जगामाशु तेनैव सह सत्वः ।

वरणस्तु प्रसज्ञात्मा जगाम च स्वमात्तवम् । 37 ॥

Šunahšepa, too, accompanied him and went away. Varuna also went to his own abode with a gladdened heart.

श्वलिज्ञु तथा सभ्यः स्वगुहाविर्युस्तदा ।

राजरपि रोगनिर्मुक्तो बयुवातिपुत्वावितः ॥ 38 ॥

प्रजासृ पालयामास सुप्रसने चेतसा ।

The councillors, too, departed. Freed from his disease, the King gladly began to govern his subjects.

रौहिताखसुत तछल्हा वृत्तानं बरणस्य ह ॥ 39 ॥

आजगाम गृहं प्रीतो दुर्गमाढनपर्वतात ।

At this time his son Rohita heard all about Varuga and became very glad and leaving the impassable forest passes and mountains, returned home.

दूता राजानमध्येय प्रोचुः पुत्रं समागतम् ॥ 40 ॥

मृदितोउसी जगामाग्यु समयुखः कोसलाधिः ।

The messengers informed the King of the arrival

of the prince; the King heard and his heart overflowed with love and he gladly came there with no delay.

दूर्वहा चितरमायानं प्रेभोद्रिकः सुसंधमः ॥ 4 1 ॥

दूषडवल्पित्तो भूमावक्षुपर्णिषुवः शृणा ।

राजापि ते समुत्थाय परिस्थ्य मुदावित्वः ॥ 4 2 ॥

समाधाय सृतं भूरिंप पप्रछ्छ कुगलं पुनः ।

Seeing the father coming, Rohitāśva became filled with love and overpowered with sorrow for long separation began to shed tears and fell prostrate at his feet. The King raised him up and embraced him gladly and smelling his head enquired of his welfare.

उसरीे ते समारोय मुदितो मेदितीपति: ॥ 43 ॥

उषीर्निजनते: श्रीर्यविपरिकमधारकोत्ति ।

राज्य शगशास तेनासी युप्रेणातिप्रिदेशण च ॥ 44 ॥

वृत्तांतं नर्योयस्य कथयामास विकस्तात् ।

When the King was thus asking his son, taking him on his lap, the hot tears of joy flowed from his eyes and fell on the head of the prince. The King and the prince then began to govern together his kingdom. The King described in detail all the events of the sacrifice where human victims are immolated.

राजसूयं क्रतुरं चकार नृपसत्तम: ॥ 4 5 ॥

वीसघु पूर्णयित्वाउं होतामकरीदिषुः ।

समाप्ते तव्य यजेशे वसिष्ठोस्ति पूजितः ॥ 4 6 ॥

He started next the Rājasūya sacrifice, the best of all sacrifices, and duly worshipping the Muni Vasīṣṭha, made him the Hotañ itn that sacrifice. When this grand sacrifice was finished, the King respected the Muni Vasīṣṭha with abundant wealth.

शक्रस्य सदनं रथं जगाम मुनिवरात् ।

विश्वाधिपत्रोति तत्रैव सहित्रेन च संरतः ॥ 47 ॥

मिलित्वा तो तिश्वती देवसदने मुनिसत्तम ।

विश्वाधिपत्रोति प्रपछ्छ वसिष्ठं प्रतिपूजितम् ॥ 48 ॥

वीक्ष्य विस्मयचित्तसं सभायां तु शबीयतेः ।

Once, on a time, the Muni Vasisṭha went gladly to the romantic Heaven of Indra; and Visvāmitra, too, went there also and both the Munis then met

Book VII Chapter XVII

with each other. The two Maharṣis took their seats in that Heaven. But Visvāmitra was astonished to see Vasiṣṭha greatly respected in Indra's hall of assembly and asked him, thus:

विश्वासि उवाच

केवेयं पूजा त्वय प्राता महती मुनिसत्तम ॥ 49 ॥

कृता केन महाभाग सत्यं बृहि ममांतिके ।

“O Muni! Where have you received this great honour and worship? O Highly Fortunate One! Who has worshipped you thus? Speak out truly.”

वसिष्ठ खचा

यजमानोस्ति मे राजा हरिश्रन: प्रतपावन् ॥ 50 ॥

राजमुः: कृततेने राजा प्रवरद्धिणः ।

Vasiṣṭha said: “O Muni! There is a King named Hariścandra; he is very powerful and my client; that King performed the great Rājasūya sacrifice with abundant Dakṣinās.

नेयुणो5ति नृपधान्यः सत्यवाघी पुतजतः ॥ 51 ॥

दाता च धर्मशीलश्व प्रजारझन्तत्यतः ।

तस्य यदे मया पूजा प्रापा कोशिकानन्तर ॥ 52 ॥

किं पृष्ठसि पुनः सत्यं ब्वीयम्बुकिंमं द्विज ।

There is no other King truthful like him; he is virtuous, charitable, and ever ready in governing his subjects. O Son of Kauśika! I have got my worship and honour in his sacrifice. O best of Dvijas! Are you telling me to speak truly?

ह्रिंश्रऊत्रमो राजा न भृती न भविष्यति ॥ ५३ ॥

सत्यादी तथा दाता शूरः परभाभिमंकः ।

Again I speak truly to you that there never was a King truthful, heroic charitable, and very religious like him nor there will be such a one.

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः: शुत्वा विश्वाधिमप्रेजोतकोपन: ।

वधूव कोधसंरक्तलोचनोउपवत्रीच्छ तम् ॥ 54 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing such words, the Viśvāmitra, of a very angry temper, spoke to him with his reddened eyes:

विश्वामित्र उवाच

एवं स्तीष नृपं विष्यावातिवर्नं कपटिप्रियम् ।

वडित्रो वकणो येन प्रतिश्रुल यरं पुनः ॥ 55 ॥

मम जन्मार्जितं पुण्यं तपसः पतितस्य च ।

त्वदीयं वाजतितपसो गलई कुक महापते ॥ 56 ॥

अर्हे चेतं नृयं सद्यो न करोम्यति संस्तुतम् ।

"O Vasistha! Hariścandra obtained a boon from Varuna when he made a certain promise; then he cheated Varuna with deceitful words. So he is a liar and cheat. Why are you praising then that King! O Intelligent One! Let us now stake all our virtues that we have earned since our birth by our asceticism and studies.

असत्यवादिनं काममदातारं महाखलम् ॥ 57 ॥

आजन्म सझितं सर्वे पुर्णं मम विनशयतु ।

अन्यथा त्वकृतं सर्वे पुर्णं लिचिति पणावहे ॥ 58 ॥

लनहं कृता ततस्तौ तु विवदन्ती मुनी तदा ।

स्वामं स्वर्गैलोकाच्छ नग्ती परमकोपने ॥ 59 ॥

डीत शीमद्वैभागवते महापुराणो सत्यमक्यान्पे

सतदशो3प्याः ॥ 17 ॥

You have praised exceedingly that King who is a great cheat; but if I cannot prove him to be a liar of the first water, I will lose all my virtues from my birth; but if it be otherwise, then all your virtues will be destroyed. Thus the two Munis quarrelled with each other and making this stake, departed from the Heavens and went to their respective Āśramas.

Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter in the Seventh Book on the freeing of Śunahśepa and the curing of Harisācanda in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgāvatam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER XVIII

On the Quarrel between Harisćandra and Visvānitra

व्यास उवाच

क्वालिन्न् ह्रैश्डनो मुगायांवं चयं गयो ।

अपश्युद्वतीं बालां सुन्दरीं चाठलोचनाम् ॥ १ ॥

तामपृष्छन्महात्राः कामिनीं कर्णापारः ।

पदाप्रविश्रालाश्रि किं रोदिषि वरानने ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Once on a time Haricācanda went out to the forest on an hunting excursion; and, while roaming to and fro, he saw that a very beautiful lady was crying. The King, seeing this, took pity on her and asked: "O Fear One! Why are you in this forest crying alone? O Large-eyed One! Has some one pained you?

कैनसि यीद्धितास्पर्व किं के तुःखं वदाणु मे ।

का च त्व विन्ने घोरे कसने भाती विलाउवा ॥ 3 ॥

न बापते च राज्ये मे ग्रासोर्पि परिगमान् ।

तं ह्मि तरसा कान्ते यस्लां सुदरी कापते ॥ 4 ॥

What is the cause of your sorrow? Express this quickly before me. Why have you come here in this dreadful lonely forest? What are the names of your husband and your father? O Beautiful One! In my kingdom, no demon can give any trouble to another's lady; I will immediately kill him who has given you this trouble.

ब्रहि दुःखं वरातोः स्वस्था भव कृशोदिर ।

विषये मम पापात्या न तिष्ठति सूपधमे ॥ ५ ॥

इति तस्य वचः शूला नारी तं चावकीशूनम् ।

प्रमुखाश्थीय वदान्द्वरिष्ठान्त्रं नृपोतमम् ॥ ६ ॥

O thin-bellied One! Be comfortable; do not weep; tell me why you are in this sorrowful state; know that no sinner can remain within my territory." Hearing the words of the King, the lady wiped out her tears by her hand and began to say:

नारुंवाच

राजन्मां बाधतेःत्यर्थ विश्वामिनो महापुनि: ।

तपः क्रोति यद्योरं मदर्धे कौशिको वने ॥ 7 ॥

तेनाहं दुःलिता राजनिवेषने तव सुझत ।

लिद्धि मां कामनां कान्ता पीडितां गुनिना भूषण् ॥ 8 ॥

"O King! I am Siddharūpini, of the nature of success; to get me, Viśvāmitra is practising terrible austerities. So these troubles have arisen from him, the son of Kuśika. O King! For this reason I am sorry in Your kingdom. O One of good vows! I am a gentle lovely Lady; still that Muni is giving me so much trouble."

राजोवाच

स्वस्था भव शिराणालाङ्ग न ते दुःखं घचिष्यति ।

तमहं वारियधामि मुनिं तापयपरायण् ॥ 9 ॥

इत्याश्रास स्विंशं राजा तस्मा मुनिनिशिधी ।

नत्वा प्रणाय शिरास तमुवाच मृतीपति: ॥ 10 ॥

The King said: “O Large-eyed One! No longer you will have to suffer any more pains. Be patient. I will go and make the Muni desist from his tapasyā.” Thus comforting the lady, the King went hurriedly to the Muni Viśvāmitra and, bowing down to him said with clasped palms: “O Maharṣi! Why are you ailing your body by this terrible severe austerity?

स्वामिक क्रियतेर्न्यर्ष तपसा देहरीबान् ।

क्रिर्भई ते समाप्तम्भे बृहि सत्यं महामते ॥ १ १ ॥

वार्षिक्त तव गाधये क्रौमि सक्लं क्रिक्त ।

उत्तिष्ठिति तस्या तपसाउलमतः परम् ॥ १ १ २ ॥

O Highly intelligent One! For what great noble cause, are you practising this hard tapasyā; speak truly to me. O Son of Gādhi! I will fulfil your desires; there is no need of your practising this severe penance; please get out of it immediately.

विषये मम सर्वेन्र न कर्तव्य सुदारुणम् ।

लोकपीडाकरं घोरं तयः केनापि काहिंघित् ॥ 13 ॥

इर्थं निषिध्य तं राजा विश्वाधिमं गृहं यये।

मनसा कौभयाधाय गतोउसी कौशिको युनि: ॥ 14 ॥

Book VII Chapter XVIII

O Maharṣi! You know everything; so what shall I say anything further? See! If ought not anyone to practise this extremely dreadful tapasyā, causing troubles to the people within my territory." Thus prohibited by the King Hariścandra, the Muni became very angry at his heart and went towards his own hermitage.

स गत्वा चिन्तयामास नृपकृत्यमसाम्यन्तम् ।

वसिष्ठस्य च सम्वादं तपसः प्रतिधेघनम् ॥ 15 ॥

The King, too, went back to his palace. The Muni on his arrival at his hermitage, began to cogitate in his mind “Why has the King unjustly desisted me from my tapasyā and also discussions that took place between him and Vasistha.

कोभाविद्धेन मनसा प्रतीकारमथाकरोत् ।

विश्वित्य बहुधा चिते दानवे घोरियहमूम् ॥ 16 ॥

Vísvāmitra became very angry at his heart and ready to take the vengeance of this. He thought over on many points and created a terrible demon of a dreadful appearance in the form of a boar and sent it to the territory of the King Harścandra.

प्रेयायामास तेहंगं विधाय सूकताकृतीम् ।

सोस्तिकायो महाकाल: कुवैजादं सुदारुकणम् ॥ 17 ॥

That terrible boar, of huge body, entered into the kingdom, raising a dreadful sound. The guards became afraid at his terrible noise.

राजश्रीपवने प्रापत्बासवर्षक्रान्तवत ।

मालतीनां च खण्डानि करनकारां तवैव च ॥ 18 ॥

यृधिकानां च चंदानि कंपर्यंश पुरुषुरुः ।

दन्तेन विलिखन्यमिं समनुमलयते हुमान् ॥ 19 ॥

Entering into the forest, that boar began to whirl round and round and destroy the Málati forest, at another place the Kadamba forest, and at others the Yūthikā forest.

चम्याक्रतैकरीषणद्रामिलकानां च पादपान् ।

करवीरानुर्गीरांश निवर्जान शुभामूदून् ॥ 20 ॥

मुचुकुन्द्रानशोकांश बकुलांसितलकांसला ।

उन्यूल कवतं तत्र चकत मुको वने ॥ 21 ॥

At other places he began to dig up the earth by his tusks and root out the Campaka, Ketakī, Mallikā

and various other trees. At other places again, he rooted out nice gentle Uśira, Karavīra, Mucukunda, Aśoka, Vakula, Tilaka and other trees and so massacred the nice gardens and forests. The forest guards, then, taking their weapons, rushed forward on that boar.

वाटिकारश्काः: सर्वे दुडुषः गश्जपाणयः ।

हाहेति चुकुशुस्तत्र माताकावा भुशतुगतः ॥ 2 2 ॥

Those that were making garlands and the florists became very distressed and uttered uproars of consternation.

बाणैः संताङ्कामानोप्रिय यदा जस्तो न वै भृगः ।

सृकान्यापीट्यामास कोलः कालसम्बृति: ॥ 2 3 ॥

ते तदास्तिपश्याकान्ता राजानं शरणं ययुः ।

तमूचुस्ताई जाहीति वेप्याना भयंकुलाः ॥ 2 4 ॥

That boar, as if an incarnation of Death, though routed out with flights of arrows, could not be terrified; rather when he began to harass the guards very much, they became very much afraid and being very distressed took the refuge of the King and, trembling, said: "O King! Protect us. Protect us." And they cried piteously.

तानगातान्सामलोक्य भयाततो-भूयपतितस्तदा ।

पप्रष्ठ किं भयं कस्मागां चुवंतु समगाताः ॥ 25 ॥

नाहं विभोयि देवध्यो राक्षसेप्यघ्र स्ककाः ।

कस्माद्वयं समुपतं तद्ववृंत् ममाप्राताः ॥ 26 ॥

Seeing the guards terrified and distressed, the King asked them: "Whom do you fear so much and why you are so distressed? Speak truly before me. O Guards! I do not fear the Deva nor the Demons; so tell me who has created this panic amongst you.

हमि चैकेन झाणेन तं शग्रु दुर्भंग किल ।

यो मेउराति: ससुर्यसे लोके पायपति: खलः ॥ 27 ॥

देवो वा दानवो वापि ते नित्रिन शरैः शितैः ।

क्व तिहिति कियद्धूप: कियद्धलसमपित्तः ॥ 28 ॥

I, no doubt, will send that vicious cheat unto the door of Death by this arrow, who has come against me in this world. What sort of enemy is that? What is his form? What is his power and

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

where is he residing now; speak this quickly to me. Be that enemy a Deva or a Dānava, I will slay him immediately by the multitude of arrows."

मालाकारा कचुः

न देवो न च दैत्योर्शित न यक्षो न च क्रिरः ।

क्रीश्रकोले माहाकायो राजर्सिद्धति कानने ॥ 29 ॥

पुष्पब्रान्तिमुद्धून्नोनामूलवाय्यसी ।

विद्यौणं तदूनं सर्वं सूकरेणातिरेहसा ॥ 30 ॥

विशिष्टीलाडितोउमापिर्वैषूद्वलैकुटैतवा ।

न विधपेति महाराज इनुमम्यानुपाद्वत् ॥ 31 ॥

The Mālākāras said: “The enemy is not a Deva, nor a Dānava, Yaksā nor a Kinnara; it is a boar of a huge body that has entered into the forest. Very powerful, he is uprooting by his teeth all the beautiful flower trees; in fact, he is ruining all the gardens and forests. O King! We shot arrows on him, struck him with cudgels and hurled stones at him so much; yet he did not get a bit afraid; rather he turned back to kill us.

व्यास उवाच

इत्याकपर्थे वचस्तेघा राजा कोयसमाकुलः ।

अश्वमार्छा तरसा जगामोपवर्त प्रति ॥ 32 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing these words, the King's fury knew no bounds and, immediately getting on horseback, he went towards the garden and forest.

सै-येन महता युक्तो गजाक्षरथसंयुतः ।

पदातिवृद्धसहितः प्रययौ वनमुतमम् ॥ 33 ॥

ततापष्यन्महाकाले घुयुर्नतं भयानकम् ।

वनं भर्न च संवीक्ष्य राजा कोधयुतोरभवत् ॥ 34 ॥

Then the horsemen, elephant drivers, charioteers and infantry, all followed him. When the King went there, he saw the terrible boar, of a huge body, whirling round and round and making the peculiar sound in the forest; and he witnessed also the destroyed condition of the forest and became very angry.

चार्ये बाणों समारोय विकृष्य च शरासनम् ।

तं इन्तुं सूकरं पायं तरसा समुपामकम् ॥ ३ ५ ॥

समातोक्य च राजानं चापहस्तं रक्षाकुलम् ।

सम्पुखो3प्यद्वत्नर्णं कुर्बेछ्छवं सुराकाणम् ॥ ३ ६ ॥

He then drew his bow and arrows and fell down on him to take away his life. Seeing the King coming angrily towards him with bow and arrows in his hands, the boar began to sound more terribly and ran forward before him. The King saw that boar coming towards him with his mouth wide opened and began to shower arrows upon him to kill him.

तमायानां समालोक्य यराहं विकृतानानम् ।

मुभोच विशिष्टां तमिन्तुकामो महीपति: ॥ 37 ॥

वंचयित्वास्य तद्वाणं सूक्रमस्तसा बलात् ।

निजांगाम महावोगातमूलंच्च नृयं तदा ॥ 38 ॥

The boar immediately made those arrows useless, and very violently and quickly jumped and passed away, over the King. When the boar passed away, the King angrily drew his bow with great care and shot sharpened arrows at him.

गच्छन्तं तं समालोक्य राजा कोयसमन्वितः ।

मुभोच विशिष्ठास्तैष्णांशापाकृष्य यन्तः ॥ 39 ॥

क्षणं दृष्टियर्थ गड़ः क्षणं चादर्शनं गतः ।

कुर्वे-बहुविधायांर सूकरः समुपारन्ति ॥ 40 ॥

One moment the boar came in the King's sight; and at another moment he vanished away; thus the boar began to flee, uttering all sorts of sounds. The King Harisācandra then became very angry and drawing his bow purposed him, mounting on a horse, swift like the wind.

हरिछ्छ्छोरितिकुपिति मुभ्यमानुजगम ह ।

अश्वेन वाप्यवेगेन विकृष्य च शरासनम् ॥ 41 ॥

इतस्ततस्ततः सैन्यमानच्च वनान्तम् ।

एकाकी नृपति: कोलं हजन्तं समुग्रदात् ॥ 42 ॥

The soldiers then entered the forest and scattered hither and thither; the King alone pursued the boar. The sun entered unto the meridian; and the King came to be alone in a lonely forest.

मध्याहूसमये राजा सम्पातो विजने वने ।

तृषितः कृषितोत्थर्थे बधूव श्रांताबानः ॥ 4 3 ॥

सुक्रोद्वर्शन प्राप्तो राजा चिन्तानुरोभवत् ।

मार्गश्छोउतिविधिने दारुको दीनवलिख्यतः ॥ 4 4 ॥

Book VII Chapter XVIII

His horse was fatigued, and he, too, was tired of hunger and thirst. The boar went away out of sight. The King also missed his way in that dense jungle and became greatly absorbed with intense cares and anxieties.

फंक काटीम ब्व गच्छामि न सह्योर्स्ति मे बने ।

अज्ञात्स्वयः कुत्र जजामीति व्यान्चिनत् ॥ 4 5 ॥

एवं चिन्तयतस्तत विधिने जनवर्जिते ।

राजा चिन्तानुरोउपयत्रदौं सुविमलोदकम् ॥ 4 6 ॥

He then began to think. “Where shall I now go? There is none to help me in this dense jungle. Especially I don’t know the right path.” While he was thus thinking, he saw, all on a sudden, a river with clear water in that lonely forest.

वीक्ष्य तां मुवितो राजा पायवित्या तुर्जकम् ।

अश्वान्तीयं विमर्तं पपी पानीयपुतमम् ॥ 47 ॥

जलं पीता नृपतत्र सुखायय मदीयितः ।

इवेप नारं गन्तुं विद्यभेणातिमोहितः ॥ 48 ॥

He became much delighted to see the flowing river and, alighting from horseback, he drank that water and made the horse also drink it.

विश्वामित्रतु सम्पातो बुद्धबाहुपाल्यपूछ ।

ननाम वीक्ष्य राजा तं प्रीतिपूर्वे द्विजोतमम् ॥ 49 ॥

He became much relieved by drinking; and though he was much bewildered not to find the right track, he wanted now to go to his own city.

तमुवाच गाधिरावाः प्रणमन्तं नृपोतमम् ।

स्वस्ति तेउन्मु महाराज किमर्षयिभूष चागतः ॥ 50 ॥

At this moment Viśāmitra came up there in an old Brāhmīn form; the King also looking at him bowed down to the Brāhmīn garbed Viśvāmitra, who then spoke to the King:

एकाकी विजने राजन्कि चिकीर्षितमत्र ते ।

ब्रहि सर्वे स्थिते घृत्वा कारणं नृपस्तम ॥ ५ १ ॥

"O King! Welfare be unto you! What for have you come here? O King! What object have you got in view in this lonely forest? Be calm and quiet and speak everything before me."

राजीवाच

सुक्रोडितमहाकायो बलवायुधकाननम् ।

समुपैल्य ममदांगु कोभतान्युषयाद्वान् ॥ 52 ॥

तं निवारयितुं दुर्ध के कृत्वा च कामुकम् ।

ससै-योर्ड स्वनगराशिणीत मुनिस्तम ॥ 53 ॥

The King said: “O Brāhmīn! One powerful boar of a huge body entered into my garden and spoilt altogether all the gentle flower trees there. To desist that boar, I pursued him with bow in hand and went out of the city.

गतोउसी दूब्यात्यापो मायावी स्वापि वेशवान् ।

पृष्ठतोउदमपि प्रात: सैन्य स्वापि गतं मम ॥ 54 ॥

क्षृषितस्तृषितश्रहं सैन्यश्रत्सिद्वातगतः ।

न जाने पुरामर्ग च तथा सैन्यातिं मुने ॥ 55 ॥

That powerful boar, very swift and, as it were a magician, has escaped my sight and gone away where I do not know. I pursued him and have come now to this place and I do not know where my soldiers have gone. O Muni! Now I am deprived of my men, I am hungry and thirsty.

पंचानं दूर्णय विभो जजामि नगरं प्रति ।

ममात्र भाययोनेन प्राप्तस्त्वं विजने वने ॥ 56 ॥

अयोध्यापिपतिईहां हरिंछन्नोउतिचित्रभूतः ।

राजगुर्यस्य कर्ता च वार्जित्धार्थप्र: सदा ॥ 57 ॥

I do not know which is the road to my city; nor do I know where my soldiers have gone. O Dear Lord! It is to my great fortune that you have come in this lonely forest. Now I want to return to my home; kindly shew me the way. I have completed my Rājasūya sacrifice. I always give everyone whatever he wants. This is known to everybody.

धनेच्छा यदि ते बह्वाय्नाशं द्विजस्तम ।

आगत-त्यव्ययोत्यावां दास्यामि विसुले धनम् ॥ 58 ॥

शी शीर्द्रैषीभागवते महापुराणे सामकक्योडगहरो3शयाः । 181

O Dvija! If you want money for your sacrifice, then come with me to Ayodhyā and I will give you abundance of wealth. I am Hariścandra, the famous King of Ayodhyā.

Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the origin of the quarrel between

Hariścandra and Viśvāmitra in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by

Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER XIX

On Hariścandra's Kingdom Taken

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः श्रुवा भूपतेः कौशिको मुनि: ।

प्रहस्य प्रत्युवाचेदं हरिश्छ्रं तदा नृप: ॥ १ ॥

राजसैतीधीमिदं पुण्यं पावनं पापनाशनम् ।

स्नानं कुक महाभाग चितृणां तपाँगं तथा ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of the King Hariścandra, the Maharṣi Kauśika smilingly said: "O King! This Tiratha is very sacred; if one bathes here, one is cleansed of one's sins and virtue springs up. So, highly fortunate One! Bathe in this and do peace-offerings (tarpaṇam) to your fathers.

कालः शुभातमोदसीते तीर्थे सन्ताल विशोधते ।

दानं दद्व्य सफलाउन पुण्यतीर्थे तिपावाने ॥ 3 ॥

प्राय तीर्थे महापुण्यमसन्ताल यस्तु गछविति ।

स भवेदात्माव भूय इति सत्यंभुवोज्विति ॥ 4 ॥

O King! This time is very auspicious and highly meritorious; so take a bath in this sacred Punya Tirtha and make charities as far as it lies in your power. Svāyambhava Manu says: “He, who arriving at a Tirtha capable to give high merits (Punya), does not bathe and make charities, deceives himself; so he is the slayer of his soul, no doubt.

तस्मातीर्वेते राजकुन कु पुचं स्वशक्ततः ।

दर्शरिय्यामि मार्गे ते नतासि नगर ततः ॥ 5 ॥

आगाधिष्यार्ह मार्देशुनार्थ ततवान्य ।

त्वया सहासुधकाकुतस्थ तव दानेन तोपितः ॥ 6 ॥

So, O King! Do meritorious acts as best as you can in this excellent tīrtha. Then I will shew you the way and you will go to Ayodhyā. O Kakuttsha! Today I will be pleased with your gifts and I will accompany you to shew you the way; this I have decided."

तच्छुत्वा वचनं राजा मुनेः कपटपिडतम् ।

वासांस्युतायं विधित्वलनातुमध्याययो नतीम् ॥ 7 ॥

Hearing the deceitful words of the Maharṣi, the

King took off his upper garments and tying the horse on to a tree, went towards the river to bathe according to due rites.

बन्यस्तिवहा हयं युवे सुनिवाक्येन मोहितः ।

अवर्यंभावियोगेन तड्गास्तु तद्धपवत् ॥ 8 ॥

राजा स्नानविधि कृत्वा सन्तयं पितृदेवता: ।

विश्वामिज्ञपावेचे स्वामिन्दानं द्वादि मे ॥ 9 ॥

O King! The accidental combination, that was to have been so (sure to come), so enchanted the King by the Muni's words, that he got himself entirely under the control of the Muni. He duly completed his bath and offered peace offerings to the Devas and the Pitts and then spoke to Visvāmitra. "O Lord! I am now making gifts to you.

यदिच्छसि महाभाग तते दास्यामि साम्यान् ।

गायो भूमिरिंग्चं च गजाध्यथावहान् ॥ १ ० ॥

O Fortunate One! Cows, lands, jewels, elephants, horses, chariots or horses, etc., anything that you like I will give you just now. There is nothing that I cannot give.

नादेवं मे किमयास्ति कुममेतद्रतं पुरा ।

गजसूये मखश्रेष्ठ मुनीनां सन्धिप्राविण ॥ 1 1 1 ॥

तस्पात्विह सम्यापतस्नीर्ध़स्म्यम्यरे मुने ।

यतेजसि वांषितं बृहि ददामि तव वांषितम् ॥ 1 2 ॥

When I performed previously the Rājasūya sacrifice, I took, then, before all the Munis, this vow. So, O Muni! You are also present at this principal Tirtha (place of pilgrimage); so express what you desire; I will give you your desired object."

विश्वासिज्ञ जवाच

मया पूर्वे श्रुता राजकन्नितिते विपुला भुचि ।

वसिद्धेन च सम्योक्ता दाता नासि महीतले ॥ 13 ॥

हरिश्छाने नृपश्रेष्ठः सूर्यवेगे महीपति: ।

तादृषी नृपतिर्द्राता न पृती न भविष्यति ॥ 14 ॥

पृथिव्यां परमोदारक्षिज्ञकृतनयो यथा ।

Book VII Chapter XIX

Vísvāmitra said: “O King! Your glory is spread far and wide in this world; especially I have already heard that there is no second man charitable like you. The Muni Vasisṭha has said: “The King of the solar dynasty, the Trīśanku’s son, Hariścandra is foremost and first amongst the kings in this world and there is no one so liberal-minded as he is; such a king there never was nor ever there will be.”

अतस्तां प्रार्थ्यायस्य विवाहो मेर्सित पार्थिव ॥ 15 ॥

पुरस्य च महाभागा तदर्थे दिहे मे धनम् ।

So, O King! Now the marriage time of my son has arrived; so I pray before you to-day, that you give me wealth to celebrate this marriage."

राजोवाच

विवाहं कुरु विज्ञे-त्र द्वादिं प्रार्थितं तव ॥ १६ ॥

यदिष्ठसि धनं कामं दत्ता तस्यामिन क्रिशुम् ।

The King said: “O Brāhmīn! Yes! Celebrate the marriage ceremony; I will give you your desired wealth. What more can be said than this that whatever wealth you would want, I will give that abundantly. There is no doubt in this.”

व्यास उचाच

इत्युक्तः कीशिकस्तेन वंचनात्तयो मुनि: ॥ 17 ॥

उद्वालय मायां गान्धर्वीं पार्थिवायायदर्शयेत् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing these words of the King, the Muni Kausika became ready to deceive him and originating the Gāndharvi Māyā, created a beautiful youth and one daughter aged ten years and showing them to the King, said “The marriage of these two is to be celebrated today.

कुमार: सुकुमारघ्छ कन्य च एशावर्षिकी ॥ १ ८ ॥

एतयोः कार्यमध्यच कर्तेल्य नृपसत्तम ।

O King! To marry the boys and the girls in the household is to earn more merits than the Rājasūya sacrifice.

राजसूयाधिकं पुणयं गृहस्थस्य विवाहितः ॥ १९ ॥

भविष्यति तत्वाठीव विगुपुरविवाहुतः ।

So today you will get that desired fruit if you make charities for the marriage of this Brāhmīn Youth."

तच्छूला वचनं राजा मायया तस्य मोहितः ॥ 20 ॥

तथेति च प्रतिज्ञाय नोवाचालयं वचस्तथा ।

The King was much enchanted by his Māyā; so no sooner he heard those words, he immediately promised: "That will be done" he did not raise any objection whatsoever.

तेन दर्शितमार्णोंसी नगर प्रति जीमवान् ॥ 21 ॥

विश्वामीजीपि राजानं वंचवितासे उसमं ययो ।

Vísvāmitra then showed the way and the King went to his city. Vísvāmitra, too, thus deceiving the King, went back to his Āśrama.

कृतोज्ञात्विधित्साविद्धामित्रोउवबीजुपम् ॥ 22 ॥

वेदीमध्ये नृपाढ्च त्वं देहि द्वानं यथेवित्यन्त ।

When the King was staying in Agnisālā (cook room), Vīsāvimitra Muni went to him and said: "O King! The marriage rites have been finished; so today give me what I desire in this sacrifice hall."

राजोवाच

किं तेउभीष्ट हिंज बृहि द्वादीय वास्छितं किल ॥ 23 ॥

अदेवमपि संसारे ययः कामोत्रिस्य संग्रतम् ।

व्यर्थ हिं जीवितं तस्य विषयं प्राप्य येन वै ॥ 24 ॥

नोपार्जितं यश: शुद्धं परलोकसुखप्रदम् ।

The King said: “O Brāhmīn! Speak out what you want; now I like to get fame. So if there be anything in the world, that is not to be given by me, if you want, I will give that even to you, no doubt. The mortal, possessing all wealth, if he do not earn good name and fame capable to give happiness to him in his next world, passes his life in vain.”

विश्वाधित्र ज्ञान

राज्यं देहि महाराज वराय सप्तिच्छदूम ॥ 25 ॥

गजाश्रधरलाळं बेदीमाधेउर्जिषायने ।

Víśvāmitra said: “O King! Give to this bridegroom, while within this sacred sacrificial alter, you entire kingdom with the royal umbrella and Cāmara for fanning the king and elephants, horses, chariots, infantry and all the gems and jewels.”

<table><tr><td>व्यास उवाच</td></tr><tr><td>भोहितो मायया तस्य श्रुत्वा वाक्यं मुनेत्रूप: ॥ 26 ॥दतमित्युक्तवाज्ञामयिवाचरं यदृच्छया ।गृहीतमिति तं प्राह विश्वामिजोर्नितिजुतः ॥ 27 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>Vyāsa said: O King! The King Harisćandra was deluded by his Māyā; so no sooner he heard the Muni&#x27;s words, he willingly said without the slightest consideration: “O Muni! I give as you pray, my this vast dominion to you.” The very cruel Viśvāmitra, then, said: “O King! I have accepted your offer; but O Intelligent One! Give now the requisite Daksīnā to complete your gift.</td></tr><tr><td>दक्षिणा देहि राजेन्द्र दान्तयोरां महामते ।</td></tr><tr><td>दक्षिणारहितं दानं निष्कलं मनुरखबीत् ॥ 28 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>Manu says: ‘Gift without Daksīnā is fruitless’ so to get the fruit of your gift give Daksīnā as duly fixed.”</td></tr><tr><td>तस्माहान्कालाय तंथ ययोक्तां देहि दक्षिणाण् ।</td></tr><tr><td>इत्युक्तस्तु तदा राजा तमुवाचातिविस्मतः ॥ 29 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>The King was exceedingly surprised to hear this and said: “O Lord! Kindly say what amount of wealth am I to give to you as Daksīnā.</td></tr><tr><td>बृहि कियवद्रतं तुभ्यं देथे स्वामिन्यासंधुत् ।</td></tr><tr><td>दक्षिणानिक्यं साधो वद्र तावत्वमाणकम् ॥ 30 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>O Saint! Say the value of your Daksīnā. O Ascetic! Don’t be impatient; I will give you the Daksīnā to that amount, no doubt.”</td></tr><tr><td>दानपूर्वै प्रदायामि स्वथो भव तपोधन ।</td></tr><tr><td>विश्वामिस्तु तद्धुत्वा तमाह मेदेनीपतिन् ॥ 31 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>Hearing this, Viśvāmitra told to the King: “At present give me two and a half loads of gold as Daksīnā.</td></tr><tr><td>देशभात्रयं सार्थ दक्षिणां देहि साम्यत्न ।</td></tr><tr><td>दास्यामीति प्रतिशूल तस्ये राज्ञातिविस्मतः ॥ 32 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>The King Hariścandra became greatly amazed and promised: “I will give you that;” he then anxiously mounted on his horseback and became ready to go quickly.</td></tr><tr><td>तदैव सैनिकासस्य वीक्ष्याणा: समाता: ।</td></tr><tr><td>इद्यात महीपतिं ज्ययं तुडुवुसे मुताविता: ॥ 33 ॥</td></tr></table>

At this time, his soldiers who lost their roads in quest of their king, came to him. They were very glad to see him; but, seeing him anxious, they began to praise him in great haste.

व्यास उवाच

बुत्वा तेनां वचो राजा नोकवा किंविदच्छूभाणुम् ।

चित्नयन्स्वकृतं कर्म ययावन्तःपुरे ततः ॥ 34 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing their words, the King did not say anything, good or bad; but thinking on his own doing, entered into the zenānā.

किं मया स्वीकृतं दानं सर्वेयं वत्समर्पितम् ।

वढ्धितोई जिंजेनात्र यने पाटच्छररित ए 135 ॥

Oh! What have I promised to give? I have made a gift of all that I have; I am cheated in this matter by the Muni like one robbed by a thief in a wilderness.

राज्यं सोपवक्ता तसे मया सर्व प्रतिश्रुतम् ।

भात्रयं सुवर्णस्य साधं च दक्षिणा पुनः ॥ ३६ ॥

My dominion including my dress I have promised to give to him. Moreover I will have to pay besides two and a half loads of gold.

कि कंपोरि मतिभंधीन न ज्ञातं कवटं मुनेः ।

प्रतितिरोई सहसा ब्राह्मणेन तपत्थिता ॥ 37 ॥

न जाने देहवाक्याँ वै हा देह किं पविष्यति ।

इति चिन्तापरो राजा गृहं प्रापोजीतिवहून: ॥ 38 ॥

My brain seems to have been completely destroyed. What to do now? I did not know the cunningness of the Muni. Therefore I am cheated by this deceitful Brāhmīn. It is next to impossible to understand the work of Daiva. Oh! My Fate! What will happen to me now?' Very much bewildered, the King entered in the interior of the palace.

पर्ति चिन्तापरं दृष्टवा राजी पप्रष्छ कारणम् ।

कि प्रभो विमान भाति का चिन्ता बूहिं समाप्तम् ॥ 39 ।

वन्तापुत्र: समायातो राजसूय: कृत: पुरा ।

कसमच्छोचित राजेज्ञ शोकस्य कारणं चद ॥ 40 ॥

The queen seeing her husband immersed in cares, enquired into the cause, thus: "O Lord! Why have you become so absent-minded? Kindly say what you are thinking now? O King! The son has

Book VII Chapter XIX

come back from the forest before you completed your Rajasüya sacrifice; why then are you in grief now? Kindly speak out the cause of your sorrow.

नारातिथिंघते क्रापि बतलावनुबैलो3पि वा ।

वरणोपरि सूमंतुः: कृतकृत्योपि भृतले ।। 4 1 ।।

चिन्ताव क्षीयते देहो नासि चिन्तासमा भृति: ।

त्यन्तां तंपगशर्तै स्वयो भव विश्वेषण ।। 4 2 ।।

तिशगय चिंशावावयं प्रीतिपूर्वं नाराधितः ।

प्रोवार किंचिचित्नाता: कारणं च रुषाणुभम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

Nowhere is your enemy, strong or weak; only Varuna was angry with you; now he is also very satisfied. So there is nothing further for you to do or to think. O King! Owing to cares, this body gets weaker and weaker, day by day. So nothing is like cares to lead one to death." When his dear wife said so, the King expressed to her somewhat the cause of his cares, good or bad.

भोजनं न चकारासी चिन्ताविष्टस्या नृप: ।

सुत्वारिज शयने रुष्रे तेषे निद्धि न भूमिपः ॥ 4 4 ॥

प्रातरस्थाय चिन्तातों वासलेन्यादिका: क्रिया: ।

But the King was much absorbed with his cares so that he could not eat nor sleep though his bedding was perfectly white and clear. Early in the next morning, when, getting up from his bed, he was doing anxiously his morning duties, Viśvāmitra came up there.

करीति नृपतित्साविद्धधार्मि: समाप्ततः ॥ 4 5 ॥

क्षता निविदितो राते भृति: सर्वस्वहारकः ।

आगत्योबाच राजानं प्रणामन्ते पुनः पुनः ॥ 46 ॥

When the sentinel informed the King of the arrival of Vísvāmitra, he gave order for him to enter. Vísvāmitra, the Looter of his all and everything, came before him and told the King who repeatedly bowed down to him:

विश्वासि उवाच

राजस्पत्न सर्वसाथे मे देहि वाचा प्रतिश्रुतम् ।

सुवर्णी सूश राजेत्र सत्यवाभ्यव सामप्रम्न।। ४ ७ ॥

“O King! Now leave your kingdom and give me the gold that you promised as Dakṣinā and prove that you are truthful.”

हरिश्रान्त्र जवाच

स्वामिजार्जं तद्वेदे मे मया दर्श किलाप्राना ।

त्यक्ताप्रान्य ग्रविष्यामि मा चित्ता कुर्य कीकीरक १। ४। ८। १।

Harīścandra said: “O Lord! I have given you this vast dominion of mine; so my Kingdom has now become yours; I am leaving this Kingdom and going to somewhere else.

सर्वस्वं मम ते ब्रह्म-गृहीतं विधिविष्ठो ।

सुवर्णदक्षिणं दातुभगतकां हुधाना हिज ॥ 49 ॥

दानं ददायि ते ततवधान्ये स्याद्धानागमः ।

O Kauśika! You need not think a bit for this. O Brāhmaṇa! You have taken my all according to the technical rule; so now I am unable to give you Dakṣinā.

पुनःश्रुकात्योगेन तदा दास्यामि दक्षिणाम् ॥ 50 ॥

इन्युक्तना नृपति: प्राङ्ग पुरं भाष्यां च माध्यांम् ।

राज्यमसी प्रदर्ते वे मया वेधां सुविस्तम् ॥ 51 ॥

If, in time, wealth comes to me, I will at once give you your Daksinā." Saying him thus, the King told his wife Śaivyā and his son Rohita "In this Agnihotra room I say that I have given my vast dominion to the Muni Viśvāmitra."

हस्यश्रधार्यसुवर्ते तनहिंमसपित्वम् ।

त्वक्वा श्रीण शरीराणि सर्वे चास्ये समर्पितम् ॥ 52 ॥

त्वक्वाप्राधोगं याभियाधिम कुत्रधिद्नगढ़े ।

गृह्ञ्तिवं दुनिः सम्यप्राज्यं सर्वेसगृद्धिमत् ॥ 53 ॥

Elephants, horses, chariots, gold and jewels all I have given to him along with my kingdom. What more than this that save us three, everything else I have given to him. "O Maharṣi! Take fully this prosperous dominion; we are going somewhere else to a forest or a mountain cave."

इत्याभाष्य सुतं भार्यां हरिश्रान्नः स्वमंदिता ।

विनिर्भतः सुधामतिमा मानसर्वत द्विज्ञातमम् ॥ 54 ॥

The exceedingly virtus Hairiscandra spoke thus to his wife and son, and, paying respects to the Muni, went out from his house.

ब्रजतं भूपतीं वीक्ष्य भारामुग्रावुभावपि ।

चिन्तातुरी सुतीरामयौ जामनु: श्रुतस्तदा ॥ 55 ॥

Seeing the King going thus away, his wife and son, afflicted with cares, followed him with their sad faces.

हाहाकारो महानासीत्रगारे वीक्ष्य तांतस्था ।

घुळ्गु: ग्राणिनः सर्वे साकेतपुरावासिनः ॥ 56 ॥

Seeing thus, all the inhabitants of Ayodhyā cried aloud, and great consternation and uproar arose in the city.

हा राजन्कि कृतं कर्म कुतः कलेशः: सभागतः ।

बिड्जोरिस महाराज विधिनासपिड्जनेन ॥ 5 57 ॥

O King! What is this act that you have done? How has this suffering come to you! O King! The great Fate, without any consideration, has certainly deceived you.

सर्वे बणीस्तादा दुः:ख्यामानुयुक्तं महीपतिम् ।

विलोक्य भार्यया साधु पुंशेण च महान्यान । ५ ८ ॥

The Brāhmanas, Kṣattriyas, Vaísyas and Śūdras, all the four Varṇas gave vent to their sorrows, when they saw the King going away with his wife and son.

निर्विदुर्बाहणं तं तु दुराचारं भृतीकसः ।

धूर्तीर्यमिति भार्योत दुःखाती बाहाणादयः ॥ ५९ ॥

निराल्य नगरातस्मादिष्यामित्रः क्षितीक्षान् ।

गच्छन्तं तमुवाचेदं समेत्य निरुक्तं वचः ॥ 6० ॥

The Brāhmins and the other inhabitants of the city, all were afflicted with sorrows and began to

abuse the vicious Brāhmaṇa saying that “He is a cheat, etc.”

दक्षिणायाः सुवर्णं मे दत्ता गच्छ नाराधिप ।

नाहं दास्यामि वा बृहि मया तर्चकं सुवर्णकम् ॥ 6 1 ॥

O King! Give the gold for Dakṣinā and then go; or say that you will not be able to give and I will then not take the Dakṣinā.

राज्यं गृहाण वा सर्वे लोपश्छीद्ध विवर्ते ।

दर्तं चेन्मन्यसे राजन्देहि यद्यतप्रतिश्रुतम् ॥ 62 ॥

Or if you entertain within yourself any greed, then take back all your Kingdom. O King! If you think that you have really made this gifts, then give what you have promised."

एवं बुद्रतं गाधेयं हरिश्रान्ने महीपाति: ।

प्राणियन्त सुर्जीन्तात्मा कृतांजलिसुपुटोत्रबीत् ॥ 63 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणो सतमस्कन्ने

एकोनिरिशोरध्यात: 11 19 11

The son of Gādhī was saying so, when the King Harisācandra very humbly bowed down to him with folded palms and said to him.

Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the taking away of Harisācandra's Kingdom

in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of

18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XX

On Harisćandra Paying His Dakṣinā

हरिश्रद्र जवा

अदत्ता ते हिरणयं वै न कार्तियामि भोजनम् ।

प्रतिज्ञा मे मुनिश्रेष्ठ शिवादं त्वज सूत्रत ॥ १ ॥

सूर्यवैशसमुद्धतः क्षत्रियोई महीधाति: ।

राजसूयस्य यज्ञस्य कर्ता बाधित्धतो नृपः ॥ २ ॥

Haricścandra said: “O Muni! I will not take my food until I pay you your Daksīnā in gold; know this to be my resolve; therefore O One of good vows! Discard all your anxieties for Daksīnā. I am the King of the Solar dynasty; especially since the time I have completed my Rājasyva Sacrifice, I give to every man whatever he desires.

कर्थं कांगीय नाकारं स्वामिन्दच्चा यदृष्ठया ।

अवश्यमेव दातव्यमूर्णं ते ब्रिजसभा ॥ ३ ॥

स्वयंथो भव प्रदाययामि सुवर्णे मनसेरितम् ।

कक्षित्कालं प्रतीक्षस्य यावतुाप्यायामध्यं धनम् ॥ ४ ॥

So, O Lord! How can it possible that I will not give what I have voluntarily promised myself? O Best of Dvijas! I will certainly pay off your debt. I must give you the gold as you desire; be calm and patient; but you will have to wait one month; and on getting the money I will pay it off to you."

विश्वामित्र जयार

कुतत्ते भविता राजन्यग्रापिततः परम् ।

गर्त राज्यं तथा कोशो बलं चैवाधर्मायनम् ॥ 5 ॥

Book VII Chapter XX

Viśvāmitra said: “O King! Kingdom, treasury and strength are the three sources of income; but you are now deprived of all these. Whence, now, do you expect to get gold? O King! Vain are your hopes to get money; what am I do now? You are now wealthless and how can I, out of greed, give you trouble?

ब्रह्म3र्षा ते महीपाल धनार्थ किं केलोमहम् ।

निर्वर्न त्वां च लोभेन पीडयामि कर्वं पूण १। ६ ।।

तस्माकवय भूपाल न दास्यामिति साम्यन्त् ।

त्वत्सा3र्गां महतीं कामां गच्छाम्यहमतः परम् ॥ 7 ॥

यथेधं जत्र तजेन्द्र भावीपुत्रसमयित्नः ।

सुवर्ण नासि किं तुभ्यं ददामीति वत्थानु ॥ 8 ॥

O King! Better say “I will not be able to give you Daksinā,” and I will then quit my strong expectation and go away as I like. And you, too, can think that you have no gold, so how can you give money and so you can go wherever you like with your wife and son.”

यास उवाच

गच्छन्वायमिदं श्रुत्वा बाहुपान्यच च भूपति: ।

प्रत्युवाच मुनिं बह्नार्थयैं कुरु ददायमहम् ॥ 9 ॥

यम देहो3लिति भार्थाया: पुत्रस्य च हानामयः ।

क्रीत्वा देहे तु ते नृनमुर्णं दाययामि ते द्वित्र ॥ १० ॥ १

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing these words of the Muni, at his time of departure, the King said: "O Brāhmaṇa! Be patient and I will certainly give you your Dakṣinā. O Dvija! My wife, son and I myself are all health; so selling these, I will give you the money; there is no doubt in this.

प्राहकं पश्य विघ्रें दातागत्यां पुरि प्रभो ।

दासभावं गमियामि सदारोड़ं सपुत्रकः ॥ १ १ ॥

गृहाण काँचनं पूर्ण साधं भारद्वयं मुने ।

मौल्येन दत्ता सर्वांत्र: सन्तुषो भव भूधर ॥ १ २ ॥

O Lord enquire whether there is anyone who can purchase us and I will agree to become the slave with my wife and son. O Muni! You can sell all of us and the price you get, you can take two and a half loads of gold out of that and be pleased.

इति बुवझगामाय सह पन्या सुतान्वितः ।

उपया कान्तया सार्थे यांकरः स्वयम् ॥ 13 ॥

या दृष्ट्वा च पुरीं त्यमां मनसो हादकारिणीम् ।

उवाच स कृतार्थोंत्रिम पुरीं पश्यन्सुवर्चसम् ॥ 14 ॥

Thus saying, the King went to Benares where Śaṅkara was staying with his dear consort Umā. The King saw the beautiful city, the sight of which makes one's heart dance with more joy and he said that he had become blessed.

ततो भागीर्याँ प्राय्य सन्ताल देवादितर्पणम् ।

देवार्थनं च निर्वर्त्यं कृतवाचन्वित्वजेकानम् ॥ 15 ॥

Then he went to the banks of the Bhāgirathi and bathed in the Ganges and offered peace-offerings (Tarjana) to the Devas and the Pitrṣ and completing the worship if his Iṣṭa Deva (his own Deity) looked around where he would go.

प्रविष्य वसुधापालो दिव्यां वाराणसी पुरीम् ।

नैषा मनुष्यभृक्तेति शूलपाणे: परिघ्रः ॥ 16 ॥

जगाग पद्धनां कु:वातीः सह पन्या समाकुलः ।

पूर्णी प्रविष्य स नृपो विश्वासमकौत्ता ॥ 17 ॥

The King entering into the beautiful city of Benares began to think that no human being is protecting this city but Śiva Himself is protecting it. So if he lives there, he would not be living in a city which has been given away by him to Viśvāmitra.

दूरुषोय मुनिश्रेशे ब्राह्मणं दक्षिणार्थिनम् ।

तं दूर्वा समनुप्राप्तं विनयावानतोभवत् ॥ 18 ॥

The King, then, distressed much with pain and troubled and being very much bewildered, began to journey on foot with his wife and son and entered into the city and placed his confidence.

प्राह्चे वैवांजलिं कृत्वा हरिष्ठज्ञो महामुनिम् ।

इमे प्राणा: सुतक्षाय प्रिया पत्नी मुने मम ॥ 19 ॥

येन ते कृत्यमस्वलागु गृहाणाछ द्वितोजनम् ।

यच्चान्यत्कार्यमसामभित्तन्यमारख्यातुमहाँति ॥ 20 ॥

At this moment he saw the Muni Viśvāmitra, wanting Dakṣinā and humbly bowed down and spoke with folded palms: "O Muni! My dear wife, my son and I myself are living here; you can take

any of us and have your work done; or say what other work we will have to do for you."

विश्वभित्र उवाच

पूर्णे: स मासो घरू ते दीवातां मम दक्षिणा ।

पूर्व तस्य तिमितं हि सम्यते स्वयचो यदि ॥ 21 ॥

Vísvāmitra said: “You promised that you would pay Dakṣinā at the end of one month; and today that one month is completed; if you remember, then give me the Dakṣinā.”

राजोवाच

ब्रह्मात्यापि सम्पूर्णां मासो ज्ञानतोष्वल ।

तिह्लेकदित्धार्थं चतत्प्रतीक्ष्व स्तवपत्र नावपरम् ॥ 22 ॥

The King said: “O Brāhmaṇa! You are wise and are endowed with the power of tapas (asceticism); as yet one month is not complete; still half a day is remaining; wait till then; and no longer.”

विश्वामित्र उवाच

इवमस्तु महाराज आगमिष्याम्यई पुनः ।

शपं तव प्रदायामयि न चेदघा प्रवच्छसि ॥ 23 ॥

Vísvāmitra said: “O King! Let it be. I will come again and if you do not give me then, I will curse you.”

इत्युक्तावश यव्ये विगे प्रजा चाधिंतयन्तव ।

कवयमये प्रव्छामीय दक्षिणा या प्रतिश्रुता ॥ 24 ॥

कृतः पुष्णित निप्राणि कुजार्थं याप्रमतं मा ।

प्रतिश्रः प्रदुष्टो मे तन याङ्गा कर्थ भवेत् ॥ 25 ॥

Thus saying Vísvāmitra went away. The King then thought within himself how he would pay him back what he had promised. There is no influential friend of mine in this Benares city who can help me with money; where then can I get the requisite money.

राजा वृत्तिचयं प्रोक्ते धर्मशास्त्रेय निश्छितम् ।

यदि प्राणानियुक्त्रामि हृधादया च दक्षिणम् ॥ 26 ॥

I am a Kṣattriya. Pratigraha (begging or accepting any gift) is forbidden to me and how can I beg or accept any gift! According to the code of Dharma, the offering of sacrifices (on one's own behalf), studying, and giving are the three duties ordained to a King.

ब्रह्मस्वहा कृमि: पापो भविष्याय्यभापம்: ।

अथवा प्रेततां यास्ये वर एलासयिक्रयः ॥ 27 ॥

And if I die not paying a Brāhmin's Daksīnā, I will be polluted with the sin of stealing a Brāhmin's property and I will then be born a worm or will became a Preta. So to sell myself (and pay off the debts) is better than this.

सूत उवाच

राजानं व्याकुलं दीनं चिन्तयानयधोगुखम् ।

प्रत्युवाच तदा पत्नी बाध्यगद्धया शिरा ॥ 28 ॥

त्वज चिन्तां महाराज स्वधर्ममैनुपालय ।

प्रेतबढ़र्नीयो हि नर: सत्यबहिष्ठकृतः ॥ 29 ॥

Sūta said: O Rṣis! When the King was thus thinking humbly with his face bent downwards, and in a distracted state of mind, his wife spoke to him with tears in her eyes and in a voice, choked with feelings: "O King! Discard all cares and keep your own Dharma, Truth.

नात: परतंर धर्मं वदन्त पुरुषस्य च ।

यारुणं पुरुषवधाया स्वस्यत्यानुपालनम् ॥ 30 ॥

He who is divorced from Truth is forsaken like a Preta. O Best of all men! To keep one's Truth is one's Dharma; there is no other Dharma superior to it; so the sages declare.

अंगिहोजमपीर्ति च दानाचा: सकताः क्रिका: ।

भवन्ति तस्य वैफल्यं वावयं व्यसानुतं भवेत् ॥ 31 ॥

सत्यमन्त्यमुपृदितं धर्मशास्तेषु धीयातम् ।

ताराणायानुं तद्यतन्तायाकृतानमान् ॥ 32 ॥

He whose words turn out false, his Agnihotra, study, and gifts and all actions become fruitless. Truth is very much praised in the Dharma Śāstra and this Truth raises up and saves the virtuous souls. Similarly falsehood, no doubt, drags a vicious man to hell.

शताश्रधीधानदार्य तारासूरं च पार्थिव: ।

कृत्वा राजा सकृत्यगदिसत्यवचनाच्छ्युतः ॥ 33 ॥

The King Yayāti performed the Horse sacrifice, and the Rājasūya sacrifice and went to Heavens but once he spoke falsely and so he was dislodged from the Heavens."

Book VII Chapter XX

<table><tr><td>राजोबाच</td></tr><tr><td>दंशबुद्धिकरशायं पुत्रसिद्धति बालकः ।</td></tr><tr><td>उच्जतां वक्तुकामासि यद्यावयं गजगामिनि ॥ 34 ॥</td></tr></table>

The King said: “O Thou, going like an elephant! I have my son who will multiply my line; speak out what Thou wishest to say.”

पत्नुवाच

<table><tr><td>राजन्माधुदस्तयं ते पुंपां पुत्रफलाः स्थित्यः।</td></tr><tr><td>तन्मां प्रदाय चित्ने देहै विज्ञाय दक्षिणम् ॥ 35 ॥</td></tr></table>

The Queen said: “O King! The wives are meant for sons (your having me has been fulfilled as there is your son). So sell me for the money value and give the Dakṣinā to the Brāhmin. Let you not deviate from the Truth.

व्यास उवाच

<table><tr><td>एतुद्धास्यपुरुष्य ययी मोहं महीपितः ।</td></tr><tr><td>प्रतिलप्य च संर्तां वै विलालपातिङ्ग:खितः ॥ 36 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>महदुर्द:खिमिं पंद्रे याच्यमेवे ब्वीथि मे ।</td></tr><tr><td>किं तब सित्तसंलापा मम पाप्यव खितृतः ॥ 37 ॥</td></tr></table>

Vyāsa said: Hearing this, the King fainted. Afterwards regaining consciousness, he wept with a grievous heart. "O gentle One! What you have uttered just now has caused me much pain; am I such a Sinner as to forget entirely all your conversations and your sweet smiles!

हा हा त्यका कव्य योगयं वकुनेतख्छुचिधितः ।

<table><tr><td>दुर्बान्यमेतदुचनं कवं वदसि भाविमी ॥ 38 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>इत्युक्ता नृपतिश्रेशो न धीरो द्राविक्रवे ।</td></tr><tr><td>निप्पात मतीषुहे मृच्छेधानिपरितुष्टः ॥ 39 ॥</td></tr></table>

Alas! O Sweet-smiling One! You ought not to speak such words. O Fair One! How have you been able to utter these harsh words not fit to be spoken! Speaking thus, the King became impatient at the idea of selling his wife and fainted and fell to the ground.

<table><tr><td>शयानं भुवि तं दृष्ट्या मृच्छ्यायपि महीपतिम्।</td></tr><tr><td>उवाचेदे सुकरणं राजपुत्री सुदुःखिता ॥ 4 O ॥</td></tr><tr><td>हा महाराज कस्वेदयमध्यानादुपगताम् ।</td></tr><tr><td>यस्त्वं निपतिती भूमौ रंकवच्छरणोचितः ॥ 4 1 ॥</td></tr></table>

Seeing him fainted and lying flat on the ground, the Queen became grievously hurt and spoke with great compassion. "O King! Whose evil have you done that you have fallen into this calamity? Alas! He who is accustomed to sleep in a room adorned with carpets is today like an humble man, sleeping on the ground!

येनैव कोडिणे शितं विग्राणामपवर्जितम् ।

स एव पूथिवीनाथो भूवि स्वर्धिति मे पति: ॥ 4 2 ॥

हा कई किं तवानेने कृतं देव महीक्षिता ।

यदिद्रोप्रेस्तुल्योउर नीत: पापामिमां दशाम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

The King who gave crores and crores of golden mohurs to the Brāhmins, that same King, my husband is lying now on the ground! Alas! What a painful thing! O Fate! What has this King done to you that You have thrown this Indra and Upendra like King in this dire calamity!"

इत्सुकता सापि सुश्रेणी भूढ्छिता निप्पणत ६ ।

भर्तुईःखामहाशेगणासहोनातिपीक्षिता ॥ 4 4 ॥

शिग्यूर्धेखा शुभाधिष्टः प्राह वाक्यं सुवृत्ति: ।

तात तात प्रदेहानं मातमें देहि भोजनम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

धूने बल्वंतजी जाता जिह्जागे मेर्तिगुधात् ॥ 4 6 ॥

इति शीमदैबीभागते महापुर्णणे सप्तमकन्धे हीक्षान्द्रोपाखाने

विशोराध्यय: 11 20 11

Thus saying, the beautiful queen (of good hips) very much grieved by the sight of her husband's pain fell down unconscious on the ground. Then the boy prince, seeing father and mother both senseless, lying on the ground, became very much troubled, and, becoming hungry, cried "O Father! O Father! I am very hungry; give me food to eat; O Mother! O Mother! My tongue is being parched; give me food to eat" and the boy began to weep repeatedly.

Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Seventh

Book on the earnestness of Harisācanda to pay

off the Dakṣinā in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevībhāgāvatam, of 18,000

verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER XXI

On the Sorrows of Harisćandra

सूत उवाच

एतस्मिन्नरते प्राणत विश्वामिजे महातपः ।

अन्तकेन समः क्रूष्टो धर्न सर्व याचितु हदा ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! At this moment, the Muni Viśvāmitra, endowed with his power of tapas, came up there, very energy as if the God of Death, to ask of his wealth.

तमातोलंच हरिश्रान: परपात भुवि मूर्दितः।

स वारीण तपाध्यूक्ष राजानामिदमवबीत् ॥ 2 ॥

उत्तिष्ठोत्ति राजेन्द्र स्वां दद्वेश्छदक्षिणाम् ।

ऋणं धारयतां दुःखमहान्यदिन वर्धेत ॥ 3 ॥

Seeing him Hariścandra fallen thus senseless on the ground, Viśvāmitra, then, began to sprinkle water on his body. O King! The man who is involved in a debt his troubles increase day by day. So get up and pay your promised Dakṣinā.

आणाययान: स तदा हिमगीतेत वारीणा ।

अवाय्य चेतनां राज विश्वामिवमेव्य च ॥ 4 ॥

पुनर्भौं सभायेदे हाय क्रोधं ययौ मुनि: ।

सभाशयस्य च राजानं वाक्यमात हिंजीतमः ॥ 5 ॥

The King, thus sprinkled with water, cold as snow, regained his consciousness; but, seeing Visvāmitra, he fainted again. At this, the Dvija Visvāmitra consolet him and angrily spoke to him thus:

विश्वासित्र उवाच

दीयतां दक्षिणा सा मे यदि दीयमेवक्षेसे ।

सत्येनाकं: प्रतपति सत्ये तिष्ठिति मेदिवि ॥ 6 ॥

सत्ये चोकाः परो धर्मे: स्वर्गः सत्ये प्रतिष्ठितः ।

“O King! If you want to maintain your steadiness, give, then my Dakṣinā. Look! It is Truth that makes the Sun shine; It is the Truth that has stationed this Earth in its position; what to speak more, even the Svarga is established on Truth; so the greatest Dharma lies in Truth.

अधोपेधसहं सु तस्यं च तुलया धृतम् ॥ 7 ॥

अश्धोपेधसह्याद्धि सत्यमेकं विशिष्यते ।

अथवा किं ममेतेन प्रोक्रेनान्तिप्र प्रयोजनम् ॥ 8 ॥

If the fruit of the thousand Asvamedhas be held in one pan and Truth be held on the other pan of the balance, then Truth outweighs the thousand horse sacrifices or what need I to speak all about this!

मदीयां दक्षिणां राजन दास्यति भवान्यदि ।

अस्ताचलगते हर्कि ग्रण्यामि त्यामतो धूमम् ॥ 9 ॥

इन्युक्ना स ययी विघ प्रा जाचीम्द्यातृः ।

दुःखीभूतोउवनी निःस्वो नृसंगं सुविनाउर्दितः ॥ 10 ॥

O King! If you fail to give my Dakṣinā before the Sunset, I will, no doubt, curse you. Saying this, Viśvāmitra went away. The King also became very terrified. The wealthless King was pained by the words of the Munī; but he was more troubled with the thought how he would pay him and keep to Truth.

सूत उवाच

एतस्मिन्नरो तत्र ब्राह्मणो वेदपारगः ।

ब्रह्मणैबहुभि: सार्थ निर्वयी स्वगृहाद्रिः ॥ 11 ॥

ततो राजी तु तं दूद्वा आयांतं तापसं चित्यत् ।

उवाच वाक्यं राजानं धर्मार्थसहितं तदा ॥ 12 ॥

त्रयाणामयि वर्णानं चिता बाहाणं उद्यन्ते ।

चितुरद्यं हि पुर्णे प्रतील्यं न संग्रयः ॥ 13 ॥

तस्मादयं प्रार्थनीयो धनार्थमिति मे मति: ।

Sūta said: O Rṣis! At this time, a Brāhmīn, skilled in the Vedas, with many other Brāhmīns, started out of his house, at that very place. The queen, then seeing the Brāhmīn ascetic close by, addressed the King in words reasonable and in accordance with the Dharma, O Lord! A Brāhmīn is considered the father of the other three Varnas (i. e., Kṣattriyas, Vaiśyas, and Śūdras) and a son can certainly take the father's things; so it is my intention that you beg your wealth from this Brāhmīn.

Book VII Chapter XXI

राजोवाच

नाहं प्रतिग्रहं कांक्षे क्षत्रियोर्हं सुमध्यमे ॥ 14 ॥

याचनं खलु विघाणां क्षत्रियाणां न विहते ।

गृहर्ि विघो घनानां पूजनीयोर्स्त सर्वदा ॥ 15 ॥

तस्मादुग्नरै याव्यः स्यात्स्विधायां विशेषत: ।

The King said: “O One of thin waist! To beg suits the Brāhmanas; it is prohibited to the Kṣattriyas; I being a Kṣattriya do not wish to take anything as gift.” The Brāhmins are the Gurus of all the Varnas. So they are always to be respected. It is not proper to beg from a Brāhmin; especially the Kṣattriyas never ask anything from the Brāhmins; it is totally prohibited.

यजनाध्ययनं दानं क्षत्रियस्य विधीयते ॥ 16 ॥

शरणागतानामययं प्रजानां प्रतिपालनम् ।

न चायेवं तु चकच्छं देहिती कृपणं चचः ॥ 17 ॥

ददामीचेय मे देवि हदये निहित चतः ।

अर्जित कृत्रचिद्धन्वं ब्राह्माणया ददायमम् ॥ 18 ॥

Offering oblations, study, gift and the governing of subjects and protecting those that take refuge is the Dharma of the Kṣattiryas but they would never, never, ask any other man “Give, give,” and utter these words indicative of humility O Devi! The words “I am giving you” are impressed within my heart; so I will earn money from some other source and give that to the Muni.

पल्युवाच

काल: समविषयक: परिघवसमामानाद: काल: ।

काल: करोति पुरुषं दातारं याचितारं च ॥ 19 ॥

विशेषा विद्या राजा कुब्दोनालिवसीमा ।

राज्याविरस्तः सीख्याच पश्य कालस्य वेधिए् ॥ 20 ॥

The Queen said: “O King! Time keeps some men in one and the same state; again it throws others into troubles; Time it is that give respect to one and again it is Time that gives disrespect to others, Time it is that makes one a donor and it is the same Time that makes another a beggar. See even the Rsi Viśvāmitra, learned and endowed with the strength of Tapasa, becoming angry has deprived you of your kingdom and happiness and

has thus done quite an irreligious act in the shape of tormenting others. You can now judge in this the wonderful workings of Time."

राजोवार

असिना तीक्ष्याधोगे वरं निहा हित्य काता ।

न तु मानं परित्यज्य देहि देवीनि पार्थितम् ॥ 21 ॥

क्षयिगोर्भ महाभागे न याचे किंचिद्यद्वहम् ।

द्वात्मि वारुं तिन्चं हिं पुजवीयाँतिजं धनम् ॥ 22 ॥

The King said: “I would rather cut off my tongue into two pieces by a sharp sword than I would quit my Kṣattrīya pride; and I would never be able to utter the words ‘Give, give,’ O Forunate One! I am a Kṣattrīya; so I never ask anything of anyone. I always say that, by the strength of my arms, I will earn money and pay off my debt.”

पत्युवाच

यदि ते हि महाराज याचितुं न क्षमं मनः ।

अहं तु न्यायाती दत्ता देदेरिपि सवासबेः ॥ 23 ॥

अहं शास्या च पल्या च रथ्या चैव महावृते ।

मन्मौल्यं संगृहीत्वाय गुर्वंधे: संगृदीयात्म ॥ 24 ॥

The Queen said: “O King! Indra and the other Devas have given me over duly to your hands. So I am your religious (legal) wife; especially I have got education and I ought to be protected. Therefore O Luminous One! If you do not like to beg then you can sell me and pay off your Dakṣinā.”

एतद्वावस्यमुपश्यत हरिश्रउते महीपति: ।

कई कदमिती प्रोष्य विललापावितु: बित्त : II 25 ||

भार्यां च भयः प्राहेदं क्रिस्तां वचनं मम ।

विश्रणापानिदन्यत्वासीचलमुपयास्यसि Ⅱ 26 ||

The King Harisācandra became grieved very much to hear these words and lamented, saying "O What a painful thing is this! What a painful thing is this!" His wife again spoke: "O King! Will we, afterwards, be burnt by the fire of curse from a Brāhmin and thus lowered very much? So keep my word now."

न युत्रतैलोनं च महद्धेतोनं राजस्थेतोनं च भोगहेतोः ।

दद्वस युवंधितो मया तं स्वस्वतं तं स्वस्त कंकव ॥ 27 ॥

इति शीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे सनमककभे इरिक्रजीपालयाने

एकविशो3ध्याः ।। २१ ।। १।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

You are selling me, not because that you are infatuated with desire for gambling nor you are deprived of all knowledge by enjoyments in worldly things nor you are selling me owing to avert the danger of your kingdom. It is that you are selling me to pay off the debt to your Guru. So

nothing sinful a fault will be incurred by you. So sell me and keep to Truth and the fruits thereof." Here ends the Twenty-first Chapter of the Seventh Book on the description of the sorrows of Hariścandra in the Mahāpurānam, Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXII

On Selling Harisćandra's Wife

व्यास उवाच

स तया नोष्टामान्तु राजा पल्प्या पुनः पुनः ।

प्राह भई क्रोपोय्य चिवकयं ते सुनिष्टुणः ॥ १ ॥

नृशंसीरपि यत्कर्तु न शक्यं तत्करोम्यहम् ।

यदि ते भाजते वाणी वतृभीद्बसुनिव्युम् ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When the Queen Mādhavī requested repeatedly the King, He said: "O Good-Auspicious One! When you have not met with any scruple to utter clearly these harsh and cruel words, I will do that act now which the most ruthless persons do not dare to do.

एवमुक्लवा ततो राजा नाचा नागरमातुः ।

अवतार्य तदा रोगे तां भार्याँ नृपसत्तभः ॥ ३ ॥

वायामाद्रकण्डस्तु ततो वचनमब्रवीत् ।

भो भो नागरिका: सर्वे शुणुध्यं चर्चनं मा ॥ ४ ॥

Saying this, the King went with his wife, very distressed, to the city. Placing her on the public road, the King cried out in a voice choked with feelings and eyes full of tears: "O Citizens! Hear you all. Do any one of you require any maid-servant?

कस्यचिद्धादि कार्य स्याहास्या प्राणोष्टया मन ।

स ब्जीतु त्वायतुची यावत्सं धार्यायम्हमू ॥ 5 ॥

तेउबुब्यपिडता: कस्त्वे पर्नी विक्रेतुभागतः ।

This lady is dearer to me than my life. If any of you be able to offer price of her as I will declare, then let him give it out quickly." The Pandits then said: "Who are you? Why are you come here to sell your wife?"

राजोवाच

किं मां पृष्छथ करत्वं भो नृशंसोहममानुष: ॥ 6 ॥

गढ़सी वार्जिस कठिनस्ततः पापं करोभ्यमू।

The King said: “Are you asking me of my introduction? Hearthen: I am a heartless brute and not fit to be called a man; or I am a Rāksasa; nay, I am more than that; I am prepared to do this sinful act.”

व्यास उवाच

तं शब्दं सहसा शुचा कौशिको विग्रहपधूक् ॥ 7 ॥

युद्धलयं समाधाय श्रिंश्रत्यभाषत ।

समर्पयस्य मे दासीमहं केता धनपूदः ॥ 8 ॥

अस्ति मे वित्तमतुलं सुकुमारी च मे प्रिया ।

गृहकर्म ने शक्योति कतृम्यमात्रच्छ मे ॥ 9 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing this, Kauśika suddenly assumed the form of an old man and came out atā spoke to Hariścandra: “I am master of boundless wealth; so I am able to give you the money you want; I am ready to purchase the maidservant by giving an equivalent wealth. Better give me the maidservant.

अर्ह गृह्मीय दासीं तु काति दास्यामि ते धनम् ।

एवमुक्ते तु विश्रण हरिश्रान्य भुपते: ॥ 10 ॥

विद्यौर्ण तु मनो दुःखात्र चैन किंकितदायित् ।

My wife is exceedingly delicate; she is unable to do all the household work; so let me have the maid. But say quickly what value am I to pay?" When the Brāhmin spoke this, Hariścandra felt his heart, as it were, torn asunder; so he could not for the moment speak anything.

Book VII Chapter XXII

विष्य उवाच

कर्मण्ड्य वेयोरूपशीलानां तव योचितः ॥ १ १ ॥

अनुक्पादिं वित्त गृहाणाये मेउलालम ।

धर्मोगतेषु यदूद्धुं तिजयो मौल्ये नरस च ॥ १ २ ॥

द्विश्रिललक्षणोपेता दक्षा शीलनुणान्विता ।

कोटिमील्यं सुवर्णस्य तिजयः पुंसलतावृष्टिन् ॥ १ ३ ॥

The Brāhmaṇa said: “Take an equivalent amount of money according to the age, beauty, qualifications and capabilities of your wife and hand her over to me. Hear about the prices of the male and female servants as written in the Dharma a Śāstras: The price of a female servant clever, good, well-qualified and possessing thirty-two auspicious qualities is one Koti gold mohurs; and the male servant similarly qualified fetches one Arbuda gold mohurs.”

इत्याकर्ण वंचलस्य हरिङ्गज्ञे महीपति: ।

दुःखेन महात्रियहो न चैन किंचिद्वबवित् ॥ 14 ॥

ततः स विगो नृपते: पुरातो बल्कलोपरि ।

धर्न निताया केशेषु धुत्वा राजीमकर्षेत् ॥ 15 ॥

Hariscandra became very much pained to hear the Brāhmīn speaking thus; but he could not say anything. The Brāhmīn then placed in front of the King the money over a bark and caught hold of the hair of the Queen and was ready to drag Her.

राज्यवाच

मुंच मुंचार्य मां सही यावत्यश्यामर्थे सुतम् ।

दुर्लंभे दर्शन विध प्रपत्रस्य पविष्यति ॥ 16 ॥

पर्यहे पुरु मोर्मेव मारतं दायरतां गताम् ।

मां माम्याश्री राजपुत्र न सूष्यासई त्वायाउ्धून ॥ 17 ॥

ततः स बालः सहसा दूद्वा कहां तु माततः ।

समप्यधावद्येति. वदन्माशुवितोचनः ॥ 18 ॥

The Queen said: “O Ārya! Let me see once the lotus-face of my son; leave me once. O Brāhimin! Please see that it will be hard for me again to see this boy. O Son! Behold! Your mother is now a slave. So, Prince, do not touch me. I am not fit now to be touched by you. The boy, then, seeing the mother suddenly snatched away, cried out “O

Mother! O Mother!" and followed her with tears in his eyes.

हृते वक्षं समाकर्ध-काकपक्षधरः सखल्न ।

तमागतं द्विजः कोधादुलमध्याहनत्तदा ॥ १९ ॥

वदंतसाधपि सोःयेति नैव मुबुक्ति मात्तम् ।

That boy tumbled at every step still he caught hold of the mother's clothing by his hand and began to accompany her. The Brāhmīn, seeing this behaviour of the boy, became impatient with anger and began to beat him. Still the boy wept, saying, Mother! Mother! and never quitted the hold of his mother.

राज्यवाच

प्रसादं कुक मे नाव क्षिणीचेमं हि वाकाम्का ॥ 20 ॥

क्रीतापि नाहं घचिता विवैनं कार्यसाधिका ।

इल्थं मामल्यभायाया: प्रसादं कुक मे प्रभो ॥ 21 ॥

The Queen said: "O Lord! Have mercy on me and purchase this boy also. Though you are purchasing me, yet without this boy I will not be able to do your work. My fate is bad; therefore this calamity has happened. Shew this favour to me.

वाहाण उवाच

गृह्धातं चितमेत्ते दीयतां मम वाकालः ।

स्तीपुंसो धर्मशास्त्रजैः कृतमेव हिं वेतनम् ॥ 22 ॥

शर्ते सहसं लक्षं च कोटिपोल्थं तथापरेः ।

द्वार्जिलतक्षणोपेता दक्षा शीलगुणान्विता ॥ 23 ॥

कोटीपोल्थे स्थितः प्रोक्तं पुचस्य तथातर्भुम् ।

"The Brāhmaṃ said: Take this money and give me the boy too. For the Wise in the Dharma Śāstras fix such to be the prices of a female and a male. The other Pandits make differences in the prices, e.g., one hundred, one thousand, one lakh, one crore and so on, according to the different qualifications. But for the female, who is skilled in all actions modest, of good behaviour, and well qualified and, on whose body the thirty-two auspicious signs are seen, her price is one Koti gold mohurs and for a man qualified, once Arbuda gold mohurs.

Śrimaddevibhagavatam

सूत उवाच

तथैव तस्य तहितं पुरः खिलं पटे पुनः ॥ 24 ॥

प्रगृह्ठ बालकं मात्रा सहैकस्थमबन्यन्त् ।

Sūta said: O King! The Brāhmin then gave over the price of the boy as decided, in gold mohurs in front of the King over a bark and then tied both the mother and son.

प्रतस्थे स गृहं क्षिप्र तथा सह मुखास्थितः ॥ 2 5 ॥

प्रदक्षिणु तु सा कृत्वा जानुभयं प्रगत स्थित ।

बाष्ययर्गेकूल दीना तिवंदं बचनवम्बबीत् ॥ 26 ॥

यदि दर्तं यदि हृतं ब्राह्मणातर्पिता यदि ।

तेन पुर्णेय ने भर्ती हरिश्रूरेजस्तु वै पुनः ॥ 27 ॥

He, then, gladly and without any delay, carried them to his home. At the time of departure, the Queen circumambulated the King and, kneeling down, bowed down to him and, in that state of humility, began to speak: "If ever I have done any charities, if ever I have poured oblations on the Fire, if ever I have satisfied the Brāhmins, then, by that virtue, Hariścandra will again be my husband."

पदयोः पतितां द्वृदा प्राणेध्योर्पि गरीयसीम् ।

हाहेति च वद्वाजा बिललापाकुलैन्द्रिया ॥ 28 ॥

विद्युक्तेयं कंवं जाता सत्यशिलगुणान्विता ।

यूबच्छायाउपि यूबं तं न जातीत कदाचन ॥ 29 ॥

Seeing his wife, dearer then his life, fallen on his feet, the King became very distracted and lamented, crying “Alas! Alas! The shadow of a tree never leaves the tree; but you being verily modest and endowed with all qualifications, are now separated from me.”

एवं भाषी वहित्वा5थ सुसंवेब्धे परस्यम् ।

पूत्र च तनुयाचेदे मां लवे हित्वा क्र यास्यसि । 30 ॥

Speaking thus reasonably with his wife, the King said to his son: "O Child! Where will you go, leaving me here?

कां दिवां प्रति यास्यामि को मे दुःखं चिवायेत् ।

राज्यलायो ने मे दुःखं चलवासे न मे दुःखं ॥ 31 ॥

वत्पूत्रेण विल्योगो मे एवमाह स प्रपृति: ।

Where shall I go now? and who will stop my miseries? The King, then, spoke to the Brāhimin:

“O Brāhim! The pain that I experience in the separation from my son, I did not feel on the occasion of quitting my kingdom or on my being exiled in a forest.”

सद्धुरीभ्याय हि सदा लोके भाग्यां भविति हि ॥ 32 ॥

मया त्यक्ताप्रस कल्याणि दुःखेन विविधोबितता।

इद्वाकुकंशसम्भूतं सर्वेनाज्यसुवोचिनम् ॥ 33 ॥

मामीद्धरो पतिं प्राय्य दासीभावं तला हुसि ।

“O Auspicious One! The husband, good natured in this world, nourishes always his wife and keeps her always in comfort and happiness. But I am such a bad husband of yours, as I have left you and made you float in the sea of sorrows, Born in the Iksyāku family, I inherited the kingdom and its pleasures; but, Alas! Your getting such a husband has now been reduced to slavery!

इनुगो मज्जमानं मां सुमहचोकारमारे ॥ 34 ॥

को मापुढ़रते देखे पीर्णाण्ड्वयान्धितरंः ।

O Devi! I am merged in this ocean of sorrows and troubles. Who will rescue me, by narrating this ocean of sorrows and troubles. Who will rescue me, by narrating this story of the Purāṇas!"

सूत जयाच

प्ययतस्तस्य तार्जरें: कशापाते: सुदारुकर्णे: ॥ 35 ॥

घातविचा तु विघ्रोगे नेतुं समुपचक्रमे ।

Sūta said: O King! The Brāhmīn, then, began to take away the queen and the boy, whipping them, in the face of the King.

नीयमानी तु तो दूर्वा भार्थियुगे स पार्थिवः ॥ 36 ॥

बिलतपालितु:खातिं नि: श्वर्योषां पुतः पुनः।

Seeing his wife and son being dragged away in that state, the King's pain knew no bounds and be frequently sighed and sighed and bitterly wept aloud.

यां न वायुर्गे वास्डविद्यो न चउने न पृथकजना: ॥ 37 ॥

दूर्धवतः पुरा पर्नीं सेयं दासीत्यमानात ।

सुर्वंक्षीरप्रमुक्तोर्गे सुकुमाराकरांगृति: ॥ 38 ॥

संग्रापो विक्रयं बालो चिछ्याममसु सुर्भर्तिमम् ।

Alas! My dear wife, whom the Moon, the Sun, Wind or any other body could not see ere this, has

Book VII Chapter XXII

become now reduced to slavery today! Oh! How beautiful and gentle are the fingers of my child? He has been sold off to-day, being born in the Solar Dynasty? Alas! Fie on my foolish understanding!

हा प्रिये हा शिशो वल मामानार्थवर दुनंवः ॥ ३ ९ ॥

देवाधीदान्शा प्राणो न पृतोरंभि तथापि चिक् ।

Oh my Dear! Oh my child Rohitāśva! Your this wretched condition is due to my Anāyra irrespective bad maxims! Oh! Through the mockery of the Daiva, I have got this distress! Fie on Me!

सृत उवाच

एवं वलिपणो राजो3प्र विशोधेनतरपीयत ॥ 40 ॥

वृक्षगोहाविधिस्तुगैस्तावाद्य त्वरान्वतः ।

अयानंतर मुनिवेशुस्त्वाजगाम महातपाः ॥ 41 ॥

सशिष्यः कीशिकन्नोउसी निशुः कूरवर्गनः ।

Vyāsa said: The King was lamenting thus when the Brāhimn disappeared with them, in the very tall trees and walls of palatial buildings. At this time the cruel fiendish Muni, endowed with great power of asceticism came there quickly, accompanied by his disciples.

विश्रामित्र उवाच

या तयोक्ता पुरा राजनाराज्यस्य दक्षिणा ॥ 4 2 ॥

तां ददस्य महाबाहो यदि सत्यं पुरस्कृतम् ।

Vísvāmitra said: “O One of mighty arm! If you think it your duty to respect Truth, then pay me the Dakṣinā of Rājasūya sacrifice that you promised before.”

हरिश्रत्र उवाच

नमस्क्तोम राजर्ष गृहाणेमां स्वदक्षिणम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

राजसूयस्य यागस्य सा यमोक्ति पुरानंत्रय ।

Hariścandra said: “O Rājarsī! I bow down to Thee. O Sinless One! Now take the Dakṣinā of the Rājasūya Sacrifice that I promised to pay you before.”

विश्वामित्र उवाच

कृती लक्ष्मीद्रं उद्यं दक्षिणार्थ प्रदीयते ॥ 44 ॥

एतदाचक्ष्व तजेन्द्र यथा उद्यं त्वयाजतिन् ।

Viśvāmitra said: "O King! Whence have you

collected these gold Mohurs that you are now paying me as my Dakṣinā. How have you earned this? Say."

राजोवाच

किम्नेन भहागभ कथितेन तवानघ ॥ 4 5 ॥

गोकस्तु वधौने विश्र शुनेनानेन सुत्रत ।

Harīścandra said: "O Dvija! O Sinless One! What use is there in telling this to you. It will increase agony by hearing O One of good vows."

ऋषिकवाच

अशगतं नैव गृह्ठामि शनमेव प्रयच्छ मे ॥ 46 ॥

इध्यसायानं राजकव्यस्य यथातथम् ।

Víśvāmitra said: “I won’t accept money earned not rightly. Give what you have acquired by rightful means. Say truly how you have acquired it.”

राजोत्ता

मया देखी तु सा भार्यं विक्रीता कोटिसामितः ॥ 47 ॥

निषेक: पुत्रो रोहितोख्यो विक्रीतोउबुदंसख्याय ।

विश्रैकाद्य कोट्यास्तं सुवर्णस्य गृहाण मे ॥ 48 ॥

Harísćandra spoke: “O Brāhmīn! I have sold my wife the Devi Mādhavī for one kotī gold mohurs and my son for ten kotīs of gold mohurs. So take this eleven Kotī Gold Mohurs from me.”

सूत उवाच

तिद्धां स्वल्यमालक्ष्य दारविक्रियसभ्यम्बम् ।

शोकाधिपूर्ति राजानं कुपितः कौशिकोउर्वतीं ॥ 49 ॥

Sūta said: Seeing the gold collected out to the sale of wife and son very small, and seeing the King overpowered with pain and sorrow, Kauśika angrily spoke:

त्रहिषकार्य

राजसूयस्य नृत्रस्य नैषा भवति दक्षिणा ।

अन्यदुन्याद्य हिंग्धं मम्पूर्णं वेन सा भवेत् ॥ 50 ॥

क्षत्रवन्धो मेमांगं त्वं सरुषी यदि दक्षिणाम् ।

मन्यसे तर्हि तक्षिंषं पर्य त्वं मे परं बतम् ॥ 51 ॥

तपसोउस्य सुतालस्य ब्राह्मणस्यात्मस्य च ।

मघृषावास्य चोप्रय सुब्द्रस्याध्ययनस्य च ॥ 52 ॥

"O King! The Dakṣinā of the Rājasīya Sacrifice

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

cannot be so small; so collect quickly other money to complete it. O Vilest of Kṣaṭtrīyas! If you think this much to be proper for me, see first the enormous power of mine that I possess of my tapasyā, practised duly of my pure Brāḥmaṇaṇhood, of my violent power and of my chaste study and then you can pay my Dakṣinā.”

राजोबाच

अन्यदास्यामि भगव-काल: क्रश्रित्रीभ्यताम् ।

अभूर्वोयाति विक्रीता पत्नी पुरुषं बालकः ॥ ५३ ॥

Hariścandra said: "O Bhagavan! I have sold just now my wife; and so wait for some time and I will collect more gold and will pay that to you."

विश्रामिक उवाच

चतुर्भागः स्थितो योउं दिवस्यस्य नाराधिप ।

एष एव प्रतीक्ष्यो मे वक्त्वयं नोरर्त तव्या ॥ 54 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीर्षागवते महापुराणे सतमककन्धे

द्विश्चितोश्वाय: 11 22 11

Vísvāmitra said: "O King The fourth part of the day is now remaining; I will wait till then. After this you won't expect any other reply from me."

Here ends the Twenty-second Chapter of the Seventh Book on the selling of Harisācandra's wife in the

Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam,

of 18,000 verses, by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXIII

On Hariscandra as a Slave of the Cāndāla

व्यास उवाच

तेवेयुक्न्वा राजानं निर्थुर्ण निरुर्णं वचः ।

तदादाय धर्म पूर्ण कृपितः कौशिको ययो ॥ 1 ॥

विश्वामिति गते राजा ततः शोकमुपागतः ।

शासोच्छ्वासं मुहुः कृत्वा प्रोवाचोच्छौधामुः ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Speaking these harsh and cruel words to the King, the Muni took that money and went away. When Viśvāmitra went away, the King Hariścandra became very much perplexed with sorrows and sighed frequently. He then began to say with his bent downwards.

वितन्मैतेन यस्यातिर्याय प्रेतेन गच्छति ।

स बबौतु त्वरायुक्तो यामे तिहिति भासकरः ॥ 3 ॥

"Suffering from constant pain and troubles, I am now turned into a Preta; if any body finds me serviceable, he may purchase me with value in gold as proper; but he should do this quickly before the sun sets."

अथाजगाम त्वरितो धर्मश्रांडालक्षपघुक ।

युगीभी विकृतोरकः समशुतो दन्तुरोउष्णी ॥ 4 ॥

कृष्णो लब्योद्रः सिनधः कालाः पुर्वाधामः ।

हस्तजजरयिष्ठ शवामार्यैरलंकृतः ॥ 5 ॥

Dharma, then, assuming the form of a heartless Cāndāla came there quickly to test Hariścandra.

The body of that low mean person was of a black colour, his air looking ferocious, his belly elongated, body emitting stench odours, teeth very long, and his face, covered with beards. He had one bamboo in his hand; in his neck, the bones of the dead were hanging and his chest was very distorted.

चाण्डल उवाच

अहं गृह्वामि दास्तवे भूत्याशः सुगहान्माम ।

क्षिप्रामावङ्क्य मौल्यं किमेत्ते संप्रदीयते ॥ 6 ॥

The Cāndāla said: "I am in urgent need of a servant; I will keep you as my slave; say, then, quickly what is, your price?

व्यास उवाच

तं ततद्रभायालक्ष्य क्रूरुष्टि सुनिभुणम् ।

वदन्तमित्रु:शीलं कल्वमिव्याद पार्थिवः ॥ 7 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When the cruel, extremely ferocious and heartless Cāndāla said thus, the King Harisācandra was surprised to see his appearance and said: "Who are you?"

वाण्डाल उवाच

चाण्डालोड़हिंह ख्यातः प्रवेरिति नृपोतम ।

शासनं सर्वदा तिह मृतदैलापहारकः ॥ ८ ॥

Book VII Chapter XXIII

The Cāṇḍāla said: “O King! I am the famous Cāṇḍāla, Pravīra; you will have to remain always subject to me and to collect the clothes of the dead persons.”

एवमुक्तिदा राजो वचनं चेदमब्रवीत् ।

ब्राहण: क्षत्रियो वांरि गृह्ञान्तिति मतिमां ॥ 9 ॥

उनमाधोनो। धर्म मध्यमय च मध्यमः ।

अयमयाधमश्रेव इति प्राहूर्भनीषिणः ॥ 10 ॥

Hearing his word, the King said: "I want to be purchased by a Brāhmin or a Kṣattriya. See! The sages say, that the Dharma of good people is excellent; the Dharma of the persons intermediate is middling; and the Dharma of the mean is depressing. You belong to low and mean class. So my Dharma cannot be observed if I remain in your house."

चाण्डल उवाच

एवमेव त्वया धर्मः कथितो नृपसत्तम ।

अविवर्धा त्वया राजस्थानोकर्त ममाप्रातः ॥ १ १ ॥

The Cāndāla said: “O King! This is the Dharma of yours now mentioned by you; then why did you mention that anybody can purchase you); without any previous consideration, you spoke before me.

विद्यारयित्वा वो बृते सौधीर्ध तपणे नतः ।

सामान्ययेन तत्रोफमविराचर्य त्वयानउनच ।। २ ॥

यदि सत्य प्रमाणं ते गृहीते3सि न संशयः ।

He who speaks with preconsideration stains his desired object; but, O Sinless One! You did not consider and you spoke that ordinarily. However, if I take your words that you spoke first to be true, then you are no doubt, purchased by me."

हशिश्र उवाच

असत्यारकें गछलेसघ हुके नराधम: ॥ १३ ॥

तन्त्रश्छालता सार्थी न वरा मे हास्त्वलता ।

Harīscandra said: “The villain that speaks untruth, goes downright to a terrible hell; so to become a Cāndāla is far better for me than to use an untrue word.”

व्यास उवोच

तस्यैवं वदतः प्राप्तो विश्वाधिम्न स्त्वोनिधिः ॥ 14 ॥

क्रोधापार्थिवृत्ताक्षः प्राहे चेदं नाराधिपम् ।

चण्डालोयं मनस्यं ते दातुं चितमुपस्थितः ॥ 15 ॥

कमासा दीयते महामगेशा यजदक्षिणाः ।

Vyāsa said: O King! When the King was speaking thus, the ascetic Viśvāmitra arrived there out of anger and impatience; he rolled his eyes and said: "This Cāndāla is come to give you your desired money; why, then, are you not giving me the remnant of my Dakṣinā!"

राजेश्वर

भगवन्युर्विंशोत्यामातानं वेधि कौशिका ॥ १६ ॥

कर्थ चाण्डालादास्तवं गमिष्ये वितकामतः ।

Harīścandra said: “O Kauśika! Nothing is unknown to you. My this body is born for the Solar Line; how then can I accept this slavery of a Cāndāla!”

विश्रामित ज्ञाव

यदि चण्डालयितं त्यमातयिक्रमजं मम ॥ 17 ॥

न प्रज्ञास्यि चेताईं ग्रणयामि त्वामसंगयम् ।

चण्डालतादयव विज्ञाद्रेहि मे दक्षिणाधनम् ॥ 18 ॥

विना चण्डालम्भुना नान्यः कर्धिछ्जनप्रदः ।

धनेनाईं विज्ञा राजक्र यास्यामि न संग्रहः ॥ 19 ॥

इदानीमेव मे विन्तं न प्रदास्यसि चेषुः ।

दिनेउर्धयिकाणेसे तत्वां शापानिनना दहे ॥ 20 ॥

Víśvāmitra said: “If you do not sell yourself to a Cāṇḍala, be certain that I will just now put you under my curse. Give me immediately my Dakṣinā, be it whether from a Cāṇḍala or from a Brāhmaṇa. There is no other purchaser at present than this Cāṇḍala. But know this as certain that I won’t go back until I get my money. O King! If you do not give me money just now, then when half the Ghatikā of the day is remaining, I will burn you up by my fire of anger.”

व्यास उवाच

हरिश्रस्ततो राजा मृतविष्छुतर्जीवितः ।

प्रसीक्षिति वदन्यादौ ऋषेजैग्राह विहृतः ॥ 21 ॥

Šrimaddevīthāgavatam

Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing these words of Viśvāmitra, the King became almost dead; bewildered with fear, then he clasped the feet of the Rṣi and said, “Be friendly, please.”

हरिश्रनु उवाच

दासोउस्यातोंस्म दीनोस्म त्वद्धकघि सिक्षेपतः ।

प्रसादं कुरु विषर्षं कर्धक्षण्डालसंकरः ॥ 2२२ ॥

भवेयं विज्ञेशेण तव कर्मकौरोअरः ।

तवैव मुनिग्यातून प्रेयश्रितानुवर्तकः ॥ 2३ ॥

Harisācranda said: “O Vipraṣi! I am now very humiliated and have become very afflicted and distressed. Especially I am your Bhakta, I am your servant; so begraciously pleased and free me from this painful companion of a Cāndāla. O Muni! In lieu of my remnant Dakṣinā, I will be your obedient slave; I will do your work and follow your commands.”

विश्वामित्र वाच

एवमसु महाराज ममेव भव किंकतः ।

किन्तु मढ़चनं कार्य सर्वदैव नारायि ॥ 24 ॥

Vísvāmitra said: “O King! You are then my slave, you will obey always my commands.”

व्यास उचाच

एवमुक्ते5थ वचने राजा हृंसमन्त्रितः ।

अभ्यन्त पुनर्जतितामानां प्राह कौशिकम् ॥ २ ५ ॥

त्वाद्रेशं कर्णिषामि यदैवाहं न संशयः ।

आदेशय द्विजश्र किं कौरोमि ततावन ॥ २ ६ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When Viśvāmitra said so, the King, out of joy, thought that he regained his life and said to Kauśika. “Always I will obey your words; now order me what work I will have to do.”

विश्वासि उवाच

वाण्डालागच्छ महस्मालैयं किं मे प्रच्छसि ।

गृहाण दासं मौल्येन मया दृत्तं तवापुर्ण ॥ 27 ॥

नासि दासेन मे कार्यं विस्तागा वर्तैं मग ।

Viśvāmitra, then addressed the Cāṃḍala and said: “O Cāṃḍala! Come to me and give me the price for this slave. I am now handing this slave

over to you; give me the price and take him. I want money; I have no need for a servant."

व्यास उवाच

एवमुक्ते तदा तेन ध्यपो हृद्यानसः ॥ 28 ॥

आगत्य सम्रिधो तूर्ण विश्वासीमतभाषात ।

Vyāsa said: O King! When Viśvāmitra spoke thus, the Cāndāla, overflowed with joy, came immediately to the Rṣi Viśvāmitra and said:

वाण्डाल उवाच

दशयोजनविस्तीर्ण प्रयागस्य च मण्डले ॥ 29 ॥

भूमि रूपमयीं कृत्वा दायले तेर्द हिकोतमा ।

अस्य विक्रयोनेयमार्तिक्ष प्रहता तवया ॥ 30 ॥

“O Dvija! The relief that you have given me by selling this servant, for that I will give you the ten Yoyanas wide land of Prayāga Manḍalam, covered over with jewels.”

व्यास उवाच

ततो रनसहस्वाणी सुवर्णिभागीचितिकः ।

चाण्डालेन प्रदत्तानि जग्राह डिजसत्तमः ॥ 31 ॥

हरिश्छ्रैतया राजा निर्विकारमुखोपभवत् ।

अम्पन्त तथा ध्यायिष्ठिभागे हि ये पति: ॥ 32 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Cāndāla then gave me thousand gems, one thousand jewels, one thousand pearls and one thousand gold mohurs and Viśvāmitra took them. No signs of distraction nor unpleasantness were visible on the face of the King Hariścandra rather he laid hold of his patience and thought within himself.

तत्तेवे मया कार्य यदयं कारिथयिति ।

अर्थात्रिषे सहसा वागुवाचारगीरिधि ॥ 33 ॥

अनुगोर्भस महाभाग दत्ता सा दक्षिणा स्वाय ।

तातो दिवः पुच्यष्टिः पपात नृपपूर्विन ॥ 34 ॥

"Vísvāmitra is now my master; I will do any work that he puts me in." At this time, the incorporeal voice, the voice of the fourth dimensional space, sounded from the Heavens: "O Fortunate One! You are freed from the Dakṣinā, the debt before that you promised to give me." A shower of flowers fell on the head of the King from the Heavens.

Book VII Chapter XXIV

साधु साधिति ते द्वेशः प्रोषु: मैंरा महीज्ञसः ।

हर्षण महत्ताप्रिद्धो राजा कौशिफकमबवीत् ॥ 35 ॥

At this time the powerful Indra and the other hosts of the Devas praised the King, saying: "Sádhu! Sádhu! Well-done, Well-done." The heart of the King was then filled with intense joy and the King then said to Kauśika.

त्वं हि माता पिता वोव त्वं हिं कवभूमंहमते ।

यदर्थं पोचितोर्डे ते क्षणाच्चैवानूणी कृतः ॥ ३६ ॥

किं करोषि महाबाहो श्रेयो मे वचनं तव ।

एवमुनेकं तु वचने नृपं मुपित्यभात् ॥ ३७ ॥

“O Intelligent One! You are a greater benefactor to me then my father, mother and friend as you have freed me in a moment from my debts. So, O mighty armed one! Your words are beneficial to me. Now order what am I to do.”

विश्वामित्र उवाच

चाण्डालतवचनं कार्यमेधापृथिते ने तृप ।

स्वस्ति तेजस्तिति ते प्रोथ्य तदादाय धनं यदो ॥ 38 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणो सतमस्कन्धे हरीक्षन्नीयास्ताने

यजीवितोउधाच्या: 11 23 11

When the King said so, Viśvāmitra then said: "Go and observe from to-day the words of the Cāndāla. Let good befall on you!" Thus saying, the Maharṣi Viśvāmitra took the money given by the Cāndāla and went away to his own place.

Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter of the Seventh Book on the King Hariścandra's acknowledgment of the slavery of the Cāndāla in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XXIV

CHAPTER XXIV

On Hariscandra in the Burning Ghaṭa of Kāśī

शौनक उवाच

ततः किमकारोत्राजा चापड़ालस्य गृहे ततः ।

तद्वृष्टि सुतत्वयं त्वं पृष्ठतः सत्वरं हिि मे ॥ १ ॥

Śaunaka said: O Sūta! Now describe as quickly as you can in detail what the King Harisācandra did afterwards in the house of the Cāṇḍala.

सूत उवाच

विश्वामित्र नते विश्रे धषणचो हृद्यानसः ।

विश्वामित्रय नतुद्वयं दत्ता बद्यूधा नरेशमू ॥ 2 ॥

असत्यो यास्यसीत्युक्त्वा एड्डेनाताडयत्त्वा ।

दणडगुहारसंघनमतीव्याकुलेत्रदूसम ॥ 3 ॥

Sūta said: When Viśvāmitra went away, the mind of the Cāṇḍala was filled with joy. He already gave to Viśvāmitra that amount of jewels; so he tied now the King and, telling him “Do you now stand on the path of falsehood? began to beat him with sticks.

इखबन्धुविद्योगतर्भानीय निजपकरणो ।

निगड़े स्थापयित्वा तं स्वयं सूचाय पिज्ञतः ॥ 4 ॥

निगडस्थततो राजा वसंश्राण्डालपकरणे ।

अत्रपाने परित्यज्य सदा वै तद्गोचयत् ॥ 5 ॥

The King was already very much tired of the bereavements from his dear ones; now being beaten by the Cāndāla, his senses were lost. In this state the Cāndāla took him to his house and fastened him with a chain. Then the Cāndāla's troubles were over and he fell asleep. The King lived in the Chāndāla's house in that state fettered by a chain; but he did not take any food there.

तन्यी दीनमुखीं दृष्ट्या बालं दीनमुखं पुरः ।

मां सत्यत्सुखाविष्टा मोक्षायिष्टानी नौ नृपः ॥ 6 ॥

उपारचित्ते विधाय दच्चा विलं प्रतिश्रन् ।

रोदमानं सुतं वीक्ष्य मां च साधोधायिष्टिते ॥ 7 ॥

Incessantly he wept for his wife and son and others. “Alas! That thin lady, seeing the sad face of her son is now remembering me with a morose face. She is now perhaps thinking, with a grieved heart, that whenever the King will get the money, he will pay off the promised money to the Brāhimn and then will free us from this yoke of slavery.

ततापर्थं ब्रजामीति रुदंतं बालकं पुनः ।

तात तातेति भाषांत तथा सम्बोध्रायिषिति ॥ 8 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

न सा मां मृगाशाङ्गी वेति चापड़ालतां गतम् ।

राज्यनाशः सुईच्यागो भार्यान्तनयिक्वतः ॥ 9 ॥

Alas! When will that day come when will he see me and this crying child and speak with us. When the son will cry, saying I will go to my father; father! When will he come and speak with the child? That fawn-eyed gentle woman does not know that I am now placed under a Cāṇḍala. Alas I am deprived of my kingdom, friends; and I have sold away my wife and son; now I am bound in the chain of slavery of Cāṇḍala.

तत्रप्राप्तालत तेच्यमहो तु:ख्यप्यमरा ।

एवं स निवसत्रित्यं स्मरंश दयितां सुतम् ॥ 10 ॥

Alas! So many miseries have fallen on me all one after another." Thus thinking incessantly about his dear consort and son, the King passed his days in the house of that Cāndāla.

निनाय दिवसाजाजा चतुगे विधिपीढितः ।

अथाहि पछमे तेन निगाऊभोचितो नृपः ॥ ११ ॥

वाण्डालेनानुशिष्ट धृतरैलापहाणे ।

कुब्देन पर्कैवर्कैयैर्निर्भर्य च पुनः पुनः ॥ १ २ ॥

Four days passed; and on the fifth day the Cāndāla came there and rebuked the King with very harsh words and freed him from his fastenings and said: "Go to the burial ground and collect the clothing of the dead bodies.

कायगश्छ दक्षिणे भागे स्मशानं विद्यते महत् ।

तद्रस्मय यथान्यां न त्यायं तत्वया कविचत् ॥ 13 ॥

इमं च जर्जैं, दण्डें गृहीत्वा याहि मा विम्य।

वीरबाहोरयं दण्ड इति घोपस्व सर्वतः ॥ 14 ॥

There is a wide Śmaśāna (burial ground) on the southern part of Kāśī; go and protect that and whatever is due to you, justly take that; do not leave it. Take this Jarjara club and go there quickly. Say to all that you are the messenger of Virabāhu and this staff is his."

सूत उवाच

कर्मियोघ्रदय काले तु मृतवैलापहारकः ।

हरिश्छोरोभवहाजा गरणाने तद्धानानुः ॥ 15 ॥

चाण्डालेनानुशिष्टु मृतवैलापहारिणा ।

राजा तेन समादिष्टो जगाम शवमिन्दिम् ॥ 16 ॥

Sūta said: O Rṣis! Thus Hariścandra became a Cāndāla's servant and was engaged in collecting the cloths of the dead persons. Thus ordered by the Cāndāla, whose duty was to collect the rages of the dead bodies, the King went to the burial ground.

पुर्यस्तु दक्षिणे देशे विद्यानं भयानकम् ।

गशवान्यसमाकर्णि दुर्गन्थं बहुधूमकम् ॥ 17 ॥

ग्शगानं घोरस्वादं शिवाशतसमाकूलम् ।

गृधगोपायुसंकर्णी शबृन्दपरिवारित् ॥ 18 ॥

To the south of the city Kāśī, was situated the dreadful Śmaśāna, scattered over with the garlands of the dead, bad odours were emitting on all sides and it was covered all over with smoke. Hundreds of jackals were yelling there and the ground was being reverberated by their yells. Vultures, jackals and dogs were at many places dragging the dead bodies.

अश्वस्यंघातसंकीर्ण महादुर्गन्यसंकुलम् ।

अर्धद्धरणशाव्यानि विकसईतपंचिक्षिः ॥ १९ ॥

हर्सतीवाराम्यस्यकावयरेवं व्यवस्थितः ।

नानामुत्सुहरादं महाकोलाहलाकुलम् ॥ 20 ॥

At other places were scattered heaps of bones; the whole ground was covered with the putrid smell of the dead. At some places it seemed that from within the funeral pyre, the half-burnt dead bodies were laughing wildly with their teeth wide open from their mouths. Thus the dead bodies looked terrible when being placed under fire. Lots of dead bodies were brought there and there was a great tumultuous uproar made by the cries of their friends and relatives.

हा पुत्र मित्र हा बन्धो धारलंस एवाया भे ।

हायले भारिनेयहं हा मातुल पितामह ॥ 21 ॥

मातामह पित: पौत्र क्र नातो २येही झांधव ।

इति शब्दे: समाकाणीं भवेर: सर्वदैहिनम् ॥ 22 ॥

जलनामासवमापेद्वष्यपिति ध्यनिसंकुलम् ।

Oh! My son! My friend! My relative! My brother! My child! My dear wife! Oh! My cousin!

Book VII Chapter XXV

Oh! My grandfather! Oh! My father! My grandson! My acquaintance! Where hast thou gone leaving me here! Come once and let me have a sight of thee! With such dreadful sounds as these, the burial ground was being echoed.

Flesh, marrow, fat all were being burnt in the fire and a peculiar sound Son, Son was, being produced there and creating voidness in the minds of the people.

अनंडठटवटाग्बो। शेरो यत्र जायते ॥ 23 ॥

कल्यांतसद्गाकारं मशगर्न तलुवारुणम् ।

स राजा तन संग्रपाते दुःखादेवमशोचत ॥ 24 ॥

The fire was burning with a crackling noise. Thus the Śmaśāna looked very terrible as if the universe was being destroyed at the end of a Kālpa. The King Harisācandra arrived there; and, with extreme pain, he began to give vent to his sorrows.

हा ध्याना मजिलगो यूयं क्त तराझं कृतोचितान् ।

हा प्रिये तूम मे बाल मां वलवता मन्दभायकम् ॥ 25 ॥

बाहुपास्य च कोपेन गता यूयं क दूरतः ।

बिता धर्म मनुव्याणां जायते न सुभं कचित् ॥ 26 ॥

"My ministers, servants! Where are you all now? Where is kingdom that I got by a succession of inheritance! O my Son! O my dear wife! Where are you staying now, at what a long distance, leaving me here out of the Brāhmin's anger. Without Dharma man can never get auspicious fruits. So men should carefully earn Dharma.

यन्तते धारयेतस्मातुभको धार्मेव हि ।

इल्लें चिन्तयन्तत्र चाण्डालोत्के पुनः पुनः ॥ 27 ॥

मलेन दिधस्वर्गः शवानां दर्पेने जबन् ।

लकुटाकारकल्पक्ष धार्वक्षापि ततस्ततः ॥ 28 ॥

The King, whose body was covered with dust and dirt, thought thus repeatedly; and at last, remembering the Cāndāla's words, went out in

quest of the dead. Out of this eventful cares and anxieties, his body became lean like a stick; still he ran, to and fro, and calculated thus:

अस्मिख्व इदं मौल्यं शर्त प्रायवामि चाप्रतः ।

इदं मम इदं रात इदं चाण्डालकस्य च ॥ 29 ॥

इत्वेच चिन्तयत्राजा व्यवस्थां दुस्तां गतः ।

जौर्गैकपटसुगंधिकृतकंक्षापरिबूः ॥ 30 ॥

चिताभस्मरजीलनमुपखावृदारीधकः ।

नानामेदोर्वसामाजलिलपाण्यंगुलि: धस्न् ॥ 31 ॥

"This dead body will fetch for its price one hundred gold mohurs; out of this, this belongs to the King; this to me, and this to the Cāndāla." So he thought constantly and his state became awful. His face, arm, belly and feet and the other parts of body were all covered over with ashes and dust; the King wore a ragged cloth where hundred places were sewn over; his toes were all besmeared with all sorts of flesh, marrow, fat and other things.

नानाशवैदनकृतक्षिवृक्षितिपरायण: ।।

तदीयमाल्यसंरेषेतकृतमस्तकमण्डल: ॥ 32 ॥

न राजी न दिवा शेते हृहिति प्रवद्मनुडुः ।

एवं झाड्ग मासासून नीता वर्भशोणमा: ॥ 33 ॥

श्री श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणो सत्यमक्ये

चतुविंशोअवार: 11 24 11

He began to satisfy his hunger out of the food that was prepared for all sorts of dead bodies; and, taking their garlands, he encircled his head with them. Day and night he did not sleep and always, he sighted and sighed, crying, Alas! Alas! Thus one year passed away, as if it had been three hundred years.

Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter of the Seventh

Book on the stay of Harisācanda in the burning

ground in the Māhā Purānam,

Śrimaddevirbhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XXV

CHAPTER XXV

On the Quarrels Between Hariscandra and Visvāmitra

सूत उवाच

एकदा तु गतो न्तु बालकैः सहितो बहिः ।

वाराणस्या नालितूरंः रोहिताख्यः कुमारकः ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: Here, on the other hand, one day the boy Rohitāśva went out with other boys to play at some place close to Kāśī.

क्रीडां कृत्वा ततो दर्भानृहीतुमुपचक्रमे ।

कोमलानत्यमृतांश सगाउऊरन्धनुसासतः ॥ 2 ॥

He first played with the his comrades; he then began to root out and collect, as far as he could, the Darbha (Kuśa) grass, with its ends and which had not deep roots.

आर्यौत्यर्थमित्युक्ता हस्तयुमेन यन्ततः ।

सलक्षणाशु समियो बर्हिंरिमं सलक्षणम् ॥ 3 ॥

पलाशकाशुन्यादाय त्विनहोमाध्यमादात् ।

मस्तके भारकं कृत्वा तिद्धयानः पेदे पेदे ॥ 4 ॥

On being questioned why he was taking the Dharbha grass, Rohita told his comrades that his master was a Brāhmin and that he was collecting them for his satisfaction. Saying this, he began to collect carefully by his hands the sacrificial fuel (Samidhā) and other fuel for the burning purposes.

उदकस्थान्यासाठ तदा बालसूर्णपात्रतः ।

भृत्रि भारत विनिश्रिष्य जलस्थाने तदा शिशुः ॥ ५ ॥

कामातः सलितं पौला विश्रयच च पुतुतकम् ।

वल्मीकोपर विस्पत्थभारो हर्तु प्रचकमे ॥ ६ ॥

He collected the Palāsa-wood for Homa purpose and making it into a bundle with other articles already collected, took it on his head, but at every step he seemed to be fatigued. Feeling thirsty he went to a pool of water close by and keeping his load on the ground went down to drink water.

विश्वामिनाज्ञा तावकृष्णायसों भयावहः ।

महाविषयो महायोरो वल्याकीत्रर्गतस्त्वा ॥ ७ ॥

Drinking water he rested a while and then as he had keep his load on the anthill, he began to take it back on his head, a very poisonous deadly serpent came out suddenly out of that anthill at the order of Visvāmitra.

तेनासी बालको दर्शतदैव च पपात है ।

रोहिताख्य मृतं दूद्धया ययुबीला दिजालयम् ॥ 8 ॥

त्वरिता घयसंविना: प्रोयुस्तन्मातृग्रतः ।

है विध्वासि ते पुत्रः क्रीडां कर्तु बहिरानः ॥ 9 ॥

अस्माधिः सहित्तस संपद्धो गृतसन्तः ।

The snake immediately bit the boy who instantly fell down and died. His comrades seeing Rohitāśva

dead went to the house of the Brāhmin. With much anxiety the boys went soon out of fear, to his mother and said: "O Brāhmin's maidservant! Your son went out with us to play outside; but suddenly a poisonous snake bit him and he is dead.

इति सा तईचः श्रुत्वा वड़पातोपमं तदा ॥ 10 ॥

पचात मृडिता भूमौ छिद्रेश कल्ती यथा ।

अथ तां बाहाणो रुहः पात्पीनेनाथपिच्चत ॥ 11 ॥

मुहूतोंचेतनां प्राप्ता बाहाप्तासामथाब्वीत् ।

Rohita's mother, hearing these cruel words like thunder lightning at once fell down on the ground like a plantain tree, cut of from its roots. The Brāhmīn, then, came and sprinkled water on her face. When she regained her consciousness, the Brāhmīn then angrily spoke:

बाहाण उवाच

अल्वभीकाकर निंदी जानती त्वं निगापुष्टे ॥ 12 ॥

रोदनं कुरुषे दुहे लज्जा ते हृदये न किम् ।

बाहाणेवेन पुत्ता सा न किंचिहास्यमवर्जित् ॥ 13 ॥

"O wicked One! It is very inauspicious to cry at the evening time; especially the disfavour of the Goddess Laksmit (i.e.), the poverty comes to the householder, you know this; why are you then weeping? Have you not a bit of shame in your heart? She made not reply at this.

रोरट ककणं दीन पुत्रणोकेन पीडिता ।

अश्रपूर्णिकृदी दीन धूसरा पुत्नमूद्धजा ॥ १४ ॥

Rather very much immersed in grief for her son, she wept in a pitiful voice. Her body was covered with dust, hairs were dishevelled and her face covered all over with tears from eyes. She constantly wept out of sorrow.

अथ तां कुपित्त विधो राजपत्नीभाषात ।

शिक्स्वां दृष्टे कर्म गृह्म मम कार्य विलुपरि ॥ 15 ॥

अशक्ता चेकर्थ ताई गृह्तां मम तद्धन् ।

एवं निर्भिर्मिता तेन कृत्यावक्ये: पुनः पुनः ॥ 16 ॥

The Brāhmīn, then, became very angry and spoke to the queen: "O Villain! O Wicked! Fie on you. I have bought you for money, yet you are hindering my Juck. If you had this thought that you

Book VII Chapter XXV

would not work under me, why did you take for nothing my money?"

कहिता कारणं प्राह विश्रं गद्रद्या गिरा ।

स्वामिन्मय सुती कालः सपँद्यो गृती बहिः ॥ 17 ॥

अनुज्ञां मे प्रवच्छस्य रहुं याय्यामि वालकम् ।

दुर्वर्ध शर्नं तेन संज्ञातं मम सुझत ॥ 18 ॥

Thus repeatedly scolded by the Brāhmīn, she pitifully cried and spoke to the Brāhmīn in a voice choked with feelings: “O Lord! My son has fallen into the jaws of death, being smitten by a serpent.” O One of good vows! I will never be able to see him. So kindly permit me to go and see my boy.”

इत्युक्त्वा करणं बाला पुनेरे क्वोद है ।

पुस्तां कुपिति विग्रो राजपनीभाषात ॥ १९ ॥

Saying thus, that lady began again to weep in a pitiful voice. The Brāhmin became very angry and spoke thus:

ब्राह्मण उवाच

गंडे दुर्भस्मावारे कि न जानासी पातकम् ।

यत्वामिवतेनं गृहा तस्य कार्व विल्यम्पसि ॥ 20 ॥

नरके पच्चते सोउध महारीरवपूर्वेक ।

“O Cheat! Your conduct is extremely blameable; you do not know how one commits a sin. The man who taking his pay from his master spoils his master’s work, he goes to the terrible hell Raurava and is being scorched there.

प्रियत्वा नरक कस्यं ततोउसी कुककुटो भवेत् ॥ २१ ॥

किम्भनेनाया कार्य धर्मसंकृतिनेच न ।

यस्तु यापरतो मूद्धे: कृते नीचोउनूत: शठः ॥ २२ ॥

तद्वयं निष्कर्ते ततिम्यभवेढ़ीजमिवोषो ।

एहि ते विद्यते किंचित्यलोकभयं वदि ॥ २३ ॥

Living in the Hell for a short while, he is born as a cock. Oritis useless for me to give you this instruction of the Dharma Sastra, for to speak to such to an illiterate, cruel, low, hypocrite and lair and to one addicted to sinful acts is to sow seed on an user land and to see it fruitless. Now if you have any fear for the afterlife, come and do the household affairs.

एवमुक्ता5य सा विधं वेयपाना3ब्रवीह्नः ।

कानण्यं कुंक मे नाथ प्रसीर् सुमुखो भव ॥ 24 ॥

Hearing this, she said to the Brāhmīn, trembling: "O Lord! Be graciously pleased and shew your mercy on a maidservant.

प्रस्थापय मुहुतं मां यावदूरक्ष्यामि बालकम् ।

एवमुक्लाव्य सा मून्ति निपत्य डिजापदायोः ॥ 25 ॥

रोदे कर्णा बाला पुत्रशोकेन पीक्षिता ।

अशह कुर्णिता विधः जोधपरत्क्लोचनः ॥ 26 ॥

Only for a moment I will go to see the dead son of mine; so give me order to go there for a moment." That lady was deeply absorbed with sorrows for her son; then she put her head on the feet of the Brāhmin and with a pitiful voice cried. The angry Brāhmin with eyes reddened then began to speak.

विप्र उवाच

किं ते पुंजेन मे कार्य गृहकर्म कृमच्च मे ।

किं न जानासि मे कोर्ध कशापातफलप्रदम् ॥ 27 ॥

एवमुक्ता स्थिता धीवारुगृहकर्मे चकार है ।

अधीराजो गतस्तस्याः पादाध्येगादिकर्भाने ॥ 28 ॥

“What purpose of mine will be served by your son? Don’t you know about my anger? Have you forgotten about my whipping? So be ready and do my household work without any delay.” Hearing his words, the queen held her patience and began to do the household work. She spent half the night time, when she finished champooing his feet.

ब्राह्मणोनाय सा प्रोक्ता पुरवार्थई जताथुना ।

तस्य दाहादिकं कृत्वा पुनरागच्छ सत्वम् ॥ 29 ॥

न लुप्येत यथा प्रातगृहकां ममेति च ।

ततत्वेकाकिनी राजी विल्वर्ती जगह है ॥ 30 ॥

When this was over, the Brāhmin spoke to her, "You can go now to your son; but see, finish his burning ceremonies and come back quickly. See that my morning works do not suffer." Thus getting the permission, the Queen went at that dead of night to look for her son, alone and weeping.

दृष्ट्या मृत निज पुत्रं घूर्णं गोकेन भीडिता ।

यूथध्घा कुरंशीव विवस्ता सौरभी यथा ॥ 31 ॥

वाराणाया बहिंगत्वा क्षणादुद्धत्वा निजं सुतम् ।

श्यानं रंकबद्धमी काष्टदर्भतृणोपरि ॥ ३२ ॥

Gradually she went out of the precincts of the city of Kaśī and there she saw her son like a poor man's son lying on the ground over leaves and pieces of woods. Seeing her son dead, the humble Queen was very troubled with sorrow like an antelope, straying from its herd and as a cow missing her calf.

विलतापातिङुःखाती शब्द कृत्वा सुनिङुम् ।

एहि मे सम्युक्ते कस्माठीघितो3स वद्धान्न ॥ 33 ॥

आयास्यमिभुखो निव्यमेवेल्युत्वा पुनः पुनः ।

गत्वा स्वलल्यदा तस्य पपातोपरि मुक्तिला ॥ 34 ॥

The Queen Mādhavī then began to lament, in a very pitiful tone, thus: “O my Son! Come once before me; sály why you are angry. Oh! My child! You used to come frequently to me, uttering Ma! Ma! Then why are you not coming now?

पुनः सा चेतनं प्राप्य दोर्ध्यामालियय वाकलम् ।

तमुखे वदने न्यस्य रोर्धातिर्वेस्ताद ॥ 35 ॥

कारभ्यां तात्वं चक्रे मलकस्योदरस्य च ।

हा बाल हा शिजो वस्स हा कुमारक सुन्दर ॥ 36 ॥

Saying thus, she tumbling went and fell over his son. She, regaining her consciousness, embraced her son and placing her face on the face of the child began to weep pitifully. "Oh! My son! Oh! My child! Oh my Kumāra! Oh! My Beautiful!" and began to beat her head and her breast with her hands.

हा राकक गतोर्धिस्त एं पर्येयं वालकं निजम् ।

प्राणोभोर्धिप शरीयांसं भूतले पतितं मृतम् ॥ 37 ॥

तथा उपश्यम्भुर्ष तस्य भृयो जीवितांगकंया ।

निर्जीववदनं जात्वा मूर्दिता निपयात् ॥ 38 ॥

O King! Where are you now? You used to look upon your son dearer then even your life. Your that son is now lying dead on the ground. Come and behold him once. It seems that the son has got back his life. Thus thinking she looked upon his face; but when it looked dead, she fell immediately unconscious.

हस्तेन वदनं गृहा पुनेरेवमभाषत ।

गयनं त्यज हे बाल शीधे जगृहि भीषणम् ॥ 39 ॥

निर्णार्थे घर्वते चेदं शिवागतर्निनादितम् ।

भृतप्रेतिपशगचादिडाकिनीयुवानादितम् ॥ 40 ॥

निर्जाणि ते पतन्यास्त्वमेकस्तु कृत: स्थितः ।

Getting back soon her consciousness, she held his face by her hands and said: "O Child! Rise up from your sleep; awake; now is the dreadful night time; hundreds of jackals are yelling into our ears. Even Pretas, Bhūtas, Piśācas, and Dākinis are roaming in packs and making terribly sounds Hum, Hum. Your comrades returned to their homes just at sunset; Why are you alone remaining here?"

सूत उवाच

एवमुक्त्वा पुनस्त्वी करणं प्रकरीद ह १। ४। १। १।

हा शिशो बाल हा वसर रोहिताख्य कुमारक ।

है पुर प्रतिशादं च केस्मार्चत न प्रपछचसि ॥ ४२ ॥

Sūta said: The thin-bodied queen, thus saying, began to lament “Oh my Child! Oh! My son, Oh! Rohitāśva, O Kumāra, why are you not replying to my words!

तवाहं जननी वसा किं न जानासि पर्य मात् ।

देशुलयागाङ्जवनाशतुपत्र भत्री सविक्रवात् ॥ 43 ॥

Oh my Child! I am your mother; do you not recognise me; look at me once. O Child! I am deprived of my kingdom and exiled from my country; my husband has sold even his body and I am myself reduced to slavery.

यद्रासीताच्य जीवाणि तां दृष्ट्या पुत्र केवतम् ।

ते जन्मसमये विश्रौरिष्टं यचलनागतम् ॥ 44 ॥

दीर्घायुः पूर्णविराजारः पुर्यपौत्रसम्यक्तः ।

- What man is there that can live in this state! I am living simply by seeing your lotus-face. The astrologer who cast your horoscope at your birth, calculated future events in your life; but where? none of them is fructified. They said: That this child will be a hero, warrior, long-lived, very charitable man, and always ready to do the worship of the Devas, Dvijas and the Gurus.

Book VII Chapter XXV

गौर्यैदानरितः सच्ची गुरुदेवडिजारंकः॥ 4 5 ॥

मातापीत्रोस्तु प्रियकृतसत्यवादी जितेन्रयः ।

इत्यादि सकलं जातामसत्यमधूना सुतः ॥ 4 6 ॥

चक्रमत्या वासउतपत्रश्रीवत्सस्वितिकक्रप्रवः ।

तव पाणितले पुर्र कलशधारमं तथा ॥ 4 7 ॥

लक्षणानि तवाधान्यानि लब्द्रसे वानि सन्ति च ।

What more than this that the child will be one paramount sovereign and with his sons and grand will enjoy his kingdom. This boy will be the master of his senses and will fulfil the desires of his father and mother. Oh my Son! Nów all those predictions have turned out false. O Child! You have on your palms so many auspicious, signs, discus, fishes, umbrella, Śri Vatsa, Svastika, flags, Kalaśa (earthen jar), Cāmara and other signs; besides these, various other auspicious omens exist on your hands.

तानि सर्वाणि मोघानि संजातान्यभुना सुत ॥ 48 ॥

हा राजन्यधितीयाश क्र ते राज्यं क्व मन्त्रिणः ।

क्व ते सिंहासनं कंवं कं ते खुवः कव तद्वान् ॥ 49 ॥

क्व साउष्टीया क्व ह्याणीय क्व गाजाश्रध्वजः ।

Are all these become in vain to-day! O Son! You are the Lord of this whole dominion; but where are your that Kingdom now, those ministers that royal throne, that umbrella, that axe, that vast amount of riches, that Ayodhyā city, those palatial buildings, those elephants, horses, and chariots?

सर्वमैतस्तथा पूर्व मां तवक्वा बक्यगतोप्रि १ ५० १।

हा कान्त हा युपागच्छ पशयंे स्वसुतं पिव्यम् ।

येन ते रिगता वक्षः कुकुर्मेनावलैपितम् ॥ ५१ ॥१

स्वर्गीराज:पैक्षेविंशगलं मिलनीकृतम् ।

Where have gone yours subjects! O Child! Where have you gone now, quitting all these and even me! O beloved Husband! See the condition of your son who in his early childhood used to move on all fours (the hands and feet) and get up on your broad chest, anointed with Kumkum, and spoil it with dust; O King! Come once and witness the condition of your child who used to press, out of ignorance due to his young age, the Tilaka on your forehead, prepared of Mrganābhi, (musk).

येन ते बालभावेन मृगनान्धिर्विवेलपितः ॥ 52 ॥

श्रिंगतो भालतिलकस्तवाकेक्थने भृपते ।

यस्य वक्त्रं मृदा लिलपं स्टोहाई चृष्वितं मय ॥ 53 ॥

तन्मुखं मधिकालिंयं पश्ये कौटैर्विद्धुपितम् ।

Alas! Flies are now sitting on the lotus face today which I used to kiss over, covered with dirt; the insects are now stinging that. Oh! This I have got to witness now! O King! Come and see once your child is now sleeping on the ground like a poor man's dead son.

हा राजन्यस्य तं पूयं भुवित्यर्थ रंकवन्मुतम् ॥ 54 ॥

हा देव किं मया कृत्यं कृतं पूर्वभवान्ते ।

तस्य कर्मफलयेयं न पागमुपलक्षेय ॥ 55 ॥

हा पुत्र हा शिक्षो वसा हा कुमारक सुन्दर ।

O Fate! What bad act did I commit in my past life, that I have got to suffer so much in this life and I do not get an end of them! O Child! O Son! Oh, my Kumāra! Oh! My Beautiful! what I not be able to see you once any more elsewhere?

एवं तस्य वित्याते ने श्रुत्वा नारपालाका: ॥ 56 ॥

जागुतास्वितास्तास्या: पार्थीमीयु: सुविधिता: ।

The Queen Mādhavī thus lamented very much when the warders of the city, hearing her lamentations awoke and came to her without any delay, greatly astonished.

रंना ऊचुः

का तव बालश्छ कस्यायं पतिले कुः तिहिति ॥ 57 ॥

एकैव निर्भया राजी कस्मात्वमिहः तेरिवि ।

एवयुक्ताउव सा स्तवी न किंधिद्वाक्यमवबौत् ॥ 58 ॥

They asked her thus: "Who are you? Whose son is this? Where is your husband? Why are you weeping here in this dead of night, without any fear?" Though thus questioned, the thin Queen did not reply anything.

भूयो5पि पृष्टा सा तृणी स्वब्धीभृता बभूव ह ।

विललापातिचुःखातां शोकाश्रयतुलोचना ॥ 59 ॥

अथ ते शैंकितास्तरणं रोमांचिततनूरहः ।

संजस्तः प्राहृत्योन्यमुद्धुताव्यपाणयः ॥ 60 ॥

Being again asked, she remained silent; and in the next moment she was pained with extreme

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

agony and began again to cry. Tears flowed incessantly from her two eyes out of her sorrow. The guards then began to suspect her and were greatly afraid. So much that hairs stood on their ends out of terror. They at once raised their arms and began to talk with each other.

नूरं क्ती न भवल्येया सतः किंचित्र भाषते ।

तस्माद्धाया भवेदेया यन्तो बालयातिति ॥ 6 1 ॥

गृभा चेताई किं हात्र निर्णार्य सिंहते बहि: ।

भक्षार्थमनया नृनामाति: कस्यचिष्छु: ॥ 6 2 ॥

When this lady is not giving any sort of reply, she is then certainly not a woman; most probably she will be a Rākṣaṣī, knowing magic and destroying young children. So she should be killed with great attention. If she be not a Rākṣaṣī, then why she should stay in this dead of night outside the city? No doubt, this Rākṣaṣī has brought some one's child to eat here.

इत्युक्चना तैंगीहिता सा गाढे केजेषु सत्वम् ।

भुज्योरपरै श्रेक्षा पालक तथा ॥ 6 3 ॥

खंची यास्यतीतुर्ने बहुभि: शक्रपाणिभि: ।

आक्राय पक्रणे नीता चाण्डालाय समर्पिता ॥ 6 4 ॥

Thus saying, they without any delay, tied her hairs closely and some caught hold of her hand and some caught hold of her neck, saying O Rāksaṣi! where will you go now? The armed men, then dragged her perforce to the house of the Cāndāla and handed her over to him.

हे चाण्डाल बहिंद्धा हासमिषबलायातिनि ।

वध्यतां व्यतयोगेश शीर्ध नीला बाहे:स्थले ॥ 6 5 ॥

All the people said: “O Chief of the Cāndālas! We have caught today outside the city this child eating Rāksaṣi; so you better take her quickly on the slaughter ground and slaughter her.

चाण्डाल: प्रात तां दूष्वा जातेयं लोकविश्रुता ।

न दृष्टुवाँ केनापि लोकाईधान्यनेक्रा ॥ 6 6 ॥

भक्षितान्यनया घरि भवद्धि: पुण्यमर्जितम् ।

ख्यातिविः शाखी लोके गच्छवं च यथावुखम् ॥ 6 7 ।

The Cāndāla looked at her body and said. "This Rāksaṣī is widely celebrating in this world. I know

her from before; but no bodies able to see her. This Māyāvini has devoured many sons of many persons. You all will acquire great merit when she will be slaughtered and your good name will be known to all and will last long. You better now go back to your own homes.

दिङसीबालोगोतीं स्वर्णतैरी च यो नरः ।

अग्निदो वर्मद्याति च मघाये गुरुतत्यम्: ॥ 68 ॥

महाजनवितीघी च तस्य पुण्यप्रदो वर्धः ।

दिजस्यापि सिक्यो वार्पि न दोयो चिद्धते वरे ॥ 69 ॥

The man who kills women, children, cows and Brāhmins, who burns another's house with fire, who destroys the wayfares of others, who steals his Guru's wife, who quarrels with saintly persons, and who drinks wine, if killed, will certainly yield merits to the man who kills him. If such a one be a female or a Brāhmin, no sin will accrue if he or she be slaughtered.

अस्य बधधु मे योग्य इनुसूचना गाढवझभनेः ।

बद्धया केशिष्याकृष्य रज्ञभित्माताउघत् ॥ ७ ७ ॥

हरिश्रुद्रमयोबाच याचा पकया तदा ।

रे दास व्यस्ताभेम चुहात्मा भा विचारय ॥ ७ १ ॥

So it is my paramount duty to kill her." Saying this, the Cāndāla tied her closely and drawing her by her hairs, began to beat her with a rope. The he told to Hariścandra in terse language: "O Slave! Kill her; this woman is by her very nature wicked; so do not judge anything in this matter of killing her."

तखाक्यं भूपति: शुत्वा वघपातोपमं तदा ।

वेपमानोउ वच आपहातं ग्राह कृशवधंगकितः ॥ ७२ ॥

न शकतोउहमिदं कर्तुं ग्रेयं देहि ममापरम् ।

असाध्यमपि यतकर्म तकसीच्छे त्याविदातम् ॥ ७ 73 ॥

Hearing these harsh words, like the falling of a thunderbolt, the King shuddered. When he came back to his nature, he fearing lest a woman be killed, said to the Cāndāla: "I am not at all able to carry this order out; so kindly make over this task to some other servant of yours. He will kill her. I will certainly carry out any other order that you would task me to do."

Brook VII Chapter XXV

སྟན་མ་ཆུང་ཆེ་བཞིན་སྟན་ཆེ་བཞིན་སྟན་ཆེ་བཞིན་སྟན་ཆེ་བྱིན་སྟན་ཆེ་བཞིན་སྟན་ཆེ་བཞིན་སྟན། དྱི་ཆེ་བཞིན་སྟན་ཆེ་བཞིན་སྟན་ཆེ་བདེ་སྟན་ཆེ་བཞིན་སྟན་ཆེ་བདེ་སྟན་ཆེ། དྱི་ཆེ་བཞིན་སྟན་ཆེ་བཞིན་སྟན་བཞིན་སྟན་ཆེ། དྱི་ཆེ་བཞིན་སྟན་ཆེ། དྱི་ཆེ་བཞིན་སྟན་བཞིན་སྟན་ཆེ། དྱི་བཞིན་སྟན་བཞིན་སྟན་ཆེ། དྱི་བཞིད་སྟན་བཞིན་སྟན་ཆེ། དྱི་བཞིད་སྟན་པའི་བཞིན་སྟན་པའི་བཞིན་སྟན་པའི་བཞིན་སྟན་པ་

"Women should always be protected with care, never to be killed; the more so as the religious Munis have assigned greater sin in the killing of woman. The man who kills consciously or unconsciously females, certainly becomes boiled in the Mahā Raurava hell."

घाण्डाला उवाच

मा वदासिंग रुहाणैने तीक्षण विद्युलमगुभम् ।

यत्रेकसिन्वयं नीते बहूनां तु सुखं भवेत् ॥ 78 ॥

तस्य हिंसा कृता नूनं बहुपुणयप्रत भवेत् ।

भक्षितान्यनया भृति लोके डिंधानि दृष्टया ॥ 79 ॥

तलिष्ठं धयतायोग लोकः स्वस्थो भविष्यत ।

The Cāndāla said: “Don’t you say this; take this sharp sword, lustrous like a lightening; where killing one engenders happiness to many, abundance of merits are acquired in doing that. This wicked fellow has eaten many children of this place; so kill her as early as possible and bring peace happiness to the Kāśī people.

राजोवाच

चाण्डालाधिपते तीघ्रं तत्रं क्षीधवधर्जन् ॥ 80 ॥

आजानतततो यत्नं न कुर्मों क्षीवोघे तव ।

The King said: "O Chief of the Cāndālas! I have taken the difficult vow from my childhood, not to be kill any woman. Therefore I cannot exert myself in this matter of killing the woman as you order.

वाण्डाल वज्च

स्वामिकार्व विज्ञा दुह किं कार्व विज्ञतेपम् ॥ 81 ॥

गृहीला वेतने मेउघ कस्मात्कार्व विल्यपर्यत ।

यः स्वायमितं गृहा स्वामिकार्व विल्युपति ॥ 82 ॥

नरकाजिकपूतितस्तय नासि कल्याग्रुतीरम् ।

The Chāndāla said: “O Wicked Fellow! No work is superior which is not the master’s work. Why then are you cancelling today to carry out my order, when you are taking pay from me. The servant that spoils his master’s work, taking his money, is not freed from the hell even if he remains for ten thousand years there.

राजोवार

चाण्डालानाय मे देहि प्रायम-व्यसूदाकाणम् ॥ 83 ॥

स्वगई बृहि ते शिध्धे प्रातिथव्याम्यसंगयम् ।

घातचित्वा तु ने शगुं त्व दाययामि मेदैन्दीन् ॥ 84 ॥

देवदेवोगी: सिद्धैर्गधर्वेपि संयुतम् ।

देवेऊनप्री जेबाभि निहन्त्य निहितः शरैः ॥ 85 ॥

एतब्छुत्वा ततो वायवं हरिश्छान्मय भुपते: ।

चाण्डाल: कुपितः प्राह वेयमानं महीपतिन् ॥ 86 ॥

The King said: “O Lord of the Cāndāla! Put me to some other task that is very difficult. I will do that easily. Or if you have an enemy, specify and I will kill him no doubt within an instant. I will give you the whole earth by killing him. Even if Indra comes against you with the other Devas, or Dānavas, or Uragas, or Kinnaras, or Siddhas, or Gandharvas, I will slay him with my sharpened arrows, but I will never be able to kill a woman.” The Cāndāla, then, began to tremble with anger at these words and said to the King.

चाण्डाल उवाच

नैतद्धावयं सुधटितं यद्धावयं दासकर्जिततम् ।

चाण्डालदासतां कृत्वा सूराणां भाग्ये सच्चः ।

दास किं बहुना नूनं शृणु मे गततो वचः ॥ 87 ॥

निर्जैज तव चेद्रस्ति किंचित्वापरभं हृदि ।

किमर्थ दासतां गताश्रण्डालस्य तु वेण्यमि ॥ 88 ॥

गृहाणैनं ततः खड्गाम्याच्छिन्नि शिरोअधुबम् ।

एवमुन्त्राश द्वाण्डालो गोड खड्गं न्येवद्वग ॥ 89 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागाते महापुराणो सतमकन्ये हरिश्रद्वीपाखाने

पद्धविशोउवायः 11 25 11

"You are a servant and what you have spoken is not fit for a servant. Working as a slave of a Cāṇḍāla, you are speaking the words of the gods. Therefore, O slave! hear now what I say; no need of exchanging any further words. O Shameless One! If you fear sin a bit why then did you accept the slavery in a Cāṇḍāla's house. Take this sword

and cut off her head." Thus speaking the Cāṇḍāla gave him the axe.

Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter of the Seventh

Book on the quarrels between Hariścandra and

Viśvāmitra in the Mahā Purānan,

Śrimaddevī- bhāgavatam, of 18,000 by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXVI

On the Sorrows of Hariscandra

सूत उवाच

ततो5थ भूपति: प्रह राजीं स्थित्या हाधोगुखः ।

अत्रोपधिष्यशां वाले पापस्य पुरतो मम ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: The King Harisācandra with his face bent low thus said to the Queen: "O Young One! I am a great sinner, otherwise why shall I be ready to do this heinous act! However now sit before me.

शिरते छेदीथ्यामि हन्तु शक्नीते चेतकर: ।

पूर्वमुक्ता समुधाय खद्रां हन्तु गतो नृपः ॥ 2 ॥

If my hand be capable to kill you, then it will cut off your head." Thus saying, the King took the axe and moved forward to cut her.

न जानाति नृपः पर्नीं सा न जानाति भूपतिम् ।

अववीद्भूगुःखातां स्वमृत्युमिफकांक्षती ॥ ३ ॥

As the King did not recognise her as His Queen, so the Queen did not recognise him as Her husband, the King. So the Queen, being very much strained with sorrow, began to utter with a view to court her death.

स्वयाच

चाण्डाल शृषु मे वाक्यं किंचित्चं यदि मन्यसे ।

भृतसितछित मे पुत्रो नातिपूरे बक्षि: पुत्रत् ॥ 4 ॥

तं द्वहामि हर्त यावदानयित्या त्वांतिकम् ।

तावत्पतीक्ष्नतां पछायसिना शाततस्य मान् ॥ 5 ॥

O Cāndāla! It you like, I say something; hear my son is dead and is lying close to the outer skirts of the city. Wait till I bring my child before you and do his burning ceremonies. Next you can cut me off by your axe."

तेनाथ बाढमित्युक्न्या प्रेषिता बालकं प्रति ।

सा जगामातिछुःखातिं विलपन्ती सुदारुभणम् ॥ ६ ॥

भार्यां तस्य नरेन्रस्य सर्वेद्धे हिं बालकम् ।

हा पुर हा वस्न शिशणे इत्येवं वदती मुड़ः ॥ ७ ॥

कृष्ण विश्वाणं मलिना पांसुप्वस्तगिरोहा ।

प्रभानाभूमिमागच स्वां प्याप्याविशण्डूवि ॥ ८ ॥

The King said: "Very well; let that be," and gave her permission to go to her dead son. The Queen, emaciated and pale, her body being covered all over with dust arrived at the burning ground and taking her dead son, bitten by a serpent, on her lap cried out loudly O Son! O my Child! O my young Son!" and referring to her husband said: "O King! See, to day, the sad condition of your son, lying on the ground, as his bed.

राजप्रद स्ववाल्ते त पश्यसीह महीतले ।

यमागं स्वसखिधिर्दे डुशद्धिता मृतम् ॥ 9 ॥

My son went to play with other boys and, bitten by a cruel poisonous serpent, left his life." Hearing the pitiful cry of that helpless woman, the King Harisćandra went to the dead and took off the cover of his face.

तत्या विलापगर्धं तमाकषर्षे स नाराधिप: ।

गशवर्धिधिमगतव वक्षमताशिपतच्च ॥ 10 ॥

Due to the long exile and the difficulties thereof, the Queen was changed altogether in her outer form, so the King could not recognise her weeping as his wife.

तां तथा हृदर्ती भार्वा नाभिज्ञानाति भूमिपः ।

चिरप्रवाससंस्तंता पुनर्जतामिवबालम् ॥ 1 1 ॥

Book VII Chapter XXVI

साउपि तं चाफकेशानंतं पुगे दृष्ट्वा जाटालकम् ।

नाथ्यजानावृषवरं शुक्वबुक्तवचोयमम् ॥ १२ ॥

On the other hand the King, too, had not the curled hair on his head as before; it has turned into matted hair and his skin especially has become like the bark of a dried tree; so the Queen could not make out the King also. The King then noticed all the King-making auspicious signs on the several limbs of that dead boy, poisoned all over and lying on the ground and began to think thus:

भूमी निवित्ते बालं बृद्धास उर्गीविधपीडितम् ।

नरेन्द्रलक्षणोपेतमचिंशवदतीं वृभः ॥ १३ ॥

अस्य पूर्णेन्दुवढ़कं शुभभूजसम्बजपम् ।

दर्पिण्यतिमोतुक्रकपोल्युगगोषितम् ॥ १४ ॥

नीलाकेशान्तुक्रवितात्यासान्दार्यमितर्शिणः ।

राजीवसरुपुं नेत्रे अंग्रेति विवर्षकतोपोम् ॥ १५ ॥

विशालवक्षा दीर्घक्षी दीर्घबाहूनतांकाः ।

विशालपादो गम्भीर: सुक्ष्मांगुल्यवर्शीधर: ॥ १६ ॥

गुणालपादो गम्भीरताभिकन्नतकंधरः ।

The face of the child is very beautiful like the Full Moon, nowhere, there is any scar nor anything like this; the nose is high; the two cheeks are clean like a mirror and specious; the hairs are blue, curling, similar, long and waving, the two eyes are widely expanded like a full blown lotus, the two lips are red like Bimba fruits; the chest is wide and spacious, the eyes are stretched up to the ears; the arms are extending up to the knees; the shoulders are elevated; the legs are elongated, yet god-like like a lotus stem; the appearance is grave, the fingers are fine, yet strong enough to hold the world; the navel is deep and the region of the shoulders elevated.

अहो कई नोरूत्रय कर्यायेप कुले शिगुः ॥ 17 ॥

जातो नीतः कृतलोने कालपाणागुरावमना ।

Certainly this boy was born in a royal family. Alas! What a pain is this! The cruel Death has reduced him to this state!

मूल उवाच

एवं दूर्वाउध तं बालं मातुरंके प्रसारितम् ॥ १ ८ ॥

स्मृतिमध्यापतो राजा हाहेत्वश्रुपयापातयत् ।

सो3प्युबाच च वतयो मे दुशामेतामुपापातः ॥ १९ ॥

नीतो यदि च योगेण कृतांतैतान्यनो वर्णम् ।

विचारयित्या राज्ञसी हीक्षीश्रस्तथा स्थितः ॥ 20 ॥

ततो राजी महादुःखावेशादिद्मभाषत ।

Sūta said: Thus looking carefully that boy in the lap of his mother from his head to foot, the King Hariścandra got back to his ancient recollections. He recognised the boy to be his and wept aloud repeating the words Oh! Oh! The tears flowed from his eyes and he said: "This is my boy that has been reduced to this state! Oh! The cruel Fate!" Though the boy is dead, yet the King remained bewildered for a moment. The queen then spoke out of terrible pain: "O Child! What sin is that which has caused this dire calamity, I cannot imagine!"

गत्सुवाच

हा वस्त कस्य पाणस्य त्वध्यानादिरं महत् ॥ 21 ॥

दुःख्यमपतितं घोरं तदूरं नोपलभ्यते ।

हा नाथ राजन्यवता मापनायस्य सुर्ध:वितान् ॥ 22 ॥

कमिन्मांस्यीयते स्थाने विश्वधरं केम हेतुना ।

राज्यनाश: सुहृत्त्यागो भार्यान्तयविक्रयः ॥ 23 ॥

हरिश्रस्यर राजर्षे: किं विध्यातः कृते तया ।

इति तत्या वचः श्रृता राजा स्थानच्युतस्तद ॥ 24 ॥

प्रत्यधिप्रानय देवीं तां पुत्रं च तिथर्थ नगत् ।

"O my Husband! O King! I am extremely worried of pains and troubles; leaving me thus, how is and where you are passing away your time in a calm, quiet state! O Fortune! It is You that has brought about the loss of the Rājarsī Harisācandra's dominion, the separation from his friends and what more, you have caused his wife and son to be sold! Has he done so much mischief to you!" Hearing her cries, the King's patience gave way and he came to recognize the Devi and the son and exclaimed 'She is my wife and dead boy is my son. Oh! What a series of troubles. one coming after another.

कट्टे मयैव पत्नीय बालक्रशीय मे सूतः ॥ 25 ॥

ज्ञाला पपात सन्तपो मूढांमितिजागम है ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

सा च तं प्रत्यिभूतया तामवस्थामुपगतम् ॥ 26 ॥

भूष्टिन सिपपातातां निश्रेशा धरणीतले ।

वेतनां प्राय्य राजेत्रो राजपनी च ती समम् ॥ 27 ॥

वितलेपतु: सुसंतन्ती शोकभारेण पीक्षिति ।

Being overpowered with extreme trouble and pain, the King fell unconscious on the ground; the Queen, too, looking at the King's state, fell motionless, and, void of senses, no sooner she recognised him as the King Hariścandra. Some time after, the King and Queen both got back at the same time their consciousness and, with great sorrow and agony, began to lament.

राजोवाच

हा वस्स सुकुमार्ते ते वदन्तं कृष्णतालकम् ॥ 28 ॥

पश्यतो मे पुर्यं दीनं हृदयं किं न दीयते ।

तात तातेति मधुरं बुवाणं स्वयमागतम् ॥ 29 ॥

उपगुहा कदा बव्ये वस्य वस्मिते सीह्यात् ।

The King said: “O Child! Why my heart does not rend to thousand pieces, seeing to day your gentle face pale lifeless, that was once beautiful with curls of hairs! O Rohita! When will you come to me saying in a sweet voice ‘Father! Father!’ When shall I address you affectionately ‘Oh my child! Oh my child!’ embracing you within my breast!

कस्य जानुपणितेन पिंगेन त्रिस्तिरेपना ॥ 30 ॥

मन्तीरीयमुसंतं त्वांगं मतलेष्यित ।

न वार्तं मम ससभुतं मनो ह्वदयनन्दन ॥ 31 ॥

मयाउसि पिटुमापित्या दिक्षितीय नेय सकुतत् ।

गतं राज्यमग्रेये मे सबान्धवधनं महत् ॥ 32 ॥

हीनदेवाइग्रसेन चृछो मे तनयस्ततः ।

अहं महातिद्रस्य पुरस्याननयड्जनम् ॥ 33 ॥

निरीक्षत्रघ चोरेण विशेषाणधिकृतोर्युना ।

Whose tawny coloured dust on his knees will spoil my clothes, lap and my body! O Delightful Son! I have sold you as if an ordinary thing, though I am your father. As yet my pleasure of having a son is not satisfied. Owing to the mockery of the mean Fate, my unbounded kingdom, friends, and abundance of riches all have vanished away!

Finally I had one son and that too is now in the jaws of death! Oh! With what an amount of terrible pain I am being burnt up to day when I am seeing the lotus-face of my son, smitten by a serpent and lying dead on the ground!"

एवमुक्ता तमादाय वालकं बाध्यगद्धः ॥ 34 ॥

परिष्क्ण च निश्छोटो मूच्छैया निपयात ह ।

ततलं पतितं दूद्या शैल्या चैवमधित्यत् ॥ 35 ॥

अयं स पुरुषव्यापः स्वरेणीवोपल्वयते ।

विद्रज्ञनमनश्छीरे हरिश्छ्ञो न सशेणः ॥ 36 ॥

तवास्य नासिका तुझा तिलपुष्योपाण सृषा ।

Thus speaking in a voice choked with feelings and with tears in his eyes, as soon as he was going to take his boy in his lap, he fell senseless on the ground. Seeing the King lying on the ground, Śaivyā thus thought: “Such is His voice as makes me certain that He is the King Hariścandra, the best of men and the delighter of the learned men’s hearts.

दन्ताश मुकुलप्रख्या: ख्यातकीर्तमैहान्म: ॥ 37 ॥

श्रणतानमानतः कम्याछोर्वं स नरेश्वः ।

विद्यार पूरशोकं सा पश्यन्तीं पतितं पतिभ् ॥ 38 ॥

प्रद्वा वित्सिता दीना भर्तपुरातिरीपीडिता ।

वीक्षन्ती सा तदारूपनमूर्छेना धरपीतले ॥ 39 ॥

प्रायः चेतश्र शनकैः सा गरुदरमभात ।

His teeth are like those of the famous Hariścandra just like to Mukul and his nose is elevated and soft like the Tila flower. But if he be Hariścandra, how is it that he has come to this burning ground!" Thus thinking, while she looked at the King, leaving for the moment the sorrow for his son, joy, pain and surprise attacked her heart simultaneously; and she, in that state, fell down unconscious on the ground. Then gradually regaining consciousness she spoke in a pitiful voice: "O Fortune! You have caused to the King who was once like an Immortal, the loss of his kingdom, friends, and even the sale of his wife and son. And now you have transformed him into a Cāndāla! You are merciless, religionless, void

Book VII Chapter XXVI

of any justice as to what is just and what is unjust. You are shameless.

धित्मत्वों देह ह्राकरण निर्मयादि जुगुपिति ॥ 40 ॥

येनायममग्रखो नीते राजा श्याकताम् ।

राज्यनगो सुहृत्यागं भार्यानतयिक्रवम् ॥ 41 ॥

प्राथिवताउपि येनाङ् चाण्डलोपं कृते ग्रुप: ।

नाङ् पर्यापति ने छत्र सिंहुसन्माथापि च ॥ 42 ॥

वायाख्याने वाउपि कोयं विधिविषयेः ।

यथायस्य जस्तः पूर्वे राजानो भृच्चतां गताः ॥ 43 ॥

स्वोतरीयै: प्रकृत्यिति विराजकं महीतलम् ।

So fie on you! O King! Where are gone today that royal umbrella, that throne, that Câmara, and that pair of fans on you both sides! Oh! What is this transformation caused by the Vidhātā (the Ordainer of Fate)! When the high-souled King used to travel, all the kings used to remove as His servants the dust of the roads by their clothing! Oh! Is He the same King of Kings, Hariścandra who is roaming in this unholy burning ground, burdened too much by his load of sufferings!

सोउंयं कालसंलेनने घटीपदनितने ॥ 44 ॥

भृतनिमाल्यसुर्जातलैन्यकेशसुर्जाभे

वसानिथ्यंदंसृष्यकमाणदलमिष्ठत ॥ 4 5 ॥

भस्मागतार्थद्धार्थस्थमज्ञासंघघुभीषणे ।

Oh! Innumerable human skulls are lying here; the small earthen posts (brought for the purification of the bodies of the dead) are lying scattered close to each; the garlands of flowers for the dead, being intertwined with the hairs of the dead, are presenting a grim spectacle! The ashes, charcoals, half-burnt dead bodies, bones, and marrows all arranged one over another make the place more hideous. The marrows of the dead bodies have come out and are dried up by the sun.

गृधरोपामयुनाद्रतें पुरुष्धूरविद्धर्मे ॥ 46 ॥

चितापुभायावतये नीलीकृतदितान्ते ।

कृपाणास्यादनमुदा संप्रकृतीनशारे ॥ 47 ॥

चरत्यविधे यजनैः शरणाने दुःखपीडितः ।

एवमुक्त्वा ए सिंलिष्य कपटे राजे नृपायबा ॥ 48 ॥

कई शोकसमाविष्टा विल्लापात्रौय गिरा ।

राजन्स्वनो5थ तत्थं वा यदेतन्यन्ते भवान् ॥ 49 ॥

तत्कल्यतां महाभाग मनो वे मुहाते मन ।

At places, vultures, and Šakunis are crying hideously and the crows and other birds, eager to eat flesh, are roaming to and fro. All the quarters of the sky are looking blue with the smoke, arising out of the burning of the dead. The Rāksasas are constantly roaming hither and thither, gladly feasting on the human flesh. Is the King passing his days thus in this place? Alas! Oh! What a painful thing is this!" The daughter of the King, Šaivyā, was overpowered with an awful sorrow; and clasping the neck of the King, began to lament again, in a pitiful voice. "O King! You have spoken that you are a Cāndāla. Is this a dream? Or a Reality? O King! If it be true you are a slave of the Cāndāla, then say to me; my mind is being deluded very much! (i.e., I cannot indulge this idea).

यदोतैदं धर्मत्र नास्ति धर्मे सहायता ॥ 50 ॥

तथैव विषदेवादिपुजने सत्यापतने ।

नास्ति धर्म: कुतः सर्वे नार्जवे नानुगसंता ॥ 51 ॥

यत्र त्व धर्मपनः स्वाराज्याद्वशेपितः ।

O Knower of Dharma! You have shewn your great zeal towards Dharma; and, for that reason, you are displaced from your royal throne! Now if such help comes out of worshipping the Brāhmins and the Devas, then Dharma cannot stand and, along with it, the truth, simplicity and harmlessness cannot exist."

सूत उवाच

इति तत्या चच: शूला नि: श्रव्योष्णं समुद्ध: ॥ 52 ॥

कथयामास तत्वंये यथा प्राप्त: श्वापकात्म ।

रुदित्वा सा तु सुविरं नि: श्रव्योष्णं सुवृ:क्षिता ॥ 53 ॥

स्वपुत्रमरणं भीरुर्थंथालनं न्ववेदयत ।

Sūta said: Hearing these words from the thin Śaivyā, the King took a heavy sigh and then described to her in detail with tears flowing on his neck, how he got the Cāndāla state. The fearful Queen became very much pained to hear all this and having a deep sigh, described, as it was, how her son died.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

शुत्वा राजा तथा वाक्यं निपपात महीत्ते ॥ 54 ॥

मृतपुरं समानीय निद्धाया विलिहन्युः ।

हरिश्छन्धपो प्रह् शैल्यां गद्रद्वा गिरा ॥ 55 ॥

कुर्ब्व स्वामिन: प्रेथ्यं छेदीथला शिरो मम ।

स्वामिड्रोहे न तेरस्त्वा माउस्मो भव भूपते ॥ 56 ॥

माउस्मचं तल राजेन्द्र परजोहस्तु पातकम् ।

O, hearing this, the King fainted and fell unconscious on the ground. Then regaining gradually his consciousness, he began to kiss, with his tongue, the face of his dead son. Śaivyā then said in a choked voice: "Now sever off my head and obey your master's word." O King! You will be saved then as having kept your truth; and your master's order would be carried out.

पुस्ताकर्ण राजा तु पपात घुवि मृष्टितः ॥ 57 ॥

क्षणेन चेतनां प्रायः विल्लतायातितुःश्रितः ।

Hearing this, the King fainted and fell down senseless. Getting up conscious in a moment, he began to weep bitterly."

राजोवाच

कयं प्रिये त्वया प्रोकं चवनं त्वतिनिषुतम् ॥ 58 ॥

यदारकयं भवेद्रुक्ते तत्कर्म क्रियते कवम् ।

The King said: "O Beloved! How have you uttered such cruel words? How can I execute that which is hard even to utter!

पल्युवाच

मया च पूक्तिता गौरी देवा विग्रास्तवैव च । ५९ ॥

भविष्यसि पतित्वं मे ह्यान्सिज्ञानि प्रभो ।

श्रुत्वा राजा तत्व वाक्यं निपपात महीत्ते ॥ 60 ॥

भृगस्य पुरस्य तदा चुचुवढ़ पुःशितो मुखम् ।

Śaivyā said: ‘O Lord! I have worshipped the Devi Gaurī and other Devas and the Brāhmins; so, with their mercy, i will get you as my husband in my future birth. Hearing this, the King again fell down instantly on the ground; getting up immediately, he was overpowered with sorrow and began to kiss the face of the dead son.

राजोवाय

प्रिये न रोचते दीर्घं कालं ललेगं मयासीशतुम् ॥ 6 1 ॥

नात्यवतीस्य तत्वीं एयय मे मन्दभायताम् ।

चाण्डालोनानुज्ञातः प्रवेध्ये ज्वलनं यदि ॥ 6 2 ॥

चाण्डालादासां तायये पुतरण्य-वतवमनि ।

The King said: "O Dear! I wo'nt be able to suffer any longer for a long time. But, O thin-bodied One! See, I am so very unfortunate that I have no command even over my heart. If I enter into the fire without the permission of the Cāndāla, then I will have to become again the slave of a Cāndāla in my future birth. Think it over.

नरकं च परं प्रायः खेदं प्रायमाथि दाहणम् ॥ 63 ॥

तापं प्रायमापि संग्राय महातीरवरीरे ।

मानस्य दुःखजलधी वरं प्राणीर्वियोजनम् ॥ 64 ॥

एकोंपि बालको योउभापतीईगकर: सुतः ।

After that I will have to go to the hell and be tormented there. But this too I find beneficial to me. Rather I will go to the hell Mahā Raurava and there suffer for a long time the torments of the hell, yet I do not like to live a little longer when my boy, the continuer of my family, has left his life out of the queen fancies of the Great Time and I be merged in the sorrows for my son.'

मन देवतायुवोगेन मृत: सोर्पि वकरीसा ॥ 65 ॥

कर्थ प्राणानिवमुंचामि परायतोजीम इगृतेः ।

तथापि दुःखबालुवाचव्यामि तु निजां ततुम् ॥ 66 ॥

My bodys is now at the command of the Cāndāla. How can I in this state quit my life without his permission. If I leave my body, I will be indebted to him and I will have to suffer in hell. Let this be so; still I will leave off my body, the receptacle of all these pains and troubles.

त्रैलोके मानित सदुःखं नानिपशवने तथा ।

वैतरण्यां कृतस्तद्धापुरां पुराविलले ॥ 67 ॥

सोर्ड सुतारगीरेणादीयामने हुतागने ।

Nowhere, in the Trilokī, is any pain like that felt in the demise of a son, not in crossing the Vaitaranī nor in the Asipratravanam! So I will now throw myself on the burning fire along with the dead body of my son.

निपतिथामि त्वन्हिंष श्नत्थां तन्मातुभूमि ॥ 68 ॥

न चक्चयं त्वया किंचिदातः कमललोचने ।

Book VII Chapter XXVII

मम वाक्यं च तत्वीरि निवधोत्रहात्मानसा ॥ 69 ॥

अनुज्ञानात्र श पछ्छ तं विषयेण सृष्टिसमे ।

So, O Thin-bodied One! You should now excuse me, i.e., do not prevent me. O Sweet-smiling One! I now permit you to go back to the house of the Brāhmim.

यदि दतं यदि हुतं गुचो यदि लोषिता: ॥ 70 ॥

संभामः परलोकें मे निजपुत्रेणे चेल्च्या ।

इह लोके कुतस्त्वेतद्विव्यति समीधितम् ॥ 71 ॥

If ever I have given in charity riches, offered oblation to the fire, and given satisfaction to my superiors then, in the other world, I will get you and my son. But there is no such chance now in this world.

यन्या हस्ता किश्रिद्रसि तां शुचित्यमे ।

अशोषुर्भ क्तसर्वं भ्रन्तव्यं मम यास्यतः ॥ ७२ ॥

राजपनीति गर्जण नावड़ेयः स मे द्विजः ।

सर्वयनेन तोयः स्यात्यामी दैवतवच्छुषे ॥ ७३ ॥

O Sweet-smiling One! If ever I had given you offence while conversing or making jokes with you, now at the time of my parting, excuse them all. O Auspicious One! Never despise the Brāhmīn out

of your pride as a Queen. Look on your master as a Deva and try all your best to satisfy him."

राज्यवाच

अहमध्यत्र राजर्षे निपतिथे हुतागने ।

दुःखभागसहादेव सह यास्यामि वे त्यया ॥ 7 4 ॥

त्याय सह मम अंशो मानं नान्यथा भवेत् ।

सह स्वर्गे च नरकं त्वया पोक्ष्यामि मानन्द ॥ 7 5 ॥

श्रुता राजा तदोवाच एवममतु पतित्रते ।

इति शीगदैवीभागवते महापुराणे सनस्मकन्ये हरीक्षन्नोषाल्ञाने

श्वविंशोद्यथा: 11 26 11

The Queen said: “O Rājarsī! I will also throw myself on the burning fire. O Deva! I will not be able to carry on this burden, so I will accompany You. It is better for me to accompany you; so there will not be otherwise. O Giver of Honour! I will enjoy with You heaven or suffer with You in the hell.” Hearing this, the King said: “O Chaste One! Do as you please.”

Here ends the Twenty-sixth, Chapter of the Seventh Book on the narration of the sorrows of Hariścandra in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

[Illegible Text]

Book VII Chapter XXVII

CHAPTER XXVII

On Harisćandra's Going to the Heavens

सूत खवच

ततः: कृत्वा चित्ता राजा आरोध्य ततयं स्वकम् ।

भार्यया सहितो राजा बढ्जांतसिदुस्तदा ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: The King Harisācandra then prepared the funeral pile, and placed his son on it. Next he and his wife with folded palms merged themselves in the meditation of the Parameśvari, the Lady of of the Universe.

धिन्तन्यम्पलेग्रानी जगताश्री जगदीधीम् ।

पछकोशान्तरातं पुरच्छद्वास्वकपिणीम् ॥ 2 ॥

रक्तान्बरणरीधानां कंकणारससागगम् ।

नानायुध्यरामंबां जगत्यालन्ततव्यम् ॥ 3 ॥

तस्य चिन्तयमानस्य सर्वे देवा: स्वासवा: ।

धर्म प्रमुखतः कृत्वा समाजगमुस्त्वार्थिता: ॥ 4 ॥

आगत्य सर्वे प्रोचुसं तराजब्छुण महाप्रभो ।

That Hundred-eyed is reigning within these five Koşas (or sheaths) Annamaya, etc. She resides in the sacral plexus of the nature of Brahman, of the Puruşa composed of Anna and Rasa And She is the Ocean of Mercy. Wearing the red robe, She is ever ready with various weapons in Her hands for the preservation of the Universe. When the King was engaged thus in meditating on Her, Indra and all the Devas with Dharma in their front came to the King Hariścandra with no delay. They all coming up said to the King: "O King! Hear.

आहूं पितामहः साक्षाद्धिश्व भगवान्वयम् ॥ ५ ॥

साध्यः सविश्वभर्तो लोकपालः स्वारणाः ।

नागाः सिद्धा सर्पभर्घा कृत्रश्रेय तथा3श्रनी ॥ ६ ॥

एते चान्येउथ बह्वो विश्वामित्रस्तथैव च ।

Srimaddevithāgavatam

विश्वप्रेयण यो भैत्री कर्तुभिच्छित धार्मतः ॥ 7 ॥

विश्वाधिमसः से तेरभीटागहतुं सत्यागिच्छित ।

I am the Grand Sire and here are present Dharma Himself, the Bhagavān Viṣṇu, the Sādhyas, Viśvedevas, Maruts, the Lokapālas, the Cāranas, the Nāgas, the Gandharvas, Siddhas, Rudras, the twin Aśvins, and all the other Devas and Viśvāmitra, who going over the three worlds wishes to make friendship according to the law ordained by Dharma, is now himself desirous to grant you your desired objects."

धर्म उवाच

मा राजन्नाहसं कार्यिधीनोंई त्वामुपानतः ॥ 8 ॥

तितिश्वासमस्तथीःस्वदुगुणीः पितोभिति: ।

Dharma said: “O King! Do not risk such an hazardous undertaking. I am Dharma; I am satisfied with your patience and forbearance, control of your senses, and the other Sāttvic qualities and have therefore come to you.

इन उवाच

हरिश्रत्र महाभाग प्राप्तः शक्रोप्रिय तेर्रतिकम् ॥ 9 ॥

त्वासऊघ भावापुंत्रण क्षिता लोकाः सनाताः ।

आगेहि प्रिविदं राजन्मार्वापुंत्रसम्पित्तः ॥ 10 ॥

सुदुष्पार्य नैरर्यैर्वितमातीयकर्मिधः ।

Indra said: “O Hariscandra! I have also come to you. So your good fortune knows no bounds, today. You with your wife and son, have conquered the Eternal World. O King! What is hardly attainable by any human being, you have conquered that, by dint of your own merits. So Get up to the Heavens (vibrations of the Fourth-dimensional Space) with your wife and son.

सूत उवाच

ततोप्रमतयं वर्षमपमृत्यनिशानगम ॥ 1 1 ॥

इनः प्रासुवदाकाणिष्चितामध्यगते शिशी ।

पुष्पवृष्टिश मर्ती दुर्भिभवम एव च ॥ 12 ॥

Sūta said: Indra then sprinkled over the dead son on the funeral piles, the netcer, destroying the fatal effect product by unnatural death. At that time

big showers of flowers were thrown on him and Dundubhīs were sounded.

समुक्तथी मृत: पुरो राजस्तस्य महात्मनः ।

सुकुमारतनुः सवस्थः प्रसनः प्रीतमानसः ॥ 13 ॥

ततो राजा हरिश्रद्र: परिछज्ञ सुतं तदा ।

सभार्यः स्वाश्रिया युक्ते दिव्यमाल्यांबारबाह्नः ॥ 14 ॥

In the meanwhile, the prince got up from the funeral pile. He got back his former beautiful body and he looked peaceful, healthy, and greatly satisfied. Hariścandra embraced his son instantly in his bosom; the King and Queen also both regained their former beautiful appearance at that time and were decked with clothes and garlands.

स्वस्थः सम्पूर्णद्वयो मुदा परमया वृतः ।

बधूव तत्स्थणादिदों धर्म चैवमभालत ॥ 15 ॥

सभार्यस्वं सपुत्रश स्वलोकं सहितं पराम् ।

सभारोह महाभाग निजानां कर्मणां फलम् ॥ 16 ॥

Their hearts were then deeply filled with great joy at their getting back their desired object and their health. Indra then said to the King: "O Highly Fortunate One! Now ascend to the Heavens with your son and wife, by dint of your meritorious deeds and get the holy happy ends of your endeavours."

हरिश्रनु उवाच

देवराजान्नुज्ञातः स्वामिना धृषचेन हि ।

अकृत्वा निष्कृति तस्य नारोक्षेवे वै सुगतलयम् ॥ 17 ॥

Harīścandra said: "O King of the Devas! The Cāndāla is my master; so until I get freedom from his bondage, I cannot go to the Heavens without his permission."

धर्म जवाच

तर्वेवं भावियं क्लेशप्रभायात्मायाय।

आत्मा धुचपत्तां नीती दर्शितं तच्च पकर्ण् ॥ 18 ॥

Dharma said: "I am myself that Cāndāla and had assumed that from and shewed you the city of the Cāndāla. Knowing that you will suffer.

इन्य उवाच

प्राध्यैत यत्परं स्थानं समसतीनुजैभूषिव ।

Book VII Chapter XXVII

तदारोह हरिश्रत्र स्थानं पुण्यकृती नृणाम् ॥ 19 ॥

What more than this, that I myself am that very Cangāla, I am that very Brāhmin and I am that very poisonous serpent who had smitten your boy."

Note: This is all the one and the same the Fourth Dimensional Space.

Indra said: Harisācranda! Now got up, by virtue of your own meritorious deeds to that place which is highly coveted by all the human beings that exist on earth.

हरिचरू उवाच

देवाराज नमस्तुर्णे वाक्यं चेदे निवोधे मे ।

मळोकामनमसः कोसले नगरे नगर: ॥ 20 ॥

Harīścandra said: “O King at the Devas! I bow down to you. Kindly consider what I say now. All the inhabitants of the city Kośala are in mourning, due to their being separated from me.

तिहीन तानपार्यैवं कर्थ यायाय्यं दिव्यम् ।

ब्रहृहत्या सुरायानं गोवध: क्षीवधस्तथा ॥ 21 ॥

How then, Can I go to the Heavens leaving my sorrow-stricken subjects here. To abandon the Bhaktas, the devotees, is to incur the great sin due to the murder of a Brāhmín, the killing of a woman, the drinking of liquors and the killing of a cow.

तुल्यमेभिर्हायां भक्त्यागादुदाहतम् ।

भक्ते भक्तत्याज्यं त्यजतः स्याकक्षे सुखम् ॥ 22 ॥

सैहिता न प्रयास्यामि तस्माखछा दिवं जज ।

यदि ते सहिता: स्वर्ग मया याति सुरेश्व ॥ 23 ॥

ततो3दपरि यास्यामि नरकं वारपि तैः सह ।

O Indra! It is highly inadvisable to abandon a Bhakta who is always in service. How can one be happy when one abandons such devotees. So I will not go to the Heavens without them. You better go back to the Heavens. O Lord of the Devas! If my subjects can go with me, I am ready to go with them to the Heavens or to the Hell."

इन्व उवाच

बहून पुण्यपापानि तेलां भिन्जानि वै नृप ॥ 24 ॥

कथं संपातभोज्यं त्वं भूपा स्वर्गमभीयासि ।

Indra said: “O King! Some of them are more sinful, some are more meritorious; different grades of people exist there. So, O King! How can you desire all to go simultaneously to the Heavens.”

हरिश्रत्र उवाच

भुक्ते शक्र नृपो राज्यं भपावासुकतेधूम. ॥ 25 ॥

यजते च महापत्रेः कर्म पूर्तं क्रगेति च ।

तच्च तेषां प्रभावेण मया सर्वेमनुषितम् ॥ 26 ॥

उपदादार संस्थये तान्हे स्वर्गतिप्रिया ।

Harisācranda said: 'O Indra! It is through the power of the citizens that the Kings enjoy their kingdoms, perform great many sacrifice, and do many engineering works (in excavating tanks, etc.) There is no doubt in this. So I, too, have due religious acts and sacrifice through my citizen's help. They gave me all the articles necessary for kings. So how can I now quit them so that I may get the Heavens.

तस्माठ्यम देवेश किंचवर्गस्त सुचौहितम् ॥ 27 ॥

दत्तमिष्टमथो जलं सामान्यं तैनस्तदनु नः ।

बहुकातोपभोग्यं च फलं यवमय कर्मगम् ॥ 28 ॥

तदनु दिनमयेकं तै: समं त्वत्सादतः ।

O Lord of the Devas! If my subjects have no such Punyams as to enable them to the Heavens, then let the Punyams done by me in giving away charities, in the performance of sacrifice, and other meritorious works be divided amongst them equally. If I myself enjoy Svarga for a very long time; but, if by your favour, I can enjoy with them even one day's residence in Švarga for my merits, that is also superior to me."

सूत जवाच

एवं भविष्यतीत्युक्चा शक्रकिंश्वपृवतः ॥ 29 ॥

प्रसत्रचेता धर्मश्र विश्वाशिक्र शापित्रः ।

गत्वा तु नगरं सर्वे चातुर्वयं समाकुलम् ॥ 30 ॥

हरिश्रान्स्य निकटे प्रोवाच विद्याधिपः ।

Sūta said: 'Let that be;' saying thus Indra, the Lord of the three worlds, Viśvāmitra, and Dharma who were very pleased went immediately to

Ayodhyā from Kāśī by their yogic power. In an instant they reached Ayodhyā, filled with the Brāhmaṇas, Kṣattriyas, Vaīsyās, and Śūdas; and Indra exclaimed to them all: 'Let all the citizens come before Harisācranda, without any delay.

आगव्छौं जना: शीधे खर्सौंको सुवुतैंम् ॥ ३ १ ॥

धर्मप्रसादासंप्राप्तं सर्वैयुभाधिरेव तु ।

हरिश्रज्ञोपि तात्मवर्ज्ञनावगरावसिनः ॥ ३२ ॥

प्राह राजा धर्मपोरो दिव्यमारुहातामिति ।

Today they all will go to the Heavens by virtue of the Punyams of Harisācandra. Thus saying, they took all the men to Harisācandra. Then that religious King told his subjects, 'let you all now ascend with me to the Heavens."

सूत उवाच

तद्रिद्रस्य वचः श्रुत्वा प्रीतास्तस्य च भुपतेः ॥ ३३ ॥

ये संसारेषु निविर्थणातसे पूरं स्वतुरेषु वे ।

कृत्वा प्रहृष्टमनसो दिवमास्कहनुजना: ॥ 34 ॥

विमानवरामाक्त्वः सर्वे भाप्तयियम्हाः ।

Sūta said: Hearing these words of Indra and their King, they all became very glad. Then those who were engaged in their worldly desires, they handed over the charge of their worldly concerns to their own sons, gladly became ready to go up to the Heavens.

तवा सम्पुनहाशीते हरिश्रत्रशे पाधिवः ॥ 35 ॥

राजेर्धिधिचिच्य तनयं रोहिताखं महामानः ।

अयोध्याखे पुरे नये ह्वयुधज्ञान्विते ॥ 36 ॥

तनयं सुहद्धाधि प्रतिज्ञापिनन्द च ।

पुणयेन लभ्यां विपुर्णतं देवादीनां सुवुर्णभाम् ॥ 37 ॥

The high-minded King Hariścandra then installed his son Rohitāśva on the royal throne and permitted him to go the beautiful city Ayodhyā, filled with jolly and healthy inhabitants. Next addressing his son and friends, he took leave of them. Thus, by virtus of his own good deeds, the King Hariścandra attained great celebrate.

संप्राय कौतिलिंतुलां विमाने स महीपति: ।

आसांचेक कामागे शुर्धर्यतिवारजिते ॥ 38 ॥

ततस्ताईं समालोक्य रूलोकमन्ते तदाजगी ।

दैत्याचार्यं महाभागः सर्वशक्तार्यं तत्त्ववित् ॥ 39 ॥

He then got up and took his seat in the aerial car that has no equal and that goes at will. It was beautifully adorned, very rare even to the Devas and decked with bells emitting jingling Kinkini sounds. The high-souled Śukrācārya versed in the Śaštras and the Guru of the Daityas, seeing Haricārandra in the Vimāna, spoke thus:

शुक्र उवाच

अहो तिलित्वागाहत्यमहो दानकलं महत् ।

यदागतो हरिश्रत्रो महैंद्रस्य सलोकताम् ॥ 40 ॥

Oh! What is the glorious result of forbearance (Titiksā)! What is the great fruit of charity! Oh! Due to whose influence, the King Harisācandra today has attained the some region with Mahendra!

सूत उवाच

एतते सर्वमाख्यातं हरिश्रान्य चेध्टितम् ।

यः: शणोते च दुःखातः स सुखं लभते-वहम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

स्वर्गोंक्षी प्रापुवात्यकर्यं सुताशी सुतामापुवात् ।

भाव्योंक्षी प्रापुवाद्वारा सत्राज्यारी राज्यामपुवात् ॥ 4 2 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणि सतमस्कन्धे हरिश्रद्रोषाखाने

सत्वविरोधोअषय: 11 27 11

Sūta said: Thus I have described to you all the doings of Harisācandra. Any man, oppressed with sorrows and troubles, no doubt, attains constant happiness, if he hears it. What more than this, those who want Svarga get Svarga, those who want son get sons, those who want wife get wife, and those who want kingdoms get their kingdoms by hearing this incident.

Here ends the Twenty-seventh Chapter of the Seventh Book on the going of Harisācandra to the Heavens in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XXVIII

CHAPTER XXVIII

On the Glory of Śaṅkṣi Devi

जनमेजय उवाच

विश्वभिमदामाख्यानं हरिश्रान्य कीर्तिनम् ।

शताक्षीपादधनकस्य राजर्षिधिकस्य च ॥ १ ॥

शताक्षी सा कृतो जाता देवी भगवती शिवा ।

तत्कारणं वद मुने सायंकं जन्म मे कुक १ २ ॥

Janamejaya said: Rsi! Wonderful is the story of the religious Rājarsi Hariścandra that you have described, the great Bhakta of Śatāksī Devī! Why is that auspicious Śivā, the wife of Śiva, called Śatāksī? Explain to me, the cause of it, O Muni! And thus make my birth full of use and success.

को हिं देहना शणान्व्यंस्वृतीयं भायसीत शुद्धापीः ।

पदे पदेउधोपतय स्तलमध्यमपुन्ते ॥ 3 ॥

Who is there amongst the clear minded that gets fully satisfied, when he hears the good deeds of the Devi? Each sentence, describing the good deeds of the Devi, gives the undecaying fruits of Asvamedha Sacrifice.

व्यास उवाच

शृणु राजन्यक्ष्यायि शताश्रीसम्पयं शुभम् ।

तत्वावाच्छं न मे किंचिद्वीभानस्य विद्यते ॥ 4 ॥

Vyāsa said: O, King. Hear; I am describing the story of Śatāksī Devī. You are the great devotee of the Devī; so I have nothing that I cannot say to you.

दुर्गमाख्यो महादैन्यः पूर्वे परमदाफणः ।

हिरण्यश्राव्ये जातो रुभगुजो महाखणः ॥ 5 ॥

देवानां तु चलं वेदो नाशे तस्य सुना अपि ।

नंक्ष्यंत्येव न सन्देहो विधेयं तावदेव तत् ॥ 6 ॥

In olden times, there was a great Dānava named Durgama; he was very cruel. He, the son of Ruru, was born in the family of Hiranyāksa. [Once he thought within himself thus: 'The Munis offer oblations by Mantras as ordained in the Vedas.

विपुर्यतैतपश्यां गत: कर्तूं हिमालये ।

ब्रहाणं मनसा ध्याना वायुभक्षो व्यतिष्ठा ॥ 7 ॥

सहस्वर्वपर्यन्ते चकार परमं तपः ।

तेजसा तस्य लोकान्तु संतन्तः ससुगासुराः ॥ 8 ॥

And the Devas, eating the clarified butter (ghee) of these oblatios, get nurtured and strengthened.] The Vedas is the strength of the Devas; if the Vedas be destroyed, the Devas also would be destroyed. Thus it is advisable to destroy the Vedas. (There is no other easy way.) Thus thinking, he went to the Himālayas to perform tapasyā. He began to meditate Brahmā in the space of his heart, and, taking air only, passed away his time.

ततः प्रसोः भगवान्सीमाकडतुभुतुः ।

ययौ तस्ये वरं तुतुं प्रसमुपख्याजुकः ॥ 9 ॥

सामाधियं मीतिलाङ्ग सूट्यमह चतुर्मुखः ।

वरं वरय भई ते यसे मनसि वर्तते ॥ 10 ॥

[Mark here that all the Devas reside in space, a magnitude of the Fourth Dimension.] He practised hard tapaysā for one thousand years and the Devas and the Asuras and all the Lokas were agitated by the power of his Tejas (fiery lustre). Then the Bhagavān, the four-faced Brahmā, became pleased with him and mounting on his carrier, the Swan came up there to grant him the boon. Brahmā told clearly the Demon, sitting in Samādhi with his eyes closed, 'Let all be well with you; now ask what you desire?'

तत्वा तपसा तुहो वरदोगो3हमागतः ।

श्रृत्वा ब्रह्मुपुवादाणी व्य्थितः स सामधितः ॥ 11 ॥

पूजयित्वा वरं बेबे वेदाद्वेहि सुरेश्वर ।

त्रिषु लोकेषु ये मन्ना ब्राह्माणेषु सुरेष्यि ॥ 12 ॥

"Satisified with your tapasyā, I have come to grant you the boon." Hearing thus, the Demon got up from his Samādhi and worshipping Him duly, said: "O, Lord of the Devas! Give me all the Vedas.

विद्याने ते तु साधिष्ये मम सन्तु मेहश्र ।

बलं च देहि वेने स्याहेवानां च पराजयः ॥ 13 ॥

O, Maheśvara! Let all the Vedic Mantrams, that

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

are found in the three worlds, with the Brāhmaṇas and the Devas, come to me and give me such strength as would enable me to conquer the Devas."

इतं तस्य वचः शुवा तवास्त्रिन्ति वचो वव्न् ।

जगाम सत्यलोकं तु चतुर्वेदेश्वर: परः ॥ 14 ॥

ततःप्रभुति विश्रैस्तु विस्मृत्ता वेदराशयः ।

स्नानसंध्यानित्यहोममबाद्यज्ञजायादः ॥ 15 ॥

Hearing this, the God Brahmā, the author of the four Vedas, replied “Let it be as you wish.” and went away. Form that time, the Brāhmaṇas forgot all about the Vedas. So bathing, Sandhyā, daily Homas, Śrāddha, sacrifice, and Japam and other rites and performances, all became extinct.

वितुला धरणीषुते हाहाकारो महानभूत ।

किमिदं किमिदं चेति विश्रा ऊनुः परमस्पम् ॥ 16 ॥

Then a cry of universal distress arose on the surface of this wide earth; the Brāhmins began to say to each other: "How has this happened! How has this come to pass! Now what are we to do? Where the Vedas have disappeared.

वेदभावान्तदसामभि: कर्तेल्यं किमतः परम् ।

इति भूमौ महानर्षे जाते परमदारणे ॥ 17 ॥

निजरी: सजरा जाता हविभंगागघपावत: ।

रोधेय स तदा दैत्यो नगरीममवारतीम् ॥ 18 ॥

अशक्तसन्ते ते योद्धु वज़दोहासुर्ण च ।

Thus when great calamities befell on the earth, the Devas became gradually weaker and weaker, not getting their share of the sacrifice Havis. At this time, that Demon invested the city of Amarāvati. And the Devas, not being able to fight with the Asura, of a thunder-like body fled to various directions.

पलायनं नदा कृत्वा निरिता निरजीरः क्रचित् ॥ १९ ॥

नितयं निरितुर्वीष्ट्र रत्ससानुगृहासु च ।

संस्थितः परमां शक्ति ध्यानंतसे पराधिकाम् ॥ २० ॥

अनौ होमाद्याभवानुं चूयत्थायोउव्यभूवृय ।

They took refuge in the caves of the mountain Sumeru and the inaccessible passes of the mountain and began to meditate on the Highest Force, the Great Goddess. O King! When oblations of

clarified butter are offered to the Fire, those get transferred to the Sun (Sūryaloka) and get transformed as rains.

वृडेशभावे संगृक्के निर्जलं चापि भृततम् ॥ 21 ॥

कृपवापीतडागास सरितः शुक्रतां गता: ।

अनावृष्टिरितं राजनभूच्छ शतावर्णिकी ॥ 22 ॥

भृताः प्रजाक्ष बहुधा गोगहिष्यादसतः ।

So when the Homa ceremonies disappeared, there was the scarcity of rain. The earth became quite dry and not a drop of water was found anywhere. The wells, tanks, pools, rivers all were dried up. And this sate of ‘no rains’ lasted one hundred years. Countless people, hundreds and thousands of cows, buffaloes and other beasts went to the jaws of death.

गृहे गृहे मनुष्याणामवच्छवसंग्रहः ॥ 23 ॥

अनर्धे त्वेयमूद्धते बाहापानः शीतोवनासः ।

गत्वा हिमवतः पार्थे सिराधियेष्वः शिवाम् ॥ 24 ॥

The dead bodies of persons remained in heaps in every house; persons would not be found to perform their burning ceremonies. When such calamities were seen, the calm and quiet body of the Brāhmaṇa, in their earnestness to worship the Supreme Goddess, went to the Hīmalayas.

समाधिध्यानुपर्णिधर्वेत्री त्रुडुत्-वढम् ।

निरहास्तसदासक्तास्तापेव शरणं वयुः ॥ 25 ॥

दरां कुरु महेषागिन पागयेषु जनेषु है ।

सर्वपराययुक्तेषु नैनच्छलायं लविडिके ॥ 26 ॥

They with their whole heart and without taking any food began to worship the Devi daily with their Samādhi, meditation and worship. “O Mahesāni! Shew mercy on us. O Mother! It’s not praisworthy to Thee to manifest Thy such anger on us, the low persons and guilty of all sins.

कोपं संहरं देवेशि सर्वातिर्यामिर्विधि ।

त्वया यथाप्रयेतैउयं क्रांति स तथा जनः ॥ 27 ॥

So, O Devesvari! Forgive us. If Thou art angry on us for our faults, even then we may be excused, for Thou art the Internal Ruler within us all and we do whatever. Thou impellest us to do. (The other

Book VII Chapter XXVIII

Devas become pleased and give fruits when they are worshipped by Japam, and other Homa ceremonies; but that is not even possible due to the disappearance of the Vedic Mantrams from amongst us. But You are kind as mothers are towards their children whenever they remember.)

नाया गतिजनस्याय कि पश्यसि पुनः पुनः ।

यचेछस तथा कर्तूं समर्थांसि मेछोशि ।। २ ८ ॥

समुद्र महेशानि संकटावरमोत्थितान् ।

जीवनेन वितारमकां कवं स्वातिर्वतिर्विके ।। २ ९ ॥

प्रसीद त्वं महेशानि प्रसीद जगद्धिके ।

अन्नतकोटिद्ब्राण्डवनायिके ते नगो नमः ॥ 30 ॥

So without Thee, there is no other rescue for these people. O Maheśvari! Whatever Thou willest, Thou canst do that; so what art Thou seeing again and again? O Maheśāni! How can we live without Water, what is called the Life. Now rescue us from this great difficulty. O Mother of the Worlds! O Maheśvari! Be pleased. Oh the Ruler of the endless crores of Brahmāṇḍas! Obeisance to Thee! We bow down to Thee, the Unchangeable, of the nature of Intelligent.

नम: कृत्यस्काप्ये चिद्युपायो नमे नमः ।

नमो वेदान्तवैद्यार्थे भुवनेत्रये नमे नमः ।। ३१ ।।

नेति नेतीति वाक्यैयां बोध्येते सकलापतेः ।

तां सर्वकारणां देढ़ी सर्वभावोन सन्ततः ॥ ३२ ॥

इति संग्रामिति देयी भुवनेगी महेश्वी ।

अनंताहिमयं क्वे दर्शनायाम पार्वती ॥ ३३ ॥

We again and again make obeisance to Thee, the Lady of the Universe and realisable by the Vedānta words (not this, not this). All the sayings of the Vedānta declare Thee, by negating (not this, not this) other transient objects as the Cause of all this Universe. We with all our hearts bow down to the Devi." When the body of the Brāhmaṇas thus praised and chanted the hymns of Maheśvari, She created innumerable eyes within Her body and became visible.

नीलांजनसमप्रद्यां नीलपचायतेक्षणम् ।

सुककौशसोतृझ्वृत्तपीचनवस्तम् ॥ 34 ॥

बाणसृष्टि च कमलं पुष्पपललयमूलकान् ।

शांकादी-कलसिंयुक्तनन्तराससंयुतान् ॥ 35 ॥

क्षूरूडजरापहान्स्तैर्विंघती च महाद्वतुः ।

सर्वसौद्यैसरं तदूयं लावणयोगचितम् ॥ 36 ॥

Her colour was dark-blue (colour of the fourth dimension, space) like heaps of collyrium (eye-paint); eyes like the blue lotuses and expanded; breasts hard, regularly elevated round and so fleshy that they touched each other; four handed; with Her right hand, holding arrows; on the under hand holding lotus; on the upper left hand holding a great bow and on the lower hand, carrying vegetables, fruits, flower and roots with abundance of juice, destroying hunger, thirst and fever.

कोटिरूप्यंप्रतीकांग करणारससागरम् ।

दूर्शियला जगद्धाठी सार्पत्नायनोद्धला ॥ 37 ॥

मोच्यामास लोकयु वारियारा: सहसशः ।

नवरात्रं महावृष्टिरभूत्रेजोद्धवैर्जैं: ॥ 38 ॥

She was the Essence of all Beauty, lovely, luminous like the thousand Suns, and the ocean of mercy. That Upholder of the Universe, showed—Her form and began to shed waters from Her eyes. For nine nights continuously, the heavy rains poured down out of the waters flowing from Her eyes.

दुःरित्तानीक्ष्य सकलाधोजाश्रण विमुच्छाति ।

तर्पितानंतरे ते लोका ओषध्यः सकलात आपि ॥ 39 ॥

नदीनप्रदणाहार्जैर्नैर्नै: सभपबद्युप ॥

नितीय संस्थिता: पूर्व सुरास्ते निरिता बहि: ॥ 40 ॥

मिलिला ससुरा विधा देहों समधिगुदुकुः ।

नमो वेदान्तवेहे ते नमो ब्रह्मस्वरूपिणि ॥ 41 ॥

Seeing the misery of all the people, out of pity, She showered incessantly tears from Her eyes; and all the people and medicines were satisfied. What more than this, out of those tears, the rivers began to flow. The Devas that remained hidden in the mountain caves, now came out. Then the Brāhmins, united with the Devas, began to praise and sing hymns to the Devi. Thou art known by the Vedānta Mahāvākyas. We bow down to Thee.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

स्वामाया सर्वजगढ्धिधार्थे ते नोम नमः ।

भक्रकल्युद्वे देखे भक्तार्थे देहधारिणी ॥ 4 2 ॥

नियचूणे निरूपणे घुवनेश्वर ते नमः ।

अस्मच्छान्यधीमुले लोचनानां महस्वकम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

Thou ordainest everything to all the worlds by Thy Māyā; so again and again we bow down to Thee. Our Obeisance to Thee! Who art a Kalpa tree to the Bhaktas yielding all their desires! Thou assumest the body for the Bhaktas! Thou art always satisfied; without any equal; the Lord of the Universe! We bow dewn to Thee.

त्वया यतीे धृतं देयि शताक्षी त्वं ततो भव ।

बुधया भीडिता मातः सतींु शफिन्चं चासित नः ॥ 4 4 ॥

कृपं कृक महेशानि वेदानप्रकाराधिके ।

As Thou, O Devi! hast innumerable eyes only for our welfare and peace, therefore Thou wilt be called henceforth by the name ‘Śatākṣī.’ O Mother! We are very much hungry; so we have no power to chant hymns to Thee; therefore, O Maheśāni? Shew mercy on us and deliver to us our Vedas.”

व्यास उवाच

इति तेषां वच: शुत्वा शाकान्वक्सरसंश्वितान् ॥ 4 5 ॥

स्वातूनि फलमूलाति भक्षणार्थ द्वटी शिका ।

नानाविधानि चाङ्रानि पणुभोज्यानि वाथि च ॥ 46 ॥

काम्यानन्तरसैयुक्तान्यानवीनोदूयं दटी ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing these words of The Devas and the Brāhmins, the Auspicious One gave them the vegetables, delicious fruits and roots to them that were on Her Hand, for their eating. After She was prayed, She gave to men sufficient quantity of various articles of juice food and to the beasts, grass, etc., until new crops came out.

शाकंभरीति नामपि तद्विनात्मभयूघ ॥ 47 ॥

ततः कोलाहले जाते तृत्वावेयने वाँधिताः ।

सर्वेन्यः सापुधो योद्धुं दुर्गमाखो3पुते ययो ॥ 48 ॥

O King, from that day She became famous by the name of Śākambhari (because She nourished all by vegetables, etc.) Great tumult arose and the Demon Durgama heard all from the emissaries and started out to fight with his weapons and army.

सहसाक्षीहिणीयुक्तः शगन्युंचेस्त्वात्थितः ।

कौधे देवसैम्यं तद्धेच्ये प्रिश्वं पुरा ॥ 49 ॥

तथा विग्राणं चैव रोध्यामास सर्वतः ।

ततः किलकिलाशब्दः समभूदेवमण्डले ॥ 50 ॥

ग्राहि ग्राहीति वाक्यानि प्रेषुः सर्वैं द्विजासभः ।

ततस्तेजोमयं चकं देवानां परितः शिवा ॥ 51 ॥

He took one thousand Akṣauhīnī armies with him (one Akṣauhīnī army equals large army consisting of 21,870 chariots, as many elephants, 65,610 horses, and 109,350 foot) and, shooting arrows, he came quickly before the Devi and invested Her and the Devas army and the Brāhmins. At this, a great tumultuous uproar arose and the Devas and the Brāhmins united exclaimed: 'O Devi! Save us; save us.'

चकार सक्षणायी स्वयं तस्माद्वहि: स्थिता ।

ततः समभवशुद्धे देया दैत्यस्य चोभयोः ॥ 52 ॥

गरवर्षसमाव्छत्रं सूर्यमण्डलमद्धुतम् ।

परमसशगतोर्दर्भसगुद्धतानिसुपुभम् ॥ 53 ॥

The Auspicious Devi, then, for the safety of the Devas and the Dvijas created round them a luminous circle and She Herself remained outside. The terrible fight, then, ensued between the Devi and the Dānavas. The Sun was covered with their incessant hurling of arrows; and the shooters could not shoot accurately on account of the darkness that then prevailed. Then by the collision of the arrows of both the parties, the arrows caught fire and the battlefield again became filled with light.

कठोरस्थापणकावधिरीकृदितकन्दम् ।

ततो देवीशगरीतु निर्गतास्तीवशफकः ॥ 54 ॥

कालिका तारिणी बाला विसुपा भैर्यी स्या ।

बगला चैव मातर्गी तथा जिपुस्पतुर्ची ॥ 55 ॥

कामाकी तुलना देवी जाँभीगो मोहिनी तथा ।

छिज्मसता गुहाकांली दशमाहसबाहुका ॥ 56 ॥

The quarters on all sides resounded with harsh bow sounds and nothing could be heard. At this moment, came, out of the body of the Devi, the principal Śaktis (forces incarnate) Kālīkā, Tārīnī,

Book VII Chapter XXVIII

Šodaši, Tripurā, Bhairavi, Kamalā, Bagalā, Mātangi, Tripura Sundari, Kāmākṣī, Tulajā Devi, Jambhini, Mohini, Chinnamastā, and ten thousand armed Guhya Kālīs and others.

प्रतिश्छच्छयान्याङ्गयानु: शद्धिमिता: परा: ।

असंख्यातास्तो देख्य: समुद्धात्सु सायुधाः ॥ 57 ॥

मुदंगपांखवीणादिनादितं संगरस्थलम् ।

गतिक्रिपिद्वसी-ये तु नागिरेक्षीद्विगीगति ॥ 58 ॥

अप्रेसर: समभवदुर्गो माहिनीपति: ।

गतिक्रिप: सह युद्धे च चकार प्रथमं रिपुः ॥ 59 ॥

Thirty-two Śaktis, sixty-four Śaktis, and then innumerable Śaktis, all armed, came out of the Devi successively. When the Śaktis destroyed one hundred Akṣauhinī forces, Mrḍanigas, conch-shells, Lutes and other musical instruments were sounded in the battle-field. At this time, the enemy of the Devas, Durgama, came in front and first fought with the Śaktis.

महधूद्धे समभवद्याभूद्रत्कावाहिनी ।

अश्वहीप्रियन्तु ता: सर्वा विन्हा द्याणिधर्दैः ॥ 60 ॥

तत एकादशे प्रापते दिनोपरमदाकणे ।

तकमाल्यांबधरो तरकार्यानुलोपन: ॥ 6 1 ॥

कृत्वोत्सवं महान्तं तु युद्धाय रथसंस्थितः ।

संसंभोधेच महता शक्तीः सर्वा विज्ञित्य च ॥ 6 2 ॥

महादेवीरायो तु स्वरयं संन्यवेशयत् ।

ततो5भवन्महुख्दे देया दैत्यस्य चोभयतेः ॥ 6 3 ॥

प्रहतृवयपर्वी हृदयत्रासाकारम् ।

ततः पड्डशाल्युप्रवाणान्देवीमुमोचे ॥ 6 4 ॥

The fight grew to such a terrible extent that, within ten days, all the Akṣauhinī troops were destroyed. So much so as the blood of the dead soldiers began to flow in torrents like rivers. When the fatal eleventh day arrived the Dānava, wearing red clothes on his waist, red garlands on his neck and anointing his body all over with red sandal paste, celebrated a very grand festivity and mounted on his chariot and went out to fight. With the strenuous effort, he defeated all the Śaktis and placed his chariot before the Devi. Then a terrible fight ensued for two Praharas (six hours). The

hearts of all shivered with horror. At this time, the Devi shot fifteen very awful arrows at the Dānava.

चतुर्भिश्रुतो वाहान्जोगेनैक सारथिम।

ब्राभ्यां नेरे भुजी झाभ्यां धजयेकेन पत्रिण ॥ 65 ॥

पड़ाधिर्द्वरं नस्य विद्याध ज्ञादयिका ।

ततो वमन्स कधिरं ममार पुर इंशितुः ॥ 66 ॥

His four horses (Vāhanas) were pierced by Her four arrows; the charioteer was pierced by one arrow; his two eyes were pierced by two arrows; his arms by two arrows, his flag by one arrow and his heart was pierced by five arrows. He then left his body before the Devi, vomiting blood. The vital spirit, the luminous counterpart, emitting from his body, merged in the space like body of the Devi.

तस्य तेनजस्त्र निर्गल्य देवीकरणे विवेत्र है ।

हते ततिम्मत्रावीर्य शान्तामासीज्ञात्यम् ॥ 67 ॥

ततो बढ़ाव्यः सर्वे तुड्युर्जभदैविकाम् ।

पुरस्कृत्व हरीशानी भवत्या नदस्या गिरा ॥ 68 ॥

The three worlds, then, assumed a peaceful appearance when that greatly powerful Dānava was killed. Then Hari, Hara, Brahmā and the other Devas began to praise and chant hymns to the World Mother with great devotion and in voices, choked with feelings.

देवा ऊचुः

जगद्धप्रभाविसर्किकारणे परमेश्वी ।

नमः शाकंभरि शिवे नमसे शगतलोचने ॥ 69 ॥

सर्वीपनिषदुपुरुते दुर्गामुस्नानाशिन ।

नमो महेश्वी शिवे पऊकोशान्तसिधे ॥ 70 ॥

The Devas said: “O Auspicious One! Thou art the only Cause of this Illusions of this world, presenting an ureal appearance (while Brahma is the Only Reality). So Thou art the Lady of all the beings (otherwise why it would be that Thou hast nourised all the beings with vegetables, etc.) So, Obeisance to Thee, the Śakambhari! Hundred-eyed! O Auspicious One! Thou art sung in all the Upaniṣads! The Destroyer of the Durgama Asura! We bow down to Thee, the Lord of Māyā, the Dweller in the five sheaths Anna, Rasa, etc.

येतसा निर्विकल्पेन यां ध्यायिति मुनीश्राः ।

प्रणावार्यकल्पा तां भजामो भुवंनश्रीम ॥ 71 ॥

अतन्तकोदिक्वाण्डजननीं दिव्यायिश्राम् ।

ब्रहायिष्यादिजननीं सर्वभावैनंता वयम् ॥ 72 ॥

We meditate upon Thee, the Lady of the universe, as demonstrated by Pranava Aum, whom the chief Munis meditate with their Nirvikalpa hearts (hearts free from any Vikalpa, doubts or ignorance). Thou art the Mother of the endless crores of universe! Thou assumest the Divine Bodies at times for our welfare! Thou art the Mother of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and others; we bow down to Thee with all our heart.

कः कुयात्यमरान्धूवा रोदनं सकलेक्षाः ।

सदचां परमेशानीं शताक्षीं मार्तं वित्ता ॥ 73 ॥

Thou art the Mother of all; so out of mercy, Thou hast shed tears from the hundred eyes, to remove the miseries of the low humble persons. Thou art the Ruler of all!"

व्यास उवाच

इति स्तुता सुरैर्वी बढ़ाविष्यादिधिपशैः ।

पूजिता विविधिर्वेल्यै: संतुहाभुच्छ तक्षणे ॥ 74 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus when Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Hara and the other Devas praised and chanted various hymns to the Devi and worshipped Her with various excellent articles, She became instantly pleased.

प्रसाता सा तदादौदी वेदनात्वरु सा ददौ ।

बाङ्गोप्यो विशेषेण प्रोवार पिक्षभाविषी ॥ 75 ॥

मायंवं तनुकल्हा पालनीया विशेषतः ।

यथा विनाउनवं एव जातो तुढो3पुर्नैव ॥ 76 ॥

Then the Devi, graciously pleased, handed over the Vedas to the Brāhmaṇas. At last, She, the Cukoo-voiced, made a special address to them. "These Vedas are the excellent parts of My body. So preserve these with your greatest care. The more so when you all have seen with your own eyes what a great calamity befell on you taken these Vedas went away out of your hands!

पूर्णासूई सर्वदा सेव्या युषामाथि सर्वदैव है ।

नात परतरं किंचित्कल्याणायोयपदिष्यते ॥ 77 ॥

पठनीयं मेमतिद्ध माहात्ययं सर्वदौतमम् ।

तेन सुहा यथिष्यामि हरिष्यामि ताव३.सदः ॥ 78 ॥

You should all worship and serve Me (the Controller of the Space) always; there is no other thing higher than this I can advise you for your welfare. Read always these My excellent glorious deeds I will be pleased thereby and will destroy all your bad calamities and misfortunes.

दुर्गमासुरहीनावदारुर्गिति मन नाम यः ।

गृह्वीत च शताक्षिति मायां भिन्चा जजलस्पी ॥ 79 ॥

किमुकनेनात्र बहुना सारं बह्यामि तचन्तः ।

संसेव्याड़ं सदा देया सर्वेत्ति सुगनुर्भेः ॥ 80 ॥

My name is Durgā, because I have killed this demon Durgama; so he, who will take My name Durgā and Śatakṣī, he will be able to unveil my Māyā and walk freely. No use in telling more than this, that I tell you now, O Devas, the Essence of all essences: 'Both the Suras and the Asuras would always serve Me and Me, alone.'

यास उवाच

इत्युक्त्वर्तिहिता देवी देवानां चैव पर्यताम् ।

सन्तोषं जनयंत्रेयंवं सचिष्यदानन्द्रकर्णिणि ॥ 81 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus giving pleasures to the Devas by these words, the Devi of the nature of Existence, Intelligence and Bliss disappeared before them.

एतते सर्वमाख्यातं रहस्यं परमं महत् ।

गोपानीय प्रयतेन सर्वकल्याणकारकम् ॥ 82 ॥

O King! This Grand Mystery I have described to you in detail; but this is the source of good to all; so keep it secret with every care.

य झमं शृणुयाजित्यमध्यायं भक्तित्यतः ।

सर्व-कामानवान्योति देवीतोंके महीयते ॥ 83 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे सत्यमकक्य-

उष्धिशोभायतः ॥ 28 ॥

The person that hears daily with great devotion this Chapter, gets all that he wants and at last gets the worship in the Devi Loka.

Here ends the Twenty-eighth Chapter of the Seventh

Book on the glory of the Sātāksī Devi in the

Mahāpurānam Śrīmaddevithāgavatam, of 18,000

verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XXIX

CHAPTER XXIX

On the Devi's Birth in the Dakşa's House

ह्यास उवाच

कृत्येवं सूर्वेक्ष्यन्तां राज्ञां चरितमुतभम् ।

सोमवंशोद्धानां च वर्णीनिंय मया क्रिकत् ॥ १ ॥

पराशीक्रप्रसादेन महत्तं प्रतियेदेते ।

राज-सुनिश्रितं विद्धि परशक्तिभ्रप्रसातृः ॥ २ ॥

Vāyasa said: O King! Thus I have described the glory of the Devi. Now I will narrate, as far as I can, the excellent lives of the kings of the the Solar and the Lunar dynasties respectively. They all attained their excellent glories, simply because they were favoured by the Grace of the Highest Śakti; they were all the great devotees of the Supreme Deity. व्याडिषुभितमत्स्त्वं श्रीमूर्जितमेव वा । तन्तेवावगघ्छ त्वं पराशकल्यंगसम्भवम् ॥ 3 ॥ एते चान्ये च राजान: पराशकेन्धसाका: ।

संसारातकुमूलस्य कुटारा अभवगुव ॥ 4 ॥

All their prowess, bravery, prosperity and all their glory, know that those all were derived from the mere parts of hte Parā Sākti. O King! Those Kings and others as well were able to cut off the Tree of this World by the Axe of their Knowledge, simply because they were the devotees of the Parā Śakti.

तस्मासर्वप्रयतेने संसेल्या घुवतेश्री ।

पतताप्रिय धान्यार्थी रतजेदन्यमोषतः ॥ 5 ॥

आमध्य येदुर्गुधार्थिं प्रातरं त्वरं माया पृण ।

पाशगतिभवादीभोर्ज कृतकूलोउम्यद ततः ॥ 6 ॥

So with all the care possible, the Lady of the Universe is to be worshipped and served. Men should avoid worshipping any other gods, as people avoid the husk to get the grain inside. O King! By churning the ocean of the Vedas, I have got the jewel as the lotus-feet of the Parā Sāktī; and I think that I have discharged all my duties and think myself satisfied and successful.

पंचब्रह्माता रूडा नरस्यन्य क्रापि देखता ।

तत एव महादेवा पशुब्रह्मासनं कृतम् ॥ ७ ॥

पशुध्यस्त्रधिकं वस्तु वेदेड्यन्त्रमितीरीते ।

यास्मितोरं च प्रोतं च सेव शीघुचनेश्वी ॥ ८ ॥

Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, and Iśvara are the four feet and Sadā Śiva is the plank over head; thus these five form the seat on which the Devi is seated. There is no other deity superior to Her. To shew this (to the ordinary ignorant people) the Mahā Devi has taken seat composed of the five Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Iśvara and Sudā Śiva.

तामवित्राय राजेन्द्र नैव मुक्तो भवेश्रः ।

यदा चर्मद्वराकर्णे वेहियथिनि मानवाः ॥ 9 ॥

Superior to these five, what is stated in the Vedas as Vyaktam and in which all this Universe in sewn, as it were, crosswise and lengthwise, lying in and through, that is Bhuvanesvari, the Goddess of the Universe.

Note: Brahmā, Viṣnu, Rudra, Iśvara and Sadā Śiva are the Regents or the presiding Deities of carth, water, fire, air and Ākāsa.

तदा शिवामिवास्य दुःख्यांतो भविष्यति ।

अतप्य श्रुतौ प्राषुः श्रोक्षात्रशाशिजः ॥ १० ॥

ते ध्यानयोगानुगत आपयन्दैवाल-

शक्ति स्वगुणीनीगुबाम ।

तस्मात् सर्वप्रयतेने जन्मसाक्पल्हतेसे ॥ १ १ ॥

No man can be free unless he until the Goddess. When men will be able to encircle the Aśāśa, of the fourth dimension, as if it were an antelope skin, then they will be able to root out the miseries of the world, without knowing the nature of the Devi (i.e., impossible). Thus the Śvetāśvataropanjaśad says: “Those that were engaged in meditation, Dhyāna Yoga, they saw the Devi covered by the Gunas Sattva, Rajas and Tamas and the forces incarnate respectively of the several Devas.”

लज्जया वा भयेनापि भवस्या वा प्रमुकृत्या ।

सर्वेर्गं पत्थित्य मनो हदि निरूप्य च ॥ १२ ॥

तत्रिष्ठतपरो भूयादिति वेत्नतर्दिक्षम: ।

येन केन विभेषाणीय स्वर्पतिष्ठ-जजरप्रिय ॥ 13 ॥

So to make the human birth a success, first avoid all companies, be it out of shame, of fear, or devotion, or out of love; then bring the mind and keep it steady in your heart and then be devoted to Her and consider Her as the Supreme. This is the Vedānta Dīndima (the declaration of the Vedānta). क्रौरपैतस्ततं देर्वीं स चै मुच्येतं बझ्यात्। तस्मात्सर्वप्रयतेन भव जराजमहेश्वरिणे ॥ 14 ॥

Whoever takes the name of the Devi, either in sleeping, going or resting or in any other condition, he is certainly freed from the bondage of the world, no doubt. O King! So worship the Māheśvari with all the care that you can.

विद्यारूपं सूत्रकणं तथांतयादमित्यरूपिणम् ।

सोपानक्रमतः पूर्व ततः शुब्दे तु चेतसि ॥ 15 ॥

Go on step by step; first worship Her Virāt Rūpa (cosmic form); then Sūksma Rūpa (subtle form) and then her Antaryāmi Rūpa (inner form, ruling within). Thus when your heart is purified, worship the Parā Śakti, of the nature of Brahma, beyond this Māyā, this Prapañca Ullāsa, of the nature of Existence, Intelligence and Bliss.

सच्चिदानन्दल्यार्थकंपतां बह्राक्षीयिणि ।

आराध्य परां शक्ति प्रपंचोल्लासवर्जितान् ॥ १ ६ ॥

तस्पां चिन्तयो यः स तस्य आराधनं स्युतम् ।

राजत्रातं परशक्तिभफतानां चरितं मवा ॥ १७ ॥

When the Citta (heart) melts in Parā Śakti, then comes the real Ārādhānā (the real worship). So dilute your heart in Her. O, King! Thus I have described to you the sanctifying deeds of the extremely devoted kings of the Parā Śakti, who were noble minded and religious.

धार्मिकाणां सूर्वसोमवर्गजानां मनस्विनम् ।

पावनं कीतिंदं धर्मबुद्धिटं सद्गतिगदम् ॥ १ ॥

One who will hear this will acquire fame, Dharma, intelligence, good end, and merits that have no equal. Now that else do you like to hear?

क्रवितं पुण्यदं पश्रातिकम-न्यच्छौतुमिच्छशि ।

गौरीलक्ष्मीसरत्यको दत्ता: पूर्वे परांबया ॥ १९ ॥

हराय हूये तद्व्राभिपचो.द्वावा च ।

तुर्गारोड्ध द्वस्या गौरी कन्दोते विश्रुतम् ॥ 20 ॥

क्षीरोद्योघ क्व्वोते महालक्ष्मीरिति मयूनम् ।

भूलदेयु.द्वावानां च कथं कन्यालमन्ययो: ॥ 21 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Bhagavan! In olden times, the World-mother Parā Sākti handed over Gauri to Hara, Lakṣmī to Hari, and Sarasvatī to Brahmā, born of the lotus from the navel of Hari. Now I hear that Gauri is the daughter of Himālaya as well of Dakṣa; and Mahā Lakṣmī is the daughter of the Kṣiroda ocean (ocean of milk). They were all origi: -ted from the Prime Devi; how, then, Gauri and Lakṣmī came to be the daughters of others?

असंभावमिद्ध पाति संगायोउर महापुने ।

छिधि ज्ञानाभिता न तं च संगायच्छेदततरः ॥ 22 ॥

O great Muni! This is next to impossible; so my doubt arises. O Bhagavan! You are quite competent to cut off all my doubts; so by your axe of knowledge, cut off my present doubt.

व्यास उवाच

शृणु राजनप्रवक्ष्यामि रहस्यं परमाद्धुम् ।

देवीभनकस्य ते किंचिद्वतायं न हि विधचो ॥ 23 ॥

देवीभयं यदा देवययायादारपरिका ।

तदाप्रभृति ते देवा: सुहिकायाणि चक्रिके ॥ 24 ॥

Veda Vyāsa said: O King! Hear. I am telling you this wonderful sect. You are greatly devoted to the Devi, so nothing there can be that I cannot disclose to you. Since the time the Great Mother gave over to Hara, and Brahmā, Gaurī, Lakṣmī and and Sarasvatī, respectively, these three Devas, Hara, etc. were performing their task, preserving, etc.

कर्मियांशसमये राज-देव्या हालाहलाधिधाः ।

महापराक्रमा जाताखैलोयंत्रे तैर्हिंक्षणान् ॥ 25 ॥

बहुर्णो वरदानेन दर्पिता राजताचनम् ।

क्रधुर्निंजसेनाधिसतया वैकुण्डपेवे च ॥ 26 ॥

O King! Once on a time, certain Dānavas, named Halāhalas were born. In time, they became very powerful and in a short time conquered the three worlds. What more then this, that they being elated

Book VII Chapter XXIX

with the boon granted to them by Brahmā, took their forces and invested the Mount Kailāsa and the Vaikuntha regions!

कामारि: कैटभारिष्ठ युब्दोशोगं च चक्नुः ।

पटिवर्षसहसायामपथुचूद मोहलकाद्य ॥ 27 ॥

हाहाकारो महानासीदेवदानवसेनयो: ।

महाताश प्रमलेन ताथ्यां ते दानावा हता: ॥ 28 ॥

Seeing this, Mahā Deva and Viṣṇu both made preparations for war. A terrible fight ensued between both the parties. For sixty thousand years the battle lasted incessantly but the result was stalemate. Gradually there was a great cry of consternation in the two parties.

स्वस्यथानेयु गत्वा ताविभागनं च चक्रतः ।

स्वशक्ल्वोर्निकटे राजन्यद्वगादेव ते हताः ॥ 29 ॥

अभिभानं तयोजीत्वा छल्हास्यं चक्रतः ।

महात्वमीधी गौरी च हास्यं दृष्ट्वा तयोस्तु तो ॥ 30 ॥

When Śiva and Viṣṇu with great effort destroyed the Dānavas. O King! Śiva and Viṣṇu then returned to their own houses and began to brag of their powers before their own Śaktis Gaurī and Lakṣmī; whereas the Demons were killed on account of the Śaktis of Gaurī and Lakṣmī. Seeing them boast, Gaurī and Lakṣmī laughed not sincerely whereon the two gods were very much angry.

देवावतीव संकुब्दी मोहितावादिमायया ।

दुरन्तरं च द्वदुतृयमानपुरःसम् ॥ 31 ॥

ततसे देवते तिथम्बुणो त्यक्ता तु ती पुनः ।

अन्तहिंत चाघवतां हाहाकारस्तदा छभून् ॥ 32 ॥

They under the magic spell of the Prime Māyā insulted them and even used offensive languages. Gaurī and Lakṣmī quitted them and disappeared. A great uproar then arose in the worlds. Both Hari and Hara became lustreless due to their insulting the two Śaktis.

नितेत्रस्की च निर्ःगती विशिष्यी च विचेतानी ।

अयमानातयो: शक्यज्ञोजीह हरितृते तथा ॥ 33 ॥

ब्रहा चिन्तातुरो जातः किमेतसामुपस्थित्यम् ।

प्रधानी देवतामध्ये कर्ण कार्याक्षमावग् ॥ 34 ॥

They become powerless and unconscious and

turned out mad. Seeing this Brahmā became very anxious. Hari and Hara are the two chief Deities; how then these two have be come unable to perform the actions of the world! What is the cause?

अकाण्डे किं निमिनेन संकटं समुपथित्यम् ।

प्रलयो भविता किं वा जगतोरभ्य निरागसः ॥ 35 ॥

निमितं नैव जानेड़ं कर्णे बालांग प्रतिक्रिया ।

इति चिन्तागुरोजस्यं दस्यो मीतिलतोवनः ॥ 36 ॥

Why this calamity has sprung up out of season? Will there be a Pralaya (a general dissolution) of the world out of some offence, when no actions are being done! I know nothing about this. So how can I find a remedy! Being thus very distressed, he began to meditate with his eyes closed in the fourth dimensional space in the heart.

परागक्तिभ्याकाणु जागमेतिहिति स्म ह ।

जानंतदा सावधानः पद्यजोप्रवृष्योत्पन ॥ 37 ॥

ततस्तयोश व्यक्यां स्वयमेवाकृतात् ।

स्वगतकेतु प्रभावेण कियकालांत लेपनिधि: ॥ 38 ॥

O King! The Lotus born Brahmā then found out by his meditation that this calamity was brought about by the great wrath of the Parā Śakti. He then tried to find out the remedy until Hari and Hara did not regain their former natural position. Brahmā began by his own Śakti to carry on the functions of them both, viz., that of preservation and destruction for some time.

तततलयोसु स्वस्थर्व भवादी-नस्युस्तानय ।

अग्रह्यामास धर्मात्मा सनकादीई सत्यतः ॥ 39 ॥

उवाच चवनं तेभ्यः सञ्नेभ्यस्तपोनिधि: ॥

कार्यास्तोउदम्यानुतः कनुं न च क्षमः ॥ 40 ॥

The religious-minded Prajāpati quickly called his son Manu and Sanaka, etc., the Rṣis, for bringing peace on the two great Gods! When they came to him, the great ascetic four-faced Brahmā told them: "I am now busy with many more works; so I am unable to carry on my tapasyā?

पराग्रतेक्सु तोषार्थ जन्मादारयुतो अस्थमू ।

शिवविष्यु च विशिष्यो पराग्रतिःप्रकोपत: ॥ 4 1 ॥

By the wrath of the Highest Force, Hari and Hara

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

have become somewhat distracted; so for the satisfaction of the Parā Śakti I am performing the three functions, i.e., those of Creation, Preservation and Destruction.

तस्मातां परमां शर्ति यूयं सन्तोयर्वत्व ।

अत्यघुतं तपः कृत्वा भवक्या परमया युतः ॥ 4 2 ॥

यथा तो पूर्ववृत्ती च स्थतां शवित्युतावरि ।

तथा कृतत मनुका यशोबृद्धिभेदित्र बः ॥ 4 3 ॥

So you both practise this hard tapasyā with the greatest devotion and bring about Her satisfaction. O my sons! Do such as Hari and Hara gain their former states and then be united with their own Śaktis respectively. Your fame will increase thereby, no doubt.

कुले यस्य घबेजकम त्योः शक्योस्तु ततूलम् ।

पावयेजगातीं सर्वा कृतकृत्यं स्वयं भवेत् ॥ 4 4 ॥

Rather that family where the two Śaktis will take their birth, will purify the whole world and that man himself be crowned with success."

व्यास उवाच

यितामह्वचः शुत्वा गता: सर्वे वनांते ।

रिशाधियवः सर्वे दृक्षात्या विमन्तानतः ॥ 4 5 ॥

शीत श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणी सतमस्कल्ये

एकान्तिश्रणीयवा: 11 29 11

Vyāsa said: O King! The pure-hearted Dakṣa and other mind-born sons of Brahmā, hearing the words of the Grandsire, expressed their desire to worship the Parā Śakti and went to the forest.

Here ends the Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the birth of the Bhagavatī in the house of Dakṣa in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddeviḥhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

प्रधानान्ति

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXX

On the Birth of Gauri and Śiva's Distraction

व्यास उवाच

ततस्ते तु वनोद्रेगे हिमाचलतटाश्रयाः ।

मायावीजजपासक्तासप्रधोकः समाहिताः ॥ १ ॥

ध्यायतां परमां शफिंक लक्षवर्षिण्यभूष्ट्रुण ।

ततः प्रसज्ञ देवी सा प्रत्यक्षं दर्जनं ददौ ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! They went to the forest and fixed their seats on the slopt of the Himālayan mountain and engaged themselves in repeating silently the seed Mantra of Mahā Māyā and thus practised their austerities. O King! One hundred thousand years passed in the meditation of the Parā Śakti. The Devi pleased became visible to them.

पाणोङ्गप्रायपीतिचतुबाईस्लोचना । कंकणासस्पूर्णां सचिव्दानन्दस्तिपिणी । ३ ।।

दूर्धा तां सर्वेंजननी तुड्युपुर्णनेयोमता: । नम्मते विश्वरूपायै वैब्ञानस्पूर्णतेये ।। ४ ।।

Her form was three-eyed, and of the form of Existence, Intelligence and Bliss (Saccidānanda); She was filled with mercy. In Her one hand there was the noose, in another hand, goad; in another hand there was the sign bidding her devotees

discard all fear, and in the other hand She was ready to offer boons.

नमतेजसहपायै सुत्रात्मवपुषे नमः ।

यमिम्बसर्वे लिंगवेह्ञा ओतग्रोता व्यवस्थिताः ॥ 5 ॥

नमः प्राजस्वलपायै नमोअ्याकृतमुपर्ने ।

नमः प्रत्यक्स्वलपायै नमसे ब्रह्मुपर्ने ॥ 6 ॥

नमसे सर्वकपायै सर्वलक्ष्यातमूर्ते ।

३ति सुत्वा जगद्धाजीं चफित्काराद्वया तिरा ॥ 7 ॥

The good-natured Munis, seeing this Form of the World Mother began to praise Her. “O Devi! Thou art existing separately in every gross body; we bow down to Thee. Thou art existing wholly (cosmically) in all the gross bodies; we bow down to Thee. O Parameśvari! Thou art existing separately in every subtle body; we bow down to Thee; Thou art existing universally in all the subtle bodies; we bow down to Thee, Thou art existing separately in all the causal bodies wherein all the Liṅga Dehas (subtle bodies) are interwoven; we bow down to Thee. Thou art existing universally in all the causal bodies; we bow down to Thee.

Book VII Chapter XXX

Thou art of the nature of the unchangeable Brahma, the receptacle of all the Jivas and thus resident in all the bodies; so we bow down to Thee. Thou art of the nature of Atman, the Goal of all the beings; we bow again and again to Thee."

प्रणेमुश्राणांभोजं दशाभा मुनयोप्रलतः ।

ततः प्रसजा सा देवी प्रोबाच चिकभाधिणी ॥ ८ ॥

वरं बृत महाभागा वरतादई सदा माता ।

Thus the pure-natured Dakṣa and the other Munis praised Her with voice, choked with feelings of intense devotion and bowed down to Her feet. Then the Devi, pleased, spoke to them in a cuckoo voice. "O Highly Fortunate Ones! I am ever ready to grant boons; so ask what you desire."

तस्यासु वचनं श्रुत्वा हृतिविष्णोस्तनोः समम् ॥ 9 ॥

तयोस्तछ्णिकलाभं च वक्षेरे नृपसतम ।

दक्षोरध वृत्त्याहु जन्म देखि कुले मम ॥ 10 ॥

O King! Hearing thus, they asked that Hari and Hara both regain their natural states and be united respectively with their Sāktis, Lakṣmī and Gaurī. Dakṣa again asked: "O Devi! Let your birth be in my family.

भवेतचाव्य वैनाहं कृतकृत्यो भवे इति ।

जयं ध्यान तथा पूजा स्थानानि विविधानि च ॥ ११ ॥

वदे मे परमेशानि रसमुखैवेव केवलम् ।

O Mother! I will, no doubt, consider myself as having then realised the fulfilment of my life. So, O Paramesāvari! Speak by Thy own mouth how Thy worship, Japam, meditation will be conducted as well the various fit places where they would be performed."

देव्युवाच

मच्छक्नोरयमानाच्य जाताजस्या तयोईयोः ॥ 12 ॥

सैताडुगः प्रकर्तीये मेप्रपातः कदाचन ।

अनुग्न मत्कृपालोगच्छरीर स्वस्थता तयोः ॥ 13 ॥

भविष्यति च ते शक्ती त्वदूगे क्षीरसागरे ।

जनित्यतस्तत ताभ्यां प्राप्यस्तः प्रेरिते मया ॥ 14 ॥

The Devi said: “The insult shewn towards my Śaktis has led to this calamitious state of Hari and Hara. So they should not repeat such crime. Now,

by My favour, they will regain their health and of the two Śaktis, one will be born in your family and the other will take Her birth in the Kṣiroda Sāgara, the ocean of milk. Hari and Hara will get back their Śaktis, when I will send them the chief Mantra.

मायावीर्जे हि मन्त्रो मे पुरुष चित्रकर: सदा ।

ध्यान विरासुर्वरो मेधवा त्वतुगतः स्थितम् ॥ १५ ॥

सचिवानन्दनरूपं वा स्थानं सर्व जान्यम् ।

युषामीय सर्वदो चाहं पूज्य धोया च सर्वदो ॥ १६ ॥

The chief Mantra of Mine is the said Mantra of Māyā; this is always sweet to Me; so worship this Mantra and make japam of this. The Form that you are seeing before you, this is My Bhuvanesvarī form (that of the Goddess of the Universe), or worship My Virāt (cosmic) form; or Saccidānanda form. The whole world is my place of worship; so you can meditate on Me and worship Me always and in all places."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्नवांतद्वीये देवी यगिणीयाधिवासिनि ।

दक्षात्या मुनवः सर्वे बह्चाणं पुनरावयुः ॥ 17 ॥

बह्वाणे सर्वेकृतांतं कथयामासुरावतत् ।

हरो हरिश्र खरवथी तौ सर्यकतार्वक्षमौ गृप ॥ 18 ॥

Vyāsa said: When the Bhuaneśvari Devī living in the Mani Dvīpa thus giving Her reply, went away, Dakṣa and other Munis all went to Brahmā and informed him with great earnestness of everything that happened. O King! Thus Hari and Hara both became devoid of their haughtiness and got back their previous natures by the Grace of the Supreme Deity and were thus enabled to perform their functions as before.

जाती परांवाकृपया गर्वेण रहिती तदा ।

कदाचिद्वय काले तु महः शागकमावतान् ॥ १९ ॥

दक्षगेह महाताज नैतोकंयेयुत्सवोप्रवत् ।

देवा: प्रमुहिता: सर्वे पुष्पवृहिं च चिक्रे ॥ २० ॥

Then, on a certain time, the Devi Bhagavati, the Fiery Nature of the Parā Sākti, took Her birth in the house of the Prajāpati Dakṣa. O King! Everywhere in the Trilokas, great festivities were

held. All the Devas became glad and showed flowers.

नैदुर्द्रुभयः स्वर्ग करकोणाहता नृप ।

मनश्वासम्यसनि साधुनाममलात्मनम् ॥ 21 ॥

सितो मार्गवाहित्यः सुप्रभोःपूर्विषाक: ।

मंगलायां तु जातायां जातं सर्वेत्र मझूलम् ॥ 22 ॥

The Dundubhis of the Devas were sounded by the hands and made very grave sounds. The pure-minded saints were gladdened; the Sun's rays looked purer and cleaner; the rivers were elated with joy and began to flow in their channels. When the World-auspicious Devi, the Destroyer of the birth and death of the Jivas, took Her birth, everything looked propitious.

तत्या नाम सर्ती चक्रे सत्यत्वात्यरसंविदः ।

द्वी पुनः शिवायाथ तस्य शनिस्तुं याभभन्त् ॥ 23 ॥

सा पुनज्जलेने दरधा दैवयोगानमनोरैन् ।

The wise Munis named Her ‘Sati’ as She was of the nature of Para Brahma and Truth Herself. The Prajāpati Dakṣa handed over the Devi, who was before the Śakti of Mahādeva, to that Deva of the Devas, Mahādeva. Due to the misfortune of Dakṣa, the daughter of Dakṣa burnt Herself in a blazing fire.

जनमेव जयवा

अनर्थक्रमेते श्रावितं वचनं मुने ॥ 24 ॥

एतावूर्ण महद्रसु कर्थ दरथं हुतागने ।

यत्रामसरणाणुणां संसारानिभयं न हि ॥ 25 ॥

केन कर्मविषाकेन मनोदर्यं तदेव हि ।

Janamejaya said: O Munis! You have made me now hear a very inauspicious word. How can such a great thing of the nature of the Highest Intelligence come to be burnt up in a fire! The mere recollecting of Whose Name dispels the terrible danger of the burning up by the fire of Sarinsāra, how can She be burnt up by fire, I am extremely eager to hear; kindly describe that to me in detail.

व्यास उवाच

शूणु राजानुया वृतं सतीदास्य कारणम् ॥ 26 ॥

कदाचिद्धय दुवीया गतो जाम्बूनदेश्यीम् ।

ददर्श देवीं ततासौ मायाकीजं जजाय सः ॥ 27 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hear. I am describing to you the ancient history of the burning of Satī. Once on a time, the famous Rṣi Durvāsā went to the bank of the river Jambū and saw the Devī there. There he remained with his senses controlled and began to repeat silently the root Mantra of Māyā.

ततः प्रसाता देवेर्शी निजकाण्ठगतां स्वजम् ।

धमद्धधमरसंस्तां मकरंदमदाकुलाम् ॥ 28 ॥

ददौ प्रसादभृतां तां जग्राह शिरसा मुनि: ।

ततो निर्गल्य तरसा व्योममार्गे तापस: ॥ 29 ॥

आजगाम स यत्राते दक्षः साक्षात्सतीपिता ।

संदर्शनार्थभमखाया ननगा च सतीपदे ॥ 30 ॥

Then the Goddess of the Immortals, ide Bhagavatī was pleased and gave the Muni a beautiful garland as Her Prasāda that was on Her neck, that emitted the sweet fragrance of Makaranda (juice of flowers; Jasamine). Whereon the bees were about to cluster. The Maharṣi took it quikly and placed it on his head. He then hurriedly went to see the Mother to the place where Sati's Father, the Prajāpati Dakṣa was staying and bowed down to the feet of the Sati.

पृष्ठे दक्षेण स पुनिमाला कस्यास्यलौकिकी ।

कर्थ लघ्या त्वया नाव दुर्भिभ भुवि मानदः ॥ 31 ॥

तच्छृता वचनं नत्य प्रोवाचाश्रयुतक्षणः ।

देव्या: प्रसादमतुलं प्रेमगर्दितान्ततः ॥ 32 ॥

The Prajāpati then asked him: O Lord! Whose extraordinary garland is this? How have you got this enchanting garland, rare to the mortals on this earth! The eloquent Maharṣi Durvāsā then spoke to him with tears of love flowing from his eyes: "O Prajāpati! I have got this beautiful garland that has no equal, as the Prasāda) favour of the Devi.

प्रार्थयामास तां मालां तं मुनिं स सतीयिता ।

अदेवं शक्तित्वाय नास्ति तैनेतक्यमण्डलें ॥ 33 ॥

इति बुद्धवा तु तां मालां मनवे स समर्थवत् ।

गृहीता शिरसा माला मनुना निजमन्दिरे ॥ 34 ॥

स्थापिता शयनं यव दयन्योरसिभुद्वरम् ।

The Prajāpati asked that garland then from him. He, too, thinking that there was nothing in the three

Book VII Chapter XXX

worlds that cannot be given to the devotee of the Śakti, gave that garland to the Prajāpati. He took that on his head; then placed it on the nice bed that was prepared in the bed-room of the couple.

पशुकर्मतीत राजी मालानायेने मोतिटः ॥ 35 ॥

अभवस्त महीपालसेन पायेन शड़े ।

शिशे द्वेभालिजातीत देव्यां सल्यां तथा नृन ॥ 36 ॥

राजसेनापारघेन तज्जन्यो देह एव च ।

Being excited by the sweet fragrant smell of that garland in the night, the Prajāpati engaged in a sexual intercourse! O King! Due to that animal action, the bitter enmity arose in his mind towards Śaṅkara and His Saṭi. He then began to abuse Śiva.

सत्या योगानिना दस्यः सतीधार्यिद्धुस्या ॥ 37 ॥

पुनश्छ हिमवलुघे प्रजुगसीतु तमहः ।

O King! For that offence, the Saṭi resolved to quit her body that was born of Dakṣa, to preserve the prestige of the Sanātan Darma of devotion to Her Husband and burnt Her body by the fire arising out of Yoga.

जन्मेव जय आच

दह्यामने सतीढ़े जाते किमकारोच्छ्वः ॥ 38 ॥

प्राणाधिकासरी यस्य तद्धियोग्न काततः ।

Janamejaya said: O Muni! What did Mahā Deva do, thus pained by the bereavement from His consort dearer than His life, when the Sati's body was thus consumed.

ध्यास उवाच

ततः परं तु यज्जतं मया वर्भू न शक्यते ॥ ३९ ॥

त्रैलोक्यप्रलयो जातः शिककोपापिन्ना नृप ।

Vyāsa said: O King! I am unable to describe what happened afterwards. O King! Out of the fire of anger of Śiva, the Pralaya seemed to threaten the three worlds.

वीरभूद: समुत्पनो भूरकातीलगणान्यितः ॥ 40 ॥

त्रैलोक्यनाशनोतृष्णो वीरभूदो यदारप्रथन्त ।

Virabhadra came into existence with hosts of Bhadra Kālis, ready to destroy the three worlds. Brahmā and the other Devas took refuge to Śankara.

बहादायस्तदा देवाः शकूरं शरणं ययुः ॥ 41 ॥

जाते सर्वस्वनाशेप्रि करणानिर्धिरीश्वः ।

अभयं तत्तारंत्येच्यो बस्तवबेज्यां तं मनुम् ॥ 42 ॥

अजीवयन्महात्मास्ते ततः विज्ञो महेश्वः ।

यज्ञातदमुपागम्य करोद शुगदुःवित्तः ॥ 43 ॥

Though Mahādeva lost everything on Sati's departure, He, the Ocean of Mercy, destroyed the sacrifice of Dakṣa, cut off his head and instead placed the head of a goat, brought him back to life and thus made the Gods free from all fears. He, the Deva of the Devas, then became very much distressed and going to the place of sacrifice, began to weep in great sorrow.

अपश्यां सती वडी द्वामानां तु चित्कालम् ।

स्कन्धेउपाधोपायामास हा सतीति वदम्भुः ॥ 44 ॥

He saw that the body of the Intelligent Satī was being burnt in the fire of the Cittā. He cried aloud; Oh My Satī! Oh My Satī!

बधाम ध्रात्चितः सज्ञानदोशुं शंकरः ।

तदा बढ़ावदो देवाश्रितामापुन्तमाम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

विष्णुस्तु त्वर्या तत्र धनुकाध्य मार्गीणे: ।

चिच्छेदावयवानस्यासतततस्थानेषु तेजपतन ॥ 4 6 ॥

And taking Her body on His neck, began to roam in different countries, like a mad man. Seeing that, Brahmā and the other Devas became very anxious and Bhagavān Viṣṇu cut off the body to pieces by His arrows.

तततस्थानेषु ततसीत्रानामूर्तिपशे हरः ।

उवाच च ततो देवानस्थानवेक्षेण यो शिखाम ॥ 47 ॥

भर्जिति परया भकत्या तेषां किंचित्र दुलैभम् ।

नित्यं सरिश्रिता यत्र निजांगेषु पराधिक्वा ॥ 48 ॥

स्थानेचेक्षेतु ये भर्ता: पुरुषशरणकर्षिणः ।

तेषां मनः प्रसिद्धानि मायाकीत्र विशेषतः ॥ 49 ॥

"Wherever the parts fell, Śankara remained there in so many different forms. He then said to the Devas: "Whoever will worship, with deep devotion in these places, the Bhagavatī, will have nothing left unattained. The Highest Mother will remain close to them there. The persons that will make Purāścarana (the repetition) of the Mantrams,

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

especially the Māyā Bija (the root Mantra of Māyā), their Mantrams will become, no doubt, fructified and become incarnate."

इत्युक्ला शंकरसैलु स्थानेषु विरहानुरः ।

कालं निच्ये नृपश्रैढ़ जयध्यानसभाधिधि: ॥ 5० ॥

O King! Thus saying, the Mahādeva, being very much distressed for Sati's departure, passed His time in those places, making Japam, Dhyānam and taking to Samādhi.

जनमेव जय अवध

कानि स्थानीत तानि स्थु: सिद्धप्रीक्षित चानि ।

कर्ति संख्या नामानि कानि तेषां च मे वद ॥ 5 1 ॥

तत्र स्थितानां देवीनां नामानि च कृपाकार ।

कृताधौड़ं भवे येन तद्वादगु महामुने ॥ 52 ॥

Janamejaya said: Where, in what places the several parts of the Satī fell? What are the names of those Siddhapīthas? And what is their number? Kindly describe these in detail; O Great Muni! No doubt I will highly consider myself blessed by hearing these words from your blessed mouth.

व्यास उवाच

श्रणु राज्यवध्यामि देवीपीदामि साम्यतम् ।

येरां श्वणमाजेण पाषहीनो भवेत्रः ॥ 53 ॥

येय येय एय च पीदेषुपायेयं सिंद्धिकांक्षिभः ।

भूतिकामैरिभध्येया तानि वक्ष्यामि तचलतः ॥ 54 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! I will now describe those Pithas (Sacred places) the mere hearing of which destroys all the sins of men. Hear. I describe dully those places where the persons desiring to get lordly power and to attain success ought to worship and meditate on the Devi.

वाराणस्यां विशालाक्षी गौरीमुखविनासिति ।

झेरे बे नैमिवारणये प्रोक्ता सा लिंगधारिणी ॥ 55 ॥

प्रयोग ललिता प्रोक्ता कामुकी नस्यादने ।

मानसे कुमुदा प्रोक्त दक्षिणो चोनरे तथा ॥ 56 ॥

विश्वभाग भगवती विश्वकामयूरणी ।

गोनन्ते गोगती देवी मन्दरे कामवारिणी ॥ 57 ॥

O Mahārāja! The face of Gauri fell in Kāśi; She is well known there by the name Viśālakṣī; that

which fell in Naimsāranya became known by the name of Linga Dhārijni. This Mahā Māyā is known in Prayāga (Allahabad) by the name of Lalitā Devī; in Gandha Mādana, by the name of Kāmukī; in the southern Mānasa, by Kumudā; in the northern Mānasa, by Viśvakāmā, the Yielder of all desires; in Gomanta, by Gomati and in the mountain of Mandra, She became known by the name of Kāmacārijni.

मदोक्टा चैअरथे जयन्ती हस्तिनापुरे ।

गौरी प्रोका कान्यकुबे रम्पा तु मलयावाले ॥ 58 ॥

एकाप्रधोते सम्पोक्ता देवी सा कांतिंमत्यिषि ।

विश्वे विश्वेश्वीं ग्राहु: पुरुहतां च पुरुके ॥ 59 ॥

The Devi is known in Caitraratha, by the name of of Madotkatā; in Hastināpura, by Jayanti; in Kānyakubjā by the name of Gaurī; in the Malaya Mountain, by Rambhā; in the Ekāmrapītha, by Kiritmatī, in Viśva, by the name of Viśveśvarī; in Puşkara, by the name of Puruhūtā.

केद्वारपीडे सम्प्रोक्ता देही सम्पार्थादियिने ।

मन्दा हिमवतः पृड़े गोकर्णे भूरकर्णिका ॥ 60 ॥

स्वानेक्षी घवानी तु विल्वके विल्वपत्रिका ।

श्रीगैले माध्वी प्रोक्ता भद्रा भन्द्रेश्ये तथा ॥ 61 ॥

She is known as Sanmārga Dāyini in the Kedāra Pitha; as Mandā, in the top of the Himālayas; and as Bhadrakarnikā in Gokarna. She is known as Bhavānī in Sthaneśvara, as Vilvapatrikā in Vilvaka; as Mādhavī in Śrīśaila; as Bhadrā in Bhadreśvara. वाराह्रगैले तु जया कमला कमलालये ।

रूत्राणी रूककोटायां तु काली कलर्जे तथा ॥ 6 2 ॥

गलायामे महदोषे शिखलिंगे जलप्रिया ।

महालिंगे तु कविपता माकोटे मुकुटेश्री ॥ 6 3 ॥

She is known as Jará in Varāha Śaila; as Kamalā in Kamalālaya; as Rudrānī in Rudra Kotī; as Kālī in Kālānjara; She is known as Mahā Devī in Śalagrāma, as Jalapriyā in Śivalíngam; as Kapilā in Mahālíngam, as Mukuteśvari in Mākota.

मावापुर्वी कुमारी यक्षासन्ताने ललितायिका ।

नायायां मंगलार प्रोक्ता दिवसारा युक्रोतमे ११ 64 ॥

As Kumarí in Mayāpurí, as Lalitāmbikā in

Book VII Chapter XXX

Santānā; as Mahgalā in Gayā Kṣetra, as Vimalā in Puruṣottama.

उत्सालाशी सहसाक्षे हिरण्याक्षे महोत्पाल ।

वियाणायाममोयाशी पाडल पुंकुवर्धे नि 165 ॥

As Utpalāksī in Sahasrāksa; as Mahotpalā in Hiranyāksa; as Amonghāksī in the Vipāśā river; as Pātalā in Paṇdra Vardhana.

नारायणी सुपार्थुं त्रिकूटे रूसुन्त्री ।

विपुले विपुला देवी कल्याणी मलयाचले ॥ 6 6 ॥

As Nārāyaṇī in Supārśva, as Rudra Sundari in Trikūṭa, as Vipulā Devī in Vipula; as Kalyāṇī in Malayācala.

सहाग्रावेकवीरा तु हरिश्रने तु चन्द्रिका ।

नगण रामतीर्थ तु यमुनायां भृगावती ॥ 6७ ॥

As Ekavīrā in Sahyādrī; as Candrikā in Harīscandra; as Ramanā in Rāma Tīrtha; as Mrgāvatī in the Yamunā.

कोटवी कोटतीर्थ तु सुगन्धा माधवे वने ।

गोदायर्वा सिसन्त्य तु गज्ञात्रोर रतिग्यम ॥ 68 ॥

As Koṭivī in Koṭatīrha; as Sugandhā in Mādhavavana; as Trisandhyā in the Godāvarī; as Ratipriyā in Gaṅgādvāra.

शिवकृष्णं शुभानन्त्य नन्दिनी देविकातते ।

रमिमणी द्वारवलां नु राथा बृच्चावने च । ६ ९ ॥

As Šubhāṇandā n Śiva Kundam; as Nandinī n Devikātaḥa; as Rukminī n Dīvaravati; as Rādhā n Vrndāvana.

देवकी मधुरायां नु पाताले परमेधी ।

चिवकृते तथा सीत चिन्ये विभ्यापितासिनि ॥ 70 ॥

As Devaki in Mathurā; as Parameśvari in Patāla; as Sitā in Citrakutā; as Vindhyādhavisāni in the Vindhyā range.

कर्यरी महात्वर्शीमा देरी विनायक ।

अतोराया वैद्यायं तु महात्काले मेढ्धधि ॥ ७ १ १ ॥

O, King! As Mahālakṣmī in the sacred place of Karavīra, as Umā Devi in Vinayaka; as Ārogyā in Vaidyānātha; as Maheśvarī in Mahākāla.

अभयेत्यूणतीर्थि नित्याव सिययदेने ।

मांडवे मण्डती नाम स्वाहा माहेश्रीपुरे ॥ ७ 72 ॥

As Abhayā in all the Usṇa tīrthas, as Nitambā

in the Vindhya mountain; as Mānḍavī in Mānḍavya; as Svāhā in Māheśvaripūra.

छगलघे प्रवघा तु चपिड़कामरकण्डे ।

सोमेश्रे वरारोहा प्रभासे पुरुकरावर्ते ॥ 73 ॥

As Pracandā in Chagalanda; as Candiākā in Amarakaṭṭaka; as Vāraḥaḥ in Somesāvara; as Puṣkarāvatī in Prabhāsa.

देवमाता सरकल्पां पारावासाते म्यृता ।

महालये महाभागा यद्योष्यां पिंपलेश्धी ॥ 74 ॥

As Devamātā in Sarasvatī; as Pārāvārā in Samudratta; as Mahābhāgā in Mahālayā; as Píngalesāvri in Payoṣnī.

सिंहिका कृतशीये नु कार्तिके वलितांकारी ।

उसलावकर्ते लोल सुभघा गोणवमुझे ॥ 75 ॥

As Sirinhikā in Krtaśauca; as Atisānākāri in Kārtika; as Lolā in Utpalāvartaka; as Subhadrā in Śona Saṅgam.

माता सिद्धवने लक्ष्मीरनांना भरताश्रये ।

जालन्योर विश्वमुपुती तापा किष्किन्यपर्वे ॥ ७ ॥ ॥

As the Mother Lakṣmī in Siddhavana; as Anaṅgā in Bhāratāśrama; as Viśvamukhī in

Jālandhara; as Tārā in the Kīskindhya mountain.

देवदारुकवे पुरिद्धिम कामगीरमण्डले ।

भीमा देही हिमाजी तु तुर्हिविंशेध्वी तथा ॥ 77 ॥

As Puṣṭi in Devaḍāru Vana; as Medhā in Kāśmirāmandaalam; as Bhimā in Himadri; as Tuṣṭi Viśvesvara Kṣetra.

कपालमोचने शुद्धुमांत कायावरोहणे ।

गंखोद्धारे धराना युक्ति: पिचाड़ाते तथा ॥ 78 ॥

कला तु चन्द्रभाग्यामच्छोदे शिवधारिणि ।

वेणायामयुता नाम बदवीमूर्वरी तथा ॥ 79 ॥

As Śuddhi in Kapālamoćana; as Mātā in Kāyāvarohana; as Dharā in Śaṅkhoddhāra; as Dhṛti in Piṇḍāraka; as Kalā in Candrabhāgā river; as Śivadhārīni in Acchoda; as Amṛtā in Venā; as Urvaśi in Vedari.

अधियधीतरकृी कृणत्रीय कृणरेका ।

मन्यथा हेममूटे तु कुमुदे सत्यवादिति ॥ ८० ॥

As medicines in Uttara Kuru; as Kuśodakā in Kuśadvipa; as Manmathā in Hemakūta; as Satyavadini in Kumuda.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

अश्रवे वन्द्वीया तु निर्धर्वैश्वणालये ।

गायत्री वेदव्ववेने पार्वौरी शिवसशिप्रधी ॥ 8 1 ॥

As Vandanīyā in Aśvattha; as Nidhi in the Vaiśravanālaya; as Gāyatrī in the mouth of the Vedas; as Pārvatī near to Śiva.

देवलोके तर्देशणी बह्यास्येषु सरस्कृति ।

सूर्यविंबे प्रभा नाम मानुणां बैणवी घतां ॥ 82 ॥

As Indrāni in the Devalokas; as Sarasvatī in the face of Brahmā; as Prabhā (lustre) in the Solar disc; as Vaisnavī with the Mārṭkās.

अन्यन्ती सतीनां तु रामासु च तिलोतनाः।

चित्ते ब्रह्माला नाम शक्ति: सर्वशरीरिणाम् ॥ 8३ ३ ॥

She is celebrated as Arundhati amongst the Satis, the chaste women and as Tilottamā in the midst of the Rāmās. Again this Mahādevī of the nature of the Great Intelligence (Samvid) is always existent in the form of Śakti named Brahmakalā in the hearts of all the embodied beings.

इमान्यश्रतानि स्यु: पीक्षिति जनमेव ज ।

ततसंख्याकासदीशान्यो देयक्ष प्रपिकीर्तिति: ॥ 84 ॥

O Janamejaya! Thus I have mentioned to you the one hundred and eight pithas (sacred places or seats of the Deity) and as many Devís.

सर्तोद्यंलग्मृतानि पीक्षिति कक्षितिनि च ।

अन्यान्यप्र प्रसंगेन याति मुख्याति भृत्ते ल ॥ 85 ॥

यः स्मोर्चृष्ण्याढापि नामाश्रतमुत्तमम् ।

सर्वेयाप्रवितिन्मुक्ति देवीलोकं परं बजेत् ॥ 86 ॥

Thus are mentioned all the seats of the Devis and along with that, chief places in India (the world). He who hears these excellent one hundred and eight names of the Devi as well as Her seats, gets himself freed from all sins goes to the Loka of the Devi.

एतैषु सर्वीधेयु गछेश्वात्रायितानः ।

सनपरैवच चिपाठीऋषुक्षाद्वीति चिपाय च ॥ 87 ॥

कुर्पाच्छ महती पूजां भगवल्या चियानतः ।

क्षमापयेजजम्द्वारी जगद्यबां मुहुभुईः ॥ 88 ॥

O Janamejaya! His heart gets purified and is rendered blessed, no doubt, who duly makes yārā (sojourn) to all these seats of the Deity, performs

Śrāddhas, offers peace-offerings to the Pitṣ and worships with the highest devotion the Goddess and asks frequently the pardon of the World Mother.

कृतकृत्यं स्वामातानं जानीयाज्जनमेजच ।

भध्यभोज्यादिप्रिध: सर्वान्द्वाणामोजयेततः ॥ 89 ।

सुवासितीः कुमारीध्र बदुकाईलिंदया नृव ।

तम्मिछोत्रे विद्यान ये तु चाण्डालगाडा आपि प्रभो ॥ 9 01

देवौकूपा: स्मृता: सर्वे पूजनीयास्तोहि ति ।

प्रतिश्रादिके सर्वे तेपु क्षेत्रेषु जर्वेति ॥ 91 ॥

O King! After worship, one should feed the Brāhmaṇas, well dressed virgins (Kumāris) and Vaṇukas with good eatables. All the tribes whether they be Cāndālas, know them all to be of the nature of the Devi and therefore they should be worshipped. Never one is to accept any donation or gifts (Pratigrahas) in these seats of the Devi.

यथाशक्ति पुरुथर्षी कुर्भान्यस्य सत्तमः ।

मायावीजेन देवेशा तत्नरीठाधिवासिनीम् ॥ 92 ॥

पूजवेदिनिगं राजन्युध्राणकूद्वेत् ।

वित्तगाङ्नं न कुर्जित देवीभक्तिणे नरः ॥ 93 ॥

The saintly persons should make Purasčaranas (repeat the names of their own deities, attended with burnt offerings, oblations, etc.) of their own Mantrams with all their might in all these places and should never be miserly in their expenses on this account.

य एवं कुक्ते यातां श्रेदिया: प्रीतमानस: ।

सहसकल्पपर्यतं बहुतोके महत्ते ॥ १ ९ ४ ॥

वसंति पितरस्तस्य सोर्जि देवीपुरे तथा ।

अने तक्यात परं ज्ञान भवेनुभो भवांबुघेः ॥ ९ ५ ॥

He who starts to these places, with devoted hearts filled with love, finds his Pitrs in the higher and greater Brahma Loka for one thousand Kalpas and gets the highest knowledge, crosses the ocean of the world and becomes free. Many a people have attained success by repeating these one hundred and eight names of the Deity.

नामाश्रताजानेव बह्वः सिद्धातं गताः ।

यत्रैतिलिखितं साक्षान्युस्तके वापि तिष्ठिति ॥ 96 ॥

Book VII Chapter XXXI

प्रद्यारीभियाद्यीन तत्र नैव भवन्ति हि ।

संभायं वर्धेते नित्यं यथा पर्वीण वारितिः : ॥ 97 ॥

Any place wherein are kept those names, embodied in a book, becomes free from such dangers as plague, cholera or any misapprehensions from planetary Deities and so forth. Nothing remains to be attained by these persons who repeat these one hundred and eight names.

न तस्य तुर्वर्भ किंक्षिच्रामागृशतानपिःः ।

कृतकृष्यो भवेनूनं देवीभक्तिपरायण: ॥ 98 ॥

नामिति देवतालतं वै देवौकलो हि स स्यूनः ।

सर्वथा पूज्यते देवैः किं पुर्नमंजुतोनपिः ॥ 99 ॥

That man, devoted to the Devi, certainly attains blessedness. That saintly person becomes of the nature of the Devi. The Devas bow down and worship him when they behold him! What then need be said that the saints would worship him!

श्रद्धकालो पठेदेत्रामाणतानुतमम् ।

नृपतसतीवतः सर्वे प्रयाति परमां गणित् ॥ 100 ॥

भूमानि मुक्तिक्रशणि साक्षात्संविद्यमयाति च ।

सिद्धपीठिति राजेन्द्र संश्रयेमतिभारः ॥ 101 ॥

The Pitrs become pleased and get their good ends when these one hundred and eight names are read with devotion. These places are, as it were,

Intelligence personified (Cinnaya) and places ready to yield freedom from bondage. Therefore, O, King! Intelligent men should take their shelter in these places.

पूरुं चतत्त्वया राजन्नुक्ते सर्वे महेशितुः ।

रहस्यातिरहस्यं च किं भृपः श्रौतुपिच्छतिस ॥ 102 ॥

श्रौत श्रीमद्वीभागवोत महापुरुषो सतमक्कभे

प्रिशोउधयाः ॥ 130 ॥

O King! Whatever secrets and other deeper secrets about the Great Goddess you asked to know from me, I described to you. What more do you want to hear. Say.

Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the birth of Gauri, the seats of the Deity, and the distraction of Śiva in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharaj Veda Vyāsa.

Note: The number one hundred and eight is a holy number, got by taking the half of 216,000, the number of breaths inhaled by a child in the womb who promises to take the name of God at his every breath or by taking one-eighth of 864,000, the number of seconds in a day. The two zeros are then dropped. Thus the number signifies the one who fulfils one's promise.

Book VII Chapter XXXI

CHAPTER XXXI

On the Birth of Pārvatī

जनमेव जय जय

धराधारधीरभौतलावारिवसरीतरं महः ।

यदुक्तं भवता भूर्यं विस्तारानढुदयव मे ॥ १ ॥

को विरज्येत मतिमान्यव्यब्छिनिकाध्यानून ।

सुयंतं तु पिवतां मृत्यु: स नैतच्छुयन्तो भवेत् ॥ २ ॥

Janamejaya said: O Muni! You told before that 'the Highest Light took Her birth on the top of the Himalayas'. Now describe to me in detail about this Highest Light. What intelligent man can desist from hearing these nectar-like words about the Sakti? The danger of death may come even to the Devas that drink nectars but no such danger can possibly come to those that drink the nectar of the Devi's glorious deeds.

व्यास उवाच

ध्योर्यस कृतकृष्योर्य सिश्छितोर्य महाविभि: ।

भायावनासि यडेल्या निव्याजा भक्तिरित्त ते ॥ 3 ॥

शृणु राज्युरावृतं सतीदेड़ेरनिचर्षिते ।

प्रांतः शिवसु बघाम कन्धिर्देशे शिवरोभवत् ॥ 4 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! You are blessed; you have attained what you are to attain in this life; you are taught by the high-souled men; you are fortunate since you are so sincerely devoted to the Devi. O King! Hear the ancient history: Wherever the Deva of the Devas the Maheśvara rested while He was wandering all over the world in a distracted state, carrying the Satī's body that was burnt by fire.

प्रपड़भानरित्रतः समाधिगतमानसः ।

ध्यायदेवीवस्वरूपं तु कालं निचे स आसावान् ॥ 5 ॥

सौभाग्यरहितं जातं शैलोक्यं सचाराचरम् ।

शन्क्हीर्नं जानसर्व साध्ध्योरं पसर्वतम् ॥ 6 ॥

He spent his time there with his senses controlled, in Samādhi, forgetting all his knowledge of Saṃsāra in deep meditation of the form of the Devi. At this time, the three worlds, with their objects, moving and immoving, with their oceans, mountains and islands became void of prosperity, and power.

आनन्द: शुक्ततां यात: सर्वेधां हृदयोतं ।

उदासीना: सर्वेलाकाश्छिताऊजरैचेतसः ॥ ७ ॥

सदा दुःखोद्धयी मन्ना रोगप्रस्तालदाघवन् ।

प्रहाणं देवतानां च वैपरीत्येच वर्तेन् ॥ 8 ॥

The hearts of all the embodied became dried up, without any trace of joy; they were all burdened with anxious thoughts and remained indifferent. All were merged in the ocean of sorrows and became diseased. Planets retrograded and the Devas had their states reversed. The Kings were attacked with a series of ills and misfortunes.

अधिपृत्ताधिद्वानां सत्यभावात्व्यापवन् ।

अवास्मिवेल काले तु ताकाख्यो महापुरः ॥ 9 ॥

Ádhibautik and Ádhidaivik (from material causes and from divine interference). At this time a great Asura, named Tāraka, became unconquerable owing to his receiving a boon from Brahmā.

बद्धतवरो दैत्यो5भवतैलोक्यनायकः ।

शिवीरास्तु यः पुःः स ने हंता भविष्यति ॥ १ ० ॥

Being intoxicated by his power and heroism, he conquered the three world and became the sovereign ruler. The Brahmā Prajāpati, gave him boon to this effect that the legitimate son of Śiva would be able to kill him.

इति कल्यिनमूषु: से देवदेवेम्हासुरः ।

शिबीरससुताभावाञ्जगर्ने च ननाद च ॥ १ १ ॥

And as at that time Śiva had no son, the great Asura, elated with joy, became infatuated and carried off all victories.

तेन चोपद्रुता: सर्वे स्वस्थानात्यन्तु: सुरा:।

शिवीरससुताभावात्रिंशतामापुरुत्पत्यवम् ॥ 12 ॥

All the Devas were banished from their places by his oppression; they remained always anxious owing to the want felt by them of a son of Śiva.

नांगना शंकरस्यासित कवं तत्सुतमध्ययः ।

असमकं भाग्यहीनानं कवं कार्यं भथिव्यति ॥ 13 ॥

Śaṅkara has now no wife; how can He then have a son! We are very unfortunate; how can our work be accomplished?

इति चिन्तातुरा: सर्वे जम्यवैकुपठमपड़ले ।

गशेसुहीरैपेकाने स चोपायं जगाद ह ॥ 14 ॥

Thus oppressed with thoughts, all the Devas went to Vaikuntha and informed the Bhagavan Viṣṇu of all that had happened, in privacy.

कतश्रिंतानुतः सर्वे कामकल्यमुना शिका ।

जागर्ति भूवतेशगानी मिणीक्षणादिवासिनी ॥ 15 ॥

The Bhāgavan Viṣṇu began to tell them the means, thus: “O Devas! Why are you all so anxious when the Auspicious Goddess of the Universe, the Dweller in the Maṇi Dvipa, the Yielder of all desires like a Kalpa Vṛkṣa is always wakeful for you.

असमाकमनयोदय तदुपेक्षाजस्ति नानथा ।

शिक्षेयं जगनामा कृतासमिष्छक्षणाय च ॥ 16 ॥

लालने ताऊने मातूनांकाफयं यथाउपंके ।

तद्वेल जानानुर्निचन्या गुपादोपयेः ॥ 17 ॥

It is due to your faults that She is shewing Her indifference; it is meant to teach us (not for our destruction but to shew Her Infinite mercy). When a mother nourishes and frightens and reprimands a son, it is not that she has became merciless; so the World Mother, the Controller of the Universe, will never be merciless to you as regards your qualifications and defects.

अपराधी भवत्येव तनयस्य पदे पदे ।

कोउपः सहते लोके केवल मातरं विश्वा ॥ १ ८ ॥

तस्माबूर्व पराब्बां तां शरणं यात मा चितम् ।

निखांजया चितनुत्वा सा वः कार्य विधायति ॥ ९ ॥

A son commits offence at every step; who can

Book VII Chapter XXXI

bear that in these three worlds except the mother! So soon take refuge to the Highest Mother, the Goddess of the universe, with the sincerest devotion. She will certainly take action and help your cause.

སྟོལ་ཁྱིལ་སྟུལ་མོ་གཞི་མཁྱིལ་སྟུལ་མོ་གཞི་ལ་

སྟོན་ཀྱི་ཟིནགས་ཀྱེ་ཞེས་: སྟན་ཟུགས་ཟེ། ། 20 ། །

आजगम महाप्रौल हिमवर्त नगाधिमय ।

अभवंश सुरा: सर्वे पुरंशणकर्भिनि: 1 2 1 1

Thus ordering the Devas, Viṣṇu with His consort Lakṣmī and the other Devas quickly went out to worship the Devi. Going to the Himālayas, they soon engaged themselves in doing the Puraścarana Karma (act of repeating the names of the Deity, attended with burnt oblations and offerings, etc.).

अवायव्यविणान्ञा अवायवं ज चँचिके ।

दृतीयादिवतान्यष्ठ चक्रः सर्वे सुरा नृप ॥ 22 ॥

कैवित्वमाधिनिष्णाता: कैचित्रामपरायण: ।

कैवित्युतभरा: कैचित्रामपरायणोलुका: ॥ 23 ॥

O King! Those who were well versed with the performance of sacrifice to the Mother, began their sacrificial ceremonies and all began to hold vows, viz. Trtiyādi Vratāni. Some were engaged in incessantly meditating on the Devi; some began to repeat Her names constantly; some began to repeat the Devi Sūkta.

मन्यपारायणपरा: केविष्कृष्यविदाक्षिरिण: ।

अन्ववीयपार: केविक्लेक्रियासपरायण: ॥ 24 ॥

इल्लेखया पराशतेः: पूर्णां घकूरर्तिंद्रता: ।

जूतेवे बडूवर्षिण कालो3गावज्ञनमेव ज 25 ॥

Thus some devoted themselves to repeating names; others to repeating mantrams. Again some were engaged in performing severe (painful) Cāndrāyaṇa and other Vratas. Some were doing Antarayāgas (inner sacrifices); some were doing Prānāgnihotra Yāgas; whereas others engaged themselves in Nyāsādi, etc. Again some began to worship the Highest Śaktī, the Goddess of the Universe, without any sleep or rest, by the seed mantra of Māyā.

अकस्माकचैत्रमासीयनवल्यां च भृगोदिं १

प्रादुर्भैषूव पुतस्तन्मडः शुत्तवीधितम् ॥ 26 ॥

चतुर्विंषु चतुर्वैर्मित्मिद्वारभिछुगम् ।

कोदिस्यैर्यतीकाशं चन्कोदिशुशीतलम् ॥ 27 ॥

O King! Thus many years of the Devas passed away. When the ninth Tithī came in the month of Caitra on Friday, the Highest Light of the Supreme Force Suddenly appeared in front of them. That Light was equal to Kotī lightnings, of a red colour, and cool like the Kotī Moons. Again the lustre was like the Kotī Suns. The four Vedas personified were chanting hymns all round Her.

विद्युक्तोदिसमानाभमरणं तत्वरं महः ।

नैव चोर्धैन ति निर्वेदन म नघेय परिज्ञभन् ॥ 28 ॥

आघतरितृते तन्तु न हस्ताधोगसंयुतम् ।

न च स्कीरमपयावा न पुरूपमपधोभयम् ॥ 29 ॥

That mass of fire was above, below, on all sides, in the middle; nowhere it was obstructed. It had no beginning, nor end. It was of the form of a female with hands and feet and all the limbs. The appearance was not that of a male nor that of an hermophrodite. The Devas, dazzled by the brilliant lustre, first closed their eyes; but at the next moment, holding patience when they opened again their eyes, they found the Highest Light manifesting in the form of an exceedingly beautiful Divine Woman.

वीरपा विधानं नैजाणां तैन्यासीन्याहीयते।

पुनशं धीयंगलंव्य यावते ददुगु: सुरा ॥ 30 ॥

तावतदेल शीकर्णेभावसिद्यं मनोहास् ।

अतीव रमणीयांगी कुमारीं नवयीवान् ॥ 31 ॥

Her youth was just blooming and Her rising breasts, plump and prominent, vying, as it were, with a lotus bud, added to the beauty all around. Bracelets were on Her hands; armlets on Her four arms; necklace on Her neck; and the garland made of invaluable gems and jewels spread very bright lustre all around.

उडयानीकृष्डिद्वर्भिदितांचीगजकुद्यालम।

रणाधिकाकिणिकाजालसिंजन्मंजीरमेखलम् ॥ 32 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

<table><tr><td>कनकांगदकेन्यूरूपीयेवकायिभूषिताम्</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>अनव्यमीयामर्षिभ्रजलावंधिराविकाताम्</td><td>II 33 II</td></tr><tr><td>तनुकेतकसरालज्जीलधमपकृतलाम्</td><td>I</td></tr><tr><td>नितावधिववसुभर्गा रोमतारिकिवारिताम् II 34 II</td><td></td></tr></table>

Lovely ornaments on Her waist making tinkling sounds and beautiful anklets were on Her feet. The hairs of Her head, flowing between Her ears and cheek sparkled bright like the large blacks bees shining on the flower leaves of the blooming Ketakī flower. Her loins were nicely shaped and exquisitely lovely and the hairs on Her navel gave additional beauty.

<table><tr><td>कर्भूराकलोपमिश्रतांकुलूरिताननाम</td><td>।</td></tr><tr><td>कनकनकताटंकविदेकवदनांबुजाम</td><td>। 35 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>अष्टमीचन्न्रविबाघललाटामायतबुधवम</td><td>।</td></tr><tr><td>रत्नारिवंदनयानुमजर्मा</td><td>मधुपाधायाम्। 36 ॥</td></tr></table>

Her exquisitely lovely lotus mouth rendered more lustrous and beautiful by the shining glden ear-ornaments, was filled with betel leaves mixed with camphor; etc.; on Her forehead there was the half crescent moon; Her eye-brows were extended; and Her eyes looked bright and beautifully splendid like the red lotus; Her nose was elevated and Her lips very sweet.

<table><tr><td>कुन्द्रकुधलन्त्यां</td><td>मुक्तहारविराजिताम्।</td></tr><tr><td>त्यसाधिपत्रमुकुटां</td><td>चन्द्रेखावतर्सितीम् ॥ 37 ॥</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">मल्लकामालातीनाकोषणाशिवाजिताम् ।</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">कामपरीविन्दुनिदितां</td></tr></table>

Her teeth were very beautiful like the opening buds of Kunda flowers; from Her neck was suspended a necklace of pearls; on Her head was the brilliant crown decked with diamonds and jewels; on Her ears, earrings were suspended like the lines on the Moon; her Hairs ornamented with Mallikā and Mālatī flowers; Her forehead was pasted with Kāsmīra Kumkuma drops; and Her three eyes gave unparalleled lustre to Her face.

<table><tr><td>पाण्डोक्रशवरभीतिचतुर्बई</td><td>त्रिलोचनम्।</td></tr><tr><td>रत्नवक्षपीधानां</td><td>दार्दिमीकुसुमप्रभाम्। ३ ३ १ ||</td></tr><tr><td>सर्वश्रुत्रावेषाकाढां</td><td>सर्वदेवनमरकृताम्।</td></tr><tr><td>सर्वांगाणूरिकांं</td><td>सर्वमोहिनीम् ॥ 4 0 ॥</td></tr></table>

On Her one hand there was the noose and on Her other hand there was the goad; her two other hands made signs granting boons and dispelling fears; Her body shed lustre like the flowers of a Dādīma tree. Her wearing is a red coloured cloth. All these added great beauty.

प्रसावसुभुख्यंमां मन्त्मिनमुखांबुजम् ।

अध्याकरणागृतीं ददुगु: पुरत: सुरा: ॥ 4 1 ॥

दृष्टा तां कंकणामूर्ति प्रणेपु: सादरं सुरा: ।

वक्तुं नागकुबन्दिक्रताप्यपृत्तिलोचना: ॥ 4 2 ॥

Thus the Devas saw before them the Mother Goddess, the Incarnate of unprented mercy, with a face ready to offer Her Grace, the Mother of the Whole Universe, the Enchantress of all, sweet-smiling, saluted by all the Devas, yielding all desires, and wearing a dress, indicative of all lovely feelings. The Devas bowed at once as they saw Her; but they could not speak with their voice as it was choked with tears.

कर्षिच्छ्यैयंगलोब्य भत्पा चातकंधारः ।

प्रेमाशुपूर्णन्यानसुरुदुर्जार्थिकम् ॥ 43 ॥

Then holding their patience, with much difficulty, they began to praise and chant hymns to the World Mother with their eyes filled with tears of love and devotion and with their heads bent low.

देखा ऊचुः

नमो देखे महादेवे शिवायै सततं नमः ।

नमः प्रकर्षे मघवीय निवतां प्रणातः स्म ताम् ॥ 44 ॥

तामनिवर्णा तपसा ज्वलती शेरीचनी कर्मफलेषु जुहाम ।

दुर्गा देर्वीं शरणामई प्रपोः सुतासि तरसे नमः ॥ 45 ॥

The Devas said: We bow down to Thee, the Devi and the Mahā Devi; always obeisance to Thee! Thou art the Prakṛti, and the Auspicious One; we always salute to Thee. O Mother! Thou art of a fiery colour (residing as a Red Flame in the heart of a Yogī) and burning with Asceticism and Wisdom (shedding lustre all around). Thou art specially shining every where as the Pure Caitanya; worshipped by the Devas and all the Jivas for the

Book VII Chapter XXXI

rewards of their actions; We take refuge to Thee, the Durgā the Devi we bow down to Thee, that can well make others cross the ocean of Sarinśāra; so that Thou helpest us in crossing this terrible ocean of world.

देबी वाचजबयन्त देवास्तां विश्वरूपा: पणवो वदन्ति ।

सा नो मदेभ्यूर्ने बुताना धेयुर्गममानपुरुष्टितु १। ४६ ॥

Mother! The Devas have created the words (i.e., the words conveying ideas are uttered by the five Vāyus, Prāna, etc., which are called the Devas) which are of the nature of Viśvarūpa, pervading everywhere, like the Kāma Dhenu (the Heavenly Cow yielding all desires, riches, honour, food, etc.,) and by which the brutes (the gods) become egotistical. O Mother! Thou art that language to us; so Thou fulfillest our desires when we praise and chant hymns to Thee.

कालरात्रि ब्रह्मस्तुं वैणव्यों स्वन्द्यमात् ।

सरखनीयदिति दक्षदुहितरं नमाम: पावनो शिवगम् ॥ 47 ॥

O Devi! Thou art the Night of Destruction at the end of the world; Thou art worshipped by Brahma; Thou art the Lakṣmī the Śakti of Viṣṇu; Thou art the Mother of Skanda; the Śakti of Śiva; Thou art the Śakti Sarasvatī of Brahma. Thou art Aditi, the Mother of the gods and Thou art Satī, the daughter of Dakṣa. Thus Thou art purifying the worlds in various forms and giving peace to all.

महातलक्ष्ये च विघाडे सर्वांगक्ये च धीमहि ।

तजो देरी प्रचोद्यात् ॥ 4 8 ॥

We bow down to Thee. We know Thee to be the great Mahā Lakṣmi; we meditate on Thee as of the nature of all the Śaktis as Bhagavatī. O, Mother! Illumine us so that we can meditate and know Thee.

नो विराट्रस्वक्रिप्पे नमः सूत्रात्ममृत्ते ।

नानोउद्याकृतलिप्पे नमः श्रीबहमूग्ते ॥ 49 ॥

O Devi! Obeisance to Thee, the Virāt! Obeisance to Thee, the Sūtrātmā, the Hiranyagarbha; obeisance to Thee, the transformed into sixteen Vikrtis (or transformations). Obeisance to Thee, of the nature of Brahma.

यद्धानाजजगद्धति रजुसर्पेशगादिवत् ।

यज्ञानालल्यमाओति नुस्मतीं शुवेर्शधीम् ॥ 50 ॥

We bow down with great devotion to Thee, the Goddess of the Universe, the Creatrix of Māyīc Avidyā (the Nescience) under whose influence this world is mistaken as the rope as a garland is mistaken for a rope and again that mistaken is corrected by whose Vidyā.

नुसस्तयदलक्ष्यार्थी चिवेदेकसस्तविपणीम् ।

अखंडानन्द्रूपां तां वेदतात्यर्थपूमिकाम् ॥ 51 ॥

पञकीणातिरिक्तां तामवस्थायसाहिणीम् ।

नुसस्त्यैवदल्थ्यार्थी प्रत्यागत्सर्वकाणिपम् ॥ 52 ॥

We bow down to Thee who art indicated by both the letters Tat and Tvam in the sentence Tat Tvamasi (Thou art That), Tat indicating the Cit (Intelligence) of the nature of oneness and Tvam indicating the nature of Akhanda Brahma (beyond the Annamaya, Prāṇamaya, Manomaya, Vijñānamaya and the Ānandamaya—the five Kośas, the Witness of the three states of wakefulness, dream, and deep sleep states) and indicating Thee.

नमः प्रणवहस्याये नोहेंकाममूर्तये ।

नानाम-नासिकाये ते कलणाये नामे नः ॥ 53 ॥

इति स्तुता तदा देदेमिगृशीपाधिवासिनी ।

प्रह चाचा ममुत्या मतकौकितनि:स्वना ॥ 54 ॥

O Mother! Thou art of the nature of Pranava Om; Thou art Hrim; Thou art of the nature of various Mantras and Thou art merciful; we bow down again and again to Thy lotus Feet." When the Devas thus praised the Devi the In-dweller of the Maṇi Dvipa, the Bhagavati spoke to them in a sweet cuckoo voice.

श्रीदेय्याच

वदन्तु विद्युभः कार्यं यदर्थिमह संगता: ।

बदाराड़ सदा भक्तकामकल्युभाउयि च ॥ 55 ॥

“O Devas! What for have you come here? What do you want? I am always the Tree, yielding all desires to my Bhaktas; and I am ready to grant boons to them.

तिश्छन्यां मायि का चिन्ता युष्याकं भक्तिजालिनाम्।

समुद्धारामि मद्धनातनुःखसंसारासागरात् ॥ 56 ॥

इति प्रतितां मे सत्यां जानीय विद्युप्रोभना: ।

इति प्रेमाकुलां वाणीं श्रुता सन्तुष्यानसना: ॥ 57 ॥

निर्भया निजीरा राजकृषुर्दुःखं स्यकीयकम् ।

You are my devotees; why do you care, when I am on your side? I will rescue you from the ocean of troubles. O Devas! Know this as My true resolve." O King! Hearing these words of deep love, the Devas became very glad and gave out all their causes of troubles.

देवा ऊचुः

नात्रात किंचिद्वध्यत्र भवत्यास्ति जगत्प्रये ॥ 58 ॥

सर्वत्रा सर्वसाधिसूचिपया परमेधरि ।

तारकेणापुरेजेन्य पीडिताः स्मो दिवानिगम ॥ 59 ॥

“O Parameśvari! Thou art omniscient and witness of all these worlds. What is there in the three worlds that is not known to Thee! O Auspicious Mother! The Demon Tāraka is giving us troubles day and night.

शिवाङ्गजाद्धपतस्य निर्मितो बह्वाणा शिवे ।

शिवाङ्गानु तु नैवाति जनासि त्वं महेश्वि ॥ 60 ॥

Brahmā has given him boom that he will be killed by the Śiva's son. O Maheśvari! Satī the wife of Śiva has cast aside Her body. It is known to Thee. सर्वेजपूरतः किं वा वक्तव्य पारमैर्नेः ।

एतदुईशतः प्रोक्तमपरं तक्यापिक्षे ॥ 61 ॥

सर्वदा घरणाधोजे बफिकः स्यातप्त निश्ठला ।

प्रार्थनीयिर्मे मुख्यमपरं देहेहतेने ॥ 62 ॥

What will the ignorant low people inform the One, Who is Omniscient? O Mother! We have described in brief all what we had to say. What more shall we say? Thou knowest all our other troubles and causes of sorrows. Bless us so that our devotion remains unflinched at Thy lotus feet; this is our earnest prayer.

इति तेषां ववः शुवा प्रोवाच परमेश्वी ।

मम गर्जिस्तु या गौरी भविष्यति हिमायले ॥ 6 3 ॥

शिवाय सा प्रदेशा स्थासा वः कार्य विधास्थति ।

भक्तिर्वच्चरणाणीभोजे भूयातुष्याकमादगत् ॥ 64 ॥

That Thou takest the body to have a son of Śiva is our fervent prayer to Thee." Hearing the Deva's words Parameśvari, with a graceful countenance, spoke to them, thus: "My Śakti will incarnate as Gaurī in the house of Himālayas; She will be the wife of Śiva and will beget a son that will destroy Tāraka Demon and will serve your purpose.

हिमालयो हिं मनसा मामुपासेउतिष्यक्ति: ।

ततस्तस्य गृहे जन्म मम प्रियकरं मतम् ॥ 65 ॥

And your devotion will remain steadfast at My Lotus feet. Himālayās, too, is worshipping Me with his wholehearted devotion; so to take birth in his house is to my greatest liking; know this."

व्यास उवाच

हिमालयोप्रि तच्छुतास्तनुपुग्रकरं चवः ।

वाधे: संक्छूकपगळो महागर्जी वचोउत्रबीत् ॥ 66 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the kind words of the Devi the King of mountains was filled with love; and, with voice choked with feelings and with tears in his eyes spoke to the Goddess of the world, the Queen of the three worlds.

महतर्ने तं कुक्पे यथानुप्रादमिच्छसि ।

नोचेल्वाहं जडः स्थाणुः क त्व सचित्वस्त्रिपीणी । 6 71 ॥

असंभावं जन्मगतैस्वपितृत्वं मामानये ।

अश्वभौतिपुर्णवैर्ग पुर्ववैर्ग ततस्माधितिः ॥ 68 ॥

"Thou hast raised me much higher, that Thou dost me so great a favour; otherwise where am I inert, and unmoving and where art Thou, of the nature of Existence, Intelligence and Bliss! It manifests the Greatness of Thy Glory. O Sinless One! My becoming the father of Thee indicates nothing less than the merits earned by me for doing countless Aśvamedha sacrifice or for my endless Samādhi.

अष्ट प्रपंके क्रिति: स्याज्ञनामात सुतासं भवत्।

अहो हिमातयस्याय ध्योजसी भागव्यापिति ॥ 69 ॥

यस्यासु जटरे सन्ति बढ्योढ़ानां च कोटयः।

सैव यय सुता जाता को वा यस्तात्मयो भृदि ॥ 70 ॥

Oh! What a favour hast Thou shewn towards me! Henceforth my unparalleled fame will be

Book VII Chapter XXXII

spread throughout the whole Universe of five original elements that ‘The Upholder of the Universe, the World Mother has become the daughter of this Himālayas! This man is blessed and fortunate!’

न जानेउस्पितृज्ञां किं स्वानं स्याधिसिंतं परम् ।

ग्रतानुर्जानां वासस्य येघां वंशेप्रतिभ मातृभाः ॥ 71 ॥

इंदं यथा च दन्तं मे कृपया प्रेमपूर्णाय ।

सर्ववैद्यातमिद्धं च त्वदूयं बृहि मे तथा ॥ 72 ॥

Who can be so fortunate, virtuous and merited as he whose daughter She has become, Whose belly contains millions of Brahmāṇḍas! I cannot describe what pre-eminent heavens are intended for my Pitts, my family predecessors wherein virtuous persons like myself are born.

योगं च भक्तिसहितं जानं च शुतिस्मयतम् ।

वद्यस्य परमेशानि त्वमेवाहं यतो भवेः ॥ 7 3 ॥

O, Mother! O, Parameśvari! Now describe to

me Thy Real Self as exemplified in all the Vedāntas; and also Jñāna with Bhakti approved by the Vedas in the same way that Thou hast shown already this favour to me. So that by That Knowledge I will be able to realise Thy Self."

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः शुश्चा प्रसभुर्षधिकृति ।

वत्कुमारभताया सा रहस्यं श्रितगृहितम् ॥ 74 ॥

श्री श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे सत्नरकरभे

देवीनीतायामेकत्रिंगोप्रथय: 11 31 11

Vyāsa said: O, King! Thus hearing the praise of Himālayas, the Goddess of the Universe, with a graceful look, began to speak the very secret essences of the Srutis.

Here ends the Thirty-first Chapter of the Seventh Book on the birth of Pārvatī in the House of

Himālayas in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses,

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XXXII

CHAPTER XXXII

On Self Realisation Spoken by the Devi

श्रीव्यवाच

शृणवनू निर्जार: सर्वे व्याह्रत्या वचो मम ।

यथ्य श्रवणायोगे मदुप्तवं प्रघतते ॥ १ ॥

अहमेवास पूर्व तु तान्यतिकंचिज्ञापाधि ।

तदात्मकर्ण चितरसंविवरब्रढ़ीकनामकम् ॥ २ ॥

The Devi said: “Hear, Ye Immortals! My words with attention, that I am now going to speak to you, hearing which will enable the Jivas to realise My Essence. Before the creation, I, only I, existed; nothing else was existent then. My Real Self is known by the names Cit, Sambvit (Intelligence), Para Brahma and others.

अग्रतकर्ममितिरंध्यमनौपय्यमनायम् ।

तस्य काधित्वस्तः सिद्धा शक्तिमभियेति विश्वुत्ता || 3 ||

न सती सा नासती सा नोभयात्या विशोधतः ।

एतहितक्षणा काधित्वस्तुभूतात्स्ति सर्वेच ॥ 4 ||

My Atman is beyond mind, beyond thought, beyond any name or mark, without any parallel,

and beyond birth, death or any other change or transformation. My Self has one inherent power, called Māyā. This Māyā is not existent, nor non-existent, nor can it be called both. This unspeakable substance Māyā always exists (till the final emancipation or Mokṣa).

पातकस्योणतेवेयपूर्णांगोरिवे दीर्घिति: ।

चन्द्रस्य चन्द्रिकेवंव ममेवं सहना बुधा ॥ 5 ॥

Māyā can be destroyed by Brahma Jñāna; so it can not be called existent; again if Māyā does not exist, the practical world cannot exist. So, it cannot be called non-existent. Of course it cannot be called both, for it would involve contr: स्तोन. This Māyā (without beginning but with end at the time of Mokṣa) naturally arises as heat cones out of fire, as the rays come out of the Sun and as the cooling rays come out of the Moon.

तस्यां कर्माणि जीवानां जीवा: कालघु संचरे ।

अभेदेन विलनीना: स्यु: सुपुर्णो व्यबहारवत् ॥ 6 ॥

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

Just as all the Karmas of the Jivas dissolve in deep sleep (Susupti), so at the time of Pralaya or the General Dissolution, the Karmas of the Jivas, the Jivas and Time all become merged in one uniform mass in this great Māyā. United with My Śakti, I am the Cause of this world; this Śakti has this defect that it has the power of hiding Me, its Originator.

स्वागतेक्ष प्रस्मायोगादहुं बीजात्मतां गता ।

स्वाधारावरणात्स्या दोषचंचे च समागत् ॥ 7 ॥

I am Nirguna. And when I am united with my Śakti, Māyā, I become Saguna, the Great Cause of this world. This Māyā is divided into two, Vidyā and Avidyā. Avidyā Mayā hides Me; whereas Vidyā Mayā does not. Avidyā creates whereas Vidyā Mayā liberates.

वैतन्यस्य समायोगातिमित्तं च कथ्यते ।

प्रवृष्यिरणामाच समावार्थिन्युच्छे ॥ 8 ॥

Māyā united with Caitanya (Intelligence); i.e., Cidābhasā is the efficient cause of this Universe; whereas Māyā reduced to and united with five original elements is the material Cause of the Universe.

कैन्चितां तय इत्याहुस्तमः केचित्जई परे ।

जानं मायां प्रधानं च प्रकृति शक्तिमयज्ञान् ॥ 9 ॥

Some call this Māyā tapas; some call Her inert, material; some call Her knowledge; some call Her Māyā, Pradhāna, Prakṛti, Ajā (unborn) and some others call Her Śakti.

विरणर्ग इति तां ग्रुः शैरणास्विगारतः ।

अविष्यामिते प्रावृदितत्वाखिंघन्तकाः ॥ 10 ॥

The Śaiva authors call Her Vimarsā and the other Vedāntists call Her Avidyā; in short, this Māyā is in the heads of all the Pandits. This Māyā is called various in the Nigamas.

एवं नानाविष्यानि सूनीमानि निमादिषु ।

तस्या जडचं दृष्यत्वाज्ञाननाशाततोउसती ॥ 1 1 ॥

चैतन्यस्य न दृष्यत्वं दृष्यत्वं जडमेव तत् ।

स्वप्रकाशं च चैतन्यं न पेण प्रकाशितम् ॥ 1 2 ॥

That which is seen is inert; for this reason Māyā

is Jāda (inert) and as the knowledge it conveys is destroyed, it is false. Caitanya (Intelligence) is not seen; if It were seen, it would have been Jāda. Caitanya is self-luminous; not illumined by any other source. Were It so, Its Enlightener would have to be illumined by some other thing and so the fallacy of Anavasthā creeps in (an endless series of causes and effects).

अनवस्थादोषस्तावर स्थेनापि प्रकाशितम् ।

कर्मकंशिविरोध: स्यातमाताधीयवलस्यम् ॥ 13 ॥

प्रकाशमानमयैषां भासकं विद्ध पवेत ।

अन्तरच च नित्यतं सिद्धसंवित्नोमम ॥ 14 ॥

Again one thing cannot be the actor and the thing acted upon (being contrary to each other); so Caitanya be illumined by itself. So It is Self-luminous; and it illumines Sun, Moon, etc., as a lamp is self-luminous and illumines other objects. So, O, Mountain! This My Intelligence is established as eternal and everlasting.

जात्यविरूपुत्वादौ इयस्य व्यभिचातः ।

सिंवोटो व्यभिचार्य तानुभृतोरिति कर्हिंचि ॥ 15 ॥

The waking, dreaming and deep sleep states do not remain constant but the sense of 'I' remains the same, whether in waking, dreaming or deep sleep state; its anomaly is never felt. (The Bauddhas say that) The sense of intelligence, Jñāna, is also not felt; there is the absence of it; so what is existent is also temporarily existent.

यदि तस्यायनुभवस्ताईं येन साक्षिणा ।

अनुभूत: स एवात्र शिष्टः संविद्युः पुरा ॥ 16 ॥

अतएव च नित्यां प्रोक्ते सच्छास्काविद्धे: ।

आनन्दक्तता चास्या: परप्रेमायत्वतः ॥ 17 ॥

But (it can then be argued that) then the Witness by which that absence is sensed, that Intelligence, in the shape of the Witness, is eternal. So the Pandits of all the reasonable Śāstras declare that Samvit (Intelligence) is Eternal and it is Blissful the fountain of all love.

मा न भूद्र हिं भूयासिमिति प्रेमामतिन स्थितम् ।

सर्वस्यान्यस्य मिथ्यालाद्रसंगल सृष्टं मम ॥ 18 ॥

Book VII Chapter XXXII

अपरिक्ष्त्रातउपेवेमत एव मता मम ।

तच्च जानं नात्यधर्मों धर्मते जडतात्मन: ॥ 19 ॥

Never the Jivas or embodied souls feel ‘I am not’; but ‘I am’ this feeling is deeply established in the soul as Love. Thus it is clearly evident that I am quite separate from anything else which are all false. Also I am one continuous (no interval or separation existing within Me). Again Jñāna is not the Dharma (the natural quality) of Ātman but it is of the very nature of Ātman.

ज्ञान्य जडशेचलं न दूई न च मम्यति ।

चिद्वमैलं तथा नास्ति चितश्रिक हिं विधते ॥ 2 0 ॥

If Jñāna were the Dharma of Ātman, then Jñāna would have been material; so Jñāna is immaterial. If (for argument's sake) Jñāna be denominated as material, that cannot be. For Jñāna is of the nature of Intelligence and Ātman is of the nature of Intelligence. Intelligence has not the attribute of being Dharma. Here the thing Cit is not different from its quality (Cit).

तस्मातात्मानस्फ: सुवहणघ सर्वदा ।

सत्य: पूर्णप्रधर्मश्रं क्षेत्रजालविबर्जितः ॥ 21 ॥

स पुनः कामकर्मादि युक्ता स्वीयामयाय ।

पूर्वानुभूतसंस्काराकालकर्मविपाकतः ॥ 22 ॥

So Ātman is always of the nature of Jñāna and happiness; Its nature is Truth; It is always Full, unattached and void of duality. This Ātman again, united with Māyā, composed of desires and Karmas, wants to create, due to the want of discrimination, the twentyfour tattvas, according to the previous Sarīnskāras (tendencies), time and Karma.

अविवेकाच्च तत्व्य सिसुक्षावान्पजायते ।

अब्दिकुपूर्वे: सर्गोंर्व कवितने नगाधि ॥ 23 ॥

O Mountain! The re-awakening after Pralaya Susupti is not done with Buddhi (for then Buddhi is not at all manifested). So this creation is said to be effected without any Buddhi (proper intelligence).

एताद्वि यमया प्रोक्ते मम रूपमलोकिम् ।

अव्याकृतं तद्यवक्तं मायाशबलमित्यपि ॥ 24 ॥

प्रोच्यते सर्वशास्त्रेषु सर्वकारणकारणम् ।

तत्त्वनामिवृभृतं च सचिद्वान्त्विधप्रभु ॥ 25 ॥

O, Chief of the Immovables! The Tattva (Reality) that I have spoken to you is most excellent and it is my Extraordinary Form merely. In the Vedas it is known as Avyākṛta (unmodified), Avyakta (unmanifested) Māyā Śabala (divided into various parts) and so forth. In all the Śāstras, it is stated to be the Cause of all causes, the Primeval Tattva and Saccidānanda Vigraha.

सर्वकर्मविरीभृतमिच्छान्त्रक्रियाश्रयम् ।

ईंकाराम-नश्वायच्छं तदादित्तं तदुच्यते ॥ 26 ॥

Where all the Karmas are solidified and where Icchā Sakti, (will), Jñāna Sakti (intelligence) and Kriyā Śakti (action) all are melted in one, that is called the Mantra Hrim, that is the first Tattva.

तस्मादाकाग उत्प्र: शब्दतमाजरूपक: ।

भवेत्सप्रांतिको बायुतैजोकृतपात्मकं पुनः ॥ 27 ॥

जलं सतात्मकं पशुत्तातो न्यात्मिका धरा ।

गब्दिकुण आकाशो बायु: स्पर्शवात्रितः ॥ 28 ॥

गब्दस्यांरूपणुं तेज इतुच्छते बुधैः ।

गब्दस्यांरूपरसैरागो वेदगुणाः स्मृतः ॥ 29 ॥

गब्दस्यांरूपसाथी: पड्गुणा धरा ।

From this comes out Äkäša, having the property of sound, thence Vāyu (air) with ‘touch’ property; then fire with form, then water having ‘Rasa’ property; and lastly the earth having the quality ‘smell.’ The Pandits say that the ‘sound’ is the only quality of Äkäša; air has two qualities viz., sound and touch, fire has three qualities sound, touch, form; water has four qualities sound, touch, form, taste; and the earth has five qualities sound, touch, form, taste and smell.

तेष्यो3पबन्महतूर्षे यल्लिंगं परिच्छते ॥ 30 ॥

सर्वात्मकं तत्संप्रोकं सूक्ष्मदेडोउयमात्नः ।

अव्यक्ते कारणो देहः स चोक्तः पूर्वेमिव हि ॥ 31 ॥

यस्पिजगवृडीजरयं स्थितं लिंगोद्वयं यतः ।

Out of these five original elements, the allpervading Sūtra (string or thread) arose. This Sūtrātman (soul) is called the ‘Līnga Deha,’

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

comprising within itself all the Prānas; this is the subtle body of the Paramātman. And what is said in the previous lines as Avyakta or Unmanifested and in which the Seed of the World is involved and whence the Liṅga Deha has sprung, that is called the Causal body (Kāraṇa body) of the Paramātman.

ततः स्थूलानि भूतानि पञ़ीकरणामांत: ॥ 32 ॥

पञ़संख्यानि जायते ततुकास्त्वशोच्छते ।

पूवौक्तानि च भूतानि प्रत्येकं विभवेन्दिष्ठया ॥ 33 ॥

The five original elements (Apañcikrta called the five Tan Matras) being created, next by the Pañcikaraṇa process, the gross elements are created. The process is now being stated: O, Girijā! Each of the five original elements is divided into two parts; one part of each of which is subdivided into four parts.

एकैकं भागमेकस्य चतुर्धि विषनैहित्रे ।

स्वलेवरात्रिदायीगे योजनावघ उष्ठ ते ॥ 34 ॥

तत्कार्य च विगाड़देः स्थूलतेहोउपामानः ।

पझभृतस्वसन्त्रोंगे: श्रोत्रादीनों समुद्धतः ॥ 35 ॥

This fourth part of each is united with the half of four other elements different from it and thus each gross element is formed. By these five gross elements, the Cosmic (Virāt) body is formed and this is called the Gross Body of the God. Jñanendriyas (the organs of knowledge) arise from Sattva Guṇa of each of these five elements.

जानेन्द्रियाणं राजेन्द्र प्रत्येके मितिलेस्तु तैः ।

अनतः कर्णपोकं स्वादुप्तिभेदाच्छतुर्विधम् ॥ 36 ॥

यदा तु संकल्पविकल्यकृतयं

तद्धा घबेतनमन इत्यभिख्यम् ।

स्याद्वुद्धिसंत्र च यदा प्रवेति

सुनिश्रितं संशयहीनकर्ण ॥ 37 ॥

Again the Sattva Guṇas of each of the Jñanendriyas united become the Antahkaraṇāni. This Antahkarana is of four kinds, according as its functions very. When it is engaged in forming Sañkalpas, resolves, and Vikalpas (doubts) it is called ‘mind.’

अनुसंधानकर्ष तच्चितं च परिकीर्तितम् ।

अहैकुलात्मकवृष्टा नु तदहंकारतां गतम् ॥ 38 ॥

तेषां रजोर्जैज्ञातिन क्रमाकस्मिन्याणि च ।

प्रत्येकं मितितेतेसैनु प्राणो भवति पंचथा ॥ 39 ॥

When it is free from doubts and when it arrives at the decisive conclusion, it is called ‘Citta’; and when it rests simply on itself in the shape of the feeling ‘I’, it is called Ahanikāra. From the Rajo Guṇa of each of the five elements arises Vāk (speech), Pāni (hands) Pāda (feet), Pāyu (Anus) and Upastha (organs of generation)

इदि प्राणो गुद्रपानो नाभिस्वस्तु समानकः ।

कणद्वेशेगुव्यानः स्वाद्व्यानः सर्वेगरीगः ॥ 40 ॥

जानेनिद्वायिन पर्वेव पढ़ कर्मनिद्वायिन च ।

प्राणादिपढ़कं चैव धिया च सहितं मनः ॥ 41 ॥

Again their Rajo parts united give rise to the five Prānas (Prāna, Apāna, Samāna, Udāna and Vyāna.) the Prāna Vāyu resides in the heart; Apāna Vayu in the Arms; Samāna Vāyu resides in the Navel; Udāna Vāyu resides in the Throat; and the Vyāna Vāyu resides, pervading all over the body. My subtle body (Linga Deha) arises from the union of the five Jñāndērriyas, the five Karmendriyas (organs of action), the five Prānas and the mind and Buddhī, these seventeen elements.

एततृष्यं शरीरं स्यान्म पिलंगं यदुच्छते ।

तरा या प्रकृति: प्रोक्ता सा राजनिद्विषया सूता ॥ 42 ॥

सत्त्वीराका तु माया स्यादिविषाणिधिता ।

स्वाधयं या तु संग्रेस्ता मायेति निगघते ॥ 43 ॥

And the Prakṛti that resides there is divided into two parts; one is pure (Suddha Sattva) Māyā and the other is the impure Māyā or Avidyā united with the Guṇas. By Māyā is meant. She, who, without concealing Her refugees, protects, them When the Supreme Seif is reflected on this Śuddha Sattva, Māyā, He is called Iśvara. This Śuddha Māyā does not conceal Brahma, its receptacle; therefore She knows the All-pervading Brahma and She is omniscient, omnipotent, the Lady of all and confers favours and blessings on all.

Book VII Chapter XXXIII

तत्या यतृतीर्विंक्षे स्याद्विषबभूतस्य चोषितुः।

स ईशर: समाख्यात: स्वाशयरनावार्य: ॥ 44 ॥

सर्वै: सर्वकर्ता च सर्वानुहकाकर: ।

अविष्यायां तु यत्किचितृतीर्विंक्षे नगाधिप ॥ 45 ॥

When the Supreme Self is reflected on the Impure Māyā or Avidyā, ,Ie is called Jiva. This Avidyā conceals Brahma, Whose nature is Happiness; therefore this Jiva is the source of all miseries.

तदेव जीवसंत्रं स्यात्सर्वेतु:खाश्रयं पुनः ।

इयोग्यीहि संप्रोक्ते देइत्रवमविद्धता ॥ 46 ॥

देहरयाधिपानाव्याथभूत्रापत्रयं पुनः ।

प्रास्तु कराणात्मा स्यात्सुभादेही तु तैजसः ॥ 47 ॥

Both Iśvara and Jīva have, by the influence of Vidyā and Avidyā three bodies and three names. When the Jīva lives in his causal body, he is named Prajñā; when he lives in subtle body he is known as Taijasa; while he has the gross body, he is called Viśva.

स्वृत्वेही तु विश्वाख्यक्षित्य: परिकीर्तितः ।

एवमीगोर्षि संप्रोक्त ईशसूत्रविराद्पदेः ॥ 48 ॥

So when Iśvara is in His causal body, he is denominated Iśa; when He is in His subtle body, he is known as Sūtra; and when He is in His gross body, He is known as Virāt.

प्रथमो व्यहिष्पत्सु समष्टात्मा पर: स्मृतः ।

स हि सर्वेश्रः साक्षाजीवानुप्रहाकायया ॥ 49 ॥

करोति विविध विश्वं नानाभोगाशयं पुनः ।

मच्छक्तिप्रेतो नित्यं मयि राजन्यकल्पितः ॥ 50 ॥

डीत श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे सदमतस्कर्ये देवीपीतायां

द्वारिशोरभावः 11 32 11

The Jiva glories in having three (as above-mentioned) kinds of differentiated bodies and Iśvara glories in having three (as above-mentioned) kinds of cosmic bodies. Thus Iśvara is the Lord of all though he feels Himself always happy and satisfied, yet to favour the Jivas and to give them liberation (Mokṣa) He has created various sorts of worldly things for their Bhogas (enjoyments). This Iśvara creates all the Universe, impelled by My Brahma Śakti. I am of the nature of Brahma; and Iśvara in conceived in Me as a snake is imagined in a rope. Therefore Iśvara has to remain dependent on My Śakti.”

Here ends the Thirty-second Chapter of the Seventh

Book on Self-realization, spoken by the World Mother in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XXXIII

CHAPTER XXXIII

On the Devi's Virāḥ Rūpa

देल्युवाच

मन्मायाशक्तिसंकल्पं जगत्सर्वं चराचरम् ।

साउपि मत: पृथड्यामाया नारनेव परमार्वतः ॥ १ ॥

व्यवहारुद्रगा सेयं विहा मायेति विश्रुता ।

तत्वपूछ्या तु नारस्येव तत्वपेवास्ति केवलम् ॥ २ ॥

The Devi said: “O Girirāja! This whole universe, moving and unmoving, is created by My Māyā Śakti. This Māyā is conceived in Me. It is not, in reality, different or separate from Me. So I am the only Cit, Intelligence. There is no other intelligence than Me.

Viewed practically, it is known variously as Māyā, Vidyā; but viewed really from the point of

Brahman, there is no such thing as Māyā; only one Brahman exists.

साउर्ड सर्वे जनासृष्ट्वा तदेतः प्रविशाण्यम् ।

मायाकर्मादिर्वहित गिरे प्राणपुःसरा ॥ ३ ॥

लोकान्तरागितिचें चेकत्थं स्यादिति हेतुना ।

यथा यथा भवैत्येव मायाभैत्स्तथा तथा ॥ ४ ॥

I am that Brahma, of the nature of Intelligence. I create this whole world on this Unchangeable Eternal (Mountain-like) Brahma, (composed of Avidyā, Karma, and various Śarīskāras) and enter first as Prāṇa (vital breath) within it in the form of Cidābhasa.

उपाधिप्रेतिद्धानई घटाकाणादयो यथा ।

उच्चनीचादिवस्तुनि भासयन्याफकर: सदा ॥ 5 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

न दृष्यति तर्वेवाईं दोवैलिंता कदापि न ।

मयि बुद्ध्यादिकर्तृलं मयस्येवावगे जना: ॥ 6 ॥

O Mountain! Unless I enter as Breath, how can this birth and death and leaving and retaking bodies after bodies be accounted for! As one great Ākāśa is denominated variously Ghaṭākāśa (Ākāśa in the air), Patākāśa (Ākāśa in cloth or picture), So I too appear variously by acknowledging this Prāṇa in various places due to Avidyā and various Antahkaranas. As the Sun's rays are never defiled when they illumine various objects on earth, so I, too, am not defiled in entering thus into various high and low Antahkaranas (heart).

वद्रति चात्मा कर्मति विमुईा न सुखुद्धयः ।

अज्ञानभेदततन्द्रनायाया भेदततसा ॥ 7 ॥

The ignorant people attach Buddhi and other things of activity on Me and say that Atman is the Doer; the intelligent people do not say that. I remain as the Witness in the hearts of all men, not as the Doer.

जीवेध्राविभागश्र कल्पितो माययेव तु ।

घटाकाशमहाकाशिविभागः कल्पितो यथा ॥ 8 ॥

तथैव कल्पितो भेदो जीवतपरामात्मनेः ।

यथा जीवबहुतं च माययैव न च स्वतः ॥ 9 ॥

तथेध्वहतुं च मायया न स्वभावतः ।

देहैन्द्रियदसंघातावसानोभदेपित्ता ॥ 1 0 ॥

O Acalendra! There are many Jivas and many Ísvaras due to the varieties in Avidyā and Vidyā. Really it is Māyā that differentiates into men, beasts and various other Jivas; and it is Māyā that differentiates into Brahmā, Viṣṇu and other Ísvaras. As the one pervading Sky (Ākāśa) is called Mahākāśa Ghatākāśa (being enclosed by jars), so the one All pervading Paramātmā is called Paramātmā, Jīvātmā (being enclosed within Jivas). As the Jivas are conceived many by Māyā, not in reality; so Ísvaras also are conceived many by Māyā; not in essence.

अधिदा जीभेद्यर हेतुनान्यः प्रकतीतः ।

गुणानं वासनाधेदेपिता या धराधर ॥ 1 1 ॥

माया सा परभेदस्य हेतुर्नान्यः कराचन ।

मयि सर्वमितं प्रोतमोते च धरणीधर ॥ 1 2 ॥

O Mountain! This Avidyā and nothing else, is the cause of the difference in Jivas, by creating differences in their bodies, indriyas (organs) and minds. Again, due to the varieties in the three Gunas and their wants (due to the differences between Sātvik, Rājasik and Tāmasik desires), Māyā also appears various. And their differences are the causes of different Īsvaras, Brahmā, Viṣṇu and others.

इंश्वरोड़ं च सूत्रात्या विराडात्माउहमासि च ।

ब्रह्माउंह विष्युक्री च गौरी ब्राही च वैषाणी ॥ 13 ॥

सूयोंड़े ताराकाशुहं तारकेशलाशप्रस्महूम् ।

पशुपक्षिस्वरूपाउं चाण्डालोड़ेचं च तस्कर: ॥ 14 ॥

O, Mountain! This whole world is interwoven in Me; It is I that am the Iśvara that resides in causal bodies; I am the ‘Sutrātman, Hīranyagarbha that resides in subtle bodies and it is I that am the Virāt, residing in the gross bodies. I am Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara; I am the Brāhmī, Vaiṣnavī and Raudrī Śaktis.

व्याधोर्ड कुतकर्मार्डे सत्यकर्मार्डे महाजनः ।

स्वीपुत्रपुस्तकाकारोच्छयेन न संशयः ॥ 15 ॥

यच्च किंचित्वस्तिव्रसु रूपयते श्रुवतरेपि वा ।

अंतर्वहिंष्रच तत्सर्वे व्याप्याहं सर्वदा स्थिता ॥ 16 ॥

I am the Sun, I am the Moon, I am the Stars; I am beasts, birds, Cāndālas and I am the Thief. I am the cruel hunter; I am the virtuous high-souled persons and I am the female, male, and hermaphrodite. There is no doubt in this. O Mountain! Wherever there is anything, seen or heard, I always exist there, within and without.

न तदिति मया त्रकं वसु किंचिच्चारावम् ।

यशिति चेतच्छूयं स्वादुक्याजुयोमयं हि तत ॥ 17 ॥

रज्जयांना सपीमताप्रवैरकता विभाति हि ।

तथैवेशादिरूपेण भाग्यहं नात्र संशयः ॥ 18 ॥

अधिष्ठानातिरेकेन कार्यलतं तत भासते ।

तस्मान्यस्तयैतैतस्तावज्ञान्यथा भवेत् ॥ 19 ॥

There is nothing moving or unmoving, that can

Book VII Chapter XXXIII

exist without Me. If there be such, that is like the son of a barren woman. Just as one rope is mistaken for a snake or a garland, so I am the One Brahma and appears as Ísvara, etc. There is no doubt in this. This world cannot appear without a substratum. And That Substratum is My Existence. There can be nothing else."

हिमालय उवाच

यथा बदसि देवेशि समध्यात्मवमुप्तिवदम् ।

तथेव उद्यमिच्छामि यदि देख कृपामपी ॥ 20 ॥

The Himalayas said: “O Devi! If Thou art merciful on me, I desire, then, to see Thy Virāt form in the Fourth Dimensional Space.

This sight is developed when the mind resides in the heart centre or in the centre of the eye-brows. A proper teacher is necessary."

यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः शुत्वा सर्वे देवाः सविधावाः ।

नन्दुपूर्वितात्यानः पूजर्योक्ष तद्वचः ॥ 2 1 ॥

अथ देवमर्ते ज्ञावा भक्तकामदुपा शिवा ।

अर्शेशप्रिकर्न कर्य भक्तकामप्रपूर्णी ॥ 2 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the words of Girirāja, Viṣṇu and all the other Devas gladly seconded him. Then the Devi, the Goddess of the Universe, knowing the desires of the Devas, showed Her Own Form, that fulfils the desires of the Bhaktas, that is auspicious and that is like the Kalpa Vṛksa towards the Bhaktas.

अप्यर्थसते महदोल्य विराङ्कपं परात्वरम् ।

ढीमैरनंक भवेदायर चन्द्रसूर्यैं च चक्छीपि । २३ ।।

दिगः श्रौत्रे वचो वेदा: प्राणो वायुः प्रक्रिलितः ।

विश्वं द्रव्यमिव्याहुः पृथिवी जयनं स्मृतः । २४ ।।

नभस्तलं नाधिसमो ज्योतिशक्रमुः स्थलम् ।

महलौकसुं ग्रीवा स्याजलोको मुखं स्मृतः || 25 ||

तपोकोको राहितैसुं सल्यलोकाद्धः स्थलः ।

इन्द्रवायो बाहल स्युः शब्धः श्रोगे महौशितुः ॥ 26 ॥

नास्तयद्वद्यों नासे स्ती गच्छो प्रायं स्त्यो कुँवे: ।

मुखमनिः: समाख्यातो दिवाराजी च पश्मणी ॥ 27 ॥

They saw Her Highest Virāt Form. The

Satyaloka is situated on the topmost part and is Her head; the Sun and Moon are Her eyes; the quarters, Her ears; the Vedas are Her words; the Universe is Her heart; the earth is Her loins; the Bhuvarloka is Her navel; the asterisms are Her Thighs; the Maharloka is Her neck; the Janarloka is Her Face; the Taparloka is Her head, situated below the Satyaloka; Indra and the Devas and the Svarloka is Her arms; the sound is the organ of Her ears; the Ásvin twins, her nose; the smell is the organ of smell; the fire is within Her face; day and night are like Her two wings.

ब्रह्मायांं पूर्विजूमपोत्यापस्तुः प्रवीर्तितः ।

रसो विन्हा समाखतात यमा दंदुः प्रवीर्तितः ॥ 28 ॥

दन्ता:स्नटकल यस्य हासो माया प्रक्रौतिता ।

सर्गस्वर्णमोगमोक्षः स्याद्वीडोध्योमहोर्जिणुः ॥ 29 ॥

लोभः: स्याद्यगीछोरस्या धर्मांगरनिंतु घुषभूः ।

प्रजापतिश्र मेई न्यादा: सद्य जानतिले ॥ 30 ॥

The four-faced Brahmā is Her eyebrows; water is Her palate; the juice thereof is Her organ of taste; Yama, the God of Death, is Her large teeth, the affection is Her small teeth; Māyā is Her smile; the creation of Universe is Her sidelooks; modesty is Her upper lip; covetousness is Her lower lip; unrighteousness is Her back.

कृषिकः समुद्रा गिरायोरस्थीन देव्या महौशितुः ।

नयो नाङ्गः समास्याला यूक्षा: केशः प्रकीर्तितः ॥ 31 ॥

The Prajāpati is Her organ of generation; the oceans are Her bowels; the mountains are Her bones; the rivers are Her veins; and the trees are the hairs of Her body.

कौमारवीरवनजरावोरस्या गतिन्तमा ।

बलाहकास्तु केशः स्युः संध्ये ते वाससी विषः ॥ 32 ॥

राजस्ध्रीजाद्वायाघोघ्रमातु मनः स्मूग्न ।

विज्ञानशक्तिशु हरी रोड़ो-त:करणं स्यून् ॥ 33 ॥

O King! Youth, virginity, and old age are Her best gaits, positions or ways (courses) paths, the clouds are Her handsome hairs; the two twilights are her clothings; the Moon is the mind of the Mother of the Universe; Hari is Her Vijñāna Śakti

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

(the knowledge power); and Rudra is Her all destroying power.

अशादिजातयः सर्वा: अशिपिद्रेण सिद्धता विधभः ।

अतलादिमहालोका: कटयधोपागतां गता: ॥ 34 ॥

एतावुर्ग महाकपं द्वशुः सुरुपुंगावः ।

The horses and other animals are Her loins; the lower regions Atala, etc., are Her lower regions from Her hip to Her feet. The Devas began to behold Her this Cosmic (Virāt) appearance with eyes, wide awake, with wonder.

ज्वालमालासहसावाखी लेलिहानं च चिह्वा ॥ 35 ॥

दैंधुकटकटारावां वर्मतं वहामिश्रिभः ।

नानायुधधरं वीरं ब्रह्मश्रौदनं च यत् ॥ 36 ॥

सहस्रशीर्नयनं सहस्रचरणं तथा ।

कोदिसूर्प्रतीकाशं विद्युक्तोदिसम्प्रभम् ॥ 37 ॥

Thousands of fiery rays emitted from Her form; She began to lick the whole universe with Her lips; the two rows of teeth began to make horrible sounds; fires came out from Her eyes; various weapons were seen in Her hands; and the Brāhmaṇas and Kṣattriyas are become the food of that Awful Deity. Thousands of heads, eyes and feet were seen in that form. Crores of Suns, crores of lightnings flashes, mingled there. Horrible, Awful, That appearance looked terrific to the eyes, heart and mind.

भयंकंत महापोरं हद्धशोल्सासकराम।

द्वशुस्ते सुरा: सर्वे हाहाकारं च चिक्रे ॥ 38 ॥

विकंभपानहद्वा मूच्छंगिपुरुर्याया ।

स्मरणं च मत तेषां जगद्येवयमित्यपि ॥ 39 ॥

The Devas thus beheld and began to utter cries of horror and consternations; their hearts trembled and they were caught with immovable senselessness. “Here is the Devi, our Mother and Preserver.” this idea vanished away at once from their minds.

अथ ते ये सितया वेदाश्रतृदिंशु महाविधाः ।

बोध्यामासुर्युं मृछीलो मूढ्धितान्सुरान् ॥ 40 ॥

अत ते धैर्मालंब्य लब्या च श्रुतिनुभान् ।

प्रेमाशुपूर्णनयना रूढ़कण्डास्तु निजरोः ॥ 41 ॥

बायणब्रद्या वाचा स्तोतुं समुपचिक्रे ।

At this moment the Vedas that were on the four sides of the Devi, removed the swoon of the Devas and made them conscious. The Immortals got, the, the excellent Vedas; and, having patience, began to praise and chant hymns in words choked with feelings nad with tears of love flowing from their eyes.

देवा कचुः

अपराधं क्षमसाव्य पाष्ट्र दीनांस्वपुद्धवान् ॥ 42 ॥

कोपं संहर देवेशि सभया रूपदर्शन्ति ।

का ते सुर्ति: प्रकर्तेव्या पारमैर्निंसरिति ॥ 43 ॥

The Devas said: "O Mother! Forgive our faults. Protect us, the miserable, that are born of Thee. O Protectress of the Devas! Withhold Thy anger; we are very much terrified at the sight of Thy this form.

स्वस्याव्युझेन प्रशासी शावान्य श्वविक्रमः ।

तद्वारंजायमानां कवं स विषयो भवेत् ॥ 44 ॥

नमसे भुवनेशानि नमसे प्रणवासिकः ।

सर्वेविदानसरित्ये नमो ईंकारमूर्ते ॥ 45 ॥

O Devi! We are inferior immortals; what prayers can we offer to Thee! Thou Thyself canst not measure Thy powers; how then can we, who are born later, know of Thy greatness! Obeisance to Thee, the Lady of the Universe! Obeisance to Thee of the nature of the Pranava Om.

यस्मादिन: स्मुत्यजो यस्मात्यूर्थि चन्द्रमा: ।

यस्मादेषधयः सर्वित्तमे सर्वांतमेन नमः ॥ 46 ॥

यस्मादच देवा: संभृता: साध्या: पक्षिण एव च ।

पणवर्ध मनुष्याशु तस्मै सर्वांतमेन नमः ॥ 47 ॥

Thou art the One that is proved in all the Vedāntas. Obeisance to Thee, of the form of Hrim! Obeisance to Thee, the Self of all, whence has originated the Fire, the Sun, and the Moon and whence have sprung all the medicinal plants. Obeisance to the Devi, the Cosmic Deity, the Self in all whence have sprung all the Devas, Sādhyas, the beasts, birds, and men!

प्राणापानी जीहिवधी तपः अढ़ा मृन्त तथा ।

बहाचर्यं विधिध्रीव यस्मात्यमे नमो नमः ॥ ४ ४ ॥

Book VII Chapter XXXIV

सत प्राणाधिईये यस्मासमिध्य: सत एव च ।

होभा: सत तथा लोकातत्से सर्वास्मिन नमः ॥ 49 ॥

We bow down again and again to the Great Form, Mahā Māyā, the Self of all, whence have sprung the vital breath Prāṇa, Apāna, grains and wheats, and Who is the source of asceticism, faith, truth, continence and the rules what to do and what not to do under the present circumstances. The seven Prāṇas, the seven Lokas, the seven Flames, the seven Samidhs, the seven Oblations to Fire, have sprung from Thee!

यस्तासमुद्रा गिरायः सिंधवः प्रदार्ति च ।

यस्तादोषधयः सर्वा रासतस्मी नमो नमः ॥ 50 ॥

Obeisance to Thee, the Great Self in all! Obeisance to the Universal form of the Deity of the Universe Whence have sprung all the oceans, all the mountains, all the rivers, all the medicinal plants and all the Rasas (the tastes of all things).

यस्ताङ्गः समुद्धाती दीक्षा यूयडु रदक्षिण।

ऋचो यज्ञिं सामानि तस्मै सर्वतंचन नः ॥ 51 ॥

नमः पुरस्तान्युते च नमस्ते पार्थ्योद्वीयः ।

अयं ऊर्धे चतुरिद्धु मातार्भयो नमो नमः ॥ 52 ॥

We bow down to that Virāt Form, the Great Self, the Mahā Māyā, whence have originated the sacrifice, the sacrificial post (to which the victim about to be immortalised is bound) and Dakṣinās (the sacrificial fees) and the Rk, the Yajus, and the Sāma Vedas. O Mother! O Mahā Māyā! We bow down to Thy front, to Thy back, to Thy both the sides, to Thy top, to Thy bottom and on all sides of Thee.

उपसंहर देवेशि रूपमेतदलौकिकम् ।

तदेव दर्शयामकं रूयं सुन्दरमुद्रम् ॥ 53 ॥

O Devi! Be kind enough of withhold this extraordinary Terrific Form of Thine, and shew us Thy Beautiful Lovely Form."

व्यास उवाच:

इति शीतानुसारानूद्धवा जगद्धवा कृषणपांच ।

संद्रल्य रूपं घोर तद्धर्णमास मुद्रम् ॥ ५४ ॥

पाणीकुणसारभीतिरयं सर्वागिकामेणम् ।

करणाणुर्णनयनं मन्द्रियमानुखांबुगम् ॥ 55 ॥

दृष्टा तत्सुदरं रूपं तदा भतीलिवर्षिताः ।

शातन्धिता: शंगमुने हर्षगद्धरिन:खना: ॥ 56 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे सत्नमकल्मे देवौपीतायां

यश्विसंगोः। 11 33 11

Vyāsa said: O King! The World Mother, the Ocean of mercy, seeing the Devas terrified, withheld Her Fearful Cosmic Form and showed Her very beautiful appearance, pleasing to the whole world. Her body became soft and gentle. In one hand She held the noose, and in another She held the goad. The two other hands made signs to dispel all their fears and ready to grant the boons. Her eyes emitted rays of kindness; Her face was adorned with beautiful smiles. The Devas became glad at this and bowed down to Her in a peaceful mind and then spoke with great joy.

Here ends the Thirty-third Chapter of the Seventh Book on the Devi's Virat Rāpa in the Mahā Purānam, Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XXXIV

CHAPTER XXXIV

On the Final Emancipation

शीटेल्याच

क्र यूर्य मन्दभाया वे क्रेट रूपं महाबुद्तम् ।

तबायि भक्तवालल्यादौदूरां दर्शितं मया ॥ १ ॥

The Devi said: “O Devas! You are not at all worthy to see this My Wonderful Cosmic Form. Where are Ye! and where is this My Form! But it

is my affection towards the Bhaktas that I have shewn to you all this great form of mine.

न वेटाधवयभेयीनैनं दानैस्वापेज्यया ।

रूपं रूष्टिमं रणकयं केवलं मन्त्रभां विणा ॥ 2 ॥

प्रकृतं श्रणु राजेन्द्र परमात्माज्ञ जीवताम् ।

उपाधियोगासंप्रानतः कर्तृत्वादिकमयत् ॥ 3 ॥

Nobody can see this form without My Grace;

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

the study of the Vedas, the Yoga, the gift, the Sacrifice, the austerities or any other Sâdhanas are quite incompetent to make this form visible to anybody. O King of mountains! Now hear the real instructions. The Great Self is the only Supreme Thing in this world of Maÿâ (Illusions).

क्रिया: क्रोति विविधा धार्मिर्यिकेहतवः ।

नानायोनिसतः प्राय सुखदुः:खेछ युज्चे ॥ 4 ॥

पुनस्तसंस्कृतिवशाज्ञानाकर्मते: सदा ।

नानादेहास्मापोतिं सुखदुः:खेछ युज्ञते ॥ 5 ॥

He it is that under the various Upādhis of an actor and enjoyer performs various functions leading to the Dharma (righteousness) and the Adharma (unrighteousness). Then he goes into various wombs and enjoy pleasure or pain according to his Karma. Then again owing to the tendencies pertaining to these births he becomes engaged in various functions and gets again various bodies and enjoys varieties of pleasures and pains.

घटीयन्बदेत्स्य न विरामः कदापि है ।

अज्ञानमेव मूलं स्थिततः कामः क्रियास्तः ॥ 6 ॥

O Best of Mountains! There is no cessation of these births and death; it is like a regular clockwork machine; it has no beginning and it goes on working to an endless period. Ignorance or Avidyā is the Cause of this Sarīsāra. Desire comes out of this and action flows thence. So men ought to try their best to get rid of this Ignorance.

तस्पाद्रान्नाशाय यतेत नियतं नर: ।

तृतीन्द्र जनस्मात्मक्यं यद्धज्ञानस्य नारणम् ॥ ७ ॥

O, King of Mountains! What more to say than this that the Goal of life is attained when this Ignorance is destroyed. The highest goal is attained by a Jīva when he becomes liberated, while living.

पुरुषार्थस्मापितिश जीवन्नृत्तद्वगाशि च ।

अज्ञानाग्ने शक्ता विश्वैत तु पटीयसी ॥ 8 ॥

And Vidyā is the only thing that is able and skilful in destroying this Ignorance. (As darkness cannot dispel darkness, so) the Karma done out of

Ignorance is Ignorance itself; and such a work cannot destroy Ignorance.

न कर्म तर्ज नोयासिर्विंरीयाथावतो गिरे ।

प्रस्तुताग्राउनानगरै कर्मणा नैव भाव्यताम् ॥ 9

अनर्वदाति कर्माणि चुन: चुनर्शगति हि ।

ततो गरास्ततो दोषस्ततोउनयों महान्यन्ते ॥ 10 ॥

So it is not proper to expect that this Avidyā can be destroyed by doing works. The works are entirely futile. The Jīvas want again and again the sensual enjoyments out of this Karma. Attachment raises out of this desire; discrepancies creep in and out of this ignorant attachment great calamities befall when such faults or discrepancies are committed.

तत्मासर्वप्रियने्न जानं सम्पादयैत्र: ।

कुर्वेब्रेह कर्मणीतन्तः कर्मणविश्यकम् ॥ १ १ ॥

ज्ञानादेव हि कैकल्यमतः स्यातत्समुचव्यः ।

सहायतां प्रजेनकर्मे जानस्य हितकारि च ॥ १ १ ॥

So every sane man ought to make his best effort to get this Jñānam (knowledge). And as it is also enjoined in the Śrutis that one ought to do actions (and try to live one hundred years) so it is advisable to do works also. Again the Śrutis declare that the ‘final liberation comes from Knowledge’ so one ought to acquire Jñānam. If both these be collectively followed, then works become beneficial and helping to Jñānam.

इति केचिद्धरंत्र तद्धिरोधाय सम्भयेत् ।

ज्ञानादूर्यस्थिधे: स्वादुदूर्यीथी कर्मसाध्वः ॥ 13 ॥

योगपदं सम्भाव्यं विशोधानु तततवरोः ।

तमः प्रकाशयोद्ध्वीरापर्धे न सम्पवि ॥ 14 ॥

(Therefore the Jivas should take up both of these.) Others say that this is impossible owing to their contradictory natures. The knots of heart are let loose by Jñānam and the knots are knit more by Karma. So how can they be reconciled! They are so very diametrically opposite. Darkness and light cannot be brought together, so Jñānam and Karma cannot be brought together.

तस्मात्स्विणी कर्मिणि वैद्धिकानि महामते ।

चित्णुक्रवर्तमेव स्युस्तानि कुयात्रव्यन्तः ॥ 15 ॥

Book VII Chapter XXXIV

ग्रामो दूमितितक्षा च वैराग्यं सत्त्वम्भवः ।

तावत्यर्वनोमेव स्यु: कर्माणि न ततः परम् ॥ 16 ॥

Therefore one ought to do all the Karmas as best as one can, as enjoined in the Vedas until one gets Cittaśuddhi (the purification of one's heart and mind). Karmas are to be done until Śama (the control of the inner organs of senses), Dama (the control of the outer organs of senses), Titikṣā (the power to endure heat and cold and other dualities), Vairāgyam (Dispassion), Sattva Sambhava (the birth of pure Sattva Guna in one's own heart) take place. तदन्ते चैव संन्यस्य संशयेद्रुकुमात्यान् । शोचित्वे ब्रह्मात्रिचं च भन्धनां निव्योजाय पुनः ॥ 17 ॥

After these, the Karmas cease for that man. Then one ought to take Sarinyāsa from a Guru (Spiritual Teacher) who has got his senses under control, who is versed in the Śrutis, attached to Brahma (practising the Yogic union with Brahma). He should approach to him with an unfeigned Bhakti. वेदान्तशवणं कुयाश्रिव्यमेवमतिहतः । तत्प्रमयादिव्यासस्य नित्यमर्थे विचारयेत् ॥ 18 ॥ तत्प्रमयादिव्यासं तु जीवक्रौत्ययोब्धिकम् । ऐक्ये ज्ञाते निर्भयस्तु मदुगो हिं प्रजायते ॥ 19 ॥ पदार्थशवगति: पूर्वं वाक्यायांवगतिस्ततः । तत्पदस्य च वाक्यायांं गिरिडं परिकीर्जितः ॥ 20 ॥

He should day and night, without any laziness, do Śravaṇam, Mananam, and Nididhyāsanam (hearing, thinking and deeply realising) the Vedānta saying. He should constantly ponder over the meanings of the Mahāvākyam ‘Tat Tvam Asi.’ ‘Tat Tvam Asi’ means Thou art That; it asserts the identity of the Supreme Self (Brahma) and Embodied Self (Jīvātmā). When this identity is realised, fearlessness comes and he then gets My nature. First of all, he should try to realise (by reasoning) the idea conveyed by that sentence. By the word ‘Tat’ is meant Myself, of the nature of Brahman; and by the word ‘Tvam’ is meant ‘Jīva’ embodied self and the word ‘Asi’ indicates, no doubts, the identity of these two.

त्वपदस्य च वाच्यार्थ जीव एव न संशयः ।

उभवोरैक्यमसिता पदेन प्रोथते बुधैः ॥ 21 ॥

वाच्यार्थवीर्विक्त्वादैवं्यं नैव घटेत है ।

लक्षणातः प्रकर्तेया तत्वमोः शुतसंस्थयोः ॥ 22 ॥

The two words ‘Tat and ‘Tvam’ cannot be apparently identified, as they seem to convey contradictory meanings (‘Tat’ implying omniscience, omnipresence, and other universal qualities and ‘Tvam’ implying non-omniscience and other qualities of a limited nature). So to establish the identity between the two, one ought to adopt Bhāgalaksmanā and Tyāgalaksmanā.

Note: Bhāgalaksmanā—kind of Laksmanā or secondary use of a word by which it partly loses and partly retains its primary meaning also called Jahadajahallaksanā. Tyāga Laksmanā—a secondary use of a word by which it loses partly its primary meaning. त्रिवात्रं तु ततोलैक्ष्य तयोर्वस्य यंपवः ।

तयोर्वस्य तथा जात्वा स्वाभेदेनाङ्गवो भवेत् ॥ 23 ॥

The Supreme Self is Brahma—Consciousness, endowed with the omniscience, etc., and the Embodied Self is Limited Jiva Consciousness, etc.). Leaving aside their both the adjuncts, we take the Consciousness, when both of them are identical and we come to Brahma, without a second.

देवदत्तः स एवायिमितवलक्षणा स्मृता ।

सूचनादिद्वर्भिति कदा संभेदत नः ॥ 24 ॥

The example is now quoted to illustrate what is called Bhāgalakṣanā and Tyāgalakṣanā. “This is that Devadatta” means Devadatta seen before and Devadatta seen now means one and the same persons, if we leave aside the time past and the time present and take the body of Devadatta only.

पश्रीकृतमहाप्रतस्मभुतः स्थूलदेहकः ।

भोगालयो जराव्याधिसंयुतः सर्वकर्मणाम ॥ 25 ॥

मिथ्यापृतोउवम्भापति सुर्टे भायामवन्तः ।

सोउयं स्थूल उपाधि: स्यादात्मानो मे नोगेश् ॥ 26 ॥

This gross body arises from the Pañcikṛta gross elements. It is the receptacle of enjoying the fruits

Šrimaddevibhāgavaatam

of its Karma and liable to disease and old age. This body is all Māyā; therefore it has certainly no real existence. O, Lord of Mountains! Know this to be the gross Upādhi (limitation) of My real Self.

ज्ञानकर्मीद्रवयुर्न प्राणपड़कसंयुर्न ।

मनोबुद्धिद्युर्ने चैतत्मूक्षம் तत्कवयो विद्य: ॥ 27 ॥

अपडीकृतपृत्योल्य सूक्ष्यदेडोउभातनः ।

दितीयोउपमुपाधि: स्यात्युखादेवकाधः ॥ 28 ॥

The five Jānandreniryas (organs of senses), five Karmerdniyas (working organs), the Prāna Vāyus, mind and Buddhī (rational intellect), in all, these seventeen go to form the subtle body, Sūksma Deha. So the Pandits say. This body of the Supreme Self is caused by the Apañcikṛta five original elements. Through this body, pain and pleasure are felt in the heart. This is the second Upādhi of the Ātman.

अनादानिवर्ध्यमिद्धमानुं तु तृतीयकः ।

देहोउपमान्नो भाति कारणात्या नोक्षः ॥ 29 ॥

उपाधिविलये जाते केवलात्माउविश्यक्ते ।

देहवये पछकोणा अनतःस्था: संति सर्वदा ॥ 30 ॥

The Ajñāna or Primeval Ignorance, without beginning and indescribable, is the third body of the ātman. Know this also to be my third Upādhi. When all these Upādhis subside, only the Supremed Self, the Brahman remains.

पछकोषाणपित्यानो ब्रहमुच्छं हि तप्पये ।

नैतिनैतीयादिवाब्वैमीम रूपं यदुच्छे ॥ 31 ॥

न जायते प्रियते तत्कादिचार्य

भृत्वा न बघ्यूव काश्चत् ।

अजों नित्यः शाश्छतोयं पुणणो

न हन्ते हन्यमाने शरीर ॥ 32 ॥

Within these three gross and subtle bodies, the five sheaths, Annamaya, Prānamaya, Vijñānamaya, and Ānandamaya always exist. When these are renounced, Brahmapucccha is obtained. That is Brahma and My Nature, too, This is the Goal of 'Not this, Not this' the Vedānta words. This Self is not born nor It dies. It does not live also, being born. (But it remains constant, though It is not

born). This Self is unborn, eternal, everlasting, ancient.

हर्ते चेमन्यते हन्तुर्हेत्थन्यते हतम् ।

उभौ ती न विज्ञानीति नायं हन्ति न हन्ति ॥ 33 ॥

अणोरणीयामहातो महीयानात्मार्थ

जतोर्निंहितो गृहायाम् ।

तमकनुः पश्यति वीतगोको धातुः

प्रसातामहितानमयम् ॥ 34 ॥

It is not killed, when the body is killed. If one wants to kill it or thinks It as slain, both of them do not know; this does not kill nor is it killed. This Atman, subtler than the subtlest, and greater than the greatest, resides within the cave (the Buddhi) of the Jivas.

आत्मनं रथिनं विद्धि शरीरं रथमेव तु ।

बुद्धिं तु सार्थिं विद्धि मनः प्रग्रहेव च ॥ 35 ॥

इन्द्रियाणि हवानाहुविंश्यांतैमु गोचरान् ।

आत्मैद्धिमनोपुकर्त भोकते त्यादुर्मनीषिणः ॥ 36 ॥

He whose hearts is purified and who is free from Sankalpa and Vikalpa (doubts and mental phenomena), knows It and Its glory and is free from sorrows and troubles. Know this Atman and Buddhi as the charioteer, this body as the chariot, and the mind as the reins. The senses and their organs are the horses and the objects of enjoyments are their aims. The sages declare that the Atman united with mind and organs of senses enjoys the objects.

यत्स्विद्धान्यक्षिति चामन्यकक्षि सदारुणि: ।

न ततव्यदायानोते संसरां चाधिप्यक्षिति ॥ 37 ॥

यस्तु विज्ञानाव्यक्षिति समयकः सदा शृषि: ।

स तु ततव्यदामानोत यस्याम्बूयो न जायते ॥ 38 ॥

He who is non-discriminating, unmindful, and always impure, does not realise his Atman; rather he is bound in this world. He who is discriminating, mindful, and always pure reaches the Goal, realises the Highest Self; and he is not fallen again from That.

विज्ञानसाराधियन्तु मनःप्रमहावार: ।

सोउध्वनः पारमाप्रोत मतीयं यस्यं पदम् ॥ 39 ॥

इत्थं श्रुताय च मत्या च निश्रियात्मानमात्मना ।

भाववैन्यामात्मरूपां निविद्यासनातोप्र च ॥ ४० ॥

Book VII Chapter XXXIV

That man becomes able to cross the Ocean of Saṃsāra and gets My Highest Abode, of the nature of everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss, whose charioteer is Discrimination, and who keeps his senses under control by keeping tight the reins of his mind. Thus one should always meditate intensely on Me to realise the nature of Self by Śravaṇam (hearing), Mananam (thinking) and realising one's own self by one's Self (pure heart).

योगयुक्ते: पुगा स्वास्मिन्यावयेद्वशरयम् ।

देवीप्रणवसंजस्य ध्यानार्थ मनवाच्ययो: ॥ 4 1 ॥

हकार: स्थूलदेहः स्यादकारः सूक्ष्मदेहकः ।

ईकारः कारणात्मासी ईंकारोर्धे तुर्णिकम् ॥ 4 2 ॥

When by the constant practise, as mentioned above, one's heart is fit for Samādhi (being absorbed in the Spirit), just before that, he should understand the meaning of the separate letters in the seed Mantra of Mahāmāyā. The letter 'Ha' means gross body and the letter 'Ra' means subtle body and the letter 'I' means the causal body; the (dot over the semicircle) is the fourth 'Turiya' state of Mine.

एवं समहिदेड़ेपि ज्ञाता बीजजयं क्रमात् ।

समहिष्यक्षोरकलं भाववेभमतिभावर: ॥ 43 ॥

समाधिकालान्यूर्वे तु भावविद्वेबमतुतः ।

तते ध्यायेत्रिनीनाड़ो देर्वीं मां जगदीश्वीम् ॥ 44 ॥

Thus meditating on the separate differentiated states, the intelligent man should meditate on the aforesaid three Bijas in the Cosmic body also and he should then try to establish the identity between the two. Before entering into Samādhi, after very carefully thinking the above, one should close one's eyes and meditate on Me, the Supreme Diety of the Universe, the Luminous and Self-Effulgent Brahma.

प्राणापानी समी कृत्वा नासाध्यंतराचारिणी ।

निद्रातविषयाकांशी वीतदोषो विमतसरः ॥ 45 ॥

भक्ता निव्यान्या युक्तो गुहायां निःसने चखले ।

हकारं विश्वामानां रकोर प्रवितापयेते् ॥ 46 ॥

रकारं तैजसं देवमीकारे प्रवितापयेते् ।

ईकारं प्राजमात्यानं ढौकारे प्रवितापयेते् ॥ 47 ॥

O Chief of Mountains! Putting a stop all worldly desires, free from jealousy and other evils, he should (by constant practise of Prānāyāma) make equal according to the rules of Prānāyāma, the Prāna (the inhaled breath) and Apāna (the exhaled breath) Vāyus and with an unfeigned devotion get the gross body (Vaiśvana) indicated by the letter 'Ha' dissolved in the subtle body Taijasa, the Taijasa body, the letter 'Ra' is in a cave where there is no noise (in the Susumnā cave) after that He should dissolve the Taijasa, 'Ra' into the Causal body 'I' He should then dissolve the Causal body the Prājna 'I' into the Turiya state Hrim.

वाय्यचारकताहीनं ऋतभाविवर्जितम् ।

अखण्डे सचिवदानन्दे भावयेतचिष्छालते ॥ 48 ॥

इति ध्यानेन मां राजसाखाकृत्य नरोतमः ।

मदुप एव भवति इयोर्येकता यतः ॥ 49 ॥

Then he should go into a region where there is no speech or the thing spoken, which is absolutely free from dualities, that Akhaṇḍa Saccidāanda and meditate on that Highest Self in the midst of the Fiery Flame of Consciousness. O, King of Mountains! Thus men by the meditation mentioned above, should realise the indentity between the Jīva and Brahma and see Me and get My Nature.

योगयुक्पाउपनया बृह्वा मामातानां परातयम् ।

अज्ञानस्य सकार्यस्य तक्षणे नागको भवेते ॥ 50 ॥

डीत श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणो सदानस्कन्दे देवीनीतायां

चतुविंशो3.यायः ।। 34 ।।

O Lord of Mountains! Thus the firmly resolved intelligent man, by the practise of this Yoga sees and realise the nature of My Highest Self and destroys immediately the Ignorance and all the actions thereof."

Here ends the Thirty-fourth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the Knowledge, Final Emancipation in the Mahā Purānam, Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER XXXV

On the Yoga and Mantra Siddhi

हिमालय जवाच

घोंगा वद महेशानि सांग संविज्ञदायकम् ।

कृतेन चैन योग्योई भवेवे तच्चदर्शने ॥ १ ॥

Himālaya said: “O Maheśvari! Now tell me the Yoga with all its Añgas (limbs) giving the knowledge of the Supreme Consciousness so that, I may realise my Self, when I practise according to those instructions.”

श्रीव्यवाच

न योगो नभसः पृष्ठे न भूमौ न रसातले ।

ऐक्यं जीवात्मनोराष्ट्रियां गोयाविशपादः ॥ 2 ॥

तत्प्यूषा: घडाख्याता योगविष्यकरान्य ।

कामक्रोधौ लोभयोही मद्यातस्यर्यंज्ञकौ ॥ 3 ॥

Śrī Deviś said: “The Yoga does not exist in the Heavens; nor does it exist on earth or in the nether regions (Pātāla). Those who are skilled in the Yogas say that the realisation of the identity between the Jīvātmā and the Paramātmā is ‘Yoga.’

योगोंरिव विच्चा तान्योगिनो योगमानुपु: ।

यमं नियममासनप्राणायामी ततः पतम् ॥ 4 ॥

प्रत्याहारं धारणाखं ध्यानं सार्थं समाधिता ।

अर्धांगान्याङ्गेताति योगिनां योगासामधे ॥ 5 ॥

अहिंसा सत्यमतेयं जहाचर्यं द्वा।४जवम् ।

भूमा धृतिमिताहारः शोर्धे चैति यमा द्वा ॥ 6 ॥

तय: संनोष आसितक्यं द्वां देक्य पुजनम् ।

सिद्धांत श्रवणं चैव ह्रौमितिश्र जयो भूतम् ॥ 7 ॥

O Sinless One! The enemies to this Yoga are six; and they are lust, anger, greed ignorance, vanity and jealousy. The Yogis attain the Yoga when they become able to destroy these six enemies by practising the accompaniments to Yoga. Yama, Niyama, Śasana, Prānāyāma, Pratyāhāra, Dhāranā, Dhyāna, and Samādhi, these are the eight limbs of Yoga. Yama includes Ahirīsā (non-injuring; non-killing); truthfulness; Asteyam (non-stealing by

mind or deed); Brahmacarya (continence); Dayā (mercy to all beings); Uprightness; forgiveness, steadiness; eating frugally, restrictedly and cleanliness (external and internal).

दर्शेते निवमा: प्रोक्तां मया पर्वतनायक ।

पदासनं स्वस्तिकं च भई वज्ञासनं तथा ॥ ८ ॥

वीरासमिति प्रोक्ते कमातासनचछकम् ।

क्रवौक्षिति विन्यस्य सम्यम्वातले शुषे ॥ ९ ॥

अंगुही च निवल्योवाद्सतायां खुक्रमाततः ।

पचासनमिति प्रोकर्ते योजिनां हृदयजूम् ॥ १ ० ॥

These are ten in number. Niyama includes also ten qualities: (1) Tapasyā (austerities and penances); (2) Contentment; (3) Āstikya (faith in the God and the Vedas, Devas, Dharma and Adharma); (4) Charity (in good causes); worship of God; hearing the Siddhāntas (established saying) of the Vedas; Hri or modesty (not to do any irreligious or blameable acts); Śraddhā (faith to go do good works that are sanctioned); (9) Japam (uttering silently the mantrams, Gāyatrīs or saying of Purāṇas) and (10) Homam (offering oblations daily to the Sacred Fire. There are five kinds of Āsanas (Postures) that are commendable: Padmāśana, Svastikāśana, Bhadrāsana. Vajrāsana and Virāsana. Padmāśana consists in crossing the legs and placing the feet on the opposite thighs (the right foot on the left thigh and the left foot on the right thigh) and catching by the right hand brought round the back, the toes of the right foot and catching by the left hand brought round the back the toes of the left foot; sitting then straight and with ease. This is recommended by the Yogis (and by this one can raise oneself in the air).

Note: The hands, according to some, need not be carried round the back; both the hands are crossed and placed similarly on the thighs.

Book VII Chapter XXXV

जानुवर्त्नरे सम्वक्कृता पादतले शुभे ।

ऋतुकावो विशेषोभी स्वतिराकं तत्प्रवक्षते ॥ १ ।।

सीवल्या: पार्थोवोर्य्य गृल्कमुंगं सुनिश्छिनम् ।

दूषणाश: पादपाण्णी पाणिण्यां परिवर्धयेत् ॥ १२ ॥

भूत्रसन्मिति प्रोक्तं योगिभि: परिपूजितम् ।

ऊर्जी: पादी क्रमायस्य जानोः प्रवड्युप्रावुगत् ॥ १ ३ ।

Place the soles of the feet completely under the thighs, keep the body straight, and sit at ease. This is called the Svastikāsana. Bhadrāsana consists in placing well the two heels on the two sides of the two nerves of the testicles near the anus an catching by the two hands the two heels at her lower part of the testicles then sitting at ease. This is very much liked by the Yogis.

कर्ती विद्याधारखातं वज्ञासनमुत्तमम् ।

एक पादपधः: कृत्वा विद्यस्योक नक्षोत्ते ॥ 14 ॥

ऋजुकायो विशेषोधी वीरासनमितीरितम् ।

Vajrāšana (diamond seat) consists in placing the feet on the two thighs respectively and placing the fingers below the thighs with the hands also there, and then sitting at ease. Virāśana consists in sitting cross on the hams in placing the right foot under the right thigh and the left foot under the left thigh and sitting at ease with body straight.

इडवासं कर्मविद्यां जाह्यो घोजगायाना ॥ १५ ॥

धायवेयुक्ति योगी चतु:पड्या तु मायना ।

सुपुर्णमाध्यंगं सम्यग्रासीशनायाना शनैः ॥ १६ ॥

नाड्गा विहूलया चैव रेचेघोभाविना: ।

Taking in the breath by the Iḍā (the left nostril) so long as we count ‘Om’ sixteen, retaining it in the Susumnā so long as we count ‘Om’ sixty-four times and then exhaling it slowly by the Pinglālā nādī (the right nostril) as long as we count ‘Om’ thirty-two times. (The first process is called Pūraka, the second is called Kumbhaka, and the third is called Reacaka).

प्राणायामिमं प्रार्थगीगाखविगारादः ॥ 17 ॥

भूयो भूयः कमातस्य बाह्याये समावरेत् ।

भाग्वाप्रद्धिकमोषेल सम्यग्रदारा पोडणे ॥ 18 ॥

This is called one Prānāyāma by those versed

in the Yogas. Thus one should go on again with his Prānāyāma. At the very beginning, try with the number twelve, i.e., as we count ‘Om’ twelve times and then increase the number gradually, to sixteen and so on.

जपध्यानादिधि: सार्थ सार्थर्न ते विदुर्वीधा:।

तद्वरेते विगर्भ च प्राणायामं परे तदु: ॥ 19 ॥

Prāṇāyāma is of two kinds: Sagarbha and Vigarbha. It is called Sagarbha when Prāṇāyāma is performed with repeating the Iṣta Mantra and Japam and meditation. It is called Vigarbha Prāṇāyāma when ‘Om’ is simply counted and no other Mantram.

क्रमादध्ययतः पुंगो देहे रेवोदोग्रोपधमः ।

मध्यमः कंपर्युक्तो भूमिव्यागः परे मतः ॥ 20 ॥

उत्तमय युणावातिविच्छीलनमिध्यते ।

When this Prāṇāyāma is practised repeatedly, perspiration comes first when it is called of the lowest order; when the body begins to tremble, it is called middling; and when one rises up in the air, leaving the ground, it is called the best Prāṇāyāma. (Therefore one who practises Prāṇāyāma ought to continue it till he becomes able to rise in the air).

इन्द्रियाणं विचरतां विषयेषु निरालम् ॥ २१ ॥

बलादाहरणं तेषः प्रयाहारोप्रधीयते ।

Now comes Pratyāhāra. The senses travel spontaneously towards their objects, as if they are without anyone to check. To curb them perforce and to make them turn backwards from those objects is called ‘Pratyāhāra.’

अङ्गुर्णुल्कजानुमूलाधार्तिरंगभिष्य 11 22 ||

हदुरीवाकणदडेशेषु लपिक्वायां ततो नस ।

भूमध्ये मस्तके भूर्टिन द्वाद्गाने यथाविधि ॥ 23 ॥

धारणं प्राणमक्तो धरणेति निद्धते ।

To hold the Prāna Vāyu on toes, heels, knees, thighs, scrum, genital organs, navel, heart, neck, throat, the soft palate, nose, between the eyebrows, and on the top of the head, at these twelve places respectively is called the ‘Dhāranā.’

<table><tr><td>समाहितेन</td><td>मनसा</td><td>चैत-यांतरत्वर्दिना</td><td>II 24 II</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">आम-यभीष्टिद्वानां धायां ध्यानिमीछोचते ।</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">समत्थाब्वान नियं जीवात्मयमात्मानो: II 25 II</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">समाधिमामुर्भुनय: प्रोक्तम्यंगलक्षणम् ।</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">इदानीं कवये तेर्भे मज्योपामनुतनम् ॥ 26 ॥</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">विश्रं शरीरियतृर्न फछभूतात्मकं नग ।</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">चन्द्रम्यपीनितेनोपिजीविद्धबीक्यस्पकम् ॥ 27 ॥</td></tr></table>

Concentrate the mind on the consciousness inside and then meditate the Iṣta Devatā within the Jivātmā. This is the Dhyāna. Samādhi is identifying always the Jivātmā and Paramātmā. Thus the sages say. (Samādhi is of two kinds (1) Samprajñāta, or Savikalpak and (2) Nirvikalpak. When the ideas the Knower, Knowledge and the Thing Known, remain separate in the consciousness and yet the mind feels the one Akhañda Saccidāmandā Brahma and his heart remains, there, that is called Samprajñāta Samādhi; and when those three vanish away and the one Brahma remains, it is called Asamprajñāta Samādhi). Thus I have described to you the Yoga with its eight limbs. O, Mountain! This body composed of the five elements, and with Jiva endowed with the essence of the Sun the Moon, and the Fire and Brahma in it as one and the same, is denominated by the term ‘Viśva.’

तिचः कोट्यस्तदर्पन शरीर नाडयो मता: ।

तापु मुखा द्वा प्रोक्तास्पन्सित्वो व्यवस्थिताः ॥ 28 ॥

There are the 350,000 nādis in this body of man; of these, the principal are ten. Out of the ten again, the three are most prominent.

प्रधाना मेकदण्डेउत्र चन्द्रम्यापिनक्षिपि ।

इज्ञा वामे स्थिता नाडी शृधा तु चन्द्रक्षिपि ॥ २ ९ ॥

शफिक्ता तु सा नाडी साश्रादमुतविश्रहा ।

दक्षिणे वा सिंगतालखा पुरूचा सूर्येशिणा ॥ ३० ॥

The foremost and first of these three is Susumnā, of the nature of the Moon, Sun, and Fire, situated in the centre of the spinal cord (it extends from the sacral plexus below to the Brahmarandhra in the head at the top where it looks like a blown Dhustūra

flower). On the left of this Susumnā is the Iḍā Nāḍī white and looking like Moon; this Nāḍī is of the nature of Force, nectar-like. On the right side of the Susumnā is the Pingalā Nāḍī of the nature of a male; it represents the Sun.

सर्वतेजोमयी सा तु सुयुना वहिकृपिणी ।

तया मध्ये विकित्वाखे इच्छान्तिकायात्मकम् ॥ 31 ॥

मध्ये स्वयं भृर्तिंनं तु कोटिर्यर्मसप्रमम् ।

तदूर्धें मायाकीजं तु हताता विद्नुतादकम् ॥ 32 ॥

The Suşumnā comprises the nature of the all the Tejas (fires) and it represents Fire. The inmost of Suşumnā is Victirā or Citrinī Bhūlīngam nādī (of the form of a cobweb) in the middle of which resides the Icchā (will), Jñāna (knowledge) and Kriyā (action) Śaktis, and resplendent like the Millions of Suns.

तद्यूँदं नु शिवाकाता कुण्डली राकविश्यात ।

देव्यानिका नु सा प्रोक्ता मद्धिभ्रा नगाधिरि ॥ 33 ॥

तद्वाहों हेमस्कापं वादिवसंतनतुदैनम् ।

द्रुतहैमसमप्रखं पर्चां त्रत विधिनन्तेम् ॥ 34 ॥

ततूर्धे च्नतगुरखं घड्वलं हीरकप्रमम् ।

वादितलतच्द्वर्णेन स्वाधिछानानुत्तमम् ॥ 35 ॥

Above Him is situated Hrim, the Māyā Bija Harātmā with 'Ha' and Candra Bindu representing the Sound (Nāda). Above this is the Flame, Kula Kunḍalini (the Serpent Fire) of a red colour, and as it were, intoxicated. Outside Her is the Śādhāra Lotus of a yellow colour having a dimension of four digits and comprising the four letters 'va', 'ša', 'ša'. The Yogis meditate on this. In its centre is the hexāgonal space (Pitham).

भूलमाधारच्छोर्ण भूतापारं ततो विदुः ।

स्वगछेन परं लिंगं स्वाधिष्ठानं तते विदु: ॥ 36 ॥

तदूर्यँ नाभिदेशे तु मणिपूरं महाप्रभम् ।

मेघाभं विदुढामं च बहुतेजोमयं ततः ॥ 37 ॥

This is called the Mūlādhāra for it is the base and it supports all the six lotuses. Above its is the Svādhiṣṭhāna Cakra, fiery and emitting lustre like diamonds and with six petals representing the six letters 'ba', 'bha', 'ma', 'ya', 'ra', 'la'. The word

Book VII Chapter XXXV

'Sva' means 'Param Liingam' (superior Male Symbol). Therefore the sages the sages call this 'Svādhisthān' Cakram.

मिफवाद्विज्ञ तत्पच मिफपचं तथोच्छते ।

दूरभिष्य द्रतैयुक्ते जादिष्नातिप्रान्तिन् ॥ 38 ॥

विष्णुज्ञप्रतिष्ठि पर्च विष्णवातोकनाकरणम् ।

तदूर्धेनात्त पवमुचादात्मवसान्धिनम् ॥ 39 ॥

Above it is situated the ‘Manipura Cakram’ of the colour of lightning on clouds and very fiery; it comprises the ten petals, comprising the 10 letters da, dha, na, ta, tha, da, dha, na, pa, pha. The lotus resembles a full blown pearl; hence it is ‘Manipadma.’ Viṣṇu dwells here.

काटिवंततर्वैक पत्रेक्षा मपहित्धिता ।

तन्मये बाणार्पिनं तु सूर्यातुसामममम॥ ४ १० ॥

गब्बद्वहामयं गब्बनाहत तन दूषयते ।

अनाहताख्यं ततवघं मुनिधि: परिकीर्तितम् ॥ ४ १ ॥

Meditation here leads to the sight of Viṣṇu. Above it is ‘Anātata’ Padma with the twelve petals representing the twelve letters ka, kha, ga, gha, ña, (ca), (cha), (Ja), (Jha,) ña, ta and tha. In the middles is Bānālingam, resplendent like the Sun. This lotus emits the sound Śabda Brahma, without being struck; therefore it is called the Anāhata Lotus. This is the source of joy. Here dwells Rudra, the Highest Person.’

आनन्दसदं ततु पुरुधाधिष्ठितं परम् ।

ततूर्धैतु विशूघ्राखं दलं पोडआणब्धुजम् । ४२ ॥

स्वरैः पोडआधिपूर्तै कृध्रवर्णं महाप्रभम् ।

विशूघं ततुते यस्माजीवस्य हंसलोकान् । ४३ ॥

Above it is situated the Viśuddha Chakra of the sixteen petals, comprising the sixteen letters a, ä, i, ü, ü, r, ŷ, li, lr, e, ai, o, ar, am, ah. This of a smoky colour, highly lustrous, and is situated in the throat. The Jīvātmā sees the Paramātmā (the Highest Self) here and it is purified; hence it is called Viśuddha. This wonderful lotus is termed Ākāśa.

विषूद्धे पदामाख्यातमाकाशाखं महाद्रतम् ।

आज्ञाचंक तद्धर्ये तु आत्मानाजिधितं परम् ॥ 44 ॥

आज्ञासंकमणं तत्र तेनाजेति प्रक्रीर्तितम् ।

ब्रिदलं हक्षसंयुक्ते पर्धं तत्सुमनोहम् ॥ 45 ॥

Above that is situated between the eyebrows the exceedingly beautiful Ajñā Cakra with two petals comprising the two letters 'Ha' and Kṣa. The Self resides in this lotus. When persons are stationed here, they can see everything and know of the present, past and future There one gets the commands from the Highest Deity (e.g. now this is for you to do and so on); therefore it is called the Ajñā Cakra.

कैतासाखं तरुद्धं तु रोधिनी तु तरुद्धतः ।

एवं त्वाधारचकाणि प्रोक्तानि तव सूत्रत ॥ 46 ॥

सहात्यगृतं विन्त्यानं ततूधेमीरितम् ।

इन्येतत्क्रवितं सर्वे योगमार्गन्यतनम् ॥ 47 ॥

Above that is the Kailāśa Cakra; over it is the Rodhīnī Cakra. O, One of good vows! Thus I have described to you all about the Ādhāra Cakras. The prominent Yogis say that above that again, is the Bindu Śthān, the seat of the Supreme Deity with thousand petals. O Best of Mountains! Thus I declare the best of the paths leading to Yoga.

आदौ प्रक्रोधोगेनायायते योजयेन्नः ।

गुदम्बुक्तेर सक्तिज्ञामकुष्ठय प्रजाधयेत् ॥ 48 ॥

Now hear what is the next thing to do. First by the ‘Pūraka’ Prānāyāma, fix the mind on the Mulādhāra Lotus. Then contract and arouse the Kula Kunḍalini Śakti there, between the anus and the genital organs, by that Vāyu.

लिङ्गभैकदमेपीव विस्फचकं च प्राययेत् ।

गम्बुना तां परां शक्तिमेकीभृतां विविधतयेत् ॥ 49 ॥

Pierce, then, the Lingams (the lustrous Svayambhu Ādi Lingam) in the several Cakras above-mentioned and transfer along with it the heart united with the Śakti to the Sahasrāra (the Thousand petalled Louts). Then meditate the Śakti united with Śambhu there.

तत्रोषित्यातुं यतुं द्रुतलाश्रासोपम् ।

पायविता तु तां गर्फिं मायाख्यां योगसिद्धिद्वा ॥ 50 ।

पट्चमळेवताल्त्रत्र संतयाणैतपाधाया ।

आनयेनेन मारोग मूलाधारं ततः सुधीः ॥ 51 ॥

There is produced in the Bindu Chakra, out of the intercourse of Śiva and Śakti, a kind of nectar-juice, resembling a sort of red-dye (lac). With that Nectar of Joy, the wise Yogis make the Māyā Śakti, yielding successes in Yoga, drink; then pleasing all the Devas in the six Cakras with the offerings of that Nectar, the Yogi brings the Śakti : down again on the Mūládhāra Lotus.

पृहममध्यायाद्यन्त्रहिन निश्रितम् ।

पूर्वोक्तूषिता मन्त्रा: सर्वे सिद्धान्ति नानया ॥ 52 ॥

Thus by daily practising this, all the above mantras will no doubt, be made to come to complete success.

जरामरणुःखाहीमुंचते भवबन्यान्त ।

ये गुणा: सन्ति तेल्या मे जनामागृदीय तथा ॥ 53 ॥

ते गुणा: साधकवरे भवन्चेव न चानाया ।

इत्येके बकितं तात वायुधाराणुतमम् ॥ 54 ॥

And one will be free from this Sarīsāra, filled with old age and death, etc. O Lord of Mountains! I am the World Mother; My devotee will get all My qualities; there is no doubt in this. O Child! I have thus described to you the excellent Yoga, holding the Vāyu (Pavana Dhāraṇa Yoga).

इदानीं धरणायलं तु शृष्यावलहिते मा ।

दिव्यालात्यनविक्छनदेख्यां तते विधाय च ॥ 55 ॥

Now hear from Me the Dhārānā Yoga. To fix thoroughly one's heart on the Supremely Lustrous Forces of Mine, pervading all the quarters, countries, and all time leads soon to the union of the Jiva and the Brahma.

तन्यमो भवति हिंद्रं जीवब्रह्मैक्ययोजनात् ।

अथवा समलं चेते यदि हिंत्रं न शुद्धाति ॥ ५६ ॥

त्वाद्वयवयोगेन योगी योगासमाध्यसेत् ।

मदीयहस्तपादात्यावेने तु मधुरे नग ॥ ५७ ॥

चितं संस्थापयेन्मनी स्थानं स्थानजयातृनः ।

विशुर्द्विचितः सर्वसिन्मलो संस्थापयेन्मनः ॥ ५८ ॥ ॥

If one does not quickly do this, owing to impurities of heart, then the Yogī ought to adopt

what is called the ‘Avayava Yoga.’ O Chief of Mountains! The Sādhaka should fix his heart on my gentle hands, feet and other limbs one by one and try to conquer each of these places. Thereby his heart would be purified. Then he should fix that purified heart on My Whole Body.

यावबन्नो तर्ष याति देख्नां संविदि पर्वत ।

तावदिष्मनुं मन्ती जगहोंमे: सम्यभयेत् ॥ 59 ॥

मन्त्राभ्यासेन योगेन जेयुज्ञानाय करूपते ।

न योगेन विता मन्त्रो न मन्त्रेश विता है सः ॥ 60 ॥

The practiser must practise with Japam and Homam the Mantram till his mind be not dissolved in Me, My Consciousness. By the practise of meditating on the Mantra, the thing to be known (Brahma) is transformed into knowledge. Known this as certain, that the Mantra is futile without Yoga and the Yoga is futile without the Mantra.

इयोरभ्यासयोगे ही बहुसमित्धिकारणम् ।

तमःपरिवृते गेहे घटो दौपेन दूरघते ॥ 6 1 ॥

एवं मायावृत्तो हाताम मनुना गोरधीकृततः ।

इति योगविधि: कुन्न: सांग: प्रोक्तो मायाधुना ।

गुरूपदेगुतो जेगो नान्वथा शासकोटिधिभः ॥ 62 ॥

इति श्रीमेद्वीभागवते महापुराणी सतमस्कन्ये

पढ़िशीघोअवयः ॥ 135 ॥

The Mantra and the Yoga are the two infallible means to realise Brahma. As the jar in a dark room is visible by a lamp, so this Jivātmā, surrounded by Māyā is visible by means of Mantra to the Paramātmā (the Highest Self). Of Best of Mountains! Thus I have described to you the Yogas with their Aṅgas (limbs). You should receive instructions about these from the mouth of a Guru; else millions of Śāstras will never be able to give you ° rue realisation of the meanings of the Yogas."

Here ends the Thirty-fifth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the Yoga and the Mantra Siddhi in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XXXVI

CHAPTER XXXVI

On the Knowledge of Brahman

श्रीद्युबावः

कृत्यादिवेयागुक्तावा ध्यावेमां बढ़ारूषिपिणि ।

भब्जया निव्याज्चा राज्ञासने समुपस्थितः ॥ १ ॥

आपि: सर्रहितं गुह्यचरं नाम महत्वयम् ।

अर्दैतत्सर्वमर्पिनमेजज्ञापिषच्च चत् ॥ 2 ॥

Śrī Deviś said: “O Himālayas! Thus making one’s own self attached to the Yoga by the above-mentioned process and sitting on a Yoga posture, one should meditate on My Brahma Nature with an unfeigned devotion. (How the knowledge of that Formless Existence and Imperishable Brahman arises, now hear.) He is manifest, near, yea, even moving in the hearts of all beings. He is the well-known Highest Goal. Know that all this whatever, waking, dreaming, or sleeping, which moves, breathes or blinks, is founded on Him.

एतज्ञानय सदसद्रेपयं परं

विज्ञानाधुरिये प्रजानाम् ।

तदोचिवदायुण्योजुष च

यस्मिल्लोका निहिता लोकिनछा ॥ 3 ॥

यदेतद्वर्शं बहा स प्राणास्तु वाड्मनः ।

तदेततत्यममृतं तद्रैढ्छ्यों सीम्य विद्धे ॥ 4 ॥

He is higher than Being and Non-being; higher than the Wisdom, He is the Best Object of adoration for all creatures. He is brilliant, smaller than the smallest and in Him the worlds are founded and the Rulers thereof. He is the Imperishable Brahman. He is the Creator (Life), the Revealer of Sacred Knowledge (speech) and Omniscient (or the Cosmic Mind). This is the Truth. He is Immortal, O Saumya! Know that He is the target to be hit.

Note: The words 'higher then wisdom' mean higher than Brahmā. (Brahmā is the highest of all Jīvas, higher than Brahmā means higher than all creatures. The word Vijñāna denotes Brahmā as we find in the following speech of Brahmā in the Bhāgavat Purāṇa) 'I, the Wisdom Energy (Vijñāna-Śakti) was born from the

navel of this Being resting on the Waters and possessed of the Infinite Powers.'

Visnu is called ‘Prāna’ because he is the leader of all (Prāna-netri). He is called Vāk, because He is the Teacher of all; Visnu is called Manas because He is the adviser of all (Mantri). He is the Controller of all the Jivas.

The third verse lays down that Brahman is to be meditated upon or that the Manana should be performed; as the second verses teacher that Dhyāna or concentration also is necessary.

Thus Śravana, Manana, and Dhyāna of Brahman have been taught. This is the method of Brahma upāsanā.

धनुर्गृहीत्थपिनवं महाक

गरं हुणपातनिर्गतं संधयिति ।

आयय न्तुदायतने चेतसा

लक्ष्ये ततेवाकां सोम विद्धि ॥ 5 ॥

प्रणवो धनुः शगे हात्मा ब्रहा तलन्ध्यमुच्यते ।

अप्रमतेने बैद्ध्यं शगतन्तभ्यो भवेत् ॥ 6 ॥

Take hold of the Mystic Name as the bow, and know that the Brahman is the aim to be hit. Put on this the great weapon (Om), the arrow (of the mind), sharpened by meditation. Withdraw thyself from all objects, and with the mind absorbed in the idea of Brahman, hit the aim; for know, O Saumya! That Imperishable alone to be the Mark. The Great name ‘Om’ is the bow, the mind is the arrow, and the Brahman is said to he the mark. It is to be hit by a man whose thoughts are concentrated, for then he enters the target.

यस्मिन्धीश पृथिवी चांतिश्रमोतं

मनः सह प्राणीश सर्वे: ।

तमेवैकं जानथाल्यानमया

वाचो विमुंचघाणुतस्यैव सेतु: || 7 ॥

In Him are woven the heavens, and the interspace, and mind also with the senses. Know Him to be the one Support of all, the Ātman. Leave off

all other words (as well as the worship of other deities). This (Ātman) is the refuge of the Immortals.

'He is the bridge of the Immortal'—the words Amṛta or Immortal means Mukta Jivas. In the Vedānta Sūtra I, 3-2, it has been taught that the Lord is the refuge of the Muktas. So also that 'He is the Highest Goal of the Muktas.'

अंग उव ध्वनाथी संहता घन नाब्धः ।

स एपौतक्षते बहुधा जागमानः ॥ 8 ॥

ओभियेवं ध्याययात्मानं स्वस्ति

व: पाराय तमस: परस्तत् ।

दिव्ये बहापुरे व्योनि

स आत्मा संप्रतिष्ठतः ॥ 9 ॥

In Him the life-webs (nādis) are fastened, as the spokes to the nave of a chariot; He is this (Ātman) that pervades the heart, and by his own free will manifests Himself in diverse ways (as Viśva, Taijasa, etc., in waking, sleeping, etc., states); and also as One as Prājña in the dreamless state. Meditate on the Ātman as Om (full of all auspicious qualities and who is the chief aim of the Vedas), in order to acquire the knowledge of the Paramātman, Who is beyond the Prakṛti and the Śrī Tattva. Your welfare consists in such knowledge.

Note: This shows that Brahman is the Antaryāmin Purusa. He resides in the heart where all the 72,000 Nādīs meet, as the spokes meet in the navel of the wheel. He moves within the organs, not for His own pleasure, but to give life and energy to them all. The Om with all its attributes must be constantly meditated upon. He manifests Himself in manifold ways in the waking and dreaming states as Viśva and Taijasa; while He manifests as One in the state of Susupti or Dreamless sleep as Prājña. He is beyond darkness; He has no mortal body. Meditate on such Viṣṇu in the heart in order to get the Supreme Brahman, with the help of the Mantra Om. The result of such meditation is that there is the welfare of yours—all evils will cease, and you will get the bliss of the manifestation of the Divinity—your Real Self within your Heart.

मनोमय: प्राणशारीरित्त

प्रतिष्ठितोजे इद्यं सत्रिधाय ।

तढ़िज्ञाने परिष्यर्थिति धीगा

आनन्द्रहपमूर्ते यदिष्पाति ॥ 10 ॥

He who is All-Wise, and All-Knowing, whose Greatness is thus manifested in the worlds, is to be meditated upon as the Ātman residing in the Ether, in the Fourth Dimensional Space, in the shining city of Brahman (the Heart). He is the Controller of the mind and the Guide of the senses and the body. He abides in the dense body, controlling the heart. He, the Ātman, when manifesting Himself as the Blissful and Immortal, is seen by the wise through the purity of the heart.

पित्ते हृदयप्रियिष्ठये सर्वसंशयाः ।

क्षीयते चास्य कर्माणि तस्मिन्छे पतावरे ॥ १ १ १ ॥

The fetters of the Jivas are cut assured, the ties of Lingadehas and Prakrti are removed (the effects of all) his works perish, when He is seen who is Supremely High (or when the Supremely High looks at the Jiva.)

Note: Viṣṇu is Parāvare, because Parā or High Beings like Ramā; Brahmās, etc., are Avara or inferior in His comparison.] [Note: This shows the result of Divine Wisdom in the last verse. The Avidyā covers both Īsvara and Jiva. It prevents Īsvara being seen by Jiva, and Jiva seeing Īsvara. It is a direct bondage of Jiva and a metaphorical fetter of Īsvara. Avidyā is the name given to Prakṛti in Her active state. When Her three qualities Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, are actively manifest. Destruction of Avidyā means putting these Guṇas in their latent state. There is a great difference between the destruction of the Avidyā [fetters as taught in this verse, and the unloosening of them as previously described in this verse! There Avidyā still remained, for it was merely a Parokṣa or intellectual apprehension of Truth. Here Avidyā itself is destroyed by Aparoksa or Intuitive Knowledge of Brahman.

The bonds are five: The lowest is the Avidyā bond, then the Lingadeha bond, then the Pramācchādaka Prakṛti bond, the Kāma bond and the Karma bond. When all these bonds are destroyed, then the Jñāni goes by

Book VII Chapter XXXVI

the Path of Light to the Sāntāmka Loka. Before proceeding further all have to salute the Śisūmarā—the Dweller on the threshold—the hub of the Universe.

The Śisūmarā literally means the Infants Killer and means the porpoise and is the name of a constellation, in the north, near the Pole. It corresponds perhaps with the Draco or the Ursā Minor. For a fuller description of it, see Bhagavad Purāna Book 5, Chapter 23. Here it is a mystical reference to a Being of an exalted order, which every Jāniī passes by, in his way beyond this Universe. It may correspond with the ring-pass not of the Secret Doctrine! It is the name of Hari, also, as we find the following verse “The Supreme Hari, the Support of infinity of worlds and who is called Śiśumāra, is saluted by all knowers of Brahma on their way to the Supreme God.”

हिरुणमये परे कोणे विराजं बढ़ा निष्कलम् ।

तच्छुं ज्योतिभा ज्योतिसटाट्याविवदो विधुः ॥ 12 ॥

The Brahman (called Sísūmaram) free from all passions and parts (manifests in the external world) in the highest Golden Sheath (the Cosmic Egg). That is pure, that is the highest of Lights, is is that which the knowers of Ātman know.

Note: 'He is in the Centre of the Cosmic (as Śisumāra, the Light of all Cosmic Suns). He is even in the centre of our Sun and illuminating all planets.']

In the first respect He is meditated upon as Śisumara and in the second as Gāyatri.'

Note: In man, the Brahman manifests in the heart or the Auric Egg. called the city of Brahman. In the Universe, He manifest Himself in the Cosmic Egg, called the ‘Golden Sheath.’ These are the two places where Brahman may be meditated upon.

This verse has been explained in two different ways: First, as applying to Śisumāra and secondly, as teaching how to meditate on Nārāyaṇa in the Sun. The ‘Golden sheath’ would then mean the Solar sphere. The Supremently High Brahman resides in the excellent Golden Sheath. He is Pure and Without parts.

न तत्र सूर्याँ भाति न चन्द्रतार्के

नैमा विद्युतो भात्रि कुतोउयमिनः ।

तनोव भान्तानुभाति सर्वे

तस्य भासा सर्वेमिदं विधाति ॥ 13 ॥

The Sun does not shine there in His Presence nor the Moon and the Stars (for His Light is greater than theirs, they appear as if dark in that Effulgence, like the candle-light in the Sun. Nor do these lightning, and much less this fire shine there. When He shines, everything shines after Him; by His Light all this becomes manifest.

Him the Sun does not illumine nor the moon and the stars. Nor do these lightnings; much less this Fire illumines Him. When He illumines all (the Sun, etc.,) then they shine after (Him with His light). This whole Universe reveals His Light (is His Light and its Light is His).

Note: The Sun, etc., do not illumine Him, i.e., cannot make Him manifest.

बहीदेवप्रभुतं पुरसताद्वारा पशुताद्वारा दक्षिणतक्रोतरेण ।

अप्रधोत्री च प्रसृतं ब्रहीदेवं विश्वं चतिभू ॥ १४ ॥

The Eternally Free is verily this Brahman only. He is in the West, in the North and the South, in the Zenith and the Nádir. The Brahman alone is; it is He who pervades all directions. This Brahman alone is it who pervades, This Brahman alone is the Full (that exists in all time the Eternity). This Brahman is the Best:

This (idam) Brahman is alone the Viśvam or Infinity or Full (pūrṇam). This alone is the Best, the Highest of all. As the word ‘idam’ is used several times in this verse, it qualifies the word Brahman and not ‘viśvam.’

Note: The Brahman was taught to be meditated upon fully in the Heart and the Hiraimanya Kośa. But lest one should mistake that He is thus limited in those two places, one is to infer that they are selected as the best.

एतातुगनुभवो यस्य स कृतायाँं नोरोनम ।

बहुभुतः प्रसातमा न गोचिति न कांक्षिति ॥ 15 ॥

द्वितीयाढ़े भयं राजसंतदभावातिद्धिचेति न ।

न तद्वीयोगो मेध्यासि मद्वीयोगोपि सव त १ ॥ १ ॥

The man who realise this is satisfied and has all that he wants to do and is considered as the best. He becomes Brahman and his Self is pleased and he neither wants anything nor becomes sorry.

O King! Fear comes from the idea of a second; where there is no second, fear does not exist. No danger then arises for him to be separated from Me. Nor I also get separated from him.

अहमेव स सोड़े दै व निश्ठर्न विविड् पवत् ।

महर्निं तु तत्र स्याधत्र ज्ञानी मम ॥ १७ ॥

O Himalayas! Know that I am he and he is I. Know that I am seen there were My Jñāni resides. नाहे तीर्थे न केलासे वैकुण्ठे वा न कहिंघित् ।

वसामि किनुं मञ्ञानिरुदर्शभोजमध्ये ॥ १८ ॥

Neither I dwell in any sacred place of pilgrimage, nor do I live in Kailāśa nor in Vaikuntha nor in any other place. I dwell in the hear lotus of My Jñāni.

मनुर्जाकौटिफलं सकुन्यज्ञानिज्ञानिज्ञानि ।

कृते पचित्रं तस्यास्ति जननी कृतकृत्यका ॥ १९ ॥

विश्वभग पुष्पवती चिल्लयो यस्य चेततः ।

The blessed man who worships once My Jñāni, gets Koti times the fruit of worshipping Me. His family is rendered pure and his mother becomes blessed. He whose heart is diluted in the all-pervading Brahma Consciousness, purifies this whole world. There is no doubt in this.

इहज्ञानं तु यत्पूषुं त्वया पर्वतसत्तम ॥ 20 ॥

क्रियांत तन्मया सर्वे नातो चत्क्यमिति है ।

O Best of Mountains! I have now told everything that you asked about Brahma Jñāna. Nothing now remains to be further described.

इर्व ज्येषाय पूजाय भक्तिष्युक्ताय शणितेन ॥ 21 ॥

शिषाय च यथोक्ताय चत्क्ये नान्यथा कवित् ।

This Brahma Vidyā (science of the knowledge of Brahma) is to be imparted to the eldest son, who is devoted and of good character and to him who is endowed with the good qualities as enumerated in the Śāstras and not to be given to any other person.

यस्य देहे परा पत्किथावे देहे तथा गुर्ती ॥ 22 ॥

तद्यौते कथिता ह्वायीः प्रकाशगे महात्मतः ।

He who is fully devoted to his Iśta Deva and who is equally devoted to his Guru, to him the high-minded persons should declare the Brahma Vidya.

येनोपदिष्ठा विद्यों स एव परमेश्वरः ॥ 23 ॥

यस्यां सुकृतं कर्तमसमर्थतन्तो ऋर्णी ।

Verily, he is God himself, who advises this Brahma Vidya; no one is bale to repay the debts due to him.

पिजोराथधिकः प्रोक्तो इब्रहानम्पदायकः ॥ 24 ॥

पितृजातं जन्म नई नेन्थे जातं कदाचन ।

तस्मै न द्रुहीद्वायादि निगमोउपयद्वर्गम ॥ 25 ॥

He who gives birth to a man in Brahma, is, no doubt, superior to the ordinary father; for the birth that a father gives is destroyed; but the bith in Brahma that is given by the Guru is never destroyed. So the Śruti says: 'Never do harm to the Guru who imparts the knowledge of Brahma.

तस्माच्छास्य सिद्धान्तो ब्रह्माता गुरु: परः ।

शिये कटे गुरुस्ताता गुरी कटे न गोकर: ॥ 26 ॥

In all the Siddhāntas (decided conclusions) of the Śāstras, it is stated that the Guru who imparts the knowledge of Brahma is the best and the most honourable. If Śiva becomes angry, the Guru can save; but when the Guru becomes angry, Śaṅkara cannot save.

तत्मासर्वप्रयन्तेने श्रीगृते तोययेन ।

कायेन मनसा वाचा सर्वैदा तत्सरो भवेत् ॥ 27 ॥

So the Guru should be served with the utmost care. So the Guru must be served with all the cares that are possible; by body, mind, and word one should always please Him.

अन्याय तु कृतधः स्यात्कृतने नास्ति निकृति: ।

इन्हेणावर्षाण्योका शिराखेदप्रतिज्ञा ॥ 28 ॥

अधिष्यां कापेत्र तस्य शिराधिछचं च वडिज्ञा ।

अर्धीयं तच्छितो नई दूर्वा वैषी सुगतेनमो ॥ 29 ॥

पुनः संयोजितं स्वीयं तान्यां मुनिगिरस्तदा ।

इति संकटसंपादा ब्रह्मविद्या नतर्पि ।

लक्का येन स धन्यः स्याकृतकृत्यक्षु भूयर ॥ 30 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणो सत्नस्कल्मे

देवीगीतायां घट्जिशोप्रथाय: 11 36 11

Otherwise he becomes ungrateful and he is not saved. O Best of Mountains! It is very difficult to acquire Brahmajñāna. Hear a story. A Muni named

Book VII Chapter XXXVII

Dadhyam of Atharvana family went to Indra and prayed to him to give Brahma Jñāna. Indra said: "I would give you Brahma Jñāna, but if you impart it to any other body, I would sever your head." Dadhyama agreed to this and Indra gave him the Brahma-Jñāna. After a few days, the two Aśvins came to the Muni and prayed for Brahma Vidyā. The Muni said: "If I give you the Brahma Vidyā, Indra will cut off my head." Hearing this the two Aśvins said: "We will cut your head and keep it elsewhere and we will attached the head of a horse to your body. Instruct us with the mouth of this horse and when Indra will cut off your this mouth,

we will replace your former head." When they said so, the Muni gave them the Brahma Vidyā. Indra cut off his head by his thunderbolt. When the horse-head of the Muni was cut off, the two physicians of the Devas replaced his original head. This is widely known in all the Vedas. O Chief of Mountains! He becomes blessed who gets this the Brahma-Vidyā."

Here ends the Thirty-sixth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the Highest Knowledge of Brahma in the Mahapurānam, Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER XXXVII

On Self Realisation Spoken by the Devi

हिमालय उवाच

स्वीयां भर्तिकं बदस्यांव येन ज्ञानं सुखेन है ।

जायेते मनुजस्याय मध्यमस्याशिरोग: ॥ १ ॥

The Himalayas said: “O, Mother! Now describe your Bhakti Yoga, by which ordinary men who have no dispassion, get the knowledge of Brahma easily.”

श्रीद्वयाच

भागांखयो मे विख्याता मोक्षप्राप्ती नगाधिति ।

कर्मयोगो ज्ञानयोगो भक्तियोगश्र सत्तम ॥ २ ॥

त्रयाणामध्ये योग्य: कर्तु शक्योजस्ति सर्वथा ।

सुतभवान्यानसलाकायधिरनाधार्योजन्त ॥ 3 ॥

The Devi said: “O, Chief of Mountains! There are three paths, widely known, leading to the final liberation (Mokṣa). These are Karma Yoga, Jñāna Yoga and Bhakti Yoga. Of these three, Bhakti Yoga is the easiest in all respects; people can be do it very well without incurring any suffering to the body, and bringing the mind to a perfect concentration.

गुणधेत्यनमुख्यायां सा भक्तिक्षिव्या मता ।

परपीड़ा समुद्धियं दम्भं कृत्वा पुरःसम् ॥ 4 ॥

मात्सर्वीकोधयुक्तो सत्यस्य भक्तिस्तु तामसी ।

परपीड़ाविरहितः स्कल्हणायांमेव च ॥ ५ ॥

This Bhakti (devotion) again is of three kinds as the Gunas are three. His Bhakti is Tāmasī who worships Me, to pain other, being filled with vanity and jealousy and anger. That Bhakti is Rājasic when one worships Me for one's own welfare and does not intend to do harm to others.

नित्यं सकामो हृदयं यशोर्षी भोगलोलुप: ।

तत्कलसमावाद्ये मापुपासते-तिभक्तितः ॥ 6 ॥

He has got some desire or end in view, some fame or to attain some obects of enjoyments and ignorantly, and thinking himself different from Me, worships Me with greatest devotion.

भेदवुद्धता तु मां खस्माद्वां जानाति पागरः ।

तस्य भक्ति: सामाखाना नागराधि तु राजसी ॥ ७ ॥

परमेशपार्थणं कर्म पारवसंहानाय च ।

वेदोक्त्वाद्वयं तक्तलिंतुं तु मपाउनिगम् ॥ 8 ॥

Again that Bhakti is Sāttvik when anybody worships Me to purify his sins, and offers to Me the result of all his Karmas, thinking that Jīva and Īśvara are separate and knowing that this action of his is authorized in the Vedas and therefore must be observed.

Book VII Chapter XXXVII

CHAPTER XXXVII

On Self Realisation Spoken by the Devi

हिमालय उवाच

स्वीयां पार्षिकं वदस्वांब वेय नानं सुखेन है ।

जायेत मनुजस्याय मध्यमस्यावितारिणा: ॥ १ ॥

The Himālayas said: “O, Mother! Now describe your Bhakti Yoga, by which ordinary men who have no dispassion, get the knowledge of Brahma easily.”

श्रीद्व्यवाच

भागांखयो मे विख्याता मोक्षप्राप्ती नगाधिप ।

कर्मयोगो ज्ञानयोगो भक्तियोगश्र सस्म ॥ २ ॥

त्रयाणापययं योग्यः कर्तु शक्योजस्ति सर्वथा ।

सुतभत्वान्मानसत्वाकायिचिताध्यीघज्ञान् ॥ 3 ॥

The Devi said: “O, Chief of Mountains! There are three paths, widely known, leading to the final liberation (Mokṣa). These are Karma Yoga, Jñāna Yoga and Bhakti Yoga. Of these three, Bhakti Yoga is the easiest in all respects; people can be do it very well without incurring any suffering to the body, and bringing the mind to a perfect concentration.

गुणभैद्यानमुख्यायां सा भक्तिक्रविधा मात ।

पर्योघों समुक्रियं द्यम्बं कृत्वा पुरःसम् ॥ ४ ॥

भातस्योकीधयुक्तो यस्तस्य भक्तिस्तु तामसी ।

पर्योघादिरहितः स्कलल्याणायीमेव च ॥ ५ ॥

This Bhakti (devotion) again is of three kinds as the Gunas are three. His Bhakti is Tāmasī who worships Me, to pain other, being filled with vanity and jealousy and anger. That Bhakti is Rājasic when one worships Me for one's own welfare and does not intend to do harm to others.

नित्यं सकामो हृदयं यशोर्धी भोगलोलुप: ।

ततफलतसमावाद्ये मापुपासते उतिभक्तितः ॥ 6 ॥

He has got some desire or end in view, some fame or to attain some obects of enjoyments and ignorantly, and thinking himself different from Me, worships Me with greatest devotion.

घेदवुद्धता तु मां खसाद्वयं जानाति पागयः ।

तस्य भक्ति: समाख्ठाता नागधित् तु राजसी ॥ ७ ॥

परमेशपार्थणं कर्म पापवसंहलानाय च ।

वेदोक्त्वाद्वयं तक्तलिंयं तु मघाउनिगम् ॥ 8 ॥

Again that Bhakti is Sātvīk when anybody worships Me to purify his sins, and offers to Me the result of all his Karmas, thinking that Jīva and Īśvara are separate and knowing that this action of his is authorized in the Vedas and therefore must be observed.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

इति निश्रितबुद्धिसु भेदबुद्धिमुपाश्रितः ।

क्रोति प्रीतवे कर्म भक्तिः सा नग साधित्क्यों ॥ 9 ॥

यापकंः प्रायिकेवं भेदबुद्धावलवंन्तः।

पूर्वप्रोक्ते हुधे भक्तो न परुपापिके मते ॥ 10 ॥

This Sattvikī Bhakti is different from the Supreme Bhakti as the worshippers think Me separate; but it leads to the Supreme Bhakti. The other two Bhakti or the Highest unselfish Love.)

अधुना पारभर्फि तु प्रोच्यमानां निवोधे भे ।

मदगुणशवणं निवयं मम नामानुकीर्नम् ॥ ११ ॥

कल्याणगुणत्नानामाकारायां मयि स्थितम् ।

वेतसो वर्तेनं चैव तैलधारासमं सदा ॥ १२ ॥

Now hear attentively about the Parā Bhakti that I am now describing to you. He who hears always My Glories and recites My Name and whose mind dwells always, like the incessant flow of oil, in Me who is the receptacle of all auspicious qualities and Gunas.

हैतुतुत तक को वापि न कदाधिद्वरेधिति ।

साधीमसाधिसायुज्यसालोक्यानां न चेषणा ॥ १३ ॥

मलेस्वातोधिकं किंचिद्वेव जानाति कहिंचित् ।

सेव्यसेवकताभावानतर मोक्षं न वांक्षिति ॥ १४ ॥

But he has not the least trace of any desire to get the fruits of his Karma; yea he does not want Sāmūpya, Sārṣṭi, Sāyujya, and Sālokya and other forms of liberations! He becomes filled with devotion for Me alone, worships Me only; knows nothing higher than to serve Me and he does not want final liberation even.

परानुरक्या मायावे चिन्तयेहो हार्त्रितः ।

स्वाधेदैयैव मान्थि ज्यानीत न विभेदतः ॥ १ ५ ॥

मूदपलेन जीवानां चिंतनं कृत्ते तु यः ।

यथा स्वस्यात्मिन प्रीतिस्तवैच च परात्मिन ॥ १ ६ ॥

He does not like to forsake this idea of Sevya (to be served) and Sevaka (servant who serves). He always meditates on Me with a constant vigilance and actuated by a feeling of Supreme Devotion; he does not think himself separate from Me but rather thinks himself ‘that I am the Bhagavatī.’

चैतन्यस्य समानत्वात्र भेदं कुकते तु यः ।

सर्वैव वर्तमानातां सर्वैकपां च सर्वेदा ॥ १ ७ ॥

नमते यजते चैवाप्याचण्डालात्मीक्षा ।

न कुतापि ग्रेश्वुद्धिं कुकते भेवदर्जन्ता ॥ १ ८ ॥

He considers all the Jivas as Myself and loves Me as he loves himself. He does not make any difference between the Jivas and myself as he finds the same with anybody as he has abandoned all ideas about separateness; he bows down, and worships the Cāndālās and all the Jivas.

मत्थावदर्शनश्रद्धा मढ़करशेने तथा ।

मच्छास्त्रवणो श्रद्धा मन्त्रनात्रविषु प्रभो ॥ 19 ॥

मयि प्रेमाकुत्मती रोनाधिन्ततनुः सदा ।

प्रेमाशुत्पूर्णाईः कणठगद्रविन्दित्वः ॥ 20 ॥

He who becomes filled with devotion to Me whenever he sees My place, My devotees, and hears the Śāstras, describing My deeds, and whenever he meditates on My Mantras, he becomes filled with the highest love; and his hairs stand on their ends out of love to Me and tears of love flow incessantly from both his eyes; he recites My name and My deeds in a voice, choked with feelings of love for Me.

Note: The Parā Prema Bhakti is like the maddening rush of a river to the Ocean; thence in the shape of vapour to the highest Himalayan Mountain peaks to be congealed into snow where various plays of bright colours take place.]

अन्येनेव भावेन पूजयेढो नगाधिप ।

मामीक्षरीं जगद्योने सर्वकारणकारणम् ॥ २१ ॥

त्रतानि मन दिखानि निर्वर्धेतिfirकान्यपि ।

नित्य यः कुकते भक्या विस्णाड्विवर्धितः ॥ २२ ॥

O Lord of the mountains! He worships Me with intense feelings as the Mother of this Universe and the Cause of all causes. He performs the daily and occasional duties and all My vows and sacrifices without showing any miserly feeling in his expenditure of money.

मतुस्मविद्धूषा च मतुस्मवकृतितथा ।

जायते यस्य नियतं स्वभावहेव पूधर ॥ 23 ॥

Book VII Chapter XXXVII

उच्चेर्यार्थ श्नामाति ममेव खलु नृत्यति ।

अर्हकारादितहोते देहतात्यम्बर्षितः ॥ 24 ॥

He naturally longs to perform My festivities and to visit places where My Utsavas are held. He sings My name loudly and dances, being intoxicated with My love, and has no idea of egoism and is devoid of his body-idea, thinking that the body is not his.

प्राध्येन यथा यच्च क्रियते तत्शा भवेत् ।

न मे चित्तास्ति तत्वारि देहुरंक्षणादिरूप् ॥ 2 5 ॥

इति भक्तिसु या प्रोक्ता परभक्तिसु सा स्मृता ।

यस्यां देहयातिरिक्ते तु न किंचिद्वीप भाव्यते ॥ 2 6 ॥

He thinks that whatever is Prārabdha (done in his previous lives) must come to pass and therefore does not become agitated as to the preservation of his body and soul. This sort of Bhakti is called the Parā Bhakti or the Highest Devotion. Here the predominant idea is the idea of the Devī and no other idea takes its place.

इन्ध जाता परा भक्तिर्यस्य भूयरु तत्वतः ।

तदैव तस्य चिन्मात्रे मदूरे विवरणो भवेदे ॥ 27 ॥

भक्तभृ ता पराकाष्ठा शैव ज्ञानं प्रकीर्तितम् ।

वैराग्यस्य च सीमा सा जाने तदृषयं यतः ॥ 28 ॥

O Mountain! He gets immediately dissolved in My Nature of Consciousness whose heart is really filled with such Parā Bhakti or All Love. The sages call the limiting stage of this devotion and dispassion as Jñāna (knowledge). When this Jñāna arises, Bhakti and dispassion get their ends satisfied.

भक्तौ कृतायां यस्यापि प्राराध्वशतो नग ।

न जायते मम ज्ञानं मिणीद्वीरं स पच्छिति ॥ 29 ॥

तत्र नालासिखल्योगाननिच्छत्रपि चच्छति ।

तदन्ते मम विदूपज्ञानं सत्यभवेषज्ञ ।। 30 ॥

Yea! He goes then to the Mani Dvipa, when his Aharikāra does not crop up by his Prārabdha Karma, though he did not fail to give up his life in devotion. O Mountain! That man enjoys there all the objects of enjoyments, though unwilling and at the end of the period, gets the knowledge of My Consciousness. By that he attains the Final

Liberation for ever. Without this Jiāna, the Final Liberation is impossible.

तेन मुक्तः सदैव स्याञ्ञानमुक्तिनं चान्यथा ।

इहैव यस्य जानं स्यादधूर्तपत्रल्यान्तम्नः ॥ 31 ॥

मम संविव्यतनोस्तस्य प्राणा ज्वजन्ति न ।

बद्वोव संस्तदान्पोति बढ़ोव बढ़ा वेद यः ॥ 32 ॥

कार्यं चाभीकरसममज्ञान्तु तिरोधितम ।

ज्ञानादाननारोगेन लब्यमेव हिं लभ्यते ॥ 33 ॥

He realises Para Brahma who gets in this body of his the above Jñāna of the Pratyak Ātmā in his heart; when his Prāna leaves his body, he does not get re-birth. The Śruti says: 'He, who knows Brahma, becomes Brahma.' In the logic of Kaṇṭha Cāṃīkara, (gold on the neck) the ignorance vanishes. When this ignorance is destroyed by knowledge, he attains all his knowledge the object to be attained, when he recognises the gold on his neck.

विदितास्विविदात्वन्यज्ञोतम वयुर्मे ।

यथाएँ त्वाउङ्पतिन यथा जले तथा पितुलेके ॥ 34 ॥

छायातपो यथा स्वच्छ विवित्ती तद्वोद्ध है ।

मम लोके भयंेज्ञानं दैतभावाविर्जितान् ॥ 35 ॥

O Best of Mountains! This My consciousness is different from the precieved pots, etc., and unperceived Māyā. The image of this Paramātmā is seen in bodies other than the Ātmā as the image falls in a mirror; as the image falls in water, so this Paramātmā is seen in the Pitrōkas. As the shadow and light are quite distinct, so in My Maṇidvīpa, the knowledge of oneness without a second arises.

यस्तु वैरायवानेव सान्धोनी विषये चेत् ।

ब्रह्मातोके वसैत्रियं यावत्कल्यं ततः परम् ॥ 36 ॥

गुर्शीना श्रीमतां गेहे भवेचत्स्य जानि: पुनः ।

करीति साधनं पछाततो ज्ञानं हि जायते ॥ 37 ॥

That man resides in the Brahma Loka for the period of a Kalpa who leaves his body without attaining Jñāna, though he had his Vairāgyam. Then he takes his birth in the family of a pure prosperous family and practising again his Yoga habits, gets My Consciousness.

अनेकजन्मभी राजज्ञानं स्व्यक्षिकज्ञन्ना

ततः: स्वर्गप्रयतेने ज्ञानाथं नयमाश्रयते ॥ 38 ॥

नोचेमहापिन्याश: स्याजज्मैततुरर्भं पुनः ।

तत्रापि प्रथमे वर्णें वेदप्रापिषद्धो दुर्वर्भा ॥ 39 ॥

O King of Mountains! This Jñāna arises after many births; it does not come in one birth; so one should try one's best to get this Jñāna. If, attaining this rare human birth, one does not attain this Jñāna, know that a great calamity has befallen to him. For this human birth is very hard to attain; and then the birth in a Brāhmin family is rarer; moreover amongst the Brāhmins, the knowledge of the Veda (the Consciousness is exceedingly rare.)

ग्रामादिवट्कसंपत्तिर्यांगसिद्धिस्तथैव च ।

तथोतमगुसूग्राति: सर्वमेवात्र उतुलभम् ॥ 40 ॥

तथैद्रियाणां पटुता संकृतत्वं तनोसथा ।

अनेकबन्मपुष्येसु मोक्षेच्छा जायते ततः ॥ 41 ॥

The attaining of the six qualities (which are considered as six wealth), restraint of passions, etc.; the success in Yoga and the acquisition of a pure real Guru, all these are very hard to be attained in this life. O Mountain! The maturity and the activities of the organs of the senses, and the purification of the body according to the Vedic rites are all very difficult to attain. Know this again that to get a desire for final liberation is acquired by the merits acquired in many births.

साधने सफले उप्वेबं जायमाने उपि यो नरः ।

ज्ञानवाँ नैव घतले तस्य जन्म निरर्धकम् ॥ 4 2 ॥

तस्माद्राजन्यशास्तव्या ज्ञानवाँ यत्मास्रक्षेत् ।

पेदे पदेउभ्योस्य फलमाणेतीत निश्छितम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

That man's birth is entirely futile, who attaining all the above qualifications does not try his best to attain this Jiāna. So one should try one's best to acquire the Jiāna. Then, at every moment, he gets the fruits of the Asvamedha sacrifice. There is no doubt in this.

भूतपिव पदसि निगूई भुते भूते च वसति विज्ञान्।

सततं मन्थित्यं मनसा मन्थानभूतेन ॥ 44 ॥

As ghee (clarified better) resides potentially in milk, so the Vijñāna Brahma resides in every body. So make the mind the churning rod and always churn with it. Then, by slow degrees, the knowledge of Brahma will be attained.

ज्ञानं लब्ध्या कृताधं: स्यादिति वेदोर्तक्षित्रिम: । सर्वभृक्तं समासेन किं भूयः श्रीतृमिच्छसि ॥ 45 ॥ श्रिति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे सदमस्कन्के वेदीगीतायां सर्वर्गैरोगेश्वाः ॥ 37 ॥

Man attains blessedness when he gets this Jñāna; so the Vedānta says: Thus I have described to you in brief, O King of Mountains! all that you wanted to hear. Now what more do you want?"

Here ends the Thirty-seventh Chapter of the Seventh Book on the glories of Bhakti in the Mahā Purānam, Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXXVIII

On the Vows and the Sacred Places of the Devi

हिमालय उवाच

क्रति स्थानानि देवेति श्रद्ध्यानि महीतले ।

मुख्यानि च पवित्राणि देवीषिप्रयतमानि च ॥ १ ॥

ब्रतान्यपि तथा यानि तुविदान्युस्वा अपि ।

तत्सर्वे बदे मे मातः कृतकृष्यो यतो नरः ॥ 2 ॥

The Himalayas said: "O Devi! Describe the places on this earth that are prominent, sacred, and worth visiting and which Thou likest best. O

Mother! Also sanctify us by describing the vows and utsavas that are pleasing to Thee, and by performing which, men become blessed and get themselves satisfied.

श्रीद्युगच

सर्वे कृप्यं मम स्थानं सर्वे काला तदात्मका: ।

उत्सवाः सर्वकातेषु यतोर्दं सर्वेक्षिपणी ॥ 3 ॥

Book VII Chapter XXXVIII

तथापि भाकात्सल्यास्त्रिक्रधितिक्रधिद्धोच्छे ।

शृणुधावहितो भूत्वा नगराज वचो मभ ॥ 4 ॥

The Devi spoke: “O Himavān! All the places that are on this earth are all Mine and all should be visited. And every moment is fit for taking vows and usabs. For I am of the nature pervading every moment; so whatever actions are performed at any moment are all equal to taking My vows and utsavas. O King of Mountains! Still I am now telling something out of My affection to My Bhaktas. Hear.

कोतापुरं महास्थानं यत्र लक्ष्मी: सदा स्थिति ।

मातु: पुरं द्वितीयं च रेणुकाधिष्ठितं पन् ॥ 5 ॥

तुलजापुरं तृतीयं स्थालपरभूजं तयैव च ।

दिंगुलाया महास्थानं ज्वालामुख्यातयैव च ॥ 6 ॥

There is a great place of pilgrimage named Kolhāpura in the southern country. Here the Devi Lakṣmī always dwells. The second place is Mātripura in the Sahyādri mountain; here the Devi Řeṇukā dwells. The third place is Tulajāpur; next is the place Saptaśrīnga, the great places of Híngulā and Jvālā Mukhi.

ग्राकंभयो: परं स्थानं घामयः स्थानमुत्तमम् ।

शीरक्तदितकस्थानं दुगीस्थानं तवैव च ॥ ७ ॥

विद्याबतनिवासिना: स्थानं सर्वर्नोगतिमम् ।

अत्रपूणांमहास्थानं कांचीपुरमनुत्तमम् ॥ ८ ॥

Then the great places of Śākambhari, Bhrāmari, Śrīraktadantikā and Durgā. The best of all places is that of Vindhyācala Vāsinī, the great places of Annapūrṇā and the excellent Kāñcipur (Conjiverum).

भीमाटेव्या: परं स्थानं विमलास्थानमेव च ।

श्रीचन्द्रलामहायनां कौशिकीस्थानमेव च ॥ 9 ॥

नीलांबाया: परं स्थानं नीलपर्वतमस्तेक ।

जांबुन्देश्वीरस्थानं तथा श्रीनगरं शुपम् ॥ 10 ॥

Next come the places of Bhimā Devi, Vimalā Devi, Śrī Crandalā Devi of Karṇāt, and the place of Kauśikī. Then are great place of Nilāmbā on the top of the Nilāparvata, the place of Jāmbūnadeśvarī, and the beautiful Śrinagara.

गुहाकात्या महास्थाने नेपाले वयूतिहितून ।

मीनाश्रा: परमं स्थानं यच्छ प्रोक्ति विद्वशे ॥ १ १ ॥

वेदारणयं महास्थानं सुंदरां समघ्रिहितून ।

एकांबरं महास्थानं पराशकन्या प्रतिहितून ॥ १ २ ॥

The great place of Śrī Guhya Kālī, well established in Nepal, and that of Śrī Mīnāksī Devi established in Cidamvaram. The great place named Vedāranya where the Sundārī Devi is residing; then the place named Ekāmvaram, and the place Bhuvaneśvara near Purusottama where I always dwell as Parā Śaktī Bhuvaneśvari.

मदातसा परं स्थान योगेश्वधार्तेव च ।

तथा नीलसरबल्या: स्थान चीज्य विश्रुम् ॥ 13 ॥

वैद्यान्ये तु बगलात्थानं सर्वात्मां मनम् ।

श्रीमद्धीपुर्वनेश्वयं मणितूँ।। 14 ॥

The famous place of Madālasā, known in the south by the name Mallāri; the place of Yogésvāri Varāt, and the widely known place of Nīla Sarasvatī in China. The excellent place of Bagalā in Baidyanāth, the supreme place Manjdivpa of Śrīmatī Bhuvaneśvari where I always reside.

श्रीमतिपुरभैर्याः कामाख्यायीमण्डलम् ।

भूमण्डले क्षेत्ररन्त महामायाउप्रियासितम् ॥ १ ५ ॥

नात: परर्त स्थानं क्वचिद्विति धरातले ।

प्रतिमासं भयंद्रेयी यत्स साक्षातजस्यला ॥ १ ६ ॥

The Yonimagāala Kāmākhyā, the place of Śrimati Tripura Bhairavi, the excellent of all the places in this earth, where the Devi Mahā Māyā always dwells. There is no other place better than this on the earth. Here the Devi becomes every month in Her course of menstruation and where the virtuous men are seen.

तत्राया देहन्तः सर्वा पर्वतात्मकता गता: ।

पदोर्तेषु वसंलेये मह्यो देहता अपि ॥ 17 ॥

Here all the Devas remain in the form of mountains and where on the mountains the excellent Devas inhabit.

तत्राया प्रदियी सर्वा देहीक्षण स्मृतत बुधैः ।

नात: परर्तं स्थानं कामाख्यायोनिमपडलात् ॥ 18 ॥

गायत्र्याश्र परं स्थान आभित्युक्रमीरिति।

अमोर्शे चधिडका स्यात्यभासे युक्केशिषणी ॥ 19 ॥

नैभिये तु महास्थाने देवी सा लिङ्गधारिणी ।

पुकृतात् युक्नराझे आपाठी च रतिस्वा ॥ 20 ॥

The sages say : That all the places there are of the nature of the Devi; there is no better place than this Kāmākhyā Yonimāṃdala Puṣkara, the sacred place, is the seat of Gāyatrī; the place of Caṇdikā in Amareśa; and the excellent place of Puśkareksinī in Prabhāsa. The place of Lingadhārinī Devi in Naimisāranya, and the place of Purubhūtā in Puṣkarāṣa; Rati dwells in Āsādhī.

चणदुपुर्दीमहास्थाने दणिकृदी परमेशुधी ।

भारभूती भवेब्दुतिनिकृले नकुलेशेथी ॥ 21 ॥

चनिक्ना तु हार्धिष्टे श्रीभरी शांकरी सुना।

जाध्येघं जिशुला स्यात्सुभ्या चाघातकेशेथे ॥ 22 ॥

शांकरी तु महाकाले शर्बिणी मध्यमाधिये ।

केदाराखे महाश्रेते देदी सा मार्गंदायिनी ॥ 23 ॥

Daṇḍini Paramesvári dwells in Caṇḍamunḍi-Bhūti dwells in Bhārabhūti; and Nakulesvari dwells in Nākula. Candrikā dwells in Harisācandra; Śāṅkari in Śrīgiri; Trísūlā in Japeśvara; and Sūksmā in Āmrātakeśvara. Śāṅkari dwells in Ujjain, Śarvānī in the place Madhyamā, and Mārga Dāyinī dwells in the holy Kṣetra Kedāra.

भैरावाख्ये भैरवी सा गायवां मंगला स्युत ।

स्थाणुपिया कुक्छेत्रे स्वायंभुव्यपि नाकुते || 24 ||

कनखले भवैद्वुता विश्वेशी विमलेशे ।

अनुहासे महानन्दा महैंडे तु महताका ॥ 25 ॥

The celebrated Bhairavi dwells in the place named Bhairava; Maṅgalā in Gayā Kṣetra; Sthānupriyā in Kurukṣetra; and Svāyambhuvī Devi dwells in Nākula; Ugrā dwells in Kaṅkhala; Viśveśa dwells in Vimaleśvara, Mahānanda in Aṭṭahāsa; and Mahāntakā in Mahendra.

भीमे धीमेधी प्रोक्ता स्थाने वस्त्रायधे पुनः ।

भवानी शांकी प्रोक्ता रूजणी त्वपंकीटिके ॥ 26 ॥

अविमुक्ते विशालाक्षी महाप्रभाग महालये ।

गोकर्णे घरूकर्णी स्वामुद्वा स्वामुद्वकर्णिके ॥ 27 ॥

उत्पालकी सुवर्णक्षे स्थाप्यशोग स्थापुसंक्षिके ।

कमलालये तु कमला प्रचण्डा छगलंडेक Ⅱ 28 Ⅱ

Bhimeśvari devils in Bhima; the Bhavānī Śaṅkarī devils in Vastrāpadma; and Rudrānī in Ardha Kotī. Viśalākṣī devils in Avimukta; Mahābhāgā dewlls in Mahālaya; Bhadrakarnī in Gokarṇa; and Bhadrā resides in Bhadrakarnaka; Utpalākṣī dewlls in Suvarnākṣa; Sthāṇviśā in Sthāṇu; Kamalā in Kamalālaya; Çandā in Chagalandāka, situated in the south near the sea coast.

कुरण्डले सिंस्था स्यान्माकोटे मुकुटेश्धी ।

मण्डलेले शोड़की स्यात्काली कालंने पुनः ॥ 29 ॥

शंकुमेणं घिनिः प्रोक्ता स्थूला स्यात्कूलकेशे ।

ज्ञानिनां हद्यांभोजे हूल्लेखा परमेश्धी ॥ 30 ॥

Trisandhyā dwells in Kurundala; Mukutésvarī

in Mākota; Śāndakī in Manḍaleśa; Kālī in

Kālañjara; Dhvani in Śañkukarnā; Sthūlā in

Sthūlakesśvara; and Parameśvarī Hrlekhā dwells

in the heart lotuses of the Jñanins.

प्रोक्तानीमात्य स्थानानि देल्या: विषयातमानि च।

तन्त्रसंजस्य माहान्यं श्रुत्वा पूर्वं नगोतमा ॥ 31 ॥

तदुकतेन विधानेन पड्याहेर्दी प्रपूजयेत् ।

The places mentioned above are all dearest to the Devi First the merits of these places are to be heard; next the Devi is to be worshipped by the rites and ceremonies according to these rules.

अध्याय सर्वेक्षेत्राणि कार्यां सन्ति नगोतमा ॥ 32 ॥

तत्र चैव वसैत्रित्यं देदीभक्तिपरायण: ।

ताति स्थानाति संपर्यक्षापन्दौंबि निरन्तमम् ॥ 33 ॥

ध्यासंस्तचरणाभीवंग मुक्तो भवति बच्यन्ता ।

इमानि देदीनामानि प्रातरल्याय यः पेतेट् ॥ 34 ॥

Or, O Mountain! All the holy places of pilgrimages exist in Kaśī. The Devi always dwells there. Persons. devoted to the Devi, see these places and if they make Japam and meditate on the lotus-feet of the Devi, they will certainly be freed from the bounds of Sarinsāra; there is no doubt in this. If anybody, getting up in the morning, recite the names of these places, all his sins would insultantly be burnt away.

भर्मीभवित्ति पायाति तत्स्थापात्रा सत्वम् ।

श्राद्धकाले पदेत्तान्यमलानि दिजाप्रातः ॥ 35 ॥

Book VII Chapter XXXVIII

And if one reads, in the time of Śrāddha, before the Brāhmins, these holy names of the Devī, his Pītrs will be purified of their sins in the Mahākāśa by the Mahā Prāṇa and will get their highest goal.

भुक्तास्त्रितस: सर्वे प्रयातिप परमां गतिम ।

अयुना कार्यश्चायामि जतानि तक सुजत ॥ 36 ॥

नार्तिभिश्र नरैश्रिक कर्तेबानि प्रवन्ततः ।

जतमन्तन्तुरीयाख्यं रसकल्याणिनीतन्तम् ॥ 37 ॥

आईनन्दिकं नाम्ना तृतीयाया तर्न च चत् ।

शुक्रावराते चैत तथा कृष्णचतुदैर्गी ॥ 38 ॥

O One of good vows! I will now describe to you the vows that are to be carefully observed by men and women; hear. Ananta Tṛtiyākhya Vrata (vow), Rasakalyānī Vrata, and Ārdrānandakara Vrata, these three Vratas are to be observed in the Tṛtiya (third) tithi. The next come the Friday vow, the Kṛṣṇa Caturdaśi vows, The Tuesday vow, and the evening twilight vow.

भीभावारतं चैव प्रदोषचतनेव च ।

यत्र देवो महादेवो देवीं संस्थाप्य विहरे ॥ 39 ॥

तृत्वं क्रोति पुरतः सार्थं देवैर्निगामुळे ।

तजोपोष्य रजन्यादौ प्रदोरे पूजयेच्छवाय् ॥ 40 ॥

In this twilight vow, Mahā Deva places the Devi in the evening on an Āśana; and He, along with the other Devas, began to dance before Her. Fasting is enjoined in this vow; and then in the evening one must worship the Devi, the Giver of all auspicious things. Especially in every forthight, if the Devi be worshipped, She gets extremely pleased.

प्रतिपक्षं विशेषेण तद्वीधीगीताकरम् ।

सोमावारतं वैव मानातिप्रयकृतम् ॥ 41 ॥

O Best of Mountains! The Monday vow is very agreeable to Me; the worship of the Devi should be done and then in the night one must take one's food.

तत्रापि देवीं सम्पूँच रात्री भोजनमाचरेम् ।

नवरावद्धं चैव ततं प्रीतिकरं मम ॥ 42 ॥

एवमान्यायपि विषो नित्यनैमितिकानि च ।

त्रतानि कुरुते यो वै मन्नीयर्थं विमतसः ॥ 43 ॥

The two nine nights vow called Navarātra are to be observed, one in the autumn and the other in the spring season. These are very dear to Me. He is certainly My devotee and very dear who for My satisfaction performs these and the other Nitya Naimittik vows, free from any pride and jealousy. He certainly gets the Sājujya Mukti with Me.

प्राप्नोति मम सायुज्यं स मे भक्तः स मे पित्रः ।

उसत्वानपि कुर्जित द्रोतोलसवमुखात्विणो ॥ 44 ॥

गयोत्नोत्सं तथा कुर्जानिता जागरणोत्सवम् ।

रथोत्सं च मे कुर्जाद्वानोत्सवमेव च ॥ 45 ॥

पविक्रोत्सवमेवापि श्रावणी प्रीतिकारकम् ।

मम भक्तः सदा कुर्देविद्यन्यामहोत्सवम् ॥ 46 ॥

O Nagarāja! The Holy (Dol) festival in the month of Caitra on the third day of the white fortnight is very pleasing to Me and should be observed by all. My devotees perform the Śayanotsava in the Paurnāmasī in the month of Āsādhā; the Jāgaranotsava in the Paurnāmasī in the month of Kārtika, the Ratha Yātrā in the 3rd of the white fortnight in Āsādhā; the Damanotsava in Caitra. And my dear festivals in the month of Śrāvana and various other festivals.

मद्धनाभोपेजदीपीता तथा चैव सुवासिनीः ।

कुमारीर्वंदुकांशीप मद्बुद्धता तलांतरः ॥ 47 ॥

वित्तशाङ्गेन रहितो यजेदेवतान्युमादिंभः ।

य एवं कुरुते भक्न्या प्रतिवर्षमतिद्रितः ॥ 48 ॥

स धयः: कृतकृत्योउसी मन्तीतः पात्रमझसा ।

सर्वमुक्तं सामासेन मम प्रीतिवायकम् ।

नारिष्याय प्रताल्यं नाभकताय कदाचन ॥ 49 ॥

इति श्रीमदैर्भीयागते महापुराणे

देवीगीतायामहिश्रीऊध्याः।। 38 ॥

In all these festivals one should feast well with gladness all My devotees, and the Kumāris (virgins), well clothed and dressed, and the boys, thinking them all to be of My very nature. No miserliness is to be entertained and I should be worshipped with flowers, etc. He is blessed and attains his goal and is dear to Me who carefully and devotedly observes every year all these

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

festivals. O Nagendra! Thus I have described to you in brief all the vows that are pleasing to Me. These instructions are not to be given who is not a disciple nor to one who is not My devotee.”

Here ends the Thirty-eighth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the vows and the sacred places of the Devi in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXXIX

On the Worship of the Devi

हिमालय उवाच

देवदेवि महेशानि करणासागरोप्रिके ।

ब्रहिं पूजाविंधि सम्ययथावद्धुना निजम् ॥ १ ॥

The Himālayas said: “O, Devi! O, Maheśvari! O Thou, the Ocean of Mercy! O World-Mother! Now describe in detail how Thy worship is conducted, the rules and ceremonies thereof.”

देस्यावच

वध्ये पूजाविर्धि राजत्रविकाया यथा प्रियम् ।

अत्यनक्षत्रया सार्थं शृणु यप्तर्णपार ॥ २ ॥

द्वितीया मम पूजा स्याद्वाहा चाध्यन्तरापि च ।

बाह्ञापि द्वितीय प्रोक्ता वैदिकी तान्ककी तथा ॥ ३ ॥

The Devi said: “O King of Mountains! I now describe to you the rites and ceremonies and the methods of My worship that are pleasing to Me. Hear it attentively and with faith. My worship is of two kinds: External and internal. The external worship is again twofold one is Vaidik, and the other is Tântrik.

वैविक्वचार्पि विविधा मृतिंभवेत्र भूरा ।

वैदिकी वैदिकः कार्यं वेदौक्षासम्पित्विः ॥ ४ ॥

तन्योक्तदीक्षाविद्युत तानिकसो संशिता भवेत ।

इर्थ पुजारुस्यं च न जात्वा विषातिकम् ॥ 5 ॥

The Vaidik worship is also of two kinds according to the differences in My forms. Those who are initiated in the Vedic Mantrams worship according to the Vedic rites and ceremonies and those who are initiated in the Tānrik Mantram worship; according to the Tānrik rites. That stupid man is entirely ruined and goes to Hell who knowing the secrets of worship, act contrary to them.

करोति यो नगो मुह: स पतत्येव सर्वथा ।

तत्र या वैदिक्ती ग्रोकता प्रथमा तां वाद्यामूँ।। ६ ॥

यन्मै साक्षात्यरं रूपं दूर्घवानसि भूप्रा ।

अनन्तर्गीर्वनवमनंतचरणं महत् ॥ ७ ॥

सर्वगतिसमायुक्त प्रेकं यत्यात्यम् ।

तदेव पूजयेत्रियं न मे ध्यावेत्यमेदोर्धि ॥ ८ ॥

First I will describe to you the Vaidik worship; hear. The highest Form of Mine that you saw before, with innumerable heads, innumerable eyes, innumerable feet, and the Illuminer of the intelligences of all the Jivas, endowed with all powers, Higher than the Highest, Very Grand, worship That, bow down to That and meditate on that. O Nogendra! This is the first form of worship that I describe to you.

इयोतत्यधान्याय: स्वरूपं कथितं ना ।

शान्तः समाहितमान दंभाहंकारवर्जितः ॥ 9 ॥

तत्यो भव तद्धाजी तद्वे शरणं जत्र ।

तदेव चेतसा पश्य जय ध्यायवर सर्वेद ॥ 10 ॥

With your senses controlled, peaceful, with a well concentrated mind, void of egoism and vanity, and devoted to That, perform sacrifices to That, take refuge of That, see That within the temple of your mind, and always recite Her name and meditate on That.

अनन्यथा प्रियनुभकपक्षता मुद्धावमाश्रितः ।

यहैपंज तयोत्नमीमेव परितेषाय ॥ १ १ १ ॥

इन्धं मानगुरुहते मोक्ष्यसे घवबन्यान्त ।

मत्यया वे मदासक्तचिता भक्तवग माताः ॥ १ २ ॥

Take hold of Me, and My ideas with one pointed loving devotion and please Me with the performance of sacrifices, austerities and gifts. By My Grace, you will no doubt be able to get the

Book VII Chapter XXXIX

Final Liberation. Whoever is entirely attached to Me, thinking Me as the Highest, is the foremost amongst the Bhaktas.

प्रतिजाने भवादस्मादुद्वाराम्यचिरेण तु ।

ध्याने कर्मयुक्तेक भक्तिज्ञाने वा पुनः ॥ १३ ॥

प्रायासं सर्वथा राजन तु केवलकर्मधि: ।

धार्मतंजयाते भक्तिभंक्वा संजायते परम् ॥ १४ ॥

I promise that I will certainly deliver him from this ocean of the world. O King of mountains! Meditation with Karma and Jñāna with Bhakti will lead one to Me. Only the work alone will fail to

get one to Me. O, Himavān! From Dharma arises Bhakti and from Bhakti arises the Highest Jñāna. श्रतिस्मतिभ्यामुदितं वतय धर्म: प्रक्रौतितं: ।

अन्याशेषण यः प्रोकतो धर्माधासः स उच्चते ॥ 15 ॥

सर्वत्रात्सर्वश्नकेतुं भगतो वेदः स्मृतिन्तः ।

अज्ञानस्य ममाभावादप्रमाणा न च शक्ति: ॥ 16 ॥

What are said in the Sruti and Smṛti Śāstras the Maharṣis take, that as the Dharma; and what are written in other Śāstras, they take them to be Dharmābhāsa (the Shadow or reflection of Dharma). Out of My omniscient and omnipotent Nature, the Vedas have come. Owing to the want of Ignorance in Me, the Vedas can never be invalidated.

सूतयश्छ्छुतेरथै गृहीत्वैच च सर्गिताः ।

मन्दादीनां शुतीनां च ततः प्रामाण्यमिष्चे ॥ १ ७ ॥

क्रविक्वाद्विसन्यार्थ कद्योषण परोत्तिम् ।

धर्म बदिति संगिस्तु नैव प्राङ्ठोर्सित विदैकः ॥ १८ ॥

The Smṛtis are formed out of the meaning of the Vedas; so the Smṛtis and Purāṇas, formed by Manu and the other Rṣis, are authoritative. In some places it is hinted that there other Śāstras than the Vedas, taking the Tantras indirectly into account. Although the matters relating to the Dharmas are mentioned therein, but as they are apparently contrary to the Śrutis, the Tantras are not accepted by the Vaidik Paṇdits.

अन्येयां शाखकर्णामानां प्रभवलतः ।

अज्ञानदोषदुर्ध्यातनुक्तेनां प्रमाणता ॥ 19 ॥

तस्मानमुबुधर्मार्थ सर्वथा वेदमाधयेत् ।

राजज्ञा च यथा लोक हृत्यने न कदाचन ॥ 20 ॥

The other Śāstra makers are marked with their ignorance; so their sayings cannot be authoritative. Therefore he must resort entirely to the Vedas who want the final liberation. As the king's order is never disobeyed amongst his subjects, so the Śruti, the Command of Mine, the Lord of all, can never be abandoned by men.

संक्षेपाना ममाना सा शुतिस्त्वाचा कवे नृभि: ।

मदानारक्षणार्थ तू बह्राक्षयित्यजातः ॥ 21 ॥

मया सुहास्ततो जेयं रहस्यं मे शुतेर्वचः ।

यदा यदा हिं धर्मस्य नतानिभविति भूधर ॥ 22 ॥

To Preserve My Commandments, I have created the Brāhmaṇa and the Kṣaṭtrīya castes. My secrets are all embodied in the Śrutis. For that reason, the words of the Śrutis are no doubt to be known and observed by the sages.

अभ्युव्यानमार्थस्य तत् वेभान्विभयंम् ।

देवदैत्यविभाग्याप्यत एवाभवदपु ।। 23 ॥

ये न कुर्वन्ति तद्मूं तच्छक्षार्थे मया सदा ।

सम्पादितास्तु नरकाक्षायो यच्छुवणाद्वेदो।। 24 ॥

O Mountain! When the Dharma (righteousness) declines and the Adharma (unrighteousness) reigns supreme, I then manifest Myself in the world as Sākambhāri, Rāma, Kṛṣṇa and others. Therefore, the Devas, the preservers of the Vedas, and the Daityas, the destroyers of the Vedas are classified.

यो वेदधर्मपुक्त्य धर्मन्यं समाशयेत् ।

राज प्रवासयेद्वेशाशिज्ञतेतान्धभिगः ॥ 25 ॥

ब्राह्यौर्ने च संभावाः पोक्त्याता न च द्विःः ।

अन्यानि यानि शास्त्राणि लोके.संस्मिनिविधापि च ॥ 26 ॥

Whoever does not practise according to the Vedas I have created many hells for their lessons. When the sinners hear of those hells, they get extremely terrified. The king should banish those stupid persons from his kingdom and the Brāhmins should not talk with them nor take them in their own lines nor when partaking of food, those who forsake the Vaidic Dharma and go for shelter to another Dharma.

श्रुतिस्मृतिविकृद्धानि तामसान्येव सर्वर्गः ।

वामं कपालकं चैव कौलकं भैरवामाः ॥ 27 ॥

The Śāstras that are extant, as contrary to the Śrutis and Smṛtis, are all Tāmasa Śāstras; Mahādeva has framed these Vāma, Kāpālaka, Kaulakas, Bhairva and such like Śāstras for fascinating the people; else He has no object in framing them.

शिशेन मोहनाथीय प्रणीते नान्यहेतुकः ।

द्वशगपाद्भुगोः शगपाद्धीचस्य च शगपत: ॥ 28 ॥

दर्षा ये ब्राह्मणवरा वेदमार्गविद्धिकृततः ।

तेषामुद्वर्णाथीय सेोपानक्रमतः सदा ॥ 29 ॥

गैवाङ्ग बैश्वावाङ्गे सीरा: शाकास्तवैव च ।

गाणपत्या आगमाङ्ग प्रपीताः शंकरेण तु ॥ 30 ॥

Those Brāhmaṇas that were burnt up by the curses of Dakṣa, Šukra, Dadhīci and were banished from the path of the Vedas, it is for delivering them, step by step that Mahādeva has framed the five Agamas, Śaiva, Vaiṣṇava, Śaura, Śākta and Gānapatya Śāstras.

तत्र वेदविकर्णोज्ञपुक्त एवं क्रचित्क्रिच् ।

विद्वैकस्तदुरहे तोषो न भवल्येव कर्हिंचित् ॥ ३ १ ॥

सर्वेथा वेदधिपत्रार्थे नाधिकारी द्विजो भवेत् ।

वेदाधिकारीनस्तु भवेचनाधिकारना ॥ ३ २ ॥

In those Tantra Sāstras there are some passages in conformity with the Vedas and there are other passages contradictory to the Vedas. If the Vaidik persons resort to passages in conformity with the Vedas, then there cannot arise any fault in them. The Brāhmins are not Adhikāris to those Tāntric texts that are contradictory to the Vedas. Those persons that have no claim to the Vedas can be Adhikāris to these latter texts.

तस्मासर्वप्रयत्नेन वैदिको वेदायाश्रयेत् ।

धर्मेण सहितं ज्ञानं परं बहा प्रकारशेचे ॥ 33 ॥

सर्वेषण: परित्यज्य मायेव शरणं गता: ।

सर्वभूतदायावन्तो मानाईकारवर्जिताः ॥ 34 ॥

मिच्छता मन्त्राणणा मनस्थानकक्षने ततः ।

संस्यासितो वनस्थाश्र गृहस्था ब्रह्माचारिणः ॥ 35 ॥

उपासते सदा भकत्या योगमैश्वरसांत्रितम् ।

Therefore the Vaidik a Brāhmaṇas should resort to the Vedas with all the care possible and make the Para Brahma of the nature of Jñāna manifest within them. The Sarinyāsins. Vānaprasthas, householders and Brāhmacārīs should give up all their desires and take refuge in Me; free from egoism and vanity, kind to all creatures, their hearts wholly given to Me and engaged in speaking out My places, with enrapt devotion. They always worship My Virāt (Cosmic) form, fmmersed in the Yoga called Aisvarya Yoga (Cosmic Yoga dealing with the glories, prosperity of god).

तेषां नित्यविशुक्तानामहमानजनं तमः ॥ 36 ॥

ज्ञानसूर्यक्राणेन नार्थायमि न संशयः ।

इन्थे वैदिक्नपूजायः प्रथायमा नगाधिप ॥ 37 ॥

I illumine the understanding with the Sun of My Consciousness, and I destroy the Darkness of Ignorance of those persons that are always engaged in practising Yoga with Me. There is no doubt in this. O Nagendra! Thus I have described in brief the methods and practices of the Vaidik Pūjā; now I will tell you the Tāntrīkī Pūjā; hear attentively.

स्वल्पमुक्ति संक्षेपादूदितीयाया अथो बुवे ।

मूर्ती वा स्व्यडिते वाथि तथा सुरैन्द्रमण्डले ॥ 38 ॥

जलेप्रथ वा बाणलिंगे नये वार्थि महापटे ।

तथा श्रीहृदयांभोजे ध्याता देहीं परातयम् ॥ 39 ॥

सगुणां ककराणुर्णा ततभीमकाणाकाणा ।

सौद्यैसारसीमां तां सर्वावयसुन्दरीम ॥ 40 ॥

शूज्ञरससम्पूर्णां सदा भक्तातर्कालातगम् ।

प्रसातसुभुजीभंवां चन्द्रखडिजिखिडनीम ॥ 41 ॥

पाणंकुशराभीतिधरामानन्द्रकपिणीम् ।

पुजयेतुपचारैछ यथावित्नानुसारतः ॥ 42 ॥

On an image, or clean plot of ground, or on the Sun or the Moon, in water, in Bāna Línga, in Yantra or on a cloth or in the lotus of heart, one is to meditate and worship the Blissful, Higher than the Highest, the Devi, Who creates this universe with the three Gunas Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, Who is filled with the juice of mercy, Who is blooming in youth, Whose colour is red like the rising Sun,

Book VII Chapter XL

Whose beauty overtops to the full, Whose all the limbs are exquisitely beautiful, Who is the sentiment of Love Incarnate, Who feels very much for the mental pain of Her Bhaktas, Who being pleased, manifests Herself before the Bhaktas on Whose forehead, the segment of the Moon shines incessantly, and Whose four hands hold goad, noose and the signs of fearlessness and to great boons.

यावदान्तरपुजायामधिकारो भवेत्र हि ।

तावद्धातुमिमां पूजां श्वेजजते तु तां त्यजेत् ॥ 4 3 ॥

आभ्यन्ततु तु या पूजा सा तु संविल्पतः स्मृतः ।

संविद्वेच परं कलपुर्पापित्रहितं मम ॥ 4 4 ॥

Until one is entitled to the internal worship, one should worship the external; never he is to abandon it. Worship is internal when one's heart gets diluted in Para Brahma, of the nature of the Universal Consciousness. O Mountain! Know My Consciousness (Samvit) to be My Highest Nature without any limitations.

अतः संविदि मदुपे चेतः स्थायं निराशयम् ।

संविद्युपतिरिक्तं तु मिथ्या मायामयं जगत् ॥ 4 5 ॥

अतः संसारनाश्य साक्षणीमात्मक्षिपणम् ।

भाववेकिंमनरैकेन योगयुक्तेन चेतसा ॥ 46 ॥

Therefore it is highly incumbent to attach one's hearts, free from other adjuncts, constantly to this Samvit. And what is more than this Samvit is this illusive world full of Māyā. So to get rid of this world one is to constantly meditate on Me, the Witness of all, the Self of all, with a heart full of devotion and free from any Sankalpa or desires.

अतः परं बाहुपूजाविस्तारः कव्यते मया ।

सावधानेने मनसा श्रुणु पर्वतस्तम ॥ 47 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे सदासकन्के

देवीनीतायामेकोनचत्वारिशोस्थाय: 11 39 11

O Best of Mountains! Now I will describe to you in detail the external form of worship. Hear attentively.

Here ends the Thirty-ninth Chapter of the Seventh

Book on the worship of the World-Mother in

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of

18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XL

CHAPTER XI.

On the Outer Worship of the Devi

देख्यवाच

प्रातरल्याय शिराति संस्मरेत्वयपुज्ज्वलम् ।

कर्पूरायं संरेत्तत्र श्रीगुर्भ निजस्टिपिणम् ॥ १ ॥

सूपसत्रं लसद्व्यापुचितं शक्तिसंयुतम् ।

नमकूल्य ततो देवीं कुण्डली संस्मरेद्वृषः ॥ 2 ॥

प्रकाशमानां प्रथये प्रयाणे प्रतिप्रयाणेउपमृतायमानाम् ।

अन्त: पद्यव्यामनुसंचरितीमानन्दरूपामवलां प्रपते ॥ 3 ॥

The Devi said: “Getting up from the bed early in the morning, one is to meditate on the thousand petalled lotus, bright, of the colour of camphor, in the top part his brain on the head. On this he should remember his Śrī Guru, very gracious looking, well decorated with ornaments, with His Consort Sakti and bow down to Him and within Him he should meditate the Kuṇḍalini Devi thus: “I take refuge unto that Highest Śakti Kuṇḍalini, of the nature of

the Supreme Consciousness, Who is manifest as Caitanya while up-going to the Brahmarandhra (the aperture supposed to be at the crown of the head, thorough which the soul takes its fight at death) and Who is of the nature of nectar while returning back in the Susumnā canal.”

ध्यातवैरं तिच्छखागये सचिवन्दानन्दूरिपणीम् ।

मां ध्यावेद्व शोभामि क्रिका: सर्वः समापयेत् ॥ 4 ॥

After meditating thus, he should meditate on the Blissful Form of Mine within the Kuṇdalini Fire situated in the Mūlādhāra Lotus (coccygeal lotus). Then he should rise up to go for the calls of nature, etc., and complete Sandhyā Vandanam and other duties.

अग्निच्छोत ततो हुत्वा मत्नीत्यर्थं द्विजोत्तमः ।

होमांते स्वासने स्थित्वा पूजासंकल्यमाचरेत् ॥ 5 ॥

Srinaddevabhāgavatam

The best of Brāhmins, then should for My satisfaction perform the Agnihotra Homa and sitting in his Āsana māke Sankalapa (determination) to do My Pūjā (worship).

Note: The brain has three divisions, the lower; the middle and the higher, or top-most part which is very pure.

प्रतृष्यादं पुरा कृत्ता मातृकान्यासभेव च ।

हल्लोख्यामातृकान्यासं नित्यमेव सामारेत्त् ॥ 6 ॥

प्रतापारे हकां च हदये च रकारकम् ।

भूतध्ये तद्वीक्षांत हींकारं मतलेक न्यसेत् ॥ 7 ॥.

Next he is to make Bhūta Suddhi (purification of elements of the body by respiratory attraction and replacement) and then the Mātṛkā Nyāsa. Then he should arrange the letters of the root Mantra of Māyā and execute the Hrllekhā Mātṛkā Nyāsa. In this he is to place the letter 'Ha' in the Mulādhāra, the letter 'Ra' in his heart and the vowel 'T' in the middle of his brows and Hripn on the top part of his head.

तत्नमोजीततान्याक्षासान्तविनामाजरेत । ५०

कल्यवेत्ताव्याने देहे पीषे धर्माधिभि; युतः ॥ ८ ॥

Finishing then all the other Nyāsas according to that Mantra, he should think within his body Dharma, Jñāna, Vairāgyam, and Prosperity as the four legs of the seat and Adharma. Ajñāna, Avairāgyam and non-prosperity, these four as the body, of the seat on the four quarters East, South, West and North.

ततो धयावेमहादौं प्राणाभावेकिज्ञपिति ।

दर्भोपोजे मम स्थाने पड़भोतमेने बधः ॥ 9 ॥

ब्रहां विण्युं रूरूश्र उद्धश्र उतावीधाः ॥

एते पंडो महोजपेः पादमुले मम स्थाने ॥ 10 ॥

Then he should meditate on the Great Devi in the lotus of his heart blew by Pranāyāma, situated on the five seats of the Pretas. O Moutinant Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, Sadāśiva and Tsvara are the five Pretas situated under My feet.

पशुभ्रात्माका होते प्रजावस्थापक्या अति।

अहं व्यक्ष्यचिष्टुपा नद्वीतोज्ञा सर्वेक्षा 11 ॥

Theese ate of the nature of earth, water, fire, air, and ether, the five elements and also of the nature of Jāgrat (waking), Svapna (dreaming). Susupti (deep sleep state) Turiyā (the fourth state) and Atāta Rūpa, the (the fifth state) excluding the 4 states, corresponding to the five states. But I, who am of nature of Brahma, am over and above the five elements and the five states; therefore My seat is always on the top of these five forces.

ततो विहरां त्राता: शक्तितन्तेयुं सर्वेयुं ।।।।

ध्यत्यैवं मानसैभंगैरि: पुत्रवेभां जादेविष ।।।२।।।

Meditating on Me thus and worshipping Me with his mind concentrated, he is next to make Japam (reciting My name slowly). After Japam he is to make over the fruits of Japam to Me. He should then place the Arghya for the external worship.

जयं समर्थ शीदेव्ये ततोर्धर्थ्यापनं चरेत् ।

पाचासादनंक कृत्वा पूत्रप्रद्वागीण शोधयेत् ॥ 13 ॥

Then the worshipper is to sprinkle with the Astra mantra 'Phat', all the articles of worship that are placed in front of him and purify them.

जलेन तेन मनुना चात्मानेण दोशकः ।

विद्यकंच च पुरा कृत्ता गुरुळजता ततः पतम् ॥ 14 ॥

तदनुजां समादारक बाढापोते ततः परम् ।

इदित्यां भावितां मृत्ति मम दिव्हां मनोहागम् ॥ 15 ॥

आवाहयन्ततः पीते प्राणस्थाप्नविद्धाय ।

आसनावाहते चार्थे प्याहाश्चरमने तथा ॥ 16 ॥

स्नानं वासोद्धवं चेवं भरणायि च मवर्गे ।

गन्धं पुर्णं वयाणायनं दत्ता श्ले स्थिति ॥ 17 ॥

यनश्वसानामवृतीनी पजन सलमाचित ।

प्रतिव्यामशक्तानी शुक्रकर्ता निव्यागतकर ।

He should close the ten quarters with the Chopika Mudrā and bow down to his Guru. Taking his permission, he should meditate on the origin of the beatusful divine form of his heart lotus and invoke the beatusful divine form of his heart lotus and invoke the deity outside and place Her on the seat by Braha Pratisthā and perform Avāhmana, and present her Her Arghya (an offer of green grass, rice, etc., made in worshipping a god), Pádaya (water for washing legs and feet), Acamana, water for bath, a couple of

Book VII Chapter XI

clothes, all sorts of ornaments, or scents, flowers and the necessary articles with due devotion and he should worship the attendant deities, of the Yantra. If one be unable to worship daily, the attendant deities, one must worship themon Friday.

पृत्यदीयप्राप्त्य. स्वपूर्णवा अंसंवेदतः ।

तत्प्रभात्यल्प्याते तैतोक्यं च दिक्षितयेन् ॥ 19 ॥

Of the attendant deities, one must meditate the principal deity of the, natupre of Prabhā (illmination) and, think that, by Her rays the three worlds are pervaded.

पुतप्रावृतिस्वितां पुलदेर्षें च, पुजयेत् ।

नसाविक्षि: पुगावीयुत तथा पुषे: पुवासिक्षि: ॥ 20 ॥

Next, he should worship again the Bhuvayesyari Devi, the Chief Deity along with other attendant deities with seer, good-smelling flowers and Naivedya and various other tasteful dishes.

नैवेटीतर्णीयीश्व दूमालैर्वीधूमाप्रिक्ति: ५। ५। ५। ५। ५। ५। ५। ५। ५। ५। ५। ५। ۵। ५। ५। ५। ५। ५। ५। ५। ५। ५। ५। ५।

He should then recite the Sahasranāma (thousand names) sottas and the Devi. Sūkta Mantra 'Aham Rudrebbh, etc., and 'Sarvevat Deya, Devi' mupatasthu etc.,' the Devi Atharva Siro Mantra and the Upanisads Mantra of Bhuvanesvari, the fathous mantras; repeatedly and thus bring My satisfaction. \( ^{[1]} \)  \( ^{[2]} \)  \( ^{[3]} \)  \( ^{[4]} \)  \( ^{[5]} \)  \( ^{[6]} \)  \( ^{[7]} \)  \( ^{[8]} \)  \( ^{[9]} \)  \( ^{[10]} \)  \( ^{[11]} \)  \( ^{[12]} \)  \( ^{[13]} \)  \( ^{[14]} \)  \( ^{[15]} \)  \( ^{[16]} \)  \( ^{[17]} \)  \( ^{[18]} \)  \( ^{[19]} \)  \( ^{[20]} \)  \( ^{[21]} \)  \( ^{[22]} \)  \( ^{[23]} \)  \( ^{[24]} \)  \( ^{[25]} \)  \( ^{[26]} \)  \( ^{[27]} \)  \( ^{[28]} \)  \( ^{[29]} \)  \( ^{[30]} \)  \( ^{[31]} \)  \( ^{[32]} \)  \( ^{[33]} \)  \( ^{[34]} \)  \( ^{[35]} \)  \( ^{[36]} \)  \( ^{[37]} \)  \( ^{[38]} \)  \( ^{[39]} \)  \( ^{[40]} \)  \( ^{[41]} \)  \( ^{[42]} \)  \( ^{[43]} \)  \( ^{[44]} \)  \( ^{[45]} \)  \( ^{[46]} \)  \( ^{[47]} \)  \( ^{[48]} \)  \( ^{[49]} \)  \( ^{[50]} \)  \( ^{[51]} \)  \( ^{[52]} \)  \( ^{[53]} \)  \( ^{[54]} \)  \( ^{[55]} \)  \( ^{[56]} \)  \( ^{[57]} \)  \( ^{[58]} \)  \( ^{[59]} \)  \( ^{[60]} \)  \( ^{[61]} \)  \( ^{[62]} \)  \( ^{[63]} \)  \( ^{[64]} \)  \( ^{[65]} \)  \( ^{[66]} \)  \( ^{[67]} \)  \( ^{[68]} \)  \( ^{[69]} \)  \( ^{[70]} \)  \( ^{[71]} \)  \( ^{[72]} \)  \( ^{[73]} \)  \( ^{[74]} \)  \( ^{[75]} \)  \( ^{[76]} \)  \( ^{[77]} \)  \( ^{[78]} \)  \( ^{[79]} \)  \( ^{[80]} \)  \( ^{[81]} \)  \( ^{[82]} \)  \( ^{[83]} \)  \( ^{[84]} \)  \( ^{[85]} \)  \( ^{[86]} \)  \( ^{[87]} \)  \( ^{[88]} \)  \( ^{[89]} \)  \( ^{[90]} \)  \( ^{[91]} \)  \( ^{[92]} \)  \( ^{[93]} \)  \( ^{[94]} \)  \( ^{[95]} \)  \( ^{[96]} \)  \( ^{[97]} \)  \( ^{[98]} \)  \( ^{[99]} \)  \( ^{[100]} \)  \( ^{[101]} \)  \( ^{[102]} \)  \( ^{[103]} \)  \( ^{[104]} \)  \( ^{[105]} \)  \( ^{[106]} \)  \( ^{[107]} \)  \( ^{[108]} \)  \( ^{[109]} \)  \( ^{[110]} \)  \( ^{[111]} \)  \( ^{[112]} \)  \( ^{[113]} \)  \( ^{[114]} \)  \( ^{[115]} \)  \( ^{[116]} \)  \( ^{[117]} \)  \( ^{[118]} \)  \( ^{[119]} \)  \( ^{[120]} \)  \( ^{[121]} \)  \( ^{[122]} \)  \( ^{[123]} \)  \( ^{[124]} \)  \( ^{[125]} \)  \( ^{[126]} \)  \( ^{[127]} \)  \( ^{[128]} \)  \( ^{[129]} \)  \( ^{[130]} \)  \( ^{[131]} \)  \( ^{[132]} \)  \( ^{[133]} \)  \( ^{[134]} \)  \( ^{[135]} \)  \( ^{[136]} \)  \( ^{[137]} \)  \( ^{[138]} \)  \( ^{[139]} \)  \( ^{[140]} \)  \( ^{[141]} \)  \( ^{[142]} \)  \( ^{[143]} \)  \( ^{[144]} \)  \( ^{[145]} \)  \( ^{[146]} \)  \( ^{[147]} \)  \( ^{[148]} \)  \( ^{[149]} \)  \( ^{[150]} \)  \( ^{[151]} \)  \( ^{[152]} \)  \( ^{[153]} \)  \( ^{[154]} \)  \( ^{[155]} \)  \( ^{[156]} \)  \( ^{[157]} \)  \( ^{[158]} \)  \( ^{[159]} \)  \( ^{[160]} \)  \( ^{[161]} \)  \( ^{[162]} \)  \( ^{[163]} \)  \( ^{[164]} \)  \( ^{[165]} \)  \( ^{[166]} \)  \( ^{[167]} \)  \( ^{[168]} \)  \( ^{[169]} \)  \( ^{[170]} \)  \( ^{[171]} \)  \( ^{[172]} \)  \( ^{[173]} \)  \( ^{[174]} \)  \( ^{[175]} \)  \( ^{[176]} \)  \( ^{[177]} \)  \( ^{[178]} \)  \( ^{[179]} \)  \( ^{[180]} \)  \( ^{[181]} \)  \( ^{[182]} \)  \( ^{[183]} \)  \( ^{[184]} \)  \( ^{[185]} \)  \( ^{[186]} \)  \( ^{[187]} \)  \( ^{[188]} \)  \( ^{[189]} \)  \( ^{[190]} \)  \( ^{[191]} \)  \( ^{[192]} \)  \( ^{[193]} \)  \( ^{[194]} \)  \( ^{[195]} \)  \( ^{[196]} \)  \( ^{[197]} \)  \( ^{[198]} \)  \( ^{[199]} \)  \( ^{[200]} \)  \( ^{[201]} \)  \( ^{[202]} \)  \( ^{[203]} \)  \( ^{[204]} \)  \( ^{[205]} \)  \( ^{[206]} \)  \( ^{[207]} \)  \( ^{[208]} \)  \( ^{[209]} \)  \( ^{[210]} \)  \( ^{[211]} \)  \( ^{[212]} \)  \( ^{[213]} \)  \( ^{[214]} \)  \( ^{[215]} \)  \( ^{[216]} \)  \( ^{[217]} \)  \( ^{[218]} \)  \( ^{[219]} \)  \( ^{[220]} \)  \( ^{[221]} \)  \( ^{[222]} \)  \( ^{[223]} \)  \( ^{[224]} \)  \( ^{[225]} \)  \( ^{[226]} \)  \( ^{[227]} \)  \( ^{[228]} \)  \( ^{[229]} \)  \( ^{[230]} \)  \( ^{[231]} \)  \( ^{[232]} \)  \( ^{[233]} \)  \( ^{[234]} \)  \( ^{[235]} \)  \( ^{[236]} \)  \( ^{[237]} \)  \( ^{[238]} \)  \( ^{[239]} \)  \( ^{[240]} \)  \( ^{[241]} \)  \( ^{[242]} \)  \( ^{[243]} \)  \( ^{[244]} \)  \( ^{[245]} \)  \( ^{[246]} \)  \( ^{[247]} \)  \( ^{[248]} \)  \( ^{[249]} \)  \( ^{[250]} \)  \( ^{[251]} \)  \( ^{[252]} \)  \( ^{[253]} \)  \( ^{[254]} \)  \( ^{[255]} \)  \( ^{[256]} \)  \( ^{[257]} \)  \( ^{[258]} \)  \( ^{[259]} \)  \( ^{[260]} \)  \( ^{[261]} \)  \( ^{[262]} \)  \( ^{[263]} \)  \( ^{[264]} \)  \( ^{[265]} \)  \( ^{[266]} \)  \( ^{[267]} \)  \( ^{[268]} \)  \( ^{[269]} \)  \( ^{[270]} \)  \( ^{[271]} \)  \( ^{[272]} \)  \( ^{[273]} \)  \( ^{[274]} \)  \( ^{[275]} \)  \( ^{[276]} \)  \( ^{[277]} \)  \( ^{[278]} \)  \( ^{[279]} \)  \( ^{[280]} \)  \( ^{[281]} \)  \( ^{[282]} \)  \( ^{[283]} \)  \( ^{[284]} \)  \( ^{[285]} \)  \( ^{[286]} \)  \( ^{[287]} \)  \( ^{[288]} \)  \( ^{[289]} \)  \( ^{[290]} \)  \( ^{[291]} \)  \( ^{[292]} \)  \( ^{[293]} \)  \( ^{[294]} \)  \( ^{[295]} \)  \( ^{[296]} \)  \( ^{[297]} \)  \( ^{[298]} \)  \( ^{[299]} \)  \( ^{[300]} \)  \( ^{[301]} \)  \( ^{[302]} \)  \( ^{[303]} \)  \( ^{[304]} \)  \( ^{[305]} \)  \( ^{[306]} \)  \( ^{[307]} \)  \( ^{[308]} \)  \( ^{[309]} \)  \( ^{[310]} \)  \( ^{[311]} \)  \( ^{[312]} \)  \( ^{[313]} \)  \( ^{[314]} \)  \( ^{[315]} \)  \( ^{[316]} \)  \( ^{[317]} \)  \( ^{[318]} \)  \( ^{[319]} \)  \( ^{[320]} \)  \( ^{[321]} \)  \( ^{[322]} \)  \( ^{[323]} \)  \( ^{[324]} \)  \( ^{[325]} \)  \( ^{[326]} \)  \( ^{[327]} \)  \( ^{[328]} \)  \( ^{[329]} \)  \( ^{[330]} \)  \( ^{[331]} \)  \( ^{[332]} \)  \( ^{[333]} \)  \( ^{[334]} \)  \( ^{[335]} \)  \( ^{[336]} \)  \( ^{[337]} \)  \( ^{[338]} \)  \( ^{[339]} \)  \( ^{[340]} \)  \( ^{[341]} \)  \( ^{[342]} \)  \( ^{[343]} \)  \( ^{[344]} \)  \( ^{[345]} \)  \( ^{[346]} \)  \( ^{[347]} \)  \( ^{[348]} \)  \( ^{[349]} \)  \( ^{[350]} \)  \( ^{[351]} \)  \( ^{[352]} \)  \( ^{[353]} \)  \( ^{[354]} \)  \( ^{[355]} \)  \( ^{[356]} \)  \( ^{[357]} \)  \( ^{[358]} \)  \( ^{[359]} \)  \( ^{[360]} \)  \( ^{[361]} \)  \( ^{[362]} \)  \( ^{[363]} \)  \( ^{[364]} \)  \( ^{[365]} \)  \( ^{[366]} \)  \( ^{[367]} \)  \( ^{[368]} \)  \( ^{[369]} \)  \( ^{[370]} \)  \( ^{[371]} \)  \( ^{[372]} \)  \( ^{[373]} \)  \( ^{[374]} \)  \( ^{[375]} \)  \( ^{[376]} \)  \( ^{[377]} \)  \( ^{[378]} \)  \( ^{[379]} \)  \( ^{[380]} \)  \( ^{[381]} \)  \( ^{[382]} \)  \( ^{[383]} \)  \( ^{[384]} \)  \( ^{[385]} \)  \( ^{[386]} \)  \( ^{[387]} \)  \( ^{[388]} \)  \( ^{[389]} \)  \( ^{[390]} \)  \( ^{[391]} \)  \( ^{[392]} \)  \( ^{[393]} \)  \( ^{[394]} \)  \( ^{[395]} \)  \( ^{[396]} \)  \( ^{[397]} \)  \( ^{[398]} \)  \( ^{[399]} \)  \( ^{[400]} \)  \( ^{[401]} \)  \( ^{[402]} \)  \( ^{[403]} \)  \( ^{[404]} \)  \( ^{[405]} \)  \( ^{[406]} \)  \( ^{[407]} \)  \( ^{[408]} \)  \( ^{[409]} \)  \( ^{[410]} \)  \( ^{[411]} \)  \( ^{[412]} \)  \( ^{[413]} \)  \( ^{[414]} \)  \( ^{[415]} \)  \( ^{[416]} \)  \( ^{[417]} \)  \( ^{[418]} \)  \( ^{[419]} \)  \( ^{[420]} \)  \( ^{[421]} \)  \( ^{[422]} \)  \( ^{[423]} \)  \( ^{[424]} \)  \( ^{[425]} \)  \( ^{[426]} \)  \( ^{[427]} \)  \( ^{[428]} \)  \( ^{[429]} \)  \( ^{[430]} \)  \( ^{[431]} \)  \( ^{[432]} \)  \( ^{[433]} \)  \( ^{[434]} \)  \( ^{[435]} \)  \( ^{[436]} \)  \( ^{[437]} \)  \( ^{[438]} \)  \( ^{[439]} \)  \( ^{[440]} \)  \( ^{[441]} \)  \( ^{[442]} \)  \( ^{[443]} \)  \( ^{[444]} \)  \( ^{[445]} \)  \( ^{[446]} \)  \( ^{[447]} \)  \( ^{[448]} \)  \( ^{[449]} \)  \( ^{[450]} \)  \( ^{[451]} \)  \( ^{[452]} \)  \( ^{[453]} \)  \( ^{[454]} \)  \( ^{[455]} \)  \( ^{[456]} \)  \( ^{[457]} \)  \( ^{[458]} \)  \( ^{[459]} \)  \( ^{[460]} \)  \( ^{[461]} \)  \( ^{

वियुग्यैतद्वगेशेणायधिकारानुक्पतः ।

कृते ये पूवनं तेन कृतार्थेत्वं भविष्यासि । ३३ ॥

O Mahīdhara! Thus I have described to you the rules of worshipping the Great Devi; consider this in all aspects and worship Me according to your Adhikāra (claim) and you will attain your Goal. There is no doubt in this.

इवं तु नीतिगास्तं मे नाडिणायय वेत्काकित् ।

नाभक्ताय प्रदात्ब्यं न धृताय च तुद्रे ॥ 34 ॥

एतत्रकाकानं मातृकुर्वटनपुतीयेनो: ।

तस्माद्वरयं यत्नेन गोपनीविभिंदं सदा ॥ 35 ॥

O Best of mountains! This Śāstra Deviṣitā you are not to tell to those who are not the devotees, to those who are enemies, and to those who are cunning. If one gives out this secret of Gītā, it is like taking off the covering from the breast of the mother; so carefully keep it secret and think that this is very necessary.

देशं भक्ताय शिषाय्य जेषछुपाया चैव है ।

सुग्रीलाय सुवेषाय देवीभिकतुगता च ॥ ३६ ॥

श्राद्धकाले पदेदेवद्वाहाणनां समीपतः ।

दुनासास्तिपसर: सर्व प्रयाति परमं पदम् ॥ ३७ ॥

This Devi Gītā ought to be given to a disciple, a Bhakta, the eldest son, and to one who is good natured, and well dressed and devoted to the Devi. O Mountain! In the time of Śrāddha (solemn obsequies performed in honour of the manes of deceased ancestors) he gets the highest place of the Pitrs who reads this Devi Gītā before the Brāhmaṇas.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्सा सा भगवती तरीवान्तरीयता ।

देवांश्र मुदिताः सर्वे दैवीदर्शनोतेभवन् ॥ 38 ॥

ततो हिमालये जते देवी हैमवती तु सा ।

या गौतीति प्रसिद्धा०५सरीह्तता सा शंकायच च ॥ 39 ॥

ततः स्कंदः सम्बुद्धुततारकरनेच पातितः ।

Vyāsa said: The Devi vanished there after describing all these. The Devas were glad and considered themselves blessed by the sight of the Devi. O Janamejaya! The Haimavati next took Her

birth in the house of the Himālaya and was known by the name of Gaurī. Śaṅkara, the Deva of the Devas, married Her. Ṣadānaṇa (Kārtika) was born of them. He killed the Tārakāśura.

सुग्रुम्यन्ते पूर्वे रत्तन्यासुनरातिर्य १ ४ ४ १

तत्र देखे: सुत्ता देखी लक्ष्मीप्राव्यर्धमाद्रात् ।

तेषामनुग्रहायंय निर्मित तु रमा ततः ॥ ४ १ १ ॥

वैकुष्ठय सुरैदंत्ता तेन तस्य शगभोप्रवत् ।

O King! In ancient times, when the ocean was churned, many gems were obtained. At that time the Devas chanted hymns to the Devi with a concentrated mind to get Lakṣmī Devi. To show favour to the Devas, Ramā Devi got out of the ocean. The Devas gave Lakṣmī to Viṣṇu, the Lord of the Vaikuntha. Viṣṇu was very glad at this.

इति ते काधितं राजन्देवीमाहात्मयमुत्तमम् ॥ 42 ॥

गौरील्ब्योः समुद्युप्नितिवर्षे सर्वकामदम् ।

न वार्यं तेलैद्वास्यमै हृस्यं काधितं यतः ॥ 43 ॥

गौता रहस्यभूतेयं गोपनीया प्रयन्ततः ।

सर्वभुक्ति समासेन यत्नुंते तत्त्वायात् ।

पचितं पावनं दिव्यं किं भूयः श्रौद्धिमच्छिस ॥ 44 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागते माहुपूर्णोर्गडादशसाहक्यां सहितायां

सतपासकन्ये देवौगीतायां चत्वारिचोर्शयाः ॥ 44 ॥

खशगघ्जाशि (2250) यदीस्तु क्षेयणवमुखच्छौतैः ।

श्रीमद्धागवतस्यास्त सतमकक-म इरितः ॥ १ ॥

O King! Thus I have described to you the Greatness of the Devi and the birth of Gaurī and Lakṣmī. One's desires are all fulfilled when one hears this. O King! This secret I have described to you. Take care not to divulge it to any other body. This is the secret of the Gītā; so carefully conceal it. O One of pure heart! I have told to you this Divine and Sin-destroying narration, that you asked. What more do you want to hear? Say.

Here ends the Fortieth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the External Worship of the Devi in the Mahāpurānam, Śrimadevībhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.