一*一

CHAPTER I

On the Description of Prakrti

श्रीनारायण उवाच

गणेशजननी दुर्गा राशा लक्ष्मी: सरखती ।

सावित्री च सृष्टिविधो प्रकृति: पडधा स्मृता ॥ १ ॥

Śrī Nārāyaṇa said: This (Highest) Prakṛti is recognised as five-fold. When She is engaged in the work of Creation, She appears as:

(1) Durgā, the Mother of Ganeśa (2) Rādhā, (3) Lakṣmī, (4) Sarasvatī and (5) Sāvitrī.

नावर उवाच

आविवर्भूव सा केन का वा सा ज्ञानितां वर ।

के वा तत्लक्षणं साधो बभूव पछ्रधा कवम् ॥ 2 ॥

सर्वांसां चरितं पूजातियानं गुण ईसितः ।

अवतारः कुत्र कक्यातनो व्याख्यातुर्महिति ॥ 3 ॥

Nārada replied: O Thou, the Best of Jñānins! Who is this Prakṛti? (Whether She is of the nature of Intelligence or of matter?) Why did She manifest Herself and then again why did She reveal Herself in these five forms? And what are Her characteristics? Now Thou oughtest to describe the lives of all, the different modes of their worship, and the fruits that are accrued thereby. Please also inform me which Forms of them manifested themselves in which different places. Dost Thou please narrate to me all these.

प्रकृततैक्षणं वस्न कोा ववतुं क्षमो भवेत् ।

किंचित्वापि वक्ष्यासि यच्छृतं धर्मवेकरन्तः ॥ 4 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Child! Who is there in this

world that can describe fully the characteristics of Prakṛti! However I will describe to you that much which I heard from my own father, Dharma. Hear.

प्रकटवाचकः प्रश्र कृतिश्र सुहिवाचकः ।

सुही प्रकृता या देवी प्रकृति: स प्रकृतिantena || 5 ||

The prefix ‘Pra’ in the word Prakrti means exalted, superior, excellent; and the affix ‘Krti’ donotes creation. So the Goddess, the Devi Who is the most excellent in the work of creation is known as the Devi Prakrti.

गुणे सचे प्रकृते च प्रणब्धे वर्तते श्रुतः ।

मध्ये त्रासे कृछे तिणव्व्तसासे स्मृतः ॥ 6 ॥

To come closer: 'Pra' signifies the Sattva Guṇa, the most exalted quality, 'Kr' denotes the Rajo Guṇa and 'Ti' denotes the Tamo Guṇa. (The Sattva Guṇa is cosidered as the Highest as it is perfectly clear and free from any impurities whatsoever; the Rajo Guṇa is considered intermediate as it has this defect—that it spreads a veil over the reality of things, so as not to allow men to understand the True Reality, while the Tamo Guṇa is considered worst as it completely hides the Real Knowledge).

विरुणात्यकस्वरूपा या सा च गर्जिन्सम्पित्वा ।

प्रधाना सृष्टिकरणे प्रकृतिसेने कथयते ॥ ७ ॥

So When this Intelligence of the nature of Brahma, beyond the three attributes, gets tinged with the above three Gunas and becomes

omnipotent, then She is superior (Pradhānā) in the work of creation. Hence She is styled as Prakrti.

प्रथमे वर्तैत प्रश्र कृतिक शुहिवाचकः ।

सुरोरदी च या देही प्रकृति: सा प्रकृतिति ॥ 8 ॥

योगेनाता सुहित्यिधी द्वित्याणे बयुर सः ।

पुगांश दक्षिणाग्रांगे वामार्थं प्रकृति: स्मृता ॥ 9 ॥

O Child Nārada! The state just preceding that of creation is denoted by ‘Pra’; and ‘Kr’ signifies creation. So the Great Devi that exists before creation is called Prakrti after creation The Paramātmā by His Yoga (i.e., Māyā Śakti, the Holy Ghost) divided Himself into two parts; the right side of which was male and the left side was the female Prakrti.

Note: The Holy Ghost is the principal of Conception and Emanation, Creation). So the Prakrti is of the nature of Brahma.

सा च ब्रह्मास्वका च निल्या सा च सनाती ।

यास्तस्वा च त्वा जत्थित्यानी दाहिका स्थिता ॥ 10 ॥

She is Eternal. As the fire and its burning power are not different, so there is no separate distinction between Ātman and His Śakti, between Puruṣa and Prakṛti.

अतएव हि योगी-दैः क्लीपुंचेदो न मन्ते ।

सर्वे ब्रह्मणं ब्रह्मऊर्धशत्पदरि नारद ॥ १ १ ॥

Therefore those that are foremost and the highest of the Yogis do not recognise any difference between a male and a female. All is Brāhman. He is everywhere as male and female for ever. There is nothing in this world that can exist for a moment even without this Brahman consisting of male and female. (i.e. they are Brahman with Māyā manifested).

वेबळायमयेच्छया च श्रीकृष्यास्तिसूक्षया ।

साउप्रवैर्वभूव सहसा मूलप्रकृतीर्शीर्शी ॥ 112 ॥

Out of the Will of Śrī Krṣṇa, to create the world Whose Will is all in all, came out at once the Mūlā Prakṛti, the Great Devi Śivari, (the Lady Controller of the Universe) Brahma with Māyā in a state of equilibriums).

तद्वासा पश्रविधा सुहिकर्मविधिका ।

अथ भक्तानुगीयात्रा भक्तानुग्राहियात्रा ॥ १३ ॥

By Her Command came out five Forms from Her, either for the purpose of creation or for bestowing Fävour and Grace to the Bhaktas (devotees).

गणेशगात तुर्णा या शिवकल्या शिवशिया ।

नातायणी विद्याग्रामा पूर्णबहुस्वरूपिणी ॥ 14 ॥

Durgā the Mother of Ganeśa, comes, as the first, the most auspicious, loved by Śiva. She is Nārāyaṇī, Viṣṇu Māyā, and of the nature of Pūrṇa Brahma (the Supreme Brahma).

बह्वादिवेदेर्मनिवर्भनुर्भिभ: पूक्ता स्तुता ।

सर्वाधिष्ठात्री वैंदी सा गर्भेक्णा सनातनी ॥ 15 ॥

This eternal, all auspicious Devi is the Presiding Deity of all the Devas and is, therefore, worshipped and praised by Brahmā and the other Devas, Munis, and Manus.

धर्मस्वपुणवकीरियोगेमानतदायिनी ।

सुखामोक्षर्यद्वीरा शोकातिंदुःखनाशिनी ॥ १ ६ ॥

This Bhagavati Durgā Devi, (when She gets pleased) destroys all the sorrows, pains and troubles of the Bhaktas that have taken Her refuge, and gives them Dharma, everlasting name and fame, all auspicious things and bliss and all the happiness, nay, the Final Liberation!

शरणान्तादौनार्थविराणपरायण ॥

तेज:स्वकाण परमा तदधिष्ठानुदेवता ॥ 17 ॥

सर्वशक्तिर्वल्पा च शक्तिरीग्रस्य संतनम् ।

She is the Greatest Refuge of Bhaktas that come to Her wholly for protection and are in great distress, whom She saves from all their dangers and calamities. In fact, know this Durgā Devi as, verily, the Presiding Deity of the heart of Kṛṣṇa and as His Highest Śakti, of the nature of the Holy Fire and the Holy Light. She is Omnipotent and resides always Kṛṣṇa, the Great God.

सिद्धधरी सिद्धल्या सिद्धद्वा सिद्धरीधी ॥ 18 ॥

बुद्दिनिंश कृश्वियसा छाया तंत्र दया स्थूति: ।

जातिः क्षांतिश्र शांतिश्र शांतिनः चानिश्र चेना ॥ 19 ॥

Book IX Chapter I

तृतीः पृथित्या तक्षीभूतित्मायां तथैव च ।

सर्वशक्तिराक्लव्या सा कृण्यस्य परमात्मनः ॥ 20 ॥

She is worshipped by all the Siddha Puruṣas (those that have attained success); the (eighteen) Siddhis all go to Her and when pleased She gives whatever Siddhis (success) that Her Bhaktas want. This Great Devi is the intelligence, sleep, hunger, thirst, shadow, drowsiness, fatigue, kindness, memory, caste, forbearance, errors, peace, beauty, and consciousness, contentment, nourishment, prosperity, and fortitude, She is sung in the Vedas and in other Śāstras as the Mahā Māyā, of the nature of the Universe. In reality, She is the All Śakti of the Universe and She is the Śakti of Krṣṇa. All these qualities are also mentioned in the Vedas.

उक्तः श्रुनी श्रुतगुणाश्रातिस्त्वयो यथागमम् ।

गुणोउस्वन्नोउनताय अपरां च निशामय ॥ 21 ॥

गुद्धमतचस्कता य पचा सा परमात्मनः ।

सर्वसंपसल्कपा सा तदधिषतुदेवता ॥ 22 ॥

What is mentioned here is a tithe merely, in comparison to that of the Vedas. She has infinite qualities. Now hear of other Sāktis. The second Sākti of the Paramātmān is named Padmā (Lakṣmī). She is of the nature of Śuddha Sattva (Higher than Sattva Guna) and is Kṛṣṇa's Presiding Deity of all wealth and prosperity.

कान्तातिद्वितां शोला च सुशीला सर्वमैगला ।

लोभमोहाकामोरोमदाईहाकारवर्जिता 11 23 11

भक्तानुरक्ता पत्युश सर्वांभ्यश पतितला ।

प्राणतुल्या भगवतः प्रेमपात्र प्रियंवदा 11 24 11

This very beautiful Lakṣmī Devī is the complete master of the senses; She is of a very peaceful temper, of good mood and all-auspicious. She is free from greed, delusion, lust, anger, vanity and egoism. She is devoted to Her husband and to Her Bhaktas; Her words are very sweet and She is very dear to Her husband, indeed, the Life and Soul of Him.

सर्वस्यात्मिका देही जीवनोपायरक्षिपिणी ।

महात्वक्षीश दैकुंते पतिसेवारात सी १२५ ॥

स्वर्गे च स्वार्षलक्षीश राजतक्षीश राजसु ।

गृहेषु गृहलक्षीश मत्थनां गृहिणां तथा ॥ २६ ॥

This Devi is residing in all the grains and vegetables and so She is the Source of Life of all the things. She is residing in Vaikuntşa as Mahā Lakṣmī, chaste and always in the service of her husband. She is the Heavenly Lakṣmī, residing in the Heavens and the royal Lakṣmī in palaces and the Gṛha Lakṣmī in the several families of several householders.

सर्वग्रीषिषु इत्येषु शोभाकृपा मन्तोहरा ।

कीतिंकृपा पुण्यवतां प्रभाकृपा नृपेषु च ॥ 27 ॥

वाणिज्ञकृपा वरणारां पाचितां कलहोकृपा ।

दयाकृपा च क्रायिता वेदोक्ता सर्वसंमता ॥ 28 ॥

O Nārada! All the lovely beauty that you see in all the living beings and all the things, it is She; She is the glory and fame of those that have done good and pious works and it is She that is the prowess of the powerful Kings. She is the trade of merchants, the mercy of the saints, engaged in doing good to others and the seed of dissensions in those sinful and vicious persons as approved of in the Vedas.

सर्वेपूज्या सर्वेवंद्या चान्यां मतो निशामय ।

वाग्बुद्धिविघानानधिक्री च परमात्मनः ॥ 29 ॥

सर्वविद्यासूकण या सा च देवी सरस्वती ।

सा बुद्धि: कविता मेण प्रतिभा सुविता गुणम् ॥ 30 ॥

She is worshipped by all, reverenced by all. Now I will describe to you about the third Śakti of the Great God who is the Presiding Deity of knowledge speech, intelligence, and learning. This third Śakti is named Sarasvatī. She is all the learning of this endless. Universe and She resides as medhā (intelligence) in the hearts of all the human beings; She is the power in composing poetry; She is the memory and She is the great wit, light, Splendor and inventive Genius.

नानप्रकारसिद्धानभेदार्थकलाना मता ।

व्याख्याबोध्यस्वधा च सर्वसंदेशुभजिनी ॥ 31 ॥

विचाराकारिणी प्रथकारिणी ग्राहिक्तिणी ।

स्वरसंगीतसंधानातलकारणकीपणी ॥ 32 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

She gives the power to understand the real meaning of the various difficult Siddhānta works; She explains and make us understand the difficult passages and She is the remover of all doubts and difficulties. She acts when we write books, when we argue and judge, when we sing songs of music; She is the time or measure in music; She holds balance and union in vocal and instrumental music.

वियपत्रानवायुपा प्रतिशक्षोपजीविति ।

याख्यावादकी शांता शीणपुतकाधिपीणि ॥ ३३ ॥

शूद्रसचस्कला च सुशिला श्रीहरिप्रिया ।

हिमचन्दनकुन्दैदुकुमुदांभोजसशिभा ॥ 34 ॥

She is the Goddess of speech; She is Presiding Deity in the knowledge of various subjects; in argumentations and disputations. In fact all the beings earn their livelihood by taking recourse to Her. She is peaceful and holds in her hands Vīnā (lute) and books. Her n:ature is purely Sāttvic (Śuddha Sattva); modest and very loving to Śrī Her. Her colour is white like ice clad mountains, like that of the white sandal, like that of the Kunda flower, like that of the Moon, or white lotus.

यजंती परमात्मानं श्रीकृष्णं रत्नमात्या ।

तपः:स्वकृता तपसां फतलत्री तपविन्नाम्। ३ ५ १ ॥

सिद्धिविधास्वरूपा च सर्वसिद्धिप्रदा सदा ।

यथा विंना तु विग्रीची मृको मृतसमः सदा ॥ ३ ६ ॥

She always repeats the name of Paramātmā Sṛi Kṛṣṇa while She turn Her bead composed of jewels. Her nature is ascetic; She is the bestower of the fruits of the asceticism of the ascetics; She is the Siddhi and Vidyā of all; She grants always success to all. Were She not here, the whole host of Brāhmins would always remain speechles like the dead cluster of persons.

देवी तृतीया ग्रिता श्रुतयुक्ता जगदायिका ।

यथापमं यथा किंचिद्वर्गतं त्वं निवोधे में ॥ 37 ॥

माता चतुर्णा वर्णानां वेदांगानां च छेदसाम् ।

संध्यावन्दन्यज्ञाणं तन्जाणं च विद्वक्षणा ॥ 38 ॥

What is recited in the Vedas as the Third Devi is the Holy Word, the Third Śakti, Sarasvatī. Thus

I have described Her. Now hear the glories of the other Devīs in accordance with the Vedas. She is the mother of the four colour (castes), the origin of the (six) Vedāṅgas (the limbs of the Vedas and all the Chandas, the Seed of all the mantrams of Sandhyā vandanam and the Root, the Seed of the Tantras; She Herself is versed in all the subjects.

दिजातिजातिका च जपहाण तादयिनि ।

बहुपयजेतोह्पा च सर्वसंस्कारलिपि ॥ ३ १ ॥

पविज्ञस पालिकी गायकी बाहाणप्रिया ।

तीर्थिति यस्या: संस्पर्शं बांधिति हात्यगुब्दये ॥ ४० ॥

Herself an ascetic, She is the Tapas of the Brāhmins; She is the Tejas (Fire) and the caste of the Brāhmin caste and embodies in Herself all sorts of Sarinskāras (tendencies; inclinations); She is the Japam. Pure, known by the name of Sāvitrī and Gāyatrī, She resides always in the Brahma Loka (the Sphere of Brahmā) and is such as all the sacred places of pilgrimages want Her touch for their purification.

गृह्म्यक्रिकंकाशा शुहृदसचल्योर्णि ।

परमानन्दंरूपा च परमा च सनातनी ॥ 41 ॥

परबहुमक्षरूपा च निवर्णपद्धार्विति ।

बहुतनेजोमरी शक्तिस्तरीध्रातुरेदेवता ॥ 42 ॥

Her colour is perfectly white like the pure crystal. She is purely Śuddha Sattva, of the nature of the Highest Bliss; She is eternal and superior to all. She is of the nature of Para Brahma and is the bestower of Mokṣa. She is the Fiery Śakti and the Presiding Deity of the Brahma Teja (the fiery spirit of Brahma, and the Brāhmaṇas). The whole world is purified by the touch of Whose Feet, this Śāvitrī Devi is the Fourth Śakti.

यत्पदारजसा पृतं जनतर्श्चे च नारद ।

देशी चतुर्षी कथिता पछ्रमी वर्णायामि ते ॥ ४३ ॥

पड्गणाणिद्वेडी या पड्गणाणस्वरूपिणी ।

प्राणाधिकप्रियतम सर्वाध्य: सुन्दरी पत्त ॥ ४४ ॥

सर्वेषुक्ता च सौभाग्यमानितीनी गौराब्विता ।

वागंगाध्यास्वरूपा च गुणेन तेजसा समा ॥ ४५ ॥

O Child Nārada! Now I will describe to you

Book IX Chapter I

about the Fifth Šakti, the Devi Rādhikā. Hear. She is the Presiding Deity of the five Prāṇas; She Herself is the life of all; dearer than life even to Śrī Krṣṇa; and She is highly more beautiful and superior to all the other Prakṛti Devīs. She dwells in everything; She is very proud of Her good fortune (Saubhāgyam); Her glory is infinite; and She is the wife, the left body, as it were, of Śrī Krṣṇa and She is not in any way inferior to Him, either in quality or in the Tejas (fiery Spirit) or in any other thing.

परावत सारभृत परमाद्य सनातनी ।

परमानन्द्रका च ध्यान मान्य च पूजिता ॥ 46 ॥

सस्मीडाधियेदी श्रीकृष्य परमात्म: ।

तस्मयडत्सम्भूत तस्मयडलमण्डित ॥ 47 ॥

She is Higher than the Highest; the Essence of all, infinitely superior, the First of all, Eternal, of all the nature of the Highest Bliss, fortunate, highly respected, and worshipped by all. She is, the Presiding Devi of the Rāsa Lilā of Śrī Krṣṇa. From Her has sprung the Rāsa maṇḍalam and She is the Grace and the Ornament of the Rāsa maṇḍalam (the dance in a circle in Rāsa).

Note: Extracts from a paper on Creation as explained by Hon'ble Justice Sir G. Woodroffe.

The Lecturer commenced by pointing out that an examination of any doctrine of creation reveals two fundamental concepts: Those of Being (Kutastha) and Becoming (Bhava); Changelessness and Change; the one and Many. The Brahman or Spirit in its own nature (Svarūpa) is and never becomes. It is the evolutes derived from the Principle of Becoming (Mūlā Prakṛti) which constitute what is called Nature. The latter principle is essentially Movement. The world is displayed by consciousness (cit) in association with Mūlā Prakṛti in cosmic vibration (spandana). Recent Western hypotheses have made scientific ‘matter’ into Maÿā in the sense that it is but the varied appearances produced in our mind by vibration of and in the single substance ether. The doctrine of vibration (Spandana) is however in Indra an ancient inheritance. The whole world is born from the varied forms of the initial movement in Mūlā

Prakṛti. The problem is how does such multiplicity exist without derogation to the essential unit of its efficient cause, the spirit? The lecturer then made a rapid survey of the Sānkhya philosophy on this point which assumed two real and independent principles of Being and Becoming which it calls Puruṣa and Prakṛti and passed from this the easiest dualistic answer to the pure monism of Śaṅkara which asserted that there was but one Principle of Being, the Sadvasu and Māyā, whether considered as a Śakti of Iśvara or as the product of such Śakti was Avastu or nothing. He then pointed out that the Tāntrik doctrine with which he dealt occupied a middle position between these two points of view. Śiva in the Kūlārnava Tantra says 'Some desire Monism (Advaivatāva), others Dualism (Dvaivatāva). Such, however, know not My Truth which is neither Monism nor Dualism (Dvaikatvaiva vivarjita). Tantra is not Dvaivatāva for it does not recognise Prakṛti as an independent unconscious principle (Acit). It differs from Śankara's Advaitaivāda in holding that Prakṛti as a conscious principle of Becoming, that is as Śakti, is not not Avastu, though its displayed picture, the world is Māyā. It effects a synthesis of the Sānkhya dualism by the conversation of the twin principles of Puruṣa and Prakṛti into the unity which is the Ardhanārīśvara Śiva Śakti.

As regard other matters it adopts the notion of the Sānkhya such as the concepts of Mūla Prakṛti with the three Gunas, vibration (spandana), evalution (Parināma) of the Vikṛtis and the order of emanation of the Tattvas. Śakti which effects this exists and is Herself never unconscious (Acit) though It has the power to make the Jiva think It is such. If this were understood one would not hear such nonsense as that the Śaktas (whose religion is one of the oldest in the world) worship material force or gross matter (Jada).

The lecturer then shortly explained the nature of Śakti (Śakti Tattva), a term which derived from the rood ‘Śak’ meant the Divine Power whereby the world was created, manifested and destroyed. In Tantra the power and the Lord who wields it (Śakti is Brahman. The first is the transcendent, the second the immanent aspect of the one Brahman, Who is both Śiva and Śakti. The Mother creates (Kāryavibhāvinī). The Father wills what She

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

does (Kārya Vibhāvaka). From their union creation comes. Śakti is not like the diminutive female figure which is seen on the leap of some Indian images, to which is assigned the subordinate position which some persons consider a Hindu wife should occupy. She is not a handmaid of the Lord but the Lord Himself in Her aspect as Mother of the worlds. This Śakti is both Nirguna and Saguna that is Cit Śakti and Māyā Śakti.

After thus defining The nature of Śakti by which the world was created, the lecturer commenced an account of its manifestation as the universe, following in the main the Śarādā Tilaka written in the eleventh century by Lakṣmanācārya, the Guru of the celebrated Kashmirian Tāntrīk, Abhinava Gupta. The following is a very abbreviated summary of this, the main portion of the paper. The lecturer first referred to the Aghanāvasthā state which was that Niṣkala Śiva and touching upon the question why Śiva became Sakala (associated with Kalā) and creative explained the term Kalā and the theory of Adrṣtaṣrṣṭī taught by the Tantara as by other Śāstras. The former is according to Sānkhya, Mūlā Prakṛti; according to Vedānta, Avidyā and according to the Śiva Tantara, Śakti. The latter is the dectrine that the impulse to creation is proximately caused by the Karma of the Jivas. It is the seed of Karma which contains the germ of Cosmic will to life. When Karma becomes ripe, there arises the state called Ikṣana and other names indicative of creative desire and will. There then takes place a development which is peculiar to the Tantra called Sadrśa Parināma, which is a kind of Vivartta. The development is only apparent for there is no real change in the Ānandamaya Koṣa. Śakti which exists in Sakala Śiva in a purely potential state is said to issue from Him. This is the first Kinetic aspect of Śakti in which Sattaguna is displayed. This is the Paramākāṣāvaśthā. Nāda (Sound, Word) then appears. Śakti becomes further Kinetic through the enlivening of the Rajo Gunā. This the Akṣarāvaśthā. Then under the influence of Tamas, Iśvara becomes Ghanibhūta and what is called the Parābindu. This is the Avyaktāvaśthā. Thus the Supreme Bindu men call by different names, Mahā Viṣnu, Brahma Puruṣa, or Devi. It is compared to a grain of gram which under its sheath contains two seeds in undivided union. These are Śiva

Sakti and their encircling sheath is Māyā. This Bindu unfolds and displays itself, in the threefold aspect of Bindu, Bīja, Nāda; or Śiva, Śakti, and Śiva Śakti; the three Śaktis of will, knowledge and action. This is the mysterious Kāma Kalā which is the root of all Mantras. These seven: Sakala Śiva, Śakti, Nāda, Parābindu, Bindu, Bīja, Nāda are all aspects of Śakti which are the seven divisions of the Mantra Om and constitute what is called the creation of Parā sound in the Íśvara creation.

The lecturer having explained the nature of these Śaktis which formed part of the sound (Śabda), Sadṛṣa Parināma, referred to the form or meaning (Artha) creation in the same development by the appearance of the six Śivas from Śambhu to Brahmā which were aggregate (Samaṣti) sound powers. It was he said, on the differentiation of the Parābindu that there existed the completed causal Śabda which is the Hidden Word. The causal body or Parā Śabda and Artha being complete, there then appeared the Displayed word or Śabdārtha. This is a composite like the Greek Logos. The Śabda Brahman or Brahman as cause of Śabda is the Caitanya in all beings. The Śabdārtha in the Vedantin Nāmarūpa or world of name and form of this Śabdārtha the subtle and gross bodies are constituted, the Śaktis of which are the Hiranyagarbha sound, called Madhyamā and the Virāt sound Vaikhārī. By Śada is not meant merely physical sound which as a quality of atomic ether is evolved from Tāmasik Ahankāra.

The lecturer then pointed out that there had been Adrṣta Srṣṭi up to the appearance of Śakti and Vivartta development up to the completion of the ‘Word’ or causal sound. There then takes place real evolution (Parināma) in which the Tattvas (or elements discovered as a result of psychological analysis of our worldly experience) are said to emanate according to the Sānkhya and not the Vedāntic scheme, though there were some peculiarities in the Tānrik exposition which the lecturer noted. Finally Yogika Srṣṭi was accepted in so far as it was the elements which in varied combinations made up the gross world.

In conclusion the lecturer pointed out that Indian Śāstra was a mutually connected whole. Such peculiarities as existed in any particular Śāstra were due to variety of standpoint or purpose in view. The main

Book IX Chapter I

point in this connection to be remembered was that the Tantra was practical Sādhanā Śāstra. Whilst Śankara dealt with the subject from the standpoint of Jānakānda, the Tantra treated it from the point of view of worship (Upāsanākānda) the Tānrik doctrine is compounded of various elements some of which it shared with other Śāstras, some of which are its own, the whole being set forth according to a method and terminology which is peculiar to itself.

रासेक्ष्री सुरासिका रासावासनिवासिनी ।

गोलोकावासिनी देवी गोपीवेषधित्याचि ॥ 48 ॥

परमाढ़ाद्रवभा च सन्तोवर्षकंविरणी ।

निरुणा च निराकारा निरिलिता उस्मखल्पिणी ॥ 49 ॥

She is the Lady of the Rāsa Lilā, the Foremost of the Jovial, humourous (witty) persons and dwells always in Rāsa. Her abode is in Goloka and from Her have come out all the Gopikās. Rāsa—The circular dance of Kṛṣṇa and the cow-herdesses of Vṛndāvana. Her nature is the Highest Bliss, the Highest Contentment, and Excessive Joy; She transcends the three Sattva, Rajo and Tamo Gunas and is Nirākāra (without any particular form); but She dwells everywhere but unconnected with any. She is the soul of all.

निरीहा निरत्कारा भक्तानुग्रहायिष्ठा ।

वेदानुसाधित्यानेन विज्ञाता सा विद्यईपे! ।। ५० ॥

She is without any effort to do anything and void of Ahankāra. She assumes froms only os show Her favour to Her Bhaktas. The intelligent learned men (Pandits) read Her Mahimā (glories) in meditating on Her according to the Vedas.

दृधिद्धा न सा केशैः सुर्जेसुर्जिनुपरंः ।

वहिषुर्जईगृकभरा नानारंकारभूषिति ॥ 51 ॥

कोटिवज्ञप्रभापुरुषरवंशीयुक्तियशा ।

श्रीकृष्याफित्रदायैककाय च सर्वसम्पदास् ॥ 52 ॥

The chief of the Devas and the Munis could never see Her; Her clothings are fire proofs and She is decorated with many ornaments all over Her body. Her body looks as if the crores of moons have risen all at once; She is the Giver of Bhakti (devotion) towards Krṣṇa, service towards Krṣṇa;

and She bestows all wealth and prosperity.

अवतारे च वागहे वृषभानुसुता च या ।

यत्पादपवंस्यर्णवित्रा च वसुंधा ॥ 53 ॥

ब्रहादोषिनद्धता या सर्वैंधृता च भाते ।

स्तीतलसासम्पूता कृष्णवक्षःस्थले स्थिता ॥ 54 ॥

यथांबरे नवघने लोला सौद्यानि सुने ।

पहिथर्वसहस्राणि प्रतनं ब्रह्णा पुरा । 55 ॥

In Varāha Kalpa i.e., when the Varāha incarnation took place, She incarnated Herself as the daughter of one Gopa (cowherd), named Vṛṣabhānu. And Earth was blessed by the touch of Her feet. She is such as Brahmā and the other Devas could never perceive Her by any of their senses, yet every one at Vṛndāvan saw Her very easily. She is the Gem amongst women. And when She is seen on the breast of Kṛṣṇa, it seems that lightenings flash in the blue mass of clouds in the sky.

यत्वादपचनखतृष्ये चातमृषद्ये ।

न च रुईंच स्वल्पेपि प्रवश्यसायी क कवा ॥ 56 ॥

तेनैव तपसा दृषा भृथि बृन्दावने वने ।

कथिता पछ्जी देखी सा राया च प्रक्रौतिता ॥ 57 ॥

अंगलकाः कलाकूपाः या कलांगोग सम्बवाः ।

प्रकृतेः प्रतितिश्रेषु देय्युं सर्वोयोषितः ॥ 58 ॥

In days gone by, Brahmā practised several austerities for sixty thousand years to purify Himself by seeing the nails of Her toes; but far from seeing that, He could not have that even in His dreams. At last He succeeded in seeing Her at Vrndāvana and became blessed. O child Nārada! This is the fifth Prakṛti and she is denominated as Rādhā. Every female in every Universe is sprung from a part of Śrī Rādhā or part of a part.

परियुणतमा: पछ विद्यादेव्य: प्रक्रौतिता: ।

या या: प्रधानांशिक्या वर्णायामि निशामय ।। ५९ ॥

प्रधानांशस्वरूपा सा गंगा भुवनपावनी ।

विष्णुविग्रासम्प्रता उव्हरणा सनतानी ॥ 60 ॥

O Nārada! Thus I have described to you the five Highest Prakṛtis Durgā and others. Now I am going to describe those that are parts of these Prakṛtis.

Šrimaddevitbhāgavatam

Hear. The Gānges, Gahgā has sprung from the lotus feet of Viṣṇu; Her form is fluidlike; She is eternal.

पापिषपोधनदाहायजलतिनस्वक्रिपिणी ।

सुखस्यर्गं स्नानपानैर्विनिणपद्वादयिनि ॥ 6 1 ॥

गोलोस्थानप्रथानसुखसोपानकरणिपी ।

पवित्रक्पा तीर्थांना सरितां च परावता ॥ 6 2 ॥

And She is the veritable burning Fire to burn away the sins of the sinner. She is sweet to touch in taking baths and in drinking; She gives final liberation to the Jivas, and leads easily to the Goloka Abode. She is the holiest amongst the places of pilgrimages and is the first of the running rivers.

शम्भूमीलिदाथमेमुक्तायक्तिरीक्ष्वस्वीर्णि ।

तपःस्म्यादिती सद्यो भारतेषु तपत्स्वनाम् ॥ 6 3 ॥

चन्द्रप्रधौत्रीनिभा शूढ़सत्त्वस्वल्यिधि ।

निर्मान निरहंकारा साध्वी नारायणप्रिया ॥ 6 4 ॥

She is the rows of pearls in the clotted haris of Mahādeva's head and She is the Tapasyā (asceticism) incarnate of the Tapasvīs (ascetics) of the Bhārata Varsa. This Ganges purifies the three worlds and is the part of Mūlā Prakṛti; She shines like the Full Moon, is white like white lotus and like milk; She is pure Śuddha Satva, clear, free from any Ahanākāra, chaste and beloved of Nārāyana.

प्रधानांगसरक्या च तुलसी विद्याक्रामिति ।

विद्यापूषणका च विद्यापदस्थिता सती ॥ 6५ ॥

तपःसंकल्पुजादिरसंपर्यापादिति मुने ।

सारभृता च पुष्पणं पवित्रा पुष्पवरा सदा ॥ 6 6 ॥

The Tulasí Devī is the consort of Viṣṇu. She is the ornaments of Nārāyaṇa, and dwells always at the lotus feet of Nārāyaṇa. By Her are performed all the acts of worship, all austerities, and all Sañkalaps (resolves). She is the chief of all the flowers, holy and able Sañkalaps (resolves). She is the chief of all the flowers, holy and able to give merits (Punyam) to others.

दूर्गनस्पर्गनाथ्यां च रघो विवर्णाद्वीयि ।

कर्ती कलुष्युषेधमद्रनायापिन्क्तिपिणी ॥ 67 ॥

यत्पादपत्रसंस्पर्गास्तवः पूता वसुंधग ।

यत्स्पर्गदाँनि चैवेछचिति तीर्थीनि शुद्धः ॥ 68 ॥

At her sight and touch, Nirvāna can be obtained; and, were it not for Her, there could be no other fire in this Kali Yuga to burn the sins. She Herself is of the nature of Fire and at the touch of Whose lotus-feet, the earth is purified; all the Tirthas desire to have Her sight and touch for purification and without Her all acts in this world become fruitless.

यया विना च विशुयु सर्वेकम् च निष्णन्तम् ।

मोक्षदा या मुमुक्षूणां कामिनि सर्वकामदा ॥ 69 ॥

कल्पवृक्षास्करण या भारते वृक्षलिपणि ।

भारतीनां प्रीणानय जाता या परदेवता ॥ 70 ॥

She bestows Moksa (liberation) to those who want final liberation, grants all sorts of desires to several people, Who Herself is like a Kalpa Vṛkṣa, Who is the Presiding Deity of all the trees in Bhārata and Who has come here to grant satisfaction to the ladies of Bhārata Varsa and She is considered very superior throughout all parts of India. This Tulasi Devi is the chief factor of Mūlā Prakṛti.

प्रधानांश्रवल्पा या मनसा कश्यपत्मजा ।

गंकरप्रियश्या च महानानविशारता ॥ 7 1 ॥

नागेश्रत्यानंतस्य भगिनी नागपूजिता ।

नागेश्री नागमाता सुन्दरी नागवाहिती ॥ 7 2 ॥

Then comes the Manasā Devī, the daughter of Kaśyapa, She is the dear disciple of Śaṅkara and is therefore very learned in matters of Śāstras. She is the daughter of Ananta Deva, the Lord of Snakes and is respected very much by all the Nāgas. She Herself is very beautiful, the Lady of the Nāgas, the mother of the Nāgas and is carried by them.

नारौद्रगणसंयुक्ता नानायुष्णभृत्ति ।

नार्गेद्वित्ता सिद्धा योगिनी नागगणियिनी ॥ ७ ३ ॥

विष्णुका विष्णुभक्ता विष्णुप्रजारयणा ।

तपस्वरूपा तपसां फलदायी तपसिंची ॥ ७ ४ ॥

She is decorated with ornaments of the Snakes; She is respected by the Nāgendras and She sleeps on the bed of Snakes. She is Siddha Yogini, the

Book IX Chapter I

devotee of Viṣṇu and always ready in the worship of Viṣṇu; She is the Tapas and the bestower of the fruits of Tapas.

दिव्यं सितक्षवर्षे च तपसत्प्वा च या हरे: ।

तपस्विनीषु पूज्या च तपस्विषु च भातेस् ॥ 75 ॥

सर्वमन्याधिवेदी च ज्वलतीं बढ्धतजास ।

Herself an ascite, She spent three lakh years (according to the Devas measure) and has become the foremost of the ascetics in Bhāratvaṃsa. She is the Presiding Deity of all the mantras; Her whole body shines with Brahmateja (the Holy Fire of Brahma).

ब्रह्मस्वरूपा परम ब्रह्मभावन्ततपा ॥ ७ १ ॥

जरकाममुने: पली कृष्णांगस्य पतितजा ।

आस्तीकस्य मुनेमांता प्रवरस्य तपस्विनम् ॥ ७ ७ ॥

प्रधानांशल्वया या देवसेना च नारव ।

मातृकासु पूर्वतमा सा यधी च प्रकीर्तिने ॥ ७ ७ ॥

Herself of the nature of Brahma, She again meditates on Brahman. She is sprung from a part of Śrī Krṣna and the chaste wife of Jarat Kāru Muni, the mother of Āstika, the great Muni; She is the part of Mūlā Prakṛti. O Child Nārada! Now comes the Saṣthī Devi, the Mother of Devasenā. She is the most superior amongst the Gaurī and the other sixteen Mārṭkās.

पुत्रपौगदिद्वारी च धार्जी विजगतां सती ।

घडीशल्या प्रकृतेतेने घटी प्रकंसिति ॥ 79 ॥

स्थाने शिशुर्नां परमा बुद्धल्या च वोगिति ।

पूजा ब्रादशमासेषु यस्या विशेषुं संतन् ॥ 80 ॥

This chaste woman is the giver of sons and grandsons in the three worlds and the nurse, the foster mother of all. She is the sixth part of Mūlā and is hence known by thename of Śaṣthi. She lives near to every child as an aged Yogini.

पूजा च सृत्तिकागारे पुरा घड्विदेने शिशे ।

एकविंशलिति चैव पूजा कल्याणहेतुकी ॥ 8 1 ॥

युनिभिर्मिता चैव नित्यकामास्थित: परा ।

मातृका च द्वारूपा शश्छक्षणाकारिणी ॥ 8 2 ॥

Her worship is everywhere prevalent in the twelve months Vaiśākha, etc. When the child gets

born, on the sixth day Her worship is done in the lying-in-chamber and again on the 21st day (after twenty days have passed away) the most auspicious worshipful ceremony of Her is performed. The Munis bow down to Her with reverence and want to visit Her daily.

जले स्थले चानत्रिक्रे शिशुनीं सद्योगेचे ।

प्रधानांशल्यचा च देवीभगडलचिचिडा ॥ 83 ॥

प्रकृतेपुंखसभूतत सर्वेभगलदा सदा ।

सुहीं मंगललचा च संहांरे कोरूपिणी ॥ 84 ॥

She protects all children always with a mother's affectionate heart. This Saṣṭhī Devī is again the part of Mūlā Prakṛti. Then appears the Devī Maṅgala Caṇḍikā. She goes from one house to another, on land or through water or in air, doing great good to them; She has come out of the face of the Prakṛti Devī and is doing always all sorts of good to this world.

तेन मेगलवचडी सा पधडतैः परिकीर्तिति ।

प्रतिमंगलावेषु प्रतिविश्वेषु पूजिता ॥ 85 ॥

पुरप्रीधानेप्रश्वय्वेगोमंगलाद्वारभी ।

परितृष्टा सर्ववांधप्रदात्री सर्ववंभितिम् ॥ 86 ॥

Her name is Māngala Cāndī because She is all auspicious at the time of creation and assumes very furious angry appearance at the time of destruction. So the Paṇdits say. On every Tuesday in all the worlds Her worship is done; and She, when pleased, gives to women sons, grandsons, wealth, prosperity, fame and good of all sorts and grants all desires.

रहा क्षणेन संहर्तुं शक्ता विश्वं महेश्वी ।

प्रधानांशस्वरूपा सा काली कमललोचना ॥ 87 ॥

दुगतिलतदासभूता रणे शुभ्यनिशुभ्यभोः ।

दुगांधीशस्वरूपा सा गुणेन तेजसा सभा ॥ 88 ॥

This Māngala Caṇḍī is again the part of Mūlā Prakṛti. Now come the lotus-eyed Māheśvari Kālī who when angry can destroy all this universe in a moment, who sprang from the forehead of the Mūlā Prakṛti, Durgā to slay the two Demons Sumbha and Niśumbha. She is the half-portion of Durgā and qualified like Her, fiery and energetic.

Śrimaddevbhāgavatam

कोटियुर्मसामूख्युखाज्ञलयिग्राहा ।

प्रधाना सर्वशगतिनां बला जलवती परा ॥ 8 9 ॥

सर्वसिद्धिप्रदा देवी परम योगसाधिगी ।

कृष्णभक्ता कृष्णानुल्या तेजसा विद्यमैगुंगीः ॥ 9 0 ॥

कृष्णाघावनया शक्रतृष्णाबर्गा सनातनी ।

संहर्तुं सर्वबह्ञापई शक्ता निःशासमाजतः ॥ 9 1 ॥

रां दैवेः समं तयाः क्रीवया लोकशिखाः ।

धर्मार्थकामपोक्षांश दातुं शक्ता च पूजिता ॥ 9 2 ॥

The beauty and splendour of whose body make one think as if the millions of suns have arisen simultaneously. Who is the foremost of all the Śaktis and is more powerful than any of them, Who grants success to all the persons, Who is superior to all and is of Yogic nature, Who is exceedingly devoted to Kṛṣṇa and like Him fiery, well-qualified, and valorous, Whose body has become black by the constant meditation of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Who can destroy in one breath this whole Brahmāṇḍa, Who was engaged in fighting with the Daityas simply for sport and instruction to the people and Who, when pleased in worship can grant the four fruits Dharma, Artha, Kāma and Moksa.

ब्रह्मादिषिः सूयमाना मुनिभिभर्निपरिः ।

प्रधानांगस्वक्या सा प्रकृतेश वसुंधा ॥ 9 3 ॥

आधारक्पा सर्वेथों वसंसय्या प्रकीर्तिता ।

रत्नकारा रत्नाभांं संर्वत्नाकाराश्रया ॥ 9 4 ॥

This Kālī is also the part of Prakrti. The Devi Vasundharā (Earth) is again the part of Mūlā Prakrti. Brahmā and the other Devas, all the Muni mandalams (the spheres of Munis), fourteen Manus and all men sing hymns to Her. She is the support of all and filled with all sorts of grains. She is the source of all gems and jewels, She bears in her womb all the precious metals. All sorts of best things issue from Her.

प्रजाशिक्ष प्रजेशैश धुक्तिता वन्दिता सदा ।

सर्वपरीजीक्वता च सर्वसम्पश्रधारिनी ॥ 95 ॥

She is the Refuge of all. The subjects and kings worship Her always and chant hymns to Her. All the Jivas live through Her and She bestows all sorts of wealth and prosperity.

यथा विना जानसर्वे निराधारं चराचरम् ।

प्रकृतेश कला या यास्ता निवोधे पुनीश्रः ॥ 96 ॥

यस्य यस्य च या पत्नी तत्सर्वे वर्णायति ते ।

स्वाहादेवी वह्हिन्ती प्रतिविशेषु पुजिता ॥ 97 ॥

Without Her, all this, moving or non moving, become void of any substratum. Where to rest on! O Child Nārada! Now hear about them who are issued again from the parts of Mūla Prakṛti as well as the names of their wives. I will now narrate duly. The Devi ‘Svāhā’ is the wife of Agni (Fire), and the whole Universe worships Her.

यथा विना हविदानं न ग्रहीतुं सुरा: क्षमा: ।

दक्षिणा यज्ञपनी च दीक्षा सर्वेत्र पुजिता ॥ 98 ॥

यया विना हि विशेषु सर्वेकर्म हि निष्पलम् ।

स्वधा पितृणां पत्नी च पुनिभिन्नुभिभर्नी: ॥ 99 ॥

Without Her, the Devi can never take any oblations. Dakṣinā and Dīkṣā are both the wives of Yajñā (Sacrifice). They are honoured everywhere. So much so that without Dakṣinā (the fees given at the end of the Sacrifice) no sacrificial ceremonies can be complete and fructifying. The Devi ‘Svadhā’ is the wife of the Pitrs. All worship this Devi ‘Svadhā’ whether they are Munis, Manus, or men.

पूजिता विद्यतांन हि निष्णलं च यया विता ।

स्वस्तिदेवी वायुपन्ती प्रतिविशेषु पूजिता ॥ 100 ॥

आदानं च प्रदानं च निष्णलं च च यया विता ।

पृष्टिपणपतेः पत्नी भूजिता जगतीतले ॥ 101 ॥

If this mantra ‘Svadhā’ be not uttered while making an offering to the Pitrs, all turn out useless. The Devi ‘Svasti’ is the wife of the Vāyu Deva; She is honoured everywhere in the Universe. Without this ‘Svasti’ Devi no giving nor taking nor any action can be fructifying and useful. ‘Puṣti’ (nourishment) is the wife of Ganapati. All in this world worship this Puṣti Devi. Without this ‘Puṣti’, women or men alike all become weaker and weaker.

यया बिना परिक्षिणा: पुर्भांतो योचितोर्पि च ।

अनंतपनी तुधिश पुर्जिता वर्दिता भवेत् ॥ 102 ॥

Book IX Chapter II

CHAPTER II

On the Origin of Prakrti and Puruṣa

नारद खाच

समासेन श्रुतं सर्वे दैवीनां चरितं प्रभो ।

विद्योभनाय बोध्यस्य व्यासेन वतुभर्महिंस ॥ १ ॥

सुंरोराशा सृष्टिवधौं कक्षामाविर्वर्भूव ह ।

कयं वा पड़घा भूता वदे वेदविद्यावर ॥ 2 ॥

Nārada said: O Lord! I have heard all that you said in brief about the Prakṛti Devī. Now describe in detail. Why the Mūlā Prakṛti Ādyā Śaktī (the Prime Force) was created at the very beginning before the creation of this world of five elements.

भूता ययोग्रकलया तथा त्रिगुणाया भवे ।

व्यासेने तासां चरितं श्रोतूमिच्छामि संग्रम्न् ॥ ३ ॥

तासां जनानुकर्जन पुजाध्यानविधिं वुध ।

स्तोत्र करचनेमिद्याँ शौर्यं वर्धय मुकूलम् ॥ ४ ॥

How did She, being of the nature of the three Guqas, come to be divided into five parts? I desire to hear all this in detail. Now kindly describe their auspicious births, methods of worship, their meditation, their stotras, (praises) Kavacas (the mystic syllables considered as a preservation like armour) glory and power in detail.

शीनारायण उवाच

नित्य आसा नभो नित्यं कालो नित्यो दिशो यथा ।

शिवानी गोलकं नित्यं नित्यो गोलोंक एच च ॥ ५ ॥

तदेकडेगो वैकुणठो नप्रभागानुसारकः ।

तथैव प्रकृतिंनंता ब्रह्मलीला सनातनी ॥ 6 ॥

Nārāyana spokc: O Devarsī! The Mūlā Prakṛti, of the nature of Māyā of Para Brahman is an eternal entity (Nitya padārtha) just as the Ātman, the celestial space (the nabho maṇḍala); Time (Kāla), the ten quarters, the Universe Egg, the Goloka and, lower than this, the Vaikunṭha dhāma all are eternal things.

यथाउनो दाहिका चन्ने पदे योभा प्रभा रथी।

गश्युक्ता न विश्रा सा यथा प्रकृतिरात्मिन ॥ 7 ॥

विना सर्वा स्वणकारः कुण्डलं कनुांक्षमः ।

विना मुदा घटं कर्तु कुलालो हि न दीश्रः ॥ 8 ॥

न हिं क्षमसलाशउत्चा च सृष्टिं सर्वुं तया विना ।

Atman and Prakrti are in inseparable union with each other as Fire and its burning capacity, the Moon and her beauty, the lotus and its splendour, the Sun and his rays are inseparably united with each other. As the goldsmith cannot prepare golden ornaments without gold and as the potter cannot make earthen pots without earth, so the Atman cannot do any work without the help of this omnipotent Prakrti.

सर्वशक्तिस्वरूपा सा यथा च शक्तिमान्त्वा ॥ 9 ॥

ऐथ्यवचनः शक्ष क्रिकः पकारम एव च ।

तत्वरूपा तदोर्दीय सा शक्ति: परिकीर्तिति ॥ 10 ॥

ज्ञानं समुद्धः सम्यातिर्थोश्य वक्तं भगः ।

तेन शक्तिभगवती भगरूपा च सा सदा ॥ 11 ॥

The letter ‘Sa’ indicates ‘Aisyaryam’ prosperity, the divine powers; and ‘Kti’, denotes might, strength; and in as much as She is the Bestower of the above two, the Mullā Prakṛti is named ‘Šakti’. ‘Bhaga’ is indicative of knowledge, prosperity, wealth, fame; and in as much as Mullā Prakṛti has all these powers, She is also called ‘Bhagavatī.’

तया युक्तः सदार्तस्मा च भगवांतेन कब्यते ।

स च चेव्छामयो देय: साकासूत्र निगृतकिं: ॥ 12 ॥

And Ātman ‘is always in union with this Bhagavatī Who is all powers, so He is called ‘Bhagavān.’ The Bhagavān is therefore sometimes with form; and sometimes He is without form.

Note: When Prakṛti becomes latent, God is without form; with Prakṛti manifest, God is with form.)

तेजोकंपं निराकारं ध्यायने योगिन: सदा ।

वर्दन्ति च परं ब्रहा परमानन्दीभ्यम् ॥ 13 ॥

अरुग्यं सर्वेत्रहारं सर्वेत्रं सर्वकाणम् ।

सर्वेट सर्वकेशं तं वैश्यावतान मवते ॥ 14 ॥

The Yogis always think of the Luminous Form of the Formless Bhagavān and declare Him to be

all blissful Para Brahma, the God. Though He is invisible, the Witness of all, Omniscient, the Cause of all, the Giver of everything and of every form, yet the Vaiṣṇavas do not say so. The Vaiṣṇavas declare how can fire, strength and energy come when there is no fiery, strong, energetic Person behind it?

वदान्ति चैव ते कस्य तेजतेजस्विना विना ।

तेजोमण्डलमध्यस्थं ब्रहा तेजस्विनं परम् ॥ १५ ॥

स्वेळामयं संस्करणं सर्वकारणाकाराण ।

अतीव सुन्दं रूप विश्वतं सुमन्तोहम् ॥ १६ ॥

किशोरावसंग शान्तं सर्वकानतं परातवम् ।

Therefore He who shines in the centre of this fiery sphere is the Para Brahma; He is the Fiery Person; He is Higher than the Highest. He is All Will; He is All-Form, the Cause of all cause and His Form is Very Beautiful. He is Young; He looks very peaceful and loved by all.

नवीनीराद्भासधार्येक श्यामविद्यमूँ ॥ 17 ॥

गराम्याल्वपशीघोगभोपानतेचानम् ।

भुक्ताधविविनीँघकन्दतपोफिन्मोरमम् ॥ 18 ॥

He is the Highest; and His Blue Body shines like new rain-clouds. His two eyes defy the beauty of the autumn lotuses in the mid-day; His exquisitely nice rows of teeth put all the series of pearls in the dark back-ground.

मयूरपिछच्छूई च मालतीमायमपिछतम् ।

सुनेसं ससितं कानतं भक्तानुग्रहकारणम् ॥ 19 ॥

ज्वलदनिविश्यूढ़ैकपीतींगुकसुशोभिनम् ।

ढिपुर्जं मुतलीहतं रत्नभूषणभूषितम् ॥ 20 ॥

The peacock's feather is seen on His crown; the garland of Mälati flowers is suspended from His neck; His nose is exceedingly beautiful; the sweet smile is always seen on His lips. There is no second like Him in showing favour to the Bhaktas. He wears yellow clothings, as if the burning fire is emanating all round; the flute is seen on both His hands, reaching to the knees. His body is decorated all over with jewels.

सर्वीधरं च सर्वीं सर्वशक्तिमृते विभुम् ।

सर्वेश्यप्रं सर्वेस्तानं सर्वमुङ्गलम् ॥ 21 ॥

परिपूर्णतं सिद्धे सिद्धेगं सिद्धाकारकम् ।

ध्यात्ने वैश्वाना: शश्छेदेवेयं सनातनम् ॥ 22 ॥

He is the Sole Refuge of this Universe; the Lord of all, omnipotent and omnipresent. No trace of deficiency can be seen in Him; He is Himself a Siddha (perfect) Puruṣa; and the foremost of all Siddha Purusas; bestows Siddhis to all. The Vaiṣṇavas meditate always That Eternal Śrī Krṣṇa, the Deva of the Devas.

जन्ममृत्युसाख्याधिकोक्षीतिरहं परम् ।

ब्रहाणो वयसा यस्य निभेय उपचरहिं ॥ 23 ॥

स चात्या स परं बहु कृष्ण इत्यधियीयते ।

कृषिस्तद्धक्तिबचनो नक्षु तत्थस्यावकः ॥ 24 ॥

He takes always fully all the fears of birth, old age, and all ills and sorrows. The age of Brahmā is the twinkling of His eye. That Highest Self, the Para Brahma is denominated as Kṛṣṇa. The word ‘Kṛṣ’ denotes Bhakti to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the letter ‘na’ signifies devotion to His service. So He is the Bestower of Bhakti and devotion to His Service.

भक्तिवर्युद्धात यः स च कृष्ण: प्रक्रांति: ।

कृषि्यु सर्वेचनो नकाते वीजेपेव च ॥ 25 ॥

स कृष्ण: सर्वेक्षण3स्त्री सिसुक्षजेक एव च।

सृष्युनयुखस्तदंरोन कालेन प्रेरितः प्रपुः ॥ 26 ॥

Again ‘Kṛṣ’ denotes all; everything; and ‘na’ signifies the root. So He Who is the Root and Creator of all, is Śrī Kṛṣṇa. When He desired, in the very beginning, to create this Universe, there was nothing then except Śrī Kṛṣṇa; and at last, impelled by Kāla, (His Own Creation) He became ready, in His part, to do the work of creation.

सेव्छामयः सच्छ्या च द्विधाको बभूव ह ।

सौकोपो वाघमपांगोरो दक्षिणांगः पुणान्यन्तः ॥ 27 ॥

तां ददूरी महाकामी कामाधारांं सनाततः ।

अजीक कामनीचां च चारभंकजसभिपम् ॥ 28 ॥

The Lord, who is All Will, willed and divided Himself into two parts, His Left part becoming female and His Right part becoming male. Then that Eternal One, Who is greatly loving, looked at the female, His left part, the Sole Receptacle to

Book IX Chapter II

hold all the contents of love, very lovely to the eyes, and looking like the beautiful lotus.

བརྒྱིམསྟནསྟནསྟནསྟནསྟནསྟནསྟནསྟནསྟནསྟནསྟནསྟནསྡནསྡནསྡནསྡནསྡནསྡནསྡནསྡནསྡནསྡནསྡནསྡནལྟནསྡནསྡནསྡནསྡནསྡནསྡནསྡནསྡནསྡནསྡནསྡ

སྟན་བཅིན་ཆུང་བཅིན་ཆུང་བཅིན་ཆུང་བཅིན་ཆུང་

སྟན་ཆེན་ཆེན་ཆེན་ཆེན་ཆེན་ཆེན་ཆེན་ཆོགས་

སྟན་ཆེན་ཆེན་ཆེན་ཆེན་ཆེན་ཆེད་ཆེན་ཆེན་ཆེན་ཆེན་ཆེན་ཆེན་ཆེད་ཆོགས་

མཆེན་སྟན་ཆེན་ཆེན་ཆེན་ཆེན་ཆེན་ཆེན་ཆེན་ཆོགས་

ཁྲིམྡོགློགློགློགློགློགློགློགློགློགྱིགློགློགློགློགློགློགློགློགྲོགློགློགློགློགློགློགློགློགསྐད། 11 3 1

The loins of this woman defy the Moon; Her thighs put the plantain trees quite in the background; Her breasts are mistaken for the beautiful Bel fruits; flowers are scattered as Her Hairs on the head; Her middle part is very slender, very beautiful to behold! Exceedingly lovely; appearance very calm; sweet smile reigning in Her lips; side long glances with Her; Her clothing is purified by fire; all over Her body decorated with gems.

शुधच्छ्रुधकोराघ्यां पिवंती सत्तं मुदा ।

कृष्णस्य मुवचनंचे च चन्द्रकोटिविनिदितम् ॥ 32 ॥

कस्तूरी विदुना साध्मभशूनन्दिकानु ।

संम सिन्दूरविन्दु च भालमध्ये च विष्णतीम् ॥ 33 ॥

Her eyes, also, like the Cakora bird (Greek partridge) began to drink incessantly with joy the moon beam from the face of Śrī Krṣna, defying, as it were, the ten millions of moons. On Her forehead there was the dot of vermilion (red-lead); over that the dot of of white sandal paste and over that was placed the musk.

वक्रमं कवरीयारं मालतीमाल्यभूषितम् ।

रतेंद्रसाहातं च दधर्ती कानतकामुकीम् ॥ 34 ॥

कोदिचन्द्रप्रभामृष्ठुपुशोभासम्पन्वितम् ।

गमनेन राजहंसगगवंविनाशिनीम् ॥ 35 ॥

The fillets or braids of hair on Her head are slightly curved; this was decorated with Mālati garlands; on Her neck was suspended the necklace of gems and jewels and She is always very amorous towards Her husband. On looking at Her face, it seems that ten millions of moons have arisen at once; when She walks, her gait puts (humiliates) those of ganders and elephants in shade.

दृष्ट्या तां तु तया सार्थे रासेणी रासमण्डले ।

रासोल्लासे सुरसिको रासकीहां चाकार है ॥ 36 ॥

O Muni! Śrī Krṣna, the Lord of the Rāsa Dance, and the Person of Taste in the Rāsa Sport, looked askance at Her for a while and then catching hold of Her by Her hand went to the Rāsamandalam and began to play the Rāsa sport, (the amorous pastime).

नानाप्रकारश्रगारं श्रगारे मृतैमानिव ।

चकार सुखसंभोगं चावढ़े ब्रहणो दिन्न ॥ 37 ॥

ततः स च परिशान्तस्तया योनौ जगत्थिता ।

चकार वीयाधानं च नित्यानन्दे शुणतक्षणे ॥ 38 ॥

गायजी योषितसत्या: सुततोचे च सुझत ।

नि:ससार भप्रजलं श्रांतायास्तेजसा हरे: ॥ 39 ॥

It seemed then the Lord of amorous pastimes had become incarnate there and had been enjoying the various pleasures of amorous passions and desires. So much, that Brahma's one day passed away in that sport. The Father of the Universe, then becoming tired, impregnated in an auspicious moment in Her womb who was born of His left portion.

महाकमणविल्हाया नि: शास्त्र शुच्य ह ।

तदा चेदे भप्रलं तत्सर्व विश्वगोतकम् ॥ 40 ॥

स च निशासवान्युः स्वांधारो बयूच है ।

निःशासवायु: सर्वेधां जीविनां च भवेषु च ॥ 41 ॥

The Prakrti Devi was also tired of the embraces of Śri Kṛṣṇa; so after the intercourse, she began to perspire and breathe frequently. Her perspiration turned into water and deluged the whole universe, with water; and Her breath turned into air and became the life of all the beings.

बधूव भूतिंद्रायोर्विंगगतायणावल्लभा ।

तत्सही सा च तत्सुज: प्राण: पश्च च जीविनाम् ॥ 42 ॥

प्राणोउपान: समानश्रीदान्यन्ती च वायवः ।

बधूतुंदे तत्सुजा अधः प्राणाश पश्च च ॥ 43 ॥

The female that sprung from the left side of Vāyu became his wife and out of their contact originated Prāna, Apāna, Samāna, Udāna and Vyāna, the five sons. These are the five vital Vāyüs of all the beings.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Besides these from the womb of the Vāyu's wife came out Nāga and the other four lower Vāyus.

प्रमतैगायाधिदेवश्र बथपूव वरणो महान् ।

तदामाज्ञच्च तपन्ती वक्षणानी बन्धुपव सा ॥ 44 ॥

अथ सा कृष्णचिछ्णिक: कृष्णाभर्ष द्वारा ह ।

गतमन्वन्तरं यावज्ज्वलतीं ब्रहातेजसा ॥ 45 ॥

The water that came out from perspiration, Varuna Deva became the presiding Deity of that; and the female, sprung out of the left side of Varuna Deva, became the wife of Varuna, called Varunānī. On the other hand, the Śakti, of the nature of knowledge of Śri Krṣna, remained pregnant for one hundred manvantaras. Her body became effulgent with Brahma-teja (the fire of Brahma).

कृष्णप्राणाधिर्देशी का कृष्णप्राणाधिक्रिया ।

कृष्णायस्य सांगिनी शक्रकृष्णायब्बःस्वतलस्थिता ॥ 46 ॥

गतमवन्दतरांत च कालेउजिते तु सुदरी ।

सुपाव डिषभं स्वर्णार्थ प्रविषधायातालयं परम् ॥ 47 ॥

Kṛṣṇa was her life and She again was dearer to Kṛṣṇa than his life even. She remained always with Śrī Kṛṣṇa; so much so that She constantly rested on His breast. When one hundred Manvantaras passed away, that Beautiful One gave birth to a Golden Egg. That egg was the repository of the whole universe.

दर्श्वा ईर्भ च सा देवी हृदयेन व्यद्युत ।

उत्सर्जं च कोपेन बह्यांडगोलके जले ॥ 48 ॥

दूर्ध्वा कृष्णा तन्यांग हाहाकारं चकार ह ।

शगण यदी देवेशलतक्षणं च यथोचितम् ॥ 49 ॥

The Beloved of Kṛṣṇa became very sorry to see the egg and out of anger, threw that within the water collected in the centre the Universe. Seeing this, Śrī Kṛṣṇa raised a great cry and immediately cursed Her duly and said:

यतोउपरंचं तव्या त्यक्तं कोपशीले च निशुते ।

भव तवमनपत्यापि चाधप्रभूति निश्छितम् ॥ 50 ॥

या यास्वदंशल्पाधु भविष्यन्ति सुरास्वयः ।

अनपत्याश्रु तः स्वास्त्वत्समा निवरीवीयना: ॥ 51 ॥

"O Angry One! O Cruel One! When you have forsaken out of ānger this son just born of you, I

say then that you become from to-day bereft of any issue. Besides, let all those godly women that will spring out of your parts, they also be deprived of having any issue or sons and they will remain ever constant in their youth."

एतमिचन्तरे देवी जिह्धागासहमा ततः ।

आविर्बैभूव कन्दैका शुक्रलवणी मनोहा ॥ 52 ॥

धृतवस्तपरिधाना वीणापुसलकाधारिणी ।

रत्नभूषणभूषाका सर्वशास्त्राप्रिदेवता ॥ 53 ॥

O Muni! While Śrī Krṣṇa was thus cursing, suddenly came out from the tongue of the beloved of Krṣṇa, a beautiful daughter, of a white colour. Her clothings were all white, in her hands there were lute and book and all Her body was decorated with ornaments made of gems and jewels. She was the presiding Deity of all the Śāstras.

अथ कालातंते सा च द्विधास्पा वधूच है ।

वामार्थगीच्च कमला दक्षिणाधार्च चीक्षा ॥ 54 ॥

एतमित्रवंतरे कृष्णो द्विधास्पो वधूच सः ।

दक्षिणाधंक्ष द्विपुजो वामार्थेघं चतुर्भुंजः ॥ 55 ॥

Some timer later the Mula Prakrti, the Beloved of Kṛṣṇa divided into two parts. Out of Her left portion came Kamalā and out of her right portion came Rādhikā. In the meantime Śrī Kṛṣṇa divided himself into two parts. From his right side appeared a form two-handed; and from left side appeared a form four-handed.

उदाय चाणी कृष्णास्ता लयस्य कामिनी भव ।

अत्रैव मानिनि राशा तत भर्ते भविष्यति ॥ 56 ॥

एवं लक्ष्मी च प्रदरी तुहो नारायणाय च ।

स जगाम च वैकुंटे ताथ्वां सार्यं जयानतिः ॥ 57 ॥

The Śrī Kṛṣṇa addressed the Goddess Speech, holding flute in her hand, 'O Devi! You follow this four-handed Person as his wife' and then spoke to Rādhā: O, Rādeh! You are a sensitive, proud lady; let you be My wife; so it will do you good' Śrī Kṛṣṇa also told Lakṣmī gladly to become the wife of the four-handed Nārāyaṇa. Then Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of the world, took both Lakṣmī and Sarasvatī to the abode Vaikunjha.

Book IX Chapter II

अनपत्ये च ते इे च जाते राधांगसंभये ।

भूता नारायणांगाच्च पार्वँद्रा चतुर्भुंज: ॥ 58 ॥

तेजसा वयसा कलपुणायां च समा हरे: ।

बभुतु: कमलांगाच्च दासीकोट्याच्र ततसमा: ॥ 59 ॥

O Muni! Both Lakṣmī and Sarasvatī became issueless, being born of Rādhā. From the body of Nārāyana arose his attendants, all four-handed. They were all equal to him in appearance, in qualifications; in spirit and in age. On the other hand, from the body of Kamalā arose millions and millions of female attendants all equal to Her in form and qualifications.

अथ गोलोकानायस्य लोमां विवरतो मुने ।

भूतश्वासांख्योगोपचर वयसा तेजसा सभा: ॥ 6० ॥

क्लेपण च गुणेनैव बलेन विफ्मेण च ।

प्राणतुल्यप्रिया: सर्वे बध्वुः पार्वादि विषोः ॥ 6 1 ॥

Then arose innumerable Gopas (cow-herds) from the pores of Śri Krṣṇa. They were all equal to the Lord of Goloka in form, Gunas, power and age; they were all dear to Him as if they were His life.

राधोगलोगकृपेयो बध्वुगोपकव्यकाः ।

राधातूल्याश तः सर्वा राधादास्य: प्रियंवदाः ॥ 6 2 ॥

रत्नाभूषणभूषाका: शगवत्सुस्थिरयोवतः।

अनपल्याच तः सर्वा: पुंसः शापेन संततम् ॥ 6 3 ॥

From the pores of Rādhikā came out the Gopa Kanyās (cow-herdesses). They were all equal to Rādhā and all were Her attendants and were sweet-speaking. Their bodies were all decorated with ornaments of jewels, and their youth was constant, they were all issueless as Śrī Krṣna cursed them thus.

एतस्मिन्तरे विष सहसा कृष्णदेवता ।

अविवर्धभूव दुर्गा सा विद्यामाया सनातनी ॥ 64 ॥

O Best of Brāhmaṇas! On the other hand, suddenly arose Durgā, the Māyā of Viṣṇu (The Highest Self) eternal and whose Deity was Krṣṇa.

Note: Durgā was the Avatāra of Mūla Prakṛti not the Avatāra of Rādhā as Laksmī and Sarasvati were.

देवी नारायणीगाना सर्वशनिक्सलक्षिपणी ।

बुद्ध्वाधिष्ठाी देवी स कृष्णायच परमात्मनः ॥ 6 5 ॥

देवीनीं बीजकपा चू मूलप्रकृतिरीश्वरी ।

परिपूर्णतम तेजःस्वकृता त्रिगुणामिका ॥ 6 6 ॥

She is Nārāyani; She is Iśāni; She is the Śakti of all and She is the Presiding Deity of the intelligence of Śri Kṛṣna. From Her have come out many other Devis; She is Mūla Prakṛti and she is Iśvari; no failings or insufficiencies are seen in Her. She is the Tejas (of the nature of Fire) and She is of the nature of the three Guṇas.

ततकाचनवर्षाभा कोटिरुर्भस्मप्रभा ।

ईपद्वायप्रसात्या सहस्वपुर्जयंत् ॥ 67 ॥

नानाशस्त्रकिनकरं विधती सा विलोचना ।

वहिषुर्ज्युंगक्रधाना तत्पभूषणभूषित ।। 68 ॥

Her colour is bright like the molten gold; Her lustre looks as if ten millions of Suns have simultaneously arisen. She looks gracious always with sweet smile on Her lips, Her hands are one thousand in number.

यस्यार्शांगीशकलया बभूवुः सर्वोपितः ।

सर्वे विश्वस्थिता लोका मोहिता: स्युध मायया ॥ 69 ॥

सर्वेश्वरप्रदारी च कामिनां गृह्वासिनाम् ।

कृष्णभक्तिप्रदा या च वैश्यानां च वैश्याची ॥ 70 ॥

मुमुक्षुर्णो मोक्षदारी सुखितां सुखदायिनी ।

स्वर्गेषु स्वर्णतक्ष्मीरच गृहलक्ष्मीगृहेषु च ॥ 71 ॥

Various weapons are in all Her hands. The clothings of the three-eyed one are bright and purified by Fire She is decorated with ornaments all of jewels. All the women who are the jewels are sprung from Her parts and parts and by the power of Her Māyā, all the people of the world are enchanted. She bestows all the wealth that a householder wants; She bestows on Krṣna's devotees, the devotion towards Krṣna; nay, She is the Vaiṣnavī Śakti of the Vaiṣnavas.

ततविष्यु तपस्या च श्रीकाण तु नृयेषु च ।

या वह्वी दाहिकाकाण प्रभाकाण च भास्करे ॥ 72 ॥

गोभाकाण च चंद्रे च सा पदमेषु च शोभान ।

सर्वोत्तिचरकाण या श्रीकृष्णे परमात्यनि ॥ 73 ॥

She gives final liberation to those that want such and gives happiness to those that want happiness.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

She is the Laksmī to the Heavens; as well She is the Laksmī of every household.

या च शक्तिमानताया यमा च शक्तिमज्ञगत् ।

यया विता जगतस्यं जीवन्मृत्तावि स्थितम् ॥ 74 ॥

या च संसारवृक्षस्य वीजरूपा सनातनी ।

स्थितिक्पा बुद्धिक्पा फलक्पा च नारद ॥ 75 ॥

She is the Tapas of the ascetics, the beauty of the kingdoms of the kings, the burning power of fire, the brilliancy of the Sun, the tender beauty of the Moon, the lovely beauty of the lotus and the Śakti of Śrī Krṣna the Highest Self. The Self, the world all are powerful by Her Śakti; without Her everything would be a dreary dead mass.

श्रुतिप्यासाद्याका नित्रा तंत्र क्षमा मति: ।

गतिलज्जातृशिष्टिधातिकालादिकरणी ॥ 76 ॥

सा च संसूय वसैर्णं तत्फरः समुवास ह ।

त्वर्सिंहासनं तस्ये प्रदरी रात्रिकेश्वरः ॥ 77 ॥

तृतसिंत्रते तन सक्रीकच चतुर्मुंतः ।

पद्यानोपनोभिपद्यापत्र:ससार महानुपे ॥ 78 ॥

O Nārada! She is the seed of this Tree of World; She is eternal; She is the Stay, She is Intelligence fruits, hunger, thirst, mercy, sleep, drowsiness, forgiveness, fortitude, peace, bashfulness, nourishment, contentment and lustre. The Mūla Prakṛti praising Śrī Krṣna stood before Him. The Lord of Rādhikā then gave Her a throne to sit. O Great Muni! At this moment sprang from the navel lotus the four-faced Brahmā, with his wife Śavitrī, an exceedingly woman.

कर्मडतुवर: श्रीमांतस्पर्सी ज्ञानिंवर: ।

चतुर्मुक्तिं तृहाय प्रजलन्द्वहातेजसा ॥ 79 ॥

सा तदा सुंदरी सूहा शनचंझरमग्रभा ।

वहिषूर्द्धोर्गक्राधाना रतभूषणपूषणा ॥ 80 ॥

रत्नसिंहासने तमये संस्त्यु वसंकारणम् ।

उवास स्वामिना सार्य कृष्णस्य पुत्तो मुदा ॥ 81 ॥

No sooner the fourfaced Brahmā, the foremost of the Jñānis, fond of asceticism and holding Kamandalu in His hand came into being than He began to praise Śrī Krṣṇa by His four mouths. On the other hand the Devi Śavitrī, with a beauty of

one hundred moons, born with great ease, wearing apparel purified by fire and decorated with various ornaments praised Krṣṇa, the One and Only Cause of the Universe and then took Her seat gladly with Her husband in the throne made of jewels.

तत्सिमन्त्रते कृष्णो द्विष्ठापको बधूव सः ।

वामाधोगो महदोवो दक्षिणो गोषिकापति: ॥ 82 ॥

शुद्धस्थिककंश: शतकोटिरविषप्रः ।

At that time Krṣna divided Himself into two parts; His left side turned into the form of Mahādeva; and his right side turned into the Lord of Gopikās (cow-herdesses). The colour and splendour of the body of Mahādeva is pure white like white crystal; as if one hundred suns have arisen simultaneously.

निशूलपहिशुभरो व्याप्रमपारि हरः ॥ 83 ॥

ततकाचरवगाधी जटाभारधर: पर: ।

भयम्प्रवितगाङ्ग सस्मितचंद्रगुखेखा: ॥ 84 ॥

दिगंबारे नीलकंठ: सरंभुषणपार्थिवि: ।

विष्घद्धिणहस्तेन रन्मालां सुसंस्कृतम् ॥ 85 ॥

In His hands there are the trident. (Triśūla) and sharp-edged spear (Pattiṣa); His wearing is a tiger skin; on His heads matted hair (Jatā) of a tawny hue like molten gold; His body was besmeared all over with ashes, smile reigning in His face and on His forehead, the semi-moon He has no wearing on his loins; so He is called Digambara (the quarters of the Sky being His clothing); His neck is of a blue colour; the serpent being the ornaments on His body and on His right hand the nice bead of jewels well purified.

प्रजन्यंचबलयेन बह्यान्योति: सनातनम् ।

सत्यवरूलं श्रीकृष्ण परमात्यानमीश्वरम् ॥ 86 ॥

कारणं कारणानां च सर्वमंगलमंगलम् ।

जन्मयनुराजव्याधिशोकभीतिरंतरं परम् ॥ 87 ॥

संस्तूय सुर्वोपौर्यूं तं चतो मनुर्जगवाधिधः ।

रत्नसिंहासने रथे समुवास हरे: पुरः ॥ 88 ॥

इति श्रीमद्दौभागवते महापुराणे नवमस्कन्धे द्वितीयोशया: ॥ 2 ॥

Who is always repeating with His five faces the Eternal Light of Brahmā, and Who was has

Book IX Chapter III

conquered Death by praising Śrī Krṣṇa, Who is of the nature of Truth, the Highest Self, the God Incarnate, the material cause of all things and the All auspicious of all that is good and favourable, and the Destroyer of the fear of birth, death, old age and disease and Who has been named

Mṛtyuñjaya (the conqueror of Death). This Mahādeva took His seat on a throne made of jewels (diamonds, emeralds, etc.)

Here ends the Second Chapter of the Ninth Book on the origin of Prakrti and Puruṣa in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa

Book IX Chapter III

CHAPTER III

On the Origin of Brahīmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa and others

श्रीनारायण उवाच

अथ तिषं जले तिष्थ्नावढ़े ब्रहाणो वयः ।

ततः से काले सुसरा त्रिपाभूता बभूव ह १। १। १।

तम्पणे शिशुरिकेशु शगकांटिरक्षिपभः ।

क्षणं तोरूवमाणश्च सतनंधः पीडितः क्षुधा ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Devars! The egg (born of Mūla Prakṛti) that was floating in the waters for a period equal to the life period of Brahmā, now in the fulness of time, separated into two parts. Within that egg there was a powerful Child, lustrous like one thousand millions of suns. This child could not suck mother's milk, as it was forsaken by Her.

पिता माता परित्यचो जलमध्ये निताश्रवः ।

ब्रहांतांसंल्यानाथो यो ददर्गार्थ्यमानायत् ॥ ३ ॥

स्थूलात्स्वुलतमः सोउपि नामा देयी महाविराद् ।

परमाणुर्वीय सूक्ष्मात्पर: स्थूलात्साध्यमसी ॥ ४ ॥

So being tired of hunger, the child for a moment cried repeatedly. The child that will become the Lord of countless Brahmāṇḍas (universes), now an orphan having no father nor mother began to looks upwards from the waters. This body came to be denominated afterwards by the name of Mahā Virāt, when he became gross and grosser. As there is nothing finer than radium so there is nothing grosser than Mahā Virāt.

तेजसा घोड़शांगी3यं कृष्णस्य परमात्मनः ।

आधारः सर्वविक्रायनां महाविष्णुरच प्रक्रातः ॥ 5 ॥

प्रत्येकं लोमकुर्णेषु शिवपानि निविलापनि च ।

अस्थापि तेषां संख्यां च कृष्णो वक्तुं न हि क्षमः ॥ 6 ॥

The power of this Mahā Virāt one-sixteenth of that of Śrī Krṣna, the Highes Self. But this boy, (born of the Prakṛti Rādhā) is the Sole Stay of all this Universe and he is denominated by the name ‘Mahā-Viṣṇu’. In his every pore countless universe are existing. So much so that even Śrī Krṣna could not count them.

संख्या चेउरजसामस्ति विश्वानां न कदाचन ।

ब्रह्माधिष्णिशादीनां तथा संख्या न विघते ॥ 7 ॥

प्रतिविश्वेषु संनंये ब्रह्माधिष्णिशादयः ।

पातालाद्वहृतोकतां ब्रह्तांं परिकीर्तिन् ॥ 8 ॥

If it were possible to count the number of the dust particles, it is impossible to count the number of the Universe. So there are endless Brahmās, Viṣṇus, and Maheśvaras. In every Brahmāṇḍa, there is Brahmā Viṣṇu, and Maheśa. Each Brahmāṇḍa extends from Pātāla to the Brahmaloka. तत क्रयं च वैकुंठो ब्रह्मोडाहिरेव सः । तत क्रयं च गोलोकः पंचाशालीदयोजनः ॥ 9 ॥

नित्य: सत्यस्करणप्रथ यथा कृष्णसाधाय्यम् ।

सप्तद्वीपिता पृथ्वी सप्तसागारसंपुता ॥ 10 ॥

The abode of Vaikuntha is higher than that (i.e. it is situated outside of Brahmāṇḍa), again the abode of Goloka is fifty koti yojanas (50×10×4 ×2 million miles) higher than Vaikuntha. This Goloka Dhāma is eternal and real as Śrī Krṣna is eternal and real. This world composed of the seven islands is surrounded by the seven oceans.

कनपोचारुपद्वीपासंखुरीलवनान्विता ।

क्रधें सप्त स्वर्गलोका ब्रह्मलोकसम्पित्तः ॥ 1 1 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

पातालानि च सतधार्धीवं ब्राहोंदमेव च ।

Forty-nine Upa-Dvipa (smaller islands adjacent to then) are existing here. Besides there are countless mountains, and forests. Higher than this earth is the Brahmaloka with seven heavens and below this are the seven Pātālas. This is the bounding limit of Brahmānda.

क्रर्षे धाराया भूतोंको घुवलोकस्ततः परम् ॥ १२ ॥

ततः परश्व स्वलोंको जनलोकस्तथापर: ।

ततः परस्पोलोकाः सत्यलोकस्ततः परः ॥ 13 ॥

ततः परं ब्रह्मोकल्पतकांचनसरिष्यः ।

एवं सर्वे कृत्रिमं च बाहाप्यन्तरोयचे च ॥ 14 ॥

Just above this earth there is the Bhūrloka; above is Bhuvarloka; then Svarloka, then Janarloka, then Taparloka, then Satyaloka, and above that is Brahmaloka. The splendour of Brahmaloka is like that of molten gold. But all the substances whether outside or inside this Brahmaloka, are transient.

तद्वितगे विनगक्षे सर्वेपामेव नारद ।

जलबुदुद्वत्सर्वे शिवसंयमानित्यकम् ॥ 15 ॥

नित्यौ गोलोककैकुंटी प्रोली गशवदुकामे ।

प्रत्येकं लोगकृप्पे बढ़ाई परिनिश्रितम् ॥ 16 ॥

When this Brahmāṇḍa (cosmos) dissolves, everything dissolves and is destroyed. All are temporary like bubbles of water. Only Goloka and Vaikunthā are eternal. In every pore of this Mahā Virāt is existing one Brahmāṇḍa (cosmos).

पूर्ण संख्या न जानाति कृष्णोन्यसायि का कवा ।

प्रत्येक प्रतिबढ़ांडं ब्रहविष्यणिवादः ॥ 17 ॥

तिः: कोट्यः सुराणां च संख्या सर्वेत्र पुत्रक ।

दिनीगाश्रव दिव्यपाला नक्षत्राणि ग्रहादयः ॥ 18 ॥

What to speak of others even Kṛṣna cannot count the number of these Brahmāṇdas. In every Brahmāṇda there is Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa. O Child Nārada! In every Brahmāṇda, the number of the gods is three kotis or 30 millions. Some of them are the Dikpatis (the Regents of the quarters); some are the Dikpālas (the Rulers of the Quarters), some are asterisms, and some planets.

पुवि वर्णाधु चत्वारोप्रधयो नागाधुशार्वा: ।

अथ कालेन स विगाङूर्ध्ये दृष्टा पुनः पुनः ॥ १९ ॥

दिंघांतरे च गृन्यं हि द्वितीयं च न किंचन ।

चितामावय शुवृत्तो रोते व पुनः पुनः ॥ 20 ॥

In the Bhūrloka, there are four Varpas (Brāhmins etc.), and in the Pātālas there are Nāgas. Thus the Universe exists composed of moveable and non-moveable things (this is Brahmāndā Vivṛti). O Nārada! Now the Virāt Puruṣa began to look up to the skies again and again but He could not see anything within that egg except the void.

ज्ञानं प्रायः तदा द्यौ कृष्णं वरमपुर्षम् ।

ततो ददर्ग तर्ने ब्रह्म्यज्योति: सनातनम् ॥ 21 ॥

नवीनजलद्यमां दिषुर्ज पीतवाससम् ।

ससितं मृगलैहरतं भक्तानुग्रहकातम् ॥ 22 ॥

Then distressed with hunger he cried out repeatedly and became merged in anxiety. Next moment getting back his consciousness, he began to think of Kṛṣṇa, the Highest Person and saw there at once the eternal light of Brahma. He saw there His form as deep blue like new rain-cloud; with two hands, garment of a yellow colour, sweet smile on His face, flute in His hand and He seemed to be very anxious to show His Grace to Devotees.

जहास बालकस्तुओं द्वृष्टा जनकमीक्षण ।

वरं तदा ददौ तस्मै वरेण: समयोचितम् ॥ 23 ॥

मत्समो ज्ञानयुकतश कृत्यिपयासाद्वितिः ।

ब्रह्मांडासंख्यनिलमो भव वत्स लयावधि ॥ 24 ॥

Looking at the Lord, His Father, the boy became glad and smiled. The Lord, the Bestower of boon granted him boons appropriate for that moment ‘O Child! Let you possess knowledge like Me; let your hunger and thirst vanish; let you be the holder innumerable Brahmāṇḍas till the time of Pralaya (the universal dissolution).

निष्कामो निर्यश्रैश्व सर्वेधां वरदो भव ।

जरामूल्योगणोकपीडादिवर्जिते भव ॥ 25 ॥

इत्युक्लवा तस्य कर्णे स महामांयं घडक्षरम् ।

त्रिःकुलश्व प्रजजाप वेदांगप्रवरं परम् ॥ 26 ॥

Be without any selfishness, be fearless and the bestower of boons to all. Let not old age, death, disease, sorrow nor any other ailings afflict thee.

Book IX Chapter III

Thus saying He repeated thrice on his ear the six-lettered great Mantra ‘Om Krṣṇāya Svāhā’ worshipped by the Vedas with their Aṅgas, the Giver of desires and the destrover of all troubles and calamities.

प्रणादिचतुर्थतं कृष्ण इत्यक्षत्रद्यम् ।

वहिजां यांतिभेषं च सर्वीक्षितर्हं परम् ॥ 27 ॥

मंत्र दत्ता तद्वाहारं कल्यमायाम वै विभुः ।

श्रूयतां तद्वहापुरि निवोधे कथायामि ते ॥ 28 ॥

प्रतिविषयं यद्रैवेदो द्वाति वैश्याजे जनः ।

तत्वोडशोगो विषयो विष्णो: पंचद्राग्यय तै ॥ 29 ॥

O Brahmā's Son! Thus giving the mantra, Śri Kṛṣṇa arranged for his fooding thus: In every universe, whatever offerings will be given to Śri Kṛṣṇa, one sixteenth of that will go to Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of Vaikuntha and fifteen-sixteenth is to go to this boy, the Virāt.

निरुर्णयताननर्शेव परिपूर्णतमस्य च ।

त्रेयेटे चैव कृष्णस्य न हि किंचित्ययोजनम् ॥ 30 ॥

यद्वदाति नैयेढ़ा तस्ये देवाय यो जनः ।

स च ख्याति ततवर्ते लक्ष्मीनाथो विवाद्य तथा ॥ 31 ॥

Śrī Krṣna did not allot any share for Himself. Himself transcending all the Gunas, and Full, He is always satisfied with Himself.

तं च मंत्रवं दर्चा तनुवाच पुनर्विषुः ।

वरमन किमिधे ते तमे बृहि ददामि च ॥ 32 ॥

कृष्णस्य वचनं मुक्ता तमुबाव विराव विधुः ।

कृष्णं तं वाकत्कसावझनं समयोचितम् ॥ 33 ॥

What necessity is there for any further offerings? Whatever the people offer with devotion, the Lord of Lakṣmī, the Virāt eats all these. Bhagavān Śrī Krṣna giving thus to the Virāt the boon and the Mantra said: 'O Child! Say what more you desire; I will give you that instantly.'

बालक उवाच

वरो मे त्वतद्याधोजेे पवित्तभंवृत् निश्ठता ।

सत्तं यावदायुर्मे क्षणं वा सुचितं च वा ॥ 34 ॥

The Virāt boy, hearing thus the words of Śri Kṛṣṇa, spoke: 'O Thou Omnipresent! I have got no desires whatsoever, save this that as long as I

live, whether for a short time or for a long time, let me have pure Bhakti towards Thy lotus feet.

त्वद्धिलयुक्तलोकेश्मस्रीवन्युक्तश्रंस्तम् ।

त्वद्धिलनींगे मूर्द्धिं शंकरविंग मृते है सः ॥ 35 ॥

किं तजपेन तपसा यजेन पूजेनेन च ।

ब्रतेन चोपवासेन पुण्येन तीर्थेसेवा ॥ 36 ॥

कृष्णभक्तिनिही-स्व मूर्द्धेयर जीवनं बुथा ।

येनात्मना जीवितशु तमेव न हि मन्त्ये ॥ 37 ॥

In this world he is Jivanmukta (liberated whilst living) who is your Bhakta; and that bewildered fool is dead while living who is devoid of any Bhakti to Thee. What needs he to perform Japam, asceticism, sacrifice, worship, holding fasts and observances, going to sacred places of pilgrimages and other virtuous acts if he be without any bhakti to Śrī Krṣṇa? Vain is his life who is devoid of any devotion to Śrī Krṣṇa, under Whose Grace he has obtained his life and Whom he does not now pay homage and worship.

यावदात्मा शरीरोस्ति नालत सशक्तिसंयुतः ।

पश्राधोति नते तस्मिन्वतंना: सर्वेशकतः ॥ 38 ॥

He is endowed with Śakti as long as Atmā (Self) resides in his body; no sooner the Ātma departs from his body all the Śaktis accompany him.

स च त्वं च महाभाग सर्वांना प्रकृते: परः ।

स्वेच्छामयश स्वर्दो बह्मज्योति: सनातनः ॥ ३९ ॥

इत्पुक्लवा कालकस्तत्र विरारम च नारद ।

उवाच कृष्ण: प्रतुव्रक्ति मनुगं श्रतिसुर्दीम् ॥ ४० ॥

O Great One! And Thou art the Universal Ātman (soul) who transcends Prakṛti, Who is All will, Primeval Person and of the nature of the Highest Light. O Child! Thus saying, the Virāt boy remained silent.

श्रीकृष्ण उवाच

सुचिरं सुस्थिरं तिष्ठ यथार्डं त्वं तथा भव ।

बहाणोसंख्यापते च पाततेने न भविष्यति ॥ 41 ॥

Śrī Kṛṣṇa then, spoke in sweet words: 'O Child! Let you remain as fresh as ever like Me. You will not have any fall even if innumerable Brahmās pass away.

अंगेन प्रतिबहाईं तं च शूर्यिवाड् भव ।

त्वात्रिभिपशाद्वहा च विश्वसहा भचिष्यति ॥ 42 ॥

ललाटे वह्वाणपरैव रूग्रडीकादणैर ते ।

शिवांगेन भचिष्यांत सृष्टिसंहरणाय वै ॥ 43 ॥

Let you divide yourself in parts and turn into smaller Virāṭs in every universe. Brahmā will spring from your navel and will create the cosmos. From the forehead of that Brahmā will spring eleven Rudras for the destruction of the creation. But they will all be parts of Śiva.

कालापिनरूसतेचेको विश्वसंहारकाकरः ।

पाता विष्णुश्र विष्णु स्त्रोंनेन भविष्यति ॥ 44 ॥

मद्धिलिनयुक्तः सन्तं भविष्यति वेगेन चे ।

धानेन कमनीयां मां नित्यं रुद्यसि निश्छितम् ॥ 45 ॥

The Ruler named Kālāgnī, of these eleven Rudras, will be the destroyer of all this Viśvas (cosmos). Besides, from each of your sub-divisions, the Viṣnu will originate and that Bhagavān Viṣnu will be Preserver of this Viśva world.

भारतं कर्मनीयं च मम वक्षःस्थलस्थितम् ।

यायि लोकं तिछ्र वसेलयुक्ना सांतरधीय। १४ ६ ॥

गत्वा स्वलोकं बढ़ाणों शंकरं समुवाच ह ।

स्वहांरं सदुपीर्णं च सहंतुं चैव तत्क्षणम् ॥ ४७ ॥

I say that under my favour you will always be full of Bhakti towards Me and so sooner you meditate on Me, you will be able to see My lovely form. There is no doubt in this; and your Mother, Who resides in My breast, will not be difficult for you to see. Let you remain here in ease and comfort. I now go to Goloka.

श्रीभगवानुवाच

सृष्टि सर्छु गच्छ वल्स नाभिपयोद्वोरो भव ।

महाविरावृ तलोमकुरो क्षुरस्य च विधो भृणु ॥ 48 ॥

गच्छ वल्स महादेव बहाभालोद्वो भव ।

Saying thus Śrī Krṣna, the Lord of world disappeared. Going to His own abode He spoke instantly to Brahmā and Śaṅkara, skilled in the works of creation and destruction: 'O Child Brahmā! Go quickly and be born in parts from the

navels of each of the smaller Virāts that will arise from the pores of the Great Virāt.

अंशेन च महाभाषा स्थयं च सुचिरं तय ॥ 49 ॥

इसुकुचना जानतां नाथो विरागा विधेः सुतः ।

जगाम द्वहा तं नत्वा शिक्षा शिवदायकः ॥ 50 ॥

O Child Mahādeva! Go and be born in parts from the forehead of each Brahmā in every universe for the destruction of the creation; (but be careful that you not forget) and perform austerities for a long, long time. O Son of the Creator Brahmā! Thus saying, the Lord of the Universe remained silent. Brahmā and Śiva, the auspicious, bowing to the Lord went to their own duties.

महाविराष् लोमकुरे ब्रह्मांगोलके जले ।

बधूव च विराद्धुरो विराईगेन सम्राजन् ॥ 51 ॥

र्यामो युवा पीतावासा: शयानो जललत्यके ।

ईमद्धार्यः प्रसात्यसो विश्वधार्पी जनादन्: ॥ 52 ॥

On the other hand, the Great Virāt that lay floating in the waters of the Brahmānda sphere, created from his every pore each smaller Virāt. That youth Janārdana of the form of the Great Cosmos, wearing yellow garment of the bluish-green colour of the Durba grass, lay sleeping pervading everywhere.

तत्थामिकाने बहा बधून कमलोद्रवः ।

संभय पचादंदे च बधाम युगलक्ष्मू ।। ५३ ॥।

नार्तं जगाम दंडस्य पचान्तालस्य पचत्रः ।

नाथिजस्य च पचस्य चित्तामापि पिता तत ।। ५४ ॥

स्वस्थानं पुनगात्य दर्शयी कृष्णपदांबुजम् ।

Brahmā took his birth in His navel. He, then, after his birth, began to travel in that navel-lotus and in the stem of the lotus for one lakh yugas. But he could not find out the place whence the lotus or its stem had sprung up. O Nārada! Then your father became very anxious and came back to his former place and began to meditate the lotus feet of Śrī Krṣna.

तते द्वर्श शूर्र तं ध्यानेन द्विष्यबुधा ॥ 55 ॥

शयानं जलतत्वे च बहापाडगोतकाण्तुते ।

यल्लीमकृपे ब्रहांडं तत्कृतं परपीश्वम् ॥ 56 ॥

श्रीकृष्णं चापि गोलेकों गोपगौरीसाम्बित्यम् ।

तं संस्तुव वरं प्राप ततः सृष्टि चकार सः ॥ 57 ॥

Book IX Chapter IV

Then, in meditation, with his introspective eye, he first saw the small Virāt, then the endless great Virat lying on the watery bed, in whose pores the universes are existing and then he saw the God Śri Kṛṣna in Goloka with Gopas and Gopiṣ. He then began to praise the Lord of Goloka when He granted boons to your father, and he began to do the work of creation.

वभुवृद्धिण: पुत्रा मानसा: सनकादय: ।

ततो कृकलाशापि शिवस्यैकादार स्मृतः ॥ 58 ॥

वभूव पाता विद्युश्छ्रस्य वामपाश्वतः ।

चतुर्भूजश भगवान् श्वेतत्रीप से चावसत् ॥ 59 ॥

From the mind of your father, were born first Sanaka and other brothers and then from forehead eleven Rudras sprang. Then from the left side of that small Virāt lying on the bed of waters, the four-handed Viṣṇu Bhagavān, the Preserver of the Universe, came. He went to Śvetadvīpa, where he remained.

श्रुत्रस्य नाभिपदमे च रज्ञा विश्वं ससर्ज ह।

स्वर्ग मदर्षे च पातालं जितोकांीं सचराचरम् ॥ 6० ॥

एवं सर्वतैलोमकृपे विष्णं प्रत्येकमेव च ।

प्रतिविश्ये क्रूरविराब्बहाविष्यणिशाद्यः ॥ 6 1 ॥

Then your father became engaged in creating this Universe, move able and non-moveable, composed of three worlds, heaven, earth and Pātāla, in the navel of that small Virāt Puruṣa. O Nārada! Thus from the pores of that great Virāt each universe has sprung and in every universe there is one small Virāt, one Brahmā, one Viṣṇu and one Śiva and others.

इत्येवं क्रवितं बढ़ा-कृष्णयसंकीर्तनं शुभम् ।

सुखदो मोक्षंदे झात्कि कंप्यः श्रोतुमिच्छसि ॥ 62 ॥

इति श्रीमदैर्षीभागवते महापुराणे नवसत्कन्ने तृतीयोरधायः । 3 ॥।

O Best of twice born! Thus I have described the glories of Krṣṇa, that give exceeding pleasure and Moksa. Now say what more you want to hear?

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Ninetth

Book on the Origin of Brahmā, Vīsṇu

and Maheśa and others in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa

Book IX Chapter IV

CHAPTER IV

On the Hymn, Worship and Kavaca of Sarasvati

नारद उवाच

श्रुतं सर्वे मया पूर्वे त्वत्रमादासुधोपमम् ।

अधुना प्रकृतीनां च व्यस्तं वर्णये पूजनम् ॥ १ ॥

कस्याः पूजा कृता केन कर्बं मत्वैं प्रचारिता ।

केन वा पूजिता का वा केन का वा स्तुता प्रभे ॥ 2 ॥

तासां ततीत्र च ध्यानं च प्रपावं चरितं शुभम्।

काधिः केभ्यो वरो त्तस्तनो व्याख्यातुमंदीस ॥ 3 ॥

Nārada said: By your Grace I have heard everything very sweet like nectar, of the origin of things. Now may I ask you which Devi of these five Prakrti has been worshipped by what Mantra? and by whom? How has each of them been praised? and by whom? How has the worship of their Mūrtis (from) become prevalent in this world? What are the Stotram (hymn of praise), the

Dhyāna (meditation) glory and life of these? Also what sort of boon do each of the Devīs grant? and to whom? Kindly describe all those in detail.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

गणेशजननी दुर्गा राथा लक्ष्मी: सरस्वती ।

साविधि च सृष्टिवधी प्रकृति: पशुधा स्मृता ॥ 4 ॥

आसां पुजा प्रसिद्धा च प्रभाव: परमाद्धूतः ।

सुधोपमं च चरितं सर्वमङ्लकारणम् ॥ 5 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Child! Durgā, the mother of Gangeśa, Rādhā, Laksmī, Sarsavatī and Śavitri, these are the five Prakṛtis sprung directly from Mūla Prakṛti. The methods of their worship, wonderful glorious acts, excellent stotrams, and their lives, inculcating good to all, and sweet like nectar are all widely written in the Vedas,

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

Purānas, Tantras and other Śāstras. So there is no need to described them here again.

प्रक्रस्यांशः कलाश्र तासां च चरितं शुभम् ।

सर्व वक्ष्यामि ते बहुत्सावधानो निगायम १। ६ ।।

काली वसुन्नारा गड़ा घड़ी मुक्त्वचिष्ठका ।

तुलसी मनसा नित्रा स्वधा स्वाहा च दक्षिणा ॥ 7 ॥

Now I am describing in detail the auspicious characters of these that are sprung from the parts and Kalās of the Prakṛti. Hear attentively. Kālī, Vasundharā, Gaṅgā, Ṣaṣṭhī, Maṅgala Caṇḍikā, Tulasi, Manasā, Nidrā, Svāhā, and Dakṣinā, these are the parts of Prakṛti.

संक्षिप्तमासां चरितं पुणवं श्रुतिसुंदम् ।

जीवकर्मविपाकं च तच्च वक्ष्यासि सुंदुम् ॥ 8 ॥

दुर्गायश्रैव रायाया विस्तीर्ण चरितं महत ।

By and by I will describe, briefly, the meriting characters, and pleasant to hear. Along with these I will describe the Karmas of the Jivas, and the great exalted lives of Durgā and Rādhā. I am now describing Sarasvati's character.

तद्व्यश्राव्यक्षयामि संबंधकमतः श्रणु ॥ 9 ॥

आदौ सरस्वतीपुजा शीकृष्णोय निविन्मिता ।

यत्रमसादामुनिश्रि मुखीं भवति पिंहितः ॥ 10 ॥

Hear, O Muni! Śrī Krṣṇa introduced first in this Bhārata, the worship of the Devī Sarasvatī, the holder of Vīnā in Her hands, under whose influence, the hearts of illiterate stupid persons become illumined with knowledge.

आविश्नात यथा देवी वक्ततः कृष्णयोचितः ।

इयेय कृष्णं कामेन कामुकी कामकरणिणी ॥ १ १ १ ॥

स च विज्ञाय तद्वारं सर्वतः सर्वमातरम् ।

तामुवाच हितं सत्यं परिणामे सुखवहम् ॥ १ २ ॥

The amorous Devi Sarasvatī sprang from the end of the lips of Rādhā and so she desired to marry Krṣna out of amorous feelings. Śri Krṣna, the controller of the hearts of all, know it instantly and addressed the Mother of the people in true words proper to Her and beneficial to Her in the end.

श्रीकृष्ण उवाच

भज नारायणं साधिब मद्रंणं च चतुर्भुजम् ।

युवानं सुंदरं सर्वेगुणयुक्तं च मत्समम् ॥ 13 ॥

कामड़े कामिनीनां च तासां च कामपूरकम् ।

कोर्टिकंदपलावपर्यं लीलालंकृतमीप्रयम् ॥ 14 ॥

O Chaste One! The four-armed Nārāyaṇa is born from My parts; He is young, of good features and endowed with all qualifications; so much so, he is like Me. He is a Knower of amorous sentiments of women and He fulfils those desires; what to speak of His beauty, ten millions of the God of love are playing in His body.

कोते काँत व भां कृत्वा यदि स्यातुपिंद्छसि ।

त्वतो बलवती राथा न भई ते भविष्यति ॥ 15 ॥

यो यसामदु बलवान्वालिण तो3-दंख्य हिक्षणः ।

कर्थं परतान्यायित यदि स्वयमनीशरः ॥ 16 ॥

O Beloved! And if you desire to marry and remain with Me, that will not be of any good to you. For Rādhā is near to Me; She is more powerful than you. If a man be stronger than another, be can rescue one who takes his shelter; but if he be weaker, how can he then, himself weak, protect his dependant from others.

सर्वैशः सर्वेशास्ताउरां तथा बाधितुम्बमः ।

तेजसा मत्समा सा च रूपेण च गुणेच ७ ॥ १७ ॥

प्राणाधिष्युदेवी सा प्राणांस्वक्ते च कक्षमः ।

प्राणातीय प्रियः पुत्रः केभां वासित च कक्षा ॥ 18 ॥

Though I am the Lord of all, and rule all, yet I cannot control Rādhā. For She is equal to me in power, in beauty, in qualifications, equal to Me in every respect. Again it is impossible for Me to quit Rādhā for She is the presiding Deity of My life. Who can relinquish life? Though a son is very dear to his father, still it may be questioned, is he dearer than his father's life?

त्वं भरे गच्छ वैकुंट तव भई भविष्यति ।

पर्ति तमीशवर्ग कृत्वा मोदस्य सुचिरं सुखम् ॥ 19 ॥

लोपभोहकामाछेधामान्हैसावित्रिता ।

तेजसा त्वतस्या तक्षी रूपेण च गुणेन च ॥ 20 ॥

So, O Auspicious One! Go to the abode Vaikuntha; you will get your desires fulfilled there. You will get for your husband the Lord of Vaikuntha and you will live ever in peace and enjoy

Book IX Chapter IV

happiness Though Lakṣmī is residing there yet like you she is not under the control of lust, anger, greed, delusion and vanity.

तया सार्थ तव प्रील्या गश्वलकालं प्रयास्यति ।

गौरंच च हरिस्तुल्यं कार्यवित प्रदोरिति ॥ 21 ॥

प्रतिविशेषु तां पूजां महतीं गौरविक्तात् ।

मायस्य शुक्लपश्चायां विहायोंचे च सुदिति ॥ 22 ॥

मानवा मनवो देवा मुनीराश्रा मुभुब्बतः ।

She is also equal to you in beauty; qualities, and power. So you will live with her in great delight and Hari, the Lord of Vaikuntha, will treat both of you equally. Moreover, I say this in particular that in every universe, on the fifth day of the bright fortnight of the month of Mâgha, every year, the day when the learning is commenced, a great festival will be held and men, Manus, Devas, and the Munis desirous of liberation.

वस्वो योगिन: सिद्धा नागा शंवर्धिकास: ॥ 23 ॥

मद्रोण कार्यव्यान कर्ये केल्ये लयावधि ।

भक्तिकुताश्र दत्वा वै चोपचाराणि चोडश्र ॥ 24 ॥

करणयशालीक्रविधिना धानेन सत्वनेच च ।

Vasus, Yogis, Nāgas, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Rāksasas all will perform your worship with devotion in every Kalpa till the time of Mahā Pralaya comes. All are required to be Jitendriya (having their senses under control) and Samyamī (concentrating his mind, and with a religious vow) and they will invoke Thee on a jar or on books and then meditate according to what is stated in the Kanva Śākhā of Yajurveda and then worship and sing hymns to Thee.

जितौत्रिया: संवताङ्ठ घरे च पुस्तकेंप्रिय च ॥ २ २५ ॥

कृत्वा सुवर्णपुत्रिकां गंधर्वद्नचर्चितान् ।

कवचं ते ग्रीष्यन्ति कंठे वा दक्षिणे भुजे ॥ २६ ॥

Thy Kava (an armour; a mystical syllable སྟོ, སྟོ) considered as a preservative like armour) is written on the bark of the Bhūrja tree and then with eight kinds of scenls mingled with it is placed within a golden nut or ring named Māduli) and then hold on the neck or on the right arm.

पठिष्यिति च विद्रास: पूजाकाले च पूजिते ।

इन्युक्लेना पूजायामास तां देवी सर्वपूजितान् ॥ 27 ॥

ततस्तपूजनं चक्रुर्बेद्रविष्यणिरावादः ।

अनंतशुपयि धर्मघ्र सुनीऋ: सनकाद्ध: ॥ 28 ॥

सर्वे देवाश्र सुनयो नृपाश्र मानवादः ।

बभूव पूजिता निव्यं सर्वतोकः सरस्तची ॥ 29 ॥

The learned should recite Thy Stotras during worship. Thus saying, the Param Brahma Śri Kṣṇa Himself worshipped the Devi Sarasvatī. Since then, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa, Ananta Deva, Dharma, Sanaka and other Munīndras, all the Devas, Munis, all the kings and all the human beings are worshipping the Devi Sarasvatī. O Nārada! Thus the worship of the Eternal Devi is made extant in the three worlds.

नारद उवाच

पूजाधियानं कवचं धानं चापि निरंतरम् ।

पूजोपयुक्ते नैवेदो पुर्ण च चंदनादिकम् ॥ ३० ॥

वदे वैदिवादो श्रष्णी कौतुहलं मम ।

वतीते इदये शश्रकामिदं श्रुनिसुंदम् ॥ ३१ ॥

Nārada said: O Chief of the Knowers of the Vedas! Now describe to me the methods of worship, Dhyāna, Kavacam, hymns, the appropriate offerings of the Pūjā flowers, sandalpaste and other good things necessary in these worships and which are so sweet to hear. I am ever very eager and anxious to hear these.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

श्रणु नारद बक्षयामि कवणाग्योक्तफपद्धिति ।

जगमानु: सरस्वतः: पूजाविधिममविन्ति ॥ 32 ॥

माध्यस्य शूलकपछ्थगं विद्यारंभदिन्द्रपि च ।

पूर्वहिंह समयं कृत्वा ततार्थि संयतः शृधि: ॥ 33 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! I am now stating the method of worship of the Devi Sarasvatī, the Mother of the Worlds, according to Kanya Śākhā of the Yajurveda. Hear. On the day previous to the fifth day of the bright fortnight of the month of Māgha or the day of commencement of education, the devotee should control his senses, concentrate his mind and take his bath.

स्नाता निविक्रिया: कृत्वा घटे संस्थाय धनिततः ।

स्वीग्योक्तचिक्रियानेन तांत्रिकेनाणायव पुनः ॥ 34 ॥

गणिंशे पूर्वमध्यच्छं ततोःभीष्टा प्रपुजयेत् ।

ध्यानेन वक्ष्यमाणेन ध्यात्वा बाह्यघटे युवम् ॥ 35 ॥

ध्यात्वा पुनः घोडणोपचारेण पुजवेद्युतत् ।

Then he is to perform his daily duties and instal the jar (Ghata) with devotion and according to the Mantras of the Kanva Sākhā or the Tantra, as the case may be. He is to worship first on that Ghata (jar) Ganapati (Gaṇeśa), then meditate the Devi Sarasvatī as described below, invoke Her and again read the Dhyāna and then worship with Śodasopacāra (sixteen good articles offered in the worship).

पूजोपयुक्तनैवेघं यच्च वेदनिरूपितम् ॥ 36 ॥

विश्यामि सीम्य तर्निक्षिद्वाघाटीतं यथायामम् ।

O Good One! Now I am speaking, according to my knowledge, about the offerings as ordained in the Vedas or Tantras.

नवनीतं दिध क्षीरं लाजांक्षा तिललड्डुकम् ॥ 37 ॥

इश्मिषयुर्ग सृकलवर्ण पक्वगुरुं मधु ।

स्वतिकं शक्तीं सृकलधान्ययाक्षानमक्षानम् ॥ 38 ॥

अधिक्रज्यकल्पान्यस्य पूर्णे कृकल्पमोदकम् ।

घृतसैप्रवसंयुक्तं हृदिष्यानं यथोदितम् ॥ 39 ॥

वयगोधूपमूचपांना पिछकं घृतसंयुन्तम् ।

पिछकं स्वतितकस्यापि पक्वरंभाफतस्य च ॥ 40 ॥

परमातं च सपुतं मिष्ठातं च सुधोपमम् ।

नारकैलं तदुर्वकं कसेकं मूलमार्कम ।। 41 ॥

पक्वरंभाफलं चाक श्रीफलं बदरीफलम् ॥

कालदेशोद्वे चाकफलं शुकलं च संकृतम् ॥ 42 ॥

Hear. Fresh butter, curd, thickened milk, rice freed from the husk by frying, sweetmeats (Til Laddu) prepared of Til, sugar cane, sugarcane juice, nice Gud (molasses), honey, svastik, sugar, rice (not broken) out of white Dhāna, cipitak of table rice (Alocāl), white Modaka, Harivsyānna prepared of boiled rice with clarified butter and salt, Piṣṭaka of wheaten flour, Paramānna with ghee, nectar like sweetmeats, cocoanut, cocoanut water, Svastik Piṣṭaka, Svastik and ripe plantain Piṣṭaka, Kaseru

(root), Mūlā, ginger, ripe plantains, excellent Bel fruit, the jujube fruit, and other appropriate white purified fruits of the season and peculiar to the place are to be offered in the Pijā.

सुर्पोथे शुक्रलपुर्णे च सुर्पोथे शुक्रलचन्दनम् ।

नवीने शुक्रलवसचं च शोखं च सुन्दरं मुने ॥ 43 ॥

माल्चे च शुक्रलपुर्णाणां शुक्रलहांरं च भपणम् ।

याडूर्गं च शुर्णी ध्यानं प्रग्रस्यं श्रुतिसुरंम् ॥ 44 ॥

O Nārada! White flowers of good scent, white sandalpaste of good scent, new white clothes, nice conchshell, nice garlands of white flowers, nice white necklaces, and beautiful ornaments are to be given to the Devi. I say now the Dhyānam sweet to hear, of the Devi Sarasvatī according to the Vedas, capable to remove errors! Hear.

तत्रिबोधि मत्थाणि घमभंजनकारणम् ।

सस्वतीं शुक्रतवाणी ससितां सुमनोहान् ॥ 45 ॥

कोदिचन्द्रप्रभामुपुर्णश्रीवृत्तिवर्गता ।

वाद्रिगुर्द्वांगृधाकानां वीणामुसकाधारिणीम् ॥ 46 ॥

तनसारैद्रनिमणिनवभूषणभूषितान् ।

सुभूजितां सुगणरैब्द्विष्णिशवादिधि: ॥ 47 ॥

बंदे भक्णा वंदितां च मुर्नीद्रनुमानवे: ।

एवं धात्या च मूलेन सर्व दत्ता विवरणः ॥ 48 ॥

I hereby bow down to the Devi Sarasvati, of a white colour, of a smiling countenance and exceedingly beautiful, the lustre of whose body overpowers that of the ten millions of Moons, whose garment is purified by fire, in whose hands there are Viña and books, who is decorated with new excellent ornaments of jewels and pearls and whom Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara and the other Devas Munis, Manus and men constantly worship. Thus meditating the Devi, the intelligent persons should offer all articles, after pronouncing the root Mantra.

संसृय कवचं धृता प्राणमेईवद्धवि ।

येवां चेयमिष्टेकी तेषां निवल्धिका मुने ॥ 49 ॥

विद्यारोच च वर्धाने संवैषां पड़भीदिति ।

सर्वीप्यक्तं मृते च वैदिकार्धक्षरः ॥ 50 ॥

Then he is to hymn and hold Kavaca and make

Book IX Chapter IV

Sāṣṭāṅga prānāmas before the Devi. O Muni! Those whose Devi Sarasvatī is the presiding Deity, are not to be spoken of at all (i.e., they will naturally do all these things and with a greater fervour). Besides all should worship the Devi Sarasvatī on the day of commencement of education and every year on the Šukla Pañcamī day of the month of Māgha. The eight-lettered Mantra, as mentioned in the Vedas is the root Mantra of Sarasvatī. (Aim Klim Sarasvatyai namah).

वेयां वेनेवदेशेग वा तेषां स मूल एव च ।

सरस्वती चतुर्थ्वर्ते वहिज्ञायतंमेव च १५ ५ १ १

नक्ष्मीमावार्तिकं चैव मोठेयं कल्पयादरः ।

Or the Mantra to which each worshipper is initiated is his Mūlamantra (not Mantra). Or uttering the Mantra ‘Śrīm Hrim Sarasvatyai Svāhā,’ one is to offer everything to the Devi Sarasvatī. This Mantra is the Kalpa Vṛksa (i.e., the tree yields all desires).

पुना नारायणघोमं वाल्याकीये कृपानिधि: ॥ 52 ॥

प्रदटौ जाह्वतीरौ पुण्यक्षेत्र च भारते ।

भगूर्दंदी च शुकाय पुक्के सुर्यर्वधिं ॥ 53 ॥

चंत्रवर्णिभि मारीचो दटी वाक्यन्ते मुत ।

भूगोष्चैव दटौं तुहो बढ़ा वर्दिकाओं ॥ 54 ॥

आरतीकस्य जरकाफदर्दी क्षीरोदासिधी ।

विभांडाको दटी मेरो ऋष्यशुक्राय धीमते ॥ 55 ॥

Nārāyana, the ocean of mercy, gave in ancient times, this very Mantra to Vālmīki in the holy land Bhārata Varsa on the banks of the Ganges; next Bhrgu gave this Mantra on the occasion of solar eclipse to Maharṣi Śukrācārya on the Puṣkara Tīrtha; Mārīca gave to Brhaşpati on a lunar eclipse; Brahmā gave to Bhrgu in the Badarikā Śārama; Jaratkāru gave to Āstika on the shore of the Kṣiroda ocean; Vibhāndaka gave this to the intelligent Rṣyaśrīga on the Sumeru mountain.

शिव: कणाद्यनुवे गौतमाय दूदी मुत।

सूर्येन यात्रालस्याय तथा कालायानयाय च ॥ 56 ॥

गेप: पाणिगये चैव भगतूजाय धीमते ।

ददौ शाकटायनाय सुतले बलिसंसदि ॥ 57 ॥

Śiva gave this to Kaṇāda and Gautama, Sūrya gave to Yājñavalkya and Kātyāyana, Ananta Deva gave to Pāṇini, to the intelligent Bhāradvāja and to Śākatāyana in Bali's assembly in the Pātāla.

चतुर्वक्षानेपेव मंभ: सिद्धो भवेयुणम् ।

यदि स्यात्मंत्रसिद्धो हि बृहस्यतिसमो भवेत् ॥ 58 ॥

केवचं श्रणु विघ्रप्रे यर्त्नं ब्रहणा पुरा ।

विश्वश्रहा विश्वजयं भृगवे गंधमादने ॥ 59 ॥

If this Mantra be repeated four lakhs of times, all men attain success. And when they become Siddhas with this Mantra, they become powerful like Brhaşpati. In past times, the Creator Brahmā gave a Kavaca named Viśvajaya to Bhrgu on the Gandhamādana Mountain. I now speak of that. Hear.

भूगृकाव

ब्रह्म-ब्रह्माधिवों श्रेष्ठ ब्रह्माननिशयारत ।

सर्वत्र सर्वैन्नक सर्वैग, सर्वैपूजित् ॥ 60 ॥

सरस्वलापत्र कवचं बृहि विश्ववजं प्रभो ।

अयातायमां मंत्राणां समुहंसयुतं परम् ॥ 61 ॥

Once on a time Bhrgu asked Brahmā the Lord of all, and adored by all, thus: 'O Brahman! Thou art the foremost of those that know the Vedas; there is none equal to thee in matters regarding the knowledge of the Vedas; (so much so that there is nothing that is not known to thee; for all these have sprung from thee). Now say about the Viśvajaya Kavaca of the Devi Sarasvatī, that is excellent, without any faults and embodying in it all the properties of all the Mantras.

ब्रह्मोवाच

श्रुणु वास प्रवक्ष्यामि कवचं सर्वकामदम् ।

श्रुतिसारं श्रुतिमुखं श्रुतयुक्तं श्रुतिपूजितम् ॥ 62 ॥

उक्तं कृष्णेन गोतोकें महां वृद्धावने वने ।

रासेयरण विभुना रासे वै रासमंडले ॥ 63 ॥

Brahmā said: O Child What you have asked about the Kavaca of Sarasvati that is sweet to hear, ordained and worshipped by the Vedas, and the giver of all desired fruits, now hear of that. In the

very beginning, the all-pervading Śri Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of the Rāsa circle, mentioned this Kavaca to me in the holy Brūndāvana forest in the abode Goloka at the time of Rāsa in Rāsa Maṇḍala.

तनीय गोपनीयं च कल्यवृक्षसमं परम् ।

अशुतादुतमंत्राणां समूहैरच समान्वितम् ॥ 64 ॥

यद्वा भगावाक्छुकः सर्वैत्येषु पूरितः ।

यद्वा पठनादुब्बनुब्दिमांरच बृहस्पति: ॥ 65 ॥

पठनाद्वाणाहायमी कवीउे वाल्मको पुनिः ।

सावांभुचो मनुरुचेव यद्वृत्वा सर्वपूर्ति: ॥ 66 ॥

This is very secret; it is full of holy unheard, wonderful Mantras. Reading this Kavaca and holding it (on one's arm) Brhaşpati has become foremost in matters of intelligence; by the force of this Kavaca Śukrācārya has got his ascendancy over the Daityas; te foremost Muni Vālmīki has become eloquent and skilled in language and has become Kavindra and Svāyambhuna Manu; holding this Kavaca he has become honoured everywhere.

काणादो गोतम: काव्य: पाणिनि: शाकदायन: ।

प्रयं चकार यद्धुत्वा दक्षः काताययनः स्वयम् ॥ 67 ॥

धृत्वा वेदविषयानं च पुराणान्यविल्जलिन च ।

चकार लीलामाजेय कृष्णद्वीयानः स्वयम् ॥ 68 ॥

Kaṇāda, Gatama, Kanva, Pānini, Śākatāyana, Dakṣa, and Kātyāyana all have become great authors by virtue of this Kavaca; Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Veda Vyāsa made the classification of the Vedas and composed the eighteen Purāṇas.

शातातपश्च संवर्ते वरिष्ठश्व परागरः ।

यद्यत्व पठनदाय्यं यात्रवल्यप्रचकास :। 6 69 ॥

ऋच्यगुंगो भरात्रज्ञशिसको देवलस्था ।

सैनीषिच्यो ययात्रिष्य धृत्वा सर्वेत्र पूर्णितः ॥ 70 ॥

Sātātapa, Samvarta, Vasiṣṭha, Paraśara nd Yājñavalkya had become authors by holding and reading this Sarasvatī Kavaca. Rṣyaśrīga, Bhāradvāja, Āstika, Devala, Jaigisavya, and Yayāti all were honoured everywhere by virtue of this Kavaca.

कवचस्यास्र विरेप्रेत्र ऋषिरेव प्रजापति: ।

स्वयं छंदश्छ बृह्नते देवता शारादंबिका ॥ 71 ॥

सर्वतत्त्वपरिज्ञानसर्वांशसाधनेयु च ।

कवितासु च सर्वसु विनियोगः प्रकर्पिति: ॥ 72 ॥

O Dvija! The Prajāpati Himself is the Rṣi of this Kavaca; Brhatī is its Chanda; and Śāradā Ambikā is its presiding Deity. Its application (Viniyoga) is in the acquisition of spiritual knowledge, in the fruition of any desires or necessities, in composing poems or anywhere wheresoever success is required.

श्री ईंी सरस्वरी स्वाहा शिरो से पातु सर्वतः ।

श्रीवाटद्वातरी स्वाहा भालों में सर्वद्वाजस्मु ॥ ७३ ॥

उं ही सरस्वली स्वाहिति श्रोत्रे पातु निरंतरम् ।

उं श्री ईंी भगवलै सरस्वली स्वाहा तद्यमं सद्वजुषं सद्वजुष् ॥ ७४ ॥

ऐं हुई वायादिध्यै स्वाहा नासां मे सर्वद्वत् ।

हीं विद्याधिष्ठातृदेवे स्वाहा चोर्धे सद्वज्ञि ॥ ७ 5 ॥

उं ई श्री हृं ब्राह्यी स्वाहिति दंर्वर्षिके सद्वज्ञ।

ऐमिवेलाक्षरो मंत्रो मम कंठे सद्वज्ञि ॥ ७ 6 ॥

उं ई श्री हाँग पुत ने प्रीवां स्कंधी ने भी सद्वालु ।

ऊं ट्रीं विद्याधिद्यारुंद्ये सद्वाह वखःसद्वादु ॥ ७ 7 ॥

ऊं ट्रीं विद्याधिर्यस्वा सहा मे पशु नाथिकाम् ।

ऊं ट्रीं कर्ती बाण्ये सद्वाहिते मम हस्तो सद्वादु ॥ 78 ॥

ऊं सर्ववर्गासिकाठे पादुव्यमे सद्वाउत् ।

ऊं वाणाधित्यादुनेवे सहावा सर्वे सद्वाउत् ॥ 79 ॥

May Śrīm Śrīm Sarasvatyaī Svāhā protect fully my head; Śrīm Vāgdevatāyai Svāhā, my forehead; On Śrīm Sarasvatyai Svāhā, my ears always Om Śrīm Śrīm Bhāgavatyai Sarasvatyai Svāhā always my eyes; Aim Śrīm Vāgvādinyai Svāhā, always my nose; Om Śrīm Vidyādhiṣṭhātrī Dēvyai Svāhā, my lips always; Om Śrīm Śrīm Brāhmyai Svāhā my rows of teeth; Aim, this single letter protect my neck; Om Śrīm Śrīm my throat; Śrīm, my shoulders, Om Śrīm Vidyādhiṣṭhātrī Dēvyai Svāhā, always my chest; Om Śrīm Vidyādhi Śvarūpāyai Svāhā my navel; Om Śrīm Klim Vanyai Svāhā my hands; Om Šarvavārnatmi Kāyai Svāhā my feet; and let Om Vāgadhiṣṭhātridevyai Svāhā protect all my body.

எசக்கேவரியைச் சவகா நூலம் சவரெவர்

எசவிர்குழாயவியன் சவராக்நிந்தேர் சவரி 80 11

Book IX Chapter V

<table><tr><td>அட்</td><td>ஞ்</td><td>தீ</td><td>கனி</td><td>சரசலவீ</td><td>கழ்பாளீ</td><td>வர</td><td>வர</td><td>வர</td><td>வர</td><td>வர</td><td>வர</td><td>வர</td><td>வர</td><td>வர</td><td>V</td><td>வர</td><td>வர</td><td>வர</td><td>வர</td><td>வர</td><td>வர</td><td>வர</td><td>வர</td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">சனா்</td><td colspan="2">மர்சாராஜ்</td><td colspan="2">வர</td><td colspan="2">வர</td><td colspan="2">வர</td><td colspan="2">வர</td><td colspan="2">வர</td><td rowspan="2">வர</td><td rowspan="2">வர</td><td rowspan="2">வர</td><td rowspan="2">வர</td><td colspan="2">வர</td><td colspan="2">வர</td><td colspan="2">வர</td><td rowspan="3">வர</td><td rowspan="3">வர</td><td rowspan="3">வர</td><td rowspan="3">வர</td><td rowspan='2">வர</td><td rowspan="2">வர</td><td rowspan="2">வர</td><td rowspan="2">வர</td><td rowspan="2">வர</td><td row="2">வர</td><td rowspan="2">வர</td><td rowspan="2">வர</td><td rowspan="2">வர</td><td colspan="2">வர</td><td colspan="2">வர</td><td colspan="2">வர</td><td colspan="2">வர</td><td colspan="2">&#x27;&#x27;</td><td colspan="2">#x27;&#x27;</td><td colspan="2">#x27;&#x27;</td><td colspan="2">#x27;&#x28&#x27;</td><td colspan="2">#x27;&#x28&#x27;</td><td colspan="2">#x27;&#x28&# x27;</td><td colspan="2">#x27;&#x28&# x&#x27;</td><td colspan="2">#x27;&#x28&# x&#x27;</td><td colspan="2">#x27;&#x28</td><td colspan="2">#x27;&#x28&# x&#x27;</td><td colspan="2">#x27;&#x28&# x</td><td colspan="2">#x27;&#x28&# x&#x27;</td><td colspan="2">#x27;&#x28&# x&quot;</td><td colspan="2">#x27;&#x28&# x&quot;</td><td colspan="2">#x27;&#x28&# x&quot;&#x28&#x27;</td><td colspan="2">#x27;&#x28&# x&quot;&#x28&#x27;</td><td colspan="2">#x27&&amp;</td><td colspan="2">#x27&&amp;</td><td colspan="2">#x27&&amp;</td><td colspan="2">#x27;&#x28&# x&quot;&#x28&#x27;</td><td colspan="2">#x27&&&&amp;</td><td colspan="2">#x27&&amp;</td><td colspan="2">#x27&&amp;</td><td colspan="2">#x28&&amp;</td><td colspan="2">#x28&&amp;</td><td colspan="2">#x28&&amp;</td><td colspan="2">#X</td><td colspan="2">#X</td><td colspan="2">#X</td><td colspan="2">#X</td><td colspan="2">#X</td><td rowspan="2" colspan="2">#X</td><td rowspan="2" colspan="2">#X</td><td rowspan="2" colspan="2">#X</td><td colspan="2">#X</td><td colspan="2">#X</td><td colspan="2">#X</td><td colspan="4">#X</td><td colspan="2">#X</td><td colspan="2">#X</td><td colspan="2">#X</td><td colspan="2">#X</td><td colspan="2">#</td><td colspan="2">#</td><td colspan="2">#</td><td colspan="2">#</td><td colspan="2">#</td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2">#</td><td colspan="2">#</td><td colspan="2">#</td><td colspan="2">#</td><td colspan="2">1</td><td colspan="2">1</td><td colspan="2">1</td><td colspan="2">1</td><td colspan="2">1</td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="4"></td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan=</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>3</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>4</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>5</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>6</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>7</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>8</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>9</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>10</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>11</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>12</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>13</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>14</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>15</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>16</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>17</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>18</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>19</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>20</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>21</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>22</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>23</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>24</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>25</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>26</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>27</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>28</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>29</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>27</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>28</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>29</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>27</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>28</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>29</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>27</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>28</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>29</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>27</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>28</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>29</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>27</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>28</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>29</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>27</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>28</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>29</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>27</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>28</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>29</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>27</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>28</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>29</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>27</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>28</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>29</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>27</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>28</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>29</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>27</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>28</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>29</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>27</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>28</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>29</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>27</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>28</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>29</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>27</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>28</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>29</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>27</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>28</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>29</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td>

Book IX Chapter V

CHAPTER V

On Sarasvati Stotra

श्रीनारायण उवाच

वायंदतायाः स्तवनं श्र्यतां सर्वकामदम् ।

महामुपनिर्ज्ञालक्यो येन तुहाव तां पुरा ॥ १ ॥

गुरुशापाच्य स मुनिन्द्रविधो बभूव ह ।

तदा जमाम दुःखातरं रविस्थानं सुपुण्यदम् ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Nārada! I now describe the

Stotra (hymn) of Sarasvati Devi, yielding all desires that Yajñavalya, the best of the Rsis recited in days of yore to Her. The Munis Yajñavalya forgot all the Vedas out of the curse of Guru and with a sad heart went to the Sun, the great meriting giving place.

संग्राप्य तपसा सूर्यं लोलाकें द्विगोचरे ।

तृशव सूर्यं शोकेन रोरोच च मुटुपुंम्: ॥ 3 ॥

सूर्यसंत पाठयामास वेदं वेदांगमीप्रवर: ।

उवाच सतीहि यावेदैर्षी भक्न्या च स्मृत्तितेचे ॥ 4 ॥

तमित्युक्त्वा दीननाथोउद्योत्थानं चक्तार सः ।

सुनि: सत्ताव च तुताव भक्तिन्यात्मकंधर: ॥ 5 ॥

There he practised asturieties for a time when the Lolákhya Sun became visible to him, when, being overpowered by great sorrow, he began to cry repeatedly; and then he sang hymns to him. Then Bhagavān Sūrya Deva became pleased and taught him all the Vedas with their Ángas (limbs) and said: "O Child! Now sing hymns to Sarasvatī Devī that you get back your memory." Thus saying, the Sun disappeared. The Muni Yājñavalkyā finished his both and with his heart full of devotion began to sing hymns to the Vāg Devī, the Goddess of Speech.

याज्रवल्प्य उवाच

कृपां कुरं जगन्यातमीमेवं हततेजसम् ।

गुरुषाणात्म्यतिष्णई विहाहीर्न च दुःखितम् ॥ 6 ॥

जानं देहि सुर्ति विशा शक्ति शिष्यप्रवोधीभि ।

प्रेथकर्तृलशर्फर्न च सुशिष्यं सुप्रतिहितम् ॥ 7 ॥

प्रतिभा सत्सभाशं च विचाराक्षमतां शुभान् ।

तुर्नं सर्वे दैवयोगावकीभूतं पुनः कुक ॥ 8 ॥

Yājñavalkya said: “Mother! Have mercy on me. By Guru’s curse, my memory is lost; I am now void of learning and have become powerless; my sorrow knows no bounds. Give me knowledge, learning, memory, power to impart knowledge to disciples, power to compose books, and also good disciples endowed with genius and Pratibhā (ready wit). So that in the council of good and learned men my intelligence and power of argument and judgment be fully known.

यथावृतुं भयमिति च करोति देयता पुनः ।

ब्रह्मस्कृपा परमा ज्योतिस्का सनातनी ॥ 9 ॥

सर्विविधाधिद्वी या तस्ये वाण्ये नोः नमः ।

विसर्गविंदुग्रायग्रु यद्यध्रानमेव च ॥ १० ॥

Whatever I lost by my bad luck, let all that come

back to my heart and be renewed as if the sprouts come again out of the heaps of ashes. O Mother! Thou art of the nature of Brahma, superior to all; Thou art of the nature of Light, Eternal; Thou art the presiding Deity of all the branches of learning. So I bow down again and again to Thee. O Mother! The letters Anusvāra, Visarga; and Cardrabindu that are affixed, Thou art those letters.

तद्धिष्ठत्री या देवी तपः नीर्वे नामे नमः ।

व्याख्यास्कला सा देवी व्याख्याधिष्ठतृषीपि ॥ १ १ ॥

यया विना प्रसंख्यावासंखां कर्तु न शक्यते ।

कालसंख्यास्कला या तपः देख्ने नमः नमः ।। १ २ ॥

So obeisance to Thee! O Mother! Thou art the exposition (Vyākhyā) of the Śāstras; Thou art the Presiding Deity of all the expositions and annotations. Without Thee no mathematician can count anything. So Thou art the numbers to count time; Thou art the Śakti by which Siddhāntas (definite conclusions) are arrived at; Thus Thou dost remove the errors of men.

भ्रमसिद्धान्तिका या तस्ये देव्ये नामोनाः ।

सूतिशक्तिज्ञानशक्तिबुद्धशक्तिस्वरूपिणी ॥ १३ ॥

प्रतिभाकल्पनाशिक्तिर्यां च तस्ये नामोनाः ।

सन्तुक्मातो ब्रह्णा ज्ञाने पूषच्छ चत्र वै ॥ १४ ॥

So again and again obeisance to Thee. O Mother! Thou art the Śakti, memory, knowledge, intelligence, Pratibhā, and imagination (Kalpanā). So I bow down again and again to Thee. Sanatkumāa fell into error and asked Brahmā for solution.

वधूम मुकवल्पोरपि सिद्धांतं कर्तुमक्षम: ।

तद्वाजगाम भगवानातमा श्रीकृष्ण ईश्वरः ॥ 15 ॥

He became unable to solve the difficulties and remained speechless like a dumb person. Then Śrī Krṣṇa, the Highest Self arriving there, said: 'O Prajāpati! Better praise and sing hymns to the Goddess of speech; then your desires will be fulfilled.'

उवाच स च तां स्तौहि वाणीमिष्टां प्रजापते ।

स च तुहाव तां बहा चाज्ञा परमात्मनः ॥ १ ६ ॥

Book IX Chapter V

चक्का ततूमसादेन तदा सिद्धांतमुतमम् ।

यदाय्यन्तं पण्ड्छ ज्ञानमेकं वसुंप्रा ॥ 17 ॥

Then the four-faced Brahmā advised by the Lord, praised the Devi Sarasvatī; and, by Her grace, arrived at a very nice Siddhānta (conclusion). One day the goddess Earth questioned one doubt of Her to Ananta Deva, when He being unable to answer, remained silent like a dumb persons.

बभूव मूकवलो5पि सिद्धांतं कतुमक्षमः ।

तदा तां स च तुहाव संत्रस्तः कश्यपात्रना ॥ १ ८ ॥

ततछाका सिद्धान्तं निर्मलं धमर्भजनम् ।

व्यास: पुराणसूत्रं च पण्ड्छ वाल्मिकं यदा ॥ १९ ॥

मौनीभृतघ सस्मार तामेव जगदंविकाम् ।

तदा चकार सिद्धांतं तड्रेण भूनीशुः ॥ 20 ॥

संग्राय निर्मलें ज्ञानं घमाधध्वसंदीपकम् ।

पुराणसूरं शुचा च व्यास: कृष्णकालोद्धः ॥ 21 ॥

At last He became afraid; and advised by Kaśyapa, praised Thee when He resolved the doubt and came to a definite conclusion. Veda Vyāsa once went to Vālmīki and asked him about some Sūtras of the Purāṇas when the Muni Vālmīki got confounded and remembered Thee, the Mother of the world. When by Thy Grace, the Light flashed within him and his error vanished. Thereby he became able to solve the question. Then Vyāsadeva, born of the parts of Śri Kṛṣṇa, heard about the Purāṇa Sūtras from Vālmīki's mouth and came to know about Thy glory.

तं शिवां वेद दूधौ च शतवर्ष च पुक्ले ।

त्वा त्वती वं प्राय्य सत्कर्षितीं बयुवह् ॥ 22 ॥

तवा वेदविषाणां च पुराणं च चकार सः ।

He then went to Puṣkara Tīrtha and became engaged in worshipping Thee, the Giver of Peace, for one hundred years. Then Thou didst become pleased and grant him the boon when he ascended to the rank of the Kavindra (Indra amongst the poets). He then made the classification of the Vedas and composed the eighteen Purānas.

यदा महैदः पपछ्छ तत्चज्ञानं स्वात्रिणय् ॥ 23 ॥

क्षणं तामेव सचित्य तस्मै जानं ददी विषुः ।

पपछ्छ शब्दशालं च महैरूश बृह्मतिम् ॥ 24 ॥

विद्यं वर्षमहर्षे च स त्वा च पुक्रोः ।

तदा त्वत्तो वर्ग प्राय पद्धव्यवर्षमहकम् ॥ 25 ॥

उवाच शब्दशालं च तदर्थे च सुरेश्वगम् ।

अध्यापिताश ये शिष्या यैरधितं मुनीक्षेः ॥ 26 ॥

ते च तां परिसंश्चित्य प्रवर्तेने सुरेश्वगम् ।

When Sadā Śīva was questioned on some spiritual knowledge, by Mahendra, He thought of Thee for a moment and then answered. Once Indra asked Brhaşpati, the Guru of the Devas, about Śabda Śāstra (Scriptures on sound). He became unable to give any answer. So he went to Puşkara Tirtha and worshipped Thee for a thousand years according to the Deva Measure and he became afterwards able to give instructions on Śabda Śāstra for one thousand divine years to Mahendra. O Sureśvari! Those Munis that give education to their disciples or those that commence their own studies remember Thee before they commence their works respectively.

लं संस्तुता पुजिता च मुनीनैर्मनुभानवैः ॥ 27 ॥

दैल्यैंश्य सुरैशाधि ब्रदायिणुगिवादिधि: ।

जडीभृत: सहसायस: पंचवक्रश्रतुगुंखः ॥ 28 ॥

यां सतौतुं किमहं सतीम तामेकायेने मानवः ।

The Munindras, Manus, men, Daityendras, and Immortals, Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa all worship Thee and sing hymns to Thee. Viṣṇu ultimately becomes inert when He goes on praising Thee by His thousand mouths. So Mahā Deva becomes when he praises by His five mouths; and so Brahmā by His four mouths.

इत्युक्त्वा यात्रवल्यम्यक्ष भवित्नभात्मकंधरः ॥ 29 ॥

प्रणानाम निराहारो करोद च पुरुदुर्भुः ।

When great personages so desist, then what to speak of me, who is an ordinary mortal having one mouth only!" Thus saying, the Maharṣi Yājñavalkya, who had observed fasting, bowed down to the Devi Sarasvatī with great devotion and began to cry frequently.

ज्योतिरूपा महामाया तेन दृष्टास्वाव च तम् ॥ 30 ॥

सुकरीत्री घावेयुकत्वा वैकुंदं च जगाम है ।

Then the Mahāmāyā Sarasvatī, of the nature of Light could not hide Herself away. She became visible to him and said: "O Child! You be good Kavindra (Indra of the poets)." Granting him this boon, She went to Vaikuntha.

याज्ञल्वस्यक्तं वाणीस्तोजमेततु च: पठेत् ॥ 31 ॥

सुकरीत्री महावामगी बृह्यपतिममो भवेत् ।

महामूर्षेधु दुर्बुद्धवेभेंके चया पठेत् ॥ 32 ॥

स पंडितश्र मेधावी सुकरीत्रे भवेद्यूवम् ॥ 33 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे नवमस्कन्धे पंचमो:5याय: 15 I

He becomes a good poet, eloquent, and intelligent like Bhraspati who reads this stotra of Sarasvatī by Yājñavalkya. Even if a great illiterate reads this Sarasvatī stotra for one year, he becomes easily a good Pandjit, intelligent, and a good poet.

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Ninth Book on Sarasvatī stotra by Yajñavalkya in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER VI

On the Coming in this World of Lakṣmi, Gaṅgā and Sarasvati

श्रीनारायण उवाच

सरस्वती तु वैकुणे स्वयं नारायणितिके ।

गंगागणेपं कलहात्कल्या धारते सरित् ॥ १ ॥

पुण्यदा पुण्यक्या च पुण्यतीर्थस्ट्रविषी ।

पुण्यविद्धिनिवेल्या च स्थिति: पुण्यवर्ता मुने ॥ 2 ॥

तपस्विनां तपोक्या तपस: फल्राविषी ।

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! Sarasvatī lives always in Vaikuntha close to Nārada. One day a quarrel arose with Gaṅgā, and by Her curse, Sarasvatī came in parts as a river here in this Bhārata. She is reckoned in Bhārata as a great sanctifying holy and merit-giving river. The good persons serve Her always, residing on Her banks. She is the Tapasyā and the fruit thereof of the ascetics.

कृतपायेप्रदाहाव जलदिन्स्वल्पिणी ॥ 3 ॥

ज्ञानासरक्यतीतोये मृता ये मानाव भुवि ।

तेषां स्वितिक्षे वैकृपते सुचिरं हरिसंसदि ॥ 4 ॥

भारते कृतपाद्ध स्नाला तत्र च ஞीलाय ।

मुच्यते सर्वपापेचो विज्ञुलोके वसेप्तिचरम् ॥ 5 ॥

She is like the burning fire to the sins of the sinners. Those that die in Bhārata on the Sarasvatī waters with their full consciousness, live for ever in Vaikuntaha in the council of Hari. Those that bathe in the Sarasvatī waters, after committing sins, become easily freed of them and live for a long, long time in Viṣṇu-Loka.

चातुप्तिमयं चौपनास्यामक्षयायां दिनक्षेये ।

व्यतीपाते च ग्रहणो-व्यस्मिनुप्यदितेप च ॥ 6 ॥

अनुर्पेण यः स्नातो हेतुना शब्दाप्रति या ।

साक्त्यं लभते नूनं वैकुण्ठे स हरेरिप ॥ 7 ॥

If one bathes even once in the Sarasvati waters, during Cāturnāśya (a vow that lasts four months), in full moon time, in Aksyayā or when the day ends, in Vyatipāta Yoga, in the time of eclipse or on any other holy day or through any other concomitant cause or even without any faith and out of sheer disregard, one is able to go to Vaikuntha and get the nature of Śrī Hari.

सरसतीमानुं तत मासमेकं च यो जयेत ।

महामूर्षे: कर्षीग्रंण स भवेत्रात्र संशय: ॥ 8 ॥

नित्यं सरस्वतीतोये यः स्नायाम्बुंडयरः ।

न गर्भवासं कुकते पुनेये स मानवः ॥ 9 ॥

If one repeats the Sarasvati Mantra, residing on the banks of the Sarasvati, for one month, a great illiterate can become a great poet. There is no doubt in this. Once shaving one's head, if one resides on the banks of the Sarasvati, daily bathes in it, one will have not to meet with the pain of being again born in the womb.

इत्वेल क्रवितं क्रिविद्धार्ते गुणाकीतनम् ।

सुखदं कामदं सारं घृय: किं श्रौतुभिद्धसि ॥ 10 ॥

O Nārada! Thus I have described a little of the unbounded glories of Bhārata that give happiness ad the fruits of all desires.

Book IX Chapter VI

सूत उवाच

नारायणवचः शुचा नारदो मुनिसनमः ।

पुनः पपछ्छ संदेहमियं शौनक सत्यम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Sūta said: O Śaunaka! The Muni Nārada hearing thus, asked, again at that very moment to solve his doubts. I am now speaking of that. Hear.

नारंद उवाच

कर्षे सरस्वती देरी गंगाशापेन भारते ।

कलया कलहैनेव बभूव पुण्यदा सरित् ॥ १ २ ॥

श्रवणे श्रुतिसाराणां बधते कौतुकं मम ।

कथापृतेने मे गृति: केन श्रेयस तृयते ॥ १ ३ ॥

Nārada said: O Lord! How did the Devi's Sarasvatī quarrel with the Devi Gāngā and how did she by Her curse turn out in India, into a holy river in giving virtues? I am becoming more and more eager and impatient to hear about this critical incident. I do not find satiety in drinking your nectar-like words. Who finds satiety in getting his good weal?

कर्थ शशाप सा गंगा पुक्तितां तां सरस्वतीम् ।

सा तु सत्वस्कृपा या पुण्यदा सुखदा सदा ॥ 14 ॥

तेजस्विच्यौद्रैयोर्विकारणं श्रुस्तिपूदरम् ।

सुदुर्लंभं पुराणेषु तन्ये व्याख्यातुमहसि ॥ 15 ॥

Why did Gāngā curse Sarasvatī, worshipped everywhere. Gāngā is also full of Sattva Gūnas. She always bestows good and virtue to all. Both of them are fiery and it is pleasant to hear the cause of quarrels between these two. These are very rarely found in the Purānas. So you ought to describe that to me.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

शूण् नारद वक्ष्यामि कक्षामेतां पुरातनीम् ।

यस्या: शवणामाजेण सर्वीयपात्मुचणे ।। १६ ।।

तक्ष्मी सरस्वती गंगा विष्णोः साधिक्याः सहा ।

प्रेणा समासतालित्रिंति सन्त हरिसिधी ॥ १७ ॥

Nārāyana said: Hear, O Nārada! I will describe that incident, the hearing of which removes all the sins. Lakṣmī, Sarasvatī and Gaṅgā, the three wives of Hari and all equally loved, remain always close to Hari.

चकार सैकदा गंगा विण्योगंसुखिनरीक्षणम् ।

ससिता च सकामा च सकाठक्षं पुनः पुनः ॥ 18 ॥

विश्वगेक्षा तद्वयं निरीक्ष्य च क्षणं ततं ।

क्षभां चकार तदद्वृष्टा लक्ष्मीनँव सरस्कती ॥ 19 ॥

One day Gaṅgā cast side-long glances frequently towards Nārāyaṇa and was eagerly looking at Him, with smile on Her lips. Seeing this, the Lord Nārāyaṇa, startled and looked at Gaṅgā and smiled also. Lakṣmī saw that, but she did not take any offence. But Sarasvati became very angry.

बोधायामास पशा तां सचल्वा च समिता ।

क्रोधायिष्ठा च सा वाणी न ग्रांता बभूव ह ॥ 20 ॥

उवाच वाणी भतिरं रत्नाया रत्नलोचना ।

कुपिता कामवेने शश्रत्यसूतिताधा ॥ 21 ॥

Padmā (Lakṣmī) who was of Sattva Guṇa, began to console in various ways the wrathful Sarasvatī; but she could not be appeased by any means. Rather Her face became red out of anger; she began to tremble out of her feelings (passion); Her lips quivered; and She began to speak to Her husband.

सरस्वतुवाच

सर्वेत्र समताबूद्धि: सुदूर्ते: काभिनी प्रति ।

धर्मिछाय सरिष्ठ्य विवर्गति खलस्य च ॥ 2 2 ॥

ज्ञातं सीभायमधिकं गेरायां ते गद्धार ।

कमतायां च तत्तूर्ण न च किंचिन्मायि प्रभो ॥ 23 ॥

The husband that is good, religious, and well qualified looks on his all the wives equally; but it is just the opposite with him who is a cheat. O Gadādhara! You are partial to Gaṅgā; and so is the case with Laksmī. I am the only one that is deprived of your love.

गंगाया: पश्चया सार्थ प्रीतिश्राति सुसंगता ।

क्ष्मां चकार तेतेदे विपरीतं हरिप्रिया ॥ 24 ॥

कि जीवनने मे3देव दुर्भगायाश्रं शप्रानम् ।

निष्कर्ते जीवनं तत्या या पत्थुः प्रेमवंचिता ॥ 25 ॥

It is, therefore, that Gāngā and Padmā are in love with each other; for you love Padmā. So why shall not Padmā bear this contrary thing! I am only unfortunate. What use is there in holding my life?

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

त्वां सर्वे सत्वरूपं च चे वद्रति मनीषिण: ।

ते च मुखां न वेदज्ञा न जानीति मति तत ॥ 26 ॥

Her quite illiterate; they have not the least knowledge of the Vedas. They are quite impotent to understand the nature of your mind.

सरस्वतीवचः शुत्वा द्वृषा तां कोपसंयुताम् ।

मनसा च समालोक्य स जगाम वहीःसभाम् ॥ 27 ॥

गते नारायणे गंगामुवाच निर्भयं रूप ।।

वाग्रधिष्ठादुवैसी सा वाक्यं श्वणतुष्करम् ॥ 28 ॥

O Nārada! Hearing Sarasvati's words and knowing that she had become very angry, Nārāyaṇa thought for a moment and then went away from the Zenana outside. When Nārāyaṇa had thus gone away, Sarasvati became fearless and began to abuse Gaṅgā downright out of anger in an abusive language, hard to hear:

है निलेन्जे है सामोने स्वामीयर्न कोरीक विम ।।

अधिक स्वामीसीभाग्यं विज्ञापितुमिच्छयति १ २ १ ॥

मानचूर्णं कारिवामी तवादा हरिस्विधरी ।

किं कारिवाति ते कान्तो ममैवं कांताल्वणे ॥ ३० ॥

“O Shameless One! O Passionate One! What pride do you feel your husband? Do you like to show that your husband loves you much? I will destroy your pride to-day. I will see to-day, it will be seen by others also, what your Hari can do for you?”

इत्येवमुक्चना गंगायाः केले ग्रहीतुमुभाता ।

वारयामास तां पचा मध्येडरं समाश्रिता ॥ ३ १ । ॥

शगणार याणी तां पचां महावलवती सती ।

वृक्षरूपा सरिद्वा भविष्यासि न संशयः ॥ ३ २ ॥

विपरीतं ततो द्वुहा किंचिछो वक्तुमईसि ।

संतिष्ठिति समाप्तध्ये यथा वृक्षो यथा सत्ति ॥ 33 ॥

Saying thus Sarasvatī rose up to catch hold of Gaṅgā by Her hairs violently. Padmā intervened to stop this. Sarasvatī became very violent and cursed Lakṣmī: 'No doubt you will be turned into a tree and into a river.' In as much as seeing this undue behaviour of Gaṅgā, you do not step forward to speak anything in his assembly, as if you are a tree or a river.

गर्पा श्रुत्वा तु सा देवी न गशाप चुकोप है ।

तत्रेव दुःरिता तस्वी घाणी धृत्वा कोरण चे ॥ 34 ॥

Padmā did not become at all angry, even when she heard of the above curse. She became sorry and, holding the hands of Sarasvatī, remained silent.

असन्तुष्त तु तां तुघुं कोपप्रकृतिताधरम् ।

उदारा भंग तां तेद्वी घरां चारक्तलोचनम् ॥ 35 ॥

श्रीगंगोवाच

ल्यमुत्पुज महोत्रा च पद्य किं के कार्थविस ।

दु:शील मुख्य नष्टा नित्यं वाचालक्षिपणि ॥ 36 ॥

Then Gāngā became very angry; Her lips began to quiver frequently Seeing the mad fiery nature of the red-eyed Sarasvati, she told Lakṣmī: 'O Padme! Leave that wicked foul-mouthed woman.

What will she do to me?

वागधिष्ठी देवीयं सततं कलहप्रिया ।

यावती योग्यता चास्या यावती शक्तिरेव च ॥ 37 ॥

तथा कांगेु वादं च मया साधं च दुर्मुखी ।

स्ववलं यन्मय बलं विज्ञापियुभिच्छिति ॥ 38 ॥

जानन्तु सर्वे तुभयोः प्रभावं विद्मिं सति ।

She presides over speech and therefore likes always to remain with quarrels. Let Her shew Her force how far can she quarrel with me. She wants to test the strength of us. So leave Her. Let all know to-day our strength and prowess.'

इत्येवमुक्त्वा सा देही वाण्ये गर्भा द्वादविति ॥ 39 ॥

सतिलक्ष्मा भवतु सा या त्वां च शपाण च ॥ 40 ॥

अधोमर्त्यं सा प्रयतु सांति यद्रैय पाधिन: ॥ 40 ॥

कली तेचां च पाबानि ग्रहीध्यति न संशय: ।

Thus saying, Gangā became ready to curse Sarasvatī and addressing Lakṣmī, said: O Dear Padmā! As that woman has cursed you to become a river, so I too curse her, that she, too, be turned into a river and she would go to the abode of men, the sinners, to the world and take their heaps of sins."

इत्येवं वचनं श्रुता तां शगण परस्कती ॥ 41 ॥

त्वमेव यास्यसि मही पारिपायं लिभध्यसि ।

एतसिन्नन्तरे तत्र भगवानाजगम है ॥ 42 ॥

Book IX Chapter VI

चतुर्भुज्धतृपिंक्ष पार्वैद्ध चतुर्भुजैः ।

सरस्वती कें धुला वास्यामास वक्षसि ॥ 4 3 ॥

Hearing this curse of Gaṅgā, Sarasvati gave her curse, ‘You, too, will have to descend into the Bhurloka (the world) as a river, taking all the sins of the sinners.’ O Nārada! While there was going on this quarrel, the four-armed omniscient Bhagavān Hari came up there accompanied by four attendants of His, all four-armed, and took Sarasvatī in His breast and began to speak all the previous mysteries.

वोधयामास: सर्वैं: सर्वैं जानं पुरातनम् ।

भुत्वा रहस्यं तासां च शापस्य कलहस्य च ॥ 4-4 ॥

उवाच दु:वित्तालाङ्ग वार्चं सामविक्ती विषुः ।

Then they came to know the cause of their quarrels and why they cursed one another and all became very sorry. At that time Bhagavān Hari told them one by one:

श्रीभगवानुवाच

लक्ष्म तं कलया गच्छ धार्यक्षजगूहं शुणे ॥ 45 ॥

अयोनिसंभवा भूमी तस्य कन्या भविष्यसि ।

तत्रेव दैवदोषण वृक्षतचं लधियस्थि ॥ 46 ॥

मदंशस्यासुर्येव शंखचुंखर्य कामिनि ।

भृत्वा पशुछ्च मतलनी भविष्यसि न सशयः ॥ 47 ॥

O Laksmi! Let you be born in parts, without being born in any womb, in the world as the daughter in the house of the King Dharma-dhvaja. You will have to take the form of a tree there, out of this evil turn of fate. There Śakhacūḍa, the Indra of the Asuras, born of my parts will marry you. After that you will come back here and be my wife as now.

त्रैलोक्यपावनीनामा तुलसीति च महापाशते ।

कतवा च सरिद्वारं शीर्ष गछ्छ वतानने ॥ 48 ॥

भारतं भारतीशापात्राना पचावती भव ।

गंगे यास्यसि पक्षात्चमंगेन विश्वपावनो ॥ 49 ॥

There is no doubt in this. You will be named Tulasī, the purifier of the three worlds, in Bhārata. O Beautiful One! Now go there quickly and be a river in your parts under the name Padmāvatī.

भारतं भारतीग्रांगायात्पायाद्वाय पाणिनम् ।

भगीरथस्य तपसा तेन नीता सुकल्पिते ॥ 50 ॥

नान्मा भागीरथी पृत्ता भविष्यसि महीतले ।

मदंगस्य समुद्रस्य जायगाजये ममात्राय ॥ 51 ॥

O Gange! You will also have to take incarnation in Bhārata as a river, purifying all the worlds, to destroy the sins of the inhabitants of Bhārata. Bhagiratha will take you there after much entreating and worshipping you; and you will be famous by the name Bhāgirathī, the most sanctifying river in the world.

मत्कलांशस्य भूपस्य शंगनेतोक्ष सुरेश्वरि ।

गंगागपेन कलया भारतं गच्छ भारति ॥ 52 ॥

कलहस्य फलं भूक्ष्य सप्तनीयां सहाच्छुते ।

स्वयं च बह्रासदने बह्वणः कामिनी भव ॥ 53 ॥

There, the Ocean born of my pats, and the King Śāntanu also born of my parts will be your husbands. O Bhāratī! Let you go also and incarnate in part in Bhārata under the curse of Gaṅgā. O Good-natured One! Now go in full Aśnas to Brahmā and become His wife.

गंगा यातु शिवस्थानमत्र पद्वैल त्रितुत ।

शगीत च क्रोधश्रिता मद्धता सत्वधीपि ॥ 54 ॥

महासाधी महाभागा सुगीला धर्मवारीणि ।

यदंगकलया सर्वा धर्मध्रौश्छ पत्रिततः ॥ 55 ॥

Let Gāngā go also in Her fullness to Śiva. Let Padmā remain with Me. Padmā is of a peaceful nature, void of anger, devoted to Me and of a Sāttvika nature. Chaste, good-natured, fortunate and religious woman like Padmā are very rare. Those women that are born of the parts of Padmā are all very religious and devoted to their husbands.

शतंकतपः सुगीताश्र प्रतिविश्वेषु पूजिताः ।

तिचोः भार्थविश्छशीताश्र प्रयो भूयाश्र योधाः ॥ 56 ॥

धूयं वेदविकन्धात्र न होते मंगलप्रदाः ।

सीधुंचच्च गृहे येधां गृहिणां सौविशः पुणम् ॥ 57 ॥

They are peaceful and good-natured and worshipped in every universe. It is forbidden, nor, opposed to the Vedas, to keep three wives, three servants, three friends of different natures, at one

place. They never conduce to any welfare. They are the fruitful sources of all jealousies and quarrels. Where, in any family females are powerful like men and males are submissive to females, the birth of the male is useless.

निष्णतं च जन्म तेषामुर्भं च पदे पदे ।

मुंदे दुहा योगिनुद्य यस्य झी कनहर्धिण ।। ५८ १ ॥

अरप्यं तेन गोतस्यं महापरयं गृहाद्धारम् ।

जलानां च स्थालानां च फलनां प्राधितेवे च ॥ ५९ ॥

सत्तं सुलभा तत्र न तेषां गृह एव च ।

At his every step, he meets with difficulties and bitter experiences. He ought to retire to the forest whose wife of foul-mouthed, of bad birth and fond of quarrels. The great forest is better for him than his house. That man does not get in his house any water for washing his feet, or any seat to sit on, or any fruit to eat, nothing whatsoever; but in the forest, all these are not unavailable.

वरमन्नी चैवतिहिंहस्यन्ता सचिषी सुखम् ॥ 6० ॥

ततोप्रि दुःखं पुंसां च दुःखसीप्रिषी धुवम् ।

व्याधिज्ञाला विष्जाला वरं पुंसां वरानते ॥ 6 1 ॥

Rather to dwell amidst rapacious animals or to enter into fire than remain with a bad wife. O Fair One! Rather the pains of the disease or venom are bearable, but the words of a bad wife are hard to bear. Death is far better than that.

दृष्टकीर्णां मुख्जाला मरणादितिच्छते ।

पुंसां च क्षीत्रितां चैव भमांतं शौचमधुवम् ॥ 6 2 ॥

यदहि कुलते कर्म न तस्य फलभामपवेत् ।

निर्दितोउ परैवेर सर्वेथा तरकं बजेत् ॥ 6 3 ॥

Those that are under the control of their wives, know that they never get their peace of mind until

they are laid on their funeral pyres. They never see the fruits of what they daily do. Then have no fame any where, neither in this world nor in the next. Ultimately the fruit is this: that they have to go to hell and remain there.

यश: कॉलिंविद्वीने यो जीवजरिय मृतते हि सः ।

बह्वीनां च सप्लतीनां नेकत्र श्रवेश स्थिति: ॥ 64 ॥

एकभार्य: सुखी नैव बहुभार्य: कदाचन ।

गच्छ गंगे शिवस्थानं बह्वाथ्यानं सरस्तिति ॥ 65 ॥

His life is verily a heavy burden who is without any name or fame. Never it is for the least good that many co-wives remain at one place. When, by taking one wife only, a man does not become happy, then imagine, how painful it becomes to have many wives. O Gange! Go to Śiva. O Sarasvatī! Go to Brahmā.

अत्र तिष्ठनु मदनोहे सुगीतना कमलालया ।

सुसाध्या यस्य पत्नी सुगीता च पतिततः ॥ 66 ॥

इह स्वर्गे सुखं तस्य धर्मो मोक्षः परत्र च ।

पतितज्ञा यस्य पत्नी च मुक्तः: शुचि: सुखी ॥ 67 ॥

जीवन्मृतौ3शुचिरुंःखी दुः:शीलनापतिरेव च ॥ 68 ॥

इति श्रीमदेशीभागवते महापुराणे नवमत्कम्पे ष्ठटी3वादाः ॥ 6 ॥

Let the good-natured Kamalā, residing on the lotus remain with Me. He gets in this world happiness and Dharma and in the next Mukti whose wife is chaste and obedient. In fact he is Mukta, pure and happy whose wife is chaste; and he whose wife is foul-natured, is rendered impure, unhappy and dead whilst he is living.

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the coming in this world of Laksmi, Gaughā and Sarasvati in the Mahāpurānam Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam of

18 000 verses by Maharvi Veda Vāśa

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER VII

On the Curses on Gaṅgā, Sarasvati and Laksmī

श्रीनारायण उद्वारा

इत्युक्चा जगातं नाथो विराराम च नारद ।

अतीव करुदैद्यः समार्तिनय परस्यम् ॥ १ ॥

तापच सर्वा: समालोक्य क्रमेणीचुस्तदेश्वरम् ।

कंपिता: साशुनेशारच शोकेन च भयेन च ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! Thus saying, the Lord of the World stopped. And Laksmī, Gaṅgā and Sarasvatī wept bitterly, embracing one another. All of them then looked to Śri Krṣṇa, and gave vent to their feelings one by one with tears in their eyes,

Book IX Chapter VII

and with their hearts throbbing with fears and sorrows.

सरसल्याचा

विश्रापों देहि है नाथ दुह्यामजनशोचन् ।

सत्यविमानपरित्यक्ता: कुतो जीवित ता: सिक्य: ॥ 3 ॥

देहत्यागं कार्यविमा योगेन भारते धूयन् ।

अत्युवृतते हि नियतं पातुमईति निश्रितन् ॥ 4 ॥

Sarasvati said: “O Lord! What is, now, the way out of this curse, so severe and paining since our births? How long can helpless women live, separated from their husbands? O Lord I certainly say that I will sacrifice my body when I go to Bhārata, by taking recourse to yoga. The Mahātmās always protect all the persons without fail.”

गड़ोवाच

अहं केनापराधेन त्वया त्यक्ता जगत्यते ।

देहत्यागं कार्यवाथि निर्देशायाः कथं लभ ॥ 5 ॥

निर्देशकामिनीत्यागं करोति थो नरो भुवि ।

स याति नरकं घोरे किंकुं सर्वेश्वरोरूप वा ॥ 6 ॥

Gāngā said: “O Lord of the Universe! Why have been abandoned by You. What fault have I committed? I will quit my body. And you will have to partake of the sin due to the killing of an innocent woman. He is surely to go to hell, even if he be the Lord of all, who forsakes in this world an innocent wife.”

पशोवाय

नाथ सत्त्वस्वरूपस्वे कोपः कथमहो तव । प्रसादं कुरु भार्ये डे सदीगस्य क्षमा वरा ॥ 7 ॥ भारते भारतीशगपाछास्यामि कल्या ह्रहम् ।

कियकालातं चितितरन कदा इत्यामिि ने पदम् ॥ 8 ॥

Padmā said: “O Lord! Thou art of the nature of Sattva Guṇa in fullness; what wonder, then, how Thou hast become angry! However let Thou be pleased now with Sarasvatī and Gaṅgā. Forgiveness is the best quality of a good husband. I am ready just now to go to Bhārata when Sarasvatī has cursed me.

दास्यति पापिन: पापं सदा: स्नानावगाहन्त् ।

केन तेन विकृताक्रदामगायिध्यामि ते पदम् ॥ 9 ॥

कलया तुलसीकर्ण धर्मध्वजसुता सती ।

भुक्ला कहा लिधायामि तलतदांबुजमच्छूत ॥ 10 ॥

But tell me, how long I will have to stay there? After how man days I shall be able to see again Thy lotus-feet? The sinners will wash away their dirts of sins in my waters by their constant baths and ablutions? By what means shall I be freed again and get back to Thy lotus-feet.

वृक्षरूपा भविष्यामि त्वद्धिध्रातुदेवता ।

समुद्धार्थसि कदा तन्मे बृहि कृपानिधे ॥ १ १ १ ॥

गंगा सरस्वतीशपाद्धि वास्यति भारते ।

शपेन भुक्ता पापाच्य कदा तां च लधियति ॥ १ २ ॥

How long shall I have to remain in my part, the daughter of Dharma Dhvaja, at the expiry of which I will be able to see Thee again? How long shall I have to assume the form of Tulasi tree, the abode of Thine. O Thou, the Ocean of mercy! Say, when wilt Thou deliver me?

गंगाग्रोपेन चा वाणी यदि व्यास्यित भारतम् ।

कदा शगपाङ्ठिनमुंच्य लिभथिति पंद तव ॥ 13 ॥

तां वाणी ब्रह्मसदने गंगां वा शिवमिन्दितम् ।

गन्तुं बदसि हे नाथ तत्क्रमस्व चे ते वचः ॥ 14 ॥

And if Gāngā have to go to Bhārata, by the curse of Bhāratī, when shall She be freed of the curse and sin and when shall She see back Thy feet? Again if Sarasvatī have to go to Bhārata out of Gāngā's curse, when will that period of curse expire? How many days after shall She be able to come back to Thy feet? Now, be pleased to cancel Thy order for them to go to Brahmā and Śiva respectively."

इत्युक्ता कमताकांतपादं धृत्वा ननाम सा ।

स्वकैशैर्षेहनं कृत्वा करोद च पुनः पुनः ॥ 15 ॥

O Nārada! Thus speaking to Jagannātha, the Devi Kamalā bowed down at His feet and embracing them by Her own hairs of the head, cried frequently.

(उवाच पच्याभस्तां पर्चां कृत्वा स्ववक्षसि ।

ईपद्धात्यप्रसात्यो भक्तानुग्रहकातरः ॥ १ ॥)

श्रीभगवानुवाच

त्वद्वयमाचारिथामि स्वतावयं च सुरोष्वरि ।

समतां च कारिष्यामि शृणु तं कमलेक्षणे ॥ १ ६ ॥

भारती यातु कलया सरिद्धा च भारते ।

अर्थों सा बह्यादवं स्वयं तिक्तु मयूरहे ॥ १ ७ ॥

Now the lotus-naveled Hari, always eager to shew favour to the devotees, smiled and with a gracious heart took up Padmā on His breast and said: "O Suresvari! I will keep my own word, also I will act according as you like. O Lotus-eyed! Hear. How the two ends can be made to meet. Let Sarasvatī go in her one part to have the form of a river and in her one-half part to Brahmā and remain with me in Vaikuntha in Her full parts.

भगीरिणे सा नीता गंगा यास्यति भारते ।

पृतं कर्तुं त्रिभुवनं स्वयं तिहिति मरुग्रे ।। १ ८ ॥

तत्रेव चन्दमौलेश्च मौलिं प्राप्यति वुर्णम् ।

ततः स्वभावतः पूताउ्यतिपुत भाव्यति ॥ १ ९ ॥

Gahgā will have to go in one part to Bhārata to purify the three worlds, as she will be urged eagerly to do so by Bhagiratha. And She will remain in her one part in the matted hair of Candra Śekhara (the Mahādeva with Moon on his forehead), obtained with a great difficulty, and so will remain there purer than her natural pure state.

कलांगागेशने गच्छ त्वं भातरे वामतोचने ।

पदावाती सरिद्धूग तुलसीवृक्षस्तिपणी ॥ 2 0 ॥

कले: पझसहचे च गते वर्षे च मोक्षणम् ।

युक्रमाकं सतितं चैव मद्योहं च गमिष्यय । 2 1 ॥

And let her remain with me in full parts. O Padme! O Lovely-eyed One! You are most innocent; so part of your part will go to Bhārata and be the Padmāvatī river and you will be the Tulasi tree. After the expiry of five thousand years of Kali Yuga, your curse will expire. Again you all will come to My abode.

संपदां हेतुभूता च विपर्पितः सर्वेहैनान् ।

विना विपर्पेमहिमा केभां पदाघवे भवेत् ॥ 22 ॥

मन्योपासकानां च सतां सनानावगाहन्त् ।

युधाकं मोक्षणं पापादूर्शनात्स्यर्गेनात्पा ॥ 23 ॥

O Padme! Calamities are the causes of the happiness of the embodied beings. Without dangers no one can understand the true nature of happiness. The saint worshippers of My mantra who will perform their ablutions in your waters, will free you all of your curse by touch and sight.

पृथिव्यां चानि तीर्थानि संनसंख्यानि सुंदरि ।

भविष्यिति च पृतानि मद्रात्मत्यर्शन्तान् ॥ 24 ॥

मन्मोत्रोपासका भक्ता विश्रमन्ति च भारते ।

पूर्तं कर्तुं तारितुं च सुपवित्वां सचुंधगम् ॥ 25 ॥

O Fair One! By the sight and touch (Darśana, Sparśana) of My bhakts (devotees), all the sacred places of pilgrimages in the world will be purified. For uplifting and sanctifying the holy earth, My mantropāsakas, i.e., Śaivas, Śāktas, Gānapatyas, etc., that are devoted to Brahma all over residing in Bhārata.

मद्रकता यत्र तिहिति पादं प्रशालयेति च ।

तत्स्थानं च महातीर्वे सुपविदं भवेद्युवम् ॥ 26 ॥

सीनीने गोफ्नः कृतनछ श्रद्धाने गुन्तल्याः ।

जीवमुक्तो भवेतृतो मद्धकस्यर्वेशन्ति ॥ 27 ॥

Where My Bhaktas reside and wash their feet, that places is undoubtedly reckoned as the holy places of pilgrimages. So much so that by the sight and touch of My devotees, the murder of a woman, of a cow, of a Brāhmim, the treacherous and even the stealer of the wife of one's Guru will be sanctified and liberated while living.

एकादशपिवहीस्थ सन्याहीनोश्व नासिकाः ।

नरयाती भवेल्नृती मद्धनस्पर्शदर्शनात् ॥ 28 ॥

असिजीर्वी मसीजीवी धारको प्राययाचकः ।

वृषयाहो भवेल्नृती मद्धनस्पर्शदर्शनात् ॥ 29 ॥

Those who do not perform the vow of Ekādaśī, who do not perform Sandhyās, who are Nāstikas (atheists), the murderers, all are freed of their sins by the sight and touch of My devotees. By the sight and touch of My devotees, those who live on their swords, pens, and the royal officials, the beggars in a village and the Brāhmaṇas who carry (deal in) bullocks are also freed of their sins.

Book IX Chapter VII

विश्षासधाती मित्रनो मिथ्यासाध्यस्य दायकः ।

स्याण्याहारी घबेतुतो मद्धनस्पर्शर्सान्ति। ३० ॥

अत्युगो वा पुंदुरकछुं जारकः पुंछुंतपितः ।

पृतछुं घृषतपुंजो मद्धनस्पर्शर्सान्ति। ३१ ॥

The traitors, the mischief makers of their friends, those who give false evidence, those that steal other's trust properties, are also freed of their sins by the sight and touch of My devotees. Those who are foul-mouthed, bastards, the husbands and sons of unchaste women are all purified by the sight and touch of My Bhaktas.

ग्रुणणं सूपाकार्धे देवलो प्रामयाजकः ।

अर्धीक्षितो भवेतृतीं मद्राक्तस्यर्गर्शनात् ॥ ३२ ॥

The Brāhimn cooks of Śūdras, Brāhimns of an inferior order (who subsist upon the offerings made to the images which he attends), the village mendicants, those who are not initiated by their Gurus, these all are purified by the sight and touch of My devotees.

वितरं मातरं भार्थी घाततं तनयं सुताम् ।

गुतेः कुलं च भगिनीं चशुहीनं च बांधवम् ॥ 33 ॥

श्रश्रं च श्रगुरं चैव यो न पुणाति सुंदीर ।

स महापातकी पुत्तो मद्धकत्सर्शैर्नानां ॥ 34 ॥

O Fair One! The sins of those persons who do not maintain their fathers, mothers, brothers, wives, sons, daughters, sisters, the blind, friends, the families of the Gurus, the fathers-in-law, the mothers-in-law are also removed by the sight and touch of My devotees.

अश्व्यनागरकश्रैव मद्धक्तनिदंकस्तथा ।

गृत्रात्रभोजी विग्रस्त पुते मद्धक्तर्शन्ति ॥ 35 ॥

देवद्रवायाहती च विग्रद्व्यायहारकः ।

लश्रालीहरसानां च विमेता दुहितुलथा ॥ 36 ॥

महापातिकनश्रैव गृज्ञाणां गरवाहकाः ।

भवेयुते पुताङ्ग मद्धक्तस्यर्शिनन्ति ॥ 37 ॥

Those that cut the Aśvattha trees, that slander My devotees, and the Brāhmins that eat the food of Śūdras, are also freed of their sins. Those who steal the Deva's articles, the Brāhmaṇa's articles, those that sell lac, iron, and daughters, those who

commit Mahā Pātakas (Brahmahatya, Surāpānam, Steyam, Gurbanganāganah, Mahānti pātakānyāhuh, tatsamsargasheha Pañcamam) and those that burn the Śūdra's dead bodies, these also are freed of their respective sins by the sight and touch of My devotees."

श्रीमाहलक्ष्मीकावार

भक्तानं लक्षणं बृहि भक्तानुग्रहकातर ।

येघां तु दर्शनस्यर्सस्तयः पुता नराधमः ॥ 38 ॥

हरिभक्तिविश्रीना प्रहाहड्रारसंयुता: ।

स्वप्रशंसाता धृतां: शाखा साधुनिंदका: ॥ 39 ॥

Mahā Laksmī said: “O Thou gracious to faithful attendants! What are the characteristics, the marks of those Bhaktas of Thine that Thou hast spoken of just now whose sight and touch destroy instantly the Mahāpātakas (five great sins), that are destroyed after a long time by the water of the Tirthas and the earthen and stone images of the Gods.

पुनीत सर्वतीर्थानि येवां सनावागवाहान्त ।

येचं च पादरजसा पुता पादोदकान्मही ॥ 40 ॥

येचं संदर्भनं स्पर्शे ये वा वांछिति भारते ।

सर्वेषां परतो लाभो वैशवानां सामगमः ॥ 41 ॥

न ह्यामयाति तीर्थिति न देवा मृष्टिकलमायाः ।

ते पुनंत्युकालेन विद्युभक्ताः क्षणादहो ॥ 42 ॥

The sins of the vilest of men, devoid of Hari bhakti, vain and egoistic, cheats, hypocrites, slanderers of saints, vicious souls are destroyed by your Bhaktas, whose touch and ablutions sanctify the sacred places of pilgrimages; by the touch of the dust and water of whose feet, the earth is purified; whom the Bhaktas of Bhārata always pray to see; ad there is nothing higher than the meeting of those Bhaktas."

सूत उवाच

महालक्षीवचः शुत्वा लक्षीकांतक्ष सस्मितः ।

निगृहतच्चं क्रविंतुमारि श्रेशोचक्रमे ॥ ४३ ॥

Sūta said: O Great Kṣi! Thus hearing the words of Mahā Lakṣmī, the Lord smiled and began to speak about the secret things or the marks of the Bhaktas.

श्रीभगवानुवाच

भक्तानां लक्षणं लक्ष्म गूर्ड श्रुतिपुर्णायो: ।

पुण्यस्वरूपं पापचं सुखदं घृष्टिमुक्तिदचम् ॥ 4 4 ॥

सारभृतं गोपनीयं न वत्क्यं खलेषु च ।

त्वां पवित्रां प्राणतुल्यां कथयामि निशमाय ॥ 4 5 ॥

O Lakṣmī! The marks of the Bhaktas are all mentioned very hiddenly in Śrutis and Purāṇas. These are very sanctifying, destructive of sins, giving happiness, devotion, and liberation. These are never to be described to deceitful persons; these are the essences and to be kept hidden. But you are very simple and like my life.

पुरुवल्बन्रादिष्णुभंगो यस्य करणें पतिध्यति ।

वर्तिते वैद्यतं चापि पत्रिकं च नरोतमम् ॥ 46 ॥

I therefore speak to you. Hear. O Fair One! All the Vedas declare him to be holy and the best of men, in whose ears are pronounced from the mouth of a Guru, the Viṣṇu mantra.

पुक्रपाणां शर्ते पूर्वे तथा तज्जन्मात्रतः ।

स्वार्थ्यं नरकस्यं वा मुक्तिमामोति तक्षणात् ॥ 47 ॥

धै: करिष्ठात्र वा जन्म लब्धं येषु च जंतुम् ।

जीवन्मुक्तानु ते पूता वांति काले हरेः पदम् ॥ 48 ॥

At the very moment of his being born into this world, one hundred generations back of that person, whether they be at that time in heaven or hell, get instantaneous liberation and if any of them happen to be born then as Jivas, they become liberated at once while living and finally get Viṣṇupadam (the place of Viṣṇu).

मद्धक्तिगुक्तो मवल्यच स पुक्तो मदुगणान्वितः ।

मदुगणाधीवृत्तिर्वः: कथाविष्टचर संततम् ॥ 49 ॥

मदुगणश्रुतिमाजेण सानंदः पुलकान्वितः ।

सगद्रः साशुनेत्रः स्वातमविस्मत एव च ॥ 50 ॥

That mortal is My Bhakta (devotee) who is full of devotion to Me, who always repeats My glories and acts according to My directions, who hears with all his heart My topics, and hearing which, whose mind dances with joy, whose voice gets

checked and tears incessantly flow out from whose eyes, who loses his outward consciousness. Such a man is indeed, My Bhakta.

न वांछति सुखं मुक्ति सालोक्यादिच्छायम् ।

ब्रहात्यममरत्वं ना ताईतां मम सेवेन ॥ 51 ॥

इज़्तर्वं च मनुत्वं च ब्रहात्यं च सुवुतंभम् ।

स्वर्गोराज्यादिभोगं च स्वदेपेपि च न बोहिति ॥ 52 ॥

My Bhaktas do not long for happiness, or Mukti, or the four states Sālokya, Sāyujya, Sāmpiya and Sārṣṭi, nor the Brahmahood, nor the Devahood (the state of immortality); they want only to do Sevā (service) to Mc and they solely intent on doing this. Even in dreams they do not desire the Indraship, Manuship, the state of Brahmā, so very difficult to be had; nor do they want the enjoyment of kingdoms and heavens.

भर्मिति भारते भक्तास्तादृजन्म सुदुर्भिभम् ।

मदुगणशवणा: शाव्यामाणीनिवं मुदात्विता : 11 53 ॥

ते यांति च महीं पुल्चा नरं तीर्थे मानलवम् ।

इत्वेब कवितं सर्वे पदो कुर्रु यथोचितम् ॥

तद्वीरया तात्वच्छूर्गैरिस्तबी सुखासे 11 54 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीरापातते महापुराणे नवमकंधे

सप्तमोउधाय: 11 7 ||

My Bhaktas roam in Bhārata, eager to hear My glories, and always very glad to recite My sweet glorious deeds. The birth of such Bhaktas in Bhārata is very rare. They purify the world and go ultimately to My abode, the best of all Tirthas (sacred places). Thus I have spoken O Padme! all that you wanted to hear. Now do as you like." Then Gaṅgā and others all went to obey the order of Śrī Hari, Who went to His own abode.

Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Ninth Book on the curses of Gaṅgā, Sarasvatī, and Lakṣmī and the way to freedom thereof in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgāvatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter VIII

CHAPTER VIII

On the Greatness of Kali

श्रीनारायण उवाच

सरस्वती पुण्यक्षेत्रमाजगाम च भारते ।

गंगाशपेन कल्या स्वयं तस्थी हरे: पदे ॥ १ ॥

भारती भारतं गत्वा बाह्यी च बह्वण: प्रिया ।

वाण्यधित्यादुवेदी सा तेन वाणी प्रकर्षितिति ॥ 2 ॥

Nārānyaa said: A part of Sarasvatī descended in this Bhārata Punya Bhūmi (land of merits), owing to the curse of Gāngā; and She remained in full in Viṣṇu's region, the abode of Vaikunṭha. She is named Bhāratī, on account of Her coming to Bhārata; she is called Brāhmī because she is dear to Brahmā; and She is called Vānī as She presides over Speech.

सरोहायां च सोतासु सर्वेत्र ही रुपयते ।

हरि: सरस्वांस्तस्ये चैने नामा सरस्वती ॥ 3 ॥

सरस्वती नदी सा च तीर्थेक्षा च पावनी ।

पार्थितं पापदाहाय जलदान्नस्वाक्षिपणी ॥ 4 ॥

Hari is seen everywhere, in tanks, in wells, in running streams (i.e., in Saras). Because He resides in Saras, therefore He is called Sarasvān. Vānī is the Śakti of that Sarasvān; therefore She is denominated Sarasvatī. The river Sarasvatī is a very sacred Tīrtha. She is the burning fire to the fuel of sins, of sinners.

पश्चाद्वारीयी नीता महीं भागीरेवेन च ।

स वै जगाम कर्या वाणीशपाने नाद ॥ 5 ॥

तत्रैव समये तां च द्वारा शिरसा शिवः ।

वेगं सेतुमयं शक्तो घुवः प्रार्थनया विधुः ॥ 6 ॥

O Nārada! Through the curse of Sarasvatī, the Devi Gāngā also assumed the form of a river in part. She was brought down to this earth at the request of Bhagiratha Hence she is called Bhāgirathi. While Gāngā was rushing down to the earth Śiva capable to bear the great rush of Her, held Her on His head at the request of the Mother Earth.

पदा जामा कलया सा च पदावाती नदी ।

भारतं भारतीशापात्त्वयं तस्थो हरे: पदे ॥ 7 ॥

ततोर्ज्या या सा कल्या लेपे जन्य च भारते ।

धार्मवजसुता लक्ष्मीविंख्याता तुलसीति च ॥ 8 ॥

Lakṣmī also, through the curse of Sarasvatī came in part of parts to Bhārata as the river Padmāvatī. But She remained in full with Hari. Lakṣmī appeared also in, Her other part as the well-known daughter Tulasī of the king Dharmadhvaja in India.

पुरा सरस्वतीशपात्यश्राच्च हरिशपात: ।

बंभूव युक्षरूपा सा कल्या विश्वपावनी ॥ 9 ॥

कलः: पढ़सहर्षे च वर्ष स्थल्या च भारते ।

जग्मुताशु सरिद्धुं विहाय श्रीहैः पदम् ॥ 10 ॥

Last of all, through Bhāratī's curse and by the command of Śrī Hari, she turned into the Tulasi trees, purifying the whole world. Remaining for five thousand years of Kali, all of them will quite their river appearances and go back to Hari.

यानि सर्वाणि तीर्थानि कारीयोद्धावनं विना ।

यास्यति सार्थ्त पौधिक्य दैकुणतमात्रा हरेः ॥ १ १ ॥

शाल्याम: शक्तिश्वी जगाधध्य भात्मा ।

कलैदंगसहचते त्यक्त्वा वांति निजं पद् ॥ १ २ ॥

By the command of Śri Hari, all the Tirthas save Kāśī and Vrndāvana will go along with them to Vaikunjtha. Next at the expiry of the ten thousand years of Kali, Śalāgrāma Śilā (the stone piece worshipped as Nārāyaṇa) Śiva, and Śiva Śakti and Puruṣottama Jagannātha will leave the soil of Bhārata and go to their respective places, (i.e., the Māhātmayas of these will be extinct from Bhārata).

साध्वश्र पुराणानि शंखानि श्राद्रतपो ।

वेदोक्तानि च कर्माणि ययुसैः साध्वीये च ॥ 13 ॥

देवयुजा देवनाम तक्लितिगुणक्लोर्निम ।

वेदोर्भानि च शाखानी ययुसैः साध्वीये च ॥ 14 ॥

There will then case to be the saints (of Śiva Śakta, Gānapatya and Vaiṣṇava sects, (eighteen) Purāṇas, the blowing of conch shells (auspicious sings), Śrāddhas, Tarpanas, and all the rites and

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

ceremonies dictated by the Vedas. The worship and glorification of the Gods, the recitation of their praises, their names will be extinct. The Vedas with their Angas will no longer be heard of. All these will disappear with them.

संतछ सत्यधर्मंु वेटाङ्ग प्रामदेवता: ।।

जतं तपशाननं वयुस्तैः साधमेव च ।। १५ ।।

वायावारतता: सर्वे मिथ्याकपटसंयुता: ।

तुलसीरिता पूजा भविष्यति ततः परम् ।। १६ ।।

The assembly of the Sâdhus, the true Dharma, the four Vedas, the village Devas and Devís, the Vratas (vows) the practising of the austerities, fasting, all will disappear. All will be addicted to the Vâmācāra ritual (the left-hand ritual Tântrik form of worship; sarcastically used in the sense of drinking wine and eating flesh, etc.)

शठा: कृत्त दाँधिकाठ्य महाईकारस्येतृतः ।

चोराश्र हिंसकाः सर्वे पशिव्यिति ततः परम् ॥ 17 ॥

पुंसे घेदः स्तीविघते विवाहो वासपि निर्भयः ।

स्ववामिभेदो वस्तूनां पशिव्यति ततः परम् ॥ 18 ॥

They will speak falsehood and be deceitful. If any body worships, his worship will be void of Tulasi leaves. Almost all will be deceitful, cruel, egoistic, thievish and mischievous. Men will be at variance with one another; women will be at variance with one another; no fear will exist in marriage ties.

सर्वे क्रीवारणाः पुंस: पुंशल्यश्र गृहे गृहे ।

तर्नैभैर्नसैन: शग्रवत्थामित ताद्ययैत च ।। १९ ॥

गृहेश्वरी न गृहिणी गृही भृत्याधिकोर्धमः ।

Properties will be only of those that will make them (i.e., there will cease to be any inheritance from father to son and so forth). Husbands will be obedient to their wives; unchaste women will be in every house. Wives will rebuke their husbands by incessant noisings and chidings. Wives will be the sole mistresses of houses and husbands will stand before them as servants with folded palms.

चेटीदासमणो बधा: शव्यूश्र शव्यूग्रस्वा || 20 ||

कतारी बलिनो गेहे योगिसंबंधिधायाः ।

विद्यासंबंधिधिध: सार्थं संभाषायि न विहते ॥ 21 ॥

तबाउपरिचिता लोकासल्या पुंसघ बाँधवाः ।

सर्वकर्माक्षम: पुंसो योषितामात्रया विहा ॥ 22 ॥

Fathers-in-law and mothers-in-law will be their servants. The brothers of wives, and their friends will be the managers of the household affairs. But there will be no friendship with one's class fellows. The brothers and friends of the house owners (masters of the house) will appear quite strangers as if they are new-comers. Without te command of the housewives, the masters of the houses will be unable to do anything.

बह्रास्त्रविश्र: शूत्रा जात्याचारविवर्षिताः ।

संख्या च यत्रामूत्र च भवेल्लुप्त न संयशः ॥ 23 ॥

मेल्छाचारा भाविध्यिते वर्णांश्वार एव च ।

मेल्णशालये पहिध्यिते स्वाशास्त्री विहाय च ॥ 24 ॥

The divisions of caste (Brāhmana, Kṣattriya, Vaīśya, and Śūdra) will entirely disappear. Far from practising Sandhyā Vandanam and other daily practices, the Brāhmanas will cease to hold the holy threads even on their bodies. The four colour-classes will practise the doings of the Mleechas, read the Śāstras of the Mleechas and forsake their own Śāstras.

ब्रह्मब्रविश शंरा: श्रूजागां सेवका: कलौ ।

सुपकाता धावकाक्ष युचवाहाक्ष सर्वेशः ॥ 25 ॥

सत्यहीना जना: सर्वे सत्यहीना च मेदिति ।

फलहीनाक्ष तत्वोपत्यहीनाक्ष योषितः ॥ 26 ॥

The Brāhmins, Kṣattriyas, and Vaiśyas will become the slaves of Śūdras, will become their cooks, runners and carriers of buffaloes. Every one will be devoid of truth. Earth will not yield any grains; trees will not yield any fruits and women will be isuseless.

क्षीरतीनास्तथा गाकः श्रीर सर्पिविजितम् ।

दंपती प्रीतिहीनी च गृहिण: सत्यवर्जितः ॥ 27 ॥

प्रतापहीना भृपाश प्रजाश करपीडिताः ।

जलहीना महान्यो दीर्घकाकंदरादयः ॥ 28 ॥

The cows will not yield milk; even if there be a little, milk, ghee will not come out of it. The affection between husband and wife will die out

Book IX Chapter VIII

and the families will be devoid of truth. The King will not wield any powers; the subjects will be over burdened with taxes. The ever flowing big rivers, the petty streams, the caves of mountains all will gradually have very little water in them.

पर्महीन: पुण्यहीना वर्णाधुसार एव च ।

लक्षेपु पुण्यवान्कोरि न तिहिति ततः परम् । २ ९ ॥

कृस्तिता विकृताकारा नरा नार्यंहा बालकाः ।

कुवार्ता कुस्तितः शब्दो भविष्यित ततः परम् ॥ ३० ॥

The Four Varṇas will be devoid of Dharma and Punya (merit, virtue). One in a lakh may be virtuous. Afterwards that too will cease. Men, women, boys, all will be ugly and deformed. They will utter bad words and vile sounds.

कैचिद्यामाङ्ग नगर नरून्या भयानकाः ।

कैवित्वल्यकृतीयेग नेण च समाविताः ॥ 3 1 ॥

अरप्यानि भविष्येति प्रामेषु नगरेष च ।

अरप्यवासिनः सर्वे जनारच करपीक्षिताः ॥ 3 32 ॥

Some villages and towns will be completely deserted by men and will look terrible; at some others few cottages with few inhabitants will be seen. Villages and town will be jungles and jungles will become filled with men. The inhabitants of the forests will become heavily taxed and disconsolate.

सस्त्रयिन च भविष्यंति तडागेषु नदीषु च ।

प्रकृष्टशेजरा हीना भविष्यंति कलो युने ॥ 33 ॥

अलौकवादिनो पूर्ति: शठाशास्यवादिनः ।

प्रकृतयिन च क्षेजाणि सस्यहीनानि नार्च ॥ 34 ॥

The beds of rivers and lakes will become dry owing to want of rains and will be cultivated. The Kulinas of high families will become very low The whole earth will be filled with liars, untruthful cheasts and hypocrites. The lands, though cultivated well, will yield grains in name.

हीना: प्रकृष्ट धिन्नो देवभक्ताश्र नासिका: ।

हिसकाक्ष द्वशाहीना: पौराक्य नश्वातिन: ॥ 35 ॥

वामना व्याधियुक्ताश्र नार नार्येख सर्वतः ।

स्वल्यायुगो गदायुक्ता यौवने रहिता: कलै ॥ 36 ॥

Those who are well known as he millionaires,

they will become poor and those who are devoted to the Devas will be atheists. The towns folk will have no trace of mercy; rather they will hate and envy their neighbours and turn out murderers of men. In the Kali age, males and females will be, everywhere, of a dwarfish stature, diseased, shortlived, and of very little youthful virility.

पलिता: पोडेशे वर्षे महापूज्धा विशगतो ।

अष्टवर्षा च युवती रजोयुक्ता च गर्भिणी ॥ 37 ॥

वस्तरांतप्रमृता स्त्री योडेशो च जरात्रिता ।

पतिपुत्रवती काविस्वां बंध्याः कली युगे ॥ 38 ॥

The hairs will turn out grey no sooner the people reach their sixteenth year. And they will be very old when they become twenty years old. The girls of eight years will have menstruation and will become pregnant. They will deliver every year. Old age will attack them when they become sixteen years old. Some women will have their husbands and children living. Otherwise almost all will be barren, childless and children living. Otherwise almost all will be barren, childless.

कन्यासिक्रियण: सर्वे वर्णाध्रतार एव च ।

मातृजावायूनां च जारोपेतात्रभक्षाः ।। ३ ३ १ ॥

कन्यानां भपीनीनां वा जारोपातज्जीविनः ।

हरेर्नीन्तं विक्रियणो भविष्यितं कलो युगे ॥ ४० ॥

The four Varnas will sell their daughters. The paramours of the mothers, wives son's wives, daughters and sisters will be the source of support to them all. No one will be able, without money, to collect the merits by repeating the name of Hari.

स्वयमुसूघ्र बानं च कांतिवर्धन्हिते ।

ततः पशुत्स्वतंच न स्वयमुल्लंचिधिति ॥ 41 ॥

देववृत्ति ब्रह्मृत्ति वृत्ति गुरुकुल्य च ।

स्वत्नां परदर्तां वा सर्वमूल्लंचिधिति ॥ 42 ॥

Persons will make gifts for name and fame and ultimately will take back what they had made as gifts. If there be any gifts made by one's own self or by one's forefathers for a Deva purpose or for Brāhmins or for the families of the Gurus, there will not be found wanting attempts to take back those gifts.

कन्यकामानिः: केचित्केचिच्च प्रवश्यानिः ।

केचिद्धूपामानिःः केचिद्धे सर्वेगानिःः ॥ 4 3 ॥

धर्मानीगामिनः केचित्सवनीमातुगामिनः ।

धातुजायागामिनश भविष्यंत कली युगे ॥ 4 4 ॥

अन्यायागमनं चैव कर्त्रियां गृहे गृहे ।

मातुयोर्नि परित्यज्य विहार्थिति सर्वतः ॥ 4 5 ॥

पत्नीना निणीयो नास्ति घनुर्णा च कलौं युग ।

प्रजानी चैव ग्रामाणां बस्तूनां च विशेषतः ॥ 4 6 ॥

Some will go to daughters, some to mothers-in-law, some to the wives of sons, some to sisters, some to mothers of co-wives, some will go to the brother's wives. In every house, those who are unfit to be mixed will be mixed with, excepting one's mother. In Kali Yuga who is whose wife? And who is whose husband? There will be no certainty; who is whose subject and what village is to whom? There will be no surety that such a property belongs to such and such a man.

अतौकावादिन: सर्वे सर्वे चोरायु पतयः ।

परस्परं ईसकासुं सर्वे च नरयातिनः ॥ 47 ॥

ब्रह्मश्रविशण शेगा भविधिंति च पाचिनः ।

लक्षालोहरसाना च व्यापारं लवणस्य च ॥ 48 ॥

वृववाहा विवर्शेशः शुत्राणों शवदाहिनः ।

श्रूत्राभोधीनिः सर्वे सर्वे च वृषलीताः ॥ 49 ॥

All will turn out to be liars, licentious, thieves, envious of other's wives, and murderers of men. In the houses of the Brāhmins, Kṣattiriyas, and Vaiśyas, the three higher castes, the current of sin will flow. They will live by selling lac, iron, and salts prohibited by the Śāstras. The Brāhmins will drive buffaloes, burn the dead bodies of the Śūdras, eat the food of the Śūdras and go to unchaste women.

पढ़यज्विहौनाङ्ग कुटुराजी च भोजिनः ।

यज्सूरविहौनाङ्ग संयागैचविहौनाकः ॥ 50 ॥

पृंशली वारुध्वीजी कुटुनी च रजस्वला ।

विप्राणां रंधनागरे भविष्यति च पाचिका ॥ 51 ॥

There will be no more faith existing in the five Rsi Yajñas. Almost every Brāhmin will not observe the vows of Amāvasyā Niśipālena. The holy

threads will be cast away and the Sandhyā Vandanam and cleanliness and good practices will cease altogether. The unchaste women who deal in giving loans, etc., and live on interests and the procureses during menstruation will cook in Brāhmin families.

अज्ञानां निवमो नासित योनीनां च विशेषतः ।

आग्रमाणां जानना च सर्वे पेलखा: कली युगे ॥ 52 ॥

एवं कली संप्रवृते सर्वे नेलछमयं भवेत् ।

हस्तप्रमाणे चृक्षे च अंग्रुहे चैव मानये ॥ 53 ॥

There will be no distinction of food, no distinction of wombs, no distinction of Śāramas, and no distinction of persons. All will turn out Mleechas. O Nārada! Thus, when the Kali will have its full play, the whole world will be filled with Mleechas, the trees will be one hand high and the men will be of the size, of a thumb.

विप्रस्य विष्यायस: पुत्र: कल्कभंवित्यि ।

नारायणकलोश्व भगवान् बलिनां वर: ॥ 54 ॥

दीर्घिं करावालेन दीर्घोटकवाहनः ।

सेन्द्रष्टग्न्यां च पुरिवर्गे जितरोज कार्यिति ॥ 55 ॥

Then the most powerful Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa will incarnate in His part in the house of a Brāhim named Viṣṇuajāś aś his son. Mounted on a long horse, holding a long sword He will make the world free of the Mlechas in three nights.

निर्मेच्छां बसुधां कृत्वा चोत्थानं कार्यिति ।

अराजका च वसुधा दस्युग्रता भयिषयिति ॥ 56 ॥

स्युगग्रामणा घडुगं वर्धेधारणतृता मही ।

लेकशुग्या वृक्ष्यान्या गृह्गान्या भयिषयिति ॥ 57 ॥

Then he will disappear from the face of the Earth and She will be without any sovereign and be filled with robbers. There will be incessant rain, for six nights and it will rain and rain and the whole earth will be deluged; no traces of men, houses, and trees.

ततश्र द्वारशादित्या: कार्थ्वल्युदयं मुने ।

प्राप्नोति शुक्रतां पृथ्वी सभा तेषां च तेससा ॥ 58 ॥

कली गते च दुर्घर्य प्रमुने च कुत युगे ।

तपःसत्वसमायुक्तो धर्म: पूर्णों भविष्यति ॥ 59 ॥

Book IX Chapter VIII

After this the Twelve Suns will rise simultaneously and by their rays the whole water will be dried up and the earth will becomes level. Thus the dreadful Kali will pass away when the Satya Yuga will come back, Tapasyā and the true religion and Sattva Guna will prevail again.

तपसिन्धि प्रथिति वेदता बाहाणा भृति ।

पतितन्ता प्रथिति योषितश गृहे गृहे ॥ 60 ॥

राजान: श्रविणा: सर्वे विघ्रभक्ता मन्स्विनः ।

प्रतपवर्ते धर्मिष्ठा: पुर्यकर्मततः सदा ॥ 61 ॥

The Brāhmins will practise Tapasyā, they will be devoted to Dharma and the Vedas. The women will be chaste and religious in every house. Again the wise and intelligent Kṣattriyas devoted to the Brāhmaṇas will occupy the royal thrones and their might, devotion to the Dharma and love for good deeds will increase.

दैर्या वाणिज्यपित्त विष्णसन्त्र धार्मिकतः।

ग्रृग्रंश पुराणशीलाश्व धर्मिधि विग्रसेविनः ॥ 6 2 ॥

विश्रश्रजिशेगं संग्र हेवीभवितपरायणः ।

देवीमंत्रतः सर्वे देवीधानपरायणाः ॥ 6 3 ॥

The Vaiśyas will again go on with their trades and their devotion to their trade and the Brāhmins will be reestablished. The Śūdras, too, will be gain virtuous, and serve the Brāhmins. Again the Brāhmins Kṣattriyas, and Vaiśyas and their families will have Bhakti towards the Devi, be initiated in Devi Mantras and all will meditate on the Devi.

श्रुतिस्मृतिपुराणज्ञ: पुंमांसो स्रुतुपामिन: 1

लैगो नासिल हृष्यमर्य पूणों धर्म: कृते युगे ॥ 6 4 ॥

धर्मक्षिपाच्च नेतायां द्विपाच्च द्वागरे ततः ।

कलौ वृतं चैकपाच्च सर्वलुस्तिततः परम् ॥ 6 5 ॥

Again there will be spread the knowledge of the Vedas, the Smṛtis, and the Purāṇas, all will go to their wives in menstruation periods. No Adharma (unrighteousness) will exist and the Dharma will reign in full, with all the parts (Kalās) complete. When the Tretā Yuga comes, the Dharma will be three footed; when the Dvāpara Yuga will come; the Dharma will be two-footed and when Kali will

begin, the Dharma will be one-footed, and when Kali will reign supreme, no Dharma will exist, even in name. (O Nārada, Now I will speak of time.)

वारा: सप्त ताव यिषु तिवध: पोडण स्मृतः ।

तथा झाड्ग मासारच ऋतवरच चढ़ेच च ॥ 66 ॥

द्रे पक्षी चायने है च चतुर्धिः प्रहरैर्दिन् ।

चतुर्धिः प्रहैर गायिमासिर्शगर्दिन्सता ॥ 67 ॥

वर्षे पड़विध्ये जेयं कालल्याविधिमध्ये ।

यथा चायांगि यांचेल तथा शुगच्छायम् ॥ 68 ॥

The seven days of the week, Sunday, etc., the sixteen tithis, Pratipadā etc., the twelve months Vaiśākha etc., the six seasons Summer, etc., the two fortnights (dark and bright) and the two Ayanas (Northern and Southern) are rendered in vogue. One day consists of four Praharas, one night consists of four Praharas; a day and a night constitute one so-called day. Thirty such days make one month. In the computation of time, five kinds of years (Varṣas) were already mentioned (in the 8th Skandha).

वर्षे पूर्णे नारणां च देवानां च दिवानिगम् ।

गतत्रये पह्वाधिके नरणां च युगे गते ॥ 69 ॥

देवानां च युगां जेयं कालसंख्याविदां मतम् ।

मन्त्रंतं तु दिव्यानां युगानाभेकस्पतति: ॥ 70 ॥

As the Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara and Kali roll on turn by turn, so the days, months and years also roll on in turn. One day, according to the Devas, is equal to one year, according to men; three hundred and sixty human Yugas equal to one Deva Yuga. Seventy-one Deva Yugas make one Manvantara.

मन्त्रतसमं जेयमापुर्थ च शर्षीपते: ।

अष्टाधिरजीमि चेन्द्र नते ब्रहादिवानिण्म ।। ७। ।।

अष्टोत्तरगते वर्षे गते पातक्ष बह्वणः ।

प्रलयः प्राकृतो जेयसत्वाद्धा वसुंधरा ॥ ७२ ॥

The life period of Indra, the Lord of Śacī, is one Manvantara. Twenty-eight Indra's lives equal to one day of Hiranyagarbha (the golden wombed) Brahmā. One hundred and eight such years equal to the life of one Brahmā. When this Brahmā dies, there is Prākrta Pralaya. The earth is not visible then. (The dissolution of Prakrī takes place.)

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

जलल्छुतानि विश्वानि ब्रहाविष्णुशिवादयः ।

ऋषयो ज्ञानिनः सर्वे लीनाः सत्ये चिद्यतमानि ॥ 7 3 ॥

तत्रेव प्रकृतिलिंना तत्र प्राकृतिको लय: ।

लयं प्राकृतिके जाते पते च बब्राणो मुने ॥ 7 4 ॥

The whole Brahmānda is deluged by water; Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara and the other wise Rṣis get diluted in Para Brahma whose substance is all truth and consciousness. That time, the Prakṛti Devī, too, gets merged in Para Brahma. The fall of Brahmā and the dissolution of Prakṛti are called the Prākṛta Pralaya.

नियेमाग्रं कालछ श्रीद्व्या: प्रोच्यते मुने ।

एवं नर्यपिति सर्वाणि ब्रह्मात्यवितानि च ॥ ७ ७ ॥

नियोपतरकाले च पुनः सुहिकमेण च ।

एवं कतिथ्या सुहित्यः कतिथियोप्रिय च ॥ ७ ७ ॥

The duration of this Pralaya is one Nimesa of the Para Brahma Mūla Prakṛti united with Māyā. All the Brahmāṇdas (universes) are destroyed at this time. When this Nimeṣa expires, the creation begins again in due order. So one cannot count the endless numbers of times when this creation and dissolution works are going on.

कति कल्या गता याता संख्या जानातिकः पुभान् ।

सुर्धीनां च लवानां च बह्जांतानां च नारत् ॥ 77 ॥

बहादादीनां च बह्जापड़े संख्या जानाति का: पुभान् ।

बह्जांतानां च सर्वेभाथीश्छीक एवं सः ॥ 78 ॥

So who can tell how many kalpas had past away, or how many Kalpas will come, how many Brahmāṇḍas were created or how many Brahmāṇḍas will be created. Who will be able to count how many Brahmās, how many Viṣṇus or how many Maeśvaras there have been. But One and Only One Para Brahma Paramesvara (the Great God) is The Supreme Lord of these countless Brahmāṇḍas.

सर्वेघा परमात्या च सच्चिदानन्दलपथूक ।

ब्रहादायश तस्यांगस्तस्यांशि महाविराद् ॥ 79 ॥

तस्यांशि विराद् बृद्ध: सैवयं प्रकृति: परा ।

तस्या: सक्राणालसंजातो उपधर्नीधीश्रस्ततः ॥ 80 ॥

This Parameśvara of the nature of Existence,

Consciousness and Bliss is the Highest Spirit of all. All others, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara the Great Virāt, the Smaller Virāt, all are His parts. This Brahma is Mūlā Prakṛti and from That has appeared Śrī Krṣṇa, the Lord of his left half which is woman (Ardha Nārīśvara).

सैव कृष्णो द्विधाभृतो द्विषुजघ घतुर्भुजः ।

चतुर्णसुख बैकुंटे गोलोके द्विषुजः स्वयम् ॥ 8 1 ॥

बढ़ापदितुपपर्यतं सर्व प्राकृतिकं भवेत् ।

यद्यात्यक्तिले सूरं सर्व नश्यमेव च ॥ 82 ॥

It is She that divided Herself into two forms; in Her one form, She resides as the two armed Kṛṣṇa in the region of Goloka; and as the four-armed Nārāyaṇa in Vaikunṭha. All the things from Brahmā, the Highest, to the mere grass the lowest, all are originated from Prakṛti. And all the Prakṛtborn things are transient.

एवंधितं सृष्टितुं सर्व नित्यं सनातनम् ।

सेवेच्छाययं परं बहुत निरुर्णं प्रकृतेः परम् ॥ 83 ॥

निरूपाधि निराकारं भवतानुग्रहकाततम् ।

क्रोतीत ब्रह्मा ब्राहोंं वक्तानात्कमलोद्यः ॥ 84 ॥

Thus the True, Eternal Para Brahma, beyond the thee gunas, the Source of all creation, Whose substance is All-Will is the Only Substance beyond the region of Prakṛti. He is without Upādhis (conditions, as time, space, causation and attributes); He is without any form; and the forms that He assumes, they are for shewing His Grace to the devotees only. The Lotus-born Brahmā is able by His power of Knowledge to create the Brahmānda.

शिको मृत्युज्यक्षेय संहर्ता सर्वतत्वित् ।

यज्ञानाइय ततसा सर्वीश्रुत तपो महान् ॥ 85 ॥

महाविष्यतिवृक्तश सर्वतः सर्वदर्शनः ।

सर्वेल्यापी सर्वीनात प्रदाता सर्वसंपदाम् ॥ 86 ॥

It is by His Grace that Śiva, the Lord of the yogis is named Mṛtyunjāya (the Conqueror of Death), the Destoyer of all, and the Knower of all Tattvas. By His Tapas, Śiva has realised Para Brahma and therefore has become the Lord of all, All-knowing,

Book IX Chapter VIII

endowed with great Vibhūtis (lordly powres), the seer of all, omnipresent, the protector of all, the bestower of all prosperities.

विष्यु: संवैक्षः श्रीमान्यद्रुतल्या यस्य सेवया ।

महामाया च प्रकृति: सर्वगतिकनियोशी । १ ८ ७ १ ॥

सैव प्रोक्ता भगवती सचिवदानंद्रकपिणी ।

यज्ञानाध्यस्य तपसा यद्ध्रतल्या यस्य सेवया ॥ ८ ८ ॥

The devotion and service towards Para Brahma have alone made Śrī Viṣṇu the Lord of all; and it is through the power of Para Brahma, that Mahāmāyā Prakṛti Devī has become omnipotent and the Goddess of all. Bhagavati Durgā has got His Grace by Her devotion and service to Him and has become Mūla Prakṛti of the nature of Being, Consciousness and Bliss.

सावित्री देवमाता च वेदाधिष्ठातृदेवता ।

पूर्णा द्वितानां वेद्ना सप्तानाधस्य सेवना ॥ ८ ९ ॥

सर्वविद्धाधिवेदी सा पूर्णा च विद्यांगे पा ।

यलेवेया वत्पसा सर्वविवेषये पूर्तित ॥ १९० ॥

And so has the Devi Śāvitrī, the Mother of the Vedas, become the presiding Deity of the Vedas and She is worshipped by the Brāhmaṇas and the Knowers of the Vedas. That She presides over all the branches of knowledge, is worshipped by the learned assemblies and by the whole Universe is the result only of worshipping the Prakṛti Devi.

सर्वश्रामाधिरेवी सा सर्वसम्यन्त्रदायिति ।

सर्वेश्वी सर्ववंहा सर्वैषां पुर्वादायिनि ॥ 91 ॥

सर्वस्तुता च सर्वज्ञा सर्वदुर्गार्तिनाथिनि ।

कृष्णवामांगरमंभृता कृष्णप्राणाधिदेवता ॥ 92 ॥

That Lakṣmī has become the bestower of all wealth and the presiding Deity of all the villages and the mistress of all, worshipped by all and the bestower of sons to all is also the result of worshipping Her. Thus it is through the worship of Prakṛti that Durgā, the Destroyer of all calamities and troubles has appeared from the left side of Śrī Krṣṇa; and Rādhā has become the presiding Deity of His Prāna (vital airs), and She is worshipped by all and possessed of all knowledge.

कृष्णप्राणाधिका प्रेमा राधिका शक्तिसेवा ।

सर्वाधिकं च रूपं च सीभायरं मानगीरसे ॥ 93 ॥

कृष्णावक्षः-स्थलस्थानं पत्नीते प्रप सेवया ।

तपश्रकार सा पूर्वं शतन्युंगे च पवर्ते ॥ 94 ॥

विद्यवसहनं च पतिग्रापत्यधीये च ।

जाते शक्तिप्रासते तु दृष्टा चंद्रकलोपाम्प ॥ 95 ॥

It is by the worship of Sakti that Radhikā has so much excelled in love, has become the presiding Deity of the prāna of Krṣna. has got His love and respect, has been placed on His breast and is exceedingly beautiful. With the object of getting Krṣna for her husband, She practised severe austerities for one thousand Deva years on the mountain Śataśrīnga in Bhārata to get the Mūla Prakti's Grace.

कृष्णावक्षःस्थले कृत्वा स्रोद कृयया विषुः ।

वरं तस्ये ददौ सारं सर्वभाभिप् दुलैभम् ॥ 96 ॥

मम वक्ष:स्थले तिष्ठ मम भक्ता च शाश्हति ।

सौभायने च मानेन प्रेणायो गौरोया च ॥ 97 ॥

त्वे मे श्रेष्ठा च ज्येष्ठा च प्रेपसी सर्वेयोचिताम् ।

वरिष्ठा च गरिष्ठा च संस्तुता पूर्तिता मया ॥ 98 ॥

सततं तव साध्योउं वंयश्छ प्राणावल्लभे ।

And when the Śakti Mūla Prakṛti became graciously pleased towards Her, Śri Kṛṣṇa seeing Rādhikā increasing in beauty like the Crescent Moon took Her to His breast and out of tenderness wept and granted Her highest boons so very rare to others and said: O Beautiful One! You better remain always in My breast and devoted to Me amongst all my wives; let you be superior to them all in good fortune, respect, love and glory. From to-day you are my greatest best wife. I will love you as the best amongst them all. O Dear! Always I will be submissive to you and fulfil what you say.

इच्छुतत्वा च जगत्रायधकार ललनों ततः ॥ 99 ॥

सप्लौरित्हितां तां च चकार प्राणावलल्याम् ।

अन्या या याशु ता देल्य:पुजिता: गशिलेविया ॥ 100 ॥

तस्मतु यात्रुशं यासां तातृकामुकर्त मुने ।

दिछ्यं वर्षेसहर्षे च तपतत्वा हिमाघतवे ॥ 101 ॥

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

Thus saying, Śrī Krṣṇa selected her as his wife without any co-wives and made Her dear to His Heart. The other Deviś besides the five Prakṛtis, already mentioned, also derived superiorities by serving Mūla Prakṛti. O Muni! What shall I say, everyone reaps the fruits as the practises Tapasyā. दूरां च तत्वदं ध्यात्या सर्वपूज्या बम्बूद्र है । सरस्वती तत्स्तवा पवैते गंधामदाने ॥ 102 ॥ लक्षवर्यं च दिव्यं च सर्ववंद्या बम्बूर सा । लक्ष्मीयुगित्रा दिव्यं तत्स्तवता च पुकते ॥ 103 ॥ सर्वसंपत्पूद्रात्रीं च जाता देवीनिषेवणात् ।

Bhagavati Durgā practised on the Himālyās tapasyā for one thousand Deva years and meditated on the lotus-fect of Mūla Prakṛti and so has come to be worshipped by all. The Devi Sarasvatī practised tapasyā for one Iākh Deva years and is come to be respected by all. The Devi Lakṣmī practised tapasyā at Puškara for one hundred Divine Yugas and, by the Grace of Mūla Prakṛti, has become the bestower of wealth to all.

साविर्मी मल्ले तत्वा पूज्या वंधा बथुपद सा ॥ 104 ॥

पहिवर्षसहर्ष च दिव्यं ध्यत्वा च ततवद् ।

शतमन्यन्तं तपं शंकरेण पुरा विषो ॥ 105 ॥

शतमन्यन्तं चेदे बह्वा शक्ति जजाप दू ।

शतमन्यन्तं विद्युस्तत्वा पाता बघृह् ॥ 106 ॥

The Devi Savitri worshipped Śakti for sixty thousand divine years in the Malaya mountain and is respected and worshipped by all. O Bibhu! Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara worshipped Śakti

for one hundred Manvantaras and so have become the Preservers, etc., of this world.

दूगमन्तंतर तत्वा श्रीकृष्ण: परमं तप: ।

गोलोकं प्रावतावित्य्वं मोदते३तावि यत्र हि ॥ 107 ॥

दूगमन्तंतर धर्मतत्वा वै भक्तिसंगुतः ।

सर्वप्रण: सर्वधातो कंचुपृस: ॥ 108 ॥

Śrī Kṛṣṇa practised for ten Manvantaras terrible austerities and therefore obtained his position in the region of Goloka and is remaining there to-day in greatest bliss. Dharma Deva worshipped Śakti with devotion for ten Manvantaras and has become the lives of all, worshipped by all, and the receptacle of all.

एवं देल्याक्रु तपासा सर्वे देवाक्रु पूर्तिनः ।

मुज्चो मन्तवो भूषण ब्राह्मणश्रैय पूर्तिनः ॥ 109 ॥

एवं ते कक्षितं सर्वे पुराणं सर्वथाममम् ।

मुख्वक्रवाध्या ज्ञात किं भूयः श्रीत्थिच्छसि ॥ 110 ॥

इति श्रीभद्रैकीभागवते नवमस्कन्धे शक्तिजुपार्थे

नारदनारायणर्वावंदेरुभो३स्थाय: 11 8 11

O Muni! Thus all, whether the Devís, Devas, Munis, Kings, Brāhmanas, all have got their respect in this world by the worship of Sakti. O Devarsī! I have thus described to you all that I heard from the mouth of my Guru, in accordance with the rules of the Vedas. What more do you want to hear?

Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the greatness of Kali in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER IX

On the Origin of the Sakti of the Earth

नारद उवाच

देव्या निमेषमानेगे बहाणः पात एव च ।

तस्य पातः प्राकृतिकः प्रलयः परिकीर्तितः ॥ १ ॥

Śrī Nārada said: In the twinkling of an eye of the Devi, the Pralaya takes place; and in that very time also the Brahmanāga (cosmos) is dissolved, which is called the Pralaya of Prakṛti.

प्रलये प्राकृते चोक्ता ततग्रद्धा वसुंधरा ।

जल्लुर्जाति विश्वासि सर्वें लीना: परात्मिनि ॥ 2 ॥

वसुंधरा तितोभूना कुजारासा च तिहिति ।

सुर्धैर्विधानसमये सासउविभूना कर्थे पुनः ॥ 3 ॥

कर्थं बधुव सा धन्या मान्या सर्वाश्रया जया ।

तस्याश्रु जनकधनं वद मंगलकारकम् ॥ 4 ॥

During this Pralaya, the Devi Vasundhara (Earth) disappears; the whole world is deluged with

Book IX Chapter IX

water and all this appearance of five elements called Prapañca vanishes in the body of Prakṛti. Now where does Vasundharā (Earth), thus vanished, reside? And how does She again appear at the beginning of the creation! What is the cause of her being so much blessed, honoured and capable to hold all and victorious. So tell about Her birth, the source of all welfare.

श्रीनारायण उचाच

सर्वांदिषुही सर्वैंचां जन्य देव्या इति श्रुति: ।

आविष्यर्वित्तरोधाव: सर्वैपु प्रत्ययेषु च ॥ 5 ॥

श्रुयतां वसुधाजन सर्वेमंगलकारण् ।

विजन्निधकरं पायनाश्नं पुणवधर्नम् ॥ 6 ॥

Śrī Nārāyana said: O Nārada! So it is heard that the Earth appears at the very outset of the creation. Her appearance and disappearance so occur in all the Pralayas. (This earth) the manifestation of the great Śakti, sometimes becomes manifest in Her and sometimes remains latent in Her (the Śakti). It is all the will of that Great Śakti.

अहो केचिद्धद्रतिति मधुकैटभमेदसा ।

बधूव वसुया धन्या तिद्धकद्मातः श्रणु ॥ ७ ॥

कचतुरती पुरा विश्यु तुही युब्देन तेजसा ।

आवां बधो न यजोर्वाँ पायसा संवृतेति च ॥ ८ ॥

Now hear the anecdote of appearance (birth) of the earth, the cause of all good, the source of destruction of all calamities, the destroyer of sin and the cause of furtherance of one's religious merits. Some say that this earth has come out of the marrow of the Daityas, Madhu and Kaitabha, but that is not the fact. Hear now the real fact. Those two Daityas were greatly pleased with Viṣṇu's valour and prowess in the fight between them and Viṣṇu; and they said: 'Kill us on that part of the earth which is not under water.'

तयोर्जविकालो न प्रत्यक्षा साभवेल्सकुटम् ।

ततें बघ्रव मेदक्ष प्रमाणानंतरं तयोः ॥ 9 ॥

मेदितीति च विज्यातेलुक्तभेतमन्तं शपु ।

जल्योता कृता पूर्वे वधिता मेघला ययातः ॥ 10 ॥

From their words it is evident that the earth was

existent during their life-time but she was not visible. After their death, the marrow came out after their bones. Now hear how the name ‘Medini’ came to be applied to the earth. She was taken out of the water, and the marrow came to be mixed with the earth.

कथयामि ते तत्नम सार्थकं सर्वभंगतम् ।

पुरा श्रुतं यच्छ्युक्तं धर्मवक्याच्छ पुक्के ॥ ११ ॥

महाविदारूपीरस्य जलस्थस्य चिंतं सूकृतम् ।

मनो बधूव कालेन सर्वगीत्यापकं धुवम् ॥ १ 2 ॥

It is on account of this mixing that she is called Medinī. Now I will tell you what I heard before in Puśkara, the sacred place of pilgrimage, from the mouth of Dharma Deva, about the origin of earth, approved by the Śrutis, consistent, and good. Hear. When the mind of Mahā Virāt, merged in water, expanded all over his body, it entered into every pore of his body.

तच्च प्रविष्ट सर्वेषां तल्लोमां विवेषु च ।

कालेन महता पश्रापूर्व वसुधा मुने ॥ १३ ॥

प्रत्येक प्रतिलोमां च कुपेषु संस्थिता सदा ।

आविभूता तितिपुता सजला च पुनः पुनः ॥ १४ ॥

Next the Mahāpthrīvi or the Great Earth appeared at the time of Pañci Karana (mixing of one-half of each of the elements with one-eighth of each of the other four elements). This Mahāpthrīvi was broken into pieces and placed in every pore. It is this differentiated earth that appears during creation and disappears during Pralaya.

आविभूता सृष्टिकाले तज्जलोयपुरपश्चिता ।

प्रल्ले च तितोभृतां जलस्याध्यंतरे स्थिता ॥ 15 ॥

प्रतिविशेषु वसुधा शैल्काननसंयुता ।

सतवसागासंसुक्ता सन्तदीपसम्पित्वा ॥ 16 ॥

From this mind, concentrated in every pore of the body of Mahā Virāt, is born this earth, after a long interval. In every pore in the skin of this Virāt Puruṣa there is one earth. She gets manifested and she disappears.

हेभाद्रिंभेसर्वगुता ग्रहचंत्राकर्मेयुता ।

बह्वीधियुणिवाहीढ़ी सुरैलैक्स्तदात्राय ॥ 17 ॥

पुण्यतीर्थसमातुत्ता पुण्य भारतसंयुता ।

कांचनीभूमिसंयुक्ता सत्यवर्मसमित्वता ॥ 18 ॥

पातालसपं तत्थसतुद्यर्दे ब्रह्योकतः ।

धुवलोकऊ नतेव सर्व विश्वचे तन ते ॥ 19 ॥

This occurs again and again. When she appears, she floats on the water; and when she disappears, she gets merged in the water. There is this earth (world) in every universe; and along with her, there are mountains, forests, seven oceans, seven islands, Suneru mountain, the Moon, the Sun and other planets, Brahmaloka, Viṣṇuloka (the abode of Viṣṇu) Śiva loka and the regions of the other Devas, sacred places of pilgrimage, the holy land of Bhāratavarsa, the Kāñcani Bhūmi, seven heavens, seven Pātālas or nether regions, on the above Brahmaloka, and Dhruvaloka.

पूर्व सर्वाणि विश्वापि पृथिव्यां तर्पितानि च ।

नशारीय च विश्वासि सर्वाणि कृत्रिमणि चि ॥ 20 ॥

प्रलये प्राकृते चैव ब्रजण्य प्रिनपाते ।

महाविराडाविरुशी सृष्टः कृष्णे चात्मना ॥ 21 ॥

This law holds good in every world in every universe. So every universe is the work of Māyā and thus it is transient. At the dissolution of Prakṛti, Brahmā falls, Again when creation takes place, the Maha Virāt appears from Śrī Krṣṇa, the Supreme Spirit.

नित्यो च स्थितिपुरजी क्राक्राकलेश्रेः सह ।

निवायधिष्ठाद्वेजी सा वागहे पूजिता सुरैः ॥ 22 ॥

मृनिभिन्नैपिधिरीर्णविदिभेय च ।

विष्योरैर्हरूपस्य पत्नी सा शुतिसंमता ॥ 23 ॥

तन्त्रगे मंगलो जेयो घटेगे गंगालामजः ।

Eternal is this flow of creation, preservation and destruction; eternal is this flow of time, Kāṣthā; eternal is this flow of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa, etc. And eternal is this flow of Vasundharā who is worshiped in the Vārāha Kalpa by the Suras, Munis, Vipras, Gandharvas, etc. The Śruti says that the Presiding Deity of this eternal earth is the wife of Viṣṇu in His boar-form. Maṅgala (Mars) is the son of that earth and Maṅgala's son is Ghaṭeśa.

नाद उवाच

पूर्विता केन रूपेण वाराहे च सुर्वमेही ॥ 24 ॥

वाराहे चेव वाराही सर्वे: स्वांक्षया सती ।

मूलपुकृतिसंपृतां पंचीकरणागर्ति: ॥ 25 ॥

Nārada said: In what form was the Earth worshipped by the Devas in Vārāha Kalpa. The Vārāhi, the receptacle of all things, moving and non-moving, how did she appear, by what method of Pañcī Karana, from the Mūlaprakrti?

तत्या: पूजायिषानं चायध्यशोर्ध्यमेकग: ।

भंगलं भंगल्याचि जन व्यास वद प्रभो ॥ 26 ॥

What is the method of her worship in this Bhūrloka and in the Heavens (Svarloka). Also tell me, O Lord! in detail, the auspicious birth of Maṅgala (Mars).

नारायण उवाच

वाराहे च वराहँ झडाणा संस्कृत: पुरा ।

उद्धारा मही हत्वा हित्यवाङ्ग सरातलात् ॥ 27 ॥

जले तां सायायामास पदपत्रं यथा हुते ।

तत्रैव निर्मेमे बढ़ा विश्वं सर्वे मनोहम् ॥ 28 ॥

Nārāyaṇa spoke: In ancient days, in the Vārāha Kalpa, Varāha Deva (the boar incarnation) when entreated and praised by Brahmā, killed the Daitya Hiranyākṣa and rescued the earth from the nether regions Rasātala. He then placed the earth on the waters where she floated as the lotus leaf floats on water. In the meantime Brahmā began to fashion the wonderful creation on the surface of the earth.

सूघ्रा तदीय देरीं च सकानां कामुको हरि: ।

बाराहरूपी भगवान् कोदिष्यंसमप्रभः ॥ 29 ॥

कृत्वा रतिकलों सर्वी भूर्ति च सुमनेहागम् ।

क्रीडां चकार रहसि दिव्यवर्षमहर्निगम् ॥ 30 ॥

Bhagavān Hari, in His boar from and brilliant like ten million suns saw the beautiful and lovely appearance of the presiding deity of the earth, possessed of amorous sentiments. He then assumed a very beautiful form, fit for amorous embraces. They then held their sexual intercourse and it lasted day and night for one Deva year.

Book IX Chapter IX

सुखसंभोगसंस्थगान्मूर्ही सा प्राप सुंदरी ।

विद्याधाया विद्यान्न संगमोजित्सुखप्रदः ॥ 31 ॥

विद्यान्तदारांसलेशविद्बुबुघे न दिवानिगम ।

वर्षते चेतनां प्राय कामी तत्याज कामुकीम् ॥ 32 ॥

The beautiful Earth, in the pleasant amorous plays, fainted away; for the intercourse of the lover with the beloved is exceedingly pleasant. And Visnu, too, at the same time was very much exhausted by the pleasant touch of the body of the Earth. He did not become conscious even how days and nights passed away.

पूर्वेक्यं वराहं च द्वारा स च लील्या ।

पूजां चक्कार तां देवीं ध्याला च धरणीं सतीम् ॥ 33 ॥

धूर्वेर्दीधु नैवेहो: सिंवृरेत्रलुवेपे: ।

वरई: पुधैधु वतिलिभ: संपुज्योवाला तां हौरे: ॥ 34 ॥

When full one year passed away, they got back their senses and the amorous man then left his hold of the loved. He assumed easily his former Boar form and worshipped Her as the incarnate of the Devi, with incense, lights, offerings of food, with vermilion (Sindur, red-powder), sandal-paste, garments, flowers and various other offerings of food, etc.

श्रीभगवानुवाच

सर्वाधारा भव शुभे सर्वै: संपूजिता सुखम् ।

भृनिभिन्निधिर्वैः सिद्धिकु धनावतिधिः: ॥ 35 ॥

He then said: O Auspicious One! Let Thou becest the receptacle of all things. All the Munis, Manus, Devas, Siddhas, and Dānavas, etc., will worship Thee with pleasure and willingness.

अंबुबाचीत्यानादिती गृहारंप प्रवेग्ने ।

वार्पीतडागारामचे च गृहे च कृषिकर्मिण ।। ३६ ॥

तव पूजां करिष्यित मद्रोग सुरावय: ।

मुंदा ये न करिष्यिति यास्यति नरकं च ते ॥ ३७ ॥

On the day the Ambuvāci ceremony closes, on the day when the house construction, i.e., the foundation is laid, on the day when the first entry is made into the newly built houses, when the digging of the well or tank commences, and on the day when tilling the ground commences, all will

worship Thee. Those stupid fools that will not observe this, will certainly go to hell.

वसुधोबाच

वहामि सर्वे वाराहरूधेणाई तवाजया ।

लोलामाजेण भगवन्विश्वं च सचाराचम् ॥ 38 ॥

मुक्ता शृक्ति हरेरचा शिवलिंग शिवा तथा ।

गंखं प्रदीपं यंत्र च माधिक्यं हीरकं तथा ॥ 39 ॥

यजसूत्रं च पुर्णं च पुस्तकं तुलसीदलम् ।

जपालांगे पुर्णमालां कर्णूरं च सुवर्णकम् ॥ 40 ॥

गोरोचनं चंदनं च शणसुघाम्बतं तथा ।

एतान्वोबुगस्फात्कं हित्यत् च भगवज्यूम् ॥ 41 ॥

The Earth spoke: “O Lord! By Thy command I will assume the form of Vārāhi (female boar) and support easily on my back this whole world of moving and non-moving things, but the following things, pearl, small shells, Śālagrāma, (a black stone, usually round, found in the river Gaṇḍaki, and worshipped as a type of Viṣṇu), the phallus or emblem of Śiva, the images of the goddesses, conch-shells, lamps (lights), the Yantras, gems, diamonds, the sacred upanayana threads, flowers, books, the Tulasi leaves, the bead (Japa mālā), the garland of flowers, gold, camphor, Gorocanā (bright yellow pigment prepared from the urine or bile of a cow), Sandal, and the water after washing the Śālagrāma stone, I will not be able to bear. I will be very much pained in case I were to bear these on Me.”

श्रीभगवानुवाच

इत्यापतेतिन वे मूदा अर्पिध्यथित सुंदरि ।

यास्यति कालसूत्रे ते लिख्ये वर्षेगतं त्वयि ॥ 42 ॥

इत्येवमुक्लवा भगवान् विरसाम च नारद ।

बभूव तेन गर्घणे तेजस्वी मंगलगढ़ः ॥ 43 ॥

Śrī Bhagavān said: “O Fair One! The fools that will place the above articles on Thy back will go to the Kālasūtra hell for one hundred divine years.” O Nārada! Thus saying, the Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa remained silent. Now the Earth became pregnant and the powerful planet Mars was born.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

पूजां चकुः पृथिव्याश्र ते सर्वे चात्रया होः ।

कव्यशाखोक्त्यायने तुष्वुरुषु सत्वेन ते ॥ 4 4 ॥

ददुमूलेन मंत्रेण नैवेहादिकमेव च ।

संस्तुता विषु लोकेषु पूजिता सा बभूव ह ॥ 4 5 ॥

By the command of Śrī Hari, all began to meditate on Earth according to what is mentioned in Kāṇavāsākhā and began to praise Her. Offerings of food were given, uttering the root Mantra. Thus became extant all over the three worlds Her worship and praise.

नारद उवाच

किं ध्यानं सत्वं तस्या मूलमांत्रं च किं बव् ।

गूदं सर्वीपुराणेषु श्रीतुं कौतूहलं मम ॥ 4 6 ॥

Nārada said: O Bhagavān! Very sacred is the meditation, hymn and the root Mantra of the Earth. I am very anxious to hear them Kindly describe it detail.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

आदौ च पृथिवी देवी चराहेण च पृजिता ।

ततो हि ब्रह्णा पक्षान्युक्तिता पृथिवी तत् ॥ 47 ॥

ततः सर्वैभूनीऋ मनुष्यमानवादिधि: ।

ध्यानं च स्तवनं मंत्रं शृणु वक्ष्यामि नारद ॥ 48 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: The Earth was first worshipped by Varāha Deva; next She was worshipped by Brahmā. Next She was worshipped by all the Munis, Devas, Manus and men. O Nārada! Now hear the Dhyāna, praise and Mantra of the Devi Earth.

अंट हीं शी क्लीं वसुधार्ये स्वाहैत्यनेन

मंत्रेण विद्याना पूजिता पुरा ।

श्रतपंक्कवाणीशा श्रतच्छंदीनिभानाम् ॥ 49 ॥

चन्दोतिखासवर्षिं रत्नभूषणभूषितात् ।

रत्नाधारां रत्नभाषां रत्नाकरसम्यन्तात् ॥ 50 ॥

वहिक्षुर्द्रांशुकाधानां ससितां दंवितां भजे ।

ध्यानेनानेन सा देही सर्वैंश पूरिताउपबत् ॥ 51 ॥

स्तवनं शृणु विघ्रें कवणशाल्योकमेव च ।

The Earth was first worshipped by Bhagavān Viṣṇu with this root Mantra (mūla mantra). ‘Om Hrim Śrim Klīm. Vasundharāyai Svāhā.’ Next He

said: 'O Devi Earth! O Thou Smiling One! I worship Thee, who art worshipped by the three worlds, whose colour is white like white lotus, whose face is beautiful like the autumnal moon, who art the Store-house of all gems and jewels, and who has put on a raiment purified by fire. All then began to worship Her with this Mantra.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

जये जये जलाधारे जलगीले जलघे ॥ 52 ॥

यजसूकजारे त्वं जयं देहि जयाहे ।

मंगले मंगलाधारे मांगव्ये मंगलघे ॥ 53 ॥

मंगलार्य मंगलेशे मंगले देहि मे भवे ।

सर्वाधारे च सर्वेz सर्वशक्तिस्मवित्ते ॥ 54 ॥

Śrī Nārāyaṇa said: Now hear the hymn sung before Her according to Kāṇva Sākhā: O Thou, the Giver of Victory! Holder of water! Endowed with water, full of victory; Consort of the Boar Incarnation, Carrier of victory! Bestow victory on me. O Thou Auspicious One! The Store-house of all good, O Thou incarnate of all auspiciousness! Bestower of good, Thou, the Source of all good to bestow all sorts of welfare! Bestow all things that are good and auspicious to me in this world.

सर्वकामप्रदे देवि सर्वेहं देवे हे भवे ।

पुण्यवस्तरे पुण्यानां वीजरूपे सन्तानि ॥ 55 ॥

O Thou! The Receptacle of all, the Knower of all, all powerful, the Bestower of all desires, O Devi Earth! Give me the fruits that I desire.

पुण्याश्रये पुण्यवतामालये पुण्यदे भवे ।

सर्वसर्यालये सर्वसर्यालये सर्वसर्यदे ॥ ५६ ॥

O Thou! Who art all merits Thou, the Seed of all religious merits, O Thou, the Eternal, the receptacle of all religious merits, the home of all religious persons, Thou bestowest merits to all.

सर्वसभ्यहं काले सर्वसर्यात्मिके भव ।

भूमे भृमिपसर्वसैव भृमिपलापराणे ॥ 57 ॥

भूमिपानां सुखकरे भूमिं देहि च भूमिते ।

इर्व स्तौत्रे महापुर्ण प्रातनस्थाय यः पठेत् ॥ 58 ॥

O Thou! The Store-house of all grains, enriched with all sorts of corns, Thou bestowest harvests to

Book IX Chapter X

all; Thou takest away all the grains in this world and again Thou producest all corns of various kinds here. O Earth! Thou art all-in-all to the landlords, the Best Source of refuge and happiness. O Bestower of lands! Give me lands. The above hymn yields great religious merits.

कोटिटनमसु स भवेढ्रलान्यमुपिधेखरः ।

भूमिदानकृतं पुर्णं लध्यते पठनाजन्नैः ॥ 59 ॥

भूमिदानहरायापानुच्छते नात्र संशयः ।

He becomes the sovereign of the whole earth for millions and millions of births who rising early in the morning reads this stotra. Men who read this acquire merits due to giving away lands as gifts.

अंबुवाचीभूक्रपापापास मुच्छते धुवम् ॥ 6० ॥

अन्यकूपे कृपयवननयापास मुच्छते धुवम् ।

परभूमिहृतायपान्युच्छते नात्र संशयः ॥ 6 1 ॥

भूमौ वीयैन्यापणवादुभूमौ दीपादिस्थापनात् ।

पायेन मुच्छते सोउषि स्तोत्रस्य पठनानुने ॥ 6 2 ॥

People become certainly freed of their sins, if they read this stotra, who take back the lands after making them as gifts, who dig earth on the day of Ambuvāci, who dig wells without permission on another's well, who steal other's lands, who throw their semen on earth, who place lamps on the earth.

अध्वेपिश्रतं पुचेल स्नात नारं संशवः ।

भूमिद्वेया महास्तोत्रं सर्वेकल्याणकारकम् ॥ 63 ॥

इति श्रीवेदौभागवते महापुराणे नवमसक्ये नवमोर्धधावः । 9 ।

Religious merits, equivalent to one hundred horse sacrifices accrue from reading this stotra. There is no doubt in this. This stotra of the great Devi is the source of all sorts of welfare and auspiciousness.

Here ends the Nineth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the origion of the Šakti of the earth in Śrimadevīthāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter X

CHAPTER X

On the Offences Caused to the Earth and Punishments thereof

नारद जवाच

भूमिदानकृतं पुण्यं पायं तदूरणेच च ।

परभूर्तणात्यपं परकुके खतने तथा ॥ १ ॥

अंबुबाच्यां भयुतनने वीरीय त्याग एव च ।

दीपादिष्यापनात्यपां श्रोतृमिच्छामि यन्ततः ॥ 2 ॥

अन्यदा पृथिवीजन्यं पापं यत्न्छ्छयते परम् ।

यदस्ति तन्त्रीताकरं वद वेदिविदां चर ॥ 3 ॥

Nārada said: I am now desirous to hear about the merits acquired by making gifts of land, the demerits in stealing away lands, digging wells in other's wells, in digging earth on the day of Ambuvāci, in casting semen on earth, and in placing lamps and lights on the surface of the earth as well the sins when one acts wrongly in various other ways on the surface of the earth and the remedies thereof.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

वित्तिस्तमाशूरियं च यो द्वात्ति च भारते ।

संध्यापृताय विघ्राय स याति शिवमंदिरम् ॥ 4 ॥

भूमिं च सर्वसभ्याड़ां बाङ्गाय द्वात्ति च ।

भूमिरेणुप्रमाणाद्वमंते विध्णुपदे स्थितिः ॥ 5 ॥

Śrī Nārāyana said: If one makes a gift of land in this Bhārata of the measure of a Vitasī (a long span measured by the extended thumb and little finger) to a Brāhmaṇa who performs Sandhyā three times a day and is thus purified, one goes and remains in Śiva Loka (the abode of Śiva). If one gives away in charity a land full of corn to a Brāhmín, the giver goes and lives in Viṣṇu Loka in the end for a period measured by the number of dust particles in the land.

ग्रामं भूर्षिं च धान्यं च बाहाणाय द्वताति यः ।

सर्वेपाणाडिनिमुन्तो चोभौ देवौपुर: स्थितौ ॥ 6 ॥

भूमितानं च तत्काले य साधुशानुपोदते ।

स च प्रयाति वैकुंठे मिज्ञोग्रसम्पित्वतः ॥ 7 ॥

If one presents a village, a plot of land, or grains to a Brāhmin, both the giver and receiver, become freed of their sins and go to the Devi Loka (the

abode of the Devi). Even if one be present when a proposal for a gift of land is being made in says 'This act is good,' one goes to Vaikunṭha with one's friends and relatives.

स्वत्नां परत्तां वा बढ़ाप्ति हेतु नः ।

स तिष्ठित कालसूत्रे यावच्छंदिवाकारी ॥ 8 ॥

तत्पुरपीरप्रपृत्तिभूमितीः : श्रिया हतः ।

पुर्वौनो दरिष्ठ धारे पाति च रौरचम् ॥ 9 ॥

He remains in the Kālasūtra hell as long as the Sun and Moon exist, who takes back or steals away the gift to a Brāhim, offered by himself or by any other body. Even his sons, grandsons, etc., become destitute of lands, prosperity, sons, and wealth and remain in a dreadful hell named Raurava.

गवां मार्ग विनिष्ण्य यश सस्यं द्वताति च ।

दिव्यं वर्षगतं चैव कुम्भीपाके च त्रिहिति ॥ १० ॥

गोई तडागं निष्क्य मार्गे सस्यं द्वताति यः ।

स तिहस्विसपे च यावदिद्विश्रतुदंश ॥ ११ ॥

If one cultivates the grazing land for the cows and reaps therefrom a harvest of grains, one remains for one hundred divine years in the Kumbhipāka hell. If one cultivates any enclosure for cows or tanks and grows grains on them, one remains in the Asipatra hell for a period equivalent to fourteen Indra's falls.

पंचपिंडाननुद्व्य परकृपे च स्नाति यः ।

ग्राटोति नरकं चैव स्नानं निष्कलमेव च ॥ १२ ॥

कामी भूमी च रहस्य वीर्यैलागं करतीय तः ।

भूमिसेपुप्रमाणं च वर्ष तिहिति तैरवे ॥ १३ ॥

One who bathes in another's tank without taking off five handfuls of earth from it, goes to hell and one's bath is quite ineffectual If anybody, out of his amorous passion casts his semen privately on the surface of the ground, he will have to suffer the torments of hell for as many years as are the numbers of dust particles on that area.

अंबुवाच्यां घुकरणं यः करोति च मानवः ।

स याति कृमिवर्गं च स्थितत्सत चतुरुंगम् ॥ १४ ॥

परकीये लुपकूपे कृपं युकः करोति यः ।

पृक्रिणयां च लुपायां पृक्रिणी द्वाति यः ॥ 15 ॥

If anyone digs ground on the day of Ambuvāci, one remains in hell for four Yugas. If, without the permission of the owner of a well or tank, a stupid man clears the old well or tank and digs the slushy earth from the bottom, his labour goes in vain.

सर्व फल परस्येव ततकुंड़े झतेज्च स: ।

तत्र तिहिति संतन्तो यावदिर्द्राश्रतुर्ज ११ १६ ॥

परकीये तडागे च पंकमुबुल्य चोन्मुक्ते ।

रेणुप्रमाणवर्ष च ब्रह्यलोके वसंसरः ॥ १७ ॥

The merit goes to the real owner. And the man who laboured so much goes to Tapta Kuṇḍa Naraka for fourteen Indra's life-periods. If any one takes out five handfuls of earth from another's tank, when he goes to bathe in it, he dwells in Brahma Loka for a period of years amounting to the number of particles in those handfuls of earth.

पित्रं पित्रे भूमिपान्तीन प्रदाय च मानवः ।

श्राद्धे करोति यो युवो नरकं याति निश्छितम् ॥ 18 ॥

भूमी दीर्घ योउपयिति स चोधः सदानजनम् ।

भूमी शंखं च संस्याय कुछं जन्मांतरे लभेत् ॥ 19 ॥

During one's father's or grandfather's Śrāddha ceremony, if one offers pīnda without offering any food (pīnda) to the owner of the soil, the Śrāddha performer goes certainly to hell. If one places a light (Pradīpa) directly on the earth without any holding piece at the bottom, one becomes blind for seven births; and so if one places a conch-shell on the ground (Śaṅkha), one becomes attacked with leprosy in one's next birth.

मुक्तां माणिक्यहीरी च सुवर्णं च माणिं तथा ।

पंच संस्थायदेवुभूमी स चाधि: सतजान्मु ॥ 20 ॥

शिवलिंग शिवामर्चा च सत्यपंपति भूतले ।

गतान्यन्तं यावत्कृमिभबः स तिहति ॥ 21 ॥

If any body places pearls, gems, diamonds, gold and jewels, the five precious things on the ground he becomes blind. If one places the phallic emblem of Śiva, the image of Śivānī, the Sālagrāma stone on the ground, he remains for one hundred Manvantaras to be eaten by worms.

गुंखं घंत्र शिलातोंवं पुर्णं च तुलसीदलम् ।

यशार्पविति भूमौ च स लिहेत्रकें धुवम् ॥ 22 ॥

Book IX Chapter XI

जपामालां पुष्पमालां कपूरं रोचनं तथा ।

यो मूढ्धाप्रयेद्यूमी स याति नरकं धुवम् ॥ २३ ॥

Conchshells, Yantras (diagrams for Śakti worshippers), the water after washing Śilās (stones) i.e. Caraṇāṃtrā, flowers, Tulasī leaves, if placed on the ground, lead him who places these, verily to hells. The beads, garlands of flowers, Gorocana, (a bright yellow pigment prepared from the urine or bile of a cow), and camphor, when placed on the ground, lead him who places so to suffer the torments of hell.

भूमी चन्द्रकाषं च रुद्राक्षं कुरुभूलकम् ।

संस्थाय्य भूमी नरके वसेमन्यन्तराधि ॥ 24 ॥

पुस्तक यसूत्रं च भूमी संस्थायपेन्नः ।

न घबेढ़िप्रधोगेची च तस्य जन्माते जनि: ॥ 25 ॥

ब्रहाहत्यासमं पापमिष्टे वै लभते ध्रुवम् ।

ग्रविष्युर्न घसूत्रं पूज्चं च सर्ववर्गकैः ॥ 26 ॥

The sandal wood, Rudraksa mālā, and the roots of Kuśa grass also, if placed on the ground, lead the doer to stay for one manvantara in the hell. Books, the sacred Upanayana threads, when placed on the ground make the doers unfit for Brāhmin birth; rather he is involved in a sin equivalent to the murder of a Brāhmin. The sacred Upanayana thread when knotted and rendered fit for holding, is worth being worshipped by all the castes.

सर्ज कृत्वा तु यो भूमिं क्षीरिंग न हि सिज्ञिति ।

स याति ततभूमिं च संतपः: सपतजमसु ॥ 27 ॥

One ought to sprinkle the earth with curd, milk, etc., after one has completed one's sacrifices. If one fails to do this, one will have to remain for seven births in a hot ground with great torment.

भृक्ये प्रहणे यो हिं करोति खननं घुवः ।

जमान्तरे महापापी हांगहीनो भवेद्युबम् ॥ 28 ॥

भवनं यत्र सर्वेषां भूमितेन प्रकर्पितिं ।

कार्यपी कश्यपस्येयमला स्थितरूपतः ॥ 29 ॥

विश्वंभरा धारणाच्छनंतान्तनस्वकलिपणे ।

पृथिवी पृथुकन्यालाब्रिस्तृतत्वामहामुने ॥ 30 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे नवमरकन्चे

दरगमोड्यावः 11 10 11

If one digs the earth when there is an earth-quake or when there is an eclipse, that sinner becomes also devoid of some of his limbs in his next birth. O Muni! This earth is named Bhūmi since She is the abode of all; she is named Kāśyapī since she is the daughter of Kaśyapa; is named Viśvambharā, since she supports the Universe; She is named Ananta, since she is endlessly wide; and She is named Prithviī since she is the daughter of the King Prthu, or she is extensively wide.

Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the offences caused towards the surface of the earth and punishments there of in hells in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevirbhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XI

CHAPTER XI

On the Origin of the Gaṅgā

नारद उवाच

श्रुतं पृथिव्युपाख्यानमतीव सुमानोहरम् ।

गंगोपाख्यानमधुना वद वेदविदां वर ॥ १ ॥

भाते भारतीगायात्सा जगाम मुरेश्वी ।

विष्णुवक्त्या परमा स्वयं विष्णुपदोति च ॥ 2 ॥

कक्षे कुर्य युगे केन प्रार्थिता प्रेरिता पुरा ।

तत्कर्म श्रीतृमिच्छाम पापच्च पुणवद शूर्भम् ॥ 3 ॥

The Devarşi Nārada said: O Thou, the foremost of the knowers of the Vedas! I have heard the

excellent narration of Earth. Now I want to hear the anecdote of Gangā. I heard, are long, that Gangā, of the nature of Viṣṇu and appearing from the feet of Viṣṇu, the Āśvari of the Devas, appeared, due to the curse of Bhāratī, on Bhārata; why has she come to Bhārata; in which Yuga and asked by whom did she come to Bhārata? O Lord! Now describe to me this auspicious anecdote capable to destroy sins and yield religious merits.

शीनारायण उवाच

राजराजेश्वर: श्रीमान्मार: सूर्वंवर्जन: । तस्य भार्यां च वैद्यर्षि शैल्या चे त्म नोहरे ॥ 4 ॥ तत्पल्यामेकुपत्रऊ बधूव सुमनोहर: । उसमंत्र इति खात: शैल्यायां कुलवधिनः ॥ 5 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Child! In ancient days there was born a prosperous Emperor King of Kings, in the Solar dynasty. He had two beautiful wives; one was named Vaidarbhī, and the other was named Śaivyā. Śaivyā delivered a very lovely son; his name was Asamañjā.

अन्या चाराध्यायमास शंकरं पुत्रकामुकी ।

वधूव गर्भत्स्याछ हरस्य च वेरण है ॥ 6 ॥

गते शताद्धे पूर्णें च मासियिंढ़ं सुधाव सा ।

तदद्धुवा सा शिवं व्यात्वा श्रोतेचेधै: पुनः पुनः ॥ 7 ॥

On the other hand, the queen Vaidarbhi desirous of getting a son, worshipped Śaṅkara, the Lord of Bhūtas who became pleased and granted her request; and Vaidarbhi became pregnant. After one hundred years of pregnancy she gave birth to one mass of flesh. Seeing this, the queen became very afflicted and taking refuge of Mahādeva, began to cry loudly and very often.

शंभुबहिगाणकेषेण तत्समीपं जगाम ह ।

चकार संविभज्यैतिप्रंदं पहिसहस्य प्रा ॥ 8 ॥

सर्वे बभुवः पुत्राश महावलयातकामः ।

श्रीमथायात्रामातंखप्रभामुकलेवतः ॥ 9 ॥

Bhagavān Śaṅkara, then, appeared there in a Brāhmim form and cut that mass of flesh into thousand pieces. Those thousand pieces turned out into thousand very powerful sons. Their bodies looked more brilliant than the mid-day sun.

कपिलस्य मुने: शापात्रभूवुर्भस्मारच्च ते ।

राजा करोत तद्ध्यून जागम गहने वे ॥ 10 ॥

तपश्रकासमंजो गंगानयनकारणात् ।

लक्षवर्ष तपस्तवा ममार कालयोगतः ॥ 11 ॥

But they were all burnt to ashes by the curse of Kapila Muni. And the King began to lament bitterly and he entered into the forest. Asamānjā practised tapasyā to bring the Gaṅgā for one lakh years when

he quitted his body in course of time. His osn Arinśumān practised tapasyā for one lakh years to bring Gaṅgā unto Bhārata and he, too, died.

अंशुमांस्तस्य तन्यो गंगानयनकारणात् ।

तपः कृत्वा लक्षवर्ष ममार कालयोगतः ॥ 12 ॥

भगीरथस्तस्य पुत्रो महापभावतः सुर्धीः ।

वैल्याचे विद्यापक्रकष्ट शुणवाजजमरः ॥ 13 ॥

Then the son of Anísumān, the intelligent Bhagiratha, a great devotee of Viṣṇu, free of old age and death and the store of many qualifications, practised tapasyā for one lakh years to bring Gāngā on earth. At last he saw Śri Kṛṣṇa brilliant like ten millions of summer suns. He had two hands; there was a flute in his hand; be was full of youth in the dress of a cow-herd.

तपः कृत्वा लक्षवर्षे गंगायन्यकरणात् ।

ददर्ग कृष्ण ग्रीभ्यस्यं सूवंकीटमप्रमृष्म ॥ 14 ॥

दिमुर्जे मुरलीहतं क्रिशोरं गोपयेक्षिणम् ।

गोपालसूद्रौरिधं भक्तानुग्रहक्षिपण् ॥ 15 ॥

A sight of His ever ready to show grace on His devotees. He is Para Brahma, whose Substance is Will; he has no deficiencies. Brahma, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara and the other Devas and Munis, etc., all praise Him, who pervades everywhere.

सेवेष्ठायमं परं ब्रह्म परिपूर्णतां प्रपुम् ।

ब्रह्मविष्युशिवाहीघु स्तुतं मुनिणगोनुन्ति ॥ 16 ॥

निर्णिलं सांक्षुरूपं च निर्णी प्रकृतेः परम् ।

ईषद्धास्यप्रसात्यं भक्तानुग्रहकारणम् ॥ 17 ॥

He is not concerned with anything; yet He is the Witness of all. He is beyond the three gunas, higher than Prakṛti. A sweet smile is always in his face, which makes it the more lovely. There is none equal to him in showing Grace to the Bhaktas.

वहिष्ठुर्दीक्षृतभानं रत्नभूषणभूषितम् ।

तुहाव तद्धा नृपति: प्राण्य च पुनः पुनः ॥ 18 ॥

लील्या च वरं प्राप वांर्तितं वंशतापम् ।

कृत्वा च सत्वनं दिव्यं पुरुकांकितविधाः ॥ 19 ॥

His raiment is purified (uninflammable) by fire and he is decorated with gems, jewels and ornaments. The King Bhagiratha saw that

Book IX Chapter XI

unforeseen appearance, bowed down and began to praise over and over again. His whole body was filled ecstasy. Then he clearly told what he wanted for the deliverance of his family.

श्रीभगवानुवाच

भारतं भारतीशाणाद्रच्छ शीधे सुरेश्वरि ।

सारस्य सुतासवर्णपृताकुक ममाज्ञा ॥ 2 0 ॥

त्वस्यर्णिवायुना पुता यास्यति मम महाद्वरु ।

बिघ्रतो मम मूर्तीश दिव्यस्यन्दनागरिनः ॥ 2 1 ॥

Bhagavān Śrī Krṣṇa then, addressed Gaṅgā and said: “O Sureśvari! Go quickly and appear in Bhārata, under the curse of Bhāratī. By My command go quickly and purify the sons of Sagara. They will all be purified by the touch of the air in contact with the Ganges and rise up in divine aerial cars, assuming forms like Mine and they will come to My abode.

मत्यार्थर घबिख्यित सर्वाकारं तिरायायः ।

सुर्पिछ्छा कर्मशोगान्कृताउमनि जनमि ॥ 22 ॥

कोटिज्ञामित्रिते पारंप साते यकृतं नृभि: ।

गंगाया शतस्यर्जन नयतितीय श्रुतौ श्रुतम् ॥ 23 ॥

They will there remain always as My attendants and they will not be involved in the sins that they committed in their previous births." O Nārada! It is stated thus in the Vedas, that if the human souls, taking their births in Bhārata, commit sins for millions and millions of births, the sins will be completely destroyed if they touch once the air in contact with and carrying the particles of the Ganges.

स्पर्गान्दर्शनोद्धया: पुणवे द्राणुगां ततः ।

सीसल्सनानामाशेण सामान्यदिवसे नृगाम् ॥ 24 ॥

शनकोटिजन्यमार्गे नय्वतीति श्रुतो श्रुतम् ।

यानि कानि च पणानि ब्रह्मात्यादिकानि च ॥ 25 ॥

The sight of the Ganges and the touch of the Ganges water give religious merits ten times more than the touch with the air in contact with the Ganges water. People become freed of their sins then and there especially if they bathe in the Ganges.

जनमसंख्यार्षितान्येव कामतोउपि कृतानि च ।

ताति सर्वाणि गर्भविति मौसल्ल्यानतो नृणाम || 26 ||

पुण्याह्न्यानत: पुण्यं वेदा नैव वदन्ति च ।

किंच्छिद्धिन्ति ते विघ फत्मेव यथागमम् ॥ 27 ॥

It is heard in the Srutis that the bathing in the Ganges, if done according to rules, destroys all the sin e.g. the murder of a Brāhmin, etc., acquired in one thousand millions of births done consciously or unconsciously. The merits that are acquired by the bathing in the Ganges on a day of religious merit, cannot be described even by the Vedas. Whatever is mentioned in the Agamas is but a mere trifle.

ब्रहाविष्णुरिवाहाढ्य सर्वे नैव वर्दित च ।

सामान्यादिवसनानसंकल्पं शृणु सुदारि ॥ 28 ॥

पुर्णवं दारुणुं चैव मोसत्सनात: परम् ।

ततिक्षेत्रदारुणुं पुर्णवं परिवसंक्रमणे दिने ॥ 29 ॥

Even Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa cannot describe fully the merits of the bathing in the Ganges. O Brāhmī! Such is the glori of ordinary bathing. Now I will describe the effect of the Ganges bath done with a Śankalpa (resolve); hear. Ten times more the result is obtained when the Ganges bathing is done with a resolve (Śankalpa) than ordinary bath and if one bathes on the day when the sun passes from one sign to another (in the Zodiac), thirty times more religious merits accure.

अमायां चाधि ततुल्यं द्विगुणं दक्षिणायने ।

ततो द्विगुणं पुणयं नराणामुतारयणे ॥ 30 ॥

चातुमारियां घौर्णमायामन्तं पुणयेव च ।

अक्षामायां च ततुल्यं चैतड़ेदे निरूपितम् ॥ 31 ॥

On the new Moon (Amāvasyā) day, the Ganges bath gives the merits as above mentioned; but when the Sun is in his Southern course (Dakṣināyana) double the merits are obtained and when the sun is in his Northern course, ten times more religious merits are obtained. The Ganges bathing in the time of Cāturmāśya, full Moon day, Akṣayā Navamī or Akṣaya ‘trītyā yields merits that cannot be measured.

असंख्युप्यफलदयेतेषु स्नानदानकम् ।

सामान्यदिवसन्नानादानच्छतगुणं फलम् ॥ 32 ॥

मन्नतराधायां तिथी सुगाधायां तथैव च ।

माध्यस्य सितसतपन्थां बीभ्याछ्यां तथैव ॥ 33 ॥

अथायोगैकाह्यथां च नवन्यां च तथा हरे: ।

And if on the above Parva (particular periods of the year on which certain ceremonies are commanded) days both bathing, and making over gifts are done, there is no limit to the religious merits acquired; hundred times more than ordinary bath, religious merits are obtained. Great religious merits accrue from the Ganges bath on Manvantarā tithi, Yugādyā, Šuklā seventh day of the month of Māgha, Bhīsmāṣṭamī day, Aśokāṣṭamī day, and Śrī Rāma Navamī day.

ततोर्जी विश्रणु पुर्णयं नन्त्यायां नैव दुर्वेभम् ॥ 34 ॥

उश्राहतदायमां तु युग्यातिस्मयं फलम् ।

नन्त्यमं च कारभयं महनुर्षे चतुर्णेण ॥ 35 ॥

Again double the merits than those of the above arise from bathing in the Ganges during the Nanda ceremony. The Ganges bath in Daśaharā tanth gives merits equivalent to Yugādyā Snānam (bath). And if the bathing be done on Mahāndanā or in Mahāvārunj day, four times more religious merits accrue.

ततश्रुतर्णुणं पुण्यं द्विमहपूर्वकैं सति ।

पुणवं कोटिगुणं चैव सामान्यसनातो5पि यत् ॥ 36 ॥

चज्ञोरागसमये सूर्वे द्वागुणं ततः ।

पुणयमधाँद्वे काले ततः शनतपुणं फलम् ॥ 37 ॥

Ten million times more religious merits accure from the Ganges bathing on Mahā Mahā Vārunī day than ordinary bath. The Ganges bath in the Solar eclipse yields ten times more religious merits than in the Lunar eclipse. Again the Snānam in Ardhodaya Yoga yields hundred times more religious merits than that of the (solar) eclipse.

इन्वेवमुक्चला देवेशो विराता त्यतः पुः ।

तमुवाच तते गंगा भक्तिभात्मकंधरा ॥ 38 ॥

Thus saying to Gāngā before Bhagīrattha, the Lord of the Devas remained silent. The Devi Gāngā with her head bowed down with devotion, said:

गड़ोवाच

यामि चेद्वारतं नाव भारतीशापतः पुरा ।

तद्वाज्ञा च राजैद्र तपसा चैव संग्रतम् ॥ 39 ॥

दार्यतीत पाधियो महं प्रापाति याति काति च ।

ताति मे केन नर्यर्ति तनुपायं वद्ध प्रभो ॥ 40 ॥

Gaṅgā said: “If I am after all, to go to Bhārata as Thou commandest and under the curse given previously by Bhāratī, then tell me how I would be freed of the sins that the sinners will cast on me.

कति कालपरिभितं स्थितिमं तत्र भारते ।

कदा यास्यामि देवेश तिद्धणोः परमं पदम् ॥ 41 ॥

ममान्याङ्गितं यडास्वर्ज जानातिस सर्वैवित् ।

सर्वान्तरात्मसर्वैत्र तदुपायं वद प्रभो ॥ 42 ॥

How long will I have to remain there? When, O Lord! Shall I be able to return to the Highest place of Vishnu? O Thou, the Inner Self of all! O All Knowing! O Lord! Whatever else I desire, Thou knowest them all. So be pleased to instruct me on all these points."

श्रीभगवानुबाच

ज्ञानायि वार्षितं गंने तव सर्वे सुरेश्वरि ।

पतितसे द्रवरूपाया लवणोदो भविष्यति ॥ 43 ॥

स मगांगश्वरूपश्रू तवं च लक्ष्मीस्वरूपिधिं ।

विद्धपाया विद्योपे संगमो गुणवान्यपुढ़ि ॥ 44 ॥

Bhagavān Śrī Hari said: “O Sureśvarī! I know all that you desire; when you will assume the liquid form, the Salt Ocean will be your husband. He is My part and you are of the nature of Lakṣmī; so the union of the lover with the love stricken in the world will turn out a happy and qualified one.

वायत्व: संति नवछ्ध भारत्याद्धाङ्ध भारते ।

सीभाग्य तं च तास्वेल ल्वणोद्यस्य सीते ॥ 45 ॥

अद्धप्रपृति देवेशि कलः: पंचसहकवम् ।

वर्ष स्थितिते भारत्या: शापेन भारते भुचि ॥ 46 ॥

Of all the rivers Sarasvatī and others in Bhārata, that go to mix with the ocean, you will be the best and highly fortunate of them all. From today you will have to remain in Bhārata for a period of five thousand years, under the curse of Bhāratī.

Book IX Chapter XI

नित्यं त्वम्धिना सार्थ़ं कार्तियस रोर त्रिलम्।

त्वयेर रसिका देखि रसिकेजेण संयुत्न ॥ 47 ॥

त्वां स्तोष्यित च स्तोषण भपीरथ्छुतेन च ।

भातस्था जना: सर्वे पूजिथ्येति भक्ति: ॥ 48 ॥

You will be able to enjoy daily and always the pleasures with the Ocean. O Devi! As you are a clever lady, so He is also apt and expert. The inhabitants of Bhārata will praise Thee and worship Thee with great devotion by the stotra which Bhagiratha has composed.

कण्वग्योक्त्यानेन ध्यावा तां पूजिथ्येति ।

यः स्तौति प्रणमेघित्यं सो5श्मेधफलं लभेत् ॥ 49 ॥

गंगा गंगेति यो बूयाघोजनानां श्रौतरि ।

मुच्यते सर्वोपेध्यो विद्युलोकं स गच्छिति ॥ 50 ॥

He will derive the fruit of one horse-sacrifice who will meditate on Thee as per Kāṇvaśākhā and worship, praise and bow down to Thee daily. Even if one utter ‘Gaṅgā,’ ‘Gaṅgā,’ though one is one hundred Yojanas away from the Ganges, one will be freed of all sins and go to Viṣṇu-loka.

सहस्वापिति स्नानाधावणे ते भविष्यति ।

प्रकृतैर्भन्संस्पश्रद्धि तिह्व विलेक्षति. ॥ 51 ॥

पापिनां तु सहसाणां शवस्यर्नि वयत्वि ।

तन्योगपाकस्नानान्तदं च विनंक्ष्यति ॥ 52 ॥

Whatever sins will be cast in Thee by thousand sinners bathing in Thee will be destroyed by the touch of the devotees of Prakrti Devi. Even if thousands and thousands of sinners touch the dead bodies an bathe in Thee, all those will be destroyed when the Devi Bhaktas, the worshippers of Bhuvaneśvari and Māyā Bīja, will come and touch Thee.

तत्रैव त्वमधिछानं क्रियस्ययमोचनम् ।

सार्य सरित्द्रः श्रेष्ठधि: सरस्वत्यादिधि: शुणे ॥ 53 ॥

तन्तु तीर्थे घतेसघाएं यत्र त्वरुणाकौतिनम् ।

त्वेत्रपुण्यर्भागेण तृती भवति पातकी ॥ 54 ॥

रैणुप्राणवर्ष च देवीलोकेक वसेद्युवम् ।

O Auspicious One! Thou wilt wash away the sins of the sinners, by Thy stay in Bhārata with other best rivers Sarasvatī and others. That will be at once a sacred place of pilgrimage where Thy

glories will be chanted. By the touch of the dust of Thine, the sinner will be at once purified and he will dwell in the Devi-loka (Manj Dvīpa) for as many years as will be the dust there.

जानेन तथिति मे भक्क्या मग्राम्याप्रतुर्षकम् ॥ 55 ॥

समुत्सृजित प्राणांशु ते गच्छिति हरे: पदम् ।

पार्वेद्वारस्ते च भविष्यितं हरेश्रिम् ॥ 56 ॥

लयं प्राकृतिके ते च इव्यन्ति चार्यल्यकम् ।

मृत्यव बहुगुप्येन तच्छवं लयि विज्यन्ते ॥ 57 ॥

प्रयाति स च वैकुंट यावढ़ः स्थितितस्ययि ।

All Hail to the Devi Bhuvaneśvari! He who will leave his body on Thy lap with full consciousness and remembering My name, will certainly go to My abode and will remain, as My chief attendant for an infinite period. He will see countless Prākrtik Layas (dissolutions of the Universe). Unless a man has collected hordes of religious merits, he cannot die in the Ganges; and if he dies on the Ganges he goes to Vaikuntha as long as the Sun rises in this world.

कार्यव्यूहं ततः कृत्वा भोजयित्वा स्वकर्मकम् ॥ 58 ॥

तस्मै दद्वामि सारूपं कारोमि तं च पारंद्वम् ।

अज्ञानी चत्वजल्यगर्हादि प्राणानमसुवृजेत् ॥ 59 ॥

तस्मै दद्वामि सारूपं कारोमि तं च पारंद्वम् ।

I get many bodies for him where he can enjoy the fruits of his Karma and I then give him My Sārūpya (From resembling Mine) and make him My attendant. If any ignorant man, void of any Jñānam, quits his body by touching merely Thy water, I give him Sālokya (place in My region) and make him My attendant.

अन्यत्र ता व्यतेत्राणांत्वनामम्यतुपुर्कम् ॥ 60 ॥

तस्पै द्वादिम सालोकयं यावड़े झडणो बयः ।

अन्यत्र ता चलेनत्राणांत्वनाम्यतुपुर्णम् ॥ 61 ॥

तस्पै द्वादिम सात्क्यमलंखं प्राकृतं लवम् ।

रत्नेद्रसातिमर्गागयानेन सह पार्वदैः ॥ 62 ॥

सखः प्रयाति गोलेकां मम तुल्यो भवेद्युवम् ।

Even if one quits one's body in a far off place, uttering Thy Name, I give him place in My region for one life time of Brahmā And if he remembers Thee with devotion, and quits his mortal coil at an

other place, I give him Sārūpya (Form resembling Mine) for a period of endless Prākṛtīk Layas. He instantly gets on an aerial car made of jewels and goes with My attendants to the region of Goloka and gets form like Me. Those that worship daily My Mantra, that pass their days, eating the remnant of the food offered to Me, they need not have any distinction whether they die in Tirath or not. They themselves can easily purify the three worlds. Getting on the excellent and best aerial car built of jewels, they go to the region of Goloka.

नौर्रिज्यतीं मरणे विशेषो नास्ति कक्षान १ ६३ १ ॥

मन्नोरोपककानां तु नित्यं नैवैषे घोफिनान् ।

पूर्तं कर्तुं सगत्को हिं लीलाया घुवनजयम् ॥ ६४ ॥

रत्नेत्रसारायने नोगलेकं संप्रवर्ति च ।

मद्धक्ता बांधाव येषां तैरे पश्रादयो5पि हि ॥ 6 5 ॥

प्रवर्ति रत्वायने नोगलेकं चातितुल्बनम् ।

यत्र तत्र स्मृताते च ज्ञानेन ज्ञानिनः सति ॥ 6 6 ॥

जीवमृक्ताश्र ते पूता मद्धतैः संविधानतः ।

O Chaste One! Even if the friends of My devotees, be born in animal births, they also will be purified by the devotion shewn towards Me and getting on a jewelled aerial car will be able to go to Goloka, so difficult of access. Wherever the Bhaktas may be, if they simply remember Me with devotion, they will become liberated while living by the power of My Bhakti.

इलुकुत्वा श्रीहरितां च प्रत्युवाच भगीरम्ब। 6 7 ॥

सूक्षि गंगामिमां भक्त्या पूजां च कुक संग्राम् ।

भगीर्यस्तां तुहाव पूजामायाम भक्ति: ॥ 6 8 ॥

कौशुयोकेन ध्यानेन स्तोजणीपुः पुनः ।

प्रणानाम च श्रीकृष्णं परमात्मानीश्वरम् ॥ 6 9 ॥

भगीर्यश्व गंगा च सेठान्तर्न चकार ह ।

Thus saying to Gaṅgā, Bhagavān Śrī Hari addressed Bhagīrathā: O Child! Now worship Gaṅgā Devī with devotion and chant hymns to Her. The pure Bhagiratha meditated with devotion as per Kauthuma Śākhā and worshipped the Devi and praised Her repeatedly. Then Gaṅgā and Bhagiratha bowed down to Śrī Krṣṇa and He disappeared at once from their sight.

नाद खाच

केन ध्यानेन स्तोत्रेण केन पूजाक्रोग च ॥ ७० ॥

पूजां चकार नृपतिर्वं वेद्विद्वां वर ।

The Devarṣī Nārada said: O Thou the foremost of the Knowers of the Vedas! How, by what Kuthuma Śākhā, the noble King Bhagiratha meditated on the Devi Gāngā; what storia did he recite and what was the method with which he worshipped the Gānges.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

स्नावा निवाक्रिया कृत्वा धृत्य धौते च वाससी ॥ 71 ॥

संपूर्ण देववद्के च संयतो भक्तिपूर्वकम् ।

गणोंचे च दिनोंचे च वाई विज़णुं शिव हिंवामुं ॥ 72 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Nārada! One should first take one's bath, and putting on a clean washed clothing should perform one's daily duties. Then one should control oneself and with devotion worship the six Devatās Gaṇeśa, Sun, Fire, Viṣṇu, Śiva and Śiva.

संपूच्य देवर्धकृचे च संगोद्धिकारी च पूजने ।

गणेणं विच्छनाशय आरोग्याय दिवाकर्म। ॥ 73 ॥

वाईं ग्रीचाय विश्युं च लध्य्यर्षे पूजवेधरः ।

शिवं ज्ञानाय जानेणे शिवां च मुक्तिसिद्धरे ॥ 74 ॥

Thus one becomes entitled to worship. First worship is to be given to Gangaśa for the destruction of obstacles; the Sun is to be next worshipped for health; Fire, for purification; Viṣṇu is then worshipped for getting wealth and power; Śiva is worshipped for knowledge and Śivānī is worshipped for Mukti.

संपूर्वैताल्लेषयज्ञो विपतितमतोज्ञस्या ।

दध्याबनेने ध्यानेन तद्धानां श्रणु नाद् ॥ 75 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे नवमकरभे चकाशोरधाया: 111 ।

When these Devatās are worshipped, one is entitled to worship the Deity. Otherwise contrary become the effects. Now I am saying what Dhyānam (meditation) did Bhagiratha practise towards the Devi Gaṅgā.

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Ninth Book on the origin of the Ganges in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XII

CHAPTER XII

On the Origin of the Gaigā

श्रीनारायण उवाच

ध्यानं च कपवशाखोक्तं सर्वायपरणाशनम् ।

श्वेतपंकाजरणांचा नंगां पापपूरणाशिनीम् ॥ १ ॥

कृणविष्यहंर्षभृतां कृणन्तुत्वां परां सतीम् ।

विक्षुरूप्योर्गुकाधानां रत्नप्रणापृषितम् ॥ २ ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! Now about the meditation (Dhyāna) of the Devi Gāngā as per Kāṇve Śākhā, which destroys all the sins. 'O Gānge! Of white colour like white lotuses! Thou destroyest all the sins of men. Thou hast appeared from the body of Śri Kṛṣṇa. Thou art powerful like Him. Thou art very chaste and pure. Thou hast worn the raiment, uninflammable and decorated all over with ornaments made of jewels.

ग्रत्यपूर्णे-पुगतकमूर्शोभाकारं वराम ।

ईपद्वाय्यप्रसाध्या गशल्यतृषियर्योवरानि ॥ 3 ॥

नारायणियां शांतां सस्तीभावयस्माप्रिताना ।

विष्पतीं कवरीभारे भाललीमाल्यसंयुना ॥ 4 ॥

सिंतूरविंद्युलिलं सार्थे चंदनविंद्यिभः ।

कस्तूरीपकं तोँ नानाधिसम्यमित्ति ॥ 5 ॥

Thou art more brilliant than one hundred autumnal Moons. Thou art also well pleased with a smile on Thy lips. And Thou art always of steady youthful beauty (that never wanes). Thou art dear to Nārāyaṇa, calm and of peaceful temper, and proud of being His with His fortune. Thou bearest the braid of hair, decked with garlands of Mālatī flowers; Thy cheeks are anointed with sandal dots, with Sindūra bindu (dots of red powder, vermilion) and well adorned with various artistic lines made of musk.

पत्थविविविनिधाछचाबाँधुपुतुमम् ।

मुक्ताप्तिङ्गप्रभायुद्वतंपतिफ्चानोरम् ॥ 6 ॥

Thy garment and Thy beautiful lips are more red than the ripe Bimba fruit (the red fruit of a cucurbitaceous plant); Thy teeth vie as it were, with the rows of pearls.

सुचास्वक्वनयनं सकटाखं मनोहारम् ।

कठिनं शीफलाकारं सनतयुगं च विश्वतीं ॥ 7 ॥

ब्रहछ्छीघी सुकठितं सैपास्तीविवित्तम् ।

स्वलपद्यभाग्युषावपव्युगं वरम् ॥ 8 ॥

How lovely are Thy eyes! How delightsome is Thy side-long glance! How close are Thy breasts like Bel fruits! Thy loins are thicker and more solid then the plantain trees. How do Thy feet look beautiful, defying the beauty of the Sthalapadma (ground Lotus)!

रत्यापुकसंयुक्ते कुकुमार्ते सयावकम् ।

देवेश्वरीलियंदारमकरंदकाणकम् ॥ 9 ॥

How do the red sandals look lovely with Kunkuma and alaktak (red powder)! What a red tinge Thy feet have shewn with the honey of Parijāta flower that is seen on the head of Indra).

सुरसिद्धमुप्नीरैछ्छ दत्तार्थसंतुं सदा ।

तपसियोलिनिकन्धमगढ़ीणिरंगेतुम् ॥ 10 ॥

मुकितपूर्व मुपुळ्णा कामिनां सर्वीभगवत् ।

वरां वरेण्या वरांं भक्तानुग्रहकाणिरिध् ॥ 11 ॥

श्रीविष्णो: पददार्ची च भत्रे विष्णुपर्ती सतीम् ।

The Devas, the Siddhas, the Munis, offer always Arghyas (offerings of rice with Durba grass) at Thy feet; the ascetics bow down at Thy feet, and it seems as Though so many lines of bees are on Thy lotus feet. O Mother! Thy lotus feet give liberation to those that want Mukti and enjoyment to those that want Bhukti (enjoyments). O Mother! Thou art the boon; Thou art the chief excellent; Thou grantest boons and Thou showest Thy favour to Thy devotees; Thou bestowest the Viṣṇupadam (the place of Viṣṇu); but Thou hast come from the feet of Viṣṇu.

इत्यनेत्रेय ध्यानेन ध्याना त्रिपशां शुभाम् ॥ 12 ॥

दत्वा सैपुजरेवुद्धविशुपचाराणि चोडग ।

आसनं पादामर्धे च स्नानीयं चानुलेपनम् ॥ 13 ॥

धूपं दीपं च नेवेघं तांवूलं शीतलं जलम् ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

वसनं भूषणं माल्यं गंधभाचमनीयकम् ॥ 14 ॥

मनोहं सुतत्वं च देशायैतानि पोड्गा ।

Thus meditating on the Devi Gāngā flowing by three routes (in Heaven, earth and internal regions), the bestower of good things one should offer to the Devi sixteen things: Śasana, Pādya, Arghya, water for bathing, ointment (anūlepana), Dhūpa (scents), Dīpa (lights), Naivedya (offerings of food), betel, cool water, clothings, ornaments, garlands, sandal-paste, Āacamanīya (water for sipping), and beautiful bedding and worship Her with these.

दत्ता बकला च प्रणोकसंसूय सैपुट्रांलिः: ॥ १ ५ ॥

संपूर्वैवं प्रक्रोग एसो5धमेधफलं भवेत् ।

Then, with folded hands, one should perform stotra to Her and bow down to Her with devotion. Thus the worshipper gets the fruits of Asvamedha sacrifice.

नारद खाच

घोतुमिच्छामि देवेश लक्ष्मीकात जपत्यते ॥ १ ६ ॥

विष्णोर्विष्यपरीतेयं पापपं पुण्यकातकम् ।

Nārada said: O Lord of the Devas! At present I am desirous to hear the sin-destroying and virtue-bestowing stotra (hymn) of Gaṅgā Devī, the Purifier of all those that are fallen from virtue, originated from the feet of Viṣṇu, the Lord of world and the husband of Lakṣmi. Kindly narrate all these in detail.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

शृणु नारद वक्ष्यामि पापपं पुणवकाराण् ॥ 17 ॥

शिवसंगीतसंपुथश्रीकृष्णगांगस्पुद्वाम। ।

राधांगुद्वसंसूक्तां तां गंगां प्रणामावमूँ ॥ 18 ॥

यज्ञम् युहोराटी च गोलोके रासमंडले ।

सविधाने गंकरस्य तां गंगां प्रणामावमूँ ॥ 19 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! Now I am narrating the stotra of Gāngā Devi, that destroys all sins and bestows all religious merits. Hear. I bow down to the Ganges who appeared from the body of Śri Krṣṇa, enchanted by the music of Śiva, and, who

was bathed with the prespiration (water coming out of the body) of Śri Rādhā. I bow down to Gāngā Devi who first appeared in the circular dance (Rāsa Maṇḍalam) in the region of Goloka and who always remains with Śaṅkara.

गोर्यैर्गीर्यिज्ञाकीर्णे शुणे राधामहोत्सवे ।

क्रार्तिकीर्णिगावा च तां गंगां प्रणामायहम् ॥ 20 ॥

कोटियोजनविस्तीर्ण हेट्ये लक्षपुणा ततः ।

समावृता या गोलेके तां गंगां प्रणामायहम् ॥ 21 ॥

My obeisance to the Devi Gāngā who remains in the auspicious grand utsav of Rādhā (Rāsa Māndalam), crowded with Gopas and Gopīs, in the Full Moon night of the month of Kārtika. She is one kotī yojanas wide and one lakh times on kotī yojanas long in the region of Goloka.

थिहल्ब्योजना या ततो देर्थे चतुर्णुगा ।

स्मावुता या वैकुण्ठे तां गांगं प्रणामायून ॥ 2 2 ॥

प्रिंगलल्ब्योजना या देर्थे घंचुर्णुगा ततः ।

आवृता ब्रहूलोके या तां गांगं प्रणामायून ॥ 23 ॥

My obeisance to Her! In Vaikuntha, Gaṅgā is sixty lakh yajonas in width and four times that in lenght. My Obeisance to Her! In Brahma-loka, Gaṅgā is thirty lakh yajonas wide and five times as long. I bow down to Her.

शिशल्योजना या देर्धें चतुरुर्णित ततः ।

आवृत्त शिवतोके या तां गंगां प्रणामायहम् ॥ 24 ॥

लक्ष्योजनविस्तीर्ण देर्धें सन्त्युना ततः ।

आवृत्त ध्रुलोके या तां गंगां प्रणामायहम् ॥ 25 ॥

In Śiva-loka, She is thirty lakh yoganas wide and four times that in length. I bow down to Her. In Dhruva-loka, She is one-lakh yoganas wide and seven times as long. I bow down to Her.

लक्ष्योजनविर्तिणी दैर्धें घड़गुणा ततः ।

आवृता चंड्रलोक यां तां गंगां प्रणामायहम् ॥ 26 ॥

थहिसह्वयोजना या दैर्धें दूरपुणत ततः ।

आवृता सूर्यलोक यां तां गंगां प्रणामायहम् ॥ 27 ॥

In Candra loka She is on lakh yoganas wide and five times as long. My obeisance to Śri Ganga Devī. I bow down to the Ganges who is sixty thousand yoganas wide in the Sūrya loka and ten times that in length.

Book IX Chapter XII

लक्ष्योजनविस्तीर्ण हैर्षे पंचगुणा ततः ।

आयुता या तपोलोके तां गंर्ण प्रणायामदूम् ॥ 28 ॥

सहस्वयोजनायामा देधें द्वगुगुणा ततः ।

आयुता जनलोके या तां गंगा प्रणायामदूम् ॥ 29 ॥

I bow down to Gāngā in Tapo-loka who is one lakh yojanas wide and five times that in length. My obeisance to Gāngā Devi in Janar-loka, who is one thousand yojanas wide and ten times that as long.

इशलक्ष्योजना वा दैर्धें चंचपुणता ततः ।

अगतृता या महलोंके तां गंगा प्रणमाच्यमूँ ॥ ३० ॥

सहस्वयोजनायामा दैर्धें द्रगुणा ततः ।

अगतृता या च केलासे तां गंगी प्रणमाच्यमूँ ॥ ३ १ ॥

I bow down to Gāngā in Mahar-loka who is ten lakh yojanas wide and five times that in length. My obeisance to Gāngā Devi in Kailāsa who is one thousand yojanas wide and one hundred times as long.

शतयोजनविस्तीणां दैधें द्वरुणगा ततः ।

मंदाकिनी चेंद्रलोके तां गंगां प्रणामावमृह् ॥ 32 ॥

I bow down to Gāngā Devi who is known as Mandākini in Indra-loka, and who is one hundred yojanas wide and ten times than that in length.

पाताले भवाती च दिस्तीर्णा द्याजयोजना ।

ततो द्वगुणा दैर्थे तां गांगी प्रणामाम्यहम् ॥ 33 ॥

कोशीकमाविस्तीर्णत ततः क्षीणा च कुत्रचित् ।

क्षिती चालकनंव या तां गांगी प्रणामाम्यहम् ॥ 34 ॥

सत्ये या क्षीरवर्णों च जेतायामिद्वसभिपा ।

द्वारे चंदनाभा या तां गांगी प्रणामाम्यह् ॥ 35 ॥

My obeisance to Gāngā Devi, known as Bhagavati in Pātāla who is ten yojanas wide and five times as long. I bow down to Gāngā Devi, known as Alakanandā in this earth, who is two miles wide, in som places more wide and in some places less wide. I bow down to Gāngā Devi who was of the colour of milk in Satya yuga, of the colour of Moon in Trejā Yuga of the colour of white sandal paste in Dvāpara yuga.

जलप्रभा कली या च नान्य वृधवीरितो ।

स्वर्गे च नित्यं क्षीराभा तां गंगां प्रणामायह्म् ॥ 36 ॥

यत्तोयकणिकास्पर्षे पाचितां ज्ञानसंघवः ।

बहाह्त्यादिके यपं कोटिजन्यार्जिंतं दौह्न् ।। 37 ॥

I bow down to Śrī Gāngā Devī who is as water in Kali yuga in this earth and as milk in Kali yuga in Heaven. O Child! By the touch of one molecule of the water of the Ganges, all the horrible sins incurred in ten million births, the murder of a Brāhmin and so forth, are burnt to ashes.

इत्येवं कथिता ब्रह्नानगायदीकर्षितशितः ।

सतोकरं च परमं पाघनं पुणवजीवनम् ॥ 38 ॥

नित्यं चो हि पटेढ़क्वता संपूज्य च सुरुष्वीम् ।

सोउस्वीधकर्त नित्यं रूपते नात्र संशयः ॥ 39 ॥

Thus I have described in twenty-one years the great stotra (human) of the sin-destroying and the virtue-increasing merits of Gaṅgā. He reaps the fruit of the Aśvamedha sacrifice (Horse sacrifice), who daily sings this praise of Gaṅgā after worshipping Her with devotion. There is no doubt in this.

अपुत्रो लभते पुत्रे भगवाहीनो लभेस्त्रिव्यम् ।

रोगापमृष्यते रोगी बध्नानुक्ती भवेद्युबम् ॥ 40 ॥

अस्पष्टकीर्ति: सूयग मुखों भवति पीडितः ।

यः पदेग्रातरूथाय गंगात्सोत्रमिदं शुभम् ॥ 41 ॥

गुणं भवेच्च दुःखनो गंगात्नापकर्त लयेत् ।

The persons that are without any sons get sons hereby and those who have no wives get wives. The diseased get themselves free from their diseases, and the man who is under bondage, is liberated from that bondage. He who getting up early in the morning reads this stotra of Ganga, becomes widely known even if he be not known at all and he becomes illumined with wisdom even if he be quite ignorant. Even if he sees a bad dream, he acquires the merit of bathing in the Ganges and of seeing good dreams.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

स्तोत्रेषानेन गंगा च सूला चैव भगीराः ॥ 42 ॥

जगाम तं गृहीला च यत्र नष्टा श सगारः ।

वैकुपंठ ते ययसूनुर्ण गंगायाः स्पर्शिवायुना ॥ 43 ॥

भगीरथेन सा.उन्मीता तेन भागीरथी स्मृता ।

Śrī Nārāyaṇa spoke: O Nārada! With this stotra (hymn) did Bhagiratha praise the Gaṅgā Devī. Who then went with him to the spot where the Sagara's sons were burnt to ashes by the curse of Kapila. By the contact of the wind in touch with the particles of water of the Ganges, those sons of Sagara were instantly freed of their curses and they all repaired to Vaikuntā. She is named Bhāgirāthi, because Bhagiratha brought Her to this earth.

क्रुलेयं बकितं सर्व गड़ोपाख्यानमुपनम् ॥ 44 ॥

पुण्यदं मोक्षदं सारं किं घ्यः झोतुमिच्छतिस ।

Thus I have discribed to you the story of the Ganges. This anecdote is highly meritorious and the great step to liberation. What more do you now want to hear? Say.

नारद खाच

कयं गड़ा विधधाग जाता घुवनपावजी ॥ 4 5 ॥

कृत्र वा केन विधिना तत्सर्वे वद मे प्रभो ।

तत्स्थाशु जान ये वे ते च किं चकुकृतभम् ॥ 46 ॥

एतत्सर्वे तु विस्तीर्ण कृत्वा वतुभिरहाईरि ।

Nārada said: O Lord! How did Gaṅgā come to flow through the three worlds by there routes, and thus purify them? How was she carried and to which places? How did the people of those localities accord respect to Her? Kindly describe all these in detail.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

क्रात्तिक्यां पूर्णिमायां तु राधाया: सुमहोतस्वः ॥ 47 ॥

कृष्ण: संपूछ्न तां राधायपास रासमंडले ।

कृष्णोन पूजितां तां तु संपूछ्य हृद्यानसाः ॥ 48 ॥

क्रवृद्धोद्धादयः सर्वे ऋषयः शेनेकादयः ।

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! On the Full Moon night of the month of Kārtik in the Rāsa mandalam, at the great festivity in honour of Rādhā, Śri Kṛṣṇa worshipped Rādhā and remained there. Next Rādhā, worshipped by Śri Kṛṣṇa, was worshipped by Brahmā and the other Devas, by Śaunaka and the other Rṣis, who also stopped there with much gladness.

एतसिम्ब्रंतरे कृष्णसंगीता च सरस्थती ॥ 49 ॥

जगी सुन्दरतालेन वीणया च मनोहस् ।

तुही बढ़ा ददौ तस्ये रन्ट्रैसाराहाकम् ॥ 50 ॥

शिको मणीद्रसारे तु सर्वेबहाण्डवुर्णभम् ।

कृष्णा: कौतपुभरलं च सर्वेरन्तारयं वस् ॥ 51 ॥

अमूत्यरत्निर्माणं हारसारं च राधिका ।

नारागश्र भगवान्द्दी मालं मनोहान् ॥ 52 ॥

अमूत्यरत्निर्माणं लक्ष्मी: कनककुडलम् ।

विष्णुभावा भगवती भूतप्रकृतिरीखरी ॥ 53 ॥

दुर्गा नातयगशीगना बह्वभक्ति सुतुर्वर्णम् ।

धार्मेबृद्धिं च धर्मड्य शयश विष्णुभ के ॥ 54 ॥

यहिष्टुपद्राणुकं वहिद्वार्थ्य महिनुपुरान् ।

At this moment the Devi Sarasvatí, the Presiding Deity of the Science of Music began to sing lovely songs regarding Krṣna, in tune with vocal and instrumental music. Brahmā became glad and presented to Sarasvatí a necklace of jewels; Mahā Deva gave her gems and jewels rare in this universe; Krṣna presented the best Kaustubha jewel; Rādhikā offered excellent invaluable necklace of jewels; Nārāyāna presented to her the best and most excellent garland of jewels; Lakṣmī gave her invaluable golden earrings decked with gems; Viṣṇu-Māyā Mūla Prakṛti, Bhagavatī Durgā, who is Nārāyanī, Īśvari, Īśānī, presented Her devotion to Brahma, so very rare; Dharma gave her devotion to Dharma and high fame; Agni (fire) gave her excellent raiments purified by fire and Vāyu gave Her Nūpura (toc ornaments) made of gems and jewels.

एतस्मिनंते शुर्भबृह्णा प्रेरितो मुहु: ॥ 55 ॥

जगी झीकृष्यांसीनत रासोललाससमन्दिनत् ।

At this time, Maheśvara, the Lord of Bhūtas (elements) began to sing, at the suggestion of Brahmā, songs relating to Śri Kṛṣṇa's grand Rāsa festival.

मृच्छीप्रपु: सुरा: सर्वे चित्रयुन्तिका यथा ॥ 56 ॥

कषेन चेतनां प्राय्य ददुग्र रासमडले ।

स्वलं सर्वे जलकौर्ण राधाकृष्णायहीनकम् ॥ 57 ॥

Hearing this, the Devas became very much

Book IX Chapter XII

enchanted and remained motionless like statues. With great difficulty, they regained their consciousness. Then they saw that there was no Rādhā nor Krṣna in the Rāsa maṇḍala; everything was deluged with water.

अत्युचै क्रकुः सर्वे गोण गोयः सुरा दिजा: ।

ध्यानेन बढ़ा बुकुंये सर्वे तीर्थमभीरितमन ॥ ५८ ॥

गतछ्त्रा तथाया साधुं श्रीकृष्णो उत्रतामिति ।

ततो बहादायः सर्वे तुहुवः परमेश्वग्न ॥ ५९ ॥

स्वमूर्ति त्रृपत विषो बांछितं वरमेव नः ।

The Gopas, Gopis, Devas and Brahmanas began to cry loudly. Brahmā in his meditation then came to know that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa both have assumed this liquid appearance for the deliverance of the people of the world. Brahmā and others, all began to praise Śrī Kṛṣṇa and said: “O All pervading One! Now be pleased to show as Thy form and grant us our desired boons.

एलमिश्रते तत्र वार्षमपूशारीरिणी ॥ 60 ॥

तामेव शुश्वु: सर्वे सुव्यक्तां मधुगान्यतान् ।

स्वात्माउहीयं शक्तिभक्तानुग्रहायिका ॥ 61 ॥ ॥

माग्यव्याश्र येटेन कर्तैलं च किमावराः ।

At that instant a sweet incorporeal voice was clearly heard by all, as coming from air above, that, "I am the Self of all, pervading all; and this my Śakti, Rādhā, is also the Self of all, prevades all; so there is no separation of us from you all even for a moment. It is only to show our favour to the devotees that we assume special forms. For this reason only there is separation of us from you as regards this body! There is nothing else. Besides you have no necessity with our bodies.

मनवो मानवा: सर्वे मुनयक्षेय वैश्वना: ॥ 62 ॥

मन्यन्तपुता मां उद्युगगायिध्यांति मन्यदम् ।

मृति राष्ट्र च सुव्यक्तां यदीच्छव सुरेश्वा: ॥ 63 ॥

कंगेतु ईंगभूतनेव मदीयं वाक्यपालनम् ।

स्वयं विधाततस्तं बह्रात्माजां कुक जगदगुम् ॥ 64 ॥

O Devas! Now if my Manus, men, Munis, Vaīnśpavas and you all, purified by Mantras, desire very much to see My From clearly, then I tell you

to request Maheśvara to carry out My word. O Brahma! O Creator! Better ask Mahādeva, the World-Teacher, that He would better compose the beautiful Tāntra Śāstra, in accordance with the limbs of the Vedas.

कर्तु शाखविशेषं च वेदांगं सुमनोहाम् ।

अपूर्वमन्त्रिनर्धे: सर्वभीषीकल्पदे: ॥ 65 ॥

सतीक्षेत्र निकर्ण्यर्विनेपुं पुजाविधिकमे: ।

मन्यंत्रकवचस्तोत्र कृत्वा यल्लेन गोपानम् ॥ 66 ॥

And that the above Śāstra be full of Mantras, capable to yield desired fruits, Sottras (hymns) and Kavacas (protection mantras) and rules of duc worship in proper order. And that also My Mantra, My Stotra, and My Kavaca be also given there in a hidden form. So that those people that are sinners might not understand their real meanings and thus turn out against Me.

भर्वति विमुखा येन जना मां तत्कल्थिति ।

सहसुः शगलेको मन्मंत्रोपासको भवेते ॥ 67 ॥

जना मानंप्रपृताङ्गा यमिध्योति च मयदम् ।

अन्वधा न भविष्यिति सर्वे गोलोकवासिनः ॥ 68 ॥

निष्णलं भविता सर्वे ब्रह्मांडं चैव ब्रह्मणः ।

जना: पढ़ प्रकाशा युक्ता: स्थुं भवे भवे ॥ 69 ॥

It may be that one in a thousand or in a hundred may worship My Mantra. And My Mantra worshippers, the saints, become purified and come to My Abode. If My Śāstra be not well made (i.e., if every one be able to understand its meaning) and if every one be able to go from Bhūrloka to Goloka, then Thy labour in this creation of the world will all be in vain. Therefore dost Thou better create different worlds according to the difference of Sāttvik, Rājasik, and Tamo Gunas; then some will be the inhabitants of this Bhūrloka, some will be the inhabitants of Dyuloka according to their Karmas.

पृथिवीरासिन: कैचित्केचित्वर्शनिवासिन: ।

इदं कर्तु महादेव: क्रांति देवसंसदि ॥ ७ ७ ॥

प्रतितां सुर्द्वां सहचतन्तो मृतिं च रूक्ष्यति ।

इन्येवमुक्त्वा गाने विरातम सनातनः ॥ ७ १ ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

O Brahman! If Mahā Deva promises earnestly in this assembly of the Devas, I will then exhibit My True Form. O Nārada! Thus speaing, the Eternal Puruṣa Śrī Krṣṇa remained silent. (i.e., the aerial incorporeal voice stopped).”

तच्छूला जगतां धाता तमुवाच शिवं मृदा ।

ब्रहणो वचनं श्रुत्वा जानेगो जानिनां वर: ॥ ७२ ॥

गड़तोगं वं करे कृत्वा स्वीकारं च चकार स: ।

संयुक्त विद्यामायावा मंत्रीश: शास्तमुतमम् ॥ ७३ ॥

वेदसारं कार्थियाम प्रतिज्ञापतलनाय च ।

गंगातोयमुपम्युय विद्या यदि वदेजनः ॥ ७४ ॥

स याति कालसूत्रं च यावद्रै बढ़णो यवः ।

Hearing this, Brahmā, the Creator of the world, gladly informed Śiva of this. When the Lord of Knowledge, the Foremost of the Jñāniens, Bhūtanātha heard the words of the Creator, He took the Ganges water in His hands and swore that “I will complete the Tantra Śāstra, full of Rādhā mantras and not opposed to the Vedas.” If one touches the Ganges water and speaks lies, one remains in the terrible Kālasūtra hell for a period of one Brahmā’s life time.

इत्युक्ते शंकरे बह्ञानोलोके सुरसंसदि ॥ 75 ॥

आविश्वभूव श्रीकृष्णो राशया सहितस्ततः ।

तं सुद्धा च संह्धासुदुवुः पुरुषोतमम् ॥ 76 ॥

O Dvija! When Bhagavān Śaṅkara said this before the assembly of the Devas in the region of Goloka, Śrī Krṣṇa appeared there with Rādhā. The Devas became exceedingly glad to see Him. They

praised Him, the Best Puruṣa and they were all filled with rapture and again engaged themselves in the grand Rāsa Festival.

परमानंदपूर्णांश चकुश पुनरूपवम् ।

कालेन शैर्षभगवान्युक्तिदीयं चकार सः ॥ 77 ॥

इत्येवे कथितं सर्वे सुगोय्यं च सुदुर्लेम् ।

स एव उद्वक्ता सा गड़ा गोलोकसंचा ॥ 78 ॥

Some time after, Mahā Deva lighted the Torch of Mukti i.e., the Tantra Śāstra was published by Him, as promised. O Child! Thus I have disclosed to you this anecdote, so-very secret, and hard to be attained. Thus Śrī Krṣṇa Himself, is verily the liqueed Gaṅgā sprung in the region of Goloka.

राधाकृष्णांशंभृता धृतिमूर्तिकफल्याद ।

स्थाने स्थाने स्थायिता सा कृष्णन च परात्मना ॥ 79 ॥

कृष्णयस्कणा परम सर्वेब्रह्यांधपूर्ति ॥ 79 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीयाणवते महापुराणे नवमस्कन्चे

प्रदारोअधाय: 11 12 11

This holy Gaṅgā, born of the bodies of Krṣṇa and Rādhā inseparable from each other, grants enjoyment, lordship and libe,ation. Śrī Krṣṇa, the Highest Self, has placed Her in various places; so Gaṅgā is of the nature of Śrī Krṣṇa and is everywhere, equally honoured everywhere in the Brahmāṇḍa (universe).

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter in the Ninth Book on the origin of Gaṅgā in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER XIII

On the Anecdote of the Gaṅgā

नारद उवाच

क्रलेः पझसह्वावे समितीते सुरेश्वर ।

व्व गता सा महाभाग तन्मे व्याख्यामुदर्शिति ॥ 1 ॥

Nārada said: O Lord for of the Devas! Kindly say in what Loka did Gaṅgā go after 5000 (five thousand) year of the Kali Yuga?

श्रीनारायण उवाच

भारतं भारतीशाणात्समागत्येश्वरैच्छया ।

जगाम तत्र वैकुंठे शपान्ते पुनेर्व सा ॥ 2 ॥

भारती भारतं त्यक्ल्या तज्जगाम हरे: पदम् ।

पद्यावती च शपानंे गंगा सा चैव नादा ॥ 3 ॥

गंगा सरस्वती लक्ष्मीक्षौतासित्रवः पिया हरेः ।

तुलसीसहिता ब्ब्रांधतवः क्रीर्तितः शुतौ ॥ 4 ॥

Nārāyana said: The Bhāgirathi Gāngā came down to Bhārata under the course of Bhāratī; and when, the term expired, She went back, be the Will

Book IX Chapter XIII

of God, to the region of Vaikuntha. Also at the end of the period of their curses, Bhārati and, Lakṣmī, too, left Bhārata and repaired to Nārāyaṇa. Gaṅgā, Lakṣmī, and Sarasvati, these three and Tulasi all these four are so very dear to Śrī Hari.

नारद उवाच

केनोपायेन सा देवी विष्णुपादाङ्गसंभवा ।

ब्रह्मकंदलुस्था च श्रुता शिवप्रिया च सा ॥ 5 ॥

बधूव सा मुनिश्रेष्ठ गंगा नारावणप्रिया ।

अही केन प्रकारेण तमे व्याख्यातुमहींस ॥ 6 ॥

Nārad said: How did Gaṅgā appear from the lotus feet of Viṣṇu? Why did Brahmā put Her in His Kamandalu? I have heard that Gaṅgā is the wife of Śiva; how then, came She to be the wife of Nārāyaṇa? Kindly describe all these jn detail to me.

शीनारायण उवाच

पुरा बधूव गोलेके सा गंगा उवाकपिणी ।

राधाकृष्णातुसंपृतं तदंशा तत्स्वकपिणी ॥ ७ ॥

इवाधिष्यादुर्वी या रूपेणाप्रतिमा भुवि ।

नवयीवनसंप्रा सर्वाभरणभूषिता ॥ 8 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Muni! In ancient times, in the region of Goloka, Gāngā assumed the liquid appearance. She was born of the bodies of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So she is of the nature of both of them and their parts. Gāngā is the presiding deity, of water. She is unequalled in Her beauty in this world. She is full of youth and adorned with all ornaments.

शनमध्याहुष्यास्या सस्मिता सुमनोहरा ।

तपाकाङ्गवर्णिभा शरचंद्रसमप्रभा ॥ 9 ॥

Her face was like the autumnal mid-day lotus and sweet smile was always reigning on Her lips; Her form was very beautiful; Her colour was as bright as melted gold and She looked brilliant like the Autumnal Moon.

सिभ्यप्रभाउसुसिन्घा शुव्रसचवरूषिणी ।

सुर्पानकतिजशोधि: सुनितंबुर्भाग्धा ॥ 10 ॥

पौनोत्रतं सुकाटिनं स्ननयुमं सुवर्तुलम् ।

सुचाफेनप्रयुगलं सुकाटिशं सुर्वकिंमम् ॥ 11 ॥

Eyes and mind get cool and become pleasant at Her beauty and radiance; She was of purely Śuddha Sattva; Her loins were bulky and hard and She was covered with excellent clothings all over Her body. Her breasts were plump and prominent; they were raised, hard, and nicely round. Her eyes very fascinating, always casting side-long glances.

वंकिमं कवरीभरं माल्लीमाल्यसंयुतम् ।

सिंदूरविंदुल्लितं सार्थं चन्दनविंदुर्भिः ॥ 12 ॥

कस्तूरीविकायुक्तं गंडयुगमं मनोरमम् ।

बंधूककुसुमाकामयरोई च सुंदरम् ॥ 13 ॥

Her braids of hair situated a little oblique and the garland of Málati flowers over it made Her look extremely handsome. The sandal-paste dot and the vermilion dot were seen on Her fore-head. On Her cheeks the leaves of musk were drawn and Her lips were red like Bandhūka flowers and they looked enchanting.

पव्वदाडिवबीजाभदंतपंक्तिसमुज्जलम् ।

वाससी वक्षिषुड़े च नीवीयुक्ते च विषिति ॥ 14 ॥

सा सकामा कृष्णायईं समुवास सुलजिता ।

वाससा मुखामछाठ लोचनाथा विभीभुंखम् ॥ 15 ॥

नियेबरहिताभ्यां च विष्वती सततं मुदा ।

प्रफुललवदना हर्षत्रवसंगमालकसा ॥ 16 ॥

Her rows of teeth looked like rows of ripe promegranates; the ends of Her cloth not inflammable by fire, worn in front in a know round the waist She sat by the side of Krṣṇa, full of amorous desires, and abashed. She covered Her face with the end of Her cloth and was seeing, with a steadfast gage the face of the Lord and She was drinking the nectar of His face with great gladness. Her lotus face bloomed and became gladdened at the expectation of a first amorous embrace.

मृच्छिता प्रभृकरणे पुल्कांकितविद्याह ।

एतसिम्बोतर तर्य विद्याना च राधिका ॥ १ ७ ॥

गोपीत्रिंशकोंदितुका कोदिचन्द्रसमप्रभा ।

कोपेनार्तकपाताया रत्कपेकजलोचना ॥ १ ८ ॥

She fainted on seeing the Form of Her Lord and a thrill of joy passed all over Her body. In the

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

meanwhile Rādhikā came up there. Rādhā was attended by thirty kotis of Gopīs. She looked brilliant like tens of millions of Moons. Seeing Gaṅgā by the side of Śrī Krṣṇa, Her face and eyes became reddened with anger like a red lotus.

पीता चंपकदाणिभा गजेन्रंदगामिनी ।

अमूल्यत्निमिणानानामृष्णभूषिता ॥ 19 ॥

अमूल्यत्नखितमामूल्यं बहिहरणीचकम् ।

पीतवस्त्रस्य युगलं नीवीयुक्तं च विधती ॥ 20 ॥

Her colour was yellow like campaka and Her gait was like a maddened elephant. She was adorned with various invaluable ornaments made of jewels. Her pair of clothings were tied round Her waist. They were decked with invaluable jewels and not inflammable by fire. (fire-proof).

स्थलवशुभाषयुं कोमलं च सुरिंजितम् ।

कृष्णदात्ध्येयंसुंकृं विद्यसंसती पर्विबुजम् ॥ 21 ॥

रलेन्द्रसारनिर्माणियमानादरकृष्ण सा ।

सेव्यमाना च ऋषिधिभः क्षेत्तभारमयातुम् ॥ 22 ॥

The Arghya offered by Śrī Krṣṇa was on Her lotus-feet of the colour of a flowing shrub-Bibiscus mutabilis and She was going slowly step by step. The Rṣis began to fan Her with white Cāmaras no sooner She, descending from the excellent aeroplane decked with jewels, began to walk.

कस्पूरीविंदुभियुंक् चन्दनेन समवित्न् ।

दीपदीपप्रभाकारं सिंदूरं विदुरोगिभन् ॥ 2 3 ॥

द्यती भालमध्ये च सीमंताधः स्वलोज्जले ।

पारिज्ञातम्युनाां मालयुक्ते सुवैकिम्न ॥ 24 ॥

Below the pont where the parting of the hairs on the head is done, there was the dot of Sindūra on Her fore-head. If looked brilliant like a bright lamp flame. On both sides of this Sindūrabindu, the dot of musk and the dot of Sandal-paste were seen. When She began to quiver with anger, Her braid, with Pārijāta round it began to tremble also.

सुचाक्रकवीभारं कंपयतीं सुकंपिता ।

सुचाक्रतारसंयुक्तभोई कंपयतीं रूपा ॥ 25 ॥

गल्योवास कृष्णवार्थे रनसिंहासने रुषे ।

सखीनं च समूहैश्य परिपूर्णी विभोः प्रिया ॥ 26 ॥

Her lips adorned with beautiful colours, began to quiver also. She took Her seat angrily on a jewel throne by the side Śrī Krṣṇa. Her attendants took their seats in their allotted positions. Seeing Rādhā, Śrī Krṣṇa got up at once from His seat with reverence and addressed Her, smiling and began to converse with Her in sweet words.

तां दुब्धा च समुतस्यी कृष्ण: सादरपूर्वकम् ।

संभाव्य मयुतालपे: सस्मित्तु ससंभमः ॥ 27 ॥

प्रणोगुरितसंसरला गोपा नवात्मकंधराः ।

तुबुदुप्ते च भकत्ता च तुहाव परमेश्वरः ॥ 28 ॥

The Gopís, very much afraid and with their heads bent low, began to chant hymns to Her with devotion. Śrī Krṣṇa also began to praise Her with stotras. At this moment Gaṅgā Devi got up and praised Her with various hymns and asked Her welfare with fear and with humble words. Out of fear, Her throat, lips and palate were parched up.

उत्थाय गंगा सहसा स्तुति बहु चकार सा ।

कुशलें परिपृष्छ भीताउतिनिवने ॥ 29 ॥

नप्रभागसिता जस्ता शुक्रकपडोहतालुका ।

ध्यानेन शरणायत्ता श्रीकृष्णचरणाङ्गुले ॥ 30 ॥

She took refuge humbly at Śrī Kṛṣṇa's feet. Śrī Kṛṣṇa then took Gaṅgā Devi on His breast when She became calm and quiet. At this interval Suresvari Gaṅgā looked at Rādhā, seated on a throne, lovely and sweet, as if She was burning with Brahma Fire.

तां ह्वच्यित्वां कृष्णो घीताढे चाभयं ददौ ।

बभुव स्थिरचिता सा सर्वेश्वरोण च ॥ ३१ ॥

कर्णविसंहासनस्थां च राधां गंगा ददर्ग सा ।

सुनिरभ्यां सुखदूर्यां च जल्लोंं बहानेसा ॥ ३२ ॥

Since the beginning of creation, She is the Sole Lady of innumerable Brahmās and She is Eternal. At the first sight, She looked young as if of twelve years old. Nowhere in any Universe can be seen a lady so beautiful and having no beginning nor end.

असंख्यक्रहणः कार्मादिरुहेः सनातनीम् ।

सदा द्वारुषार्थीं कन्याभिनवर्याविनाम् ॥ 33 ॥

Book IX Chapter XIII

विश्ववन्धा निरूपमां क्लेषण च गुणेन च ।

शांतां कातामनंततात्माधतरितां सतीम् ॥ 34 ॥

She was auspicious, well endowed with all auspicious signs, prosperous, and having the good fortune of having a best husband. She was the foremost jewel amongst the ladies and appeared as if all the beauties were concentrated in Her.

शुभां सुमारं सुभगां स्वामिसीभाग्यसंगुतम् ।

सौदर्यैंदुरी श्रेष्ठं सर्वायु सुंदरीषु च ॥ 35 5 ॥

कृष्णाधारी कृष्णसामं तेसला वसला तिथा ।

पूर्तितं च महलक्ष्मी लक्ष्म्या लक्ष्मीश्रेणा च ॥ 36 ॥

Rādhā is the (left) half of Śrī Krṣna's body; whether in age or in strength or in beauty she was in every was perfectly equal to Śrī Krṣna. Lakṣmī and the Lord of Lakṣmī both worship Rādhā. The excellent brilliance of Śrī Krṣna was overpowered by the beauty of Rādhā. Taking Her seat on the throne She began to chew betals offered by Her attendants (Sakhīs).

प्रच्छाद्यानां प्रभवा समामीग्रस्य सुप्रभाम् ।

सखीदन्तं च त्रांकुरुं भृक्तवर्तीं च दुर्वभम् । 37 ॥

अजन्यां सर्वेक्ननीं धन्यां मान्यां च मानिनीम् ।

कृष्णप्राणाधियेदेची च प्राणाधियतमां रामम् ॥ 38 ॥

She is the Mother of all the worlds; but no one is Her mother. She is fortunate, respected and proud. She is the Ruling Lady of Śrī Krṣna's Life and Soul and ever dearer to Him than His Prāna (vital breath).

दूषा रासेभरीं तृषितं न जगाम सुरेशृते ।

निवेशहिताभयं व लोचनाभयं पची च ताम । ३ १ ॥

तृलस्मिन्ते राशा जगदीशमुवाच सा ।

वाचा मभुर्या शांता विनीता सस्मिता मुने ॥ 40 ॥

O Devarsj! Gangā, the Governess of the Devas, looked at Her over and over again with a steadfast gaze; but Her eyes and mind were not at all satiated. At this moment, Radhā addressed smilingly to Śri Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of the world, humble and in sweet words.

राधोवाच

कैयं प्राणेश कल्पाणी समिता तत्मुखांबुजम् ।

पर्यंती समितां पार्शे सकामा वकलोचना ॥ 41 ॥

मूर्डी प्राप्तोति रूपेण पुलकांकितविश्रा ।

वर्येण मुख्यामच्छादि निरीक्षनी पुनः पुनः ॥ 42 ॥

O My Lord! Who is that Lady sitting by Thy side, looking askance, eager and with a smiling countenance. She is enchanted with Thy beauteous form and fainting away. Her whole body is excited with rapturous joy. Hiding Her face with cloth She is frequently looking at Thee.

त्वे चापि तां संनिरीक्ष्य सकामः समितः सदा ।

मयि जीवित गोलोके भूता तुबूचितीरुगी ॥ 43 ॥

Thou also dost look on Her smilingly and with desires. What are all these? Even during My presence in this Goloka, all these bad practices are being rampant.

त्वमेव चैव दुर्बर्तं वारं वारं करोषि च ।

क्ष्मां कंपीरि प्रेणा च क्ली जातिः सिन्ध्यमानस ।। 44 ॥

संगृहोमां पियामिषां गोलोकाद्रच्छ लंपर ।

अन्यथा न हि ते भई भविष्यति ब्रजेश्व ॥ 45 ॥

It is Thou that art doing all these bad things often and often! We are female sex; what shall we do? We are naturally, of a very pleasing temper, simple. I bore and forgave all these out of our love. O Licentious One! Take Thy Beloved and go away quickly from this Goloka. Otherwise these things will not bid fair to Thee.

दृष्टस्तं चिरजायुक्तो मया चंदनकानने ।

क्षमा कृता मया पूर्व सखीनीं वचनाएहो ॥ 46 ॥

त्वया मच्छद्वमावेण तिरोधानं कृतं पुरा ।

देई तत्वाज चित्रा नदीरूपा बंधूव सा ॥ 47 ॥

Firstly, One day I saw Thee, united with Virajā Gopi, in Candana (Sandal wood) forest. What to do? At the request of the Sakhīs, I did forgive Thee. Then, hearing My footsteps, Thou didst fly away. Virajā, out of shame, quitted Her body and assumed the form of a river.

कोटियोजनविस्तीर्णां तते देयें चतुर्णग ।

अशापि विद्यामाना सा तव स्क्लोर्स्तीर्विणी ॥ 48 ॥

गृहं मायि नातायां च पुनर्गत्वा तद्यक्ति ।

उद्दे करोद विजरे विजरे चेते संस्मरन् ॥ 49 ॥

That is million Yojanas wide and four times as

long. Even to this day Virajā is existing, testifying to Thy Glory (near Puri, Jagannātha)! When I went back to My home Thou didst go to Virajā again and cried aloud ‘O Viraje! O Viraje!’

तदा तोतास्तमुखाया स योगात्सिद्ध्योगिनी ।

सालकता मृतिंमती ददी तुभच्च दर्जनम् ॥ 50 ॥

ततस्तां च समाधिष्य वीधधानं कृतं तवा ।

ततो बधुतुस्तया च समुत्रा: सदा एव च ॥ 51 ॥

Hearing Your cry, Virajā, the Siddha Yogini arose from the waters, out of Her Yogic power, and when She showed Thee Her divine appearance, decked with ornaments, Thou didst draw Her to Thy side and cast Thy seed in Her. It is owing to the casting of that seed in the womb of Virajā that the seven oceans have come into existence!

दृष्टस्वं शोभया गोया युक्त्धधककानं ।

सदो मच्छद्माजेण तितोधानं कृतं त्वया ॥ 5 2 ॥

गोभा देई परित्यज जगाम चंद्रमंडले ।

तततस्वा: शरीरं च सिन्धो तेजो कपूव ह ॥ 5 3 ॥

Secondly—One day I saw Thee in actual intercourse with the Gopi named Śobhā! Hearing My footsteps, Thou fled'st away that day also. Out of shame Śobhā quitted Her body and departed to the sphere of Moon (Candra Mandal). The cooling effect of the Moon is due to this Śobhā.

संविभव क्यला दर्त हुदनेय विद्वता ।

तलाया किंचित्वल्पाय किंचिन्माणिवाराय च । ।५ ४ ।।

किंचित्कीणां मुखावेध्य: किंचित्दोत्रे किंचन ।

किंचित्सललेवेध्यधु पुचेध्यधारी किंचन ।। ५५ ।।

किंचित्कलेवय: पवेवेध्य: सस्येध्यापी किंचन ।

नुपदेवगृहेध्य प्रेस्कृतोषध्य किंचन ।। ५६ ॥।

When Śobhā was thus distressed, Thou didst divide Her and put some parts to gems and jewels, part to gold, partly to excellent pearls and gems, partly on the face of women, partly to the bodies of Kings, partly to the leaves of trees, partly to flowers, partly to ripe fruits, partly to corns, partly to palaces and temples, partly to purified materials, partly to young and tender shoots and foliage, and partly to milk.

किंचिन्न्तनपेध्यो दुर्घेध्यशापि किंचन ।

दृष्टस्वं प्रभया गोणया युक्तो युद्यावने चे । ५७ ॥

सहो मच्छद्धमाजेण तितीधानं कृतं तत्वा ।

प्रमा देई पौरित्यज जागम सूर्मंबछे ॥ ५८ ॥ ।

तततस्वा: शरीरं च तीढ़े तेजो बभूव ह ।

संविभज्य तत्वा दर्त प्रेणा प्रकटता पुरा ॥ ५९ ॥

विसृष्टे चक्ष्योः कृष्ण लज्जया मढ़वेन च ।

हुतातानया किंचित्चच यक्षेभ्याशी किंचन ॥ 6 0 ॥

किंचित्युकभसिंहेभ्यो देवेभ्यशी किंचन ।

किंचिद्विषुजनैमध्ये जानीभोजीचे पिंचन ॥ 6 1 ॥

Thirdly—I saw Thee united with Prabhā Gopi in Vrndāvana. Thou fled’s at away, hearing My footsteps. Out of shame, Prabhā quitted Her body and departed to the Solar atmosphere. This Prabhā (lustre) is fierce luminosity of the Solar atmosphere. Out of the pangs of separation Thou criedest and didst divide Prabhā and didst put some parts in Fire, partly amidst the Yaksas, partly into lions, among men, partly amongst the Devas, partly in Vaiṣṇavas, partly in serpents, partly in Brāhmaṇas, partly in Munis, partly in ascetics, and partly in fortunate and prosperous ladies.

ब्राह्मणीयो मुनिन्यश्र तपविश्यश्र किंचन ।

स्लीयः सीभाग्ययुक्तायो यगसिव्यश्र किंचन ॥ 62 ॥

ततु दत्ता च सर्वेध्य: पूर्व प्रक्रित्त तथा ।

शातिणीयो युतस्तचं च दृष्टोसि रासमंडते ॥ 63 ॥

वसंते पुण्यालयायां माल्ववांशंद्रनोक्षितः ।

तनप्रदीयैयुक्तं च तननिर्माणमंदिति ॥ 64 ॥

तन्युषाण्याष्ठां तन्यभूषिता सह ।

तया दर्न च तांवृर्तं भुक्तवांशं पुत्र विभो ॥ 65 ॥

Thou hadst to weep then after Thou hadst thus divided Prabha, for Her separation and and fourthly I saw Thee in love union with the Gopi Śānti in Rāsa Manḍalam. On the coming of the spring season, one day Thou with garlands of flowers on Thy neck and with Thy body besmeard with sandal paste and decked with ornaments, wast sleeping on a bed of flowers with Śānti Gopi, decked with gems, in a temple made of gems and pearls and illumined by a lamp of jewels and Thou wast chewing the betel, given by Thy beloved.

Book IX Chapter XIII

सढो मच्छवमाप्रेश लितोधानं कृतं तत्वा ।

शर्नितैईं परित्यज भिया लीना तविय प्रभो ॥ 6 6 ॥

ततस्तत्या: शरीरं च गुणांश्रे बधूव ह ।

संविभज्य तव्या दर्ते प्रेण्या प्रकटता पुरा ॥ 67 ॥

विश्वे तु विविधे किंक्षिवद्बुक्षणे च माय प्रपे ।

गुद्वस्तचलक्षापै किंक्षिलक्ष्मये पुरा विधे ॥ 68 ॥

त्वन्मनोयासेक्यध्यु शालेन्यशुपीय किंचन ।

तत्यस्विष्यध्ये धार्यय दार्थीयेच्छ्य किंचन ॥ 69 ॥

Hearing My sound Thou fled'st away. Sānti Gopī, too, out of fear and shame quitted Her body and disappeared in Thee. Therefore Śānti is reckoned as one of the noblest qualities. Out of the pain of separation. Thou didst divide the body of Śānti and distributed partly to forests, partly to Brahmā, partly to Me, partly to Śuddha Sattvā Lakṣmī, partly to Thy Mantra worshippers, partly to My Mantra worshippers, partly to the ascetics, partly to Dharma, and partly to the religions persons.

भवा पूर्वे च त्वं वृढ़ो गोया च क्षमया सह ।

सुवेयपुक्तो मालावानांधर्वंदनचर्चितः ॥ 70 ॥

तत्पश्चितया गंधचंदनोक्षितया सह ।

सुखेन भूष्टितस्तपे पुष्पचंदनचंचिते ॥ 71 ॥

Fifthly—Dost Thou remember that one day anointing all over Thy body fully with the sandal paste and good scent and with garlands on Thy neck, well dressed, decked with jewels, Thou wast sleeping with Kṣamā (forgiveness) Gopī in ease and happiness, on a nice bedding interspersed with flowers and well scented.

लिष्ठही निर्वित्रव सखः सुखेन नवसंगमात् ।

मया प्रवोधिता सा च भवांशु स्मरणं कृक ॥ ७२ ॥

गृहांतं पीतवस्वे च मुरली च मनोहरा ।

वनमालाकीस्तुषधायमूस्यं रत्नकुडलम् ॥ ७३ ॥

Thou wert so much overpowered by sleep after fresh intercourse that when I went and disturbed, then Thou two didst get up from the sweet sleep. I took away Thy yellow robes, the beautiful Murali (flute), garlands made forest, Kaustubha gems, and invaluable earrings of pearls and gems.

पश्रातप्रदं प्रेमणा च सखीनीं वचनादहो ।

लज्जया कृष्णवाणों५भूद्वतायपानेय च: प्रभो ॥ 74 ॥

क्षमा देहे पतिर्यल्य लज्जया पृथिवी गता ।

तततस्प्या: शरीरं च गुणश्रेडे चभूच है ॥ 75 ॥

संविभन्य त्वया दर्त प्रेमणा प्रस्तत एपु: ।

किंविद्रतं चिणयोचेय्छ शिक्षणा चेथणावेय्छ शिक्षणा ॥ 76 ॥

धार्मिकेच्छध धार्यमे दुवंलेच्छ क्षिकन ।

तपरियेच्योरि देयेचेय: पंडितेच्छ क्षिकना ॥ 77 ॥

I gave it back to Thee at the earnest request of the Sakhis. Thy body turned black with sin and dire shame. Kṣamā then quitted Her body out of shame and went down to the earth. Therefore Kṣamā turned out to be the repository of best qualifies. Out of affection to Her, Thou didst divide Her body and distributed them partly to Viṣṇu, partly to the Vaiṣṇavas partly to Dharma, partly to the religious persons, partly to weak persons, partly to ascetics, partly to the Devas, and partly to the Pandits (literary persons).

एतते कथितं सर्वे किं भूयः श्रोतृमिच्छसि ।

त्वरुणं चैव बहुगे न जतानिम परं प्रपो ॥ 78 ॥

इत्येवमुक्ल्वा सा राशा रक्लपंकजलोचना ।

गंगां वक्तुं सामोपे नापाखां लफ्जितां सतीम् ॥ 79 ॥

O Lord! Thus I have described Thy qualities as far as I know. What more dost Thou want to hear? Thou hast many qualities! But I am not aware of them. Having thus spoken, the red-lotus eyed Rādhā began to rebuke Gāngā sitting by the side of Śrī Krṣṇa with Her head bent low out of shame.

नंगा रहस्यं विज्ञाय योगेन सिद्धयोगिनि ।

तिरोधूम सभामध्ये स्थलजं प्रविश्वेग सा ॥ 80 ॥

At this time Gāngā, who was a Siddha Yogini came to know all the mysteries, and instantly disappeared from the assembly in Her own water form.

राधा योगेन विज्ञाय सर्वैत्रावस्थितां च ताम ।

पानं कर्तुं सामारेपे गंड्वगासिद्योगीनि ॥ 81 ॥

गड़ा रहस्यं विज्ञाय योगेन सिद्योगीनि ।

श्रीकृष्णचरणांभोजे विशेष शरणं यदी ॥ 82 ॥

The Siddha Yogini Rādhā came to know also,

by Her Yogic power, the secrets of Ganga and became ready to drink the whole water in one sip. Ganga, knowing this intention of Rādhā, by Her Yogic power, took refuge of Krṣṇa and entered into His feet.

गोलेके सा च वैकुण्ठे ब्रह्मोलाक्रिके तथा ।

ददर्गे राशा सर्वेत्र नैव गड़ां ददर्गे सा ॥ 83 ॥

सर्वत्र जल्गूर्ण्यं च शुक्रधकंचे च गोलकम् ।

जलजंतुसमूहैश युतदेहैः सम्वित्वम् ॥ 84 ॥

Then Rādhā began to look out for Gāngā everywhere: First She searched in Goloka, then Vaikuntha, then Brahma-loka; then She searched all the Lokas one by one but nowhere did She find Gāngā. All the places in Goloka became void of of water; all turned out dried mud and all the aquatic animals died and fell to the ground.

ब्रह्माध्यिषावानंतधर्पेऋरिवाकारः ।

मनवो मुनवः सर्वे देवसिद्धतविचितः ॥ 85 ॥

And Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Śiva, Ananta, Dharma Indra, Moon, Sun, Manus, Munis, Siddhas, ascetics all became very thirsty and their throats became parched.

गोलोकं च समाजगु: शुक्कगढोहुतालुका: ।

सर्वे प्राणेपुरीविंदं सर्वेर्ग प्रकृतेः परम् ॥ 86 ॥

वरं वेण्यायद्यविरिष्यवरकारणम् ।

गोपिकाणोपवृत्तानं सर्वेर्ग प्रवरम्यभुम् ॥ 87 ॥

निरीहज निराकारं निरिलिंचं च निराशयम् ।

निर्णीगं च निरस्त्यात् निर्विकारं निरज्जनम् ॥ 88 ॥

स्वेच्छामयं च साकारं भक्तानुप्रहाकारकम् ।

सत्त्वस्वलयं सल्येगं साहित्यरें सनातनम् ॥ 89 ॥

They then went to Goloka, and bowed down with devotion to Śri Krṣṇa, Who was the Lord of all, beyond Prakṛti, the Supreme, worthy to be worshipped, the Bestower of boons, the Best, and the Cause of boons; Who is the Lord of Gopas and Gopis; Who is formless, without any desire, unattached, without refuge, attributeless, without any enthusiasm, changeless, and unstained; Who is All Will and who assumes forms to show favour to His devotees; Who is Sattva, the Lord of truth,

the Witness and eternal Puruṣa, and Who is the Highest, the Supreme Lord, the Best and Excellent, the Highest Self and the Supreme God. They began to hymn Him.

परं परेणं परमं परमात्नामीक्षरम् ।

प्रणाय तुडुषुः सर्वे भक्तिनप्रात्मकन्धराः ॥ 90 ॥

सगदायादा: साक्षुनेत्रा: पुल्काकिकतियद्वाहः ।

सर्वे संरनुय सर्वेर्ग भगवंतं परात्यम् ॥ 91 ॥

All were filled with intense feelings with devotion; tears of love were flowing from their eyes and the bodies of all were filled with ecstasy, the hairs standing in ends.

ज्योतिर्यं परं बहा सर्वकारणकारणम् ।

अमूत्यरत्ननिर्माणिवारसिंहासनसित्यम् ॥ 92 ॥

सेव्यमानं च गोपालैः: शेतचामरावयुना ।

गोपालिकानृत्यति पर्यतं समिति मुदा ॥ 93 ॥

प्राणाधिक्रवितमं राधावस्थल्लिश्यन्ति ।

तया प्रदर्त तांबूलं भुकतवंतं सुवासितम् ॥ 94 ॥

परिपूर्णतां रासे दरुगृछ सुरोक्षम् ।

मुनयो मनवः सिद्धास्तपासघु तपविनः ॥ 95 ॥

He was Para Brahma; His Substance was made of Transcendental Light, Who is the Cause of all Causes, who was seated in a wonderful throne, built of invaluable gems and jewels, who was being fanned by the Gopas with white chowries, who was seeing hearing with great delight, and smiling countenance, the dancing and singing of the Gopis, who was chewing the scented betel offered by Rādhā and who residing in the heart of His dearest Śrī Rādhā, who was the Perfect, all pervading, and the Lord of the Rāsa Circle. The Manus, Munis, and the ascetics all bowed down to Śri Kṛṣna, no sooner they beheld Him.

प्रहृत्यनसः सर्वे जम्युः परमविस्यम् ।

परस्यं समलोकय प्रोजुस्ते च चतुर्मुंखम् ॥ 96 ॥

निविदितं जगताथं स्वाधिप्रायमभीरितम् ।

बह्ना तद्वचनं शुत्वा विशुं कृत्वा स्वद्धिणी ॥ 97 ॥

वामाते वामदेवं च जगाम कृष्णसाठ्रितम् ।

पर्यान-वद्युक्तं च पर्यान-दर्शपिणम् ॥ 98 ॥

Joy and wonder at once caught hold of their

Book IX Chapter XIII

hearts. They then looked at one another and gave over to Brahmā the task of communicating their feelings. The four faced Brahmā, with Viṣṇu on His right and Vāma Deva on His left, gradually came in front of Śrī Krṣṇa. Wherever He cast His glance in the Rāsa Maṇḍalam, He saw Śrī Krṣṇa, full of the Highest Bliss, of the nature of the Highest Bliss, sitting.

सर्वे कृष्णायं धाता ददर्श रास्मडले ।

सर्वे समानवेशे च समानावसनंस्थितम् ॥ 99 ॥

दिषुर्जं भृलौहतं वनमालाविष्यपितम् ।

मयूरपिछ्छचूई च कौतुभुंने विश्राजितम् ॥ 100 ॥

अंतील कमनीयं च सुन्दरं शांनिविश्रमम् ।

गुणभूषणारूपेण तेजसा व्यसा त्रिष्ठा ॥ 101 ॥

All have turned out Krṣnas; their seats were all uniform; all were two armed and with flutes in their hands; on every one's neck is the forest garland; peacock's tail was on the top of everyone's crest and Kaustubha jewels were on and their breasts. The Forms of all of them were very beautiful; very lovely and very peaceful. No difference at all between them whether in form, or in qualities, or in ornaments, or in radiance, in age, in lustre, in no respect no one was inferior to another.

परिपूर्णांम सर्वे सर्वेश्वर्यसप्तिवत् ।

कि सेल्य सेवकं किं वा युधा निवर्तमुकाम: ॥ 102 ॥

क्षणं तेजः:स्वल्पं च रूपं तत्र स्थितं क्षणम् ।

निरकारं च साकारं द्वर्शि द्विवधें क्षणम् ॥ 103 ॥

No one was imperfect; no one was deficient in lordliness. It was indeed very difficult to make out who was the master and who was the servant. Sometimes He is seen in His Teja form as the Great Light, and there is nothing else; sometimes there is that Clear Divine Form; sometimes He comes Formless; sometimes with form; and again sometimes both with and without form.

एकमेव क्षणं कृष्ण राधया रहितं परम् ।

प्रयेकासनसंखरं च तया साधै च तखणम् ॥ 104 ॥

राधाकपरं कृष्णं कृष्णाकरं कलजकम् ।

स्तीकरं च पुरुषं विधाता ध्यातुमक्षमः ॥ 105 ॥

Sometimes there is no Rādhā; there is only Krṣṇa; And sometimes again in every seat there is the Yugal Mūrti Rādhā and Krṣṇa combined. Sometimes Rādhā assumes the form of Krṣṇa. So the Creator Brahmā could not make out whether Śrī Krṣṇa was a female or a male. At last He meditated on Śrī Krṣṇa in his heart-lotus and began to chant hymns to Him with devotion and prayed for forgiveness for his misdoings.

हरवप्यर्थ च श्रीकृष्ण ध्याला ध्यानेन चक्षुषा ।

चकार तत्वां भक्यम पशित्रमनेकथा ॥ 106 ॥

ततः स्वच्छुक्नील्य पुनश्छ ततदुज्ञा ।

दूर्वर्ग कृष्णमेक च राधावक्षःस्थलसिंचन् ॥ 107 ॥

When Śrī Krṣṇa got pleased, the Creator, opening His eyes, saw Śrī Krṣṇa on the breast of Śrī Rādhā. There were His attendants on all the sides and the Gopīs all around. Seeing this, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara bowed down to Him and sang His praises.

स्वपार्थै: परिवृतं गोपीमंडलभंडितम् ।

पुनः प्रणीपुन्ते चूदा तुवुः परपेक्षम् ॥ 108 ॥

तत्विभ्यायमात्राय तानुवाच रमेशः ।

सर्वात्मा स च सर्वेत्र: सर्वेश: सर्वेभावन: ॥ 109 ॥

श्रीभगवानुवाच

आगच्छ कुर्सलं बढ़ाराजागच्छ कमलपते ।

इहागच्छ महदेव शशकृतुशलमसु वः ॥ 110 ॥

Śrī Krṣṇa, the Lord of Lakṣmī', the Omnipresent Cause of all, the Lord of all, and the Internal Ruler of all, knew their intentions and, addressing them, separately said: "O Brahaman! Is it all well with you? O Lord of Kamala! Come here. O Mahādeva! Come here; let all be well to you.

आगता हि महाभाग गड़ान्यकरणात् ।

गड़ा च चरणामधोके घयेन ग्रणगं नात ॥ 1 1 1 ॥

राघे में पातुपिछन्त्री द्वुंगा मसचिधानतः ।

दाख्यामीमां च भवति यूयं कुक्त निर्भयाम् ॥ 112 ॥

You all have come to me for Gaṅgā. Gaṅgā has taken refuge under My feet out of fear for Rādhā. Seeing Gaṅgā by My side, Rādhā wanted to drink Her up. However I will give over Gaṅgā to the

hands of you all; but you will have to pray to Rādhā, so that Gāngā becomes fearless of Her.

श्रीकृष्यय वचः शुचा ससितः कमलेद्रः।

गुहार राधामात्यां श्रीकृष्यानिरूपजितम् ॥ 113 ॥

वकत्रैशुर्पिः संस्तुय भक्तिभ्यातकंधरः ।

धाता चतुर्णां वेदानामुवाच चतुर्नानः ॥ 114 ॥

The lotus born Brahmā smiled at Śrī Krṣṇa's words and began to sing hymns to Rādhā, Who is fit to be worshipped by all. The Creator Brahmā, the Compiler of the Four Vedas, the Four-faced One praised Rādhā with His Four heads, bent low and addressed Her thus:

चतुरान्न उवाच

गृहा त्वद्धस्म्पृता प्रभोक्षा रासमप्रडले ।

युवयोर्द्रवल्पा सा मुध्ययोः शुक्रस्वनान् ॥ 115 ॥

कृष्णांगा च त्वरुंच च त्वरू-न्यासूरी प्रिया ।

त्व-मंत्रप्रादूणं कृत्वा करीतु तव पूजनम् ॥ 116 ॥

Brahmā said: “O Rādhle’ Gaṅgā, appeared from Thee and the Lord Śrī Krṣna. Both of you were transformed before into the liquid forms in the Rāsā Maṇḍalam, on hearing the music of Śaṅkara. And That Liquid Form is Gaṅgā. So She is born of Thee and Śrī Krṣna. Hence She is like Thy daughter and to be loved as such. She will be initiated in Thy Mantra and She will worship Thee.

पंचियाति पतितस्तया वैकुण्डेशश्रुर्भुः ।

भूस्याया: कलया तथा: पतितस्यावतिशिधः ॥ 117 ॥

गोलोकसा च या गृत्रा सर्वसया त्वाणिके ।

तद्विका त्वं देवेशी सर्वदा सा त्वादतमा ॥ 118 ॥

The four armed Lord of Vaikuntha will be Her husband. And when She will appear in parts on earth, the Salt Ocean will be Her husband, O Mother! The Ganga that dwells in Goloka, is dwelling everywhere. O Governess of the Devas! Thou art Her mother; and She is always Thy Self born daughter."

इदाणी वचनं शुवा सीचकार च समिता ।

विद्वेष्वृ सा कृष्णयादाङ्छनखात्राः ॥ 119 ॥

तत्रैव सकृतां शान्ता तस्यो तेषां च मयतः ।

उवास तोयादुत्थाय तदधिष्ठादुवेतता ॥ 120 ॥

तन्तोयंक्राणाक्रिश्रित्यापितंचकमण्डती ।

क्रिक्रिष्टार शिरस चन्द्रधिकृतशेखरः ॥ 121 ॥

Hearing, thus, the words of Brahma \( ^{1} \) , Rādhā gave Her assent towards the protection of Ganga. And then Ganga appeared from the toe-tip of Śri Krṣna. The liquid Ganga, then, assumed Her own form and, getting up from water, was received with great honour by the Devas. Bhagavān Brahma \( ^{1} \)  took a little of that Ganges water in His Kamandalu and Bhagavān Mahādeva kept some of it in His own head.

गड़पर्य याधिकामन्य प्रददो कमलोद्यः ।

तस्तोजकवचं पूजां विधानं ध्यानमेव च ॥ 122 ॥

सर्वे तत्सामदेवोक्ते पुरुष्यांकमं तथा ।

गड़ा तामेव संपूज्य बैकुंठ प्रययी सह ॥ 123 ॥

The lotus born Brahmā, then, initiated Gāngā into the Rādhā Mantra and gave Her instructions, Rādhā Stotra (hymn of Rādhā) according to the Sāma Veda, Rādhā Kavaca (protection mantras), Rādhā Dhyān (meditation on Rādhā), method of worship of Rādhā, and Rādhā's puracsaraṇa. Gāngā worshipped Rādhā according to these instructions and went to Vaikunṭha.

लक्ष्मी: सस्वती गड़ा तुलसी विध्यावली ।

एता नारायणस्यैव चतरो योचितो मुने १ १ १ २ ३ ४

अथ तं सस्मितः कृष्णो बढ़ाणं समुचार सः ।

सर्वकालस्य वृत्तांत दुर्बिधमविर्याश्रता ॥ १ १ २ ५ ॥

O Muni! Lakṣmī, Sarasvatī, Gaṅgā, and the world purifying Tulasi, these four became the wives of Nārāyaṇa. Kṛṣṇa, then, smiled and explained to Brahmā the history of Time, hardly to be comprehended by others.

श्रीकृष्ण उवाच

गृहाण गड़ां है बहान् है विजणो है महेश्व ।

शृणु कालस्य चृतांतं मन्तो ब्रह्विणगमय ॥ 126 ॥

यूयं च ऐउ-ऐ० देवाश्रु मन्यो मनवस्था ।

सिद्धा यगश्विनश्ठीव ये ऐर्नेय समानता: ॥ 127 ॥

He then spoke: "O Brahmā! O Viṣṇu! O Maheśvara! Now you better take Gaghā and I will now tell you what a change has been effected by this time. Hear.

Book IX Chapter XIV

You, the three Devas, the other Devas, Munis, Manus, Siddhas, and other Mahātmās that are present here, are living now. For this region of Goloka is not affected by Kāla (Time). Now the Kalpa is going to expire.

एते जीवित नोगोकेके कालचक्रविवर्षिते ।

जलगलुते सर्वविश्वं जातं कल्पस्वयोरद्धना ॥ 128 ॥

ब्रहाणाय येन्यविश्वश्यास्ते विलीभानुगा मयि ।

बैकुण्डं च चिता सर्वं जलमनं च पचपत्र ॥ 129 ॥

So in the other regions than Goloka and Vaikunthā, the Brahmās, etc., that were existing in all other Universes, have all now dissolved in My Body. O Lotus-born! Save Goloka and Vaikunthā, all are now under water, the pre-state of earth.

गत्वा सुहिं कुरु पुनर्वह्योगकादिकं भवम् ।

स्वे ब्रह्मां वित्तय पश्यारूषा प्रपास्यति ॥ 130 ॥

एवमन्येषु विशेषु सुही ब्रह्मादिकं पुनः ।

कंरोग्यहं पुनः सुहिं गछ्छ शीर्धं सुरैः सह ॥ 131 ॥

Batter go and create your own Brahmāṇḍas and Ganga will go to that newly created Brahmāṇḍa. I will also create other worlds and the Brahmās thereof. Now you all better go with the Devas and do your own works respectively.

गतो बहुतरः कालो युधाकं च चतुर्मुखाः ।

गत: कतिविधास्ते च भविष्यन्ति च वैधसः ॥ 132 ॥

इत्युक्चा राधिकानाथो जगामांतःपुरे मुने ।

देवा गत्वा पुन सृष्टि चढ़गेव प्रयन्ततः ॥ 133 ॥

You have waited here for a long interval. As many Brahmās that have fallen all appear again." Thus saying Śrī Krṣṇa, the Lord of Rādhā went to His Inner Chamber. The Devas also instantly retired from that spot and engaged themselves earnestly in the creation work.

गोलोके सा स्थिता गुजा वैकुण्ठे शिवलोकतः ।

ब्रहलोके स्थिताएं-यत्र यत्र यत्र पुः: स्थिता ॥ 134 ॥

तत्रैव सा गता गुर्ज्ञा परमात्मानः ।

निर्भात विधुपादाङ्गानेन विधुपदौ सुता ॥ 135 ॥

इत्येवं क्रवितं बहान्नोगोख्यानुप्तामम् ।

सुखदे पोक्षदं सरा किं घ्यः शोतुमिच्छसि ॥ 136 ॥

इति शीमद्वैशीभागवते महापुराणे नवमस्कन्ये गंगोपाख्याने

ययोदोयोध्याः: 11 13 11

Gangā remained as before till then in the region of Goloka, Vaikuntha, Śivaloka, Brahma-loka, and in other places, by the command of Śri Kṛṣṇa. She is named Viṣṇupadī, because She appeared from the feet of Viṣṇu. Thus I have described to you this pleasant, essential story of Gāngā, leading to liberation. What more do you now want to hear? Say.

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter the anecdote of

Gāngā in the Ninth Book in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XIV

CHAPTER XIV

On Gangiā, as the Wife of Nārāyaṇa

नारद उवाच

लक्ष्मी: सरस्वती रोगा तुलसी विश्वापावनी ।

एता नारायणस्यैव चतस्वश्र प्रिया झृति ॥ 1 ॥

गंगा जगाम वैकुण्टमिद्वोर व श्रुतं मया ।

कर्थ सा तस्य पली च बव्यूविति च न श्रुतम् ॥ 2 ॥

Nārada said: O Lord! Gaṅgā, Laksmī, Sarasvatī, and the world purifying Tulasi, these four, are dearest to Nārāyaṇa. Out of these, Gaṅgā went did the region of Goloka to Vaikuntha. So I have heard. But how did She come to be the wife of Nārāyaṇa. I have not heard. Kindly describe this.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

गंगा जगाम वैकुण्ठं तत्यक्षाजगतां विधिः ।

गतचोबाच तया सार्य प्रणाय जगदीक्षगम् ॥ 3 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: Brahmā came from Goloka to the region of Vaikuntha accompanied by Gaṅgā.

ब्रह्मोचच

राधा कृष्णांगसंभृत ता देवी इवरूषिणी ।

नव्यौवनसंपत्रा सुगीता सुंदरी वरा ॥ ४ ॥

गुड़सत्त्वस्क्या च कोर्धाहंकारवर्जिता ।

तदांगसंभवा नान्यं वृणोतीयं च तं चिता ॥ ५ ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Brahmā said to Nārāyaṇa: O Lord! Gaṅgā, born of the bodies of Rādhā and Krṣṇa, full of youth, modest, extraordinarily beautiful, of pure Śuddha Sattva, and void of anger and egoism, does not like to marry anyone save Thee as She is born of Thee.

त्रातिमानिनी राशा सा च तेजस्विनी वरा ।

स्मुचुक्ता पातुर्मिमां भीतरें चुद्धिपूर्वकम् ॥ 6 ॥

विवेश चरणाधोजे कृष्णस्य परमात्मतः ।

सर्वेग लोकं शुक्क दृष्ठासहमगतं तद ॥ 7 ॥

But Rādhā is of a very proud nature and very wrathful. She was even ready to drink up Gaṅgā. But Gaṅgā at once and intelligently took refuge into the feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. So the whole Goloka became void of water.

गोलेके वयं कृणश्छ सर्वेचुतांतप्राप्तये ।

स्वतितात्मा सर्वैषं ज्ञाताशिप्राप्तयेच च ॥ 8 ॥

बहिष्ठकार गंगां च पादांगुष्टनखात्रातः ।

दत्तावस्ये राधिकामांगे भृगिवला च गोलका ॥ 9 ॥

Seing this, I have come here to know in particular the whole history of the case. Then Śrī Krṣna, the Knower and the Ruler of the hearts of all, came to know my heart and instantly caused Gaṅgā to issue from His toe and handed Her over to me. I bowed down to Śrī Krṣna and now I have come with Gaṅgā to Thee.

प्राणय तां च राधेशं गृहीत्वासज्ञाम प्रभो ।

गाधवैण विवाहेन गृहाणोमां सुरेश्यीम ॥ १० ॥

सुरेशेषु रसिको रसिकयं समागता ।

त्वं रन्तं सुभु देवेश क्षीरन्तं क्षीचित्यं सही चि । । । । । ।

Now Thou dost marry the Suresvarī Gaṅgā according to the Gāndharva rule of marriage. As Thou art a Deva of taste and humorous in the assembly of the Devas, so Gaṅgā is. As Thou art a gem amongst the males, so She is the gem amongst the females.

विद्याधाव विदर्धेन संगमो गुणावाभ्यरे ।

उपस्थिता स्वयं कन्यां न गृह्नतीह यः पुभान् ॥ 12 ॥

तं विहाय महालक्ष्मी रहा याति न संशयः ।

यो भवेत्यंडितः सोअपि प्रकृति नावमन्तये ॥ 13 ॥

And the union of a humorous man with a

humorous woman is exceedingly pleasant. Now marry this Lady who has come of Her own accord to Thee. Śrī Mahā Lakṣmī becomes annoyed with one who dest not marry a woman who has come spontaneously. There is no doubt in this. The wise men do never insult the Prakṛti.

. सर्व प्राकृतिका: पुंस: कामीम्ब: प्रकृते: कला ।

त्वमेव भगवात्रायो निर्गुण: प्रकृते: पर: ॥ 14 ॥

अधोई प्रिपुः: कृष्णो योर्धर्पोने चतुर्भुःकः ।

कृष्णवामांतर्भभूत बधूत राधिका पुरा ॥ 15 ॥

All the Puruṣas (males) are born of Prakṛti and all the females are parts of Prakṛti. So Prakṛti and Puruṣa are both inseparable and verily one and the same. So these two should never insult each other. (If Thou sayest that Gaṅgā is attached to Kṛṣṇa; how canst Thou marry Her. He reply is) As Śrī Kṛṣṇa is beyond the attributes and beyond Prakṛti, so Thou also above Prakṛti. The one-half of Srī Kṛṣṇa is two armed; the other half of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is four-armed.

दक्षिणांश: स्वयं सा च बामांश कमला तथा ।

तेनैयं त्वां चुणोत्येव यतस्त्वदेहर्भयना ॥ १ ६ ॥

एकांगं चैव क्षीपुंसोयंधा प्रकृतिपृष्णे ।

उद्वेयमुक्चना धाता तां तं समर्थ जगाम सः ॥ १ ७ ॥

Rādhā has appeared from the left side of Śrī Krṣṇa. He Himself is the right half and Padmā is His left-half. (As there is no difference between Rādhā and Kamalā so there is no difference between Śrī Krṣṇa and Thee. Therefore as Gaṅgā is born of Thy body, she wants to marry Thee. As Prakṛti and Puruṣa are really one and the same without any difference, so the males and females are one.

गाध्रवैण विवाहेन तं जग्राह हरि: स्वयम् ।

नारायण: करं ध्रुत्वा पुष्पचंदनचर्धिनम् ॥ १ ४ ॥

रेमे यापतिस्तत्र गंगया सहितो मुता ।

गंगा पृथ्वीं गता या सा स्वस्थानं पुर्नगतता ॥ १९ ॥

Thus speaking to Nārāyaṇa, Brahmā handed Gāngā over to Nārāyaṇa and went away. Nārāyaṇa, then, married Gāngā smeared with sandal paste and

Book IX Chapter XV

flowers, according to the rules of the Gandharva marriage. The Lord of Lakṣmī then spent his time happily in enjoyment with Gaṅgā. Gaṅgā had to go to the earth (under the Bhāratī's curse) and afterwards returned to Vaikunṭha.

निर्माता विष्णुपादाङ्गातेन विष्णुपदीति च ।

मूछ्णी संप्राप सा देनेी नवसंगमलोल्या ॥ २० ॥

रसिका सुखसंगोगाउसिकेश्वरसूता ।

तां बुधा दुःशिता वाणी पदाया वर्जितासपि च ॥ २१ ॥

As Gāngā appeared from the feet of Viṣṇu, She denominated Viṣṇupadī. Gāngā Devī was very much overpowered with enjoyment in Her first intercourse with Nārāyaṇa; so much so that She remained, motionless. Thus Gāngā spent the days happily with Nārāyaṇa. Sarasvatī's jealousy towards Gāngā did not disappear. though She was advised by Lakṣmī Devī not to do so. Sarasvatī cherished incessantly the feeling of jealousy

towards Gāngā. But Gāngā had not the least feeling of jealousy towards Sarasvatī.

नियमीर्धिति ता वाणी न च गंगा सरस्वतीम् ।

गंगा श्रणाय कोपेन भारते च हरिपिया ॥ 22 ॥

गड़या सह तस्यैव तित्यो भार्यां रायपतेः ।

सार्यं तुल्या पश्चाच्च चरक्षाभवम्पनुः ॥ 23 ॥

ड्रित श्रीमद्वीभागतं महापुराणे वनस्कंधे

चतुद्वीगोरध्याः: 11 14 11

At last, one day, when vexed too much, Gaṅgā became angry and cursed Sarasvatī to take Her birth in Bhārata. So Lakṣmī, Sarasvatī and Gaṅgā were the wives of Nārāyaṇa. Lastly Tulasī became the wife of Nārāyaṇa. So the number of wives of Nārāyaṇa amounted to four.

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter in the Ninth Book on the story of Gaṅgā becoming the wife of Nārāyaṇa

in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of

18,000 verse by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XV

CHAPTER XV

On the Anecdote of Tulasi

नार्त्व जयाच

नारायणप्रिया साध्वी कर्थ सा च बघव ह ।

तुलसी कुत्र संभृता का वा सा पूर्वकन्मिनि ॥ १ ॥

कस्य वा सा कुले जाता कस्य कन्या कुले सती ।

केन वा तपसा सा च संप्राप्ता प्रकृतेः परम् ॥ २ ॥

Nārada said: O Bhagavan! How came the pure chaste Tulasī to the wife of Nārāyaṇa? Where was Her birth place? And what was She in Her previous birth? What family did She belong to? Whose daughter was She?

निर्विकार निरीहं च सर्वविश्वस्वरूपकम् ।

नारायणं परं बहुत परमेश्वभीरप्रवर्ध ।। ३ ।।

सर्वार्ताधं च सर्वेर्ग सर्वईं सर्वकारणम् ।

सर्वाधारं सर्वकंरं सर्वेधां परिपालकम् ॥ ४ ॥

And what austerities did She practise, that She got Nārāyaṇa for Her husband, Who is above Prakrti, not liable to change without any effort, the Universal Self, Para Brahma and the Highest God; Who is the Lord of all, omniscient, the Cause of

all, the Receptacle of all, Omnipresent, and the Preserver of all.

कथेमतादूर्धी देयी वृक्षत्वं समवाप ह ।

कर्थ साउप्यमुर्यता संवेषूच तपचित्यनी ॥ ५ ॥

सुनिन्धुं मे मनो लोतं प्रेर्यनां मुडुपुंडुः ।

छेतुर्महींस संदेहं सर्वे संदेश्वपनन ॥ ६ ॥

And how did Tulasi, the chief Devi of Nārāyaṇa, turn out into a tree? Herself quite innocent, how She was attacked by the fierce Asura? O Remover of all doubts! My mind, plain and simple, has become restless. I am cager to hear all this. So kindly cut asunder all my doubts.

नारायण उवाच

मनुष्ठ दक्षसावार्थिण: पुण्यवार्येणयः शृचि: ।

यश्यकी कौतिमांश्रिव विज्ञांश्रसामुद्धतः ॥ 7 ॥

तन्यूजी ब्रह्मासार्थिणिधिजो क्षेणतः शृचि: ।

तन्युजो धर्मसार्थिणीक्षणवशि वितेत्रियः ॥ 8 ॥

तन्युजो रूससार्थिणीभक्तामविजितेन्रियः ।

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! The Manu Dakṣa

Sāvarni was very religious, devoted to Viṣṇu, of wide renown, of a great name, and born with Viṣṇu's parts. Dakṣa Sāvarni's son Brahma Sāvarni was also very religious, devoted to Viṣṇu and of a pure Śuddha Sattva Guṇa. Brahma Sāvarni's son, Dharma Sāvarni was devoted to Viṣṇu and He was the master of his senses.

तन्युरो देवसावर्णिर्थिणुरतपरायण: ॥ 9 ॥

तनुय इन्सावर्णिर्महाविष्णुपरायण: ।

युधधजऊऊ तनुयो वृषधजपरायण: ॥ 10 ॥

Dharma Sāvarni's sons Ruda Sāvarni was also a man of restraint and very devoted. Rudra Sāvarni's son was Deva Sāvarni, devoted to Viṣṇu. Deva Sāvarni's devoted to Viṣṇu. Deva Sāvarni's son was Indra Sāvarni. He was a great Bhakta of Viṣṇu. His son was Vṛṣadhvaja. But He was a fanatic Śaiva (devoted to Śiva).

यत्साधो स्वयं शंभुपासीद्वगुगतयम् ।

पुराविष पर: स्नेहो नृपे तस्मिऊळवरच च ॥ १ १ ॥

न च नारायणं मेने न ल्बूर्षी न सरस्वतीम् ।

पूजां च सर्वदेवानां दूरीभूतां चकास सः ॥ १२ ॥

At his house Śiva Himself remained for three Yugas according to the Deva measure. So much so that Bhagavān Bhūtanātha loved him more than His own son. Vṛṣadhvaja did not recognise Nārāyaṇa, nor Lakṣmī nor Sarasvatī nor another body. He discarded the worship of all the Devas. He worshipped Śaṅkara only.

भारे मासि महाल्बीपूर्णां मत्ते बर्भनह् ।

तया माधीयोपंचायां विस्तृतां सर्वदैवतः ॥ 13 ॥

पाप: सरस्वतीपुजां दूरीभृतां चकार स: ।

यजं च विणुपूजां च नर्वतं तं दिवाकरः ॥ 14 ॥

The greatly exciting Lakṣmī Pūjā (worship of Mahā Lakṣmī in the month of Bhādra and Śrī Pañcamī Pūjā in the month of Māgha, which are approved of by the Vedas, Vṛṣadhvaja put an entire stop to these and the Sarasvatī Pūjā. At this the Sun became angry with the King Vṛṣadhvaja, the discarder of the holy thread, the hater of Viṣṇu, and cursed Him thus:

चुकोप देवी धूपेंई शगायन शिवकारणात् ।

श्रष्टीस्तं च भवेति तं शगायन दिवाकर: ॥ 15 ॥

गृलं गृहीला तं सुर्यमायच्छंकर: स्वयम् ।

विंगा साद्धं द्वितेशश बह्याणं शगणं ययो ॥ 16 ॥

"O King! As you are purely devoted to Śiva and Śiva alone, and as you do not recognise any other Devas, I say within no time, you will be deprived of all your wealth and prosperity." Śaṅkara, hearing this curse, became very angry and taking His trident, ran after the Sun. The Sun, becoming afraid, accompanied His father Kaśyapa and took refuge of Brahmā.

शिवास्त्रिगुरूलस्तश ब्रहूलोकं ययी कृधा ।

बहुता सूर्यं पुरस्कृत्य वैकुण्टं च ययी मिया ॥ 17 ॥

बहाक्रावयमातंडा: संसन्ता: शुक्रतालुका: ।

नारायणं च सर्वैंगं ते ययुः शरणं भिया ॥ 18 ॥

Bhagavān Śañkara went to the Brahma Loka, with trident in His hands. Brahmā became afraid of Mahādeva and took Sun to the region of Vaikuntha. Out of terror, the throats of Brahmā, Kaśyapa, and Sun became parched an dry and they all went afraid for refuge to Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of all.

भूटर्जा प्रणेभुसे गत्वा तुवुवुश पुनः पुनः ।

सर्वे निवेदनं चकुर्भयस्य काणं हरी ॥ 19 ॥

नारायणश कुयया तेभ्यश हाभयं ददौ ।

स्विधा भवत हे भीता भवं किं च मिथ सिद्धि ॥ 20 ॥

They all bowed down to Him and praised Him frequently and finally informed Him of the cause of their coming and why they were so much afraid. Nārāyaṇa showed them mercy and granted them 'Abhaya' (no fear). "O You! Who are afraid, take rest. What cause of fear there can be to you, when I am here!"

सर्वेति वे यत्र वयं मां विपत्ती भगवित्ताः ।

तांस्व वगता श्वामि चक्रहस्तस्वारावित्तः ॥ 21 ॥

पाताउई जगतां देवाः कर्ता च सततं सदा ।

सदा च ब्रह्मरूपण संहर्ता शिक्षकपतः ॥ 22 ॥

Whoever remembers Me, wherever he may be, involved in danger or fear, I go there with the

Book IX Chapter XV

Sudarśara disc in My hand and save him. O Devas! I am always the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of this universe. In the form of Viṣṇu, I am the Preserver; in the form of Brahmā, I am the Creator; and in the form Maheśa,

शिलोई त्वमई चापि सूयोर्नई चित्रगुणात्मकः ।

वियाय नानारूपे च करोगि सुश्चापत्नम् ॥ २३ ॥

यूयं गच्छत मूर्ते वो भविष्यति भयं कृतः ।

अशुप्रपृति मड़रणे भयं वो नास्ति शंकरात् ॥ 24 ॥

I am the Destroyer. I am Śiva; I am you; and I am the Sūrya, composed of the three qualities. It is I who assumes many forms and preserves the universe. Better go to your respective places. What fear can ye suspect? I say, all your fears due to Śaṅkara, are verily removed from this day.

सर्वेशो वै स भपावाङ्ठकराङ्ग सतां गति: ।

भक्ताभीक्ष भक्तानां भक्ताना भक्तवललः ॥ 25 ॥

सुर्गर्नः शिवश्रैव मम प्राणाधिकः प्रियः ।

ब्रह्माण्डेषु न तेजस्वी है ब्रह्मनयो: पा: ॥ 26 ॥

Bhagavān Śaṅkara, the Lord of all, is the Lord of the Sādhus. He always hears the words of His Bhaktas; and He is kind to them. He is their Self. Both the Sun and Śiva are dearer to Me than My life. No one is more energetic than Śaṅkara and the Sun.

गृतः: स्वघु महादेव: सुर्वेकोंटि च लील्या ।

कोटि च बढ़ागमेवं नासारयं गृलिनः श्रभेः ॥ 27 ॥

बाहुज्ञानं वैव किंचिद्धायाने मां दिवानिगम् ।

मन्वीज्ञान्दुगणान्यत्ता पंचवक्रेण गयाति ॥ 28 ॥

Mahādeva can easily create ten million Suns and ten million Brahmās. There is nothing impossible with Sūlapāni. Having no consciousness of any outer thing, immersed, day and night, in meditating on Me, with His whole heart concentrated, He is repeating with devotion My Mantra from His five faces and He always sings My glories.

अहमेवे चित्रायाम तत्कल्याणं दिवानिगम् ।

दे यथा मां प्रपहीते तांतत्वैव भजामयदूम् ॥ 29 ॥

शिवस्वरूपो भगवाड्छवाधिष्ठादुपदेवता ।

शिवं घवित तस्माच्च शिवं तेन विद्वुरुधा: ॥ 30 ॥

I am also thinking, day and night, of His welfare. Whoever worships Me in whichever way, I also favour him similarly. Bhagavān Mahā Deva is of the nature of Śiva, all auspiciousness; He is the presiding deity of Śiva, that is, liberation. It is because liberation is obtained from Him, He is called Śiva."

एतमिधारंतर तत जगाम शंकर: शिव: ।

शूलहस्तो वृषाकडो तर्पेकजलोचन: ॥ 31 ॥

अवक्रहु वृषानुर्णं भक्तिज्ञात्मकन्यर: ।

ननाम भक्त्या तं शांतं लक्ष्मीकांतं परात्यम् ॥ 32 ॥

O dear Nārada! While Nārāyaṇa was thus speaking, the trident holder Mahādeva, with his eyes red like reddened lotuses, mounting on His bull, came up there and getting down from His Bull, humbly bowed down with devotion to the Lord of Laksmī, peaceful and higher the highest.

रत्नरिसोहनस्यं च रत्नलोकापृषितम् ।

क्रिरीटिंन कृपाड्लेनं चक्रिणं वनमालिनम् ॥ 33 ॥

नवीन्निरद्यमां सुंदरं च चतुर्षुंम् ।

चतुर्षुंः सेवितं च श्रेनतवामरावुना ॥ 34 ॥

चंदनोक्षितसर्वोईं भूषितं पोतवासमस् ।

लक्ष्मीप्रदत्तांबृत् भुक्चलं च नारद ॥ 35 ॥

विद्याधरीन्यपीनी पर्षवंत समितं सदा ।

ईक्षंर परमात्मानं भक्तानुग्रहविश्रद्धम ॥ 36 ॥

Nārāyaṇa was then seated on His throne, decked with jewel ornaments. There was a crown on His crest; two earrings were hanging from His ears; the disc was in His hand; forest flower's garlands on His neck; of the colour of fresh blue rain cloud; His form exceedingly beautiful. The four-armed attendants were fanning Him with their four hands; His body smeared all over with sandal-paste and He is wearing the yellow garment. That Bhagavān, distressed with the thought of welfare for His Bhaktas, the Highest Self was sitting on a jewel throne and chewing the betel offered by Padmā and with smiling countenance, seeing and hearing the dancing and singing of the Vidyādhāris.

तं नाना महादेवी बहाणा नमितघुः सः ।

ननाना सूर्यों पत्न्चा च संस्वतश्छूरेण्डायम् ॥ 37 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

कथप्यघ महाभक्त्या तुहाव च ननाम च ।

शिव: संनुय सर्वैंग समुवास सुखासने ॥ 38 ॥

When Mahādeva bowed down to Nārāyaṇa, Brahmā also bowed down to Mahādeva. The Sun, too, surprised, bowed down to Mahādeva with devotion. Kāśyapa, too, bowed and with great bhakti, began to praise Mahādeva. On the other hand, Śānkara praised Nārāyaṇa and took His seat on the throne.

सुखानसे सुखासीन विश्रांतं चंत्रशेखारम् ।

श्वेतनायारवातेन सेवितं विद्यापर्वदैः ॥ 39 ॥

पीयूषतुल्यमधुरं वचनं सुमनोहरम् ।

विष्युक्वाच

आगतो5सि कर्व चात्र वद कोपस्य काराण् ॥ 40 ॥

The attendants of Nārāyaṇa began to fan Mahādeva with white chowries. Then Viṣṇu addressed Him with sweet nectar-like voice and said: "O Maheśvara! What brings Thee here? Hast Thou been angry?"

महावेद उवाच

वृषधवं च मदूक्ते मव प्राणाधिकं ग्रियम् ।

सूर्वः शगाण झुति मे प्रकोपस्य तु काराणम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

पूत्रवल्लशोकेन सूर्वे हृतुं समुधुतः ।

स ब्रहाणं प्रपवश्र सूर्वेथ सर्विधास्त्रविषि ॥ 4 2 ॥

Mahādeva said: O Viṣṇu! The King. Vṛṣadhvaja is My great devotee; he is dearer to Me than My life. The Sun has cursed him and so I am angry. Out of the affection for a son I am ready to kill Sūrya. Sūrya took Brahmā's refuge and now he and Brahmā have taken Thy refuge.

त्वयि मे शरणापत्रा ध्यानेन वचसासीय वा ।

निरपादो विशंगकानले जग मृत्युस्थे लेत्रितः ॥ 4 3 ॥

प्रत्यक्षं शरणापत्रापत्णलं किं वदायि भोः ।

हरिम्युतिश्राभयदा सर्वेगंगलदा सदा ॥ 4 4 ॥

And Those who being distressed take Thy refuge, either in mind or in word, become entirely safe and free from danger. They conquer death and old age. What to speak of them, then, of those who come personally to Thee and take Thy refuge. The

remembrance of Hari takes away all dangers. All good comes to them.

किं के भक्तस्य भविता तन्य वृहि जगतमृषो ।

श्रीहतस्याय मुहस्य यूर्यागपेन हेतुना ॥ 45 ॥

O Lord of the world! Now tell me what becomes of My stupid Bhakta who has become devoid of fortune and prosperity by the curse of Sūrya."

विष्युकाव्य

कालोस्तितातो देवेन युनाानामेकविश्रितः ।

वैकुण्डं घटिकार्थिन शीर्षे पच्छ लयामलयम् ॥ 46 ॥

वृषयबो मुतः कालवदुर्निवायांत्सूदारभणात् ।

राध्यज्ञ क्रतुगे मृत : सोर्पिश्रिया हतः ॥ 47 ॥

Viṣṇu said: “O Śaṅkara! Twenty-one yugas elapsed within this one-half Ghaṭikā, by the coincidence of Fate (Daiva). Now go quickly to Thy abode. Through the unavoidable coincidence of the cruel Fate, Vṛṣadhvaja died. His son Rathadhvaja, too, died.

तत्सुजी च महाभागी धार्यवज्ञकुशध्यजी ।

हताश्री सूर्यशापात्म्युती परमदीवाणी ॥ 4 8 ॥

राज्यधडी श्रिया धडी कमलतपसा राते ।

तयोक्षा भाययोल्बीः कलया च भविष्यति ॥ 49 ॥

Rathadhvaja had two noble sons Dharmadhvaja and Kuśadhvaja. Both of them are great Vaiṣṇavas; but, through Sūrya's curse, they have become luckless. Their kingdoms are lost; they have become destitute of all property, prosperity and they are now engaged in worshipping Mahā Lakṣmī. Mahā Lakṣmī will be born in parts of their two wives.

संयतुकी तदा ती च नृपश्रेष्ठी वधिष्यतः ।

मृतस्ते सेवकः शंभो गच्छ यूयं च गच्छत ॥ 50 ॥

Then again, by the grace of Lakṣmī, Dharmadhvaja and Kuśadhvaja will be prosperous and become great Kings. O Śambhu Your worshipper Vṛṣadhvaja is dead. Therefore Thou dost go back to Thy place. O Brahmā, O Sun! O Kaśyapa! You all also better go to your places respectively.

Book IX Chapter XVI

<table><tr><td>इत्युक्त्वा च सल्ब्यमीक: सभातो3ध्यंतरं गतः ।</td><td>went gladly to their own places respectively. And Mahādeva, too, Who is always quite full within Himself, departed quickly to perform His Tapas.</td></tr><tr><td>दैवा जमुः सोमूद्रा: स्वाश्रमं परया मुत्ना ॥ 51 ॥</td><td>Himeself, departed quickly to perform His Tapas.</td></tr><tr><td>शिवघ्र तपसे शीर्घं परिपूर्णतचो यद्यो ॥ 51 ॥</td><td>Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter on the question of anecdote of Tulasi in the Ninth Book in the Mahāpurānam Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.</td></tr></table>

Book IX Chapter XVI

CHAPTER XVI

On the Incarnation of Mahā Lakṣmī in the House of Kuśadhvaja

श्रीनारायण खाच

लक्ष्मी ती च समाराध्य चोयोग तपसा मुने ।

वरामिछं च प्रत्येकं संप्रापततृषीवित्मत् ॥ १ ॥

महालक्ष्मीवंशेणैव ती पृव्यशीणे क्षयवृतः ।

पुण्यवंती पुर्वतौ धार्येजकुशण्यजै ॥ २ ॥

₹rī Nārāyaṇa said: O Munī! Dharmadhvaja and Kuśadhvaja practised severe tapasyā and worshipped Lakṣmī. They then got separately their desired boons. By the boon of Mahā Lakṣmī, they became again the rulers of the earth.

कुणाधजस्य पनी च देवी मालावती सती ।

सा सुषाव च कालेन कमलांगां सुती सतीग् ॥ 3 ॥

सा च भूथिकालेन ज्ञानयुक्ता बघ्रव ह ।

कृत्वा वेव्यविं सयघुन्तखौ सृतिकागृहात् ॥ 4 ॥

वेद्यविंस स चकार जातमाधेग कन्यका ।

They acquired great religious merits and they also had their children. The wife of Kuśadhavaja was named Mālāvatī. After a long time, the chaste wife delivered one daughter, born of the parts of Kamalā. The daughter, on being born, became full of wisdom.

तस्मातां च वेद्वर्ती प्रवदिति मनिधिणं: ॥ 5 ॥

जातामत्रोग सुन्नता जगाम तपसे वनम् ।

सर्वेर्निपिद्धा यलेन नात्याणपरायणा ॥ 6 ॥

On being born, the baby began to sing clearly the Vedic mantrams from the lying-chamber. Therefore, and She was named Vedavati by the Pandits. She bathed after her birth and became ready to go to the forest to practise severe tapas. Everyone, then, tried earnestly to dissuade her,

devoted to Nārāyaṇa, from this enterprise. But she did not listen to anybody.

एकमन्यंतरं चैव पुरुकरं च तप्तविनी ।

अन्युग्रां च तप्तयां च लीलगा हि चकार सा ॥ 7 ॥

तथापि पुहा न किल्हा नवयोवनसंयुता ।

शुश्राव सा च सहसा सुवाचम्यगरीरिणीम् ॥ 8 ॥

जम्भाते च ते भर्ती भविष्यति हरि: स्वयम् ।

ब्रहादिष्यिनुरायंध पति लप्यसि सुंदीर ॥ 9 ॥

She went to Puşkara and practised hard tapasyā for one Manvantara. Yet her body did not get lean a bit; rather she grew more plumphy and fatter. By degrees her youth began to shew signs in her body; one day she heard an incorporeal voice from the air above, 'O Fair One! In your next birth Śri Hari, adored by Brahmā and other gods, will be your husband.'

इति श्रुत्वा च सा इहा चकार हु पुनस्तपः ।

अतीव निर्जनस्थाने यदते गंधामदने ॥ १ ० ॥

तत्रेव सुचिरं तत्वा विश्वस्य समूवास सा ।

ददर्षं पुतस्तज रावणं दुनिवारणम् ॥ १ १ ॥

ग्रहुा सात्रिविष्यक्ना च पाणं तमै ददी किका ।

सुस्वादुपूर्ति च फलं जलं चाधिपुशीरतम् ॥ 12 ॥

तन्द्र भुक्नवा स पाधिष्ठशोबास तत्समीपत: ।

Hearing this, her joy knew no bounds. She went to the solitary caves in the Gandhamādana mountain to practise tapas again. When a long time passed away in this tapasyā, one day the irresistible Rāvaṇa came there as guest. No sooner Vedavati saw the guest, than the gave him, out of devotion to the guest, water to wash his feet, delicious fruits,

Šrimuddevībhāgavatam

and cool water for his drink. The villain accepted the hospitality and sitting there, began to ask:

चकार प्रणमिति तां का तां केल्याणि वर्तेसे ॥ 13 ॥

तां दृष्टा स वरारोहां पीनओषीपयोधारम।

गरल्योत्सावस्यां च सस्मितां सुदतीं सतीम् ॥ 14 ॥

मृच्छीमवाप कुपणं: कामवाणप्रपीक्षितः ।

स केण समाकृष्य श्रुगारं कर्तुमुचतः ॥ 15 ॥

“O Auspicious One! Who are you?” Seeing the fair smiling lady, with beautiful teeth, her face blooming like the autumnal lotus, of heavy loins, and of full breast, that villain became passionate. He lost entirely all consciousness and became ready to make violence on Her.

सती चुकोप द्वृता ते सत्थितं च चकार ह ।

स जड़ी हस्तपादेशु किंचिद्रुर्फे न च क्षमः ॥ 16 ॥

तुहाव मनसा देवीं प्रययी पयलोचनात् ।

सा तुहा तस्य तत्वानं सुकृतं च चकार ह ॥ 17 ॥

Seeing this, the chaste Vedavati, became angry and out of her tapas influence, astounded him and made him insensible to move. He remained motionless like an inanimate body. He could not move his hands nor feet nor could he speak. That wicked fellow then mentally praises to her. And the praise of the Higher Śakti can never go futile. She became pleased and granted him religious merits in the next world. But she also pronounced this curse:

सा शणाप मद्यं त्वं विनंश्यसि सबोध्वः ।

स्पष्टाई च तव्या कामाछले चाययलोकया ॥ 18 ॥

इत्युक्चना सा च योगेन देहल्यागं चकार ह ।

गंरायां तां च संन्यस्य स्वगृहं रावणो ययो ॥ 19 ॥

‘That when you have touched my body out of passion, then you will be ruined with your whole family for my sake.’ Now see my power. O Nārada! Thus saying to Rāvaṇa, Vedavati left her body by her yogic power.

Then Rāvaṇa took her body and delivered it to the Ganges and he then returned to his own home. Rut Rāvaṇa thought over the matter repeatedly and exclaimed.

अहो किम्बुद्रतं दृष्टं किं कृतं वान्यासं धुना ।

इति संचित्य संचित्य विल्लण पुनः पुनः ॥ 20 ॥

सा च कालोतरं साध्यी बथूव जनकात्मजा ।

सीतादेवीति विश्याता यवर्थे यावणहो है ॥ 21 ॥

‘What wonder have I seen! Oh! What a miracle this lady has wrought! Rāvaṇa thus lamented, This Vedavatī, of pure character, took her birth afterwards as Sitā, the daughter of Janaka. For the sake of this Sitā, Rāvaṇa was ruined with his whole family.

महातपविद्वनी सा च तपसा पूर्वेजन्मतः ।

लेभे रामं च भर्तरं परिपूर्णतम् हरिम् ॥ 22 ॥

संग्राप तपसात्धம் तुरागार्यं जान्यतिम् ।

सा रामा सुविरं जेसे योगण सह सुन्दरी ॥ 23 ॥

By the religious merits of her previous birth, the ascetic lady got Bhagavān Hari Śrī Rāma Candra, the Fulest of the Full, for her husband and remained for a long time in great enjoyment with the Lord fo the world; a thing very difficult to be attained!

जातिसमरा न समरित तपसघ कतनं पुरा ।

सुखेन तनजही सर्वे दुःखं चापि सुखं फले ॥ 24 ॥

Though she was a Jātisamarā (one who knows all about her past lives), she did not feel any pain due to her practising severe austerities in her previous birth; for when the pains end in success, the pains are not then felt at all.

नानाप्रकारविषयं चकार सुचिरं सती ।

संग्राय सुकुमारं तमतीव नव्योवाना ॥ 25 ॥

गृधिनं रसिके श्राँत कांतं देवमनुतमम् ।

स्लीणां मानोजं कृदितं तथा लेये यथैवितम् ॥ 26 ॥

चितुः सत्यपालनार्थ सत्यसंधोर्यूढ़ः ।

जगाम कानन्तं पशुत्कालेन च कवतीसया ॥ 27 ॥

Sitā, in Her fresh youth enjoyed various pleasures in the company of her husband, handsome, peaceful, humorous and witty, the chief of the Devas, loved by the female sex, well-qualified, and just what she desired. But the all-powerful Time is irresistible; the truthful Rāmacandra, the scion of the Raghu's family, had

Book IX Chapter XVI

to keep up the promise made by his father and so he had to go to the forest, ordained by Time.

तस्थी समुद्रिनके्ते सीताया लक्षणे च ।

दर्दर्ग तत्र बहिंच च विग्रकपरंरु हरि: ॥ 28 ॥

रामं च दुःस्तितं सूद्या स च दुःस्ती कम्प्यह ।

उवाच किंचित्सल्येहं सत्यं सत्यपरायण: ॥ 29 ॥

He remained with Sītā and Laksmaṇa near the sea. Once the God Fire appeared to Him in the form of a Brāhmaṇa. Fire, in a Brāhmin-form, saw Rāma Candra morose and became himself mortified. Then the Truthful Fire addressed the truthful Rāmacandra:

द्वित्र जयाच

भगवज्युतां राम कालोउयं यदुपस्थितः ।

सीताहरणकालोउयं तवैव समुपस्थितः ॥ 30 ॥

“O Bhagavān Rāmcandra! I now speak to you how time is now coming to you. No has come the time when your Sītā, will be stolen.”

दैवं वुर्दिवायं च न च दैवात्यो बली ।

जगतसूर्मं मयि न्यस्य छायां रक्षितिकंधुना ॥ ३ १ ॥

दायायमि सीतां तुभ्यं च परीक्षासमये पुनः ।

देवे: प्रस्थापितोड़ं च न च विधो हुताशन: ॥ ३ २ ॥

The course of Destiny is irrestible; none else is more powerful than Time, Fate. So give over your Sitā, the World Mother to me and keep with you this Chāyā Sitā (the shadow Sitā; the false Sitā). When the time of Sitā's ordeal by fire will take place; I will give Her back to you. The Devas united have sent me to you. I am not really a Brāhmin; but I am Agni Deva (eater of oblations).

तमसहब्रवंनं शुचा न प्रकाश्य च लक्ष्मणम् ।

स्वीकारं वचसध्रके हृदयेन विद्युता ॥ 33 ॥

वहिंयोगेन सीताया मायासीतां चकार ह ।

ततुल्यगुणसर्वांगां ददौ रायाय नारत ॥ 34 ॥

Rāmacandra heard Fire and gave his assent. But his heart shattered. He did not speak of this to Lakṣmana. By the yogic power Agni (Fire) created a Māyā Sītā. This Māyā Sītā, O Nārada, was perfectly equal to the real Sītā. Fire, then, handed this Māyā Sītā to the hands of Rāmcandra.

सीतां गृहीत्वा से ययौ गोभयं वतुं निषिध्य च ।

लक्ष्मणो नैव बुबुधे गोयामन्यस्य का कथा ॥ 35 ॥

एतमिश्रतंरो रायो ददर्गं कानकं गृणम् ।

सीता तं प्रेर्यामास तद्यें यत्पपूर्वकम् ॥ 36 ॥

Hutāšana (fire) took the real Sitā and said ‘Never divulge this to any other body’ and went away. What to speak of divulging the secret to any other body, Lakṣmaṇa even could not know it. By this time Rāma saw one deer, made of all gold. To bring that deer carefully to her, Sitā sent Rāmacandra with great eagerness.

संन्यस्य लक्ष्मणं रामो जानक्या रक्षणो बने ।

स्वयं जागम तृष्णं ति तविष्ण ध सायकेन च ॥ 37 ॥

लक्ष्मणेति च शब्दं स कृत्वा च मायया मृगः ।

प्राणांस्तत्याज सहसा पुरो दृष्टा हीरं स्मरन् ॥ 38 ॥

Putting Sitā under Lakṣmaṇa's care, in that forest, Rāma went himself immediately and pierced the deer by one arrow. That Māyā mrga (the deer created by magic powers) on being pierced, cried out 'Hā Lakṣmaṇa! and seeing Hari before him and remembering the name of Hari, quitted his life.

भूगदेहं परित्यज्य दिव्यस्यं विधाय च ।

रत्निमितियानेव वैकुंठे स जगाम ह ।। ३ ९ ।।

वैकुपठलोकद्वार्यसीरिककोरो द्वारपालयोः ।

पुनर्जगाम तद्धुरामादेशाद्धुरायलयोः ।। ४ ० ।।

The deer body then vanished; and a divine body made its appearance in its stead. This new body mounting on an aerial car made of jewels, ascended to Vaikuntha. That Maÿik (magic) deer was in its previous birth, a servant of the two gate-keepers of Vaikuntha; but, for the sake of some emergency, he had to take up this Râksasa birth.

अथ शब्चे च सा शुवा लक्ष्मणेपि च विकल्यम् ।

तं हि सा प्रेयामास लक्ष्मणं रामसर्पिधी ॥ 41 ॥

गते च लक्ष्मणे गेरा यावणो दुनिवारणः ।

सीती गृहीत्वा प्रयवी लंकामेव स्वलील्या ॥ 42 ॥

He again became the srevant of two doorkeepers of Vaikuntha. On the other hand Sita Devi, hearing the cry ‘Ha Lakṣmana!’ became very

Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam

distressed and sent Lakṣmaṇa in search of Rāma. No sooner diś Lakṣmaṇa get out of the hermitage, the irresistible Rāvaṇa took away Sītā gladly to the city of Laṅkā.

विसपाद च रामश्र वने चूद्रा च लक्षणम् ।

नृणं च स्वाभयं माला सीतां नैव दर्शर्ग सः ॥ 4 3 ॥

मृच्छी संग्राम सुचिरं विल्लाप भृर्णे पुनः ।

पुनः पुनःख घषाम तद्वोयणपूर्वकम् ॥ 44 ॥

Now Rāmacandra, seeing Lakṣmaṇa on the way in the forest, became merged in the ocean of sorrows and without losing any time came hurriedly to the hermitage where he could not find Sītā. Instantly he fell unconscious on the ground; and, after a long time, when he regained his consciousness, he lamented and wandered here and there in search of Her.

कालेन प्राय तद्धातां गोदावरीनदीते ।

सहायावनान-कूला बब्धे सागरं हरि: ॥ 45 ॥

लंकां गत्वा रघुश्रेष्ठो जवाना सायकेन च ।

कालेन प्राय ते हत्वा राजर्षा बांधवेः सह ॥ 46 ॥

After some days on the banks of the river Godāvārī, getting the information of Sītā, he built a bridge across the ocean with the help of His monkey armies. Then he entered with his army into Lankā and slew Rāvaṇa with arrows with all his friends.

तां च विह्वरीक्षां च कारयामास सत्वम् ।

हुताशस्त्र काले पु यास्तवीं जानकीं दहो ॥ 47 ॥

उवाच छाया वर्त्र है चामं च चिनयान्सिता ।

कनिष्यापीति किमई तृपायां वव्तव मे ॥ 48 ॥

When Sītā's ordeal by fire came, Agni (Fire) handed over the real Sītā to Rāmcandra. The Shadow Sītā then humbly addressed Agni and Rāma Candra 'O Lord! What am I to do now? Settle my case.

श्रीरामानी ऊचतुः

त्वं गच्छ तपसे देखे पुक्वरं च सूपुणद्यम् ।

कृत्वा तपस्यां तत्रैव सर्वांलक्ष्मीर्धिथासि ॥ ४९ ॥

Agni and Rāmcandra both of them then said to Chāyā Sītā: "O Devi! Go to Puśkara and practise

tapasyā there; that place is the giver of religious merits and then you will be the Svarga Lakṣmī (Lakṣmī of Heaven).

सा च तद्धचनं श्रुत्वा प्रतय पुक्षे तपः ।

दिथ्यं जिलक्षवर्षे च स्वर्णलक्ष्मीर्वंभूत ह १५० ॥

सा च कालेन तपसा यजूकण्डसपुन्द्वा ।

कामिनी पोडवानां च श्रीद्वी दुवतत्मना ॥ ५१ ॥

Hearing this, the Chāyā Sītā went and practised tapasyā for the three divine lākh years and became Mahā Lakṣmī. This Svarga Lakṣmī appeared at one time from the sacrificial Kuṇḍa (pit). She was known as the daughter of Drupada and became the wife of the five Pāndavas.

कृते युगे वेदवर्ती कुग्यजसुता रूपा ।

हतायां रामपन्ती च सीतते जनकात्मजा ॥ 52 ॥

नछ्ठाया श्रीदेवी देयी द्वापरे दुवदात्मजा ।

निहायणी च सा प्रोक्ता विद्यामाना युगायरे ॥ 53 ॥

She was Veda Vatī, the daughter of Kuśadhvaja in the Satya Yuga; Sītā, the wife of Rāma and the daughter of Janaka in Tretā Yuga; and Draupadī, the daughter of Drupada, in the Dvāpara Yuga. As she existed in the Satya, Tretā, and Dvāpara Yugas, the Three Yugas, hence She is Trihāyaṇī."

नात्व उवाच

प्रिया: पछ्र कथं तस्या बभूवरुंगिनुपुंव ।

इति मचित्तसंदेई भंज संदेहर्भजन ॥ ५४ ॥

Nārada said: O Chief of Munis! O Remover of doubts! Why had Draupadi five husbands? A great doubt has arisen in my mind on this point. Remove my doubt.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

लंकारा वास्तवी सीता रामं संप्रप नारद ।

रूपयोवानसंपंत्रा छाया च बहुचितया ॥ 55 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Devarṣi! When, in the city of Laṅkā, the real Sītā came before Rāma, then Chāyā Sītā, full of youth and beauty, became very anxious. रायामानोरात्रया तत्पुयुपानते शंकरं परम् ।

कामानुता पत्नियज्ञा प्रार्थवंती पुन: पुन: ॥ 56 ॥

पतिं दैहि पतिं दैहि पतिं दैहि पतिज्ञाने ।

पतिं दैहि पतिं दैहि पड़ावारं चकार सा ॥ 57 ॥

Book IX Chapter XVII

Agni Deva and, Rāmachandra both told Her to go to Puškara and worship Śaṅkara. While this Chāyā Sītā was practising austerities in Puškara, She became very anxious to get a good husband and asked from Mahā Deva the boon ‘Grant me a husband’ and repeated it five times.

शिवसत्त्यार्थां शुचा प्रमूल सरिकेश्वरः ।

प्रिये तव प्रियाः पढ़ा भविष्यिति वरं द्टो । ५८ ॥ ।

तेन सा पांडवानां च बभूव कामिनी प्रिया ।

इति ते कथितं सर्वे प्रसतंव वास्तवं ग्युग् । ५९ ॥

Śiva, the chief among the humorous, witty persons, hearing this, said ‘O Dear! You will get five husband.’ and thus granted her the boon. Therefore, She became the dearest wife of the five Pāndavas. Now hear other facts.

अथ संप्राय लंकामां सीतां तपो मनोहताम् ।

विभीषणाय तां लंका दत्वासप्रोष्यां ययौ पुनः ॥ 60 ॥

एकादिशस्थलावं कृत्वा तारयं च भारते ।

जगाम सर्वैलोंक्रैक्षा सार्थ वैकुपनमेव च ॥ 61 ॥

कमलांगा वेदवती कमलायां विवेश सा ।

When the war at Laṅkā was over, Śrī Rāmacandra got his own dear wife Sītā, and in-

stalling Vibhīṣaṇa on the throne of Laṅkā, returned to Ayodhyā. He ruled for eleven thousand years in Bhārata and finally went to Vaikunṭha with his all his subjects. Vedavatī, the incarnation in part of Lakṣmī dissolved in the body of Kamalā. Thus I have described to you the pure anecdote of Vedavatī.

कथितं पुण्यमाख्यानं पुण्यदं पायानाशनम् ॥ 62 ॥

सत्ते मूर्तिमन्त्र श्वेद्धाश्यार एव च ।

संति वय्याश किष्णो स च चेवेद्वती श्रुता ॥ 63 ॥

धर्मध्वजसुताख्यानं निवोधे कवयापि ते ॥ 64 ॥

श्रति श्रीद्वीभागवते महापुराणे नवमस्कन्थे

शोडशोस्थाय: 11 16 11

Hearing this destroys sins and increase virtue. The four Vedas geigned incarnate, in their true forms, on the lips of Vedavatī; hence She was named Vedavatī. Thus I have told you the anecdote of the daughter of Kuśadhvaja. Now hear the story of Tulasī, the daughter of Dharmadhvaja.

Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Ninth Book on the incarnation of Mahā Laksmī in the house of Kuśadhvaja in Śrimaddevibhāgvatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XVII

CHAPTER XVII

On the Anecdote of Tulasi

श्रीनारायण उवाच

धार्यध्वजस्य पत्ती च माध्यवीति च विश्रुता ।

युंण सार्थ सासोरामे तेभे च गन्यमादने ॥ 1 ॥

ग्रवां रतिकर्गे कृत्वा पुष्पचन्दनचर्धिताम् ।

चन्दनाफिलसावाँकुं पुष्पचन्दनवायुना ॥ 2 ॥

Śrī Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! The wife of Dharmadhvaja was Mādhavi. Going to the Gandhamādana mountain, She began to enjoy, with great gladness, the pleasures with the king Dharmadhvaja. The bed was prepared, strewn with flowers and scented with sandal-paste. She smeared all over her body with sandal-paste. The flowers and cool breeze in contact with the sweet

scent of sandal-paste began to cool the bodies. Mādhavī was the jewel amongst women.

स्ट्रीरत्मतिचारवाँक्री रत्नभूषणभूषिता ।

कामुकी रसिका सुहा रसिकेन च संसूता ॥ 3 ॥

सुरते विरतिन्तित तयोः सुरतिविजयोः ।

गतं देवर्षग्रंत न जाते च दिवानिगम् ॥ 4 ॥

Her whole body was very elegant. Besides it was adorned all over with j-wel ornaments. As she was humorous, so the king was very expert in that respect. It seemed as if the Creator created especially for Dharmadhvaja, the humorous lady Mādhavī expert in amorous affairs. Both of them were skilled in amorous sports. So no one did like

to desist from amorous enjoyments. One hundred divine years passed in this way, day and night passed unnoticed.

ततो राजा मर्ति प्राय्य सुरताद्विराम च ।

कामुकी सूदरी किंचित्र च तुरिं जगाम सा ॥ 5 ॥

दधार गर्भे सा सडो दैवाद्वर्ज्ञतं सती ।

श्रीभगों श्रीयुना सा च संबंभूव दिवे दिवे ॥ 6 ॥

The king then got back his consciousness and desisted from his amorous embraces. But the lustful woman did not find herself satisfied. However, by the Deva's influence, she became pregnant and conceived for one hundred years. In the womb there was the incarnation of Lakṣmī; and the body's lustre increased day by day.

शुभे क्षणे शुभदिने शुभमवेगे च संयुते ।

शुभलने शुभांगे च शुभस्वामिमघात्विते ॥ 7 ॥

क्रान्तिकीपुर्णिमावां तु सितावरे च पचवा ।

सुभाव सा च पचांगां शपित्यों तां मनोहामू ॥ 8 ॥

Then, on an auspicious day, on an auspicious moment, auspicious Yoga, auspicious lagna, auspicious Arinśa, and on an auspicious combination of planetary rules and their houses, she delivered on the full moon night of the month of Kārtika one beautiful daughter, the incarnation in part of Lakṣmī.

ग्रत्याव्यिच्छात्यां ग्रस्यंकजलोचनान् ।

पक्वाविंबाघारोईी च पर्पर्ती समितां गृहम् ॥ 9 ॥

इस्तपादतालरतां निम्ननाधिं मनोरामाम् ।

तद्धसिज्जलयुक्ता नितंबयुगवतुलम् ॥ 10 ॥

The face of the body looked like the autumnal moon; Her two eyes resembled autumnal lotuses and her upper and lower lips looked beautiful like ripe Bimba fruits. The daughter began, no sooner it was born, to look on all sides of the lying-in-room. The palm and lower part of feet were red. The navel was deep and below that there were three wrinkles. Her loins were circular.

शीते सुखीण्यसर्वी शीधे च सुखशीतालम् ।

शयामां सुकेशी चिर्वां न्यौधोर्षमिंडालम् ॥ 1 1 ॥

पीतचंपकवणांभां सुन्दीचेव सुन्दीम् ।

नरा नार्येछ तां झुढ़ा तुलनां दातुमक्षामाः ॥ १ २ ॥

Her body was hot in the winter and cold in the summer and pleasant to touch. Her hairs on the head were hanging like the roots of the fig tree. Her colour was bright like Campaka; She was a jewel amongst women. Men and women cannot compare her beauty.

तेन नाना च तुलसी तां वंदिति मनीषिणः ।

सा च भूविष्यमानेन योग्यशी प्रकृतिरंथा ॥ 13 ॥

सर्वैपिंविद्धा तपसे जगाम बदरीवन् ।

तत्र देवाद्वलक्षं च चकार परमं तपः ॥ 14 ॥

The holy wise men named Her Tulasī. As soon as she was born, she looked of the female sex, full on every way. Though prevented repeatedly by all, She went to the forest of Badari for practising Tapasyā. There she practised that Rapasyā for one lākh divine years.

मनसा नारायण: स्वामी भवितेति च निश्रिता ।

ग्रीधे पंचताय शीते तोयवझा च प्रावृषि ॥ 15 ॥

आसनस्वा बृधित्याग: सह्नौति दिवानिग्नम् ।

विश्रासह्ववर्ष च फलतोयागना च स ॥ 16 ॥

Her main object was to get Nārāyaṇa for her husband. In summer she practised Pañcatapā (surrounded by fire on four sides and on the top); in the winter she remained in water and in the rainy season she remained in the open air and endured the showers of the rain, twenty thousand years. She passed away thus in eating fruits and water.

स्थितसहस्वर्ष च पत्राहारा तप्तविनी ।

चत्वारिंशलसुश्रव्दं बाय्याहार कृणोहरी ॥ 17 ॥

For thirty thousand years she subsisted only on the leaves of trees. When the forty thousandth year came, she subsisted only on air and her body became thinner and thinner day by day.

ततो दशसहवाद्वे निर्याहारा बभूव सा ।

निलक्षा चैकपादस्था द्वुतां तां कमलोद्वः ॥ १ ॥ ॥

समावयी वरं दातुं परं बदरिकाओम् ।

चतुर्मुंचं च सा द्वुहा ननाम हंरवाहन् ॥ १९ ॥

तामुवाच जयकता विधाता जगतामपि ॥

Book IX Chapter XVII

Then for ten thousand years afterwards she left eating anything whatsoever and without any aim, stood on only one leg. At this time the lotus-born Brahmā, seeing this, appeared there to grant her boons. On seeing Him, Tulasī immediately bowed down to Brahmā, the Four-faced One riding on His vehicle, the Swan.

Note: The vehicle theory of the Devas came from Egypt. The Devas were without vehicles at first and were faced half-beasts. Then they were rendered men and their vehicles were fancied as beasts. The face of the Durgā Devi was thought of as that of a tiger.

बशोवाच

वरं वृषीष्य तुलसि यते मनसि वांतिहन् ॥ 20 ॥

हरिभर्पितं हेरदास्यमजारमततामपि ।

He then addressed her and said: "O Tulasī! Ask any boon that you like. Whether it be devotion to Hari, servantship to Hari, freedom from old age or freedom from death, I will grant that to you."

तुलस्याच

श्रुणु तात प्रवक्ष्यापि यन्मे मतसि बाँतिछ्न ॥ 21 ॥

सर्वेत्रस्यापि पुरतः का लज्जा मम संप्रिन् ।

Tulasi said: “Father! I now say you my mind. Hear. What is the use of hiding away my views out of fear or shame to One who knows everything reigning in One’s Heart.

अहं तु तुलसी गोपी गोलोकेंद्रहं स्थिता पूरा ॥ 22 ॥

कृपाधिया किंकरी च तद्वेगा तत्सखी प्रिया ।

गोविद्वतिसंभुकतामतुरांगां मो च मृष्टिताम् ॥ 23 ॥

रासेध्वरी समानतय ददर्ग रासमपडले ।

गोविदं भर्तीयामास मां शगतप सभविता ॥ 24 ॥

I am Tulasi Gōpi (cowerdess); I used to dwell before in the Goloka. I was a dear she-servant of Rādhikā, the beloved of Kṛṣṇa. I was also born of Her in part. Her Sakhis (female attendants) used to love me. Once in Rāsa Maṇḍalam I was enjoyed by Govinda; but I was not satiated and while I was lying down in an unconscious state, Rādhā, the Governess-in-chief of the Rāsa circle, came there and saw me in that state. She rebuked Govinda and, out of anger, cursed me:

याहि त्वं मानवीं योगनियत्वेचं च शशाप्र ह ।

मामुवाच स गोविदो मदांगं च चतुर्भुज् ॥ 25 ॥

लधिष्यस तपस्तवा भाते बढ़णी वरत् ।

‘Go at once and be born as a human being.’ At this Govinda spoke to me: “If you go and practise Tapas in Bhārata, Brahmā will get pleased and He will grant you boon. When you will get Nārāyaṇa, the Four-armed, born of Me in part as your husband.”

इत्येवमुक्त्वा देदेशो3प्यंतधार्वं चकार स: ॥ 26 ॥

देव्या भिया ततू त्यक्त्वा प्राप्तं जन गुते शुधि ।

अहं नारायणां कांतं शगतं सुन्दरविष्यम् ॥ 27 ॥

सांग्रतं ते पर्न लक्ष्यु वय्ये त्वं च देहि मे ।

O Father! Thus speaking, Śri Kṛṣṇa disappeared out of sight. Out of Rādhā's fear, I quitted my body and am now born in this world. Now grant me this boon that I get the peaceful, lovely beautiful Nārāyaṇa for my husband."

ब्रहादेव उवाच

सुदामा नाम गोपश्र शीकृष्णांगसमूद्रवः ॥ 28 ॥

तदंशश्रातितेजस्वी लेणे जम च भारते ।

सांग्रतं राधिकारशापहनुवंशसमूद्रवः ॥ 29 ॥

Brahmā said: O Child Tulasi! The Gopa (cowherd) Sudāmā was born of Śrī Krṣna's body. At the present time he is very energetic, He too, under the curse of Rādhā, has come and taken his birth amongst the Dānavas.

गंखच्छूंदित विज्यातरबौलेकोये न च ततमाः ।

गोलेके त्वां पुरा द्वृषा कामोनभितमानमसः ॥ 30 ॥

He is named Śañkha Cūḍa. No one is equal to him in strength. In Goloka, when he saw you before, he was overpowered with passion for you.

विलिभिनुं न शगाक शरिकायाः: प्रभातः ।

स च जातिस्मरतस्माव्रुदयामाभूच्च सागरे ॥ 31 ॥

जातिस्मरा त्वयपि सा सर्वं जानासि सुन्दरि ।

अधुना तस्य पत्नी त्वं संभविष्यसि शोभेन ॥ 32 ॥

पश्रात्रारायणं शांतं कतमेक वरिष्यसि ।

शापात्रारायणस्यैव कल्या दैवयोगतः ॥ 33 ॥

Only out of Rādha's influence, he could not embrace you. That Sudāmā is Jātismara (knows

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

all about his previous births); and you, too, are Jātismarā. Therefore is nothing unknown to you. O Beautiful One! You will now be his wife. Afterwards you will get Nārāyaṇa, the Beautiful and Lovely for your husband.

भविष्यसि वृक्षरूपा त्वं पृता विश्वपावनी ।

प्रधाना सर्वपुषेपु विद्युप्राणाधिका पश्चे ॥ 34 ॥

त्वया विचा च सर्वेषां पूजा च विफलां भवेत् ।

वृन्दावने वृक्षरूपा नाना वृद्धावतीति च ॥ 35 ॥

Thus under the curse of Nārāyaṇa, you will be transformed into the world purifying Tulasi tree. You will be the foremost amongst the flowers and will be dearer to Nārāyaṇa than His life. No one's worship will be complete without Thee as leaf. You will remain as a tree in Vrndāvana and you will be widely known as Vrndāvani.

त्वतयोगीयिणाया पुत्रिययिति माधायम् ।

युशातिवेदीकरण सार्थ फूर्णोय नंतरत् ॥ 36 ॥

विद्यार्थिसे गोपेन स्वच्छंद मदुर्गण च ।

इत्वंदे वचनं श्रुत्वा सस्मिता हद्यमानसा ॥ 37 ॥

प्रणानाम च द्वाणा तं च किंचिद्वावास स ।

The Gopas and Gopīs will worship Mādhava with Your leaves. Being the Presiding Diety of the Tulasī tree, you will always enjoy the company of Kṛṣṇa, the best of the Gopas." O Nārada! Thus hearing Brahmā's words, the Devi Tulasī became very glad. Smile appeared in her face. She then bowed down to the Creator and said:

तुलस्याच

यथा मे दिषुर्जे कृष्णो वांछा च र्यामासून्दरे ॥ 38 ॥

सर्वे ब्रावीमि दे तात न तथा च चतुष्टिंगे ।

अतूपाउई च गोयिदे दैवाच्छूजारभगतः ॥ 39 ॥

गोविन्द्वर्यैव वचनात्रार्थयामि चतुर्भुम् ।

त्वत्रमावेत० गोविद्व० पुनेरेव सुतुलंभम् ॥ 40 ॥

धूवमेव लिध्यामि राधाभीति प्रमोचय ।

“O Father! I speak now truly to Thee that I am no! as devoted to the four-armed Nārāyaṇa as I am devoted to Śyāma Sundra, the two-armed. For my intercourse with Govinda Śrī Krṣṇa was suddenly interrupted and my desire was not gratified. It is

because of Śrī Govinda's words that I prayed for the four-armed. Now it appears certain that by Thy grace I will get again my Govinda, very hard to be attained. But, O Father! Do this that I be not afraid of Rādhā."

ब्रहादेव उवाच

गृहाण राधिकामांत्र द्वादीय भोड्गाशमू। १। ४। १।

तत्स्था प्राणतुल्या त्वं मद्रोगे घाधव्यासि ।

श्रंगारं व्यवारोगोंव न जास्यति च राधिका ॥ ४ २ ॥

राधासमा त्वं सुभगे गोविन्दस्य घथिव्यासि ।

Brahmā said: “O Child! I now give you the sixteen lettered Rādhā mantra to you. By Her Grace you will be dear to Rādhā as Her life. Rādhikā will not be able to know anything of your secret dealings. O Fortunate! You will be dear to Govinda like Rādhā.”

इन्येवमुक्का तत्ता च देख्य वे घोडगाशमू १। ४३ ।।

मंत्रे चैव जगद्धाता स्तोत्रे च कवचं परम् ।

सर्वे पूजाधियानं च पुरुध्याधिधिकमम् ॥ ४ ४ ॥

Thus saying, Brahmā, the Creator of the world, gave her the sixteen lettered Rādhā mantra, stotra, Kavaca and mode of worship and puraścarana and He blessed her.

परां शृभाधिरां चैव पूजां चैव ककरा स ।

बधूव सिद्धा सा देयी तनुसादात्रमा यथा ॥ 45 ॥

सिद्धं मंत्रेण तुरुसी वरं प्राप यथोदितम् ।

बुधुजे च महाभोगें यडिष्येचु च दुर्लेम् ॥ 46 ॥

Tulasi, then, engaged herself in worshipping Rādhā, as directed. By the boon of Brahmā, Tulasi attained Siddhi (success) like Lakṣmī. Out of the power of the Siddha mantra, She got her desired boon. She became fortunate in getting various pleasures, hard to be attained in this world. Her mind became quiet.

प्रसत्रमनसा देवी तत्वाज तपस: कलमम् ।

सिद्धे फले नगणों च दुःखं च सुखमुजनम् ॥ 47 ॥

भृक्वा पीत्वा च संतुहा ग्रनंचे च चक्या स ।

तत्वे मनोमे तत्र पुष्पचंदनर्पिते ॥ 48 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वैभिणगवते नवमलकन्ये नारायणनारदस्यंदरे

तुलस्युपाध्याने सपतद्वी3धायाः ।। 17 11

Book IX Chapter XVIII

All the the toils of Tapasyā disappeared. When one gets the fruit of one's labour, all the troubles then transform to happiness. She then finished her

food and drink and slept on a beautiful bed strewn with flowers and scented with sandal paste. Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the anecdote of Tulasi in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XVIII

CHAPTER XVIII

On the Union of Śaṅkhacūḍa with Tulasi

नारायण ज्ञाच

तुलसी परितृघा च सुचाय भृह्मानसा ।

नवयीवनसंपत्रा बृध्यजवसंगाना ॥ १ ॥

चिश्रेप पंचबाणश्र पढ़ बाणांश्र तां प्रति ।

पूषायुघ्न सा दर्शा पूषचेदनचर्चित्ति ॥ २ ॥

Nārāyana said: Thus highly pleased, Tulasī went to sleep with a gladdened-heart. She the daughter of Vṛsadhvaja, was then an her blooming youth and while asleep, the Cupid, the God of five arrows, shot at her five arrows (by which one gets enchanted and swooned). Though the Devi was smeared with sandal paste and She slept on a bed strewn with flowers, her body was felt as if being burnt.

पुलकाधितसर्वाँजी कंपितारक्लोचना ।

क्षणं सा गृछकता प्राप क्षणं मुढ़ीमवाग व् ॥ 3 ॥

क्षणमुहित्नातं प्राप क्षणं तंत्रा सुखाखतम् ।

क्षणं च दह्नं प्राप क्षणं प्राप प्रसन्ततम् ॥ 4 ॥

क्षणं सा चेतनां प्राप क्षणं प्राप विष्णवणताम् ।

Out of joy the hairs stood on their ends all over her body; her eyes were reddened and her body began to quiver. Sometimes She left uneasiness, sometimes dryness; sometimes She got faint; sometimes drowsiness and sometimes again pleasantness; sometimes she became conscious, sometimes sorrowful.

त्रिभूतंती क्षणं तल्पाद्धर्त्ती निकटे क्षणम् ॥ 5 ॥

घर्मती क्षणमुद्वगाधिवसती क्षणं पुनः ।

क्षणमेव समुद्वगात्युषाय पुनरेव सा ॥ 6 ॥

Sometimes she got up from her bed; sometimes she sat; and sometimes she fell again to sleep. The flower-bed, strewn with sandalpaste, appeared to

her full of thorns; nice delicious fruits and cold water appeared to her like poison.

पुष्पचेदन्तत्वं च तद्वध्वारितिकंटकम् ।

विषधारि सुखं दिख्य सुंदरं च फलं जलम् ॥ ७ ॥

निलयं च विलाकारं सुक्ष्मवस्वं हुताशनः ।

सिंदुपयकं चैव जगतुल्यं च दुःखदम् ॥ ८ ॥

Her house appeared to her like a hole in a ground and her fine garments seemed to her like fire. The mark of Sindūra on her forehead appeared, as it were, a boil, a sore. She began to see in her dreams that one beautiful, well clothed, humorous, young man with smile in his lips, appeared to her.

क्षणं ददर्शं तंत्रायां सुवेयं पुर्वं सती ।

सुन्दरं च युवानं च सस्मितं रसिकेश्वरम् ॥ 9 ॥

चन्दोर्नीक्षितसर्वाँं रनभूषणभूषितम् ।

आप्छेदंत माव्यवंति पिंबतं तन्युखांबुजम् ॥ 10 ॥

His body was besmeared with sandal-paste and decked with excellent jewels; garlands of forest flowers were suspending from his neck. Coming there, he was drinking the honey of her lotus face. He was speaking on love themes and on various other sweet topics.

कथवंतं रतिकथां बृहतं मधुरं पुढ़ः ।

संभृक्तवंत तल्पे च समापिल्वधंतीपितन् ॥ १ १ ॥

पुरेनेव तु गछतंलागघ्छतं च सज्रिधौ ।

यांतं क्व यासि प्राणेगश तिहोत्येवमुाच ॥ १ २ ॥

As if he was embracing amorously and enjoying the pleasures of intercourse. After the intercourse he was going away; again he was coming near. The lady was addressing him 'O Darling! O Lord of my heart! Where do you go. Come close.'

पुरंक्षे चेतनां प्राय्य विल्लाला पुनः पुनः ।

एवं सा यौवनं प्राय्य तस्थी तत्रैव नारद ॥ 13 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

गंखचूढो महायोगी जैगीष्ण्यान्नोहारम् ।

कृष्णारंत्रे च संग्राय कृत्वा सिद्धू तु पुरुष्चे ॥ १ ४ ॥

Again when she became conscious, she began to lament bitterly. Thus on entering in her youth, the Devi Tulasi began to live in the hermitage of Badari (Plum fruit, It may signify womb. Those who visit Badari are not to enter again to any womb). On the other hand the great Yogi Śaṅkhacūḍa obtained the Krṣna Mantra from Maharṣi Jaigīṣavya and got siddhi (success) in Puskara Tirtha (sacred place of pilgrimage where one crosses the world).

कवचं च गले बद्धया सर्वमंगलमंगलम् ।

बहाणछ वरं प्राय दधे मनसि वाँतिहत् ॥ 15 ॥

आज्ञा बहण: सोप्रि बदरी च समावयी ।

आगच्छंतं गैखच्छं ददर्शं तुलसी मुने ॥ 16 ॥

नवयीवनसंपंज कामदेवसमप्रभम् ।

སྟेतेतचंकवर्गभं त्वन्यपणभूषित् ॥ 17 ॥

Holding on his neck the Kavaca named Sarvamāngalamaya and obtaining the boon from Brahmā as he desired, he arrived at Badari, by Brahmā's command. The signs of the blooming youth had just begun to be visible in the body of Śankhacūḍa as if the God of Love incarnated in his body; his colour resembled that of white Campakas and all his body was decked with jewelled ornaments.

श्रत्यावर्णिच्न्रास्य शर्येकजलोचनम् ।

त्वसारविन्दिमणीयिनानस्यं मनोहनम् ॥ 18 ॥

त्वकुषडल्युमेन गंडस्थलिगतजन् ।

पारिजाताप्रूसनानां मालावर्ते च सुमितम् ॥ 19 ॥

कस्तूरीकुंकुमारुक्ते सुर्गधिचन्दनात्रितम् ।

His face resembled the autumnal full moon; his eyes were extended like the lotus leaves. The beautiful form was seen to sit in an excellent aerial car, made of pearls and jewels. Two jewel earrings, nice and elegant, suspended up to his cheek; his neck was adorned with Pārijāta flower garlands; and his body was smeared with Kumkum and scented sandal-paste.

सा द्वृषा सक्रियावेनं मुखमाच्छात याससा ॥ 20 ॥

सस्मिता तं निरीक्षेति सकटाक्षं पुनः पुनः ।

बभूवातिनममुखी नवसंगमलजिता ॥ 21 ॥

गरविदुविनिडीकस्वमुखैदुविराजिता ।

अमूल्यरत्निभाग्यावकावलिसंपुता ॥ 22 ॥

मणित्रसारतिनमणिवर्णमंजीरंजिता ।

दधतीं कवीभारं भालनीमाल्यसंपुतम् ॥ 23 ॥

O Nārada! Seeing Śaṅkhacūda coming near to her. Tulasi covered her face by her clothings and she, with a smiling countenance, cast repeatedly sidelong glances on him and bent her head low abashed in the expectation of a free intercourse. How beautiful was that clear face of her! It put down the autumnal moon in the background. The invaluable jewelled ornament were on her toes. Her braid of hair was surrounded by sweet scene Mālatī garlands.

अमूल्यत्निर्माणमाकृतिकुंकल । १

चित्रकुंडल्यमेन गंडस्थलविराजता ॥ 24 ॥

रत्नेत्रसारहोण सनमध्यस्लोजवला ।

रत्नकंकणकेपुराणंकृपणभूषिता ॥ 25 ॥

रत्नांगुलीयकेंदिर्येंगुल्यावलिराजिता ।

द्वुत तो ललितां रव्यां सुगीलां सुंदरी सतीम् ॥ 26 ॥

उवास ततमापीय तु मभुंरं तामुबाच सः ।

The invaluable jewelled wonderful earrings like the shape of a shark were hanging up to her cheek. Extraordinarily beautiful necklaces were seen being suspended to the middle of her breasts and added to the beauty thereof; on her arms and hands were jewelled bangles and conch ornaments; jewelled armlets and on fingers excellent jewelled rings were seen. O Muni! Seeing that lovely beautiful chaste woman of good nature, Śaṅkhacūdā came to her and taking his seat addressed her as follows:

गंखच्छ उवाच

का तां वंक्य च कन्या च धन्या मान्या च घोपिताम् ॥ 27 ॥

का तां मानिन कल्याणि सकंकल्याणाद्विनि ।

मौनीभूते किंकरे मां संभाषां कुक सुवर्ति ॥ 28 ॥

'O Proud One! O Auspicious One! Who are you? Whose daughter are you? You took fortunate

Book IX Chapter XVIII

and blessed among women. I am you silent slave. Talk with me."

इत्येवं वचनं शुत्वा सकामा वामलोचना ।

सस्मिता नववद्वना सकामां तमुवाचा सा ॥ 29 ॥

That beautiful eyed Tulasī, full of love, replied to Śankhacūḍa with smiling countenance and face bent low:

तुलस्यवाच

धर्मेश्वजसुताउई च तपस्यायां तपोवेन ।

तपस्विन्यहं तिहामि करलं चछ्छ यथासुखम् ॥ 30 ॥

कामिनी कुलजातां च रहस्येकाकिनी सतीम् ।

न पृष्ठति कुले जात तुरेवे मे शुती शुतम् ॥ 31 ॥

"I am the daughter of the great king Vṛṣdhvaja. I have come to this forest for tapasyā and am engaged in this. Who are you? What business have you to talk with me? You can go away wherever you like. I have heard in the Śāstras that persons born of a noble family never speak with ladies of a respectable family in privacy.

लंघोटोसत्कुले जातो धर्मशास्थावर्जितः ।

येनाङुत: शुतैरधः स कामीच्छिति कामिनीम् ॥ 32 ॥

आपाताममुतां मत्तामन्तकां पुकपस्य तात् ।

विषकुंभाकारल्पाममुतास्या च सन्ततम् ॥ 33 ॥

हदये क्षुतयागसो शग्रन्यामृत्याषिणीम् ।

स्वकार्यपित्तिचम्प्ते तत्परां सन्ततं च तम् 34 ॥

Only those that are lewd, void of any knowledge in the Dharma Sāstras, void of the Vedic knowledge and who are not Ku linas, like to speak with women in privacy. And those women, too, that look externally beautiful but very passionate and the Death of males, who are sweet tongued but filled with venom in their hearts, those who are sweet externally but like a sword internally, those that are always bent in achieving their own selfish ends and those that become obedient to their husbands for their own selfish ends otherwise behaving as they like, those that are filled inside with dirty things and outside looking pleasant in their faces and eyes, whose characters are pronounced as

defiled, what intelligent learned and noble-minded man can trust them?

कार्योंर्व सातियिणामध्यवैवारणां सदा ।

स्वातमलिनरूपां च प्रसजवदतेक्षणणा ॥ 35 ॥

श्रुती पुर्णो यासां च चरित्रमतिनुषिति ।

तासु को विश्वसेन्द्रातः प्रजावांश दुर्गायः ॥ 36 ॥

Those women do not discriminate who are their friends or who are their enemies; they want always new persons. Whenever they see a man well dressed, they want to satisfy their own passions. And they pretend with great care that they are very chaste.

तासों को वा रिपुर्मिंग प्रार्थयिति नवं नवम् ।

द्वृा सुवेय पुरुषमिच्छन्त हृदय सेवा ॥ 37 ॥

बाहो स्वार्थ सतीचं च ज्ञापयन्ती प्रयन्ततः ।

गश्वत्कामा च राया च कामाधाया मनोहरा ॥ 38 ॥

They are vessels of passion; they always attract the minds of others and they are very enthusiastic in satisfying their own just. They verbally shew that they want other men to go away but at hearts, feelings for intercourse remain preponderant; whenever they see their paramours in private, they laugh and become very glad but externally their shame knows no bounds.

बाहो छलावेदवन्ती ख्वातर्षिभुगनासा ।

कांतं इसती रहसि बाहोउतीव सुलजिता ॥ 39 ॥

मानिनी भैयुनाभावे कोपना कलहांतुगा ।

सुप्रीता भूरिसंभोगात्वल्यमैथुनदुःखिता ॥ 40 ॥

When they do not have their intercourse with their paramours, they become self-conceited; their bodies burn with anger and they begin to quarrel. When their passions are satisfied fully, they become glad and when there is a deficiency in that, they become sorrowful.

सुप्रिधात्यछीततीयादाकांक्षन्ती च मानसे ।

सुन्दरं रसिकं कांतं युवानं गृणिनं सदा ॥ 4 1 ॥

सुतात्यरामधिसन्हे कुबेनी तसिकोपरि ।

प्राणाधिक प्रियनमं संभोगकुशलं प्रियम् ॥ 42 ॥

For the sake of good and sweet food and cold drinks, they want beautiful young persons,

Šrimaddevibbāgavatam

qualified and humorous. They consider witty young persons clever in holding intercourses, more dearly than their sons.

पश्यन्ती पितुतुल्यं च वृद्धं वा बैयुनाक्षमम् ।

कलहं कुबौति शश्वतेन सार्थं सुकोपाने ॥ 4 3 ॥

वचसा भक्ष्यतीं ते सर्ग आयुषिवोल्बणम् ।

दुःसाहस्वलचा च सर्वदोषाश्रया सदा ॥ 4 4 ॥

And if that beloved one becomes incapable or aged, then he is considered as an enemy. Quarrels and anger then ensue. They devour these men as serpents eat rats. They are boldness personified and they are the source of all evils and voice.

बहाविष्णुशिवाहीनां सु:ास्या मोहूकरणी ।

तपोमागांगील शरणवमोक्षात्राकादिका ॥ 4 5 ॥

हरेंपक्तिष्यवहिता सर्वमायाकर्यिका ।

संसाराकामगारे च शरणविभागडलिपणि ॥ 46 ॥

Even Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa remain deluded before them. They cannot find out any clue of their minds. They are the greatest obstacle in the path of tapasyā and the closed doors for liberation. Devotion to Hari cannot reach those women. They are the repositories of Māyā and they hold men fast by iron chains in this world.

इज्जालकल्पा च मिथ्या च सद्णकधीण।

विषयी बाहासीद्यमयो3ूमपितुकृसितम् ॥ 47 ॥

नानाविण्यप्रयुवानामाधारं मलसंयुक्ति ।

दुर्गीधिद्योसंयुक्ते रक्तारकमसंकृतम् ॥ 48 ॥

They are like magicians and false like dreams. They enchant others by external beauty; their lower parts are very ugly and filled with excrements, faeces, of foul scent and very unholy and smeared with blood.

मायास्ता मायिनां च विधाना निमिता पुरा ।

विषयका मुप्रूष्णाममूष्ट्राया उपाधियांत्तम ।। ४ ९ ॥

इत्युक्ता तुलनी तं तु विरया च नारव ।

सस्मतः शंखचूढ्छ प्रवक्तुभुपचक्रमे ॥ ५० ॥

The Creator Bhagavān has created them as such, the Māyā to the Māyāvīs and the venom to those who want liberation, and as invisible to those that want to have them." Thus saying Tulasi stopped.

O Nārada! Śaṅkhacūḍa, then smilingly addressed her as follows:

गंखचूड़ जवाच

त्वया यत्क्रियतं देवि न च सर्वमिलीकम् ।

किंचितत्यमलीकं च किंचिन्मन्ति निशामय ॥ 51 ॥

निर्भितं द्विवधं धारा स्कीरूपं सर्वीमेतृन् ।

कृता कर्ण वातवंचे च प्रग्रस्चा च प्रग्रसितम् ॥ 52 ॥

O Devi! What you have spoken is not wholly false; partly it is true and partly it is false. Now hear. The Creator has created this all-enchanting female form into two parts. One is praiseworthy and the other is not.

लक्ष्मी सरवही दुर्गा सावित्री पतिअक्रिकता ।

सृष्टिमुत्रस्वल्पा च आषा सृष्टिविनिति ॥ 53 ॥

एतासामांगलच च स्त्रीलयं वास्तवं मयूनम् ।

तत्प्रासयं यगोलयं सर्वमंगलकारकम् ॥ 54 ॥

He has created Lakṣmī, Sarasvatī, Durgā, Śāvitrī, and Rādhā and others as the primary causes of creation; so there are the prime creations. Those women that are born of their parts, are auspicious, glorious, and much praiseworthy.

गतत्का देवहुती स्वधा सलाहा च दक्षिणा ।

छायावती गौहेणी च करणानी शकी तथा ॥ 55 ॥

कुबेरस्य च पनी या प्रत्यद्वितिश्छ दितिलिता ।

लोगमुहानस्या च कोटपी तुल्ही तथा ॥ 56 ॥

अह्यातःशंदी मेना ताग मंदोदरी तथा ।

दयमंती वेद्वतरा नाङ्ग च मनसा तथा ॥ 57 ॥

पृष्टिशूलिः सूमितिधा कालिका च सुभूयतः ।

षही मंगलचंडी च मूर्तिशु धर्मकामिनी ॥ 58 ॥

स्वस्ति: श्रद्धा च शांतिशु कांति: क्षांतिस्तवायात ।

निद्रा तंत्र श्रुतिप्यासा संख्या राविंदिनानि च ॥ 59 ॥

संपतिभूतितिकीति च क्रिका शोषा प्रभा शिका ।

यत्क्रीवं च संभृतमुक्तां तु तुये तुये ॥ 60 ॥

Śatarūpā, Devahūti, Svadhā, Dakṣinā Chāyāvatī, Rohinī, Varunāni, Śacī, the wife of Kubera, Diti, Aditi, Lopāmuḍrā, Anasūyā, Kautabhi (Kotari), Tulasī, Ahalyā, Arundhatī, Menā, Tārā, Mandodari, Damayanti, Vedavatī, Gaṅgā, Mānasā, Puṣṭi, Tuṣṭi, Smṛti, Medhā, Vasundharā, Ṣaṣthī, Mangalacandī, Mūrti, wife of

Book IX Chapter XVIII

Dharma. Svasti, Śraddhā; Śānti, Kānti, Kṣānti, Nidrā; Tandrā, Kṣudhā, Pipāsā, Sandhyā, Rātri, Divā, Sampatti, Dhṛti, Kirti, Kriyā, Šobhā, Prabhā, Śivā, and other women born of the Prime Prakṛtis, all are excellent in every Yuga.

कलाकलोशकं च स्ववैर्शयादिकमेव च ।

तद्वप्राश्व विश्वेषु पुंडुलीकपेवेच च 1611

सच्यधानं यदूयं यद्युक्तं च प्रभावतः ।

तदुतमं च विश्वेषु साध्योक्तं प्रश्रसितम् ॥ 62 ॥

The prostitutes of the heavens are also born of the above women in their parts and parts of parts. They are not praiseworthy in the universe; they are all regarded as unchaste women. Those women that are of Sattva Guṇas are all excellent and endowed with influence. In the Universe they are good, chaste and praiseworthy.

तहास्तवं च विज्ञं प्रवर्तिते मनिधिण: ।

राजोकं स्नापोकं कलगु विधिं स्मृत्ति ॥ 63 ॥

मध्यमा रसस्थांशास्तारु भोगेण लोलूण: ।

मुखसंभोगव्यथा श्वकार्वे निरता: सदा ॥ 64 ॥

This is not false. The Paṇḍits declare them excellent. Those that are of Rajo Gunas, and Tamo Gunas are not so praiseworthy. Those women that are of Rajo Gunas are known as middling. They are always fond of enjoyments, yield of them, and always ready to achieve their own ends.

कवटा मोहकारिणयो धार्यक्षियुक्ता: सहा ।

राजोकपस्य साख्यीत्माने नैवोपजायते ॥ 6 5 ॥

इंद मध्यमकर्ण च प्रवर्तिन मनीषिणः ।

तमोकर्ण दुनिवार्यमधम तिदिकुरुधा: ॥ 6 6 ॥

These women are generally insincere, delusive, and outside the pale of religious duties. Therefore they are generally unchaste. The Pandits consider them as middling. Those women that are of Tamo Guñas are considered as worst.

न पृष्ठति कुले जातः पंडितश परतिख्यम् ।

निर्विने निर्विले वासपि रहस्यपि परिस्थम् ॥ 67 ॥

आपच्छायि तलसीमापमाज्ञा ब्रह्माणो3पुता ।

गांधवैण विवाहेन त्वां ग्रहीध्यापि गोभने ॥ 68 ॥

Those born of noble families can never speak

with other wives in a private place or when they are alone. By Brahmā's command I have come to you. O Fair One! I will marry you now according to the Gandharva method. My name is Śaṅkhacūḍa. The Devas fly away from me out of terror. Before I was the intimate Sakha (friend) of Śri Hari, by the name of Sudāmā.

अह्मेव शंखच्छुंे देवविद्वाकारकः ।

दनुवंश्य विशेषेण सुदामातई हरे: पुरा ॥ 6 9 ॥

अहमघरु योगेषे गोपोशपि पार्वदेषु च ।

अभुना दानवैद्योर्धर तथित्यागश प्रापत: ॥ 70 ॥

Now, by Rādhikā's curse I am born in the family of The Dānavas. I was a Pārisad (attendant) of Śrī Krṣna and the chief of the eight Gopas. Now, by Rādhikā's curse I am born as Śaṅkhacūda, the Indra of the Dānavas.

जातिस्मरोड़ं जानापि कृष्णायंप्रभावतः ।

जातिस्मरा त्वं तुलसी संभुत्ता हरिणा पुगा ॥ 71 ॥

त्वमेव रात्रिकाकोपाज्जातप्रेय भारते भुवि ।

त्वां संभोक्नुपुतुकोई नालं राधाभयान्तः ॥ 72 ॥

By Śrī Kṛṣṇa's grace and by His mantra, I am Jātismarā (know of my past births). You, too, are Jātismarā Tulasi. Śrī Kṛṣṇa enjoyed you before. By Rādhikā's anger, you are now born in Bhārata. I was very eager to enjoy you then; out of Rādhikā's fear I could not.

इत्येवमुक्त्वा स पुमान्विरराम महापुने ।

सस्मितं तुलसी तुहा प्रवक्तुपघकमे ॥ ७ ३ ॥

Thus saying, Śankhacūda stopped. Then Tulasī gladly and smilingly replied: “Such persons (like you) are famous in this world; good women desire such husband.

तुलसुवाच

एवंविधो बुधो नित्यं विश्वेषु च प्रशास्तः ।

कान्तमेविंधी कांता शणविद्धति कामतः ॥ ७ ४ ॥

त्यव्याङ्मयुना सत्यं विचारोण पराजिता ।

स निंदितशाण्युग्चियं: पूर्णांத் लिया जितः ॥ ७ ५ ॥

Really, I am now defeated by you in argument. The man who is conquered by woman is very impure and blamed by the community. The Pitr



Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Lokas, the Devas Lokas, and the Gandharva Loka, too, look upon men, overpowered by women, as mean, despicable.

निद्रिति चितते देवा बाधवा: क्षीजितं नरम् ।

क्षीजितं मनसा माता पिता भाता च निदिति ॥ 76 ॥

शुज्धो विधो उद्धाने जातके मुतके यथा ।

भूमिचो ब्रादगहोर वैश्य: पडडणाहतः ॥ 77 ॥

गृही मासेन वेदेषु मातृवढ़ीनंसकरः ।

अशुचि: क्षीजितः शुक्रश्चिताद्रनकालाः ॥ 78 ॥

Even father, mother, brother, etc., hate them mentally It is said in the Vedas that the impurities during birth and death are expiated by a ten days observances for the Brāhmāṇas, by twelve days observances for the Kṣattriyas, by fifteen days, observances for the Vaiśyas and by one month's observances for the Śūdras and other low castes. But the impurity of the man who is conquered by women cannot by expiated by any other means except (his dead body) being burned in the funeral pyre.

न गृह्न्तीच्छा तस्य चित्र: चिष्ठतर्पिण्।

न गृह्न्तेव देशंश तस्य पुष्पजलादिकम् ॥ 79 ॥

किं वा जानेन तपसा जपहीमप्रपुर्जनैः ।

किं विद्याच च यशसा कृशिभिर्यं मनो हतम् ॥ 80 ॥

The Pitjs never accept willingly the pindas and offerings of water (Tarpanas) offered by the women-conquered men. So much so that the Devas even hesitate to accept flowers, water, etc., offered by them on their names.

विद्याभभावज्ञानार्थ मता तं च परीक्षितः ।

कृत्वा परीक्षां कान्तस्य वृणोति कामिनी वरम् ॥ 8 1 ॥

वराय गुणहीनाय वृद्धायाजनिते तथा ।

दरित्राय च मुख्याय रोगिणे कृत्तिस्ताय च ॥ 8 2 ॥

Those whose hearts are entirely subdued by men, do not acquire any fruits from their knowledge, Tapasyā, Japam, five sacrifices, worship, learning and fame. I tested you to ascertain your strength in learning. It is highly advisable to choose one's husband by examining his merits and defects.

अत्पताकोपयुक्ताय वास्त्वंतदुर्मुखाय च ।

पंगहे चांगहीनाय चांधाय वधीराय च ॥ 83 ॥

जडाय चैव मुकाय कर्तीबतुल्याय पाधिये ।

ब्रहात्यां लभेस्तोषि यस्कन्यां प्रदाति यः ॥ 84 ॥

गतांतय गृणिणे चैव यूने च विदुषेपि च ।

साधवे च सुतां दत्त्वा दशयकफलं लभेत् ॥ 85 ॥

यः कन्याणलं कृत्वा कांतीय विहिकम्य ।

विक्रेता धानलोघेन कुम्भीपातं स गच्छति ॥ 86 ॥

Sin equivalent to the murder of a Brāhmīn is committed if one give in marriage one's daughter to one void of all qualifications, to an ole man, to one who is ignorant, to a poor, illiterate, diseased, ugly, very angry, very lame, devoid of limbs, deaf, dumb, inanimate like, and who is impotent. If one gives in marriage a daughter to a young man of good character, learned, well qualified and of a peaceful temper, one acquires the fruits of performing ten horse sacrifices. If one nourishes a daughter and sells her out of greed for money, one falls to the Kumbhipāka bell.

कन्यामुझे पुरीर्ष च तत प्रश्रति पातकी ।

कृमिभिर्दिगतः काकैयांविद्रश्रादुर्दुरि ॥ 87 ॥

तद्ते व्याधिरंसुतः क सणेजन्म निश्रितम् ।

विक्रीणाति मांसभारं वह्वलेव दिवानिजग् ॥ 88 ॥

इन्वेयपुक्ला तुलसी विरात्म तपोनिधे ।

That sinner drinks the urine and eats the excrements of that daughter, remaining in that hell. For a period equal to the fourteen Indra's life-periods they are bitten by worms and crows. At the expiry of this period, they will have to be born in this world of men as diseased persons. In their human births they will have to earn their livelihood by selling flesh and carrying flesh."

ब्रहोावच

किं कारोषि शुक्रचुड संवादमनया सह ॥ 89 ॥

गाधर्शन विवाहेन तं चास्या ग्रहणं कृम् ।

पुस्तेष्वसि रत्नं तं क्षीषु रत्ने स्वितं मी ॥ 90 ॥

Thus saying, when Tulasi stopped, Brahma appeared on the scene and addressed Śaṅkhacūda: O Śaṅkhacūda! Why are you spending uselessly

Book IX Chapter XIX

your time: in vain talks with Tulasi? Marry her soon by the Gāndharva method. As you are a gem amongst males, so She is a gem amongst females.

विद्यायाव विदधेन संगमो गुणावम्यन्ते ।

निविंधीभुसुं राजकी वा त्यजति दुर्वभम् ॥ 9 1 ॥

योप्रियोभुसुखत्यागी स पशुनांन संशयः ।

कि परीक्षसि त्वं कांतमीघुंगे गुणिनं सहि ॥ 9 2 ॥

देवानामसुराणां च दानवानां विमर्दकम् ।

It is a very happy union between a humorous lover and a humorous beloved. O King! Who despises the great happiness when it is at one's hand! He who forsakes the pleasure is worse than a beast in this world. O Tulasī! And what for are you testing the nobly qualified person who is the tormentor of the Devas, Asuras and Dānavas.

यथा लक्ष्मीश लक्ष्मीश यवा कृष्णे च राधिका ॥ 9 3 ॥

यथा मयि च साविजी घवानी च भवे यथा ।

यथा धरा वगहे च दक्षिणा च यद्धस्थे ॥ 94 ॥

यावोउरेनसूया च दमवंती यथा नले ।

रौहिणी च यथा चंडे यथा कामे रात्र: सती ॥ 95 ॥

यावादिवित: क्ययपे च वसिष्ठेज्ञंधती सती ।

यावाङ्ह्या गौतने च देववृतिंश कदौ ॥ 96 ॥

यथा वृह्यस्ती तात्र शतरूपा मनी यथा ।

यथा च दक्षिणा यजे यथा स्वाहा हुताशने ॥ 97 ॥

यथा शपी महैरे च यथा पृष्टिरोगेश ।

देवसेना यथा स्कन्दे धर्मे भूतिंयां सती ॥ 98 ॥

सौभाग्या सुप्रिया त्वं च रोखचुँ तथा भव ।

अनेन सार्थ सुचितं सुदैरा च सुदैरि ॥ 99 ॥

O Child! As Laksmī Devi is of Nārāyaṇa, as Rādhikā is of Krṣṇa; as is My Śāvitrī, as Bhava's is Bhavānī, as Boar's is Earth, as Yajñā's is Dakṣinā, Atri's Anasūyā, Gautama's Ahalyā, Moon's Rohinī, Brhaṣpati's Tārā, Manu's Śatarūpā, Kandarpa's Rati, Kaśyapa's Aditi, Vasisṭha's Arundhatī, Karddama's Devahūti, Fire's Svāhā, Indra's Śacī, Gangeśa's Puṣti, Skanda's Devasenā, and Dharma's Mūrti, so let you be the dear wife of Śankhacūḍa. Let you remain with Śankhacūḍa, beautiful as he is, for a long time, and enjoy with him in various places as you like.

स्वाने स्थाने विहारं च ययेच्छं कुक संतन्ति ।

पश्रात्राण्यसि गोलोकै श्रीकृष्णं पुनरेव च ।

चतुरुर्षत च वैकुंटे शंखचुरुं मृते सति ॥ १०० ॥

श्रिति श्रीमहैर्षीभागवते महापुराणे

नवमस्कन्देप्रादशीरध्वाया: 11 18 11

When Śaṅkhacūḍa will quite his mortal frame, you would go to Goloka and enjoy easily with the two-armed Śrī Krṣṇa, and in Vaikunṭha with the four-armed Krṣṇa and with great gladness."

Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the union of Saṅkhacūḍa with Tulasi in the Mahāpurāṇaṃ Śrimaddevirbhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XIX

CHAPTER XIX

On the Going of the Devas to Vaikuntha after Tulasi's Marriage with Śaṅkhacūḍa

नारद उवाच

विविधमिदमाख्यानं भवता समुदाहतम् ।

शुनेन वेने मे तुरिन्दनं कदापि हि जायते ॥ १ ॥

ततः परं तु यज्जातं तत्वं वद महामते ।

Nārada said: O Bhagavan! Wonderful is the story that has been now recited by you. My ears are not satisfied. So tell me what happened afterwards.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

इत्येवमाणिरं दन्त्वा स्वालयंं च ययौ विधिः: ॥ 2 ॥

गान्धर्वेण विवाहेन जगृहे तां च दानवः ।

स्वर्गे दुंदुपिवाहं च पुष्पवृटिवंभूव ह ॥ 3 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! The Creator Brahmā, blessing them, departed to His own abode. The Dānava married Tulasi under the Gandharva method. The celestial drums sounded and the flowers were showed. In the beautiful lovely house the Dānaverdra, remained in perfect enjoyment.

स तेभे रामवा साई वासोगोईे मनोरोमे ।

मृच्छीं सा प्राप्त तुलसी नवसंगमसंगता ॥ ४ ॥

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

निम्नाने निर्जैल साध्यी संभोगसुखसागरे ।

चतु: ब्रहिकलामांन चतु: ब्रहिकथे मुख्यम् ॥ 5 ॥

Tulasī, too, being busy with fresh intercourses, became almost mad after them. The chaste Tulasī and Śaṅkhacūda both became deeply immersed in the ocean of bliss in their sexual union and began to enjoy sixty-four sorts of amorous sports.

कामगाशे यत्रिकस्तं रसिकानां यथेधित्यम् ।

अंगघृतवंगसंउल्यपूर्वकं क्षीमनोहरम् ॥ 6 ॥

तत्सर्वे सरयुक्तं चकारा रसिकेक्षरः ।

अंतिति सप्देशेचे च सर्वेन्तुविवर्षिते ॥ 7 ॥

In the Śāstras on love affairs, all the connections of limbs with limbs that are described, as the lover and the loved desire, they both enjoyed those with perfect freedom and pleasure. The place was solitary; to add to it, the scenery was grand and lovely; so nothing remained untasted of the several tastes of amorous pleasures.

पुष्पचन्दितनघे च पुष्पचन्दवायुना ।

पुष्पोद्याने नदीतीरे पुष्पचन्दनचर्धिते ॥ 8 ॥

गृहीत्वा रसिको रासे पुष्पचन्दनचर्धितम् ।

भूषितो भूषणेत्रे रत्नभूषणभूषिताम् ॥ 9 ॥

सुरते विरतिनंसित तयोः सुरतिबिजयोः ।

On the banks of the river, in flower-gardens, they slept on the flower-beds smeared with sandal-paste, and enjoyed the amorous pleasures. Both were adorned with jewel ornaments; both were skilled in amorous practices; so no one desisted.

जहार मानसे भर्तुलैलया लीलया सती ॥ 10 ॥

चेलनां रसिकावाश्र जहार रसभाविति ।

वक्षसईचंत राजस्तिलकं विजहार सा ॥ 11 ॥

The chaste Tulasi out of her nimbleness due to young age, easily stole into the heart of her husband. Śaṅkhacūḍa, too, a great expert in knowing other's amorous sentiments, attracted with heart of Tulasi.

जहार स च तस्याक्ष सिंसूरं विदुपत्रकम् ।

स तद्वक्षस्युरोचे च नखरेखां ददौ मुदा ॥ 12 ॥

सा ददौ ततुषपार्थे कर्णभूषणलक्षणम् ।

राजा तदोषुरुके ददौ रदनंदर्शनम् ॥ 13 ॥

Tulasi obliterated the sandal marks from the breast of the King and the sign of tilak from his nose. The King also wiped away the dot of Sindūra and Alakā (vermillion) marks from Tulasi's forehead and put marks of nails on her round plump breasts.

ततूरांडपुगले सा च प्रदृती तच्छतुर्णम् ।

आल्लानं चुच्यन्तं च जंधातिवर्दनं तथा ॥ 14 ॥

एवं परस्यं मौड़ां चक्रानुस्ती विजानतो ।

सुतेरे विलते तौ च समुत्थाय परस्यम् ॥ 15 ॥

सुवेयं चक्रानुस्ततय यद्याननसि वांशितम् ।

Tulasi also hurt the King's left side by her bracelets. Then the King bit the lips of Tulasi. Thus each one embraced the other, kissed each other and each one began to champoo the thighs, legs, etc. When both of them thus spent their time in amorous sports, they got up and began to dress themselves as they desired.

चंद्रंः कुंकुमारकैः सा तस्य तिलकं ददो ॥ १ ६ ॥

सर्विग मुन्दरे रमे चकार चानुलेयनम् ।

सुबासं चैव तांतुतं वर्हिजुके च वासमी ॥ १ ७ ॥

पारिज्ञातस्य कुर्मुं जरात्रोहरं परम् ।

अमूत्यरत्निनियांणंगुलीयकमुतनम् ॥ १ ८ ॥

सुंदरं च मणिर्वरं त्रिषु लोकेषु उतृर्णम् ।

दासी तत्वाहिमदेवं समुच्चायं पुनः पुनः ॥ १९ ॥

Tulasi smeared Śaṅkhacūḍa's nose with red sandal-paste mixed with Kumkum (saffron), smeared his body with sweet-scented sandal-paste, offered sweet-scented betels in his mouth, mad him put on celestial garments (fireproof; brought from Fire) put unto his neck the wonderful garland of Pārijāta flowers, destructive of disease and old age, invaluable jewel rings on his hand, and offering him excellent gems, rare in the three worlds, said: "O Lord! I am your maidservant" and uttering this repeatedly bowed down to the feet of her husband with devotion.

नानाय परशा भक्ल्या स्वामिनं गुणाशीलनम् ।

ससिता तन्मुखाधोयं लोचनाधयां पुनः पुनः ॥ 20 ॥

निमेभरहिताध्यां चाययप्यत्कामसुद्वम् ।

Book IX Chapter XIX

<table><tr><td>स च तां च समाकृष्य चकार वक्षसि प्रियाम् ॥ 21 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>सीमनां वाससाछछं दर्शगं मुखधकजम् ।</td></tr><tr><td>चुच्यक कठिने गंडे विवोष्टी पुनरेव च ॥ 22 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>ददी तन्ये वक्षतूमां वक्षगादाहतं च यत् ।</td></tr><tr><td>तदाहतां रत्नमालां श्रिषु लोकेषु दुलैभाम् ॥ 23 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>ददी मंत्रीत्युम् च सहायाम आहतं च यत् ।</td></tr><tr><td>केन्यरूपம் छायाया रोहिण्याश्रेय कुण्डलम् ॥ 24 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>अंगुलीयकल्पाति रत्नाश्र कर्णपाणम् ।</td></tr><tr><td>गजूं च रचिर्च विंत्रं यहर्ति विश्वकर्भण ॥ 25 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>विविचयपत्रक्रशेणी शय्चां चापि सुतुर्वीभम् ।</td></tr><tr><td>भूषणानि च दत्ता च भूपो होहां चकार है ॥ 26 ॥</td></tr></table>

She then got up and with smiling countenance began to look on his face with a steadfast gaze. The king Śankhacūda then attracted his dear Tulasi to his breast and took off the veil fully from her face and began to look on that, next moments he kissed on her cheek and lips and gave her a pair of garments brought from the Varuna's house, a necklace of jewels, hard to get in the three worlds, the tinklets of Svāhā, th wife of Agni, the Keyūra (armlets) of the Sun's wife Chāyā, the two earrings of Rohinī, the wife of the Moon, the finger rings of Rati, the wife of Kāmadeva, and the wonderfully beautiful conch, given by Viśva Karmā, excellent bedding studded with pearls and jewels and various ornaments; and when he gave her all these things, he smiled.

निर्मेमे कवरीभारे तस्या मांगल्यपूर्णण ।

सुचित्र पत्रक नंडयंडलै3स्या: सयं तथा ॥ 27 ॥

चंत्रलेखाधिक्रियर्तेच्चन्देन सुगाधित्रा ।

परितं परितक्षित्रैः सार्थं कुकुमविक्रपिं: ॥ 28 ॥

ज्वलतद्वीपाकारं च सिंदूरतिलकं ददी ।

तत्वादयव्यगुरो स्थलपत्यविरिभिंदि ॥ 29 ॥

चित्रालक्कारां च नख्रेषु ददी मुदा ।

स्ववक्षसि मुळ्न्यैस्य सरागं चरणांबुजम् ॥ 30 ॥

The king then put garlands on Tulasi's braid of hair, nicely variegated Alakās on her cheek, three crescent lines of sweet-scented sandal paste within the Alakās, dots of saffron all around that, the brilliant Sindūra mark looking like a flame, and

red Alkā on the feet and toes; he then placed feet on his breast and uttered repeatedly:

हे देवि तब दासोउदमित्युच्चार्य पुंन: पुनः ।

रतभूषितहसेन तां च कुला स्वक्षसि । 31 । ॥

तपोवर्ष परिस्त्य सरा स्थानांतरं ययो ।

मलये देविनलये शैले शैले तपोवर्धे ॥ 32 ॥

स्थाने स्थाने3तिरये च पूर्णयोहाने च निजिन ।

कन्दे कन्दे सिंधुतिंरे चैवातिसुन्दो ॥ 33 ॥

पुष्पभूजनदीतीर नीरातमानोहरे ।

पुलिने पुलिने निचे नचां नचां नदे नदे ॥ 34 ॥

मधी मधुकारणां च मधुराव्यनिताविले ।

विस्यंदने सुरसने नन्दने गन्यमादने ॥ 35 ॥

"I am your servant" and then held her on his breast. They then left the hermitage, in that state and began to travel in various places. In the Malaya mountain, in mountains after mountains, in solitary flower gardens, in the mountain caves, in beautiful sea-beaches, on the banks of the Puspabhadrā river, cool with watery breeze, in various rivers and riversides, in Vispandana forest with sweet songs of the birds of the vernal season.

देवेहोराने नदने च चित्रचंदनकामने ।

चंपकानां केतकीनां माध्यवीनां वरे ने ॥ 36 ॥

कैदानां मालतीनां च कुमुदोभोजकानने ।

कल्पवृक्षे कल्पवृक्षे पारिजातवने वने ॥ 37 ॥

They then went from Vispandana forest of the Surasana forest, from the Surasana, forest to the Nandana forest, from the Nandana forest to the nice Candana forests, from Candana forest to Campaka, Ketaki; Mâdhavi Kunda, Mâlati, and Kumuda and lotus forests; thence they went to the forest of desire gratifying trees (Kalpavrksa forest,) and Pârijâta trees.

निर्जनै कांचेन स्थाने ध्यये कांचनपर्वे ।

कांचीवने किंजलके कंचुके कांचनाकरे ॥ 38 ॥

पुष्यचन्दतलये पुंकाकिलकलशुत ।

पुष्यचन्दसयुक्तः पुष्यचन्दवायुगा ॥ 39 ॥

कामुक्यव कामुकः कामालसे रेगे रामया सह ।

They then went to the solitary place Kāñcana, thence to the Kāncī (forest) they then went to the

Śrinaddevibhāgavatam

Kījjalaka forest, thence to the Kāñcaṇākar (the gold mine), thence to Kāñcuka and various other forests echoed with the sweet sounds of cuckoos. There, on beds strewn with flowers and scented with sandal-paste they both enjoyed each other to their hearts content and with great pleasure.

न हि रुणतो दानवैद्रसूर्पित नैव जगाम सा ॥ 40 ॥

हविवा कृष्णवस्थैव ववुधे मदानसतः ।

But none of them, whether Śaṅkhacūḍa or Tulasī, got quenched with their thirst. Rather their passions were inflame! like the fire on which clarified butter is poured (in sacrifices).

तया सह समागत स्वासभं दानवस्ततः ॥ 41 ॥

रम्यं क्रीडाल्यं गत्वा विजहार पुनः पुनः ।

एवं स बुधुजे राज्यं शबुचूईः प्रतपावान् ॥ 42 ॥

एकमवन्तरं पूर्ण राजराजेश्वरो महान् ।

देवातामसुगाणां च दानवानां च संतन्तु ॥ 43 ॥

गधर्वाणि क्रिसरणारी राक्षसनां च शानितः ।

हताधिकारा देवाधुरिति चिक्षुका यथा ॥ 44 ॥

The King of the Dānavas, then, brought Tulasi to his own kingdom and, there, in his own beautiful garden house, he incessantly enjoyed her. Thus the powerful king of the Dānavas passed away one Manvantara in the enjoyment of his kingdom. He spread his sway over the Devatās, Asuras, Dānavas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, and Rāksasas. The Devas, dispossessed of their realms, wandered everywhere like beggars.

ते संर्वेतिविचरणाध्य प्रजमुर्षेधण: सभम् ।

युत्तांत कवधामासु रुनछुय भुगे युयु: ॥ 4 5 ॥

तदा बहा सुरैः सार्थ जागम शंकारलायम् ।

सर्वेगं कवधामास विधाता चंत्रोज्यम् ॥ 46 ॥

At last they united in a body and went to the Brahma's assembly and there they began to cry and then related the whole history how the Dānava Śankhacūda oppressed them. Hearing all this, Brahma took them to Śaṅkara and informed Him of the whole history of the case.

बढ़ा शिक्ष श्रीः सार्धे वैकुंदे च जगाम है ।

दुलैभं परमं धाम जराम्यतुहरं परम् ॥ 47 ॥

संप्राप च वरं द्वारमाङ्गमाणं हरेरों ।

ददर्श द्वारपालांश रत्नसिंहासनसिंहयतान् ॥ 48 ॥

When Mahādeva heard all this, He took them all to the highest place, Vaikuntha devoid of old age and death. Going towards the first entrance of Nārāyana's, abode, they saw the gate-keepers watching the gate, taking their seats on jewel thrones.

गोभितानीतावर्येक्ष रत्नभूषितान् ।

समितान्सेरावक्रासायान्यघनेत्रान्मोहान् ॥ 49 ॥

गंखचक्रमादापवधारांश्रैव चतुर्भज्ञान् ।

वनमालात्वितान्सर्वेअथाममुद्रविश्रहान् ॥ 50 ॥

They all looked brilliant, clothed with the yellow garments, adorned with jewel ornaments, garlanded with forest flowers, all of Śyāma Sundara (dark blue, very beautiful) bodies. They were fourarmed, holding on their hands, conch, mace, discus and lotus; sweet smile was on their faces and eyes beautiful like lotus leaves.

बहा तान्बथायाम वृत्तांत गमनार्थकम् ।

ते5नुर्जा च ददुस्तम्पे प्रविशेष तद्धान्या ॥ 51 ॥

एवं घोडण झाराणि निरीक्ष्य कामलोद्यः ।

दैदेः सार्थ तानतील प्रविशेष हरेः सभाम् ॥ 52 ॥

On Brahāmā asking them for entrance to the assembly, they nodded their assent. He, then, accompanied by the Devas, passed one by one, sixteen gates and at last came before Nārāyaṇa.

देवर्विधि: परितृता पार्थेड्ध चतुर्भर्जे: ।

नारायणस्वरूपेधे सर्वे: कौतुरुभ्यृषिति: ॥ 53 ॥

नवैदुर्मंडलाकारं चतुरतां मनोहराम ।

On reaching there. He saw that the assembly was completely filled with Devarşis, and four-armed Nārāyaṇalike Pārisads (attendants), decked with Kaustubha jewels. The sight of the Sabha (assembly) makes one think that the Moon has just arisen, shedding effulgent rays all round.

मणिर्द्वारनिर्माणी हीरासासुरुणीभितम् ॥ ५४ ॥

अमूल्यतल्याचितां रचितां सेवल्याय होः ।

माणिक्यमालजालभां मुक्तपर्चिक्विष्णितम् ॥ 55 ॥

Book IX Chapter XIX

मंडितां मंडलाकारे रत्नदर्पणकोदिधि: ।

विश्नेशीअत्रेखाशिमर्नानाशिवसिविशितमा। ५६ ॥

By the will of Śrī Hari, excellent diamonds, invaluable gems and necklaces of gems and jewels were placed at various places. At other places rows of pearls were shedding their splendour and brilliance like the garlands of gems and jewels. At others, the mirrors were placed in a circle; and at various other places, the endless wonderful picture lines were drawn.

पदारानोंद्रसितां स्तिरां माणियंकजैः ।

सोपानशतकैयुक्ता स्यमन्तकविरिपिंदितेः ॥ 57 ॥

पटुसूग्रधिष्युकै.शुशचन्द्रपललवेः ।

इन्द्रीललंपवर्वर्वैहिता सुमनोहारण ॥ 58 ॥

Again at other places, the jewels called Padmarāgas were artistically arranged as if the lotuses were there spreading their lustrous beauty all around. At many other places rows of steps were made of wonderful Syamantak jewels. All around the assembly, there were the excellent pillars, built of Indranīlam jewels.

तद्विन्पूर्णकृष्यानां समूहैंक्ष सम्यित्वात् ।

पारिजातग्रसुनानां मालगाजलैर्वितजितान् ॥ 59 ॥

कस्तूरीकुंकुमारकेत्: सुगाधिचन्दनुघैः ।

सुसंस्कृतां तु सर्वे वासितां नंधावगुना ॥ 60 ॥

Over those pillars, sandal leaves strung on strings from pillar to pillar, were suspended. Golden jars, all brimful with water were located at various places. All around, the garlands of Parijāta flowers were seen. The hall was decorated with sweet scented sandal trees, red like saffron and musk. Sweet scents were being emitted all round.

विद्यारीसूढानी दान्त्यालईरिवारितान् ।

सहस्योजनायमो परिपूर्ण च क्रिके: ॥ 6 1 ॥

The Vidyādharis were dancing at places. The assembly hall measured one thousand Yojanas. Countless were engaged all over on various works.

ददर्श शीहीरं बझा शंकरऊ शुरैः सह ।

वसंतं तन्मध्येशे यथेन्दुं तारकावुतम् ॥ 62 ॥

अमूल्यरत्नियर्णचित्रसिंहासने त्रियतम् ।

क्रनीटिंटं कुण्डलिंन वनमालाविष्यति ॥ 63 ॥

चन्द्रनीक्षितसर्वां क्षितं कैलिंकजम् ।

पुगते नृत्यगीतं च पश्वांतं सस्मितं मुदा ॥ 64 ॥

Brahmā, Śaṅkara, and the other Gods saw there Śrī Hari seated in the centre on an invaluable jewel throne, as a Moon looks surrounded by stars. There were the crown on His head, the earrings on His ears; garlands made of wild flowers were on his neck and His body was smeared all over with sandal paste and He was holding Kelipadma (a sort of lotus) in His hand. He was seeing with a smiling countenance, the dancing and music before Him.

गर्भार सरस्वतीताकां लक्ष्रीधृतयाद्यबुजम् ।

लक्ष्म्या प्रदर्त तांबुतं भुक्तवंत सुवासितम् ॥ 65 ॥

गंगाया पराया भक्त्या सेवितं प्रशेतचारम्: ।

सर्वेक्षा स्तूयानां च भक्तिन्यापतकर्षेः ॥ 66 ॥

He was full of peace, the Lord of Sarasvati Lakṣmī was holding gently His lotus-feet and He was chewing the sweet scented betal offered by Her. Gaṅgā also was fanning Him devotedly with a white Cāmara and the others were singing hymns to Him with their heads bent low with devotion.

एर्वसिधिष्टं तं दृष्टा परिपुरातां प्रभुम् ।

बहादाय: सुग: सर्वे प्रणय्य तुड्युस्तदा ॥ 67 ॥

पुलकाशितसर्वाग्नः साधुनेत्राश महपादा: ।

भक्ताश पश्चा भक्तवा भीता न्यात्मकंधाः ॥ 68 ॥

Brahmā and the other Gods all bowed down to Him; their bodies were all filled with Pulaka (excessive joy causing hair stand on end); tears flowed from their eyes and their voices were choked out of emotion.

कृताजिलुपुं भृत्वा विधाता जगतामपि ।

वृत्तां कंक्षयामास विलयेन हेः पूः ॥ 69 ॥

हरितद्विचनं शुत्वा सर्वतः सर्वभावयित् ।

प्रहस्योवाच ब्रहाणां रहस्यं च मनोहम् ॥ 70 ॥

The creator Brahmā, then, with clasped hands informed Him, with head bowed down, of the whole history of Śaṅkhacūḍa." Hearing this, the omniscient Hari, knowing the minds of all, smiled and spoke to Brahmā all the interesting secrets:

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

श्रीभगवानुवाव

गंखच्छस्य वृत्तां सर्वे ज्ञानाय पचत्र ।

मद्राकस्य च गोपस्य महातेजस्विनः पुरा ॥ 7 1 ॥

शृणु तत्नर्ववृत्तानिमितिहासुं पुताननम् ।

गोलोकस्यैव चरितं पापचं पुण्यकात्मम् ॥ 7 2 ॥

O Lotus born! I know all about Śaṅkhacūḍa. He was in his previous birth My great devotee, an energetic Gopa. Now I speak to you the ancient history of Goloka; hear. This story about Goloka is sidestroyang and highly meritorious.

सुदामा नाम गोष्ठ प्रापेद्वगरे मम ।

स प्राप दानवी थोर्नि राधागपालसुद्राभणत् ॥ 7 3 ॥

तत्रैकदारुभगमं स्वालयद्वासमंडलम् ।

विराजामपि नीचा च मम प्राणाधिका पता ॥ 7 4 ॥

śaṅkhacūda, in his previous birth was the Gopa Sudāmā, My chief Pārisad (attendant). He has now become a Dānava on account of the dire curse pronounced by Śri Rādhā.

सा मां विज्ञा साधि विज्ञाय किंकरीयुखात् ।

पश्रात्कृष्टा सा जगान न द्वर्शि च तत्र ताम ॥ 75 ॥

विज्ञां च नदीकर्णं मां ज्ञाला च तिरोहित्न् ।

पुर्जनांगम सा द्वृषा स्वालयं सखिधिः सह ॥ 76 ॥

One day when I went from My abode, accompanied by Virajā Gopi, to the Rāsa Manḍala, My beloved Rādhā, hearing this news from a maid servant, came up at once with Her whole host of Sakhīs wrathful, to the Rāsa Manḍalam (ball dance in Goloka) and, not being able to see Me, saw Virajā turned into a river, She thought that I had disappeared.

मां दूद्रा मन्द्रे देवी सुदामना सहितं पुरा ।

भूगं सा भरल्यामास मौनीभूतं च सुविध्यम् ॥ 77 ॥

तच्छुलाससहमानऊ सुदामा तां चुकोप है ।

स च तां भरल्यामास कोपेन मम सक्रिधे ॥ 78 ॥

So She went back to Her own abode with Her Sakhis. But when I returned to the house with Sudāmā, Rādhā rebuked Me very much. I remained silent. But Sudāmā could not bear and he rebuked Rādhā in My presence, a thing quite intolerable to Her dignity!

तच्छूला कोययुक्ता सा रकपढ़जलोचना ।

बहिक्तूं चकात्माजी संसरन्तं मम संसदि ॥ 7 9 ॥

सखीलक्षं समुतस्थी दुवरिं तेजसोल्बणम् ।

बहिक्षाकर तेतूर्ण जल्यन्ते च पुनः पुनः ॥ 80 ॥

On hearing this rebuke, Rādhā's eyes became red with anger and She immediately ordered Her Sakhīs to drive him away. Sudāmā began to tremble with fear. Immediately on Her command lakhs and lakhs of Sakhīs got up immediately and drove that not irresistible Sudāmā away. Sudāmā repeated his chafings and roarings.

सा च तत्ताऊं तासां श्रुत्वा रहा शाशण है ।

याहि है दानवीं योविंमित्येवं दाहणं वचः ॥ 81 ॥

तं गच्छते शर्षते च रूवन्तं मां ग्रणम्य च ।

वारयामास तुहा सा रुदती कृपया पुनः ॥ 82 ॥

On hearing these, She cursed him: 'You better be born in the womb of a Dānavi.' Hearing the terrible curse, Sudāmā bowed down to Me and went away crying; then Rādhā, who was all-mercy, became melted with mercy.

है वत्स तिष्ठ मा गच्छ क्व यासीति पुनः पुनः ।

सपुच्चार्य च तत्थाङ्गजगमा सा च विकल्पम् ॥ 83 ॥

गोय्यछ रुकुनु: सर्वा गोग्याशीय सुवुःखिताः ।

ते सर्वे राधिका चापि तत्स्थात्रोंधिता मया ॥ 84 ॥

And She prevented him repeatedly, not to go away. Rādhā wept and told him, 'O Child! Wait. Where are you going? No more you will have to go; return.' Thus saying She became very distressed. The Gopas and Gopiś also began to weep. I then explained to them.

आयास्यति क्षणानें कृत्वा शापस्य पालनम् ।

सुदामंस्विभ्रागच्छेयुक्वा सा च निवारिता ॥ 85 ॥

गोलोकस्य क्षणान्धि चेक मन्त्रतं भवेत् ।

पृथिव्यां जगतां धारातिरेव वचनं ध्यम् ॥ 86 ॥

In about half a moment Sudāmā will come back, fulfilling the conditions of the curse. 'O Sudāmā! Come here when the curse expires.' Then he appeased Rādhā also. Know that one moment (Kṣaṇa) in Goloka is equal to one Manvantara on earth.

Book IX Chapter XX

इत्येवं शंखपूढ़शु पुनस्तत्रेव यास्यति ।

महाबलिष्ठो योगेशः सर्वमायाशिपर: ॥ 87 ॥

मम शूलं गृहीत्वा च शीधं गच्छुु भातम् ।

शिवः करोतु सहारं मम शुलेन रक्षसः ॥ 88 ॥

The Yogi Śankhacūda, expert in Mañā and very powerful will soon return from the earth. Take this My weapon Śūla and go early to Bhārata. Śiva will slay the Dānava by this Śūlāstra.

मैव कवचं कंठे सर्वमंगलकारकम् ।

विशर्पित दानवः शश्वस्मारे विजयती तः ।। ८९ ॥।

तम्मब्बाद्भियन्ते चैव न को3पि द्विंस्तुं क्षभः ।

तद्वाचनां कारिधामि विग्रस्पोजहमेव च ॥ ९० ॥।

The Dānava holds always on his neck My auspicious Kavaca and will therefore become the conqueror of the universe. No one will he able to kill him as long as he holds the above Kavaca. So, first of all, I will go to him in the form of a Brāhmaṇa and ask from him the Kavaca.

सतीत्यहान्सितत्यन्या यत्र काले भविष्यति ।

तत्रैव काले तन्म्यूरिति दन्तो वरसत्वया ॥ 9 ।। ॥

तत्पत्याश्रोदे सौर्मेपर्यिषयाम पितश्रतम् ।

तत्बणे चैव तन्मूल्यंविषयिति न संशयः ॥ 92 ॥

पशास्ता देहुस्त्युज्य भविष्यिति मम प्रिया ।

O Creator! Thou also didst give him the boon that his death would occur when the chastity of of his wife would be destroyed. I will go and hold intercourse with his wife. Then his death will occur without fail. His wife after her death will come and become My dearest wife.

इत्युक्त्या जगतां नायो ददौ शुले हराय च ॥ ९३ ॥

शुले दत्ता ययी शीघं हरिरचन्तरे मुदा ।

भारतं च ययुद्वां ब्रह्मक्ररुपोमाः ॥ ९४ ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे नवमस्कन्ये

एकोनविशोर्यथा: 11 19 1

Thus saying, Nārāyaṇa gave over to Mahādeva the Sūlaśtra. Then He went gladly to His inner compartments. On the other hand, Brahmā and Rudra and the other Devas incarnated themselves in Bhārata.

Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter on the going of the Devas to Vaikuntha after Tulasi's

marriage with Śaṅkhacāḍa in the Mahāpurāṇaṃ

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XX

CHAPTER XX

On the War Preparations of Śaṅkhacūḍa

श्रीनारायण खाच

बहा शिवं संनियोज्य संहारे दानवस्य च ।

जगाम स्वालयं तूर्ण गयायस्यां नुसीतमाः ॥ १ ॥

चन्द्रभागवदौतीर वटमूले मनोहरे ।

तत्र तस्वी महादेवेरे देवविस्तारतेहे ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: Brahmā, then putting Śiva to the task of killing Śaṅkhacūḍa went to His own abode. The other Devas returned to their homes. Here under the beautiful Vata tree, on the banks of the river Candrabhāgā, Mahādeva pitched His big tent and encamped.

दूतं कृत्वा चित्रयंरं नान्यवैश्वरमीभितमान् ।

शीधं प्रव्याययामासे शंखदुबालितकं मुदा ॥ 3 ॥

सर्वेश्वरात्राय शीधं चयौ तऊगरं परम् ।

महैद्रनगरोत्कृष्टे कुबेरभवनाधिकम् ॥ 4 ॥

Himself, to get the victory of the Devas. He, then, sent Citaratha, the Lord of the Gandharvas, as a messenger to Śaṅkhacūda, the Lord of the Dāṇavas. By the command of Mahādeva, Citaratha went to the city of the king of Daityas, more beautiful than Indra's place and more wealthy than the mansion of Kubera.

पढ्योजनविरसीर्णे दैर्धें नटद्विगुर्ण भवेत् ।

स्वरिकाकार्यरिधिर्मिति मिति ५ १ सदधिहित् ॥ ५ १

सदधिथ: परित्वाधिश्र दुर्गामिथ: समवित्यम् ।

जललद्विनिधेः शगवकत्नित्वन तकनोटिधः ॥ ६ ॥

The city was five yojanas wide and twice as much in length. It was built of crystals of pearls and jewels. There were roadways on all sides. There were seven trenches, hard to be crossed, one

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

after another, encircling the city. The city was built of countless rubies and gems, brilliant like flames.

पुक्ते च वीधीशतकैमणिवेदित्वितिः ।

पत्रतो वणिजां सौदीनानवस्तुविराजितः ॥ 7 ॥

सिंतुरकामपिभिपिंमितैक्षि विवितिः ।

There were hundreds of roadways and markets and stalls, in the wonderful Vedais (raised platforms) built of jewels. All around were splendid palacial buildings of traders and merchantmen, filled with various articles

भूर्विते भूधितैद्वेधाग्रभैः शतकोटिथः ॥ 8 ॥

गत्वा ददर्श तनमध्ये शंखदृष्ठालयं परम् ।

अंतवि बलयाकारं यथा पुर्णेनुमण्डलम् ॥ 9 ॥

There were hundreds and kotis of beautiful buildings, adorned with various ornaments and built of variegated red stones looking like Sindūras. Thus he went on and saw, in the middle, the building of Śankhacūda, circular like the lunar sphere.

ज्वलद्निशिखात्भिः परिखाश्रुस्तिषः ।

तदुर्गमें च श्रुग्गामान्येचां सुगमं सुखम् ॥ 10 ॥

अत्यद्वैयोगनस्यिभियोगशूक्रविराजितम् ।

राजितं द्वादशाद्वैतरूपालमसन्तितम् ॥ 11 ॥

Four ditches all filled with fiery flames, encircled one after another, his house. So the enemies could not in any way cross them; but the friend could easily go there. On the top were seen turrets, built of jewels, rising high to the heavens.

The gate-keepers were watching the twelve gates.

पर्णीन्सारनिमणीः शीर्षितं लक्ष्मान्दितः ।

शोधितं तलसोपानै रलस्तम्भविराजितम् ॥ 12 ॥

तद्धुधा पुवद्वोत्रीय वरं हारं ददर्श सः ।

हारे नियुक्ते पुरुषं शूलहस्तं च ससितम् ॥ 13 ॥

तिङ्ठतं चिंगलाशं च तापवर्णे भयंकर्म ।

कवयामास वृत्तानं जागम तद्तुज्ञा ॥ 14 ॥

In the centre were situated lakhs and lakhs of excellent jewel built houses. In every room there were jewelled steps and staircases and the pillars were all built of gems, and jewels, and pearls. Puspadanta (Citraratha) saw all this and then went

to the first gate and saw one terrible person, copper coloured, with tawny eyes, sitting with a trident in his hand and with a smiling countenance. He told he had come as a messenger and got his entrance.

अतिक्रम्य च तद्धारं जगगामध्यन्तरं पुः ।

न कोर्पि स्थतित श्रुत्वा दृतल्वं रणस्य च ॥ 15 ॥

गत्वा सोर्ध्यन्तरांद्रं ह्रायाल्युबाच ह ।

रण्यस्य सर्ववृत्तान विज्ञापयत माधिचम् ॥ 16 ॥

Thus Citraratha went one after another to all the entries, not being prohibited at all though he told that he had come as a messenger on war service. The Gandhara reached one after another, the last door and said: O Door keeper! Go quickly and inform the Lord of the Dānavas all about the impending war.

स च तं कथयित्वा च दूतो गंगुमवाच ह ।

स गला संखचूई ते ददर्गं सुमनोहरम् ॥ 17 ॥

राजपबलमध्यस्यं स्वर्गसिंहासने स्थितम् ।

मणी-त्रयितं दिव्यं रत्नवर्षसाम्वित्वम् ॥ 18 ॥

रत्नक्रिमपुष्येध प्रशस्तः शोधितं सदा ।

भूतेन मरतकन्यन्तं स्वर्णच्छत्रं मनोहम् ॥ 19 ॥

When the messenger had spoken thus, the gatekeeper allowed him to go inside. Going inside, the Gandhara saw Śaṅkhacūda, of an excellent form, seated in the middle of the royal assembly, on a golden throne. One servant was holding on the king's head an umbrella, decked with divine excellent gems, the inner rod of the umbrella being made up of jewels, and decorated with expanded artificial flowers made of gems.

सेवितं पार्थदगणं रूचितः: श्वेतचापः ।

सुवेषे सुन्दरं रथं रत्नभूषणभूषितम् ॥ 20 ॥

माल्येन लेपनं सुगमं सुवस्वं द्वधतं मुने ।

दानवेदैः परिवृतं सुवेषेश्र त्रिकोदिधिः ॥ 21 ॥

गतकोटिधिन-यैश्छ भ्रमद्रत्स्वापिधिः ।

The attendants were fanning him with beautiful white cāmaras; he was nicely dressed, beautiful and lovely and adorned with jewel ornaments. He was nicely garlanded, and wore fine celestial garments. Three Koti Dānavas were surrounding

Book IX Chapter XX

him; and seven Koti Dānavas, all armed, were walking to and fro.

एवंभृतं च तं द्रुहा पुष्पदन्तः सविसम्यः ॥ 2 2 1 ॥

उवाच स च वृत्तातं यदुक्ते शंकरेण च ।

पुष्पदन्त उवाच

राजेन्द्र शिवक्योर्डे पुष्पदन्ताधिधाः प्रभो ॥ 2 3 ॥

तदुक्ते शंकरेणैव तद्वबीयि निशायम ।

Puspadanta was thunderstruck when he saw thus the Dānava, and he addressed him thus: "O King! I am a servant of Śiva; My name is Puspadanta; hear what Śiva has commanded me to tell you.

राज्यं देहि च देवानामधिकारं च संगतम् ॥ 24 ॥

देवाश्र सगरायमात्रा देवेशं श्रीहिं परम् ।

हरिदैत्वास्य शूलं च तेन प्रस्थापितः शिवः ॥ 25 ॥

पुष्पभ्रतदार्तीति वटमूले जिलोचनः ।

'You better now give back, to the Devas, the rights that they had before'. The Devas went to Śri Hari and had taken His refuge. Śri Hari gave over to Śiva one Śāla weapon and asked the Devas to depart. At present, the three eye' Vedva is residing under the shade of a Vāta tree in the banks of the Puspabhadrā river.

विषयं देहि तेषां च युद्धं वा कुक निश्रितम् ॥ 26 ॥

गत्या वक्ष्यायि किं संभूभ्य तद्ध मामयि ।

दूतस्य वचनं शूला संखुदूः प्रस्थस च ॥ 27 ॥

He told me to speak this to you, 'Either give over to the Devas their rights, or fight with me.' Please reply and I will speak to Him accordingly.' Śankhacūḍa, hearing the messenger's words laughed and said:

प्रभातेड़ं गायिषामी तवे च गच्छेलुवाच ह ।

स गतवोबाच तं तृर्णं वदमूलस्थमीधारम ॥ 2 8 ॥

गंखचुङ्य वचनं तदीयं तन्युखोदितम् ।

एतस्मिन्तोरं रकंद आजागम शिवातिकम् । 29 ॥

"Tomorrow morning I will start, ready for war. Better go away to-day." The messenger went back to Śiva and replied to Him accordingly. In the meantime the following personages joined Śiva and

remained seated on excellent aerial cars, built of jewels and gems. The following were the persons:

वीरभद्रऊ नंदी च महाकालः सुभद्रकः ।

विशालावक्षत शाणाक्ष त्रिविलाक्षे चिकपनः ॥ 30 ॥

विस्तूपो विकृतिश्रेय मणिपमघ्रढ़ शबकलः ।

कपिलाक्षो दीर्घदेंष्टी विक्टसताप्रकोनः ॥ 31 ॥

कालकंकी वलीभद्रः कालविजूः कुटीबरः ।

बलोमन्तो राणसलोगो दुर्भयो गुर्भसला ॥ 32 ॥

अष्टी च भैवा रौत्रा रुद्रश्रीकादण स्मृतः ।

वसवोउषी व सवश्र आदिवा द्वारूप स्मृतः ॥ 33 ॥

हुतातगस्त चन्द्रश विश्वकर्माधिश्नो च तौ ।

कुबेरष्य यमधुेव जयन्तो नलकुबरः ॥ 34 ॥

वायुस्थ करणश्रेव बुधध मंगलस्णा ।

धर्मंशु शनिरीगानः कामदेवश धरीर्वान् ॥ 35 ॥

Skanda, Virabhadra, Nandī, Mahākāla, Subhadraka, Visālakṣa, Bāṇa, Pīngalākṣa, Vikampana, Virūpa, Vikrtī, Manibhadra, Baṣkāla, Kapilāksa, Dirgha Danṣṭra, Vikata, Tāmralocana, Kālakāntha, Balībhadra, Kārajīva, Kuṭicara, Balonmatta, Ranaślagho, Durjaya, Durgama, (these eight Bhairavas), eleven Rudras, eight Vasus, Indra, the twelve Ādityas, fire, moon, Viśvakarmā, the two Aśvins, Kubera, Yama, Jayanta, Nala Kūbara, Vāyu, Varuna, Budha, Maṅgala, Dharma, Śanī, Iśāna, the powerful Kāmadeva.

उद्रद्धु चोर्यचंडा कोटरा केटभी तथा ।

स्वयं चार्षुपुना देही घड़काली भयंकर्ती ॥ 36 ॥

रन्तेन्द्रारानिर्माणियानोपार्थि संस्थिता ।

रत्कवस्त्रपीधाना रत्कामाल्यानुपेलना ॥ 37 ॥

Ugradanṣtrā, Kotarā, Kaitabhi, and the eight armed terrible Devī Bhadrakālī. Kālī wore the bloody red clothings and She smeared red sandal paste all over Her body.

नृत्यन्ती च हर्मती च गायन्ती सुस्वरं मुता ।

अभयं द्वाति भक्तेष्योअभयं सा च भयं रिपुम् ॥ 38 ॥

विप्रति विकटां जिहां सुलोलां योज्ञानयाम् ।

गंखचक्रावादपवाङ्ज्ञन्यिनु:शरान् ॥ 39 ॥

Dancing, laughing; singing songs in tune, very jolly, She bids He devotees discard all fear, and terrifies the enemies. Her lip is terrible, lolling, and

extends to one Yojana. On Her eight arms She holds conch, disc, lotus, axe, skin, bow and arrows.

खर्यं वर्तुलाकारं गर्भीरं योजानयतम् ।

श्रिरूलं गानत्मलिणी शफित्र च योजानयतम् ॥ 40 ॥

मुईतं मुसलं वज़ं खेटं फतकमुज्जलम् ।

वैधावासं वाकणस्तं वाह्वें नागपाशकम् ॥ 41 ॥

नारायणासं गान्यर्ने बढ़ासं गाफडं तथा ।

पर्जन्यासं पाणुपतं जृष्यपाणतं च पार्वतम् ॥ 42 ॥

माहेशुगतरं वायवं देईं संमोहनं तथा ।

अवधधमकक्षे दिवध दिवधास्थतकं पन् ॥ 43 ॥

She was holding in Her hands, the bowl shaped human skull; that was very deep and one Yojana wide. Her trident reached up to the Heavens; Her weapon called Śakti (dart) extended to one Yojana. Besides there were Mudgara (mace), Musala (club), Vajra (thunderbolt), Kheta, (club), brilliant Phalaka (shield), the Vaiṣṇava weapon, the Varuna weapon, the Āgneyāstra (the fire weapon), Nāgapaśa (the noose of serpents), the Nārāyaṇāstra, the Gandharva's weapons, the Brahma's weapons, the Gadudāstram, the Pārjanayāstram, the Pāśupatāstram the Jrmbhanāstram the Pārvatāstram, the Maheśvarāstram, the Vāyyavāstram, and the Sanmohanam rod and various other infallible divine weapons. Besides hundreds of other divine weapons were with Her.

आगत्य तत्र तस्थी च योगिनां जिकोटिधि: ।

सार्य च डाकिनीनां च विकटानां जिकोटिधि: ॥ 44 ॥

भूतप्रेणिणाश्रु कृष्णांडा ब्रह्मास्सा: ।

वेताला राक्षसाश्रे वक्षाश्रे तु किजरा: ॥ 45 ॥

Three Kotis of Yoginis and three Kotis and a half of terrible Dākinis were attending Bhadrakālī. Bhūtas, (demons) Pretas, Piśācas, Kuṣmāṇḍas, Brahma Rāksasas, Rāksasas, Vetālas, Yakṣas and Kinnaras also were there in countless numbers. At this time Kārtikeya came there and bowed down to his father Mahādeva.

ताधिष्ठीव सह स्कंदः प्राणाय चन्द्रगेश्वम् ।

पितुः पार्थे सहायार्थं समुवास तद्वात्रया ॥ 46 ॥

अथ दूते गते तत्र गंखच्छः प्रतपावन् ।

उवाच तुलसी वाता गत्वास्थन्तरोच च ॥ 47 ॥

He asked him to take his seat on His left side and asked him to help. Then the army remained there in military array. On the other hand, when Śiva's messenger departed, Śaṅkhacūḍa went to the zenana and informed Tulasi of the news of an impending war.

रणावाती च सा श्रुत्वा शुण्ककंठीतालुका ।

उवाच मुप्रं साध्यी हद्येन विवृतया ॥ 48 ॥

तुल्यवाच

हे प्राणबंधा हे नाव तिक्त मे वक्षसि क्षणम् ।

हे प्राणाधिष्यतृव स्थ मे जीवितं क्षणम् ॥ 49 ॥

No sooner She heard than her throat and lips and palate became dried. She then with a sorrowful heart spoke in sweet words: "O my Lord! O my Friend! O the Ruler of My life! Wait for a moment and take your seat on My heart.

भूष्व जन समासाठा यन्मे वोँतिज् ।

पश्यामि त्वा क्षणं किं चिल्लोचनाथचं च सादार्। ५० ॥

आन्तोलयेते प्राणा मे मनो दध्यं च सेतन्तु ।

दुःख्नछा मया दृष्ण्याढ्रे वरमे निरिण ॥ ५१ ॥

Instil life in Me for a moment. Satisfy My desire of human birth. Let me behold you fully so that my eyes be satisfied. My breath is now very agitated. I saw by the end of the night one bad dream. Therefore I feel an internal burning.

तुलसीवचनं शुवा भुक्वा पीवा तीवा नुपेशः ।

उवाच वचनं प्राजो हितं सत्यं यथोचितम् ॥ 52 ॥

Thus at the words of Tulasī, the king Śaṅkhacūda finished his meals and began to address her, in good and true words, beneficent to her:

शकुष्ठ उवाच

कालेन योजितं सर्वे कर्म भोगनिवन्यम् ।

गुर्भ हरेः सुखं दुःखं भयं शोकश्र मतलम् ॥ 53 ॥

“O My Lady! It is Kāla (the time) that brings out these various combinations by which the Karmic fruit is enjoyed; it is Kāla that awards auspicious and inauspicious things; this Kāla is the

Book IX Chapter XX

Sole Master to impart pain, fear, and good and bad things. Kāla is the Sole Master to impart pain, fear, and good and bad things.

काले भवती वृक्षा स्कंध्वंतँक कल्यानः काल।

क्रमेण युष्ववंतँक फलवंतँक कालतः ॥ 5४ ॥

तेषां फलानि पख्वानि प्रभवंत्येव कालतः ।

ते सर्व फलिताः काले पात वांति च कालाः ॥ 5 5 ॥

Trees grow up in time; their branches, etc., come out in time; flowers appear in time and fruits come out in time. Fruits are ripened in time and after giving the fruits, they die out also in time. O Fair One! The universe comes into existence in time and dies away in time.

का ले भवर्गित विश्वानि कालेन न्यसीत सुन्दरि ।

काललस्तद्धा च सुजति पाता पाति च कालतः ॥ 56 ॥

संहर्ता संहरेकाले क्रमेण संचरिते ते ।

ब्रद्धाविष्युगिवादानाभिश्वः प्रकृति: परा ॥ 57 ॥

The Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer of the universe, are creating, preserving and destroying the worlds with the help of time. Time guides them in every way. But the Highest Prakṛti is the God of Brahma, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa (i.e., the Creatrix of Time).

सदा पाता च संहर्ता स चात्मा कालन्तर्काः ।

काले स एव प्रकृति स्वाधिचां संच्छच्या प्रभुः ॥ 58 ॥

निर्माय कृतावन्स्वल्थिश्वस्थाश्छ चराचरान् ।

संदर्शश: संकल्पश्व सर्वांतम परमेश्वतः ॥ 59 ॥

This Highest Prakrti, the Highest God is creating, preserving and destroying this universe. She makes the Time dance. By Her mere Will, She has converted Her inseparable Prakrti into Māyā and is thus creating all things, moving and unmoving. She is the Ruler of all; the Form of all, and She is the Highest God.

जनं जनेने जनिता जनं पाति जनेन यः ।

जनं जनेन हृते ते देवं भव सांग्रतम् ॥ 6 0 ॥

यस्याज्ञा वाति वातः शीशगामी च संप्रतम् ।

यस्याज्ञा च तपानस्तपवेय वयाश्रणम् ॥ 6 1 ॥

यथाशणं वर्षेतींरी मनुष्यगरिते जंतुम् ।

यथाशणं दृत्यत्यनिश्छान्नो घमपति शीतचान् ॥ 62 ॥

By Her is being done this creation of persons by persons, this preservation of persons by persons, and this destruction of persons by persons. So you better now take refuge of the Highest Lord. Know it is by Her command the wind is blowing, by Her command the Sun is giving heat in due time, by Her command Indra is showering rain; by Her command, Death is striding over the beings; by Her command Fire is burning all things and by Her command the cooling Moon is revolving.

मृत्योग्रैलुं कालकालं यमन्य च यमं परम् ।

विषुं सहुषुं सहारं मातुष्ठ मातुकं भवे ॥ 63 ॥

संहताँरं च संहतैनुं देवें गरण ज्ज ।

को वा बंधुंळ केषां वा सर्ववंधुं भज प्रिये ॥ 64 ॥

She is the Death of death, the Time of time, Yama of yama (the Good of death), the Fire of fire and the Destroyer of the destroyer. So take Her refuge. You cannot find and fix who is whose friend in the world; so pray to Her, the Highest Go, Who is the Friend of All.

अहं को वाच लं का वा विधिता योजितः पुरा ।

त्वया सार्थ कर्मणा च पुस्तेने विव्योजितः ॥ 65 ॥

अज्ञानी काततः शोके विपत्ती न च पोहितः ।

सुखे दुःखे घर्मलेव कालेनैमिकमेण च ॥ 66 ॥

Oh! Who am I? And who are you either? The Creator is the combiner of us two and so He will dissociate us two by our Karma. When difficulty arises, the ignorant fools become overwhelmed with sorrow; but the intelligent Pandits do not get at all deluded or become distressed.

नारायणं तं सर्वैणं कांतं यास्यसि निश्रितम् ।

तप: कृत्तं वर्धर्षे च पुरा बदरिकाओं ॥ 67 ॥

मया त्वं तपसा लक्षा ब्रह्माप्नु वेण च ।

हर्षेयं चत्पत तोही प्राप्यसि कामिनि ॥ 68 ॥

By the Wheel of Time, the beings are led sometimes into happiness; sometimes into pain. You will certainly get Nārāyana for your husband; for which you practised Tapas before, in the hermitage of Badarī (the source of the Ganges, the feet of Viṣṇu). I pleased Brahmā by my Tapasyā and have, by his boon, got you as my wife.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

घंदावने च गोविद्वं गोलोके तर्न लम्मियसि ।

अईं यास्यामि तल्लोकं तनुं त्यक्त्वा च दानवीम् ॥ 69 ॥

तन उब्ब्यसि मांतं च उब्ब्यसि चां सुभ्रानम् ।

अगमं राधिकाणपादूरातं च सुवुर्लेभम् ॥ 70 ॥

But the object for which you did your Tapasyā, that you may get Hari as your husband, will certainly be fulfilled. You will get Govinda in Vrndāvana and in the region of Goloka. I will also go there when I forsake this, my Demon body. Now I am talking with you here; afterwards we will meet again in the region of Goloka. By the curse of Rādhikā, I have come to this Bhārata, hard to be attained.

पुनराय्यामि तनैव कः शोको मे शृण प्रिये ।

त्वं च देई परित्यज्य दिष्यल्पं विधाय च ॥ 71 ॥

तत्कालं प्रण्यस्य हिरों मां काले कातात भव ।

इत्युक्ला च दितिने च तया सार्यं मनोहरम् ॥ 72 ॥

You, too, will quit this body and, assuming the divine form will go to Śrī Hari. So, O Beloved! You need not be sorry." O Muni! Thus these conversations took them the whole day and led them to the evening time.

सुखाप शोभने तल्ये युष्यचंदनचर्धिते ।

नानाप्रकारिषघचं चकार तलमंदिते ॥ ७३ ॥

The king of the demons, Śaṅkhacūḍa then slept with Tulasi on a nicely decorated bed, strewn with flowers, and smeared with sandal paste, in the Ratna Mandir (temple built of jewels.) This jewel temple was adorned with various wealth and riches.

तलप्रदीपसंयुक्ते कृत्तिरंत प्राय सुन्दरीय ।

निनाय रजनों राजा क्रीडाकोतुकर्मणकेः ॥ 74 ॥

कृत्वा वक्षसि तां कांतां रुदतीभितुःखितान् ।

कृणोदरी निर्गहारां निमर्गां गोकासगरे ॥ 75 ॥

पुस्तां बोधयामास दिव्यजानेन ज्ञानवित् ।

The jewel lamps were lighted. Śaṅkhacūda assed the night with his wife in various sports. The thin bellied Tulasi was weeping with a very sorrowful heart, without having taken any food. The king, who knew the reality of existence, took her to his breast and appeased her in various ways.

पुरा कृष्णेयं वर्त्त भाईते तत्त्वमुत्तम् ॥ 76 ॥

स च तस्ये ददौ सर्वे सर्वोगोकहं परम् ।

ज्ञानं संग्रय स देवी प्रसवद्वतेक्षणा ॥ 77 ॥

मौडां चकार हर्षेण सर्वे मन्तेति नथगम् ।

तौ दंपती च मौडौंती निमन्ती सुखसागरे ॥ 78 ॥

What religious instructions he had received in Bhāndjira forest from Śri Kṛṣṇa, those Tattvas, capable to destroy all sorrows and delusions, he now spoke carefully to Tulasī. Then Tulasī's joy knew no bounds. She then began to consider everything as transient and began to play with a gladdened heart.

पुलकाधिवसर्गी मूढिते निर्जने मुने ।

अंगत्यांगसंपुन्ती सुनीति सुतोत्सुकी ॥ 79 ॥

एकांगी च तबा तो ही चाधानीशीघर यथा ।

प्राणेश्वरं च तुलसी मने प्राणाधिकं परम् ॥ 80 ॥

Both became drowned in the ocean of bliss; and the bodies of both of them were filled with joy and the hairs stood on their ends. Both of them, then, desirous to have amorous sports, joined themselves

and became like Ardhanārīśvara and so one body.

प्राणाधिका च तां मेने राजा प्राणेशुर्षी सतीम् ।

तै शिवती सुखसुच्तो च तंद्रिती सुन्दरी सभी ॥ 81 ॥

सुवेषो प्रखुसेंभोगाददोषे सुमनोहरी ।

क्षणं सुचेतनी ती च कवधंती रसाङ्गवात् ॥ 82 ॥

As Tulasi considered Śankhacūda, to be her lord, so the Dānava King considered Tulasi the darling of his life. They be came senseless with pleasurable feelings arising out of their amorous intercourses. Next moment they regained their consciousness and both began to converse on amorous matters.

कक्षां मनोरमां दिव्यां हसंतीं च क्षणं पुनः ।

क्षणं च केतिसंयुक्तो रसभावसम्पित्ति ॥ 83 ॥

सुते विरतिनर्पित्त नी तदिष्यपंडिति ।

सत्तं जययुक्तो द्वी क्षणं नैव पराजिति ॥ 84 ॥

इति श्रीमद्दैभागवते नवस्नकर्णे नारदनारायणसंवादे शक्तिश्रामृषिवि

विशोरोयायः 11 20 11

Thus both spent their time sometimes in sweet conversations, sometimes laughing and joking,

Book IX Chapter XXI

sometimes maddened with amorous sentiments. As Śaṅkhaçūḍa was clever in amorous affairs, so Tulasī was very expert. So none felt satiated with lov affairs and no one was defeated by the other.

Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the war preparations of Śaṅkhaçūḍa with the Devas in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXI

CHAPTER XXI

On the War between Maḥā Deva and Śaṅkhacūda

श्रीनारायण उवाच

श्रीकृष्णं मनसा ध्याना रक्षः कृष्णायपणाः ।

बाहो मुतूर्ते उद्याय पुष्पतल्यान्मनोहात् ॥ १ ॥

रास्वास: परित्यज्य स्नाला मंगलवारिणा ।

धौते च वाससी धूला कृत्वा तिलकमुज्जलम् ॥ २ ॥

चक्रताहिकमावग्यमभीट्येववंदनम् ।

Śrī Nārāyaṇa spoke: Then the Dānava, the devotee of Śrī Krṣna, got up from his flower strewn bed, meditating on Śrī Krṣna, early in the morning time, at the Brahma Muhūrta. Quitting his night dress, he took his bath in pure water and put on a fresh washed clothing. He then put the bright Tilaka mark on his forehead and, performing the daily necessary worship, he worshipped his Īsta devatā (The Deity doing good to him).

दस्यावमधुललांशं द्वर्शं वस्तु मंगलम् ॥ 3 ॥

त्यनश्रेष्ठ मणिश्रेष्ठं वक्षश्रेष्ठ च काञ्ञान् ।

ब्राह्मणेचो द्वी भक्प्या यथा सित्य च नारद ॥ 4 ॥

अमूल्यन्तरं वर्लिकविन्नुभामाणिव्यहीराक् ।

द्वौ विज्ञाय गुर्वे यात्रामङ्गल्लेते ॥ 5 ॥

गजरात्मभ्रतर्नं धनत्नं मनोहारूम ।

द्वौ सर्वे दरित्रय विधाय मंगलाय च ॥ 6 ॥

भांत्राणों सहस्वाणि नगराणों दिल्छकम् ।

ग्रामाणां शतकोंदि च ब्राह्मणाय ददौ मुदा ॥ 7 ॥

He then was the auspicious things such as curd, ghee, honey, fried rice, etc., and distributed as usual, to the Brāhmaṇas the best jewels, pearls, clothing an gold. Then for his marching to turn out auspicious, he gave at the feet of his Guru Deva priceless gems, jewels, pearls, diamonds, etc., and finally he gave to the poor Brāhmins with great gladness, elephants, horses, wealth, thousands of stores, two lakhs of cities and one hundred kotis of villages.

पुत्रं कृत्वा तु राजेन्रं सर्वेषु दानवेषु च ।

पुत्रे समर्थ भार्यां तां राज्यं च सर्वसंपदम् ॥ ८ ॥

प्रजानुचरसंघं च भांड़ांत वाहनादिकम् ।

खयं संसाहुषनुष्ठ धनुष्याणिबंभूत ॥ ९ ॥

He then gave over to his son, the charge of his kingdom and of his wife, and all the dominions, wealth, property, all the servants and maid servants, all the stores and conveyances. He dressed himself for the war and took up bows and arrowcases.

भृत्यव्राता क्रमेणैव चकार सैन्यसझयम् ।

अशानां च चिक्छेण लक्षेण वर्हरितानम् ॥ १ ० ॥

रथानामयुतेनैव धानुक्काणं चिकोदिधिः ।

विकोदिभिवर्षिणं च गृल्लिं च विकोदिधिः ॥ १ १ ॥

By the command of the King, the armies began together. Thee lakhs of horses, one lakh elephants, one ayuta chariots, three Kotṣ of bowmen, three Kotṣi armoured sodiers and three Kotṣis of trident holders got themselves ready.

कृता सेना परिपित्ता दानवेज्ञेण नारद ।

तस्वी सेनापतिश्रेय युद्धगणबिधगारः ॥ 12 ॥

महायः स विज्ञोयं रयैनां प्रवरी एणे ।

त्रिलक्षास्त्रशीहिणी सेनापति कृत्वा नाराधिय: ॥ 13 ॥

सिंगदश्वीतिणीवार्यं भांडीयं च चकार है ।

बहिद्वेष्य शिविरामनसा शीहरिं स्मर् ॥ 14 ॥

Then the King counted his forces and appointed one Commander-in-Chief. (Mahāratha), skilled in arts of warfare, over the whole army. Thus the generals were appointed over the three lakh Akṣauhīnī forces and their provisions were collected by three hundred Akṣauhīnī men. He, then, thinking of Śri Hari, started for war, accompanied by his vast army.

Note: One Akṣauhīnī consists of a large army consisting of 21870 chariots, as many elephants, 65,610 horses, and 109,350 foot).

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

रत्ने-त्रसारनिर्माणीयमानमारकोह सः ।

गुरुबानी-गुरुकूल्य प्रवयी शंकरांतिकमू 115

पुष्पभ्रजनदीतीरं यज्राक्षयवटः शुभः ।

He then mounted on a chariot built of excellent jewels and, headed by his Guru and all his other elders, went to Śaṅkara. O Nārada! Bhagavān Mahādeva was at that time, staying on the banks of Puspabhadrā.

सिद्धाभ्यं च सिद्धानां सिद्धिक्षेत्रं च नारद ॥ 16 ॥

कम्पिलस्य तपःस्थाने पुण्यक्षेत्रे च भारते ।

पश्रिमोदिपुर्वे च मलयस्य च पश्रिमे ॥ 17 ॥

श्रीलोततभागे च नाभ्यामदानखिणे ।

पछयोजनविस्तीर्णां दैर्थे शतगुणा तथा ॥ 18 ॥

That place was Siddhāśrama (the hermitage where the yogic successes had been obtained and can easily be acquired in future for the Siddhas as well a Siddha Kṣettra.) It was the place where the Muni Kapila practised. Tapasyā, in the holy land of Bhārata. It was bounded on the east by the western ocean, on the west by the Malaya mountain, on the south, by the Śrī Śaila mountain and on the north by the Gandha Mādana Mountain. It was five yojanas wide and one hundred times as long.

शुद्धस्कित्कसंकाशा भारते च सुपुण्यदा ।

ग्राष्ट्री जल्पूर्णां च पुष्पभत्र नदी सुभा ॥ 19 ॥

ल्वाणाक्रियाय भार्या शश्वतीभायसर्वुता ।

शरावतीमित्धिता च निरिता सा हिमालयात् ॥ 20 ॥

This auspicious river in Bhārata yields great religious merits and is always full of clear, sparkling running water. She is the favourite wife of the Salt Ocean and She is very blessed. Issuing from Sarāvatī Himālayas, She drops into the ocean.

गोमती वामतः कृत्वा प्रविष्य पश्रिमोद्धरी ।

तत्र गत्वा शुबुच्छो द्वर्शं चंत्रशेखम्य ॥ 21 ॥

वटमुले समारीनं सुर्वंकोदिसमप्रमम् ।

कृत्वा योगासनं घुवा मुवतुर्केच सस्मितम् ॥ 22 ॥

Keeping the river Gomati (Goomti) by her left; She falls into the west ocean. Śaṅkhacūḍa, arriving there, saw Mahādeva under a Peepul tree near its

root with a smiling countenance, like one Koti Sun seated in a yogic posture.

शुद्धम्किकसंकांग ज्वलंत बढ्जतेजसा ।

शिशुलविशुशरं व्याप्चमीबरं वरम् ॥ 23 ॥

भक्तमूलूरं शान्तं गौरीकांतं मनोहरम् ।

तपसां फलदातारं दातारं सर्वसंपदाम् ॥ 24 ॥

His colour was white like a pure crystal; as if the Fire of Brahma was emitting from every pore of His body (burning with Brahma Teja); He was wearing the tiger skin and holding the trident and axe. He dispels the fear of death of His Bhaktas; His face is quite calm. He, the Lord of Gauri, is the Giver of the fruits of Tapasyā and of all sorts of wealth and prosperity.

आशुतोष प्रसात्यर्थ भक्तानुग्रहकात्मम् ।

विश्वान्यं विश्वश्रैंज विश्वश्रचं च विश्वजम् ॥ 25 ॥

विश्वामरं विश्वसरं विश्वसंहाराकात्मम् ।

कारणं कारणानां च नरकाणर्वतारणम् ॥ 26 ॥

The smiling face of Aśutosā (one who is pleased quickly) is always thinking of the welfare of the Bhaktas; He is the Lord of the Universe, the Seed of the universe, the All-form (all-pervading), and the Progenitor of the universe. He is omnipresent, All pervading, the Best in this universe, the Destroyer of this universe, the Cause of all causes, and the Saviour from the hells.

ज्ञानपूदं ज्ञानवीजं ज्ञानानन्दे सनातनम् ।

असकूहा विमानाच्छ तं दुब्धा दानवेश्वरः ॥ 27 ॥

सर्वैः सार्थ भक्तिमुक्तः शिरसा प्रणामास सः ।

वामाते भक्तलों च स्कंदं च ततुः चित्यम् ॥ 28 ॥

He is the Awakener and Bestower of Knowledge, the Seed of all knowledges, and He Himself is of the nature of Knowledge and Bliss. Seeing that Eternal Puruṣa, the King of the Dānavas at once descended from his chariot and bowed down with devotion to Him and to Bhadra Kālī on His left and and to Kārtikeya on his front. The other attendants did the same.

आशिषं च ददौ तस्यै काली रूपद्ध शंकरः ।

उत्स्थुरागतं दृष्टा सर्वे नंदीश्वरादयः ॥ 29 ॥

Book IX Chapter XXI

परस्यं च भाषन्ते चकूस्तत्र च संग्रतम् ।

राजा कृत्वा च संभाषापुवास ति शिवसंनिर्भी ॥ ३० ॥

प्रसजात्मा महदोवे भगवासतमवाच ह ।

Śankara, Bhadra Kālī and Skanda all blessed him. Nandīśvara and others got up from their seats on seeing the Dānava King and began to talk with each other on that subject. The King addressed Śiva and sat by Him. Bhagavān Mahādeva, the Tranquil Self, then, spoke to him, thus:

महादेव उवाच

वियाता जगतां बह्या विता धर्मेय धर्मवित् ॥ 31 ॥

मरीचितस्य पूजँधु वैभाव्बात्रि धार्मिकः ।

करणयक्षापि तलुजो धर्मिष्ठघु प्रजापति: ॥ 32 ॥

“O King! Brahmā, the knower of Dharma and the Creator of the world, is the Father of Dharma, The religious Marīci, a devotee of Viṣṇu, is the son of Brahmā. The religious Prajāpati Kaśyapa is also the Brahmā’s son.

दक्ष: प्रीत्या द्वदी तमैके भत्त्वा कन्याख्योदण ।

तावेका च दनु: साखी तत्लीभाग्यविवर्धिति ॥ 33 ॥

Daksa gladly gave over to Kaśyapa in marriage, his thirteen daughters. Danu, fortunate and chaste, is also one of them.

चत्वारिगहनो: पुत्र दानवासलेजसोल्वणा: ।

तेथेको विध्रचितिष्ठ महाबलपातकम: ॥ 34 ॥

तनुप्रो धार्मिको दोषो विध्णभफो जितेन्द्रयः ।

जजाप परमं मन्त्रं पुचकरे लक्षवतस्मर् ॥ 35 ॥

Danu had forty sons, all spirited and known as Dānavas. The powerful Vipracitti was the prominent amongst them. Vipracitti's son was Dambha, self controlled and very much devoted to Viṣṇu. So much so that for one lakh years he recited the Viṣṇu mantra at Puṣkara.

शुक्राभार्य गुरु कृत्वा कृष्णस्य परमात्मनः ।

तदा एतां तनयं प्राप परं कृष्णपरायणम् ॥ 36 ॥

पुरा तं चपार्वे गोपो गोपेष्वपि सुधामिकः ।

अशुना राधिकाणापाद्राते दानवेषरः ॥ 37 ॥

His Guru (spiritual teacher) was Śukrācārya; and, by his advice, he recited the mantra of Śri

Krṣṇa, the Highest Self. He got you as his son, devoted to Krṣṇa. In your former birth, you were the chief attendant Gopa (cow-herd) of Krṣṇa. You were very religious. Now, by Rādhikā's curse, you are born in Bhārata, as the Lord of the Dānavas powerful, heroic, valorous, and chivalrous.

आबहास्तेवार्यन्ते नृत्यं मेने च देशणः ।

सालोकवसाहित्यानुजसामीध्चे च हरेरपि ॥ 38 ॥

दीयामाने न गृह्न्ति वैशणाल: सेवनं विना ।

ब्रहात्वममरत्वं वा तृच्छं मेने च देशणः ॥ 39 ॥

All the things from Brahmā down to a blade of grass, the Vaiṣṇavas regard as very trifling; even if they get Sālokya, Sārṣṭi, Sāyujya and Sāmīpya of Hari, they do not care a straw for that. Without serving Hari, they do not accept those things, even if those are thrust on them. Even Brahmahood and immortality, the Vaiṣṇavas count for nothing.

इन्हलं चामन्तवं वा न मेने गणान्यु च ।

कृष्णभक्रस्य ते किं वा देवानां विषये पभः ॥ 40 ॥

देहि राजचं च देवानां मटुगिति रक्ष भूमिप ।

सुखं खराज्ये तं लिह देवालितघुं वे पेरे ॥ 41 ॥

They want to serve Hari (Sevā-bhāva). Indrahood, Manuhood, they do not care. You, too, are a real Kṛṣṇa Bhakta. So what do you care for those things that belong to the Devas, that are something like false to you. Give back to the Devas their kingdoms thus and please Me. Let the Devas remain in their own places and let you enjoy your kingdom happily.

अर्के भृतिवेशेघेन सर्वे कश्यपवंशजाः ।

यानि कानि च प्यानि ब्रह्मत्यादिकानि च ॥ 42 ॥

जातिद्रोहस्य प्यानि कलां गर्हिति घोडणीम् ।

सर्वसंदर्षा च हानि च यदि राजेंत्र मन्यसे ॥ 43 ॥

No need now for further quarrels. Think that you all belong to the same Kaśyapa's family. The sins that are incurred, for example, the murder of a Brāhmīn, etc., are not even one-sixteenth of the sins incurred by hostilities amongst the relatives.

सर्वावस्था च समतं केषां गाति च सर्वदा ।

बहागधा तिरोपाचो लये प्राकृतिके सदा ॥ 44 ॥

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

आविषांव: पुनस्तव्य प्रभवादीश्वरेच्छया ।

ज्ञानवृष्टिश्व तत्पसा स्मृतिलोषश्र निश्छितम् ॥ 45 ॥

If, O King! You think that by giving away to the Devas their possessions, your property will be diminished, then think that no one's days pass ever in one and the same condition. Whenever Prakrti is dissolved, Brahmā also vanishes. Again He appears by the Will of God. This occurs always.

कोतीत सृष्टि जानेन सद्य तोश पत्रि क्रमेण च ।

परिपूर्णितमो धर्मः सत्ते स्वास्थये सद्ये ॥ 46 ॥

विश्रभा: सोडपि वेतायां दिषागो ज्ञापे स्मृतः ।

एकभागः कली पूर्व तदोशँक क्रमेण च ॥ 47 ॥

True, that knowledge is increased by true Tapasyā; but memory fails then. This is certain. He who is the creator of this world, does his work of creation gradually by the help of his Knowledge-power (Jñāna-Śakti). In the Satya Yuga, Dharma reigns in full; in the Tretā Yuga, one quarter is diminished; again in the Dvāpara only one-half remains. And in the Kali Yuga, only one quarter remains.

कल्यामांकले: शेपे कुह़ा चन्द्रकला यथा ।

यातृकेनो रेव्यौधीय न तानूकिशिरे पुनः ॥ 48 ॥

दिनेयु यायुद्यम्याहे सयां प्रातर्ने तत्समम् ।

उदयं यांति कालेन बालतां च क्रमेण च ॥ 49 ॥

Thus Dharma gets increase and decrease. At the end of the Kali, the Dharma will be seen very feeble as the phase of the Moon is seen very thin on the Dark Moon night. See, again, the Sun is very powerful in summer; not so in winter. At midday the Sun is very hot; it does not remain so in the morning and evening?

प्रकांडतां च ततशुशात्कालोउस्तं पुनेरिति सः ।

दिन प्रच्छन्तां वाति कालेन वृदिने घने ॥ 50 ॥

ग्राहुमते कंपितक्ष पुनेरेय प्रसजताम ।

परिपूर्णतमश्रद्रः: पूर्णिभायां च जायते ॥ 51 ॥

तादूशो न भवेत्रित्यं क्षयं याति दिने दिने ।

पुनश पुरिष्यायाति परं कुहा दिने दिने ॥ 52 ॥

The Sun rises at one time; then he is considered as young; at another time be becomes very

powerful and at another time he goes down. Again in times of distress (i.e., during the cloudy days) the Sun gets entirely obscured. When the Moon is devoured by Rāhu (in the Lunar Eclipse), the Moon quivers. Again when the Moon becomes liberated (i.e., when the eclipse passes away) She becomes bright again. In the Full-Moon night She becomes full but She does not remain so always. In the Dark fortnight She wanes every day. In the bright fortnight She wanes every day.

संययुक्तः शुकल्पक्षे कृष्णो रूपान्य शक्रमण।

गहुप्रासे दिने रूपनो वृद्विने न विरोचते ॥ 53 ॥

काले चन्द्रे पंचेच्छूकें पश्छीः कालभेदतः ।

भविष्याति बलिश्छेन्द्रो भश्छी: सुतलेउरुप्न ॥ 54 ॥

In the bright fortnight, the Moon becomes healthy and prosperous and in the dark fortnight, the Moon becomes thinner and thinner as if attacked with consumption. In the time of eclipse She becomes pale and in the cloudy weather, She is obscured. Thus the Moon also becomes powerful at one time and weak and pale at another time. Vali now resides in Pātāla, having lost all his fortunes; but, at some other time, he will become Devendra (the Lord of the Devas).

कालेन पृथ्वी सस्याड्ञा सर्विधारा वसुभ्यात ।

काले जले नियमना सा तिरोधभृतुबिल्युत् ॥ 55 ॥

काले नर्यांति विश्वानि प्रपवेचेव कालतः ।

चराचराङ्ग कालेन नर्यांति प्रपवर्ति च ॥ 56 ॥

ईश्वरस्वे समता बहुपा: परमात्मनः ।

अहं मृत्रुजयो यम्यादस्यां प्राकृतं लवम् ॥ 57 ॥

अदर्शं चापि श्रस्यामि वारं वारं पुनः पुनः ।

This earth becomes at one time covered with grains and the resting-place of all beings; and, at another time, She becomes immersed under water. This universe appears at one time and disappears at another. Every thing, moving or non-moving, sometimes appears and again, at another time, disappears. Only Brahma, the Highest Self, remains the same. By His grace, I have got the name Mrtyuñjaya (the Conqueror of Death). I, too, am

Book IX Chapter XXI

witnessing many Prākṛtik dissolutions, I witnessed repeatedly many; dissolutions and will in future, wintenss many dissolutions,

स च फ्रकृतरूपश स एव पुरुष: स्मृतः ॥ 58 ॥

स चात्मा स च जीवश नानारूपधर: परः ।

कांतीस सततं यो हि ततामगुणकांतरन् ॥ 59 ॥

काले भूतरुं स जयति जन्मोगभयं जग्न् ।

स्वा कृतो विधितेने पाता विद्युः कृतो भवेत् ॥ 60 ॥

अहंकृतशं सहर्तां वयं विविधिणः कृततः ।

The Paramātman becomes of the nature of Prakrti. Again it is He that is the Purusa (male principle). He is the Self; He is the individual soul (Jiva). He thus assumes various forms. And, again, Lo! He is beyond all forms! He who always repeats His Name and sings His Glory, can conquer, at some occasion, death. He is not to come under the sway of this birth, death, disease, old age and fear. He has made Brahmā the Creator, Viṣṇu the Preserver and Me the Destroyer. By His Will, we are possessed of those influences and powers.

कालापिनरूई संहारे नियोज्य विषये नृप ॥ 6 1 ॥

अर्ह करोमि सत्तत ततामपुणाकीतनम् ।

तेन मृत्युंजयोड़ं च ज्ञानेनानेन निर्भयै ॥ 6 2 ॥

भृत्युंमृत्युभयाद्याति वैनतयादिवेगानः ।

O King! Having deputed Kāla, Agni and Rudra, to do the destruction work, I Myself repeat only His name and sing His glory, day and night, incessantly. My name is, on that account, Mrtyunjjaya. By His Knowledge Power, I am fearless. Death flies away fast from Me as serpents fly away at the sight of Garuda, the Vinatā's son."

इत्युक्त्वा स च सर्वैगः सर्वभावेन तस्वः ॥ 6 3 ॥

विरताम च शंभूघु सभामध्ये च नात्र ।

राजा तुद्रवचनं शुत्वा प्रशोशस पुनः पुनः ॥ 6 4 ॥

उवाच मपूरं देते परं विनयपूर्वकम् ।

O Nārada! Thus saying, Śambhu, the Lord of all, the Progenitor of all, remained silent. Hearing the above words of Śambhu, the King thanked Mahādeva again and again and spoke in sweet humble words.

शंखचूढ़ उवाच

त्वया यत्कथितं देह नान्यथा चवनं स्मृतम् ॥ 65 ॥

तथापि किंड्डाद्यायल्यं श्रूवर्ता मिहेवेदनम् ।

जातिग्रहे महतपारं व्यतोतमभुना च यत् ॥ 66 ॥

गृहीत्व तस्य सर्वेयं कृत: प्रस्थापिति बलि: ।

मया समुद्धुतं सर्वेभूत्येंमैध्वर्पीधार ।। 67 ॥

सुतलाच्च समुद्धुत् नालं तत्र गद्धास: ।

सभातुको हित्यपालः कयं देयेक्ष हिंसितः ॥ 68 ॥

गुभावद्यशासुराक कयं देर्वेनिपातिताः ।

Sankhacūda said: The words spoken by Thee are quite true. Still I am speaking a few words. Kindly hear.' Thou hast spoken just now that very great sins are incurred by kindred hotilities. How is it, then, that He robbed Bali of his whole possessions and sent him down into Pātāla.? Gadādhara Viṣṇu could not recover Bali's glory But I have done that. Why did the Devas kill Hiranyāksa and Hiranyakāṣipu, Śumbha and the other Dānavas?

पुरा समुद्रमदने पीरुयं भक्रितं सुरैः ॥ 69 ॥

क्लेशपाओं वयं तत्र ते सर्वे फलभोपानि: ।

क्रीडाभाड़ीदिवि विश्व प्रकृतेः परमात्मनः ॥ 70 ॥

यस्मै यत्र स ददाति तस्यैधर्थं घतेतादा ।

देवदानवयोर्वादः शश्छ्रैमितिकः सदा ॥ 71 ॥

पराजयो जयसेनो काठेरूसाकं क्रमेण च ।

In the gone days, we laboured hard when the nectar was obtained out of the churning of the ocean; but the best fruit was reaped by the Devas only. However, all these point that this universe is but the mere sporting ground of Paramātman, Who has become of the nature of Prakṛti (the Polarities of the one and the same current to produce electric effects). Whomsoever He grants glory and fortune, he only gets that. The quarrel of the Devas and the Dānavas is eternal, Victory and defeat come to both the parties alternately.

तदास्वयोक्षित्रोे वा गानं निष्णलं परम् ॥ 72 ॥

समसवस्थिति बन्योरीश्वस्य महात्मतः ।

इयं ते महही लज्ञा युद्धेउसामाथि: सहायूना ॥ 73 ॥

जये ततो5धिका कांतिंहूर्निश्वि पराजये ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

So it is not proper for Thee to come here in this hostility. For Thou art the God, of the nature of the Highest Self. Before Thee, we both are equal So it is a matter of shame, no doubt, for Thee to stand up against us in favour of the gods. The glory and fame that will result to Thee, if Thou favour of the gods. The glory and fame that will result to Thee, if Thou art victorious, will not be so much as it will be if we get the victory. On the contrary the inglory and infamy that will be inconceivably much more than what would come to us if we are defeated. (For we are low and Thou art Great.)

སྒྱི་བཞིན་མཐའ་སྐྱི་བཅུག་མཐའ་བཞིན་སྐྱི་བཅུག་མཐའ་བཞིན་སྐྱི་བཅུག་སྐྱི་བཅུག་སྐྱི་བཅུག་སྐྱི་བཅུག་རྒྱི་བཅུག་སྐྱི་བཅུག་སྐྱི་བཅུག་སྐྱོག་སྐྱོག་སྐྱོག་སྐྱོག་སྐྱོག་སྐྱོག་སྐྲོག་སྐྱོག་སྐྱོག་སྐྱོག་སྐྱོག་སྐྱོག་སྟན་སྟན་སྟན་སྟན་སྟན་སྟན་སྟན་སྟན་སྟན་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུར་སྡུང་སྡུང་སྡུར་སྡུང་ས�

Book IX Chapter XXII

CHAPTER XXII

On the Fight Between the Devas and Śaṅkhacūḍa

श्रीनासाय जवाच

शिवं प्राण्य शिरसा दानवेऊः प्रतपाचन् ।

समाकरोह यानं च सहामात्यैः स सत्वः ॥ १ ॥

शिवः स्वसैन्यं देखाशु प्रेरयामास सत्वम् ।

दानवेँदः ससैन्यश्र युद्धारभे बभूव ह ॥ 2 ॥

Śrī Nārāyaṇa spoke: Then the King of the Dānavas, very powerful, bowed down to Mahādeva and ascended on the chariot with his ministers. Mahādeva gave orders to His army to be ready at once. So Śaṅkhacūda did.

स्वयं महेन्द्रो युवुघे सार्थे घुवपर्वेणा ।

भार्कारो युवुघे विग्रचितिना सह सत्य: ॥ 3 ॥

दोभेन सह चंद्रश चकार परयं रणम् ।

कालस्येण कालश्र गोकर्जन हुताशनः ॥ 4 ॥

कुवेः कालकेवेन विश्वकर्मा मयेन च ।

भयक्रुण मृत्युश संहारेण यमतस्वा ॥ 5 ॥

विककर्णे वरणश्छचलेन समीरणः ।

ब्रुधघ चृतपुहेन रक्ताक्षेण शनैधः ॥ 6 ॥

जयंती रत्त्वसारेण वसवो वर्चांग गणैः ।

अश्विनी च द्वीतिमता धूपेण नलकूबः ॥ 7 ॥

धृधेण धर्मे उषाक्षेण च मंगलः ।

गोभाकरोण वै भानु: विद्रोण च ममधः ॥ 8 ॥

गोधामुखेन चृणेन खड्वोन च धळजेन च ।

कांचीयुक्ति चिंडेन धूमेश सह नंदिता ॥ 9 ॥

विश्वेन च पलाशेनाविद्याचा युवघुः परे ।

एकादश च रुत्र वै एकादृष भयंकरेः ॥ 10 ॥

महामारी च युवुः चोप्रचंडादिधि: सह ।

नन्टीश्वराद्यः सर्वे दानवानां गपेः सह ॥ 11 ॥

Terrible fight then ensued between Mahendra and Vṛṣaparvā, Bhāskara and Vīpracitti, Niśākara and Dambha, between Kāla and Kāleśvara, between Fire and Gokarṇa, Kubera and Kālakeya between Viśvakarmā and Maya, between Mrtyu and Bhayankar between Yama and Sarīhāra, between Varunā and Vikamka, between Budha and Dhrtaprṣtha, between Śani and Raktāksa, Jayant and Ratnasāra, between the Vasus and Varcasas,

between the two Aśvin Kumāras and Diptimān, between Nalakūbara and Dhūmra, between Dharma and Dhurandhara, between Maṅgala and Uṣāksa, Bhānut and Śovākara, between Kandarpa ad Pithara, between the eleven Ādityas and Godhāmukha, Cūrṇa and Khadgadhvaja, Kañcimukha and Piṇḍa Dhūmra and Nandī, between Viśva and Palāśa, between the eleven Rudras and the eleven Bhayañkaras, between Ugracaṇḍā and the other Mahāmāris and Nandiśvara and the other Dānavas.

युयुधुं महायुंद प्रलयेप्रि भयंकरे ।

वदमुले च रंगभूषु तस्थी काल्याः सुतेन च ॥ 12 ॥

सर्वे च युयुधुः सैयनमूग्रः सत्ते मुने ।

रत्नसिंहासने रये कोटिभिदानंबले सह ॥ 13 ॥

उवास शबुचूच्छुं रत्नभूषणभूषितः ।

शक्रृत्य च ये थोधा दानवैधु पयाजितः ॥ 14 ॥

देवाथा शुदुयुः सर्वे भीताशु क्षतविश्रादुः ।

The battlefield, then, assumed a grim aspect, as if the time of Dissolution had come. Bhagavān Mahādeva sat under the Vata (peepul) tree with Kārtikeya and Bhadrakālī. Śankhacūḍa, decked with his jewel ornaments, sat on the jewel throne, surrounded by kotis and kotis of Dānavas.

चकार कोपं कंदहघं देयेम्ब्रभाघरं ददी ॥ 15 ॥

बलं च स्वाणानां च वर्धयामास तेसला ।

सोउयमेकछ्युयुघे दानवानां गणैः सह ॥ 16 ॥

अक्षौहिणीणां रोगकं समरे च जघान सः ।

The Śaṅkara's army got defeated at the hands of the Dānavas. The Devas, with cuts and wounds on their bodies, fled from the battlefield, terrified. Kārtikeya gave words "Do'nt fear' to the Devas and excited them. Only Skanda resisted the Dānava forces In one moment he slew one hundred Aksauhīnī Dānava forces.

असुरायात्यामास काली कमललोचना ॥ 17 ॥

पपौ रकतं दानवानामितकुळ्धा ततः परम् ।

द्रगलक्ष्मणजैद्राणां शतलक्ष्म च कोदीक्ष: ॥ 18 ॥

The lotus eyed Kālī also engaged in killing the Asuras. She became very angry and no sooner did She slay the Asura forces, than She began to drink their blood. She easily slew with Her one hand and at every time put into Her mouth ten lakhs, and hundred lakhs and Kotis and Kotis of elephants.

समादावैकहत्ने मुखे चिवेशे लील्या ।

कदंबानां सहलं च नन्तरं समरे मुने ॥ 19 ॥

स्कंदस्य शराजलेन दानवाः क्षतविश्राः ।

भीताश्र दुबुतुः सर्वे महारणपराक्रमः ॥ 20 ॥

Thousands and thousands of headless bodies (Kavandhas) came to be witnessed in the filled. The bodies of the Dānavas were all cut and wounded by the arrows of Kārtikeya. They were all terrified and fled away.

वूपपर्व विश्वितिरंधभ्याशि विककर्णः ।

कंदेट सार्थं व्युयुक्ते सर्वे विक्रमेण च ॥ 21 ॥

महामारी च व्युप्ये न बभूव पराव्युक्ती ।

बभूवृत्ते च संक्षुक्या: स्कन्दस्य शक्तिपीक्षिताः ॥ 22 ॥

Only Vṛṣaparvā, Vipracitti, Dambha, and Vikamkana remained fighting with Skanda with an heroic valour. Mahāmārī, too, did not shew his back and he fought out vigorously. By and by they all became very much confused and distressed; but they did not turn their backs.

न दुकुर्ष्याल्वर्ये पुण्यवृद्धिभूव है ।

स्कंदस्य समरं सूघा महारोरे समूल्वणम् ॥ 23 ॥

दानवानां क्षयकरं यथा प्राकृतिको लय: ।

राज विभागमात्का चकार बाणवर्षणम् ॥ 24 ॥

Seeing this terrible fight of Skanda, the Devas began to shower flowers. The killing of the Dānavas looked like a Prākṛtik Dissolution. Śankhacūda, then, began to shoot arrows from his chariot.

नृपस्य श्रावृष्ठि धनस्य वर्षणं यथा ।

महधोरधाकार्य बह्वुत्यानं बभूव च ॥ 25 ॥

देवा: प्रदुबुः सर्वेप्रध्ये नंदीध्रादयः ।

एक एव कान्तिकेयस्तथी सममूर्पिंप १२६ ॥

The shooting of arrows by the king seemed as if rains were being poured in clouds. Everything

became pitch dark. Fires only were seen emitting their golden tongues. The Devas, Nandiśvara and others, fled away, terrified.

पर्वतानां च सर्पाणां शिलानां शाखनां तथा ।

नृपशक्तार बूँँचे च दुवाँगं च भयंकीर्म ॥ 27 ॥

नृपस्य शरवृष्णा च प्रहितः शिवनन्दनः ।

नौहारेण च साठ्रेण प्रदितो भास्कमो यथा ॥ 28 ॥

Only Kārtikeya remained in the battlefield. Then Śaṅkhacūda began to throw terrible showers and showers of mountains, snakes, stones, and trees. So much so, that Kārtikeya was covered by them as the Sun becomes obscured by fog.

धनुश्रश्छेल्कन्दच्य दूर्वहं च भयड़ूः ।

बर्भज च रथं दिव्यं चित्ब्छेद रथपीठकान् ॥ 29 ॥

मयूरं जर्जीभृतं दिव्यानेश चकार सः ।

शक्ति विश्वेय सुवाँधा तस्य यसूस्य चातितीम् ॥ 30 ॥

क्षणं मूढ्छी च संग्राप बभूव होतनः पुनः ।

गृहीत्वा तद्धनुद्विं यदतं विष्णुना पुरा ॥ 31 ॥

The Demon King cut off the weighty quiver and the pedestal of Skanda broke His chariot. By the divine weapons of the Dānava, the peacock (the vehicle) of Kārtikeya became exhausted. Kārtikeya threw one Śakti (weapon) on the breast of the Dānava; but before it fell, the Dānva cut off that, lustrous like the Sun and, in return, darted his Śakti.

रत्ने-हसारनिर्माणायानामहनु कार्तिकः ।

गस्तावं च गृहीत्या स चकार रणमूल्वणम् ॥ 32 ॥

सपांष्ण यदांतश्रीव बूर्णांहु प्रस्तरांशला ।

सर्वाश्छेद्धे कोपेन दिव्यानेषण शिवात्मजः ॥ 33 ॥

By that stroke, Kārtikeya became stunned for a moment; but he immediately regained his consciousness. He then took up the quiver that Bhagavān Vīṣṇu gave him before and many other weapons; and ascending on another chariot, built of jewels, began to fight out violently and valiantly.

लढ़े, निविर्यमास पार्ज-येन प्रतपावान् ।

रथं धनुष्य चित्रदेड संगखचुडस्य लील्या ॥ 34 ॥

सत्राहे सारथि चेव क्रिरोट मुकुटीज्ञल्लम् ।

विशेषे शणिक सुरुकलाभां दानवेत्रस्य बक्षसि ॥ 35 ॥

Getting angry, he resisted all those showers of

Book IX Chapter XXII

snakes, mountains and trees by his divine weapons. He resisted fire by his watery (Pāryannya) weapon. Then He cut off easily Ṣaṅkhacūḍa’s chariot, bow, armour, charioteer, and his bright crown and he threw on his breast one blazing Ṣakti of white colour.

भृच्छी संग्राय राजा चेतनघ्र बघूव है ।

आतरोह यानन्यन्द्रजुर्जार स्तवरः ॥ ३६ ॥

चक्कार शराजलं च मायया मायिनां वर: ।

गृहं चच्छाद् समे शराजलेन नातर ॥ 37 ॥

The Dānavendra fell unconscious; but, at the next moment, he regained his consciousness quickly, mounted on another chariot and took a fresh quiver. The Dānava was the foremost in his magic powers, He, by his power of Māyā, made a shower of arrows so much so that Kārtikeya became completely covered by that multitude of arrows.

प्रग्राह शक्तिमव्याजा शतसुर्यसमप्रभम् ।

प्रत्यामिनिशाखणப் विद्याधोते जसावुतम् ॥ 38 ॥

चिश्रेय तां च कोनेम महावेगेन कांतिके ।

पपात शक्तिस्तत्रोये वहितारिगिरोज्जलम् ॥ 39 ॥

मुर्णी संग्राप शकल्या च कांतिकेयो महावलः ।

काली गृहीत्व तं झोडे निजाय शिवसक्रियो ॥ 40 ॥

Then the Dānava took one invincible Śakti, lustrous like one hundred Suns. It seemed that flames of fire were licking high as if the Disolution Time had come aright. Inflamed by anger, the Dānava threw that Śakti on Kārtikeya. It seemed, then, that a burning mass of fire fell on him. The powerful Kārtikeya became senseless.

शिवसंतं चापि ज्ञानेन जीवयामास लीलया ।

ददौ बल्मनंतं च समुन्त्रथी प्रतपावान् ॥ 41 ॥

कालो जगाम समरं रक्षितुं कान्तिकस्य या ।

वीरास्तमनुजम्युं ते च नंदीक्षारावः ॥ 42 ॥

सर्वे देवाङ्ग शंघर्यां व्यसारक्षसिक्रगः ।

वाठ्याभंडाङ्ग बहुगः शतगों मधुवाहकाः ॥ 43 ॥

Bhadrakālī immediately took Him on Her lap and carried him before Śiva easily restored him to his life by his knowledge-power and gave him the

indomitable strength. He then got up in full vigour. Bhadrakālī went to the field to see the Kārtikeya's forces. Nandiśvara and other heroes, the Devas, Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Rāksasas and Kinnaras followed Her. Hundreds of war drums were sounded and hundreds of persons carried Madhu (wine).

सा च गत्वास सोमां सिंहनादं चकार च ।

देव्याश्र सिंहनादेन प्रापुर्मूष्छा च दानवाः ॥ 44 ॥

अयुहुहासमाश्व चकार च पुनः पुनः ।

द्वाु पपौ च माध्यौकं नन्तरं रणपूर्णिति ॥ 45 ॥

उद्यद्वुः चोर्धादं कोटकी च पपौ मधु ।

योगिनीडाकिनीनां च गणा: सुरगणाद्यः ॥ 46 ॥

Going to the battle-ground, She gave a war-cry. The Dānava forces got fainted by that cry. Bhadrakālī shouted aloud inauspicious peals after peals of laughter, Then She drank Madhu and danced in the battlefield. Ugra Damṣtrā, Urgacandā, Kotavi, the Yoginīs, Dākinīs, and the Devas all drank Madhu (wine).

द्रष्टा काली शब्दुचुः शीघ्रमाजी समाययी ।

द्रानवाक्य भयं प्रापू राजा तेभ्योभयं द्वंदो ॥ 47 ॥

काली विश्वेप वाई्च प्रत्यावनिरिष्योपमम् ।

राजा निर्वियामास पार्ज्येन च लील्या ॥ 48 ॥

Seeing Kālī in the battlefield, Śaṅkhacūḍa came up again and imparted the spirit of Fearlessness to the Daityas, trembling with fear. Bhadrakālī projected, then, the Fire weapon, flaming like the Great Disolution Fire; but the king quickly put out that by the Watery weapon.

चिश्रधे वाक्णां सा च तीबं च महद्धद्धुतम् ।

गाधवैण च चितच्छेद दानवैर्ध्छ लील्या ॥ ४९ ॥

माहैर्वरं प्रचिश्व केण ली बहिंशिजोपमम् ।

राज जाबान ते शीर्धे वैश्याने च लील्या ॥ ५० ॥

Kālī then projected the very violent and wonderful Varunāstra. The Dānava cut off that easily with Gandharvāstra. Kālī then threw the flame-like Mâheśvarāstra. The king made it futile by the Vaiṣṇavāstra.

नारायणासं सा देवी चिश्वेप मंजपूर्वकम् ।

राजा ननाम तदूद्धुा चावकघु तथावसी ॥ 51 ॥

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

क्रधैं जगाम तच्चारं प्रल्यामिनिशखोपमम् ।

पाता शंखचुरूढ़ भकत्या तं देडवढ़वि ॥ 52 ॥

Then the Devi purifying the Nārāyanāstra with the mantra, threw it on the king. At this the king instantly alighted from his chariot and bowed down to it. The Nārāyanāstra rose high up like the Dissolution Fire. Śankhacūḍla fell prostrate on the ground with devotion.

ब्रह्मासे सा च स्थिपय यन्तते मेजपूर्वकम् ।

ब्रह्मायेग महाराजो निर्विधें चकार सः ॥ 53 ॥

तदा सिक्षेप दिव्यास्व सा देवी मेजपूर्वकम् ।

राजा दिव्यास्जाजलेन तत्रिवर्णं चकार च ॥ 54 ॥

The Devi threw, then, the Brahmāstra, purifying it with Mantra. But it was rendered futile by the Dānava's Brahmāstra. The Devi again shot the divine weapons purifying them with mantras; but they also were nullified by the divine weapons of the Dānava.

देवी विश्वेण गर्नि च वयन्तो योजनायताम् ।

राज दिव्याखजालेन शतखंडों च चकार ह ॥ 55 ॥

Then Bhadrakālī threw one Sākti extending to one Yojana. The Daitya cut it to pieces by his divine weapon.

जग्राह मंजपूर्त च देवी पाणुपर्नं सभा ।

निक्षेपणं निरीघूं च वाराक्यूवासरीरिणी ॥ ५६ ॥

मृत्यु: पाणुपं नारित नृत्यच म हात्मतः ।

यावदिति च मंत्रस्य कवचं च होरिति ॥ ५७ ॥

The Devi, then, being very much enraged, became ready to throw Pāśupata Astra, when the Incorporeal Voice was heard from the Heavens, prohibiting Her, and saying “O Devi! The high-souled Dānava would not be killed by the Pāśupata weapon.

यावस्ततीत्यमस्नेव सल्याक्ष नवयोषितः ।

तावदस्य जगमृतुर्नार्मतीति ब्रहणीय चचः ॥ 58 ॥

इत्याकर्ण्यं घरकाली न तिच्छक्षेप शाखकम् ।

शतलक्षं दानवानां जगास लील्या क्षुधा ॥ 59 ॥

For Brahmā granted him this boon that until the Viṣṇu's Kavaca will remain on his neck and until his wife's chastity be violated, old age and death

will not be able to touch him." Hearing this Celestial Voice, the Devi at once desisted. But She out of hunger, devoured hundreds and lakhs of Dānavas.

प्रस्तुं जगाम चेनेन शंखच्छं भयंकी ।

दिव्यासेण सुतीक्षेणेन वारयामास दानवः ॥ 60 ॥

खड्गं चिक्षेप सा देकी प्रीम्यमूयीमां नंथा ।

दिव्यासेण दानदेश: शतखंचे चकार सः ॥ 61 ॥

The terrible Devi Kālī, then, went with great speed to devour Śaṅkhacūḍa but the Dānava resisted Her by his sharp divine weapons. The Devi then threw on him a powerful axe, lustrous like a summer Sun; but the Dānava cut it to pieces by his divine weapon.

पुर्णस्मैतं महाद्वीये बेगेन च जगाम तम् ।

सर्वसिद्धश्र: श्रीमान्ववृधे दानवेश्वः ॥ 62 ॥

वेगेन मुहिना काली कपेयुक्ता भयंकरी ।

बर्भजे च रर्थ तस्य जयान साराखिं सती ॥ 63 ॥

The Devi seeing this, became very angry and proceeded to devour him; but the Dānava King, the Lord of all Siddhis, expanded his body. At this, Kālī became violently angry and assuming a terrific appearance, went quickly and with the blow of one first, broke his chariot and dropped down the charioteer.

सा स शुले च चिश्विप प्रल्यार्पिनिशोयामम् ।

यामहसने जग्राह शुबुचुः: स्वलील्या ॥ 64 ॥

मुखा जयान तं देईी महाकोपेय वेगतः ।

बधाम च तया दैवः क्षणं मृच्छीमवाय च ॥ 65 ॥

Then she hurled on the Asura one Śula weapon, blazing like a Pralaya Fire. Śankhacūḍa easily held that by his left hand. The Devi became angry and struck the Dānava with Her first; the Daitya's head reeled, and, rolling, he fell unconscious for a moment.

क्षणेचे चेतनां प्राय्य मसुन्तस्यी प्रतपायन् ।

न चकार बाहुयुद्धे त्वया सह ननाम तात् ॥ 66 ॥

देव्याश्रासे स चिष्ठेद्व जगह् च स्वतेजसा ।

नासं चिष्ठेतां भानो मातृभकत्या तु वैधणाः ॥ 67 ॥

Next moment regaining his consciousness he got

Book IX Chapter XXIII

up. But he did not fight hand to hand with the Devi. Rather he bowed down to Her. The weapons that the Devi threw afterwards were partly cut down by the Dānava and partly taken up by him and absorbed in him and thus rendered futile.

गृहीता दानवं देवी घामवित्या पुन: पुनः ।

ऊर्ध्यं च प्रायमास महावेनेन कोशिति ॥ 6 8 ॥

ऊर्ध्यविपात वेनेन शुकृषुः प्रतपवान् ।

निपत्य च समुतस्यी प्रणाय भग्रकालिकाम् ॥ 6 9 ॥

Then Bhadrakālī caught hold of the Dānava and whirling him round and round threw him aloft. Then the powerful Śaṅkhacūḍa fell down on the ground from high with great force; he immediately got up and bowed down to Her.

रत्नेस्रारिनिमांण विमानं सुमनोहरम् ।

आरनोह हर्षेयुक्तो न विश्रांतो महारणे ॥ ७ ७ ॥

दानवानां च क्षतजं सा देवी च पपी क्षया ।

पीता भुत्वा भुस्ताली जगाम रंगक्रौतिकम् ॥ 7 1 ॥

He then ascended on his beautiful chariot, built of excellent jewels. He did not feel any fatigue with the war and went on fighting. Then the Devi Bhadrakālī, feeling hungry began to drink the blood of the Dānavas and ate the fat and flesh,

उवाच रणावृतांत पौर्वार्यं यथाक्रमम् ।

शुत्वा जहास शंभुश दानवानां विनाशनम् ॥ 7 2 ॥

लक्षं च दानवंर्णामवशिषं रणेस्पुना ।

भुज्ञन्या निरितं वक्यात्तव्यं भुक्तमीक्षा ॥ 7 3 ॥

She came before Mahādeva and described to Him the whole history of the warfare from beginning to end. Hearing the killing of the Dānavas, Mahādeva began to laugh. She went on saying “The Dānavas that get out of my mouth while I was chewing then, are the only ones that are living. This number will be about one Iakh.

संग्रामे दानवेईेच च हेतुं पाणुपाने वे ।

अवध्यस्त व जतेत्र वावम्बूवागरीिणी ॥ 74 ॥

राजईश महान्ती महावल्यरात्मभः ।

न च चिक्षेप मध्यस्ते चित्यदेव मम सायकम् ॥ 75 ॥

इति शीमद्वैशीभागवते महापुराणे नवमरकन्चे नारदनारायणसंवेद

ड्राविशोअव्याः ॥ 22 ॥

And when I took up the Pāśupata weapon to kill Dānava, the Incorporeal Celestial Voice spoke: 'He is invulnerable by you.' But the very powerful Dānava did no more fling any weapon on Me. He simply cut to pieces those that I threw on him."

Here ends the Twenty-second Chapter in the Ninth

Book on the fight between the Devas

and Śaṅkhacūda in the Mahāpurāṇam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXIII

CHAPTER XXIII

On the Killing of Śaṅkhacāḍḍa

श्रीनारायण उवाच

शिवस्तत्वं समाकपयं तत्वज्ञानविशारादः ।

यथी स्वयं च समरे स्वागपैः सह नारद ॥ 1 ॥

शड़चूद्रः शिवं चूढ़ा विमानादवस्कृच च ।

ननाम पर्या भवक्ना शिरसा दंडवद्धुवि ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyana said: Śiva, versed in the knowledge of the Highest Reality, hearing all this, went himself with His whole host to the battle. Seeing Him, Śankhacūḍa alighted from his chariot and fell prostrate before him. With great force he got up and, quickly putting on his armour he took up his huge and heavy bow case.

तं प्रणय च वेगेन विमानमार्गहे सः ।

तूर्णं चकार सजाई धनुर्जीग्रह दुर्दहम् ॥ ३ ॥

शिवदानवयोयुँदं पूर्णमब्छरतं पुरा ।

न बधुवतृन्योनं बढ़ीज्ययराजयी ॥ ४ ॥

Then a great fight ensued between Śiva and Śaṅkhacūḍa for full one hundred years but there was no defeat nor victory on either side. The result was stalemate. Both of them, Bhagavān and the Dāṇava quitted their weapons.

न्यस्तशक्ष्ठ भगवान्यस्तशक्ष्ठ दानवः ।

रथस्य: शंखद्धुड्ठ हुवस्थो वृषभध्वजः ॥ ५ ॥

दानवानां च शतकम्पूदतं च बधूत है ।

रणो वे वे युता: संधुर्जिव्यामास तान्विभु: ॥ 6 ॥

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

Śankhacūda, remained on his chariot and Mahādeva role on His Bull. Hundreds and hundreds of Dānavas were slain. But extraordinarily endowed with divine power, Śambhu restored to life all those of His party that were slain.

पृतस्मित्रोंते चुद्धबाहुण: परमातुरः ।

आगत्य च रणश्वामयुवाच दानवेश्वभ । ७ ।।

In the meanwhile, an aged Brāhmaṇa, very distressed in his appearance, came to the battlefield and asked Śaṅkhacūda, the King of Dānavas:

युद्धबाहुण उवाच

रेहि शिक्षां च राजेन्र मही विधाय संग्रन्म ।

त्वं सर्वस्म्यदां दाता यन्मे मनसि वांछितम् ॥ 8 ॥

निरीहाय च वृद्धाय दृषिताय च संग्रम्न ।

पशुत्वां कविध्यामि पुः सत्यं च कुर्किति ॥ 9 ॥

"O King! Grant me what I beg of you; you give away in charity all sorts of wealth and riches; give me also what I desire; give me, a Brāhmin, something also. I am quite peaceable aged Brāhmin, very very thirsty. Make your Promise first and then I will speak to you what I desire.

Note: The Brāhmins only are fit for receiving frauds and cheatings.

ओमित्युवाच राजेंद्र: प्रसजवदनेक्षणः ।

क्रवाचार्थी जनश्रादामित्युवाचातिमायया ॥ 10 ॥

तच्छुवा कवचं दिव्यं जग्राह हरिसे च ।

शुकृष्डस्य रूपेण जगाम तुरुसी प्रति ॥ 11 ॥

The King Śaṅkhacūḍa, with a gracious countenance and pleasing eyes swore before him that He would give him what he would desire. Then the Brāḥim spoke to the King with great affection and Māyā: 'I am desirous of your Kavaca (amulet).' The King, then, gave him the Kavaca (the amulet, mantra written on a Bhurja bark and located in a golden cup). Bhagavān Hari (in the form of that Brāḥim) took that Kavaca and, assuming the form of Śaṅkhāḍūḍa came to Tulasi.

गत्वा तस्यां मायया च वीर्याधानं चकार च ।

अथ शंभूरि: शूलं जग्राह दानवं प्रति ॥ 12 ॥

ग्रीभमध्यात्मान्तैषडूल्यान्निशाखोपम्।

तृनीवार्ये च दुर्वर्भमवर्धे वैरिताक्तम् ॥ 13 ॥

Coming there, He made His Māyā (magic) manifest and held sexual intercourse with her. At this time Mahādeva took up the Hari's trident-aiming at the king of the Dānavas. The trident looked like the Mid-day Sun of summer, flaming like a Pralaya fire, It looked irresistible and invincible as if quite powerful to kill the enemies.

तेजसा चक्रतूल्यं च सर्वशलासारकाम।

शिवकेशगवोरान्वुदईं च भयंकर्म ॥ 14 ॥

In brilliance it equalled the Sudarśana Cakra (disc) and it was the chief of all the weapons. No other body then Śiva and Keśava could wield such a weapon.

धनु:सहरं दैर्घेंण प्रयोन शतहस्तकम् ।

सर्जीवं ब्रह्मार्यं च नित्यक्रमनिर्दिगम् ॥ 15 ॥

संहर्तुं सर्वबह्रासलं यत्वीयालीया ।

चिश्रप तोलने कृत्वा शंखचुढ़े च नारद ॥ 16 ॥

राजा चारं परित्यज्य श्रीकृष्णचरणायुजम् ।

ध्यानं चकार भकल्या च कृत्वा योगासनं चिया ॥ 17 ॥

And everybody feared that but Śiva and Keśava. In length it was one thousand Dhanus and in width it was one hundred hands. It seemed lively, of the nature of Brahma, eternal and not capable to be noticed, whence and how it proceeded. The weapon could destroy, by its own free Lilā (Will) all the worlds. When Śiva held it aloft the aiming at Śaṅkhacāḍa, He hurled it on him, the King of the Demons quitted his bows and arrows and with mind collected in a yoga posture, began to meditate on the lotus-feet of Śri Kṛṣna with great devotion.

गूलं च भ्रमणं कृत्वा पपात दानवोपरि ।

चकार भयसातं च सर्श चाव लीलया ॥ 18 ॥

राजा धृत्वा दिव्यकर्ण किंशोरं गोपवेकम् ।

दिपुर्ज मृलहिंस्त रतनभूषणभूषितम् ॥ 19 ॥

रत्नेहसाराविमर्शो वेहितं गोपवकादिधि: ।

गोलोकाद्यातं यानमाहरोह पुरं यद्ये ॥ 20 ॥

At that moment. the trident, whirling round fell on Śaṅkhacūda and easily burnt him and his chariot to ashes. He, then, assuming the form of a two-

Book IX Chapter XXIV

armed Gopa, full of youth, divine, ornamented with jewels, holding flute, mounted on a Divine Chariot, surrounded by kōtis and kōtis of Gopas who came there from the region of Goloka, whose bodies were built up of excellent jewels, and Śankhacūda then went up to the Heavens (Goloka, where Śri Vrndāvana is located is located in the middle).

नाला ननाम शिरसा स राश्राकृष्णायोभुने ।

भवल्या च चरणाधोजं रासे वृद्धावने चे १ २ १ ॥

सुदामानं च तो सूद्वा प्रसज्वदनैक्षणी ।

क्रेडे चक्रतुरलंते प्रेणान्तिषारिसंसुतो ११ २२ ॥

He went to Vrndāvana, full of Rasas (sentiments) and bowed down at the lotus feet of Rādhā Krṣṇa with devotion. Both of them were filled with love when they saw Sudāmā, and, with a gracious countenance and joyful eyes, they took him on their laps. On the other hand the Śūla weapon came with force and gladness back again to Krṣṇa

अथ शुलं च वेगेन प्रययी तं च साद्यम् ।

अत्थिधिः: शाखच्छूत्थ संखजातितर्बेवृह ॥ 23 ॥

नानाप्रकास्वेण शश्वभूता सुरावेने ।

प्रश्नरं संखतोयं च देवानां प्रीतिदं परम् ॥ 24 ॥

The bones of Śaṅkhacūḍa, O Narada! were transformed into conch-shells. These conch-shells are always considered very sacred and auspicious in the worship of the Devas. The water in the conch-shell is also very holy and pleasing to the Devas. What more than this, that the water in the conch-shell is as holy as the water of any Tritha.

तीर्वीयस्यल्पं च पवित्रं शंभुना विना ।

गंखगढ़ो बपेढ़ात तक लक्ष्मी: सुसंश्रियरा ॥ 25 ॥

स सन्तः सर्वतीर्थ्यु घः सन्तः गैखवारिणा ।

गंखो हेरंरधिहानं चत्र गैखतन्तो हरि: ॥ 26 ॥

This water can be offered to all the Gods but

not to Śiva. Wherever the conch-shell is blown, there Lakṣmī abides with great pleasure. If bathing be done with conch-shell water, it is equivalent to taking bath in all the Tīrthas. Bhagavān Hari resides direct in the conch-shell.

तत्रैव वसते लक्ष्मीद्वीभूतममूकलम् ।

स्लीणां च संख्याधनिभः श्रुज्ञाणा च विशेषतः ॥ 27 ॥

भीता कहा याति लक्ष्मीतत्यल्वाल्यद्यतः ।

शिवर्ष पदानवं हृता शिवालोकं जगाम ह ॥ 28 ॥

Where Śaṅkha is placed, there Hari resides. Lakṣmī also resides there and all inauspicious things fly away from there. Where the females and Śūdras blow the Śaṅkhas, Lakṣmī then gets vexed and, out of terror, She goes away to other places. O Nārada! Mahadeva, after killing the Dānava, went to His own abode.

प्रहृही वृषभासुक: स्वर्गीषु सम्बतु: ।

सुरा: स्वविषयं प्रापु: परमानंदसंपुतः ॥ 29 ॥

नेदुईदुघमयः स्वर्गे जगृर्गी-वर्गीक्रिर्भतः ।

बधूर पुण्यवृष्टिश्वास्योर संततम् ।

प्रशसीसुः सुगतं च मुनी-न्रप्रवरादः ॥ 30 ॥

इति शीमदौरिभागवाते महापुराणो नवमस्कन्धे

नयोविरोगोअध्याः ॥ 23 ॥

When He gladly went away on His Vehicle, on the Bull's back, with His whole host, all the other Devas went to their respective places with great gladness. Celestial drums were sounded in the Heavens. The Gandharvas and the Kinnaras began to sing songs. And showers of flowers were strewn on Śiva's head. All the Munis and Devas and their chiefs began to chant hymns to Him.

Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter of the Nineth

Book on the killing of Śaṅkhacūda in

Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXIV

CHAPTER XXIV

On the Glory of Tulasi

नारद उवाच

नारायणश्रु भपाखानीयांधानं चकार ह ।

तुलस्यां केन रूपेण तन्मे व्याख्यानुमहींस ॥ 1 ॥

Nārada said: How did Nārāyaṇa impregnate Tulasi? Kindly describe all that in detail.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

नारायणश्व भगवान्देवानां साधनेषु च ।

गंखचूडस्य कवचं गृहीत्वा विद्यामायया ॥ २ ॥

पूर्वविधाय तरूपं जगाम तस्सौगृहम् ।

पातित्रत्यस्य नाशेन शकुषचूडजिघांसया ॥ ३ ॥

Nārāyana said: For accomplishing the ends of the Devas, Bhagavān Hari assumed the Vaisnavi Māyā, took the Kavaca from Śaṅkhcūḍa and assuming his form, went to the house of Tulasi. Dundubhis (celestial drums) were sounded at Her door, shouts of victory were proclaimed and Tulasi was informed.

दुर्उपिं बाद्यामास तुलसीद्वारसिद्धी ।

वयशद्धं च तद्धूतर वीध्यामास सुन्दीम् ॥ 4 ॥

तच्छूत्वा च रथं साखी परमानन्दसयुता ।

राजमार्ग गवाङ्गण दर्शण परमात्रत् ॥ 5 ॥

ब्राहिणीभयो धर्न दत्ता कारयामास मंगलम् ।

वंत्येष्यो मिबुक्रोन्पश्व वाचिष्यशु धर्न ददी ॥ 6 ॥

The chaste Tulasi, hearing that sound very gladly looked out on on the royal road from the window. Then for auspicious observances, She offered riches to the Brāhmins; then She gave wealth to the panegyrists (or bards attached to the courts of princess), to the beggars, and the other chants of hymns.

अक्रकृत श्यादेयो देल्याध भवनं ययी ।

अमूल्यरत्निरिभंगि सुन्दरं सुमनोहरम् ॥ 7 ॥

द्वृषा च पुरतः कानत सा तं कानं मुद्धात्विता ।

तत्वादं क्षालयामास ननाम च रोदे च ॥ 8 ॥

That time Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa alighted from His chariot and went to the house of the Devi Tulasī, built of invaluable gems, looking exceedingly artistic and beautiful. Seeing her dear husband before her, She became very glad and washed his feet and shed tears of joy and bowed down to Him.

तलसिंहासने रथे वासयामास कामुकी ।

तांतूलं च ददी तस्मै कर्णारिवसुवासितम् ॥ ९ ॥

उद्य मे सफलं जन्य जीवनं च बभूव ह ।

रोगे गतं च प्राणोशं एपयंल्याङ्ग पुनगृहे ॥ १० ॥

Then She, impelled by love, made him take his

seat on the beautiful jewel throne and giving him sweet scented betels with camphor, began to say: "To-day my life has been crowned with success. For I am seeing again my lord returned from the battle."

ससिता सकटार्णे च सकामा पुलकाक्षिकृता ।

पप्रळ तणवृत्तांं कान्तं मधुर्या मिंगा ॥ ११ ॥

Then she cast smiling glances askance at him and with her body filled with rapturous joy lovingly asked him the eyes news of the war in sweet words:

तुलस्वयाच

असंख्यविश्रसहांं साधैमाजी तव प्रभो ।

कर्थं कम्पूव विजयसन्तमे बूहिं कृपानिधे ॥ १ २ १ ॥

तुलसीवचनं श्रुना प्रक्ष्य कमलापति: ।

गंखद्धुरस्य रूपेण तामुवाचामृतं वचः ॥ १ ३ ॥

"O Thou, the Ocean of mercy! Now tell me of your heroic valour, how you have come out victorious in war with Mahādeva who destroys countless universes." Hearing Tulasi's word, the Lord of Lakṣmī, in the guise of Śankhacūda, spoke these nectar-like words with a smiling countenance.

श्रीभगवानुवाच

आवयो: समर: कान्ते पूर्णमिद्ध बभूव ह ।

नागो बभूव सर्वैषां दानवानां च कामिनि ॥ 14 ॥

प्रीति च कारयामास बहा च स्वयमावयो: ।

देवानामधिकारश प्रदत्तो ब्राहुणाज्ञा ॥ 15 ॥

मयाउंसत्त स्वभवर्ग शिवलोक शिवगे गतः ।

इत्युक्त्वा जगतां नाश: शयनं च चकार ह ॥ 16 ॥

O Dear! Full one Samvatsara the war lasted betwixt us. All the Daityas were killed. Then Brahma Himself came and mediated. Peace, then, was brought about and by the command of Brahma. I gave over to the Devas their rights.

रेसे सपातिस्तत्र रायमा सह नारद ।

सा साध्यों सुखसंभोगातकर्णथ्यतिक्रमान् ॥ 17 ॥

सर्व वितकंयामास करल्येवेल्यावस सा ।

When I returned to my home, Śiva went back to His Śivaloka. Thus saying! Hari, the Lord of the world, slept and then engaged in sexual intercourse

Book IX Chapter XXIV

with her. But the chaste Tulasi, finding this time her experience quite different from what She used to enjoy before, argued all the time within herself and at last questioned him:

तुलस्यवाच

को या तं वं दर मायेय भुक्ताउं मायया तथा ॥ १८ ॥

दूरीकृतं मसतीत्वं यदतस्तंश पशामि है ।

तुलसीवचनं शुत्वा हरि: शापभयेन च ॥ 19 ॥

दधार लीलया बढ़ान्मूर्ति सुमनोहराम ।

दर्शं पुतते देदी देवदेवं सनातनम् ॥ 20 ॥

नवीननीरद्यमां शतलढ़जलोचनम् ।

कोटिकन्दपरीलोभयं रत्नभूषणभूषितम् ॥ 21 ॥

"Who are you? O Magician! By spreading your magic, you have enjoyed me. As you have taken my chastity, I will curse you. Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa, hearing Tulasi's words and being afraid of the curse, assumed His real beautiful figure. The Devi then saw the Eternal Lord of the Devas before her. He was of a deep blue colour like fresh rain-clouds and with eyes like autumnal lotuses and with playful Liliās equivalent to tens and tens of millions of Love personified and adorned with jewels and ornaments.

ईपद्धार्य प्रस्नार्य संग्रिंत पौतावासम्म।

तं द्रष्टा कामिनी कामं मृच्छीं संग्राम लीलाया। 2 22 ॥

पुनश्छे चेतनां प्रायय पुनः सा तमुवाच ह ।

His face was smiling and gracious; and he were his yellow-coloured robe. The love-stricken Tulasī, seeing That Lovely Form of Vāsudeva, immediately fell senseless; and at the next moment, regaining consciousness, she began to speak.

तुल्यवाच

है नाथ ते दया नास्ति पाषाणसदृशस्य च ॥ २३ ॥

छलेन धर्मभंगेगेन मम स्वामी तवा हतः ।

पाषाणहृदयस्तं हि दयाहीनो नयः प्रभे ॥ २४ ॥

O Lord! Thou art like a stone. Thou hast no mercy. By hypocrisy Thou hast destroyed my chastity, my virtue and for that reason didst kill my husband. O Lord! Thou hast no mercy; Thy

heart is like a stone. So Let Thee be turned into a stone.

तस्मायाघणाकृपस्वं भवे देव भवाधुना ।

ये वदन्ति च साधुं त्वां ते भ्राता हि न संशयः ॥ 25 ॥

भक्तो विनापराधेन परार्थे च कवं हतः ।

भूर्णं रौद्ध सोकातां विल्लाग युद्धुरुंः ॥ 26 ॥

ततक्षि कर्णां द्धा कर्णागरससागरः ।

नयेन तां बोधीयतुमुबाव कमालपतिः ॥ 27 ॥

Those who declare Thee as a saint, are no doubt mistaken. Why didst Thou for the sake of others, kill without any fault, another Bhakta of Thine. Thus speaking Tulasi overpowered with grief and sorrow, cried aloud and repeatedly gave went to lamentations. Seeing her thus very distressed, Nārāyaṇa, the Ocean of Mercy, spoke to her to cheer her up according to the rules of Dharma.

श्रीभगवान्वाच

तपस्मवां कृतं भरे मदर्थे भारते चितम् ।

त्वदर्थे शंखदूढ़छ चकार सुविंतं तपः ॥ 28 ॥

कृत्वा त्वां कामिनी सोर्जि विजहार्च च तत्क्षणात् ।

अधुना दातुमुचितं तर्वेत तपसः फलम् ॥ 29 ॥

O Honoured One! For a long time you performed tapasyā in this Bhārata, to get me. Śaṅkhacūḍa, too, performed tapasyā for a long time to get you. By that tapas, Śaṅkhacūḍa got you as wife. Now it is highly incumbent to award you also with the fruit that you asked for.

इंदं शरीरं त्यकत्वा च हिव्यदेहं चिधाया च ।

तामे पर मया सार्थ तर्व सामसूर्णी भव ॥ ३० ॥

इयं तनुनींटीषा गंडकीति च विश्रुता ।

पूता सुपुण्यदा नृणां पुणे भवतु भाते ॥ ३१ ॥

Therefore, I have done this. Now quit your this terrestrial body and assume a Divine Body and marry Me. O Rame! Be like Lakṣmī. This body of yours will be known by the name of Gaṇḍakī, a very virtuous, pure and pciuicid stream in this holy land of Bhārata.

तव केशसमूढ़ः पुण्यवृझे पशिव्यति ।

तुलसीकेशसंभृता तुलसीति च विश्रुता ॥ 32 ॥

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

प्रियु लोकेकु पुर्णाणां पत्राणां देवपूजने ।

प्रधानरूपा तुलसी भविष्यति वरानने ॥ 33 ॥

Your hairs will be turned into sacred trees and as they will be born of you, you will be known by the name of Tulasi. All the three worlds will perform their Pūjas with the leaves and flowers of this Tulasi.

स्वर्ग मत्वैं च पाताले गोलोके मम सन्धिशे ।

भव तं तुलसी वृक्षवरा पुथेषु सुदारी ॥ 34 ॥

गोलेक शिवजातीर रासे वृद्धावने वने ।

भांडीरे चम्यकवने रम्ये चन्दनकानने ॥ 35 ॥

माध्यवीकेतकीकुन्द्मल्लकामालतीबने ।

Therefore, O Fair-faced One! This Tulasi will be reckoned as the chief amongst all flowers and leaves, In Heavens, earth, and the nether regions, and before Me, O Fair One, you will reign as the chief amongst trees and flowers. In the region of Goloka, on the banks of the river Virajā, in the Rāsa circle (the celestial ball dance), where all amorous sentiments are played in Vrndāvana forest, in Bhāndīra forest, in Campaka forest, in the beautiful Candana (Sandal) Forests and in the groves of Mādhavī, Ketakti, Kunda, Mallikā, and Mālati, in the sacred places you will live and bestow the highest religious merits.

वाससोर्जेव भवतु पुण्यस्थानेपु पुण्यद: ॥ 36 ॥

तुलसीतमूलेश पुण्यदेशेषु पुण्यदम् ।

अधिष्ठानं च तीर्थानं सर्वेषां च भविष्यति ॥ 37 ॥

तत्र च सर्वेदेवानां ममाधिष्ठानये च ।

तुलसीपरपतन्नायये च वरानने ॥ 38 ॥

All the Tirthas will reside at the bottom of the Tulasi tree and so religious merits will accrue to all. O Fair-faced One! There I and all the Devas will wait in expectation of the falling of a Tulasi leaf.

स स्नातः सर्वतीर्थु सर्वयत्रेषु दीक्षितः ।

तुलसीपत्रातेय नोर्सभवेकं समाचरेत् ॥ ३९ ॥

सूपाध्यतसहसाणां या तुहितुं भवेद्यरेः ।

सा च तुहिभवैनूनं तुलसीपत्रव्रतानः ॥ ४० ॥

Any-body who will be initiated and installed

with the Tulasī leaves water, will get all the fruits of being initiated in all the sacrifices. Whatever pleasure Hari gets when thousands and thousands of jars filled with water are offered to him, the same pleasure He will get when one Tulasī leaf will be offered to Him.

गवायमुतदानेन यकर्षत तरकर्ष भवेत् ।

तुलसीपत्रदानेन तरकर्त कार्षिके सती ॥ 41 ॥

तुलसीपत्रतोयं च मृत्युकाले च यो क्षेपत् ।

मुच्यते सर्वयोपयो० विद्यणोके महीयते ॥ 42 ॥

Whatever fruits are acquired by giving Ayuta cows as presents, those will be also acquired by giving Tulasi Leaves. Especially if one gives. Tulasi leaves in the month of Kārtika, one gets the fruits same as above mentioned.

नित्यं यस्तुलसीतयं घुंके कवचा च मानवः ।

लक्षाक्षभोत्रं पुर्णे संग्रान्ताति स मानवः ॥ 4 3 ॥

तुलसी स्वकरे कृत्वा धृत्वा देहे च मानवः ।

प्राणास्त्वजित तीर्थेषु विष्णुलोकं स गच्छति ॥ 4 4 ॥

If one drinks or gets the Tulasī leaf water at the momentous Time of Death, one becomes freed of all sins and is worshipped in the Viṣṇu Loka. He who drinks daily the Tulasī leaf water certainly gets the fruit of one lakh horse sacrifices. He who plucks or culls the Tulasī leaf by his hand and holding it on his body, quits his life in a Tirath, goes to Viṣṇu Loka.

तुलकीमहाठनिर्यामाला गृहाति यो नरः ।

पदे पटेःधमेयस्य लभते निश्रितं फलम् ॥ 45 ॥

तुलसी स्वकरे कृत्वा स्वीकारों यो न सक्षिति ।

स याति कालसूत्रं च यावच्छर्दिवाकरी ॥ 46 ॥

Whoever holds in his neck the garland made up of Tulasi wood, gets certainly the fruit of horse sacrifices at every step. He who does not keep his word, holding the Tulasi leaf in his hand, goes to the Kālasutra Hell as long as the Sun and Moon last.

करीति मिथ्याणपर्व तुलस्यां गोउत्र मानवः ।

स याति कुंभीपाकं च यावद्रिंडाश्रुटिंग १। ४७ ॥

तुलसीतीयकाणिका मृत्युकाले च यो लभेत ।

रत्नयानं समाक्रहु वैकुंड प्राप्येत ध्रुवम् ॥ ४८ ॥

Book IX Chapter XXIV

He who gives false evidence in the presence of the Tulasi leaf, goes to the Kumbhipāka Hell for the life-periods of fourteen Indras. He who drinks or gets a bit of the Tulasi leaf water at the time of death, certainly goes to Vaikuntha, ascending on a car made up of jewels.

पूर्णिवायाममायां च द्वाद्यां राविसंकमे ।

तैलाथयंं च कृत्वा च माध्याङ्गे निरिं शंययतेः ॥ ४ ९ ॥

अशौचे3-शुचिकाले ये राजिवासोनिता नगः ।

तुलसीं ये विक्रियन्ति ते छिदांति हरे: शिरः ॥ 5 ० १ ॥

Those who pluck or call the Tulasi leaves in the Full Moon night, on the twelfth lunar day, on the passing of the sun from one sign to another, the mid-day, or on the twilights, on the night, while applying oil on their bodies, on the impurity periods, and while putting on night dresses, verily cut off the Nārāyaṇa's head.

त्रिरातं तुलसीपत्रं गुर्द्धे पर्युक्ति सति ।

श्राढ़े जते च दाने च प्रतिष्ठायां सुराचे ॥ ५१ ॥

भूगतं तोयपतितं यदृतं विष्णवे सति ।

गुर्द्धे च तुलसीपत्रं क्षलानाद्यकर्मिण ॥ ५२ ॥

O Chaste One! The Tulasi leaf kept in the night, is considered sacred. It is considered good in Śrāddha, vow, ceremony, in the making over of any gift, in the installation of any image or in worshipping any Deva. Again, the Tulasi leaf fallen on the ground or fallen in water or offered to Viṣṇu, if washed out can be used in holy and other purposes.

वृक्षाधिष्ठानुदेवी या गोलोके च निरामाये ।

कृष्णेन सार्थ नित्यं च नित्यक्रीडां कार्तियासि ॥ ५३ ॥

नद्धिष्ठानुदेवी या गोलोके सा सुपुण्यत ।

ल्वणोद्य सा परनी मद्राश्य च भविष्यति ॥ ५४ ॥

Thus, O Good One! You will remain as trec in this earth and will remain in Goloka as the Presiding Deity thereof and will enjoy daily the sport with Kṛṣna. And also you will be the Presiding Deity of the river Gāndakī and thus bestow religious merits in Bhārata; you will be the wife of the Salt Ocean, which is My part You are very chaste; in Vaikuntha you will enjoy me as Ramā lives with Me.

तवे च स्वयं महासाध्यी वैकुण्ठे मम सन्धिणी ।

रासाममा च रामा च भविष्यसि न संग्रवः ॥ 55 ॥

अई च शैल्कणेण गडकीतीरसिद्धियों ।

अधिष्ठानं कतिष्यामि भागते तव शगपतः ॥ 56 ॥

कोदिसंख्यास्तत्र कौदारीसीशपादुंचारपुरुषुः ।

यच्छलाकुहरं चकं कारियांत मदीयकम् ॥ 57 ॥

And as for Me, I will be turned into stone by your curse; I will remain in India close to the bank of the river Gandakī. Millions and millions of insects with their sharp teeth will make ring, (the convolutions in the Śālagrāma or sacred stones), on the cavities of the mountains there, representing Me.

एकहारं चतुर्छकं नवीनीरोघमम् ।

नवीनीरोहाकारं लक्ष्मीनारायणाधिमम् ॥ 58 ॥

एकहारं चतुर्छकं नवीनीरोघम् ।

लक्ष्मीजनादौने जेशो रहितो बनमालया ॥ 59 ॥

Of these stones, those that have one door (entrance hole), four convolutions, adorned by the garland of wild flowers (having a mark like this) and which look like fresh rain-cloud, are called Laksmī Nārāyaṇa Mūrtis (forms). And those that have one door, four convolutions and look like fresh rain-clouds but no garlands are called Laksmī Janārdana Cakras (discus).

हारदये चतुर्कडे गोष्येने वित्यजितम् ।

सूचनाथिधे जेयं रहितं वनमाला ॥ 60 ॥

अतिछुरुं द्विचकं च गोष्येने वित्यजितम् ।

तद्वामनिधिं जेयं रहितं वनमाला ॥ 61 ॥

Those that have two doors, four convolutions, and decked with mark like cow's hoof and void of the garland mark are called Raghunātha Cakras. Those that are very small in size, with two Cakras and look like fresh rainclouds and void of garland marks are named Vāmana Cakras.

अतिछूरं द्विचकं च नवीनजलद्धपम् ।

विज्ञेयं शीधरं रूपं शीधरं गृहिणां सदा ॥ 6 2 ॥

स्वूलं च वर्तुलाकारं गृहितं वनमालया ।

द्विचकं सृष्टमत्यन्तं ज्ञे द्यामोदाराधिमम् ॥ 6 3 ॥

Those that that are very small in size, with two Cakras and the garland mark added, know then to

be the Sridhara Cakras. These always bring in prosperity to the household. Those that are big, circular, void of garland mark, with two circular Cakras, are known as Dāmodara forms.

मध्यमं सतचकं च छकृष्णभूषितम् ।

रागरामाधियं जेवं शरतुणसम्बित्यम् ॥ 64 ॥

मध्यमं सतचकं च छजतामभूषितम् ।

राजराजेशं जैयं राजसपददं नृणाम् ॥ 65 ॥

Those that are mediocre in size, with two Cakras and marked as if struck by an arrow, having marks of arrows and bow-cases are known as Rana-Rāmas. Those that are middling, with seven Cakras, having marks of an umbrella and ornaments, are called Rājarājeśvaras. They bestow the royal Lakṣmī to persons.

ढिसप्तचकं स्थूलं च नवनीरदुग्रप्रभम् ।

अनंताखं च विद्रेयं चतुर्वीफलप्रद्यम् ॥ 66 ॥

चकाकारं द्विचकं च सश्रीकं जलद्वमम् ।

सगोष्टं मध्यमं च विजरें मधुसूनम् ॥ 67 ॥

Those that have twice seven Cakras, and are big, looking like fresh rain-clouds are named Anantas. They bestow four fold (Dharma, wealth, desire and liberation). Those that are in their forms like a ring, with two Cakras, beautiful, looking like rain-clouds, having cow-hoof marks and of mediocre size, are named Madhusūdanas. Those that have one Cakra are called Sudarśanas.

सुदर्शनं चैकचकं गुप्तचकं गद्धार्यम् ।

द्विद्राके ह्वववक्याएं ह्वयीद्रा प्रकर्पितरिंम् ॥ 6 8 ॥

अंतीव विस्तृतायं च द्विक्रां किंकटं सति ।

नरसिंहं सुविज्ञेयं सदो चैरायदं नृणाम् ॥ 6 9 ॥

Those that have their Cakras hidden are called Gādādharas. Those that have two Cakras, looking horse-faced, are known as Hayagrivas. O Chaste One! Those that have their mouths very wide and extended, with two Cakras, and very terrible, are known as Narasinhas. They excite Vairāgyas to all who serve them.

ढिकं क्षितुतार्यं च वन्मालासमन्यितम् ।

लक्ष्मीनृसिंहं विजेयं गृहिणां च सुखप्रदम् ॥ ७० ॥

ब्रार्तेशे डिक्चे च सश्रीक च सभं स्कुटम् ।

वासुदेवं तु विज्ञेसं सर्वकामकलप्रदम् ॥ ७१ ॥

Those that have two Cakras, mouths extended and with garland marks (elliptical marks) are called Laksmī Nrsimhas. They always bless the householders who worship them. Those that have two Cakras near their doors (faces), that look even and beautiful, and with marks manifested are known as Vāsudevas. They yield all sorts of fruits.

प्रधृतं सूक्षभचं च नवीननिरादूषम् ।

सृष्विच्छिद्बहुले गृहिणं च सुखप्रदम् ॥ 72 ॥

है चके चैकल्लेन च पृछं यत्र तु पुकलम् ।

संकर्षणं सुविजेयं सुखदं गृहिणं सदा ॥ 73 ॥

Those that have their Cakras fine and their forms like fresh rain-clouds and have many fine hole marks within their wide gaping facets are called Pradyumna. They yield happiness to every householder. Those that have their faces of two Cakras stuck together and their backs capacious, are known as Saṅkarṣanas. They always bring in happiness to the householders.

अनिक्तद्रं तु पीताभं वर्तुंलं चातिरोभनम् ।

सुखाद्धं गृहस्थानां प्रवद्ति मनीषिणः ॥ 74 ॥

गाल्यामिला यत तत सभितितो हरि: ।

तत्रैव लक्ष्मीवंसिति सर्वतीर्थंसम्पित्ता ॥ 75 ॥

Those that look yellow, round and very beautiful are Aniruddhas. The sages say, they give happiness to the householders, Where there is the Śālagrāma stone there exists Śrī Hari Himself; and where there is Hari, Lakṣmī and all the Tirthas dwell there. Worshipping Śālagrāma Śilā, destroys the Brahmahatya (killing a Brāhmim) and any other sin whatsoever.

यानि कानि च पायानि ब्रह्मत्यादिकानि च ।

तानि सर्वाणि नर्यंति शाल्यामशिलाबनन्ति ॥ 76 ॥

छात्राकारे भवेत्राज्यं वर्तुरे च महाधियः ।

दुःखं च शकटाकारे शूलाघे मरणं धुवम् ॥ 77 ॥

In worshipping the Śālāgramā stone looking like an umbrella, kingdoms are obtained; in worshipping circular Śilās, great prosperity is obtained; in

Book IX Chapter XXIV

worshipping cart-shaped stones, miseries arise; and in worshipping stones, whose ends look like spears (Šūlas, death inevitably follows.

विकृतासे च दारिंह्वो चिंगले हानिरेव च ।

भन्चके भवेद्व्याधिर्विंदीगे मरणं धूवम् ॥ 78 ॥

जतं स्नानं प्रतिष्ठां च शाब्दं च देवपूजनम् ।

शाग्यामय साधिश्यानुशनतं तद्वेक्षिति ॥ 79 ॥

Those whose facets are distorted, bring in poverty; and yellow stones bring in various evils and afflictions. Those whose Cakras look broken, bring in diseases; and those whose Cakras are rent asunder bring in death certainly. Observing vows, making gifts, installing images, doing Śrāddhas, worshipping the Devas, all these become highly exalted, if done before the Śalāgrāma Śīlā.

स स्नातः सर्वतीयेषु सर्वयेजूये दीक्षितः ।

सर्वयेजूये तीर्थेयुं बतौयुं च तपःसु च ॥ 80 ॥

पाटे चतुर्णा वेदानां तपसां करणे सति ।

तत्पुर्ण क्षणते नूनं शाल्यामाशिलाबन्ना ॥ 81 ॥

One acquires the merits of bathing in all the Tirthas and in being initiated in all the sacrifices, if one worships the Śalāgramāa Sīlā. What more than this, that the merits acquired by all the sacrifices, all the Tirthas, all vows, all austerities and reading all the Vedas are all acquired by duly worshipping by the holy Śalāgramāa Sīlā.

"शलामाशिलातौर्यैंद्रिभवेकं सदासउचेत्।

सर्वदानेषु यत्पुर्ण प्रदक्षिणं भुवो यथा ।।"

शलामाशिलातोयं नित्यं भुक्ति च यो नतः ।

सुरैपितं प्रसादं च रूपते नात्र संशयः ॥ 82 ॥

He who performs his Abhiṣeka ceremony always with Śālagrāma water (being sprinkled with Śālagrāma water at the initiation and installation ceremonies), acquires the religious merits of performing all sorts of gifts and circumambulating the whole earth. All the Devas are, no doubt, pleased with him who who thus worships daily the Śālagrāma.

यस्य सर्शे चार्वड़ती तीर्थीन निश्छिन्ति च ।

जीवन्नुक्तो महापुतोउघन्ते याति होः पदम् ॥ 83 ॥

तत्रैव ह्रिणा साध्मसंखं प्राकृतं लवम् ।

यास्येवेह हिं दासेच व निवृष्तो दास्यकर्मिणि ॥ 84 ॥

What more than this, that all the Tirthas want to have his touch. He becomes a Jīvannukta (liberated while living) and becomes very holy; ultimately he goes to the region of Śrī Hari and reains in Hari's service there and dwells with him for countless Prākritic dissolutions.

यानि कानि च पापानि बहुहत्यासमानि च ।

तं चूद्रा च पलायते वैनतेवादिवेरागः ॥ 85 ॥

तत्पादराजम देवी सह्य:पुता वसुंधरा ।

पुंसां लक्षं तत्पिनुणां निस्तेत्तस्थ जन्मतः ॥ 86 ॥

Every sin, like Brahma Hatyā, files away from him as serpents do at the sight of Garuda. The Devi Vasundharā (the Earth) becomes purified by the touch of the dust of his feet. At his birth, all his predecessors (a lakh in number) are saved.

गणासामगिलातोमं घृम्युकले च चो लभेन ।

सर्वेपार्वितिपूर्णी तिथणुलोक से गच्छिति ॥ 87 ॥

निर्वाणपूर्ति क्षयते कर्मभोगारमुच्छत ।

विष्णोः पदे प्रलिध्ध भविष्यति न संशयः ॥ 88 ॥

He who gets the Sâlagrâma Śilâ water during the time of his death, he is freed of all his sins and goes to the Viṣṇu Loka and gets Nirvāna; he becomes freed entirely from the effects of Karma and he gets, no doubt, dissolved and diluted for ever in (the feet of) Viṣṇu.

शाल्यामशिलां भूत्वा मिथ्यावाक्यं बंदेतु चः ।

स याति कृम्भीपाके च गवाड़े ब्रहणणे वयः ॥ 89 ॥

शाल्यामशिलां धृत्वा सीकारों यो न पालयेत् ।

स प्रायात्यसिपयं च लक्षम-वंततराधि ॥ 90 ॥

He who tells lies, holding Śālāgramā in his hands, goes to the Kumbhipāka Hell for the life-period of Brahmā. If one does not keep his word, uttered with the Śālāgramā stone in his hand, one goes to the Asipatra Hell for one lakh manvantaras.

तुलसीपत्रविद्ध्छें शाल्यामे क्रौति यः ।

तस्य जमांते कांते क्षीविष्ठदो भविष्यति ॥ 91 ॥

गलायामां च तुलसीं ग्रंखं यो हि कौतरी च ।

भार्यांतीने भवेलसोप्र पैगी च सपतजमसु ॥ 92 ॥

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

He who worships the Śālāgrāma stone without offering Tulasi leaves on it or separates the Tulasi leaves from the stone, will have to suffer separation from his wife in his next birth. So if one does not offer the Tulasi leaves in the conchshell, for seven births he remains without his wife and he becomes diseased.

गालामां च तुलसीं गंखं चैकत्र एव च ।

यो स्थिति महान्तानी स भवेच्छीहरे: प्रियः ॥ 9३ ॥

सकुदेव हि यो यस्वां वीर्यायनं करोति च ।

तद्धिच्छे तस्य दुःखं भवेदेव एनस्प्यम् ॥ 9४ ॥

त्वं प्रिया शकुच्छस्य चैकमन्वंतराविध ।

गर्येतो सार्यं त्वद्धेदः केवलं दुःखद्रसना ॥ 9 5 ॥

He who preserves the Śālagrāma stone, the Tulasi and the conchshell, in one place, becomes very learned and becomes dear to Nārāyaṇa. Look! He who casts his semen once in his wife, suffers intense pain, no doubt, at each other's separation So you become dear to Śaṅkhacūḍa for one Manvantara. Now, what wonder! That you will suffer pain, at his bereavement.

इत्युक्वा श्रीहरितां च विरताया च नारत ।

सा च देई परित्यज दिव्यरूपं विधाय च ॥ 96 ॥

यथा श्रीध तथा सा चाय्यास हरिवक्षिति ।

स जगाम तया साधे कैकुणं कमलापितः ॥ 97 ॥

लक्ष्मी: सरस्वती गंगा तुलसी चापि नारद ।

O Nārada! Thus saying, Śrī Hari desisted. Tulasi quitted her mortal coil and assumed a divine form, began to remain in the breast of Śrī Hari like Śrī

Lakṣmī Devī. Hari also went with her to Vaikuntha Thus Lakṣmī, Sarasvati, Gaṅgā, and Tulasī, all the four came so very dear to Hari and are recognised as Íśvaris.

हरेः प्रियाश्तसघ्र बभूवृतीश्रस्य च ॥ 98 ॥

सघतस्तेहजाता च बभूव गंडकी नदी ।

ईक्षर: सोर्धिष शैलक्ष तत्तीर पुणवदो रुणगा ॥ 99 ॥

On the other hand, the mortal coil of Tulasi, no sooner quitted by Tulasi, became transformed into the river Gandaki. Bhagavān Hari, too, became also converted into a holy mountain, on the banks thereof, yielding religious merits to the people.

कुर्वित तक कौटाङ्ग शिलां बहुविधां मुने ।

जले पतित या याङ्ग फलदास्ताङ्ग निश्रितम् ॥ 100 ॥

स्थलस्था: पर्यिला जेन्याश्रीपतापाद्रसेरिति ।

इन्वेचं कथितं सर्व किं भृपः श्रीतुमिच्छसि ॥ 101 ॥

शी शीमदैवीभागतो महापुरुषो नस्मकच्चे नारायण गारवसंवादे

चतुर्विरोगेश्वण: 11 24 11

The insects cut and fashion many pieces out of that mountain. Of them, that fall into the river, yield fruits undoubtedly. And those pieces that fall on the ground become yellow coloured; they are not at all for worship. O Nārada! Thus I have spoken to you everything. What more do you want to hear now? Say.

Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the glory of Tulasī in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXV

On the Worship of Tulasi

नारद उवाच

तुलसी च घटा पुर्या कृतत नारायणप्रिया ।

अर्याः पूर्नायिधानं च स्तोयं च घद संप्रितम् ॥ 1 ॥

केन पूजा कृता केन स्तुता प्रथमतो मुने ।

तत्र पूर्णा सा बधूव केन वा घद मामहो ॥ 2 ॥

Nārada said: When the Devi Tulasī has been made so dear to Nārāyaṇa and thus an object for worship, then describe Her worship and Stotra (the

hymn of Tulasī) now. O Muni! By whom was She first worshipped? By whom were Her glories first sung? And how did She become therefore an object of worship? Speak out all these to me.

सूत जवाच

नारदस्य वचः श्रुला प्रत्य सुनिपुज्वः ।

कर्शा क्रवितुभारोचे पुर्णयं पाचहां परात् ॥ ३ ॥

Sūta said: Hearing these words of Nārada,

Book IX Chapter XXV

Nārāyaṇa, laughing, began to describe this very holy and sin-destroying account of Tulasī.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

हरि: संपूछ्य तुलसीं रेमे च रमया सह ।

रामसामानसीभायां चकार गौरेषण च ॥ 4 ॥

सैहे च लक्ष्मीगण च तत्याक्ष्य नवसंगमम् ।

सीभायागीरां कोपात्तन सेहे सरसती ॥ 5 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: Bhagavān Hari duly worshipped Tulasī, and began to enjoy her with Lakṣmī; He raised Tulasī to the rank of Lakṣmī and thus made her fortunate and glorious Lakṣmī and Ganga allied and bore this new union of Nārāyaṇa and Tulasī. But Sarasvatī could not endure this high position of Tulasī owing to Her anger.

सा तां जयान कल्ले मानिनी हरिसिद्धिणी ।

श्रीडया चापमानेन सांतधार्नं चकार ह १। ६ ॥

सर्वसिद्धेशी देवी ज्ञानिना सिद्ध्योगिनी ।

जगामादर्शनं कोपासर्वेत्र च हरेरो ॥ ७ ॥

She became self-conceited and beat Tulasī on some quarrel before Hari. Tulasī became abashed and insulted and vanished off. Being the Iśvari of all the Siddhis, the Devi, the Self-manifest and the Giver of the Siddhiyoga to the Jñānins, Tulasī, Oh! what a wonder, became angry and turned out as invisible to Śri Hari even.

हरिने चृष्टा तुलसी बोधयित्वा सरसतीम ।

तदनुर्गा गृहीत्वा च जगाम तुलसीवनम् ॥ 8 ॥

तत्र दत्वा च सुनतो हरि: स तुलसी सतीम् ।

पूजयामास तं घायाता स्तोयं भकत्वा चकार ह ॥ 9 ॥

Not seeing Tulasī, Hari appeared Sarasvatī and getting Her permission went to the Tulasī forest. Going there and taking a bath in due accord, and with due rites, worshipped with His whole heart the chaste Tulasī and then began to meditate on Her with devotion.

लक्ष्मी माया कामवाणी बीजपूर्व दशाक्षरम् ।

युन्धावनीति डेन्नं च चहिंजायांतमेव च ॥ 10 ॥

अनेन कल्पतला मन्त्राजेन नारद ।

पूजयेढी विधानेन सर्वसिद्धि लभेद्युम् ॥ 11 ॥

O Nārada! He gets certainly all siddhis who

worships Tulasi duly with the ten lettered mantra: 'Śrim Hrim Klīm Aim Vrndāvanyai Svāhā,' the King of mantras, yielding fruits and all gratifications like the Kalpa Tree.

भृतदीयेन धूपेन सिंदूरचन्दने च ।

नैवेदोन च पुर्णेण योचारणेन नारद ॥ 12 ॥

हरित्तोजेन तुहा सा चाविर्भूत महीकृतत् ।

प्रसा चरणांभोजे जगाम राणरं शुभा ॥ 13 ॥

ONārada! At the time of worship, the lamp of ghee, was lighted and dhūpa, sindūra, sandal, offerings of food, flowers, etc., were offered to Her. Thus hymned by Hari, Tulasi came out of the tree, pleased. And She gladly took refuge at His lotus feet.

वरं तस्यै ददी विष्णुः सर्वेपूजा भवेरिति ।

अहं चां धारिय्यामि सुरूपां भूटिन बक्षसि ॥ 14 ॥

सर्वे तां धारिय्याति स्वामूर्दिं च सुरादयः ।

इन्दुकृता तां गृहीला च प्रवयी स्वालव विषुः ॥ 15 ॥

Visnu, then, granted her boon that 'You will be worshipped by all; I will keep you in My breast and in My head and the Devas also will keep you in My breast and in My head and the Devas also will hold you on their heads.' And He then took her to His own abode.

नात्र उवाच

किं ध्यानं सत्वं किं वा किं पूजाविधानकम् ।

तुलस्वाश्र महाभाग तन्मे व्याख्यानुर्महिति ॥ 16 ॥

Nārada said: O Highly Fortunate One! What is Tulasi's dyhāna, sotra and method of worship? Kindly describe all these.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

अनर्हिंहतायां तस्यां च हरिकृद्वावने तदा ।

तस्याक्रके सुत्ति नाला तुल्मी विश्राहतुरः ॥ 17 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: When Tulasi vanished, Hari became very much agitated at her bereavement and went to Vrndāvana and began to praise her.

श्रीभगवानुवाच

ब्रन्दाक्षाया बृक्षाश्र यदैकत्र भवन्ति च ।

विदुर्घीयानेत वृन्दां मलिप्यां यां बजायमहम् ॥ 18 ॥

पुरा वर्ष्य वा देवी त्वाटी वृन्दावने वने ।

तेन वृन्दावनीं छलात्तं सौभायां तां पत्राव्यस्थम् ॥ १९ ॥

The Bhagavān said: The Tulasī trees collect in multitudinous groups; hence the Pandjts call it Vrndā. I praise that dear Tulasī. Of old, She appeared in the Vrndāvana forest and therefore known as Vrndāvanī. I worship that fortunate and glorious One.

असंख्रेषु च विश्वेषु पुक्ता या निरन्तरम् ।

तेन विश्वपूजिताख्यां पूजितां च भवाम्यम् ॥ 20 ॥

असंख्यान च शिवजानि पवित्राणि त्वया सदा ।

तां शिवधावनि देहीं विहेण समायाम्हम् ॥ 21 ॥

She is worshipped always in innumerable universe and is therefore, known as Viśvapūjitā (worshipped by all). I worship that Viśvapūjitā. By whose contact, these countless universe are always rendered pure and holy; and therefore She is called Viśvapāvani (purifying the whole universe). I am suffering from her bereavement, I remember the Devi. Without Tulasi, the Devas do not get pleased, thought other flowers be heaped on them; therefore She is considered as the essence of all the flowers.

देवा न तुहा: पुष्णागं समूहेन यया दिवा ।

तां पृष्यसारां शूर्दां च शूद्धिष्छायि शोकतः ॥ 2 2 ॥

विश्ये वर्जायिवमाजेष चक्तानंदो भवेद्धुवम् ।

निविजी तेन विश्वतासा सा प्रीता भक्तादिष्ट ॥ 2 3 ॥

Now I am in sorrow and trouble and I am very eager to see her, who is of the nature of purity incarnate. The whole universe gets delighted when the Bhaktas receive her; hence She is called Nandani; so may She be pleased with me.

यस्या देयास्तुला नास्ति निशिल्लेषु च ।

तुलसी तेन विज्ञाता तां यामि शरणं प्रियाणि ॥ 24 ॥

कृष्णकीवनस्पा सा शरणक्रियतमा सती ।

तेन कृष्णकीवनी सा सा मे रक्षुत जीवनम् ॥ 25 ॥

There is nothing in the universe that can be compared to Her; hence She is called Tulasi; I take refuge of that dear Tulasi. That chaste dear one is the life of Kṛṣṇa, hence She is known as Kṛṣnajivani. Now may She save my life.

इत्येवं स्तवनं कृत्वां तत्थी तत्र तयापतिः ।

दर्शतं तुलसी साक्षतादघघनतं सतीभ ।। २६ ।।

रुदतीमवमानेन नानिर्नीं मानपूक्तिमात् ।

प्रियां द्वृष्टा प्रियः शीर्धे वास्यामास वक्षसि ॥ 27 ॥

O Nārada! Thus praising, Ramāpati remained there. The chaste Tulasi then came to His sight and bowed down to His lotus feet; when She becoming sensitive out of the insult, began to weep. Bhagavān Viṣṇu, seeing that sensitive dear one, immediately took her to His breast.

भारत्याजां गृहीत्वा च स्वालयं च ययो गृहीः ।

भारत्या सह तर्नीति कार्यायामा सस्तम् ॥ 28 ॥

वरं विष्णुदौते तस्ये सर्वेज्ञा भवेरिति ।

शिरोधायां च सर्वेयं वंधा मान्यां ममेति च ॥ 29 ॥

Taking, then, Sarasvati's permission, He took her to His own home and brought about, first of all, the agreement between her and Sarasvati. Then He granted her the boon, 'You will be worshipped by all, respected by all, and honoured by all; and all will carry you on their heads.'

विष्णोदीप्त सा देदी पतिरुहा बभुव च ।

सरस्वती तामाकृष्य वास्यामास सक्रिधी ॥ 30 ॥

लक्ष्मीर्गा ससिता च तां समाकृष्य नारद ।

गृहं प्रवेश्यामास विनयेन सर्जी तदा ॥ 31 ॥

I will also worship, respect and honour you and keep you on My head. Receiving this boon from Viṣṇu, the Devi Tulasi became very glad. Sarasvatī then attracted her to her side, made her sit close to her. Laksmī and Gaṅgā both with smiling faces attracted her and made her enter into the house.

ब्रुदा बुद्धवी विश्वपूर्तिता विश्वपावती ।

पुष्यातार निदिति च तुलसी कृष्णाजीवी ॥ 32 ॥

एतजामाहकं चैव स्तोत्रं नामार्थसिंगुम् ।

यः पठेतां च संगुज्य सोउयवेधफलं लभेते ॥ 33 ॥

O Nārada! Whosoever worships her with her eight names Vrndā, Vrndāvaṇī, Viśvapūjitā, Viśvapāvaṇī, Tulasī, Puspasarā, Nandanī and Krṣṇa Jīvaṇī and their meanings and sings this hymn of eight verses duly, acquires the merit of performing Asvamedha Yajñā (horse sacrifice).

Book IX Chapter XXVI

कार्तिक्या पूर्णिमयां च तुलस्या जन्मांगलम् ।

तत्र तस्याश्र पूजा च विहिता हरिणा पुगा ॥ 34 ॥

तस्यां यः पूर्वेन्तो च भवल्या च विश्वपावनीम् ।

सर्वेपाराधिनेमुक्तो चिथणुलोकं स गच्छति ॥ 35 ॥

Specially, on the Full Moon night of the month of Katrika, the auspicious birth ceremony of Tulasi is performed. Of old Viṣṇu worshipped her at that time. Whoever worships with devotion on that Full Moon combination, the universe purifying Tulasī, becomes freed of all sins and goes up to the Viṣṇu Loka.

कांतिके तुलसीपत्रं यो द्वाति च वैशणले ।

गवामुतदानस्य फलं प्राप्नोति निश्छितम् ॥ 36 ॥

अपूत्रो लभते पूरं प्रियाहीनो लभेतिएवायम् ।

बन्युहीने लभेढ्रधून्स्तोत्रशवणामाततः ॥ 37 ॥

Offerings of Tulasi leaves to Viṣnu in the month of Kārtik bring merits equal to those in giving away Ayuta cows. Hearing this stotra at that period gives sons to the sonless persons, wives to the wife less persons and friends to friendless persons.

रोगी प्रमुच्यते रोगाद्रदो मुच्येत बंधन्ता ।

भयान्मुच्येत भीतस्तु प्यापान्मुच्येत पाकतकी ॥ 38 ॥

इत्येवं कथितं स्तोत्र ध्यान पूजाविधिं शृणु ।

On hearing this stotra, the diseased become free of their diseases, the persons in bondage become free, the terrified become fearless, and the sinners are freed of their sins. O Nārada! Thus it has been mentioned how to chant stotra to her. Now hear her dhyāna and method of worship.

त्वयेव वैदे जानासि कणवशणाकौकमेव च । ३ १ ॥

तद्वक्षे पूजयेतां च भनशा चावाहनं विना ।

तं धात्वा चोपचारेण धवानं पातकनाशनम् ॥ 40 ॥

In the Vedas, in the Kānya Śākhā branch, the

method of worship is given. You know that one is to meditate on the Tulasi plant, without any invocation (āvāhana) and then worship her with devotion, presenting all sorts of offerings as required to her. Now hear Her Dhyānam.

तुलसी पुच्यसारं च सर्ती पृतां मनोहारम् ।

कृतपापेधनदाहाय जलदिनिशखोपामम् ॥ 41 ॥

पुष्ये पुत्ना यस्य नास्ति वेद्यु भाषितम् ।

पवित्रकरण सर्वसू पुल्ली सा च कीर्तिता ॥ 42 ॥

शिरोधार्यां च सर्वेभाषीस्ता विश्वपावनी ।

जीवन्युक्तो पुक्तिच्चा च भजे तां हरिभक्तिद्वम् ॥ 43 ॥

Of all the flowers, Tulasī (the holy basil) is the best, very holy, and captivating the mind. It is a flame burning away all the fuel of sins committed by man. In the Vedas it is stated that this plant is called Tulasi, because there can be made no comparison with Her amongst all the flowers. She is the holiest of them all She is placed on the heads of all and desired by all and gives holiness to the universe. She gives Jivanmkuti, muktī and devotion to Śrī Hari. I worship Her.

इति ध्याला च संपूज्य सुत्वा च प्रणमेक्सूधीः ।

उक्ते नुलस्याप्यादानं किं भूयः श्रीतुमिच्छसि ॥ 44 ॥

ड्रिति श्रीमदेवीपार्णतो महापुराणे नवमरकन्थे

पद्धविरोधधायः 11 25 11

Thus meditating on Her and worshipping Her according to due rites, one is to bow down to Her. O Nārada! I have described to you the full history of Śrī Tulasi Devī. What more do you want to hear now, say.

Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the method of worship of Tulasi Devi in the

Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXVI

CHAPTER XXVI

On Sāvitri

नारद जवाच

तुलस्यपाखानमिदं श्रुतं चातिसुधोपमम् ।

ततः: साविश्युपाखानं तन्मे व्याखानामूर्दिंस ॥ १ ॥

पूरा केन समुद्धता सा श्रुता च श्रुतेः प्रयुः ।

केन वा पूजिता लोक प्रमय केश डा परे ॥ 2 ॥

Nārada said: I have heard the anecdote of Tulasī.

Now describe in detail the history of Śāvitrī. Śavitrī

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

considered as the Mother of the Vedas. Why was She born, in days gone by? By whom was She first worshipped and subsequently also?

श्रीनारायण उवाच

ब्रहाणा वेदजननी प्रथमे पूजिता मुने ।

छितीये च वेदगाधैलत्यक्षाहितुवरां गणैः ॥ ३ ॥

तदा चाधुपतिभूप: पूजयामास भारते ।

तत्यक्षान्युजयमासुबर्गीक्षात्वार एव च ॥ ४ ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Muni! She was first worshipped by Brahmā. Next the Vedas worshipped her. Subsequently the learned men worshipped her. Next the King Asvapati worshipped Her in India. Next the four Varnas (castes) worshipped Her.

नारद उवाच

को वा से3प्रपतिद्वाक्नेन वा तेन पूजिता ।

सर्वपूजा चा स देवी प्रथमे कैक्ष वा परे ॥ 5 ॥

Nārada said: O Brahman! Who is that Āsvapati? What for did he worship? When the Devi Śāvitrī became adorable by all, by which persons was She first worshipped and by which persons subsequently.

श्रीनारायण खाच

महदेशे महाराजो बभूवाशुपतिनुने ।

वैरिणां बल्हतां च मिश्राणां दुःखानाशनः ॥ 6 ॥

आसीस्त्य महात्राडी महिकी धर्मचारिणी ।

मालतीति समाठ्याता यथा लक्ष्मीरिंघुभतः ॥ 7 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Muni! The King Asvapati reigned in Madradeśa, rendering his enemies powerless and making his friends painless. He had a queen very religious; her name was Mālati; She was like a second Lakṣmī.

सा च रात्री च वत्थ्या च विस्त्रस्योपेक्षतः ।

चकाराताधनं भक्त्या साविश्याश्रैव नारद ॥ 8 ॥

प्रत्यादेश न सा प्राणता महीर्णे न द्वर्शत नाम ।

गृहं जगाम दुःखातां हद्येन विद्यता ॥ 9 ॥

She was barren; and desirous of an issue, She under the instruction of Vasistha, duly worshipped Sāvitrī with devotion. But She did not receive any

vision nor any command; therefore She returned home with a grievous heart.

राजा तां दु:रित्तां द्वृष्टा बोधायित्या नयेन वे ।

साविश्वासपसे भकत्या जागम पुकर्त नदा ॥ 10 ॥

तपश्रकार तदैव संयतः शतावतस्मय ।

न ददर्शे च साविश्वा: प्रत्याद्रेणे बधूच च ॥ 11 ॥

Seeing her sorry, the king consoled her with good words and himself accompanied her to Puskara with a view to perform Tapas to Sāvitrī with devotion and, being self-controlled, practised tapasyā for one hundred years. Still he could not see Sāvitrī, but voice came to him.

शुश्रावाकाराणपी च नूप्रेश्राशीरीिणीम् ।

गायत्रा द्रशलक्षं च जयं त्वं कुक नारद ॥ 12 ॥

एतिम्बिते तत्र आजामा घराशः ।

प्रणानाम ततस्तं च पुनिनर्यमुवाच च ॥ 13 ॥

An incorporeal, celestial voice reached his ears: 'Perform Japan (repeat) ten lakhs of Gāyatrī Mantram.' At this moment Parāśara came up there. The king bowed down to him.

मुनिश्वाच

सकुज्ञपछ्ग गायकशः पापं दिनभवं हेरेत् ।

दूशारं जपैपैव न्ययेत्यां दिवामिजम् ॥ 14 ॥

The Muni said: “O King! One japa of Gāyatī, destroys the days sins. Ten Japams of Gāyatī destroy day and night’s sins.

शतवारं जपद्रैश पार्य मासर्जित हेत् ।

सहसधा जपद्रैश केलमयं वत्सरार्जिन् ॥ 15 ॥

लक्षो अन्मकृतं पारं शुलक्षो3-यज्ञमजम् ।

सर्वेजन्मकृतं पारं शतलक्षान्द्रियति ॥ 16 ॥

कोतीत सुक्ति विग्राणां जगो दशगुपान्ततः ।

One hundred Gāyatrī Japams destroy one month's sins. One thousand Japams destroy one year's sins. One lakh Gāyatrī Japams destroy the sins of the present birth and ten lakh Gāyatrī Japams destroy the sins of other births. One hundred lakhs of Japams destroy the sins of all the births. If ten times that (i.e. 1,000 lakhs) be done, then liberation is obtained.

कर्ते सर्पिणाकारं कृत्वा तर्धयमृद्रितम् ॥ १ ७ ॥

Book IX Chapter XXVI

आनमभूधंमचलं प्रजनेरामड्युखो द्विजः ।

अनामिकामध्येराद्वो घामक्रमेण च ॥ १८ ॥

तर्नीमूलपर्यन्तं जपर्यर्वे क्रमः कले ।

(Now the method, how to make Japam). Make the palm of the (right) hand like a snake's hood; see that the fingers are all close, no holes are seen; and make the ends of the fingers bend downwards; then being calm and quiet and with one's face eastward, practise Japam. Then count from the middle of the ring (nameless) finger and go on counting right-handed (with the hands of the watch) till you come to the bottom of the index finger. This is the rule of counting by the hand.

इतपंकजवीजानां स्थितकानां च संस्कृताम् ॥ १९ ॥

कृत्वा वै मालिकां राजसुचेप्तीर्वं सुरालये ।

संस्थाय मालामश्रवाये पचे च संपत: ॥ 20 ॥

कृत्वा गोरोचानांचा च मायद्या सपावेयुसर्धीः ।

गायत्रीगतंक तस्यां जपेच्च विधिपूर्वकम् ॥ 21 ॥

O King! The rosary is to be of the seed of white lotus or of the crystals; it should be consecrated and purified. Japam is to be done then in a sacred Tīrtha or in a temple. Becoming self-controlled one should place the rosary on a banyan leaf or on a lotus leaf and smear it with cowdung; wash it, uttering Gāyatrī Mantra and over it perform one hundred times Gāyatrī Japam intently in accordance with the rules.

अथवा पंचायवेने सनाला मालां सुरंस्कृतान् ।

अथ गोरोदकेनैव सनाला वाउतिसुसंकृतम् ॥ 22 ॥

एवं क्रमेण राजर्षे एश्लक्षे जपं कुं ।

साथाद्रुद्धसि साविर्जी जिजन्यपातकक्षयान् । 23 ॥

Or wash it with Pāñcagavya, milk, curds, clarified butter, cow urine and cowdung), and then consecrate it will. Then wash it with the Ganges water and perform best the consecrations. O Rājarsī! Then perform ten lakhs of Japam in due order. Thust he sins of your three births will be destroyed and then you will see the Devi Savitri.

नित्यं संभयं च हे राजकनिष्यसि दिने दिने ।

मध्याढ़े चापि सायाढ़े प्रातरे शुचि: सदा ॥ 24 ॥

संध्याहोनो3शुचिन्त्यमनईः सर्वकांसु ।

यद्धा कुतते कर्म न तस्य फलभाषयेत् ॥ 25 ॥

O King! Do this Jāpam, being pure, every day in the morning, mid-day, and in the evening. If one be impure and devoid of Sandhyā, one has no right to do any action; and even if one performs an action, one does not get any fruit thereby.

नोपतिष्ठिति यः पूर्वा नीपासे यस्तु पक्षिभाम् ।

स शूर्वद्वविद्धकार्यः वर्सेमादूढिक्रमेण: ॥ 26 ॥

यावज्जीकिनपर्यतं नि:संध्यां यः क्रांतीत च ।

स च सुर्यस्मो विध्यसंज्ञा तत्पसा सदा ॥ 27 ॥

He who does not do the morning Sandhyā and the evening Sandhyā, is driven away from all the Brāhminic Karmas and he becomes like Śūdras. He who does Sandhyā three times throughout his life, becomes like the Sun by his lustre and brilliance of tapas.

तत्वादपधारजसा सदा:पूता वसुंधरा ।

जीवन्युक्तः स तेकस्वी संस्थापुते हि यो द्विकः ॥ 28 ॥

तीर्थानि च पवित्राणि तस्य संस्पर्शगमातः ।

ततः पापानि यांत्येव वैन्तेयादिवीरगाः ॥ 29 ॥

What more than this, the earth is always purified by the dust of his feet. The Dvija who does his Sandhyā Vandanam and remains pure, becomes energetic and liberated while living. By his contact all the tirthas become pourified. All sins vanish away from him as snakes fly away at the sight of Garuda.

न गृह्धिंस सुरा: पूर्जा पितर: पिंडतर्णपुं।

सेवछया च जित्जतेष्ठि सिन्धोग्रतिहत्स च ॥ ३० ॥

मूलप्रकृत्यभक्तो यस्तनंसंख्यावनचकंः ।

ततुस्वविहित्रा विश्वहीने चयोरगः ॥ ३१ ॥

The Dvija who becomes void of Sandhyā three times a day, the Devas do not accept his worship nor the Pitrṣ accept his Pindas. He who has no Bhakti towards the Mūla Prakṛti, who does not worship the specific seed Mantra of Māyā and who des not hold festivities in honour of Mūla Prakṛti, know him verily to be an Ajagara snake without poison.

विष्णुंगंव्रिहीन्त्र शिवसंधारहित्ते द्विजः ।

एकादशीविहित्थ विश्वतीं नोयोरा: ॥ ३२ ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

हरेनेवैद्यभोजी च धावको वृषवाहकः ।

गृह्रारजभोजी यो विज्ञो विषहौने योधारण: ॥ 33 ॥

Devoid of the Viṣṇu mantra, devoid of the three Sandhyās and devoid of the fasting on the Ekādaśī Tithi (the eleventh day of the fortnight), the Brāhmin becomes a snake devoid of poison. The virābhmin who does not like to take the offerings dedicated to Hari and who does the washerman's work and eats the food of Śūdra and drives the buffaloes, becomes a snake devoid of poison.

ग्रृजणां शवदाही यः स विश्वे घुवतीपितः ।

ग्रृजणां सूपाकार्श विश्वहीनो यशेगतः ॥ 34 ॥

The Brāhmīn who burns the dead bodies of the Śūdras, becomes like the man who is the husband of an unmarried girl. The Brāhmīn also who becomes a cook of a Śūdra, becomes a snake void of poison.

ग्रृजणां च प्रतिगाही ग्रृजवारी च चो हिजः ।

मतिसीजि असतीजिति विषहतीचे घयोरभः ॥ 35 ॥

यः कन्याविकधी विषो घो रेनामिविकधी ।

यो विधोउरीतारभोजी क्रतुस्तातारभोजकाः ॥ 36 ॥

The Brāhmīn who accepts the gifts of a Śūdra, who performs the sacrifice of a Śūdra, who lives as clerks and warriors becomes like a snake void of poison. The Brāhmīn who sells his daughter, who sells the name of Hari or eats the food of a woman who is without husband and son, as well as of one who has just bathed after her menstruation period, becomes like a serpent void of poison.

यनार्जीवो वार्थप्रियको विद्वहितो नयोरतः ।

यो विद्याधिकर्मी विज्ञा विषहीनी नयोराः ॥ 37 ॥

सूयोदैव सयेषो हि मल्यपोजी च ची द्विजः ॥

शिवापूजादिरित्तो विद्वहीनी नयोराः ॥ 38 ॥

The Brāhmin who takes the profession of pimps and pampers and lives on the interest, is also like a serpent void of poison. The Brāhmin who sleeps even when the Sun has risen, eats fish, and does not worship the Devi is also like a poisonless serpent.

इत्युक्त्वा च मुनिश्रेषः सर्वपूजाविधिकम् ।

तमुवाच च साविधा ध्यानादिकमपीशितम् ॥ 39 ॥

दत्ता सर्वे नृप्रेत्रय ययो च स्वाध्रामे मुने ।

राजा संपूज्य साविडीं ददर्शं वरमाप च ॥ 40 ॥

Thus stating all the rules of worship in order, the best of the Munis told him the Dhyānam, etc., of the Devi Śavitrī, what he wanted. Then he informed the King of all the mantras and went to his own Śārama. The king, then worshipped accordingly and saw the Devi Śavitrī and got boons.

नारद उवाच

किं वा ध्यानं च साविध्या: किं वा पूजाविधिकम् ।

स्तोत्रं मंत्र च किं दत्त्वा प्रवयी स परागरः ॥ 4 1 ॥

Nārada said: What is the Śāvitris Dhyāna, what are the modes of her worship, what is stotra, mantra, that Parāśara gave to the King before he went away?

नृपः केन विधानेन संपूच्य शुतिमातान् ।

वरं च कं वा संप्राय संपूच्य तु विधानतः ॥ 42 ॥

तत्सर्व शोद्गीपछ्जीय सावित्राः परमं महत् ।

रह्याति रहस्यं च शुतिसिद्धं समासतः ॥ 43 ॥

And how did the King worship and what boon did he get? This great mystery, grand and well renowned in the Śrutis, about Śavitrī, I am desirous to hear in brief on all the points.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

ज्येष्ठकृष्णग्रयोद्वरायां शूढ़काले च सन्तः ।

जतमेवं चतुदैर्षया जती भक्पता समाचरेत् ॥ 44 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: On the thirteenth day (the trayodaśī, tithī) of the black fortnight in the month Jyeṣṭha or on any other holy period, the fourteenth day (the caturdasī tithī) this vow is to be observed with great care and devotion.

जर्ते चतुदैगाख्टं च हिंसपत्कलसंयुतम् ।

दत्ता हिंसपनवैद्यों युष्यपुराविके चेर्त् ॥ 45 ॥

खरसं यज्ञायतीतं च भोजन विधिपूर्वकम् ।

संस्थाय मंगलघटं फलशाखासम्बित्वम् ॥ 46 ॥

Forteen fruits and fourteen plates with offerings of food on them, flowers and incense are to be offered and this vow is to be observed for fourteen

Book IX Chapter XXVI

years consecutively. Garments, holy threads and other articles are also offered and after the Vrata is over, the Brāhmins are to be fed. The lucky pot (maniglahata) is to be located duly according to the rules of worship with branches and fruits.

पाणेगं च दिनेणं च बह्रू विष्णु पिशं पिशाण।

संपूछ पूजयेछ्छे घरे आवाहिते हिजः ॥ 47 ॥

गृणु ध्यानं च साविज्ञाशोक्ते माध्यंदिने च रत् ।

स्तोत्रं पूजाविधानं च मंत्रे च सर्वकामद्न् ॥ 48 ॥

Ganēsā, Agni, Viṣṇu, Śiva and Śivā are to be worshipped duly. In that ghata Śāvitrī is to be next invoked and worshipped. Now hear the Dhyānam of Śāvitrī, as stated in the Mādhyan Dina Śākhā, as well the stotra, the modes of worship, and the Mantra, the giver of all desires.

तपाकचिवनाथांा जल्लीतं बह्रातेसा ।

ग्रीमध्यग्रह्मातर्णेडसहस्मितिप्रभाग् ॥ 49 ॥

ईपद्वायप्रसाधायां तनभूषणभूषितगान ।

वहिषुर्द्रशुकामानां भक्तागुरहायिषहाय. ॥ 50 ॥

सुखदां मुक्तिदां शान्तां कांतां च जगतां विधः ।

सर्वसंपत्स्वल्पां च प्रदारीं सर्वसंपदान् ॥ 51 ॥

वेदाधिष्ठागृद्टवैं च वेदेग्रास्वरूकिपिणी ।

वेदवीजस्वल्पां च भजे तां वेदमात्तम् ॥ 52 ॥

I meditate and adore that Sāvitrī, the Mother of the Vedas, of the nature of Pranava (Om), whose colour is like the burnished gold, who is burning with Brāhma teja (the fire of Brahma), effulgent with thousands and thousands of rays of the midday summer Sun, who is a smiling countenance adorned with jewels and ornaments, wearing celestial garment (purified and uninflammable by fire), and ready to grant blessings to Her Bhaktas; who is the bestower of happiness and liberation, who is peaceful and the consort of the Creator of the world, who is all wealth and the giver of all riches and prosperity, who is the Presiding Deity of the Vedas and who is the Vedas incarnate, I meditate on Thee.

బాణా బాణనేనే జేక్రణ వాగ్రి ముక్రున్ ।

పునబ్రణా వేంక్రు వేంక్రు వేంక్రు వేంక్రు 153

ద్రావు శేంక్రంగేండర వేండ్రేండ మన్య్వేండు ।

संपूज्य स्तुला प्रणमेदेबदेवीं विधानतः ॥ 54 ॥

Thus reciting the Dhyānam, mantra and meditating on Her, one is to offer Naivedyas (offerings of food) to Her and then place one's fingers on one's head; one is to meditate again, and then invoke the Devi within the pot. One should next present fourteen things, uttering proper mantras according to the Vedas. Then one must perform special pūjā and chant hymns to the Devi and worship Her. The fourteen articles of worship are as under :

असने पाधामर्थ च स्नानीयं चानुलेवम् ।

धूप दीपं च नेवेढ़ा तांकुलं शीलतं जलम् ॥ 55 ॥

वसनं भृपणं माल्यं गंधामाचयनीवकम् ।

मनोहंरं सुतल्यं च देवायोतानि पोडण ।। 56 ॥

(1) Seat (Āsana); (2) water for washing feet (Padya), (3) offering of rice and Durba grass (Arghya), (4) water for bath (Snānīya), (6) anointment with sandalpaste and other scents (Anulepana), (7) incense (Dhūpa), (8) anointment with sandalpaste and other scents (Anulepana), (7) incense (Dhūpa), (8) Lights (Dipa), (9) offerings of food (Naivedya), (10) Betels (Tāmbūla), (11) Cool water, (12) garments, (13) ornaments, (14) garlands, scents, offering of water of sip, and beautiful bedding.

द्रासारविकारं च हेतावितिनिंत च जा ।

देवाधारं पुणवदं च मया तृभयं निवेदितम् ॥ 57 ॥

While offering these articles, one is to utter the mantras, this beautiful wooden or golden seat, giving spiritual merits is being offered by me to Thee.

तीर्थोदकं च पाठं च पुणवदं प्रीतिं महत् ।

पूजांगभृतं शूखं च मवा तुभयं चिविदितम् ॥ 58 ॥

पवित्रकपार्यं च दूर्वीपुचल्गवित्यम् ।

पुणवं ईखतोगताकं मया तुभ्यं निविदितम् ॥ 59 ॥

This water from the Tirthas, this holy water for washing Thy feet, pleasant, highly meritorious pure, and as an embodiment of Pūjā is being offered

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

by me to Thee. This holy Arghya with Durba grass and flowers and the pure water in the conch-shell is being offered by me to Thee. (as a work of initial worship).

सुर्पिध यंगतेयं च स्नेहं सौगाथ्यकाकाम।

मया निविदितं भन्या सनापीयं प्रतिगृहुतान् ॥ 60 ॥

भोग्य्वोजूद्वं पुण्यं प्रीतिं दिव्यगंधद् ।

मया निविदितं भन्चा गंशतोयं त्वामिकेः ॥ 61 ॥

This sweet scented oil and water being offered by me to Thee with devotion for Thy bathing purposes. Kindly accept these. O Mother! This sweet-scented water Divine-like, highly pure and prepared of Kumkuma and other scented things I offer to Thee.

सर्वमंगलकरं च सर्वे च मंगलप्रदम् ।

पूयदं च सुभूयं तं गृहाण परमेक्षिति ॥ 6 2 ॥

सुर्णध्युक्ते सुखदं मया तुर्थे निविदितम् ।

O Paramesvarī! This all-auspicious, all good and highly meritorious, this beautiful Dhūpa, kindly take, O World Mother! This is very pleasant and sweet scented; therefore I offer this to Thee.

ज्ञातां दर्जान्याय प्रदीयं दीपिकाकारम् ॥ 6 3 ॥

अन्यकार्यसंजीतं मना तुथ्यं निविदितम् ।

O Mother! This light, manifesting all this Universe and the seed, as it were, to destroy the Darkness is being offered by me to Thee.

तृहिंदं पुरिंदं चैव प्रीतिंदं कृष्टिनारानम् ॥ 64 ॥

पुणवं स्वावुरूपं च नैवेहं प्रतिगृहतानम् ।

तांबूलप्रवरं रमयं कर्णरातिवुसारासि ॥ 65 ॥

तृहिंदं पुर्विंहं चैव मला तृथवे निविदितम् ।

सुशीतलं वारि शीति चिपासानाशकाकरम् ॥ 66 ॥

ज्ञानतं जीवलचं च जीवनं प्रतिशुतानम् ।

देहशोभावलखं च सभाशोभाविदधनम् ॥ 67 ॥

Devī! Kindly accept this delicious offering of food, highly meritorious, appeasing hunger, pleasant, nourishing and pleasure giving. This betel is scented with camphor, etc., nice, nourishing, and pleasure-giving; this is being offered by me to Thee. This water is nice and cool, appeasing the thirst and the Life of the World. So kindly accept this.

कार्पासंचे च कृमिजं वसनं प्रतिगृहाताम ।

कार्वानादिविनिर्माण श्रीकरं श्रीमर्त सदा ॥ 68 ॥

सुखदं पुण्यदं रत्नभूषणं प्रतिगृहाताम ।

नानावृक्षसमुद्धून नानासपसमन्दितम् ॥ 69 ॥

O Devi! Kindly accept this silken garment as well the garment made of Kārpāsa Cotton, beautifying the body and enhancing the beauty. Kindly accept these golden ornaments decked with jewels, highly meritorious, joyous, beauteous and prosperous.

फलस्यखरां फलदे फलं च प्रतिगुहाताम ।

सर्वमंगलकर्ण च सर्वमंगलमंगलम् ॥ 70 ॥

नानापुष्यविनिर्माणं बहुगोभासमित्यम् ।

प्रीतिंदं पुणवदं चैव मालयं च प्रतिगुहातम् ॥ 71 ॥

Kindly accept these fruits yielding fruits of desires, obtained from various trees and of various kinds. Please have this garland, all auspicious and all good, made of various flowers, beauteous and generating happiness.

पुणवदं च सुर्णघाङ्गं यांचं च देवि गुहात् ।

सिंतूर च वरं रत्यं भालल्योपाविवर्धन् ॥ ७ २ २ ॥

भूषणानां च प्रवरं सिंतूरं प्रतिगुहात् ।

विशुणद्ध्रायिसंयुक्तं पुणयसूत्रविनिर्मितम् ॥ ७ ३ ॥

पचित्रं वेदमंत्रेण यजसूचं च गृहात् ।

द्वयाण्येतानि मुलेन दत्ता स्तोत्रं पदेसुर्धीः ॥ ७ ४ ॥

O Devi! Kindly accept this sweet scent, highly pleasing and meritorious. Please take this Sindira, the best of the ornaments, beautifying the forehead, highly excellent and beautiful. Kindly accept this holy and meritorious threads and purified by the Vedic mantrams and made of highly holy threads and knitted with highly pure knots. Uttering thus, offer the above articles that are to be offered to the Devi, every time the specific seed mantra being uttered.

ततो विधाय भकला च जती द्याच्च दक्षिणाम् ।

साविशिति चतुर्थ्यैतं वहिज्ञान्यानेव च ॥ 75 ॥

लक्ष्मीयायाकामपूर्वं मंत्र्याहक्षरं विदु: ।

माध्यंदिनोकं रसोत्रं च सर्वकामफलप्रदम् ॥ 76 ॥

Then the intelligent devote should recite the stotras and subsequently offer the Dakṣinās

Book IX Chapter XXVII

(presents) with devotion to the Brāhmaṇas. The Radical or the Specific Seed Mantra mantra is the eight lettered mantra Śrim Hrim Klim Śvaitrai Svāhā; So the sages know. The Stotra, as stated in the Mādhyandina Sākhā, gives fruits of all desires. I am now speaking to you of that mantra, the Life of the Brāhmaṇas. Listen attentively.

विप्रजीवनलंच च निवीधे कथायाम ते ।

कृष्णेन दन्तां साविर्जी गोलेके बढ़णे पुरा ॥ 77 ॥

नायाति सा तेन साधं बढ़ालेके च नरत ।

ब्रह्म कृष्णात्रया भन्च्या तुहाव वेदमात्तम् ॥ 78 ॥

तदा सा पत्तिकृहा च बढ़ाणों चकमे पतिन् ।

O Nārada! Savitri was given to Brahmā, in the ancient times of old in the region of Goloka by Kṛṣṇa; but Savitri did not come Brahma loka with Brahmā. Then by the command of Kṛṣṇa, Brahmā praised the mother of the Vedas. And when She got pleased, She accepted Brahmā as Her husband.

बढ़ोवाच

सच्चिदानंद्रलो तर्व मूल्यकृतिलिपिणि ॥ 179 ॥

हिरण्याभंकले तर्व प्रसना भव सुंदरी ।

तेज:स्वरूपे परमे परमानंद्रलिपिणी ॥ 180 ॥

डिवानीनी जातिरूपे प्रसना भव सुंदरी ।

नित्ये नित्यप्रिय देवि नित्यानंदस्वरूपिणी ॥ 181 ॥

Brahmā said: Thou art the everlasting existence intelligence and bliss; Thou art Mūlaprakrti; thou art Hiranya Garbha; Thou didst get pleased, O Fair one! Thou art of the nature of fire and Energy; Thou art the Highest; Thou art the Highest Bliss, and the caste of the twice born. Dost thou get appeased, O Fair One! Thou art eternal, dear to the Eternal; thou art of the nature of the Everlasting Bliss.

सर्वमंगलको च प्रसना भव सुंदरी ।

सर्वस्वको विज्ञाणां मंत्रसरे परात्परे ॥ 82 ॥

सुखदे मोक्षे देवि प्रसना भव सुंदरी ।

O Devi, O Thou, the all auspicious One! O Fair One! Beest thou satisfied. Thou art the form all (omnipresent)! Thou art the essence of all mantras of the Brâhmaṇgas, higher than the highest! Thou art the bestower of happiness and the liberator O Devi, O Fair One! Beest thou appeased.

विप्रपाधेपदाहाय जललन्निरिषाखोपे ॥ 83 ॥

ब्रह्मोतःप्रदे देवि प्रसन्ना भव सुंदरी ।

कायेन मनसा वाचा यत्पां कुकते नर: ॥ 84 ॥

तत्वस्मरणामत्रेण भवस्मीभूतं भविष्यति ।

इतुल्यक्ना जगतां धाता तस्वी तत च संसदि ॥ 85 ॥

Thou art like the burning flame to the fuel of sins of the Brāhmaṇas! O Thou, the Bestower of Brahma teja (the light to Brahma) O Devi! O Fair One! Beest appeased. By Thy mere remembrance, all the sins to me by body, mind and speech are burnt to ashes." Thus saying the Creator of the world reached the assembly there.

साधिक्री ब्रह्माणा साधुं ब्रह्मोके जगमा सा ।

अनेन सत्वार्जाने संस्न्याधुपतिनुप: ॥ 86 ॥

दर्शर्ग तां च साधिक्री वर्ग प्राप नगोगनम् ।

सत्वार्जामिं पूर्ण्यं संधरां कृत्वा च यः पदेत् ॥

पाठे चतुर्णां वैद्यानां तत्कलं लभते च तत् ॥ 87 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागतं महापुराणे नवमकद्भे

चद्धिवीश्वायः 11 26 11

Then Śāvitrī came to the Brahmaloka with Brahmā. The King Āśvapati chanted this stotra to Śāvitrī and saw Her and got from Her the desired boons. Whosoever recites this highly sacred king of Stotras after Sandhyā Vandanam, quickly acquires the fruits of studying the Vedas.

Here ends the Twenty-sixth Chapter of the Ninth

Book on the narration of Śāvitrī in

Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXVII

CHAPTER XXVII

On the Birth, etc., of Sävitri

शीनारायण उवाच

सुत्वाउनन सो3ध्यपति: संपूज्य विधिपूर्वकम् ।

ददर्गं तत्र तां देर्वीं सहस्वाकैसमप्रभात् ॥ 1 ॥

उवाच सा च राजानं प्रसन्ना सस्मिता सती ।

यथा माता स्वपुरं च छोतयंतीं दिशास्तिचथा ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Nārada! After having chanted

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

the above hymn to the Goddess Sāvitrī and worshipped Her in accordance with due rites and ceremonies, the king Āśvapati saw the Devī, effulgent like the lustre of thousand suns. She then smilingly told the king, as a mother to her son, whilst all the quarters were illumined with the lustre of Her body:

साविष्युवाच

जानाथ्यहं महाराज यते मनसि वांक्षितम् ।

वांक्षितं तव तल्याश्र सर्वं दास्यामि निश्रितम् ॥ 3 ॥

साखी कन्याभिलाथे च कोरिति तव कामिनि ।

त्वं प्रार्थयसि पुरं च भविष्यति क्रमेण च ॥ 4 ॥

Sāvitrī said: O King! I know your desire. Certainly I will give what you wife long for. Your chaste wife is anxious for a daughter, while you want a son. So, one after another, the desires of both of you will be fulfilled." Thus saying, the Devi went to the Brahma Loka.

इत्युक्ना सा तदा देवी बढ़ालोकं जगाम है ।

राजा जगाम स्वगृहं तत्कन्यासदी बघूबह है ॥ 5 ॥

आराधनाच्च साविश्य बघूब कमल पर।

साविशिति स तनाम चकाशधान्तिनुः ॥ 6 ॥

The King also returned to his house. First a daughter was born to him. As the daughter was born, as if a second Lakṣmī was born after worshipping Śāvitrī, the King kept her name as Śāvitrī.

कालेन सा वध्माला बघूव च हिते दिते ।

रूपयीवनसंपन्ना शुक्ले चंद्रकला यथा ॥ 7 ॥

सा वरं वरयामासे शुमसेनात्मजं तदा ।

सत्यवर्तं सत्यशीलं नानागुणसमप्रित्यमत् ॥ 8 ॥

As time rolled on, the daughter grew, day by day, like the phases of bright fortnight moon, into youth and beauty. There was a son of Dyumat Sena, named Satyavāna, always truthful, good natured and endowed with various other qualifications.

राजा तसे दूदी तां च रत्नप्रपणभूषिताम ।

सोर्पि सार्धं कौतुकेन तां गृहीत्वा गृहं यये ॥ 9 ॥

स च सच्चसरेजीते सत्यवास्त्यविक्रमः ।

जगाम फलकाछार्थं सर्श्यं चितुगज्ञा ॥ 10 ॥

The daughter chose him for her bridegroom. The King betrothed her with jewels and ornaments, to Satyavāna, who gladly took her home. After one year expired, the truthful vigorous Satyavāna gladly went out, by his father's command, to collect fruits and fuel.

जगगम साखी ततशुशासविकी दैवयोगतः ।

नियय दृक्षान्त्रैव प्राणांस्तालाया सववान् ॥ १ १ ॥

यमस्तं पुरूचं द्रुषु बब्द्रहृष्टिसमं पुने ।

गृहीता गमनं चके तत्यश्रापयथी सती ॥ १ १ २ ॥

The chaste Savitri, too, followed him. Unfortunately Satyavāna fell down from a tree and died. Yama, the God of Death, saw his soul as a Puruṣa of the size of one's thumb and took it and went away. The chaste Savitri began to follow Him.

पशुशानां सुदर्ती चूँगा यमः संयमानीपतिः ।

उवाच मधुरं साधसीं साधूनां प्रवरो महान् ॥ 13 ॥

The high souled Yama, the Foremost of the Sâdhus, seeing Savitri following Him, addressed her sweetly:

धर्मारा उवाच

अहो कव यासि सावित्र गृहीत्या मानुषों तनुम् ।

यदि यास्यसि कॉतेन साथि देंहे तदा त्यज ॥ 14 ॥

“O Śāvitrī! Whither are you going in your this mortal coil? If you like to follow after all, then quit your this body.”

गन्तुं मवॉन न शक्नोति गृहीत्वा पांच भौतिकम् ।

देहं च मम लोकं च नघरं नघर: सदा ॥ 15 ॥

भर्तुने पूर्णकालो वै बघुव भागते सति ।

स्वकर्मफलभोगार्थ सत्यवान्याति मदगुहम् ॥ 16 ॥

"The mortal man, with his transient coil of these five elements, is not able to go to My Abode. O Chaste One! The death time of your husband arrived; therefore Satyavāna is going to My abode to reap the fruits of his Karma.

कर्माण जायते जन्तुः कर्मांव प्रलीयते ।

सुखं दुःखं घयं शोकः कर्मांवे प्रगपीयते ॥ 17 ॥

कर्मणेज्ञे घरेज्ञजीव बहापूयः स्वकर्भाण ।

स्वकर्मण हरेदांसी जन्मादिरहितो घयेत् ॥ 18 ॥

स्वकर्मण सर्वसिद्धमपरत्वं लभेद्युवम् ।

लभेत्यवकर्माण विद्याणोः सालोक्यादिवतृष्टयम् ॥ 19 ॥

Book IX Chapter XXVIII

Every living animal is born by his Karma. He dies again through his life long Karma. It is his Karma alone that ordains pleasure, pain, fear, sorrows, etc., By Karma, this embodied soul here becomes Indra; by Karma he can become a Brahma's son. What more than this that Jiva, by his Karma, can be in Hari's service and be free from birth and death! By one's own Karma all sorts of Siddhis and immortality can be obtained; the four blessed regions as Viṣṇu's Sālokya, etc., also can be obtained by Karma.

सुरत्वं च मनुत्वं च राजेनूत्रतं लभेन्नर: ।

स्वकर्माण शिवार्तं च गणोग्रत तदैव च ॥ 20 ॥

कर्मण च मुनिंहन्तं तपरिवलं स्वकर्मण ।

स्वकर्माणक्षिवित्यं वैययतं च स्वकर्मण ॥ 21 ॥

कर्मणैव च लेख्छतं लभते नात्र संगय: ।

स्वकर्मण जजुष्मतं शैलत्वं च स्वकर्मण ॥ 22 ॥

कर्मण राश्रसत्वं च किन्तरत्वं स्वकर्मण ।

कर्मणैवाधिप्यतं च वृक्षतं च स्वकर्मण ॥ 23 ॥

कर्मणैव पशुत्वं च वनर्जीवी स्वकर्मण ।

कर्मणा शूज्जन्तुं कृमित्वं च स्वकर्मण ॥ 24 ॥

दैतेप्तवे दानवलमपुस्तं स्वकर्मण ।

इत्येततुक्वता साविजी विरातम स वै यम्: ॥ 25 ॥

ड्रिति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे नवमकचे

सप्तविंशोअषय: 11 27 11

What more than this that by Karma, a being becomes divine, human, or a King, or Śiva or Gangeśa! The state of Munindra, asceticism, Kṣattriyahood, Vaiśyahood, Mleccchahood, moving things, stones, Rākṣasahood, Kinnaras Kingship, becoming tree, beasts, forest animals, inferior animals, worms, Daityas, Dānavas, Asuras, all are fashioned and wrought by Karma and Karma alone." O Nārada! Thus speaking, Yama remained silent.

Here ends the Twenty-seventh Chapter of the Ninth

Book on the birth etc. of Śavitri in

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXVIII

CHAPTER XXVIII

On Sāvitri

श्रीनारायण उवाच

यमस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा सावित्री च पतित्रता ।

तृछाव परया भक्त्या तमुवाच मनस्विनो ॥ १ ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! Hearing the words of Yama, the chaste intelligent Śāvitrī, replied with great devotion:

साविश्यचार

किं कर्म तद्वरेकेन को वा तद्वौरुचे व।

को वा देड़ी च देड़: कः को वाउज कर्मकारकः ॥ 2 ॥

“O Dharmarājan! What is Karma? Why and how is its origin? What is the cause of Karma? Who is the embodied soul (bound by Karma)? What is this body? And who is it that does Karma?

किं वा ज्ञानं च बुद्धिः कः को वा ग्राणः शरीरिणाम् ।

कान्नींद्रयाणि किं तेषां लक्षणं दे्वताक्षः का: ॥ 3 ॥

भोक्ता भोजयिता को वा को भोगक्ष निष्कृति: ।

को जीव: परमात्मा कस्तने व्याख्यातुमहैति ॥ 4 ॥

What is Jñāna? What is Buddhī? What is this Prānas of this embodied Jīva? What are the Indriyas? And what are their characteristics? And what are the Devatās thereof? Who is it that enjoys and who is it that makes one enjoy? What is this enjoyment (Bhoga)? And what is the means of escape from it? And what is the nature of that State when one escapes from enjoyment? What is the nature of Jīvatāma? And what of Paramātmā? O Deva! Speak all these in detail to me.”

धर्म जवाच

वेद्यपिहिता धर्मः कर्मं चमकुलं परम् ।

अर्वैदिकं तु यत्कर्म तदेवाणुभयं च ।। ५ ॥

अंहैतुकी देवसेवा संकल्परहिता सती ।

कर्मनिर्मूलकूपा च सा एव परभक्तिदा ॥ ६ ॥

Dharma said: “Karma is of two kinds—good and bad. The Karma that is stated in the Vedas as leading to Dharma is good; all other actions are bad. The God’s service, without any selfish ends (Sañkalpa) and without the hope of any fruits thereof (ahaitukī), is of such a nature as to root out all the Karmas and gives rise to the highest devotion to God.

को वा कर्मफलं धुने को वा निस्थित एव च ।

ब्रहभफ्तो यो नरुश स च मुक्तः शुतः शुर्ति ॥ 7 ॥

जन्मानुखुजायधिजीकभीतितिवर्षितः ।

भक्तिश्र दिविधा साधिव श्रुन्ता सर्वसंमता ॥ 8 ॥

A man who is such a Bhakta of Brahma becomes liberated, so the Śrutis say. Who then does the Karma and who is it that enjoys? (i.e., no such body). To such a Bhakta to Brahma, there is birth, death, old age, disease, sorrow nor any fear. O Chaste One! Bhakti is two-fold. This is stated by all in the Śrutis. The one leads to Nirvāṇa and the other leads to the nature of Hari. The Vaiṣṇavas want the Bhakti to Hari i.e. the Saguna Bhakti.

निर्वाणपद्वात्री च हरित्वपद्वा नृणान् ।

हरित्वपत्रवक्ता च भक्ति वांक्षित वैभाणाः ॥ ९ ॥

The other Yogis and the knowers of Brahma want the Nirguna Bhakti. He who is the Seed of Karma, and the Bestower for ever the fruits of Karma, Who is the Karma Incarnate and the Mūla Prakrti, is the Bhagavān; He is the Highest Self. He is the Material Cause of Karma.

अन्ये निर्वर्णमिच्छित योगीने बहाविनामः ।

कर्मणी बीजल्पघु सततं तत्फलप्रदः ॥ 10 ॥

कर्मरूपघु भगवान्यातमा प्रकृति: परा ।

सोर्पि तद्वेतुल्यश्रदेशे नधर एव च ॥ 11 ॥

Know this body to be by nature liable to dissolve and die. Earth, air, âkâša, water, and fire these are the threads, as it were, of the work of creation of Brahma Who is of the nature of Being, 'Dehî' or the Embodied Soul is the Doer of Karma, the Kartâ; he is the enjoyer; and Âtmâ (self) is the prompter, the stimulator within to do the Karma and enjoy the fruits thereof.

भृथिवी वायुराकाणे जलं तेजसत्यैव च ।

एतानि सूत्रस्पानि सुहिक्रतपिधी सतः ॥ 12 ॥

कर्म कर्ता वे दौही च आत्मा भोजयिता सहा ।

भोगो विषयचेघड शिकृततिरुप्तिक्तच च ॥ 13 ॥

The experiencing of pleasures and pains and the varieties thereof is known as Bhoga (enjoyment). Liberation, Mukti is the escape there from. The knowledge by which Âtmā (sat) and Māyā (Asat) are discriminated is called Jñānam (Brahma Jñānam).

सदसद्देवाबीचे च ज्ञानं नानाविधं भयेत् ।

वियवाणां विभाणानां भेदे बीजं च कॉलितम् ॥ 14 ॥

बुद्धिद्विवेवना सा च ज्ञानवीयं श्रुते श्रुतम् ।

वायुभेदाङ्ग प्राणाङ्ग लल्कापाङ्ग देहितम् ॥ 15 ॥

The knowledge is considered as the root discriminator of various objects of enjoyments. (i.e. by which the various objects are at once recognised as different from Âtman). By Buddhi is meant the right seeing of things, (as certain) and is considered as the seed of Jñānam. By Prāna is known as the different Vāyus in the body. And this Prāna is the strength of the embodied.

इन्द्रियाणां च प्रवरमीधरांगसमूहकम् ।

प्रेकं कर्माणां चैव सुनिवार्यं च देहिनम् ॥ 16 ॥

अनिल्वापत्रुयं च ज्ञान्पेहो मन: स्मृतः ।

लोचनं श्वर्ण प्राणं त्वक्च रसनर्पिरिद्यम् ॥ 17 ॥

Mind is the chief, the best, of the senses, it is a part of Íśvara; its characteristic is its doubtful uncertain state. It impels to all actions, irresistible. It is inascertainable, invisible; it obstructs the Jñāna. The senses are seeing, hearing, smelling, touching and tasting. These are the several limbs, as it were. of the embodied and the impellers to all actions.

अंगिनाभारतं च प्रेकं सर्वकंभाणम् ।

रिपुत्वं मित्रकं सुखलयं च दुःखदम् ॥ 18 ॥

सूर्यों वायुँघ झबहादा देवतः स्मृतः ।

प्राणदेहादिपृष्ठा हि स जीव: परिकितिः ॥ 19 ॥

They are both enemies and friends as they give pain (when attached to wordly objects) and happiness (when attached to virtuous objects) both.

Book IX Chapter XXIX

The Sun, Vāyu, Earth, Brahmā and others are their Devatās. The Jīva is the holder, the sustainer of Prāna, body, etc.

परमं व्यापकं बढ़ा निरुण: प्रकृते पर: ।

कारणं कारणानां च परमात्मा स उच्यते ॥ 20 ॥

जूतेवं कथितं सर्व त्वया पूरं यथागाम् ।

ज्ञानिनां ज्ञानकरं च गच्छ वसे यथासुखम् ॥ 21 ॥

The Paramātmā, the Highest Self, is the Best of all, Omnipresent, transcending the Gunas, and beyond Prakṛti. He is the Cause of all causes and He is the Brahma Itself. O Chaste One! I have replied, according to the Śāstras to all your questions. These are Jñānas of the Jñāniens. O Child! Now go back to your house at pleasure.”

सायिश्यवाच

त्यक्त्या क्य याथी कांत तां वां तां शानार्थं धुवम् ।

यद्यक्तोपि प्रश्नं च तद्वाव्यक्तुमंतीति ॥ 22 ॥

कां कां योनि याति जीवः कर्माण केन वा पुनः ।

केन वा कर्माण स्वर्ग केन वा नरकर्गितः ॥ 23 ॥

Sāvitrī said: “Whither shall I go, leaving my Husband and Thee, the Ocean of Knowledge? Please oughtest to answer the queries that I now put to Thee. What wombs do the Jivas get in response to which Karmas? What Karmas lead to the Heavens? And what Karmas lead to various hells?

केन वा कर्मण मुक्तः केन भक्तिभवैद्युर्गे ।

केन वा कर्मण योगी रोगी वा केन कर्मण ।। 24 ।।

केन वा दीर्घजीवी च केनाल्यायुक्ष कर्मण ।

केन वा कर्मणःखी सुखी वा केन कर्मण। 25 ॥

Which Karmas lead to Mukti? And which Karmas give Bhakti? What Karmas make one Yogi and what Karmas inflict diseases? Which Karmas make one's life long? or short? Which Karmas

again make one happy? And what Karmas make one miserable?

अंगहीनिछ्छ काणिष बधिरः केन कर्माण ।

अंधो वा गंगुरपि च प्रमानः केन कर्मणि ॥ 26 ॥

क्षिलो5तितृष्ककशीः केन वा कर्मण भवेत् ।

केन सिद्धिमवापनोत सालोक्यादि चतुध्यम् ॥ 27 ॥

Which Karmas make one deformed in one's limbs, one-eyed, blind, deaf, lame or idiotic? Which Karmas again make one mad? Make one very much avaricious or of a stealing habit? What Karmas make one possess Siddhis? Or make one earn the four Lokas Sālokya, etc.?

केना बा ब्राह्मणास्वे च तपस्तिव्वचं च केना व ।

स्वर्गभोगादिकं केन वैकुण्डं केन कर्मणि ॥ 28 ॥

गोलोकं केन वा ब्रह्म-संर्वाल्कृहं नितामयम् ।

नको वा कातिथितः किंसंख्यो नाम किं च वा ॥ 29 ॥

What Karmas make one a Brāhmīn or an ascetic? Or make one go to Heaven or Vaikuntha? What Karmas enable one to go to Goloka, the par excellence and free from all diseases? How many are the hells? What are their names and how do they appear?

को वा के नरके याति क्रियांते तेषु तिष्ठिति ।

पाधिनां कर्मण केन को वा व्याधिः प्रजायते ॥

यद्धलियं मवा पृष्टं तमे व्याख्यातुर्महिति ॥ 30 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभगवतो नवमरकन्चे गरदनारायणसंवादे

साविशुपधावनोउद्धाविरोअधायः ॥ 28 ॥

How long will one have to remain in each hell? and what Karmas lead to what diseases? O Deva, Now tell me about these that I have asked to you and oblige."

Here ends the Twenty-eighth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the story of Śavitri Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāṣa.

Book IX Chapter XXIX

CHAPTER XXIX

On Sāvitri, on Gifts, and on Karmas

शीनतायण उवाच

साविशैचचरं शुत्वा जागा विस्तयं यमः ।

प्रस्थ वतुभागरेचे कर्मपांकं तु जीवितान् ॥ १ ॥

Nārāyana said: Yama got thunderstruck at these queries of Sāvitri. He then began to describe, with a smiling countenance, the fruition of the several works of the Jivas.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

धर्म उवाच

कन्या द्वारभार्यंचा वसले त्वं वससा5धना ।

ज्ञानं ते पूर्वविद्यां ज्ञानिनां योगिनां परम् ॥ २ ॥

साविक्षिवादानेन तं स्वाविक्री कला सती ।

प्राप्ता पुरा ध्युभृता च तपसा तत्समा सुते ॥ ३ ॥

Dharma said: O Child! You are now a daughter only twelve years old. But you speak of wisdom like the Highest Jñāniš and Yogis, Sanaka and others. O Child! By virtue of the boon granted by Śāvitrī, you have become incarnate of Her in part. The King Āsvapati got you before by performing severe penances.

यथा श्रीः शीपतेः कोउेे भवानी च भवोरासि ।

यथार्तिदितः कयये च यथार्डल्या च गौतने ॥ 4 ॥

यथा शची महेन्रे च यथा चन्रे च रोहिणी ।

यथा राति: कामदेवे यथा स्वाहा हुतानगे ॥ 5 ॥

As Laksmi is dear and fortunate with regard to Viṣṇu, as Mahādevī is to Mahādeva, Aditi to Kaśyapa, Ahalyā to Gautama, so you are to Satyavāna in respect of affection and good-luck and other best qualities.

यथा स्वधा च विरुतु यथा संध्या दिवाकरे ।

वक्तानी च वक्तो यजे च दक्षिणा यथा ॥ 6 ॥

यथा वारहे पूर्वविं हेवसेना च कार्तिक ।

सौभाग्यासु प्रिया त्वं च तथा सत्यन्तः प्रिये ॥ 7 ॥

As Śacī is to Mahendra, as Rohinī is to Moon, as Rati is to Kāma, as Svāhā is to Fire, as Svadhā is to the Pitrs, as Sanjñā is to the Sun, as Varunāni is to Varuna, as Daksinā is to Yajña, as Earth is to Varāha, as Devasenā is to Kārtika, so you are fortunate and blessed with respect to Satyavāna.

अयं तुर्थे वरो द्नो3प्यपरं च यथेपत्नम् ।

यूणु देयि महाभागो ददामि सकलेषितम् ॥ 8 ॥

O Śāvitrī! I myself grant you this boon of my own accord. Now ask other boons. O highly fortunate One! I will fulfil all your desires.

साधिव्याच

सत्यवत औरसानां पुजाणां शतकं मम ।

भविष्यिति महाभाग वरमेतन्यदीक्षिति ॥ 9 ॥

मयितुः पुत्रशतकं धशुगस्य च चक्षुषी ।

राजलाभो भववेदे वरमेतन्मदीक्षितम ॥ 10 ॥

Sāvritī said: “O Noble One! Let there be one hundred sons of mine by Satyavāna. This is the boon that I want. Let there be one hundred sons of my Father as well; let my Father-in-law get back his (lost) eyesight and may he get back his lost kingdom. This is another boon that I want.

अंते सत्यवता सार्थं यास्यामि हरिसिंदितम् ।

समातीते लक्षवर्षे देहीदं मे जगतृषधो ॥ 11 ॥

जीवकर्मिवणकं च श्रोतुं करोतुहरं मम् ।

विश्वनितार्जीजं च तन्मे व्याख्यातुमुईसि ॥ 12 ॥

Thou art the Lord of the world. So grant me this boon, too, that I may have this my very body for a lākh years when I may go to Vaikuntha with Satyavāna. Now I am eager to hear the various fruitions of Karmas of several Jivas. Kindly narrate them and oblige.”

धर्मरत खाच

भविष्यित महासार्थि सर्वे मानसिकं ततः ।

जीवकर्मविषयकं च कथयामि निशामय ॥ 13 ॥

गुभानामूभानां च कर्माणं जन्म भारते ।

पुण्यक्षेत्रे च नान्यत्र सर्वे च भूजते जनाः ॥ 14 ॥

Dharma said: "You are very chaste. So what you have thought will verily come to pass. Now I describe the fruition of Karmas of the Jivas. Listen. Excepting this holy land of Bhārata, nowhere do the people enjoy wholly the fruition of their twofold Karmas, good and bad.

सुरा दैत्या दानवाङ्ग गान्यां राक्षसाद्यः ।

नराधु सर्वेजनक न सर्वे जीविनः सति ॥ 15 ॥

विशिष्टीकिनः कर्म पुंजते सर्वेभिनिषु ।

शुभागृधे च सर्वेत्र सर्वगैयु नरकेषु च ॥ 16 ॥

It is only the Suras, Daityas, Dānavas, Gandharvas, Rāksasas, and men that do Karmas. The beasts and the other Jivas do not do Karmas. The special Jivas e.g. men, etc., experience the fruition of their Karmas in Heavens, hells and in all the other Yonis (wombs).

विशेषते तीव्रिन्घ ध्रमंते सर्वोवितुम् ।

गुभाग्यर्णं भुजते च कर्म पूर्वार्थितं परम् ॥ 17 ॥

Book IX Chapter XXIX

शुभेन कर्माणा याति स्वलोकादिक्रमेव च ।

कर्माणा चाणुभेनैव प्रभाति नरकेषु च ॥ 18 ॥

Specially, as the Jivas roam in all the different Yonis, they enjoy their Karmas, good or bad, as the case may be, carved in their previous births. The good works get fructified in Heavens; and the bad works lead the Jivas to hells.

कर्मिनीयने भक्ति: सा चोक्ता दिविया सति ।

निर्वाणस्पा भक्तिश्छ ब्रह्मणः प्रक्रतेत्रि ॥ १९ ॥

रोरी कुमकर्ण जीवक्षारोगी रुष्मकर्ण ।

दौर्भेजीची च क्षीणातुः सुखी दुःखी च कर्मण ॥ २० ॥

This Karma can be got rid of by Bhakti. This Bhakti is of two kinds: (1) Nirgunā of the nature of Nirvāṇa; and (2) towards Prakṛti, of the nature of Brahma, and with Māyā inherent. Diseases come as the result of bad and ignorant actions; and healthiness come from good and certain scientific Karmas. Similar are the remarks for short and long lives for happiness and pain.

अन्यादयश्रोगहीना: कर्मण कृसितेन च ।

सिद्वादिकमवाप्नोति सर्वोकृष्टि कर्मण ॥ 21 ॥

सामान्यं क्रियां देवि विशेषं शृणु सुंदरी ।

सुर्दर्भेयं सुगोयं च पुराणेषु स्मृतीखपि ॥ 22 ॥

By bad works, one becomes blind or deformed in body. So by doing excellent Karmas, one acquires Siddhis, etc. These are spoken generally. I will now speak in detail; listen. This is very secret even in Purāṇas and Smṛtis.

दुर्लभा मानुषी जातिः सर्वजातिषु भगते ।

सर्वेष्यो बाहाण: श्रेष: प्रशास्तः सर्वकर्मिषु ॥ 23 ॥

In this Bhāratavarsa, men are the best of all the various classes of beings. The Brāhmānas are the best of men and are best in all Kinds of Karmas. They are responsible, too, for their actions.

ब्रह्मिणे हिक्रील गरीवान् भारते सति ।

निष्कामश सकामश ब्राह्मणो हिक्रियः सति ॥ 24 ॥

सकामाच्छ प्रधान्यात् निष्कामो भक्त एव च ।

कर्मभोगी सकामाश निष्कामो निशपत्रः ॥ 25 ॥

स याति देहं व्यक्त्वा च पदं वत्निरामयम् ।

पुनरागमनं नास्ति तेषां निष्कामिनां सत्ति ॥ 26 ॥

O Chaste One! Of the Brāhmins, again, those that are attached to the Brāhmanas are the best. The Brāhmanas are of two kinds as they are Sakāma (with desires) or Niṣkāma (without desires). The Niṣkāmī Brāhmanas are superior to the Sakāmī Brāhmanas. For the Sakāmīs are to enjoy the fruits of their Karmas, while the Niṣkāmī Brāhmānas are perfectly free from any such disturbances (they have not to come back to these field of Karma). The Niṣkāma Bhaktas, after they quit their bodies, go to a place free from sickness or disease, pure and perfect. From there they do not come back.

सेवोते दिषुपं कृष्णं परमात्मानमीधास् ।

गोलोकं प्रति ते पत्ना दिव्यस्पधियारिणः ॥ 27 ॥

सकामिनो वैभाणाङ्ग गत्वा वैकुण्ठमेव च ।

भारतं पुतरायांति तेषां जन्म द्विजातिलु ॥ 28 ॥

The Niskāma Bhaktas assuming the divine forms go to the Goloka and worship the Highest God, the Highest Self, the two-armed Kṛṣṇa. The Sakāmi Vaīṣṇavas go to Vaikuntha; but they come back in Bhārata and get into the wombs of the twice-born.

काले गते च निकामा भवेनैव क्रमेण च ।

भर्चि च निर्मलों तेन्यो दास्यामि निश्रितं पुन: ॥ 29 ॥

ब्राह्मण वैणवाठीव सकामा: सर्वेजनसु ।

न तेषां मैन्मल वृष्द्विथ्युभक्तिविवर्जिता ॥ 30 ॥

By degress they also become Niṣkāma when they certainly acquire pure undefiled Bhakti. The Brāhmanas and Vaiṣṇavas that are Sakāmis in all their births, never get that pure undefiled intellect and never get the devotion to Viṣṇu.

नीर्थाशिता हिता ये च तयस्यानिततः सति ।

ते यांति बहूलोकं च पुनरायांति भारते ॥ 31 ॥

स्वधर्मानिता ये च ये च तीर्थीनावासिनः ।

ब्रजति ते सत्यलोक पुनरायांति भारते ॥ 32 ॥

The Brāhmanas, living in the Tirthas (sacred places of pilgrimages); they again come down to Bhārata. Those that are devotedly attached to their own Dharma (religion) and reside in places other than Tirthas, go to Satyaloka and again come to Bhārata.

स्वाधर्पितता विग्रा: सूर्वैभक्ताक्ष भाते ।

ज्जति ते सूर्वैलोकं पुरतायांति भाते ॥ ३३ ॥

मूलप्रकृतिभक्ता ये निक्कामा धर्मचारिण: ।

मणिद्धीयं प्रयोग्येव पुनराष्ट्रिनर्वक्तिन् ॥ ३४ ॥

The Brāhmaṇas, following their own Dharma and devoted to the Sun go to the world of the Sun and again come to Bhārata. And those who are devoted to Mūla Prakṛti and devoted to Niṣkāma Dharma go to Maṇi Dvīpa and have not to come back from thither.

स्वयंति निता भक्ताः शैया: शाकाश्रा गाणण: ।

ते यांति शिवलोकं च पुनरायांति भारते ॥ 35 ॥

वे विधा अन्यदेवेज्ञा: स्वधर्मपितरा: सति ।

ते यांति सपैलोंकं च पुनरायांति भारते ॥ 36 ॥

The Bhaktas of Śiva, Śakti, and Gangeśa, and attached to their own Dharma respectively go to the Śiva Loka and return from thence. Those Brāhmaṇas that worship the other Devas and attached to their own Dharmas go to those regions of theirs respectively and again come to Bhārata.

हरिभनाङ्ग विमकामाः स्वधर्मपित्ता द्विजाः ।

ते यांति च होलेकिं कम्पादनिकलादरे ॥ 37 ॥

स्वधर्मरिता विज्ञा देवान्यसेवना: सदा ।

घटाचारात्र कामात्र ते गांति नरकं घुवम् ॥ 38 ॥

Attached to their own Dharmas, the Niskāmi, Bhaktais of Hari go by their Bhakti step by step to the region of Śri Hari. Those that are not attached to their own Dharma and do not worship the Devas and always bent on doing things as they like without any regard to their Acāras go certainly to hells. No doubt in this.

स्वधर्पनिता एव वर्णाधुस्वारा एव च ।

पर्वतैल वृग्भ्यसैव कर्मण: फलभोगिनः ॥ 39 ॥

स्वकर्मरित्ता ये च नरके यांति ते धूवम् ।

भारतै न पर्वतैल्व कर्मण: फलभोगिनः ॥ 40 ॥

The Brāhmanas and the other three Varnas, attached to their own Dharmas all enjoy the fruits of their good works. But those who do not do their Svadharma, go verily down into hells. They do not come to Bhārata for their rebirth, they enjoy their fruits of Karmas in hells!

स्वधर्पितता एव वर्णाश्रवार एव च ।

स्वधर्पितता विज्ञा: स्वधर्पितताय च ॥ 41 ॥

कन्यां द्वति विज्ञाप चंत्रलेका प्रवर्तीत ने ।

वसांति तन ते साधिय यावद्रिंश्रतुरैंग नि । 42 ॥

Therefore the four Varnas ought to follow their own Dharmas of the Brāhmanas, they are to remain attached to their own Dharmas and give their daughters in marriage to the similarly qualified Brāhmanas. They then go to the Candraloka (the region of the Moon). There they remain for the life periods of the fourteen Indras.

सालकृताया इनेन द्विणुणं फलमुच्यते ।

सकामा यांति तल्लोकै न निकामामु साययः ॥ 43 ॥

ते प्रयांति विष्णुलोकै फलसंयावर्जिताः ।

गव्यं च रजतं स्वर्णं वस्नं सर्पि: फलं जलम् ॥ 44 ॥

And if the girl be given, with ornaments, the results obtained would be twice. If the girl be given with a desire in view, then that world is obtained; but if the girl be given without any desire but to fulfil the God's will and God's satisfaction only, then one would not have to go to that world. They go to Visnu Loka, bereft of the fruits of all Karmas.

ये दूर्त्वेव विष्ण्यध्रुतरोके प्रयाति ते ।

वर्सति ते च तत्कोके वायवमन्वंतरं सति ॥ 45 ॥

सुचिरात्युचिरं वासं कुर्वित तेन ते जनाः ।

Those that give to the Brāhmaṇas pasture ground and cattle, silver, gold, garment, fruits and water, go to the Candrałoka and live there for one Manvantra. They live long in those regions by virtue of that merit.

ये द्वर्ति सुवर्णशीष त्रास्ताप्रिक्ति सिति ॥ 46 ॥

ते यांति सुवर्णेकेच ह सृषये ब्राह्माणाय च ।

वसिति ते तत लकेके वर्षाणाममुतं सिति ॥ 47 ॥

विपुले सुधितं वासं कुर्बीत च तिरमायाः ।

Again those that give gold, cows, copper, etc., to the holy Brāhmaṇas, go to the Sūrya Loka (the region of the Sun) and live there for one Ayuta years (10,000 years), free from diseases, etc, for a long time.

द्वाति भूमि विरेषो ध्वानि विपुलिन च ॥ 48 ॥

स याति विष्णुलोकं च श्वेतद्वीधं मनोहम् ।

Book IX Chapter XXIX

तत्रैव निवसत्येव यावच्चंद्रदिवाकरी ॥ 49 ॥

Those that give lands and lots of wealth to the Brāhmins, go to the Viṣṇu Loka and to the beautiful Śvetā Dvīpa (one of the eighteen minor divisions of the known continents). And there live as long as the Sun and Moon exist. O Muni! The meritorious persons live long in that wide region.

Note: Śvetā Dvīpa may mean Vaikuntha, where Viṣnu resides.

विषुले विपुलं वासं क्रौति पुण्यवान्मुने ।

गृहं द्विति विप्राय ये जना भक्ति पूर्वेकम् ॥ 50 ॥

ते याति विष्णुलोकं च सुचिरं सुखदायकम् ।

गृहोरुपमाणं च विणुलोकें महनं ॥ 51 ॥ विषुले विपुलं वासं कुर्वैन्ति मानवा: सति ।

यस्मै यस्मै च देवाय यो द्वाति गृहं नः ॥ 52 ॥

Those who give with devotion dwelling places to the Brāhmanas, go to the happy Viṣṇu Loka. And there, in that great Viṣṇu Loka, they live for years equal to the number of molecules in that house. He who offers a dwelling house in honour of any Devas, goes to the region of that Deva and remains there for a number of years equivalent to the number of particles in that house.

स याति तस्य लोकं च रेणुमानाद्वमेव च ।

सीये चतुरुर्ण पुणवं देशे शतगुर्ण फलम् ॥ 53 ॥

प्रकृष्टे द्विणुर्ण तस्मादित्याह कमलोद्वतः ।

The lotus-born Brahmā said that it one offers a royal palace, one obtains a result four times and if one offers a country, one gets the result one hundred times that; again if one offers an excellent country, twice as much merit one acquires.

यो द्वाति तडागं च सर्वेभायापनुतये ॥ ५४ ॥

स याति जनलोकं च रेणुमानाद्वमेव च ।

वायां फलं श्रणगुणं प्राप्नोति मानवः सदा ॥ 55 ॥

स तु वाणीप्रदानेन तडागस्य फलं लभेत् ।

धनुश्रुतःसहरेण दैर्श्यमानेन निश्रितम् ॥ 56 ॥

न्यना वा ताराती प्रख्ये सा वाणी परिकीर्तिता ।

One who dedicates a tank fer the expiation of all one's sins, one lives in Janar Loka (one of the pious regions) for a period equivalent to the number

of particles therein). If any man offers a Vāpi (a well) in preference to other gifts, one gets ten fold fruits thereby. If one offers seven Vāpis, one acquires the fruits of offering one tank.

दशगवीस्मा कन्या यदि पाते प्रदीयते ॥ 57 ॥

फलं द्वाति द्विगुर्णं यदि साउलंकृता भवेत् ।

यकलं च तडाणे च तदुद्वीर च तकलम् ॥ 58 ॥

वायाथा यंकोद्वरणे वार्थीतुल्यकलं लभेत ।

A Vāpī is one which is four thousand Dhanus long and which is as which wide or less

Note: Dhanu equals a measure of four hastas.

If offered to a good bridegroom, then the giving of a daughter in marriage is equivalent to a dedication of ten Vāpis. And if the girl be offered with ornaments, twice the merits accure. The same merit accrues in clearing the bed of the mud of a pond as in digging it. So for the Vāpi (well).

अश्वायदुबमातीय प्रतिष्ठा च: करोत्ति च ॥ 59 ॥

स प्रयाति तपोलोके वर्षाणामयुत सति ।

पुधोघानं यो द्वाति सावित्रि सर्वभृतते ॥ 60 ॥

स वसेद्युवलोके च वर्षाणामयुतं धुवम् ।

O Chaste One! He who plants an Aśvattha tree and dedicates it to a godly purpose, lives for one Ayuta years in Tapar Loka. O Śāvitrī! He who dedicates a flower garden for the acquirement of all sorts of good, lives for one Ayuta years in Dhruva Loka.

घो द्वाति विमानं च विणाघे भारते सति ॥ 6 1 ॥

विषयुर्लोक वसेतोर्सि यावन्यन्तंतं परम् ।

चित्रयुक्ते च विधुरे फर्लं तस्य चतुर्णुगम् ॥ 6 2 ॥

तस्याएं शिविकादानं फल्मेव लभेद्युवम् ।

O Chaste One! He who gives a Vimāṇa (any sort of excellent carriage) in honour of Viṣṇu, in this Hindus thān, lives for one Manvantara in Viṣṇuloka. And if one gives a Vimāṇa of variegated colours and workmanship, four times the result accrues. And one who gives a palanquin, acquires half the fruits.

यो द्विति मफित्युन्तो हरये दोलमन्दिरम् ॥ 63 ॥

विषाणुलोक वसेतसोर्पि यावम्बन्वन्तं शगत् ।

राजमार्ग सीध्युक्तं चः क्रोति पतितते ॥ 64 ॥

वर्षिणामुतं सोउपि शक्रलोके महीयते ।

Again if anybody gives, out of devotion, a swinging temple (the Dol Mandir) to Bhagavān Śrī Hari, lives for one hundred Manvantaras, in the region of Viṣṇu. O Chaste One! He who makes a gift of a royal road, decorated with palacial buildings on either side, lives with great honour and love in that Indraloka for one Ayuta years.

बाहाणेघोअयं वेतेयो दाने समकर्त लभेत् ॥ 65 ॥

यद्ध दत्तं च तद्बुले न दत्तं नयोतिष्ठते ।

भुक्त्वा स्वागिर्दिं सोखं पुणवाञ्जन्म भाते ॥ 66 ॥

लभोढ़िपुकुलेचेक क्रमेणीवभातिपु ।

Equal results follow whether the above things are offered to the Gods or to the Brāhmanas. He enjoy that which he gives. No giving, No enjoying. After enjoying the heavenly pleasures, etc., the virtuous person takes birth in Bhārata as a Brāhman or in other good families, in due order, and ultimately in the Brāhmaṇa families.

भारते पुरवत्थिज्ञो भुतत्वा स्वगीदिकं फलम् ॥ 67 ॥

पुन: सोउपि भवेडिप्रद्रोवे च श्रवियादय: ।

श्रिवयो वाथ वैश्यो वा कल्यकोंदितशने च ॥ 68 ॥

The virtuous Brāhmaṇa, after he has enjoyed the heavenly pleasures, takes his birth again in Bhārata in Brāhmaṇa, Kṣattriya or in Vaiśya families. A Kṣattriya or a Vaiśya can never obtain Brāhmaṇahood, even if he performs asceticism for one Koti Kalpas.

तस्या बाहुपाल्चं च न प्राप्नोत श्रुते श्रुतम् ।

नापूचतं क्षीयते कर्म कल्याकोटितरोरि ॥ 69 ॥

एतते कथितं किंचिरिकं भूयः श्रोतुमिच्छसि ॥ 70 ॥

ड्री श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणं नवमस्कन्चे नारदनारायणसंवादे

साविष्युपखाने एकोनर्शितोश्वायः ॥ 29 ॥

This is stated in the Srutis. Without enjoying the fruits, no Karma can be exhausted even in one hundred Koti Kalpas. So the fruits of the Karmas must be enjoyed, whether they be auspicious or inauspicious. By the help of seeing the Devas and seeing the Tirthas again and again, purity is acquired. O Śavītri! So now I have told you something. What more do you want to hear? Say."

Here ends the Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the anecdote of Śavītri on the fruits of making gifts and on the effects of Karmas in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXX

On the Conversation Between Sāvitri and Yama

साविश्यवाच

प्रवाति स्वर्गमवं च येपैव कर्मणा यम ।

मानवा: पुण्यवंस्थ तन्ये व्याख्यातुमहंसि ॥ 1 ॥

Sāvitrī said: “O Dharmarājan! Kindly tell me in detail about those works that lead the meritorious persons to the Heavens and various other spheres.”

धर्मार्ग जयाच

अत्रदानं च विषाय यः क्रोतीत च भारते ।

अत्रप्रमाणवर्षे च शिवलोके महीयते ॥ 2 ॥

अत्रदानं महादानमन्येष्ठोप्रि कोरिते यः ।

अत्रदानप्रमाणं च शिवलोके महीयते ॥ 3 ॥

Dharmarāja said: “O Child! He who gives rice and food to the Brāhmaṇas in India, goes to the

Śivaloka where he dwells with great respect for years equivalent to the measure of that food. This ‘Anna-dāna’ (the giving of boiled rice and other eatables) is a great dāna (charity) and this can be done not only to the Brāhmaṇas but to the other castes also, where similar results also follow.

अज्दानात्यरं दानं न भूतं न भविष्यति ।

नात्र पावरशीहा स्थान्र कालिनियमः स्वचित् ॥ 4 ॥

देवेध्यो ब्रह्माण्यो वा द्वाति चासनं यदि ।

महीयते विद्य्युलेको वर्षाणाममुतं सति ॥ 5 ॥

There is, or will be, no other charity superior to this charity of anna (rice, boiled it may be and other eatables). For here no distinction is made as to what

Book IX Chapter XXX

caste will get it or not, nor the discrimination of time, when to give such a charity. O Child! Seats (Āšanas) given to the Devas and the Brāhmaṇas, carry the donor to the Viṣṇu Loka, where he dwells for Ayuta years with great respect and love.

यो द्वाति च विघ्राय दिह्वां धेनुं पर्यस्तिन् ।

तल्लोममानवर्ष च विष्णुलोक महीयते ॥ 6 ॥

चतुर्णीं पुण्यद्विते तीर्थें शतगुर्णं फलम् ।

दानं नारायणक्षेत्र फलं कोटिपुर्णं भवेत् ॥ 7 ॥

Giving excellent cows yielding milk to Brāhmanas take the donor to Visṇuloka, where he is glorified and remains for years equivalent to the number of pores in that cow or those cows. And if cows be given on a meritorious day, four times the merits accure, and if given in a sacred place of pilgrimage, hundred times the result occurs; and if given in a tīrtha, where Nārāyaṇa is worshipped, kojti times the results accrue.

गां यो द्विति विषाय भारते भक्तिपूर्वकम् ।

वर्षाणामयुतं चैव चन्द्रलेके महीयते ॥ 8 ॥

यशीभयमुखीदानं करोति बहागाया च ।

तल्लोमानवर्ष च विद्युलोके महीयते ॥ 9 ॥

He who gives with devotion, cows to the Brāhmaṇas in Bhārata, remains in the Candraloka for one Ayuta years and is glorified. He who gives a two-mouthed cow to a Brāhmaṇa goes to Visnuloka and remains there for as many years as there exist the numbers of hairs on the body of that cow and is glorified.

यो द्वाति ब्राह्माणय श्रेतच्छत्रं मनोहरम् ।

वर्षाणामवृतं सेटिपि मोदते वक्रणालये ॥ १ ० ॥

विज्ञाय पीडितानाय वस्वयुम् द्वाति च ।

महीयते वायुलेकि वर्षाणामवृत सति ॥ १ १ ॥

A gift of a beautiful white umbrella to a Brāhmaṇa makes one go to Varunāloka for Ayuta years where he remains with great pleasure. Giving garments to the diseased Brāhmaṇas make one fit to remain with glory in Vāyuloka for one ayuta years.

यो द्वर्तीत बाहाणाय शाल्यामं सवस्तकम् ।

महीयते स बैकुंटे यावच्छंद्रिवाकरी ॥ १ २ ॥

यो द्वर्तीत बाहाणाय दिथ्वां शय्यां मनोहाम् ।

महीयते चन्द्रलोके यावच्छंद्रिवाकरी ॥ १ ३ ॥

Giving to a Brāhmana the Śālāgrāma with garments makes one remain with glory in Vaikuntha as long as there exist the Sun and Moon. Giving a beautiful bedding to a Brāhmana, glorifies a man in the Candraloka as long as there exist the Sun and Moon.

यो ददाति प्रदीपं च देवेध्यो बाहाणाय च ।

यावन्मवन्तरं सेठिपि वहिलके महीयते ॥ 14 ॥

क्रौति गजदानं च यदि विधाय भारते ।

यावदिंद्रो नरस्तावदिंद्रस्याधांसने वसेत् ॥ 15 ॥

To give lights to the Devas and Brāhmaṇa glorifies a man in Agniloka (the region of Fire) for one Manvantara. To give elephants to the Brāhmaṇas in Bhārata, makes one sit in the same throne with Indra for his life period.

भारते यो3शुदानं च करौते ब्राह्मणाय च ।

मोदते वासणे लोके यावन्मन्तरं सति ॥ १ ६ ॥

प्रकृते शिविकां यो हिद्धत विहाणाय च ।

मोदते वासणे लोके वावद्विद्रश्रतुर्है ॥ १ ७ ॥

Giving horses to the Brāhmaṇas makes one remain in Varunāloka for fourteen Indras life periods. Giving a good palanquin to a Brāhmaṇa make one remain in the Varunaloka for fourteen Indras life-periods.

प्रकृही वार्तिकां यो हि द्वर्तित ब्राह्माणाय च ।

महीयते वायुलोके यावन्मन्तरं सति ॥ १८ ॥

यो द्वाति च विप्राय व्यजनं श्रेतचामग् ।

महीयते वायुलोके वर्षाणामयुतं घुमम् ॥ १९ ॥

Giving a good site or a good orchard to a Brāhmana leads one to the Vāyuloka where he remains with glory for one Manvantara. Giving a white cāmara and fan to a Brāhmana, leads the donor to the Vāyuloka where he remains for one ayuta years.

धान्यं रत्वं यो द्वाति चिरंत्रीही भवेत्सुधीः ।

द्राता ग्रहीता ती ही च धुवं वैकुणतामिनि ॥ 20 ॥

Giving grains and jewels make one long-lived and both the donors and receivers go certainly to Vaikuntha.

सततं श्रीहर्नीम भाते यो जयेघरः ।

स एव चित्रजीची च ततो मृत्युः पलाऊरे ॥ 2 1 ॥

यो नरो भाते वर्षे दोलनं कायदेसुधीः ।

पूर्णिमाजरजीशे जीवन्मुन्तो भवेराः ॥ 2 2 ॥

इह लोके सुखं भुक्ल्या याव्ये विज्युमादित्यम् ।

निश्छतं निवसेत्त्र शतमवन्तरावधि ॥ 2 3 ॥

He who always recites the name of Śrī Hari, lives for ever and Death goes far far away from him. The intelligent man that celebrates the Swinging Festival (Dol Yātā) in the last quarter of the Full Moon night in this land of Bhārata, becomes liberated while living, enjoying pleasures in this world, goes in the end to Viṣṇuloka, where he remains for one hundred Manvantaras; there is no doubt in this.

फलभुतफलपुर्ण्यां ततो5पि दिषुणां भवेत् ।

करण्योत्नीय स भवेदित्याहु कमलोद्वः ॥ 24 ॥

तिटवानं बाहाणाय यः करोति च भारत ।

तिलगमाणवर्ष च मोदते शिवमन्दिरे ॥ 25 ॥

If the Swinging Festival be performed under the influence of the asterism Uttara Phālguni then the fruits become doubled; this is the saying of Brahmā Himself The performer lives to the end of a Kalpa. To give til (Sesamum) to a Brāhmaṇa, leads one to Śiva Loka, where one enjoys for a number of years equal to the number of til.

ततः सुयोर्न संग्राम विरजीबी भवेल्सुखी ।

तापपात्रस्य दानेन द्रिणुणं च कलं लभेत् ॥ 26 ॥

सालोक्तां च भोगं च सरखां सुदर्धि प्रियाण।

यो द्वाति ब्राह्माणय भाते च पतितमात् ॥ 27 ॥

महीयते चंद्रलोके यावदिदंश्छतुर्दें ।

तत्र स्वर्वेयया सार्यं मोदते च दिवानिणम् ॥ 28 ॥

Then one is born in a good yoni and becomes longlived and happy. To give a copper plate yields double the effect. To give in India a chaste wife the garments and ornaments to a Brāhmana (and then to purchase her with an equivalent in gold) leads one to Candra Loka where one remains for fourteen Indra's life periods and enjoys day and night the celestial Apsarās.

ततो गंधर्वलोके च वर्षाणामयुतं धुवम् ।

दिवापितर्ग कांतुकेन चोवंश्या सह मोदते ॥ 29 ॥

ततो जनमहसहं च प्राप्नोति सुदार्ति प्रियाम् ।

सर्ती सीभाग्ययुक्ता च कोमलो प्रियवादिदीम् ॥ 30 ॥

Thence the donor goes to the Gandharva Loka for one ayuta years and day and night enjoys Urvaši. Then he gets for thousand births chaste, fortunate, wealthy, gentle and sweet-speaking, beautiful wives.

प्रद्वाति फलं चाफ ब्राह्मणाय च यो नरः ।

फलप्रमाणवर्षे च शकलोके महीयते ॥ 31 ॥

पुनः सुयोर्नि संप्राण्य सुतमुत्तमम् ।

He who gives nice and delicious fruits to the Brāhmapas, remains with glory in the Indra Loka for a number of years equivalent to the fruits. He gets again a good Yoni (birth) and gets excellent sons.

सफलनां च वृक्षाणां सहचं च प्रश्रसितम् ॥ 32 ॥

केवलं फलदानं वा बाहाणाय द्वताति च ।

सुचिरं स्वर्गावासं च कृत्वा याति स भारते ॥ 33 ॥

नानाद्वयस्मायुक्ते नानास्यस्मार्वित्नम् ।

द्वाति यश्र त्रियाय भारते वियुले गृहम् ॥ 34 ॥

सुरलेके वसेतसो5पि यावन्यन्तरं शतम् ।

To give thousand trees while there are fruits on them, or nice fruits only to the Brāhmanas, makes one enjoy the Heavens for a long, long time and he then comes back to Bhārata. To give various things and good edifices with grains, etc., to the Brāhmaṇas leads once to the regions of the Devas where he remains for one hundred Manvantaras.

ततः सुवोर्ग संग्राय स महाप्रधनात्यभवेत् ॥ 35 ॥

यो नरः सरमवंगुक्तां भूमिं च कौघां सति ।

द्वाति भकला विग्राय पुण्यघ्रेत्रे च भारते ॥ 36 ॥

महीयते च वैकुणे मन्वन्तशगतं घुवम् ।

पुनः सुयोनिं संग्राम्य महांश्र भृमिभो भवेत् ॥ 37 ॥

Then he gets a very good birth and becomes the master of abundant wealth. He who gives with devotion to the Brāhmanas lands certainly goes for one hundred Manvantaras and remains there in glory for one hundred Manvantaras; and, coming

Book IX Chapter XXX

again to be born in good wombs, they become Kings.

तं न तयजाति भूमिश्र जन्मनां शतकं परम् ।

शीमांश्छ धनवांश्रिय पुत्रवांश्र प्रजेश्रः ॥ 38 ॥

यो त्रजं च प्रकूर्ं च ग्रामं दद्याधिज्ञाय च ।

लुभमवन्तरं चैव वैकुण्ठे स महीयते ॥ 39 ॥

The earth does not leave him for hundred births. He becomes prosperous, wealthy and possesses many sons and becomes the lord of his subjects. He who gives a good village with pasture land and cows, dwells with glory in Vaikuntja for one lakh manvantaras.

युन: सुयोर्नि संग्राम यामलक्षस्मावित्तम् ।

न जहाति च तं पृथ्वी जन्मनां लक्ष्मेव च ॥ ४० ॥

Then he gets a good birth (becomes born in a high caste family) and obtain a lakh villages. The earth quits him not even if he be born a lakh times. (This is very bad then, to one who does not like to be born again).

सुप्रजं च प्रकूटं च पक्वसत्यसामन्वित्तम् ।

नानापुक्रिरीषुक्षणकलल्लीसमावित्तम् ॥ 41 ॥

नारं यक्ष विष्याय द्वाति भारते भवैत ।।

महीयते स केलासे शललक्षेत्रकालकम् ॥ 42 ॥

He who gives a village inhabited by good and obedient subjects with ripe excellent grains, various tanks, trees and adorned with fruits and leaves dwells in Kailāśa with great glory for ten lakh Indra's life periods.

पुन: सुवोर्गे संप्रायण राजेन्द्र भारते भवेत् ।

ननाराणां च नित्युं स लभेशत्र संशयः ॥ 43 ॥

धरा तं न जहाव्यैव जन्मनामयुतं धूवम् ।

परमेश्वर्यंसुक्तो भवेदेव महीतले ॥ 44 ॥

Getting again born in high family, he becomes Rājadhīrāja in Bhārata and obtains Niyuta towns. There is no doubt in this. The earth quits him not, even if he be born āyuta times. Really he gets the highest prosperity in this earth.

नरागरांचे शनकं देईंगो हि हिकज्ञाने ।

सुप्रकृह्टे मध्यकृष्टे प्रजापुक्ते द्वताति च ॥ 4 5 ॥

व्यापीतडागसंयुक्ते नानावृक्षसम्पित्तम ।

महीयते स वैकुणंठे कोटिमव्नतारविध ॥ 46 ॥

He who gives to a Brāhmaṇa one hundred towns and countries, inhabited by good or mediocre subjects, with wells, tanks, and, various trees, remains with glory in Vaikunṭha for one Koti manvantaras.

पुनः सुयोर्नि संग्राम्य जंबूढीपवितभंत्रेत ।

पारमैधर्वसंयुक्तो यथा शक्रस्वथा भृति ॥ 47 ॥

मही तं न जहावेल वन्मानां कोटिदेव च ।

कल्पांतकीवी स भवेत्रज्ञाजेश्रो महान् ॥ 48 ॥

Then he becomes born in this earth in a high caste family, becomes the Lord of Jambudvīpa and attains in this earth great prosperity like Indra. The earth quits him not even if he comes here Koṭi times; in reality he is a Mahātmā (a great-sould man), Rājrājeśvara (the Lord of Kings) and lives upto the end of a Kalpa.

स्वाधिकारं समयं च यो द्वाति द्विज्ञानले ।

चतुर्णी फलं चाते भवेतस्य न संशयः ॥ 49 ॥

जंबुद्वीयं यो द्वाति बाहाणाय तपिथने ।

फलं शतगुर्ण चोते भवेतस्य न संशयः ॥ 50 ॥

He who gives his whole property to a Brāhmīna, gets in the end four times that; there is no doubt in this. He who gives Jambu Dvīpa to an ascetic Brāhmana, gets undoubtedly in the end one hundred times the fruit.

जंबुढीपमहीदातु: सर्वतीर्थानि सेवितु: ।

सर्वेधां तपसां कर्तु: सर्वेधां वासकारिणः ॥ 51 ॥

सर्वेनासप्रतुत श्वसीस्थेधारस्य च ।

अस्वये पुनरावृतिंन भन्तस्य महोशितुः ॥ 52 ॥

असंख्यब्रद्धाणां पात पर्यन्ति भुवनेशितुः ।

निवसंति यमिष्ठीये श्रीद्वया: परये पदे ॥ 53 ॥

If you give away Jambu Dvipa, the whole earth; if you travel all the Tirthas, if you perform all sorts of asceticisms, if you give shelter to all, if you make gifts of all sorts, know that you will have to come again to be reborn in this earth; but if you become a devotee of Mūla Prakṛti, then be sure that you won't have to come here and be reborn. The devotees of Mūla Prakṛti go to Mani Dvipa, the

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Highest place of Śrī Bhuvaneśari Śrī and remain there and they see the fall of innumerable Brahmās.

देवीमन्नोयासकाय शिवाय मानवीं तनुम् ।

विषूर्ति दिव्यास्पर्प च जन्ममतुजरात्राम । ५४ ॥

लक्ष्या देयायु सात्वयं देवीसेवां च कुवंते ।

पश्यन्ति ते मणिहीपे सखंडे लोकसंक्षयम् ॥ ५५ ॥

The worshippers of the Devi Mantra when they quit their mortal coils, assume divine appearances endowed with Vibhūtis (manifestations of powers) and free from birth, death and old age, assume the Sārūpya (the same form) of the Devi and remain in Her Service. They reside in Mānidvīpa and see the part Pralayas.

नश्यति देता: सिद्धाश विहाय मानवी तनुम् ।

विष्यति दिव्यल्पां च जम्मयतुल्यगत् ॥ 56 ॥

कांतिके तुलसीदानं कांतीत हरयं च यः ।

युगवयप्रमाणं च मोते हरिचन्दिरे ॥ 57 ॥

The Devas die, the Siddhas die, the whole universe vanishes; but the Devi Bhaktas never die and they remain free from birth, death, and old age. He who offers Tulasi leaf to Bhagavān Hari in the month of Kārtika resides for three yugas in the temple of Hari.

पुनः सुयोर्नि संग्राम हरिचर्निक लभेद्यूवम् ।

वित्तप्रियाणां प्रवर: स भवेद्धारते पूर्वि ॥ 58 ॥

मध्ये यः: स्नाति गंगायामकणोयकालतः ।

यगवधिसहस्राणि मोदते हरिपिन्दे ॥ 59 ॥

Getting again a good birth, he acquires the devotion to Śrī Hari and becomes the Foremost of those who restrain their senses. He who bathes in the Ganges early before the rising of the Sun remains in enjoyment in the temple of Hari for sixty thousand yugas.

पुनः सुवोर्नि संग्राम यिण्यांगं लभेद्युवम् ।

स्वक्ला च मानुषं दैई पुनर्विति हरेः पदम् ॥ 6 0 ॥

Getting again a good birth, he gets the Viṣṇu Mantra, and, quitting his mortal coil, becomes united with the Feet of Śri Hari.

नास्ति तत्पुनग्नितिक्षेकुऊच महीतले ।

क्रोगीत हिरादायं च तथा साक्ष्यमेव च ॥ 6 1 ॥

नित्यस्नायी च गंगायां स पुतः सुर्येवद्धुवि ।

पदे पोदःशभोयस्य लभते निश्छितं फलम् ॥ 6 2 ॥

He has not to come back from Vaikuntha to this earth. He remains in Hari's Service and gets the same form of Hari. He who bathes daily in the Ganges, becomes purified like the Sun and gets the result of performing the Horse-sacrifice at every step.

तस्यैव पाद्रजसा सदा:पुता वसु-धूरा ।

मोदते स च वैकुण्टे यावच्छन्धदिवाकारी ॥ 63 ॥

पुनः सुयोगेन संग्रण्य हरिभर्फिक लभेद्युवम् ।

जीवन्युक्तो5तितंजस्वी तपोर्वप्रवगे घबेत् ॥ 64 ॥

The earth, becomes purified by the dust of his feet and he enjoys in Vaikuntha as long as the Sun and Moon exist. Then again he becomes born in a good and beautiful womb, and is liberated by acquiring the devotion to Hari. He becomes very energetic and the formost of the ascetics, pure, religious, learned, and self-restrained.

स्वधर्मान्तर: शुख्दो विद्वांश स जितेन्द्रिया: ।

मीनककटवोभीये गाढ़ तपति भास्कर: ॥ 65 ॥

भातते यो द्वाल्येव जलमेव सुवासितम् ।

स मोदते च केलसो यावदिद्वाशुतुर्देग ॥ 66 ॥

When the Sun comes midway between Pisces and Cancer and heats intensely the earth, the man who in Bhārata gives cool water to drink to the people, resides in happiness in Kailāśa for fourteen Indra's life periods.

पुनः सुचीन संग्रव्य रूपवांश सुखी भवेत् ।

शिवभनछ्छ शेतखी वेदवेदंगागराः ॥ 67 ॥

वैशाखे सन्तुदानं च यः करोति द्विजारावे ।

सक्नुर्णुप्रमागाद्ध मोदते शिवमन्त्रि ॥ 68 ॥

Getting again a good birth here, he becomes beautiful, happy, devoted to Śiva, energetic and expert in the Vedas, and the Vedāṅgas. He who gives to a Brāhmana the Śaktu (sattu) in the month of Vaiśākha enjoys in the Śiva temple for as many years as there are number of particles in that quantity of sattu (powders in parched oat).

क्रोतीत भाते यो हि कृष्णज्ञान्यहीज्ञान् ।

शतजन्मकृतं पार्थ मुच्यते नात्र संशय: ॥ 69 ॥

Book IX Chapter XXX

वैकुंठे मोदते सोअपि वार्विद्राश्रतुर्दै ।

पुनः सुयोर्नि संग्राय कृष्णे भक्ति लभेद् धुवम् ॥ 70 ॥

He who performs the Krṣna Janmāṣṭamī vow in this Bhārata, is freed from the sins incurred in his hundred births; there is no doubt in this. The observer of the vow remains in great enjoyment in Vaikuntha for fourteen Indra's gets again a good birth here and acquires Hari Bhakti.

ईहि भातरे वर्षे शिवारत्रिं क्रांतीत यः ।

मोतेते शिवलोके स सतमन्वन्तरावधि ॥ 71 ॥

शिवाय शिवारत्री च बिल्वपत्रं द्वताति यः ।

पत्रमानयुगं तत्र मोदते शिवमिन्द्रे ॥ 72 ॥

He who performs the Śivārātri vow in this Bhārata Varsa, resides with great joy in Śiva Loka for seven manvantaras. He who offers the Bel leaves to Śiva in Śivārātri time, resides with great joy in Śiva's Abode for as many yugas as there are number of leaves.

पुनः सुवर्तीं संग्राम शिवभक्ति लंभद्रुबण् ।

विद्यान्पुरवाजघ्रीमान्यजावन्यप्रियामभवेत् ॥ 73 ॥

चैवमासे ३६वा माघे शंकरं योउचैवद्यत् ।

क्रोति नर्तनं भस्त्या वेयपाणिर्दिवानिशणम् ॥ 74 ॥

मासं वाउव्यमांसं वा द्वा सप्त दिवानि च ।

दिवमानयुगं सोप्रि शिकलोके महीयते ॥ 75 ॥

Getting again a good birth here, he acquires the devotion to Śiva and becomes learned, prosperous and possesses sons, subjects and lands. He who performs vow and worships Śankara in the month of Caitra or Māgha and who, with a branch of a tree in hand, dances day and night for one month, or half a month, or half a month, for ten days or for seven days, dwells in Śiva Loka for as many yugas as the number of days he dances.

श्रीरामनवर्मी यो हिं करोति भारते पुभान् ।

संरमन-वन्तरं यावमोदते विज्यामन्दितं ॥ 76 ॥

पुनः सुवोर्नि संग्राम्य रामधार्वित लभेद्युवम् ।

जितेन्द्रियाणां प्रवरो महांश्छ धनवान्यन्ते ॥ 77 ॥

He who performs the vow of Śri Rāma Navamī, lives in the abode of Viṣṇu for seven Manvantaras in great joy. Getting again a good birth, he

becomes devoted to Śri Rāma, the foremost of those who have self restraint and he becomes very wealthy.

गाराद्वीरां महापूजां प्रकृतेर्ः क्रोतित च ।

महिषेश्ठगारलमैय: शड़ैर्भकादिधिः सति ॥ 78 ॥

नैवेटीभवहातैश धुपद्वीपादिभनस्था ।

नृत्यगीतादिभिविधीनांनाकोतुकर्मगलम् ॥ 79 ॥

शिवलोके वसेतलोप्रि समतान्वतारविध ।

He who performs the Sāradyā Pūjā' (the great Durgā Pūjā in the month of autumn) of the Mūla Prakṛti with incense, lights, offerings of food, and animal sacrifices of buffaloes, goats, sheep, rhinoceros, frogs or other animals, together with dancing, music, and various other auspicious things, resides in the Śiva Loka for seven Manvantaras.

पुनः सुयोर्नि संग्राम्य नरो बुद्धि च निर्मलम् ॥ 80 ॥

अन्तुलं त्रियमाप्तोति पुर्णवैगविद्धर्मीम् ।

महाप्रभावयुक्तशु गजाज्ञिसम्यित्वः ॥ 81 ॥

राजराजेश्वर: सोअपि भवेदेव न संशयः ।

Getting an excellent birth, and a pure understanding, he gets unbounded prosperity, sons and, no doubt, grandsons and he becomes a very powerful sovereign possessing many horses and elephants. There is no doubt in this.

ततः शुक्लाम्धीं प्राय महाप्रक्षीं चो उपोर्वेत् ॥ 82 ॥

नित्यं भतन्त्रा पशुमेकं पुण्यश्रेचे च भारते ।

दत्ता तस्य प्रकृतीच चोपचाराणि घोड़ग ॥ 83 ॥

गोलोके च वसेत्सोरिपि यावदिन्द्राशुतुरैण ।

पुनेः सुयोर्नि संग्रणय राज्ञानेश्वरो भवेत् ॥ 84 ॥

Again he who worships daily with devotion for a fortnight beginning from the eighth day of the bright fortnight the Mahā Devi Lakṣmī, remains in the region of Goloka for fourteen Indra's life periods. Then, obtaining an excellent birth, he becomes a sovereign.

कार्तिकीयुर्णियायां च कृत्वा तु रासमण्डलम् ।

गोपानां शतकं कृत्वा गोपीनीं शतकं तथा ॥ 85 ॥

शिलायां प्रतिमायां च श्रीकृष्णा राघया सह ।

भारते पूजयेद्वल्या चोपचाराणि घोड़ा ॥ 86 ॥

Šrimaddevibhagavatam

गोतोके वसते सोर्सि यावड़े ब्रह्मणो वयः ।

भारतं पुनरागत्य कृष्णो भक्ति लभेद्युवम् ॥ 87 ॥

He who in the full moon night in the month of Kārtika prepares a Rāsa maṇḍala with one hundred Gopas and Gopis and worship Śrī Krṣna and Rādhā in Śālagrama or in images with sixteen varieties of offerings remains in Goloka for Brahmā's life-time and coming again to Bhārata acquires an unflinching devotion to Śrī Krṣna.

क्रमेण सुवृद्धां वर्फिक लव्यम मंत्र हरेहो ।

देहं त्यक्त्वा च गोलोकं पुनरेव प्रयाति सः ॥ 88 ॥

ततः कृष्णस्य साक्ष्यं पार्वद्धवरो भवेत् ।

पुनस्तलन्तं नास्ति जगम्यतुरहो भवेत् ॥ 89 ॥

And when this Bhakti becomes greatly intensified, he gets initiated into Śrī Hari mantra and after quitting his mortal coil, he goes to the Goloka. Then he gets the Sārūpya (the same form) of Kṛṣṇa and becomes the chief Pārisad (attendant of Kṛṣṇa) and, becoming free from old age, he has no fear to fall again down to this earth.

शुक्लं वाज्यदयाला कृष्णां कारोल्येकादूर्गि च रः ।

वैकुंटे मोदते सोर्पि यावड़े ब्रह्मणो वयः ॥ ९० ॥

भारतं पुत्रगत्य कृष्णभक्ति लभेद् धूवम् ।

क्रमेण भर्फि सुदुर्गं कारोलेकां हरोहो ॥ ९१ ॥

देहं त्यक्त्वा च गोलोकं पुनेवे प्रयाति सः ।

ततः कृष्णस्य साक्ष्यं संग्राम्य पार्वैंट भवेत् ॥ ९२ ॥

He who observes the Ekādaśi day, remains fasting and performing penances in the bright or dark eleventh day, remains in Vaikunjha in great enjoyment and comfort. Then, again coming into this Bhārata he becomes a devotee of Hari. And when that Bhakti is intensified he becomes solely devoted to Hari and quitting his mortal coil, goes again to the Goloka and gets the Sārūpya of Kṛṣṇa and becomes His Pārisada (attendant).

पुनस्ततन्तं नान्ति जगाम्यूल्हो घबेत् ।

भारे च गुरुक्छोदार्यं वः शक्र पूजयेघरः ॥ 93 ॥

पहिवर्षसहस्राणि शक्रतके महीयते ।

रविवारे च संक्रांत्यां सप्तमयं शुक्रलपक्षेक ॥ 94 ॥

संपूजकाँ हविष्यार्थ वः क्रांति च भारते ।

महीयते सोड़कलेके यावर्तेग्रश्रुतुर्श १ 95 ॥

Then, freed of old age and death, he does not fall. He who worships Indra in the month of Bhâdra in the twelfth day of the white fortnight is worshipped in the regions of Indra for sixty thousand years. He who performs in Bhârata the worship of the Sun on Sunday Saṅkrānti (when the Sun goes from one sign to another) and the bright seventh Tithi, according to due rules and ceremonies and eats the food called Havisyānna (rice boiled in ghee), dwells in the Sūryaloka for fourteen Indra's life periods.

भारतं पुर्नगतस्य चारोगी श्रीयुतो भवेत् ।

ज्येष्ठकृष्णावतुरैर्यां साविर्यों यो हि पूर्वयते् ॥ 96 ॥

महीयते ब्रह्मलोके सदामन्त्रतावधि ।

पुर्नम्हीं समागत्य श्रीमानतुलविक्रमः ॥ 97 ॥

Then coming to Bhārata, he becomes free from all diseases and becomes prosperous. He who worships Sāvitrī on the fourteenth day of the black fortnight dwells in region of Brahmā for seven Manvantaras with great eclat and glory.

धिरंजीती घतेलोरोपि नानावान्संपदायुतः ।

माधस्य शुक्रलपंचम्पा पूर्वदेशः सरस्वतीम् ॥ 98 ॥

संयते भक्तिे दत्ता चोपचाराणि घोडग ।

महीयते मिणहीयो यावदूबहा दिवानिपन् ॥ 99 ॥

Coming again to Bhārata he enjoys beauty, unequalled valour, long life, knowledge and prosperity. He who worships on the fifth day of the bright fortnight in the month of Māgha, with his senses controlled and full of devotion, the Devi Sarasvatī with sixteen articles of food, resides in Mani Dvipa for one day and one night of Brahmā.

संग्राय च पुनर्जन्म स भवेकाक्रविष्ठितः ।

गां सुवर्णफिंक वे हो ब्राह्माणा ददाति च ॥ 100 ॥

नित्यं जीवनपर्यर्ते चनिक्षुक्तिश प्राते ।

गवां लोमप्रमाणाद्ध द्विगुण विद्यमूर्तिदे ॥ 101 ॥

On getting re-birth, he becomes a poet and a learned man. He who daily gives with devotion for his whole life, cow and gold to a Brāhmaṇa dwells in Viṣṇu Loka for twice as many years as there are the numbers of hairs on the bodies of these

Book IX Chapter XXX

cows and plays and jests with Viṣṇu and doing auspicious things he finds pleasure.

मोतेह हरिणा सार्थ म्रीडाकोतुकर्मानं: ।

तदन्ते पुनरागाल्य राजराजेश्वी भवेते ॥ 102 ॥

श्रीमांधु पुर्वातिवझाज्ञानावास्तरितः सुखी ।

In the end he comes again to this Bhārata and becomes the King of Kings, He becomes fortunate, prosperous, possesses many sons, becomes learned, full of knowledge and happy in every way.

भोपेचेधोपि मिहाङ्ग ब्राह्मणेच्छा भाते ॥ 103 ॥

विश्रमोममगणादं मोदते विद्यामंद्रे ।

ततः पुनिर्हागत्य सुखी च धनवान्यभवेत् ॥ 104 ॥

विद्यानुचिरतौरी च श्रीभानतुलविक्रमः ।

He who feeds a Brāhmaṇa here with sweetmeats goes to Viṣṇu Loka and enjoys there for as many as there are hairs on the body of the Brāhmaṇa. In the end he comes again to Bhārata and becomes happy, wealthy, learned, long lived, fortunate and very powerful.

यो वर्षिका वा द्वाल्येव हरेनामिन भागते ॥ 105 ॥

युगं नाममप्राणं च विद्युलोके महीयते ।

ततः पुनरिहाग्य स सुखी धनवान्यभेत् ॥ 106 ॥

यदि नात्यपाण्ड्रेत्र फलं कोटिटुणां भवेत् ।

नानां कोटि हरेवाँ हि हक्षे नारायणे जयेत ॥ 107 ॥

सर्वभाविविनुक्तो जीवनुक्तो भवेद्युव्यम् ।

न लभेस्त पुनर्जन्म बैकुंठे स महीयते ॥ 108 ॥

He who utters the name of Hari or gives the name (i.e. the mantra) of Hari to others, is worshipped in Viṣṇu loka for as many yugas as the number of times, the name or mantra was uttered. Coming again he Bhārata, he becomes happy and wealthy. And if such things be done in Nārāyaṇa Kṣettra, koṭi times the above results ensue. He who repeats the name of Hari koṭi times in Nārāyaṇa Kṣettra, becomes, no doubt, freed of all sins and liberated while living and he will not get rebirth. He lives always in Vaikuntha.

लभेघिषाणोश साक्तव्यं न तस्य पतनं भवेत् ।

विष्णुभक्ति क्षेभेस्तोप्र विष्णुसाक्तव्यमापनुयात् ॥ 109 ॥

शिवं वः: पूर्ववैत्रित्वं कृत्वा लिंगं च पार्थिविम।

यावज्जीविनपर्षतं स याति शिवर्गविंदग्य् ॥ 110 ॥

मूदो रेणुप्रमाणादं शिवलोके महीयते ।

He gets the Sālokya (the same region) of Viṣṇu, is not liable to fall, becomes a Bhakta of Viṣṇu. He who daily worships the earthen phallic symbol (after making it daily) for his whole life, goes to the Śiva Loka and dwells there for as many years as there are the number of particles of earth.

ततः पुनरित्रान्य राजत्रे भारते भवेत् ॥ 111 ॥

शिला च पुवद्रवित्र्य शिलातयो च भक्षित ।

महीयते च वैकुणटे यावढ़े ब्रह्मणः शतम् ॥ 112 ॥

Getting rebirth he becomes the King of Kings. He who worships daily the Śālagrāma stone and eats the water (after bathing it) is glorified in Vaikuntha for one hundred Brahmā's lives and becomes bron again.

ततो लक्ष्या पुर्जन्मे हरिभक्ति च दुर्वीभाम् ।

महीयाते विष्णुलोके न तस्य पतनं घबेत् ॥ 113 ॥

तपोसि चैव सर्वाणि ब्रतानि निविल्यानि च ।

कृत्वा निष्ठति वैकुणेट यावदिंद्राश्रुदर्य ॥ 114 ॥

When he acquires the rare Hari Bhakti and quitting his mortal coil goes to Viṣṇu Loka, whence he is not to return. He who performs all the Tapasyās (asceticism) and observes all the vratas (vows), dwells in Vaikuntha for fourteen Indra's life periods.

ततो लक्ष्या पुर्जन्म राजेडो भारते घवेत् ।

ततो सुन्तो घबेत्याश्रानुर्जन्म न विश्ठते ॥ 115 ॥

यः स्नात्वा सर्वतीर्थेयु घवः कुला प्रदिष्टिणगम् ।

स तु निवर्गानां याति न तज्जन भवेद्वुवि ॥ 116 ॥

पुण्यक्षेत्रे भारते च योअभधेः करोति च ।

अश्ठलीभिताङ्चं च श्रातस्याधिंसनं भन्ते ॥ 117 ॥

Getting rebirth in Bhārata he becomes the King of Kings and then he becomes liberated. He is not to return any more. He who bathes in all the Tirthas and makes a journey round the whole world, gets Nirvāna. He is not reborn. He who performs the Horse-Sacrifice in this holy land Bhārata enjoys half the Indraship for as many years as there are hairs on the body of the horse.

चतुर्णी राजसूयदकलापानीते मानवः ।

सर्वेधोप्रिय मढ्रेध्यो हिं पारो देवीमयडः स्मृत: ॥ 118 ॥

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

विष्याना च कृतः पूर्वे ब्रह्माणा च वरानने ।

शक्ररेण महैनेन विपुरासुरनागने ॥ 1 1 9 ॥

He who performs a Rājasūya Sacrifice, gets four times the above result. Of all the sacrifices, the Devi Yajña, or the Sacrifice before the Devi is the Best. O Fair One! Of old, Viṣṇu, Brahmā, Indra and when Tripurāsura was killed, Mahā Deva did such a sacrifice.

शफ्चिज्ञः प्रधानघ सर्ववेग्रेषु सुन्दरि ।

नानेन ससूगो यज्ञसिषु लोकेषु विद्यते ॥ 120 ॥

द्वेण च कृत: पूर्व महान्संभासंयुतः ।

O Beautiful One! This sacrifices before the Sakti is the highest and best of all the sacrifices. There is nothing like this in the three worlds. This Great Sacrifice was done of yore by Dakṣa when he collected abundant sacrifice materials of all sorts.

वभ्यू वक्लो स्य दक्षशंकरयाः सति ॥ 121 ॥

शेषुश निद्धि विज्ञा नीदी विद्यांक कोपतः ।

यद्योतैर्वक्षयं च वर्भन चन्द्रशेखरः ॥ 122 ॥

And a quarrel ensued on this account between Dakṣa and Śaṅkara. The Brāhmins conducting the sacrifice cursed the Nandi and others. And Nandi cursed the Brāhmaṇas. Mahādeva, therefore, disallowed the going on of sacrifice and brought it to a dead stop.

चकार देवीयूयं स पुरा दक्षः प्रजापति: ।

धर्मश्र क्रयपश्छीय पशेश्यापि च कदमे: ॥ 123 ॥

स्वायंभुचो मनुष्ठीय तत्पुरक्षा प्रियन्तः ।

शिव: सनत्कुमारक्ष कपिलक्ष पुवत्सना ॥ 124 ॥

Of yore the Prajāpati Dakṣa did this Devi Yajñā; it was done also by Dharma, Kaśyapa; Ananta, Kardama, Svāyambhuva Manu, his son Priyravrata, Śiva, Sanat Kumāra, Kapila and Dhruva.

राजसूयसह्वाणं फलमानोति निश्रातम् ।

देवीयात्रासपो यजो नासि वेदे फलप्रद: ॥ 125 ॥

वर्षाणं शतजीवी च जीवन्मुक्तो भवेद्युवम् ।

ज्ञानेन तेजसा चैव विष्णुतुल्यो भवेदिह् ॥ 126 ॥

The performance of this sacrifice brings fruits equal to performing thousands and thousands of Rājasūya sacrifices. Therefore there is no other

sacrifice greater than this Devi Yajña. One becomes surely endowed with a long life of one hundred years and is liberated while living. He becomes equal to Viṣṇu in knowledge, energy, strength, and asceticism. This is as true as anything.

देवतां च यथा विष्णुर्विणातनं च नारः ।

गस्त्राणां च यथा देवां वर्णांतां ब्राहणो यथा ॥ १२७ ॥

तीर्थानां च यथा गंगा पवित्राणां जिथो यथा ।

एकादशी प्रतानां च पुर्णाणां तुलसी यथा ॥ 1 2 8 ॥

नक्षत्राणां यथा चंत्रः पक्षिणां गरकडी यथा ।

यथा क्लींणां च पूर्णी तथा वाणी वर्भूधा ॥ 1 2 9 ॥

श्रीप्राणां चौद्रियाणां चे चंचलानां मनो यथा ।

प्रजापनीतां बढ़ा च प्रजानां च प्रजापनीः ॥ 1 3 0 ॥

ब्रन्दावनं वनानां च वर्षाणां भारतं यथा ।

श्रीमतां च यथा श्रीश विदुषां च सरस्वती ॥ 1 3 1 ॥

पतित्रानां दुगां च सौभाग्यानां च राधिका ।

देवीयान्तरालं चलैस सर्ववेजुपं घामिनि ॥ 1 3 2 ॥

अश्रमेधान्तेनैव शक्तवं च लभेद्युवम् ।

सहलेश विद्युपदं सैप्रानः पुयुर्वे च ॥ 1 3 3 ॥

O Child! This Devi Yajñā is the best and highest of all the sacrifices as Viṣṇu is the highest amongst the Devas; Nārada, amongst the Vaiṣṇavas; the Vedas, amongst all the Śāstras; the Brāhmaṇas amongst all the castes; the Ganges amongst the sacred places of pilgrimages, Śiva amongst the Holy of Holies, the Ekādaśi vow amongst all the Vratas; Tulasi, amongst all the flowers; the Moon, amongst the asterisms; Garuda, amongst the birds; Prakṛti, Rādhā, Sarasvatī and Earth amongst the females; the mind, amongst the quick-going and restless senses; Brahmā, amongst the Prajāpatis; Brahmā, amongst all the subjects; Vrndrāvana, amongst all the forests; Bhārata Varsa, amongst all the Varsas; Lakṣmī, amongst the prosperous; Sarasvatī, amongst the learned; Durgā, amongst the chaste; Radhikā, amongst the fortunate. If one hundred horse sacrifices are performed, Indrahood is sure to be obtained.

स्नानं च सर्वतीर्थानां सर्वद्वेषु दीक्षणम् ।

सर्वेषां च रात्नां च तपसां फलमेव च ॥ 134 ॥

Book IX Chapter XXXI

पाठे चतुर्ण वैदानां प्रादक्षिपणं घुवस्तथा ।

फलभूतिरिवं सर्वं भूतिक्तं शक्तिसेवनम् ॥ 135 ॥

It is by the influence of bathing in all the Tirthas, performing all the sacrifices, observing all the Vratas, practising all the austerities, studying all the Vedas circumambulating the whole earth, that this Highest Śakti's service is obtained and this service of Śakti is the direct cause of Mukti (liberation).

पुराणेषु च वेदेषु चेत्तिहासेषु सर्वतः ।

निस्किप्त सारभृतं देवीपादिद्बुजारंनम् ॥ 136 ॥

तद्वर्णनं च तद्वानं तत्रामगुणकीर्तनम् ।

तस्तोत्रमसरणं चैव यंदनं जयमेव च ॥ 137 ॥

तत्यादिदकर्नेवेध पब्जणं नित्यमेव च ।

सर्वसम्पतिमत्वेयं सर्वैस्तमतिधरं सति ॥ 138 ॥

To worship the lotus-feet of the Devi is the best and highest, is stated in all the Purāṇas, in all the Vedas, and in all the Itihāsas. To sing the glories of Mūla Prakṛti, to meditate on Her, to chant Her Name and attributes, to remember Her stratos, now down before Her, to repeat Her Name, and to drink daily Her Pādodaka (water after washing Her feet)

and the offerings already offered to Her, these are approved of by all; and everyone desires this.

भज नित्यं परं बहा निर्णुंगं प्रकृति परम् ।

गृहाण स्वामिनं वत्से सुखं वस च मंदिते ॥ 139 ॥

अयं ते क्रिकतः कर्मविषयाको गंगलो नृणगम् ।

सर्वैपित्तः सर्वमतस्तच्ज्ञानप्रदः परः ॥ 140 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमदेवीभागवतो गतगुर्णणे नवमकन्चे

प्रिंशोस्थावः ।। ३० ॥।

So worship, worship this Mūla Prakṛti, Who is of the nature of Brahmā, and, lo! Who is again endowed with Māyā. O Child! Take your husband and live happily with him in your home. O Child! Thus I have described to you the fruition of the Karmas. This is auspicious to every human being, desired by all and approved of by all. The Real Knowledge from this. There is no doubt in this."

Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the conversation between Sāvitrī and Yama and on the fruition of Karmas in the Great Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXXI

CHAPTER XXXI

On Yama's Giving the Sakti Mantra to Sāvitrī

श्रीनारायण उवाच

ग्रौकृकारीर्नं शुचा साधित्वी यमवक्रतः ।

साशूनीरा सपुल्का यमं पुनरावचा सा ॥ १ ॥

Nārāyana said: O Nārada! Hearing thus the supreme nature of Mūla Prakṛti from Dharmarāja Yama, the two eyes of Śāvitrī were filled with tears of joy and her whole body was filled with a thrill of rapture, joy and ecstasy.

सास्थ्यवाच

शकतेक्लीर्तीनं धर्मे सकलेढ़ारकारणम् ।

श्रोग्नां चैव वक्तुर्ण जनमृत्युजारहम् ॥ २ ॥

She again addressed Yama: O Dharmarāja! To sing the glories of Mūla Prakṛti is the only means of saving all. This takes away the old age and death of both the speaker and the hearer.

दानवानां च सिद्धानां तपसां च परं पदम् ।

योगानां चैव वेदानां कौतर्ने सेवनं विषयो ॥ ३ ॥

मुक्तिचयमारलं च सर्वसिद्धाल्येव च ।

श्रीगर्भिसेवकरसैव कलां नाईहि चोडगीम् ॥ ४ ॥

भजामि केन विधिना वद वेदविद्धं वर ।

गुणकर्मविपाकं च श्रुतं नृणां मनोहारम् ॥ ५ ॥

कर्मगुणविषाकं च तन्ते व्याख्यानुर्महिं ।

This is the Supreme Place of the Dānavas, the Siddhas, the ascetics. This is the Yoga of the yogins and this is studying the Vedas of the Vaidikas. Nothing can compare even to one-sixteenth of the sixteenth parts of the (full) merits of those who are in Śakti's Service; call it Mukti, immortality, or attaining endless Siddhis, nothing can come to it. O Thou, the Foremost of the Knowers of the Vedas!

I have heard by and by everything from Thee. Now describe to me how to worship Mūla Prakṛti and what are the ends of Karmas, auspicious and inauspicious.

इत्युक्त्वा च सती बह्ञाभित्नभावतकंधार ॥ 6 ॥

गुहाव धर्मरां च वेदोकनेत सवने च ।

Thus saying, the chaste Sāvitrī bowed down her head and began to praise Yama in stotras according to the Vedas.

साविश्याच

तपसा धर्माराध्य पृकले भासकर: पुरा ॥ 7 ॥

धर्म सूर्वे: सुतं प्राप धर्मारं नन्यामहम् ।

समता सर्वभृतेषु यस्य सर्वस्य साक्षणः ॥ 8 ॥

अतो यवामशमनमिति तं प्रणामामहम् ।

She said: “O Dhamarājan! The Sun practised of yore very hard austerities at Puṣkara and worshipped Dharma. On this, Dharma Himself became born of Sūrya as his son. And Thou art that son of Sūrya, the incarnation of Dharma. So I bow down to Thee.

येन्त्रछ कृतो विश्रे सर्वेधां जीविनां परम् ॥ 9 ॥

कामातुर्वं कालेन ते कृतातं नाम्याह्मृ ।

विषिति दई दंडाय पापिनं गृधिद्धते ॥ 10 ॥

नामपि ते दंडधरं वः शगता सर्वीजीविनम् ।

Thou art the Witness of all the Jivas; Thou seest them equally; hence Thy name is Samana. I bow down to Thee. Sometimes Thou by Thy own will takeest away the lives of beings. Hence Thy name is Kṛtānta. Obeisance to Thee! Thou holdest the rod to distribute justice and pronounce sentence on them and to destroy the sins of the Jivas; hence Thy name is Dānḍadhara; so I bow down to Thee.

Note: Any Jiva, in course of his travelling towards Mukti, can expect to pass through the stage Yamaship; and if he pleases, he can become a Yama.

विश्वो च कल्यलेव वः सर्वेषु च संततम् ॥ ११ ॥

अलीय दुनिवार्य च तं कालं प्रणामायहम् ।

तपसी ब्रह्मितोः वः संयमी संजितेन्रियः ॥ १२ ॥

At all times Thou destroyest the universe. None can resist Thee. Hence Thou art named Kāla; so

obeisance to Thee! Thou art an ascetic, devoted to Brahma, self-controlled, and the distributor of the fruits of Karmas to the Jivas; Thou restrainest Thy senses. Thou art called Yama. Therefore I bow down to Thee.

जीवानां कर्मफिलुदरं यमं प्रणामाध्यमू ।

स्वात्मागसु सर्वजैन मित्रं पुण्यकृतां भवेत् ॥ 13 ॥

पाधिनां कलेशोदो यस्ते पुण्यं मित्रं ननामध्यम् ।

यज्ञन्म ब्रहणोंउशेन जल्लतं ब्रह्मतेसा ॥ 14 ॥

Thou art delighted with Thy Own Self; Thou art omniscient; Thou art the Tormentor of the sinners and the Friend of the Virtuous. Hence Thy name is Punya Mitra; So I bow down to Thee. Thou art born as a part of Brahmā; the fire of Brahma is shining through Thy body.

यो ध्यायिति परं ब्रह तमीर्ण प्रणामाधसून ।

इतुसुत्वा सा च सावित्री प्रणात्या यमं पुने ॥ 15 ॥

यमस्तां शक्तिभवजं कर्मपाकमुवाच ह ।

Thou dost meditate on Para Brahma, Thou art the Lord. Obeisence to Thee!" O Muni! Thus praising Yama, She bowed down at the feet of Him. Yama gave her the mantra of Mūla Prakrti. How to worship Her and He began to recite the fruition of good Karmas.

इर्वे म्याहकं नित्यं प्रातरल्याय यः पठेत् ॥ १ ६ ॥

यमात्त्य भयं नाति स्वर्यावग्युच्छेत ।

महापापी यदि पठेत्रित्यं पशितसमार्थितः ॥

यमः करोति सगुर्द्धं कायव्यूहेत निश्छिन्न ॥ १ ७ ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागते महापुराणे नवमलक्ये

एकविशेषोस्थावः ॥ 31 ॥

O Nārada! He who recites these eight hymns to Yama early in the morning, getting up from his bed, is freed of the fear of death. Rather he becomes freed of all his sins. So much so, that even if he be a veritable awful sinner and if he recites daily with devotion this Yamāṣtakam, Yama purifies him thoroughly.

Here ends the Thirty-first Chapter of the Ninth Book on the Yama's giving Sakti Mantra to Sāvitri in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXXII

CHAPTER XXXII

On Various Hells

शीनारायण उवाच

मायावीजं महामन्तं प्रदत्ता विधिपूर्वेकम् ।

कमारीभूषविका च तापुघाच रखे: सुतः ॥ 1 ॥

Nārāyana said: Then, initiating her with the Great Seed, the ādi Radical Mantra of the Mahā Śakti, Śrī Bhūvaneśvarī in accordance with due rules, the son of Sūrya began to recite the various effects of various Karmas, auspicious and inauspicious.

धर्मराज उवाच

गुभकर्मविधाकारा नरक याति मानवः ।

कर्मार्थभविषयां च कथयामि निशायम १। २। १।

नानापुराणघेनो नामघेनो वभामिन ।।

नानाप्रकारं स्वर्ग च याति जीवः: स्वकर्मिभः ॥ ३ ॥

"Never do the persons go to hell when they perform good Karmas; it is only the bad works that lead men to hells. The different Purāṇas narrate various heavens. The Jivas go to those places as the effects of their various good Karmas.

गुधकर्मवियाकास नरक याति कर्मिभः ।

कुकर्मणा च नरक याति नानाधियं नरः ॥ ४ ॥

नरकाणां च कुण्डाति संति नानाधियानि च ।

नानाशाम्बमाणेन कर्मभेदेन याति च ॥ ५ ॥

The good Karmas do not lead men to hells; but the bad Karmas do lead them veritably to various hideous hells. In different Śāstras, different hell-pits are ascertained.

विस्तृतिन च मतानि क्लेशदानि च दुःखिनाम् ।

भयंकर्ताण चोराषि हे वसे कुस्तितानि च ॥ 6 ॥

पड्णींति च कृपडानि एवमन्यानि संति च ।

निबोध तेषां नामानि प्रसिद्धानि श्रुतों सति ॥ 7 ॥

Different works lead men to different hells. O Child! Those hell-pits are very wide, deep, painful and tormenting, very horrible and ugly. O these! Eighty-six pits or Kunḍas are prominent. Many other Kunḍas exist. Now listen to the names of the Kunḍas mentioned in the Vedas. Their names are:

वहिकुण्डे तत्पडुण्डे शारकुण्डे भयानकम् ।

विद्युकुं प्रभुकुंचे च लेश्मकुण्डे च दुःसहम् ॥ 8 ॥

गरकुण्डे तूविकुण्डे वसाकुण्डे तथैव च ।

गृकुण्डपदमयुकुंडपथकुंच्च कृकुस्तम् ॥ 9 ॥

कुण्डे गायस्नानां च कर्णविद्यकुपदेच च ।

मज्जाकुण्डे मांसकुंकें नक्कुंक च दुस्तम् ॥ 10 ॥

लोमकुण्डे कौकुण्डपरमिव्यकुं पं दुस्तम् ।

तामकुंके लोहकुण्डे प्रतरां क्लेश्यहं ॥ 11 ॥

चर्मकुण्डे ततसुराकुण्डे च परिकीर्तितम् ।

तीशणकंटककुण्डे च विषोदं विषकुपडकम् ॥ 12 ॥

प्रतलकुंते तैलस्य कुनकुण्डे च दुबहम् ।

कृमिकुण्डे पूर्वकुं सर्वकुंतु उत्तमम् ॥ 13 ॥

मगुकृत्वं दोर्गकुणं घीमं गरलकुण्डकम् ।

कुणं च वज्द्रदूर्णा वृधिकानां च सुवते ॥ 14 ॥

गगुकण्डे शूलकुर्णे खद्गाकुर्णं च भीषणम् ।

गोलकुणं नकुण्डे काककुर्णे शुचामयद् ॥ 15 ॥

मन्यानुकुर्णे बीजकुर्णे घजुकुर्णे च दु:सहम् ।

तत्पायाणाकुर्णे च तीक्ष्यायाणाकुर्णकदम् ॥ 16 ॥

लालकुर्णे मसीकुर्णे चूर्णिकुर्णे तथैव च ।

चक्रकुर्णे चक्रकुर्णे कूर्णकुर्णे महोत्क्वणम् ॥ 17 ॥

ज्वालकुर्णे घमकुर्णे दर्प्यकुर्णे शुचिस्मते ।

Vahni Kunda, Tapta Kunda, Ksāra Kunda, Bhayānaka Kunda, Viṭ Kunda, Mūtra Kunda, Ślesma Kunda, Gara Kunda, Duṣikā Kunda, Vasā Kunda, Śukra-Kunda, Śonita Kunda, Asrū Kunda, Gātramala Kunda, Karṇamala Kunda, Majjā Kunda, Mārīnsa Kunda, impassable Nakra Kunda, Loma Kunda, Keśa Kunda, impassable Asthi Kunda, Tāmra Kunda, the exceedingly hot and painful Lauha Kunda (the pit of molten iron). Carma Kunda, the hot Surā Kunda, sharp Thorny Kunda, Viṣa Kunda, the hot Taila Kunda, very heavy Astra Kunda, Kṛmi Kunda, Pūya Kunda, terrible Sarpa Kunda, Maśaka Kunda, Darīśa Kunda, dreadful Garala Kunda, Vajra Damīstra Vršcika Kunda, Śara Kunda, Śūla Kunda, awful Khadga Kunda, Gola Kunda, Nakra Kunda,

sorrowful Kāka Kuṇḍa, Manthāna Kuṇḍa, Bija Kuṇḍa, painful Vajra Kuṇḍa, hot Paśāna Kuṇḍa, sharp Paśāna Kuṇḍa. Lālā Kuṇḍa, Masī Kuṇḍa, Cakra Kuṇḍa, Vakra Kuṇḍa very terrible Kirma Kuṇḍa, Jvālā Kuṇḍa, Bhasma Kuṇḍa, Dagdh Kuṇḍa, and others.

तदस्पृचीमायितयं क्रुतयं सूचिकामुखम् ॥ 18 ॥

गोकामुखं नकमुखं गजद्रेगं च गोपुखम् ।

कृभ्योपाक कालसूत्रं मत्स्योदं कृमितन्तुकम् ॥ 19 ॥

पांसुभोज्यं पाणवेहं शुलुकोयं प्रक्रमनम् ।

उल्कापुखपंधकुणं वेधनं तातं तथा ॥ 20 ॥

जालरंधे देइचूणँ दलनं ओषणं कषम् ।

शूर्ग जालामुखं चैव धूमांयं नागवेदनम् ॥ 21 ॥

Besides these, there are the Taptasūci, Asipatra, Kṣuradhāra, Sūcimukha, Gokhāmūkha, Kūmbhipāka, Kālasūtra, Matsyoda, Krmi Kantuka, Pāmsūbhoyja, Pāśavesṭa, Śūlaprota, Prakampana Ulkāmakha, Andhakūpa, Vedhana, Tādana, Jālarandhra, Dehacūrṇa, Dalana, Śoṣana, Kaṣa, Śūrpa, Vālāmūkha, Dhūmāndha, Nāgavesṭana and various others.

कृष्णद्योतिन सावित्रि परिणां कलेशादीन च ।

नियुक्ते: विकारणी रक्षितानि च संततम् ॥ 22 ॥

दण्डस्ते: पाण्डसैर्मदमतैर्धयंकर: ।

शनिक्रसैर्गाहुस्तैरिसहते: सुदारुणी: ॥ 23 ॥

O Śavitrī! These Kunḍas give much pain and torment greatly the sinners; they are under the constant watch of innumerable servants. They hold rods in their hands; some of them have nooses; others hold clubs, Śaktis, awful scimitars; they are fierce fanatics, maddened with vanity.

तमोयुक्तैर्वाहीरेनितिवर्षश न सर्वतः ।

तेजस्विधिष्ठ नि:गंकैराताप्रियंगलोचनः ॥ 24 ॥

योगयुक्तै: सिद्धियुक्तैनानापरधरैभंदै: ।

आसग्रमतृष्यिष्टैः पारिभि: सर्वेजीविधि: ॥ 25 ॥

All are filled with Tamogunas, merciless, irresistible, energetic, fearless and tawny-eyed (like copper). Some of them are Yogis; some are Siddhas, they assume various forms. When the sinners are about to die, they see these servants of Yama.

स्वकर्पितर: सर्वे: शा:क: सौरैः ताणपोः ।

अदृष्टये: पुण्यकूद्धव सिद्धोर्गिभिरेव चे ॥ 26 ॥

स्वधर्मपितर्वेधि वित्तर्वां स्वतन्यकै: ।

बल्वाद्धिका नि:शंकैः स्वपन्द्रुषुं वैध्याहै: ॥ 27 ॥

एतते कथितं साधिकु कुषासेल्यानिरूपणम् ।

येघां निवासो वत्नुष्ठे निवोधि कथयामिते ॥ 28 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे नवमसकर्ये नारदनारणसंवेदे

द्वारिशोस्थाय: 11 32 11

But those who do their own duties, who are Sāktas, Sauras, or Gānapatyas or those who are virtuous Siddha Yogis, they never see the servants of Yama. Those who are engaged in their own Dharmas, who are possessed of wisdom, who are endowed with knowledge, who are mentally strong, who are untouched by fear, who are endowed with the feelings of the Devas, and those who are real Vaisṇavas, they never see these servants of Yama. O Chaste One! Thus I have enumerated to you the Kūndas. Now hear who live in the Kūndas."

Here ends the Thrity-second Chapter of the Ninth

Book on the enumeration of various

hells for sinners in the Mahāpuraṇam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣī Vedā Vyāsa.

CHAPTER XXXIII

On the Descriptions of Different Sinners

धर्मज जवाच

हरिसेवारतः शुज्ञो योगसिद्धो ज़ती सति ।

तपस्यी ब्रह्मारी च न याति नरकं धुवम् ॥ १ ॥

Dharmarājan said: “Those that are in Hari’s service, pure, the Siddhas in Yoga (those that have attained success in Yoga), the performers of Vratas

CHAPTER XXXIII

On the Descriptions of Different Sinners

धर्मराज जवाच

हरिसेवातर: शुखो योगसिद्धो जाती सति ।

तपस्यी ब्रह्मारी च न याति नरकं धुवम् ॥ १ ॥

Dharmarajan said: “Those that are in Hari’s service, pure, the Siddhas in Yoga (those that have attained success in Yoga), the performers of Vratas

Book IX Chapter XXXIII

(vows), the chase, the ascetics, the Brahmacāris never go to hells. There is no doubt in this.

कटुवाचा बाँधवांश बल्लेघेन यो नरः ।

दध्याक्नोति कलवान्दिकुंई प्रयाति सः ॥ 2 ॥

स्वागातलोमानावंह तन स्थल्या हुतागते ।

पशुयोगनिवमापोति रैद्रद्धधां जिजनपिन ॥ 3 ॥

Those persons that are proud of their strong positions and who use very harsh burning words to their friends, they go to Vahni Kunḍa and live there for as many years as there are hairs on his body; next they attain animal births for three births and get themselves scorched under the strong heat of the Sun.

बाहाणं तृषितं तपतं क्षुधितं गृहमागनम् ।

न भोजयति यो मुडस्ततकुषं प्रयाति सः ॥ 4 ॥

तत्र तल्लेमानां च वर्ष स्थलाचा च दुःखते ।

तत्पथले वहिकल्पे पक्षी च सपतन्मसु ॥ 5 ॥

He goes to the Tapta Kunda hell who does not entertain any Brāhmaṇa guest with any eatables who comes to his house hungry and thirsty. He lives there for as many years as there are hairs on his body and he has to sleep on a bed of fire, very tormenting. Then he will have to be born for seven births as birds.

रविवारे च संक्रायाममारां आपद्वासरे ।

वस्त्राणां क्षारसंयोगं करोति केवलं नः ॥ 6 ॥

स याति क्षार्तुईं च सूत्रमानाद्वमेव च ।

स ब्रजेत्रजजी योनि सपतजन्मु भाते ॥ 7 ॥

If anybody washes any clothing with any salt on Sunday, or on the day of Saṅkrānti (when the Sun enters another sign), or on any new-moon day or on any Śrāddha day (when funeral ceremonies are performed), he will have to go to the Kṣāra Kūṇḍa hell where he remains for as many years as there are threads in that clothing and finally he becomes born for seven births as a veritable washerman.

मूलप्रकृतिनिंदां यः कुकते मानवाधमः ।

वेदनिद्वां शाखनिंदां पुराणानां तथैव च ॥ 8 ॥

ब्रहाविष्युशिवादीनां तथा निद्धापरे जनः ।

गौरीवाण्यादिदेवीनां तथा निद्धापरे जनः ॥ 9 ॥

सर्वे ते नित्ये यांति तस्मिन्कुँके भयानके ।

नातः परतरं कुण्डे दुःखदुं तु भविष्यति ॥ 10 ॥

The wretch that abuses Mūla Prakṛti, the Vedas, the Śāstras, Purāṇas, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Śiva and the other Devas, Gaurī, Laksmī, Sarasvatī and the other Devīs, goes to the hell named Bhayānaka Narakakunā. There is no other hell more tormenting than this.

तत्र स्थित्यानेककल्पं सरयोनिं जतेयुनः ।

देवीनिवारपारास्य प्रायाश्रितां न विश्ते ॥ 11 ॥

स्वदन्तां परदन्तां वा वृत्ति च सुरविश्रयोः ।

पोष्वर्षसहस्राणि विद्युकांई च प्रयाति सः ॥ 12 ॥

The sinners live here for many Kalpas and ultimately become serpents. There is no sin greater than the abuse of the Devi.

तावंचेच व चर्पाणि विश्रभौजी तन तिहिति ।

पश्रिगवर्षसहस्राणि विद्युकांगिश्र पुनर्भवि ॥ 13 ॥

There is no expiation for it. So one ought never to abuse the Devi. If one discontinues the allowances given by oneself or other persons to the Devas or Brāhmanas, one goest to Visthā Kūndā and has to eat the faeces there for sixty thousand years and finally to be born in Bhārata as worms in faeces the same number of years.

परक्रीयतडागो च तडागं यः करोति च ।

उत्सुजैद्ववोदोग मूत्रकुण्ड प्रगतति सः ॥ 14 ॥

तदीयुगानवर्ष च तद्वोजी तत शिक्छिति ।

पुनः पूर्णशतादं च स युयो भारते भवेत् ॥ 15 ॥

If any person without the owner's permission digs another's tank dried of water, or makes water in the water of any tank, he goes to Mūtra Kunḍa and drinks urine for as many years as there are the particles in that tank. Then he becomes born in this Bhārata as an ox for one hundred years.

एकाकी मिष्टयश्नति रूपेक्षकुष्डं प्रपतिं च ।

पूर्णमिद्धशर्ते चैव तद्वोत्ती त्रत सिंहिति ॥ 16 ॥

ततः पूर्णशताद्धं च स प्रेतो भारते भवेत् ।

रुलेक्षमुपत्ररं चैव पूयं धृतैः ततः शुधि: ॥ 17 ॥

If any person eats good things himself without

giving any portion thereof to the number of his family, he goest to Śleśma Kuṇḍa where he eats phlegm, for full one hundred years. Then he becomes born as Preta (disembodied spirits) in this Bhārata for hundred years and drinks phlegm, urine and puss; then he becomes pure.

पितरं मातरं चैव गुरुं भाव्यां सुतं सुतान् ।

यो न पुणात्यनायां च गरकुंड प्रयाति सः ॥ १ ८ ॥

पुर्णमद्धूतां चैव तद्धोजी तत्र तिहितु ।

ततो जजेद्भूतयोनि सतायर्ष ततः शुचि: ॥ १९ ॥

He who does not support his father, mother, spiritual teacher, wife, sons, daughters and the helpless persons, goes to Gara Kuṇḍa where he eats poison for full one hundred years. Finally he becomes born and wanders as Bhūtas (disembodied spirits). Then he becomes pure.

श्रुतिरिधि वक्रच्छः कोतीय वो हि मानवः ।

पितृदेवास्तस्य जलं न गृह्न्त च पाधिनः ॥ 20 ॥

याति कानि च पाणिने ब्रह्मत्यादिकानि च ।

ईव लभते चोते दृषिकाकुंडमाबजेत ॥ 21 ॥

He who becomes angry and shrinks his eyes at the sight of a guest who has come to his house offered the Devas or Pitṛs, who do not accept the water offered to them by that villain. On the contrary, he earns all the sins of Brahmatahyā (murder of a Brāhmin and so forth) and finally goes to Dūsikākṇḍa where he remains for one hundred years and eats polluted things.

पूर्णम्बद्धगतं चैव तद्धोजी तन तिश्ठिति ।

ततो जजेदेभूगतोर्पिति शतवर्ष ततः शृत्रि: || 2 2 2 ||

दर्शना रुद्ध च विधाप्य चान्यस्मै दीयते यदि ।

स तिष्ठति वसाकुंडे तद्धोजी शतवत्सम् ॥ 23 ॥

Then wandering as Bhūtas for one hundred years he becomes purified. If anybody makes a gift of any article to a Brāhmīn and then again gives that article to a different man, he goes to Vasā Kūndā where he eats marrows for one hundred years.

कृकलासो भवेतसोर्पि भारत सेतराजमसून ।

ततो भवेम्हात्रीं दरिद्रोल्यापुरं च ॥ 24 ॥

पूर्णसं कामिनी वापि कामिनीं वा पुचान्य ।

या शुक्र पाययत्वे शुक्रकुंदे प्रयाति सः ॥ 25 ॥

The he has to roam about in India for seven as a Krkalāsa (lizard) and finally the becomes born as a very poor man with a very short life. If any woman or any man makes another of a different sex eat semen, out of passion, he goes to Šukra Kunḍa where he drinks semen for one hundred years.

पूर्णब्द्वर्गत तैव तद्धोजी त्रत तिहिति ।

कृमियोंने शाखदं च बजेदपूरा ततः शुचि: ॥ 26 ॥

संताजय च गुरु विध्र रक्तपांत च कारयेत् ।

स च तिहतयस्कुपणे तद्धोजी शततकसरम् ॥ 27 ॥

Then he crawls about as worms for one hundred years. And then he gets purified. If anybody beats a Brāhmaṇa who is a family preceptor and causes his blood to come out, he will have to go to Rakta Kuṇḍa where he has to drink blood for one hundred years.

ततो लभेझाप्राजन्म सपतजम्यु भाते ।

ततः सुप्रिदमवाप्नोति मानवश्छ क्रमेण है ॥ 28 ॥

यो5घु लयजन्ते गायर्वतं भक्ते चृष्टा समगदम् ।

श्रीकृष्णगुपारंभीति हस्तयेव हिं यो नरः ॥ 29 ॥

स वसेस्व्युकृपंचे च तद्धजी शतवर्षकम् ।

ततो भवेच्च चांडालशिज्ञान्मित ततः शृषिः ॥ 30 ॥

Finally he has to roam about for seven births in India as tigers; then he becomes pure by degrees. If any body mocks and laughs at any devotec of Krṣṇa who sings with rapt consciousness and sheds tears of joy, he will have to go to Asru Kūndā where he drinks tears for one hundred years.

क्रांतिि शक्तां तद्ध्रित्यं सुहृदि यो नः ।

कुण्डं गामलानां च स प्रयाति शताछकम् ॥ 31 ॥

ततः सा गार्दीभी योगिव्यानोति तिज्ञानम् ।

त्रिजन्मिन च शागर्णीततः शुखो भवेद्युवम् ॥ 32 ॥

Then he has to roam as a Cāndāla for three births and then he becomes pure. He who always cheats his friends, lives for one hundred years in Gātramala Kuṇḍa. Then roaming about for three births as an ass and for three births as a fox concurrently, he becomes purified.

ब्रिधरं यो हन्येव्य पिंन्द्रवैयाभिनानतः ।

स वसेल्कर्णिवद्कुणई तद्ध्वीगी शतवतसम् ॥ 33 ॥

Book IX Chapter XXXIII

ततो भवेल्स वधीरो दरिरः: सपतजन्मु ।

सपतजन्मन्यंगहीनततः शृन्द्धि लभेद्युवम्। ३ ४ १ ॥

Out of vanity, if anybody jests at a deaf person, he goes to Karnamalakunda where he eats for one hundred years the wax of the ear. Next he comes to the earth as a deaf and a very poor man for seven births, when at last he gets purified.

लोगात्स्वभरणाधर यीक्षितं हितं यो नरः ।

मज्जाकुंडे वसेतो5पि तद्रोजी लक्षवतस्मर् ॥ ३ ५ ॥

ततो भवेच्छ शगकों मीव्छ सपजन्मु ।

त्रिजमनि वराह्छ कुक्कुटः सपजन्मु ॥ ३ ६ ॥

If any body commits murder out of greed to support his family, he goes to the hell Majjākundā where he eats marrow for one lakh years. Next he becomes a fish for seven births, for seven births he becomes a mosquito, for three births he becomes a bozai, for seven births he becomes a cock, deer and other animals concurrently; at last he gets purified.

एणादयः कर्मभ्यस्ततः सुईलुं कर्मद्युम् ।

स्वकन्याललं कृत्वा विलेधणाति च यो नः । ३७ ॥

अर्थलोभान्मातृष्यो मांसकुपड़ं प्रपाति सः ।

कन्यालोमप्रमाणादं तद्वोर्ति तत्र तिष्ठति ॥ ३८ ॥

If any stupid person sells the daughter whom he has supported, out of greed for money, he goes to Mārīsa kūṇḍa and lives there for as many years as there are hairs on her body.

तस्य टपुस्तूरां च कुर्वन्ति यमकिंकराः ।

मांसभारं मृद्धिन कृत्वा रत्कभारं लिहेल्युधा ॥ ३ ९ ॥

The Yama's servants beat him with their clubs. His head becomes overloaded with the burden of the flesh; and, out of hunger, he licks the blood coming out of his head.

ततो हि भारते पापी कन्याविद्धुकिमगो घबेत् ।

पहिबर्षसहस्वाणि व्याधिश्व सतपजनसु ॥ 40 ॥

त्रिज्ञानि वराह्छं कुक्कुटः सदाजनसु ।

मंकुको हिं जलौकाश्व सदाजनसु भारते ॥ 41 ॥

Next that sinner comes to Bhārata and for sixty years becomes a worm in any daughter's faseses for seven births he becomes a hunter; for three

births, a boar; for seven births, cock; for seven births, frog; for seven births, leech; and for seven births, crow; when he gets purified.

सदानस्य काकक्ष ततः शुद्धि लभेद्युष्यम् ।

ब्रतानापुधवासानां आब्रादौर्नां च संगमे ॥ 42 ॥

कोरोति यः क्षीरकर्मं सो3गृषि: सर्वकर्मेषु ।

स च तिष्ठति कुण्डं च नवहादीनां च सुंदरि ॥ 43 ॥

One who shaves on the day of observing vows, fasting and funeral ceremony day, becomes impure and unfit to do any action, and, in the end, he goes to the Nakha Kūnda where he receives blows of clubs and eats nails for one hundred Deva years.

तैर्वद्वितमानाद्ध तद्धोजी दंडताधितः ।

सकेशं पार्थिवं लिंगं यो वारुंचरिति भारते ॥ 44 ॥

स तिष्ठिति केशकुण्डे मुंरीणुमानवर्षकम् ।

तदन्ते यावर्ती योति प्रपातीह हरकोपतः ॥ 45 ॥

If anybody worships, out of carelessness, the earthen Śiva phallic symbol with any hairs on it, he goes to the hell Keśa Kunda where he remains for as many years as there are particles in that hair; then he gets to the yoni (womb) of a Yāvanāni (a Mleccha woman) out of Hara's wrath.

सात्बाच्छूद्धमापोति राक्षस: स भवेद्युवम् ।

पितृणां यो विष्णुपदे पिंई नैव द्वताति च ॥ 46 ॥

स च तिह्वास्विकुपडें खलोमाद्ध मोतृत्वणे ।

ततः सुवोर्नि संग्राय कुर्जंज: संपतजन्मु ॥ 47 ॥

After one hundred years he becomes freed from that and then he becomes a Rāksasa; there is no doubt in this. He who does not offer Pīndas to the Viṣupāda in honour of his Pitṛs at Gayā goes to the hell Asthikunā where he remains for as many years as there are dirts on his body. Then he becomes a man; but for seven births he becomes lame and poor. Then he gets purified.

भवेमहादरिक्षத் ततः शुब्दी हि देहतः ।

यः सेवते महामुखो गुरिवर्णी च स्वकामिनीम् ॥ 48 ॥

प्रतते ताम्रकुण्डे च शतवर्षे स तिहिति ।

अवीराचं च यो भूवते मेकुस्तानानमेव च ॥ 49 ॥

The stupid man who commits outrage and violence on his pregnant wife, resides for one

hundred years in the hot Tāmra Kuṇḍa (where coppers are in a molten condition). He who takes the food of a childless widow and the same of any woman that has just bathed after menstruation goes for one hundred years to the hot Lauha Kuṇḍa (where iron is in a molten condition).

लोकरूपो शताद्ध च स च तिहिति तपले ।

स बजेजरबी गाँगी काकानां सराजमसू । ५० ।।

For seven births he becomes then a crow and for seven births he becomes born of washerwoman, full of sores and boils, and poor. Then he gets purified.

महावरणी दरिश्छ ततः शुद्धो भवेनः ।

यो हि चर्मान्हरुनेत देवद्व्ययुपम्युगते ॥ 51 ॥

गतवर्षप्रमाणं च चर्मकुण्डे स तिष्ठिति ।

यः गृहेगाध्यनुजातो घृतेने गृहान्मेव च ॥ 52 ॥

स च सरा सुराकुंे शताद्धि तिज्ञः ।

ततो भवेच्छूदयाजी बाहाण: सतजन्मु ॥ 53 ॥

गृहप्रशब्दान्भोजी च ततः शुखो भवेद्युवम् ।

If one touches the things of the Devas after touching skins or impure hydes, one remains in the Carma Kunda for full one hundred years. If any Brāhmīn eats a Śūdra's food, requested by him, he lives for one hundred years in the hot Surā Kunda. Then for seven births he performs, the funeral rites for a Śūdra; at last he becomes pure.

वाग्युः कटुको वाचा ताउवेल्वामिनं सदा ॥ 54 ॥

तीश्याकटककुपं से नद्यौजी तत प्रतिहित ।

ताहितो यमदुतेन दण्डेन च चतुर्णुणम ॥ 55 ॥

If any foul-mouthed person uses always harsh and filthy language to his master, he will have to go to Tikṣṇa Kaṇṭaka Kūndā where he eats thorns.

तत उद्यै: श्रवा सनजन्मवेवत नतः शृष्चि: ।

विशेषण जीवनं हौत निर्वेदीयो वेहि मानवः ॥ 56 ॥

वियकुण्डे च तद्धोजी सहसाब्दं च तिहित ।

ततो भवेन्न्यायती च जपी च शतजनस्मृ ॥ 57 ॥

Besides, the Yama's servants give severe beatings to him with their clubs. For seven births he will have to become horses when he gets purified. If any man ministers poison to another

and so takes away his life, he will have to remain for endless years in Viṣakunḍa, where he will have to eat poison.

सप्तनमसु कुशी च ततः शुक्रो भवेद्युवम् ।

दण्डेन तावद्रोदों हि वृषं च वृषवाहकः ॥ 58 ॥

भृत्यद्वारा स्वतनो वा गुप्यक्षेत्रे च भारते ।

प्रतने तैलकुंडेजनौ स तिहिति चतुरुंगम् ॥ 59 ॥

गवां लोगमुपागणाटं चृषो भवति तत्परम् ।

Then he will have to pass for one hundred years as a murderer Bhilla, full of sores and boils, and for seven births he will have to be a leper when at last he gets purified. Being born in this holy land Bhāratavarsa, if any man strikes a cow with a rod or any driver does so whether by himself or by his servant, he will have to dwell certainly in the hot Lauha Kūnda for four yugas. He will have to pass as many years as a cow as there are hairs on that cow when ultimately he gets purified.

कुन्नेने हाँति यो जीर्व बहिलोहेने हेल्या ॥ 60 ॥

कुनत्कुंडे वसेल्सोउपि वर्षाणामयुतं सति ।

ततः सुयोनि संग्राम्य चोदेः व्याधिरसंयुतः ॥ 61 ॥

If any body strikes any other body with a red-out iron dart (Kunta weapon), he will have to dwell in the Kunta Kūndā for ayuta years. Then he will have to remain for one birth in a good womb, with a diseased constitution, when ultimately he will be purified.

जन्मनैकेन कल्लेगेन ततः गुह्धो भवेनः ।

यो धंफेच कृच्या मांमं मांसलोधी द्विजाधमः ॥ 62 ॥

हरेनेवेधभोजी कृमिकृष्टं प्रयाति सः ।

स्वलोममानवर्ष च तद्धोजी तत प्रतिष्ठि ॥ 63 ॥

If any Brāhmīn villain eats, out of greed, any flesh (not sacrificed before the goddess) or anything not offered to Hari, he will have to remain in the Krmi Kunḍa where he eats those things for as many years as there are hairs on his body.

ततो घबेबन्नेच्छवातिलिज्ञान्यित तद्धि: ।

बाहापण: शूरप्रजी व शूरश्रद्धान्धभोजकाः ॥ 64 ॥

शूराणों गवदाही च पूयकुण्डे वसेद्युवम् ।

यावल्लोमप्रणाणादं यमद्धज्ञे सूत्रे ॥ 65 ॥

ताडितो यमदूतेन तद्वोजी तत्र तिहति ।

Book IX Chapter XXXIII

Then he will have to pass for three births as Mlechas when ultimately he becomes born in a Brāhmim family. If any Brāhmim performs the Śrāddha of a Śūdra, eats the food pertaining to a Śrāddha of a Śūdra or burns the dead body of a Śūdra, he will have to dwell certainly in Pūya Kuṇḍa, where, being beaten by the rod of Yama, he eats the puss, etc., for as many years as there are hairs on his body.

ततो भारतमाग्व स गुरूः सदानजम्नु ॥ 66 ॥

महातरीगी दरिष्ठ कविरो मूक पूव च ।

कृष्णां पदां च के यस्य तं सर्वे हित यो नरः ॥ 67 ॥

स्वलोमानावर्षं च सर्वकुण्डं प्रपाति सः ।

सर्वेण भक्षितः सोउथ यमुद्रेन ताहितः ॥ 68 ॥

सेन्च्च सर्वविद्धभोजी ततः सपों भवेद्युवम् ।

ततो भवेमानावघ उद्वल्यापूर्वेदुसंगुतः ॥ 69 ॥

Then he becomes reborn in this Bhārata as one greatly diseased, poor, deaf and dumb and ultimately he will have to roam for seven births as a Śudra. He who kills a black serpent on whose hood there is the lotus mark, lives in Sarpa Kunda for as many years as there are hairs on his body and he is bitten by serpents there and beaten by the servants of Yama and eats the excrescences of snakes and finally becomes born as a serpent.

महाकलेशेन तन्मूलुः सर्पेण भक्षितात्युवम् ।

विधिप्रदत्त जीव्यांश क्रूजरंभूश इति वः ॥ 70 ॥

Then he becomes a man shortlived and having the cuticaneous disease and ringworm. And his death also comes out of snake-bite.

स द्वामशयो: कुण्डे जन्नुभागनाद्मेव च ।

द्वाविंगर्श भक्तिस्तरीनाहाश्र शब्दवान् ॥ 71 ॥

हस्तपादाविद्वब्द्र शयमुतेन ताडितः ।

ततो घवेल्छूत्रजन्तुजांतिश्व यावनी भवेत् ॥ 72 ॥

ततो भवेमानवश्य सोउ़हीनस्ततः सुचिः ।

यो मुंदो मधुमयन्तीह हत्वा च मधुमशिका: ॥ 73 ॥

स एव गारले कुण्डे जीवमानाद्कं वसेत् ।

भक्षिता गरहैदंधो मम दूतेन ताहितः ॥ 74 ॥

He who kills mosquitoes and other small fanged-animals, that earn their substance rightly

and pass so their lives, goes to Darbaśa maśa Kunda where he is eaten by mosquitoes and other fanged-creatures and lives there without food and crying, weeping, for as many years as the numbers of lives destroyed. Besides the Yama's servants tie his hands and feet and beat him.

ततो हि महिकानाजातिसतः शुज्धो भवेनरः ।

दंई कतोलदंडो च विध्रे दंई कंतीत च ॥ 75 ॥

स कुंडे वजद्वर्णणं कीटानां याति सत्वग्म।

स तल्लोमप्रमाणाद्ध तत्र तितृष्टवर्भिनग्म ॥ 76 ॥

Then he becomes born as flies ultimately he becomes purified. He who beats and chastises any man not fit to be chastised and beaten and as well as a Brāhmaṇa, goes to Vajra Darīnṣṭra Kuṇḍa, full of worms, and lives there day and night for as many years as there are the number of hairs on the chastised person.

गब्दिकूब्द्रसितनैस्तु मम दूतेन ताडितः ।

करोति रोदनं भत्र हहाकारं इणे क्षणे ॥ 77 ॥

पुनः सुक्रयोनी च जायते सपतजन्मसु ।

जिजन्यनि काकयोने ततः शुक्रो भवेनरः ॥ 78 ॥

When he is bitten by the worms and beaten by Yama's servants, he cries sometimes, weeps sometimes, and becomes very miserable. Next he is reborn as a crow for seven births when ultimately he gets purified.

अर्थलोषने यो मुंदः प्रजावण्डं करोति सः ।

ब्रौछिकानां च कुंडे च तललामवद्य सेवेद्युवम् ॥ 79 ॥

ततो बृधिकजातिंश सतनजन्मु भारते ।

ततो नरश्रागीहीने व्याशिशुज्धो भवेद्युवम् ॥ 80 ॥

If any foolish king punishes and gives trouble to his subjects out of greed of money, he goes to Vrşcika Kūndā where he lives for as many years as there are hairs on the bodies of his subjects. There is no doubt in this. Finally he becomes born in this Bhārata as a scoprion; then a man diseased and defective in limbs, when ultimately he becomes freed of his sins.

ब्राह्मण: शक्रधारी यो हान्येधां धायको भवेत् ।

संध्याहीन्थ यो विज्ञो हरिभक्तिबहीन्कः ॥ 81 ॥

स तिष्ठित स्वलोमाबंद कुंडेषु च शरादिषु ।

विद्ध: शरादिषिभ: शश्रततः शुखो घनेचनः ॥ 8 2 ॥

If any Brāhmin carries or raises weapons, washes the clothes of others who do not perform Sandhyās and abandons his devotion to Hari, he lives in Sarādi Kuṇḍa for as many years as there are hairs on his body; he is, then, pierced by arrows. Finally he becomes purified.

कारागरे सध्वकारे प्रणिष्ठित प्रजाङ्ग थः ।

प्रभतः स्वस्य दोषेण गोलकुंडं प्रयाति सः ॥ 83 ॥

स पंकृततपोत्यारकं सध्वकारं भयंकर्म ।।

तीक्ष्यादैषूरच कौटैँड सयुक्ते गोलकुंडकम् ॥ 84 ॥

If any king maddened by his own folly and fault, shuts his subjects in a dark cell and kills them, then he will have to go to a dreadful dark hell filled with worms having fanged teeth and covered with dirt. This hell is named Gola Kunḍa.

कीटैदिक्नो वसेतन प्रजालोमाद्विव च ।

ततो भवेतप्राण्यस्ततः शुच्छो भवेतक्रमात् ॥ 85 ॥

He lives there bitten by insects for as many years as there are hairs on the bodies of his subjects. Finally he becomes a slave of those subjects, when he gets purified.

सरोवरानुद्वितांत्र नाकावीर्हिति यो नरः ।

नककंकककमानावं नककुंड प्रयाति सः ॥ 86 ॥

ततो नाकादिवातीयो भवेन्नाकादिषु धुवम् ।

ततः सदो विगुर्णे हि दंईनेव पुनः पुनः ॥ 87 ॥

If anybody kills the sharks and crocodiles, etc., that rise out of the water spontaneously, he will have to remain, then, in Nakra Kunḍa for as many years as there are thorns or edged points on those animals. Then he will have to be born as crocodiles, etc., for some time, when he will be purified.

वक्षःश्रीणीरनासंच च च: पश्वसि परसिक्या: ।

कामेन कामुको यो हि पुण्यक्षेत्र च भारत ॥ 88 ॥

If any man, overpowered with lust, sees another's wife's uncovered breast, loins, and face, he will have to remain in Kāka Kuṇḍa for as many years as there are hairs in his own body.

स वसेल्काकुरुं च काकः: संचुर्णोल्चः ।

ततः: स्वलोममानादं भवेद्धधलिजन्मिन ॥ 89 ॥

स्वर्णतंसी च यो मुंदो भाते सुराविप्रयीः ।

स च मंयान्कुंडे वे स्वलोगाद्व वसेयुद्यम् ॥ 90 ॥

Here the crows take out his eyes. Finally for three births he gets himself burned by Fire when he becomes pure. He who steals in India the gold of the Devas and the Brāhmaṇas, dwells certainly in Manthāna Kūndā for as many years as there are hairs on his body.

ताडितो यमदुतेन मंबानैप्छघलोचनः ।

तद्विरुधोंजी च तबैत ततशोधिष्जनमनि ॥ 9 1 ॥

सतजन्म दरिष्ठ महापुरुष यातकी ।

भारते स्वर्णकारुक्ष स च स्वर्णविणक्तः ॥ 9 2 ॥

My servants give him good beatings, and cudgellings; his eyes are covered by Manthāna Dānḍa insects (or animals) and he eats their dirty faeces. Then he is reborn as a man but for three births he becomes blind and for seven births he becomes very poor, cruel, and a sinful goldsmith and then he is born a Svarnavanjik (Sonár bene).

यो भारते तापचौरो लोहचौरश सुंदरि ।

स च स्वलोममानाद्ध बीजकुंडं प्रयाति सः ॥ 9 3 ॥

तत्रैव बीजविद्धेभोजी बीजैश छन-लोचनः ।

ताडितो यमदूतेन ततः शुब्दो येबनः ॥ 9 4 ॥

भारते देववोरशे रेवर्यावणहारकः ।

स दुत्नरे घउड़कें खलोमाद्वं वसैद्युवम् ॥ 9 5 ॥

O Fair One! He who steals in India copper or iron, silver or gold, dwells in Bijā Kūnda for as many years as there are hairs on his body. There the Bijas (a kind of insect) cover his eyes and he eats the ex-crescences of those insects. My messengers torment him. Finally he gets purified. If any body steals in India any Devatā or the articles of a Devatā, he dwells in Vajra Kūnda for as many years as there are hairs on his body. There his body gets burnt up. My messengers torment him and he cries and weeps and remains without any food. Then he gets purified.

देहद्योर्धीपति तद्धत्रैनाहारुश शब्दकृत् ।

ताडितो यमदूतैश ततः शूद्रो भवेन्नः ॥ 96 ॥

रौयण्यांशुकानां च यश्री: सुराविप्रयो: ।

ततपोयाणकुँडे स स्वलोमाद्वं वसेद्धुव्यम् ॥ 97 ॥

Book IX Chapter XXXIII

त्रिजनानि च कृष्णोर्धि श्रेतस्पल्सिजनि ।

जनैये क्षेतचिद्धशु ततोन्ये श्रेतपक्षिण: ॥ 98 ॥

If any body steals the metal gold or silver, cows, or garments of any Deva or a Brāhmaṇa, certainly he dwells in hot Pāṣāna Kuṇḍa for as many years as there are hairs an his body. Next for three births he becomes a tortoise and all sorts of white birds. Finally for three births he becomes a leper and for one birth he becomes a man with white marks on his body.

तातो तत्कविकारी च गुली तै मानयो बेलत् ।

सप्तबन्मसु चालयामुस्ततः शुद्धो घबेलनः ॥ 99 ॥

रंतं कास्यमयं पात्रं यो हरेदेविषयप्रोः ।

तीश्यपाणपाङ्गुंते स स्वलोमाद्वं सेवनतः ॥ 100 ॥

Next for seven births he becomes diseased with a severe colic pain and bad blood and lives short. When he gets purified. If any body steals brass or Kāmsya properties of any Devas or a Brāhmaṇa, he will have to remain in the sharp Pāṣāna Kūndā for as many years as there are hairs on his body.

पुंशल्यचं च यो भुंलने पुंशलीकीव्यजीवनः ।

स्वलोमापनवर्ष स ललाकुर्के वसेद्युवम् ॥ 101 ॥

स भवेद्धजातिश्च भारते सदनन्मयु ।

ततोप्रिकोनगजातिश्च पादगोते तगृचि: ॥ 102 ॥

Next he becomes born in Bhārata for seven births as horses; and ultimately his both the testacles got enlarged and he gets diseases in his legs when he gets purified. If any body verily eats the food of an adulterate woman or lives on her alms, he will have to go to the Lālā Kūndā for as many years as there are hairs on his body.

ताडितो यमदुर्नेन तद्वोजी तत्र दुःखितः ।

ततश्रक्षु:गूलगेगी ततः शुद्धः क्रमेण सः ॥ 103 ॥

My messengers torment him there and he eats the saliva and thus lives miserably. Then he gets eye diseases and colic; when ultimately he gets purified.

स्लेछसेवी मसौजीवी थो विग्रो भारते भुवि ।

वसेत्स्वलोभमानाद्ध मसीकुँड से दुःखभाक् ॥ 104 ॥

ताडितो यमदुतेन तद्धोजी तत शिक्षिति ।

ततिज्ञानमनि भवेतृष्णवर्षी: पशु: सिति ॥ 105 ॥

त्रिज्ञानम विधेच्छागः कृष्णावर्णिज्ञानमि ।

ततः स तालवृष्ण सत: शुर्दो घबेन्च: ॥ 106 ॥

If any Brāhmaṇa lives on writing only or on the service of Mlechas, he lives in Masi Kunḍa very painfully, eating ink, tormented by My messengers for as many years as there are hairs on his body. Then he becomes a black animal for three births and for another three births he becomes a black goat. Then he becomes a Tāl tree when he gets purified.

धान्यादि गर्यं तांबूल्ये यो हेत्सुपविपयोः।

आसानं च तथा तल्यं चूर्णकुँडे प्रयाति सः ॥ 107 ॥

शताबं तत्र निवसेधान्यदुन्ते ताक्षतः ।

ततो घबोन्यवातीः कुक्कुटघुः शिवन्मिन ॥ 108 ॥

If any body steals a Deva's or a Brāhmaṇa's grains, or any other good materials, betel, Śasana (seat) or bedding, he lives in Cūrṇa Kūndā for one hundred years, tormented by My Dūtas (messengers). Next for three births he gets himself born as a goat, cock, and monkey.

ततो भवेद्वानरथ कासल्याधिपुतो भृति ।

वंशाती० दरिष्छ अत्यम्युघ ततः सुधिः ॥ 109 ॥

करीति चक्र विपाणां हावा उब्यं च यो जनः ।

स वसेचक्रकुंडे च शताक्दं देहताकितः ॥ 110 ॥

Finally he becomes born as a man with the heart disease, without any issue, poor, and short lived. When, at last, he gets purified. If any body steals any Brāhmīn's property and thereby does cakra pūjā (the famous cakra circle worship in Tantra), or prepares a potters's wheel or any other wheels, he will have to go to Cakra Kunḍa and remain there for one hundred years, tormented by My messengers.

ततो भवेमानवश्र तैलकारस्तिजनम् ।

व्याधियुक्तो भवेत्रोगी वर्जीर्नस्ततः सुधिः ॥ 111 ॥

गोधयेनु च विगेषु कंतीत चक्रतां पुमान् ।

प्रयाति वक्रकुण्डं स तिडेडुगगरां सति ॥ 112 ॥

Then he will be born for three births as an oilman suffering from very severe diseases when he will ultimately be poor, without any issue and diseased.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Finally he gets purified. If any body casts a sinful eye on any Brāhmana or on cows, he will have to remain in Vakra Kunḍa for one hundred Yugas.

ततो भवेल्स वक्रांगी हीनांगः सगवजमनि ।

दरित्रो वंगहीनाङ्ग भायाहीनस्ततः शृषिधः ॥ ११३ ॥

ततो भवेदुर्णप्रजन्या जिजनमनि च सूकरः ।

जिज्ञानि विज्ञालक्षा म्यूरूष प्रजिजनि ॥ ११४ ॥

Next for three births he becomes a cat, for three births he becomes a vulture; for three births he becomes a boar; for three births he become a peacock; for seven births he becomes a man deformed and defective in limbs, his wife being dead, without any issue. Finally he becomes purified.

निर्भिद्धं कुम्भांसं च ब्राह्मणो यो हि भक्षति ।

कुम्बिकुं वसेलसोर्जि शतान्द्धे कुम्पमघितः ॥ 115 ॥

तते घवेत्कुम्बेन्म निजमनि चि जयकम्पि ।

त्रिजमनि विडालछ मयूरछा ततः गृधि: ॥ 116 ॥

If any person born in a Brāhmīn family eats the flesh of a tortoise that is prohibited, he lives in Kūrma Kūndā, for one hundred years, eaten by tortoises. Then he becomes for three births a tortoise; for three births, a boar; for three births a cat; for three births, a peacock; till at last he gets purified.

घृतं तैलादिकं चैव यो हेरसुतविप्रयोः ।

स याति जलालकुँई च प्रमसूईंच पताकी ॥ 117 ॥

तत्र स्थिला शतादंच च स पवेतैलापयितः ।

सतजमयिन मतस्यच पूकाक्छ ततः शुधिः ॥ 118 ॥

If anybody steals clarified butter or oil of any Devas or a Brāhmaṇa he will have to go to Jvālā Kūnda or Bhasma Kūndā. That sinner remains in oil for one hundred years and gets stoked through and through. Then for seven births he becomes a fish and a mouse when he gets purified.

सूरपित्रिलेलं धार्यौ वा गंधुरव्यान्यदेव वा ।

भाते पुण्यवर्षे च यो हेत्स्तुविप्योः ॥ 119 ॥

स वसेहरधकुंडे च भवेहरधो दिवानिगम् ।

स्वलोमपानवर्षे च ततो दुर्गिधको भवेत् ॥ 120 ॥

If anybody, born here in this holy land Bhārata, steals-sweet oil of a Devas or of a Brāhmaṇa, the powdered myrobalan or any other scent, he goes to

Dagdha Kūṇḍa where he lives, burnt day and night for as many years as there are hairs on his body.

दुर्गाधिकः सरतजम मृगनाधिशिज्ञान्यिन ।

सरतजमसु मंदायानस्तते हि मानचो घबेत् ॥ १२१ ॥

For seven births he becomes born emitting a nasty smell, for three births he becomes musk (mrga-nābhi) for seven births, as a Manthāna insect.

बलैलेव छलैलेव हिंसारूपेण वा सति ।

बलिष्ठश हेद्धूमि भाते पर्यतृकीम् ॥ 122 ॥

स वसेनतमूर्चि च भवेतापी दिवानिशम् ।

तत्तलेले यथा जीवो उद्यो भवति संततम् ॥ 123 ॥

Then he becomes born as a man. If, out of envy, a powerful man appropriates to his purpose another's ancestral property by cheating, by using force, he goes to the hot Sūcī Kuṇḍa, being tormented there like a Jīva dropped in the midst of a very hot oil tank, full of boiling oil.

भयसास्त्र भवत्येव भोगे देही न नययति ।

सदाम्बनंरं पायी संतद्धस्तत्र तिष्ठिति ॥ 124 ॥

His body is, then, being burnt up severely as the result of his own Karma; the wonder being that his body never gets completely destroyed nor reduced to ashes. For seven manvartanas he lives there without any food.

गर्दं करोल्यन्तहारो यमदुतेन ताक्रितः ।

पहिवर्षसह्वाधि विदूकामिष्ठ भवेत्ते: ॥ 1 2 5 ॥

ततो भवद्धिमहीने दरिष्ठा ततः शूचिः ।

ततः स्वयोनिं संग्राम्य शुभं कर्माधरेत्सून: ॥ 1 2 6 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे नवमकरभे

नवशिशोउधानः ॥ 133 ॥

My messengers give him good beating and cudgellings and chastise him; he cries aloud. Next he gets himself born as worms of faeces for sixty thousand years. When he becomes born as a pauper without owning any land. Thus that villain, getting a fresh lease of human birth, begins again to do fresh good acts."

Here ends the Thirty-third Chapter of the Ninth Book on the description of different sinners in different hells in Srimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXXIV

CHAPTER XXXIV

On Various Hells

यम उवाच

छिन्ति जीवं खड्गेन द्याहीन: सुढारणः ।

नरधाती हाँत नरायलोभेन भारते ॥ १ ॥

असिपये बसेलोर्पि यावदिद्वारचतुरैंग ।

तेषु यो ब्राह्मणान्डिति शतमन्त्यंतरं वसेत ॥ 2 ॥

Dharma Rāja Yama said: “O Fair One! If, in this Bhārata, any murderer, merciless and fierce, kills any man, out of greed for money, he goes and miserably dwells in the Asipattra hell for fourteen Indra’s life periods. And if that murderer kills a Brāhmaṇa, he lives in that hell for one hundred manvantaras. While in hell, his body becomes fiercely cut and wounded by the swords.

छिन्नोगः संवसेत्सोरी खड्गायोगे संतानम् ।

अनाहार: शब्दमुच्यैयम्वेन्ते ताडितः ॥ 3 ॥

There My messengers chastise him and beat him and he cries aloud and passes his time without any food.

भंथान: शतजन्यानि शतजन्यानि सूकरः ।

कुक्कुटः सपतजनामिनि शुगालः सपतजनासु ॥ 4 ॥

व्याधरणं सपतजनामिने चुकरणेवेल जित्जनसु ।

सपतजनसु मंकुको यमयुतेन ताडितः ॥ 5 ॥

स भवेढ़ातरे वर्षे महिषश्च ततः शुचिः ।

Then he becomes born for one hundred years as a Manthāna insect, for hundred births as a boar, for seven births as a cock; for seven births as a fox, for seven births as a tiger; for three births, as an wolf; for seven births, as a frog; then as a buffaloe when he becomes freed of his sins of murders.

प्रामाणां नाराणां वा दहनं यः कोरिते च १ ६ १

बुत्प्रादे वसेलोप्रिय पिछनांगक्षितृगं सति ।

ततः प्रेते भवेत्स्वो वहिंबकको प्रभमन्हीम् ॥ ७ ॥

सदाजनामोयधभोजी कोपोतः सलाजनामु ।

ततेो घबेन्महागृली मानवः सलाजनम् ॥ ८ ॥

If any body sets fire to a city or a village, he will have to live in Kṣuradhāra Kūnda for three

yugas with his body severed. Then he becomes a Preta (disembodied spirit) and travels over the whole earth, being burnt up with fire. For seven births he eats unclean and unholy food and spends his time as a pigeon. Then for seven births he becomes diseased with a severe colic pain, for seven births as a leper; when ultimately he gets a pure human body.

सतजन्मालरुक्ट्री ततः शुद्धो घबेनः ।

परकर्णे मुखं दत्वा परनिंदां क्लोति वः ॥ 9 ॥

परदोषे महूल्याची देवबाडाणनिंदकः ।

सूचीमुखे यसेतोस्ती सूचीविब्दो युगायम् ॥ 10 ॥

ततो भवेद्वृधिकरच सपढ़ा सपतजन्मु ।

वज्रकीटः सतजन्म भस्मकीटस्ततः परम् ॥ 11 ॥

ततो भवेमानवरच महाव्याधिसतः शृष्चि: ।

If anybody whispers in one's ear another's calumny and thus glorifies himself and abuses and vilifies the Devas and Brāhmaṇas, he goes and remains in Sūcī Kuṇḍa for three Yugas, and he is pierced there by needles. Then he becomes a scorpion for seven births, a serpent for seven births, and an insect (Bhasma Kīta) for seven births; then he gets a diseased human body when, at last, he becomes purified.

गृहिणं हि गृहं भिन्ता वसुस्तेवं कौतिथ : च । १ २ । च।

गाध्ध छागांध्य मेघांध्य गाति गोकामुचे च सः ।

ताडितो यमदुतेने वसेतत्र युगायम् ॥ १३ ॥

ततो भवेत्पतजन्म गोजातिव्याधियंतुः ।

शिजान्यि मेघजातिष्ठागजातिशिज्ञानम् ॥ १४ ॥

ततो भवेमानावरूच नित्यरोगी दरिष्कः ।

If any-body breaks into another's house and steals away all the household articles, cows, goats or buffaloes, he goes to Gokā Mukha Kunda where faces are like cow's hoofs, there, beaten by My servants, for three Yugas. (Gokā is Gokṣura, hoof of a cow). Then, for seven births, he becomes a diseased cow; for three births, a sheep; for three births, a goat; and finally he becomes a man.

भार्यहीनी बंधुरीन: संतापी च ततः शृष्चि: ॥ 15 ॥

सामान्यद्व्यचौरच याति नक्रभुखं च सः ।

ताडितो यमदुतेन वसेत्त्राब्दकत्रयम् ॥ 16 ॥

But in this man-birth he is born first as diseased, poor, deprived of wife and friends, and a repenting person; when ultimately he is freed of his sin. If anybody steals any ordinary thing, he goes to Nakra Mukha Kūndā and lives there for three years, greatly tormented by My messengers.

ततो घबेस्पतजन मोगतिव्याधिसंयुतः ।

ततो घबेमानवरश महारोगीत ततः शुचि: ॥ 17 ॥ 11

हाँत गारच गजांशेत तुलगाङ्ग नगांलक्षा ।

स याति गतबईगं च महापाणी युगावम् ॥ 18 ॥

Next for seven births, he becomes a diseased ox. Then he attains a very diseased man-birth, and ultimately he is freed of his sins. Such are the horrible results. If anybody kills a cow, elephant, horse, or cuts a tree, he goes to Gaja Darbaśa Kunda for three yugas.

ताडिते यमदूतेन नागदंतेन सैततम् ।

स भवेदजजातिकु तुगाश्र जिनमनि ॥ 19 ॥

गोजातिलेखज्जातिकु ततः शुखो भवेत्रः ।

जलं पिंबर्ती तुचितां गां वारयित यः पुयान् ॥ 20 ॥

नरकं गोभुखाकारं कुमितपोदकापित्यम् ।

तन सिहुति संतनो यावम्बतंवराधि ॥ 21 ॥

There he is punished by My messengers freely by the teeth of elephants. Then he attains three elephants births, three horse-births; then he becomes born as a cow and ultimately he is born a Mleecha when he becomes pure. If anybody obstructs any thirsty cow from drinking water, he goes to Krmi Kunḍa and Gomukha Kunḍa filled with hot water and lives there for one manvantara.

ततो नोर्धि गोहीनो महातोरी दरिक्रकः ।

सपजन्माल्यजातिङ ततः शुद्धो भवेनः ॥ 22 ॥

गोहत्वां ब्रहहत्वां च कोरिते ह्रातिदेशिकांम ।

यो हिं गच्छल यम्यां च यः कहीत्वां कोरिते च ॥ 23 ॥

भिश्रुतत्वां महापापी भूणहत्वां च भारते ।

कुभीपाकि वसेत्सोरीय वार्वदौरश्रधुरुदैर ॥ 24 ॥

Next when he attains a human birth he owns

not any cattle nor any wealth; rather he is born as a man, very much diseased, in low castes, for seven births when he becomes freed. If anybody, being born in Bhārata, kills cows, Brāhmins, women, beggars, causes abortions or goes to those not fit to be gone into, he lives in the Kumbhīpāka hell for fourteen Indra's life periods.

ताडितो यमदुतेन चूर्ण्यमानश संततम् ।

क्षणं पतति वह्ही च क्षणं पतति कंटके ॥ 25 ॥

क्षणं योत्तपततेले तयो वेण क्षणम् ।

क्षणं च ततलोहे च क्षणं च ततलाप्रके ॥ 26 ॥

गृधो जनमसह्वाणि शतज्ञनामिन सूकतः ।

काकक्ष सत जन्यानि सपीक्ष सतजनस्मु ॥ 27 ॥

There he is pulverised always by My messengers. He is made to fall sometimes in fire, sometimes over thorns, sometimes in hot oil, sometimes in hot water, sometimes in molten iron or copper. That great sinner gets thousand vulture births, hundred boar births, seven crow births and seven serpent births.

पीछवर्षसहस्राणि विद्यायां जायते कृमि: ।

नानाजमन्सु स वृषस्तत: कुछी दरिक्र: ॥ 28 ॥

He then becomes worms of faeces for sixty thousand years. Thus travelling frequently in ox births he at last becomes born as a very poor leper.

साधिव्यवाच

विप्रह्ला च गोहाया किंवाया चातितेशिका ।

का वा नृणामपान्य च को वा संध्याविकृतिकः ॥ 29 ॥

Sāvitrī said: “O Bhagavan! What is, according to the Śāstras, Brahmahatya (murdering a Brāhmīn) and Gohatyā (killing a cow)? Who are called Agamyās (woman unfit to be approached)? Who are designated as void of Sandhyā (daily worship of the twice born castes)?

अर्दीक्षितः पुमान्को वा को वा तीर्थप्रतिगृति ।

दिजः को वा प्रायायजी को वा विरुओंदये देवलः ॥ 30 ॥

गृह्जाणां सुप्रकाश्य प्रमत्तो वृषलीपति: ।

एतेषां लक्षणं सर्वे वद वेदविदां वर ॥ 31 ॥

Who can be called uninitiated? Who are said to take Pratigrahams (gifts in a Tiratha? What are the

Book IX Chapter XXXIV

characteristics of a real Grāmayājī (village priests), Devala, (Brāhmaṇa of an inferior order who subsists upon the offerings made to the images which he attends), the cook of a Śūdra, of one who is infatuated (Pramatta) and the Vṛṣalipati (one who has married an unmarried girl twelve years old in whom menstruation has commenced; a barren woman). Kindly describe all those to me.

धर्मराज जवाच

श्रीकृष्ण च तद्चार्वायाम्येधां प्रकृती सति ।

शिवे च शिवालिंगे च सूर्वे सूर्मभणी तथा ॥ 32 ॥

गणेश वाथ दुर्गाधायमे संवर्गे सुंदरी ।

यः क्रोति भेदवृद्धि ब्रह्मत्या क्षेभतु सः ॥ 33 ॥

Dharmarājan said: O Fair Śāvitrī! If anybody makes a distinction between Krṣṇa and His Image or between any Deva and his image, between Śiva and His phallic emblem, between the Sun and the stone Sūrya Kānta (a precious stone of a bright and glittering colour) between Gānṣaśa and Durgā, he is said to be guilty of the sin Brahmahattyā.

स्वगुरी स्वेष्टदेच च जन्मदातरि माताति ।

करीति भेदवृद्धि यो ब्राह्मतांलो भनेत सः ॥ 34 ॥

दैयायेदु च भक्तेषु ब्रह्मणीवतरेषु च ।

करीति भेदवृद्धि यो ब्राह्मतांलो भनेत सः ॥ 35 ॥

If anybody makes any difference (superiority or inferiority) between his own Iṣṭa Deva (his Deity), his Spiritual Teacher, his natural father, and mother, is certainly involved in the sin of Brahmahattyā.

विप्रपादोदके चैव शाल्यामोदके तथा ।

कांगीत भेदवृद्धि यो ब्रह्मात्यां लभेपु सः ॥ ३६ ॥

शिववैद्यके चैव हरिनेवेढ़के तथा ।

कांगीत भेदवृद्धि यो ब्रह्मात्यां लभेपु सः ॥ ३७ ॥

He who shews any difference (superiority or inferiority) between the devotees of Viṣṇu and those of other Devas, is said to commit Brahmahattyā. He who makes any difference in matters of respect between the waters of the feet of any Brāhmaṇa and those of Śālagrāma stone, is said to commit Brahmahattyā. The difference

between the offerings to Hari and Hara leads to Brahmahatyā.

सर्वेशोधेत्र कृष्णे सर्वकारणकारणे ।

सर्वोष्टि सर्वदैवानां सेवे सर्वान्तराननि ॥ 38 ॥

मायवायानेकल्पे वायलेक एव हि निर्गुणे ।

कोतीशीगेन भेदं यो ब्रह्मल्यां लभेनु सः ॥ 39 ॥

शक्तिभक्ते द्विषद्धूद्व शक्तिभागस्टे तदैव च ।

द्रेषं यः कुलेते मल्यों ब्रह्मल्यां लभेनु सः ॥ 40 ॥

पितृदेवार्चं न या तयजेदेवान्तिकपितम् ।

यः करोति निषिद्धे च ब्रह्महालां लभेनु सः ॥ 41 ॥

He who shews any difference between Krṣna, Who is verily the God of gods, the Cause of all causes, the Origin of all, Who is worshipped by all the Devas, Who is the Self of all, Who is attributeless and without a second yet Who by His Magic powers assumes many forms and who is Iśāna, is said to commit, indeed, the Brāhmhattyā. If any Vaiṣṇava (a devotee of Viṣṇu) abuses and envies a Śakta (a devotee of Śakti), he commits Brahmahatya. He who does not worship, according to the Vedas, the Pitrs and the Devas or prohibits others in doing so, commits Brahmahatya.

यो निदिति हृधीकेशं तन्योपासकं तथा ।

पविजाणां पर्यविं च सानानन्दं सनातनम् ॥ 42 ॥

प्रधानं वैश्यानां च देवानां संव्याधिधरम् ।

ये नार्वयिति निदिति ब्रह्मात्यां लभिते ते ॥ 43 ॥

He who abuses Hrṣikeśa, Who is the Highest of the Holy things, Who is Knowledge and Bliss and Who is Eternal, Who is the only God to be served by the Devas and Vaiṣṇavas, and those Who are worshippers of His Mantra, and those who do not worship themselves are said to commit Brahmahatya.

वे निर्दन्ति महाद्वीं कारणब्रह्मार्विणीम् ।

सर्वश्चित्रवर्णा च प्रकृति सर्वमात्मम् ॥ 44 ॥

सर्वदेवस्वक्षा च सर्वेयं बन्दितां सदा ।

सर्वकारणत्वां च ब्रह्मत्वां लभन्ति ते ॥ 45 ॥

He who abuses and vilifies Mūlāprakṛti Mahā Devi, Who is of the nature of Causal Brahma (Kāraṇa Brahma), Who is All Power and the

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

Mother of all, Who is worshipped by all and who is of the nature of all the Devas and the Cause of all causes, Who is Ādyā Śakti Bhagavatī, is said to commit Brahmahatyā.

कृष्णजन्मार्थी रामनवर्मी च सुपुणयदान् ।

शिवरार्रिं तथा चैकाद्रर्णी वारंर रवेस्तथा ॥ 4 6 ॥

पञ्च पविण पुणवानि ये न कुबेति मानावः ।

लभनित ब्रह्महलां ते पंडालाथिक्यापिति: ॥ 4 7 ॥

He who does not observe the Holy Śri Kṛṣṇa Janmāṣṭamī. Śrī Rāma Navamī, Śivārātri, the Ekādāśī happening on Sunday, and five other holy Pārvaṇas (festivals), commits Brahmahatyā; is considered more sinful than a Cāndāla.

अंबुवाच्यां भृवुञनं जलगीचादिकं च ये ।

कृवैति भारते वर्ष ब्रह्मात्या लभन्ति ते ॥ 48 ॥

पूठे च मातरं ततं ताम्बीं भार्यां सुतं सुताम् ।

अर्सिंहा यो न पुणाति ब्रह्महत्या लभेनु सः ॥ 49 ॥

He who in this land of Bharata, digs earth on the day of Ambuvācī or makes water etc. in the waters of the tanks, is involved in the sin of Brahmatahyā. He who does not support his spiritual teacher, mother, father, chaste wife, son and daughter, though they are faultless, commits Brahmatahyā.

विद्याहो यस्य न भवेव प्रप्यति सुतं तु यः ।

हरिभक्तिवहीनो को बहुहत्या लंभुन सः ॥ 5० ॥

हरेनेवेदिधकोी निथ्व विष्णुं न पुवन्ते ।

पुर्णयं पार्थिवलिंगं च बहुहात्रसी प्रकीर्तितः ॥ 5 1 ॥

He whose marriage does not take place during his whole life-time, who does not see the face of his son, who does not cherish devotion to Hari, who eats things unoffered to Śri Hari, who never worshipped throughout his life Viṣṇu or an earthen symbol of Śiva, verily commits Brahmahatya.

गोष्टहा प्रकुर्बर्ते चूद्धा यो न निवारयेत् ।

याति गोविष्योभीध्य गोहाचां। च भलभुः सः ॥ 52 ॥

दंईगीताडवेन्मूढो यो विषो वृषवाहनः ।

द्विते दिति गोवयं च भलते नास संशयः ॥ 53 ॥

O Fair One! Now I will recite the characteristics, according to the Śāstras, of Gohatyā, (Killing a

cow). Listen. If anybody does not prohibit one, seeing one to beat a cow, or if he goes between a cow and a Brāhmin, he is involved in the sin of Gohatyā. If any illiterate Brāhman, carrying an ox, daily beats with a stick, the cows, certainly the Gohatyā.

द्वाति गीय म उचिष्ट धोजयेद्वुचावाकम् ।

भूनक्ति बुचवाहात्रं स मोहत्या कंधेदुकुम् ॥ 54 ॥

If anybody gives the remains of another's meal to a cow to eat, or feeds a Brāhmīn who caries, rather moves or drives, cows and oxen; or eats himself the food of such a Brāhmīn driver, he commits Gohattyā

वूर्वलीपिति वाजयेघो धुक्ते5त्र तस्य यो नर: ।

गोहत्यागतकं सोउपि लभते नात्र संपर्यः ॥ 55 ॥

पारं ददाति वह्वी यो गाशु पादेत ताडवेत् ।

गेहं विशेट्योतीपि: स्नाता गोवधामानुयात् ॥ 56 ॥

Those who do sacrifices of the husband of a barren woman (Vṛṣali) or eat his food, commit sin equal to one hundred Gohatyās; there is no doubt in this. Those who touch fire with their feet, beat the cows or enter the temple bathing but not washing their feet, commit Gohatyā.

यो भूक्ति निश्चयादेने शेते निर्याधिप्रदे च ।

सूयादेव च यो भूक्ति से गोहाला लभेद्युवम् ॥ 57 ॥

अवीराङ्च च यो भूक्ते योदिनील्यच्च च दिजः ।

यशिसन्यम्याविश्रीनश्छ गोहाल्यां पलते तु सः ॥ 58 ॥

Those who eat without washing their feet or those who sleep with their feet wetted with water and those who eat just after the Sun has risen, commit Gohatyā. Those who eat the food of women without husbands or sons or the food of pimps and pampers or those who do not perform their Sandhyās thrice, commit Gohattyā.

स्वभर्तीर च देवे वा भेदवृद्धि करोति या ।

कटूटत्या ताडवेल्लांतं सा गोहायां लेपेदुपुर्ण ।। ५९ ॥

गोमार्विजनं कृत्वा द्वाति सस्येव वा ।

तजाये वा तु दुर्गे वा स गोहत्या लभेद्युपर्ण ।। 60 ॥

If any woman makes any difference between her husband and the Devatā, or chastises and uses

Book IX Chapter XXXIV

harsh words to her husband, she commits Gohattyā. If any body destroys cow's pasture land, tanks, or land for forts and cultivates there grains, he commits Go-hatyā.

प्रायश्छिते गोवधस्य यः क्रोतिं व्यतिक्रमम्।

पुत्रलोभावद्धानात्स गोहत्थां लभेद्युबम् ॥ 6 1 1 ॥

राजक दैवके यन्त्रोहस्वामी गां न रक्षिति ।

दुःखं द्वताति यो मुहो गोहत्थां स लभेद्युबम् ॥ 6 2 ॥

He who does not do Prāyaśchita (expiation, atonement) for the expiation of the sin of Gohatyā done by his son (for fear of his son's life), commits the sin himself. If any troubles arises in the state or from the Devas, and if any master does not protect then his own cows, rather torments them, he is said to commit Gohatyā.

प्राणिनो लंययेघो हि देवाचिमन्तं जलम् ।

नैवेहं पृथमदं च स गोहृत्यां लभेद्रयम् ॥ 6 3 ॥

गश्रनारतीति वो वादी मिथ्यावादी प्राताकः ।

देवदेपी गृहद्री स गोहृत्यां लभेद्रयम् ॥ 6 4 ॥

देवताप्रितिमां द्वुता गुरुं वा बाड़णां सति ।

संभ्रमान्न नेचोही हि स गोहृत्यां लभेद्रयम् ॥ 6 5 ॥

If any Jiva oversteps the image of a Deva, fire, water, offerings to a god, flowers, or food, he commits the great sin Brahmahatī. When a guest comes, if the master of the house always says 'there is nothing, nothing with me; no, no' and if he be a liar, cheat and an abuser of the Devas, he commits the above sin. O fair One! Whoever seeing his spiritual teacher, and a Brāhman, does not bow down and make respectful obeisance to them, commits Gohatyā.

न द्वताराशिर्ये कोपातृणताय च यो द्विजः ।

विद्यार्थिने च विधां च स गोहल्यां लयेव्युवम् ॥ 6 6 ॥

If any Brāhmīn, out of sheer anger, does not blessings to a man who bows down or does not impart knowledge to a student, he commits Gohatyā.

गोहृत्वा विप्रहत्वा च कविता चातिर्विधिका ।

गयां तिच्यं गुणायेव निवोध कथयामि ते । ६७ ॥

O Fair One! Thus I have described to you the

characteristics, approved by Śāstras, of cow-killing (Gohatyā), and murdering a Brāhmin (Brahmahatyā). Now hear which women are (Agamyās) not fit to be approached and those which are fit to be approached (Gamyās).

स्वकी गमा च सर्वेधामिति वेदानुगासनम् ।

अगमाच्चा च तदन्याच्चा वितुः विवेदी विदुः ॥ 68 ॥

सामान्यं कवितं सर्वे विशेषं शपुं सु-वृत्ति ।

अत्यगम्या हिं च याथा निवोध कवयाभि तः ॥ 69 ॥

One's own wife is fit to be approached (Gamyā) and all other woman are Agamyās, so the Pandits, versed in the Vedas, declare. This is a general remark; now hear everything in particular.

ग्रृह्जागं विघुपन्ती च विघ्जाणां गृह्मकामिनि ।

अत्यमाया च निह्ना च लोके वेदे पतिजते ॥ 70 ॥

गृह्धं श्राहणी गत्वा ब्रह्मालग्रतं पल्ले ।

तत्समं ब्राहणी चाणि कुम्भीयाकं लेभ्युद्यम् ॥ 71 ॥

O Chaste One! The Brāhmin wives of Śūdra or the Śūdra wives of Brāhmaṇas are Atyāgamyās (very unfit to be approached) and blameable both in the Vedas and in the society. A Śūdra going to a Brāhmaṇī woman commits one hundred Brahmahatyās; so a Brāhmaṇa woman going to a Śūdra goes to the Kumbhipāka hell.

श्रूग्रतां विष्णप्त्री च विप्राणां श्रूग्रतामिनी ।

यदि श्रूग्रं जतेब्रिणो वृषलीपतिरेव सः ॥ 72 ॥

स प्रशो विष्जालोसु घडालालसोउदमः स्मूतः ।

विष्ठासमश्रु तत्नैष्ठो मूर्ते नस्य च तर्पणम् ॥ 73 ॥

As a Śūdra should avoid a Brāhmaṇi, so a Brāhmaṇa should avoid a Śūdra woman. A Brāhmaṇa going to a Śūdra woman is recognised a Vṛṣalipati (one who has married an unmarried girl twelve years old in whom menstruation has commenced. So much so that that Brāhmaṇa is considered an outcast and the vilest of the Cāndālas. The offerings of Pindas by him are considered as faeces and water offered by him is considered as urine.

न विगुर्णा सुराणां च तहत्नपुयितछिति ।

कोटिज्ञानार्जितं पुण्यं तत्यथार्चा तपसासार्जिता ॥ 74 ॥

द्विस्य वृषलीलोभान्यल्येव न संशयः ।

ब्राह्माण्ड सुर्पारीतिविद्यभोजी सृष्टीयपितः ॥ 75 ॥

No where whether in the Devaloka or in the Pitploka, his offered Piṇḍas and water are accepted. Whatever religious merits he has acquired by worshipping the Devas, and practising austerities for Koti births, he loses all at once by the greed of enjoying the Śūdra woman. There is no doubt in this. A Brāhmīn, if he drinks wine, is considered as the husband of a Vṛṣalī, eating faeces.

तदमुद्राद्धदेहसत्याल्गोकितस्था ।

हरिवासरभोजी च कृम्भीपाकं जनेदूद्धिकः ॥ 7 6 ॥

And if he be a Vaisnava, a devotee of Viṣṇu, his body must be branded with the marks of a Taptamudrā (hot seal); and if he be a Śaiva, his body is to be branded with the Tapta Śula (hot trident).

गुरुभर्ती राजपत्नी सपनीमातं धूवम् ।

सृत्तं पुरवर्धं इधूर्षे सभार्थं भार्थिनी सतीम् ॥ 77 ॥

सहोदरभालुवागां मालुलानी चितुः प्रमूम् ।

मातुः प्रमूं तत्वसारं भार्थिनी घालुकल्याम् ॥ 78 ॥

शिष्यां शिष्यस्य पत्नी च भागिनेत्यस्य कामिनीम् ।

भातुः सुप्रियां चैवात्यगया आह पत्रतः ॥ 79 ॥

The wife of a spiritual teacher, the wife of a king, step-mother, daughter, son's wife, mother-in-law, sister of the same father and mother, the wife of one's brother (of the same father and mother), the wife of a maternal uncle, the father's mother, mother's mother, the mother's sister, sisters, the brother's daughter, the female disciple, the disciple's wife, the wife of the sister's son, the wife of the brother's son, these all are mentioned by Brahman's attyagamyaś (very unfit to be approached). The people are hereby warned.

एता: कामेन कांता यो बजेहे मानवाधमः ।

स मातृगामी वेवेयु ब्रह्मल्यागतं जज्ने ।। 80 ॥

अकर्महींडप्यसंयुयो लोके वेदे च निदितः ।

स याति कृभ्योपाके च महापापी सुकुचक् ॥ 81 ॥

If anybody, overpowered by passion, goes to these Atyāgamyā women, he becomes the vilest of men. The Vedas consider him as if going to his

mother and he commits one hundred Brahmahatyaś sins. These have no right to do any actions. They are not to be touched by any. They are blamed in the Vedas, in the society everywhere. Ultimately they go to the dreadful Kumbhipāka bells.

करोल्युर्द्धा संख्या वा न संख्या वा कांति च ।

त्रिसंधे वर्जयेची वा संयाश्रीव्य स हिजः ॥ 82 ॥

वैशणं व च त्वा गैरं शालनं सौरं च गाणपम् ।

योर्धंकारात्र गृह्ठति मंत्र संगेदीक्षितः स्मृत: ॥ 83 ॥

O Fair One! He who performs Sandhyās wrongly or reads it wrongly or does not perform at all the three Sandhyās daily, is called as void of Sandhyā. He is said to remain uninitiated who does not, out of sheer vanity, receive any Mantra, whether he be a Vaiṣnavite, Śaivite, or a Sun worshipper or the Ganeśa worshipper.

प्रवासामविति कृत्वा यावद्धतस्तवतुयम् ।

तत्र नारायण: स्वामी गड़ागभीर्ते वसेत् ॥ 84 ॥

तत्र नारायणद्वेत्र मृती वाति हरे: पदम् ।

वाराणायां बद्याँ च गड़ासारमसूम् ॥ 85 ॥

पुब्जे हरित्धरेजे प्रभासे कामकल्पस्वले ।

हरिप्रते च केदारे तथा मातुपुरंप्रि च ॥ 86 ॥

सरस्वतीनतीरीत पुणये वृन्दावने वने ।

गोदावचं च कौशिक्वां विवेल्यां च हिमावले ॥ 87 ॥

Where there is the running stream of the Ganges, lands on other side, four hands in width, are said to be the womb of the Ganges (Gaṅgā Garbha) Bhagavān Nārāyana incessantly dwells there. This is called the Nārāyana (Kṣetra). One goes to Viṣṇupada who dies in such a place. Vārāṇasī (Benares), Badarī, the Confluence of the Ganges with the ocean (Gaṅgā-Sāgara), puškara, Hari Hara Kṣetra (in Bihar near Chaprā), Prabhāsa, Kāmarūpa, Hardwar, Kedāra, Mātripura, the banks of the river Sarasvatī, the holy land Vrndāvana, Godāvari, Kauśiki, Trivenī (Allahabad), and the Himālayas are all famous places of pilgrimages.

एषु तीर्वेषु यो दानं प्रतिरुहाति कामतः ।

स च तीर्थप्रतिगाही कुम्भीपाके प्रयाति सः ॥ 88 ॥

गृहसेवी गृह्याजी ग्रामवाजीति कीर्तितः ।

तथा देवोपजीची च देवलः परिकीर्तितः ॥ 89 ॥

Book IX Chapter XXXV

Those who willingly accept gifts in these sacred places are said to be Tirthapratigrāhīs (the acceptors of the gifts in the Tīrtha). These Tirthapratigrāhīs go in the end to Kumbhīpāka hell. The Brāhmaṇa who acts as priests to the Śūdras is called Śūdrayājī; the village priests are called Grāmayājīs. Those who subsist on the offerings made to the gods are called Devalas.

शूरयाकोपजीदी यः सूपकार इति स्मृतः । संधायुजनहीनघ उपनतः पातितः स्मृतः ॥ 90 ॥ उनके सर्वे मया भयं रूक्षणं वृषतीपतेः । एते महापातिकनः कृष्मीपाकं प्रयान्ति दे ॥ 91 ॥ पुक्रवात्य-ययातिि ये यांति निवोधे कवयायिि ते ॥ 92 ॥ इत इशीमदौभोगवते नवमरकंधे नारदनारायणरसंवंदे साविश्युपाड्याने चतुर्सिंशो3ध्याय: ॥ 34 ॥ 11

The cooks of the Śūdras are called Sūpakāras. Those who are void of Sandhyā Vandanamans are called Pramattas (mad). O Bhadre! These are the marks of the Vṛṣalīpatis that I have (now) enumerated. These are the Great Sinners (Mahā Pātakas). They go ultimately to the Kumbhīpāka hell. O Fair One! I now state by and by the other Kundas (hells) where other people go. Listen.

Here ends the Thirty-fourth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the description of the various hells in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXXV

CHAPTER XXXV

On Various Hells

धर्माज जवाच

देवसेवां विना साधित्र न भवेत्कर्मकृतनम् ।

शूद्रकर्म शूद्रबीर्ज नरकछ कुकर्मण ॥ १ ॥

पृंशल्यत्र च यो भुंक्ते योउस्यां गच्छेत्पतितते ।

स द्विः: कालयूरं च मृतो वाति सुतुगंमम् ॥ 2 ॥

Dharmarājan said: O Chaste One! Without serving the Gods, the Karma ties can never be severed. The pure act are the seeds of purities and the impure acts lead to impure seeds. If any Brāhmaṇa goes to any unchaste woman and eats her food, he will have to go ultimately to the Kālasūtra hell.

शतवर्षं कालमूत्रे त्रिवर्धीभूतो भवेद्युवम् ।

अन्यवन्मिन रोगी च ततः शुक्रो भवेद्विड़ः ॥ 3 ॥

There he lives for one hundred years when ultimately he gets a human birth when he passes his times as a diseased man and ultimately he gets purified.

पतित्रता चैकपती द्वितीयो कुलटा स्मृता ।

तृतीये धर्षिणी जैसा चलुईं पृंड्गलीत्यपि ॥ 4 ॥

वेप्या च पढ्रुभे पषे पुरुषी च सतमोउष्टिमे ।

तत क्रस्त्र माहावेप्या सास्म्यप्या सर्वजातिषु ॥ 5 ॥

यो द्विजः कुलटां गछ्छेद्वर्षिणी पुंड्गलीमपि ।

पुरुषीं वेयर्यां महावेयरां मल्योदे याति निश्छितम् ॥ 6 ॥

Those women who are addicted to their (one) husbands only are called Pativratās. Those addicted to two persons are named Kalatās; to three, are called Dharsinīs; to four, called Purīścalis; to five, six persons, called Veyas; to seven, eight, nine persons are called Pungis; and to more than these, are called Mahāveśyās. The Mahāveśyās are unfit to be touched by all the classes. If any Brāhmaṇa goes to Kulatā, Dharsinī, Puriścalī, Pūngī, Veśyā and Mahāveśyās, he will have to go to the Matsyoda Kunda.

शताब्द्र कुलतामपी ध्रधामपी चतुर्णणम् ।

चडुगुणं पृंशुलीमापी गोरणमापी गुणाधकम् ॥ 7 ॥

पुड़़ीगमी दरणुणं वसेत्तन न संशयः ।

महावेश्याकामुक्क उतते दरणुणं वसेत्त ॥ 8 ॥

Those who go to Kulatās remain there for one hundred years; those who go to Dharsinīs, remain for four hundred years, those who go to Punīscalīs for six hundred years; those who go to Veśyās, of eight hundred years; those who go to Puṅgīs,

remain for one thousand years and those who go to Mahā-vesyās remain in the Matsyoda Kuntā for ten thousand years.

तत्रेव यातर्नां भुक्ते यमदुतेन ताडितः ।

तितितः: कुलटागगाथी ध्रातगाथी च वायसः ॥ 9 ॥

कोकिलः पुंशलीगाथी वेश्यागाथी वृकः स्मृतः ।

पूर्जीगाथी सूकषः सतजन्मनि भाते ॥ 10 ॥

My messengers chastise and beat and torment them very severely. And when their terms expire, the Kulatā-goes become Tittirīs (a bird), the Dharsīnī-goers become crows, the Purīścalī-mongers become cuckoos, the Veśyā-haunters become wolves; the Pungī-goers become for seven births boars.

महावेश्यापूर्णी च जायते शाल्मलीतः ।

यो भूक्ते ज्ञानहीनश्र प्रहणे चन्द्रमूर्योः ॥ १ १ ॥

अन्तनुदं स यात्येवायव्यमानावध्येच च ।

ततो भवेमानवश्यापूर्वते रोगपीडितः ॥ १२ ॥

गुल्यमृक्त्र काणधुं दर्तीनस्ततः शृष्चि: ।

वाव्यद्तां स्वक्यां च थोउ-यम्ये प्रद्वति च ॥ १३ ॥

स वसेर्यासुकुपंचे च तद्वीजी शतवलसम् ।

If any ignorant person eats food during the lunar and solar eclipses, he goes to Aruntuda Kunḍa for as many years as there are particles in that food. He then becomes born diseased with Gulma (a chronic enlargement of spleen) having no ears nor teeth, and after passing his time so, he becomes freed of his previous sin. If anybody makes a promise to give his daughter to one but he gives actually to a different person, he goes to Pāmsu Kunḍa where he eats ashes for one hundred years.

तद्व्यक्षात्री यः साधित्य पंभुवेषे शताब्दिकम् ॥ १४ ॥

निवसेच्छग्णायायां मम दुतेन ताक्रितः ।

भक्ना न पूजयेढ़िःः शिवालिंगं च पार्थिवम् ॥ १ ५ ॥

स याति शुलिनः पायाच्छूल्योतं सुसाडणम् ।

स्थत्वा शताब्दं तत्रैव शापदः सतजन्मसु ॥ १ ६ ॥

ततो भवेदेहलक्ष सतजन्म ततः शुचि: ।

Again if anybody sells his daughter, he sleeps on a bed of arrows in Pamsuvesta Kunda for one

hundred years, chastised and beaten by My messengers. If any Brāhmaṇa does not worship with devotion the phallic emblem of Śiva, he goes to the dreadful Śulaprota Kunḍa for that heinous sin. He remains there for one hundred years; then he becomes a quadruped animal for seven births and again he becomes born a Devala Brāhmin for seven births when he becomes freed.

कोरिते कुंडित विधं वर्द्धमा केपते द्विजः ॥ 17 ॥

प्रक्रमे वसेतोरपि विगुलोमाछमेव च ।

If any Brāhmaṇa defeats another Brāhmaṇa in a bad useless argument and triflies him and makes him tremble, he goes to the Prakampana Kunda for as many years as there are hairs on his body.

प्रकोपवदान कोपात्स्वामिनं चा च पश्यति ॥ 18 ॥

कटूर्तिके तं प्रवदति सोत्पुकं संप्रयाति हि ।

उत्कां द्वाति तुळके सत्तं मम किंकतः ॥ 19 ॥

दंडेन ताडवेभ्यर्दिन तत्लोभाळद्यप्राणातम् ।

ततो भवेभवानी च विध्वा सतजनस्पु ॥ 20 ॥

सा भुकता चैव वैधयं व्याधियुक्ता ततः शुचि: ।

If any woman, being very furious with anger, chastises and uses harsh words to her husband, she goes to Ulkāmukha Kuṇḍa for as many years as there are hairs on his body. My servants put fiery meteors or torches in her mouth and beat on her head. At the end of the term, she becomes a human being but she has to bear the torments of widow hood for seven births. Then she is again born as diseased; when at last she gets herself freed.

या बहाणी शुरुघेपाया चांधकूपे प्रयाति स १ २ १ ॥

तदाशौचोदके ध्यांते तदाहारी दिवानिगग् ।

निवसेवौतिसंपतां मम दूतेन ताडिता ॥ 2 2 ॥

The Brāhmana woman, enjoyed by a Śūdra, goes to the terrible dark Andhakūpa hell, where she remains, day and night, immersed in the impure water and eats that for fourteen Indra's life periods. Her pains are unbounded and My messengers beat her severely and incessantly."

श्रीचोदके निम्नाना सा यावद्दिश्रातुर्दीर ।

काकी जन्मसह्वाणि शतजन्मानि सूकरी ॥ 23 ॥

Book IX Chapter XXXV

भूगाली शतज्ञमानि शतज्ञमानि कुक्कुटी ।

पातावती सतज्ञम यानरी सपतजमसु ॥ 24 ॥

At the expiry of the term in that hell, She becomes a female crow for thousand births, a female boar for one hundred births, a female fox for one hundred births, a hen for one hundred years, a female pigeon for seven births, and a female monkey for seven births.

ततो भवेल्सा चांडाती सर्वभोग्या च भाते।

ततो भवेच्च रजकी यक्ष्मप्रता च पुंछती ॥ 25 ॥

ततः कुक्ष्युता तैलकारी शुद्धा भवेत्ततः ।

निवसैद्धधेने वैश्या पुंगी च देंडताऊने ॥ 26 ॥

Then she becomes a Cāndālī in this Bhārata, enjoyed by all. Then she becomes an unchaste woman with the pthisis disease, a washerwoman, and then an oilwoman with leprosy when she becomes freed.

जलरेये वसैद्धश्या कुलटा देहचणके ।

स्वीरिधी त्वलने चैव धृष्टा च गोषणे तथा ॥ 27 ॥

निवसेघातान्युक्ता मम दूतेन ताडिता ।

विणमुभक्षा सत्तं वामन-वंतंर सति ॥ 28 ॥

ततो भवेढ़दुकामिश ल्ब्बर्व सत: शूचि: ।

O Fair One! The Veśyās live in the Vedhana, and Jalarandhra hells; the Púngis live in the Dangatāḍana hell; the Kulatās live in the Dehacūrna hells; the Svairīnjs live in the Dalana hells; the Dharsīnjs live in Śoṣana hells. Their pains know no bounds at all those places. My messengers always beat and chastise them and they eat always the urine and faeces for one Manvantara. Then, at the expiry of their hell period, they become worms of faeces for one lakh years when they become freed.

बाहाणो बाहाणी गच्छेश्वियां वासि श्वित्वः ॥ 29 ॥

वैर्यो वैर्यां च गुर्हृ वा गुर्हृशायि मेजेहादि ।

सर्वपरिवर्त्रेष् काययं यांति ते जनाः ॥ 30 ॥

भुक्ता काययं तपोदं निवसेहा शताब्दकम् ।

ततो विज्ञा भवेच्छूद्धतन्ती वे क्षत्रियादयः ॥ 31 ॥

योषित्धातीय शूढ्धतीनोल्यमाहू पितामहः ।

क्षयिचो बाहाणी गच्छेशूयो सर्वपि तिथि ॥ 32 ॥

मातृगामी भवेल्सोर्पि शूर्षे च नरके वसेत् ।

शूर्णकौरिक कृमिभिश्रांत्या सह भक्षितः ॥ 33 ॥

प्रतनमूत्रभोजी च मम तुदेन ताडितः ।

तत्रेव यातनां घुंकेे यावदिंद्राश्रतुदैर ॥ 34 ॥

If a Brāhmaṇa goes to another Brāhmaṇa's wife, if a Kṣattriya, Vaiśya and Śūdra do so, they go to the Kasaṇa hell. There they drink the hot Kasaṇa water for twelve years when they become purified. The lotus-born Brahmā has said that the wives of Brāhmins, Kṣattriyas, etc., live in hells like Brāhmins, Kṣattriyas, etc., and they then get freed. If a Kṣattriya or a Vaiśya goes to a Brāhimn's wife, he is involved in the sin of his going to his mother and goes and lives in the Śurpa hell. There the worms of the size of a Śurpa bit that Kṣattriya, that Vaiśya and that Brāhmaṇa's wife. My messengers chastise them and they have to eat the hot urine. Thus they suffer pains for fourteen Indra's life periods.

सप्तान्य बारहश्छ धान्याल्छ ततः शुचि: ।

को ध्युत्वा तु तुलसी प्रतिज्ञा यो न पालयेत् ॥ 35 ॥

मिथ्या वा शपर्थ कुवात्स च जलामुखं चजेत् ।

दत्वा दक्षिणाहतं च प्रतिज्ञां यो न पालयेत् ॥ 36 ॥

शिलां वा देवप्रतिमां स च जालमुखं जजेत् ।

गंगातोयं करे कृत्वा प्रतिज्ञां यो न पालयेत् ॥ 37 ॥

स्थत्वा देवगृहे वास्पि स च जालमुखं जजेत् ।

आस्युर्य ब्राह्मणां गां च जलालाबूति निवेश च ॥ 38 ॥

न पालल्योतितां च स च जालमुखं जजेत् ।

मित्रजेही कृतलघ्य यक्ष विश्वासयातकः ॥ 39 ॥

मिथ्यासाक्ष्यप्रदेश्व स च जलामुखं जजेत् ।

एते तत्र वसंलेवेय वावादिद्राशुदर्श Ⅱ 40 ॥

तथांगारुपदधाङ्ग यमदूनत ताहिताः ।

When they become boars for seven births and goats for seven births, when at last they are freed. Now if any body makes a false promise or swears falsely, taking the Tulasi leaf in his hands, if anybody makes a false promise, taking the Ganges water, Śālagrāma stone, or any other images of God in his hand; if any body swears falsely, placing his right palm on the palm of another; if anybody

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

swears falsely, being in a temple or touching a Brāhmana or a cow; if any body acts against his friends or others, if he be treacherous or if he gives a false evidence; then all these persons go to Vālā Mukha hell, and remain there for fourteen Indra's life periods, chastised and beaten by My messengers and feeling pain as if one's body is being burnt by red hot coal.

चांडालसुलसी स्यूढ़ा सतजन ततः शुचिः ॥ 4 1 ॥

लेल्ली गंगालक्ष्याँ पंचजन ततः शुचिः ततः शुचिः ।

शिलायर्पीं विद्युकामिष्य सतजन्मसु सुंदिरि ॥ 4 2 ॥

अर्चास्यर्गी ब्रह्मूकामि: सतजन्म ततः शुचिः ।

दशहस्तप्रदाता च समर्थे सतजनस्मु ॥ 4 3 ॥

ततो भवेद्वहह्यौंटी मानवश्छ ततः शुचिः ।

मिथ्यावादी देवगृहे देवलः सतजनस्मु ॥ 4 4 ॥

One who gives a false evidence, with the Tulasi (holy basil) in his hand becomes a Cāndāla for seven births; one who makes a false promise with the Ganges water in his hand, becomes a Mlecha for five births; one who swears falsely while touching the Śālagrāma stone, becomes a worm of the faeces for seven births; on who swears falsely, touching the image of the God, becomes a worm in a Brāhmin's house for seven births; one who gives a false evidence touching with the right hand, becomes a serpent for seven births; then he becomes born as a Brāhmin, void of the knowledge of the Vedas, when he becomes freed. One who speaks falsely, while in a temple, is born as a Devala for seven births.

विपादिस्णीकीची च व्याजातिभवैद्युवम् ।

ततो भवेच्च मुकः स बधिर्धा त्रिजन्मिनि ॥ 4 5 ॥

भार्यांतीने बंधुतीने यंशीरानस्त: शूँचि: ।

If one swears falsely, touching a Brāhmaṇa, one becomes a tiger. Then he becomes dumb for three births, then for three births he becomes deaf, without wife, without friends, and his family becomes extinct. Then he becomes pure.

मित्रत्रोही च नकुलः कृतपद्धार्थि खंडकः ॥ 46 ॥

विश्रास्याती व्याक्प्र सतजन्मु भाते ।

मिथ्यासक्षी च चत्ब्ये मंदुकः सतजन्मु ॥ 47 ॥

Those that rebel against their friends, becomes mongoose; the treacherous persons become rhinoceroses; the hypocrite and treacherous persons become tigers and those who give false evidences become frogs.

पूर्वान्स्तापगस्पत पुरुषबन्धिति चातमः ।

नित्यक्रियाविहीक्षा अजदोवे युतो क्रिकः ॥ 48 ॥ ॥

So much so, that their seven generations above and seven generations below go to hell. If any Brāhmana does not perform his daily duties (Nitya Karma), he is reckoned as Jada (an inert matter).

यस्यानाखया वेदवाबये मन्दे ह्मसी संतान् ।

त्रतोषवास्त्रीश सूद्राव्यपर्पिद्धः ॥ 49 ॥

धूपधो च सेत्नो5 पि शताद्धं धूपभक्षकः ।

जलजुर्णविलोपि शततजमक्रमे च ॥ 50 ॥

He has no faith in the Vedas. Rather he laughs at the Vedic customs. He does not observe vows and fastings; he blames others who give good advices. Such persons live in Dhūmrāndhakāra hell where they eat dark smoke only.

ततो नानाप्राकाशु मत्स्यजातिसतः शृष्चि: ।

यः कोतैपुर्भासं च देवब्राह्मणायोर्धेन ॥ 51 ॥

पातयित्वा स पुरुषान्द्रग पूर्वाद्विशपरान् ।

सोउयं याति तु ध्रुप्रान्यं ध्रुपध्यंतसमयित्न ॥ 52 ॥

Then he roams about as an aquatic animal for one hundred births successively. Then he becomes born as various fishes when he is freed. If anybody jests at the wealth of a Deva or a Brāhmaṇa, then he with his ten generations above and below becomes fallen and he himself goes to the Dhūmrāndhakāra hell, terribly dark and filled with smoke.

धूपविल्हो धूपभोजी वसेतत्र चतुर्णुणम् ।

ततो मूषकाजितिह सपतजमसु भारते ॥ ५३ ॥

ततो नानाधिधाः पश्जजातवः कृमिजातिधिः ।

ततो नानाधिधा वृक्षा: पश्वश्छ ततो नर: ॥ 54 ॥

There his pains know no bounds and he lives there for four hundred years, eating smoke only. Then he becomes a mouse for seven births, and he

Book IX Chapter XXXVI

becomes various birds and worms, various trees and various animals when ultimately he gets a human birth.

विधे दैवूजजीच च दैशुजीच विवित्कसः ।

लहाफालीहाद्विषायपी रसादिविक्रीच च च: 155 च।

स याति नागवेई च नागर्वैहित्येव च ।

वसेल लोममागवर्धे तवैव नागपणिताः । ५६ ॥

If a Brāhmīn earns his livelihood by being an astrologer or if he be a physician and lives thereby or if he sells lac, iron, or oil, etc., he goes to the Nāgaevṣṭana Kuṇḍa hell where he lives for as many years as there are hairs on his body, tied up by snakes.

ततो नानाविधाः पश्रिजातयशु ततो नः ।

ततो भवेत्स गणको वैश्छु सप्तजमसु ॥ 57 ॥

Then he becomes born as various birds; ultimately he gets a human birth and becomes an astrologer for seven births and a physician for seven births.

गोपशु कर्मकार्ता संगकारस्ततः शुचि: ।

प्रसिद्धानि च कुंडानि कथितानि पतितते ॥ 58 ॥

Then for sometime he becomes a cowherd (milkman), for sometimes a blacksmith; for sometimes a painter, when he becomes freed of his sin. O Chaste One! Thus I have described to you all the famous Kūndas or hells.

अन्त्यानि चाप्रसिद्धानि कुंडाणि सन्ति तव ते ।

संति पातकिनस्तेषु रखकर्मेकृतभोपिन: ॥

भर्मति नानायोनि च किं भूयः श्रोतुष्चद्धसि ॥ 59 ॥

श्री श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे नवमरकम्पे

पंचिशोरधाग: 11 35 11

Besides there are innumerable small Kunḍas. The sinners go there and suffer the fruits of their own Karmas and travel through various wombs. Of Fair One! What more do you now want to hear? Say."

Here ends the Thirty-fifth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the description of the various hells for the various sinners in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXXVI

CHAPTER XXXVI

On Having No Fear of Yama for those Who are the Pančopāšakas

साविश्यबाच

धर्मराज महाभाग वेदवेदाङ्गपारा ।

नानापुराणेतिहासे यत्सरां तत्पदर्शेय ॥ १ ॥

सर्वेषु सारभूतं यत्सर्वेहं सर्वसैमतम् ।

कर्मच्छेद्वीजरूपं प्रगरसं सुखदें नृणाम् ॥ 2 ॥

Sāvitri said: O Dharmarājan! O Highly Fortunate One! O Thou! Expert in the Vedas and the Ángas thereof! Now kindly describe that which is the essence of the various Purānas and Itihāsas, which is the quintessence, which is dear to all, approved of by all, which is the seed by which the Karmic ties are cut asunder, which is high, noble and happy is this life.

सर्वप्रदं च सर्वेभां सर्वांभेलाकारम् ।

भयं दुःखं न पश्यति येन वै सर्वांभानाः ॥ 3 ॥

कुंकाति ने न पश्यति तेषु नैव पतन्ति च ।

न भवेढ़ोन जन्मादि तत्कर्मं वदा संप्रातम् ॥ 4 ॥

Kindly describe the above by which man can acquire all his desires, and what is the only source of all the good and auspicious is things. And by knowing which man has not to face any dangers or troubles, nor has he to go to the dreadful hells that thou hast severally just now described and that by which men can be freed of those various wombs.

किमाकाराणि कुंडानि नाति वा निर्मितानि च।

के च केनैव रूपेण तत्र त्रिष्टिं पापिन: ॥ ५ ॥

स्वदेई भमसादभूमते याति लोकांतरं नरः ।

केन देहेन वा भोगं करोति च शुणग्रुष्म। ॥ ७ ॥

सुचिरं कलेशफोगेन कथं देहो न नश्यति ।

देहो वा किंविधो ब्रडासनेव व्याख्यातुमहिंस ॥ ७ ॥

Kindly now describe all these. O Bhagavan! What is the size of the several kundas or hells that Thou hast just now enumerated? How do the sinners dwell there? When hast just now

enumerated? How do the sinners dwell there? When a man departs, his body is reduced to ashes. Then of what sort is that other body by which the sinners enjoy the effects of their Karmas? and why do not those bodies get destroyed when they suffer so much pains for so long a time? What sort of body is that? Kindly describe all these to me.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

साविश्विवचनं श्रुत्वा धर्मोजी हरिं स्मरन् ।

कथां कथितुमारेचे कर्मव्यान्थितृन्तीम् ॥ 8 ॥

Nārāyana spoke: Hearing the questions put forward by Sāvitrī, Dharmarāja remembered Śri Hari and began to speak on subjects that sever the bonds of Karmas:

धर्मोज जवा

वत्से चतुर्षु वेदेषु धर्मेषु संहितासु च ।

पुराणीक्षितितासे पोचरात्रदिकेषु च ॥ ९ ॥

अन्येषु धर्मोग्रावेषु वेदांगेषु च सुझते ।

सर्वेहं सारभृतं च पढ़देवानुसंवन् ॥ 10 ॥

जन्ममृनुजारामाधिशोकसंतापनाशनम् ।

सर्वमूलकूपं च परमानंदकरणम् ॥ 11 ॥

कारणं सर्वसिद्धीनां नरकाणंवताराणम् ।

भक्तिद्धक्षितृकर्तं कर्मद्वधनिकृतनम् ॥ 12 ॥

“O Child! O One of good vows! In the four Vedas, in all the books on Dharma, (Smrtis) in all the Sanhiñtās, all the Ithāsas, all the Purānas in the Nārada Pañcarāram, in the other Dharma Śāstras and in the Vedāngas, it is definitely stated that the worship of the Pañca Devatās (the five Devatās) Śiva, Śakti, Viṣṇu, Ganeśa, and Sūrya is the best, the highest, the destroyer of the old age, disease, evils and sorrows, the most auspicious and leading to the highest bliss. In fact, the worship of these Pañca Devatās is the source of acquiring all the Siddhis (the success) and saves one from going to the hells. From their worship springs the Bhaktic Tree and then and then only the Root of the Tree of all Kārmic bonds is severed for ever and ever.

विमोक्षसोपानमिद्यनिवाणपर्वे स्मृतम् ।

सालोक्यसाहिंसाकल्यसामीथाविद्धरं शुणम् ॥ 13 ॥

कुंडाउन यमदूतैश्र शक्तानिस सदा शुणे ।

न हिं पश्यांति स्वपे च पड्ड्वेवार्चंका नगः ॥ 14 ॥

This is the step to Mukti (final liberation) and is the indestructible state. By this one can get Sālokya, Sārṣṭi, Sārūpya, and Sāmīpya, th different state of beatitudes in which the soul (1) resides in the same world with the Deity, (2) possesses the same station, condition, or rank, or equality with the Supreme Being in power and all the Divine attributes (the last of the four grades of Mukti, (3) possesses the sameness of form or gets assimilated to the Deity or (4) gets intimately united, identified or absorbed into the Deity,

देयीभक्तिहितीना ये ते एप्यर्ति मामलयम् ।

याति वे हृत्तियां वा अयती हरितावसम् ॥ 15 ॥

प्रणाति हरिं नित्यं हरिंची कल्पयति च ।

न यांति तेति पीयांं च मम संयमनि पुरीम् ॥ 16 ॥

O Auspicious One! The worshipper of these five Devatās has never to see any of the hells, watched by My messengers. Those who are devoid of the devotion to the Devi see My abode; but those who go to the Tirthas of Hari, who hold Harivāsaras (festivities on the days of Hari) who bow down at the feet of Hari and worship Hari, never come to My abode named Samyamaana.

विसंधितृता विग्राक्ष शुद्धाचासम्वित्ता: ।

निषूर्ति नैव लव्यति देवीसेवां विम नरा: ॥ 17 ॥

स्वधर्मित्ताचारा: स्वधर्मित्तालया ।

गच्छंते मृत्युलोकं च दुर्दुशा मम विकारा: ॥ 18 ॥

Those Brāhmaanas that are purified by their performing the three Sandhyās and by their following the pure Ācāras (customs and observances), those that find no pleasure until they worship the Devi, those that are attached to their own Dharmas and their own Ācāras, never come to My abode.

भीता: शिवोपासकेकधो वैनेतयादिवेगा ।

स्वतूतं पाशहस्तं च गच्छंतं वारयाम्यहम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Book IX Chapter XXXVI

यास्यति ते च पर्वत्र हरिदासाश्रयं विना ।

कृष्णमान्योपासकाच्च वैनतयादिवारोगाः ॥ २० ॥

My terrible messengers, seeing the devotees of Śiva, run away out of terror as snakes run away terrified by Garuda I also order My messengers with nooses in their hands never to go to them. My messengers go mostly to other persons than the servants of Hari. No sooner do My Messengers see the worshippers of the Krṣna Mantra, than they run away as snakes get terrified at the sight of Garuda.

देवीमन्नोघासकानां नानां चैव निकृतानम् ।

क्रोति नखलेखन्या चित्रगुतक्ष भीतवत् ॥ 21 ॥

मधुपकर्षिके तेषां कुलेते च पुनः पुनः ।

विलेय ब्रह्मलोकं च लोक गच्छिति ते सीत ॥ 22 ॥

Citragupta, too, one of the beings in Yama's world, recording the vices and virtues of mankind), strike off the names of the Devi worshippers, out of fear and prepare Madhuparka, etc., for them (a mixture of honey; respectful offering made to a guest or to the bridegroom on his arrival at the door of the father of the bride).

दुरितानि च नर्यांति वेधां संसरणैमात्र ।

ते महाभायवंतीे हि सहस्वकुलपावना: ॥ 23 ॥

They rise higher than the Brahma Lokas and go to the Devi's abode, i.e., to Manjdivpa. Those that are the worshippers of the Śakti Mantra and are highly fortunate, whose contact removes the sins of others, they deliver the thousand generations (from the downward course).

यथा च प्रजलढ़ाई शुक्रानि च तृणानि च ।

प्राप्नोते महः संभोते तांश द्वृषा च भीतवत् ॥ 24 ॥

कामश कामिनं यालि लोगक्रोधी ततः सति ।

मृत्यु: प्रलीयते रोगे जरा शोकों भयं तथा ॥ 25 ॥

As bundles and bundles of dry grasses become burnt to ashes, no sooner they are thrown into fire, so the delusion at once becomes itself deluded at the sight of the forms of those devotees. At their sight, lust, anger, greed, disease, sorrow, old age, death, fear, Kāla (time that takes away the life of persons), the good and bad karmas, pleasures and enjoyments drop off to a great distance.

कालः शुभागुर्भ कर्म हर्षों भोगतस्थैव च ।

ये चे न्यांति तो पीडी कथितात्मे मय सति ॥ 26 ॥

शृणु देहिवरणं कथयामि यथागमम् ।

पृथिवीवायुराकाशलेजस्तोयमिति सुकटम् ॥ 27 ॥

O Fair One! Now I have described to you the states of those persons that are not under the control of Kāla, good and bad karmas, pleasures and enjoyments etc., and those that do not suffer those pains. Now I am speaking of this visible body. Listen. Earth, water, fire, air, and ether are the five Mahā Bhūtas (the great elements); these are the seeds of this visible body of the person and are the chief factors in the work of creation.

देहिनां देहबीजं च स्वरूपहिविधेपी परम् ।

पृथिव्यादिपंचभूतीयं देहो निर्मितो भवेत् ॥ 28 ॥

स कृत्रिमो नज्ञश भवमसाच भवेदेहि ।

बढ़ोड़कुष्माणश यो जीवः पुरुषः कृतः ॥ 29 ॥

The body that is made up of earth and other elements is transient and artificial i.e., that body becomes burnt to ashes. Within this visible body, bound, is there a Puruṣa of the size of a thumb; that is called Jīva Puruṣa; the subtle Jīva assumes those subtle bodies for enjoying the effects of karmas.

विषभित सूक्ष्मं देहं तं तनुयं भोगहितवे ।

स देहो न भवेद्रूम्य जल्द्वर्नी मामालये ॥ 30 ॥

जलेन नष्टो देही वा प्रहारे सुचिरं कृते ।

न शक्रेशन न वाउजेश सुतीक्षाकंटके तथा ॥ 31 ॥

In My world, that subtle body is not burnt by the burning fire. If that subtle body be immersed in water, if that be beaten incessantly or if it be struck by a weapon or pierced by a sharp thorn, that body is not destroyed.

तत्तद्धे ततलोहे तत्पाषाण एव च भ्रततप्रतिमासलेये यत्पूर्वतने3पि च ॥ 32 ॥

न दर्पयो न च भग्नः स भुक्ते संतापयेच च ।

कथितो देहृषृतांतः कारणं च यथागमम् ॥ 33 ॥

कृष्णतानं लक्षणं सर्वे बोधाय कवयामि ते ।

डीत श्रीमदेवीभागवते माहापुराणे नवस्कनघे

भद्रप्रिंगोद्याय: 1136 11

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

That body is not burnt nor broken by the burning hot and molten material, by the red hot iron, by hot stones by embracing a hot image or by falling into a burning cauldron. That body has to suffer incessant pains. O Fair One! Thus I have dwelt on the subject of the several bodies and the causes

thereof according to the Šāstras. Now I will describe to you the characters of all the other Kundas. Listen."

Here ends the Thrity-sixth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the destruction of the fear of the Yama of those who are the worshippers of the Five Devatās, in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXXVII

On the Eighty-six Kunđas

धर्मोरज उवाच

पूर्णैनुप्रंडलाकारं सर्वे कुणई च वर्तुलम् ।

निर्भं पाणाणधेप्रेषच पाचितं बहुषिः: सति ॥ १ ॥

न नर्षर च प्रलयं निर्मितं चेधोर्च्छया ।

क्लेश्रं पातकानां च नानास्तः तदालयम् ॥ 2 ॥

Dharmarāja said: “All the Kūndas (hells) are circular in form like the Full Moon. Of these, the Vahnikūndā has the fire lit at its bottom, by the help of various kinds of stones. This Kūndā will not be destroyed till Mahāpralaya comes. Here the sinners are tormented severely.

ज्वल्ल्यारक्यं च शतस्तसगिखात्वितम् ।

परितः क्रोमानं च बह्दिकूपं प्रकर्पितत् ॥ 3 ॥

मह शर्द प्रकृतिद्वः पाधिभः पधिपृत्तिम ।

रक्षितं मम दूतैरश ताक्तिदेशपति संततम् ॥ 4 ॥

It looks like a blazing coke. The flames are rising from it one hundred hands high. In circumference those flames are two miles. This is named Vahnikunā. It is full of sinners crying loudly. It is constantly watched by My messengers who are chastising and punishing the sinners.

प्रत्नोदकर्णु च हिंसर्जुसमन्त्रितम् ।

महापोरं काकुशबं प्रहोरण दृदेन च ॥ 5 ॥

कोशाध्यानं तदुत्तैस्त्राडितैमं पार्वैंः ।

तन्त्रक्षातोदकैः पूर्ण पुनः काकैक्ष संकुलम् ॥ 6 ॥

Next comes the Tapta Kunda. It is filled with hot water and full of rapacious animals. The sinners there are severely beaten by My messengers and they are always crying out very loudly, which is being echoed and re-echoed all around terribly. It

extends for one mile. This Kunda is filled with hot salt water and the abode of many crows.

संकुलं पाधिषिधीय ब्रोगमानं भयानकम् ।

ग्राहीति शब्दं कुर्विंद्रमांन दूतैध तार्धितः ॥ ७ ॥

प्रचलिड्नताहीः शुककंठोछातुलैकः ।

विद्धभित्य कृर्ण पूर्णी क्षोभगर्भा च कुस्तिस्तम् ॥ ८ ॥

Then there is the Bhayānaka Kunda. It extends for two miles and it is filled with sinners. They are being punished by My messengers and they are incessantly crying ‘Save us, Save us.’ Next comes the Viṣṭhā Kunda. It is filled with foeces and excrements, where the sinners are moving without any food and with their palates and throats dry.

अतिरुर्गान्ससंसक्त्वायां पार्थिभिन्वहम् ।

ताडितीमंन दूतिधः सुतदाहीः सुतादणेः ॥ 9 ॥

श्वेति शब्दं कुर्विद्रसन्तकीटैरेव बर्षितः ।

तदपूगद्वरेः पूर्ण मुकाकौटिं शंकुम्म ।। 10 ॥

युक्ते महापातिक्रिभित्यकीटैर्यक्षितेः सदा ।

गव्यूतिमानं ध्यांताकर्ते शब्दकृद्धिह सतम् ॥ 11 ॥

Its size is two miles and it is very bad and ugly, with foetid and nasty smell. It is always filled with sinners, who are being chastised by My Dūtas (messengers) and eat those foecs and excrements. The worms therein are constantly biting and stinging them and they are crying ‘deliver us, deliver us.’ Then comes the hot Mūttra Kunda. It is filled with the hot urine and the worms thereof. The great sinners always dwell here. It measures four miles; and it is quite dark.

Book IX Chapter XXXVII

महैस्तातिडितैधरै: शुकककोडितालुके: ।

ग्लेशमपूर्ण प्रगामित तत्वहौरे: परितं तदा ॥ 12 ॥

तद्धोतिभः पाणिभिश्व वेहितः सदा ।

कोशार्यं गरकुंडं च गरभोजिभिन्यतम् ॥ 13 ॥

My Dūtas always beat them and their throats, lips, palates are all dry. Then comes the Ślesma Kuṇḍa. It is filled with phlegm and the insects thereof. The sinners dwell in phlegm and eat that phlegm. Then comes the Gara Kuṇḍa. It is filled with (factitious) poison. It measures one mile. The sinners eat this poison and dwell here.

गरकौदीर्धितिह यापिथि: पूर्णमेव च ।

तादितेमंन दुतेश शब्दकुन्द्रिक कंतेति: ॥ १४ ॥

सपांकारैवंजदईः शुल्ककंतेः सुराकृतेः ।

नेवयोमेनुपणं च कोशणों कीटसंयुन्त्र ॥ १ ५ ॥

The worms thereof bite them. They tremble at the chastisement of My Dūtas and cry aloud. My messengers look like serpents, with teeth like thunderbolt and they are very furious an fierce, with their throats dry and their words very harsh. Then comes Dūsīkā Kuṇḍa. It is filled with the rheum and dirt of the eyes and it measures one mile. Innumerable worms are born therein.

पाधिभि: संकुलं शब्धव्यमाद्वि: कॉदीवधक्षिति ।

वसारसेने संपूर्णं क्रीतगुर्वे सुदुःसहम् ॥ १६ ॥

तद्धोतिभि: पातकिमिभिम दुतेघा तातक्षे ।

शुक्कुंकं क्रीभालितं शुक्कबीटेघुं सर्वतुम् ॥ १७ ॥

Numberless sinners live there, and as they move, the insects immediately bite and sting them. Next comes the Vasā Kūndā It is filled with the serum or marrow of the flesh and it measures one-half mile. The sinners dwell there, chastised and punished by My messengers. Then comes the Śukra Kūndā. It measures two miles in diameter. The insects, born in the semen, bite the sinners, and they move on and on.

पाणिभि: संकुलं शश्युद्वस्द्धि: कीटभक्षिति: ।

दुर्गधित्रकर्णु च चाणियानं भयीरकम् ॥ १८ ॥

तद्धोर्जिभि: पाणिभिश्र संकुलं कीटभक्षितम् ।

पूर्ण नैत्राशुभित्तनं बहुपार्थिभिरन्यितम् ॥ १९ ॥

वाणीतुर्ध्रमाणं च रुद्धिः: कीटभक्षितः ।

Then comes the Rakta Kuṇḍa, with very offensive, footed smell. It is deep like a well and filled with blood. The sinners dwell here, drinking blood. The insects therein are always biting them. Then follows the Asru Kuṇḍa. It measures in size one fourth the measure of the well (above-mentioned). It is always filled with hot tears of eyes; and many sinners are seen there living weeping and crying and being bitten by the snakes.

नृणां मात्रमलैयुक्तं तद्वक्षे: पार्थिवर्भुन्ति || 20 ॥

तातिथीनं दूरीध व्यप्रेण कौभ्यक्षिते: ।

कर्णविद्यपिणुं च तद्वक्षे: पार्थिवर्भुन्ति || 21 ॥

वायीतुर्णेमणं च बुवाद्धे: कौभ्यक्षिते: ।

Then there is the Gātra Mala Kuṇḍa. The sinners are chastised and punished there by My messengers and being bitten by the insects thereof, they eat the dirts of the body and dwell there. Then comes the Karna Mala Kuṇḍa. The sinners eat the wax of the ear and fill the place. The insects always bite them and they are crying aloud. It measures one fourth the measure of a Vāpi.

मज्जापूर्ण नराणां च महावुर्गाधिसंयुन्ति ॥ 22 ॥

महापातकिषिधुक्तं वाणीतुर्णमाणकम् ।

परिषृणं निरन्यासौर्मेन मुंत्रेच तार्तिके ॥ 23 ॥

पाणिधि: संकुलं चैव वाणीमानं भयानकः ।

Then comes the Majjā Kunda. It is filled with fat and marrow, emitting footed offensive odour. It measures one fourth the measure of a Vāpī. The great sinners always dwell there. Then comes the Māmsa Kūndā. This is filled with the greasy flesh. If measures (one-fourth) that of a Vāpī.

कन्याविक्रविभिर्भवैव तद्व्यै: कौटभक्रिति: ॥ 24 ॥

पाहीति शब्द कुर्विद्वस्तिसैतच भयानकः ।

वागीतुर्भिभागं च नवातिकचतुष्यम् ॥ 25 ॥

पाणिधि: संयुतं शब्धनाम दूतैरच ताक्षितः ।

Those who sell their daughters dwell here. My messengers always chastise and punish them and horrible insects bite and sting them and they cry, out of fear and agony, 'Save us, Save us,' and eat

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

at times that flesh. Then come in succession the four Kuṇḍas Nakha, Loma and others. They also measure each one-fourth that of a Vāpi. The sinners dwell there, always chastised by My messengers.

प्रस्तताप्रकुंचे च तापोपर्युकृताचित्म् ॥ 26 ॥

तापाणां प्रतिमाल्यः प्रतलेव्यांत सदा ।

Next comes the very hot Tāmra Kunda. Burning cokes exist on the top of very hot coppers. There are lakhs and lakhs of very hot copper figures in that Kunda.

प्रत्येक प्रतिमारिष्ठः स्वद्धि: पार्थिभियुन्ति || 27 ॥

ग्व्युतिमानं विस्तीर्णं मम दूतैरच ताविहैः ।

प्रतपतलोहारं च ज्वललैगासंसुन्ति ॥ 28 ॥

लोहानां प्रतिमाशिले हविद्धः पाचिभिन्तुम् ।

प्रत्येक प्रतिमाशिले: शब्रज्ञजलितेपिता ॥ 29 ॥

The sinners, being compelled by My messengers, are made to embrace each of these hot copper figures and they cry loudly and live there. It measures four miles. Then come the burning Angāra Kuṇḍa and the hot Lauha Dhāra Kuṇḍa. Here the sinners are made to embrace the hot iron figures and, feeling themselves burnt, cry out of fear and agony.

रक्ष रक्षेति शब्दं च कुर्वीद्धूर्तताविति: ।

महापातिकीभूवंर्ते द्विव्यूनितिमाणकाम १३० ॥

भयानके ध्वतावृक्तं लोकुक्ते प्रक्रवितितम् ।

चर्मकुं तत्सूपाकुं वाय्यमीय च ॥ ३१ ॥

Whenever My messengers punish them they immediately cry out ‘Save us, Save us.’ It measures eight miles; and it is pitch dark and very awful. This is named the hot Lauha Kuṇḍa. Then come the Carma Kuṇḍa and Surā Kuṇḍa. The sinners, beaten by My men, eat the skin and drink the hot urine and dwell there.

तद्वीपिपाधिभिथार्म मन दूतेश्च ताकितः ।

अतः शामलिङ्ठं च बूबकंटकशीभितम् ॥ ३२ ॥

लक्ष्मीरमानं च कौशमानं च दुःखदम् ।

धनुमर्गेः कंटकैश्न सृतौक्षणेः परिवेशितम् ॥ ३३ ॥

Then comes the Sālmali Kunda; it is overspread with thorns and thorny trees, causing intense pain.

It measures two miles. Millions and millions of great sinners are made by My men to fall from the tops of those trees down below where their bodies get pierced by very sharp thorns, six feet long; and thus they dwell there, beaten by My men.

प्रत्येक विद्वापात्रिश्च महापातिकीभयुक्ति ।

चूक्षाग्रासिताद्विज्ञ मम दूर्तेध पातिनेः ॥ 34 ॥

जलं देहिति शब्द च कुर्बाद्धः शुक्रातलुर्केः ।

महाभियास्तिव्यीघु दारड़े: संभनमस्तकें: ॥ 35 ॥

Out of thirst, their palates get dried up; and they cry out repeatedly ‘Water, Water,’ Out of fear, they get very anxious and then their heads get broken by the clubs brought down on them by My men. So they move there like the beings burnt in very hot oil.

प्रचल्टिद्रयंथा तपतैलजीविभिवे च ।

विपदैस्तब्धाकाणां च पूर्व च कोआगनाकम् ॥ 36 ॥

तद्वक्षे: पाधिपियुक्ते मम दूर्तेश तातक्षे: ।

प्रतपतैलपूर्ण च कीटादिप्रविजितम् ॥ 37 ॥

Then comes the Visoda Kūndā. It measures two miles in diameter and is filled with the poison of the serpent called Taksakas. My men punish the sinners and they drink the poison thereof and dwell there. Then comes the hot Taila Kūndā. There are no insects here. Only the great sinners dwell.

महापाताकिभिन्धुरैंक दर्शभांगरिषर चेहितम् ।

काकुशर्द्धि उपहिन्दैषुकौद्वैर्दैयाप्रिकि: ॥ 38 ॥

ध्वातयुक्ते क्रीशमानं क्लेशादं च भयानकम् ।

गूलाकारै: सुतीक्षणालैहंशलैश्चर वेहितम् ॥ 39 ॥

All around burning coals are flaring and when My men beat the sinners, they run hither and thither. It is filled with horrible intense darkness and it is exceedingly painful. It looks dreadful and measures two miles. Then comes the Kunta Kunḍa. Sharp pointed iron weapons like tridents are placed in order all round.

शस्तत्प्वस्वरूपं च मोशतुर्वीप्रमाणकम् ।

वेहितं वयताकिभि: कृतविद्वेक्षि वेहितः ॥ 40 ॥

ताडितीमेन पूतेष शुक्रकंठीक्षितागृकैः ।

कौटैक्ष शुक्रप्रमिते: सर्पमानैर्पयंकरेः ॥ 41 ॥

Book IX Chapter XXXVIII

तैश्यादंतैरच विफृतैल्यांतं ध्यान्तुतं सति ।

महापानतिक्रियुक्ते मम दूतैरच ताक्रिटि: ॥ 42 ॥

The sinners, pierced by those weapons, are seen encircling the Kunḍa. It measures one-half mile. Beaten by My men, their throats and lips get dried up. Then comes the Krmi Kunḍa. It is filled with terrible worms and insects, snake, like-with sharp teeth, of the size of a Śañku (a Sāl tree) deformed and hideous looking; and it is filled with pitch darkness, terrible to look at. Beaten by My men, the great sinners dwell there.

द्विष्यतिभ्रमाणं च पूयकुंड प्रचक्षते ।।

तद्वक्षे: प्राणियर्भिकृं मन दूरैंतः ताडितः ॥ 43 ॥

तालवृक्षयमाणैं सर्वक्रौटिभिरावृतम् ।

सर्वेश्विताग्रैंय पालिभि: सर्भपिंक्षिते: ॥ 44 ॥

Then comes the Pūya Kuṇḍa. It measures eight miles in diameter (or in circumference?). The sinners dwell and eat the puss; thereof and, are beaten by My men. Then comes the Sarpa Kuṇḍa. Millions and millions of snakes of the length of a Tāl tree are existing there. These serpents encircle the sinners and as they bite them.

संकुलं शब्दकूद्रिक्ष मन दूतेक्ष ताक्तिकः ।

कुण्डत्रयं मगादीनों पूर्णं च मगकाविकिधि: ॥ 4 5 ॥

सर्वे क्रीणार्यमानं च मगुपातकिक्यितून ।

हस्पावादिवद्धिक्ष शतनीघेन लोकिंतः ॥ 46 ॥

हाहेति शब्दे कुर्वादिस्ताविदीन मापरिः ।

My men also beat them at the same time. So there arises a general hue and cry. 'Save us, Save us; we are done for.' Then come in order the Damša Kunḍa, Maśaka Kunḍa, and the Garala Kunḍa. These are filled with gad-flies, mosquitoes, and poison respectively. Each of them measures one mile. The sinners hands and feet are tied up. So when the gad-flies and mosquitoes fiercely sting them, and My men violently beat them simultaneously, they raise a loud uproar and are made to move on, in their tied states by My persons.

यज्ञवृहिका: कृपई तान्यां च परिपूर्तिन् ॥ 47 ॥

वाय्यर्धे पारिभियुक्तं चजुवृषिकर्निगते: ।

कुण्डत्रयं मग्राईनां तैरेव परिपूर्तिन् ॥ 48 ॥

Their bodies get thoroughly reddened and covered with blood by the stinging of the flies, etc. Then come the Vajra Kūnda and the Vṛsāka Kūndā filled respectively with Vajra insects and the scorpions. Each of them measures one-half that of the Vāpī. The sinners that dwell there, are incessantly bitten by insects (Vajras and scorpions. Then come in order the Śara Kūnda, Śūla Kūndā, and the Khādga Kūndas. They are filled respectively with arrows, spikes, and scimitars. Each of them measures one half that of the Vāpī.

तिंविद्धः पार्थिविभूतं काव्यधरं तनलोहितेः ।

तततोयोदकः पूर्ण सद्यांत गोलकुषाकम् ॥ 49 ॥

कोंटे: शंकुसमानैक्ष भक्षिते पार्थिविभूतन् ।

वाय्यधामनं भौतैष प्रापिधि: कॉटपत्रिहि: ॥ 50 ॥

The sinners are pierced by arrows, etc., and become covered over with blood and dwell there. Then comes the Gola Kūṇḍa. It is filled with boiling hot water and it is pitch dark. The sinners live there, bitten by the insects. This Kūṇḍa measures half that of the Vāpi. The insects bite them and My men beat them; so their fear knows no bounds; everyone of them is weeping and crying loudly.

रुद्रिः क्रीशमानेश्च मन दूरैंठ तार्तिः ।

अतिरुर्धिंधसंयुक्त दुःखदे पर्पिता सदा ॥ ५१ ॥

दारुनीदिकृताकारभैक्षितं पार्थिविभूतम् ।

वाय्यधे परिपूर्ण च जलयेर्नैकक्रौदिधि: ॥ ५२ ॥

This Kunja is filled with hideously offensive smells. So the pains of the sinners are infinite. The Nakra Kunja comes next. It measures half the Vāpī, is filled with millions and millions of crocodiles living in water. The horrible looking deformed sinners live there. The Kāka Kunja then follows.

विषमूत्रलेवमपश्रेष्ठ स्तुतं शतकोदिभि: ।

काकैक्ष विकृताकारैर्धक्षिते: पार्थिविभूतम् ॥ 53 ॥

मावानुकुर्दे बीकुकुर्दं ताथ्यों पूर्णे धनुःशनम् ।

भक्षितेः पार्थिविभूतैनं शब्दकृद्धिक्षं संतनम् ॥ 54 ॥

The sinners here are being bitten by hundreds of deformed crows eating focces, urines and

phlegm. Then come the Manthāna Kuṇḍa and Bijā Kuṇḍa. These are filled respectively with insects called Manthāna and Bijā. Each of them measures one hundred Dhanus. (One Dhanu=four hastas) Those insects are stinging the sinners and they cry out very loudly. Then follows the Vajra Kuṇḍa.

ཐུན་ཐོན་ གྱིལནུན་ གྱིལན་ སྟན་ཆུང་

སྟོམདྲིངསྟོབྱོནྡོདྡོདྡོདྡོདྡོདྡོདྡོདྡོདྡོདྡེ

མོའིསྟོགས་ཀྱིན་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུ

སྟོན་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆོས་ཀྱི

སྟོན་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆོས་ཀྱེད་

It measures one hundred Dhanus. Many insects with their teeth as hard as thunderbolt live there and bite the sinners who cry out loudly. It is pitch dark. Then comes the hot Pāṣāṇa Kuṇḍa. It measures twice that of the Vāpi. It is so built of hot stones as it resembles a burning mass of coal. Th sinners become restless with the heat and turn round and round in the middle. Then comes the Pāṣāṇa Kuṇḍa and the Lālā Kuṇḍa. The Pāṣāṇa. Kuṇḍa is made up of the sharp pointed stones, having sharp edges.

महापातिक्रियकृतं लालाकृष्टं च लोहितः ॥ 57 ॥

कोशगातं च गंभीरं मम दूरीढ़ ताहितः ।

ततार्जानाचलाकारः परिपूर्ण धनुःशतम् ॥ 58 ॥

चलढ़िः पार्थिवर्फ़े मम दूरीढ़ ताहितः ।

पूर्ण चूर्णद्रजेः क्रोगमानं पार्थिवर्षित्वन्ति ॥ 59 ॥

Innumerable sinners dwell there. Many red beings live in the Lālā Kuṇḍa. Then comes the Mahī Kuṇḍa. Its size is one hundred Dhanus and its depth is two miles. It is made up of hot stones, each measuring the Anjāna mountain. The sinners, beaten and driven by My persons, move on and on in the middle. Then comes the Cūrṇa Kuṇḍa. It measures two miles (in circumference) and is filled with (seven) cūrṇas (powders).

तद्रोकिंभ: प्रदार्थेपच मन दूतेश्च ताकितः ।

कूणंड कुललचकं च घुणीमानं च संतलम् ॥ 60 ॥

सुतीक्षा घोडणारे च चूर्णितेः पाधिविधून् ।

The sinners, driven and beaten My men, go on,

restless hither and thither and eat the powders and get themselves burnt. Then comes the Cakra Kuṇḍa. Here a potter's wheel sixteen sharp-edged spokes is constantly whirling round and round; the sinners are being crushed by this wheel.

अत्तीव चक्र निम्न च द्विगत्यूपिमागकान् ॥ 61 ॥

कंदराकारिनिगा तनोटेशच तनोटिंश्च समवित्यान् ।

महापातकिषियुक्तं पश्रितैर्जजकुर्जभः ॥ 62 ॥

जल्दिक्र: शब्दकूद्ध्रक्ष्वतुभयनाक् ।

Then comes the Vakra Kunḍa. It depth is eight miles. It is fashioned very much curved; and with and sharp slope it has gone down. It is built on the plan of a mountain cave, filled with hot water and it is enveloped with deep dense darkness. The aquatic animals there are biting the sinners, who get very much restless and are crying out very loudly. Then comes the Kūrma Kunḍa.

कोटिभिर्विकृताकाताः: कच्छयेष सुरावभोः ॥ 63 ॥

जल्पधे: संगुत तैश्य भ्रविष्यान् ।

जालाकलापैसेतोभिनिर्मितेः क्रीभागनम् ॥ 64 ॥

गब्दिकूपिट: पाताकिभि: संगुतं क्लेशदं सदा ।

क्रीभागनं च भापीरं ततन्यमविपरिन्यत् ॥ 65 ॥

Here millions and millions of tortoises in the water awfully distorted, are bitting the sinners. Then comes the Jvālā Kunḍa. It is built of fierce fiery flames. It measures two miles in circumference. The sinners here are always in great difficulty, with intense pain and crying out loudly. Next follows the Bhasma Kunḍa. It measures two miles.

शकुञ्जलिद्र: संयुक्तं पाविधिभर्मवधिक्षितः ।

तत्पायाणलोहानां स्मूर्ते: परिपूर्ति: ॥ 66 ॥

The sinners get themselves well burnt in hot ashes and live there, eating the ashes. It is filled with hot stones and hot irons. The sinners here are always being burnt in hot irons and hot stones and their throats and palates are being parched up.

पाधिविर्यायात्रीय युक्तं च गुण्यकालुफैः ।

कोशमानां ध्यातंयुक्तं नाभीयमितद्यारुभम् ॥ 67 ॥

ताडितैश प्रदर्भेश दरभकुं प्रकर्पितिंम् ।

Book IX Chapter XXXVII

अतीवीर्मितुं तोयं प्रतनक्षारसंयुतून् ॥ 68 ॥

नागप्राकर्षिकर्सैजलंर्गुभित्यवतम् ।

Then comes the Dagdha Kūndā. It is deep and horrible. It measures two miles in circumference. My messengers threaten always the sinners there. Then comes the Sūci Kūndā. It is filled with salt water. Waves are always rising there. It is filled with various aquatic animals making all sorts of noises.

घ्राव्यतिप्रामणं च गम्भीरं ध्वांतसंयुतम् ॥ 69 ॥

तद्वश्रैः पाचिभ्युक्तं दंशितैंलजतैपि: ।

ज्लिद्धः शब्दकृद्धड्र न पश्यद्धः परस्यम् ॥ 70 ॥

It measures eight miles in circumference and it is deep and dark. The sinners here cannot see each other and are bitten by the animals. Pained very much, they cry out loudly. Then comes the Asipattra Kūndā. On the top surface of the Kūndā there is a very big Tāl tree very high.

प्रतनसूचीकुर्षं च कीर्तितं च भवानकम् ।

असीव धारापत्रसाय्युचैस्तालतोरधः ॥ 71 ॥

कोशाध्यानं कुंचे च पतत्यत्रमन्यितम् ।

पापिनां रक्तपूर्णं च वृक्षाग्रावततां धूबम् ॥ 72 ॥

परित्राहीत शब्द च कुर्वंतमसतामपि ।

गाफीरं घतांतयुक्तं च रक्तकोदसन्त्यितम् ॥ 73 ॥

The edges of the leaves of this tree are sharp like the edge of a sword. One mile below this Tāl tree is situated the Kūnda. The sharpedged Tāl leaves, then, fall on the bodies of the sinners from the height of a mile and they get cut and wounded; blood comes out of them and the sinners, in great pain, cry out ‘save, save.’ It is very deep, very dark and filled with Rakta Kitā a kind of blood like insects.

तदसीपत्र कुंडं च कीर्तितं च भयानकम् ।

धनु:शतप्रमाणं च क्षुरधारासंभुतम् ॥ 74 ॥

पापियां तक्पूर्णं च क्षुरधारं भयानकम् ।

मूचीभुखीस्त्रसंयुक्तं पापित्तीघपूरितम् ॥ 75 ॥

This is the horrible Asipatra Kuṇḍa. Next comes the Kṣura Dhāra Kuṇḍa, measuring one hundred Dhanus (one Dhanu=four hastas). It is filled with

keenedged weapons, as sharp as nice razors. The blood of the sinners is flowing here profusely. Then comes the Śucī Mukha Kuṇḍa filled with sharp weapons of the form of long needles.

पडाशब्दुर्गरायमं क्लेशदं सूचिकामुखम् ।

कस्यचिजन्तुषेचस्य गोकाख्यस्य मुखाकृति ॥ 76 ॥

कूपकरं च गम्भीरं धनुर्विशत्रमागकम् ।

महापातकिनां चैव महल्लेशप्रदं पर्च ॥ 77 ॥

तल्कीटभक्षितानां च नमास्यानां च संततम् ।

It measures fifty Dhanus. The sinners get pierced by them and are constantly emitting blood. Their intense pain knows no bounds. Then comes the Gokāmukha Kunda; inhabited by a sort of insect, called Gokā. They look like mouths; hence they are named Gokāmukha. It is deep like a well and it measures twenty Dhanus. The great sinners suffer an intense amount of pain there. They have got to keep their mouths always downwards as the Gokā insects always bite and sting them.

कुण्ड नकमुखाकां धनु:पोड्डगामनकूम ॥ 78 ॥

गम्भीरं पापसूचं च पापिभ्रः संकुले सदा ।

धनु:शलगमाणं च कांतिैतं गवढेशनम् ॥ 79 ॥

Then comes the Nakra Kunda. It resembles like the mouth of a crocodile and measures sixteen Dhanus. It is deep like a well and numbers of sinners dwell there. Then comes the Gaja Damša Kunḍa.

धनु:खिलामणां च कुंडं च गोग्याखुकात् ।

पार्थिनां कलेशनं शग्रवद्गोगुर्षे परिकीर्तिन् ॥ 80 ॥

It measures one hundred Dhanus. Next comes the Gomukha Kunḍa. It measures thrity Dhanus and resembles the mouth of a cow. It gives incessant pains and troubles to the sinners.

कालचक्रेना संयुक्तं ध्रममाणं भयानकम् ।

कृम्भाकारं धर्तयुक्तं द्विग्व्यतिभगणकम् ॥ 81 ॥

Then comes the Kumbhipāka Kuṇḍa. It is like a wheel resembling that of the Kālacakra, very horrible; and it is rotating incessantly. It looks like a water-jar, measuring eight miles, and it is quite dark.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

लक्षपौरभमानं च गम्भीरं विस्तृतं सति ।

कृपचित्तपतलेलं च तापाविकुडेवेच च ॥ 82 ॥

पापिनां च प्रधान्येय मूर्दित: कृमिधित्युत् ।

पत्सरं च नर्यद्धिभः शब्दकुर्विश्रक्षे संत्ति ॥ 83 ॥

Its depth is one lakh Purusas of the height of 100,000 persons. There are many other Kunḍas, Tapta Taila Kunda and Tapta Taila Tāmra Kunḍa, etc., within it. This Kunda is filled with almost unconscious great sinners and insects. They beat each other and cry out loudly.

तातिदेवमदुळेघ मुसलैमूद्रैस्तथा ।

यूर्णमानै: पतन्द्रिभ्य मृद्धितेश्र क्षणं क्षणम् ॥ 84 ॥

पातितैर्मद्वर्तैष्ठ हटन्यस्माखणं पुनः ।

यावत्न: पायिन: संति सर्वकुंडेषु सुंदिर ॥ 85 ॥

My messengers also threaten them with clubs and Musalas. So at times they fall dizzy-headed, at times they get unconscious, and sometimes they get up and cry. O Fair One! The numbers of sinners here equal to four times that of all the other sinners in the other Kundas.

ततश्रुगुंग: सन्ति कुम्भीपाके च दुःखदे।

सुचिरं वध्यानातसे भोगदेहा न नश्वा: ॥ 86 ॥

They know no death, however much you beat them. Their lives persist. For the body is built up for sufferance, it is indestructible.

सर्वकुंडप्रधानं च कृम्भीपाकं प्रक़ीर्तिन् ।

कालर्गमितिपूर्णे निविद्धा चय पापिन: ॥ 87 ॥

उत्यापितारच दूतैरच क्षणमेव मिविजिता: ।

निश्रासबद्धा: सुचिरं तथा मोहं गता: पुनः ॥ 88 ॥

अतीव क्लेशसंयुक्ता देहघोगेने सुंदरी ।

प्रततोययुक्तं च कालसूरं प्रक्रांतितम् ॥ 89 ॥

अवटः कुपचेढ़ा मल्योदः स उदाहतः ।

प्रततोयपूर्ण च चतुर्वित्यमाणकम् ॥ 90 ॥

This Kumbhipāka Kūṇā is the chief of all the Kuṇḍas. This Kūṇā where the sinners are tied to a thread built by Kāla, where My men lift the sinners on high at one time, and sink them down below at another time, where the sinners becoming suffocated for a long time, get unconscious, where their sufferings know no bounds, where it is filled

with boiling oil, is named the Kālasūtra Kuṇḍa Then comes the Matsyoda Kuṇḍa, hollow like a well. It is filled with boiling water and it measures twenty-four Dhanus.

व्यापतं महापापिधित्यादायांशीक्षे संततम् ।

मदूतैस्तात्रिकै: शश्वद्वटेदं प्रकर्पितिंम् ॥ 91 ॥

यत्रोदस्यर्गमातेगर सर्वेक्षाप्रियेषु पापपिनम् ।

भवेदकस्मात्ततां यस्मल्कुंके छे.पृजते ॥ 92 ॥

Next comes the Avatoda Kunda. It measures one hundred Dhanus. The sinners get their bodies burned and chastised by My persons, live there. No sooner they drop into the water of this Kunda, than they are attacked with all sorts of diseases. Then comes the Krmikantuka Kunda.

अन्रतुर्दैभिश्रैतनु प्राणिभिवर्च्च संकुलम् ।

हाहिति शब्दं कुर्विद्धसर्वेकानुरं विषु: ॥ 93 ॥

तत्पारंभुर्भिताकीर्णं ज्वलिद्धसुनुवधधकैः ।

तद्धक्षेः पार्थिविरुक्तं पासुभोजैर्युग्रान् ॥ 94 ॥

The sinners are bitten by the Krimi Kantuka insects and cry out loudly, creating a general consternation and live there. Its another names is Arun tunda Kunda. Next comes the Pārisu Kunda. It measures one hundred Dhanus. It is overspread with burning rice husks.

पातामाश पाणी च पाशेग वेहितो भवेत् ।

कोशमाजेण कुईं च तत्णारवेछने विदुः ॥ 95 ॥

पापमाजेण पाणी च शूलेन वेहितो भवेत् ।

धनुर्विशताम्बां च शूलप्रोतं प्रकीर्तिन् ॥ 96 ॥

The sinners eat those hot husks and live there. Then comes the Pāsaveśtana Kunda. It measures two miles. No sooner the sinners fall in this Kunda than they are twined round by this rope or Pāśa. Hence its name. Then comes the Sūlaprota Kunda. पततां पाचिनां यत्र भवेदेव प्रकंपनम् ।

अत्तीव हित्योकातं क्रोगार्थ च प्रकंपनम् ॥ 97 ॥

दद्वलेव हि मे दूता यत्रोल्काः पाचिनां मुखे ।

धनुष्विण्यामां तदुल्कामिश्र सुसंकुलम् ॥ 98 ॥

It measures twenty Dhanus. No sooner the sinners fall here than they are encircled with the Sūlaśtra (darts). Then comes the Prakampana

Book IX Chapter XXXVII

Kupda. It measures one mile. It is filled with ice-cold water. The sinners, going there, shiver at once. Next follows the Ulkā Kupda. It measures twenty Dhanus.

लक्ष्वपीरम्यानं च भांपीरं च धनुःशतम् ।

नानप्रकरै: कृमिभि: संयुक्तं च भयानकम् ॥ 99 ॥

अनधीकाख्यालं च कृपाकारं च वर्तूलम् ।

नुद्वर्षे: पाणिभिकृतं प्रणयाद्विः: परस्यम् ॥ 100 ॥

It is filled with burning torches and meteors. My messengers thrust the torches and meteors into the mouths of the sinners living there Next comes the Andhra-Küpa Kunga. It is pitch-dark, shaped like a well, circular and very horrible. The sinners beat each other and eat the insects thereof.

तन्तौयप्रद्योः खलैद्धः कीटपश्रितैः ।

धातौपतच्छया चोर्धीधतुकाः प्रकीर्तिनः ॥ 101 ॥

Their bodies are burnt with hot water; they cannot see anything on account of dire darkness.

नानाप्राकारश्छौवैयंय विद्वांध पापिनः ।

धनुविंशमारणं च वेधन्तं तत्यकीर्तिन् ॥ 102 ॥

दंडेन ताहिता वय मम दूतेध पापिनः ।

धनु:घोडणानं च तत्कुंड दंडताडन् ॥ 103 ॥

The Kunāa where the sinners are pierced by various weapons is known as the Vedhana Kunāa. It measures twenty Dhanus. Then comes the Dangatāḍana Kunāa. It measures sixteen Dhanus. The sinners dwell here, threatened by My messengers.

निर्भूघ्रा महाजालैर्वया मीना प्रापिनः ।

धनुविश्रिपणों च जाल्धधे प्रकीर्तिन् ॥ 104 ॥

पततां पापिनां कुंडे देइक्षणों भवेदिरू ।

लोहबंदीनिवद्धानां कोटिपोरूषमानक्न ॥ 105 ॥

Then comes the Jālarandhra Kuṇda. Here the sinners live encompassed by a great net as fishes, etc., are tied in a net. Next comes the Dehaçūrna Kūnda. It is quite dark and its depth is that of the height of one kotī persons; its circumference is twenty Dhanus.

गंभीरं धतातसंयुक्तं धनुविंशम्रामाणकम् ।

मृदितानां जडानां च देहचूर्ण प्रकर्षितान् ॥ 106 ॥

दलिताः पापिने यत्र मम दूतैरश्त ताडिताः ।

धनु:घोडगमानं च तत्कुंड दल्लं स्मृतम् ॥ 107 ॥

The sinners, here, encompassed by iron chains are made to fall below where their bodies are reduced to powders and they are inert and almost unconscious. The Kūṇa where the sinners are crushed and threatened by My messengers is known as the Dalana Kūṇa; it measures sixteen Dhanus in circumference.

पत्नेनैव पापी च शुक्रककोठालुकः ।

बालुकासु च ततासु धनुषिंक्षामणकम् ॥ 108 ॥

गतपीकसामानं च गंभिरं ध्वातसंयुतम् ।

शोषणं कुंडतेपोद्ध पापिनां पयु:खतम् ॥ 109 ॥

नानाचर्मकपायोदपरिणूणं धनु:शगतम् ।

दुर्गीध्युक्तं नद्धसूः प्राणिधि: संकुलं कम् ॥ 110 ॥

Next comes the Śoşana Kūndā. It is deep up to the height of one hundred persons and it is very dark. It measures thirty Dhanus. On falling on the hot sand, the throats and palates of sinners get dried up. Their pains knows no bounds. Hence it is called the Śoşana Kūndā. Then comes the Kaṣa Kūndā. It measures one hundred Dhanus. It is filled with the juices of skins and its smell is very offensive. The sinners eat those astringent waters and live there.

शूपीकामुखं कुंडं धनुर्जिद्वगमानकम् ।

तत्नलोहबालुकाभि: पूर्णे पाताकिसंयुतम् ॥ 1 1 1 ॥

दुर्गीध्युक्तं तद्धस्वे: पाधिपि: संकुलं सति ।

शूपांकामपुर्जं कुंडे धनुद्वीद्यामानकम् ॥ 1 1 2 ॥

प्रतलवालकुर्णपाँ महापातिक्रियन्तु ।

अंतत्यिशिष्यानं च जाल्यावापुर्षं सदा ॥ 1 1 3 ॥

धनुषिंशितिमानं च प्रमाणं वय्य सूदीर ।

जालामिदंध्याग्रेश्व पार्थिविध्यांतिनेव च ॥ 1 1 4 ॥

Then comes Sūrpa Kunḍa. It measures twelve Dhanus and is extended like a winnowing basket. It is filled with hot iron dust and many sinners live there, eating those foetid iron dusts. Next comes the Vālāmukha Kunḍa. It is filled with red hot sand. From the (bottom) centre rises a flame,

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

overspreading the mouth of the Kunđa. It measures twenty Dhanus.

तन्महाकलेशंर शशकुर्कं जलामुपढ़ं स्मृतम् ।

पतामत्राधरच पापी मूर्तित हो वे नरो भवेद् ॥ ११ १५ ॥

तपोहकाम्बर्नरितं वायर्धे जिहुकापुकदम् ।

धूपधोकारसंयुक्ते धूपधीघ पारिभिर्युतम् ॥ ११ ६ ॥

The sinners are burnt here by the flame and live awfully; they get fainted no sooner they are dropped in this Kunđa. Then comes the Dhūmrāndha Kunđa. It is dark, quite filled with smoke. Within that the hot bricks are placed. The sinners get suffocated with smoke; and their eyesight becomes also obstructed.

धनुःशर्तं शासरोधूमांधो परिकीर्तितम् ।

पात्ममात्राय पापी नारीश्च वेहितो भवेत् ॥ 117 ॥

धनु:शर्त नागपूर्ण तत्नार्येँहितं भवेत् ।

चडगीति च कुंडानि मयंतानि निशामय ।

लक्षणं पाचि तेषां च किं मुवः शोतुपिच्छिस ॥ 118 ॥

शीत शीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे नवमरकन्धे साविच्युपाधवाने

सर्वसिंगोउपया: || 137 ||

It measures one hundred Dhanus. Then comes the Nágavesṭana Kuṇḍa. It is encircled and filled with the serpents. No sooner the sinners are let fall there, than they are surrounded by the snakes. O Śavitri! Thus I have spoken to you about the eighty-six Kuṇḍas and their characteristics, Now what more do you want to hear? Say."

Here ends the Thirty-seventh Chapter of the Ninth Book on the Eighty-six Kuṇḍas and their characteristics in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXXVIII

On the Glories of the Devi

साविष्यवाच

देवीभक्ति देहि महां साराणां चैव साकाम।

पूंसा मुक्तिद्रावीजं नरकाणवतारकम् ॥ १ ॥

कारणं मुक्तिसाराणं सर्वीगुभविनाशनम् ।

दारकं कर्मद्धुक्षाणां कृतपाणीघदारणम् ॥ २ ॥

Sāvitrī said: “O Lord! Give me the devotion to the Devi to that Adyā Śakti Bhagavati Mahā Māyā. Parameśvarī Māyī that is the Essence of all essences, the Door of final liberation to the human beings, and the Cause of delivering them from hells, that is the Root of all the Dharmas that lead to Mukti, that destroys all the inauspiciousness, that takes away the fear of all the Karmas, and that takes away always all the sins committed before.

युक्तिक्र कतिधायरित किं वा तासां च लक्षणम् ।

देवीभक्ति भक्तिभेद निकेकस्यापि खंडन् ॥ 3 ॥

तत्वज्ञानविद्वीना च स्त्रीजातिर्विधिनर्दिता ।

किंचित्ज्ञानं सारभृतं वद वेदिवेदां वर ॥ 4 ॥

O Thou, the Foremost amongst the knowers of the Vedas! How many kinds of Muktis are there in this world? What is the True Bhakti? What are its

characteristics? What is to be done by which the enjoyment of the karmas done can be desisted and nullified? O Bhagavan! The woman kind has been created by the Creator as devoid of any Tattvajñāna or true knowledge; now tell me something about this True Knowledge.

सर्वे दानं च यज्छु तीर्थे स्नाने बत ततः ।

अज्ञानिज्ञानदानस्य कलं नाईति घोडगीम् ॥ 5 ॥

यितु: श्रतगुणा माता गौरैवे चेति निशितान् ।

मातु: श्रतगुण: पूर्यो ज्ञानदाता गुरू: प्रभो ॥ 6 ॥

All the charities, sacrifices, bathing in the sacred places of pilgrimages, observing vows and austerities cannot be compared with one sixteenth of imparting knowledge to those who are ignorant (of true knowledge). Mother is hundred times superior to father; this is certain; but the Spiritual Teacher, the Giver of True Knowledge, is hundred times more to be reverenced and worshipped than the mother. O Lord!"

धर्मराज उवाच

पूर्व सर्वों वरो दन्तो यसे मनसि वांछितः ।

अधुना शक्तिभक्त्रेते वत्से भवतु महात् ॥ 7 ॥

Book IX Chapter XXXVIII

श्रौतुमघडिस कल्याणि श्रीदेवीपुणाकीर्तनम् ।

वक्तृणां पृष्छकानां च श्रौतृणां कुलतारणम् ॥ 8 ॥

Dharmarāja said: “O Child! What boons you desired of Me before, I granted them all to you. Now I grant this boon to you that ‘Let the devotion towards the Śakti now arise in your mind’ O Auspicious One! You want to hear the reciting of the Glories of Śri Devi; by this; both he who puts forward the question and he who hears the answer, all their families are delivered.

ग्रेणो वक्रसहस्रेशन न हि यद्रतुभीश्र: ।

भृत्युंजयो न क्षमघ वर्तु फघुपुखेन च ॥ 9 ॥

धाता चतुर्णा वेदानां विधाता जगतामयि ।

ब्रहा चतुर्मुंखैने वालं विद्यृष्ठ सर्ववित् ॥ 10 ॥

कांतिकेकः घणपुखेन नापि वतुभलं धुवम् ।

न गणेशः समधंधु योगीद्वागो युगैरुंक: ॥ 11 ॥

सामभृताक्र शासकाणां वेहताद्ध एव च ।

कलामातं व्यदुगानां न विहिति बुधायं च ॥ 12 ॥

सरस्वती जडीभृता नालं तद्गुणवर्षने ।

सन्तकुमारो धार्थि सनंदतः सनानतः ॥ 13 ॥

सनकः बकितः सूबों येघेच च बहणा: सुतः ।

विश्वक्षणा न यद्रुक्ति किं चान्ये जडबुद्धः ॥ 14 ॥

न यद्रक्तुं क्षमा: सिद्धा मुनींत्र योगिनस्तथा ।

के वा चान्ये वयं के वा श्रीदेव्या गुणवर्णनें ॥ 15 ॥

ध्यायते यत्पदांभोजं बढ्धाविष्णुशिवरातः ॥

अतिसाध्यं स्वभक्तानां तदन्येयं सुवुर्लंभम् ॥ 16 ॥

किंश्रिक्तिक्रिज्ञानीत दनुणोक्लोर्ने शुभम् ।

अतिरिक्त विज्ञानाति बहुना ब्रह्माविश्राद: ॥ 17 ॥

ततोतिरिक्ते ज्ञानाति गणेशो ज्ञानिनां गुरु: ।

सर्वातिरिक्तं ज्ञानाति सर्वतः शेषपुरैव सः ॥ 18 ॥

When the Śeṣa Nāga Ananta Deva with His thousand mouths is unable to recite the glories of the Devi, when Mahādeva cannot described with His five mouths, when the Creator Brahmā is incapable to recite Her glories with His four mouths, when Viṣṇu, the Omniscient, falls back, when Kārtikeya with His six mouths cannot sufficiently describe, when Gāncēa, the Guru of the Gurus of the great yogis is incapable, when the Pandits, the knowers of the four Vedas, the Essence

of all the Śāstras, cannot know even a bit of Her, when Sarasvati becomes inert in going to describe Her glories; when Sanatkumāra, Dharma, Sanātana, Sananda, Sanaka, Kapila, Sūrya and other sons of the Creator have fallen back, when the other Siddhas, Yogindras, Munindras are quite incapable to glorify the deeds of Prakṛti Devi, then how can I recite fully the Glories of Her? Whose lotus-feet Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Śiva and others meditate; and lo! when it becomes difficult for Her devotees even to think of Her, then what wonder is there that She will be so very rare to others! Brahmā, skilled in the knowledge of the Vedas knows more of Her than what other ordinary persons know so little of Her auspicious Glories.

तस्पी दर्ते पुरा जाने कृष्णोय परमात्मना ।

अतीव निज्ञानप्रणे गोलोकै रास्यदंचे ॥ १ १ ॥

तत्रेव कथितं किंचित्तपुणोलक्तीनं शुभम् ।

धर्म च कवयामास शिवलोके शिव: स्वयम् ॥ 20 ॥

धर्मैतु कवयामास भावस्ते पृष्ठते तथा ।

यामाराध्य मयित्ताउपि संग्रण तपसा सभी ॥ 21 ॥

पूर्व त्वं विषयं चाहं न गृह्जीम प्रयन्ततः ।

वैराययुक्नतसपे संगृतमिष्ठति सुवते ॥ 22 ॥

More than Brahmā, Gāncā, the Guru of the Jñānins, knows; again Sāmhu, the Omniscient, knows the best of all. For, in ancient times, that knowledge of the Prakrti Devī was given to Him by Kṛṣṇa, the Highest Spirit in a solitary place in the Rāsa Maṇḍalam in the region of Goloka. Mahādeva, again, gave it to Dharma in the Śivaloka; Dharma again gave the Prakrti Mantra to My father. My father became successful (Siddha) in the worship of Prakrti Devī when he practised austerities.

तदा मां कथयामास पिता तदुगणकीतन् ।

यथानां तद्वादि निवीधातीव दुर्भिम् ॥ 23 ॥

तदुर्णसंानजानाति तदन्यस्य चाकाधा ।

यथाकाशो न जानाति स्वातमेव वरान्ने ॥ 24 ॥

सर्वांत्या सर्वभगवान्यवैकरणाकरण: ।

सर्वेश्वरश सर्वोष्ट: सर्ववित्यपिलाकः ॥ 25 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

<table><tr><td>नित्यकृपी नित्यदेही नित्यान्नदो निराकृति: ।</td></tr><tr><td>निरंकृणो निराकृति निर्णुणघु सितमयः ॥ 26 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>नितिलत: सर्वसाक्षी च सर्वाधार: परात्यर: ।</td></tr><tr><td>मायाविशिष्टः प्रकृतिस्तक्तिकाराघ प्रकृता: ॥ 27 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>स्वयं पुर्णां प्रकृतिस्ताविभजी परस्यम् ।</td></tr><tr><td>यथा ब्रह्मतस्य शक्तिनं चिपाउस्वेव कुक्रचित् ॥ 28 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>सेयं शक्तिनंद्रामाया सचिवादानन्द्रकर्णिणि ।</td></tr></table>

Of old, the Devas wanted to offer to me the Government of the Yama Loka; but as I was very much dispassionate towards the world, I became unwilling and became ready to perform austerities. Then my Father told the Glories of Prakrti Devi. Now I describe to you what I heard from my Father and what is stated in the Vedas, though very difficult to comprehend. Listen carefully. O Fair Faced One! As the eternal space does not know its own extent, so Prakrti Devi Herself knows not Her own Glories; then what can be said of any other person on this! She is the Self of all, endowed with all powers and lordship, the Cause of all causes, the Lord of all, the Origin of all and the Preserver of all; She is Eternal, always with Her Cosmic Body, full of everlasting bliss, without any special form, unrestrained, having no fear, without any disease and decay, unattached, the Witness of all, the Refuge of all, and Higher than the Highest; She is with Māyā and She is Mūla Prakrti; the objects created by Her being known as the Prākrt creation; Who remains as Prakrti and Purusa inseparable from each other as Agni and Her burning force; the Mahā Mayā, of the nature of everlasting existence, intelligence and bliss.

कर्व विव्यलैरूपा च भक्तानुपहतेवे १ २ १ ॥

गोपालसुन्दरीकरं प्रवर्मा सा ससर्ज है ।

उत्तीव कर्मनीं च सुन्दरं सुमनोहरम् ॥ 30 ॥

नवीनीरिद्यमां किशोरों गोपवेधकम् ।

कंदपंकोटिलावणं लीलाधाम मनोहर्म ॥ 31 ॥

Though formless, She assumes forms for the gratification of the desires of Her Bhaktas. She created first the beautiful form of Gopāla Sundari i.e., the form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa very lovely and beautiful, captivating the mind. His body is blue like the fresh

rain cloud; He is young and dressed like that of a cow-herd. Millions of Kandarpas the (the Love deity) are, as it were, playing in His body.

गरान्यधारूपचानां गोभागोचनलोचन् ।

गरत्याविगोकौटुगोभाप्रख्यादानानन् ॥ 32 ॥

अमूल्यरत्निर्माणानानावृष्णभृष्णितम् ।

ससितं शोभितं शुश्वमूल्यपीलासासा ॥ 33 ॥

His eyes are vie with the midday lotus of the autumn. The beauty of His face throws under shade the millions and millions of the Full Moon. His body is decorated with invaluable ornaments decked with jewels. Sweet smile reigns ever in His lips; it is adorned more over with His yellow coloured invaluable robe.

परबहुस्तरूप च जलतें ब्रह्मतेजस ।

सुखदुपयं च शांतं च राथाकातमन्तकम् ॥ 34 ॥

He is Parama Brahma. His whole body is burning with the Brahma Teja, the Fire of Brahma. His Body is Fiery. He is lovely, sweet to look at, of a peaceful temper, the Lord of Rādhā and He is Infinite.

Note: The Universe; as we see, is unreal like what we see in the Kaleidoscope; various apparent pictures of an endless variety of beautiful colour, and forms.

गोर्पीधिर्विध्याणं च समित्याधिश्रं सतन्ति ।

रासमंडलमध्यस्वे त्रनिसिंहासनशित्यम् ॥ 35 ॥

He is sitting on a jewel throne in the Rāsa Mandalam, and is incessantly looked upon by the smiling lovely Gopīs at one and the same time. He is two-armed.

वंर्गी क्वणतं द्विषुजं वन्मालाविष्यितम् ।

कोस्तुपुंद्रपाणिद्रिप्रा शणवद्धः:स्थलोज्जलम् ॥ 36 ॥

कुकुभागुकस्तूरीचन्दनचर्धितयिद्यम् ।

चाफवेकमालाकारं मालतीगाल्यमंडितम् ॥ 37 ॥

A garland made of wild flowers is hanging from His neck. He is playing on His flute. His breast is resplendent with Kaustubha gem that He always wears. His body is anointed with Kumkuma (saffron); Aguru (the fragrant and cooling paste of the Aguru wood), musk, and sandal-paste. The garland of beautiful Campaka and Malati flowers is hanging from His neck.

Book IX Chapter XXXVIII

चाक्छंद्रक्रशेभाढ्ये चुडावंकिमराजितम् ।

एवंभूत च ध्यायिते भत्ता भक्तिपरित्युताः ॥ 38 ॥

यद्वयाज्जगतां धाता विधाते सुहिधेये च ।

कर्मानुसाराल्लिखतं क्रोतैत सर्वकर्माणम् ॥ 39 ॥

तपसां फलवाता च कर्माणं च यद्याया ।

On His head, the beautiful crest is being seen, a little obliquely situated in the form of the beautiful Moon. Thus the Bhaktas, filled with Bhaktis, meditate on Him. O Child! It is through His fear that the Creator is doing His work of creation of this Universe; and is recording the Prārabdha fruits of their Karmas.

विष्यु: पाता च सर्वेधां चद्यायातीय संततम् ॥ 40 ॥

कालान्सिक: सहर्तां सर्वविश्रेषु चद्यात् ।

शिवो मृत्युंजयश्रैव जानिनां च गुरोर्भूः ॥ 41 ॥

यज्ञानाज्ञानावनसित योगीशे जानविषमुः ।

परमानन्दयुक्तश्र भवित्वीरायसंयुतः ॥ 42 ॥

It is through His fear that Viṣnu is awarding the fruits of Tapas and preserving the Universe. By His command the Kālāgni Rudra Deva is destroying all. By Whose favour Śiva has become Mrtyunjāya, the Conqueror of Death and the Foremost of the Jñānis; knowing whom Śiva has become Himself endowed with knowledge and the Lord of the knowers of knowledge, full of the Highest Bliss, devotion and dispassion.

यद्यात्राविति पवन: प्रवर: श्रीभागीयनाम ।

तपश्छ प्रजपति यद्यातर्वतंत सति ॥ 43 ॥

यद्राज्ञा वर्षौतिंत्री मृत्युश्राति जन्तुष ।

यद्राज्ञा दोहद्राक्रिजलमेवे सुर्गीतलम् ॥ 44 ॥

Through Whose fear the wind becomes the foremost of runners and carries things, the Sun gives heat, Indra gives rain, Yama destroys, Agni burns, and Water cools all the things.

दिशो रक्षिति दिव्याला महापीति यद्राज्ञा ।

भ्रमति राशिचकानि ग्राह्य यद्रवेच न ॥ 4 5 ॥

भयात्कलिति वृक्षाङ्ग पुर्णविधि च यद्रयात् ।

यद्राज्ञा तु प्रस्कृत्य कालः काले हेर्द्वाया ॥ 4 6 ॥

By Whose command the Regents of the (ten) quarters of the sky are watching and preserving nice orders; through Whose fear the planets are

describing their several orbits. Through Whose fear, trees flower and yield fruits; By Whose command the Kāla destroys all. By Whose command all the beings whether on land on in water are quitting their lives in time; until the proper time comes no man does not die even if he be pierced whether in battle or in danger.

तया जलल्यल्स्थान न जीविते यद्यात्या ।

अकालेनाहरिद्रदूं रोगुं विषयेषु च ॥ 47 ॥

धते बायुत्नोरायिग तोयं कूर्मं तद्वारा ।

कूर्मेउनं च क्षोणी च समुद्रासा च पवतन् ॥ 48 ॥

सर्वे चैव श्मात्कपा नानारन्तं विषयितं च।

यतः सर्वाणि भूगानि स्वीयोते हौत तक हिं ॥ 49 ॥

By Whose command the wind supports the water; the water supports the tortoise; the tortoise supports the Ananta and the Ananta supports the earth; the earth supports the oceans, mountains and all the jewels. The earth is of the nature of forgiveness, i.e., endures all. For this reason all things, moving and non-moving, rest on Her and again melt away in Her. Seventy-one Divine Yugas constitute one Indra's life period.

इज्ञायुशि दिव्यानां युगानामेकसन्तति: ।

अशांत्रीशे ग्रकानते बहणाश दिवानिग्नम् ॥ 50 ॥

एवं त्रिंशदिनीमांसीद्वायमापायमानु: सुस्तः ।

ऋतुभि: पद्धभिवाद्व बहणो वै वयः स्मृतम् ॥ 51 ॥

Twenty-eight Indra's life periods constitute Brahma's one day and one night. Thus thirty days constitute Brahma's one month; so two months constitute one Rtu (season); six Rtus make one year.

ब्रहणध निपाते च चकुन्मीलनं हरे: ।

चक्षुन्मीलने तस्य लयं प्राकृतिकं विदु: ॥ 52 ॥

प्रलेश प्राकृते सर्वे देवाधाछा चराचरा: ।

लीना धाता विधाता च श्रीकृष्णानाथपिकं ॥ 53 ॥

Thus one hundred years constitute Brahma's life. When Brahmā dies, Śri Hari's eye closes. That is the Prākṛtik Pralaya. At this time, everything, moving and non-moving, from the Deva loka to Bhūr loka (earth) dies. The Creator Brahmā gets dissolved in the navel of Śri Krṣna.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

विष्यु: क्षीरेणायी च वैकुंठे यक्षुर्णुंज: ।

विलीना वामपार्थे च कृष्णस्य परमात्मन: ॥ 54 ॥

यस्म जाने शिवो लीने ज्ञानाधीश: सनातनः ।

दुर्गार्थ विष्णुभाग्यां विलीना: सर्वशक्ततः ॥ 55 ॥

The four-armed Viṣnu, of Vaikuntāha, sleeps on Kṣiṣra Samudra, the ocean of milk, i.e., He dissolves on the left side of Śrī Krṣna, the Highest Spirit. All the other Sāktis (forces) dissolve in Mūla Prakṛti, the Māyā of Viṣnu.

सा च कृष्णस्य बुद्धो च बुद्ध्यधिष्ठादुरेवता ।

नारायणांग: स्कन्दश्र तीनो वक्षसि तस्य च। ५६ ॥

श्रीकृष्णांगश्र तद्वाही देवाधीशो गणेश्वः ।

पदांगाश्रैव पदायांा सा तथाायां च सुद्धे। १५७ ॥

The Mūla Prakṛti Durgā, the Presiding Deity of Buddhi (reason) dissolves in the Buddhist of Kṛṣṇa. Skanda, the part of Nārāyana, dissolves in His breast. Ganeśa, the formot of the Devas, born in part of Kṛṣṇa, dissolves in the arm of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

गोयाशुचि च तस्यां च सर्वांशे देवोषितः ।

कृष्णप्राणाधिदेवी सा तस्य प्राणेषु संस्थिता ॥ 58 ॥

सावित्री च सरस्वल्यां वेदः शास्त्राणि याति च ।

स्थिता वाणी च निद्धायां यस्य च परमात्मनः ॥ 59 ॥

And those who are born in parts of Padmā, dissolve in Her body and Padmā dissolves in the body of Rādhā. All the cow-herdesses and all the bodies of the Devas dissolve in Rādhā's body. But Rādhā, the Presiding Deity of the Prāṇa of Śrī Krṣṇa, dissolves the Prāṇa of Śrī Krṣṇa. Śāvitrī, the four Vedas and all the Śāstras dissolve in Sarasvatī; and Sarasvatī gets dissolved in the tongue of Śrī Krṣṇa, the Highest Self.

गोलोकस्य च गोपाश्र विलीतासस्य लोमपु ।

तलापोषु च सर्वेधा प्राणा वाता हुताशना: ॥ 6 0 ॥

जटतरानी विलीनाश जलं तद्रसनाघतः ।

वैणावाङ्गराणोंने परमानन्दसंपुता: ॥ 6 1 ॥

The Gopas in the region of Goloka dissolve in the pores of His skin; the Prāna Vāyu of all dissolve in His Prāna Vāyu; the fire dissolves in the fire in His belly; water dissolves in the tip of His tongue, and the Vaiṣṇavas, (devotees of Viṣṇu), drinking

the nectar of Bhakti, the Essence of all essences, dissolve in His lotus-fect.

सारास्तारताभक्तिस्तरीयूषपातयिन: ।

विरार्डशास्त्र महाति लीना: कृष्णे महाविराद् ॥ 62 ॥

यस्यैल लोकमूषेपूष विश्वानि निविलुकानि च ।

यस्य चक्षुप उन्मेय प्राकृतः प्रलयो भवेत् ॥ 63 ॥

All smaller Virāts dissolve in the Great Virāt and the Great Virāt dissolves in the Body of Śrī Krṣṇa. O Child! He is Krṣṇa, on the pores of Whose skin are situated endless Universes; at the closing of Whose eyes, the Prākrītika Pralaya comes and on the opening of Whose eyes, the creation takes place.

चछुक्न्मीलने सृष्टियैर्वेय पुनरेव सः ।

यावकालो निभिषेण तावदुभीलोन च ॥ 64 ॥

बढ़णाक्ष शताछे च सुहः सूत्रलयः पुनः ।

बढ़पुरुषलयानां च संख्या नात्स्वेव सुतेने ॥ 65 ॥

The closing and opening of the eyes takes the same time. Brahmā's creation lasts one hundred years and the Pralaya lasts one hundred years. O One of good vows! There is no counting how many Brahmā's or how many creations and dissolutions have taken place.

यथा भृज्ञां चैव संख्यानं नैव विद्यते ।

चक्षुनिंमे प्रलयो यस्य सर्वान्तात्मनः ॥ 66 ॥

उभीलेन पुनः सृष्टिभेदेवेशप्रेख्या ।

स कृष्णः प्रलये तस्यां प्रकृती लीन एव हि ॥ 67 ॥

As one cannot count the number of dusts, so one cannot count the creations and dissolutions. This is the Great Unspeakable Wonder! Again on Whose closing of the eyes the Pralaya takes place and on whose opening of the eyes the creation takes place, out of the will of God, That Kṛṣṇa dissolves at the time of Pralaya in Prakṛti.

एकैव च परा शक्तिनिर्णुः परमः पुगन्त् ।

स एवेदम्य आंसीक्षिति वेदविद्धि विदुः ॥ 68 ॥

मूलप्रतिव्यक्ता उपव्याकृतपदार्थित्या ।

सिद्धिभ्रलवमापना प्रल्ले सेव तिक्षति ॥ 69 ॥

This Highest Śakti, the Mūla Prakṛti is the Only One without a second; it is the only one Nirgunā and the Highest Puruṣa. It is considered as ‘Sat’

Book IX Chapter XXXVIII

existing, by the Seers of the Vedas. Such a thing as Mūla Prakṛti is the unchanged state (Mukti). During the Pralaya, Force, Who can in this universe recite Her glories?

तदुर्णोक्लीनीत वक्तु ब्रह्माण्डेषु च कः क्रमः ।

मुकतयश् चतुवैदैर्निककताश् चतुर्विधा: ॥ 70 ॥

Mukti is of four kinds, (1) Sālokya, (2) Sārūpya, (3) Sāmipya and (4) Nirvāna. So it is stated in the Vedas.

तत्प्रधानेवे घनितमुक्तेरपि गरीयसी ।

सालोक्यदा घनेदेशा तथा सारूप्यदा घर ॥ 7 1 ॥

सामीप्यदा5थ निवर्णपूदा मुक्तिश्रुत्थित्रा ।

भकास्तांना ति वांक्षिति विना तत्केवनं विनः ॥ 7 2 ॥

Out of them Bhakti towards the Deva is the highest; so much so that the Deva Bhakti is superior to Mukti. Mukti gives Sālokya, Sārūpya, Sāmipya, and Nirvāna. But the Bhaktas do not want anything. They want service of the Lord. They do not want anything else.

शिवल्यममरतं च बहुरावं चाहवेल्या ।

जन्ममृत्युजाख्याधिपशयोकामिकर कं धनम् ॥ ७३ ॥

दिव्यस्पधारणं च निवर्णी मोक्षणं विदुः ।

मुक्तिश्रसोवारिता भक्ति: सेवाविर्धिनी ॥ ७ ४ ॥

The state of becoming Śiva, of becoming an Amara or an immortal, becoming a Brahmā, the birth, death, disease, old age, fear, sorrow, or wealth, or assuming a divine form, or Nirvāna or Mokṣa all are looked on alike by the Bhaktas with disregard and contempt.

पतितमुपक्नोरयं घरे पेनेविक्छंडनं श्रणु ।

विदुर्बुधा निवेक्चे च भोगं च कृतकर्माणम् ॥ 75 ॥

तत्वण्डनं च शुभयं श्रीविभः सेवनं परम् ।

तत्वज्ञानिविं साथि विश्यं च लोकवेदयो: ॥ 76 ॥

Because Mukti is without any service while Bhakti increases this service. Thus I have told you the difference between Bhakti and Mukti. Now hear about the cutting off of the fruits of the past Karmas. O Chaste one! This service of the Highest Lord severs the ties of Karmas (past acts). This service is really the True Knowledge.

निर्विचरं शुभदं चोकतं गच्छ वत्से यवासुखम् ।

इत्पुक्ला सूर्यपुरक्षा जीवनिवा च ततविति् ॥ 77 ॥

तत्ये शुभाशिंग दत्ता गमनं कर्तुभुक्तः ।

द्रष्टा यमं च गच्छतं सा सावित्री प्राण्य च ॥ 78 ॥

So, O Child! I have now told you the Real Truth, leading to auspicious results. Now you can go freely as you desire." Thus saying to Śāvitrī, Yama, the son of Sūrya, gave life back to her husband and blessing her, became ready to go to His own abode.

रूतीय चरणी धूला सापुच्छेदन दुःवित्ता ।

साविक्रीतैन्द्रं भृता यमश्रेक पूर्णमितिधः ॥ 79 ॥

तामित्युवारा संतुतः स्वयं चैव रूतेद है ।

Seeing Dharmarāja ready to go away, Śāvitrī became sorry to have the bereavement of a good company, bowed down at His feet and began to cry. Yama, the Ocean of Mercy, hearing the crying of Śāvitrī began to weep and told the following words:

धर्मारा उवाच

लक्षवर्षे सुखं भुक्ल्या पुण्यक्षेत्रे च भारते ॥ 80 ॥

अन्ते यास्यास्त लतलोकं यय देवी विराजते ।

गत्वा च स्वगृहं भरे सविष्याश्रा तर्नं कुर् ॥ 81 ॥

Dharma said: "O Child! You enjoy in this holy Bhārata happiness for one lakh years and you will in the end go to the Deviloka or Mani Dvipa. Now go back to your house and observe for fourteen years the vow called Śavitrī-vrata for the mukti of women.

द्विस्तवर्षपर्यन्ते नारीणां मोक्षकारणम् ।

ज्येष्टुग्रकचतुद्रंगया सावित्याश्रत रंगभूम ॥ 82 ॥

गुकलष्टायां भापद्रे महात्क्रया यथा जतम् ।

झूष्टवर्ष ततं चैव प्रपतवेर्गं शुचिभिते ॥ 83 ॥

This Vrata is to be observed on the fourteenth day of the white fortnight in the month of Jyṣṭha. Then observe the Mahā-Laksmī Vrata. Its proper time is the eighth day of the bright fortnight of the month of Bhādra. For sixteen years consecutively without any break this vow is to be observed.

करीति भवस्या या नारी सा याति च विधोः पदम् ।

प्रतिमूक्लवारे च देवीं मझूलदायिनीम् ॥ 84 ॥

प्रतिमासं शुक्लपष्ट्ठां घर्षी मढ़ल्यात्यिनीम् ।

तथा चाषास्क्रांक्णां मनसां सर्वसिद्धिद्यान् । 8 5 ॥

राधारासे च कार्तिक्वां कृष्णप्राणाधिक्रियाय् ।

उपोथ शुक्लाध्यचां च प्रतिमांस वर्षप्रदम् ॥ 8 6 ॥

विश्युगामां भगवतीं दुर्गा सुनतिनारिणीम् ।

प्रकृतिं जगदांचां च प्रतिमासं वर्षप्रदम् ॥ 8 7 ॥

The woman who practises with devotion this vow, goes to the abode of Mūla Prakṛti. You would worship on every Tuesday in every month the Devi Maṅgala Caṇḍikā, the giver of all good; on the eighth day in the bright fortnight you should worship Devi Saṣthī (i.e., Devasenā); you should worship Manasā Devī, the giver of all siddhis, on the Saṅkrānti day (when the Sun enters another sign) in every year; you should worship Rādhā, the Central Figure of Rāsa, more than the Prāṇa of Kṛṣṇa on every Full Moon night in the month of Kārtika and you should observe fasting on the eighth day in the bright fortnight and worship the Viṣṇu Māyā Bhagavatī Devī, the Destructrix of all difficulties and dangers.

Note: The Rāsa is the playing out of the Vedāntic saying of Brahma as ‘Raso vai Sah;’ He is of the nature of Rasa, the most sweet and lovely Divine Principle which unites the Rasika and the Rasikā).

पतित्रानासु शुद्धासु यनेषु प्रतिमासु च ।

या नाती पूजयेद्वल्पा धनसंतानहेतसे १८८ ८१

इह लोके सुखं घुकत्ता थायतेने औशिफोः पदम् ।

एवं देल्या विष्वतीषु पूजयेतसाधकोशनिषम् ॥ ८९ ॥ ९ ॥

The chaste woman having husband and sons who worships the World Mother Mūla Prakṛti, whether in Yantra, or in Mantra or in image, enjoys all pleasures in this world; and, in the end, goes to the Devīloka or Manj Dvīpa. O Child! The worshippers Sādhaka (one who is in one's way to success) must worship all the manifestations of the Devi, day and night.

सर्वकाल सर्वक्या संल्या परमेश्वी ।

नात: परतरं किम्बिलुक्तकृत्यत्वदायकम् ॥ 90 ॥

इत्युक्चला तां धर्मोजी जागाम निजमंदितम् ।

गृहीला स्वामिने सा च साविका च निजाल्यम् ॥ 91 ॥

At all times one must worship the omnipresent Durgā, the Highest Āsari. There is no other way to attain blessedness than this." Thus saying, Dharmarāja went to His own abode. Sāvirīt. too, with her husband Satyavān went to her home.

साविकी सत्यवांशीव प्रयची च यथागतम् ।

अन्यांश्र कथयामास स्वतृत्तां हि नारद ॥ 92 ॥

साविकीजनकः पुत्रान्संप्रातः प्रक्रमेण च ।

श्रशुरश्रशुर्गी राज्यं सा च पुत्रान्वरेण च ॥ 93 ॥

Both Savitri and Satyavān, when they reached home, narrated all their stories to their friends and acquaintances. In time, by the blessing of Yama, Savitri's father got sons and father-in-law recovered his eyesight and kingdom and Savitri Herself got sons.

लक्षवर्षे सुखं भुक्ला पुणवश्रेत्रे च भारते ।

जगाम स्वामिना सार्य देवीलोके पतितता ॥ 94 ॥

सवितुशाधिरेदेयी या मंत्राधिशतृदेवता ।

For one lakh years, Śāvitrī, enjoyed pleasures in this holy land of Bhārata, and ultimately went with her husband to the Deviloka Śāvitrī is the Presiding Deity of the Sūryamandalam, the solar orb. The Sun is the central Para Brahma. The Gāyatrī Mantra, the Presiding Devi, proves the existence of the highest Brahma in the centre of the Sun.

साविक्री ह्रापि वेदानां साविक्री तेन कौतिला ॥ 95 ॥

इन्वेब कावितं वत्स साविक्याख्यानुभनम् ।

जीवकर्मविषयकं च किं पुनः श्रोतृमिष्ठसि ॥ 96 ॥

श्री श्रीमदैवीभगावते नवमरकंये नारदवारावणसांवरे

साविष्यगछ्ञानोउद्धिश्रीअवयाः ।। 38 ॥

Therefore She is called Śāvitrī. Or Her name is Śāvitrī because all the Vedas have come out of Her. Thus I have narrated the excellent anecdote of Śāvitrī, and the fruitions of the Karmas of the several Jīvas. Now what more do you want to hear? Say.

Here ends the Thirty-eighth Chapter in the Ninth Book on the glories of the Devi and on the nature of Bhakti in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XXXIX

CHAPTER XXXIX

On Mahā Lakṣmi

नारद उवाच

श्रीमूलप्रकृतेद्वया गायव्यास्तु निराकृतेः ।

साविरीयमसंवादे श्रुतं चै निर्मलं वशः ॥ १ ॥

तद्गुणोक्लीनिं सत्यं मंगलानां च मंगलम् ।

अधाना श्रोतुमिच्छामि लक्ष्यपाण्डलानामीध्न ॥ 2 ॥

Nārada said: O Lord! I have heard in the discourse on Sāvitrī and Yama about the Formless Devi Mūla Prakṛti and the glories of Sāvitrī, all true and leading to the endless good. Now I want to hear the story of the Devi Lakṣmī. O Thou, the Chief of the knowers of the Vedas! What is the nature of Lakṣmī?

केनादौ पूजिता सार्थ पिंक भृता केन वा पुरा ।

तदुगणोत्किनीत मढ़ो वद्द विद्वीत वर ॥ ३ ॥

By whom was She first worshipped? and by what Mantra? Kindly describe Her glories to me.

शीनारायण उवाच

मुटोरांत पुत्र बढ़ान्छान्य परमासनः ।

देवी वामासंभृता बघ्य रासमंडेल ॥ 4 ॥

उर्जीव सुदरी ग्रवामा न्यप्रोधारमिडता ।

यथा द्वारणवर्गीय शश्वसृत्यिरयोग्ना ॥ 5 ॥

ग्रवेतचफवजर्णाभा सुखदूगया मनोहरा ।

शरत्यावर्णिकोटीदुपभाप्रस्तदानना ॥ 6 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: Of old, in the beginning of the Prākṛtika Creation, from the left side of Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Spirit, appeared in the Rāsamandalam (the Figure Dance) a Devī. She looked exceedingly handsome, of a dark blue colour, of spacious hips, of thin waist, and with high breast, looking twelve years old, of steady youth, of a colour of white Campaka flower and very lovely. The beauty of Her face throws under shade millions and millions of autumnal full moons.

साम्यम्याप्रदायानां शोभामोचनलोचना ।

सा देरी द्विविधा भूता सह सर्वेश्रैच्छया ॥ 7 ॥

स्वीयक्षेण बर्णीन तेजसा व्यसा त्रिवा ।

यशसा वाससा कृत्वा धृष्णेने गुणेन च ॥ 8 ॥

Before Her wide expanded eyes, the midday lotus of the autumnal season becomes highly ashamed. By the Will of God, this Devi suddenly divided Herself into two parts. The two looked equal in every respect; whether in beauty, qualities, age, loveliness, colour, body, spirit, dress ornaments, smile, glance, love, or humanity, they were perfectly equal.

सितेन वीक्षणेपेव प्रेरणा वासूनयेन च ।

तद्वारांसाम्हाल्क्यसीद्विणांसाच्च राधिका ॥ 9 ॥

राधास्टी द्वी वरयामास दिषुर्णं च परात्यम् ।

महालक्ष्मीश तत्थान्चकर्मे कमनीयकम् ॥ 10 ॥

Now she who appeared from the right side is named Rádhā and she who came from the left side is named Mahā Lakṣmī. Rádhā wanted first the two armed Śri Kṛṣṇa, Who was Higher than the highest; then Mahā Lakṣmī wanted Him.

कृष्णसद्गीरावीय द्विःतणो बयुर ह ।

दक्षिणांसह्य दिषुपुंजो बगामसहच्छतुर्पुंजः ॥ 1 1 1 ॥

चतुषुंगाय दिषुपुंजो महाकृष्णी ददी पुरा ।

लक्ष्यते शुभ्यते विखुं सिन्याद्धुखा यवाड़ीनगम् ॥ 1 2 ॥

देवीभूता च महाती महातक्ष्मीघा सा स्मृता ।

Rādhā came out of the right side and wanted first Krṣna; so Krṣna, too, divided himself at once into two parts. From His right side came out the two-armed and from his left side came out the four-named The two-armed person first made over to Mahā Lakṣmī the four-armed One; then the two-armed person Himself took Rādhā. Lakṣmī looks on the whole universe with a cooling eye; hence She is named Lakṣmī and as She is great, She is called Mahā Lakṣmī.

राधाकांतक्ष दिषुजी लक्ष्मीकांतक्षानुर्षि: ॥ 13 ॥

शूद्रसचल्यस्तपा च गोरौर्गोंभिभातृता ।

चतुर्वंजक शैकुणं प्रवयी पदाया सह ॥ 14 ॥

And for that reason the Lord of Rādhā is two-armed and the Lord of Lakṣmī is four-armed. Rādhā is pure Aprākrtic Śuddha Sattva (of the nature of pure Sattva Guṇa, the illuminating

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

attribute) and surrounded by the Gopas and Gopis. The four-armed Puruṣa, on the other hand, took Lakṣmī (Padmā) to Vaikuntha.

सर्वर्गेन समी ती ही कृष्णनारायणी वरी ।

महाल्यक्षीय योगेन नानाक्या बभूव सा ॥ 15 ॥

बैकुण्डे च महाल्यक्षी: परिपूर्णतमा राम ।

गृह्मसचल्वसना च सर्वसीभायसंयुना ॥ 16 ॥

The two-armed person in Krṣṇa; and the four-armed is Nārāyaṇa. They are equal in all respects. Mahā Lakṣmī became many by Her Yogic powers. (i.e., She remained in full in Vaikuntha and assumed many forms in parts). Mahā Lakṣmī of Vaikuntha is full, of pure Sattva Guṇa, and endowed with all sorts of wealth and prosperity.

प्रेणा सा च प्रधाना च सर्वसृ तपणीषु च ।

स्वपौष्य स्वार्लक्सीय शक्संपरवल्किपणि ॥ 17 ॥

पाताले नाराल्क्यीय राजलक्ष्मीय राजसु ।

गृहलक्ष्मीगृह्चेय च गृहिंगं च कलांगतः ॥ 18 ॥

संपल्सक्या गृहिंगां सर्वमंगलमंगला ।

गवां प्रसृति: सुराभिर्दिक्षणा चत्रकामिनी ॥ 19 ॥

She is the crest of woman-kind as far as loving one's husbands is concerned. She is the Svarga Lakṣmī in the Heavens; the Nāga Lakṣmī of the serpents, the Nāgas, in the nether regions; the Rāja Lakṣmī of the kings and the Household Lakṣmī of the householders. She resides in the houses of house-holders as prosperity and the most auspicious of all good things. She is the progenetrix, She is the Surabhi of cows and She is the Dakṣinā (the sacrificial fee) in sacrifices.

श्रीरोसिंधुकन्या सा श्रील्पा पश्चिनीषु च ।

गोभावस्क्या चन्द्रे च सूर्यमंडलमंडिता ॥ 20 ॥

She is the daughter of the milk ocean and she is Padmini, the beauty of the spheres of the Moon and the Sun.

विषयूणोषु रन्तेषु फलेषु च जलेषु च ।

नृपेषु नृपपत्नीषु दिव्यक्षीषु गृहेषु च ॥ 21 ॥

सर्वसत्ययु वलेषु स्थानेषु संकृतेषु च ।

प्रतिमासु च देवानां मंगलेषु घटेषु च ॥ 22 ॥

माणिक्येषु च मुक्तासु माल्येषु च मनोहरा ।

मणीत्रेषु च हरिषु क्षीरुषु चन्दनेषु च ॥ 23 ॥

चक्षणाखासु रथासु नवमेधेषु वस्तुवु ।

वैकुण्डे पूजिता साउसदी देवी नारायणेन च ॥ 24 ॥

She is the lustre and beauty of the ornaments, gems, fruits, water, kings, queens, heavenly women, of all the houses, grains, clothings, cleansed places, images, auspicious jars, pearls, jewels, crest of jewels, garlands, diamonds, milk, sandal, beautiful twigs, fresh rain cloud, or of all other colours. She was first worshipped in Vaikuntça by Nārāyaṇa.

हितीये बहाणा भन्ध्या तृतीये शंकरेण च ।

विष्णुना पूजिता सा च क्षीरोदे भारते मुने ॥ 25 ॥

स्वायंभुवेन मनुना मानवेत्रश सर्वतः ।

ऋषी-नैक्षे सुनी-नैक्षे सिद्धश गृहिभिर्भयै ॥ 26 ॥

गन्धर्वैंश्व नागाठीः पातालेघु च पूर्तित ।

Next She was worshipped by Brahmā and then by Śaṅkara with devotion. She was worshipped by Viṣṇu in the Kṣirāda Samudra. Then she was worshipped by Svāyambhava Manu, then by Indras amongst men, then by Munis, Rṣis, good householders, by the Gandharvas, in the Gandharvaloka; by the Nāgas in the Nāgaloka.

गूकलाध्यां भगदपे कृता पूजा च बढ़णा ॥ 27 ॥

भक्ल्या च पक्षर्यन्ति तिशु लोकेनु नाद् ।

चैत्रे पौधे च भारे च पुण्ये मंगलवासरे ॥ 28 ॥

She was worshipped with devotion by Brahmā for one fortnight commencing from the bright eighth day in the month of Bhādra and ending on the eighth day of the dark fortnight in the three-worlds. She was worshipped by Viṣṇu, with devotion in the three worlds on the meritorious Tuesday in the months of Pauṣa, Caitra, and Bhādra, Manu, also, worshipped Her on the Pauṣa Saṅkrānti (the last day of the month of Pauṣa when the Sun enters another sign) and on the auspicious Tuesday in the month of Māgha.

विष्णुना पुविता सा च विशु लोकेषु पविततः ।

वर्षान्ते पौष्यसंक्रायां माध्यामावाहु मांगले ॥ 29 ॥

मनुस्ता पूजयामास सा भूता सुवनवये ।

पूजिता सा महेन्द्रेश मांगलैयेव मांगला ॥ 30 ॥

Book IX Chapter XL

Thus the worship of Mahā Lakṣmī is made prevalent in the three worlds. She was worshipped by Indra, the Lord of the Devas and by Maṅgala (Mars) on Tuesday.

कैदारीपेल नीलेन सुबलेन नलेल च ।

घुवेणोत्तनपादेन श्रांकण बलिना तथा ॥ 31 ॥

क्रणयेन च द्रक्षेण कर्दौन विवस्वता ।

ग्रियव्रतेन चढ्रेण कुवेर्णेण वायुना ॥ 32 ॥

घानेन वह्रिना चैव कर्णपैर्व पूजिता ।

एवं सर्वत्र सर्वेषु पूजिता वन्दिता सदा ॥

सर्वेश्वराधिरिद्वी सा सर्वसंपरक्स्तिपिणी ॥ 33 ॥

इति शीमद्दैवीभागवते महापुराणे नवमककन्

एकोनचत्वारिशो3थावा: 11 39 11

She was then worshipped by Kedāra, Nīla, Subala, Dhruva, Uttānapāda, Śakra, Bali, Kaśyapa, Dakṣa, Kardama, Sūrya, Priyavrata, Candra, Vāyu, Kubera, Varuṇa, Yama, Hutāśana and others. Thus Her worship extended by and by to all the places. She is the Presiding Deity of all wealth; so She is the wealth of all.

Here ends the Thirty-ninth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the story of Mahā Laksmī in the Mahā Purāṇam Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

[1] 2014年1月1日

Book IX Chapter XL

CHAPTER XL

On the Birth of Lakṣmi

नारद जवाच

नारायणायिता सा च वारा वैकुण्डवासिनी ।

वैकुण्डपिछाणुदोर्गे महाक्षभी सनातनी ॥ १ ॥

कथं बभूव सा देवी पृथिव्यां सिन्युकन्यका ।

पुरा केन स्तुनाउर्डी सा तन्मे व्याख्यातुमहाँसि ॥ २ ॥

Nārada said: O Lord! How did the eternal Devi Mahā Lakṣmī, the dweller in Vaikuntha, the beloved of Nārāyaṇa, the Presiding Deity of Vaikuntha, come down to the earth and how She, became the daughter of the ocean? By whom was She first praised? Kindly describe all these in details to me and oblige.

शीनारायण उवाच

पुरा दूर्वाससः शपाद्धण्ड्छीश्छ पुरंदरः ।

बधूव देहसंघघ मर्यलोके च नारद ॥ 3 ॥

लक्षीः स्वर्गादिकं तयक्त्वा कहा परमदूःदिता ।

गत्वा लीनर च वैकुण्ठे महाकृष्णश्रि नारद ॥ 4 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! In ancient days when on Durvāsās curse, Indra was dispossessed of his kingdom, all the Devas came down to earth. Lakṣmī, too, getting angry, quittied the Heavens, out of pain and sorrow and went to Vaikuntha and took the shelter of Nārāyaṇa.

तदा शोकाधुः: सर्वे दु: विज्ञा बहुणः सभाम्।

ब्रह्माणं च पुरस्कृत्य ययूर्वैकुण्ठमेव च ॥ 5 ॥

वैकुणंडे शरणापत्रा देवा नारायणे परे ।

अंतीव दैन्यपृताक्ष शुण्ककण्ठोशतालुकाः ॥ 6 ॥

The Devas, then, went to Brahmā with their hearts full of sorrow and, taking Him from there, they all went to Nārāyaṇa in Vaikuntha. Going there they all took refuge of the Lord of Vaikuntha. They were very much distressed and their throats, palates and lips were quite dry.

तदा लक्ष्मीध्र करल्या पुराणपुरुकाप्राया ।

बधूव सिन्युक्ना सा सर्वेसंपल्बक्रिपिणी ॥ ७ ॥

तथा माधिला क्षीरोदं देवा देल्याणीः सह ।

संग्रापताङ्ग महाक्षसी विम्युस्तां च द्वरहं ह ॥ ८ ॥ ॥

At that time Lakṣmī, the wealth and prosperity of all, came down on earth by the command of Nārāyaṇa and became born in part as the daughter of the ocean. The Devas, then, with the Daityas churned the Kṣīroda Ocean and, out of that, Mahā Lakṣmī appeared.

सुराधियो वरं दत्ता वनमालां च चिणयो ।

ददौ प्रसजद्वना तृहा क्षीरेणादायिने ॥ 9 ॥

देवाध्यायसुग्रस्तं राज्यं प्रापुष्य नातर ।

तां संपूच च संभूय सर्वेच च नित्यदः ॥ 10 ॥

Viṣnu looked on Her. Her joy knew no bounds.

She smiling, granted booms to the Devas and then offered a garland of flowers on the neck of

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

Nārāyaṇa (as a symbol of marriage celebrated). O Nārada! the Devas, on the other hand, got back their kingdoms from the Asuras. They then worshipped and chanted hymns to Mahā Lakṣmī and since then they became free from further dangers and troubles.

नारद उवाच

कयं शगाय दुवासा मुनिशेषः कदाचन ।

केन दोषय च बढ़ान् बढ़ावास्तचित्युना ॥ १ १ ॥

ममंयुः केन रूपेण जलधिं ते सुराव्यः ।

केन स्तोत्रेण वा देवी शक्र साक्षादभूव सा ॥ १२ ॥

को वा तायोक्ष संगघाटो बभूव तद्ध प्रभो ।

Nārada said: O Bhagavan! Durvāsā was the best of the Munis; he was attached to Brahma and had spiritual knowledge. Why did he curse Indra? What offence had he committed? How did the Devas and Daityas churn the ocean? How, and by what hymns Lakṣmī became pleased and appeared before Indra? What passed on between them. Say all this, O Lord.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

मधुपानप्रमतश्छे नैलोक्यापितिः पुग ॥ 13 ॥

क्रीडां चकार रहीस रंभया सह कामुकः ।

कृत्वा क्रीडां तवा सार्थं कामुक्या हनमानसः ॥ 14 ॥

तस्थौ तत महारण्ये क्रामोभवित्मानसः ।

कैलसशिखे चांते वैकुण्ठवृषिसत्मम् ॥ 15 ॥

Nārāyana said: In ancient days, Indra the Lord of the three worlds, intoxicated with wine and becoming lustful and shameless, began to enjoy Rambhā in a lonely grove. After having enjoyed her, he became attracted to her; his mind being wholly drawn to her, he remained there in that forest, his mind becoming very passionate.

दुर्वाससं ददर्शन्हे ज्वलंते बढ्धतेजसा ।

ग्रीममध्याभ्रामतर्णदसहसप्रभमीक्ष्मर् ॥ १ १ ६ ॥

प्रतपतकाचनाकारं जटाभारमहोजजल्ले ।

गुरुल्वजोपवीर्त च चोरत्पडी कमणडलुम् ॥ १ ७ ॥

महोज्जलं च लिलक विष्वां चेनुसन्धिमम् ।

Indra then saw the Muni Durvāsā on his way from Vaikuntha to Kailśa burning with the fire of

Brahma. From the body of the Rsi, emitted, as it were, the rays of the thousand mid-day Suns. On his head was the golden matted hair. On his breast there was the hoary holy thread; he wore torn clothes; in his hands there was the Danḍa and Kamandalu; on his forehead there was the bright Tilaka in the form of the Crescent Moon.

(Tilaka—a sectarian mark on the forehead made with coloured earth or sandalpaste.)

सम्रवित् शिष्यलक्ष्रैर्वेद्विद्धुपारीः ॥ 18 ॥

दृष्टा ननाम शिरासा संप्रमत: पुरंदर: ।

शिष्यवर्ग तदा भकत्या तुहाव च पूदार्वितम् ॥ 19 ॥

One hundred thousand disciples, thoroughly-versed in the Vedas and the Vedāngas, were attending him. The intoxicated Purandara, seeing him, bowed down to him and he began to chant with devotion hymns to his disciples also. They were very glad. The Rsi with his disciples then blessed Indra and gave him one Pārājāta flower.

मुनिना च सशिष्येण दत्तास्मरै सुभाशिषः ।

विष्युन्तं पारितानुपर्थे स सुमनेहारू ॥ 20 ॥

तज्जरातोगमृत्युने शोकंठ मोक्षात्कारम् ।

शक्र: पुर्ण गृहीत्वा च प्रभत्तो राज्यसंवेद्य ॥ 21 ॥

पुर्थं स न्यतस्यामास तदेव करिमस्तके ।

When the Muni was returning from the region of Vaikuntīha, Viṣṇu, gave him that beautiful Parijāta flower. Old age, death, disease, sorrows, etc., all are removed by the influence of the flower; and the final liberation is also attained. The Devendra was intoxicated with his wealth; so taking the flower given by the Rṣi, he threw it on the head of the elephant Airāvata. No sooner the elephant touched the flower, than he became suddenly like Viṣṇu, as it were, in beauty, form, qualities, fire and age.

हस्ती तत्यर्पगीदायेच रूपेच गुणेन च ॥ 22 ॥

तेजसा व्यसासेकस्मादिष्यानुल्यो बभूव ह ।

त्यक्ता शक्रि गजेन्द्रश जगाम घोकाननम् ॥ 23 ॥

न शगकाम मेहेन्द्रस्त रक्षतुं तेजसा मुने ।

The elephant, then, forsook Indra and entered

Book IX Chapter XL

into a dense forest. The Lord of the Devas could, in no way, get him under his control.

तनुष्यं त्यक्तवंतं च द्वृषा शक्र मुनीशः ॥ 24 ॥

तमुवाच महाकरः शगणा च भगवित्नः ।

On the other hand, the Muni Durvāsā seeing that Mahendra had thus dishonoured the flower, became inflamed with rage and cursed him saying

मुनिवाचा

अरे श्रिया प्रमत्तस्वं कर्थे मायमवन्यसे ॥ २५ ॥

मद्तपुथ्यं दर्ते च मर्यंग कार्मिसतके ।

विष्णोर्निवित्ते देव नैवेहां वा फलं जलम् ॥ २६ ॥

प्रतिभात्रोग घोक्तायं त्यागने बहुहा भवेत् ।

प्रश्रधीर्ध्वनुद्धि पुरुष्य भवेतु सः ॥ 27 ॥

यत्स्वजिद्विण्येनैवं घायनेघार्षिवर्तं शुभम् ।

प्रतिवात्रोग यो पुंक्ते भक्तो कविष्यविद्येनि ॥ 28 ॥

पुंसां शतं समुद्ध्य जीवनुक्तः स्वयं भवेत् ।

“O Indra! You are so mad with wealth that you have dishonoured me. The flower that I gave you so lovingly, you have thrown that, out of vanity, on the elephant’s head! No sooner one gets the food, water, fruits that had been offered to Viṣṇu, one should eat that at once otherwise one incurs the sin of Brahmahattyā. If anybody forsakes the things offered to Viṣṇu, that he has got perchance, he becomes destitute of wealth, prosperity, in telligence, and his kingdom. And if he eats the food already offered to Viṣṇu with devotion, he then elevates his hundred families passed before him and he himself becomes liberated while living.

नैवेहं भोजनं कृत्वा नित्यं यः प्रणमेद्वरिंच् ॥ 29 ॥

पूजवेस्तीति वा भवत्वा स विणुगपूजीये भवेत्।

तत्यर्शवायुना सघतसीधीधघ शिव्युध्यति ॥ 30 ॥

If any-body daily cats Viṣnu’s Naivedyam (food offered to Viṣnu) and bows down before Him or worships Hari with devotion and chants hymns to Him, he becomes like Viṣnu in energy and wealth. By mere touch with the air round about his body, the places of pilgrimage become all purified.

तत्पादराजसा मूढ सढः पूता वसुभ्यग ।

पृंशत्यन्त्रमवीरांं श्रूक्षाड्धाद्रामेव च ॥ 31 ॥

यद्धरेनिवेईं च वृषा मांसस्य भक्षणम् ।

शिवलिंगप्रदानं च यहर्तं श्रूर्याजिना ॥ 32 ॥

चिकित्मकद्धिज्ञांं च देवलात्रं तदैव च ।

कन्यादिक्रियाणानं यदन्त्योजिनीजिनाम् ॥ 33 ॥

उच्छ्छानं पर्युक्ति सर्वभक्षावशैचितम् ।

आन्यायागामनं चैव द्विजानामत्रमेव च ॥ 34 ॥

अदीक्षितद्विजानं च यदन्तं शरवादीहानम् ।

आन्यायागामनं चैव द्विजानामन्तेव च ॥ 35 ॥

मित्रदुर्गही कृतन्तानामन्त विश्वासायतातिनम् ।

मिथ्यासाक्षयदानं च ब्रहणान्तं तथैव च ॥ 36 ॥

एते सर्वे सिंग्य्यान्ति विज्ञान्विवेशधक्रणतम् ।

O You Stupid! The earth becomes purified by the contact of the dust of the feet of such a one devoted to Viṣṇu. If anybody eats the food unoffered to Hari and flesh that is not offered to any Deity; if he eats the food of any unchaste woman, any woman without husband and sons, the food offered at any Śūdra's Śrāddha (funeral) ceremony, the food offered by a Brāhmana, who is a priest to the Śūdras in honour of a Śiva Lingam, the food of a Brāhmana priest who subsists on the presents of a temple, the food of one who sells his daughter, the food of one who subsists on dealings with womb concerns, the leavings of others, the stale food left after all others had eaten, the food of the husband of an unmarried girl (twelve years old in whom menstruation has commenced), the driver of oxen, the food of one uninitiated in one's Iṣṭamantram, of one who burns a corpse, of a Brāhmin who goes to one not fit for going, the food of a rebel against friends, of one who is faithless, treacherous who gives false evidence, the food of a Brāhmin who accepts offerings in a sacred place of pilgrimage, all his sins (incurred in the ways above-mentioned) will be removed if he eats the prasādam of Viṣṇu, i.e., the food offered to Viṣṇu.

शयवशेहीद्विणुसौवी वैशनां कोटिपूढ़रेत् ॥ 37 ॥

होरघक्को मनुज: स्वं च रक्षितुमक्षम: ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

अज्ञानाद्वि गृह्वाति विष्णोपैविद्धोचे च ।। ३ ३ ॥

सज्जन्मार्जितात्यापान्यूचरो नात्र संग्रयः ।

Even if a Cāndāla be attached to the service of Viṣṇu, he sanctifies his millions of persons born in his family before him. And the man who is devoid of the devotion to Hari is not able even to save himself. If anybody takes unknowingly the remains of an offering (such as flowers) made to Viṣṇu, he will certainly be freed from all the sins incurred in his seven births.

जात्वा भक्त्वा च गृह्ठति विलोगेशिद्धोच्चे च ॥ 39 ॥

कोटिजनामतितायपानमुच्यते निश्छतं हरे ।

यस्मातसंख्यापितं पुर्ण्य गर्जेण कारिमतकते ॥ 40 ॥

तस्मायुष्यान्यतिच्यय यातु लक्ष्मीहि: पदम् ।

And if he does this knowingly and with intense devotion, he will certainly be freed of all sorts of sins incurred in his Koti births. So, O Indra! I am a devotee of Śri Hari. And when you have cast away the Pārijāta flower offered by me on the elephant's head, then I say unto you that the Mahā Lakṣmī will leave you and She will go back to Nārāyaṇa.

नारायणस्य भनोड़रं न विषेमि सुराधिधेः ॥ 41 ॥

कालान्ययोजरात्रक कान्यानाणवाथि च ।

किं कस्पिति ते ततः कार्यप्रध प्रप्रापितः ॥ 42 ॥

ब्रृहस्पितृकृक्षि विज्ञांकस्य च मे हरे ।

इंद पूर्ण यस्य भूर्टित तस्यैव पूर्जनं परम् ॥ 43 ॥

I am highly devoted to Nārāyaṇa; so I do not fear anybody, I fear neither the Creator, nor Kāla, the Destroyer, nor old age, nor death; what to speak of other petty persons! I do not fear your father Prajāpati Kaśyapa nor do I fear your family priest Brhaṣpati. Now he, on whose head there lies the flower Pārjiāta offered by me, verily he should be worshipped by all means.

इति श्रुत्वा महैन्द्रध धृत्वा स चरणं मुने ।

उच्चे रोदे शोकात्तसामुवाच भयाकुलः ॥ 44 ॥

Hearing these word of Durvāsā, Indra became bewildered with fear, and being greatly distressed and holding the feet of Muni, < >d out loudly.

महेन्द्र उवाच

दन्तः समुचितः त्राणे महा मायापड प्रभो ।

हन्तां न चाचे संपत्ति किंचिज्ञानं च देहि मे ॥ 4 5 ॥

ऐष्यर्य विद्यां बीजं ज्ञानप्रकलकारण ।

मुकित्मागंकुतारघु घकतेश व्यवधायकम् ॥ 46 ॥

He said: The curse is now well inflicted on me; and it has caused my delusion vanish. Now I do not want back my Rāja Lakṣmī from you; instruct me on knowledge. This wealth is the source of all coils; it is the cause of the veil to all knowledge, it hides the final liberation and it is a great obstacle on the way to get the highest devotion."

पुनिवहाच

जन्ममृत्युजराशोकोगवीअंगूरं परम् ।

संपत्तितिमितिध्छ पुक्तिमानों न प्रपक्षिति ॥ 47 ॥

संपमन्तो विमुक्छ सुरामन्तः स एव च ।

बांधवेर्वेक्षितः सो3पि बंधुत्वेनेव है हे ॥ 48 ॥

The Muni said: This birth, death, old age, disease, and afflictions, all come from wealth and the manipulation of great power. Being blind by the darkness of wealth, he does not see the road to Mukti.

संपत्तिमदमतष्ठ विषयांध्रु विद्धुतः ।

महाकामी राजसिकः सच्चमार्गं परथपति ॥ 49 ॥ 11

द्विविधो विषयांध्रु राजसस्तामसः स्मृतः ।

अशाल्ब्रस्तामसश शाल्ब्तो राजस: स्मृतः ॥ 50 ॥

The stupid man that is intoxicated with wealth is like the one that is intoxicated with wine. Surrounded by many friends, he is surrounded by the unbreakable bondage. The man that is intoxicated with wealth, blind with property and overwhelmed with these things has no thought for the real knowledge. He who is Rājasik, is very much addicted to passions and desires; he never sees the path to Sattvaguṇa. The man that is blind with sense-objects is of two kinds, firstly, Rājasik and secondly Tāmasik. He who has no knowledge of the Śāstras Tamasik and he who has the knowledge of the Śāstras is Rājasik.

Book IX Chapter XL

शास्त्र च द्विषिधं मार्ग दर्शयेत्सुपंगव ।

प्रवृत्तिकीजेपंक च निवृत्तेः कारणं परम् ॥ 51 ॥

चरिति जीविनशादी प्रवृत्तेःखवमंपि ।

स्वच्छन्दं च प्रसनं च निविंशोथे च संततम् ॥ 52 ॥

O Child of the Devas! Two paths are mentioned in the Śāstras; one is Pravṛtti, going towards the sense objects and the other is Nivṛtti, going away from them. The Jivas first follow the path of Pravṛtti, the path that is painful, gladly and of their own accord like a mad man.

आयाति मधुनो लोभालल्लेशेन सुख्यमिति: ।

परिणामेनाश्वीजे जन्मयतुजराकरे ॥ ५३ ॥

अनेकजनभयंन्ते कृत्वा च भ्रमणे मुता ।

As bees, blind with the desires of getting honey, go to the lotus bud and get themselves entangled there, so the Jivas, the embodied souls, desirous first of getting enjoyments come to this very painful circle of births and deaths, this wordly life, which in the end is realised as vapid and the only cause of old age, death, and sorrow and get themselves enchained there.

स्वकर्मविदितायां च नानायोन्यां क्रमेण च ॥ 54 ॥

ततश्रीगानुग्राहच सतर्गं लभते च सः ।

सहसैषु शतेच्येको भवाच्ये:पारकाणम् ॥ 55 ॥

For many births he travels gladly in various wombs, ordained by his own Karmas, till at last by the favour of gods, he comes in contact with the saints. Thus one out of a thousand or out of a hundred finds means to cross this terrible ocean of world.

साधुस्तचप्रदीयेन मुक्तिमागों प्रदर्शयते ।

तदा करोति यत्नं च जीवो कंधनखंडेन ॥ 5६ ॥

अनेकजनयोगेन तसपासज्ञानेन च ।

तदा लभेम्युक्तिमागं निखित्यं सुखदं परम् ॥ 57 ॥

When the saintly persons kindle the lamp of knowledge and shew the way to Mukti, then the Jiva makes an attempt to sever this bondage to the world. After many births, many austerities and many fastings, he then finds safely the way to Mukti, leading to the highest happiness. O Indra! What you asked me, I thus heard from my Guru.

इदं श्रुत गुरोर्वेकत्रादित्यच्छिस पुरन्दर ।

मुनेस्तद्वचं शुत्वा वीततगगे बधूव सः ॥ ५८ ॥

वैराग्यं वर्धयामास तस्य ब्रह्माद्विने दिते ।

मुनेः स्थानादूर्भूं गतवा स ददर्गामरावतीम् ॥ ५९ ॥

O Nārada! Hearing the words of the Muni Durvāsā Indra became dispassionate towards the Samsāra. Day by day his feeling of dispassion increased. One day, when he returned to his own home from the hermitage of the Muni, he saw the Heavens overspread by the Daityas and it had become terrible.

दैत्यैसुरासंधैष सामाकीर्ण भयाकुलाम् ।

विषयोपल्पां पुत्रवन्मुहीनां च कुत्रप्रित् ॥ 60 ॥

पितृगत्कलगविविहीनामितिचलम् ।

गजुघमतां च तां द्वृष्टा जगाम वाक्यति प्रति ॥ 61 ॥

गज्ञो मन्दाकिनीर्ति दर्दगं गृह्मीप्रवम् ।

ध्यायमानं परं बहु गंगताये स्थितं परम् ॥ 62 ॥

सूर्याशिपसंगुं पूर्वमुक्तं च विश्वतोगुक्तम् ।

At some places outrage and oppression knew no bounds; some places were devoid of friends; at some places, some persons had lost their fathers, mothers, wives, relations; so no rest and repose could be found. Thus, seeing the Heavens in the hands of the enemies, Indra went out in quest of Brhaspati, the family preceptor of the Devas. Seeking to and fro Indra ultimately went to the banks of the Mandākinī and saw that the Guru Deva had bathed in the waters of the Mandākinī and sitting with his face turned towards the East towards the Sun, was meditating on Para Brahma, Who has His faces turned everywhere.

साधुनैयं पुलिकतं परमानन्दर्वसुतम् ॥ 63 ॥

वरिष्ठ च गरिष्ठ च धर्मिष्ठ श्रेक्ष्येक्षितम् ।

प्रेशे च बन्युवार्णायातिश्रेशे च ज्ञानिनम् ॥ 64 ॥

Tears were flowing from his eyes and the hairs of the body stood erect with delight. He was elderly in knowledge; the spiritual Teacher of all, religious, served by all great men; he was held as most dear to all the friends. Those who are Jñānišn regard him as their Gurus.

śrimaddevibhāgavatam

न्येई च भातुवर्गाणामिच्छे सुर्वैशिणाम् ।

द्वृा गुरु जानतं च तत तस्थौ सुरुश: ॥ 65 ॥

प्रहर्तो गुरु द्वृा चोचितं प्रणाना सः ।

प्रणाय चरणांभोजे रोदोद्वैयैमुधुर्दुः ॥ 66 ॥

He was the eldest of all his brothers; he was considered as very unpopular to the enemies of the Devas. Seeing the family priest Brhaṣpati merged in that state of meditation, Indra waited there. When after one Prahara (three hours), the Guru Deva got up. Indra bowed down to his feet and began to weep and cry out repeatedly.

युत्तांत कथयामास बह्रागपादिकं तथा ।

पुनर्वीरपलिध्ध च ज्ञानप्रियां सुतुलंभाग् ॥ 6७ ॥

वैरप्रस्तां च स्वपूर्ण क्रमेपीव सुरेवरः ।

Then he informed his Guru about his curse from a Brāhmīn, his acquiring the true knowledge as so very rare, and the wretched state of Amarāvatī, wrought by the enemies.

शिष्यस्य ववनं शुत्वा सुबुद्धवैतां वरः ॥ 68 ॥

ब्रृह्मपतिचावेदे कोपसंरक्तलोचन: ।

O Best of Brāhmaṇas! Hearing thus the words of the disciple, the intelligent speaker Brhaspati spoke with his eyes reddened out of anger.

गुरुकावा

श्रुतं सर्वे सुरश्रछ्मा मारोदीर्बनं श्रणु ॥ 69 ॥

न कातारो है नीतिजो विषती च कदाचन ।

संपत्तिबा विपत्तिं नक्ष्या अमस्पिणी ॥ 70 ॥

पूर्वस्य कर्मविता च स्वयं कर्ता तयोरि ।

सर्वेषां च भवत्येव शगवज्जन्मिन जन्मिन ॥ 71 ॥

'O Lord of the Devas! I have everything that you said; do not cry; have patience; hear attentively what I say. The wise politicians of good behaviour, with moral precepts, never lose their heads and get themselves distressed in times of danger. Nothing is everlasting; whether property or adversity; all are transient; they only give troubles. All are under one's own Karma. What had been done in previous births, so one will have to reap the fruits afterwards. (Therefore property or adversity, all are due to

one's own Karma.) This happens to all persons eternally, births after births.

घकनेकिमेणीय नत का परिवेदना ।

उक्त हि स्वकृतं कर्म भुज्जतेश्वलभारते ॥ 72 ॥

Pain and happiness are like the ring of a rolling wheel. So what pain is there? It is already stated that one's own Karma must be enjoyed in this Holy Bhārata.

शुभाणुभं च राकिंचित्तवकर्मफलभुबमुगान ।

नापुक्तं क्षीयते कर्म कल्याकोटगतरिंप ॥ 73 ॥

The man enjoys the effects of his own Karmas, auspicious or inauspicious. Never the Karma gets exhausted in one hundred Koti Kalpas, without their effects being enjoyed.

अवर्यमेव भोक्त्वयं कृतं कर्म शुभागुर्णं ।

इन्वेवमुक्ति बेदे च कृष्णेन परमात्मना ॥ 74 ॥

सामवेदोक्तगाखायां संबोध्य कामलोढ़वम् ।

जन्मभोगावर्षे च सर्वेणं कृतकर्माण्म ॥ 75 ॥

अनुकूलं हि तेणं च भातरेण्यत्र चैव हि ।

The Karma, whether auspicious or inauspicious must be enjoyed. Thus it is stated in the Vedas and as well by Śrī Krṣna, the Supreme Spirit. Bhagavan Śrī Krṣna addressed Brahmā, the lotus-born, in the Sāma Veda Sākhā that all persons acquire their births, whether, in Bhārata or in any other country, according to the Karma that he had done.

कर्मण ब्रह्माणं च कर्माण च रुभाशिष्य। १ ७ ७ ॥

कर्मण च महलक्ष्मी लभैर्यं च कर्मण ।

कोदिज्ञानर्जित कर्म जीवितामनुगच्छति ॥ ७ ७ ॥

The curse of a Brāhmaṇa comes though this Karma; and the blessings of a Brāhmaṇa come again by this Karma. By Karma one gets great wealth and prosperity and by Karma again one gets poverty. You may take one hundred Koti births; the fruit of Karma must follow you.

न हि स्वाजेदिता भोगं तच्छायेव पुरंदर ।

कालपेरे देशपेरे पात्रपेरे च कर्णामणि ॥ 78 ॥

न्यूनताधिकभावोजीय भवेदेद हि कर्णाण ।

वस्तुघाने वस्तूनां सां पुर्ण द्विते दिने ॥ 79 ॥

दिनपेरे कोदिगामसंखं वा ततोर्धिकम् ।

समे देणे च वस्तूनां दाने पुर्ण्यं समं सुर ॥ 80 ॥

Book IX Chapter XL

O Indra! The fruit of Karma follows one like one's shadow. Without enjoyment, that can never die. The effects of Karma become increased or diseased according to time, place, and the person concerned. As you will give away anything to persons, of different natures, in different times and in different places, your merit acquired will also very accordingly. Gifts made on certain special days bring in Koti times the fruits (merits, punyam) or infinite times or even more than that.

हेशपोदे कोटिगुणाकसंखंख वा ततोर्धिकम् ।

समे पात्र सेमं पुणं वस्नुर्नां कतुरैव च ॥ 81 ॥ 11

पात्रभेते शतगुणामसंखं वा ततोर्धिकम् ।

यथा फलिते सस्यानि न्यूनान्यथिकानि च ॥ 82 ॥

कर्मकाणां क्षेत्रभेदे पात्रभेते फलं तथा ।

सामान्यदिवसे विघ दानं समफलं भवेत् ॥ 83 ॥

अमायां रविकसंतंचां फलं शगतुर्णं भवेत् ।

Again gifts, similar in nature, made in similar paces yield punyam the same, in character also. Gifts made in different countries yield punyams, Koți times, infinite times, or even more than that. But similar things given to similar persons yield similar punyams. As the grains vary in their natures as the fields differ, so gifts made to different persons yield different grades of punyas infinitely superior or infinitely inferior as the case may be.

Giving things to a Brāhmaṇa on any ordinary days yields simple punya only. But if the gift be made to a Brāhmaṇa on an Amāvasyā day (new moon day) or on a Sankrānti day (the day when the Sun enters another's sign) then hundred times more punyam is acquired.

चतातुमांसां पौर्णमास्यानंतं फलमेव च ॥ 84 ॥

प्रहणे शफिनः कोटिगुणं च फलमुच्यते ।

सूर्यस्य प्रगणे वारप्रि ततो दशगुणं भवेद् ॥ 85 ॥

अश्वयायाम्बयं यदसंखं फलभूचते ।

एवमान्यत्र पुणवाहे फलाधित्यं भवेक्षिति ॥ 86 ॥

Again charities made on the Cāturmāśya periods (the vow that lasts for four months in the rainy season) or on the full moon day, yield infinite

punyams. So charities made on the occasion of the lunar eclipses yield Koti times the result and if made on the occasion of the solar eclipse yield ten times more punyamas. Charities made on Aksayaya Trītyā or the Navamī day yield infinite and endless results. So charities on other holy days yield religious merits higher than those made on ordinary days.

यथा दाने तथा स्नाने जये3न्यपुणवकमैसु ।

एवं सर्वत्र बौक्द्यं पुराणां कर्मणां फलम् ॥ 87 ॥

यथा दार्डेन चक्रेण शार्तोषा ध्योग च ।

कुभ्यं निर्मिति निर्माता कुभ्यकारो मृदा भृति ॥ 88 ॥

As charities made on holy days yields religious merits, so beating, reciting mantrams, and other holy acts yield meritorious results. As superior results are obtained by pious acts; so inferior results are obtained by impious acts. As an earthen potter makes pots, jars, etc., out of the earth with the help of rod, wheel, earthen cups or plates and motion, so the Creator awards respective fruits to different persons, by the help of this thread (continuity) of Karma.

तथैव कर्मसूत्रण फर्ल धाता ददाति च ।

यस्यान्ना सूधिमदं तं च नारायणं भज ॥ 89 ॥

स विधाता विधातुंष पातु: पाता जगत्येव ।

स्वेषु: स्वहा च संहर्तुः संहर्तं कालकलकः ॥ 90 ॥

Therefore if you want to have cessation of this fruition of Karma, then worship, Nārāyaṇa, by whose command all these things of Nature are created. He is the Creator of even Brahmā, the Creator, the Preserver of Viṣnu, the Preserver, the Destroyer of Śiva, the Destroyer and the Kāla (the great Time) of Kāla (the Time).

महाविषत्तो संसारे यः: सरेन्धुधूसूनम् ।

विषपत्ति तस्य संपतिभर्वेदित्याह शंकरः ॥ 9 1 ॥

इन्वेवयुक्त्वा तत्वज्ञः सामालिय युंशयम् ।

दत्वा शुभाशिषं चेहं बोधायामास नारद ॥ 9 2 ॥

डीते श्रीमद्वीभागचते महापुराणे नवम्बलम्

चत्वारिंशोभयाः ॥ 40 ॥

Śaṅkara has said: He who remembers

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Madhusūdana (a name of Viṣṇu) in great troubles, his dangers cease and happiness begins. O Nārada! The wise Brīhaspati thus advised Indra and then embraced him and gave him his hearty blessings and good wishes.

Here ends the Fortieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the birth of Lakṣmi in the discourse of Nārada and Nārāyaṇa in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XLI

On the Churning to the Ocean

श्रीनारायण उवाच

हरिं ध्यात्या हरिकंब्राउजागाम बझाण: सभाम् ।

ब्रह्म्यति पुरस्कृत्य सर्वैः सुरागणैः सह ॥ १ ॥

शीर्ष गत्वा बझालेकं वृढ़ा च कमलेझ्वम् ।

प्रणेमुद्वेततः सर्वे सहैत्रा गुर्गणा सह ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyna said: O Twice-born! Indra then remembered Hari and took Brhaşpati, the Guru of the Devas, to the assembly of Brahmā, accompanied by the other Devas. They soon reached the region of Brahmā and no sooner they saw Him, than Indra and the other Devas and Brhaşpati all bowed down to Him.

भूतांतं कथयामास सुराव्यों विधिं प्रति ।

प्रह्योवाच तच्छुत्वा महेन्द्र कमलसनः ॥ ३ ॥

Brhaşpati, the Ācārya of the Devas, then communicated all to Brahmā. Hearing this, He smiled and spoke, addressing Indra:

ब्रह्मोयाच

वत्स महंजगतोर्जस प्रप्तीयं मे विद्बानः ।

ब्रह्मयतेष शिष्यत्वं सुगणामधिधः स्ववम् ॥ 4 ॥

मातामहः द्वक्षते विद्याभकः प्रतायवान् ।

कुलत्रयं यस्य शूद्रं कर्व सोर्जकृते भवेत् ॥ 5 ॥

“O Indra! You have been in My race; nay, you are My grandson; the Ārya Brhaşpati is your Guru; you yourself are the ruler of the Devas and you are very wise and sagacious; the mother of your father is the powerful Dakṣa, a great Viṣṇu Bhakta. How is it, then that when the three sides of the family are pure, one would turn out so haughty and arrogant!

माता यतिता यस्य पिता शुद्धो जितेन्द्रिया: ।

मातामहो मातुलकु कर्व सोउईकृती भवेत् ॥ 6 ॥

जनः धैतुकाटीयेण दोषान्मातामहस्य च ।

गुरुकोषातिनिपदैर्षहिंद्रोषी भवेद्युवन् ॥ 7 ॥

Whose mother is so much devoted to her husband, whose father, mother's father and mother's brother are self-controlled and of pure Sattva Guna, he is not expected to be so very haughty! Every man may be guilty to Hari for the three faults: For some fault due to that of his father, or of his mother's father, or of Guru, the Spiritual Teacher.

सर्वान्तरात्मा भगवान् सर्वेट्रेष्वसिताः ।

यस्य देशात्स प्रगति स शवस्तक्षणो भवेत् ॥ 8 ॥

मनोड़मिंद्रियेशं च ज्ञानकणे हि शंकाः ।

विष्णुपाणा च प्रकृतित्विद्धभगवती सती ॥ 9 ॥

निद्रादय: शकनध्यं ता: सर्वी: प्रकृतेः कलाः ।

आत्मनः प्रतिबिष्यः जीवो भाणगरीभ्यून् ॥ 10 ॥

Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa, resides in this great holy temple of our this physical body controlling the hearts of all. At whatever moment, Śrī Nārāyaṇa quits this temple-body, at that moment this body becomes dead. I myself am the mind; Śaṅkara is the knowledge, Viṣṇu is the vital breaths, Bhagvati Durgā is the intelligence (Buddhi), sleep, etc., the powers of Prakṛti; when these are being reflected on by the Ātman, Jīva is formed with a body for enjoyment called Bhoga Śarīrabhṛt.

आत्मनीगे गते देहात्सर्वे गांति सरंभाप्नः ।

यथा वर्तनि गच्छन्ते नरदेवमिवानुगाः ॥ ११ ॥

अहं शिवश्छ शेषश्छ शिवणूर्पमें महाविराद् ।

यूयं यद्रिण भवताशं तत्पूर्णे न्यककृतं तत्वा ॥ १ २ ॥

When a king departs, his attendants also follow him; so when this Indra! We all, are verily, the parts of Śrī Krṣṇa I myself, Śiva, Ananta Deva,

Book IX Chapter XLI

Viṣṇu, Dharma, Mahā Virāt, you all are His parts and entirely devoted to Him. And you have shown contempt for His flowers.

शिशेन पूजितं पादपयं पुवेण येन च ।

तत्र दुवांसस दर्जे दैवेन -व्यक्तून तथा ॥ 13 ॥

तत्पुष्यं मतके यय कृष्णपादाकप्रच्छत् ।

सर्वेषां च सुराणां च तत्पूजा पुरतो भवेत् ॥ 14 ॥

दैवेनं वैधितस्त्वं हि दैवं च बलवत्नम् ।

भाग्यहीनं जनं मूढ़ को वा रक्षितुमीक्षरः ॥ १ ५ ॥

Bhagavān Śaṅkara, the Lord of the Bhūtas, worshipped the lotus feet of Śrī Krṣna with that flower. The Rṣi Durvāsā gave you that flower. But you showed disrespect to it. The flower, Pārjjāta, after being offered at the lotus-feet of Krṣna, should be placed on the head of an Immortal; His worship is to be done first; and it is the foremost amongst the Devas. So you are now being afflicted by the inevitable course of Fate; Fate is the most powerful of all.

सा श्रीनंतापुना कोपात्कृष्णानिर्माल्वजन्ति।

अभुना गच्छ वैकुण्डे मया च गुणना सह ॥ १६ ॥

नियेब त्रन झीनाथं क्षियां प्राप्यसि मढ़तात् ।

एवमुक्क्वा च स बढ़ा सर्वैः सुरागपैः सह ॥ १७ ॥

Who can save that unlucky man against whom Fate has turned? Seeing that you have rejected the flower offered to Śri Krṣṇa, Śri Laksmī Devi has left you out of anger. Now come with Me and with your family priest Bhaspati to Vaikunṭha and worship the Lord of Lakṣmī; then by His grace you may get back your Heavens.

तत्र गत्वा परवढ़ा घपावंतं सनातनम् ।

द्वाु तेजःस्वरूपं तं प्रजल्लं स्वतैससा ॥ 18 ॥

ग्रीभयमध्यामताद्विज्ञात्कोटिसम्प्रभम् ।

शांतं चानादिमध्यांतं लक्ष्मीकांतमानन्तकम् ॥ 19 ॥

Thus saying, Brahmā with Indra and all the other Devas, went to the Eternal Puruṣa Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa and saw that He was full of Fire and Energy like one hundred koti summer mid-day Suns, yet perfectly cool and calm. He has no beginning, and no end, nor any middle. He is Infinite.

चतुर्षुर्षे: पार्वदैषु सरस्वता युतं प्रभुम् ।

भकस्या चतुर्भिवेदैष्ठ गंगाय परिवेशित् ॥ 20 ॥

तं प्रणेपु: सुरा: सर्वे मृतःन बहुपुगेनाम: ।

भवितन्याः: साधुनेजान्तुहुवुः परमेश्वम् ॥ 21 ॥

वृत्तांत कवयामास स्वयं बहुा कृतांजलि: ।

रूकुद्विता: सर्वा: स्वाधिकाराव्छ्युता तः ॥ 22 ॥

The four-armed Pārisādas, Sarasvaītī, the four Vedas, and the Ganges, all were surrounding Him. Seeing Him, Brahmā and the other Devas bowed down with devotion and began to chant hymns to Him with tears in their eyes. Brahmā, then, informed Him of everything when all the Devas, dispossessed of their places, began to weep before Him. Nārāyana saw that the Devas were very afraid and much distressed.

स द्वर्शं सुरागण विषयुरासं भयाकुलम् ।

तत्पृष्णणान्यं च वाहान्तिविजितम् ॥ 23 ॥

गोभाण्य-नं हतश्रीकं निष्पर्भं सभयं परम् ।

उवाच कातरं चूषा भवभीतिविधंजनः ॥ 24 ॥

श्रीभगवानुवाच

मार्भैबहान् हे सुराक्ष भयं किं वो मधि स्थिते ।

दास्यामि लक्ष्मीमचरणं परिप्रियवंद्रिणीम् ॥ 25 ॥

They had no jewel ornaments as before, no vehicles (Vāhanas), nor the Daivic splendour as before, not that brilliance; always fearful. Then Nārāyana, the Destroyer of fear, seeing the Devas in that state, addressed Brahmā and the other Devas: O Brahmaṇa! O Devas! Discard all fears. What fear can overcome you? I am here. I will give you again the immoveable prosperous Rājya Lakṣmi (the Lakṣmī of the kings).

किं च मद्यनं किंचिच्छ्यतं समयोचित् ।

हितं सत्यं सारभृतं परिणामसुखावहम् ॥ 26 ॥

जनाश्रासंख्यिव्यवस्या मदधीनाशं संततम् ।

यथा त्वाङ़ं महक्रतपराधीनोस्वतंक: ॥ 27 ॥

But for the present, I give you some advice proper for this moment. Listen. There are endless universe where exist innumerable persons. All of them are under Me. So know verily, that I am under them also.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

पं ये रहो हि मढ़कतो मतयो हि निरंकुश: । तद्गुरुर्नं र नित्यिय पदाया सह निश्रितम् । 2 8 ॥ दुबांसा: शंकरांग्रश वैण्यावे मतयाया: । तच्छापादागतोर्हे च सल्ब्यीको हि वो गृहात् ॥ 2 9 ॥

My devotees regard Me as the Highest They know no other than Me; they are fearless; so I do not remain in that house where My devotees are dissatisfied. I instantly quit that hous with Lakṣmī. Durvāsā Rṣi is born in part of Śaṅkara. He is highly devoted to Me. He is pakkā Vaiṣṇava. He cursed you and, as a matter of fact, I am Lakṣmī instantly left your house.

पत्र शंख्यविनिरीत सुतली न शिवार्थेन्मु ।

न भोजनं च शिवाणां न पचा तत शिक्षित् ॥ ३० ॥

मढ़कानां च मे निदा यत्र बहान् भवेतुर्गः ।

महाहा महाल्कूमीसतो याति परभवम् ॥ ३१ ॥

Lakṣmī does not reside in that house where conchshells are not blown, where there are no Tulasī trees, where there is no worship of Śiva and Śivā, where the Brāhmaṇas are not fed. O Brāhmaṇa! O Devas! Where I and My Bhaktas are blamed, Mahā Lakṣmī becomes greatly displeased. She instantly goes away out of that house.

मद्धिकितीची नो मुहो धुचने को हरिजासरे ।

मम जन्मदिते वाथि याति श्रीसद्गुरावर्धि ॥ 32 ॥

मत्रामविक्री यंघ विलोणति स्वकन्यकम् ।

यजातिविंधं धुचने च मतिग्या याति तद्गुराह्न । 33 ॥

Lakṣmī does not stay even for a moment in that house where the stupid person, without any devotion for me, takes his food on the Harivāsara Ekādaśī day (the eleventh day of the moon's wane or increase) or on My anniversary birthday. If anybody sells My name or his own daughter, where the guests are not served, Lakṣmī quits that house instantly and goes away.

Note: That Guru is the Real Guru, who, being capable, imparts the name of God to worthy persons without taking any fee at all.

यो विध: पृंडुलीपुत्रो महापापी च ततवितः ।

पापिनो यो गृहं याति गृहप्रश्राद्वारभोजकः ॥ 34 ॥

महाक्रष्टा ततो याति मंदिरात्कमलालया ।

गृह्जाणं शवदाही च भाग्यहीनो दिज्ञायमः ॥ 35 ॥

If the son of an unchaste woman be a Brāhmana, he and the husband of an unchaste woman are great sinners. If anybody goes to such a person's house or eats the food of a Śūdra during a Śrāddha ceremony, Lakṣmī becomes very angry and vacates that house. Being a Brāhmin, if one burns a Śūdra's corpse, one becomes very wretched and the vilest of the Brāhmins.

याति रूषा तदनुग्रच्छ देवा: कमलावासिनि ।

गृह्जाणां सूपकारी यो बाहाणो वृषवाहकः ॥ 36 ॥

तन्तोयपानभीता च कमला याति तदनुग्रहत् ।

अशुब्द्रदाय: कृरो हिंसको निंदको दिजः ॥ 37 ॥

Laksmī never stays for a moment more in that house. Being a Brāhmīn, if he be a Śūdra's cook and drives oxen, Laksmī fears to drink water there and quits his house. Being a Brāhmīn, if his heart be unholy, if he be cruel, envies others and elames persons, if he officiates as a priest for the Śūdra, Laksmī Devī never stays in his house.

ब्राह्मा: शूर्याजी च वाति देवी च तद्गुरुहा ।

अवीराड़ च वो घुंचेत तम्याड़ाति जगतमू: ॥ 38 ॥

तृणं चिन्ति नखरेसैर्वां वो विलिजेबमहीम् ।

निरागो बाड़ाणो यत्र तद्गुरुहाथाति मतिथा ॥ 39 ॥

The World-Mother never stays even for a moment in his house who eats at the house of one who marries an unmarried girl twelve years old in whom rienstration has commenced. He who cuts grass by his nails, or writes on the ground with his nails, or from whose house a Brāhmaṇa guest goes back disappointed, Lakṣmī never stays in his house.

सूर्योदये द्विजो घुंकते दिवास्याची च बाहाणः ।

दिवा मैयुवकारी च यस्तस्माताति मतिथ्या ॥ 40 ॥

आचारतीनी विधो यो यछ गुर्जप्रतिर्ही ।

अदीक्षितो है यो मुहुस्तस्माड़े यांति मतिथ्या ॥ 41 ॥

If any Brāhmaṇa eats food at the early sunrise, sleeps during the day or engages in a sexual intercourse during the day, Lakṣmī never stays in his house. Lakṣmī slips away from that Brāhmaṇa

Book IX Chapter XLI

who is devoid of Ācāra (rules of conduct), who accepts gifts from Śūdras, from him who remains uninitiated in his Mantram.

स्थमघाद्धाने नगो हि यः शेते ज्ञानदूबलः ।

शशब्दवित बाचालो याति सा तद्गृहास्ति ॥ 42 ॥

शिर:सनातसु तैलेन थोउ-यांग समुपयुशेत् ।

स्वांगे च बायद्येहांं रहा सा याति तद्गृहात् ॥ 43 ॥

The ignorant man who sleeps naked and with his feet wet, who laughs always, and always talks at random on disconnected subjects like a mad man, is forsaken at once by Laksmī. Lakṣmī becomes angry and goes away from the house of that man who applies oil all over his body first and then touches the bodies of others and always makes some sounding noise on several parts of his body.

ततोपवासाहीना वः संध्याहीनेअृषिचिहितः ।

विष्णुभक्तिवाहीनतृन सभ्याठिति च मप्रिया ॥ 4४ ॥

ब्राहणं निवेदोही है तं च यो द्रैष्टि सतन्ति ।

जीवाहिंहो द्याहीयो गाति सर्वप्रमुस्ततः ॥ 4 5 ॥

If any Brāhmaṇa forsake observing vows, fastings, the Sandhyā ceremony, purity and devotion to Viṣṇu, Kamalā (Lakṣmī) does not remain in his house any longer. If anybody blames always the Brāhmaṇas and shews his hatred always towards the Brāhmaṇas, if he does injury to the animals, and if he does not indulge in his heart anything of pity, kindness, Lakṣmī, the Mother of the Worlds, quite him.

यत्र यत्र हरेची हरेल्कतींतं तथा ।

तत्र तिष्ठिति सा देवी सर्वमंगलमंगलां ॥ 46 ॥

यत्र प्रशंसा कृष्णस्य तद्धकतस्य पितामह ।

सा च कृष्णप्रिया देवी तत्र सिष्ठिति संतन्ति ॥ 47 ॥

O Lotus-born! But where Hari is worshipped and Hari's Name is chanted, Lakṣmī, the Mother of all auspiciousness remains there. Lakṣmī remains where the glories of Śrī Krṣna and His Bhaktas are sung.

यत्र शकुष्ययि: शंखः शिला च तुलसीद्वाल्।

तलैसावांद्वं द्यानं तत्र सा परितिष्ठिति ॥ 48 ॥

Lakṣmī always remains there with the greatest

gladness where conch-shells are blown, where there are conchshells, the Śālagrāma stone, the Tulasī leaves and the service and meditation of Lakṣmī are daily done.

शिवालिगार्थं चत्र तस्य चोत्कीर्तिं शुभम् ।

दुर्गार्थं तद्गुण्डा तत्र पद्यिवासिनि ॥ 49 ॥

विजाणां सेवंत्रे चत्र तेचं च भोजनं शुभम् ।

अर्जंने सर्वदैवानां तत्र पद्मपुखी सती ॥ 50 ॥

Where the phallic emblem of Śiva is worshipped, and His glories sung, where Śri Durgā is worshipped and Her glories are sung, Laksmī, the Dweller in the Lotus, remains there. Where the Brāhmanas are honoured and they are gladly feasted, where all the Devas are worshipped; the chaste Lakṣmī, the Lotus-faced, remains there.

इत्पुक्त्वा च सुरान्सर्वान्मात् स सपात्रितः ।

क्षीरोद्वाराने जन्म करल्या कर्येति च ॥ 51 ॥

इत्पुत्वा तां जगायधो बढ़ाणां पुनराह च ।

माधित्वा सारगं लक्ष्मी देयेच्छो देहि पव्जा ॥ 52 ॥

Thus saying to the Devas, the Lord of Lakṣmī said: "O Devi! Go without any delay to the Kṣiroda Ocean and incarnate there in part." He then addressed Brahmā and said: "O Lotus-born! You also better go there and then churn the Kṣiroda Ocean; when Lakṣmī will arise, give Her to the Devas."

इत्थुक्ला कामलकांतो जगामांत:पूरं मुने ।

देवाधिश्रण कालेन ययुः क्षीरोदसागरम् ॥ 53 ॥

मंथानं मंद्रं कृत्वा कुमं कृत्वा च भाजनम् ।

कृत्वा रोगे मंधपाणं मंधधूसरुग: सुरा: ॥ 54 ॥

O Devarsi! Thus saying, the Lord Kamalā went to His inner compartment. On the other hand the Devas, after a long time, reached the shores of the Kṣiroda Ocean. The Devas and the Daityas then made the Golden Mountain (the Sumeru) the churning rod, the Deva Kūrma (the tortoise), the churning pot and Ananta Deva (the thousand headed serpent) the churning cord and began to churn the ocean.

धर्वतंत्रि च पीयुषमुच्चे: ब्रवसमीषितम् ।

नानारलं द्वित्रितं प्रापुल्लेक्षी सुदर्शनम् ॥ 55 ॥

वनमालां ददौ सा च शीरोद्वगाधिये मुने ।

सर्वेश्राय रत्याय विश्वाये वैश्वासी सती ॥ 56 ॥

While churning was going on, by and by arose Dhanvantari, Amṛta (the nectar), the horse Ucchaihśrava, various other invaluable jewels that were desired, the elephant Airāvata and the beautiful eyed Laksmi. Viṣnupriyā, Śrī Lakṣmi Devi, no sooner She got up from the ocean, she, the chaste woman, presented on the neck of Nārāyaṇa, of beautiful appearance, the Lord of all, Who slept on the Kṣiroda ocean the garland (indicative of accepting Him for her bridegroom).

देवे: स्तुता भृजिता च ब्रह्मा गंकलेण च ।

ददौ पूर्वि सुरगृहे ब्रह्माणविमोचन्ता ॥ 57 ॥

गुपदूर्वा: स्वविषयं दैत्यमतं घयंकेनम् ।

महालक्ष्मीप्रमदेन चरत्नेन नारद ॥ 58 ॥

Then Brahmā and Maheśvara and the other

Devas being pleased, cast a favourable glance

towards the homes of the Devas, in order to free them from their curse. Then, by the grace of Mahā Lakṣmī and by the granting of the boon by Brahmā, the Devas got back their own possessions from the hands of the Daityas."

इत्येवं कथितं सर्वे लक्ष्यपाखानभुत्तामम् ।

सुखदं सारभृतं च किं भूयः शोतुमिष्ठसि ॥ 59 ॥

इति शीमद्वीरागवते महापुराणे नवमरकचे

एकचत्वारिशोराधाय: 11 41 11

O Nārada! Thus I have described to you the story of Lakṣmī Devī, the Essence of all Essences, and very pleasant to hear. Now what more do you want to hear? Say.

Here ends the Forty-first Chapter of the Ninth Book on the churning of the ocean and on the appearing of

Lakṣmī in the Mahā Purānam

Śrimaddevihbāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER XLII

On The Stotram of Mahā Lakṣmi

नारद उवाच

हरेकल्वितीनं भत्र श्रुतं तज्जानमुत्तमम् ।

ईपितं लक्ष्यपाण्डयानं ध्यानं स्तोत्र वद प्रभो ॥ १ ॥

Nārada said: O Bhagavan! I have heard about the glories of Hari, about the Tattvajñānam (the True Knowledge) and the story of Lakṣmī. Now tell me Her Dhyānam (meditation) and Stotram (recitation of hymns) of Her.

नारद खाच

स्नाला तीर्थे पुरा शक्तो धृत्वा धौते च वाससी ।

चटं संस्थायि क्षीरोहे षड्वेलाव्यर्पिज्ञत् ॥ २ ॥

गणेशं च दिनेशं च वाईँ विश्वं जिश्व विश्वाम।

एतान् भवत्वा समभ्यन्त्यं पुष्प्याधिद्धिस्मतद ॥ ३ ॥

Nārāyana said: O Nārada! Indra then, bathed first in the Tirath (holy place) and, wearing a cleansed cloth, installed, first of all, an earthen jar (ghata) on the beach of the Kṣiroda Ocean. Then he worshipped with devotion Gangeśa, Sūrya, Fire,

Visnu, Śiva, and Śivā, the six deities with scents and flowers.

आवाहा च महात्कर्मी परमेध्रवंक्षिपिणीम् ।

पूजां चकार देवेशेगे बहाणा च पुरोधसा ॥ 4 ॥

पुर:स्थितेषु मुनिषु बहाणेपु गुरी हरी ।

देवादिषु सुदेशे च जानानंद शिवे मुने ॥ 5 ॥

Next Indra invoked Mahā Lakṣmī, of the nature of the highest powers and greatest prosperity, and began to worship Her as Brahmā, who was acting as an officiating priest in the presence of the Munis, Brāhmanas, Brūspati, Hari and the other Devas, had dictated him.

पारिज्ञानस्य पुचं च गृहीला चंदनोक्षितम् ।

ध्याना देखीं महाकृष्मी पुरवाघमास नारद ॥ 6 ॥

ध्यानं च सामवेदोक्ते यहतं बहणे पुरा ।

हरिणा तेन ध्यानेन तिबिधो वदायि ते ॥ ७ ॥

He first smeared one Pārijāta flower with sandal paste and reciting the meditation mantra of Mahā Lakṣmī offered it to Her feet. The meditation

Book IX Chapter XLII

mantra that was recited by Devendra, was what Bhagavān Hari first gave to Brahmā. I am now telling you that. Listen.

सहस्वल्पवास्यक्षिणाकावासीनें पराम् ।

गरसावैणकोटीदुर्भभागुधिकारं परम् ॥ 8 ॥

“O Mother! Thou residest on the thousand-petalled lotus. The beauty of Thy face excels the beauty of koti autumnal Full Moons. Thou art shining with Thy own splendour.

स्वतेजसा प्रज्वलंती सुखदुर्गयं मनोहाराम ।

प्रतपताकंचनिभगोर्भां मृतीत्मती सतीम ॥ 9 ॥

तनभूषणभूषाढ्यां शोभितां पौतावसास ।

ईपद्वार्यप्रसात्यां शश्वसुचित्यौवानाम ॥ 10 ॥

Thou art very beautiful and lovely Thy colour is like the burnished gold; Thou art with from, chaste, ornamented all over with jewel ornaments; Thou art wearing the yellow cloth and look! What beauty is coming out of it! Always a sweet smile reigns on Thy lips. Thy beauty is constant; Thou art the bestower of prosperity to all.

सर्वसंपर्यदार्िं च महात्मक्षी भजे शुभाम् ।

ध्यानेनोने तं ध्याला नानगुणसम्पित्तम् ॥ १ ॥

संपूछ बढ़ावावल्येन चोपचाराणि योड्ग ।

दरीं भक्ल्या विधानेने प्रवेकें मंजपूर्वकम् ॥ १२ ॥

I Mahā Laksmī! I meditate on Thee." Thus meditating on Her endowed with various attributes with this mantra, Indra worshipped devotedly with sixteen upacāras (articles offered). Every upacāra (article) was offered with the repetition of mantra. All the things were very excellent, right and commendable.

प्रशतानि प्रकृतिने वताणि विवधानि च ।

अमूल्यत्सारं च निरिंतं विश्वकर्माणं ॥ 13 ॥

आसनं च विवित्रं च महालक्ष्म प्रग्रहात्मा ।

गुर्द्रें गंगोदकामिरे सर्ववैदितमीपित्नम् ॥ 14 ॥

“O Mahā Laksmī! Vīśvakarāmā has made this invaluable Āsana (a carpet seat) wonderfully decked with jewels; I am offering this Āsana to Thee. Accept. O Thou residing in the Lotus! This holy Ganges water is considered with great regard

and desired by all. This is like the fire to burn the fuel in the shape of the sins of the sinners.

पापव्यादिकृपं च गृहातां कमललये ।

पुष्यचंदनवृदारिद्धसुन्ते जाह्वीजलम् ॥ १ ५ ॥

गड़्गपंसिवतं स्वत्थं गृहातां पश्वासिनि ।

सुर्गधिष्युष्लेलं च सुगंधागलकीकलम् ॥ १ ६ ॥

O Thou! The Dweller in the Lotus! This Dūrba grass, flowers, this Arghya (offering) of the Ganges water perfumed with sandalpate, I am offering to Thee. Accept. O Beloved of Hari! This sweet scented flower oil and this sweet scented Āmalaki fruit lead to the beauty of the body; therefore I present this to Thee. Accept.

देहसैरंदर्वर्कीं च गृहातां शीहरेः प्रिये ।

कापसिंसं च कृमिंग वसनं देवि गृहात्म ॥ 17 ॥

रनस्वपशिकारं च देहुष्पापिवर्धनम् ।

गोभार्ये शीकरं रनं भूषणं देवि गृहात्म। ॥ 18 ॥

सर्वसौदर्यैजीत च सदा: गोभाकरं परम् ।

वृक्षनिवास्वरं च नग्यत्रव्याविसंयुतम् ॥ 19 ॥

O Devi! I am presenting this cloth made of silk to Thee; accept. O Devi! This excellent ornaments made of gold and jewels, which increases the beauty, I am presenting to Thee. Accept.

श्रीकृष्णकांते पूर्ण च पवित्र प्रतिग्रहताम् ।

सुर्पायुर्फे सुखदं चंदनं देय गृहताम् ॥ 20 ॥

जगचब्धुःस्वरूपं च पवित्रं तिमिरापहम् ।

प्रदीपं सुखल्पं च गृहतां च सुरेश्वति ॥ 21 ॥

नानोपहारकं च नानाससमवित्यम् ।

अतिस्वावुंकर चैव नैदेशं प्रतिगृहताम् ॥ 22 ॥

O Beloved of Kṛṣṇa! I am presenting this sweet scented holy Dhūpa prepared from various herbs and plants, exquisitely nice and the root of all beauty, to Thee. Accept. This sweet scented pleasant sandalpate I offer to Thee, O Devi! Accept. O Ruler of the Devas! I present this pleasing holy Dipa (lights) which is the eye of this world and by which all the darkness is vanished; accept. O Devi! I present to thee these very delicious offerings of fruits, etc., very juicy and of various kinds. Accept.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

अन्ने ब्रहास्वरूपं च प्राणारक्षणकारणम् ।

तृहिंदं पृहिंदं चैव देव्यन्तं प्रतिगृहात्मा ॥ 2३ ॥

शाल्यन्तं सुपवचं च शक्रतान्यवसंयुतम् ।

स्वावुकुंचे महात्रिक्ष्म परमानं प्रगृहात्मा ॥ 24 ॥

D'evesî! This Anna (food) is Brahma and the chief means to preserve the life of living beings. By this the nourishment of the body and the mental satisfaction are effected. Therefore I am presenting this food to Thee. Accept. O Mahâ Laksmi! I am presenting this most delicious Paramânnna, which is prepared out of rice, milk and sugar, to Thee.

शर्कराग्यपर्वचं च सुस्वातु सुमनेतारूम ॥ 25 ॥

नानाविधानि रयायिण पवब्नातिन फलानि च ।

सुरपितरनसंल्यकं सुस्वातु सुमनेतारूम ॥ 26 ॥

Accept. O Devi! I am presenting this most delicious and pleasant svastika prepared of sugar and clarified butter to Thee; accept. O Beloved of Acyuta! I am presenting to Thee various beautiful Pakkānnas, ripe delicious fruits and clarified butter out of cow's milk; accept.

मत्यांगुतं सुगवयं च गृहातामध्यतप्रिये ।

सुस्वायुतसर्वनुभनिष्ठुब्बसपुब्बन ॥ 27 ॥

अरिनवस्वमतिस्वायु रुई च प्रतिगृहात्म।

घवानीयुभस्स्यानां चृषीरिभुभुद्रबन ॥ 28 ॥

O Devi! The sugarcane juice, when heated, yields a syrup which again heated yields very delicious and nice thing called Gur. I am presenting this Gur to Thee; accept. O Devi! I am presenting to Thee the sweetments prepared out of the flour of Yava and wheat and Gur and clarified butter; accept.

सुपवर्य गुड़ायाक्ते मिछानं देवि गुहात्मा ।

सत्यचूर्णोंद्वं पबर्व स्वतिकादिसम्पतिवत् ॥ 29 ॥

मया निविदितं भक्त्या नैवेघो प्रतिगृहात्मा ।

श्रीतावपुर्दं चैव दाहे च सुखदं परम् ॥ 30 ॥

I am presenting with devotion the offering made of Svastika and the flour of other grains; accept. O Kamale! I am presenting to Thee this fan and white cāmara, which blows cool air and is very pleasant when this body gets hot; accept.

कमले गृहातां चेदे व्यजनं श्वेतचामरम् ।

तांबूषे च वरं रयं कंपूराविसुवासितम् ॥ 31 ॥

जिह्ञाज्ञच्छेदकरं तांबूषे प्रतिगृहात् ।

सुवासितं सुगीतं च पियपानायाकारकान् ॥ 32 ॥

O Devi! I am presenting this betel scented with camphor by which the inertness of the tongue is removed; accept.

जगजजीवनरूपं च जीवनं देयि गृहात् ।

देवसौदर्यैजीजं च सदाशेषाविवधरन् ॥ 33 ॥

कापीसजं च कृमितं वसनं देयि गृहात् ।

रत्सरणविगकारं च देह्यूषाविवधरन् ॥ 34 ॥

O Devi! I am presenting this scented cool water, which will allay the thirst and which is known as the life of this world; accept. O Devi! I am presenting this cloth made of cotton and silk that increases the beauty and splendour of the body. Accept. O Devi! I am presenting to Thee, the ornaments made of gold and jewels which are the source of beauty and loveliness. Accept.

शोभाधरां शीकरं च भूषणं देवि गुहात्मान ।

नानाक्रतुतु निर्भाणं बहुशोषायं परम् ॥ 35 ॥

सुर्भपूर्णिर्य शुर्द्रं माल्यं देवि प्रगृहानम् ।

शुद्धिदं शुद्धकर्ण च सर्वमंगलमंगलम् ॥ 36 ॥

O Devi! I am presenting to Thee these pure garlands of flowers which blossom in different seasons, which look very beautiful and which give satisfaction to the Devas and to the kings. Accept.

गंधवस्तुद्रवं रभ्यं गंधे देवि प्रगृह्धान् ।

पुण्यतीर्थोंद्रं चैव विगूर्दं शुद्धिदं सदा ॥ 37 ॥

गृह्धातं कृष्णकान्ते तं पर्यमाचनानीयकम् ।

रत्सरातिदिनियांणं पुण्यचन्द्रन्धितम् ॥ 38 ॥

O Devi! I am presenting to Thee this nice scent, this very holy thing to Thee by which both the body and mind become pure, which is most auspicious and which is prepared of many fragrant herbs and plants; accept. O Beloved of the God Kṛṣṇa! I am presenting this Ācamaniya water to Thee for rinsing the mouth, pure and holy, and brought from holy places of pilgrimages; accept.

वस्बभूषणभूषात्मां सुतलं देयि गृहानाम् ।

यशदूर्व्यमपूर्वं च पृथिव्यामपि दुरुर्भम् ॥ 39 ॥

Book IX Chapter XLII

देवभूषहोभोग्यं च तदूरम्यं देयि गृहात्मा ।

ग्रहाययेतानि दत्ता च भूतेन देवपुंपाः ॥ 40 ॥

O Devi! I am presenting to Thee, this bed made of excellent gems and jewels and flowers, sandalpaste, clothings and ornaments; accept. O Devi! I am presenting to Thee all those things that are extraordinary, very rare in this earth and fit to be enjoyed by the Devas and worthy of their ornaments; accept.

मूलं जजाप भक्ल्या च दशलक्षं विधानतः ।

जपेन दारुलक्षेण मंत्रसिद्धिदंभूव ह ॥ 4 1 ॥

मंत्रछा बहाणा दन्तः कल्पवृक्षशु सर्वतः ।

लक्ष्मीमांग कामावाणी डें-ना कामलावसिति ॥ 4 2 ॥

D evarsj! Uttering those mantras, the Devendra offered those articles, with intense devotion according to the rules. He, then, made Japam of the Mūla Mantra (the Radical Seed Mantra) ten lakhs of times. Thus his Mantra revealed the Deity thereof and thus came to a successful issue. The lotus born Brahmā gave this Mantra ‘Śrim, Hrim Klim Aim Kamalavāsinyai Svāhā’ to the Devendra. This is like a Kalpavrksa (the tree in Indra’s garden yielding whatever may be desired).

धैटिको मंत्रलाओर्य प्रपित्द्र: स्वाहाया निवत: ।

कुबेरोनेन मंत्रेण पर्येष्रवर्मापादान् ॥ 4 3 ॥

राजराजेत्रवरी दक्ष: सावर्गिमंत्रुरेव च ।

मंगलोजनेन मंत्रेण सन्त्रीपेध्वनीरपतिः ॥ 4 4 ॥

This Vaidik mantra is the chief of the mantras. The world ‘Svāḥā’ is at the end of the mantra. By virtue of this Mantra, Kubera got his highest prosperity. By the power of this Mantra, the King-Emperor Dakṣa Śāvarni Manu and Maṅgala became the lords of the earth with seven islands.

प्रियत्रोतानपाटी केदारो नृप एव च ।

एते सिद्धाश्र राजेत्रा मंत्रेणानेन नाद १४५ ११

सिद्धे मंत्रे महालक्षीः शकाय दर्शनं दहो ।

रत्नैरसारनिर्माणविमानस्था वरपदा ॥ ४६ ॥

Priyavrata, Uttānapāda, and Kedārārāja all these became Siddhas (were fructified with success) and became King-Emperors. O Nārada! When Indra

attained success in this Mantra, there appeared before him Mahā Lakṣmī, seated in the celestial car, decked; with excellent gems and jewels.

सदात्रीपवर्ती पृथ्वीं छादरंगी तिथा च सा ।

སྟོན་པེ་བཅོག་ཡོག་ རྣམ་སྟོག་ཡོག་ ། १ ४ ७ १

ईषद्धास्यप्रसात्या भक्तानुपहकाता ।

विषयती रनमाला च कोदिष्च-हममप्रभाम् ॥ ४ ४ ॥

The Great Halo, coming out of Her body made manifest the earth with seven islands. Her colour was white like the white campaka flower and Her whole body was decked with ornaments. Her face was always gracious and cheerful with sweet smiles. She was ever ready to shew Her kindness to the Bhaktas. On Her neck there was a garland of jewels and gems, bright as ten million Moons.

दृष्टा जागत्सूं श्राँतां तुहावैतां पुरंदरः ।

पुकक्राचितसर्वानः साक्षुनः: कृतज्ञलः ॥ 49 ॥

बहाणा च प्रदनेन स्तोत्रजाने संयुतः ।

सर्वभीष्टायेदेव वैदिकेनैव तत्र च ॥ 50 ॥

O Devarsī! No sooner did Indra saw that Wrold Mother Mahā Laksmī, of a peaceful appearance, than his body was filled with joy and the hairs of the body stood on ends. His eyes were filled with tears; and, with folded palms, he began to recite stotras to Her, the Vaidik stotras, yielding all desires, that was communicated to him by Brahmā.

पुरंद उवाच

नमः कमलावासिन्ये नारायण्ये नाने नमः ।

कृष्णप्रियारी सर्तं महालक्ष्ये नाने नमः ॥ 51 ॥

पदापत्रेशणारी च पदाखल्यारे नाने नमः ।

पदासनार्ये पधित्ये वैशण्ये च नाने नमः ॥ 52 ॥

Indra said: "O Thou, the Dweller in the lotus! O Nārāyaṇī! O Dear to Krṣna! O Padmāsane! O Mahā Lakṣmī! Obeisance to Thee! O Padmadalaksane! O Padmanibhānane! O Padmāsane! O Padme! O Vaiṣnavī!

सर्वसंपल्पकृपिये सर्वांगरधे नमो नमः ।

हरिभक्तिप्रदाये च हर्वंदाये नमो नमः ॥ 53 ॥

कृष्णवखःस्थितये च कृष्णशरी नमो नमः ।

चंद्रशोधास्वल्पाये रलपचो च शोभने ॥ 54 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Obeisance to Thee! Thou art the wealth of all; Thou art worshipped by all; Thou bestowest to all the bliss and devotion to Śri Hari. I bow down to Thee. O Devi! Thou always dwellest on the breast of Krṣṇa and exercisest Thy powers over Him. Thou art the beauty of the Moon; Thou takest Thy seat on the beautiful Jewel Lotus. Obeisance to Thee!

संपत्थध्रातुर्वेल्ये महावेल्ये नाम नमः ।

नमो वृद्धिस्वल्पाये वृद्धिद्वायै नमो नमः ॥ 55 ॥

O Devi! Thou art the Presiding Deity of the riches; Thou art the Great Devi; Thou increasest always Thy gifts and Thou art the bestower of increments. So I bow down to Thee.

वैकुण्ठे या महात्कुमीर्थ लक्षी: श्रीरागते ।

स्वांग्रहक्षीरिद्रोहे राजकुमिनीर्णले ॥ 56 ॥

गृहत्कुमश्रि गृहिता गेहे च गृहदेवता ।

सुरभि: सागरे जाता दक्षिणा यजकामिनि ॥ 57 ॥

अदितिर्देवमाता तं कमल कमलालया ।

स्वाहा तंच च हविन्दी कव्वदाने वस्या सुता ॥ 58 ॥

O Devi! Thou art the Mahā Lakṣmī of Vaikuntaha, the Lakṣmī of the Kṣiroda Ocean; Thou art Indra's Heavenly Lakṣmī; Thou art the Rāja Lakṣmī of the Kings; Thou art the Gṛha Lakṣmī of the hosheolders; Thou art the household Deity of them; Thou art the Surabhī, born of the Ocean; Thou art the Dakṣinā, the wife of the Sacrifices; Thou art Aditi, the Mother of the Devas; Thou art the Kamālā, always dwelling in the Lotus; Thou art the Svāhā, in the offerings with clarified butter in the sacrificial ceremonies; Thou art the Svadhā Mantra in the Kāvyas (an offering of food to deceased ancestors). So obeisance to Thee!

त्वं हि विद्युस्वरूपा च सर्वाधारा सर्वुंधरा ।

शुद्धसत्त्वस्वरूपा तं नारायणपारायणा ॥ ५९ ॥

कोधोहित्यार्वजिता च वरदा शारदा शुभा ।

परामार्थप्रदा तं च हरित्यस्प्रदा परा ॥ 6० ॥

O Mother! Thou art of the nature of Viṣṇu; Thou art the Earth that supports all; Thou art of pure Śuddha Sattva and Thou art devoted to Nārāyaṇa.

Thou art void of anger, jealousy. Rather Thou grantest boons to all. Thou art the auspicious Śarādā; Thou grantest the Highest Reality and the devotional service to Hari. Without Thee all the worlds are quite stale, to no purpose like ashes, always dead while existing.

यया विना जात्मत्वं भर्सीभूतमसारकम् ।

जीवन्मूतं च विश्वं च शगलसर्वे यथा विना ॥ 6 1 ॥

सर्वेषां च परा माता सर्वविंधल्विणी ।

धर्मार्थकाममोक्षाणां तं च कारणकृचिणी ॥ 6 2 ॥

Thou art the Chief Mother, the Chief Friend of all; thou art the source of Dharma, Artha, Kāma and Mokṣa! As a mother nourishes her infants with the milk of her breasts, so Thou nourishest all as their mother!

यथा माता सत्तार्थानां शिष्यानां शैगशे सदा ।

तथा त्वं सर्वदा माता सर्वेधां सर्वकतः ॥ 63 ॥

मातृहीतः सन्त्रायन्तु स च जीविते द्वतः ।

त्वया हीने जनः कोप्रि न जीवत्वेय निश्रितम् ॥ 64 ॥

A child that sucks the milk might be saved by the Daiva (Fate), when deprived of its mother, but men can never be saved, if they be bereft of Thee! O Mother! Thou art always gracious. Please be gracious unto me.

सुप्रसन्यकरणा तं मां प्रसना भवांविके ।

वैरिग्रस्तं च विषयं देहि महां सनातनी ॥ 65 ॥

अर्ह यावत्चया हीनी बंधुतीश्व भिशुकः ।

सर्वसंपद्धिहीनश तावदेव हरिग्रिये ॥ 66 ॥

O Eternal One! My possessions are now in the hands of the enemies. Be kind enough to restore my kingdoms to me from my enemies' hands. O Beloved of Hari! Since Thou hast forsaken me, I am wandering abroad, friendless, like a beggar, deprived of all prosperities.

ज्ञानं देहि च धर्म च सर्वसीभायसीयतम् ।

प्रभावं च प्रजायं च सर्वाधिकारमेव च ॥ 67 ॥

जयं पत्राकां मुके परमेश्वर्येव मेच ।

इत्युक्त्वा च महेन्द्रश्र सर्वे: सुरगणे: सह ॥ 68 ॥

O Devi! Give me Jñānam, Dharma, my desired fortune, power, influence and my possessions. O

Book IX Chapter XLIII

Nārada Indra and all the other Devas bowed down frequently to Mahā Laksmī with their eyes filled with tears.

प्रणनाम साधुनेगो मूटनों चैव पुनः पुनः ।

बह्मा च संकर्केशि शेणो धर्मेक्ष केलगः ॥ 6 9 ॥

सर्वे चकुः परीहारं सुरार्थे च पुनः पुनः ।

देवेध्यघ उर्व दत्ता पुष्पमालां मनोहाग्य ॥ 70 ॥

कैगवाय ददी ल्बमीः सन्तुहा सुरसंसरित ।

ययुदैवाङ्ग सन्तुहा: स्व स्व स्थानं च नारद ॥ 71 ॥

Brahmā, Śaṅkara, Ananta Deva, Dharma and Keśava all asked pardon again and again from Mahā Lakṣmī. Lakṣmī then granted boons to the Devas and before the assembly gladly gave the garland of flowers on the neck of Keśava. The Devas, satisfied, went back to their own places.

देवी ययी हरेः स्थानं घट्टा शीरोद्वागयिनः ।

ययुश्वि स्वगृहं बढ़ोगानी च नारद ॥ ७२ ॥

दत्ता शुभागिर्यां ती च देेवेध्यः प्रीतिपूर्वकम् ।

इंद स्तोयं महापुर्णयं सितंयं च पठेत्रः ॥ ७३ ॥

कुवेत्तुल्यः स भवेत्रज्ञाजेश्वरो महान् ।

पञलक्षजपैनेव स्तोत्रसिद्धभवैद्यगाम ॥ ७४ ॥

The Devi, Lakṣmī, too, becoming very glad went to Śrī Hari sleeping in the Kṣiroda Ocean. Brahmā and Maheśvara, both became very glad and, blessing the Devas, went respectively to their own abodes. Whoever recites this holy Stotra three times a day, becomes the King Emperor and gets prosperity and wealth like a God Kubera. Siddhi (success) comes to him who recites this stotra live lakhs of times.

सिद्धस्तोत्र यदि पेटनासमेकं तु सततम् ।

महासुखी च राजेज्ञे पथिव्यति न संग्रध: ॥ 75 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे नवमस्कन्धे

द्विचारिशीउधाय: 11 42 11

If anybody reads regularly and always this Siddha Stotra for one month, he becomes very happy and he turns out a Rājarājendra.

Here ends the Forty-second Chapter of the Ninth

Book on the Dhyānam and Stotra of Mahā

Lakṣmī in the Mahā Purānam

Śrimadevibhāgāvatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XLIII

CHAPTER XLIII

On Svåhä

नारद उवाच

नारायण महाभाग देवदेव मम प्रभो ।

रूपेणीय गुणनैव महसा तेजसा तिचषा ॥ १ ॥

त्वमेव ज्ञानिनां श्रैक्ष: सिद्धानां योगिनां मुने ।

तपस्विनां मुनिनां च परो वेददिवं वर: ॥ 2 ॥

महालूब्यया अगल्यानं विज्ञातं महद्धुतम् ।

अन्यतिकविष्टुपालयानं निगूई वव सप्रान्ते ॥ 3 ॥

अतीव गोपनीयं यदुपयुक्तं च सर्वतः ।

अग्रफाकर्यं पुराणेषु वेदोर्जतं धर्मसंयुतम् ॥ 4 ॥

Nārada said: O Rsī Nārāyaṇa! O Highly Fortunate One! O Lord! Thou art equal to Nārāyaṇa whether in beauty or in qualities, or in fame or in energy or in everything Thou art equal to Nārāyaṇa. Thou art the foremost of the Jñāniens; there cannot be found be found a second like Thee as a Siddha Yogi, the ascetics and the Munis. And Thou art the crest of the knowers of the Vedas. I have heard

the wonderful anecdote of Mahā Laksmi that Thou hast told me. Now tell me any other thing that is unknown, very good in everyway, in accordance with Dharma, in the Vedas, and that which is not as yet written in the Purāṇas.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

नानाप्रकारमाखणान्यप्रकार्य पुर्णातः ।

श्रुतं कतिविधं गृहमासते ब्रह्म-सुदुर्भम् ॥ 5 ॥

तेषु यत्सारभूतं च श्रोतुं किं वा रत्मिच्छसि ।

तन्मे बृहि महाभाग पश्राद्धस्याति तत्सून: ॥ 6 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: There are many wonderful hidden anecdotes that are not published as yet in the Purāṇas. What you have heard is very small in fact. Please mention me what you like to hear, what you think as best amongst them and I will describe that to you.

नारद उवाच

स्वाहा देखी हविदाने प्रशस्ता सर्वकंमु ।

चिन्ताने स्वधा शस्ता दक्षिणा सर्वतों वरा ॥ 7 ॥

गृलासां चरितं जनमफलं प्रधान्यमेव च ।

ओगुचिष्छायि स्वढ़क्नाड़वे देवैविदां वर ॥ 8 ॥

Nārada said: When clarified butter is poured as libations in all the sacrificial ceremonies to the gods, Svāhā is to be uttered everywhere as excellent, and commendable; so Svadhā is to be repeated in the offerings when the obations are offered to the Pitts, te deceased ancestors. Then, again, Dakṣinā (the sacrificial fee) is always to be paid as right and excellent. So, O Knower of the Vedas! I like to hear the account of Svadhā, and Dakṣinā and their merits. Please now tell me about them.

सूत उवाच

नारदस्य वचः शुत्वा ग्रहस्य मुनिसनम ।

क्यांं कविणुमारेषे पुराणोक्तां पुरातनीम् ॥ 9 ॥

Sūta said: Hearing the words of Nārada, Nārāyaṇa Rsi smiled and began to speak the very ancient words of the Purāṇas.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

सुःः प्रयन्तो देवा: स्वाहात्रार्थं वयुः पुरा ।

ब्रहुलोकं बहुसभ्यामाजमु: सुमनोहाग् ॥ १० ॥

गत्वा निवेदनं चकुर्गाहाहैतुर्क मुने ।

ब्रहा श्रुचा प्रतिज्ञा निवेचे श्रीहरिं परम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Nārāyana said: Before the creation, the Devas assembled in the beautiful Brahmā's Council to decide on their food question. They all brought to the notice of Brahmā the scarcity about their food. Brahmā promised to remove their food difficulties and began to chant hymns to Hari.

नारद उवाच

यज्ञपो हि भगवान्कलया च कमूव ह ।

ये० यच्छाद्विदंनं दर्न ते०यश्छा: ॥ 12 ॥

Nārada said: O Lord! Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa Himself incarnated in part as Sacrifice. Are not the Devas satisfied when the Brāhmaṇas pour oblations of ghee to the Devas in those sacrifices?

श्रीनारायण उवाच

हविद्वर्ति विप्राधु अन्ये ये क्षत्रियदाय: ।

सुरा नैव प्राप्नवर्ति तत्तून मुनिपुढ़ वि 13 ॥

देवा विषणणाले सर्वे तत्सभां च ययु: पुनः ।

गत्वा निवेदनं चक्रगहाराभगवाहेतुम् ॥ 14 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Muni! The Devas, in fact, did not get the offerings of the clarified butters that were poured in with devotion in sacrificial acts by the Brāhmaṇas and Kṣattriyas. So they were very much depressed and went again to the council of Brahmā and informed Him that they could not get any food for themselves.

ब्रहा श्रुत्वा तु ध्यानेन श्रीकृष्णा शरणं ययो ।

पूजां चकार प्रकृतेश्वानैव तद्वापा ॥ 15 ॥

प्रकृतेः कलया चैव सर्वगतिक्रस्वस्थिणी ।

अतीव सुन्दरी श्यामा सपणीया मनोहता ॥ 16 ॥

ईपद्व्यस्यप्रनात्या भत्नानुप्रकतात ।

उवारोति विघेरों घपयोगे वरं श्रणु ॥ 17 ॥

विधिसुद्वानं शुत्व संभामात्यमुवाच तम् ।

On hearing this, Brahmā at once meditated and took refuge of Śrī Krṣṇa; Krṣṇa advised them to worship Mūla Prakṛti. Brahmā then, by the command of Srī Krṣṇa, began to meditate on Prakṛti, worship Her and chant hymns to Her, Then from the part of Prakṛti, an all-powerful Devi appeared. She was very beautiful, Śyāmā (of a blue colour) and very lovely. This Devi was Svāhā. She looked always gracious with smile in Her face; it seemed that She was always ready to show favour towards the Bhaktas. She appeared before Brahmā and said: “O Lotus born! Want any boon you desire.”

प्रजानतिकवाच

त्यमनेद्रिका शक्तिर्भव याजतीय सुद्ती ॥ 18 ॥

दार्थुं न शक्तः प्रकृतीहुताश्रुं तया विना ।

त्वब्रामोच्चार्यं मंत्रिते यो दास्यति हविन्दैरः ॥ 19 ॥

सुरीयस्तत्यानुवन्ति सुरा: सानन्दपूर्वकम् ।

Hearing Her words, the Creator spoke reverentially: "O Devi! Let Thou be the burning power of Fire; without Thee Fire would not be able

Book IX Chapter XLIII

to burn anything. At the conclusion of any Mantra, whoever taking Thy name, will pour oblations in the Fire to the Gods, will cause those oblations to go to the Gods and reach them. And then they will be very glad.

अनः: संपत्स्वरूपा च श्रीरूपा सा गृहेक्षी ।। 20 ॥

देवानां पूजिता शक्रधरादीनां भर्वाधिके ।

ब्रहणधु बचः श्रुत्वा सा विष्णणा बचूव ह् ॥ 21 ॥

तमुवाच तते देवी स्वाधिप्रायं स्वयंभुवम् ।

O Mother! Let Thou be the wealth of Fire, the beauty and housewife of Fire; let Thou be incessantly worshipped in the regions of the Gods and amongst men and other beings." Hearing these words of Brahmā, Svāhā Devī became very sad and expressed Her own intentions: 'I will get Krṣṇa as my husband; let me perform Tapasyā as long as it takes. This is my object. All other things are false as dreams.

स्वाहोचाच

अर्ह कृष्ण भविष्यामि तपसा सुधिरेण च ॥ 22 ॥

ब्रह्मतदन्यं यत्किंघित्वपनवद्धभ्रमेव च ।

विधाता जानतत्वं च रंभपूर्ण्युज्ञेयो विध्युः ॥ 23 ॥

विचर्पि शेणे बोल्चंच व धर्मः साक्षी च दर्पिणाम् ।

सर्वाधुपूज्यो देवानां गणेषु च गणेष्वरः ॥ 24 ॥

I always meditate with devotion on the lotus-fect of Śrī Krṣṇa, serving Which You have become the Creator of this world, Śambhu has become the Conqueror of death, Ananta Deva is supporting this universe, Dharma is the Witness of the virtuous, Gangeśa is getting first of all, the first worship.

प्रकृति: सर्वेमुज्ञा यत्रमसात्यगुर्भवन्त।

त्रययो मुनयेधि पूजिता यतिबेया ॥ 25 ॥

तत्पादपं चित्रत भावेन चिंतयाम्यहम् ।

पशास्या पशामित्युक्त्वा पशनाभागुस्तार: ॥ 26 ॥

Prakrti Devi has become the adorable of all and the Munis and the Rsis respected by all. O Child! Heaving spoken thus to the Lotus-born, Padmā, with Her lotus-face, meditating incessantly on the Lotus-Feet of Śrī Krṣṇa, free from any disease, started to perform tapasyā for attaining Him.

जगमात तपसे देवी ध्याला कृष्ण निरामयम् ।

तपसलेये वर्षेलक्षेमकपादेन पशुजा ॥ 27 ॥

तदा द्वर्ग श्रीकृष्ण निरुर्णं प्रकृतेः परम् ।

अतीव कमनीयं च रूपं द्वृषा च रूपिणी ॥ 28 ॥

She, first of all, stood on one leg and practised austerities for one lakh years. Then She saw the Highest Puruṣa Śrī Krṣna, Who is beyond Prākṛti and Her attributes. The beautiful amorous Svāḥā, seeing the Lovely Form of the Lord of Love, fainted. मृच्छीं संग्राम काटेन कामोगस्य च कामुकी ।

विज्ञान तदधिपूर्गं सर्वेजस्तमायचर ह ॥ 29 ॥

समुत्थाय च तां क्रोडे क्षीणांगी तपसा चित्यम् ।

The omniscient Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa knowing Her intentions, took Her to His lap, reduced very much in body by long continued Tapasyā, and He said:

श्रीभगवानुचार

वाराहे वे त्वमंत्रेन मम पत्नी भविष्यसि ॥ 30 ॥

- नामा नार्यजिती कन्या कांले तन्यजितस्य च ।

अनुतान्नेनद्रिका तंच भवपत्नी च भामिनि ॥ 31 ॥

मन्यांगकला पूज्ञा च मतुससादान्द्रविष्यसि ।

वहिक्त्वां चितिफाबेने संपुज्ञ च गृहुर्वर्गिम ॥ 32 ॥

रामिधिति तवा सार्थं नायया रमणीयाव ।

O Devi! Thou shalt be My wife in the next Varāha Kalpa. Then Thou wilt be the daughter of Nagnajit and wilt be known by the name of Nāgnajiti. O Beloved! At present let Thou be the Energy of Fire and be His wife. By My boon Thou wilt be worshipped by all. Fire will make Thee the Lady of His house and take the utmost care of Thee. Thou wilt be able to enjoy easily with Him.

इत्युक्स्तांतदीये देवो देवौ संभाष्य नारद ॥ 33 ॥

तजाजगाम संस्करी वहिद्रक्षीदान्देशतः ।

सामवेदोक्त्यानेन ध्यात्वा तां जगदंविकाम् ॥ 34 ॥

सम्पूज परितुह वा पाणि जग्राह मंत्रतः ।

O Nārada! Thus saying to Svāhā, Bhagavān disappeared. On the other hand, Fire came in there by the command of Brahmā, with a doubtful mind and began to meditate on Her, the World Mother as per Sāma Veda and worshipped Her then pleased and married Her with mantrams, etc.

तदा दिख्यं वर्षशतं से रेमे रमया सह ॥ 35 ॥

अतिनि निजेने देशे संभोगासुखरे सदा ।

बभूव गार्भत्सया तु हताशस्य च तेजसा ॥ 36 ॥

तं दधारा च सा देहीं दिखं ह्रादशलतस्मर ।

ततः सुधाव पूरांश्च सपणीयामनोहरान् ॥ 37 ॥

दिश्षणानिरनाहर्यताहवनीयान् क्रमेण च ।

For one hundred divine years they enjoyed each other. In a very solitary place while they were enjoying each other, Svāhā Devi felt pregnant. For full twelve divine years She retained Her pregnancy.

Then She delivered gradually there sons

Daksināgni, Gārhapatyāgni, and Āhavanīyāgni.

ऋषयो मुनवर्षेवेब बाहाणा: क्षत्रियाद्व: ॥ 38 ॥

स्वाहांतं मंसपुच्चार्थे हृदिवर्धनं च चझित्रे ।

स्वाहायुक्तं च मंत्रं च चा यूहाति प्रशास्तकम् ॥ 39 ॥

सर्वसिद्धिपर्वित्तस्य मन्त्रद्विणाग्रातः ।

विश्रहीने वृथा सप्तं वैद्रहीने यथा द्वितः ॥ 40 ॥

पतिसेवार्वहीना स्ती विद्याहीनो यथा पुमान् ।

फलशाखाविहीनप्र यथा चूक्षो हि निंतिः : ॥ 41 ॥

स्वाहाहीनस्तथा मनो न हुतः फलदायकः ।

परितुहा दिज्ञा: सर्वे देवा: संप्रपुरातृषी: ॥ 42 ॥

The Rsis, Munis, Brāhmaṇas, Kṣattriyas poured oblations of clarified butter pronouncing the terminal mantra ‘Svāhā.’ He who pronounces this excellent terminal Mantra ‘Svāhā’ gets immediate success in his actions. Then all the mantras without ‘Svāhā’ the in teend became impotent as snakes become when void of poison, the Brāhmaṇas when they are devoid of the knowledge of the Vedas, the wife when she does not serve her husband, the men when they turn illiterate and the trees, when void of fruits and branches. O Child! The Brāhmaṇas then became satisfied. The Devas began to receive the oblations.

स्वाहितेनैव मन्तेण सफलं सर्वमेव च ।

क्रूवेवं क्रवितं सर्वे स्वाहोपाख्यानमुत्तमम् ॥ 43 ॥

सुखदं मोक्षं सारं किं घृभ्यः श्रोतुमिच्छसि ।

With the ‘Svāha’ mantra everything turned out fruitful. Thus I have described to you the anecdote of ‘Svāhā.’ One who hears t. is essential anecdote

gets his happiness enhanced and the Mokṣa in his hands. What more do you want to hear? Say.

नात्र उवाच

स्वाहापूजाविधानं च ध्यानं स्तोत्रं भूनीखर ॥ 44 ॥

संपूत्र्य बहिनुस्ताव येन तदूद मे प्रभो ।

Nārada said: I like to hear how Fire worshipped Svāhā and recited stotras (thymns of praise) to Her. Kindly tell me the method of worship, the Dhyānam and Stotra.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

ध्यानं च समावेदोर्वतं स्तोजपूरालयाकम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

वदाति प्रश्नतां बहुत्साटधानो भूनीश्व ।

सर्वेत्रानार्थकाले शाल्यामे घरेडथवा ॥ 4 6 ॥

स्वाहा संपूज्य यत्नेन यजं कुयार्थकलावये ।

स्वाहा मन्नांगयुक्तां च मन्त्रसिद्धावस्थितिपणि ॥ 47 ॥

सिद्धां च सिद्धिदां रुणा कर्मणां फलदां रुषाणम् ।

Nārāyaṇa said: O Best of Brāhmaṇas! I now tell you the meditation (Dhyānam) as per Sāma Veda, the method of worship and stotra. Listen attentively. At the commencement of any sacrificial stone or in an earthen jar (ghata), the Devi Svāhā and then commence the ceremony with the expectation of getting the desired fruit. The following is the Dhyānam (meditation) of Svāhā Devi: “O Devi Svāhā! Thou art embodied of the Mantras; Thou art the success of the Mantras; Thou art Thyself a Siddhā: Thou givest success and the the fruits of actions to men Thou dost good to all.

इति ध्याना च मूलेन दत्ता पादाधिकं नर: ॥ 48 ॥

सर्वसिद्धि लभेतलुना मूलमन्वं मुने शृणु ।

उं० ईँई वाङ्गजायधे देखे साहित्यनेन च ॥ 49 ॥

यः: पूजेषेच्च तां भवस्या सर्वेई संभवेद्युबम् ।

Thus meditating, one should offer Pādya (water for washing the feet), etc., uttering the basic Mantra; success then comes to him. Now hear about the Radical Seed Mantra. The said mantra (mūla mantra) is this: 'Om Hrim Śrim Vahnijāyāyai Devyai Svāhā.' If the Devi be worshipped with this Mantra, all the desires come to a successful issue.

Book IX Chapter XLIV

वहिक्वाच

स्वाहा वहिक्षिया बहिजाया संतीषाकारिणी ॥ 50 ॥

ग्रस्ति: क्रिया कालद्धारी परिपाककरी धुवा ।

गतिः सदा नराणां च दाहिका ददनक्रम ॥ 51 ॥

संसारासारूपा च घोरा संसारातिराणि ।

देवजीवनल्पा च देहूपोषणकारिणी ॥ 52 ॥

Fire recited the following stotra: “Thou art Svâhā, Thou art the Beloved of Fire, Thou art the wife of Fire; Thou pleasest all’ Thou art the Śakti, Thou art the action, Thou art the bestower of Kāla (time); Thou dost digest the food; Thou art the Dhruvā; Thou art the resort of men; Thou art the burning power; Thou canst burnt everything, Thou art the essence of this world; Thou art the deliverer from the terrible world; Thou art the life of the gods and Thou nourishest the Gods.”

घोड़शीतिन नामानि यः घरेट्रप्रदिससंयुतः ।

सर्वसिद्धिर्भवैतत्सय इह लोके परंब च ॥ 53 ॥

नांगहीनं घबेत्स्य सर्व कर्म सुणेशनम् ।

अपुत्रो लभते पुरं भार्याहीनो लभेसिद्याम् ॥

रमोपोपां खकांतिं च संग्राम्य सुखामपानुवात् ॥ 54 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमदेवीभागवते नवमस्कन्धे नारदनारायणसंवादे

स्वाहोपाख्याने निवचारिशोस्थायः ॥ 43 ॥

O Nārada! He who reads with devotion these sixteen names, gets success both in this world as well as in the next. None of his works become deficient in any way; rather all the works are performed successfully and with a successful issue. Reading this stotra, one who has no wife, gets wife. So much so that the man who recites the stotra gets for his wife equal to Rambhā, the heavenly nymph, and passes his time in greatest bliss.

Here ends the Forty-third Chapter of the Ninth Book on the history of Svāhā in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam,

the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XLIV

CHAPTER XLIV

On Svadhā

शीनारायण उवाच

शृणु नार्त वक्ष्यामि स्वधोपाख्यानमुतम् ।

विद्गणां च तृत्यितरं आद्धाराकफलवधेनम् ॥ १ ॥

सुर्धेरादौ विगुर्णानासर्ज जनतां विधि: ।

चतुरष्ठ भूतिमतर्सीशं तेजःस्वकीर्णीः ॥ २ ॥

Nāyāyana said: O Nārada! I will tell you now the excellent anecdote of Svadhā, pleasing to the Pitrs and enhancing the fruits of the Śrāddha ceremony when foods are offered to the Pitrs. Listen. Before the creation, the Creator created seven Pitrs. Four out of them are with forms and the other three are of the nature of Teja (light).

Note: Kavyavāhoanalah somo yamaścāryamā tathā, agnisīvāttāh barhiṣadah somāpā pīt devatāḥ. These seven Pitrs are according to the other Purānas.

श्रुा सप्तिगुणान् सुखक्यात्मानोहान् ।

आहारं ससुने तेनां आद्ध तपणपूर्वकम् ॥ 3 ॥

स्नानं तर्पणयरंतं श्राद्धे तु देवधुजनम् ।

आद्धिकं च सितंध्यान्तं विघाणां च श्रुते श्रुतम् ॥ 4 ॥

Seeing the beautiful and lovely forms of the Pitrs, He made arrangements for their food in the form of Śrāddhas and Tarpanas, etc. (funeral ceremony and peace-offerings), etc. (Śrāddha, solemn obsequies performed in honour of the manes of deceased ancestors.) Taking bath, performing Śrāddha ceremony upto Tarpanam (peace-offerings), worshipping the Devas and doing Sandhyā thrice a day these are the daily duties of the Brāhmaṇas.

नित्यं न कुयांची विप्राससंध्यं श्राद्तपंगण।

बलि वेट्यबनि सेठपि विषतीने ययोरगः ॥ ५ ॥

देसीसेवाहितीनच श्रीहरनेविद्युपं क

भस्मितं सृतकं तस्य न कर्महीश्न नारद ॥ ७ ॥

If any Brāhmaṇa does not perform daily the Trisandhyās, Śrāddha, Tarpana, worship and the reciting of the Vedas, he becomes devoid of fire like a snake without any poison. He who does not perform the devotional service of the Devi, who

eats food not offered to Śri Hari, who remains impure till death is not entitled to do any karma whatsoever.

बहा श्राद्धादिकं सुहा जगम पितृहैते ।

न प्राप्तुविति चितरो द्वर्ति बहाणादय: ॥ 7 ॥

सर्वे च जमयु: कृष्टिता: तिज्ञास्तु बहणण: सभाम् ।

सर्वे निवेदने चकृत्सेव जगतां विधिम् ॥ 8 ॥

Thus, introducing the Śrāddhas, etc., for the Pitṛs, Brahmā went to His own abode. The Brāhmaṇas went on doing the Śrāddhas for the Ptṛs, but the Pitṛs could not enjoy them and so they remained without food and were not satisfied. They all, being hungry and sad, went to the Council of Brahmā and informed Him everything from beginning to end.

ब्रह्मा च मानसी कन्यां सुखे तु मनोहगम् ।

रूपयीवनसंपांजी शतचंद्रसिन्धाननम् ॥ 9 ॥

विद्यार्ती गुणवतीमतिरूपवर्ती सतीम् ।

झतचेषकवाणीं रत्नप्रपणभूषितम् ॥ 10 ॥

Brahmā then created out of His mind one daughter very beautiful, full of youth and having a face lovely, as if equal to one hundred moons. That women was best in all respects whether in form, beauty, qualities or in learning. Her colour was white like the white Campaka flower and her body was adorned all over with jewel ornaments. This form was very pure, ready to grant boons, auspicious and the part of Prakṛti.

विश्युजां प्रकृतेरीं शसितां वरदां रुष्माम ।

स्वाधामिधां च सुर्तीं लक्ष्मीलक्षणारंसुतम् ॥ १ १ ॥

शतपघपदान्सतपादपचं च विष्तीम् ।

पत्नीं विगुणां पचास्वां पचजां पचलोचनाम् ॥ १ २ ॥

Her face was beaming with smiles; her teeth were very beautiful and her body shewed signs, of Lakṣmī (i.e., of wealth and prosperity) Her name was Svadhā. Her lotus-feet were situated on one hundred lotuses. She was the wife of the Pitrs. Her face resembled that of a lotus and Her eyes looked like water lilies. She was born of the lotus born Brahmā.

चितृध्यश्व ददौ बह्मा तुहेध्यस्तुष्टिशिपीम् ।

बाहाणानां चोपदेशं चकार योपनीयकम् ॥ 13 ॥

स्वधांतं मंमपुच्चार्य चितृध्यो देवमित्यपि ।

क्रमेण तेन विग्राका चित्र दानं ददुः पुरा ॥ 14 ॥

The Grand-father Brahmā made over that daughter of the nature of Tuṣṭi (Contentment) to the hands of the Pitṛs and they were satisfied. Brahmā advised the Brāhmanas privately that whenever they would offer any thing to the Pitṛs, they should offer duly with the mantra Svadhā pronounced at the end. Since then the Brāhmanas are offering everything to the Pitṛs, with the Mantra Svadhā uttered in the end.

स्वाहा शस्ता देववादे पितृवादे स्वधा स्मृता ।

सर्वेर दक्षिण शगला हतं चाम्पादिक्षणम ॥ 15 ॥

पित्तो देवता विगा मुनवो मनवस्तथा ।

पूजां चकुः स्वधां शगतां तुहुवः यमादात् ॥ 16 ॥

Svāha is laudable, when offerings are presented to the Gods and Svāha is commendable when offerings are made to the Pitṣ. But in both the cases, Dakṣinā is essential. Without Dakṣinā (sacrificial fee), all sacrifices are useless and worthless. The Pitṣ, Devatās, Brāhmaṇas, the Munis, the Manus worshipped the peaceful Svāha and chanted hymns to Her with great love.

देवावद्यः संतुहा: परिपूर्णमनोरधाः ।

विपाद्वध्य तिहत: स्वधाद्वी दोरण च ॥ १ १ ७ ॥

इन्येवं कार्वितं सर्वे स्वधोपाख्यानावेच च ।

सर्वेषां च तुहिकरं किं भूयः शोर्गमिष्ठसि ॥ १ १ ॥

The Devas, Pitrs, Brāhmanas, all were pleased and felt their ends achieved when they got the boon from Svadhā Devī. Thus I have told you everything about Svadhā. It is pleasing to all. What more do you want to hear? Say. I will answer all your questions,

श्रीनार्त उवाच

स्वधापुजाधियानं च ध्यानं स्तोयं महामुने ।

श्रौतुपिच्छामि यत्नेन वदे वेदिवदां वर ॥ 19 ॥

Nārada said: O Thou, the Best of the knowers of the Vedas! O Muni Sattama! I want now to hear

Book IX Chapter XLIV

the method of worship, the meditation and the hymns of Svadhā Devi. Kindly tell me all about this.

नारायण उवाच

ध्यानं च स्तवनं बह्ञान्वेक्तं सर्वेगलगम् ।

सर्वे जानासि च कक्षं जातुमिष्छसि वृद्धदे। 2 0 ॥

गरत्कृष्णविदोर्धगं माघवां आढ़ावासरे ।

स्वयं संपूँच्य न्येनेन ततः शाद्धे समाचरेत् ॥ 2 1 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: You know everything about the all auspicious Dhyāna, Stotra, as stated in the Vedas; then why do you ask me again? However I will speak out this for the enhancement of knowledge. On the thirteenth day of the Dark Fortnight in autumn when the Maghā asterism is with the Moon and on the Śrāddha day.

स्वयं नाभ्यच्छं यो विषः कुर्बाद्वर्मिति: ।

न भवेकल्पाविस्तयं आब्रह्म त्यांच्या च ॥ 22 ॥

ब्रह्माणो मानसी कन्या शशल्स्यिवर्योवान् ।

पूज्या वे विपुर्वेदवानां आब्रदानां फलदां भजे ॥ 23 ॥

One should worship with care Svadhā Devī; then one should perform Śrāddha. If, out of vanity, a Brāhmin performs Śrāddha without first worshipping Svadhā Devī then he will never get the fruits of Tarpānam or Śrāddha. 'O Devī Svadhe! Thou art the mind-born daughter of Brahmā, always young and worshipped by the Piṭs. Thou bestowest the fruits of Śraddha.

इति ध्याना शिलाथा वा हाथवा मंगले घरे ।

दहायताघादिकं तस्ये मुनेतेनि शुनीं शुतम् ॥ 24 ॥

ऊं ईं ईं ईं कसी सधादेवैल्याहिते च महामुने ।

समुच्चार्थ च संयुज स्वुला तां प्रणमेदिद्विः ॥ 25 ॥

So I meditate on Thee. Thus meditating, the Brāhmīn is to pronounce the motto (mūla mantra) and offer the Pādyam, etc., on the Śalāgramā stone or on the auspicious earthen jar. This is the ruling of the Vedas. The motto is ‘Om Hrim, Śrim, Klīm, Svadhā Devyai Svāhā.’ She should be worshipped with this Mantra. After reciting hymns to the Devi, one is to bow down to the Svadhā Devi.

स्तोत्रं शृष्यु सुनिश्रष्ट श्रव्युप्र विश्रात् ।

सर्ववीक्षाप्रदं नृणां बह्वाणा यत्कृतं पुरा ॥ 26 ॥

O Son of Brahma! O Best of Munis! O Skilled in hearing! I now describe the stotra which Brahma composed at the beginning for the bestowal of the desired fruits to making. Listen.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

स्वयंोच्चारणायेगत रीर्थन्वारी भवेत्रः ।

मुच्यते सर्वोपपेधो वाजयेपकलं लभेत् ॥ 27 ॥

Nārāyana said: The instant the Mantra Svadhā is pronounced, can get at once the fruits of bathing in the holy places of pilgrimages. No trace of sin exists in him at that time; rather the religious merits of performing the Vājapeya sacrifice accrue to him.

स्वधा स्वधा स्वधेत्येवं यदि वारजयं सन्ते ।

आद्रव्य फलमाणिति वलेश्छ तर्पायच च ॥ 28 ॥

आद्रकाले स्वधातोयं यः शृणीत समाहितः ।

स लभेच्छाद्वर्भवृतं फलमेव न संशयः ॥ 29 ॥

‘Svadhā,’ ‘Svadhā,’ ‘Svadhā,’ thrice this word if one calls to mind, one gets the fruits of Śrāddha, Tarapanam, and Bali (offering sacrifices). So much so, if one hears with devotion during the Śrāddha time the recitation of the hymn of Svadhā, one gets, no doubt, the fruit of Śrāddha.

सद्य सद्य सद्योर्वे विनंस्य: यः पदेस्रः ।

प्रियां विवितीत स लभेतपाडी पुत्रुणान्वितात् ॥ 30 ॥

पितृणां प्राणतुल्या तं द्विजनैवनस्थिपणी ।

श्रद्धाविश्रादुर्वी दो भ्राद्धादीनां फलप्रद्धा ॥ 31 ॥

If one recites the Svadhā mantra thrice every time in the morning, midday and evening) every day, one gets an obedient, chaste wife begetting sons. The following is the hymn (Stotra) to Svadhā wife begetting sons. The following is hymn (Stotra) to Svadhā: 'O Devi Svadhe! Thou art dear to the Pitjs as their vital breaths and thou art the lives of the Brāhmaṇas. Thou art the Presiding Deity the of Śrāddha ceremonies and bestowest the fruits thereof.

निवार्यां सत्यस्प्रासि पुरुषस्पासि सुते ।

आविषर्वितितेभावौ सुधी च प्रलये तव ॥ 32 ॥

अंः वस्तिश्व नमः: स्वाहा स्थाया तं दक्षिणा तथा ।

निरूपिताश्रतुर्दैदे: प्रशस्ता: कर्भिगां पुनः ॥ 33 ॥

O Thou of good vows! Thou art eternal, true, and of the nature of religious merits. Thou appearest in creation and disappearest in dissolution. And this appearing and disappearing go on for ever. Thou art Svasti, Thou art Namaskāra (salutation); Thou art Svadhā. Thou art Daksīnā, Thou art the various woks as designated in the Vedas.

कर्मपूर्व्यंधिवेता ईशृरणे विनिर्मिताः ।

इन्वेवयुक्त्वा स बह्या बह्योगेके स्वसंसदि ॥ 34 ॥

तस्थो च महसा सघः स्वथा साविवर्भूव है ।

त्वा चितृष्यः प्रददौ तामेव कमलनान्म. ॥ 35 ॥

तां संप्राय वयुस्ते च पितरश्र प्रतर्पिताः ।

स्वधास्तोभिवरं पृथय वः शृणोति समाहितः ॥

स स्नातः सर्वतीर्थ्ये वांछितं फलमान्युवात् ॥ 36 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणो नवमस्कन्मे नारदनारायणसंवादे

स्वधोपाख्याने चतुब्रह्वारिणोउध्यायः ॥ 44 ॥

These the Lord of the world has Created for the success of actions. \( ^{3} \)  No sooner Brahmā, seated in His assembly in the Brahma Loka, reciting this stotra remained silent, then Śavdhā Devi appeared there all at once. When Brahmā handed over the lotus-faced Svadhā Devi over to the hands of the Piṭṭs, and they gladly took Her to their own abodes. He who hears with devotion and attention this stotra of Svadhā, gets all sorts of rich fruits that are desired and the fruits of bathing in all the Tirthas.

Here ends the Forty-fourth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the story of Svadhā Devi in the discourse between Nārada and Nārāyaṇa in the Mahā Purānam Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER XLV

On Daksinā

श्रीनारायण उवाच

उनके स्वाहास्वधाख्यानं प्रशस्तं मधुरं परम् ।

वक्ष्यामि स्टिंषणाख्यानं सावधानो निशामय ॥ १ ॥

गोपी सुशील गोलेके पुर्णे उसीद्वेयसी दरेः ।

राघा प्रधाना सधीची धन्या मान्या मनोहार ॥ २ ॥

उत्तील सुंदरी रामा सुभगा सुदती सती ।

विद्यारती गुणारती चातिरूपवर्ती सती ॥ ३ ॥

Nārāyana said: The excellent, most sweet stories of Svāhā and Svadhā are told; now I will tell you the story of Daksjñā; hear attentively. In early days, in the region of Goloka, there was a good-natured Gopi named Suśilā, beautiful, Rādhā's companion and very dear to Śri Hari. She was fortunate, respected, beautiful, lovely prosperous, with good teeth, learned, well qualified and of exquisitely handsome form.

कल्यात कीभालंगी कांता कमललोचना ।

सुक्षीणी सुस्नी रथामा न्योधेपर्यिषित्ति ॥ 4 ॥

Her whole body was tender and lovely like Kalāvatī (one versed in 64 arts; moon) She was beautiful and her eyes were like water lilies. Her hips were good and spacious; Her breasts were full;

she was Śyāmā (a kind of women having colour like melted gold; body being hot in cold and cool in summer; of youthful beauty); as well She was of the Nyagrodha class of women (an excellent woman. Stanau Sukathinau Yasyā Nitambeca Viśalata. Madhye Krinābhavedyā Sānyagrodha parimandālā).

ईन्द्रास्यप्रसात्या रत्नालंकारभूषिता ।

श्वेतचंफकरणांना विवोष्टी भृगलोचना ॥ 5 ॥

Always a smile sweetened Her face; and that looked always gracious. Her whole body was covered with jewel ornaments. Her colour was white like the white campakas. Her lips were red like the Bimba fruits; Her eyes were like those of a deer.

कामाशबेबु निणुणा कामिनी हंसगामिनी ।

भावानुक्ता भावज्ञा कृष्णस्य प्रियभामिनी ॥ 6 ॥

Suśilā was very clever in amorous sciences. Her gait was like a swan. She was specially versed in what is called Premā Bhakti (love towards God). So She was the dearest lady of Śri Krṣṇa. And She was of intense emotional feelings.

Book IX Chapter XLV

सस्ता रसिका रासे रासेशस्य रसोसुका ।

उवासादिक्षणे कोडे तथायाः पुस्तः पुरा ॥ ७ ॥

संवभूवानप्रभुखी भयंेन मधुसूदनः ।

द्वुगा तथा च पुस्तों गोपौनीं प्रवरीतमाम् ॥ 8 ॥

She knows all the sentiments of love; she was witty humorous, and ardent for the love of Śri

Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of the Rāsa circle. She sat by the left side of Śri Kṛṣṇa in the presence of Rādhā. Śri Kṛṣṇa, then cast His glance on Rādhā, the Chief of

the Gopis and hung down His head through fear.

कामिनी रत्नतदानां रत्नतपंकजलोचनाम् ।

कोपेन कंपितागीं च कोपेन सुकृत्तितधारम् ॥ 9 ॥

रेगेन तां तु गच्छतीं विज्ञाय ततन्तनम् ।

विरोधभीति भागवानंतर्निं चकार सः ॥ 10 ॥

पलायंत च कांत च शांत सत्त्वं सुविध्राम् ।

विलोक्ष्य कंपिता गोवः सुशीलग्रासतो भिचा ॥ 11 ॥

Rādhā's face turned red; the two eyes looked like red lilies; all Her bodies began to quiver out of anger and Her lips began to shake. Seeing that state of Radhā, Bhagvān Śrī Krṣna dissappeared, fearing that a quarrel might ensue. Suśilā and other Gopīs seeing that the peaceful Krṣna of Sattvā Guṇa and of lovely form had dis appeared, began to tremble with fear.

विलोक्य लपटे तन गोपीनों लक्षकोटयः ।

युंराजिलयुगा भीता भक्तिन्यात्मकंधा: ॥ १ 2 ॥

रक्ष रक्षेलुर्फकंव्यो देबीमिति पुनः पुनः ।

वयुभवैन शरणं तत्याङ्गणपकें जे १ ३ १

Then one lakh Koti Gopis seking Kṛṣṇa absent and Rādhā angry, became very much afraid and bowing their heads down with devotion and with folded palms began to say fequently. ‘Rādeh! Protect us, protect us’ and they took shelter at Her feet.

त्रिलक्षकोटयो गोपा: सुदामादय एव च ।

व्युर्षयेन शरणं तत्याद्याङ्गे च नाद ११ १४ ११

पलायंतं च कांतं च विज्ञाय परमेश्वरी ।

पलायंती सहचरी सुगीलां च शणणा सा ॥ 15 ॥

O Nārada! Three lākh Gopas also including Sudāmā and other took shelter at the lotus feet of

Śrī Rādhā out of fear. Seeing, then, Krṣṇa absent and Her companion Suśilā running away, Rādhā cursed her thus:

अद्याप्यिति गोलोकं सा चेद्यातित गोपिका ।

सहो गयनमाओंण भयसाच्च भविष्यति ॥ १ ६ ॥

इत्येवमुक्त्वा तत्रैव देवदेवेश्वीरा क्या ।

रासेक्षी रासमध्ये रासेगामाजुहाव है ॥ १ ७ ॥

'If Suśilā' comes again to this Goloka, she will be reduced to ashes.' Thus cursing Her companion Suśilā out of anger, Rādhā, the Darling of the Deva of the Devas, and the Lady of the Rāsa circle went to the Rāsa circle and called on Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of the same.

नालोक्य परतः कृष्णं राशा विरहकातर।

युगकौटिरमं मेने क्षणपेँदन सुझत ॥ 18 ॥

हैं कृष्ण प्राणनाशेशगच्छ प्राणाधिकप्रिय ।

प्राणाधिश्छाद्वेरेण प्राण योति त्वया किना ॥ 19 ॥

Not being able to find out Śrī Krṣṇa, a minute appeared a yuga to Her and she began to say: O Lord of Prāṇas! O Dearer than My life! O Presiding Deity of my life! O Krṣṇa! My life seems to depart from Thy absence! Come quickly and shew Thyself to me.

स्वीराबं: पतिसीभायद्धोते च दिने दिने ।

सुखं च विपुलं व्यमातं सेवेद्वर्दनतः सदा ॥ 20 ॥

पतिथिकु: कुलस्वीणामधिद्धे: सदा गति: ।

परसंपरवरूपश्च पूर्तिमाभ्योगर: सदा ॥ 21 ॥

धार्मदः सुखदः शरणवीति: शाँति: सदा ।

O Lord! It is through the favour of one's husband that the pride of women gets increased day by day. Women's safeguards of happiness are their husbands. Therefore women, who are helpless creatures, ought always to serve their husbands according to Dharma. The husband is the wife's friend, presiding deity and the sole refuge and the chief wealth. It is through husbands that women derive their pleasures, enjoyments. Dharma, happiness, peace and contentment.

सम्पानैर्वीध्यमानश्व मानदो मानखंडनः ॥ 22 ॥

सारास्तारतः स्वामी कंयुन्ता कंयुन्ता: ।

न च भर्तु: समो कंयुर्वीधीविक्षुरु इयन्ते ॥ 23 ॥

If husbands are respected, wives are respected and if husbands are dishonoured, women are dishonoured too. The husband is the highest thing to a woman. He is the highest friend. There is no better friend than him.

भरणादेव भर्ती च पालनात्यतिन्कच्यते ।

शरीरिकाच स सवामी कामदः कांत उच्चते ॥ 24 ॥

बंधुश सुखद्धूद्वा च प्रीतिदानास्थि: सूना: ।

ऐपवर्धतान्दीशु क्षणेशास्त्राणनायकः ॥ 25 ॥

रतिदानाच्य सणः प्रियो नास्ति प्रियावर: ।

पुस्तु स्वामिनः शुक्राकजायते तेन स प्रियः ॥ 26 ॥

The husband is called Bhartā because he supports his wife; he is called Pati, because he preserves her; he is called Svāmī, because he is the master of her body; he is called Kānta because he bestows the desired things to her; he is called Bandhu, because he increases her happiness; he is called Priya, because he gives pleasure to her; he is called Iśa, because he bestows prosperity on her; he is called Prāneśvara, because he is the lord of her Prāna; and he is called Ramana, because he gives enjoyment to her. There is no other thing dearer than husband. The son is born of the husband; hence the son is so dear.

शतपुरातर: स्वामी कुलकानां विष: सदा ।

असलुलपुरता या कांति विज्ञानुमक्षमा ॥ 27 ॥

स्नानं च सर्वतीर्थेषु सर्ववैनुषे उद्धिषण ।

प्रादिष्णयं पृथिव्याश्र सर्वाणि च तपांसि च ॥ 28 ॥

सर्वाणिवेय नजातीम महान्तानि याचि च ।

उपोषणानि पुष्पानि यानि यांशि श्रुतानि च ॥ 29 ॥

गुरुसेवा विष्सेवा वेदसंवादिकं च यत ।

स्वामिन: पादसेवाया: कलं गहाँतने घोक्षिणि ॥ 30 ॥

The husband is dearer to a family woman than one hundred sons. Those who are born in impure families, cannot know what substance a husband is made up of. Taking baths in all the Tirthas, giving Dakṣinās in all the Yajñas (sacrifice), circumambulating round the whole earth, performing all austerities, observing all vows, making all great gifts, holy fastings, all that are dictated in the

Šāstras, serving the Guru, the Brāhmaṇas and the Devas all cannot compare to even one sixteenth part with serving faithfully the feet of the husband. The husband is the highest; higher than the Spiritual Teacher (Guru), higher than the Brāhmaṇas, higher than all the Devas.

गृकविप्रे-द्रवेषु सर्वेथ्य प्रतिभुः ।

विद्याटाता यथा पुंसां कुलजानां तथा प्रियः ॥ 31 ॥

As to man, the Spiritual Teacher who imparts the Spiritual Knowledge is the Best and Supreme, so to the women their husband are the best of all.

गोपीनां लक्षकोटींना गोपानां च तथैव च ।

बढ़ाईज्ञानारंख्यानां तत्रस्थानां तथैव च ॥ 32 ॥

विश्वादिगोलकांतानामीश्वरो यनुसावतुः ।

अई न जाने तं कांतं क्वीस्वभावो दुतयसः ॥ 33 ॥

Oh! I am not able to realise the glory of my Dearest, by Whose favour I am the Sole Ruler of one lakh Koti Gopīs, one lakh Kotī Gopas, innumerable Brahmāṇṇads, and all the things thereof, and all the lokas (regions) from Bhu (earth) to Goloka. Oh! The womanly nature is insurmountable.”

इतुसूतना राधिका कृष्णं तत दूधी स्थणिततः ।

कोरो प्रेणा सा राधा नावधान्येत चाबबीत् ॥ 34 ॥

दर्शनं देहि रामण दीना विरहुदुःविता ।

अथ सा दक्षिणा देवो धक्ता गोलोकतां मुने ॥ 35 ॥

Thus saying, Radhika began to meditate with devotion on Śrī Krṣna, Tears began to flow incessantly from Her eyes. She exclaimed “O Lord! O Lord! O Ramana! Shew Thyself to me. I am very much weak and distressed from Thy bereavement.”

सुचिरं च तपस्तचा विवेश कमलातनो ।

अथ देवादयः सर्वे ग्रं कृत्वा सुतुकम्प। ॥ 36 ॥

नालभंसे फलं तेषां विष्णणाः प्रव्यूर्विधम् ।

विधिप्रविदंनं श्रुत्वा देवादीचां जगत्यतिम् ॥ 37 ॥

Now the Dakṣinā Devi, driven out from Goloka, practised Tapasyā for a long time when She entered into the body of Kamalā. The Devas, on the other

Book IX Chapter XLV

hand, performed a very difficult Yajña; but they could not derive any fruit therefrom. So they went to Brahmā, becoming very sad.

द्यौची सुचिरं भकल्पा प्रत्योर्गमावप: सः ।

नारायण्ड भगवान्माहल्ब्यम्यां उद्धतः ॥ 38 ॥

विनिष्कृष्य मार्ल्वल्बर्गी बहुणो दक्षिणां दही ।

ब्रहा दही तां चत्राय पूर्णार्थं च कर्माणम् ॥ 39 ॥

यज्ञ: संपूञ्य विधित्यानों तुहाव तत्पा ।

Hearing them, Brahmā meditated on Viṣṇu for a long time with devotion. At last Viṣṇu gave Him a reply. Viṣṇu got out of the body of Mahā Lakṣmī a Martya Lakṣmī (Lakṣmī of the earth) and gave Her Daksīnā to Brahmā. Then with a view to yield to the Devas the fruits of their Karmas, Brahmā made over to the Yajña Deva (the Deva presiding the sacrifice) the Devī Daksīnā, offered by Nārāyaṇa, Yajña Deva, then, worshipped Her duly and recited hymns to Her with great joy.

तपकाचनवर्णाधं चन्द्रकौटिसमप्रभाण ॥ 40 ॥

उतीव कमनीयां च सुचर्यं सुमनोहराण ।

कमलायां कोमलांगी कमलायतलोचनाम ॥ 41 ॥

कमलासनपूज्चां च कमलांगसामुद्वाम ।

वहिषुर्द्वीर्णकाधानां विबेबोई सुदर्ती सतीम ॥ 42 ॥

विश्वर्गी कविरीभारं मालतीमाल्यसंयुन्तम् ।

ईपद्वायप्रसाधायां रत्नभूषणभूषितम् ॥ 43 ॥

सुवेधाकां च सुस्नातां सुनिनानसमोहिनीम् ।

कस्तूरीविद्युभि: सार्थे सुगन्धिचन्दनेयुभि: ॥ 44 ॥

सिंदुर्दिवुतान्येनाप्यलकाशः स्थलोज्जलम् ।

सुप्रगत्नतितंबाबा बृहच्छोगिपणयोधरम् ॥ 45 ॥

Her colour was like melted gold; her lustre equalled kotī Moons; very lovely, beautiful, fascinating; face resembling water lilies, of a gentle body; with eyes like Padma Palāsa, born of the body of Lakṣmī, worshipped by Brahmā, wearing celestial silken garments, her lips resembling like Bimba fruits, chaste, handsome; her braid of hair surrounded by Mālati garlands; with a sweet smiling face, ornamented with jewel ornaments, well dressed, bathed, enchanting the minds of the Munis, below the hair of her forehead the dot of

musk and Sindūra scented with sandalpaste, of spacious hips, with full breasts, smitten by the arrows of Kāma Deva (the God of Love). Such was the Daksīnā Devi.

कामदेवाधारस्णो कामवाणप्रीडिताम् ।

तां द्वुत्रा सपनीयं च यजो मृष्ठमावरा ह १। 4 6 ।।

पर्सी तामेव जग्राह विधिक्रवीधानपूर्वकम् ।

विद्यं वर्षगतं चैव तां गृतीत्वा तु निर्वेने ॥ 4 7 ॥

यजो रेमे मुदा युक्तो रामेणे रमया सह ।

गर्भ द्वारा सा देवी दिव्यं झादणवर्षकम् ॥ 4 8 ॥

Seeing Her, the Yajña Deva fainted. At last he married her according to due rites and ceremonies. Taking her to a solitary place, he enjoyed her for full divine one hundred years with great joy like Lakṣmī Nārāyaṇa. Gradually then Dakṣinā became pregnant. She remained so for twelve divine years.

ततः सुचाव पुरं च फलं वे सर्वकर्माणम् ।

परिणुर्गं कर्मिण च तत्युः फलदायकः ॥ 49 ॥ *

यजो दक्षिणाय साधु पूजेण च फलेन च ।

कर्मिणा फलदाता चेल्यं वेर्विद्व विदुः ॥ 50 ॥

Then she duly delivered a nice son as the fruit of Karma. When any Karma becomes complete, this son delivers the fruits of that Karma. Yajña Deva with His wife Dakṣinā and the above named Karmaphala, the bestower of the fruits of actions, gives the desired fruits to all their sacrificial acts and Karmas.

यज्ञः दक्षिणा प्राय पुरं च फलदायकम् ।

फलं ददी च सर्वेध्यः कर्मिणां चैव नारद ॥ 51 ॥

तदा देवादसन्तुः परिपूर्णमनोरधाः ।

स्वस्थाने ते ययुः सर्वे धर्मवेक्रादिद्धं श्रुन्त् ॥ 52 ॥

So the Paṇdits, the knowers of the Vedas, say. Really he, henceforth, began to give fruits to all the persons of their acts, with his wife Dakṣinā and son, the bestover of the fruits of the actions. The Devas were all satisfied at this and went away respectively to their own abodes.

कृत्वा कर्म च कर्ता च तूर्ण द्रवाच्य दक्षिणम् ।

तत्स्थणं फलमाणोति वैदैक्नकिंदं मुने ॥ 53 ॥

कर्मी कर्मिण पूर्णे च तत्स्थणे यदि दक्षिणम् ।

न द्वादाद्वाहाणेध्य्य ईवेनाज्ञानते५ध्या ॥ 54 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Therefore, the man who performs Karmas, generally known as Karma Kartās, should pay the Dakṣiṇā (the Sacrificial fee) and so he completes at once his actions. It is stated in the Vedas, that no sooner the Karma Kartā pays the Dakṣiṇā, than he obtains the fruits of his Karmas at once.

पूर्ते समतीते तु द्विशुणा सा भवेद्युवम् ।

एकारते व्यतीते तु सा क्रिकोटिगृणा सा ॥ ५ ५ ॥

त्रिरोत तच्छतगुणा सताहे द्विगुणा ततः ।

साले लक्षगुणा प्रोक्ता ब्राह्मणानां च यधते ॥ ५६ ॥

In case the Karma Kartā, after he has completed his acts, does not pay either through bad luck or through ignorance, any Daksinā to the Brāhmanas, its amount is doubled if a Muhūrta, passes away and if one night elapses, its amount is increased, to one hundred times. If three nights pass away, and the Daksinā not paid, the amount last brought forward, is increased again to hundred times; if a week passes, the last amount is doubled, and if one month passes away, the Daksinā is multiplied to one lakh times.

संवस्तेये सतीते तु सा प्रिकोटिणा भवेत् ।

कर्म तद्धमानानां सर्वे वै निष्णकं भवेत् ॥ 57 ॥

स च ब्राह्मवहारी च न कामहिंउगृचिनरः ।

दत्रिई व्याधियुक्तश्छ तेन यायेन पाताकी ॥ 58 ॥

If one year passes away, that is increased to ten millions of times and the Karma, also, bears no fruits. Such a Karma Kartā is known as taking away unfairly a Brāhmaṇa's property and is regarded as impure. He has no right to any further actions. For that sin, he becomes a pauper and diseased. Lakṣmī Devi goes away from his house, leaves him, cursing him severely.

तदुर्गहावाति लक्ष्मीश श्राणं दत्ता सुदारुणम् ।

पित्तो नैव गृह्विन्त तदर्श भाछदानपणि ॥ 59 ॥

एवं सुराक्ष तत्पूर्णा तद्धतामिनराहुलिम ।

दर्तं न दीयते दानं गृहीता नैव खाचते ॥ 60 ॥

So much so that the Pitps do not accept the Śrāddha, Tarpānam offered by that wretched fellow. So the Devas do not accept his worship,

nor the Fire accepts the oblations poured by him. If the person that performs sacrifices does not pay the sacrificial fee that he resolves to pay and he who accepts the offer does not demand the sum, both of them go to hell.

उभौ तौ नरके यातिश्छ्रज्जी यथा घटः ।

नार्यवेधज्ञानयेश्याचितशायि दक्षिणम् ॥ 61 ॥

भयंदेवहास्याभवही कुभ्यीपाके बजेद्युम् ।

वर्षलक्षं वसेत्न यमदूतेन ताडितः ॥ 62 ॥

But if the performer of the sacrifices does not pay when the priests demand the fee, then the Yajamāna (the performer of the sacrifices) only falls down to hell as the jar, severed from the rope, falls down. The Yajamāna (pupil) is denominated as a Brahmasvāpahārī (one who robs a Brāhmaṇa's property); he goes ultimately to the Kumbhīpāka hell.

ततो भवेत्स चांडालो व्याधियुक्तो दरिङ्कः ।

पातयेत्पुरुषान्सत एवांशु सरत जन्मतः ॥ 6 3 ॥

इत्येवे कथितं विध्र किं भूयः श्रोतुमिच्छसि ।

There he remains for one lakh years punished and threatened by Yama's messengers. He is then reborn as a Cāndāla, poor and diseased. So much so that his seven generations above and his seven generations below go to hell. O Nārada! Thus I have narrated to you the story of Daksjna. What more do you want to hear? Say.

नात्र उवाच

यत्कर्म दक्षिणाहीनं को धुंकते तत्कर्ते युने ॥ 65 ॥

सदाक्षणे कर्मणि च फलोव प्रवर्तेत ।

अदक्षिणा च यत्कर्म तद्युंजते च बलिभूने ॥ 66 ॥

Nārada said: O Best of Munis! Who bears the fruits of that Karma where no Dakṣinā is paid. Describe the method of worship that was offered to Dakṣinā by Yajña Deva. Nārāyaṇa said: Where do you find the fruit of any sacrifice without Dakṣinā? (i.e. nowhere.) That Karma only gets fruits where Dakṣināś are paid. And the fruits of the acts void of any Dakṣinā, Bali who lives in the Pātāla only enjoys; and no one else.

Book IX Chapter XLV

बल्ये तत्पदर्त च वामनेन पुरा मुने ।

उश्वीयित्य: शाब्द्रल्यमधब्दादानयेव च १ 6 7 ॥

वृषलीपतिविधाणां पूजा रूव्यादिक च यत ।

असद्धिकैः कृतं यम्भगुचेः पूजनं च यत् । 6 8 ॥

गुरावधनकस्य कर्मं बलिपुंकने न संशयः ।

For, in olden times, it was ordained by Bāmana Deva that those fruits would go to the king Bali. All those pertain to Śrāddha not sanctioned by the Vedas, the charities made without any regard or faith, the worship offered by a Brāhmin who is the husband of a Vṛṣala (an unmarried girl twelve years in whom menstruation has commenced), the fruits of sacrifices done by an impure Brāhmaṇa (a Brāhmaṇa who fails in his duties), the worship offered by impure persons, and the acts of a man devoid of any devotion to his Guru, all these are reserved for the king Bali. He enjoys the fruits of all these.

दक्षिणायश्रय बद्धानं स्तोत्रे पूर्वाविधिकम् ॥ 69 ॥

तत्सर्वे कणवशाखोक्त प्रवक्ष्यामि निशामय ।

पुरा संप्राप्य तां वमः कर्मदक्षा च दक्षिणाम् ॥ 70 ॥

मुमोहायः स्वरेण पुत्थाव कामकाततः ।

O Child! I am now telling you the Dhyāna, Stotra, and the method of worship as per Kanva Śākhā of Dakṣinā Devī. Hear. When Yajña Deva, in ancient times got Dakṣinā skilful in action, he was very much fascinated by her appearance and being lovestricken, began to praise her: "O Beautiful One! You were before the chief of the Gopis in Goloka. You were like Rādhā; you were Her companion; and you were loved by Śrī Rādhā, the beloved of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

यत्र उवाच

पुरा गोलेकागीची त्वं गोपीनां प्रवरा रा ॥ 71 ॥

राधासमा तत्सखी च श्रीकृष्णप्रेयसी प्रिया ।

क्रान्तिकीपूर्णिमायां तु रासे राघा महोत्सवे ॥ 72 ॥

आविर्भूता दक्षिणांशालल्प्रथायां तेन दक्षिणा ।

पुरा त्वं च सुशीलख्या ख्याता शीलेन शोभने ॥ 73 ॥

लक्ष्मीद्वासोसमागाच्चं राधाशपाचच्छ दक्षिणा ।

गोलेकाक्चं परिघ्घाए मम भाग्यादुपस्थिता ॥ 74 ॥

In the Rāsa circle, on the Full Moon night in the month of Kārtik, in the great festival of Rādhā, you appeared from the right shoulder of Laksmī; hence you were named Dakṣinā. O Beautiful One! You were of good nature before; hence your name was Suśilā. Next you turned due to Rādhā's curse, into Dakṣinā. It is to my great good luck that you were dislodged from Goloka and have come here. कृपा कृक महाभागे मायेव स्वायिनं कृक ।

कर्मिणं कर्माणं देहि त्वयेव फलल सदा ॥ 75 ॥

त्वया विना च सर्वेयं सर्वे कर्म च निष्णलम् ।

त्वया विना तथा कर्म कर्मिणं च न शोभते ॥ 76 ॥

O highly fortunate One! Now have mercy on me and accept me as your husband. O Devi! You give to all the doers of actions, the fruits of their works. Without you, their karmas bear no fruit. So much so, if you be not present in their actions the works never shine forth in brilliant glory.

ब्रहाविष्यमूँहाग्रह विद्यालाद एच च ।

कर्मण्ड कष दातुं न सकताङ्छ तया विना ॥ 77 ॥

कर्मकी र्वयं ब्रह्मा फलक्षी महंक्षरः ।

यज्ञको विद्यूँहं त्वमेभां साराकाणि ॥ 78 ॥

फलदातु परं बह्ञ निरुणा प्रकृति: परा ।

स्वयं कृष्णाक्ष भगवान्च च शकत्स्वया सह ॥ 79 ॥

त्वमेव शक्ति: कांते मे शक्रज्ञमयिन जयनि ।

सर्वेकर्मणि शक्तोड़ं त्वया सह चरानने ॥ 80 ॥

Without Thee, neither Brahmā, nor Viṣṇu nor Maheśa nor the Regents of the quarters, the ten Dikpālas, can award the fruits of actions. Brahmā is the incarnate of Karma. Maheśvara is the incarnate of the fruits of Karmas; and I Viṣṇu myself is the incarnate of Yajñas. But Thou art the Essence of all. Thou art the Parā Prakṛti, without any attributes, the Para Brahma incarnate, the bestower of the fruits of actions. Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣna cannot award the fruits of actions without Thee.

इत्पुक्लवा च पुरस्तव्यी वज्धासित्युदेवता ।

तृहा बयूव सा देवी भेजे तं कामलकला ॥ 81 ॥

इर्वे च दक्षिणास्तोयंत्र वज्काले च यः पयेत् ।

फलं च सर्वयज्ञानां प्राप्तोने नात्र संशयः ॥ 82 ॥

O Beloved! In every birth let Thou be my Śakti. O Thou with excellent face! Without Thee, I am unable to finish well any Karma. O Nārada! Thus praising Dakṣinā Devi, Yajña Deva stood before Her. She, born from the shoulder of Lakṣmī, became pleased with His Stotra and accepted Him for Her bridegroom. If anybody recites this Dakṣinā stotra during sacrifice, he gets all the results thereof.

राजसूवे वाजपेये गोपेधनरमेधेक ।

अश्मये लंगरेच च विद्यापूजे यशकले ॥ 8 3 ॥

धवदे भूमिदे पूर्ते फलदे गजमेघके ।

लोहयजे स्वर्णसजे रत्वजे5व तापके ॥ 84 ॥

शिवयजे रुदयजे शकज्ञे च बंधुके ।

बूढी वसणवागे च कंडके वैरिमदों ॥ 85 ॥

शुचियजे धर्मवेज्ञे धर व पापमोचने ।

बहाणी कंबोगे च योवियगो च भघ्ने ॥ 86 ॥

If anybody recites this stotra in the Rajasūtya sacrifice, Vājapaya, Gomedha (cow sacrifice) Naramedha (man sacrifice), Aśvamedha (horse sacrifice), Lāngala Sacrifice, Viṣṇu Yajñā tending to increase one's fame, in the act of giving over wealth or pieces of lands, digging tanks or wells or giving fruits, in Gaja medha (elephant sacrifice), in Loha Yajñā (iron sacrifice), Svarna Yajñā (gold sacrifice), Ratna Yajñā (making over jewels in sacrifice), Tāmra Yajñā (copper), Šiva Yajñā, Rudra Yajñā, Śakra Yajñā, Bandhuka Yajñā, Varuna Yajñā (for rains), Kaṇḍaka Yajñā, for crushing the enemies, Śuci Yajñā, Dharma Yajñā, Pāpa mocana Yajñā, Brahmāni Karma Yajñā, the auspicious Prakṛti Yāga, sacrifices, his work is achieved then without any hitch or obstacle. There is no doubt in this.

तृतीयां च समारंभे इदं स्तोत्रं च यः पठेत् ।

निविदनेच तत्कर्मे सर्वे भवति निशितान्। १ 87 ॥

इदं स्तोत्रं च कारितं ध्यानं पूजाविधि श्रणु ।

शाल्यामे घरे वाथि दक्षिणां पूजवेत्सुर्धीः ॥ 88 ॥

The stotra, thus, is mentioned now; hear about the Dhyānam and the method of worship. First of all, one should worship in the Śālagrāma stone, or

in an earthen jar (ghata) Dakṣinā Devī. The Dhyānam runs thus:

लक्ष्मीद्वांससंभृतां दक्षिणां कमलाकलाम् ।

सर्वकमपु दक्षां च फललां सर्वकर्माणम् ॥ 89 ॥

विष्णोः शक्तिस्वक्पां च पूजितां वंदितां शुभाम् ।

शुद्धिदां शुद्धिक्पां च सुगीलां शुभवां भर्जे ॥ 90 ॥

“O Dakṣinā! Thou art sprung from the right

shoulder of Lakṣmī; Thou art a part of Kamalā;

Thou art clever (Dakṣa) in all the actions and Thou

bestowest the fruits of all the actions. Thou art the

Sakti of Viṣṇu, Thou art revered, worshipped. Thou

bestowest all that is auspicious; Thou art purity;

Thou bestowest purity, Thou art good natured.

ध्यात्वानेनैव वरां मूलेन पुत्रवेल्युर्धी: ।

दत्ता पाठादिकं देखे वेदोतनेनैव नार्त ॥ 91 ॥

उं० श्री कल्हीं हुई दक्षिणाये स्थात्रेत च विद्वक्षणः ।

पूजवेह्रिधिवन्द्रल्क्या दक्षिणां सर्वप्रृजिताम् ॥ 92 ॥

So I meditate on Thee" Thus meditating, the intelligent one should worship Dakṣinā with the principal mantra. Then with the Vedic Mantras, pādyas, etc. (offerings of various sorts) are to be offered. Now the mantra as stated in the Vedas, runs thus: 'Om Śrīm, Klim, Hrīm, Dāksināyaī Svāhā.' With this mantra, all the offerings, such as pādyas, syāhā. With this mantra, all the offerings, such as pādyas, arghyas, etc., are to be given, and one should worship, as per rules, Dakṣinā Devī with devotion.

इन्वेयं क्रवितं बह्याद्विणाख्यानयेव च ।

सुखदं प्रीतिंदे चैव फललं सर्वकंभणान् ॥ ९३ ॥

इदं च दक्षिणाख्यानं वः शुणोति समाहितः ।

अंगहीचं च तत्कर्मे न भवेद्धारते भुवि ॥ ९४ ॥

O Nārada! Thus I have stated to you the anecdote of Daksīnā. Happiness, pleasure, and the fruits of all karmas are obtained by this. Being engaged in sacrificial acts, in this Bhāratavarsa, if one hears attentively this Dhyānam of Daksīnā, his sacrifice becomes defectless.

अपुजो लभते सुरं निशितं च गुणान्वितम् ।

भार्याहीनो लभेढ़ार्यां सुगीलां सुंदरीं पराम् ॥ 95 ॥

Book IX Chapter XLV1

<table><tr><td>वरागेहां पुरवर्ती विनीतां प्रियवादिनीम् । पतितन्तां च सुक्ठां च कुलर्जां च वधूं वराम् ॥ 9 6 ॥ विद्याहीनो लभेद्रियां धनहीनो लभेद्रनम् । भूमिहीनो लभेद्रूर्षियं प्रजाहीनो लभेत्रजाम् ॥ 9 7 ॥ संकटे बंधुरिच्छेते विपत्ती बंधने तथा । गामलेकमिद्धे शुत्वा मुच्यते नात्र संशयः ॥ 9 8 ॥ हीति शीर्दैर्धेभागवाते महापुराणे वनमरकर्भ नादरानदायासंगवं वंचवानिरीओंस्थायः ॥ 4 5 ॥ 1

So much so that the man who has got no sons gets undoubtedly good and qualified sons; if he has no wife, he gets a best wife, good nature, beautiful, of slender waist, capable to give many

sons, sweet speaking, humble, chaste, pure, and Kulina; if he be void of learning, he gets learing; if he be poor he gets wealth; if he be without any land, he gets land and if he has no attendants, he gets attendants. If a man hears for one month this stotra iof Daksjna Devi, he gets over all difficulties and dangers, bereavements from frinds, troubles imprisonments, and all other calamities.

Here ends the Forty-fifth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the anecdote of Daksjna in the Mahā Purānam Śrimadevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XLV1

CHAPTER XLVI

On Şaşthi Devi

नारद खाच

अनेकानां च देवीनां शुतमाख्याममुतम् ।

अन्यासां चरितं ब्रह्मावद् वेदविद्धां वर ॥ १ ॥

Nārada said: O Thou, the foremost of the Knowers of the Vedas! I have heard from you the anecdotes of many Devīs. Now I want to hear the lives of other Devīs also. Kindly describe.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

सर्वांसी चर्तितं विश्व देवेषु च पृवक्यप्रथक ।

पूर्वोक्तानां च देवीनी तासां श्रोतुमिह्छ्वसि ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Best of the Brāhmaṇas! The lives and glorious deeds of all the Devīs are described separately. Now say, which lives you want to hear.

नारद उवाच

घड़ी मंगलचंडी च मनसा प्रकृतेः कला ।

उत्पत्तिमासां चरितं श्रौतुमिच्छामि तचलतः ॥ ३ ॥

Nārada said: O Lord! Ṣaṣṭhī, Maṅgala Cangī, and Manasā, are the parts of Prakṛti. Now I want to hear the lives of them.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

पह्रीगा प्रकृतेयं च सा च घष्टी प्रकर्जितिता ।

बालकानामधित्वाश्री विष्णुमाया च बाल्वा ॥ 4 ॥

मातृकासु च विल्याता देवसेनाभिधा च या ।

प्राणाधिक्रिया साध्यी स्कंदभायां च सूत्रता ॥ 5 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Child! The sixth part of Prakṛti is named as Saṣṭhī. The Deviṣaṣthi is the Presiding Deity of infants and children; She is the Māyā of Viṣṇu and She bestows sons to all. She is one of the sixteen Mātṛkās. She is known by the name of Devasenā. She performs Vratas (vows); She is the chaste and dearest wife of Skanda.

आयुःप्रदा च जालानां धात्री स्थणकारिणी ।

सत्तं शिशुपाश्रंस्था योगेन सिद्ध्योगिनी ॥ ६ ॥

She decides on the longevity of children and is always engaged in their preservation. So much so, that this Siddha Yogini always keeps the children on her side.

तत्या: पूजार्थिधे बह्याजितृहासपिंदं श्रुचं परम् ॥ ७ ॥

यच्छृतं धर्मवेक्लेन सुखदं पुरुदं परम् ॥ ७ ॥

राज प्रियदात्रशास्त्रियंधुवमनो: सुतः ।

योगीऋ नोहद्धाद्यां तप्यासु ततः सदा ॥ ८ ॥

O Best of Brāhmaṇas! I will now talk about the method of worshipping this Devī and the history about Her bestowing children that I heard from Dharma Deva. Hear. Sväyambhuva Manu had one son Priyavrata. He was a great Yogindra and remained in practising austerities. So he was not inclined to have any wife.

बह्रात्रासा च यत्नेन कृतादारो बभ्यूर है ।

सुचिरं कृतदारश्र न लेभे तनयं मुने ॥ 9 ॥

पुत्रेष्यिज्ञ तं चापि कारयामास करयप: ।

मालिन्ये तय क्रांताएं मुनिवर्जनरं ददो ॥ १० ॥

At last by the effort and request of Brahmā, he got himself married. But many days passed, and he could not see the face of a son. Then Maharsi Kaśyapa became his priest in the Putreṣti Sacrifice (to get a son); and when the sacrifice was over, he gave the sacrificial offering called caru to his wife Mālini.

भुक्ला च तं चर्क तयासः सहो गर्भे बभूव है ।

दधार तं च सा देही देवे द्वारशलतस्मर ॥ १ १ ॥

ततः सुवासा सा ब्रह्म-कुमारं कनकप्रभम् ।

सर्ववियवस्मयं मृन्तुभारोल्पनम् ॥ १ २ ॥

On eating the caru, the queen Mälini become pregnant. For twelve Deva years she held the womb. After twelve years she delivered a full developed son, of a golden colour; but the son was lifeless and his two eyeballs were upset.

तं चुढ़ा रूकून: सर्वा नार्थं बोधवासिह्वः ।

पृष्ठभिवाप तन्माता पूत्रगोकेन भूयसा ॥ 13 ॥

प्रभाशं च ययौ राजा गृहीत्वा बालकं मुने ।

रोद तत कांतोरे पुत्रं कृत्वा स्ववक्षसि ॥ 14 ॥

At this, the friends wives became very sorry and began to weep. The mother of the child became so very sorrowful that she became senseless. O Muni! The King himself took the son on his breast and went to the burning ground.

नोल्पज्ञालक राजा प्राणांत्स्वन्तुं समुढ़तः ।

ज्ञानयोगं विस्तमार पुत्रशोकाल्युद्राणत् ॥ 15 ॥

तृतसिंग्रन्तरे तत्र विमानं च दर्शसं सः ।

गृह्यमक्रतिकसंकांगं मणिराजविनिर्मितम् ॥ 16 ॥

There with his child on his breast he began to cry aloud. Rather he got himself ready to quit his own life than leave the son from away his breast. At this time he saw in the space overhead an aerial car, white as crystal, made of excellent jewels, coming towards him.

तेजसा जलित्तं शशच्छोभितं क्रीमावासरा ।

नानाधिरविधिनाड्यो पुयमालाविरावितम् ॥ 17 ॥

ददर्शत तदेवीं च कमनीयां मनोहराम् ।

श्रतचंपकवर्णाभां शश्रतुषित्यरयोवानम् ॥ 18 ॥

The car was shining with its own lustre, encircled with woven silken cloth, which added to its beauty. Innumerable garlands of variegated colours gave it a very nice and charming appearance.

ईषद्धास्यप्रसात्यां रत्नभूषणभूषिताम् ।

कृपायमों योगसिद्धां भक्तानुग्रहकतारम् ॥ 19 ॥

दृष्टा तां पुरतो राजा तुराव परमदारत् ।

चकार पुजनं तत्या विहास वालकं भुवि ॥ 20 ॥

On that car was seated a Siddha Yogini, very beautiful, of a lovely appearance of a colour like that of white campakas, always youthful, smiling, adorned with jewel ornaments, ever gracious to show favour to the devotees. On seeing Her, the King Priyavrata placed the child from his breast on the ground and began to worship Her and chant hymns to Her with great love and devotion.

पूषछि राजा तां गुहां गीमसुर्यसमप्रभम् ।

तेजसा जल्लिंशी शांति कांतां कंकद्य नाद ॥ 21 ॥

राजोबाच

का तं वं सुगीघने काने कस्य कान्तासि सुवते ।

कस्य कन्या वरातोह धन्या मान्या च योषिताम् ॥ 22 ॥

And he then asked that peaceful lady, the wife of Skanda, Who was shining like a summer sun: "O Beautiful! Who art Thou? Whose wife art Thou and whose daughter art Thou? From Thy appearance it seems that Thou art fortunate and respected amongst the female sex."

नृपन्नस्य वच: श्रूला जनगर्नालचिडका ।

उवाच देवसेना सा देवानां राकारिणी ॥ 23 ॥

देवानां दैत्यम्रतानां पुरा सेना बयुप सा ।

जयं ददी सा तेभ्य्छुं देवसेना चे तेन सा ॥ 24 ॥

O Nārada! In ancient times, when the Daityas dispossessed the Devas of their positions, this Lady was elected as a general and got victory for the Devas; hence She was named Devasenā. Hearing the words of the King Priyavrata, Devasenā, who fought for the Devas and was all good to the whole world, said:

Book IX Chapter XLV1

श्रीदेवसेनोवाच

बहाणो मानसी कन्या देवसेनासुधीश्वी ।

श्रुधा मां नसता धाता दरी स्कंदाय भूपिम १ 2 5 ॥

मातृकासु च विश्वाता स्कंदभाथां च सुञात ।

विशे घर्षिति विज्ञाता घर्शाग प्रकृतेः परा १ 2 6 ॥

“O King! I am the mind-born daughter of Brahmā. My name is Devasenā. The Creator before created Me out of His mind and made Me over to the hands of Skanda. Amongst the Mārṭakās, I am known as Saṣthi, the wife of Skanda. I am the sixth part of Prakṛti; hence I am named Saṣthi.

अपूत्राय पुरवतरई प्रियवती प्रियाय च ।

धनतरई दरिस्थः कर्मिच्छ्य स्वकर्मदि ॥ 27 ॥

I give to those who have no sons, wives to those who have no wives, wealth to the poor, and I give works to those who are workers (karmis.)

सुखं दुःखं घणं श्रोको तृषों मंगलमेव च ।

सम्पतिश्व विपतिश्व सर्व भवति कर्मणि ॥ 28 ॥

कर्मण बहुपुत्रघ खर्गहीनः स्वकर्मण ।

कर्मण मृत्युपऋ कर्मण चित्रसीवनः ॥ 29 ॥

Happiness, pain, fear, sorrow, joy, good, and wealth and adversity all are the fruits of Karmas. As the result of one's Karmas, people get lots of sons and it is due to the result of one's Karma again that people are denuded of all the issues of their family. As the result of Karma, the people get dead sons; and as the result of Karma the people get long lives.

कर्णेण गुणवांश्रेय कर्णेण चांगहीनकः ।

कर्णेण बहुभारंश घ्यार्थीही कर्णेण ३ ३० ॥ ३० ॥

कर्णेण स्वायन्मार्यों तृती शश्वत्यकर्णा ।

कर्णेण च भवेद्वायधि कर्णोस उरीभयेच न ॥ ३ । ॥

All enjoy the fruits of their Karmas, whether they be well qualified, or deformed or whether they have many wives, or whether they have no wife, whether they be beautiful, religious, diseased, it is all through Karmas. Disease comes out of their Karmas.

तस्माकर्मरं राजसर्वेष्यश्छुती श्रुन्तु ।

इत्येवमुक्त्वा सा देयी गृहीत्वा बालकं मुने ॥ 32 ॥

महान्नानेन सा देयी जीवयामास ललया ।

राजा द्वर्शी रं बालं सस्मितं कनकदमभम् ॥ 33 ॥

Again they get cured by their Karmas. So, O King! It is stated in the Vedas that Karma is the most powerful of all." Thus saying, Devasenā took the dead child on her lap; and, by the wisdom, early made the child alive. The King saw, the child, of a golden colour got back his life and began to smile.

देवसेना च पश्वर्तं नृपमापृष्ठा सा ततं ।

गृहीत्वा बालकं देवी गर्नग नत्नुपुक्ता ॥ 34 ॥

पुनस्तुधात तां राजा शुक्रकर्णदोक्षालुकः ।

नृपस्तोजेन सा देवी परितुषा बचव ह ॥ 35 ॥

उवाच तं नृपं ब्रह्न् वदेतेक कर्म निर्भिनम् ।

Thus bidding goodbye to the King, Devasenā took the child and became ready to depart, At this the King's palate and throat got dry and he began again to chant hymns to Her. The Deviṣaṣthi became pleased at the stotra made by the King. The Devi then addressed the King and said:

देल्युबाच

विषु लोकेषु चं त्रा सत्यवंभुवमानो: सुतः ॥ 36 ॥

मम पूजां च सर्वत्र कारयित्वा स्वयं कुतः ।

तदा दास्यामि पुत्रे ते कुलपयं मनोहमूम् ॥ 37 ॥

"O King! All that is stated in the Vedas, is made up of Karmas. You are the son of Svāyambhuva Manu, and the Lord of the three worlds. You better promulgate My worship in the three worlds and you yourself worship Me. Then I will give you your beautiful son, the lotus of your family.

सूत्रत नाम विद्यालां गुणवर्ते सुंपडितम् ।

जातिस्मरं च योगिरं नारायणकालात्मकम् ॥ 38 ॥

गतत्कुतकं श्रेष्ठ क्षत्रियाणां च वर्दितम् ।

मत्तातंगलक्षणाणां धृतवर्ते वलं शुभम् ॥ 39 ॥

धनिनं गृणिनं शूद्धं विद्यां प्रियवेच च ।

घोभिनां ज्ञानिनां चैव सिंहिकृक्षं परविष्टवान् ॥ 40 ॥

यशस्विनं च लोक्षयु दातातं सर्वसम्यदान् ।

Your son, born in part of Nārāyaṇa, will be famous by the name of Suvrata. He will be well-qualified, a great literary man, able to remember his conditions in his former lives, the best of Yogis,

performer of one hundred Yajñas, the best of all, bowed down by the Kṣattriyas, strong as one lakh powerful elephants, wealthy, fortunate, pure, favourite of literary persons, learned and bestower of the fruits of the ascetics, renowned and bestower of wealth and prosperity to the three worlds."

इत्येवमुक्ता सा देवौ तस्मै ते नालकं ददो ॥ 4 1 ॥

राजा चकार स्वीकारं पूजावं च प्रियवतः ।

जगाम देवी स्वर्गं च दत्ता तस्मै शुभं वरम् ॥ 4 2 ॥

Thus saying Devasenā gave the child to the king. When the king promised that he would promulgate Her worship, the Devi granted him boons and went up to the Heavens.

आजगाम सहागात्यः स्वगृहं हृद्यानसः ।

आगत्य कवयामास वृत्तां पुर्वेतुकम् ॥ 43 ॥

श्रुत्वा बच्युः सैतुहा वरा नारंक्षे नारद ।

मंगलं कारयामास सर्वत्र पुर्वेतुकम् ॥ 44 ॥

The king, too, becoming very glad and surrounded by his ministers, returned to his own abode and informed all about the son. The ladies of the house, become highly delighted when they heard everything. On the occasion of the son's getting back his life, the king performed everywhere auspicious ceremonies.

देवीं च पूजयामास बाहाणेघो धरं ददौ ।

राजा च प्रतिमाविषु शुक्लगघछां मोहालयस् ॥ 4 5 ॥

पशुवा देल्याश्य यन्ने कारयामास सर्वतः ।

बालानां सूतिकागरे घहाहे यत्पवृकम् ॥ 46 ॥

The worship of Saşthi Devi commenced. Wealth was bestowed to the Brāhmins, Since, then, on every sixth day of the bright fortnight in every month, great festivals in honour of Saşthi Devi began to be celebrated.

तत्पूजां कारयामास चैकविंशतिवासरे ।

बालानां शुभकार्ये च शुभासप्राशनते तथा ॥ 47 ॥

सर्वेक वर्धयामास स्वयमेव चकार ह ।

ध्यानं पूजाविधानं च स्तोरं मत्ते निशगाय ॥ 48 ॥

यच्छुतं धर्मवक्रोण कौधुभोक्ते च सुत्रतः ।

Since then, throughout the kingdom, on every sixth day after the birth of a child in the lying-in

chamber, Saṣṭhī Devī began to be worshipped. On the twenty-first day, the auspicious moment, at the ceremony of giving rice to a child for the first time, when sixth months old, and on all other auspicious ceremonies of the children, Saṣṭhī Devī's worship was made extant and the king himself performed those worships with great care and according to due rules. Now I will tell you about the Dhyānam and method of worship and stotra as I heard from Dharma Deva, and as stated in Kauthuma Sākhā. Hear. He has said:

शाल्यामे घरे वार्ध वदमूलेर्धया मुने ॥ 49 ॥

विर्त्यां पुतिलको कृत्वा पुवयेढ़ा विवध्रणः ।

घड़ांगी प्रकुतेः शुद्धां प्रतिष्ठाय च सुप्रभाम् ॥ 50 ॥

In a Śalāgrama stone, in a jar, on the root of a Vāṭa tree, or drawing the figure on the floor of the rooms, or making an image of Ṣaṣthi Devī, the sixth part of Prakṛti and installing it, one should worship the Devī.

सुपुत्रदो च शुभदां दयास्त्वां जगतमूम् ।

प्रेतेचेषकवाणां रतन्युपाण्युपितम् ॥ 51 ॥

पवित्रकर्णे घरमां देवसेनां घरां भजे ।

इति ध्याना स्वशिरस पुष्य दन्ता विद्वक्षणः ॥ 52 ॥

The Dhyānam is this: O Devasenā! Thou art the bestower of good sons, the giver of good luck; Thou art mercy and kindness and the progenitor of the world; Thy colour is bright like that of the white Campaka flowers. Thou art decked with jewel ornaments. Thou art pure, and the highest and best Devi. Obisance to Thee I meditate on Thee." Thus meditating, the worshipper should place flower on his own head.

पुनर्ध्यांचा च मूलेन पुजयेत्पुजतां सतीम् ।

पाणाध्यांचमनीयैश्रं गंपण्यं प्रदीपकैः ॥ 53 ॥

नैवेहीर्विविधेश्वायि फलेन शोभनेन च ।

३० हूीं षहीदेल्यै स्वाहिति विधिपुर्णकैम् ॥ 54 ॥

Then again meditating and uttering the principal mantra one is to offer the Pâdya (water for washing feet), Arghya, Âcamaniya, scents, flowers, dhūp, lights, offerings of food and best roots and fruits

Book IX Chapter XLV1

and one should worship thus the with various things Şaşthi Devi ‘Om Hrim Şaşthi Devyai Svâhâ’ is the principal Mantra of Şaşthi Devi.

अधाक्षरं महामन्तं ययाणिकं जानेन्नः ।

ततः सुत्वा च प्राणमेद्वानिभृक्तः समाहितः ॥ 55 ॥

सतोत्रं च समावेदोक्तं वरं चुपफलप्रदम् ।

अधाक्षरं महामन्तं लक्षया थो जपेततः ॥ 56 ॥

This great Mantra of eight letters a man should repeat as his strength allows. After the Japam, the worshipper should chant hymns with devotion and undivided attention and then bow down. The Stotra (hymn) of Saşthī Devi as per Sāma Veda is very beautiful and son-bestowing.

सुयुत्रं स लभेन्नारमित्वह कामलोढ़वः ।

सतीं शृणु भुतिश्रेश सर्वकामगुभावदूम ॥ 57 ॥

The lotus-born Brahmā has said: If one repeats (make Japam) this eight lettered mantra one lakh of times, one gets certainly a good son. O Best of Munis; Now I am going to say the auspicious stotra of Saṃthī Devi as composed by Priyavrata, Hear.

वांघारंद च सर्वेर्ग गृहं नारद ।

नमो देखे महादेवेल सिद्धो शार्लै नमो नमः ॥ 58 ॥

नुणारे देवसेनारे पश्टी देखे नमो नमः ।

बरादारे पुत्रदारे धनदारे नमो नमः ॥ 59 ॥

One's desires are fulfilled when one reads this very secret stotra. Thus the King Priyavrata said: "O Devi, Devasena! I bow down to Thee. O Great Devi! Obeisance to Thee! Thou art the bestower of Siddhis; Thou art peaceful; obeisance to Thee! Thou art the bestower of good; Thou art Devasena; Thou art Saṣṭhī Devi, I bow down to Thee! Thou grantest boons to persons; Thou bestowest sons and wealth to men.

सुखदायी मोक्षदायी बड़ी होदे तयो नमः ।

सुखी घडाशकलायी सिद्धारी चे नमः :। 60 ॥

मायावी सिद्ध्योगिन्ये घडीहोये नमः ।

सारावी सारादी च च परावेदेय नमः ॥ 6 1 ॥

So obeisance to Thee! Thou givest happiness and mokṣa; Thou art Ṣaṣthi Devi; I bow down to Thee. Thou thyself art Siddha; so I bow down to

Thee. O Ṣaṣṭhī Devi! Thou art the sixth part of this creation; Thou art Siddha Yogīnī, so I bow down to Thee. Thou art the essence, Thou art Śaradā; Thou art the Highest Devi.

बालाधिष्ठागुंदेचे च घडीहेल्चे नमे नमः ।

कल्पाणादी कल्पायी फलदाये च कर्माणम् ॥ 62 ॥

प्रत्यक्षारे स्वभक्तानां पहड़ी देल्ये नमो नमः ।

पूज्याये स्वेक्रकांताये सर्वेधा सर्वकमभु ॥ 63 ॥

So I bow down again and again to Thee. Thou art the Presiding Deity Saṣthi Devi of the children; I bow down to Thee. Thou grantest good; Thou Thyself art good and Thou bestowest the fruits of all Karmas. O Thou O Saṣthi Devi! Thou shewest thy from to thy devotees; I bow down to Thee! Thou art Śuddha Sattva and respected by all the persons in all their actions.

देवास्थणकारियर्षे घड़ीद्वेले नमो नमः ।

गृद्धसचल्यलपार्थे बल्न्तार्ये नृणां सदा ॥ 64 ॥

हिंसाक्रोधार्यस्तीतार्ये घड़ीदेलो नमः नामः ।

धर्ने देहि प्रियां देहि पुरं देहि सुरंधरि ॥ 65 ॥

Thou art the wife of Skanda. All worship Thee. O Saşthī Devi! Thou hadst saved the Devas. So obeisance to Thee O Saşthī Devi! Thou hast no envy no anger, so obeisance to Thee. O Sureśvari! Give me wealth, give me dear things, give me sons. Give me respect from all persons; give me victory; slay my enemies.

माने देहि जयं देहि जिको जमे महेश्वी ।

धर्मे देहि यगो देहि श्रीदीखे नो नामः ॥ 66 ॥

देही भूमिं प्रजां देहि विश्वां देहि सुगुजिते ।

कल्याणं च जयं देहि श्रीदीखे नो नामः ॥ 67 ॥

O Maheśvari! Give me Dharma; give me name and fame; I bow down again again to Saşthī Devi. O Saşthī Devi! worshipped reverentially by all! Give me lands, give me subjects, give me learning; have welfare for me; I bow down again and again to Saşthī Devi, O Nārada!

इति देवीं च सस्नृय लेभे पुत्रं प्रियन्तः ।

यग्रसितं च रोजेनः: यहीदेयाः प्रयात्टः ॥ 68 ॥

घहीस्तोर्मिदं इबान् यः शृणोति तुं जलसग् ।

अपुजो लभते पुत्रं परं सुविर्जीवितम् ॥ 69 ॥

Thus praising the Devi, Priyravata got a son, renowned and ruling over a great kingdom through the favour of Saṣṭhī Devi. If any man that has no son, hears this sorta of Saṣṭhī Devi for one year with undivided attention, he gets easily an excellent son, having a long life.

वर्षमेकि च यो भक्ल्या संपूजेदेरं शूणिति च ।

सर्वेपाराद्रसिन्मुक्तो महावल्य प्रमुचते ॥ ७ ॥

वीरं पुत्रं च गृणिनं विद्यार्वंतं यशस्विनम् ।

सुविरापुब्यव्रतं च सूते देवीप्रसातः ॥ ७ ॥

If one worships for one year with devotion this Devasenā and hears this stotra, even he most barren woman becomes freed from all her sins and gets a son. Through the grace of Ṣaṣṭhī Devī, that son becomes hero, well qualified, literate, renowned and long-lived.

काकबंध्या च या नारी मृतवत्सा च या भवेत् ।

वर्षं श्रुत्वा लभेमूयं घटीदौरिभसादतः ॥ 72 ॥

रोगयुक्ते च बाले च विदात्माता शृणोति चेत् ।

मासेन मुच्यते बालः घटीदौरिभसादतः ॥ 73 ॥

इति श्रीमदौकीभागते महापुराणो नवमरकवे भख्युपाख्याने

घट्चत्वारिशोअयायः ॥ 46 ॥ 11

If any woman who bears only a single child or delivers dead children hears with devotion for one year this stotra, she gets easily, through the Devi's grace, a good son. If the father and mother both hear with devotion, this story during the period of their child's illness, then the child becomes cured by the Grace of the Devi.

Here ends the Forty-sixth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the anecdote of Şaṣthī Devi in the Mahā Purānam

Śrimaddeviḥhāgyatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER XLVII

On Manasā

शीनारायण उवाच

क्रवितं घट्रयुपाख्यानं बहापूर्णं यथागमम् ।

देवी मंगलस्थीं च तदाख्यानं निशामय ॥ १ ॥

तत्या: पूजादिकं सर्वे धर्मवेक्रेण यच्छुतम् ।

शुतिसंगमोपेबंटे सर्वेभं विद्यापार्थि ॥ 2 ॥

दक्षा या वर्तते चंडी कल्याणेषु च मंगला ।

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! I have now narrated the anecdote of Saṣṭhī as stated in the Vedas. Now hear the anecdote of Maṅgala Caṇḍī, approved of by the Vedas and respected by the literary persons. The Caṇḍī, that is very skilled in all auspicious works and who is the most auspicious of all good things, is Maṅgala Caṇḍīkā.

मंगलेषु च या द्वहा सा च मंगलचंडिका ॥ ३ ॥

पूज्या या वर्ते चंडी मंगलोउपि महीसुतः ।

Or the Caṇḍi who is an object of worship of Maṅgala (Mars), the son of carth and the bestower of desires is Maṅgala Caṇḍikā.

मंगलाधौटदौं या सा वे मंगलच्छिका ॥ 4 ॥

मंगले मनुवंयशु सदाडीघपारपाति: ।

तस्य पूज्यासीष्टदेवी तेने गंगलचंडिका ॥ 5 ॥

Or the Caṇḍi who is an object of worship of Maṅgala of the family of Manu who was the ruler of the whole world composed of seven islands and the bestower of all desires is Maṅgala Caṇḍi.

मृतिंभेदेन सा दुर्गा मूलप्रकृतिरीक्षी ।

कृपाल्पातित्यस्था योचितामिहद्धेता ॥ 6 ॥

प्रथमे पुक्तिता सा च रंकरेण पतारमता ।

विषुगस्य कंधे घोरे विष्णुना प्रेरितेन च ॥ ७ ॥

Or it may be that the Mūla Prakṛti, the Govern-ess, the Ever Gracious Durgā assumed the form of Maṅgala Caṇḍi and has become the Iṣta Devatā of women. When there was the fight with Tripurāśura, this Maṅgala Caṇḍi, iñgher than the highest was first worshipped by Mahādeva, stimulated by Viṣṇu, on a critical moment.

ब्रह्म-ब्रह्मोपदेशेन वुर्जिति च संकटे ।

आकाशायतिते याने दैर्वेन पातिते रूपा ॥ 8 ॥

ब्रहाविष्णुपिटिश्व दुर्गा तुहाव गंकरः ।

सा च मंगलबड़ी या बभूव रूपभेदतः ॥ 9 ॥

O Brāhmin! While the fighting was going on, a Daitya threw out of anger one car on Mahādeva

Book IX Chapter XLVII

and as that car was about to fall on Him, Brahmā and Viṣṇu gave a good advice when Mahādeva began to praise Durgā Devī at once.

उवाच पुरतः शंभोपर्यं नारतीति ते प्रभो ।

भगाव-वृषलपत्र सर्वैग्रासे पंचिष्यति ॥ 10 ॥

शुद्धाशिक्सवरूपाउँ पंचिष्यामि न संशयः ।

मायानमन च हतिणा सहायेन वृषयक्षे १ १ १ १

जहि दैत्वं स्वशुं च सुगणां पद्यातकम् ।

Durgā Devi that time assuming the form of Maṅgala Candaī appeared and said “no fear no fear, Bhagavān Viṣṇu will be Thy Carrier buffalo. I will be also Thy Śakti in the action and Hari, full of Māyā, will also help Thee. Thou better slayest the enemy that dispossessed the Devas.”

इत्युक्त्वांतहिता देवी शंभोः शिक्तबंभूव सा ॥ 12 ॥

विषयुत्तेन शक्रेश जयान तुमामपाति: ।

O Child! Thus saying, the Devi Mahāgala Cangī disappeared and She became the Śakti of Mahādeva. Then with the help of the weapon given by Visnu, the Lord of Umā killed the Asura.

मृनीर् पतिते दैते० सर्वे दैवा महर्षेः ॥ 13 ॥

युयु: संकरं देवं भक्तिभाव्यकंपर: ।

सदा: शिरसि संभोघु पुण्यवृष्टिबंपून है ॥ 14 ॥

बहा विद्युः संगुहो ददी तमे शुभाणियम् ।

बहाविद्युपविद्धः सुस्ततः संकरस्तथा ॥ 15 ॥

When the Daitya fell, the Devas and Rṣis began to chant hymns to Mahādeva with devotion and with their heads bent low. From the sky, a shower of flowers fell instantaneously on Mahādeva's head. Brahmā and Viṣṇu became glad and gave their best wishes to Him. Then ordered by Brahmā and Viṣṇu, Śankara bathed joyously.

पूजयामात नो कवया देवी मंगलचंडिकाम् ।

पाठायामंचमनीक्षे वरक्षे शिविधरिंचि ॥ 16 ॥

पुष्यचन्दिनवैदोर्धकैव्या नानावियैर्ने ।

छानौमैष्ठि महिषैर्वदेः पहिंभित्या ॥ 17 ॥

वस्तालंकारमाल्ये ध्यासे: पिछकौपि ।

मधुपिष्ठ सुधाभिष्ठ फलैनानिविषि ॥ 18 ॥

Then He began to worship with devotion the Devi Nāgala Cāndī with pādya, Arghya,

Açamaniya and various clothings. Flowers, sandal paste, various goats, sheep, buffaloes, bisons birds, garments ornaments, garlands, Pāyasa (a porparation of rice, ghee, mild and sugar), Piṣṭaka, honey, wine, and various fruits were offered in the worship.

संगीतैनैतैनैकीदीकृलवैनामकैनोंतः ।

ध्यारा माध्यंदीतोकेन ध्यानेन भक्तिपूर्वकम् ॥ 19 ॥

, दूदी ट्रव्याणि मूलेन मंत्रेणि च नारद ।

ऊं ढूँ क्लैर्नी सर्वेषुचले दैदिं मंगलचिषिके ॥ 20 ॥

Dancing, music, with instruments and the chanting of Her name and other festivals commenced. Reciting the Dhyāna as in Mādhyandina, Mahādeva offered everything, pronouncing the principal Radical Mantra. 'Om Hrim Śrim Klim Sarvapūjye Devi Māngala Candike Hum Phat Svāhā' is the twenty-one lettered Mantra of Māngala Caṇḍi. During worship, the Kalpa Vṛksa, the tree yielding all desires, must be worshipped.

हुं हुं पट्ट स्वाहायेक्रविश्रास्पो मनु: ।

पूः: कल्पतरश्वि भक्तानां सर्वकामदः ॥ 2 1 ॥

द्वशलक्षजपैने मंत्रसिद्धभ्रवेद्युम् ।

ध्यानं च श्यातां ब्रह्म-वेदोकर्त सर्वसंस्मत् ॥ 2 2 ॥

O Nārada! By repeating the Mantra ten lakhs of times, the Mantra Siddhi (success in realising the Deity inherent in the Mantra) comes. Now I am saying about the Dhyānam of Māngala Candi as stated in the Vedas and as approved by all. Listen.

देवीं घोडगवर्षिंग शरणसुशिव्यारीवनम् ।

विवोक्षीं सुदातीं शुज्धां शतस्पत्थिनाबनानम् ॥ 23 ॥

श्वेतचम्यकरणाणां सुनीलोराललोचनम् ।

जगढ़ाजी च दाखी च सर्वेध्यः सर्वसंवादम् ॥ 24 ॥

"O Devi Māngala Caṇdike! Thou art sixteen years old; Thou art ever youthful; Thy lips are like Bimba fruits, Thou art of good teeth and pure. Thy face looks like autumnal lotus; Thy colour is like white campakas; Thy eyes resemble blue lilies; Thou art the Preserver of the world and thou bestowest all sorts of prosperity.

संसारसारने घोरे ज्योतीक्णं स्वा भजे ।

देव्याङ्छ ध्यानसिवेलं स्तवनं श्यतां मुने । २ ५ ॥

Thou art the Light in this dark ocean of the world. So I meditate on Thee." This is the Dhyānam. Now hear the stotra, which Mahādeva recited before Her.

महावेद उवाच

रक्ष रक्ष जगमातर्दिव मंगलचधिके ।

हार्विके विष्वरों राशोईर्भगलकाडिके ॥ 26 ॥

हर्भेमंगलदक्षे च हर्भेमंगलदायिके ।

गुधे मंगलखे च रुभे मंगलचिडके ॥ 27 ॥

Mahādeva said: “Protect me, Protect me. O Mother! O Devi Maṅgala Caṇḍike! Thou, the Destroyer of difficulties! Thou givest joy and good. Thou art clever in giving delight and fortune. Thou the bestower of all bliss and prosperity! Thou, the auspicious, Thou art Maṅgala Caṇḍika.

मंगले मंगलाई च सम्वेकुलमूँले ।

सता मूबल्ले सर्वेभां मंगलालये ॥ 28 ॥

पूबे मंगलवारे च मंगलाभीढदेवे ।

पूजये मंगलभूपस्य मनुवंगस्य संततम् ॥ 29 ॥

Thou art Mahgalā, worthy of all good, Thou art the auspicious of all auspicious; Thou bestowest good to the good persons. Thou art worthy to be worshiped on Tuesday (the Māngala day); Thou art the Deity, desired by all. The King Māngala, born of Manu family always worships Thee.

मंगलाधिषादुपदैव मंगलानां च मंगले ।

संसारमंगलाधारे मोक्षर्मगलादायिनि ॥ 30 ॥

सारे च मुकूलाधारे पारे च सर्वकर्मणाम् ।

प्रतिमुकूलवारे च पूज्ये शुभमुखप्रदे ॥ 31 ॥

सतोजपानेन शंभुश्छ सुत्वा मुकूलवैडिकाम् ।

प्रतिमुकूलवारे च पूजां दत्त्वा नतः शिवः ॥ 32 ॥

Thou, the presiding Devi of Maṅgala; Thou art the repository of all the good that are in this world. Thou, the Bestower of the auspicious Mokṣa. Thou, the best of all; Thou, the respository of all good; Thou makest one cross all the Karmas; the people worship Thee on every Tuesday; Thou bestowest abundance of Bliss to all."

प्रथमे पूजिता देवी शिवेन सर्वमेपुक्ता ।

दितीये पूजिता सा च मुक्तेन प्रदेष च ॥ 33 ॥

तृतीये पूजिता भग्र मुक्तेलेन नृपेण च ।

चतुर्षे मुक्ते वारे सुन्दरिभि: प्रपूजिता ॥ 34 ॥

Thus praising Maṅgala Candiākā with this stotra,

and worshipping on every Tuesday, Śambhu departed. The Devi Sarva Maṅgalā was first worshipped by Mahādeva.

पंचमे मुक्लाकांक्षिनरैमीलचडिका ।

पूजिता प्रतिशयखे पृत्रशेयगुपजिता सदा ॥ 35 ॥

ततः सर्वत्र संपूजा बभूव परमेयरगी ।

देवेश्व पूर्तिंभिश्व मानवैर्मनिपुंने ॥ 36 ॥

Next she was worshipped by the planet Mars; then by the King Maṅgala; then on every Tuesday by the ladies of every household. Fifthly she was worshipped by all men, desirous of their welfare. So in every universe Maṅgala Caṇḍikā, first worshipped by Mahādeva, came to be worshipped by all. Next she came to be worshipped everywhere, by the Devas, Munis, Mānavas, Manus.

देव्याङ्ग मुकूलसोतं यः शुणोति समाहितः ।

तन्मूर्ते पवोत्थन न पवोत्थमूर्णम् ।

वर्यिते पुराणौश्रेय मुक्ते च चित्रे चित्रे ॥ 37 ॥

O Muni! He who hears with undivided attention this stotra of the Devi Maṅgala Caṇḍikā, finds no evils anywhere. Rather all good comes to him. Day after day he gets ons and grandsons and so his prosperity gets increased, yea, verily increased!

श्रीनारायण उवाच

उक्तं झ्योभाठ्यानं बहापुर्य यथागमम् ।

श्यातं मनसाठ्यानं यच्छुतं धर्मवक्ततः ॥ 38 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! Thus I narrated to you the stories of Saṣthi and Maṅgala Caṇḍikā, according to the Vedas. Now hear the story of Manasā that I heard from the mouth of Dharama Deva.

सा च कन्य भगवती कश्यपस्य च मानसी ।

तेनैव मनसा देवी मनसा या च दीव्यति ॥ 39 ॥

मनसा ध्यायते या च परमात्मानीश्वस्म ।

तेन सा मनसादेवी तेन योगेन दीव्यति ॥ 40 ॥

Book IX Chapter XLVII

Manasā is the mind-born daughter of Maharṣi Kaśyapa; hence she is named Manasā; or it may be She who plays with the mind is Manasā. Or it may be She who meditates on God with her mind and gets rapture in Her meditation of God is named Manasā.

आत्मारामा च सा देवौ वैष्णावी सिद्ध्योगिनि ।

विश्वगं च तत्स्तत्वा कृष्णस्य परमात्मनः ॥ 4 1 ॥

जरकाकशरीरं च दूषा यत्थीणीश्रः ।

गोपोपितर्नाय चऊे जरकाकरिति प्रधुः ॥ 4 2 ॥

She finds pleasure in Her Own Self, the great devotee of Visnu, a Siddha Yogini. For three Yugas She worshipped Śrī Krṣṇa and then She became a Siddha Yogini. Śrī Krṣṇa, the Lord of the Gopís, seeing the body of Manasā lean and thin due to austerities, or seeing her worn out like the Muni Jarat Kāru called her by the name of Jarat Kāru.

वांछितं च ददौ तद्ये कृपया च कृपानिधि: ।

पूजां च कारायामास चकार च स्वयं प्रधुः ॥ 4 3 ॥

स्वर्गे च नागलोके च पृथिव्यां ब्रह्मलोकतः ।

भूणं जगत्सु गौरी सा सुदरी च मनोहार् ॥ 44 ॥

Hence Her name has come also to be Jarat Kāru. Krṣṇa, the Ocean of Mercy, gave her out of kindness, Her desired boon; She worshipped Him and Śrī Krṣṇa also worshipped Her. Devi Manasā is known in the Heavens, in the abode of the Nāgas (serpents), in earth, in Brahmaloka, in all the worlds as of very fair colour, beautiful and charming.

जगद्रौतीत विद्यालात तेन सा पूजिता सती ।

शिवशिष्या च सा देवी तेन शैवी प्रक्रसितिंत ॥ 4 5 ॥

विष्णुभक्तावि शक्रद्धेणावी तेन क्रांतिता ।

She is named Jagad Gauri as she is of a very fair colour in the world. Her other name is Saivī and she is the disciple of Śiva. She is named Vaisnavī as she is greatly devoted to Viṣṇu.

नानानां प्राणारक्षित्री यजे पार्थितिस्तव च ॥ 46 ॥

नोगेश्वतीत विद्याता सा नागभिनीति च ।

विश संहनुनीगा या तेन विवहती स्युता ॥ 47 ॥

सिद्धियोगे हरात्राय तेन सा सिद्धयोगिनी ।

महात्रानं च योगं च मृतसंजीवनी पराम् ॥ 48 ॥

She saved the Nāgas in the Snake Sacrifice performed by Parīksit, she is named Nagesāvari and Nāga Bhagini and She is capable to destroy the effects of poison. She is called Visāhari. She got the Siddha yoga from Mahādeva; hence She is named Siddha Yogini; She got from Him the great knowledge, so she is called Mahā Jñānayutā, and as she got Mṛtasānijīvani (making alive the dead) she is known by the name of Mṛtasānijīvani.

महातानुवृता तां च प्रवर्तिने मन्निधिणः ।

आसतीकस्य भूगीर्य माता साउपि तपविद्यि ॥ 49 ॥

आसतीकमाता विज्ञाता जान्यां सुप्रतिहिता ।

प्रिया मुनेजैरकारोर्मुनीर्य महात्मनः ॥ 50 ॥

योगिनी विश्वपूज्यस्य जरकारकप्रियात ततः ।

जरकारकर्णदारीनी मनस स्विद्धयोगिनी ॥ 51 ॥

वैशणी नागपर्भिनी शैली नागेश्वरी तथा ।

जरकारकप्रियातसीकमात विषघरोते च ॥ 52 ॥

महात्रानयुता चैव सा देवी विश्वपूर्णिति ।

As the great ascetic is the mother of the great Muni Aštika, she is known in the world as Āštika mātā. As She is hte dear wife of the great high-souled Yogi Muni Jarat Kāru, worshipped by all, she is called as Jarat Kārupriya. Jaratkāru, Jagadgauri, Manasā, Siddha Yogini, Vaiṣnavi, Nāga Bhagini, Śaivi, Nāgeśvari, Jaratkārupriya, Āstikamātā, Viṣaharī, and Mahā Jīnānyautā these are the twelve names of Manasā, worshipped everywhere in the Universe.

इदार्तौतिन नामानि पूजाकाले तु यः पटेत् ॥ 53 ॥

तस्य नापायं नास्ति तस्य वंगोड़स्यच च ।

नापार्थीते च शयने नाप्यमते च मंद्रे ॥ 54 ॥

नागशोभे महादुर्गे नागवेडितप्रियते ।

इर्वे सोत्रे पंडित्वा तु मुच्यते नात्र संशयः ॥ 55 ॥

नित्यं पटेढ़ास्तं द्वृष्टा नावगर्धेः पलायते ।

He who recites these twelve names while worshipping Manasā Devi, he or any of his family has no fear of snakes. If there be any fear of snakes in one's bed, if the house be infested with snakes, or if one goes to a place difficult for fear of snakes or if one's body be encircled with snakes, all the

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

fears are dispelled, if one reads this stotra of Manasā. There is no doubt in this. The snakes run away out of fear from the sight of him who daily recites Manasā stotra.

द्वगलक्षनपैव स्तोभसिद्धभवैन्गणाम ॥ 56 ॥

स्तोभसिद्धभवैद्यस्य स विषं भोतुभीश्वर: ।

नारीश भूषणं कृत्वा स भवेभागवाहनः ॥ 57 ॥

नागासनो नागाल्यो महासिद्धो भवे-नर: ।

अंते च विष्णुना सार्ये क्रीड़त्येव द्विदानिशम् ॥ 58 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभगवते महापुरुषो नवम्मकर्ये नरदनारावशसंदार

सपतचारिशोस्थाय: 11 47 11

Ten lakhs of times repeating the Manasā mantra give one man success in the stotra. He can easily drink poison who attains success in this stotra. The snakes become his ornaments; they carry him even on their backs. He who is a great Siddha can sit on a seat of snakes and can sleep on a bed of snakes. In the end he sports day and might with Viṣṇu.

Here ends the Forty-seventh Chapter of the Ninth Book on Manasā's story in the Mahā Purānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vāysa.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER XLVIII

On Manasā

शीनारायण उवाच

मत्त: पूजाविधानं च श्रूयता मुनिपुर्णाव । ध्यानं च सामवेदोरके प्रोके देवीविधानम् ॥ १ ॥

श्रवेतंपकवरणाणं। रत्नभूषणभूषितम् । वहिक्षुद्धिणुकाधानां नागयज्ञोपवीतिनम् ॥ २ ॥

महाजान्यतुतां तां च प्रवर्ताजिनां वराम् ।

सिद्धाधिगुदादेवीं च सिद्धा सिद्धिप्रदांं भगे ॥ ३ ॥

Nārāyana said: O Nārada! I will now speak of the Dhyānam and the method of worship of Śri Devi Manasā, as stated in the Sāma Veda. Hear. 'I meditate on the Devi Manasā, Whose colour is fair like that of the white campaka flower, whose body is decked all over with jewel ornaments, whose clothing is purified by fire, whose sacred thread is the Nāgas (serpent), who is full of wisdom, who is the foremost of great Jñāniens, who is the Presiding deity of the Siddhas, Who Herself is a Siddha and who bestows Siddis to all.'

इति ध्याना च तां देवी मूलेनैव प्रपुजयेत ।

नैवेटीविविधीपूरि: पुव्यपांधानुरेनपे: ॥ 4 ॥

मूलमेंग्रेष्ठ बेदोर्फैर्फन्तां वांशितप्रद: ।

मुने कल्यतरनाम सुसिंद्रो झादणाक्षतः ॥ 5 ॥

O Muni! Thus meditating on Her, one should present Her flowers, scents, ornaments, offerings of food and various other articles, pronouncing the principal Seed Mantra. O Nārada! The twelve

lettered Siddha Mantra, to be mentioned below, yields to the Bhaktas their desires like the Kalpa Tree.

उठे हीी बली रैंद मनसा देखे स्वाहिति कीर्तितः ।

पछल्बजपैने मन्त्रसिद्धमैन्द्रगणम् ॥ 6 ॥

मन्त्रसिद्धप्रदेशस्य स सिद्धो जगतिलो ।

सुधासपं चितं तस्य धवर्तिरसभो भवेत् ॥ 7 ॥

Now the Radical mantra as stated in the Vedas is ‘Om Hrim Śrīm Klīm Aim Manasā Devyai Svāhā’. Repetition of this, five lakhs of times, yields success to one who repeats. He who attains success in this mantra gets unbounded name and fame in this world. Poison becomes nectar to him and fame in this world. Poison becomes nectar to him and he himself becomes famous like Dhanvantarī.

बहान्नालात् तु संक्रांत्यां गृह्गालासु यन्ततः ।

आवाहा देवीमीगानां पुवयेडो प्रतिभक्ति: ॥ 8 ॥

पड्घयं मनसां धायन् देये दहाच्च यो बलिम।

धनवान्युवर्षोशे कौतिमान्स भवेद्युवम ॥ 9 ॥

O Nārada! If anybody bathes on any Saṅkranti day (when the sun enters from one sign to another) and going to a private room (hidden room), invokes the Devi Nanaśa Iśanā and worships Her with devotion, or makes sacrifices of animals before the Devi on the fifth day of the fortnight, he becomes certainly wealthy, endowed with sons and name and fame.

Book IX Chapter XLVIII

पूजाथिधानं कथितं तताद्यानं निशामय ।

कथयामि महाभाग यच्छुतं धार्यबस्तः ॥ 10 ॥

पुरा नागभ्याङ्गतां बधुबुर्मानंवा भृवि ।

गतातते शगरं सर्वे कशययं मुनिपुंगवम् ॥ 11 ॥

Thus I have described to you the method of worship of Manasā Devī. Now hear the anecdote of the Devi as I heard from Dharma. In olden days, men became greatly of the Devi as I heard from Dharma. In olden days, men become greatly terrified on earth from snakes and took refuge of Kaśyapa, the supreme amongst the Munis. The Maharṣi Kaśyapa became very afraid.

मंत्रांश सयुजे भरितः करणयो ब्रहणान्यितः ।

वेदवीजानुसारेण चोपदेशेन ब्रहाण: ॥ 1 2 ॥

मन्त्राधिष्ठानुदेवीं तां मनसां ससुजे तदा ।

तपसा मनसा तेन बन्यूव मनसा च सा ॥ 1 3 ॥

He then with Brahmā, and by His command composed a mantra following the principal motto of the Vedas. While composing this mantra, he intensely thought of the Devi, the Presiding Deity of that Mantra, through the power of his Tapasyā and through the mental power, the Devi Manasā appeared and was named so, as She was produced from the sheer influence of mind.

कुमारी सा च संभृता जगामा शंकालयम् ।

भक्ल्या संपूच्य कैलासे तुहाव चंद्रशेखादम् ॥ 14 ॥

दिव्यवर्षसहरूं ते सियेवे च मुनैः सुता ।

आगुतोषो महेश्ठा तां च तुहो बघूबर ए ॥ 15 ॥

On being born, the girl went to the abode of Śankara in Kailāśa and began to worship Him and chant hymns to Him with devotion. For one thousand Divine years, the daughter of Kaśyapa served Mahādeva when He became pleased.

महान्नां ददी तस्ये पाठयामास साम च ।

कृष्णमंत्र कल्पतर्के ददावधाक्षरं मुने ॥ १६ ॥

He gave her the Great Knowledge, made Her recite the Sāma Veda and bestowed to her the eight-lettered Krṣṇa mantra which is like the Kalpa Tree.

लक्ष्मीयायाकामार्थीजं डेनेन कृष्णपदत: ।

त्रैलोक्यमूढ़लं नाम कवचं पूजनकमम् ॥ 17 ॥

पुरुष्याक्रमं चापि वेदोक्तं सर्वसंपतम् ।

प्राय्य मृतुर्ज्ञान्यांत्र सा सती च मुनेः सुता ॥ 18 ॥

जगाम तपसे साखी पुक्छरं शंकराज्ञा ।

त्रिवुर्णं च तपतत्वा कृष्णस्य परमात्मनः ॥ 19 ॥

सिद्धा बभूव सा देवी द्वर्णे पुतः प्रभूम् ।

‘Śrīm, Hrīm Klīm Kṛṣnāya Namah, was the eight-lettered Mantra. She got from Him the Kavaca (amulet) auspicious to the three worlds, the method of worship and all the rules of Puraşcarana (repetition of the name of a deity attended with burnt offerings, oblations, etc.) and went by His command to perform in Puṣkara very hard austerities. There she worshipped Kṛṣṇa for the three Yugas. Śrī Kṛṣṇa then appeared before Her.

दूधा कुशार्गी बालां कृपया च कृपानिधि: ॥ 20 ॥

पूजां च कारयामास चकाच च स्वयं हरि: ।

वरं च प्रददी तस्ये पूजिता त्वं भवे भव ॥ 21 ॥

वरं दत्त्वा च कल्याण्ये ततशुतन्दीरं हरि: ।

On seeing Kṛṣṇa, immediately the girl, worn out by austerities, worshipped Him, and she was also worshipped by Śri Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa granted her the boon ‘Let you be worshipped throughout the world’ and departed.

प्रदये पुक्ति सा च कृष्णोन परमात्ना ॥ 22 ॥

द्वितीये शड़ूर्णैल कवयपेन सुरेण च ।

मुनिना मनुना चैव नागेन मानवादिभि: ॥ 23 ॥

बधूव पुक्ति सा च विमु लोकेषु सुवता ।

जरलाकामुनीत्रय कवयपस्तां ददी पुरा ॥ 24 ॥

O Nārada! She was thus first worshipped by the Supreme Spirit. the Deva Krṣṇa; secondly by Śaṅkara; thirdly by the Maharṣi Kaśyapa and the Devas.

अयाचितो मुनिश्रेषो जग्राह ब्राहणाज्ञा ।

कृत्वोद्वाहामहायोगी विश्रान्तसपसा चित्यम् ॥ 25 ॥

सुबण वेद्या जपने वद्युले च पुकेले ।

निर्जो जगाम स पुनि: स्मूला निर्जेशाधीर्ण ॥ 26 ॥

Then she was worshipped by the Munis, Manus, Nāgas, and men; and She become widely renowned in the three worlds. Kaśyapa gave Her over to the hands of Jaratāru Muni. At the request of the

Brāhmin Kaśyapa, the Muni Jarat Kāru married Her. After the marriage, one day, being tired with his long work of Tapasyā, Jarat Kāru laid his head on the hip and loins of his married wife and fell fast asleep.

जगामास्तं दिनकर: सायंकाल उपस्थिते ।

संविध्य मनसा साखी मनसा सा पतित्रानि । २७ ॥

धर्मलोपघयेनेव चकारालोचनं सती ।

अकूला पशुभां संख्या नित्यां चैव द्विजन्यम् ॥ २८ ॥

बहुहत्यादिके पायं लिभ्यति पतिमम् ।

नोपतिहित यः पूर्वी नोपासे न्यतु पशुधाम् ॥ 29 ॥

स सर्वेजागृधिनित्यं बहुहत्यादिके लभेत ।

वेदोक्तमिति संचित्य बोध्यामास सुंदरी ॥ 30 ॥

स च बुदो मुनिश्रभतां चुकांप भृर्णे मुते ।

Gradually the evening came in. The sun set. Then Manasā thought ‘If my husband fails to perform the Sandhyā, the daily duty of the Brāhmaṇas, he would be involved in the sin of Brahmahatyā. It is definitely stated in the Śāstras, that if any Brāhmaṇa does not perform his Sandhyā in the morning and in the evening, he becomes wholly impure and the sins Brahmahattyā and other crimes come down on his head.’ Arguning thus, these thoughts in her mind, as commanded by the Vedas, at last she awakened her husband, who then got up from his sleep.

मुनिवाच

कर्थ मे सृष्टिनः साधि्य निद्राभंः कृतस्वया ॥ 31 ॥

व्यर्थे तारादिकं तस्या या मनुंशापकारिणी ।

तपश्रानर्नं चैव त्रतं द्रानादिकं च यत् ॥ 32 ॥

भतुंरिध्यकाणिण्या: सर्वे भवति निष्णकम् ।

यया प्रियः पूजितश्र श्रीकृष्णः पूजितस्तथा ॥ 33 ॥

पतित्रतात्याचं च पतिस्णो हरि: स्वयम् ।

सर्वदानं सर्वयैज्ञः सर्वतीर्थसिवेशणम् ॥ 34 ॥

The Muni Jarat Kāru said: O Chaste One! I was sleeping happily. Why have you thus interrupted my sleep? All his vows turn out useless who injures her husband. Her tapas, fastings, gifts, and other meritorious works all come to vain who do things unpleasant to her husband. If she worships her husband, she is said to have worshipped Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

सर्वत्रत तपः सर्वमुपवासादिक च यत् ।

सर्वभंग्रष्ठ सर्वं च सर्वेवदिपूजनम् ॥ 35 ॥

तत्सर्वे स्वामिवेलाया: कलं नाहींत पोडगीम् ।

For the sake of fulfilling the vows of the chaste women, Hari himself becomes their husbands. All sorts of charities, gifts, all sacrifices, fastings, practising all the virtues, keeping to truth, worshipping all the Devas, nothing can turn out equal to even one-sixteenth part of serving one's husband.

पुण्ये च भाते वर्षे पतिसेवां क्रौतिं या ॥ 36 ॥

वैकुंते सवामिता सार्थ सा याति बहणण: पदम् ।

विषयें कुने भर्तविषियं वदति प्रियम् ॥ 37 ॥

असत्कुले प्रमृत्ता हि तत्कलं श्रवती सति ।

कृष्पीपाकं ब्रजेत्सा च यावच्छंद्रिवाकरी ॥ 38 ॥

ततो भवति चोडाली पतिभुत्रिवर्वर्जिता ।

She ultimately goes with her husband to the region of Vaikuntha, who serves her husband in this holy land Bhārata. She comes certainly of a bad family who does unpleasant acts to her husband or who uses unpleasant words to her husband. She goes to the Kumbhipāka hell as long as the Sun and Moon last and then she becomes born as a Cāndālī, without husband and son.”

इन्युक्णा च मुनिश्रेष्ठो बभूव सुर्गितापर: ॥ ३ १ ॥

चकंपे तेन सा साखी भयंनेवाव च त पतिम ।

Speaking thus, Jaat Kāru, the best of the Munis, became angry and his lips began to tremble. Seeing this, the best Manasā, shivering with fear, addressed her husband:

साध्युवाच

संध्यालोपघयेनैव नित्यांनः कृतस्व च । 4 0 ।।

कुरु शर्ति महाभाग दुहाया मम सूत्रत ।

श्रगारात्रनिद्राणों यश्छ भंगं करोति हि ॥ 4 1 ॥

I have broken your sleep and awakened you, fearing you might miss your time of Sandhyā. I have committed an offence. Punish me as you think.

स ब्रजेक्तालसूत्र वै यावच्छंद्रिद्वाकरो ।

इत्युक्चना मनसा देवी स्वामिन्धग्रणाणुबे ॥ 42 ॥

Book IX Charter XLVIII

पात्र भक्श्या भीता सा रोद च पुनः पुनः ।

कृपितं च मुनिं चूढ़ा श्रीसूई गणतुयुक्तम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

तत्राजगाम भगवान्संध्यया सह नारत ।

"I know that a man goes to the Kālasūtra hell as long as the Sun and Moon last in this world, who throws an obstacle when any man eats, sleeps or enjoys with the opposite sex." O Nārada! Thus saying, the Devi Manasā bell down at the feet of her husband and cried again and again. On the other hand, knowing the Muni angry, and ready to curse her, the Sun came there with Sandhyā Devi.

तत्रागय वृनीं सम्यगुवाच भास्कर: स्वयम् ॥ 44 ॥

विनयेन च भीतश्र तया सह यथोचितम् ।

And He humbly spoke to him with fear: "O Bhagavan! Seeing Me going to set, and fearing that you may miss Dharma, your chaste wife has awakened you.

भास्कर उवाच

सूर्यास्तसमयं द्वृषा साध्यो दर्भाथयेन च ॥ 4 5 ॥

बोधायामास त्वां विध्र शरणं त्यामहं नतः ।

शमस्व भगवन्बहामां शर्तु नोचितं मुने ॥ 46 ॥

बाहुणानां च इदयं नवनीतसमं सदा ।

तेषां क्षणार्थं क्रोधध्छ ततो भम भयंज्ञगत् ॥ 47 ॥

पुनः स्थूं द्विजः शक्तो न तेजस्वी द्विजात्पः ।

O Brāhmīn! Now I am also under your refuge; forgive me. O Bhagavan! You should not curse Me. The more so, a Brāhmaṇa's heart is as tender as the fresh butter. The anger of a Brāhmaṇa lasts only half the twinkling of an eye (Kṣāna). When a Brāhmaṇa becomes angry, he can burn all this world and can make a new creation.

ब्राह्मणो ब्रह्मणो वंश: प्रचलल्बब्रह्मतेसा ॥ 48 ॥

श्रीकृष्ण भावयेतित्ये ब्रह्म्योति: सनातनम् ।

So who can possess an influence like a Brāhmana. A Brāhmin is a part of Brahmā; he is shining day and night with the Tejas of Brahma. A Brāhmana meditates always on the Eternal Light of Brahma." O Nārada! Hearing the words of the Sun, the Brāhmin became satisfied and blessed Him. The Sun also went to His own place, thus blessed duly.

सूर्यस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा डिजस्तुहो बधूव है ॥ 49 ॥

सूर्यों जगाम स्वस्थानं गृतीलां बाहाणगीरमम् ।

तत्वाज मनसां विध्य: प्रतिज्ञापालनाय च ॥ 50 ॥

रुद्तीं गोकसंयुक्तां इद्येन विद्यता ।

सा समसार गृहं शंभुभिछेर्वं विधिं हरिम् ॥ 51 ॥

कर्यपं जन्मदातारं विषत्तो भयकर्गिता ।

To keep his promise the Brāhmin Jaratkāru quilted Manasā. She becomes very sorry and began to cry aloud with pain and anguish. Being very much distressed by the then danger, she remembered Her Iṣṭa Deva, Mahādeva, Brahmā, Hari and Her father Maharṣi Kaśyapa.

तजाजगाम गोरीगेश भगवाछक्षंपूरे च ॥ 52 ॥

विधिछ्छ कल्पवघैव मनसा परिचितितः ।

द्वृा विपो3भीद्वंवे निर्णी प्रकृतेः परम् ॥ 53 ॥

तृधाव परया भक्ल्या प्रणानाम मुहुपुरुः ।

On the very instant when Manasā remembered, Śrī Krṣṇa, the Lord of the Gopīs, Mahādeva, Brahmā and Maharṣi Kaśyapa appeared there. Then seeing his own desired Deity Śrī Krṣṇa, superior to Prakṛti, beyond the attributes, Jaratkāru began to praise Him and bowed down to Him repeatedly.

नमधुकार गंभु च ब्रहाणां करपयं तथा ॥ 54 ॥

कथमागमनं देहा इति प्रजनं चकार सः ।

बहा तद्वनं शुचा सहा सामयोचितान् ॥ 55 ॥

प्रत्युवाच नमस्कृत्य द्वीकैशपदांवुजम् ।

यदि त्यक्ता धर्मपन्ती धर्मिष्ठा मनसा सती ॥ 56 ॥

कुरुधायायां सुतोत्थिं सद्योपानलाव ते ।

Then bowing down to Mahādeva, Brahmā and Kaśyapa, he enquired why they had come there. Brahmā, then, instantly bowed down at the lotus feet of Hrṣikeśa and spoke in befitting words at that time if the Brāhmin Jaratkāru leaves at all his legal wife, devoted to her own Dharma, he should

first of all have a son born of her to fulfil his Dharma.

जायायां च सुतोतर्चिं कृत्वा पश्चत्वजेमुने ॥ 57 ॥

अकृत्वा तु सुतोत्पर्नित विरागी यत्स्वजेग्रियम् ।

स्वते तस्य पूर्णे च चाल्याचा व यथा जलम् ॥ 58 ॥

ब्रहणो वचनं श्रुता जरलाकामुनीश्र: ।

चकार नाधिभरस्यर्ग योगेन मंत्रपुर्वकम् ॥ 59 ॥

मनसाया मुनिश्रेष्ठो मुविश्रेष्ठ उवाच ताम ।

अकृत्वा तु सुतोत्थिति विगती यस्यजेक्रियाम् ।

स्वते तस्य पूर्णे च चाल्याचा व यथा जलम् ॥ 58 ॥

ब्रहणो वचनं श्रुता जरलाकामुर्नीश्र: ।

चकार नाधिभरस्यर्ग योगेन मंत्रपुर्वकम् ॥ 59 ॥

चकार नाधिभरस्यर्ग योगेन मंत्रपुर्वकम् ॥ 59 ॥

मनसाया मुनिश्रेष्ठो मुविश्रेष्ठ उवाच ताम ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

O Muni! Any man can quit his wife, after he has impregnated her and got a son. But if without having a son, he leaves his wife, then all his merits are lots as all water leaks out of a siever or a strainer. O Nārada! Hearing thus the words of Brahmā, the Muni Jaratkāru by his Yogic power recited a Mantra and touching the navel of Manasā spoke to her:

जरूकाकरवाच

गर्भणाने मनसे तव पुरो भविष्यति ॥ 60 ॥

जितेनिद्वाणां प्रवरो धार्मिको ब्राह्मणामृगः ।

तेजस्वी च तपस्वी च यशल्वी च गुणात्वितः ॥ 6 1 ॥

वरो वेद्विद्वं चैव ज्ञानिनां योगिनां तथा ।

“O Manasā! A son will be born in your womb self-controlled, religious, and best of the Brāhmaṇas. That son will be fiery, energetic, renowned, well-qualified, the foremost of the Knowers of the Vedas, a great Jñānin and the best of the Yogis.

स च पुत्री विज्युस्तको धार्यिकः कुल्युद्धेत् ॥ 6 2 ॥

नृत्विन्त विपत: सर्वे जन्माग्रिण वै मुता ।

पतित्रता सुगीला या सा प्रिया विश्वादिति ॥ 6 3 ॥

धीग्रा युप्रमाता च कुलक्जी कुलपालिका ।

हरिभक्तिप्रदो बधुर्ने चाभीधसुखप्रदः ॥ 6 4 ॥

That son is a true son, indeed, who uplifts his family who is religious and devoted to Hari. At his birth all the Pitrs dance with great joy. And the wife is a true wife who is devoted to her husband, good-natured and sweet-speaking and she is religious, she is the mother of sons, she is the woman of the family and she is the preserver of the family. He is true friend, indeed, the giver of one's desired fruits, who imparts devotion to Hari.

यो बंधुँछेस च विता हरिवर्गप्रदर्शकः ।

सा गर्भधारिणी या च गर्भावासविभोच्नी ॥ 6 5 ॥

द्यारूषा च भयिनी यमधीतिविमोच्नी ।

विष्युभंगप्रदाता च स गुरूकिंव्युभनिक: ॥ 6 6 ॥

That father is true father who shows the way to devotion to Hari. And She is the True Mother,

through whom this entering into wombs ceases for ever, yea, for ever! That sister is the true kind sister from whom the fear of Death vanishes. That Guru is the Guru who gives the Viṣṇu Mantra and the true devotion to Viṣṇu.

गुरूछ ज्ञानदो यो हि यज्ञानं कृष्णाभावनम् ।

आब्रह्मतर्बायर्वन्त यात विश्वं चराचरम् ॥ 67 ॥

आविर्भूतं तितिभृतं किं वा जानं तद्यन्तः ।

वेदैतं यज्ञं यद्यतसारं हरिसेवनम् ॥ 68 ॥

That Guru is the real bestower of knowledge who gives the Jñānam by which Śrī Krṣṇa is meditated in whom this whole universe, moving and non-moving from the Brahmā down to a blade of grass, is appearing and disappearing. There is no doubt in this. What knowledge can be superior to that of Śrī Krṣṇa. The knowledge derived from the Vedas, or from the sacrifices or from any other source is not superior to the service to Śrī Krṣṇa.

तत्त्वानां सारभूतं च हरेन्यद्रिद्धबनम् ।

दर्ते ज्ञानं मया तृण्यं स स्वामी ज्ञानं ही च: ॥ 69 ॥

ज्ञानात्रपुच्यते बन्धात्स रिपुयं हि बन्धवः ।

विष्युभक्तियुतं ज्ञानं नो द्वालित हिं यो गुरुः ॥ 70 ॥

The devotion and knowledge of Śrī Hari is the Essence of all knowledge; all else is vain and mockery. It is through this Real Knowledge; that this bondage from this world is severed. But the Guru who does not impart this devotion and knowledge of Śrī Hari is not the real Guru; rather he is an enemy that leads one to bondage.

स रिषु: शिष्याती च यतो बंधात्र मोचयेत् ।

जनर्जी भर्पिबल्लेशाद्यमतानया तथा ॥ ७ १ १ ॥

न मोचवेधः स कर्थ गुरुस्ताले हि बांधवः ।

पर्यानन्दक्षं च कृष्णमार्गमन्वरम् ॥ ७ २ ॥

Verily he kills his disciple when he does not free him. He can never be called a Guru, father or friend who does not free his disciple from the pains in the various wombs and from the pains of death. Verily he can never be called a friend who does not show the way to the Undecaying Śrī Krṣna, the Source of the Highest Bliss.

Book IX Chapter XLVIII

न दर्शयिहः सततं कौद्युगो बांधवो नृणाम्।

भज साधित यरे ब्रह्माच्छृतं कृष्णं च निरुर्णम् ॥ 73 ॥

निर्भूले च भवेद्युंसां कर्म बै तस्य सेवया ।

मया छलेन त्वं तच्ना क्षमस्वैतनमय प्रिये ॥ 74 ॥

क्षमायुतांना साध्वीनो सचालकोयो न विहते ।

पृष्करं तपसे याथि गच्छ देवि यथासुखम् ॥ 75 ॥

So, O Chaste One! You better worship that Undecaying Para Brahma Śrī Krṣṇa, Who is beyond the attributes. O Beloved! I have left you out of a pretence; please excuse me for this. The chaste women are always forgiving; never they become angry because they are born of Sattvagunas.

Now I go to Puşkara for Tapasyā; you better go wherever you like.

श्रीकृष्यारणांभोजे नि:स्यूहाणां मनोराधा: ।

जरत्कान्चच: शुल्या मनसा शोककातन ॥ 76 ॥

साघुभोत्रा च विन्यादुवाच प्रणावल्लभम् ।

Those who have no desire have their minds always attached to the lotus feet of Śrī Krṣṇa. O Nārada! Hearing the words of Jaratkāru, the Devi Manasā became very much distressed and bewildered with great sorrow. Tears began to flow from her eyes. She then humbly spoke to her dearest husband:

मनसोवाच

दोषो नास्येव मे त्यक्तु निद्राभंगने ते प्रभो ॥ 77 ॥

यत्र स्मारीय त्वां नित्यं तत्र मागमागमध्ययि ।

बन्धुपेदे: क्लेलातम: पुज्येदस्ततः परम् ॥ 78 ॥

प्राणोशपेदः प्राणानां विच्छेदासर्वतः परः ।

पति: पतित्रानां तु शतपुजात्रिकं प्रियः ॥ 79 ॥

“O Lord! I have not committed any such offence, as you leave me altogether when I have thus broken your sleep. However kindly show Thyself to me when I will recollect you. The breavement of one’s friend is painful; more than that is the breavement of a son. Again one’s husband is dearer than one hundred sons; so the breavement of one’s husband is the heaviest of all.

सर्वेस्मातु प्रियः क्लीणं प्रियस्तेनोच्छते बुधैः ।

पुरे यथैकुपुजाणों वैष्णावानां यथा हरी ॥ 8० ॥

नेत्रे यथैकनेजाणं तृषितानां यथा जले ।

क्षुधितानां यथा5-ने च कामुकानां च मैयुने ॥ 8 1 ॥

यथा परस्वे चोरणगं यथा जारे कुयोधितान् ।

विद्यां च यथा शापसे वाणिज्ये वर्गिजां यथा ॥ 8 2 ॥

तथा शफवमनः काने साध्यीनां योचितां प्रभे ।

To woman, the husband is the most beloved of all earthly things; hence he is called Priya, i.e., dear. As the heart of one who has only one son is attached to that son, as the heart of a Vaiṣṇava is attached to Śrī Hari; as the mind of one-eyed man to his one eye, as the mind of the thirsty is attached to water, as the mind of the hungry is attached to food, as the mind of the passionate is attached to lust, as the mind of a thief is attached to the properties of others, as the mind of alewd man to his prostitute, as the mind of the learned is attached to the Śāstras, as the mind of a trader is attached to his trade, so the minds of chaste women are attached to their husband.

इत्युक्त्वा मनसा देवी पापात स्वामिनः पदे ॥ 83 ॥

क्षणं चकार कोड़े तां कृपया च कृपानिधि: ।

नेत्रोदकेन मनसां स्तायामास तां मुनि: ॥ 84 ॥

साधुनेत्रा मुनेः कोईं सिवेच भेदकाता ।

तदा ज्ञानेन तौ ही च विगोंकी संबंधमुतुः ॥ 85 ॥

Thus saying, Manasā fell down at the feet of her husband. Jaratkāru, the ocean of mercy, then, took her for a moment on his lap and drenched her body with tears from his eyes. The Devi Manasā, too, distressed at the bereavement of her husband also drenched the lap of the Muni with tears from her eyes.

स्मारं स्मारं पटुर्णोजे कृष्णस्य परमात्मनः ।

जगाम तपसे विधः स्वक्रांतों संप्रयोक्ष्य च ॥ 86 ॥

जगाम मनसा शंभोः कैलासं मंदितं गुरोः ।

पार्वती बोधयामास मनसां शोकाकशिताम ॥ 87 ॥

शिवक्षातीव ज्ञानेन शिवेन च शिवालयः ।

Some time after, the true knowledge arose in them and they both became free from fear. Jaratkāru then enlightened his wife and asked her to meditate on the lotus feet of Śri Kṛṣṇa the

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Supreme Spirit repeatedly; thus saying he went away for his Tapasyā. Manasā, distressed with sorrow, went to his Iṣṭa Deva Mahādeva on Kailāsa. The auspicious Śiva and Pārvati both consoled her with knowledge and advise.

सुप्रशस्ते दिने साध्यी सुचुवे मूज्छणे ॥ 88 ॥

नारायणोंं पूर्व ते योगिनां जानिनां गुभम् ।

गर्भस्थो महान्जानं शुचा शंकत्वकताः ॥ 89 ॥

संबभूव च योगिहो योगिनां जानिनां गुहः ।

जातकं कारायामास वाचवायामास मुकुलम् ॥ 90 ॥

Some days after, on an auspicious day and on an auspicious moment she gave birth to a son born in part of Nārāyaṇa, and as the Guru of the Yogis and as the Preceptor of the Jñāinis. When the child was in mother's womb, he heard the highest knowledge from the mouth of Mahādeva; therefore he was born as a Yogindra and the Spiritual Teacher of the Jñāinis. On his birth, Bhagavān Śaṅkara performed his natal ceremonies and performed various auspicious ceremonies.

वेटांघ पाठवामास रिवाया च चिक: शिलोः ।

मशिरलक्रीटांघ ब्राह्मणेच्ये द्वी तिकाः ॥ 9 १ १ ॥

पार्वती च गवां लक्षं रत्नानि विविधानि च ।

शंभृघ चतुरो वेद्यावैद्यानितरांसधा ॥ 9 2 ॥

The Brāhmaṇas chanted the Vedas for the welfare of the child; various wealth and jewels and Kīrītas and invaluable gems were distributed by Śaṅkara to the Brāhmaṇas; and Pārvāti gave one lakh cows and various jewels to others. After some days, Mahādeva taught him the four Vedas with their Aṅgas (six limbs) and gave him, at last, the Mrtyunjāya Mantra.

बालकं पाठ्यायमास ज्ञानं मृत्युबयं परम् ।

पवित्तस्पधिका कानतेउभीढ़देवे गुरी तथा ॥ 93 ॥

As in Manasa's mind there reigned the devotion to her husband, the devotion to her Iṣta Deva and Guru, the child's name was kept Āstika.

यस्यापतेचे च तत्पुजो बधुवास्तीक एव च ।

जगाम तपसे विष्णो: पुरूकरं शंकराज्ञाय ॥ ९४ ॥

संग्राय च महामन्तं ततश्व परमात्मन: ।

Aštika then got the Mahā Mantra from Śaṅkara and by his command went to Puṣkara to worship Viṣṇu, the Supreme Spirit.

विद्यं वर्षित्वर्श्चे च ततस्तत्वा तपोधनः ॥ 95 ॥

आजगमा महायोगी नामकर्तुं शिवं प्रभूम् ।

शंकरं च नमकृत्य स्थिता तत्रैव बालकाः ॥ 96 ॥

सा चाजगाम मनसां कशयपत्यामयं चितुः ।

There he practised tapasyā for three lakh divine years. And then he returned to Kailāśa, to bow down to the great Yogi and the Lord Śaṅkara. Then, bowing down to Śaṅkara, he remained there for some time when Manasā with her son Āstīka went to the hermitage of Kāśyapa, his father.

तां सपुत्रां सुतां दृष्टा मुदं प्राप प्रजापति: ॥ 97 ॥

शतलक्षं च रत्नानां ब्राह्मणेच्ये दटी मुने ।

ब्राह्मणाभोज्यामास सेोरसंखान्र श्रेयसे शिषणे: ॥ 98 ॥

अदितिक्षा दितिश्रान्या मूदं प्राप पत्नत १

सा सपुत्रा च सुविरं तत्थी ततालये नेतृ ॥ 99 ॥

Seeing Manasā with son, the Maharsī's gladness knew no bounds. He fed innumerable Brāhmaṇas for the welfare of the child, and distributed lakhs and lakhs of jewels. The joy of Aditi and Diti (the wives of Kaśyapa) knew no bounds; Manasā remained there for a long, long time with his son.

तदीयं पुनराख्यानं वक्ष्यामि ननिशगाय।

अथापिम्बनुतनंने ब्रह्माण: परीक्षिते ॥ 100 ॥

बधूव सहसा बहान् दैवदोयेण कर्मणा ।

सपाठे समितीत तु तक्षकत्वां च धध्यति ॥ 101 ॥

गणप शूक्ती तैव कौशिक्याक्य जलेन वे ।

राजा शुचा तत्यष्टिंन विवर्तत्यनामगत: ॥ 102 ॥

तत्र तत्पथी च सपतहं देहक्षानत्पतर: ।

सपतहं समताते तु गच्छत तक्षकं पथि ॥ 103 ॥

O Child! Hear now an anecdote on this. One day due to a bad Karma, a Brāhmana cursed the king Parikṣit, the son of Abhimanyu; one Rṣi's son named Śrngī, sipping the water of the river Kausikī cursed thus: 'When a week expires, the snake Takṣaka will bite you, and you will be burnt with the poison of that snake Takṣaka.' Hearing this, the King Parikṣit, to preserve his life, went to a

Book IX Chapter XLVIII

place, solitary where wind even can have no access and he lived there.

ཕྲལོའི་ཀྱིན་ སོ བཞིན་ བྱུན་ གམཆུང་ གཟི་ གཞི། །

त्योबैभूव संवादः सुप्रीतिश्र परस्परम् ॥ 104 ॥

ཕྲལོའི་རིན་གྱི་གྲག་སྟན་ཆུང་: སྡེནོགྱམ་ཐའི། །

བ་མདའི་ཀྱིན་ནུ་སྟོགྱི་རྒྱལ་མཆོགས་ཆེ། ། 105 ॥

When the week was over, Dhanvantari saw, while he was going on the road, the snake Taksaka who was also going to bite the king. A conversation and a great friendship arose between them; Taksaka gave him voluntarily a gem; and Dhanvantari, getting it, became pleased and went back gladly to his house.

तक्षको भक्ष्यामास नृपं त मझके स्थितम् ।

राज जगाम तसरा देई त्यकत्वा परत्र च ॥ 106 ॥

संस्कार कार्यामास पितृर्वें जनोबेलः ।

राज चकार यज्च च सम्वसत्रं ततो मुने ॥ 107 ॥

The king Parikṣit was lying on his bed-stead when Takṣaka bit the king. The king died soon and went to the next world. The king Janamejaya then performed the funeral obsequies of his father and commenced afterwards the Sarpa Yajñā (a sacrifice where the sankes are the victims).

प्राणांस्तत्वास सपर्णो समूहो ब्रह्मोजसा ।

स तक्षको वै भीतस्तु महेन्द्रं शरणं ययौ ॥ 108 ॥

संद्रं च तक्षकं हेतुं विप्रवर्ग: समुद्रतः ।

अथ देवाशु संद्राशु संजगमुनेसांतिकम् ॥ 109 ॥

In that sacrifice, innnumerable snakes gave up their lives by the Brahma Teja (the fire of the Brāhmins). At this, Taksaka became terrified and took refuge of Indra. The Brāhmins, then, in a body, became, ready to burn Taksaka along with Indra, when, Indra and the other Devas went to Manasā.

तां तुहाव महेन्द्रश भयंकतारविह्लः ।

तत आसीक आगल्य चर्चं च मातुरात्रया ॥ 110 ॥

महैद्रतक्षकाणान्यायचे भृमियं परम् ।

ददौ वरं नृपश्रेष्ठः कृपया ब्राह्माणात्रया ॥ 111 ॥

यजं सामाय विधेभ्यो दक्षिणं च ददी मुदा ।

विग्राश मुनयो देया गत्वा च मनसांतिकम् ॥ 1 2 ॥

Mahendra, bewildered with fear, began to

chant hymns to Manasā. Manasā called his own son Āstika who then went to the sacrificial assembly of the king Janamejaya and begged that the lives of Indra and Takṣaka be spared. The king, then, at the command of the Brāhmaṇas, granted their lives. The king, then, completed his sacrifice and gladly gave the Dakṣinās to the Brāhmins. The Brāhmaṇas, Munis, and Devas collected and went to Manasā and worshipped Her separately and chanted hymns to Her.

मनसां पुकायामासुसुद्धुश पृथक् पृथक् ।

गकः संभृतसंघगते भक्तिपुकः सदा गृधि: ॥ 113 ॥

मनसां पुकायामास तृधाव पमादरात् ।

नत्वा घोडणोपचारं बलिंच ततिन्यं तदा ॥ 114 ॥

प्रदूदी परितृष्ण ब्रह्मविष्यगिशवाज्ञा ।

संपूच्य मनसां देयीं प्रवपुः स्वालयं च ते ॥ 115 ॥

इन्येकं कथितं सर्व किं कृप्यः श्रौतुपिच्छसि ।

Indra went there with the various articles and He worshipped Manasā with devotion and with great love and care; and He chanted hymns to Her. Then bowing down before Her, and under the instructions of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa, offered her sixteen articles, sacrifices and various other good and pleasant things. O Nārada! Thus worshipping Her, they all went to their respective places. Thus I have told you the anecdote of Manasā. What more do you want to hear. Say.

नारद उवाच

केन स्तोजण तुहाव महैद्रो मनसां सतीम् ॥ ११ ६ ॥

पूजाविधिकमं तस्या: श्रीदीम्ब्छामि तचताः ।

Nārada said: O Lord! How did Indra prasie Her and what was the method of His worshipping Her; I want to hear all this.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

सुस्नतः शूचिरचांतो धृत्वा धौते च वाससी ॥ 117 ॥

रत्नसिंहासने देर्वी वासयामास भक्तिः ।

स्वर्गीगया जलेनैव रत्नकुभथित्येत च ॥ 118 ॥

सत्पायामास मनसां महेन्द्रो वेद्यंत्रतः ।

वासवी वासयामास वहिह्युद्धे मनोहरे ॥ 119 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Nārāyaṇa said: Indra first took his bath; and, performing Ācāmana and becoming pure, He put on a fresh and clean clothing and placed Manasā Devī on a jewel throne. Then reciting the Vedic mantras he made Her perform Har bath by the water of the Mandākinī the celestial river Ganges, poured from a jewel jar and then He made Her put on the beautiful clothing, uninflammable by fire.

सर्वात्रें चंदनं कृत्वा पात्रार्थं भक्तिसंयुतः ।

गणेशं च दिनेशं च ताईं विद्युं जिशं विज्ञाम् ॥ 120 ॥

संपूज्यादौ देवयद्कं पूज्यामास तां सतीम् ।

ऊं हूँ श्री मनसादेवे सहोत्येवं च मंत्रतः ॥ 121 ॥

Then He caused sandalpaste to be applied to Her body all over with devotion and offered water for washing Her feet and Arghya, an offering of grass and flowers and rice, etc., as a token of preliminary worship. First of all the six Devatās Ganesa, Sun, Fire, Viṣṇu, Śiva, and Śivā were worshipped. Then with the ten lettered mantra ‘Om Hrim Śrim Manasā Devyai Svāhā’ offered all the offerings to Her.

दशाप्रसेण मूलेन ददी सर्वे यथोचितम् ।

दत्वा घोडंगोपचारानुर्लभान्देवनायकः ॥ 1 2 2 ॥

पूजयामास भत्त्या च विध्गान् प्रेिती मुदा ।

वार्यं नानाप्रकारं च वाद्ययामास तत्र वै ॥ 1 2 3 ॥

बभूव पुष्प्यहिष्ठ नभसे मनसोपरि ।

Stimulated by the God Viṣṇu, Indra worshipped with great joy the Devi with sixteen articles so very rare to any other person. Drums and instruments were sounded. From the celestial heavens, a shower of flowers was thrown on the head of Manasā.

देवप्रियात्या तत इद्विष्यणिशवात्या ॥ 124 ॥

सुवार साश्रनेशेडे पुलकांकितिविषहः ।

Then, at the advice of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa, the Devas and the Brāhmaṇas, Indra, with tears in his eyes, began to chant hymns to Manasā, when his whole body was thrilled with joy and hairs stood on their ends.

पुरंदर उवाच

देवि तां सतीपिच्छामि साधीनां प्रवं सराम् ॥ 125 ॥

परात्वरां च परमां न हि सतीतुं क्षमो3धुना ।

सतीजागां लक्षणां बेदे स्वभावाख्यानततसरम् ॥ 126 ॥

न क्षमः प्रकृते वक्तुं गुणानां गणानां तत ।

युद्धस्तचल्कल्पा त्वं कोर्धिसादिवर्षिता ॥ 127 ॥

न च शगतो मुनिसेन त्वक्तुं याच्वा कृता यातः ।

Indra said: O Devi Manase! Thou standest the highest amongst the chaste women. Therefore I want to chant hymns to Thee. Thou art higher than the highest. Thus art most supreme. What can I now praise Thee? Chanting hymns is characterised by the description of one's nature; so it is said in the Vedas. But, O Prakrti! I am unable to ascert ain and describe Thy qualities. Thou art of the nature of Śuddha Sattva (higher than the pure sattva unmixed with any other Gunas); Thou art free from anger and malice. The Muni Jaratāru could not forsake Thee; therefore it was that he prayed for Thy separation before.

तं यमा पुक्ता साखी जननी मे यवासंदिति: ॥ 128 ॥

दयाक्पा च भार्थिनी क्षमाक्पा यथा प्रसूः ।

तव्या मे रक्षिताः प्राणाः पुत्रवाताः सुरेश्वारि ॥ 129 ॥

O Chaste One! I have now worshipped Thee. Thou art an object of worship as my mother Aditi is. Thou art my sister full of mercy; Thou art the mother full of forgiveness. O Sureśvari! It is through Thee that my wife, sons and my life are saved.

अर्ह कंपीय त्वतुर्जां प्रीतिश्व कर्धितां सहा ।

नित्या चद्य पूरुचा त्वं सर्वैन जगदंबिके ॥ 130 ॥

तथापि त्व पूर्णा च कर्धायामि सुरोजरि ।

ये त्वामाषावसंक्रतायां पूर्णियधौत भक्तिः ॥ 131 ॥

पंचभयं मनसाख्यायां मासाने वा दिने दिने ।

पुरपौरावद्यतसेयं बर्धन्ते च ध्वानि वे ॥ 132 ॥

यशस्विनः कीर्तिमंतो विद्यावन्तो गुणात्विताः ।

I am worshipping Thee. Let Thy love be increased. O World-Mother! Thou art eternal; though Thy worship is extant everywhere in the universe, yet I worship Thee to have it extended and further. O Mother! Those who worship Thee with devotion on the Saṅkrāti day of the month

Book IX Chapter XLVIII

of Āsāḍha, or on the Nāga Pañcamī day, or on the Saṅkrānti day of every month or on every day, they get their sons and grandsons, wealth and grains increased and become themselves famous, well gratified, learned and renowned.

ये त्वां न पूत्रियध्येति निरंत्वज्ञानतो जना: ॥ 133 ॥

लक्ष्मीतीना भविष्यन्ति तेषां नापभयं सदा ।

त्वं सर्वे सर्वेल्ब्धीशु वैकुंटे कमललया ॥ 134 ॥

If anybody do not worship Thee out of ignorance, rather if he censures Thee, he will be bereft of Lakṣmī and he will be always afraid of snakes. Thou art the Gṛha Lakṣmī of all the householders and the Rāja Lakṣmī of Vaikunṭha.

नारायणांगो भगवाञ्जराकाम्पूनीश्वरः ।

तपसा तैनसा त्वां च मनसा सुखे पिता ॥ 135 ॥

अस्माके रक्षणायैव तेन तव मनसाधिपा ।

Bhagavān Jarat Kāru, the great Muni, born in part of Nārāyaṇa, is Thy husband. Father Kāśyapa has created Thee mentally by his power of Tapas and fire to preserve us; Thou art his mental creation hence thy name is Manasā.

मनसाद्वि शन्णा त्वं सतानना सिद्धोर्गिनी ॥ 136 ॥

तेन तं मनसाद्वी पूजिता वरिता भव ।

दे भक्या मनसां देवाः पूजयन्त्यिशं भृपाम ॥ 137 ॥

तेन तां मनसां देरी प्रवर्तिन मनीषिणः ।

सत्यस्करणा देखे तं शश्रवस्त्यनिश्चेणान् ॥ 138 ॥

Thou Thyself hast become Siddhā Yoginī in this world by thy mental power hence thou art widely known as Manasā Devī in this world and worshipped by all. The Devas always worship Thee mentally with devotion; hence the Pandits call Thee by the name of Manasā. O Devī! Thou always servest Truth, hence Thou art of the nature of Truth. He certainly gets Thee who always thinks of Thee verily as of the nature of truth."

यो हिं त्वां भवेयित्वं स त्वां प्राप्नोति तत्परः ।

इन्ध्छ प्रमतां सुत्ता यूहीता भपीनीतयम् ॥ 139 ॥

प्रजागम स्वभवन्तं भृपया सप्तिच्छदम् ।

पुंत्रेण सार्थ सा देवी चिरं तस्वी चितुर्गृहेः ॥ 140 ॥

O Nārada! Thus praising his sister Manasā and receiving from her the desired boon, Indra went back, dressed in his own proper dress, to his own abode. The Devi Manasā, then, honoured and worshipped everywhere, and thus worshipped by her brother, long lived in Her father's house, with Her son.

भातृभि: पूजिता श्रशवनान्या वंदा चा सर्वतः ।

गोलोकानुर्धिषब्रह्नु तनागत्य सुप्रजितान् ॥ 14 1 ॥

तां सनायचित्या क्षीरिता पूजवामास सादरम् ।

ज्ञानं च कथयामास गोये सर्वे सुवुलेभम् ॥ 14 2 ॥

Ond day Surabhi (the heavenly cow) came from the Goloka and bathed Manasā with milk and worshipped Her with great devotion and revealed to Her all the Tattva Jñānas, to be kept very secret. (This is now made the current story wherever any Liṅgam suddenly becomes visible.)

तथा देहै: पुत्रिता सा रखलोंके च पुनर्वयी ।

इन्द्रस्तोत्र पुण्यबीजं मनसां पुवयेयदेत् ॥ 143 ॥

तस्व नागपयं नारित तत्य यंजीढ़वस्य च ।

विषं घबेत्स्थानुल्यं विद्धस्तोत्रे यदा घबेत् ॥ 144 ॥

O Nārada! Thus worshipped by the Devas and Surabhi, the Devi Manasā went to the Heavenly regions. O Muni! One gets no fear from snakes who recites this holy Sotra composed by Indra and worships Manasā; his family descendants are freed from the fear due to snakes. If anybody becomes Siddha in this Stotra, poison becomes nectar to him.

पंचराक्षजपैन वि सिद्धतोत्री भवे-नरः ।

सर्पिणायीं घबेलोःपि निश्रितं सर्वाह्न: ॥ 145 ॥

इति श्रीमदैभीगवगते महापुराणे नवमरकमे-.

श्चालारिशी3थावः ॥ 48 ॥

Reciting the stotra five lakhs of times makes a man Siddha in this Stotra. So much so that he can sleep on a bed of snakes and he can ride on snakes.

Here ends the Forty-eight Chapter of the Ninth

Book on the anecdote of Manasā in the Mahā

Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER XLIX

On Surabhi

नारद उवाच

का वा सा सुरार्थिद्वीं गोकोलाकाराता च वा ।

ततन्मचरितं बह्ञ्यब्रौतुभिमछामि यन्ततः ॥ १ ॥

Nārada said: O Bhagavan! Who was that Surabhi, who came down from te region of Goloka. I want to hear Her life. Kindly describe.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

गवामधिष्ठातृदेवी गवामाद्या गवां प्रपुः ।

गवां प्रधाना सुराभंगोलोक से सामुद्धवा ॥ 2 ॥

सर्वादिसुईशिति कवयायि निशगाय ।

बभूव येन ततजन्म पुरा बृन्दावेय ने ॥ 3 ॥

Nārāyaṇa spoke: O Devarṣi! The Devi Surabhi sprang in the Goloka. She was the first in the creation of cows; and, from Her, all the other cows have come. She is the Presiding Deity of the cows. I will now speak Her history from the very beginning. Hear. Before, She appeared in the holy Vrndāvana.

एकदा राधिकानाधो राधाया सह कौतुकी ।

गोगंगनार्थितृती पुण्यं बृन्दावनं यथो ॥ 4 ॥

सहसा तत्र रहसि विजहार स कौतुकत् ।

बधूव क्षीरापनेछा ततय सेवेच्छामयस्य च ॥ 5 ॥

One day the Lord of Rádhā, surrounded by the Gopīs, was going gladly with Rádhā to the Holy Vrndāvana. There he began to enjoy in a solitary place with great pleasure. He is All Will and suddenly a desire arose in His mind that He would drink milk.

ससुजे सुराभि देखी लील्या वामपार्थतः ।

वत्सयुक्तो दृषधीर्वर्ती वस्लो नाम मनोरथः ॥ 6 ॥

द्वृषा सवसां श्रीदामा नवभणघे दुवोह च ।

क्षीरं सुधातिरिकं च जन्ममृत्युजारहम् ॥ 7 ॥

Then He created easily the Devi Surabhi, full of milk, with Her calf, from His own left side. The calf of Surabhi is nothing else but Her wish personified. Seeing Surabhi, Śrīdāmā milked Her in a new earthen jar. The milk is more sweet than even the nectar and it prevents births and death!

ततुर्थ च पय: स्वातु पपी गोपीपति: स्वयम् ।

सरो बधूव पयसां भाणड्विवसंनेच न ॥ ८ ॥

दीर्घं च विस्तृतं चैव परितः शतयोजनम् ।

गोलोकंदयं प्रसिद्धस्य योपि क्षीरसतीवरः ॥ 9 ॥

The Lord of the Gopis drank the milk. What milk dropped out of the jar, created a big tank! The tank measured one hundred Yojanas in length and in breadth and is known in Goloka by the name of Kṣirasāgara.

गोपिकानां च राधाया: क्रीडावाथी बघूव सा ।

रन्टेजरचिता पूर्णं भृत्ता चाधीयुंरेष्ठा ॥ 10 ॥

बभूव कामधेनूनां सहसा लक्षकोटयः ।

यावर्तसत्र गोपायां सुरभ्या लोमकुकत: ॥ 11 ॥

The Gopikas and Rādhā play therein. At the will of Śrī Krṣṇa, Whose Nature is All Will, that tank become full of excellent gems and jewels. Then, from every pore of Surabhi, there appeared suddenly one lakh koṭi Kāmadhenus (cows who yield according to one's desires). So much so that every Gopa who used to live there in Goloka had one Kāmadhenu and each house had one such.

तासां पुरात्र शक्र: संबंभूतसंख्याकः ।

कथिता च गर्वां सृह्डिस्वा च पूर्ति जन्त् ॥ 12 ॥

पूर्जा चकार भगवान् सुरभ्याशु पुरा मुने ।

ततो बभूव तत्पूजा त्रिषु लोकेपु तुर्वभा ॥ 13 ॥

Their calves again became so many that no limit can be put to them. Thus, by degrees, the whole universe was filled with cows. This is the origion of the Cow Creation. O Nārada! Surabhi was first worshipped by Bhagavān Sīrī Kṛṣṇa. Therefore She is so much honoured everywhere.

दीपालितप्रपतिदेशे श्रीकृष्यस्वाज्ञा हरे: ।

बधूस सुरभि: पूजा धर्मविज्ञादिदं श्रुतम् ॥ 14 ॥

धान स्तोत्र मूलमंत्र यदासूजाविधिक्रमम् ।

वेदोक्ते च महापाना निवोधि कथयामि ते ॥ 15 ॥

On the day next the Devālī night (new moon in the month of October), Surabhi was worshipped

Book IX Chapter XLIX

by the command of Śrī Krṣṇa. This is heard from the mouth of Dharma Deva. O Child! Now hear the Dhyānam, Stotra, and the method of worship of Surabhi as mentioned in the Vedas. I will now speak on this. ‘Om Surabhyaī namah,’ is the principal six-lettered mantra of Surabhi.

ஞ்கு புரங்கு மன துன் நிம்சனலா: ஏகத்ர: 1

सिद्धो लक्षसपैलैव भक्तानां कल्पपादः ॥ १६ ॥

ध्यानं यजुर्वेदगीतं तस्याः पूजा च सर्वतः ।

ऋद्धिदा शुद्धिदा चैव मुक्तिदा सर्वकामादा ॥ 17 ॥

If anybody repeats this mantra one lakh times, he becomes Siddha in this mantra. This is like Kalpa Vṛksa (a tree yielding all desires) to the devotees. The Dhyānam of Surabhi is mentioned in the Yajur Vedas. Success, prosperity, increase and freedom come as the result of worshipping Surabhi.

ल्हमीरकलां परां त्रासहर्षी परम् ।

गवामधिष्ठानृदेवों गवामाशा गवां प्रभूम् ॥ 18 ॥

पवित्रकपां पृतां च भक्तानां सर्वकामदाम् ।

यया पृतं सर्वविश्व तां देवीं सुरिभं भजे ॥ 19 ॥

घटे वा धनुषगिरिसे बंधवर्भे गयामपि ।

शाल्यामे जलानी वा सुर्धिं पूजवेद्धिजः ॥ 20 ॥

The Dhyānam runs as follows: “O Devi Surabhi! Thou art Lakṣmī, Thou art best, Thou art Rādhā; Thou art the chief companion of Śrī Rādhā, Thou art the first and the source of the cow creation, Thou art holy and Thou sanctifiest the persons; Thou fulfilled the desires of the devotees and Thou purifiest the whole universe. Therefore I meditate on Thee.”

दीपालितापरदिने पूर्वांढ़े पृत्यिसंयुतः ।

यः पूर्वेच्च सुरंपि स च पूज्यो भवेद्धृति ॥ २१ ॥

एकदा विशु लोकेषु वगहे विष्णुमायया ।

श्री जहार सुरिभिंशितिज्ञ सुरावयः ॥ 22 ॥

Reciting this Dhyānam, the Brāhmaṇas worship the Devi Śurabhi in jars, on the heads of cows, or on the pegs where cows are fastened or on Sālagrāma stone or in water or in fire. O Muni! He who worships with devotion on the next day

morning after Divālī night, becomes also worshipped in this world. Once a day in the Vārāhakalpa Surabhi did not yield milk, by the influence of Viṣṇu Māyā.

ने नेचा ब्रह्लोकें च ब्रह्लाणं तुधुवस्तव ।

तद्वज्ञा च सुरार्थ तुहाव पाकशासनः ॥ 23 ॥

The Devas became very anxious. Then they went to the Brahamloka and began to praise Brahmā. At His advice, Indra began to chant hymns (Stotra) to Surabhi:

पुन्तर वजाच

नमो देये महादेवे सुरार्थे च नमो नमः ।

गवां बीजस्वलपारे नमसे जगदंबिके ॥ 24 ॥

नमो राधाधियार्ये च पदाग्राशे नमो नमः ।

नमः कृष्णप्रियार्ये च गवां मात्रे नमो नमः ॥ 25 ॥

The Devenda said: "O World-Mother! O Devi! O Mahā Devi! O Surabhi! Thou art the source of the cow creation. Obeisance to Thee! Thou art the dear companion of Rādhā; Thou art the part of Kamalā; Thou art dear to Śrī Krṣna; Thou art the mother of cows, I bow down to Thee.

कल्पबुळस्वरूपारे सर्वेयं सततं परे ।

क्षीरादौये धनवाद्ये बुद्धिद्वार्ये नमः ॥ 26 ॥

गुभार्ये च सुभग्रह्ये गोप्रदार्ये नमः नमः ।

यगोदार्ये कौतित्वार्ये धर्मद्वार्ये नमः ॥ 27 ॥

Thou art like the Kalpa Vrksa (a tree yielding all desires), Thou art the Chief of all; Thou yieldest milk, wealth and prosperity and increase thereof. So I dow bown to Thee. Thou art auspicious, Thou art good, Thou bestowest cows. Obisance to Thee! Thou givest fame, name and Dharma. So I bow down to Thee."

सतोत्रप्रव्यमापोगे तृषा हुहा जगतप्रयु: ।

आविर्बभूव तत्रैव बह्योलके समतानी ॥ 28 ॥

महैत्राय वर्ध दत्ता बांहितं चापि दुलंभम् ।

जगाम सा च गोलोकं वयुदेवादायो गृहम् ॥ 29 ॥

O Nārada! Thus hearing the praise sung by Indra, the enternal Surabhi, the originator of the world, became very glad and appeared in the Brahmaloka. Granting boon to Mahendra, so very rare to others

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

and desired by him, Surabhi went to the Goloka. The Devas, also, went back to their own abodes.

वभूव विश्वं सहसा दुर्धपूर्णं च नाटव ।

दुर्भं घृतं ततो यजस्ततः प्रीति: सुरस्य च ॥ 30 ॥

इर्वं स्तोत्रं महापुर्णयं भक्तियुक्तघ यः पदेत् ।

स गोगान् धन्वांश्रेव कर्जितमान्युवर्जांस्तथा ॥ ३ ॥

The whole world was now full of milk; clarified butter came out of the milk; and from clarified butter sacrifice began to be performed and the Devas were fed and they became pleased. O Child! He who recites this holy Stotra of Surabhi with devotion, gets cows, other wealth, name, fame and sons.

स स्नातः सर्वतीर्थेयु सर्वयेजूय दीक्षितः ।

इह लोके सुखं घुकत्वा याच्येत कृष्णमन्दिरे ॥ 32 ॥

सुचिरं निवसेतत्र करीति कृष्णसेवनम् ।

न पुनर्भवंत तत्र बहपुरत्रो घयेततः ॥ 33 ॥

ड्रौं श्रीमद्वीघागवतो महापुराणं नवमरकन्के

एकानंपशासामो5ध्यायः ॥ 49 ॥

The reciting of this Stotra qualifies one as if he had bathed in all the sacred places of pilgrimages and he had acquired the fruits of all the sacrifices. Enjoying happiness in this world, he goes in the end to the Temple of Śri Kṛṣṇa. There living long in the service of Kṛṣṇa, he becomes able to be a son of Brahmā.

Here ends the Forty-ninth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the anecdote of Surabhi in the Mahā Purānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER L

On the Glory of Šakti

नार दवाच

श्रुतं सर्वेमुपाख्यानं प्रकृतीनां यथातस्थम् ।

शुचा तं मुच्यते जेनुजन्मसंसाराखंघान्ति ॥ 1 ॥

अधाना श्रीतुषिष्ठासि रहस्यं वेदगोपोषिन् ।

राधायाश्रैव वृगाय विधानं शुतिचोदितम् ॥ 2 ॥

Nārada said: O Bhagavan! I have heard all the anecdotes of Prakṛti, as according to the Śāstras, that lead to the freedom from birth and death in this world. Now I want to hear the very secret history of Śrī Rādhā and Durgā as described in the Vedas. महाम वर्षितोजीत सवता परयोघौंयोः ।

शुचा ते तत्तं चेतोन करय स्वामानुनीश्वर ॥ 3 ॥

ययोरंगो जगत्सर्वे यन्नियच्ये चराचरम् ।

ययोभक्तव्या घनैयुन्सित्धिधानं बदायुना ॥ 4 ॥

Though you have told me about their glories, yet I am not satisfied. Verily, where is he whose heart does not melt away on hearing the glories of both of them! This world is originated from their parts and is being controlled by them. The devotion towards them frees one easily from the bonds of Samsāra (rounds of birth and death). O Muni! Kindly describe now about t. m.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

शृणु नारद वक्ष्यामि रहस्यं भूतिचोदितम् ।

यन्न कस्यापि चाख्छातं सारास्तारं परात्यम् ॥ 5 ॥

श्रुत्वा परम्ले नो वाच्यं यतोउतींवे रह्यकम् ।

मूल्यकृतिस्फियाः सिंवेदो जगदूद्वे ॥ 6 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Nārada! I am now describing the characters of Rādhā and Durgā, as described in the Vedas listen. I did not describe to anybody this Secret which is the Essence of all essences and Higher than the highest. This is to be kept very secret.

प्रादुर्भूतं शक्तियुंगमं प्राणबुद्धाधिदेवतम् ।

जीवानां चैव सर्वेधां निवन्तु प्रेकं सदा ॥ 7 ॥

तद्धीर्नं जनासर्वे विराडादिरचारम् ।

यावत्तयोः प्रसादो न तावन्मोक्षे हि दुर्लंभः ॥ 8 ॥

Hearing this, one ought not to divulge it to any other body. Rādha presides over the Prāna and Durgā presides over the Buddhī. From these two, the Mūlāprakrti has originated this world.

तत्ततयोः प्रसादार्थ नित्यं सेवेत तद्धवम् ।

तत्रादौ राधिकामांरं श्यु नाद भपिताः ॥ 9 ॥

ब्रहाधिष्यवादिभर्पित्यं सेविते यः परात्यम् ।

श्रीधोति चतुर्थतं वढ़ेजाँया ततः परम् ॥ 10 ॥

Book IX Chapter L

These two Šaktis guide the whole world. From the Mahāvirāt to the small insect, all, moving or non-moving, are under the Mūlaprakṛti. One must satisfy them. Unless these two be satisfied, Mukti cannot be obtained. Therefore one ought to serve Mūlā Prakṛti for Her satisfaction.

पडझरो महामनो धर्माधर्मिकाकाः ।

मायावीजाकिड़ायां यंछाणिंतमाणिः स्मृतः ॥ १ १ ॥

ववककोदिसहसैनु पिछाकोदिशतैरपि ।

गृतनान्यस्य माहात्ययं वर्णितुं नैव शक्यन्ते ॥ १२ ॥

Now of the two in Mūla Prakṛti, I will describe fully the Rādhā Mantra. Listen. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and others always worship this mantra. The principal mantra is ‘Śrī Rādhāyai Svāhā.’ By this six-lettered mantra Dharma and other fruits all are obtained with ease. If to this six lettered Mūla mantra Hrim be added, it yields gems and jewels as desired. So much so, if thousand koti mouths and one hundred koti tongues are obtained, the glory of this mantra cannot be described.

जग्रह प्रवर्ग मन्त्र श्रीकृष्णा भक्तित्वरः ।

उपदेशामूलदेव्या गोलोके रासमपड़ते ॥ १३ ॥

विष्णुलेनेपविद्धसुने तेन बढ़ा विराट् तथा ।

तेन धर्मतेन चाहमिवेशा हि परमयं ।। १४ ॥

When the incorporeal voice of Mūla Prakṛti was heard in the Heavens, this mantra was obtained, first by Krṣṇa in the Rāsa Maṇḍalam in the region of Goloka where all love sentiments are played : (The Vedas declare him as Raso vai Sah). From Krṣṇa. Viṣṇu got the Mantra; from Viṣṇu, Brahmā got; from Brahmā Virāt got, from Virāt, Dharma, and from Dharma I have got this Mantra. Repeating that Mantra, I am known by the name of Rṣi.

अर्हे जपायि ते मन्ते तेनाहमृषिवीक्षितः ।

इद्याता: सकल देवा नित्यं धार्यति तां मुदा ॥ 15 ॥

कृष्णाचार्यां नाधिकारो यतो राधार्यचं निवा ।

वैधावे: सकलैस्तस्मात्कर्तेयं राधिकार्चिन् ॥ 16 ॥

Brahmā and the other Devas meditate always on the Mūlā Prakṛti with greatest joy and ecstasy. Without the worship of of Rādhā, never can the

worship of Śri Krṣṇa be done. So men, devoted to Viṣṇu, should first of all worship Rādhā by all means. Rādhā is the Presiding Deity of the Prāṇa of Śri Krṣṇa. Hence Śri Krṣṇa is so much subject to Rādhā. The Lady of the Rāsa Māndalam remains always close to Him.

कृष्णप्राणाधिद्वी सा तदधीनी विषूमैतः ।

रासेधी तस्य नित्य तया हीनो न तिष्ठति ॥ 17 ॥

राठाति सकल्कामांतस्माद्धधिति कीर्तिता ।

अजोक्तानं मनूनां च ऋषिरत्यमृदोच च ॥ 18 ॥

छंद्ध उद्वी गायत्री देवताउत्र च राधिका ।

Without Her Śrī Krṣṇa could not live even for a moment. The name Rādhā is derived from ‘Rādhnoti’ or fulfills all desires. Hence Mūlā Prakṛti is termed Rādhā. I am the Rṣi of all the mantras but the Durgā Mantra mentioned in this Ninth Skandha. Gāyatrī is the chanda (mantra) of those mantras and Rādhikā is the Devatā of them. तारो बीजं शफिकीयं शफित्स्तु परिकीति ति १९ १

मूल वृत्ता चर्भगानि कर्तव्यानीतरत्र च ।

अथ ध्यायेम्हादौर्वी राशिकां रासनायिकम् ॥ 20 ॥

Really, Nārāyaṇa is the Rṣi of all the mantras; Gāyatrī is the chanda; Pranava (om) is the Bija (seed) and Bhuvaneśvarī (the Directrix of the world) is the Śakti. First of all the principal mantra is to be repeated six times; then meditation of the great Devi Rādhikā, the Śakti of the Rāsa is to be done, as mentioned in the Sāma Veda.

पूर्वोक्तीर्या तु मुने सापवेदे र्वितीर्या ।

श्वेतचंपकवर्णाधां शारिदुसुमानानम् ॥ 21 ॥

कोदिचन्द्रसीकारां शरद्वभोजलोचनाम् ।

विद्वाधरां पृचुश्रीणं काडीयुतनित्रिविनीम् ॥ 22 ॥

कुंदपक्तिसमानाघदंतपंक्तिविरावजिताम् ।

श्रीमांकरपरीधानां वहिकुण्ड्वांगृकान्तिवतम् ॥ 23 ॥

ईषवद्वायमसजायां कर्तिकुमयगुगतनीम् ।

सदा झादशवर्षीयां रत्नपूषणपृष्टितम् ॥ 24 ॥

शूज्ञारसिंगुरुहर्गे भक्तानुग्रहकातनम् ।

मल्लिकामाल्तीमालोकेशपारामविराजितम् ॥ 25 ॥

सुकुमारांगलितकां रासमपडलमध्यागम् ।

The meditation of Rádhā is as follows: “O Devi Rádhike! Thy colour is like white Campaka

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

flowers; Thy face is like the autumnal Full Mon; Thy body shines with the splendour of ten million moons, Thy eyes look beautiful like autumnal lotus; Thy lips are red like Bimba frutis, Thy loins are very heavy and decked with the girdle (Kānci) ornament; Thy face is always gracious with sweet smiles. Thy breasts defy the frontal globe of an elephant. Thou art ever youthful as if twelve years old; Thy body is adorned all over with ornaments; Thou art the waves of the ocean of Śrīgāra (love sentiments). Thou art ever ready to shew Thy grace to the devotees; on Thy braid of hair garlands of Mallikā and Mālati are shining; Thy body is like a creeping plant, very gentle and tender; Thou art seated in the middle of Rāsa Maṇḍalam as the Chief Directrix; Thy one hand is ready to grant boons and another hand expresses ‘Have no fear.’

वराभयकरां शान्ता शश्रतुष्तियर्योवान् ॥ 26 ॥

त्वनिश्रहासासीना गोपीमंखलायिकाम् ।

कृष्णप्राणाधिकां वेदवोधितां परमेश्वीम् ॥ 27 ॥

एवं ध्याता ततो बाहो शालामे घरेउव्वा ।

चनै वातद्वलै देवीं पुरवेषु चित्धानतः ॥ 28 ॥

Thou art of a peaceful appearance; Thou art ever youthful; Thou art seated on a jewel throne; Thou art the foremost guide of the Gopikāś; Thou art dearer to Krṣna than even His life; O Parameśvarī! The Vedas reveal Thy nature." Meditating thus, one is to bathe the Devi on a Śālāgramā stone, jar, yantra or the eight-petalled lotus and then worship Her duly.

आवाहा देवी तन्यश्रादासनादि प्रतीयताम ।

मूलमन्नं समुष्चार्यं चासनाटीनी कलयवेत् ॥ 29 ॥

गाथं तु पादवोद्वीयान्सतेकंघर्यं समीरितम् ।

मुखे त्वाचमनीयं स्यातिवगरं गृलिविद्या ॥ 30 ॥

First the Devi \( ^{1} \) is to be invoked; then Fādya and Āśana, etc., are to be offered, the principal Mantra being pronounced at every time an offering is given. After giving water for washing both the feet, Arghya is to be placed on the head and Ācamanīyam water to be offered times on the face.

मधुपकं ततो ददादिकां गां च पर्यविस्नीम् ।

ततो नयेत्नानगलां तां च तदैव भावयेत् ॥ 31 ॥

अभ्यूजिद्वनाविधि कल्यिलावाउव वाससी ।

ततश्च चन्दनं ददाचानालंकारपूर्वकम् ॥ 32 ॥

Madhuparka (an oblation of honey, milk etc.) and a cow giving a good quantity of milk are next to be offered. Then the yantra is to be thought of as the bathing place where the Devi is to be bathed. Then Her body is to be wiped and a fresh cloth given for putting on. Sandalpaste and various other ornaments are next to be given.

पुष्यमाला बहुविधास्तुलसीमज्वरीयुतः । पारिजानप्रभूर्नानि शतपत्रविकानि च ॥ 33 ॥ ततः कुर्बाल्यविद्धं तत्परितारार्चं तिथपोः । अन्नीसातुरावयव्यमध्यदिष्ट्वंभगुजनम् ॥ 34 ॥ कृत्वा पश्वाद्वटदे दक्षिणावर्तनोंउग्रतः ।

Various garlands of flowers with Tulasi Mañjari (flower stalks) Parijāta flower and Śatapatra etc., then, are to be offered. Then within the eight petals, the family members of the Devi are to be thought of; worship is next to be offered in the right hand direction (with the hands of the watch).

मालावतीमप्रदले वहिकोणे च माधवीम् ॥ 35 ॥

रन्माला दक्षिणे च नैक्षेले तु सुगीलकाम् ।

पक्षाहले शफिकलां पूजयेमतिमाजरः ॥ 36 ॥

मालते पारिजातां चायुन्ते च परवातीम् ।

ईशानकोले सम्पूखा सूदरी प्रियकारिणी ॥ 37 ॥

First of all, Mālāvatī on the petal in front of (on the east) the Devī, then Mādhavī on the south-east corner, then Ratnamālā on the south, Suśilā on the south-west Saśikalā on the west, Pārījātā on the north-west, Parāvatī on the north and the benefactious Sundarī on the north-east corner are to be worshipped in order.

बाहुधादयस्तु तद्धाठो प्रणशाणालंस्तु भूयुं ।

वज्रादिकान्यायुपानि देवीमिचर्य प्रपूजेण ।। 38 ॥

तते देईी सावरणों गावाडीरूपचारकैः ।

राजपचारसहितैः पूजेचन्मतिभावरः ॥ 39 ॥

Outside this, Brāhmi and the other Mārṭkās are to be worshipped and on the Bhūpūras (the entrances of the yantra), the Regents of the quarters,

Book IX Chapter L

the Dikpālas and weapons of the Devi, thunderbolt, etc., are to be worshipped. Then all the attendant Deities of the Devi are to be worshipped with scents and various other articles.

ततः सुर्जीत देवेपीं सतीर्थीमसहस्वकः ।

सहस्वसंखं च जयं नित्यं कुयित्यन्तः ॥ 4० ॥

य एवं पुजदेवेहीं राशि राशिशं परम् ।

स घवेडिष्युतृल्यन्तु गोलोकं याति संतन्तम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

Thou finishing the worship, one should chant the Stotra (hymns) named Sahasra-nāma (thousand names) Stotra with care and devotion. O Nārada! The intelligent man who worships thus the Rāseśvari Devi Rādhā, becomes like Viṣṇu and goes to the Go-loka.

यः कार्तिक्यों घौणीमास्यां राधाजन्मोत्सर्वे बुधः ।

कृते तत्पर साधिश्यं द्वादासोस्पशी परा ॥ 42 ॥

केनपिकालारोपैल राधा बुद्धावने वने ।

वृषभानुस्तु जाता गोलोकस्थाविनी सदा ॥ 43 ॥

He who performs the birth-day anniversary of Śrī Rādhā on the Full-Moon day of the month of Kārtika, gets the blessing of Śrī Rādhā who remains near to him. For some reason Rādhā, the dweller in Goloka was born in Vrndāvana as the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu.

अंगैक्तानां तु मंग्राणां वर्गसंख्याविधानतः ।

पुरुषाणकामोंक द्वारांगी होमामाचेत् ॥ 44 ॥

तत्लैक्ष्वसादुसंयुत्कौजुंद्याद्विकभावतः ।

However, according to the number of letters of the mantras that are mentioned in this chapter, Puraścarapa is to be made and Homa, one-tenth of Puraścarapa, is to be then performed. The Homa is to be done with ghee, honey, and milk the three sweet mixed with Til and with devotion.

नात्व ज्ञाच

स्तोत्रं वद मुने सत्ययेन देवी प्रसीद्ति ॥ 4 5 ॥

Nārada said: O Bhagavan; Now describe the Stotra (hymn) Mantra by which the Devi is pleased.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

नमसे परशेगानि रासमण्डलासिनि ।

रासेश्वरि नमसे5सुत कृष्णप्राणाधिकप्रिये ॥ 46 ॥

नमसैलोकयजननि प्रसीद ककाणणये ।

ब्रहाधिव्यादिविर्वैर्वेर्विमानपदांबुजे ॥ 47 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! Now I am saying the Rādhā Stotra. O Thou, the Highest Deity! the Dweller in Rāsa Mandalam! I bow down to Thee; O Thou, the Chief Directrix of the Rāsa Mandalam; O Thou dearer to Kṛṣṇa than His life even, I bow down to Thee. O Thou, the Mother of the three Lokas! O Thou the Ocean of mercy! Be pleased. Brahmā, Viṣṇu and the other Devas bow down before Thy lotus feet.

नमः सरस्वतीफे नमः सास्वित्र शंकरि ।

गंगापावातीसोः पश्रि मंगलर्शिके 1148 ॥

नमसे तुलसीको नमो लक्षीस्वरूपिणि ।

नमो दुर्गै भगवति नमसे सर्वीपणि ॥ 49 ॥

Thou art Sarasvati; Thou art Sāvitri; Thou art Śaṅkari I bow down to Thee; Thou art Gāngā; Thou art Padmāvati; Thou art Saṣthi; Thou art Maṅgala Caṇḍikā; Thou art Manasā, Thou art Tulasi; Thou art Durgā; Thou art Bhagavati; Thou art Lakṣmī; Thou art all, I bow down to Thee.

मूल्यकृतिक्वा तां बपाना: करणाणर्गाल्म।

संसारसगरादस्मानुद्धारांद वभा कुरु १५० १।

इर्वे स्तोत्र सितस्यं यः पटेश्वां समसरः ।

न तस्य दुरुर्भे किष्ठिक्वाराचित्वच भविष्यति १ ५ १ १

Thou art the Mūlā Prakṛti; Thou art the Ocean of mercy. Obesiance to Thee! Be merciful to us and save us from this ocean of Samsāra (round of british and death).” O Nārada! Any body who remembers Rādhā and reads this Stotra three times a day does not feel the want of any thing in this world.

देहान्ते च वसेघित्वं गोलोके रासमण्डले ।

इर्वं रहस्यं परमं न चाख्येयं तु कस्यित् ॥ 52 ॥

अधुना भगुण विधेन्र दुगादेव्या विधानकम् ।

यस्या: ससगामाजेण लावयन्ते महापदः ॥ 53 ॥

He will ultimately go to Goloka and remain in the Rāsa Manḍalam. O Child! This great secret aught never to be given out to any. Now I am telling you the method of worship of the Durgā Devi.

Hear. When any one remembers Durgā in this world, all his difficulties and troubles are removed. एनां न भजते यो हि तातुकृतास्वेव कुत्रचित् ।

सर्वपास्या सर्वमाता शैली शफिन्महादुतां ॥ 54 ॥

सर्वबुद्धादिवेदीयमन्त्यांसिध्स्वलिपणी ।

दुरांसंकटईजीति दुर्गेति प्रधिता भुवि ॥ 55 ॥

It is not seen that anybody does not remember Durgā. She is the object of worship of all. She is the Mother of all and the Wonderful Śakti of Mahādeva. She is the Presiding Deity of the intellect (Buddhi) of all and She controls the hearts of all and She removes the great difficulties and dangers of all.

दैषावानां च शैवानापुाययें च निवर्शः ।

पूल्यकृतिल्पा सा सृधिधिस्थल्नकारिणि ॥ 56 ॥

तस्या नावक्षरं मंत्र वक्ष्ये मंत्रोत्तमात्मम् ।

वाग्भवं शेषुवित्ति कामवीजं ततः परम् ॥ 57 ॥

Therefore She is named Durgā in the world. She is worshipped by all, whether a Śaiva or a Vaiṣnava. She is the Mūlā Prakṛti and from Her the creation, preservation and destruction of the universe proceed. O Nārada! Now I am saying the principal nine lettered Durgā Mantra, the best of all the Mantras.

चागुपाढ्यै पदं पश्ठापृष्टेचे इत्यक्षतद्वयम् ।

नवाक्षरो मनु: प्रोत्नो भजतां कल्पपादय: ॥ 58 ॥

ब्रहाविष्णुमंशना ऋषयोःय प्रवीर्तिता: ।

छ-तद्यमृत्तानि सततं गायव्युविणानुकुधः ॥ 59 ॥

महाकाली महातक्ष्मी: सरस्वत्यपि देवता: ।

स्यात्रक्नैतिकांवीं तुर्ण च भागरी तथा ॥ 60 ॥

'Aim Hrim Klim Cāmuṇḍāyai Vicee' is the nine lettered Bijā mantra of Śri Durgā; it is like a Kalpa Vṛksa yielding all desires. One should worship this mantra by all means. Brahmā Viṣṇu, and Maheśa are the Rṣis of this mantra; Gāyatrī, Uṣnik and Anuṣṭubha are the chandas; Mahākālī, Mahā Lakṣmī and Sarasvatī are the Devatās; Rakta Dantikā, Durgā, and Bhrāmari are the Bijas.

नंहागकंभरोदेथी भीमा च शक्यः सुतः ।

धर्मार्थकामेधुय विविणेया उद्वाहतः ॥ 6 I I ||

ऋषिच्छेदो दैवतानि मौली वक्ने हृदि गयेत् ।

सतनयोः शक्तिक्रीजानि न्यसेलवार्थीसिद्धये ॥ 62 ॥

Nandā, Śākambhari, and Bhimā are the Śaktis and Dharma (virtue), Artha (wealth) and Kāma (desires), are the places of application (Viniyoga). Assign the head to the Rṣi of the mantra (Nyāsa); assign the chandas to the mouth assign the Devatā to the heart.

कीजरवैश्रुत्प्रिश्र श्राव्यां सर्वेण चैव हि ।

चर्भानि मनैः कुर्बाजातितुस्नानि देशिकाः ॥ 63 ॥

शिखायां लोचनाद्रदे शुतिनासाननेषु च ।

गुदे यसेन्यन्वरणां-सर्वेण व्यापकं चेते ॥ 64 ॥

Then assign the Śakti to the right breast for the success and assign the Bija to the left breast. Then perform the Śadaṅga Nyāsa as follows: Aim Hrdayāya namah, Hrim Śirase Svāhā, Klim Śikhāyām Vaṣat, Cāmuṇḍāyai Kavacāya Hum, Vicec Netrābhyām Vauṣat, ‘Aim Hrim Klim Cāmuṇḍāyai Vicec’ Karatalaprṣṭhābhyām Phat. Next say touching the corresponding parts of the body: ‘Aim namah Śikhāyām, Hrim Namah’ on the right eye; ‘Klim Namah’ on the left eye, Cām Namah ‘on the right ear, ‘Mum namah’ on the left ear, nḍām Namah’ on the nostrils; Vim Namah on the face; ‘Ccem Namah’ on the anus and finally ‘Aim Hrim Klim Cāmuṇḍāyai Vicec’ on the whole body. Then do the meditation (dhyaña) thus:

खदुगचक्रान्दावणचापनि परिधे तथा ।

गृलं भुगुंडी च शिरः शुबुं संद्धवर्ती करेः ॥ 65 ॥

महाकालिं जिनवर्नो नानाभूषणभूषितम् ।

नीलाजनसमप्रख्यां दशपादानां भजे ॥ 66 ॥

‘O Cāmundê! Thou art holding in Thy ten hands ten weapons viz, Khadga (axe) Cakra (disc) Gadā (club) Bāna (arrows), Cāpa (bow), Parighā, Śūla (spear), Bhusūndī Kapāla, and Khadga. Thou art Mahā Kāli; Thou art three-eyed; Thou art decked with various ornaments. Thou shinest like Lilānjana (a kind of black pigment). Thou hast ten faces and ten feet.

मधुकैट्यनाश्यां यां नुहायाम्बुजासनः ।

एवं ध्यायेन्महाकाली कामवीजस्वलिपिणीम् ॥ 67 ॥

Book IX Chapter L

अक्षमालां च परगुं गदेषकुलिशानि च ।

पदां ध्रपुक्षीडकां च दंडशक्तिमर्स सत् ॥ 6 8 ॥

चार्मिङ्गं तथा घण्टां सुरायपां च शुल्कम् ।

पाणं सुदर्शनं चैव द्धतीमरणप्रभाम् ॥ 6 9 ॥

The Lotus born Brahmā chanted hymns to Thee for the destruction of Madhu Kaitabha I bow down to Thee." Thus one should meditate on Mahā Kālī, of the nature of Kāmabija (the source whence will comes). Then the Dhyānam of Mahā Lakṣmī runs as follows: "O Mahā Laksmī, the destroyer of Mahisāsura! Thou holdest the garland of Aksa (a king of seed), Paraśu (a kind of axe), Gādā (club), Işu (arrows), Kuliśa (the thunderbolt) Padma (Lotus), Dhanu (bow), Kunḍikā (a student's waterpot, Kamandalu), Danda (rod for punishment), Śakti (a kind of weapon), Asi (sword), Carma (shield) Padma (a king of waterlily), Ghaṇā (bell), (Surāpātra) (a pot to hold liquor), Śula (pick-axe) Pāśa (noosc) and Sudarśana (a kind of weapon. Thy colour is of the Rising Sun.

रकायाजुसनगतं मायावीज्यस्करिपिण् ।

महालक्षीं भवेदेदं महिषासुमर्दिनीय १७० ॥

Thou art seated on the red Lotus. Thou art of the nature Māyābija (the source whence female energy comes). So Obcisance to Thee! (The Bija and the Devi are one and identical).” Next comes the Dhyānan of Mahā Sarasvatī as follows:

पटगुशूले हलं शंखं मुसलं च सुदर्भान् ।

धनुर्बाणान्हसपदौर्धानां कृदस्विभान् ॥ 71 ॥

ग्रामादिद्वेत्यसंर्जीं वाणाडीजस्वक्रिपिण् ।

महासरस्वती ध्यावेत्सचिद्यानन्दिव्याह्न् ॥ 72 ॥

O Mahā Sarasvatī! Thou holdest bell, pickaxe, plough (Hala), Conchshell, Musala (a kind of club), Sudarśana, bow and arrows. Thy colour is like Kunda flower; Thou art the destroyer of Śumbha and the other Daityas; Thou art of the nature of Vānibja (the source whence knowledge, speech comes.

घंत्रमस्या: शृण प्राज ज्यसं घट्कोणसंयुन्ति ।

ततो3हदलपत्रं च नतुर्गविशतपत्रकम् ॥ 73 ॥

Thy body is filled with everlasting existence, intelligence and bliss. Obeisance to Thee!" O Nārada! Now I am going to say on the Yantra of Mahā Sarasvatī. Listen.

भूगृहेण समायुक्ते यन्मेवं विचितन्तेत् ।

शाल्यामे चेटा प्रति यन्चे वा प्रतिमासु वा ॥ 74 ॥

बाणलिंगेधवा सूर्ये ये जेहेदीमन्यधीः ।

जयादिगतिसंयुक्ते पीढे देवीं प्रपूजन्ते ॥ 75 ॥

First draw a triangle. Draw inside the triangle eight petalled lotus having twenty-four leaves. Within this draw the house. Then on the Yantra thus drawn, or in the Sâlagrâma stone, or in the jar, or in image, or in the Vanalingam, or on the Sun, one should worship the Devi with oneness of heart.

पूर्वकीणे सरस्वत्या सहितं पयजं यजेत् ।

शिवा सह हर्त तत्र नैस्क्रौ कोणके यजेत् ॥ 76 ॥

पार्वत्या सहितं शम्भुं वायुकोणे समचर्येत् ।

देव्या उत्तरतः पुर्वः सिंहो वायो महासुरम् ॥ 77 ॥

Then worship the Piṭha, the deities seated also on the dais, i.e., Jayā, Vijayā, Ajitā, Aghorā, Mangālā and other Pitha Śaktis. Then worship the attendant deities called Āvaraṇa Pūjā: Brahmā with Sarasvatī on the east, Ārāyaṇas with Lakṣmī on the Nairrit corner, Śankara with Pārvatī on the Vāyu corner, the Lion on the north of the Devi, and Mahāśura on the left side of the Devi; finally worship Mahisa (buffalo).

महिषं पुजयदन्ते चट्कोगेषु यजेकामात् ।

नंदर्ग रक्तदांं च तथा शाकर्षी शिजाम् ॥ 78 ॥

दुर्गा भीमां घामरीं च तते वसुदलेषु च ।

ब्राह्मी महेश्वरों चैव कौमार्ति वैश्यावी तथा ॥ 79 ॥

वागहीं गारसिंहीं च ऐस्टीं चाभुंकको तथा ।

पूजयेच्च ततः पश्रात्त्वपत्रेषु पूर्वतः ॥ 80 ॥

विष्णुभावां चेतनां च बुद्धि निहां सुधां तथा ।

छायाशक्ति परां तृणां शांति जातिं च लजवा ॥ 81 ॥

शांति भर्ता कॉलिल्ब्ब्यो धृति झृति श्रुति सूचीम् ।

दया तृष्टि ततः पृष्टि मातुभांती इति क्रमात् ॥ 82 ॥

Next worship Nandajā, Raktadantā, Sākambhari, Śivā, Durgā, Bhimā, and Bhāramī. Then on the

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

eight petals worship Brāhmī, Maheśvarī, Kaumārī, Vaispavī, Vārāhī, Nāra Sīnīhī, Aindrī, and Cāmuṇḍā. Next commencing from the leaf in front of the Devī, worship on the twenty-four leaves Viṣnu Māyā, Cetanā, Buddhi, Nidrā (sleep), hunger, a shadow, Šakti, thirst, peace, species (Jāti), modesty, faith, fame, Lakṣmī (wealth), fortitude, Vṛtti, Śruti memory, mercy, Tuṣṭi, Puṣṭi (nourishment), Bhrānti (error) and other Matṛkās.

ततो भपुरकोगेषु गणोगं क्षेत्रपालकम् ।

बढ़के योगिनीशापि पूजेयन्मितागतः ॥ 8 3 ॥

इन्हाटानि नहाहो वज्ञादायुपसंयुतान् ।

पूजयेदत्या तीता देहीं सारिणां ततः ॥ 84 ॥

राजोपचारनिविधान्द्यादायप्रतुये ।

ततो जपेत्रजणीं च मनं मनार्थपूर्वकम् ॥ 85 ॥

Next on the corners of the Bhūpura (gates of the Yantra), Ganesa Kṣetraṇālas, Vatuka and Yoginis are to be worshipped. Then on the outside of that Indra and the other Devas furnished with weapons are to be worshipped as per the aforesaid rules. For the satisfaction of the World-Mother various nice offerings and articles like those given by the royal personages are to be presented to the Mother; then the mantra is to be repeated, understanding its exoteric and esoteric meanings.

ततः सदगतशीतांते देख्या अगे तु संपटेत् ।

नानेन सद्गं स्तोत्र विहते घनवत्रये ॥ 86 ॥

ततश्वानेन देवेशी तोपेवेत्रवर्लं नरः ।

धार्यार्काममोक्षाणामालयं जायते नः ॥ 87 ॥

Then Saptaśati stotra (Candī pātha) is to be repeated before the Devi. There is no other stotra like this in the three worlds. Thus Durgā, the Deity of the Devas, is to be appeased every day. He who does this gets within his easy reach Dharma, Artha, Kāma, and Mokṣa, the four main objects of human pursuits (virtue, wealth, enjoyment and final beatitude).

इति ते कथितं विध प्रशुनीया विधानकम् ।

कृताधौत येन भवेनैदत्कथितं तव ॥ 88 ॥

सर्वे देवा हरिब्धाप्रसुखा मनवस्तथा ।

मुनयो ज्ञाननिष्ठा योगिनश्ठाभमातला ॥ 89 ॥ लक्ष्याद्वस्तथा देव्यः सर्वे धायरित्त तां शिवाम् ।

O Nārada! Thus I have described to you the method of worship of the Devi Durgā. People get by this what they want. Hari, Brahmā, and all the Devas, Manus, Munis, the Yogis full of knowledge, the Śāramīs, and Lakṣmī and the other Devas all meditate on Śivām.

तदैव जनसाकल्यं दुर्गासरणामस्ति चेत् ॥ 90 ॥

चतुर्वर्णीय मनोय धात्वा चरणपढ़जम् ।

मन्तूर्ण प्राणवतन्छं द्वेता: चंवं चयं पदं तथा ॥ 91 ॥

One's birth is attained with success at the remembrance of Durgā. The fourteen Manus have got their Manuship and the Devas their own rights by meditating on the lotus feet of Durgā.

तदात्तर्वमात्यातं रह्यातिरहस्यकम् ।

प्रकृतीनां पड्डकस्य तदैशानां च वर्णनम् ॥ 92 ॥

श्रूवैतनमुजी नित्य पुरुषावधैतुर्धयम् ।

लभते नात्र सन्देशः सत्यं सत्यं मयोदितम् ॥ 93 ॥

O Nārada! Thus I have described to you the very hidden histories of the Five Praktrīs and their parts. Then, verily, the four objects of human pursuits Dharma, Artha, Kāma and Mokṣa are obtained by hearing this.

अपुत्रो लभते पुत्रं विद्यार्थी प्राप्यान्धच तान् ।

यें ये कांमं सरेपुत्रीप तंतं श्रुत्वा समाप्यान् ॥ 94 ॥

नवराते पदेतेद्रवेधये तु स्माहितः ।

परितुया जगद्धारी भवत्येव हिं निश्रित् ॥ 95 ॥

He who has no sons gets sons, who has no learning gets learning and whoever wants any thing gets that if he hears this. The Devi Jagaddhārī becomes certainly pleased with him who reads with his mind concentrated on this for nine nights before the Devi.

निव्यमेकैकमध्यार्यं पदेशः प्रत्यहं नरः ।

तस्य वर्णा भवेद्रेही देवौ प्रियकतो हि सः ॥ 96 ॥

गरुक्नांशं परीक्षेत निव्यमायन्याशिविधि ।

कुमारीविद्यहरत्ने यद्धा बदुकराभ्यज्ञान् ॥ 97 ॥

The Devi becomes obedient to him who daily reads one chapter of this Ninth Skandha and the reader also does what is acceptable to the Devi.

Book IX Chapter L

To ascertain before-hand what offects, merits or demerits, would accure from reading this Bhāgavata, it is necessary by examining through the hands of a virgin girl or a Brāhmim child, the auspicious or inauspicious signs.

मनोरथे तु सङ्कूल्य पुस्तकें पूजयेततः ।

देवी च जगदीशानां प्रणमेच चुनः पुनः : चुनः १९ 8 १

सुस्तांत कन्यकां ततन्योविष्यचें यथाविति ।

शलाकां रोपयेमध्ये तथा स्वर्णेन निर्मितम् ॥ 99 ॥

First make a Sankalpa (resolve) and worship the book. Then bow down again and again to the Devi Durgā. Then bring there a virgin girl, bathed well and worship her duly and have a golden pencil fixed duly in her hand and placed in the middle on the body.

शुभं वाज्यशुभं तव यदायाति च तद्वयेत् ।

उद्वातीतेयुवारीने कार्य घबाति निशितम् ॥ 100 ॥

इति शीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे नवमस्कन्धे

पंचासतमोउधाया: 11 50 11

Then calculate the auspicious or inauspicious effects, as the case may be, from curves made by that pencil. So the effects of reading this Bhagavata would be. If the virgin girl be indifferent in fixing the pencil within the area drawn, know the result of reading the Bhagavata would be similar. There is no doubt in this.

Here ends the Fiftieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on

the glory of Śakti in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

बाणाधिस्वरामैनु साई. (362511) स्नोकों: सुवितरैं.

देवीभागवतस्याय नवमः स्कन्ध इरीतः 11

समाजातेयं नवमः स्कन्धः ।

Here ends the Ninth Book.

The Ninth Book Completed.

Notes on Śakti and the Śāktas

Extracts from the Calcutta Review. No. XLVII, March 1855.

The Śāktas—Their characteristics and Practical influence in society.

In the Mārkāndeya Purānam, Nature (Prakṛti) is said ‘to have assumed three transcendent forms, according to her three Guṇas or qualities, and in each of them to have produced a pair of divinities, Brahmā and Sarasvatī, Maheśa and Kālī, Viṣṇu and Lakṣmī, after whose intermarriage, Brahmā and Sarasvatī formed the mundane egg, which Maheśa and Kālī divided into halves; and Viṣṇu, together with Lakṣmī, preserved from destruction.

The Tantras, which are full of mysteries and mystical symbols, while they admit the three forms of the female principal to be severally the representatives of the three primary Gūṇas, derive their origin from the conjunction of Bindu, or the sound called Anusvāra, and marked (*) with the Bīja or roots of mantras or incantations. Every specific mantra, or a mantra, peculiar or exclusively belonging to any divinity, consists of Bija or root, and the Anusvāra, which together from what is called a Nāda; and it is from the Nāda, or the combination of the two symbols, that the Three forms of Śakti are said to have had their origin. But this symbolical representation, the Tantras, which exalt Śiva and his bride, above all other divinities, mean, that Bindu and Bīja severally represent Śiva and Śakti. the parents of all other gods and goddesses. Thus: 'The Bindu, which is the soul of Śiva, and the Bīja which is the soul of Śakti, together form the Nāda, from which the three Śaktis are born (Kriyā Sāra Tantra). Here is another attempt of the worshippers of Śiva and his Śakti to identify their guardian divinities with the Supreme Brahma.

In the Gorakṣa Sarihītā, we read as follows, 'Will, action, and intelligence are in order the sources of Gaurī, the wife of Śiva, Brāhmī, the wife of Brahmā and Vaiṣṇavī, the wife of Viṣṇu.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

The theory dismisses altogether the notion of the three Guñas, and substitutes will, action, and intelligence in their place.

Again the Šāstras, it appears, have increased the number of the female divinities, according as they have increased the number of the male deities or their incarnations. The Kūrma Purāṇam gives five forms of the original Šakti: 'And she (Mūlā Prakṛti) became in the act of creation fivefold by the will of the supreme.' And the forms which, according to this authority the original Prakṛti is said to have assumed, are: Ist, Durgā, the birde, Šakti, or Māyā of Śiva; 2nd, Lakṣmī, the bride, Šakti, or Māyā of Viṣṇu; 3rd Sarasvatī, the same of Brahmā, or in the Brahma Vaivarta Purānam of Hari, whilst the fourth, Śāvitrī is the bride of Brahmā. The fifth division, Rādhā, is unquestionably, as Dr. Wilson very justly remarks, ‘a modern intruder into the Hindu pantheon.’

In every successive creation of the universe, the Mūlā Prakṛti is said ‘to assume the different gradations of ‘Arñśa-rūpīnī, Kalā-rūpīnī, and Kalāmsa-rūpīnī, or manifests herself in portions, parts and portions of parts and further subdivisions. Thus the writes of the Purāṇas state: ‘In every creation of the world, the Devi, through Divine Yoga assumes divine forms and becomes Amsa-rūpā, Kalā-rūpā, and Kalārūnsa-rūpa, or Arñśārīsa-rūpā. The Arūsas form the class in which all the more important manifestations of the Śakti are comprehended, the Kalās include all the secondary Goddesses, and the Kalārūnsas and Arñśārūsas are subdivisions of the latter, and embrace all womankind, who are distinguished as good, middling or bad, according as they derive their being from the parts of their great original, in which the Sattva, Rajo and Tamo Guṇa predominates. At the same time, being regarded as manifestations of the one Supreme Spirit, they are all entitled not only to respect but to veneration. ‘Whoever,’ says the Brahma Vaivarta

Purānam, offends or insults a female' incurs the wrath of Prakṛti, whilst he who propitiates a female, particularly the youthful daughter of a Brāhmin, with clothes, ornaments and perfumes, offers worship to Prakṛti Herscll.'

We shall next determine the questions,—What is Śākta, and what is the complexion of his faith? By Śāktas are understood the worshippers of Śakti. This is true only when we take the term Śakti in its restricted sense. This term, which had originally but one primary signification, has in the course of time come to be used in two different senses, a general and a limited one. When taken in its widest sense, it means the allegorical representation of the active energy of God and is synonymous with Mūlā Prakṛti, the primitive source of Gods and men. In its limited sense, it is confined to Śiva Śakti, the Tāmasī, the offspring of darkness, and the last of the first three forms of the original Prakṛti. It is Śakti in this latter sense, the.bride of Śiva, whom, in her manifold forms, the Śaktas worship. The followers of the Śiva Śakti then are alone called Śāktas.

Every Hindu may pay his adoration to all the thirty-three Kotis of Gods and Goddesses composing the Hindu pantheon, but one and one only of the five divinities, Viṣṇu. Śiva, Sūrya, Ganapati and Śakti must be his Iṣṭa Devatā or tutelar divinity. Here is the marked distinction between general worshippers and special followers. To render this distinction more clear, we observe, that three are certain general formulas and prayers forming the ritual of worship of every praticalur divinity. These may be learnt by any Hindu from the Śāstras, or from the mouth of a Brāhmaṇa and used in the adoration of any God or Goddess, according to choice or necessity. But besides these general mantras, which may be made use of by any Hindu, without any distinction of sect, there are the Bīja or specific formulas, which are received only from

Book IX Chapter L

the hallowed lips of the Guru or spiritual guide. These are kept in great secrecy and repeated manntally every day, as a matter of highest religious duty. The God or Goddess, whose Bija or Mūla mantra is received in the prescribed manner, by any devotee, becomes his guardian divinity; and the person, thus initiated, becomes the special follower of that divinity. The Śaktas, then, are the special followers of the Śakti of Śiva. They may in general worship any other God or Goddess, but the bride of Śiva, in one or other of her horrid manifestations, must be their guardian deity. The following passage, quoted from the works of Mr. Colebrooke, will much elucidate the subject.

That the Hindus belong to various sects, is universally known. Five great sects, exclusively worship a single deity. One recognises the five divinities, which are adored by the other sects respectively; but the followers of this most comprehensive scheme mostly select one object of daily devotion and pay adoration to other deities on particular occasions only. The Hindu theologists have entered into vain disputes on the question, which, among the attributes of God, shall be deemed characteristic and pre-eminent Śankarācārya, the celebrated commentator on the Vedas, contended for the attributes of Śiva; and founded or confirmed the sect of Śaivas, who worship Mahādeva as the supreme being, and deny the independent existence of Viṣṇu and other Deities. Mādhava Ācārya and Vallabha Ācārya have, in like manner, established the sect of Vaiṣṇavas who adore Viṣṇu as God. The Sauras (less numerous then the two sects above mentione) worship the Sun, and acknowledge no other divinity. The Gānapatyās adore Gānēśa, as uniting in his person all the attributes of the Deity. Before I notice the fifth sect, I must remind the reader, that the Hindu Mythology has personified the abstract and active powers of the divinity; and

has ascribed sexes to these mythological personages. The Śakti, or energy of an attribute of God, is female and is fabled as the consort of that personified attribute, * * * The exclusive adorers of the Śakti of Śiva, are the Sāktas. (Asiatic Researches, Vol. VII, pp. 279).

The Śāktas, who adopt the female principle in the last of her three principle modifications, as their special divinity,—instead of deriving her origin from the supreme Brahma, use to her the language which is invariably applied to the preferential object of worship in every sect, and contemplate her as the only source of life and existence. She is declared to he equally in all things, and that all things are in her, and that besides her there is nothing. In short, she is identified with the Supreme Being. Thus it is written in the Kāśī Khanda: ‘Thou art predicated in every prayer-Brahmā and the rest are all born from Thee. Thou art one with the four objects of life, and from Thee they come to fruit. From Thee this whole universe proceeds, and in Thee, asylum, of the world, all is, whether visible or invisible, gross or subtle in its nature: what is, Thou art in Śakti form and except Thee nothing has ever been. ‘The Śakti of Śiva being identified with Śaktimān, the Deity, is-declared to be not only superior to Her Lord, but the Cause of Him. Of the two objects (Śiva and Śakti) which are eternal, the greater is the Śakti.’ Again Śakti gives strength to Śiva; without Her he could not stir a straw. She is therefore the Cause of Śiva. (Śaṅkara Vijaya).

Although the Purāṇas do, to a certain extent, authorize the adoration of Śakti, yet the principal rites and incantations are derived from a different source. Of the Purāṇas, those which in particular inculcate the worship of the female principle, are the Brahma Vaivarta, the Skanda, and the Kālikā. But neither in them, nor in any other Purāṇam, do we find the Bija or radical mantras which the Śaktis receive from their spiritual guides. These, as well