CHAPTER I

On Svāyambhuva Manu

नारंद उवाच

नारायण धराधार सर्वपालनकारण ।

भवतोदीरितं देरीचरितं पायनाशनम् ॥ १ ॥

मन्त्रतेषु सर्वेषु सा देरीं यत्स्वरूपिणी ।

यदाकारेण कुरते प्रापूर्णं महेंग्वरी ॥ 2 ॥

तातः सर्वन्सामख्याहि देरी महातन्यमिश्रिताम् ।

Nārada said: O Nārāyaṇa! O Thou, the Supporter of this whole world! The Preserver of all! Thou hast described the glorious characters of the Devi, that take away all the sins. Kindly describe now to me the several forms that the Devi assumed in every Manvantara in this world as well as Her Divine Greatness.

यथा च येन येनेह पुजिता संस्तुतापि हि ॥ ३ ॥

मनोराथान्यूरवति भक्तानां भक्तबलला ।

तञः शुकृष्याणानां देदीचितमुभामम् ॥ ४ ॥

वर्णयस्य कृपासिन्यो येनानोति सुखं महत् ।

O Thou, full of mercy! Describe also how and by whom She was worshipped and praised; how She, so kind to the devotees, having been thus pleased, fulfilled their desires. I am very eager to hear these, the very best and blissful characters of the Devi.

शीनारायण उवाच

आकर्षीय महर्षे त्वं चरितं पापनाशनम् ॥ ५ ॥

भक्तानां भक्तिजनं महासंपतिकारकम् ।

जगाधोनिभृतेजा बहुा लोकपितामाः ॥ 6 ॥

Śrī Nārāyaṇa said: Hear O Maharṣi! The glories and greatness of the Devi Bhagavatī leading to the devotion of the devotees, capable of giving all sorts of wealth and destroying all sins. From the navel lotus of Viṣṇu, the holder of the Cakra (discus), was born Brahmā, the Creator of this universe, the great Energetic One, and the Grand Sire of all the worlds.

अविरासीजाभिवाहेदेवस्य चिक्षणः ।

स चतुमुखं आसाठा प्रातुभार्वं महामते ॥ ७ ॥

The four faced Brahmā, on being born, produced from His mind Svāyambhava Manu and his wife Śatarūpā, the embodiment of all virtues.

मनुं स्वायंभुंवे नाम जवायमास मानसात् ।

स मानसो मनुः पुत्रो ब्रह्मणः परमेऊनः ॥ 8 ॥

शतकपां च तत्पत्यीं जउे धार्यस्वीक्षणीम् ।

स मनुः क्षीरसिधोक्ष तोरे परपवावे ॥ 9 ॥

देवीमाराध्यामास महाभायकल्पज्यम् ।

मूर्ति च मुन्मवीं तस्या विधाय पृथिवीपति: ॥ 10 ॥

For this very reason, Svāyambhuna Manu has been known as the mind-born son of Brahmā. Svāyambhuna Manu got from Brahmā the task to create and multiply; he made an earthen image of the Devi Bhagavatī, the Bestower of all fortunes, on the beach of the sanctifying Kṣīra Samudra (ocean of milk) and he engaged himself in worshipping Her and began to repeat the principal mystic mantra of Vāgbhava (the Deity of Speech).

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

उपासतेभ्म तां देवीं वापभवं स जपन्र रहः ।

निराहारो जिततश्वासो नियममतकाश्रितः ॥ ११ ॥

एकपादेन संतितछ्न धरायामिनर्ग स्थितः ।

गतवर्ष जिताः कामः क्रोधस्तेन महात्मना ॥ १२ ॥

Thus engaged in worship, Svāyambhuna Maunu conquered by and by his breath and food and observed Yama, Niyama and other vows and became lean and thin. For one hundred years he remained standing always on one leg and became successful on controlling his six passions lust, anger etc.

भजे स्थावरातं देल्याशुराणी चिंतयन् हृदि ।

तस्य तत्परमा देवी प्रापुभूर्ता जान्यमी ॥ १३ ॥

उवाच चचनं दिव्यं वरं वरय भूपिये ।

तत आनंदजनकं श्रुत्वा वायकं महीपति: ॥ १४ ॥

वरयामास तान् इत्यन्त्यु वरान्यावतुर्वभान् ।

He meditated on the feet of that Aśdyā Sakti (the Primordial Śakti) so much that he became inert like a vegetable or mineral matter. By his Tapas the Devi, the World Mother appeared before him and said: "O King! Ask divine boons from Me." Hearing these joyous words, the King wanted his long cherished and heart-felt boon, so very rare to the Devas.

मनुरुवाच

जय देव विशालाशिंत्र जय सर्वान्तरस्थिते ॥ 15 ॥

मान्ये पूज्ये जगद्धात्रि सर्वेभगतमंगले ।

त्वकट्याश्वालोकेन पचभुः सुजते जगत् ॥ 16 ॥

वैकुंतः पालयत्वेह हरः संहर्ते क्षणात् ।

Manu said: “O Large eyed Devi! Victory to Thee, residing in the hearts of all! O Thou honoured, worshipped! O Thou the Upholders of the world! O Thou, the Auspicious of all auspicious! By Thy Gracious Look, it is that the Lotus born has been able to create the worlds; Viṣṇu is perserving and Rudra Deva is destroying in minute.

श्वीरपित्तिलोक्याशु शासको भवदात्रया ॥ 17 ॥

प्राणिज: शिक्षायनेव दंदेन न परेतात् ।

यादसामधिधः पाशी पालनं मात्रुशामपि ॥ 18 ॥

कृते स कुबोरीउप निर्थीनां पतिरवध्यः ।

जुतभुट् नैक्छंते वायुरीशानः शेष एव च ॥ 19 ॥

By Thy command it that Indra, the Lord of Śacī, has got the charge of controlling the three Lokas; and Yama, the Lord of the departed is awarding fruits and punishing according, to their merits or demerits, the deceased ones, O Mother! By Thy Grace, Varuna, the holder of the noose, has become the lord of all aquatic creatures and is preserving them; and Kubera, the lord of the Yakṣas, has become the lord of wealth. Agni (fire), Nairṭa, Vāyu (wind), Iśāna and Ananta Deva are Thy parts and have grown by Thy power.

त्वदोरंभवा एव त्वच्छक्तिपरिक्षिता: ।

अशापि यदि दे दिव वरो देवोप्रतिस भोजन् ॥ 20 ॥

तदा प्रद्वा: सर्गकांवं वित्पा नयंवुत् मे शिवे ।

वाग्यवस्यापि मंत्रय ये केविद्युपवेयितः ॥ 21 ॥

तेशां सिंदीदः सत्वापि कार्याणां जायतापि ।

ये संवादिभं देवि पद्टिं श्रावयन्ति च ॥ 22 ॥

Then, O Devi! If Thou desirest to grant me my desired boon, then, O Thou! the Auspicious One! Let all the great obstacles to my work of procreating in this universe and increasing my dominions die away. And if any body worships this great Vāgbhava Mantra or any body hears with devotion this history or makes others hear this, they all shall be crowned with success and enjoyment and Mukti be easy to them.

तेशं लोके भूक्तिभूमती सुरुषे भवाशे शिशे ।

जातिस्मरलं भवतु वक्तृलं सीछोत तथा ॥ 23 ॥

ज्ञानसिद्धि: कर्मभारसंसिद्धिपर चान्तु है ।

पुर्वगीरसम्पूढ़िक आयेदित्वेवे मे चवः ॥ 24 ॥

श्री श्रीमदेशीभागतं महापुराणे दशमकल्पे प्रधागोरधावः । १ ।

Specially they would get the power to remember their past lives, acquire eloquence in speaking, all round beauty, success in obtaining knowledge, success in their deeds and especially in the increase of their posterity and children. O Bhagavatī! This is what I want most.

Here ends the First Chapter of the Tenth Book on the story of Svāyambhuvā Manu in the Mahāpurānam Śrimadadevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book X Chapter II

CHAPTER II

On the Conversation Between Nārada and the Vindhya Mountain

श्रीवैख्यावच

भूमिपाल महाबाहो सर्वेनेऊद्विष्यति ।

यत्स्वा प्रार्थितं तते द्वादिम मनुजाधित्य ॥ १ ॥

अई प्रसन्ना देलेन्द्रजागताभोपोर्विकमा ।

वारभवस्य जपेनेव तपसा ते सुनिश्रितम् ॥ २ ॥

The Devi said: “O King! O, Mightyarmed One! All these I grant unto you. Whatever you have asked for, I give them to you. I am very much pleased with your hard Tapasyā and with your Japam of the Vāgbhava Mantra. Know Me that My power is infallible in killing the Lords of the Daityas.

राज्यं निष्कटकं तेउस्तु पुत्रा बंशकार आयि ।

मयि चिन्हिद्वा वस्म श्रोजिते मदये घबेत् ॥ 3 ॥

एवं वराम्यादौदी तस्मै दत्ता महात्मने ।

पश्यतस्तु मनोरेव जगाम तिथयपर्वतम् ॥ 4 ॥

O, Child! Let your kingdom be free from enemies and let your prosperity be increased. Let your devotion be fixed on Me and in the end you will verily get Nirvāna Mukti. O Nārada! Thus granting the boon to the highscolded Manu, the Great Devi disappeared before and went to the Vindhya Range.

योस्ती तिथ्याचलो रुद्रः कुभोद्वमहर्भिणा ।

भानुभागविरोधार्थ प्रवृत्तो गगानं स्युशन् ॥ 5 ॥

सा तिथ्यवासिनी तिथ्योत्नुजा वरदेधरी ।

वयूव पूचा लोकानां संर्वेधो भूनिसनम ॥ 6 ॥

O Devarsī! This Vindhya mountain increased in height so much so that it was well nigh on the way to prevent the course of the Sun when it was arrested by Maharṣi Agastya, born of a kumbha (water jar). The younger sister of Viṣṇu, Varadeśvari, is staying here as Vindhyavāsinī. O Best of the Munis! This Devi is an object of worship of all.

ऋषय कनु:

को3सी विध्याचल: सूत किमर्थ गर्न नसूशन् ।

भानुभागविरोधे च किमर्थ कृतावनसी ॥ 7 ॥

कर्थ च मैत्रावक्तिण: पर्वतं तं महोनन्तम् ।

प्रकृतिस्थं चकारीत सर्वे विस्तरतो वर्द ॥ 8 ॥

Śaunaka and the other Rşis said: O Sūta! Who is that Vindhya Mountain? And why did He intend to soar high up to the Heavens to resist the Sun's course? And why was it that Agastya, the son of Mitrāvaruṇa quietened that rising mountain? Kindly describe all these in detail.

न हि तृण्यामहे साधो स्वत्यसगलितामुन्तम् ।

देत्याश्रिस्तपाख्यं पौला तृणा प्रवधौं ॥ 9 ॥

आसीद्धिन्याचलो नाम मान्यः सर्वेधारभुन्तम् ।

महावनस्मुहाबो महापादपसंकृत: ॥ 10 ॥

O Saint! We are not as yet satisfied with hearing the Glories of the Devi, the ambrosial nectar, that have come out of your mouth. Rather our thirst has been increased. Sūta said: "O Rṣis! There was the Vindhya Mountain, highly honoured and reckoned as the chief of the mountains on the earth.

सुपुथित्रनेकैक्षु लतानुक्मैस्तु संवृत: ।

भुगा वराहा महिषा व्यापा: शार्डैनृलका अपि ॥ ११ ॥

वानरा: शगला क्रश्म: शुगलाक्ष समंततः ।

विचरांत सदा ह्हा पुहा एव महोद्याम: ॥ १२ ॥

It was covered with big forests and big trees. Creeping plants and shrubs flowered these and it looked very beautiful. On it were roaming deer, wild boars, buffaloes, monkeys hares, foxes, tigers and bears, stout and cheerful, with full vigour and all very merrily.

नदीन्द्वलाक्षांतते देवानंधर्विकितरै: ।

अयसोपिधः किंपुरुशे: सर्वकामफलकुर्षे: ॥ 13 ॥

एताङुगे किंध्यगे कदाचित्यवर्धटसहीम् ।

देवक्षि: परमप्रीते जगाम सेच्छया पुनिः ॥ 14 ॥

The Devas, Gandharvas, Apsarás, and Kinnaras come here and bathe in its rivers; all sorts of fruit trees can be seen here. On such a beautiful Vindhya Mountain, came there one day the ever joyful Devarsi Nārada on his voluntary tour round the world.

तं दृष्टा स नगो मेक्षु तृर्णमुत्थाय संभ्रमात् ।

पाधामर्थ तथा दत्ता वारासननधारपर्यत् ॥ 15 ॥

सुखोपविष्टे देविष प्रसत्रं नग ऊधिचवान् ।

Seeing the Maharṣi Nārada, the Vindhya Mountain got up and worshipped him with pādya and arghya and gave him a very good Āśana to sit. When the Muni took his seat and found himself happy, the Mountain began to speak.

विश्य उवाच

देवर्ष कव्यातं जात आगमः कुत उतमः ॥ १ ६ ॥

तवागमन्तो जातमन्त्यं मम मंदितम् ।

तव चंक्रमणं देवाभ्याद्धि हि यथा रवेः ॥ १७ ॥

अपूर्वं यवमनोयुक्तं तद्वृहि मम नातर ।

Vindhya said: “O Devarsi! Now be pleased to say whence you are coming; your coming here is so very auspicious! My house is sanctified today by your coming. O Deva! Your wandering is, like the Sun, the cause of inspiring the beings with freedom from fear. So, O Nārada! Kindly give out your intention as to your coming here which seems rather wonderful.

नातर उवाच

ममागामनिमीजर जातं स्वपीनिरस्त्य ॥ 18 ॥

तत्र दृष्टा मया लोकाः शक्तानियमपातिजनम् ।

सर्वेषां लोकपालानां भवनानि समंततः ॥ 19 ॥

मया दृष्टानि विध्याग नानाधोगप्रदानि च ।

Nārada said! “O Vindhya! O Enemy of Indra! (Once the mountain had a very great influence. Indra cut off their wings and so destroyed their influence. Hence the mountains are enemies of and so destroyed their influence. Hence the mountains are enemies of Indra). I am coming from the Sumeru Mountain. There I saw the nice abodes of Indra, Agni, Yama, and Varuna. There I saw the houses of these Dikpālas (the Regents of the several quarters), which abound in objects of all sorts of enjoyments.”

इति चोकत्वा ब्रहयोयिन: पुनरुच्छ्वासमायियन् ॥ 20 ॥

उच्छ्वसर्ते मुनि द्वूषा पुनः: पप्रच्छ शैलाद् ।

उच्छ्वासकारणं कि तद्वृष्टि देवध्ये भम ॥ 21 ॥

Thus saying, Nārada gave out a heavy sigh Vindhya, the king of mountains, seeing the Muni heaving a long sigh, asked him again with great eagerness. "O Devars! Why have you heaved such a long sigh? Kindly say."

इत्थाकरणं नग्यशोक्ते देवर्षिमितबुतिः ।

अद्वीक्ष्युतां वाल सभोच्छ्वासस्य काराणम् ॥ 22 ॥

गौरीगुरुस्तु हिमवाड्छिवस्य श्रुगुरुः किल ।

संबंधित्वालयगुपेतः पूज्य असील्माभुपतान् ॥ 23 ॥

Hearing this, Nārada said: “O, Child! Hear the cause why I sighted. See! The Himālaya Mountain is the father of Gaurī and the father-in-law of Mahādeva; therefore he is the most worshipped of all the mountains.

एवमेव च केलासः शिवय्वायसधः प्रधुः ।

पूज्यः पृथ्वीभुतां जातो लोके पाणीवराणः ॥ 24 ॥

निषधः पर्वतो नीलो शंभामदान एव च ।

पूज्यः स्वस्थानमासाठ सर्व एव क्षमाभूतः ॥ 25 ॥

The Kailāśa Mountain again, is the residence of Mahādeva; hence that is also worshipped and chanted as capable of destroying all the sins. So the Nisadha, Nīla, and Gandhamādana and other mountains are worshipped at their own places.

यं पर्वेति च विधात्या सहचनाकित्का: सद्यात् ।

सप्रहक्षिणोपतेः सोउयं कनकपर्वतः ॥ 26 ॥

आत्मानं मनुते श्रेष्ठ वरिष्ठ च धरापुतान् ।

सर्वेधामहोवारुशो नास्ति लोकेषु मत्समः ॥ 27 ॥

What more than this, that the Sumeru Mountain, round whom the thousandraved Sun, the Soul of the universe, circumambulates along with the planets and stars, thinks himself the supreme and greatest amongst the mountains "I am the supreme; there is none like me in the three worlds."

एवं मानाभिमानं तं सुचोद्ध्वासो मयोडिज्ञतः ।

असनु नैतावता कृत्वं तपोवललतां नग ।

प्रसंगतो मयोक्ते ते गिधियामि निजं गृहम् ॥ 28 ॥

गृति श्रीमहैबीभागवते महापुराणे दशमस्कंधे द्वितीयोउषाय: 12 ।

Remembering this self-conceit of Sumeru, I sighed so heavily. O Vindhya! We are ascetics and though we have no need to discuss these things, yet by way of conversation I have told this to you. Now I go to my own abode."

Here ends the Second Chapter of the Tenth Book on the conversation between Nārada and the Vindhya Mountain in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book X Chapter III

CHAPTER III

On Vindhya's Obstructing the Sun's Course in the Heavens

सूत उवाच

एवं समुपदिष्ययं देविष: परम: स्वार्द ।

ज्ञापा ब्रह्मणो लोके स्टैर्यारी महापुनि: ॥ 1 ॥

गते मुनिवरे विक्यश्रितां लोभेउनपार्विनीम् ।

नैव शर्ति स लेभे च सदानःकृतशोच्न: ॥ 2 ॥

Sūta said: “O Rṣis! Thus advising, the Devarsi, the great Jñāni and Muni going wherever he likes, went to the Brahmaloka. After the Muni had gone, the Vindhya became immersed in great anxiety and, becoming always very sorrowful, could not get peace.

कर्ण किं त्वत्र मे कार्य कर्ण मेर्ने जयाम्यहम् ।

नैव शार्ति लक्षे नापि सासस्यं मे मानसे भवेत् ॥ 3 ॥

विगृताहं च मानं च चिकुके काँर्ति च चिकुकलम् ।

चित्बलं मे पीतर्ब चिक्त् स्मृतं पुर्वैर्महात्यपि:।

एवं तिवतयानस्य विक्यस्य मतस सुकटम ॥ 4 ॥

प्रदृष्टिता मति: कार्य कर्तेल्ये दोषकारिणि ।

“What shall I do now so as to overthrow Meru? Until I do that, I won’t be able to get the peace of my mind or my health. The highsouled persons always praised me for my enthusiasm and energy. Fie to my energy, honour, fame and family! Fie to my strength and heroism! O Rsis! With all these cogitations in his mind, Vindhya came finally to this crooked conclusion:

मेरुद्रक्षिणां कुर्वक्रियमेवे दिवाकाः ॥ ५ ॥

सग्रहर्शगणोगेपतः सदा दूयत्थयं नतः ।

तत्या मार्गस्य सोरोधे क्रतियामि निजः क्रैः ॥ ६ ॥

“Daily the Sun, stars and planets circumambulate round the Sumeru; hence Sumeru is always so arrogant; now if I can resist the Sun’s course in the heavens be my peaks, He will not be able to circumambulate round the Sumeru.

तदा निरुद्धो द्युमिण: परिकामेलक्षं नगम् ।

एवं मार्गे निर्द्रुं तु मया दिनकरस्य च ॥ ७ ॥

भनन्दो दिव्यनगो भनिष्यति विनिश्रितम् ।

एवं निश्रित्य विद्यारिः: तं सुशन्वधे घड़ीः ॥ ८ ॥

महोजनैः शुक्रवैः सर्वे व्याय व्यवस्थितः ।

कदोद्येषित भायत्वांने तोथियिष्याम्यहं कदा ॥ 9 ॥

एवं संश्वितानमत्थ सा व्यतीयाय गर्शेरी ।

If I can do this, certainly I will be able to curb the Sumeru in his pride. Thus coming to a conclusion, Vindhya raised his arms that were the peaks high up to the heavens and blocking the passage in the Heavens remained so and passed that night with great uneasiness and difficulty, thinking when the Sun would rise and he would obstruct His passage.

प्रभात विमलं जउे दिशा वितिमिता: कौं: ॥ 10 ॥

कुर्वन्स निर्नोतो भानुद्वयावीद्ये सिरो ।

प्रकाशलेस मिवलं नभो भानुकरै: शुर्षे: ॥ 11 ॥

विकासं नलिनी भेजे मीलनं च कुमुद्रती ।

स्वानि क्राविणि सर्वे च लोका: समुपतिथ्ये ॥ 12 ॥

At last, when the morning broke out, all the quarters were clear. The Sun, destroying the darkness, rose in Udaya Giri. The sky looked clear with His rays; the lotus, seeing Him, blew out with joy; while the excellent white water-lilies, at the bereavement of the Moon, contracted their leaves and closed as if at the separation of one's lover, gone to a distant place.

हृयं कव्यं भृत्तलिंद देवानां च प्रवधान् ।

प्राक्षपताक्षम्याङ्धविभाने विश्वां पति: ॥ 13 ॥

The people began to do their own works on the appearance of the day; the worship of the gods, the offerings to the Gods, the Homas and the offerings to the Pitrs were set a going on (in the morning, afternoon and evening respectively).

एवं प्रप्ती त्वानपौरी समाश्रय विवोधिनीम् ।

जल्लेति चित्रकालीनविरहादिव कामिनीम् ॥ 14 ॥

भास्कोरप्र कुमानोश्र दिलं नूनं विहाय च ।

यायमां गौतु ततत्सुर्ण प्रतये कमलाकरः ॥ 15 ॥

न शशाकायातो गौतु ततोउनुक्योज्ञपत् ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

The Sun marched on in His course. He divided the day into three parts, morning, mid-day, and after-noon. First of all he consoled the eastern quarter which seemed like a woman suffering from the bereavement of her lover; then he consoled the south earten corner; then as He wanted to go quickly towards the south, His horses could not go further. The charioteer Aruṇa, seeing this, informed the Sun what had happened.

अनुकलवाच

भानो मानोजते विध्यो निवस्य गर्न विध्ना : १ १ ६ १

स्पधौते मेकणा प्रेमुस्वतदृत्तां च प्रद्रक्षिणम् ।

Aruṇa spoke: “O Sun! The Vindhya has become very jealous of the Sumeru as You circumambulate round the Sumeru Mountain daily. He has risen very high and obstructed your course in the Heavens, hoping that you would circumambulate round him. He is thus vying with the Sumeru Mountain.

सूत उवाच

अनुकाव्ययाकरण्यं सविता ह्रास चितयन् ॥ 17 ॥

अहो गाननामों5पि कथ्यते चातिविस्तयः ।

प्रायः शुर्णेन किं कुर्पातुवध्ये वर्चनि स्थितः ॥ १ १ ॥

निर्भेद्धो नो वार्षिमागों देघे कि बलवतनम् ।

Sūta said: O Rsis! Hearing the words of Aurna, the charioteer, the Sun began to think thus: "Oh! The Vindhya is going to obstruct My course! What can a great hero not do, when he is in the wrong path? Oh! My horses' motions are stopped to-day! The fate is the strongest of all (Because Vindhya is strong to-day by Daiva, therefore he is doing this).

गुहाबाहुपहल्यप्रे यः क्षणं नावतिंहते ॥ १९ ॥

स विशं रकूद्यमार्गेरिक कैके करोत विधिर्बलैं ।

एवं च मार्गे संरकूद लोका: सर्वे च सेभूरा: ॥ 20 ॥

नावविदन्त शरणं कर्तव्यं नावयघत ।

Even when eclipsed by Rāhu (the ascending node) I do not stop for a moment even; and now obstructed in My passage, I am waiting here for a

long time. The Daiva is powerful; what can I do? The Sun's course having been thus obstructed, all from the Gods to the lowest became helpless and could not make out what to do.

चित्रगुप्ताद्यः सर्वे कालं जानन्ति सूर्तेः ॥ 21 ॥

स कढ़ो विश्यभिगग आहो देवविषययः ।

यदा निकढ़ः सदिता मिगिगा स्पर्धया तदा ॥ 22 ॥

नष्टः स्वाहास्यधाकारो नष्टप्रायमपूजगत् ।

Citragupta and others ascertain their time through the Sun's course; and that Sun is now rendered motionless by the Vindhya mountain! What a great adverse fate is this! When the Sun was thus obstructed by the Vindhya out of his arrogance, the sacrifices to the Devas, the offerings to the Pitrs all were stopped; the world was going to rack and ruin.

एवं च पश्ड्या लेका दाहिषणायात्तर्वे च ॥ 23 ॥

निद्रामीलिनक्षुक्ता निशगामेव प्रपेदिते ।

प्राचस्घोत्त्राह्छा तीक्षतापप्रतिपाति: ॥ 24 ॥

भुता नहाछ भनाछ श्विनगामभज्ञज्ञा: ।

The people that lived on the west and south had their nights prolonged and they remained asleep. The people of the east and the north were scorched by the strong rays of the Sun and some of them died; some of them lost their health and so forth.

हाहामृतं जगतवर्षे स्वधाकल्यविवर्जितम् ।

देवा: सेंद्रा: सपहिंद्रना: किं कुमं इंतिवादिन: ॥ 25 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे दशमकन्धे देवीमाहार्ये

दृतीयोअव्या: 11 3 11

The whole earth became devoid of Śrāddhas and worships and a cry of universal distress arose on all sides. Indra and the other Devas became very anxious and began to think what they should do at that moment.

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Tenth Book on the obstruction of the Sun's course by the Vindhya

Mountain in the Mahā Purānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

Book X Chapter IV

CHAPTER IV

On the Devas' Going to Mahā Deva

सूत उवाच

ततः सर्वे सुराणा महै-त्रप्रमुखास्तत ।

पदायोर्नि पुरस्कृत्य रूत्रं शरणामव्युः ॥ १ ॥

उपलब्यु: प्रगतिधि: स्तोत्रेश्वासिपृत्तिधि: ।

देवदेवं निरिणं शशिल्लतिजांवम् ॥ २ ॥

Sūta said: O Rṣis! Then Indra and all the other Devas, taking Brahmā along with them and placing Him at the front, went to Mahādeva and took His refuge. They bowed down to Him and chanted sweet and great hymns to Him, Who holds Moon on His forehead, the Deva of the Devas, thus:

देवा ऊचुः

जय देव गणाधक्ष उमालिलनपछ्ज ।

अष्टसिद्धविष्यतीना द्वीय भक्तज्ञान ते ॥ ३ ॥

"O Thou, the Leader of the host of Gods! Victory to Thee! O Thou, Whose lotus feet are served by Umā, Victory to Thee! O Thou, the Giver of the eight Siddhis and Vibhūtis (extraordinary powers) to Thy devotees, Victory to Thee!

महामावालिलसितस्थानाय पवनामने ।

वृबांकायामरोगश नैकलास्थितिशालिने ॥ 4 ॥

अहिबुघ्ट्याय मान्याय मनवे मानदायिने ।

अजाय बहुक्षाय स्वातमाताय शंभहे ॥ 5 ॥

O Thou, the Background of this Great Theatrical Dances of this Insurmountable Māyā! Thou art the Supreme Spirit in Thy True Nature! Thou ridest on Thy vehicle, the Bull, and resistet in Kailāśa; yet Thou art the Lord of all the Devas. O Thou, Whose ornament is snakes, Who art the Honoured and the Giver of honours to persons! O Thou! the Unborn, yet comprising all forms, O Thou Sāmbbu! That findest pleasure in this Thy Own Self! Victory to Thee!

मानायाधाय देवाय गिरिशाय नमो3सुत ते ।

महाधिष्टिताएं ते महाविष्णुस्तुत्वा च १ ६ १।

विष्णुहकंजवासाय महायोगताय च ।

योगमध्याय योगाय योगिनां पतये नमः ॥ 7 ॥

योगीशाय नमस्तुभ्यं योगानां फलदायिने ।

दीन्द्वानपरायाथि दयासागमतुमैने ॥ 8 ॥

O Thou, the Lord of Thy attendants! O Thou, Giríśa! The Giver of the great powers, praised by Mahā Viṣṇu! O Thou, That livest in the heart lotus of Viṣṇu, and deeply absorbed in Mahā Yoga! Obeisance to Thee! O Thou that can’t be known through Yoga, and nothing but the Yoga itself; Thou, the Lord of the Yoga! We bow down to Thee. Thou awardest the fruits of yoga to the Yogins. O Thou, the Lord of the helpless! The Incarnate of the ocean of mercy! The Relief of the diseased and the most powerful! O Thou, whose forms are the three gunas, Sattva, Rajo, Tamas!

आतिग्रहमानयोद्योवीय तृणमुक्ते ।

वृष्यधजाय कालाय कालकालाय ते नमः ॥ 9 ॥

O Thou! Whose Emblem (carrier) is the Bull (Dharma); Thou art verily the Great Kāla; yet Thou art the Lord of Kāla! Obeisance to Thee! (The Bull represents the Dharma or Speech).

सूत उवाच

एवं सुत: स देवेशेये यज्ञुभिभियुंध्वज: ।

ग्राह गंभीर्या वाचा ग्रहस्निवडुपंभन् ॥ 10 ॥

Thus praised by the Devas, who take the offerings in sacrifices the Lord of the Devas, whose emblem is Bull, smilingly told the Devas in a deep voice:

श्रीभगवानुबाच

प्रसजोड़ं हिविध्वर: स्तोत्रेशोत्सम्पुर्षा: ।

मनोरंधं पूर्यामि सर्वेधां देखतर्षभाः ॥ १ १ १ ॥

O Thou, the excellent Devas! The residents of the Heavens! I am pleased with the praises that you have sung of Me. I will fulfil the desires of you, all the Devas.

देवा ऊचुः

सर्वदेवेश गिरिग शिशगीतिल्वारजित ।

आर्तानां शक्रस्वलं चु श वियेघिं महाबल ॥ १ २ ॥

पर्वतों विंध्यनामास्ति मेनहेद्रा महोजतः ।

भानुभार्ग निरीढ़ा हि सर्वेषां दुःखदोउपच ॥ १ ३ ॥

तद्वृद्धिंद्र स्तंभयेशान सर्वकल्याणकूद्व ।

भानुसंचारोरोधे कार्लजानं कर्थ भवेत् ॥ १४ ॥

नटे स्वाहास्पताकार लोके कः: शरणं भवेत् ।

असमकं च भयतातीं भवानेव हि दृष्यते ॥ ५ ॥

दुःखनाशकरो देव प्रसीत गिरिजापते ।

The Devas said: O Lord of all the Devas! O, Girisa! O, Thou whose forehead is adorned with Moon! O, Thou, the Doer of good to the distressed. O, Thou, the Powerful! Dost Thou do good to us. O, Thou, the Sinless One! The Vindhya Mountain has become jéalous of the Sumeru Mountain, and has risen very high up in the Heavens and he has obstructed the Sun's course, thereby causing great troubles to all. O, Thou, the Doer of good to all! O Iśāna! Dost Thon check the mountain's abnormal rise. How can we fix time it the Sun's course be obstructed! And when there is no knowledge, what is now the time, the sacrifices to the Devas and the offerings to the Pitrs are now almost dead and gone. O Deva! Who will now protect us? We see Thee as the Destroyer of the fear of us and of those who are terrified. O Deva! O Lord of Giriśa! Be pleased with us.

शिव उवाच

नासाकं शक्तिस्त्रीह तद्वृद्धित्तधेन सुरा: ॥ १ १ ॥

इमपेयं वदिष्यामो भपत्यतं रापाधयम् ।

सोउमाकं प्रपुराता च पुचः: कारणकाध्यूम् ॥ १ ७ ॥

गोर्धिदो भपार्विष्यु: सर्वकारणकारण: ।

तं गया कवधिष्यामः स दुःख्योतो भधियलि ॥ १ ८ ॥

Śrī Bhagavān said: “O Devas! I have no power to curb the Vindhya Mountain. Let us go to the Lord of Ramā and pay our respects to Him. He is our Lord, fit to be worshipped. He is Govinda, Bhagavān Viṣṇu, the Cause of all causes. We will go to Him and tell Him all our sorrows. He will remove them.

इत्येवामाकर्णं निरीशभाषितं

देवाङ्ग सेन्द्रा: सप्यतोसंपवा:।

रूद्रं पुरस्कृष्य च वेयपाना

वैकुपठलोकं प्रतिनम्पुरंसा ॥ 19 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे दर्भामकल्ये चतुषोध्याय: 14 ।

Hearing thus the words of Girīśa, Indra and the other Devas with Brahmā placed Mahādeva at their front and went to the region of Vaikuntha, trembling with fear.

Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the going of the Devas to Mahādeva in the Mahāpurānam Srimaddevirbhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER V

On The Devas' Going to Viṣṇu

सूत उवाच

ते नाता देवदेवेशं मानार्थे जगदगुकम् ।

विष्णुं कामलपत्रांहं द्रष्टुः प्रभ्याप्तिवर्षम् ॥ १ ॥

स्तोत्रेण तुडुकुर्भेनका यगद्धवसर्यक्ता: ।

Sūta said: Then the Devas, on arriving at Vaikuntha, saw the Lord of Lakṣmī, the Deva of the Devas, the World-Teacher, with his eyes beautiful like Padma Palāsa (lotus-leaves), shining with brilliance and began to praise Him in a voice choked with intense feelings of devotion, thus:

देवा कचुः

जय विजाणो रमेशाहा महापुरुष पूर्वज 11 2 11

दैत्याते कामजनक सर्वकामफलप्रद 1

महावारह गोर्विद महावस्वरूपधकु 11 3 11

"Victory to Visnu! O Lord of Rama! Thou art prior to the Virāt Puruṣa." O Enemy of the Daityas! O Thou, the Generator of desires in all and the Bestower of the fruits of those desires to all! O Govinda! Thou art the Great Boar and Thou art of the nature of Great Sacrifice!

Book X Chapter V

महाविष्णो ध्योराए आजुप्यक्तिकारण ।

मत्थवावतारे भैद्यानमुढ़ाराधारलफ्क ।। 4 ।।

सत्यव्रतधार्यीग मत्थलकाय ते नमः ।।

जयाकृपार दैत्यत सुराकार्यमरपर्क ।। 5 ।।

O Mahā Visṇu! O Lord of Dharma! Thou art the Cause of the origin of this world! Thou didst support the earth in Thy Fish Incarnation for the deliverance of the Vedas! O Thou Satyavrata of the form of a Fish! We bow down to Thee. O Thou! The Enemy of the Daityas! The Ocean of mercy! Thou dost do the actions of the Devas out of mercy.

अमृतातिपिकरणेन कुमंरूपाय ते नमः ।

जयादिदै-न्यनागधर्मादिपूरकरूपयूक ।। ६ ।।

महूद्धारुकतोष्ठोग कोल्हपाय ते नमः ।

नारसिंहं वयुः कृत्वा महादैत्यं द्वार यः ।। ७ ।।

O Thou! The Tortoise Incarnation! That grantest Mukti to others! Obeisance to Thee! O Thou! That didst assume the form of a Boar for the destruction of the Daityas Jaya and others and for raising the earth from the waters! Obeisance to Thee! Thou didst assume that form—Half man and half Lion—of the Nṛsimha Mūrti and tore asunder Hiranya Kaśipu, proud of his boons, by Thy nails.

करजैर्वपूर्णां तस्मी नृहरये नमः ।

वामनं रूपमास्थाय तैलोक्यैध्यंमोहितम् ॥ 8 ॥

बलि संछल्यामास तस्मै यामनरूपिणे ।

टुर्धर्जनिविनाणाय सहस्करणजये ॥ 9 ॥

We bow down to Thee! Obeisance to Thee! That in Thy Dwarf Incarnation, didst deceive Bali, whose head got crazed by the acquisition of the kingdom over the three Lokas. We bow down to Thee, that in Thy Paraśu Rāma Incarnation, didst slay Kātra Viryārjuna, the thousand handed, and the other wicked Kṣattriyas! Obeisance to Thee!

रैयुकागर्भजातना जामदन्यान ये नतः ।

दूरधासपीलल्यागरिष्डेदिवरीये ॥ 10 ॥

श्रीमहाराये तुभ्यं नमोरन्तकामय च ।

That wert born of the womb of Renukā as the son of Jamadagni. Obeisance to Thee, of great prowess and valour, that in Thy Rāma Incarnation

as the son of Daśaratha, didst cut off the heads of the wicked Rāksasa, the son of Pulastya!

कंससुद्योपनाडीश दैनैय: पृथ्वीगलाङ्गे: ॥ १ १ ॥

भात्राकांतां मही योरभाज्ञज्ञार महाविषुः ।

धर्म संस्थायामास पार्यं कृत्वा सुदूरतः ॥ १ २ ॥

तस्मै कृष्णाय देवाय नमो3स्तु बहुया विषो ।

We bow down again and again to Thee, the Great Lord, that in Thy Kṛṣṇa incarnation, didst deliver this earth from the clutches of the wicked King Duryodhana, Kamsa and others and didst establish the religion by removing the then prevailing vicious ideas and doctrines.

वृष्यज्ञिवधाताय पशुहिंसानिर्वृतं च ।। 13 ॥

बौद्धुरूपं दधी योउसी तमैं देवाय ते नमः ।

स्नेक्षणये5क्षल लोके बुहराजन्यपीक्षिते ॥ 14 ॥

We bow down to Thy Buddha Incarnation, that Great Deva who didst come down here to put a stop to the slaughtering of the innocent animals and to the performance of the wicked sacrificial ceremonies! Obeisance to the Deva! When almost all the persons in this world will turn out in future as Mleechas and when the wicked Kings will oppress them, right and left,

कल्किक्सं समाद्धयी देवेदेवाय ते नमः ।

दशावतारास्ते देव भक्तानां रक्षाणाय वै ॥ 15 ॥

दुष्टैल्विधायाता तस्माचं सर्वेयुःखहत् ।

Thou wilt then incarnate Thyself again as Kalki and redress all the grievances! We bow down to Thy Kalki Form! O Deva! These are Thy Ten Incarnations, for the preservation of Thy devotees, for the killing of the wicked Daityas. Therefore Thou art called as the Great Reliever of all our troubles.

जय भक्त्रतिंनाशाय घृतं नारीजलात्मसु ॥ १६ ॥

रूपं वेने तथा देव को०यस्ततो द्वारनिधि: ।

इत्येवं देवदेवेशं स्तुला श्रीपीतवाससम् ॥ १७ ॥

प्रणेषुपर्पिक्सहिताः साहांगं विबुधर्षधानः ।

तेषां स्तवं समाकरणं देवः शीपुरुचोतम् ॥ १८ ॥

उवाच चिकुधानस्वान् हर्षयन्त्यैगादायः ।

O Thou! Victory to Thee! The Devas Who

assumess the forms of women and water for destroying the ailings of the devotees! Who else can be so king! O Thou, the Ocean of mercy! O Rsis! Thus praising the yellow robed Viṣṇu, the Lord of all the Devas, the whole host of the Devas bowed down to Him and made Sāṣṭāngas. Then Viṣṇu Gādādhara, hearing their hymns, gladdened them and spoke:

श्रीभगवानुवाच

प्रसजोश्मि सत्येनार्हे द्वैवास्तारं विमुज्चथ ॥ 19 ॥

भवतां नागशिव्यामि दुःखं परमुःसहम् ।

वृणुघं च वरं मतो देवा: परमदुर्लंम् ॥ 20 ॥

द्वारमि परमप्रीतः सतव्यास्य प्रसाततः ।

Śrī Bhagavāna said: “O Devas! I am pleased with your stotra. You need not be sorrowful. I will remove all your troubles that have become unbearable to you. O Devas! I am very glad to hear the praises that you have offered on Me. Better ask boons from Me. I will grant them though very rare even and obtained with difficulty.

व एत्वयते स्तोत्रं कल्य उत्थाय मानवः ॥ 21 ॥

मिय भक्ति परां कृत्वा न तं शोकः स्युलेक्वा ।

अलक्ष्मीः कालकर्णि च नाकामेनदपूर्वुं सुः ॥ 22 ॥

नोपसर्गा ने वेताला न प्रहा बढ़मानवाः ।

न रेगा वातिकाः वैभातः ३लैम्यसंभवितनस्तथा ॥ 23 ॥

नाकाल्यरणं तस्य कदापि च भविष्यति ।

संततिःश्रकाल्क्या भोगाः सर्वे सुखादयः ॥ 24 ॥

Any person who rises early in the morning and

recites with devotion this stotra sung by you, will never experience any sorrow. O Devas! No poverty, no bad symptoms, no Vetālas nor planets nor Brahma Rāksasas nor any misfortunes will overtake him. No disease, due to Vāta (windy temperament), Pitta (bile) and Kapha (phlegm) nor untimely death will visit him. His family will not be extinct and happiness will always reign there.

संभविष्यति तन्मवीर्युहे यः स्तोजप्राछकः ।

कि पुनर्वहुनीकेन स्तोत्रं सर्वार्थसाधकम् ॥ 25 ॥

एतस्य पठनायूणां भृक्तिमुनी न दूरतः ।

देवा भवन्तु यवदुःखं कल्यतां तत्सेशगम् ॥ 26 ॥

नाशयामि न संदेहश्रान कार्योंणुरेव च ।

एवं शीभावह्वावं भूत्वा सर्वे दिवैकासः ।

प्रसवमनसः सर्वे पुनरूपचुर्याकपिम् ॥ 27 ॥

इति शीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे दशमकंधे

पूजमोर्षायाः ।। 5 ।।

O Devas! This stotra can give every thing. Both the enjoyment and freedom will come within any one's easy access. There is no doubt in this. Now what is your difficulty? Give out. I will remove it at once. There is not a bit of doubt in this." Hearing these words of Śrī Bhagavān, the Devas became glad and spoke to Viṣṇu.

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the

Devas' going to Viṣṇu, in the Mahā Purāṇam

Śrīmaddevībhāgāvatam of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER VI

On The Devas' Praying to the Munī Agastya

सूत उवाच

श्रीगस्य वचनादेवाः संनुहाः सर्व एव हि ।

प्रसाधनसो भूत्वा पुनरेनं समृष्विं ति । ।।

Sūta said: “O Rṣis! Hearing the words of the Lord of Lakṣmī, all the Devas become pleased and they spoke:

देवा कचुः

देवदेव महाविष्णो सृहित्धन्तंकारण ।

विष्णो विर्ययनगोड़कस्य मार्तीधं करोति हि ॥ 2 ॥

तेन भानुविरोधेन सर्व एस महाविभो ।

अलध्यभोपाभागा हि किं कुम्: कुंत्र यामहि ॥ 3 ॥

The Devas said: “O Deva of the Devas! O Mahā Visṇu! O Thou, the Creator, Preserver and the Destroyer of the Universe! O Visṇu! The Vindhya mountain has risen very high and it has stopped the Sun’s course. Therefore all the works on earth are suspended. We are not receiving our share of

Book X Chapter VI

Yajñas. Now where we will go, what we will do, we do not know."

श्रीभगवानुवाच

या कार्जी सर्वजगतामाधा च कुलवर्धनी ।

देवी भगवती तत्या: पूजकः परमधुति: ॥ 4 ॥

Śrī Bhagavān said: “O Devas! There is now in Benares the Muni Agastya of indomitable power, in devoted service of that Primordial Śakti Bhagavati, the Creatrix of this Universe.

अगत्स्यो मुनिवर्गेसी वाराण्यां सामाते ।

ततेजोर्वकौड़गस्यो भविष्यति सुरोतमाः ॥ 5 ॥

तं प्रसाहा द्विजवरमास्यं परमौजसम् ।

याच्छं विद्युपा: कार्णिं गत्वा नि: श्रेयस: पदीम् ॥ 6 ॥

This Muni alone can put a stop to this abnormal Vindhya Range. Therefore it behoves you all to got to that fiery Dvija Agastya at Benares where the people get Nirvāna; the Highest Place and pray to him (to kindly fulfil your object).”

सूत उवाच

एवं समुपदिष्यते विष्णुना विबुधोतमाः ।

प्रतीता: प्रगता: सर्वे जन्मुबांगरणसी पुरीम ॥ ७ ॥

Sūta said: “O Rsis! Thus ordered by Viṣṇu, the gods felt themselves comforted and, saluting Him, went to the city of Benares.

क्षणेन विबुधप्रेशा गत्वा काशीपुरी शुभाम् ।

मिफाकर्णी समाल्छूल सर्वेलं भक्तिरमंशुना ॥ ८ ॥

संतर्षे देर्वांशि पिटुन्चता दानं विधानतः ।

आगत्य मुविवर्धेय चाङ्गमं परमं महत ॥ 9 ॥

In a moment they went to the Holy City of Benares, and bathing there at the Manikarnikā ghāt, worshipped the Devas with devotion and offered Tarpanas to the Pitrs and duly made their charities. Then they went to the excellent Śārama of the Muni Agastya.

प्रगतंशप्रदाकर्शनं नानापादपसंकुलम् ।

मधुरै: सारसैईर्शऊकावैकृपाश्रिभान् ॥ 10 ॥

महावारहै: कोलेश्ठ व्याधेः शार्गैंटकर्षिति ।

मृगी रूकभित्यर्थं खड़ैः शरणभक्ररि ॥ 11 ॥

The hermitage was full of quiet quadruped ani-

mals; adorned with various trees, peacocks, herons, geeses and Cakravākas and various other birds tigers, wolves, deer, the wild boars, rhinoceros, young elephants, Ruru deer and others. Though there were the ferocious animals, yet the place was free fear and it looked exceedingly beautiful.

सभाशितं परमथा लक्ष्यम मुनिवर्ते त्वा ।

दण्डवत्पत्तिताः सर्वे प्रणेपूछ पुनः पुनः ॥ 12 ॥

On arriving before the Muni, the gods fell prostrate before him and bowed down again and again to him.

देवा ऊचुः

जय ब्रिजाणाधीश मान्य पूज्य धरासुर ।

वातापीबल्नाशय नामसे कृष्यभोयरे ॥ 13 ॥

लोपामुझपते श्रीमन्प्रावक्षणसभ्यच ।

सर्वविद्यानिरेपरस्व शगक्षयेने नमोसूत ते ॥ 14 ॥

They then chanted hymns to him and said: O Lord of Dvijas! O Thou honoured and most worshipful! Victory to Thee. Thou art sprung from a water jar. Thou art the destroyer of Vātāpi, the Asura. Obeisance to Thee! O Thou, full of Śrī, the son of Mitrāvaruna! Thou art the husband of Lopāmuḍrā. Thou art the store house of all knowledge.

यथोदाये प्रसानीन भव-नुज्ज्वलभाज्यि ।

तोयाति तोयार्थीनां तस्मै तुर्थ्यं मोनोस्तु ते ॥ 15 ॥

काशुप्यविकासाय लंकावासिधाय च ।

जटामपडल्युक्ताय सशिष्याय नमोस्तु ते ॥ 16 ॥

Thou art the source of all the Śāstras. Obeisance to Thee! At Thy rise, the waters of the ocean become bright and clear; so obeisance to Thee! At Thy rise (Canopus) the Kāśa flower blossoms. Thou art adorned with clots of matted hair on Thy head and Thou always livest with Thy disciples. Śrī Rāma Candra is one of Thy chief disciples.

जय सर्वमित्तव्य गुणारोही महामुने ।

वरिष्ठाय च पूजाय सखीकाव नमो3स्त ते ॥ 17 ॥

प्रसादः क्रियतां स्वामिव्यं त्वां शरणं गताः ।

दुस्तराष्छेलानदु खात्यिजिताः परममुते ॥ 18 ॥

O great Muni! Thou art entitled to praise from

Śrimaddevīthāgāvatam

all the Devas! O Best! The Store house of all qualities! O great Muni! We now bow down to Thee and Thy wife Lopāmuḍrā! O Lord! O very Energetic! We all are very much tormented by an unbearable pain inflicted on us by the Vindhya Range and we therefore take refuge of Thee. Because of this, we are

इत्येवं संस्तुतेजास्यो मुपिन: परमधार्यिकः ।

ग्राह प्रसवा वाचा विहस्त् द्विसस्तमः ॥ १९ ॥

Thus praised by the gods, the highly religious Muni Agastya, the twice born, smiled and graciously said:

मुनिवाचा

भवन्तः परमश्रेष्ठा देवालिक्षपवेनेश्वरा ।

लोकपाल महात्मानो सिग्राहनुपहक्षमः ॥ 20 ॥

योभगवत्यशीगानः कुलिशं यस्य याव्याम् ।

सिद्वार्यके च यद्वादारि स शक्रो मस्तां पति: ॥ 21 ॥

"O Devas! You are the lords of the three worlds, superior to all, highshould, and the preserver of the Lokas. If your wish, you can favour, disfavour, do anything. Especially He who is the Lord of heavens, whose weapon is the thunderbolt, and the eight Siddhis are ever at his service is your Indra, the Lord of the Devas.

वैधानरः कृशानूई ह्वल्यक्यवहो5निशम् ।

भुख सर्वमाणां है सोडीन: किं तस्य दुकम् ॥ 22 ॥

What is there that he cannot do? Then there is Agni, Who burns everything and always carries oblations to the gods and the Pitrs, Who is the mouth piece of the Devas.

रक्षोगाणाधियो भीमः सर्वेधां कर्मसाधिकः ।

दण्डव्यप्रको देख: किं तस्यासुकरं सुरा: ॥ 23 ॥

नवापि यदि देखेगा: कार्य मच्छनिर्भिद्धभूत् ।

अस्ति चेद्युत्पतिं देवा: कार्चिधामि न संशया: ॥ 24 ॥

Is there anything impracticable with him! O Devas! Then again Yama is there amongst you, the Lord of the Rāksasas, the Witness of all actions, and always quick in giving punishment to the offenders, that terrible looking Yama Rāja. What is there that the he can not accomplish? Still, O Devas! if there be anything required by you that awaits my co-operation, give out at once and I will do it undoubtedly.

एवं मुनिवरणोन्के निशम्य विवृतधर्षाः ।

प्रतीतः प्राणयोहिनना: कार्य निजगनुदिनम् ॥ 25 ॥

महर्षे विध्यमिरिणा निक्छोड़कविनिगाः ।

त्रैलोकयं तेन संविधे हाहामुपनयेचेतम् ॥ 26 ॥

Hearing these words of the Muni, the Devas became very glad and joyfully began to say what they wanted. O Maharṣi! The Vindhya mountain has risen very high and thwarted the Sun's course in the Heavens. A cry of universal distress and consternation has arisen and the three worlds are now verging to the ruins.

तद्वन्द्रि स्तम्भय मुने निजया तपसः श्रिया ।

भवतसोजसागरस्य नूनं नोघो भविष्यिति ।

एतदेवासदीयं च कार्य कर्तल्यमिति है ॥ 27 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे दयामकबन्धे षटोधायाः । 6 ।

O Muni! Now what we want is this that Thou, by Thy power of Tapas, curbest the rise of this Vindhya Mountain. O Agastya! Certainly, by Thy fire and austerities, that mountain will be brought down and humiliated. This is what we want.

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the Devas' praying to the Muni Agastya for checking the abnormal rise of the Vindhya Range in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevithāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER VII

On the Checking of the Rise of the Vindhya

सूत उवाच

इति वायकं समाकरणं विबुधानां द्विजोतमः ।

कार्थे काययेनेतई प्रत्युवाच ततो मुनि: ॥ १ ॥

अंगीकृतं तदा कार्यं मुनिना कृभपजन्मना ।

देवा: प्रमुदिता: सर्वे वचपूर्विक्रजस्तमाः ॥ २ ॥

Sūta said: Hearing the words of the Devas,

Book X Chapter VII

Agastya, the Best of the Brāhmins promised that he would carry out their works. O Rsis! All the Devas then became very glad when the Muni, born of the water jar, promised thus.

ते देवा: स्वानि शिष्यानि भेत्रेर मुनिवाक्यतः ।

पत्नीं मुनिवर: श्रीमनुवार नृपकन्यकम् ॥ 3 ॥

अयं नृपमुते प्राणो विरानेअर्थ्य कारकः ।

भानुगर्भिनिरोधेन कृती वैक्ष्यमहीभृता ॥ 4 ॥

They then bade good-bye to him and went back gladly to their own abodes. The Muni then spoke to his wife thus: "O daughter of the King! The Vindhya Mountain has baffled the progress of the Sun's course and has thus caused a great mischief. What the Munis, the Seers of truths said before referring to Kaśī, all are now coming to my mind when I am thinking why this disturbance has overtaken me.

आ जातं कारणं तच्च स्मृतं वावयं पुरातनम् ।

कारीषूद्विश्य यद्यौतं सुनिशितस्त्वर्दिशिधः ॥ 5 ॥

अविष्युक्त न मोक्त्वं सर्वेधेव मुपुळ्धुधिः ।

किन्तु चिदा भविष्यति कार्णं निवसतां सताम् ॥ 6 ॥

They said that various hindrances would come to him at every step, who is a Sādhu intending to settle at Kāśī. Let him who wants Mukti, never quit Kāśī, the Avimukta place, in any case.

सोउनाचो यम प्राप्तः कार्णां निवसता हिये ।

इत्येवमुक्ता भार्यां तां मुनि: परमतापनः ॥ ७ ॥

मणिकार्यां समालुस्य द्वृषा विव्येश्वं विवृम् ।

दंद्वपाणि समभ्यच्छे कालारजं समागतः ॥ ८ ॥

But, O Dear! To-day I have got one hindrance during my stay at Kāśī." Thus talking with much regret on various subjects with his wife, the Muni bathed in the Manjkarṇikā ghāt, saw the Lord Viśeśvara worshipped Dandapānjī and went to the Kāla Bhairava. He said in the following terms:

कालगल महाबाहो घक्तानां भयहारक ।

कर्व दूरयसे पुवां: काशीपुवांस्त्वमीक्ष्र: ॥ 9 ॥

त्वं काशीशाविद्भानां नागको भक्तश्रकाः ।

मां किं दूरयसे स्वामिन् भक्तातिंविनावारक ॥ 10 ॥

"O Mighty armed Kālabhaivara! Thou

destroyest the fear of the Bhaktas; Thou art the God of this Kāśī City. Then why art Thou driving me away from this Kāśīdhāma. O Lord! Thou removest all the obstacles of the devotees and Thou preservest them. Then why, O Destroyer of the sorrows of the Bhaktas! Art Thou removing me from here?

परापवादो नोत्को मे न धैरुम्० न चानुतम् ।

केन कर्मविषयकेन कारणा दूरं कारोषि मान् ॥ १ १ ॥

Never I blamed others; nor did I practise any hypocrisy with any person nor did I lie; then under what sin, Thou art driving me away from Kāśī.

एवं प्राथ्यं च तं कालनायं कृम्योद्वो सुनि: ।

जगाम साक्षिविन्नें सर्वैविन्निवारणम् ॥ 12 ॥

तं चूवा०प्रथ्यं संग्रथां ततः पूर्यं विनिरन्तः ।

लोपामुग्रपति: श्रीमानगस्त्यो दक्षिणां दिष्णम् ॥ 13 ॥

O Rsis! Thus praying to Kāla Bhairava, the Muni Agastya, born of water jar and the husband of Lopāmdurā, went to Sāksī Gāneśa, the Destroyer of all evils and seeing and worshipping Him, went out of Kāśī and proceeded to the south.

काशिविरहसुंततो महाभायविनिधासुंपि: ।

संस्यत्यानुक्षणं काशीं जगाम सह भायांय ॥ १ ४ ॥

तपोयानमिवाहनु निविष्यानि वे सुपि: ।

अउे द्वर्षं तं विंध्यं क्रद्धांवरमधो-ननम् ॥ १ ५ ॥

The Muni, the ocean of great fortune, left Kāśī; but he become very much distressed to leave it and he remembered it always. He began to march on with his wife. As if riding on his car of asceticism he arrived at the Vindhya mountain in the tiwnkling of an eye and saw that the Mountain had risen very high and obstructed the passage of the Sun in the Heavens.

चक्रेपे चाचलनुर्णं रुईवाए त्रिश्वतं पुनिम् ।

गिरि: खद्वतरे भूत्वा विव्युत्यनिधि १ १ १ १

दंडवत्पिततो भूमौ साहांगं भक्तिभावतः ।

तं शुधा न्यशिखां विंधां नाम महातिगित् ॥ १ १ ॥

The Vindhya Mountain, seeing the Muni Agastya in front, began to tremble and as if desirous to speak something to the earth in a whisper became

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

low and dwarfish and bowed down to the Muni and fell down with devotion in ssāṭṭāngas with devotion just like a stick dropped flat on the ground before the Muni.

प्रस्ववदानोगत्पलो मुनिविध्यमधावबीत् ।

वत्सैवं तिषु तात्चं यावदाग्यमते यम ॥ १ ८ ॥

अशक्तीजई नांखैशलारोष्टी तव पुत्रक ।

Seeing the Vindhya thus low, the Muni Agastya became pleased and spoke with a gracious look: "O Child! Better remain in this state until I come back. For, O Child! I am quite unable to ascend to your lofty heights.

एवमुक्त्वा मुनिविध्मविद्रां प्रति गोपोत्सुकः ॥ १९ ॥

आकाषु तस्य शिल्डापयवाहकदुत्कमात् ।

गतो याघ्यदिरां चापि शीरीलें प्रेक्ष्य वर्चनि ॥ 20 ॥

मलयाचलमासाड् तताश्रयपरोभवत् ।

सापि देही तत तिथ्यमागता मनुपजिता ॥ 21 ॥

लेकिंपु प्रयिता विर्यवासिनीति च शौनक ।

Thus saying, the Muni became cager to go to the south; and, crossing the peaks of the Vindhya, alighted gradually again to the plains. He went on further to the south and saw the Śrī Śaila Mountain and at last went to the Malayācala and there, building his Śāśrama (hermitage) settled himself. O Śaunaka! The Devi Bhagavatī, worshipped by the Muni went to the Vindhya Mountain and settled there and became known, in the three worlds, by the name of Vindhyavāsinī.

सूत उवाच

एतच्छात्रिं परमं शुकुनाशनमुतमम् ॥ 2 2 ॥

अगस्त्वलिध्यनगयोराखानं पायनाशनम् ।

राजां विजवदं तच्च द्विजानां ज्ञानवधैनम् ॥ 23 ॥

वैश्यानां धान्यधनं शृज्ञाणं सुखदं तथा ।

Sūta said: Any body who hears this highly pure narrative of the Muni Agastya and Vindhya, becomes freed of all his sins. All his enemies are destroyed in no time. This hearing gives knowledge to the Brāhmanas, victory to the Kṣattriyas, wealth and corn to the Vaiśyas and happiness to the Śūdras.

धर्मार्थी धर्ममानोते धनार्थी धनमान्यात् ॥ 24 ॥

कामानवानुवाकमी भकला चाय सकृष्छ्वाला ।

If any body once hears this narrative, he gets Dharma if he wants Dharma, gets unbounded wealth if he wants wealth and gets all desires if he wants his desires fulfilled.

एवं स्वायंभुवमनुदैवीमात्राय भक्तितः ॥ 25 ॥

लेभे राज्यं धरायासु निजमन्यन्ताशप्रमम् ।

इन्येतद्वर्णितं सीय मया मन्त्रताशिनम् ॥

आई चरित्र श्रीद्वया: किं पुन: कवयामि ते ॥ 26 ॥

डीत श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे दशमस्कन्चे

सप्तमोउधाय: 117 11

In ancient times Sväyambhuva Manu worshipped this Devi with devotion and got his kindom for his own Manvantara period. O Śaunaka! Thus I have described to you the holy character of the Devi in this Manvantara. What more shall I say? Mention please.

Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Tenth Book on the checking of the rise of the Vindhya Range in the

Mahā Purānam Śrimadevībhāgavatam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER VIII

On the Origin of Manu

शौनक उवाच

आटी मन्वन्तः प्रोक्तो भयता चायमुतमः ।

अन्येयामुद्रवं वृष्टि मनूनां दिव्यतेजसाम् ॥ १ ॥

Saunaka said: O Sūta! You have described the beautiful narrative of the first Manu Svāyambhuvā. Now kindly described to us the narratives of other highly energetic Deva-like Manus.

सूत उवाच

एवमाधस्य चोत्पर्णि श्रुत्वा स्वायंभुवस्य हिं ।

अन्येषां क्रमाग्रतोपों संभूर्ति परिभूच्छति ॥ २ ॥

नारदः परमो ज्ञानी देवीतत्त्वार्थकीविदः ।

Sūta said: O Rṣis! The very wise Nārada, well versed in the knowledge of Śrī Devi, hearing the glorious character of the first Sväyambhuva Manu,

Book X Chapter VIII

became desirous to hear of the other Manus and asked the Eternal Nārāyana:

नारद उवाच

मनूनां मे समाख्याहि सूचपतिं च सनातन ॥ 3 ॥

O Deva! Now favour me by reciting the origins and narratives of the other Manus.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

प्रथमो3यं मनु: स्वायंभुव उनको महामुने ।

देव्यायघनोते वेन प्रापतं राज्यमकंटकम् ॥ 4 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Devarsj! I have already spoken to you everything regarding the first Manu. He had worshipped the Devi Bhagavatī, and thus he got his foeless kingdom. You know that then.

प्रियततोनपादी मनुपुत्री महौजसी ।

राज्यपालनकर्तौरि विज्ञातो वरुपालते ॥ 5 ॥

द्वितीयघ मनु: ख्यापोरिध उन्हो मनीषिधि: ।

प्रियतनसुतः श्रीमानप्रेमयराकमः ॥ 6 ॥

Manu had two sons of great prowess, Priyavrata and Uttānapāda. They governed their kingdoms with fame. The son of this Priyavrata, of indomitable valour, is known by the wise as the second Svärocisa Manu.

स स्वारोपिध्वनामपि कालिदौकुलतो मनुः ।

निवासं कल्याभास सर्वसचाधियंकः ॥ ७ ॥

जीर्षपत्राजानो भूत्वा तपः कनुर्मन्त्रतः ।

देव्या मृति मृमवी च पूजवामास भक्तिः ॥ ८ ॥

Dear to all the beings, this Svärocisa Manu built his hermitage near the banks of the Kālindi (the Yamunā) and there making an earthen image of the Devi Bhagavatī, worshipped the Devi with devotion, subsisting on dry leaves and thus practised a severe austerities.

एवं द्वारण वर्षाणि वनस्थस्य तपस्यतः ।

देवी प्रातुर्भूत्ता सहचाकंसमवृदितः ॥ 9 ॥

ततः प्रस्वा देयेगी रुतवारजेन सुवता ।

द्वौ स्वातीचार्यैव सर्वमंचताश्रवय् ॥ 10 ॥

Thus he passed his twelve years in that forest; when, at last, the Devi Bhagavati, resplendent with brilliance of the thousand Suns, became visible to

him. She got very much pleased with his devotional stotrams.

आधिपयंं जगद्धाती ताल्णीति प्रशामगात् ।

एवं स्वारोचिमयनुस्तापिणराधायनाततः ॥ १ १ ॥

आधिपयंचं च लेचे स सर्वांगतिविज्ञित् ।

धर्मं संस्थाय वित्थिद्वात्रयं पुंशै: स्मां विधुः ॥ १ २ ॥

The Devi, the Saviour of the Devas, and Who was of good vows, granted to him the sovereignty for one Manvantara. Thus the Devi became famous by the name Tārīnī Jagaddhātrī. O Nārada! Thus, by worshipping the Devi Tārīnī, Svārocisa obtained safely the fooless kingdom. Then establishing the Dharma duly, he enjoyed his kingdom with his sons; and, when the period of his manvantara expired, he went to the Heavens.

भुक्ल्वा जगाय लल्लोक निजम्बन्नताशयात् ।

तृतीय उनमो नाम धिवातसुती मनु: ॥ 13 ॥

गंगाकुले नास्तत्वा वाग्भवं संजप्रहः ।

वर्षिणि शीणयुवसन्देव्यनुग्रहमाशित् ॥ 14 ॥

Priyavrata's sons named Uttama became the third Manu. On the banks of the Ganges he practised tapasyā and repeated the Bīja Mantra of Vāgbhava, in a solitary place for three years and became blessed with the favour of the Devi.

सतुत्वा देवी सतीवर्षेपक्तिभाषवितानासः ।

राज्य निष्कटकं लेभे संतर्नि विराकलिकीम् ॥ 15 ॥

राज्योल्यानि सोक्षायिन पुक्वा प्रधान्यस्य च ।

सोउधाजगाम पद्वी राजर्षिवर्षाधितिध् ॥ 16 ॥

With rapt devotion he sang hymns wholly to the Devi with his mind full; and, by Her boon, got the foeless kingdom and a continual succession of sons and grandsons. Thus, enjoying the pleasures of his kingdom an the gifts of the Yuga Dharma, got in the end, the excellent place, obtained by the best Rajarsis.

चतुर्धर्तमासो नाम प्रियदातसुतो मनु: ।

नर्मदादक्षिणे कृले समाराध्य जान्यकरिणु ॥ 17 ॥

महेशर्षी कामराजकूटजायपरायण: ।

वासते शगाटे काले नवरात्रसपर्यया ॥ 18 ॥

तोषयामास देवेश्जी जलजाशीमनूर्णमाय।

A very happy result. Priyavarata's another son named Tāmasa became the fourth Manu. He practised austerities and repeated the Kāma Bīja Mantra, the Spiritual Password of Kāma on the southern banks of the Narmadā river and worshipped the World Mother. In the spring and in the autumn he observed the nine night's vow (the Navarātri) and worshipped the excellent lotus eyed Deveśī and pleased Her.

तत्या: प्रसाद्यमासाठ नत्वा रसोत्रैन्तमः ॥ १९ ॥

अकंटक महद्राज्यं बुधुजे गतासाध्वस: ।

पुत्रान्लोढ्धतावृष्यान्द्य शीर्विन्केतनान् ॥ 20 ॥

उत्पाद निजाभायीया जगामावस्थानुम् ।

O obtaining the Devi's favour, he chanted excellent hymns to Her and made prañāmas. There he enjoyed the extensive kingdom without any fear from any foe or from any other source of danger. He generated, in the womb of his wife, ten sons, all very powerful and mighty, and then he departed to the excellent region in the Heavens.

पंचमो मनुराखातो रैवततामानुज: ॥ 21 ॥

कालिदीकुलमाश्रित्य जजाप कामसंजकम् ।

शौंज परमवार्यद्वार्यक साधकाश्रयम् ॥ 22 ॥

गृतवाराधावाद्य स्वाताखिद्मनुतमाम् ।

The young brother of Tāmasa, Raivata became the Fifth Manu and practised austerities on the banks of the Kālindī (the Yamunā) and repeated the Kāma Bija Mantra, the spiritual password of Kāma, the resort of the Sādhakas, capable to give the highest power of speech and to yield all the Siddhis, and thus he worshipped the Devi.

बलमप्रहतं लोके सर्वसिद्धिवधायकम् ॥ 23 ॥

संतर्टित चिराक्लीनां पुरुषौत्रमयीं शुभाम् ।

धार्मन्वस्य व्यवस्थाय विष्यानुपभुज च ।

जगायामात्रितमः शुगो महैद्रालयमुत्तमम् ॥ 24 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमदैवीभागतं महापुराणे

दशमरकन्ने उद्धगोस्थाय: ।। 8 ।।

He obtained excellent heavens, in domitable power, unhampered and capable of all success and a continual line of sons, grandsons, etc. Then the unrivalled excellent hero Raivata Manu established the several divisions of Dharma and enjoying all the worldly pleasures, went to the excellent region of Indra.

Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the origin of Manu in the Mahāpurānam Śrīmadavebīghatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER IX

On the Anecdote of Cāksuṣa Manu

श्रीनारायण उवाच

अशात: श्रूयतां चित्रं देदौमिहात्यमुत्तमम् ।

अंगपुत्रेण मनुना यथा0.25नं राजमुत्तमम् ॥ १ ॥

अंगस्य राज: पुत्रोप्रच्छाक्ष्यो मनुत्तमः ।

मष: सुपुल्हं नाम ब्रह्मार्थ शरणं गत: ॥ 2 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Nārada! I will now narrate the supreme glories of the Devi and the anecdote how Manu, the son of Aṅga, obtained excellent kingdom by worshipping the Devi Bhagavati. The son of the king Aṅga, named Cāksuṣa became the Sixth Manu. One day he went to the Brahmarṣi Pulaha Rṣi and taking his refuge said:

बहार्य त्वामड़े प्राप्त: शरणं प्रणतातिन्ह्न ।

गाथि मां किंकरं स्वामिन् येणाडं प्राप्तुयं त्रिषयम् ॥ 3 ॥

मेदिव्याश्राधितम्बं मे स्याहायावदखितम्न ।

अव्याहतं भुजवलं शक्तास्बनिगुणां क्षमम् ॥ 4 ॥

O Brahmarsi! Thou removest all the sorrows and afflictions of those that come under Thy refuge; I now take Thy refuge. Kindly advise Thy servent how he may become the Lord of an endless amount of wealth. O Muni! What can I do so that I may get the sole undisputed sway over the world? How my arms can wield the weapons and manipulate them so that they may not be baffled?

Book X Chapter IX

सतितिश्राकलीनास्पखडं वय उत्तम् ।

अंतेउपवर्लाभप्रच स्यातधोपदिशाय मे ॥ 5 ॥

इत्येवं वचनं तस्य मनो: कर्णवेधभवत् ।

How my race and line be constant and my youth remain ever the same, undecayed? And how can I, in the end, attain Mukti? O Muni! Kindly dost Thou give instructions to me on these points and oblige.

प्रत्युवाच मुनिः श्रीमान्देख्या: संराधनं परम् ॥ 6 ॥

राजकाण्यि वचो मम श्रीसुखं महत् ।

शिवामाराधयादा तं तस्मादादिवं भवेत् ॥ 7 ॥

Hearing thus, the Muni wanted him to worship the Devi and said: "O King! Listen attentively to what I say you to-day. Worship to-day the all auspicious Śakti; by Her grace, all your desires will be fulfilled."

वाक्षय उवाच

कौरुगाराधं न देव्यासत्मय: परमपावनम् ।

केनाकारेण कतवें काफयाद्रकतुमईसि ॥ 8 ॥

Caksuşa said: “O Muni! What is that very holy worship of Śrī Bhagavatī? How to do it? Kindly describe all these in detail.”

मुनिवाचा

राजत्राकर्षतां देया: पूजनं परमव्यम् ।

वापभं बीजमव्यक्तं सज्वयमिनीर्ण तथा ॥ 9 ॥

त्रिकालं सड़पन्यम्वाँ पुक्तिभुक्ती लोभेतु न्हि ।

न बीजं वारभावाद्यवटित राजन्यनन्दन ॥ 10 ॥

The Muni said: “O King! I will now disclose all about the excellent Pūjā of the Devi Bhagavatī. Hear. You recite (mentally) always the seed mantra of Vākbhava (Speech) (The Deity being Mahā Sarasvatī). If any one makes japam (recites slowly) of the Vākbhava Bīja thrice a day, one gets both the highest enjoyment here and, in the end, release (Mukti). O Son of a Kṣaṭtriya!

वाणसिद्धिकरं वीर्यबलवृद्धिकरं परम् ।

सृतःस आपत्याचोर्धि सुधित्तां महावलः ॥ १ १ ॥

विष्यार्जसपतः सुधित्यालकः परिकीर्तितः ।

महेश्वोर्जपि संहर्ता यज्ञापदाभवन्यू ॥ १ २ ॥

There is no other Bija Mantra (word) better than

this of Vāk (the Word). Through the Japam of this Bija Mantra comes the increase of strength and prowess and all successes. By the Japam of this, Brahmā is so powerful and has become the Creator; Viṣṇu preserve the Universe and Maheśvara has become the Destroyer of the Universe.

लोकपालास्तबायोरि निश्रातुनुग्रक्षमाः ।

यदाशयादघुबंते कलवीयमेदोद्धता: ॥ 13 ॥

एवं त्वमपि राजन्य मेड्गी जगद्धिकमम् ।

समातध्य महर्षि च लयस्यरेचिरकालतः ॥ 14 ॥

The other Dikpālas (the Regents of the quarters) and the other Siddhas have become very powerful by the power of this Mantra, and are capable of favouring or disfavouring others. So, O King! You, too, worship the Devi of the Devas, the World Mother and are long you will become the Lord of unbounded wealth.

एवं स पुनिवर्षण पुल्लेन प्रवोधितः ।

अंगपुत्रस्तपस्तुं जगाम विरजां नदीम् ॥ 15 ॥

स च तेपे तपस्तीक्षे वाभव्यस्य जपे तः ।

ब्रीजस्य पूर्ववैधालय: श्रीणपणिण्गो विषुः ॥ 16 ॥

There is no doubt in this" O Narada! Thus advised by Pulaha Rsi, the son of the King Añga went to the banks of the Virajā river to practise austerities. There the king Cāksuṣa remained absorbed in making Japam of the Vāgbhava Bijā Mantra and took for his food the leaves of the trees that dropped on the ground and thus practised severe austerities.

प्रवेभेउद्धे पल्लगशो हितीये तोयभक्षण: ।

तृतीयेउद्धे पवनभृतक्शी स्थाणुरिवाकः ॥ 17 ॥

एवं झाइण वर्षिणि सत्काहारस्य ध्युर्ज: ।

वाग्बं जातो निवयं मतितारीबृष्णभाविता ॥ 18 ॥

The first year he ate leaves; the second year he drunk water and in the third year he sustained his life by breathing air simply and thus remained steady like a pillar. Thus he remained without food for twelve years. He went on making Japam of the Vāgbhava Mantra and his heart and mind became purified.

तथा च देध्याः परमं मन्त्रं संज्ञपतो रहः ।

प्रागुरासीजनामाता साक्षात्यधीरपमेधी ॥ 19 ॥

तेजोमयी दुराधर्षा सर्वदेवमयीक्षी ।

उवाचागन्तूनं ते प्रसला ल्लिलाक्षमम् ॥ 20 ॥

While he was sitting alone, absorbed in the meditation of the Devi Mantra, there appeared before him suddenly the Parameśvari, the World Mother, the Incarnate of Lakṣmī. The Highest Deity, full of dauntless fire and the Embodiment of all the Devas, spoke graciously in seet words of Cākṣuṣa, the son of Anga.

देव्युवाच

पृथिवीपाल ते चत्यार्च्चितितं परवं वतम् ।

तद्वृष्टि संप्रदास्यामि तपसा ते सुतोक्षिति ॥ 2 1 ॥

"O Regent of the earth! I am pleased with your Tapasyā. Now ask any boon that you want. I will give that to you.

चान्युय उवाच

ज्ञानासि देवदेवेशि यत्नाख्यों मनसेपित्तम् ।

अनत्यांमिवस्करणे तत्सर्वे देवपूजिते ॥ 22 ॥

तथापि मम भाधेयन जातं यत्चत दर्जानम् ।

बलीम देव मे दैहि राज्यं राजन्यस्तमम् ॥ 23 ॥

Chāksuṣa said: “O Thou, worshipped by the Devas! O Sovereign of the Deva of the Devas! Thou art the Controller Inside; Thou art the Controller Outside. Thou knowest everything what I desire in my mind. Still, O Devi! When I am so fortunate as to see Thee, I say “Thou grantest me the kingdom for the Manvantara period.”

श्रीद्व्यवाच

दर्तं मन्वन्तरस्याय राज्यं राज्यसन्तम ।

पुत्रा महावलास्ते च भविष्यन्ति गुणाधिकाः ॥ 24 ॥

राज निष्कण्टकं भावि मेक्षोज्ञे तचीय निश्रितः ।

The Devi said: “O Best of the Kṣaṭtrīyas! I grant unto you the kingdom of the whole world for one manvantara. You will have many sons, very powerful, indeed, and well qualified. Your kingdom will be free from any danger till at last you will certainly get Mukti.”

एवं दत्ता वरं देवी मनवे वरमुत्तम्म् ॥ 25 ॥

जगामादर्जनं सद्यतने भवल्या च संस्तुता ।

सोर्धि राजा मनुः पष्टः प्रसादानु तद्धभवान् ॥ 26 ॥

बधूम मनुमान्यो३सी सार्वभीममुखैवृतः ।

पुत्रास्तव बलोकुतःः कार्यभरसहानुतः ॥ 27 ॥

Thus granting the excellent boon to Manu, She disappeared then and there, after being praised by Manu, with deep devotion. The Sixth Manu, then favoured by the Devi, enjoyed the sovereignty of the earth and other pleasures and became the best of the Manus.

देवीभकाठ शूराङ्ग महावलपराकमः ।

अन्यत्र माननीयाठ महाराज्यसुखायदा: ॥ 28 ॥

एवं च चाष्यमनुर्देवासाधनतः प्रभु: ।

बभूम नमुवर्गोंसी जगामाते शिवायदम् ॥ 29 ॥

इति शीमद्वीभागाते महापुराणे दशमकल्पे वैद्वीर्चे

नवमो3धाय: 11 9 11

His sons became the devotees of the Devi, very powerful and expert and became respected by all and enjoyed the pleasures of the kingdom. Thus getting the supremacy by the worship of the Devi, the Cāksuṣa Manu became merged in the end in the Holy Feet of the Devi.

Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the narrative of Cāksuṣa Manu in the Mahāpurānam

Srimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER X

On the History of the King Suratha

श्रीनारायण उवाच

सतमो मनुराख्यातो मनुर्वैक्स्वतः प्रभु: ।

श्राद्वेदः परानन्दभोक्ता मान्यस्तु भूभुजाम् ॥ १ ॥

स च वैद्यस्तमनुः परेदेखा: प्रसादतः ।

तथा तत्तपसा चैव जातो मन्वन्तराधिथः ॥ २ ॥

Nārāyana said: Now the Seventh Manu is the

Book X Chapter X

Right Hon'ble His Excellency the Lord Vaivasvata Manu Śrāddha Deva, honoured by all the kings, and the Enjoyer of the Highest Bliss, Brahmanāanda. I will now speak of this seventh Manu. He, too, practised austerities before the Highest Devi and by Her Grace, got the sovereignty of the earth for one Manvantara.

अष्टमो मनुग्रव्यतः सावर्णिः: प्रथितः क्षिति ।

स जन्मांतर आराध्य देवीं तद्रलाभकतः ॥ 3 ॥

जातो मन्वन्तरपति: सर्वोजान्यपूजितः ।

महापराकमो धीते देदीभक्तपरायण: ॥ 4 ॥

The Eighth Manu is the Sun's son, known as Sāvarni. This personage, a devotee of the Devi, honoured by the kings, gentle, patient, and powerful king Sāvarni worshipped the Devi in his previous births; and, by Her boon, became the Lord of the Manvantara.

नारद उवाच

कर्थं जन्मातरे तेन मनुना२५ार्थनं कृतम् ।

देवयः पृथिव्युद्वायास्तमामाख्यातुमहसि ॥ 5 ॥

Nārada said: O Bhagavan! How did this Śāvami Manu worship in his previous birth the earthen image of the Devī. Kindly describe this to me.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

देववंशसमुद्धुते राजा स्वारोचिषे5-ते ।

सूराधो नाम विद्यातो महावलपातकामः ॥ 6 ॥

गुणग्राही धनुधीगी मान्यः श्रेषः कवि: कृती ।

धनसंग्रहकर्ता च दाता याचकमणडले ॥ 7 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Nārada! This Eighth Manu had been, before, in the time of Svārocisa Manu (the second Manu), a famous king, known by the name of Suratha, born of the family of Caitra, and very powerful.

अरीणां मदौने मानी सर्वांस्त्रकुलले कवी ।

तस्यैकदा बप्युत्ने कोलाविध्यंसिनो नृपा: ॥ 8 ॥

ग्रावः सैन्यस्तिहाः परिवार्यैन्पूजिताः ।

रूपुभूमर्ति तस्य राजो मानधनस्य हि ॥ 9 ॥

He could well appreciate merits, clever in the science of archery, amassed abundance of wealth,

a generous donor, a very liberal man and he was created pot and honoured by all. He was skilled in all arts of warfare with weapons and indomitable in crushing his foes.

तदा स सुर्यो नाम राजा सैन्यसमावृतः ।

निर्वयी नगात्स्वीयास्वरोग्युनिवर्भेः ॥ 10 ॥

तदा स समरे राजा सुर्यः श्रगृधिप्रितः ।

अमार्यैर्ग्रिपिश्रेश्व तस्य कोरगतं धनम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Once on a time, some of his powerful enemies destroyed the city of Kolā, belonging to the revered king and succeeded in besieging his capital wherein he remained Then the king Suratha, the conqueror of all his foes went out to fight with the enemies but he was defeated by them.

हर्ते सर्वप्रेतेषण तत्धजतयत भूमिपः ।

निष्काशिषक्ष नगरात्स राजा परमयुषितः ॥ 12 ॥

जगागमुभगवाह्याहु गुगवागयतेच नवम् ।

एकाकी विज्ञानेउपवे बघामोर्षृतामानसः ॥ 13 ॥

Taking advantage of this opportunity, the king's ministers robbed him of all his wealth. The illustrious king then went out of the city and with a sorrowful heart rode alone on his horse on the plea of having a game and walked to and fro, as if, absent-minded.

मुनेः कस्यचिद्यात्य स्वाक्षमं श्रतामानसः ।

प्रश्रानंतुसंयुक्तं मुनिशिष्यभगर्यैतून् ॥ १४ ॥ ॥

उदाय कंचिकालं स राता परमप्रीभने ।

आधमे मुनिवर्धस्य दीर्घंडुः सुभेधस् ॥ १ ५ ॥

The king, then, went to the hermitage of the Muni Sumedhā, who could see far-reaching things (a Man of the Fourth Dimensions). It was a nice, quite Śārama, surrounded by quiet and peaceful animals and filled with disciples. There in that very sacred Śārama, his heart became relieved and he went on living there.

एकता स महीपालो मुर्ने पुत्रावसानके ।

काले गत्वा प्रणायाशु प्रपछ्छ विनयान्वितः ॥ 16 ॥

मुने मम मनोयुःखं झायते चाधिसंभवम् ।

ज्ञाततत्स्थ पूर्वेल निष्प्रास्य च संततम् ॥ 17 ॥

One day, when the Muni finished his worship,

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

etc., the king went to him and saluted him duly and humbly asked him the following: "O Muni! I am suffering terribly from my mental pain. O Deva on the earth! Why I am suffering So much though I know everything, as if I am quite an ignorant man.

शुवृषिवर्षितस्यावि हतास्पस्य सर्वशः ।

तथायि तेषां मनसि ममत्वं जायते सृष्टम् ॥ 18 ॥

किं कौरीचि वयं राज्यात्मि कवं शर्मल्ये मुने ।

त्वदनुप्रहमागसे वद वेदविद्धां वर ॥ 19 ॥

After my defeat from my enemies, why does my mind become now compassionate towards who stole away my kingdom. O Best of the knowers of the Vedas! What am I to do now? Where to go? How can I make me happy? Please speak on these. O Muni! Now I am in want of your good grace.

मुनिवाच

अकर्णये महीपाल महाङ्गयंकरं परम् ।

देवीमाहात्मवमुले सर्वकामपूर्व परम् ॥ 20 ॥

जगन्मयी महामाया विष्णुबहाहूरेज्ञा ।

सा बलादपह्लैय वंजूना मानसानि हि ॥ 21 ॥

The Muni said: “O Lord of the earth! Hear the extremely wonderful glories of the Devi that have no equal and that can fructify all desires. She, the Mahā Māyā, Who is all this world, is the Mother of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa.

मोहाय प्रतिसंच्छेदिति जानीहि भूमिप ।

सा सुजल्यिष्ठलं विश्वसं सा पाल्यति संद्धि ॥ 22 ॥

संहोर हरूलेण संहल्पेव भूमिप ।

कामदारी महामाया कालगविद्रंत्यथा ॥ 23 ॥

O King! Know verily that it is She and She alone, that can forcibly attract the hearts of all the Jivas and throw them in dire utter delusion. She is always the Creatrix, Preservix and Destructrix of the Universe in the form of Hara. This Mahāmāyā fulfills the desiree of all the Jivas and She is known as the insurmountable Kālārāti. She is Kāli, the Destructrix of all this universe and

विश्वसंहितिणी काली कमला कमलाल्या ।

तस्यां सर्वे जाजजातं तस्यां विश्वं प्रतिहितम् ॥ 24 ॥

लवोभ्यति तस्यां च तस्मातैव परात्यरा ।

तस्या देल्या: प्रसादघ्र यस्योपरि भवेकृप ।

स एव मोहमत्येति नान्यथा धरणीपते ॥ 25 ॥

श्रौं भीमदैवीभागवते गतापुराणे दर्गमकल्ये

दर्शमीध्यान: 11 10 11

She is Kamalā residing in the lotus. Know that this whole world rests on Her and it will become dissolved in Her. She is therefore, the Highest and Best. O King! Know, verily, that he alone can cross the delusion (Moha) on whom the Grace of the Devi falls and otherwise no one can escape from this Anādi Moha."

Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the anecdote of the King Suratha in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XI

On Madhu Kaijabha Killed

राजोवाच

का सा देवी त्वया प्रोक्ता बूहि कालविदां दर ।

का मोहयति सत्वाति कारणं कि भवेद्ट्रिक्ष १ १ १ ॥

कामपुवच्छते देवी किं रूपा स किमापित्का ।

सर्वमाख्याहि भूदेव कृपया मम सर्वतः ॥ 2 ॥

The king Suratha spoke: O Best of the twice born! Who is that Devi that you spoke just now? Why the Devi deludes all these beings? What for does She do so? Whence is the Devi born? What

is Her Form? and what are Her qualities? O Brāhmin! Kindly describe all these to me."

पुनिष्ठाच

राजन्द्रेख्या: स्वक्षरं ते वर्णायिम निशगाय ।

यथा चोत्पतिता देवी तेन वा सा जानमवी ॥ ३ ॥

यदा नारायणो देवो विश्वं संहस्य योगारत् ।

अस्तीसीं श्रेषं भगावास्मुर्रे निरितोरोभवत् ॥ 4 ॥

तदा प्रस्वायरणगो देवदेवो जनादंनः ।

तत्कर्णमलंजातो दानवी मधुकैटधौ ॥ 5 ॥

Book X Chapter XI

The Muni spoke: “O King! I will now describe the nature of the Devi Bhagavatī and why does She take Her Form in due time. Listen. In ancient days, when Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa, the king of the Yogis, was lying in deep sleep on the ocean on the bed of Ananta, after He had destroyed the the Universe, there came out of the wax of his ear the two, Dānavas, Madhu and Kaitabha, of monstrous appearances.

बहाणां हेतुमुचुक्तो दानवी पोरक्रिपिणि ।

तदा कमलजो देते पूद्धा तौ मधुकैटपी ॥ 6 ॥

नित्रिते देवेदेवेशं चिन्तापाय दुरत्यव्यम् ।

नित्रितो भगवानीशो दानवी च दुगासदी ॥ 7 ॥

They wanted to kill Brahmā, who was lying on the lotus coming out of the navel of Bhagavān. Seeing the two Daityas Madhu and Kaitabha and seeing also Hari asleep the Lotus-born Brahmā became very anxious and thought:

किं कंतीचि चक्र पच्छामि कयं शर्म लेच हुईम् ।

एवं चित्यतस्तस्य पदायोनेंमहात्मनः ॥ 8 ॥

सुविद्र: प्रादूर्षभत्तत तदा कार्यप्रसाधिति ।

यस्या वर्गोगते देवो निर्ऋति भगवान्हरि: ॥ 9 ॥

तां देवीं शरणं वाथि निद्रां सर्वेग्रपृतिकाम् ।

Now Bhagavān is asleep; and these two indomitable Daityas are ready to kill me. Now what am I to do? Where to go? How shall I get ease? O Child! Thus thinking, the high souled Lotus born suddenly came to a practical conclusion. He said: Let me now take refuge to the Goddess Sleep, Nidrā, the Mother of all and under Whose power Bhagavān Hari is now asleep. \( ^{3} \)

बह्योवाच

देवि देवि जगद्धाति चकाचीधरूकप्रे ॥ १० ॥

जग्नामये महामये समुद्राशयने जिवे ।

त्वद्भावशगणः सर्वे स्वस्वकार्यविधायिनः ॥ १ १ १ ॥

Brahmā then began to praise Her thus: "O Devi of the Devas! O Upholdress of the world! Thou grantest desires of Thy devotees. O Thou auspicious! Thou art Para Brahma! By Thy Command all are doing respectively their proper spheres!

कालाप्रिभूषाग्रामैहान्रामैदोक्टा । व्यापिनी वर्गगा मान्य माह्नदैकेशपिः ॥ 12 ॥ महनीय महाराध्या माया मधुमती मही । परपराणां सर्वैंपं परम त्व प्रक्रितिता ॥ 13 ॥ लज्जा पुहि: क्षमा कीर्ति: क्रान्ति: काल्पत्ययिषहा । कर्मनीय जगहंहा जागदारिद्वस्कपिणी ॥ 14 ॥

Thou art the Night of Destruction (Kāla Rātri); Thou art the Great Night (Mahā Rātri). Thou art the greatly terrible Night of Delusion (Moha Rātri); Thou art omnipresent; omniscient; of the nature of the Supreme Bliss. Thou art regarded as the Great. Thou art highly worshipped; Thou art alone in this world as highly intoxicated; Thou art submissive to Bhakti only; Thou art the Best of all the things; Thou art sung as the Highest, Thou art modesty; Thou art Puṣṭi (nourishment); Thou art forgiveness (Kṣamā); Thou art Beauty (Kānti); Thou art the embodiment of mercy; Thou art liked by all; Thou art adorned by the whole world; Thou art of the nature of wakefulness, dreamn and deep sleep; Thou art the Highest; Thou art alone Highest Deity; Thou art highly attached to the Supreme Bliss. There is no other thing than Thee. There is One only and that is Thee. Hence art denominated as One; Thou becomest again the two by contact with Thy Māyā.

परम परमेगानी परानंदपरायणा ।

एकास्प्रोकस्वरूपा च संद्रितीया द्वार्यतिका ॥ 15 ॥

त्रयी त्रिवार्णिलया तृर्णं तृर्णयदात्रिका ।

पंचमी पंचभूतेशी पट्टी पेछधारीत च ॥ 16 ॥

सप्तमी सप्तवारेगी सप्तसप्तवर्षरा ।

अष्टमी खनुगाथा च नवश्रामशीधी ॥ 17 ॥

नवरागकला रेमा वनसंख्या नवेश्वी ।

Thou art the refuge of Dharma, Artha and Kāma; hence Thou Thou art Thee; Thou art the Turiya (the fourth state of consciousness) hence Thou art Four. Thou art the God of the five elements; hence Thou art Pañcami (five); Thou president over the six passions Kāma, anger etc.; hence Thou art Saṣthi; Thou president over the seven days of the week and Thou grantest boons seven by seven;

hence Thou art seven. Thou art the God of the eight Vasus; hence Thou art Aṣṭamī; Thou art full of the nine Rāgas and nine parts and Thou art the Goddess of nine planets; hence Thou art Navamī.

यमपी द्रादिव्युर्ज्ञा द्वशागल्यापिनी सता ॥ १ ८ ॥

एकादशपित्मका चैकादाशक्रत्निवेषिता ।

एकादाशितिथियोगा एकादशगणाप्रिया ॥ १९ ॥

द्वार्जी द्वारभुक्रा द्वारशादिवन्यम्भुः ।

त्रयोदाशपित्का देही जयोहरणाप्रिया ॥ 20 ॥

त्रयोदाशपिधा भिन्ना विश्वेशेदाविधिदेवता ।

Thou pervadest the ten quarters and Thou art worshipped by the ten quarters; hence Thou art named Daśamī (the tenth day of the fortnight); Thou art served by the Eleven Rudras, the Goddess of eleven Gaṇas and Thou art fond of Ekādaśi Tithī; hence Thou art denominated Ekādaśī; Thou art twelve armed and the Mother of the twelve Ādityas; hence Thou art Dvādaśī; Thou art dear to the thirteen Gaṇas; Thou art the presiding Deity of Viśve Devās and Thou art the thirteen months including the Malas Māsa (dirty month), hence Thou art Trayodaśī.

चतुर्वैर्यवरा चतुर्वैर्यानुप्रसू: ॥ 21 ॥

पंचाधिकद्वीवेहा पंचाधिकद्वीर्शितिथः ।

घोडणी घोडाशुज्ञा घोडोज्ञ-तुकलमधी ॥ 22 ॥

घोडाशतमकंत्रीशूल्यानदिव्यकंलेश ।

Thou didst grant boons to the fourteen Indras and Thou gavest birth to the fourteen Manus; hence Thou art Caturdaśī. Thou art knowable by the Pañcadaśī. Thou art sixteen armed and on Thy forehead the sixteen digits of the Moon are always shining; Thou art the sixteenth digit (ray) of the Moon named Amā; hence Thou art Sodaśī.

एवंक्षापसि देवेति निरुर्णे तामसेदोः ॥ 23 ॥

त्वया गृहीतो भगवान्देवदेवो तपापति: ।

एतूं दुरासदौ दैर्वो किंक्रांतो मधुक्रैकरी ॥ 24 ॥

एत्योक्षु कदायार्थ देवेशं प्रतिविधाय ।

O Deveśī! Thou, though attributeless and formless, appearest in these forms and attributes. Thou hast now enveloped in Moha and Darkness

the Lord of Ramā, the Bhagavān, the Deva of the Devas. These Daityas. Madhu and Kaitābha are indomitable and very powerful. So to kill them, Thou better dost awake the Lord of the Devas.

युनिष्वाच

एवं सुत्ता भगवती तामसी भगवतिगृया ॥ 25 ॥

देवदेवं तदा त्यक्ना मोह्यामास दानवी ।

The Muni said: Thus praised by the Lotus-born, the Tāmasi Bhagavati (the Goddess of sleep and ignorance), the Beloved of Bhagavān, left Viṣṇu and enchanted the two Daityas.

तदैव भगवान्विणु: परमात्मा जगत्यति: ॥ 26 ॥

प्रबोधपाप देवेशो दर्शो दानवोत्तो ।

तदा ती दानवी घोरौ ग्रृद्धा तं मधुपुदन् ॥ 27 ॥

युब्धाय कृतसंकरणी जममु: सविधि हरे: ।

युवुघे च तततताथां भगवान्मधुरून: ॥ 28 ॥

पड्ववर्षसूक्षाति वाजुप्रदरणो विभुः ।

On being awakened, the Supreme Spirit Viṣṇu, the Lord of the world, the Bhagavān, the Deva of the Devas, saw the two Daityas. Those two monstrous Dānavas, beholding Madhu Sūdana, came up before Him, ready to fight. The hand-to-hand fight lasted amongst them for five thousand years.

तौ तद्धार्तिकलोम्नती जगन्यायाविधोहिती ॥ 29 ॥

वियतां वर इन्येवम्बुत: परमेश्वरम् ।

एवं ततोर्वतः श्रुता भगवानादिपुक्नः ॥ 30 ॥

बड़े वर्यातुषी मेठा घबेतामिति निश्रितम् ।

Then the two Dānavas, maddened by their great strength, were enchanted by the Māyā of Bhagavati and told the Supreme Deity “Ask boon from us.” Hearing this, the Bhagavān Ādi Puruṣa (the Prime Man) asked the boon that both of them would be killed that day be Him.

तो तत्प्रतिबली देेवं पुरनेयोजनुर्हिम् ॥ 31 ॥

आवां जाड़ि न ययोर्वों पसवा च पयिल्तुता ।

तथेवनुस्वा भगवता गदारंगख्णाने नृप ३३ २ ॥

Those two very powerful Dānavas spoke to Hari again “Very Well. Kill us on that part of the earth which is not under water.” O King! Bhagavān

Book X Chapter XII

Vişnu, the Holder of the conch and club, spoke: "All right. Indeed! Let that be so."

कृत्वा चढेकण वै छिके जघने शिरसो तयोः ।

एवं देयी सभुत्वत्रा बह्वाणा संस्तुता नृप ॥ 33 ॥

महाकाली महाराज सर्वयोगेच्छरक्षी ।

महालक्ष्यमास्त्रीयार्चिंत निशामय महीपते ॥ 34 ॥

इति श्रीद्दैवीभागवते महापुराणे सशमकल्चे देवीमाहात्मये

एकावशो5धाया: 11 1 1 11

Saying this He placed their heads on His thigh

and severed them with His disc (cakra). O King! Thus Mahā Kālī, the Queen of all the Yogas arose on this occasion when the praise was offered Her by Brahmā. O King! Now I will describe another account how this Mahā Lakṣmī appeared on another occasion. Listen.

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Tenth Book on the killing of Madhu Kaitabha in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book X Chapter XII

CHAPTER XII

On Sāvārni Manu

मुनिवाच

महिषीर्षभंभुतो महावलपराकमः ।

देवान्सर्वायपात्रियल महिषोःप्रूजगतप्रधु: 11 11

सर्वेधां तोकामलानामधिकातामहासुर: ।

बलाभिश्रित्य बुधुजे जैतोकवैध्यर्मद्धुतम् ॥ 2 ॥

The Muni said: O King! The powerful Asura Mahisa, born of a She-buffalo, defeated all the Devas and became the Lord of the whole universe. That indomitable Dānava seized forcibly all the right of the Devas and began to enjoy the pleasures of the kingdom over the three worlds.

ततः पराजिताः: सर्वे देवाः: स्वर्णरिच्युतः ।

ब्रह्माणं च पुरस्कृत्य ते जगमृतौकमुत्तमम् ॥ 3 ॥

यजोत्तमी देवदेवौ संस्थितों शंकारच्छृती ।

युत्तानं कथयामासुर्महिषस्य दुर्गात्मनः ॥ 4 ॥

The Devas, thus defeated, were expelled from their abodes in Heavens. They took Brahmā as their Leader and went to the excellent regions where Mahā Deva and Viṣṇu resided and informed them of all that had been done by that vicious Asura Mahisa.

देवानां चैव सर्वेभं स्यानानि तरसासुरः ।

विनिज्ञस्य स्वयं भूंने बलवीयंमदोद्धतः ॥ 5 ॥

महिष्यसुरनामास्ते दुर्घटैलोउमर्शरी ।

वधीपायक्षु तस्याशु चित्यतामसुरादैनी ॥ 6 ॥

They said: O Deva of the Devas! The insolent

Mahisāśura has become unbearable and he has taken possessions of the rights and properties of the whole host of the Devas and he is now enjoying them. Both of you are quite capable to destroy the Asura. So why do you not devise means to annihilate him in no time!

एवं शुवा स भगवान्देवनामार्तिमुवचः ।

चकार कोयं सुबहु तथा शंकपर्यजी ॥ ७ ॥

एवं कोषयुत्स्थाय सूरात्यामहीपते ।

तेजः प्रातृष्यूढ़िथ्वं सहसाकंसमयुति ॥ ८ ॥

Hearing these pitiful words of the Devas, Bhagavān Viṣṇu became quite indignant. Śaṅkara, Brahmā and the other Devas all were inflamed with anger. O King! From the face of the angry Hari, then emanated an Unusual Fire, brilliant like thousand Suns.

अथातुकमतस्तेजः सर्वेषां शिविद्वीकासाम् ।

शरीरादुद्वं प्राप् हर्षविद्वुधाधिपान् ॥ 9 ॥

वयभूच्छंपूर्ज तेजो मुखाम्योदयचत ।

केशा बभूव्यायीय वैश्यावेन च शबहः ॥ 10 ॥

Then by and by emanated fires also from the bodies of all the Devas who were filled then with joy. From the mass of fire thus emanated there came out a beautiful Female Figure. The face of this figure was formed out of the fire that emanated from the body of Mahā Deva. Her hairs were

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

formed out of the fire of Yama and Her arms were formed out of the fire that emanated from Viṣṇu.

सीयेच्न च स्नौ जातौ माहे-ग्रेण च मध्यम: ।

वाकणेन ततो भूप जंचोर सेवप्रवुतुः ॥ ११ ॥

नित्यावी तैलसा भूमे: पाटी ब्राह्मण तैलसा ।

पादाङूल्यो भानवेल वासवेन कारूकृती ॥ १ २ ॥

कोवीर्ण तथा नासा दन्ता: संज्ञिरे तदा ।

प्राजापत्येनोतपने तैलसा वसुयाधिपि ॥ १ ३ ॥

पावकेन च संजातं लोचनत्रितयं शुभम् ।

संधेयने तेलसा जाते भूकुट्यी तेलसां निर्भी ॥ १ ४ ॥

O King! From the fire of the Moon came out two breasts; from the fire of Indra came out Her middle portion; from the fire of Varuna, appeared Her loins and thighs; from the fire of Earth, Her hips were formed; from the fire of Brahmā, Her feet were formed; from the fire of the Sun, Her toes were formed; from the fire of the Vasus, Her fingers were formed; from Kubera's fire, Her nose came out; from the excellent tejas of Prajāpati, teeth; from the fire of Agni, Her three eyes; from the fire of the twilights, Her eye-brows and from the fire of Vāyu, Her ears appeared.

कर्षा बायव्यो जाती तेजसो मनुजाधिप।

सर्वोषा तेजसा देवी जाता महिषमर्दिति ॥ १ 5 ॥

शूलं द्वी शिवो विष्णुधकं शर्ज़ च पाणभृत् ।

दुताग्नो ददी शर्फिं माल्जाशप्यासके ॥ 16 ॥

खत्र महेन्द्र: प्रददी घणटं चैरावतादज्ञात् ।

कालदण्डं यमो बढ़ा चाक्षमालाकमण्डत् ॥ 17 ॥

दिवाकरी राश्ममालां रोमकृषेपुं संदद्धि ।

काल: खड्यां तथा चर्म पिंनलं वसुधाधिपि ॥ 18 ॥

स्मुहो निर्मलं हारमजरे चावजे नृपः ।

चूढामणि कुण्डले च कटकानि तयासुकूदे ॥ 19 ॥

अधिनन्द्र निर्मलं च नूपुराणि तथा दहो ।

प्रेवयकं पूर्णं च तस्ये देखे मृदावित्वः ॥ 20 ॥

विश्वकर्मा चोमिकाक्षा ददी तस्ये धरापते ।

हिमबान्बहनं सिंहं रत्नानि विधियानि च ॥ 21 ॥

O Lord of men! Thus Bhagavatī Mahisamardini was born of the Tejas (fiery substances) of the Devas. Next Śiva gave Her the Śula (weapon spear); Viṣṇu gave Sudarśana (Cakra:) Varuna gave

the conchshell; Fire gave Śakti (weapon); Vāyu gave Her bows and arrows; Indra gave Her thunder bolt and the bell of the elephant Airāvata; Yama gave Her the Destruction Staff (Kāla Dānḍa); Brahmā gave Her the Rudrāksa, rosary and Kamandalu; the Sun gave Her, in every pore the wonderful rays; the Time (Kāla) gave Her sharp axe and shield; the oceans gave Her the beautiful necklace and new clothes two in number); Viśvakarmā gladly gave Her the crown, ear-rings, Katāka, Aīgada, Candrādhā, tinklets; and the Himālayas gave Her the Lion as Her Vehicle and various gems and jewels.

पानपात्रं सुरापूर्णं ददौ तस्ये धनाधिपः ।

गेशघ्र भगवान्देवो नागहानं ददी विषुः ॥ 2 2 ॥

अन्यैरोषविद्ध्यैर्मानिता सा जगन्मयी ।

तां तुड्युर्भोहदौं देवा महिष्योहिताः ॥ 2 3 ॥

नानास्तोत्रैमैंडगानीं जगतुुद्वकतिरिणीम् ।

तेषां निगम्य देवेशीं स्तोयं विबुधपूजिता ॥ 2 4 ॥

Kubera, the Lord of wealth gave Her the cup filled with the drink; Bhagavān Ananta Deva gave Her a necklace of snakes (Nāgahāra). Thus the World Mother, the Devi, became honoured by all the Devas. The Devas, very much oppressed by Mahisāsura, then, chanted various hymns of praise of the World Mother Maheśvari Mahā Devi.

महिषस्य व्याधार्य महानादं चकार है ।

तेन नाने महिष्यक्तितोभूद्धारणे ॥ 25 ॥

आसासदा जगद्धारी सर्वैसै-यममावृतः ।

ततः स युवुये देव्या महिषाखो महामुतः ॥ 26 ॥

Hearing their Stotras, the Devesí, worshipped by the Devas, shouted aloud the War-Cry. O King! Mahisāsura, startled at that War-Cry, came to Bhagavatī with all his army corps.

शक्रात्बैबंद्धा हिंपर: पूर्यब्रंबरात्मम् ।

विश्वुगो प्रामणी: सेनपातिरुंधरवुंखी ॥ 27 ॥

वाक्लस्ताम्रकश्ठेव विज्ञालवद्नोउपर: ।

एतेश्ञान्यैरसंख्यतः संग्रामांकसश्रिधः ॥ 28 ॥

Then that great Asura Mahisa hurled various weapons in the air and overcast the sky with them

Book X Chapter XII

and began to fight with great skill. The several generals Ciksura, Durdhara, Durmukha, Bāskala, Tāmraka, Bidālākṣa and various other innumerable generals as if Death incarnate, accompanied Mahisa, the chief Dānava. A fierce fight then ensued.

योधे: परिवृत्तो वीरी महिषो दानवोभमः ।

ततः सा कोपताघाडी देवी लोकविमोहिति ॥ 29 ॥

जघान योधानसमरे देवी महिष्याशितान् ।

तत्नतेषु ह्रोल्लेय स दैर्यो रोषमूर्हितः ॥ 30 ॥

Then the Devi Who enchants all the beings, became red-eyed with anger and began to kill the generals of the against party. When the generals were killed one by one Mahisāsura, skilled in the science of magic, came up quickly to the front of the Devi.

अससाद तदादेवीं तूर्ण माया शिज्ञादः ।

रूपात्रातणि संभेने मायया दानविश्वः ॥ 31 ॥

तानि तान्यस्य रूपाणि नागयामास सा तदा ।

ततोउने मिहिं रूपं विश्वाणाममार्दिनम् ॥ 32 ॥

The Lord of the Dānvas, then, by his magic power, began to assume various forms. Bhagavati, too, began to destroy his those forms. Then the Daitya, the crusher of the Devas, assumed the form of a buffalo and began to fight.

पाशेन बद्यमा सुवृद्धित्या खद्येन तिछ्छः ।

पातयामास माहिषे देवी देवपाणोतकम् ॥ 33 ॥

हाहाकृतं ततः शेयं सैन्यं भवनं दिशो द्वग ।

गुरुदुर्देवदेवेशीं सर्वे देवाः प्रमोदिताः ॥ 34 ॥

The Devi then fastened the animal, the Asura, the Death of the Devas, tightly and cut off his head by Her axe. The remainder of his forces, then, fled away in terror and disorder with a loud cry. The Devas became very glad and began to chant hymns to the Devi.

एवं लक्ष्मी: समुपत्रमा महिषासुरमादिंति ।

राजऋषुगु सरस्वला: प्रादुभवीये यधारभवत् ॥ 35 ॥

एकदा शुभ्यनामासेसहित्यो मद्वलोतकरः ।

निरुभंश्याति तद्ध्याता महावलपराकमः ॥ 36 ॥

O King! Thus the Lakṣmī Devi appeared to kill

Mahisāsura. Now I will describe how Sarasvatī appeared. Listen. Once on a time the two very powerful Daityas Śumbha and Nisūmbha were born.

तेन संपीक्षिता देवाः सर्वे षछ्धिगयो नृप ।

हिम्वंतमथासाठ देवीं तुडुबुगदात् ॥ 37 ॥

They attacked the Devas, oppressed them and siezed their houses and rights. The Devas became dispossessed of their kingdoms and went to the Himalayas and offered stotras to the Devi with the greatest devotion:

देव कबुः

जय देवेशि भक्तानामार्तिनार्फकोंविदे ।

दानवांतकल्पे त्वमजामाणेउपदे ॥ 38 ॥

देवेशि भक्तिसुलभे महावलपताकमे ।

विष्णुगंकरबघाद्धावस्वलोउनंतविक्रम ॥ 39 ॥

“O Devesi! O Thou, skilled in removing the difficulties of the Bhaktas! Victory to Thee! O Thou, the Sinless One! Old age and death cannot touch Thee. O Thou! Death incarnate to the Dānavas! O Devesi! O Thou, of mighty valour and prowess! O Thou, the embodiment of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa! Unbounded is Thy might; Thou canst be easily reached by the power of devotion.

यृष्टिश्वितिकर नाराकारिके कांतिदायिनि ।

महातांडवसुप्रीते मोदादायिनि माधवि ॥ 40 ॥

O Thou, the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer! O Mādhavī! O Thou, the Giver of Bliss! Thou dance with great joy at the time of the dissolution of all the things (Pralaya).

प्रसीद देवदेवेशि प्रसीद कल्पानिधे ।

निरुभयुभंसभृतभयागतंबुवारयिधे ॥41 ॥

उद्धारसामप्रभातीनाफिके शरणागतान् ।

एवं संस्तुवतां तेचां विद्यानां धरायते ॥42 ॥

O Thou, full of mercy! O Deva Devesi! Be gracious unto us. O Thou, the Remover of the sufferings of the refugees! We now come unto Thy protection. The terror of Śumbha and Niśumbha is like an endless ocean unto us. Save, save us from their fast clutches. O Devi! save us O King! verily.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

प्रसा शिरिजा प्राह् वृत् तत्वनकारणम् ।

एतमिसत्रेते तत्या कौगरूपातस्मृति्वता ॥ 43 ॥

कोशिकी सा जगत्पूज्या देवान्यीत्येदमब्रवीत् ।

प्रसाजई सुरश्रेषा: तद्वोत्तमसषिणी ॥ 44 ॥

When the Devas praised thus, the daughter of the Himālayas, Bhagavatī became pleased and asked “What is the matter?” In the meanwhile, there emitted from the physical sheath of the Devi, another Devi Kaūsikī who gladly spoke to the Devas: “O Suras! I am pleased with Thy Stotra. Now ask the boon that you desire.

विद्यतां वर इन्युक्ते देवा: संविज्ञे वरम् ।

गुभनामास्वरो घाता निरुभभतस्य विश्रुतः ॥ 4 5 ॥

त्रैलोक्यमोजसास्धात्रां दैत्येन वलगालिना ।

तद्धधिक्न्यतां देवि दुरात्मा दानवेक्षरः ॥ 4 6 ॥

बाघते सततं देवि तिरस्कृत्य निजीजसा ।

The Devas then asked for the following boon: "O Devi! The two famous Daityas Śumbha and Niśumbha have forcibly the three worlds. The wicked Lord of the Dānavas, Śumbha, has overcome us by the power of his arm and is now tormenting us without any break. Kindly devise some means to kill him."

श्रीव्यवाच

देवशर्तु पातयिष्ठ निरुर्णं शुर्णमेव च ।। 47 ।। स्वस्थातिस्वतुं घरूदं कः कंटक नारणायाम वः ।

इत्युक्त्वा देवदेवेशी देवान्सेग्रान्त्वायामी ॥ 48 ॥

जगामादर्शने सघो भिवर्तो विद्वीकासम् ।

देवा: समागता हुई सुवर्णाश्रिगृहा गुभम् ॥ 49 ॥

The Devi said: “O Devas! Be patient. I will kill these two Daityas, Śumbha and Niśumbha and thus remove the thorn on your way. At an early date I will do good to you” Thus saying to Indra and the other Devas, the merciful Devi disappeared at once before their eyes. The Devas with their hearts delighted went to the beautiful Sumeru Mountain and dwelt there in the caves thereof.

चंद्रमुंडी पयन्त:सभ पृभ्यी शृभनिरुर्णभयो:।

दूद्या तां चास्वर्मीं देवीं लोकविमेहिन् ॥ 50 ॥

Here the servants of Śumbha and Niśumbha

Canda and Mumda, while they were making their circuits, saw the exquisitely beautiful Devi, the Enchantress of the world, and came back to Śumbha, their King and said:

कथयामासृत रोते घृष्यौ ती चरणडुंडको ।

देव सर्वीसुरोष्ठ रत्नभोगाई मानद ॥ 51 ॥

अपूर्वों कामिनी द्वा चाचाप्यां रिपुमदौन ।

तत्या: सभागोपायोरत्वमस्येव तत सम्रात् ॥ 52 ॥

"O Destroyer of enemies! O Giver of honour! O Great King! You are the Lord of all the Daityas and are fit to enjoy all the gems and jewels. Today we have seen an extraordinary beautiful woman jewel. She is fit to be enjoyed by you.

तां समानय चार्वर्गी घंभूव सीख्यसमन्वितः ।

ताडूरी नागूरी नारी न गंधर्वर्गे न दानवी ॥ ५३ ॥

न मानवी नायि देये यादूगी सा मनोहरा ।

So now you would better bring that perfectly beautiful woman and enjoy. No such enchanting woman can be seen amongst the Asura women, Nāga Kanyās, Gandharva women, Dānavīs or men."

एवं भृपत्यचः श्रुत्वा शुभ्यः परखतादनः ॥ 54 ॥

दूतं संप्रेयामास सुर्गीवं नाम दानयम् ।

स दूतत्वितरं गत्वा देल्या: सविध्यपादगत् ॥ 55 ॥

Hearing thus the words of the servent, Sumbha, the tormentor of the foes, sent a Daitya named Sugriva as a messenger to Her. The messenger went to the Devi as early as possible and spoke to Her all that Sumbha had told him.

यूतांतं कवयामास देखे शुभ्यस्य यद्धचः ।

देवि शुभ्यासुरो नाम जैतोक्याविकरणी प्रभुः ॥ 56 ॥

सर्वेषा रत्वसूनां भोक्ता माटो दिवीकसाम ।

तदुक्ते शृणुं मे देखे रत्नभोक्ताउहमव्यः ॥ 57 ॥

“O Devi! The Asura Śumbha is now the conqueror of the three worlds and respected by the Devas. O Devi! He is now enjoying all that is best, the gems and jewels. O Devi! I am his messenger sent here to convey to you his message as follows: O Devi! I am the sole enjoyment of all the jewels. O Beautiful-eyed! You are a gem; so you would worship me.

Book X Chapter XII

तं चापि रत्नभूताउसि भव मां भाछलोचने ।

सर्वेषु याति रत्नाति देवासुरनरेषु च ॥ 58 ॥

ताति मध्ये सुभगे भव मां कामजे सैः ।

O Fair One! All the gems and jewels that are in the Deva loka, in the Daitya loka, or amongst the regions of men, are under my control. So you would lovingly worship me."

देव्युवाच

स्वयं वदसि हे दूत दैत्यराजप्रियंकरम् ॥ 59 ॥

प्रतित्रा या मया पूर्वं कृता सप्रयन्ता कवम् ।

घवेत्तां श्युण मे दूत या प्रतित्रा यथा कृता ॥ 60 ॥

The Devi said: “O Messenger! True that you are speaking for your King; but I made a promise before How can I act against it? O Messenger! Hear what I promised.

घो मे दूरं चिक्युतुते घो मे बलमपोहिति ।

घो मे प्रतिबलो भूमालय एवं मय भोगभाक् ॥ 6 1 ॥

तत एणां प्रतिभां ते सत्यां कृतवासुरुंश्रः ।

गृह्तुत पाणिं तरसा तत्यागलयं किमग्र ति ॥ 62 ॥

Whoever in the three worlds will conquer me by sheer force and thus crush My vanity, whoever will be as stong as Myself, He can enjoy Me. So the King of Daityas can prove My promise true and by sheer force can marry Me.

तस्माद्रच्छ महातून स्वामिनं बूहि चातून: ।

प्रतिज्ञां चापि ते सत्यां चित्यायिति वन्ताधिकः ॥ ६३ ॥

एवं वायवं महाविद्याः स्माकाण्यं स दानाः ।

कदयामास सुभार देवता वृत्तनामदिति: ॥ 6 4 ॥

What is there with him that he cannot do? So, Messenger! Go back to your master and tell him all this so that the powerful Šumbha may fulfil My promise." Hearing thus the words of the Great Devi, the messenger went back to Šumbha and informed him everything regarding the Devi's sayings.

तद्धार्थि वृत्तावयं सुभभः शुत्वा महावलः ।

कोभमाहारयामास महांतं दनुजाधिपः ॥ 65 ॥

ततो ध्यास्थनामानं दैत्वं दैत्यपति: प्रभुः ।

आदिदेश शृणु वचो धृमाश्रम मचान्तः ॥ 66 ॥

The very powerful Lord of the Daityas, Śumbha

became very angry at the unpleasant words of the messenger and commanded the Daitya named Dhūmrāksa: "O Dhūmrāksa! Listen to my words with great attention.

तां दुहों केशागशेषु धृत्वाध्यानीयतां मा ।

सभीभगवितंबेन शीर्घं गच्छव मे पुरः ॥ 67 ॥

इत्यादेशे समासाठा दैत्येणो ध्रुपलोचनः ।

घट्याउपुराणां सहितः सहस्नाणां महावलः ॥ 68 ॥

Go and catch hold of that wicked woman by her hairs and bring her to me. Go quikly; do not delay." Thus commanded, the very powerful and the best of the Daityas, Dhūmraksa, went at once to the Devi with sixty thousand Daityas and cried aloud to Her:

तुहित्यालमासादा देल्या: सविधमेव स: ।

उन्द्रैदेंँी जगादायु भज देत्यलिं गुधे ॥ 69 ॥

गुण्यं नाम महात्रीयं सर्वभोगानादपुहि ।

नोचेकेशग-गृतीखा त्वां नेचे देत्यलिं प्रति ॥ 70 ॥

"O Auspicious One! You would better worship quickly our Lord Śumbha, who is very powerful and mighty; you will then acquire all sorts of pleasures; else I will hold you by your hairs and take you to the Lord of the Daityas.

इतयुक्ता सा ततो देवी दैलेन विहरणार्णा ।

उदाच देल यदखूसे ततस्यां ते महावल ॥ ७ १ ॥

राज यृष्मापुरस्यं च किं कंरिष्यस तिहद ।

इतयुक्ती देलयोधावतूर्णी शहस्मन्वितः ॥ ७ २ ॥

Thus addressed by Dhūmrāksa Daityas, the enemy of the Devas, the Devi said: "O Powerful One! O Dainya! What you have spoken is perfectly right, but tell me first what you or your king Šumbha can do to Me? When the Devi said thus, the Dainya Dhūmralocana rushed to Her at once with arms and weapons.

भस्मसानं चकारायुं हृकांगण महेश्वरी ।

ततः सैन्यं वाहनेन देव्या भनम् महीपते ॥ 73 ॥

दिश्री द्राणभाज्छीधं हाहाम्पतमचोतनम् ।

तत्वुक्तांत समाश्रुल स युष्यो देवतार्विषयु: ॥ 74 ॥

With one loud noise, Maheśvari burnt him immediately to ashes. O King! The other forces

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

were partly crushed by the Lion, the vehicle of the Devi and partly fled away in disorder to all the quarters; some become senseless out of fear. Šumbha, the Lord of the Daityas, became very angry to hear this.

घुकोप च महाकोपाद्धुकुटीकुटिलानः ।

ततः कोयपरीतात्या दैत्यराजः प्रसापवान् ॥ 75 ॥

चण्डे भुपं रक्तबीजं कमतः श्रेयदिषुः ।

ते च गत्वा जयो दैत्या विक्रिता बहुविक्रमः ॥ 76 ॥

His face assumed a terrible form with eyebrows contracted. Then he became impatient with anger and sent in order Caṇḍa, Muṇḍa and Raktabīja. The three powerful Daityas went to the battle and tried their might to capture the Devi.

देवी ग्रहीतुपारक्ष्यतालते हृषयब्बलात् ।

तानपातत एवासी जनाद्धारी गदोल्कटा ॥ 77 ॥

गूलं गृहीत्वा वेगेन पातवामास भृतले ।

ससै-्याजित्ञातञ्युल्या दैत्यांक्सी-त्नावेश्वशी ॥ 78 ॥

The Devi Jagaddhātri, of violent prowess, seeing that these three Daityas were coming to Her, killed them by Her trident and laid them prostrate on the ground. Hearing their death with all their army, Śumbha and Niśumbha came in their own persons arrogantly to the battlefield.

गृभश्रैय निर्गुंभश्र समाजमनुर्गोजसा।

निरुभश्रैय रूपमश्र कृत्वा युद्धं महोत्कटम् ॥ 79 ॥

देव्याश्र वरणो जाती नित्ती च तयासुरुगे ।

इति दैत्यवं रुष्मं घताथित्वा जानमयी ॥ 80 ॥

Śumbha and Niśumbha fought for a time with the Devi a terrible fight and became tired, when the Devi killed them outright. When the Bhagavatī, Who is all this world, killed Śumbha and Niśumbha, the Devas began to praise Bhagavatī, the Supreme Deity of Vāk (Word) incarnate.

विद्युः: संस्तुता तत्साधाश्वात्राणीश्वरा ।

एवं ते वर्णिता राजन्यादुभांवो5तिरयकः ॥ 8 1 ॥

काल्याश्री महालक्षया: सस्वतःा: क्रंणेच च ।

परा पोषधी देवी जानसर्व कांतीत च ॥ 8 2 ॥

O King! Thus I have spoken to you in due order the manner in which the beautiful Kālī, Mahā

Laksmī and Sarasvatī incarnated themselves on the earth. That Supreme Deity, the Devi Paramesvārī thus creates, preserves, and destroys the Universe.

पालनं चैव संहारं सेव देवी द्याति हि ।

तं समाश्रय देवेश्रीं जानमोहनिवारिणीम् ॥ 83 ॥

महागायां पूज्यतमां सा ते कार्य विधायस्ति ।

You better take refuge of that highly adored Devi, that causes the distinction and the delusion of this Universe. Then only you will attain success.

नारायण उवाच

इति राजा वचः श्रुत्वा मुनेः परमर्शोभनम् ॥ 84 ॥

देवीं जगाम राशणं सर्वकामफलप्रदाम् ।

निराहो यतमाच च तन्मानघा समाहितः ॥ 85 ॥

Nārāyana said: The king Suratha, hearing these beautiful words of the Muni, took refuge of the Devi, that yields all desired objects.

देवीभूर्ति भूममची च पूर्वयामास भक्तितः ।

पूजनांते बलिं तस्ये निजगायासृवं द्वत् ॥ 86 ॥

तदा प्रसादा देवेशी जगदोनिः: कृपावतां ।

प्रादुर्भूषय पुत्तो वरं बूदीति भाषिणी ॥ 87 ॥

He built an earthen image of the Devi and, with concentrated attention, thought wholly of the Devi and began to worship Her with devotion. When the worship was over, he offered sacrifice of the blood of his body to the Devi. Then the World-Mother, the Deity of the Devas, became pleased and appeared before him and asked him: Accept the boon that you desire.

स राजा निजमोहस्य नारणं ज्ञानमुत्तमम् ।

राज्यं निष्क्रदंके चैव याचतिमय मेहधीगि ॥ 88 ॥

When the Devi said thus, the king asked from the Maheśvari that excellent knowledge whereby the ignorance is destroyed and as well the kingdom free from any dangers of difficulties.

श्रीद्व्यवास

राजशिक्कंटक राज्यं जानं दे मोहानागन् ।

भविष्यति मया दत्तमस्मिचेव भवे तव ॥ 89 ॥

अन्यच्छ श्रुणु घृपाल जन्मांतरविषेधि ।

भानोर्जन्म सामसाठा सावर्धिभ्यक्ति भवान् ॥ 90 ॥

The Devi said: "O King! By My boon, you will

Book X Chapter XIII

get your foeless kingdom in this very birth as well as the Jñānam that removes ignorance. O King! I will tell you also what you will be in the next birth. Hear. In your next birth, you will be the son of the Sun and be famous as Śāvarni Manu.

तत्र मन्त्रत्यापि पतित्वं बहुष्विकम् ।

सन्तर्ति बहुतां चाधि प्राधवसे महान्द्वान् ॥ 91 ॥

एवं दत्ता वरं देखी जगामादर्शनं तत ।

सोर्पि देख्या: प्रसदेत जातो मन्त्रताधिप: ॥ 92 ॥

By My boon you will be the Lord of the Manvantara, become very powerful and you will get good many sons." Thus granting him this boon, the Devi disappeared. By the Grace of the Devi,

Suratha became the Lord of the Manvantara.

एवं ते वर्धित साधो सावर्जझन्य कर्म च ।

एततदंतशा शुणवन्द्यमुकामान्यात् ॥ 93 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमहेशीभागते दशमरकम्ये देवीमहात्मये

ब्रहशो3धागः 11 12 11

O, Sādhu! Thus I have described to you the birth and deeds of Śāvārṇī. He who hears or reads this anecdote with devotion, will be a favourite of the Devi.

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the anecdote of Śāvārṇī Manu in the Mahāpurānam

Srimaddevbihāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book X Chapter XIII

CHAPTER XIII

On Bhrāmari Devi

श्रीनारायण जवाच

अयता: श्रवता रोषमन्नां चिंचमुद्वामु ।

यस्य स्मरणाग्रियेण देवीभक्ति: प्रजायते ॥ १ ॥

Śrī Nārāyaṇaumbo: O Child Nārada! Hear now the wonderful anecdotes of the births of the remaining other Manus.

आस-वैवर्यस्तमनो: पुत्रा: पत्र् विमलेदाया: ।

कल्पश्र पृथपश्र नाभागो दिष्ट एव च ॥ 2 ॥

ग्रग्रांतिश्र प्रिगंकुश सर्वे एर महावलाः ।

ततः पद्रे वे ताना कार्तिहास्तीमुतमम् ॥ 3 ॥

निराहाग्रात्रिक्षास: पूजां चकुस्ततः स्थिताः ।

देव्या महीमर्षी भूर्ति विव्रिपर्व युव्वयूव्धः ॥ 4 ॥

The mere remembrance of these birth anecdotes causes Bhakti to grow and well up towards the Devi. Vaivasvata Manu had six sons: viz., Karusa, Prṣadhra, Nābhāga, Diṣṭa, Śaryāti, and Triśaniku. All of them were stout and strong. Once they all united went to the excellent banks of the Yamunā and began to practise Prānāyāma without taking any food and became engaged in worshipping the Devi.

विविधीरूपचारितां पूजयामासुरादृता: ।।

ततश्व सर्वे एवैते तप:सारा महावलाः ॥ 5 ॥

जीर्णपर्णोरना वायुभक्षणात्मीयजीयान: ।

धूपपाना रश्मयाना: क्रमगश्व बहुभ्रमा: ॥ 6 ॥

ततत्सेमामादरेणाराधनं कुर्वर्ते सदा ।

विमला मतिरूपया सर्वोमेहाविनाशिनी ॥ ७ ॥ ७ ॥

Each of them built separately an earthen image of the Devi and worshipped Her with devotion and with various offerings. In the beginning they took the dry leaves of the trees that dropped of themselves for their food; then they drank water only, then breathed air only; then the smoke from the fire of the Homa; then they depended on the Solar Rays. Thus they practised tapasyā with great difficulties.

वध्मुपंनुपुत्रासते देवीपादैकविन्तनाः ।

मत्या विमलया तेषामात्म-वेयास्थित जन्ति ॥ ८ ॥

दर्शनं संजगामाशु तद्बुतमिवाघन्त ।

एवं द्वादशवर्षित तपसा जगदीक्षी ॥ ९ ॥

The continual worship of the Devi with the greatest devotion made them conscious of their clear intellect, destructive of all sorts of vanities and delusions, and the Manu's sons thought only of the Hallowed Feet of the Devi; their intellects were purified and they were greatly wondered to see within their Self the whole Universe.

प्रादुषैभूव देवेशी महशाकसमघृति: ।

तां दृष्ट्वा विमलात्मानो राजपुत्रा घडेवे ते ॥ १० ॥

तुखुर्षीक्तिज्ञांत:करणा भावसंयुतः ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Thus they practised their Tapasyā full twelve years when Bhagavati, the Ruling Principle of this Universe resplendent with the brilliance of the thousand Suns, appeared before them. The princes with their intelligence thus purified saw Her, bowed downt and, with their lowly hearts, began to chant hymns to Her with greates devotion.

राजपुरा कयुः

महेश्वी जयेशानि परमे कलापालये ॥ 11 ॥

वाभवाराधनप्रीते वाभवप्रपतिपाते ।

“O Iśānī! O Merciful! Thou art the Devi presiding over all. Thou art the Best. So Victory to Thee! Thou art known by the Vāgbhava Mantra. Thou gettest pleased when the Vāgbhava Mantra is repeated.

क्लौकासीयिछे देवि क्लौकासीपतिविधि ॥ 12 ॥

कामपाजनमोभेदाद्विभीक्ष्रतोक्षिणि ।।

महामाये मोदपे महासापाज्यद्विधि ॥ 13 ॥

विष्यकर्कैरग्रकामादिवस्वणे पोगार्थदिति ।

एवं स्तुना भपावती राजपुत्रैमहातपिधि: ॥ 14 ॥

प्रसादसुपुखी देवी प्रीवाच बचनं शुभम् ।

O Devi! Thou art of the nature of Klim Kāra (of the form of Klim). Thou gettest pleased with the repetition of Klim Mantra. O Thou, that gladdenest the Lord! Thou bestowest joy and pleasure in the heart of the King of Kāma. O Mahā Māyā! When Thou art pleased, Thou givest that Unequalled Kingdom. O Thou that increaset the enjoyments! Thou art Viṣṇu, Sūrya, Hara, Indra and the other Devas. When the high-souled princes praised Her thus, Bhagavati became pleased and spoke to them the following sweet words:

श्रीव्यवाच

राजपुरा महात्मानो भवतत्परमा युतः ॥ 15 ॥

निकल्मया: शूर्याधियो जाता वै मदुपासन्ता ।

वरं मनेगतं सर्वं याचध्यमविलंक्षितम् ॥ 16 ॥

प्रसाउर्ई प्रत्यसानि युभाकं मनसि स्थितम् ।

“O High-souled Princes! You all have worshipped Me and practised, in need, very hard

tapasyās and thus you have become sinless and your intellects and hearts have become thoroughly purged and thus purified. Now ask boons that you desires. I will grant them are long to you.

राजपुत्रा कचुः

देवि निष्कंटक राज्यं संततिश्रजीविनी ॥ 17 ॥

भोगा अव्याहताः कामं यशसतेजो मतिश्र ह ।

अकुणितत्वं संर्वेमावे व वरो हितः ॥ 18 ॥

The Princes said: "O Devi! We want unrivalled Kingdoms, many sons of long longevity, continual enjoyment of pleasures, fame, energy, freedom in all actions, and as well the good and keen intelligence. These will be beneficial to us.

श्रेत्यबुधाच

एवामस्तु च सर्वेषां घबतां यव्मनीगतम् ।

अथान्यदि मे वाकयं श्रतातामादरिद्धम् ॥ 19 ॥

भवन्तः सर्व एतेत मवन्तसपतीश्वाः ।

संतता दीर्घया भोगैनेक्रिंग सभाः ॥ 20 ॥

अखक्ततबत क्षर्यं यशस्तेजीविष्यतः ।

भवितारो मत्सादात्राज्याः क्रमेण तु ॥ 21 ॥

The Devi said: Whatever you have desired, I grant them to you all. Besides I give you another boon. Listen attentively. By My Grace you all will be the Lords of the Manvantaras and acquire strength that will experience no defeat, and you will get prosperity, fame, energy, powers, and a continual line of descent and abundant full enjoyments."

श्रीनारायण उवाच

एवं तेभ्यो वरान्त्वा भागरी जगद्धिका ।

अन्तर्पर्न जगगामाएं भवचा तै: संस्तुता सती ॥ 22 ॥

ते राजपुत्रा: सर्वेक्षि तस्मिज्ञान्यन्तुम् ।

राज्यं महीरात्मभोगान्युभुज्छ महीजसः ॥ 23 ॥

Nārāyana said: After the World Mother Bhramari Devi granted them these boons, the princes chanted hymns to Her and then She instantly vanished. The very energetic princes acquired in that birth excellent kingdoms and abundance of wealth.

Book X Chapter XIII

संतर्टि चाखडितां ते समुवाघ महीत्ते ।

वेश संस्थाय सर्वेशि मनुतां पतयोभवन् ॥ 24 ॥

They all had sons and thus established their families, and became the Lords of Manvantara in their next births.

भवान्तरे क्रमेणैव साविणीयदभागिनः ।

प्रथमो दक्षसाविणीर्वमो मनुरितरः ॥ 25 ॥

अव्यात्तवलो देवोः प्रसादादभविद्धुः ।

द्वितीयो मेकसाविणिंगमो मनुरेव च ॥ 26 ॥

वर्षव मवन्तरपो मतादेवीप्रसादातः ।

तृतीयो मनुराल्यातः सुर्यसाविणामकः ॥ 27 ॥

एकादणो महोत्सहास्तपसा खेन पाबिताः ।

चतुर्धेक्ष्रसाविणीर्दुरोग मनुराङ् विषुः ॥ 28 ॥

देवीसमाराधने न जातो मन्तन्ते ध्वः ।

घंचमो रूसाविणिक्वोग्य मनु: स्मृतः ॥ 29 ॥

महावाले महास्त्वो बधून जगदीधः ।

मष्ठछ विणुसाविणीघुतुरंगमनु: कृति ॥ 30 ॥

बधूव देवीकरणते जगतां प्रथितः प्रधुः ।

चतुर्वैति मनवो महातेजावलैयुक्ता: ॥ 31 ॥

देवायाराधन्तः पूज्य बंदा लोकेकु पिन्हणः ।

महाप्रातपिनः सर्वे भ्राम्यन्त्र प्रसादतः ॥ 32 ॥

By the Grace of the Devi, the first of the princes Karusa became the Ninth Manu, the exceedingly powerful Dakṣa Sāvarpi; the second prince Prṣadhra became the Tenth Manu, named Meru Sāvarni; the third prince, the highly enthusiastic Nābhāga became the Eleventh Manu, named Sūrya Sāvarni; the fourth prince Diṣta became the Twelfth Manu, named Candra Sāvarni; the powerful fifth prince Śaryāti became the Thirteenth Manu named Rudra Sāvarni and the sixth prince Trisanku became the Fourteenth Manu named Viṣṇu Sāvarni and became the celebrated Lord of the world.

नारद खाच

केवं सा धामरी देवी कर्थ जाता किमामिका ।

तदाखानं वद प्रात्र विविधं शोकनाशकम् ॥ 33 ॥

न तुदमधिभान्छामि पिब-देवीकाथातूनम् ।

अमृतं पिचातं ग्रनुलनाय शवणतो यतः ॥ 34 ॥

Nārada questioned: O Wise One! Who is that Bhārami Devi? What is Her Nature? What for She

takes birth? Kindly describe all this beautiful and pain destroying anecdotes to me. I am not satiated with the drinking of the nectar of the Glories of the Devi; my desire to hear further more is as strong as ever. As the drink of the nectar takes away death, so the drink of this anecdote of the Devi takes away the fear of death.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

श्रणु नारद वक्ष्यामि जगन्मातुविंचेधितम् ।

अधिन्यावन्क्तपाया विविचर मोक्ष्यायकम् ॥ 35 ॥

यशच्चरित्र श्रीद्व्यास्तत्सर्व लोकहोतवे ।

निध्यांजया करणाया पुरे मातुर्यंथा तथा ॥ 36 ॥

Nārāyana said: “O, Nārada! I will now narrate the wonderful glories of that unthinkable, unmanifested World-Mother, leading to Mukti. Hear, as a Mother behaves towards Her child kindly and without any hypocrisy, so the World-Mother in all Her lives manifests Her merciful sincere dealings for the welfare of the humanity.

पूर्व दैत्यो महानासीदरणाखो महावलः ।

पतालते दैत्यसंस्थाने देवद्रेणी महाखलः ॥ 37 ॥

स देवावङ्गेतुकामश्च कारकर परमं तपः ।

पदासंभवमुहिक्य स नस्ताना भविष्यति ॥ 38 ॥

In days gone by, in the nether regions, in the city of the Daityas, there lived a powerful Daitya named Aruna. He was a furious Deva Hater and a pākkā hyprocrite.

गत्वा हिमवत पार्थं गड़्गाजलसुगीतले ।

पकवरणाणितो योगी संनिरूप्य मक्रद्वाण ॥ 39 ॥

गायत्रीजपसंसक्तः सकामस्तमसा युतः ।

द्वागवर्मसूद्राणि ततो वारिकाणानः ॥ 40 ॥

With a view to conquer the Devas, he went to the banks fo the Ganges in the Himālayas, practised a very hard Tapasyā, to Brahmā, taking Him to be the Protector of the Daityas. First influenced by Tamo Guṇa, he withheld in his body the five Vāyus and partook only the dry leaves and repeated the Gāyatrī Mantra and practised austerities.

द्वगवर्षसहस्राणि ततः पवनभोजनः ।

द्वगवर्षसहस्राणि निराहारो5पचततः ॥ 41 ॥

Thus he practised for full ten thousand years. Then for another ten thousand years the Daitya lived drinking some drops of water only; then for another ten thousand years he remained by inhaling air only; and then for another ten thousand years he did not take any thing and thus practised he his wornderful Tapasyā.

एवं तप्यतस्तस्य शरीरातुल्यधोउन्तः ।

ददाह जगतीं सर्वां तद्द्वतमिवाभवत् ॥ 4 2 ॥

किमितं किमितं चेति देवाः: सर्वे चकमित्रे ।

संसस्तः सकल लोका बझाणं शरणं वयुः ॥ 4 3 ॥

Thus practising his Tapasyā, a sort of wanderful halo of light emitted from his body and began to burn the whole world. This thing then appeared a great wonder. All the Devas then exclaimed. "Oh! What is this! Oh! What is this! And they trembled. All were very much terrified and took refuge of Brahmā.

विद्यापितं देववरैः शुचला तत्र चतुर्मुंखः ।

गायत्रीसहिते हंससमारूढो ययौ मुदा ॥ 44 ॥

प्राणमाराविरिष्ठं तं धमनीशरसंकुलम् ।

गुणकोदों क्षमगारां ध्यामपीलितलोचनम् ॥ 45 ॥

Hearing all the news from the Devas, the four-faced Bhagavān rode on His vehicle, the Swan, and with the Gāyatrī went very gladly to where the Daityas was practising his austerities and saw that the Daitya was immersed in meditation with his eyes closed; and he looked, as it were, blazing with fire, as if a second Fire himself.

दर्शर्गे तेनसा दीर्णे तिहीयमिव पावकम् ।

वरं वरय भई ने लतय यन्मतिस स्थितम् ॥ 46 ॥

श्रुतमात्रेण सेतोषकारकं वाक्यम्चिवान् ।

श्रुवा ब्रह्मुखात्राणि सूपधात्रात्मिकाण: ॥ 47 ॥

His belly had become dried up, body withered and the nerves of the bodics, too, became almost visible; only the life breath was lingering there. Brahmā then spoke to him: "O Child! Auspices to you! Now ask the boon that you desire." Hearing these gladdening nectar-like words from the mouth of Brahmā, Aruna, the chief of the Daityas opened his eyes and saw Brahmā in his front.

उभीलिभाक्ष: पुत्तो ददर्गं जलजोढ्मवम् ।

गायसीमहितं देवं चतुर्वद्समपित्तम् ॥ 48 ॥

अक्षरवकुर्जिकाहतं जपन्तं बहा शगछतम् ।

द्रष्टीयाय ननामाय स्तुला च विविधे: सर्वे: ॥ 49 ॥

Seeing Brahmā before him with a rosary of beads and Kamandalu in his hand and attended by Gāyatri and the four Vedas, muttering the name of the Eternal Brahma, the Daitya rose up and bowed down to Him and sang to Him various Stotras.

वरं चसे स्वबुद्धस्यो मा भवेन्मनुर्यित्यपि ।

शुत्वा.5रणवचो रड्वा बोधायामास साद्यम् ॥ 50 ॥

बह्राविष्यामूदेशगाघा मृत्युना कवलीकृता: ।

तदास्त्रयेचं तु का वाता मरणे दानवोतम ॥ 51 ॥

Then the intelligent Daitya asked from Brahmā the following boon that “I shall not die. Grants this.” Brahmā then gently explained to him: “O Best of the Dānavas! See that Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara and others are not free from this limitation of death! What to speak then for others! वरं योययं तते बृहि द्रतुं यः शक्यते मया । नाजार्यं प्रकृपिति बुद्धिमन्तो ज्ञानः कवित्ति ॥ 52 ॥

I cannot grant you a boon that is an impossibility. Ask what is possible and just. The intelligent persons never show an eagerness to an impossibility."

इति इहावचः शुत्वा पुनः प्रोवाच सादाम् ।

न युद्दे न च शताक्षात्र पुंच्यो नापि योधितः ॥ 53 ॥

द्विपाद्येय वा चतुणाद्येयो नोभयाकातरतया ।

भवेने मृत्युस्तिव्य देव देहि वरं प्रपो ॥ 54 ॥

बलं च विमुले देहि येन देवजयो भवेत् ।

Hearing the above words of Brahmā, Aruṇa again said with devotion: "O Deva! If Thou art unwilling to grant me the above boon, then, O Lord! Grant me such a boon, as is practicable, that my death shall not be caused by any war, nor by any arms or weapons, nor by any man or any woman, by any biped or quadruped or any combinations of two and grant me such a boon, such a large army as I can conquer the Devas."

इति तस्य वचः शुत्वा तत्थास्विति वचोउदबीत् ॥ 55 ॥

Book X Chapter XIII

दत्त्वा वरं जगामागु घपत्र: स्वं निकेतनम् ।

ततोरकणाण्डो देवसुत पाताललत्यावश्यविलान्ति ५६ ॥

Hearing the words of the Daitya, Brahmā said "Let that be so" and went back instantly to His own abode. Then, Puffed up with that boom, the Daitya Aruṇa called on all the other Daityas that lived in the nether regions.

दैत्यानाकारयामास ब्रहाणो वरदार्थितः ।

आगत्य तेउसुरा: सर्वे दैत्येणं तं प्रचिक्रे ॥ 5 7 ॥

दूर्त च प्रव्यामासुरुद्धार्यमरावतरीम ।

दूतवाययं तदा शुत्वा देवराष्ट्र भयकमित्यः ॥ 5 8 ॥

The Daityas, that were under his shelter, came and saluted him, as their king and, by his command, they sent messengers to the Heavens to fight with the Devas. Hearing from the messenger that the Daityas were willing to fight with the Devas, Indra trembled with fear and went instantly with the Devas to the abode of Brahmā.

देवे: साधं जगामागु इब्रण: सदनं प्रति ।

ब्रहाविष्णु: पुरस्कृत्य जगमुले रॉकारालयम् ॥ 59 ॥

Taking Brahmā, too, along with them from there, they went to the Viṣṇu Loka and took Viṣṇu with them and all went to the Śiva Loka.

विद्वारं चक्रिते तन वधार्थे ते सुरुद्धान् ।

एतस्मिन्त्रमये तन देत्यनेतमापनयुतः ॥ 60 ॥

अरुणाख्यो देत्यताजो जगामागृ त्रिविष्टपम् ।

सूर्येन्दुमयबहीनामधिकारान्यथक, पृथयू. ॥ 6 1 ॥

There they all held a conference how to kill the Daitya, the enemy of the Gods. While, on the other hand, Aruna, the king of the Daityas surrounded by his army, went ere long to the Heavens.

स्वयं चकार तपसा नानारूपघरे मुने ।

स्ववस्थानच्छूता: सर्वे जम्भुः केतमसामूक्तम् ॥ 6 2 ॥

गर्जसु: शंकरं देवा: स्वस्वतुःखं पृथकं पृथकं ।

महान्विचारतत्रासीत्ककतंत्यमतः परम् ॥ 6 3 ॥

O Muni! The Daitya, then, through the power of his Tapas, assumed various forms and seized the rights and possessions of the Moon, the Sun Yama, Agni and all the others.

न युद्धेन च शकास्वैर्न पुंच्यो नायि योषितः ।

द्विपाद्ययो वा चतुषाद्ययो नोषयाकातोप्रये च। १६ ४। ||

मृत्युभंवैदिति बढ़ा प्रोवाच चचनं यतः ।

इति चिंतातुरः सर्वे कर्ण किंत्रिच च भ्रमः ॥ 6 5 ॥

All the Devas, then, dislodged from their stations went to the region of Kailāśa and represented to Śaṅkara about their own troubles and dangers respectively. Then, what was to be done on this subject, on this, great discussions cropped up. When Brahmā said, that the death of the Daitya would not ensue from any fight, with any arms or weapons, from any man or woman, biped, quadruped or from any combination of the above two.

एतमिन्मयमे तत्र वागभूद्गशीरिणी ।

भजक्षं भुवनेगातीं सा वः कार्य विधायसि ॥ 66 ॥

गायत्रीजपसंसन्तो दैत्याज्ञदि तां लयेत् ।

मृत्युयोग्यस्तदा भृयादित्युचैस्तोषकातिरिणी ॥ 67 ॥

Then the Devas became all anxious and could not find out any solution at that instant, when the Incorporeal Voice was clearly heard in the Heavens: Let you all worship the Queen of the Universe. She will carry out your work to success.

शूला देर्वीं तथा वाणीं मन्ययामासुरपुन्तः ।

ब्रह्म्यति समाहूय वचनं ग्रह देवराट् ॥ 68 ॥

गुगो गच्छ सुराणां तु कावार्वीधमसुरं प्रति ।

यथा भवेच्च गायत्रीयागतस्तय तथा कृते ॥ 69 ॥

If the king of the Daityas, always engaged in muttering the Gāyatrī, forsakes the Gāyatrī any how, then his death will occur. Hearing this gladdening Celestial Voice, the Devas held the council with great caution. When it was settled what ought to be done, Indra asked Brhaşpati and said:

अस्माधिः परपेणानी सेव्येत ध्यानयोगतः ।

प्रसता सा भगवती साहाय्यं ते कौरिधिति ॥ 70 ॥

“O Guru Deva! You would better go to the Daitya for carrying out of the Devas’ ends and do so that he forsakes the Devi Gāyattri Paramesāvri. We will all now go and meditate on Her. When She will be pleased, She will help us.

इत्यादिष्य गुरु सर्वे जगुर्जपूर्वदेश्वरि ।

सामान्दोत्थभयत्रसात्प्राणियन्ति शोभना ॥ 71 ॥

तत्र गत्वा तप्धार्य चक्र: सर्वे सुविधिताः ।

मायावीजजजपास्ता देवीमखपरायण: ॥ ७२ ॥

Thus commanding Bràspati and thinking that the beautiful Protectress of Jambū Nada would protect them the Devas all started to worship Her and, going there, began the Devi Yajñāa and with great devotion muttered the Māyā Bijā and practised asceticism.

ब्रृह्यतितिदा शीर्षं जगामासुरसिद्धी ।

अगातं मुनिवर्षं तं पप्रच्छाय स दैत्याद् ॥ ७३ ॥

मुने कुजागमः कस्मातिमद्यपिति मे वद ।

नाहं युष्मतक्ष्याती प्रत्युतारातितेच च ॥ ७४ ॥

On the other hand, Brhaspati went ere long in the garb of a Muni to the Daitya Aruna. The king of the Daityas then asked him: "O Best of Munis! Whence and why have you come here. Say, O Muni! Where have you come? I am not one of your party. Rather I am your enemy.

इति तस्य वयंः शुचा प्रोवाय मुनिनायकः ।

असमेल्या च या देवी सा तथा पूजतेत्रिण्म।॥ 75 ॥

तस्मादास्त्यक्षपाती न भवेल्वं कंथं वह ।

इति तस्य वचः शुचा मोहितो देयामयाय ॥ 76 ॥

तत्वाज परमं मन्त्रभिमानेन सत्ता ।

गायजीत्यागते दैवो नितनेजको कंपूर्व है ॥ 77 ॥

Hearing the above words, Brhaspati said: When you are worshipping incessantly the Devi whom we too worship, then say how you are not a one on our side! “O Saint! The vicious Daitya, hearing the above words and deluded by the Māyā of the Devas, forsook the Gāyatrī Mantra out of vanity and therefore he became weak, bereft of the Holy Fire.

कृतकायों गुरुस्तमात्स्थानार्थिनतायानृतः ।

ततो वृत्तानियडल कंकयायास वडिज्ञो ॥ 78 ॥

संतुहास्ते सुरा: सर्वे भोजरे परमेश्वीम् ।

Then Brhaspati, having succeeded in his work there, went to the Heavens and saw Indra and told him everything in detail. The Devas became satisfied and worshipped the Highest Deity.

एवं बहुगते काले कॉर्मिश्रासमये मुने ॥ ७ १ ॥

प्रादुरासीजगन्माता जगन्मंगलकारिणे ।

कोटिसूर्यप्रतीकाणा कोटिकन्दपैसुन्दरा ॥ 80 ॥

चित्रानुलेनया देथी चित्रवासोयुगान्धिता ।

विधित्रमान्याभरणा चित्रभ्रमयुक्ति ॥ 81 ॥

O, Muni! Thus a long interval passed, when one day the World Mother, the Auspicious Devi appeared before them She was resplended with the brilliance of ten million suns and looked beautiful like ten millions of Kandarpas (Gods of love). Her body was anointed with variegated colours, etc.; She wore a pair of clothings; a wonderful garland suspended from Her neck; Her body was decked with various ornaments and in the fists of Her hands there were wonderful rows of hornets (large black bees).

वराभघकारा श्रांता करणामुतसागरा ।

नानाघमतस्वीतृकृष्यमालाविराजिता ॥ 82 ॥

श्रमार्थिधिविधिराभिरसंख्याभिः समातृता ।

घ्रमैरगीयामैनछ हॉंकामनुपनबहम् ॥ 83 ॥

समन्ततः परिवृता कोटिकोटिपरिबिका ।

सर्वेगृगारेवाथवा सर्वेविद्रप्रासिता ॥ 84 ॥

सर्वात्मिका सर्वमीयी सर्वंगलरूषिपी ।

सर्वत्रा सर्वजन्ती सर्वां संखंशी शिका ॥ 85 ॥

Her one hand was ready to grant boons and Her other hand was ready to hold out “no fear.” On the neck of Bhagavatī, the Ocean of Mercy, and peaceful, were seen the variegated garlands with large black bees all round. Those male and female bees singing incessantly all round Her the Hrīnkāra Mantra (the First Vibration of Force), kotis of black bees surrounded Her. The Allauspicious Bhagavatī, praised by all the Vedas, Who is all in all, composed of all, Who is all good, the Mother of all, Omniscient, the Protectress of all, was adorned fully with dress.”

द्वृहा तां ततलात्मने देवा बहुपुगेनामः ।

तुडुबुद्धिमनसे विहरप्रवसं शिवाम् ॥ 86 ॥

Seeing suddenly the Devi, in their front Brahmā and the other Devas became surprised and by and by they got relieved and gladly began to chant hymns of praise to Bhagavati, Whose Glories have been written in the Vedas.

Book X Chapter XIII

देश कबुः

नमो देयि महाविदो सृधिथित्यंतकारिणि ।

नमः कमलपत्रास्थि सर्वाधोगे नोजेस्तु ते ॥ 87 ॥

सविश्वतैसाप्राजसिवरसूत्रप्रात्मिके नमः ।

नमो व्याकृतल्पायौ कृत्यथायै नमोनाः ॥ 88 ॥

The Devas said: “O Devi! Obeisance to Thee! Thou art the Highest Knowledge and the Creatrix, Preservrix and the Destructix of the Universe. O Thou, the Lotus-eyed! Thou art the Refuge of all! So we bow down to Thee. O Devi! Thou art collectively and individually Viśva, Taijasa, Prājña, Virāt and Sūtrātmā. O Bhagavatī. Thou art differentiated and undifferentiated; Thou art the Kūtastha Caitanya (the Unmoveable, Unchangeable Consciousness).

दुर्गं समाधिरहिते दुर्गसंरोधानों ।

निरनीघुमेमापे भर्षे देथि नापोस्तु २ ॥ ८९ ॥

So we bow down to Thee. O Durge! Thou art unconcerned with the creation, preservation and destruction; yet Thou punishest the wicked and art easily available by the sincere devotion of Thy Bhaktas.

नमः श्रीकालिके मातानंगे नीलसरवति ।

उप्रातरे महोघे ते नित्यमेव नगे नमः ॥ ९० ॥

नम: पीतांबरे देख नमलिपुगसुन्दि ।

नमो भैरवि मातिंग धूमावति नमे नमः ॥ ९१ ॥

O Devi! Thou scorchest and destroyest the ignorance and sin of the embodied souls. Hence Thou art named Bhargā. So we bow down to Thee. O Mother! Thou art Kalikā, Nila Sarasvati, Ugra Tārā. Mahoggrā; Thou assumest many other forms. So we always bow down to Thee. O Devi! Thou art Tripura Sundarī, Bhairavi, Mātāngi, Dhūmāvatī, Chinnamastā, Śākambhari and Rakta Dantikā.

छिमसते नमतेउन सु श्रीसागरकम्बे ।

नम: शाकम्परि शिवे नमसे त्क्तदितके ॥ 92 ॥

निरुभ्यमूभमदलन तक्थीजविनाशिनि ।

धूमलोचनिरणाशि चूगसुरपिबर्हिंण ॥ 93 ॥

चगडुपुण्डमाधिन तानवांतक्ने । शिव ।

नमसे विजये गंगे शारदे विकचानने ॥ 94 ॥

Obeisance to Thee! O Bhagavatī! It is Thou that didst appear as Lakṣmī out of the milk ocean (Ksīra Samudra). Thou hadst destroyed Vṛtrāsura, Caṇḍa, Muṇḍa, Dhūmralocana, Rakta Bīja, Śumbha, Niśumbha and the Exterminator of the Dānavas and thus, Thou didst do great favours to the Devas. पृथ्वीकृपे द्वराकृते तैजीकरो नमो नमः ।

प्राणकृले महाकृले भूतकृले नमोउक्ते तै १९५ ॥

विश्यमूर्ते द्वयमूर्ते धर्ममूर्ते नमः नमः ।

देवमूर्ते ज्योतिमूर्ते ज्ञानमूर्ते नमोउक्ते तै १९६ ॥

So, O Gracious Countenced! Thou art Vijayā and Gaṅgā; O, Śārade! We bow down to Thee. O Devi! Thou art the earth, fire, Prāna and other Vāyus and other substances. O Merciful! Thou art of the form of this Universe; the Deva from, and the Moon, Sun and other Luminous forms and of the Knowledge Form.

गायत्रि बरदे दैव सावित्रि च सर्वती।

नमः स्वाहे स्वधे मातदक्षिणे ते नो नमः ॥ 97 ॥

नेति नैतैति वाक्यवीं बोधोये सकलगमे: ।

सर्वे प्रत्यवस्करणां तां भजाम: परदेवताम् ॥ 98 ॥

O Devi! Thou art Sāvitrī; Thou art Gāyatrī; Thou art Sarasvatī; Thou art Svadhā, Svāhā, and Dakṣinā So we bow down to Thee. Thou art, in the Vedas, the Agamas, “Not this” “Not this” Thou art what is left after the negation of all this. This all the Vedas declare of Thy True Nature Thus as the Absolute Consciousness in all. Thus Thou art the Highest Deity So we worship Thee.

धर्मरैंहिता यस्मादुधामी सा ततः स्मृता ।

तस्ये देख्ये नमो नित्यं नित्यमेव नमो नमः ॥ 99 ॥

नमसे पाष्यर्वीः पुछे नमसे पुत्तीबिक्स ।

नम ऊर्ध्ये नमध्यः सर्वैत्र नमो नमः ॥ 100 ॥

As Thou art surrounding by large black bees, Thou art named Brhamari. We always make obeisance to Thee! Obeisance to Thee! Obeisance to Thy sides! Obeisance to Thy front! O Mother! Obeisance to Thy above! Obeisance to Thy below!

कृषं कुरु महादेवीय मिणिप्रधायिकासिन ।

अनन्तकोदिब्राद्धोदनायके जगदायिके ॥ 101 ॥

जय देिय जग्न्मातर्जय देिय परात्यरे ।

जय श्रीभुवेग्रानि जय सर्वोपनामे ति 102 11

Obeisance to everywhere round of Thee! O Thou, the Dweller in Mani Dvipa! O, Mahā Devi! Thou art the Guide of the innumerable Brahmāṇḍas! O world Mother! Let Thou be merciful to us. O Devi! Thou art higher than the highest. O World Mother! Victory be to Thee! All Hai! O Goddess of the universe!

कल्याणगुणत्नानामाकरे पुवनेश्वरि ।

प्रसीत परेयोगनि प्रसीत जतनोरेण ॥ 103 ॥

Thou art the Best in the whole universe; Victory to Thee! O Lady of the world! Thou art the mine of all the gems of qualities. O Parameśvari! O World Mother! Let Thou be pleased unto us."

नारायण उवाच

इति देवेचचः शुत्वा प्रगल्पं मधुरं वचः ।

उवाच जगद्यवा सा मतकोकिलेकणाधिणी ॥ 104 ॥

Nārāyana said: Hearing those sweet, ready and confident words of the Devas, the World Mother said in the sweet tone of a Mad Cuckoo:

देत्युवाच

प्रसत्राङ़ सदा देवा वरदेशिणखामणि: ।

बुवंतु विद्युधा: सर्वे यदेव स्याचिर्बकीर्णितम् ॥ 105 ॥

देवीवावयं सुरा: शुना प्रोवुढ़ी:ख्यव कारणम् ।

दुर्दैत्यवच सरितं जगद्धाधाकरं परम् ॥ 106 ॥

"O Devas! As far as granting boons to others is concerned, I am ever ready. I am always pleased with you. So, O Devas! Say what you want." Hefearing the words of the Devi, the Devas began to express the cause of their sorrows.

देवबाढापावेदानां हेलनं नागरनं तथा ।

स्थानप्रशंत्री सुराणं च कवयामासुरानुतः ॥ 107 ॥

ब्रहाणो बरदानं च यथावते स्मृत्रि ।

शुत्वा देवमुखात्वाणों महाभगवती तदा ॥ 108 ॥

They informed Her of the wicked nature of the vicious Daitya, the neglect of the Devas, the Brāhmanas and the Vedas and the ruins thereof, and the dispossession of the Devas of their abodes and the receiving by the Daitya of the boon from

Brahmā; in fact, everything what they had to say, duly and vigorously.

प्रेयामास हस्तस्थान्यमरान्यमारी तत ।

पार्थस्थाननभागस्थानानकलधारांस्तदा ॥ 109 ॥

Then the Bhagavati Bhāramī Devi sent out all sorts of black bees, hornets, etc., from Her sides, front and forepart.

जनयामास बहुगो दैथ्यांतं भुवनत्रयम् ।

मटचीयुधतेषां समुदायस्तु निरपत: ॥ 110 ॥

तद्रांतिरिक्षे तैत्यालीपंधाकर: क्षितावभूत ।

तिदि पवतंगरीगु दुगेषु विपिनेचयि ॥ 111 ॥

Innumerable lines of black bees then were generated and they joined themselves with those that got out of the Devi's hands and thus they covered the whole earth. Thus countless bees began to emit from all sides like locusts. The sky was overcast with the bees; and the earth was covered with darkness.

प्रभग त्व संजातातस्तद्धृतमिभावत् ।

ते सर्वे दैत्यवक्षांसि द्वारयामासुकृद्गता: ॥ 112 ॥

नरं मभुहरं यद्वमधिकानः कोयसंपुतः ।

उपयोगे च न रूषत्णां तथाउक्ताणां तद्धपवत् ॥ 113 ॥

The sky, mountain peaks, trees, forests all became filled with bees and the spectacle presented a grant dismal sight. Then the black bees began to tear asunder the breasts of the Daityas as the bees bite those who destroy their beehives.

न युद्धे न च संभाया केकलं मरणं खलु ।

यस्म्यस्मित्यस्थले ये ये स्थित्त दैया यथा यथा ॥ 114 ॥

तत्रैव च तथा सर्वे मरणं प्रापुकल्पया:

परमरं समाचारो न कस्यापयचत्ता ॥ 115 ॥

Thus the Daityas could not use their weapons nor could they fight nor exchange any words. Nothing they could do; they had no help but to die. The Daityas remained in the same state where they were and in that state they wondered and died. No one could talk with another.

क्षणमायोग ते सर्वे विस्हा दैत्यर्भावा: ।

कृत्वेधं घ्रमा: कार्वे दैवीनिकटमाययुः ॥ 1 1 6 ॥

आश्रयमेदातश्रादीमित लोका: सभूचिते ।

कि चित्रं जगद्वबाया यस्या माययमीघुरी ॥ 117 ॥

Book X Chapter XIII

Thus the principal Daityas died within an instant. Thus completing their destruction, the bees came back to the Devi. All the people then spoke to one another “Oh! What a wonder!” “Oh! What a wonder!” Or like this:

तते देवाणा: सर्वे बहावियाणुरोगाना: ।

निमाना हर्षलक्षी पूजयामासुरीविकाम् ।। ११ १ ॥

नानोचारीरिविधिनीनोपायपणायाः ।

जयग्वर्ध प्रकुर्णणा मुचुचुः सुमानंसि च ॥ ११ १ ॥

दिवि दुंदुपयो नेतृन्नेतुधास्परोगणाः ।

पेतुर्देवानुभिश्रिक्षा नियंबांहा जगूनस्या ॥ १२० ॥

"Whose Māyā is this! What a wonder that She will do like this!" Thus Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa became merged in the ocean of joy and worshipped the Devi Bhagavatī with various offerings and shoutings of chants "Victory to the Devi" and showered flowers all around. The Munis began to recite the Vedas. The Gandharvas began to sing.

पूर्वमानुस्वाजीणाकक्षकासाम्नि: स्ववे: ।

पंटार्शखनिवादैष व्यावमात्रीज्ञगतत्यम् ॥ 121 ॥

नानास्तोकैस्ता सुत्वा मूर्ण्यधार्यावर्जसिंस्ता ।

जय मातर्जेशगीनीत्येवं सर्वे ममृषिते ॥ 122 ॥

The various musical instruments. Mrdaṅgas, Murajas, the Indian lutes, Dhakkās, Damarus, Śankhas, bells, etc., all sounded and the three worlds were filled with their echoes. All with folded palms chanted various hymns of praise to the Devi and said “O Mother! Isānī! Victory to Thee!”

ततस्तुहा महादेवी वरान्दत्ता पृथक्ययुक्त ।

स्वसिष्ठ विवृलो भक्ति प्राधिता तैद्वैदी च तम् १ 1 2 3 ||

पश्यतामेव देवानामेत्थनं गता ततः ।

इति ते सर्वमाख्यातं घामार्थाशितरं महत् ॥ 1 2 4 ॥

The Mahā Devi became glad and gave to each separate boons and when they asked “for unshakeable devotion to Thy lotus feet,” She granted them that also and disappeared before them. Thus, I have described to you the glorious character of the Bhāramī Devi.

पठतां शृण्वतां चैव सर्वोपपरणाशनम् ।

श्रुतमाश्रयंजकं संसाराण्वताकम् ॥ 125 ॥

एवं मनूनां सर्वैषां चरितं पापनाशनम् ।

देवीमाहात्मवसंयुक्ते पठऊशृषवशुभप्रदम् ॥ 126 ॥

यश्रितवदते निव्यं शपुण्याधोनिरं नः ।

सर्वेपार्थिविन्दिभृतो देवीसायुव्यमाप्नुवत् ॥ 127 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराण्ये उपमलकंधे

श्वोदशोअध्वाः ॥ 13 ॥ 11

सार्थस्के: पंचरात (5111) श्लोकैद्यासिकृतेः शुर्षेः ।

देवीभागवतस्य द्वामकन्धः श्रैताः ॥ 11 ॥

सप्तालोर्ध वरामः कन्धः ।

If anybody hears this very wonderful anecdote, he crosses at once this ocean of the world. Along with the glories and greatness of the Devi, if one hears the accounts of Manus, then all auspiciousness comes to him. He who hears or recites daily this Greatness of the Devi, becomes freed from all his sins and he gets himself absorbed in the thoughts of the Devi (Sājaya).

Note: The Mantra is here not merely the Seed, the Spiritual Password, but it connotes, besides the idea of the password, the Adi First vibration and it exhibits the First Spiritual Form, endowed with the highest feelings of Faith, Wisdom, Bliss and Joy, displayed with the grandest colours, startling thrills, rapt enchanting signs, gestures, and postures, the shooting forth of all powers, the sources of Siddhis, that cannot be ordinarily conceived in the worldly concerns. Their faint echoes govern this mighty world. The Mantras are seated in the six cakras or plexuses or the six Laya centres in the spinal cord. Within these cakras, the transformations of the Tattvas take place. Some vanish. Some appear and so on. Remarks: In this chapter we find clearly the mention of the several names of the ten Daśa Mahā Vidyās.

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Tenth Book of the account of Bhramari Devi in the

Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevirbhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa and here ends as well the Tenth Book.

***