Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

is no trace of any doubt in this statement. Whoever will hear with devotion this Sandhyā stotra, the nectar-like thing, will be freed from all sins.

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the Gāyatrī Stotra in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER VI

On the one thousand and eight names of the Gāyatrī

नारद उवाच

भगवनस्वीधर्मात्र सर्वशगत्बिवगार ।

श्रुतिस्मृतीपुणानां तस्यं त्वन्मुखाख्यून् ॥ 1 ॥

Nārada said: O Bhagavān! O All-knowing One! O Thou versed in all the Śāstras! I have heard from Thy mouth all the secrets of Śrutis and Smṛtis.

सर्वेभप्रदरं देव येन विद्या प्रवर्तते ।

केन वा बह्वावितानं कि तु वा मोक्षासाधनम् ॥ 2 ॥

बाहाणानां गति: केन केन वा मृत्युानाशन् ।

ऐहिकामृष्मिकर्क केन वा पत्यलोचन ॥ 3 ॥

वतुभहंस्योषेण सर्वे निशिलमादितः ।

Now I ask Thee, O Deva! How can the knowledge of that Veda Vidyā (Learning) be obtained by which all sins are rooted out and destroyed, how is Brahmajñānam obtained and how can Mokṣa be obtained? How can death be conquered and how can the best results be obtained in this world and in the next. O Lotus-eyed One! Thou ought'st to describe fully all these to me.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

साधु साधु महाप्रात स्मयक् पृष्टं त्यवाउनच ॥ 4 ॥

श्रणुं वक्ष्यामि यन्तेन गायव्यहासहवकम् ।

नानां शुभानां दिव्यानां सर्वयापविनाशनम् ॥ 5 ॥

सुख्यावौं न्द्रागवत पूर्व प्रोक्तं ब्रवीमि ते ।

अशोतसहस्वय ऋषिर्बेत्रा प्रकीर्तिनः ॥ 6 ॥

छलोरनुकुलथा देवी गाययी देवता स्मृता ।

हलो बीजानि तस्याश्व स्वरा: शक्त्य ईरिता: ॥ 7 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! O Highly Learned One! Sādhu! Sādhu! You have now put a nice question indeed! Now I will describe one thousand and eight names of the Gāyatrī Devī. Listen attentively. These all sin-destroying auspicious names were composed by Brahmā and first recited

by Him. Its Rşi is Brahmā; the Chandas is Anuṣṭup; the Devatā is Gāyatrī; its Bija is Halavarna (consonants) and its Śakti is Svaravarna (vowels).

अज्ञ्यासकरन्यासावुधेते मातुकाक्षरैः ।

अथ त्यानं प्रव्यानि साधकानां हेताव वै ॥ 8 ॥

Perform the Anga Nyāsa and the Kara Nyāsa by the Maṭṭkā varnas (that is, by the fifty syllables). Now hear its Dhyānam, that will do good to the Sādhakas (the practisers).

Note: Anga Nyāsa Touching the limbs of the body with the hand accompanied by appropriate Mantras. Kara Nyāsa-assignment of the various parts of fingers and hand to different deities which is usually accompanied with prayers and corresponding gesticulations.

रक्छेताहिष्यनीलधवलैयुक्ता निजनेजज्जलं

रक्ता रक्तनवरवर्ज मणिणार्थैवर्ता कुमारीमिमाम् ।

गायत्री कमालसनां करतल्यान्द्रकुंडीबुंजां पचार्थ्रीं

च वरकरंच च द्यर्ती हंसाधिक्णां घनें ॥ 9 ॥

I worship the Kumārī (virgin) Gāyatrī Devī, the Lotus-eyed One, riding on the Swan (the Prānas), and seated on a lotus (creation); Who is three-eyed and of a red colour; and Who is bright and decorated with gems and jewels of red, white, green, blue, yellow and other variegated colours; Who is holding in Her hands Kuṇḍikā, the rosary, lotus and making signs as if ready to grant the desired boons and on whose neck is suspended the garland of red flowers. I worship the Devī Gāyatrī.

Note: The colours are the various emotions and feelings.

अविष्ट्यल्बणास्यक्तासप्रधर्मानुरहेश्वी ।

अमृताणविमध्यसाध्यपतिता चापरपीतता ॥ 10 ॥