CHAPTER I

On the Birth of Matsyagandhā

त्रश्य उवाच

आठ्ययंकरमेतते वचनं गर्भहैतुकम् ।

सन्दोईज समुच्यतः सर्वैंना नत्नपरिवनम् ॥ १ ॥

माता व्यासस्य मेधाविज्ञाना सत्यवतीति च ।

विवाहिता पुरा राजा शन्तनुना यथा ॥ २ ॥

The Rsis said: O Sūta! Your words sound wonderful to us indeed! but you have not as yet definitely spoken to us the original events in detail; so a great doubt has arisen in our minds. We know that king Śantanu married Vyāsa's mother, Satyavatī.

तस्या: पुत्र: कवं व्यास: सती स्वपत्रे स्थिता ।

ईईगी सा कयं राजा पुनः शनन्तून वृता ॥ 3 ॥

तस्वां पुत्रावृषी जाती तत्त्वं कवय सुठत ।

वित्तरेण महाभाग कवां परमपावनीम ॥ 4 ॥

Now say, in detail in how Vyāsa became her son? How such a chaste woman Satyavati, remaining in her own house, came to be married again by Śantanu? and how the two sons came to be born of Śantanu's sperm and Satyavati's ovum? Now, O highly fortunate Suvrata? Kindly describe in detail this highly sanctifying historical fact.

उत्तर्षिते वेद्यासस्य सत्यव्यात्सता युनः ।

श्रोतुकामाः युना: सर्वे ऋषयः संशिज्ञानतः ॥ 5 ॥

These Rşis, who are observing vows, are desirous to hear of the birth of Veda Vyāsa and Satyavati.

सूत उवाच

प्रणाय्य परमां शक्ति चतुर्वर्णिद्धातिनीम् ।

आदिगर्भक्ति तिख्यामि कवां घोपाणिकीं शुभाम् ॥ 6 ॥

यस्योचारणाभोगेन सिद्धिपर्विति शाश्रां ।

व्याजेनापि हि बीजस्य वाभवस्य विशेषतः ॥ 7 ॥

Sūta said: I bow down with devotion to the Highest Primordial Force, the bestower of the fourfold aims of existence of human life, who grants to all, their desires when so prayed by the help of the Vāgbhava Bījamantra with their heart and soul, for the success of all their desires.

सत्यक्सर्वान्ताना सर्वैं सर्वेकानार्थसिद्धये ।

स्मत्थव सर्वेधा देवी वांतिज्ञाप्रदायिति ॥ 8 ॥

राजोपरिचरो नाम धार्मिकः सत्यसंगरः ।

चेद्रिद्वेणपति श्रीमान्वयूत विज्जपकः ॥ 9 ॥

The above bīja is so potent in its effect that even pronounced very lightly, even under a pretext, it grants all siddhis. So, the Devi should be remembered by all means; and, now saluting Her, I begin my narration of the auspicious Purānic events. In days gone by there reigned a king, named Uparicara; he ruled over the Cedi country and respected the Brāhmins; he was truthful and very religious.

तपसा तस्य तुईने विमानं स्माटिकं शुभम् ।

दतनिम्देशनतत्मसै सुन्तं चिवकाव्यथा ॥ 10 ॥

Indra, the lord of the Devas, became very

pleased by his asceticism and presented him an auspicious celestial car (going in the air) made of pearls and crystals, helping him in doing what he liked best.

तेनारूढसून सर्वत्र याति दिख्येन भूपाति: ।

न भूपानुपरिस्थो5सो तेनोपरिचरो सु: ।। 11 ।। ॥

विद्यालतः सर्वलोकेषु धर्मानिव: स भूपाति: ।

तस्य भावां वरारोहा निरिकानाम सुन्दरी ॥ 12 ॥

Mounting on that divine chariot, that religious king used to go everywhere; he never remained on earth; he used to remain always in the atmosphere and, therefore, he had his name as “Uparicara Vasu” (moving in the upper regions). He had a very beautiful wife, named Girikā; and five powerful sons, of indomitable vigour, were born to him.

पुत्राश्रस्य महावीर्याः पछासम्रमितौजसः ।

पृथावंशेषु राजानः स्थापितासेनेच भ्युजा ॥ 13 ॥

वसोसु पत्नी मिका कामान्काले न्यवेदयत् ।

ऋतुकालमनुपायता स्नात पुंसवने शुचिः ॥ 14 ॥

तदह चितरक्षीनुचुर्जिंट मृगानिति ।

The king give separate kingdoms to each of his son and made them kings. Once on an occasion, Girikā, the wife of the Uparicara Vasu, after her bath after the menstruation and becoming pure came to the king and informed him of her desire to get a son; but that very day his Pitjs (ancestors) requested him also to kill deer, etc., for their Śrāddha solemn obséquies performed in honour of the manes of deceased ancestors)

तच्छुत्वा चित्यामास भावायितुमतीं तथा ॥ 15 ॥

पितृवावयं गुर्गे मन्ता कंत्यमिति निश्छितम् ।

चचार मृगायां रात्रा गिरिकां मनसा समर्प ॥ 16 ॥

वने तिथितः स राजर्षिश्छिते सम्मार भामिनीम् ।

अतीवाकृपस्ममजां साक्षात्ध्वयिवावगारम् ॥ 17 ॥

तस्य ततः प्रवर्कैद स्मरतलां च कामिनीम् ।

वदपत्रे तु तद्धजा स्कक्रमातं समाक्षिपत् ॥ 18 ॥

इंदं वृषा परिक्कनं तेजे वै न घबेकधारम् ।

ऋतुकालं च विज्ञाय मेति चक्रे नुपस्तद् ॥ 19 ॥

Hearing the Pitps, the king of Cedi became

somewhat anxious for his menstruous wife; but thinking his Pitps words more powerful and more worthy to be obeyed, went out on an hunting expedition to kill deer and other animals, with the thought of his wife Girikā in his breast.

अमोघे सर्वेथा वीर्यं मय चैतन संशय: ।

प्रियाये प्रेयायामेत्यिति वुद्धिमकल्यवत् ॥ 20 ॥

Then while he was in the forest, he remembered his Girikā, who was equal in her beauty and loveliness to Kamalā, and the emission of semen virile took place.

शुक्रप्रस्थापने काले महिष्या प्रसमीक्ष्य सः ।

अभियन्त्याय त्रौष्यैं वटपर्णपुटे कृत्तम् ॥ 21 ॥

He kept this semen on the leaf of a banyan tree and thought “How the above semen be not futile; my semen cannot remain unfruitful; my wife has just now passed her menstruous condition; I will send this semen to my dear wife.”

पाछ्रीस्थं श्रेनमाभाथ्य राजोबार चित्र प्रति ।

गृहाणें महाभाग नच्छ शीर्भ गृहं मम ॥ 22 ॥

Thus thinking the time ripe, he closed the semen under the leaves of the banyan tree and charging it with the mantra power (some power) addressed a falcon close by thus: "O highly fortunate one! Take this my semen virile and go to my palace.

महीत्यर्थिमितं सौम्य गृहीत्या त्व गृहं नय ।

निराकार्य प्रच्छाशु तस्यास्वतर्षमवरु चै ॥ 23 ॥

O Beautiful one! Do this my work: take this semen virile and go quick to my palace and hand it over to my wife Girikā, for today is her menstruation period."

सूत उवाच

इत्युक्ला प्रदूती पर्णे श्येनाय नृपसतमः ।

स गृहीतोत्यपातागु गर्गनं गतिविधिमः ॥ 24 ॥

Sūta said: “O Rūsi! Thus, saying, the king gave that leaf with the virile therein to the falcon, who is capable of going quick in the air, took it and immediately rose high up in the air.

गछ्छां गर्गाने श्रवें धृष्णा चंचुपुटे पुद्य ।

तमपश्वद्धायानां त्वांग श्येनस्तधाउपर: ॥ 25 ॥

अभियंत्र से तु विक्राय शीघ्रमध्यद्रवल्गगम् ।

तुष्तयुद्धमायाकगो तातृषी सम्प्रचक्रतः ॥ 26 ॥

Another falcon, seeing this one flying in the air with leaf in his beak, considered it to be some piece of flesh and fell upon him. Immediately, a gallant fighting ensued between the two birds with their beaks.

युद्धातीयपत्रद्रैतस्तचापि यमुर्नाथसि ।

खगौ तौ निर्वर्ती कामं पुटके चतिते तदा ॥ 27 ॥

While the fighting was going on, that leaf with semen virile fell down from their beaks on the waters of the Yamunā river. Then the two falcons flew away as they liked.

एतसिम्नसमये काधिदद्धिका नाम चायसरः ।

बाहणों समगुगर्ग सन्यावन्दन्ततयम् ॥ 28 ॥

O Rsis! While the two falcons were fighting with each other, one Apsarā (celestial nymph) named Adriāk came to a Brāhmin, who was performing his Sandhyā Vandanam on the banks of the Yamunā.

कृतीत जलकौल सा जले ननना चचार सा ।

जग्राह चरणं नारी द्विजस्य वरवर्धिनी ॥ 29 ॥

That beautiful woman began to bathe in the waters and took a plunge for playing sports and caught hold of the feet of the Brāhmin.

प्राणायामपर: सोअ शूद्वा तां कामचारिणीम् ।

श्रागा भव मत्थी त्वं धान विदकांति : ॥ 30 ॥

The Dvija, engaged in Prānāyāma (deep breathing exercise), saw that the woman had amorous intentions, and cursed her, saying:

सा श्राता विगमुखेन बभूव ययुनाचरी ।

श्रभरी रूपसम्पत्रा ह्याद्रिका च वरणसभः ॥ 31 ॥

"As you have interrupted me in my meditation, so be a fish."

Adrikā, one of the best Apsarās, thus cursed, assumed the form of a fish Safari and spent her days in the Yamunā waters.

श्रवेपाद्वरिष्टं तच्छुक्रमथ वासखी ।

जग्रह तसासंध्येत्य साजत्रिका मत्यरूकिपणी ॥ 32 ॥

When the semen virile of Uparicara Vasu fell

from the beak of the falcon, that fish Adriká came quickly and ate that and became pregnant.

अथ कालेन क्रियता मत्स्यों तां मत्स्यजीवतः ।

संग्रपते एरमो मासि बबंध तां मानोरामा ॥ 33 ॥

When ten months passed, a fisherman came there and caught in his net that fish Adriká.

उदरं विद्वराग्यु स तस्या मत्स्यजीवतः ।

युग्यं विनि:सृतं तत्समुदुरामानुपाकृति ॥ 34 ॥

When the fish's belly was torn asunder, two human beings instantly came out of the womb.

बाल: कुमार: सुभगस्तथा कन्या शुभानना ।

नूद्वारो ५४शीविंद सेो ५४ विसयं घरमे नतः ॥ 35 ॥

One was a lovely boy and the other a beautiful girl. The fisherman was greatly astonished to see this.

राजे निवेद्यामास पुरो बौं तु इमोद्वली ।

राजापि विस्माधिक: सुर्त जग्राह ते शुभम् ॥ 36 ॥

He went and informed the king of that place who was Uparicara Vasu that the boy and the girl were born of the womb of a fish. The king also was greatly surprised and accepted the boy who was auspicious.

स मल्यो नाम राजारसी धार्मिकः सत्यसंगः ।

वसुपुत्रो महतोलातः पित्रा तुल्यपताकमः ॥ 37 ॥

This Vasu's son was highly energetic and powerful, truthful and religious like his father and became famous by the name of Matsyarāja.

कालिका बसुना दत्ता तरसा जलजीविने ।

नाना कालीति विद्याता तथा मलयोदरीति च ॥ 38 ॥

Uparicara Vasu gave away the girl to the fisherman. This girl was named Kāli and she gave away the girl to the fisherman. This girl was named Kāli and she became famous by the name of Matsyodarī.

मत्स्यान्धोति नाना वे गुणेन समाजायत ।

विबर्पीमाना दासस्य गृहे सा वाससी रुषा ॥ 39 ॥

The smell of the fish came out of her body and she was named also Matsyagandhā. Thus, the auspicious Vasu's daughter remained and grew in that fisherman's house.

སྟོགས་ཆུན:

अद्विका मुनिना शगता मत्थी जाता वराप्यसा: ।

विद्यारिता च दारोगे मृता च भक्षिता पुनः ॥ 40 ॥

The Rsis said: “The beautiful Apsarā, cursed by the Muni, turned into fish; she was afterwards cut asunder and eaten up by the fisherman.

किं बभूव पुनस्तया अपसराया बदख सत् ।

शापस्यांतं कर्व सूत कर्वं स्वर्गमवाप स ॥ 4 1 ॥

Very well! What happened afterwards to that Apsarā? How was she freed of that curse? and how did she go back to the Heavens?

सूत उवाच

शला यदा स मुनिना विमिता सवम्पूव है ।

स्तूति चकार विषयस्य दीनेव कृत्ती तदा ॥ 42 ॥

Thus questioned by the Rsis, Sūta spoke as follows: “When the Apsarā was first cursed by the Muni, she was greatly astonished; she began to weep and cry like one greatly distressed and afterwards began to praise him.”

दयावान्बाहुप: प्राह तां तदा कृत्ती स्थितम् ।

मा शोकं कुक कल्याणि शापांतं ते वदायम्छूम ॥ ४३ ॥

The Brāhmīn, seeing her weeping, took pity on her and said: "O good one! Don't weep; I am telling you how your curse will expire.

मतकोधापाव्योगेन मतस्योर्नि गता शुभे ।

मानुषी जनसित्या तंख शामपोक्षमवाप्यसि ॥ 44 ॥

As an effect of having incurred my wrath, you will be born as a fish and when you will give birth

to two human children, you will be freed of your curse."

इसुकृता तेन सा प्राप मत्यवहेंहं नटीजले ।

बालकौ जनचित्वा सा मृता मुक्ता च शापतः ॥ 4 5 ॥

The Brāhmín having spoken thus, Adrikā got a fish-body in the waters of the Yamunā.

संत्यजरू रूपं मत्यस्य दिष्छलपयाव्य च ।

जगामामर्यार्च च शापांते वरवर्णिनी ॥ 4 6 ॥

Afterwards she gave birth to two human children and became freed of the curse when she, quitting the fish form, assumed the divine form and went up to the Heavens.

एवं जाता वरा पुत्री मत्थनांधा वरानना ।

पुत्री च पात्यमाना सा दाशगेहे व्यबधेत् ॥ 47 ॥

O Rşis! The beautiful girl Matsyagandhā thus took her birth and was nourished in the fisherman's house and grew up there.

मत्थनाथा तदा जाता किशोरी चातिसुप्रधा ।

तस्य कार्याणि कुर्वाणि वासवी चातिसुप्रभा ॥ 48 ॥

इति शीघैदोषीगगवते द्वितीयकन्ये मत्थनाभ्योचितीमा

प्रभानोउपधा: 11 1 11

When the extraordinarily lovely girl of Vasu, Matsyagandhā attained her youth, she continued to do all the household duties of the fisherman and remained there.

Thus ends the First Chapter of the Second Book on the birth of Matsyagandhā in the Mahāpurāna

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER II

On the Birth of Vyāsa Deva

मूत उवाच

एकदा तीर्थयात्रायां बजन्याराशेगे मुनि: ।

आजगाम महातंजाः कारिलंशास्तदमुक्तमम् ॥ १ ॥

निवादमाह धर्मात्मा कुर्वर्त भोजनं तदा ।

प्रायवस्य परं पारं कार्यतिंहा उद्धुपेन माम् ॥ २ ॥

Once on an occasion, the highly energetic Muni Parāśara went out on pilgrimage and arrived on the banks of the Yamunā, and spoke to the religious fisherman who was taking his food then thus: 'O

fisherman! Take me on your boat and carry me to the other side of the river.'

दारणः श्रुत्वा मुनेवाक्यं कुबाणी भोजनं तटे ।

उवाच तां सुतां वालां मत्स्यान्यां मनोरामम् ॥ ३ ॥

Hearing this, the fisherman spoke to the beautiful girl Matsyagandhā: “O beautiful smiling one! This religious ascetic intends to cross the river; so take the boat and carry him to the other bank.

उड़पेन मुनिं बाले परं परं नयव्य है ।

गंतुकामोडिति धर्मात्मा तापसोउंश गृधिकिति ॥ 4 ॥

Thus ordered by her father, the exceedingly beautiful Vasu girl Matsyagandhā began to steer the boat whereon sat the Muni.

इत्युक्ता सा तदा पित्रा मत्स्यांधाउथ वासकी ।

उदुपे भुनिवासीनों संवाहवति भामिनी ॥ 5 ॥

प्रजन् सूर्यतातोये भावित्वाहिवयोगतः ।

कामातंतसु भुनिजातो दृष्ट्या तां चाक्लोचनाम् ॥ 6 ॥

Thus while the boat was sliding on the waters of the Yamunā, the Muni Parāśara saw the beautiful-eyed damsel Matsyagandhā and became as if under the command of the great destiny, greatly enamoured of her.

गृहीतुकामः स भुनिवृष्ट्या व्यजितयोवन् ।

दक्षिणेन कर्णेनामव्यूगद्धिणे करे ॥ 7 ॥

He desired to enjoy Matsyagandhā, full of youth and beauty and with his right hand caught hold of her left hand; the blue coloured Matsya looking askance spoke out smilingly in the following words:

तमुवाचासितापांनी सितमुर्षिंमदं चचः ।

कुलस्य सदृशं वः किं श्रुतस्य तपसश्छ किम् ॥ 8 ॥

“O knower of Dharma! What are you going to do, pierced by the arrows of Cupid?

लं वे वसिष्ठदायादः कुलशीलसम्बन्धितः ।

किं चिकारीपर सधर्म मनवेशने प्रपर्षितः ॥ 9 ॥

What you desire now, is it worthy of your family or your study of the Śāstras or worthy of your Tapasyā; see, you are born in the line of Vasiṣṭha and you are well known as of good character.

दुर्भर्भ मानुपं जन्म भृवि ब्राह्मणसन्न ।

तजारी दुर्भर्भ मन्ये ब्राह्मणत्व विशेषतः ॥ १० ॥

O best of Brāhmins! You are quite aware that the attaining of a man-birth in this world is very rare; and over and above this the attainment of Brāhminhood is, as far as my knowledge goes, particularly difficult.

कुलेन शीलेन तथा श्रुतेन

द्विजोतमस्तं चिक्त धर्मविष्च।

अनार्थभावं कक्षयमात्रोसि विश्रेद

मां वीक्ष्य च मीनारभात् ॥ १ १ ॥

O Prince of Brāhmins! You are the foremost and best as far as your family, goodness, and learning in the Vedas and other Śāstras are concerned; you are will versed in Dharma; how is it, then, that you are going to do this act, not worthy of an Ārya, though you see me possessed of this bad smell of fish throughout my body.

मदीये शरीरे ऋतामोषयुद्धे

शुभं किं समातोक्य पाणि ग्रहीतुम् ।

समीपं समायासि कामातुरस्त्वं

कर्वं नाफिकानासि धार्य स्ककीम् ॥ 12 ॥

O one of unbaffled understanding! O best of twice-born! What auspicious sign do you see in my body that you are stricken with passion on my account that you have caught hold of my hand to enjoy me? Why have you forgotten your own Dharma?"

अहो मंदवुद्धिहिकोजंयं ग्रीषीच्छले

मन एवाहा मां वे गृहीत्वा ।

मनो व्याकुलं पडबाणातिविद्ध

न कोर्पीह शक्तः प्रतीये हि कतुम् ॥ 13 ॥

Thus saying, Matsyagandhā thought within herself: “Alas! This Brāhmīn has certainly lost his brains in order to enjoy me; certainly he will be drowned just now in his attempt to enjoy me in this boat; his mind is so much agitated with the arrows of Cupid that no body, it seems, can act against his will.”

इति संचित्य सा बाला तमुवारा ।

धैर्य कुरु महाभाग वर्गे वर्गे नवामि वे ॥ 14 ॥ ॥

Thus thinking Matsyagandhā spoke again to the Muni: “O highly fortunate one! Hold patience! let me first take you to the other side of the river; then you may do as you please.”

सूत उवाच

पाराशरस्तु तच्छूला वचनं हितपूर्वकम् ।

करं वल्कता स्थितस्तत्र सिंधी: पारं गत: पुनः ॥ 15 ॥

Hearing these reasonable words, the Muni let

loose of her hand and took his seat on the boat and gradually got down on the other bank of the river.

मत्यमान्यां प्रज्ञाह सुनि: कामातुरस्त्वा ।

वेयमाना तु सा काना तमुवाच पुरःस्थितम् ॥ 16 ॥

But the Muni, becoming again extremely passionate caught hold of Matsyagandhā; when the young woman spoke to Parāśara, in front of her, shuddering:

दुर्धायड़ं मुनिश्रे कर्व लें नोपगड़्जे ।

समानरूपयो कामसंयोगसु सुखावहः ॥ 17 ॥

"O best of Munis! My body is emitting very bad smell; do you not feel this? You know very well that the sexual intercourse between male and female of similar types brings in happiness and comfort."

इत्युक्तेन तु सा कन्या क्षणमाजेण भामिनि ।

कृता योजनमाया तु सुक्षण च वरानना ॥ १८ ॥

भुगनाभिसुगंधां तां कृत्वा कान्तां मानोहारम् ।

जग्राह दक्षिणे पाणी भूनीमन्मथपीक्षितः ॥ १९ ॥

Thus spoken to, Parāśara made Matsyagandhā emit sweet scent like that of musk to a distance of one Yojana (8 miles) and her body exceedingly lovely and beautiful and, becoming extremely passionate, again caught hold of her right hand.

ग्रहीतुकामां ते ग्राह नाना सत्यवतीं शुभा ।

मुने पश्यति लोकोयं पिता चैव तत्थितधानः ॥ 20 ॥

पशुधामां न मे प्रीति जनयत्यतिहानः ।

प्रतीक्षस्य मुनिश्रेश यावद्धवति यामिनि ॥ 21 ॥

Then the auspicious Satyavati addressed Parāśara Muni, resolved to enjoy her, thus: “O Muni! Behold! all are looking at us; my father too, is there on the bank of the Yamunā; so, O Muni! wait till night; this beastly act before all is highly unsatisfactory to me.

रात्री व्यवाय उद्धिटो दिवा न मनुजस्य दि ।

दिवासङ्गे महान्दोय: पर्ष्यति किल मानवा: ॥ 22 ॥

The wise persons declare it a great sin to commit sexual intercourse during day; they have ordained night time as the best time of intercourse for men;

not the day time; the more so that many person's eyes are in this direction.

कामं चघ्छ महावृद्धे लोकनिदा दुरास्वा ।

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य युनभुक्तमुदारधीः ॥ 23 ॥

So, O intelligent one! hold on your passion for a while; for the blame pronounced by the public is horrible. Hearing these reasonable words, the liberal-minded Parāśara created, by his influence of Tapasyā, a dense fog so that both the banks of the Yamunā became covered with darkness."

नीहारं कल्यामास शीर्घं पुणवबलेन वै ।

नीहारे च समुपये तटेस्तितमसा युते ॥ 24 ॥

कामिनी तं सुविं ग्राह मुदुपूर्विमंद वचः ।

कन्यारई ब्रिजगाईन धुक्चना गंतासि कामतः ॥ 25 ॥

अमोपधीर्वस्वे बहान्ना गतिमंं भवेदिति ।

पितरं किं ब्वीयाद्ध सभागं चेद्वायामह्न ॥ 26 ॥

त्वं गमिष्यस भुक्ना मां किं करोगें वद्यत तत ।

Then Matsyagandhā gently spoke to the Muni: O, best of Dvijas! I am not as yet married; I am now a girl; you will go away after enjoying me; your semen virile is not fruitless; so Brāhman! What will be my fate? If I be pregnant today, what shall I say to my father? and what will be my future state? There is no doubt that, after enjoying me, you will go away; what will I do afterwards; kindly say.'

पागरण उवाच

कोतेउ मलियुं कृत्वा कन्यैव तं पधियसि ॥ 27 ॥

वृषीष च वरं भीक यं लमिष्ठसि पाधिनी ।

Hearing these words of Matsyagandhā, Parāśara said: “O beloved! after you have done my pleasant duty, you will remain a girl as you are now; yet, O timid one! ask from me any boon you like; I will grant it to you.”

सत्यवल्युवाच

यथा मे पितरी लोकेन न जानीते हि मानद ॥ 28 ॥

कन्यातनं न मे हन्यातथा कुक्र हिज्ञोम ।

पुरत्रु तत्समः कामं घवेद्धुद्तीयांन्ति ॥ 29 ॥

गोधोर्यं सर्वदा मे स्याहीदानं च नव नवम् ।

Satyavati then said: O best Brāhmin, O giver of one's honour! grant me these things: That my father and mother do not know anything of this affair and that my virginity be again as ever the same. Also, let an extraordinarily powerful energetic son be born to me like you; let this nice smell continue to remain always in my body and let my youth and beauty remain afresh and increase ever more."

पातागर उवाच

शृणु सुन्दरी पुत्रसे विष्यक्षाममयः शृति: ॥ ३० ॥

भविष्यित च विध्यातर्षतेलोकवे वरवर्धिंन ।

केन्चित्कारणेनाहं जातः कामातुरस्वायि ॥ ३१ ॥

Hearing this, Parāśara said: “O beautiful one! a son, very pure and holy, will be born to your, from Nārāyaṇa’s part! his name will be famous in the three worlds. O beautiful one! never before my heart was agitated with such passion.

कदापि च न सम्मोहो भूतपूर्वां वरानने ।

यूद्या चास्मसां रूपं सदारड़ं धैर्यमावहम् ॥ 32 ॥

दैवयोगेन बीक्ष्य त्वां कामव सयाणोपवम् ।

तल्किचित्कारणं विद्धि दैवं हि दुर्लित्कमम् ॥ 33 ॥

दूध्वारड़ं चातिरुर्नीया तां कंकं मोहमानुपायम् ।

पुराणकर्ता पुत्रसे भविष्यति वरानने ॥ 34 ॥

वेदविद्धागकर्ता च खलातघ भुवनत्रये ।

I do not know why I have become so much passionate for you. I saw the unrivalled beauties of Apsarās but I never lost my patience; but seeing you, I have become attracted to you; it must be under the direction of Providence; know it certain that there must be some mysterious cause in this. However Fate is unavoidable to all; otherwise you are full of so bad smell; why shall I be fascinated by your sight? O beautiful one! your son will be famed in the three worlds; will compose the Purānas and will sub-divide the Vedas."

सूत उवाच

इत्युक्चता तां वर्णं यातां भुक्त्वा स मुविसमतः ॥ ३ ५ ॥

जगमा तरसा स्नात्वा कालितीद्वीसलिते भूतः ।

Thus saying, Muni Parāśara enjoyed Matsyagandhā who became quite submissive; and after bathing in the Yamunā, quickly went away.

साउपि सत्यवती जाता सहो गर्भवती सती ॥ ३ ६ ॥

सुखेवे यमुनाईपे पुरं कामविवारपम् ।

On the other hand, the chaste Satyavati, too, became pregnant and immediately gave birth on the island of Yamunā to a son beautiful, as if the Second Kāmadeva, the god of Love, Kāmadeva.

जातमास्तु तेजस्वी तामुावा स्वमातन् ॥ 37 ॥

तपस्वेय मनः कृत्वा विविधे चातिवीर्वान् ।

No sooner that son, very fiery and highly potent, was born than he devoted his mind to tapasyā and spoke to his own mother Satyavatī thus: "O Mother! now go wherever you like; I will also go to perform tapasyā. O highly fortunate one; No sooner you remember me, I will come to you.

गछ्छ मातार्यकामां गछ्ध्यामृद्धतः परम् ॥ 38 ॥

मतर्दि महापाभगे सूर्यिध्यापि वै स्मुतः ।

मातर्यदा घबेकार्यत तत किंचिद्वतुतम् ॥ 39 ॥

सात्योज्डेत तत शीप्रमानीयिण्य पारभिति ।

स्वतित रेतसु पशिव्यापि तव्वता चित्ता सुखं सस । 40 ।

इत्पुक्तवानिर्योवायासःसाउपिधिर्योक्तताकत ।

O Mother! where you will have any onerous duty, remember me and I will instantly come to you. Let all good be unto you; now I go. Avoid all cares and live happily." Thus saying, Vyāsa Deva went out. Matysagandhā, too, went back to her father.

ड्रीये व्यस्तस्वा बालस्तमावटुषायनेठभवत् ॥ 4 1 ॥

जातमाजो जगामाशु बृद्धिं विष्वश्योगतः ।

Vyāsa was named also Dvaipāyana (born on an island, a Dvipa) in as much as Satyavati gave birth to him in a Dvipa island); and as he was born of Vispu's parts, he grew up no sooner he was born. तीर्थे तीर्थे कृतसनाशुचार तय उत्तम ॥ 4 2 ॥

एवं द्विषायो जेत्र सत्यवल्या पराशगत् ।

Muni Dvaipāyana bathed in every Tīrtha and performed the highest asceticism. Thus Dvaipāyana Vyāsa was born of Parāśara in Satyavati's womb.

चकार वेल्गाख्याक्ष प्राणं ज्ञाला केलयुंगम् ॥ 43 ॥

वेद्यस्तिराकरणाझ्ञासनामाभवम्पिनः ।

पुराणसहिताङ्गके महापारतमुतमम् ॥ 44 ॥

शिष्यानध्यायमास वेदान्कृत्वा विभाणशः ।

सुमन्तुं जैमिनि पैलं वैशमायनमेव च ।। 4 5 ।।

असिते देखलं चैव शुक्रं चैव स्यामात्बजम् ।

Seeing the advent of Kali Yuga, he adorned the tree of the Vedas with many Sákhās (branches). It is because he expanded the Vedas by many Sákhās, that he is denominated also as Veda Vyāsa; he composed eighteen Purāṇas, Sarinītās, the excellent Mahābhārata, subdivided the Vedas and made his disciples Sumantu Jaimini, Paila, Vaiśampāyana, Asita, Devala and his son Sūka to study them.

सूत उवाच

एतच्च कथितं सर्वे कारणं मुनिसत्तमाः ॥ 46 ॥

सत्यव्यथा: सुतस्यापि समुयतितस्तथा शुभा ।

Sūta said: “O Munis! Thus I have described to you the birth of the holy Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati and all the causes.

संशयोज्ञ न कतंच्य: सभये मुनिसन्ता: ॥ 47 ॥

मह्नां चिति चैव गृणा ग्राहा मुनैतिति ।

O Munis! Do not allow any doubt enter your mind as regards his birth; for it is always advisable to take up only the good things as far as the lives of great persons and Munis are concerned.

कारणाच्छ समुवर्तितः सत्यव्वता इम्पोदेः ॥ 48 ॥

पाराशरेण संयोगः पुनः शनत्नुना तथा ।

There must be some extraordinary mysterious cause owing to which Satyavati was born of a fish and she was first united to Parāśara and then to Śāntanu.

अन्यथा तु मुनेक्षितं कर्व कामाकुलं भवेत् ॥ 49 ॥

अनार्थग्रुं धर्मैनः कृतावान्न कर्वे भृति: ।

Otherwise how can one account for the fact of the Muni Parāśara being so much agitated by passion and why he would behave like a mean low person in the committal of such a grossly blameable act?

सकारणेयमुत्पत्ति: कथितासे5शयंकीर्णी ॥ ५० ॥

शुत्वा पाणच्छ निर्मुक्तो नरो भवति सर्वथा ।

य एतच्छुभभाख्यानं शृणोति श्रुतिमात्रः ॥ ५१ ॥

न दुर्गतिसवानोति सुखी भवति सर्वदा ॥ ५२ ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे द्वितीयसक्थे

द्वितीयोरध्या: 11 2 11

Now has been spoken the wonderful birth story of Vyāsa Deva together with all incidents, enveloped under the great mystery. If any one hears this holy narrative, he will be freed from all sins and will always be happy.

Thus ends the Second Chapter of the Second Book on the birth of Vyāsa Deva in the Mahāpurānam Śrimadevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.

GTA DODD III

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER III

On the Curse on the River Gangiā

ऋष्य कचुः

उत्पत्तिस्तु त्वया प्रोक्ता व्यासस्यामिततेजसः ।

सत्यवत्यास्तवा सूत चित्तरेण त्यबाउपच ॥ 1 ॥

तथायेकस्तु सन्तेशिश्तेउसाकों सुसंस्थितः ।

न निवर्तित धर्मत्र कथितेन त्यबाउपच ॥ 2 ॥

The Rşis said: “O sinless Sūta! You have described to us in detail the birth of Vyāsa, of unrivalled fire, and of Satyavati; but we have one great doubt in our minds though. O knower of Dharma! which is not being removed by your words.

माताव्यासस्यायाजीघानामासत्यवतीशुभा ।

सा कर्थं नृपति प्राणता शनन्तुं धर्मवित्तमम् ॥ ३ ॥

निषायदूग्रीं स कर्थं वृत्तावृषपति: स्थयम् ।

धर्मिषु: पौरों जरा कुलहीनामसंवर्तमम् ॥ ४ ॥

O Sinless one! First, as regards the mother of Vyāsa, the all-auspicious Satyavati, we have this doubt how she came to be united to the virtuous Śantanu? The king Śantanu, of the family of Puru is a greatly religious man; how could he have; married Satyavati knowing her to be a fisherman's daughter and born of a low family?

ग्रान्तोः प्रथमा पत्ती का हृष्णकथायानुः।

भीम पुत्रोल्प भेमावी वसोरंगः कर्व पुनः ॥ 5 ॥

Now say who was the first wife of Śantanu and how Bhisma the intelligent son of Śantanu came to be born of the parts of Vasu?

त्वया प्रोर्फ पुग सूत राजा चिन्तागदः कृतः ।

सत्यव्यतः सुता वीरी यीधेपागितितनेजस ॥ 6 ॥

चित्रागदे हृते वीर कृतसदतुजस्तथा ।

विचित्रवीर्यानाउसी सत्यव्यतः सुता नृप: ॥ 7 ॥

O Sūta! You told before that Bhīsma, of indomitable valour, made Satyavati's son, the brave Citrāngada, king; and subsequent to his death made his younger brother Vicitravirya king.

व्योषे शीभे स्थिते पूर्वे धर्मिषे रूपवत्यिष ।

कृतवान्य कयं राज्यं स्थापितरन्तेन जानता ॥ 8 ॥

But when the elder brother Bhīṣma, the greatly religious and beautiful was present, how was it that Citrāngada and Victiravīrya having been installed by Bhīśma himself could have reigned.

मृत विव्रवार्यैं तु सर्ववत्यतिबृ:खिता ।

व्यूध्यां गोतकां पुत्री जलयामास सा कर्ण ॥ 9 ॥

Again on the demise of Victiravīrya. Satyavatī became very much grieved and got two sons born of her two son's wives by Veda Vyāsa?

कर्थ राज्यं न भीषाय ददौ सा वरविंगिनी ।

न कृतस्तु कर्थ तेन वीरिण दारसंग्रहः ॥ 10 ॥

अधार्मितु कृत: कर्माङ्गावसंगनामिततजास ।

ज्येछेन धातुधार्यां युजाव्यादिताविति ॥ 11 ॥

How can we explain this fact? Why did she do this? Why did she not give to Bhisma the kingdom? Why did Bhisma not marry? And how was it that the elder brother Vyāsa Deva, of indomitable valour, did such an irreligious act as to beget two (Goloka) sons from the wives of the brothers?

पुराणकर्ता धर्मात्मा स कधं कृतावानूनि: ।

सेवनं परदाराणां घातुईव विशेषतः ॥ 12 ॥

Vyāsa composed the Purāṇas and knew everything of religion; how then did he go to other's wives, especially, of his brother's wives?

जूगुष्मतिभंद कर्म से कर्थ कृतावानुपि: ।

शिष्टाचारः कर्थ सूत वेदानुपिमितकासः ॥ 13 ॥

O Sūta! Why did Vyāsa Deva do such a hateful act, in spite of his being a Muni? The actions of Vedas are inferred from their subsequent good conducts; how can this act of Vyāsa be calculated as one amongst them?

व्यासशिष्योसि सेधायिनस्तद्हे छेतुर्महींस ।

श्रौतुकामा वयं संखे धर्मक्षेत्र कृतक्षणाः ॥ 14 ॥

O Intelligent one! You are the disciple of Vyāsa; therefore, you are the best man to solve our doubts. We all of this Dharmaksetra Naimisāranya are very eager to hear this.”

सूत खाच

इश्राकुलशप्रभवो महाधिष्य इति स्मृतः ।

सत्वावन्यमंगीतश्व चक्रवर्ती गृणोतमः ॥ 15 ॥

At this Sūta said: “In ancient days, there reigned a king named Mahābhiṣa, in the family of Āksvāku endowed with all the qualities of a great king; he was the foremost of all the kings, truthful and religious.

अश्वमेधसहेषण वाजपेयगतेन च ।

तोषयामास देेवेन्द्र स्वर्ग प्राप महामाति: ॥ 16 ॥

That highly intelligent king performed thousand-horse-sacrifices (Aśvamedhas) one hundred Vājapeya sacrifices and thereby satisfied Indra, the king of the Devas and went to Heavens.

एकादा बहासदन्त गती राजा महाधिभः ।

सुरा: सर्वे समाजपु: सेवनार्थ प्रजापतिम् ॥ 17 ॥

Once, on an occasion, that king went to the abode of Brahmā; the other gods also went there to serve Prajāpati.

गंगा महान्दी तत संश्रिता सेवितु विभुम् ।

तत्या वास: समुद्धुर्भत मारतेन तरिश्वा ॥ 18 ॥

अधोगुखा: सुरा: सर्वे न विलोबयैव तां स्थितः ।

राजा महापिचतां तु नि:शंक समपरवत ॥ 19 ॥

The great river, Ganga Devi, too, assuming the feminine form, went to Brahmā to serve him. Now, in the interval, violent winds arose and the clothing of Ganga Devi went off; at this the Devas did not

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

look at her; rather kept their faces downwards; but the king Mahābhiṣa continued gazing at her.

साउपि ते प्रमेयंतुं नृपं त्रातवती नृते ।

दूर्वा ती प्रेमयंतुंची निरंतर्जी कामाभोहिति ॥ 20 ॥

Gaṅgā also came to know the king and that he had become attached to her.

बहा चुकोप ती तृणं शणाय च क्वाप्तित ।

मत्पलोकेषु भृपाल जन्म प्राय पुर्निद्वम् ॥ 21 ॥

Brahmā, seeing that both of them are love-stricken and are shameless, became angry and cursed them immediately: "O king! you better take your birth again in the human world and practise great meritorious deeds and come again to this Heaven.

पुर्णेय महातविष्टस्वमाव्यप्सि सर्वथा ।

गड़ां नशोक्तान्बहा यौक्ष्य प्रेमवर्ती नृपे ॥ 22 ॥

Thus saying, Brahmā looked at Ganga, who was attached to the king, and addressed her: "You too better go to the human world and become his wife."

विमनस्कौ तु ती तूर्ण नि:सृती ब्रहणोउत्नतम् ।

स नृपांश्रितयित्वाउध भृत्पौंके धर्मतत्त्वग्न ॥ 23 ॥

Both of them, the king as well as Gāngā, came out of Brahmā's abode, very much grieved in their hearts.

प्रतीयं चित्तयामास पितरं पुर्वंशजम् ।

तृतिस्तमवरे चाही वसवः क्षीसमित्वतः ॥ 24 ॥

विश्वस्यामां प्राता रममाणा वरुच्छ्या ।

पृथ्वादीनां वसूनां च मध्ये को3पि वसूनमः ॥ 25 ॥

King Mahābhisa thought of coming to this world and reflected on the kings thereof and settled to make the king Pratipa of Puru's family his father. At this time the eight Vasus with their wives wandering in various places and enjoying as they liked came to the hermitage of Vasiṣṭha.

धीनीमा तस्य भार्यांश नन्दिनीं गां ददर्श ह ।

इद्वा पति सा पण्ड्छ कस्येयं धेनुकत्ता ॥ 26 ॥

Amongst the aforesaid eight Vasus Prthu and others, one Vasu Dyau's wife seeing Nandinī, the sacrificial cow (Kāmadehneu) of Vasiṣṭha asked her husband:

धौतमामह बसिष्ठस्य गौरिंशं शृणु सुन्दरि ।

दुर्धयमस्या: पिवेदासून नारी वा रुपकोंड या चि 27 चि

अयुतायुभंवेकूनं सदेवागतत्योवनः ।।

तच्छूचा सुसृदी प्राह पुरुतुलोके.जित से सखी ॥ 28 ॥

“Whose is this excellent cow that I see?” Vasu then replied as follows: “O Beautiful one! This is Vasistha’s cow. Whoever, be he a man or woman drinks her milk gets his longevity extended to 10,000 years and his youth never ends.” Hearing this, Vasu’s wife said:

उशीनरस्य राजर्षे: पुत्री परमर्शोभना ।

तस्या हेतोमहाभाग सवसां गो पवसिवसीम् ॥ 29 ॥

आनायास्धाम श्रेष्ठ नन्दिनं कामदां शुभाणम् ।

यावदस्या: पय: पीला सखी मम सदैव हिं ॥ 30 ॥

मानुषेषु भवेदेका जरगतोगविवर्जिता ।

"There is a very beautiful comrade (Sakhī) of mine, the daughter of the Rājarsī-Usīnīsa in the world, of auspicious qualities. O Mahābhāga! Kindly bring to me from Vasiṣṭha's hermitage that auspicious sacrificial milch cow Nandinī together with her calf that yields all desires; my Sakhī will then drink her milk and be thereby get free from disease, old age and become the chief amongst all mankind."

तद्धुत्वा वचनं तत्या दीर्जहार च नंदितून् ॥ 31 ॥

अवमान्य मुनिं वानां पृथ्वाठीः सहितोउपः ।

हतायाथ शन्निव्यां वसिष्ठसून महातपाः ॥ 32 ॥

आजगामाभ्रमपर्थ फलान्यावय सत्वाः ।

Hearing thus, his wife's word, the Vasu Dyau, though sinless, stole together with Prthu and the other Vasus the cow Nandini in utter defiance to the self-controlled Muni Vasistha. When the cow Nandini had been stolen, the great ascetic Vasistha came quickly to the hermitage with abundance of fruits.

नापयश्व यदो धेनुं सवस्तां स्वाध्रभे भूति: ॥ 33 ॥

भृगयामास तेजस्वी गहाशेषु वनेश्धिं ।

नासाडिता यदा धेनुशुकोपातिरूपां भूति: ॥ 34 ॥

वाकगीश्वाधि विज्ञाय ध्यानेन वसुभिर्भतुम् ।

वसुधिमं हता धेनुर्मेसामापमन्य वै ॥ 35 ॥

Muni Vasiṣṭha, not finding, in his hermitage,

his cow with her calf, searched for her in many forests and caves; but he, the son of Varuna, could not find out his cow even after prolonged searches; he, then, took recourse to meditation and came to know that the Vasus had stolen the cow and became angry.

तस्मासर्वे जनिथ्यिति मानुषेपु न संशय: ।

एवं शशाण धार्मिता वर्मुस्तान्याकिणि: स्वयम् ॥ 36 ॥

He expressed: “When the Vasus have stolen this my cow in utter defiance to my self, they must be born amongst men.”

भुत्वा विमनसः सर्वे प्रयतुर्द्विताश्र से ।

शला: स्म इति ज्ञानं त्रश्र पितुप्रचन्न: ॥ 37 ॥

When religious Varuna's son Vasistha thus cursed the Vasus, they became very sorry and absent-minded; all of them went to Vasistha's hermitage and saw him there; they began to supplicate him as much as they could; and took refuge under him.

प्रसाद्यंतस्पृधि वस्वः शरणं गता: ।

पृमित्सानाह धर्माता वसू-दीनानुर्प: स्थितान् ॥ 38 ॥

अनुसंविर्तरं सर्वे शपायोक्षमवाय्यः ।

येनेयं विह्नत धेनुर्निद्ती मम वस्तला ॥ 39 ॥

तस्माह्रीभानुर्भे दैहे दीर्धकालं वशिष्यिति ।

Seeing the Vasus standing before him in an extremely distressed condition, the virtuous Muni Vasistha said: "You all will be free from the curse within one year; but Vasu Dyau will dwell amongst men for a long, long period as he had stolen direct my Nandini with her calf."

ते शगत: पथि गच्छन्ती गड़ांं दृष्ट्वा सरिद्वाग् । 40 ॥

क्रभुतां प्रणातः सर्वे शगतां चितातुतां नदीम् ।

While the Vasus, thus cursed, were returning, they saw on the way the chief river Gaṅgā Devi also cursed and therefore distressed; all of them bowed down to her simultaneously and said:

भविष्यामो वयं देँवि कर्वं देँवा: सुधाशना: ॥ 4 1 ॥

मानुषाणों च जठरे चिन्तेय महती हि नः ।

तस्मार्वं मानुषी भूत्वा जनयास्मावसिद्धे ।। 4 2 ॥

"O Devi! A serious thought is troubling our

minds, how can we, who live on nectar, take our birth in human wombs; so, O best river! You better be a woman and give birth to us.

शंतनुर्म सारास्सितस्य भार्यां भवानघे ।

जाताझाताझुले चास्यासि:क्षिपस्य सुपारपे ॥ 4 3 ॥

एवं शपवितिमर्शे घविता नात्र संशयः ।

O Sinless one! You better be the wife of the sage King Śantanu and no sooner we be born of your womb, kindly throw us in river Ganga (your water). If you do thus, O Ganga, we will certainly be freed of our curse."

तथेयुक्ताश्रि से वर्षे अनुर्लॉक्स स्वक्ष पुनः ॥ 44 ॥

गड़ान्सि निर्माल होदी चिंतयमाना पुनः पुनः ।

महापिघों पुंगे जातः प्रतीपस्य सुततदा ॥ 45 ॥

Gangā Devi replied “Well; that will be.” Thus spoken, the Vasus went to their respective places; and Gangā Devi, too, thinking on the subject again and again, went out of that place. At this time Mahābhiṣa became born as a son of the king Pratipa and became known as Śantanu.

गंतनुर्नाम ग्राजर्षिमांना सत्यसङ्गः ।

प्रतीपस्तु स्तुति चढ़े सुर्येयामिततेजसः ॥ 4 6 ॥

तदा च सलितात्यमात्रिःसूता वरवर्धिनि ।

दक्षिणं शालसंकाशमूदे भेजे शुभानना ॥ 47 ॥

He was exceedingly religious and true to his promise. One day while King Pratipa was praising the Sūrya Deva (the sun) of unequalled energy, Gaṅgā Devi assumed an extraordinarily beautiful feminine form and came out of the waters and sat on the right thigh, resembling like a sāl tree, of the king Pratipa.

अङ्ग्रे स्थिति सिद्धयं चाहा मांगुवहाकि वयरानने ।

मभोगवासियतासि सर्व तिकमर्थ दक्षिणो गुर्जे ॥ 48 ॥

The sage king Pratipa spoke out to the lady sitting on his right thigh, thus: "O beautiful faced one! Why, unasked, have you sat on my auspicious right thigh?"

सा तमाह वरारोहा यदर्थ राजसत्तम् ।

सिद्धानास्येके कुकश्रेघ कामयानां भजस्य मम् । ४१ ।

The lovely Gaṅgā then replied: "Hear why I

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

have sat here. O best of Kurus! O king! Becoming attached to you, I have sat on your thigh; so please accept me."

तमाचोच्छंयो राजा रूपयीवनशालिनीम् ।

नाट परस्धित्य कामाद्रास्छेयं वरवर्धिनीम् ॥ ५० ॥

At this, king Pratipa spoke to the beautiful lady, full of youth and beauty, “I never go, simply out of passion to another’s wife.

स्थिता दक्षिणमूर्ने मे त्वामफिल्प्य च भापिनि ।

अपल्यानां सुचाणों च स्थानं विद्धि शुचिसितं । ५१।

There is another point; you have sat on my right thigh; that is the seat of sons and son's wives; so, when my desired son will be born, you will then, be my son's wife.

सुना मे भव कल्याणि जाते पुत्रे5त्तिवाड्छते ।

भविष्यति च मे पुत्रस्तव पुण्यात्र संशयः ॥ ५२ ॥

And certainly, by your good will, my son will be born." The lady of divine form, said, 'Well; that will be done! and went away.'

तवेल्युक्त्वा गता सा वै कामिनी दिव्यर्शनि ।

राजा चापि गृहं प्रापतिश्रित्यंसिं तिवयं पुनः ॥ ५३ ॥

ततः कालेन क्रियता जाते पुत्रे पयस्त्विनि ।

वनं जिलापिषू राजा पुत्रे वृत्तांतमूचिबान् ॥ ५४ ॥

पुत्तांतं कथयित्वा तु पुनरूचे निवं सुतम् ।

यदि प्रयाति सा बाला त्वं वने चाह्हातिसिनि ॥ ५५ ॥

The king returned to his palace, thinking of the lady. After some time, he had a son born to him and when the son attained his teens, the king desired to lead a forest life and communicated this matter to his son. He said also, if the aforesaid beautifully

smiling girl comes to you to marry, then marry her.

कामयाना वरागेहा तां भवेधा मनोरामम् ।

न प्रवृत्या तवया कासि मघिवोगाराशिपि ॥ 56 ॥

धार्मिन्ती च तां कृत्वा भविता त्वं सुखी किल ।

And I am also ordering you not to question her anything “who are you” and so forth. If you take her as your legal wife, you will certainly be happy.”

सूत उवाच

एवं संदिष्य तं पुंत्रे भूपति: प्रीतमानसः ॥ 57 ॥

दन्ता राज्याक्रियं सर्वा वनं राजा विवेश ह ।

तत्रापि च तत्परत्वा समागध्य पार्थिवकम् ॥ 58 ॥

जगाम स्वर्ग राज्ञसरी देई त्यक्त्वा स्वतेजसा ।

राज्य प्राव्य महातेजाः शन्तुः सावधीभिकम् ॥ 59 ॥

प्रजा वे पालयामास धर्मदूषको महीपति: ॥ 60 ॥

इति शीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे द्वितीयकन्धे

तृतीयोउध्याय: 11 3 11

Thus saying to son, king Pratipa handed over all his kingdom to his son and gladly retired into the forest. The king practised tapasyā in the forest and worshipped Ambikā; on quitting his mortal coil, he went by his sheer merit to the Heavens. The highly energetic king Śantanu, on getting his kingdom, bagan to administer justice according to the laws of Dharma and governed his subjects.

Thus ends the Third Chapter of the Second Book on the description of the curse on Ganga, Mahabhijsa

and Vasus in the Mahapurānam

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.

CHADVED IV

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER IV

On the Birth of the Vasus

सूत उवाच

प्रतीपे5व दिवं याते शननु: सत्यविक्रमः ।

बधूव मृगयाशीलि निशन्यायाम्नुगाथः ॥ 1 ॥

Sūta said: “On the king Pratipa, ascending to the Heavens, the tru!y hero-king Śantanu went out hunting tigers and other forest animals.

स कदाचिद्धने घोरे गुजातीरे चरयुपः ।

दर्शं मृगशावक्षीं सुद्वीं चाकभूषणाम् ॥ 2 ॥

Once, while he was roaming in the wilderness, on the banks of the Ganges, he saw a fawn-eyed well decorated beautiful woman.

दूरहा तां गृपतिमंन: प्रिक्रोकैयं वरानना ।

रूपयौवनस्पम्पता साक्षालल्बभीरिवारपा ॥ 3 ॥

No sooner the king Śantanu saw him than he became addicted to her and thought within himself thus: “Certainly my father spoke of this beautiful faced woman who is looking a second Lakṣmī, endowed with beauty and youth.

पिवन्मुखांबुजं तस्या न नृतिमगमान्पः ।

इहरोभाबवरात्र व्यापचिति झवानय ॥ 4 ॥

महाधिपं साउभि मत्वा प्रेमयुक्ता बधूव ह ।

किंब्धिन-द्वित्यितं कृत्वा तस्यावयो नृपस्य च ॥ 5 ॥

The king could not rest satisfied simply with seeing the lotus-like face. The hair on his body stood on their ends and his heart was very much attracted to her. Gaṅgā Devī, too, knew him to be king Mahābhiṣa and became, in her turn, very much attached to him.

वीक्ष्य तामसितापाङ्गी राजा प्रीतमना भृणम् ।

उवाच मरुंर वाक्यं सांत्ययजलक्षया गिरा ॥ 6 ॥

She then went smiling towards the king. Seeing the blue-coloured lady looking askance at him. The king became very happy and consoled her in sweet words and said:

देही वा तां च बामोक मानुषी वा वरानने ।

गन्यवीं वाथ यक्षी वा नागकन्यप्रसगीव वा ॥ 7 ॥

“O one of beautiful things! Are you Devi, Manuṣi (human kind) Gandharvi; Yakṣi, daughter of Nāgas (serpents), or a celestial nymph?

थासि काउसि वरारोहे भावों मे भव सु-वृत्ति ।

प्रेमयुक्तिसेते त्वं धर्मपत्नी भवाएं मे ॥ 8 ॥

Whoever you may be, O beautiful one! be my wife; your smiles, it seems, are brimful of love; so be my legal wife today.

सूत उवाच

राजा तां नाभिज्ञानाति गड़ैयमिति निश्छिनम् ।

महाधियं समुतयं नृयं ज्ञानाति जाइबी ॥ 9 ॥

Sūta said: “The king Śantanu could not recognise the lady to be Gaṅgā; but Gaṅgā knew that he is the king Mahābhiṣa and is born as Śantanu.

पूर्वीप्रमसामोगाछ्छूला वाचं नृपस्य ताम ।

उवाच नारी राजानें सिमपूर्विंदिं वचः ॥ 10 ॥

Hearing the above words of the king, Gaṅgā, out of her previous affections, spoke out to the king, smiling :

स्व्यवाच

ज्ञानाति त्वां नृपश्रेष्ठ प्रतिपतानयं शुभम् ।

का न वार्ज्डति चार्वीर्ग भाविलास्तर्पुं पतिम् ॥ १ १ ॥

“O king! I know that you are the son of the king Pratipa. Behold! Though it is inevitable that woman will get thier husbands, yet who is that beautiful lady that does not husband according to her liking and qualifications?

वावक्योन नृपश्रेष्ठ कार्थिय पति किल ।

शृणु मे समयं राजन्नृणोगि त्वां नृपोतम ॥ 12 ॥

But I can take you as my husband, if you make certain promise to me. Hear my resolve: afterwards I will marry you.

यच्च कुर्यार्महं कार्यं शुर्णं च यदि वारजुषम् ।

न निषेध्या त्वया राजत्र चत्क्यं त्वाप्रियम् ॥ 13 ॥

O king! Whatever I will do, be it good or bad, auspicious or inauspicious, you must not hinder or interrupt me nor ever say that it is not to your liking and satisfaction.

यदा च त्वं नृपश्रेष्ठ न कत्थ्यासि मे वक्षः ।

तदा मुक्ल्चा गमिष्यामि येर्देशुंचे च मारिये ॥ 14 ॥

Whenever you will break this my resolve, I will instantly quit you and go to another place wherever I like."

सूला जन्म वसूनां सा प्रार्थनापूर्वकं कृदि ।

महाधिषय्य प्रेमाय विवर्धेर्व च जाहडी ॥ 15 ॥

तथेत्युक्ताउव सा देवी चकातर नृपति पतिन् ।

King Śantanu, then, said: "Well! That will be" and promised to the above effect; then Gangaś Devi recollected within herself Vasus' words and thought of the attachment of the king Mahābhiṣa and accepted Śantanu as her husband.

एवं वृता नृनूपाय कृत्री मानुषुक्तिपणी ॥ 16 ॥

नृपरित्य मन्दिरे प्राप्ता सुभगा वरवर्गिनी ।

नृपस्तितरां समासाश चिन्जीडोपवने शुभे ॥ 17 ॥

Thus married to king Śantanu, the beautiful Gaṅgā in human form went to his abode. The king, on having got possession of her, began to enjoy in pleasant gardens.

सार्थि ते रमयामास भावज्ञा वै सारुक्तना ।

न बुबोधि नृपः क्रीड-नात्न. वर्षगणानण १। १८ ॥

स तवा मृगलावाश्या रणचा रगतकतुर्वो।

सा सर्वगुणस्म्यज्ञा सेठीपि कामविचक्षणः ॥ १९ ॥

रेमाते मन्टरे दिव्ये न्यानारायणायिव ।

एवं गच्छिति काले सा द्वारा नुपलेतद्धा ॥ 20 ॥

गर्भ गड़ा वसुं पुरं सुपुवे चाक्लोचना ।

जानमात्रं सुतं वारि चिक्षेर्वेबं द्वितीयके द्वितीयके ॥ 21 ॥

तृतीयेद्व चतुर्धैद्व पझने पछ एच च ।

सपने या हते पुत्रे राजा चिंतापरो5पवत् ॥ 22 ॥

The lady, too, appreciated his mental feelings and began to serve him to his satisfaction. Thus many years elapsed in lovely enjoyments and intercourses between couple who looked like Indra and his pair Saci; and they did not feel at all how the time passed. The lady endowed with all qualities and the clever king, well-versed in the art of loving, began to enjoy incessantly like Lakṣmī and Nārāyaṇa, in their divine palace. Thus many years passed when the lovely eyed lady became pregnant of the king Śāntanu's sperm and, in due time, gave birth to a son who was a Vasu. No sooner the son was born than Gaṅgā Devī threw it in the waters of the Ganges. Thus the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh sons were thrown successively into the waters.

कि कौरोमध्यं वरीगे मे कधं सत्यतृष्यितो भृति ।

सत पुत्रा हता तूनमनवा पापकपया ॥ 23 ॥

Then the king became very anxious and thought within himself: "What am I to do now? How my family be preserved?

निवारापयि यदीमां चल्कता यास्यति सर्वथा ।

अत्यदोप्रं सुसूप्राप्तो गर्भों में मनसीलितिः ॥ 2 2 4 ॥

This my wife, incarnate of sin, has killed my seven sons; if I now desist her, she will instantly

leave me and go away. Now this is the eighth pregnancy as desired by me.

न वारयाम चेच्छा सर्वेथें जले श्रिपेत् ।

भविता वा न वा चाडो संग्योर्धे मभाबूतः ॥ 25 ॥

सम्भवेर्षि च दुह्यें रक्ष्येहा न रक्ष्येत् ।

एवं संग्यिते कार्य किं कर्तव्य मयाउघ्ना ॥ 26 ॥

वंशस्य रक्षणार्थ हिं यनः कार्यः परे मया ।

Now if I do not interrupt her, she will certainly throw my son in the Ganges. Whether a son will be born again or not is doubtful; and even if that be born, it is doubtful whether she will preserve that child; now what am I to do in this doubtful point? However I will try my best to continue the thread of my family line.

ततः काले यदा जातः पुत्रोउपमहाय वसुः ॥ 27 ॥

मुनेयैन् हता धेनुर्निदनी क्षीकितेन है ।

तं दृष्टवा नुपाति: पुत्रं तानुपावच पतनये ॥ 28 ॥

Now, in due time, the Vasu who, having been influenced by his wife had stolen Vasistha's cow Nandinī, became born as the eighth son of Gaṅgā Devi; king Śantanu, seeing son fell unto Gaṅga's feet and said:

दासोस्मि तव तन्विक्र प्रार्थयामि शुचिधिमते ।

पुत्रमेकं पुषायनें देहि जीवितमाद्ध मे ॥ 29 ॥

“O thin-bodied woman! I pray to you to give my life today; better nourish this my one son.

हिंसिता सन पुत्रा मे करोफ़्त रव्या शुणाः ।

अर्ध्य रक्ष सुश्रीण पतायि तक पाद्वो: ॥ 30 ॥

O beautiful one! You killed in succession my seven exceedingly beautiful sons.

अन्यहै प्रार्थित तेउरा द्वताय्य च दुर्लंमम् ।

बंगो मे रक्षणीयोउछा त्वया परमगोधने ॥ 31 ॥

O one of beautiful hips! I now fall at your feet. O beautiful one! save the life of this child of mine. If you ask from me any other thing today, even that be very rare, I will give it to you; but you better now keep the thread of my family line.

अपुत्रस्य गतिन्तरित स्वर्गे वैद्विवदो विवुः ।

तस्माद्व वराग्रेे प्रायंयान्यद्यं सुतम् ॥ 32 ॥

The Pundits, versed in the Vedas, say that he who has no issues cannot go to Heaven; so, O beautiful one! Today I pray to you to keep the life of this my eighth son."

इत्युक्तापि गृहीत्वा तं दया गन्तुं सम्युक्ता ।

तदा स कुपितो राजा तामुवाराशितू:खितः ॥ 33 ॥

पाणिषेத் किं करोमध्य निर्वाश विभेषे किम् ।

क्रांति यायकरणां त्वं पुरी यायरता सदा ॥ 34 ॥

Though thus spoken by Śantanu, Gaṅgā Devi was eager to take away the son to throw in the waters; the king became very sorrowful and angrily spoke out “O vile and vicious woman! What are you going to do?

यथेच्छं पच्छ हा तिष्ठ पुरो मे स्थीयातिषु ।

कि कौरीय तथा पाये वेशान्तकरायनग्न ॥ 35 ॥

Do you not fear hell! of what villain are you the daughter, that you are always doing this vicious deed? O Sinner! go away wherever you will or remain here as you like, it matters little; but my son will remain here.

एवं वदति घृपाले सा गृहीला सुर्त शिशुम् ।

गछ्छनीं वचनं कोपसंयुता तुमावाच है ॥ 36 ॥

When you attempt to bring my family to extinction, what use is there in living with you?" When the king thus spoke to the woman who was ready to take away the son, she angrily spoke as follows:

पुत्रकामा सुतं त्वेनं पालयामि वने गता ।

समयो मे पनीत्यामि चवनं हान्ययाकुतम् ॥ 37 ॥

“O King! When you have acted against my promise, my word is broken and my connection with you has stopped from today.

गड़ांगं मैं वैवजानीहि देवकायार्वीयमाताम् ।

वसवस्तु युरा शगता वसिष्ठेन महात्मना ॥ 38 ॥

Therefore, I will take this son to the forest, where I will nourish him. I am Gāngā; to fulfil God's work I have come here. The high-souled Vasistha cursed before the eight Vasus:

ज्वर्तु मानुषी योनिं स्थितां चित्तातुरासु माम ।

दूर्ध्वेदे प्रार्थयामासुर्जन्ती नो भवान्चे ॥ ३ ९ ॥

“Better be born as men”: they became very anxious; and seeing me they prayed: “O Sinless one! let you be mother of us all.”

तेभ्यो दत्ता वर्ग जाता पर्नीं ते नृपसत्तम ।

देवकाव्यार्थिविर्सिद्धार्थ जानीहि संभवो मम ॥ ४० ॥

O best of kings! I granted them what they desired! and then for the purpose of serving god's ends, I became your wife. Know this my history.

सप्त ते वसवः पुत्रा मुक्तः शापावृषेसु ते ।

क्रियन्तं कालमेकोउंच तव पुत्रो घोविष्यति ॥ 4 1 ॥

The seven Vasus already were born and were freed; now this is the last Vasu and he will remain here for sometime as your son."

गड़ादतमियां पूरं गृहाणं शन्नतो स्वयम् ।

वसुं देते विदित्वेने सुखं भूक्ष सुतोड़वम् ॥ 42 ॥

O Śantanu! now take this son offered by Gāngā. Know this to be the Deva Vasu and enjoy the pleasure of having a son.

गोगोधोयं महाभाग घबिव्यित्र बतायकः ।

अष्ठ तत नयामेयं यत्र त्वं वे मया वृतः ॥ 43 ॥

दास्यामि योवनं प्रानं पानवित्यात महीपते ।

न मातृहितः पुत्रे जीवेत्र च सुखी भवेत् ॥ 44 ॥

Ohighly fortunate one! This son will be famous by the name of Gāngcya (Gānga's son) and will be the most powerful of all. O King! Today I will take this son to the place where I chose you as my husband; I will nourish him and when he attains his youth, I will return him to you. For, this son, if deprived of mother, will not be happy; nor will he live."

इतुक्कनातदीय गुक्ता तं गृहीत्वा च बालकम् ।

राजा चातीव दु:खातं: संविध्यो निजमन्दिरे ॥ 45 ॥

Thus saying, Ganga's vanished with the son; king Śantanu became very sorrowful and passed away his time in his palace.

भार्थिरिकृतं दुःखं तथा पुत्रस्य चाढुतम् ।

सर्वदा चिन्तयत्रासते राज्यं कुर्वेमहीपति: ॥ 46 ॥

The king thought always of the separation from his wife and son and thus painfully governed his kingdom.

एवं गछति कालेश्व नुपतिभुगयां गता: ।

निधन्मनगगणान्वाणीमहिषान्मूकरानपि Ⅱ 47 Ⅱ

गंगातीमनुपाल: स राजा शन्तनुस्तदा ।

नदी सतिकाजलों दृष्टवा विमित्म: स महीपति: ॥ 48 ॥

Thus some time passed on, when, once on an occasion, king Śantanu went out a hunting and killed, with arrows, buffaloes, boar, and other wild animals and came to the banks of the Ganges.

ततापश्यन्तुकार्ते न मुंड्तं विशिषाळ्बहूत ।

आकृष्य च महाचार्य क्रीडन्ते सरितरते ॥ ४१ ॥

Here he saw with great wonder that a boy was playing with a great bow and was shooting arrows after arrows.

तं वीक्ष्य विमित्तो राजा न सम ज्ञानाति किऊ्ज्ञान ।

नोतेलेपे स्मृति भूप: पुत्रोदरं मम वा त वा ॥ ५० ॥

The king's attention was attracted towards the boy, but whether that was his or not, did not at all come to his mind.

दृष्टवाद्यमानुर्यं कर्म बाणेषु ल्युहस्तात् ।

विद्यां वास्त्रिमां कर्णं तन्य वै स्मरसिश्मभ ॥ 51 ॥

पण्छ्छ विस्मितो राजा कस्य पुजोर्जस चानय ।

नोवाच किष्ठिक्छीरीउसी मुंचकिष्ठीमुखान्य ॥ 52 ॥

Looking at his extraordinary feats, his agility in shooting arrows with ease and quickness his learning that can have no equal and his beautiful form, as if of Cupid, he became greatly surprised and asked him: "O Sinless one! whose son are you? The hero boy did not reply anything but went away shooting his arrows.

अन्धार्थनंगर: सोडय राजा चिन्तालुतेरोभवत् ।

कोउं यम मुतेो वालः किं करोमि ग्रजामि कम् ॥ 53 ॥

The king thought within himself “Who is this boy? Whose son is he? What to do now? To whom shall I go now?

गड़ो तृत्वा भृपाल स्थितस्तत्र समाहितः ।

दर्शनं सा ददौ चाथ चारूकपा चथा पुरा ॥ 54 ॥

Thus pondering, he recollected within himself and began to recite verses in praise of Gāngā; Gaṅgā, assuming her beautiful form as before, became visible to the king.

दृष्टा तां चास्त्वर्मी वभावे नृपति: स्वयम् ।

कोउयं गड़े नृते वालों मन त्वं दर्शयानुना ॥ 55 ॥

Seeing her, the king said: O Gaṅgā! Who is this boy that has just gone? Will you show him once more to me now?"

गंगोवाच

पुत्रोयं तव गजेत्र रक्षितश्राम्यो वसु ।

ददामि तव हस्ते तु गंगोरोयं महातपः ॥ ५६ ॥

Hearing these words of Śantanu, Gaṅgā said: "O king of kings! He is your son, he is that eighth Vasu. So long I have nourished him and now I hand him over to you.

कौतिकांत कुलस्याय भविता तव सुस्तः ।

पाठितस्वविज्ञालावेदान्यनुवेदं च शाश्त् ॥ 57 ॥

O Suvrata! This is the great ascetic Gāgneya. He is the illustrious scion of your family. The glory of your line will be enhanced. I have taught him the whole science of archery.

वसिष्यायान्ने दिष्ट्य संस्थितोर्भ सुस्तल ।

सर्वविदायाधिनानः सर्वर्विशुक्रणतः सुधि: ॥ 58 ॥

This pure son of your dwelt in the hermitage of Vasistha and has become versed in all the Vidyās and skilled in all the actions.

यद्रे उमादन्योर्भसी तदैदायं सुस्तव ।

गृहाण गच्छ राजैंर सुखी भव नराधिप ॥ 59 ॥

Your this son knows everything that Jamadgni Paraśurāma knew. So, O King of Kings! Take now your son and be happy.

इन्युक्त्वांगतदीय गुजा तत्त्वा गुजा तत्त्वा ने ।

नूपनस्तु मुदा युक्तो बष्वानतिसुखान्तिच : ॥ 60 ॥

समालिथ्य सुते राजा समाधाय च मतकम् ।

समापेय चपुं जस्युं स प्रपक्रमे ॥ 61 ॥

Thus saying, Gaṅgā gave him his son and vanished; the King also became very glad and embraced his son; he smelled his head and took him to his chariot and drove towards his own city.

गत्वा गजाबुढ़ा राजा चकारोत्सवमुतम् ।

दैवर्षे च समाकृय पण्ड्छ च शुर्णं दिनम् ॥ 62 ॥

On returning to Hastināpur, the king held a great

festival (utşab) in honour of the arrival of his son; he called all his astrologers and enquired what day was auspicious.

समझाइत्य प्रजा: सर्वा: सचिवान्यर्वेशृ. शुभान् ।

यौवाराज्ये३४ गाज्ञैवं स्थाययामास पार्थिव: ॥ 6 3 ॥

He then called all his subjects and ministers, did installed Gāngeya as the Crown Prince.

इयूवा तं युवराजानं पुत्रं सर्विगुणान्यितम् ।

सुख्यास स धर्मातना न समसर च जाखदीम् ॥ 6 4 ॥

The religious Śantanu became very happy on making Gāngeya, the Crown Prince; he forgot the pains due to Gānga's bereavement.

सूत उवाच

एतद: कथितं सर्वे कारणं वः सुगापजम् ।

गाङ्गेयस्य तथोत्थिं जाहुबा: सम्भवं तथा ॥ 65 ॥

Sūta said: “Thus I have described to you the cause of the curse on Vasus, the birth of Bhisma from the womb of Gaṅgā, the union of Gaṅgā and Śantanu, etc.

गड़ावतरणं पुण्यं वसूनां सम्भवं तथा ।

यः शुणोति नरः पायामुच्यते नात्र संशया ॥ 6 6 ॥

He who hears in this world this holy story of Gaṅgā's birth and the birth of the Vasu, is freed of all sins and gets mukti.

पुर्णयं पविषमाख्यानं कथितं मुनिसत्तमाः ।

यथा मया श्रुतं व्यासात्युर्णगं वैदसंगितम् ॥ 67 ॥

O Munis! I have described these meritorious holy accounts, as I heard from the mouth of Vyāsa.

श्रीमद्धागवतं पुणयं नानाख्यानकबात्वितम् ।

द्वैपायनमुखोबूतं पछतक्षणगर्मयुन्त् ॥ 68 ॥

शुण्वतां सर्वेपाण्टेन शुण्वं सुखदं तथा ।

इतिहासमिदं पुण्यं काँतिंतं पृत्रिसत्तमाः ॥ 69 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागतते महापुराणे द्वितीयरकन्दे

सतुर्योधया: 11 4 11

Any body who hears this holy Śrimad Bhāgavatam, endowed with five characteristics and filled with various anecdotes, that came out of the mouth of Vyāsa, finds all his sins destroyed and attains peace and blessedness. O, Munis! Thus has been described completely to you this holy history.

Thus ends the Fourth Chapter on the birth of the Vasus in the Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.

CHAPTER V

On the Marriage of Stayavati

རྟམས ཆུན:

མུརྡོ་ མུརྡོ་ མུརྡོ་ མུརྡོ་ མུརྡོ་ མུ་

गाङ्गेयस्य तथोयस्ति: कथिता लोगहर्षो ॥ १ ॥

The Rsis said: "O son of Lomaharṣna, O Sūta; you have described to us how the eight Vasus, cursed by Vasisṭṭha, took their birth and how Bhismā was born.

माता व्यासस्य धर्मत्र नान्ता सत्यवती सती ।

कथं शैतनुना प्राप्ता भार्याँ नाथवती शुभा ॥ २ ॥

तन्माघवृव विस्तारं दाराणुप्री कर्थं वृत्ता ।

राज्ञा प्रभवरिज्ञि संगयं छिधि सुवत ॥ ३ ॥

O knower of Dharma! Now describe to us in detail how the greatly religious king Śantanu married the auspicious Yojanagandhā, the chaste Satyavati, the mother of Vyāsa, knowing full well

that she was a fisherman's daughter? O Suvrata! Remove our this doubt."

सूत उवाच

शन्तनुपंमि राजर्धिभूगयानितर: सदा ।

वंनं जगाम निधनवै मृगांश्र महिष्यानृत्त् ॥ ॥ ॥

Sūta then said: The sage king Śantanu always used to go to forests on hunting expedition, with his heart addicted to hunting buffaloes, deer and various other wild animals.

चत्वायैंत तु वर्षिण पुत्रेण सह भूपति ।

यमाण: सुखं प्राप कुमारेण यथा हरः ॥ 5 ॥

Thus, for four years that king went out a hunting, with his son Bhīsma, deer and other wild animals and got the highest happiness as Mahādeva finds in company with Kārtikeya.

एकदा विश्वप-वाणणान्विनिचन-वड्वाग्युकग्न।

स क्वा चिद्वनं प्रातः कार्लिंदी सरितां वत् ॥ 6 ॥

Once, on an occasion, while he was shooting arrows at rhinoceros and boar, etc., he went so far as to reach the banks of the Yamunā, the chief of the rivers.

महीपतितनिद्रैन्यमाजिद्वरोंधमुतनम् ।

तस्य प्रवयमविच्छसंचचार वर्न तदा ॥ 7 ॥

न मंदारस्य न्योउंयं मृगनाभिमदस्य न ।

चमकस्य न मालत्वा न केततव्या मनोहरः ॥ 8 ॥

कृतोउपयेति वायुर्वं मम प्राणायिभाहन: ॥ 9 ॥

There he began to smell an excellent nice smell that could not be described in words; he tried to find out the source and wandered here and there, and on all sides of the forest; and thought that this enchanting smell was not that of Mandāra flowers, musk, Campaka nor that of Mālati nor that of Ketaki flowers; the air was blowing saturated with peculiar fragrant smell that he never experienced before.

इति सछित्यमानोउसी बघाम वनमण्डलम् ।

मोहितो गम्बोभेन शनतुः पवनानुगः ॥ 10 ॥

Thus thinking of that smell king Śantanu, being enchanted with that, followed to its source in that forest.

स दर्दर्ग नदीतीरे संस्थितां चाफर्दर्गनाम् ।

शूज्ञार्यहितां कान्तां सुस्थितां मलिनांवराम् ॥ 11 ॥

दूद्वा तामसितापांगी विमिता: स महीपति: ।

अन्या देहस्य गीधोर्यमिति संगतानिश्रधः ॥ 12 ॥

At last he came to a spot on the banks of the Yamunā the chief of the rivers, where a very beautiful girl, calm and quiet and with feminine gestures and posture amorous, lovely but ill-clad, was sitting; and he found out that the above beautiful smell was coming out of her body.

तद्धूत रूपयमतीय सुन्दरं

तथैव गयोर्शिखललोकसंमतः ।

वयश तारूद्नवयीवन रुभं दृहेव

राज किल विमितो५वत् ॥ 13 ॥

The form of the lady was extremely beautiful;

the smell was very wonderful, and captivating the hearts of all; her age then entered to youth and she was very auspicious.

केवं कृती वा समुपगातअरुना

देवांगना वा किमु मानुषी वा ।

गन्धर्वेपूत्री किल नागकन्या जाने

कर्वं गन्धवर्ती नु कामिनीम् ॥ 14 ॥

The king was greatly surprised and was eager to know who the lady was; whence she had come; whether she was a Deva girl, or a human or a Gandharva daughter or a Nāga daughter?

सख्रित्य चैवं मनसा नृगोरसी

न निश्छयं प्राप यदा ततः स्थवम् ।

गड़ां स्मारन्मावर्ग गतोस्थ

पप्रच्छ कान्ता ततसंस्थांत च ॥ 15 ॥

But, being unable to come to a definite conclusion and passionate, he remembered Ganga and asked that lady sitting on the bank of the Yumunā, thus:

कासि प्रिय केस्य सुतासि

कस्माद्रि स्थिता तं विजने वरेगे ।

एकाकिनी किं बद चाफनेत्रे

विद्यातिता या न विवाहितासि ॥ 16 ॥

“O dear! Who are you? Whose daughter are you? Why are you alone in this lovely forest? O beautiful eyed! Are you married? Or are you as yet unmarried? So answer to all these.

संजातकामोउहमालनेरे नवां

वीक्ष्य कान्ता च मनोहारं च ।

ब्रहूँ पिंये यासि चिकोर्षिस

वं किं चेति सर्वे मय चिस्तरेण ॥ 17 ॥

O lovely eyed one! Seeing your lovely enchanting form I am become extremely passionate. So, O dear! Describe in detail to me, who are you? and what do you intend to do?"

इत्येवमुक्ता सुदती गुरेण

प्रोवाच तं सस्मितमंबुजेक्षणा ।

दाराशय पूर्याँ त्वमवेहि

राज-कन्या चितुः शासनसंस्थितां च ॥ १८ ॥

When the king spoke thus: "The lotus eyed nice-

teethed lady replied as follows: "O king! know me as a fisherman's daughter and I am completely under my father's command.

तरीमिमां धर्मानिमितमेव

संवाहयामीह जले नृप्रेँ ।

पिता गृहे मेउढा गतोस्ति कामं

सत्यं ब्रवीमथर्वपते तवाएं ॥ 19 ॥

O king of kings! For Dharma's sake I carry ferry across this Yamunā river. My father has gone today to our house. O Master of wealth! Thus I have spoken truth to you."

इत्येवमुक्त्वा विरराम बाला

कामातुरस्तां नृपतिवंभाये ।

कुकप्रवीरं करभं पांति तवं

यूथा न गच्छेनु यौवने ते ॥ 20 ॥

Thus saying the lady desisted; the passionate king then spoke to him: "I am the foremost hero of the Kuru family; so choose me as your husband; then your this youth will not go in vain.

न चास्ति पली माम वै द्वितीया

तं धर्मपनी भव मे भुगाश्रि ।

दासोरीस्थि तेउई खगगः सदैव

मनोभवत्पायति प्रिये माम ॥ 21 ॥

O fawn-eyed one! I have no other wife existing; so you will be my legal wife. O Dear! Passion is giving much pain to me; therefore, I am now become your obedient servant for ever.

गता प्रिया मां पीह्व्य कान्ता

नान्या वृताङर्ह विधुरोस्मि कान्ते ।

त्वां वांक्ष्य सर्वांवरवातिरमां

मनो है जातं विवर्ग मदीवम् ॥ 2 2 ॥

O Beloved! My former dear wife has abandoned me and gone away; but I have not married since then. Now seeing you beautiful, in all respects, I cannot bring my mind under control."

शुत्वासभृतात्यातरसं नृपस्य

वचोस्त्रियं खतु दासक-न्या ।

उवाच तं सात्चिकभावसुना

कृत्वास्त्रियैं नृपत सुगना ॥ 23 ॥

Hearing these nectar-like beautiful words of the

king, the sweet scented fisherman's daughter, though also turned extremely passionate, held patience and exclaimed:

यदाच्य राजनमय तत्वेय

मन्येउद्यमेतनु यथा वधरले ।

नास्मि स्वतन्ना त्वमवेहि कामं

दाता पिता मेधये तं लवागु ॥ 24 ॥

“O King! I also desire that which you have expressed; I am of opinion to act according to your wishes. But, what am I to do? I am not dependent. You are to know this. My father alone can give me in marriage to you.

न स्थैरिणी हास्यपि दाणुर्जी

पितृर्वींगेउई सततं चरापि ।

स चेहद्वाति प्रधितः पिता

मे गृहाण पार्थि वरणागसि मेतेहम ॥ 25 ॥

So better ask my father for me. Though I am a fisherman's daughter, still I am not wanton and wilful. I am always obedient to my father; if my father wills, you can marry me. And I will be obedient to you.

मनोसवस्त्यां नृप किं दुनौति

यथा पुनर्मा नवयोर्नां च ।

दुनेति ततापि हि रक्षणीया

धृति: कुलतावारप्यमारसु ॥ 26 ॥

O king! The god of love is tormenting me, who is endowed with youth; he does not torment you so much. Still I must regard my family manners and customs coming down from ancient times. I must hold my patience."

सूत उवाच

इत्याकार्यं चचस्तस्या नुपति: काममोहितः ।

गतो द्वाणपतेर्ह तस्या याचनद्रेतर्ह १२७ ७।

Sūta said: “Thus passionately pleased with these fascinating words of the lady, the king went to the fisherman’s house for the lady.”

दूर्वा नुपतिशायन्तं द्वागोस्तिविरमयं गतः ।

प्रणामं नृपतेः कृत्वा कृतावृत्तिरभायन ११ २८ ॥

Seeing the king coming, the fisherman was

Srimaddevibhagavatam

greatly bewildered and astonished and bowed with great devotion and said:

द्वारा उवाच

द्वासोस्ति तव घ्याल कृतार्थोई हतायगे ।

आजाँ देहि महाराज यद्यमिह चागमः ॥ 29 ॥

“O King! I am Thy servant. I am blessed by Thy presence. O great King! Now be graciously pleased to order me the cause of Thy arrival.”

राजोवाच

धर्मपत्नी करिष्यामि सुतामेतां तवानय ।

त्वया चेदीयते महां सत्यमेतदूक्रवीति ते ॥ ३० ॥

Hearing the fisherman's words, the King said: "O sinless one! This I tell you truly that if you give me your daughter in marriage I will certainly make her my legal wife."

द्वारा उवाच

कन्यारन्तं मदीयं चेच्चतं प्रार्थयसे नृय ।

दालव्यं तु प्रदास्यामि न लद्येच कदाचन ॥ 31 ॥

The fisherman replied: “O king! What must be given ever, how can I say that is not to be given. Therefore, if Thou askest for my daughter, I will certainly give her to Thee.

तत्सा: पुत्रो महाराज त्वदन्ते पृथिवीपिति ।

सर्वथा चाभिषेक्यो नाव्यः पुरसत्वेति व ॥ ३२ ॥

But, O Great King! Thou wilt have to make her son, the king of Thy kingdom; no other son of Thine could be king after Thy absence."

सूत उवाच

शुत्वा वाक्यं तु वाशस्य राजा चित्तानुरोभवत् ।

ग्रासुँयं मसता कृता नोवाच नुपतितस्तद ॥ 33 ॥

Hearing these words of the fisherman, king Śantanu became very anxious. He remembered Gāngeya and could not speak anything.

कामातुरो गृहं प्राणालिंशतिबेहो महीपति: ।

न सस्तौ बुधुजे नाथ न सुचाम गृहं गतः ॥ 34 ॥

He, being sick with love anxiously returned home; but he abandoned bathing, fooding, sleeping, etc.

चिन्तातुरं तु तं दुर्धया पुत्रो देवबतस्तदा ।

गत्वारूपछ्चमहीपालं तदसनोषाकारणम् ॥ 35 ॥

At this, the son Gāngeya Bhīṣma whose vow was equal to that of the gods, marking that the king was being troubled with some thought, went to him and asked why he was anxious:

दुर्जेयः कोर्सित शुजस्ने कोरोमि बरागं तव ।

का चिन्ता नृपगाईल सत्यं वद नृपोनम ॥ 36 ॥

"O king! Say truly what is your anxiety; who is your enemy that is not conquered; whom do you want to bring under your control? O King! What use is there of having a son who does not understand the difficulties of his father, or does not try to remove these difficulties.

किं तेन नातेन सुतेन राजनुःखं

न जानाति न नागयेऊः ।

प्रथां प्रतीतुं सुगुयगातोउसी

प्रागजनं नात विशालगाउसित ॥ 37 ॥

A son can be called really the son, who is born to repay the debts incurred by him in previous births; there is no manner of discussion in this.

विमुच्य राज्यं सुवन्द्रतोपि

ताताज्ञा द्वाराशियतु रामः ।

वर्न गतं लक्ष्मणाजानकीभ्यां

सहैव गैले किल विश्रकटम् ॥ 38 ॥

See, Raghu's son Dāśarathī Rāma abandoned his kingdom under the orders of his father and repaired to Citrakūta forest with his brother Laksmana and wife Sitā.

सुतो हरिश-हन्नुपस्य राजन्

यो गेहितश्रौत प्रसिद्धनामा ।

क्रीतोर्ध यशि विश्यणोशस्थ

दासापिते चिपगृहे तु नृनम् ॥ 39 ॥

The son of king Harisācandra, Rohita, ready to repay the debt of his father and sold by his father worked as a servant at a Brāhmin's house.

तथासंजिनार्त्य सुतो वरिष्ठो

नामा शूर्ज-शेग इति प्रसिद्धः।

क्रीतस्तु पित्रायय युपवद्धः

संगीचितो गाधिसुतेन पशत् ॥ 40 ॥

So the famous Śunaśepha, sold by his high souled father Ajigarta was tied for sacrifice in a sacrificial post; but he was afterwards freed by the Gādhi's son Viśvāmitra.

प्रियात्रया जामदान्येन पूर्व

छिड़ शिंगे मातृर्नित प्रसिद्धम् ।

अकामीयमाचारित च तेन

गुरोतृज्ञा च गरीयसी कृता ॥ 41 ॥

It is well known that, in ancient days, the Jamadagni's son Paraśurāma cut off his mother's head under the orders of his father. He considered the father's words more important, and hence could do such an unjust act.

इंड शर्गीत तब घृपते न

क्ष्मोदासि नूनं बेते किं करोम्यहम् ।

न शोचरीयं मायि वर्तमाने-

उद्यासाध्यमर्थ प्रतिपाद्यम्यद: ॥ 42 ॥

O king! This my body is at your disposal; I can certainly do what you order me to do. So say what am I to do? as long as I am living, you need not express any sorrow; if you permit, I will do what is even hardly practicable to do.

प्रश्रूहि राजस्वत काजस्ति चिन्ता

निवारायामध्य धनुर्गृतीला ।

हेदेन मे चेच्चरिताथता वा

भवल्योभा भवतिश्राकीषि ॥ 43 ॥

O king! Say why you are anxious; I will remove that at once with this bow in my hand. If my body goes in carrying you mandate, know that your desire will be fructified.

धिन्के सुतं च: विगुरोषित्तार्थ

क्ष्मोर्षि सत्र प्रतियादयेध: ।

ज्ञानेन किं तेन सुतेन कामं

वितृनं चिन्तां हि समुद्धोहः ॥ 44 ॥

Fie to that son, who, being capable, is averse to do what his father desires! What use is there in having a son who does not remove the cause of his father's anxiety?"

सूत उवाच

निश्योति वचस्तस्थ पुत्र-य प्रोतनुर्पिणः ।

तज्जमानस्तु मनसा तमाह त्वितिं सुतम् ॥ 45 ॥

Hearing the words of the son, King Śāntanu felt much ashamed in his heart and said:

राजोवाच

चित्ता मे महती पुत्र यस्त्वमेकोप्रति से सुतः ।

शूरोअतिवलवान्मी संग्रामेवधराक्रधुःः ॥ 46 ॥

एकावतवस्य मे तात युद्धेते जीवितं कित् ।

मृते त्विय घुंरे क्वाथि कि कंकौमि नित्रावः ॥ 47 ॥

एषा मे महती चित्ना तेनाता दुःवित्तोस्यसहम् ।

नान्याचितानास्तिति से पुत्र यां ततायो घदायम्हम् ॥ 48 ॥

“O son! This is now my gravest care that you are my only son; besides you are a hero very powerful, honoured and never showing your back in battles; therefore, if, out of ill-luck you become dead in some battlefield, I will become isueless; under such circumstances what am I to do?

सूत उवाच

तदाक्षयां या गृहेयो मान्रवृद्धानपृष्ठत ।

न मां वदिति भृपातोल लज्जयाद्ध परिप्लुतः ॥ 49 ॥

वित्त वार्तां पुर्यचादु पृष्टवा यूयं विनिश्यात् ।

सत्यं बवैतु मां सर्वे तत्कारोभि निराकुलः ॥ 50 ॥

So, O son! My life is fruitless when I have got only one son; this is my gravest care; therefore I am sorry. O son! I have no other cares that I can mention to you."

तच्छूला ते नृयं गत्वा संविदाय च कारणम् ।

गश्गसुर्विविदायैस्तु गाज्ञेसर्वद्धिनन्तय् ॥ 51 ॥

सहिस्तैर्जगामगु दाशस्य सर्वन्त तथा ।

प्रेमपूर्वप्रावेदे विनयो जाह्वीसुतः ॥ 52 ॥

Hearing these words of the father, Gāngeya called the old ministers and said that the king was ashamed to speak out to me the real matter; so I ask you all to know exactly the king's cares and communicate them to me as they are; I can carry them out, without any hitch, then. At these Bhisma's words, the ministers went to the king, and learned the true cause, and spoke to Bhisma; learning this, he began to think what ought to be done.

गाङ्गेय उवाच

पिंत्रे देहि सुत्तां तेउदा प्रार्थयामि सुपाध्यामणि ।

माता मेउसु सुतेयं ते दासोउमध्ययाः परन्ता ॥ 53 ॥

Gangā's son Bhīśma, then, accompanied by the ministers, quickly went to the house of the fisherman, and with words of humility and affection, spoke: "O tormentor of foes! I pray to you to give your beautiful daughter in marriage to my father. Your daughter will be my mother and I will be her servant."

दाश उचाच

त्वं गृहाण महाभाग पत्नी कुक नृपात्मज ।

पुत्रोउस्या न भवेद्राजा वर्तीमाने त्वयितीत वे ॥ 54 ॥

The fisherman, then, said: “O highly lucky prince! Then the king’s son will not be able to become king, in your presence; so kindly marry yourself my daughter.”

गाङ्गेय उवाच

मातेवं मम दुरोशी राज्यं नैव क्रोम्यहम् ।

युओंस्या सर्वेथा राज्यं कार्वित्यान न संशयः ॥ 55 ॥

At this Bhīsma again said: “Let your daughter be my mother; I will never accept the kingdom. The son of your daughter will, no doubt, become king.”

द्वारा उवाच

सत्यं वाक्यं मया जातं पुत्रसें बलवान्भयेत् ।

सोर्पि राज्यं बलात्रूनं गृहीयादिति निश्रायः ॥ 56 ॥

The fisherman said: “I know your words are true; but if your son be powerful, he can take forcibly the kingdom for himself.”

गाङ्गेय उवाच

न दाससंघं नूनं कारिथामि हि सर्वथा ।

सत्यं मे वचनं तत मवा भीमं चतं कृतम् ॥ 57 ॥

At this Bhima again said: “O Sire! Know my words as true; I will never marry; from today, I have accepted this difficult vow.”

सूत उवाच

एवं कृतां प्रतिजां तु निशम्य झपजीवकः ।

ददौ सच्यतां तस्ये गोउे सर्वागीणेभानम् ॥ 58 ॥

Sūta said: Hearing this firm resolve of Bhīṣma; the fisherman gave over his beautiful daughter to king Śāntanu.

अनेन विधायिन तेन वृता सत्यवतीं प्रिया ।

न जानाति परं जन्य व्यासस्य नृपसत्तमः ॥ 59 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणो द्वितीयकन्धे

पड़मोउध्याः: 115 ॥

Thus Śāntanu married dear Satyavati; but he was quite unaware of the wonderful birth of Vyāsa Deva.

Thus ends the Fifth Chapter of the Second

Book the marriage of Satyavati in the

Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

of 18,000 verses.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER VI

On the Birth of the Pāndava

सूत उवाच

एवं सत्यवती तेन वृता शंतनुना किल ।

द्रो सुनी च तथा जातौ मृतौ कालवशादपि ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: “Thus Śāntanu married Satyavati; two sons were born to her and they died in course of time.

व्यासवीर्णेनु संजातो धृतताषोउप च च ।

मृति दृष्टाविश कामिन्या नेत्रसंमीरन्ते कृते ॥ २ ॥

Out of Vyāsa Deva's semen, Dhṛtaraṣstra was born. Ambikā Devi, the mother of Dhṛtaraṣstra

closed her eyes on seeing Veda Vyāsa; hence Dhṛtaraṣstra was born blind.

धौतरूपा यतो जाता दूद्धा व्यासं नृपात्मजा ।

व्यासकोपासमुपम्बः पाण्डुस्तेन न संशयः ॥ ३ ॥

(Seeing Dhṛtaraṣtra blind Satyavati asked Vyāsa to go to Ambālikā. (Pāndu's mother); the princess Ambālikā, mother of Pāndu turned pale at the sight of Vyāsa; hence, her son became of a pale colour out of Vyāsa's wrath. Hence, the name of the son was Pāndu.

सन्तोषितसाया व्यासो दास्या कामकलाधिवा ।

विदुस्तुं समुत्पत्रो धर्पाशि: सत्यवाक्युर्धि: ॥ 4 ॥

Next the maid servant, expert in the science of amorous pleasures, satisfied Vyāsa; hence her son Vidura was born of Dharma's part and became truthful and holy.

राज्येसंयाधित:पाणु:कनीयानपिमन्दिधि:।

अन्यत्वाद्युतराष्ट्रोउसी नाधिकारे निवेशितः ॥ 5 ॥

Though Pāndu was younger, the ministers installed him on the throne. Dhṛtārāstra could not become king, as he was blind.

भीभ्यस्यानुते राज्यं प्राप्त: पाणुभूमित्रावल: ।

विदुरोउथ्य येभावी मन्त्रकाँवे निवोजितः ॥ 6 ॥

By the permission of Bhīśma the powerful Pāndu obtained the sovereignty; and the intelligent Vidura became his minister.

धृतराष्यर हे भार्ये गन्धारी सौबलिं स्मृता ।

द्वितीया च तथा वैश्या गाईरस्थेयु प्रतिद्धिति ॥ 7 ॥

Dhrtarāstra had two wives Gāndhāri and Sauvāli; this Sauvāli was Vaiśyā; she was engaged in the household affairs.

पाण्डोर पिता पत्थी दे प्रोतेने वेदवादिधि: ।

गौरसेनी तथा कुन्ती मात्री च मढ़देशगा ॥ 8 ॥

King Pānḍu had two wives, too; the first was Kunti, the daughter of Sūrasena; and the other was Mādri, the daughter of the Madra king.

नायाती सुव्रे पूत्रगतं परमगोपनम् ।

वैश्यायेक सुतं कान्तं युयुत्सुं सुयुचे विद्यम् ॥ 9 ॥

Gandhāri gave birth to one hundred beautiful sons; Vaísyā Sauvāli gave birth to one beautiful son named Yuyutsu.

कुन्ही तु प्रथमं कन्या सूर्याल्कर्ण मनोहरम् ।

सुयुवे प्रितृगेहस्य पशुतायणुपरिषहः ॥ 10 ॥

While Kunti was a virgin, she gave birth, through the medium of the Sun, the lovely Karṇa; next he became the wife of Pānḍu.

སྐབས་ཆུང:

क्रिमेत्तसूत चित्रं त्वं भाषये भूतिसत्ता ।

जनितश्र सुत पूर्वे पाण्डुना सा विश्वाहिता ॥ 1 1 ||

सूयाकर्ण: कंबंजातः कन्यायांवद्विस्तरात् ।

कन्य कां बंधुज्जिता पाण्डुना सा विश्वाहिता ॥ 1 2 ॥

Hearing this, the Rsis said: “O Muni Sūta! What are you saying? First Kunti brought forth a child afterwards she was married to Pāndu; this is wonderful, indeed! How was Karṇa, born of Kunti, unmarried? and how came Kunti to be married afterwards? describe all these in detail.”

सूत जवाच

शूरसेनसुता कुन्ती बालभावे यदा दिजातः ।

कुनिभोजेन राजा तु प्राधिता कन्यका शृभा ॥ 13 ॥

कुनिभोजेन सा बाला पुत्री तु परिकलिता ।

सेवानर्थ तु दीप्तव्य विहिता चाहसासि ॥ 14 ॥

Sūta then said: "O Dvija! While Śūrasena's daughter Kuntī was a virgin girl, the king Kuntibhoja asked for Kuntī that she might become her girl and Śūrasena gave her to the king Kuntibhoja who brought up this beautifully smiling girl. He put to her the service of Agni of Agnihotra.

दुर्वासामु मुनि: प्राप्तश्रतुर्मांस्य स्थितो द्विजः ।

परिचयां कृता कुंल्या मुनिस्तोयं जगम है ॥ 15 ॥

ददौ मन्त्ये गुर्थं तस्ये येनातुः सुः: स्वयम् ।

समायाति तथा कामं प्रर्यिष्यति वाज्छतम् ॥ 16 ॥

Once, on an occasion, Durvāsā Muni, engaged in the vow, lasting for four months, came there; Kuntī served him during that period; the Muni became greatly pleased and gave her a very auspicious mantra, by virtue of which any Deva, when called upon by that mantra will come to Kuntī and satisfy her desires.

गते मुनी ततः कुन्ती निश्रायां गृहे स्थिता ।

चिन्तयामास मनसा के सुरं समचितये ॥ 17 ॥

When the Muni went away, Kunti, remaining in her house, wanted to test the accuracy of the mantra and asked within herself “What Devatā to call upon.”

उदितशु तदा भानुस्तथा युही दिवाकारः ।

मनोच्चारं तथा कृता चाहुतस्तिमगमुस्तद ॥ 18 ॥

Seeing God Sūrya had arisen in the sky, Kunti uttered the Mantra and invoked him.

Śrimaddevibhāgvatam

मगडलामानुर्ष रूपं कृत्वा सर्वतिपेशलम् ।

अवातरत्तदाकाशालसमीये तन्य मन्दिरे ॥ 19 ॥

The Sun, then, assuming an excellent human form, came down from the Heavens and appeared before Kunti in the same room.

दूर्याद देवं समायानं कुन्ती भानुं सुविस्तिता ।

वेयमाना रजोदोर्ष, प्राप्ता सहसून भामिनी । २० ॥

Seeing the Deva Sun, Kunti became greatly surprised and began to shudder and instantly became endowed with the inherent natural quality of passion (had menstruation).

कृताङ्गति: स्थिता सूर्य बभावे चाक्लोचना ।

सुर्जिता दर्जनेनाए गस्त्छ त्वं निजमण्डलम् ॥ 21 ॥

The beautiful-eyed Kunti, with folded palms spoke to Sūrya Deva standing before: “I am highly pleased to-day, seeing Thy form; now go back to Thy sphere.”

सूर्य उवाच:

आहृतोस्मिक कर्थ कुन्ति त्वया मन्त्रबलेनैः ।

न मां भवसि कसमाच्तं समाहूय पुरोतम् ॥ 22 ॥

Sūrya Deva said: “O, Kunti! What for you called me, by virtue of the Mantra? Calling me, why do you not worship me, standing before you?

कामातोंर्यसितापाकि भव मां भावसंयुम् ।

मनेशणीधीनां प्राणां क्रीषितुं नय माधिमि । २३ ॥

O beautiful blue eyed one! Seeing you, I have become passionate; so come to me. By means of the mantra, you have made me subservient to you; so take me for intercourse."

कुल्याच

कन्यास्मवहं तु धर्मत्र सर्वसाधिक्रामाध्यम् ।

तवाय्यहं ने वृकौच्या कुलकन्यास्मि सुवत् ॥ 24 ॥

Hearing this, Kunti said: “O Witness of all! O knower of Dharma! You know that I am a virgin girl. O Suvrata! I bow down to you; I am a family daughter; so do not speak ill to me.”

सूर्य तवाच

लज्जा मे महती चाहा यदि गच्छायहं बूथा ।

वाच्यातं सर्वदेवानां यास्यायत्र न संशयः ॥ 25 ॥

Sūrya then said: "If I go away in vain, I will be an object of great shame, and, no doubt, will be laughed amongst the gods.

गय्याति त हिजं चाह येय मन्थ समर्थितः ।

त्वां चाधि सुभूर्ण कुर्तिन तोयेन्मां त्वं भविष्यति ॥ 261

So, O Kunti! If you do not satisfy me, I will immediately curse you and the Brāhmin who has given you this mantra.

कन्याधर्षः स्थितसे स्यात्र जास्यन्ति जना: किल ।

मत्समन्तु तथा पुत्रो भविता ते वरानने ॥ 27 ॥

O Beautiful one! If you satisfy me, your virginity will remain; nobody will come to know and there will be born a son to you, exactly like me."

इत्युक्ता तारिण: कुन्ती तन्मानकां सुल्लिन्सात् ।

भुक्त्वा जगाम देयोगे वरं दन्धास्तिवाक्षित्म् । 28 ।

Thus saying, Sūrya Deva enjoyed the bashful Kunti, with her mind attracted towards him; He granted her the desired boons and went away.

गर्भ द्वारा, सुशोणी सुगुपे मन्त्रिे स्थिता ।

धात्री बेह पिंगा चैका न माता न जनसंथा ॥ 29 ॥

The beautiful Kunti became pregnant and began to remain in a house, under great secrecy. Only the dear nurs- knew that; her mother or any other person was quite unaware of the fact.

गृप्त: सघानि पुस्तु जातश्रातिमन्तोहः ।

कवचेनातिरयेण कुण्डलाथां सामवित्तः ॥ ३० ॥

In time, a very beautiful son like the second Sun and Kartikeya, decked with a lovely Kavaca coat of mail and two car-rings, was born there.

द्वितीय इव सुर्यैतु कुमार इव चापरः ।

को कृत्वाध धारयेथी तामुवाच सुर्विज्ञानम् ॥ 31 ॥

Then the nurse caught hold of the hand of the bashful Kunti and said: "O Charming one! What care can you possibly have as long as I am living."

कां चित्तां कार्योक त्वमाधलप्रेडाधित्यात्सभ्यम् ।

मकृष्णायां सुतं कुन्ती मुझ्न्ती वाक्यमवर्जित् ॥ 32 ॥

Kunti then, placed the son in a box and said: "O son! What shall I do? Being afraid of shame, I am leaving you, though you are dear to me as my life itself! I am exceedingly unfortunate that I am casting aside this all-auspicious son.

कि करोमि सुतातांई ज्येत तां प्राणवल्लभम् ।

मन्दभाया त्वाजामि तां सर्वलक्षणासंयुतम् ॥ 33 ॥

पातु तां सगुणासुगण भगवती सर्वक्षी चाधिक्वा ।

सन्त्ये सैव ददातु विश्वजननी कालायवनी कामव ।

इस्वेर्दे मुवप्रकृत्र सुललितां प्राणप्रियाई कृता ।

त्यवत्वा तां विजने वने रविस्तुं दुषा यथा सर्वेरणी । 34।

May the attributeless Bhagavati Ambikā, the World Mother and the Lady of all, endowed with attributes, protect Thee! May Kätyāyani, the giver of all desires, feed you with Her milk! Alas! I am quitting you, born of Sūrya's semen in this solitary forest like a vitiated wanton woman. I do not know, when shall I see your lotus like beautiful face, dearest to me like myself.

पूर्वस्मिनि जनानि जिजगतां माता न चाराधिता ।

न ध्यातं पदपूढ़जें सुखकरं देद्वाः : शिवायाश्रिभू ।

तेनाहं सुत दुर्भागरासि सत्तं त्यकत्वा पुसत्वां बने ।

नध्याधि प्रिय पातकं सुस्तवी कुद्धका कृतं वतवयम् ॥ 35 ॥

Alas! I never worshipped in my former birth Śivānī, the mother of the three worlds; I never meditated Her lotus like feet, the giver of all happiness; hence, I am so very unfortunate. O Dear son! I must perform great tapasyā to expiate for this terrible sin, that I knowingly commit in relinquishing you in the forest."

सूत उवाच

इतुसूचना तं सुतं कृती मद्यपायां धृतं किल ।

धारीहरते ददौ भीता जनदर्शनतस्वा ॥ 36 ॥

Sūta said: “Thus saying to the son within the casket, Kunti gave over that to the hands of her nurse, terrified, lest someone might see her.

सात्वा जस्ता तता कुनी पितृवेश्यन्युवास सा ।

मदुषा बहमाना च प्राप्ता हृधारथेने च ॥ 37 ॥

Kunti then bathed and remained with a fearful heart in her father's house. A carpenter (charioteer?) named Adhiratha got accidentally that casket floating in the Ganges.

राधा सुतस्य भार्यां चै तताउसी प्राधितः सुतः ।

कर्णोंभूद्रलवानीर: पालितः सुतसचिनि ॥ 38 ॥

The carpenter's wife Rādhā prayed for the son

and nourished him under her care. Thus nourished in the carpenter's house, the famous Kunti's son Karna became a very powerful warrior.

कुन्ती विवाहित कन्या पाणुज्ञा सा सर्ववेरे ।

माड़ी चैवापारा भार्यां महाराजसुता शुभा ॥ 39 ॥

King Pāndu then married Kunti in a Svyamvara, a marriage in which the girl chooses her husband from among a number of suitors, assembled together. And the all-auspicious daughter of the king of Madra became also the second wife of Pāndu.

मृगवां रममाणस्तु वने पाणडुर्महावलः ।

जयान मृगबुढ़या तु रममाणं मृनि वने ॥ 40 ॥

Once, on an occasion, the powerful Pāndu, while hunting in the forest killed a Muni, in the form of a deer, engaged in the act of co-habitation, thinking it to be a deer.

शगत्नरेने तत याणबुंगिनना कुपितेन च ।

स्तीसईं यदि कतांसि सत ते मरणं धुवम् ॥ 41 ॥

इति शणतस्तु मुनिना पाण्डु: शोकसमन्ति: ।

त्यक्त्वा राज्यं वने वासं चक्रात भृणतुः पित्रतः ॥ 42 ॥

The dying Muni became inflated with wrath, cursed Pānḍu: “If you cohabit, certainly you will die.” Thus cursed by the Muni, Pānḍu became very sorrowful and abandoned his kingdom and began to live in the forest.

कुन्ही माडी च भार्यें हे जमनुः सह संगते ।

सेवनार्थ सतीर्थं संश्रिंते गुनिसतमाः ॥ 43 ॥

O Munis! His two wives Kunti and Mādri, followed their husband as chaste women do, to serve him in the forest.

गड़ातीर स्थितः पाणडुर्जनीनामाश्रयेषु च ।

शृणवानो धर्मगृशक्षाणि चाकार दुक्षं तपः ॥ 44 ॥

Dwelling in the hermitage of the Munis, Pāndu listened to the Dharma Śāstras and practised severe penance.

कक्षायां वर्तमानायां मदार्थिद्वमंसांशितम् ।

अशणोड़चनं राजा सुगूरं मुनिभाषितम् ॥ 45 ॥

अपुत्रस्य गतिनर्जिति स्वयं गन्तुं परन्तः ॥

येन केनाप्यायोने पुत्रस्य जननं चरेत् ॥ 46 ॥

Once while he was listening to the religious discourses of the Munis, he heard unmistakably the Munis telling that the man who is senseless can never go to the Heavens; so he must get a son somehow or other.

अंगज: पुत्रिकापुजः क्षेत्रजो गोलकलस्था ।

कुपडः सहोढ़ः कानीनः क्रीतः प्रापतलस्था वरे ॥ 47 ॥

दन्तः केनाप घाशज्जी धन्याग्रिसुता: स्मृता:।

उनत्तोस्ततः पुत्रा निकृहा इति निश्रयः ॥ 48 ॥

The Pundits declare that the sons born of the father's semen, the sons born of their daughters, the Ksetraja, the Golaka, the Kunda, the Sahodha, the Kānina, the Krita, one obtained in the forest, or one offered by another father, unable to nourish his son, all are entitled to inherit the wealth of the father, but the sons, enumerated successively are more and more inferior.

Note: Ksetraja—of a son, the off-spring of the wife by a kinsman appointed to procreate issue to the husband.

Golaka—bastard child of a widow.

Kundā—a child born in adultery.

Sahodha—the son of a woman pregnant at the time of marriage.

Kānina—the son born of a young and unmarried woman.

Krita—purchased.

इत्याकर्णे तदा प्राङ् कुन्ती कमललोचनाम् ।

सुतमृत्यादयाणु त्वं मुपिन गत्या तपोचित्यम् ॥ 49 ॥

Hearing this, Pāndu spoke to the lotus-eyed Kunti to procreate sons for him soon by a great ascetic Muni:

ममाज्ञा न दोषस्ते पुरा राजा महात्मना ।

वसिष्ठाज्ञानितः पुत्रः सौदासेनैतेने मे श्रुन्तम् ॥ 50 ॥

“By my order, you will not incur any sin in doing this. I heard that in ancient times the high- souled king Saudāsa got son from Vasiṣṭha.”

वे कुन्ती वचन ग्राह मम मान्योस्ति कामतः ।

दत्तो दुर्वासा पूर्व सिंहिदुः सर्वेधा प्रभो ॥ 5 । ॥

Kunti, then spoke to the king: "O Lord! I know

one Siddha mantra; it was given to me before by the Muni Durvāsā.

निम्नरेड़रं चे देवं मनेशानेन पार्थिव ।

आगच्छेलर्वंबारी वे मम पार्थं निमन्त्रितः ॥ 52 ॥

Whichever Devatā I will invoke by that Mantra, he will instantly come to my side, controlled by that Mantra.

भर्तीवंक्येन सा तत सूच्या धर्म सुर्तोमम् ।

सज्ञ्य सुवुवे पुत्र प्रवमं च युध्धित्यम् ॥ 53 ॥

At the request of the husband, Kunti invoked Dharma, the best of the Devas; and after being impregnated by him, gave birth to Yudhiṣṭhira.

वायोर्कौकांदं पूर्व जिथुं चैव शतक्रतोः ।

वर्षे वर्षे जयः पुत्रा: कृत्वा जाता महावक्ता: ॥ 54 ॥

Then she got through Pavana Deva, the son Vrkodara; and through Indra, the Lord of the Devas, Arjuna. Thus, in every year, Kunti gave birth to one son and so in three years she gave birth to three very powrvful and mighty sons.

माठ्री प्राह पर्षिते पाण्डु पुत्रे मे कुरु सत्तम ।

किं क्रोगिम माहारज दुःखं नारणय मे प्रभो ॥ 55 ॥

At this Mādri spoke to her husband: "O King, the best of the Kurus! What shall I do now?

प्रार्थिता पतिन कुन्ती द्वदी मन्ते द्वार्थिता ।

एकपुत्रप्रबच्नि मात्री पतिनते स्थिता ॥ 56 ॥

Kindly suggest to me the means of procreating sons; O Lord, remove my pain." Pānḍu asked Kunti for this; Kunti, moved with pity, gave her the mantra, so that she might get one son.

स्मृता तताधिजी देवी मूत्रासमुता सुती ।

नकुल: सहदेवघु सुयुवे वरविणीति ॥ 57 ॥

Then the beautiful Mādri, invoked the twin Asvins under the advice of her husband and got a pair of twins Nakula and Sahadeva through them. एवं ते पाषड्वा: पढ़ क्षेत्रोराश्नः सुरात्बजः ।

अहंवर्षान्ते जाता वने तस्मिन्ड्जोतमाः ॥ 58 ॥

O Munis! Thus five Pāndavas were born successively in every following year to the wives of Pāndu by the seeds of the Devas.

एकस्मि-समये पाण्डुर्गाई दृष्टवास्य निर्जनें ।

आश्रये चातिकामातों ज्याग्रानतदीशस: ॥ 59 ॥

Once upon a time Pāndu, whose end was drawing nigh, became very passionate at the sight of Mādrī in that solitary hermitage.

मा मा मा मेति बहुधा निषिद्धोपि तया भृणम् ।

अतिलिङ्ग प्रियां देवात्पयात धरणितेच । ६० ॥

He, though forbidden repeatedly by Mādrī, warmly embraced her, as if dictated by the great destroyer, and fell to the ground.

यथा यूक्षगता वल्ली तिक्रे पतिति वे दुगे ।

तथा सा पतिता बाला कुर्बती रोन्द न बहु ॥ 6 1 ॥

As the creeper falls down when the tree is felled, so Mādri dropped on the ground and began to cry violently.

प्रत्यगाता तदा कुनी रुद्ती बालकास्तथा ।

मुन्यश महाभाग शुत्वा कोलाहलं तथा ॥ 6 2 ॥

Having the wailings of Mādri, Kunti and the five sons of Pāndu came there weeping and crying; a tumult then ensued and the great Munis also appeared on the scene.

मृतः पाण्डुस्तदा सर्वे मुनयः संशितानतः ।

सहानिमिधिर्विधि कृत्वा गझ्जातीरे ताद्रवदून ॥ 6 3 ॥

Then those Munis, practising great vows, knew that Pāndu was dead and performed duly, on the banks of the Ganges, the ceremony of burning the dead.

चके सहैव गमनं माझी दत्वा सुती शिशु ।

कुन्चै धर्मे पुरस्कृत्य सतीनां सत्यकामतः ॥ 64 ॥

At that time Mādri gave over to Kunti the charge of her two sons and followed the Saṭi practise along with her husband to go to Satyaloka.

जलदानादिके कृत्वा मुनयरात्र वासिनः ।

पशुपुत्रयुतां कृनीमनयन्दस्तिनापुम् ॥ 65 ॥

The Munis, then, performed Tarpaṇa ceremonies in honour of Pāṇḍu and Mādri and took Kunti and the five sons to Hastināpur.

तां प्राणां च समात्राय गाङ्गेयो विदुरस्तथा ।

नगरीं घृतगृत्य्य सर्वे तत्र समाययुः ॥ 6 6 ॥

Knowing that Kunti has come, Bhīṣma, Vidura and the relatives of Dhṛtaraṣtra within the city, all came to Kunti.

पप्रच्छुश जना: सेवें कस्य पुत्रा वराने ।

पाणड़ो: शापं समाजाय कुन्ती दुःखात्विता तदा ॥ 67 ॥

They all asked Kunti: “O beautiful one! Whose are these five sons?” Kunti, then, remembered the curse on Pāndu and sorrowfully expressed:

तानुवाच सुराणां वे पुत्रा : कुरकुतोद्वा: ।

विश्वासार्थं समाहुतः कृत्या सर्वे सुरास्तद ॥ 68 ॥

आगत्य खे तदा तैस्तु कविरं नः सुतः किल ।

भीधोग सस्कृतं वाक्यं देवानां सकृताः सुतः ॥ 69 ॥

"These are the Deva's sons born in Kuru family." In order to convince the people assembled there, Kunti invoked the Devas who came in the celestial space above and said: "Yes, these are the sons born of our seeds. Bhismā, then, paid respect to the words of the Devas and honoured duly the boys.

गता नागपुरं सर्वे तानादाय सुतान्वधूम् ।

भीभादयः प्रीतचित्नः पालयामासुर्यतः ॥

एवं पाथा: समुद्वग्रा गाङ्गेयनाथ पालिताः ॥ ७ ७ ॥

श्रित श्रीमदेवीभगवते महापुराणे द्वितीयकन्धे

श्वरोउध्याः ॥ ६ ॥

Bhisma then took the five sons and Pāndu's wife to Hastinā and gladly nourished them. O Munis! The sons of Pārthā were thus born and nourished by Bhismā."

Thus ends the Sixth Chapter of the Second Book on the birth of the Pāndavas in the Mahāpurānam Śrimadhevibhāgavatam.

CHAPTER VII

On Showing the Departed Ones

सूत उवाच

पड़ानां त्रिपटी भावरां सा मान्या सा पतित्रता ।

पंछा पुत्रास्तु तत्थाः: स्युर्भनुष्योउतीव सुन्दारा ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: “The chaste Draupadi was the common wife of all the five very beautiful! sons of Kunti; and she bore five sons, one to every husband.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

अनुंन्य ता भार्यं कृष्णस्य भर्मनी शुभा ।

सुभग्रा या हता पूर्वं जिण्यृता हरिसमाते ॥ 2 ॥

Arjuna had one wife more; she was Subhadrā, the sister of Śri Kṛṣṇā. By the order of Śri Kṛṣṇā, Arjuna stole her away (took her by force).

तस्यां जातो महावीते निहतोजरी राजाजे ।

अभिन्यटुहित्र श्रीपहाछ सुतः किन्त ॥ 3 ॥

The great hero Abhimanyu was born of Subhadrā. This Abhimanyu and the five sons of Draupadī were killed in battle.

अभिम्योर्वारा भाषां वैराटी चातिसुन्दारी ।

कुलाने सुवेषे पुत्रं मृतीं वाणारिनना शिशुः ॥ ४ ॥

Abhumanyu's wife Uttarā was the charming daughter of king Virāt. She gave birth to one dead child, after all the boys, the descendants of the family were extinct.

जीवितः स तु कृष्णेन भापीनयसुतः खयम् ।

ग्रीभाणापनिरिदंधः प्राणेनामुळेन च ॥ ५ ॥

The above child died of the arrows of Asvatthāmā. The extraordinarily powerful Śrī Kṛṣna Himself made alive again his sister's dead grandson.

पत्रक्षीणेयुं बंगेषु जातो यस्माद्र: सुतः ।

तस्मार्तीक्षितो नाम विज्ञातः पृथिवीतते ॥ 6 ॥

As this son was born after family had become extinct, he became known in the world by the name of Parikşit.

निततेषु च पुरेषु धतराष्ट्रीस्तु:खितः ।

तस्थौ पाण्डवराज्ये च भीमवाराणपीक्षितः ॥ 7 ॥

When the sons were all destroyed, Dhrtarāstra became very sorry, and , tormented by the arrow-like words of Bhima, remained in the kingdom of the Pāndavas.

गाध्वारी च त्वास्तिच्छ्युत्रोकातुरा भृगम् ।

सेवां त्रवीद्वारातं चकातारतां वृष्टिश्र: ॥ 8 ॥

Gandhārī, too, exceedingly distressed on the bereavement of the sons, remained there also. Yudhīsthira, day and night, served Dhrtarāstra and Gāndhāri.

विद्योरूपयितिध्यांना प्रज्ञानेयमोधायत ।

यृधिष्रियस्यानुमते भ्रातृपार्थी व्यतिहत ॥ 9 ॥

The greatly religious Vidura always used to console, by the advice of Yudhiṣthira, his brother Dhrāraśtra, who possessed the eye of wisdom and he remained by his brother's side.

धर्मपूजोपरि धर्मात्मा चकार सेवनं पितुः ।

पुत्रजीकोद्वं दुःखं तस्य विस्मारवादिन १ १ ० १ ॥

Dharma's son Yudthśhira used to serve his uncle Dīhtarāstra in such a way as he might forget the pain of the death of his sons.

यथा श्रणोति वृद्धोजरी तथा भीमोजितेशितः ।

वायबाणेनाहन्तं तु आयवसंस्थिताङ्गनान् ॥ १ १ ॥

But Bhima used to pierce his heart by his arrow-like words that he pronounced so loud as to reach the ears of the old king Dhrātaśrātra.

मया पुत्रा हताः सर्वे दुर्व्याध्यय ते ११ ।

दुःशासनस्य सर्पिरं पीर्ण हृद्ध तथा भ्रूमग् ॥ १ २ ॥

Bhima used to say: “In the battlefield I killed all the sons, of the wicked blind king (Dhrtarāstra) and it was I that sucked well and drunk, full to the brim, the blood of the heart of Duhśāsana.

भुर्निक्त पिच्छर्मोटिंग मवा दूर्त नगतवः ।

ध्रांब्धवादु शवच्चापि युवा जीवत्यसी जनः ॥ 13 ॥

Now this blind king eats shamelessly like a crow and a dog, the mass of food (Piṇḍa) given by me, and thus is bearing uselessly the burden of life."

एवंधितानि स्क्षणिं शावयल्पुवासरम् ।

आशासवित धर्माता मूर्खोंर्यमिति च बुबन् ॥ 14 ॥

Daily Bhima used to tell, thus, harsh words to him; whereas the religious Yudhṣthira used to console him saying “Bhima is a quite illiterate brute” and so forth.

अश्रादीर वर्षानि स्थला तत्रेव दुःखितः ।

धूतराष्टो चने यानं प्रार्थयामास धर्मन् ॥ १ ५ ॥

अयाचत धर्मपुं छिताग्ये महीपति: ।

पूत्रयोर्द द्वान्याद निवर्गे विधपूर्वकम् ॥ १ ६ ॥

King Dhrātaśrāta remained there with a grieved heart for eighteen years; one day he proposed to the Dharma's son Yudhṣithra about his intention to dwell in forest thus: "To-day I wish to perform Tarpāṇas in the names of my sons.

खकोदोरण संर्वेंभं कृतमत्रीध्वंदीढ़िकम् ।

न कृतं मम पुत्राणां पूर्ववैरमनुस्मन् ॥ 17 ॥

True it is, that Bhima performed the funeral obseques of them all; but, having in view of the former enmity, he did not do anything for my sons.

द्वातिसे चेद्वनं महं कृत्वा चैवीध्वेदितिकम् ।

गमिष्ठप्रं वनं तपुं तप: स्वर्पभलप्रदम् ॥ १ १ ॥

If you give me some money, I will, then, perform the funeral obsequies of my sons and then retire to the forest to perform tapasyā so that I can go to Heaven."

एकाने विदुरंगोक्तो राजा धर्मसुतः शुचि: ।

धरं वर्तुं मनछोहे धृतराष्य चाधिंये ॥ 19 ॥

Vidura also asked Yudhiṣṭhira privately to pay to Dhrātrāṣtra the sum that he wanted; Yudhiṣṭira also intended to pay the required money.

समाहुव निजान्सर्वानुवाच पृथिवीपति: ।

धन दायरे महाभागाः पिबे निवार्षकामिने ॥ 20 ॥

Then Yudhiṣṭhira, the lord of the world called his younger brothers and addressed them as follows: “O highly fortunate ones! Our revered uncle is desirous to perform the funeral obsequies of his sons; so we will have to give him some money for the purpose.”

तद्युत्वा वचनं धातुर्अँधुस्यामिततेजसः ।

संप्रडेल्य महावाहामूर्तितः: कुपितोउबचीत् ॥ 21 ॥

Hearing these words of his elder brother of indomitable valour, Pavana's son, the mighty armed Bhima became very angry and spoke out as follows:

धनं देयं महाभाग दुयौधन्त्रिताय किम ।

अन्योपि सुखाम्पानीत मुर्स्तैव किमतः परम् ॥ 22 ॥

“O highly lucky one! Is it that we will have to give wealth for the spiritual benefit of Duryodhana and others? What a great stupidity can there be than the fact that such a malevolent blind king is deriving so great happiness at your hands?

तव दुम्पित्रनेताथ दुःख प्राप्ता वने वसम् ।

त्रीयदी च महाभाग समानीत दुरात्मना ॥ 23 ॥

O Ārya! It is by your bad counsel that we

suffered endless troubles in the forest; and the extremely good Draupadī was brought before the public in the hall by Duhśāsana.

विराटभवने वास: प्रसादानस सुवत ।

दास्तर्व च कृतं सर्वमैनस्य्यामितिकमर्पि: ॥ 24 ॥

O one of good vows! It is for your satisfaction alone that we, though we were very mighty, had to remain in the house of Matsya Rāja Virāt as servants.

देविता त्वं न चेज्येछः प्रभवेतक्षयः कथम् ।

सूपकारो विराट्यस्य हत्वासभूवं तु मागधम् ॥ 25 ॥

Had you not been our elder brother and not been addicted to the gambling, would it have been possible that I, who killed Rajasandha, would have been a cook to Virāt Rajā! Never we had been put to so great a trouble?

ब्रह्मला कर्थ जिण्युभवेद्वलत्थ नतर्कः ।

कृत्वा वेयं महावादुयोगाय तास्वतावनः ॥ 26 ॥

Never would the mighty armed Arjuna, the Vāsava's son, have acted the part of an actress (a dancer), dressing himself in a female garb, under the name Vrhannalā.

गाण्डीवाणीभर्ती हस्तौ कृतो कक्रणणोभिति ।

मानुषं च वयुः प्रायः किं दुःखं स्यातयः परम् ॥ 27 ॥

दूर्या वेणीं कृतां मूर्टि कजलं लोचने तथा ।

असि गृहीता तसा डेभ्यई नान्यथा सुखम् ॥ 28 ॥

Alas! What more painful could there be by assuming a human birth, that the hands of Arjuna, that wielded always the Gānḍiva bow, would have worn bracelets befitting a woman? I would have been happy then had I, seeing the braid of hair on Arjuna's head and the collyrium in his eyes, cut off the head of Dhṛtaraśstra?

अपूर्वा च महीपालं निश्रितोर्भिनियां गृहे ।

दगुकामप्र यापनाम निर्देशेपोर्से पुरोजनः ॥ 29 ॥

O Lord of the earth! 'Without you, I set fire on the house, named Jautgṛha (a lac-house, as built by Duryodhana in order to burn up the Pāndavas) and, therefore, the vicious Virocana, who wanted to burn us, was himself burnt up.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

कौचका निहताः सर्वे त्वामपूर्वा जनाधिप।

न तथा निहताः सर्वे सभायां घृतारुकाः ॥ 30 ॥

Again, O Lord of men! similarly, without asking you, I slew Kicaka; this is now the one thing I regret that I could not have killed in the same way the sons of Dhrtarāstra before the public hall.

मृत्वील तव राजेन्द्र नयवैधव्य भोभिताः ।

दुर्धीधनादय: कामं शत्रवो निराकीतृतः ॥ 31 ॥

O king of kings! It was simply your stupidity that you liberated Duryodhana and other sons, the great enemies of the Gandharvas, when they had been imprisoned by them.

दुर्धीधनतितायाछ धर्ने तृत्वमिष्ठसि ।

नाहं ददे महीपाल सर्वथा प्रेरितस्वया ॥ 32 ॥

Again today you are willing to give wealth for the spiritual benefit of those Duryodhana and others! But, O Lord of the earth, I would never give wealth, even if you request me specially to do this.

इत्युक्चना निर्णतं भीमे विभि: परिवर्तां नृपः ।

ददौ वित्तं सुवहुलें धृतताश्य धर्मजः ॥ 33 ॥

Thus saying, Bhima went away. Dharma's son Yudhisthra then consulted with the other three brothers and gave abundance of wealth to Dhratarāstra.

कार्यायमास विधित्यनुजाणं चौधदैविकम् ।

दूदी दानानि विधेष्यो धृतगृछोप्रविकासुस्तः ॥ 34 ॥

With this sum, the Ambikā's son Dhrāraśstra duly performed the Śrāddha ceremony of his sons and gave away lots of things to the Brāhmins.

कृत्यीध्वैदिके सर्वे गान्यारीसहितो नृप: ।

प्रविशेष शनं तृर्ण कुंल्या च विद्येणा च ॥ 35 ॥

King Dhrāraśtra, thus performing all the funeral obsequies, became ready to go early to the forest with Gāndhāri, Kuntī and Vidura.

संसंयेन परित्रातो निर्नोतोजसी महामाति: ।

पूरिनिर्वार्यमाणोप्रिय शूरसेनसुता गता ॥ 36 ॥

वित्तवभामसोनोप्रि तायान्ये चापि कौराव: ।

गज्ञातीरात्यवास्य ययु: सर्वे गजाड्यम् ॥ 37 ॥

By the help of Sañjaya, the highly intelligent

Dhrtarāstra became informed of the roads of the forest, and then went out of the house. Śūrasena's daughter Kunti, though stopped by her sons, followed them. Bhīma and other Kauravas went along with them weeping up to the banks of the Ganges and thence returned to Hastināpura.

ते गत्वा जाइबीतीरै शतयुपायमं शुभम् ।

कृत्वा तृणै: कुर्दी तत्र तपसेतुः समाहिता: ॥ 38 ॥

The ascetics went to the auspicious Śatayūpa hermitage on the banks of the Ganges and building a hut practised tapasyā with their hearts concentrated.

गतान्यद्वानि वट् तेशं यदा याता हि तापसाः ।

युधधिसृत विरहान्नुजानिदमबजीत ॥ 39 ॥

Thus six year elapsed when Yudhiştihra, troubled by their bereavements said to his younger brothers:

स्वने दृष्टा मया कुनी तुदैला वनसंश्चिता ।

मनो मे जायते उहुं मातरं पित्ती तथा ॥ 40 ॥

विदुरं च महात्मानं सुखयं च महामितिम् ।

गेरोचे यदि वः सर्वान्जाम इति मे पति: ॥ 41 ॥

ततसे भाततः सर्वे सुभग्रा त्रीयती तथा ।

वैराटी च महाभागा तथा नागरिकों जनः ॥ 42 ॥

प्राणता: सर्वेजनैः सार्थ पाण्ड्वा दर्शनोलुकाः ।

गतपूयाश्रभ प्रायय द्वरुगुः सर्वे एव ते ॥ 43 ॥

विदुरो न यदा दृष्टो धर्मेनं पृष्टवांस्तदा ।

क्वालते स विदुरो धीमावत्सुवारचिकवासुतः ॥ 44 ॥

"I dreamt that our mother Kunti got very lean and thin. Now my mind wants bitterly to see mother, uncle, aunt, the high-souled Vidura and the highly intelligent Sañjaya. If you approve, I want to go to there." Then the five brothers, Pāndu's sons, became desirous to see Kunti, and taking with them Draupadi, Subhadrā, Uttarā, and other persons went to the Śatayūpa hermitage and saw the persons there; but not seeing Vidura, Yudhṣithra asked: "Where is Vidura?" Hearing this Dhāratṣāra said:

विरक्तश्रुते सन्ति निरीहो निर्यश्रिक: ।

कुतोउपेकान्तसंवासी धायार्वेतः सनातनम् ॥ 45 ॥

"Vidura has taken up Vairāgyam (dispassion) and has gone alone to a solitary place and is meditating in his heart the eternal Brahma.

गड़ां गच्छिन्तीयेर्द्रि वने राजा युधित्रः ।

ददर्श विदुरं क्षामं तमसा शासितबतम् ॥ 46 ॥

Next day while king Yudhiṣṭhira was walking along the banks of the Ganges, he saw in the forest Vidura, engaged in his vow and become lean and thin by his tapasyā; he then exclaimed:

दूर्ववोबाय महीपालो वन्देहं त्वां युधितुः ।

तस्वी शुना च विदुरः स्वाणपून्त इवान्यः ॥ 47 ॥

"I am King Yudhisthira; I am saluting you." Holy Vidura heard and remained motionless like a log of wood.

क्षणेन विदुर्यस्यात्रिसूर्ते तेन अद्धुतम् ।

सीनं युवित्रिस्याये धर्पशाल्यास्यम् ॥ 48 ॥

Within an instant a wonderful halo came out of Vidura's face and entered the mouth of Yudhishira, both of them being Dharma's parts.

क्षता जही तदा प्राणाखुशोचातियुधितः ।

दाराष्टी तस्य देहस्य कृतलानुधमं नृपः ॥ 49 ॥

गृवतस्तु तदा राजो वाणुवाचागरीरिणी ।

वित्तोघंयं न दाहाही यथेथं चष्ठ पूर्णे ॥ 50 ॥

Vidura then died; Yudhishira expressed great sorrow. When Vidura's body was going to be set on fire, a celestial voice was heard: "O king! He was very wise; so he ought not to be burnt; you can go away as you like."

शुत्वा ते भातः: सर्वे सस्नुर्गड़जलेंमले ।

गत्वा निवेदयामासुर्भूतिग्याय विस्तारना ।। ५। ॥

Hearing this, Yudhiṣhira bathed in the pure Ganges and returned to the Āśrama and informed everything in detail to Dhrāraśstra.

स्थितास्ताओंमसे सर्वे पाण्डवा नागरैः सह ।

तत्र सत्यवतीमतुर्नरिंख्छु समाप्ताः ।। ५२ ॥

मुर्नयोन्मे महात्मान्धागतात धर्मनन्दनम् ।

कृनी प्रात्र तदा व्यासे संश्वर्ते शुभदर्शनम् । ५३ ॥

While the Pāṇḍavas were staying in the hermitage with the other inhabitants of the city, Veda Vyāsa, Nārada, and other high-souled Munis came there to Yudhishira. Kuntī then spoke to the auspicious Vyāsa:

कृष्ण कर्णस्तु पुत्रो मे जतनामान्तु वीक्षितः ।

मनो मे तप्यतेत्यर्थे दर्शयस्य तपोधन ॥ ५४ ॥

“O, Kṛṣṇa! I saw my son Kārṇa, only just when

he was born; my mind is being very much tormented for him; so, O great ascetic! Shew him once to me. O highly fortunate One! You alone can do this; so O Lord! Satisfy my heart's desire."

नार्यावृत्राच

समर्पोसि महापाग कुरु ने वाज्छितं प्रभो ।

दुर्भोधिनो रणेपाछ्छतीक्षिति न मया मुने ॥ 55 ॥

Gāndhāri said: “O Muni! I did not see while Duryodhana went to battle; so, O Muni! Show me Duryodhana with his younger brothers.”

सुभग्रोधाच

तं दर्शय मुनिश्रिषु पुत्रे मे त्वं सहानुम् ।

अधिमन्युं महावीरं प्राणाद्यधिकं प्रियम् ॥ 56 ॥

ग्रहुकामासि सर्वैत द्रशैवा तथोन ।

Subhadrā said: O Omniscient one! I want very much to see the great hero Abhimanyu, dearer to me than my life even; O great ascetic! Show him once to me."

एर्वेशियानि वाक्यानि शुत्वा सत्यवतीसुतः ॥ 57 ॥

प्राणायामं तत कृत्वा द्यथी देर्वीं सनातनीम् ।

संध्याकातेउव सम्पाने गडुतायां मुनिसनमः ॥ 58 ॥

सर्वस्तांश समाद्य युधिष्युरोग्यमान् ।

तृत्वा विश्वजननी स्नाता पुण्यसरिज्जले ॥ 59 ॥

प्रकृति पुरुषारामां सगुणां निर्पुर्ण तथा ।

देवदेवीं ब्रह्मल्पं मणिद्धोपाधिवासीनिभ ॥ 60 ॥

यदा न वेधा न च विद्युर्धितृयो

न वासवो नैव जलाधिपतथा ॥

न तिचपो नैव यमध पावकस्तदार्सि

देवि त्वमहं नमाया ॥ 6 1 ॥

Sūta said: Satyavati's son Vyāsa Deva, hearing their words, held Prānāyāma (deep breathing exercise) and meditated on the eternal Devi, the force of Brahma. When the evening time came, the Muni invited Yudhisthira and all others to the banks of the Ganges. He then bathed in the Ganges and began to chant hymns in praise of the Devi Brahmamayī Prakṛti, resting on the Puruṣa, the

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

Dweller in the Maṇi Dvīpa, with attributes, at the same time transcending them, thus: “O Devi! When Brahmā was not, Viṣṇu was not, Maheśvara was not, nor when existing Indra, Varuna, Kubera, Yama, and Agni, Thou alone existed then; my salutation to Thee.

जरंने न वायुर्नं धरा न चाम्बरं

गुणा न तेषां च न चैद्रियायवह्म।

मनो न बुद्धिनं च तिमगुः शगी

तत्प्रसि देयि त्वमहं नामयि मात् ॥ 6 2 ॥

When there existed not water, Vāyu, ether, earth and their Gunas, taste, smell etc., when there were no senses, mind, Buddhi, Ahariṅkāra; when there existed no Sun, Moon nor anything, Thou alone existed then; so, O Devi! I bow down again and again to Thee.

इमं जीवलोकं समाधाय चित्ते

गुणीतिजुकोशं च नीत्वा समाधौ ।

स्थता कल्पकालं न यस्यात्मतना

न कोउपस्थित सेना विवेक तांती5पि ॥ 63 ॥

O Mother! Thou holdest all these visible Jiva lokas in the cosmic Hiranyagarbha; again Thou bringest this Hiranyagarbha, the sum-total of Linga Šarīras (the subtle bodies), with the Gunas Sattva, Rajas and Tamas to a state of equilibrium named Sāmyāvasthā and remainest quite independent and apart for a Kalpa period. At that time even those that are possessed of the power of great discrimination and dispassion cannot fathom Thy nature.

प्रार्थयेच्पि पां लोको मृतानां एर्णंन पुनः ।

नाईक्ष्मोरिस्ममातरत्वंदशयगुजानम्युतन्ति 164 ॥

O Mother! These persons are praying to me to

see their dead once; but I am quite incapable to do that. So kindly shew them their departed ones early."

सूत जाच

एवं सुताता तदा देवी माया शीभुवनेश्वी ।

स्वगांदाइय सर्वान् व उर्धियामास पार्थिवान् ॥ 65 ॥

While Vyāsa praised thus the Devi, the Devi Mahāmāyā, the Lady of the Universe, of the nature of Universal Consciousness called all the departed ones from the Heavens and shewed them to their relatives.

दूर्वा कुन्ती च गान्धारी सुभग्रा च विगराठा ।

पाण्डवा मुगुः सर्वे बीक्ष्य प्रत्यागतान्यक्तान् ॥ 66 ॥

Then Kunti, Gāndhāri, Subhadrā, Uttarā, and the Pāndavas became very glad to see their relatives come to them again.

पुनर्विसर्पितान्तेन व्यासेनामिततेजसा ।

सूचता द्वौं महामायामिद्रजतलमिवोद्धान्म।। 67 ॥

Vyāsa, of indomitable valour, again remembering Mahāmāyā, bade good bye to the departed ones; it seemed then, a great magic had occurred.

तदा पृष्टया ययुः सर्वे पाण्डवा मुनयस्तथा ।

राजा नानाभूरं प्राप: कुर्वेन्य व्यासकां पाँधि ॥ 68 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणो द्वितीयकन्ने

सत्तमोउध्याः 117 11

The Pāndavas and the Munis bade good bye to each other and went to their respective places. King Yudhiṣṭhira talked on the way about Vyāsa and ultimately came to Hastinā.

Thus ends the Seventh Chapter of the Second Book on shewing the departed ones in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER VIII

On the Extinction of the Family of Yadu and on the Anecdote of Pariksit

सूत उवाच

ततो दिने तृतीये च धृतात्प्र स भूपति: ।

दावागिनना बने दध्यः सभाये: कुनितसंयुतः ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: On the third day after the Pāndavas had returned to Hastināpur, king Dhrārāṣtra was burnt up together with Gāndhāri and Kunti, by the conflagration of fire in the forest.

सुप्रत्यलीय्यायां गतस्प्वल्पा महीपतिम् ।

शुत्वा युधिष्ठी राजा नारदादूःखामाद्वान् ॥ 2 ॥

Sañjaya went away at that time, leaving Dhrtarāshtra in the forest, on a tour on pilgrimage. King Yudhishthira heard all this from Nārada and was very sorry.

वट्रसिंगेश नाले वर्षे कीराणां शयानुतः ।

प्रभासे याद्वासे: सर्वे विघप्राणात्वर्थं गतः ॥ 3 ॥

Now after thirty six years after the Kuru family had become extinct, all the descendants of Yadu in the Prabhāsa tīrtha were destroyed by the Brāhmin's curse.

ते पीला मिच्टरां मत्ता: कृत्वा युद्धं परस्मरण ।

क्षयं प्राप्ता महात्यान: पंशयतो रामकृष्णायो: ॥ 4 ॥

The high-souled descendants of Yadu, intoxicated by drinking wine, fought against each other and were extirpated in the presence of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma.

देई तत्वाग रामसू कृष्णः कमललोचनः ।

व्याध्वाणहु: शपां पलायन्भगावाह्नर: ॥ 5 ॥

Balarāma then quitted his mortal coil; the lotus-eyed Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa quitted his life, struck by the arrows of a hunter, to pay respect to a Brāhmín's curse.

वसुदेवस्तु तच्छुत्वा देह्यागं होरेश ।

जही प्राणज्छूची-कृत्वाचिते श्रीभुवनेश्वीम ॥ 6 ॥

Vasudeva heard of Hari's quitting his mortal coil, and meditated the Goddess of the Universe within his heart and left his holy life.

अजुन्नस्तु ततो गत्वा प्रभासे चातिवृ:खित ।

संस्कार तत्र सर्वेधां यथायोग्यं चकार ह ॥ 7 ॥

Arjuna became very sorry; he went to Prabhāsa and performed the funeral obsequies of all duly.

सर्पीक्षया हरेईं कृत्वा काहस्य संचयम् ।

अधाभि: सह पत्नीभिद्रहायामास पार्थिव: ॥ 8 ॥

देहं रामस्य रेवल्या सह दारधा विभावसौ ।

अज्ञाने द्वाराकामेय पुरात्रिकामयजजनम् ॥ 9 ॥

पूरी सा वासुदेवस्य पतावितादधिता तत ।

अज्ञन: सर्वलोकानू वै गृहीत्वा निर्णतस्तदा ॥ 10 ॥

Seeing the dead body of Hari, Arjuna collected

fuel and burnt his body together with his eight principal wives; he burnt also Balarāma's body with that of his wife Revatī. Arjuna, then, went to the Dvārakā city and removed all the inhabitants of the city when the whole Dvārkā city of Vāsudeva was drowned in waters of the ocean.

कृष्णपन्यस्तदा मार्गे चीराभीर्षे तुर्विततः।

धनं सर्व गृहीत च निस्तेजशाज्ञी०प्रभव् ॥ १ १ ॥

इन्द्रप्रथे समागल वज्ञो राजा कृतस्तदा ।

अनिर्भटसुती नान्मा पार्वेर्नामिततेजसा ॥ १ २ ॥

While Arjuna was taking all the persons with him after getting out of Dvārākā, he felt himself very weak on the way; and therefore a band of robbers, known by the name of Ābhīras plundered all the wealth and all the wives of Krṣṇa.

व्यासाय कथितं दुःखं तेनोतो3रमी महारथः ।

पुर्णवेदा हरिस्चं च भवितासि महामते ॥ 13 ॥

Arjuna, of indomitable valour, after his arrival at Indraprastha made Vajra, Aniruddha's son, the king of the place.

तदा तेजतसावतुर्मं भविष्यति पुनर्वुंगे ।

तच्छुत्वा वचनं पार्यों गत्वा नागपुरे उर्जुनः ॥ १ ४ ॥

Then the highly powerful informed Vyāsa of his powerlessness when Vyāsa said: “O highly intelligent one! When Hari and you will reincarnate in another Yuga, then your heroic strength will again be manifested. Hearing all these words.

दुःरित्तो धर्मराजानं वृत्तानं सर्वमव्रवीत् ।

देहत्वानं हरेः श्रुत्वा याद्वतानां क्षयं तथा ॥ १ ५ ॥

गमनाय मति चक्रे राजा हेत्माण्ड प्रति ।

घट्टिश्रश्राप्रक्रियक राज्ये स्थापयित्वोत्तासुतम् ॥ १ ६ ॥

निजांगमा वनं राजा ऋरिषा भातृषिभः सह ।

चट्टिश्रष्टिव बचाणि कृत्वा राज्यं नाजाइये ॥ १ ७ ॥

गत्वा हिमायचले यह दे जहुः प्राणान्यधासुतः ।

परीक्षिति परिधर्षे: प्रजा: सेवां:सुधार्थिमकः ॥ १ ८ ॥

Prthā's son Arjuna returned to Hastinā with a sorrowful heart and informed everything to Yudhiṣṭhira, the Dharmarāja. Hearing the extinction of the Yādavas and Hari's quitting His mortal coil, Yudhiṣṭhira wanted to go to Himālayas.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

He installed Parikṣit, Uttarā's son who was then thirty six years old on the throne and went out of his palace in company of his brothers and Draupadi to the forests of the Himālayas. Thus the Pāndavas, Prthā's sons reigned for thirty six years in Hastnā and quitted their mortal coils in the Himālayas. Here the greatly religious sage-king Parikṣit governed with vigilance all his subjects for sixty years.

अपालयच्च राजेन्द्र: पथिवर्षपियतन्त्रतः ।

बधूव मुगायगीलो जगाम च वनं महत् ॥ 19 ॥

विद्धूगंगविधिन्वावनोभयद्राकेभूपति: स्वयम् ।

नृतिछ्छ प्रपिशान्तः क्ष्यपिशक्षीतासूनतः ॥ 20 ॥

After this, Parikṣit went once on an hunting expedition to a dense forest and shot a deer. He then searched for the deer and it became noon and he felt very thirsty, hungry, quite fatigued with his body, perspiring, when he saw a Muni, merged in meditation; he asked the Muni “Where can water be had?”

राजा धर्मेण संततो दर्शगं भूनिमंतिके ।

ध्याने स्थितं भूनीं राजा जलं पप्रच्छ चातुतः ॥ 21 ॥

नोवाच किक्रिभौनास्थ्युकोप भूपत्तिस्तत ।

मृतं सर्प ततोउद्वाय पनुष्कोट्या तुपातुः ॥ 22 ॥

But the Muni held at that time the vow of silence; so he did not answer anything. Seeing this, the thirsty king, influenced by Kali, became angry and raised a dead serpent by the fore-end of his bow and coiled it round the Muni's neck.

कलिनानउशिष्टिचित्तु कपठे तस्य न्येशशान् ।

आतोपिते तथा सर्पे नोवाच मुनिस्तमः ॥ 23 ॥

न चचाल समाधियो राजापि स्वगृहं गतः ।

Even thus coiled with a snake round his neck the Muni remained as before motionless in his state of enlightenment and spoke nothing. The king also returned home.

तस्य पुत्रोक्तितेजस्यी गवि जातो महातपः ॥ 24 ॥

महागताकोर्ष शुश्राव कौढ़िभानो वनानिके ।

मित्राण्याहुश तत्पुरं मितु: कपुंते तत्धानुना ॥ 25 ॥

Then the Muni's son, born from the cow's

womb, Śrīgi, a great ascetic, a fiery devotee of Mahāsakti, heard of the above event, while he was playing in the forest. His friends spoke to him:

लिभितोर्सित मुन: सर्पे: केनारीति मुनीक्षा ।

तेषां तद्वचनं श्रुत्वा चुकोपालितायां तदा ॥ 26 ॥

शशाप नृपति कुब्ठो गृहीत्वासृहु केरं जलम् ।

“O Muni! Some body has now enclosed a dead serpent around the neck of your father.” Hearing their words, Śrīgī became very angry and taking water in his hands cursed thus:

यितुः कण्ठेउषा मे येय विनिर्धिप्राणे सुतोर्गाः ॥ 27 ॥

तक्षकः सन्तराजेने तं द्रौल्यापुरुकम् ।

"He who has coiled today a dead serpent around my father's neck, let that villain be bitten by the serpent Taksaka within one week from this day."

मुने: शिष्योप्र राजानं समुपेत्य गृहे स्थितम् ॥ 28 ॥

शापं निवेदयामास मुपिभुजेण चार्थिनम् ।

One disciple of the Muni then went to the king in his house and informed him of the Muni's curse.

अभिमन्यपुत: शुभा शापं दत्त डिजेन वे ॥ 29 ॥

अनिवार्यं च विज्ञाय मनिवृद्धानुवाच ह ।

शणोर्नं द्विजकर्णेप माम झेशादांशयम् ॥ 30 ॥

Abhimanyu's son Parikṣit heard of the curse pronounced by a Brāhim, and knowing it infallible, spoke to the aged councillors: "O Ministers! Certainly, it is through my fault that I have been cursed by a Brāhim's son.

किं विधेयं मयामात्य उपायक्षीश्वताभिक् ।

मृगुः किलानिवार्योंसी बदलि वेदवादिव: ॥ 31 ॥

यलन्तवायिगाश्रोतः कर्दिवः सर्वेधावुः ।

उपायवादितः केचित्यबदित मन्नीचिणः ॥ 32 ॥

Now find out and settle what is to be done though the persons versed in the Vedas say that death is inevitable under these circumstances; yet the wise ones should try their best to thwart this according to the Sāstras. Many sages who are the advocates of taking steps to redress any act, say that all the actions of wise persons are fructified by proper means; their solution does not remain unsolved.

विद्योपायेन सियंति कार्याणि नेततस्य च ।

मणिमान्यप्रधीधानी वे प्रभावाः खलु दुर्विंदः ॥ 33 ॥

न भवेदिति कि तैसृ मणिमाद्वः सुसाधितः ।

सर्वद्वा पुरा भाषां मुनैः संर्जित्वा मृता ॥ 34 ॥

दत्तावधीभावुपवन्ते मुनिना सा वारासतः ।

भवितवे न विश्वासः कर्त्वः सर्वथा बृष्टे: ॥ 35 ॥

Therefore, I am saying that the powers of manis, mantrams and herbs (Osādhis) are indescribable; if applied duly, do you think that they will bear no fruit in this case? I heard that when a Muni's wife died out of snake bite, the Muni gave away the half of his life to his wife Apsarā and made her alive again.

प्रत्यक्षं तत्र दृष्टानं पश्यन्तु सचिवा: किल ।

दिवि कोर्पि पृथिव्या वा दुभयते पुकपः क्वचित् ॥ 36 ॥

It is not proper for the learned to depend on the maxim that what is inevitable must come to pass; one must try one's best to act for the living present.

देवे मर्ति समाधाय चसितेषु निकघाः ।

वित्क्त तु विनिर्पूला विभ्राशं याति सर्वथा ।। 37 ॥

गृहस्थानां गृहे कामामहृतो वातधवान्याय ।

यदूच्छयोपरचं च दिष्टं केनापि वा मुखे ॥ 38 ॥

O Ministers! Have you seen any person in the Heavens or in the world who remains idle, depending on fate alone? The Sarinyāsins have renounced the world; but they must have to go to the houses of the house-holders, whether they be invited or not invited. See again, supposing that the food of a person is brought to him unasked and suppose it is thrown into the mouth by some one, can you conceive that food would go down into the belly from the mouth without one's effort?

उद्यमेन विना चास्यादुते संविशेक्तबम् ।

प्रयलक्षोद्यो कार्यं यदा सिंद्रि न याति चेत् ॥ 39 ॥

तदा देख स्थिते चेति चित्तमालंवयेद्वुध: ।

Therefore one should exert one's own prowess from the very outset; though the intelligent ones should be satisfied with the thought "what can be done? It is not ordained in my fate."

मन्त्रण ऊचुः

को मुनिवर्न दत्त्वार्धमायुगे जीविता प्रिया ॥ 40 ॥

कर्थ मृता महाराज तसेच बूढ़े सविस्तम् ।

When Parikşit said thus, the ministers asked: "Which Muni made his dead wife alive again, by giving her half his own life? And how did his wife die? Kindly describe all these in detail to me."

राजोबाच

भूगोर्षायां वरातोहा पुलोमा नाम सुदूर्धे ॥ 41 ॥

तस्यां तु च्ववनो नाम मुनितांगोपतिशिश्रतः ।

च्यवनस्य च शयातेः सुकन्यानाम सुदूर्धे ॥ 42 ॥

The king said: Bhrgu Muni had a very beautiful wife Pulomā. In her womb the world renowned Cyavana Muni was born. Sukanyā, the daughter of Śaryāti was the wife of Cyavana.

तस्यां जउे सुतः शीमान्यमतिनांय विश्रतः ।

प्रमेतस्तु प्रिया भाषां प्रतापी नाम विश्रन्ति ॥ 43 ॥

In her womb was born a beautiful son named Pramati; he was famous. Pramati had his famous beautiful wife Pratāpi.

रूकनाम सुतो जाततस्था परमतपास: ।

तत्मिश्रा सपवे काश्रल्युकनेश्रा विश्रन्तः ॥ 44 ॥

बष्यत तपसा युक्ता धर्मात्मा सत्यस्ममतः ।

एतमित्रनेट मान्या मेनका च वरापसतः ॥ 45 ॥

फ्रीडो चके नदीतीरे जिपु लोकेषु मुन्त्रों ।

गर्ष विश्वाससोः प्राप्य निर्नाता वरवर्गिनी ॥ 46 ॥

In her womb was born the great ascetic son Ruru. At this time a person named Sthūlakesa, a religious truthful man of great name, was practising tapasyā. O Ministers! In the meanwhile, the chief Apsarā Menakā held sexual intercourse with Viśvāvasu Gandhvara on the banks of a river and became pregnant.

स्वृतःकेशागे माला विसर्सर्ज वारामपा: ।

कन्यकां च नदौतीरि चिपु लोकेषु सुदीम् ॥ 47 ॥

She went out from that place to the hermitage of Sthūlakēsa on the river bank and gave birth to a very beautiful daughter.

दूर्वाउनाथा तदा कन्यां जग्राह मुनिसनमः ।

पुणेष चसूलकौलनु नाना चक्रे प्रमद्गरम् ॥ 48 ॥

Seeing this girl quite an orphan and very beautiful, Muni Sthūlakesa began to rear her up and named her Pramadvarā.

सा काले यौवन प्राप्ता स्वेलक्षणासंपुता ।

कर्नईयाद्धा तं चालां कामबाणार्थितों हुषपुत् ॥ 49 ॥

शीत श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे द्वितीयरकन्नेउर्धभोपस्थायः ॥ 8 ॥ 11

This all-auspicious girl Pramadvara attained youth in due course when Muni Ruru saw her and became smitten with passion."

Thus ends the Eighth Chapter of the Second Book on

the extinction of the family of Yadu and on the

anecdote of Parikṣit in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgāvatam of 18,000 verses.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER IX

On the Account of Kuru

परीक्षिवाच

कामात़ः स पुनिर्वाला रूकः सुचो निजाध्मे ।

चिता पपछ्छ दीनं तं किं करो चियना असि ॥ १ ॥

Parikṣit said: “When Muni Ruru went to his room to sleep, his mind having become perturbed with passion, his father Pramati seeing him sorrowful, asked him: “O Ruru! Why do you look so absent-minded?” Ruru was passionate then; so he said to his father:

स तमाहातिकामातः स्थूलकेश्य चाङ्गेम ।

कन्या प्रमद्धता नाता सा मे भार्यां भवेदिति ॥ 2 ॥

"I saw a girl named Pramadvarā in the hermitage of Sthūlakeśa; I wish that she might become my wife."

स गाला प्रमतिस्तूर्ण स्थूलकों महापुन्तिम् ।

प्रमुहा सुमुखं कृलाय ययाचे तां वरानान्मा ॥ 3 ॥

दूदी वाचं स्थूलकेशः प्रवास्यामि गुर्भेजृति ।

विद्याहर्षं च सम्भारं रचयामासुरुंने ॥ 4 ॥

Hearing this, Pramati want immediately to the hermitage of Sthūlakeśa, and pleased him by various conversations and asked for his beautiful daughter when Sthūlakeśa promised that he would give her daughter in marriage on an auspicious day.

प्रमति स्थूलकेशश विद्याहार्थं समुर्धाती ।

वध्वतुम्हाल्मानो समीपस्थो तपोवेने ॥ 5 ॥

तम्मिचवसेरे कन्या समागण गृहांगणे ।

प्रसूर्ण पत्रगं पादोनास्यूषचाक्लोचना ॥ 6 ॥

Then both the high-souled persons Pramati and Sthūlakeśa began to work in co-operation and make arrangements for marriage ceremony and collected

various articles in that hermitage when the fair eyed girl Pramadvarā, while playing in the courtyard in the house, trod on a serpent and was bitten by it and consequently died.

दहा तु पत्रोनाथ सा ममार वर्गाना ।

कोलाहलसदा जातो मृतां द्रव्हा प्रमढ़ारम् ॥ 7 ॥

मिलिता मुनवः सर्वे चुकृष्णे: शोकसंयुतः ।

भूमी तां पतितां द्रश्वा लिता तस्यातिबृघितः ॥ 8 ॥

Seeing then Pramadarvā dead all the Munis of the place assembled and cried and wept with sorrowful hearts, when a great tumultuous uproar ensued.

रोहे वित्तग्राणां दीयमानां सुतेजसा ।

रूँ क्षुत्वा तदाबंदन्नार्थां समागतः ॥ 9 ॥

द्वर्षा पतितां तत्र सजीवामिव कामिनीम् ।

रहंतं स्थलकेशं च दृष्याउ्यान्घिसत्नाम् ॥ 10 ॥

Though the life departed from Pramadvara's body, yet seeing the brilliant lustre of her lifeless body lying on the ground, her nourisher and father Sthūlakaśa became very sorry and wept aloud.

रूकः स्थानाडहितां रूगोद विहहाकुलः ।

अहो दैवेन सर्पोर्धा प्रेपितः परमाढ़तः ॥ १ १ ॥

Hearing this cry of his, Ruru came there to see what had happened and perceived the girl, though lifeless, yet seeming alive and lying on the ground.

मम गर्भविधाताय दुःखतेत्रुयं किल ।

कि कंलीपि कव पाच्धामि मृत्ता मे प्राणवल्लभा ॥ 1 2 ॥

"Seeing Sthūlākeśa and other Rṣis weeping, Ruru went out from that place and with a grievous heart, began to cry aloud. "Alas! Fate has certainly

sent this serpent as the cause of all my miseries and to mar all my happiness.

न कै बीकितुिच्छामि विवृतकः प्रियवासनव।।

नार्लिंगिता वरात्रोहा न मया चूचिता मुखौ ॥ १३ ॥

Alas! What am I to do now? Where to go? When my beloved has fallen unto the jaws of death, I do not want to live any longer, bereft of my wife.

न पाणिग्रह प्राप्तं मन्दभायेन सर्वथा ।

ताजाहोमतशा चानी न कृतस्वल्या सह ॥ 14 ॥

Oh! What an unfortunate creature I am? I have not been able to embrace this beautiful darling of mine. I am deprived of kissing her face and marrying her.

मानुधं विमिरं कामं गच्छल्वच मामसवः ।

दुःखित्यन व चा मृत्युविधितः सम्पैति हि ॥ 15 ॥

Alas! Fie to my human birth! Let my life get out just now in as much as I could not, out of mere shame, throw myself on the burning pyre along with my beloved!

सुवर्द ताई कयं दिव्यमायते भुवि वाज्छितम् ।

प्रपतिम हृदे पोरे पावके प्रपताम्यम् ॥ १ ६ ॥

Oh! When death comes not to the sorrowful person, even when prayed for, how then can I expect divine happiness in this world?

विषयमिधि गले पार्शं कृता प्राणार्थत्वाज्यमृहम् ।

वित्तपैवं कस्तत्र विचार्यं मत्सा पुनः ॥ 17 ॥

So let me now drop myself down in a lake or enter into a burning fire or drink venom or strangle myself by tieing rope round my neck!"

उपारं चित्तयामास स्थितस्तमिषमदीते ।

भरणार्षिक फलं मे स्यादात्मह्या दुतुय्वा ॥ 18 ॥

Thus Ruru wailed much on the bank of the river and long reflecting in his mind found out a way and thought what would be the advantage in death?

दू:खितशुधितामेथाजजननी चातितूःखिता ।

देवसुतो घबेलकामं दूयदा मां त्यक्जीक्षितम् ॥ 19 ॥

“Rather an irretrievable sin would be incurred in committing suicide; and my father and mother would be sorry.

सर्वे: प्रमृत्तिक्ष स्यात्मस्थेनात्र संशय: ।

उपकात: प्रियाया: कः परलोके भवेदीय ॥ 20 ॥

Seeing me commit suicide, my bad luck and enemies will be gladdened; there is no manner of doubt in this. What benefit will my beloved gain if I commit suicide or if I be distressed for her bereavement.

मृते मयात्मायतेन विहार्यापिडतेर्पि च ।

परलोक प्रिया साजपि न मे स्यादात्मयातिनः ॥ 21 ॥

Suppose I die, even then my beloved will not become mine in the next world, so there are many faults in my committing suicide but there is no fault if I preserve my life."

एतदर्थं मृते दोषा मयि नैवाग्ये पुनः ।

विष्यवैधकस्तत्रनालासप्रत्यमृषिव: सित्तः ॥ 22 ॥

Thus coming to a conclusion Ruru bathed, performed Äcaman and became pure. He then took water in his hand and said:

अवबीद्धिचनं कृत्वा जलं पाणावसी मुनि: ।

यन्मया सुकृतं किंचित्कृतं देवाचनांतिकम् ॥ 23 ॥

गुरव: पूजिता भवसा हुतं जलं पत: कृतम् ।

अधीतात्यलिजाल वेदा गायजी संकृत्या यदि ॥ 24 ॥

रविरागधितसंतने संजीवतु मम प्रिया ।

यदि जीवेज मे कान्ता न्यसे प्राणानहं ततः ॥ 25 ॥

“Whatever good works, worshipping the gods, etc., that I have done and if I have performed, with devotion, the service to my preceptors and teachers and superiors, homa cremonies, japam, tapasyā, if I have studied all the Vedas and if I have rollected Gāyatrī and worshipped the Sun then let my beloved have life and get up as an outcome of my Punyam. If my beloved does not get back her life, I will certainly quit my life.

राजोबाच

इन्युक्त्वा तज्जलं भुभी चिक्षेपाराध्य देवतः ।

एवं विलपतन्तस्य भायोदा दुःवित्तस्य च ॥ 26 ॥

देवदूतस्तादोःप्येत्य वाक्यमाह कर्न ततः ।

Thus saying, he worshipped the Devas mentally and threw that water of his hands on the ground. Thus Ruru, with a sorrowful heart was weeping.

देवदृत उवाच

माकार्णी: साहसं बहान् कबं जीवेन्मृता प्रिया ॥ 27 ॥

गतानुघीया सुश्रोगी गान्यवीयससोः सुता ।

The Deva's messenger came down and said: "O Brāhmīn! Don't make this bold attempt; how can your beloved get back her life? The life-period of this beautiful girl, born of Gandharva's sperm and Apsarā's ovum is now exhausted; now look for another beautiful woman.

अन्यां कामय चार्वर्गी मुतेयं चाचिवाहिता ॥ 28 ॥

किं तोदिसि सुदुर्दुळे का ग्रीतिस्तेज्ञसा सह ।

O one of very dull understanding! Why are you crying in vain? Where is the affection between you and this girl; she died in an unmarried state (without marrying you).”

रूसाचा

देववृत न चान्यां वै वरिष्यामदम्बूनान् ॥ 29 ॥

यदि जीवेत्र जीवेत्रा मतैंल्य चाधुना मया ।

At this Ruru said: O Deva messenger! I won't marry any other lady, whether my beloved gets back her life or does not get back her life; in case she does not regain her life, I will also forego my life at this instant."

राजोवाच

विद्वेषिति हठं तस्य देवदूतो सुवात्यिनः ॥ 30 ॥

उवाच वचनं तल्यं सत्यं चातिमनोहाम ।

At this greatest importunity of Ruru, the Deva messenger became glad and spoke the following truthful beneficent yet beautiful words.

उपारं श्रणु विग्रें द्विक्तिं यनसुरैः पुरा ॥ 31 ॥

आयुषो5धप्रयोने जीवयातु प्रमद्वारा ।

“O Brāhim! I will suggest one way to you; kindly hear. The Devas ordained this long, long ago. You can give up your half life period, and with that you can make this girl alive soon.”

रूसाच

आयुषो5ध प्रयळामि कन्याये नार संशयः ॥ 32 ॥

अष्ट प्रत्यावृतगाण प्रोतिष्ठु मम प्रिया ।

Ruru said: “O Deva messenger! I give half my life-period to this girl; there is no doubt in this. Let my beloved get back her life soon and get up.”

विश्वासुस्तत तत्र विमानेन समगतः ॥ 33 ॥

जात्या पुर्वी भूतां चाशु खर्गोलाकाम्यानु।

ततो नान्यराजश देववृतश सतभः ॥ 34 ॥

The King said: “O Ministers! At this time Viśvāvasu, knowing that his daughter Pramavārā is dead, descended from the Heavens in a celestial car and came to the place; then the Gandharva king and the Deva messenger both went to Yama,

धर्मार्जुपरैवं वचनं प्रत्यभाषतम् ।

धर्मारक रो: पनी सुता विश्वासोस्तथा ॥ 35 ॥

The Dharmarāja, and spoke thus: “O Dharmarāja! This Viśvāvasu’s son was bitten by a snake and has now come to your place.

सूता प्रमद्धा कन्या दहा सर्पेन धान्यान ।

सा करोरायुषोर्धेन मतुकामस्य सुर्यैन ॥ 36 ॥

समुप्तिष्ठु तन्त्यीं जतचयीप्रभावतः ।

The Dvija Ruru is now desirous to quit his life; so, O Sun's son! Now let the girl again get her life through the influence of Ruru's brahmacarya (purity) as a consequence of his giving away his life period for the girl."

धर्म उवाच

विश्वासुसुतां कन्यां देवेवुत यदीच्छिस ॥ 37 ॥

उत्तिष्वाव्योर्धन रूक नाचा त्वमयोग ।

Dharmarāja said: O Deva messenger! if you want to make the girl alive again, let her get life as a consequence of half the life-period of Ruru being subtracted. Go immediately and give the girl to Ruru."

राजोबाच

एवमुक्तस्तो गत्वा जीवियत्वा प्रमुदाग् ॥ 38 ॥

रुतेः समयेयामास देवदुतस्त्वाग्वितः ।

The king said: “O Ministers! Yama having said thus to the Deva messenger, he went away immediately and made Pramadvara alive and handed her over to Ruru.

ततः शुभेड़िं विधिना रूरणापि विवाहिता ॥ 39 ॥

इन्द्र वंघायवोनेन मृत्यपूजीविता तदा ।

Thus, on an auspicious day, Ruru married her. Thus the Rşi's daughter Pramadvarā though fallen dead, got again her life by proper manas.

उपायस्तु प्रकतैल्य सर्वेश शास्त्रसंमत ॥ ४० ॥

मागमन्नोषधीमिश्र विन्धित्यग्राषणे ।

So, O Councillors! to save life, one should resort one's best duly according to the Śāstras, by the use of gems, mantras, and herbs and plants.

इत्युक्ना सचिवाज्ञा कल्यविता सुरक्षकाः ॥ 41 ॥

कारवित्यासथ प्रासादं सतधूमिकमुतामम् ।

आरकोहोतास्तुः सचिवः सह तत्णगम् ॥ 42 ॥

Thus speaking to the ministers, King Parikshit had a fine building of seven floors in height erected, placed the principal guards around it and stationed also the most powerful men well versed in the knowledge of mani (gems), mantrams, and plants for protection and immediately ascended to this building.

मीमान्धरधरा: शुरा: स्थापितास्त्र तशणे ।

प्रेयामास भूपालो मुनिं गौरामुं ततः ॥ 4३ ॥

To appease the wrath of the Muni Śrīgī, the king sent the Muni named Gaurmukha to him and requested him repeatedly “Let the crime of the humble devote be forgiven.”

प्रसादार्थे सेवकस्य क्षमवेति पुनः पुनः ।

बाहाणासिद्यमन्नाजारक्षणार्थितस्ततः ॥ 44 ॥

Then, for self preservation, the king brought from all sides the Brāhmins, who are perfect in their knowledge and application of the mantras.

मन्पिक्ष: स्थितस्तत्र स्थाययामास: द्वित्नः ।

न काश्रिदास्हेत्र प्रासादे चातिरिक्षते ॥ 45 ॥

वातोर्पि न चेरन्त्र प्रवेशे विनिवार्यते ।

भध्यभोज्यादिकं राजा तत्स्थश्छ चकार सः ॥ 46 ॥

The minister's son placed the elephants in proper places so that nobody could ascend to the top of the building; what more can be said than the fact that even air could not find entrance there when once ordered "no admission," what to speak of others! King Parikṣit remained there and counted the number of days of the serpent Takṣaka's coming there;

स्नानसन्थ्यादिकं कर्म तत्रेव विनिवल्चं च ।

राजाकर्मणि सर्वाणि ततस्थाकारीयुः ॥ 47 ॥

मन्त्रिभि: सह संभंत्र यणायन्दिवसानपि ।

क्रक्षच्छ करणयो नाम ब्राहणो मन्ससम् ॥ 48 ॥

शुश्राव च तथा शापं प्राप्त राजा महात्मना ।

स धनार्थी दिजश्रेषः करणयः समर्पित्यत् ॥ 49 ॥

ब्रजामि तन यत्रास्ते शण्तो राजा दिजेन है ।

इति कृत्वा मर्ति विधः स्वगृहासि:सुतः पथि ॥ 50 ॥

करणयो मन्त्रविद्धान्यार्थी मुनिसत्तम: ।

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे द्वितीयकल्पे

नवनोउधाय: 11 9 11

He performed his bath, Sandhyā Vandamans and fooding; even he consulted with his ministers and governed his kingdom from there. O Rjsis! At this time a Brāhmin named Kaśyapa, versed in the mantras, heard of the curse of the king and thought that he would get abundant wealth if he could free the king from Takṣaka's poison and proposed to himself that he would go to the place where the cursed king Parikṣit was staying with the Brāhmin. Pondering thus, the Brāhmin went out of his house, on the expectation of wealth from the king.

Thus ends the Ninth Chapter of the Second Book on the account of Ruru in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.

CHAPTER X

On the Death of Pariksit

सूत उवाच

तस्मिचेव दिने नामा तक्षकस्तं नृपोत्तमम् ।

गर्शतं जात्वा गृहातूर्णि निःसून: पुरुषोत्तम ॥ १ ॥

वृद्धदाक्षायणवेधेण तक्षकः पथि निरितः ।

अपयथकर्णयं यार्गे जजन्ते नृपति प्रति ॥ २ ॥

Sūta said: O Risīs! On that very day when the

Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam

Brāhmīn Kaśyapa went out of his house, Takṣaka, knowing the king Parikṣit cursed, assumed an aged Brāhmīn's form and went out of his abode. The serpent Takṣaka met Brāhmīn Kaśyapa on the way.

तमपृष्ठ्यप्रागोउसी बाहुणं मन्त्रवादिन् ।

वन भर्मात्मवित्ती याति कि च कार्य चिकारीति ॥ 3 ॥

Seeing the Brāhmīn, versed in the Mantras, Takṣaka asked him “Where are you going so in haste, and what for are you taking this trouble?”

कथय उवाच

परीक्षितं नृपश्रेष्ठं तक्षकष्ट प्रध्यक्षिति ।

तगाई त्वरितो यामि नृपं कतुंमपज्ञतम् ॥ ४ ॥

Thus questioned, Kaśyapa replied: "I heard that the serpent Taksaka will bite king Parikṣit; therefore, I am going in haste to king Parikṣit to cure him of the serpent's poison.

मनोजिति मम विघ्रंत्र विनपाशकर: कित।

जीविध्याम्बरुं ते वे शीवित्यो३पुना कित ॥ ५ ॥

I know the mantra (mystic verse) that can destroy the effect of poison. If his life-period is not exhaust, I will certainly give him back his life.

तक्षक उवाच

अर्हे स पत्रगो बह्यांस्तं धक्षयामि महीपतिम् ।

निवर्तीस्य न जानस्तंच मवा दूर्ध चिकिस्तिमु। ॥ 6 ॥

Taksaka then said: "O Brāhmīn! I am that Takṣaka; I will bite him and take away his life. So you better desist. Will you be able to treat him whom I bite; certainly you will not."

कल्पय ज्ञाच

अहं दृ त्वया सर्पं नृपं शगतं तिज्ञेन वै ।

जीवयथ्याम्यस्ते कामं मन्त्रलेन वै ॥ ७ ॥

Kaśyapa said: “O chief of snakes! When you will bite the king who has been cursed by the Brāhmin, I will no doubt make him alive by the power of my mantra.”

तक्षक उवाच

यदि तं जीवितुं यासि मया दईं नृपोतमम् ।

मन्त्रणिकं बत विध्र उर्थय त्वं ममानच ।। ८ ॥

चक्ष्यायेने च न्यप्रों विषदैदुष्पितय हे ।

Taksā said: 'O, chief of Brāhmins! If you have so thought that you will make the king alive after I bite him, then shew me your strength before hand. O sinless one! I will bite this Nyagrodha tree (the Indian fig-tree); just now make it alive."

क्रवप उवाच

जीविधेये तवया दर्द दूर्ध वा परगोतम ॥ 9 ॥

Kaśyapa said: “Certainly, I will make this tree alive, that will be burnt away by the venom of your teeth.”

सूत उवाच

अद्वास्तरणो वृक्षं भयसासच्च चकार तम् ।

उवाच क्रस्यं भूयो जीवयैनं द्विज्ञानम् ॥ १० ॥

Sūta said: The snake Takṣaka then bit the tree, which was reduced to ashes; and asked Kaśyapa to bring back that tree to life.

दूर्वा भस्मीकृतं वृक्षे प्रपनेन विश्वानिना ।

सर्वे भस्म समाहार्य कार्ययो वाक्यमब्रतीन् ॥ १ १ ॥

Seeing the tree reduced to ashes by the fire of venom of the snake, he collected all the ashes and said: "O highly venomons serpent.

पश्य मन्त्रबलं मेउषा न्यायीधं पश्रजीगत ।

जीवयामव्य दृष्ट्रं वै पश्यतस्ते महाविष १। १२।।

See today the power of my mantra. Behold! While you are witnessing, I will enliven this tree."

इत्पुक्नता जलमादाय करणयो मन्त्रवितमः ।

सिषेच भमसार्शं तं महिन्तैयेव वारिणा ॥ १३ ॥

Thus the great mantra-knower Kaśyapa took water in his hand, and impregnating it with mantra power, sprinkled the water on the ashes.

तद्धारिसेचनाजातो न्यप्रीध: पूर्वविद्युभः ।

विसयं तक्षकः प्राणो दूर्वा तं जीवितं नगम् ॥ 14 ॥

तमाह क्रस्यं नाग: किमर्थे ते परिश्रभः ।

सम्पाद्यामि तं कामं बृहि वाद्व वाज्छतम् ॥ 15 ॥

Immediately, on the sprinkling of the mantra saturated water, the Nyagrodha tree got back its life as before. Takṣaka became greatly astonished

to see the tree enlivened again and said to Kaśyapa: "O cheif of Brāhmin! What is your object in taking so much pain? Speak out what you want and I will fulfil your desires."

कथपय उवाच

वित्तार्थी नृपति मत्वा शपतं घरम गिन:सुतः ।

गृहादं चोपकर्तु विद्या नृपतसनाम् ॥ 16 ॥

Kaśyapa said: “O chief of serpents! Knowing the king cursed, I am going to do good to him by my knowledge and to get in return abundant wealth.”

तक्षक जवाच

वित्तं गृहाण विश्रं प्रयाविद्धचस पार्थिवात् ।

द्वातिम स्वगृहं याहि सकामोड़ं भवायन्तः ॥ 17 ॥

Hearing this, Taksaka said: “I will give you the amount of wealth that you desire; take that and go back to your house, and let my desire be also fulfilled.”

सूत उवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य कश्यप: परमार्थवित् ।

चित्तयामास मनसा किं कतमीय पुनः पुनः ॥ १८ ॥

Kaśyapa, the knower of the highest state, heard Takṣaka's words and pondered in his mind again and again. "What is to be done now?

धर्म गृहीत्वा स्वगृहं प्रधामीय चाहंहु पुनः ।

भविष्यति न मे कीसिलिके लोभसामाशयात् ॥ 19 ॥

जीवितेअ द्यूपरेगेछे कौसिं: स्याद्वतला मम ।

धनप्रापितिश्छ बहुधापवेत्युर्षं च जीवनात् ॥ 20 ॥

If I take this wealth and go back to my house, my name and fame will not be known in this world, simply for my greed; but if the king be made alive again, my undying fame, abundant wealth, and greatest Punyam will accrue to me.

स्थणीयं यय कामां त्रिभयं यशमा विना ।

सर्वेयं रघणा पूर्वे दर्त विधाय कीर्ते ॥ 21 ॥

ह्रिंश्छ्रौण क्रानि क्रौर्व्यं बहुविस्तम ।

उदेक्षेयं कर्वे घृपं दहामानं विधापिन्न ॥ 22 ॥

Again fie to that wealth with which there is no fame; so one must try one's best to preserve one's

fame. King Raghu, in ancient days, gave away everything of his to the Brāhmins for fame; King Hariścandra and Kārṇa did not hesitate a bit to give away endless property. There is one point again to take into account, how can I trifle away the matter, seeing the king burnt up by the venomous fire?

जीवितेड़ा म्या राजि सुखु सर्वेजनस्य च ।

अराजके प्रजानाशो भविता नात्र संग्रव: ॥ 23 ॥

If I can bring back the king's life, everyone will become happy. If the kingdom be without its king, the subject will, no doubt, be ruined.

प्रजानाशस्य पापे मे भविष्यत मृते नृते ।

अपकीर्णिति लोकैक्य धनतोभाद्धविषयिति ॥ 24 ॥

So, following the king's death, sin will also incur on me due to the ruin of the subject; and infamy will come on my head that I am a very greedy man."

इति संसुित्व मनसा धानं कृता स कश्य ।

गतायुर्ष च नुपर्ति ज्ञतावान्युद्धिनमतः ॥ 25 ॥

Thus meditating in his mind, the highly intelligent Kaśyapa began to meditate, and plunged himself in Dhyāna; he, thereby, came to know that the king's life period was spent up.

आसप्रमूल्य जगनं ज्ञाला ध्यानेन कशयः ।

गृहं ययौं स धर्मात्मा धनमादाय तऋकान् ॥ 26 ॥

Thus knowing the king's death imminent, the virtuous Kaśyapa took the desired wealth from Takṣaka and returned home.

निवल्वें कशयपं सर्पः मद्वतः सूचन् ।

हैतुकानी जगामायु नगरं नागसाछ्यम् ॥ 27 ॥

शुश्राव नागरम्यांते प्रापादस्यं परीक्षितम् ।

मणिमन्त्रीधेः कामं रक्ष्यागमतिन्हिन् ॥ 28 ॥

Thus making Kaśyapa to retire to his house on the seventh day, Taksaka went on to Hastināpur to bring death and destruction on to Parikṣit. When he went close to the city, he heard that King Parikṣit was staying on the upper storey of the palace; and the palace had been preserved by various gems, mantras, herbs and plants.

चिन्ताविष्टसदा नागो विश्राणपथवाकुल: ।

चित्तयामास योगेन प्रविश्रयं गृहं कवम् ॥ 29 ॥

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

वंचायामि कर्थे चैन राजानं पापकारिणम् ।

विप्रशपाद्धतं मूर्द विपूधीदाकरं गडम् ॥ 30 ॥

Takṣaka became very anxious; and fearing, lest the curse of the Brāhmins, will fall on his head, became very much agitated and thought. “How shall I now enter the palace? How can I cheat this stupid hypocrite vicious king, cursed by the Brāhmin, who causes troubles to the Brāhmins.

पाण्डवानां कुले जातः को3पि नैतादृषो भवेत् ।

तापसस्य गले येन मतः सर्पि निवेशितः ॥ 31 ॥

Not a single man has taken birth in the Pāndava family ever since that has coiled a dead serpent round the neck of an ascetic Brāhmīn.

कृत्वा विमर्हितं कर्म जानन-कालगति नृपः ।

रक्षकाम्यने कृत्वा ग्रासादमधिगमाय च ॥ ३२ ॥

मृत्युं वझ्यतो राजा वतंतैउघ तिराकुलः ।

तं कंधे धक्षयिष्यामि विग्रावास्येन चोदितः ॥ 33 ॥

The king has committed a very heinous crime and knowing the course of time to be infallible, has placed sentries on all sides of the palace and has ascended to the top-most story of the building, thinking thereby to deceive Death and is staying in a peaceful mind. How can then he be smitten, in accordance with the Brāhimin's word?

न जानाति च मन्दात्मा मरणं हृधिवर्तमम् ।

तेनासी शक्तान्याय शीधास्त्रीडा मोदते ॥ 34 ॥

यदि वे विकित्तो मृतुर्दैविनामिततेजसा ।

स कयं परिवर्तितं कृतेर्जैस्तु कोदिधि: ॥ 35 ॥

The king, of dull intellect, knows not that death cannot be prevented; for that reason he has placed guards and sentinels round the building, and himself has got up the house and is happily whiling away his time; but he is quite ignorant that when Fate “Who can never be violated, ordains the death, how can it be prevented, though thousands of attempts are made to thwart it?

पाण्डवस्य च दायादो जानम्नुं गतं नृपः ।

जीवने मतिमायायय स्थितः स्थाने निर्वाकृः ॥ 36 ॥

This scion of Pānḍu family that his death is at hand and yet wants to live and therefore is staying 'in his own place with a tranquil mind.

दानपुण्यादिकं राजा कतुर्महिति सर्वथा ।

धर्मेण हृन्ते व्याधिर्यान्यु शाश्धतं भवेत् ॥ 37 ॥

The king ought now to make charities and do other meritorious works; it is only by acts of Dharma that disease is destroyed and life is prolonged.

नोचेम्नुच्छिति कृत्वा स्नानदानादिक क्रिया: ।

मरणं स्वर्गलोकाय नरकायान्याया भवेत् ॥ 38 ॥

And if that be not the object then a dying man ought to take bath, to make charities and to await his time of death; he thereby attains heaven; otherwise hell is inevitable.

डिजरीडाकृतं पापं पृथायास्य च भुपतेः ।

विश्रणास्यता धोर आसञ्च मरणे किल ॥ 39 ॥

न कोईपि ब्राह्मणः पार्थिं य एन प्रतिविधेयते ।

वैस्या विहितो मृत्युगिवार्यन्तु सर्वथा ॥ 40 ॥

The king committed great sin in the act of causing pain and trouble to the Brāhmīn or other similar acts and, therefore, death is so close that the Brāhmīn's curse has fallen thus on his head. Is there no such Brāhmīn who can make him understand this; or the Creator has ordained his death now as inevitable."

इति सईचल सपुर्ती सचानगाफिकरे तैश्वतन् ।

कृत्वा तापसवेशांस्ताप्राहीणतोस्पर्जगमान् ।। ४। ।।

फलमूलातिकं गृह्य रात्रे नागोयं तक्षतः ।

स्वयं च कौटरूपेण फलमध्ये ससार है ॥ ४।२ ॥

Thus meditating, the chief serpent made other serpents following him assume the form of ascetic Brahmins and gave them roots and fruits to be taken to the king.

निर्णासते तदा नागाः फलान्यादाय सस्वतः ।

ते राजाभवर्ग प्रायः स्थिताः प्रापासदास्रिधौ ॥ 43 ॥

The serpent Takṣaka himself entered within the fruits in the form of an insect. Then the ascetic serpents took the fruits and quickly went out of the place. They came to the palace where Parikṣit was resting.

स्थाकासापासान्यूद्वा पण्यूष्टसीच्कर्मिभित् ।

क्रयुक्ते भूपति श्रुं प्राप्ता: स्मोडा तपोवान् ॥ 44 ॥

अधिमन्युस्तुं चौर कुलाकं चाफडर्णेन् ।

परिवर्धितुं प्राणता मनैराशवंरील्पा 145

निवेदयध्यं राजानं दर्जान्धारितामानुनीन् ।

कृत्याधिषेकान्यास्यामोदचाचादफलानिचा 461

Seeing them, the guards asked: "What for have you come here?" Hearing this, We are coming from the hermitage to prolong the life of the hero king the son of Abhimanyu and the son of the Pāndava family, by chanting the mantras of the Atharvavedas, and we want to have an interview with the king; now you better go and inform the king that some Munis have come to see you. We will sprinkle water on him and give him some sweet fruits and then depart.

भारतानां कुले क्वापि न दृषा द्वारशकाः ।

न मुतं तापसानां तु राज्ञासद्धर्न किल । ४ ७ ।।

We have never come across such gatekeepers in the family of Bharata as disallow ascetic Muni visitors to go and see the king.

आरोहामो वयं तन यत्र राजा परीक्षितः ।

आशीरिपिर्वैधिवैर्ने दत्ताना: प्रवजामहे ॥ ४ ४ ॥

We will ascend to the place where the Pariksit is staying and we will bless him, and wish him long life; we will communicate to him our orders and then depart to our own places."

सूत उवाच

इत्याकपयं चरन्तेधां तपासना तु रक्षका: ।

प्रत्यचुस्तानिज्ञान्मत्वा निदेशें धपतेयैधा ॥ 4 9 ॥

Sūtā said: Hearing these words, the sentinels spoke as perviously ordered by the king, as follows:

नाठ बो दर्शनें विगा रोजः स्याहिति नो मति: ।

शः सर्वातपरिस्त त्वाणतव्यं नृपालये ॥ 5 0 ॥

अनारोहसृ प्रसादो विगाणां मुनिसनमाः ।

विश्रणापयान्द्रात्रा विहितोस्ति न संशया: ॥ 5 1 ॥

“O Brāhmins! We think verily you won’t be able to have an interview with the king today; you, all ascetics can come tomorrow to this palace. O Munis! Owing to the Brāhmīn’s curse, the king has built this place; then it follows, as a matter of course, that the Brāhmins are not allowed to get up to the palace.” Then the serpents, in the form of the Brāhmins, spoke:

तदोचुस्तानथो विशा: फलमूलजलानि च ।

विग्राणिषघ्रा गड़ेल प्राह्यन्तु सुरुस्का ॥ 5 2 ॥

“O good sentinels! Then take these roots and fruits and offer them to the king and communicate to him our blessings.

ते नत्वा नूपति प्रोषुस्तापसानानातुझना: ।

राजोचाच नयखे वै फलमूलादिक च यत् ॥ 5 3 ॥

The sentinels went to the king, and informed him of the arrival of the ascetic Brāhmins. The king replied: “Bring here the roots and fruits offered by them and ask what for they have come.

पृष्छधं तपासाकार्यं प्रततगामनं पुरः ।

प्रणार्म कवधधं मे नाट्य सन्तर्गिं मम ॥ ५४ ॥

Give them my pranāms; today I cannot meet with them; let them come tomorrow morning."

ते गतावंद सभादाय फलमृताविकं च यत् ।

राजे समयेयामासुर्वैमानपुन:सम् ॥ ५५ ॥

The sentinels went to the ascetics and got from them their roots and fruits and offered them with great respect to the king.

गतेषु तेषु नागेषु विषयेषावृतेषु च ।

फलान्यादाय राजासी सचिवानिदप्रबतीन् ॥ ५६ ॥

मुहदो भायन्त्य कल्योतिन सर्वैशः ।

अद्याद्धे चैकमेतेई फलं विज्ञापितं महत् ॥ ५७ ॥

इनुकुलता तकलं दंचा सुहृद्धशोतगसुतः ।

को कृत्वा फलं पक्वं ददार नुपति स्वयम् ॥ ५८ ॥

When the serpents in the guise of the hypocrite Brāhmins went away, the king took those fruits and spoke to his ministers: “Take these fruits and let all my friends eat them. I will take only this one fruit given by the Brāhmins and will eat it.”

विदारिति फलं राजा तत्र क्रिमिरभूद्गु ।

स कृष्णान्वनस्ताजो दृष्टो घुपतिना स्वयम् ॥ ५९ ॥

Saying this, the Uttarā's son Pariksit gave away fruits to the friends and took one ripe fruit for himself, broke it and saw within it a very fine copper-coloured black eyed insect.

तं दृष्ट्वा नृपति प्राह सचित्रात्विमितानाय ।

अस्तमध्येति सविता विषाद्व न मे भयम् ॥ 60 ॥

At this, the ministers were astonished; the king

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

spoke to them: "The sun has set; so there is no further chance of any fear from any poison today.

अङ़ीकरोमि तं शापं कृमिको मां दुशल्यम् ।

एवमुक्ल्वा स राजेज्ये प्रीवायां संन्येवेश्यन्ति ॥ 6 1 ॥

I speak then today, fearing the Brāhmin's curse, "Let this insect bite me." Thus, saying the king took the insect and placed it on his neck.

अरल्यातेदिवानायेधृत: कण्ठेउधकीटकः ।

तक्षकस्तु तदा जातः कालरूपी भयानका ॥ 6 2 ॥

That Takṣaka in the form of an insect, when placed, during sunset, on the neck by the king, immediately assumed the form of the terrible Kāla (Death), coiled round the king and bite him.

राजा संवेहितस्तेन  व्यंशप्रीय महीपति: ।

मान्थणे विषयमं प्रपाता रक्तदूभुशुर्जु: स्थिता ॥ 63 ॥

The ministers were greatly surprised and began to weep and cry with great pain and sorrow.

प्रोरूपमर्हि वीक्ष्य दुबुवुले भयादिताः ।

चुकुर्णू श्रक्रका: सर्वे हाहाकारो महानभूत ॥ 64 ॥

Seeing that terrible serpent, the ministers, overwhelmed with terror, fled away on all sides. The guards cried out loudly. A terrible out-cry was raised on all sides.

येहितो भोपिभोगेन विनवहबुणीरुकः ।

नोवाच नृपति: किंचित्र चचालोतरासुतः ॥ 65 ॥

Then Uttarā's son, king Parikṣit, coiled by the serpent, saw that all his efforts were rendered fruitless, and remained silent and held fast to his patience.

उत्थिताउनिशाखा घोरा विषवा तक्षकानन्त।

प्रजज्ञाल नृरं त्वाशु गतप्राणं चकार है ॥ 66 ॥

From the mouth of the serpent Taksaka the terrible venomous flames came out burning all and immediately killed the king.

हत्वा उशु जीवित राजसलक्षो गमने गतः ।

जगह्धधं तु कवर्णं ददुशुस्तं जना इह ॥ 67 ॥

Thus taking away the life of the king, Taksaka went up in the celestial atmosphere; the people then saw that the serpent was ready as if to burn the world.

स पपात नज्ञागो राजा दध्य इव दूम: ।

कुकुर्ण्छा जना: सर्वे मृतं दृष्ट्वा नाराधिम् ॥ 68 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभगवते द्वितीयकन्ये परीक्षिनगां नाम

दशगो3ध्वय: 11 10 11

The king fell down lifeless like a burnt tree; and all the persons cried out seeing the king dead.

Thus ends the Tenth Chapter of the Second

Book on the death of the king Parikşit in the

Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of

18,000 verses.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER XI

On the Sarpa Yajña

सूत उवाच

गतप्राणं तु राजानं बालं पुत्रं समीक्ष्य च ।

चक्छुधं मन्त्रिण: सर्वे परलोकस्य सहिक्ञाः ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: “O Munis! seeing now the king lifeless, and his son a mere boy, the ministers themselves performed all his funeral ceremonies.

गज्ञातिरे उत्पटेईं भस्मप्रयं मतीपतिन् ।

अगुर्भिश्राधिष्युक्तायां चितायामध्येपघ्न् ॥ 2 ॥

First, they burned the king on the banks of the Ganges without uttering any Mantra, as his death was an accidental one due to snake bite.

दुर्भगेय मृतस्यास चक्छीशोर्धर्वेहिकीम् ।

क्रियां पुरोहितास्तव येदमन्नेश्विधानतः ॥ ३ ॥

ददुद्वानाति विघुघेयो गा: सुवर्णं यथोवितम् ।

अत्रे बहुविधं तत्र वस्थानि विद्वधानि च ॥ ४ ॥

Afterwards they had an effigy of the king made of kuśa grass and placed it on a funeral pyre and burned it, with sandal and scented wood. The priest then performed and completed his funeral obsequies, repeating duly the Vedic mantras, and distributed various things in charities to the Brāhmins, together with sufficient quantity of gold, and varieties of food and clothings so that the king may attain heaven.

सुभूद्रौं सुतं बालं प्रजानां प्रीतिबर्धनम् ।

सिंहासने शुभे तत मनिष्य: संन्येशरान् ॥ 5 ॥

पौरा जानपदा लोकाश्छकुस्तं नृवर्ति शिष्णुम् ।

जनमेजवनामां राजलक्षणसंयुन्तम् ॥ 6 ॥

Next, on an auspicious moment, the ministers installed the child prince on the throne that gladdened the hearts of the subject and all the populace of the city, towns, and villages acknowledged the child prince as Janamejaya, endowed with all royal qualities as their king.

धारेयी शिक्षयामास राजनिद्वानि सर्वशैः ।

दिने दिने वर्धमानः स बभूव महामति: ॥ 7 ॥

The Dhātreyī gave all instructions to the king about his duties. The child prince gradually grew in years and became endowed with great intellect.

प्राप्ते चैकाट्वो वर्षे तस्मै कुलपुरोहतः ।

यथोचितां ददी विहां जग्राह स यथोचिताम् ॥ 8 ॥

When Janamejaya became eleven years old, the family priest initiated him duly with the Gāyatrī mantra and he also studied it duly.

धनुर्वैंद कृपः पूर्णे द्वारवस्मे सुसंकृतम् ।

अनुनीय यथा ग्रौण: कर्णाय घानीयं यथा ॥ 9 ॥

Then Krpācārya taught him perfectly the science of archery (Dhanurveda) as Dronācārya taught Arjuna and Parasurāma taught Karna.

सम्प्रातिविधो बलवान्भूव दुरतिकमः ।

धनुवैद तथा वेदे पारमः परमार्थिवि् ॥ 10 ॥

धर्मशास्थिकुलः सत्यवादी जितेन्द्रयः ।

चकार ताखं धर्मात्मा पुरा धर्मसुतो यथा ॥ 11 ॥

Janamejaya learnt by and by all the sciences and became very powerful and indomitable to his enemies as he was skilled in the science of archery, he was similarly in the other branches of the Vedas. Truthful, self-controlled, religious, king Janamejaya acquired full knowledge in the Dhārmśāstras (philosophies and law books) and Arthasāstras (economics) and governed his kingdom like the Dharma's son Yudhiṣṭhira.

ततः: सुवर्णमांही राजा काशिपितः किल ।

वपुह्मां शुभां कन्यां ददौ पराशिताय च ॥ 12 ॥

स तां प्राण्यासितापाङ्गी मुमुंटे जनमेवयः ।

काशिराजतुर्गा कान्ता प्राय राजा यथा पुरा ॥ 13 ॥

विश्वत्रवीयों मुदुः सुभ्रां च यथाज़्नः ।

विज्ञहा महीपालो वनेपुचवनेषु च ॥ 14 ॥

तया कमलपत्राध्या शच्या शतक्रतुर्था ।

The king of Kāśī gave his all-auspicious daughter Vapuṣṭamā in marriage to king Janamejaya, wearing golden coat of armour. King Janamejaya, with the beautiful Vapuṣṭamā casting sidelong looks, looked very happy as was the king Victiravīrya, when he got for his wife the daughter of Kāśirāja and also when Arjuna got his Subhadrā. Then the king began to enjoy his lotus-eyed Vapuṣṭamā in forest, and gardens like Śatakratu and Śacī.

प्रजातस्य सुसंतुथा बभवुः सुखालिताः ॥ 15 ॥

मन्थिणः कर्मकुलाशक्षुः कार्याणि सर्वेण: ।

The able ministers conducted satisfactorily the reins of government; and the subject, well governed passed away their time with cheerful hearts.

एतस्मिवेक काले तु मुनिरक्तेकानामकः ॥ 16 ॥

तक्षेकण परिक्षितही हरितनापुर्मम्यन्ता ।

वैरस्यापिति को3स्य प्रकुर्बादिति चित्यन् ॥ 17 ॥

परीक्षित्सुं मत्वा तं नृपं समुपगानतः ।

In the meanwhile, a Muni, named Uttanika, being much troubled by Takṣaka, thought who could help him in his taking revenge on Takṣaka and, seeing King Parikṣit's son the king Janamejaya a proper person came to Hastinā to the king and spoke out thus:

कार्याकार्य न ज्ञानास समये नृपसत्तम ॥ 18 ॥

अकर्तेल कोरोष्य कर्तव्य न करोपि वे ।

“O good king! Thou dost not know when to do a thing that ought to be done; Thou art doing at present what ought not to be done; and thou art not doing what should be done now. There is nothing of anger or energy within Thee;

किं त्वां सम्रायायम्य्यातनामर्न सितद्वामम् ॥ 19 ॥

अर्वैत्रमन्तेज्ज बालचेहासम्पिन्ति ।

Thou dost things as a child does; so Thou dost

not know the meaning of the Śāstras nor dost Those know Thy former ememy; so what shall I pray before Thee?"

जनमेजय उवाच

किं कैरं न मया जातं न किं प्रतिकृतं मया ॥ 20 ॥

तद्व त्वं महाभाग क्रोगीय घटन्तरम् ।

Hearing this Janamejaya said: “O highly fortunate one! I do not know who is my enemy; what wrong is there to be redressed? Please speak out what I am to do.”

उन्हेंक उवाच

पिता ते नितहो घृप्त तझकेण दुरात्मना ॥ 21 ॥

मन्त्रिणस्तं समाहूय पृष्छस्य पित्नाशनम् ।

Uttanāka said: “O king! the wicked Takṣaka killed Thy father; ask about the death of Thy father from Thy councillors.”

सूत उवाच

तच्छूत्वा वचनं राजा पप्रच्छ मन्त्रिस्तमान् ॥ 22 ॥

ऊपुर्वे तिज्ञापाने दुः: सर्पेण वै मूतः ।

Sūta said: Hearing these words, King Janamejaya asked his ministers. They replied “Thy father died out of the snake Takṣaka’s bite.”

जन्मेव जयान

शाणोउत्र काणघा नृत्रा: शणस्य मुनिना किल ॥ २३ ॥

तक्षकस्य तु को दोषो बृहि मे मुनिसतम ।

Then the king spoke: “The cause of my father’s death is the Brāhimin’s curse; what is the fault of Takṣaka in this matter; please say.”

उनके जवाच

तक्षकेण धर्न दच्चा कशपय: संविज्ञातितः ॥ 24 ॥

न स किं तक्षको हैरी पिटुहा तव धपुते ।

Uttanka said: “It was Taksaka that gave abundance of wealth to Kāśyapa who was coming to cure Thy father of Taksāka’s poison and made him desist from his purpose; so, O King! Is not that Taksāka, then, Thy father’s great enemy and his slayer?”

भार्यां रोः पुरा भृप ददा सर्पेण सा मृता ॥ 25 ॥

अविवाहिता तु मुनिना जीविता च पुनः प्रिया ।

O King! In former days, when Pramadvāra, the dearest wife of the Muni Ruru, died of snake bite in her unmarried state, Ruru made her alive again.

रूपानीय कृता तत्र प्रतिता चातितारुणा ॥ 26 ॥

यं यं सर्वे प्रपुर्वामि तं तं हन्यायुधेन वै ।

But Ruru made the promise “whichever serpent I will see, I will take away its life by striking it with a club.”

एवं कृत्वा प्रतिज्ञा स शस्त्रपाणी क्रस्तदा ॥ 27 ॥

व्यचरत्थिवर्षी राजत्रिपन्तम्यांनितस्तत ।

एकादा स वने घोरं डुपुर्णं जरसात्यन्ति ॥ 28 ॥

अपयदंडुभुव्यम्य हन्तुं तं समुपाययी ।

अभ्यहसूचिति विग्रस्तमुवाचाध शुकुषभः ॥ 29 ॥

नायपाटीपि ते विध्र ककमानामारभित्र सि ।

O King! Thus making the resolve, he began to kill snakes wherever he found, with his club, and thus, in his course of travel all round the earth, he saw within a forest an aged terrible water-snake (Dhonda serpent) and immediately lifted his club to kill it and angrily struck a blow on it, when the snake replied: "O, Brahmina! Why are you striking me thus? I have not caused any offence to you."

रूरकाचय

प्राणिप्रिया में दयिता द्वा सर्पेणा सा मृता ॥ ३० ॥

प्रतिज्ञं तदा सर्पे रु:खितेन मया कृता ।

Ruru said: "O serpent! My dearest wife died of snake bite; since then I have made this resolve, under great provocation and sorrow, to kill snakes."

इण्डुप सचाच

नाहं एरामाति तेज्ये वै वे दुर्गति घुर्जामाः ॥ 31 ॥

गरीससमयोगेन न मां हिंसितुर्महैस ।

Hearing thus, the water-snake Dundubha replied: "I do not bite; those who bite are a different class of snakes; simply on account of my bearing a body similar to them that you will strike me is not quite proper."

उनंक उवाच

श्रुत्वा तां मानुर्षी वाणी सपैणोक्तां मनोहारूम ॥ 32 ॥

क्रः पूच्छ कोर्सि त्वं कस्माङ्डुषभतां गतः ।

Hearing these beautiful humane words from the mouth of a serpent, Ruru asked: "Who are you? Why have you become this Dundubha snake?"

सर्प उवाच

बाङ्गणोर्डं पुरा विश्र सखा मे खगामाधिधः ॥ 33 ॥

विज्ञो धर्मभृता शेछः सत्यवादी जितेंद्रियः ।

The snake replied: “O Brāhmaṇa! I was formerly a Brāhmin; there was a friend of mine named Khyās, very religious, truthful and self-controlled. स मया वशित्रो मीढ़ांतिसर्यं कृता च तत्णिकम् ॥ 34 ॥ घयं च प्रापितोस्तथंमिनोहोत्रगृहे स्थितः ।

Once he was staying in his Agnihotra room and I foolishly terrified him much by placing before him an artificial snake created by me of the leaves of trees.

तेन भीतेन शगतोर्ज विहृतेनितिवेपिन ॥ 35 ॥

पव सर्पी मन्दखुदे येनाहं धर्पितस्तवा ।

He became so much bewildered with fear and shuddered so terribly that he at length cursed me saying—“O one of blunt intellect! As you have terrified me by this snake, having no poison, so you better be a snake of that type.”

मया प्रसादितोत्यर्थं सर्पेणासी त्रिजानेनः ॥ ३६ ॥

मायुवाचा तक्रोधात्रिकंचिछानीमवाया च ।

Immediately I turned into a snake and when I much entreated that Brāhmana, his anger abated a little and he said again:

रूते मोचिता शाप्यत्थाय सर्प भविष्यति ॥ ३७ ॥

प्रमतेसु सुती नृनिमिति मां सेोझबीढ़तः ।

“O snake! Pramati’s son Ruru will no doubt free you of this curse.” I am that snake; and you are also that Ruru; now hear my words in conformity with Dharma. The highest Dharma of the Brahmanā is non-killing.

सोउई सर्वा रूक्तव्च च श्रणु मे परमं वच: ॥ 38 ॥

अहिंसा परमो धर्म विज्ञाणां नात्र संशय: ।

दया सर्वैर कर्तव्या बाहाणेन विज्ञानता ॥ 39 ॥

यज्ञाद्यव्य विघ्रेत्र न हिंसा याजिकी मता ।

There is no doubt in this. The wise Brāhmaṇas

ought to show mercy to all. No harm of killing is to be committed any where except in Yajña (sacrifice); killing is only allowed in a Yajña; for, at the sacrifice, the animal killed attains the highest goal; hence killing in sacrifice is not reckoned as an act of killing."

उनंक उवाच

सरपोतेर्विनिपुन्तो ब्राहणोउसी रुस्तत: ॥ 40 ॥

कृत्वा तस्य च शापांतं परित्यक्तं च हिंसनम् ।

Uttanka said: "That Brāhmaṇa was then freed of the serpent body; and Ruru, too, desisted from killing since then.

विवाहिता तेन बाला मृता सड़ीविता पुनः ॥ 41 ॥

कदनं सर्वसपाणां कृते वैरामनुस्मन ।

O King! Ruru gave life back to that girl and married her but even then, remembering the former enmity he killed the snakes.

त्वं तु बैरं समुन्यस्य वत्से पजोर्धध च ॥ 42 ॥

विमन्युर्षतिक्षे चितृपातकेषु वै ।

But, O chief of Bharata's family! Thou art staying without any care, without any anger to the snakes and without any revenge to the previous wrong.

अन्तरिक्षे मृतस्तातः स्नानदानविवर्षितः ॥ 43 ॥

तस्योद्मारं च जौत्रा कुरू हत्वारा पवगान् ।

पितृर्दीं न जानाति जीवेत्रव मृतो हि सः ॥ 44 ॥

युर्गितसे पितृस्तावधावताना हनियक्षि ।

O king of kings! Thy father died high up in the air without any bath or charity due to be done at the time of death. So rescue thy father by killing 'is enemies, the snakes. That son is dead, through living, who does not consider the act of his father's enemy as inimical. Until Thou dost kill the snakes, Thy father's enemies, Thy father's hell life will not be freed.

अध्मायदायियं कृता कुरे यजं नृपोतम ॥ 4 5 ॥

सर्पसत्रं महाराज पितुवेदमनुसम्न ।

O King! Now remember the wrong done to Thy father and perform the sacrifice to the Great

Mother, denominated as the Sarpa Yajña (the sacrifice of snakes).”

सूत उवाच

इति तस्य वच: श्रुता राजा जन्मेजयस्तदा ॥ 46 ॥

नेशम्यामशुपानं च चकारातीव दुःखितः ।

धिष्ठकामासु सुदुर्द्वैदैर्था मानकस्य वे ॥ 47 ॥

Sūta said: Hearing the words of Uttanka, king Janamejaya sadly wept and shed tears and thought within himself: "Alas! Fie to me! I am a great stupid; hence, I feel myself proud but in vain.

पिता यस्य गति घोरां प्रापतः पत्रगपीडितः ।

अशाहं मख्यामध्य करोयपचिति मितुः ॥ 48 ॥

हत्वा सर्पानस्विष्यो दीयमाने विभावरो ।

Where can his honour be whose father, bitten by a snake, has gone down to hell. Now, I will, no doubt, commence the Sarpa Yajña and ensure the destruction of all the snakes in the blazing sacrificial fire and thus deliver my father from hell."

आहूय मन्त्रिणः सर्वान् राजा वचनमबवीत् ॥ 49 ॥

कुर्वन्तु यजसभारं यशाहं मन्त्रिसतामः ।

Thus coming to a conclusion, he called all his ministers and said: O ministers! Better make arrangements duly for a great sacrifice.

गृज्ञातीर गुणां भूमि मापयित्वा डिजोजनः ॥ 50 ॥

कुर्वन्तु मण्डपं स्वस्था: शगत्साधं मनोहर्म ।

Have a suitable holy site on the banks of the Ganges, selected and measured by the Brāhmanas and have a beautiful sacrificial hall built up on one hundred pillars and prepare a sacrificial alter within this.

वेदो यज्ञस्य कर्तेल्या ममाठा सचिवा: खतु ॥ 51 ॥

तद्गाले विवेयो के सर्वसः सवित्रतः ।

O Ministers! When all these preliminaries will be completed, I will commence with great eclât the great Sarpa Yajnâ (sacrifice of snakes).

तक्षकस्तु पशुस्त्र होतोतंको महापुर्नि: ॥ 52 ॥

शीघ्रमहावृत विश्रा: सर्वजा वेद्यारणाः ।

In that Yajña, the snake Takṣak will be the animal victim; and Uttanka, the great Muni, will

be the sacrificial priest; so invite early the all-knowing Brāhmaṇas, versed in the Vedas.

सूत जवाच

मन्थिणस्तु तदा चक्रभूषिवाक्येर्विवक्षणः ॥ ५३ ॥

यज्ञस्य सर्वसंभारं वेद्यैं यज्ञस्य विस्तृताम् ।

हवेने वर्ताने तु सपाणिं तस्कको गतः ॥ ५४ ॥

इन्द्र प्राति भवातोर्ह नाहि मामिति चारबेति ।

भव्यतीतं समाङ्गस्य स्वासने सचिवेश्य च ॥ ५५ ॥

दूदावभयमत्यर्थं निभयो भव पत्रग ।

Sūta said: Thus at the command of the king, the able ministers collected all the materials of the sacrifice and prepared a big sacrificial altar. When the oblations were offered on the sacrificial fire, calling on the snakes, Takṣaka became greatly distressed with fear and took refuge of Indra saying. "Save my life." Indra, then, gave hope to Takṣaka, trembling with fear, and made him sit on his Śasna, encouraged him with words "No fear" O! snake do not fear any more.

तमिह्राणरं जात्वा मुनिद्रताभयं तथा ॥ ५६ ॥

उत्तोंकोढ्रवुद्धिवः संदें कृत्वा निमन्याण् ।

स्मृतस्तदा तक्षेकण यायावरकुलोद्धः॥ ५७ ॥

आस्तीको नाम धर्माना जरकास्तुमी पुनि: ।

तत्रायाय मुनेवालस्तुषाय जनमेवगम् ॥ ५८ ॥

राजा ततचंयामास दृष्टवा बालं सुर्पडितम् ।

Muni Uttanka, seeing that Taksaka had taken Indra's protection and that Indra had given him hopes of "no fear", called on Takṣaka with Indra to come to fire with an anxious heart; Takṣaka, then, seeing no other way, took refuge of the greatly religious Astik, the son of the Muni Jarat Kāru, born of the family of Yāyāvara. The Muni's son Āstika came to the sacrificial hall and chanted hymns in praise of Janamejaya; the king, too, seeing the Muni boy greatly learned worshipped him and said: What for have you come?

अर्धिचिता नृपस्तं तु छंद्यामास वाजिछतेः ॥ ५९ ॥

स तुं चवे महाभाग यज्ञोरयं विनरपिलित ।

"I will give you what you desire." Hearing this,

Ästika prayed: "O, highly enlightened one! Let you desist from this sacrifice."

सत्यबद्धो नृपस्तेन प्राधितछा पुनस्तथा ॥ 60 ॥

होमं चिवर्तैवामास सर्पाणां मुनिवाक्यन्तः ।

भारतं आव्यामास वैशंपायन विस्तारात् ॥ 61 ॥

श्रुतायिप्नुपति: कामंनशगतिमभिजामिवान् ।

व्यासंपूच्छभूषातोममगान्ति:कर्थपवेत्। 62 ॥

मनोरितद्धृतं कामा किं कारोमि वद्वय मे ।

पिता मे दुर्भगस्वैय मृत: पार्थसुतात्मजः ॥ 63 ॥

The truthful king, prayed thus again and again, stopped the Sarpa Yajña to keep the Muni's word. Vaiśampāyana then recited the whole of Mahābhārata to the king to cheer up his heart. But the king, hearing the whole Mahābhārata could not find peace and asked Veda Vyāsa "how can I get peace; my mind is constantly being burned with sorrows; say what am I to do? I am very miserable; hence my father Parikṣit, the son of Abhimanyu has died an unnatural death.

क्षत्रियाणां महाभाग संग्रामे मरणं वरम् ।

रणे वा मरणं व्यास गृहं वा विधिपूर्वकम् ॥ 64 ॥

मरणं च चितुर्मेंभूदन्तरिक्षे मृतोउवशः ।

शान्त्यपायं वद्वसाय त्वं च सत्यवतीसून ॥ 65 ॥

यथा स्वर्गे बजेदार्यू पित्ता मे दुर्गिंत गतः ॥ 66 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवतेः द्वितीयस्कन् एकावशोउध्याः ॥ 11 11 ॥

O lucky one! See that a Kṣatriya's death in a deadly battlefield or in an ordinary battle is praiseworthy; even his death in his own house, if followed up according to natural laws and Vidhis (rules) is commendable; but my father did not get such a death; under the Brāhmaṇa's curse why did he, quite senseless, quit his life high up in the air? O son of Satyavati! Now advise me so that my father who is now in hell can again go up to the heavens, and that my heart may find its way to peace."

Thus ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Second Book on the "Sarpa Yajñā" in the Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevībhagavatam of 18,000 verses.

CHAPTER XII

On the Birth of Ästika

सूत उवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य व्यास: सत्यवतीसुतः ।

उवाच वचनं तत सभायां नृपति च तम् ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: Hearing these words of the king, Vyāsa Deva, the son of Satyavati addressed to him before the assembly, thus:

व्यास उवाच

भृणु राजनप्रव्यामि पुराणं गुहामद्धुतम् ।

पुर्णं भागवतं नाम नानाख्यानयुतं शिधा ॥ 2 ॥

"O king! I am now reciting to you a Bhāgavata Purāna, holy, wonderful, filled with many anecdotes, and leading to auspicious results; listen.

अध्यायितं मवा पूर्वं शुक्रायासमुताव ये ।

श्रावयामि नृप त्वां हि रहस्यं परमं मम ॥ 3 ॥

Before, I made my son Suka study this Purāṇa; O king! I will now recite before you that highest Purāṇa; with all the secrets contained therein.

धार्मिकामभोक्षाणां कारणां श्रवणान्तिकल ।

गृषपं सुखदं नितयं सर्वागमममुद्धुतम् ॥ 4 ॥

I have extracted this from all the Agamas; it brings in Dharma (religion), Artha (wealth), Kama (fructification of desires) and Moksa (liberation); hearing this gives always happiness and good results."

जनमेव जय जवाच

आस्तीकोदयं सुतः कस्य विदार्थ बक्यामातः ।

प्रयोजनं किम्बितास्य सर्पणां रक्षणे प्रभो ॥ 5 ॥

कथवैतनमहाभाग विस्तरणे कथानकम् ।

पुराणं च तथा सर्व विस्तराद्र सुजत ॥ 6 ॥

At this Janamejaya said: “O Lord! Whose son is this Muni Āstika? Why did he come as an obstacle in my Sarpa Yajñā (sacrifice of snakes)? And what object had he in preserving the snakes? O highly fortunate one! Kindly describe all this in

detail; after this recite that Purāṇa, also, in detail to me."

व्यास उवाच

जरत्कासूंपि: शान्तो न चकार गृहाश्रमम् ।

तेन दृष्टा वने गर्ते लंबवामना: स्वपूर्वतः ॥ 7 ॥

Vyāsa Deva said: “O king! In former days there lived a Muni named Jaratikāru. He always remained in the path of peace; and he did not marry. Once he saw, in a cave in a forest, his fathers and forefathers pendant.

तत्समाहुः कुर पुरा द्वान्

यथा च नः स्यात्यमा हि तृति: ।

स्वर्गं जमामः खलु दुःखमुक्ता

वयं सदाचारायुते सुते नै ॥ 8 ॥

They spoke to Jaratkāru thus: “O son! marry; we will thereby be greatly pleased; if there be a son of good character born to you, we all will be freed from all troubles and we would then be able to go to Heavens.”

स तनुवाचाध लभे समानाम-

याचितां चातिवर्जानुगां च ।

तदा गृहारभमहं कृतोमि

ब्रतीम तथं मपूर्वांत वै ॥ 9 ॥

Hearing this Jaratkāru said: “O Forefathers! If I get a girl of my name, without begging and asking and if she be entirely obedient to me, I will marry and lead a householder’s life; thus I have spoken truly to you.”

इत्युक्चना तात्ररात्कारनंतरतीर्थ-प्रति हिजः ।

तथैव प्रवगा: शाला मात्राउनरी तिपर्वतिचिति ॥ 10 ॥

Thus saying to his forefathers, Jaratkāru went on to the holy places. Now it happened so, that at that very time Kadru, the mother of snakes cursed her sons, saying “May you be burnt by fire.”

कश्यपस्य मुने: पत्नी ककूषु श्विनता तथा ।

दूद्वात्रशद्वलयो घाघुमचतुघ परस्पतम् ॥ १ १ १ ॥

The matters of this incident run as follows: “At that moment Kadru and Vinatā, the two co-wives of Káśyapa saw the horses yoked in the chariot of the sun and thus argued with each other:

तं दूद्वा च तदा कटूर्विनतामिदमब्रवीत् ।

किंबणोंदंह हयो भरे सत्यं प्रवृहि माधिचरम् ॥ १ २ ॥

Kadru, seeing the sun's horse, first asked Vinatā "O good one! Tell me soon, what is the color of this horse?"

विनतोबाच

छेत एवाघगजोरयं किं वा लं मन्यसे रुषे ।

ब्रृहि वर्णं त्वायम्यस्त ततस्तु विषणावहे ॥ 13 ॥

Vinatā said: “O auspicious one! What do you think?” I said, ‘the colour of the horse is white; you also better say beforehand what is its colour?’ We will then lay a wager (and challenge).”

कटूबाच

कृष्णावर्णमंत्र मन्ये हयमेनं शृष्णिस्मते ।

एहि सार्थ मया दिख्यं दासीभावाय भामिनी ॥ 14 ॥

Kadru said: “O smiling one! I think the horse is black. Now come; let us challenge; whoever will be defeated will become the slave of the other.”

सूत उवाच

ककुछ्य स्वसुतानाह सर्वान्याय्वेग स्थितान् ।

बालान् श्यामान्यकुवंतु यावतो३धागरीके ॥ 15 ॥

Thus saying, Kadru told her sons that were obedient: "Cover by your bodies all the pores of the body of the horse of the chariot of the Sun, so it may look black; go and do it."

नेति केचन ताजहुस्तान्यसाँ शरणार ह ।

जनमेवजयस्य घवे वे गमिथव्य हुताशनम् ॥ 16 ॥

At this some snakes replied: "That cannot be." Kadru then cursed them saying: "Let you fall on the sacrificial fire of Janamejaya."

अन्य चकुर्हंव सर्पा: ककुर्ं वर्णभोगकः ।

वेधत्याजस्य पुच्छे तु मातु: प्रियचिकीया ॥ 17 ॥

Then the other snakes tried to please their mother and coiled round the back of that horse so that the horse began to look black.

भगीर्यो च सुसंयुक्ते गला दुर्भगतुहंम् ।

काईं ते हयं दुर्घा विनता चातिदुःशिता ॥ 18 ॥

Kadru and Vinatā, the two co-wives went together and saw the horse. Vinatā saw it black and became very sorry.

तदा०३जगाम गकड़: सुतनस्तव्या महाबल: ।

स दृष्ट्या मातरं दीनामपूच्छत्यत्रागगानः ॥ १९ ॥

Now, Garudā, Vinatā's son, very powerful and devourer of snakes was passing that way and seeing his mother very distressed asked her:

मातः कबं सुदीनासि स हदितेव विभासि मे ।

जीवानेने माये सुते तथास्ये चैवसारथे ॥ 20 ॥

“O Mother! Why do you look so very sorry? It seems as if you are weeping. Aruna, the charioteer of the Sun and I myself are your two sons living.

दु:लितासि ततो वां तिर्जीवितं चाफलोचने ।

किं जातेन सुतेनाथ यदि माता सुड़:खिता ॥ 21 ॥

गंस मे कारणं माता: कंजीय विगतज्ञायम् ।

Fie to us that, while we are living, you will have to suffer pains. O beautiful one! If mother suffers while the son is living, then what use is there in having such a son? So, O Mother, give out the cause of your grief and I will remove it at once."

विनतोवाच

सपल्या दास्यई पुर किं कवीमि वृथा क्षता ॥ 22 ॥

वह मां सा ब्रवीत्यद तेनासि मुः द्विता सुत ।

Hearing this Vinatā said: “O son! What shall I say to you of my misery; I am now become the slave of my rival wife. By some pretext she defeated me and is now telling me to carry her on my back. O son! For this reason I am sorry.”

गरड उवाच

बहिष्येई त्रत किलि चर सा गन्तुत्सुका ॥ 23 ॥

मा शोकें कुरू कल्याणि निर्धितां त्वां कौरोम्बहम् ।

Hearing these words of the mother, Garuda said: "Very well I will carry her on my shoulders where ever she wishes to go. O auspicious one! You need not be sorry; I will remove all your cares."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्ता सा गता पार्श्ध कंडोश्व विनता तदा ॥ 24 ॥

दारसीभावमपाकर्तु गरकौउपि माढालयः ।

Vyāsa Deva said: Thus spoken to by Garuda, Vinatā went to Kadru. At that time the highly powerful Garuda went there also to free his mother

of her slavery and carried Kadru with all her sons on his back to the other side of the ocean.

उदाह ततं सुचंत्रा वै सिंधोः पारं जगाम ह १ २ ५ १

गत्वा तां गरूक प्राह बूहिं मालन्मोज्यु ते ।

कर्थ मुच्छेत मे माता दारीभावादंशयम् १ २ ६ १

When Garuda went across the ocean, Garuda spoke to Kadru: "O mother! I bow down to thee; kindly say how my mother can be freed of your slavery."

कूकृत्वाच

अभृतं देवलोकाच्चं वलावतानीय मे सुतान् ।

समपर्य सुत्ताथगु मातरं मोचयावलाम् ॥ 27 ॥

Hearing this Kadru said: "O son! If you can bring today by your sheer force nectar from the Devaloka and give it to my sons, then you will be able to free your helpless mother."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तः प्रययो रीणमिंग्रतोकं महावलः ।

कृत्वा युद्धं जहागुः सुधाकुभ्यं खतोगतः ॥ 28 ॥

समानीयागृते मात्रे वैनतेवः समयपंत् ।

भोक्तिता विनता तेन दासीभावादर्शभयम् ॥ 29 ॥

When Kadru said so, the highly powerful Vinatā's son, Garuda immediately went to the abode of Indra and fighting hard, stole away the jar of nectar and brought and gave it to Kadru and freed his mother Vinatā from the slavery of Kadru.

अभृत संजहारंद्रः स्नातुं सपां यदा गता: ।

दारीभावाद्विनिभूंका विनता विपर्पेबल्नत् ॥ ३० ॥

In the meantime, the snakes went for their bath, after which they would drink the nectar. Indra stole away that jar which contained nectar. O king! Thus, by the sheer strength of arms of Garuda Vinatā was freed of her slavery.

तत्रास्तीणीः कुशास्तैसु लीक्षा: पत्रगनामकैः ।

द्विजिछाने सुसंपश्रा: कुणाध्यम्यंगितः ॥ ३१ ॥

On the other hand, when the snakes returned from their bath and found that there was no jar of nectar, they began to lick the kuśa grass over which the jar of nectar was kept, thinking that they would

thereby get some drops of nectar which might have trickled over; and the result was that by the sharp edges of kuśa grasses, the tongues of all snakes were cut asunder into two; hence the snakes are called Dvijjhvā."

मात्रा: शताङ्ग ये नागा वासुकिपमुखा: शुना।

ब्रह्माणा शरणां गावता ते होचुः: शापजं भयम् ॥ 32 ॥

तानाह भगवान्बह्ञा जरत्काभर्महामुपिनः ।

वासुकंभरितीं तस्ये अर्थायंस्त सनापिकाम् ॥ 33 ॥

तस्वयं यो जायते पुःः स वस्त्रात भविष्यति ।

आस्तीक इति नामासौ भविता नाम संशया: ॥ 34 ॥

The snake Vāsuki and others, whom Kadru, the mother of snakes, cursed, went to Brahmā and took his refuge and informed all of the cause of their terror, the curse from their mother; when Brahmā spoke to them: “Go and give the sister of Vāsuki, named Jaratkāru, in marriage to the great Muni Jarat Kāru, (both of the same name). In her womb, a son named Āstīka will be born; and he will certainly deliver you from you difficulties.

वासुकिंस्तु तदाकमर्थे बचनं ब्रहणा: शिवम् ।

वनं गत्वा सुतां तस्मै ददौ विवयवृक्कम् ॥ 35 ॥

समानां तां मुनिज्ञाला जरताकारुकचा तम् ।

अधियं मे यदा कुयर्भिता तां संख्याम्यम्बृम् ॥ 36 ॥

Hearing these beneficial words of Brāhmaṇa, Vāsuki went to the forest and requested humbly the great Muni Jarat Kāru to accept in marriage her own sister when the Muni, knowing the girl to be of his name, spoke out thus: "But when your sister will act against my wishes, I will forsake her at once."

वायक्यं तादुर्गं कृता युनिज्ञाहु तां स्वयम् ।

दत्वा च वायुकि: कामा घनवं स्वं जगाम ह । ३ ७ ॥

Under these conditions, the Muni married her. And Väsuki, after giving her sister in marriage according to her own wishes to the Muni, returned to her own abode.

कृत्वा परिकुर्दी गृभां जरकारकमहावरे ।

तथा सह सुखं प्राप समागण: पत्नतः ॥ 38 ॥

O Tormentor of foes! Then the Muni Jaratkāru

built a white hut of leaves in that great forest and began to pass his days happily in enjoyment with his wife.

एकादा भोजनं कृत्वा सुतोउरी मुनिस्तमः ।

भगिनी वासुकेनरा संस्थिता वरवर्गिनी ॥ 39 ॥

न सबोधीयतख्योड़ं त्वया कानते कंधेचन ।

इन्युक्तन्तुगतोनिद्रामुनितसंमुदतीतदा ॥ 40 ॥

रविसतारीरिंगत: संयेमाकाल उपस्थिते ।

Once, on an occasion, after he had taken his dinner he slept and told his wife not to awaken him under any circumstances and fell fast asleep. The beautiful sister of Vāsuki sat by his side. When the evening time came and the sun began to set, the Vāsuki's sister Jaratkāru became afraid at the thought that the evening Sandhyā might not be performed by the Muni and thought thus:

किं कौरोय ने ग़णान्तस्येजनां बोधत:पुन: ॥ 41 ॥

धर्मोपभयातीत जतकास्त्रवित्यत् ।

नोचेद्वयोथायने संधाकालो वृधा जन्ते ॥ 42 ॥

“What am I to do now? My heart finds not rest if I do not awaken him; and if awaken him, he will forsake me at once. Now if I do not awaken him, the evening will pass away to no purpose.

धर्मनाग्रातं व्यानास्वाधि मरणं धुवम् ।

धर्मातिनिराणां हि नराकाय भवेतुतः ॥ 43 ॥

Whatever it be, if he quits me or if my death ensues, that is better than the non-observance of Dharma; for when Dharma is destroyed, hell ensues.

इति संस्धित्य सा बाला ते मुनि प्रयबोधयत् ।

संध्याकालोउपि संज्ञात उत्त्रधोत्तिश सुझत ॥ 44 ॥

अखितोउसी मुनि: कोपत्तामुवाच बजामयहम् ।

त्वं तु भातुगृहं याहि निर्वादिष्छेदकारिणी ॥ 45 ॥

Thus thinking, the girl awakened him saying: "O One of good vows! It is evening time; so get up; etc.!" The Muni got up in great anger and addressed his wife: "When you have disturbed my sleep, I now go away from you; you also better go to your brother's house."

वेयमानाज्ववीत्राव्यमित्यृष्ठा मुनीना तदा ।

भ्राजा दत्ता तदर्थं तत्कर्थ व्यादिमतप्रभा ॥ 46 ॥

When the Muni said so, Vāsuki's sister spoke out, trembling: "O One of indomitable lustre! How will the object be served for which my brother has given me in marriage with you."

युनि: प्राह जरकाकं तदसतीति निराकुलः ।

गता सा युनिना त्यक्ता वायुकः सदतं तथा ॥ 47 ॥

The Muni then spoke firmly to his wife Jaratkāru: “That is within your womb.” Jaratkāru then, forsaken by the Muni, went to the abode of Vāsuki.

पूषा धागाउत्रबीढ़ावयं यथोक्तं पतिना तदा ।

अस्तीतुब्बता च हित्या मां गतोजीय भूनिसम्भः ॥ 48 ॥

When her brother Vāsuki asked her about her son, she said: "The Muni has forsaken me, saying that the son is within your womb."

वायुकित्नु ततदाकपर्य सत्यवाड्युपनिरित्युत ।

विश्वासं च परं कृत्वा भागितों तो मास्धाश्त् ॥ ४ ९ ॥

ततः कालेन किंवाता जातोजी सुनिवालकः ।

आस्तीक इति नामाउसी विश्यातः कुकसत्तम ॥ ५० ॥

At this Vāsuki trusted; and said: "The Muni won't ever tell lies" and gave shelter to his sister. O Kurusattama! After some time, a famous boy named the Muni Āstika was born.

तेनारं रक्षितो यज्ञतव पार्थिवसत्ता ।

भातुपक्षस्य रक्षार्थे मुनिना भावितात्मना ॥ ५१ ॥

O King! That Muni boy, the knower of truth, had desisted you from your sacrifice of snakes for the preservation of his mother's family.

भयं कुत महाराज मानितोरंच त्वया मुनि: ।

यायावरकुलोत्यत्रो वासुकैभर्शिनीसुनु: ॥ ५२ ॥

It is well and good, befitting you, that you respected the words of the Muni Āstika, born of Yāyāvara family and the cousin of Vāsuki.

स्वस्ति तैरसु महाबाहो भारत सकलें कुतम् ।

दानानि बहु दत्तानि पृजिता मुनयस्तथा ॥ ५३ ॥

O Mighty-armed! Let all auspiciousness come to you; you have heard the whole Mahābhārata and gave away lots of things in charities. You have worshipped innumerable Munis.

कृतेन सुकृतेनापि न चिता स्वर्गितं गतः ।

पार्वितं नः कुलं कृत्वेनं त्वया भूपतिसत्तम ॥ 5 4 ॥

But, O king! Though you have done so many good things, yet your father has not attained heaven and you have not been able to sanctify your family.

देत्याक्षायतनं भूप विस्तीणं कुक भक्तिः ।

येन वै सकला सिंद्रिक्तव स्याजनमेवेन ॥ 55 ॥

पूजिता परया भक्त्या शिवा सकलादा सदा ।

कुलवृष्टिं करोलेव राज्यं च सृष्टियं सदा ॥ 56 ॥

So, O king Janamejaya! Now install a capacious temple of the Devi with the highest devotion; then all your desires will be fulfilled. The all auspicious Devi, the Giver of all desires, makes the kingdoms more stable and increases the family, if She be always worshipped with the highest devotion.

देवीयसूढ विधानेन कृत्वा पार्थिवसरम ।

श्रीमद्धारावतं नाम पुराणं परसं शृणु ॥ 57 ॥

O King! You better perform duly the Devīmakha Yajña Yotiṣoma and others, pleasing to the Devi, and hear the great Purāna Srimaddevī Bhāgavatam, filled with accounts of the glorious deeds of the Devi.

त्यामहं शाखियध्यामी कवां परमपावनीम् ।

संसारातिरिणी दिव्यां नानारससमाहतान् ॥ 58 ॥

I will make you hear now that Divine Purāṇa, filled with various sentiments, highly sanctifying and capable to carry one across this ocean of world.

न श्रोतव्यं परं चासामातुगणाद्धते भूवि ।

नाराध्यं दिवते राजन्देवीपादाम्बुजात् ॥ 59 ॥

O King! There is no other subject in this world worthy to be heard than the above Purāṇa and there is no other thing to be worshipped than the lotus feet of the Devi.

ते सभायाः कृतप्रज्ञ ध्यायते नृपसत्ति ।

येषां चित्ते सदा देवौ बस्ति प्रेमसंकुले ॥ 60 ॥

O king! Those are certainly fortunate, those are intelligent and blessed, in whose hearts of love and devotion reigns always the Devi Bhagavatī.

सुडुःवित्ताने इय्यते भृवि भातत भाते ।

नाराधिता महाभाया वैजैनैशु सदग्रविक्षा ॥ 6 । ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

O illustrious scion of Bharata's family! Know them to be always afflicted with troubles who do not worship in this world the great Mother Mahāmāyā.

ब्रहादाव: सुरा: सर्वे चदाराधनतत्वा: ।

वर्तैत सर्वदा रासंस्तां न सेवेत को जनः ॥ 62 ॥

O king! Who is there that will not worship Her when Brahmā and all the Devas are always engaged in Her devotional service.

य इदं रुण्याप्रिक्त्यं सर्वी-कामानवादपुयात् ।

भगवत्या समाख्यानं विश्वाये यदनुतमम् ॥ 6 3 ॥

O king! He who hears always this Purāna gets all his desires fulfilled; in former days, Bhagavatī Herself spoke this excellent Purāna to Viṣṇu.

तेन श्रुतेन ते राजधित्रे शान्तिभंचिष्यति ।

प्रिनुणां चाक्षसः स्वर्गः पुराणब्रवणाद्ध्वेते ॥ 64 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे द्वितीयकन्चे

शोष्रवन्दुपसंगों नाम द्वारवो3थाय: 11 12 11

द्वार्षिणत्यधिकमकुईये: घष्टी: सरकारते.शुभे: 1

श्रीमहावासयुखोर्जीतीद्वितीय: स्कन्ध्य इंरित: 11 11

समाप्तोयं द्वितीयः स्कन्धः ।

O king! Your heart will be appeased and become peaceful when you hear this; and, as a result of your hearing this Purānam, all your ancestors will attain endless Heavenly life."

Thus ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Second Book

on the birth of Aśtika in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Here ends as well the Second Skandha.

***