一*一

CHAPTER I

On the Questions Put by Janamejaya

जनमेव जय चाच

भगवन्यवता प्रोक्त यजमवाधिधं महत् ।

सा का कर्थं सम्युपसा कुरं कसाच्च किकुणा ॥ १ ॥

कौनूशा मखतस्तयाः स्वरूपं कौनूशा तथा ।

विधानं विधिवद्बृहि सर्वज्ञोस द्वानिधि ॥ २ ॥

ब्रह्माण्डस्य तयोत्परितं वद वित्तस्तत्या ।

ययोक्ते यायुगं बह्वार्जिखतं वैसि भ्रुगु ॥ ३ ॥

Janamejaya said: “O Bhagavān! What is that great Yajña (sacrifice) named Ambā Yajña about which you referred just now? Who is the Ambā? Where was She born? From whom and what for did Her birth take place? What are Her qualities? What is Her form and nature? O Ocean of mercy! You are all-knowing; kindly describe everything duly. Along with this, describe in detail the origin of Brahmānda. O Brahmāṇa! You know every thing of this whole Universe. I heard that Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra are the three Devatās, who are successively originated to create, preserve, and destroy this Universe.

इद्वा विद्युश्छ मरूढ़ यज्ये देवा मया शुताः ।

सृध्यपालनसंहारकाकार सुगणास्त्वमी ॥ 4 ॥

Are these three highshoulded entities independent? or Do they do their respective duties, being subservient to another Person? Now I am very eager to know all these.

स्वतनाराते महात्मानः पाराणर्यं वदस्य मे ।

आहोदियत्पत्नाराते श्रीतुममिष्छामी साम्यात्म । 5 ।

मृत्युधमांश्छ ते नो वा सचिवदानन्द्वीपणः ।

अधिप्नात्रविधियुक्ती न वा दुखैक्षधायकः ॥ 6 ॥

कालस्य वर्गगा नो वा ते सुग्रहा महावलाः ।

कर्थ ते वै समुत्वा कस्माविति च संशया: ॥ 7 ॥

हर्षोगकयुता ते वै निद्रातल्यस्माविताः ।

सप्तधातुमयातशें द्वेता: किं वाउ-नय्या मुने ॥ 8 ॥

So Pārāśara's son! Describe all these to me. Are these highly powerful Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara subject to Death like ordinary beings? Or are they of the nature of everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss? Are they subject to the three fold pains arising from their own selves from elements and from those arising from gods? Are they subject Time? How and wherefrom were they originated? Do they feel the influence of pleasure, pain, sleep or laziness? O Muni! Do their bodies consist of seven Dhātus? (blood, etc.) or are they of some other kinds?

कैईल्यैर्निंसितारे वे कैनुर्णीरिद्रैलस्था ।

भोगछ कौदुर्गस्लोयं प्रमाणमायुपस्था ॥ 9 ॥

निवासस्थानमध्येधां विभूर्ति च वदस्य मे ।

शोतुपिच्छान्यरं बह्वान्स्तरणं कथामिमम् ॥ 10 ॥

A great doubt has arisen in me on all these points. If these bodies be not made up of five elements, then of what substance are they built of? And of what gunas are their senses built also? How do they

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

enjoy objects of enjoyments? How long is their longevity? O Brāhmaṇa! where do they, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara, the best of the gods live? And of what nature are their powers and prosperities? I like very much to hear all these. So describe all these in detail to me."

व्यास उवाच

दुर्गम: प्रजनभारोद्यं कृती राजस्ववासधुना ।

बह्वादीनीं समुचपितः कस्मादिति महामते १ १ १ १

एतदेव मया पुत्र पुहोउसौ नारदो मुपिनः ।

विश्मितः प्रत्युबाचेदमुषित्वः शृणु भृपते १ १ २ १

Vyāsa said: “O highly intelligent king! The questions that you have asked me to day “whence and how Brahmā etc., were born? etc. are very difficult. In ancient days, once, on an occasion, I asked many questions like you of Muni Nārada. At first he was greatly surprised to hear my queries, afterwards he gave due replies to them. O King! I will answer to you in the same way; listen.

कम्पिश्रु समये चाहं गझूर्तीर चित्तं मुनिन् ।

अपर्यरं नारंड शान्तै सर्वतें वेदवितमम् ॥ १३ ॥

इद्वारड़ं मुदितो भूला पाद्योरपतं मुनेः ।

तेनाजप्तः समीपेरस्य संविष्टघुं वासरमे ॥ १४ ॥

Once, I saw that the all-knowing, peaceful Nārada, the knower of the Vedas was sitting on the banks of the Ganges. I became very glad and fell at his feet. By his order I took one excellent seat.

शुत्वा कुणलवाताँ है तमपूच्छं विधेः सुन्तम् ।

निर्विद्धं जाड्धवीतीरि निर्जेने सूक्ष्मवालुके ॥ १ ५ ॥

Hearing, then, of his welfare and seeing him sitting on the sands I asked him: 'O highly intelligent One! Who is the Supreme Architect of this widely extended Universe?

मुनेर्जितिततस्याय बढ़ाण्डस्य महामते ।

कः कर्ता परम: प्रोफ्रक्सने यहूं विधानतः ॥ १ ६ ॥

कस्मादेतस्मयुरवं बढ़ाण्डे मुनिसत्तम ।

अतिवं वा तथा निवं तदाचख्य दिजोत्तम ॥ 17 ॥

एककर्णक्मोतदा बहुकर्णकम-यथा ।

अकर्दिक न कार्य स्यादितोर्धोर्धा विक्षति में ॥ 18 ॥

इति सन्देशसदोहे मनं मां तारायधुना ।

विकल्पकोर्टीः कुर्बाणि संसारोप्रियम्न प्रविस्तरे ॥ 19 ॥

Whence is this Brahmāṇḍa born? It is eternal or temporary? When it is an effect, then it is natural that it cannot be created without a cause. Now when the cause, the creator, is certain, is he one or many? O sage! as regards this wide Saṃśāra, I have expressed my doubt; now answer me what is the Real and True, and thus remove my doubts.

ब्रुवेति शुक्रं केचिन्मत्वा कारणाकरणम् ।

सदार्थिकं महादेवं प्रलयोयतिचर्जितम् ॥ 20 ॥

आत्मारामं सुरेशं च त्रिणुणं निर्मलं हरम् ।

संसाराताकं निव्यं सृष्टितिथ्यतंकारणम् ॥ 21 ॥

Many believe Mahā Deva, the Lord of all the other Devas as the Supreme God, the Cause of all. He is the source of deliverance to all the Jīvas; devoid of birth and death; always auspicious: peaceful in Himself and the controller of the three gunas. He is the one and only cause of creation, preservation and destruction.

अन्ये विष्णुं सुवर्तेल्ने नसंवीं प्रभुनीशून् ।

परमात्मानम्यक्ते सर्वशक्तिसम्पित्यम् ॥ 22 ॥

भुक्तिरं भृक्तिरं शान्तं सर्वोदि सर्वतीमुखम् ।

व्यापकं विश्वशरणमानतिदिनिधनं हृति ॥ 23 ॥

धातारं च तथा चान्ये बुविति सुहिकाणम् ।

तमेव सर्वेक्ततं सर्वभूतप्रवर्तकम् ॥ 24 ॥

Some Pundits believe Viṣṇu as the God of all and praise Him as such. It is Viṣṇu that is the powerful Supreme Self, the Lord of all and the First Person Æúpuraṣu. It is He that has no birth nor death, the Deliverer of the whole Jīvas, Omnipresent; His faces are every where; He is the Granter of enjoyments and liberation to the devotees. Some others call Brahmā, the Cause of all. It is He that is omniscient and the Stimulator of all beings.

चतुर्मुंखं सूरेशानं नाथिपवधभवं विभूम् ।

स्वहारं सर्वलोकानां सल्यलोकानिवासिनम् ॥ 25 ॥

The four-faced Brahmā, the best of all the Devas is born from the navel lotus of some One endless

Book III Chapter I

force. He resides in Satyaloka; He is the Creator of all and the Lord of all the Devas.

दिनेशं प्रवैल्प्यमये सर्वेशं वेदवादिनः ।

सुवर्जिन चैव गायन्ति सार्यप्रातरन्तिजितः ॥ 26 ॥

यजनित च तथा यजे वासवं च शतकतनु ।

सहस्राकं देवदेवं सर्वेपां प्रभुभुल्बणम् ॥ 27 ॥

Again some other Pundits call the Sun, Surya as God. In the morning and in the evening they chant His hymns, without any lack of slackness and laziness. Again there are some others, who say that Indra is the lord of all the Jivas; He is thousand-eyed; it is Indra the of Śacī, that is the God of all. Those who perform Yajñas (sacrifices) worship Vāsava, the king of the Devas.

यज्ञार्थीं सुग्रहींग जिलोकों शर्बीपतिम् ।

यज्ञानं चैव भोक्तरं सोमयं सोमपरिष्यम् ॥ 28 ॥

He dirnks Soma juice Himself and those who drink Soma are his beloved. He is the one and only Lord of Sacrifices.

वरणं च तथा सोमं पावकं पवन्त तथा ।

यमं कुवेरं धनदं गणाधौशं तथायरे ॥ 29 ॥

हैरंबं गजवकं च सर्वकार्यप्रसाधकम् ।

स्मरणात्सिद्धं कार्यकामवं कामगं परम् ॥ 30 ॥

Thus, all men worship, according to their respective wishes. Varuna, Soma, Agni, Pavana (wind), Yama (the god of Death), Kubera, the lord of wealth; there are some again who worship the elephant-faced Ganapati, the Fructifier of all actions, the Granter of desires of all the devotees, and the Giver of success to all in all enterprises, no sooner He is remembered.

यवानी केचनाचारीः प्रवंद्रभवित्वालाथंद्वम् ।

आदिमायां महाशक्ति प्रकृति पुरुषानुगाम् ॥ 31 ॥

Some Ācāryas (professors) say again that the All-auspicious the Ādi Māyā, the Great Śakti Bhavānī, the Giver of everything, Who is the nature of with and without attributes.

ब्रहीकातासामपत्रां सुहित्यथन्तकारिधान् ।

मातरं सर्वभृतानां देवतानां तथैव च ॥ 32 ॥

अनातिदिनधनां पूर्णा व्यापिका सर्ववंतुम् ।

इश्री सर्वलोकानां निरुणां सपुर्णा शिवान् ॥ 33 ॥

Who is not different from Brahma, who is both Puruṣa and Prakṛti, the Creatrix, the Preservatrix and the Destructrix of all, the Mother of all the gods, beings and lokas is the Great Goddess of this Brahmānda. She is without beginning and end, full, present in all the beings and everywhere.

वैष्णाठी शाङ्गरी जाहती वासवीं वरकर्णी तथा ।

वाराहीं नारसिंही च महात्वमईी त्वाद्धुद्वान् ॥ 34 ॥

वेद्यतात्येकां च विद्यां भवतरोः त्रिवत्या ।

सर्वेकुःखनिर्हनी च स्मरणान्सर्वकामदान् ॥ 35 ॥

It is this Bhavānī that assumes the various endless forms such as Vaisṇavī, Śānkarī, Brahmī, Vāsaī, Vārunī, Vārahī, Nāra Sirīhī, Mahā Lakṣmī the one and without a second Vedamātā, and others. It is this Vidyā nature that is the One and the only Root of this tree of Sarīṣāra (universe).

मोक्षतं च मुभुकुषाणां कामदां च फलाधिणम् ।

त्रिगुणातीत्कपां च गुणाविस्तारकाकाम् ॥ 36 ॥

The mere act of remembering Her destroys heaps of afflictions of the devotees and fulfils all their desires. She gives Mokṣa to those who are desirous of liberation and gives rewards to those who want such.

निरुगां सुगुणां तस्मातां धार्यांति फताल्थिनः ।

निरज्ञनं निराकार निर्वर्षं निरुगणं किल ॥ 37 ॥

She is beyond the three Gunas and still She emanates them. Therefore, the Yogis that want rewards meditate on Her, Who is of the nature of Vidyā and Who is devoid of attributes.

अस्पं व्यापकं बहा प्रवदिति मुनीक्ष्रा: ।

वेदोपनिषदि प्रोफलसोजमय इति वस्वित् ॥ 38 ॥

The best Munis, the knowers of the truths of Vedānta meditate on Her as formless, immutable, stainless, omnipresent Brahma devoid of all Dharma. She is described in some Vedas and Upaniṣads as full of Light (Tejas).

सहसर्गिधा पुनर: सहस्नवनलवा ।

सहस्ककर्णश्रु सहस्वास: सहस्वात् ॥ ३९ ॥

विणीः पादमथाकाशं परमं समुदाहतम् ।

विराजं विरजं शान्तं प्रवदिति मनीषिणः ॥ ४० ॥

Some intelligent persons describe God as of

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

infinite hands, infinite ears, infinite legs, infinite faces, peaceful, Virāt Puruṣa and describe sky as the Pada (place) of Viṣṇu.

पुरुषोनमं तथा चान्ये प्रवदिति पुराविदः ।

नैकोपीति वर्त्यस्य प्रभूगीरः कदाचन ॥ 41 ॥

Other knowers of the Purāṇas describe Him as Purusottama. There are some others again who declare that this creation cannot be done by a single individual.

अनशीधरिंदं सर्वे ब्रह्माण्डमिति केचन ।

न कद्याण्डिजन्यं यज्ञपोदतद्विन्तितम् ॥ 4 2 ॥

Some atheists say that this inconceivable infinite Universe can never be created by one God.

सदैवेदेयमीर्ण च स्वभावोल्यं संदर्भुगम् ।

अकतांसी पुमान्योक्तः प्रकृतिस्तु तथा च सा ॥ 4 3 ॥

So there is no such definite God that can be called its Creator. Though without any creator, this Brahmāṇḍa is sprung from the Nature and conducted by Her.

एवं वदन्ति संख्याश्रु मुनयः कपिलादयः ।

एते सन्देहस्नोहाः प्रभवन्ति तथापरे ॥ 44 ॥

The followers of the Sānkhya system say that Puruṣa is not the creator of this Universe; they declare that Prakṛti is the Mistress of this Universe O Muni! Thus I have expressed to you what the Muni Kapila, the Ācārya of the Sānkhya and the other philosophers declare as their opinions; various doubts, thus, reign always in my breast.

विकल्पीवृष्टतं चेतः विकं क्रौमि मुनीश्र।

धार्मभिविख्याशा न मनो मे स्थरं भवेत् ॥ 45 ॥

Owing to these doubts my mind is so confused that I cannot arrive at any definite conclusion. My mind is very much unsettled as to what is Dharma and what is Adharma.

को धर्म: कौदुर्णोधर्मश्रिकृं नैवोपलभ्यते ।

देवा: सत्त्वगृत्याज्ञा: सत्यधर्मव्यविश्ता: ॥ 46 ॥

पीड़ान्दे तदानवै: पापै: कुत्र धर्मविश्वशिति: ।

धर्मविश्ता: सदाचारा: पाण्ड्वा मयं वंज्ञा: ॥ 47 ॥

दुःखं बहुविधां प्राप्तास्त्र धार्यं का शिथिति: ।

अतो मे हृदयं तात वेपतेउतीव संगये ॥ 48 ॥

कुँ भे मेसंगयं चेतः समवर्गसि महानुने ।

What are the characteristics of Dharma? I cannot make out them. For the Devas are all sprung from the Sattva Guna and are always attached to the true Dharma; yet they are frequently troubled by the sinful Dānavas. How, then, can I place my confidence on the permanence of the Dharma? My forefathers, the Pāṇḍavas were always endowed with good behavior and good actions and they remained always in the path of the Dharma; yet they suffered a good deal of troubles and sufferings. In these cases it is very difficult to understand the greatness of Dharma. So, O Father! Seeing all these, my mind is thrown into a sea of doubts and troubles.

ताहि संसारावाँस्वो ज्ञापयोतेन मां मुने ॥ 49 ॥

मझ्जंतं चोत्यतन्तं च मनं महाजलाविते ॥ 50 ॥

O Great Muni! There is nothing impracticable with you; so remove my doubts. O Muni! I am always plunged and raised and plunged again in this sea of delusion. So save me by lifting me on a boat of wisdom and carry me across this ocean of samsāra (this world).”

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयकल्पे

जननेजवप्रसने प्रश्वोरध्याः ।। १ । ।।

Thus ends the First Chapter on the Third Book on the questions put by Janamejaya in the Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevibhagāvatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER II

On the Rudras Going Towards the Heavens on the Celestial Car

व्यास उवाच

यत्वया च महाबाहो पृष्टोई कुरुस्तम ।

तान्यन्नातादः प्राह मया पृष्टो मुनीश्ररः ॥ १ ॥

नातद उवाच

व्यास दिके ते बबीम्यदु पुराउयं संगयो मम ।

उत्पनो हृदयेउत्पवर्ष सन्दोहासारपीडितः ॥ 2 ॥

Book III Chapter II

गत्याड़े पितरं स्थाने बढ़ाणपमितीसानम् ।

अपूच्छे चत्वया पूरुं व्यासाठा प्रसन्नुत्तमम् ॥ 3 ॥

पितः कुतः समुपरत्रं बढ़ाण्डपरिष्तलं विभो ।

भवत्कृतेन वा सम्यकिंक वा विद्युक्तं तिवदम् ॥ 4 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O mighty armed Kuru! What you have asked me just now, I also asked the same thing of Nārada, the Lord of the Munis and he gave me the following reply: “O Vyāsa! What shall I say to you on this point more than this that a doubt occurred to me also in my former days. The question that you have put to me today rose in my mind before; and I went to my father Brahmā, of endless energy and asked to him thus: “O Lord! O Father! Whence is this whole Brahmāda born? Have You created it? Or is it Viṣṇu or Maheśvara? O all- pervading soul!

རྟན་ན་ལ་སྟན་མཆུང་སྟན་ལ་སྟན་ལ་

आराधनीय: कः कामं सर्वोनृक्छ कः प्रयुः ॥ 5 ॥

तत्वरं वद मे बढ़ासन्देहांशिड्धि चानय ।

नियमानो ह्रास्म संसारे दुःखद्धेप्रतोपाये ॥ 6 ॥

सन्देहोतिलतं चेतो न प्रशाप्यति कुजचित् ।

न तीर्थ्यु न देवेषु साधयेनिवतेषु च ॥ 7 ॥

Who is there in this Brahmānda fit to be worshipped? O Lord of the world! Who is the topmost Lord ruling over everything? Kindly say. O Brahman! I am plunged in this sea of Māyā and perils; my heart is agitated with doubts; hence, it is not appeased in any place of pilgrimage; or in thinking any Deva or in practising any Sādhana or in any other object. O Sinless one! Give me the answers duly and thus remove my doubts.

अविक्षाय परंतर्व कृतः शान्ति: परन्त्प ।

विक्रीणं बहुधा चित्रं नैकक स्थितरां जतेन् । ८ ॥

O Tormentor of foes! Unless the highest truth is not known, peace is not found. This heart, distracted in various ways, cannot rest fixed on one subject.

कंसरामीय युगे के वा के जजायन्द्रधारीः क्म ।

स्तीमि के नाथिज्ञानामि देव सर्वेश्छेश्वग्न् ॥ ९ ॥

Whom am I to remember? Whom to worship?

Where to go? Whom to praise? Who is the Supreme God in this Universe?

ततो मां प्रत्युबारोदं बढ़ा लोकपितामाहः ।

मया सत्यवतीसुनी कृते प्रजेन सुडुस्ते ॥ 10 ॥

ब्रह्मोवाच

किं ब्रवीम सुताछाई दुर्बोधं प्रजन्मुत्तम् ।

त्वया शक्यं महामागा विधणोरस सुनिश्रवात् ॥ 11 ॥

I do not understand these things. O Satyavati's son!" Hearing these my serious queries, Brahmā, the Grandsire of beings, replied to me as follows: "O highly illustrious son!

रोगी कोईपि न जानाति संसारोत्रस्मिन्महामते ।

विरत्कष्ठ शिवजानाति निरीहो यो विम्वसरः ॥ 12 ॥

एकाणीवे पुरा जाते नष्टे स्वायरजुद्रे ।

भूतमात्रे समुपदेवे संज्ञे कमलादहम् ॥ 13 ॥

What more shall I say to you than this that even Vīṣuḥ is unable to answer your questions; so difficult are they indeed! O great intelligent one! Nobody that is attached to the world knows anything about this. Those who are unattached to this world, who are free from any envy, those who are without desires and calm, those high-souled ones know the secret of all this. In former days when all was water, water everywhere and all things, moving and non-moving were destroyed, when five elements were sprung, then I was also born from the lotus navel of Vīṣuḥ.

नाप्यर्थ तर्पि सोमं न वृक्षात्र च पर्यतान् ।

कर्फिकायां समाविष्टांशनामकरं त्वा ॥ १ ४ ॥

Then not seeing Moon, Sun, trees, or mountains or anything and sitting on the centre (Karnikā) of the lotus thought thus: 'Whence I am born in this great ocean of waters?

कस्मादुः समुद्धतः सलितेशस्मिन्हाणों ।

को मे जाता प्रशुः कर्ता सहंतां वा युगात्यये ॥ 15 ॥

Who has created me? Who is now my Protector? And Who will be my Destroyer when this cycle ends? There is no earth distinctly visible anywhere here; on what, then, this mass of watch rests?

न च भूविद्धोत स्पष्टा यद्धारं जलं लिवदम् ।

पछ्जं कवम्यत्पत्र प्रसिद्धं रूविद्योगयो: ॥ १ ६ ॥

Lotus is turned Pankaja because it springs from mud and dirt; so unless there exists the earth underneath with mud and dirt, how this lotus will come out here!

पश्याम्यात्याय पढ़ं त मृत वे पढ़जस्य च ।

भविष्यति धरा तत्र मृतं नात्स्यत्र संशयः ॥ 17 ॥

Now let me try and find out where is the root of this lotus, where is the mud and dirt? If this be found, then the earth will be also certainly there.

उत्तरसलिले त्रय यावदूर्भसहचकम् ।

अन्वेयमाणो धरणी नावाय तां यदा तदा ॥ 18 ॥

Thus thinking, I dived underneath the water and searched for one thousand years but could not find earth anywhere, when the celestial voice entered my ears “Practise tapasyā (austerities).”

तपस्पिति चाकारो वाग्यदूरशीरिणि ।

ततो माय तपतलां पदो वर्षसहसूकम ॥ 19 ॥

Hearing this celestial voice, I sat on the lotus, my birth place, and practised tapasyā for one thousand years.

सुजेति पुनरुद्धता वाणी तत्र श्रुता माय ।

विघ्राहं तताकषर्ष के सुर्जामि करोपेम किम् ॥ 20 ॥

Next, the celestial voice again came saying "Create" Hearing this. I became quite confounded and began to think within myself "now what am I to create? What to do?"

तदा दैत्यावपि प्राप्तो दाराणी मयुकैटो भ ।

तान्यां विभीषितश्रहं युद्धाय मकरालये ॥ 21 ॥

After this, the two terrible Daityas Madhu and Kaitabha came to me and affrighted me saying "Fight with us."

ततोड़ नालमालंख्य वारियध्यमावताम ।

तत तम मया दृष्टः पुरुषः परमादुतः ॥ 22 ॥

I became quite terrified and holding the stem of the lotus, I got down within the water. There I saw a wonderful person, sleeping on the Ananta serpent.

मेध्यमागसीतु पीतावासाशुतुर्षुः ।

गेशगाशी जगाओं वनमालाविश्वपितः ॥ 23 ॥

He was of a deep blue colour like a rain-cloud,

wearing yellow clothes, four-armed, garlanded with forest flowers, and the Lord of this whole Universe.

गंखचक्रान्तपचाधाव्युघै: सुविराजितः ।

तमहाक्षं महाविष्णुं शेषपर्यंक्षागायिन् ॥ 24 ॥

On the four arms of this Mahā Viṣṇu there were conchshells, disc, club, and lotus and other weapons.

योगनिज्ञा समाक्रान्तमाविस्यं द्विनमच्छुतम् ।

शयानं तं समातोकव भोगिणोगोपरिस्थितम् ॥ 25 ॥

I saw this Acyuta Puruṣa, sleeping on the Ananta serpent bed, motionless and under the influence of Yoga Nidrā. I then thought within myself “What am I to do”?

चित्त मामद्धुता जाता किं कर्मोति नारद ।

मय स्मृता तदा देखी स्तुता निद्रास्कपिणी ॥ 26 ॥

Not being able to find out any other way, I recollected the Devi who was then of the nature of sleep and began to praise Her.

देहाधिरन्य सा देवी गाने संस्थिता शिवा ।

अवितकसंगरीरा सा दिव्याभरणमणिकता ॥ 27 ॥

विष्यादौंहं विद्यायणु विराजव नमःशिता ।

उदतिष्ठदेयोनाता तथा मुक्तो जनादनः ॥ 28 ॥

The auspicious Devi Yoga Nidrā, whose form could not be determined, immediately left the body of Viṣṇu and decorated with divine ornaments, began to shine in the air. After She left the body of Viṣṇu, Viṣṇu immediately got up.

पडवर्षेसहस्वाणि कृतबान्, शुद्धमुत्तमम् ।

तदा विलोकिती दैलही इरीण विविपातिती ॥ 29 ॥

उत्सईं चिवलं कृत्वा तत्रैव निर्तीत चे ति ।

And He fought terribly for five thousand years with the Dānavas Madhu-Kaitabha; then by the grace of the Bhagavati, He extended His own thighs and then, on those thighs, He slew the two demons.

क्रूसत्रैव म्याप्तो यजावां संश्विताबुणी ॥ ३० ॥

विधि: संवीक्षितामामि: स्वथा देवी मनोहार ।

Where Viṣṇu and myself were standing, Rudra Deva came also and joined with us. Then we three saw the beautiful Devī in the celestial space.

Book III Chapter III

संसुता परम शक्तिरुचाचास्मानवस्थितान् ॥ 31 ॥

कृपावलोकनैः कृत्वा पावनैभूदितानथ ।

देल्युवाच

काजेशा: स्वानि कार्याणि कृकस्यं समतिन्रतः ॥ 32 ॥

सृष्टिश्वितिविशिष्यानि हतवेती महासुरै ।

कृत्वा स्वानि निकेतानि बस्पयं विमतज्वरः ॥ 33 ॥

प्रजाक्षतुर्विधा: सर्वाः सुक्राथे स्वविष्णितिभः ।

We three, then, commenced to chant hymns to Her and She gladdened our hearts by Her gracious look and said: "O Brahma! O Viṣṇu! O Rudra! The two great Daityas are slain. Now forsake your laziness and do your respective work of creating, preserving, and destroying the Universe; create your own abodes, and live in happiness; create by your respective lordly powers, the four-fold beings."

ब्रह्मोवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्याः पेशलं सुखदं मुदु ॥ 34 ॥

अबुम् तामशस्ताः स्मः कर्व कुमीरत्वाः प्रजाः ।

न मही वित्ता मातः सर्वत्र वित्तं जलम् ॥ 35 ॥

न घृतानि गृणाशामि तन्माजाणीद्रियाणि च ।

त्वाकपर्थ वचोद्यमाक् शिवा जाता सितानन्ति।36 ॥

झटिवेवागनं तत्र विमानं गनानच्छुभम् ।

सोवाचासिन्युगः कामं विजार्यं तनासाध्यसः ॥ 37 ॥

विचाने ब्रद्धिष्यधीगा दर्शायमध्य चा ब्रहुन्तम् ।

तिश्रिय चवस्तस्या ओमित्युक्त्वा पुनर्विम् ॥ 38 ॥

Hearing the Devi's gentle sweet words, we

spoke: “O Mother! There is no wide earth here; all is one mass of infinite ocean. No five elements, no five nāmatrās, no sensual organs, no Guṇas, nothing exists here; how can we then execute the work of creation, etc.” Hearing our words, the Devi smiled. Immediately, there came from the sky overhead a beautiful aerial car. The Devi said: “O Brahma! O Viṣṇu! O Rudra! Get in this car without any fear. Today I will show you one wonderful thing.”

समाकष्टीपविहा: स्मो विमाने रत्नमधितुं ।

मृक्तादामयुसंवीते किंकीपीजाजशबिद्धि ॥ 39 ॥

सुसचचिनिधे ग्वयं जयस्त्राजिश्विकता: ।

सोपविहांस्तो नृद्ध्या देव्यसान्वितजिंद्रियान् ॥ 40 ॥

स्वशक्तया तद्विमानं वै नोदयामास चोत्रे ॥ 41 ॥

शीत शीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयस्कन्ये

दितीयोरध्याः ॥ 2 ॥ 11

At Her word, we got into the beautiful car without any fear. It was decorated with various gems and jewels, bedecked with pearls, emitting sweet tinkling sounds of bells and looking as the abode of the celestials. Seeing us seated without any fear, She made the car get high up in the sky by Her force.

Thus ends the Second Chapter of the Third Book on Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra's going towards the heavens on the celestial car, given by the Devi in the Mahāpurāna Śrīmaddevībhāgvatam of 18,000 verses by Mararsi Veda Vyāsa.

Book III Chapter III

CHAPTER III

On Seeing the Devi

बहावाच

विवानं तम्नोवेगं यत्र स्थानान्तरे गतम् ।

न जलं तत्र पश्यामो विक्सिताः: म्यो वयं तदा ॥ १ ॥

वृक्षा: सर्वकला रध्याः कोकिलारायमिडिताः ।

मही महीधराः कामं वनान्युवचनानि च ॥ 2 ॥

Brahmā said: “We were very much astonished not to find water where our beautiful air craft landed us. We saw earth resonated with the sweet cooings

of cuckoos, filled with beautiful fruit-laden trees, forests and gardens.

नार्थंष पुरुषाश्रैव पशवश सरित्रा ।

वाय्यः कृपास्तडागाश्र पल्ल्वानि न निर्व्रौरः ॥ 3 ॥

Big rivers, wells, tan's, ponds, water-springs, small pools, women, men all were there.

पुरतो नगरं रभ्ये दिव्यप्राकारमिडतम् ।

यज्ञालासमायुक्तं नानाह्यर्विराजतम् ॥ 4 ॥

Next we saw, in front of us, a nice city enclosed by a divine wall, containing many sacrificial halls and various palacial buildings and magnificent edifices.

प्रत्यभिज्ञा तत जाताउप्रत्यमाकं प्रेक्ष्य तत्पुम् ।

स्वरांघिमिति केनासी निर्मितैस्ति महाद्धतुम ॥ 5 ॥

Oh! We thought "It is Heaven! What a great wonder! Who built this?"

राजानं देवसङ्गुशं जञनं मृगवांं चने ।

अस्माधिः संश्सिता शूद्य विमानोपर चाधिका ॥ 6 ॥

क्षणाच्छचाल गाने विमानं पवनैरितम् ।

मुह्तीझा ततः प्राप्त देशे चान्ये मनोहरे ॥ 7 ॥

Next we saw, “A king looking like a Deva is going out on a hunting excursion in the forest. Devi Ambikā, Whom we saw before, is staying on the chariot. In an instant, our air craft, propelled by air got high up above the sky and reached in the twinkling of an eye at a lovely place.

नन्दं च वनं तत्र दृष्यसामधिकतम् ।

पारितातरूच्छायासंशिता सुराभि: स्थिता ॥ 8 ॥

We saw there a divine Nandana garden. There Surabhi, the cow of plenty, was staying under the shade of the Pārijāta tree.

चतुर्दैनो गजस्तव्या: समीपे समवस्थितः ।

अपसरसां तत्र वृद्वानि मेनकापृष्टीनीच च ॥ ९ ॥

क्रीडिति विविधेघविर्यानानुल्यसन्त्रवितः ।

गन्धर्वां: शतशस्तनय सूचा विद्याधारसत्या ॥ 10 ॥

मन्दारावाटिकामध्ये गायन्ति च रस्तित च ।

दूर: शतक्रतुरस्तर पौलोन्या सहित: प्रभुः ॥ 11 ॥

Close by her, there was an elephant having four tusks; and Menakā and other hosts of Apsarās were there with their various gestures and postures, playing, dancing and singing. There were hundred of Yakṣas, Gandharvas, Vidyādharas within that Mandāra garden playing and singing. Within this there was the Lord Śatakratu with Śaci, the daughter of Pulomā.”

वर्य तु विक्षिताओंस्या दृष्ट्वा गैविष्यं त्वा ।

यादःपति कुबेरे च यमं सूर्वे स्थिभावसुम् ॥ 12 ॥

वित्तोक्य विक्षिताओंसास्य वयं तत्र सुरात्स्थितान् ।

तदा विनिरितोराजा पुरात्स्यात्सुमण्डितात् ॥ 13 ॥

देवराज इवाक्षीभ्यो नरवाहुावरनी स्थितः ।

विमानस्या वयं तृच्चाचल तत्सागतम् ॥ 14 ॥

बह्रातोकं तदा दिव्यं सर्वदेवमस्कृतम् ।

तत्र ब्रह्माणमालोक्य विक्सिती हरकेशजी ॥ 15 ॥

Next we saw with great wonder, Varuna, the lord of the aquatic animals, Kubera, Yama, Sūrya (sun), fire and the other Devas; then we, saw that in our front, Indra the Lord of the Devas, was coming out from a well decorated city. He was there situated in his palanquin, calm and quite and carried by men. Then the car, where we were situated, began to get up high in the sky, and in the twinkling of an eye, we reached Brahmaloka, that is saluted by all the Devas.

सभायां तत्र वेदाङ्ग सर्वे साङ्गः स्वलिपणः ।

सागतः सत्तिश्व पर्वतः पत्रगोगतः ॥ १ ६ ॥

There Sambhu and Keśava were greatly bewildered to see Brahmā of that place. In the council hall of Brahmā, the Vedas with their Angas, the serpents, hills, oceans and rivers were seen.

मामुचतुशुर्जेक्नः कोरंयं बह्ञा सन्तानः ।

ताववोचमहं नैव जाने सृष्टिपरितं पतिम् ॥ 17 ॥

Seeing all these, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara asked me: "O Four-faced one! Who is this eternal Brahma?"

कोड़ं कॉरंक किमर्थ वा फमोरंयं मन चेष्टी ।

क्षणाद्ध विमानं तच्चवालासु मनोजवम् ॥ 18 ॥

I replied: “I do not know who is this Brahmā? Who am I? and who is He? why has this error come over me? You, too, also are gods: so you can better ponder over it.”

कैलासशिप्रहे प्राप्त रथे च्यक्षगणान्ति ।

मन्दारवादिकारये कीराकोकितकृजिते ॥ १९ ॥

Next our car, going with the swiftness of mind went, in the twinkling of an eye, to the beautiful all auspicious Kailāśa mountain, surrounded by bliss-giving Yakṣas.

वीणामुजरवोघुः नातिदे सुखदे शिवे ।

यदा प्राप्त विमानं तन्त्रैव सदनान्धुषान् ॥ 20 ॥

It was beautiful by the Mandāra garden,

Book III Chapter III

resonated with the sweet cooings of Šukas and cuckoos and the sweet sounds of lutes and small drums and tabors.

निरनीं भगवाठबंभुरुंभाकडसिलोचनः ।

पशान्नो दर्शपुंकः कृतसोमाधिशेषतः ॥ 21 ॥

व्याङ्चमंपरीधानो नाजचर्मतरीयकः ।

पाणिण्वर्ती महावीरी गाजाननषढाननो ॥ 22 ॥

शिशेन सह पुत्री ह्री उजमानी विसेतुः ।

When we reached there, we saw the five-faced, three-eyed Bhagavān Śaśī Śekhara, with ten hands, wearing tiger skin, and the upper garment of the elephant skin. He was, then, getting out of his abode, riding on a bull.

नन्दिप्रभृतः सर्वे गणायधा बराश्र ते ॥ २३ ॥

वश्यादं प्रयुंजना जजन्ति शिवपुरुषा: ।

तं वीक्ष्य शुक्रं चान्यं विस्मितास्तत्र नारद । २४ ॥

मातृभि: संग्याविष्टसत्राहं न्यवसं मुने ।

क्षणात्समादुगिरेः शूर्णामानं वातरहंसा ॥ २५ ॥

बैकुँठसदनं प्राणेन रामायणमन्दिन्यम् ।

असभ्याया विभूतिक्ष तत्र वृष्टा मया सुत ॥ २६ ॥

His two sons, the great heroes, Gangeśa and Kārtikeya, beautifully adorned, were attending Him as His bodyguards. Nandi and all other hosts were following Him, chanting victories to Him. O, Muni Narāda! we were greatly surprised to see another Śaṅkara, surrounded by the Mātrkās. So much so, that perplexed with doubts, I sat down there. Next our air craft went on with the force of wind; and in an instant reached the abode of Vaikuntha, the amusement court of Lakṣmī.

विस्तिषये नदा विद्युईया तत्पुर्मुत्तमम् ।

सदनाएं ययो तावद्धोरः कमलतोचनः ॥ 27 ॥

O Sūta! There at Vaikutha, we saw a wonderful manifestation of power. Our companion Viṣṇu was greatly surprised to see that excellent city.

असनीकुमुभामाशः पीतिवासाशुर्भुः ।

द्विज्ञाजाधिकड्श द्विधायरणभूषितः ॥ 28 ॥

We saw there four-armed Viṣṇu, of the colour of Ātasi flower, wearing yellow garments, adorned with divine ornaments, sitting on Garudā.

वीज्यानस्तद लक्ष्या कामिन्या चामरे रुषः ।

तं वीक्ष्य विमिता: सर्वे वयं विगुणं सन्तानम् ॥ 29 ॥

Laksmī Devī is fanning wonderful chowry to Him. Struck with wonder at the sight of the eternal Viṣṇu, we took our seats on the car and looked at one another's face.

परस्यरं निरीक्षितः स्थितास्तमिन्य वरायने ।

ततश्रघाल ततसा विमानं वातरंहसा ॥ 30 ॥

“Next the baloon ascended with the swiftness of wind; and, in the twinkling of an eye, reached to the ocean of nectar, the Sudhā-Sāgara, with waves playing sweetly on it.

सुधासमुद्र: सम्पातो मिद्धारिमहोमिनान् ।

यादोगणसमाकीर्णंशलूतीधिविराशितः ॥ ३। ॥

This ocean Sudhā Sāgara is filled with aquatic animals and agitated with ripples. We saw and went along and came to a very wonderful place called the Maṇi Dvīpa (the island of gems) in the midst of the Ocean.

मन्द्रापरित्राताठीः पादर्परित्रोगिधतः ।

नानास्तरणासंसुनी नानाधिविविधित्र: ॥ 32 ॥

मुक्ताद्यापरिक्षित्हो नानाद्यापिराजितः ।

अंगोकबकुलाखेध यूबेः कुरबकादिधिः ॥ 33 ॥

It was adorned with Mandāra and Parijāta and other heavenly flower trees (plants?), with various beautiful carpets, with variegated trees Aśoka, Vakula, Ketaki, Campaka, Kuruvaka, etc., adorned with lustrous gems and pearls.

संयुत सर्वतः सौभ्यैः केतकीचंफकैनृतः ।

कोकितगारसंयुहो दिव्यानभ्रमनितः।। 34 ॥

It was resonated with the sweet coings of the cuckoos and the humming sounds of bees; and it presented the sight of a sweet harmonious music playing there.

द्विरेषातिरणत्काररित्रुतः परमाद्धुतः ।

तत्स्म्नीये शिवाकार: पर्यडूः सुमन्तोहः ॥ 35 ॥

रत्नालखचितो3रथर्व नानारत्नविशरिताः ।

दृष्ठो3स्माथिविमानस्थैतूतः परिमधिकतः ॥ 36 ॥

"Sitting on our air craft, we saw, from a distance, within that Dvīpa, a beautiful cot known as

Śivākāra (i.e. whose four legs represent Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, etc, and whose top portion represents Sadā Śiva) looking like a rainbow, with exquisitely beautiful carpet spread over it and decked with various gems and jewels and inlaid with pearls.

नानास्तरणसंछत्र इंज्ञापसम्पिततः ।

परैंक्रूप्ररे तस्मिनुपिधित रंगना 137 ॥

रकमाल्यविरधरा रकमायानुपेपना ।

सुरक्नयना कान्ता विद्युक्तोदिसमप्रभा ॥ 38 ॥

We saw a Divine Lady, sitting on the cot, wearing a red garment and a garland of red cloth and bedewed with red sandal paste. Her eyes were dark-red; that beautiful faced red-lipped lady looked more beautiful than ten millions of lightnings and ten millions of Lakṣmīs and lustrous like the Sun.

सुचाक्रवदना रक्तन्दच्छद्विराजिता ।

साकोठाधिका कान्ता सूर्याविंबनिभाषिता । 39 ।

वरपाणाङ्गणाधिष्टया शीभुवनेक्षी ।

अटुधूर्वां द्वा सा सुद्वी सितम्पृष्णा ॥ 40 ॥

The Bhagavatī Bhuvanesvari was sitting with a sweet smile on Her lips and holding in Her four hands noose, goad, and signs indicating as if She was ready to grant boons and asking Her devotees to discard all fear. We never saw before such a form.

ईंकारजपनिश्रैत् पहिक्यैदेनिवेलिता ।

अरणा करणामृतिं: कुमारी नवरीवारि ॥ 41 ॥

Even the birds of that place repeat the mystic incantation Hrim and serve that Lady, Who is of the color of the rising Sun, all-merciful, and in the full bloom of youth.

सर्वश्रुत्रावेषाठा मन्दासितमुखांबुजा ।

उद्यानीनुकचढ़द्विनर्जितांभोजकुद्यमला ॥ 42 ॥

नानामिगणगालीभूषणीरणशेपाचिता ।

कन्कोगकेन्यूरिकीटपरिशीधिता ॥ 43 ॥

That lotus-faced smiling lady was adorned with all the beauties of Nature. Her high breasts defied the lotus bud. She was holding various jewelled ornaments e.g. armplates, bracelets, diadems, etc.

कनकच्छीचकताटंकविटंकवदनांबुजा ।

हल्लेखा घुवनेगीति नामजापयराधेय: ॥ 4 4 ॥

Her lotus-face looked exceedingly beautiful with jewelled earrings of the shape of the Śī Yantra (yantra of Tripurā Sundari). Hrllekhā and other Deva girls were surrounding Her.

सखीद्वे: स्तुता नित्यं घुवनेगी महेश्वी ।

हृल्लेखाधामयकन्याधिः परियेहिता ॥ 4 5 ॥

There were Sakhiś on the four sides-always chanting hymns to Maheśvari, the Lady of the world.

अनंगकुसुमाढाधिर्देवीधिः परियेहिता ।

देवी घट्कोपणमध्यसा यत्राजोपरि स्थता ॥ 46 ॥

She was surrounded on Her all sides by Ananga kusuman and other Devis. She was sitting in the middle of the Satkona (six angled) Yantra.

दूबहा तां विमसा: सर्वे वयं तन स्थताभवन् ।

केयं काना च किं नान न जानोगोजर संस्किता ॥ 47 ॥

We were all amazed at the sight of this. Wonderful Form never seen before and we thought: "Who is this Lady? What is Her name? We know nothing of Her, from such a distance."

सहस्वनयन रामा सहस्वकरसंयुता ।

सहस्वदन्त नया भाति दुरादसंगयम् ॥ 48 ॥

Thus, while we were gazing at Her, that four-armed Lady became gradually thousand eyed, with thousand hands and thousand feet; so it seemed to us.

नापसरा नापि नार्थर्वीं देवांगना किल ।

इति संगयामापासरत्र नारद संस्थतः ॥ 49 ॥

तदारसी भगवान्विगूरैद्वा तां चाहहासिनीय ।

उवाचांवां स्वविज्ञानाकृत्वा मनसि निशयम् ॥ 50 ॥

O Nārada! We became very much embarrassed with guubts and thought within ourselves “Is She Apsarā (nymph) or a Gandharva daughter or any other Deva Gīrī? Who is She?” At this juncture Bhagvān Viṣṇu saw closely the sweet smiling Devi and by his intelligence came to a definite conclusion and spoke to us:

एषा भगवती देही सर्वेधा कारणं हि नः ।

महाविद्या महामाया पूर्णं प्रकृतित्वया ॥ 5 1 ॥

Book III Chapter III

"This is the Devi Bhagavatī Mahāvidyā Mahā Māyā, undecaying and eternal; She is the Full, the Prakṛti; She is the Cause of us all.

दुर्जंवास्यन्धियां देखी योगमाया दुर्जाया ।

इच्छा पातनतः कामं निव्यानियस्यक्षिपणि ॥ 52 ॥

This Devi is inconceivable to those who are of dull intellect; only the Yogis can see Her by their Yoga-powers. She is eternal (Brahma) and also non-eternal (Māyā). She is the Will-force of the Supreme Self. She is the First Creatrix of this world.

दुरात्यास्त्यभायेछुः देवी विध्धधी शिला ।

वेदमार्ची विशालाखी सर्वेमामादिरीघी ॥ ५३ ॥

एषा संहृच सकल विध्धं क्रीविति सक्षये ।

तिज्ञानि सर्वजीवानां स्वशगरी तिथेयच च । ५४ ॥

This Devi with wide eyes, the Lady of the Universe, has produced the Vedas. The less-fortunate persons cannot worship Her. During the time of Pralaya, She destroys all the Universe, draws within Her body all the subtle bodies (Linga-Śarīras), and plays. O two Devas! At present She is residing in the form of the Seed of the Universe.

सर्ववीजमयी होया राजते साम्पतं सुर्ति ।

विश्वमतःस्थिता:पार्थिप्यरताकोदिग:क्रमात् 5 5 ॥

Behold! On Her sides are seen duly all the Vibhūtis (manifestations of powers). They are all adorned with divine ornaments and anointed with divine scent and are serving Her.

दिव्याभरणभुपाक्ढां दिव्यान्यानुपेलपना: ।

परिचर्यापरा: सर्वो: पर्यतां ब्दशगझूरी ॥ ५६ ॥

O Brahman! O Śaṅkara! Today we are blessed and highly fortunate that we have got the sight of this Devi.

धात्या वयं महाभागाः कृतकृता: स्म साम्यान् ।

यदत्र दर्शनं प्राप्ते भगवतः स्वयं तिवद्न ॥ ५७ ॥

The tapasyās (asceticisms) that we practised of yore have yielded to us this fruit. Else why Bhagavatī has shown so carefully Her own form?

तपसत्तं पुरा यत्नात्यदें फलमुपनाम् ।

अन्यथा दर्शनं कुत्र भवेदसामकामदारत् ॥ 58 ॥

Those who are highly meritorious by tapasyās and gifts of abundant wealth, those high souled persons are able to see this all-auspicious Bhagavatī.

पर्यतिं पुण्यपुज्ञा ये ये वद्यान्यासप्त्विनः ।

रागिणो नैव पश्यति देर्वी भगवर्ती शिवान् ॥ 59 ॥

The person attached to sensual objects can never see Her. It is She that is the Mūlā Prakṛti, united with the Cīdānanda Person.

मूलभूकितेर्वेधा सदा पुरुषसंगता ।

बह्ञाण्ड दर्णयेत्यां कृत्वा वे परमात्मे ॥ 60 ॥

It is She that creates this Brahmanāṇa and exhibits it to the Paramātmā (the Supreme Self). O two Devas!

ग्रहासी नृव्यमखिलं बह्ञाण्डे देवता: सुर्गे ।

तस्यैया कारणं सर्वां माया सर्वेशुं शिजा ॥ 6 1 ॥

This whole Universe and all the Seers and Seen and other things contained therein owe to Her as their sole cause. She is the Māyā, assuming all forms; She is the Goddess of all.

व्वाहं वा वव सुरा: सर्वैं सभ्याहा: सुयोक्षितः ।

लक्षोर्जेन तुलामस्या न भवामः कंधंचन ॥ 6 2 ॥

Where is I myself! Where are the Devas! Where are Laksmī and the other Devis! We cannot compare to one-hundred thousandth part of Her.

सैपा वर्गाना नाम या वे दूहा महानंचे ।

बालभावे महादेवी दोलर्वतील मां मुदा ॥ 63 ॥

It is this all-excellent Lady, Whom I saw in the great Ocean when She reckoned Me who was a baby then with greatest gladness.

गयनं वदपत्रे च पर्यकै सुस्थिते दूदं ।

पादांगुरुं करे कृत्वा निवेशय मुखधकुं जे ॥ 64 ॥

लेलिहनं च क्रीडत्नमनेकैबलंचष्टिकैः ।

रमाणं कोमलांगं बटपत्रुंटे स्थितम् ॥ 65 ॥

In former days, when I was sleeping on the cot made of immoveable fixed leaves of a banyan tree and licking my toe, making it enter within my mouth and playing like an ordinary baby, this Lady rocked my gentle body to and fro on the banyan leaves, singing songs like a Mother.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

<table><tr><td>गायन्ती दोलयन्ती च बालभावान्मयि स्थिते ।</td></tr><tr><td>सेयं सुनिश्रितं ज्ञातं जातं मे टर्सानंदित्व ॥ 6 6 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>कामं नो जननी सेघा श्युणु तं प्रवदायम्बरु ।</td></tr><tr><td>अनुभूतं मया पूर्वं प्रत्यभिभूता समत्धिता ॥ 6 7 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>इति श्रीमद्देशभागतते महापुराणते तृतीवत्कन्यें</td></tr><tr><td>तृतीयो5ध्याय: 11 3 11</td></tr></table>

Now I recollect all what I felt before at Her sight

and recognise that She is the Bhagavatī. These very things I now communicate to you. Hear attentively that She is this Lady and She is our Mother.

Thus ends the Third Chapter of the Third Book on seeing the Devi in the Mahā Purānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER IV

On the Hymns to the Devi

ब्रहोाच

इत्युक्त्वा भगवान्विणु: पुनराह जनंद्नः ।

वयं गच्छेम पार्षेडस्या: प्रणमन्तः पुनः: पुनः ॥ 1 ॥

Brahmā said: “Thus speaking, Bhagavān Janārdana Viṣṇu spoke to me again: ‘Come; let us bow down to Her again and again and let us go to Her.

सेयं वरा महामाया दास्यल्येच वरान्ह नः ।

सुखामः सर्हिधि प्राय पिभयाश्रणानिके १ २ ॥

We shall reach at Her feet fearlessly and we will chant hymns to Her; Mahā Māyā will be pleased with us and will grant us boons.

यदि नो वारयिध्यन्ति द्वारस्या: परिचारका: ।

पटिष्यामश्र तनरक्षा:सनुर्ति तेल्या: समाहितः ॥ 3 ॥

If the guards at the entrance prevent us from going, we would stand at the gate way and we chant hymns to the Devi with one mind.'”

बढ्रोवाच

इत्युक्ते हरिणा वावसे सुप्रहही सुसंशित्यों ।

जातौ प्रमुदिति कामं निकटे गमानय च ॥ 4 ॥

Brahmā said: 'When Hari addressed us in the above way, we two became choked by intense feelings of joy; our voice became tremulous and we waited there for some time; our hearts were elated with joy to go to Her.

ओभिम्बुकला हाँर सर्वे विमानाचरिताक्रयः ।

उत्तीर्ण निर्णत हारि शुक्रभाना मनस्वलम् ॥ 5 ॥

We then, accepted Hari's word, said "Om" and got down from our car and went with hastened steps and with fear to the gate.

हारस्थावीक्ष्य तान्सर्विन्देवी भगवती तदा ।

सितं कृत्वा चकारागु तोक्षीन्कीसफधारिणः ॥ 6 ॥

Seeing us standing at the gateway, Devi Bhagavati smiled and within an instant transformed us three into females.

वर्ये चुवतयो जाता: सुस्पाश्राकृष्णग: ।

विसर्यें परमं प्राता गताततसंनिधिं पुनः ॥ 7 ॥

We looked beautiful and youthful women, adorned with nice ornaments; thus we greatly wondered and went to Her.

सा सुह्यान न स्थितांसतर कौकीपंशरणानिके ।

व्यलोकयत चार्वीगं प्रोमस्पूर्णया चुगा ॥ 8 ॥

Seeing us standing at Her feet in feminine forms, the beautiful Devi Bhagavatí, looked upon us with eyes of affection.

प्रणय तां महादेवीं पुस्तः संस्थिता वयम् ।

परस्यं लोकंयतः क्लीक्याग्राकृष्णपुण: ॥ 9 ॥

We then bowed to the great Devi, looked at one another and stood before Her in that feminine dress.

पादपीठे प्रेक्षमाणा नानागधिगिवृषितम् ।

सुर्यकोटिप्रतीकारां श्वित्तास्त्र वयं ययः ॥ 10 ॥

We three, then, began to see the pedestal of the great Devi, shining with the 'justre of ten million Suns and decorated with various gems and jewels.

कांधिउक्तांबरास्त्र सहचर्य: सहस्रतः ।

कांधिउर्जीलांव गार्थतव्या पीतावम्बा: शुभाः ॥ १ १ १ ॥

We next discerned that thousands and thousands of attendants are waiting on Her.

देव्य: सर्वा: शुभाकारा विविधायम्पुर्णतः ।

विरेजुः पार्थतस्तव्या: परिवर्षापरा: किल ॥ १ २ ॥

Book III Chapter IV

जगुळ नन्तुळान्या पर्पुपासंन्त ताः स्थितः ।

वीणामास्तबाघानि वाद्यंतीं पूदान्तिज्ञा: ॥ १ ३ ॥

Some of them are wearing red dress; some blue dress, some yellow dress; thus the Deva girls, variously dressed were serving Her and standing by Her side.

शूणु नातर वक्ष्यामि यद्धुर्द तक चाब्धुतम् ।

नखदर्पर्णमध्ये  शे देथ्याशरणपंक्ने ॥ 14 ॥

They were dancing, singing on and playing with musical instruments and were gladly chanting hymns in praise of the Devi. O Nārada! We saw there another wonderful thing.

ब्रहाण्डवगितृलं सर्वे तन स्थावरजंभम् ।

अर्ह विद्युष्ठा रुद्ध्य वायुरनियोये रोच : १ १ ५ ॥

वरण: शीतगुस्त्ब्वटा कुवेर: पाकशासन: ।

पर्वतः सागरा नचो गाध्वांपरसस्तथा ॥ १ ६ ॥

विश्वासुश्रिक्रजेकृतः श्रोतश्रिंगावस्तथा ।

नारदस्वैकुश्छीश हाहाहूहलसेव च ॥ 17 ॥

अधिनी वसव: साध्या: सिद्धाश्व पितरस्तथा ।

नाना: शेणावय: सर्वे किजरोरगारक्षसा: ॥ 18 ॥

वैकुंठी बढ़ालोकढ़ कैलास: पर्वतींतपम: ।

सर्वे तद्विजलं चूई नखमध्यस्थितं च तत ॥ 19 ॥

Listen. We saw the whole universe, moving and non-moving within the nails of the lotus feet of the Devi. We saw there myself, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Vāyu, Agni, Yama, Moon, Sun, Varuna, Tvaṣṭā, Indra, Kubera and other Devas, Apsarās, Gandharvas, rivers, oceans, mountains, Viśvāvasus, Citraketu, Śveta, Citrāngada, Nārada, Tumburu, Hā Hā Hū Hū and other Gandharvas, the two Aśvins, the eight Vasus, Sādhyas, Siddhas, the Pitts, Ananta and other Nāgas, Kinnaras, Uragas, Rākṣasas, the abode of Vaikuntīha, the adode of Brahmā, Kailāsa mountain, the best of all mountains; all were existing there. Within that nail of the toe were, reflected all the things of the Universe.

मज्ञमपंकंज तस स्थितोई चतुरान्नः ।

शेषशागी जगात्रावस्थता च मधुक्रटभी ॥ 20 ॥

The lotus whence I was born, the four-faced

Brahmā like myself on that lotus, Bhagavān Jagannātha lying on that bed of Ananta, the two Demons Madhu-Kaitābha, all I saw there.

श्रीभगवान्वाच

एवं दृष्टं मया तत्र पायद्यान्ये स्थितम् ।

विस्मतीड़ं ततो वीक्ष्य किमेनेविरि शक्ति: ॥ 21 ॥

विष्णुधि विस्मायाविषः: शक्रृषच तथा स्थितः ।

तां तदा मेनेत देवी वयं विक्षय मात्मम् ॥ 22 ॥

Seeing all these wonderful things within the nails of Her lotus feet, I became greatly surprised and thought timidly: “What are all these?” My companions Viṣṇu and Śaṅkara were struck with wonder. We three then, made out that She was our Mother of the universe.

ततो वर्षेगतं पूर्णं व्यतितानं प्रपश्यतः ।

सुधामये शिव हीपे विहृतं विहितं चि ।। २३ ॥

सख्य इव तत तत मेनेरिस्मानविशलान् ।

देव्यः प्रमुदिताकारा नानाभरणयमिष्ठतः ॥ 24 ॥

Thus full one hundred years passed away in seeing the various glories of the Devi in the auspicious nectar-like Mani Dvipa; as long we were there, Her attendants, the Deva girls adorned with various ornaments gladly considered us as Sakhís.

वयमध्यतिरयन्ताद्वर्षभूमिव विमोहिताः ।

प्रनटमनसः सर्वे पश्यन्यावन्मनोराम्न् ॥ 25 ॥

We, too, were greatly fascinated by their enchanting gestures and postures. For that reason, we saw always their beautiful movements with great gladness.

एकदा ता महादेवीं देर्वीं शीभुवनेश्वीम् ।

तुशाव भगवानिष्यापुर्वनीभावसंश्रितः ॥ 26 ॥

Once, on an occasion, Bhagavān Viṣṇu, while He was in that feminine form, chanted hymns in praise of the great Devi Śrī Bhuvaneśvari.

श्रीभगवानुवाच

नमो देख्ये प्रकृत्ये च विधान्ये सत्तं नमः ।

कल्याणे कामादये च दृष्टिसिद्धो नमोनमः ॥ 271 ॥

Śrī Bhagavān said: “Salutation to Devi Prakrti, the Creatrix; I bow down again and again to Thee.

Thou art all-auspicious and grantest the desires of Thy devotees; Thou art of the nature of Siddhi (success) and Vrddhi (increase) I bow down again and again to Thee.

सच्चिदानंदरूणिये संसारागणे नमः ।

पझकृत्यविद्धायै ते भुवनेश्ये नामोनम: ॥ 28 ॥

I bow down to the World Mother, Who is of the nature of Everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss. O Devi! Thou createst, preservest and destroyest this Universe; Thou dost the Pralaya (the great Dissolution) and showest favour to the created beings. Thus Thou art the Authoress of the above five-fold things that are done; so, O Bhuvanesvari, I bow down to Thee!

स्वाधिष्टानस्वाधी कूटस्थाये नामोनः ।

अधमात्रार्थभृतार्थ हृतलेखये नामोनः ॥ 29 ॥

Thou art the great efficient and material cause of the changeful. Thou art the Unchangeable, Immovable Consciousness; Thou art the half letter (Ardhamātrā), Hrllekhā (the consciousness that ever pervades both inside and outside the Universe); Thou art the Supreme Soul and the individual soul. Salutation again and again to Thee.

ज्ञात मया प्रतिज्ञिमंदं त्वये सर्जिश्रिंह

तत्तोउस्य सम्भवयावधि मातरह।

गर्निक्छे तेउस्य करणे चिततग्रभावा

ज्ञातप्रयाना सकललोकमयीति नृनम् ॥ 30 ॥

O Mother! I now realise fully well that this whole Universe rests on Thee; it rises from Thee and again melts away in Thee. The creation of this Universe shews Thy infinite force. Verily, Thou art become Thyself all these Lokas (regions).

वित्तार्थं सर्वमिखितं सर्वसद्धिकारं

सन्दर्शयस्यविकलं पुरुषाय काले ।

तत्प्रेश्य प्रोडशणीयेव च सत्पशिष्य

भार्यस्ट्रजालयि नः किल रंजनाय ॥ ३। ॥

During the time of creation Thou createst the two formless elements Akāsa and Vāyu and the three elements with form, fire, water, and earth; then with these Thou createst the whole Universe

and shewest this to the Enjoyer Puruṣa, who is of the nature of consciousness, for His satisfaction. Thou again dost become the material cause of the twentythree Tattvas, Mahat, etc., as enumerated in the Sānkhya system and appear to us like mirage.

न त्वामुते किमयि वसुगत विष्याति

व्यायैव सर्वमिखलं त्वमविश्यतासि ।

गर्निक विंना व्यवहतो पुरुषो3यणत्को

बंभपयते जननि बुद्धिमता जनेन ॥ 32 ॥

“O Mother! Were it not for Thee, no object would be visible. Thou pervadest the whole Universe. It is for this reason that those persons that are wise declare that even the Highest Puruṣa can do no work without Thy aid.

प्राणासि विश्वामिखतं सन्तं प्रपाते:

स्वैतेनजसा च सकलं प्रकटीकांशीव ।

अत्येव देवि तरसा किल करलकाले

को वेद देवि चरितं तव वे भयस्य ॥ 33 ॥

O Devi! Thou createst and art giving satisfaction to the whole Universe by Thy power; again at the time of Pralaya Thou swallowest forcibly all these that are seen. So, O Devi! Who can Fathom Thy powers?

त्राता वयं जननि ते मधुकैटभाण्यं

लोकाश्र ते सुवितता: खलु दर्शिता ते ।

नीता: सुखस्य भवने परमां च कोर्टि

यहर्जनं तव भवानि महाप्राभावम् ॥ 34 ॥

O Mother! Thou didst save us from the hands of Madhu and Kaitabha. Then Thou hast brought us to this Mani Dvipa and shewed us Thy own form, all these extended regions and immense powers and given us exquisite delight and joy. This is the highest place of happiness.

नाहं भवो न च विलिपि विवेद मातः

को3:0 नी हे वेति चरितं तब तुर्दिंभाव्यम् ।

कानीह संति घुवन्तिन महाप्रभावे

श्रीमभवामि रचिते रचनाकलापे ॥ 35 ॥

“O Mother! When I Myself, Śaṅkara and Brahmā or any one of us is unable to fathom Thy

Book III Chapter IV

inconceivable glory, who else can then ascertain? O Bhavānī! Who knows, how many more than the several regions that we saw reflected in thy nails of Thy feet, exist in Thy creation.

अस्माधिरत्र भुवने हरिन्य एव

दृष्टः शिवः कमलजः प्रधितम्भावः ।

अन्येषु देये धुवनेषु न सोल किं ते

किं विश्व देये वित्ततं तल सुप्रभावम् ॥ 36 ॥

O One endowed with infinitely great powers! O Devi! we saw another Viṣṇu, another Hara, another Brahmā, all of great celebrity in the Universe exhibited by Thee; who knows how many other such Brahmās etc. exist in Thy other Universes! Thy glory is infinite.

यावोउव तेंत्रिकमलं प्रणिप्पल क्रांप

घिते सदा वस्तु रूपमिदं तरोतत ।

नागरि वक्सकुहरे सततं तवैव

सन्दर्भनं तव पदांजुवणोः सदैव ॥ 37 ॥

O Mother! I bow down again and again to Thy lotus feet and pray to Thee that may Thy this form exist always in my mind. May my mouth always utter Thy name and may my two eyes see always Thy lotus feet.

भूतयोउयमिति सत्तां मीय पावनीयं

त्वां स्वामितीति मनसा ननु चिंशतयामि ।

एषासउवयोरितता किले देयि

भूयाड्वापिति: सदैव जननी सुतयोरिवार्थ || 38 ||

O Revered One! May I remember Thee as my Goddess and may'st Thou constantly look on myself as Thy humble servant. O Mother! What more shall I say than this: May this relation as mother and son always exist between Thee and me.

त्वे वेति सर्वमितिवर्ग भुवनप्रपंच

सर्वन्ता परिसमापितिनतनभूमि: ।

किं पाभरेण जानंद्र विनेद्रीयं

यदुक्तभावर भवाति तर्वितं स्यात् ॥ 39 ॥

O World-Mother! There is nothing in this world that is not known to Thee for Thou art omniscient. So, O Bhavānī! What more shall my humble self declare to Thee! Now dost Thou do whatever Thou desirest.

ब्रहा सुजल्यवति विद्युभ्यापतिश्र

संहारकाकर इयं तु जन प्रसिद्धि: ।

किं सत्यमेतदापि देयि तवेच्छया वे कर्तु

भूमा वयवजे तत शक्तिसुक्तः ॥ 401

O Devi! rumour goes that Brahmā is the creator, Viṣṇu is the Preserver, and Maheśvara is the Destroyer! Is this true? O Eternal One! It is through Thy Will power, through Thy force, that we create, preserve and destroy.

धात्री घरायसुते न जगद्धिभर्ति

अधारणशक्तिरखिलं तव वे विधर्भर्ति ।

सूर्योंसि भाति वरदे प्रभया युतस्ते

तं वं समीन्दित्वि लिंवरा विभागसि ॥ 41 ॥

O Daughter of the Himalaya mountain! The earth is supporting this Universe; it is Thy endless might that is holding all this made of five elements. O Grantress of boons! It is through Thy power and lustre that Sun is lustrous and becomes visible. Though Thou art the attributeless Self, yet by Thy Māyic power Thou appearest in the form of this Prapañca Universe.

ब्रह्मा उद्गमीधारय: किलत ते प्रभावासर्वे

वयं जनियुता न यदा तु नित्या: ।

के3-ये सुरा: शाममखप्रमुखाश्र नित्या

नित्या त्वयेव जननी प्रकृति: पुराणा ॥ 42 ॥

When Brahma, Maheśa, and I myself take birth by Thy power and are not eternal, what more can be said of Indra and other Devas than this that they are mere temporary things and created. It is only Thou that art Eternal, Ancient Prakṛti and the Mother of this Universe.

लं चेद्रवानि दयसे पुरुषं पुराणं

जानेउद्धमव तव संनिधित्यः सदैव ।

नोद्रेदं विषुर्नादिर्नीह इंगो

विश्वात्मधीरिति तमः प्रकृति: सदैव ॥ 43 ॥

O Bhavānī! Now I realise from my remaining with Thee, that it is Thou that dost impart, out of mercy, the Brahma vidyā to the ancient Puruṣa; and thus He can realise His eternal nature. Otherwise, He will remain always under delusion that He is the Lord, He is the Puruṣa without

beginning, that He is good and the Universal Soul, and thus suffers under various forms of egoism (Aharikāra).

विद्या त्वमेव ननु बुद्धिमतां नराणां

शक्तिस्वमेव किल शक्तिज्ञातं सदैव ।

त्वं कीर्तिकान्तिकमतामतनुहिष्ठपा

भृत्तिप्रदा विरतितेव मनुष्यलोकें ॥ 4 4 ॥

Thou art the Vidya of the intelligent persons and the Śakti of the beings endowed with force; Thou art Kirti (fame), Kānti (lustre), Kamālā (wealth) and the spotless Tuṣṭi (peace, happiness). Amongst men, Thou art the dispassion, leading to Mukti (complete freedom from bondage).

गायशसि प्रथमवेदकला त्यमेव

स्वाहा स्थभा भगवती सगुणाधेमात्रा ।

आनाम यह एव हितीते निगमो भवल्यै

संजीवनाय सत्तं सुरपूर्वजानाम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

Thou art the Gāyatri, the mother of the Vedas; and Thou art Svāhā, Svadhā, etc. Thou art the Bhagavati, of the nature of the three Gunas; Thou art the half mātrā (half the upper stroke of a letter), the fourth state, transcending the Gunas.

मोक्षायीयेव रचयस्यलिङ्ग पप्रड़े तेषां

राता: खलु यतो ननु जीवभावम् ।

अंगा अनाविनिधान्य किलानायस्य

पूर्णाणैवस्य वित्ता हिं यथा तर्गाः ॥ 46 ॥

It is Thou that givest always the Śāstras for the preservation of the Devas and the Brāhmanas. It is Thou that hast expanded and manifested this whole phenomenon of the visible Universe for the liberation of the embodied souls (Jivas), the parts of the pure holy Brahman, the Full, the Beginningliness, the Deathless, forming the waves of the Infinite expanse of ocean.

जीवो यदा तु परिवेत्त तदैव कृत्वं

लं संहरस्यविज्ञमेवतिति प्रसिद्धम् ।

नाटवं नटेन चित्तं वित्वेप्रतनोंरे

कार्य कृते विरमसे प्रधितप्रभावा ॥ 47 ॥

When the Jiva comes to know internally and becomes thoroughly conscious that all this is Thy work, Thou createst and destroyest, that all this is Thy Māyic pastime, false, like the parts of an actor in a theatrical play, then and then only he desists for ever from his part in this Theatre of world. O Mother! O Destroyer of the greatest difficulties! I always take refuge unto Thee.

ज्ञाता त्वमेव मम मोहमयाद्वावधे-

स्वामविक्से सततंभिय माहृतिंदे च ।

रागादिधिर्विरिचिते तिथवे किलाने

मायेव पाहि बहुतुःखको च काले ॥ 48 ॥

Thou dost save me from this ocean of Sarinśāra, full of Moha (delusion). Let Thou be my Saviour when my end will come, from these infinitely troublesome and unreal pains arising from love and hatred.

नमो देयि महाविद्यो नामामि चरणी तत ।

सदा ज्ञानप्रकाशे मे देयि स्वार्थंदि शिले ॥ 49 ॥

श्री श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयकल्पे

वतुर्षोड्यायः 11 4 11

Obeisance to Thee! O Devi! O Mahāvidyā! I fall prostrate at Thy feet. O Thou, the Giver of all desires! O Auspicious One! Dost Thou give the knowledge that is All-Light to Me."

Thus ends the Fourth Chapter of the Third Book on the hymns to the Great Devi by Visnu in the Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER V

On Chanting Hymns by Hara and Brahmā

ब्रह्मोयाय

इत्युक्चता वित्ते विद्यणौ देवदेव जनाद्ने ।

उवाच शड़ूः: शबै: प्रणतः पुतः स्थितः ॥ 1 ॥

Brahmā said: “O Nārada! Thus speaking, Viṣṇu stopped; Śaṅkara, the Destroyer, then stepped in and, bowing down to the Devi said:

Book III Chapter V

शिव उचार

यदि हरित्व देय विभावज-

स्वत्पु घवघ एवं तवोढ़ावः।

किमहमत्र तवापि न सुडण:

सकललोकविधी चतुरा शिवे ।

Śiva said: “O Devi! If Hari be born by Thy power and the lotus-born Brahmā have come into existence from Thee, why, then, I who am of Tamo Guṇa be not born of Thee! O Auspicious One! Thou art clever in creating all the Lokas! What wonder is there in My being created by Thee.

त्वामिति भृ: सहिलं पवन-

स्वथा खमपि विक्रीणुक तथा पतुः।

जननि तानि पुनः करणानि च

त्वमिति बुद्धिमनोउथव हंकृतिः।

O Mother! Thou art the earth, water, air, ākāśa and fire. Thou art, again, the organs of senses and the organs of perception; Thou art Buddhi, mind and Ahanikāra (egoism).

न च विदन्ति वदन्ति च येउन्यथा

हिरहाजकृतं निखिलं जान् ।

त्व कृताख्य एव सदैव ते

विरच्यन्ति जनसचराचर्म ।

Those who say that Hari, Hara, and Brahmā respectively the Preserver, the Destroyer and the Creator of this whole Universe do not know anything. All the three, above mentioned, are created by Thee; then they perform always their respective functions; their sole refuge being Thyself.

अवनिवायुखविड्जलादिपि;

सविषये: सगुर्णीय जान्द्रवेत् ।

यदि तदा कवमध्य च तत्सुर्ट

प्रभवतीति तवांव कलामुते ॥ 5 ॥

O Mother! If the Universe be created of the five elements, earth, air, ether, fire, and water, having the properties of touch, taste, etc, then how these five elements possessing attributes and of the nature of effects, can come into manifestation, without their being born from Thy Cit portion (Intelligence)?

भवसि सर्वीमंदं सचराचरं

ल्यमजिथ्यग्रीवाकस्पित्यम् ।

विविधवेषविलासकृतृहतै-

विसमे रासरेप्रब यथाफ्चि ॥ 6 ॥

O Auspicious Mother! It is Thou in the shape of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva, That art creating this Universe and it is Thou that hast assumed the form of this whole Universe, moving non-moving. Thus Thou playest, as it wills Thee, under variour- forms, again and again. Thou dost cease from play (during pralaya) as it likes Thee.

सकललोकसिश्युहरं हरि:

कमलपूँँ घबाम यद्धार्थिके ।

तव पदाम्बुजांपुर्परिष्टं

समाधिभ्य तन्द ननु चकिम ॥ 7 ॥

O Mother! When Brahmā, Viṣṇu and I become desirous to create the world, we execute our duties by taking the dust (earth, etc.) of Thy lotus feet.

यदि द्वाद्रमेनान न सदाधिकंके

कथमहं विहित्ध तमोगुणः ।

कमलजक्षं रजोगुणासभ्य

सुविहितः किमु सच्चगुणो हरि: ॥ 8 ॥

O Mother! If it were not Thy mercy, then how Brahmā could have become endowed with Rajoguna, Viṣṇu Sattvaguna and I with Tamoguna?

यदि न ते विषया मतिरिकेक

कथमिदं बहुधा विहितं जगत् ।

सचिवपूपतिष्यतज्ञातृतं

बहुधनैरधनैधु समाकुलम् ॥ 9 ॥

O Mother! If there were no differences observed in Thy mind, then why hast Thou created in this world rich and poor, king and councillors, servants, etc., various classes of beings? Why hast Thou not created all alike happy or all alike miserable?

तव गुणाक्रय एव सदा

क्षमा: प्रकट-नावनसहरणेषु वै।

हरित्यूद्धिणा क्रमाच्वया

विरचितास्क्रियन्ति किल कारणम् ॥ 10 ॥

So, Thou wilt have to shew Thy mercy towards me. Thy three gunas are capable at all times to

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

create, preserve and destroy the world; then Hari, Hara and Brahmā, whom Thou hast created as the cause of the three worlds, is simply Thy will.

परिचितानि मगा हरिणा

तथा कमलजेन विमानानते वे ।

पशिणतीभूवनानि कृतानि वा

कथय केन भवानि नवानि च ॥ 11 ॥

O Bhavāni! If Thy Gunas had no power in the acts of creation, etc. then how can the fact that while we three Hari, Brahmā and I were coming in the air craft, we saw on our way new worlds created by Thee, become possible? Kindly dost Thou say on this.

सृजसि पासि जगजजगदिष्के

स्वकलया क्रिविद्धचस नाशितुम् ।

नयमसे स्वपर्ति पुरूयं सदा तदा

गर्ति न हि विश्व वयं रोषे ॥ 12 ॥ ॥

O World-Mother! It is Thou that desirest to create, preserve, and destroy this world by Thy part. Māyik power. Thou art always enjoying with Purusa, Thy husband. O Śiva! We cannot fathom Thy inscrutable ways.

जननि देहि पदामयुजसेवनं

भवति भागवतानपि नः सदा ।

पुरुषतामाधिगाय पदाम्बुजाड्रहिता:

क्व लभे न सुखं स्मूटम् ॥ 13 ॥

न सुधिरस्ति मर्मांब पदाम्बुर्ज

तव हिद्धाय हिथे घुवनेचषलम् ।

निवसितुं नरदेहमवाय्य च

त्रिषुवनस्य पतितमवाय्य ते ॥ 14 ॥

सुवर्ति नासि मनागराये मे

रतिर्वुवतिभावमवाय्य तवानितके ।

पुरुषता क्व सुखाय भवत्यलं

तव पदं न यदीक्षणगोकरम् ॥ 15 ॥

O auspicious one! How can we understand Thy sport? O Mother! We are transformed into young women before Thee let us serve Thy lotus feet. If we get our manhood, we will be deprived from serving Thy feet and thus of the greatest happiness. O Mother! O Sire! I do not like to leave Thy lotus

feet and get my man-body again and again in the three worlds. O Beautiful faced one! Now that I have got this youthful feminine form before Thee, there in not a trace of desire within me to get again my masculine form. What use is there is getting manhood, what happiness is there if I do get sigh of Thy lotus-feet!

निष्पवेन्यु भवलिव्यमिधके

मम सदैव हिं कर्जितनार्थिला ।

युवतिषाचवमाव्य पदाछ्जुर्ज

परिसिंत तव संयुतिनाशनम् ॥ 16 ॥

O Mother! Let this unsullied fame of mine be spread over in the three worlds that I have got, in this young womanly form, the chance of serving Thy lotus feet that has got this effect that the idea of world goes away.

भृवि विहाय त्वान्तिक्सेवनं

क ऋर वाज्छति राज्यकंटकम् ।

ब्रुटिसौ किल याति युगायन्तां

न निकटं यदि तैंडिभसोरोहम् ॥ 17 ॥

Who is there will leave Thy service and desire to enjoy the foeless kingdom in the world? Oh! even a moment appears a Yuga to him who has not got Thy lotus feet with him!

तपसि ये निरता मुनयोप्रमालास्तव

बिहार्य घतम्युजपूजनम् ।

जननि ते वित्थिना किल विज्ञानः

परिभबो विषये परिकसित्यः ॥ 18 ॥

O Mother! Those that leave the worship of Thy lotus feet and become engaged in performing tapasyā are certainly deprived of the best thing by the Creator, though their minds be pure and holy. Their power from their Tapasyā may be acquired and they be entitled for Mukti; yet they get dire defeat from not having Thee.

न तपसा न दमेन समाधिना

न च तथा विहितैः क्रतुभिर्यथा ।

तव पदाकवपगानीवेबणा.द्वविति

भूक्तिजे भवसागगत् ॥ १९ ॥

O Unborn One! Austerities, control of passions,

Book III Chapter V

enlightenment or performance of sacrifice, as ordained in the Vedas, nothing can save, from this ocean of Sarinsāra. It is the devotional worship only of Thy lotus feet that can make one attain the Beatitude.

कुरु द्वयं द्वये यदि देयि

मां कथय मन्मनमातिलमद्धुतम् ।

सभपत्र प्रजन्मृत्तिक्षो हृहं

सुविशर्द न नवाणमनुतमम् ॥ 20 ॥

O Devi! If Thou be extremely merciful towards me, then initiate me in that wonderful holy mantra of Thine; I will repeat that omnipotent par-excellent nine-lettered mantra of the Candikā Devi and be happy.

प्रथमज्ञमनि चाधिणतो मया

तद्धुना न विभागित नवाक्षरः।

कथय मां मनुमछ भवाणांव-

ज्ञननि तारय तारय तारके ॥ 21 ॥

O Mother! In my former birth I got the nine-lettered mantra but now I have forgotten it. O Tārīn! O, Savior! Give me today that mantra and save me from this ocean of world.

ब्रहोयाच

इत्युक्ता सा ताद देवी शिवेनाद्रततेजसा ।

उच्चवारांविका मंत्र प्रपुस्तं च नवाक्षरम् ॥ 22 ॥

तं गृहीत्वा महादेवः परां मुतमाया ह ।

प्रणाय चरणो देयास्त्रैवावस्थितः शिवः ॥ 23 ॥

जपत्रवाक्षरं मन्ते कामदं मोक्षेतं तथा ।

बीजयुक्ते शुभोच्चारं शुक्रस्त्रियबांस्ताद । 24 ॥

Brahmā said: “When Śiva, of wonderful fire and energy, said this, Devi Ambikā clearly uttered the nine-lettered mantra. Mahādeva accepted the mantra and became very glad. He fell down at the feet of the Devi, and then and there began to repeat the nine-lettered mantra together with Bija (seed) that yields desires and liberation and can be easily pronounced.

तं तथाउत्थितं दूद्या शड़ूः लोकशड़ूम् ।

अयोचे तां महामायां संश्वितोड़ं पदानिके ॥ 25 ॥

When I saw Śankara, the Auspicious One to all

the Lokas, in that state, I fell down also at the feet of the Devi and spoke to Mahā Māyā:

न वेदास्त्वामेवं कलियतुमिहासप्रपटवो ।

यात्ले नोकुत्वां सकतल्पतायीमविकलाम् ।

स्वधान्धुता देवी सकलमखहोगेम्यु विहिता ।

तदा त्वं सर्वज्ञ जननि खलु जाता सिभुचने ॥ 26 ॥

“O Mother! It is not that the Vedas are unable to ascertain Thy nature; for, in the performances of sacrifices and other minor actions, they do not mention Thy full Nature, the Ordainer of all but mention simply Indra and minor deities and Svāhā Devi, a portion of Thy essence as the presiding deities of the sacrificial offerings and oblations. So, O Devi! It is Thou that hast been extolled in this Universe as the Universal Consciousness, all knowing and transcending all the Devas and all the Lokas.

Note: The nine-lettered mantra is "Om Hrim Śrim Candikāyai namah."

कर्ताईं प्रकृतीय स्वर्भित्वं ब्रह्मण्डमत्यद्धुतं।

कोउन्योस्तीह चारचोरे विभुवने मन्तः सपर्थे: पुमान् ।

धयोउपम्बन न संशयः किल यदा ब्रह्माउसि लोकातिगो ।

मानतेई भवसागरे प्रवित्ते गर्वाधिरेशादिति ॥ 27 ॥

I have created this greatly wonderful Universe; I am the Lord of this Brahmānda. Who is there more powerful than me in these three world? When I am Brahmā, transcending all the lokas, then I am blessed; there is no doubt in this. By reason of this vanity I am plunged in this widely extended ocean of Sarīsāra.

अशहां तव पादपूर्जपरागादानर्जीण वे ।

धन्योर्जसीति चयार्थवैर्दानिपुणो जात प्रसादाच्छ्च ते ।

याचे त्वां घबर्षीतिनाशवतुरां मुक्तिप्रदां चेश्रिं ।

हित्वा मोहकृतं महातर्दीनिर्भई त्वद्धक्तियुक्तं कुक १। २८। १।

That now I have been able to get the dust of Thy lotus feet, has now made me really proud; and truly I am blessed today and by Thy grace this manifestation of pride on my part has become quite justified.

अतोर्दे च जातौ विमुक्तः क्वं

स्वां सरोजादये मात्वद्वीक्षित्तां ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

तवाज्ञाकः किंकरोउस्मिति नूनं शिशे

पाहि मां महामरं भवाख्यों ॥ 29 ॥

Thou destroyest the fear of this Sarinsāra and givest Mukti. So, O Goddess! I pray unto Thee that Thou dost cut asunder this iron chain of my delusion, full of great troubles and make me devoted to Thee. O, Auspicious One! I am born from the lotus discovered by Thee; now I am extremely anxious how I can get Mukti. I am Thy obedient servant; I am merged in this delusion of this ocean of world. Save me O Śivā! from this Sarinsāra.

न जानीत ये मानवासते वदन्ति

प्रभुं मा तवाढं चरित्रं पवित्रम् ।

यजेतीह ये वायकाः स्वर्गकामा

न ते ते प्रभावं विद्वेलये कामम् ॥ 30 ॥

Those who do not know Thy character, think that I am the Creator and Lord of this Universe; those, who do not worship Thee and worship Indra and other Devas and perform sacrifices to attain Heaven are certainly ignorant of Thy glory. O Prime Māya! Thou art the Eternal Mahā Māya! It is Thou that dost want to play this world play, and for that purpose hast created me as Brahma.

त्वया निर्मितोर्ह विधित्य पेहतरं

विकर्तुं चतुर्णं विधायादिसर्गम् ।

अर्हे वेधि कोउ-या विवेत्रातियाये

क्षमस्वापराथं त्वहूजारं में ॥ 31 ॥

Then I created these four sorts of beings, engendered by heat and moisture (said of insects and worms), those that are oviparous, those that are sprung from germs or shoots, and those that are born from womb, viviparous and exhibit my pride “That I am Omniscient” So forgive this sin of mine, this my pride.

प्रभं येड्धधा योगमाणं प्रवृत्ता:

प्रकृति मुहा: सामार्थी स्थिता है ।

न जानीत ने ताम मोक्षप्रदं वा

स्पष्टचारितं जातु मातर्पिणे च ३३२।

O Mother! Those ignorant persons blinded by

passion, who take recourse to the eight-fold Yoga and Samādhi and labour under it, do not know for certain, they would get Moksā, if they utter Thy name, even under a pretext.

विचारे पे तत्वसंख्याविधाने

पंदे मोहिता नाम ते संविदाय।

न कि के विमृष्टा भवाक्यों भवानि

त्वमेवासि संसारमुक्तिप्रदा वै ॥ ३३ ॥

O Bhavānī! are they not deluded by error and blinded by passion for this world, who discriminate only the Tattvas (essences) and forget Thy name? For it is Thou that dost give Mukti from this world.

परं तत्वविज्ञानमहीजैर्नैरजे

चानुभूतं त्वज्वेल वे तिकम् ।

निमेषाधामांत पवित्रं चरित्रं

शिवा चात्विका शक्तिरीशित नाम ॥ 34 ॥

O Thou Unborn! Can Hari, Hara, etc. and other ancient persons who have realised the highest Truth, forget, even for a second Thy holy character and Thy names Śivā, Ambikā, Śakti, Iśvari and others? Canst Thou not create, by Thy glance merely, this four-fold creation? In fact, for mere recreation and will, it is Thou that hast made me as a Creator from the earliest times.

न कि कंल सभार्थसि विश्वं

वियातुं दृषीवागुं सर्वे चतुर्ण विष्णम् ।

विनोदार्थीयंविंधियां मां विध्याराविसर्गें

किलेते कंरीषिति कामम् ॥ 35 ॥

Is it not that Thou didst save Hari in the ocean from the two Daityas Madhu and Kaitabha? Is it not again the fact that Thou destroyest Hara who is the great destroyer, when Thou dissolvest the creation? Otherwise why is it that Hara becomes born from my eye-brows at the time of fresh creation?

हरि: पालकः किं त्यसाओं

मथोर्वां तथा कैटभाड्रक्षितः सिसूमध्ये ।

हर: संकेत: किं त्यसाओं न काले

कर्थे मे धुवोभीध्येशास्त जातः॥ ३६ ॥

So Hari is not the Preserver of all. Hara is not

Book III Chapter V

the Destroyer of all. Had they been such, why would they be preserved and destroyed respectively by Thee? So Thou alone art the Creatrix and Preservetrix of all.

न ते जन्म क्रायरि दूई श्रुतं वा

कृत: सम्पावसे न कोउपीह वेद ।

किलाधासि शन्निरल्यमेका भवानि

स्ततःम: सम्पतैतो वोधितासि ॥ 37 ॥

O Bhavānī; no one has heard of or seen Thee taking birth; no body knows whence Thou art born. Thou art, indeed, the One and only Sakti! Only the four Vedas can make one understand Thy Nature. O Mother! It is only by Thy help that I am able to create this creation; Hari, to preserve; and Hara to destroy.

त्वया संयुतोड़ं विकर्तुं समर्थों

हरिशतुर्मेव त्वया संयुतश ।

इरः सम्रह्तुं त्वयैवेह सुतः क्षमा

नाए सर्वे त्वया विग्युक्ताः ॥ 38 ॥

Without Thy aid, We are able to do nothing. There is nobody, in this world, born or that was born or that will be born, who does not become doubtful as we are.

यावरई हरि: शक्रः किं त्वासन्ये

न जाता न सोहौ नो वारभायिन् ।

न मुह्याति केजस्मिन्तावाल्यंतिचित्र

विनोरे विवादास्यदेःल्याणयान् ॥ 39 ॥

This Thine wondrously variegated Universe, full of Thy Lilā, consisting in variety, is the common ground of dispute of the imperfect intellects; who are not deluded here! In this Sarīnāra, full of things, visible and invisible, there is another one who is more ancient than Thee; there is another Highest Person who is Thy substratum.

अकाती गुणस्यष एवादा देवो

निरीहोउनुपाधि: सदैवाकतश।

तवाणीश्ररसे वितिर्णिं चिनोदे

सुसंपश्यतीत्याहुरेवं विधिप्राने: ॥ 40 ॥

If it be argued nicely, it will be seen that there is no other third Person that can be proved as far as evidences or proofs go to measure it.

दूरादृष्टविपेदेडस्म्याकलत्तो वै पुमान्यः ।

नान्यः कौरिप चृतीयोरित प्रमेवे सुविचारिति ॥ 41 ॥

The wise persons, knowing all the laws, declare that there is the One God attributedness, inactive, without any object in view, without any upādhis or adjuncts, without any parts, who is the witness of Thy widely extended Lilā. “One alone exists; and that is Brahman, and there is nothing else.”

न प्रियथा वेदवाक्यं वै कल्पनीयं कदाचन ।

विरोधोरयं मवाप्तवर्ते हृदतं चै विजर्णिक्तः ॥ 4 2 ॥

This is the saying of the Vedas. Now I feel in my mind a doubt as to the discrepancy with this Veda saying. I cannot say that Veda is false.

एकभेवाद्रितीयं यदुङ्ग देवा वदन्ति च ।

सा किं तं वाधासी वा किं सन्देह विवित्वर्ध ॥ 43 ॥

So I ask Thee: “Art Thou the Brahman, the one and the secondless that is mentioned in the Vedas? or Is the other Person Brahma? Kindly solve this doubt of mine.

नि:संशयं न मे चेत: प्रभवत्यिशिज्ञतम् ।

द्वित्वेकत्वचिरोर्समिभ्रमनं शूलतकं मनः ॥ 44 ॥

My mind is not completely free from doubts; this little mind is still discussing whether the Reality is dual or one; I cannot solve myself.

स्वमुखोनापि नन्टैं छेतुमहिंस मामकम् ।

पुषयभोगाच्च मे प्राप्ता संगतितस्त पादयो: ॥ 45 ॥

पुभानासि त्वं की वार्डिस वह विस्तरतो मम् ।

ज्ञालाड़े परमां गर्जिक मुक्तः: स्वा भवमसागत् ॥ 46 ॥

इति श्रीमदैबीभागवते महापुराणी तृतीयकन्के

पख्योरध्या: 11 5 11

So dost Thou say from Thy mouth and cut my doubts asunder. Whether Thou art male or female, describe in detail to me. So that, knowing the Highest Šakti, I be freed from this ocean of Sarīsāra.”

Thus ends the Fifth Chapter of the Third Book as the chanting of hymns by Hara and Brahmā in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevīthāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER VI

On the Powers of the Devi

ब्रहीयाच

इति पृषा मया देबी विनयावन्नेत च ।

उवाच वचनं रलक्षणमाठा भगवती हिं सा ॥ १ ॥

देव्युवाच

सदैकतवं ने घेठोर्सित सर्वैद्धव मापास्य च ।

योउसौ साहमहं योसौ घेँटोर्सित मतिविष्मात् ॥ २ ॥

Brahmā said: “When I thus asked with great humility, Devi Bhagavatī, the Prime Śakti, She addressed me thus in sweet words: There is oneness always between me and the Purusa; there is no difference whatsoever at any time between me and the Purusa (the male, the Supreme Self). Who is I, that is Purusa; who is Purusa, that is I. The difference between force and the receptacle of force is due to error.

आवयोत्नरं सूक्ष्मं यो वेद मतिमानि सः ।

विमुक्तः स तु संसारान्युच्यते नात्र संगयः ॥ ३ ॥

He who knows the subtle difference between us two, is certainly intelligent; he is freed from this bondage of Sarīsāra; there is no manner of doubt in this. The One Secondless Eternal Everlasting Brahma substance becomes dual at the time of creation.

एकमेवात्रितीयं वे बहा निरयं सनातनम् ।

दैनभावं पुनर्वाति काल उत्पल्सुसंजके ॥ ४ ॥

As a lamp, though one, becomes two by virtue of adjuncts; as a face, though one, becomes two, as reflected in a mirror; as one man becomes double by his shadow, so we become reflected into many, by virtue of different Anthah Karanas (mind, buddhi, and aharikāra) created by Māyā.

यथा द्वीपतल्योपायर्गालसंजयते हिंया ।

छावेशदार्णिये वा प्रतिथिंबं त्वासउवयो: ॥ 5 ॥

The necessity of creation, again and again, after the Prākṛt Pralayas is due to the fructification of those Karmas of the Jīvas, whose fruits were not enjoyed before the Pralayas; so when creation again

commences, the above said differences are found to appear; Brahma is the material cause of these changes; without Brahma the existence of Māyā is simply impossible. It is, therefore, that in Māyā and Māyā's action, Brahma is interwoven.

भेद उत्पत्तिकाले वे सर्पार्य प्रधावयत ।

दूरयातृरयिभेदोर्धं द्विविधे सति सर्वथा ॥ 6 ॥

For this reason as many differences are found in Māyā, so many differences exist in Brahma. Māyā and Brahma appear as two and hence all the differences, visible and invisible, have come forth. नाई क्ती न पुंगांश्राई न क्तीर्व सर्गसंक्षेये ।

सर्ग सति विभेदः स्यात्कलितोर्ध विधा पुः: ॥ 7 ॥

Only during creation are these differences conceived. When every thing melts away i.e. there comes the Pralaya or general dissolution, then, I am not female, I am not male, nor I am hermaphrodite. I then remain as Brahma with Māyā latent in it.

अहं बुद्धिरहं श्रीध युति: कीर्ति: सुतीस्तथा ।

श्रद्धा मेधा दया लज्जा क्षुया तृष्णा तथा क्षमा ॥ 8 ॥

क्रान्ति: शान्ति: पियासा च नित्या तन्त्र जारज्ञा ।

विद्याविद्या सुहा वाठ्छा शक्तिश्राजीकरोच्च च ॥ 9 ॥

वसा मज्जा च त्वक्चादं दृष्टिविंगन्तानृता ।

परा मध्या च पर्षतीं नतद्योर्धं विविधाय नः ॥ 10 ॥

During the time of creation I am Śrī (wealth), Buddhi (intellect), Dhṛti, (fortitude), Smṛti (recollection), Śraddhā (faith), Medhā (intelligence), Dayā (mercy), Lajjā (modesty), Kṣudhā (hunger), Trṣṇā (thirst), Kṣamā (forgiveness), Akṣamā (non-forgiving), Kānti (lustre), Śānti (peace), Pipāśa (thirst), Nidrā (sleep) Tandrā (drowsiness), Jarā (old age), Ajarā (non old-age), Vidyā (knowledge), Avidyā (non-knowledge) Sprhā (desires), Vāñchā (desires), Śakti (force), Aśakti (non-force), Vasā (fat), Majjā (marrow), Tvak (skin), Drṣti (sight), Satyāsatya Vākya (true and untrue words) and it is

Book III Chapter VI

that become Parā, Madhyamā, Paśyanti, etc. the innumerable Nāḍīs (tubular organs of the body e.g. arteries, veins, intestines, blood vessels, pulses, etc.); there are three koti and a half Nādīs (35 millions of Nādīs).

किं नाई पश्य संसारो मद्धियुक्त किमस्ति हि ।

संस्मैवाद्यैपलेवे निश्रयं विद्धि पच्चा ॥ १ १ ॥

O Brahmā! See—what substance is there in this Saṃsāra, that is separate from Me? And what can you imagine with which I am not connected?

तैमें निश्रिते क्वेर्विंहीनं किं वद्रव मे ।

तस्माद्धं विधे चात्मसमर्पे वै वित्तासंवम् ॥ १२ ॥

So know this as certain that I am these all forms. O Creator! Say, Is there any such thing, where you will not see my above mentioned positive form? So, in this creation, I am one, and I am many as well, in various forms.

नूनं सर्वेषु देवेषु नानानामध्यरा हहाम् ।

भवामि शनिकार्जेण क्रामे च पराकामम् ॥ 13 ॥

Know this as certain that it is I, that assuming the names of all the various Devas, exist in so many forms of Śaktis. It is I that manifest power and wield strength.

नौरी जाही तथा रौरी वाराही वैधाबी शिवा ।

वारुणी चाय कौवेरी नारासिंही च वासची ॥ 14 ॥

O Brahmā! I am Gauri, Brāhmī, Raudri, Vārahī, Vaiṣnavī, Śivā, Vāruni, Kauberī, Nāra Sinhī, and Vāsavi Śaktis. I enter in every substance in every thing of the nature of effect.

उत्पत्रेषु समस्पेषु कार्येषु प्रविशामि तान ।

क्रोंमि सर्वक्राविणि चिनिति तं चिधाय ते ॥ 15 ॥

Making that Purusa the instrument, I do all the actions (rather Purusa is the efficient cause, the immediate agent).

जले श्रौत तथा बढ़ावीर्ण्यं ज्योतिद्विकारे ।

निज्ञानों के हिमा कर्म प्रभवाति यथा तथा ॥ 16 ॥

I am the coolness in water, the heat in fire, the lustre in the Sun, the cooling rays in the Moon; and thus I manifest my strength.

मया त्वक्ति विधे नूनं स्यन्त्रुं न क्षम भवेत् ।

जीवजातं स संसारे निश्छयोज्यं बुढे त्वियं ॥ 17 ॥

O Brahma! Verily, I tell you this as certain that this universe becomes motionless, if it be abandoned by Me.

अशक: शड़ूरी हेतु दैत्यान्कित मयोष्ठितः ।

शक्तिहीनं नरं बृते लोकेश्वातितुबलम् ॥ 18 ॥

रुद्रहीनं विद्याहीनं न वद्यन्ति जनाः किल ।

शक्तिहीनं यथा सर्वे प्रवदन्ति नराधमम् ॥ 19 ॥

If I leave Śaṅkara, he will not be able to kill the Daityas. A very weak man is declared to be as without any strength; he is not said to be without Rudra, or without Viṣṇu, nobody says like this; everyone says, he is without strength, without Śakti. पतितः स्वतितो भीतः शानतः शुज्वग ततः । अशकः प्रोचते लोके नाहतः कोपि कवणे ॥ 20 ॥

Those who get fallen, tumbled, afraid, quiet, or under one's enemies are called powerless; no one says that this man is Rudraless and so forth.

तिद्रिक कारणं शक्तिर्यर्थां त्वं च सिसुक्षसि ।

भविता च यदा सुतः शक्यता कर्ता तदार्यस्तिथम् ॥ २ ॥

So the creation that you perform, know Sakti, power to be the cause thereof. When you will be endowed with that Sakti, you will be able to create this whole Universe.

तथा हरित्णा शम्भुस्तधौंज्ञाय विभावसुः ।

शगरी सूर्यो यमस्त्वहा कशण: पवनस्तथा ॥ 2 2 ॥

Hari, Rudra, Indra, Agni, Candra, Sūrya, Yama, Viśvakarmā, Varuna, Pavana, and other Devas all are able to do their karmas, when they are united respectively with their Śakti.

धरा स्थिता तदा धर्तुं शक्तिकृता यदा भवेत् ।

अन्यथा चेहरात्ता स्यात्रमागणोक्ष धारणे ॥ 23 ॥

This Earth, when united with Śakti, remains fixed and becomes capable to hold all the Jivas and beings. And if this Earth be devoid of force, She cannot hold an atom even.

तया शेपस्तथा कुमी वि:०ःये सर्वे च दिमाजाः ।

मयुक्तावैसमर्थस्यानिकाव्याणिसाधितुम्। 24 ॥

"Thus Ananta, Kūrma and all the other elephants

of the eight points of the compass, become able to do their respective works, only by My help (when united with Me, the Force).

जलं विवामि सकलं संहारामि विन्यावसून ।

पवनं संभयामध्य यदिष्ठामि तथायरम् ॥ 25 ॥

तत्वानां चैव सर्वां कदापि कमती.द्व व

असतां भावसन्देः कतव्यो न कदाचन ॥ 26 ॥

कदापितूगाभाव: स्यात्यप्रेसापाव एव वा ।

भृस्वेडु कणालेपु घटाभावे यव तथा ॥ 27 ॥

O Lotus born! If I wish, I can drink all the fire and waters today and I can hold wind in check. I do whatever I wish. If I say that I am creating this world then the inconsistency arises thus: "When I am everything, then I being eternal, all this universe, made up of Prapañca, becomes eternal." (Whereas this universe is not eternal in the sense that it is changing). If it were said that this universe is different from Me, then My saying that I am everything becomes inconsistent." Thinking thus, do not plunge yourself in the doubt as to the reality and origin and separateness of the non-eternal universe. For that is unreal, how can that come into existence? The unreal substances can never come into existence; as the child of a barren woman, the flowers in the sky are simply absurd. What is real can only be born. In discussing about origin, birth, etc. the appearance and disappearance of real things is called their birth and dissolution. In the cold of earth exists the previous existence of the jar and this is the cause of the appearance of the jar; the disappearance of the jar exists in the jar; hence this disappearance is the cause of the destruction of the jar. Thus the appearance and disappearance of the causal eternal things are called the Origin and Parlaya. Similarly, in discussing on the causal nature, there does not arise any inconsistency in My being everything.

अशाय पृथिवी नास्ति क्व गतेति विचारणे ।

संज्ञाता इति विज्ञेया अस्यास्तु परमाणवः ॥ 28 ॥

So there is nothing to fear. In discussing about the reality of effects, this is to be conceived, that today there does not exist here the earth in the form of jar, if it is destroyed, where it has gone?

गश्रतं क्षीणिकं शृन्य निव्यानियं सकतुंकम् ।

अहूकारायिमं चैव सपन्नदेवैर्विवहितम् ॥ 29 ॥

The conclusion is that the earth in the form of jar exists in atoms. O Brahman! All substances eternal, existing for a moment only, the void, and the substances of the nature, real and unreal both, all are due to a cause. Ahankāra is born first among them.

गृहाणाज महतचमहश्रास्तदुळवः ।

ततः सर्वाणि भूतानि रचयस्व यथा पुरा ॥ 30 ॥

Thus substances are of seven kinds: Mahat, etc. O Unborn One! Mahatattva first arises from Prakrti; from Mahatattva springs Ahaṅkāra; and from ahaṅkāra arises other substances. Thus, in this order, you go on creating this Universe.

त्रजनुं खानि धिष्ण्यानि विरध्य निवसन्तु च: ।

स्वानि स्वानि च कार्याणि कुर्वैतु देवभाविताः ॥ 31 ॥

O Brahmā! Now you better go to your respective places, and after crc. 'ing the Universe, remain there and perform your respective functions ordained by Prārabdha.

गृहाणीम विधे शर्कि सुकर्ण चाह्हासिनीम् ।

महासरस्तीं नाम्ना रजोगण्यतां वरम् ॥ 32 ॥

Take this beautiful great Śakti Mahā Sarasvatī, full of Rajoguna, and of a smiling nature.

श्रताम्पर्यतं दिव्यां दिव्यभूषणभूषिताम् ।

वरासनसमारकां क्रीताथं सह्चारिणीम् ॥ 33 ॥

This Śakti, wearing white clothes, adorned with divine ornaments and sitting on Varāsana, will always be your playmate.

एषा सह्चरी नित्यं भविष्यिति वराङ्गना ।

माजससन्ध्या विषूर्ति मे मत्वा पूज्यतना विष्यम् ॥ 34 ॥

This beautiful woman will always be your boon companion; consider Her as My vibhūti (manifestation of power), and so most worshipful. Never show any sort of disrespect towards Her.

Book III Chapter VI

गच्छ त्वमनया सार्थ सत्यलोकं बतायुः ने।

वीजाच्छतुर्विंधं सर्वे मसुत्यादव साम्यन्तः ॥ 35 ॥

तिङुकौशोक्ष आवैसतः सहिताः कर्मिभितया ।

वर्तेन संस्थिताः काले तनकुक त्वं यथा पुरा ॥ 36 ॥

Take Her and go immediately to Satyaloka; and from the seed of Mahatattva, create the fourfold beings from these. The subtle bodies (Linga śarīra) and Karmas are remaining mixed up with each other. Separate them, as before, duly, in due time.

कालकर्मवधावाखे: कारणै: सकलं जगत् ।

स्वभावसूगपौरुक्ते पूर्वस्वसारचारम् ॥ 37 ॥

Now go on as before and according to Kāla (time), Karma, and Svabhāva (nature), join them with their respective attributes (sounds and other qualities); in other words bestow fruits according to their guṇas and Karmas (Prārabdhas), and to the time when these fruits are due.

माननीस्वस्या विष्ण: पूजनीयश्छ सर्वतः ।

सत्यगुणधानावहिधिकः सर्वतः सदा ॥ 38 ॥

Visnu is prominent in Sattvaguna and hence superior to You. So You should always respect and worship Him.

यदा यदा हिं कार्यं को भविष्यति दरत्ययम् ।

करिष्यति पृथिव्यां वे अवतारं तदा हरि: ॥ 39 ॥

Whenever any difficulty will come to you, Visnu will come down on earth to fulfil your ends.

तिर्यनोवावयान्य मानुर्गी तनुमाशितः ।

दानावनां विनागं वे कौर्यति जनादं: ॥ 40 ॥

Janārdana Visnu will sometimes be born in the wombs of men and destroy the Dānavas.

भवोदयं ते सहायघ भविषयित महावलः ।

सपुर्णादा सुरान्यसांविहरस्य यथासुखम् ॥ 41 ॥

श्राण: श्रिन्या वैश्या नान्यवै: सद्विभीः ।

यजिखनि वियानेन सर्वान: सुसमाहितः ॥ 42 ॥

The highly powerful Mahā Deva, too, will help you. Now create the Devas and enjoy as you like. The Brāhmaṇas, Kṣaṭtriyas, and Vaiśyas will worship you, with devotion, in various sacrifices, endowed with due sacrificial fees.

नमानोच्चारणासर्वे मवेधु सकलैयु च ।

सदा तृणतश सतुश पविष्यध्वं सुरा: किल ॥ 4 3 ॥

शिवश्र माननीयो वे सर्वेधा यतभोगुणः ।

यज्ञावैयुं सर्वेधु पुवनीय: प्रयतन्तः ॥ 4 4 ॥

All the Devas will be always satisfied when my name “Svāha” will be uttered in the sacrificial oblations and ceremonies. Śiva, the incarnate of Tamo gunā will be revered and worshipped by all persons in every sacrifice.

यदा पुनः सुराणों वे भयं दैत्याद्विधिति ।

गक्त्वो मे तदोत्यज्ञ हीर्धनित् सुविधातः ॥ 4 5 ॥

वाराही वैश्वायो नौरि नारसिंही सदाशिजा ।

एताङ्गान्याक कार्याणि कृत्य कं कमलोद्ध्य ॥ 4 6 ॥

When the Devas will be frightened by the Daityas, then Vārahī, Vaisnavī, Gaurī, Nāra Sirinhi, Śacī, Šivā and My other Śaktis will take excellent bodies and destroy your fear.

नावक्षामियं मन्यं बीज्यायन्युं सदा ।

जपन्स्वाणी कार्याणि कृक त कमलोद्य ॥ 47 ॥

So, O Lotus-born! Be at your ease and do work. You utter and repeat my nine-lettered mantra with Bijā and Dhyāna and do your work.

मन्त्राणामुनेजये दैव ते जानीहि महामते ।

हदये ते सदा धार्यः सर्वकामार्थसिद्ध्ये ॥ 48 ॥

O highly intelligent one! This nine-lettered mantra is the best of all the mantras. You are to keep this mantra, within your heart, for the accomplishment of all your ends.

इनुकुला मां जगन्माता हरिं प्राह रुष्थिमिता ।

विष्णो बज गृहाधोमां महातर्षमी मनोहाग् ॥ 49 ॥

Thus saying to me, Bhagavati smiled and began to say to Viṣṇu: “O Viṣṇu! Take this beautiful Mahā Lakṣmī and go.

सदा वक्ष:स्थले स्थाने भविता नज संशय: ।

श्रीद्वारा ते नया दत्ता शक्ति: सर्वांद्यि शिवा ॥ 50 ॥

She will always reside within your breast; there is no doubt in this. This all auspicious giving Śakti I give to you for your enjoyment.

त्वयेयं नावमन्तव्या माननीया च सर्वदा ।

लक्ष्मीनारायणाख्योयंयोगोविवहितोमया। 51 ॥

जीवनार्थ कृता यज्ञ देवानां सर्वथा मया ।

अधिरोधेन सईन वर्तित्वं तिधिः सदा ॥ 52 ॥

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

You should always shew respect to Her; never show hatred or contempt. For the good of the world, I unite thus Lakṣmī and Nārāyaṇa. For your sustenance I create Yajña. You three will act together in harmony unanimously.

तं च वेधा: शिवस्तेते देवा मदुगुपम्भवा: ।

मान्या: पूच्याश्रु सर्वेभं पशिव्यनि न संशया: ॥ 53 ॥

You, Brahmā and Śiva are my three Devas, born of my Guṇas. You three will undoubtedly be respected and worshipped by the world.

ये विषेदं करिथ्यिति मानवा मुह्चोतसः ।

निरयं ते गाम्यन्ति विपेदात्राजर संशय: ॥ 54 ॥

यो हीर: स शिका: साक्षादा: शिका: सच्यं हरि: ।

एतयोभैद्मातिष्ठत्रकाय भवेत्रः ॥ 55 ॥

The stupid man who find any difference between you three, will go to hell; there is no doubt in this. He who is Hari, is Śiva; He who is Śiva, is Hari; to make difference between these will lead one to hell. तथेव द्रुविणो जेयं नारा कार्य विचारणा ।

अपरो रुणपेदोरस्ति शृणु युणिणो ब्रवीमि ते ॥ 56 ॥

मुख्य: सत्त्वगुप्ततेउत् वरमावार्थिचितने ।

नौणत्वेउपि परी ख्याती रजोगुणतामोगुणी ॥ 57 ॥

लक्ष्या सह क्विकारेयु नानाभेदेयु सर्वैत ॥

रजोगुणगुतो भूत्वा विहरल्याना सह ॥ 58 ॥

So Brahmā is one and the same with Śiva and Viṣṇu; there is no manner of doubt in this. O Viṣṇu! But there are other differences in their Gunas; I will tell this; listen, as far as meditation of the Supreme Self is concerned you will have Sattva Guna predominant within you; and Rajo Guna and Tamo Guna will be secondary. In various other pursuits and Vikāras (changes) better have Rajo Guna with Lakṣmī and always enjoy Her.

वार्षीजें कामराजं च मायावीजं तृतीयकम् ।

मनोउयं त्वं रामकान महत: परमार्थै: ॥ ५९ ॥

O Lord of Rama! I give you Vākbīja, Kāmabīja, and Māyābīja that will lead you to the highest end.

गृहीता जप ते नियं विहरस्य ययासुखम् ।

न ते मृत्युभयं विज्ञाने न कालग्रभयं भयम्। 6 0 ॥

Take this Mantra and repeat it and enjoy as you

like. O Viṣṇu! By this, danger of death, caused by Kāla, will never come to you.

यावदेष विहारो मे भविष्यति सुनिश्रयः ।

संहरिष्यामहं सर्वे यदा विश्धं चराचरम् ॥ 6 1 ॥

When the creation of this Universe will be completely done I will then destroy this whole thing moving and non-moving. You all will then be dissolved in Me.

भवन्तीपि तदा नूनं लीना भविष्यय ।

सर्तेल्योर्ध सदा मनः कामदो मोक्षत्सतया ॥ 6 2 ॥

You should add pranava to this mantra with Kāmabīja leading to Mokṣa and repeat it always with auspicious motives.

उद्योधिन च संयुक्तः कर्तेल्यः शुभमिष्ठता ।

कारयित्वाद येकुंटं वस्तव्यं पुरुषोत्तम ॥ 6 3 ॥

विश्रस्य यथाकामं चिन्तयन्मां सनातनीम् ।

O Puruşottama! Build your Vaikuntha-puri; live there and think of this My Eternal Form and enjoy as you like.

ब्रहोावच

इत्युक्लवा वासुदेवं सा सिगुणा प्रकृति: परा ॥ 64 ॥

निर्गुणा शक्ररं देवमोविद्युतं चवः ।

Brahmā said: Saying thus to Vāsudeva, that Higher Prakṛti Devī, who is all of the three Gunas and yet transcending them, began to address Mahā Deva, the Deva of the Devas, in sweet words, thus:

देव्याच

गृहाण हरगौरी त्वं महाकालीं मनोहामू ॥ 65 ॥

कैलासं कार्यित्वा च हविरस्व यथासुद्यम् ।

मुख्यस्तमोगुणस्तेउन्य गोगी सचराजोगुणी ॥ 66 ॥

विहासुरुनाशर्ष रजोगुणतमोगुणी ।

“O Śānkara! Accept this beautiful Mahā Kālī Gauri, build a new Kailāśa city and live there happily. Your primary Gunas will be Tamas; Sattva and Rajas will be your secondary Gunas. Have recourse to Rajo and Tamo Gunas while you slay the Asuras and thus wander. O sinless Śānkara! Have recourse to peaceful Sattra Guna, when you reflect on the Supreme Self and practise austerities.

Book III Chapter VI

तपस्तर्न तथा कर्तूं स्मरणं परमात्मनः ॥ 67 ॥

सर्वसच्युगः शान्तो गृहीतव्यः सदानप्रय ।

सद्यां त्रिगुणा यूयं सृष्टिश्वत्यंतकारकाः ॥ 68 ॥

एविवहीर्नि संसारे वस्तु नैवात्र कुत्रचित् ।

You all are for creating, preserving and destroying the Universe; and you are all of the three Gunas. There is no such thing in this world as are devoid of these three Gunas. Every thing, that is visible, is endowed with the three Gunas, and whatever will be or was before cannot exist without them.

वस्तुमात्रु तु व्यदूर्यं संसारे प्रिगुर्ण हि तत् ॥ 69 ॥

दूर्यं च निरुर्णं लोके न पृतं नो भविष्यति ।

निर्गुण: परमात्माउसी न तु दूर्यः कदाचन ॥ 70 ॥

सुगुण निरुगणा चाहं समये शुक्रोतमा ।

Only the Supreme Self is without these Gunas; but He is not visible. O Śaṅkara! I am the Parā Prakṛti; at times I appear with Gunas; and at other I remain without any Gunas.

सदार्डं कारणं शम्पो न च कार्यं कदाचन ॥ 7 1 ॥

सगुण कारणवाद्ये निर्गुण पुरुषांतिके ।

O Śambhu! I am always of the causal nature; never I am of the nature of effect. When I am causal, I am with Gunas; and when I am before the Highest Puruṣa, I am, then, without any Gunas (on account of my remaining in the state of equilibrium (Sāmyāvasthā)).

महत्तचमहूत्रो गुणा: शब्दाद्यस्तथा ॥ 72 ॥

कार्यकारणशेष संसरेत त्वहर्सिण् ।

सुद्धुतस्वहंकारसेनाहं कारणं शिवा ॥ 73 ॥

अहूबार्ध मे कार्यं सिगणोजीसी प्रतिद्धतः ।

अहूबारामहन्तत्वं बुद्धि: सा परिकीर्तिता ॥ 74 ॥

महत्तचं हे कार्यं स्वादुहंकारी हे काराणम् ।

Mahattattva, Aahirākāra, and sound, touch, etc. all the Guṇas perform the work of Saṃsāra, day and night, each preceding one being the cause each subsequent one being the effect; never do they cease in their activities. From the Reality (Sat vastu) springs Aharikāra (Avyakta); therefore, I am of the nature of causalty; again Aharikāra is embodied

with the three Guṇas, and so the Pundits call it as an effect of mine. From Aharikāra arises Mahatattva; this is denominated as Buddhi. So Mahatattva is the effect and Aharikāra is its cause. From Mahatattva arises again another Aharikāra; from this second Aharikāra arise the five Tanmātrās or the subtle elements.

तन्मात्राणि तर्वहाकारानुद्यतीं सदैव हि 175 ॥

कारणं पझभृतानां तानि सर्वसमुद्धे ।

From these five Tanmātrās, the five gross elements arise after a process called Pañcikarāṇa. From the Sāttvika part of the five Tanmātrās, arise the five organs of perception; from their Rājasik part, the five organs of action come; from their Pañcikarāṇa, come the five gross elements sixteen things come into existence.

कर्मेन्द्रियाणि पडीव पढ़ ज्ञानेश्रियाणि च ॥ 76 ॥

महाप्रतानि पडीव मनः घोडगमेव च ।

कार्य च कारणं चैव गुणोटयं घोड़गात्मकः ॥ 77 ॥

परमात्म पुमानाठो न कार्य न च कारणम् ।

These organs of perception, etc., and other effects together with the Mahā bhūtas form one Ganga, composed of the sixteen categories. The original Puruṣa is the Supreme Self; He is neither cause nor is He any effect.

एवं समुद्रः शम्भो सर्वेभागत्सम्भये ॥ 78 ॥

संक्षेपेण मया प्रोक्तस्व तत्र समुद्रवः ।

O Śambhu! At the beginning of the creation, all the above things are born in the way already indicated. Thus I have described to you, in brief, about creation.

ब्रजंच्छ विमानेन कार्यार्थ मम सत्तामे ॥ 79 ॥

सरणाङ्गरांन तुर्थ यंत्रये इंचिमे स्थिते ।

सर्तेन्वार्डं सदा देण: परमात्मा सनातन: ॥ 80 ॥

उपयो: सरणायेल कार्यसिद्धरसंगयम् ।

O Devas! Now get up in your air craft and go to your respective places and fulfil your respective duties. Whenever you get into any dire distress, then remember Me; I will appear before you. O Devas! You should remember always the Eternal

Supreme Self and Me. When you will remember us both, all your actions, will, no doubt, be crowned with success.

ब्रहीवाच

इत्युक्त्वा विससर्जीस्मादत्त्वा शक्तीः सुसंस्कृताः ॥ 81 ॥

विषयोद्ध प्र महातक्ष्मी महाकर्ति शिवाय च ।

महासरस्वती महं स्थानातासामहिसर्जिताः ॥ 82 ॥

स्थलान्तं समासाधत ते जाताः पुरुषा वयम् ।

चिन्तयन्तः स्वक्षो ततृष्यावं परमादुतम् ॥ 83 ॥

Brahmā said: “Bhagavati Durgā gave us Śakti, full of Divine beauty and lustre; She gave Mahā Lakṣmī to Viṣṇu, Mahā Kālī to Śiva, and Mahā Sarasvatī to me and bade good bye to us. Thus given farewell to by the Devi, we three went to another place and were born as males. We thought of the very wonderful nature and influence of the Devi and we got upon divine aircraft.

विमानं तत्समासाय संकलास्त्र वे प्रय: ।

न द्वीपोउसी न सा देवी सुधास्थिसुत्येव च ।

पुन्द्रैंं विमानं वै ततासाधिनं चान्यथा ॥ 84 ॥

When we ascended, we saw there was no Manidvīpa, there was no Devi, there was no ocean of nectar, nothing whatsoever. Save our aircraft we did not see anything.

आसाध तत्मिन्वितते विमाने

प्राणा वयं पड़्जसन्धिये च ।

महापाँचे यत्र हर्ती दुरत्ययं

भूरात्रिणा ती मधुकैटभाख्यों ॥ 85 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयकन्ये

फर्उ3प्रथाय: 11 6 11

We then got into our wide aircraft and reached there where Viṣṇu killed the two indomitable Daityas, in the great ocean, where I was born from the lotus.

Thus ends the Sixth Chapter of the Third

Book on the description of the Devi's

Vibhūtis (powers) in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER VII

On Creation

बढ़ोवाच

एवंप्रभाला सा देरी मया दूर्भाउव चिणुना ।

शिशेनापि महाभाग तास्ता देल्य: पृथक्यघक्ष. ॥ १ ॥

Brahmā said: Nārada! Thus we three I, Viṣṇu, and Mahādeva saw that highly eflugent Goddess: we also saw separately Her attendant goddesses, one after another, that form, as it were, a veil to her? (Who were also preeminently grand.

व्यास उवाच

इत्याकर्ण्यं चितुर्पावेक्यं नारतो मुनिसस्तमः ।

पग्रष्ठ पगमप्रीतः प्रजापतिमिदं वचः ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Nārada, the foremost of the Munis, hearing thus his father's words, was exceedingly pleased and asked "O Grandsire of all the Lokas! Now describe in detail that ancient and indestructible undecaying, unchangeable, eternal Puruṣa, that is Nirguna (free from Prāktiṃ qualities) that you have seen and realised.

नारद उवाच

पुर्जनानाओंद्रविनार्गी यो निर्गुर्णोच्छुलित्यव्यः ।

द्रष्टशेवानुप्नक्षि नतद्वस यितमाह १३ ३ ॥

Father! You have seen the Sakti (the Prime Energy) personified, the Saguna energy, the Supreme Goddess, having hands and feet; but I cannot understand of what kind is that Nirguna Śakti which cannot be seen and which is devoid of all Prākritic qualities.

विरुगा वीक्षिता शक्तिर्मिगुगा कीदूर्णी पितः ।

तत्या सक्षरं मे बृहि पुरुषस्य च पश्च ज १ ४ १।

O Lotus-born! Be good enough to describe to me the real nature of that Prakṛti and Puruṣa and thus satisfy me.

यद्यं च मया ततं छेतुप्रीये महतपः ।

युधा: सिद्धा महात्यानस्तापस गतमन्यः ॥ ५ ॥

परमात्मा न संप्राप्तो मयाउसी दृष्टिगोश्रः ।

पुनः पुनस्तप्तीयं कृतं तत्र प्रजापते ॥ ६ ॥

Book III Chapter VII

O Lord of Creation! I practised severe austerities in Śvetadvīpa (white island), so that I might realise and see the Nirguṇa Highest Self and the Nirguṇa Śakti, the Supreme Goddess; I saw there many other Mahātmās (high class spiritual persons) who attained siddhis (supernatural powers) practise Tapasyā with their passions and anger conquered. But I did not realise nor did I see anything about that Nirguṇa Highest Self. Father, I was not despaired; again and again I continued with my ascetic practises; but still I failed.

भवता सुगृणा शक्तिर्हीता तात मनोराम ।

निर्गृणा निर्गृणाश्रेख कौद्वुरी तो द्वद्वस मे ॥ ७ ॥

Father, you have been so successful as to see that beautiful Śakti with qualities; I have heard about Her from you, but how and of what sort, is that invisible attributed less energy as well as that Nirguna Purusa? Please narrate and explain all these and satisfy my desires that always reign in my breast.

व्यास उवाच

इति पृथः पिता तेन नारदेन प्रजापति: ।

उवाच वचनं तध्यं सितमद्धवे पितामहः ॥ 8 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus asked by Nārada, the Lord of creation, the grandsire of the Lokas, smiled, and began to speak the truth in the following words:

ब्रह्मोवाच

निरुणस्य मुने रूपं न भवेद्वृद्धिणोचम् ।

दूरयं च नधरं यस्माद्रूसं दूरयते कवम् ॥ 9 ॥

“O best of Munis! The form of the Nirguna Puruṣa (the Supreme Spirit beyond the Prākṛtic qualities) cannot exist or be visible; for every thing that comes within the range of sight is transitory. How can, then, that Eternal Spirit have form and how can He become visible!

निर्गुण दुर्गमा शक्तिनिर्गुणं तवा पुमान् ।

ज्ञानपार्ये पुनीनां तु घावनीयी तथा पुनः ॥ 10 ॥

O Nārada! The Nirgūna Energy or Nirgūna Purūsa comes not easily within the range of knowledge; but both of them can be realised by

the Munis in their meditation in their consciousness.

अनादिन्धिनी विद्धि सदा प्रकृतिपृष्णी ।

विश्वासनामियान्यौ तो नाविश्वासेन कर्हिंचित् ॥ ११ ॥

Prakrti and Puruṣa have no beginning nor end; they can be realised only through faith; those that have no faith can never realise them.

चैतन्यं सर्वभूतेषु यतादिक्ति परात्मकम् ।

तेज सर्वंगमं निल्चं नानाभावेषु नात्र ॥ १ २ ॥

Nārada! The universal consciousness, that is felt in all the beings, know that as the Highest Self; the Energy that is universal and is seen always in all the beings, know that as the Highest Self.

तं च तां च महाभाग व्यापको विद्धि सर्वेगी ।

तान्थां विहिति संसरेन न किंचिद्रसूत विहते ॥ 13 ॥

O blessed one! That Puruṣa and Prakṛti pervade everywhere and exist in all the things; in this Universe nothing can exist without the presence of both of them.

ती विचियों सदा देहे मिश्रीमृती सदा उध्ययो ।

एकसधी विद्यात्मानी निपुणी निर्मलावृषी ॥ १ ४ ॥

Both of them are the highest intelligent self, nirguna (free from all material qualities), without any tinge of impurity, and undecaying. The one form that is a combination of these two is always to be meditated upon in the heart.

या शक्ति: पर्यात्माज्ञी सा योजसी परमा मता ।

अन्तर नैतयोः को3पि सूख्मां वेद च नारद ॥ 15 ॥

What is Śakti (energy) is the Highest Self; what is the Highest Self is the Highest Śakti. O Nārada! Nobody can ascertain the subtle difference between these two.

अर्थीत्य सर्वशास्त्राणि वेदसात्माज्ञान्य नारद ।

न जानाति तयो: सूक्ष्मान्तरं विरितं विना ॥ 16 ॥

O Nārada! Merely the study of all the Śāstras and the Vedas with their Āgamas without renunciation does not enable one to ascertain the difference between these two.

अहूबारकृतं सर्व विश्वं स्थावरजकुमम् ।

कर्षे तर्हितु पुत्र भवेत्कल्यशतैरि ॥ १ १ ७ ॥

O Child! This whole universe, moving and non-moving, comes out of Aharīkāra (egoism). How can one ascertain the above difference even if he tries for one hundred kalpas, unless one frees oneself from Aharīkāra.

निर्गुर्ण सगुण: पुर्र कर्ष पश्यति चक्षुपा ।

सगुर्ण च महाबुद्दे चेतसा संविचारच ॥ १८ ॥

The Jivas are Saguna (with qualities), how can the Sagunas see the Nirguna One with their physical eyes? Therefore, O Intelligent one! try to see the Saguna (Brahma) only within your heart (until you free yourself from the material qualities and thus be fit to realise the Nirguna Brahma).

पितेनाच्छादिता जिह्ञा च्ब्छुं धुनिसत्ता ।

कटु पित्त विज्ञानाति सरं रूपं न तत्णा ॥ १९ ॥

गुणैः समावृतं चेतः कंधे ज्ञानाति निर्गुणम् ।

अहक्रौपाद्धे तच्च तिद्धीनं कधं भवेत् ॥ 20 ॥

O best of Munis! If the tongue (organ of taste) and eyes (organ of sight) be affected with over biliousness, the pungent taste and the yellow colour do not appear what it appeared before; so the hearts of Jivas, overpowered with material qualities, are quite unfit for realisation of the Nirguna Brahman. O Nārada! That heart again has come out of Ahankāra; how can then that heart be free from Ahankāra?

यावय रुणविछ्छेदसतावताहर्जनं कुतः ।

तं पश्यति तदा चिते यदार्डंकारवर्वितः ॥ 21 ॥

Until one become able to cut asunder all connections with qualities, the seeing of that Nirguna Brahma is impossible. No sooner one is totally free from Aharīkāra, than the Nirguna Brahma is at once seen by him within his heart."

नारद खाच

स्वकरो देवदेवग जयाणावे विसतगत ।

गुणानां यत्स्वकाणोस्त हाहूज्ञार्थिककृपः ॥ 2 2 ॥

सात्कको राजस्थेव तामसँध तथापः ।

विपेदेन स्वक्षाणि वदस्य पुरुषोतम ॥ 2 3 ॥

यज्ञाला विगमुच्येउई ज्ञानं तद्धव मे प्रभो ।

गुणानां लक्षणान्येव वित्तानि विभागगः ॥ 24 ॥

Nārada said: “O Best of the Devas! Ahanikāra is three-fold, Sāttvik Rājasik and Tāmasik; describe in detail the differences between these three subdivisions as well the real nature of the Gunas. Also describe to me about that knowledge, knowing which will lead to my salvation. Also describe, in detail, the characteristics of the several Gunas, in due order.”

ब्रह्मोवाच

त्रयाणां शक्तयित्तसन्तद्ब्रवीम त्वानघ ।

ज्ञानशफि: क्रियाशक्तिरक्षणिक्तधायणि ॥ 25 ॥

साचिकस्य ज्ञानशक्ती: राजसस्य क्रियामिका ।

द्व्यशक्तितामसस्य तिचक्ष क्रवितास्ति ॥ 26 ॥

तेषां कार्याणि वध्यामि श्रणु नारत तत्ततः ।

तामस्या द्व्यस्थगतैंक शब्द्यर्षगसमुद्रवः ॥ 27 ॥

रूपं सखा नध्यघु तन्यानाणि प्रवघते ।

Brahmā said: “O Sinless one! The energy of Ahariñkāra is of three kinds: Jñāna Śakti, Kriyā Śakti, and Artha or Dravya Śakti. The power by which knowledge is produced or obtained is the Sāttvik Ahariñkāra; the power by which action or activity or motion is produced is the Rājasik Ahariñkāra; and that by which the material things or objects of five senses are generated is called the Tāmasic Ahariñkāra.

गर्दीक्षणगाफांश वायु: स्पर्गिणतथा ॥ 28 ॥

सुरुधिकंपुणोनिर्ऋ जलं सर्याणामकम् ।

पृथी गन्धगुणा जेमा सुक्ष्माण्योतिन नारद ॥ 29 ॥

दर्शौतानि मिलित्वा तु र्व्यशिक्तुतानि चै ।

तामसाहूक्रानः स स्वास्तर्गसदनुवृतिकः ॥ 30 ॥

O Nārada! thus I described to you, in due order, the threefold Aharñākas. Now I describe to you their merits and working in detail; hear. Out of the Dravya Śakti of the Tamasic Aharñaka come sound, touch, form, taste and smell. From these five qualities, the five Tanmātrās or the five subelements (primary atoms) are produced.

Sound is the quality of Akāsa (ether); touch is the quality of Vāyu (air); the form is the quality of

Book III Chapter VII

Agni (fire); the taste is the quality of Jala (water); and the smell is the quality of earth.

O Nárada, these ten gross and subtle materials can, when combined, become endowed with power to work out results in the shape of earth, water, fire etc. and when the Pañcikaraṇa process is combined, the building of the whole cosmos takes place as a natural consequence of the Tāmasa Ahariñkara, endowed with the energy of generating material substances.

राज्यास्थ क्रियाणतेकृत्वज्ञानि शृणुष्य चे ।

शोत्रं त्वरसना चछुपर्णीचे चेच चछापम् ॥ 31 ॥

ज्ञान्रैद्यायी चैजानि तथा कर्मैन्द्रयाणि च ।

वावमाणिपादपायुश गृहांतानि च पछ्र ते ॥ 32 ॥

प्राणोउपानछ ध्यानछ समानोदानावयव: ।

पडइण मितिलेव वराजस: सर्ग उदयते ॥ 33 ॥

साधानानि किलेतानि क्रियाशक्तिवाचि च ।

उपादानं किलेतेपां चिवन्दुपुक्तिरूपये ॥ 34 ॥

Now hear what are produced by the Rājasic energy. The five organs of hearing, touch, taste, sight, and smell (ears, skin, tongue, eyes and nose) called the five Jīnāendriyas (organs of senses); mouth, hands, feet, anus and the organs of generation called the five Karmendriyas (organs of action); and Prāna, Apāna, Vyāna, Samāna, and Udāna, the five Vāyus. The creation out of these fifteen substances is called the Rājasic energy. Nārada! All these organs of senses and actions endowed with the Kriyā Sakti, called the Karanas and the materials fashioned out of them are called the Cidānuvrīti or Māyā.

ज्ञानशक्तिसमावुक्ता: सालिकावच समुद्धाव: ।

दिगो वायुश सूर्यं क्रल्याश्रिज्ञावयि ॥ 35 ॥

ज्ञानंद्रियाणं पझानां पझाधिहावृदेवतः ।

चन्त्रो बढ़ा तथा रूरः क्षेजरक्षा चतुर्वेकः ॥ 36 ॥

इन्त: कर्णाणाख्यस्य बुद्वायेदेक्षाधिद्वैवतः ।

चत्वार्वैव तया प्रोक्ता: किलाधिहाणुदेवतः ॥ 37 ॥

यमसा सह चैतानि नूनं पछदरैशे लु ।

सान्तिकायसुर्गोपैंड सानिकायाल्यःप्रकीर्ति: ॥ 38 ॥

O Nārada! From the Śāttvik Aharinkāra are produced the five presiding rulers of the five internal organs named Dik (quarters), Vāyu, Sun,

Varuṇa, and the twins Aśvini Kumāras and the four presiding rulers of the four-fold division of Antahkarana (Buddhis, Manas, Aharinkāra and Citta) named Moon, Brahmā, Rudra, and Kṣetrajna. Thus the above five organs of senses, the five organs of action, the five Vāyus and mind, these sixteen substances are reckoned as the Sātvik creation.

स्वुलसूक्षापिदेवेनेते कै रूपे परमात्मनः ।

ज्ञानकरं निराकारं निवादां तत्प्रवक्षते ॥ 39 ॥

साधकस्य तु ध्यानादौ स्थूलकरं प्रचक्षते ।

गरीरं सुक्ष्ममेदेवे पुरुषस्य प्रक्रितितम् ॥ 40 ॥

O Child! The Highest Self has two forms; one gross and the other subtle. The formless Self; the Consciousness incarnate, as it were, is the first from. The Seers consider this formless self to be the primary cause (the ultimatum) of all this phenomenal cosmos. (This is only for the best qualified Jñānis, not for others).

The Second Form is the Gross Form for the meditation of the second class qualified persons; thus the sages say. This second form of the Supreme Goddess is conditioned by inherent Māyā (time, space and causation); this is also divided into gross and subtle, according as it is the outer or inner body of the second form (and the form suited for the meditation of the third class and the second class devotees.

मम चैव शगरीं वे सूत्रमिवर्षधीयते ।

स्वूलं शगरीं वक्ष्यामि ब्रहण: परमात्मन: ॥ 4 1 ॥

My body is called Sūtrātmā; I will now tell you the gross body of Brahman, the Highest Self. O Nārada! This my body and soul having the nature of a string or thread is called Hiranyagarbha; this is also the gross body of the Paramātman; therefore, the Paramātman together with the Sutrātmā, should also be worshipped. O Nārada! I will now describe to you the outer gross body of Brahman, the Highest Self, hear it attentively; if one hears it with faith and devotion, one is sure to get salvation.

शृणु नाद्य यत्नेन यच्छुत्वा विगप्रभृचते ।

तन्याजाणि पुरोक्तानि भूततूभूमाणि यानि वे ॥ 42 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

पश्रीकृत्य तु तान्येव पशुभूतसमुद्धः ।

पश्रीकरणपोदोर्धं श्रणु संवदतः किन्त ॥ 4 3 ॥

I have mentioned to you before the five subtle elements, called the five Tanmātrās; these, now, when the Pañcīkarana process is done, are converted into the five gross elements. Now hear what the Pañcīkarana process means:

प्रधानं सत्नमात्रामुपादाय मनस्याये ।

कल्येच्च तथा तद्य यथा भवति चोदकम् ॥ ४४ ॥

शिष्यार्ची बेवा भूतानामोगान्कृत्वा पृव्यक्युधक् ।

उदके मिश्रयेच्छांगान्कृते रसमये ततः ॥ 45 ॥

Suppose you are to create the gross elements of water. Divide into two equal parts the subtle element of water; divide also the other 4 elements into two equal parts respectively. Now set apart the first half of each of the five elements; divide the second half of each of the elements into four equal parts. Mix the first half of each of the elements with each of the fourth part of the other four elements; and you get one gross element similarly you get the other four gross elements. Four example: You want to get the gross elements

of water:—With the half of the subtle element ( \( \frac{1}{2} \) ) of water mix the fourth part, of the halves of the other elements of ether, fire, air and earth;

\[

\left\{ \begin{array}{l} \text { Fire   Air   Earth   Ether } \\ \frac {1}{8} + \frac {1}{8} + \frac {1}{8} + \frac {1}{8} \end{array} \right.

\]

you get the gross element of water and so on.

The Pānācīkarana process is clearly illustrated in the following table.

Table

<table><tr><td></td><td>Ether</td><td>Air</td><td>Fire</td><td>Water</td><td>Earth</td></tr><tr><td>Ether</td><td>\( \frac{1}{2} \)</td><td>\( \frac{1}{8} \)</td><td>\( \frac{1}{8} \)</td><td>\( \frac{1}{8} \)</td><td>\( \frac{1}{8} \</td></tr><tr><td>Air</td><td>\( \frac{1}{8} \)</td><td>\( \frac{1}{2} \)</td><td>\( \frac{1}{8} \)</td><td>\( \frac{1}{8} \)</td><td rowspan="2">\( \frac{1}{8} \)</td></tr><tr><td>Fire</td><td>\( \frac{1}{8} \)</td><td>\( \frac{1}{8} \)</td><td>\( \frac{1}{2} \)</td><td>\( \frac{1}{8} \)</td></tr><tr><td>Water</td><td>\( \frac{1}{8} \)</td><td>\( \frac{1}{8} \)</td><td>\( \frac{1}{8} \)</td><td>\( \frac{1}{2} \)</td><td rowspan="2">\( \frac{1}{8} \)</td></tr><tr><td>Earth</td><td>\( \frac{1}{8} \)</td><td>\( \frac{1}{8} \)</td><td>\( \frac{1}{8} \)</td><td rowspan="2">\( \frac{1}{2} \)</td></tr><tr><td>Gross Element 1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr></table>

तथा भूतविभागो च चैत्ये च प्रकाशिते ।

चैत्यन्यस्य प्रशेगान्तु ततप्रहासिति संशयः ॥ 46 ॥

When the five gross elements are thus produced, consciousness then enters into these elements as their presiding deities; next comes the feeling of egoism (I ness) identifying itself with the body thus created out of the five elements. (I am this body and so forth).

प्रतीयामने तेनैव विशेषेणाधिमानतः ।

आदित्यायणो देवो भगवानिति चोच्चते ॥ 47 ॥

This great “I”, the great consciousness, creating and considering the Cosmos as its body is called the Bhagavān, Ādideva, Nārāyana or Vaiśvānara. घनीभूतेज धनातां विषाणे स्यतां गते ।

ब्रद्धिं प्राय युणीक्षोयमैकक्रुणवृद्धितः ॥ 48 ॥

When, by the Pañcīkaraṇa process, the five gross elements, earth, ether, air, etc., are solidified and get their clear definite forms, one, two, three, four, five, qualities are seen to exist in ether, air, fire, water, and earth, respectively.

आकासस्य गुणश्रीक: शब्द एवं न चापर: ।

गब्ब्यसर्गें च वायोश द्वी गुणी परिक्षितिति ॥ 49 ॥

अनः: शब्द्य स्पर्शि कपमेते जयो गुणाः ।

गब्द्यसर्गेकरासाठ्यतो वे जलस्य च ॥ 50 ॥

यर्शगहबरसा रूपं गंथश पृथिविगुणाः ।

एवं मिलितवोगेधी कद्धापाङ्गेयातिनक्तचे ॥ 51 ॥

Thus ether has one quality only—that is sound: the air has got two qualities—sound and touch; the fire possesses three qualities—sound, touch, and form; the water has got four qualities—sound, touch, form and taste; the earth has got five qualities—sound, touch, form, taste and smell, and by the various combinations of these five gross elements, is produced this grand Cosmos, the great body of Brahman.

सर्वे जीवा मितिलिवेब ब्रह्माण्डांशसमुद्धवा: ।

चतुरगीतिलक्षाग्र प्रोक्ता चै नीवजातय: ॥ 52 ॥

Similarly, the sum-total of Jīvās is produced from several parts of the whole Brahmanā; these Jivas are eighty four lakhs; so the sages say.

श्री श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयरकचे

सप्तमोउधाय: 117 11

Book III Chapter VIII

Thus ends the Seventh Chapter of the Third Book of Šrimaddevibhāgvatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses, on the creation and the Tattvas and their presiding Deities.

Note: Of these Jivas, those who are the best qualified, the Uttamādhikārīs, are known as the Brahmañāsa,

Jānaghana Turiyas, as denoted by Om Hrīm; the middlings have their gross, subtle and causal bodies and are called as Brahma Vaīśvānara, Sūtra, Hiranyagarbhas; and the third class is known as Viśva, Taijasa, and Prājñas and forms the body, as it were, of the Brahma. There are others also, animals, etc., in the lowest class.

Book III Chapter VIII

CHAPTER VIII

On the Characteristics of the Gunas

ब्रह्मोचाच

सर्गोंदयं कक्षित्तसात यनुष्ठोर्ज त्वायोरुना ।

गुणानां रूपसंख्यां वै शुण्यैक्रामानस: ॥ १ ॥

Brahmā said: O Nārada! I have described to you what you asked me just now about the creation of this universe, etc. Now hear with attention the colour of the three qualities, as well their configuration and how they are seen to exist.

सन्त्यं श्रीत्याकं त्रेयं सुखात्यीतिसमुखवः ।

आरवं च तथा सत्यं शीचं शब्दा क्षमा धृति: ॥ 2 ॥

अनुकंपा तथा लज्ञा शान्ति: सन्तोष एच ॥

एतैः सत्त्वसीत्तिश्र आयते निश्रला सदा ॥ 3 ॥

The Sattva Guna is the source of pleasure and happiness; and when happiness comes, everthing seems delighting. When integrity, truthfulness, cleanliness, faith, forgiveness, fortitude, mercy, bashfulness, peace and contentment arise in one's heart, know certainly that there has arisen firmly the Sattva Gunas in that man.

श्रोतर्ण तथा सच्चं धर्मे श्रितिकरः सदा ।

सच्छूद्रोत्यादकं नित्यमसच्छूद्रानिवारकम् ॥ 4 ॥

The colour of the Sattva quality is white; it makes one always like religion, and have faith towards good purposes and discard one's tendencies towards bad objects.

सात्चिकी राजसी चैव तामसी च तथापग ।

अद्धातु त्रिविधा प्रोक्ता मुनिनिस्तत्वदर्शिधि: ॥ 5 ॥

The Rsis, the secers of truth classify Śraddhā (faith) under the three headings: Sāttvik, Rājasik and Tāmasik.

राकर्ण राव: प्रोक्तमप्रीतिकारमद्धुतम् ।

अभीतिरु:ख्योगलाढलवेल सुनिश्छिता ॥ 6 ॥

The quality Rajas is of red colour, wonderful and is not pleasant; it is the source of all troubles; there is no doubt in this.

प्रदोषोद्र तथा ग्रौहो मत्सरः सत्मप एव च ।

उक्तकी च तथा नित्रा श्रद्धा तव च राजसी ॥ 7 ॥

मानो मदतमा यावों रजसा किल जायते ।

प्रत्येतवं राजस्वतीर्तैर्वर्णोष्ठ विद्वर्णेः ॥ 8 ॥

The intelligent should understand that Rajas has certainly arisen in him, when his mind is filled with hatred, enmity, quarrelsome feeling, pride, stupification, uneasiness, sleeplessness, want of faith, egoism, vanity and arrogance.

कृष्णवर्ण तम प्रोक्ते मोहनं च विषादकृत् ।

आलस्यं च तथाड़ानां निजा दैन्यं भयं तथा ॥ 9 ॥

विषाद्धेडि कार्णयं कोटिल्यं रोष एव च ।

वैघयां वातिनातिरित्यं परदोषानुदर्शनम् ॥ 10 ॥

प्रत्येलन्तं तमस्त्वेतेतैक्षणै: सर्वथा बुधैः ।

तामस्या अघदया वृक्ते परतायोपपादकम् ॥ 11 ॥

The quality Tamas is of black colour. From Tamas arises laziness, ignorance, sleep, poverty, fear, quarrels, miserliness, insincerity, anger, aberration of intellect, violent atheism, and finding fault with others. The wise should think that Tamas has overpowered him when the above qualities are found to possess him. When this Tamas quality is attended with the Tāmasī faith, then it becomes the source of pain to others.

सस्त्व प्रकाशयित्यां निर्यंतयं रजः सदा ।

संहर्तेयं तमः कामं जनेन शुभमिच्छता ॥ 12 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

The well wishes of Self should manifest in themselves the Sattva qualities, control the Rājasic qualities, and destroy the Tāmasic qualities.

अन्योभायिभावाछेते विर्वयंति परमपरम् ।

तथाउन्योन्याश्या: सर्वे न तिष्ठिति निराश्या: ॥ 13 ॥

These three qualities are always found to remain intermingled with one another, and each of them has always an inherent tendency to overcome the others; and therefore they are always, as it were, at war with one another. They never have a separate existence from one another.

सत्तं न केवलं ब्वापि न रजो न तमसला ।

मिलिताशु सदा सर्वे तेनायोन्याश्रा: स्मृता ॥ 14 ॥

Never is found any where only one Sattva quality to the exclusion of others, the Rajas and Tamas ; similar is the case with the Rajas or Tamas. They remain intermingled and depend on one another.

अन्योयिष्यान्त्वैव विस्तारं कथायामहम् ।

शृणु नगर यज्ञाला मुच्यते भववन्यान्त ।। 15 ॥

O Nārada! Now hear, in detail, which two qualities remain in twins, knowing which, one is freed from this ocean of the transmigration of existence.

सन्तेड़ोत्र न कर्तेब्यो जातेल्युक्ति मया वचः ।

जातं तदनुभुतं यचरित्गतं फले सति ॥ १६ ॥

I have realised these; therefore you ought not to have any uncertainties on these points. The reality of these is especially felt, when it is really understood and when its effects begin to manifest themselves.

श्वजाणादूर्नाव्बे स्वपटोव महामते ।

संस्कानारुभवाच्यैव परित्रातं न जायते ॥ 17 ॥

O high-minded! No one is able to realise these at once; it requires to be heard, and then meditated upon. It also depends on one's natural capability and merits, due to the past actions.

भुतं तीर्थे परिवयं च श्रद्धोत्पत्रा च राजसी ।

निर्नतस्तत तीर्थे वै दूर्ध चैव यथाश्रुतम् ॥ १ ८ ॥

स्नातस्तत्र कृतं कृत्वं दर्त दानं च राजसम् ।

स्थितस्तत्र क्रियकालां रजोगुणासमावुतः ॥ १९ ॥

राग्येश्वात्र निर्मुक्तः: कामकोधीयस्मावुतः ।

पुनेवे गृहं प्राणतो यथापूर्व नवा शिक्षतः ॥ 20 ॥

श्रुतं च नानुपुतं वै तेन तीर्थं मनीश्व ।

न प्राप्ते च फलं यस्माद्वशुतं विद्धि नारद ॥ 21 ॥

Suppose one hears of the sacred places of pilgrimages and is filled with the Rājasic devotion. He goes out to those places and sees what he had heard before. There he performs his ablutions, makes offerings and the Rājasic gifts, stays there for some time; but all this he does under the influence of the Rājasic quality. And when he returns home, he finds himself not free from lust, anger, love and hatred; he remains the same that he was before. Therefore, in this case, O Nārada! a man hears but he does not realize the purifying effects of those holy places. O best of Munis! And when he does not find any benefit from the holy place of pilgrimage, it is equivalent to his not at all hearing of the place.

नियापचं वर्त विद्धि तीर्थेय मुनिसत्तम ।

कृषेः फलं यथा लोके नियज्ञात्रस्य भक्षगण् ॥ 22 ॥

O best of Munis! the effect of visiting the sacred places of pilgrimages is then said to accrue to any individual, when he becomes freed from his sins, just as the fruit of cultivating fields is then said to occur, when the cultivator gets the ripened harvest out of his labour and enjoys the produce of his fields.

पापस्ट्रविकारा ये कामकोधायय: परे ।

लोपो मोहत्सला सुभा द्रेयो रागसताय मदः ॥ 23 ॥

O Nārada! Lust, anger, covetousness, delusion, thirst, hatred, love, vanity, malice, jealousy, non-forgiveness, unrest all these indicate that there is sin; and until these are purged out of one's body and mind, man lives in sin. If the visiting of the sacred places of pilgrimages does not enable one to overcome the above passions, then the labours in going to those places are in vain i.e. those labours merely are the results just as the toil only undergone

Book III Chapter VIII

by the cultivator is his only result, and is not met with any reward when there is no harvest at all.

अस्येष्योःसामोउशीत: पाणान्योतिन नारत ।

न निर्वातिनि देहानुत तावल्यपयुतो नरः ॥ 24 ॥

कृते तीर्थे यद्वेतिनि देहात्र निर्गतिनि चेत् ।

निष्कलः श्रम एवैकः कर्षकस्य यथा तथा ॥ 25 ॥

श्रभाणपीक्षिति क्षेत्र कृष्टा भृमि: सुदुर्गेति ।

उर्ने बीज महर्षे च हिता शून्तिद्वाहा ॥ 26 ॥

अहोरात्र परिसिल्ही रक्षणार्थ फलोसुक : ।

काले सुभन्तु हेमने वने व्याणादिपिभूगण् ॥ 27 ॥

पक्षितं शतपे: सर्वे निराणश्रकु तप: ।

तद्धतीर्थम: पुर्र कष्टदो न फलप्रदः ॥ 28 ॥

Lo! The cultivator takes hard labour to clear his fields and cultivate the hard soil, he then sows the valuable seeds, because this is considered as doing good. Next, in expectation of the harvest, he undergoes a good deal of pains, day and night, to protect his fields and goes down to sleep, in the cold season, in the forest surrounded by tigers and other dangerous animals; but alas! locusts coming eat away and destroy all the crops, to the utter disappointment of the cultivator. All his labours are spent in vain. So, O Nārada! The labour taken by one in going to the holy places yields pain, and pain only, instead of success and happiness.

सत्त्वं समुक्तं जातं प्रवृद्धं शास्त्रर्जनात् ।

वैराग्यं तत्कर्तं जातं तामासांथैवु नारदः ॥ 29 ॥

प्रसहाधिपचार्येव तर्जतसामसी उपे ।

रज: समुक्तं जातं प्रवृत्तं लोपभयोगतः ॥ 30 ॥

तन्तथाधिपचार्येव तमः सच्चे तथा उपे ।

तमस्थोधोक्तं भृत्वा प्रवृद्धे मोहयोगतः ॥ 31 ॥

तत्सच्चरजसी चोपे संगम्याधिपचार्यति ।

वित्तरं कवयामच्य तयाधिपचारीति चे ॥ 32 ॥

When the Sattva quality grows in abundance, as a consequence of reading the Vedānta and the other Śāstras, dispassion comes towards the Rājasic and the Tāmasic qualities and things, and the Sattva quality overpowers the Rajas and Tamas. Similarly, when the Rājasic quality grows in abundance, as a natural consequence of greed and avarice, then it

overpowers Sattva and Tamas; so by delusion, when the Tāmasic quality grows in abundance, it overpowers the Sattva and the Rājasic qualities. O Nārada! I will now speak to you, in detail, about the overpowering of these qualities by one another.

यदा सत्तं प्रवृद्धं वै मतिधर्मं स्थिता तदा ।

न त्रिवतयिते बहाग्वां रजतन्म:समुद्वम्य ।। ३३ ॥

अर्थसत्त्वसमुद्धूतं गृह्वाति च न चान्यथा ।

अनायासकृतं चार्थं धर्मे व्रतं च चाऊछिति ॥ 34 ॥

सात्विकेवेथे भोगेयु कामं वै कुकते तदा ।

राजसेनु न मोक्षार्थ तामसेषु पुनः कुतः ॥ 35 ॥

When the Sattva quality grows in preponderance, the individual rests in religious ideas and things; it no more thinks of those external things, the products of the Rajas and Tamas qualities. Rather it wants to enjoy the Sättvik things; wealth, religious affairs, sacrifices that can be acquired or performed without any trouble. Then that individual yearns after salvation and renounces his pursuit after the Räjasic and Tāmasic objects.

एवं जित्वा रजः पूर्व ततशु तमसे जयः ।

सत्तच्चं पुत्र केवलं पुत्र तथा प्रवाति निर्मितम् ॥ 36 ॥

Thus, O Nārada! first try to conquer the Rajas and then the Tamas; then the Sativa becomes pure.

यदा रज प्रपूर्वे तै व्यक्त्वा धर्पान्यानतान् ।

अन्यधाकुक्ते धर्माध्युद्धां प्राप्त तु राजसीम् ॥ 37 ॥

When the Rājasic quality grows in preponderance, the individual imbibes the Rājasic faith, abandons his own Sanātan Dharma (settled eternal religion) and practises against his religious instructions.

राजसदार्थसंवृद्धिस्तथा भोगसृत्त ज्ञसः ।

सन्तं विगर्भितं तेन तमसह्वाधि निग्रहः ॥ 38 ॥

Under the Rājasic propensities, one is eager to amass wealth and enjoy the Rājasic things. The Rajas drives away the Satva and curbs the Tamas.

यदा तमो विवृद्धूं स्यादुक्तटं सवधपूव है ।

तदा वेदे हन विषायो धर्मशास्ते तदैव च ॥ 39 ॥

श्रद्धो च तामसी प्राय करोते च धनाययम् ।

ग्रौहं सर्वैक कुक्ते न शान्तिमिधाख्छिति ॥ 40 ॥

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

जित्या सत्त्वजड़ीय क्रोधिनो दुमैति: शठः ।

वर्तते कामचारेण भावेषु विततेषु च ॥ 41 ॥

Nārada! So, when the Tāmasic quality grows in preponderance, the faith in the Vedas and in religious Śāstras entirely disappears. Imbibing the Tāmasic faith, the individual squanders away his wealth and is always engaged in quarrels, and petty feelings, envy, violence and never enjoy space. The individual with the Tāmasic quality in excess overpowers the Rājasic and Sātvik qualities and becomes angry, wicked, and a great cheat and does everything, as he likes, without any regards to his superiors.

एकं सत्तं न भवति रजक्षेकं तमतसा ।

सहैवाश्रित्य वर्तै नृगा मिथुनधारिणः ॥ 4 2 ॥

Nārada! Thus you see that, of these three qualities, no one can remain entirely alone, free from the other qualities. These remain always in twos or threes.

रजो विज्ञा न सच्चं स्याद्रकः सच्चं विज्ञा वक्षित् ।

तमो विज्ञा न चैवैते वर्तन्ते पुरुषर्षभः ॥ 4 3 ॥

तमसाध्यां विहितीं तु केवलं न कदाचन ।

सर्वे पिबुनुभभंगी गुणा: कार्यान्तरेषु वे ॥ 4 4 ॥

The Sattva can never exist without the Rajas; the Rajas can never exist without the Tamas; and these two qualities can never exist without Tamas. Again Tamas cannot exist without Rajas and Sattva. These qualities act and react always in twos or threes.

अन्योर्यस्त्रितः सर्वे निर्घुते न विवोजिताः ।

अन्योर्यजनकाश्रय वातः प्रस्वधर्मिणः ॥ 4 5 ॥

सत्तं कदाचिच्च रजस्तमसी जनयत्युत ।

कदाचितु रजः सत्ततमसी जनयत्पर्य ॥ 4 6 ॥

कदाचितु तमः सत्त्वरसी जनयत्पुः ।

जनयंत्येवमयोन्यं मृत्यिंडश्र घटं यथा ॥ 47 ॥

They never exist separately; they live in pairs or threes and are the originators of each other; these qualities are of the nature of procreating things; in other words, Sattva originates the Rajas or Tamas; again the Rajas originates sometimes Sattva and Tamas. Again the Tamas sometimes originates Sattva and Rajas. Thus they generate each other as the earthen pots and earth are their mutual causes.

वृद्धिद्धासते गुणा कामान्वोधयन्ति परस्यम् ।

देवदत्तविष्णुमिप्रयज्ञदत्तादयो यथा ॥ 48 ॥

यथा क्लीषु पुरुषश्रैव भिवृष्टी च परस्यम् ।

तथा गुणा: समायाति युभमाचं परस्यम् ॥ 49 ॥

Deva Datta, Viṣṇu Mitra, and Yajña Datta these three unitedly perform any action, so these three qualities united reside in the Buddhi, (intellect) of the Jivas and generate their sense perceptions.

Just as the husband and wife form into a couple, the qualities get into couples.

रजसो मिवुने सच्चं सच्चय मिवुने रजः ।

उभे ते सच्चरजसी तमसे मिवुने विवुः ॥ 50 ॥

The Satva with Rajas forms the couple Rajas Sattva; So, Sattva Rajas forms another couple, where the Sattva predominates. So, Sattva and Rajas forms each with Tamas the other couples.

नात्द उवाच

इन्येतत्कथितं विश्रा गुणाक्षपन्तमम् ।

श्रुत्वाध्येतस एवाहं ततो.पुष्प्छं वितामहम् ॥ 51 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभाग्यते महापुरणो तृतीवस्कन्धे

अष्टधोरध्यः ॥ 8 ॥

Nārada said: “O Dvaipāyana! Hearing thus about these three qualities from my father, I asked him again these questions.”

Thus ends the Eighth Chapter of the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam containing the description of the Gunas, of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER IX

On the Anecdote of Satyavrata

नार द्वाच

गुणानां लक्षणां तात भवता कथितं किल ।

नरुणो5स्मि पिबविमर्धे त्वन्युखात्रच्छुतं रसम् ॥ 1 ॥

गुणानां तु परिज्ञानं यथावदनुवर्णये ।

येनाहं परमां शान्तिमधियान्छामि चेतसि ॥ 2 ॥

Book III Chapter IX

Nārada said: “Father! You have described to me the characteristics of the three qualities; though I have drunk the sweet juice from your lotus like mouth, still I am not quite satisfied. Kindly describe to me, in detail, in due order, how I can recognise clearly the three qualities, so that I can get the highest peace of mind.”

व्यास उवाच

इति पृथस्तु पुत्रेण नारदेन महात्मना ।

उवाच न जागक्त्ति रजोगुणसमुद्धवः ॥ 3 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! The Creator of the world, Brahmā, originated from the Rajo Guṇa, asked by his minded son Nārada, began to speak in the following terms.”

ब्रह्मोवाच

न्यू जातद वक्ष्यामि गुणानां परिवर्णनम् ।

स्मयड् नाहं विज्ञानायि यथामितं वदामि ते ॥ 4 ॥

“O Nārada! I myself do not possess fully the complete knowledge of the three qualities; but, as far as I know, I am telling that to you.

सत्वं तु केवलं नैव कृतापि परिलक्ष्यते ।

मिश्रीगावतु तेषां वै मिश्रलं प्रतिभाति वे ॥ ५ ॥

The pure Sattva quality is not found alone to exist anywhere; it manifests itself always, in mixed condition, in combination with the other qualities.

यथा कार्विडार नारी सर्वभूषणभूषिता ।

हावभावयुना कामां भर्तुः प्रीतिकारी भवेत् ॥ 6 ॥

मातापीत्रोस्तथा सेव बन्धुवर्गस्य प्रीतिता ।

दुःखं मोहं सप्तनिषु जनत्यपि सेव हि ॥ 7 ॥

एवं सच्चेन तेनैव क्लौल्यमापादितेन च ।

रजसस्तमसडीव जनिता वृत्तिरन्यथा ॥ 8 ॥

रजसा क्लिकृतेनैव तमसा च तथा पुनः ।

अन्योन्यस्य समायोगादन्यथा प्रीतिभाति ॥ 9 ॥

As a beautiful woman, well decorated with ornaments and endowed with amorous gestures, gives delight, on the one hand, to her husband, father, mother and friends; and, on the other hand, becomes a source of pain and delusion to her rival wives, so the Sattva quality, personified as a

beautiful woman, engenders the Sättvik happiness of the mind to some individual, at one time, and at another time becomes as source of pain to the same individual (or at one and the same time becomes a source of happiness to one and a source of pain to another). Thus the Rajas or the Tamas quality, personified respectively as a beautiful woman becomes a source of pain or delusion to an individual at one time, and at another time, a source of a happiness to the same man. So, it is easily seen that one quality cannot remain single; it remains in union with the other qualities.

Note: It is very possible that a man, possessing the Sättvik quality at any time, can be said not to possess only the Sättvik quality but also the Rajas and the Tamas to a certain degree. At any subsequent time the Rajas might get preponderance, and that man may be in circumstances requiring money or so forth; but, due to his Sattva quality before hand he did not collect money and therefore he feels pain afterwards. So, with the Rajas. Or it may be thus: Suppose an earning member is Sättvik. He earns just sufficient to meet his wants. But his family members require more money, for they are Räjasik. Therefore the earning member is happy for his Sättvik quality; but the other members are unhappy for his Sättvik quality. A man is, as it were, wedded to the three wives, Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas.

अवस्थानात्वधावेषु न ने जात्यतत्तीय च ।

लक्ष्येते विव्यतितिन योगात्राद कुजिच्त् ।। 10 ॥

O Nārada! When the three qualities remain each in their own real natures, then the effects produced by them also remains always the same; no changes are perceived owing to the difference of time or person. But when they get combined, then each of them produces effects sometimes counter to their nature.

यथा रूपवती नारी यौवेनन विभूषिता ।

लज्जामादुप्यैतृता च तथा विव्यस्मुता ॥ १ १ ॥

कामगाखिविज्ञा च धर्मगार्डप्रि सम्मता ।

भूर्तु: प्रीतिकरी भूत्वा सपर्नीनीं च दुःखदा ॥ १ २ ॥

मोहादु:खस्याबास्था सत्त्वशेत्युळयते जनैः ।

तथा सत्त्वं विकुबर्णीमन्यभावं विषधाति च ॥ १ ३ ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

A young beautiful woman, shy, modest and of sweet qualities, well versed in her religious learning, and full of good behaviour, skilled in love practices and full of sweet sentiments becomes a source of loving delight to her beloved and also a source of pain to her rival wives so each of the three qualities assume no doubt, different aspects according to the differences in time and in the nature of the person.

O Nārada! As one woman gives pain and delusion to her rival wives and gives pleasure to her husband and friends, so the Sattva quality, when perverted, gives pain and delusion to the person.

चौरभ्युद्धानां हि साधूनां सुखदो घबेत् ।

दुःखा मृहा च दस्यूनां सैव सेना तथाणुपि ॥ 14 ॥

विपरीतप्रतीति वे वर्जयित्न स्थभावत ।

यथा च दुर्विंत जातं महामेधयनवतून् ॥ 15 ॥

विद्युस्ततितस्तंयुक्ति तिमिरेणावगुपितन्तम् ।

सिऋढ़ूर्वि प्रवर्षेते तमोल्यपुराद्वारम् ॥ 16 ॥

यदेतत्कर्षकाणां वे तदेवातीवदुर्दिनम् ।

बीजोप्यकस्त्युक्तानां सुखदं प्रभववतुम् ॥ 17 ॥

अप्रच्छघ्रगुणों च दुर्भागां विशेषतः ।

तृणाकाक्षगृहीतानां दुःखदं गृहमेधिनाम् ॥ 18 ॥

प्रोषितभक्तुंकाणां वे मोहंद प्रवल्वपि ।

स्वभावस्या गुणा: सर्वे विपरीत विषांति वे ॥ 19 ॥

As the police, sepoys and constables are, on the one hand, delighting to the saints, troubled by thieves, and, on the other hand, sources of pain and confusion to the thieves and robbers; again as the heavy shower of rain in a pitch dark night, in the rainy season, when the sky is over clouded, and when there are flashes of lightning and thunder, is on the one hand, a source of highest delight to a farmer, who has all the seeds and necessary things and implements, and, on the other hand, is a source of pain to the unfortunate householder, whose house is not yet completely thatched with grass or who has not been able to collect his beams and grass for necessary roofing, and a source of utter bewildering confusion to the young woman, whose husband is abroad and expected back at that time,

so the three Gunas produce contrary results, when perverted by contact with the remaining Gunas, instead of what they would have produced, had they not been perverted so.

लक्षणानि पुनस्तेभां शृणु पुत्र ब्वीयाम्न ।

लयुप्राकाशकं सत्त्वं निर्मलं विश्वरं सदा ॥ 20 ॥

यदाउज्ञानि लघ्न्येन येनात्नीर्तिर्याणि च ।

निर्मलं च तथा चेतेग्यहाति विषयात्रान्ति ॥ 21 ॥

तदा सत्त्वं शरितै वे मन्तव्य च समुकटम् ।

जूभां सतम्पं च तन्त्रं च चलं चैव रत: पुनः ॥ 22 ॥

यदा ततुकटं जाते हेरे यस्य च कस्यित् ।

कालिं भुगवते कर्तु गन्तु प्रामान्तरं तथा ॥ 23 ॥

चलिभनस्य सेोउवर्थ विवादे चोठानस्तया ।

गृह्मावरणों कामं तमो भवति तद्धाद ॥ 24 ॥

तदाउङ्गानि गुलुपय्य,गु प्रपवंत्यातानि च ।

इन्ट्रियाणि मनः शूर्य नित्रों नैवाधिच्याछति ॥ 25 ॥

गुणानां लक्षणान्येवं विशेयानीह नारत ॥

O Child! Again I speak to you of the characteristics of the three Gunas. The Sattva gunas is pure, clear, illuminating, light (not heavy) and white. When the senses, eyes, etc., and the limbs are felt very light (without any heaviness) and the heart and brain clear, and when there is dispassion towards the Räjasic and the Tāmasic enjoyments, know then that the Sattva quality has grown in preponderance in a body. When there is a tendency to yawn, when there is rigidity and suppression of the functions of faculties and when one feels drowsiness, consider that the Räjasic quality has gone to excess. Again, when one seeks after quarrels and goes to another village, when one is always restless and ready to fight, when one feels heaviness in one's body, as if wrapped by a very heavy darkness, when one's limbs and senses are heavy and obscure, when one's mind is vacant, and when one does not like to go to sleep, know that the Tamas has increased too much, Nārada!"

नारद उवाच

विधिप्रतक्षणा: प्रोक्ता: पितामह गुणात्बय: ॥ 26 ॥

कथमेकत्र संस्थाने कार्य कुर्यत्न शाशत्न्।

Book III Chapter IX

Narada said: "O Father! You have described the different characteristics of the three Gunas; but I cannot understand how they act all in conjunction?

परस्यं मितिल्वा हिं विभिना: शनवः किलि ॥ 27 ॥

एकत्रल्या: कर्व कार्यं कुर्वतीति वदस्य मे ।

As those who are enemies to one another do not work united, so these Gunas, of opposite characteristics, are enemies, as it were, to one another; how can, then, they act in unison? Kindly explain this to me".

बहोवाच

शूणु पुर प्रवक्ष्यामि गुणासते दीयवृत्तयः ॥ 28 ॥

प्रदीपश्र यथा कार्य प्रक्रोत्यधर्शनम् ।

वर्तिलैलं यथार्थिंश विक्रद्धाश परस्यम् ॥ 29 ॥

विक्रद्ध हि तथा तैल्यपिन्ना सह संगतम् ।

तैलं वर्तिलिंत्रोध्ये वापकोंदपि परस्यम् ॥ 30 ॥

एकरम्बा: पदार्थानां प्रकृतीति प्रदर्शनम् ।

Brahmā said: “O, Nārada! The three Gunas may be likened to a lamp. As a lamp manifests a certain object, so these three qualities united do manifest or reveal a certain thing. See the wick, oil, and flame are all of different characteristics; though the oil goes against fire, still it unites with the fire. The oil, wick and fire though running against each other, all these united, serve the one common purpose of illuming, revealing a certain object.

So, O Nārada! All the three qualities, though of contrary nature, go to prove the same thing."

नारद उवाच

एवं प्रकृतिजा: प्रोक्ता गुणा: सत्यवतीसुत ॥ 31 ॥

विश्वस्य कारणं ते वै मया पूर्वं यथा श्रुन्तम् ।

Nārada said: O Son of Satyavati! The lotus born Brahmā thus described the three qualities, as born of Prakṛti; and they are the causes of this Universe. What I heard of you about the nature of Prakṛti, I have now described before you."

व्यास खाचा

इत्युक्ति नारेदेनाथ मम सर्वे सविस्तम्प ।। ३२ ॥

गुणानां लक्षणं सर्वे कार्यं चैव विभागगः ।

Vyāsa said: “O King! What you asked me, I asked the same before of Nārada and he described thus (as I told you above) to me about the characteristics and the effects of the three Gunas in regular order and in detail.

आताधा परम शक्तियां सर्विमंद ततम् ॥ 33 ॥

सरुणा निर्गुणा चैव कावधेचे सदैव हि ।

अकर्ता पुरुकः पूर्णं निरीतः परमोज्ययः ॥ 34 ॥

कोरोयभा महामाया विश्वं सदसदात्मकम् ।

O King! Wherever in the Śāstras whatever is said, the essence of all that is this—that the Highest Energy, the Supreme Force, the Great Goddess who is pervading the Universe, is always with qualities and without qualities, according to the differences in the manifestation. This Supreme Force is to be worshipped with the highest devotion.

The Brahman, the Purusa (the Supporter, the Ultimate substratum), the Highest Energy considered as the Male Principle) though It is Undecaying, Supreme and Full, is still without any desires or emotions. It is not able to accomplish any action (without the help of its inherent force); this Mahāmāyā, the Supreme Force is doing all the junctions, real and unreal, of the universe.

बहुना विद्युतशा कहः सुर्योत्रः ज्ञपिति: ॥ 35 ॥

अधिजी वसवस्त्यहा कुबेरो यादासां पति: ॥

वाद्रिवंगुतन्या पूया सेनानीक्षा विद्यानकः ॥ 36 ॥

सर्वे शफित्युतः शक्तः कर्तु कार्याणि स्वानि च ।

अन्यथा तेउध्यशक्ता वे प्रस्यांवैतुर्मनीक्षारः ॥ 37 ॥

सा चैव कारणं राजझुगतः परधेश्वी ।

Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, the Sun, Moon. Indra, the twin Aśvīns, the Vasus, Viśvakarmā, . Kubera, Varuna, Fire, Air, Pūsā, the Sadānana, and Ganesa all are united with Śakti and can do their respective functions; else they are unable to move themselves. Therefore, O king! Know that Supreme Goddess Mahāmāyā as the cause of this Universe.

समापाधय तां भूप कुरु चज्चताधय: ॥ 38 ॥

पूजनं परया भक्न्या तत्या एव विधानतः ।

O Lord of men! You worship this Goddess,

Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam

perform sacrifices in honour of Her and worship Her with the highest devotion.

महातक्ष्मी महाकाती तथा महासरस्ती ॥ 39 ॥

ईक्षीत सर्वभृतानां सर्वकाणाकाणम् ।

O King! That Mahāmāyā is Mahā Lakṣmī, She is Mahā Kāli, She is Mahā Sarasvatī; She is the Goddess of all the bhūtas and She is the Cause of all causes.

सर्वकामार्थदा शान्ता सुखसेल्या द्वावित्ता ॥ 40 ॥

नानोचारणामत्रेण वांक्षितार्यफलपत्र ।

That all peaceful, easily worshipped and the ocean of mercy, when worshipped, fulfills all the desires of Her devotees; what to say, the mere utterance of Her name is sufficient for the granting of desires.

देवेशरापिता पूर्वे ब्रह्मातिथ्यामुईधरेः ॥ 41 ॥

मोक्षकामैअघ विविधेरत्नापेसिंबित्ततापिथि: ।

In days of yore, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara and all the Devas and many other self controlled ascetics worshipped Her to attain liberation.

अस्पत्थपि यजाम प्रसंगेनापि भाधितम् ॥ 42 ॥

द्वाति वार्त्रिज्ञतायनंतृर्निभापनि सर्वथा ।

O King! What shall I speak now about Her more than this: If one takes Her name even with indistinctness, She grants the desired purposes, even if they are quite unattainable.

ऐरे इति भगताने दूर्वा व्यापादिकं वने ॥ 4 3 ॥

विद्धुरीनमपीत्यूर्ते वाजित्छां प्रद्वाति वे ।

In the midst of forest, on the sight of tigers and other ferocious animals, if one becoming afraid, cries aloud Her seed mantra (twice) “Ai, Ai,” without the Bindu (incorrectly) instead of “Aim, Aim” She grants immediately his desires.

तत्र सत्यातत्येव द्वृतःनो नृपसतम ॥ 44 ॥

प्रत्यक्ष एव चासामकं मुनिनो भावितात्मानम् ।

बाहुपाणांना समाजेषु तस्योदाहरणं बुधे: ॥ 45 ॥

कव्यमानं मया राजछ्छुतं सर्वे सवितस्तम् ।

O Best of Kings! There is an example of Satyavrata on this point. That the mere utterance of the name of Bhagavatí gives unforeseen results, has been witnessed by us and other high-minded Munis. Also in the assembly of the Brāhmanas I have heard fully many sages quoting in detail many instances on the above points.

अनसूरो महामुर्खों नामा सत्यन्ते तिज्ञः ॥ 46 ॥

श्रुवासड़र्कं कोलमुखात्समुच्चार्य स्वयं सतः ।

बिन्दुर्जीने प्रसंगेन जातोउसी विद्योतमः ॥ 47 ॥

O King! There was a Brāhman, named Satyavrata, illiterate, a thorough blo 'e-head. Once he heard the letter "Ai" "Ai" being uttered by a pig; and in course of a talk he himself uttered incidentally that letter and thereby became one of the best Pundits.

Note: "Aim" is the seed mantra of Sarasvatī, the Goddess of learning.

ऐक्रात्रोचरणाहेदी तुषा भयावती तत् ।।

चकार कविराजं तं द्याङ्गं परमेश्वी ॥ 48 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते मातुपुर्णते तृतीयकचे

नवमो5ध्याः 11 9 11

The Goddess Devi, the Ocean of mercy, hearing the letter “Ai” being pronounced by that Brāhmīn, became very glad and made him the best of the poets.”

Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Third Book on the characteristics of the Guṇas in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahāpurānam of 1,8000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER X

On the Anecdote of Satyavrata

जनमेव उवाच

को उसी सत्यजतो नाय बाहुपणो डिजसत्तमः ।

कसिम्बेउने समुपतयः कीपुरुषः वद्त्वय मे ॥ १ ॥ ॥

Janamejaya said: "O Maharṣi! Who was

Satyavrata, the Brāhim whose name you have just taken? In what country was he born? Of what nature was he? Please describe all these to me and satisfy my curiosity?

Book III Chapter X

कथं तेन श्रुतः शब्दः कक्षमूच्चातितः पुनः ।

सिद्धिक्ष कौजुरी जाता तस्य विष्यस्य तक्षणात् ॥ 2 ॥

How did he hear that sound “Ai”; how did he repeat that word? How came out the success to him, illiterate Brāhman, at that very instant?

कर्थ तुषा भवानी सा सर्वज्ञा सर्वसंस्थिता ।

वित्तरेण वद्यवाहा कवभातें मनोरामम् ॥ ३ ॥

And how is it that the Great Goddess, who is omniscient and omnipresent, was pleased with him, kindly describe this interesting incident in detail".

सूत उवाच

इति पृथस्तवा ग्राा व्यास: सत्यवतीसुत ।

उवाच परमोदारं वचन रसवद्छुचि ॥ 4 ॥

Sūta said: “Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati, thus asked by the king, addressed in the following pure, sweet, and highly liberal words.”

व्यास उवाच

शृणु राजप्रवक्ष्यामि कवां पौराणिकीं शृणाम।

श्रुत मुनिसमाजेषु मया पूर्व कुरूद्रह ॥ ५ ॥

Vyāsa said: “Hear, O King! You are the best and foremost in the Kuru clan; what I before heard in the assembly of the Munis, I am now relating that ancient story, highly beneficial to you.

एकदारई कुर्वेश्रे कुर्वेसीधार्ने शूणि ।

सम्प्रापो नैमिपार्णवं पावनं मुनिसेवितम् ॥ 6 ॥

O best of the Kurus! Once in my peregrinations in the holy places of pilgrimages, I came to the Naimisāranya forest, that highly sacred place frequented by the Munis.

प्रणम्यां मुनी-सर्वान् स्थितस्तर वराधमे ।

विधिपुत्रास्तु यथासुजीवन्युक्ता महाततः ॥ 7 ॥

कक्षाप्रसंग एवासीरत विग्रसमागमे ।

जमदर्गिनस्तु पप्रच्छ मुनीरेवं सभाधित्धतः ॥ 8 ॥

जमद्विनरकार

सन्देहो5ति महाभाग मम चेतसि तापसा: ।

समाजेषु भूनीर्गा वै नि:सन्देहो भवायमहूम ॥ 9 ॥

That time there were staying Sanaka, Sanātana and the other sons of Brahmā who were liberated while living. I went there and bowed down to the

Munis and took my seat. Then the religious conversations ensued there in the assembly, when the great sage Maharsī Jamadagni began to question the Munis in following terms:

“O highminded excellent ascetics and Munis! There has arisen a great doubt in my mind; I am desirous to have that doubt solved in this assembly of the Maharsis.

ब्रह्माधिष्युतशा रुहे मघवा बरूणोउलः ।

कुबेर: पवनस्त्वश सेनानीक्ष गणाधिपः ॥ १ ० ॥

सूर्योर्भिश्री भगः शूरा सिगानाथो ग्रहासला ।

आरापनीयतमः कोउत्र वार्छितार्थ कलपदः ॥ १ १ ॥

सुखलेम्यक्ष सततं चागुतोषश मानतः ।

ब्रुवन्तु मुन्य शीर्धं सर्वज्ञा: संग्रितालतः ॥ १ २ ॥

O all-knowing Maharsis that have fulfilled your vows! O Givers of one's honour! Now, my question is this: "Of the following Devas Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Indra, Varuna, Fire, Kubera, Wind, Viśvakarmā, Kārtikeya, Gapeśa, the Sun, the two Aśvins, Bhaga, Pūṣā, Moon, and the other planets, who is the first and best to be worshipped, that can easily be served; who is very quickly satisfied and grants the desired boons; kindly tell me this as early as possible."

एवं प्रपेने कृते तत्र लोपागे शावयमब्रवीत् ।

जमदाने शपुष्यैतदात्यूरं वै त्वयासुभृता ॥ 13 ॥

Thus questioned by Muni Jamadagni, Maharṣi Lomāsa, one in the assembly, spoke: “O Jamadagni! Hear in reply to your question.

सेवनीयतम शफि: सर्वेषां शुभमित्यन्ता ।

परा प्रकृतिराडा च सर्वाना सर्वेदा शिका ॥ 14 ॥

देवानां जननी सेव बढ़ादौनीं महात्मानम् ।

आदिपुकतिनूले सा संसारापदायय वे ॥ 15 ॥

The Goddess of Energy is the best the Devas, most excellent and highest to be worshipped. Those who want welfare, they ought to worship this Supreme Force. She is the Parā Prakrti, the Highest Nature, the Brahma, conditioned by Māyā (Time, space, and causation). She grants all the desires, does good to all, pervades everywhere, and is the

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Mother of B.ahmā and the other high souled Devas. She is the First Prakṛti, and is the Root of this gigantic Tree of Universe.

सूता चोच्यातिरि देवी द्वाति किन वाशिकनम् ।

सर्वदेवार्थिचिता सा वरदानाय सेतिहा ॥ १ ६ ॥

If any one calls the Devi in remembrance or distinctly utters Her Name, She fulfills all the desires of the human beings. If anybody worships Her, she is at once filled with mercy and becomes ready to grant boons.

इतिहासं प्रविश्यामि शुचंतु मुनयः शुभम् ।

अश्लोच्चारणादेच यथा प्रात् द्विजेन वै ॥ १७ ॥

O Munis! How, once upon a time, a Brāhmin, uttering one letter of Her mystical mantra, obtained Her Grace, I am now describing that most auspicious history before you. Be pleased to hear. कौसलेनु द्विजः काईह्येद्वतेनैत विश्रुतः ।

अनपत्यशुकारौंट पुत्राव विधिपूर्वकम् ॥ 18 ॥

Once upon a time, there lived in the country of Kosala*, a famous Brāhmin, named Deva Datta. He had no issues and therefore started duly according to the prescribed rules a sacrifice called Puttreşti for the sake of obtaining children.

*Note: Kosala is a country situated, according to Rāmāyana, along the banks of the Sarayū (or Gogrā). It was divided into “Uttara-Kosala” and “Dakshina Kosala.” The former is also called “Ganda” and it must have therefore signified the country, north of Ayodhyā comprising Gonda and Bahraich. Aja and Dāsaratha, etc, are said to have ruled over the province. At the time of Rāma’s death, his two sons Kuśa and Lava reigned respectively at Kuśāvatī in Southern Kosala in the defiles of the Vindhyas and at Śrāvastī in northern Kosala.

तमसातीरामध्याय कृत्वा मणडयमुतमम् ।

द्विज्ञानाद्य वैद्वानास्वकर्मविशणराद्न् ॥ १९ ॥

कृत्वा वैद्वी विधानेन स्थापयित्वा विधायासून् ।

पुत्रौंह विधित्चत चकार जिजसत्तमः ॥ 20 ॥

On the banks of the Tamasā river, the Brāhmin erected a temporary building (or an open shade) for performing the ceremony, and there built an altar and invited the Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas,

and clever in performing sacrificial rites. There he placed the fire and began to perform according to the strict rules, the Puttreṣti sacrifice.

ब्रहाणं कल्यामास सुहोत्रं गुप्तिसनाम् ।

अध्वरुं याजरल्प्यं च होतारं च बृह्यमिति ॥ 21 ॥

प्रस्तोतरं तथा चैतमुद्गतातरं च गोषितम् ।

सभ्यान-यामुनी-कृत्वा विधित्यद्रवौ सयु ॥ 22 ॥

In that sacrifice, Suhotra, the best of the Munis acted the part of Brahmā (1); Yājñyavalkya acted the part of Adhvaryu (2); Bhraspati, that of Hotā (3); Paila, that of Prastotā (4); Govila, that of Udgatā (5); and the other Munis acted as assistants. These all were duly paid their remuneration.

उद्गाता सामगः श्रेषः सदस्वरसम्पत्थत् ।

रथतनमागयत् स्वरितेन सम्पत्थित् ॥ 23 ॥

तद्धान्य स्वारभूज्ञे प्रभूकृते शासे मुकुषुम् ।

देवदत्तशुक्राणगु गौभिंत प्रयुवाच ह ॥ 24 ॥

(1) One of the four priests employed at a Same sacrifice as a superintendent.

(2) Any officiating priest technically distinguished from Hotri, Udgātri and Brāhmaṇa. His duty was “to measure the ground, build the altar, prepare sacrificial vessels, to fetch wood and water, light the fire, bring the animal and immolate it and while doing this to repeat the Yajurveda.

(3) A sacrificing priest who offers the oblations. Or one who recites the prayers of the Rg Veda at a sacrifice.

(4) One of the four principal priests at a sacrifice, one who chants the hymns of the Sāmaveda.

The Hotā Govila, the excellent reciter of the Sāma hymns, began to sing in accented tones called svarita (the accents are three Udātta, Anudātta and Svarita) and the Rathanara Sāma in 7 tunes.

Then he began to draw breath frequently; and consequently there was a break in time in the accent of Govila. Seeing this, Deva Datta was angry and immediately said to Govila.

मूर्खोंसि मुनियुखाया स्वारभूत्स्वया कृतः ।

कार्यकर्मणि संजाते पुरावर्य वजतक्ष मे ॥ 25 ॥

Book III Chapter X

Well, Govila, you are the foremost of the Munis and still you are doing your work like a quite illiterate man. I fear obstacles may arise in the getting of my son in this my sacrifice of Puttresti.

भोभिस्तु तदोवाच देवदर्तं सुकांपितः ।

मुखैंते भविता पुत्र: शठः शब्दविवर्षितः ॥ 26 ॥

सर्वप्राणिशरिते तु धानोच्छ्वासः सुदुर्दिः ।

न मेत्र दूर्ण किंक्षित्वल्यपत्रे महामते ॥ 27 ॥

Govila then became much enraged and told Deva Datta “your son will be illiterate, hypocrite, and dumb.”

Behold! Every being is subject to breathing and respiring; it is very hard to control them; there is no fault of mine in the accents of my songs beings thus broken; it is strange that you, being intelligent, cannot understand this.

तद्धुत्वा घवनं तस्य गोभितस्य महात्मन: ।

शापाद्रौती तेवदतस्तमुवाचातिरु:खितः ॥ 28 ॥

Afraid of the curse from Govila, Deva Datta became very sorry and said “O Muni! I have done no serious offence; why are you so offended without any cause. See! the munis are void of anger and they always give delight to others.”

कयं कृद्धो3स विघ्रिंद्र यथा मधि निरागाति ।

अकोभना हि मुनयो भवन्ति सुखदा: सदा ॥ 29 ॥

स्वलेनप्रपाधि विघ्रें कयं शणतस्वया हहम् ।

अपूजोई सुतान: प्रात्मापयुक्तः पुनः कृतः ॥ 30 ॥

O best of Brāhmaṇas! My offence is very trifling; why have you inflicted on me so severe a curse? I was already under the mental agony, since I had no issues; and now you have made me suffer more pain.

मूर्वपुरावसुपुत्वं वरं वेदविदो विद्युः ।

तथापि बाङ्गणो मूर्तेः सर्वेषां निश्च एव हि । ३ १ । ॥

For the Vedic Pundits declare that it is better not to have any son than to have an illiterate son; the more so, when a Brāhmīn's son is illiterate, he is blamed by one and all.

प्रणुवच्छुद्रवच्चेव न योग्यः सर्वकर्मिषु ।

किं कारोमीह मुर्जीण पुत्रेण दिजसत्तम ॥ 3 2 ॥

An illiterate son is like a Śūdra or a beast; he is unfit for any action. O Brāhmīn! What shall I do with an illiterate son?

यथा गृहस्तया मुर्जी बाहाणो नास संशयः ।

न पूजाहीं न दानाहीं निश्छा सर्वकंमसु ॥ ३३ ॥

An illiterate Brāhmin is like Śūdra; consequently not an object to be engaged in any act of worship or of gifts, he is not deserving to do any action.

देशे वै वस्मानछ श्राढ्गाणो बेवदार्फितः ।

करदः: शूरवन्देव मंतव्यः स च भूभुजा ॥ 34 ॥

A Brāhmaṇa, bereft of the knowledge of the Vedas, lying in a country is treated as a Śūdra by the king of the place and is liable to pay taxes.

नासने पितृकार्थपुं देवकार्येषु स हिजः ।

मूरुः समुपवेश्यक्ष कार्यक्ष फलमिष्ठन्ति ॥ 35 ॥

Whoever wants to have any fruit in any action will never invite an illiterate Brāhmin to take his seat in the ceremony relating to the Pitṣ or the Devas.

राजा शूरसमो जेयो न योज्यः सर्वकर्मेपु ।

कर्षेकस्तु द्विः कायों ब्राह्मणो वेदवर्कितः ॥ 36 ॥

The king will consider in illiterate Brāhmīn as if a Śūdra and will never engage him in any religious ceremony but will order him to do the work of a farmer in cultivating fields.

विना विग्रंण कर्नेथ श्राबू कुशबटेन वै ।

न तु विश्रण मुर्षीण श्राबूं कार्य कार्वचन् ॥ 37 ॥

Rather to perform the funeral ceremonies by erecting a Kuśacata than to engage an illiterate Brāhmin for the purpose.

आहारादधिकं चात्रं न दात्यमपधिजे ।

दाता नकमापानोत प्रहीता तु विशेषतः ॥ 38 ॥

One should give food to an illiterate Brāhmīn just sufficient to fill his belly and no more. If he does not do that, the giver and especially the receiver are subject to go down to hell.

धियाज्चं तस्य राज्ञो वै यस्य देतेगुवघा जना: ।

पूर्जन्ते ब्राह्मणा मूर्खा दानमानादिकर्षि ॥ ३ ३ ॥

Fie to a kingdom where honour is shewn to the illiterate stupid Brāhmānas.

आसने पूजने दाने यत्र भेदो न चाणवपि ।

मूर्खपिछतलोभेची ज्ञातल्या विबुघेन वे ॥ 40 ॥

Where no difference is observed when seats, worship and gifts are given to various person, sages should draw their inference how the literate and illiterate persons are treated there.

मूखा यत्र सुगविष्ठा दानामनारियईः ।

तम्मिच्छेने न वस्तस्यं पण्डितेन कथंचन ॥ 41 ॥

When the illiterate fools become haughty, when they are paid honors and gifts, the literary persons should never dwell there.

असतामुपकाराय दुर्जनानां विभूतयः ।

चिपुबम्बः फलाडोप्री काकौकौयोपुच्छते ॥ 42 ॥

The wealth of the wicked goes to the enjoyments of the bad persons; for the Nim trees, though abounding richly in fruits, are enjoyed only by crows.

भुक्तनाशं वेदविद्धिप्रो वेदाध्यासं करोति है ।

क्रीक्षिति पूर्वजातस्य व्यर्ग प्रमुदिता: कित्त ॥ 4 3 ॥

Again, on the other hand, if the Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas, study the Vedas even after they have taken their food, still his father and forefathers are happy and play cheerfully in their heavens.

गोभिताः किमुक्ति के त्वया वेदविद्युत्तम ।

संसारे मुखुपत्रयं मरणादितिभाद्धिन् ॥ 44 ॥

Therefore, O Gobhila! You being the foremost of the Brāhmins, who are versed in the Vedas, what have you said just now? See in this world, death is better than to have an illiterate son.

कृषा कुक महाभाग शापस्यानुर्हं प्रति ।

दीनोद्वारणशक्तोसि यतामि तव पादोचे ॥ 45 ॥

How is it, then, that you have cursed me that I would get an illiterate son, when you are the best one, highly qualified with knowledge. O high minded one! You are capable to relieve the distressed; I am bowing down to your feet; shew your mercy and re-consider your curse."

लोगश उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा देवदत्तसु पतिततस्य पादयोः ।

सुवन्दीन्हदत्यर्थं कृपणः साशुलोचनः ॥ 46 ॥

Lomaśa said: O Munis! Devadatta, saying these words, fell prostrate at his feet and began to eulogise him in very pitiful words, being very much grieved and with tears in his eyes.

गोषीमलसु तदा तन युद्धवा तं दीपनेतस्म ।

क्षणकोंमा महान्तो वे पाणिष्ठा: कल्यकोपना: ॥ 47 ॥

Seeing him thus distressed, Govila was moved with pity. The persons that are noble their anger satiated after a short while; the anger is of the ignoble lasts for a long time.

जलं स्वभावतः शीर्गे पायकततपयोगतः ।

उष्णं भवति तच्छीधं तिहान शिजिरं भवेत् ॥ 48 ॥

The water is naturally cool; but it gets hot in contact with fire or heat; and no sooner the heat is drawn away, water gets again cooled quickly. (

दयावान्तोभिलस्त्वादे देववर्तं सुब:वित्यान् ।

मुखों भृत्वा सुत्तते वे विद्वानीय भविष्यति ॥ 49 ॥

The merciful Govila then addressed the distressed Devadatta “your son, though at first illiterate, will afterwards be very learned.”

इति दन्वरः सोअ धुवितोर्भयूद्विजर्भेः ।

इर्हिं समाय यिग्यानै विससर्जे यथाविधि ॥ 50 ॥

Brāhmin Deva Datta was very glad on getting this boon; then completing the sacrifice, rewarded the Brāhmins with their due dakshinās and dismissed them.

कालेन किवता तस्य भार्यां रूपमती सती ।

गर्भ द्वारा काले सा गौहिणो गौहिणीसामा ॥ 51 ॥

In due course of time, his fair chaste wife Rohinī, like the asterism Rohinī became pregnant.

गर्भधानादिकं कर्म चक्रा विधिवद्धिज्ञः ।

पुसंवन्धिवधान च शूत्राकरणं तथा ॥ 52 ॥

Deva Datta performed the Garbhādhāna (1) and Pūnsavana (2) ceremonies and other purificatory (3) rites duly.

सीमंतेत्रजनं चैव कृतं वेदविधानतः ।

ददौ दानाति मुहितो मत्लौं सकलां तथा ॥ 53 ॥

He performed the Simantonnayana ceremony according to rules and considered his Puttvresṭi sacrifice successful and made various offerings to Brāhmins.'

Book III Chapter X

Note: (1) One of the Samskāras, purificatory ceremonies, performed after menstruation to ensure or facilitate conception (this ceremony legalises in a religions sense the consummation of marriage).

(2) It is a ceremony performed on a woman's perceiving the first signs of a living conception, with a view to the birth of a son.

(3) “Parting of the hair” one of the twelve Samskāras or purificatory rites observed by woman in the fourth, sixth, or eighth month of their pregnancy.

གྱབ་ཉིན་མུབྱུང་བྱུར་ཀྱིན་གྱི་གྱིན།

दिन लगने शुभेत्यर्ष जातकर्मं चकार सः ॥ 54 ॥

पुर्वर्णिकं कृत्वा नामकर्म चक्रार च ।

उतध्य इति पुरस्य कृतं नाम पुराविद्ध ॥ 55 ॥

In the auspicious lagna when Rohinī asterism was present and in the auspicious day, his wife Rohinī gave birth to a male child. Devadatta performed the nativities of the new born child and saw its face. Next that knower of the Purānas, Devadatta kept the name of the child as Utathya.

स चार्ये तथा वर्ये गुधे वे गुधवासरे ।

तस्योपनयनं कर्म चकार विधिवित्यिता ॥ ५६ ॥

When the son was eight years old, Devadatta performed the Upanayana (thread) ceremony duly.

वेदमध्यायामास मुरन्त से बते स्थितम् ।

नोच्चार तथोत्यतः संस्थितो मुध्यतन्ता ॥ ५७ ॥

बहुधा पातितः पिता न द्वारा मर्ति गड़ः ।

मृद्वस्तिष्ठतेर्वर्ष तं शुशोच पिता तद ॥ ५८ ॥

Next the child was made to accept the vow of Brahmacāri; and Devadatta made him study the Vedas; but the child could not pronounce a single word and used to sit simply like a stupid boy. Though he tried in various ways to read and write, that wicked boy never paid the slightest attention, simply sat idly. Seeing this, his father was very sorry and much grieved.

एवं कुर्वैनसदोःययंसे जातो द्वादुशार्थिकः ।

न वेद विधित्वकनुं संधावन्दनं किं विधिं ॥ ५ १ १ ॥

Thus twelve years passed. Yet the boy could not learn how to perform his Sandhyā Vandana duly.

मूर्डोंप्रदूतितोकेषु गता वातोंजितिवस्तरा ।

ब्राहणेषु च सर्वेषु तापसेश्वितेषु च ॥ 6 0 ॥

Rumour went abroad that Uttatlya, the son of Devadatta turned out very illiterate. All the Brāhmanas, ascetics, and other persons came to learn this fact.

जहास लोकस्तं प्रं यत्र तत्र गतं मुने ।

पिता माता निर्विद्धा मूर्खं तमतिभत्संयन् ॥ 6 1 ॥

Wherever Uttahya used to go in any forest on hermitage, people used to laugh at him, ridiculed his father and mother and began to chide that illiterate son.

निर्वितोर्ध अजै: का पितृध्यमय बांधवेः ।

वैराययमगाडिप्रो जगाम वनमध्यसौ ॥ 62 ॥

Thus blamed by father, mother and all other persons, dispassion occupied the heart of Utathya.

अंधो वरसला यंगुन मुकैंसु वर: सुस्तः ।

इत्सुक्तोजी सिंतृष्यां वे विवेय काननं प्रति ॥ 63 ॥

‘Once when rebuked by his father and mother that it was better to have a blind and lame son instead of an illiterate brute, Uttahya took recourse to renunciation and went to a dense forest.

गड़गातीर गुधे स्थाने कृत्याटेजन्मुत्ताम् ।

वन्यां वृत्ति च सुकूल्य स्थिततस समाहितः ॥ 64 ॥

नियमं च परं कृत्वा नास्तयं प्रव्रीयघ्न् ।

स्थिततसजाये मय बहाव्यवंत्रते हि सः ॥ 65 ॥

ड्रित श्रीदेवीभागवते महापुरुषो हृतीयकल्भ्रे

वर्षामो३थाव: 11 10 11

On the banks of the Gangs in a beautiful spot free obstacles, he built a beautiful hut and began to subsist on the roots and fruits of the forest and with collected mind. Having made the excellent vow “I will never speak untruth” and holding the vow of celibacy, he lived in that beautiful hermitage.

Thus ends the Tenth Chapter in the Third Book

of Śrimaddevvibhāgavatam of 1,8000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa relating to the

story of Satyavrata.

CHAPTER XI

On the Devi in the Anecdote of Satyavrata

लोगश उवाच

न वैद्याध्ययनं किक्रिज्ञानाति न जयं तथा ।

ध्यानं न देवतानां च न चैवाराधनं तथा ॥ १ ॥

नास्तं वेद विषूप्रोसौ प्राणायामं तथा पुनः ।

प्रत्याहारं तु नो वेद भूतगृद्धि च कारणम् ॥ २ ॥

न मन्त्रकीलकं जान्यं गायसँचे न च वेद सः ।

शोर्चं स्नानविर्धि चैव तथाचमनंक पुनः ॥ ३ ॥

प्राणारिनोहो नो वेद बलिन्दानं च चातिशिध् ।

न संधां समिधो होमं विवेद च तथा मुनि: ॥ 4 ॥

सोकरोत्थानल्याय यास्तिचिद्रंधावन् ।

स्नानं च शूत्रवत्त्र गज्ञायां मन्यबजितम् ॥ 5 ॥

Lomaša said: “O Munis Utathya, the son of Devadatta, was quite ignorant of anything of the Vedas, Japam (muttering of mantra), meditation of the deity, worship of the Devas, Āsana (Posture), Prānāyāma (withholding the breath by way of religious austerity), Pratyāhāra (restraint of mind), Bhūtaśuddhi (purification of the elements of the body by respiratory attraction and replacement), mantra (a mystical formula regarding some dicty), Kīlaka (chanting of a mantra to serve as a pin of protection), Āyatrī (the famous mantra of the Brāhmins), Āsauca (cleanliness, external and internal), rules on how to bathe, Ācamana (sipping of water and reciting mantrams before worship), Prānāgnihotra (offering of oblations to the fire of Prāna or to the fire of life), the offering of a sacrifice, hospitality, Sandhyā (the morning, midday or evening prayer), collecting fuels for oblation, and offering of oblations. Daily he rose in the morning and somehow rinsed his mouth and washed his teeth and bathed in the Ganges river without any mantrams (like a Śūdra).

कलान्यादाय बन्याति मध्याङ्डीपि यद्धच्छया ।

प्रब्यामध्यरितानं न जाताति शठतसथा ॥ 6 ॥

That stupid fellow ate indiscriminately, did not know what to eat and what not to eat. During the

mid-day he collected fruits from the forest and used to eat them.

सत्यं बृते स्थितस्तत्र नानृतं बदते पुनः ।

जनैः सत्यत्पानम कृतनय कृत्रस्य वै ॥ ७ ॥

But he always spoke truth while he stayed there; never did he say any untruth. The people of that place, seeing this, named him “Satyatapā”

नाहितं कस्यचित्कृयांश सत्रावक्षितं कवचित् ।

सुखं ख्विपिति तत्रैव निर्यर्षिङ्गत्नवर्षिति ॥ ८ ॥

कदा मे मरणं भावि दुःखं जीवायी कानने ।

जीवितं पित्रक्य पूर्वेल्य तरसा मरणं घुवम् ॥ ९ ॥

That Utathya did no good or bad to any body; he slept peacefully and blissfully; but he used to think when he would die; thus his troubles would be ended; he felt that the life of an illiterate Brāhmaṇa is a curse; his death would be a better alternative.

दैवेनाहं कृतो मूर्खीं नान्योज्ञ कारणं मम ।

प्राय्य चैवोत्चां जन्य वृथा जातं ममाधुना ॥ १० ॥

He used to think thus: “Fate has made me fool; I do not find any other cause for it. Oh! I got the exceedingly good birth amongst men; but all this has been rendered in vain by Fate.”

यथा वंध्या सुरूपा च यथा वा निष्पतो द्रुमः ।

अदुर्धयोहा धेनुर्ह तयारई निष्पलं कृतः ॥ १ १ ॥

Oh! As a fair woman, if barren, a cow if giving no milk, and a tree without any fruit are all useless, so Fate has rendered my life, too, quite useless.

कि नु निदायहं दैवं नृनं कर्म मेमदुगम् ।

न दर्ते पुस्तकं कृत्वा बाहाणय महात्मने ॥ १ २ ॥

Why am I cursing Fate? This is all the fruits of my past Karma. In my previous life I never wrote a book and presented to a good Brāhim; hence, I am illiterate in this birth.

न वै विहा मया दत्ता पूर्वेज्ञानेय निर्मल ।

तेनाहं कर्मवीणेन शगडोर्भि च डिज्ञाभमः ॥ 13 ॥

‘In my former birth I did not impart any

Book III Chapter XI

knowledge to my favourite pupils; hence, I am wicked and a cursed Brāhmin in this birth.

न च तीर्थे तपस्तं सविता न च साध्वः ।

नदिजा:पूजिताद्रल्लेसनेजानोरिसिद्धधीः।। 14 ॥

I never performed any religious asceticism in any holy place, I did not serve the saints, I never worshipped the Brāhmin with any offerings. For all these reasons I am now born of perverted intellect in the present birth. (14).

वर्तने मुनिपुजाश्र येवेशाश्बायागता ।

अर्ह सुमुकः सझातो देवयोगेन केनचित् ॥ 15 ॥

Many a son of the Munis have learnt the meanings of the Vedas and the Sāstras; and I am whiling away my time thus in a quite illiterate condition by some wretched combination of incidents.

न ज्ञानीय तपस्तु कि कंगीय सुसाधनम् ।

चिष्यायंयेजसङ्गूल्योनंय भायशुर्णकिंक्षत ।। ६ ॥

I do not know how to perform Tapasyā; what is the use, then, of my attempting to do so? I am of very bad luck, and thus my good resolve will not be crowned with success.

दैदयेव परं मये चित्यबीक्यमनर्वकम् ।

व्या शमकृतं कार्य दैवाद्वति सर्वथा ॥ १७ ॥

I consider Fate to be the strongest of all; Fie on one's own prowess! For actions done with effort and hard labour are frustrated entirely by Fate.

बहा विद्युध रुद्ध शक्राहा: किल देवता: ।

कालस्य करणाः सर्वे कालो हि दुरुतिकाः ॥ १८ ॥

Time can never be overstepped; See! Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Indra, and others are all under the influence of the Great Time.

एवंविप्रान्तिकर्तिकु कृवाणीण्डर्निंश हित्रः ।

स्थितस्तत्राश्रये तीरे जाइल्या: पावने स्थले ॥ १९ ॥

O Rsis! Thus arguing in his mind, that Brāhmin son Uttathya stayed there in that hermitage on the bank of the holy Ganges.

वित्कः सु रु संज्ञानः स्थितस्तावश्रभे द्विजः ।

कालातिवाहनं शान्तशक्तार विजने वने ॥ २० ॥

"And gradually he become thoroughly

unattached to all the things and, being peaceful, passed away his time in that forest without any habitations and men, with great difficulty. (20).

एवं स्थितस्य तु वने विमतोदके वै

वर्षाणि तत्र नवधूत्र गतानि कामम् ॥

नाराधनं न च जयं न विवेद मन्त्र

कालानतिहानमसौ कृततान् वने च ॥ 21 ॥

Thus passed away fourteen years in that forest where the Ganges was flowing. Still he did not learn how to worship the Supreme Deity, how to make Japam, nor did he learn any mantrams. Simply he lived there and whileed away his time.

ज्ञानाति तस्य चिततं ब्रतेवे लोकः

सत्यं चदत्यपि मुनि: किल नामाजतम् ।

जातं यथा सकलेषु जनयु कामं

सत्यन्तोयमिनिं न मृषाधिभाणी ॥ 22 ॥

People surrounding that place this much knew only of him that this Muni spoke truth only and hence his name was Satyavrata. This one name made him celebrated that he is Satyavrata; never did he say any untruth.

तत्रैकदा तु भृगवां समापण एव

प्राणो निषादनिर्गोदो धृतचापबाण: 1

मोड़न् वनेजनिविपुने यमतुल्यदेह:

क्रूराकृतीई-नन्दार्यगि चातिद्वर्षः ॥ 23 ॥

Once upon a time, a hunter named Niṣāda, exceedingly clever in hunting, came accidentally with bows and arms in his hands, while hunting a deer in that wide forest. He looked like a second God of Death (Yama) and seemed to be very cruel.

तेनातिकुईन ग्रेण विद्धः कोलः कितारने धनूप्रैण ।

पतायामानो भविद्वूलक्ष मुनेः समीपं विदुतो जागा । 24 ।

That savage mountaineer, drawing his bow so as to touch the ear, pierced a boar with his sharp arrows. The boar, being very much terrified, fled with enormous rapidity to the Muni Satyavrata.

विकंपमानो कृधितार्द्रेहो

यदा जगामाघममण्डलं है ।

कालस्तदातीद वदार्थैराथं

प्राणो सुनिस्तत्र समीध्य दीनम् ॥ 25 ॥

On seeing the distressed condition of the boar trembling with fear and his body besmeared with blood, the Muni was moved with mercy.

अंगे बजन्ते कृधिराद्रेहं दूद्या मुनि: सूकमाग्यु विद्धम् ।

द्वाभिषेयोदातिकेमानाः सारस्वतं बीजमाथोच्चारा ॥ 26 ॥

While the boar, pierced with arrows and besmeared with blood, was running away in front of him, mercy took possession of the Muni, therefore the Muni began to tremble and agreeably to the human nature exclaimed “Ai” “Ai” (go to that direction), the seed mantram of the Goddess of learning with “m” left out (Aim, Aim).

अज्ञातपूर्व च तथा श्रुतं च

दैवान्युओं वे समुपागतं च ।

न ज्ञातवान्नीजमसी विमूढो

ममज्ञ शोके स पुनिमहीत्या ॥ 27 ॥

That illiterate Brāhmin son never heard before that “Ai” was the seed mantram of the Sarasvatī Devī; nor did he come to know of it by any other means. Accidentally it came out of his mouth, and he uttered. And afterwards that Mahātmā seeing the boar’s distressed condition was merged in deep sorrow.

कोल: प्रविश्यामपण्डलं तन्त्रो

निकुंजे प्रविलीय गृहम् ।

अग्रापनागों द्वनिर्विंशणचेता

प्रवेयमानः सरपीक्षितलात् ॥ 28 ॥

The boar entered trembling into the Muni's hermitage very much distracted and being very much pained with arrows. Being unable to find any other way the boar hid himself in the dense bushes.

ततः क्षणादाकरणांतकूटं

चार्यं द्वयानो5तिकारलदेहः ।

प्राप्तस्तन्ते स च मृय्याणों

निधाद्वारा: किल काल एव || 29 ||

Instantly there appeared then, before the Muni, the terrible savage hunter, like a second God of Death, with string stretched to his ear, in pursuit of that boar.

दूदया मुनि तक कुशासने स्थितं

नाम्ना तु सत्यवत्रमद्वितीयम् ।

व्याधः प्रणाय्य प्रमुखे स्थितोंउसौ

पप्रच्छ कोलः: क्व नाते हिद्रेश १। ३० ॥

जानामि तेउं सूत्रत प्रसिद्धं

तेनाए पृष्ठे मम बाणविद्धः ।

क्षुधार्यितं मे सकलं कुटुंवे

विषनुंकामः किलः आगतोउसि ॥ 31 ॥

On seeing Muni Satyavrata sitting there alone and silent on the Kuśa grass seat the hunter bowed down to him and asked 'O Brāhmīn! Whither has that boar gone. I know very well everything about you that you never speak untruth; therefore I am enquiring about the boar pierced by my arrows.

वृत्तिमैभेवा विहिता विधाना

नान्याशिति विघेन्द्र ऋर्ते ब्रावीम ।

भर्तैयमेवेह कुटुव्यमंजसा

केनान्यपायेन शुभाणुर्भेन ॥ 32 ॥

सत्यं ब्रवीत्वा सत्यन्तोसि

ध्रुधातुते वर्तैते पोयवर्गे: ।

कवासी गत: सुक्रो बाणविद्धः

पृष्ठायर्दं बाडव बृहि तृर्णम् ॥ 33 ॥

My family members are all very hungry; and to feed them, I am come out in this hunting. This is the living, ordained by the Fate; I have got no other means of maintaining the livelihood of my family. This I speak truly to you; whether it is bad or good, I will have to maintain my family with it. O, Brāhmaṇa! You are famous as Satyavrata; my family members are starving; kindly reply quickly where that boar has gone?'

तेनेति पृष्टः स मुनिभर्ताता

वितर्कमानः प्रवधूव कामम् ।

सत्यवर्त मेउष घवेत्र धानं

न दृष्ट इत्यूच्चरिति किं है ॥ 34 ॥

Thus asked by the hunter the Mahātmā Satyavrata was merged in an ocean of doubt; he began to argue, if I say I have not see the boar, then my vow to speak the truth will certainly be broken.

गतोउत्र कोल: शरविद्धदेवः

कर्थ ब्रवीयघ्ट यूषासुघा वा ।

Book III Chapter XI

སྒྱལ་མོད་ཆེ་བར་གྱི་སྟན་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བྱི་སྟན་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར།

སྟོབ་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བྱི་སྟན་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བདེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆོ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཁྱི་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་ཆེ་བར་

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

Therefore, O King! You should always worship and serve that Great Goddess, the Prime Energy, the Cause of all this Universe.

तस्या यजं महागरा कुरु वेदविधानतः ।

सर्वकामप्रदं नित्यं निश्रयं कथितं पुरा ॥ 48 ॥

O King! With due Vedic rites you perform that sacrifice to that Goddess which will surely yield results at all times and all desires. I already spoke to you about this.

स्मृता सम्पूत्रिता भक्न्या ध्याता चोच्चारिता स्तुता ।

द्वाति वार्तिज्ञतानयोत्रकायद्वा तेन कौल्येते ॥ 49 ॥

That Great Goddess is known as Kāmadā (the giver of all desires); for She grants all desires when men with devotion remember Her, worship Her, take Her name, meditate Her and eulogise Her.

अनुभावयिति राजकन्तेत्यं सर्वथा बुधैः ।

इद्या शेमयुतानीतनान्ध्यिताक्षिनान्छ्छितान् । । । । ।

जनानातिलेथा मुवर्त्नीवितान् वैरिफि: सह ।

दासमाज्ञाकरान्ध्यात्रायिललान्त्रिलालनय ॥ 5 1 ॥

अतपानाभोजने भोगे सदातनिवर्जित्रियान् ।

पुणाधिकानगरणोंश्छा सदाधिपरिधितिहन् ॥ 5 2 ॥

तवा विषवसम्यान्यपौत्रिवधिनान् ।

पृष्टदोक्षा सभागैः संयुतान्देवदाविनः ॥ 5 3 ॥

राजलक्ष्म्या युताव्यूर्णावशीकृतजनावय ।

स्वचनरिव्युक्तांश सर्वतक्षणलक्षितान् ॥ 5 4 ॥

व्यतिरेकान्वायाघां च विचेतल्यं विचक्षणैः ।

गृभर्न मृजिता देयो सर्वार्थफलत्व शिया ॥ 5 5 ॥

समाराधिता च तथा नृभेपिधि: सदार्धिकका ।

यातोः.भी सुविह्नः सर्वे संसारो:स्मित्र संशयः ॥ 5 6 ॥

O King! The wise sages ought to see the persons diseased, distressed, hungry, those without any

wealth, the hypocrite, the cheat, the afflicted, the sensual, the covetous, the incapable, always suffering from mental troubles; again those who are wealthy with their children and grand-children, prosperous, healthy, with enjoyments, versed in the Vedas, literary, kings, heroes, those who command over many, those attended with relations and kinsmen and endowed with all good qualities; and then judge for themselves that those people did not worship the Goddess and therefore they were sufferers and these people worshipped the Goddess and hence they were happy in this world."

व्यास उवाच

इति राजब्धुतं तत मया मुनिसमागे ।

लोमाशय युजाल्कामं देवीमाहात्यमुक्तमम् ॥ 57 ॥

Vyāsa said: “Thus I heard from the mouth of Lomāśa Muni, in the assembly of the sages, the good merits of the Great Goddess.

इति सखित्य राजेन्द्र कतिथं च सदारअंनम् ।

भक्त्या परमया देख्नः प्रीत्या च पुरुषर्षेभ ॥ 58 ॥

शीत श्रीमदैर्शीभागते महापुराणे तृतीयकन्ने

एकाव्योउधाव: 11 11 11

O King! Consider all these and you will find that the Highest Goddess, the Bhagavatī is to be worshipped always with devotion and unselfish love."

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter on the merits of the Devi in the stroy of Šatyavrata in the Third Book of the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgāvatam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER XII

On the Ambā Yajñā

राजोवाच

वद् यज्ञिविं प्रस्पदेव्यालस्त्या: समंततः ।

भुत्वा करीयहं स्वामिन्याश्रिक हार्तरितः ॥ १ ॥

The King spoke: “O Lord! Kindly describe the rules and regulations as to how the Devi Yajña (sacrifice) is performed with its duly prescribed

rites and ceremonies. Hearing it I will unwearied perform it, as far as it lies in my power, with as little delay as possible.

पूजाविधि च मन्त्रांशे होमरुद्यमर्शगयम् ।

बाहाणाः कतिसंख्याश दक्षिणाशं तथा पुनः ॥ 2 ॥

How the worship is done, what are the mantras,

Book III Chapter XII

what are the articles required for oblations, how many Brāhmīns are required and what Daksinās are to be paid to them, describe in detail all these."

व्यास उवाच

शृणु राजन्यवक्ष्यामि देया यजं विधान्त ।

विविधे तु सदा जेयं विधिपटुते कर्मणा ॥ ३ ॥

सात्चिक राजसं चैव तामसं च तथापरम् ।

मृनीनां सात्चिक प्रोक्त नृपाणां राजसं स्मृतः ॥ 4 ॥

तामसं ग्रहसानां वे ज्ञानिनां तु गुणीड्ज्ञान् ।

विशुक्तानां ज्ञानमयं विक्सतारब्रवीमि ते ॥ 5 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! I am telling you duly how the Devi Yajñā is performed, hear. The actions are always three-fold according as the preparations are made and according as they are practised with regard to the observed rules. The three-fold divisions are Sāttvik, Rājasik and Tāmasic. The Munis do the Sāttvik Pūjā, the kings celebrate the Rājasic and the Rakṣasas do the Tāmasik Pūjās. There is another Pūjā which is devoid of qualities and which is performed by the liberated wise ones. I will describe to you all these in detail.

हैगः कालस्वा हृल्यं मन्यां ह्र ब्राह्मणाल्या ।

श्रद्धा च सात्कवी यत्र तं चत्र सात्कवि किंवुः ॥ 6 ॥

ह्व्यशुद्धि: क्रियाणुद्विनशुद्धिक्ष धृम्पि ।

भवेद्यादि तता पूर्ण फलं भवति नान्या ॥ 7 ॥

O king! The Yajña is then called Sāttvik, when it is performed in a Sāttvik country, like Benares, etc., in Sāttvik time e.g. in Uttarāyana, when the materials collected are earned rightly, when the mantras are those of the Vedas, when the Brāhmin is Śrotriya, where there is Sāttvik faith, void of any attachment towards the sensual objects. when all these happen to coincide. O King! When all the above takes place and where there is purification of materials, actions, and mantras, i.e. when the materials are all right, when the actions are done as they ought to be, and where there is no error or omission, etc. in the mantras, etc.) then and then only the Yajña becomes perfect and no doubt yields full results; there would be nothing contrary to this.

अन्यायोपार्जितेनैव कतल्वं सुकृतं कृतम् ।

न कॉर्टिंग्र लोके च परलोके न तत्कलम् ॥ ८ ॥

तस्मान्यायाजितेनैव कतल्वं सुकृतं सदा ।

यशसे परलोकाय भवलेव सुखाय च ॥ ९ ॥

If the Yajña is performed with articles not rightly earned, then there is no fame either in this world nor there is any reward in the next world Therefore, it is necessary that the Yajña should be performed with rightly earned materials; then there is fame in this world and better state in the next world; and happiness is also acquired; there is no doubt in this.

प्रत्यक्षं तव राजेन्द्र पंडवैसु मखः कृत ।

राजसूयः क्रतुवरः साम्पावरद्धिणः ॥ 10 ॥

O King! It is before your eyes, as it were, that the Pāndavas performed the Rājasūya Yajña, the king of sacrifices, and on the completion whereof, the excellent Dakṣinās were paid to Brāhmins and others.

यत्र साक्षादुः: कृष्णो याद्वरेजे महान्नः ।

बाहाण: पूर्णविद्याङ् भगद्धाजाद्वरसधा ॥ 1 1 ॥

In that Yajña the highly intelligent Śrī Krṣṇa Himself, Lord of the Yādavas was present, as well as many Brāhmanas, like Bharadvāja and other fully enlightened souls.

कृत्वा यजं सुसंपूर्णे मासमाजेण पाण्डवेः ।

प्राप्त महर्तरं कई वनवासघ उदारणः ॥ 12 ॥

But within three months after completing the sacrifice, the Pāndavas suffered extreme hardships and had to live, with extreme difficulty, as exile in the forest.

पीड़नं चैव पाझाल्यासता घृते पराजयः ।

वनवासो महकई कव गत मखजं फलम् ॥ 13 ॥

Consider the insult shown towards Draupadī, the Pāndava's defeat in the play of gambling, their going away to dwell in the forest; these hardships were borne by the Pāndavas. What rewards did then the Pāndavas derive from the Rājasūya yajñā?

दास्तर्व च विरास्य कृतं सर्वैम्हालमिः ।

कोपकेन परिक्लिणा द्विपदी च प्रमद्वा ॥ 14 ॥

अशीर्वादा द्विजातीनां क्व नाताः शुद्धचेतसाम् ।

भक्तिवां वासुदेवस्य कव गता तत्र सकुटे ॥ 15 ॥

Šrimaddevīthāgavatam

All the high-souled Pāṇḍavas had to work as slaves of Virāta; and Draupadī, the best of women, was very much troubled and insulted by Kīcaka. When all these occurred, any one can easily ask where were the asīrvādas of the pure souled Brāhmanas? Also what result did they derive from their unflinching devotion towards Śrī Krṣṇa when they were involved in the above critical sate?

न रक्षिता तदा बाला केनापि दुपादतम्बा ।

प्रापतेकेशग्रहा काले साध्यी च चरवार्थणी।। १६ ॥।

No one protected Draupadī, the chaste and the best, the daughter of Drupada, when she was drawn by her hair on her head into the hall of assembly where gambling was being played.

क्रमम द्वितनीयं वे धार्मेतुग्यकारणम् ।

कैग्ये सति देवेगे धार्मेतुं चुधिष्ठि ॥ 17 ॥

O King! How could all these happen in a place where Śrī Bhagavān Keśava Himself and the high souled Yudhishira were present? If one argues, one would conclude “there must have been something wrong in that Yajñā”.

भवित्वयिति प्रोक्ते निष्णल: स्यातदायाम: ।

वेदमन्तासधाउन्ये च वितावा: सूयुरसंगयम् ॥ १ ॥

If you say that nothing wrong happened in the Yajña, all these were caused by Fate; then it comes to this: that the Vedic mantras, Āgamans and the other Vedic rites are all fruitless.

साधनं निष्कलं सर्वपुरायघु निरर्धकः ।

भवित्वयं भवत्वेव वचने प्रतिपाटके ॥ 19 ॥

If it be argued that thought the Vedic mantras are powerful enough to bear fruits, yet whatever is predistened to come to pass, will surely pass, then the proposition resolves into this: that all the means, expedients, and appliances lead to meaningless conclusions.

आभाओंयर्वाहवर: स्यातिकया: सर्वा निर्विका: ।

स्वार्षा च तपो व्यर्थ वर्णायमंत्र ये तथा ॥ 20 ॥

Then the Agamas, the Vedas merely recommend a vidhi or precept by stating the good arising from its proper observance and the evils arising from its

omission and also by adducing historical instances as its support; in other words, they are powerless as far as bearing fruits is concerned; all the acts are meaningless, asceticism to attain Heaven comes as useless and the peculiar duties of caste are fruitless. O king! This view is exceedingly culpable; it is never fit for acceptance by the high-souled persons.

सर्व प्रमाणं व्यर्थ स्याद्धितन्त्ये कृते इदि ।

उभयं चापि मन्त्रयं दैवं चोपाय एव च ॥ 21 ॥

O King! If what is laid by God in the womb of futurity, (a state of things preordained by God in which it is sure to take place in the fulness of time) be taken as the first-hand proof, then all the other proofs are rendered null and void. Therefore, Fate and human exertion both are to be undoubtedly taken into account to ensure success.

कृते कर्मणि चेस्तिविद्विपरीता यदा भवेत् ।

वैगुणयंकल्पनीयंस्यातुझोः पण्डितमौतिलिपि: ॥ 22 ॥

Human exertion being applied, if the results come otherwise, wise Pundits would infer that some defect, omissions or imperfections crept into the work.

तत्कर्म बहुधा प्रोक्ते विहूद्ध: कर्मकारिभि: ।

कर्तुभेदात्मानभेदादुद्व्यभेदात्घा पुनः ॥ 23 ॥

All the Pundits, very learned and institutes of sacrifices have classed Karma under different headings according as the agents, mantras, and articles employed in the worship vary.

यथा मयतात पूर्वे विश्रभणे वृत्तो गुरु: ।

वियातीत कृते तेन कर्म मगृत्रिताय वै ॥ 24 ॥

E.g. Once on an occasion Viśvarūpa, ordained as a Guru by Indra (in a Yajñā) (intentionally) did things contrary so as to benefit the Daityas, who belonged to his mother's side.

देवेधयो द्रावेधयस्तु वसतीयुक्त्वा पुनः पुनः ।

असुरा मातृपक्षीया: कृतं तेषां च रक्षणम् ॥ 25 ॥

Viśvārūpa uttered repeatedly the mantrams beneficial to the gods, while they were present; and, during their absence, prayed heartily for the

Book III Chapter XII

welfare of the Daityas; and, in the long run, protected the Daityas.

दैत्यान् दूर्वातिसम्पुहाशुकोप मयवा तदा ।

शिरोगित सत्य वज्जेन चिश्छेद्त सराह हरि: ॥ 26 ॥

On seeing the Asuras gaining strength, Indra, the Lord of the Devas, became very much enraged and instantly cut off Viśvarūpa's head by his thunderbolt.

क्रियावैगुण्यमत्रै कर्तृभेदारसंशयम् ।

नोतेवेचालारजेन रोषेणपि कृता क्रिया ॥ 27 ॥

O King! This is then the instance where that contrary fruits were borne out by the agent employed in performing the Yajña; there is no doubt in this. This is not possible in the other cases.

भगत्राजिनाशया पुत्रयोग्यादानय च ।

ध्रशुध्न: सुस्पत्नो वेदिमध्याच्छ द्वीर्षी ॥ 28 ॥

See, again, the king of Pāncāla performed sacrifice to get a son to kill Droṇa, the son of Bharadvāja; and though he did this out of angry motives, still Dhṛṣtadyumna was born out of fire; and Draupadi sprang out of the altar.

पुरा दर्शशेनापि युवेहिष्ठु कृता यदा ।

अपूत्रस्य सुतास्तस्य चत्वारः संग्रजित्रे ॥ 29 ॥

Again, in days of yore, Daśaratha, the king of Kosala, was sonless; and he instituted a sacrifice to get one son; and lo! he got four sons.

अतः क्रिया कृता युक्त्या सिद्धिदा सर्वथा भवेत् ।

अयुकत्ता विपरीता स्यात्सर्वांना नृसत्तम ।। ३० ॥

Therefore O King! If the Yajña be performed according to proper rules and regulations, it yields fruites in all respects; again if it be done unrighteously, without any regard for the rules etc. it yields results just the contrary; there is no doubt in this.

पाण्डवानां यथा यसे किंक्षिक्रीण्ययोगतः ।

विवरीत फलं प्राप्तं निर्विंगतलरे दुरोरे ॥ ३ १ ॥

सत्यवाही तथा राजन्यमंपुत्रो युधिष्ठि: ।

त्रीयदी च तथा साध्वी तवान्येयज्ञानु: शुभाः ॥ ३ २ ॥

Therefore, there must have been some defects in the Yajña of the Pāṇḍavas; hence contrary effects

ensued, and therefore the truthful king Yudhiṣṭhira and his powerful brothers and the chaste Draupadī were all defeated in the play at dice.

कुर्व्ययोगाङ्गुगायं समुत्थं मघडेअधवा ।

साधिमानैः कृताढारि दूषणं समुपथित्यान् ॥ 33 ॥

It might be that the materials were not of a good stamp; they were all earned by killing the kings, good many in number, and earned thus unrighteously; or it might happen that the Pāndavas did their Yajña with too much egoism. However, this is certain that there had crept in some defects in their actions.

सात्विकस्तु महाराज दुर्लंभो वे मतः स्मृतः ।

वैखानसम्पुनीनां हि विहितोजसी महामखः ॥ 34 ॥

O King! The Sāttvik Yajña is rare; it can be done only by the Sāttvik Munis who live in the 3rd order of the household life or who live as hermits.

सात्विकं भोजनं ये वे नित्यं कुर्बैन्ति तपासः ।

न्यायार्थितं च चर्यं च तथा ऋध्यं सुसंस्कृतम् ॥ 35 ॥

पुरोडाभपरा नित्यं विव्युपा मन्त्यपूर्वकाः ।

श्रद्धाधिका मखा राजनसान्तिकाः परमाः स्मृतः ॥ 36 ॥

The ascetics that eat daily the Sāttvik food, the roots and fruits, collected from forests and obtained rightly, that is good to the Munis and that is well cleaned and purified, are the only ones that can perform with full devotions the Sāttvik Yajñas, where no animals are sacrificed (where there are no sacrificial posts to which the victim is fastened at the time of immolation) and where offerings of cakes of ground rice in vassels are given. These are the best of all the Sāttvik Yajñas.

राजसा ऋलबहुताः सयुपाश्र सुर्मेकृताः ।

क्षत्रियाणां विशां चैव साधिमानाङ्ध ये मखाः ॥ 37 ॥

The Kṣattriyasandthe Vaīsyasperformthe Yajñas with Abhimāna (self-conceit and egoism) where many presents are given, animals are sacrificed, and all things are well cleansed, purified and elaborately decorated. This Yajña is called Rajasic.

तामसा दानवानां वै सक्रोधा मदवधकाः ।

सामर्षी: संस्कृता: कृता मखा: प्रोता महात्माथि: ॥ 38 ॥

That Yajña is according to the sages, Tāmasik, where the Dānavas, puffed up with arrogance, infatuated with anger, jealousy and wickedness perform their acts with the sole object of killing their enemies.

भूनीनां मोक्षाकामानां विरक्तानां महात्मनाम् ।

मानसस्तु स्मृते याग: सर्वसाधानसंवृतः ॥ 39 ॥

That Yajña is called Mānas Yāga or mānasic (mental) where the high-souled Munis, void of worldly desires, collect mentally all the necessary articles and perform the Yajña the sole object of liberation from the bondages of the world.

अन्येषु सर्ववेसु किंकित्यूनं भवेदीय ।

इंलोग श्रद्धया वासिप क्रियया ब्राह्मणैस्तथा ॥ 40 ॥

In all the other Yajñas (than the Mānas Yāga) some imperfections or other naturally arise, due to some defects in the materials, or want of faith, or in the performance or in the Brāhmins.

देशकालपृथग्द्यसाधानैः सकलैस्तथा ।

नान्यो भवति पूर्णे वै तथा भवति मानसः ॥ 41 ॥

No other Yajñas can be so complete as the Mānas Yajña; the reason being that in the other Yajñas some, imperfections come out due to time, place, and separate ingredients to be collected.

प्रथमं तु मनः शोथे कर्तव्यं गुणवर्जितम् ।

शुद्धे मनसि देते है शुद्ध एवं न संशयः ॥ 42 ॥

इन्द्रप्रधधर्यित्यक्ते यदा जातं मनः शृत्रि ।

तदा तस्य मखस्यासी प्रभवेद्धिकारवान् ॥ 43 ॥

Now hear who are the persons fit to undertake this mental Yajña in honour of the Great Goddess. First this mind is to be purified, by making it void of the Guñas; the mind being pure, the body becomes also pure, there is no doubt. When the mind becomes completely pure, after it has abandoned all sensual objects, fit for enjoyment, then that man is entitled to perform the Mother's Yajña.

तद्धिजी मपड़णं कृत्वा बढ्योजनविस्तृतम् ।

स्तवैश्र विपुलैः रणल्यौर्यिप्रदुमसाम्बवै: ॥ 44 ॥

वेदीं च विग्वर्ता तत्र मनसा परिकल्ययेत् ।

अन्यशोप्रि तथा स्थाय्य विधिव्यन्मसा किल ॥ 45 ॥

There he should build mentally the big hall for sacrifice, many Yojñas wide, decorated with high polished pillars out of the materials brought for the purpose (e.g. fortitude, etc.). Within the hall he will imagine a wide and spacious altar and place the Holy Fire on it mentally according to due rules and regulations.

ब्राह्माणानां च वरणं तथेव प्रतिपाठ च ।

ब्रह्मात्यवृत्तथा होता प्रस्तोत विधिपूर्वकम् ॥ 46 ॥

उद्गाता प्रतित्तां च सच्याश्रान्ये यथाविद्धि ।

पूजनीया: प्रयत्नेन मनसेव द्विजोत्तमाः ॥ 47 ॥

He is to select mentally the Brāhmīn priests and consecrate them as Brahmā, Adhvaryu, Hotā, Prastotā, Udgātā, Prathartā and other assistants. He is to worship mentally all these priests.

प्राणोपानस्तथा व्यानः समानोदार एव च ।

पावकाः पञ्र पृदैते स्थाया वेहां विधानतः ॥ 48 ॥

Then he will have to imagine the five Vāyus Prāna, Apāna, Vyāna, Samāna, and Udāna as the five fires and locate them duly on the altar.

गाह्विन्यस्तदा प्राणोपनाश्रहवनीयकः ।

दक्षिणानिवस्ताया व्यानः समानशासयकः ॥ 49 ॥

सभ्योदानः स्मृत होते पावकाः परभोकतः ।

ग्रव्यं च मनसा भाव्यं निर्णुर्णं परमं शृष्चि ॥ 50 ॥

Prāna Vāyu stands for Gārthapatya; Apāna, for Āhavanīya; Vyāna for Daksīnā; Samāna for Avasathya; and Udāna for Samya Agni. These fires are all very terrible; then one should place these carefully on the altar with great concentration of mind. He is to collect then all the other necessary materials and think all are very pure and free from any defects.

मन एल तदा होता चकामानस्वीव तत् ।

यज्ञाधिवेदता बढ़ा निरुर्णं च सनातनम् ॥ 51 ॥

फलाद निरुर्णा शक्ति: सदा निर्वेद्दा शिका ।

बढ़ाविद्वाउलिजायाग याय्य सर्वे संशित्या ॥ 52 ॥

तदुईने तदूरब्ध हुनेताणानियु शिकः ।

पश्राचितं निरालंक कृत्ता प्राणानिप प्रभो ॥ 53 ॥

कुण्डलीमुख्यामाणि हुनेद्र ब्रह्माण शाश्यो ।

स्वानुभूतस्थ्यात्मानं सर्वभूतानि चातमिन ॥ 54 ॥

Book III Chapter XII

समाधिनेव योगेन ध्यायेच्छेतस्यनाकुतः ।

सर्वभूतस्याभानं सर्वभूतानि चात्मिनि ॥ 55 ॥

यदा एश्वति भूतात्मा तदा एश्वति तां शिखाम ।

इश्चा तां ब्रह्मिवृष्यात्सीच्चानंद्रकिपिणी ॥ 56 ॥

तदा मायादिकं सर्वे दूधं भवति भूमिप ।।

प्रारख्या कर्मारां तु चावडेई च तिहिति ॥ 57 ॥

In the Mānasic Yajñā, mind is the offerer of oblations and mind is the Yajarnāna, the performer of the Sacrifice; and the Presiding Deity of the Sacrifice is the Nirguna Brahma. The Great Goddess, the Nirguna Energy, who is always auspicious and gives the feeling of dispassion and indifference to worldly objects is the awarder of fruits in this Yajnā. She is the Brahma Vidyā, She is the substratum of all and She is all pervading. The Brāhmīn is to take Devi's name and offer oblations in the fire of Prāna, the necessary articles for the Devi's satisfaction. Then he is to make his Citta and Prāna void of any worldly thought or any worldly support and to offer oblations to the Eternal Brahma through the mouth of Kundalini (the Serpent Fire). Next, within his Nirvikalpa mind, by means of Samādhi, he should meditate his own Self, the Maheśvari Herself by his consciousness. Thus, when we will see his own self in all the beings and all the beings in his own self, then the Jiva will get the vision of the Goddess Mahāvidyā, giving auspicious liberation (Mokṣa) O King! After the high souled Munis have seen the Goddess, of everlasting intelligence and bliss, then he becomes the knower of Brahman. All the Māyā, the cause of this Univirse becomes burnt up; only, as long as the body remains, the Prārabdha Karma remains.'

जीवन्युक्तस्त्वा जातो मृतेो मोक्षमावानुयात् ।

कृतकृष्णो भवेत्ता यो भजेजवादीवक्रम। ५ ५ १ ॥

Then the Jivas become liberated, while living; and when the body dissolves, he attains to final liberation. Therefore, O Child! Whoever worships the Mother becomes crowned with success; there is no doubt in this.

तस्मात्सर्वेलेन धेयया श्रीभुवनेश्री ।

श्रोतम्बा चैव मंत्व्या गुरुवाक्यानुसारतः ॥ ५९ ॥

Therefore follow the advise of the Guru, the Spiritual Teacher; and with all attention, hear, think and meditate on the Great Goddess of the World. राजत्रेवं कृती यज्ञे मोक्ष्वो नात्र संशयः ।

अन्ये यज्ञः सकामासुरूपबन्ति क्षयोभ्युखा: ॥ 60 ॥

O King! Liberation is sure to ensue of this Mānasa Yajñā. All the other Yajñās are Sakāma (with some object in view) and therefore their effects are temporary.

अनिष्ठोभेन विधिवत्स्वगिकामो यजेदिति ।

वेयातुगासनं चैततुववर्ति मनीषिणः ॥ 6 1 ॥

क्षीणे पुण्ये मृत्युर्लोक विगर्पित च यथापति ।

तस्मातु मानसः श्रेष्ठे यजोउपब्रथ एव सः ॥ 6 2 ॥

He who wants enjoyments in Heaven, should perform the Agnisotma Yajña, with due rites and ceremonies; such is the Vedic injunction. But when the acquired merit expires, the sacrificer will have to come again into this world of mortals. Therefore the Manasa Yajña is eternal and best.

न राजा साधितुं योग्यो मखोउसी जयमिच्छता ।

तामसस्तु कृतः पूर्वे सर्वेत्रस्वयासुंधना ॥ 63 ॥

वैरं निविंहितं राजसत्तकस्य दुरात्मनः ।

यकृतेनितस्ता: सपार्त्ववासानीकोडिग्र: पेरं ॥ 64 ॥

देवीयजं कुरुवाठा विततं विधिपूर्वकम् ।

विष्णुना यः कृत पूर्वे सुह्यादो गुर्पसन ॥ 65 ॥

O King! Hear now about the Devi Yajña, that was performed by Viṣnu in the beginning of the creation. You better now do that Devi Yanjña with due rules.

तथा त्वं कुक राजेन्र विधिं ते प्रव्रीभ्यम् ।

ब्राह्मण: सन्ति राजेन्व विधित्रा वेवदितमाः ॥ 66 ॥

देवीवीविधान्ता मन्त्रमार्थिविष्णाः ।

याजकास्ते पवीध्यन्ति यजमानस्वलेवे हि ॥ 67 ॥

I will tell you all about the rules; there are Brāhmins that know the rules and know best also the Vedas; they know also the seed mantrams of the Devi, as well as the rules of their application; they are clever in all the mantrams. These will be your priests and you yourself will be the sacrificer.

कृत्वा यज्च विधानेन दत्त्वा पुण्यं मयाजितम्।

समुद्रर महाराज चितरं दुर्गति गतन् ॥ 68 ॥

O King! Do this sacrifice duly and deliver your father from hell by the merits that you will acquire thereby.

विश्रावमानजं पायं दुर्घटं नरकप्रदम् ।

तथैव शापजी दोषः प्रापः चित्रा ततवान्य ॥ 69 ॥

O Sinless One! The sin incurred on account of insulting a Brāhmīn is serious and leads the sinner to hell. Your father committed that sin and incurred the curse from a Brāhmīn. Therefore he has gone to the hell.

तथा दुर्भरण प्राप्तं सर्वदेशेन घ्युग्जा ।

अन्तराले तथा मृत्युर्नं घ्युनी कुशसंस्तरे ॥ 70 ॥

Your father died also out of a snake bite which is not a meritorious one. The death occurred also in a palace built high up in the air (on a pillar), instead of taking place on the ground on a bed of Kuśa grass.

न संप्रामे न गृत्रायां स्नानदानादिवर्जितम् ।

मरणं ते चितुस्तत्र सीधे जाते कुरुद्धः ॥ 71 ॥

O best of the Kurus! The death did not occur in any battle nor on the banks of the Ganges. Void of proper bathing and charities, etc., he died in a palace.

कृणपानि च सर्वाणि नरकस्य नृपोतम ।

तर्केक कारणं तस्य न जातं चातितुर्तेभम् ॥ 72 ॥

O best of Kings! All the ugly causes, leading to hell, were present in the case of your father. See, again, there is also one thing which done will lead to one's liberation; but that was absent too with your father.

यत्र यत्र स्थितः प्राणो ज्ञाला कालं समागतम् ।

साधनानामभावेप्रि ढ्वशश्रातिसघुक्टे ॥ ७३ ॥

यदा निवेद्यमाति मनसा निमेनेल वै ।

पशुभृतामको देहो मम किं चार्र दुःखदम् ॥ ७४ ॥

पतत्वघ यथाकामं मुक्तोर्द हिनुगोगेख्ययः ।

नागामकानि तत्वानि तत्र का परिवेदना ॥ ७ 5 ॥

ब्रहीवाहं न संसारी सदा मुक्तः सनातनः ।

देहेन मम सब्बन्धः कर्मणा प्रतिपादितः ॥ ७ 6 ॥

That is this: Let a man remain, wherever he may, whenever he comes to learn that his end is approaching, even if he had not practised before any good practises or meritorious deeds, and even if he becomes senseless in the trial time of death, when dispassion comes to an individual whose mind gets, for the time being, clear and free from any worldly thoughts, then he should think thus: "Thus my body, composed of five elements, will soon be destroyed; there is no cause whatsoever in having any remorse for it; let whatever come, that it may; I am free, void of qualities; and I am the Eternal Pursua; death is not capable to do any harm to me. All the elements are liable to decay and destruction; what remorse can overtake me? I am not a man of the world, I am always free, Eternal Brahma; I have got no connection with this body that is merely the outcome of actions.

तानि सर्वाणि मुक्तानि शुभानि चेतताराणि च।

मनुव्यदेशयोगेन सुखदुःखानुसाध्यन्ति ॥ 77 ॥

Before I did meritorious or unmeritorious acts, leading to happiness and pain; therefore I have got this mortal coil and am enjoying the fruits of my past auspicious or inauspicious Karma.

विमुक्तो3तिभयादुयोगाद्यमात्संसारसंकटात् ।

इत्येवे चित्यमानसु नन्दानविवर्षितः ॥ 78 ॥

Whoever thinks thus and dies, even if he does not take proper purificatory bath or make any charity, he gets himself freed from the awful Sarinsāra and never comes to see himself again born in this world.

मरणं चेद्वापोति स मुचेजजनमदुःखतः ।

एषा काछा पर प्रोक्ता योरिनामयि दुर्विभ ॥ 79 ॥

O King! This method of parting from one's body is rarely attained even by the Yogins; this is the acme, the highest height of all the human efforts towards liberation.

पिता ते नृपश्रादुर्ग दृष्ट्वा शापा दिजोदितम् ।

देहे ममत्वं कृतायास निर्वेदमयावतान् ॥ 80 ॥

But your father, hearing even the curse from a

Book III Chapter XIII

Brähmin, retained his attachment towards his body; therefore, he did not attain dispassion.

नीरीतो मम देहोउयं राख्य निरूत्कण्टकम् ।

कयं जीवाग्रहं कामं मन्त्रानानयन्तु है ॥ 81 ॥

He thought thus: “My body is now free from any disease; my kingdom is free from enemies or any other source of danger; how can I now get myself saved from this untimely death.” Thinking thus, he ordered to call the Brāhmapas, who know the mantrams.

और्धधं मणिमन्ते च यन्ते परमकं तथा ।

आतोर्ण तथा सौधे कृतत्वामुपतित्वा ॥ 82 ॥

Then that king ascended to the palace, with medicines, maṇi mantras and many other instruments.

न स्नाने न कृतं दानं न देथ्या: स्मरणं कृतम् ।

न प्रभौ शयनं चैव देवं मचा परं तथा ॥ 83 ॥

मनो मोहाणंदे धोरे मृत: सौधेडिहना हतः ।

कृत्वा पापा कलेयेंगातापससत्याबमानजम् ॥ 84 ॥

He considered his fate to be the strongest and, therefore, did not take his bath in any holy place; he did not perform any charities, did not sleep on the ground or remember any mantram of the Devi. Due to Kali entering into his body, he committed the sin of insulting an ascetic and plunged himself

in the ocean of delusion and died bitten by the Taksaka snake on the top of a palace.

अवश्यमेव नरकं एतैरावरणेभवैत ।

तस्मातं चितरं प्याततमपुढर नृपोतम ॥ 85 ॥

The King has now fallen undoubtedly to hell, on account of those vicious deeds. Therefore, O King! dost Thou deliver your father from the sin.

सूत जवाच

इति श्रुत्वा वचसत्य व्यासस्यामिततेजसः ।

साशुकफो3तितु:खात्तों बधूव जनमेवय: ॥ 86 ॥

Sūta said, O Rsis! Hearing these words from the fiery Vyāsa, the king Janamejaya became very sad and tears came from his eyes and flowed down his cheeks and throat.

स्थिरिं अंजिति मेठध चित्त मे नरके स्थितः ।

तत्कारीय यथैवाठा खर्चा यात्युत्तासुतः ॥ 87 ॥

डीत श्रीमदेवीभागलो महापुराणे तृतीयकल्पे

प्रदारोडध्याः ॥ 12 ॥

He then exclaimed in a suffocating voice “Fie on me! my father is still in the hell. I will now do at once whatever leads my father to heaven.”

Thus ends the Twelfth Chapter on the Amba

Yajña rules in the Third Book of

Śrimaddevīthāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of

18,000 verses composed by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book III Chapter XIII

CHAPTER XIII

On the Devi Yajñā

राजोवाच

ह्रौिणा तु कर्थ यजः कृतः पूर्वे पितामह ।

जगलकारणस्पेण विज्ञाना प्रभाविज्ञाना ॥ १ ॥

के सहायास्तु तथासन्माहापा: के महामते ।

ऋलिवजो वेदतत्त्रजास्तमे बूहि परन्तव ॥ 2 ॥

पशुल्कारोग्यहं यजं विधिपृटेन कर्मण ।।

शूला विद्याकृते यागमंबिकवाग: सभाहिति ॥ 3 ॥

The King spoke: “O Grandfather! How did Visnu, the Powerful, the Cause of the world, perform the Devi Yajña? Whose help did he receive and what priests with their knowledge of the Vedas did he engage, kindly tell all these to me in special

details. I will very attentively hear first this Devi Yajña, performed by Visnu; and then I will make arrangements to do that myself accordingly.

व्यास उवाच

राजऋषुण महाभाग विस्तरं परमाद्धुतम् ।

यथा भगवता यजः कृतश्र विधिपूर्वकः ॥ 4 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O noble one! Hear in detail that very wonderful thing, how Viṣṇu celebrated the Devi Yajña conformably to the rules laid down in the Śāstras.

विसर्जिता यदा देया दत्ता शन्नीक्षा ताक्यः ।

काजेश: पुरुषा जाता विमानवरमाधिश्वतः ॥ 5 ॥

When Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa were each given powers by the Devī, the Goddess of the Universe, and when they parted, these three Devas became free of their womanhood, while they were coming back in their aerial cars and turned out men, as they were before.

प्राता महापर्वे घोरं ग्रवते विबुचोतमाः ।

चुकः स्नानानि वासार्थं स्मुतायाद्ध भयं स्थितः ॥ 6 ॥

These three Devas, found the great ocean before them. They brought out world from it; and built, in that world, dwelling abodes; and they themselves began to live in some of them.

आधारशक्तिरचाल मुक्ता देख्या स्वयं ततः ।

तद्धाया स्थिता जाता धरा मेदः सम्पित्ता ॥ 7 ॥

That world became fixed, steady and the supporter of all beings when the Goddess imparted the power of fixture, steadiness, and the power of supporting to the world. The earth, filled marrow, then, became fixed and the great supporter by Her power.

मधुकैदभयोंदैर्स:संयोगामेदैति स्मृता ।

धाणाच्च घरा प्रोका पृथ्वी विस्तारयोगतः ॥ 8 ॥

मही चापि महीयस्वाद्धृता सा शेभमस्तेक ।

गैरयक्ष कृताः सर्वे धारणार्थ प्रविस्ताः ॥ 9 ॥

सोड़कौलं यथा काफे तथा ते गिरयः कृतः ।

महीधरो महाराज प्रोच्छते विबुधैर्नैर्नैः ॥ 10 ॥

O King! The name of this earth is Medinit, since it was made out of the marrow of the two Asuras, Madhu and Kaitabha. This earth is termed Dharā because it supports all; is termed Prthvī because it is very capacious; and it is called Mahī because it is great, since it supports so many beings. O King! the Ananta serpent is holding it on her thousand hoods. To make the earth remain solid and compact, Brahmā built at places mountains. An iron nails in a log of wood, so these hills and mountains within this earth made it fixed. Therefore, the Pundits call these mountains “Mahīdhara” holder of the earth.

जातक्रपयो मेकईयुवोजनवित्रतः ।

कृती मणियमधे: श्रौर: शोभितः परमाढुतः ॥ 1 1 ॥

O King! Thus the golden Meru, the great mountain, many Yojanas wide, adorned with many golden mountain peaks was created.

मरीचिनारैदोत्रिश्र पुलस्वः पुलहः क्रतुः ।

दस्वो वसिष इन्येने बह्वण: प्रशितः सुतः ॥ 1 2 ॥

Next Marici, Nārada, Atri, Pulastya, Kratu, Dakṣa, and Vasiṣtha were created by Brahmā; these are the Brahmā's mental sons (sons created by the sheer power of mind).

मरीचेः कार्यपो जातो द्वाकन्याखयोद्वा ।

ताथ्यो देहाशु दैत्याशु समुर्पत्रा हुनेकश: ॥ 13 ॥

The son Kaśyapa was born to Marīci and thirteen daughters were born of Dakṣa. From these daughters and out of the seed of Kaśyapa, various Devas and Daityas were born.

तस्तु कार्यपी सृष्टि: प्रश्ना चातिविस्ता ।

मनुष्ययुग्यपीद्वाजातिभेदैतैकथा ॥ 14 ॥

Then human beings, animals, serpents and many other classes were created. This is called the Kāśyapī Srisṭi or the Kāśyapa's creation.

ब्रह्माध्याधिद्वितु मनु: स्वायंभुतोप्रभन्त ।

गतत्कप तथा नारी संजाता वामभगतः ॥ 15 ॥

Next Svāyambhu Manu sprang from the lower half of Brahma; and the daughter named Śatarūpā came out of the left hand side of the Brahma's body.

प्रियतत्तेनापदी सुती तत्या बभूवतुः ।

तिज्ञः कन्या वारगोहा हुभवग्रसिसुन्दरीः ॥ १ ६ ॥

Two sons Priyavrata and Uttānapāda were born of Manu in the womb of Śatarūpā and the three daughters, very beautiful and fair complexioned, were also born of him.

एवं सृष्टि समुताह भगवान्मलो:द्वः ।

चकार बहलोकं च मेकश्री मनोहर्म ॥ १७ ॥

Creating then, the Bhagavān, the lotus born Brahmā built the beautiful Brahma-loka, on the top of the Meru mountain.

वैकुण्डं भगवान्विणु रामारगामुचम् ।

क्रीडास्थानं सुगयं च सर्वैलोकोपरि विधतम् ॥ 18 ॥

Then Bhagavān Viṣṇu built the Vaikuntha city on the top of all the lokas or worlds to dwell with his consort Lakṣmī.

Book III Chapter XIII

शिवोर्पि परसं स्थानं कैतासाखं चकार ह ।

समासाठ चृतरणं विज्ञात्र यथास्थिति ॥ १९ ॥

Mahādeva, too, built the exceedingly beautiful Kailāśa and stayed there with his Bhūtas and played with them at his will.

स्वाशिशिष्टे मेकशिज्ञापरिकरिता: ।

तच्च स्थानं सुरेन्द्रस्य नानारलविशितज्ञ। २ २० ॥

The third Loka termed Heaven was built on the top of Meru, decorated with various precious gems and jewels and stones. It was fixed as the abode of Indra.

समुद्रमथनात्याप: पारिजातस्तरुक्तम: ।

चतुर्दैनतश नाग: कामधेनुश कामत ॥ २१ ॥

उच्चे: श्वासताशःशो वैं रोगाध्यमसतशा ।

इंज्ञोपात्मखिलं जाते वै स्वर्गभूषणम् ॥ २२ ॥

When the great ocean was churned, Pārijāta, the best of all the trees, the elephant Airāvata with four tusks, the Heavenly cow yielding the milk of all desires, the Uccaihśravā horse and Apsarās, Rambhā and others, arose and were taken by Indra. These became the ornaments of Heaven.

धर्वंतीर्घान्त्रमाशु सागराच्छ समुद्धभी ।

स्वर्पशित्ती विराजते देवी ब्रुणीर्णैती ॥ 23 ॥

Moon and Dhanvantari, the great physician also came out of the churning of the ocean. These surrounded with many other members began to shine, being situated above the Heaven.

एवं सृष्टि: समुद्वा जिविधा नृपसत्ता ।

देवतियंड्नमुव्याधिवेदिंविधक्लिनता ॥ 24 ॥

O King! Thus the three varieties, human beings, Devas, and Tiryakas (birds, etc.) and their great subvarieties sprang up.

अंडजा: सेद्वजाड्री चोद्विज्ञान शयुवजा: ।

चतुर्षिंदै: समुपत्न जीवा: कर्मवृता: किल १ 2 5 ॥

The four classes of Jivas, Andaja (born from the eggs) Svedaja (born out of sweats) Udbhija (plants etc.) and Jarāyuja (men etc.) were created, being endowed with the fruits of their past auspicious or inauspicious Karmas, as the case may be.

एवं सृष्टि समासादा ब्रहाविष्णमृद्धश्रा: ।

विद्धारं सेव्य स्थानेषु चक़ः सर्वे यथेपित्न् ॥ 26 ॥

Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa began to play and walk about at their leisures in their respective spheres, after they finished all their creations.

एवं प्रवर्तिते सर्गे भगवान्यभूरन्तुः ।

महात्वल्यम सம் तत सित्राकोष पुवने सक्षे ॥ 27 ॥

Thus the wheel of creation being started, the Great God Bhagavān Viṣṇu Acyuta remained in sport with Mahā Lakṣmi in His own sphere Vaikuntha.

एकसिनस्यये विज्युर्वैकृणठे संश्रितः पुग ।

सुधांसीभृत्यितं झीपं समात मिणमिडितुम् ॥ 28 ॥

Then Bhagavān Viṣṇu, while sitting one day in Vaikunṭha, got in his mind the memory of that beautiful island, called Manj Dvipa, adorned with precious stones, gems and jewels.

यत्र युद्धा महामावां मन्त्रधार्याति रुषः ।

सुखा तो परभा शर्कि कृषिभावं गमितो यथा ॥ 29 ॥

यजं कर्तु मन्त्रधेक अरिकवाया रपापतिः ।

उत्तीर्व भुवन्तास्वात्माकृय महेशुभ्य ॥ 30 ॥

ब्रह्नाणं वर्णं शकं कुवरे पावकं यम् ।

वसिषं कशययं देवं वामदेवं बृह्म्यतिम् ॥ 31 ॥

संभारं कल्यमास यजायं चातिविस्तम् ।

महाधिघचसंयुक्ते सान्चिकं च मनोह्म् ॥ 32 ॥

मण्डर्वे वित्तं तप कार्यमास शिथित्यिभः ।

त्रतीवजी वरयामास सन्तविशेति सुजान् ॥ 33 ॥

O King! In this Mani Dvipa, the Bhagavān Viṣṇu got the vision of the Mahā Māyā and the auspicious mantra. He now thought to celebrate a Yajñā in honour of the Devi, when he recollected the highest Energy, the Great Goddess. He then went out of his abode and invited Brahmā, Maheśvara, Kubera, Indra, Varuṇa, Fire, Yama, Vasiṣṭha, Kaśyapa, Dakṣa, Vāmadeva, Brhaspati and others and began to collect lots of materials necessary for the Devi sacrifice. Selecting a site Sāttvik, beautiful, and possessing great spiritual powers, Viṣṇu erected, with the help of the great artists and engineers, a wide capacious sacrificial

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

hall, and for the due celebration and fulfilment of it, appointed twenty seven priests; who pledged a solemn view to complete it duly.

पित्ति च कारायामास वैदीक्षेय सुवितस्तः ।

प्रजेदुबाहुणा मज्ञान्येय बीजसप्तितान् । ३ ४ ॥

When the big altar and chiti (pile of wood for burning). (Stack of sacrificial bricks) were finished, the Brāhmaṇas began to recite, slowly the Devi mantrams with their root mantrams.

Note: Citi, lit, pile of wood for burning, is perhaps the Mulādhāra, the sacral plexus, where the fire called Kundalinī is first kindled by processes of Yoga.

डुडुसून तैयः कामं विधित्यरिक्तरणे ।

कृते तु वित्ते होमे वागुवाराशरीर्णी ॥ 35 ॥

विष्णु तदा समाभीय सुस्वरा मधुराश्रत ।

विष्णो तं भव देवानां हरे श्रेष्ठतमः सदा ॥ 36 ॥

मान्यघ पुवनीयघ समर्थश सुरेषिति ।

सर्वे त्वामर्चियथिन्त बढ़ाढाडा सुवसना ॥ 37 ॥

Then the profuse quantities of ghee were offered as oblations to the Sacred Fire. Thus when the Homa (offering oblations of ghee to the fire) ceremony was finished elaborately and conforming to the rules of the Sāstras, the sweet and melodious Heavenly voice was heard in the air, addressing Visnu Bhagavān, thus: "O Visnu! Let You be the supreme amongst the gods; honour and worship shall be Thine first; and you would be the most powerful of the Devas. Indra together with Brahmā and the other Devas, all will worship You.

प्रभविष्यिति भो भत्का मानवा भृवि सर्वतः ।

वरद्रस्तं च सर्वेयं भविता मानवेषु वै ॥ 38 ॥

कामद: सर्वदेवानं परम: परमेश्वर: ।

सर्वयेजु सुखलयं पूज्यः सर्वेथ प्रातिकः ॥ 39 ॥

O Acyuta! (O Infallible One!) Those men on the earth that will be devoted to you, will certainly be endowed with power and you shall be the bestower of boons and all their desires. O Viṣṇu! you will be the Supreme of the Devas and you will be the God of the gods; you will be the first and foremost in all the sacrifices and you will be worshipped by the sacrificers.

त्वां जाना पूजायिष्यन्ति वरदस्तं भविष्यसि ।

श्रयिष्यन्ति च देवास्त्वां दानवैरितपीक्षिताः ॥ ४० ॥

शरणास्त्वं च सर्वेर्वां भविता पुरुषोतम ।

पुराणेषु च सर्वेषु वेवेषु वितन्तेषु च ॥ ४१ ॥ ११

त्वं चे पूच्यतः कामं कौतिलस्तव भयिष्यति ।

People will worship you; and you will favor them with the boons. O best of the Puruṣas! When the Devas will be troubled by the Asuras, they will come and take refuge in Thee. You will be the Protector of all, there is no doubt in this. In all the Purūṇas and all this vast Vedas, You will be first worshipped.

यदा यदा हि धर्मस्य रत्नानिभविति भृतते ॥ 42 ॥

तदोशनावतिर्यागु कतव्यं धरप्रेणम् ।

O Késava! Wherever there will be decay and decline in religion, You will incarnate in your parts and preserve the religion.

अवतारा: सुविक्षताः: पृथिव्यां तां भागतः ॥ 43 ॥

भविष्यन्ति धराथां वे माननीया महात्मानम् ।

अवतारीयु सर्वैनु नानायोनिषु माधव ॥ 44 ॥

विषयाता: सर्वतोकेषु भविता मधुसूदन ।

O Mādhava! Avatāras, renowned in all the worlds, will come down on earth as Your part incarnations in all sorts of wombs, in due order, and will be respected by all the high souled personages. O Madhusūdana! Those Avatāras and will be famous in all the Lokas, the worlds.

अवतारेषु सर्वेषु शफिस्ते सईचारिणी ॥ 4 5 ॥

भविष्यिति मगशेन सर्वकार्यप्रसाधिति ।

In all your Avatāras, you will get your attendants, the Śaktiis (females) drawing their energies from My parts; and they will serve all your purposes.

वाराही नारसिंही च नानाभेदैरनेक्या ॥ 46 ॥

नानायुधा: शुभाकाता: सर्वभरणमणिततः ।

ताधिष्ट्र: सदा विश्यो सुरकाव्यिणि माध्यय ॥ 47 ॥

साध्रविष्यस तत्सर्वे महत्त्वदानतः ।

Varāhi, Nārasinhī, etc. and various other Saktis of auspicious appearances, endowed with various weapons and decked with all the ornaments will

Book III Chapter XIII

serve as your attendants; no doubt in this. O Viṣṇu! Always with their help and under the influence of My favour, you will no doubt be quite competent to serve the purpose of the Devas.

तात्स्या नावमन्त्याः सर्वेशा गर्वेलगतः ॥ 48 ॥

पूजनीयाः प्रयनेलेन माननीयाशु सर्वेल।

You should respect and worship all those powers by all means and with very great attention; never shew the slightest trace of pride to them; never do you thus insult them.

नूनं ता भारते खण्डे शतन्धः सर्वकामदा: ॥ ४९ ॥

भविष्यिति मनुभाणां पूर्तिता: प्रतिमासु च ।

These Śaktis, capable of bestowing all the desires, will be worshipped in Pratimās (images of clay, etc.) in the whole of India.

तासा तत च देवेश कीर्ति: स्याद्यिलेषधि ॥ ५० ॥

डीयेषु सतस्वयि च विस्त्यात भुवि मण्डले ।

O Deva of the Devas! The fame of all these Saktis, as well as of You will be spread in the seven worlds and in the whole Universe.

ताछा त्वां वे महापाम मानवा भुवि मण्डले ।। ५१ ।।

अर्धियथिति वाज्छाखीं सकामाः सत्तं हरे ।

O Hari! Human beings on this earth will constantly worship with selfish ends these powers and you, for the fructification of their desires.

अर्चिंसु चोपहाईथु नानाभावसमित्वितः ॥ ५२ ॥

पूर्वियस्थिति वेदोकैर्दैर्निपिजरैस्तथा ।

Having various desires, men will, in your worship, present various offerings, recite the Veda mantrams, and repeat the names of you and the powers.

महिमा तव भूतोंके स्वर्गं च मधुसुदन ॥ ५३ ॥

पूजनाहेदवेदेश वृद्धिमेधिति मानवै: ।

O Viṣṇu! You will be the God of the Immortals and your glory will be enhanced by worship offered by the human beings in the world as well as in the heavens.'

व्यास उवाच

इति दत्त्वा वरान्वाणी विरताम खसभ्वा ॥ 54 ॥

भगवानप्रि प्रीताता इभवबछ्छ्वणादिव ।

Vyāsa said: “O King! The heavenly voice, thus, bestowing boons on Viṣṇu, ceased. Viṣṇu Bhagavān became very glad to hear this.”

समाय विविधात्रं भगवान्टिरीधरः ॥ 55 ॥

विसर्विता तान्देवान्बहापुत्राम्पूनीनि ।

जगागमानुचेः सार्थ वैकुण्डं गकडधजः ॥ 56 ॥

स्वामि स्वामि चि भिण्यापि पुनः सर्वे सुगस्ततः ।

मुनयो वित्सिता वार्ता कुर्वित्ते परस्परम् ॥ 57 ॥

ययु: प्रभृदिता: कामं स्वाभ्यान्यावनानय ॥ 58 ॥

Then Hari, the God of Gods, completed duly the sacrifice and dismissed the Devas and the Munis, the sons of Brahmā. Then ascending on Garuda, (His Vāhana), He went up to Vaikuntha with his followers. The Devas also went to their own respective places. The Munis also retired gladly to their own hermitages, all thounderstruck to see these things, conversing with each about this sacrifice”

श्रुत्वा वाणीं परमिविशरांं ध्योमजां शोजरमयं

सर्वेधी वे प्रकृतिविषये वफिक्वशु जातः ।

चकुः सर्वे द्विजमुनिणगाः पूजनं भक्तिकुक्तासत्या:

कामां निविलफलर्त चागमातेम् मुनीद्राः ॥ 59 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयकन्क्ये

रगदोद्योस्थगः // 13 / 11

O King! All were filled with best devotion towards the Supreme Force, on hearing this clear beautiful, sonorous heavenly voice; then the Dvijas, the Munis, and Munindras began to worship with devotion, according to the Vedas, that Highest Force, the Supreme Goddess, giving all desired objects profusely in all the details.

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter on the

Devi Yajña by Śri Visnu in the Third Book

in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of

18,000 verses composed by Maharṣi

Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XIV

On the Glories of the Devi

जनमेव जयात

श्रुतों वे हरिणा कल्युतो यज्ञे विस्तरतो हित्र।

महिमानं त्वाध्यवया वद्र विस्तरतो मम ॥ १ ॥

श्रुत्वा देयाशुरिंव वे कुर्बे मखमानुत्तमम् ।

प्रसादात्व विश्रेदं भविष्यामि च पावनः ॥ २ ॥

Janamejaya spoke: “O Dvija! I have heard in detail the Devi Yajña, performed by Śri Viṣṇu. Now describe Her Glory and glorious deeds. After hearing these, the Devi’s glorious deeds, I will also perform that, the best of all sacrifices. Thereby I will no doubt be pure through your favour.”

व्यास उवाच

शूणु राजन्यवस्यामि देयाश्रितमुन्तमम् ।

इतिहास पुराणं च कथयामि सुविस्तम् ॥ 3 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King. Hear, I am describing to you the history of the most auspicious mighty deeds of the Devi, according to the Purānas.

कौसलेषु नृपश्रेषु: सुर्वंक्षरासमुद्धः ।

पुथपुत्रो महातेजा धुवसिंधितरिति स्मृत: ॥ 4 ॥

धर्मात्मा सत्यसंध्र शर्णभ्रवित्ते रतः ।

अयोधायायां समुद्धायां राज्यं चक्रे शुर्चित्रतः ॥ 5 ॥

In days of yore, there reigned in the country of Kosala, King Dhruvasandhi of the Solar Dynasty. He was the son of Puspa and celebrated on account of his great prowess. He was truthful religious, engaged in doing good to his subjects, obeying the laws of the four castes and Śāramas. He being pure, performed his regal duties in the flourishing city of Ayodhyā.

ब्राह्मण: श्रविता यैश्या: श्रूत्रश्रान्ये तथा द्विजा: ।

स्वां स्वां वृत्ति समास्थाय तत्राज्ये धर्मोत्रभवन् ॥ 6 ॥

The Brāhmanas, Kṣattriyas, Vaiśyas, and Śūdras and other good persons all lived religiously under his rule, each abiding by his own profession.

न चौरा: पिशुना पूर्णतिस्तस्य राजेचे च कुत्रचित् ।

दंभा: कृतचना मुख्यांश्य वसन्ति किल मानवाः ॥ 7 ॥

No thieves, cheats, cunning persons, vain and arrogant persons treacherous and illiterate men were allowed to remain in his kingdom.

एवं वै वर्तमानस्य नृपस्य कुकसत्तम ।

दे पत्थौ रूपसम्पत्रे ह्रासतु: कामभोगरे ॥ 8 ॥

O best of Kurus! Thus ruling virtuously, the king had two wives, both of them young, fair and beautiful and well able to give delights and enjoyments to the king.

मनोराम धर्मपत्नी सुरूपास्तिविचक्षणा ।

लीलावती द्रितीया च सास्पि रूपगुणोन्दिता ॥ 9 ॥

The first and lovely wife was Manoramā, and the second was Lilāvati. Both of them were exceedingly handsome, intelligent and qualified.

विज्ञहार सपत्नीभ्यां गृहेषुपवनेषु च ।

मौडीगिरी दीर्घिकासु सोयेषु विविधेषु च ॥ १ ० ॥ ॥

The king enjoyed much with them in palaces, gardens, romantic hills, lakes, and various beautiful mansions.

मनोरामा शुभे काले सुवेषे पुत्रमुत्तमम् ।

सुर्दर्नाभिधं पूत्रं राजत्कृष्णसंयुन्तम् ॥ ११ ॥

In the auspicious moment, Manoramā gave birth to a beautiful child, endowed with all royal qualifications. The child was named, in due course, Sudarśana.

लीलावत्यपि तत्वन्ती मासैनेकेन भापिनी ।

सुवुले सुन्दरं पुरं गुधे पशे दिने तथा ॥ 12 ॥

Next within one month, his second wife the fair Lilāvatī in the auspicious fortnight and in the auspicious day, gave birth to an excellent child.

चकार नृपतिस्तत्र जातकमार्विकं द्वयो: ।

ददौ दानानि विधेभ्यः पुजजनप्रमोदितः ॥ 13 ॥

The King then performed the Jāta-Karma (ceremonies on the birth of a child) and being very glad, made lots of presents, wealth etc., to the Brāhmaṇas.

प्रीति तयोः समां राजा चकार सुतयोगैः ।

नृपधाकार सौहाद्वैधतरं न कदाचन ॥ 14 ॥

Book III Chapter XIV

The King shewed affection equally to the two children; never he made any distinction between them.

चूताकर्म तयोश्रके विधिना नृपसत्तमः ।

यथाविभवमेवासी प्रीतियुक्तः परन्तः ॥ 15 ॥

The king, the tormenter of the foes, was very glad and performed duly the Cūdākarana ceremony according to his position and wealth.

कृतचूदी सुती कामां जहतुर्गुपतेमंतः ।

क्रीडसानावृषी कान्ती लोकानामानुरंजकां ॥ 16 ॥

The sight of these two sons delighted very much the people. Now seeing these Krtačūdas, and playing, the king was merged in the ocean of pleasure.

तयो सुरूर्णीने ज्येछो तीलावव्या: सुतः शुषः ।

शत्रुविसंक्रकः कामं चातुद्वाययो घयुष है ॥ 17 ॥

नृपते: प्रीतिजनको मघुवायवचासदर्शन: ।

प्रजानी वतल्पः सो5पृत्तया मफिजनस्य वे ॥ 18 ॥

Sudarśana was the eldest; but Śatrujit, the second beautiful son by Lilāvatī was of sweet and persuasive speech. His beautiful figure and sweet words gave very much delight to the king, and for these qualities, the child Śatrujit turned out also a favourite of the people and ministers.

तथा तस्मिकुपः प्रीति चकार गुणायोगतः ।

मन्दभायामन्दघावो न तथा वै सुदर्शनें ॥ 19 ॥

The king could not show so much affection to the unfortunate Sudarśana as he shewed to Śatrujit.

एवं गच्छिति काले तु धूवस्धिर्मूर्वोपात्म: ।

जगाम वनमध्येउसी मृगयाधिपतर: सदा ॥ 20 ॥

निनम्गुगान् रूक-कंक्रून्युक्तगावयाच्छशन् ।

महिषाछ्छपान्यड्वगीश्रकीड नृपतिर्वर्ने ॥ 21 ॥

Thus some days having passed, one day King Dhruvasandhi went out on a hunting expedition to the forest. He killed in the forest many deer, Ruru (a kind of deer), elephants, boar, hare, buffaloes, rhinoceros, camels and amused himself very much with this hunting affair.

क्रीडागने नृप तव वने घोरेप्रतिद्धको ।

उदतिष्ठिकुक्रान्तु सिंहः परमकोपनः ॥ 22 ॥

राजा शिलीमुखेनादी विद्धः कोधवर्ग गतः।

दूद्धाउप्रे नृपति सिंहो ननाद मेयनि स्कनः ॥ 23 ॥

While he was hunting thus, a lion got very much enraged, and, from a bush, suddenly jumped and came upon the king. That king of the beasts was already struck with arrows; now seeing the king in front, he loudly roared.

कृत्वा चोर्धें स लोगूल प्रसारितवृहतस्टः ।

ह्रंतुं नृपतिमाकाशादुव्यपतातिकोपनः ॥ 24 ॥

नृपतिसतरसा वीक्ष्य द्वापारसि करे तदा ।

वामे चर्म समादाय स्थितः सिंह इवापरः ॥ 25 ॥

He angrily lifted his long tail high up in the air and, puffing up his manes, jumped up high in the air to attack and to take the life of the king. Seeing this, instantly the king took sword in his right hand and shield in his left and stationed himself like another lion before him.

सेवकातस्य ये सर्वे तेपि वाणान्यथक् ।

अमुंचकृपिता: कामं सिंहोपरि रूपाचित्यतः ॥ 26 ॥

The king's followers, one and all, angrily shot arrows on the lion.

हाहाकारो महानासीलंप्रहारश्व टारणः ॥

उत्पात तत सिंहो नृपस्योरि टारणः ॥ 27 ॥

Then a loud uproar ensued; and all began to hurl arrows as best as they could. But, after all, that dangerous lion fell upon the king.

तं पतन्तं समालोक्य खड्गौनाथसहनपुः ।

सोउपि क्रूरैनखाडीघु तजागत्य विद्यातिरः ॥ 28 ॥

स नखौराह्तो राजा पपात च ममारे वे ।

चुकुगु: सैनिकासे तु निजीटुर्बिहिलेखतां ॥ 29 ॥

Seeing thus, the king struck him with his sword, but the lion also tore asunder the king, with his sharp nails. The king thus struck by the lion, fell on the spot and died. The soldiers cried aloud and killed the lion with arrows.

मृतः सिंहोर्पि तवैव भूपतिछा तथा मृतः ।

सैनिकर्मीभ्रुमुखाशु तत्रागाय निविदिताः ॥ 30 ॥

Thus both the king and lion lay dead on the spot; and the soldiers turned back to the palace and gave all the informations to the royal ministers.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

परतोकानां भूपं शुत्वा ते मन्रिसत्तमाः ।

संस्कारं कारायामासुरांचा तत्र वर्जितिके ॥ 31 ॥

When the munis heard the demise of the king, they went to the forest, performed the burning of the dead body of the king.

परतोकाक्रियां सर्वा विस्त्रो विधिपूर्वकम् ।

कारयामास तत्रैव परतोकपुरुखावहम् ॥ 32 ॥

The Maharṣi Vasisṭha performed duly on the same spot, all the funeral ceremonies, thus ensuring the king the safe journey to the next world.

प्रजा: प्रकृतयेडिव वसिष्ठघ महापुनि: ।

सूरर्जनं नृपं कटुं मनः चकुः परस्पर्भ ॥ 33 ॥

All the subject and the citizens and the Muni Vasisṭha counselled each other to install Sudarśana on the throne as the king.

धर्मपनीसुत शान्तः पुरुषश्र सुलक्षणः ।

अयं नृपासनाईश हाबुब्वमान्सितसना: ॥ 34 ॥

विशेषो3पि तथैवाह योग्यो3यं नृपतेः सुतः ।

बातो2पि धर्मवान् राजा नृपासनिशहाईति ॥ 35 ॥

The minister-in-chief as well as the other members proposed that as Sudarśana is the son of the legal wife, calm and quiet, beautiful and endowed with all the royal qualifications, he is fit for the throne. Maharṣī Vasiṣṭha said, the royal son, though not attained to proper age is still religious; therefore he is really fit be installed as king on the royal throne.

कृते मन्मे मन्थिवृदैयुधाज्ञापा पाधिवः ।

तजाजगाम तरसा शुन्ता तृज्यिधीपिति: ॥ ३६ ॥

When the wise aged ministers thus decided, Yudhājit, the king of Ujjain, on hearing the decision hastened to the spot.

मृतं जामातरं शुना लीलावन्या: पिता तत् ।

तजाजगाम व्वितो दौहिजप्रियकायया ॥ ३७ ॥

He was the father of Līlāvatī; on hearing the demise of his son-in-law he came there, so that his daughter's son might get the kingdom.

वीरसेनस्तथा उसात: सुदर्भनहितेन्दिष्या ।

कलिलाधिपतिशेक मनोरामपिता नृप: ॥ 38 ॥

Next, Virasena, the king of the country of

Kalinga and the father of Manoramā, came there also with the object that his daughter's son Sudarśana be the Emperor.

उभौ ती सैन्यसंयुक्तो नृपो साध्यससंश्वितो ।

चक्रतुपनिमुखैसैर्निंग राजस्य कारणत् ॥ 39 ॥

The two kings, accompanied respectively by their own army and soldiers, began to counsel with the aged ministers, each trying so that his daughter's son may get the throne.

युधाजितु तदारूपछ्छज्येषुः कः सुतयोईयोः ।

राज्य प्राणोति ज्येषो वै न कनीयान्कदाचन ॥ 40 ॥

Yudhājit made the question: Who is the eldest of the two sons? Is it always the case that the eldest will inherit the kingdom? Will not the youngest ever be able to acquire it?

वीरसेनोप्रि तग्रह धर्मपन्सीरुत किल ।

राजाहं: स यथा राजज्ञास्त्रेन्यो मया श्रुन्ति ॥ 41 ॥

Virasena said: "O King! He who is the son of the legal wife inherits the kingdom; this I have heard from the learned who are proficient in the knowledge of the Śāstra".

युधाजित्नुगराहेदे ज्योड़ोर्ध च तथा गुणीः ।

राजलक्षणसंयुक्तो न त्वार्यं सुर्जनः ॥ 42 ॥

Hearing Virasena, Yudhājit repeated “Sudarśana is not so qualified with royal qualifications and other matters as this son of the late king, Śatrujit. How can then Sudarśana inherit the throne?”

विवादोउर सुसंपजो नृपयोस्तत लध्ययो: ।

कः: सदैहमपाकर्तुं क्षमः: स्यादितिबड़्टे ॥ 43 ॥

O King! Then quarrels ensued amongst the two kings. Now, at this critical juncture, who is able to solve their doubts?

युधाजीमन्त्रिण: प्राष युयं स्वार्थपरा: किल ।

सुदर्जनं नृपं कृत्वा धर्नं भोतुं किलेक्छंच ।। ४४ ॥।

Yudhajit then addressed the ministers: “You all are prompted by selfish ends; you want to acquire a good deal of money by making Sudarśana the king.

युषाकं तु तिचारोउयं मया ज्ञातत्थोङ्ग ।

सत्रुवित्सवलस्तस्मायमती चे नृपासने ॥ 4 5 ॥

Book III Chapter XV

मयि जीवित कः कुयात्कनीयांसं नृप किकल ।

स्वक्वा ज्येषे गुणाई च सेनया च सम्पत्नम् ॥ 46 ॥

I have come to know by your gestures and postures that your decision is to the above affect. After all, as Śatrujit possesses many more qualifications then Sudarsana, he has more claims to the throne; and, therefore, he is fit to occupy the throne and no other. Moreover, let me see as long as I live who can set aside the claims of a qualified prince, in possession of an army, and put forward the claims of a prince who has no qualifications at all.

नूरं सुखं करिष्यामि तस्मिन्बड्गास्य मेदिति ।

धारया च हिंधा भूयात्युषाकां तत्र का कथा ॥ 47 ॥

I am ready to fight and I will tear into two pieces by my sword. What more have you to say on this"?

वीरसेन्मुत तच्छूला युधाजितमभाषत ।

बातौ ती सूरिणज्ञों को घेदोउन विचारण ।। 48 ॥

Hearing this, Virasena addressed Yudhajit “I see the two boy’s intelligence as the same. You are intelligent; kindly mention where is the difference?”

एवं विवद्यानौ ती संस्थितो नृपती तत् ।

प्रजाश्र ऋषयश्रेवे बभयुव्यंमानतः ॥ ४१ ॥

O King! The two kings quarrelling with each other, remained there; the subject and the Rşis, seeing this, were very anxious.

समाजमूछ श्रापन्ताः समैयाः कलेशततयाः ।

विश्रां चाधिकांक्षितः परमयरमतंदिताः ॥ ५० ॥

Hundreds of tributary princes wanting that the two kings might be involved into quarrels with each other, came to the spot, with their soldiers, though they had to undergo great hardships in doing so.

निष्पाद हाययुतन श्रुब्रेसपुराओयः ।

राजज्वयमापहतुं मृतं शुचा महीपतिन् ॥ 51 ॥

Many aborigines, from the inhabitants of Śrīgavperur, hearing the demise of the late king, also appeared on the scene with the sole object to plunder.

पूत्री च बालकौ शुचा विगूहं च परस्यम् ।

चौरास्तर समाजमयुंरेणतनारवि ॥ 52 ॥

The two princes are minors; and hearing their parties at war with each other, many robbers from various adjoining countries came also there.

संमदन्त्र सड़ातः कलहें समुपस्थिते ।

युधापिज्ञीरमेन्य शुद्धकामी बध्वतुः ॥ 53 ॥

इति श्रीमद्धेंभागवते महापुराणो हृतीयकल्भं चतुर्वीरोअयायः ॥ 14 ॥

Thus when the war broke out between the two kings, the great confusion and tumult arose within the kingdoms; on the other hand, Yudhājit and Virasena both became ready to fight."

Thus ends the Fourteenth Chapter on the narration of the glories of the Devi and the death of the Kosala

king Dhruva Sandhi in the Third Book of

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam.

Book III Chapter XV

CHAPTER XV

On the Fight between Yudhājit and Virasena

व्यास उवाच

संयुगे च सति तत्र धप्ययोराहवाय

सपुणतपशस्थयोः ।

कोधलोभवशयोः समं ततः

संबंधूत तुपुलसतु तिमर्दः ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When the war was declared, the two kings, excited by greed and anger, took up arms; and a dreadful encounter ensued.

संस्थितः स समरे धृताचपः

पार्थिव: पृथुल्बाद्रयुधार्जित् ।

संयुतः स्वबलवाह्नादि-

कैराह्वाय कृतनिश्छायो नृपः ॥ 2 ॥

On one side, King Yudhājit of long arms, surrounded by his own army, with bows and arrows came ready to fight.

वीरसेन इह सैन्यसंयुतः क्षात्रधर्मानुसूच स्वांगे ।

पुत्रिकात्मबहिताय पार्थिवः संरिस्थतः सूपपतेः समानेकाः॥ 3 ॥

On the other hand, the fiery Virasena, the second God of the Devas appeared in the battle, following a true Kṣatriya custom, on behalf his daughter'son.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

स बाणवृष्टि विससर्जे पार्थिवे

युधार्जितं वीक्ष्य रोगे स्थितं च ।

सिर्ते तिड्वानिव सोयवृष्टिधिः:

कोधान्वितः सत्यपात्रकमोउसी ॥ 4 ॥

Then that truthful king Virasena, seeing Yudhājit in battle, became very angry and hurled arrows on him, as a cloud rains on the mountain top.

तं वीरसेनो विशिष्टः शिलाशितः

सामावुणोदासुमार्मिज्ञानैः ।

चिच्छेद वाणीशु शिलीमुखानसौ

तेनैव मुक्तानित्वेभपातिनः ॥ 5 ॥

On being covered, as it were, by the sharp and swift arrows, sharpend on a stone slab hurled at him by Virasena, Yudhājit, too, quickly, shot arrows at Virasena and cut off all his arrows.

गराश्वतृगाणां सव्यपुवातियुब्दे

सुरनमुपनिसंर्वैशिक्तं चातिघोरम् ।

वित्तविद्यादुवैर्यगृतं व्योम सहः

पिशितमाशितुकामैः कामगृधातिविध्ध ।। 6 ।।

O King! A dreadful fight then ensued between the cavalries, the warriors on the elephants; and the Devas, men, and Munis began to witness this terrible battle with wonder and astonishment. Birds, vultures and crows, desirous to eat the flesh of the dead soldiers, flew in the air.

तमद्धुत क्षनलसिन्युर्नवह घोरा

ब्रैटैथ एव नर्यौतुर्मामाणम् ।

त्रासावहा नयनमार्गता नराणां

पाणात्मनों रविजगार्णचेब कामम् ॥ 7 ॥

Blood of elephants, horses and warriors, the bodies that lay dead, flowed in torrents awfully like rivers in that deadly battle ground. The torrent of blood excited fear amongst those who came to see it, as the river Vaitarani on the way to hell (the Lord of Death) is very fearful to the sinners.

कौणानि विषयपुलिने नरमलकानि

केशगवानि न विभांति यवैव सिध्नी ।

तुर्बीफलानि विहितानिवहृतकामी-

बालैयथा राविसुताप्रभवैश्च नूनम् ॥ 8 ॥

Human skulls were driven ashore by the current and they looked like so many hollow shells of gourds scattered there for the play of the boys on the banks of the Yamunā.

वीरं मृतं भृति गतं पतिंत रथाड़े

गृध: पतार्थमुपरि धमतीति मन्ये ।

जीवोउपस्यो निजागरीरमवेक्ष्य कानं

कांक्षल्यहो3तिविज्ञो5पि वृन: प्रवेधूम ॥ 9 ॥

When any warrior lay dead on the field, the vultures began to fly about in the air for devouring his flesh. It seemed then that the soul of the warrior beholding his beautiful body tried to reenter into his body, though he thought that it had become very inaccessible to him.

अजी हतोउपि नृवर: सुविमानरूढ:

स्वाक्षे स्थितां सुरवधुं प्रवदत्यभीटम् ।

पर्याप्तुना मम शरीरमदं पूर्णव्या

बाणाहतं निवितितं करभोक कानतम् ॥ 10 ॥

Some warrior on being slain in the battle instantly arose in a celestial car to the heavens and was seen addressing the celestial nymph, who came already within his embrace, thus “O one of beautiful thighs. Behold! how my beautiful body is lying on the earth below!”

एको हतस्त्र सिपुर्णे गतोउ-नार्तिश्छं

देवांगनां समाधिगम्य सुते विमाने ।

ताविरिष्या हुतवहे सुसमयदे हें जगाद

कान्तमवला सवला स्वक्रीया ॥ १ १ ॥

Another warrior thus slain got up in the heavens on a celestial car, came in possession of a celestial nymph and when he was sitting with her in the car, his former wife in the earth made herself a sati and burnt herself up in the funeral pyre, thus got a celestial body, came up to the heavens; and that chaste virtuous woman drew away perforce her own husband away from that celestial nymph.

युढे मृती च सुपटी दिवि संगती

ताव्यो-यशस्कनित्ती सह सम्याती ।

तत्रैव जान्तुरलं परमाहितास्त्रा-

वैकापासोर्धीवहृति कलाहाकुली च ॥ १२ ॥

Book III Chapter XV

Two warriors, went up, slew each other and lay down dead at the same time. They went up in the heavens at the same time and there began to quarrel with each other and fight with their weapons for one and the same celestial nymph.

क्रशिष्ठा समाधिन्य सुरांगनों दै

रूपाधिकां गुणवर्ती किल भक्तियुक्ता ।

स्वीयान् गुणान्यवित्तान्यवदंतवादसौ

तां प्रमदानयुचकार च योगयुक्तः ॥ 13 ॥

Some hero got in the heavens a nymph more lovely and beautiful than himself and he thus became very much attached and devoted to her. He began to describe his own heroic qualities and also to copy dotedly the qualities of his lover so that she might remain faithfully attached to him.

भौमं रजोस्त्रितितं दिवि संस्थितं च

च रात्रं चकात्र तर्शिंच च समावृष्णोशत् ।

मनं तदेच कर्शिरांकृत्यिधावकस्मात्-

प्रावैक्षेपू वरिय्यातिकानित्युः ॥ 14 ॥

Thus dust, arising from the dreadful encounter of the soldiers in the battlefield, rose up in the air and covered the sun. It appeared night. After a while that dust became absorbed in the blood below, and the sun appeared very red, reflected with the colour of the blood.

क्रश्टिप्रान्तरु गगनं किन्त देवकन्यां

सग्राप्य चार्वदनां किल भफिष्युक्ताम् ।

नांगीवकार चतुरो ब्रतानाश्भीतो

यास्यतयं मम वृथा ध्रुकुक्लशब्दः ॥ 15 ॥

Some Brahmacārī fought in the battle and was slain. He went up to the heavens; instantly a lovely-eyed Devakanyā, a celestial nymph desired to select him as a bridegroom with great devotion. But that clever man did not accept the offer, thinking that his vow of Brahmacarya would be thus broken.

संगमे संवृते तन युधाजित्यविधयिति: ।

ज्ञान यीरसेनें तं बाणौरतीक्षे: स दारणैः ॥ १ ६ ॥

नित्रतः स पपातोल्या तिज्वपूर्णं महीपत: ।

प्रभन्ते तद्वलं सर्व निरितं च चतुदिंहणम् ॥ १ ७ ॥

O King! Thus when the battle was deadly, king Yudhājit shot a sharp, dreadful arrow at Virasena

and severed his head from his body. Virasena lay dead on the battle field and his army was routed. The soldiers fled away from the battle.

मनोरमा हतं श्रुत्वा चितरं रणामुघिन ।

भयत्रसात्र शंजाता चितुर्वैरमनुस्मन् ॥ 18 ॥

हानियाति युधार्जिद्रे पुरं मम दुरागयः ।

गज्वलोभेन पाणात्मा सोति चित्तापरभबत् ॥ 19 ॥

Hearing that his father was slain in the battle, Manoramā became very terrified and anxious. She then began to think that the vicious wicked king Yudhājit will surely slay her son, for kingdom's sake and to satisfy his enemy with her father.

किं कांतीय बल गच्छायि पिता मे नित्हत रोगे ।

भर्ता चापि मृतोरईय पुत्रोउरं मण बालकः ॥ 20 ॥

What shall I do now? My father is slain in the battle. My husband is no more. My child is a minor today. Where shall I go?

लोपोरतीच च पापिष्ठतेन को न वशीकृत:।

किं न कुर्जानदायि: पाण पाणविसम्म: ॥ 21 ॥

Greed is very sinful; who is there that cannot be bought over by love of gold? and what vicious act can there be, that cannot be done when actuated by covetousness?

यितरं मातरं श्रानु-गुरू-न्यवजनबोधान् ।

हाँत लोभस्मायिष्टो जनो नात्र विचारणा ॥ 22 ॥

A greedy man does not hesitate to kill his father, mother, spiritual guide, friends and others. There is no doubt in this.

अभव्यभक्षणं लोभादाय्यागमन्त तथा ।

कोरोति किल तृष्णातां धर्मत्वागं तथा पुन: ॥ 23 ॥

It is the inordinate love of worldly things that makes a man eat what is held unclean in society, that makes a man approach a woman who is unapproachable, and it is greed that makes a man discard his own religion and become an apostate.

न सहायोर्सित मे कौहिज्ञारोउर महावल: ।

यद्याएरे सिता चाहं पालवामि सुतं शृष्म. ॥ 24 ॥

In this city I find none so powerful as I can remain there under his shelter and be able to rear up my child.

हते पुत्रे नृपेणाछ किं करिष्यामर्थे पुनः ।

न मे जाताजलि घुवने येन वे सूचित्या हाद्म् ॥ 25 ॥

What can I do if king Yudhājit slays my son? There is none in this world who can save me, and, counting on whose shelter, I can stay here without any anxiety.

साथि वैश्युता कामं सप्तनी सर्वीव भवेत् ।

लीलावती न मे पुत्रे भविष्यति दयावती ॥ 26 ॥

And this my co-rival wife Lilāvatī will always practise enmity with me. She will never shew mercy on my son.

युधाजिति समायाते न मे निःसरणं भवेत् ।

त्राला बालं सुत्तो सोउध कारागगरं नयिध्यति ॥ 27 ॥

When Yudhājit will arrive in this city, I will never be able to go out of it and he will today put my son in the prison on the pretext that he is a minor.

भूयते हि पुरेजेण मातुर्भर्गभतः शिष्यः ।

कृतेतः सप्तध यघात्कालसे सदा सप्तध ॥ 28 ॥

प्रविष्य चोदरं मातु: केरे कृत्वाउप्यकं पविम् ।

एकोनपत्रशापदि तेरे भवम्वमतो दिवि ॥ 29 ॥

I heard that, in days of yore, Indra entered the womb of his pregnant step-mother with a small thunderbolt in his hand and divided the foetus into seven parts with that weapon, again each of these seven into seven parts again, thus the forty nine Maruts were born in the Heavens.

सप्तवै गरलं दर्नं सपल्यानू नृपभार्याय ।

गर्भनग्राध्यमूढ्रिय एनृतेई मया श्रुतम् ॥ 30 ॥

जाततु बालकः पश्राहेहे विषयुतः किल ।

तेनासी सगरो नाम विल्यालो भुविमण्डले ॥ 31 ॥

I heard also that in ancient times one queen gave poison to destroy the foetus in the womb of her rival wife. When the child came out of the womb, he was celebrated by the name of Sagara (with poison) in this earth.

जीवमानो5थ भर्ती वे कैकेय्या नृपभार्यो।

रामः प्राजिति० ज्येषो भूतो उदारथो जृणः ॥ ३२ ॥

The husband was alive, and still his queen Kaikeyi banished the eldest son of his kings, Śri

Rāmcandra to the forest; and the king Daśaratha sacrificed his life for that very reason.

मन्त्रिणसत्ववशा कामं वे मे पुत्रं सुदर्शनम् ।

राजानं कर्कौकामा वै युधाजिहागगाछ ते ॥ 33 ॥

The ministers no doubt wanted before to install my son as the king; but now they are not independent; they have now yielded themselves to king Yudhājit.

न मे भाता तवा गुरो यो मां बच्यातुमोचेत् ।

महल्कटं च सम्पानं मवा शे दैवयोगतः ॥ 34 ॥

There is no brother of mine powerful enough to release me from my bondage; I see I have fallen into a great difficulty by the combination of unforeseen circumstances.

उद्यभः सर्वेधा कार्यः सिद्धिद्विविज्ञ जायते ।

उपायं पुरस्क्षार्थं करोमध्ये त्वरापित्ति ॥ 35 ॥

Though the success depends on Fate, still one should make an earnest effort. If one does not make any effort, fate also remains asleep. I will therefore soon make out a plan to save my son.

इति सड्धित्य सा बाला विदल्लं चातिमामिन् ।

निरुर्णं सर्वकार्थे विचर्यं मन्ववरोतमम् ॥ ३ ६ ॥

समाकृद्य तमेकांते प्रोवाच बहुदुःखिता ।

गृहीत्वा बालकं हते रन्ती दीनामनस ॥ ३ ७ ॥

मिता मे निहतः संख्ये पुत्रोद्यं बालकसत्ता ।

युधाजिद्वलवाजाजा कि विधेयं वदस्य मे ॥ ३ ८ ॥

O King! Thinking thus, that woman Manoramā called in private the best and very respectable minister Vidalla, v'ho was intelligent and expert in everything, and holding the hands of her son and weeping, said humbly in a depressed spirit "O Minister! My father is slain in the battle field, this my son is a minor, and Yudhājit is a powerful king; consider all these and tell me what 1 should do now?"

तामुबाच विदल्लोउसी नात्र स्थातव्यमेव च ।

गायिष्यो वने कांया बाराणस्या: पुनः किल ॥ 39 ॥

तत्र मे मातुलः श्रीमान्वरतै वलवतरः ।

सुबाहुरिति विद्यात्रो रक्षिता स भयिष्यति ॥ 40 ॥

The venerable minister Vidalla then said to the

Book III Chapter XV

queen Manoramā “It is never advisable for us to stay here. Soon we will go into the forests of Benares. There I have got my powerful uncle Subāhu. He is prosperous and has got a strong army. He will protect us.”

युधाजिश्नौत्कण्ठमनसा नगराइहि: ।

निर्णत्व रथामास्हा गत्नंव नात्र सोश: ॥ 41 ॥

"I will make the pretext that I am become very anxious for the king and therefore I am going out to see King Yudhājit and will go out of the city in my chariot. There is no doubt in this."

इल्पुता तेन सा रात्री गत्वा लीलावर्ती प्रति ।

उवाच चितरं ग्रहुं गछळम्यड सुलेचेच ॥ 42 ॥

इल्पुकला रथामहा सैरधीसंयुता तत ।

विद्वल्लेन च संयुक्ता नि:सुता नगराड़िः ॥ 43 ॥

Hearing, thus, the Vidalla's words, queen Manoramā went to Lālāvatī and said "O faireyed! Today I am going to see the father Yudhājit." Thus saying, she went out of the city in a chariot accompanied by her son, attendants and Vidalla.

सता हातार्तिलिकृणाय पितुः शोकसमाकृता ।

इदया युधाजितं भृपं पितरं गतजीवितम् ॥ 44 ॥

संस्कार्य च त्वयगुक्ता वेयमाना भयाकृता ।

दिवद्वेन संप्रापता राजी भागीरथीतदम् ॥ 45 ॥

Grieved at the loss of her father, fearful, distressed, and helpful fatigued, Manoramā saw Yudhājit and performed the cremation of her father Virasena; and, trembling with fear, got to the banks of the Ganges after two days' swift journey.

निवाटैर्पीष्टिता तत्र गृहीतं सकलं वसु ।

रथं चापि गृटीचला ते निरिता दस्यः शका: ॥ 4 6 ॥

रुदती सुतमादाय चाकवस्ता मनोराम ।

निर्वयी जाड्जीतीरे सैर्यीकरणविता ॥ 47 ॥

आरहा च भवाखीधगुबं सा भयाकृता ।

तीर्वां भागीर्याँ पुणवां यवी प्रिकटपर्वतम् ॥ 48 ॥

There the robbers, the Nişādas plundered all their riches and took the chariot and went away. Manoramā had only her clothings, that she wore, left to her. She began to weep, and, holding the hands of her attendant, went to the Ganges shore,

and being afraid crossed the river on a raft and went to the Citrakūta mountain.

भारह्वाजामं प्राप्ता त्वरया च भयाकृता ।

संवीक्ष्य तापसंसात्र संज्ञात निर्भयत तदा ॥ 49 ॥

That terrified Devi went to the hermitage of Bhāradvāja as early as possible. There she saw the ascetics and was relieved of her fear.

भुनीना सा ततः पृष्ठा काउसि कस्य परिग्रहः ।

कहैनात्र कर्थ प्राता सर्वे बृहि शुचित्मिते ॥ 50 ॥

Bhāradvāja asked, “O lotus-eyed! Who are you and whose wife are you? Why have you taken so much trouble to come here? Answer all these truly. देयी वा मानुषी वाउसि बालपुत्रा वने कर्ण ।

राज्यधेह वामोक भासि त्वं कमतेक्षेण ॥ 51 ॥

“O beautiful one! are you a Devi or a human being? your son is a very minor. Why have you come in this dense forest? It seems, as if you are deprived of your kingdom.”

एवं सा मुनिना घुहा नोवाच वरवर्धिनी ।

रुदती दुःखसंतना विदल्लं च समादिशत् ॥ 52 ॥

Thus asked by the best of the Munis, the beautiful Manoramā became very much afflicted with grief and began to weep; she could not speak anything herself and ordered Vidalla to inform the Muni all what had happened.

विद्वल्तस्तमुवाचें धूवसिंधन्योभतः ।

तस्य भावां धर्मपती नामा चेयं मनोरमा ॥ 53 ॥

सिंहेन नित्तौ राजा सुर्य्वंशी महावलः ।

पुत्रोर्धं नृवतेस्तस्य नान्मा चैव सुर्शनिः ॥ 54 ॥

Vidalla then said: Therefore was a king of Kosala, named Dhruvasandhi. She is the legal wife of that king. Her name is Manoramā. That powerful king of the Solar Dynasty was killed by a lion in a forest. This boy Sudarśana is his son.

अस्या पितास्तिध्याना दौहिजार्यं मृती रणे ।

युधार्जिद्वासार्जसरा संप्राणा विजने वने ॥ 55 ॥

The father of this Manoramā was very religious. He died fighting for the cause of his daughter's son. Now the present queen has become much afraid and has therefore come to this wild forest.

ल्यामेव शरणं प्राप्ता वालपुत्रा नृपात्मज्ञा ।

त्राता भव महाभाग त्वमस्या मुनिस्तम्म ।। ५६ ॥

The son of this woman is now a minor; he is now taking your refuge. O best of the Munis! Protect them.

आर्तैस्य स्थणे पुर्णयं यज्ञाधिकमुदाहतम् ।

भवततस्य दीनस्य विशेषफलतं स्मृत्तम् ॥ ५७ ॥

To give protection to any distressed person is to acquire merits higher than performing a sacrifice. Therefore to protect one who is very much afflicted with fear and who is helpless will have still higher merits.

ऋषिर्वाच

निर्भया वस कल्याणि पुरं पालय सुझते ।

न ते घयं विशालास्त्रि कर्तेयं शत्रुसम्भवम् ॥ ५८ ॥

Bhāradvāja said: “O beautiful one! Remain in this hermitage without any fear; rear up your son here. O auspicious one! There is no cause of fear here from your enemies.

पालयस्व सुर्त कान्तं राजा तेयं भविष्यति ।

नात्र दुःखं तथा शोक: कदाचित्मभविष्यति ॥ ५९ ॥

Better nourish and support your child. Your son

will surely be a king and if you remain in this hermitage, no sorrow or grief will overtake you.

व्यास उवाच

इक्युक्ता मुनिना रात्री सर्वथा सा समवभूव ह ।

उदरे मुनिना दसे वीतिशोका तदार्यसत् ॥ 60 ॥

Vyāsa said: When the great Muni Bhāradvāja said thus, the queen Manoramā became peaceful. The Muni gave them a cottage to live in and there they dwelt without any sorrow.

सैरधीसहिता तन विद्वलेन च संयुता ।

सुर्दर्नां पालयाना न्यवससा मनोराम ॥ 61 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयकन्धे

पडवरोअधाव: ॥ 15 ॥

Thus Manoramā dwelt obediently with her maid servant, liked by all. Vedalla also remained there and Manoramā began to nourish her child.

Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter on the Devi

Māhātmya and the battle between Yudhājit

and Virasena and the going away of

Manoramā to the forest in the Thrid

Book of Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER XVI

On Yudhājit's Going to the Hermitage of Bharadvāja

व्यास उवाच

युधाजित्वच संग्रामादुरात्वाउयोधां महावल: ।

मनोरामां च पगच्छ सुदर्शनविधासंया ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: After gaining the victory in the battle, the king Yudhājit returned to the city of Ayodhyā, with his huge army and asked where are Sudarśana and Manoramā? He wanted to kill Sudarśana.

सेवकान् प्रिययामास क्व गतेति मुड्वैदन्त् ।

शुषे दिनेउध दौहित्रं स्थाययामास चासने ॥ 2 ॥

He repeatedly exclaimed “Where are they gone?” and sent his servants on their search. Then, on an auspicious day, he installed his daughter’ son on the throne.

मन्त्रिभिध्धु वसिष्ठन मन्त्रैगवर्धौगै: शुभे: ।

अधिपिच्छा सम्पूर्णै: कलशैज्लपूर्तै: ॥ 3 ॥

Mahārṣi Vasistha was engaged as the priest; he and the other ministers began to chant the auspicious hymns of the Atharvaveda and with the jars, filled with water, and consecrated by these hymns, installed Śatrujit on the throne.

भोरीगढ़ानिद्रेश तृयाणं चाथ नि:स्वर्ने: ।

उत्सवतु नायर्यों वै सवधूव कूक्छड़ १। ४। १।

O best of the Kurus! Conch shells resounded; bheris and tūriyas resounded; and great festivals and rejoicings took place in the city.

विग्राणां वेदपाठैश्र वैदितां स्तुतिभस्तथा ।

अयोध्या मुदितेवासीज्वयग्वदे: सुमझूलेः ॥ 5 ॥

Book III Chapter XVI

The reciting of the Vedic mantrams by the Brāhmaṇa, the chanting of hymns by the bards and the auspicious acclamation of Victory to their new king resounded the whole city of Ayodhyā with joy.

हृदयुङनाकीर्ण स्तुलिवाद्विन:स्वना ।

नवे तत्मम्बीराले पूर्वयौने नृत्नेव सा ॥ 6 ॥

When the new king Śatrujit ascended on the throne, the subject were filled with joy; everywhere hymns were sung; drums were resounded. At this Ayodhyā looked as fresh as ever.

कैत्रितस्पृजन वे चै चकुः शोक गृह् त्रिवतः ।

सूरर्गेन विधित्याच्य क्व नातोउसी नृपात्मकः ॥ ७ ॥

मनोरापतिसार्यी सा क्व गता सुतसंयुता ।

वितास्थना निहतः संख्ये राज्यलोभेन वैशिण ॥ 8 ॥

O King! Though there were thus great rejoicings and festivals, yet some good persons were found that remembered Sudarśana and gave vent to this feeling of sorrow, thus: “Alas! Where has that prince gone? Where has that chaste queen Manoramā gone with her son? Oh! the enemies have killed his father for greed of kingdom.”

इल्वेवं त्वित्यमानासे साधव: समबुद्धय: ।

अतिषद्धु:वित्तास्तत्र शतुविज्ञधार्वर्तिनः ॥ 9 ॥

The saints with their views impartial, thus rendered uneasy, sorry, began to pass away their time there subject to Śatrujit.

युधाजित्यि दौहिंत्रे स्थापयित्वा विधानतः ।

राज्यं च मन्सिकानुत्वा चलितः स्वां पुरीं प्रति ॥ 10 ॥

After installing duly his daughter's son on the throne and after having made over the charge of the kingdom to the wise councillors, Yudhājit turned towards his own city.

श्रुत्वा सुदर्शनं त्रनु पीनानामप्रमे स्थितम् ।

हनुकामो जगामाग्य् चित्रकुटं स पवैनम् ॥ ११ ॥

निवादाधिपर्ति गृरं पुरस्कूल बलाधिधम् ।

दूर्वेशिल्यमतादणु शूब्जेवपुराधिप्यम् ॥ १२ ॥

Afterwards Yudhājit heard that Sudarśana was staying in the hermitage with the Munis. He started at once for Citrakūṭa and went quickly to Durdarśa,

the chief of the city of Śrṅgavera, being accompanied by Bala, the chief of the Niṣādas.

श्रुत्वा मनोराम तत्र बधूवातिसुतुःखिता ।

आगच्छंतं बालपुत्रा भयातां सै-व्यसंयुन्त् ॥ 13 ॥

तमुवाचातिरोगोकातां मुर्नि साश्रविलोचना ।

किं कंटीम वर्य नष्ठागये युधाजित्मयुगवित्यः ॥ 14 ॥

चिता में निर्होर्जनेने दौहितो भृपति: कृतः ।

सुर्गे में हनुकार्मोज्ञ समावाति बलात्विनः ॥ 15 ॥

Hearing that Yudhājit was coming there with his army, Manoramā began to think that his son was a minor and became very sorrowful, distressed and terrified. Then she with tears in her eyes addressed the Muni thus: "Yudhājit is coming here; what shall I do and whither shall I go? He has slain my father, and has installed his daughter's son on the throne. Still he is not satisfied and he is now coming with his army here to kill my minor child."

पुरा शुक्त मया स्थामियापडण वे वने स्थितः ।

मुनीनामामे पुण्ये पाझात्या सहितास्तदा ॥ १ ६ ॥

गतात्मे मृगयां पार्था घातरः पझे एल ते ।

ग्रीष्टी संस्थिता तत मुनीनामामझे शुभे ॥ १ ७ ॥

धीयोउप्रीमाल्वः पैले जाबालिरीतमो धपुः ।

च्यवनश्छानिगोऋ कपवश्रैव जनुः मन्तु ॥ १ ८ ॥

वीर्णितिजोः सुमुन्त्र शवन्तोज स्वलतः ।

राशनसः कहोडश्व यवक्रीयंजकृतक्नः ॥ १९ ॥

एते चान्ये च मुनयो भारजावद्य: शुभा: ।

वेदपाठयुता: सर्वे संस्थिताशायये स्थिताः ॥ 20 ॥

दारसीधि: सहित तत याजसेनी स्थिता मुने ।

आधमे चात्सर्वाईी निर्भय गुनिसंपुते ॥ 21 ॥

O Lord! In days of yore, I heard that the Pāndavas, when they went to the forest, lived in the holy hermitage of the Munis with Draupadi. One day the five brethren went a hunting, and the beautiful Draupadi stayed without any fear with other maid servants in the hermitage where there was the chanting of the Vedas by Dhaumya, Attri, Gālava, Paila, Jābāli, Gautama, Bhrgu, Cyavana, Kanva of the Atrigotra, Jatu, Kratu, Vītihotra, Sumantu, Yajñādatta, Vatsala, Rāsāsana, Kahoda Yavakrī Yajñakrit, Kratu and other holy high souled Rṣis like Bhāradvāja and others.

पार्यां मृगानुगास्तावस्थ्याताङ्ग वनाङ्गम् ।

धनुबोधापश वीराः पत्रे वै शज्ञातपानः ॥ 2 2 ॥

तावलिस्पृपति: श्रीमान्यानिर्बी बलसंयुतः ।

आगताश्रशमाध्यायो शुवत तु नियमधेबिन् ॥ 2 3 ॥

While the five great heroes Arjuna and others, the destroyers of their enemies, were reaming in the forests, Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu came with his army to the hermitage, hearing the reciting of the Vedic hymns.

शुचा वेदेधर्नि राजा मुनीां भावितात्मान् ।

उत्तरत रथतपूर्ण दर्जानकांक्षया नृपः ॥ 24 ॥

Hearing thus, that king quickly descended from the chariot so that he might have a sight of these holy Maharsis.

यदा निरगमन्तत्र भूत्यद्वयसमिति: ।

वेदपावदुगत्यावीक्ष्य मृनीनुड्यमसंसिति: ॥ 25 ॥

कृतांखिलुप: स्वियम्संशितो३ वजद्वतः ।

आम्रो मुनिभिनुंटे पुपति: संविवेश ह १ २६ ॥

तरोपविद्धं राजनं ग्रहकामाः तैक्षयस्तत् ।

आययमुर्पिनायांश कॉउयमिव्यबुव्यप् ॥ २७ ॥

Accompanied by two attendants only, he approached to the Munis and, finding them engaged in the study of the Vedas, waited there with folded hands for an opportunity. O Lord! When the king Jayadrathā on entering the hermitage took his seat, the wives of the Munis came there to see the king and began to enquire “who is this person?

तासां मध्ये वरातोहा गाउसेनी समानात ।

यजत्रदेने चूहा सा रूपणे शीरिवारणे ॥ 28 ॥

With the wives of the Munis came there also the beautiful Draupadi. Jayadratha looked upon Draupadi as if she were the second goddess Laksmī.

तं चितोक्यासितापांगी देवक-न्यामिवापराम् ।

प्रपछ्छ नृपतिर्थीम्यं केयं रणाया वरान्ता ॥ 29 ॥

भार्यां कस्य सुता कस्य नान्मा का वरवर्गिनि ।

रूपतावणयसंयुक्ति जशीव वसुयां गता ॥ 30 ॥

Looking at that lovely royal daughter who looked like the Deva girls Jayadratha asked Maharṣi Dhaumya, “Who is this beautiful lotus eyed lady? Whose wife is she and who is her father?

What is her name? Oh! From her beautiful appearance it seems that the goddess Śacī has come down on earth."

बब्बुलवनमध्यस्या लर्वंगलितका यथा ।

ग्रास्तीर्वृतान नूत नम्बेवापति भार्थिनि ॥ 31 ॥

This fair woman is shining like the celestial nymph Rambhā surrounded by the Rāksasīs or like the beautiful creeper Lavāngalatika encircled by thorny trees.

सत्वं वद महाभाग कस्वेयं वल्लभाउवला ।

राजपतिव चापाति नैया मुनिवर्षूद्धिं ३ ३ २ ॥

O good ones! Tell truly whose beloved is she?

O Brāhmins! It seems that she is the wife of some king, not the wife of a Muni.

धौम्य उवाच

पाण्डवाना पिंवा भार्यां त्रीदपी सृष्णतक्षणा ।

पाङ्गाली सिस्युगजेन्द्र बस्वयर वराङ्मे ॥ 33 ॥

Dhaumya said: "O king of Sindhu! She is the daughter of Pānācala; her name is Draupadī; she is the wife of the Pāndavas; they are residing in this forest, having got rid of their fears."

जयद्धय सचाच

वक्त नातः पाण्ड्वा: पढ़ शुगा: सम्पति विश्वुतः ।

वसंस्वय चे वीरा वीतगोंका महावतः ॥ 34 ॥

Jayadratha said: “Where have those powerful Pāndavas of great prowess gone now? Are they dwelling in this forest, free from fears?

धौम्य उवाच

भृगवार्थी गताः पझु पाण्डवा रथसंस्थिता ।

आभिध्यन्ति मध्याङ्गे भुगानाठाय पार्थिवाः ॥ 35 ॥

Dhaumya said: "The five Pāndavas have gone out on hunting, ascended on a chariot. They will return at noon with their game."

तच्छूला वचनं तस्य उदतिड्वसो नृपः ।

ग्रीपतिसप्रिधौ गत्या प्राग्येदमुबाच् ६ ॥ 36 ॥

कुगलं ते वरागेहे वक गता: पतयक्ष ते ।

एकादश गतान्यक्ष वर्षाणि च वने किल ॥ 37 ॥

Hearing the Muni's words Jayadratha got up, and going near Draupadi, bowed down to her and

Book III Chapter XVI

said: “O Fair One! Is there every thing well with you? Where have your husbands gone? Today it is eleven years that you are residing in the forest.”

ह्रीपरी तु ततोवाच स्वसि ते०तु नृपालन ।

विश्रयावश्रामाध्याशे क्षणाद्यान्ति पणड्वाः ॥ 38 ॥

Draupadī then said: “O prince! Let all be well with you, wait here for a short while; the Pāndavas are coming quickly.

एवं बुवंलां तस्यां तु लोपाधिष्टः स भूपति: ।

जहाग्र हीपर्वी वीरोउनाद्य पुनिसत्तमान् ॥ ३ ९ ॥

While Draupadi thus spoke, that powerful king, being overpowered with greed and avarice, stole her away, disregarding all the Munis present there.

कस्याधिवेय विश्वासः कर्तेम्यः सर्वेधा बुधेः ।

कुर्वन्तु:खमवाणोति वृहांतत्स्वत वै बलि: ॥ 40 ॥

वैरोचनसुतः श्रीमान्यमिंहु सत्यसूत्र: ।

युक्तची च दाता च गरण्य साधुसमानः ॥ 4 1 ॥

नामं मैनतः क्वापि ग्रहादस्य च गैरकः ।

एकोनगरायज्ञान्यै स चकार सदक्षिणान् ॥ 4 2 ॥

O Lord! The wise should never trust anybody; if on anybody he places his trust, he will surely come to grief. For example, see the case of the King Bali. Bali, the son of Virocana, and the grandson of Prahlāda, was prosperous, devoted to his religion, true to his promise, performer of sacrifices, generous, always giving protection to and liked by the saints and a great warrior. His mind never turned to any irreligious subject and he performed ninety-nine Yajñas with full Dakṣinās (remunerations).

सचमूर्ति: सदा विष्यु: सेव्यः से योगिनापि।

निर्विकोरोपि भगवान्वैकवार्थविंसद्धये ॥ 4 3 ॥

कर्यवाच्च समुद्धते विष्यु: कपटवामन: ।

ताव्यं छतेन हतावनाई चैव समातागम् ॥ 44 ॥

But the Bhagavān Viṣṇu, who is all full of Sāttvik purity and who is never affected with passions and changeless, who is always worshipped by the Yogis, He, in the form of a dwarf in his Vāmana incarnation as the son of Kaśyapa Rṣi, to serve the Devas, stole away his whole seagirt earth and kingdom deceitfully on hypocritical pretext.

सो5भवत्स्यायाग्राजा बलिर्वीरोचन्सिता ।

कयंटं कृतवास्त्याग्रिद्धर्यं तु मया श्रुन्ति ॥ 4 5 ॥

O Lord! I heard that the son of Virocana was a generous largehearted king. He truly resolved to give what was wanted; but Viṣṇu behaved with him deceitfully to serve the cause of Indra.

अन्य: किं न कत्नोलेवे कृतं वे सचचुप्तिनं ।

वामनं रूपमास्थाय यज्ञातं चिक्तीपत् ॥ 46 ॥

When the pure, Sāttvik Viṣṇu could assume this dwarf incarnation to bring about the hindrance to Bali's Yajña, what wonder is that other ordinary mortals would practise things like that?

न च शिश्रसित्ये वै कदाचिकेन्पितशना ।

लोपश्रोतसि चेत्यसिम्बीदृक्यापकृतं भयम् ॥ 47 ॥

Therefore never trust anybody in any way. Lord! Where there are greed and avarice, reigning in one's heart, what fear can he have to perpetrate any evil deed?

लोभाहुतः प्रवृहिति पापाति प्राणिनः किल ।

परलोकाद्वयं नासित कस्यचित्कर्हिंचनुने ॥ 48 ॥

मनसा कर्मण बाचा परस्वादानेहुतः ।

प्रपतित नतः सध्यतलोभिपतृतेस्ततः ॥ 49 ॥

O Muni! It is through avaric that men commit sinful deeds; they do not care what good or bad will happen to them in the next world. Thoroughly overpowered by greed, they take away in mind, word and deed other's things; and thus they become fallen.

देवानाराध्य सत्तं वाख्छित च धनं नराः ।

न देवानत्करें कृत्वा सभर्था दतुर्मंसता ॥ 50 ॥

अन्यस्यानीयते विलिं प्रयच्छित् मनीषितम् ।

वाणिज्ञेनाथ दानेन चौरैंणपि बलेन वा ॥ 51 ॥

Lo! Human beings always worship Gods for wealth; but the Devas do not give them wealth instantly; they give them these things through others by making them carry on trade, make gifts, or shew their strength or by making them steal.

विक्रभाथं गृहीला च धान्यवशदिकं बहु ।

देवानचंयेत वैश्यो महाद्विंमं भवेदिति ॥ 52 ॥

The Vaiśyas worship the Gods simply because

they they will be highly prosperous and therefore, they sell many things as grains, cloth and the like.

नात्र किं परवित्तेच्छा वाणिज्चेन परन्तप ।

प्रशुणकाले तु सम्पाले महर्षे वाचि काछ्छूषिति ॥ ५३ ॥

O Controlled one! Is there not the desire to take away the other's property in this act of merchandise? Certainly there is. Besides the merchants, when they find that when people are in urgent need of buying articles from them, expect that the price of those articles might run higher.

एवं हि प्राणिनः सर्वे परस्वादानततरतः ।

वर्तनै सन्ततं ब्रह्मृ विश्वाश: कौदुश: पुनः ॥ ५४ ॥

O Muni! Thus every one is anxious to take away other's properties. How, then, can we trust them?

यूषा तीर्थं वृथा दानं वृथा0ध्यनमेव च ।

तोभमोहावृतानां वै कृतं तदत्कृतं भवेत् ॥ 55 ॥

Those who are clouded by greed and delusion, their going to places of pilgrimages, their making charities, their reciting the Vedas, all are rendered useless. Though they go to the holy places, etc, still these things bear no fruits to them, as if they have not done these things at all.

तस्मादेनं महाभाग विसर्जय गृहं प्रति ।

सपुत्राड़ं विस्फामीय जानकीवर्दिक्जोतम्म । ५६ ॥

Therefore, O Enlightened one! You make Yudhājit go back to his own place. Then I will be able to remain here, like Sitā, with my son.

इलुक्तोउसी भुनिसावदास्त्वा युधाजितं वृपम् ।

उवाच वचनं रोहे भारज्ञानः प्रतपावान् ॥ 57 ॥

गच्छ राजन्यथाकामं स्वपुरं नृपसत्तम ।

नेयं मनोरामध्येति बालपुत्रा सुदुःवित्ता ॥ 58 ॥

On Manoramā's thus speaking to the Muni, the fiery Maharṣi went to Yudhājit and said: "O King! You better go back to your own place or anywhere else you like. The son of Manoramā is a minor; that queen is very much grieved; she cannot come to you now."

युधानिदुबाच

मुने युंच हंड सौम्यां विसर्जय मनोरामाम् ।

न च यायाम्यादं मुक्तया नेथ्याम्यड चलान्तुतः ॥ 59 ॥

Yudhājit said “O peaceful ones! Kindly cease shewing this impudence and give me Manoramā. I will never go away leaving her. If you do not give her easily, I will take her away by force.”

त्रशिक्षाच

नयस्य यदि शक्तिरुते बलेनाठा मामाश्रमात् ।

विश्वाधिमत्रो यथा धोनुं वसिश्छस्य मुने: पुरा ॥ 6० ॥

श्री श्रीमद्वीर्यागतो महापुराणी तृतीयरकन्धे

पोडशोअधाय: 11 16 ॥

The Rsis said: “O King! If there be any strength in you, you can take away Manoramā by force; but the result will be similar to that when the King Viśvāmitra wanted to take away the heavenly cow by force from teh hermitage of Vasisṭha.”

Thus ends the Sixteenth Chapter on the glory of the

Devī and the going of the king Yudhājit to the

hermitage of Bharadvāja, to kill Sudarśana, in the the

Third Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam by Maharṣi

Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER XVII

On the Story of Visvāmitra

व्यास उवाच

इत्याकर्पयं वचस्तस्य मुनेस्त्रावरीपिति: ।

मन्त्रिवदूं समाहूय पपछ्छ तमतन्टितः ॥ १ ॥

किं कर्तव्यं सुबुद्धोउ प्रयाउघ चतु सुवत ।

बतावयायित तां कामं सपुत्रां च सुभाषिषिणी ॥ 2 ॥

रिपुरल्पोर्षि नोगेश्यः सर्वथा शुभमिच्छता ।

राजयक्षेयं संवृद्धो भूत्वये परिकल्पयेत् ॥ 3 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of the Maharṣi Bhāradvāja and seeing that he made a firm resolve, King Yudhājit called his prime minister quickly and asked, “O intelligent one! What am I to do now? I want to carry away be force this boy with his mother sweet Manoramā; no one desirous of one’s welfare wo’nt trifle away

Book III Chapter XVII

his enemy, be he even a very weak one; if he does so, that enemy will get stronger day by day, as the disease consumption becomes stronger; and will ultimately become the cause of death."

नात्र सैन्यं न योद्वासिति यो भामात्र निवारयेत् ।

गृहीता हमिन तं तत्र दौहित्रस्य रिपुं किल 11 4 11

"There is no warrior, nor any soldier here of the other party; no one will be able to resist me; I can take away, as I like, the enemy of my daughter's son and can kill him."

निर्फंटकं भवेग्रज्यं वतामध्ये बलादम् ।

हते सुदर्भे नूनं निर्भयोजेसी भवेदिति ॥ 5 ॥

"I will try today to carry him away by force, and Sudarśana being killed, my daughter's son will reign fearlessly without an enemy; there is no doubt in this."

प्रधान ज्ञाच

नाहसं न हि कतैंव्छं शुतं राजनमेवंचः ।

विश्वामित्य दृष्टान: कवितन्तेने मारिष ॥ 6 ॥

The prime minister said: “No such hazardous courage need be shewn now; you have heard the Maharṣi’s words; he quoted you the example of Viśvāmitra.”

पुरा गाधिसुतः श्रीमात्विशामैज्ञोरितिशिश्रतः ।

विश्रचन नृपश्रेष्ठो वसिष्ठाश्रममप्यगत् ॥ 7 ॥

“O King! In days of yore, Viśvāmitra, the son of the King Gādhi, was a celebrated monarch; one day while roaming, he accidentally reached the hermitage of Vasiṣṭha.

समस्कूल च रं राजा विश्वामिजः प्रतपायान् ।

उपविष्ठो नृपश्रेष्ठो पुतिना दत्तविष्टः ॥ 8 ॥

The powerful king Viśvāmitra bowed down before the Muni, and the Muni gave him a seat. The king took his seat there.

निर्मित्रोत वसिष्ठेन भोजनाय महात्मना ।

सरीव्यछ श्वितो राजा गाधिपुजो महायशा: ॥ 9 ॥

Then the high souled Vasiṣṭha invited the king to a dinner. Viśvāmitra, the king, went there with his whole army.

नन्दिग्याउसातीदतं सर्व भव्यभोज्यादिकं च यत् ।

भुक्सा राजा ससैन्यश वार्डितं तत भोजनम् ॥ 10 ॥

प्रतापं तं च नन्दिन्या: परित्य स पार्थिवः ।

ययाचे नन्दिनीं राजा वासिषं मुनिसतमम् ॥ १ १ ॥

विश्वाधित्र उवाच

मुने वैधुसहं ते घटोर्नीनां ददाम्यमू ।

नन्दिनीं देहि मे वेनुं प्रार्थयामि परन्तवः ॥ १ २ ॥

There was a cow, named Nandini, of Vasisṭha. The Muni prepared all sorts of eatables from her milk and entertained them all. The king with his whole army was very much pleased; and, coming to know of the divine power of the cow, asked Vasisṭha to give his cow Nandini over to him and said: "The udder of your cow Nandini is like a big jar. I will give you thousand cows like that; I pray you to let me have your cow Nandini."

वसिष्ठ उवाच

होमधेनुरित्यं राजत्र ददायी कक्षंचन ।

सहसं चापि धेनुर्नां तदैवं तत सितुं ॥ 13 ॥

Vasiṣṭha said: “O King! This is my sacrificial cow; I cannot give you this cow any way, let your thousand cows be yours.”

विश्वास उवाच

अयुतं वाउव लक्षं वा दादामि मनसेसितम् ।

देहि मे निन्दीं साधो ग्रहीवामि कराल्वा ॥ 14 ॥

Víśvāmitra said: “O Saint! I will give you cows lakhs or tens and hundreds of lakhs or any number you like. Please give me your cow; in case you be unwilling, I will carry her away perforce.”

वसिष्ठ उवाच

कामं गृहाण नृपते बलाद्व यथाक्चि ।

नाहं द्वादीय ते राजनस्येब्थया नास्तिनों गृहान् ॥ 15 ॥

Vasittha said: “O King! As you like, better take it perforce; I will never be able to give you my cow Nandini from my house.”

तच्छूला नुपतिभूत्यानादिद्वेग महावलान ।

नयधे नर्तिनी धేनेु बलदधिसुसंस्थिता: ॥ १ ६ ॥

O King! Hearing thus Vasistha's words,

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Viśvāmitra, the king, ordered at once his powerful followers to carry the cow Nandinī away by fastening a cord round her neck per sheer force.

ते भूत्वा जगुहुतां तु हुतदाक्रम्य यनितान् ।

वेयमाना मुनि प्रह सुराभि: साशुलोचना ॥ 17 ॥

मुने त्वजसि मां कस्मात्कर्षयन्ति सुवन्तिनाम् ।

मुनसितां प्रत्युबाचेदं त्वजे नाहं सुदुर्धधदे ॥ 18 ॥

बलाययति राजास्ती पृजितोउघ मया शुषे ।

कि करीमि न चेच्छामि तसृष्टां तांना मसा किल ॥ 19 ॥

The followers, obeying the order at once bound the cow with ropes and began to carry her away by force. At this Nandini, trembling and with tears in her eyes, began to say to the Muni “O One! whose wealth consists only in asceticism! Are you going to leave me? Otherwise why these fellows are binding me with a cord and dragging me away?” At this the Muni replied: “O Nandini! I have never parted with you; I perform all my sacrifices through your milk. O auspicious one! I honoured this king, my guests, with eatables prepared from your food; and for that reason he is carrying you away from me by sheer force. What can I do? O Nandini! I have not the least desire to part with you.

इतुल्ता मुनिना धेयुः कोधयुक्ता बघ्यूव है ।

हंभारवं चकाराणु कृणशबं सुदाडणणु ॥ 20 ॥

Hearing these words from the Muni, the cow became very angry and bellowed terribly.

उद्यगातस्मया देहानु दैत्य योरतगरसता ।

सायुधासिति तिक्षिति बृदतेः कवचाबृताः ॥ 21 ॥

At once came out from her body, on that very spot, the terrible demons wearing coats of armour, and holding various weapons; and they uttered aloud, “Wait; you will soon meet with vengeance.”

सैन्यं सर्व हर्त तैस्तु नन्दिति प्रतिमोचिता ।

गृकाकी निर्भौतो राजा विश्वामिकोरितुःवित्तः ॥ 22 ॥

They then destroyed all the forces of the king. And the king alone was left and he went away alone, much dejected and sorrowful.

हर्ते घापोस्तिवानामा निदन्धासावलं महत ।

बाबांं बलं दुराराध्ये मत्वा स तपसि स्थितः ॥ 23 ॥

Oh! That wicked king then cursed with great humility the Ksattriya Śakti; and thinking the Brāhmanic power would be attained with great exertion, began to practise asceticism and penance.

तत्वा बहुति वर्षिणि तयो घोरं महावने ।

ऋषित्वं प्राण गाधोयस्वक्त्वा क्षात्रं विधिं पुनः ॥ २४ ॥

Performing penance and tapasyā, very hard indeed, in the great forest, Viśvāmitra, the son of Gādhi, succeeded at last in becoming a Rṣi and then he renounced his Kṣaṭtriya Dharma.

तस्मात्मार्थि राजेन्द्र मा कृष्ण वैरमद्धुतम् ।

कुलनागरकं नूनं तापसैः सह संयुगम् ॥ 25 ॥

Therefore, O King! Dost Thou never quarrel with these ascetics and be involved in wars resulting in great enmity and causing the extinction of the race."

मुनिवर्ष जजाङ त्वं समाश्रय तपोतिधिम् ।

सुदर्जनोन्पि योजनैर तिहत्वच यथासुखम् ॥ 26 ॥

“Better dost appease the Muni and now go back to your own kingdom. Let Sudarśana remain here at his pleasure.”

बालोर्धयं निधिनः किं ते कार्थिति नृणाहितम् ।

वृथा ते वैरभावोउमनाथे दुबलें शिर्णी ॥ 27 ॥

O King! This minor boy has no wealth; what harm can he do to you? It is useless to show your enmity towards an orphan, a weak minor boy.

दया सर्वेक कर्तेबा दैवधानीमदं जन्त ।

ईर्थ्यां कि नृपश्रेष्ठ पट्ट्यांल तद्धाविधि ॥ 28 ॥

This world is under the control of Destiny; therefore one should shew mercy to all. O king! What use is there to shew one's jealousy? What is inevitable will surely come to pass."

वड़ं तृणायते राज-दिव्योरागर संशयः ।

तृणं वझायते क्वापि समये देवयोगतः ॥ 29 ॥

O King! The thunderbolt comes sometimes like a blade of grass; and a blade of grass acts sometimes like a thunderbolt.

शगरको हृति शार्तून माफको वे तथा गजम् ।

साहसं मुकु घेधाविन कुभे मे वचनं हितम् ॥ 30 ॥

O King! You are very intelligent; consider that

Book III Chapter XVII

by, combinations of circumstances, a hare can kill a powerful tiger and a gnat can kill an elephant. Therefore dost thou forsake this rashness and hear my beneficent advice.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छुला वचनं तस्य युधाजिपुसपतम्: ।

प्राण्य तं भुनी भून्तीं जगाम स्वपुरं वृपः ॥ 31 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! The best of kings, Yudhājit hearing the prime minister's advice bowed down humbly at the feet of the Muni and returned to his own city.

मनोरापसि स्वस्थापूदाश्रमे तत्र संशिता ।

पालयामास पुत्रं तं सुवर्णेन्मृतजतम् ॥ ३३ २ ॥

Manoramā, too, became free from anxiety, and, remaining peaceful in the hermitage, began to nourish and support her child, engaged in vows?

दिते देने कुमारोउसी जगामोपेचरं ततः ।

सुगिवालगतः क्रीडाशिभयः सर्वतः सृषः ॥ 33 ॥

The lovely son of the king began to grow daily like the phases of the waxing moon and sport fearlessly with the boys of the Munis, all together, wherever they liked, a sight very auspicious.

एकस्मिनस्यमयं तन विदल्लं समुपागतम् ।

क्लीविते पुनिगुस्तमामंयत्तदितिके ॥ 34 ॥

One day the minister Vidalla came there and the sons of the Munis seeing him began, in the presence of Sudarśana, to address him Kliḥ, "Kliḥ."

सुर्गनस्तु तच्छुत्वा द्यातैकाक्षरं सुकृटम् ।

अनुसावायुतं तच्च प्रोवाचापि पुनः पुनः ॥ 35 ॥

Sudarśana, too, hearing them pronounce “Klib,” “Klib” took up the one letter “Kli” and uttered this only repeatedly, which is, in fact, the prince of the root mantras of Kāma, with anusvāra omitted.

खीजे वे कामराजाख्यं गृहीतं मनसा तदा ।

जजाप बालको3त्यर्थे धृत्वा चेपसि सादम् ॥ 36 ॥

Then the son of the king took that mantram and silently repeated this in his mind.

भावियोगाम्याराज कामाराजाख्यमद्धुम् ।

स्वभावेनैव तेनैत्थं यृहीतं बालकेन वै ॥ 37 ॥

O King! Thus that boy Sudarśana was initiated in this root mantra of Kāma (desire) spontaneously, out of his original Saṃskāra (innate tendency) owing to the unavoidable destiny of Fate.

तदारभी पडमे वर्षे प्राय मन्यमनुत्तमम् ।

त्रशिष्ड्छेदोक्षिति च ध्यान्यासविवर्षितम् ॥ 38 ॥

प्रजयम्नसा नियं क्रीडालयि स्वायित्यि ।

विसस्मान तं नमं ज्ञाला सारमिति स्वयम् ॥ 39 ॥

The son of the king, when he was five years old, got this most excellent mantra, though without its Rsi (seer), meditation, without its chanda (metre) and without Nyāsa (assignment of the various parts of the body to different deities, accompanied with prayers and corresponding gesticulations), and considered this as the quintessence of all, therefore meditated this always in his mind spontaneously and never forgot it.

वर्षे चैकाव्यो प्राप्ते कुमारोज्ञी सृगवाक्यः ।

मुनिना चोपनीतोप्र येवदम्यापितस्तथा ॥ 40 ॥

धनुर्वैदं तथा संगं नितीगास्त्रं विधानत ।

अभ्यस्ताः सकला विद्यास्तेन मन्वकलादिति ॥ 41 ॥

When the king's son grew eleven years old, the Muni performed his Apunayana (sacred thread) ceremony and made him begin the study of the Vedas. The son, with that mantra power, soon mastered all the studies about archery, all the moral and political sciences in conformity with proper rules, within a very short time.

कदाचित्योति प्रयक्षे देवीकर्ण ददारुं है ।

रक्ताबरं रक्तबर्ग रक्तस्वविभिषुभुम् ॥ 42 ॥

गरड़े वाहने संस्थां वैधवारी शक्तिमद्धुताम् ।

दूद्धा प्रसन्ददन: स बयूद नृपातक्नः ॥ 43 ॥

One day Sudārsana got a vision of the Supreme Goddess, of a red colour, wearing red apparel and decorated with red ornaments, mounting on Garuda and with Her wonderful Vaisnavi powers and Her face, fully opened like the budding of a lotus flower. वने तम्मीस्थितः सोउ शवविद्वार्यतचलित् ।

मातरं सेवामानसु विज्ञाहर नदीतेरे ॥ 44 ॥

Thus, expert in many branches of learning,

Sudarśana served his Mother in that forest and began to wander on the banks of the Ganges.

गतसनं च सम्पातं विशिषाङ्ठा शिलाशिताः ।

नृपीतकवचं तस्मै दर्तं चाचिक्वया वने ॥ 45 ॥

One day the Mother of the Universe gave the bows, sharpened arrows, quiver and a mail coat of armour to that boy in that forest.

तृतस्मिन्समये पुत्री काशिराजस्य सुप्रिया ।

नाना शशिकाल दिव्या सर्वलक्षणासंपुता ॥ 46 ॥

शुभात नृपपुरं तं वत्नर्थ च सूद्रानंम् ।

सर्वलक्षणसम्पर्न शूरं काममिवायपम् ॥ 47 ॥

O King! At this time the extraordinary beautiful and lovely princess Śaśikalā, endowed with all auspicious qualities, the daughter of the King of Kāśī, came to hear that a beautiful prince named Sudarśana, a second Kandarpa, full of heroism and endowed with all auspicious qualities is dwelling in a forest.

वर्दीवान्युवाच्छुवा राजपुरं सुर्मंतम् ।

चकमे मनसा ते वै वंर वरवितुं छिया ॥ 48 ॥

The princess, hearing this from a soothsayer, mentally loved and desired him and wanted finally to accept him as her legal husband.

स्वपे तस्या: सामाग्य जगद्यका निशान्ते ।

उवाच वचनं चेदं समाधास्य सुसंस्थिता ॥ 49 ॥

वं वर यमुश्रीण मम भकः सुदर्जनः ।

सर्वकामप्रदलरेस्तु वचनात्मय भाधिमी ॥ 50 ॥

Thus, on one occasion, at the end of a night (night-fall), the Goddess appeared in her dreams before her and consoled her and said: "O fair one! ask a boon from me; Sudarśana is my devotee; he will fulfill, at my word, all your desires."

एवं शशिकला दूद्वा स्वपे रूपं मनोहरम् ।

अंबाया वचनं सूत्वा जहर्षं घृष्णाभिमिति ॥ 51 ॥

Thus seeing the beautiful figure of the Goddess in her dreams and hearing Her sweet words, the honoured Śaśikalā was drowned in an ocean of bliss.

उपस्थिता सा मुटा युक्ता पृष्टा मात्रा पुनः पुनः ।

प्रमोदे कारणं बाला नोवाचातित्रपान्यित्ति ॥ 52 ॥

प्रमोदे कारणं बाला नोवाचातित्रपान्यित्ति ॥ 52 ॥.

प्रमोदे कारणं बाला नोवाचातित्रप्रापित्ति ॥ 52 ॥

प्रमोदे कारणं बालா नोवाचातित्रापित्ति ॥ 52 ॥

gladness, her mother perceived her joy and inferred that her daughter must have been internally very glad, and asked her repeatedly, but Saśikalā was too much abashed and did not give vent to the cause of her satisfaction.

जहास मुदामपाता स्मृत्वा स्वन्दे मुहुर्मुहुः ।

सखी प्राह तदात-यां वे स्वलवृत्तं सविस्तम् ॥ 53 ॥

The princess, remembering her dreams, began to laugh repeatedly on account of her excessive joy. At last she spoke out in detail all about her dreams to one of her lady friends, or companions.

कदाचित्सा शिकाराधेयवापोयचनं सुभम् ।

सखीयुक्ता शिवगालाही चमकैकरूपशीभत्न ॥ 54 ॥

On one occasion, that large eyed Śaśikaālā went out for enjoyment to a nice garden beautified with campaka flowers, attended by her companion.

पुष्याणि चित्त्वती बाला चमकाशःचित्ताउबल ।

अपयद्वाहाणों मार्गे आगछन्त नत्वारित्यम् ॥ 55 ॥

While the King's daughter seated under a campaka tree, was collecting flowers, she saw a Brāhmin, coming towards her in great haste.

तं प्रणाय द्विजं श्यामा बभावे मयूरं चचः ।

कृतो देशान्याभाग कृतभागमं त्वया ॥ 56 ॥

After bowing down before him, that beautiful princess, endowed with all auspicious qualifications, addressed him in sweet words “O blessed one! whence are you coming?”

द्विज उवाच

भारत्जाबभ्यालैने नूनभागमं मम ।

जातं वै कार्यवीरोन किं पृष्ठसि वद्वय मे ॥ 57 ॥

The Brāhmaṇa said: “O girl! I am coming on an errand from the hermitage of Bharadvāja Muni. Please mention what you are going to ask me?”

शशिकलोबाच

तत्राक्षेम महाभाग वर्षनीयं किमिति वे ।

लोकातिलं शिशेषेण प्रेक्षणीयतमे किल ॥ ५८ ॥

Sāsikālā replied “O Noble one! What beautiful thing is there in that hermitage that is extraordinary and worth describing.”

Book III Chapter XVIII

बाहाण उवाच

धूवसन्धिसुतः श्रीमानासे सूद्रिंगना नृपः ।

यथार्थनाम सुशोणि वर्तेने पुरुभोपनाः ॥ ५९ ॥

The Brāhmaṇa said “O fair one! There is staying the most lovely Sudarśana, the son of the King Dhruvasandhi. He is the loveliest of all men.”

तस्य तोचनमावन्तं निष्क्रत प्रतिभाति च ।

येन रुहो न चामोक कुमारस्तु सुदर्शनः ॥ 6 ० ॥

O fair one! He who has not seen him, I think, has his eyes given to him in vain."

एकत्र निहिता धारा गृणाः सर्वे सिसुक्षुणा ।

गुणानामाकरं उहुं मन्ये तेनैव कौतुकात् ॥ 6 1 ॥

O auspicious one! It appears as if the Creator, with a view to seeing how it looks, has invested him with all the qualities."

तब योग्यः कुमारो5सी भर्तां भवितुम्हैति ।

योगो5यं विहितोयासी-मिणाकांचनयोरिति ॥ 6 2 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणों तृतीयरकन्चे

सप्तद्यो5ध्याः ॥ 17 7 ॥

O beautiful one! what shall I say more to you, suffice to say that, that prince is fit to become your husband. I think that the Creator has, no doubt, settled already the union between you two, as a happy union of two congenial things (gold in union with Jewel).

Thus ends the Seventeenth Chapter on the story of Visvāmitra and on the getting of the root mantra of Kāma by the son of the King in Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book III Chapter XVIII

CHAPTER XVIII

On Swayamvara of the Daughter of the King of Benares

यास उवाच

भुत्वा तद्वचनं ज्यामा प्रेमयुक्ता बभूव ह ।

प्रतस्पे ब्राह्मणतस्तमात्स्थानावुक्त्वा समाहितः ॥ 1 ॥

Vyāsa said: The King's lovely daughter was very glad on hearing the words of the Brāhmaṇa, and drowned herself in ecstasy of love. The Brāhmaṇa also departed, thinking of the whole affair.

सा तु पूर्वानुगाई मना प्रेण्ञान्तिवंचला ।

कामवाणहोतवास गते तस्मिन्डजोतमे ॥ 2 ॥

The daughter was already attached to the prince, and now she became the more merged in love for him and became very anxious. Now, on the departure of the Brāhmin, she felt herself struck by the arrows of love.

अथ कामारिता प्राह सखी छ-दोनुवर्तनीम् ।

विकारुः समुत्वोः देहे यच्छ्वणादुः ॥ 3 ॥

अज्ञातरसविज्ञानं कुमारं कुलतम्प्रयम् ।

दुनौति मदान: पापः किं करोमि कव याथि च ॥ 4 ॥

Then Śaśikalā, oppressed by love, addressed her dear companion, who followed her inclinations' thus: "O my companion! I have not as yet had any knowledge of the king's son; still the signs of love

have sprung up in my body and mind, from the moment that I heard about him from the Brāhmin. The love is giving me much trouble; tell, my companion, what am I to do now? and whither shall I go?

स्वानेषु वा मया दृषः पड्वाणा इवापरः ।

तपते मे मनोरभर्ध विहाहुकृतिरंतं मघु ॥ ५ ॥

O dear companion! I saw him like a second God of Love in my dreams; and, since then, my innocent mind is being troubled with his being away from me."

चन्दनं देहल्पनं मे विषवद्धाति भामिनी ।

स्वागर्व सर्वेषच्छेच नन्द्रपात्रध वहिहत् ॥ 6 ॥

O fair one! The sandal paste on my body appears to me like a poison, this garland is like a serpent and the moon's rays seem like a fire."

न हर्षे न वने गं से दीर्घिकानां न वर्ते ।

न दिवा न निशायां वा न सुखं सुखतायभैः ॥ ७ ॥

O companion! My mind gets not rest any where, in palaces, in gardens, in lakes, in hills, at any time, during the day or night; all the enjoyable things have assumed now contrary aspects and are paining me."

न शल्या न च तांबूतं न गीतं न च घादनम् ।

प्रीण्यांति मनो मेउढ़ा न तृते मम लोचने ॥ 8 ॥

The bedding, betel leaves, music, singing, and dancing, all now fail to give me satisfaction and peace.

प्रयाम्यच्चं वने तत्र यत्रासी वर्तेत शकः ।

भीतातीय कुललज्जायाः परन्तःया प्रिकुतशा ॥ 9 ॥

O companion! I would have gone today where is residing that deceiver; but I fear for my father as well for the honour of my family.

स्वयंवरं पिता मेउष्ठा न क्रातीक क्रोगेम क्रिम् ।

दास्यामि राजपुराय कामं सुदर्शनाय बै ॥ १० ॥

My father is not yet declaring the svayamvara for my marriage. What shall I do? Had he given me in marriage to that Sudarśana, I would have allowed him embrace me and satisfy his passion today!

संस्थाने पृथिवीपाला: शतश: संभृतद्विः ।

सपीया ने तेउडा राज्यहीनोउपसी मनः ॥ १ १ ॥

"O friend! look at the strange ideas of the Creator! There are hundreds of kings today who are influential and I do not consider them beautiful; and that King's son is exiled from his kingdom. and yet he has stolen away my heart."

व्यास उवाच

एकाकी निर्धनश्रिव बलहीनः सुदर्भनः ।

वनवासी फलाहारतसत्याश्रिते सुसंश्रिता ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus that King's son, Sudarsana, though helpless, and living in forest on roots and fruits, deprived of wealth, power, and army, began to reign in the heart of that princess.

वार्थीक्रिय सपासिद्धित्सया एषायुपस्थिता ।

सोषि ध्यानयोरोस्थन्ते जजापा मन्त्यमुत्तम् ॥ 13 ॥

स्वने पश्यस्यी देवीं विष्ण्यामायाखिद्धात्म।

विश्वभात्मयक्तां सर्वसंपत्कारंविकाम् ॥ 14 ॥

Śaśīkālā, too, began to recite slowly the root mantra of Sarasvatī and therefore her love towards this prince held out signs of success.

Once engaged in meditation on that excellent root mantra on Kāma, and, whole repeatedly

reciting it mentally, he got in a dream the vision of that Ever Full, the World Mother Ambikā, that cannot be expressed in words, the Vaisṇavi Śakti and capable to bestow all wealth and property.

श्रगावेषुराधक्षो निवादः समुदोच तम् ।

द्वौं रथवरं तत्मे सर्वोपरूकरसंयुतम् ॥ १ ५ ॥

चतुर्भिस्तुरीयुक्ति पताकावरमधितुम् ।

जैत्रं राजसुतं ज्ञाला ददी चोपायन्ते तद् ॥ १ ६ ॥

At this time the King of Niśādas, the lord-of Śrīngaverpur came to the hermitage and presented an excellent chariot together with all other necessary things. This chariot was drawn by four horses, decorated with nice flags and was endowed with the prospect of getting victory everywhere; thinking it thus a befitting present to be given to the King, he gave it to Sudarśana.

सोर्धि ज्यात्र हं प्रीवा सित्तेन सुसीक्षितम् ।

वन्यैमूलकर्ते: सव्यार्थियामास शंखरम् ॥ 17 ॥

Sudarśana, too, accepted the offer of a friend and worshipped him well in return, with roots and fruits of the forest.

कृतातिथ्ये गते तस्मिभिद्यादिघपते तदा ।

मुनयः प्रीतियुक्तासे तम्बुतत्पासा मिथः ॥ 18 ॥

राजपुत्र धृष्टा नज्य प्राप्यसि तर्चे च सर्वथा ।

स्वल्यैरहोभिरव्ययः प्रतापाशत्र संशयः ॥ 19 ॥

The lord of the Nisādas, thus worshipped as a guest, went away. The Munis and ascetics then began to address Sudarśana, with fondness “O son of the king! Don’t be anxious and restless; within a very short time, you will get your kingdom, no doubt, by your own good luck and prowess.

प्रसता तेरभिका देवी वरद विधभोहिती ।

सहायस्तु सुसंपयो न चित्तां कुक सुवत् 11 20 ॥

O one attached to one's vows! The Goddess that enchants the whole universe, the Giver of boons, Śrī Ambikā, has been pleased with you; assistance is rendered well to you; therefore do not trouble yourself with contrary thoughts any more."

मनोरां तथोच्छुत मृन्य संशित्राततः ।

पुत्रसंउद्ध धारधीशो भविष्यति शुचिशित्मे ॥ 21 ॥

Book III Chapter XVIII

The Munis, who have taken vows, addressed Manoramā also “Your son will soon become the lord of the world; you need not care any more.

सा तानुवाच तन्वीी वचनं वोउसु सरूकल्प।

दास्तोउयं भवतां विधा: किं चित्रं सदुपासन्ति । 22 ॥

Then the lean and thin Manoramā, hearing the Muni's words said "O Brāhmaṇas! Let your āśīs (words of benedictions) be justified with success. What wonder that a kingdom be obtained by the good will of the Sādhus!"

न सैन्यं सचिवा: कोशो न सहायघ कक्षन ।

केन योगेन पुत्रो मे राज्यं प्रापुविहाहित् ॥ 23 ॥

There is no force, no minister, no help, no property; how, under what combinations, can then my son get kingship?

आशीर्विद्धि वो नूनं पुत्रोउयं मे महीपति: ।

भविष्यनि न सन्देहो घवन्तो मन्त्रविनता: ॥ 24 ॥

You are the best of the knowers of mantrams; due to the influence of your good will, my son will surely be a king; there is no doubt in this.

व्यास उवाच

याहाकडः स मेधावी यत्र याति सुदर्भनः ।

अशौहिणीसामवृत इवापाशित से तेजसा ॥ 25 ॥

Vyāsa said: Wherever that intelligent Sudarsāna used to go on his chariot, there he seemed by his own prowess, as if he were surrounded by a whole army consisting of 109, 350 foot, 65,610 horse, 21,870 chariots and 21,870 elephants.

प्रताथो मन्त्रीजस्य नावः क्रऊन भूपते ।

गृवं के जपतस्तस्य प्रीतियुक्तस्य सर्वेथि ॥ 26 ॥

This is the influence of the seed mantra; it is not an ordinary acquisition. It is because Sudarśana, with gladness and one-pointedness of his mind, meditated on his seed mantra, that he acquired the above powers; there is no doubt in this.

समप्राय सदगुरोर्षिंत कामराजाखमद्धुतम् ।

जदेषासु गृधि: शानतः सर्वान्कामानावगुतम् ॥ 27 ॥

Becoming pure and peaceful, whoever gets this wonderful seed mantra from a true spiritual guide and meditates on it incessantly, is destined certainly to attain all desires.

न तर्सिति पृथिव्यां वा दिवि वारपि सुतुर्विभम् ।

प्रसवाचा: शिवायाङ्य यद्याप्यं नृपोन्म ॥ 28 ॥

O best of kings! There is no such thing either in the heavens above or in the worlds below, that a man won't get, when the Supreme Goddess becomes pleased.

ते मन्दारतेश्रिदुष्योग्योगेसं समाधिगुतः ।

येषां चित्ते न विश्ठासो भवेदेवार्थनायिषु ॥ 29 ॥

Those are certainly very unfortunate and of intellect, who cannot place their faith on the worship of this Goddess and consequently suffer incessantly all sorts of troubles.

या माता सर्वेदेवानां युगावौ परिकीर्तिता ।

आदिमातेति विश्याता नाना तेन कुकढ़हं ॥ 30 ॥

O best of the Kurus! At the beginning of the creation, this Amba Devi was the Mother of all the Gods, and is therefore known as the First Mother.

बुद्धि: कीर्तिधूतितर्षीः शक्ति: श्रद्धा मति: स्थूति: ।

सर्वेषां प्राणिनां सा वे श्रवर्षे वै विपासते ॥ 31 ॥

She is practically seen in this world in the shape of Buddhi (intelligence), Kirti (fame), Dhṛti (fortitude), Laksmī (Goddess of wealth), Śakti (the Force), Śraddhā (Faith), Mati (Intellect), Smṛti (memory), etc.

न जानांति नरा ये वै मोहिता मायया किल ।

न भजित कृतकौना देवी विधेश्धी शिकाम् ॥ 32 ॥

It is only the deluded souls that do not realise the nature of the Devi; it is only those, whose hearts are destroyed by the glare of false argument, that do not worship this All-auspicious Goddess of the Universe.

ब्रह्मा विष्यासा शम्बुरास्वो वक्षणो यमः।

वायुरानि: कुबेरिष्ठ न्वष्टा पूर्णिष्ठनी भनः ॥ 33 ॥

अदिल्या वसवो रुदा विश्वेशेवा मन्द्राणा: ।

सर्वे ध्यायिन तां देवीं सृहित्यचल्नकारिणीम् ॥ 34 ॥

O king! Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Śambhu, Indra, Varuna, Yama, Vāyu, Agni, Kubera, Viśvakarmā, Pūṣā, Bhaga, the two Aśvīns, Ādītyas, Vasavas, Rudras,

Víśvedevās, Maruts, all worship the Supreme Deity of Creation, Preservation and Dissolution.

को न सेवेत विद्यान्ये तां शर्से परमात्मिकाम ।

सुवर्भनि न सा जाता देवी सर्वांदीय शिला:।। 35 ॥

Who is there amongst the wise that does not serve this Highest Energy? The real nature of that Auspicious Goddess, the Bestower of all desires, Sudarśana came to know very well.

ब्रहीव सातिनुकुमार विघाउविद्यारस्विधो।

योगेशया परा शनिर्भमुभुर्णों च बलल्पा ॥ ३ ६ ॥

She is the Real Essence, Brahma, very rarely realised : She is the Higher Vidyā and the Lower Vidyā (Avidyā) and She is the vital energy, the Mukhya Prāna, of the best of the Yogis, who are desirous of liberation.

परामास्वरूयं को वेतुमहिति तां विना ।

या सृहि विधियां कृता दर्शनयविद्यालमना । ३ ७ ॥

O king! What individual is there that is able to realise the nature of Pramātmā (the Highest Universal Self) without having recourse to Her, Who is manifesting this universal consciousness, by bringing into existence these Sātvik, Rājasik, and Tāmasik creations.

सुर्वान्तु तां देवीं मनसा परिधितयन् ।

राज्यलाभार्यं प्राया सुखं वे कानेन स्थितः ॥ 38 ॥

Sudarśana, though the dwelt in the forest, realised a greater happiness than that in obtaining the sovereignty of a kingdom, by constantly meditating on that Goddess.

सारपि चंद्रकलाजस्यं कामबाणप्रपीक्षिता ।

नानोपचार्तैरिभं हद्यार दुःखितं वपुः ॥ 36 ॥

Śaśikalā, too, being too much oppressed with the arrows of love, any how remained with her soul in her body, having had to be always cared for her health in various ways by her attendants.

ताततस्या: पिता जाता कन्यो पुत्रवार्षितीम् ।

सुबाहु: कारयामास स्वयंवरमनंर्तिद्र: ॥ 40 ॥

Then the king Subahū, on coming to know that her daughter is desirous of getting her husband, made arrangements for her Swayarīnvara (a marriage

in which the girl chooses her husband from among a number of suitors assembled together) without any delay.

स्वयंवरसू त्रिविधो विद्धिद्र: परिकीर्तितः ।

राज्ञी विद्वाह्योग्यो के नान्येबां कवितः किल ॥ 41 ॥

इच्छास्वयंवरछोकी छितीयछ प्रणाधिधः ।

यथा रामेण भपाने वे अयंकस्य शासनम् ॥ 42 ॥

तृतीयः श्रीयंगुल्का श्रूगणां परिकीर्तितः ।

इच्छास्यवरं तत्र चकार नुचसनम्:। 43 ॥

The Svaaryānvara of the royal family, the Pundits say, is of three kinds: 1st Icchā Svaamyvara (optional); 2nd Panya Svayamvara by fulfilling a promise e.g. Rāmacandra broke in two the bow of Śiva and married Sītā; 3rd the Svaamyvara, preferring one who will prove the strongest hero by one's own prowess. Of these three kinds of Svaaymvaras, the king Subāhu preferred Icchā Svaaymvara (according to the bride's free choice).

शिष्यिध: कातिरा मंचा: शुभैरातलपौर्युतः।

ततश्र विविधाकारा: सुकल्ला: सध्यमखुपा: ॥ 44 ॥

Accordingly the king employed many artisans, had platforms covered with beautiful carpets and big halls decorated beautiful in various ways.

एवं कृतेस्तिमंचारे विद्वार्थे सुवित्तरे ।

सखीं शणिकला प्राह दुःविता चाहलोचना ॥ 45 ॥

इदं मे मातरं बृहि त्वमेकानते वचो मम ।

मया वृत: परितिक्षे धुवसन्धिसून: शुभ ॥ 46 ॥

नान्ये वरं वरिष्यामि मनुते वै सुरुर्जनम् ।

स मे भर्तां नृपसुतो भगवया प्रतिष्ठितः ॥ 47 ॥

Thus the assembly hall for Svaaryinvara built and decorated and all the necessary articles and equipments brought thither, the fair eyed Śaśikalā, told her companions with sorrow “Better go to my mother and say her privately that I have already selected mentally my husband the beautiful Sudarśana, the son of the king Dhruvasandhi in my mind; I wo’nt marry any other prince than him; the Goddess Bhagavatī has settled him for my husband.”

Book III Chapter XIX

<table><tr><td>ஆரஞ்சா சவரவ</td></tr><tr><td>ஆரஞ்சா சம சரஞி ஈரவா நூத சரஞா</td></tr><tr><td>ஆரஞ்சி விரகே வரகை மற்ற் மஞ்சபரியரி 148</td></tr><tr><td>ஆரஞ்சி தே:ஆரஞ்சா நூத சரஞி வர மஞஞே வர</td></tr><tr><td>ஆரஞ்சி வஞ் கூக கரஞியரி நடேஞ்டு வரவிரதமா 149</td></tr><tr><td>ஆரஞ்சி வஞ்சா மழுய் டுஞ்சபரியதுன்டேஞ் வர</td></tr><tr><td>ஆரஞ்சி வஞ்சா வஞ்சா வஞ்சா</td></tr><tr><td>ஆரஞ்சி வஞ்சா வஞ்சா</td></tr></table>

Vyāsa said, the companion of Saśikālā hearing thus, went quickly to her mother Vaidarbhi and addressed her sweetly in private “O chaste one! Your daughter, with a sorrowful heart, has sent me to you to say the following; Please hear and do at your earliest convenience, what is good and beneficial, the son of the king Dhruvasandhi; I have mentally selected him as my husband; I won’t select any other prince.”

म्यास उवाच

रानी तद्वचनं श्रुत्वा स्वपतौ गृहमागते ।

निवेदयामास तदा पुत्रीवासयं यथातमम् ॥ 51 ॥

Vyāsa said: The queen, hearing her words, told to her husband, when he returned to the palace, all her daughter's words as she had heard them.

तच्छूत्वा वचनं राजा विवित्मतः प्रहस्मयुः ।

भार्यामुवाच वेदपूर्ण सुवाहुस्तु न्रतं वचन: ॥ 52 ॥

सुषुं जानासि वालोउसी राज्याधिक्यासितो वन ।

एकाकी सह मात्रा वे वसते निजने वने ॥ 53 ॥

Hearing this, the king Sabāhu was astonished and then laughed frequently and then began to say to his wife, the daughter of the king of Vidarbha the following true words: "O fair one! That king's son Sudarśana is a minor, he has been exiled to the forest; now he is helpless and is residing with his mother in a dense forest.

तकृते नितहतो राजा वीरसेनो युधापिता ।

स कर्बं निर्धोने भर्ती योग्य: स्याच्याक्लोचने ॥ 54 ॥

For his sake, the king Virasena was slain in battle by the king Yudhājit. O fair eyed! how can that helpless exiled poor boy become her husband.?"

खृष्टि पुरीं ततो वाक्यं कदाधिद्धि विध्रियम् ।

आगमिष्यिति राजान: स्थितिनं: स्वयंदेचे ॥ 55 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागते महापुराणे

तृतीयकन्येडगहसोड्याव: ।। १ १ १ ।।

Do say therefore to Śaśikalā that, in the assembly hall for her Swayanivara, many kings commanding honour and respect would be present; She would then choose whomever she likes. She need nor repeat such words any more.

Thus ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Third Book about the Swayanīvara of Śaśikalā, the daughter of

the king Kāśirāja in the Mahā Purānam

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī

Veda Vyāsa.

Book III Chapter XIX

CHAPTER XIX

On the Marriage

यास उवाच

भर्मा साउभित्रता बालां पुत्रीं कृतवांकसंस्थिताम् ।

उवाच चवचं रल्बणं समाभार्य शृचिंसिताम् ॥ 1 ॥

किं वृथा सुर्लित त्वं हि विधियं मय भायसे ।

पिता ते दुःखाम्पोति वाक्येनांनेन सुखते ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: After the king Subāhu had spoken thus, the Queen made her daughter Śaśikālā, who had always sweet smiles on her lips sit on her lap and after consoling her with words, began to say

"O fair eyed! You always practise vows and other religious performances; why are you, then, speaking these unpleasant words? The King has heard all what you wanted to say has been very sorry."

सुर्दोर्नोर्दिष्यांगेरो राज्यश्रो तिराशयः ।

बलकोशविद्रौनछ परित्यक्तसु बाँधवे: ॥ ३ ॥

मात्रा सह बनं प्राप्तः फतमूलाशनः कृतः ।

न ते योग्यो वरीउर्ध वै बनवासी च दुर्भर्भः ॥ 4 ॥

राज्यपुत्रा: कृतप्रजा रूपवंतः सुसंमतः ।

नहाहीं: पुत्रि सन्त्यये राजधिक्रतैलकृता: ॥ 5 ॥

That Sudarśana is very unfortunate, deprived of his kindom, helpless, void of wealth and army, abandoned by his friends, exiled with his mother in the forest, subsisting on roots and fruits, lean and thin. Thus he is not worthy of becoming the husband of yours. There are many learned, beautiful, approved of all, qualified with all royal marks, princes fit to become your husband. They all will come in this Swayamvara.

भातास्थ वर्तते कानतः स राज्य कोसलेषु वे ।

कॉर्पीत रूपसमपत्रः सर्वतक्षणासंपुतः ॥ 6 ॥

There is one brother of this Sudarśana, who is endowed with all kingly qualifications, beautiful, and qualified in various other ways. He is the king of the Kosala country.

अन्यच्छ कारणं सुचु सुगु युच्च यथा श्रुतम् ।

युधासितततं तस्य वधकामोरितं घमिमः ॥ 7 ॥

There is another point worth consideration; please hear it. The King Yudhājit is trying his best to kill Sudarśana on a befitting opportunity.

दीडिः: स्थापितसेन राज्य केल्यात्सितंगम् ।

वीरसेनं नृंं हृता संमंत्र सचिवः सह ॥ 8 ॥

He already counselled with his ministers and killed in a desperate fight the king Virasena and installed his daughter's son on the throne.

भारद्वाजामं प्राणं हृतकाम: सुदर्शनम् ।

सुन्नि वातरि: पक्षाजगाम निममन्दितम् ॥ 9 ॥

Even he came up so far as the hermitage of Bhāradvāja to kill Sudarśana; afterwords he was prevented by the Munis from doing so; then he returned home.

शशिकालोबाच

मातामेमितिः कामं वनस्योरपि नृपात्मजः ।

श्रवीतिवचनेनैव सुकान्य च पतितन्ति ॥ 10 ॥

च्यवनं च यथा प्राप्य पतिर्गुक्षणे रत ।

भतैगुशूपणं क्लीणां ख्वर्यँ मोक्षंत तथा ॥ 1 1 ॥

अक्तिवक्तृत नृनं सुखदं भवति सिक्याः ।

Sasikālā replied: "Mother! That prince, though

staying in the forest, is approved of by me; under the advice of Saryāti, the chaste Sukanyā married Cyavana Muni and served her husband all along; so I will marry this king's son and will always be engaged in serving him. The women are able to attain heaven and emancipation, if they serve their husbands; therefore if we be sincere in serving our husbands, we will no doubt be happy."

भगवत्या समादिष्ट स्वने वरमनुतमम् ॥ 12 ॥

तमुतेड़ह कर्थ चान्यं संशयामि नृपात्मजम् ।

I have seen in my dream that the Goddess Bhagavatī has ordained him to be my husband; how can I now accept any other body as my husband than him?

मचित्तभित्ती लिखितो भगवता सुढर्जनः ॥ 13 ॥

तं विहास प्रियं कानं करीचेउई न चापरम् ।

The Devi Bhuvaneśvari has pictured his frame firmly in my heart; I will never be able to leave my dearest beautiful husband and to contract marriage with any other person."

व्यास उवाच

प्रत्यादिष्ठाश वैदर्भीं तया वहुनिर्वर्षेः ॥ १४ ॥

भर्तीरं सर्वमाचड युप्रोकतं वचनं भृगम् ।

Vyāsa said: Thus the mother, the daughter of the King of Videha, found many signs and at last desisted. She then reported to the King all the words of Saśikalā.

विद्यार्थ्य दिनाद्वर्जागरं भूतसम्बित्नम् ॥ १ ५ ॥

हिड़ं शगशिकाल तत्र प्रेषयामास सत्वम् ।

यथा न वेदे मे ताततशा गच्छ सुरुर्नम् ॥ १ ६ ॥

भात्राजाग्रभे बृहि महाव्यान्तसा विभो ।

When Śaśikalā, on the day before the marriage day, became very anxious and, sent in a great hurry, one trustworthy Brāhmīn, versed in the Vedas to the hermitage of Bhradvāja with this message “O Brāhmīn, go in such a way to Sudarśana, as my father be not able to know about it and tell Sudarśana all my words.

पित्रा मे सम्भूतः कामं मवर्धेन स्वयंवरः ॥ 17 ॥

आगमिष्यित नजानो बलयुक्ता हानेकशः ।

Book III Chapter XIX

मया त्वं वै पृतछिते सर्वेधा प्रीतिपूर्वकम् ॥ 18 ॥

भगवता समाधिटः स्वप्रे मम सुरोपम् ।

My father has called in for my marriage a Swayamvara ceremony; many powerful kings will attend with their armies; O Deva! The Goddess Bhagavatī has ordered me in dream and accordingly I, with full gladness of my heart, have become yours already in my heart."

विषमधि हुतों हा प्रगतमि प्रदीपिति ॥ 19 ॥

वर्ये त्वन्ते नान्यं विवृष्यां प्रतितप्रति च ।

"Rather I will take poison or I will jump in a blazing fire, than I can obey my father's and mother's words and marry another."

मसा कर्मणा वाचा संवृत्तस्य मया करः ॥ 20 ॥

भगवत्या: प्रसादेन शर्माविष्यां भविष्यति ।

“By my mind word, and deed, I have selected you my husband; and pleasure and happiness is sure to attend on us by the blessings of the Bhagavati.”

आगात्मखं त्याद्यारे दैवं कृत्वा परं बलम् ॥ 21 ॥

यदधीनं जगत्सर्वे वर्ते सचराचरम् ।

"Please depend unto Her, at Whose command this universe, moving and unmoving is resting, unto that Great Destiny and come to this place without fail."

भगवत्या यद्याष्ट्रं न तन्मिथ्या भविष्यति ॥ 22 ॥

यड़ुोे देवाना: सर्वा सर्तेने शड़ूरावय: ।

What the Goddess, whose commands Śankara all the other Devas obey, has ordered, an never turn out false.

वत्क्योजी तया इद्यरेकाने वै नुपातयकः ॥ 23 ॥

यथा भवति मे कार्य तत्कर्तेल्य त्वयान्च ।

“O Brāhmīn! You the foremost amongst the virtuous do therefore call on that King’s son in privacy and speak out all these to him. What shall I say more to you. Do all that my object may be fulfilled.”

इत्युक्चना दक्षिणां दत्ता मुनिन्विधापित्रतस्तथा ॥ 24 ॥

गाला सर्व निवेशागु तत्र प्रत्यागते हिजः ।

Thus saying, she gave the Brāhmīn his Dakṣinā

and sent him to Sudarśana. He went there and reported all the matter duly to him and quickly returned back.

सुदर्जनस्तु तत्ज्ञाला निश्छयं गमने तदा ॥ 25 ॥

चकार मुनिना तेन प्रेरितः परमादरात् ।

On coming to know all this, Sudarśana determined to start; and the Maharṣī Bhāradvāja, with gladness, sent him.

व्यास उवाच

गमनावोहतं पूरं तुमवाच मनोरमा ॥ 26 ॥

वेयमानासितु:खातां जाततयासम्युतोवनाः ।

Vyāsa said: Seeing her son ready to start, his mother Manoramā became very sorry and, trembling and shedding tears, thus spoke to his son.

कुरा गच्छसि पुराठ सभाजे पृभुतां किल ॥ 27 ॥

एकाकी कृतवैश्छ किं विविज्च स्वयंवरे ।

युधाजिब्छूतकामस्वां समेधिति महीपिति: ॥ 28 ॥

न तेऋ्योक्ति रहायशु तस्मायामा जज पुरक ।

“Sudarśana! Where are you going now? How do you dare to go there in the Swayamvara alone, where are present kings and all your terrible enemies. O Son! You are as yet a boy. The King Yudhājit will certainly go there with the object of killing you; there will then be no other body to help you. So you should never go to that place.

एकपुत्रातिहीनास्थि ततधारा निताधया ॥ 29 ॥

नाईस ति महापाण निराजां कतुभय मात् ।

"You are my only son; I am very poor, and helpless; I have no other to lean upon than you; therefore you ought not to throw me in despair at this moment."

चित्त ते निह्त्तो येन सोर्धि त्रजागतो नुप: ॥ 30 ॥

एकाकिनं नत तत्र युधाजित्चां हनियति ।

"See Sudarśana! King Yudhājit who had slain my father, that uncontrollable king will come there; if you go there alone, he will certainly kill you."

सुरर्शन उवाच

भवित्यं भवत्येव नात कार्या विचाराणि ॥ 31 ॥

आदेशाच्च जगन्मातुरीच्छाय्य स्वयंवरे ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Sudarśana replied—“Mother! What is inevitable will certainly come to pass; there is no need to discuss further on the subject. I will go at the command of the World Mother to that assembly hall of Swayamvara.

मा शोक कुक कल्याणि क्षितयासि सचनाने ।

न विधोभि प्रसादेन भगवल्या नितन्तम् ॥ 32 ॥

O Auspicious one! Do not give vent to sorrow; I do fear none by the grace of the Bhagavatī."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा ध्यामक्रह्मा नातुकामां सुदर्शनम् ॥ 33 ॥

दृष्ट्वा मनोरामा पुत्रमाणिर्भिश्रान्योदयत् ।

Vyāsa said. Thus saying, Sudarśana mounted on his chariot and was ready to start. Seeing this Manoramā began to bless him and so cheer him.

अग्रतले प्रमिका पातु पार्वती पातु पुछतः ॥ 34 ॥

पार्वती पार्थ्वीय: पातु शिक्षा सर्वेक सम्प्रात् ।

वाराही विषये मार्गे दुर्गा दुर्गेषु कर्हिंघित् ।

कालिका कलहे धोर पातु त्वां परमेश्धी ॥ 35 ॥

मगढ़ो तत्र मातर्जी तथा सौम्या स्वयंवेगे ।

भवानीं घुपमध्ये तु पातु त्वां भवमोचनी ॥ 36 ॥

निर्जित गिरितुर्णे घ्नापुढा चलयेयु च ।

कामगा काननेचेवे रक्षतु त्वां सनातनी ॥ 37 ॥

O Son! Let Ambikā Devi protect your front; Padmalocanā protect your back; Pārvatī, your two sides; Šivā Devi, all around you; Vārāhi, in dreadful paths; Durgā, in royal forts, Kālikā, in terrible fights; Parameśvarī, in the platform hall; Mātāngī, in the Swayamvara hall; Bhavānī, the Avertress of world, amidst the kings; Girijā, in mountain passes; Camundā, in the sacrificial ground, and let the eternal Kāmagā, protect you in the forests.

विवादे बैध्वारी शक्तिर्वातांचा रघुद्धह ।

भेरची चरणे सीम्य श्रजूर्ण वै समागने ॥ 38 ॥

O Descendant of Raghu family! Let the Vaiṣnavī force protect you in quarrels; let Bhairavi protect you in battles and amongst your enemies."

सर्वेदा सर्वेशेषु पातु त्वां भुवनेश्वी ।

महामाया जगद्धाउं सचिद्वानन्द्रकिपिणी ॥ ३९ ॥

O Son! Let the Mahā Māyā Jagaddhātri Bhuvaneśvari protect you everywhere and at all times."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा तं तदा माता वेयमाता भयाकुत्ता ।

उवाचाड़ तव्या साध्यमागमिष्यासि सर्वथा ॥ 40 ॥

Vyāsa said: Then Manoramā, speaking thus to him, trembled with fear and again said: "O Sudarśana, I will also accompany you; there will not be otherwise."

निमिषार्थं बित्ता तांवे नाहं स्थातुमिहोत्सहे ।

सहैह नय मां बल्स यत्र ते नपने मति: ॥ 41 ॥

"I will never be able to remain anywhere without you and even for the twinkling of an eye. O Son, carry me thither where you are desiring to go."

इयुक्णा नि:सृता माता धार्वौमंसुता तत ।

विर्देश्नानिष्यः सर्वे निविदूर्हेंसयुतः ॥ 42 ॥

Thus saying, his mother with her attendants was ready to start. The Brāhmanas pronounced their blessings. All then went out.

वाताग्यां तत प्राता रथेनेकेन रावय: ।

ज्ञातः सुवाहूना तत भूजितश्राईगणिविभः ॥ 43 ॥

Sudarśana, the descendant of the Raghu family, mounted then alone on his chariot and reached Benares. There King Subāhu, hearing that he had come, welcomed him and worshipped him with various presents.

निवेशार्थ गृहं दनमप्रणानाक्रिक तथा ।

सेवकं समनुजाय परिव्यार्थीयेव च ॥ 44 ॥

He gave him the house for his residence, and made arrangements for his food and drink and other necessary requirements and gave order to his servants to wait on the prince.

मिलितास्वध राजानो नानोर्हणाधियाः किल ।

युधाजिदयि सम्पातो दौहिजेण सम्पत्थितः ॥ 45 ॥

Then, from various quarters, the kings assembled together; and Yudhājit, too, come there accompanied by his daughter's son, Śatrujit.

करूपाधिप्रतिश्रित तथा मद्रश्रो :पृतः ।

सिन्युगात्सधा वीरी योद्धा महिष्यतीपति: ॥ 4 6 ॥

Book III Chapter XIX

पाङ्गाल: पर्वतीयघु कामरूपो3तिवीयन्ति।

काणार्टिशोलेद्रोयो वैदर्भें महावल: ॥ 47 ॥

अशौहिणी विश्रिक्षि मिलिता सहुवा ततं ।

वेहिता नगरी सा तु सै-यै: सर्वे संस्थिति: ॥ 48 ॥

The King of Karūṣa, the King of Madra, the King of Sindhu, the King of Māhimatī" the valiant warriors, the King of Pānāśla, the kings of the mountainous tract, the King of Kārṇāṭ, the powerful King of Kāmarūpa, the King of Cola, and the very powerful King of Vidarbhas with 180 Aksauhīnī soldiers all arrived and assembled there. Benares was then crowded all over with soldiers and soldiers.

एते चान्ये च बहवः स्वयंवरिद्ध्वया ।

मिलितास्तत्र राजानो वरावरायर्वताः ॥ 4 9 ॥

Many other kings came there on their beautiful elephants to witness the Swayamvara ceremony.

अन्योयं नृपपुत्रास्त इत्यचूमिंलितास्तवा ।

सुदर्शनो नृपसुतो हागतोर्जित निराकूलः ॥ 50 ॥

Then the princes began to talk amongst them "The King's son Sudarśana, too, had come there and is staying unconfused and calm."

एकाकी श्यामाहु मात्रा सह महामाति: ।

विद्याहार्थीमहावातः काकुल्य किं नु संग्राम ॥ 51 ॥

Is it that the high minded Sudarśana, born of the Kákuttsha family, had come there on a chariot, helpless, to marry?

एताजाजुतांस्तवल्चा सरीन्यान्यापुधाना ।

किमेने राजकुत्री सा वार्थिति महापुत्रम् ॥ ५२ ॥

Can it be that the princess will overlook these Kings with soldiers and weapons, and select the long armed Sudarśana?

युधाजिवध राजेशस्तानुवाच महीपतीन् ।

अहमेनं हनियाथि कन्यार्थ नात्र संयाः ॥ ५३ ॥

Then King Yudhājit addressed all the other kings "I will slay Sudarśana for the sake of the daughter; there is no doubt in this."

केतलाधिपति: प्राह तं तदा नीतिस्तम: ।

नात्र युद्ध प्रकर्तैलं राजस्धिक्वल्यवंरे ॥ 54 ॥

बलेन हर्णं नास्ति नात्र शुल्क्यवयंरः ।

कन्येच्छया उर वर्णा विवादः कीनुशसिद्ध ॥ 55 ॥

Hearing Yudhājit's words, the king of Keral, the foremost of those who know morals, began to say: "O king! In this Icchā svayamvara, it is not proper to fight. Here there will no marriage for prowess; there is no arrangement fixed to steal away the bride elect by force; here the bride will select of her own free choice; what cause can than there crop up here for quarrels?"

अन्यायेन त्वया पूर्वमसी राज्याध्वसितः ।

दौहित्रायार्थितं राज्यं बलवघुपसत्तम ॥ 56 ॥

"Before, you had driven him out of his kingdom; and though you are the superior king, you have taken his kingdom by force and installed your daughter's son on the throne."

काकुष्योयं महाभाग कोतलीघपतेः सुतः ।

कथमेनं राजपूत्रं हनियसि निरगामम् ॥ 57 ॥

“O King! This Sudarśana is born of the Kākutstha family and the son of the King of Kosala. Why would you kill this innocent boy?”

लप्यसे तत्कर्ते नूनमनवस्य नृपोतम् ।

गशास्तिक कडीशतुविषमुक्तानोर्य जगतयो: ॥ 58 ॥

"O Long lived! Better be sure that there is some God of this Universe; He is governing all; and if you commit anything wrongful, know that you will get the fruit of that due to you; there is no doubt in this.

धर्मों जयित नाधर्म: सर्वे जयित नानुतम् ।

माउनवं कुरु राजेन्द्र तवप पापमति किल ॥ 59 ॥

O King! There is victory everywhere of the Truth and Dharma; always you find Adharma and Felsehood defeated. Therefore dost thou forsake your evil and mean intentions and pacify you vile mind."

दौहित्रलत समुपान: सोप्री कृपसमयित: ।

राजयुक्तलया श्रीमान्कर्ष तं न वरियिति ॥ 60 ॥

"Your daughter's son is also present here; he is beautiful and prosperous and is reigning a kingdom. Why will not that birde elect him as bridegroom?"

अन्ये राजसुता: कामं वत्ने क्ललतसा: ।

कन्यास्वयंवरे कन्या स्वीकार्थिति सामगन्ति ॥ 6 1 ॥

युते तथा विवाद: कः प्रवदन्तु महीभुज: १

परस्यं विरोधोउत्र न कर्तव्यो विज्ञानता ॥ 6 2 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयकन्थे

एकानाविशोउधाय: ॥ 1 9 ॥ 11

Consider again that there are many other powerful princes and kings in this Swayarivara; the princess may select them also. Therefore let all the kings assembled here say that if the selection

of the bridegroom be performed in that way, what cause of a quarrel can there crop up? Knowing all these, you ought not to quarrel here.

Thus ends the Nineteenth Chapter on the going to the Swayarivara assembly of Sudarśana and the other kings in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XX

On the Swayainvara Hall

व्यास उवाच

इतिवादिने भूपाले केरलाधिपतौ तदा ।

प्रत्युचार महाभाग युधारिवर्ष पार्थिवः ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa sand: O Noble minded one! King Yudhājit replied to the address of the king of Kerala, thus:

नीतिरयं महीपाल यदुखवीति भवानिह ।

समाने पार्थिवानां वै सत्यवार्षिवजित्रियः ॥ २ ॥

वोयेयु वर्तमानेयु कन्यारलं कृतोह्छ ।

अयोग्योड़हीत भृपाल न्यायोउंच तव रोचते ॥ 3 ॥

O King! You are truthful and have restrained your passions. What you have told just now in this assembly of kings is all correct and approved by morality. O best of the kings! You are born of a high family; you better say how can this take place that when so many fit persons are present here to become the bridegroom, can an unworthy person take away the offer?

भागं सिंहस्य रोगामुवर्णितुभर्हिति वा कथम् ।

तथा सुरर्गनीठयं वै कं व्यारालं किम्हिति ॥ 4 ॥

As a jackal never becomes fit to enjoy what are the dues of a lion, so this Sudarśana is also unfit to acquire this bride elect.

बलं वेदो हि विज्ञाणां ध्रुप्रजां घापजं बलम् ।

किम्याययं महाराज ब्वीवाम्यहिमहानुना ॥ 5 ॥

The Brāhmanas have the Vedas as their strength; the Kṣattriya kings take bows and arrows to be their

source of strength; this is ordained every where. Therefore O King! What wrong have I done in my statement. Kindly explain.

बलं शुरूकं यथा राजां विवाहे परिकीर्तितम् ।

बलवानेव गृहुतु नावलस्तु कदाचन ॥ ६ ॥

तस्माकन्याणं कृत्वा नीतित्र विधीयात् ।

अन्यथा कलहः कामं भविष्यित मतीभुजम् ॥ ७ ॥

The power of the kings is the befitting money given to the parents of a bride; according to this the strongest man is to acquire the bride, a jewel. The Ksatiriyas that are weak can never acquire that. Make this the rule in this marriage. The earth is fit to be enjoyed by the heroes only and not by the cowards and intriguing persons. Otherwise quarrels are sure to ensue amongst the kings.

एवं विवादे संवृते राजां तत्र परस्मरम् ।

आहुतस्तु सभामध्ये सुवाहुनुर्यसनमः ॥ 8 ॥

The dispute thus arose in that Svayamvara hall; and the king Subāhu was called in.

समाहूद नृपा: सर्वे तमुचुस्तत्वदर्शिनः ।

राज्जीतिस्वया कायां विवाहोउर समाहिता ॥ 9 ॥

The kings that could see the reality of things then addressed the king Subāhu. “O king! You are requested to establish a golden rule in this marriage ceremony”.

किं के चिकर्शिंत राजसन्तुद्रव स्वमाहितः ।

पुत्रा: प्रदानं कर्मे ते रोचते नृप चेतेसि ॥ १ ० ॥

Book III Chapter XX

“What is your object in calling this svayamvara. Better give it out after a mature consideration. Please be explicit whom have you intended to give over your daughter in this marriage?”

सुवाहुर्वाच

पुर्या मे मनसा कामं वृतः कलि सुदर्शनः ।

मवा निवारितोयवं न सा प्रत्येति मे वचः ॥ १ १ ॥

किं करोमि सुताया मे न वर्गे वर्तेत मनः ।

सुर्शन्नतवैकाकी सम्पानोरिति निराङ्कतः ॥ १ २ ॥

Subāhu said: “My daughter has mentally selected Sudarśana; I prevented her repeatedly from doing this; but she did not accept my word. What shall I do now? The mind of my daughter now is not at her will. Sudarśana, too, though uninvited, has come here singly and is residing calmly, without any signs of disturbance in his mind.

व्यस उज्ञ

स्मयत्रा घ्युर्ज: सर्वे समायुव सुर्जर्जन् ।

कंचु: समागतं शान्तोबाकिकान्मतरित्रता: ॥ 13 ॥

राजपुर महाभाग केनाहृतोउस सुत्रत ।

एकाठी यः समायातः समाजे ध्युन्तामिह ॥ 14 ॥

Vyāsa said: Then the chief kings all invited Sudarśana there; Sudarśana, too, came there quietly, and the princes, seeing his quiet nature, asked him. “O one, engaged in practising vows! Who has invited you here? Why have you come here singly, in this assembly of kings?

न वे सैन्यं न सचिवा न कोंगो न सहुदलम् ।

किमयं च समायाततत्त्वं बृहि महामते ॥ 15 ॥

You have no force, no ministers, no help, no wealth, and no army. O intelligent! Then explain why have you come here along?

युद्धकामा नृपतयो वर्तोत्र सामागे ।

कन्यार्थ सैन्यसमप्रा: किं त्व कर्पिभेच्छसि ॥ 16 ॥

In this assembly of kings you see that the powerful monarchs are ready to fight with each other for the sake of this princess. What do you intend to do under these circumstances?

भात ते सुखतः शुरः सम्याप्तोस्ति विषूक्षया ।

युयाज्च्च महाबाहु: साहाय्यं कर्भाग्रतः ॥ 17 ॥

Your brother, too, is come to have the princess; he has got his army and is also marked for his strength and valor. The powerful Yudhājit has come here also to help him.

गच्छ चा तिछु राजेंय यायात्वथ्युदाहन् ।

त्वयि सैन्यिहीने च यथेछे कुरु सुत्न ॥ 18 ॥

O observer of good vows! Seeing you without any army, we have narrated to you all the facts, Now think and do accordingly. If you please, remain here or go anywhere else.

सुर्गन उवाच

न बलं न सहायो मे न कोशो तुर्मिक्षयः ।

न मित्राणि न सौहाईं न नृया रक्षका मम ॥ 19 ॥

अत्र स्वयंवं श्रुत्वा उद्धुकाम इहागतः ।

स्वपे देया प्रेत्तोत्रिस भगवता न संशयः ॥ 20 ॥

Sudarśana replied: “True, I have no army, no help, no wealth, no forts, no friends or no kings to protect me. Hearing that Swayamvara will be held here, I have come here to witness it. But there is one particularity here; it is this: The Devi Bhagavatī has ordered me in my dream to come here. Under Her command I have come here; there is no doubt in this.”

नान्यचिर्याकीर्षित मेउदा भागह जगदीक्षृति ।

तया यद्धित्रतं तच्च भविताउघ न संशयः ॥ 21 ॥

I have got no other object in view; I have obeyed what the Bhagavati Bhavaneśvari has ordered me to do. Today will happen, no doubt, what She has ordained."

न शुज्ञित संसार कोअप्रज जगतीश्वरा ।

सर्वेय पश्यतो मेऊ घबाजीं जगाद्विकबान् ॥ 22 ॥

यः कौरियति शजुत्वं मया सह नृपात्मज्ञा: ।

शास्ता तव महाविद्यात नाहं ज्ञानीय मुक्तान् ॥ 23 ॥

O kings! I am seeing everywhere the Supreme Goddess Bhagavatī Bhavānī. Therefore there is no enemy of mine in this world; but he who will turn out an enemy of mine, will be duly punished by the Mahā Vidyā Mahā Māyā. I do not know what is enmity?

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

यद्धार्य तई भविता नान्यथा नृपसत्तम: ।

का चिता हुक्र कर्तेल्या देवाधोनोदिस सम्बत ॥ 24 ॥

O kings! What is inevitable will surely come to pass. There will be nothing otherwise. I am always depending on Fate, Destiny. What is the use, then, in thinking what will be the result?

देवभूमनपुर्वेषु सर्वभूतेषु सर्वदा ।

सर्वेषां तत्कृता भक्तिनान्यथा युपसमाना ॥ 2 5 ॥

Every where in the Devas, in the spirits, in men, in all the beings, the Devi's power is existent; it cannot be otherwise.

सा यं चिकारीपे भूयं तं केरोति नृपाधिया: ।

निर्मर वा नर काम का चित्ता चै तदा मम ॥ 26 ॥

O kings! Whomever She wishes, She makes kings masters of wealth or devoid of wealth. What is, then, the use of bothering my head in this?

तापुते परमां गर्जिक बढ़ाधिशुतारयः ।

न शक्ता: स्यंदितुं देघा: का चिंता से तदा नृपा: ॥ 27 ॥

When even the Gods Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa without Her presence, become powerless enough to move their hands or feet, then why shall I be anxious for the result?

अशक्ता या सशक्ता या याशुसतशुसत्वहम् ।

तद्धात्या नृपाधीव संग्रातोस्मि स्वयंवेते ॥ 28 ॥

O kings! Whether I am unable or able or an ordinary person, you have nothing to consider; I have come here in this assembly hall under the command of the Supreme Bhagavati.

सा यदिष्छलि तत्कुर्ग्याम्न किं चित्रनेन थे ।

नात्र शंका प्रक्रतिया सत्यमेततुद्बीयाम्न् ॥ 29 ॥

जये परायले जलना ने भेजापयाणे याधिःः ।

भगवत्यास्तु लजासित तद्धीनेत्रिस्म सर्वथा ॥ 30 ॥

What She has willed, She will do that. I am not to care for that. O high minded ones! You need not be afraid at all in this. I have told you all truth. Victory or defeat, I feel no shame in either of them. For I am always under the control of Bhagavatī; therefore if there be any shame here, it is all Hers.

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य तदाकपयं वचनं राजसत्तमाः ।

कचुः परस्परं प्रेक्ष्य निश्छयज्ञा नराधिप्र: ॥ 31 ॥

सत्यभृतं तव्या साधो न पिथया कहिंधूद्वेत् ।

तथाप्यूज्जयनीत्थस्वां हेतुं परिकांक्षिति ॥ 32 ॥

त्वाकृतै न दया दृषा त्यां बंधीमो महापते ।

यथुक्तं तत्वया कार्य विचारयं मनसाउनच ॥ 33 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing thus his words, and seeing that his mind is firmly devoted to Bhagavatī, the kings saw each other and said thus: "O Sudarśana! What you have said is quite true; it is never otherwise; still Yudhājit, the king of Ujjain is intent on killing you." O intelligent! O sinless! we have all come to know that there is no trace of evil in you, We were all overcome with pity for you; hence we have informed you; now think and do the needful?

सूरर्जन उवाच

सत्यमुक्तं भवद्धिकु धुकपावद्धि: सुहृजनैः ।

कि ब्रवीम पुनर्वाव्यमुक्तना गृपतिस्तमाः ॥ 34 ॥

Sudarśana said, “You are all kind and large hearted; what you all have said is quite true. What shall I tell you, being a minor as yet!

न मृगु: केनपिछ्याव्यः कस्यविद्धा कदाचन ।

दैवार्थीनिर्ध सर्वे जान्यथावरजुकुमम् ॥ 35 ॥

O kings! No one can cause the death of another. All this world, moving and unmoving, is under the control of Fate.

स्वलगोयं न जीवोर्सित स्वकर्मविगगः सदा ।

तत्कर्म विविध प्रोक्त विद्धान्तचलर्शिभि: ॥ 36 ॥

सघ्रितं वर्तमानं च प्राग्यं च तृतीयकम् ।

कालकर्मवस्थावैषर ततं सर्वसिंदं जन्त ॥ 37 ॥

न देवी मानुषं हन्तु शफः कालागमं विना ।

हन्त निमिनमाजेश हाँत काला: संसनतः ॥ 38 ॥

No soul is independent; every one is under the effect of one's own Karma. The Pundits that have realised the Truth, say that Karma is of three kinds, Accumulated, Present, and Prārabhā? This whole world is due to Kāla (Time), Karma (action) and Svabhāva (Nature); unless the proper time comes, even the Devas cannot kill men. The men are killed on account of some cause, immediate; but the Great Time is the real Destroyer.

Book III Chapter XX

यथा पिता मे निह्तः सिंहेनामित्रकर्षण: ।

तया मातामहोःपेवे वृद्धे युधातिता हतः ॥ 39 ॥

My father, though a destroyer of many others, was himself killed by a lion and my mother's father was slain by Yudhājit in the battle.

यत्नकोर्ट प्रकुर्बाणे ह्यन्ते देवयोगतः ।

जीविद्वर्मह्वाणि श्रणेल निवा नरः ॥ 40 ॥

The Jīvas, though caring hard to preserve their lives, are killed by Fate in spite of all their cares; and they live thousand years though there is none to protect them.

नाहं विषेपि धर्मिहुः कतचिन्च युधाजितः ।

देवमेव परं मत्वा सुस्तिशतोज्सि सदा युना: ॥ 4 1 ॥

O religious kings! I do not fear a bit Yudhājit. I consider Fate as the Supreme and I therefore remain always undisturbed, calm and quiet.

स्मार्ग सत्तं नित्यं भगवत्या: कांतोयहम् ।

विश्वस्य जननी देली कल्याणं सा कार्यित्धि ॥ 42 ॥

Daily and constantly I remember Bhagavatī, Who is the Mother of all this Universe. She will look after my welfare.

यूर्वांस्ति हि भोक्त्वयं शुभं वाय्यगृधं तथा ।

स्वकृतस्य च भोगेन कीवृक्षोको विजानात्म ॥ 43 ॥

Behold! One will have certainly to bear the burden of one's past Karma, whether it be good or it be bad; one's own actions must bear their fruits. Then why shall he be sorry, who has come to know this?

स्वकर्मफलयोगेन प्रायय दुःखमयनेतः ।

निमिताकारणे वैर क्रोतल्यमाति: किता ॥ 44 ॥

The less intelligent deluded persons, on getting pain from their own actions, turn out enemies on very trifling matters.

न तथाड़हं विज्ञानामि वैरं जोकें भयं तथा।

निःजकमिरु सम्पान्तः समाजे धूभृतामिह ॥ 45 ॥

I do not grieve nor do I fear on account of such enemies. I am staying here in this assembly of kings, cool-minded.

एकाकी उद्धकामोई स्वयंवरमनुतमम् ।

भविष्यिति च व्यद्वाय प्राप्तोत्रिम चिछकाझाम ॥ 46 ॥

Under the order of Candikā, I have come here to see this Svayamvara; whatever is inevitable will surely come to pass.

भगवत्या: प्रमाणं मे नान्यं जानामि संयतः ।

तत्कृतं च सुखं दुःखं भविष्यिति च नान्यथा ॥ 47 ॥

The words of the Bhagavatī are the best proof; I do not know any other. My mind is entirely given up to Her. There will be nothing otherwise than what She has ordained; whether it is good or whether it is bad.

युधाजित्सुख्यामोनुत न मे बेरं नृपोतमाः ।

यः क्रत्थिति मे बेरं से प्राप्यति फर्न तथा ॥ 48 ॥

O kings! Let Yudhājit remain in peace. I have no enmity with him. He, who will deal inimically with me, will certainly reap his reward. There is not the least doubt in this.

व्यास उवाच

इनुकृतसे तथा तेन सन्तुषा भूभुजः स्थितः ।

सोर्पि स्वामाभंग प्राय सूचितः संबंभून ह १ ४ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! When Sudarśana addressed them thus, all the kings became very glad and they all remained there for the Swayamvara. Sudarśana, too, went to his camp and remained also calm and quiet.

अपरेजिह्ट्रुभके काले नृपा: संभक्तितः किल ।

सुबाहुना नृपेणाय कधिरे वे स्वमण्डे ॥ 5 0 ॥

Next day the king Subāhu invited all the kings present in his city to their respective seats in the Svayamvara hall.

दिव्यास्तरणयुक्तेच मझेयु रचितेयु च ।

उपविशिष्ठा राजानः शुभालङ्करणीयुक्ता ॥ 51 ॥

The princes and kings, decorated with best ornaments, came and took their seats on their respective platforms, covered with valuable carpets of best workmanship.

दिव्यवेषधरा: कामं विमानेबयमा इव ।

दीय्यमाना: श्वितात्तन स्थवंरादिवृक्ष्या ॥ 52 ॥

The kings then looked like the celestial Devas, wearing divine ornaments and apparels, blazing with the lustrous light of gems, and remained to see the Swayamvara affair.

Śrimadievbhāgavatam

इति विप्तापसः संर्वे कदा सा०यागमिष्यति ।

भाग्यन्ते नृपश्रेष्ठ श्रतुपूर्णे वरिष्यति ॥ 5 3 ॥

Everyone there had this foremost thought in his mind when will the princess, the bride elect, would come there; and who will be the man so fortunate as to be blessed with garlands offered by her (as a token of selection of the bridegroom)!

वटा सुरुर्जनं देहात्मज्ञा सम्पृष्येदितु ।

विवादो वे नृपाणां च भविता नारं संशया ॥ ५४ ॥

If, accidentally, she offers the garland to Sudarśana in this Swayamvara assembly, then will ensue, no doubt, desperate struggles amongst the kings.

क्रूलेर्वं चित्यमानसे घृपा मढ़ेषु संशित्या: ।

वार्दियोषः सुमहानुवित्तो नृपमण्डपे ॥ ५५ ॥

अथ कार्थिपति: प्राह सुतां सन्तां स्वलंकृताम् ।

मगुकमालासयुक्तां क्षीमवासोपैध्यपिताम् ॥ ५६ ॥

विद्याएपकर्णैंकृतां दिव्यां सिंधुस्तोपामम् ।

चितापरां सुवसनां सितपूर्वमैदि वचः ॥ ५७ ॥

उत्तिष पुत्रि सुनीसे करे धृत्वा रुणां सकम् ।

जन मणदयायेउदा समाजं पर्य क्षपुब्जाम ॥ ५८ ॥

While they were thus meditating, sounds of drums were loudly sounded. Then Subāhu, the king of Benares, went to his daughter and found that Śaśikalā had just taken her bath and put on her silken clothes, and adorned herself its various ornaments and sweet garlands. Thus, dressed in complete marriage dress, she began to shine like another Goddess Laksmī, the Goddess of wealth. The king, on seeing his daughter dressed in silken cloth, afflicted with anxious thoughts, just smiled and said, “Child! Rise and take the beautiful garlands by your hands and go to the Svaayinvara hall and just look at the assembly of kings.

गुणावाह-स्पत्मम्पत्र कुतीनऊ शुनेतमः ।

तब चिते सवेशस्तु तं शुणुष सुमधमे ॥ 59 ॥

O lean bodied one! Whoever, well-qualified, beautiful, and of noble birth, amongst the kings is reigning in your mind, better select him.

देशदोशाधिया: सर्वे मढ्रेषु रचितेषु च ।

संश्रिया: परम तर्वयि वरयस्व यथाक्ति ॥ 60 ॥

O graceful! The kings from various quarters are adorning their respective seats; better go and see and select whomever you like."

व्यास उवाच

तं तथा भायमाणं वै तिरातं मितभाषिणी ।

उवाच वचनं बाला ललितं धर्मसंयुतम् ॥ 6 1 ॥

Vyāsa said: When Subāhu had spoken thus, Śaśikālā, who generally talked little, replied with sweet sonorous words, impregnated with religious truth.

शशिकलोचाच

नाहं दृष्टिपये राजा गणियामीय पितः किल ।

कामुकानां नोरंगानां गछल्यान्याशु योचिति ॥ 62 ॥

"Father! I won't go before the kings who are inspired by lust; women like me never go there; it is those that are dissolute that attend those places."

धर्भगास्ते श्रुत तात मयंदं चवनं कित ।

एक एव वरो नारां निरीक्षः स्यारा चापः ॥ 6 3 ॥

"Father! I have heard from the religious texts that women should cast their glances on their husbands only and not on any other.

सतीचं निर्मितं तस्या या प्रयाति बहून्य ।

कक्रल्यवित्ति से संवैं दूरवा मे भवतात्रिति ॥ 64 ॥

The woman that goes to many persons is mentally claimed by all; each of them contemplates strongly “Let this woman be mine.” Thus her chastisy is destroyed.

स्वयंवरे सर्व धृत्वा यद्यागछिति मणद्ये ।

सामान्या सा तदा जाता कुलटेवापारा वधूः ॥ 65 ॥

वास्त्री विषणे गत्वा यथा वीक्ष्य नान्धिस्वान् ।

गुणागुपणपित्रानं क्रौति निजमानसे ॥ 66 ॥

"Desirous of selecting her husband, when the woman holding in her hands, the garland for her would-be-husband, goes to the Swayarinvara hall, then she turns out like an ordinary unchaste woman.

As a prostitute going to a public shop looks on many persons and judges of their merits and demerits according to her own power of judgment,

Book III Chapter XXI

the maid that goes in the Svaṇyānvara hall does exactly the same."

वेकभावा यथा वेग्या वृथा पण्यति कामुकम् ।

तथाउड़ं मपडेप नत्वा कुर्वे वार्तखया कृतम् ॥ 67 ॥

"How can I behave myself in the hall of the assembly of kings like a prostitute, who does not attach her feelings firmly on a single individual but glances constantly at many lustful persons."

ब्रढ़ौरतः कृतं धर्म न कार्थिम साम्रातम् ।

पत्नीततं तथा कामं चरिष्ठसई धृततन्ता ॥ 68 ॥

Though this system of Swayamvara is approved by the elderly persons, I am not going to follow that now. I will take the vow of a chaste woman and act up to that doctrine as perfectly."

सामान्य प्रवर्म नाला कृत्वा सुकृत्तिवतं बहु ।

युणीति चैकं तद्वे द्याणीम कवमघ दै ॥ 6 9 ॥

I will never be able to act like an ordinary woman going in the Swayanīvara hall, mentally

determining many and finally selecting one.

सुर्दर्शनो मया पूर्वे वृत: सर्वात्मना चितः ।

तमुते नान्यथा कर्तूमिष्ठ्ठमीन नृपसतम ॥ ७ ७ ॥

Father! From the very beginning, I have given myself up to Sudarsāna in mind, word and deed. I have not the least inclination to leave him and select another in his stead.

विद्यार्थिविधा देहै कन्यादानं शुभे दिने ।

सुदर्जनीय नृपते यदीच्छासि शुभं मप ॥ ७ १ ॥

श्रिति श्रीमद्वीभागपते महानुगणं तृनीयकन्धे

बिशोराध्याय: 11 20 11

O King! If you want to have my welfare, then give your daughter on an auspicious day and in an auspicious lagna to Sudarśana according to the prescribed rites.

Thus ends the Twenty Chapter on the Swayanivara hall and the king's conversation there in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verse by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book III Chapter XXI

CHAPTER XXI

On the King of Benares Fulfilling the Advice of His Daughter

व्यास उवाच

सुवाहुर्यि तच्छूला युक्तभूर्न तथा तदा ।

स्थिताविष्टो बभूवाणु किं कतन्यमतः परम् ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: On hearing the sound words of his daughter Śāśikālā, prcgnant with reason, Subāhu the king of Benares, become very anxious and began to think what he would now: so short a space of time in this momentous occasion, thus:

संगता: पृथिवीपाला: सरी-न्या: सपरिभूहा: ।

उपविष्टाङ्ग प्रमेषु योदुक्कामा महावाला: ॥ 2 ॥

यदि ब्रवीमि तान्सर्वान्सुता नायाति साम्यान् ।

तथापि कोपसंयुक्ता हनुर्मा दुख्युद्ध्वः ॥ 3 ॥

"The powerful kings, all, have come here on intention that they would fight and therefore they are all attended with their armies and followers respectively; and they are now sitting on their respective daisess in the Swayamvarahal. If I go now and tell them that my daughter Sāsikalaïs is not willing

tocome of her won accord in the hall, the evil-minded kings will certainly kill me out of their wrath."

न मे सैन्यवलं तादूक्टन दुर्गवलमढ़तमू ।

येनाहं नृपतीस्विन् प्रत्यादेयुभिकोलसे ॥ ४१

I have not so much strength, whether in my army or in forts, as to be able to decline these kings and drive them away from my kingdom.

सूदर्गनस्तथेकाको हृसहाशोरोधन: शिणुः ।

किं कतव्य विमानोउर्ष सर्वथा दुःखसारने ॥ ५ ॥

Sudarsāna, too is, alone, helpless, wealthless, and a mere boy. What shall I do now? Alas! I am now plunged in deep sorrow."

इति चिन्तापरो राजा जगाम नृपस्विजरी ।

प्रणय तानुवाचाय प्रश्यावन्तो वृपः ॥ ६ ॥

Thinking thus, with head bowed down by humility, the king went to the kings, and said thus:

कि कर्तव्ये नृपा: कामं नैति मे मण्डये सुता ।

बहुगः प्रेयमाणासि सा मात्रासि यमासि च ॥ ७ ॥

“O Kings! The girl, though requested repeatedly by me and her mother, is not willing to come to this hall. What can I do now?

मूनां पतामि पावेरु राजां दासोस्म साम्यान् ।

प्रतिहिक गृहीताउऊ जजंतु सद्यानि वः ॥ 8 ॥

द्वामि बहुल्यानि वस्त्राणि च गजावधान् ।

गृहीत्वाउऊ कृपां कृत्वा जजुंत भवान्यूत ॥ 9 ॥

I am your servant and, bowing my head at the feet of you all, pray to you, to accept my worship and return to your own places respectively. I am ready to give a sufficient quantity of gems and jewels, clothes, elephants, chariots. Kindly accept these and go back to your own homes.

न वजे मे सुता बाता प्रियते यदि खेदिता ।

तदा मे स्यामहुदुःखं तेन चिन्तागुरोउम्यम् ॥ १० ॥

My daughter is as yet a girl; if I chastise her, she may commit suicide; and I will be exceedingly sorry; therefore I am very much distressed with this thought.

घर्वतः कल्पावन्तो महाभाग्या महौजसः ।

किं मे तया वृद्धिता तु मंद्या दुर्विंनीतया ॥ १ १ ॥

You all are fortunate, energetic, and of a merciful disposition; what will it serve you to accept the daughter of mine, who is disobedient and unfortunate?

अनुग्राहीउपि वः कामं दासोउहमिति सर्वथा ।

सुता सुतेव मन्तव्या भवादूः सर्वथा माम ॥ १२ ॥

I am your obedient servant; shew your mercy on me and it is your duty to consider my daughter as your daughter."

व्यास उवाच

शुना सुबाहुवचनं नोचुः केचन भूमिपा: ।

युयातिकोयाताभ्रास्तमुवाच रभावितः ॥ १ ३ ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing Subāhu's words, the kings did not utter a single word; but Yudhājit, with his eyes reddened out of wrath, began to address the king of Benares in an angry tone:

राजमूर्खोंसि किं बृषे केला कार्य सुनिंदितम् ।

स्वयंवरः कर्थ मोहात्रयितः संगेश सति ॥ 14 ॥

“O King! You are a veteran fool; what do you say now after committing a most blameable act? Had you any doubt as to your proceedings, why have you, out of sheer delusion, called this meeting hall of Svayamvara, without thinking the matter before-hand.”

मितिता धमुपत्रः सर्वे त्वयाउरुत्ता: स्वयंरे ।

कथमदा नृपा गन्तु योग्याते स्वगृहान्धति ॥ 15 ॥

"You have invited the kings and princes in this marriage ceremony Svayamvara; and they all have assembled here; how can they now go back to their homes?

अवमान्य नृपान्सर्वित्व किं सूर्णनाय वै ।

दातुपिच्छसि पुरीं च किमानार्यमतः परम् ॥ 16 ॥

Are you going now to insult these? and will give your daughter in marriage to Sudarśana? Nothing can be more ignoble than this?

विद्यार्थे पुरुभेणादौ कार्ये वै रुणमिच्छता ।

आरब्धस्यं तव्या ततु कृतं राजत्र जानता ॥ 17 ॥

The welfare-seeking person ought to judge before-hand and then to act. But you have started your work without any previous judgment and decision. You will have to reap its fruit; there is no doubt in this.

एताविहाय नृपती-वलवाहनसंयुतान् ।

वरं सुर्जर्गं कर्तुं कथमिष्ठस साम्पत्न ॥ १ ८ ॥

Why are you now thinking of giving your daughter to this helpless, wealthless Sudarśana in the presence of kings that are powerful and that command a great militia.

अहं त्वा हन्मि यपिष्ठं तथा पशुत्सूरर्भन् ।

दौहित्रायाद्ध ते कन्यां दास्यामीति विविधुः ॥ १९ ॥

O thou most sinful! Today I will certainly kill you; next I will kill Sudarśana and then give your daughter to my daughter's son; know that this is my firm resolve.

मय विस्तृति कोन्योक्ति यः कन्यां हृतिंभिच्छिति ।

सुर्दर्शन: क्रिज्ञानघि निर्विधी निर्वर्ज: शिष्टु। ॥ 20 ॥

Who is there, when I am standing, in this assembly that can aspire to carry away the

Book III Chapter XXI

bridegroom elect by force or theft? Nothing to speak of Sudarśana who is powerless, wealthless and a mere boy!

भातुझाज्ञभे पूर्व मुक्तो मुनिकृते मया ।

नाहाई मोचिय्यामि सर्वेया जीवितं शिशणेः ॥ 21 ॥

I spared his life before in the hermitage of Bhāradvāja at the Muni's request; but today I will not spare the boy under any circumstances whatsoever.

तस्मादिषार्थी सम्यलं पूज्या च भार्याय सह ।

दीहिजाय प्रियां कन्यां देहि मे सुभृवं किल ॥ 22 ॥

Therefore, please go and consult with your wife and daughter and give your dear beautiful daughter to my daughter's son.

सव्यती भव दत्वा त्वं पुत्रीमतो मनोरामम् ।

उच्चाशय: प्रकर्तेव्य: सर्वदा: शुभमित्छता ॥ 23 ॥

Be engaged in a marriage tie with me by giving your exquisitely beautiful daughter to my daughter's son. You can very well judge that it is always proper and advisable that a great man shall come under the protection of another great man.

सुर्जर्नाय दत्ता तव पुरीं प्राणिचिया शुभाम् ।

एकाडिलेज्यराज्याय किं सुखं प्राप्तिमछस्थिसि ॥ 24 ॥

What happiness can you expect from this Sudarśana, who is helpless and banished from his kingdom, that you are going to give him your dear and auspicious daughter!

"कुत विजं बत रूप रायं तुग सुकुजनम् ।

दूरवा कन्या प्रताल्या नान्या सुखमुच्छिति ॥"

परिस्थिति धर्म तं रजानीति च राश्धतीम् ।

कुक कार्य वयायोगं मा कृया मतिमन्यथा ॥ 25 ॥

“Family, wealth, army, appearance, kingdoms, forts and true friends and other helping persons,” these a man should consider when he is going to give away his daughter in marriage to any body; else there is no surety of happiness. Think over the royal custom and the never failing Dharma and do what is proper. Never it is advisable to do any act, abandoning the path of Dharma and morals.

सुहृदासि ममात्यर्थ हितं ते प्रव्रीयामृदम् ।

समानव सुतां राजान्मण्डये तां सखीबुतम् ॥ 26 ॥

You are my intimate friend; therefore I am telling you these good words. O king! Better bring your daughter, surrounded by her attendant maids, in this hall of Swayamvara.

सुदर्जनमुने चेयं वरीचिति चतुदयसौ ।

वियहो मे दात न स्यादिवाहोस्तु लदैकितः ॥ 27 ॥

Let this daughter select any man other than Sudarsana; I have got no cause of quarrel; and the marriage will then be celebrated according to your will.

अन्ये नृपतयः सर्वे कुलीना: सबला: समा: ।

विरोधः कौदुगस्वेने वर्णोषादि नृपोन्मि ॥ 28 ॥

O best of kings! The other kings are all of high descent; and they have armies and are all in positions befitting your connection! If the daughter chooses any one amongst them, then no quarrels would arise.

अन्यधानई हरियेऊ डालत्कान्यामिं शुभाम् ।

मा विरोधं सुकु:साधयं नष्ठ पार्थिवसत्ति ॥ 29 ॥

But if the daughter choose Sudarśana, then certainly I will carry her by force. Therefore, O king! act in such a way that no quarrels occur in future.

व्यास उवाच

युधाजिता समाविष्टः सुबाड़ः शोकसंयुतः ।

निः शुभस्मवं नवा पार्था प्रह शुचावुतः ॥ 30 ॥

पूर्वी बृहि सुधांजे कलहे समुपस्थिते ।

कि कतैल्व मया शक्यं लढ़णोर्सि समुलेचे ॥ 31 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus addressed by Yudhājit, the king of Benares was very sorrowful, and, after a heavy sigh, went to his palace and told with a grieved heart to his wife, thus: "O fair eyed one! Now I am completely under your control, you better explain to Śaśikalā that a dreadful quarrel is now to occur; what am I to do now?"

व्यास उवाच

सा श्रुत्वा पतिवाक्यं तु गत्वा ग्रह सुतालिकम् ।

वत्से राजातिपु:खात्र: पिता तेउधापि वर्ते ॥ 32 ॥

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

त्वर्धे विग्रहः कामं समुल्यजोउघ भूभुताम् ।

अन्यं वरय सुशोणि सुर्दर्शनमुते नृपम् ॥ 33 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing her husband's words, the queen went to her daughter and spoke thus: "O child! Quarrels have now ensued amongst the kings for your sake; your father has become very sorrowful; therefore, O fair one! Choose any other man your husband than Sudarśana.

यदि सुर्दर्शनं वतले हुढान्चं वे वीर्थसि ।

युधार्चितं च मां चैव हरिन्धति बलावित्वः ॥ 3 4 ॥

सुदर्शनं च राज्ञसौ बलमन्तः प्रतापवान् ।

द्वितीयसे पति: पश्चाद्विता कलहे सति ॥ 35 ॥

O Child! If you do not judge and rashly choose Sudarśana, then the powerful King Yudhājit, possessing a large army, will no doubt kill you, me and Sudarśana. It might be, if quarrels ensue, you might be married to another husband; therefore better think now and act.

तस्मालुदर्शनं त्यक्त्वा वरायांव नृपोतमम् ।

सुवामिच्छस चेनमहुं तुर्थं वा भृगलोचने ।

O dear eyed! It is now your incumbent duty to choose another king for your husband, if you want your and my welfare and happiness. Leave Sudarśana."

इति मात्रा बौधितां तां पशुग्राजायबोधायम् । ३ 6 ॥

उभयोर्विनं शुता निर्भयोवास कन्यक।

The mother thus advised her daughter; the king, too, afterwards explained and tried to convince her. The girl spoke fearlessly.

कन्योवाच

सत्यमुक्ते ग्रपक्षे ज्ञानासि च ततं मा ॥ 37 ॥

नान्यं वृणीय भृपाल सुर्गर्णमृते कवचित् ।

“O king! What you have said is all true; but you know my firm resolve already. I won’t ever select any other king than Sudarśana.

विशेषेय पद्य तराजेन नृपयः किल कातरः ॥ 38 ॥

सुर्जर्णाय दत्त्वा मां विसर्जप पुरादिहः ।

स मां रेखे समातेय निर्मिष्यति ते पुरात् ॥ 39 ॥

भवित्यं तु पश्राद्रे भविष्यति न चान्यथा ।

"O king! If you are afraid and be in agony, then do this thing: better give me in marriage to Sudarśana and then drive us away from your city. He will put me in his chariot and go away out of your city. After that what is inevitable will surely come to pass. There cannot be anything otherwise.

नात्र चित्ता त्यया कार्या भविलये नृपोत्न ॥ 40 ॥

यद्धारि तद्वलयेव सर्वधात्रन न संगयः ।

O king! You need not fear anything about what is kept in the womb of future by Destiny. What is inevitable will happen; there is no doubt in this."

राजोवाच

न पुत्र साहसं कार्वं मतिम्दिः कदाचन ॥ 41 ॥

बहुर्भिनं विरोद्व्यमिति वेदविद्धो विद्यः ।

The king said: "O child! The intelligent persons never shew too much rashness and insolence. The learned people, versed in the Vedas, say it is never advisable to quarrel with many persons.

विश्वक्षयामि कर्व कंवा दंच्या राजसुनाय च ॥ 4 2 ॥

राजानो वरसंयुक्ता: किं न कुर्षुरासीप्रान् ।

How can I give my daughter in marriage to one and then banish them both? The kings have turned out enemies. There is no heinous crime, that they cannot commit now.

यदि ते रोचते वसे पर्ण संविद्धायाम्बन् ॥ 43 ॥

जनकेन यथा पूर्व कृत: सीतास्वयंरे ।

O child! If it be your opinion, I can pledge something as a pawn for your marriage, as the king Janaka pledged in days of yore for his daughter Sitā.

गैर्य धनर्यांते तेन धृतं कृत्वा पर्ण तथा ॥ 44 ॥

तथा3हमयि तद्वीगि करोग्यघ दुर्गसदम् ।

विवादो चेन राजां है कृते सीत समं जजेने ॥ 45 ॥

पालिथयिति वः कामं से ते भर्तां भथित्यिति ।

सुर्दर्गनस्तधान्यो वा वः कांळ्रहुलवतरः ॥ 46 ॥

पालिथिता पणं त्वां वे वरीथयिति सर्वथा ।

I will also put forward a pawn very difficult to be carried out, as Janaka originally made an offer of the hands of Sītā to whomsoever, who would break the Śiva's strong bow. Thus the quarrels

Book III Chapter XXI

amongst the king might be diminished; for he, who will be able to fulfill the promise, will be able to accept you. Then, be he Sudarśana or any other king, whoever will be strong to fulfill the promise will take you as his wife.

एवं कृते नृपाणां तु विवाद शमितो भवेत् ॥ 47 ॥

सुवैकान्हे विवादं ते कृत्त्वामिति तत परम् ।

Thus the quarrels will cease and I will also be able to perform your marriage ceremony in peace and happiness."

कन्योवाच

संदेहे नैव मज्जामि मुतुक्त्यमिदं यतः ॥ 48 ॥

मया सुदर्जनः पूर्वे पृत्तशेत्तिस नान्यथा ।

The daughter said: “Father! On hearing from you, I am merged in an ocean of doubt, for it seems to me what you are saying is the act of a fool; already I have chosen in my mind Sudarśana for my husband; now it cannot be otherwise.

कारणं पुच्यपापानां मन एह महीपते ॥ 49 ॥

मनसा विधुयं त्यक्त्वा कवमन्यं वृणे पितः ।

O king! The mind is the source of virtue and vice. When I have mentally selected, how can I now forego him and choose another?

कृते पणे महाराज सर्वेधां वरणगा हादून ॥ 50 ॥

एकः पात्रविता ही वा बह्वो वा भविते चेत् ।

किं कर्तव्यं त्वत तात विवादे सपुर्पिध्यते ॥ 51 ॥

संशयाधिष्ठि कार्मे माते नाहं करोयन्तः ।

O king! If you keep any pledge, then I will be subject to any and every body; if one, two, or more fulfill the same pledge, I will be then subject to any or all of them. Father! in that case quarrels may arise. What shall I do then? I cannot give my vote on this doubtful point."

मा चिन्तां कुरु राजेंद्र दैहि सुदर्शनाय माम् ॥ 52 ॥

विवहं विधाय कृता सं विधाययिति चण्डिका ।

O king! You need not fear anything. Better give me in marriage to Sudarśana according to the prescribed rules; then, in that case, the Goddess Caṇḍikā will certainly protect us.

यत्रामकर्तीनादेव दुःखीघो विलयं व्रजेत् ॥ 53 ॥

तां सूच्या परमां शर्फिक कुक काव्यमित्रितः ।

O king! Taking Whose Name destroys a whole host of sins, take Her Name and think the Almighty and perform carefully our marriage ceremony.

गत्वा वद नुपेध्यस्तं कृतांजलिपुटोउष्ठ चै ॥ 54 ॥

आगतंत्य च शः वसंरिते भूपै: स्वयंवरे ।

Better go to the king's assembly today, and, with folded hands, tell them come tomorrow to the hall of Swayamvara.

इत्युक्ता तव सिकुर्जाणु सर्वं नुपतिमण्डलम् ॥ 55 ॥

विद्यारं कुक रातों मे वेदोराकविद्धिता नृप ।

पारिवहं यथायोग्यं दत्ता तमैय सिवर्सये ॥ 56 ॥

गामिधाति गृहीताय मां धुवसंसीयुतः किल ।

Thus bidding goodbye to the kings, perform in the right spirit, according to the prescribed rites, our marriage ceremony. Next, after giving fit dowries and other articles after the marriage, better tell the prince Sudarśana to depart. The son of Dhruvasandhi will take me away with him.

कदाचिते नृपा: कुद्धा: संग्रामं कर्तुंपुवताः ॥ 57 ॥

भविष्यित तद्ये सीहास्ये नः कार्येष्ठित ।

If, at this, the kings get angry and be ready to quarrel with you, then in that case, Goddess Bhagavatī wili no doubt help us.

सोप्रिय राजसुर्तैनैस्तुं संग्रामं संविद्यास्यति ॥ 58 ॥

दैवान्पुधे मृते तस्मिन्तिध्याम्यहमयुत ।

Sudārasāna then will fight against those kings; and if he loses his life perchance in the battle, then I will also follow him and die.

स्वस्ति तैस्तु गृहे तिष्ठ दत्ता मां सहसैयकः ॥ ५९ ॥

एकैवाई गाधियमि तेन सार्थ रिसंस्या ।

O king! Let all good come unto you! Better give me in marriage to Sudarśana and remain here with your army. I will go alone with him, the object of my love."

यास उवाच

इति तस्या वचः शुत्वा राज्ञाजी कृतिनिध्यः ॥ 60 ॥

मर्ति चक्रे तथा कर्तु विश्वासं प्रतिषघ च ।

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयस्कन्ये

एकविंशो3प्रयाः ॥ 21 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Vyāsa said: Hearing these words from her daughter, the king Subāhu trusted her, and firmly resolved to act according to that, and to celebrated the marriage of Śaśikalā.

Thus ends the Twentyfirst Chapter on the king of Benares fulfilling the advice of her daughter in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXII

On Sudarśana's Marriage

व्यास उवाच

शुत्वा सुतावाक्यमर्निंततामा

नृपांश गत्वा नृपतिंर्गाद।

ब्रजंतु कामं शिवसिण पृथा:

शो वा विवाहं किल संविधाये ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Then, on hearing her daughter's words, that high souled king of Bcnares, Subāhu, came to the spot where the kings were staying and said. "O kings! Now you can go to your own camps; tomorrow I will perform my daughter's marriage ceremony.

भव्यापि येचानि यवास्यपतिनि

गृह्छु सर्वे माय सुप्रसतः ।

भो भाचि कार्य किल मण्डपेउत्र

समेल्य सर्वेत्रि संविधेयम् ॥ 2 ॥

Let you all be pleased with me and graciously accept the food and drink, given by me. Tomorrow let you all come here and perform my daughter's marriage ceremony.

नाताति युनी किल मण्डपेउद्ध

कातीय किं भूपतयोउ कामम् ।

प्रातः समाध्यास्य सूतां नियेष

गच्छुं तस्माधित्रविरिधा पूधः ॥ 3 ॥

O Kings! My daughter is not coming to day to this hall of Swayanīvara; what can I do now; I will console her and bring her here tomorrow. Therefore do you all go now to your own camps respectively."

न विद्याहे बुद्धिमतां निवासीमे

कृपा विधेया सततं ह्वाप्पे ।

विधाय तां प्रातार्हानयिध्ये

सुत्तं तु गच्छेतु नृपा यवेधम् ॥ 4 ॥

Intelligent persons should not quarrel with the members of their own family. But they should

always shew kindness towards their own sons and daughters who are under their protection. However, I will make my daughter understand and bring her tomorrow morning. You may all go now to your places as you desire.

इच्छापणं वा परिचित्य तिने

प्रातः कौरिष्याय संविहारण।

सर्वै: समोवान नृपै: समेतेः

स्वयंवर: सर्वमेतन कार्य: ॥ 5 ॥

Tomorrow morning we will settle about the pledge, whether by choice or by fulfilling a promise, that requires strength, and have marriage celebrated; or better you all together would decide what mode of Swayamvara is to be adopted."

श्रुवा नृपास्तेविचर्यं विविद्वा चवो ययु स्वानि निकेतनानि ।

विधाप्य पार्थे नगरस्य रक्षां चुकः क्रिया मध्यदिन्दौतिहा १६।

The kings heard Subāhu and trusted him. Then seeing that the city is well guarded on all sides, they went to their own camps and performed their midday duties.

सुबाहुर्यार्यजैन: समेतश्रकार कार्याणि विवहाकाले । पुर्वी समायुर गृहे सुगुपते पुरोहितैर्विद्वार्वं वरिःः। ७ । । स्नानादिके कर्म वरस्य कृत्वा विवाहभूषाकरणं तबैवा आनायय वेदैरप्रिते गृहे वे तस्याहांगं भूमपितिक्रता । ८ । ।

King Subāhu on his side began to perform all the duties regarding the marriage of his daughter, after duly consulting with all the chief members of the family. At the appointed time of marriage he brought his daughter in a well concealed and guarded chamber, had the bathing ceremony of the bridegroom elect performed by the priests, versed in the Vedas, and had him well dressed and did other requisite things. Then he bθugh the

Book III Chapter XXII

bridegroom in the house, made him seat on a Vedi (platform) and duly worshiped him.

सविष्टं चाचमनीयमर्थे वस्त्रद्वरं गायभ कुण्डले ते ।

समर्थं तस्ये विधिध्वजरेरे एल्वलुत्तादामहीसतचः ॥ 9 ॥

Then the large-hearted king gave to the bridegroom seat, Ācamaniya (water for rinsing the mouth and such articles of food as require rinsing one's mouth after eating them), Arghya (articles for worshipping deservedly, Pādyam. e.g. water for washing the feet with an offer of green grass, rice, etc. made in worshipping a God or a Brāhmaṇa), the two silken cloths and sheet, cows, and two ear-rings and then wanted to give Sudarāna his daughter.

सोउध्यातीलवर्मदानचेताः

श्राणा चिन्ताश मनोरायाः।

कन्यां सुकेशीं निधिकन्यकासमां

मेने तदाउसनामनुत्तं च ॥ 10 ॥

The high minded Sudarśana accepted all the offerings given by the king. Seeing this, Manoramā was relieved of her anxiety. Manoramā began to think that beautiful and well adorned daughter as if the daughter of Kubera (the God of wealth) and thanked herself and thought as if all her duties were over.

सूपूजितं घृष्णवल्बदानैर्वीनतमं

तं सचिवासन्तान् ।

निन्युश ते कोतुकमण्डपात-ं

मुद्रात्वान तीतभवा श्रवे ॥ 11 ॥

Then the royal ministers carried gladly and fearlessly the beautiful Sudarśana, worshipped with ornaments and clothings, in a good nice carriage to the centre of the amusement court.

समापन्धूषां विधिविद्धिता:

सिवध्र तां रास्तुर्गतं सुयाने ।

आपीय निव्यूवेरसंश्रियानं

चतुक्युक्ते किल मण्डधे चे ॥ 12 ॥

On the other hand, the elderly female members, who knew all about the prescribed rules, performed the dressing of the princess in a befitting manner

and placing her in a beautiful conveyance took her before the bridegroom elect, in the marriage hall, where there was the platform regularly built.

अर्जिन समाधाय पुरोहितः स

हुत्वा यथावच्च तर्दतारणे ।

आद्राव यत्ती कृतकौतुकों तु

वधूवरी प्रेममुती निकामम् ॥ 13 ॥

लाजाविसर्गे विधित्वाद्धाय

कृत्वा हुताशस्य प्रदक्षिणं च ।

ती चक्रतूलतयथोचितं सल्पवै

वियानं कुलगोजजातम् ॥ 4 ॥

The Sacred Fire was then lit, the royal priest began to perform the Homa ceremony duly; when the amusement ceremony of the bridegroom and bride united in love was duly performed, the priest called them there. After this the bridegroom and bride performed duly the Lājā Homa ceremony and circumambulated the Sacred Fire. Thus all the ceremonies, befitting the gotra and family, were all fully performed according to the prescribed rules.

स तद्वाद्य चाश्युर्जा रथानां

सुभूषितं चापि शरीचसंयुतम्।

द्वौं तृने-त्रस्तु सुर्जनाय

सुर्जितं पारिबर्हे विवाहे ॥ 15 ॥

मदोक्तटान्मेविष्यतिश्रु

गजानिगरेः श्रीगमामानदेहान् ।

गर्ते सपादे नृस्पन्नवेउसी

नृदावय प्रेमयुतो नृपेजः।। १ ६ ॥

दासीशतं काऊनभूषितं च

कोर्णकानां च गर्न सुचाफ।

समर्पयामास वराय राजा

विवाहकाले भृदितोउनृवेलम् ॥ 17 ॥

Then the king Subāhu, excited by feelings of love, in the marriage time, gave to prince Sudarśana the following presents: well adorned two hundred chariots, with horses and the arrow cases filled with arrows, one hundred and twenty five elephants, dressed with golden ornaments, looking like so many mountains, one hundred beautiful female

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

elephants and one hundred maid servants, all dressed in golden ornaments.

अदात्यनुदांससह्वयेकं

सर्वायुधे: सम्प्रतभूषित च ।

त्वानि वासांसि यथोचितानि

दिव्यानि चित्राणि तथा3.5विकानि ॥ 18 ॥

ददी पुनवासगृह्णीत तस्मै

न्यायणि दीर्घणि विविचितानि ।

सिन्धूद्वानां तुरगोत्मानाम-

दात्सहस्वितयं सुगयम् ॥ 19 ॥

क्रमेलकानां च शततयं वै

प्रत्यादिश्मादारभृतां सुचाक ।

शतद्धवे वै शकटोतमानां

तम्ै ददी धान्यसे प्रपृत्तिम ॥ 20 ॥

The king gave the bridegroom also one thousand servants well adorned, bearing the complete set of all sorts of weapons, many gems and jewels, clothings, nice variegated woolen clothes, beautiful capacious rooms to live in, and two thousand excellent horses born in the Sindhu country, three hundred good camels able to carry sufficient loads, and two hundred carriages, filled with grains, etc.

मनोरांग राजसुतां प्रणाथ्य जगाद

वावयं विहिताझलिं: पुरः।

दासोउम्म तं राजसुतं वरिष्ठे

त्वदूषि यत्स्यानु मनोगत ते ॥ 21 ॥

Then the king bowed to the king's daughter Manoramā and with clasped hands, said: "O royal daughter! I am now become your servant; now kindly say what is your desire?"

तं चाक्रावयं निजगाद सापि

स्वत्स्यतु ते भूप कुलस्य वृद्धि:।

सामानिताङ्गे मम सुनेवे त्वया

दत्ता यातो रत्नवरा स्वकन्या ॥ 21 ॥

Hearing these beautiful words of the king, Manoramā said: “O king! all good to you and let your family increase in sons and grandsons. You have increased my honour by giving in marriage your daughter (jewel) to my son. I have no other desire than to see your welfare constant and

increase in your family, posterity and prosperity.

न बन्दिपुत्री नृप माणधी वा

सतीभीढ़ किंचां खरजनं महतमू।

सुमेकृतुल्यस्तु कृत: सुतोछ्धे मे

सम्बन्धिना घूपतितोनामे 11 23 11

O king! You are the chief amongst the kings. You have made my son great and strong like the Sumeru mountain by giving him your daughter in marriage. You are high and my related. I am not the daughter of a panegyrist or a bard; how can I then praise you for this noble act of yours."

अहो5तिचित्रं नृपतेश्रित्रं

परं पवित्र तत किं वद्यात् ।

यद्धशजायम सुताय मेउहा

दत्ता तव्या पृज्यसुता वरिष्ठा ॥ 24 ॥

वनाधिवासाय किलाधानाय पिता विहीनाय विलेत्यकाय ।

सर्विनिषान्यमुपर्नीस्थाय क्रलगानायार्थविचितानि 112 5 ॥

O king! Your character is wonderful and pure. What more shall I say to you than this that you all, in the face of many other kings, have given your daughter to my son in marriage, who is banished from his kingdom, is deprived of his father and living in the forest, pennyless, armyless, subsisting himself on roots and fruits only.

समानवित्तेउव कुले बले

च द्वाताति पूर्णे नृपतिश्र ध्रवः।

न कोउपि मे भूपसुतेउधौहिने

गुणान्वितां रूपवर्ती च द्वात् ॥ 26 ॥

In these cases the kings as a rule make relations with those only, who are their equals in rank and position, of noble families of equal grade, having forces and wealth equal to each other. No other king would have offered his beautiful well-qualified daughter in marriage to my prince who is without any wealth.

वैरं तु सर्वै: सह संविधाय

नृपर्विरिष्छेबलसंसुतेक्षा ।

सुदर्शनायाथसुतासंपिता मे

किं कर्णेय धैर्यमिदं त्वदीयम् ॥ 27 ॥

Book III Chapter XXII

O king! On your this act, all the other kings, holding great influence and possessing armies, have turned out your enemies. I being a woman am unable to describe the amount of patience in you."

निग्याय वाक्यानि नृपः प्रहुः

कृताझ्लिवांक्यमुवाच भूयः।

गृहाण राज्यं मम सुप्रसिद्धं

भवामि सेनापतित्वा गहाम् ॥ 28 ॥

The King Subāhu of Benares, hearing the sweet words of Manoramā was highly pleased and, with folded hands, began to say. “O Devi you better take my this celebrated kingdom; I will become the commander of your forces and will try my best of guard this city.”

नोचेतद्धर्य प्रतिगृहा चात्र

सुतान्वितो राज्यफलानि भूश्व ।

विद्यार वाराणायिकानिवासं

वने पुरे वासमती ने भरेत्रि ॥ 29 ॥

Or you can take half of my kingdom and remain here with your son. It is not my desire that you leave this Benares and go and live in the forest.

नृपान्तु संलेवे रूपान्तिवता

वै गत्वा कारिष्य प्रथमं तु सान्त्वनम्।

ततः परं झावपरावुपायी

नोचेततो युद्धमहं कारिष्य ॥ 30 ॥

जयाजयी दैववगरी तथापि

धर्मे जयो नैव कृतोउध्यभं ।

तेषां किलाधार्मवांत नृपाणां

कर्थं भविष्यत्यनुचितन्ति नै ॥ 31 ॥

The kings have become very offended; I will first try to appease them; if they be not satisfied, I will adopt the means of “gift” or sowing dissensions amongst them; and even, if, in that, I fail, I will ultimately take to war. O Devi! Victory or defeat is under the hands of the Destiny; still victory comes to those who are in the right path and defeat to those who are in the wrong path. How then can the victory arise to those sinful kings?”

आकार्य तूद्धारियमवैच्छ

जगाद वास्यं हितकारकं तम् ।

मनोरा मानमवाय

तस्माल्यर्वित्ना मोदयुता प्रसवा ॥ 32 ॥

Hearing the king's words, pregnant with meaning, Manoramā felt herself highly respected; and, with a cheerful heart, said the following good words.

राजिक्छवं ते3स्तु कुरुच्य राज्यं

त्यक्त्वा भयं त्वं स्वसुतै: समेतः ।

सुतो5पि मे नृनयावाय राज्यं

साकेतपुर्गं प्रचिष्यतीह ।। 33 ॥

"O king! let all good come on you! you better discard all fear and reign with your sons here; my son Sudarśana, too, will become the king of Ayodhyā by the Grace of Śri Bhagavatī Bhuvaneśvarī, the Supreme Cause of the innumerable worlds, and will roam in this world; there is no doubt in this.

विसर्जीव्यामाजिसच्या नन्तु

शिवं भवानी तव संविधास्यति ।

न काउपि चिन्ता मम भूप

वर्तैत सँश्रितन्येना परमाधिकवों है ॥ 34 ॥

May Bhagavati Bhavāni bring all good unto you; now kindly permit us to depart to our homes, O king! I always contemplate the Highest Goddess Ambikā; and I have no time to indulge in other thoughts.

दोषा गता विविधवाक्यपदै

रसातैरन्योन्यभाषणपदैर्मुतीपमैशु ।

प्रातनुंप: समाधिणाय कृतं विराहुं

रोषान्विता नगराब्धागतास्तथोचुः ॥ 35 ॥

Thus, on various subjects, Manoramā and the king Subāhu began to talk with each other, causing satisfaction to both like nectar, when the morning broke out.

अर्धैव त नुपकलंकधरं च हत्या बालं

तथैव किल तं न विवाहायोगम् ।

गृह्छीम तां शणिकालां नृपरेशु लक्ष्मीं

लज्जामवाय्य निजसहं कर्ध जजम् ॥ 36 ॥

The kings, knowing, early in the morning, that the princess had been given away in marriage,

became very much enraged and went out of the city and began to discuss with one another.

"We will kill today the king Subāhu, the disgrace amongst the kings as well that boy Sudarśana totally unfit to marry the princess, and take away the kingdom and the princess Śaśikalā. How can we return to our homes, with this severe disgrace, stamped on our heads.

भूरपंतु तृर्वीन्पित्रकित वाद्यामान-

उद्यवसनानिभषवित् मूद्बुशवदा: ।

गीतध्विनं च विविधं निगमवनं च

मन्यामहे नृपतिनाज कृती विवाहः ॥ 37 ॥

Hear, O kings! the sound of the drums, mrdangas, other instruments; the sounds of the conchshells have even been overpowered. Hark! the various musical sounds and the chanting of the Vedas. It is then certain that the King Subāhu has finished the marriage ceremony of his daughter Śaśikalā with Sudarśana.

अस्मात्यानं वचनैविधिप्वच्चकार

वेवाहिकेन विधिना करपीड़नं वे ।

कर्तेल्यमघ किमहो प्रविचितन्त्यनु

भृपा: परस्यमिति च समर्थयन्ति ॥ 38 ॥

Oh! This king has deceived us with his words and performed the marriage ceremony, according to ordinary religious rules.

एवं वदसु नृपतिषय कन्याकाया:

कृत्वा विवाहविधमप्रतिमप्रभाव: ।

भूपातिमन्यविद्यागु जगाम राजा

कारीपति: स्वसुद्देः प्रशितम्भावेः ॥ 39 ॥

Now O king! decide unanimously what to do and come to a definite conclusion."

When the kings were thus discussing, the king of Benares, of indomitable prowess, the king Subāhu, after finishing his daughter's marriage, came there with his famous friends to invite them.

आगच्छं च तं दूर्वा रुण का काणीपति तत ।

नोचू: किंघ्रिवी कौभार्यानैनाभाय संस्थिति ॥ 40 ॥

Seeing the King of Benares present, all the other

kings did not utter a single word, but they remained silent, beaming with anger.

स गता प्रणिपलाह कृताज्ञतिरभाषत ।

आगन्तव्यं नृपैः सर्वैर्नितानर्थ गृहे मम ॥ 4 1 ॥

Subāhu then approached to the kings, bowed down, and, with folded hands, said: "Be kind enough to come to my house for dinner.

कन्यास्ती चृतो भूप: कि कंलीम हिताहितम् ।

भवद्धिस्तु शुभः कार्यां महान्तो हि दुसावलः ॥ 42 ॥

O kings! My daughter Śaśikalā after all has selected Sudarśana; I could not help in this. You are all kind and noble; therefore you all be peaceful and let the matter drop."

तिश्राम्य वचस्तस्य नृपा: क्रोधारिण्लुतः ।

प्रत्युचुर्भनमसाधि: स्वरूई नृपते ब्रज ॥ 43 ॥

The kings hearing him were filled with rage and said, “We have all taken food; our desires have been fulfilled; you better now go back to your own home.”

कुरु कार्यिण्यशेणामि यथेथे सुकृतं कृतम् ।

नृपा: सर्वे प्रपालत्वा स्वानि स्वानि गृहाणि च ॥ 44 ॥

सुवाहुपि तध्यूला जागम शंकितो गृहम् ।

किं कार्यिन्ति संविना: कोधयुक्ता नृपोतमा: ॥ 45 ॥

You behaviour with us is all right and proper; now do your other duties and let the kings go back to their homes." Hearing these words of the kings, the king of Benares was very much terrified and returned home, thinking that the kings were all filled with rage and might do serious harm to him. Thus he began to pass away his time in dire anxiety.

गते बतस्मिन्महीपालाध्राकुछ्ध समयं पुनः ।

रुद्ध्वा माणं ग्रहीधाम कन्या हत्वा सुरुर्जनम् ॥ 46 ॥

Then the king Subāhu disappeared; the kings united made this resolve that they would block the passage of Sudarśana, kill him, and take the girl away.

केन्चोनुः किमस्माकं हृत तेन नृपेण वे ।

दृष्ट्वा तु कौतुकं सर्व गतियमायि यथागतम् ॥ 47 ॥

Some of these kings rather: said: "What is the

Book III Chapter XXIII

use in killing the king's son. We will all go willingly to see the fun."

इत्युक्चता ते नृपा: सर्वे मार्मामाक्रय संस्थिता: 1

चक्रासोरकार्याणि सुबाहुः स्वगृहं नतः ॥ 48 ॥

इति श्रीमदैर्भोगवाते महापुराणे दृतीयकन्ये

द्वाविंशो5स्थायः ॥ 22 ॥

Thus the kings went and remained blocking the path of Sudarśana; and the king Subāhu, on returning home, began to make arrangements for the departure of the bridegroom and the bride.

Thus ends the Twenty second Chapter on Sudarśana's marriage in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharasi Veda Vyāsa.

Book III Chapter XXIII

CHAPTER XXIII

On Killing the Enemy of Sudarsana

व्यास उवाच

तस्पे गौरवधोज्यान विधाय विधायत्वात ।

वासराशि च घडुजा भोजवामास भक्तितः ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: After paying due respects to his new son-in-law, the king Subāhu cheerfully entertained him for six days with variety of good dishes.

एवं विवाहकार्याणिकृत्वा सर्वाणि पार्थिवः ।

पारिवह्छं प्रद्वलाध्य मन्यस्यान्चितेः सह ॥ 2 ॥

Thus finishing off the marriage ceremony, the king after consulting with his ministers, presented the bridegroom and the bride various jewels and ornaments and other things given naturally on marriage occasions.

तृतीस्तु कथितं श्रुत्वा मार्गसैरोधनं कृतम् ।

बधूव विमना राजा सुवाहुर्मितमुंचितः ॥ 3 ॥

Then the king of Benares, of brilliant splendour, heard from his messengers that the kings had obstructed the way-back of Sudarśana and became very absent minded.

सुर्जन्सत्तोबाच धुगुरं संशितानतः ।

अस्मान्सर्वसंगृत्यं लँ पनिष्यभो हुशणैकता: ॥ 4 ॥

Then Sudarśana, of firm resolve, told his father-in-law “O king! better now give us order that we may depart. We will go without any fear.

भात्राजाक्षம் पुर्णे याना तत समीहिता ।

निवासाय विचारो वे कर्तेव्यः सर्वथा यूच ॥ 5 ॥

O king! First we will halt at the holy hermitage of Bhāradvāja Muni; and next we will, after due considerations, settle where we would go.

नृपेध्यत्र न कतंल्यं भयं किंघित्चरायान्च ।

जगन्माता भावती ने साहाय्ये वे कंकीच्छिति ॥ 6 ॥

O pure one! You need not fear a bit from these kings; the Mother of the Universe, the Bhagavati Bhavānī will surely protect us."

व्यास उवाच

तस्येति मतमाज्ञा जामातुर्नुपसमतः ।

विस्सर्प धर्म दर्शा प्रात्पथे सोर्धि सत्यतः ॥ 7 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king Janamejaya! Hearing thus his son-in-law's orders, the king Subāhu gave him a vast amount of wealth and bade good-byc to him. Sudarśana, too, quickly departed.

बलेन महताविष्टो ययावतु नृपोनमः ।

सूदर्जनी वृतस्तत्र चचाल पथि निर्भयः ॥ 8 ॥

The king Subāhu followed him with a long train of soldiers. Thus Sudarśana went on, in his journey, fearless.

रथे: परितृतः शूर: सदारो रथसंस्थितः ।

गछ्छन्छर्षे सै-व्यानि नृपाणां रघुनन्दः ॥ 9 ॥

The great hero Sudarśana, the descendant of Raghu, with his new consort in the chariot and followed by many other chariots, saw the soldiers of the several kings.

सुबाहुरपि तत्थीक्ष्य त्रिवतिष्टो बभूर ह ।

विविधस त्रिवां चित्ते जगाम शरणं मुदा ॥ 10 ॥

The king Subāhu, seeing them, became anxious. But Sudarāna, gladly took refuge, with his whole heart, of the all-auspicious Goddess Śaṅkari.

जजार्विकाकारं मन्दं कामारामनुतम् ।

निर्भयो वीतशोक्रषु पल्या सह नवोक्या ॥ १ १ ॥

Sudarśana began to recite silently the excellent one word seed mantra of the King of Desires (Kāmarāja) and, out of its power, he and his wife remained in the chariot without any fear and sorrow.

ततः सर्वे महीपाला: कृत्वा कोलाहलं तव।

उद्विता: सैन्यसंयुक्ता हनुकामासु कन्यकम् ॥ १ २ ॥

Then all the kings came there with their soldiers to fight with Sudarśana and to carry away by force the bride. Thus a loud uproar arose.

काशिराजसु तान्यूद्या हेतुकामो बभूव है ।

निवातिरस्तद्धान्थे राघवेण जिगीर्वात ॥ 13 ॥

The king of Benares seeing them wanted to kill them. But Sudarśana, the descent of Raghu, desirous of victory, repeatedly asked him not do so.

तगयि नेयु: शंखाङ्ध धर्मेश्रानकन्दुर्धिधः ।

सुबाहोछ नृपाणं च परमत्यर्जिभतानम् ॥ 14 ॥

Loud arose, then, the uproar, caused by the sounds of conchshells, bheri, and war-drums of the kings on one side and Subāhu on the other, each of the two parties determining to extirpate the other.

शुर्जुन्ति सुसंतृतः स्थितस्तत्र जिघांसया ।

युधाजितल्हायावें मनस्दः प्रवेषूच है ॥ १ ५ ॥

Śatrujit prepared himself for the war to destroy his enemy. Yudhājit came there for his help, equipped with army, etc.

कैविष्चः प्रेष्रकास्तस्य सहानीकैः स्थितास्त्वा ।

युधाविद्याते गत्वा सुर्दनंनपुर्यिषस्तः ॥ 16 ॥

शुविजितेन सहिते हेतुं धानतमानुः ।

परमयं ते वाणीवैस्ततः क्रोधार्मूँतः ॥ 17 ॥

Some warrior kings remained there as witnesses with their soldiers. Then Yudhājit went in front of Sudarśana. His younger brother Śatrujit, too, attended Yudhājit to kill his brother in the battlefield. Then the warriors, overpowered with anger, shot each other with arrows.

संमदः सुमहास्तर संप्रवृत्तः सुमारगीः ।

काश्रिपतिस्तदा तूर्ण सैन्येन बहुना वृत: ॥ 18 ॥

A great encounter then ensued in the battlefield

with sharp arrows. The king of Benares hurriedly advanced there, with a great body of army, to provide relief to his son-in-law.

साहाध्यार्थ जगभागु जानातरमर्निदात्म।

एवं प्रवृते संग्रामे दारणे लोगदर्शे ॥ 19 ॥

Thus when the dreadful war began to grow more and more horrible, the Goddess Bhagavatī suddenly appeared there, mounted on Her lion.

प्रादुर्वधूप सहसा देवी सिंहोपरि सियता ।

नानायुधरा रया वराण्यूर्णाभूषिति ॥ 20 ॥

दिच्यावरपरिधाना मन्दारवक्सुर्मुता ।

तां दृष्ट्या तेज्य भृपाता विस्मयं परं गरता: ॥ 21 ॥

The beauty of Her body was exceedingly lovely; She was adorned with various excellent ornaments and She held weapons. She wore divine clothings and the beautiful Mandāra garland suspended from Her neck up to Her knees. The kings were greatly astonished to see Her. They began to argue “Who is this Lady, mounted on a lion? Whence has She so suddenly come?”

केवे सिंहसामारूडा कुनी वेति समुस्तिता ।

सुर्दर्जनस्तु तां वीक्ष्य सुबाहुपिति चाङबीति ॥ 2 2 ॥

पश्य राजन्हादौबीमानतां दिव्यदर्शनान् ।

अनुग्रहाय मे नूनं प्रापुभृतां द्वावित्वा ॥ 23 ॥

Becholding Her, Sudarśana told the king of Benares “O king! Behold! The Divine Mahā Devi has come here to favour us. She is very merciful. Now I am completely fearless.”

निर्भयोर्भह महाराज जातोरप्रिस निर्भयाद्वीप ।

सुर्दर्जनः सुबाहुक्ष तामालोक्य खराननम् ॥ 24 ॥

Sudarśana and Subāhū were highly delighted to see the Beautiful Goddess and bowed down to Her feet with great devotion.

प्रणामं चक्रतुस्तया मृदितों दर्शनेन च ।

ननाद च तदा सिंहो गजास्तसाठ्यकंपि ॥ 25 ॥

Then the lion, the vehicle of the Goddess, roared, making tremendous noise. Hearing the roaring of the lion, all the elephants trembled. At that time, the winds began to blow violently and the four assumed an awful appearance.

Book III Chapter XXIII

वबुवांता महाश्रोर दिशशासन्सुदारूणा: । सुरूर्गनस्तदा प्राह्र निजं सेनापति प्रति ॥ 26 ॥ मार्गे जत्र तंरसा घृपाला यत्र संस्थिता: ।

किं कारिच्छित राजान: कृपिता दुढ़चेतस: ॥ 27 ॥

Then Sudarśana told his general to carry soon his forces where the king's were staying, blocking his way. What could the vicious kings do now, though they had become very angry? The Goddess Bhagvatī had come there to save us."

शरणार्थ च संप्राणा देही भगवती हि नः ।

नित्रातैक्र श नत्वयं मार्गेत्रिमन्यूपरबूर्ते ॥ २ ८ ॥

"Now you all go safely and calmly through the midst of the kings. See! At my remembering Her, She has come here mercifully to save us."

स्मृता मया महादेवी रक्षणार्थमुपगता ।

तच्छुला वचनं सेनापतिस्तेन चधाजजन् ॥ 29 ॥

युधाजितु सुमेकुळदसानुवाच महीधाने ।

किं स्थिता भयसंजस्ता निर्भन्तु कन्यकान्तिमन्त ॥ 30 ॥

The general, on hearing these words, became ready to march by that route. Then Yudhājit, very much infuriated with anger, said to all the kings: "Why are you all so much fear stricken? Kill this Sudarśana, stealing away this girl.

अवमान्य च नः सर्वान्वलतीनो बलाधिकान् ।

कन्यां गृहीला संयाति निर्भयनस्तराशि शिष्यः ॥ ३। ॥

This lad, weak and without any support, will carry away by force and fearlessly the girl, spitting on all the kings; and won't you be able to do any thing? This is very strange!

क्रि भीता: कामिनीं बीक्ष्य सिंहोपरि सुसंशित्यान् ।

नोपेक्ष्यो हि महाभागा हंतलोत्र समाहिते: ॥ 32 ॥

Are you afraid to see this one lady on a lion? O high minded kings! Never trifle away this boy; kill him with all attention."

हृलैनं संगृहीधाम कन्यां चाकविष्यपाणम् ।

नायं केसिरिणा5दत्तां छेतुर्महैति जंकुः ॥ 33 ॥

Killing him, we will then take away this girl. The jackal can never snatch away the lady under the grasp of a lion."

इत्युक्त्वा सैन्यसिंगुक्तः शनुक्तिवसहितस्तदा ।

योदुकामः सुसंप्राणो युधाजित्कोधसंवृतः ॥ 34 ॥

Thus saying, the king Yudhajit, filled with anger, came to the battle field with Satrujit and all his forces.

मुपाव विशिषास्तूर्ण सम्पुखात्रिक्लाशितान् ।

धनुताकृष्य कर्णानं कर्मार्विर्माजित्रान् ॥ 35 ॥

हैतुकामः सुदुर्भेधा सुदर्शनमधोपरि ।

मुर्दानस्तु तान्बाणीश्छ्छेद्वापततः क्षणान् ॥ 36 ॥

That wicked king, drew his bow string well nigh to his ear and shot arrows after arrows, sharpened under stone and by blacksmith at Sudarśana, with the object of killing him. Sudarśana cut off all those arrows quickly with his own quick going arrows.

एवं युद्धे प्रवृतेश्व चुकोप चधिडका भृगम् ।

दुगोंदौबी मुभोचाथ वाणान् युधावित्र पति ॥ 37 ॥

Thus when the fight grew intense, the Goddess Candikā became very much enraged and shot arrows at Yudhājit.

नानाक्या तदा जाता नानाशक्षरा शिवा ।

सम्पाता तुमुलं तन चकार जार्थिकव ।। 38 ॥

शुर्जविज्ञहतस्तत्र युधाजदिप पार्थिवः ।

पतिती ती रथाथ्यां तुं जयग्वहस्तत्रप्रभन्त ।। 39 ॥

Assuming diverse forms, the Goddess Durgā, holding various weapons, the auspicious Mother of the Universe, began to fight terribly in the battle field. Śatrujit and the King Yudhājit were killed in that terrible battle. Both of them fell dead from their chariots; and a shout of victory arose from the side of Sudarśana.

विसयं परमं प्राता घपूः सर्वे वित्तेक्य ताम् ।

निधनं मातुलस्वामि भागिनेवस्य संयुगे ॥ ४ ४ ॥

The uncle and cousin of the king Subāhu were on the side of Yudhajit and were killed. The kings were very much astonished to see them thus lying dead.

सुबाहुरीय पतदृष्टवा निधनं संयुगे तयोः ।

तुषाव परमप्रीते दुर्गा दुर्गार्तिनिगीम् ॥ 41 ॥

The king. Subāhu, seeing them dead in the battlefield became very glad and began to praise and sing hymns in honour of Durgā Devi, the Destroyer of all difficulties.

Širmuddevibhāgavatam

सुवाहुर्वाच

नयी देखे जगद्धान्ये शिवाये सततं नयः ।

दुर्गार्थ भगवल्ये ते कामदाये नमो : च। 4 2 1 च।

नम: शिवाये शगलै ते विद्याये मोख्ये दनः ।

विश्वायादपै जगमातर्जगढ्ध्यो नम शिवशे : च। 4 3 1 च।

I bow to the auspicious Goddess Jagaddhātri, again and again; I bow to the Bhagavatī Durga the bestower of all desires; I always bow down to Her Who is auspicious, peace giving, and the Higher Vidyā. O Mother! O Giver of salvation! O Auspicious One! You are pervading the whole Universe, O World Mother! and Upholder of the Universe! I bow down to Thee.

नाहं गर्ति तत चिया परिचिन्तयन् वै

ज्ञानामि देख सगुण: क्रिल निर्गुणाना: ।

कि स्तीति विश्वजन्नी प्रकटप्रभावां

भक्तान्तिनागनरां परमां च शक्तिन् ॥ 44 ॥

O World-mother! O Devi! you are devoid of Prākṛtic qualities; you are full of qualities; beyond mind and speech; one cannot think out your prowess, etc., by one's mind. Mother! you are the Highest Force; ever willing to destroy the miseries of your devoted persons. Your influence is manifest everywhere; what eulogy can I sing of Thee.

वार्देवता त्वमिस सर्वांगैतैव

ब्रुद्धिवामितिह गतिर्ययिस सर्वंजतेः ।

त्वां स्तीय किं त्वमिस सर्वमानीरयंत्री

कि स्तूयते हि सततं खतु चात्मकाप् ॥ 45 ॥

O Devi! You are the Goddess of Våk (speech) of all beings; you are the all pervading intelligence, mind, effort, and movements; you are the controller of the minds of all; therefore how can I praise You? O Goddess; You are the Self of all; how can I sing eulogies to You, who are beyond speech and mind, and to the Universal Self.

बहा हर्ष ईर्ष हरियर्फिंग सुवनो

नाते नाता: सुरवा: किल ते गुणानम् ।

वर्गहं विषेर्मातिरंव गुणैवृत्तो वै

वर्तुः क्षमसत्व चरित्रमहोउप्रसिद्धः ॥ 46 ॥

Brahmā, Hari and Hara and other higher Devas

have not been able to find the limits of your qualities, though they are incessantly chanting your praises; O Goddess! I am the small of the smallest, I am without qualification, and bound by Prākṛtic qualities; I am ignorant as regards Jiva and Brahma. O Mother! I will never be able to describe Your characteristics that are unfathomable.

सस्तुङ़ितः कथमहो न कीति कामं

प्रासङ्क्रिपि विहिता खलु चिन्तगूढ़ि: ।

जामातुर्व स्थितितेन समागानेन

ग्रालं मायाउतुमिदं तव दर्शनं चे ॥ 47 ॥

O Mother! Why not good companionships effects the fulfilment of one's desires. The purification of my heart has been effected incidentally. O Mother! my son-in-law is wholly devoted to you; accidentally there has arisen the connection between him and me and it is on account of his connection that I have been able to see you.

ब्रह्मास्थि वांछिति सदैव हरो हरिश

सेंद्रा: सुगक्ष मुनयो विदितार्थतच्चा: ।

यर्शर्नें जनर्नि तेजदा मया दुर्गर

प्राणं विना दमगामदिसमाधिर्यिष्ठ ॥ 48 ॥

O Mother! Today I have got without any restraint and control of passions, and samādhi, the rare vision of You, who is wanted to be seen even by Brahmā, Hari and Hara, Indra and the other Devas and by the Munis, who have attained their realisation. Therefore who is there in this Triloki, that is so fortunate as I am.

क्वाहं सुमंदमितिणु त्वावलोकें

क्वेदं घवापिन भवधेघजमहितीयम् ।

ज्ञातपत्र देवि सन्ति कित

भावयुक्ता भक्तावृकनवरासमध्यानुखा ॥ 49 ॥

O Bhavānī! Where am I, void of intelligence and where is the rare vision of You, Who is the only medicine of this disease of the ocean of world? Still, O Mother! Who is worshipped by this Devas, I have got Your vision. Now I have come to know that You always shew mercy to Your Bhaktas, who are in their Bhāvas (mental images of your Self).

Book III Chapter XXIV

फिंक वर्णायामि तव देवि चरित्रमेताङ-

प्रक्षितोर्जित विषयेत्र सुर्गनीनोद्यम् ।

शत्रु हर्ती सुबलिनो तत्सा त्वयाउऊ

भक्तानुकंपि चरितं परमं पवित्रम् ॥ 50 ॥

O Goddess! You have saved Sudarśana in this great war crisis and You have slain these two powerful enemies. How can I describe your prowess in this matter? This I have understood that Your Holy Character ever shews mercy on Your devotees.

नात्यप्रेमोर्दिति देख विचारितेर्दे

तं पासि सर्वमिच्छलि स्थिरजंगमां दे ।

ग्रात्स्वया च विवितूल्य तिपुरद्वातः

संरक्षितोप्रयमधुना धुवसंदिस्युतः ॥ 51 ॥

O Goddess! Again this is not a matter to be wondered at, if one considers; for You are protecting this whole universe, moving and unmoving; and accordingly You have now protected, out of Your mercy, your Bhakta Sudarśana, the son of Dhruvasandhi, by killing his enemy.

भक्तस्य सेवनपरं स्वयंगोस्तितीपतं

कर्तू भवानि रचितं चरितं त्वयितत् ।

नोचेकक्षं सुविर्यहा सुतां वदीयां

युढे भवेकुशलवाननवहणीलः ॥ 52 ॥

O Bhavānī! It is not merely for the protection of your Bhaktas, engaged in Your service, that You shew this favour but also to extol the meritorious deeds of your Bhaktas that You do such things; otherwise how is it that this Bhakta saint like Sudarśana, by marrying my daughter, has got victory in this battle field?

शक्तास्त्रि जन्ममरणादिभ्यावित्वहंतु

किं चित्रमत्र किल भक्तजनस्य कामम् ।

त्वं गीयसे जननि भक्तजनैरपारा त्वं

पांपुष्यरहिता सगुणगरुणा च ॥ ५३ ॥

O Mother! You are fully capable to destroy the fear of birth and death. What wonder is there that you fulfill the desires of your Bhakta? The Bhaktas extol You by characterising You as Saguna (full of qualities), Nirguna (devoid of any quality) and Apārā, beyong all merits and demerits.

त्वहर्णनादहमहो सुकृती कृतार्थों

जातोउमि देव विष्नेश्रि ध्यन्त्रना ।

बीजे न ते न भवनं कित वेधि

माताज्ञतिवताए महिमा प्रकटप्रभाव: ॥ 54 ॥

O Goddess! O Bhuvanesvari! I am fortunate that I have been able to see You, and thus all my duties have become crowned with success. O Mother! I have no practices in the shape of Your meditation, etc. nor do I know any seed mantras of Yours; today I have fully seen Your glory manifested.

व्यास उवाच

एवं स्तुता तदा देवी प्रसावद्वना शिवा ।

उवाच च नृपं देवी वरं वरय सूतत ॥ 55 ॥

इति श्रीवेदौभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयकन्ने जयोविंशोउथाय: ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus extolled by the king Subāhu, the Goddess Bhagavatī, the Bestower of the Absolute Freedom, was pleased and said: "O thou, practice of good vows! Ask boon from Me."

Thus ends the Twenty third Chapter on the killing of

the enemy of Sudarśana in the great war, in

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book III Chapter XXIV

CHAPTER XXIV

On the Installation of Durgā Devi in Benares

व्यास उवाच

तस्यास्तुचनं श्रुत्वा भवान्या: स नृपोभमः ।

प्रोवाच चचनं तत्र सुबाहुर्षफित्भंसुतः ॥ 1 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing the Devi's words, the king Subāhu began to say with great devotion thus :

सुबाहुर्वाच

एकातो देवलोकस्य राज्यं भूमपडलस्य च ।

एकातो दर्शनं ते वै न च तुल्यं कदाचन ॥ 2 ॥

दर्शनानसदूर्ण किंचिनित्यु लोकेषु नासित मे ।

कं वरं देवि याचेर्दं कृतावाँर्गसम धरातले ॥ 3 ॥

"O Devi! If there be made a comparison between the kingdom of the Devas and the world on the one hand and the vision of Thine on the other hand, then it must be acknowledged that the kingdom of the Devas and the earth cannot stand in comparison before Thee. O Devi! There cannot be anything, in this Triloki, that is more exalted than Thy vision; therefore, O Mother! What other boom may I ask from Thee. I am very thankful and blessed; all my desires are fulfilled, when I have seen Thee.

तृतदिष्ठम्यं मालयीवितुं वार्थिजयं वम् ।

तब भक्ति: सदा मे०सृ निश्रुला हानपायिति ॥ 4 ॥

नगोउ तव्या मात: स्थातव्यं मम सर्वतः ।

दुगादेवीति नाना वै त्वं शक्तिर्व सभंस्वा ॥ 5 ॥

O Aupsicious Mother! I ask from You this boon, my desire that my devotion may remain constant, fixed, and unflinching towards You. O Mother! You would remain always in this city of mine being celebrated under the name of Śrī Durgā Devi, Your Śakti. This is my desire.

रक्षा तवया च कर्तेल्या सर्वदो नगरस्य ह ।

यथा सुदर्शनस्त्रातो तिपुसंघादनायमः ॥ 6 ॥

तथाउर उरक्षा कर्तेल्या वाराणास्यास्तव्याविके ।

यावत्पुरी भवेकूगी सुगतिष्ठा सुरंसीक्षता ॥ 7 ॥

तावत्च्याउर स्थातल्यं तुर्गं देवि कुपानिधे ।

यरोउरं मम ते देवः किमय-त्याद्यायमयून् ॥ 8 ॥

विविधान्यकलाप्त्वामान्देहि मे विद्धिंग जहि ।

अभ्यद्राणां विनाशं च कुरु लोकस्य सद्यो ॥ 9 ॥

ODevi! As you have cleared off all the obstacles of Sudarśana and saved him from this danger, so remain here in this city of Benares and protect it, so long as this city stands on the face of the earth and make it firm and well established and renowned. O Durgā, I pray that you may grant me these boons. O Devi! Grant me also various other desires of mine and destroy my enemies and extirpate all the irreligious and wicked people in this city. O Goddess of mercy! What more can I ask you?

व्यास उवाच

इति संप्राधित हो दीपुं दुर्गार्तिनारिणी ।

त्युवाच उपं तत्र स्तुत्वा वे संस्थितं पुरः ॥ 10 ॥

जुगांचच

राजन्सदा निवासो मे भुक्तिपूर्णं भविष्यति ।

स्थार्थ सर्वैलोकानां यावतिष्ठति मेदिनी ॥ 11 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus praising and praying, the king Subāhu stood, with folded hands, before the Devi Durgā, the remover of all calamities, when She addressed thus: "O king! I will remain no doubt, in this city of Benares, the place of salvation, as long as it stands on the face of the earth and protect all the people here."

अधो सुर्दर्गनस्तत्र समागत्य मुद्तवित्तः ।

प्रणाय्य परया भकत्या तुताव जतादिककाम् ॥ 12 ॥

Then came there Sudarśana, heartily gladdened; and he bowed to Her and began to praise Her with intense joy and devotion.

अहो कृपा ते कवयाम्यहं किं

ग्रातस्वया यात्रिक्त भक्तिहीनः ।

भक्तानुकंनी सकलो ज्ञानोस्त

वियुक्तभक्तैरवनं त्रत ते ॥ १३ ॥

“O Mother of this Universe! Everyone in this world shews mercy to those that are devoted to him; but, O Mother! I see, in Your case, You take it as if Your bounden duty, to save that are void of any devotion towards You; for You have saved my life, though I am devoid of any devotion towards you. Therefore how can I describe the boundless ocean of mercy that reigns in You!

त्वे देखे सर्वे सुजसि प्रपंचं

भूतं मया पालयसि स्वयुधम् ।

त्वमिति संहारपरे च काले न

तेउ प्रचित्र मम रक्षणं है ॥ 14 ॥

O Goddess! I have heard that You have created all this Universe, with its elements, and You are preserving this Your own creations and again You will destroy it in due time. Therefore O Mother! What wonder is there that you have saved me!

क्लोभि कि के वद देवि कार्यं

क्व वा राजानीयनुगेदालगु।

कार्य विमुळोर्यित तताज्ञान्ड

गच्छामि तिके विहरामि मातः ॥ 15 ॥

Book III Chapter XXIV

O Goddess! Now order me early what work of Yours shall I do now? Where shall I go? O Mother! Now I am unable to make out my duty; therefore kindly order me whether I will remain here or go anywhere else or remain anywhere, I like, at my leisure?"

यास उचाच

तं तथा भाषमाणं तु देवी प्राह द्वावित्ता ।

गच्छायोग्यां महाभाग कुर राज्यं कृतोचितम् ॥ 16 ॥

Vyāsa said: On Sudarśana thus petitioning before the Devi, She said with much kindness: "O good soul! Go to Ayodhyā and govern the country befitting your family.

स्मरणीया स्वादुर्भे ते पूजनीया प्रत्यन्तः ।

गं विधास्याम्बृं नित्यं राज्यं ते नृपसत्तम ॥ 17 ॥

O king! Constantly remember Me and worship Me with great care. I will always look after the welfare of your kingdom.

अध्यायं च चतुद्रैयां नवम्बं च विशेषतः ।

मप पूजा प्रकर्तेया बाल्वानयिपधानतः ॥ 18 ॥

Especially in the eighth, fourteenth, and in the ninth day of the lunar half month, worship Me according to the prescribed rites and rules and offer me victims (sacrifices).

अर्चा महीया नगरे स्वापनीया त्वयान्च।

पूजनीया प्रयलेन विकालं भक्तिपूर्वकम् ॥ 19 ॥

O sinless one! Establish my image in this city and worship it three times, morning, mid-day and evening carefully and with devotion.

गरत्काले महापूजा कर्तेल्या मन सर्वेदा ।

नवराशिद्धिनने भक्तिभावयुतेन च ॥ 20 ॥

It is noteworthy that My Great Pūjā in autumn for the nine nights (Navarātra) ought to be done with the greatest devotion.

दोत्रसंधिने तथापावे माघे कार्यां महोत्सव: ।

नवरारे महाराज पूजा कार्य। विशेषतः ॥ 21 ॥

कृष्णायुङे चतुदैर्थगं मय भक्तिस्मावित्रः ।

कतैल्या नृपशातूंल तथा3ध्यमां सदा बुढ़ीः ॥ 22 ॥

O king! In the month of Caitra, Māgha, Āśvina, and Āsādhā, My grand festival should be done on

the four Navarātris respectively; and especially on the fourteenth and on the eighth day of the black half, all persons ought to worship Me with their minds full of devotion towards Me."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्चनांतहिता देवी दुर्गां दुर्गार्तिनाशिन।।

नता सुदर्शनेनाव स्तुता बहुवितरम् ॥ 23 ॥

Vyāsa said: After the Devi, the Goddess Durgā, the Destroyer of all dangers, had finished Her sayings, Sudarśana bowed down to Her and praised Her much. The Devi, giving him the above mentioned advices, disappeared.

अन्तर्हितं तु तां दृष्ट्वा राजानः सर्वे एव ते ।

प्रणीयुक्तं समानाय्य यथा शक्रं सुरास्तथा ॥ 24 ॥

Seeing Her disappear, all the kings went to Sudarśana and bowed to him, as the Devas go to their lord, the Indra.

सुबाहुरपि तं नत्वा स्थितश्ठाये मुदावित्यः ।

क्रचुः सर्वे महीपाला अयोध्याधिपर्ति नत ॥ 25 ॥

The king of Benares, Subāhu, too, gladly bowed down and stood before him. Then all the kings began to address Sudarśana, the king of Ayodhyā.

त्यमसाकं प्रभुः शगता सेवकासे वयं सदा ।

कुरू राज्यमयोध्यायां पालयासमावृषोतम् ॥ 26 ॥

"O king! You are our lord and governor; we are always your servants; protect us as the king of Ayodhyā."

त्वत्रमसादामहाराज दूद्वा विश्रेध्वीरि शिका ।

आदिशक्तिभवीनी सा चतुरर्गीकलप्रदा ॥ 27-11

O king! It is through your grace only that we have seen the Supreme Force, the Goddess of this Universe, the most Auspicious, the Eternal Bhavānī, the Giver of the four-fold desires.

धयस्वं कृतकूलोसि बहुपुर्णे धरातले ।

यस्माण्य त्वल्कृते देवी प्रावुभूता सनातनी ॥ 28 ॥

O king! It is for your sake that the Eternal, Highest Prakrti Devi appeared; therefore you are very fortunate, auspicious, and most blessed in this world. Your have finished, as it were, all that you had to do.

न जानीमो वयं सर्वें प्रभावं नृपसत्तम ।

चिडकायासनोयुक्ता मायया मोहिता: सदा ॥ 29 ॥

O king! We all aue deluded by the Māyā of that Mahāmāyā Caṇḍikā Devi; therefore none of us is able to know Her prowess.

धनदासुतानां च सितनेधितता: सदा ।

मना महाणघे घोरे कामकाधोर्षणाकुले ।। ३० ॥

We are always engaged in thinking of wealth, sons and wives; there we are merged in this awful ocean of delusion, infested with crocodiles, etc., in the shape of lust, anger, greed, etc.

पृष्ठभास्त्वां महाभाग सर्वेजोत्रि महामते ।

कैये शक्ति: कृते जाता किंप्रपावा बदल सत् ॥ ३ १ ॥

O Blessed one! You are highly enlightened and you know everything; hence we ask you What is this Force; whence has She sprung? How is Her prowess? Kindly describe all these to us.

भव तं नीक्षा संसारे साध्योजित्यपारः ।

तस्याओं वद काकुल्य देवीमाहात्मयुन्तम् ॥ ३ २ ॥

O Descendant of Kakud! The saints are always merciful; kindly therefore relate to us the glory of the Excellent Goddess, that serves the purpose of a boat in crossing this ocean of world (transmigration).

यतृष्यावा च सा देवी यत्स्वरूपा यदुद्वा ।

सत्ववं श्रीतुष्चिषामत्वं बृहि नृत्रसोत्तम ॥ 33 ॥

O king! I am intensely desirous to hear the prowess and nature of the Devi."

Note: Kakud is an epithet of Puranājaya, son of Śaśāda, a king of the solar dynasty, and a descendant of Iśvāku. The Mythology relates that when in their war with the demons, *he gods were often worsted, they, headed by Indra went to the powerful king Puranājaya and requested him to be their friend in battle. The latter consented to do so, provided Indra carried him on his shoulders. Indra accordingly assumed the form of a bull Puranājaya seated on its hump, completely vanquished the demons. Puranājaya is therefore Kakuttha ‘standing on a hump’.

व्यास उवाच

इति पृष्टसदा तैस्तु धूबसंधिसुतो नृप: ।

चित्रित्य मनसा देखीं तानुवाच मुद्रावित्त ॥ 34 ॥

Vyāsa said: When the king had thus asked, the son of Dhruvasandhi, the king Sudaraśana became very glad and, meditating on the Goddess, began to say thus:

सुर्जन उवाच

किं कवीम महीपालास्तस्याङ्गरितमुभम् ।

ब्रहादाये न जानांत सैशा: सुरागातस्था ॥ 35 ॥

“O kings! Indra and the other Devas, even Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa are unable to fathom the most exalted deeds of that Goddess; how, then, can I describe to you the great glory of the Mahānayā.

सर्वस्यादा महलक्ष्मीदीयणा शफित्क्तमा ।

साचिक्तीयं महीपाल जान्यालनतलया ॥ 36 ॥

सुजते या राजोकूपा सचल्कापा च पालने ।

संहोर च तमोकूपा त्रिगुणा सा स्मत मात ॥ 37 ॥

निर्गुणा परमा शक्ति: सर्वकामफलप्रदा ।

सर्वेधां कारणं सा हि बढ्धादीनां नृपोनामे: ॥ 38 ॥

O Kings! The Bhagavati Bhavānī is present, as it were, being divided into four parts. She who is the first and foremost, the excellent Sāttvik Energy, worshipped by all, is always engaged in the preservation of this world. That part which is engaged in creating this world, is called the Rājasik Energy; and that part which is engaged in destroying the world is called the Tāmasik Energy, and that part which is the cause of all, Brahmā etc., that Highest Śakti, the Bestower of all desires, is called the fourth Śakti, the Nirgunā Śakti.

निरुणा सर्वेशा ज्ञानुभाग्यव योगिभिनुर्गेपः ।

सगुण सुखसेव्या सा चितनीया सदा बुद्धेः ॥ 39 ॥

O kings! Those who are not Yogis, will never be able to grasp the Nirgunā Śakti; The Sagunā Force can be easily served. All those middle Adhikārīs (fit persons) and learned men always meditate and worship the Sagunā Aspect of Her."

राजान कबुः

बाला एव वर्ण प्राप्तस्ते तु नृनं भयातुः ।

कर्थे ज्ञाता त्वया देवी परम शक्तिक्तनाम ॥ ४० ॥

Book III Chapter XXV

उपासिता कर्थ चैव पूजिता च कर्थ नृप ।

या प्रसरा तु साहाय्ये चकार त्वयाचिता ॥ 4 1 ॥

The kings said: “O king! You got afraid and went in your very early age to the forest; how is it, then, that you have been able to know the excellent Goddess Mahāmāyā. How did you worship and pray to Her? That She, becoming so glad, has favoured you and so helped you?

सुर्जन उवाच

बालभावान्यामा प्राणतं बीजं तस्याः सुर्भोभतम् ।

स्मारीय प्रजार्थित्यं कामबीजार्थिधं ग्रृपा: ॥ 4 2 ॥

झधिषि: कथ्यमाना सा यम ज्ञातोबिका शिला ।

स्मारीय तां दिवातरां भक्ल्या परमया पराम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

Sudarśana said: “O kings! Early in my childhood, I got the excellent root-mantra of desires, Kāmabjja; daily I meditated and silently uttered that mantram. After that I came to realise through the Rṣis That Eternal Auspicious Mother; and since that time, day and night, I always used to remember that Highest Deity, with the greatest devotion.”

व्यास उवाच

तश्रियय बचस्तस्य राजानो भक्तित्वपरः ।

तां मत्वा परमां शफिंक, नियंयुः व्यगृहान्ति ॥ 44 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing the words of Sudarśana, the kings came to know that the Goddess which they saw was the Highest Force and filled with the greatest devotion towards Her, returned to their own homes.

सुवाहुतृरामत्कारयां तमापृच्छ्य सूदर्शनम् ।

सुदर्शनीउपि धर्मात्मा निजर्जागम सुकोसलन्त् ॥ 4 5 ॥

The king of Benares, Subāhu, returned to his own city after bidding good-bye to Sudarśana. The

virtuous Sudarśana, too, went towards his Kosala kingdom.

मत्थिल्त नृरं श्रुता हतं शज्ञितं मृधे ।

स्ततं सूदरर्नं चैव बधूतुः प्रेमसंयुतः ॥ 46 ॥

The ministers were very glad to hear the death of Śatrujit and to see the victory of Sudarśana.

आपच्छंतं नृरं श्रुत्वा तं साकेतनिवासिनः ।

उपायान्न्युपादाय प्रयु: सम्युखे जनः ॥ 47 ॥

तथा प्रकृतय: सर्वे नानोपायनपायाः ।

धूवसंधिपुतं तत्त्वा भृतिताः प्रययुः प्रजाः ॥ 48 ॥

The inhabitants and armies of Saketa (Ayodhyā) hearing that Sudarśana is coming and knowing him to be the son of the king Dhruvasandhi, became highly delighted and approached to him with various offerings.

सिद्धोपसंयुतः सोअ ध्राप्यायोर्यां सूद्रनिः ।

संमान्य सर्वलोकांश ययो राजा निवेशगनम् ॥ 49 ॥

ब्रंधिभः सूयमानस्तु वंद्यामानश मन्थिनः ।

कन्याधिः कौर्मयाणश तातैः सुमनसैलना ॥ 50 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीयागवते महापुराणे तृतीयस्कन्दे

चतुर्षिरोधणः ॥ 24 ॥

Sudarsana, with his new consort, arrived at Ayodhyā with his heart highly gladdened, and shewed his regard and respect towards all his subject. Then the ministers came and saluted him; the women threw at him offerings of Lāja (fried rice) and flowers; the bards began to praise loudly. Thus, honoured by various auspicious ceremonies, the king entered into his palace.

Here ends the Twenty fourth Chapter on the installation of Durga Devi in the city of Benares and the return to Ayodhyā of Sudarśana in the Mahā Purānam Srimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book III Chapter XXV

CHAPTER XXV

On the Installation of the Devi in Ayodhyā and Benares

व्यास उवाच

गतलाउपोथो नृपश्रेष्ठो गृहं राज्ञ: सुहृदयुत: ।

शुशुज्ञमातरं प्राह प्रणम्य शोकसंकुलम् ॥ १ ॥

मातर्ने ते भवा पुत्र: संग्रामे निहतः किल ।

न पिता ते युवाजिज्च्र शपे ते चरणी तथा ॥ २ ॥

दुर्गया ती हृती संख्ये नावराधौ म्यात्र वै ।

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

अवर्यंभाविभावेषु प्रतिकारो न विद्यते ॥ ३ ॥

न गोकोउर तव्या कार्यों मूनपुत्रस्य मानिन ।

स्वकर्मवशगो जीवो घृतैके भोगान्युखासुखान् ॥ 4 ॥

Vyāsa said: The king Sudarśana, surrounded by his friends, on coming to the palace at Ayodhyā, bowed down to Līlāvatī, the mother of Śatrujit, and said: "O mother! I swear by touching your feet, that I have not killed in battle your son Śatrujit nor your father Yudhājit; it is the Devi Durgā that has killed them; I am not to be blamed a bit in this. O mother! You need not be sensitive in this; there is no remedy for what will inevitably come to pass; therefore you do not be sorry for the death of your son; you must know that the jīvas enjoy pleasure and pain as the results of their own Karmas.

दासोदयिति तव भो मातर्यथा मम मनोराम ।

तथा त्वयपि धर्मेत्र न येधोस्ति मनायपि ॥ 5 ॥

O mother! I am your servant; you are entitled to the same respect and worship as Manoranmā, my own mother; there is no difference whatsoever between her and you.

अवश्यमेव भोक्तयं कृत कर्म शुभाशुभम् ।

तस्मात्र शेचित्यं ते सुखे दुःखे कदाचन ॥ 6 ॥

O mother! One must bear the effects of one's Karma, good or bad; therefore when pleasure or pain arises, you should not be glad or otherwise.

दुःखे दुःख्याधिकान्येषसुखे एपलैसुखाधिकम् ।

आत्मानं शोकहर्षायां शत्रुघ्याधिव नार्येवेत् ॥ ७ ॥

When pain arises, more pain is said to be conceived and when pleasure arises, more pleasure is seen. But the learned say that man ought not to subject himself to excessive pleasure or pain.

दैवार्थीनिवर्षे सर्वे नात्माधीनें कदाचन ।

न ओकेन तदात्मानं ओषेयेमतिभाजरः ॥ ८ ॥

O mother! This whole world is under Fate, Destiny; nothing of it is yours. Therefore the intelligent persons ought not to grieve their hearts at any time with sorrow.

यथा दासमयी योषा नटदारीना प्रचेहते ।

तथा स्वकर्मविशगो देही सर्वत्र वत्ते ॥ 9 ॥

As the wooden dolls dance in a stage as danced by the actor, so the individual souls here work as the result of their past Karmas; there is no doubt in this.

अर्ह वनगतो मातनांभयं दुःख्यानसः ।

चितयन्स्वकृतं कर्म भोक्तव्यमिति वेधि च ॥ 10 ॥

O mother! I know that the effect of one's own Karma, must have to be borne; it is, on that account, that I never felt sorrow in my exile in the forest.

मृत्तो मातामाड़ोउत्रेव विधुरा जननी मम ।

भयातुरा गृहीत्वा मां निवंशी गहनं वनम् ॥ १ १ ॥

You are quite aware that my mother's father was killed here, and my mother, becoming very much afraid and sorrowful, took me and escaped to the forest.

लुंदिता तत्कर्मेर्मी वर्कहीना तथा कृता ।

पायेय च हतं सर्व बालपुका निताशया ॥ १ २ ॥

माता गृहीत्या मां प्राता भात्याजाग्यं गृति ।

विद्वलोरयं समायातस्वा धार्येक्राउतल ॥ १ ३ ॥

The robbers robbed us of everything save our clothes on our bodies; I was then very young; my mother was without any shelter; she carried me with his minister Vidalla and my helpless nurse to the hermitage of Bhāradvāja.

मृत्यिमधुपिंपन्तीभिद्धयाकृतः समंततः ।

पोषितः फलनीवारैर्वं तत्र स्थितास्वधः ॥ 14 ॥

There the kind hermit and his wife and the other wives of the hermits protected our lives in that forest, with the roots and fruits, that can be obtained there in that forest. Thus our time passed.

न दुःखं मे तदा हासीसुखं नाथ धनागमे ।

न वैरं न च मातस्यं मत चित्ते तु कहिंधित् ॥ 15 ॥

Mother! I had felt no pain then; nor do I feel pleasure at present, when wealth is flowing into me. What more to say, I have no feeling of jealousy or envy whatsoever in my mind.

नीवारभक्षणं श्रेष्ठ राजभोगायरन्ते पे ।

तद्वारी नरक याति न नीवाराशना: क्वविद्धि ॥ 16 ॥

O mother! Rather it is better, in my eyes, to subsist on roots and fruits than to enjoy kingdoms;

Book III Chapter XXV

for the kings go to hell; but the ascetics living on roots fruits never meet with that result.

धर्मेश्वारणं कार्यं पुरुषेण विजानता ।

संज्ञावैन्ट्रिवरार्य वै यथा न नरकं ब्रजेत् ॥ 17 ॥

The wise should undoubtedly practice Dharma and control their passions and thus save themselves from being led to hell.

मानुव्यं दुर्जनी मातः खोईप्रमिश्राते रुषे ।

आहारादि सुखं नूनं भवेत्सबाभु योगिषु ॥ 18 ॥

प्राय तं मातुषं देते कतिथ्य धर्मसाधनम् ।

व्यापीक्षप्रदे नृणां दुर्वर्भे चान्ययोनिषु ॥ 19 ॥

O mother! The human birth in this auspicious Bhāratvarsa is seldom obtained. The enjoyments in eating and drinking are possible in every womb, but it is highly incumbent on us when we have got the privilege of this human birth, to earn Dharma, leading to the salvation which can be very rarely attained in being born in other wombs."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्ता सा तदा तेन लीलावल्यतिलिज्ञता ।

पूरगोक्षे परित्यज्य तमाहाश्रविलोचना ॥ 20 ॥

सापराधार्यसम पुत्राई कृत्त पिता युधाजिता ।

हल्या मातामहं तेउत्र हृतं राज्यं तु येन वै ॥ 21 ॥

Vyāsa said: When Sudarśana had told thus, Lilāvatī became very abashed; she cast aside the sorrow for the death of her son, told him with tears in her eyes: "O my son Sudarśana! I am very much guilty on account of my father Yudhājit killing your mother's father and taking hold of the sovereignty of this kingdom.

न ते वारियटुं शक्ता तटाड़ं न सुतं मम ।

यलूतं कर्म तैनैव नारपाठीस्ति मे सुत ॥ 22 ॥

I could not then hinder my father and son; whatever unlawful evil and cruel deeds were then committed, all were done by my father Yudhājit. Therefore, my child, I am not to be made guilty in any way in these doings.

तो मृती खलुकीनैव कारणं त्वं तयोनै च ।

नाहं शोचामि तं पूत्रं सदा शोचामि तत्कृतम् ॥ 23 ।

Both my father and son were killed out of the wickedness of their own actions; how can you account for those wicked things? Child! I am not expressing sorrow at the death of my son; I have been pained by his doings.

पुत्र त्वमसि कल्याण धर्मिनी मे मनोराम ।

न क्रोधी न च शोको मे त्वयि पुत्र मन्यामि ॥ 24 ॥

कुरु राज्य महाभाग प्रजा: पालय सुळत ।

भगवत्या: प्रसादेन प्राप्नमेतद्रकंकम् ॥ 25 ॥

O noble souled one; You are my son; Manoramā is sister; Child! I am not at all offended with you nor am I the least sorry for your obtaining the kingdom; child! you are very fortunate; therefore you have obtained, by the grace of Bhagavatī, this kingdom without any enemies; now rules your subjects according to the prescribed rules of Dharma."

तदाकपयं चवो मातुनंत्वा तां नुपनंदनः ।

जगाम भवतं रयं यत्र पूर्वं मनोराम ॥ 26 ॥

न्यवस्तत्र गत्वा तु सर्वानाहुय मन्त्रिणः ।

देवज्ञानय पपछ्छ पुरुर्ते दिवसं रुणम् ॥ 27 ॥

सिंहासर्त तथा हिंमं कारयित्वा मनोहमम् ।

सिंहासने स्थितां देवी पूजायेथे सदास्यमूम् ॥ 28 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! The king Sudarśana heard Lilāvatī and bowed down at her feet. Then he went to the beautiful palace where Manoramā had previously gone and begun to live there. Inviting the ministers and the astrologers, he asked them what was the auspicious day and the auspicious moments, that he can establish Durgā Devi on a beautiful golden throne and he would worship Her.

स्थापवित्याउसने देवौं धार्यविकामपोहज्ञान् ।

राज्यं घड़ाकार्थियाय विश्य रागादिधि: कृतम् ॥ 29 ॥

“O ministers! First I will install on the throne the Devi, the Awarder of the four main objects of human pursuits (viz. Virtue, wealth, enjoyment and final beatitude) and then I will govern my kingdom like the kings Śri Rāma Candra and others.

पूजनीया स्ता देवो सर्वेनार्थिकैजंय: ।

माननीया शिवा शक्ति: सर्वकामार्थिसिद्धिदा ॥ 30 ॥

All the people of this city of Ayodhyā ought to worship this Auspicious Śakti, the Highest Energy, the Giver of all desires and Siddhis, and that is respected and adored by all.

इलुक्ता मन्निग्रास्ते तु चकुर्षे राजसासनम् ।

प्रास्ते कारयामासु: शिष्यिधि: सुमनेराम् ॥ 31 ॥

The ministers, on hearing his words, had a beautiful palace built by the engineers, artists and workmen and proclaimed in the city the king's proclamation.

प्रतिमां कारयित्वास्य मुहुर्तेक्ष शुभे दिने ।

द्विजानादुय वेद्वान्स्थाययामास मुपति: ॥ 32 ॥

Then the king Sudarśana had an image of the Devi nicely built and got that installed with the help of the Pundits, versed in the Vedas, on an auspicious day and at an auspicious moments.

इवनं विधित्यकृत्वा पूजयित्वास्य देवतान् ।

प्राप्तो मितिनान् देल्या: स्थाप्यामास भूमिपः ॥ 33 ॥

The intelligent king performed the worship and Homa ceremony, according to the prescribed rules, and thus finally settled the ceremony of invocation of the Deity into the new image and established it as an idol in the temple.

उत्सवस्तन संवृत्ती वादिताणों च नि:स्वर्नेः ।

बाङ्गापानां वेदोर्शेर्गरनैसृ विविधेर्नर् ॥ 34 ॥

O Janamejaya! There the soundings of the various drums and other musical instruments, the chanting of the Veda mantrams by the Brāhmanas, and sweet music was heard; and various sorts of festivities and rejoicings were celebrated.

व्यास उवाच

प्रतिष्ठाय शिवां देवीं विधिवेद्वादिविधि: ।

पूर्जां नानाधिं शां ज्चकारातिविधानतः। 35 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus completing the installation ceremony of the Durgā Devī by the Brāhmaṇas, versed in the Vedas, the king Sudarśana duly worshipped the image in various ways, etc.

कृत्वा पूर्वाविधिं शरा राज्यं प्रायः स्वर्वेषुकम् ।

विद्याता चाधिका देवी कौसलेषु बभूबह ७ ॥ ३६ ॥

Thus gaining his father's kingdom and worshipping the Devi, he and the Devi became celebrated throughout the kingdom.

राज्यं प्राय्य नृपः सर्वे सामंतकनृपायन ।

वशे चक्रेस्तिप्रिभान्यद्वर्मविर्जी नृपः ॥ ३७ ॥

The religious largehearted Sudarśana, on gaining his kingdom, brought all the other feudatory princes under his control by the sheer force of his religious character.

यथा रामः स्वाग्चेप्रष्टितीपस्य रघुयां।

प्रजानां वै सुखं तद्वन्यविद्धानि पत्थंपवत् ॥ 38 ॥

The subject became happy and got honour in the reign of Sudarśana, as they got before in the reigns of Dilipa, Raghu and Rāmacandra.

धर्मों वर्णाशमाणां च चतुष्यादभवतथा ।

नाधर्मे सन्ते चित्तं केभामपि महीतले ॥ 39 ॥

The virtue of all the citizens under Varnāśrama shone complete with all its four pādas; and there remained none in the world irreligious.

ग्रामे ग्रामे च ग्रासाद्धकु: सर्वे जनाधिपाः ।

देखा: पूजा तदा प्रीत्या कोसतैयु प्रवर्तिता ॥ 40 ॥

In villages after villages, the chief townsmen began to build temples, worship the Goddess there with all their jolliness. Thus everywhere in the Kosala kingdom spread the Devi worship.

मुबाहुरी कार्ययां तु तुणीय: प्रतिमां शुभान् ।

कारचित्वा च प्राप्तां स्वायभायाम पशित्तः ॥ 4 1 ॥

On the other hand, the king Subāhu established the Idol in Benares, had temples built and worshipped there the Devi.

तत्र तस्य जना: सर्वे प्रेमभक्तिपरायणा: ।

पूजां चकृर्विधानेन यथा विश्रेधारस्य ह ॥ 4 2 ॥

The inhabitants of Kāśī became then filled with devotion and intense love towards the Devi and duly worshipped Her, as they used to do to Śiva in the temple of Viśvañātha.

विद्याता सा बभूवा शुर्दिधी धरातले ।

देशे देरे महाराज तस्या भक्तिव्यवित्ति ॥ 43 ॥

Thus the Durgā Devi became very widely celebrated in this world. O king! Thus in different

Book III Chapter XXVI

countries, the devotion began to increase towards the Goddess.

स्वयं भारते लोके सर्ववर्णेु सर्वथा ।

भजनीया भवानी तु सर्वेयाभभवन्ता ॥ 44 ॥

The Devi Bhagavatī Bhāvānī became in every way an object to be worshipped and adored by all people and everywhere in Bhāratavarsa.

शक्तिभक्ततः सर्वे गानिनक्षावबुव्य ।

आगभोक्तैरव स्तोत्रैजपध्यानपरायणा: ॥ 45 ॥

The people began to recite slowly, meditate, and chant hymns as advocated by the Agamas constantly and became deeply attached to the Sakti worship and began to be looked upon with the highest honour by others.

नवराग्रेषु सर्वेषु चक्र: सर्वे विधानतः ।

अर्नंन हवनं यागं देह्या भक्तिपरा जना: ॥ 46 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागनते महापुराणे तृतीयस्कन्धे

पद्धविरोधोउध्याः: 11 25 11

O king! From that time all the people used to worship, perform Homa, ceremony and sacrifice duly in honour of the Devi in every Navarātri (for the first nine days of the bright half in the months of Āśvina and Caitra).

Here ends the Twenty Fifth Chapter on the installation of the Devi in Ayodhya and Benares in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevirbhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Vedā Vyāsa.

Book III Chapter XXVI

CHAPTER XXVI

On the Navarătri

जनमेज उवाच

नवराएे तु संग्राटे किं कर्तवें छिजोत्तम ।

वियांन विविचव दृष्टि श्रताकाले विशेषतः ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said : “O Best of the Brāhmīns! What are men to do in the time of Navarātra? Especially in the Navarātra ceremony during the autumnal season how is the ceremony to be performed? Kindly relate all this with the prescribed rules regulations.

फिंक फतं खतु करतार विधि: कार्यों महामते ।

एताद्धितरती बहु कृयया द्विजसत्तम ॥ 2 ॥

O intelligent one! What are the fruits therein of the Navarātra ceremony? and what are the rules to be observed? Kindly describe all these to me.

व्यास उचाच

शृणु राजनप्रवक्ष्यामि नवरात्रजतं शुभम् ।

शरकाले विशेषेण कत्नं विधिपूर्वकम् ॥ 3 ॥

वसंते च प्रकत्थं तथैव प्रेभपूर्वकम् ।

ब्रावृत् यमदैशूल्यो नूनं सर्वजेनयु वै ॥ 4 ॥

शराद्रसंतनामानी दुर्भी प्राणिनामिक् ।

तस्म्यात्नार्विदं कार्य सर्वन सुभमिष्ठता ॥ 5 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O king! Hear about the vow of auspicious Navarātra. This has to be performed

with loving devotion in the vernal season; but its special season is autumn. The two seasons. autuman and spring, are famous as the teeth of Yama, the God of Death; and these are the two seasons, very hard for the persons to cross over. Therefore every goodfaring man should everywhere perform this vow very carefully.

इवावे सुमहापोरावूत् रोगकर्गे रुणाम् ।

वसंतगरादावे सर्वनोगकारवृषी १६ ७ ॥

तस्मात्त्र प्रकर्तेच चण्डिकापूजनं बुधैः ।

चैराधिति शृणे मासे पत्तिपूर्वे नराधिप १ ७ ॥

अमावायां च संग्राय संभारं कल्यचेछूषम् ।

हविष्यं, राजानं कार्यमेकपुवतं तु तहिने ॥ ८ ॥

O king! The people are very much afflicted with various terrible diseases in these two seasons autumn and spring and many lose their lives during these portions of the year. Therefore the wise should unquestionably worship with great devotion the Cangākā Devi in these auspicious months of Caitra and Śśvina.

मण्डपस्पू प्रकत्ने: सभे देशे रुष्पे स्थले ।

इतपोडणमानेन संभव्रजसमन्ति: ॥ 9 ॥

गौरमुद्रोमवाय्यां च लेपनं कारयेत्ततः ।

तन्यधे वैदिका शुभा कर्तेचा च स्मा स्थिता ॥ 10 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

चतुहैस्ता च हस्तोच्छा पीटावँ स्थानुत्तमम् ।

तोरणानि विचित्राणि वितानं च प्रकल्पयेत् ॥ १ १ ॥

On the day previous to the commencement of the vow, when the Amāvasyā tithi commences, one should collect the materials that will be required in the worship and should eat only once in that tithi what is called Havisyānna (sacred food, boiled rice with ghee) and should on that day prepare an open shade in a temporary building, twenty four (24) feet in dimensions, on a level piece of ground, that is considered holy; it is to be equipped with a post and a flag. Next, this is to be heaped over with yellow earth and cow dung. Then a raised platform called the Vedī, six feet wide and 1 ½ one and a half foot high, level and hard, is to be erected, and provided with an excellent space thereon for the seat of the Devi. Provisions are to be made also for ornamented gate ways and an awning over the top.

राते द्विजानायांन्य देवीतत्वविशारदान् ।

आचारनितन्तादांतान्देवदारंगपाणना ॥ 12 ॥

प्रतिपद्विसे कार्य' प्रात:स्नानं वियानतः ।

नहा नदे तडागे वा वाय्यां कुरे गृड़ेश्वा ॥ 13 ॥

प्रतर्नित्वं पुर कृत्वा द्विजानां वरणं ततः ।

अर्थप्याचारिके सर्व कर्नोल मधुपूर्वकम् ॥ 14 ॥

वस्त्रालंकरणादीनि देवापि व स्वशक्ततः ।

विशगणाटों कर्तेलि चिपवे सर्टीकहित् ॥ 15 ॥

विश्रे: संतोर्वितः कार्य मयूर्ण सर्वेथा भवेत् ।

नवषघ्रदयश्छीके देवा: थाटे डिजा: स्मृतः ॥ 16 ॥

वरयेद् बाढ्याणं शान्ते पारायणकृते तदा ।

स्वत्सरावचनं कार्य वेद्यन्स्वियाताः ॥ 17 ॥

One should invite then, those Brāhmins, that observe fully the customs and usages, who are self restrained and versed in the Vedas and Vedāngas, especially those who are skilled in the ceremony of worshipping the Devi.

Next, in the Pratipadā tithi (the first day of the bright half), one should take one's morning ablutions in a river, or in a lake, tank or a well or in one's own residence, according to rules, and one

should perform one's every day practices of Sandhyā Vandanam. Afterwards he should appoint the Brāhmins and give them water for washing their feet and Arghya (offerings of grass, rice etc.), and Madhuparka (an oblation of honey and milk etc.), and give and then, as his means permit, clothings and ornaments to them. If he happens to be rich, he should never shew his miserliness here in making these gifts; for if the Brāhmins be satisfied, they will try their best to make the ceremony a complete success. O king! The Candī Pātha (the reading of the book called Candī) and Bhāgavata Pātha (the reading of some portions of the book named Bhāgavat) are done on this occasion, for the satisfaction of the Goddess; and either nine Brāhmins or five or three or at least one Brāhim, of a restrained and calm nature, is to be appointed, who would observe the fasting on the day previous (pārāyana). All these being done, the able man is to perform the ceremony preparatory to the solemn Devi worship, (in which the priest utters the Vedic mantra Svasti-vācana, Svasti na Indro vṛddha-śravāḥ etc.). Om Hrim Śrim Dūm Durgāyai namah is the nine lettered Durgā mantra.

वेश्वा सिहासन स्थाय श्रीमवहसामभवितम् ।

तत्र स्थाया प्रविका देवी चतुर्वैतसायुधात्वा ॥ १ ॥ १

रन्यप्रपणसंयुक्ता मुक्रात्राविराविता ।

विद्याम्ब्यसरा सीमा सर्वतक्षणसंयुता ॥ १९ ॥

गंखचक्रतापवधान सिंहे स्थिता शिका ।

अश्वतशपुत्रा वासि प्रतिष्ठाया सन्तानी ॥ 20 ॥

O king! When the ceremony has been thus commenced, one should place on the Vedi (a raised platform; an altar), the throne fitted with double silken clothes; and, on that throne, he should place the image of the Devi. The Devi, the Eternal World-Mother, is to be four-armed or eighteen armed, (4 or 18) fully provided with all the weapons, ornamented with garlands of pearls and jewels, decorated with various ornaments of gems and precious stones, wearing excellent heavenly

Book III Chapter XXVI

clothing, all the parts of the image being artistically finished and endowed with all the auspicious signs, mounted on a lion, and holding conch shell, wheel, club, and lotus in Her hands.

Note: The Devī, here, is represented with four (4) or eighteen (18) hands.

अर्याधोत तथा यनं नवाणीमन्यसंयुतम् ।

स्थापवैनौदुपानी कलशं तत्र पाईशः ॥ 21 ॥

पशुपल्लवसंयुक्तं वेद्यान्ये: सुरंस्कृतम् ।

सुतीर्थंजलस्म्यूर्णं हेमरन्ते: समन्तितम् ॥ 22 ॥

In the absence of the image, one should place an earthen water-pot, on that throne, thoroughly purified by the Vedic Mantras, filled with gold and jewels, and filled fully with the water, brought from a sacred river or a sacred place of pilgrimage and with five young shoots of plants, the extremities of branches bearing new leaves immersed in water. Beside the water-pot on the throne, there should be a symbol (Diagram or Yantra) with the nine lettered Mantram (Om Hrim Śrim Čandikāyai namah) in it for the purpose of worship.

पार्थु पूर्णवर्षम्भात्यारिकल्य्य समन्ततः ।

गतिवादिविधोषाकारयेन्मालय ते ॥ 23 ॥

One should place on one's side all the materials of worship in their due places, and then have the music and other sounding drums played, for the good fortune and prosperity of the family.

Note: Look for the mantras in the book Mantramaho Dadhi.

तिशी इत्सान्याया च नन्दाया पुजनं वरम् ।

प्रथमे दिवसे राजन्धित्यकतामदं नृणम् ॥ 24 ॥

O King! If the first day be the Nanda tithi (i.e. the first day of the bright half with the asterism Hastā in the ascendant), then that is the best time for worshipping duly the Holy Goddess. There is no doubt that special fortunate results would arise on this.

नियमं प्रवयं कृत्वा पश्रात्यूजां समाचरेत् ।

उपवासेन नेकेन चैकभकेन चा युनः ॥ 25 ॥

On the previous night, one should observe fasting, or on the previous day one should take only one meal of Havisyānnā (boiled rice and ghee); and on the next day one should make a Saṅkalpa (an avowal of the purpose to perform a rite) and then begin worship.

करिष्यामि जते पातर्नवराममन्तमम् ।

साहाय्यं कुभ मे देखि जगदेव ममापीडलम् ॥ 26 ॥

One should pray before the Goddess thus, “O Mother, Mother of the World! I will perform this excellent Navarātra vow; be pleased to help me in every respect.”

यथाशक्ति प्रकर्तेबा नियमो प्रतहतेव ।

पश्रातृज्ञा प्रकतैव्य विधिव्यमान्यपूर्वकम् ॥ 27 ॥

One is to observe, as far as possible, all the rules enjoined in this vow, and then utter the mantras and do the worship according to the prescribed rules.

चन्दनागृककप्रैः कुसुमैधा सुगात्थिनः ।

मन्दारकराजाशिकच्यकः कदार्विकः ॥ 28 ॥

मालतीब्रह्माकुपुष्येस्तथा शिवल्वदलेः शुभेः ।

पूजरेज्ञगतां धार्जी पूर्वैर्विपेक्षित्धानतः ॥ 29 ॥

फलैर्नानाविश्येर्ध प्रदात्वं च तत्र वै ।

नारिकेल्मांगतुलुर्गैर्विडिमावक्तिपैकलेः ॥ 30 ॥

नारैर्ः: पनसैश्व तथा पूर्णफैले: शूपैः ।

अत्रदानं प्रकर्तैर्वं भक्तिपूर्वै नराधिप ॥ 31 ॥

First of all, one should worship duly the Goddess Jagaddhātri, presenting Her Candana (sandal paste), Aguru (a fragrant wood, the aloe wood), Camphor, the flowers Mandāra (one of the five trees of the celestial regions), Karaja (a kind of fragrant flower)! Aśoka, Campaka, Karavira, Mālaṭi, and Brāhmi and various lovely sweet scented flowers and good Bel leaves, Dhūpa (incense, a fragrant gum burnt before idols) and lamps. Next one should present the fruits cocoanut, Mātulinga, the pomegranate, bananas, oranges, the jack furits, Bel, Bel and various other delicious fruits and then, offering Her ardghya, present boiled rice and other food with a heart, full of devotion.

Šrımaddevībhāgavatam

मांसाशनं वे कुबेलित तैः कार्य परुहिंसनम् ।

महिषाजवराहाणां बलित्वां विशिष्यमे ॥ ३२ ॥

Those who eat meat, they can sacrifice animals in this worship of the Devi; and, for this purpose, goat and wild boars are the best.

देव्यो नित्ता याति पशवः स्वर्गम्वयम् ।

न हिंसा पयुजा तन निवन्ता तकृतेनं२४ ॥ ३३ ॥

आहिंसा यात्रिकी प्रोक्ता सर्वेगात्रक्षिविधिपो।

देवतार्व विसुहानां पयून्तां स्वर्गतिर्युंव ।। ३४ ॥।

O sinless one! The goats etc., offered as a sacrifice before the Devi, attain to unending heavens. Therefore persons offering the sacrifices of goats do not incur any sin. O king! The goats etc., and other beasts offered as a sacrifice before the Devas undoubtedly go to the heavenly regions; therefore, in all the Śāstras, it has been decided that this killing of animals in a sacrifice is considered as non-killing.

होभार्थ चैव कर्तेलं कुण्डे चैव विजोभाकम् ।

स्थप्रिडतं व प्रकर्त्यं त्रिकोणं मानतः शुभम् ॥ 35 ॥

Now, for doing the Homa, ceremony one should prepare, according to one's requirements, attriangular pit from one to ten hands in dimensions and a triangular level piece of ground covered with sand.

त्रिकालं पूजनं निवयं नानाद्यैमंनोहरैः ।

गतिवादिप्रनुवैध कत्वेध्य मतोतस्वः ॥ 36 ॥

Daily, thrice, one should worship the Devi with various lovely articles and finally make a great festivity with dancing, singing and music.

नित्यं पूर्णो च शयनं कृमारीणां च पूर्णन् ।

वस्त्रालंकर्णिर्दिवेशैभाँजैनघु सुधामयै ॥ ३७ ॥

Everyday he should sleep on the ground and worship the virgins (young girl from the age of the age of ten) with nectar like sweetmeats and beautiful clothings and ornaments.

एकैका पूर्णवित्यमेककुब्द्रा तथा पुनः ।

द्विगुर्ग विगुर्णं वाउपि प्रत्येकं नवकं च वा ॥ ३८ ॥

Everyday one virgin or increased by one, two, or three every day or nine virgins in all the days respectively are to be worshipped.

विषयस्वानुसारेण कतैल्पूवनं किल ।

वित्तगाठ्यं न कतवें राजस्वक्तिमस्ते यदा ॥ ३ ९ ॥

O king! One should perform worshipping this Kumārī (virgint) Pujā for the satisfaction of the Devi, as his means allow; never one is to shew miserliness in this.

एकबर्षा न कतंव्या कन्या पूजावियौ गृय ।

परमज्ञा तु भोगानां गन्यादीनां च बालिका ॥ 40 ॥

O king! Hear the rules of the virgin worship that I am going to tell you. The virgin, aged one year, is not to be worshipped: for they are quite ignorant as to smell and tasting various delicious things.

कुमारिका तु सा प्रोक्ता द्विवर्षा या भवेदित् ।

त्रिमूर्ति श्रिवर्षा च कल्याणी चतुर्त्विक्धा ॥ 41 ॥

रोहिणी पड्वर्षा च पड्वर्षा कालिका स्मृत ।

चिफडका सतवर्षा स्याहद्वर्षा च शाम्याची ॥ 42 ॥

नवषर्षा भवेद्वरुगा सुभत्रा रुशाखिकी ।

अत ऊर्धे न कतैव्या सर्वकार्याविनहिता ॥ 43 ॥

The virgin aged two years is named the Kumārī; aged three years is named the Trimurtī; four years, is called the Kalyāṇī; five years, Rohinī; six years, Kālīkā; seventh year, Cangīkā; eighth year, Śambhavī; ninth year, Durgā; and a virgin, aged ten year, is called Subhadrā. Virgins aged more than ten years are not allowed in all ceremonies.

पश्रिका नामाभि: पूजा कत्हीया विधिसंपुता ।

तासां फलाति वक्ष्यामि नवानां पूजने सदा ॥ 44 ॥

One should worship these virgins, taking their names and observing all the rules. I am now mentioning the different results that arise from the worship of these nine classes of virgins.

कुमारी पूजिता कुर्बादुःखदारित्रानाशनम् ।

सत्रुस्थं धनायुर्णे बलवृष्टि करोति वै ॥ ४ ५ ॥

The worship of Kumārī leads to the extinction of miseries and poverty, to the extirpation of one's enemies and the increment of riches, longevity and power.

विमूर्तिपूजनारावुस्त्रिवर्षय फलं भवेत् ।

धनधान्यागमश्रैव पुर्येराधिद्वद्धृद्ध: ॥ 46 ॥

The Trimūrti Pūjā yields longevity, and the

Book III Chapter XXVI

acquisition of the three things, Dharma, wealth, and desires, the coming in of riches, sons and grandsons.

विद्यार्थी विजर्यार्थी च राज्यार्थी यक्षा पार्थिवः ।

सुखार्थी पुत्रविद्यार्थी कल्याणी सर्वकामादम् ॥ 47 ॥

Those who want learning, victory, kingdom and happiness, they should worship the Kalyānī, the fructifier of all desires.

कालिकां शयुनागर्थ पुत्रेयद्धक्तिपूर्वकम् ।

पृष्यर्थपनाकामश उचिष्ठकां परिपूर्वेणे ॥ 48 ॥

पूजयेच्छोपर्षी नित्यं नृपसंभोहनाय च ।

दुःखदारिद्धिनागाय संग्रामे विजयाय च ॥ 49 ॥

Men should worship Rohinī duly for the cure of diseases. For the destruction of enemies, the worship of the Kalikā with devotion is the best. For prosperity and riches, Candikā is to be worshipped with devotion. O king! For the enchanting and overpowering of one's enemies, for the removal of miseries and poverty, and for victory in battles, Sāmbhavī worship is the best.

क्रूरशूरविनाराणि नशोप्रकर्मसाधने ।

दुर्गा च पुर्वेद्धूतचा परलोकसुखाव च ॥ 50 ॥

वांशितार्थस्य सिद्ध्वयं सुभर्तां पुर्वेस्तव।

रोष्टिणी रोनाशगाय पूर्वेत्रेड्धिवसरः ॥ 51 ॥

For the destruction of awfully terrible enemies and for happiness in the next world, the worship of Durgā is the safest and best. People worship Subhadrā when they want their desires to be fulfilled.

श्रीरित्विति च मन्नेण पूर्णवेद्धक्तितपर: ।

श्रीयुक्तमंत्रशवा जीजमन्द्रेशपयि वा ॥ 52 ॥

People should, with great devotion, worship the Kumāris (virgins) with the mantrans “Širrastu” or other mantrams, beginning with “Šri” or with the seed mantrams.

कुमारस्य च तत्वापि या मुजल्पि लीलया ।

कादीपि च देवांस्ताकुमारी पूजयामहम् ॥ 5 3 ॥

The Goddess who can create without any difficulty all the sacred tattvas of the Kumāra Kārtikeya and who effects, as if in sport, the

creation of all the Devas Brahmā and other; I am worshiping the same “Kumārī” Devi.

सत्तादिधिक्षमूलित्यों तैहै नानावस्कपिणी ।

त्रिकाल्यापिनी गर्फिक्षमूलित् पूजायाम्बून् ॥ 54 ॥

She who is appearing under the three forms as differentiated by the three gunas Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, and who is appearing in multiple forms, owing to the differentiations of the three gunas again into various minor differences, I am worshipping Her the “Trimūrtī” Devi.

कल्याणाकर्षिति नियंच भक्तानं पूजितान्निण् ।

पूजयामि च तां भकता कल्याणी सर्वकामादम् ॥ 55 ॥

She who being worshipped always fares with auspicious things, I am worshipping Her, with devotion, the Kumārī “Kalyānī”, the awarder of all desires.

गेहयंती च चीजानि प्रागज्ञमस्त्रितानि वे ।

या देयी सर्वभृतानां गौहितीं पुरावाभ्यमूँ ॥ 56 ॥

I am worshipping the “Rohinī Devi” with a heart, full of devotion who is germinating all the karmas in seed forms, that have accumulated owing to past deeds.

कालो कालयते सर्वे ब्रह्माण्डं सचाराचरम् ।

कल्पानसमये या तां कालिकां पुत्रायामघ्न ॥ 57 ॥

She who, at the end of a Kalpa gathers unto Her in the form of “Kālī” all this Universe, moving and unmoving, I worship that “Kālikā Devi” with devotion.

तां चचडपावरूर्णी चपिड़ां पूजायामघ्न ॥ 58 ॥

She, who is furious and wrathful and hence is called “Candikā” and who killed the two Demons “Canda” and “Munda” I bow down to Her humbly with devotion, to that “Candikā Devi,” who destroys the terrible sins.

अकाराणालम्यतित्यनयैः परिकीर्तिता ।

यथास्तां सुखदां देवाँ शाम्भवां पूजायाम्दम् ॥ 59 ॥

I worship that, “Sāmbhavī Devi” the giver of all pleasures and happiness, whose form is the Veda Brahma, and whose origin is without any cause, and who is so recited in the Vedas.

दुर्गतायिति भर्ते या सदा दुर्गतिनाथि ।

दुर्जेया सर्वैद्यानां तां दुर्गा पूजयामध्यम ॥ 6 0 ॥

She who saves from danger her devotees and who always delivers from various difficulties and troubles, whom all the Devas are incapable to know, I worship with devotion that “Durgā Devi” the destroyer of all calamities.

सुभ्रदायी च भक्तानां कुकते पूजिता सदा ।

अभ्यन्त्रिनीं देवीं सुभत्रों पूजायामहम् ॥ 6 1 ॥

I, with my mind devoted, offer my salutations to that “Subhadrā Devi”, Who procures all auspiciousness to Her devotees and removes all inauspicious incidents.

एभियंत्रै: पूजनीया: कन्यकाः सर्वेवा बुधैः ।

वस्ताल्वूर्णोपौरल्यैर्पीटरूचावेरपि ॥ 6 2 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयस्कन्धे

वद्धिवींशोध्याः ॥ 26 ॥ ॥

Thus, in the mantrams, above described, people should always worship the virgin girls, giving them clothings, ornaments, garlands, scents, and various other articles.

Here ends the Twenty sixth Chapter on the narration of what are to be done in the Navarātri in the Mahā Purānam in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXVII

On Worshipping the Virgins

व्यास उवाच

द्वीनारी वर्जेल्कन्यां कुश्युक्ता प्राणिकताम् ।

गत्यमूर्तितौनारी विशालकुलसभ्यवान् ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Those Kumāris, who are defective in limbs, who are lepers, who are filled with sores and ulcers over their bodies, whose bodies emit offensive smell or whose bodies are polluted, or those who are of a bad family are never to be accepted for worship in the Navarātra ceremony festival.

जात्यंधी केकारी काणां कुरूपां बहुगेभगाम् ।

संस्पर्नेगीर्णी कर्मां रत्नपुथादितांकिताम् ॥ 2 ॥

शामां गर्भस्युद्धृतां गोलकां कन्यको.द्ववाम् ।

वर्जनीयाः सदा चैताः सर्वेपुजादिकमपु ॥ 3 ॥

Those who are born blind, who are squint-eyed, who are blind of one eye, of disgraceful appearance, whose bodies are overgrown with hairs, or who are diseased, or who are in their menstruation or in any other signs, indicating thus their passionate youthful tendencies, or those who are very lean and thin, or born of widows, or of women unmarried are always to be avoided in this Pūjā.

अरोशिणी सुरूपार्णी सुन्दरी जपावर्जिताम् ।

एकवंशसमुद्धातं कन्यां सम्यक्पूजतेन् ॥ 4 ॥

O king! It is only the healthy, graceful, beautiful, without any ulcers, and who are not bastards, those virgins are to be selected for the “Kumārī” Pūjā.

ब्राह्मणी सर्वकायैषु जायधें नुपर्यशगत ।

लाभार्थे वैश्यवंशोराया मता वा शूर्यक्रगान ।। 5 ॥

In all the cases, the Kumāris, born of the Brāhmīn families, can be taken; when victory is desired, the “Kumāris” of the Kṣattriya families are preferred; when profit is wanted, the Vaiśya Kumāris and, when general welfare is wanted, the Śūdra Kumāris are to be taken.

बाहायीर्द्धाताः पुरा राज-वैक्षहायशाः।

वैश्यतिबर्जाना: पूर्ण्याशतस: पादसभ्बेः ॥ 6 ॥

कासभिश्र वंशोत्या यथायोग्यं प्रपुजयेत् ।

नवराविधायने भक्तपूर्व सदैव हि ॥ ७ ॥

O king! In the Navarāti Pūjā, the Brāhmins should select for worship the Brāhmin Kumāris; Kṣattriyas, Brāhmin or Kṣattriya; the Vaiśya worshippers can select for worship Brāhmin, Kṣattriya, or Vaiśya Kumāris. And the Śudra worshippers can select, for worship, any of the four classes. But artists and artisans should select for worship the Kumāris from their own families and tribes respectively.

Book III Chapter XXVII

अशक्तो निवतं पूजां कर्तुं चेत्रवराजके ।

अध्यायं च विशोधेण कत्वं पूजनं सदा ॥ 8 ॥

If persons become unable to worship on all the days, then it is advised that they should perform the special worship on the eighth day (Aṣṭamī tīthī).

पुरासुध्यं भघ्रकाली दक्षयज्ञविनाशिनी ।

प्रापुर्भूता महापोरा योगिनी कोर्टिधि: सह ॥ 9 ॥

अतो3ध्यां विगोषण केतंव्य पूजनं सहा ।

नानाविधोपहरैंष नस्यमाल्यानुतेपर्ने: ॥ 10 ॥

In ancient times, on the eighth day, Bhadra Kali Goddess, the destroyer of the sacrifice, started by Dakṣa, appeared on that day in hideous forms, surrounded by hundreds and lakhs of Yoginis (one of a class of sixty goddesses or female attendants on Kali). Therefore one should worship in particular on the eighth day with scents, garlands, and pastes and various offerings.

पार्वसरीविर्थेर्हिंबाहुणानां च भोजनैः ।

फलपुष्योपहर्ते तोपयेज्ञगद्विकवमा ॥ 1 1 ॥

On this day, Pāyasa (a food prepared of rice, milk and sugar), and flesh, fish are to be specially offered to the Deity. The Homa ceremonies, feasting of the Brāhmaṇas, and the worship of the Mother Goddess are done with various offerings, the fruits and flowers, and in good quantities. (11)

उपवासे ह्रणतानां नवराजते पुनः ।

उपोषणयंत्र प्रोक्ते यथोक्तफलदं पुनः ॥ 12 ॥

O king! Those who are unable to observe the fasting in this Navarātra Pūjā, will reap the same fruits, if they observe fasting for the three days only the Saptamī, the Aṣṭamī, and the Navamī tithis.

सत्यायं च तवासुस्यां नव्ययं भक्तिभावतः ।

त्रिचारकरणात्सर्व फलं भवति पुजानत् ॥ 13 ॥

On the seventh, eighth, and ninth days, in these three tithis (lunar days) if one worships with devotion, one will acquire all the merits.

पूजाधिश्रयो होमैष्छ कुमारीपुजन्सेनथा ।

स्मपूर्ण तद्वतं प्रोक्त विज्ञाणों चैव भोजनैः ॥ 14 ॥

When the Devi's worship, Homa, Kumārī

worship and the feasting of the Brāhmaṇas, all these are done, know that the Navarātri Pūjā is completed.

त्रतिनि याति चान्याति दानानि विधधानि च ।

नवरात्रवत्थास्य नैव तुल्यानि भृतले ॥ 15 ॥

O Janamejaya! No worship or vow or charitable gifts extant in this world, can be compared, as regards their meritorious effects, with this Navarātra Pūjā.

धन्यात्याद्रं नित्यं सुखसंतानवृष्टिद् ।

आयुरातेयदं चैव स्वर्गदं मोक्षदं तथा ॥ 16 ॥

On observing this Navarātram Vrata, one gets riches, crops, sons and grandsons, prosperity and happiness, longevity, health and heaven and even the final beatitude.

विद्यार्थी व धार्थार्थी वा युजार्थी वा यवेत्रः ।

तदैनं विधिवकायं हतं सीभाग्यदं शिजम् ॥ 17 ॥

Those who are desirous of learning, riches, or sons will get them all, if they perform this most auspicious Navarātra ceremony, able to confer fortunes on the devotees.

विद्यार्थी सर्वेश्वां वै प्राप्नोति हतसाधान् ।

राजश्रधो नृपो राज्यं समवाप्नोति सर्वदा ॥ 18 ॥

On the performance of this sacrifice, those who want learning get all the learning; and he, who is deprived of his kingdom will get back all his kingdom.

पूर्वेजन्यिने वैनुर्ने न कृतं ब्रतमुत्तमम् ।

ते व्याधियो दरिष्रध भवन्ति पुरवर्जिताः ॥ 19 ॥

Those who did not, in their previous births, perform this meritorious vow, they become diseased, poor and devoid of sons in their present births.

वंधा च या भवेत्राती विध्धा धनवर्जिता ।

अनुभा तर कतंत्या नेयं कृतवर्ती जनम् ॥ 20 ॥

Those women that are barren, or widows or devoid of sons, infer that they never, in their previous births, performed this sacrifice.

नवरावत्रत प्रोक्त न कृतं वेय भृतले ।

स कथं विभयं प्राप्य मोदते च तथा विद्धि ॥ 21 ॥

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

Those who have not performed the Navarātra ceremony, how can they acquire riches in this world and acquire happiness and peace in the next?

तच्चदानसामिश्र: कोमलैर्विल्वपत्रकः ।

भवानी पुजिता येन स भवेकुपति: क्षिति ॥ 22 ॥

He who has worshipped the Goddess Bhagavati Bhavānī Devi with young leaves of the Bel tree, besmeared with red sandal paste, it is he that will undoubtedly become the king in this world.

नारात्रिता येन शिजा सनातनी

दुःखातिंहा सिद्धिकृति जगद्वा ।

दुःखावृत: शत्रुघुगक्ष भृपते

नूनं दरिडो भवतीही मानवः ॥ 23 ॥

That man who has failed to worship the Goddess of the whole universe, Who fructifies all the pursuit of human life, Who destroys all the troubles, pains and miseries, Who is all auspicious Bhagavati Bhavāni, that fellow is sure to pass his days in this world, wretched, impoverished, and surrounded by his enemies on all sides.

वां विद्यूरिडी हरपदार्जी तथा

वाईः कुबेरो वक्षणो दिवाकरः ।

ध्यार्यिति सर्वार्थसामितनंदितास्तां

कि मनुच्या न भजिते चण्डिकाम् ॥ 24 ॥

When Hari, Hara, Brahmā, Indra, Fire, Varuṇa, Kubera, and the Sun when all these possessing all the wealth and powers and filled with the highest felicities, when they meditate constantly the Goddess of this universe, Who is All Existence Intelligence, and Bliss, then what to speak of the human beings! How is it that persons do not worship that Cangīdā Devi, the One that leads all human pursuits to success!

स्वाहा स्वधा नाम मनुप्रभावै-

स्वयन्ति देवा: पितरस्तर्वेल ।

यजेषु सर्वेषु मुवा हरित

यवाम युगम्बुतिपिभूर्गित्रा: ॥ 25 ॥

यस्येच्छया सुवाति विश्वामिदं प्रजेशो

नानावतारकलंन कुक्ते हरिश ।

नूनं क्रोतिं जगतः किल भस्म

गम्भूतां गर्दिं न भजते नु कर्थ मनुष्य: ॥ 26 ॥

Why should not the people worship the Goddess Bhavānī, the bestower of all happiness, whose other names are Svāhā and Svadhā, the mantrams under whose intrinsic energies the Devas and the Piṭs always get satisfied, and which are recited by all the Munis when they chant in every sacrifice the Vedic mantrams? Under Whose Will power, Brahmā the Creator, creates all this Universe? Under Whose energy, the Viṣṇu Janāradana, the Devas, incarnates in this earth in various forms and preserves this world, and under Whose power, Śaṅkara destroys this whole Universe?

नैकोंस्ति सर्वभुवनेयु तया विहितो

देवो नरोध विहारा: किलपत्रजी वा ।

गन्धर्वोक्षसपिणाङ्गनगेय नृतं

यः स्पवितुं भवति शक्तिपुतो यवेध्छम् ॥ 27 ॥

No body, in this whole universe, can have his existence without having recourse to that Prakrit Devi, the Śakti incarnate; he be a Devā, a human being or a bird, or a serpent, Gandharva, Rāksasa, without the help of this Force.

तां न सेवेत क्रधर्तीं सर्वकामार्थं तिवाम् ।

त्रतं तस्या न कः कुयांढ्राक्षधरतुष्यम् ॥ 28 ॥

Therefore, why should not any body worship that Caṇḍikā Devī, the Award of all desires and wealth? And how is it, that a man desiring one of the 4 objects of human pursuits, Dharma, wealth, desires, and the final beatitude, observes not the vow regarding that Deity.

महापातकसंयुक्तो नवराजतं चोरेत् ।

मुच्यते सर्वोपायेचो नात्र कार्यां विचाराणा ॥ 29 ॥

So much so, that even a man who has committed a heinous offence (five such are enumerated viz. (1) killing a Brāhmaṇa, (2) drinking liquor, (3) stealing gold, (4) adultery with the wife of a spiritual guide (5) associating with any such person), if he performs the Navarātī vow, he will be absolved entirely from all such sins; there is no doubt in this.

Book III Chapter XXVII

पुरा कक्षिड़ापिर्यानो धनहीनः सुचु:खितः ।

कुर्वी चापवलकशिकासोल से नुपसत्ता ॥ 30 ॥

O king! Once upon a time there lived in the country of Kosala, a trader, poor and miserable, having under him many relations and dependants in his family, whose provisions he had to provide.

अपत्यानि बहू-त्यस्याघवल्बुर्णीक्षितानि च ।

भव्यं किंक्षितु सायाहे प्रापुस्तस्य च चालकाः ॥ ३१ ॥

He had many sons and daughters; when they were very hungry and distressed, then they used to get a little food and that in the evening, only once in twenty-four hours.

भुंक्सा कार्यकर्ताओं परस्याश्व बुभूषिताः ।

कुरुंबभरणं तत्र चकारातिनाराकृलः ॥ 32 ॥

That trader, too, worked under another, the whole day; and when it was evening, he used also to take his meals. Thus, being very much anxious and distressed, he maintained some how or other his family members (that are to be maintained).

सदा धर्मतः शान्त सदाचाराश्र सत्यवाक् ।

अक्रोधनश्र धृतिमार्थिन्डास्युरकः ॥ 33 ॥

सम्यूच देवता नित्यं पितुन्यतिशीरला ।

भुंजाने पोच्यर्सेश कृतवान्योजन वधिक् ॥ 34 ॥

The trader was of a quiet temper, of a good conduct, truthful, always ready to act religiously, devoid of anger, steady and contented, void of vanity and jealousy; daily he used to worship the Devas, Pitrs, and the guests and used to take his meals after all his family members had taken their meals.

एवं गच्छित कावे है सुर्गोलो नामतो गृणो:

दारिद्वाताते जिंह जानतं पप्रच्छातिवृषुश्रितः ॥ 35 ॥

सुशील जवाच

भो भूदेव कृपां कृत्वा वदस्यादा महामते ।

कयं दारिद्वानगः स्यादिति मे निश्छेयने वै ॥ 36 ॥

Thus many days passed away when that good trader, named Suśila, being very much perplexed with poverty and hunger, asked a quiet tempered Brāhmin “O Bhūdeva! (deva incarnate on the earth)! kindly tell me positively how this state of poverty can be got rid off!”

धनैषणा मे नैवाति धनी स्यामिति मान्द।

कुरुबेधरणार्थ वै पृष्ठधामि त्वां दिजोत्तम ॥ 37 ॥

O noble minded! Kindly advise me such as preserves my honour; I do not want wealth, nor do I like to be a rich man; O Brāhmīn! I want just enough to meet with the expenses incurred in maintaining my family; please advise so that I may be able to earn this much only.

पुत्री सुत्तनु मे बालो भक्षार्थी रोतेदं भृगम् ।

तावन्मात्र गृहे नात्रं मुह्येकां ददान्यमूम् ॥ 38 ॥

I have many sons; I have not got any food, sufficient enough to give them even a handful of rice.

विसर्कितो यतो गेहात्रतो वालो रुदन्यथा ।

अतो मे दहातेस्वर्थ किं कसौमि धर्म विना ॥ 39 ॥

Alas! My youngest son was crying today for food; I have driven him out of the house by chastising him. O Brāhmī! What am I do? I have got no wealth; my heart is burning with grief and sorrow; my baby has gone out of the house, weeping and hungry.

विद्याड़ीस्त सुताया मे नासिल वित्तं करोपि किम् ।

द्रशवर्धाधिकायासु दानकालोर्धि याचलम् ॥ 40 ॥

My daughter has come to a marriageable age; I have no money. Her age has exceeded ten years; the marriageable age limit has been exceeded. Alas! What am I to do?

तेन शोचापि विघ्रस्वज्ञोस द्वायित्ये ।

तपो दानं हत किंछिद्वृहिं मन्ऋजं तथा ॥ 41 ॥

येनाहं पोथवर्गस्य कारीम द्विज घोपणम् ।

तावये स्याद्नप्राणितनर्धिक प्राध्येय किल ॥ 42 ॥

O Brāhmīn! I am expressing my sorrow for all that. You are merciful, and all knowing; tell me any means, be it asceticism, gifts, vow, or the reciting of any mantrams by which I can maintain my family; I want wealth just sufficient for that purpose and nothing more.

त्वत्प्रसादाकुर्दुबं मे सुरित्वं प्रभवेरित् ।

तत्कृष्ण महाभाग जानेन परिधित्व च ॥ 4३ ॥

O high minded one! Kindly devise and tell me

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

some means by which my family members become happy in this world.

व्यास उवाच

इति पृष्टस्वथा तेन ब्राह्मण: संगितगतः ।

उवाच परमप्रीतस्तं वैर्यं नृपसभा ॥44 ॥

पूर्जनं भयावताश्र हवर्ने भोजनं तथा ॥45 ॥

वेदयारायणं शफिकजपहोमादिकं तथा ।

कल्प्याद्य वधागर्फि तत कार्यं भविष्यति ॥ 46 ॥

Vyāsa said: The Brāhmin that used to practice vows when thus asked by the trader told him gladly: "O trader! Do now the Navarātri vow, the most auspicious, and worship the Bhagavati, perform Homa, and feast the Brāhmins. Have the Vedas and Purāṇas recited and recite then slowly the Śakti mantram and try, as much as you can, to do other concomitant ceremonies; and your desires will thus be undoubtedly fulfilled.

तृतसमादरं किंछिद्धृद नतं नारिति धारतले ।

नवराग्राभियं वैश्य पाचनं सुखदं तथा ॥ 47 ॥

There is no other vow superior to this in this world; this vow is very holy and will bring unto you happiness.

ज्ञानं मोक्षंदं चैव सुखसंतानवर्धनम् ।

श्रनुभागकं कामं नवरात्रवतं सदा ॥ 48 ।

This vow leads to wisdom and liberation; destroys enemies and increases posterity and prosperity.

राज्यधाटेन रामेण सीताविरहितेन च ।

किंक्षिप्यांतं वर्ते चेत्कृतुं दुःखातुर्णते चे ॥ 49 ॥

In former days, Śrī Rāma Candra suffered very much owing to his being deprived of his kingdom; and, then, on account of his wife being stolen away. Subsequently he performed this Navarātra vow in Kiskindhā, his heart being heavily laden with grief."

प्रत्पेनापि रामेण सीताविरहाविहिना ।

विधित्वानुक्ति देवी नवरात्रवतेन वै ॥ ५० ॥

Though troubled very much, on account of the bereavement of Sītā, still Rāma Candra observed this Vow of Navarātra and worshipped the Goddess

according to the prescribed rules and rites.

तेन प्राप्ताउथ वैदेही कृत्वा सेतुं महापहिं ।

हत्वा मन्दोदीनाथं कृम्भकर्ण महाबलम् ॥ 51 ॥

मेघनादं सुर्ज हेत्वा कृत्वा घृप्त विश्रीषणम् ।

पशुतादयोघ्यामागत्य प्राप्तं राज्यमकंटकम् ॥ 52 ॥

As a fruit of this worship he was able to bridge the great ocean and kill the giant Kumbha Karna, Meghanāda, the Rāvaṇa's son, and Rāvaṇa, the king of Laṅkā; and subsequently he was able to recover his Sītā. He installed Vibhiṣaṇa on the throne of Laṅkā (Śri Laṅkā) and at last returned to Ayodhyā and reigned there without any enemies.

नवरात्रवत्थाय प्रभावेण विश्रांवर ।

सुखं भूमितते प्राणं प्रोणमिततेजसा ॥ 53 ॥

O best of the Vaiśyas! Rāma Candra, of incomparable prowess, was able to obtain happiness in this world on account of the influence of this Navarātra ceremony.

व्यास उवाच

इति विष्वचः शुत्वा स वैश्यस्तं द्विजं गुभम् ।

कृत्वा जग्राह समन्तं मायाबीजाधिंश पूर् ॥ 54 ॥

जजाप परया भक्ल्या नवरात्मनंत्रिता ।

नानावियोष्टार्थे पुज्यामास सादम् ॥ 55 ॥

नवसंत्सं चैव मायाबीजपरायण ।

नवमे सल्सराते तु महाध्यां महेश्वी ॥ 56 ॥

अधीराते तु सड़ाते पत्थर्वं दर्शनं द्वौ ।

नानावरप्रदानैश्छ कृतकुल्च चक्रात तम् ॥ 57 ॥

इति श्रीदैवीभागगते महापुराणे तृतीयकल्पे

सत्विषोर्शधायः ॥ 27 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O king! That Vaiśya, hearing thus the Brāhmīn’s words, made him his Guru, was initiated by him in the seed mantra of Māyā and ceaselessly, without any laziness, recited slowly the mantram for nine nights and worshipped the Devi, with great caution and with various offerings. Thus for nine consecutive years he devoted himself to the Japam (reciting slowly) of the seed mantra of Māyā till, at last, when the ninth year was completed, the Great Goddess appeared distinctly before his eyes on the night of the great Aṣṭamī

Book III Chapter XXVIII

tithi (the eighth day of the bright half) and gave him various boons and delivered the Vaiśya from poverty and bestowed on him wealth and his other desired things.

Here ends the Twenty seventh Chapter on the virgins fit to be worshipped and the Glory of the Devi in the Mahā Puranām Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa in the Third Book.

Book III Chapter XXVIII

CHAPTER XXVIII

On Incidents Connected with Navarătri

जननेजय उवाच

कयं राणेम तच्वीर्णं ब्रतं देल्या सुखप्रदम् ।

राथ पष्टः कथं सोउप कथं सीता हत् पुनः ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: O Muni! How did Rāmcandra celebrate the Devi's Pūjā, that leads to happiness? Who was He! And how was stolen away His Sita? How was He deprived of His kingdom? Please satisfy me by narrating all these incidents to me.

व्यास उवाच

राजा दूराशः श्रीमानवोध्याधियपितः पुरा ।

सुर्येवैशप्राशीदेवबाहाणपुजकः 11 2 11

Vyāsa said: O king! There lived, in days of yore, in the city of Āyodhyā, a prosperous king of the solar dynasty named Daśaratha, He always worshiped the Devas and Brāhmaṇas.

घनवारो जजिस तस्य पुत्रा लोकेषु विश्रुतः ।

तामलक्ष्मणातृब्ना भरतक्षिति नामतः ॥ 3 ॥

राजः प्रियकरा सर्वे सद्गा गुणकल्पतः ।

कोसल्यावा: सुत्तो राम कैकेव्या भरतः स्मृतः ॥ 4 ॥

सुप्रियन्तन्यो जातो यमली ह्री मनोहरी ।

ते जाता वे किंशोगेश्व धनुष्विणधरा: किल ॥ 5 ॥

He had four celebrated sons Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa, Bharata and Śatrughna. These four sons were equally learned and beautiful and they always did actions agreeable to the king. Of these, Rāmacandra was the son of the Queen Kauśalyā, Bharata was the son of Kaikeyi, and the good looking Lakṣmana and Śatrughna were the twin sons of Sumitrā. While young, they learned the art of archery and began to play with bows and arrows in their hands.

सुनवः कृतसंस्करा घपतेः सुखवधँकाः ।

कोशिकेन तदारअराव प्रार्थितो रघुनन्दनः ॥ ६ ॥

राघवं मखाखर्षा सूनुं पोडणवार्षिकम् ।

तस्मै सेठोयं ददी रायं कौशिकाय सलक्ष्मणम् ॥ ७ ॥

Thus educated and purified, the four sons began to give delight more and more to the king; one day the Maharṣi Vísvāmitra came to Ayodhyā and asked from the king Dāśaratha the help of his son Rāmacandra for the protection of his sacrificial ceremonies. The king could not cancel the Vísvāmitra's request and sent with him Rāma, accompanied by Lakṣmana.

तो समेलय पुनि मार्गे जममतुशाकदर्जनौ ।

ताटका निह्ता मार्गे राक्षसी घोरदर्जना ॥ ८ ॥

रामोपैकेन बाणेन मुनिनां दुःखदा सदा ।

यज्ञक्षा कृता तत्र सुबाहुनिंतः शठः ॥ ९ ॥

मारीचोउध मृतमायो निखिलो बाणवेगतः ।

एवं कृतवा महत्कर्मे यज्ञस्य परिश्रभणम् ॥ १ ० ॥

गताते मिथिलां सर्वे गरानक्षणकौशिकाः ।

अहल्या मोचिता शापाधिष्यापा से कृताउङताना । १ १ ॥

The lovely Rāma and Lakṣāmana accompanied the Muni on his way back. There lived a terrible looking Rāksaṣī, named Tāḍakā, in a forest on their way, who used to give great troubles to the ascetics; and Rāma killed her with only one arrow. Next he killed Subāhu and shot arrows at another night-wanderer Mārīca and made him senseless, almost dead and threw him at a great distance and thus saved Viśvāmitra from all the obstacles troubling him in his sacrificial ceremonies. Thus fulfilling the great work, protecting the sacrificial ceremonies,

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa and the Muni Kauśika, the three, started for the kingdom of Mithilā. On his way, Rāma Candra rescued Ahalyā from the curse that she was suffering from.

विदेशनरो तो तु जमतुर्भिना सह ।

वर्भज शिवचार्च च जनकेन परणीकृतम् ॥ 12 ॥

उपयेम ततः सीतां जानकी च चागंगजाम्।

तक्षमाणा ददौ राजा युप्रीमकां तथापिंलम् ॥ 13 ॥

At last the two brothers, accompanied by the Muni, reached the city Videhanagar. Just at this time the king Janaka of Ayodhyā made a vow to give in marriage Sītā to anybody who will be able to break the bow of Śiva; Rāma broke that bow into two and married Sītā, born of Lakṣmī's parts. The king Janaka gave in marriage to Lakṣmana his own daughter Urmilā.

कृणतेजसुते कन्य प्रापतृषतिरावुधी ।

तथा भरतागुञ्ची सुगीली सृष्नतक्षणी ॥ १४ ॥

The good and auspicious Bharata and Satrughna married respectively Māṇḍavi and Śrutakirti, the two daughter of Kuśadhvaja.

एवं दारिकासतेंधां घाणुणां चाभवघृषु ।

चतुर्णा मिथिलायां तु वयाविधि धियानतः ॥ 15 ॥

O king! Thus, in the great city of Mithilā, the four brothers performed their marriage ceremonies, according to the prescribed rules and rites.

राज्यमोर्थ सुतं दूद्वा राजा द्वाराश्रस्तां ।

रायवाय युंर दुतुं मनश्रके निजाय वे ॥ १६ ॥

The king Daśaratha, then seeing Rāma well qualified to take charge of the kingdom, proposed to instal him on the throne of Ayodhyā.

सभात्र वित्तिं दूद्वा केकेनी पूर्वक्रतिपती ।

चरी सम्यार्थयामास भर्तारं ब्यरातिंनम् ॥ 17 ॥

The queen Kaikeyi, seeing that various articles were being collected for the installation of Rāma, asked for the two boons, promised before, from her husband Daśaratha, who was completely under her control.

राज्यं सुताये चैकेन भरताय महात्मने ।

रायाय वनवासं च चतुर्दंस समास्तथा ॥ 18 ॥

The first request was her own son Bharata's becoming the king of Ayodhyā; and the second request was the banishing of Rāma to the forest for fourteen years.

रामसुं बचनातस्याः सीतालक्षमणसंयुतः ।

जगाम दण्डकारण्यं राक्सैरभवेशितम् ॥ 19 ॥

Thus Rāmacandra went accompanied by Sītā and Lakṣmana to the Dandakā forest, frequented by the Rāksasas.

राज दारण्यः पुरविरहेश प्रपीडितः ।

जही प्राणानंमेयाता पूर्वेशापमनुस्मरन्त् ॥ 20 ॥

The high souled king Dásaratha felt very much due to bereavement of his son, remembered the curse given to him by Andhaka Muni and left his mortal coil.

भरतः पितरं दूर्वा मृतं मातुकृतेन वै ।

राज्यमूदं न ज्याह भातुः प्रियचिचर्शीया ॥ २१ ॥

Bharata, seeing that his father died solely on account of his mother, refrained from becoming the king of Ayodhyā, the prosperous city and wanted the welfare of his brother Rāma.

पशुवट्यां वसन रामो रावणावरजां बने ।

गुर्णायां विकरां वे चकारातिस्मतानुगम ॥ 22 ॥

Rāmacandra went to the forest Pañcavaṭī. One day the youngest sister of Rāvaṇa, named Sūrpanakhā became very passionate and came to Rāma; whereon Rāmacandra disfigured her by cutting off her nose and ears.

खारदास्यस्तं तंद्ववा छिड़नासां निशाचराः ।

चक्रः संग्राममतुलं रायेणामिततेजसा ॥ 23 ॥

Seeing her nose thus cut away, the Rāksasas Khara, Dūṣana, and others fought very hard against the powerful Rāmacandra.

स जवान खार्त्रिंश दैत्यानतिवलात्वितान् ।

मुनीनां हितमान्च्छन्न तमः सत्यपात्मः ॥ 24 ॥

The truly powerful Rāma, killed Khara, Dūṣana and all other powerful Rāksaṣas, for the welfare of the Munis.

गत्वा शूर्पणेखा लढ़ी खादूषणधातनम् ।

दृषिता कथयामास रावणाय च रायवात् ॥ 25 ॥

Book III Chapter XXVIII

Then Šūrpanakkāh went to Laṅkā and informed Rāvana of her nose having been cut and of the death of Khara, Dūṣana and others.

सोये शुवा विजारों तं जातः क्रोयशः खलः ।

जगाम रथमाहु मारीचस्यामं तदा ॥ 26 ॥

The wicked and malignant Rāvana, hearing of their death, became filled with anger and, mounting on a chariot, quickly went to the forest of Mārica.

कृत्वा हेममृगं नेतुं प्रेषयामास राजणः ।

सीताप्रलोभनायाय मायात्यिनमसंभवम् ॥ 27 ॥

Rāvaṇa expressed his desire to take away Sitā; so ordered that magician Mārica to assume the form of a golden deer and go to Rāma and entice away.

सोउद हेममुगो भूत्वा सीतातृष्टिधधं गतः ।

मायायी चातिचित्रांश्रग्रवलमतिनके ॥ 28 ॥

The magician Mārica assumed the form of a golden deer and reached the sight of Jānakī. Then that variously spotted deer began to move about near the Sitā Devi.

तं दृष्ट्या जानकी प्राह्र तायर्वे दैवनोदिता ।

यान्नियस्य कान्तेति स्वाधीनपतिक्या यथा ॥ 29 ॥

Looking at the beautiful golden splendour of the body of that golden deer, Sitā Devi, prompted as it were by the great Fate, spoke to Rāmacandra like other independent women “O Lord! Bring me the skin of the deer.”

अर्विवार्याचे राजापीर तत्र संस्थाया लक्ष्मणम् ।

सर्गं धनुरादाय ययौ मृगपदानुगः ॥ ३० ॥

Rāma too, not judging at all, as if it was the work of Destiny, asked Laksamana to remain there and protect Sitā, took hold of his bows and arrows and went after the deer.

सारड़़ीपि हरिं दृष्टवा मायाकोटिविगारदः ।

दूर्यादृष्यो बभूवाथ जगाम च वनंतारम् ॥ 31 ॥

Infinitely skilled in magic, the deer seeing Hari in the shape of Rāma sometimes came and sometimes came not his sight and travelled from one forest to another.

मत्वा हस्तगत राम कोधाकृष्टधनु पुनः ।

जयान चातितीक्षणेन शेरण कृविर्मे मृगम् ॥ 32 ॥

When Rāma saw that He had come very far away from His place, He became angry and drew his bow and shot sharp arrows at that deer, the transformed Mārica.

स हृतोर्भितिवाताने च्छोज भुगुर्भ:वित्तः ।

हा लक्ष्मण हृतोर्भसीति मावाठी नधरः खतः ॥ 33 ॥

The deceitful conjuror Rāksasa, being thus shot very violently and pained intensely, cried out “O brother Lakṣmana! I am killed” and breathed his last.

स शब्दस्तुमुलस्तावज्ञानक्या संश्रुतस्त्वा ।

राघवस्येति सा मत्वा दीना देवमवबीत् ॥ 34 ॥

गच्छ लक्ष्मण तूर्णं त्वं हतोउसी सृष्ठनन्दनः ।

त्वामाह्यति सीमिते साहाय्यं कुरु सत्यम् ॥ 35 ॥

This loud awful cry reached Jānaki's ears. She took that voice for Rāma's voice and told to Lakṣmaṇa in a grieved tone "Lakṣmaṇa, go quickly. I fear Rāma is killed; hear the voice "O Lakṣmaṇa! come quickly and deliver me" is calling you to go there".

तत्राह लक्ष्मण: सीतामंव रामवधादपि ।

नाहं गछ्छउढ़ मुक्ल्वा तामसहायामिहासे ॥ ३६ ॥

Lakṣmaṇa then replied “Mother! You are alone in this forest; therefore I cannot leave you thus, even if Rāmacandra be killed”.

आज्ञा मे राजयस्यात्र सिष्ठिति जनकात्मजे ।

तदतिकमर्षीतोड़े ने त्वजामि त्वांतिकम। १ ३ ७ ॥

“O daughter of Janaka! Rāma has ordered me to remain here. Now if I leave you and go elsewhere, then I will be charged with having disobeyed his order. Fearing that, I am unable to leave this place.

दूरं है रायबं दूरबा वने मायाविना किल ।

त्यक्ता त्वां नाधिणछामी पद्मेकं शुच्चित्मे ॥ ३ ८ ॥

"It seems to me, moreover, that some magician has carried Rāma away from here; I am therefore unable to move a step from here and leave you alone."

कुरु धैर्य न मन्येडा रामं हेतुं क्षमं श्रिष्टो ।

नाहं त्वकता गमिष्यामि विलंच्य रामभाषितम्। ३१ ॥

"Hold patience; let me consider; I find no such man as can kill Rāma; I am unable to leave you by any means alone here had and to go away, disobeying Rāma's orders."

व्यास उवाच

रुदती सुदती गह् तं तत्व विधिनोदिता ।

अक्रा वचनं क्रूरं लक्ष्मणं शुभलक्षणम् ॥ 40 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Then the young wife of Rāma, having handsome teeth, began to cry aloud, fearfully, as if made to do so by Destiny, and uttered the cruel words to the pure Laksamāna.

अहं जानामि सीम्रिः सानुगरां च मां प्रति ।

प्रेरितं भरतेनेव मद्यमिह संगतम् ॥ 41 ॥

“O son of Sumitra \( ^{1} \) . I know why you are so much attached towards me? I know very well that you have been sent here by Bharata to accompany us simply to obtain me.

नाहं तथायिता नारी स्थैरीणी कुहकायम् ।

मृते रामे पति त्वां न कृतीपिछ्यापि कामतः ॥ 42 ॥

O vile Ksattriya, skilled in magic! I am not that sort of woman acting to my wanton will; never I will accept you of my will as my husband in case Śri Rāmacandra be dead.

नागायिष्यिति चेघ्रामो जीवितं संलवाम्यहम् ।

वित्ता तेन न जीवामि विधानु तु:वित्ता शुभम् ॥ 43 ॥

In case Śrī Rāma does not return, I will certainly commit suicide; without him I would by very much grieved and afflicted with sorrows; and I would not be able to hold on my life.

गच्छ चाति सीमिति न जानोई तवैल्पितम् ।

वव गत तेउष सीहाईं ज्येषे धर्मते किन ।। ४४ ॥

“O Saumitri! Whether you remain here or do not remain, I won’t request anything more to you; for I am quite unaware of your mind; but this much I like to say to you, where has your intimacy towards your religious elder brother now gone?”

तच्छुता वचनं तत्या लक्ष्मणो दीयानातः ।

प्रोवाच नक्दूकपठनु तां तावे जानकतमाज् ॥ 4 5 ॥

किमायाश्र सिंत्तिते वाक्यं मयि क्रूतरां किल ।

किं वदस्यविनिर्ः ते भावि जाने धिया हुहम् ॥ 4 6 ॥

Hearing thus the Sītā Devi's words, Lakṣmaṇa became exceedingly sorry; and, being suffocated with heaving sighs on account of the internal pain told Sītā "O! One born from without any womb! Why are you uttering so cruel and malignant words; I clearly see when you are speaking such unworthy words, that some great evil is sure to befall on you very soon."

इतुकुलता निर्वेयी वीरतां त्वल्वा प्रकटन्युगम् ।

अग्रजस्य ययौ एपयळ्छोकातृः पृथिवीपते ॥ 47 ॥

O king! Thus saying, the spirited Lakṣmana left Sītā and went out weeping very much, and, being very much afflicted with grief, traced the footsteps of his elder and went on in search of him.

गते३थ लक्ष्मणे तत रावण: कयदाकृति: ।

विश्वल्ये ततः कृत्वा प्रावेक्षत तत्वामे ॥ 48 ॥ ॥

When Lakṣmaṇa thus departed, Rāvaṇa entered into the hermitage in the guise of a deceitful beggar (Bhikṣu wearing a red garb).

जानकी तं चर्ति मत्वा दत्तार्थं वन्यामदारत् ।

वैश्यं समर्यामास राजाणाय दुरातने ॥ ४ ४ ॥

Jānaki took that villain Rāvaṇa to be a Yogī and respectfully gave him offerings of worship and forest fruits.

तां पप्रच्छ स दुहात्या नम्पूर्वं मुदुस्यम् ।

काउसि पघपलगाथि वने चैकाकिभि ग्रिये ॥ 50 ॥

पिता कल्पेल यामोक भ्राता कः कः पतितल ।

मृदे वेकाकिडीचा ग्रास स्थिताउसि वरवर्गिभी ॥ 51 ॥

निर्जेने विविजे किं त्व सीमाहुं त्वमसि चिंरे ।

उठने मुनिपनिलैवंकन्यासमप्रभा ॥ 52 ॥

That villain asked Sītā humbly, in a gentle tone, "O beautiful! Your eyes are beautiful like Palāśa! Lotus leaves; therefore it seems that you are not an ordinary woman; how is it that you are here alone in a wild forest? O fair one! Who is your father? Who is your brother and who is your husband? Being such a beautiful one, how is it that you are in this forest here like an ordinary woman, dumfounded? O good looking one! You are worthy to live in a palace filled with nectar; why are you

Book III Chapter XXVIII

living, in this hovel, in this wild forest like an ordinary Muni's wife, when your beauty is shining in lustrous beams like a Deva girl?"

व्यास उवाच

इति तद्वचनं श्रुवा प्रत्युवाच विदेहजा ।

दिव्यं दिद्वा यति जाला मंदोद्वर्ग: पत्ति तदा ॥ 53 ॥

राजा द्वारशः श्रीमांशुवात्सल्य वे सुता ।

तेवां जयेः पतिर्मेंस्तर गयमानेति विश्रुतः ॥ 54 ॥

विवासितो5य केकेया कृते भुपपतिन वर ।

चतुद्विंग समा रामो वसतेउत्र सलक्षमणः ॥ 55 ॥

Vyāsa said: The daughter of Jānaki, hearing the words of Rāvaṇa, the husband of Mandodari, unfortunately took him to be a good Yogi and replied in the following way: “Perhaps you have heard that a prosperous king Daśaratha is reigning in Ayodhyā city. He has four sons; the eldest of these, Śrī Rāma Candra, is my husband. The king offered two boons to Kaikeyī; due to which Rāmacandra has been exiled in this forest and is with his brother Lakṣmana.

जनकस्य सुता चाहं सीतानाम्पिति विश्वुता ।

पंस्वता शैरं धनुः कामा रामोणहं विहाहिता ॥ 56 ॥

"I am the daughter of the King Janaka; my name is Sitā; Rāma Candra has broken the bow of Śiva and has married me."

तामबाहुखलेनाव सवामो निर्भया वने ।

काऊंनं मृगामालोक्य हन्तु मे निर्फातः पति: ॥ 57 ॥

Resting under his prowess of arms, I am resting here fearlessly in this wild forest; seeing a golden deer, he has gone out to kill that for me.

तक्षमणो पि पुनः शुत्वा रवं घातुर्गतोरुधाना ।

तयोबाहुबलादत्र निर्भयोत्रं वसामि मे ।५ ५८ ॥।

Laksmaṇa, too, hearing his voice has gone just now: O Yogi! I am living here depending on the strength of these two brothers."

मयेदं कथितं सर्वे सूत्ताने वन्यासके ।

तेउगाग्याहूर्णां ते वे कार्यस्थिति यथाविधि ॥ 59 ॥

Thus I have told you all about our living in this forest; shortly they will come and worship you duly.

यतित्वैण्यवरूपोसि तस्माचं पूजितो मया ।

आश्रमो विविचे घोरे कृतोसि रक्षामं कुले ॥ 60 ॥

तस्माचां परिपृष्णामि सर्वं बृहि ममघतः ।

कोंसि विद्यिडल्लेण विविचे तंखे समाततः ॥ 61 ॥

"The man who has controlled his passions and has become a Yati is like Viṣṇu incarnate; therefore I have worshipped you. O Yogi! Our Śārama is in the midst of this terrible forest, surrounded by Rāksaṣas. Therefore I am asking you how is it that you have been able to come here in this dress of Tridānḍi (a Sainnyāsi Yogi); please speak in the name of Truth before me."

रावण उवाच

लेकेशोड़ं मरालाक्रि श्रीमान्यदोरपिति: ।

त्वलृते तु कृतं रूपं मयेल्थं शोभनाकृते ॥ 62 ॥

Rāvaṇa said: “O askance looking one! I am the king of Lanka, the husband of Mandodari. O beautiful one! it is for you that I have put on this dress of Yati.

आगतोड़ं वराग्रेः भगिन्या भ्रेतितोउर चे ।

जनस्थाने हृते श्रुत्वा भातरी खरुपणी ॥ 63 ॥

“O beautiful! My two brothers Khara and Dūṣṇaṇa have been killed in this forest; and being urged by my sister I have come here.

अजौकुक नृप मां तं त्यस्तत तं मानुपं पतिन् ।

हताराज्य तगक्षीकि निर्वर्ते वनवासियम् ॥ 64 ॥

पटुतापी भव तं मे मन्दीदुपरि सुकुटम् ।

द्वासोउम तत लनकिं स्यामीय भव भामिने ॥ 65 ॥

"Now leave your this man-husband, residing in the forest as a pauper, devoid of fortune and wealth; and worship me as a husband. O fair one I am Rāvaṇa, the king of kings; you now become my lord."

जेतातई लोकपालानां पतानि तव पादयोः ।

करं गृहाण मेउद्ध त्वं सनायं कुक्र जानकि ॥ 66 ॥

“O daughter of Janaka! I am the lord of the Regents of the quarters; and yet I bow my head down to your lotus feet; better accept me and fulfil my desires today.

विता ते याचितः पूर्वे मया चै स्वकृतिजले ।

जनको मामुवारेत्यं मतपार्वंधी मया कृतः १ 6 7 १ ॥

रुद्रवापभ्याराईं संग्रापत्सु खवंवरे ।

मनो मे सचित्यं तार्वक्रमनं विश्रातुगून् ॥ 6 8 ॥

Formerly I asked of you from father, the king Janaka; but he then said, that he had laid a pledge, "Whoever will break the Śiva's bow will marry my daughter." The Bhagvān Rudra is my Guru; hence I feared to break his bow, and therefore I was not present in your Swayamvara. But from that time my mind is always thinking of you and is in a state of bereavement for you."

वनेत्र सचित्वा श्रुत्वा पूर्वानुरागफौहितः ।

आगतोउम्यवित्तावार्थि सफलं कुरु मे अम्प। ॥ 69 ॥

श्री श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयकक्ये अशाविशो५व्या:

O beautiful one! Hearing now that you are residing in this forest, I, impelled by my previous fascination for you, have now come hither; and you better now crown labour with success."

Thus ends the Twenty Eighth Chapter on the incidents connected with the Nava Rātri and the description of Rāmayānam in Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam of .18000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa in the Third Book.

Note: The story about the origin of Sitā Devī runs thus: Rāvaṇa, the king of Ceylon (Lankā) practised very severe austerities and got extraordinary powers. He brought the three worlds under his subjection, levied taxes from all. The Devas and all the other inhabitants of the several worlds paid their taxes, as imposed by Rāvaṇa. Rāvaṇa sent messengers to the Rūsī and the Munis, the ascetics, dwelling in forests and asked then to pay their taxes. The Rūsī replied that they had no property. But Rāvaṇa insisted. The Rūsī gave, them, blood, cutting their thighs, in a jar that was carried to Lankā. Rāvaṇa kept that jar under the custody of his

queen Mandodarī, and instructed her that the jar contained poison and that she should not eat that. Mandodarī, however, ate a portion of that, out of curiosity, and became pregnant and gave birth to a daughter. Fearing Rāvaṇa, she floated the jar with the daughter, in the ocean, which, floating through oceans and rivers, came and touched the lands of the King Janaka. The peasants while tilling, found that and took the girl to the king, who reared her as his daughter. Thus Sītā, born out of the blood of the Brāhmaṇas, took away subsequently the kingdom, life, and all of Rāvaṇa.

Another version is this: As before, the messenger advised the Munis to give something; otherwise Rāvaṇa would insist and put them to various troubles. So the Munis cut their thighs and gave blood as their tax, saying that that blood in the jar would cause ruin and desolation to the country where it will be kept. Rāvaṇa, hearing this, ordered the jar to be carried to the kingdom of the king Janaka, thus causing ruin to him. The jar was brought and placed in the fields of Janaka.

Now it happened that there was a very severe drought; rains were absolutely wanting; and a dire famine was imminent. The Brāhmīn Pundits informed the king that if the king and his wife ploughed themselves the fields, rains would fall. So the king with his wife did that, the king holding the plough and the queen holding the hand of the king. The foreend of the plough accidentally hit upon that jar, out of which came out Sītā Devī with two women Rddhi and Siddhi, waving chowries on her two sides. The two ladies disappeared and Sītā Devī looked like a girl. The king Janaka reared her, as if his daughter. Sītā Devī use to lift daily with her left hand the bow of Śiva, kept in the king's house, and daily worshipped that, and thus cleansed the place: Seeing this, the king Janaka pledged the vow that, whoever would break the Śiva's bow, would marry Sītā.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXIX

On the Stealing of Sitā

व्यास उवाच

तदाक्षर्यं वचो दुर्घं जानकी भयविद्धुला ।

वेयमाना स्थितं कृत्वा मनो वाचमुवाच ह १ १ १ १

पौलस्य विमसूताक्यं त्वमात्य स्यमापोहितः ।

नाहं वै स्थैरिणी किन्तु जनकस्य कुलोजूद्वा ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing these vicious words, Jānakī

Book III Chapter XXIX

became very much confounded with began to tremble; somehow collecting herself she began to say: "O descendant of the family of Pulastya! Why are you, prompted by lust, uttering these sinful words? I am born of the family of Janaka; therefore I cannot act wantonly according to my own inclination.

भाछ्छ लढ़ी द्वारास्ता त्वं राम त्वं वे द्विध्यति ।

मत्कृते मरणं तत्र भविष्यित न संग्रयः ॥ ३ ॥

O ten faced one! Better you go to Lanka quickly; else Rāmacandra will take away your life; you will no doubt incur death for my sake."

इत्युक्चना पश्णालायां गता सा बहिंग्रिधी ।

गच्छ गच्छिति वद्ती राजणं लोकारावणम् ॥ 4 ॥

सोउध कृष्णा निजी रूपं जगामोटजामान्तकम् ।

बलाजजग्राह तां बालां रूदतां भयविह्वालम् ॥ 5 ॥

Thus saying, Sitā Devi went towards the Sacred fire called Gārhapyata, placed in the house, with words “go away” “go away” in her mouth. He, whose wickedness has caused all the Lokas cry out “save” “save”, the same Rāvaṇa, of perverted intellect, then assumed his real form went towards the hut and caught hold of Sitā Devi who was crying, bewildered with fear.

तयारमिति क्रंदती लक्ष्मणेति मुडुपुंडुः ।

गृहीता निरनं: पापो रथमारोप्य सत्यरः ॥ 6 ॥

Sitā cried “Rāma” “Rāma” “Laksmaṇa”, and the sinful Rāvaṇa caught hold of her and quickly mounting her on the chariot, fast got away.

गच्छकरभुपगुज मार्ग कढ़ो जटायुषा ।

संग्रामो5भूमहागैद्रस्तयोस्तत्र वनान्तरे ॥ 7 ॥

हूला तं तां गृहीत्वा च गतोजसी राश्रमाधिपः ।

लंकायां कंदर्ती तात कुरीर्व सुरात्मनः ॥ 8 ॥

अंगोकवनिकायां सा स्थापिता राश्रसीयुता ।

स्वत्नात्रेव चलिता समावतादिधि: किल ॥ 9 ॥

On the way Jatāyu, the son of Aruna met Rāvana; and a terrible fight then ensued between the two, when the evil minded Rāvana, king of Demons, killed Jatāyu. Rāvana carried Sitā to Lankā. Then Sitā cried like a forlorn deer and

Rāvaṇa kept her in the Aśoka forest, (Jaffnā) surrounded and guarded by the Rāksasis. The king of Lankā tempted Sitā with comforting words, and the kingdoms etc., but she never swerved from her own pure and stainless chastity.

रामोर्पि तं मृगं हृता जगामादाय निर्वृत: ।

आयातं लक्ष्मण बीक्ष कि कृतं तैनउजासमम् ॥ 10 ॥

एकाकिर्मी प्रियां हित्वा किमर्थं त्वमिहाताः ।

श्रुला स्वनं तु गामस्य राघवस्त्वबीदिदम् ॥ 11 ॥

सौमित्रित्वबद्वीद्वाक्यं सीतावारावणपीर्ततः ।

प्रभोजगहं समायातः कालयोगात्र संवराः ॥ 12 ॥

On the other side, Rāmacandra after killing the deer and taking it was coming back calmly, when he saw Lakṣmaṇa going to him and said “O Lakṣmaṇa! What a great blunder you have committed! Hearing the voice of that villain conjurer, how is it that you have left my dear Sita alone and come here! Lakṣmaṇa said: “O Lord! Being pierced sharply by Sita Devi’s words (coming like sharpened arrows) and being driven away by her, under the guidance of the Inevitable Destiny as it were, I have come her; there is no doubt in this.”

तदा ती परिणालायां गला विश्वासितु: प्रिक्तो ।

जानक्य-देषणे यत्नपुभी कर्तुं समुदाती ॥ 13 ॥

They, then, both hurriedly went to their hut, made of leaves; and there not finding Sitā, they were very much afflicted with sorrows and went in quest of Jānakī.

मार्गमाणी तु सम्पानी यत्रासी पतितः खगः ।

जटायुः प्राणशेषसु पतितः पृथिवीतेले ॥ 14 ॥

Rāma and Laksmaṇa in their search for Sītā, came at last to the spot where Jatāyu, the king of birds, was lying on the surface of the earth, with his life ultimately on the point of parting away from his body.

तेनेोकं रावणेनाथ हृताउसौ जनकामजा ।

मया निर्भूदः पाणातया पातितोड़ं मृधे पुनः ॥ 15 ॥

इत्युक्स्ताउसी गतग्राण: संस्कृतो रावयेच वै ।

कृत्यौध्वंदैहिकं पागलक्ष्मणौ निर्फर्ती ततः ॥ 16 ॥

Śrimaddevithāgavatam

Jatāyu said: Rāvaṇa, the king of Laṅkā, carried away today stealthily Sītā Devī; I resisted that villain who then fought with me on that account and threw me down on this spot by weapons. Thus saying, the king of birds died; whereupon Rāmacandra performed the burning of his dead body as well his funeral ceremonies. Then both of them went out of that place.

ककंधो धारायित्वारसी शगाणच्चामोचयद्रभुः ।

वचनातस्य हरीण सख्यं चक्रे३४ रायबः ॥ 17 ॥

Then the Lord Rāmacandra killed Kabandha and freed him from his curse; and, through his advice, he made friendship with Sugriva, the king of the monkeys, and was thus bound under a tie.

हत्वा च वालिन्दं वीरं किंक्किपाराज्युपनाम् ।

सुरीवाय ददी राम: कृतसखाय कार्वत: ॥ १ ८ ॥

Next Rāma killed the hero Bali as a duty and gave the excellent kingdom of Kīskindhyā to his new friend Sugrīva according to his promise.

तत्रैव वार्षिकान्मासांतस्थी लक्षणमंसुतः ।

चिंतयज्ञानकी चित्ते इशाननहतं चियाम ।। १ १ ॥

Then, he began to ceaselessly think of the stealing away of Sītā by Rāvana and passed away the four months of the rainy season there with his brother Lakṣmaṇa.

तक्ष्मणं प्रष्ट्र रामसृ सीताविरह्योषितः ।

रीमिये कैक्षयसुता जाता पूर्णमोनार्थ ॥ 20 ॥

Rāma, being very much shaken on account of the bereavement of Sītā, began to address Lakṣmana thus: “O Saumitre! The desires of the daughter of the king of Kekaya are now fulfilled.”

न प्राप्ता जानकी नूने नाई जीवामि तां विज्ञा ।

नागाधिष्याययोधायामुते जनकनन्दिनीम् ॥ २१ ॥

Jānakī will no more be obtained; without Jānaki I will not go back to Ayodhyā; without Jānaki I won't be able to live any longer."

गतं राज्यं बने वासो मृततातो हता प्रिया ।

पौद्रभ्यां स द्रुवाता द्वैवोउे किं करिष्यति ॥ 22 ॥

Kingdom lost, dwelling in forests happened, father left his body, at last the dear wife is lost; the

cruel hands of Destiny are tormenting me now thus; what more it will inflict, how can I say now?"

दुर्जेंयं घबित्वयं हिं प्राणिनां घरतानुज ।

आवयोः का गतितस्ता भविष्यति सुबुःखदा ॥ 23 ॥

O Brother Lakṣmana! What is to happen is very hard to be known beforehand by men; I cannot say what is written on my fate after this, painful or otherwise.

प्रायः जन्म मनोर्वेरी राजपुत्रावृषी कित।

चनेत्रितुःखणीकर्ता जातौ पूर्वकृतेन च ॥ 24 ॥

See! Both of us, the descendants of Manu, though born in a royal family, are exiled in forests due to our past deeds.

त्यक्ता त्वमपि योगांस्तु मया सह विवर्गितः ।

दैवयोगार्च सीधिये पुध्व दुःखं दुर्वत्यम् ॥ 25 ॥

O Lakshmana! It is Fate, too, that you, abandoning the pleasures of the royal surroundings, have come out with me; and you, too, are now suffering heaps of dire troubles with me.

न कोय्यस्तुले पूर्व मसमो दुःखभाड़नः ।

अर्किचनोक्ष्म लित्तो न पृतो न पविष्यति ॥ 26 ॥

No one in our family suffered so much as we are suffering; why we talk of our family! No human being was ever born or will ever take his birth that suffered or will like me so many troubles, will be like me incapacitated and a penniless pauper.

कि कंसोम्ब शीमिये मनोरंमि दुःखसागरे ।

न चास्ति तरणोपायो हासहायस्य मे किल ॥ 27 ॥

O Saumite! I am drowned in the ocean of pain and troubles; What am I to do now? I have no means to cross this ocean; I am quite helpless, no doubt.

न वित्त न वर्त वीर त्यमेकः सहचारकः ।

कोपं कसिन्करोगध्य भोगेसिन्यकृतोउनुज ॥ 28 ॥

No money, nor armies, O hero! you are my one and only one companion; O brother! On whom shall I be angry when I am suffering on account of my own deeds?

गतं हस्तगतं राज्यं क्षणादिद्रासनोयम् ।

वने वासस्तु संप्राप्तः को वेद विध्विनिर्मितम् ॥ 29 ॥

Book III Chapter XXIX

Alas! The kingdom that could have been compared in prosperity to the Indra Sabha, was almost obtained by me when, in an instant, I lost it and am now in exile in forest. Laksmaṇa! Who can ascertain what is in the womb of Destiny?

बालभावाच्छ्व वैदेही चलिता चावयोः सह ।

नीता दैवेन दुढेन रणमा दुःखतर्गो दणा ॥ 30 ॥

Oh! That soft bodied Sitā, with her child like nature came out with is in this forest; but the inexorable Fate has now drowned her, that perfectly beautiful woman, into an ocean of sorrows, difficult to be crossed?

लंकेशस्य गृहे रणमा कर्थ दुःखं पशिव्यति ।

पतितान सुर्गीता च मयि प्रीतितुगा भृणम् ॥ ३ १ ॥

That fair daughter of Janaka is extremely devoted to me; she is pure and holy. How will she be able to suffer troubles in the house of the king of Lanka!

न च लक्ष्मण वैदेही सा तस्य वर्गगा भवेत् ।

स्वीरिणीव रात्रोहा कर्थ स्याजनकात्मजा ॥ 32 ॥

O Laksmana! Sitā Devi will never come under the control of Rāvana; how can that excellent chaste woman act like an ordinary public woman?

त्वजेन्वागाधिर्यन्ते वैधिती भरतानुज ।

न रावणस्य वरणा भयंदिति सुनिश्छान् ॥ 33 ॥

O Laksmana! Rest assured that in case Rāvana exercises, out of his lordly position, any violence on Sitā, she will rather put an end to her life than come under his control.

भृता चेजजनकी वीर प्राणांल्यक्षायामसंशयम् ।

भृता चेदिसतावगी कि मे देहेत लक्ष्मण ॥ 34 ॥

O Laksāma! And when Jānaki sacrifices her life, I will assuredly do the same; for, of what use, then is this body to me when that fair Sitā has gone away with her life?"

एवं विलप्यानं तं रामः कमललोचनम् ।

लक्ष्मण: ग्रष्ट धर्मात्मा सांत्यवन्त्रया गिरा ।। 35 ॥

While the lotus-eyed Rāmacandra was thus weeping and expressing his regrets and arrows, the religious Lakṣmaṇa consoled him with the following sweet, truthful, words:

धियं कुर्भ महावाही त्यक्त्या काततातिमहं ।

आनविष्यामि वैदेही हत्या तं राक्षसाधामम् ॥ 36 ॥

O Hero of heroes! Kindly cast aside this weakness and have patience; I will soon kill that villain demon Rāvana and get you back your Sītā Devi"

आपदि सम्पदि तुल्या धीर्वाद्वान्ति ते धीरा ।

अत्यधियन्तु निम्नानः कहे भवन्ति विषवेधि ॥ 37 ॥

The wise steady persons remain on account of their fortitude, unshaken in their hearts whether in joy or in sorrow; whereas men, of little intellect, indulge in sorrows when they are happy.

संयोगो विग्रयोगश्र दैवाधीनावृषावि ।

गोकस्तु कीर्णास्त्र देशेनान्यिन च कवित्न् ॥ 38 ॥

Coming in union and going out in disunion, both are under the hands of Destiny; What, then, there is the need for expressing sorrows for this body, which is not soul.

राज्याद्धा वने वसामो वेदेहा हरणं यथा ।

तथा काले समीचीने संयोगोर्पि भविष्यति ॥ 39 ॥

As we have been banished from our kingdom into this forest, as there has happened this bereavement of Sītā, so, in proper time we will again get back Sītā Devi.

प्राप्तव्यं सुखदुःखानां भोगार्वित्रं नव्यित् ।

नान्यथा जानकीजाने तस्माछेकं रक्षाज्ञानु ॥ 40 ॥

O Darling of Jānakī! There must come a time when sorrows will be converted into happiness and vice; there will be nothing otherwise. So avoid this sorrow now and have firmness.

वानगः सन्ति मुचांगो गाथिच्छिति चतुर्विण ।

शूढ़ि जनकानन्दिन्य आनयिविन्त ते किल ॥ 41 ॥

There are multitudes of monkeys, who are our helping hand; they will go to all the four quarters and bring back to us the news of the daughter of Janaka; there is no doubt in this.

ज्ञाला मार्गस्थिति तत्र गत्वा कृत्वा पराक्रमम् ।

हत्वा तं पापकर्मिणानयिधायिमे भिविलीम् ॥ 42 ॥

O Lord! Knowing the way to Lankā, we will go there and kill by our prowess the villainous Rāvaṇa and bring back Sitā Devi.

सनैम्यं भर्तं वारूपि समायुव सहानुजम् ।

हन्थिमायो वयं श्रई किं शोचरिस सुधाग्रज ॥ 4 3 ॥

Or we will call Bharata with Sátrughna and will all the armies we all united will kill our enemy; why, then, are you thus expressing sorrows in vain.

त्युगीकरचेनेव जिता: सर्वा दिशः पुरा ।

तद्वीजनः कर्थ शोकै कर्तमूर्तिस रायच ॥ 44 ॥

O Lord! our ancestor Raghu, the hero of heroes, the monarch won his victories over the ten quarters; and you belong to that family and are now plunged in grief!

एकोईं सक्लताझ्रेतुं समवर्गस्मि सुरासुरान् ।

किं पुनः ससहायो वै रावणं कुलपांतनम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

Alone, I can defeat all the Devas and the Demons; and if I get help, is there any doubt, then, in my killing that Rāvaṇa, the disgrace of the family of Rāksasas.

जनक वा समानीय साहाय्ये सुनन्दन ।

हनिष्यामि दुराचारं राजर्षं सुरुकपटकम् ॥ 4 6 ॥

O Powerful One! We may call to our aid the king of Janaka and root out that wicked source of enemy to the Devas.

सुख्यसानन्तं यस्य सुखुखःखस्मूद्वे ।

स शोकसागरे मनो न सुखी स्यात्कदाचन ॥ 4 7 ॥

मनोउतिताकारं यस्य सुखुखःख स्मूद्वे ।

स शोकसागरे मनो न सुखी स्यात्कदाचन ॥ 4 8 ॥

“O Descendant of Raghu! Like the rim of a wheel, happiness and pain come alternately; it is not that happiness, or pain comes and remains for ever. He whose mind is very much overwhelmed with pain or happiness, is the man who is always plunged in an ocean of misery; and he can never expect to become happy.”

इन्ट्रेण व्यसनं प्राप्त पुरा वै स्युनन्दन ।

नहुषः स्थायिति देखे: सर्वैर्मयन्तः पदे ॥ 49 ॥

See! In days of yore, Indra once got addicted into vicious habits; The Devas united put in place of Indra, the king Nahuṣa.

स्थितः पडूजमध्ये च बहुवर्षगणानपि ।

अज्ञातावां मघवा भीतस्यत्वता निजं पदम् ॥ 50 ॥

Then Indra, terrified, relinquished his post and passed very many years into an unknown and noticed state within lotus.

पुनः प्राप्त निजस्यानं काले विषरित्रिते ।

नहुष: परितो भूमौ शापाद्वजाराकृति: ॥ 51 ॥

Again, when time changed, he got his own post back; and the king Nahuṣa fell down on this earth and became transformed into a boa constrictor, (a big serpent) through the curse of a Rṣi.

इन्द्राणीं कामयानस्तु बाह्याणनवमन्य च ।

अगस्तिकोपासंजात: सपद्रेहो महीपति: ॥ 52 ॥

The king Nahuṣa wanted the wife of Indra and insulted a Brāhmin; therefore, he was under the curse of Maharṣi Agasti, transformed into a snake on the earth.

तस्माधोको न कर्तवो व्यसने सति राघव ।

उद्यो चित्तमास्थाय स्थात्यं वे चित्थैक्षता ॥ 53 ॥

Therefore, O Rāghava! One ought not to plunge in grief, when a danger comes; rather one should be quite energetic in times of danger and remain firm; thus, the sages do.

सर्वत्रोसि महाभाग समर्पोसि जगायते ।

कि प्राकृत इतावर्थ कुनेर शोकामतानि ॥ 54 ॥

O Lord of the world! You are high minded, omniscient and omnipotent; why are you now overwhelmed with grief, like an ordinary mortal.

व्यास उवाच

इति लक्ष्मणावक्येन बोधितो रघुनन्दन: ।

त्यक्त्वा शोकं त्वारभवं घषूव विगतअर: ॥ 55 ॥

इति शीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयकन्ये

एकोनिरिशोअवाग: 11 29 ॥

Vyāsa said: Oh king! Thus consoled by Lakṣmana, Rāma discarded all his heavy sorrows and began to remain with his heart firm and at rest.

Thus ends the Twenty ninth Chapter on the stealing of Sītā and the sorrows of Rāma in the

Third Book of Śrimaddevirbhāgavatam

of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi

Veda Vyāsa.

Book III Chapter XXX

CHAPTER XXX

On Ramā's Performing the Navarātra Ceremony

व्यास उवाच

एवं ती संविदं कृत्वा यावतृष्णीं बभूवतुः ।

आजागम तदाकाशाजारदो भगवानुर्पिः ॥ १ ॥

रणायमहर्तीं वीणां स्वर्यामाविश्वभितम् ।

गायन्युहर्यं समा तदा तमुपतत्स्थवान् ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Rāma and Lakṣmana, discussing thus, remained silent; when the Rsi Nārada appeared there from the sky above, singing the Rathāntara Sāma Veda hymns in tune and musical gamut with his renowned lute.

दूरवा तं तग उत्थाय ददावध घूरं शुभम् ।

आसनं चार्थे पार्ं च कुरावानिमतशुक्ति: ॥ ३ ॥

पूजां परमिकां कृत्वा कृतांजलिसत्यक्षितः ।

उपविष्टः समीपे तु कृताजो मुनिना हरि: ॥ ४ ॥

Rāmacandra, of indomitable prowess, on beholding him rose up from his seat and gave him quickly an excellent seat and offerings of water for washing his feet. Then he worshipped the Muni and stood with folded hands. When the Muni ordered him, he took his seat close by Nārada.

उपविष्ट तदा रामं सानुजं दुःखामानसम् ।

पग्रच्छ नावरः प्रीत्या कुशल सुमितसम्: ॥ 5 ॥

कर्णं पाचर शोकातों यथा वे प्राकृतो नरः ।

हन्तों सीतां च जानापि रावणेन दुरात्मना ॥ 6 ॥

सुरस्मागतश्रईं शुतावाज्ञनाकामजम् ।

पौलस्त्येन हृतां मोहात्मरणं स्वमाजनात ॥ 7 ॥

तव जन च काकुत्थ्य पौलस्त्यनिधानय वे ।

सैवित्हीर्ण जातनेतदर्थे नातिपि ॥ 8 ॥

On Rāmacandra taking his seat there with Lakṣmaṇa with a grievous heart, Nārada asked him in sweet tone “O Descendant of Raghu! Why are you being afflicted with sorrows like an ordinary mortal? I know that the evil minded Rāvaṇa has stolen Sitā Devi. I heard while in the heavens that Rāvaṇa, the descendant of Pulastya, stole away Jānakī, out of fascination, could not know that

would be the cause of his death. O Descendant in the family of Kakuttsha! It is for the killing of Rāvaṇa that your birth has taken place; and for that purpose Jānakī has been stolen now.

Note: The real Jānakī was not stolen; Her shadow form was stolen.

पूर्वेज्यनि वैदेही मुपिनुपी तपोर्वनी ।

रावणेन वने दृष्टा तपस्यंनी शुचिसिता ॥ 9 ॥

प्रार्थिता रावणेनासी भव भार्येति रावय च ।

तिरस्कृततसादासी से जगह क्रवं कलात् ॥ 10 ॥

शरणाप तत्बणं राम रावणं तापसी भृणग ।

कुपिता तचकफिछ्ठती देई संस्पर्गद्धिपत्न ॥ 11 ॥

दुरात्मसेन तगरणां भविष्यामि धरातले ।

अयोनिजा वरा नारी त्यक्वा देई हाजविप ॥ 12 ॥

O Rāghava! The Devi Jānaki, in her previous birth, was the daughter of a Muni and practised asceticism. While engaged in her austerites, in her holy hermitage, Rāvana came and looking at her, prayed that beautiful woman to become his wife. Hearing this, she gave a good reproach to Rāvana, when he perforce caught hold of her hair. That ascetic woman got very angry, and, considering her body polluted by the devil's contact, resolved to put an end to her life and cursed Rāvana, thus: "O Vil!ain! I will be born on the surface of the earth, not from any womb but simply for your destruction and ruin." Thus saying, she parted with her life."

सेवं रायोसरम्भूता गृहीता तेन रक्षसा ।

विनागशर्ष कुलस्येव ब्यानी सचिरा संभ्रमात् ॥ 13 ॥

O Tormentor of the foes! Rāvana, the king of the Rāksasas, mistook a garland for the extremely poisonous serpent and has stolen away Sitā Devi, the part incarnation of Lakṣmī, in order to root out his race.

तव जन च काकुत्थ तस्य नागश चामरै: ।

प्राधित्यस्य हरेरंगादजवैगोप्रधजनम्: ॥ 14 ॥

“O Kākutstha! When the Devas prayed for the destruction of that wicked insolent Rāvaṇa, difficult to be subdued, you are born on this earth, in the family of Aja, as a part incarnate of Hari, beyond birth, old age and death.”

कुरु धैर्य महावाही तत्र सा वर्तेतेउरबना ।

सर्ती धर्मतत सीता त्वां धायांतीं दिवाबीऋमा ॥ १ ५ ॥

"O mighty-armed! Have patience; Sitā Devī is meditating you, day and night.

कामधेनुपय: पाते कृत्वा मघवता स्वयम् ।

पानाथे प्रेषित तस्या पीते चेवापृतं यथा ॥ १६ ॥

सुरभीदुयपानतास हुनुदुःखियवर्षिता ।

जाता कमलपत्राकी वर्ते वीक्षिता मया ॥ १७ ॥

Indra himself, the king of the Devas, sends the nectar and the Heavenly Cow's Milk in a pot to Her daily; and She subsists on that alone."

O Lord! On drinking the Heavenly Cow's Milk, the lotus eyed Sitā Devī is living without any hunger or thirst! I use to see Her daily."

उपारं कवयाम्यदा तस्य नाशाय रायव ।

ततं कुरुव बढ़ावानाश्चिने मासि साम्यान् ॥ 18 ॥

O Descendant of Raghu! I am telling how that Rāvaṇa can be killed. Perform, in this very month of Śśvina, the vow the devotion.

नवरायोपवासं च भगवत्या प्रपुजनम् ।

सर्वसिद्धिकरं राम जपह्मायिप्रानत ॥ 19 ॥

Fasting for nine nights, the worship of the Bhagavati, and repeating the Mantram silently and performing the Homa ceremony, observing all the rules, will certainly fulfill one's all the desires.

मेध्रैध प्रपुषिर्देव्या बलिं दत्ता विशर्षितः ।

द्राणां हवनं कृता सशक्तस्यं भविष्यति ॥ 20 ॥

O the best in the race of Raghu! You should offer the sacrifice before the Goddess of sacred and unblameable animal, perform Japam and Homa ceremony equivalent to one-tenth of Japam. If you do all this, you will certainly be able to release Sītā. विष्णानो 3वतितं पूर्व महादेवेन ब्रह्मा ।

तथा मघवता चीर्णं स्वर्णमध्यस्वितेन वै ॥ २। ॥

In days of yore, Viṣṇu, Śiva and Brahmā and

the Devas in the Heavens all performed this worship of the Goddess.

सुविज्ञान राम कतैल्यं नवराजत्रतं शुभम् ।

विशेषेण च कतैल्यं भूमा कहणतेन वै ॥ 22 ॥

Therefore, O Rāghava! Every person desiring happiness, specially those that have fallen under great difficulties, ought to do this auspicious ceremony, without the least hesitation.

विश्यामिचेण काकुल्य कृततेतर संशयः ।

भ्यूगान्ध वसित्रेन कश्यपेन तवैव च ॥ 23 ॥

गुरुणा इतदारेण कृतमेतन्महातम् ।

तस्मार्त कृक राजेन्द्र राजायस्य वधाय च ॥ 24 ॥

O Kakuttsha! Viśvāmitra, Bhrgu, Vasistha and Kaśyapa all of them did this worship before. When some stole away the wife of Bhraspati, the Guru of the Devas, he, too, by the force of this worship, got his wife back. Therefore O king! dost thou also celebrate the Pūjā for the destruction of Rāvana."

इन्हेण बूँवनाशाय कृतं बतमनुतनम् ।

विपुरस्य विनाशाय शिवेनापि पुरा कृतम् ॥ 25 ॥

हरिणा मधुनाशाय कृतं मेरी महामते ।

विधिवल्कुक काकुलस्थ बतमेतदतंदितः ॥ 26 ॥

O high minded one! This vow was practised before by Indra for the destruction of Vītra, by Śiva for killing the demon Tripura, by Nārāyana for the killing of the demons Madhu and Kaitabha; so you should also firmly resolve to perform duly this vow with your whole heart.

श्रीम रावच

का देवी किंग्रपावा सा कुतो जाता किमकाकुति: ।

ततं किं विधित्वंद्वृहि मवर्त्रांस दयानघे ॥ 27 ॥

Rāma replied: “O Ocean of Knowledge! Who is that Devi? What is Her influence; whence has She sprung? What is Her Name? And how is that vow to be duly observed? Kindly describe all these to me in detail.”

नाद्य उवाच

श्रणु राम सदा नित्य शक्तिराखा सनातनी ।

सर्वकामप्रदा देवी पूजिता दुःखनाशिनी ॥ 28 ॥

Book III Chapter XXX

Nārada answered: “Listen, O Rāghava! That Goddess is Eternal and Ever Constant Primordial Force. If you worship Her, all your difficulties will be removed and all your desires will be fulfilled.”

कारणं सर्वेजन्तुं ब्रहादीनों रघुहृदं ।

तस्याः शर्कि विना को3पि संदितुं न क्षमो भवेत् ॥ 29 ॥

She is the source of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and others and of all these living beings. Without Her force, no body would be able even to move their limbs."

विषणो: पालनशीक: सा कर्णुशिक: पितृमानं।

रूद्यर नाशशीक: सा त्व-्यशर्षिक: परा शिका ॥ 30 ॥

That Supreme Auspicious Goddess is the preserving energy of Viṣṇu, is the creative power of Brahmā, and is the destroying force of Śiva.”

यच्च किंचित्वलविप्रद्रुं सर्वसद्धुवनयरे ।

तस्य सर्वस्य या शन्निकर्तमुत्वपितः कृते भवेत् ॥ ३ १ ॥

Whatever there exists in this infinite Universe, whether Temporal or Eternal, She is the Underlying Force of all; how, then, can She have an origin.

न ब्रह्मा न यदा विद्यान्हं कड़ो न दिवाक्कः ।

न चेन्यद्वादुसुरा: सर्वे न धाना न धारधानः ॥ 32 ॥

तदा सा प्रकृति: पूर्णा पुरुषेय परेय है ।

संयुता विहृत्येव युगादौ निरुग्णा शिका ॥ 33 ॥

Her origin is not Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa, Sun, Indra, or the other Devas, not this Earth nor this Upholder of the Earth; She is devoid of any qualities, the Giver of Salvation of all, the Full Prakrti. In the time of the final dissolution of this Universe, She lives with the Supreme Puruṣa."

मा भृत्वा सगुण पशुताक्लोति भुवनजयम् ।

पूर्वं संयुच्य ब्रदादी-दन्त्वा शनतीश्व सर्वेशः ॥ 34 ॥

She is also Saguna, full of qualities, and is the Creatrix of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa and has empowered them, in every way, to create the three Lokas.

तां ज्ञाता मुच्यते जन्तुर्जन्संसारव्यन्तान् ।

सा विहा परमा ज्ञेया वेद्धाता वेदकारिणी ॥ 35 ॥

She is the Supreme Knowledge, existing before the Vedas, and the Originator of the Vedas. The individual souls, knowing Her Nature, become able to free themselves from the bondages of the world.

असंख्यातिन नामानि तस्या ब्रहादिधिः: किल ।

गुणकर्मविधान्स्तु कल्स्यातिन च किं कुवे ॥ 36 ॥

She is known by endless names. The Brahmā and the other Devas might choose to call Her according to their actions and qualities. I am unable to describe those names.

अक्रारादिकारान्तै: स्वरैर्वर्णित्य योजितैः ।

असंख्योयानि नामानि भवन्ति सुन्तन्दन ॥ 37 ॥

O descendant in the race of Raghu! Her names are formed by the various cominations of the various vowels and consonants from the letter “A” to the letter “Kṣa”.

राम उवाच

विधि मे वृहि विषर्षे जतस्यास्य समासतः ।

कोरोमध्येत्र अब्द्वाराऊलीद्व्याः: पूजनं तथा ॥ 38 ॥

Rāma said: “O best of the Munis! Describe briefly all the rules and regulations as to how that vow and worship are to be performed. With my heart, full of devotion and faith, I will worship the Goddess to day.”

नात्व उवाच

पीठं कृता सेय स्थाने संस्थाया जगद्धिकाम् ।

उपवासज्ञवैल त्वं कुक राम विधानतः ॥ 39 ॥

Nārada said: “O Rāghava! On a level plot of ground, prepare an altar. Place the Goddess there and fast for nine days.

आचार्योई भविष्यामि कर्णपत्यिममाहीपते ।

देवकार्यविधानार्थमुताई प्रक्रोमेघम् ॥ 40 ॥

“O king! I will be your priest and I will, great energy, carry out this yajña to fulfil the work of the Gods.”

व्यास उवाच

तखूला वचनं सर्वे मत्वा रायः प्रापावान् ।

कारियला शुर्ण पीठे स्थायपित्वांकि शिक्षाम ॥ 41 ॥

विधिप्रवतुर्जन तस्याक्कार प्रतवान् हरि ।

संग्रापते चाधिने मासि तस्मिनारिवरे नदा ॥ 42 ॥

Vyāsa said: Then the powerful Bhagavān Hari, hearing all from the Muni, believed them to be true; and, on the approach of the month of Āśvina,

Śrimaddevitbhāgavatam

prepared the alter on the top of a hill and placed the Auspicious Goddess, one World Mother and, observing all the rules, performed the vow and worshipped the Goddess.

उपवासपरो रामः कुरावान्नतुभमम् ।

होमं च विधित्वतन बलिदानं च पूजनम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

भात्ते चक्रतुः प्रेणा बतं नारदस्मितम् ।

अध्यमां भधरात्रे तु देवी भगवती हिं सा ॥ 4 4 ॥

सिंहाकृका ददी तत्र उर्दीनं प्रतिपूजिता ।

निर्गिश्रू त्रिवलोबाच रावयं सानुजं निरा ॥ 4 5 ॥

मेघगम्भीरया चेदं भक्तिभावेन तोचिता ।

देवयुवाच

रामा राम महाबाही तुहा5स्पथढ़ा तेने ॥ 4 6 ॥

When, on the grand night of the Eighth lunar day, the two brothers completed the vow as told by Nārada, the Supreme Bhagavati was pleased with the worship and appeared before them, mounted on a lion, and remaining there on the mountain top, addressed Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, in a sweet grave tone, like the rumbling of a rain cloud, thus: “Rama, I am satisfied with your worship; ask from me what you desire.”

प्रावंधरव वर्ग कामं चते मनसि वर्तते ।

नारायणांशसंभृतस्त्वं चिंशे मानवेजनचे ॥ 47 ॥

Rāma! You are sent by the gods for the destruction of Rāvaṇa and are born as a part incarnate of Nārāyaṇa, in the pure and stainless family of Manu.”

रावणस्य वधावैय प्राणितस्त्वमरैसि ।

पुगा मन्यस्तुं कृत्वा हत्वा धोरं च राश्रमम् ॥ 48 ॥

It is You that, in ancient times, incarnated as a fish for serving the purpose of the Devas and preserved the Vedas by killing the terrible Rāksasas for the welfare of the Universe.

त्वया वै रक्षिता वेदः सुरणां हितिमछ्ठता ।

भृत्वा कच्छपक्षपतु धृतावामन्दरं गिरिग् । ४ १९ ॥

It is You that incarnated as a tortoise and held aloft the Mandara mountain, churned the ocean and nourished the Devas.

अकूपारं प्रमान्थानं कृत्वा देवानपोषयः ।

कोलरूषं परं कृत्वा दर्शनाधोगे मेदिनीम् ॥ 50 ॥

धतवानसि यद्राम हित्याश्रं जयान च ।

नारसिंहीं नतुं कृत्वा हित्यक्रकीर्ण पुगा ॥ 51 ॥

O Rāma! It is You that incarnated, in days of yore, as a boar and held aloft on your teeth this earth. It is You that assumed the form of a Man-Lion and preserved Prahlāda, by tearing asunder the body of Hiranya Kaśipu, by your sharp nails.

प्रहादं राम रक्षिता हतवानसि रावव ।

वामनं वपुरास्थाय पुरा छलितवान्बलिम् ॥ 52 ॥

O Descent of Raghu! It is You that assumed, in ancient times, the form of a dwarf and served the purpose of the Devas, by deceitfully cheating Bali, the younger of Indra."

भूवैन्द्रसानुज: कामं देवकायीप्रसाधक: ।

जमदार्मिनुस्तयं चे विण्योरोगेन संगतः ॥ 53 ॥

O son of Kauśalyā! You incarnated as the son of Jamadagni in the Brāhimin family, extirpated the line of Kṣaṭtriya kings and gave over this whole earth to Bhagavān Kaśyapa Rsi.

कृत्वांतं क्षत्रियाणां तु दानं घमेरदाद्विजे ।

तद्विदानी तु काकुष्य जातो उर्शयात्मज ॥ 54 ॥

So You are now born as the son of Daśaratha, in stainless race of Kakuttha, at the request of the Devas, harassed by Rāvana.

प्राधितिन्तु सुरैः सर्वे रावणेनातिपीडितैः ।

कपयस्ते सहाया वै देवांगा बलवतगतः ॥ 55 ॥

भविष्यन्ति नल्याप्र मच्छक्तिसंगुता हामी ।

गेशांगो3पनुजनसेउंचं रावणात्मजनागकः ॥ 56 ॥

These powerful monkeys, born as Deva incarnates, all endowed with great power by Me, will help you. Your younger brother Lakṣmana is the incarnate of Śeṣa serpent; this indomitable man will kill undoubtedly Indrajit, the son of Rāvana.

भविष्यति स नस्देहः कर्णवीउत्र त्वचाउनय ॥

यसने सेवनं कार्य त्वया त्रातिशघट्वाद्या ॥ 57 ॥

You will kill Ravana; then you would worship Me, with great devotion, in the vernal season and then enjoy your kingdom according to your liking.

Book III Chapter XXX

हलाड़ा राजर्गे पार्शं कृक राज्य बधासुखम् ।

एकादश सहस्राथि वर्षिण पूथिवितोले ॥ 5 8 ॥

कृत्वा राज्यं सुश्रैई नात्रसि निविदं पुनः ।

O best of the Raghus! For full eleven thousand years you will reign on this earth; and after that re-enter your heavenly abode."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्यांतदैपे देवी रास्तु प्रीतमानसः ॥ ५९ ॥

स्माया तद्वतं चक्र प्रयाणं ट्रामीदिते ।

विवयापूर्जनं कृत्वा दत्ता दानान्यनेकशः ॥ 60 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Thus saying, the Devi disappeared. Rāma Candra became very glad and, completing that most auspicious ceremony, performed the Vijaya Pūjā on the tenth day and gave lots of presents to Nārada and made him go towards the ocean.

कपियतिवलयुक्त : सानुज: श्रीपतिङ्ग

प्रकटपरमगलक्या प्रेरितः पूर्णकामः ।

उदयित्यतानोउसौ सेतुबन्धे विधायाय-

हनदमरात्रुं रावणं गौतिकांति: ॥ 6 1 ॥

O king! Thus stimulated by the Supreme Energy, the Highest Goddess brought front to fornt, Rāmacandra, the husband of Kamalā, went to the

shores of the orcean, accompanied by Lakṣmana and the monkeys. Then he erected the bridge across the ocean and killed Rāvaṇa, the enemy of the gods. His unparalleled fame spread every where throughout the three Lokas.

यः शुणोति नरो भक्त्या देद्याश्रितामुतमम् ।

स भुक्वता विपुलाभ्योगान्यानोति परमं पदम् ॥ 62 ॥

He who hears with devotion his excellent account of the Devi, will get the greatest happiness in this world, and, in the end, will get the final beatitude. There is no doubt in this.

संत्यानयि पुराणानि विस्तारीण बहूनि च ।

श्रीमद्रागततस्यान न तुर्यानीति मे पति: ॥ 63 ॥

डॉत श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणोडारासाहराक्वां सहितायां

तृतीयकन्चे प्रिंगोस्थायः ।। ३० ॥।

O king! There are extant many other Purāṇas, but none is equal to this Śrimadevibhāgavatam. Know, this is my firm belief.

Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter on the narration of the Navarātra ceremony by Nārada and the performance of that by Rāma Candra in the Third Book in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa. Here ends the Third Book.

***