CHAPTER I

On the Questions put by Janamejaya Regarding Krṣṇa's Incarnation

जनमेज उवाच

वासवेय मुनिश्रेष्ठ सर्वज्ञानिधो5नय ।

प्रशुभिष्ठामर्थे स्वागिरसमाकं कुर्वतर्पनि ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: O Vāsaveya! the Chief amongst the Munis, the Ocean of all knowledge, O the Sinless One! the Lord and Well Wisher of our families, I come to you with a mind to ask you certain questions.

Note: Vāsavi is the name of the mother of Vyāsa.

गुरुसेनसुतः श्रीमानसुदेशः प्रतापयान् ।

श्रुतं मया हरिरयेय पुत्रभावमवाप्तवान् ॥ 2 ॥

देवानामपि पुर्वोर भुप्रान्मा चानककुंद्धिः ।

कारागारे कंधे बब्दः कंस्यस्य धर्मतन्तः ॥ 3 ॥

I heard of yore, but I do not know why was that illustrious son of Sūrasena, that powerful Anakadundubhi, (1) the pious and illustrious Vasudeva, the father of Śrī Krṣna, the incarnation of the God Hari Himself, and who was worshipped even by the Gods, thrown into prison by Karīnsa?

Note: Anakadundubhi is the epithet of Vasudeva, father of Śrī Krṣna, since at Vasudeva's birth, drums called Ānakas and Dundubhis were resounded in the sky.

देवक्या भार्येया सार्थ किमागः कृतावनसौ ।

देवक्या बालप्रदकस्य विनाशछा कृतः पुनः ॥ 4 ॥

तेन कैसेन कस्माढ़े ययातिकुलजेन च ।

कारागरे कर्ज जन्य बासुदेवस्य वै हरेः ॥ 5 ॥

What faults had he and his wife Devaki

committed? Why that Karīsa, the descendant of Yayāti, killed the six infant sons of Devakī? And for what reason did the God Śrī Hari incarnate Himself as the son of Vasudeva in the prison house of Karīsa?

गोकुले च कर्वं नीते भगवान्सत्वां चितः ।

गतो जन्मान्तरं कस्मात्सित्ते निगडे स्थिति ॥ 6 ॥

How was that Lord of the Universe, Śrī Bhagavān, and the Ruler of the Yādava clan, taken to Gokula? Why was He, born of a Kṣattriya family, generally recognised as of the Gopāla (cowherd) clan?

देवक्रीमदुर्वेदो च कृष्णस्यामिततेजसः ।

कर्थ न मोचिती वृद्धौ पितर्ते हरिणासुना ॥ ७ ॥

जगत्कर्तु समर्थेन स्थितेन जनकोदरे ।

प्रात्कनं किं तयोः कर्म दुविंत्रयं महात्माथि: ॥ ८ ॥

Why were His father Vasudeva and mother Devaki thrown into prison? And why did not Śri Krṣna, of indomitable prowess, and capable to create and preserve the worlds, could release instantly, father and mother from their imprisoned state?

जन्म वै वासुदेवस्य यत्रासीतयामतः ।

के ते पुराङ्ठा का बाला या कंसेन विधोधिता ॥ 9 ॥

शिलायानिर्माता योनि जाना ताख्छुजा पुनः ।

गाह्रस्थ्च च हरैशूँहि बहुभायांस्य चान्च ॥ 10 ॥

I cannot conceive that the so-called Fate could have any influence on such high souled persons, the father and mother of the Supreme Being, Śrī Krṣṇa; who were those sons of Vasudeva that were

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

killed by Karīsa? And who was that girl child who when struck by Karīsa on a slab of stone, instantly rose up above the sky, assuming the form of Aṣtabhujā, the eight armed Goddess? O Sinless One! Kindly explain unto me how did Śrī Hari manage to perform the house-holder's duties, when he had married the several wives? and what were those glorious deeds that he did in His this incarnation and how did he finally pass away from his mortal physical coil?

क्रार्याणि त्रन तान्येव देहल्याणं च तस्य वे ।

क्रिवन्दना क्षुतं चतम्बनो मोहस्थतीव मे ॥ ११ ॥

My mind sinks into an ocean of confusion, when I hear of the several things done by Śrī Hari; some times I find the deeds, not capable of beings done by any other than the Supreme Being Himself and sometimes I hear of deeds that can be done by an ordinary man. And, therefore, I cannot decide whether Vāsudeva was the Incarnation of God or an ordinary being. Be pleased to remove these doubts from my mind and describe the life of Vāsudeva in its true light.

वर्तिते वासुदेवस्य त्वामख्याहि यवातयम् ।

ननारायणी देवौ पुराणावृषिस्तमी ॥ १२ ॥

In days of yore, the two sons of Dharma were the two best amongst the Rşis, and were the Devas Nara and Nārāyāna.

धर्मपुत्री महात्मानी तपशेत्रतुस्तमम् ।

यी भूनी बहुवर्षाणि पुणये बदरिकाओंम ॥ १३ ॥

निर्वाही त्रित्तामती नि:सूष्टी जितपद्धुणी ।

विष्णोगौरी जानस्येने तपश्रेतुक्तमम् ॥ १४ ॥

They were very high souled persons and they performed severe austerities for long extending years. They were born as part incarnations of Visnu; and, for the good of the world, did they, in the Badarikśrama, perform penances, controlling their six passions, and free from desires.

त्योरंगशताती हि विज्युक्णी महावलि ।

प्रसिद्धो मुनिभि: प्रोत्नी सर्वेत्रेनैरादिषि: ॥ १ ५ ॥

The all-knowing sages Nārada and others say

that the well known Arjuna and Śrī Krṣṇa of indomitable prowess were the two part incarnations of those ancient Munis Nara and Nārāyaṇa.

विद्यामगरीतौ तो कर्थ दैहान्तरं गतौ ।

ननारावाणदी देह्वी पुनः कृष्णाजुनी कवम् ॥ १ ६ ॥

How came those two Devas Nara and Nārāyaṇa to be born in the two bodies of Krṣna and Arjuna, though they did not relinquish their previous bodies!

यो चक्रतुलपश्ठोयं मुक्लवर्धं मुनिसतमो ।

ती कंयं प्राप्तुदैही प्राप्तवोगो महातपो ॥ 17 ॥

And also when those two Munis had attained liberation, their goal in their Yogas, by performing severe penances, how could they again be born in other bodies!

शूर: स्वधर्मान्थितु देहान्ते क्षवियस्तु स: ।

गुणाचातो मृतो वो वे स गुहे प्राहणी भवेत् ॥ 18 ॥

ब्राह्मणो निः:सृष्टः शान्तो भवेरोगाड्मुपचले ।

विपरीतिमंद भाति नरनारायणे च ते ॥ 19 ॥

If any Śūdra dies performing his own religion, he takes up a Vaiśya body in his next incarnation; if any Vaiśya die so, he takes up a Kṣattriya body and a Kṣattriya when adhering to his own rites and ceremonies, dying takes up a Brāhmaṇa body in his next incarnation. And if a Brāhma in be free desires and resorts to the path of peace, when he dies, he becomes free from incarnations and is saved from this disease of getting into the world.

तपसा शोक्तितानी शिक्षी ती कंचयुत: ।

केन ती कर्मण शान्ती जाती शगेघन वा पुनः ॥ 20 ॥

बाहाणी शक्तियों जाती कारणं तन्मुने वद ।

याद्वानां विनाशँध ब्रह्माणाविति श्रुतः ॥ 21 ॥

Now the reverse seems to take place in the case of Nara nad Nārāyaṇa. In spite of withering up their bodies by hard penances, they took up Kṣattriya bodies. Under what influence of Karma, did they take up birth when they were Yogis? Or might they, the Brāhmins, become Kṣattriyas owing to some curse? Whatever it may be, kindly remove my doubts, explaining to me their causes.

Book IV Chapter I

कृष्यामयि हि गाध्यार्थी: शापेनैव कुलक्षयः ।

प्रधुनहर्ण चैव शंबेरण कर्थ कृतम् ॥ 22 ॥

It is heard that the Yādava clan suffered destruction through the curse of a Brāhmaṇa and in spite of Śrī Kṛṣṇa being the incarnation of the Supreme Being, his family died of the effect of curse from Gāndhārī.

वर्तमाने वासुदेवे देवदेवे जनाईने ।

पुरस्य सूतिकगोहादूरणं चातितुर्धेन् ॥ 2 23 ॥

How was it that Pradyumna was stolen away by Sambara, the lord of the Asuras; and for what purpose when Vāsudeva, the Deva of the Devas was present, how was it that his son was stolen away from the lying-in room? This seems impossible.

द्वाराकादुर्भायश्रै हरिवेशमाहूरत्ययात् ।

न ज्ञातं वायुदेवेन तत्कथं दिव्यचक्षुया ॥ 24 ॥

Why did not Vāsudeva see, with His inner vision, the stealing away of his son from the impregnable walls of His fortress like mansion in Dwārkā? (And could thus have prevented this!)

संदेहोरयं महान्वब्धिसः-सन्देहं कृष्ण प्रभो ।

वत्नल्यो बासुदेवस्य दस्यिष्लुक्तित हातः ॥ 25 ॥

स्वर्गेते देवदेवे तु तत्कर्थं मुनिसत्तभ ।

संग्यो जायते ब्रह्धिश्चांतोलनकारकः ॥ 26 ॥

O Munī! After Vāsudeva had gone to Heaven, his wives were plundered by the dacoits on the way. I am very much in doubt on this point. Also I cannot understand why did this event take place just after His translation to Heaven?

विष्णोर्गः समुद्धतः शौरिभूभाराकृत् ।

सं कबी भयगुरात्यं भयाचयत्बना जनादंः ॥ 27 ॥

द्वारवर्यां गत साधो सर्वेन्यः समुद्धरूपः ।

अवतारो हरेः प्रोक्तो भूभारहरणाय वै ॥ 28 ॥

Again how was Śrī Krṣṇa, who was Viṣṇu's Full incarnation, born into this world to take of vicious load of this earth, and to destroy the evil-doers, terrified and He fled through the fear of Jārāsandha, evacuated His kingdom of Mathurā and went with his armies and friends to Dwārkā?

पाणत्मनां विनाशाय धर्मसंस्थापनाय च ।

तत्कथं बायुर्वेदेन चौरात्ते न विगातिताः ॥ 29 ॥

Vāsudeva came here to destroy the evil miscreants and to conserve the religion; how then did He not, as He was all knowing, previously kill those dacoits, who afterward stole and plundered His wives?

यैहृता वासुदेवस्य पत्थ: संर्तुतिहा श्र: ।

सेनातके किं न विज्ञाता: सर्वज्ञं सत पुन: ॥ 30 ॥

भीमब्रोजणधः कामं भूभारुणे मत: ।

अंचित्रा महात्मानः पाण्ड्वा धर्मतन्तरः ॥ 31 ॥

Was it, that He, being Omniscient did not know those dacoits? He protected the Pāndavas, no doubt, who were high souled, righteous and virtuous; but I cannot understand how did He consider the high souled virtuous persons like Bhīsma, Drona and others as loads of earth and slay them.

कृष्णभक्ताः सदाचारा युधधिषुपुगेनामः ।

ते कृत्वा राजसूयं च यज्ञार्जं चियानतः ॥ 32 ॥

दक्षिणा विधाय दत्ता ब्राह्मणेयोर्जितानतः ।

पांबुज्ञान्तु देवांशा यासुदेवक्षिता मुने ॥ 33 ॥

घोरं दुःखं कव प्राप्ताः कव गतं सुक्तं च तत् ।

किं तत्यापं महारौदं येन ते पीक्षितः सदा ॥ 34 ॥

The devotees of Śri Kṛṣṇa, observing good customs, conducts and practices, Yudhiṣthira and his brothers performed the Rājasūya sacrifice, according to rules, giving various offering to the Brāhmins and depended entirely on Vāsudeva; still, O Muni! they suffered terrible hardships; whither were their virtuous deeds by this time? what horrible sins did they commit that they had to suffer pains and troubles in the assembly.

त्रीपदी च महाभागा वेदीभट्यात्मपृत्रिता ।

रामांगजा च साध्यी च कृष्णभक्तिशुता तथा ॥ 35 ॥

The highly merited Draupadī arose from the midst of sacrificial fire and is born of the part of Lakṣmī, pure and devoted to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

सा कथे दुःखमतुलं प्राप चोरं पुनः पुनः ।

दुःशासनेन सा केशे गृहीता पीडिता भृणम् ॥ 36 ॥

रजस्वला सभायां तु नीता भीतैकवाससा ।

विश्वानगरे दासी जाता मत्थस्य सा पुनः ॥ 37 ॥

How did such a glorious woman meet with incomparable terrible pains often and often; how could she be caught hold of by her hair on her head by Duhśāsana; and carried to the royal assembly, when she was in her menses and extremely terrified and harassed?

धर्पिता कीच्चेताथ रूटती कुरी यथा ।

हता जयद्रेशेना क्रेद्यानप्रतिद्र: सिद्धता ॥ 38 ॥

मोचिता पाणढ़ेः पड़्धाद्वलविद्धमौतामिभः ।

पूर्वेजन्मकृतं पारं किं तदोन च पीक्षिता: ॥ 39 ॥

How did she come to be a slave of Matsya Rāja in his kingdom Virāt, and though actually crying aloud like a female osprey (eagle) she was highly insulted by Kīcaka! Alas! how could Draupadī be stolen away by Jayadratha, though latterally released by the Pāndavas.? What evil deeds did the Pāndavas commit in their previous births, that they had to befall under so many telling difficulties?

इःखान्येनकान्यापतासे कथयाछ महामते ।

रातमूयं क्रतूवरं कृत्वा ले मम पूर्वतंः ॥ 40 ॥

O high minded Muni! My ancestors performed the Rājasūya sacrifice; and still they fell under so many serious difficulties. Kindly explain the cause of these to me.

युःखं महर्ते प्रापता: पूर्वेजन्मकृतेन वै ।

देवांशानां कर्थे तेषां संग्योउरं महान्द्र सै ॥ ४ १ ॥

If it be urged, that they suffered so many serious calamities, due to their actions in their former lives, that seems impossible. Because they are born of the Devas; thus arises my doubt; be pleased to explain to me.

सदाचारितु कौतोवैभिण्ड्रोणादयो हता: ।

छलेन धतलापार्थ ज्ञानानैर्नशं जगत् ॥ 4 2 ॥

Again how the Pāṇḍavas, the sons of Kuntī, of good conduct, and knowing the illusory nature of the world, why did they, out of pretence kill Bhīsma, Drona and others?

प्रेरिता वासुदेवेन पापे घोरे महात्मना ।

कुलं क्षयितवंतते हरिणा परमात्मना ॥ 4 3 ॥

This appears a riddle to me that these Pāṇḍavas were led to the extermination of their race, being inspired by Hari Vāsudeva, to this horrible act.

वरं भिश्रान्तं साधो नीवारैर्प्रिंतं वरम् ।

योधात्र हत्या लोभेन शिल्लेन जीवनं वरम् ॥ 44 ॥

Rather to live on begging alms and to live on rice, growing wild or without cultivation, or to live as an artisan or artist than to kill the valiant warriors unlawfully in a battle, simply out of voluptuous greed.

विच्छ्छस्लु त्या यंगो रक्षितो मुनिसत्ता ।

समुतया सुतानागु गोलकाछ्छनाशनान् ॥ 4 5 ॥

O Best of the Munis! You have preserved this extirpated race by producing the Goloka sons (i. e. sons born by other persons of women after their husbands are dead) of indomitable prowess.

सोउपेवेल तु कालेन विरातदनयासुतः ।

तापस्वस गले सर्षे न्यस्तबाङ्धधद्धुतम् ॥ 46 ॥

And why did my honoured father, born of Uttara in this respected family, encircle a snake round the neck of a Brāhmin ascetic?

न कोर्पि बाहाणं ईहे क्षयिष्य सुकोद्धवः ।

तापसं योनसंयुक्ते पिया किं तत्कृतं मुने ॥ 47 ॥

एतेर-यैशु सन्देशैर्षिकलं मे मनोधुना ।

सिंधं कुरु पितः साधो सर्वोजीसि दयापिति ॥ 48 ॥

No body, born of a Ksattriya family, shews sings of hatred and jealousy towards a Brāhmīn. Is it that my father shewed such feeling to that ascetic, who took the vow of silence!

इति शीमद्वैभागवो चतुर्वैकवन्ये जनोजवप्रसनो

नाम प्रथमोउधाय: ।। १ ।।

O Best of the munis ! These things and lots of others are troubling my mind with many grave doubts. O merciful saint! You know every thing; be kind enough to quell this the disturbed state of my mind.

Thus ends the First Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavata Mahā Purāna of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Book IV Chapter II

CHAPTER II

On the Supremacy of the Effects of Karma

सूत उवाच

एवं पृथः पुराणजो सत्यवतीसुतः ।

परीक्षितसुतं शान्तं ततो वै जनगेजवम् ॥ १ ॥

उवाच संगशच्छेनु वावयं वाव्यविशपातः ।

Sūta said: The learned Vyāsa, the son of Satyavatī, and the knower of the Purānas, when thus asked by Janamejaya, the son of Pariksit, whose heart had become calm, replied in the following words, capable to remove all his doubts.

व्यास उवाच

राजकिमेत्त्रकल्यं कर्मणो गहना गति: ॥ 2 ॥

दुँत्रया किल देवानां मानवानां च का कथा ।

Vyāsa said: O king! You would better know, that in this Universe the course of Karma is not easily comprehensible; even the Devas are not capable to comprehend the wonderful effects of actions; what to speak of men!

वदा समुवित्ते चैनद्वहाण्डे नियुगणात्मकम् ॥ 3 ॥

कर्मणैव समुवत्ति: सर्वेधां नात्र संशय: ।

When this Universe composed of the three Guṇas arose, it was through Karma, that everything had its origin

अनाविंहिन्ना जीवाः कर्मवीजसमुद्धवः ॥ 4 ॥

नानायोगैनु जायते प्रियते च पुनः पुनः ।

कर्मण रहिते देहरभोगो न कहाचन ॥ 5 ॥

It was the seed of Karma whence the Jivas (the individual embodied souls) arose with neither any beginning nor any end. Those Jivas go on often and often incarnating in numberless varieties of wombs and then go to dissolution. When this Karma ceases, the Jivas then are never to have any more connection with any other body.

शुभागुभैरसा मिश्रीः कर्मिभवैहितं तिवसून।

त्रिविधानि हि तान्याहुर्धोर्धास्तत्वविद्धये चे ।। ६ ।।

The Karmas done by Jivas are of three kinds: auspicious, inauspicious and mixed (partly

auspicious and partly inauspicious); of which the auspicious is the Sättvik Karma, the inauspicious is the Tāmasik Karma and the mixed, is the Rājasic Karma. Thus has been said by the Sages.

संचितानि भविष्यन्ति प्रार्थानि तथा जुप: ।

वर्तमानानि देहेउस्मखेलियं कर्माणं किल ॥ ७ ॥

These three again are subdivided into three. They are Sañcita (accumulated), Bhavisya (impending in future) and Prārabdha (commenced.) All these Karmas are in dwelling always with the body.

बहाद्यीनां च संर्वेयं त्रुतगचं नराधिप ।

सुखं दुःखं जगाम्युवृषीणंकादयस्तथा ॥ 8 ॥

कामाकोधी च लोभशु सर्वे देहगता गुणाः ।

दैवाधीनाशु सर्वेयं प्रभवन्ति नराधिप ॥ 9 ॥

O king! Everybody, even Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa all are under the influence of this Karma! And they experience pleasure, pain, old age, disease and death, joy and sorrow, lust, anger, greed and other bodily qualities, out of the effects of this Karma, which are call ordinarily Fate.

रागद्धिवधो भावा: स्वर्गर्षि प्रभवति हि ।

देवानां मानवानां च तिराशं च तथा वपः ॥ 10 ॥

विकारा: सर्व एवैते दैहेन सह संगताः ।

पूर्वैतरानुयोगेन सैत्ययोगेन वै पुनः ॥ 11 ॥

Therefore love, hatred and other bodily qualities all predominate equally in all bodies Anger, jealousy, hatred, and other similar qualities arise in the Devas, men, and birds owing to some sort of dislikes on previous occasions; and love, compassion, pity etc. arise out of some sort of likings, existing already.

उत्पत्ति: सर्वर्वेन्तृना विना कर्म न विहते ।

कर्माण भ्रमने सूर्य: शगताकः क्षयरोगान् ॥ १ २ ॥

कपाली च तथा रूदः कर्मपौल न संशयः ।

अनाविदिन्यं चैलकाणं कर्म विहते ॥ १ ३ ॥

O king! No individual can arise without some

sort of action or other. It is through Karma that the Sun traverses in the sky; it is through Karma that the Moon was attacked with consumption disease; and it is through Karma that the Rudra holds the disc of skull bone. This Karma, therefore, has no beginning nor end (till Mokṣa); now that this Karma is the sole cause in the production of this Universe.

तेन्हे शाश्रतं सर्वे जनत्यावरर्जगमम् ।

निवातिनिविचारोरत्र निममना मुग्न: सदा ॥ 14 ॥

न जान्ति किमेत्तैई नियं वाज्ञिनियमेव च ।

मायायां विद्यानायां जगत्रित्यं प्रतीयते ॥ 15 ॥

कार्याधिका: कवं याच्य: कारणे सति सर्वेया ।

माया नित्या कारणं च सर्वेषां सर्वेदा किल ॥ 16 ॥

For this reason, this whole Universe, moveable and immovable, is real; but Munis are deeply absorbed in meditation to ascertain about its reality or unreality. They cannot definitely know it for certain whether this world is real or unreal; for where Māyā is prevalent, the universe is there. Where there is the cause fully existing in all respects, there is no effect, how can we say? The Māyā is eternal and always acts as the Prime Cause of all.

कर्मवीजं ततो नित्यं चित्तनीयं सा बुधैः ।

भ्रमवेल जागतर्वा राजकर्मनियन्त्रितम् ॥ 17 ॥

Therefore, O king! the sages declare that the seed of Karma is eternal. This whole universe changes incessantly, being controlled by this karma.

नान्योतिभू गरजेन्र नानाधर्मयेषु च ।

इच्छया च भवेज्ञनय विण्योरिततेजसः ॥ 18 ॥

O king of kings! They say, it is through the will of Viṣṇu, or unbounded energy and splendour, that all this universe enters, again and again, into all sorts of wombs, whether good or evil.

Now, if the birth of Viṣṇu, of infinite prowess, takes place according to His will, then why is that He travels through many impious births? Why is it that Bhagavān Viṣṇu goes, in different Yugas, to take His births in low, vile origins?

युगयुगेचनेकासु नीचयोगितु लत्कवम् ।

त्यक्त्वा वैकुपतर्पावसंग सुख्योगाननेकश: ॥ 19 ॥

Where is that self dependent man, who, leaving his abode Vaikuntha and all sorts of pleasures and happiness, desires to live in this mortal temple, filled with urine, faeces and other filthy matters.

विष्णुप्रमिद्धिर वासं संसरतः कोप्रभावज्ञति।

पुष्यावचलाता च जलकेंति: सुखासनम् ॥ 20 ॥

No intelligent man will leave comfortable resting places and amorous sports and gathering flowers for the sake of dwelling in this uterus in the womb?

त्यक्त्वा गर्भगृहे वासं कोर्षभावज्ञति बुद्धिमान् ।

तुलिकां मुडुसंयुक्ता दिखा गया विनिर्मितम् ॥ 21 ॥

Who likes to live with his face downwards in the womb, when he can enjoy fine heavenly soft downs, puffed up with cotton or silk.

त्यकत्वाधोगुखवासं च कोर्भिधाव्छिति पिड़तः ।

गीतं नृत्वं च वाढं च नानाभावसमन्वितम् ॥ 2 2 ॥

Who will abandon singing, dancing and music, where all sorts of love feelings are being manifested, and think of coming down to this veritable Hell?

मुत्वा को नरके वासं मनसापि वित्तितेयते ।

सिंधुजोब्दुभावानां रां सत्यत्वा सुदुस्यजम् ॥ 2 3 ॥

Who will abandon the wonderful ambrosial nectar and prosperity given by Lakṣmī, that cannot be easily renounced, and then like to taste this urine faeces.

विष्यमूरसपानं च क इक्छेमातिमाशरः ।

गर्भवासात्परो नास्ति नरको धुवनये ॥ 24 ॥

There is no hell more aggravating in the three worlds than this existence in the wombs. The Munis, afraid of these, perform difficult asceticisms in this wondrous world.

तद्वीताश्र प्रकृर्विति मुग्वो दुस्तं तयः ।

हिला थोगं च राज्यं च बने याति मनस्विनः ॥ 25 ॥

Wise, intelligent persons renounce their kingdoms and enjoyments and resort to forests. Who is there so stupid as to enter willingly in the various wombs?

Book IV Chapter VI

तद्वीतस्तु विम्युतात्मा कस्तं सेवितुमिच्छिति ।

गर्भे तुदन्ति कृमयो जठरागिनस्तपतवधः ॥ 2६ ॥

Worms and insects torment the Jivas in the womb; the digestive fire of the stomach heats it from below, whereas it is always fearfully tied down on all sides by the flesh, enclosing its fat or marrow. O King; Not a trace of happiness is visible there.

वपासेवेधनं कूरं किं सुखं तत्र भुपते ।

वरं कारागृहे वासो बन्यनं निगईवैर्म्य ।। 27 ॥

It is far better to live in a prison house, fettered by hard iron chains. Whereas it is not desirable to live for a moment in the womb.

अत्यमात्रं कृष्णं नैव गर्भावासः स्वचिच्छृषः ।

गर्भावसे महदुदुःखं द्रामासनिवसनम् ॥ 28 ॥

It is very hard and painful to be in the womb for ten months. To come out of the hard and terrible womb is extremely troublesome.

तथा निःसरणे दुःखं योपिन्यन्नेजिद्वारणे ।

बालभावे सदा दुःखं मृकाङ्पाबवंसुतम् ॥ 29 ॥

Jivas get trouble in their childhood; they cannot speak, and they do not know what to say, when they are hungry or thirsty; they depend entirely on others and they are grieved.

श्रुचा वेदनाशकः पतन्त्रोक्ताकातः ।

श्रीधेते र्विदे वाले माता चिन्तुरा तथा ॥ 30 ॥

When the child becomes hungry and cries, the mother becomes anxious. When the child is afflicted with diseases and cries, the mother then knows and administers medicines.

नानाविधानि दुःखानि बालभावे भवन्ति वे ॥ 31 ॥

Thus many troubles arise in childhood. Sages do not therefore find any happiness and do not desire, of their own accord, to come here.

किं सुखं विबुधा युद्धा जन्म बाख्छिन चेच्छया ।

संगामामरैः सार्थे सुखं त्यक्त्वा निरन्तरम् ॥ 32 ॥

O king, no sane man would leave incessant heavenly pleasures and prefer before the Devas to this toilsome and painful state of being born in the womb.

कर्तूमिच्छेच्च को मुंहः श्रमदं सुखनाशनम् ।

सर्वेवैल नृपश्रेष्ठ सर्वे बज्हादयः सुतः ॥ 33 ॥

O king of kings! All the Devas, Brahmā and others have to enjoy full the effects of their Karmas done, whether they are pleasant or painful.

कृतकर्मविषयेनक न्रापनुवन्ति सुखासुरुते ।

अवश्यमेव भोक्त्वयं कृतं कर्म शुभाशुभम् ।

देहवादिन्द्रभिवेदीनिर्यभिश्र नृपोतम ॥ 34 ॥

O best of kings! The fruits of karma must have to be experienced, whether auspicious or inauspicious, be he a Deva, or human being or an animal; any one who has embodied himself in fine or gross bodies!

तपसा दानवनैश्छ मानवश्छेत्रतां वजेत् ।

क्षीणे पुण्येध शक्तोर्धि पतत्येव न संपश्यः ॥ 35 ॥

Human beings, by dint of their practise of penance, religious austerities, alms givings and sacrifices, rise to Indrahood. Indra, in his turn, when the effects of his good actions cease, comes down to inferior births! there is no doubt of it.

रामावतारयोगेन देवा वान्तरां नातः ।

तथा कृष्णसहायार्थ देवा यावतरां नातः ॥ 36 ॥

·In the Rāma incarnation, the Devas had to incarnate themselves as monkeys; and in the Krṣna incarnation, the Devas had to incarnate themselves as human beings, Cowherds (Gopas) and Yādavas. एवं युगे युगे विष्णुर्वतारान्नेकानः ।

क्रौति धर्मेश्वार्य बहाणा प्रेरितो भूगण् ॥ 37 ॥

Thus being urged on by Brahmā, Viṣṇu Bhagavān incarnates Himself many times, yugas after yugas, no preserve the religion.

युन: पुरुरैरेरे नानायोनिषु पार्थिव ।

अवतारा भवेन्य्ये रथचक्रवद्धुतः ॥ 38 ॥

O king of mortals! Thus, like a carwheel, Bhagavān Hari incarnated Himself in various wombs successively in a wonderful manner.

दैत्यानां इननं कर्म कतव्य हरिणा स्ववम् ।

अशोगोगे पृथिव्यां वै कृत्वा जन्म महात्मना ॥ 39 ॥

The destruction of the Daityas was done by Hari in His many secondary incarnations.

तदहं संप्रवक्ष्यामि कृष्णजन्मकक्षां शुभाम् ।

स एव भगवातिश्युग्रवतीगों यदो: कृते ॥ 4० ॥

Now I will narrate to you the auspicious facts of the birth of Kṛṣṇa, Who incarnated Himself in the family of Yadu (Yadu Kula).

कथयस्य मुनेरेगो वसुदेवः प्रतापवान् ।

गोयुक्तिरयवत्राजान्युरीणानुभावतः ॥ 4 1 ॥

O king! The illustrious Vāsudeva, born of the part of the Muni Kaśyapa, had to take his birth again as a human being due to his previous curse and had to maintain his livelihood by tending cows.

कथयस्य च द्रे पल्यौ गाणादत्र महीपते ।

अदिति: सुरसा चैवमासु: पृथिवीपते ॥ 42 ॥

देवकी रोहिणी चोभे भगिन्यो भतरर्भि ।

वकणेने महात्रषाणे दान: कोपादिति श्रुतम् ॥ 43 ॥

O best of kings! And the two wives of Kaśyapa, Aditi and Surasā, had to take their births as the two sisters, and Rohini, on account of the curses cast on them. O Descendant of Bharata! We have thus heard that they were greatly cursed at one time by Varuna, the water deity, who got very much angry. The king said.

राजोवाच

किं कृतं कश्यपेनागो येन शगलो महानुषि: ।

सभावं: स कर्षे जातसद्वद्वर्य महामते ॥ 44 ॥

कर्च च भवावीक्ष्यासुरत जातो5तिगोकले ।

वासी वैकुण्डनिलये रमापितरखणितः ॥ 45 ॥

निदेशालक्य यभावात्वरते प्रभृत्यव्य ।

नारायण: सुरश्रेष्ठो युगादि: सर्वधारकः ॥ 46 ॥

स कधं सदनं त्यक्त्वा कर्मवानिव मानुपे ।

करीति जननं कस्मादर मे संगयो महान् ॥ 47 ॥

What fault was committed by Kaśyapa that he had to take his birth along with his wife as cowherds. And why was it that the Everlasing uninterrupted Ātman Viṣṇu Nārāyaṇa had to take his birth in Gokula, He whose abode is Vaikuntha, who is the Lord of Ramā! who is Bhagavān and the Supreme amongst the gods, who is the upholder of the universe and the yugas! Under Whose order can such a being abandon his abode and take his birth in the world like an ordinary mortal? there is this grave doubt, then, of mine on this point.

प्रायः मानुषदेहं तु कांति च विड्वनम् ।

भावारानाविधांतरत मानुषे दुर्जान्यनि ॥ 48 ॥

कामः क्रोधोपर्शोगकी वरं प्रोतश कर्हिंचित् ।

सुखं दुःखं भयं नृणां दैन्यमाजेवमेव च ॥ 49 ॥

दुकृतं सुकृतं चैव वचनं ह्ननं तथा ।

पोषणं चलनं तापो विमर्शश्व विकलबन् ॥ 50 ॥

लोषो दंभस्तथा मोहः कपटः गोचनं तथा ।

एते चान्ये तथा भावा मानुष्ये सभ्यवन्ति हि ॥ 51 ॥

Obtaining this depraved human coil, one is always perplexed with various thoughts, sometimes with lust, anger, jealousy, intoleration, sorrow enmity sometimes with pleasurable feelings, happiness, fear, sufferings, penury, sometimes with straight-forwardness, good or bad deeds, faithfulness, treachery, unsteadiness, supporting others; sometimes with remorse, hesitation, bragging, greed, vain boasting, delusion, or hypocrisy and sometimes with remorse; these different feelings exist in men.

स कर्ष भाषाविण्युलसक्वा सुखमवश्यम्।

करीति मानुर्ष जन्म भावैस्तैस्तैरिधुतम् ॥ 52 ॥

How then can Viṣṇu Bhagavān abandon His eternal pleasures and have recourse to this human birth, full of many perplexing thoughts.

कि सुखं मानुर्ष प्रायः भृति जन मृनीश्र ।

कि निमितं हरि: साक्षतप्रभवां कांति है ॥ 53 ॥

O best of Munis! What peculiar happiness is there in the pleasures of human births, that Śrī Bhagavān Hari has to undertake the burden of dwelling thus in the human wombs?

गर्भेयुःखं जमन्दुःखं बालपाटे तथा पुनः ।

यीवने कामाजं दुःखं गाईल्येउगिमहुत्तम् ॥ 54 ॥

दु:खान्येतान्यवाप्नोति मानुषे द्विजस्तम ।

कर्थं स भावान्विष्युवतानान्यून: पुनः ॥ 55 ॥

O Munindra! The sufferings that are experienced, while in the womb, the pain during the time of delivery, the misfortunes in the early childhood, the troubles of passionate lust in youth, the greater sorrows and difficulties in the householder's life, all these are existent there; how

Book IV Chapter III

then Bhagavān Viṣnu incarnate Himself often in these various human births.

प्राय यमावतार्ति हि हरिणा बह्वायोनिता ।

दुःखं महतरं प्राणं वनवासेस्तिदाक्णो ॥ 56 ॥

सीताविरहर्ने दुःखं संगमश्र पुनः पुनः ।

कान्ताचागो3प्यनैवमनुभृतो महात्मना ॥ 57 ॥

What an amount of enormous difficulties had Brahma-born Hari to undertake in His Rāma incarnation! That high souled One had to suffer for his exile in forest, for the stealing away of his wife Sitā, for the frequent wars, for the final separation from his wife Sitā.

तथा कृष्णावतारोपि जन्म ईशग्रहु पुनः ।

गोकुले गमनं चैव गवां चरणमित्युत ॥ ५८ ॥

कैसय श्नं कष्टद्वाराकागमनं पुनः ।

नानासंसादुःखानि भूक्तवाभ्याकान्धम् ॥ ५९ ॥

Likewise in the Kṛṣṇa Avatāra, the birth in a

prison, the departure to Gokula, tending cows, the killing of Kaṇsa, departure to Dwārkā with great difficulty and all sorts of household difficulties were there. Why had He to suffer all these?

सेवेच्छया कः प्रतीक्षेत चुक्तो कुःखानि ज्ञानवान् ।

संशयं छिपि सर्वत्र मम चित्तप्रजान्तये ॥ 60 ॥

शी शीमद्वीभागवते मातपुराणे चतुर्विक्तचे

घितीयोउपयः ॥ 2 ॥ 11

Who amongst the wise and the emancipated, of his own accord condescends to take on his shoulders so many hard sufferings? This is the grave doubt in my mind; be graciously pleased to remove my this grave doubt and make my mind tranquil.

Here ends the Second Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevībhagāvatam of the Mahā Purānam of 18000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IV Chapter III

CHAPTER III

On the Previous Curse of Vasudeva

व्यास उवाच

कारणानि बहून्यायवतते हरे: किल ।

सर्वेयं चैव देवानारंगवतरणोबयि ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! The incarnation of Śrī Hari and the incarnation of the Arniśa Avatāras of all the other. Devas are accountable to many causes. (The chief cause being Karma; the minor cause being many.

वसुदेवावतारस्य कारणं श्रणु तत्वतः ।

देवकमाश्रीव गौहित्या अवतारस्य कारणम् ॥ 2 ॥

Hear, now, the cause of incarnations of Vasudeva (Kṛṣṇa's father), Devaki and Rohinī in detail.

एकदा कश्यपः श्रीमान्यत्राज्यं धेनुमाहरत् ।

याचित्तोयं बहुविधं न ददो धेनुमुत्तमाम् ॥ ३ ॥

Once, on an occasion, Śrīmān Kāśyapa stole away away the Kāmadhenu (the heavenly Cow, yielding all desires) of the Deva Varuna for his sacrificial purpose; and though he was entreated by Varuna often and often to return the cow,

Kaśyapa did not return to him that, the best of all the cows.

वरभान्तु ततो गत्वा बढ़ाणं जगतः प्रधम् ।

प्रणयोवाच दीनात्मा स्वदुःखं विनयान्वितः ॥ 4 ॥

Varuna became very sorry; he went to Brahmā, the Lord of the creation and told him humbly all that had happened and about his sorrows.

कि कंपीम माहाभाग मनोउसी न द्वताति गाम् ।

ग्राणो मया विमृष्ठोउस्मै गोपालो घव मानुषे ॥ ५ ॥

भार्ये ढे अपि तदेव भवेतां चातितु:खिते ।

ततो वत्सा रूदत्यत्र मगृहीना: सुयु:खिता: ॥ 6 ॥

“O Glorious One! Maharṣi Kaśyapa is now almost infatuated with his sacrifice; and though I have tried all my means, he is not returning me my cow. I could not hear the pitiful cries and wailings of the calves on bereavement from their mother; and I cursed Kaśyapa saying “You would go down and take birth in the human world as a cow-herd; and your two wives also are to go there as human

mortals, suffering under the greatest difficulties and dangers."

भुतवस्तासप्रतितस्तस्माद्विवधिति धरातले ।

कारागतिनावसा च तेनापि बहुदुः प्रित्ता ॥ 7 ॥

O Brāhmana! On seeing the distressed condition of the calves I cursed Aditi a second time that the would be put to prison, her children would be still born, and she would suffer lots of troubles."

व्यास उचाच

तच्छुंला चचनं यादोनाशस्य पदापुः ।

समाहूय मुनिं तत्र तमुवाच प्रपापतिः ॥ ८ ॥

O Janamejaya! Hearing this, the Lotus-born Brahmā called Kaśyapa before him and asked.

कस्मात्चया महाभाग लोकपालस्य दोषतः ।

हताः पुनर्न दत्ताश किमन्यायं करोषि च ॥ 9 ॥

O Fortunate One! Why have you stolen away all the cows of the Varuna Deva, the Guardian of a quarter of the world? And why have you committed an offence in not returning the cows to Him?

जान्यायं महाभाग परवितापहारणम् ।

कृतवान्कल्यन्यायं सर्वेजोस्ति महामते ॥ 10 ॥

Bhagavan! You are intelligent, you know everything fully; knowing that it is a sin to steal other's property, why have you committed this unlawful act of stealing away the cows.

अही तोभस्य महिमा महतोप्रे न मुच्छित ।

तोभं नरकंद नूनं पायाकरमर्मनम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Oh! What is the wonderful influence of covetuousness! Even those that are great are not free from the clutches of greed. Covetuousness is the source of all sins, is unapproved by the Sages and leads to hell.

क्यपोष्पि न ते ल्यूके समर्थः किं कतोभ्यहम् ।

सर्वदेवाधिकस्तमालोभो वै कलितो मया ॥ १२ ॥

Lo! Maharși Kaśyapa is not able to leave this vicious habit even now; what shall I do? will hence count greed as more powerful than even Fate, the Ruler of all destinies.

ध्यातसे मुनवः शान्ता जितो वैलॉभ एव च ।

वैखानसै: शमपरैः प्रतिग्रहणराछूगईः ॥ 13 ॥

Besseed are those saints that have devoted themselves wholly to the attain ment of peace, who are tranquil-hearted, lead a hermit life and don't ask themselves of any thing from any body. Verily those are blessed.

संसारे बलवाञ्छुतर्णीफोमेध्योङर: सदा ।

कर्यपोर्गि दुगाचर: कृतनसेहो दुर्गतवना ॥ 14 ॥

This covetuousness is a powerful enemy; it is always unholy and odious. See! Its influence has overpowered the Maharşi Kaśyapa and has tied him down to an ordinary affection and has urged him to commit a sinful act.

बह्यापि तं शगाणाय कर्यपं मुनिसतमम् ।

मयांदारक्षणार्थ हि पौरं परमवललभम् ॥ 15 ॥

अंगेन तंचे पुथिख्यां वे प्रायः जन्म यदो: कुले ।

भार्थ्या संयुतस्तत्र गोपागतलं कौरियसि ॥ 16 ॥

Then the Prajāpati Brahmā, to preserve and keep the prestige in the name of Justice and Religion, cursed his own very dear grandson Kaśyapa, the best of the Munis, and said: "Go to the earth in your Aṃśa, and take your birth in the Yadu clan, be united with your wives and work as a Cowherd."

व्यास उवाच

एवं शपतः कथयपोजसी वरूणेन च ब्रहूणा ।

अंशावतरणाथाव भूभारहणाय च ॥ 17 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Thus was cursed the Maharṣi Kaśyapa by Brahmā and Varuna to come down to the earth as Anśāvatāra to relieve the earth of her burden.

तथा दित्यासदिति: शगता शोकसंतदाया घृष्णम् ।

जाता जाता विनयेशेरनव पुगास्तु सत वे ॥ 18 ॥

Diti, too, becoming grieved much with sorrows, cursed Aditi that seven of her sons would be killed consecutively after their births.

जनमेज्य उवाच

कस्माहित्या च भारिनी शगतेज्ञजनी मुते ।

कारणं वद्र शगपे च शोकस्तु मुनिसनम ॥ 19 ॥

Janamejaya said: O best of Munis! Why was it that Diti so cruelly cursed his sister Aditi, the

Book IV Chapter VI

mother of Indra? Kindly explain to me the cause of this and oblige. I am sorry to hear of this curse.

सूत उवाच

पारतीक्षितेन पृथस्तु व्यास: सत्यवतीभुतः ।

राजानं प्रत्युवाचेदे कारणं सुसमाहितः ॥ 20 ॥

Sūta said: Thus asked by the son of Parksit, Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati, himself replied to the king about their cause in the following words.

व्यास उवाच

राजन्दक्षसुते हे तु द्वितिःधारितिज्ञाने ।

कथयस्य प्रिये भार्ये बथूवतुरुककमे ॥ 21 ॥

Vyāsa said: Dakṣa Prajāpati had two daughters, Diti and Aditi; these two, of high rank, were married to Kāśyapa; and they were his favourites.

अदित्वां मघवा पुत्रो यदतप्रदृत्तीर्वर्गत् ।

तदा तु तातृषं पुंत्रं चकमे दितिरोजसा ॥ 22 ॥

Aditi gave birth to the very powerful Indra, the king of the Devas. Diti, too, asked for a son of the same strength, prowess, and splendour as those of Indra.

विमामहासितापांगी पुत्रं मे देहि मान्दि ।

इन्द्रतुल्यं बलं वीरं धर्मिष्ठी व्रीयंततम् ॥ 23 ॥

Diti, of beautiful dark blue eyes, entreated to her husband and said, "Give me a son, O giver of due respects to every body! who shall be a hero as strong as Indra, religious and of indomitable energy."

तामुवाच मुनि: कान्ते स्वस्था भव मयोदिति ।

त्रान्ते भविता तुभ्यं शतकृतसूम: सुतः ॥ 24 ॥

The Muni said to her: "O Dear! Be peaceful; I advise you to take a vow, practise a rite, and when the period of your practice will be over, you will get a son like Indra."

सा तयेति प्रतिश्रुच चकार ततमुत्तमम् ।

निविष्तं भुनीना नर्भ विश्राणा सुमनोहरम् ॥ 25 ॥

Diti promised to act according to his word and took an oath; and when she practised the vow, Maharṣi Kāśyapa impregnated the seed in her womb, Diti also bore the seed in her womb according to the usual rite.

भूमी चकार शयनं यपोबतपरायणा ।

पशिया धाणायुक्ता बभूव वरबर्धितीः ॥ 26 ॥

The excellent fair complexioned Diti remained sacred, observed all the rules and, deeply intent on her vow, subsisted only on milk and slept on the ground.

एवं जातः सुसंगुणो यदा गर्भांति विश्वेयान् ।

गृष्धागृधानिरीतर्णांति दिति दृष्टवा तु दुःविता ॥ 27 ॥

मघवत्सदूग: पुत्रो भविष्यति महावल: ।

दिव्यास्तदा मम सुततलेजोहीनो भवेकित्व ॥ 28 ॥

Thus when the foetus was fully developed, Diti began to look white and full of splendonr. On seeing her thus, Aditi became anxious and thought if there be born of Diti a son like the powerful Indra, then my son will no doubt be deprived of his brilliance and splendour.

इति चित्तापरा उपमिन्द्रो चोवारा मानिनी ।

श्रुस्तोडा समुन्त्रजो दितिभर्षेडितीर्वीयान् ॥ 29 ॥

The proud Aditi, thinking thus, said to Indra: "O Son! There, in the womb of Diti, is your powerful enemy.

उपायं कुक नाशाय शजोरा विचित्र च ।

उर्वत्तिरेव हंल्या दिव्या भार्येय शोभन ॥ 30 ॥

O Beautiful One! Even now think out how you can kill your enemy. Before the child is born of the womb, try to destroy it.

वीक्ष्य तामसितापर्गी सप्तनीभावमास्थिताम् ।

दुनौति हदये चिता सुखमर्पविनारिणी ॥ 31 ॥

Since the time I have looked on my co-wife Diti, of beautiful eyes and proud, this is the one and only thought that troubles the peace in the innermost of my hearts.

तराजस्थेल संखुच्दो नहो नैव भवेद्रिपुः ।

तस्मादंकृति हन्यादखुद्विमान्तिं किल ॥ 32 ॥

The enemy, if he firmly gets hold like a fully developed consumption, cannot be killed; therefore the intelligent persons should destroy their enemies, when they are in their bud.

लोहांगुकौक्र विश्वो गर्भों वै हृदये मय ।

येन केनायुपायेन पातयावा तघकते ॥ 33 ॥

O Śatakratu! My heart is being pierced wholly by an iron spoke when I see the womb of Diti; kill it by any means you can!

सामदानवलेनापि हिंसनीयस्वल्या सुतः ।

दिव्या भर्षों महापाना मय चेदिछ्छसि पियम् ॥ 34 ॥

O High minded One! If you wish my welfare, then destroy the foetus, in the womb of Diti, by any of the existent means, Sāma, Dāna or strength and thus remove the cause of grief in my heart."

व्यास उवाच

श्रुवा मातृवचः शको विधिंचेय मतसा तः ।

जगाभापरमातुः स समीपममराधिपः ॥ ३ ५ ॥

Vyāsa said: On hearing his mother, Indra, the King of the Immortals, thought over all the means and went then to his step-mother Diti.

ववंदे विन्यात्यादौ दित्या पापमतिनरूप ।

प्रोबाय विनयेनासी ममूरं विशर्पितान् ॥ ३६ ॥

That evil minded Indra bowed down at the foot of Diti with humility and addressed her with words, sweet but full of poison.

इन्ट उवाच

भातस्वे ततयुक्तप्रसि क्षिणद्दोर्जान्तद्वैत ।

संवार्थीमू संप्राप्नः किं कर्तेयं वद्यव मे ॥ 37 ॥

“O mother! You have become very weak, lean and thin in the practise of your vow. I have come to serve you; order me now what I can do for you.

यावसंवाहन्ते तेर्कं कृत्याभ्यम पतितं ।

गृहशूक्ष्णातपुर्णं लभते गतिमक्षायाम ॥ ३ ८ ॥

O chaste one to your husband! I want to shampoo your feet. To serve one's Guru means to earn righteousness and immortality.

न मे किमपि भेदोर्सित तथातिद्या शपे किल ।

इत्युस्चना चरणी स्पूच्या सेवाहनपरो3पवत् ॥ 39 ॥

O mother! I swear, on oath, I don't make any difference between you and my mother Aditi." Saying thus, he touched her feet and began to shampoo her legs.

संवाहनसुखं प्राय निद्रामय सुलोचना ।

शांता तत्कुशा सुमता विश्रता परम सती ॥ 40 ॥

The beautiful eyed Diti, tired of the vow, lean

and thin, thus being shampooed and having full faith in Indra's words, fell to deep sleep.

तां निद्रावरामपातं विलोक्य प्राविशतन्नु।

रूपं कृत्वात्रिसूभं च शरक्षाणिः समाहितः ॥ 41 ॥

उदरं प्रविवेशगृ तत्या योगवलेन वै ।

गर्ष चकर्ते वज्जेण सन्ताया पर्विनायकः ॥ 42 ॥

Seeing her asleep, Indra, with thunderbolt in his hand, took his subtle form and by the influence of his yogic power, entered carefully into her womb quickly and cut asunder the foetus in the womb into seven parts.

रोदे च तदा वाले वज्जेणाशिन्तस्तथा ।

मा रहेति शनैर्वाक्यमुवाच मघवानुम् ॥ 43 ॥

शकलानि पुनः सप्त सप्तथा कतिलानि च ।

तदो वैकॉनंचाशन्मतक्ष्राभववुम् ॥ 44 ॥

The child in the womb, struck by the thunder bolt, cried out. Indra spoke to the child gently: "Do not cry," and in the mean while cut each of the seven parts into seven parts again. Thus, O king! The forty-nine Maruts were born.

तदा प्रबुद्धा सुदर्ती जाला गर्भ तथा कृतम् ।

इन्हेण छलकर्णे चुकांप भुशपु:वित्ता ॥ 45 ॥

When the good natured Diti awoke, she came to know that Indra has treacherously cut the foetus in her womb and became very sorry and angry.

भगीनकृतु तु सा बुद्ध्या शणाग कुपिता तत ।

अदिति मघवन्तं च सच्वततपरायणा ॥ 46 ॥

यथा मे कर्तिते गर्भरतव पुत्रेण छघना ।

तथा तत्रागमापातु राज्यं त्रिशुवनस्य तु ॥ 47 ॥

Knowing that all these treacherous acts are really done under the advice of her sister, the truthful Diti; who was under the vow, cursed Aditi, and Indra, saying that as her son Indra has treacherously cut the foetus in her womb, Indra's kingdom over the three worlds would be destroyed.

यथा गुप्तेन पायेन मम गर्भं निवातितः ।

अदित्या पापचारीपया यथा मे पातितः सुनः ॥ 48 ॥

तस्या: पुजास्तु नस्पन्तु जाता जाता: पुनः पुनः ।

कारागरे वसलैया पुत्रगोकारुप भृगम् ॥ 49 ॥

अन्यज्मनि चायेव मृतापत्या भविष्यति ।

Book IV Chapter IV

And as the sinful Aditi has secretly caused the destruction of my son, her sons, too, would also die after their birth consecutively and she would dwell in the prison house in much trouble and anxiety and would also bear still born sons in her next birth.

यास उत्तरा

इत्युसूई तदा श्रुत्वा शापं मरीचिनन्दन: ॥ 50 ॥

उदार प्रणयोपेता वचनं समयबिल ।

Vyāsa said: O king! Maharṣi Kaśyapa, the son of Marīci, hearing the curse, allayed her anger with loving words.

भा कोर्भ कुरु कल्याणि पुत्रासे बलवतरा: ॥ 51 ॥

भविष्यन्ति सुरा: सर्वे मन्तो मवत्सतखा: ।

O Blessed One! Do not be angry. Your sons would all become very powerful and would be called Maruts. They would be companions and friends to Indra.

शापोयं तव यामोक त्वहार्विंशेध द्वारे ॥ 52 ॥

अंशेन मानुं जन माप थोभ्यति भामिति ।

O Dear! Your curse won't be fruitless; in the 28th Manvantara, at the end of the Dvāpara Yuga, your curse will bear fruit. Then Aditi, sinful for her jealousy and anger, will go down on earth to

take the human birth through her Anīsa (part) and suffer according to your curse.

वक्तोनापि द्नोडसि शाप: सन्तापितेन च ॥ 53 ॥

उभयो: शापयोगेन मानुरीयं भविष्यति ।

Varuna, too, had become very grieved and cursed her. And, due to both these curses, this Aditi will be born as a woman.

व्यास उवाच

पतिनाउंश्रासिता देवी नसूला सोउभवस्त्ता ॥५४।।

नोवाच विधिप्रं किक्षित्ततः सा वरवर्षिणी ।

O King! The fair complexioned Diti, thus consoled by her husband, became glad and did not utter any more unpleasant words.

इति ते कविरा राजन्यरोगायस्य काराणम् ।

अदितिर्देशकी जाता स्वांगेन नृपसत्तम ॥ 55 ॥

O king! Thus I have narrated to you the cause of the previous curse. O best of kings! Thus Aditi was born as Devakī out of her Anísā.

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे चतुर्विकन्ये

तृतीयोउद्यानः ।। ३ ।।

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Fourth Book of the Mahā Purānam Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses on the former curse of Vasudeva and Devakī by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IV Chapter IV

CHAPTER IV

On Adharma

राजोवाच

विसितोरभि महाभाग श्रुलारा उख्यानं महामते ।

संसारोउं घापहप: कर्थ मुच्येत बन्यन्ति ॥ १ ॥

The King spoke: O highly honoured and intelligent one! I have heard the anecdote just related to me by you. I am very much bewildered. This Samsāra (world) is vice incarnate. I wonder how the Jivas, entangled in its meshes, can again be freed!

क्रव्यस्यायि द्वादादिस्लोकविधेसे सति ।

कृतवानीदूर्ण कर्म को न कुयोज्वुपिस्तान् ॥ 2 ॥

When the son of Kaśyapa, whose kingdom is the three worlds, can commit such an heinous act,

what wonder, then, that any other ordinary person would do more blameable things!

नार्ध प्रविष्य बालस्य हूननं दाक्णा किल ।

सेवाधिरेण यानुछं कृत्वा शपथम्बुद्धून ॥ ३ ॥

On the pretence of serving and on a solemn oath, when a man can enter into his step-mother's womb and take away the life of the son, what more heinous and event dreadful can take place than this!

शास्ता धर्मेय योगा च जितोकया: पतित्यत् ।

कृतबानीदुर्ग कर्म को न कुर्दादसांग्रिन् ॥ 4 ॥

When the preserver and controller of religion, the ruler of the three worlds can do such acts, you

cannot expect that any other person would desist from committing heinous, contemptible acts.

पितामहा मे संग्रामे कुरूक्षेत्रेस्तदार्णम् ।

कृतवर्तनतावस3शर्षं दूरं कर्म जनतानुगे ॥ 5 ॥

O World Teacher! Indeed my grandfather did unjustifiable horrible mean acts in the battle field of Kuruksetra. It is really wonderful!

भीमो उराण: कुप: काणं धर्माशिप विध्धितः ।

सर्वे विक्बद्धर्मोग वासुदेवेन नोदिताः ॥ 6 ॥

असारातं विजानन्तः संसारस्य सुधेधसः ।

देवांशाशु कर्व चकुनिंन्दितं धर्मतत्पराः ॥ 7 ॥

Bhīsma, Droṇa, Krpa, Kārṇa, even Yudhīsthira, who is the part incarnate of Dharma all these were urged by Vāsudeva into this contrary religious act. These personages are all born of Devānās, devoted to religion, and intelligent. These know the transitory nature of this world; how can these commit such mean blameable things!

कासस्था धार्यव विश्रंत्र प्रमाणं किं विनिश्छिन् ।

चलिण्तोस्मि संजातः शुत्वा चैतकाधानकम् । ८ १ ॥

O Glory of the Brāhmins! What faith or regard can we have for a religion, when such high souled persons commit such irreligious acts! Indeed, there is doubt whether religion exists at all or not! O Best of the Munis! My heart is agitated very much on hearing these incidents.

अनवाक्यं प्रमाणं चेद्यातः कः: परहेद्वान् ।

पुको विश्वासात्तो रागी भवति सर्वेथा ॥ 9 ॥

If it be said that the word of the Āptas (seers) is a sufficient guarantee for the entity of religion, it may then be questioned where there is such an Āpta, holding such a pure religious body? All those persons who are attached to woldliness are bent on all worldly objects with their whole head and heart; these, therefore, cannot be Āptas.

रागो ऋषो भवेघुन्यर्थानागरसंगयम् ।

द्वादस्यवचनं वक्त्वं स्वार्थसिद्धये ॥ 10 ॥

When self interest is obstructed, jealousy and anger arise; and to secure one's self interest, out of jealousy, arise untruthful words.

जरासंधविधातार्थ द्विरिण सत्त्वमूर्तिना ।

छलेत्र तिचेत रूपं ब्राह्मणस्य विज्ञानता ॥ १ ॥ ॥

Even the pure, excellent, virtuous Śri Krṣṇa, with full consciousness, had to assume under pretence a Brāhimn form for killing Jarāsandha.

तद्वतः कः प्रमाणं किं सत्त्व्यूर्तिपौदुगः ।

अज्ञैनोर्षि तर्वेवास कर्यं चूत्रवित्थिनिति ॥ १२ ॥

Just as the holy Śrī Hari assumed a false appearance to kill Jarāsandha, similarly Arjuna, too, did a false sacrifice to accomplish his ends. Where is, then, one who can claim to be an Āpta? And what proof of there is the existence of such an Āpta?

कोदुशोर्धवं कृती वयः किमर्थं शमवर्जितः ।

परलोकपदार्थ वा यशसे वात-न्यथा किल ॥ 13 ॥

What sort of sacrifice was this? Did it lead to heaven in the next world or did it lead to glory or did it serve the cause of any goodwill? Why was it deprived of that peace and rest? (It was performed with a view to kill Śísūpāla and others).

धार्मेय प्रथम: पाद: सत्ययेतकुतेर्षतः ।

द्वितीयस्तु तथा शोचं दया पादसूतीयकः ॥ 14 ॥

दानं पादशुत्थंध्र पुराणजा वदन्ति वै ।

तैर्वितीतः कथं धर्मसिंहिद्र सुमंमतः ॥ 15 ॥

The Pundits, of yore, declare that truth is the first Pāda, cleanliness, the second; compassion, the third; and charity is the fourth Pāda (foot) of Dharma (Religion). Thus, devoid of these, how can Religion stand with due regards from all?

धर्महीन कृतं कर्म कर्ब तत्कलं घरेत् ।

धर्मे स्थिति मत: स्वापि न कस्यापि प्रतीयते ॥१६।१

How can an act bear good fruits, which has no trace of virtue in it? It seems no one had any trace of faith and steadiness in one's religion. (The Pāndavas did sacrifice out of arrogance; how can they be Āptas?)

छलाई च तदा विद्युविमानोतःपूजामतमुषु: ।

येन वामनकोण यंचितो३जी बलिनूप: ॥ 17 ॥

विहर्ता शलयत्रस्य वेद्यानं परिपालकः ।

धर्मिष्ठी दानशील सत्यवादी विलेत्रियः ॥ 18 ॥

Book IV Chapter IV

स्थानात्यप्रशितो5कसामविष्याना प्रभविष्याना । जितं केन तयोः कृष्ण बलिना वामनेन वा ॥ 19 ॥ छलकर्मविद्य चापं सन्देहोउत्र महान्यम् । वश्यित्या वश्चितेन सत्यं वद्य तिततोम् ॥ 20 ॥ पुराणकर्ता त्वमिति धर्मईघ महामिति: ।

Víṣṇu, the Lord of the Universe, assumed His Dwarf (Vāmana) Incarnation with the express object to cheat Vali, the king of the Daityas. Now, O Muni! The king Bali, performed one hundred sacrifice; he was the protector of the Vedas, virtuous, charitable, truthful and self-controlled; why was such a man dislodged from his position by Víṣṇu, the Powerful. Who was victorious in this affair? Was he the Bali, who was cheated? Or was it Vāmana Deva, the expert in making nice pretence? Who was the better of the two? I have got grave doubts on this point. O the best of the twice-born! You are the composer of the Purāṇas, virtuous, and liberal hearted. Speak what is true (and thus tranquil my heart).

व्यास उवाच

वित्त वे बलिना राजन्त्ता येन च मेदिति ॥ 21 ॥

विविक्रमोपि नाना यः प्रवितो वामानोभवत् ।

छलनार्थिमं राजन् वामनत्व नराधिप्य ॥ 22 ॥

संप्राप्त हरिणा भूयो द्वारपालत्वमेव च ।

सत्याद्यन्तराजसित मूलं धर्मेत्य पार्थिंद ॥ 23 ॥

दुःसाध्ये रैहिंना राजनस्वी सर्वसेना किल ।

Vyāsa said: O king! The victory was certainly Bali's in as much as he fulfilled his promise and gave over his kingdom of earth to Viṣṇu. And in as much as Viṣṇu in his fifth or dwarf Incarnation deceived Bali, he had to become a dwarf (i.e. a small mean person indicated even by the shortness of his body). O king! There is nothing superior in religion to truth. See! Śrī Hari even had to become, for his falsehood, a gate keeper of Bali. O king! It is hardly possible for a human being to observe in every way the injunctions of truth.

माया बल्वती घपू विभुगा बहुकशिपी ॥ 24 ॥

ययेदे निर्मिति विधं गुणै: शबलितं त्रिभि: ।

Powerful, indeed, is Māyā, composed of the three qualities and of various forms. By Her is created this Universe, made manifold by the admixture of the three qualities (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas).

तस्माखलतं सर्व कुतोर्शिद्धं भवेयुए १। २५ ॥

मिश्रण जनितश्रेय स्वितिरेया सन्तानी ।

How can you expect therefore, truth to be observed wholly, without the least violation, by a deceiver. This world is made up of the mixture of Rajas; O king! Know this as the every day routine of things in nature.

वैखानसाधा मुनवो नि:संगा निश्रितिधूतः ॥ 26 ॥

सत्ययुक्ता भवन्यत्र वीरातगा गततृषः ।

दूर्धान्दर्जानाथर विनिमिताने च तादूशाः ॥ 27 ॥

अन्यत्सर्वे शबलितं गुणैरिभितिबिंग्रु ।

It is only the Munis and Hermits that can observe pure truth; and that is why they are without any attachment; they do not accept any thing from any other body; they are desireless; and they all have no rough wear and tear of the world. They exist as perfect examples; their case is quite separate. All the others are caught under the meshes of the three Māyīc Guṇas.

नैकं वाक्यं पुराणेषु वेधेयु नृपस्तम १। २८ ॥

धर्मशास्त्रेषु चांगेषु सगुषी रचितेशिक्त ।

O Best of kings! The Dharma Śāstras, Purāṇas and the Angas of the Vedas are full of diverse opinions on any one point under consideration; for their composers were under the influence of the different Gūṇas.

सयुण: सयुणं कुर्बाशिवर्णं न करोति ते ॥ 29 ॥

गुणास्ते सिश्रिता: सर्वे न पृथभावसंगस्ता: ।

The Suguna persons (i.e. persons under Māyā) do Saguna works (works composed of qualities) and the Nirguna persons (i.e. persons above Māyā) do not do any Saguna work. And when the Guna are mixed with one another, they cannot remain pure (i.e. they exhibit qualities of those Gunaş with which they are mixed).

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

निव्यौतिके स्थिते धर्म मति: कस्यापि न स्थिति ॥ 30 ॥

भवो.टूबे महाराज मायया मोहितस्य वै ।

O king! One is influenced by Māyā no sooner one takes one's birth in this world; so that no body can remain steady in this pure, steady maxim of truth, untainted by any falsehood or deceit.

ईन्द्रियाणि प्रमाधीनि तदासर्फे मनसला ॥ 31 ॥

क्रातील विवियाभ्याल्यानुगीत: प्रेरितो भृणम् ।

The sense organs, Indriya, as, confound the Buddhi (reason) and make one follow the path of enjoying sensual things. Mind is attached to senses and follows diverse ways, urged on furiously by the three Gunas.

वशातिवर्षयपत्न : प्राणिनः : स्थितरंगमाः : । ३ २ । ॥

सर्वे मायावगा राजनसाउनुकीक्षिति लेरिह ।

O king! All the beings, Brahmā down to the moving and non-moving things, fall under the delusion of Māyā; She plays with them.

सर्वानैं मोहयत्येया विकुर्वेत्यिनगं जगत् ॥ 33 ॥

असलो जायते राजकार्यवान्यमं नरः ।

This Māyā is always imposing on all; and She is incessantly making formations and transformations in this Universe; O king of king! The man under the influence of action takes recourse to this untruth (i.e. actions arise first from this untruth) from the very moment of his birth.

शून्द्रियार्थीऋतयानो न प्राणानीत यदा नरः ॥ 34 ॥

तदर्थं छलमादने छलायपे प्रवर्ते ।

Persons when they do not get their desired object after they have pondered how to secure the sensual objects, take recourse to pretext, and, from that pretext do many sinful acts.

कामः क्रोधश लोभश्र वैरीणो बलवरतः ॥ 35 ॥

कृताकृतं न जानित प्राणिनस्तशं गता: ।

Lust, anger, and avarice; these are very powerful enemies. The Jivas under their influence cannot distinguish right from wrong.

विघये सत्यहंकार: प्रबलः प्रभावलपि ॥ 36 ॥

अहंकाराद्वेभोहो महामरणाये च ।

When wealth, might and rank come to a person,

he gets deep-rooted Aharinkāra, and becomes very egoistic; from Aharinkāra, delusion comes and, from delusion, insensibility and death ensue.

सकूल्य बहुवस्त्त विकल्पा: प्रपवन्ति च ॥ 37 ॥

ई्योंमृया तथा ईयः प्रायुर्भवित् चेतासि ।

आशा तृष्णा तथा दैन्यं द्यमो5धर्मापीतस्तथा ॥38 ॥

प्राणिज्ञा प्रभवेत्येते भावा महामुद्धावः ।

Here men argue mentally many plans; and thence jealousy, intolerance and enmity spring in the heart; next arise, out of delusion, hope, thirst, misery, low-spiritedness, arrogance and irreligiousness.

यज्ञानानि तीर्थानि ज्ञानानि नियमास्तथा ॥ 39 ॥

अहूब्रात्याभ्यन्तु कगोति पुरुषोउवहम् ।

It is through Ahamkāra that people are led to perform sacrifices charities, visiting places of pilgrimages, practising vows and rules for religious rites and ceremonies.

अहंभावकृतं सर्वे प्रपवेत्रे न शीचवत् ॥ 40 ॥

रागलीभावृक्तं कर्म सर्वांग शुद्धिवर्जितम् ।

Hence these sacrificial acts, etc, from Aharñkāra, are unable to remove the clouds of impurity from the mind, as observance of purity and cleanliness does. Especially when any action is done through greed or undue affection, as its motive, it cannot be pure in every respect.

प्रधानं रद्वयगृद्धिक्र शद्वया विबुधेः किल ॥ 4 1 ॥

अउहोष्णासितं रद्यं प्रगलं धर्मकर्मणि ।

Therefore, at the commencement of any sacrifice, the wise persons looks at the purity of sacrificial things; (Dravya Śuddhi); those articles that are collected without injuring others, are the best in religious acts.

उहार्जितेन रुद्येण यक्योति शुभं नः ॥ 42 ॥

विपरीतं भवेत्तु फलकाले नृपोतम ।

O best of Kings! If the things, acquired by injuring others, be utilised in any auspicious act, they yield contrary results at the time of fruition.

मनोरितिनिरंच यस्य स व्यव्यरूकतापाषयेत् ॥ 43 ॥

तस्मिन्विकारयुक्ते तु न यथार्थपर्ल लभेत् ।

Book IV Chapter V

It is he only, whose mind is very-pure and undefiled, who gets the results wholly auspicious from any sacrificial act. Minds defiled do not acquire their proper desired objects.

कताऱ: कर्मणां सर्वे आचार्यश्रस्तिजाद्यः ॥ 44 ॥

सूभे त्रिशुद्रमनसस्तदा पूर्ण भयेकतमम् ।

देशकालतिकागद्यमकुर्णो शुळता यदि ॥ 4 5 ॥

न-नाणां च तदा पूर्ण कर्माणं फलमपुन्ते ।

When the preceptor and the priests ordained are sincere and pure; more over, when the place, moment, act, sacrificial things, the mantras, and the sacrificer are all holy, then and there only, the full results accrue in their entirety to the sacrificer.

श्रूर्णो नारामहिष्य स्वयुद्धि परभां तथा ॥ 46 ॥

क्रांति सुकृतं तद्धिपरितं भवेकित्कि ।

If the sacrifice be intended for the destruction of one's enemy or for a personal motive and one's gain, it converts auspicious results into those that are inauspicious and leads to ruin in the ends.

स्वाधिसकः पुणप्रियरं न जानाति शुभाशुभम् ॥ 47 ॥

देवाधीन: सदा कुध्यत्पापमेव न सकृतम् ।

Selfish persons are unable to ascertain, which actions are auspicious and which are not; they depend on the circumstances what they call Daiva, and the people do acts sinful instead of virtuous.

प्रजापत्या: सुरा: सर्वे हुसुराधुः तदुद्धना: ॥ 48 ॥

सर्वे ते स्वार्थिनस्ताः परमसरविरोधिनः ।

सचोद्धता: सुरा: सर्वे प्ययुक्ता वेवेयु भागुना: ॥ 49 ॥

रजो-द्वावसातमासासु तिथच: परिकीर्तिता: ।

The Devas and demons all are created by Brahmā, the Prajāpati, the Creator; they all are selfish; hence they are always at war and war with each other. The Devas are born from the Satīva Guna; the human beings are sprung from the Rajas and the birds are sprung from the Tamas.

सत्त्वैद्वानां तैर्वरं परम्यमनातन् ॥ 50 ॥

तिरधान्य कि चित्र जातिवैरमुद्धे ।

O King! When the Devas, born of the Sativa Guna are always engaged in inimical actions, what wonder, then, is there, that the lower ones would be at war with one another!

सदा श्रौहमर देवास्तपोश्चनकारतथा ॥ 51 ॥

असन्तुषा देषपारः परम्यस्तेषिधिनः ।

अहूबारसपूद्रतः संसारोउयं यतो नृप ।

रागदेषविहीनस्तु स कर्व जायते नृप ॥ 52 ॥

शीत श्रीमदीभागवते महापुराणे वतृष्वैकन्ये

बतुर्षो5थायः 11 4 11

O King! When the Devas are always discontented, filled with jealousy and envy, at war amongst each other, and obstructors of the ascetics and the austere persons, then know that this Universe has sprung from Aharñkara (egoism). How can you expect them to be free from feelings of anger, jealousy; etc.!

Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Fourth Book, the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses on Adharma by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IV Chapter V

CHAPTER V

On the Dialogues of Nara Nārāyaṇa

व्यास उवाच

अथ विक यदुनेतेचन संसारोस्मिध्योतम ।

यर्मान्मारोडीहबुद्धितु कक्रिद्धवति कर्हिंधन् ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O best of kings! There is no need of dwelling at length on this point; suffice to say, that in this world, are found persons very rare that are religious, and free egoism, jealousy, anger, etc.

रागदेश्वार्ते विश्वं सर्वे स्थावरजंगम् ।

आष्टे युगेपि राजेन्द्र किमष्ट्र किलदूषिते ॥ २ ॥

O king of kings! Even in the Satya Yuga, the Golden age, this world, moving and unmoving, was covered with feelings of jealousy and anger. What to say in this Kali Yuga (Dark Age)! (There is no wonder that this world would be full of these vicious things.)

देवा: सेव्यांश सहोहाण्डलकर्मरता: सदा ।

मानुपाणां तिरक्षां च का वातां नृप गणयते ॥ 3 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

O best of kings! When the Devas are deceitful, jealous, and filled with feelings of anger, what is to be said with human beings and other lower creations!

ग्रैहोर प्रेहरो पर्वेदिति समानता ।

अग्रौहिण तथा शान्ते विहेषः खलता स्मृता ॥ 4 ॥

O Lord of the Earth! It is natural, that injury be inflicted on those persons that commit injury; but when peaceful person, void of any enmity, are injured, that is certainly an act wicked and mischievous.

यः कश्रितापसः शान्तो जपध्यानपरायणः ।

भवेतन्य जपे विद्यकर्ता वे मघवा पत् ॥ 5 ॥

Whenever, any devout ascetic, calm and quiet, is engaged in prayer and meditation, and silent muttering of one's martrams, the king of the Immortals throws hindrance in his asceticism. (This is certainly a mischievous act.)

सर्ता सत्यगुं सश्रात्सर्वदैवावर्ता कति: ।

मध्यमो मध्यमानां तु क्रियायोगी युगे स्मृती ॥ 6 ॥

(Holy, unholy and mixed persons exist in all the yugas). To those that are holy, all the yugas are the Satya yuga; to the unholy ones, always it is the Kali yuga (Dark age); and to the mixed ones, always it is Tretā and Dvāpara.

कीक्षित्दाचिद्वलिति सत्यधारुनतैकः ।

अन्यधारुव्ययुगानों से वर्से धर्मपरायण: ॥ 7 ॥

You will very seldom find a few persons, following really the True Religion; otherwise, you would have found all the persons in the different yugas religious, appropriate to those yugas.

यासना कारणं राजनसर्विकं धर्मवैस्थिति ।

तस्यां वे मतिनयां तु धर्मोषि मतिनो घबेत् ॥ ८ ॥

O king! In all cases where the conservation of religions and religious affairs are concerned, know that the original wish and desire is the cause. If this desire be impure and sullied, religion becomes also sullied; for, verily, this impurity in one's desire is one's cause of ruin in every respect. (Therefore the impure desires are never to be cherished and indulged.)

मतिना वासना सर्व विनाश्योति सर्वथा ।

बहाणणे हदयाज्ञातः पुत्रो धर्म इति स्मृतः ॥ 9 ॥

A son, named Dharma, was born of the heart of Brahmā; he was devoted to Brahmajñāna (the knowledge of Brahma), truthful, and always engaged in rites and ceremonies and in accordance with the Vedic religion.

बहाणण: सत्यस्म्यजो वेदधार्मतः सदा ।

दक्षस्य दुहिताएं हिं घृता द्रग महात्मना ॥ 10 ॥

This high souled Muni Dharma was a householder and married duly, according to the proper procedure, to the ten daughters of Dakṣa Prajāpati.

विवहाविधिता सम्यकः मुनिना गृहधारिण।

तास्वजीजनयतुज्ञान्यं: सत्यवर्ता बर: ॥ 11 1 ॥

This Dharma, the foremost amongst the followers of truth, impregnated them and had four sons, named respectively Hari, Kṛṣṇa, Nara, and Nārāyaṇa.

हरिं कृष्ण नरं चैदा तथा नारायणं नृप ।

योगाध्यासराते निवर्ध दीर: कृष्णो बभूव हु ॥ १२ ॥

Hari and Kṛṣṇa, amongst the four, used to remain always in the practising of the yoga.

नस्नारायणी चैव चेसुत्सप उतनम् ।

प्रातेल्यार्टि समायान तीर्थे बदरीकाभ्ये ॥ १३ ॥

Nara and Nārāyana came over to the Himālayan mountains and, in the hermitage of Badarikā, commenced the difficult religious asceticism and penance.

तपविस्तु ध्रुर्णी ती पुराणी भुनिसन्ती ।

गृणांती तस्यं बढ़ा गंगाया विपुले तदे ॥ 14 ॥

The foremost of the ascetics, those two ancient Munis, began to recite that highest mantra of Para Brahma, the Gāyatrī, on the wide spacious bank of the Ganges.

हरेंडेशी स्थिती तत्र ननतारायणावृषी ।

पूर्णं वर्षसहसं तु चक्राते तप उतमम् ॥ 15 ॥

The two Rṣis named Nara and Nārāyaṇa, born of Hari's Anīsa, practised excellent tapasyā for full one thousand years.

Book IV Chapter V

तापितं च जगत्सर्वे तपसा सचाराचरम् ।

नरनारायणायचं च शक्र: क्षीभं तदा ययौ ॥ १ ६ ॥

The whole Universe, moving and unmoving, became hot through the Fire of their Tapas. Indra became also perplexed.

चिन्ताविहः सहस्वाक्षो मनसा समकल्ययत् ।

कि कत्वं धधपुत्रो तापसी ध्यानसंयुत् ॥ १७ ॥

सिद्धार्थी सुयुणं श्रेष्ठमानं नो ग्रहीधानः ।

विज्ञ: कर्थ प्रकर्तैल्यतपो येन भवेत्र हि ॥ 18 ॥

The thousandeyed Indra became anxious, and thought within himself thus: What is to be done now? These two sons of Dharma are practising Tapas and are in meditation. If they succeed, they can occupy my excellent seat in Heaven; how can I break their Tapasyā and what steps shall I take to hinder them.

उत्पाद कामं क्रोधं च लोभे जयातिर्दारभम्।

इत्थिद्रियसहख्रशः समाकृह गजोतनम् ॥ १९ ॥

विधन्कामस्तु तत्सा जगाम गन्धमादनम् ।

गत्वा तजामे पुण्ये तावयश्यच्छतकुः ॥ 20 ॥

Lust, anger, and insurmountable avarice Indra brought into existence and, intent on hindering their tapasyā, mounted on the elephant Airāvata, went quickly to the hill Gandhamādana, and approaching the holy hermitage, saw the two ancient Rsis.

तस्मा दीनदोहै तु भात्मकाविव कोदिति ।

ब्रहाविष्यु किमेती वे प्रकटो व विभावसु ॥ २ १ ॥

धार्पुरावृष्टि तृती तस्या किं कारित्यः ।

Their bodies were incandescent by Tapasyā, as if they were the two rising Suns. Were they Brahmā, Viṣṇu manifested there or were they the two shining sources of light? These two Rsis were the sons of Dharma. What would they do with their Tapasyā?

इति संघित्य ती दूद्या तृतीवाच श्रवीपिति: ॥ 22 ॥

किं वां कार्य महागभी कृतं धर्मसुती किल ।

ददामि वां वरं श्रेष्ठ दातुं यातोउम्यदूमपी ॥ 23 ॥

अंदयमायि दास्यामि तुहोउम्मि तपसा किल ।

Thinking thus, the lord of Śacī seeing them addressed thus: “O highly fortunate ones! O two Rṣis the sons of Dharma! Please tell me what are your objects? I have come here to give thee excellent boons; I am very pleased with your Tapasyā; therefore ask boons of me; and even if they be not worth-giving, I will give them to you.

व्यास उवाच

एवं पुन: पुनः शक्रस्तावुवाय पुन: स्थितः ॥ 24 ॥

नोचृतनाडुर्षी ट्यानसंसिंधनों दृढ़वेतसौ ।

ततो वे मोहिनी मायां चकार भयदां वृषः ॥ 25 ॥

Vyāsa said: The Rsis were deeply immersed in meditation and seemed very firm and resolute; they, therefore, did not reply anything, though Indra, standing before them, repeatedly urged them to ask boons from him. Seeing this, the king of the Immortals began to terrify them with his supernatural enchanting fearful māyic powers.

युकान्सित्रांश व्याखांश सुस्यावाश्रविभीयम् ।

वर्षे वातं तथा वाईंस सुमुभावा चुन: पुनः ॥ 26 ॥

He created lions, tigers, wolves and other murderous animals and began to terrify the two Rsis with them; Indra also produced rains, hurricanes and fires very frequently so that they might yield.

भीष्यामास तौ शक्रो मायांं कृत्वा विमोहित्रीम् ।

भयतो2पि वर्ष नीती न तो धर्मेतुती मुनी ॥ 27 ॥

नरनारायणी दृष्टव शक्र स्वभवं नगः ।

In spite of Indra's attempt to terrify them by his wonderful Māyā, the two Munis, Nara Nārāyaṇa, the two sons of Dharma, could not be brought under his control. And Indra returned to his own place.

बरदाने प्रतुळ्ही न न भीति वहिवायुतः ॥ 28 ॥

व्याप्सिंहादिपि: क्रान्ती चलिता नाश्रमात्सक्त।।

न तत्योधानिभां वे कृतं कोर्पि क्षमोअपवत् ॥ 29 ॥

इन्होपि सदनं गत्वा चिंतयामास दु:खितः ।

चलिता भवलोगमथां नेगो मुनिवरोगमे ॥ 30 ॥

चिन्तपनो महाविद्यामादिशानिकं स्मातनीम् ।

ईशर्ती संलोकानां पर्ग प्रकृतिमद्धुतान् ॥ 31 ॥

ध्यातचत कः क्षमो लोके बहुभगवादिवदुतः ।

And he became very sorry and thought thus:

"These two Munis could not be tempted away with boons, nor did they fly away from their place of worship, though terrified with fire, wind, wolves, tigers and lions. No one, I think, would be able to break their meditai on. When fear and temptations have not distracted their meditation, they are certainly meditating on the Eternal Mahā Vidyā Śri Bhuvanesvari, the Prime Force of Nature, the Source of all Māyās, and the Goddess the Creatrix of all the worlds, the wonderful highest Prakrti; what other expert in creating Māyā there can be? Who can break their meditation!

यमूल्ना: सकल्पा माया देवासुरुक्ताः किन्ति ॥ ३२ ॥

ते कंबं वाधितुं शक्ता ध्यायिते गतकल्यपाः ।

Indeed! how can this whole host of Māyā that are created by Gods and Asuras overpower those purged of all their sins, who are meditating their Creator, the Supreme Māyā, that Illusion by which one considers the unreal Universe as really existent and as distinct from the Supreme Spirit, whence the Gods and Asuras have derived all their supernatural powers.

वार्थकी कामकीवं च मायाकीं तथैव च ॥ ३३ ॥

त्रिते यस्य भवेते नु वायितुं कोर्पि न क्षमः।

He in whose heart reign the seed mantras of Vāk, Kāma and Māyā, (called Vāgbjām, Kāmabjām, Māyābjām, no one is able to stand against and overpower him.

मायया मोहितः शक्रो भूयस्तस्य प्रतिक्रियम् ॥ 34 ॥

कर्तुं कामवस्तौ तु समातुयावबीद्धचः ।

मनोभववसंतेन रत्वा युक्तो बजाउनु ॥ 35 ॥

अभ्वतोषिः: समायुक्तस्तसा गन्धभावन् ।

O king! Indra, enchanted by Māyā, did not desist from tempting the two Rṣis, but he went on thinking other means by which their asceticism could be baffled and asked Kāma and Vasantā (the god of Lust and the srpiug season) to come before him and addressed them, thus: "O Kāma! You now be united with your wife Rati and Vasantā (the God of spring) and go to the hill Gandhamādaṇa,

accompanied by all the Apsarās (celestial damsels) and with all the Rasas (love sentiments).

Note: The Gandhamādaṇa is mountain like unsurpassable intoxicating happiness of the senses.

नरनावायणी तत्र पुराणाप्रियस्तनो Ⅱ 36 Ⅱ

कुरुस्तत्प एकान्ते स्थिती बद्रिकाओंमे ।

गत्वा तत्र सर्वीये तु तयोर्नम्ब्व मार्गेणि: Ⅱ 37 Ⅱ

वित्तं कामातुंरं कार्यं कुरु कार्यं मायामुंना ।

There you will find the two ancient excellent Rsis Nara and Nārāyana practising asceticism in solitude, in the hermitage of Badarikā. O Manamatha! You better go before them, and with the influence of your arrows, do now my work and make hearts extremely lustful.

मोह्यित्योच्चार्यित्या विजिगढ़ेताउवायु च ॥ 38 ॥

वशीकृक महाभाग मुनी धर्मेतुरावि ।

O Furtunate One! Charm over them by means of your arrows, make them leave their asceticism by magical spells.

को ह्यास्मिनसंसंसारे देवो दैत्योज्य मानवः ॥ 39 ॥

यस्ते बाणवर्ग प्राप्तो न याति भूगतादितः ।

Who is there in this world of Devas, Daityas, human beings, that, being whipped by your arrows, do not come under your control?

ब्रह्मार्ति गिरितानावश्छंत्रे बहिंदियमितिः ॥ ४० ॥

गणना कॉन्वोः काम त्वबुणानं पराकमे ।

When Brahmā, I, Mahādeva, Moon and Fire are all fascinated by your arrows, then is there any doubt that these two Rṣis would not be fascinated by them!

वारांगनागणोर्धं ते सहायार्थं मवेरितः ॥ 4 1 ॥

आगमिष्यति तत्रैव रभ्यादीनां मनोरमः ।

I am sending these public women as your assistants. Rambhā and other beautiful celestial nymphs would all follow you.

एका तितोतमा रभ्या कार्ये साधायिं श्रम ॥ 42 ॥

त्यमेवैकः श्रमः कामं चित्रितैः कर्तु संशयः।

You alone, or Rambhā or Tilottamā alone can do this work. Will there be any doubt if you all unite in this?

Book IV Chapter VI

कुरु कार्य महाभाग ददामि तव वार्षिछतम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

O Good One! Do this work for me; I will confer on you your desired objects.

प्रलोभिती मवास्तवर्ध वरदानैस्तपस्थिति ।

स्थानात्र चलिती शांतीं वृचायउं मे ततः श्रभः ॥ 4 4 ॥

O Manmatha! I tempted them with boons but these two ascetics, of controlled minds, could not be displaced from their seat. My efforts were rendered useless.

तथा वे भायया कृत्वा भीषिति तापसौ भूणम् ।

तथापि नोत्थिती स्थानाहेहरक्षापरे न तो ॥ 4 5 ॥

I frightened them very much with all the Māyic powers; yet they could not be dislocated from their deep thoughts. It seems that they are quite heedless in the preservation of their bodies.

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः श्रुत्वा जाक्र प्राप्त मानोषवः ।

वासवादु कार्यवामि कार्य ते मनसोषितम् ॥ 46 ॥

Vyāsa said: Kāmadeva, on hearing the king of the Devas, addressed him thus: "O Indra! To day I will fulfill all your desires.

यदि विज्युं महेशं वा ब्रह्माणं वा दिवाकमम् ।

ध्यार्वती तौ तद्धउसाकं भवित्तीरा वर्गी मुनी ॥ 47 ॥

But there is one word. If these two ascetics be meditating Viṣṇu, Śiva or Brahmā or the Sun, then I will bring them under my control.

देवीभर्ते वर्गीकर्तूं नाहं शरकः कर्णचन ।

कामारां महावीजं चिन्तयन्तं मनस्यलम् ॥ 48 ॥

And if they be meditating on the Great Seed Mantra, the root of all Māyā, and the great Kāmabījam, the king of the Kāma, I will never be able to subdue such a devotee of the Highest Devi. तां देवीं चेम्हागर्जिति संश्रिती भक्तिभावतः ।

न तदा मम बाणानां गोचरी ताप्पसे किकल ॥ ४ ९ ॥

If these two ascetics have devotedly taken refuge of the Great Power Mahā Devi, then they will not come under the sight of my arrows."

इन्द्र उवाच

गच्छ त्वं च महाभाग सर्वस्तत्र समुभृतेः ।

कार्य मापातितुःसाध्ये कर्ता हितमनुतमम् ॥ 50 ॥

Indra said: “O Blessed One! Go now with your assistants, ready to do your work. Nobody but you, I find, that can fulfill my this beneficial, though very difficult work.”

व्यास उवाच

इति तेन समाधिदा ययु: सर्वे मयुधाताः ।

यत्र ती धर्मपुत्री द्वै तेपाते उप्करं तपः ॥ 51 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणो चतुर्भिकल्भे

पत्रमो5याय || 15 || 1

Vyāsa said: Thus ordered by Indra, they all departed to where the Dharma's sons Nara, and Nārāyana were performing their hard Tapasyās.

Here ends the Filth Chapter in the Fourth Book of

Śrimadkevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of

18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IV Chapter VI

CHAPTER VI

On the Origin of Urvási

व्यास उवाच

प्रथमं तत्र सम्प्राटो वसन्तः पर्वतींत्तमे ।

पुधिताः पादपाः सर्वे डिंरेभालिर्वारिजिताः ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! First there appeared, on the mountain, the king of the seasons, Vasanta, the Spring. All the trees flowered and became very beautiful; and the bees began to hum round all sides.

आमाश्र डकुला रथासितलका: किंशुका: शृभा: ।

सालालासालास्मालाश मधुका: पुचिता बधु: ॥ 2 ॥

Mangoes, Bokulla trees, the beautiful Tilaka trees, the good Kiriśukas, Sāla, Tāla, Tamāla and Madhuka trees assumed unequalled beauties, ornamented with their flowers.

बधूवुः कोकिलालापा वृक्षायेषु मनोहराः ।

वल्ल्योदपि पुधिताः स्वां आलिलिंनुनीगोतमान् ॥ 3 ॥

Cuckoos began to coo coo (warble) beautiful on the tops of trees; the creepers flowered and began to embrace the trees.

प्राणिनः ख्वायु भार्यातु प्रेमयुक्ता: स्मातुतः ।

बभुव्छातिनात्रा क्रीडासक्ताः परस्वम् ॥ 4 ॥

The creatures became enamoured with love and began to look on their paramours with amorous eyes and began to hold pleasant sexual intercourses.

वसुर्भूत: सुगन्धाशु सुस्पर्शा दक्षिणानिताः ।

इन्द्रियाणि प्रमाहीति मुन्नौतामपि चाघवत् ॥ 5 ॥

The southern breeze blew gently, full of pleasant odours and agreeable to touch. The sensual organs became very powerful and could no longer be brought under their control by the Munis.

तित्युक्ततः कामः पूर्यन्यघ्न मारणान् ।

चका चरितस्तत्र वासं बदोरिकाओं ॥ 6 ॥

Then Kāma, united with Rati, hurriedly entered into the Hermitage of Badarikā with the five arrows in his hands.

रभा तिलोनमाद्धाङ्ग गत्वा तत्र वाराङ्गे ।

गानं चकुः सुगीतज्ञः स्वतातनसम्वित्यम् ॥ 7 ॥

Rambhā, Tilottamā, and other prominent Apsarās all went to that beautiful! hermitage and began to sing in perfect tune with gamuts, key notes and respective pauses.

तच्छ्वा मधुरोद्रौं कौकिलानां च कुजितम् ।

भ्रमतिलिवारं च प्रबुद्धौ तो मुनीधरी ॥ ८ ॥

The two Mahariss awoke on hearing the sweet music, the warblings of the cuckoos and the nice hummings of the bees.

ऋतुराजमकले तु दूद्या तो पुषितं नन् ।

जाती चिन्तापरो तत्र ननतारयाणची ॥ 9 ॥

Nara Nārāyaṇa became anxious to see the untimely bursting of the Vasanta (vernal season) and the flowering of the trees.

किमय शिशिरायाय: संवृत: समयं विना ।

प्राणिजी विद्वाल: सर्वे लक्ष्मोपेत्तिमातृतः ॥ 10 ॥

How can the spring season come now at such an untimely season. I see, all the creatures are

become extremely amorous with each other and infatuated with passionate lust.

कालधर्मविपर्यासः कथमघ दुर्गासदः ।

नरं नारायण: प्राह विस्यमोतुल्ललोचनः ॥ १ १ ॥

It is very unusual that untimely things should happen. How has this come to pass? Stuck with wonder, Nārāyaṇa began to speck to Nara with eyes wide apart.

नारायण उवाच

पथ्य ध्रातरिये वृक्षा: पुथिता: प्रतिभान्ति वे ।

कोकिलालायसंयुहा ध्रमारतिविजिताः ॥ 12 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: “O Brother! See these trees look very elegant with flowers on them; the cuckoos are sounding sweet notes on all sides; the bees are humming on all sides.

शिशिरं भीमातर्नां दारायन्वखर्नैवंः ।

वसंतैक्सरी प्राप्त: पलाशकुर्मपैनुं ॥ 13 ॥

The spring, the lion of the seasons, has burst asunder the fierce elephant, the winter season, by its sharp nails, as testified by the budding of Palāsa flowers.

राकाणीककात तन्वी देवर्ष किंशुकांधिका ।

नीलाणोककाना श्यामा विवाकीसकमलाना ॥ 14 ॥

नीलैंदीवतेना सा विज्वबुङ्घफलती ।

प्रोतुल्लोकुंदरदाना मछरी कर्णशीभता ॥ 15 ॥

पंधुजीक्षाया गृधा सिन्धुवारणखोद्वा ।

पुंकाकिलित्वसा पुणया कद्ववद्वसना सुभा ॥ 16 ॥

बाईवृन्दकालाप च सासस्वन्नपुरा ।

वासन्तो बढ़राना भनहंभगतिसथा ॥ 17 ॥

पुत्रजीवांशुक्यस्त रेमार्जिनिर्वारिता ।

वसन्तक्षीः सम्पाता बह्ञाव्यदीराक्रप्रे ॥ 18 ॥

O Brāhmīn! See how beautiful and excellent has become this hermitage with the presence of the Goddess Spring Lakṣmī? O Devarsī! The Raktāśoka flower is the palm of her hand; Kiniśuka flowers, her excellent feet; Nilāśoka flowers, her black hair on her head, the full-blown lotuses, her eyes; the bel fruits, her breast; the jolly Kunda flowers, her teeth; Mañjari, her beautiful ears; red Bandhu flowers, her lips; Sindhuvāra, her wonderful nails;

Book IV Chapter VI

the peacocks, her ornaments; the sounds of Sārasa birds, the jingling of her feet ornaments; the wreathes of flowers, her waist ornaments; the mad gooses, her gait; Kadamba flower's filaments, her hairs on her body; O best of ascetics! With all these, the Vasanta Lakṣmī has assumed a wonderful nice appearance.

अकाले किमियं प्राता विस्मयोउयं ममाधुना ।

तपोविफकारा नूनं देवर्षे परिधिंतय न 119 ॥

Why has this occurred untimely? Think over it; O Devarṣi! I am struck with wonder; surely this is obstructive of our penances.

भूयते सुरानीर्णां गानं ध्यानविनारानम् ।

आवयोस्तपिभंगाय कृतं मघवता किल ॥ 20 ॥

Hear! There the Apsarās are singing sweetly the song, tending to destroy our Tapasyās; it seems, these are the means, no doubt, adopted by Indra to pollute our Tapasyā.

མཆུང་བྱུམ་གྱུང་གྱུང་གྱུང་གྱུང་གྱུང་གྱུང་གྱུང་གྱུ

विनोद्यं विहितो भाति भीतेनासुराज्युण ॥ 21 ॥

Why is this spring season now generating our pleasures? It is clear that that. Indra, the enemy of the Asuras, is become afraid of our Tapasyā and is creating these obstructions to disturb our asceticisms.

वाता: सुगन्धा: शीला प्रसामाति मनोहा: ।

नान्यकारणमस्तीह शतक्रतुर्कर्ति बिना ॥ 22 ॥

Lo! The cool, odorous, and pleasant breezes is blowing; no other cause can be traced than the wicked deed of Indra."

इति बुवति विप्राप्ये देने नारायणे विभो ।

सर्वे द्विष्यं प्राता मन्यप्रमुखास्तात ॥ 23 ॥

When the best of the Brāhmins, the Deva Nārāyaṇa was addressing thus, the whole host of Cupid became visible before their sight.

दूरर्गं भगवान्यवर्त्रजे नारायणतशा ।

वियमायाश्यमनसी बभूवतुरभावपि ॥ 24 ॥

And the two Rsis were very much surprised on seeing them.

मान्यं मेकां दीव रभां दैव लिलोतमाम् ।

पुष्पान्यां सुकेशीं च महाश्रितां मारोपायम् ॥ 25 ॥

प्रमूत्रां घृताङ्गी व गीतजां चासहासिनीम् ।

चन्द्रप्रभां च सोमां च कोकिलालापमधिद्धतम् ॥ 26 ॥

विद्युभालांबुजाईं च तथा काङ्गनामिनीम् ।

एताङ्गान्या वरात्रोहा घृतसाध्यां ततदान्तिके ॥ 27 ।

They saw near to them the Cupid with his attendants Menakā, Rambhā, Tilottamā, Puspagandhā, Sukesī, Mahāśvetā, Manoranmā, Pramodvarā, Ghrṭāci, Čaruhāsini, the expert in music, Candra Prabhā, the cuckoo voiced Somā, the lotus eyed Vidyunmālā, Kāncanamlinī, and others.

तासां ऋषसहस्वाणि पञ्ञारद्धिकानि च।

वीक्ष्य ती विक्सितो जाती कामकैस्यं सुविसतम् ॥ 28 ॥

Eight thousand and five hundred Apsarās and long multitudes of the hosts of Cupid, the Munis saw and were surprised.

प्रणम्याश्रे स्थिताः सर्वां देववारांगनास्ततः ।

दिव्याभरणभूमात्वा दिव्यान्योपोषभितः ॥ 29 ॥

Then those prostitutes of the Devas, dressed with their heavenly ornaments and the heavenly flowers, appeared before the Munis and bowed down their heads on the ground.

जगुष्ठलेन ताः सर्वा: पृथिव्यामितुलर्भम् ।

ततचावस्वित्यां दिव्यां मन्यथातिविवधान् ॥ 30 ॥

The Apsarās began their enchanting songs, exciting much passion and rarely heard or seen in this world.

शुषाव भगवान्विणुर्नो नारायणस्ततः ।

शुत्वा प्रोवाच सातस्त प्रीत्या नारायणो मुनि: ॥ 31 ॥

आस्वतां सुखमदैव करोमातिलयमद्धूनम् ।

भवन्योर्जितिध्यॉण प्रापतः स्वर्गाल्यमध्यम: ॥ 32 ॥

The two Munis Bhagavān Viṣṇu like Nara Nārāyaṇa were pleased with their music and addressed them thus: O thin waisted good looking Apsarās! You have come here as guests, I see, from your Heavenly world. Stay here in peace and all comfort; we will gladly serve you as your hosts."

व्यास उवाच

साधिभानस्तु संजातस्तवा नारायणो मुनि: । इन्द्रैण प्रेयिता नूनं तथा विद्यन्धिकरीयां ॥ ३ ३ ॥

वरायकः का इमा: सर्वी: सुजाम्यद्ध नावः किल ।

तृणभ्यो दिव्यस्पाधा दर्यायिम तपोबलम् ॥ 34 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! The two Munis, thinking that Indra has sent these Apsarās to obstruct their Tapasyā, were filled with egoism and determined to create, out of their strength of Tapasyā a new Apsarā, who would be very much more beautiful and possessing far more heavenly graces than the present ones, who are ordinary looking and clumsy in their behaviours.

इति संघिन्य मनसा करोगोंः प्रताङ्य चै ।

तस्सोत्पादयामास नारीं सर्वांकुषुन्दीम् ॥ 35 ॥

And the Munis, by clapping or striking their thighs, instantly created a woman, exquisitely beautiful in all respects.

नारायणोरभ्यमृत हुवैर्गिति ततः शुभा ।

दूरशुता: स्थितास्तात्र सियमयं परयं युः ॥ 36 ॥

This good looking woman was named Urvaśī, since she was produced from the thighs. And all the other Apsarās present there were very much thunderstruck on seeing that Urvaśī.

तासां च परिचार्यां तात्तीशातिसुन्दरी: ।

प्रादुशकार तसा तदा युनिसंम्बभ: ॥ 37 ॥

Then Muni Nārāyana easily created as many women as there were Apsarās to serve them.

गायल्थ इंसल्थ नानोपायनपाणव: ।

प्रमेमुस्ता मुनी सर्वा: स्थिता: कृत्वोउलिं पुरः ॥ 38 ॥

The just produced Apsarās brought with them all sorts of offerings in their hands, and, singing and smiling, came before the Munis and with clasped hands bowed down before them.

तां वीक्ष्य विभ्रमकर्ती तपसो विभूर्ति

देवांगना हि मुगुड़: प्रविमोहरंचल: ।

क्रत्रुधु ती प्रमुदिताननपश्ठोगेभा

रोगोहमालेलसितधान्तिनाजंगलल्पः ॥ ३ ९ ॥

The heavenly damsels sent by Indra, though enchanting to others, were themselves now bewildered on beholding Urvaśī, beautiful in all respects and produced out of the Tapasyā of the Munis; and their hairs over the bodies stood on

their ends. Then they tried to make their faces as beautiful as they could and began to address the Munis thus:

कुरुः कथं स्तुतिमहो तपसी महन्चं

धैर्य तर्वेय भवतामिधीक्ष्वेय बाला: ।

अस्मत्कारक्षियविद्याश्रोण द्धधः

को चा न ततभवातो मनसो व्यथा नः ॥ 40 ॥

O Munis! We are ignorant girls; how can we praise you and the greatness of your Tapasyā and at your steadiness. Oh! There is no one in this Universe, that is not burnt with the passion by the arrows of our sharp eyesight. But there is no trace of mental disturbance and defilement in you; Oh! Wonderful is your greatness, indeed!

जातौ युवां नरहः: परमांगभृतौ

देवी मुनी ग्रामदामतिनिधी सदैव ।

सेवानिकाममिह नो गानं न कामं

कार्य हरे: शनतमध्येय चितानुभेव ॥ 4 1 ॥

We are convinced that both of you are the Arnisas of Vişnu and that your treasures are your incessant peace and control of mind. We have come here not to serve you but to hinder you in you penances, that we may fulfill the desires of Indra.

भायेन केन युवयोः किलन दर्शनं नः

सम्पतितं न विदितं खलु सखितं तत् ।

चित्तं क्षம் निजजने विहितं युवाध्यामसप्रिद्धे

किल कृतानास तायमुक्त्म ॥ 4 2 ॥

कुर्वन्ति नैव विवृधासपसो व्ययं

ई शानेन तुच्छफलदेन महानुभावा: ।

By what good luck of ours we have got a sight of thee, we do not know; we do not know also what merits we did? We have committed a great offence to you; still you have not cursed us. You have considered us as those of your own family and have pardoned us. Therefore our minds are free from sorrow and anxiety. Much praise be to your forgiveness! Wise saints do not squander away their occult powers, derived from austerities, in trivial ways like cursing others.

Book IV Chapter VI

<table><tr><td>མས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྲིགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གློགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྱོགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གྲོགས་ཀྱི་གཅིགས་ཀྱི་གཅིགས་ཀྱི་གཅིགས་ཀྱི་གཆིགས་ཀྱི་གཅིགས་ཀྱི་གཅིགས་ཀྱི་ག

Vyāsa said: Very pleased were those two Dharma's sons, the two Maharṣis self controlled and desireless, to hear these words of those goodly behaved heavenly damsels; they then spoke to the damsels, blazing with the fire of their Tapas.

ननतावणावृषतुः

ब्रुन्तु वाजित्ञान्कामान्द्वावस्तुर्णमानसे ॥ 44 ॥

थांतु स्वगं गृहील्मामुर्षीं चाल्त्तोचनाम् ।

उपायनमियं बाला गच्छलवघ मनोहरा ॥ 45 ॥

Nara and Nārāyana said: O Damsels! We are pleased with you; better ask from us your desired boons; we will instantly grant them to you. You better take with you to your Heaven this beautiful eyed Urvaśī, born of our thighs as a present to your Deva Rāja, the Indra.

दतास्त्रवाण्यं भवतः श्रीणनायोकसभ्याः ।

स्वलस्तु सर्वदैवेण्यो यथेढ़े प्रजन्तु च ॥ ४६ ॥

“न कस्यापि तपोधित्वं प्रकर्तेल्यात परम् ”

Now peace be to all the Devas; you better go to your own places; do not, in future, disturb the Tapasyā of others.

दैव्य ऋनु:

वव गच्छागो महाभाग प्राप्तासे पादपूक्जम् ।

नारायण सुरश्रेष भक्ल्या परमया मुत् ॥ 47 ॥

The damsels said: Where will we go now? We have reached your lotus feet through our devotion, and our joy knows no bounds; O Nārāyana the Supreme amongst the Gods!

वार्षिडतं चेत्रं नाथ दूदासि मधुसूदन ।

तुः: कमलपत्राक्ष ब्रवीमो मनस्पतिसतम् ॥ 48 ॥

O Lord! O Madhusūdana! O Lotus-eyed! If Thou are pleased with us and dost want to give us our desired boons, we disclose to you our wished for object.

पतितर्वं घव देदेश वरामेनं परन्तप ।

भवामः प्रीतिङुक्तास्वां सेवितुं जगदीक्षा ॥ 4 9 ॥

O Lord of the Devas! Thou art the Lord of the world; so beset Thou the Lord of us. O Destroyer of the foes! We will gladly put ourselves at the service of your feet.

त्वया चोत्पादिता नांशे: संत्यन्यश्राललोचना: ।

उर्वयश्रात्तसा यान्तु खर्नि ५ भवतद्वासा ॥ 50 ॥

Let those sixteen hundred and fifty beautifullyed damsels including Urvaśī, that are your creation and that are now existing here, let them go unto Heaven by your command.

स्वीर्णा घोड़गासाड़े निर्हचल शताधंकम् ।

सेवां तैंउ कार्वियामो युव्योत्सायतोमती ॥ 5 1 ॥

And we, the sixteen hundred and fifty damsels that have come before, may be allowed to remain here at your service.

वाहित्ठं देहि देहेश सत्यवार्थभर भाधव ।

आशाभगो हि नारीणां हिंचनं परिकीर्तितम् ॥ 52 ॥

O Mâdhava! You are the Lord of the Devas; be true to your word and give us our desires. Those seers, the Munis, who know what is Dharma, declare that it is sin, equivalent to murder, to destroy the hopes of those women that are struck with passion.

कामातर्ना च मुनिभिधर्मिंस्तत्वदर्शिभि: ।

भाययोगादिष्ट प्राणत: स्वान्तिमुभपरितृतः ॥ 53 ॥

त्वक्रुं नाईसि देयेग समवर्धसि जगतयते ।

We are very fortunate to come here from Heaven and we are filled with extreme love for you, O Devesa! You are the Lord of the world; you can do all things; therefore do not leave us.

नारायण झगचे

पूर्ण वर्षसहर्ष तु तपस्तर्ण मात्राउत्र वै ॥ ५४ ॥

त्रितेन्द्रियण चाचायक: कर्थ भकुं कंपीयन्तः ।

Nārāyaṇa said: O thin bodied damsels! I am practising at this place the tapasyaś for full one thousand years, controlling my passion; how can I now break it by engaging myself to enjoy sensual things.

नेच्छा कामे सुखे कान्सिलुखधर्मविनारणेक १५ ५५ ॥

पशुनामपि साधये रेमेत मतिमान्कधम् ।

I have no inclination to indulge in sexual pleasures, tending to destroy the Highest Bliss as well as the Highest Dharma. What intelligent person will like to indulge like a beast in sensual pleasures.

अपसर ऊचुः

शब्दादीनां च पझानां मध्ये स्पर्भासुं खरम् ॥ 56 ॥

आनन्दिसमूर्ते वै नायन्दिति सुखं किल ।

अतोउसाकां महाराज वचनं कुरु सर्वथा ॥ 57 ॥

The Apsarās said: Of the five senses; sound, etc., the pleasures attained through the sensation of touch are excellent, and is reckoned as the source of Bliss; no other pleasures stand equal to it. Therefore do then fulfill our words, and enjoy

incessantly this highest bliss and roam freely in this Gandhamādana mountain.

निर्भरं सुखामासाद चरसव गन्यमादने ।

यदि वाज्छसि नाकं त्वं नाधिको गन्यमादनात् ।

रामस्वात रुषे घनो प्राप्य सर्वा: सुर्गानतः ॥ 58 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे चतुर्धिकन्ये

फर्उीउध्वाः: 11 6 11

If you like to go Heaven, be pleased to know that there is no Superior Heaven to Gandhamādana (the mountain like intoxicating happiness of the senses). Dost thou enjoy the highest bliss, the pleasant sexual intercourse with us, the heavenly damsels in this very beautiful and lovely place.

Thus ends the Sixth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa on the origin of Urvaśī.

CHAPTER VII

On Ahanikāra

व्यास उवाच:

इत्याकर्ण वचस्तासां धर्मपुत्र: प्रतपवान् ।

वियगीमक्रोरोच्चते किं कर्तेल्य मयाध्यान ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! The Dharma's son, of excellent prowess, hearing thus, the words of these damsels, thought within himself, thus: what shall I do under the circumstances.

हास्योर्दुं मुपिव्युदेवु पविष्याम्यदा सङ्गमात् ।

अहक्रूगारिवं प्राणतं दुःखं नात्र विचाराणा ॥ 2 ॥

If I indulge now in sexual pleasures, I will be an object of laughter amongst the Munis. This present trouble has, no doubt, arisen from my Aharñkāra (egoism). This Aharñkāra is the first and foremost in ruining one's Dharma.

मूलं संसारखुक्ष्य यतः प्रोक्तो महात्मिभः ।

दूद्वा मौनं समाधाय न विश्तोड़ं समागतम् ॥ ३ ॥

वार्यान्नाराणं जुहं तेनासं दुःखभाजनम् ।

उनावित्तासथा नार्यों मया धर्मव्येयेन वै ॥ ४ ॥

तास्तु मां बाधितुं वृता: कामातीः प्रमदोतमाः ।

ऊर्पानिभिरिवाहाई जालेन स्वकृतेन वै ॥ 5 ॥

बद्धोर्सम सुवृदेवान्र किं कतंव्यमतः परम् ।

The wise sages have declared this Aharikāra as the root of this tree of world. I did not observe the vow of silence on seeing those damsels come here; I have held much conversations with them; therefore I have got into this troublesome anxiety and sorrow. I have created these damsels at the expense of my Dharma and Tapasyā. The beautiful and lovely damsels sent by Indra are now full of lust; and are bent on ruining my tapasyā. Now if through Aharikāra I had not created the damsels, I would not have fallen into this difficulty. Now I am caught firmly in the meshes of my own creation like a spider; what am I to do next?

यदि चिन्तां समूल्युख संलबान्यबलत इया: ॥ 6 ॥

ग्रणता प्रषा प्रजिष्यंति सर्वां भरनमोराधा: ।

मुक्तोड़े संचरिष्यामि विजने परमं तपः ॥ 7 ॥

तस्माकोंधे समुताया त्यश्यामि सुन्दीगणम् ।

If I abandon these damsels, thinking that there is no necessity to reconsider the matter, then would

Book IV Chapter VII

be broken hearted; and they would go away cursing me?

Yet I would be free from this present danger at least and then be able to practise excellent tapasyā in a lonely place. Therefore, now, I will get angry and tell these damsels go away from me.

यास उत्तर

इति सच्छित्य मनसा मुनिनारायणस्तदा ॥ 8 ॥

विशर्णमकरीचित्त से सुखोत्यादनसाधने ।

Vyāsa said: O King! The Muni Nārāyaṇa thought that he would become thus happy; but, at the next moment, he discussed in his mind, thus:

द्वितीयोदयं महाशुः क्रोधः सन्तापकाकरः ॥ 9 ॥

कामायदधिको लोके लोपादरिध च दारूणः ।

The second great enemy is anger; it is greater than causing hurt to others; and it is greater than lust aud avarice.

कोधाधिषयुः कुभते हिंसां प्राणविषातिनीम् ॥ 10 ॥

युःख्वां सर्वभृतानां नरकारामदीर्धिकाम् ।

Out of anger people commit murder; this murder is the source of hell and is giving pain to all.

यवाउनिर्वर्षिणाज्ञातः पादायं प्रदेहेतावा ॥ १ १ १ ॥

देहोत्यजस्तथा कोधो देई दहति दाहणः ।

As trees, rubbing against each other, generate fire; and are themselves burnt up in this fire, arising from this body ultimately burns this body to death.

व्यास उचाच

इति सच्छित्यमानं तं छातरं दीनामानसम् ॥ १ २ ॥

उवाच वचनं तव्यं नतो धार्मुक्तोउनुः ।

Vyāsa said: The younger brother Nara on seeing his elder brother anxious and low-spirited, spoke out what is right, as follows:

नर उवाच

नारायण महाभाग कोघं यच्छ महामते ॥ १३ ॥

श्रान्ते भावं समाधित्य नाश्याहंकृति पराम् ।

O Nārāyaṇa! You are very intelligent and very good; therefore relinquish this feeling of anger and betake to quietude and peace, and kill this dreadful anger.

पुराडह्वारदोषण तपो नटं किलावयो: ॥ 14 ॥

संग्रामश्रावचताध्यां भावाध्यामसुरेण ह ।

दिख्यवर्षसहर्ने तु प्रहादेन महाद्रतम् ॥ 15 ॥

Do you not remember that it is through this Ahanikāra and anger that our tapasyā was destroyed on a previous occasion; and we had to fight severely with Prahlāda, the Lord of the Asuras for one full divine thousand years.

दुःखं बहुतरं प्रापतं त्रतावाण्यां सुरोतम ।

तत्सामकोंधे परित्यज्य शान्तो भव मनुभीक्ष ॥ 16 ॥

“शान्तत्वं तपासे मूलं मुनिभि: परिकीर्तितम् ।”

O Lord of the Devas! We were put to much difficulties then; therefore O Lord of the Munis! Get rid of this anger; be quiet! The sages declare the peace is the root cause and the only object of Tapasyā.

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः श्रुवा शान्तोरभूद्वर्मानन्दनः ।

Vyāsa said: On hearing these words of his younger brother Nara, the Dharma's son Nārāyana took to peace.

जनमेव तय उवाच

संशयोरयं मुनिश्रिक प्रहादेन महात्मान ॥ 17 ॥

विष्णुभक्तेन शान्तेन कथं युद्धं कृते पुरा ।

कृतवर्ती कर्थ युद्धं नरनारायणाथी ॥ 18 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Lord of the Munis! The high souled Prahlāda was a devotee of Viṣṇu and of a peace loving heart; how it was that, in the ancient days, the battle took place between him and these Rsis; how could the Rsis fight? There is this great doubt in my mind.

तापसौ धर्मपुत्री हौ सुशान्तमानसावृषी ।

समापाम: कथं जाततस्योद्स्युस्त्यच च ॥ 19 ॥

संग्रामस्तु कथं तत्थां कृतसेने महात्मना ।

प्रहादोर्ध्यतिप्रामीना ज्ञानाविख्युन्तर: ॥ 20 ॥

These two Dharma's sons were ascetics and peace loving; how the fight could come to pass between these and the Daityāsuras? How did these two Rṣis fight with the high-souled Prahlāda?

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

ननारायणी तद्धतापसौ सत्वसंस्थितो ।

तेन ताध्यां सम्पूद्तं वैरं यदि परस्परम् ॥ 2 1 ॥

तदा तपसि धर्मे च भ्रम एव हि केवलम् ।

क्व जपः क्व तत्धश्यों पुरा सत्ययुगेपि च ॥ 2 2 ॥

Prahlāda was very religious, full of knowledge and very much devoted to Viṣṇu. Nara Nārāyaṇa were sattvik and ascetics; therefore if there had occurred enmity between those, it appears that the religion and asceticism, Tapasyā and Dharma were matters in name only; and the labour was spent in vain in the golden age even. What was the value of asceticism and meditation and muttering silently the mantras! No one can make out.

ताड़ीर्नीं जितं चित्तं क्रोभाढ़ार्यसंतुम् ।

न क्रोधो न च मातस्यंमहूर्जारूईं चित्ति ॥ २३ ॥

Oh! Persons like them could not conquer their hearts full of anger and egoism! Anger and jealousy cannot spring unless there be at the bottom a feeling of egoism (Aharikāra).

अहूर्णात्समुच्नाः कामकोधायः किल ।

वर्षकौटिसूईं तु तपः कृत्वासिताङ्गणम् ॥ 24 ॥

All the passions, lust, greed, anger etc., come out of Aharikāra (egoism), there is no doubt of it; one hundred lakh years of severe asceticism are rendered quite useless by the cropping up afterwards of a bit of Aharikāra.

अहक्रातृकृते जाते व्यर्थ भवति सर्वथा ।

यथा सूर्यदेव जाते तमोक्षப் न तिष्ठि ॥ 25 ॥

As darkness is dispelled entirely on sunrise, so no trace of religious merit can exist on the rising of a bit of Aharinkāra.

अहक्राणिक्रस्यो तथा पुर्यं न तिष्ठिति ।

प्रहावो5पि महाभाग हरिणा समयुध्यत ॥ 26 ॥

When Prahlada could fight with Śri Bhagavān Hari, then, Oh! all his merits in this world are rendered to no use whatsoever.

तदा व्यर्थ कृते सर्वे सुकृतं किल भृत्ते ।

नरनारायणी शान्ती विहाय परमं स्तः ॥ 27 ॥

Where is the religious merit and where is peace when the quiet souled persons Nara Nārāyaṇa, the

two Rāsis began to fight, without paying any heed to their highest end, the Tapasyā?

कृतवन्ती यदा युद्ध ब्ब शमः सुकृतं पुनः ।

ईरुभया सत्वयुक्ताध्यामजेया यद्यहुक्तिः ॥ 28 ॥

When Aharinkāra became invincible by the two Rṣis, then what can be expected from the weak trivial persons like us in the matter of subjugating this Aharinkāra?

मादुशानां च का वातां मुनेशडूगारसंक्षये ।

अहड़ापर्यित्यक्तः को:प्रथिति भुवनत्रये ॥ 29 ॥

Who can be free from Aharinkāra in these three worlds, when the high souled persons like the above were not free from it? I am quite confident that, in this Universe, no body was ever before free from Aharinkāra nor will there be any such in the distant future.

न भृती भविता नैव यस्यक्तसेन सर्वथा ।

मुच्यते लोहिनारेबैब्दः काक्यमैत्यया ॥ 30 ॥

One can be free bound by an iron or a wooden chain; but when one is pierced by Aharinkāra, one can never become free from it.

अहक्रातिनवब्दस्तु न कदाचिदिपुच्यते ।

अहक्रापितृ सर्वे जानत्यावरजंमम् ॥ 31 ॥

This whole Universe, moving and unmoving, is rolling in this Samsāra (migration and transmigration) plitted by urine and faeces, being covered by Aharikāra.

भ्रमवैव हि संसारे विश्रमूर्प्रदृषिते ।

ब्रह्मानं कुततवालसंसारे मोहसंवृते ॥ 32 ॥

Where is, then the Brahma Jñāna? O Good One in vows! The Karma theory, according to the Mimāṃsakas, seems reasonable and true.

मर्त मीमांसकानां वै समन्तं भाति सुझत ।

महान्तोर्पि सदा सुना: कामक्रोधादिषिभूर्पि ॥ 33 ॥

माइशानां कलावसिन्का कथा मुनिसत्तम ।

O Muni! What can you expect from weak minded persons like me in this Kali yuga, when the great persons are always overpowered with lust, anger, etc.

Book IV Chapter VII

यास उवाच

कार्य वै कारणादूढ़ं कथं घबाति भारत ॥ 34 ॥

कटकं कुण्डलं चैव सुवर्णस्वूर्ण भवेत् ।

अड़क्राणोद्धवं सर्व बह्याण्डे सचारातयम् ॥ 35 ॥

पटस्तेतुवश: प्रोक्तस्तिद्युतः कयं भवेत् ।

Vyāsa said: O Descendant of Bharata! How can the effect be different from its cause? Gold and golden ear-rings though different in form owing to upādhis, are both similar to their original cause, the metal gold.

Thread is the cause of cloth; therefore as cloth cannot be different from its thread, so this whole universe, moving and unmoving, is sprung from Aharīkāra; then how can it be free from Aharīkāra?

मायागृगीक्षिभि: सर्वे रचितं स्विराजुम् ॥ 36 ॥

सर्गुणं सत्यायर्तं का तत्र परिवेदना ।

All this, moving and unmoving, including a blade of grass, are fashioned out of the three qualities of Māyā; so if it be formed of those qualities, what repentance can come to those who are wise and know every phenomenon as unreal?

बहा विध्गुल्णा शूद्रसे चाहूक्रमोहिताः ॥ 37 ॥

भयंत्यमिन्महागाधे संसारे नृसनसि ।

O Best of kings! Brahmā, Viṣṇu or Maheśa, even these are all rolling in this vast ocean of Samsāra, being bewildered and fascinated by Aharṅkāra.

वसिष्ठनारदाश्रा मृनयो ज्ञानिन: परम् ॥ 38 ॥

तेशप्रभृतः संसरित संसारोप्रस्मिनुः पुनः ।

The great sages like Vasistha, Nārada and the other Munis are frequently taking their births in this Samsāra.

न कोय्प्रसित नृपश्रेष्ठ श्रिषु लोकेषु देहभृत् ॥ 39 ॥

एभियांयाणुर्गीभूतः शान्त आसमुखे स्थितः ।

In this Trilokī, there is not even one embodied soul, who is entirely free from this Māyā and has become quiet and immersed in the highest bliss of the Supreme Self.

कामाङ्गोरी तथा लोभो मोहोरुद्धूरासम्पवः ॥ 40 ॥

न मुईति नरं सर्वे देहवन्तं नृपोत्तम ।

O Best of kings! Lust, anger, avarice, and

fascination, all, arise from Aharñākara. These do not leave any embodied person.

अधीत्य वेद्गास्धानि पुराणानि विचित्यच च ॥ 4। ॥

कृत्वा तीर्थानंत दानं ध्यानं चैव सुरार्वनम् ।

कोरोति विषयासतः सर्व कंच च चोरत् ॥ 4 2 ॥

विचारयति नो पूर्व कामोमृहमाद्वित्यतः ।

Studying all the Vedas and Purāṇas, going to all the sacred places of pilgrimages, making charities, thinking on Paramātman and worshipping the gods, doing all these, the people still get attached to sensual objects and act like a thief.

कृते युगेशि जेतायां द्वापरे कुरनन्दन ॥ 43 ॥

विद्धोउसातित च धर्मेशि का कवाएड कली गुनः ।

O Son of Kuru! In the three yugas, the Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara, the Dharma had been pierced and wounded very much; what to say of the Dharma in this Kali Yuga!

स्पर्धा सदैव सहोहा लोपामर्षों च सर्वदा ॥ 4 4 ॥

एर्वविद्धोर्जित संसारो नात्र कार्यां विचारणा ।

You will find quarrels, avarice, anger raging always in this Kali yuga. Therefore there is no wonder that you will not find any one thinking and doing what is worth thinking, and doing what is not worth doing?

साधवो विर्ताल लोक भवन्ति गतमतसरा: ॥ 4 5 ॥

वितक्रोधा विज्ञापर्धा युद्धोतर्थं व्यवस्थितः ।

Free from envy, anger, and jealousy, such persons are rare now-a-days in this Kali yuga. Some peaceful persons exist here and there to keep up the ideal.

राजोवाच

ते धन्या: कृतपुण्यासे मद्गोहविशर्जितः ॥ 46 ॥

ब्रितेत्रिया: सदाचारा जितं तैभुविनयम् ।

The king said: O Muni! They are blessed and holy who are free from this fascination of Māyā, self-controlled, who have conquered their passions, and who follow good conduct. They have risen above the Trilokī.

दुनौमि पातकं सूच्या पितुर्मे महातनः ॥ 47 ॥

कृततत्पत्थिनः कण्डे मृतसर्पा हृधां विज्ञा ।

O Best of Munis! My high minded father put a dead serpent round the neck of an ascetic without any fault; I am very sorry to think of his act.

अतसत्य मुनिश्रेष भविता किं ममाता: ॥ 48 ॥

न जाने बुद्धिसंभोहाकि वा कार्यं भविष्यति ।

Therefore, O Muni! Kindly suggest any means by which I can now redress that act. O Bhagavān! I do not know what will be the result of this act, committed out of the bewildering of intellect.

मधु पश्यति मृतात्मा प्रपातं नैव पश्यति ॥ 49 ॥

कोति निर्विद्धं कर्म नरकाच विषेति च ।

Fools in search of honey see only honey before them but not the falls, whence they might tumble down and die. So the stupid men do disgraceful acts and do not get afraid of the tortures of hell.

कयं सुवृद्ध पुरा वृर्त विस्तारानुद्रवये ॥ ५० ॥

प्रहादेन यथा चोर्यं नरनारयणस्य वै ।

Kindly describe, in detail, how the fight incurred between Prahlāda and Nārāyaṇa in ancient times.

प्रहादस्तु कर्थ यातः पातालान्तद्वरवये ॥ ५१ ॥

सारयस्ते महतीर्थे पुणये बदरिकाओं ।

How was it that Prahlāda went out of Paṭāla (the nether regions) and went to the great holy place,

the hermitage of Badarikasrama in the Sārasvata country, the great place for pilgrimage.

नरनतावणी शान्ती तापसी मुनिसतमी ॥ 52 ॥

कृतवन्ती तथा युद्धे हेतुना केन मानत ।

O Muni! What was it that led the best of thet Munis, the two ascetics to fight with Prahlāda?

वैरं भवति विज्ञाथं दाराथं वा परमयम् ॥ 53 ॥

एषणारहिती कसमाचक्रतुः प्रधरं महत् ।

Enmity springs where there is wealth, wife, or land. The two Maharsis were desireless, had nothing of these; how, then, without any cause, they fought such a battle!

प्रहातोरप्र च धर्माना ज्ञाला देवी सनातने ॥ ५४ ॥

कृतवान्स कथं युद्धं नरनारायणी भुनी ।

Prahlada was also very religious and knew that those two Rsis were the Devas; knowing this, why did he fight with them?

एतद्धितस्तो बह्यन्त्रतुपिच्छामि कारणम् ॥ ५५ ॥

So describe in detail the cause of all these.

इति श्रीमद्वीभागकते महापुराणे चतुर्बंकनः

सत्तोउधान: 11 7 11

Here ends the Seventh Chapter in the Fourth Book of

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses on

Ahankāra by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER VIII

On Going to the Tirthas

सूत उवाच

शृति पृष्टस्ताव विगो रज्ञा पारीक्षितेत ने ।

उवाच वित्तरात्सर्वे व्यास: सत्यवतीसुतः ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: Thus asked! by the son of Parikṣit, the king Janamejaya, the best of the Brāhmaṇas, the son of Satyavati, Vyāsa spoke, in detail, the following:

जन्मेज्ञो9वि धर्मात्मा निर्वेदं परमं गतः ।

चितं दुर्गति मत्ता वैराटीतनस्यव ते ॥ २ ॥

The virtuous Janamejaya became very much sorry and despondent when he heard in detail the improper acts of his own father Parikşit, the son of Uttarā.

तस्यैदोड़राणार्थीय चकार सत्तं मन: ।

विप्रावमानपपेने यमलोकं गतस्य दै ॥ ३ ॥

Owing to insulting the Brāhmin boy, his father had to go to hell; and he was constantly thinking how to release his father.

पुत्रामतकाधास्मात्यते पितरं स्वकम् ।

पुत्रेति नाम सार्थ स्वातेन तस्य मुनीक्षाः ॥ ४ ॥

The son is called “Putra” for he releases his father from the hell, named “Put”. He is the true son that can do so.

सर्पदृष्टे नृपं श्रुला ह्यायपित मृते तथा ।

विप्राणायात्तेरेयं स्नानदानविवर्जितम् ॥ ५ ॥

वितुर्पर्तिं निश्यामती निर्वेदं नरावाक्षः ।

पारीक्षितो महाभागः सन्तपो भयविद्धलः ॥ ६ ॥

Book IV Chapter VIII

The fortunate son of Parikṣit became very much tormented and bewildered with fear when he heard what was the fate of his father, who died bitten by a serpent on the top of a palace, due to the curse of a Brāhmin, void of any bathing, charities, and the purificatory acts.

परम्छय मुनि व्यासं गृहातमनिर्विति: ।

नरनारायणस्येमां कक्षो परमवित्तात्मा ॥ 7 ॥

When Vyāsa returned home, Janamejaya asked him, the whole course of events of Nara Nārāyaṇa.

व्यास उवाच

स यदा नित्तो रौद्रो हिरण्यकशिपुरंग ।

अभियक्तिस्तदार राज्य प्रहादो नाम ततुतः ॥ 8 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When the terrible Hiranyakāśipu was slain, his son Prahlāda was installed on the throne.

तम्मिछासति देत्येटे देवहाहाणुजके ।

महैभूंयो नृपतयो चजतः श्रद्धायित्नतः ॥ 9 ॥

During the government of Prahlāda, the chief of the Daityas, the worshipper of the Brāhmanaş and Devas, the kings on earth began with faith to do many sacrifices for the satisfaction of the Devas.

ब्राहणाशु तपोधर्मतीर्थयात्रा कुर्वेते ।

श्रेयाशु खस्ववृत्तिस्वा: शुत्रा: शुधूषणे ततः ॥ 10 ॥

The Brāhmanas were engaged in their Tapasyā, Dharma, and in frequenting the places of pilgrimages; the Vaishyas, in their trade; and the Śūdras, in serving the other three classes.

गृसिंहिन च पातले स्थापितः मोक्ष देवात्यः ।

राज्यं चकार तत्रैव प्रजापातन्तरतः ॥ ११ ॥

The incarnation of Hari, the Nrsinha (Man-Lion) made Prahlāda, the king of the Daityas in the Pātāla (Nether regions); and Prahlāda, engaged there, spent his time in the preservation and welfare of his subjects.

क्रतिविद्युपुत्रोय च्यवनाखो महातपा: ।

जगाम नर्मदों सन्तु तीर्थे बे न्याद्तीक्षण् ॥ 12 ॥

Once, upon a time, the great ascetic Cyavana Muni, the son of Bhrgu went on his way to bathing

in the river Narmadā, at the place of pilgrimage, called Vyāhrtiśvara.

रेबां महानर्दी दृष्ट्वा ततस्तस्यावतात् ।

उत्तरन्ते प्रजग्रह नागी विषयमढ़रः ॥ 13 ॥

गृहीतो भवभीतस्तु पाताले भूमितसभः ।

सस्मार मनसा विद्युं देदवेदं जनादन्म् ॥ 14 ॥

There he saw the great river Revā and, while he was descending in the river, a dreadful snake caught hold of him and carried him to the Pātāla. The Muni was greatly terrified and began to think of the Deva of the Devas, Janārdana Viṣṇu.

संस्मूते पुरुषतीकाके निर्विकोःपन्न्योरगः ।

न प्राप चलवनो दुःखं तीयमानो रासततम् ॥ 15 ॥

On remembering the lotus eyed. Viṣṇu, the serpent lost his poison, and Cyavana Muni did not find any trouble, though carried to the Pāṭāla.

ढिजिछून मुनिस्वत्तो निरिणेणानतिषोक्ता ।

मां शपेत मुनिः कुंद्रस्तपासोयं महानिति ॥ १ ॥

Then the serpent, coming to know of the power of the Muni, left him for fear that the Muni might curse him; the snake afterwards repented very much.

चचार नागकन्याथि: पुजितो मुनिसत्तम: ।

विदेशान्यथ नानानां दानवानां महलुम् ॥ 17 ॥

Cyavana, the best of the Munis, worshipped by the daughters of the serpents, roamed there and entered once into a beautiful palace of the Nāgas and the Dānavas.

कदाधिवर्षपुरुषुं तं विचरन्तं पुरोतमे ।

द्वर्धें दैत्यराजोउरी प्रहावो धर्मवस्तकः ॥ 18 ॥

While he was walking, he was seen by the religious king of the Daityas, the Prahāda.

दूर्ध्वा तं पूजयामास मुनिं देत्यपतित्वा ।

पप्रष्ठ कारणं किं ते पातालामाने वद ॥ 19 ॥

The lord of the Daityas on seeing him worshipped him and enquired of him the cause of his coming there.

प्रेयितोत्र सि किमिश्रेण सर्व बृहि हिकोणम ।

दैत्यविद्धिपुक्तेन मम राज्यदिषुक्षया ॥ 20 ॥

Are you sent here by Indra? Speak truly, O best

of the Brāhmaṇas. Is it to pry into my kingdom out of the enmity between the Devas and the Daityas?

च्यवन उवाच

किं मे भयवता राजन् यदई प्रेयितः पुनः ।

तृतकार्यं प्रकुर्णिणः प्राप्तवापरते तव ॥ 21 ॥

Cyavana said: What have I to do with Indra? That I might be sent by him, as his spy, messenger, to your city!

विद्धि मां भृगुगुरं तं स्वनोयं धर्मततयम् ।

मा शकूंं कुरू दैत्येंत्र वासवप्रेषितस्य वै ॥ 22 ॥

O Chief of the Daityas! Know me as Cyavana, the son of Bhrugu, prompt in religious duties and whose eye is illumined by knowledge. Do not fear that I am sent here by Indra.

स्नानार्थ नमंदां प्रात: पुण्यतीर्थे नृपोतम ।

नघामेवावतीर्णोंई गृहीतघ महाविना ॥ 2 3 ॥

When I went to bathe in a place of pilgrimage, in the holy Narmadā and dropped into the river, a poisonous snake caught hold of me (and carried me here).

जातोउसी निविधः सपों विणोः संस्मरणादिव ।

भुक्तोड़ं तेन नागेन प्रभावात्स्मारमय ते ॥ 24 ॥

I took the name of Viṣṇu; and the serpent, hearing the Viṣṇu's name, became void of poison, and left me here as you see.

अगाताने राजेन्द्र मयान3प्रत तव हर्जन् ।

विष्णुभक्तों दैवेन्द्र तद्धक्ते मां विधित्वान । 25 ॥

O king! coming here, I see you. You are a devotee of Viṣṇu; know me, too, a devotee of the same Viṣṇu.

व्यास उवाच

तिश्याम वचः रूल्थां हिरण्यकशिपोः सुतः ।

प्रपछ्च परया प्रीत्या तीक्षिति विविधाति च ॥ २ ६ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Prahlāda, the son of Hiranya Kaśipu, on hearing his sweet words, gladly asked him about the various places of pilgrimages.

प्रहाद उवाच

पृथिव्यां कानि तीक्षिति पुण्याति मुनिस्तम ।

पाताले च तथा2प्रकाशे तानि नो वद विस्तारात् ॥ 27 ॥

Prahlāda said: O Best of Munis! Kindly describe to me, in detail, which are the places of pilgrimages on the earth, Pātāla, and in the Heavens, that verily lead to holiness.

छवन उवाच

मानोवाक्कायशुक्रानां राजस्नीथे पदे चे ।

तथा मलिनचितानां गुत्रापि कीकाटिधिका ॥ 28 ॥

Cyavana said: O King! He whose body, words, and mind have grown pure, to him, his every footstep is a place of pilgrimage; he, whose heart is impure and defiled, to him the holy Ganges even is a thing more hated and worse than the Kikata country (the name of Bihar).

प्रथमे चेन्मनः शूद्रं जातं पायाविजितम् ।

तदा तीर्थिति सर्वांशि पाचवानि भविति चे ॥ 29 ॥

Every holy place will impart holiness to him whose mind is first pure and deprived of sin.

गड़ातीरे हि सर्वेत्र वसन्ति नगराशि च ।

त्रजाशैवकारा प्रामाः सर्वे छेटास्तधापरे ॥ 30 ॥

निपादानां निवासाशु कैकतन्तां तथापरे ।

हूणवंगखानां च भलेच्छानां दैत्यसत्तम ॥ 31 ॥

O Best of the Daityas! On the banks of the Ganges, are situated good many cities, towns, villages, places to assemble, mines, small villages, the living places of the aborigins, the Cāndālas, and Kaivartas, the Hūnas, Baṅgas, the Khasas and the other Mlechcas.

पिबित्ति सर्वदा गार्ड़े जलं ब्रहोणमं सदा ।

स्नानं कुर्विति दैस्टैंत्र विकालं स्थेच्छ्या जना: ॥ 32 ॥

The inhabitants of the above places drink at their will the holy Ganges water, equivalent to Brahma, and bathe therein and do other works.

तत्रैको3पि विश्रुद्धातना न भवत्येव मारिये ।

किं फल नर्ति तीर्थस्य विषयोपहातामसु ॥ 33 ॥

O King! There not even a single soul becomes pure. What use is a holy place to him, whose heart becomes attached to the sensual objects and who can therefore be called the lost souls.

कारणं मन एवात्र नान्यत्राजन्विचित्रत ।

मनःशुद्धिः प्रकर्तेम्या सततं शुद्धिमिच्छता ॥ 34 ॥

Book IV Chapter VIII

Know, O king! the mind as the principal factor in any religious act or in any holy place. He who wants purity, let him first make his own mind pure.

तीर्वासी महापापो घरेत्त्रात्मवर्यचनात् ।

तदैवार्चितं पघामन्तंत्य प्रकल्पते ॥ 3 5 ॥

The residents in any holy place deceive others and thus incur great sin. The sins committed in a place of pilgrimage can never be removed; they become unending and inexhaustible.

वयंद्रवाकर्ण पबवं मिथे वैभोपजायते ।

भावद्रुस्तथा तीर्थे कोटिस्तानो न शुथ्यति ॥ 36 ॥

As the fruit, Indraváruna, is never sweet though fully ripe, so whose heart is defiled, he can never be pure though he bathes hundreds and thousands of times in the Tirtha water.

प्रथमं मनसः शुद्धि: कर्तेल्या शुभमिच्छता ।

शुढ़े मनसि र्वस्य पृथिवर्षिति नायया ॥ 37 ॥

He who wants welfare of his own and others, he should first make his mind pure; when his mind becomes pure, then, the purity of material things and the purity of conduct can have any effects; then and then only resorting to places of pilgrimages becomes efficacious.

तर्वेवाराग्याद्धि: स्याततस्तीर्थ प्रसिध्यति ।

अन्यथा तु कृतं सर्व व्यर्थ भवति तल्यणात् ॥ 38 ॥

“हीनवर्णीय संसर्ग तीर्थ नाला सदा चयजेत ।”

भूतानुकंपनं चैव कल्लिं कंर्णण विधा ।

यदि पृष्ठसि राजेत्र तीर्थ वक्ष्यायन्तुनामय ॥ 39 ॥

Always avoid company with the lowest class of persons in the holy places; it is far better to shew one's good will and compassion to all the souls (jivas) by one's intellect and by one's acts. You have asked me about the holy places of pilgrimages; I will now tell you those that are the best.

प्रधर्म वैभियं पुर्णयं चक्रतीर्थ च पुक्रमम् ।

अन्येषां चैव तीर्थानां संख्या नासित महीत्ते ॥ 40 ॥

पावानानि च स्थानानि बहुति नृपसतम् ।

O king! The holy Naimisāranya is the first, next Cakratirha; next Puskaratirtha; there are many

others besides these that cannot be counted. O Best of kings! There are lots of other holy places in this world.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छूला वचनं राजा वैभियं गन्तुमुक्ता: ॥ 41 ॥

नोदयामास दैत्यान्वे हर्षिनिर्यमासनः ।

प्रहार उवाच

उत्तिष्ठु महाप्रयाग गमिष्यामोउत वैभियम् ॥ 42 ॥

ऋथाम: पुण्डरीकाक्षं चौतवाससमच्छुतम् ।

Vyāsa said: O king! Prahlāda, the king of the Daityas, on hearing the Muni's words, became ready to go Naimisāranya and, with very much gladness, exclaimed to his followers, the Daityas: O Good Ones! Get up; to-day we will go to Naimisāranya and we will see the lotus eyed, yellow robed Śrī Acyutam, the Viṣṇu.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्ता विद्यापनैतन सर्वे ते दानावास्तदा ॥ 43 ॥

तेनैव सह पातातार्धिर्युः परया मुदा ।

Vyāsa said: O King! When thus addressed by Prahlāda, the Demons were exceedingly glad; and they all marched out of Patāla.

ते समेत्य च देतैया दानावाङ्ग मढ़ावताः ॥ 44 ॥

नैमिपारण्यमासाठा स्नां चक्रभूंदाचिताः ।

The Daityas, and Demons all united went to Naimisāranyam and filled with much pleasure, they all bathed on reaching that holy place.

प्रक्रादस्तत तीर्थेषु चर-दैवैः साम्वितः ॥ 45 ॥

सरस्वती महापुण्यां द्वर्गे विमतोदकाम ।

There, accompanied by the Daityas, Prahlāda roamed about the sacred places and saw the holy Sarasvati river and Her pure.clean water.

तीर्थ त्रन युधेष्छ प्रहादस्य महात्मनः ॥ 46 ॥

मनः प्रसर्ध संज्ञानं स्नाला सारस्वते जले ।

The high souled Prahlāda bathed in the Sarasvatī river and his mind was satisfied.

विधिवस्त्र देर्येंत्रः स्नानदानादिक शुभे ।

चकारायि प्रसज्ञात्या तीर्थे परमपावने ॥ 47 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वैभागवते महापुराणे चतुर्धिकन्योड्गभोउध्यायः ॥ 8 ॥ 11

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

The king of the Daityas was very much pleased and he performed ablutions and charities according to due rites in that most auspicious sacred place pilgrimage.

Here ends the Eighth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa on going to the Tirthas.

CHAPTER IX

On the Fight between the Rşis and Prahlāda

व्यास उवाच

कुर्वैस्तीर्विविधं तत्र हिरण्यकशिपो: सुतः ।

न्योधों सुमहच्छायमप्रथतुस्ततदा ॥ १ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: After performing duly his religious rites there, the son of Hiranya Kaśipu saw before him an unbrageous peçal tree.

ददर्गे बाणानपराशानाजातीयकांस्तदा ।

पृथपक्षुवृतांस्तीताडिलाधौताम्होज्ज्वलान् ॥ 2 ॥

चित्तयामास मनसा यस्येमे विश्रखातिर्वल् ।

ऋषीणामाङ्गमे पुणे तीर्थे परमपावेन ॥ 3 ॥

There he saw along with the feathers of vultures, the terrible, sharpened under a stone, various glittering arrows, arrayed in due order; and he was surprised to think who could have kept such arrows, well guarded in this very holy hermitage of Rṣis.

एवं विश्वतान्नेने कृष्णाजिनधरौ मृनी ।

सभुज्जतवाभाती दृष्टी धर्मसुतो तत ॥ 4 ॥

तयोरो्ये घृते शुषे धनुषी लक्षणान्विते ।

शाङ्गैमाजवं चैव तथाउक्ष्ययो मेहपुषी ॥ 5 ॥

While Prahlāda was thus meditating in his mind, he saw before him, wearing the skin of a black antelope, the two sons of Dharma, the two Munis Nara Nārāyaṇa, loaded on their heads with high clots of hairs. Before them were placed the two white bows named Śārīngam and Ājagavam, (Pināka) the bows of Viṣṇu and Śiva respectively, bearing their qualified marks, as well as their two inexhaustible big quivers.

ध्यानस्थौ तौ महाभागौ नत्नारायणाव्यौ ।

दूद्या धर्मैतृत्ति तत्र दैत्यानामधिप्सतदा ॥ 6 ॥

कोधरात्कक्षास्तौ तु प्रोवासूरुपालकः ।

किं भवद्धुांं समारक्छो दूभपो धर्मविनारणः ॥ 7 ॥

न श्रुतं नैव दूरं हि संसारेउस्मिन्कदापि हि ।

तपसडुरणं तीव्रं तथा चापय धारणम् ॥ 8 ॥

वितोधोरयं दुये चाह कथं वुक्त कलिरियम् ।

बाहाणपर्य तयो वृक्त तर किं चापधरणम् ॥ 9 ॥

कव जटाधारणं देहे कवेयुंण न विडवनो ।

धर्म्याचरणं वुक्ते युवयादिंव्यभावयोः ॥ 10 ॥

The Lord of the Daitya, then, saw those two blessed ones, the two Rṣis Nara Nārāyaṇa, the two sons of Dharma, deeply absorbed in meditation. Seeing this, he became very much enraged, his eyes became red, and he began to address them thus: O two Ascetics! Has vain arrogance possessed your mind to destroy religion? It is never seen nor even heard, that the practice of severe asceticism and the holding of the bows and arrows, were carried into effect simultaneously by one man in any of the Four Ages. These two are contradictory things. That may be worthy in the Kali Yuga? This asceticism is fit for the Brāhmaṇas; why, then are the bows and arrows held by you? There is an irreconcilable difference between the holding of clotted hairs on the head and the holding in the hand of the bows and arrows. Therefore, do you practise religious rites, with feelings befitting your divine positions!

यस उवाच

इति तस्य चचः श्रुत्वा नरः प्रोवाच भारत ।

क्राते चित्रात्रदैत्यैद्य वृथा तपसि चावयोः ॥ ११ ॥

Vyāsa said: O Descendant of Bharata! On hearing thus the Prahlāda's words, the Nara Rsi said: O Lord of the Daityas! What matters it to you? Why do you, for nothing, trouble yourself with our tapasyā.

Book IV Chapter IX

सामर्थ सति यत्कुयोत्तसंपद्रोत तस्य हि ।

आवां कार्यद्ये मन्द समर्थी लोकविश्रुती ॥ १२ ॥

An able man can accomplish any thing. It is widely known in the three worlds, that we are able to accomplish these two things contemporaneously. O thou of weak understanding!

युद्धे तपरिस सामर्थ्य त्वं पुनः किं कार्यस्य।

गच्छ मार्गे यथाकामं कस्मादर विकल्पसे ॥ १३ ॥

In the battlefield as well as in asceticism, we can shew our prowess. What have you got to do with us in these matters? The road before you is unobstructed, you can go wherever you like; why do you brag of your own merits?

ब्रहतोजौ दुराराधं न त्वे देव विमोहितः ।

विद्यचर्चा न कतैव्या प्राणिधि: सुखमीयुधि: ॥ 14 ॥

You are very dull and stupid; what can you understand of Brahmanic glory that is very rare and attained with great difficulty? Those that want happiness need not meddle with the Brāhmanas.

प्रहाद उवाच

तापसौ मन्दखूनी स्वी मृषा वा गर्नोमहितो ।

मयि तिष्ठिति दैने०नै धर्मसैतुरवर्केन ।। १५ ॥।

न युक्मतेतर्हीर्जस्मिक्र धर्मार्णगं पुनः ।

का शक्तिस्तव युद्धेजस्ति दर्शयाएं तपोधन ॥ १६ ॥

Prahlāda said: Blunt headed and vain braggarts are you! When I am present in this Tirtha, I who am the upholder of Dharma, I won't allow you to practise any irreligious things here! O Ascetics! Better show me your skill in fight to-day.

व्यास उवाच

तदाक्षर्यं वचस्तस्य नरसं प्रत्युवाच रु ।

युध्यस्वादा मया सार्थे यदि ते मतिरीघुर्गी ॥ 17 ॥

अदा ते स्मोटीवियामी भूर्पानममुताथा ।

"युढ़े प्रद्वा न ते पशु.द्वीक्षयित कार्वन ॥"

Vyāsa said: O king! The Rṣī Nara on hearing his words replied: Give us battle if you are so desirous. O wretched amongst the Asuras! In today's battle, I will knock you head down, and then you shall never in future desire to fight with any body.

व्यास उवाच

तश्रिणय वचस्तस्य टैर्येउः: कुपितस्तद् ॥ 18 ॥

प्रहादो बलवानत्र प्रतिजामागरोह सः ।

येन केनाव्यपायेन जेषायाम तावुभावपि ॥ 19 ॥

नन्नारायणी दान्तायुंी तत्पिम्बित्ती ।

Vyāsa said: On hearing these words, the chief of the Daityas was very much angry and promised to conquer these two self controlled Rṣī ascetics, Nara Nārāyana by any means whatsoever.

वास उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा चचनं दैत्य: प्रतिगृहा शासनम् ॥ 20 ॥

आकृष्य तसा चाघं ज्याणबं च चकार है ।

नोउपि धनुरादाय शरांस्तीवाज्छ्छतशितान् ॥ 21 ॥

मुभोच बहुगः क्रोधायाज्ञादोपरि पार्थिव ॥ 22 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus saying, the Daitya; took up his bow and quickly stretched it with arrow and the bow string made a terrible noise. Then Nara, too, took up with anger his bows and began to shoot arrows at Prahālda lots of sharpened arrows and weapons.

तादैत्याजसतपनीय-

पुर्वैशिक्छेद्व आणीत्सरा समेत्य ।

समीक्ष्य डिक्रांश नः स्वयुर्जान

न्यानुमोगाणु क्षावित्तो वै ॥ 23 ॥

The lord of the Daityas quickly selected the arrows, glittering like gold, and with them tore asunder the arrows thrown by Nara. Nara, seeing his arrows, cut asunder, became infuriated with anger and began to hurl as quickly lots of other arrows.

दैत्याधिपसानापि तीब्रवेगशिष्ठचा

ज्चानोरितं तं मुनी-ह्मू ।

नरोडीप तं पछ्धिभाग्रौशु

कृद्वो3हन्हैल्यपांति बाहुदेशे ॥ 24 ॥

Prahalāda then cut asunder with arrows, of quick velocity, the Nara's weapons and struck violently on the breast of Nara. Nara, too, with anger pierced the arms of Prahlāda with five quick arrows.

सेंग्रा: सुरास्त्रत त्योर्ही युद्धे

श्रूं घिमारैर्नैगनाश्चिताशा ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

नरस्य वीर्यं सुधि संस्थितस्य ते

तृटुर्बुदैवपलेशं भृभ्य: 11 25 II

Indra and the other Devas came on their respective acroplanes to see their fight and began to give cheers sometimes to Nara and sometimes to Prahlāda from above the skies.

ववर्षे दैत्याधिति आतचापः

शिलीमुखानंबुधरो यथापः ।

आदाय शान्हं धनुतुममेवं

मुभोच बाणाधिजहोमपुंखान् ॥ 26 ॥

The Lord of the Daityas taking up his bow, began out of furious anger, to hurl various weapons on Nara as incessantly as clouds give rain over the mountain peaks. The Nara Muni now became very much exhausted and weary, being struck with Prahlāda's arrows.

बभूव युद्धे तुमुलं तयोस्तु

जयैविणपे। पार्थिवदेदैव्यपे।

ववर्षुगकारुपाये श्वित्ताने

पूथाणि दिव्यानि प्रहृधितना: ॥ 27 ॥

Nārāyaṇa then seeing Nara exhausted, became very much amazed and holding his unequalled Śārīga bow, began to quit arrows, shining with with golden lustre.

चुकोन दैत्याप्रितर्शरी स

मुगोच बाणानितितीत्रवेगान् ।

चिच्छेद तान्यमैतुतः सृतीक्षी

ध्रुविमुक्तैर्विशिजीस्ताद३गु ॥ 28 ॥

O Lord of the earth! Then Nārāyaṇa and Prahlāda both were desirous to win the victory, and a terrible fight ensued. The Devas gladly poured forth flowers on their heads from the skies.

ततो नारायण बाणोः प्रहाद्वशातिकर्षितः ।

ववर्षं सुस्तितं वीरं धर्मपूत्रं सन्तानम् ।

नारायणोप्रि तं वेगान्युर्स्कौर्णीः शिलाशितिः ॥ 29 ॥

तुरोतातीव पुरतो द्वैलानामधिरं पश्वतम् ।

सप्रियातोउबरे तत्र द्विद्धूर्णा बन्यूव ह ॥ 30 ॥

The king of the Daityas got very much enraged and began to hurl arrows with tremendous quickness. Nārāyaṇa, the son of Dharma,

immediately cut asunder those weapons with his very sharp arrows.

Nārāyaṇa too, threw arrows sharpend under stones with high velocity and very much troubled the lord of the Daityas, who now became very much restless.

देवानां दानवानां च कुर्वर्ता जयकोषणम् ।

उभयोः शरबर्षण छादिते गानवे यदा ॥ 31 ॥

दिवास्थि रासिसरुं बधूव तितिरं महत ।

कचुः परस्यं देव दैत्याश्रतीव विमसता: ॥ 32 ॥

अदृषपूर्वे युद्धे वे वर्तेउष सुदारुणम् ।

The sky was covered over with arrows and arrows from both the parties and the day looked like the night. Then the Devas and the Daityas were very much astonished and told each other. “We never saw before a terrible fight like this.”

देवर्वधोउ नाभ्वां यक्षिक्रसपरानः ॥ 33 ॥

विद्याध्यार्थागणांश विस्तयं परं ययु: ।

Then the Devarşis, Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Kinnaras, Pannagas, Vidyādharas and Cāranas were all very much confounded.

नारदः परंतक्षित्र प्रेशणार्थ स्थिती मुनी ॥ 34 ॥

नारदः परंतें प्राह नेतुर्णं चाघवतुरा ।

ताराकासुर्युद्धं च तथा बुजासुर्य च ॥ 35 ॥

मधुकैटभयंसुंद्रहं हौरणे चेयुंगं कृतम् ।

The two Rsis Nārada and Parvata came also to witness their fight; the Devarsi Nārada told the Parvata Rsi he never saw before such a dreadful fight. There were awful battles with Tārakāsura and Vṛtrāsura and also the battle between Hari and Madhu-Kaitabha; but they were all inferior and cannot stand in comparison.

प्रहादः प्रबलः शूरीे यस्मात्रायाणेन च ।। ३६ ॥।

क्रोतैत सर्गुं युद्धे सिद्धेनादुतकर्णे ।

It seemed that Prahlāda was very powerful; otherwise how could an equal fight last so long a time with such an accomplished person, perfect with all the supernatural powers and of such heroic deeds as Nārāyaṇa.

Book IV Chapter IX

<table><tr><td>སྒྱལ་མ་ཆུམ་</td></tr><tr><td>ཡིན་ཆེན་པོ་བྱི་བྱི་བྱི་བྱི་བྱི་བྱི་བྱི་བྱི་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་པའི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་པའི་བྲུགས་བྱི།</td></tr><tr><td>བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྱུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུམས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས།</td></tr><tr><td>བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྱུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུམས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས།</td></tr><tr><td>བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྱུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུང་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་འབྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྱུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུང་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་འབྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྱུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུགས་བྱི་བྲུ།

ཞིནྡེ་ ཡུལྟི ཞིནྡེ་ གྲིནྡེ་ གྲིནྡེ་ གྲིནྡེ། ཡ 141 ད 1

ज्यान धर्मजे तृर्णं बाहीभेयेडितिकोपः ।

तमायांतं स वलवान्मार्गीर्नविभूर्निः : 142 ད 1

चिच्छेट परिधं घोरं दराधिस्तमातडयत् ।

गदामादाय देत्यैंदः सर्वायसमर्थीं द्वृतम् ॥ 43 ॥

Thus, then, when all the bows of Prahlāda were destroyed, the Daitya Rājā took up Parigha (iron club), became enraged and threw it on Nārāyaṇa's arm. The powerful Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa, seeing the dreadful iron club, cut it asunder with nine arrows and pierced Prahlāda with ten arrows.

जानुवेगे जयानागु एवे नारायणं रथा ।

गद्या चापि पिशित्बल्स्थितः शिव्यमानसः ॥ 4 4 ॥

धर्मगुनीतिबलावामुभोचणु शिलीमुखान् ।

गदा चित्येल ये भावांस्तदा दैत्यवपेतुंघान् ॥ 4 5 ॥

विस्मयं परंजे जगुः प्रेशक्षा गगाने स्थिताः ।

Then Prahlāda, enraged, threw the iron gadā on Nārāyaṇa's thighs. The exceedingly powerful Dharma's son was not at all agitated and stood firm like a rock and taking up arrows quickly cut asunder the iron gadā of the Daitya. Then the visitors were much startled.

स तु शफिंक समादाय प्रहादः परवीरहा ॥ 46 ॥

चिश्रप तस्मा कुछ्वी बलानागयागरोस ।

तामापतर्ती संवीक्ष्य बाणोनेक्न लीलाया ॥ 47 ॥

सत्यध कृतवानगु सत्यधितं जयान ह ।

Then Prahlāda, intent on killing his enemy, became very much angry and threw the Śakti darts, spears and missiles instantly on Nārāyaṇa's thighs with great velocity. Nārāyaṇa with one arrow cut that easily into seven parts and with seven arrows pierced Prahlāda.

दिव्यवर्मसहनं तु तद्धूदं परमं तयोः ॥ 48 ॥

जातं विस्मवदं राजनसर्विं तत चाधमे ।

Thus for one thousand Deva years the terrible fight lasted between Prahlāda and Nārāyaṇa in that hermitage; and the whole universe was struck with surprise.

तद्वाजगम तस्मा पीतवासाश्रतुर्षुः ॥ ४९ ॥

प्रहादास्थाम तत्र जगाद च गदाधरः ।

चतुर्षुजो समाकानो रथाणदरपथभूत ॥ ५० ॥

दूधता तमागतं तत्र हिरण्यकशिपोः सुतः ।

प्रणाय्य परया भक्त्वा प्रजलिः: प्रत्युबाव ह ।

Then Gaddâhara with yellow robes and four hands quickly came there and called Prahlâda. The son of Hrianya Kaşipu, Prahlâda, seeing the Lord of Lakṣmī, four armed, Nārāyaṇa with lotus and disc in His hands come there, bowed low, and, with folded hands, began to speak to him with great devotion.

प्रहाद उवाच

देवदेव जगत्राय भनकतसल माधव ॥ 51 ॥

कर्थं न तिजरानावाजद्वहिते तपथ्स्विते ।

संग्रामसृ मया देव कृत: पूर्णा शर्त समा: ॥ 52 ॥

सुराणां न तिक्ती कस्मादिति मे विक्रमयो महान् ।

O Deva of the Devas! You are the Lord of the universe and devoted to your devotees. O Mādhava! I have taught for full one hundred Deva years, still I have not not been able to defeat these ascetics. I do not know why. I am surprised at it.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

<table><tr><td>विष्युकावाच</td></tr><tr><td>सिद्धाविंमी मदंडुंगी च विस्मयः कॉत्र मारिय १ ५३ १</td></tr><tr><td>तापसी न जितात्मानी ज्नरातायणी जितो १</td></tr><tr><td>गच्छ त्वं वित्तं राजनुक भर्फिंक ममाचतामू १ ५४ १</td></tr><tr><td>ताप्यां कुक विरोधें त्वं तापसाध्यां महामते १</td></tr><tr><td>Visnu said: O Forgiving One! These two Rsis</td></tr><tr><td>Nara Nārāyaṇa are the perfect ascetics, self controlled and born of my Arnisas. Therefore you have not been able to defeat them. What wonder is there! O king! Better go now to your Pātāla and keep your steadfast devotion on me. O Intelligent one! Do not quarrel any more with these two ascetics.</td></tr></table>

ध्यास उवाच

<table><tr><td>इत्याज्ञ्तो दैत्यसगो निर्यायसुरैः सह ।</td></tr><tr><td>नरनारायणी भूयस्तपोयुक्ती बभूवतुः ॥ 5 5 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>Vyāsa said: O king! The Daitya king Prahlāda then advised by Viṣṇu went out of that place with his Asura followers; and the two Nara Nārāyaṇas began again to practise their Tapasyās.</td></tr><tr><td>इति श्रीमदैबीभागते महापुराणे वतुर्धैककः नवमो3ध्याय: ॥ 9 ॥ Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Fourth Book of Srimaddevibhagavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses, on the fight between the Rsis and Prahlāda by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.</td></tr></table>

CHAPTER X

On the Curse on Viṣṇu by Bhṛgu

जनमेव उवाच

सन्देशेउं महानत्र परागरं कथानके ।

नरनारायणी शान्तो वैषणावांगी तपोधीपं ॥ १ ॥

तीबीधमी सत्त्वमुक्तो वन्याशनपरी सदा ।

धर्मपुत्री महात्मानी तापसी सत्यसंस्थित्यो ॥ 2 ॥

कर्थ रासमासयुक्ती जाती युढ़े परस्यम् ।

संग्रामं चक्रतः कस्माचल्वता तपिमपुत्तभाम् ॥ 3 ॥

प्रहादेन समं पूर्णं दिव्यवर्षगतं किल ।

हिल्या शान्तिसुखं युढ़ं कुलवन्ती कधं मुनी ॥ 4 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Son of Parāśara! There has arisen a great doubt in my mind on hearing just now your words. These Nara Nārāyana are the two sons of Dharma; they are ascetics, calm and quiet, the Anīśas of Viṣṇu; they reside in a holy place of pilgrimage! They are filled with the sāttivic qualities, subsisting always on roots and fruits of the forest, the highsouled hermits and truthful. How were they addicted to such warfare? Why had they left their invaluable asceticisms? And with what object were they fighting for full one thousand Deva years with Prahlāda.

कथं ती चक्रतुरुंद्र प्रहादोर समं पुनी ।

कथयस्व महानाग काण्य विग्रहस्य वै 15 ॥

What was the end, O Muni, of their fight with

Prahlāda? Kindly explain to me in detail the cause of this warfare.

काभिनी कनकं कार्य काण्य विग्रहस्य वै ।

युब्द्वुरुद्धः कथं जाता तयोक्ष नहित्रकतिः ॥ ६ ॥

Women, wealth or any other worldly object can be the cause of any quarrel or fight amongst any persons; but, in this case, the two ascetics had none of these; how then this idea of fight sprung within their minds.

तथाधिं तपस्ततं ताथ्यां च केन हेतुना ।

मोहाशं सुखफोगार्थं स्वर्गांथे वा परन्तप ।

कृतमत्युक्तटं ताथ्यां तप संक्षेफलप्रदम् ॥ 7 ॥

युनियं शान्तिचिताथ्या प्राप्तिकं फलमद्धूनम् ।

And why did they practise such severe austerities? Was it that they had to overpower others, or enjoy pleasures themselves or to reach Heaven that they practised tapasyā? What fruits did they eventually obtain from such penances?

तपसा पीक्षितो देहः संग्रामेण पुनः पुनः ॥ ८ ॥

दिव्यवर्षगतं पूर्ण श्रमेण परीक्षिति ।

न राज्यार्थ धने वार्थिन न दारेषु गृहेषु च ॥ ९ ॥

क्रियर्थ तु कृतं युद्धं ताथ्यां तेन महात्मना ।

They became very lean and thin through their asceticism; still how could they fight full one thousand Deva years without getting fatigued.

Book IV Chapter X

निरीह: पुरुषः कस्मात्यकुयाँधुद्धमीरुषण् ॥ 10 ॥

दुःखदं सर्वेथा देहे जानन्यमं सनातनम् ।

They were not entangled in this fight for kingdom, or wealth or for women or for any other worldly object; then why did they fight with the highsouled Prahlāda?

सुबुद्धि: सुखदानीह कर्मणि कृते सदा ॥ १ १ ॥

न दुःखदानि धर्मत्र स्थितिरेवा सन्तानी ।

Having no attachment for any worldly object nor any desire to gain any thing therefrom, why did they engage themselves so thoroughly, in such pains giving battle?

धर्मपुत्री हरेर्शी सर्वजी सर्वभूषिति ॥ १ २ ॥

कृतवंती कर्थ युद्ध दुःखं धर्मविनाशकम् ।

Intelligent persons always do works leading to bliss; they never do painful works; this is the long standing rule of the world.

त्यक्तवता तः समानीतं सुखागमं महत्कनम् ॥ १३ ॥

संयुगं दारणं कृष्ण नैव मुखॉपि वाक्छति ।

The two sons of Dharma were the Arishas of Hari, all knowing and adorned with all qualities; why did they fight, subversive of religion? (13)

शुती मया ययातिस्तुं चतुतः स्वर्गान्महीपति: ॥ १४ ॥

अहंकारभवतायायतातिः पृथिवीतिः ।

O Maharṣi! Even the dull and stupid persons in the world won't go to these deadly battles leaving asceticism and samādhi, leading to the purification of all desires.

यनकृहानकर्ता च धार्मिकः पृथिवीपिति: ॥ 15 ॥

ग्वदोचारणामत्रेण पातिते वज्ञपाणिना ।

I have heard that Yayāti, the Lord of the earth was dropped from Heaven to this world, owing to his Aharṅkāra, though he was a virtuous king devoted to charities and sacrifices.

अङड़ाग्भुते युद्धे न भवलेवे निश्रयः ॥ १६ ॥

किं फलबास्य युद्धस्य मुने: पुराविनाशगम ।

No sooner Yayāti, said the king: did Aśvamedha sacrifice, etc., with Ahankāra, egoism, he was dropped by Indra with thunderbolt in his hands. So one can see that, without Ahankāra no fight

can occur. The ascetics had no bodily strength; therefore if they had to fight, it is through the waste of their Tapasya that they could do so.

व्यास उवाच

राजन्संसारमूलं हि विशियं परिक्षितितम् ॥ 17 ॥

अहूबारसु सर्वेभूमिनिधभूमिनिशुवे ।

Vyāsa said: O king! The all knowing sages that have realised the truth or Dharma declare the threefold Aharīkāra arising out the Sāttvic, Rājasic and Tāmasic qualities respectively to be the cause of this world.

स कर्थ मुनिनाल्युक्ते योग्यो देहभृतां किल ॥ 18 ॥

कारणेन विना कार्यं न भवल्येन निश्रयः ।

How, then, can these two Munis being embodied forego their Aharinkāras? Without any cause, no actions follow; this is quite certain.

तपो दानं तथा यज्ञा: सात्चिकात्यभवतिने ते ॥ 19 ॥

राजसाढ़ा महाभाग तामासात्कहस्तथा ।

Tapas, charities, sacrifices all originate from the Sāttvic qualities. And quarrels arise from the Rājasic or Tāmasic qualities.

डिया स्वलापीय राजेन्द्र नाड़कृति विना कवचिं ॥ 20 ॥

शुभा वाज्यपुर्णा वाज्य प्रभवत्य विभुयः ।

All arise from Aharikkāra, whether good or bad; this is quite certain.

अहूक्रात्रांधकारी नान्योदस्ति जगतीतले ॥ 21 ॥

येनैदं रचितं विश्वं कर्थं तर्हितं भवेत् ।

There is no other thing that enchains a soul than this Aharikāra. It is out of Aharikāra that this Universe is created; how can it be then free from it?

बहा मूर्तस्या विज्यारुहंकार्युतास्वमी ॥ 22 ॥

अन्येचं चैव का वातां मुनीति वसुधाधित्य ।

O King! Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśha, even these are with Aharikāras. Then how can you expect other ordinary Munis to be free from it?

अहंकारावृतं विश्वं घ्रमनोदं चराचरम् ॥ 23 ॥

पुनर्जन मुनेपूतुः सर्वे कर्मविशानुम् ।

Encased with Aharikāra, this Universe is rolling. Births and deaths occur respectively through this Karma.

देवतिर्वंडमनुध्याणां संसारोर्सिन्महीपते ॥ 24 ॥

रथांगवदसवर्वर्ण भ्रमणं सर्वदा स्मृत्तम् ।

विषाणोरथवताराणां संख्यां जानाति कः पुभान् ॥ 25 ॥

O Lord of the earth. The Devas, birds and men are revolving in this world like the wheel of a chariot.

विततेर्स्मितुं संसार उत्तमाधमयोगिनु ।

नारायणो हरि: साक्षान्मात्यं वरुपचाश्रितः ॥ 26 ॥

In this wide world who can count how many Avatāras Viṣṇu had to take in all sorts of wombs, good or low.

कामदं सीकरं चैव नारसिंहं च वामनम् ।

युगे युगे जगाढ्यो वासुदेवो जनार्दनः ॥ 27 ॥

Ordained by the Lord of the Universe, Nārāyaṇa Himself had to take the Fish, Tortoise, Boar, Man-Lion and the Dwarf incarnations.

अततानासंख्यातान्करोति विधाधिनतः ।

वैवस्वते महाराज सचने भगवान् द्वरि: ॥ 28 ॥

Vāsudeva Janārdana the Lord, had to undertake countless Avatāras births in this world.

मन्दोरंदवतारान्ये चके ताज्युण तच्चतः ।

भ्रुगुशापान्यहाराज विद्युद्विवर: प्रभुः ॥ 29 ॥

In the Vaivasvata manvantara, the Avatāras of Bhagavān Hari are being mentioned to you. Hear!

अवतारान्नेकांतु कृतावनाखिलेशः ।

The all-pervading Lord of the world, the God of the Gods, had to take several incarnations in this world, owing to the curses inflicted by Bhgru.

राजोवाच

सन्देहो3यं महाभाग हृदये मम जायते ॥ 30 ॥

भृगुण भगवात्विणुः कथं शप्तः चिनात्मः ।

The king said: There has now again arisen another fresh doubt, why was Visnu cursed by Bhgru Muni?

हरिणा च मुनेतस्य विधियं किं कृतं मुने ॥ 31 ॥

यद्रीषाद्धपुणा शप्तो विष्णुद्विनमस्कृत: ।

O Muni! What injury did Hari commit to that Muni, and whereof the Muni Bhgru cursed him.

व्यास उवाच

श्रणु राजन्यव्यायी भुगौः शापस्य कारणम् ॥ 32 ॥

पुरा कृषयव्यायाटे हिरण्यकशिपुर्नूपः ।

यदा तदा सुरैः सार्य कृतं संख्या परस्पतम् ॥ 33 ॥

कृते संखो जगत्सर्व व्याकृतं समजायत ।

Vyāsa said: Hear, O king! the cause of the curse; I will narrate to you. In days of yore, the king Hiranyakaśipu, the son of Kaśyapa often quarrelled with the Devas'; owing to this incessant warfare, the whole universe was much alarmed and perplexed.

हते तत्स्विपे राजा प्रहादः समजायते ॥ 34 ॥

देवान्स पीडयामास प्रहादः शुक्रभर्षणः ।

And when Hiranyakasipu was slain by the Man-Lion incarnation, Prahlāda, the tormentor of the foes, continued his enmity towards the Devas and began to annoy them.

संग्रामो कृषवद्धोरः शक्रप्रहाद्योरस्ता ॥ 35 ॥

पूर्ण वर्षेगतं राजेन्लोकाविस्मयाकराम् ।

Thus one hundred years dreadful battle occurred between the Devas and Prahlāda, to the astonishment of all.

देवेयूंद्धं कृतं चोर्ध प्रहादस्तु पशातिः ॥ 36 ॥

निर्वेदे परम प्रातो ज्ञाला धर्मे सनातनम् ।

विश्चान्सुतं राज्य प्रतिहाय्य बलिं नृप ॥ 37 ॥

जगाम स तपस्तनुं पवैते गन्धभादने ।

O king! The Devas fought very hard and were victorious. Prahlāda was defeated and was sorely grieved. Hearing that the Eternal Religion is the best, he handed his kingdom over to his son Bali and went to the Gandhamādan hill to practise tapasyā.

प्रायः राज्यं बलि: श्रीमानुर्शेरींर चकार ह ॥ ३ ८ ॥ ॥

ततः परमयं सुर्द्धे जातं परमदारभम् ।

ततः सुरैर्जितं दैया इन्जगामितंतेजसा ॥ ३ ९ ॥

The prosperous Bali, too, on gaining his kingdom, began to quarrel with the Devas and the war thus went on. Ultimately the powerful Indra and the Devas defeated the Asuras.

विष्णुना च सहायेन राज्यश्रहा: कृतान् ।

तत परपित्ता दैर्याः काव्यस्य शरणं गताः ॥ 40 ॥

किं त्वं न कुक्पे ब्रह्न् साहाय्यं नः प्रतपावान् ।

Book IV Chapter XI

स्थानुं न शुकुंगे ह्रत्र प्रविशगोर साततलम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

यदि लं व न सहावोरिस ज्ञानुं मन्त्रविदुन्तमः ।

O king! Indra, of unequalled prowess, with the aid of Viṣṇu, deprived the Daityas of their kingdom. The defeated Daityas took refuge of their family spiritual guide Śukrācārya and addressed him thus, O Brāhmaṇa! You are endowed with your fiery strength of Tapasyā and you are now powerful; why are you not lending your helping hands to your Daitya followers. O foremost of the councillors. If you do not help us and save us, we will not be able to stay on this earth and will soon have to go down to Pātāla.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तः सोउत्रबीहैत्यानाकायः कारणिको भूनि: Ⅱ 4 2 Ⅱ

मा भैष्ट धारायथामि तेजसा स्थेन भौः सुरा: ।

मन्सेनसीधेधिपिध्धा साहायथ नः सर्वेह हि ॥ 4 3 ॥

कारीथामि कृतोत्साहा भवन्तु विगतज्ञरा: ।

Vyāsa said: Thus addressed by the Daityas, the very kind hearted Šukrācārya said, O Daityas! Do not be afraid; I will protect you by my fire of strength and vigour; and help you with sound counsels and medicines. Be brave and energetic and cast aside your mental agony and sorrow.

यास उवाच

ततसेत निर्भय जाता दैया: काव्यस्य संश्यात् ॥ 44 ॥

दैंः: शुतस्तु वृत्तानः: सर्वशास्युवातिकल ।

तन संमन्य ते देवा: शंकेना च पर्ययम् ॥ 45 ॥

मन्चे चकु: सुसंविना: काव्यमन्यप्रभावतः ।

योदूं नख्यामहे तृर्णं यावत्र च्यावयन्ति वे ॥ 46 ॥

प्रसह हत्वा शिक्षांस्तु पातालं प्राययामहे ।

Vyāsa said: O king! The Daityas became fearless

under the patronage of Śukrācārya. The Devas had their spies and knew all about these. They held councils with Indra and settled that before the Daityas had time to dislodge us from our Heaven with the mantra of Śukrācārya, we will speedily go and attack them. Thus attacked all on a sudden, they will all be slain by us and we will drive them down to the Patāla.

दैत्याङ्गमुस्ततो देवा: संस्हा: शाखपाणय: ॥ 47 ॥

जगमुस्तानिष्यमुस्तिता दानवा हरिणोदिततः ।

Thus forming their resolves, with fully equipped arms and weapons, they went out of rage to fight with the Daityas and ordered by Indra and aided by Visnu, they began to kill the Demons.

वध्यमानासु ते दैवा: संसन्ता भयपीघिताः ॥ 48 ॥

काव्यस्य गरणं जग्यु तश्येति चाबुबन् ।

When the Devas were thus slaying the Demons, they got very much terrified and exclaimed ‘O Lord! Protect us! Protect us!’ and took the refuge of Šukra.

ताज्युकः पीडितान्यूद्या देर्वैर्व्यान्महावलान् ॥ 49 ॥

मा थेहेति वचः प्रात् मन्त्राथिवलादिषुः ।

यूद्वा काव्य सुरा: सर्वे त्यक्ता नायययुः किक्त ॥ 50 ॥

इति शीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणो वतुर्षकन्धे दर्भगोउवायः। 10 ॥

Śukrācārya, seeing the Daityas very much perplexed and distracted, at once cried aloud out of the influence of his Mantra “No fear, no fear,” Then the Devas on seeing Śukrācārya left the Daityas and fled away to their ov:n places.

Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Fourth Book of the Mahā Purānam, Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, of 18000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa on the curse on Viṣṇu by Bhrgu.

Book IV Chapter XI

CHAPTER XI

On Šukra's Going to Mahādeva to Get the Mantra

व्यास उवाच

तया गोतु येवेतु काव्यस्तान्यवुचार है ।

बहागा पूर्वेमुक्ते चब्बुणुळ्यं दानवोतमाः ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: When the Devas retired from the

battlefield, Śukrācārya addressed the Demons thus:

O best of the Demons! Please hear, what had been

told to me by Brahmañ in days of yore.

विष्णुर्वैलयो युक्तो हनिष्यिति जनार्दतः ।

वाराहरूपं संस्थाय विराण्याश्रो यथा हत: ॥ 2 ॥

Śrimaddevybhāgavatam

यथा नृसिंहरूपेण हिरण्यकशिपुर्णतः ।

तथा सर्वान्कृतोत्साहो हनिष्यति न चान्यथा ॥ 3 ॥

Janārdana Visnu is coming here to slay all the Demons. He killed before Hiranyāksa, the king of the Asuras, in His Boar incarnation. He killed Hiranyakasipu by assuming His Man-Lion appearance; now too, he will kill all the Daityas, no doubt, with great enthusiasm.

न मे मन्वलं सप्यक्रतिभाति यथा हरिम ।

जेतुं यूयं समर्थः स्व मया जाताः सुरान्य ॥ 4 ॥

तस्माकालं प्रतिक्षध्यं क्रियन्तं दान्वोतम्पा ।

अहमदा महदोंदे मन्त्राथ प्रज्ञापि वे ॥ 5 ॥

Now my mantra force will not be of any avail before Śrī Hari. And without my help you will not be able to conquer the Devas. Therefore, O Demons wait for some time for me; I will start to-day to the presence of Śiva Mahādeva to obtain from him the Mantra Śakti.

प्राय मन्यान्महादेवाद्यापिध्यापि सामप्रतम् ।

युषमधं तान्यदास्यामि यथार्थ दानवोतमा: ॥ 6 ॥

I will return, as early as possible, getting the Mantras from Śri Mahādeva; and with the help of the power of those great Mantras I will be able to protect you thoroughly.

दैत्या ऊचुः

भार्जिताः कवं स्थातुं पृथिव्यां मुनिसत्तम ।

शक्ता भवामो.प्रयलत्सात्वाकलं प्र.दि.सिनुम् ॥ 7 ॥

The Daityas said: O best of the Munis! We are now defeated and our forces are well nigh exhausted; how will we be able to stay on this earth and expect your return for so long a time?

नित्ता बलिनः सर्वे केविष्छिष्टा हवनाः ।

नाद्य सुक्ताश्य संग्रामे स्थानुषेयं सुखावहः ॥ ८ ॥

Those who were of great strength amongst us, they all are slain; now we are left very few in number. In this crisis it is not advisable and auspicious for us to remain here in this battlefield.

शुक्र सचच

यावदई मन्त्रविद्यामानियाणि शक्रगत् ।

तावद्धविद्धः स्थाल्यं तपोयुक्तः: शामवितः ॥ 9 ॥

Śukrācārya said: Better you all stay here until I return, getting the requisite Mantra; remain peaceful and engaged in asceticism.

सामदानादयः प्रोक्ता विद्धाद्धः सभ्योचिताः ।

देशं कालं बलं वीरित्राला शफिंक बलं बुधैः ॥ १ ० ॥

The heroes apply one or other of the following four measures:—conciliation, alliance, gifts and bribery, partitions and sowing dissensions and punishment or open according to the conditions of time, place, strength and circumstances. (10)

सेवाउव समये काव्यां शज्जगा शुभकायया ।

स्वशकलुपयरे काले हन्तवासले मनीषिभि: ॥ 1 1 ॥

Intelligent and well wishing persons do serve their enemies even in times of distress; but no sooner they find that tleir strength and army have increased, than they try at once to kill all their enemies.

तद्वि चिनयं कृत्वा समापूर्वे छलेने वे ।

तिष्छयं स्विनैकेतैयुं मदागमतकांक्षया ॥ १ १ २ ॥

Now, therefore, pretend your meekness and allegiance and adopt peace and remain in your own place until my arrivel.

प्राय्य मन्त्रान्महादेवादागमिष्ण्यामि दानावा: ।

युध्यामहे पुनर्वैवान्मानमारथाय वै कवम् ॥ १ ३ ॥

O Demons! I will come back with the Mantra from Mahādeva. I will fight again with the Devas, by that veritable mantra power.

इन्युकल्याथ धपुत्सेधो जगाम कृतनिध्यः ।

महावरं महारतं नन्द्रार्यं मुनिस्तमः ॥ १ १ ॥

O King! Thus firmly making up his mind to have the Mantra, Śukrācārya went to Mahādeva.

दानावः प्रेयमामुः ग्रहादं सुरसप्रिधे ।

सत्यवादिनमध्यं सुगणं प्रत्ययप्रदम् ॥ १ ५ ॥

The Dānavas sent Prahlāda to the Devas for conciliation. The Devas regarded Prahlāda truthful and they all trusted on him.

प्रब्रादस्तु सुराग्राह प्रश्यावन्तो नृपः ।

असुरैः सहितस्तत्र वचनं नमतायुतम् ॥ १ ६ ॥

Prahlāda with Asuras addressed thus the Devas with gentleness and humility.

Book IV Chapter XI

སྟོན་བཅུ་སྒྱིན་མོ་བར་མོ་ཟིན་སྟོན་མོ་བར་མོ་ཟིན་སྟོན་མོ་བར་མོ་ཟིན།

འཁྱིལ་སྟན་ཀྱིལ་མོ་བར་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆོུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆོང་ཆིང་ཆོང་ཆི

attacked with fear and began to address the Devas, proud with their army, in words, full of good meanings and morals.

यस्तग्रासे भगवाति आचार्ये ज्ञात्मस्थिते ।

दत्वाघयं पुग द्वा: संग्रापना नो जिशंभस्या ॥ 33 ॥

O Devas? We have abandoned our arms; we are now armless; our spiritual guide is in his tapasyā, you gave us words of fearlessness; why then you have come now dressed in full armour and with armies to kill us.

सत्यं वः क्व गतं देया धर्मेध् सुतिनोदितः।

यस्ताश्चान् न हन्तव्या भीताक्ष प्राणं गताः ॥ 34 ॥

O Devas! Where is your truth. And where is your religion according to Śruti? It is stated in Śruti never to kill the weaponless, the fear stricken, and the refugees.

देश कलुः

भविद्धः प्रेपितः काव्यो मन्यार्थ कृहकेन च ।

तपो ज्ञान हिं युभाकं तेन युध्याम एव हि ॥ 35 ॥

The Devas said: You sent your good Śukrācārya, out of pretence to acquire the Mantras; your asceticism is veiled under a deceitful object. Therefore we will fight with you certainly.

सज्जा भवंतु युद्धाय संरक्षा: श्रक्षापाणय: ।

शुश्रिक्छ्रीण हन्तल्य एव धर्म: सनातन: ॥ 36 ॥

Be ready now and dress yourself with your arms and ammunitions. “Lo! Whenever you get any loop hole in your enemies, catch hold of it and kill your enemy.” This is the eternal religion.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छुला वचनं दैला विचारांचे च परस्यम् ।

पलायवनपर: सर्वे निर्भात भयविहृक्तः ॥ 37 ॥

Vyāsa said: 'On thus hearing the reply from the Devas, the Daityas after consideration quitted that place and fled away terror.

शरणं दानवा जगमुर्षितारते काव्यमात्तम् ।

दूधा तानतिस्ततानभयं च दूदावय ॥ 38 ॥

And they took refuge under the Šukrācāryā's mother. She saw the Daityas very much fear-

stricken and at once guaranteed to them protection from fear.

काव्यमातोवाच

न भेतल्यं न भेतल्यं भयं त्यजत दानावा: ।

मस्तप्रिधी वर्तमानारा भीभवितमूर्तिति ॥ 39 ॥

The mother of Kāvya Sukrācārya said: Don't fear; don't fear; cast away fear. O Dānavas! In my presence, no fear can overtake you.

तच्छूत्वा वचनं दैन्वा: सितास्तत्र नताव्याः ।

निरायुधा ह्रसंप्रांतास्ताजामवरेसुरा: ॥ 40 ॥

The Asuras on hearing her words were free from anxiety and pain and remained in that hermitage, in no way now bewildered or agitated, though they had no arms.

देवास्ताप्रिद्धुतान्बीक्ष्य दान्बांतरे पदानुगाः ।

अभिजमुः प्रसंष्ठ तानविचार्यं वतावतम् ॥ 4 ॥

तत्रागता: सुरा: सर्वे हेतुं द्वैत्यानमुघताः ।

वारिताः काव्यमात्राजपि जन्मुतानामश्रयितान् ॥ 4 2 ॥

Here the Devas, seeing the Daityas flying away, pursued them and entering the hermitage were ready to kill the Daityas, not taking into account what strength they gained there. The mother of Šukra warned the Devas not to kill; but, inspite of her hindrance, they began to slay the Daityas.

हन्यमानानुरैद्वया काव्यमानाउतिविधिता ।

उदाच सर्वान्निर्जित्साय तै करोभ्यदूम् ॥ 43 ॥

Seeing the Daityas thus attacked, the mother was furiously irritated and told them she would make all of them overpowered by sleep by her tapas strength, clarified intellectual force.

Note: Is it by the asphyxiating gas? Or, by poisonous vapours or liquids?

इतुकुला प्रोतता निद्रा तानागत्य पयात च ।

सेंत्र निद्रावणं याता देवा मुक्ववृत्तस्थितः ॥ 44 ॥

So saying she sent the Goddess of sleep who at once overpowered the Gods and made them all lie down on the grounds senseless. Indra with the other Devas lay there dumb, and miserable.

इन्हें निद्राजितं दृष्टवा दीन विद्याप्रभालत ।

मां तां प्रशिक्ष भई ते नये त्वां च सुरोतम ॥ 4 5 ॥

Book IV Chapter XI

On seeing Indra thus stupefied by sleep, the Bhagavān Viṣṇu told Indra to enter into His today. He would then carry him to another place and he will be better.

एवमुक्तस्तो विद्युं प्रविशेष पुरन्द्रः ।

निर्भयो गतिनिद्रश बभूव हरिरक्षितः ॥ 4 6 ॥

रहितं हरिणा दूर्वहा शकं तत्र गतवध्यम् ।

काव्यमाता ततः कुब्दा वचनं चेदमवबीत् ॥ 4 7 ॥

Indra entered into the Viṣṇu's body; and, under His protection, he became free from sleep and fear. On seeing Indra thus sheltered by Viṣṇu and fearless, the mother of Kāvya spoke.

मघवंल्चां भक्ष्यामि सायिन्धुं वे तपोबलात् ।

पुर्यातं सर्वदेवानामीदूगं मे तपोबलम् ॥ 48 ॥

O Indra! I will devour you with Viṣṇu to-day by my Tapas force. All the Devas will presently see all this and my extraordinary power.

Note. B. Is it by making the earth go down, causing a fissure, thus engulfing the whole army? Or by blowing them up? Or by showering jets of poisonous gas or hot water or vapour from all sides.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्ती तु तया देवी विधिग्वर्त्रे योगविदाया ।

अभिपूर्ती महात्मानी सत्यधी ती सम्बयपुत: ॥ 49 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! No sooner the mother spoke thus, than both Indra and Viṣṇu were both stupefied under her magical spell, superior thought power, and a thorough learning of the art of warfare.

विस्मतन्तु तदा देया दूरवा ततवित्वारिति ।

चढ़: किल्लिकलाखंदू ततसे दीनामतास: ॥ ५० ॥

The Devas, seeing them very much overpowered and bewildered, were greatly struck with wonder; they became desperate and began to cry aloud.

कोशमानानुसारनुद्धवा विशुं प्राह शचीपति: ।

विशेषेणाधिपभूतोरभ्य तलतो३हं मधुयुत्न । ५ १ । ॥

Indra, on hearing the Devas cry aloud, told Viṣṇu, O Madhusūdana! I am more bewildered in particular than yourself.

जहौनो तरसा विषयो यातनो न देहोरभो ।

तपसा दर्पितं दुर्गं मा विचारय भायव ॥ 52 ॥

O Mādhava! No need of any further consideration. Before this wretch, inflated with pride by her tapasyā, burns us, better cause her death as early as possible.

इन्युक्तो भगवान्विणुः शंकिम प्रथितेन च ।

चक्रे समसार तरसा धृणां त्यकल्याम धायदः ॥ 53 ॥

When thus requested by Indra who was very much perplexed, Bhagavān Viṣṇu quickly remembered his Sudarśana disc, casting aside the thought that it is hateful to kill a woman.

स्युतमारंत्रे सु सम्पादां चक्र विष्ण्यग्रानुम् ।

दधार च करे कुब्दो घधार्थ शकनोदितः ॥ 54 ॥

गृहीत्वा तक्नरे चक्र शिरोधिष्ठचेट रंहस ।

हतां दूद्धया तु तां शको मृवितक्षापचतदा ॥ 55 ॥

The disc, the ever obedient weapon of Viṣṇu appeared instantly at his remembrance; and Viṣṇu, becoming angry as prompted by Indra held the disc in His hand, and, hurling it off on the Śukra's mother, severed off her head quickly. God Indra became very glad at this.

देवाश्रातील सन्तुहा हरिं जय जयेति च ।

तुहुवुर्युतितः सर्वे संज्ञाता शिगतज्ञातः ॥ 56 ॥

The Devas became free from sorrow, got very much pleased and heartily hailed victory to Hari and worshipped Him and began to chant His praises.

इन्द्रविष्यू तुं जजाती तत्क्षणापूर्वद्वव्यव्यो ।

स्त्रीविधान्डकमानो तु भुगोः शापं दुरत्यम् ॥ 57 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीपागवते महापुराणे चतुर्बेकब्भे

एकावशो3थण: 11 17 11

Indra and Viṣṇu then became free from all troubles; but they began to fear that Bhrgu (Śukra's father) would curse terribly and without fail.

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter in the

Fourth Book of Srimaddevibhāgavatam,

the Mahā Purānam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa,

on Śukra's gong to Mahādeva

to get the Mantra.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER XII

On Bhruś's Curse and the Dialogue Between. Śukrācārya and the Daityas

व्यास उवाच

तं दृष्टा तु वधं घोरं चुकोध भगवान्यगुः ।

वेयमानो3तिजुःखातं: प्रोवाच मधुसुदनम् ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! On seeing Viṣṇu killing his wife, and thus committing a dreadful atrocious act, the Bhagavān Bhrgu was very sorry and began to tremble with anger and addressed Madhusūdana thus.

भूगुकावा

अकृतं ते कृतं विष्णो जानन्यपां महामते ।

वधोउं विश्वजाताया मनसा कनुमक्षमः ॥ २ ॥

Bhruj said: O Viṣṇu! You have done an extremely sinful act. O intelligent one! Knowing it, you have done so; what a great wonder! No body dreams of the murder of this Brāhmana's daughter; and you have committed it deed, black and white.

आख्यात्तस्व सच्गण: स्मृते ब्रह्मा च राजस: ।

तधारड़ी तामसः शेभुविंधरितं कांबे स्मृतः ॥ 3 ॥

O Devas! The Maharṣis declare you to be Sāttvic, engaged in preservation; Brahmā to be Rajasic (creator) and Śambhu Śiva to be Tāmasic (destroyer). Why then is the contrary thing visible in this case?

तामसरलं कंबं जातः कृतं कर्मातिनिर्विद्तम् ।

अवस्था स्ती त्वया विश्यो हता कसामशिरसाया ॥ 4 ॥

Why have you become Tāmasic? Why have you done this heinous crime? O Viṣṇu! The females are never to be killed; this is a known fact; then why have you killed this woman without any fault.

शपाधि त्वां दुराचारं किम्यन्त्रकारीयि ते ।

विषुर्गोई कृतः पाप त्वयाईं श्रकाकरणात् ॥ 5 ॥

न शपोई तथा शक्ऱे शपे तथा मधूमूर्त ।

सदा छलपोरीस त्वं कीटयोनिद्रुगायः ॥ 6 ॥

You have done a very execrable act. What shall

I do to you? It is another matter that I would curse you. O Great Sinner! You have pained me very much and made me very weary. I will not curse Indra. You always assume a deceitful appearance and behave like a black cruel serpent; your mind is all full of wickedness; I will curse you.

ये च त्वां सात्चिकं प्राहुले पूर्खां मुनवः किल ।

तामसस्त्वं दुरावारः प्रत्यक्षे में जनार्देन ॥ ७ ॥

O Janārdana. Those Munis who call Sāttvic are fools; I have seen to day that your ways are exceptionally vicious and tāmasic.

अवतारा मृत्युलोके सन्तु मच्छापसभावाः ।

प्रायो नर्भभवं दुःखं घुंक्ष्य पापाज्ञजनर्दिन ॥ 8 ॥

O Viṣṇu! I curse you now to take frequent births, suffer very frequently in different wombs, in the earth and thus suffer the pains of remaining in the wombs.

व्यास उवाच

तत्स्तेनाथ शापेन नष्टे धर्मे पुनः पुनः ।

लेकास्य च हिताथाय जयते मानुशेथिह १ १ ॥

O king! Therefore whenever religion subsides in the world, Bhagavān Viṣṇu incarnates frequently in this human world, due to the curse of Bhrgu.

राजोवाच

भ्युभायां हता तर चेकेशपामिततेजसा ।

गाह्रैल्थ च पुननस्य कथं जाते महात्मन: ॥ 10 ॥

The king said: O best of the Munis! Did that Mahātmā Bhrgu again marry and lead a householder's life when his wife was thus killed by the lustrous disc Sudarśana.

व्यास उवाच

इति शल्चा हरि रोषात्तदायि शिरस्त्वन्त ।

कार्य संबोधे जरसा सभुः प्रोवाच कार्यविद्धि ॥ 11 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! The sacrifice Bhṛgu angrily cursed Hari and next took that severed head and quickly placed it over the body as before and said:

Book IV Chapter XII

अच ल्चां विष्णुनें देवैहं हतां संकीवायामहम् ।

यदि कृत्तनो मया धर्मों ज्ञानेचे चितिरो5पि चा ॥ १२ ॥

तेन सत्येन जीक्षिते यदि सत्यं ब्वीधमहम् ।

पर्यंतु देदाता: सर्वां मम तेजोबलं मह्न् ॥ १३ ॥

अद्रित्तां प्रोष्य शीताभिजीविमी पतोबलात् ।

सत्यं शीचं तथा चेदा यदि मे तपसो बलम् ॥ १४ ॥

O Devi! Viṣṇu has slain you to day; I will make you regain your life just now. If I am acquainted with all the Dharmas and if I have practised these in my life and if have spoken truth always, then dost thou regain your life by my religious merit. Let all the Devas witness my power and strength. If I know the True, if I have studied all the Vedas and if I have realised the Knowledge of the Vedas, then I, sprinkling your body with this cold water, charged with my mantras, will revive you.

व्यास उवाच

अद्विः: संग्रहिता देखी सखः संबंधिता तत।

अत्थिता परमप्रीता भुभोभार्यं गृधिस्तिमा ॥ ५ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Sprinkled by the water by Bhruṇ, his wife regained her life and rose up at once and felt herself glad and smiled.

ततस्तां सर्वभृतानि दूद्वा सुप्नोश्वतामिति ।

साधु साधिति तं तां तु तुडुवः सर्वती दिशम् ॥ 16 ॥

All the persons and living creatures seeing her stand, as if awoken from her sleep, at once exclaimed from all sides “well done, well done!” thanked Bhrgu and his wife very much and highly praised them.

एवं संकीक्षिता तेन भ्रुणा वरविधीनि ।

विसम्पं परमं अनुदैवा: संद्रा विलोक्य तत् ॥ 17 ॥

Thus seeing the fair complexioned wife regain her life through Bhrgu, Indra and all the Devas were very much struck with wonder.

Note: Thought power and inhalation of some medicines might have revived her.

इनः: सुरान्योवाच मुनिना जीविता सती ।

काव्यस्त्वा तपो घोर किं कश्यति मन्त्रित् ॥ 18 ॥

Indra then addressed the Devas: Now the mother of Śukra has regained her life through Bhrgu; but

when Śukrācārya will receive the mantra after his severe tapasyā, we do not know what terrible harm he would do to us!

व्यास उवाच

गता निद्रा सुरेन्द्रस्य देहे३क्षेमभूषून ।

सूचना काव्यस्य वृत्तांत मन्यार्थमितिद्वारभून ॥ 19 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Though the deep sleep that overtook Indra had now left him, yet he became very unhappy, remembering the severe asceticism of Šukra's tapasyā and his receiving mantras.

विमुग्य मनसा शक्रो जयन्ती स्वसुतां ततं ।

उवाच कन्यां चार्वींगि सिमतपूर्विमेदं चचः ॥ 20 ॥

Thinking over deeply in his mind, Indra called his daughter Jayanti and spoke to her with affection.

गच्छ पुत्रि मया दत्ता काव्याय त्वं तपस्विने ।

समाधाय तन्वीग मन्त्रुतं तं वर्णं कुक ॥ 21 ॥

उपवारीभूर्नितेर्हे: समाराध्य मन:प्रिये: ।

भयं मे ततसा गला हर तत्र वाराधे ॥ 22 ॥

Go! Daughter! I have given thee over to the ascetic Kāvya. Do this service for me, go to Kāvya and help him in his asceticism and bring him under your control. By whatever acts the Muni be pleased, dost thou do at once and please him in every way and thus remove my fear.

सा विपूर्वचंत्र श्रुता ततगछम्बनोराम ।

तत्पर्यश्रिंगलाश्री विवर्ते धूममाओं ॥ 23 ॥

The large eyed beautiful Jayanti, hearing her father's words, went to her hermitage and there saw the Rṣi inhaling the smoking.

तस्य देई समातोक्य सूच्या वाक्यं पितुस्त्वा ।

कदत्नीतदनामादय वीजयामास ते भुनिन् ॥ 24 ॥

On seeing the body of the ascetic, and remembering her father's words she brought the leaves of the plantain trees and began to fan him.

निर्मलें शीतलं वारि समानीय सुवासितम् ।

पानाय करत्ययामास भक्या परमया लघु ॥ 25 ॥

The intelligent Jayanti with no excitement used to bring the pure, clear, cool, and well scented water and place it, with great devotion, before the sage for his drinking.

Note: Here Indra bribes by giving away his daughter.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

हावां वस्तातपेण भास्करे मध्यसे सति ।

रचायमास तन्वीरा स्वयं धर्मे स्थिता सती ॥ 26 ॥

When the sun was over his head, she used to prepare some protection, with her clothes, from the sun and thus made the shade for him. Thus, in various ways, did she begin to serve the Muni, herself remaining steady in her religion.

फलान्यायीय दिखानि पक्वानि मभुगीण च ।

मुभोचाठी मुनेस्तस्य मध्यार्थ विहितानि च ॥ 27 ॥

She brought sweet and ripe fruits proper according to the Śāstras and used to place them before him for his repast.

कृणा: प्रोरणामा हि हिता: शुकसिन्भा: ।

दधाराटीअ ध्यूभाणि नित्यकर्ममुख्ये ॥ 28 ॥

In the performance of her daily duties, she used to collect the Kuśa grass of the span of thumb and fore finger, and flowers, white and yellow and placed them before him.

निद्राधौ कल्यामास संस्तरं पल्लवात्यन्ति ।

तस्मिन्नौ चारस्था चकार व्यजनं गर्भे: ॥ 29 ॥

For the Muni's bedding to lie down and sleep, she used to gather soft green leaves and with them she used to keep his bed ready; and when the Muni laid himself down, she used to fan him gently.

हावभावादिकं किंचिद्धिकारजनं च तत ।

न चकार जवनी सा शापपीता मुनेतदा ॥ 30 ॥

Never did she exhibit for fear of curse, any gesture or posture calculated to disturb his mind. स्तुति चकार तत्वीं गीधिंस्तस्य महात्मन: ।

सुभाषिण्यकुलाधिः प्रीतिकर्हिंभरयुत ॥ 31 ॥

The sweet-tongued, thin lady used to praise Šukrācārya in pleasing and favourable terms.

प्रबुद्धे जलमादाय दधाराचमानय च ।

मनोउनुकुलं सततं कुर्वन्ती व्यवरत्ता ॥ 32 ॥

When the Muni awoke, she placed water before him to wash his face and hands. Thus serving the Muni, did she stay in the hermitage.

इंडोर्जी सेवाकसंसत्र प्रेयमातमास चात्रुः ।

प्रवृत्ति ज्ञातुकामो वै मुनेतस्य जितानमतः ॥ 33 ॥

The fear stricken Indra used to send messengers to fathom the mind of that self controlled Muni.

एवं बहूनि वर्षिणि परिचयोपराउभवत् ।

निर्विकारा जितक्रोधा बहुतवर्परा सती ॥ 34 ॥

Thus did Jayanti serve for good many years the Muni, being void of anger and observing duly her celibacy.

पूर्णैं वर्षसहर्ये तु परितुँये महेश्वरः ।

वरेण छंदयामास काव्यं प्रति मनोहरः ॥ 35 ॥

In this way one thousand years passed duly, the God Mahādeva was very pleased and addressed Śukrācārya that He had come to give him boons that he desired.

ईश्व उवाच

यच्छ किंचिदपि ब्रह्मान्विधते घपुनन्दन ।

प्रतिपश्यसि यासर्वे तच्च वाच्यं न कस्यचित् ॥ 36 ॥

सर्वाधिभावकत्वेन भविष्यिन र संशयः ।

अवध्यः सर्वभृतानां प्रजेशश्र द्विजोन्म ॥ 37 ॥

The God Mahādeva said: Whatever there exists in this universe, whatever you see with your eyes and whatever can not be described in words, you will be the lord of all these and the conqueror of all. There is no doubt in this. You can not be killed by any creature; you will be the ruler of all beings and will be reckoned as the best of the Brāhmanas.

व्यास उवाच

एवं दत्ता वराऊघुभुतवैवांतराधीयत ।

काव्यसामय संवैश्व जवन्नी वाक्यमवबीत् ॥ 38 ॥

Vyāsa said: The God Mahādeva disappeared then and there, after granting him the boons. Then Śukrācārya saw Jayanti and said to her: O lady of beautiful hips! Who and whose daughter art thou? What is the desire in your mind? What for you have come here? O one of beautiful thighs! what is your duty?

कासिस कल्यासि सुश्रीणि बूहि किं ते चिकीक्षित् ।

किमर्थमिहु संप्राप्ता कार्य बद वरोके मे ॥ 39 ॥

किं बांछिस कांप्यष्ठ दुकंचे चेसुलोचने ।

प्रौतिसीय त्वलृतेनोषा वरं वरय सुहते ॥ 40 ॥

O beautiful eyed! I am very pleased with all that you have done for me. What do you want? O one

Book IV Chapter XII

of good vows! Ask boons from me; I will grant them even if they be difficult.

ततः सा तु पुर्न प्रह जयन्ती मुदितान्ना ।

चिकीर्षितं मे भगवंतनसा ज्ञानुमर्हसि ॥ 4 1 ॥

On hearing this, Jaiyanti's face became bright with joy; she said: whatever I desire, you know that already by force of your Tapasyā.

व्यास उवाच

ज्ञातं मया तथापि तवं बृहि यन्मनसेसितम् ।

कंरोपि सर्वेथा भर्त्र प्रीतो5स्म परिचर्यय ॥ 42 ॥

The Kārya said: Your mental desires I know; still mention them yourself particularly; I will do good to you in any way you like; I am pleased with your services.

जंदेल्यावर

गऊकस्याहं सुता ब्रह्मियात तुभ्यं समपिता ।

जयंती नामतश्राहं जयंतावरजा मुने ॥ 4 3 ॥

सकामास्मि तस्य विश्वेभीविधोबीछितंकुभेयुभा ।

रंस्ये तस्या महाभाग धर्मतः प्रीतिपुर्वकम् ॥ 4 4 ॥

Jayanti said: O Brāhmīn! I am the daughter of Indra and I am the younger of my brother Jayanta. Father has given me over to you; I now like to live with you. Kindly fulfil my desires now. O blessed one! You better take me and enjoy me according to Dharma. This is my desire.

गृक्र उवाच

मया सह त्वं सुश्रीण दूरा वर्षाणि भामिनि ।

सर्वभूतिरूपया च रमवेह यदृष्ठया ॥ 4 5 ॥

Šukrācārya said: O thou of large and handsome hips! Better enjoy with me for ten years, according to your liking, without being visible to any body.

व्यास उवाच

एवमुक्ता गृहं गत्वा जयंल्या: पाणिगमुढ़त् ।

तया सहासर्वेह्या द्रग वर्षिणि भागंशः ॥ 46 ॥

अजुष्यः सर्वभृतानां मायया संवृताः प्रपुः ।

दैत्यात्मतागानं क्रुवा कृतार्थ मान्सर्युतम् ॥ 47 ॥

अभिजमगुरुं तस्य मुदिताते दिवूक्ष्वतः ।

नाप्यवत्रममाणों ते जयेत्या सह संयुतम् ॥ 48 ॥

Vyāśya said: Thus saying, Šukrācārya went to his home and, according to religious observances, married Jayanti and lived with her for ten years under the shade of Māyā and unobserved by any body. On the other hand, the Daityas, hearing that Šukrācārya returned home successful getting his desired Mantra, were very glad and went to his house to pay their respects to him. But Šukra was then living with Jayanti; hence the Asuras could not see him.

तदा विमनसः सर्वे जाता भग्नोट्यामृतः ते ।

चिंतयारतिद्वीनाश्य वीक्षमाणाः पुनः पुनः ॥ 49 ॥

Then they got very much dejected, sorry and were drooped in spirits; they searched for again and again.

अर्द्धवा तं तु संवृतं प्रतिजनमुवंशगतम् ।

स्वगृहान्दैत्यवयासेते चिताविषाय भयानुतः ॥ 50 ॥

Not being able to see Šukra under the shade of Māyā, the Daityas were very sorry and got afraid and then returned to their own residences.

यमाणं तथा नात्वा शकः प्रोक्षितं गुकम् ।

ब्रह्माति महाभागं चिकं कर्तैल्यमतः परम् ॥ 51 ॥

On the other hand, the Devas, knowing that Šukra was holding intercourses with Jayanti, Indra, the God of Devas, spoke to the Deva Guru Brhaşpati. O Guru! Advise us what to do under the present circumstances and relieve us from the impending difficulties.

गच्छधा दानवान्बह्मभायया त्वं प्रतोभय ।

अस्माक कुरु कार्य त्वं बुद्धा संहित्य मान्दे ॥ 52 ॥

O Brāhmaṇa! Better go to day to the Dānavas and do that by which our honour may be maintained. You better put the Dānavas under some charm by your magical spell and think and do good to us.

तच्छूला वचनं काव्यं सम्भाणं सुरंसृन्ति ।

जाला तद्धुपास्थाय दैत्यान्याति यद्य गुरुः ॥ 53 ॥

On hearing Indra's words and knowing that Śukra is now enjoying with Jayanti, Brhaṣpati went to the Dānavas, putting on the appearance of Śukrācārya.

गत्या त्रातीथकत्वाउसौ दानवास्मुपाक्रवत् ।

आगातालेउपुगा: सर्वे द्वशु: काव्यमप्रतः ॥ 54 ॥

Going to the Demons, he called on then very politely and sweetly. The Asuras said that Śukrācārya had come in presence of them.

प्रणाय संशिता: सर्वे काव्यं मत्वाजित्मोहिताः ।

न विदुर्ते गुरोगियां काव्यरूपविषाथविनीम् ॥ 55 ॥

The Demons were very glad and bowed down before Śukrācārya and could not make out that he was the false Śukrācārya, under the Māgic charm of Brhaspati.

तानुवाच गुरः काव्यरूप: प्रच्छनमायया ।

स्वागतं मय याज्ञानां प्राणोर्भं चै तिहान ये ॥ 56 ॥

अहं वो बोधियधामि विश्वां प्राणातामाययां ।

तपसा तोषितः शंभुर्यामकल्याणहेते ॥ 57 ॥

Then the false Śukrācārya asked the welfare of the Daityas? and said: I went so long for your good; I performed severe tapasyā and satisfied the God Śambhu and acquired from him the Mantra, the

sacred knowledge, and that I will frankly explain to you.

तच्छूचा प्रीतमनसो जाताते दानवोत्तभाः ।

कृतकार्य गृहं मत्वा जडयुले विमोहिताः ॥ 58 ॥

On hearing this, the Demons were very pleased and, knowing that the Guru had been successful, were filled with joy.

प्रणेपुले मुदा युक्ता निरातांका गतत्यक्षाः ।

देवेध्यश्र भयं चत्वन्ता तस्युः सर्वे निरपायाः ॥ 59 ॥

इति शीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे चतुर्बेकन्चे

द्वादशोध्याः ॥ 12 ॥

They saluted him with joy and began to live quietly and freely and without pain, having got rid of fear the Devas.

Here ends the Twelth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhagāvatam, the Mahāpurānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa on Bhargu's curse and the dialogue between Śukrācāryā and the Daityas.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XIII

On Cheating the Daityas

राजोवाच

किं कृतं गुर्गणां पशुब्राजूरूषण वर्तां ।

छनेनेव हि दैत्यानां पौरोहित्येन धीमता ॥ १ ॥

The king said: What did the intelligent Brhaṣpati do after he had assumed falsely the appearance of Śukrācārya, and lived there as the spiritual guide of the Demons.

गुरुः सुराणामिनि सर्वविद्यानिशितथा ।

सुतांगीरस एवासी स कबं छलकूम्पिनः ॥ 2 ॥

O Muni! Brhapsati is the Guru of the Devas; he also devotes his time in studying the Vedas; and is the ocean of all knowledge; he is the son of the Maharsi Angirā and he is himself a Muni. Endorsed with all these good qualifications, how could he deceive the Demons.

धर्मशक्षेपु सर्वेषु सत्यधर्मय कारणम् ।

कथितं मुनिभियैन परमात्यासि लभ्यते ॥ 3 ॥

वाय्यसितसथा मिथ्या वक्ता चेहानवान्यति ।

कः सत्यक्ता संसारे भविष्यति गृहाश्रामी ॥ 4 ॥

In all the religious Sāstras, Truth is declared to be the essence of Dharma; and the Supreme Self is attained through Truth, so the wise sages say. How can we expect an ordinary householder to be true when such a man as Brhaspati takes recourse to falsehood with the Demons.

आहाराद्धिक भोज्यं बहाण्डविभवेउपि न ।

तत्वं मुनयो मिथ्या प्रवर्तैने कर्थ मुने ॥ ५ ॥

If one acquires, as one's wealth, the whole Universe, still one does not require anything more than what is required in feeding one's belly; how is it that Brhaspati could speak falsehood merely for the sake of his belly?

शब्दप्रमाणमुच्छेदे शिषाधावे गत न किम् ।

छलकमप्रमुत्ते वारक्षितारांत गृती कथम् ॥ 6 ॥

O Muni! The words sung by the ancient virtuous and respectable sages were true and had their corresponding objects by those words; now they

Book IV Chapter XIII

employed the term Śiṣṭa meaning that there were virtuous, respectable persons as denoted by them. When Brhaṣpati can even commit such condemnable deceitful acts and speak falsehood, we can expect no virtuous respectable persons in the world. Where then do you find the Śiṣṭa persons, denoted by the word Śiṣṭa, sung by the ancient sages? The word Śiṣṭa is now meaningless!

देवा: सत्त्वसमुद्धुता राजसा मानवा: स्मृता: ।

तिर्वास्तमासा: प्रोक्ता उत्सत्ती भूनिषि: क्रिल १ ७ ॥

The Devas are sprung from the Sāttvic qualities, men from Rajisaci qualities and birds, etc. from the Tāmasic qualities.

अमराणां गुरु: साक्षात्म्यायावाटी स्वयं यदि ।

तदा कः सत्यवक्ता स्याध्वासस्तामास: पुनः ॥ 8 ॥

When the Guru of the Immortals, the incarnate of Sāttvik qualities, can become a liar, how can one expect those who are Rājasik Tāmasik to follow rigorously the truth?

व्य स्थितितस्य धर्मस्य सन्देड़ोयं मामात्नः ।

का गति: सर्वेन्तूनां पिथापुते जातयते ॥ 9 ॥

Oh! This Trilokī is all pierced with falschool! Where is the Religion! And what will be the ultimate goal of all these creatures!

हरिबंहा रणीकान्तस्वाधाउ्ये सुरस्वभा: ।

सर्वे छलिधी दह्म मनुयाणां च का कथा ॥ 10 ॥

When Bhagavān Hari, Brahmā, Indra and the best of the Devas when all can betake to protest, fraud and trickery and show cleverness in them; what to speak of men!

कामाबोधासिन्ताप लोधीपहत्तचेतस: ।

छल दक्षा: सुरा: सर्वे मुनयशु तपोधना: ॥ 11 ॥

वसिष्ठो बामदेवश्व शिक्षापित्रो गुरुरूषना ।

एते पारपततः काउत्र गतिभर्मेय मानव ॥ 12 ॥

O Giver of honour! When all the Devas, Vasistha, Vāmadeva, Visvāmitra, Bhraspati and other ascetic Munis get themselves overpowered by lust and anger, when their intelligence gets destroyed by covetuousness and avarice, when they are addicted to vices and are expert in fraud, pretext

and trickery, then what fate, alas! can you expect of Dharma and what help is there of any religious persons?

इन्ट्रोसिनशून्ट्रमा वेधा: परदाराभिलम्यता: ।

आर्यत्वं भुवनेचेषु स्थितं कृत्र मुने वद ॥ 13 ॥

Alas! Indra, Agni, Moon, and Brahmā when these get overpowered by the strong influence of lust, are in illicit love with others wives, where is the goodness and virtuous behaviour in this Triloki?

वचनं कस्य मन्त्यमुपदेशप्रियासनच ।

सर्वे लोपाधिभूतास्ते देवाशु मुनयस्तथा ॥ 14 ॥

O Sinless One! To whom, then, can we look upon as our spiritual guide and our advice and law givers when all the Devas and Muni are corrupt with avarice?

व्यास उवाच

किं विश्यु: किं शिवो बहुत मघवा किं बृहस्यति: ।

देहवान् प्रभवत्येव विकारैः संयुतः सदा ॥ 15 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Be he Indra, Brhaspati, Brahmā, Viṣṇu or Maheśa whoever is embodied or will put on bodies, he will have to be in touch with the previously mentioned Aharūkāra, and covetuousness and other vices due to name and form.

रागी विध्य: शिको रागी बह्ञापि रागसंयुतः।

“रायाविकमकुत्वं वै न करोति नाराधि ।”

रागवानपि चातुर्गविद्धेड इव लक्ष्यते ॥ १ ६ ॥

O king! Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa are all attached to sensual objects; and what improper and sinful actions there can be that cannot be committed by persons devoted to sensual objects! सम्प्रावे सुक्टे सेठीप गुणैः सम्वायते किल ।

कारणाद्रहितं कार्यं कवं भवितुर्महैति ॥ 17 ॥

It is through cleverness and fraud that any one devoted to sensual objects can easily make oneself as cleverly free from Māyā; but when difficulty comes, then his trickery gets discovered and the respective qualities hidden in him are brought to bear their respective results. Know, then, the three

qualities to be conjointly the cause of all these actions; as without any cause, no action gets visible.

इद्यादौनां च सर्वेषां गुणा एव हि कारणम् ।

पश्रविश्वसमुद्धता देहासेलां च नाच्यथा ॥ 18 ॥

These discrepancies in the case of Brahmā and others are caused by the three qualities; their bodies are all created from Pradhāna Mahat and the other 25 Tattvas. (essences).

काले मरणधार्मिते सन्देहः को3उ ते नृप ।

परोपदेशे विस्पर्धे शिषा: सर्व पवित्त च ॥ 19 ॥

विलुत्तिहिंशेशेषे। स्ककार्ये समुपस्थिते ।

कामः क्रोभत्धला लोभग्रोहाङ्कुरासस्तः ॥ 20 ॥

O king! Brahmā and others are subject to death; then how can you doubt on other things? In advising others, everybody gives, as it were, good and virtuous advices; but the burden falls upon their own heads; they fall off from their advices and act according to their hidden natures; then they yield to lust, anger, envy, egoism and fascination.

देहावा-कः परित्यक्त्मीशो भवति तान्युनः ।

संसारोउयं महाराज सदैवैर्विविधः स्मृतः ॥ 21 ॥

No one who is embodied can get rid of passions, born of the three qualities. O king! Thus the Triloki goes, is the saying of the Maharsis.

नान्यथा प्रभवत्येव रुभाग्रुभमयः किल ।

कदाचिद्वगाविच्यानुस्तपशृति दाकृणम् ॥ 22 ॥

कदाचिद्विषायान्यान्तिनतीसे सुराधिधः ।

कदाचितु स्मारूरस्त्रिक्तः परमेश्वरः ॥ 23 ॥

रमते किल वैकुणले तद्वासस्तरणो विभुः ।

कदाचिष्ठानवैः सारधे सुखं परमदाकाणम् ॥ 24 ॥

करीत कर्णासिम्युस्तद्वाणपीडिते धृप्यम् ।

कदाचिजयमानोति देवालसोप्रि पराजयम् ॥ 25 ॥

सुखदुःखाधिपृतीउसी भवलेवेव न संशयः ।

गेपे गोते कदाचिष्ठे योगनिद्रासमावृतः ॥ 26 ॥

This Trilokī, auspicious, inauspicious, mixed, never gets any serious change; its nature remains always uniform. See Bhagavān Viṣṇu sometimes practises severe asceticism; Indra, the lord of the Devas some times follows the practices of religious sacrifices. Again you find Viṣṇu Bhagavān, full of

youth, fond of the Līlā, enjoying the company of Ramā in Vaikuntha; some times He is the ocean of mercy, is fighting dreadful battles with the Demons and being severely afflicted with their clusters of arrows; some times he gains victories, some times he gets defeat through the irony of Fate; thus he gets undoubtedly pleasures and pains.

काले जागर्ति विश्रामा स्थायाप्रतिविधितः ।

गर्वें बढ़ा हरिश्छित इन्जाडा वे सुरातथा ॥ 27 ॥

मुनवश्व तिविनारीः स्वायुषो विवरान्ति हि ।

निशावसाने संजाते जनस्थावरजंगम् ॥ 28 ॥

घियते नात्र सन्देहो नृप किश्छलदापि च ।

स्वायुषो-ने पचजाड़ा: क्षयमूच्छिति पार्थिं ॥ 29 ॥

Oking! some time Nārāyaṇa draws all the worlds into his belly and takes his yogic sleep on the thousand headed serpent Śeṣa and again he gets himself awakened by Prakṛti. O king! Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa, Indra, the Devas, and Munis all of them, live up to the limit of their ordained time and when the time of Pralaya the Universal dissolution, ends, this whole Universe, moving and nonmoving, again comes into existence as before; there is no doubt in this. O king, at the expiry of the ordained time, Brahmā and all others will die, no doubt.

प्रभवन्ति पुनर्विष्णुहराशकाय: सुग: ।

तस्माल्कामादिकान्यावादैह्वान्यतिप्रदते ॥ ३० ॥

नात्र ते विमयम: काव्यं: कदापिचिप पार्थिति ।

संसारोयं तु सन्दिधाः कामक्रोधादिपिनूर ॥ ३१ ॥

Again, in due course, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa and the other Devas come out and assume bodies and get all the passions, lust, etc. as ordained. O King! You need not be astonished; this Trilokī always goes on accompanied by lust, anger, etc.

तुर्वभस्तिद्विनमुक्तः पुरुषः परमार्थवित् ।

यो विवेपौहं संसारे स दारात्र क्रौतलपि ॥ 32 ॥

विमुक्तः सर्वसोपेध्ये विवरत्याविगकतः ।

तस्मादुर्हस्यतेभिरां शगशनातिभिता पुनः ॥ 33 ॥

गुरुभालाभिता भार्यां तथा भातुर्थीवासः ।

एवं संसारचक्रोंस्मव्रगतोपादिविधित्विधृतः ॥ 34 ॥

Book IV Chapter XIII

Persons free from lust, anger and other passions are very rare in this world. He who is afraid of this world does not marry, and thus being free from the attachments to any worldly objects, becomes free and roams fearless. The Moon stole away the wife of Brhaşpati, and Brhaşpati himself stole away the wife of his younger brothers. Thus in this wheel of Sanisāra, all the creatures are ever passionate with attachment avarice, etc.

गत्थस्यं च समास्थाय कर्थं मुक्तो घेवेत्रः ।

तस्मासर्वप्रयतेनं हित्वा संसारसारताम् ॥ 35 ॥

The householder can never expect to obtain freedom. Therefore those who want to be free, should carefully relinquish the idea of the stability of the world and worship the Eternal Mother Full and Sat, Cit and Ānandam.

आत्यायेमहेशानी सचिद्वानन्द्रविणीम् ।

तन्मायागणतश्छं जगदेतच्चाराम् ॥ ३६ ॥

This world, moving and unmoving, O Maheśanī, rolls in madness, overpowered by Her Māyā.

प्रभत्यमन्तवलर्ष मदिरामपतवज्ञ ।

तस्या आगधानेपैव गुणानसर्विन्धयुत च ॥ ३७ ॥

Intelligent persons worshipping Her, trample upon the three qualities and become free. O king! No other Path exists for Freedom.

मुक्ति भजेत मतिमाजान्यः पंधास्थितः परः ।

आग्रायिता महेशगानी न यावकुकृतो कृपण। ३ ३ १ ||

तावद्ध्वेल्पुं कमाकाकोयोर्जित दया युतः ।

करणासागरामेतां पंजतेन्स्मादायया ॥ ३ ९ ॥

Until one gets the Grace from the Maheśānī, one never gets happiness. True mercy is not found anywhere else but from Her. Then one should worship the All merciful, being of pure heart. For Her worship leads to freedom, even in this bodyhood.

यस्यास्तु भजनेनैव जीवन्मुत्कवमरन्तु ।

मानुध्यं तुर्वर्भ प्राय्य सेविता न महेश्वरीं ॥ 40 ॥

He who getting a human frame fails to worship Maheśānī, gets down from the highest rung of the ladder. This is my opinion.

निःशिणकाप्राप्तिता अथ इन्येव विवहें ।

अहूक्राप्तुं विश्वं गुणावसम्वित्यम् ॥ 41 ॥

असत्येनापि सम्वद्धं मृच्यते कायमन्यथा ।

हिला सर्व ततः सर्वे: संसेल्या घुवनेश्धी ॥ 42 ॥

This Universe, composed of the three qualities, is encompassed with Ahankāra and fastened to untruth; therefore freedom can never be expected without the worship of That Potent Goddess. O Muni! O king! Renounce every worldly object and serve the Goddess Bhuvanesvari; this is the highest duty of all.

राजोवाच

किं कृतं गुरुणा तत्र काव्यकपधेण च ।

कदा शुक्र: समायाततन्मे बृहि पितामहं ॥ 43 ॥

The king said: What did, then, the Devaguru do in the disguise of Śukrācārya? And when did the real Śukrācārya come there? O respected Muni! Speak on these points.

व्यास उवाच

भ्युण राजन्यव्ययामि यत्कृतं गुरुणा तदा ।

कृत्वा काव्यस्वरूपं च प्रच्छेने महात्मना ॥ 44 ॥

Vyāsa said: Please hear what the disguised Brhaṣpati in the shape of Śukrācārya did afterwards.

गुरुणा बोधिता दैत्या मत्वा काव्य स्वकं गुरुम् ।

विश्वास परमं कृत्वा बध्वुत्स्नमयास्ताद ॥ 45 ॥

The demons were made to understand clearly by Brhaşpati; and then they took him for Śukrācārya and placed implicit faith on him and began to think of him and him alone.

विद्यार्थे ग्रणत भातु भगुं मत्वाउमोगैहिताः ।

गुरुणा वियतख्याने तोभाको वा न मुवाहि ॥ 46 ॥

The Daityas, enchanted and deceived by the magic of Brhaşpati, took now his refuge for acquiring the knowledge from him, since they mistook him for Śukrācārya. Who is there that is not enchanted by the idea of gaining something?

दूरश्वर्णिके काले सम्पूर्णसमये तदा ।

जर्यवा सह क्रीडित्वा काव्यो याज्ञानचित्यत् ॥ 47 ॥

On the other hand, when the term of ten years was over, Šukrācārya, the real Guru of the Daityas, ceased enjoying Jayanti and began to remember his disciples, the Daityas.

आशया माम मार्गे ते प्रध्यन्तः संस्थिताः किल ।

गतला तान्ये प्रपयेउई घाज्ञानतिनययातुगन् ॥ 4 8 ॥

He now began to think that “my disciples, the Daityas, are expecting every instant my return; and I would now go and see them, bewildered with fear.

मा देवेध्यो भयं तेषां मदूकानां भवेदिति ।

सँत्रिल बुद्धिमास्थाय जयंत्रीं प्रत्युवाच इ ॥ ४९ ॥

देवानेवोघसंवर्ति पुरा मे चाहलोचने ।

समयलेउछ स्यमूर्णं जातोरअं दशाविषिकः ॥ ५० ॥

तस्माद्छामहं देवि रूढुं याज्ञान्सुमध्ये ।

पुरेनेवागमियामि तवान्तिकमनुद्रतः ॥ ५१ ॥

They are my devotees and I ought to do such that they might not be afraid of the Devas." And then he exclaimed to Jayanti, "O beautiful one! Let my sons take the shelter of the Gods; your term of ten years is today over; I now go therefore, to see my disciples; soon I will again come to you.

तथैति तमुवाचाय जयन्ती धार्यितमा ।

यथेहं गच्छ धर्मेन न ते धर्मं विलोपेचे ॥ 52 ॥

"Be it so", replied Jayanti, the best of those who know religion, "you can go where you like; I am not to destroy your Dharma."

तद्युवा वयनं काव्यो जाग्य वरितस्ततः ।

अप्यशूनवानां च पार्थे वाच्यति तदा ॥ 53 ॥

छरूक्षपरं सीयां बोधयन्तं छलेन तान् ।

जैनं धर्मं कृते खेने यज्ञनिद्वपरं तथा ॥ 54 ॥

Hearing these words, Šukrācārya went hurriedly to the Demons and saw the Devaguru Brhaspati sitting before them in the guise of Šukrācārya. He was explaining to him the Jaina doctrines, compiled by himself and finding fault with the act of envy, taking revenge and killing and cursing the sacrifices, etc.

भो देवरिप्वः सत्यं ब्रवीमि भवतां हितम् ।

अहिंसा परमो धर्मों हेतव्या ह्राततायिनः ॥ 55 ॥

He was telling them “O Enemies of Gods! Truly, I am telling you words that will, no doubt, prove good to you. Non-killing is the highest virtue; even the enemies ought never to be killed.

छिडीभोगतरैवैदे दर्शिनं हिंसनं पशोः ।

जिहास्वादपरै: काममहिंदेव परा मता ॥ 56 ॥

It is the Brāhmanas, addicted to enjoyments and pleasures of senses, who want to satisfy their tastes and pleasures that are found in the Vedas injunctions to kill animals; but there is no virtue higher than non-killing animals.

एर्वधिधानि वाक्यानि वेटगाछ्चपाराणि च ।

बुवाणे भूमकाकर्णे विक्सोजसी गुणो: सून: ॥ 57 ॥

चिन्त्यामास मनसा मम ढ्रेष्यो गुरुः किल ।

वझिता: किल धूतेन याज्ञा मे नात्र संशयः ॥ 58 ॥

O king! Sukrācārya was perfectly astonished to hear Brhaşpati, the Guru of the Devas, speaking against the Vedas and began to think that "Brhaşpati is certainly my enemy. My disciples have been duped by this cheat; there is no doubt in this.

प्रियतोषं पायबीजं वै नरक्रहागूर्जितम् ।

गुरुत्यन्ते बृते प्रेरितो येन पायमा ॥ 59 ॥

Fie to Avarice! It is the seed of sin; very strong and the veritable gate to hell; Brhaşpati, even, the Guru of the Devas, is speaking lies, bound under the influence of this heinous avarice!

प्रमाणं चत्वं यस्य तोप्रेप पाखण्डधारकः ।

गुरुः सुराणां सर्वैंधं धर्मशास्त्रवतर्कः ॥ 60 ॥

Oh! What wonder is this that the Guru of the Devas, who is the promulgator of all the religious Śāstras and whose word is accepted as the final decision, is now expounding the doctrines of atheists.

किं किं न तपते लोभामलिनीकृतमानसः ।

अन्योदपि गुरुरूपेवं जातः पारखण्डपिछतः ॥ ६१ ॥

When Brhaşpati can become the expounder of atheistic doctrines, impelled by covetuousness: what to speak of those whose minds are not pure and whose intelligence is not sharp?

Book IV Chapter XIV

<table><tr><td>शैलुपचेघितं सर्वे परिगूहा ब्रिजोत्तमः ।वंचययतिसम्मुजादैन्यान् याज्ञान्माप्यसी ॥ 6 2 ॥इति श्रीमद्वैभागवते महापुराणे चतुर्षकन्येत्रयोद्धारो5यायः ॥ 1 7 3 ॥</td></tr></table>

This Deva Guru, though a Brāhmin, is acting to-day like a rogue, wanting to take away all and

is deceiving my disciples the Daityas, who have been confounded by his magic.

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahapurānam of 18,000 verses on cheating the Daityas by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IV Chapter XIV

CHAPTER XIV

On the Daity's Getting Back their Sukrācārya

व्यास उवाच

इति सिंह्येल मनसा तानुवाच हस्रिवः ।

विश्रिता मत्सक्षरेण दैत्याः किं गुरुणा किल ।। । ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus arguing in his mind, Śukrācārya smilingly said to the Daityas: O Daityas! what for have you all been cheated by Brhaṣpati, the Guru of the Devas, in my guise.

अर्ह काव्यो गुरुकाशं देकाकार्यप्रासधकः ।

अनेन बक्षिता यूर्यं महाज्ञा नात संशयः ॥ २ ॥

I am Śukrācārya; you are my disciples; this man is Brhaṣpati, wanting to serve the Gods. He has cheated you, there is no doubt in this.

भा ब्रद्धयं चोरोस्पायां द्राधिकोरयं महाकृति: ।

अनुपाख्त मां याज्ञास्त्वर्जनैं बृह्मश्यति ॥ ३ ॥

This vain villainous person has assumed my form; do not put the least faith in his words. O Daityas! You are disciples, follow unto me; leave this Brhaşpati, vain and arrogant.

दूर्याकष्टं चबरतस्य दूर्या ती सूर्शी पुनः ।

विस्यमं परंं जगुः काव्योउयिति निश्रिताः ॥ 4 ॥

The Daityas, on hearing his words were struck with wonder at the resemblance of the two personages and came to the conclusion that “the person just come is the real Śukrācārya.

स तान्त्रीय सुसंधानानुक्राविस्युवाच ह ।

गुर्वाँं चंचचायेव मदूधोरं बृह्यस्ति: ॥ 5 ॥

Then Brhaşpati, the false Śukrācārya explained to the Daityas in plain and enchanting words that “the second man just come is the Deva Guru Brhaşpati; he has come here in my guise. His object is to cheat you.

प्राणो वश्यितुं युधान्देवकार्यार्थसिद्धये ।

मा विश्वासं वचस्यय कुठघं दैत्यसत्तमाः ॥ 6 ॥

He has come here to cheat you and serve the purpose of the Devas; do not believe in his words.

प्राणता विश्वा मया शफभोर्याभनधायपाति ताम् ।

देवेथ्यो विजयं नूनं कारिष्यामि न संशयः ॥ 7 ॥

What knowledge I have acquired from the God Śarībhū, I am teaching it to you; I will make you, no doubt, victorious in the battle with the Devas."

इति श्रुत्वा गुरोविंयं काव्यरूपधरस्य ते ।

विश्वांस परमं जगुः काव्योर्यमिति निश्यान् ॥ 8 ॥

Thus the Daityas, hearing the words of the false Śuśārkārya, thought the false one to be real and placed implicit reliance in his words.

काव्येन बहुधा तत्र बोधिताः कित दानवाः ।

बुबुधूनं गुगोर्मायामीहिताः कालपयंयात् ॥ 9 ॥

The real Śukrākārya, then explained them as much as he could; but the Daityas, owing to the magic of the false Śukrārya and to the wonderful effect of time, did not hear his words.

एवं ते निश्छयं कृत्ता ततो भागवमब्रुन्त् ।

अयं गुरुर्नों धर्मातना बुद्धिद्ध हिते तः ॥ 10 ॥

The Daityas thus convinced said to the real Śukrāśraya, “this man before us is our Guru for our welfare enlightenment, he is the foremost religious Śukrāśraya; for ten continuously he is giving us advices. You are not our Guru; you appear fictitious and false; you better leave this place and go away.”

दूण बर्षीण सततमयं नः शारित भागवः ।

गच्छ तर्व कृहको भासि नास्याके गुरुपन्तु ॥ 11 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

The Dull brained Daityas repeatedly told Šukrācārya the reproachful words and bowed down to the false Šukrācārya, and, saluting him, gladly welcomed him as their Guru.

इतुसुक्ता भार्ची मुहा निर्भर्य व पुनः पुनः ।

जगुहुस्तं गृहं प्रीत्या प्रगिपत्याचीभवाहा च ॥ १ २ ॥

काव्यस्तु तनयान्दूर्वा चुकोषाय शरणाय च ।

दैत्याविचोधिताभ्यमा गुरुणा चातिविहितान् ॥ १ ३ ॥

यस्मान्यया बोधिता वे गृह्वीयुर्नं च मे वशः ।

तस्मान्नरस्थेना वै परणभवमावस्यय ॥ १ ४ ॥

The real Śukrācārya, seeing the Daityas exceedingly attached to Brhaşpati, the Guru of the Devas, and deceived by his words, cursed them out of anger and said: "As you have not taken my words though I have explained every thing to you, you would lose your knowledge and get defeat.

मद्ववापकर्ते कामं स्वल्ये काले ह्वायाययः ।

तदास्य कपटं सर्वे परित्रां भविष्यति ॥ 15 ॥

As you have shown towards me, you will get the fruits of it at an early date and will then understand the deceitful behaviors of that Deva Guru.

इत्युक्तवासी जगाभागु भागवेः कोधेसंयुतः ।

ब्रह्म्यातिपूर्वे प्राप्य तस्थो तत्र समाहितः ॥ 16 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus saying Śukrācārya hurriedly went away, in furiated with anger. Bhraspati was glad and remained there with his mind calm.

ततः शप्तानुर्जाला दैत्यांस्ताम्पारीयण है ।

जगमा तरसा तव्कता स्वस्तयं स्व विधाय च ॥ 17 ॥

गत्वोबाच तदा शकं कृतं कार्य मधुवम् ।

शप्ता: गुहैमा ते द्विता मया तवक्ता: पुनः किल ॥ 18 ॥

निराधारा: कृता नृनं वातधं सुरससभा: ।

संग्रामाय महाभाग शापद्धया मया कृताः ॥ 19 ॥

Bhraspati then knowing the Daityas cursed by Śukrācārya, assumed his real appearance, left that place, and hurriedly returned to Indra. He began to say “I have undoubtedly succeeded in my undertaking; the Daityas have been cursed and left by me too. They are now helpless; so, O Good Suras! I have made them cursed, you would better now try to fight with them.”

इति श्रुत्वा गुरोर्वस्यं मघवा मुदामपल्न् ।

जड्धूश सुरा: सर्वे प्रतिपुज्य बृह्मयतिम् ॥ 20 ॥

संग्रामाय मिति चक्रः संविद्वार्य विष्य: पुनः ।

निर्वंगुर्मिततः सर्वे दानवाभिमयुका: सुरा: ॥ 21 ॥

Indra heard their Guru and became very glad; all the other Devas were glad and worshipped him. They held another cabinet, secret council, how to fight with the Daityas; and, then, all uniting together marched out in battle against the Asuras.

सुरान्समुहाताज्ञाला कृतोद्योगान्यहावलान् ।

अन्तहिंतं गुरुं चैव बथयुधिंहतयान्वितः ॥ 22 ॥

Seeing that the powerful Devas marching towards them ready to fight and knowing their false Guru had fled, the Daityas became very anxious.

परस्पमधोचुले मोहितातस्य मायया ।

सम्पसाठो महात्मा च यातोउसी नष्टमानस: ॥ 23 ॥

They told each other: Alas! We were enchanted by the Devaguru; the highscould Śukrācārya angrily left us; now it is our incumbent duty to satisfy him.

वड्यायिता गत पापो गुरुः कपटपिण्डतः ।

भ्रातृस्कीतंभनः प्रायो मलिनोउन्तबिकेः सुचि: ॥ 24 ॥

That vicious, dirty inside and pure outside, hypocrite Pundit Deva Guru, who used to go to his brother's wife, has really cheated and has quitted us.

किं कुंना: क्व च गच्छाम: कर्थ काव्यं प्रक्रोधितम् ।

कुर्विमहि सुहायांष प्रसनं इद्यानसम् ॥ 25 ॥

What are we to do now? where to go? How to satiate now the anger of Śukra so that he might be glad and help us.

इति संचित्त ने सर्वे मितिता भयंकंपिताः ।

प्रहारं पुतः कृत्वा जगमुते भारपं पुः ॥ 26 ॥

Thus pondering over they all unitedly, shuddering with fear, again went to Śukrācārya, keeping Prahlāda in front of them.

प्राणेशुधगृते तस्य मुनिर्मान्यतता ।

भार्यवत्नावाचा रोषसंरक्तलोचनः ॥ 27 ॥

They all bowed down at the feet of their Guru;

Book IV Chapter XIV

Šukra remained silent; then, bursting with anger and with eyes red, told them.

मया प्रबोधिता चूयं मोहिता गुरुभायया ।

न गृहीत चंचो योग्यं तदा याज्या हिते शृणि ॥ 28 ॥

You were all warned by me that you were being cheated by the Māyā of Brhaṣpati; you did not take my word, as worth hearing, though unselfish, pure and leading to your welfare.

तदास्वागीतश्रहं भवद्धिस्तद्वर्श गतेः ।

प्राणं नूनं मदोभनैमावमानजं फलम् ॥ 29 ॥

Rather you were influenced by him and infatuated with vanity, you insulted me; now you will have to bear undoubtedly the effects of that Karma.

तत्र गच्छत सद्भूषा घजासी कपटाकृति: ।

वंक्कः सुराकार्याँनी नाहं तद्विद्ध बझकः ॥ ३० ॥

You are now vitiated from the path of your welfare; go now where that disguised cheat resides for the welfare of the Gods; know me not to be a cheat like him.

व्यास उवाच

एवं बुवंत शुक्र तु वाक्यसन्दिशया गिरा ।

प्रहादस्ते तदोवाच गृहीता चरणों ततः ॥ ३ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! When Šukra finished saying his uncertain words, Prahlāda clasped his feet and began to say thus:

प्रहाद उवाच

भार्यावछ सयायात्याज्यानस्मांतश्वातृन्त ।

त्यन्तु नारीस सर्वेत्र त्विद्धितांसनयार्थ नः ॥ ३२ ॥

Prahlāda said: O our Guru Bhārgava! To-day we have come to you in a very distressed condition! O Omniscient! we are your disciples; we are your good sons; you ought not to quit us.

गते त्वयि तु मन्थर्ष शैतृपेण दुरात्मना ।

त्वेक्षेयम्युरातार्वियं तेन प्रविश्रतः ॥ 33 ॥

On your departure to get the Mantra, that hypocrite, vicious Brhaspati getting the opportunity, assumed your false appearance and cheated us.

अज्ञानकृतदोषेण नैवं कुयिति शान्तिमान् ।

सर्वेत्रसर्वे विज्ञानासि चितं नः प्रवर्ण त्वति ॥ 34 ॥

Peaceful persons do not take any offence committed with ignorance; you know every thing; you know very well that our hearts are devoted to thee and to thee alone. There is no need of telling any thing further to you.

ज्ञाला नतस्पास भावं त्वज कोर्भ महामते ।

ब्रुवर्ति सुनयः सर्वे शणकोया हि साधयः ॥ 35 ॥

O Highly Intelligent One! By your Tapas, you know our inner minds and relinquish your anger. The sages say that the anger of the saints is not lasting.

जर्त स्वभावतः शीर्ते नह्वातापसमागान्ति ।

भवल्युर्ण विश्योगाच्छ शीतत्यमनुगच्छिति ॥ 36 ॥

O Muni! Water is naturally cool; when in contact with fire it gets, hot; but, when the heat is removed, it gets cold shortly after.

कोधश्रशतलयो वै तचक्यः सर्वेधा बुधैः ।

तस्माइत्रोषं परित्यज्य प्रसादं कुक सूत्रत ॥ 37 ॥

O observer of good vows! Anger is like Cāndāla; sages therefore quit it. Our prayer to you is that you leave your anger and be pleased with us.

यदि न त्वासि कोधे त्वनयस्मानुसु: विज्ञान् ।

तथा तत्का महाभाग गायिष्यायो सत्ताल्म ॥ 38 ॥

If you do not quit your anger and if you make us overpowered with grief and sorrow, O blessed one! We, being abandoned by you, will go down to the Pātāla.

व्यास उवाच

प्रहादस्य वचः श्रुत्वा भाग्यो ज्ञानवशूषा ।

विलोक्य सुमना भूत्वा तानुवाच हसविश्च ॥ 39 ॥

Vyāsa said: Bhārgava heard Prahlāda's words and, with his intuitioned eye, came to see the proper state of affairs and was pleased and lovingly said.

न भेतल्यं न गतल्यं दानवा वा सतालम् ।

स्वशिव्यामि वो याज्ञान्यान्यैरितयिः किन्त ॥ 40 ॥ 10

You will not have to fear nor to center into the Pātāla. You are my Yajamānas; I will certainly protect you all by my never failing Mantra power.

हितं सत्यं ब्रवीम्यद्य शृषुण्यं तत् निश्रयम् ।

वचनं मम धर्मज्ञ: श्रुतं यद्बहण: पुरा ॥ 4 1 ॥

O knower of religion! What Brahmā of yore told me, I am now telling you accordingly. Hear my truthful words, leading to your welfare.

अवर्धभ्याविनो भावाः प्रभविति शुभाणुभाः ।

दैवं न चान्यथा कर्तुं क्षमः को3पि धगतते ॥ 4 2 ॥

Whatever is inevitable, doomed to pass, must come to pass, be it auspicious or inauspicious. No one is able in this world to go against the current of Fate.

अष्ट मन्दवला यूयं कालयोगादसंशयम् ।

देवैर्जिताः सकृष्चापि पातालं प्रतिपल्यथा ॥ 4 3 ॥

Under the influence of Time you are now deprived of strength; therefore you will have to suffer defeat at the hands of the Devas and you will have to go once to the Pātāla.

प्राप्त: पर्यविकालो व इति ब्रह्मा उध्यभाषत ।

भुर्फ तारयं भवाद्रिष्ठ पूर्ण सर्वे समुद्धिमत् ॥ 4 4 ॥

युगानि दर्श पूर्णानि देवानात्रक्य मूर्धनि ।

देवयोगाच्छ युधाविभर्षुर्भे जैतलेवमूर्जितम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

Brahmā said: When your time to enjoy the sovereignty of the Triloki had come, you enjoyed the kingdoms of the Triloki with all its wealth and power. You attacked the Devas and, helped by Time, had been able to trample them under your feet and held your sovereignty for full ten yugas and enjoyed the pleasures without any hitch.

सावर्गिके मनी राज्य पुनस्तुभ विध्यति ।

पौरब्रहीलोक्यविराजी राज्य प्राप्यति ते बलि: ॥ 46 ॥

You will regain this kingdom in the Sāvarnika manvantara. Then Bali will come in your family as the grandson of Prahlāda and will conquer the Triokī and will get name and fame throughout his kingdom.

यदा वामनस्लेण हृतं देवेन विज्याना ।

तदैव च भव्यतीयः प्रोक्तो देवेन विज्याना ॥ 47 ॥

हृतं वेन बलै राज्यं देवेनावळशधीसद्धये ।

त्वमित्यो भविता चाठ्ये चिषते साविणीके मन्ती ॥ 48 ॥

When the Lord of Vaikuntaha had incarnated as

Vāmana and stolen away the kingdom of Bali, then the Janārdana Viṣṇu told Bali, the king of the Demons that “I have taken away your kingdom by pretext to serve the purpose of the Gods; you will become Indra, no doubt, in the coming Śavarnika manvantara”.

भार्गव उवाच

इल्युक्तो हरिणा पीजस्वल प्रब्रहा संग्रतम् ।

अदृष्यः सर्वभूतानां गुप्तभूतरित भीतवत् ॥ 49 ॥

Bhārgava said: According to the sayings of Śrī Bhagavān Hari, your grandson Bali is now invisible to all creatures and is now passing away his time, very much terror stricken.

एकता वासवेनासी विलिर्यंभरूपाफक ।

गूच्य गृहे स्थितः कामं भयभीतः शतकातः ॥ 50 ॥

दृष्टि बढुप्रा तेन वासवेन बलिस्तव ।

किमर्थ गार्वैं रूपं कृतत्वान्द्विपृगव ॥ 51 ॥

Being afraid of Indra, he is now staying in a lonely house as an ass. One day Indra on seeing him enquired of him, in various ways, the cause of his assuming that ass-body.

भोक्ता लं सर्वतेकास्य दैत्यानां च प्रगामिता ।

“न लज्जा खरूसंपण तव राक्षसस्ताम ।”

तस्य तद्धचनं श्रुत्वा दैत्याज्ञो बलिस्तदा ॥ 52 ॥

O Lord of the Daityas? You have always enjoyed pleasures of all the world; you are the ruler of the Daityas; you ruled over all the world; do you not feel shame now in thus assuming this ass body. The Lord of the Daityas, hearing him, spoke thus.

प्रोवाच चवनं शकं कोउर शोकः शतकतो ।

यथा विज्यामृदोतजो मल्यकछ्छपतं गते ॥ 53 ॥

तथा3ई खरूर्णे संवितः कालयोगतः ।

यथा तं कमले लीन: संस्थितो बहाहत्यया ॥ 54 ॥

O Indra—‘There is nothing to be sorry in these matters? When the most powerful Viṣṇu can assume fish and tortoise incarnations, then what wonder is there that I by virtue of the force of Time, am now staying as an ass? When you had murdered a Brāhmana, you had hoid yourself

Book IV Chapter XV

in the Mānasa lake in the lotusses; similarly to-day distressed, I am staying here in this ass body.

पीडितश तथा ताश स्थितोई खललपूक् ।

दैवार्थिनस्य किं दुःखं किं सुरं चाकशासन ॥ 55 ॥

कालः क्रातिवे वे नूनं यदिच्छति यथा तथा ।

O Indra! What sorrow or happiness can be to a person who is under the control of Fate. To him everything is alike; for whatever the Time wishes, It can act accordingly."

भानव उवाच

इति ते बलिवेदेशेगे कृत्वा संविद्युतमाम् ॥ ५६ ॥

प्रबोधी प्राप्तुः कामं यथास्थानं च जमतुः ।

Bhārgava said to Prahlāda! Both persons Bali and Indra got enlightenment at the mutual

conversations; and they went away to their places at their own will.

इन्योतनें समाध्याता मया देवबलिष्ठता ।

देवाधीनं जगत्सर्वे सदेवासुरमानुभम् ॥ 57 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमद्दैयिणालो महापुराणे वतुर्बेकन्के

चतुर्देशोउध्याः: 11 14 11

O Lord of the Asuras! I have narrated to you this stroy indicating how powerful is the Time. Know that the Devas and Daityas and all the human beings and this whole universe is under that Great Fate.

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimadevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses on the Daityas getting back their Śukrācārya, by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book IV Chapter XV

CHAPTER XV

On the Truce Between the Daityas and the Devas

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः शुत्वा भार्गवस्य महात्मनः ।

प्रहादस्तु सुसंह्छो वध्व वृनपन्दन ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king Janamejaya! Prahlāda was glad to hear the above words of the high souled Bhārgava.

त्राला देयं बलिष्ठ च प्रहादस्तावुरावा च ।

कृतंपि युद्धे न जयो भविष्यति कदाचन ॥ 2 ॥

Knowing Fate to be the strongest, he addressed the Daityas: Never, in this battle will victory be ours.

तदा ते जयिनः प्रीघृदानैवा मदार्थिततः ।

संग्रामस्तु प्रकर्तेथो देई किं न विदामहे ॥ 3 ॥

निरुद्धामानां देई ति प्रधानमसुराधिप ।

केन दृष्टं कव वा दृष्टं कौदृषंगे केन निर्मितम् ॥ 4 ॥

तस्मादुब्दं करीथ्योगे बलमाथाय साम्यन्तम् ।

भवागे देल्वयंरं लं सर्वज्ञोरि महामते ॥ 5 ॥

Then the victorious Demons, infatuated with pride, told Prahlāda: What is Fate? We do not recognise it. We ought to fight. O Lord of us: Fate reigns over those that are idle, not energetic. Has Fate any shape? Who has created it? Has any body seen Fate? However let us gather strength and

fight. You are very intelligent and all knowing. It is proper that you should take our lead in the fight.

इतुक्तसैतदा राजप्रहादः प्रवलाहिता ।

सेनातीक्ष तदा भूत्वा देवान् युद्धे समाक्रयत् ॥ 6 ॥

O king! When the Daityas spoke thus, Prahlada, the great Destroyer of enemies, became the general and challenged the Devas to fight.

तेक्षि तजासुरान्द्रवहा संग्रामे समुपस्थितान् ।

सर्वे संभृतसंभाग देवास्तानसमयोधयन् ॥ 7 ॥

On seeing the Asuras in the battlefield, the Devas, dressed with arms and weapons, began to fight with them.

संग्रामन्तु तदा घोर: शक्रप्रहादयोरभूत् ।

पूर्णे वर्षशंत तत्र पुनीनां विस्मयावह: ॥ 8 ॥

For full one hundred years the dreadful battle was fought between Indra and Prahlâda; on seeing this, the Munis were astonished.

वर्तमाने महायुढे शुक्रेन प्रतिपालिता: ।

जयमापुस्तदा दैत्याः प्रक्रावप्रमुखा नृप ॥ 9 ॥

O king! In this fearful battle, the Daityas with their general Prahlāda, the followers of Śukrācārya, got the victory.

तदेवे-न्नो भुगोर्वक्यासर्वेदुःखविनाशिनीम् ।

सम्मार मनसा देवीं भुक्तिंदां परमां शिवाम् ॥ १० ॥

Then Indra, advised by their Guru Brhaşpati, began to remember the Goddess of the Universe, the Most High, the Giver of welfare, the Destroyer of all sorrows and calamities, and the Bestower of freedom, worship Her, and sing hymns to Her with great devotion.

इन्ह जवाच

जय देयि महामाये शुल्याधिपी चांबिके ।

शंखचक्रमावयवघडूगहलेउंपययदे ॥ १ १ १ ॥

नमसे घुवेगुओगि शक्तिरूर्गनमकिके ।

दुशतत्वास्थिके मातर्महाविन्दुव्यक्षिपि ॥ १ २ ॥

Indra said! Victory be to the name of the Goddess Mahāmāyā, the Eternal Mother, the Holder of the trident! Holder of conchshell, disc, club, and lotus, the Giver of “no fear.” Salutation to Thee, the Goddess of the Universe; Thou art the Supreme Heroine in everything that relates to force, that is described in the Sakti Darśana Śāstras. Thou art the Ten Tattvas, Thou art the Mother, Thou art the Mahāvidyā (the Supreme Knowledge).

Note: There are many Tattvas; here the ten tattvas are according to the Sakti Darśana. There are many Dharma Śāstras. Here Śakti Śāstra is meant.

The Tattvas are those ultimate substances into which these gross manifestations resolve. The tattvas are Mahābindu, Nāda Śakti, Miśra Bindu, etc.

महाकुष्डलिनीकले सचिवादानन्दलिपि।

प्राणानिहोत्रविद्यो ते नगो दीपिशाखामिके ॥ १३ ॥

O World Mother! Thou art the Mahā Kundalini (the great Serpent Fire); thou art the Everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss; Thou art the Deity of the vital Fire (Prāna); Thou art the Deity of the Agnihotra (maintenance of the Sacred Fire and an oblation to It); Thou art the Holy Flame, burning always in the etherial space in the Heart; Salutation to Thee!

पढ़कोशान्तराते तुच्छे ब्रह्माखलीणि ।

आनन्दकलिके मात: सर्वोपनिषद्धिति ॥ 14 ॥

Thou dwellest within the five Sheaths (the Annamaya, the Prānamaya, the Manomaya, the Vijñānamaya and the Ānandamaya sheaths are the five sheaths here referred to). Thou art the Indweller of the Ānandamaya koṣa, Thou art of the nature of Puccha Brahma, the end of Brahma. Thou art the Deity of all, the Ānanda (bliss) unblown, O Mother! Thou art the Deity of all the Upaniṣadas.

मातः प्रसीद सुमुखी भव हीनसत्त्वं-

स्वायव नो जननि दैन्यपारजितान् वै ।

त्वं देवि नः शरणादा घुवन प्रमाणा

शक्ताउसि दुःखागमनैस्तिलबीयकुंचे ॥ 15 ॥

O Mother! Be pleased unto us; we have become powerless; protect us. O Mother! we are defeated by the Daityas; O Goddess! Thou art endowed with all the powers, Thou art our Sole Refuge in this Universe, in times of distress, and Thou art the Only One, strong and capable to remove all our dangers.

ध्यार्याति येधि सुखिती नितरां भवन्ति

दुःखात्विता विगतगोक्षभायतशास्त्रये ।

मोक्षार्थिनो विगतमानविष्युकसंगाः

संसाराविर्धितजं प्रतरित संतः ॥ 16 ॥

O Goddess! Those who incessantly meditate on Thee are really happy; and those that do not meditate Thee, their fear, and sorrows are never removed; those that want ultimate freedom from bondage and who meditate on Thee always—those pure souls, being free from Ahariñkāra, and free from attachment go, no doubt, beyond this ocean of world.

लं देवि विश्वजनपि प्रशिक्षभावा

संस्थानाथमुदितासंहिरुपतापा ।

संहरुभेतदिखिलं किल कालकपा

को बेत्ति तेउम्य चरितं ननु मन्दबुद्धि: ॥ 17 ॥

O World Mother! Thy prowess is ever manifested whenever protection is demanded; You always come forward and relieve the distressed; You are the great destroyer! Thou art the Time Incarnate of all these worlds; O Mother! We are fools; how can we appreciate your qualities.

Book IV Chapter XV

इहा हर्ष शरिद्धशरो हरीष्ठ इन्जो

यमोक्ष वक्षणोजनियमौरी च ।

जातुं भूमा न मुन्योरीप महानुभावा

यम्या: प्रभावमतुलं निगमागमाधि ॥ 18 ॥

Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa, I myself, Sun, Yama, Varuna, Fire, Air, the high minded munis, Āgama, Nigama (the Tantras and the Vedas, are quite unable to realise Your unequalled prowess; Salaution to Thy Fect.

धन्यास एव तव भक्तिपरा महानतः

संसारयु:खरितृतः सुखसिन्युमानः ।

ये भक्तिभावरहिता न कदापि

दुःखाधोधि जनिक्षयतरंगमुपे तरिति ॥ 19 ॥

Those are blessed that are devoted to Thee; They are the great souls; they always dive in the Ocean of Bliss, being always free from the fangs of this Samsāra. Those that are not Your devotees, cannot cross this Ocean of Samsāra, where the Birth and Death are the billows.

ये वीर्यमाना: सित्तवामरेशु

क्रीडन्ति धन्या: शिविकाधिकडा:।

मै: पूजिता त्वं किल पूर्वदैते

नानोषहरिति चिन्तयामि ॥ 20 ॥

O Goddess! Those that are always fanned by the white cāmaras and those that travel always in cars, they in their previous births worshipped Thee with various things; therefore they have acquired the effects of their meritorious deeds; this is my opinion.

ये पूर्यमाना वरावणत्या

विलासिनीर्वृद्विलासयुक्ता:।

सामानकैक्षीपनर्तैर्जलित मन्ये

हि तैन्स्व कि पूजितासि || 21 ||

Those that are always worshipped amongst the human beings, those that go on nice elephants, those that are surrounded by pleasures and enjoy the lovely companions of beautiful coquetish women, those that go surrounded by soldiers, O Goddess! I consider they worshipped Thee in their previous births, and they are now enjoying fruits of their past deeds.

व्यास उवाच

एवं स्तुता मघवत्ता देवी विश्वेषृति तदा ।

प्रादुर्बंभृत तत्सा सिंहाकृडा चतुर्भूजा ॥ 22 ॥

गंखचकानदायपात्बिघन्नी चाक्लीचना ।

रक्तबारधा देदी तिव्यमाल्यविष्यपाण ॥ 23 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus praised by Indra, the Goddess of the Universe with four arms hurriedly appeared there mounted on a lion. Conchshell, disc, club, and lotusses were held by the beautiful eyed Goddess in Her four hands respectively, wearing a red apparel and ornamented with divine garlands.

तानुवाच सुगान्देवी प्रसज्वद्ना नीता ।

भयं रचजुं भो देशः शं विधाये किलतानुपा ॥ 24 ॥

The Goddess being pleased addressed the Devas with sweet words, "Cast off your fear. O Devas! I will see presently all about your welfare."

इत्युत्नवा सा तदा देही सिंहास्काठितिसुन्दी ।

जगाम तरसा तर यत्र दैर्या मद्धान्धितः ॥ 25 ॥

Addressing the Devas thus, the Divine Mother mounted on a lion, went hurriedly to the place where the demons were waiting, infatuated with pride.

प्रहादप्रमुखा: सर्वे दूर्वा देर्वी पुरः त्रिवताम् ।

ऊचु: परमरं भीता: किं कतन्यमितमत्तद ॥ 26 ॥

All the Daityas with their general Prahlāda saw the Goddess before them and were terrified and began to address each other “What are we to do now?”

देवं नारायणं चार संप्राप्ता चधिडका किल ।

महिप्रांतकरी नूनं चण्डपुर्णद्विनारिणी ॥ 27 ॥

निहनिययिति नः सर्वान्विका नास संगयः ।

वक्रकृष्णा यया पूर्वे निहतों मधुकेटभी ॥ 28 ॥

This Candikā Goddess has come here to protect the Devas. She destroyed Mahisāsura and Caṇḍa Munḍa; it was She that killed, in days of yore, Madhu-Kaitabha with evil look.

एवं चिन्तातुान् बीक्ष्य प्रह्मादस्तानुवाच है ।

योद्ब्येन यान्तव्य पलाय्य दान्वोतमाः ॥ 29 ॥

नमुचितानुवाचा पलायनपरान्ह ।

हनिष्यति जगन्माता क्षिपता किल हैतिथि: ॥ 30 ॥

Seeing the demons thus full of sorrowful thoughts, Prahlāda addressed the Daityas: “It is better not to fight but let us fly away all together.” Then the Daitya Namuci told the Daityas ready to fly away “If you fly away, this World Mother will instantly kill you all with weapons in Her hands.

तथा कुभ महाभाग यथा दुःखं न जायते ।

जजामोउदीय पातालं तां स्तुत्वा तदनुज्ञा ॥ ३ १ ॥

Do that by which we can protect us. Let us worship the Goddess of the Universe, and, getting Her permission, we will go this very day to the Patāla."

प्रहाद उवाच

स्तोमि देती महामायां सृष्टिश्यन्तकारिणीम् ।

सर्वेषां जननीं शान्धि भक्तानामभयंकीम् ॥ ३२ ॥

Prahlāda said “I will worship the Goddess Mahāmāyā, the Creatrix, Preservix and Destructrix of the Universe, the World Mother, and the Assurer of safety to Her devotees.”

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्चा विद्याभनस्तु प्रहादः परमाध्ययित् ।

तुधव जगतां धार्यी कृताझलिपुटसदा ॥ 33 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus saying, the knower of the highest knowledge, Prahlāda, the devotee of Viṣṇu, began to sing hymns with folded hands in praise of the Goddess, the Upholdress of the Universe.

माला सर्वद्वापाति यस्यां सर्वे चराचरम् ।

सर्वाधिष्ठान्तपारे तस्ये हिंमूर्तेय नमः ॥ 34 ॥

I bow down to Thee, the incarnate of the mantra "Hrim" the Refuge of all, and within Whom this whole Universe, moving and unmoving, is appearing untruly as a snake is mistaken for a garland of flowers.

त्वस्तः सर्वमिदं विश्वं स्थावतं जंगमं तथा ।

जन्ये निविमगाङ्गाते कतारित्वन विनिर्मितः ॥ ३ ५ ॥

O Goddess! All these Universes, moving and unmoving, have sprung from Thee; Brahma, Viṣṇu and others are Creators, Preservers in name only; Thou hast created them all.

नमो देख महामाये सर्वेधा जननी स्मृता ।

को भेदस्त्व देवेषु दैत्येषु स्वकृतेषु च ॥ ३६ ॥

O Mahāmāya! You are the Divine Mother of all! When You have created the Asuras and the Suras, how can you then see any difference between the Devas and the Daityas?

मातुः पुत्रेषु को भेदोउध्यगुंष शुभेषु च ।

तथैव देवेब्यमातु न कर्तैवस्त्वयोर्जना ॥ 37 ॥

As a Mother makes no distinction between her good sons and bad sons, so You are not to make any difference between us and the Devas; this is our prayer to you.

यादुपासताशुग मातः सुताते दानवा: किल ।

यतस्त्वं विश्वजननी पुराणेषु प्रक्रौतिंता ॥ 38 ॥

O Goddess! You have been sung in all the Purāṇas as the World Mother; therefore, O Mother! We are your sons just as the Devas are.

तेत्रि स्वार्थपरा नूनं तबेव वयमयत् ।

नातरं दैत्यसुर्योपैदोर्धं मोहस्पमवः ॥ ३ १ ॥

O Mother! As they have got their interests, so we too have got our interests; therefore there is no difference between the Daityas and the Devas. Therefore if any one makes any difference, it is due to the subtle error.

धन्वरादिघोगेषु वयं सत्ता दिवानिगम ।

तथैव देवा देवेशि को घोदोउसुदेवयो: ॥ 40 ॥

O Goddess! As we are attached to wealth, wives, and other pleasures of the senses, so the gods are; O Goddess! How then can any difference exist between them and us.

तेषि कश्यपदायादा वयं तत्सम्भाव: किल ।

कुतो विरोधसभूतिजिता माततलायुना ॥ 41 ॥

O Mother! They are the sons of Maharşi Kaśyapa; we also are his sons; Therefore you cannot have partiality for them before us.

न तथा विहितं माततलयि सर्वीमुद्धले ।

साम्यतेव त्वया स्थाया देवेच्यमासु चैव हि ॥ 42 ॥

O World Mother! In You no such difference is visible any where. Therefore do You here preserve equality amongst us both.

Book IV Chapter XV

गुणधितिकात्सर्वे समुपयज्ञ: सुरासुरा: ।

गुणाधिता यावेयुने कर्थे देहभृतोजभगः ॥ 4 3 ॥

The Suras and Asuras all have sprung from the permutations and combinations of the 3 qualities! Then how the Devas being embodied can possess more qualities than us.

कामः कोधछ लोगश्र सर्वदेषेरु सचित्यः ।

वर्तने सर्वदा तस्मात्ञोत्रियोरी भवेजनः ॥ 4 4 ॥

Every embodied soul possesses always cupidity, anger, covetuousness; how then can one expect to remain without any quarrels with others.

त्वया मिथो विरोधोउरं कलित्यः किल कौतुकात् ।

मन्यामाहे विषयेने नूनं सुद्दिद्वक्षया ॥ 4 5 ॥

We think that it is all sport with You to see our opinions different, rather contradictory, and it is You who got us involved in quarrels with each other and it is Your pleasure to witness how we fight against each other.

अन्यथा खलु भानुणां विधीयः कीर्णोउनये ।

तं वेत्रेच्छस चामुपडे वीक्षितुं कलहिं किल ॥ 46 ॥

O Sinless one! O Câmunde! Were You not so fond to see our fight, how then, we being brothers are at war against each other. Certainly it is Your Divine Sport.

ज्ञानायि धर्म धर्मे वेधि चाहं शनकतमुम् ।

तथापि कलहोउसाकं भोगार्थ देवि सर्वदा ॥ 47 ॥

O Goddess! I know what is religion, I know who is Indra. It is the very idea to enjoy these sensual pleasures that is the only cause of our incessant quarrels.

एकः कोर्पि न शास्त्रास्ति संसारे तां चित्रास्थिके ।

सूहावतस्तु कः कर्तुं क्षमते वचनं बुधः ॥ 48 ॥

O Mother! You are the Sole Ruler of this Samsāra; no sensible man can carry out the words of a man who yearns for something (i. e. O Mother, You are the only one that is desideriss; so we can obey your words).

देवानुरीरयं सिंभूमिधितः समये क्वचित् ।

विष्णुना विहितो भेदः सुधानलच्छनेवे च ॥ ४ १ ॥

O Mother! Once the Devas and the Asuras

conjointly churned the ocean. At that time Viṣṇu, on the plea of distributing the jewel, and the ambrosial nectar, incurred quarrels amongst them.

त्वयाउसौ कल्पितः शौरि: पालकल्चे जगदगुरुः ।

तेन तक्षसी: स्वयं लोपागृहीतामसनुस्ति ॥ ५० ॥

O Mother! You have made him the Preserver and Controller of the Universe and the Spiritual Guide of the world, And it was He that took away the Goddess Lakṣmī, the beautiful lady amongst the Deva women.

ऐरावतलवेढ़ेण पारिताजोर्ध यामधुक ।

सुरैरूच्छे:शबा: सर्व गृहीतं वैण्यावेच्छ्या ॥ 51 ॥

Indra, the Lord of the Gods, took the elephant named Airāvata, the flower Pārijāta, the Heavenly Cow yielding all desires, and the horse Uchchaishravā. Thus, through the desires and devices of Vishnu, they got all the excellent things.

अनय तादुर्ग कृत्वा जाता देवासुं माधवः ।

"अन्यायिनः सुग नूनं पश्य तं धर्मक्षणम्।"

संस्थापिता: सुग नूनं विष्णुना बहुमानिना ॥ 52 ॥

O! What a wonder is this that the Devas were considered holy persons, after they had committed such unholy acts; no doubt the Devas had done a very heinous crime. O Goddess! You can judge Yourself what is the just and unjust thing in this case.

नूनं दैत्या: पराभूवन्यग्र चंधर्तक्षणम् ।

क्व धर्मः कीर्ण्यो धर्म: क्व कार्य क्व च समुत्ना ॥ 53 ॥

What is Religion? And where is Religion? And what are the acts done by a religious man? What is uprightness, justice, and purity? You better examine which party has observed virtue? Who has shown uprightness justice and purity? To whom victory and defeat are due? You are the only one capable to judge all these things.

कवयासि न कस्याएं सिद्धे मेमापिके मन्त्र।

ताकिका युक्तिवाद्ञा विधिप्रा वेदवादाकः ॥ 54 ॥

उक्ता: सकर्निकं विश्व विवदते जाड़ानकाः ।

Alas! Whom to tell all the conclusions arrived at in the Mīmārīsakas. If any one considers, one

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

will find the world is the field of dissensions and quarrels; the argumentators look to the logical reasoning only; the followers of the Vedas look to the rules and regulations only; these so called men of gross ideas they acknowledge that this world is created and preserved by the One only, and yet they quarrel amongst each other.

कर्ता भवति चेद्यम्बस्मोत चितते किन्ति ॥ 55 ॥

वितोध: कीदुगस्तन चैककर्मणि चै निय: ।

वेरेनेकमाति: कममच्छासेध्चपि तथा पुनः ॥ 56 ॥

नैकवाक्यं चवस्तेषामपि वेदिविदां पुनः ।

If there be One and only One Lord of this wide infinite Sarīsaña, then why would there be difference and quarrels amongst each other? Why is there not seen any agreement in opinion and why do the Sāstras differ and why are there so many differences in the opinions held by the knowers of the Vedas.

यतः स्वार्थपरं सर्वे जनस्थावरजंगमम् ॥ 57 ॥

निःस्पृहः कोर्पि संसारे न भवेवे भविष्यति ।

O Goddess! This whole Universe, moving and unmoving is selfish; hence arise so many differences between several opinions. There was no one unselfish in this world and there would be no unselfish persons born hereafter.

शशिजास्य गुोपोर्षां हेता जात्वा बलादपि ॥ 58 ॥

गौतमस्य तवेज्ञे जानता धर्मनिश्रभ्यम् ।

गुरुणान्तुज्यभावां च भृत्ता भर्षिती बलात् ॥ 59 ॥

ग्रणो भर्षगोत बालः कृतशोधस्वा पुनः ।

Look! The Moon stole away perforce knowingly the wife of Brhaspati; Indra, knowing what is religion stole away the wife of Gautama; Brhaspati enjoyed forcibly the wife of his younger; and also he outraged his elder brother's wife in her pregnant state and cursed the boy in the womb and made him blind.

विष्णुना च शिरिश्छत्रं राहोश्रकेश के बलात् ॥ 6 0 ॥

असपार्थ विभा कामं तदा सच्चवताम्विके ।

पौजो धर्मवतां शूर: सत्यवतारपायण: ॥ 6 1 ॥

यज्ञा द्वापणितः शान्तः सर्वैजः सर्वेपूजकः ।

What more to say than Viṣṇu, all full of Sāttvic

qualities, severed perforce the head of Rāhu. O Mother! Look to the case of my grandson Bali who used to pay due respects to all, who was the foremost amongst the virtuous, observer of rigorous truth, performer of sacrifices, liberal, peaceful, all-knowing.

कृत्यास्त्र धावानं रूचे ह्रौणा छलवेदिता ॥ 62 ॥

वडितोउरी बलि: सर्व हतं राज्यं पुरा किल ।

तथापि देवान्यर्थन्यावदिति मनीपिणः ॥ 63 ॥

वद्रति चादुदादांध्र धर्मदादाङ्गयं नातः ।

एवं जात्वा जान्यानार्थेथ्छस तथा कुरु ॥ 64 ॥

गरणा दानवा: सर्वे जक्ति वा स्थ वा पुनः ।

The pretender Hari, taking the form of a dwarf in his Vāmana incarnation) deceived Bali and took away all his kingdoms. Alas! Still the intelligent good persons reckon the Deva Viṣṇu as the preserver of Religion. What a wonder! Those who are flaterers become victorious in this world; and defeat come to those that speak of Dharma.

O Goddess! You are the Mother of all the worlds; do whatever You like. But You should know that the Demons are all under Your protection; kill or save them as You like.

श्रीदेव्यवाच

सर्वे गछळत पातालं तन वारं यथेवितम् ॥ 65 ॥

कुठ्छं दानवा: सर्वे निर्भया गतान्यवः ।

The Devi said: O Demons! Leaves you all the anger arising from this warfare and go without any fear to Pātāla and live there at your ease and happiness.

काल: ग्रीत्योय युधाधिः कारणं स गुषेज्युषे ॥ 66 ॥

सुनिवंदुपराणां हि सुखं सर्वेत्र सर्वेत्र ।

Better now wait on Time; whether you will get auspicious or inauspicious fruits for your deeds. Know whoever is desireless and unattached, to him happiness is always and everywhere.

त्रैलोक्यस्य च राज्येधिन पे सुखं लोपचेतसामू ॥ 67 ॥

कृते5पि न सुखं पूर्णं स्मयुहाणां फलैपि ।

Whose mind is avaricious, He does not get peace and happiness, even if he acquires the Triloki.

Book IV Chapter XVI

Even, in the golden age, avaricious persons did not get happiness, though they acquired the fruits of their actions.

तस्माचक्यता महीमेतां प्रयांत्वघ महीतलम् ॥ 68 ॥

ममाजां पुरतः कृत्वा सर्वे विगतकल्पया: ।

Therefore you get yourselves freed of your sins and obey My order and leave the earth and go down to the Pātāla.

म्यास उवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं देल्यासतेथ्युत्वा रसातलम् ॥ 6 9 ॥

प्राणम्य दानवा: सर्वे नात: शक्लवाभिराक्रातः ।

Vyāsa said: On hearing the Devi's words, the Demons obeyed and bowing at Her feet and preserved by Her, went to Pātāla.

अन्तदीये त्तो देही देवा: स्वभुवनं नतः ॥ 70 ॥

त्यक्त्वा वैरं स्थिता: सर्वे ते तदा देहवदान्वा: ।

Then the Devi disappeared; and the Devas went away to their own homes. Thus the Devas and the Daityas, abandoning their feelings of enmity towards each other, lived in place.

एतदाख्यानमिहलं वः श्रणीति वदत्यथा ॥ 71 ॥

सर्वेदुःखविनिभून: प्रयाति पदमुत्तमम् ।

ड्राँते श्रीमदेवीभाग्रतो महापुराणो चतुर्बंकल्ये

पडवशो5धयाः: 11 15 11

O King! He who hears this fact, gets himself freed from all sorts of calamities and reaches the Highest Peace.

Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses, on the truce between the Daityas and Devas and on their departures with peace by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IV Chapter XVI

CHAPTER XVI

On the Birth of the Several Avatāras of Viṣṇu

जनमेजय उवाच

भूगुणापान्यनिश्र हेराद्धृतकर्मण: । अवतारतः कर्थे जाताः कस्मिन्मवन्तरे विभो ॥ १ ॥ विस्त्तगघ्रद्ध धर्मेन अवतारकर्थ होरः । पाचनागक्षीं बह्यब्छृतां सर्वसुखावहामू ॥ २ ॥

Janamejaya spoke: O best of Munis! How did Viṣṇu, of wonderful deeds, get his incarnation owing to the curse, cast on Him by Bhṛgu? what were His different incarnations in different Manvantaras respectively? O Thou, well versed in religion! O Brāhmaṇa! Kindly narrate those dis-trostying deeds of Hari in His several incarnations, that are the source of happiness, peace and welfare to all humanity.

व्यास उवाच

शूणु राज्यव्यायी अवतान्त् हरेयां।

यस्मिन्यन्ते जाता युगे यस्मित्रायिधि ॥ 3 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Hear, I am narrating to you the incarnations of Śrī Bhagavān Hari which He

had in the several Manvantaras and in the several Yugas respectively.

येन रूपेण यत्कार्यं कृतं नारायणेन वै ।

तत्वयं नृप वध्यामि संक्षेणेत तत्वापून ।। ४ ।।

I will tell you now, in brief, what forms He took and what deeds He did in the various incarnations.

धर्मदैयवालतोरो भृच्छाक्ष्ये मनुसभ्यवे ।

ननताराणे धर्मपुत्री छातारी महीत्ते ॥ ५ ॥

In the Cāksuṣa Manvantara, the Bhagavān Hari took the incarnation of Dharma; and the two sons of Dharma, Nara Nārāyaṇa, were widely celebrated in this world.

अथ वैव्यस्ताखोउस्मिन्द्रतीये तु युगे पुनः ।

दन्तायोदयततोउरंः पुवत्यमामद्धरि: ॥ 6 ॥

Then, in the present Vaivasvata Manvantara, under the reign of Vaivasvata Manu in the second Yuga, Bhagavān Hari incarnated as Dattātreya, in the shape of the son of Atri Rsi.

बहा विष्यानुसथा रुद्रस्योदगी देवसत्तमाः ।

पुत्रविमयान्देवास्तवायोर्धिया वृत्ताः ॥ 7 ॥

Anasūyā the wife of Atri, was desirous to have,

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

as her sons, the three Devas Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra; and in fulfilment of her desires, the Devas took their births in her womb.

अनसूयाश्रियली वच सतीनापुसा सती ।

यसा सप्राधिता देया: पुत्रल्यमागंस्वयः ॥ 8 ॥

Ansūyā, was foremost amongst the chaste and virtuous women and on her praying, Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra the Trinity at once agreed to become her sons.

ब्रह्मा प्रभृतसोमरूपसृद्धताजेयो हृति: स्वयम् ।

दुर्वीमा रूहरूपोर्सी पुरन्तं ते प्रयेदेर ॥ 9 ॥

Brahmā was born as Soma, Hari was born as Dattātreya and Rudra was born as Durvāsā.

गृसिंहस्यावातास्तु देवकायार्थसिद्धये ।

चतुर्थे तु युगे जातो द्विष्ठाक्पो मनोहरः ॥ 10 ॥

In the fourth Yuga, the Bhagavān assumed the beautiful double form in one, the upper part resembling a lion the lower part a human being to accomplish the noble purpose of the Devas.

हिरण्यकाशिणो: सम्यवधाय भगवान् हरि: ।

वक्र केयं नारसिंहं देववानां विस्मयप्रद् ॥ १ १ ॥

It was to kill Hiranyakaśipu that the Bhagavān Hari assumed this appearance, wonderful even to the Devas.

बलेनिंवमनाधाय ऋषे० तेत्रातुगे तथा ।

चकार कर्व भगवान् वामनं कश्यपानुनेः ॥ १ २ ॥

In the Tretā Yuga, the superior and the best of all the Yugas, the Bhagavān incarnated as Vāmana, (the Dwarf), the son of Maharṣī Kaśyapa, to curb the power of Bali.

छलचित्या मखे भूपं राज्यं तस्य जहार ह ।

वाताले स्वाययामास वलिं वामनस्तध्यूक् ॥ १३ ॥

The Dwarf Hari took away by pretext, the kingdom of Bali, while he was performing a sacrifice and sent him down into the Pātāla, (the lower regions).

युगे चैकानविक्षेण द्वे तात्ये घे भगवान् हरि: ।

जमदर्भिनुक्ती जातो रामो नाम महावलः ॥ १४ ॥

Afterwards, in the nineteenth Yuga, known as the Tretā Yuga, Śrī Bhagavān Hari incarnated as

Paraśurāma, very powerful and the son of Jamadagni Rsi.

क्षत्रियांतकरः श्रीमान्सल्यादी जितोंद्रियः ।

दत्तवामेदिति कृतसां कदयपाय महामने ॥ 15 ॥

He was very beautiful and graceful in his body, truthful and the conqueror of his senses. He

extirpated the Kṣattriya race and gave the whole world over to the high minded Rṣi Kaśyapa.

यो वै परयुगामाखो हेरद्धुतकर्मण: ।

अवतारस्टु राजेन्द्र कवितः यापतगतः ॥ 16 ॥

O king! He is the Paraśurāma, the sin-destroyer, the incarnation of Hari, and the doer of wonderful deeds.

जेतायुगे रपोर्वरी गामो दर्शरायतमतः ।

नत्नारायणांगे ही जातौ भृति महावती ॥ 17 ॥

अष्टाधिंगे युगे शस्ती द्वारपेज्ञनगोरिणी ।

धरायावताराथाँ जातौ कृष्णाज्ञी भृति ॥ 18 ॥

कृतवर्तौ महापुब्दे कुर्वेत्रेजितदारुणम् ।

एवं युगे युगे राजत्रवतगा हरेः किल ॥ 19 ॥

भवन्ति बहवः कामं प्रकृतैतनुपलतः ।

प्रकृतरखितं सर्वे वर्गोतजजगतयम् ॥ 20 ॥

After that the Bhagavān Hari incarnated as Rāma, the son of Daśaratha. Next in the twenty-eighth Dvāpara Yuga, He incarnated as the very powerful Arjuna and Śri Kṛṣna, the Anisās of Nara Nārāyana. To remove the load of the earth, these two were born; and they fought deadly battles in the battlefield of Kurukṣetra. O king! Thus the several incarnations of Hari arose, according to the requirements of Prakṛti. O King! These three worlds are under the control of Prakṛti.

यथेच्छति तदेवेयं भ्रमयत्निजां जगत् ।

पुर्षस्य प्रियार्थी सा रचयत्यखितं जगत् ॥ 21 ॥

Whatever the Prakrti wishes at any time, She can fashion the world in that way. And She does this incessantly in accordance with the Word Divine, the Highest Śakti, to please the Puruṣa, without any cessation.

दूर्वा पुरा हि भगवाझ्मदोतच्चारम् ।

सर्वादि: सर्वांश्रासी दुर्जेय: परमोड्ययः ॥ 22 ॥

Book IV Chapter XVII

निरालम्बो निराकारो नि:स्यूढ़ा परावर: ।

उपधितिस्थिति भाति यच्या: सा प्रकृति: परा ॥ 23 ॥

In days of yore, the most ancient Bhagavān, the Highest, above all the qualities of Māyā, formless, all pervading, difficult to be conceived, without any decay, self-supporting, without any want, created these worlds, moving and unmoving and He manifested Himself as the Trinity, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa in the shape of the three qualities Satīva, Rajas and Tamas, and which is called the Highest Prakṛti.

उत्पत्तिकालयोगाता विभा भाति शिवा तत ।

सा विश्व कुन्ते कामं सा पालयति कामाद् ॥ 24 ॥

This all auspicious Prakṛti shines differently according to the differences in time and circumstances. This threefold Prakṛti, the Great Enchantress of the world is creating, preserving the worlds and is destroying them at the end of the Kalpas.

कल्यान्ते संहृत्येव विरूपा विश्वभोहिनि ।

तया युक्तो3सुबद्धृद्धा विष्णु: पालि तयाधिति: ॥ 25 ॥

O King! Whenever there takes place the union with this Prakrti. Brahmā creates, Viṣṇu preserves, and the all-auspicious God Śankara destroys the worlds.

रुद: संहृते कामं तया सभमिलतः शिवः ।

सा चेवोत्याङ्काकुल्यं पुरा वे नुपसतमम् ॥ 26 ॥

It was She That gave birth to Kākutstha, the best of the kings; and to conquer the Dānavas, She placed him at a certain place.

कुत्रचित्स्थाययामास दानवानां जयाय च ।

एवमर्भिश्छ संसारे सुखदुःखात्विताः क्रिकल ।

भवित्न प्राणिनः सर्वे विधितन्त्रनियन्त्रतः ॥ 27 ॥

ड्रिति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे चतुर्यकन्थे

षोडशोरध्याः: 11 16 11

O king! Thus all men controlled by the Great Law in this world, enjoy sometimes the pleasures, enjoy sometimes pains and thus exist in the world. Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahāpurānam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa, on the Birth of the several Avatāras of Visnu and their deeds.

Book IV Chapter XVII

CHAPTER XVII

On the Questions asked by Janamejaya

जनमेव जय जवाच

वारांगनास्त्वया छ्याता नरनारायणाओं ।

एकं नारायणं शान्तं कामयाना: स्मातुग: ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: O Muni! You told before that the heavenly prostitutes sent by Indra in the hermitage of Nara Nārāyana became lustful and desired to live with Nārāyana only, whose heart was crlm and quiet.

शपुत्कामस्तदा जातो मुनिनरीरायण्डा ततः ।

निवारितो नरोणा ध्राजा धर्मविद्धा नृप ॥ 2 ॥

At that moment when Nārāyana was about to curse them, his brother Nara desisted him from taking that step.

किं कृतं मुनिना तेन व्यसने समुपस्थिते ।

ताधि: संकल्पितेणना कामाशोधिभूर्णं मुने । 3 ॥

शक्रेनोराविताधिश्र यदुग्रार्थेनाय युनः ।

याचितेन विवाहार्थं किं कृतं तेन जिजाणूना ॥ 4 ॥

Now I ask you what did that triumphant Nārāyaṇa Muni do, in that critical juncture, when he was repeatedly asked by those prostitutes, sent by Indra, to satisfy their lust?

इन्येतच्छोतुपिच्छ्याम घरितं तस्य मोक्षदम् ।

नारायणस्य मे बूहि चित्रस्तेण चित्रात्मह ॥ ५ ॥

O Grand Sire! I am very eager to know the deeds of Nārāyaṇa, leading to one's freedom, Kindly describe in detail and fulfill my wishes.

व्यास उवाच

श्रणु राजन्यक्ष्यामि यथा तस्य महामन्तः ।

धार्मुपत्रस्य धर्मत विस्तरणं बद्यामि ते ॥ ६ ॥

Vyāsa said: Hear, O king! I am describing to you in, detail, what that high souled son of Dharma did.

शप्तुकाममतु सन्त्रयो नेरणाय यदा हरिः ।

वारितो3सौ समाधायस्य मुपनिरारीयणस्तदा ॥ 7 ॥

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

When Nārāyaṇa Hari was ready to curse them, the Rsis Nara, seeing this, consoled him and desisted him.

ग्रान्तकोपस्तदोवाच तासपस्यी महापुनि: ।

सितमुर्षिमितं वाक्यं मभूरं धर्मनन्दन: ॥ 8 ॥

Then the great sage, the ascetic son of Dharma, Nārāyaṇa, leaving aside his anger, began to address them in sweet words with countenance smiling.

अस्मिज्ञमनि चार्वीयः कृतसङ्कूल्यवानहम् ।

आवाय्यं च न कतैव्यः सर्वेधा दारमंत्रहः ॥ ९ ॥

तस्माद्रष्टनु त्रिविदं कृपां कृत्वा मापोपति ।

धर्मान न प्रकृर्वित्त बतभङ्गे परस्य वै ॥ 10 ॥

O Fair women! We have determined to practise asceticism in this life; it does not therefore behave us to accept any wife; therefore shew your kindness unto us and go back to your Heaven. You would better think that those who know what is religion, they never desire to break the vow of another.

शूत्रोरप्रिमसे नृतं स्वाधीभावो रितः म्यूतः ।

कथं क्रौमि सव्यर्थ तदभावे सुतोचना: ॥ 1 1 1 ॥

O beautiful eyed ones! In the sexual pleasure, it is the delightful feeling of passionate joy that is requisite; and we are wanting in those feelings; then how can we effect that union?

कारणेन विना कार्य न भवेदिति निश्रायः ।

कविधि: कवितं शास्ते स्थायीभावो सः किक्त ॥ १२ ॥

No action can come out of no cause; this is all clear. The poets say that the sexual power and pleasure, is the feeling, the mental attitude that corresponds; and that is the only thing, that lasts. And we have no desire for that.

धन्य: सुचासवर्गी: सभायोर्द्ध रातते ।

प्रतिपातं यतो जातो भवतीनामकृतिमम् ॥ १३ ॥

However my limbs are all very graceful, I am very fortunate and blessed in this world, otherwise how can I be the object of your sincere love towards me.

भवतीभि: कृपा कृत्वा रक्षणीय इतं मा ।

भविष्यामि महाभागा: पतितम्यज्ञनमि ॥ १ ४ ॥

You all are very fortunate; therefore do now

shew this mercy unto me “do not break my vow. I pray now that, in a subsequent birth, I may become your husband.

अर्हायिंश शिर्तालाश्यो द्वापरेडस्मिश्रातले ।

देवानां कार्यसिद्ध्याँ प्रभविष्यामि सर्वथा ॥ 5 ॥

तदा भवत्यो महारा: प्राय्य जन्म पृथवमुथक् ।

भूपतीनी सुता भूत्वा पत्नीभावं गाधियव ॥ १ ६ ॥

O large eyed fair women! In the twenty-eighth Dvāpara Yuga, I will certainly incarnate on earth to effect the purpose of the Devas; then you all also would respectively incarnate as the daughters of kings and would also become my wives.

इत्याश्रय हरिसतानु प्रतिश्रुच परिघहम् ।

व्यसज्वस भगवाइमगुढ विमतजरा: ॥ 17 ॥

Nārāyāna thus consented to marry them in some other next birth; and consoling them, made them go back to their Heavens. They also abandoned their mental disquietude and, on reaching back to Heavens, they explained everything to Indra.

एवं विस्वितास्तेन नाता: स्वर्ग तद्धाना: ।

गक्राव कथयामासु: कारणं सकरं पुन: ॥ 18 ॥

आश्रय मघवा तान्यो वृत्तानं तस्य विस्तत् ।

तुषाव तं महात्मानं नारीदूर्वा तयोर्षी: ॥ 19 ॥

Indra heard (from these heavenly women) what the two two Rṣis did and saw before him Urvaśī and other women created by Nārāyaṇa from his thighs, etc. and began to extol the merits of the high souled Nārāyaṇa.

इन्र उवाच

अहो धैयं मुनेः कामं तथैव च तपोबलम् ।

येनेवैध्यः स्वतपसा तापूरूपा: प्रकल्पितः ॥ 20 ॥

Indra said: O! How wonderful is the patience of the Muni? What is the wonderful influence of his Tapas! Oh! He has created, by the sheer force of his Tapas, Urvaśī and these fair women, unrivalled for their beauties, from his thighs.

इति सुत्वा प्रसातमा बथुप सुरारु ततः ।

नातयाणोष प्रभातमा तस्यधिपतो5पबत् ॥ 2 । ॥

The Lord of the Devas thus extolled his merits and became freed from his anxieties. The virtuous

Book IV Chapter XVII

Nārāyaṇa, too, devoted himself to the practice of his Tapasyā.

इन्येततस्वीमाख्यातं मुनेवृत्तातमूढ़तम् ।

नारायणस्य सकर्ते नरस्य च महामुने ॥ 22 ॥

O king! Thus I have described to you, in detail, all the wonderful accounts regarding Nara Nārāyana.

तौ हि कृष्णाजुनी वीरी भूभारहणाय च ।

जातौ तौ भरतश्रेष्ठ भृगोः शणवशाद्धि ॥ 23 ॥

O Superior in the descendants of Bharata! These two Nara and Nārāyana afterwards incarnated themselves, due to Bhīgu's curses the two great heroes Arjuna and Krṣna, to relieve the burden of the earth.

राजोवाच

कृष्णावतारचरितं विस्तरणे वद्रव मे ।

सन्देहो मम चित्रोस्ति त निवारय मानव ॥ २४ ॥

The king said: O respect giving Muni! Now describe in detail the life of the Avatāra Krṣna and dispel my mental doubt.

ययो: पुत्रत्वमापजी हृद्रनन्ती महावली ।

देवकीक्युदौले ती दुःखभाजी कर्ण मुने ॥ 25 ॥

कंसेन निगडे बढ़ी पीक्षिति बहुवलसग्न ।

ययो: पुत्रो हरि: साक्षानपस तीपितोभवत् ॥ 26 ॥

O best of the Munis! Why were Vasudeva and Devaki, who were chosen by the very powerful Hari and Ananta as their parents, doomed to so many miseries and afflictions. Why had these parents to remain for good many years in the prison of Kanisa, who pleased directly by their Tapasyā that Bhagavān Janārdana.

जातोउसी मयुगरातु तु गोकुले स कथं नतः ।

कर्म हृता झारकायां निवासं कृतावाक्यम् ॥ 27 ॥

Why did Kṛṣṇa taking his birth at Mathurā, go to Gokula? Also what was his object to go to Dvārkā, situated in the ocean, when he killed the enemy Karīsa?

पित्रादिवैति हेणं समुद्धे पावनं किल ।

त्यक्त्वा हेणान्तोरनार्य गतावन्म कईं हरि ॥ 28 ॥

Also why did his father, mother adr relatives,

leave their old holy places of residences and go abroad to live in a wretched old country?

कुलं च द्विज्ञापेन कक्षमुसादितं हरे: ।

भारावतारणं कृत्वा वासुदेवः सनातनः ॥ 29 ॥

देहं मुभोच तरसा जगाम च दिवं हरि: ।

पाधिष्ठानां च भारेण व्याकृतासभून्य मेदिति ॥ 30 ॥

ते हता वासुदेवेन पार्थनामिकर्मणा ।

लुंटिता थैरीः पन्यन्ते कवं न पिवातिता ॥ 31 ॥

Why was the Yadu race destroyed by the curse from a Brāhmaṇa! How did Śrī Kṛṣṇa Vāsudeva leave finally His body after He had relieved the burden of the earth and was about to enter into His Heaven? The evildoers of the earth were slain by Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, of unequalled prowess; but how was it, that those who plundered the wives of Śrī Hari, were not at all punished by Him!

भीभी प्रोषतस्वा काणी वाहीकोंयण याधिवः।

वैराटो५४ विज्णांध्र ध्रष्ट्यान्छा पार्थिवः ॥ ३२ ॥

सोमदानादय: सर्वे निहताः समे नृप ।

तेषापुनीतो भार्यशीरणां न हतः कवम् ॥ ३३ ॥

The great personages Bhīśma, Droṇa, Kāṃa, the king Vālhīka Virāta, Vikāma. Dhṛṣtadyumna, the king Somadatta were destroyed for relieving the burden of the earth; and the plunderers were acquitted! Kindly explain the cause of this.

कृष्णपन्यः कक्षं दुःखं प्रपातः प्रान्तेः परिवत्ताः।

सन्देशोंस् पुनिश्रष्टि चिति ने परिवर्तिते ॥ 34 ॥

How was it that those chaste and virtuous wives of Śrī Kṛṣṇa got into troubles at the latter end of their lives? There has arisen a doubt in my mind on this point.

वसुवेस्वतु धर्मात्या पुत्रु:खेन तापितः ।

त्यकान्यान कयं प्राणानयमृत्रुं जगाम ह ॥ ३५ ॥

Why did the virtuous Vaisudeva leave his mortal coil owing to the death of his sons and why djú he die an unusual death?

पाण्ड्वा धर्मवंभुक्ता: कृष्णे च निततः सदा ।

ते कथं दुःखभोक्तारो हृषयन्मुनिसन्म १३६ ॥

O best of Munis! The Pāṇḍavas were devoted to Kṛṣṇa and they were religious; they had to suffer so many troubles!

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

ग्रीष्टी च महाभागा कर्थे दुःखस्य भागिनी ।

वेदीमध्याच्च संजाता तक्ष्ययासम्भवा किल ॥ 37 ॥

Why was Draupadī so very unfortunate and she had to suffer so much miseries, and pains, who was born of Lakṣmī from amidst the sacrificial place and from the altar.

सभावां च समानीता रजोदोर्षमन्त्रिता ।

बाला दु:शासनेनाथ केशग्रहणकर्शिता ॥ 38 ॥

पीडिता सिस्युताउष वनमध्यमता सती ।

तथैव कीचेकानपि पीडिता रूतीं भृणम् ॥ 39 ॥

Why did Duhśāsana drag Her by hair while She was in Her menstruation period, in the hall of audience and why was it that Sindhu Rāja Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu, gave Her exceedingly mental troubles?

पुत्रा: पड़ेल तस्यान्तु निहता श्रीभिना गृहे ।

सुभ्रात्रया: सुतो युद्धे बाल एव निपातितः ॥ 40 ॥

Why was it that Her five sons residing in Her house were killed by Asvatthāmā? What was the cause that the son of Subhadrā had to die in the battlefield?

तथा च देवकीपुःा: घट्कं केसेन निपूर्तितः ।

समर्थानि ह्रिणा दैवेन कृतमन्था ॥ 4 1 ॥

Why did the king Karīsa kill the six sons of Devakī; and why was it that Śrī Harī who was capable of averting the Fate did not at all prevent that?

यावतानां तथा ग्रापः प्रभासे नियनं पुनः ।

कृतक्षयस्तथा तीव्रस्तपत्नीचां च लुंठनम् ॥ 42 ॥

What a wonder is this that in the matters of Brāhmaṇa's curse towards the Jādavas, their being killed in the Prabhāsa, the total extermination of the Jadū race and the plundering of His wives, why did He allow Fate to do these great momentous things?

विष्णुना चेध्रोपापि साक्षात्रायायोने च ।

उप्रसेनस्य सेवा वे दासवस्ततं कृता ॥ 4 3 ॥

If He was the all-powerful God and He Himself Nārāyaṇa, that why did He incessantly act like a slave towards Ugrasena.

Note: Ugrasena was the king of Mathurā and father of Kahīsa. He was deposed by his son; but Krṣṇa after having slain Kahīsa restored him to the throne.

सन्देशेयं महाभाग तत्र नारायणे भुनी ।

सर्वजुत्समानत्वं व्यवहार्ते निरन्तम ॥ 4 4 ॥

हर्शगोकादयो भावाः सर्वेधी सद्गुगाः कवम् ।

ईशस्य हरेजांत कवमयन्याय मति: ॥ 4 5 ॥

All these bring doubt in our minds regarding Nārāyaṇa Munī that His deeds are always like those of ordinary persons; why did his pleasures and pains resemble those of ordinary human beings? Were he God, why his actions were not Godly? (i.e. superhuman)

तस्मादित्ततो बृहि कृष्णाय चरितं महत ।

अलीकिकेन हरिणा कृते कर्म महीतले ॥ 46 ॥

Therefore dost Thou describe in detail all the Divine Lilās (playful sports) done by Hari of super human powers in this world.

हता आयुः क्षये देल्या: क्लेणेन महता पुनः ।

कर्वेध्यंशनिः : प्रयिता ह्रिणा मुनिसन्तम ॥ 47 ॥

O Best of Munis! When one's longevity expires, one dies; then I cannot understand what glory was manifested by Hari in killing the Daityas? For Fate Killed them; not Hari.

राक्षमणीहणे नूनं गृहीत्पाटप्र पतायनम् ।

कृतं हि वासुदेवेन चीरबच्चरितं तदा ॥ 48 ॥

Was not the doing of Hari like a thief when he stole away the Lady Rukminī and fled quickly to his own place.

मवुगामण्डलं व्यक्तवा समुद्धे कुलसम्मतम् ।

जरासंधभवातेन द्वारकामानं कृतम् ॥ 49 ॥

What did it mean when he fled to Dvārakā city, and quitted his own highly prosperous town Mathurā simply out of the fear of Jarāsandha?

तदा केनापि न जातो भगवान्हिरीक्षरः ।

किंवित्यकृष्टि मे ब्रह्म-कारणं जजलोपनम् ॥ 50 ॥

Did not any body at that time recognise that he was Śrī Bhagavān Hari? O Respected One! Were he Bhagavān, why did He hide himself in Vraja? Please explain the cause to me.

Book IV Chapter XVIII

एते चान्ये च बह्वः सन्देहा वासवीसुत ।

नायाद्ध महाभ्यास सर्वज्ञोरिस डिजोजन्म १ ५ १ ॥

O Muni! These and many other doubts always exist in my mind; you are the best of the Dvijas and blessed; I pray, dost thou remove these doubts.

गोयस्तबैकः सन्देहो हदयार्त्र निवर्तैत ।

पाङ्गालयाः पञ्धभतैलं लोके किं न जुणीस्थितम् ॥ ५२ ॥

सदारावं प्रमाणं हि प्रवर्दिन मनीिणः ।

पशुप्रमं: कक्षे सैतु समर्थेसि संश्रितः ॥ ५३ ॥

O best of Munis! Another doubt exists and is not dispelled and that is secret. Was not the taking of the five husbands by Pāncālī for herself shameful and despised by the society? The good manners and doings are always considered by the learned as he proofs of virtue. Why did those Pāndavas, then, capable in every respect, do this thing like brutes?

भीभेणापि कृतं किं वा देवक्षोपेण भूतले ।

गोलकों ती सम्यपाङ्य यत्नु वंशस्य रक्षणम् ॥ 54 ॥

And what did Bhisma do living like a Deva in this world? May I ask, was has act of producing two sons by a widow and thus preserving his line of ancestors worthy of his name?

धित्यार्पिनिधा: कामं मुनिधिभ: परितर्पितः ।

येन केनाज्यपायेन पुत्रोस्पत्नलक्षण: ॥ 55 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागतते महापुराणे चतुर्बिकन्क्ये

सप्तद्वी3.शयः ।। 17 ।।

The religious sanctions advocated by the Munis "Procreate sons in any way whatsoever" is simply shameful. Fie to this religious sanction.

Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter in the fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyasa on the questions asked by Janamcajaya.

Book IV Chapter XVIII

CHAPTER XVIII

On the Devi Earth's Going to the Heavens

व्यास उवाच

शूणु राजन्यव्यायीम कृष्णायच चरितं महत् ।

अततारकारणं चैव देद्याश्रितमद्धुतम् ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Hear in detail the complete life and the deeds in the in carnation of Śri Kṛṣṇa and also the various wonderful achievements by the Goddess of this universe.

धरैकवा भगत्माना रुदती चातिकर्शिता ।

गोक्पधारिणी दीना शीतागघळितविष्टघम् ॥ 2 ॥

Once on a time, the Earth was very much overburdened by the load of wicked kings and She was therefore very much afraid. She then assumed the appearance of a cow and went to the Devaloka crying and very much dejected.

पृष्ठा शेक्न कि तेउघ वर्तेतं भयमित्यव ।

केन वे पीक्षितास्ति त्वं किं ते दुःखं वसुर्पे ॥ ३ ॥

Indra, the lord of the Devas, asked him, O Vasundhare! What is the cause of your fear now? Who has troubled you? What afflictions are you merged in? Please tell me these.

तच्छुचेला ततोवाच शुणु देवेश मेउखिलम् ।

दुःखें पृष्ठसि यचनं च भाराकात्तास्मि मानद ॥ 4 ॥

On hearing Indra's words, the Earth exclaimed: O Respect giver! When You have asked me, I am explaining to you the cause of all my afflictions and sorrows; at present I am overburdened with too much load.

जरासंधो महापापी माफांधे पतिमां ।

शिशुपाललसा चेधः काशीराजः प्रतपावन्त् ॥ 5 ॥

रुक्मी च बलवाक्मो रन्त्रक महावल: ।

शाल्वः सौभपाति: कूर केशी धेनुकवलकों ॥ 6 ॥

सर्वे धर्मविह्नीव्रा परस्पतिवर्धिति: ।

पाणचारा मदोभस्ता: कालत्काप्रा पार्थिवा: ॥ 7 ॥

तैर्हं पीडिता शक्र भागकानानक्षमा विशो ।

किं कंजीम वयं गच्छामि चिन्ता मे महती चिह्ना ॥ 8 ॥

Now is reigning in the earth Jarāsandha, the king of Magadha, a very very vicious persons. Thus the other Śiśupāla, the lord of the Cedis, the uncontrollable Kāśirāja, Rukmī, the powerful Karīsa, the strong Naraka, the Saubhapati Śāiva, the wicked Keśī, Dhenuka, and Vatsaka all these

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

are now in royal positions. O Lord of the Devas! These kings are all devoid of the least trace of virtue, quarrelsome against each other, infatuated with vanity, and addicted to vicious deeds. These have become kings as if they were personified Yamas, the Lords of Death, and are constantly troubling me. I am now unable to carry their loads; where shall I go now? This great thought is constantly ailing me.

पीडिताई वर्गेह ज्यव्हिणा प्रभविष्याना ।

ग्रक जानीहि हरिणा दुःखादुःखतरं गता ॥ 9 ॥

याताङं दुर्भेदैलेन कश्यपस्यात्मजेन वै ।

हताउं हिरण्याक्षेण मगना तस्मिन्महाणर्वे ॥ 10 ॥

तदा सुकररूपेण विद्याना नित्तोउपसरी ।

उद्धताउं वरोहण स्थापिति हि स्थिता कृता ॥ 11 ॥

O Vasava! What to tell! The Bhagavān in His Boar Incarnation is the cause of all these my afflictions; O Indra! These present troubles I am fallen into only through Him; for when the cruel Daitya Hiranyāksa; the son of Kaśyapa stole me away and drowned me in the great ocean, then it was Viṣṇu in his Boar incarnation that killed him and rescued me from the ocean and then kept me in this my stable position.

नोदेशमातले स्वस्था सित्ता नया सुखगाथिति ।

न शताउम्पद्ध देवेश भारं चोबुं तुरातनम् ॥ 12 ॥

Had he not then lifted me up, I would have rested safe in the depths of Rasātala; O Lord of the Devas! Now I am quite unable to bear the load of these vicious persons.

अउे तुः: समापाति ह्राद्विक्षतशा कलिः ।

तदारूं पीक्षिता श्रक्र गतानोरम्याशु सातालन् ॥ 13 ॥

O Surendra! The vicious twenty eight Kali is coming quickly in front. Thinking of His influence, it seems to me that I will be very troubled then and will have to go down to Rasātala.

तस्माचं देवेदेशेण दुःखरूपणीवस्य च ।

पारदो भव भार मे हर पार्दो नमामि ते ॥ १४ ॥

Therefore, O Lord of the Devas! I am bowing down before Your feet, Kindly relieve me of my burden and save me from these endless troubles.

इन खाव

इले किं ते कारोम्प्यत बढ़ाणां शरणां ज्ञ ।

अर्ह ततागमिष्यामि स ते दुःखं हरिष्यति ॥ 15 ॥

Indra said: O Earth! I can not do anything for you. You better go and take refuge of Brahmā. I am also going to Him. He will remove all your troubles.

तच्छूता त्वरिता पृथ्वी ब्रह्मलोकं गता तदा ।

गहानीय पुड़तः प्राप्तः सर्वदेवपुरःसरः ॥ 16 ॥

Hearing Indra's words the Earth hurriedly went to the realm of Brahmā and Indra and all the other Devas followed Her; and all reached the Brahmaloka.

सुरभीमगतां तत्र दृष्टीवाच प्रजापति: ।

महीं जाता महात्राज ध्यानेन समुपस्थितिम् ॥ 17 ॥

कस्मातुवृति कल्याणि किं ते दुःखं वदायुम् ।

पीडिताउपि च केन त्व पाचावारेण भवेद् ॥ 18 ॥

O King! The Grand Father Brahmā saw the Earth coming to him and through the power of meditation, found out the cause of Her coming and said: O Auspicious One! why are you crying? What troubles You have now? What wicked person has given You troubles.

प्रोताच

कलिरायाति दुर्भोर्ग विषयेमि तद्वायादरुम् ।

पाणाचाताः प्रजास्तत्र भविष्यन्ति जनतन्ते ॥ 19 ॥

The Earth said: O Lord of the Earth! The vicious Kali is coming before; under Its influence the subjects will be horribly vicious; therefore I am very much afraid of this Kali.

राजानछ्छा दुराचाराः परस्यरिवीरोधिनः ।

चौराकर्मरतः सर्वे ग्रहसाः पूर्णवैरिणः ॥ 20 ॥

In the beginning of this Kali Yuga, the ancient enemies, the Asuras have now incarnated on this earth as kings. They will be extremely wicked, quarreling against each other, and will be clever in stealing others things. There is no doubt in these.

तान्हत्वा नृपतीभारं हर मेध्ध पितामह ।

पीडितास्तिम महाराज सैन्यभरणे भूभुताम् ॥ 21 ॥

Book IV Chapter XVIII

O Grand Father! Now kill these vicious kings and relieve my burden. O Lord! I am very much troubled by the armies of these kings.

ब्रशोवाच

नाहं शक्तसधा देयि भारावतरणे तव ।

गच्छाव: सर्वनं विशाणेदैवद्वेस्य चक्रिण: ॥ 2 2 2 ॥

Brahmā said: O Goddess! I, too, am unable like Indra to remove your lad. Let us go to that Viṣṇu, the Holder of the disc.

स ते भारपानेदों वै कतियिति जनादनैः ।

पूर्वं मयापि ते कार्य चिन्तितं सुविचारये च। २३ ३ ॥

तत्र गच्छ सुरप्रेक्षि यत्र देवो जनादनैः ।

That Janārdana will remove your burden. I thought of this well before and settled what to do.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्चा वेदकर्तोंसी पुरकृत्य सुरांश गाम ॥ 24 ॥

जगाम विणुसन्दर्भ हंसाक्छक्षतुर्भुखः ।

नुहाव वेदवाक्येधि भक्तिप्रवणमानसः ॥ 25 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus saying, the four faced Brahmā, the Author of the Vedas, rode on His Hamsa Vehicle taking in front the Goddess Earth; and the Devas went to Viṣṇu and began to praise Viṣṇu Janārdana, the Deva of the Devas, with the words of the Vedas with full devotion.

ब्रह्मोवाच

सहसशीर्षत्वमीर सहसाधः सहसघात् ।

चं वेदुपुभः पूर्वे देवदेवः सनातनः ॥ 26 ॥

Brahmā said: Thou hast thousand heads, thousand faces, thousand feet. Thou art the Purusa of the Vedas, Thou art the Deva of the Devas, and Thou art Eternal.

भूतपूर्वे भविष्यच्च वर्तमानं च यद्धिणो ।

अमरत्वं तथा दत्तमसाकं च रमापते ॥ 27 ॥

O Omnipresent! Thou art the Past, Present, and Future! O Lord of Lakṣmī! Thou hast awarded immortality unto us.

एलावामहिता रेउसित को न येति जगत्ये ।

तवं कर्तांप्रयिता हर्तों तवं सर्वगतिरीश्रः ॥ 28 ॥

Thou art the Creator of universe, the Preserver

and the Destroyer; Thou art the One and the Only goal and thou art the God. Every body knows that all these glories belong to Thec.

यात्र उवाच

इतीक्षितः प्रभृविंषुः प्रसजो गकडधज्ञः ।

दर्शनं च ददौ तेभ्यो ब्रहामिष्यो मतलागयः ॥ 29 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! When Brahmā praised thus, Viṣṇu whose sign was Garuda, was highly pleased and appeared before Brahmā and the other Devas.

पप्रच्छ स्वागतं देदायमत्रवदनो हरि: ।

ततस्वागनने तेषां कारणं च सचितस्तम् ॥ 30 ॥

The Bhagavān asked them about their welfare and enquired in detail into the cause of their arrival there.

तमुवाचाबजी नत्वा धागुःखं च संस्मन्त् ।

भारात्वरणं विद्यो कर्तव्यं ते जनादेन ॥ 31 ॥

Brahmā them bowed down to Him and, remembering the cause of the sorrows of the Goddess Earth, said: O Lord! Thou art now to relieve the burden of the Earth.

भूवि धृत्वाउतरां त्वं द्वारपाने समापते ।

हत्वा दुहाधुगनुखां हर भारं द्वानिधे ॥ 32 ॥

O Thou, Ocean of mercy! When the end of the Dvāpara yuga will come Thou art to incarnate in the world and kill the wicked kings and thus to relieve the burden of the Earth.

विष्णुकाव

नाहं स्वतन्य एवात्र न बहा न शिवतशा ।

नेन्ट्रोसिनं यमस्तद्धा न सुयों वक्रणतशा ॥ 33 ॥

योगमावावशे सर्वीमिंट स्वावरजुकम् ।

ब्रह्मादित्वापयन्ते प्रथितं गुणयुक्तः ॥ 34 ॥

Viṣṇu said: I am not independent in these matters; why I? Brahmā Maheśa, Indra, Agni, Yama, Viśvakarmā, the Sun and Varuna and other Devas, no body is independent. This whole universe, moving and unmoving is existing under the control of the Yoga Māyā; and from Brahmā up to the clot of grass, all are strung into the thread of Her Three qualities.

यथा सा सैच्छया पूर्व कर्तूमिच्छति सुठत ।

तथा कातीत सहिता वयं सर्वैपि तद्गशः ॥ 3 5 ॥

O One of good vows! Whatever that Yoga Māyā, the Supreme Goddess, Who is All will, Whose mouth is inward, Who does good at all times, what she wills She does that at any time. You should all know that we are entirely under Her control.

यद्रहं स्वां स्वतन्त्रो वै विंतानु पिधा किल ।

कृतोउपबं मत्थवपुः कच्छणे या महापर्णे ॥ ३६ ॥

तिर्ययोगिषुकोभोग:काक्लीति:किंसुवं पुनः।

किं पुण्यं किं फलं तत श्रुवयोगिनतासय मे ॥ 37 ॥

You better think that were I independent, what for would I have stayed in the great ocean, incarnating in the Fish and Tortoise Bodies? O Brahmin! What name or pleasure is there in enjoyment in the body of lower animals! What holy merit or any other reward may I expect from being born in the wombs of lower animals?

कोलीवास्य तुसिंहो वा वामनोवासभवं कृतः।

अमदनिमुन्तः कमलास्पधवेयं पितामह ॥ 38 ॥

What is the reason that I assume the body of a Boar? or of a Man-Lion? or of a Dwarf? Why was I born as the son of Jamadagni. Especially why did I, being born of that high-souled Brāhmin Jamadagni, and being the best of the Brāhmins, do the most atrocious act like that of a heartless brute and fill up the lakes with their blood.

नूरुर्सं वा कवं कर्म कृतलावन्मि भूतले ।

क्षनजैसु हृदास्वान्मूरयेवं कवं पुनः ॥ 39 ॥

तत्कवं जमदानेश्ठ पुत्रो भूत्वा द्विजोतभः ।

क्षरियान्हतलानाजी निर्दोयो भर्गेभगनपि ॥ 40 ॥

Alas! I killed the Ksatriyas mercilessly; to say nothing more than that I killed the sons that were then in the wombs. Were I independent, what for I would have done these horrible and cruel deeds! O Lord of the Devas! See again.

रामो भूत्वाथ देवेन्द्र प्राविशड़ंडके वनम् ।

प्रदातिक्षीरवासघ जटावकल्बानपूनः ॥ 4 1 ॥

In my Rāma incarnation I roamed on foot,

helpless and without any provision, in the fearful Dandaka forest unfrequented by any body, wearing clotted hair, bark, rags, like a man who feels no shame, and behaved like a hunter and killed many animals.

असहायो हुपाधयो भीषणे निर्जने बने ।

कुर्वेत्राखेदकं तत्र व्यचरं वियगतप्रः ॥ 42 ॥

न ज्ञातावमूगं हिंमे मायया चिहास्तसदा ।

उठजे जानकीं त्यक्त्वा निर्गतस्तदावनुगः ॥ 43 ॥

लक्षणणोप्र च तां त्यक्त्वा निर्गतो मदवादुगाः।

वारितोप्र यमावत्थं मोहितः प्राकृतैपुर्गेः ॥ 44 ॥

Being under the delusion of Māyā, I could not make out the real nature of the golden deer; consequently leaving Jānaki in the thatched cottage, I went out perusing the deer. Though repeatedly warned by me not to leave the place, Lakṣmana was moved by the qualities of Prakṛti, forsook her and went out on my search.

विश्वरूपं ततः कृत्वा रावणः कयदाकृतः ।

जहार तरसा रक्षो जानकां शोककर्शिताम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

Then the hypocrite Rāvaṇa, the king of the Rāksāsas, under the garb of a beggar; stole away by force the daughter of Janaka, who had become very lean on account of sorrows.

दुखातेन मय तत्र सर्दितं च चने वने ।

सुप्रीयेण च मित्रतं कृतं कार्यवर्गानया ॥ 46 ॥

I was very much distressed owing to the separation from my dear wife, and roamed about weeping sorely in forest and formed friendship with Sugriva, under the influence of the circumstances.

अन्यायेन हतो वाली शापाच्छेव निवारितः ।

सहायान्नानान्कृत्वा लंकायां चलितं पुनः ॥ 47 ॥

It was an act of gross injustice on my part to kill Vālī, the king of the monkeys. I freed him from his curse; afterwards, aided by the monkeys, I had to go to Lanka.

बद्धोर्भहं नापयाणीछ लक्ष्मणघ मानुनजः ।

विसंजी पत्तिते दृष्टवा वानरा विस्मयं नातः ॥ 48 ॥

When my younger Lakṣmana and myself were both enchained under the chain of the serpents,

Book IV Chapter XVIII

Någapåsa, and were senseless, the monkeys all were astonished.

गऊऊने तद्ध़प्रान्य मोचिती धातरी किल ।

चिन्ता मे महती जाता देई किं का कार्थस्थिति ॥ 49 ॥

Then Garuda came and freed us the two brothers, from those Någapåsås! I considered then what adverse inauspicious circumstances Fate sometimes ordians on our lot.

हतं राज्यं बने वासो मृत: तातः प्रिया हृता ।

युद्धं कटं द्वतार्वेममरे किं वा कार्विथिति ॥ 50 ॥

I lost my kingdom, lived in the forests, my father died, Jānakī was stolen and I had to suffer extreme troubles in very deadly battles; I could not know what worse fate still awaited for us?

प्रथम् तु महादुःखमार्जस्य वनाश्रयम् ।

राजपुत्राश्रावतर्येव धनहीनश्र निर्भितः ॥ 51 ॥

O Suras! What more calamity can you expect to befall any person than—that I was from the very first deprived of my kingdoms and wealth, and had to go to the forest with the princess Sitā dwelling in and taking shelter in a dense forest!

वार्टिकार्जि विरा मे न दत्ता वन्निर्भिये ।

पदातिरसहायोर्द्ध नधनीत्रश्र सिनीर । II 52 II

At the time of my going to the forest my father did not give a single penny; penniless and helpless I had to get out of Ayodhyā on foot.

वतूर्दैशि वर्षिणि नितानि च तदा मदा ।

क्षात्रं धर्म परित्यज्य व्याधयुत्त्या महावने । ५३ ॥

I was compelled to leave my Kṣattriya Dharma and take up the avocation of hunter and thus to spend fourteen years in forest.

दैवादुढे जयः प्राप्तो नित्ञोरसौ महासुरः ।

ज्ञानीता च पुनः सीता प्राप्ताप्रोथया माया तथा ॥ ५४ ॥

After that, under the benign influence of Fate, I was able to kill that Asura Rāvaṇa and got the victory in the battle and was able to bring back dear Sītā to Ayodhyā.

वर्षोरि कतिचित्रा सुखं संसारस्म्यवम् ।

प्राप्ति राज्यं च सम्पूर्णं कोसलाप्रधितिहत ॥ 55 ॥

There I succeeded in becoming the ruler of the

kingdom Kośala with its subjects and got the full kingdom and enjoyed for a few years the pleasures of the world.

पुरैव वर्तमानेन प्राप्ताराजेन वै तदा ।

लेकापवादपीतिन तत्का सीता वने मया ॥ 56 ॥

कान्ताविरहर्ने दुःखं पुनः प्राप्तं दुगासदम् ।

पातालं सा गता पश्धाद्वी तिभत्या धातकाना ॥ 57 ॥

The stealing away of Sītā took place at the first outset; next I got my kingdom; then the subjects began to circulated the bad name regarding Jānakī; and I being afraid of that, deported her into exile in the forest. At that time I had to suffer again extreme pain and agony due to the serparation from my wife. Then the daughter of the Goddess Earth penetrated into the Earth and got down to the Patāla.

एवं रायावततोर्षि दुःखं प्राप्तं निरितमम् ।

परतन्त्रणे मे नूनं स्वतन्तः को भवेत्तदा ॥ 58 ॥

O Devas! When I had to depend on Fate and to suffer so many troubles incessantly, where else can you dare to say that an independent man exists.

पश्राकालवशामुपाव: स्वर्गों में भातृभिनः सह ।

पततन्यस्य का वातां वतन्या विबुघेने वे ॥ ५९ ॥

Afterwards under the influence of Time, I had to go to Heaven with my brother. Let all this point to what it may, the intelligent learned people can say what an amount of mishaps takes place to one who is dependent!

पतन्तोउस्यहं नूनं पच्योगेने निशामय ।

तथा त्वमपि रूक्ष सर्वे चान्ये सुरोतमाः ॥ 60 ॥

डीत श्रीमदेश्वीभागते महापुराणे

चतुर्विकन्येउधारशोअयाः ।। 18 ॥ 11

O One born from the Lotus! You hear my word; I am in every way dependent; why I? Rudra, You and all those Suras are fully dependent.

Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of

the Fourth Book of the Mahā Purānam

Śrimaddevithāgāvatam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa

on the Devi Earth's going to

the Heavens.

CHAPTER XIX

On Chanting the Hunns to the Devi

ཕམ་ཟམས:

སྟོལྟུལ་ཀྱི་སྟོལ་ཀྱི་སྟོལ་ཀྱི་སྟོལ་ཀྱི་སྟོལ་ཀྲི་སྟོལ་ཀྱི་སྟོལ་ཀྱི་སྟོལ་ཀྱི་སྟའི་སྟའི་སྟའི་སྟའི་སྟའི་སྟའི་སྟའི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཁྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་བྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་གྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་ཀྱི་སྟལ་

We, too, are fascinated by that Māyā; and hence we also, being blinded by that, do not at all remember. That Highest Eternal Purusa, calm and quiet, the World-Teacher, the Highest Self, of the nature of Pure Existence, Intelligence and Bliss.

अर्ह विद्यारूई बढ़ा शिवोड़मिति मोहिताः ।

न जानीमो वयं धातः परं वस्तु सनातनम् ॥ 3 ॥

O Brahma! I am Visnu, I am Brahmā, I am Rudra, thus our I-ness Aharikāra has blinded our eyesight; and we are made unable to recognise That Eternal Highest Self.

यन्यामाघौहित्राई सदा वर्ते परात्मनः ।

परवान् दारभाङ्गती माधिकस्य यथा यरे ॥ 4 ॥

As the wooden dolls dance according to the will of the player, the magician, I also am similarly fascinated by the Māyā and am thus incessantly rolling about like a dependent man.

भवताउपि तथा दूषा विभूतितस्य चाढ़ुता ।

करणादी भवयुक्तेन मयापि च सुधाणें ॥ 5 ॥

मिण्हाप्रेय 8 मन्त्राविद्ये रासमण्डले ।

समाजे तत्र सा दृष्टा श्रुता न वचसाधि च ॥ 6 ॥

O Brahma! In the beginning of the Kalpa, Maheśvara, You and I saw the wonderful unspeakable form and glory of that Highest Self at the time of Rāsamandala in the Māni Dvipa where there was the Mandāra Tree and the Devas assembled. Then I also saw that wonderful thing a second time in the Sudh\( ^{2} \):nava ocean of nectar,

and the most wonderful of it is this: that until we were able to See that Form, we did not hear anything of Her before!

तस्माता परमां गर्फिंक सर्वेनवघ सुरा: शिवगम् ।

सर्वकामप्रदो मायामाठी शर्फिंक परावमाः ॥ ७ ॥

Therefore, O Devas! To-day do you all remember that Prime Force, the Highest Self, that all beneficent Force that yields all good and auspicious things; That Very Force will fulfill now all your desires.

व्यास उवाच

इतुक्ता हरिणा देना बढ़ाठा भुवनेश्वीम् ।

सस्मर्नसा देहीं योगमायांं सनातनीम् ॥ ८ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! No sooner the Bhagavān Hari addressed thus, Brahmā and the other Devas at once mentally began to meditate on that Eternal Yoga Māyā, the Goddess of the Universe.

स्मृतमात्रा तदा देही प्रत्यक्षं दर्जनं दही ।

पाणाङ्गशरापीतिप्रा देहो जगराणा ।

इद्धया प्रमुदिता देहान्तुडुवर्ता सुर्दर्गना ॥ 9 ॥

Being thus meditated, at once appeared before their eyesight the Devi, the Goddess of the Universe, whose colours were like the blood red Java flower, holding in two of Her hands noose, hook, or goad, while the third hand indicated favour and the fourth hand bade all discard every sort of fear.

देवा ऊचुः

कर्णनाघाढ्या तन्त्रविस्कृतीयां विषावसोः ।

तथा जगद्धतेस्या निर्मतं तां नत्ता बयम् ॥ 10 ॥

As the web comes out of a spider of fire and sparks come out, so this whole Universe comes out of that Goddess. We all bow down before Her with our humble hearts, full of devotion.

यन्मायाशक्तिसंकल्पं जानसर्वे चराचम् ।

तां चितं धुवनाधीशां सरमाः कर्णाणिधा ॥ 11 ॥

Book IV Chapter XIX

We all salute to that Goddess of the Universe, Bhuvanesvari, under Whose Māyīc force this whole Universe, moving and unmoving, is recreated; Who is All-Intelligence and the Ocean of Mercy.

यद्धानाद्वोत्थितिर्वज्ञानाद्ववनाशनम् ।

संविद्धुपं च तं दौंदी स्मारमः सा प्रधोद्यात् ॥ 12 ॥

This world appears real to him who is unable to realise Her Real Essence; and the world drops off as unreal no sooner he realises Her Presence. We all meditate on that All Intelligent Goddess and we all pray to Her that She may grant unto us more strength to meditate Her and Her alone so.

मातलस्थे च विवाईं चर्यशक्न्चे च धीमाहि ।

तनो देवी प्रचोदयात् ॥ १३ ॥

We all want to know Mahā Lakṣmī, we all meditate on the Omnipotent; May the Goddess grant unto us strength to meditate on Her so.

भारन्तनैः स्म भुवनानिरंतरं प्रसीद

गं नो विधिके कुरु कार्यमिद्ध द्वयरं ।

भारं हरव विवित्रव सुरारिवर्ग महा

महेश्वर सतां कुरु गं भवानि ॥ 14 ॥

O Thou, the Remover of the world's afflictions! Best pleased unto us; O Thou, kind hearted! Do this work for us and promote our good. O Thou, Lord of the Earth! Dost Thou relieve the burden of the earth by killing these Asuras and bring on our welfare.

यद्वेबुबालिध दयसे न सुरान्कदाचिक्ति ने

क्षमा रणमुपुडे सिरशरे: ग्रहरुम् ।

एतचवैय गदितं ननु यक्षल्पं

धूला तृणं दह इतागपदाधिक्षणैः ॥ 1 5 ॥

O Thou, Lotus-Eyed! If Thou dost not show Thy mercy towards the gods, they will never be able to strike their enemies with their weapons in the battlefield. O Goddess! Thou didst verify the truth of this before, when Thou didst assume the appearance of a Yakṣa and utter the following sentences “O Fire! You burn this blade of grass” etc. (in the Kena Talavakāra Upaniṣad).

कंस: कुजोर्श यवनेन्सुतश केर्शी

वाईरूशो बकबकीखशाल्यमुख्या: 1

येउ-ये तथा नृपतयो भूथि सन्ति तांस्वं

हत्वा हरस्व जगतो भरमाशु मातः ॥ 16 ॥

O Mother! Kañsa, Bhauma, Kālayavana, Keśī, Jarāsandha, the son of Brhadratha, Vaka, Pūtanā, Khara, Śalva and other vicious kings respectively are dwelling on the earth. Dost Thou better kill them and relieve the burden of the Earth.

वे विद्यान्ना न निहाना: किल शक्रेशण

वे वा विश्रहा जलजाशिक पुरन्देशे।।

ते ते पुरुखं सुरुखकंरं सुमीक्षमाणाः।

संख्ये शर्यिविन्हता निजलौतया ते ॥ 17 ॥

O Lotus-Eyed! Thou hadst killed those Asuras without any effort that were not slain by Viṣṇu or Maheśvara and they ended their lives, while they were beholding Thy pleasing countenance.

शर्फिकं विना हरित्वगुखा: सुराङ

नैवेक्षा विचितन्तु तत देवदेवेल ।

किं धारणाविरहितः प्रपूर्णवन्तो

धर्तु धरां च रजनीशकलावतंसे ॥ 18 ॥

O Goddess! Holding Moon on Her forehead! These Hari, Hara, Brahmā and the other gods are unable to move a step without the help of Force; nothing to speak any further, the thousand headed King of Serpents is unable to hold this earth even for a moment, were he not provided with the Śakti of upholding this world.

इन्र उवाच

वाचा विना विधिरलं भवतीह विध्ध

कर्तृ हरि: किमु स्मारहितोध पातुम् ।

संहर्तुभीग उभ्योजितून ईशः किं ते

ताभिरेव सहिता: प्रभव: प्रजेशः ॥ १९ ॥

Indra said: O Bhagavati! Would Brahmā be ever able to create this world without the aid of Sarasvatī! Would Viṣṇu, the Deva of the Devas, be ever able to preserve it without the aid of Laksmī or would Mahesvara be ever able to destroy this world without the help of His Umā; no, never! These Devas, the Trinity, are able to take their

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

respective parts in the keeping up of the world simply because they are united with the forces, incarnate in Sarasvatī, etc., who are again parts of Thee.

विष्णुर्वाच

कर्तु प्रभुने ईहिणो न कदाचनाहं

नाथीश्रस्तव कतारहितक्षिलोक्या: ।

कर्तु प्रभुचमनयोउत्र तथा विहर्तु त्वं

वै समस्तविषयेक्षिरे भासि नूनम् ॥ 20 ॥

Visṇu said: O Vimale! Were we deprived of Thy Force, the Creator would never have been able to create the world, I would never have been able to preserve it and Maheśvara would never have been able to destroy Therefore O Devi! Thou alone art reigning as the Supreme Goddess amidst all the glories in the creation, preservation, and destruction of this Universe.

व्यास उवाच

एवं सुत्वा तदा देवी तानाह विबुधेश्वान् ।

कि तत्कार्यं वदल्वच कंपिभ विगतलयतः ॥ 21 ॥

असाध्यमपि लोकेश्मितलकोमीय सुरीमतान् ।

शंसन्तु भवतां दुःखं धरायाङ्य सुरोतमाः ॥ 22 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Thus praised by the Gods, the Goddess then addressed them: O Devas! Let all anxities leave you all; I will do what the Devas have desired, even if be very difficult to do in this world; now explain what is troubling the Goddess Earth.

देवा कचुः

वसुधैवं भयाकान्ता सम्पात विबुधान्यति ।

रूदती वेयपाना च पीडिता दृष्यपुर्जेः ॥ 23 ॥

The Devas replied: The wicked kings are troubling very much this Earth. She cannot any longer bear their burden; therefore She came crying unto us.

भागपहर्णं चायया: कतिथं घुवनेश्वी ।

देवानामीमितं कार्यमेतदेवापुना शिशे ॥ 24 ॥

O Bhuvaneśvari! Now it is Your duty to remove this load of earth. O Auspicious One! Know this, the desire of the gods.

घातितसु पुरा मातस्वया महिषरूपभृत ।

दानवोर्गतिवलाकान्तसत्सहायांश्छीदिगः ॥ 25 ॥

तथा शुभ्यो निशुभ्यश रत्कौजास्तधापरः ।

चणदमुपडी महावीर्याँ तवेय धूपतोचनः ॥ 26 ॥

दुर्मुखो दुःसह्छैव कारलश्रातीलयैवान् ।

अन्ये च बहवः क्रारास्तव्यैव च निपातितः ॥ 27 ॥

O Mother! In days of yore, You have killed the most powerful Dānava named Mahiṣa, attended by lacs and lacs of Dānavas and Daityas; What to speak! You have slain Śumbha, Niśumbha, Raktabīja, the very powerful Canda Mungda, Dhūmralocana, Durmukha, Duhsaha, the strong Karāla and many other cruel Dānavas.

तथैव च सुरार्थि जहि सर्वान्हीशान्न ।

“ भारं हर धान्याश्र उदुरं दुषुधुजाम् ॥”

Now, similarly kill the wicked kings, the enemies of the Gods and save the Earth from their heavy loads.

व्यास उवाच

इतुक्ता सा तदा देवे दोवानाहीयका शिवा ॥ 28 ॥

समूहस्यासितापाङ्गी मेघमाधीराय शिता ।

Vyāsa said: Thus addressed by the Devas, the Most Auspicious One, the Devi, whose colour was black and who looked askance, said smiling in a tone, grave and deep, like that of the rumbling of a raincloud.

श्रीदेख्याच

मयंदे चिन्तितं पूर्वमैशालत्रणं सुरा: ॥ 29 ॥

भारावतरणं चैव वथा स्यादुपुर्णपुर्णम् ।

O Suras! I have already thought over how the burden of those wicked kings, the parts incarnate of Asuras, can be removed.

मया सर्वे निर्तेल्या दैत्येणा ये महीभुजाः ॥ 30 ॥

मागधाडा महाभागा: स्वशक्त्या मंदतेजसः।

I will, by My own power, rob them of their powers, of that highly prosperous and affluent Jārāsandha, the king of Magadha, and others, the parts incarnate of the wicked Asuras, that are now shining on the Earth.

Book IV Chapter XIX

भविद्वारि वंरैगीरवतीयं धरातले ॥ 31 ॥

मच्छफिन्नेः कतव्यं भारावतरणं सुरा: ।

O Devas! You would all better go down and incarnate yourselves as part incarnations, impregnated with My power, and help thus in the removal of the load of this earth.

क्यपयो भारया सार्य दिविनानां प्रजापनि: ॥ 32 ॥

यादवानां कुले पूर्वं भविताने उनककुदुपि: ।

The Deva Prajāpati Maharṣi Kaśyapa would first of all go with his his wife and incarnate as Ānaka Dundubhi Vasudeva, in the race of Yadu.

तथैव भृगुगायाड़े भगवाल्विष्णुव्यय: ॥ 33 ॥

अंगेन भविता तत्र वसुदेवसुत्तो हरि: ।

The Imperishable Bhagavān Viṣṇu will also incarnate as part, owing to the curse of Bhṛgu, as the son of Vasudeva.

त्वारुई प्रभविष्यामि यग्रोतायां च गोकुले ।। 34 ॥

कार्य सर्वे कार्यमिम सुणां सुरसन्तमाः ।

O Devas! I will be born, then, in the womb of Yaśodā, in Gokula and will accomplish all the ends of the Gods.

कारागारे गत विष्णु प्रापयिष्यामि गोकुले ॥ 35 ॥

शेपं च देवक्रीगभित्रापयिष्यामि रेहिणीम् ।

I Will send Viṣṇu from the prison to the Gokula; also I will transfer Ananta from the womb of Devaki to the womb of Rohin?

मच्छकरणोघचिती ती च कततीं दुरसंक्षयम् ॥ 36 ॥

दुरानां भूषुजां कामं द्वापराने सुनिश्छितम् ।

They two will grow, day by day, by My Force and at the end of the Dvāpara Yuga, will no doubt kill the wicked kings.

इंत्रणो5यज्ञनः साक्षात्क्रियित वलक्षायम् ॥ 37 ॥

धर्मारी3पि महाराजो भाविष्यित युधिष्ठि: ।

वाय्वेगो भीमसेन्नाशिक्यंगी च यमावपि ॥ 38 ॥

वसोरोंगे5य गोगेयः क्रियिति वलक्षायम् ।

Arjuna too, the part incarnate of Indra, will destroy the armies of those kings. Yudhishira, the part incarnate of Dharma, Bhimseña, that of of Vāyu, Nakula and Sahadeva the incarnate of the two Aśvins, and Bhismā, the incarnate of Vasu as

the son of the Gangā, will take their respective births and exhaust their armies.

जजत् च भवन्तोड्य धाग भवतु सुस्धिता ॥ 39 ॥

भागवतलर्ग नूनं कारिणीम सुरोत्तमाः ।

O Devas! Now be calm and quiet and go. Let the Earth be also calm and quiet; be confident that I will certainly remove the load of this earth.

कृत्वा निमिणासांतान्यराजलगड़र नं संशया:। ४० ॥

कृकक्षेत्र कारिष्यामि क्षत्रियाणां च संक्षयम् ।

I will make the above mentioned Gods as my instruments merely and I will destroy, by My own force, the Ksatryas in the battlefield of Kurukşetra.

असुर्येधां मतिसनृष्णा ममताधिमाता सुहा ॥ 41 ॥

जिगीषा मदनो मोहो दोर्भेनैश्वन्ति याद्वाः ।

Malice, jealousy, foul intention, desire, attachment, vanity, covetuousness, desire for victory, lust, and fascination are the vices that will destroy the Yádavas.

बाहाणस्य च शापेन वंशाणो भविष्यति ॥ 42 ॥

भगवानपि शापेन त्वक्ष्यतैतक्लेवम् ।

The race of Yadu will end owing to the curse of a Brāhmaṇa. The Bhagavān also will leave His mortal coil due to a curse.

भवन्तोर्पि निजांगीश सहाया: शार्ड्धिन्वनः ॥ 4 3 ॥

प्रभन्तु सनारीका मधुरायां च गोकुले ।

Now go and incarnate in your respective parts, with your wives, in Gokula and Mathurā, and be helpers in the work of the Lord.

व्यास उवाच

इन्युक्चलांदईये देही योगायामा परातमः ॥ 44 ॥

सधारा वे सुरा: सर्वे जनयु: स्वान्यालयानि च ।

धराशि सुविधा ज्ञान तस्य बावनेने तीचिति ॥ 45 ॥

Vyāsa said: Saying thus, the Devi the Goddess of the Universe, the Māyā incarnate of the Highest Self disappeared. The Devas and the Earth went to their respective places. O king Janamejaya! the Goddess Earth was pleased with the Devi's words, and being quiet, remained surrounded with various medicinal plants and creepers.

<table><tr><td>अोषधीवीरूघोपेतात बभूव जनमेव 1प्रजाश्र सुस्तिने जाता द्विजाश्रामुसंहोदयम्।सन्तुहा मुनयः सर्वे बभूवुर्धर्मततपरा: ॥ 46 ॥इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे चतुर्वकन्न्येएकॉनिवीरोस्थाय: ॥ 19 ॥</td></tr></table>

Then the subjects felt peace and pleasure, the Brāhmaṇas also grew stronger in happiness and

porrseity, and the Munis became glad and began to perform their religious acts with fresh zeal and alacrity.

Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, the Mahā Purānam, on chanting the hymns to the Devi by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XX

On Devaki's Marriage

व्यास उवाच:

शृणु भारत वक्ष्यामि भारावतरणं तथा ।

कुरक्षेत्र प्रभासे च श्रपितं योगमायया ॥ १ ॥

यदुवंशे समुचितिथ्योगरिततेजसः ।

भूगृगाप्यतपेन महामायावलेन च ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O Bharata! I now narrate to you about the relief of the burden of the Earth, the destruction by the Yoga Māyā of the armies at Kuruksetra and Prabhāsa, the two sacred places, and about the birth, due to the curse of Bhru, of the Bhagavān Hari, of unparalleled prowess, under the influence of Mahāmāyā, in the race of Yadu. Now hear.

ऐक्षितिपासमुत्तारिनितिमिति मे पति: ।

मायया विहित्तो योगो विष्णोजेन्म धरातले ॥ 3 ॥

Viṣnu's taking birth in the world was effected under the circumstances caused by Yoga Māyā, to relieve the burden of the Earth; this is my opinion.

Note: Prabhāsa is a well-known place of pilgrimage near Dvārakā, in Gujarat.

एकं विश्रं नृप देवी सा ब्रह्माविष्युरापि ।

नर्तेबलिनं माया विगुणा न पराधिकमु ॥ 4 ॥

O king! When the Goddess Mahāmāyā, the Incarnate of the three qualities can make Brahmā, Viṣṇu and the other Devas dance incessantly as their Internal Controller, then what wonder, that She would appear charming to the other Jivas and make them dance incessantly, as woodon dolls.

गर्भवासोद्रदं वुःखं विष्णुस्नायुसंगुतम् ।

विष्योरापवितं सव्यरयया विगतलीलाया ॥ 5 ॥

All the troubles incurred in remaining in the womb, amidst the urine, excreta and tissues, She had brought to bear finally on Viṣṇu by Her ever famous Līlā (Divine Sport).

पुरा रायावततेर्धि निर्जरा वानसा: कृता: ।

विवितं ते यथा विद्युर्जु:ख्यापोगे मोहिताः ॥ 6 ॥

In days of yore, in Rāma incarnation, She, That Supreme Goddess made the Gods become monkeys and you know very well already, what an amount of trouble Bhagavān Viṣṇu had to undergo by the hard iron chain of bondage, “This is mine, this is I”, etc., imposed by Māyā.

अर्ह मेमिति पाशेन सुवृद्धेन नाराधि ।

योगिनो मुक्त्मंगाष मुक्रिकामा मुप्रहक्ष: ॥ 7 ॥

This Yogis who want final liberation and who have abandoned all their attachments and who want devotion, they worship the Supreme Goddess of the Universe, the Incarnate of Auspiciousness.

तामेव सुप्रपासने देर्वि विश्रेष्ठश्री शिवगम् ।

तद्धक्तिलेणलेशांश लेणलेशलवांगकम् ॥ 8 ॥

O king! Who will not serve Her? A trace of devotion towards Whom effects at once the salvation of the Jivas.

लब्धा सुनी घोबजंतुलां न सेवेत को जनः ।

भुवनेशीलेव वक्ने द्वातिति भुवनजयम् ॥ 9 ॥

If any human being utters simply the name "Bhuvaneśvari" (the Goddess of Universe) She gives him the three worlds; and if any one cries and utters for help "Save me," then the Goddess of the Universe, being unable to find anything that

Book IV Chapter XX

She can repay him as a fit recompense for his Utterance, becomes Herself indebted to that man. मां पातीत्यय चचसो देवाभावादुपगाधिता ।

विद्यार्थिवीत तस्या ऋे रूपे जानीहि पार्थिव ॥ 10 ॥

O King! Know Vidya (knowledge) and Avidyā (non-knowledge, spiritual ignorance, Iowner knowledge) Her two forms; Vidya gives liberation; Avidyā causes bondage.

विद्याभू मुचते जन्तुबंधते प्रविद्धया पुनः ।

ब्रहा विद्युघ हरूघ सर्वे तस्य वाजपानुः ॥ १ १ ॥

Brahmā, Viṣṇu Rudra, all these and their Avatāras are Her instruments and are under Her subjection, are if they as all fastened by a cord.

अवतारा: सर्वे एवं यन्थिता इव दामधि: ।

कदाचिच्च सुखं घुंफे वैकुण्डे श्रीसागरे ॥ 12 ॥

कदाचिलुकृते युद्धं दानवैर्विवतनरै: ।

हरि: कदाचिद्धान्यै वित्तान्यकरोत्ति च ॥ 13 ॥

कदाचिच्च तपस्तीत्र तीर्थे चरित सुमत ।

कदाचिच्छ्यने शेते योगानिद्रामुगाधिनः ॥ 14 ॥

The Bhagavān Hari sometimes resides in Vaikunthā, sometimes resides in the sea of milk and enjoys pleasures, sometimes fights with the powerful Dānavas, sometimes performs extensive sacrificial ceremonies sometimes performs severe asceticism and sometimes takes to deep sleep under the guidance of Yoga Māyā. Thus He never becomes free and independent.

न स्वतनः क्वाधिषच भगवान्यमुसूनः।

तथा बढ़ा तथा रूस्तलधेन्द्रो वरणो यमः ॥ 15 ॥

कुवेरीउनी सीन्द्र च हवाउन्ये सुरसनाः ।

मुन्यः सनकाध्यां ससिद्धायतलयाये ॥ 16 ॥

सर्वेप्रवारणगा नित्यं पशुतालीव नस्य च ।

O King! And like Viṣṇu, Brahmā, Rudra, the other Gods Indra, Varuna, Yama, Kubera, Agni, the Sun, Moon and other celestial gods, the Sanaka and other Munis, Vasisītha and other Rṣis, all are incessantly controlled by the Supreme Goddess, as if they are the dolls in the hands of a playing magician.

नसि प्रोता यथा गावो विवर्तिन वशानुपाः ॥ १ ७ ॥

तथैव देवता: सर्वा: कालपाशनियन्त्रिता: ।

All the Devas are controlled by the noose of Time, just as oxen are brought under control by men, by strings passed within their noses.

हर्षगोकारवो भावा निर्जित-ज्ञालसादय: ॥ १ ८ ॥

सर्वेणा सर्वेदा राजन्देहिनां देहर्शिंशतः ।

O King! Pleasure, pain, sleep lassitude, idleness, and other passions and feelings are always found inherent in every embodied being.

अभाग निर्जान: प्रोक्ता देवाशु प्रत्याकारकः ॥ १९ ॥

अभिप्रानताश्यतीनन्तेनुतगा:बवित् ।

उपतिर्धितिनागाख्या भावा वेशं नितन्तम् ॥ २० ॥

अभारसंत कंबं घाच्या निर्जीराक्य कंपु नः ।

The Devas are written down by authors in their books as not subject to death or decay; this statement is merely nominal and not real; for whoever is always subject to birth, growth, decay and death how can we call him immortal or beyond old age and death?

कंधे दुः:खाधिपूर्णा वा जायन्ते विद्योतमाः ॥ 21 ॥

कंधे देखा शक्त्वा व्यसने क्रीडनं कंधपू ।

Why do the Devas get into sorrows, and troubles? How can they be called gods? How can one enjoy when one is involved in a trouble?

क्षणातुवस्तिजाश्र इयुवतेर्जित्य संशय: ॥ 22 ॥

जलजानां च कीटानां गमकानां तथा पुन: ।

उपमा न कर्व चैघामायुधोजने मरा: स्मृता: ॥ 23 ॥

In this world, it is seen mosquitoes and other insects born from water die after a very short time; so, like these, the Devas at the expiry of their ordained life-period, die too. Then why not the Devas be treated like those insects? Why not shall we term them, "Mortal"?

ततो वर्षविश्रधारि शतावर्षायुपस्था ।

मनुष्या ह्रामरा देवास्तस्तमावृ हब्दा पर: सून्तः ॥ 24 ॥

रहस्तथा तथा विष्णु क्रमगक्ष भवन्ति हि ।

नश्यन्ति क्रमगक्षेव वर्द्धने चोत्तीसेनम् ॥ 25 ॥

Some human beings live one year; some other live upto one hundred years the Devas live longer than men; the life of the Prajāpati Brahmā exceeds those of the Devas; Rudra lives longer than

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Brahmā; and Viṣṇu lives longer than Rudra. All these are thus subject by turns to birth growth, and decay.

नूनं देह्वता नाणो मृतस्योरपितेच च ।

चक्रवद्यमणे राजनसर्वेणां नात्र संशयः ॥ 26 ॥

Those who are born, they die; those that die are again born. Thus O King! In this world all the Jivas, no doubt, move round and round like a wheel.

मोहजालावृतो जन्तुभूयते न कदाचन ।

मायायां विद्यानायां मोहजालां न नर्यति ॥ 27 ॥

The Jivas are deluded by the network of Moha (charms) and thus deluded. They can never gain final release. So long as Māyā exists in them, their delusion is not destroyed.

उत्स्युकाल उत्पत्ति: सर्वेषां नृप जायते ।

तथेव नागः करणाने ब्रह्मादीनां यथाकामम् ॥ 28 ॥

O King! At the time of creation Brahmā and all other things came into existence, in due order, and these will duly dissolve at the time of the Great Dissolution (the Pralaya)?

निमितं यस्तु यत्रागे स भावतितं तं नृप ।

नान्यथा नद्ववैकृतं विधिभान निर्मितं तु यत् ॥ 29 ॥

Whatever is the cause of destruction to any body here, that destroys the body in question. According to the Will Powers of the Supreme Goddess, whatever is created by Brahmā, no none can undo that. Know this as perfectly certain.

जन्माम्युजरायाशिपु:खं वा सुखमेव वा ।

ततथैव घनेत्कामं नान्यथे हविनियाँः ॥ ३० ॥

Know this the predestined law that the birth, death, old age, diseases, pain or pleasure overtake all the Jivas according to the perscribed order of Nature; never these laws fail to operate in their actions.

सर्वेधां सुखदी देवी प्रत्यक्षी शिशिभास्करो ।

न गयालित तयोः पीड़ा क्वचिन्छौरिसम्पया ॥ ३ १ ॥

See! The Devas that we see with our physical eyes, the Sun and Moon yield pleasure to all; still they suffer always troubles at the hands of their enemies (i.e. Rāhu and Ketu, i.e. there always take

place regularly solar and lunar eclipses, when they are in the ascending and descending nodes). This suffering is never removed.

भास्करस्य सुतो मन्दः क्षयी चन्दः कलंकवान् ।

पश्य राजन्विधः सूत्रं दूर्वार्च महतामपि ॥ ३ ३ ॥

The son of the Sun (Saturn) is always injurious to people; hence it is termed “Manda” (bad); the Moon was attacked with consumption and bears stain on his body (spots in the Moon disc). What to speak of ordinary men? The great men even are subject to the prescribed laws of Fate and Nature.

वेदकर्ता जगद्धतां बुद्धिद्रनु चतुर्मुखः ।

सोप्रियकिलवतांग्रापोनृष्यापुर्जीसरवतीन् ॥ 33 ॥

The Creator of the world, the four faced Brahmā is the author of the Vedas and awarder of Intelligence. He, too, on seeing Sarasvatī, his own daughter, was afflicted with passion.

शिवस्थापि मृता भार्यी सती रूपधा केलवम् ।

सोउभवदुःखसंततः कामार्तेऊ जानितां ॥ 34 ॥

When Sati, the wife of Śiva, left off Her mortal coil, Mahādeva, though He could remove the sorrows of all, was very much moved with passion and greatly afflicted.

कामानिन्दधदोहसु कालिंचां पत्ति: शिवः ।

साउपि रथामज्ञान जाता तरिद्वाधयगघुच ॥ 35 ॥

Then, being burnt very much as it were by the fire of passion, he threw himself down into the water of the river Kālindi; and the water of that river became black-coloured, as if burnt by the burning fire of the Sorrows of Śiva.

कामातों रयमाणसु ननः सोर्पि घुणोर्वम् ।

गतः प्राप्तोर्ध घपुणा शपः कामातुरो घुणम् ॥ ३६ ॥

पतत्वदीय ते लिङ़ं निर्ज्ञेजि घुणं किल ।

पयी चामुतवापी च दानवैर्पिभितं गुदे ॥ ३७ ॥

O King! When Mahādeva, being infatuated with Kāma, went into the forest of Bhrgu and becoming naked, began to copulate, the ascetic Bhrgu, seeing him in that state, exclaimed “O You are very shameless” and cursed Him thus: Let your penis drop off just now. Mahādeva, then to satisfy his

Book IV Chapter XX

thirst for passion, began to drink the water of the lake Amrta Vāpi, dug by the Dānavas.

इन्ट्रीपि च वृषो भूत्वा वाह्नत्वां गतः क्षितौ ।

आहायय वसंतोकस्य विषाणोर विवेकिनः ॥ 38 ॥

सर्वेन्त्रयं नांत कुत्र प्रघुगफितः कुतो गता ।

यदेम्पुगविज्ञानं न ज्ञातं हरिणा किल ॥ 39 ॥

Indra, too, the Lord of the Devas, turned into a bull and carried Viṣṇu on his back on the face of the earth. What to speak where the omniscience and omnipotence disappeared of Bhagavān Viṣṇu, Who is the First of all created beings and possessed of reason and discrimination? Oh! What a great wonder, that He could not know about the golden deer?

राजन्यायावलं पश्य रामो हि काममोहितः ।

रामो विरहसंतनो करोद शुभागतुः ॥ 40 ॥

योप्रच्छत्याद्वामूढः वयं गता जनकामजा ।

भक्षिता वा हता केन रुदयुचन्तरं ततः ॥ 4 1 ॥

Judge, O King! for yourself, the great power of Māyā, that even Rāma Candra was deluded by passion, and very much grieved for the separation from his dear wife Sītā, and wept much for Her. Greatly deluded, he began to cry aloud and ask the trees “where has gone My Sītā, the daughter of Janaka? Is she devoured by the rapacious animals? or whether is she stolen by some mischievous person?

लक्ष्मणाई मरिधामि कान्ताविरहूःश्रितः ।

त्वं चापि मम दुःखेन मरिष्यसि बनेउनुः ॥ 4 2 ॥

आवयोर्मर्ग जाला माता मम मार्थिति ।

गुरुभोउध्वितुःखातृः कर्थ जीवितुमहिति ॥ 4 3 ॥

O Brother Lakṣmaṇa! I am being consumed by the fire of separation from my beloved; I will commit suicide now; and you too will die due to the separation from me; our mother, too, would die when they will hear of our deaths; Śatrughna, too, will be very much afflicted at our death and will not hold his life.

सुभिमा जीवितं जहाग्यत्रयसनकर्जिता ।

पूर्णकामास्थ बैकैयी भवेत्युसमप्तिता ॥ 44 ॥

The mother Sumitrā, too, will destroy her life, being afflicted with her son's demise; and then Bharata's and his mother's desires will certainly be fulfilled.

हा सीते ब्क नगात्रसि त्वं मां बिहायु मसानुगा ।

एहोहि मुगावगशक्षि मां जीवय कुशोदरि ॥ 45 ॥

O Sita! I am very much moved by your separation; where have you gone, leaving me here! O dear-eyed, O one of thin waist! come; give life unto me!

किं करोमि वक गच्छामि वद्धीर्न च जीवितम् ।

समाशास्य दीनं मां प्रियं जनकनन्दिनि ॥ 46 ॥

What shall I do? Where shall I go? My life is entirely dependent on you, O daughter of Janaka! I am your darling? Now I am very much depressed owing to your separation. Please come and speak to me words of hope and courage.

एवं विलपता तेन रोपाणमिततेजस ।

वने वने च भ्रमता नैहिता जनकात्मजा ॥ 47 ॥

Though Rāma, of unequalled prowess, roamed about weeping from forest to forest, yet he could not fine out Sitā.

शरणय: सर्वलोकानां राम: कमललोचन: ।

गरणां वानराणां स गतो मायाशिमेहितः ॥ 48 ॥

सहायान् वानरान्कावा बकवभ बकणालयम् ।

जघान रावणं वीरं कृम्भकर्ण महोदरम् ॥ 49 ॥

He, who is the Refuge of all the worlds, the lotus-eyed Rāma, got entangled into the delusion of Māyā and had to take refuge Himself under the monkeys, and with their help, constructed the bridge across the ocean, crossed the ocean and was thus able to

kill the valiant warriors Kumbhakarna and Rāvaṇa.

आनीच च ततः सीतां गमो दिव्यमकात्यम् ।

सर्वैज्ञोप्रि हृतां मत्वा रावणेन दुर्गतमना ॥ ५० ॥

Then Rāma got back His Sītā before him but suspecting, since she had been stolen by the vicious Rāvaṇa, made her take an oath, though it is to be remembered that Rāma was all-knowing.

किं क्वीमि महाराज योगमायावलं महत् ।

यया विश्वामिदं सर्वे श्रामितं ध्रमते किल ॥ 51 ॥

Śrimaddevibhagavatam

O King! The power of Yoga Māyā is very great; what shall I speak of Her great power? This whole cosmos is always urged into activity by Her and thus goes rolling on and on incessantly.

एवं नानावतारोउर विष्णु: शापवर्श गत: ।

क्रांति विविधाश्रौ द्वैवाधानि: सदैव हि ॥ 5 2 ॥

Thus, in various incarnations, Bhagavān Viṣṇu was always under the influence of previous curse and also under the control of Destiny and had to do various functions incessantly.

त्वाहं क्रविध्यापि कृष्णयासपि विवेहितम् ।

प्रभवं मानुषे लोके देवकार्यांशसिद्धये ॥ ५३ ॥

O King! Now I will speak to you about the birth of Śrī Krṣna in the world for serving the purpose of gods and will narrate His Lilā.

कालिन्दीपुलिने रथे हासी-मधुवर्ने पुरा ।

लवणो मधुपुस्तु तत्रासीद्वावो वली ॥ 54 ॥

In days of yore, on the delightful banks of the river Kálindi, there was a place, called Madhuvana, where lived a powerful Daitya named Lavana, the son of Madhu.

द्विजानां दुःखदः पाथी बरादोन नार्थितः ।

नित्तोउसौ महाभाग लक्ष्मणास्यानुजेन वे ॥ ५५ ॥

शुक्रनेनाथ संग्रामे ते नित्रत्य मदोलकन्दम् ।

वासिता मयुगा नामी पुगी परमगोभना ॥ ५६ ॥

That wicked Demon was exceedingly arrogant, on getting a boon, and he used to give an enormous amount of trouble to the Dvias. Śatrughna, the younger of Lakṣmana, killed that uncontrollable Daitya and built a very beautiful city there and named it Mathurā.

स तन पुक्रारक्षी ई पुत्री शज्ञिपूर्वनः ।

निदेश्य राज्य मतिमाकाले प्रप्त दिवं गतः ॥ 57 ॥

The intelligent Sátrunha, the destroyer of enemies, installed his two lotus-eyed sons in that kingdom and, when his end came, went to Heaven.

सूर्यवैश्रश्वे तां तु यावादा: प्रतिवेषिति ।

मवूगं मुक्तिडां राजन व्यातितनाय: पुरा ॥ 58 ॥

Afterwards on the decline of the Solar race, the

Yādavas, born of the race of Yayāti, occupied that Mathurā city, giving salvation to all.

शूरसेनाधिधः शूरस्ताथभूमेदिर्वीपति: ।

माधुराळ्यूरसेनांशे बुधुने विषयातृष्य ॥ 59 ॥

O King! There reigned in Mathurā city one Yādava king, a valiant warrior, named Śūrasena; and he enjoyed all the pleasures of Mathurā.

तत्रोप्यः कश्यपोशः शापाच्छ वक्षाम्य वै ।

वसुदेवो5तिविख्यातः शूर्येनसुतस्तदा ॥ 60 ॥

Under the curse of Varuna, Vasudeva took his birth as the son of the renowned Sūrasena, as the part incarnate of Kaśyapa.

वैश्यवृत्तिरतः सो5प्न्युते विलिति माधवः ।

उउसेनो बमुवाच केसस्तत्यामजो महान् ॥ 61 ॥

He took up the profession of a Vaiśya and engaged himself in agriculture. And on the death of his father, the prosperous and wealthy Ugrasena became the King of Mathurā. The powerful Karīsa was the son of Ugrasena.

अदितिवेदकी जाता देवकस्य सुता तदा ।

शापाई वक्णस्याथ कक्यपानुगता किल ॥ 62 ॥

On the other hand, the King Devaka had a daughter born to him, named Devakī, the part incarnate of Aditi. She under the the curse of Varuna, followed Kaśyapa.

दत्ता सा वायुर्देवाय देवकेन महात्मना ।

विद्यार्थे रचिते तत्र वागभूग्राने तथा ॥ 63 ॥

The high souled King Devaka performed the marriage ceremony of his daughter Devaki with Vasudeva.

कंस कंस महाभाग देवकीगर्भसभ्यवः ।

अर्धास्तु सुतः श्रीमांस्व हन्ता भयिष्यति ॥ 64 ॥

When this marriage ceremony was over, a voice was heard from Heaven, saying: O furtunate Karīsa! The eighth son of this Devakī will take away your life.

तखूला वचनं कंसो विमितोउभूम्हाबलः ।

देववाचं तु तां मत्वा सत्यां चित्तमावम सः ॥ 65 ॥

The powerful Karīsa, hearing that voice from Heaven, was surprised and took it to be true and became very anxious.

Book IV Chapter XX

किं करोमीति संचिन्य विमर्गमकरोत्त्व ।

नित्तैनां न मे मृत्युभवेद्रैव सत्म्य ॥ 6 6 ॥

उपायो नान्यथा चास्मिकार्य मृत्युभयावहे ।

इयं चितृष्वसा पूज्या कर्थ हन्मीचिन्तन्त्य ॥ 67 ॥

Kañsa began to argue in his mind. Once he thought “I would to-day destroy her; then my death won’t take place; for I can’t see any other way of escape from this difficulty; again he thought, “she is my sister, daughter of my paternal uncle and therefore fit to be worshipped; how can I kill her!”

पूर्वविंशरायामास मरणं मेउस्वहो स्सा ।

पापेनापि प्रकर्तेमा देहरूषा विष्णित्धा ॥ 68 ॥

Lastly, he came to the final conclusion, thus “she is the cause of my death, though she is my sister,

fit to be worshipped; to kill her will not lead me to sin; for it is enjoyed by the wise: Do even a sin to avert one's own death."

प्रायश्धितेन पापस्य शृत्रद्धर्षिति सर्वथा ।

प्राणास्त्रा प्रकर्तेमा बुधैरधेनसा तथा ॥ 6 9 ॥

The sins can be remedied always by penances. Therefore to save one's life, by committing even a sinful act, ought to be done by the wise.

विधिन्य मनसा कंसः खड्यामादाय सत्यतः ।

जग्राह तां वरारोहां केशेष्वाकृष्य पापकृत् ॥ ७ ॥

कोशालखद्यापुङ्क्य हृतकामो दुराशयः ।

पश्यतां सर्वलोकानां नवोबां तां चकर्ष है ॥ ७ ॥ ॥

The vicious Kañsha thus arguing, holding the scabbard in his hand, drew from it the sword and dragged and caught hold of the newly married handsome woman by her to kill her before the presence of the public.

हन्यमानां च तां दृष्ट्वा हाहाकारो महानभूत ।

वसुदेवानुगा वीरा युद्धायोशकामुर्भिकः ॥ ७ 72 ॥

A cry of universal consternation and distress arose on all sides, seeing Kārīsa thus ready to kill Devaki; then the warriors, under Vasudeva, at once raised their bows and arrows, ready to fight.

भुड़ मुडौत प्रोबुस्ते ते तदादुत्साहास: ।

कृपया मोचयामासुरैदककी देवमातम् ॥ 7 3 ॥

These wonderfully valorous warriors loudly

exclaimed to Kāṃsa, “Leave Devakī at once” “Leave Devakī at once” and then they were finally able out of their mercy to release the Devamātā Devakī, from the hold of the vicious Kāṃsa.

तद्धुद्रमाभवद्धोरं वीगाणां च परस्यम् ।

वसुदेवहायानां केसेन च महात्मानां ॥ 74 ॥

वर्तमाने तथा युद्धे दारूणे लोमहरणे ।

कंसं निवारयामासुरुंद्धा चे यदुस्तमाः ॥ 75 ॥

पितृब्बसेयं ते वीर पूजनीया च बालिणा ।

न हन्तव्य त्वया वीर विवाहात्सवर्माने ॥ 76 ॥

Deadly battles ensued then between the powerful Karīsa and those valorous on Vasudeva's side.

Seeing the exceedingly terrible battle, the old Yādavas asked Karīsa to desist from such a battle and advised him thus. This Devakī is your sister; you ought to pay her respect. Did you not consider even for a moment that she is as yet a girl. O Hero! You ought not to kill her at the time of this joyous marriage ceremony.

श्रीहत्या दुःसहा वीर कांतिनी पापकृतमा ।

भृतभाषितमाजेण न कर्तेल्या विज्ञानता ॥ 77 ॥

O Valiant Warrior! The murder of a woman is intolerable! Destroyer of fame, and most heinous crime! You should also consider that learned persons ought not to commit such dastardly acts as the murdering of females, depending simply on a voice from heaven, a very ordinary thing!

अन्तर्हिंते केनापि गरुणा तव चास्य वा ।

उद्दितिंत कुतो न स्याढ्रानबंकरी विषो ॥ 78 ॥

It may be that some of your Vasudeva's enemy has uttered that harmful word, hiding himself from your sight. No reason can be shewn contrary to this.

यशसते विधाताय वसुदेवगृहस्य च ।

अरिण रचिता वाणी गुणमायाविदा नृप ॥ 79 ॥

We are of opinion that to ruin your name and to destroy the house of Vasudeva, some magician, expert in black magic, your enemy has framed this voice from Heaven.

विशेषेय विरस्वं भृत्वा भूतभूयितभायया ।

यशोमूर्तविधातार्थमुपायस्वरिणा कृतः ॥ 80 ॥

Šrimuddevibhāgavatum

O king! You are a hero; why do you fear the words of a devil. We firmly believe, there is no doubt, that this is done by your malicious enemy to ruin your name.

विद्युबसा न हतल्या विवाहसमये पुनः ।

भवितच्यं महाराज भवेच्च कथमन्यथा ॥ 8 1 ॥

O king! What is destined to take place, will take place; no one can stand against it otherwise. Therefore, at this marriage festivity, you ought never to kill this your respected sister.

एवं तैर्वीध्यमानोउसी निवृत्तो नाभवटादा ।

तदा तं वसुदेवोउपि नीतिज्ञः प्रत्यभावत ॥ 82 ॥

कॉस सत्यं ब्रवीयघु सत्यायारं जगतयम् ।

दायामि देवकीपुगन्त्यज्ञांसव सर्वेश: ॥ 83 ॥

O King Janamejaya! Though made to understand thus by the old wise Yādavas, the king Karīsa did not desist from his purpose; Śrī Vasudeva, versed in morals, told him “Karīsa! These three worlds are established on Truth. I say on Truth that I will hand over to you all my sons, born of the womb of Devakī, no sooner they are born.

जातं जातं सुतं तुध्यं न दायायाम यदि प्रभो ।

कृभपोपाक तदा घोरे पतंतु मम पूर्वज्ञः ॥ 84 ॥

And if I do not deliver to you all those sons, no sooner they are born, then all my forefathers will fall down into the hell called Kumbhipāka.

शून्याध शवर्न सर्व पौराय वे पुरःस्थितः ।

कचूले त्विततः कंसं साधु साधु पुनः पुनः ॥ 85 ॥

न मिया भाषते क्वापि वसुदेवो महाना: ।

कैंग मुंघ महाभाग स्तीह्यापातकं तथा ॥ 86 ॥

The descendants of Puru, that were present there, hearing his truthful words, praised him repeatedly and told Karīsa “Vasudeva is a high minded personage; he is surely not to tell a lie. Therefore, O Thou, blessed one! Now leave Devakī and be free from committing the murder of a woman.

एवं प्रविधितः कंसो यदुकूर्दैहानमिभः ।

क्रोधे तथस्त्वा स्थितस्तत्र सत्यवाक्यामोदितः ।

O king! Thus made to understand by the aged high minded Yādavas, the king Karīsa accepted the truthful words of Vasudeva and abandoned his anger.

ततो दुनुभयो नेवुर्वादिजाणि च सत्यम्: ॥ 87 ॥

जयग्वदस्तु सर्वेभामुपवस्तत्र संसदि ॥

Then the Dundubhis and other sounding instruments were sounded; and their sounds filled the place; and all repeatedly uttered jai, jai.

प्रसाध कंसं प्रतिमोच्य देर्वकाँ

महायशा: श्रासुतस्तदानीम् ।

जगाम गेहे स्वजानानुवृतो

नवोदया वीतभयस्तरी ॥ 88 ॥

इति श्रीमद्दैभीभगवते महापुराणे वर्जृकंकन्धे विशोभयाय ॥ 20 ॥

Then the famous Vasudeva, the son of Sūrasena, thus pleased the king Karīsa and freed Devaki; and, surrounded by his relatives, he went quickly without any fear to his own house, accompanied by Devaki.

Here ends the Twentieth Chapter in the Four Book of

Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of

18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa, on Devaki's marriage.

Šrimuddevibhāgavatum

CHAPTER XXI

On the Killing of the Sons of Devaki

व्यास उवाच

अथ काते तु सम्पाठे देवकी चैदक्षिणी ।

गर्भ द्वारा विधिवसुदयेतेन सज्ञा ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus, in due course, Devaki, the goddess incarnate, being united according to rules with Vasudeva, became pregnant.

पूर्णर्ष द्वगभे मासे सुभुचे सुनभुत्तमम् ।

रूपावयवसम्पत्रे देवकी प्रथमं यदा ॥ 2 ॥

तदार3.6 वसुदेवस्ती सत्यावब्यानुगोपिति: ।

भात्विताच्च महाभागो देवकी देवमातरम् ॥ 3 ॥

वरोक समयं मे तं वं जानासि स्वसुतापणे ।

मोचिता तं महाभागो रणथवेन मया तदा ॥ 4 ॥

When full ten months were over, a good-looking

Book IV Chapter XXI

and beautiful child (male) was first born to Devakī. Then the good-natured Vasudeva remembered his promise, and also what is ordained by Heaven; and he spoke to Devakī, the part incarnate of Aditi “O fair-looking! You know that I saved your life at your marriage by swearing on oath to deliver all your fresh-born children to Karīsa. Now has come the time to hand over your child to Karīsa.”

इन पुरं सुकैगानते दाख्यामि भातुभूने ।

'खले कंसे विनाशार्थ दैवे कि व कार्त्विति ।'

विविचकर्माणं पाको दुर्जीय हकृततमविः ॥ 5 ॥

O good-haired woman! Now I will hand your this son to Karīsa. Know Karīsa is very cruel and wicked. I cannot say what step he will take urged on by Fate, to kill your child. O Sweet One! We have no hands in the matter. The effects of Karma are exceedingly puzzling. Ordinary persons cannot know them.

सर्वेधां कित जीवानां कालपाणानुवर्तीनान् ।

भोक्त्यं स्वकृतं कर्मं रुषं वा यदि वातुगम् ।

प्रात्प्रा सर्वैवैयाज जीवस्य विधिभिनिम्न ॥ 6 ॥

All persons are subsect to Time, the Destroyer, and enjoy the merits or demerits of their deeds. The effects of past Karma are fashioned by the Creator; knowing this, allow me to take away your child.

देवक्याच

स्वामिन्यूँ कृतं कर्म भोक्त्यं सर्वथा नृभि: ॥ 7 ॥

तीर्थेल्पोषिवर्दीवि कि न याति क्षयं ही तत ।

Devaki said: O Lord! Certainly men have to suffer fully the effects of their past Karmas. But can that not be upset by residing in holy places, practising penances and asceticism or by making generous gifts?

तिलितो धर्मशास्त्रे पायश्रितविधिनू प १ ८ १।

यूर्वार्तिज्ञानां पाणानां विनाणाय महामर्भिः ।

ब्रहाहा हेमहारी न सुपायो गृतल्पतः ॥ 9 ॥

द्वारणाद्धते चौणें गुद्धि याति यतस्ततः ।

The high minded Maharjis have fixed rules and penances for destroying the sins of past deeds;

twelve years' vow to observe penances can purify one from sine e. g., Brāhimicide, stealing gold, drinking or stealing the wife of one's preceptor and many others.

मन्यात्रिपियोंहिंट्र प्रयाश्रतं चियानतः ॥ १ ० ॥

तथा कृत्वा नर: पाणमुच्येत वा न वाउनच ।

विगतिच्चानते किं मुनवस्त्चर्विंगतः ॥ १ १ ॥

याज्ञल्क्यादय सर्वे प्रंभाश्रप्रवर्तकाः ।

O Sinless one! Will not any one be freed from their sinful effects, if they observe practices and penances as are ordained by Manu or other Munis? If you don't accept penances to be sufficiently purificatory, do you mean to say, then, that what the Maharsis, secers, Yajñavalkya and other promulgators of religious doctrines have uttered, they did so, as an act of dire falsehood and villainy?

भवित्यं भवत्ये यद्यं निशयः प्रभो ॥ 12 ॥

आयुर्वैद् स प्रियेये मन्वादास्तवाश्रस्ताः ।

O My husband! “What is in the womb of Fate will surely come to pass,” if this be taken as granted, then the whole Ayurveda (medicinal books) and Mantra vādas, the science and recitation of mantras or sacred formulae turn out utterly fruitless and false!

उद्यमन्तु वृथा सर्वमेवं चेईविनिर्मितम् ॥ 13 ॥

भवित्यं भवत्येव प्रवृत्तिस्तु निरर्थिका ।

अनिर्योमादिक व्यर्थ निवर्ते स्वर्गमाधानम् ॥ 14 ॥

यदा तत प्रमाणं हि वृथैव परिभावितम् ।

वितर्थे तत्प्रमाणे तु प्रभोच्छे: कृतो न हि ॥ 15 ॥

उद्यो च कृते सिंहिटुः प्रवर्धक्षेणे साध्यते ।

तत्सादप्र प्रकर्तेल्यः प्रपंचश्रितकल्पित्यः ॥ 16 ॥

यथायं वालकः क्षेमं प्राप्नोति मम पुक्रकः ।

If all the actions are under the control of Fate, then no effect can come out of any efforts; so all effort are reduced to no effect. If what is ordained by Heaven is to come to pass then what is the use of taking recourse to any action and Agniṣtoma sacrifices etc., that are declared to lead to Heavens. Judge! If Heaven or Fate you consider all-in-all, then the whole Vedas, the revelations from God's

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

mouth turn out false; if the Vedas be false, then there is no reason why the whole Dharma will not be destroyed.

Note: Fate is here denounced.

मिया यदि प्रकर्तेयं वचनं शुभमिच्छता ॥ 17 ॥

न तत्र दूषणं किंचित्यबटिनं मनोषिणः ।

Now when it is seen that effects do come out whenever any exertion is made, then you ought to think out carefully and find out some means to avert danger. Therefore do you judge and find out a good way of preserving the life of this new born baby.

The learned people say that to tell a lie is not a sin, if you can there by save a life, and have honest motive for the welfare of all.

Note: Here is a diplomatic statement!

སྭུམ་ཆེན་ཆེན་

निरुभाय महापभो सत्यमेतदुब्बीम ते ॥ १ १ १ ॥

Vasudeva said: O blessed one! I now tell you what is truth and the matters connected with truth.

उपम: खलु कतिथः फलं दैवबयानुगम् ।

त्रिविधानीह कर्माणि संसारोउर पुराविदः ॥ १९ ॥

प्रवदनीते जीवानां पुराणोधामायेषु च ।

सँखितानि च जीणानि प्राक्याति सुमध्यमे ॥ २० ॥

वर्तमानाति वामोक शिवधानीह देहिनाम् ।

Effort, application and manifestation of energy are certainly the duties of man; but their effects are all under the Great Destiny or Fate. The Pundits knowing the ancient lore say that there are three kinds of Karma mentioned in the Purāṇas and Āgamas: First, the Sañcita Karma (done in past births); the Prārabdha Karma, the Karma already done; and the Vartamāna Karma (Karma in hand).

शुभागुभानि कर्माणि बीजभूतानि यानि च ॥ 21 ॥

बहुजन्ममुच्यानि काले निर्घ्ति सर्वथा ।

The Karma, auspicious and inauspicious, done in many previous lives and preserved in seed forms, remains always inherent in a human soul. Urged on by this Karma, the Jivas quitting their previous bodies, enjoy Heaven or Hell as effects of these, their own acts.

पूर्वदेंहं परित्यज्ञ जीवः कर्मवशानुगः ॥ 22 ॥

खर्गा वा नरकं वार्थि प्राप्नोति स्वकृतेन वै ।

दिख्ये देहं च सम्याय यातनादेहमर्थजम् ॥ 23 ॥

According to their good or bad works, the Jivas acquire the higher happy body and enjoy various pleasures in the Heaven, or they take up very painful vicious bodies and suffer various pains in hell.

भूनक्ति विविधान्योगान्ययं वा नरकेशवा ।

भोगान्ते च यदोत्पत्ते: समयस्तस्य जायते ॥ 24 ॥

लिंगवद्रेल सहितं जायते जीवसंजित्मा ।

तैद्व सझितेभ्यछ कर्मभ्यः कर्मिभः पुनः ॥ 25 ॥

At the expiry of the above period in Heaven or Hell, when there comes the time of his assuming another body, the Jiva becomes conscious of the subtle body (Línga Deha) and takes his birth again. When the Liūga Deha comes into existence, the part of the Karma done in various previous births that are ripe and ready to yield their fruits, gets attached to the Jiva by God (or Destiny).

योजयवेय तं कालं कांगिण प्राकृतिन च ।

देहनानेन भाव्यानि शुभानि चाजुपानि च ॥ 26 ॥

Therefore the collective effect of Karma done in previous births always exists in a Jiva's body. O Fair-eyed One!—The effects of Prārabhda Karma, ripened and ready to yield their fruits must have to be experienced by a Jiva, whether happy or unhappy.

प्राख्यान च जीवेन भोक्त्यानि सुलोचने ।

प्रावश्छितेन नग्रयिति वर्तमानाति भामिनी ॥ 27 ॥

O beautiful young woman! Penances, performed according to rules, destroy the effects of Karmas that are in hand and are weak, (i.e. not yet accumulated strongly as to remain in seed forms.)

सच्छितानि तर्वेषागु यवार्थ विंहितेन च ।

प्रायक्रमंणां भोगासंख्यो नान्यथा भवेदे ॥ 28 ॥

तेनायं ते कुमारो बे देवः कंसाय सर्वथा ।

The Prārabdha Karma, those acts out of all the previous acts done in previous births are fully mature and ready to yield their fruits) cannot be

Book IV Chapter XXI

averted; their effects must have to be experienced and then they can die away; they cannot be expiated by penances or any other remedial measures. Therefore you most hand over unconditionally your new born babe unto the hands of Karisa.

न विद्यावचनं मेप्रति लोकर्निदाधिपूत्थितम् ॥ 29 ॥

अतिवेअप्रिस्तु संसारो धर्मसोर महात्मनाम् ।

दैवाधीनं हि सर्वेषां मरणं जनन्त तथा ॥ 30 ॥

तस्माछ्कोक न कत्वेयो दैहिनां हि तिरायंकः ।

O Goddess! I have never done any blameable action, nor have I told any lic. Therefore do you fulfill your truth and hand over your baby. O Devaki! Dharma is the only thing permanent and real in this fleeting world. Even the births and deaths of high souled persons are subject to the great Destiny. Therefore the Jivas ought not to be sorry when there is no help for it.

सत्यं व्यस्य गतं कान्ते व्यथा तस्यैव जीवितम् । ३ १ ॥

इह लोकों गतो यमात्यरलोकः कृतस्ततः ।

O dear one! What shall I say to you! Know this much that his life is spent in vain who is lost to Truth. O beautiful one! Whose this life is destroyed, what can he expect in the life to come!

आगो दौहि सुतं सुषु कंसाय प्रद्याम्यहम् ॥ ३ २ ॥

सत्यसंस्तगहाँवि शुभमयो भविष्यति ।

Therefore, O Goddess! Give me your baby and I will hand it over to Karīsa. If we can observe this truth, we will meet with ample rewards afterwards; there is no doubt in it.

कत्वील सुकृतं पुंभि: सुखे दुःखे सति प्रिय ॥ ३३ ॥

“सत्यसंक्षणाहिंहि शुभायेव भविष्यति ।”

Where there are pains and pleasures for the Jivas, there it is highly incumbent on us to do good and meritorious deeds. If we can act according to Truth, we will certainly get good fruits.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तवित कान्ते सा देवकी शोकसंयुता ।

द्वौ पुत्र प्रसूतं च वेभयाना मनस्विनी ॥ 34 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus addressed by Vasudeva, the

husband of Devaki, who was very much grieved and intelligent, gave over the newly born baby, her whole body trembling, to the hands of Vasudeva.

वसुचेदोर्पि धर्माना आदाय स्वसुतं शिशुम् ।

जगाम कंससदं मार्ग लोकेशिशुतः ॥ 35 ॥

The virtuous Vasudeva took that baby and went out to the Kamsa's palace. On the way, the people, seeing him thus, were very much astonished and began to praise him.

लोका कचुः

पर्यन्तु बसुदेवं घो लोका एवं मनस्विनम् ।

स्ववाक्यमनुक्छैव बालमादाय यात्यसी ॥ 36 ॥

मृत्यवे दातुकामोउढा सत्यवागनसूयक: ।

सफलं जीवितं चाख्य धार्मं पर्यवृते चाळूतम् ॥ 37 ॥

यः पुरं याति कंसाय दातुं कालात्मयेपि हि ।

The copla said: “O people! See how Vasudeva is sensible to keep his words! He is taking his son to hand over to Karīsa. This truthful and highsouled man, free from malice, is going to give up his son to the hands of Karīsa who is the Death Personified. See his wonderful patience; this man’s life is really high, noble and true.

व्यास उवाच

इति संन्यामानन्तु प्राप्तः कंसालयं वृप ॥ 38 ॥

ददावस्यैः कुमारं तं जातामात्रामानुम् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Vasudeva, thus praised, reached; at last the Kamsa's palace and handed over his newly-born son to Kāṃsa.

कंसोप्र विस्तयं प्राणो दूद्वा धीरं महात्मनः ॥ 39 ॥

गृहीता बालकं प्राह सिमन्तुर्पिंद्ये वचः ।

धान्यस्तं श्रुपुत्राठ जातः पुत्रसमर्पणात् ॥ 40 ॥

मम भूतुर्नं चार्यं वै निरा प्रोक्त्नु चादभः ।

न हृत्वो यथा कामं बालोयं यातु ले गृह्म ॥ 41 ॥

अधमन्तु प्रदात्यस्त्वया पुत्रो महामते ।

The King Kañsa, too, was very much astonished to see this wonderful patience of Vasudeva. Then he held aloft the child and laughed and said: "O son of Śārasena: You have been blessed to-day by giving me your son just now. But the voice from

Srimaddevibhagavatam

Heaven said that your eighth son will be the cause of my death; this your first son is not my cause of death. Therefore I will not kill this baby; you can take your baby back to your home.

O High-minded One! Let me have your eighth son brought here, when he will be born; I hope you will positively do it."

इत्युक्चा बसुदेवाय ददाव्या खल: शिशुम् ॥ 42 ॥

गच्छत्वयं गृहं बालः क्षेमं व्याहतवायूः ।

The cruel and wicked Karīsa returned the child and said: “Let this child go back safely to his home.”

तमादाय तत्न शीरितंगमा स्वगृह मुदा ॥ 43 ॥

कंसोप्री सचिवानाहं वृथा किं धातये शिशुम् ।

अध्यमादेवकीपुत्रामम मृत्युस्वहातः ॥ 44 ॥

अतः किं प्रवमं बालं द्वता पार्यं कौरामदम् ।

When the King Karisa said thus, Vasudeva, the son of Śūrasena gladly took his child back and came home. Then the King Karisa told his ministers: that the Heavenly voice told that the eighth son would be the cause of his death; and so there was no necessity to kill that child. There was no need to incur sin by killing the first child.

सभा साधिदिति तेयुक्वना संशिता मन्सिकसना:॥ 4 5 ॥

विसर्जितासु कंसेन जम्पुले स्वगृहान्यति ।

The ministers, hearing the king Kamsa's those words, began to praise him very much and exclaimed repeatedly "Well done" "Well done." They went away to their respective ho.nes, when ordered to do so by Kanisa.

गतेषु तेषु सम्पातो नारदो मुनिसत्तम: ॥ 4 6 ॥

अभ्युद्यानार्ययाद्वादि चकारोरमुस्तत्वा ।

पगच्छ कुशलं राजा ततागमनकारणम् ॥ 47 ॥

नारदस्ते तदोवाच सिमतपूर्विमेदे वचः ।

कंस कंस महाभाग गतोईं हेमपर्वतम् ॥ 48 ॥

तत्र बह्रादायो देवा मन्त्र चक्रः समाहिताः ।

देवक्यां बसुदेवस्य भावांयां सुरास्तमः ॥ 49 ॥

Now Nārada, the best of the Munis, arrived to Kaṇīsa. The king Kaṇīsa, the son of Ugrasena, stood up at once and offered him water to wash his

mouth and with green grass and rice worshipped him dejectively and enquired of his wife—He then asked the Muni about the cause of his untimely arrival there. The Maharṣi Nārada then smilingly and with sweet words repeatedly uttered “Kaṇisa,” “Kaṇisa” and then said, O blessed one! I went perchance to Sumeru Mountain. There Brahmā and other gods formed an assembly and were thus thinking out plans that Viṣṇu, the Supreme God, would take His birth in the womb of Devakī, the wife of Vasudeva to kill Kaṇisa.

वराधरै तव शिष्यूघ जनं चात्र कतिष्यति ।

तत्कथे न हतः पुत्रत्वया नीति विज्ञाना ॥ ५० ॥

Now I ask you, you are very expert as a politician; then why have you not killed the son of Vasudeva?

कंस उवाच

अष्टमं च हनिष्येड़ं मृत्युं मे देवभाषितम् ।

Karīsa said: "I will kill the eighth son according to the Heavenly Voice".

नात्र उवाच

न जानासि नृपश्रेष्ठ राजनीति शृभाशुभाम् ॥ ५ १ ॥

माघावर्न च देवानां न त्वे वैत्स वद्यामि किम् ।

Nārada said: O King! Now I understand that you do not understand any thing of politics, leading to auspicious or inauspicious results; especially when you are quite ignorant of the Māyā of the Devas, then what shall I say to you!

रिपुरलोप्रि गृहेणा नोरेश्वः शुभमिच्छता ॥ 52 ॥

सम्पेलनक्रियायां तु सर्वे ते ह्रहणाः स्मृतः ।

मूर्खल्वमरिसंलायाः कृतोर्धे जानता लवा ॥ 53 ॥

The truth is this: the warriors, looking after their own welfare, never overlook the weakest of their foes. What have you understood when the Heavenly Voice uttered: “the eighth son.” It means the children counted from the first and then finished upto eighth; it may mean first, second, third or upto eighth. Never forego your enemies: then why have you desisted in killing your enemy when you got

Book IV Chapter XXII

that enemy in your possession. Nothing is shewn of you in this act save dire foolishness, and ignorance.

इत्युक्वताउगु गतः श्रीमात्रायरे देवदर्जनः ।

गतेउव नारद केसः समाहूयाय बालकम् ।

पाणाणे पोथथामास सुरुखं प्राप च मन्त्यधीः ॥ ५४ ॥

इति शीमद्दौभाणवने महापुराणो चतुर्बिक्क्ये

एकानोबिंशोउथावः ॥ 21 ॥

Thus saying, the Maharṣī Nārada vanished quickly. Kaṃsa, of little understanding brought back the son of Vasudeva and killed him by dashing him against a stone and was relieved.

Note: This human body is a microcosm; the universe is the macrocosm. God resides in the centre and controls the two. In this human body also live the Devas and the Danavas. The left half of the body, the Idā side, is the seat of the Devas. The right half, the Pingālā side, is the seat of the Dānavas. In this body war is always going on between the Devas and Dānavas. Sometimes the Devas get victory; sometimes the Dānavas win. God is in the centre, the heart and controls the two.

Here ends the Twenty first Chapter of Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses composed by Veda Vyāsa, on the killing of the sons of Devakī.

Book IV Chapter XXII

CHAPTER XXII

On the Part Incarnations of the Several Devas

जनमेजय उवाच

किं कृतं पातकं तेन वालकेन पितामह ।

वञ्जातमाजो निहस्तलया तेने तुदातमना ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya asked: O grand father! What bad act did that child commit, that no sooner he was born than he was killed by Karīsa?

नारदोर्धि मुनिश्रेष्ठो ज्ञानवाभ्यांतलयः ।

कमेबेबिध्धि पार्थ कृतावन्बहावितमः ॥ २ ॥

Especially, Maharṣi Nārada is the the best amongst the Munis and foremost amongst the Brahmavids (Knowers of Brahma), always doing virtuous acts, and learned; why did he become the agent in this very sinful act?

कर्ता कार्यिता पापे तुल्यपापी स्मृती बुधीः ।

स कर्वं प्रेर्यायाम युनि: कर्म खलं तदा ॥ 3 ॥

Pundits declare that the doers and stimulators of any evil deed both are equally responsible; then how is it that Nārada, being the best of the Munis, instigated the wicked Kaṇisa to do this evil act!

संशयोर्धरं महान्पेत्र बृहि सर्वे सविसतम् ।

येन कर्मविषयकेन वालको तिथनं गतः ॥ ४ ॥

I am very much in doubt on this point. Kindly describe, in detail, the act that the child did as the result of which he had to meet with this fate of being killed.

ध्यास उवाच

नारदः कौतुकेश्री सर्वेत्रा कलहप्रियः ।

देवकावार्थीमागव सर्वेत्रच्छकार ह १। ५।।

Vyāsa said: the Devarṣi Nārada is always fond of seeing quarrels brought about amongst parties; he always likes thus to see the fun. Here specially to serve the gods' purpose he went to Kaṇīsa and incited him to such an act.

न चिष्याधायणे बुद्धिरुपैतस्य कदाचन ।

सत्यवक्ता सूरणा स कतवेय निततः शुचिः ॥ ६ ॥

Really he never intends to speak a lie; he is always truth speaking, pure hearted, and always ready to serve the gods.

एवं पद्ध बालकानेने जाता जाता निपातिताः ।

पद्ध नष्णा शापयोगेन सम्भय मरणं गताः ॥ ७ ॥

Thus the six sons were born to Devaki; and Karīsa, too, killed those six sons consecutively as they were born. These six sons named Sāgarbha, were killed just after their births, owing to their having been previously cursed.

श्रणु राजप्रवक्ष्यामि तेषां शापस्य काराणम् ।

स्वायंभुघैन्ते पुत्रा मौदोः घणमहावलः ॥ ८ ॥

O King! Hear why they were cursed before. In the reign of Sväyānbhūva Manu, were born to Urṇā, the wife of Maharṣi Marīci, the six powerful sons, all of a virtuous disposition.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

क्रणार्यों चैव भार्यायमासन्यर्मविचघणाः ।

बहाणं जहसुर्विध्य सुतां यथितमुचुतम् ॥ 9 ॥

शगाण तांस्तदा बहा दैत्ययोर्न विशलंच्यः ।

कालनैमिसुता जातासे चड्णभर्ग विशणरं ॥ 10 ॥

अवतारे परे ते तु हिरण्यक्रिपयोः सुता: ।

जातस्ते ज्ञानसंयुक्ताः पूर्वशापभयावृष्य ॥ 11 ॥

Once, on an occasion, the Prajāpati Brahmā, on seeing his daughter, became passionate, and was ready to hold sexual intercourse with her. At this, those six sons laughed at him. Brahmā cursed them saying “You all go quickly and take your births in the wombs of the asuras”. Therefore those six sons became the sons of Kālanemi in their first birth. At their second birth, they became the sons of Hiranyakasipu. This second time they had the fear of curse in their minds and therefore were born endowed with knowledge.

तमिमुक्समनि शनताछ तयडुकुः समाहिताः ।

तेनां प्रीते5पवद्बाद्धा घड्गाभाणां वरान्द्यै ॥ १ २ ॥

In this birth they became peaceful and, collecting all their energies, they began to practise austerities. Brahmā was pleased at this and asked the Sāgdarpha to take boons.

ब्रहोवाच

शला यूयं मया पूर्वं क्रोधयुक्तेन पुजकाः ।

तुऊसि यो महाभागा बुबैतु वाक्तिजं वरम् ॥ 13 ॥

Brahmā said: O my sons! I was, very angry to you before and cursed you; now I am very much pleased with you; ask boons from me that you all desire.

व्यास उवाच

ते तु शुत्वा वचस्त्यः ब्रह्णा: प्रीतमानसाः ।

ब्रहाणामबुद्बन्कामं सर्वे कार्यार्थतत्परा: ॥ १४ ॥

गर्भा ऊनुः

पितामहाशु तुढो5स देहि नो वाज्छतं वरम् ।

अवध्या देहतैः सर्वेमानवेश्ठ महोरैः ॥ १५ ॥

गव्यसिंस्द्वपतिभिवर्धो मापूरित्यामह ।

Vyāsa said: Hearing Brahmā's words, they were very glad and becoming very anxious to secure their

object of desire, said: O our grand sire! To-day thou art pleased unto us; now favour us with our desired boons. That we may be invulnerable to all the Devas, human beings, the big serpents the Gandharvas, and the Lord of Siddhas, (semi-divine beings supposed to be of great purity and holiness and said to be particularly characterised by eight supernatural faculties called Siddhis).

व्यास उवाच

तानुवाच तते ब्रहा सर्वेमेत्ब्रविष्यति ॥ १ १ ॥

गछन्तु वो महाप्यागाः सत्यमेव न संगयः ।

Vyāsa said: Brahmā told them “what you have asked, you would certainly get; O blessed ones! better go now; my words will be found to be literally true. No doubt in this.

दत्वा वरं तते बह्मा मुविताने तदा भवन् ॥ 17 ॥

हिरण्यकसिंगपुः: कृष्टस्तानुवाच कृष्टज्ञः ।

यस्माड्रिक्राय मां पुत्रास्तोषिते बै पितामहः ॥ 18 ॥

वरेण प्रार्थितो:त्यर्थं बलन्तवो नतो:भवन् ।

युषामिषहिंपितः स्नेहस्ततो युषामेल्याजाग्यहम् ॥ 19 ॥

यूयं रज्जेत् पाताले पडूभणां विश्रुता भृति

Granting them boons, Brahmā went away; they then became very glad. O best of Kurus! Hiranya-kāśipu began to think “my sons now have pleased the Grandsire Brahmā and are now regardless of me” and got very angry and said: You all are become very proud on account of receiving boons; and since you have ceased your good feelings towards me I also henceforth cut off my connection with you. Now better go to Pātāla; you will be known in this world as Sadgarbha.

पताले निद्राविष्टारितसहुत् बहुवल्सग्न् ॥ 2011

ततस्तु देवकीर्णर्षे वर्षे वर्षे पुनः पुनः ।

पिता च: कालेनेभेतुत तत्र कंको भविष्यति ॥ 21 ॥

स एव जातमाज्ञान् वो वधिष्यति सुदारुणः ।

At present you would be always involved in deep sleep and remain in Pātāla for many years; and when you will be born one after another in the womb of Devakī, then your father Kālanemi of previous birth will be born as Kanisa; and he would

Book IV Chapter XXII

be cruel hearted and surely kill you all, no sooner you be born.

व्यास उवाच

एवं शप्तस्तदा तेन नर्षें जातान्यून: पुनः ॥ 22 ॥

जंघान देवकीपुत्रान्यद्वारभांउछापनोदितः ।

Vyāsa said: Thus because they were cursed, they took their birth repeatedly and Karīsa, too, being urged on by the same curse, killed those sons of Devakī, the Śadgarbha, no sooner they were born.

शोशोः सदमास्तत्र देवकीभर्मन्सितः ॥ २३ ॥

विश्वसितश भयंोर्सती योगेन योगमायया ।

नतीशे गौहिणीपार्थ कृत्वा संकर्णी बलात् ॥ २४ ॥

पत्नतः पड्यो मापि लोकख्यालितं गतस्तत ।

In the seventh womb of Devakī, Ananta made his appearance. The featus in the womb was attracted by Yoga māyā and placed in the womb of Rohinī. But there was the rumour that there was miscarriage in the womb of Devakī in the fifth month; and this became known to the public.

कंसोरोपि ज्ञातलास्तर वेदकांगर्भपतान्न ॥ 25 ॥

मूंद प्राप स दुहात्मा शुत्वा वाता सुखावाहाम् ।

Kainsa came to know that there had been miscarriage. That wicked soul became exceedingly glad to hear this gladdening news.

अष्टमे देवकीर्णर्भ भगवान्साल्यतं पति: ॥ 26 ॥

उसास देवकायर्ध भागवततगाय च ।

And about this time the Bhagavān, the protector of the devotees appeared in the eighth womb of Devaki to serve the purpose of the gods and to relieve the load of the Earth.

राजोवाच

वसुदेव: कथयपांगः शेणांशस्थ तदारभवत् ॥ 27 ॥

हरेरांस्वथा प्रोक्तो भवता मुनिसनम ।

अन्य च वैउगा देवनां यत्र जातानस्तु तान्य वद ॥ 28 ॥

भारावतरणार्थे वै श्रितः प्रार्थन्यान्नय ।

The King said: O best of Munis! “You have described the part incarnations of (1) Kaśyapa as Vasudeva and (2) of Bhagavān Hari to relieve the burden of the Goddess Earth as prayed by Her; and (3) of Ananta Deva; but you have not described

the part incarnations of the other Devas. How the other Devas incarnated as their parts on this earth, kindly describe them now."

व्यास उवाच

सुराणामसुराणां च वे येउसा भृवि विश्रुतः ॥ 29 ॥

तानई संग्रवंश्यामि संबंधेपणं श्रणुष्य तान् ।

Vyāsa said: The part incarnations of Suras and Asuras on this earth, and their names I am now saying to you in brief; hear.

वसुरुदेवः कर्णवपोशे ठेवकी च तवास्टिति: ॥ 30 ॥

बलदेवस्वन्तंगो वर्तमानेयु तेषु च ।

योउसौ धर्मसुतः श्रीमात्रायण इति श्रुतः ॥ 31 ॥

तत्यांगो वासुदेवसु: विद्यामने युनी तदा ।

नरस्त्यानुजी यस्तु तत्यांगोउर्जन एव च ॥ 32 ॥

Vasudeva was the part incarnation of Káśyapa, Devakī was of Aditi, Baladeva, of Ananta; Vāsudeva Śri Krṣṇa, of Śrimān Nārāyaṇa; the son of Dharma existing even at that time in his physical body; Arjuna, of Nara, the younger brother of Nārāyaṇa.

युधिष्ठिरनु धर्मशील धार्थशेणी धामु इन्छुत ।

अधिश्यंशी ततः प्रोन्ती माठीयुगे महावृत्ति ॥ 33 ॥

Yudhiştihra was part incarnate of Dharma, Bhimasena, of Vāyu, the powerful twins of Mādri, Nakula and Sahadeva, of Asvinīkumāras?

सूर्याश: कर्ण आख्यातो धर्माशिवुः स्युतः ।

ग्रोगो बृह्मयनेरांशस्तमुत् शिवांगजः ॥ 34 ॥

The valiant hero Karna, born of Kunti, was part incarnate of the Sun, and the high minded Vidura, the knower of the Supreme Essence, was incarnate of Yama, the king Dharmarāja. Drona, the Ācārya of the Kurus and the Pāṇḍavas was the part incarnate of Bhaspati; and his son Asvāthamā was part incarnate of Rudra Deva.

सपूत्र: श्रोन्तुः प्रोक्तो गंगा भायां मता बुधे: ।

देवकन्तु समाख्यातो गन्यवंपतिरामे ॥ 35 ॥

Śantanu was the part incarnate of the Ocean; his wife, of the river Ganges in human form. It is stated in the Purāṇas that the king Devaka was part incarnate of the Lord of Gandharvas.

वसुभीष्मो विराटसु महज्ञा इति स्युतः ।

अर्षिष्य सुत्तो हौमो धृतगाषुः प्रकीर्तिनः ॥ ३६ ॥

महज्ञः कृपः प्रोफः: कृतवमां तथापर: ।

दुर्गंधनः कलेशंशः शकुनिं विद्ध द्वापरम् ॥ ३७ ॥

सोमपुत्र: सुवर्चिखः: सोमप्रकृतदाहतः ।

पावकांगीः पृष्टयुणः शिखडी राक्षसस्तथा ॥ ३८ ॥

सनत्कुमारस्थांगस्तु प्रयुन्तः परिक्षितिः ।

दूघदो वकणास्यांगे त्रीयदी च रासंगजा ॥ ३९ ॥

त्रीयदीतनया: पछ्र विश्वेश्वांगना: स्मृता ।

कुन्ति: सिद्धिद्वितिमरी मतिणाधिरारजना ॥ 40 ॥

कृष्णान्य-संस्था सर्वे देववारांगना: स्मृता ।

राजान्ध तथा सर्वे असुरा: शकनीदिता: ॥ 41 ॥

The Grand-father of the Kauravas, the foremost of the heroes, Bhīsma Deva was the incarnate of Vasu; Virāta, the Lord of Matsya was the part incarnate of Maruts; Dhṛtarāstra, of the Daitya Harīsa, the son of Arīsta Nemi; Krpa and Krta Varmā, of Maruts; Duryodhana, of Kali and Śakuni, of Dvāpara; Suvarcākhya Somapraru, of the son of the Moon; Dhṛṣtadyumna was part incarnate of Fire and Śikhandī of Rāksasa; Pradyumna was part incarnate of Sanatkumāra; the king Drupada was part incarnate of Varuna; Draupadī, of Lakṣmī; Draupadī's five sons, of Viśve-Devas; Kuntī was incarnate of Siddhi; Mādri, of Dhṛti; Gāndhāri, of Mati; the wives of Śri Kṛṣṇa were the heavenly public women; thus all the Devas came as their part incarnations, urged on by Indra.

हिरण्यकशिपोरेश: शिशुपाल उद्राहत: ।

वियवितर्जसाम्ब: शल्य: प्रब्राह द्रवपि ॥ 42 ॥

कालनैमित्रला कंसः केशी हवशिशास्त्रला ।

अग्रिष्टे बलिपुसन्त कुकृची गोकुले हतः ॥ 43 ॥

Amongst the Asuras, Śiśupāla was the incarnate of Hiranyakaśipu; Jarāsandha, of Vipracitti, Śalya, of Prahlāda; Karīsa, of Kālanemi and Keśī, of Haya Sīrā. The Asura named Arīṣṭa of the form of a cow that was killed by Krṣṇa was the son of Bali.

अनुहादो ध्युकेतुर्भगतानोय आक्सलः ।

लम्बः प्रणंवः संजातः खरोःसीधेनुको5भवत्। 44 ॥

Dhṛṣṭaketu was part incarnate of Anuhrādhā, Bhagadatta, of Bāskala; Pralamba, of Lamba; Dhenuka, of Khara.

वाराख्छ क्रिरोष्ठ धैल्पो परमदारुणी ।

मल्ली तावेव संजाती ख्याती चाण्यपुधिको ॥ 4 5 ॥

Cānūra and Muṣṭika, the two athletes, were part incarnates of Vārāha, and Kiśora, the two dreadful Daityas.

दितिपुजसत्धास्टिषो गजः कुकल्याधिधः ।

बलिपुजी बकी खाता बकस्तदनुः म्यूत: ॥ 46 ॥

यमो क्रतरला कामः क्रोधश्रवे चतुर्धकः ।

तेघामंगैस्तु संजातो इंगणपुत्रे महावलः ॥ 47 ॥

Kuvalaya, the elephant of Kañsha, was part incarnate of Arīṣṭa, the son of Diti. Vaki was the daughter of Bali, Vaka was her younger. The powerful son of Droṇa, Āsvatthāmā, though known as the part incarnate of Rudra, was really born of the four parts of Yama, Rudra, Cupidity and Anger.

अंगवतरणे पूर्वैतैयता राक्षसात्सा ।

जाता: सर्वे सुरांगास्ते ब्रितिभागतवताणे ॥ 48 ॥

पूतेषां कथितं राजनंशानतरणं नृप ।

सुराणां चासुराणां च पुराणेपु प्रकर्पितेन् ॥ 49 ॥

The Daityas and Rāksasas that were born to relieve the heavy burden of the Earth were all incarnates of Asuras. O king! I have thus narrated to you in order the incarnations of the Suras and Asuras, as they are stated duly in the Purāṇas.

यदा बढ़ायदो देवा: प्रार्थनार्थ हरि गतः ।

हरिणा स तदा दर्ती केशी खलु सितासिति ॥ 50 ॥

श्यामवर्णैततः कृष्ण: श्रोतः संकर्पणस्तथा ।

भारावतरणार्थ ती जातो देवांशमम्बी ॥ 51 ॥

When Brahma and the other Devas went to Visnu and prayed to Him, then Hari gave to Brahma one hair of a black colour and one hair of a white colour. The Bhagavān Sī Krṣna was born of that black hair and Sankarṣana Baladeva was born of the white hair. They were both the incarnations of Visnu.

Note. Here the black is the younger and the stronger; and they also represent the polarities. The Jivas are points of those hairs.

Book IV Chapter XXIII

<table><tr><td>अंशावतरणं चैतच्छूणोत भक्तिभावतः ।</td></tr><tr><td>सर्वेभपातिविमुक्तो मोते स्वजनैवृतः ॥ 52 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>इति श्रीमदैभागवते महापुराणो चतुर्बैकन्वे</td></tr><tr><td>द्वाविंशो5.धाया: ॥ 22 ॥</td></tr></table>

He who hears with devotion the story of these part incarnations, becomes freed of all sins and

passes away his time merrily, surrounded by his circle of friends; there is no doubt in this.

Thus ends the Twenty second Chapter in Fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa on the part

incarnations of the several Devas.

Book IV Chapter XXIII

CHAPTER XXIII

On the Birth of Śri Kṛṣṇa

व्यास उवाच

हतेयु घटसु घुपेयु देवकवा औग्रमेसिना ।

समये पत्ति गर्भे वचनारावरस्य च ॥ १ ॥

अधमस्य च गर्भस्य रक्षणार्थमतिन्रतः ।

प्रयत्नकारोज्ञा मरणं स्वं विवित्यन्त्र ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: The six sons of Devaki being thus killed by Kānsa and the seventh womb being miscarried, Kānsa began, when Devaki was pregnant for the eighth time, to think of the cause of his own death, as advised by Nārada and watched carefully, day and night, so that this time there would be born a son and there be no miscarriage.

समये देवकीर्णपं प्रवेशमकेतोद्धरि: ।

अंगेन वसुदेवे तु समागन्य यथाकमम् ॥ 3 ॥

On the other hand the Bhagavān Hari came down and rested on the body of Vasudeva as part incarnate and then entered into the womb of Devaki, in due order.

तदेवं योगाया च यगोदायां यधेष्छया ।

प्रवेशमकाहोद्वी देवकार्थर्विसद्धे ॥ 4 ॥

That very time the Goddess Yogamāyā, of Her own accord, entered into the womb of Yaśodā in order to help the workings of the gods.

गौहिष्यात्तयो रामो गोकुले समाजयत ।

यतः कंसमयोद्विज्ञान संस्थिता सा च कामिनी ॥ 5 ॥

Rohinī, the wife of Vasudeva was anxiously dwelling at that time through the fear of Kahīsa in the Nanda Gokula; Balarāma, the part incarnate of Ananta, took his birth there as Her son.

कारागते ततः कंसो देवकांी देवसंस्तुगम् ।

स्थाययामास रक्षार्थं सेवकान्समकल्यन्त ।। 6 ॥

Kainśa then imprisoned Devaki, who was being worshipped by gods, and engaged servants to take care of her.

वसुंदवस्तु काभिन्याः प्रेमतनुपिनवर्षिताः ।

पुत्रोर्याति स सझिन्त्य प्रविष्य: सह भार्यया ॥ 7 ॥

Vasudeva, too, entered into the prison with his wife Devakī, thinking of his issue and also being attracted by his attachment towards his wife.

देवकांगर्भागो विष्णुदेवकावार्थसिद्धये ।

संस्तुतोप्रसर्वेश्य व्यवर्तन यथाकम्प् ॥ 8 ॥

Visnu, here, the Deva of the Devas, to accomplish the purpose of the gods began to grow regularly in the womb of Devaki, being incessantly adored and praised by the gods.

सझाते द्वगम तत्र मातरेश शाखणे शुभे ।

प्रजापत्यवह्मंसृक्ते कृष्णपक्षेउर्धातिवि ॥ 9 ॥

कंसस्तु दानवास्वनुवाच भयविह्वतः ।

रक्षणीया भवाद्धि देककी गर्भिन्ति ॥ 10 ॥

When the tenth month was complete, on the eighth day of the dark fortnight, under the star Rohinī, Karīsa became much bewildered with fear and called on his Dānava followers and said “you must all carefully protect Devakī in the prison.”

अष्टयो देवकौर्गभर्ग: श्रूर्गर्भ प्रभविष्यति ।

स्थगीय: प्रयन्तेन मृत्युस्प: स बालकः ॥ 11 ॥

हलैनं बालकं दैव्या: सुखं स्वध्यामि मन्दिते ।

निर्वृतिवर्जिते दुःखे नाशिते चाह्मे सुते ॥ 12 ॥

The son born from this eighth womb of Devaki will turn out my dire enemy; therefore do you all very carefully protect that child, my death incarnate (so that the child may not be transferred anywhere

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

else). O Daityas! I will be able to sleep without any anxiety then, when I will be successful. Kill this eighth son of Devakī who has become the source of my constant worries and endless troubles."

खद्धुपासधातः सर्वे नित्रुत् धृतकामुंका: ।

निद्रातन्नविरीनीआ सर्वेन नितिनेक्षणाः ॥ १३ ॥

Equipped with swords, shafts and bow and darts do you all incessantly watch with eyes open on all sides, leaving off your sleep and drowsiness.

व्यास उवाच

ज्ञ्यादिश्यासुराणान् कंसो5तिभयविद्धूनः ।

मन्दिरं स्वं जगामाशु न लेभे दानवः सुखम् ॥ 14 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus ordering the Demons, the king Kāṃsa who had become worn out with this anxiety and was bewildered with fear, went quickly to his own palace room; but he could not find any trace of happiness.

निरीधे देवकी तत्र वसुवेदयुपाव च ।

कि कंतीम महाराज प्रसवावसरी मम ॥ १५ ॥

बह्वो रक्षपालाछ्छा निर्होत्थय चयानका: ।

नन्दपन्य मया सार्थ कृतोर्जित समयः पूग ॥ १६ ॥

प्रेगतिच्यस्तया पुत्री मन्दिते मम मानिति ।

पालियध्याम्यं तत्र तवातिमनसा किल ॥ १७ ॥

अपत्ये ते प्रदायामि कंसस्य प्रत्यायाय दे ।

किं कर्तैव्य प्रभो चाहा विषये सपुषपित्थते ॥ १ ८ ॥

On the other hand, Devakī, at dead of night, in that prison, told Vasudeva “O king! My birth pain has come; I see here many guards, terrific, who are watching and protecting us; what shall I do now? Yasōdā, the wife of Nanda, promised me before this “O respected one! Your heart is almost burnt up with the fire of grief; therefore do you send to my house your son; I will protect it with utmost care; and especially to incur Kamsa’s faith and belief, I will give you another son. O Lord! This is now a very hard moment; what are we to do now?

व्यय्यः सन्ततेः शीरे कयं कर्तुं क्षणो भयेः ।

दूरे तिहस्य कान्नाछ लज्जा मेउतिदुर्भायया ॥ १९ ॥

And again how are you to exchange the two sons? However let what may come, to pass; now the moment of child birth has come; I am possessed by a feeling of shame not liable to be overcome.

परावृष्य मुखं स्वामिन्यथा किं केभीयहम् ।

इत्युक्त्वा तं महाभागं देवकी देवसमतम् ॥ 20 ॥

बालकें सुचुवे तर निर्णीधे परमादुर्जन् ।

You better turn away your face; there is no other remedy here. Thus saying to that blessed Vasudeva, worshipped by the gods, Devakī, at dead of night, delivered a wonderful child.

तं द्रव्या विस्मयं प्राप देवकी बालकं शुभम् ॥ 21 ॥

पति प्राह महाभागा हर्षोर्भूललकेवरा ।

The blessed Devaki looking on that exceedingly beautiful child, was struck with wonder and told her husband, her whole body being filled with joy.

पश्य पुत्रपुत्रं कान्त दुर्लंभ हि त्व प्रभो ॥ 22 ॥

अर्धैने कानरूपोउसी घातविषयित भातुजः ।

O Lord! Look at the face of your new born child, a very rare thing to see such a face as this. Alas! The son of my paternal uncle, Karīsa, will kill my this new born child.

वसुदेवसधीयुक्तना तमादाय के सुतम् ॥ 23 ॥

अपश्चचानं तन्य सुतस्यादुतकर्णः ।

"Karīsa will do so." Saying this, Vasudeva took up that child in this arms and began to look amorously at the face of that child of wonderful deeds.

वीक्ष्य पुत्रमुखं शेगिरित्थतिषिधे बभूव ह ॥ 24 ॥

किं कारीमि कर्ण न स्यादुःख्यस्य कृते मम ।

Thus looking, Vasudeva thought “What can I do now so as to relieve me from my sorrows owing to the future destruction of this child.

एवं चिन्तातुरे तत्म्यान्यावाश्रासीरिणी ॥ 25 ॥

वसुदेवं समाभाध्य गगने विश्यास्यास ।

वसुदेव गृहीर्वेनं गोकुले नय सत्यरः ॥ 26 ॥

रक्षापालास्था सर्वे मया नित्यविमोहिताः ।

विवृतिने कृतान्यही कपालिन च श्रंखला: ॥ 27 ॥

मुक्स्वैनं नन्दग्रे ल्व योगमायां समानय ।

While Vasudeva was thus anxiously pondering

Book IV Chapter XXIII

over, the Heavenly Voice clearly said thus: "O Vasudeva! Quickly go to Gokula with this child. The keepers and guards I have made dead asleep by My Māyā. The eight very strong doors are now lying wide open. You better free yourself from your chains and take this child, keep it in the house of Nanda and bring Yoga Māyā from there and come back here."

शुवैवं वसुदेवस्तु तस्मिन्कारागृहे नतः ॥ 28 ॥

विवृतं द्वापमालोक्य बभूव तसला नृप ।

तमादाय ययावाणु द्वारपालैरलस्तिक्तः ॥ 29 ॥

कालिन्दीतटमासाठ पूरं दूद्वा सुनिश्छितम् ।

Thus hearing the Heavenly Voice, he cast his glance at the doors and found them all wide open. O King! Very quickly then he took the child and stepped out of the prison, quite unnoticed by the guards and watchmen. Going to the banks of the Yamunā he found there the daughter of Kalindi, flowing with great force and became anxious.

तदैव कदिद्धनी सा बभूवासु सरिद्धा ॥ 30 ॥

योगमायाप्रभावेण ततारानकन्दुर्भिः ।

गला तु गोकुलं शीरिंगनिशीये निजनै पथि ॥ 31 ॥

नन्द्वारे स्थितः पश्यविश्वर्ति पशुसंजिताम् ।

But the river Yamanūś instantaneously turned out to be easily fordable, just knee deep; then Vasudeva, guided by Yoga Māyā, crossed the Yamanūś and betaking to an unfrequented road arrived at Gokula at dead of night. There, at the doorway of the house of Nanda, he began to see the cows, buffaloes, the wealth and property of Nanda.

तदेव तत्र संजाता यशोदा गर्भसम्भवा ॥ 32 ॥

योगमायांशजा देवी विगुणा दिव्यरूपिणी ।

At that very moment, there was born of Yośodā, the Mahā Devi, the part of the Divine Yoga Māyā, the Incarnate of the three qualities.

जाता तां बालिकां दिव्यां गृहीता कार्यकंत्र ॥ 33 ॥

तनागपत ददौ देखी सैरंधीक्रपतिरंगी ।

Then the Mahādevi Yoga Māyā, assuming the appearance of a female artisan, taking that divine

child in her arms came there and handed her over to Vasudeva.

वसुदेव: सुर्त दत्ता सैरंधीकरणेंकते ॥ 34 ॥

तमादाय ययौ शीर्धे बालिकां मुदिताशयः ।

Vasudeva, too, delivered his child over to the lotus like hands of the Devi and, taking the female child instead, quickly returned with his heart full of joy.

कारागारे ततो गत्वा देवक्षया: शयने सुताम् ॥ 35 ॥

नि:क्षित्य संस्कित: पार्षे चिन्ताविषो घयातुः ।

He went unto the prison and kept that female child in the bed of Devakī and remained aside, fearful and anxious.

रोरो सुरस्वरं कन्या तदैवागतसंज्ञाकः ॥ 36 ॥

उत्तस्थु: सेवका रातः श्रुत्वा तद्विति निशि ।

तप्तुभूपर्ति नत्वा वरितात्से3तिथिह्नतः ॥ 37 ॥

देवव्याशु सुतो जातः शीघ्रभेटि महामते ।

But that child, the moment she was lulled to sleep, began to cry in a sonorous voice; the royal guards at once woke upon that cry, and being bewildered with fear, hurriedly went to their king and said “O King! Come quickly. Devaki has brought forth a child.”

तदाकर्ण वचसोशं शीधे भोजपतिर्यो ॥ 38 ॥

प्रावृतं द्वारमालोक्य वसुदेवमधावृकत ।

कंस उवाच

सुतामान्य देवक्या वसुदेव महामते ॥ 39 ॥

गृत्युमें चाहणो गर्भसंत निहन्य सिंगुं शृत्रिम ।

The King of the Bhojas, hearing their words, went there quickly and saw the doors open, called on Vasudeva “O blessed one! Let me have the eighth son of Devaki, my death incarnate; I will at once kill that enemy of mine, born as part incarnate of Hari.”

व्यास उवाच

शुत्वा कंसचवः शीरिभ्यजस्तिविज्ञोः ॥ 40 ॥

तामादाय सुना पाणी ददी चारु महदिव्व ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing Kamsa's words, Vasudeva handed over to him the female child crying and very much bewildered with fear.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

इश्रासे ४ दारिकां रागा विस्मयं परंम गतः ॥ 4 1 ॥

देवबाणी बृथा जाता नारदस्य च भारितम् ।

At the sight of the female child, the king was very much astonished and began to think that the Heavenly Voice and the Seer Nārada's words turned out false.

वसुदेवः कवे कुर्वादितून संकटे त्रिशतः ॥ 4 2 ॥

रक्षपालाक्षे मे सर्वे साधधाना न संशयः ।

How can Vasudeva be able to bring about, in this dreadful place, the unnatural act of turning male into a female. Especially my guards are carefully watching the place. There is no doubt in this.

कुतोउक कन्यका कामं वक्ष गतः स सुतः किला। 4 3 ॥

सन्देशोउन न कलंक्यः कालस्य विषया गति: ।

How has this female child come here? Where has that eighth born child gone? I ought not to doubt in this matter. For the ways of Time are mysterious!

ईत सच्छिन तां बालां गृहीत्वा पादयोः खलः ॥ 44 ॥

पोययामास पायाणो निरुर्ण: कुलपासेनः ।

सा कारमिःसृता बाला ययावाकाणप्रपहलम् ॥ 45 ॥

दिव्यक्षा तदा भूत्वा तमुवाच मुदुस्वना ।

किं मया हताया पाप जाततेले बलवाधिपुः ॥ 46 ॥

हन्धियाति दुरागाध्य: सर्वेथा त्वां नारधामम् ।

Thinking thus, the cruel King Karīsa caught hold of that female child by her legs and, raising her high up in the air, was going to strike her against a stone, when the female child slipped out of his hands and flying into the air assumed a divine appearance and gently spoke to Karīsa, thus: "What will you get by killing me? Your powerful enemy is already born on the earth. O vilest of men! Disgrace to your family! He, the Excellent Human being Who is very difficult to be worshiped will certainly kill you."

इत्युक्त्वा सा गता कन्या गगनं कामगा शिवा ॥ 47 ॥

कंसरतु विस्यायविधो गतो निजगूई तदा ।

आनाय्य दानावन्यर्विंनिदं चरणमव्यवीत् ॥ 48 ॥

बकधेनुकवत्सादी-न्कोधाविधो भयानुगः ।

गछन्तु दानवा: सर्वे मम कार्यांशिसिद्धे ॥ 49 ॥

जातमात्राशु हेत्वया बालका यय कुत्रयित् ।

Saying thus, the auspicious female child, able to go anywhere according to her will, disappeared. Katīsa astonished returned to his own home and, becoming impatient with fear and anger, called all the Dānavas Baka, Dhenuka, Vatsa and others, and addressed them thus: "O Dānavas. Go all of you to serve my purpose. Kill any where the child whom you see just born.

पूतनैभा ब्रजावरा बालकी नन्दगोकुलम् ॥ 50 ॥

जातमाजार्विनिर्भन्ती शिशुन्तम ममाज्ञा ।

Let Pitanā, expert in killing children go to-day to Nanda's Gokula. My order is this: Any child recently born they must kill.

घैनुको वासकः केशी प्रलोबे बक एव च ॥ 51 ॥

सर्वे तिष्ठुं तत्रैव मम कार्यविकारीय ।

Dhenuka, Vatsaka, Keśī, Pralamba, and Vaka etc., all should remain in Gokula to carry out my order."

इत्याज्याम्यसुरान्कसो ययी निजगृहं खलः ।

चित्तविष्ठोर्दीनात्मा चिन्तियैवं तं पुनः ॥ 52 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते मातुपुराणे वतुर्षकन्चे ज्योविंशोराधायः ।

The cruel king Kasma, thus ordering the Demons, went away to his own palace, and, thinking on this matter over and over again became, very much afflicted with fear and his mind got immensely depressed.

Thus ends the Twenty Third Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimadevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāpam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa,

on the birth of Sat Vrana

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXIV

On the Stealing Away of Pradyumna

व्यास उवाच

प्रातनंद्रष्टे जातः पुत्रजन्महोस्वतः ।

किंबदंत्यथ कंसेन श्रुता चारामुखादपि ॥ १ ॥

ज्ञानाति बसुदेवस्य दारास्तत्र बसन्ति हि ।

पणवो दासवर्गश्र सर्वे ते नन्दगोकुले ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: On the other hand, there, at the house

Book IV Chapter XXIV

of Nanda, early in the next morning, commenced the grand birth day festivity. Karīsa came to know, afterwards, by his spies as well as by general rumour, that at Gokula, in the house of Nanda, a very joyous festival on a grand scale was being performed; he also know before hand that the other wives of Vasudeva, his animals and his servants were all staying at Nanda's residence in Gokula.

तेन शक्रासमाविशेषो गोकुलं प्रति भारत ।

नारेदनापि तसर्व कथितं काणं पुरा ॥ ३ ॥

गोकुले चे च नन्द्यास्तवल्यक्ष सुगीराजा: ।

देवकीकायुदेवाथा: सर्वे ते शत्रकः किल ॥ ४ ॥

O Bhārata! Thus all these gave reasons to Karīsa to suspect the place Gokula. Especially Nārada told him before that the residents, the cowherds at Gokula, Nanda and others, their wives, Devakī and Vasudeva were all Devas incarnate; and consequently they were his enemies.

इति नारदावक्येन बोधितो3सी कुलाधमः ।

जातः कोपमना राजकंकः परमपाकृत् ॥ 5 ॥

पूतना निहता तत्र कृष्णोनामिततेजसा ।

बको वत्सासुरस्थापि धैनुकक्ष महावलः ॥ 6 ॥

प्रलोबे नित्रतस्तेन तथा गोर्धधनीं धृत: ।

श्वैतिकामं कंसस्तु मेने मरणामात्नः ॥ 7 ॥

Thus being brought to more confidence by Nārada's words, that vicious Kaṇisa, the disgrace to his family, was very angry and sent there his demons Pūtanā, Baka, Vatsa, the great Asura, the powerful Dhenuka, Pralamba. They were all killed by Krṣna, of unsurpassable prowess. Śrī Krṣna held aloft also the hillock Gobhārdhāna (to protect the cow herds and cows etc.). Hearing all these, Kaṇisa became certain also of his own death.

तथा विनिरुतः केशी ज्ञाना कंसोरितुर्मानः ।

धनुर्गामियोग्य तात्यानेतु प्रजकमे ॥ ८ ॥ ॥

Lastly when the evil minded Karīsa heard that the Daitya Keśī was also slain, then he made arrangements for a sacrifice, known as Dhanuryajñā; and under this pretext wanted to bring over there at Mathurā the two brothers Krṣṇa and Balarāma.

अकूरं प्रेययामास कूरः पायमतितस्तदा ।

आनेतुं रामकृष्णो च व्यायामिनतिकमी ॥ 9 ॥

The evil minded Karīsa to effects the death of those two, Rāma and Krṣṇa, of unsurpassable prowess, sent Akrūra to Gokula to bring them over to Mathurā.

रथामोर्य योगाले गोकुलात्रादिनीसृत: ।

आगातो मदुयायां तु कंसाड्रेण स्थितः किन्त ॥ १ ० ॥

Akrūra, the son of Gāndinī, under the orders of Karīsa, went to Gokula and brought the two boys on a chariot to Mathurā.

तावागाल्य तदा तत धनुपर्गे च चकतुः ।

हत्वास्त्र वर्कक कामं गर्जा चाण्युधिकम् ॥ १ १ ॥

गलं च तोलग्लं चैव निवजायन हरित्वतः ।

जघान कंमं देदेशनः केशेघाकृष्य तीलाया ॥ १ १ २ ॥

On arriving at Mathurā, Rāma and Krṣṇa first broke the bow; killed Rajaka, the elephant Kuvalaya, Cāṇūra, Muṣṭika, Śala, Tośala and other athletes and warriors. Last of all, Hari, the Lord of the Devas, holding Kānsa by his hair, killed him with utmost ease.

यितरी मोचयित्वार्थ गतनुःखी चकार है ।

उप्रसोनय राज्यं तद्वादारिनिषुदूनः ॥ 13 ॥

The enemy-destroyer Kṛṣṇa removed the sorrows of his father and mother and released them from their prisons and gave over the kingdom of Mathurā to Ugrasena (the father of Kāṃsa.)

वसुदेवस्वीर्यत्र मौड़ीबन्यप्रवृकम् ।

कारयामास विधिध्वद् ततबच्छं महामना: ॥ 14 ॥

उपनीर्ति तदा ती तु गतौ सान्दीपनातयम् ।

विद्या: सर्वा: समध्यस्य मधुतयागती पुनः ॥ 15 ॥

The high minded Vasudeva, then, with the triple girdle made of Muñja grass, performed the Upanayana ceremonies (wearing the sacred thread round the body) of Rāma and Krṣna and made them accept the vow of Brahmacarya. They then departed to the hermitage of the holy Muni Sāndīpana to acquire knowledge) there, they returned quickly to Mathurā.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

जातौ द्वारणवर्षीयी कृतविद्यौ महावली ।

मयुरायां स्थिती वीरी सुतावानकडुतुघे: ॥ १ ६ ॥

The two sons of Anakadundubhi stayed there and on attaining their twelfth year, became proficient in all the branches of learning and became very powerful.

माफायसु जरायंधो जागात्यवघुःखितः ।

कृत्वा सै-न्यसामाजं स मवुगामगातः पुरीम् ॥ 17 ॥

That time Jārasāndha, being grieved at the killing of his son-in-law Karīsa, collected a strong and numerous army and marched to Mathurā.

स सप्तदशबारं तु कृष्णेन कृतत्विद्वान ।

जितः संगाममासाथ मधुयुर्गी निवासिना ॥ 18 ॥

Seventeen times Jāraśandha, the king of Magadha, attacked Mathurā and seventeen times he was defeated by ingenuity of that highly intelligent Śri Krṣna, who was of firm resolve and was then residing in Mathurā.

पश्चाच्य प्रेरिततेन स कालयवनाधिधः ।

सर्वेलैच्छाधिपः शुरो यदावानां भयंकरः ॥ १९ ॥

Lastly, Jarāsandha sent the Kalayavana (Black Yavana) to invade Mathurā. These Yavanas were brave and the lords of all Mlechas (untouchables) and extremely terrific to the Yādavas.

Note: Kalayavana—A king of Yavanas and enemy of Krṣna and an invincible foe of the Yādavas. Krṣna finding it impossible to vanquish him in the field of battle, cunningly decoyed him to the cave where Mucukunda was sleeping who burnt him down.

शुत्वा यवनमायानं कृष्ण: सर्वान्यवृत्तमान् ।

आनायच च तथा राममुबाच मधुमुदनः ॥ 20 ॥

भयं नोउस मसुचरं जासंधामकावलात् ।

किं कत्थं महाभाग यवन: समुपैति है ॥ 21 ॥

प्राणाजण प्रक्रतंत्य त्वक्का गेहं बलं धनम् ।

Yavana means a Greek, an Ionian; then any foreigner, or barbarian (the word is applied at present to a Mohammadan or a European also).

Hearing that Kāla Yavana was coming to attack the Yādavas, Krṣna the destroyer of Madhu, called all the Yādavas and Baladeva and addressed them thus: "O blessed ones! Now a cause of great terror

has appeared amongst us; Kāla Yavana is being sent by our powerful enemy Jarāsandha to attack Mathurā. Now what to do? It is better to save one's life by leaving aside all our homes, wealth and army.

सुखेन स्वीयते यत्र से दूरः: खतुं पैतृकः ॥ 22 ॥

सदोईगकारः काम किं ककौल्यं कुतलोचितम् ।

You should all know that is the place of our father and forefathers where we can safely and happily dwell; where there is a constant source of anxiety and uneasiness that, though the place of our fathers and forefathers, ought to be avoided; never ought any one to dwell there.

गैलसागरसाहित्रये स्थातयं सुखामिच्छता ॥ 23 ॥

यत्र वैरिभयं न स्वात्थतन्तं तय पिड़तैः ।

If you want to dwell at ease and comfort, you ought to dwell in that country or place which is adjacent to a sea or a mountain; where there is no fear from an enemy, the sages will always remain there.

गेशपत्थयं समाधित्य हौरे: स्वपिति सागरे ॥ 24 ॥

तबैय च भयान्द्रोतः कैतगते त्रिपुरादनः ।

See! The Bhagavān Hari, being afraid, as it were, of his enemy has taken refuge on the body of the thousand headed Śeṣa serpent as his sleeping place and is sleeping at ease and comfort on the ocean. It seems likely that the enemy of Tripura, the great Śiva is also dwelling on the Kailśa mountain.

तस्मात्रानेय स्वात्यमस्माभिः शुज्ञातिपि: ॥ 25 ॥

हारवलां गाथिमयाः सहिताः सर्वे एवे ।

We, too, are being constantly worried by our enemies here; therefore we ought not to live here any longer. We should all go to Dvārkā city with our friends, relatives and wealth.

कथिता गऊरेनाथ रथ्या द्वारवती पुरी ॥ 26 ॥

रैवातचलमात्रिये सिंयुकुले मनोहरा ।

Garuda, the king of the birds, has given us the detailed information of the city Dvārkā. That beautiful city is situated on the sea shore in the vicinity of the Raivataka mountain.

Book IV Chapter XXIV

यास उवाच

तच्छुला वचनं तध्यं सर्वे यादवपुज्ञाः ॥ २७ ॥

गानवा मति चकुः सकुदुवा: सवाहना: ।

Vyāsa said: The Yādava chiefs, hearing Śrī Krṣṇa's utterances fraught with their welfare, were ready to depart to that place Dvārāk, attended by their friends, relatives, and appurtenances.

शकटानि तशोटुषा वायवश महिषासना ॥ 28 ॥

धनपूर्णानि कृत्वा ते निर्युर्नगराढ़ः ।

They then collected their camels, mares, and buffaloes and filled their conveyances with wealth, gems and precious stones and marched out of their place.

रामकृष्णी पुरस्कृत्य सर्वे ते सपरिष्छदा: ॥ 29 ॥

उगे कृता प्रजा: सर्वीक्षितु: सर्वे यदूतमा: ।

Rāma and Krṣṇa went in front; the Yādavas and other subjects then marched in groups (several parties).

क्रतिविधिवर्षे: प्रापु: पुरी द्वारवर्ती किल ॥ ३० ॥

श्रलिधिभ: कारयामासजीणोंद्वारमाधाव: ।

Marching some days, they all reached Dvāravatī. Then the portions of the city that were dilapidated or destroyed, Śrī Krṣna had them repaired by engineers, artisans and craftsmen.

संस्थाय याद्वासंत्र तावतेि बलकेशो। ॥ ३। ॥

तसा मवुगामेल संस्थिति निर्जनां पुरीम् ।

Placing the Yādavas there, Keśava and Baladeva quickly returned to Mathurā and began to stay in that desolated city.

तदा तत्रैव सम्पाटो बलावान् ववनाधिधः ॥ 32 ॥

ज्ञालैन्मागतं कृष्णो निर्वंत्री नगराड़ीः ।

The extremely powerful king of the Yavanas arrived then at Mathurā. Śrī Krṣṇa knowing that the Yavana chief had come there, went out of the city.

पदातिरोधे तसायभुवतवन्य जनादिनः ॥ 33 ॥

पीताव्यधरः श्रीमान्रहस्मधूसून: ।

The Bhagavān Madhusūdana, the destroyer of the boastings of Asuras and other people, dressed in yellow robes, appeared on foot before the Kālayavana with smile on his lips.

तं दृष्ट्वा पुरतो यान्तं कृष्णं कमललोचनम् ॥ 34 ॥

यवनोदपि यदाती: सन्युक्षतोउगुतः खलः ।

Seeing the lotus eyed Krṣṇa before him, the treacherous Lord of the Varanas, pursued him on foot to catch hold of him.

प्रसुनी यत्र राजार्थमैयुकुन्दो महावलः ॥ 35 ॥

प्रयपी भभावांस्तर सकालयवनो हरि: ।

Where the powerful Rājarsī Mucukunda was sleeping soundly, the Bhagavān Hari led Kālayavana there.

तत्रैवांतदैय विद्यामूघुकुन्दं सभीज्य च ॥ 36 ॥

तत्रैव यवनः प्राप्तः सुपन्धृतमपश्यत् ।

There Śrī Krṣṇa, saw Mucukunda and vanished away at once; the king of the Yavanas on arriving there found the Rājarsī (the royal sage) there in deep sleep.

मत्वा तं वासुदेवं स पाटताताडवयूम् ॥ 37 ॥

प्रबुद्धः क्रोयत्ताक्षसन्तं ददाह महावलः ।

The wicked Yavana mistaking Mucukunda for Śrī Krṣṇa, gave him a good kick. The powerful king Mucukunda got up and was very angry; his eyes became red and reduced that vicious Yavana instantly into ashes.

तं दर्शया मुचुकुन्दो ४६ दर्शगं कामलेक्षणम् ॥ ३८ ॥

बासुदेवं सुदेवेशं प्रणाय्य प्रश्रित्यो वनम् ।

When Mucukunda burnt the Yavana, he saw the lotus-eyed Kṛṣṇa; he bowed down to that Supreme Deva, Vāsudeva, and went to forest.

जगाम द्वारकां कृष्णो बलदेवसपित्तः ॥ ३९ ॥

उप्रसेनं नृप कृत्वा विज्ञात्र यवारुचित् ।

Śrī Kṛṣṇa then went back to the city Dvārkā with Rāma and made Ugrasena there the king and began to enjoy at his will.

अहरुद्रक्रमणीं कामं शिरुपालत्यव्यवर्त् ॥ 4० ॥

राक्षसेन विवाहेन चके दारविधि इति: ।

At the marriage ceremony of Śisūpāla, at the palace of the king of Vidarbha, Janārdana Viṣṇu carried away by force Rukmini, the bride elect from the Swayamvara assembly (where the husband is self elected by the bride herself) and afterwards

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

married her according to the rule called Rāksasa Vidhi (one of the eight forms of marriage in Hindu Law in which a girl is forcibly seized and carried away after the defeat or destruction of her relatives in battle.)

ततो जांबबती सत्यां मित्रविद्धं च भामिनीम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

कालिन्दीलक्षणं भत्रीवान्नमिविंगुणम् ।

पृथक्यथक्समानीयाण्युपयेने जनाईनः ॥ 42 ॥

अष्टावेक महीपाल पल्यः परमर्शोभनाः ।

"Afterwards He brought also Jambavati, Satyabhāmā, Mitravindā, Kālindī, Laksmanā, Bhadrā, and auspicious Nāgnajitī (the daughter of the king Nagnajit) on various occasions and married them. O Lord of the earth! These eight women were the best and most beautiful of Śrī Krṣna's wives.

प्रभृत कविषणी पूत्र प्रवृानं चाक्रदर्शनम् ॥ 43 ॥

जातकर्मादिकं तस्य चकार मधुसूदनः ।

Rukmini first gave birth to the beautiful child Pradyumna and Śrī Krṣna performed the religious ceremony at the birth of his child.

इतोउसी सूतिकोगोहाच्छेरण बतौवसा ॥ 44 ॥

नीतश्व स्वपुरी बालो मायावत्से समर्पितः ।

Then the powerful Dānava named Śambara stole away the little baby from the lying-in-chamber and carried him to his own city and made him over under the charge of Māyāvatī.

वायुरेवो हतं वृष्टा पुरं शोकसम्पित्तः ॥ 4 5 ॥

जगाम शरणं देर्वी भक्तियुक्तेन चेतसा ।

Coming to know that His son had been stolen away, Śrī Krṣna became very much overpowered with sorrow and took the shelter of the Supreme Goddess, the Devi, with a heart full of devotion.

युस्मुराव्यो दैत्य लीलयैव यया हताः ॥ 46 ॥

ततोउसी योगमायायाकार परमां सुतितम् ।

वचोपि: परमेदोररक्षे: सत्वपै: शुषै: ॥ 47 ॥

Śrī Krṣna then began, to chant, in sweet auspicious tone, hymns in alphabet, conveying the highest meanings, in adoration of the Yoga Māyā, Who slew Vrtrāsura and other Daityas with ease and alacrity.

श्रीकृषा उवाच

मात्मंयातितस्या परितोषिता तयं

प्रारजन्मिन प्रमुभानिद्धिरर्धितात्रसि ॥

धर्मान्जन वद्रतीवराखण्डमध्ये किं

विस्मृती जननि ते त्वयि भक्तिभावः ॥ 48 ॥

“O Mother! I, in my former birth as the son of Dharma, appeased You by my ascetic practices in the hermitage of Badari and worshipped You with various offerings; O Mother! Have you now forgotten all my devotion to You?

सुतीगृहादयहूत: किमु बालको मे

केनापि शुद्यनसाध्यय कौतुकाढा ।

मानापहारकरणाय ममाछ नूनं

लज्जा तताया खलु भक्तजनस्य वुता ॥ 49 ॥

O Mother! Has any evil minded enemy stolen away my son from the lying-in chamber? Or have You Yourself done this to make a fun and see the amusement? It seems that some one of my enemies has done so to insult me; however, You, O Mother! ought not to put your devotee under this shameful condition.

दुर्गों महानिततरां नगरी सुगुपता ततापि

मेउस्ति सदां किल मध्यभागे ।

अन्तःपुरे च चित्रितं ननु सुतिंगेहं

बालो हतः खलु तथापि मयैव दोषात् ॥ 50 ॥

O Mother! This Dvārakā city is well guarded; a very strong fort is built in its middle and my place is in the midst of that; and the lying-in-chamber is again in the middle; I therefore must say that it is due to my bad luck that the child is stolen away!

नाहं गतः परपुरं न च याद्वाक्ष

स्थावती च नगरी किल वीरवर्षे: ।

माया तर्वे वननि प्रकटप्रभाव मे

बालकः परिक्तः कुहकेन केन ॥ 51 ॥

O Mother! I did not go to the house of my enemy; the Yādavas also did not go there; this city is guarded by valiant soldiers; then how is it, under what charm, the baby has been stolen? O Mother! Now I come to know that it is due to Your Māyā; such things are common due to Your Māyā in the three worlds.

Book IV Chapter XXIV

नो वेच्छई जननि ते चरितं सुगुपं

को वेद मन्दमतिरल्यविदेव देही ।

ब्वासी गतो मम थटैनं च बीक्षितो वा

हर्तार्थिके जवनिका तक कलियेतम् ॥ 52 ॥

O Mother! When I am ignorant of your deepest mysteries, how can there exist any one among the little minded Jivas that can know your doings? My watchmen could not see anything, where my child was taken away and who has stolen it. O Mother! I come to the conclusion that it is hidden behind the screen of Your Māyā.

चित्रं न तेउत्र पुरतो मम मातुगर्भो

नीतल्वायोर्धसमये किल मायायोर्सो ।

वं रोष्टिणी हलधरं सुचुवे प्रसिद्धं

दूरे स्थित पतिरपरा सिथूनं विनारपि ॥ 53 ॥

O Mother! It is not strange with You; to the chaste woman, Rohinī Devi, though situated at a great distance and not connected with any male persons, You, in the fifth month, moved away the son to my knowledge from the womb of my mother; and thus Baladeva was born to Rohinī. This is now known to all.

सृष्टि क्रोषि जगतामनुपालनं च

नारां नवैव पुरनव्यिनरां गुणीरन्तम् ।

को बेते टेउम्ब चरितं दुरितांतकारि

प्रायेण सर्वमिखिल विहितं त्वयैतत् ॥ 54 ॥

Mother! You are incessantly creating, preserving, and destroying this whole universe by the mixture of the three qualities. Who can know Your sin-destroying doings? Mother! There is no need of dwelling at length. Suffice it to say that You, no doubt, are doing all that is being done in this whole universe.

उत्पादा युज्ञननप्रभवं प्रमोदं दत्त्वा

पुर्नविर्हर्ज किल दुःखभागम् ।

त्वं क्रीडेस मुतलितैः खतु लैविद्वारेनीं

चेकक्षे यम् सुतापितरितवैंथा स्यात् ॥ 55॥

You first create the joy at the birth of a child; again You load us with heavy burden of sorrows due to the separation from that child; thus you are

always sporting; otherwise how my joy at the birth of my child would thus be rendered quite useless?

माताउस्य रोहिति भुर्ण कुरीव बाला

दुःखं तनोति मम सविधिपा सदैव ।

कई न वैस्ति ललितेउप्रमितभावा

मातस्वमेव शरणं भवपीढितानाम् ॥ 56 ॥

The mother of that child is always weeping like an ewe, straying from a flock; she is giving vent to her sorrows always to me; O Kind-hearted! Being thus endowed with illimitable prowess and understanding, do You not know my troubles! O Mother! You are the only source of consolation to one, suffering from the sorrows of this world. There is no doubt in this.

सीमा मुख्यस्य सुतजन्म तदीयनाणे

दुःखस्य देवि भवने विद्धया वदन्ति ।

तल्कि क्तोमि जननि प्रथमे प्रनटे पुरे

मगाठ इदरं स्मूटनाति मानः ॥ 57 ॥

O Goddess! The wise seers say that the birth of a child in any house is the highest bliss there, and the death of a child is the greatest sorrow that can befall to any house. Therefore, O Moher! What shall I do in this? What shall I say more than that my heart is going to burst, due to the disappearance of my child.

यजं कांतीय तव तुर्थिकां ततं वा

दैवं च पूजनमवाशित्वनुःखहा त्वम् ।

मातः सुतोउत्र यदि जीवित तर्गयाणु

त्वं वै क्षमा सकलोगोकविनाशना ॥ 58 ॥

O Mother! I will perform all the necessary sacrifices, take up vows, perform all sorts of worship to the entire satisfaction of the Great Fate (Ordainer of things); You be pleased to remove my sorrow. O Mother! If my son be alive, kindly shew him once to me. Mother! There is no other than You Who is fully capable to destroy this my pain and sorrow, raging in my heart.

ध्यास उवाच

एवं सुत्ता तादा देवी कृष्णोनाकित्यकर्मणा ।

प्रत्यक्षदर्शना भूत्वा तमुवाच जगदारुम् ॥ 59 ॥

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

Vyāsa said: He who brings into practice, things that are considered impracticable for the Devas and removes the load of the Goddess Earth with ease and alacrity, the same Saviour of world, Śri Krṣṇa thus chanted hymns in adoration of the Great Goddess. The Devī then became visible to him and said.

श्रीव्यवाच

शोकं मा कुरु देवेश शापोर्धं ते पुतानः ।

तस्य योगेन पुत्रसे शंबरेण हृती बतात् ॥ 6० ॥

O Lord of the Devas! Do not any longer be sorrowful and miserable; there had been a curse on you before; and, for that reason, the Daitya Śambara has stolen away your son by his demoniac magic.

अतन्ते योड्गो वर्षे हृत्वा तं शंबरं बतात् ।

आगमिष्यिति पुत्रसे मनुसाठार संशय: ॥ 6 1 ॥

Therefore, when your son will grow the sixteen

years age, then he will by My Grace, kill the Daitya perforce and will return to you. There is no doubt in this.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्त्वास्तर्धैं देवी चाक्षिका चण्डविकमा ।

भगवानपि पुरस्य श्रौकं त्यकत्वाभवत्सुशी ॥ 6 2 ॥

इति श्रीद्वीभागवते महापुराणो चतुर्धैकन्ये

चतुर्विंशोधावः ॥ 24 ॥

O king! Thus saying these words full of hope and confidence, the Great Goddess Candikā, of formidable prowess, disappeared. Krṣna too, quitted his sorrows, due to the bereavement of his child, and began to spend his time in happiness and peace.

Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter of the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyasa on the stealing away of Pradyumna.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXV

On the Devi's Highest Supremacy

राजोवाच

सन्देहो मे मुनिश्रेष्ठ जायते वचनात्व ।

वैभायांशे भगवति दुःखोचर्चिं विलोकंच च ॥ १ ॥

The King said: “O Best of Munis! Hearing these sorrows of Śrī Krṣna, the part incarnate of Viṣṇu Bhagavān, I am in doubt on your utterances.

नारायणांगसम्पूर्ती वासुदेवः प्रतपाचान् ।

कर्ष स सूचितकागाराब्दूनी बालो हेरोरि ॥ 2 ॥

Behold! Bhagavān Vāsudeva is the part incarnate of Nārāyaṇa; how could the Asura Śambara steal away His son from the lying-in-chamber!

सुगुप्तनगरे रथे युगते5ध सूचितकारुह ।

प्रविष्य तेन देहैलय गृहीतोउसी कर्ध शिष्यु ॥ ३ ॥

The beautiful Dvarakā city is specially well-guarded; the lying-in-chamber is again within the centre of that; under these circumstances, how was it that the Daitya could enter there and steal away the child!

न जातो वासुदेवेन चित्रमेतन्माद्धतम् ।

जायते महदाशयं चिते सत्यवतीभुत ।। ४।।

O Son of Satyavati! How was it that Vāsudeva could not know that! this appears very strange to me!

ब्रहि तत्कारणं बढ़ारज्ञातं क्रवेच नत् ।

हरणं तत्र संस्थेन शिरोगोंवं सृत्तिकागृहत् ।। ५ ॥

O Brāhmaṇa! Please explain to me why was that child stolen away from the lying-in-chamber, though Śrī Kṛṣṇa was staying there at the city; and how was it that he was not able to know this beforehand!

व्यास उवाच

माया बलवती राजत्राणां बुद्धिमोहिनी ।

गम्भवी विश्रुता लोके को वा मोहै न गच्छिति ॥ 6 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! The Māyā called Sāmbhavī (Pārvatī) is the cause; it fascinates and deludes the minds of human beings. Thus it is

Book IV Chapter XXV

known to us. Who is there in this world that is not deluded by this Māyā?

मानुषं जन्म सम्प्राय युणा: सर्वेक्षि मानुषा: ।

भवन्ति देहजा: कामं न देवा नागुसात्शा ॥ 7 ॥

The Jivas, no sooner they are born as human beings, are immediately overcome with human qualities; the Deva or Astura qualities or their natures do not then visibly exist.

श्रुचपिन्ना भयं तन्त्र व्याभोहः शोकसंशयः ।

हर्षेश्वाथमानछ जारमणयेव च ॥ 8 ॥

अनानं रतानिरप्रीतिरीध्यासुया मदः श्रमः ।

एते देहभवा भावाः प्रभवन्ति नराधिप ॥ 9 ॥

O King! Hunger, thirst, sleep, fear, lassitude, delusion, sorrow, doubt, pleasure, egoism, old age, disease, death, non-knowledge, knowledge, displeasure, envy, jealousy, pride and weariness all these human qualities are seen to exist in human embodiments.

यथा हेमभुगं रामो न बुबोधे पुरोतगम् ।

जानक्या हूर्ण चैव जटायुभरणं तथा ॥ 10 ॥

अधिषेकदिने रामो वनवासं न वेद च ।

तथा न जातवाताम: स्वशोकात्मरणं वितृः ॥ १ ॥

Behold! The night wandere: Rāksasa Mārica assumed, by his Māyā, the form of a golden deer and came before Śrī Rāmacandra; and Rāmacandra was not the least aware of it. Then the stealing away of Sītā, the death of Jaṭāyu, Rāma's going to the forest on the very day of his installation to the throne of Ayodhyā; the death of his father due to his bereavement, all these Śrī Rāmacandra did not know a bit beforehand.

अज्ञविद्वचारासी पश्यमानो वने वने ।

जानकीं न विवेदाय रावणेन हर्तां बलात् ॥ 12 ॥

When Rāvana stole away Jānakī and carried her by force Rāma did not know this before or after that event had happened. He wandered from forest to forest in search of Her, like a quite ignorant man.

सहायान्वानरान्कुला हत्वा शक्रभुतं बलात् ।

सारो सेतुबन्ध च क्रवोतीयं सरित्यादि ।। १३ ॥

Afterwards He killed Vāli, the son of Indra and

with the help of the monkeys, erected a bridge across the ocean, and, crossing it, went to Lanka.

प्रेषयामास सर्वसृत्र दिष्छु तान्कपिकुझरान् ।

संग्रामं कृत्वान्भोरं दुःखं प्राप रणातिजे ॥ 14 ॥

He sent the chief monkeys to all the quarters in search of Sitā and had to undergo all the troubles of deadly battles in the great battlefield.

बन्धूनं नागपाणेन प्राप रामो महावलः ।

गरूडान्मोक्षणं पशुदान्वभूद्रपुनन्दनः ॥ 15 ॥

The most powerful Raghunandana was tied down by Nāgapāśa (snakes) and was afterwards freed from it by Garuda.

अहनूद्रावर्ग संख्ये कृम्भकर्ण महावलम् ।

मैघनादं निकुम्भं च कृपितोर्युनन्दनः ॥ 16 ॥

Then, being furiously enraged, the great Rāghava slew Kumbhakarna, Nikumbha, Megha Nāda and Rāvana.

अनुध्यलं च जानक्या न विवेद जनादनः ।

विद्यं च कारयामास जलितेजनी प्रवेशनम् ॥ 17 ॥

The Janārdana Rāmacandra was not aware of the innocence of Sitā; and therefore He made her take an oath about the purity of Her character and even made Her undergo an ordeal of fire.

लेकापवादाच्च परंतरल्याज तां प्रियाम् ।

अनुधां दूषितां मत्वा सीतां दुर्शयात्मतः ॥ 18 ॥

Afterwards Rāmacandra, the son of Daśaratha, had to banish his dear blameless Sītā on the more ground of bad name, imputed to her by some ignorant person and that he would be thus blamed by the public

न जातौ स्वसुती तेन रामोघा च कुशीतवी ।

मुनिना क्रथिती तौ तु तस्य पुत्री महावली ॥ 19 ॥

He did not know that Kuśa and Lava were His two sons, born in the forest. Afterwards when the Muni Vālmiki told him, He came to know of them.

पातालमानं चैव जानक्शा ज्ञातवात्र च ।

राधव: कोपसंयुक्तो धातरं हन्तुभुक्तः ॥ 20 ॥

Behold also Rāmacandra could not know about the departure of Sītā to Pātāla; getting angry once He was about to kill his brother Laksmanāva even.

Srimaddevibhagavatam

कालस्यामानं चैव न विवेदे खरानकः ।

मानुषं देहमाश्रित्य चके मानुपणेहितून ॥ 2 1 ॥

तबैव मानुष्याभावात्रात कार्य विचारणा ।

Rāma, the slayer of Rāksasa Khara, did not know that Kāla Puruṣa was coming to him. He, incarnating in the human body, did acts all becoming to a man. Similarly Śri Krṣṇa, the descendant of Yadu, taking human birth did acts all like a man. What more discussion can there be in this?

पूर्व कंसभ्यात्माप्तो गोकुलेये वयुनन्दनः ॥ 22 ॥

जत्संधभयात्यशादुबारवलां गतो हरि: ।

Lo! From the very outset He fled, out of fear of Karīsa, to Gokula; afterwards he fled out of fear of Jarāsandha to the Dvārkā city.

अधर्म कृत्वाकृष्णो रूकियणा हृष्यो चत ॥ २३ ॥

शिशुपालहतायाश्र जानन्यमं सनातनम् ।

Knowing all the rites and ceremonies of the Sanātan Dharma (the Eternal Religion) He stole away Rukminī who was chosen as bride elect by Sísupāla. This act was very unreligious of Him.

शृणोव बालकं कृष्ण: शबेशण हर्त बलात् ॥ 24 ॥

भुपोद जानन्यूत्र तं हर्षगीक्षयुतस्ततः ।

Sambara Daitya stole away his newly born child and Kṛṣṇa lamented for this. Afterwards on coming to know of the real state of things from the Goddess Bhagavatī, He was very glad. Therefore it can be easily seen from all these circumstances that He had to yield to pleasures and to undergo remorse like ordinary human beings.

सत्यभापान्राय वतु युयुधे खर्गतः किल १ २ ५ ॥

इन्हेण पादपार्थ तु क्षीजितन्तं प्रकाशयन् ।

Again, under the orders of his wife Satyabhāmā, He had to go to Heaven to bring the Pārjiāta tree and He had to fight with Indra. This shows clearly that He was under the subjection of His wife.

जहार कल्पवृघं यः पराभ्यूय शतकतुम् ॥ 26 ॥

मानेनीमानसक्षर्ष हितश्रधरः प्रभुः ।

In that battle Hari with disc in hand defeated Indra, the Lord of the Devas, took away the Kalpa

tree and retained the prestige of His respected wife (whom He had offended).

बद्धया युक्षे हरिं सल्या नारदाय ददी पतिम् ॥ 27 ॥

दत्तावकानकंकृणांभोच्यामतभामिनी ।

Again Satyabhāmā tied down Hari against a tree and presented Him as a gift to Nārada; afterwards she, the passionate woman, freed Krṣna on paying an equivalent of gold coins.

दूर्वा पुत्रानुकरुणान्युद्नप्रमुखानय ॥ 28 ॥

कृष्ण जीवबाती दीना ययावे सन्ति शुभाम् ।

स ययो पर्वतं कृष्णसत्ययाकृतनिश्रयः ॥ 29 ॥

उपमन्युर्जित्यं शिवधन्कः पत्नपः ।

On seeing Rukminis many sons, Pradyumna and others, all qualified with diverse qualifications, His wife Jāmbavati prayed to Śri Krṣna with humility, so that she may have also many beautiful sons. For her sake, Krṣna firmly resolved to practise tapasyā and went to the place where the great devotee of Śiva, Upamanyu, was staying.

उपमन्युं गृं कृत्वा दीक्षां पाणुपर्ती दीः ॥ 30 ॥

जग्राह पुत्रकामसून मुण्डी दण्डी बयून ह ।

Hari desiring to have sons engaged Upamanyu as His spiritual guide and obtained from him the Mantram called Pāsūpata Mantra and became a Dandī (holder of a staff) and shaved His head.

उर्जा तन तपसेपे माममेकं फलाशनः ॥ 31 ॥

जजाप शिवमन्त्रं तु शिवध्यानपरो हरि: ।

द्वितीये तु जलाहारसिहछलेक्यदा हरि: ॥ 32 ॥

तृतीये वायुभक्षस्तु पादाङ्छुधारसंश्रितः ।

In the first month He subsisted on fruits only and meditated on Śiva and repeated silently the Śiva mantra. Thus He practised very severe austerities. In the second month He subsisted on water only and stood on only one leg. In the third month he lived on air only and stood on the end of His great toe.

घड़े तु भगवानुङ़ः प्रसजो भक्तिभावतः ॥ 33 ॥

दर्शनं च ददी तत्र सोमः सोमकलापः ।

आजगाम बुधाकडः सुरीरित्रविषयन्तः ॥ 34 ॥

बहाविष्यानुतः साक्षाध्यान्यवेसेवितः ।

Book IV Chapter XXV

स्वाधोधन् वासुदेवं शक्रस्तमुवाच ह 1135 ||

तुओंस्मि कृष्ण तपसा तवोत्रेण महामते ।

द्वामि वार्ज्डितान्कामान्वृहि यादवनन्दन ॥ 36 ॥

मय दृष्टे कामपुरे कामशेणो न सभ्यन्ते ।

Thus time passed away. In the sixth month the God Rudra, holding Moon on His forehead, was pleased with His asceticism and devotion and appeared before Him on that spot. The God Mahā Deva came on a bull; He was attended by Brahma and Viṣṇu, Indra and the other Devas, Yakṣas and Gandharvas and addressed thus—“O high minded Krṣṇa of Yadu’s descent; I am pleased with Your severe asceticism; now ask Your desired boon; I will grant it just now. I fulfil all the desires of all my devotees; what desire, then, there can be that is not fulfilled, when I am seen by the devotees!”

व्यास उवाच

तं दूद्वा शड़ूं तुहं भपावाद्वेकसुतः ॥ 37 ॥

यात पादयोलस्य दण्डवल्यमेस्युतः ।

स्तुर्ति चकार देवेशो मेघाभधीरया सिता ।

स्थितस्तु पुरतः शभ्योबांसुदेवः सन्तानः ॥ 38 ॥

Vyāsa said: The son of Devaki was very glad to see the God Śaṅkara and fell prostrate at His feet. Then that eternal supreme God of the Devas began to recite hymns in praise of Him in a tone as deep as the rumbling of cloud.

कृष्ण खच्च

देवदेव जगत्राय सर्वभूतातिनारण नि 39 ॥

विश्योने सुरारिटन नमक्रौलोक्यकाकाः ।

Krṣṇa said: O Deva of the Devas! O Lord of the world! You alone destroy the misfortunes and sorrows of all the beings. O Destroyer of Asuras! You are the Cause and Creator of this universe. I salute Thee.

नीतकष्ठ नमतुध्यं शूलिने ते नामोनमः ॥ 40 ॥

शैलाजाल्लभायाव यज्ञदाय नामोउस्तु ते ।

O One having a blue throat! I bow down to Thee! O Holder of trident! I again and again salute Thee! O Lord of Pārvatī! You destroyed Dakṣa's sacrifice. I salute Thee.

बद्धोर्धे कृतकृत्योर्धे एर्शान्ताव सुघत ॥ 4 1 ॥

जन्म मे सफलं जातं नत्वा ते पाद्यंकजम् ।

I am blessed by Thy sight and think myself as having discharged all my duties and satisfied. O Virtuous One! My human birth is crowned with success by saluting Thy feet.

बढ़ोर्ड़े सीमये: पाशैः संसारोस्मिडगयुगृतः । ४२ ॥

गरणं तेउघ संग्रणतो रक्षणार्थि तिलोघ्न ।

O Lord of everything! O there-eyed! I am tied down to this world by my attachment towards my wives, now I take refuge unto Thee to free me from these bonds.

सग्राम या मनुं जन्म तिज्ञोड़े दुःखनाशन ॥ ४३ ॥

ग्राहि मां शरणां प्रावर्षितं घवासुंगना ।

O Destroyer of sorrows! I am very much troubled on attaining this human birth; O Bhava! I am afraid of this world; and hence I take refuge unto Thee; now save me.

गर्भवासे महदुदुःखं प्रगतं मदन्तहक् ॥ 44 ॥

जन्मतः कंसमघजमनुभूतं च गोकुले ।

जातोर्जं नन्दीपालो बल्वनाझाकरस्तथा ॥ 45 ॥

गोराज:कौगीकौशस्तु भूम्बन्दावने वने ।

O Destroyer of cupidity! I experienced a good deal of troubles in the womb; next out of fear to Kañsa I had to go to Gokula where I suffered much pains; there I had to obey the orders of cow-herds; there I had to attends as Nanda's cow-herd, the pasturing of his cows and was constantly suffocated with the awful dust thrown up by the cows; I had to wander constantly in the wild forests of Vrndāvana.

स्नेच्छताजभयजस्तो गतो द्वारवर्ती पुनः ॥ 46 ॥

त्वक्वा चित्रयं शुभे देशे मारुं दुर्लिं विधो ।

O Omnipresent One! I had to leave my dear ancestral place, the city of Mathurā, a rare place to be found anywhere else, out of the great fear of Kāla Yavana, the king of the Mlechas and had to go to Dvārakā city.

ययातिगायबढ़ेन तस्ये दर्न भयाधिणो ॥ 47 ॥

राज्यं सुयुषमपि च धर्मेश्वापरणे च ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

उप्रमेनस्य दासत्वं कृतं वै सर्वदा मया ॥ 48 ॥

राजास्त्री यावदानां वे कृतो न: पूर्वैक्ष: किल ।

O Lord! In order to preserve the cause of religion, I had to hand over the best prosperous kingdom to Ugrasena, due to the curse of Yayāti. My elders made him the king of the Yādavas; following their examples. I gave him the kingdom and now serving him always like his servant.

गार्त्रस्थयुःखदंगभोक्रीविश्यंधमैखणजन्। 49 ॥

पातन्त्यं सदा बज्यो मोक्षवातांत्र उत्नेंगा ।

O Śambhu! The householder's life is exceedingly troublesome; it make one subject to one's wife and go against his religion. There we are always dependent on others; and no word is heard or dreamt even, how to free oneself from those bondages of the world. Oh! What an irony of Fate.

रूमिभ्यास्तनयान्धूवा भार्यां जांववीत माम ॥ ५० ॥

प्रेयामास पुत्रार्थ तपसे मद्यान्तक ।

O Destroyer of cupid! My wife Jāmbavatī, on seeing the sons of my wife Rukmini has urged me to practise this Tapasyā so that she might get excellent sons born to her also.

सकामेन मया ततं तय: पुत्रार्थमघ वै ॥ 51 ॥

लजा भवति देतेश प्रार्थानया जगदगुते ।

O Lord of the Devas! O Lord of the world! I am engaged in this asceticism with the desire to get sons; O Deva! I feel shame in asking you for the sons!

कल्वमातायय देवेगं मुक्तिं भक्तवलसम् ॥ 52 ॥

प्रसत्रं चायते मुकः फलं तुच्छं विनारीय चत् ।

You are the lover of your devotees; You give eternal freedom; You are the Lord of all the Devas. By worshipping and satisfying You, who is so fool as to ask for this trivial and transient thing!

सोउरं मायायिकृताया चाचे पुत्रमुखं विषो ॥ 53 ॥

कामाया प्रेति: शफ्यो मुक्तिई त्वां जगत्ये ।

O Omnipresent One! O Sambhu! O Lord of the world! Knowing You as the giver of salvation, I, still deluded by Māyā, ask from You, being

requested by my wife, this happiness that sons be born to me of my wife.

जनामि दुःखदं शम्भो संसारं दुःखासाधन् ॥ 54 ॥

अतिनर्ते नाशप्रभांगं तथापि वित्तिनं मे ।

शपावात्रायणोगोर्ड जातास्त्रिमस्तिमरमड़ते ॥ 55 ॥

भोर्भु बहुतरं दुःखं मायापणेन व्यक्ततः ।

O Śaṅkara! This world and its concerns are the abode of all sorrows; it is the cause that brings in all sorts of pains and troubles, and it is transient and will go to destruction. I know all these; still my mind does not desist from it.

व्यास उवाच

इतुभक्तवर्त गोविन्दे प्रत्युवाच महेश्वः ॥ 56 ॥

बह्वस्ते भविष्यन्ति पुत्रा: शबुनिभूदत ।

Vyāsa said: O great and powerful king! The God of Gods, Mahā Deva, thus praised and adored by Govinda, the Destroyer of enemies, replied: "You will get many sons.

स्वीणां घोडगसाहर्ते भविष्यति शताधिकम् ॥ 57 ॥

तातु पुत्रा दूरा दूरा भविष्यन्ति महाबाला: ।

You will get 16,100 sixteen thousand one hundred wives and no doubt you will get ten sons of each of them. These sons will be very powerful and valorous.

इत्युक्लोयरमागु शड़ूः : प्रियदर्शनः ॥ 58 ॥

उवाच गिरिता देवी प्रगतं मधुमुदनम् ।

कृष्ण कृष्ण महाबाहो संसारे-स्मित्याधि ॥ 59 ॥

गृहस्यवरो लोके बधियति भवानिरू ।

ततो वर्षीतानते तु दिज्ञगणाज्ञानंदि ॥ 60 ॥

गधायांशु तथा शाणाद्विता ते कुलक्षयः ।

The good-looking Śaṅkara saying these words remained silent; then Śri Krṣna bowed down at the feet of Girijā, the wife of Śaṅkara. Then the Goddess Pārvatī addressed repeatedly to Vāsudeva and said: O mightly armed! O Krṣna! O best of human beings! You will be the typical exemplary householder; (all people will try to follow you). When one hundred years will pass away, your race will be extinct, due to the curse of the Brāhmaṇa and Gāndhāri.

Book IV Chapter XXV

परम्परं निर्हलाजी पुत्रासे शापमोहिता: ॥ 6 1 ॥

गाययिति कृरं सर्वे याद्वाहु तथापरे ।

Your sons and the other Yâdavas will lose their senses on drinking liquor; they will kill each other in the battle field and thus will be extirpated.

Note: Here Viṣṇu and Andhkas are meant.

सानुजस्त्वं तथा देहें वल्कता याख्यासे वै दिवम् ।

गोककतत्र न कतिथो भवितस्यां प्रति प्रश्नो ।

Then you and your elder brother Balabhadra (Balarāma) will give up your bodies and will ascend to the Heavens; O Mighty Person! Do not grieve in matters that cannot be avoided.

अवश्यभाविभावानां प्रतीकाएं न विहते ॥ 6 3 ॥

तन शोको न कत्वीयो नूनं मम मतं सदा ।

You should know that there can be no remedy to what will inevitably come to pass; therefore no one is to grieve for them; this is all along my view.

अशावकस्य शपेन भार्यावैत मधुसूदन ॥ 64 ॥

वीरेभ्यो ग्रहणं कृष्णा गमिष्यन्ति मृते त्वयि ।

O Madhusūdana! After Your death, due to the curse of Asṭāvakra Muni, your wives will be forcibly stolen away by indomitable robbers. There is no doubt in this.

इत्युक्नवान्तदीय शम्भुः सोमः ससुरामण्डलः ॥ 65 ॥

उपमन्यु प्रणायधा कृष्णोर्षि द्वाराकां ययो ।

Vyāsa said: When Devi Pārvatī thus spoke, Śambhu, with the other gods disappeared; Kṛṣṇa too, bowed down to Upamanyu and went back to the city Dvārkā.

यस्मात्र ब्रह्मादयो राज्ञस्निति यद्यपधीक्षाः ॥ 6 6 ॥

तवापि मायाकल्लोतवोगासंक्षुपितांततः ।

तद्धीना: त्रित्यातः सर्वे कार्युतलिकोपमा: ॥ 6 7 ॥

Therefore, O King! Though Brahmā and the other Devas are heard to be the lords of the world, still they are all being tossed hither and thither by the waves of the ocean of Māyā. They are all like wooden dolls, subject to Māyā.

वया वाया पूर्वमहं कर्म तेषां तथा तथा ।

प्रेत्यवर्सिणं माया परबहास्वकर्षिणे ॥ 6 8 ॥

As their previous karmas, so their several

manifestations in the field of action, by the Great Māyā, the incarnate of Para Brahma.

न वैषयं न नैयुंर्णे भागवयंां कहावन ।

केवलं जीवगेक्षार्यं चतेन भुवनेश्वी ॥ 69 ॥

She has no differences nor any want of mercy; That Goddess of the universe is always leading the Jivas towards the Eternal Freedom (freedom from Māyā).

यदि सा नैव सुभ्रेत जयदेतच्चाचयम् ।

तदा मायां विना भृतं जईं स्यादेवं निवशः ॥ 70 ॥

Had She not created this world, moving and unmoving and if She had not remained there as the Controller of the Jivas in the shape of unshakeable consciousness the Kūtashya Caitanya, this whold world would have become devoid of any consciousness, like an insentient substance and would have dissolved in the Tāmasī māyā (sheer darkness). There is no doubt in this.

तस्मालाकार्यमाधिस्य जगज्जीवादिकं च यत्।

करोति सततं देढो प्रेर्यत्थिजीं च तत् ॥ 71 ॥

Therefore that Goddess of the Universe has, through Her mercy, created all these worlds and Jivas, and resting incarnate in each Jiva, is directing each and every of them according to his karmic merits and demerits.

तस्माद्बहादिपोह्ड़ीस्मिन्तैम्बः संशोगो न हि ।

मायात्न: पात्रात्न: सर्वे मायाधीना: सुगतुग्न: ॥ 72 ॥

Therefore it is a matter not to be doubted that Brahmā and the other gods are all under this Māyā; the Suras and Asuras are subject to Her.

स्वतनाव सेव देवेशी संदेष्ठागराविद्यारिण ।

तस्मात्बसितना राजन्सेवनीया मेहंशी ॥ ७ ३ ॥

Therefore, O King! Know this as certain that the Great Goddess moves and enjoys freely according to Her will; She is not dependent on any body. Therefore it is the duty of every one to serve and worship, with whole head and heart, that Devi.

नातः परतरं किंक्रिद्धिकं भुवनत्रये ।

एतद्धि जनसामफल्य परागक्तेः: पदसूमिति: ॥ 74 ॥

In these worlds there is nothing higher or more

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

excellent than Her. Therefore this birth cannot be crowned with success in any other way than remembering that Highest Force, the Parā Śakti and Her place.

मामूत्रा कुले जन्य यत्र देवी न देवतम् ।

अर्हे देवी न चान्योर्थि ब्रहीवादं न गोकाभाक् ॥ 7 5 ॥

इत्यभेदेन तां नित्यां चिन्तयेजगद्धिकवम् ।

त्राला गुस्पुखादेनं वेदान्तप्रवाणादिधि: ॥ 7 6 ॥

नत्ययेकाप्रामनसा भावयेदात्मकरणिपाणि ।

मुक्तो भवति तेनागु नान्यथा कर्मकोटिधि: ॥ 7 7 ॥

One should always think, without any difference, that Eternal World Mother, thus “Let me not be born in that family which has not that Supreme Goddess for its presiding Deity; I am that Goddess Bhagavati and no other; I am Brahma, untouched by sorrows.” One should hear first from the mouth of one’s Spiritual Guide; next by hearing Vedānta and other religious scriptures, one should first form an idea of that Bhagavati; and then if one daily meditates on That Goddess, the Highest Self incarnate with one minded devotion, one will get, within a short period, the Eternal Freedom; else there is not the least chance, even if one performs lots of innumerable good works of becoming free.

श्रोताधतादयः सर्वे ऋषयो मिनैलागया: ।

आत्मक्शा इदा जाता विमुक्ता भवबंधान्त् ॥ 78 ॥

śvetāśvatara and other pure hearted Rṣis obtained this freedom from the bondages of Māyā by meditating, in their hearts, this Highest Self and nothing else.

ब्रद्धिष्णवाद्यस्तद्वृगीर्णक्ष्याद्यस्तथा ।

तापेव समुपास्ने सच्चिदानन्द्रकिपणीम् ॥ 79 ॥

Brahmā, Viṣṇu and the other Devas, Gaurī, Lakṣmī and other goddesses, all worship This Supreme Goddess, of Saccidāṇanda Para Brahmānī. इति के क्षितं राजन् यद्यतायुरं त्यवा२२ ॥

प्रंभवपाप्राप्रतेनै किं भूयः शोतृचित्यक्षि ॥ 8 0 ॥

O pure-hearted king! I answered all that you

asked me, terrified with the fears of this world; what more do you want to hear?

एत्ते कथितं राजन्यासे5ख्यानमनुत्तमम्।

सर्वेपारहं पुण्यं पुराणं परमाद्धुन्त् ॥ 81 ॥

य इदं शृणयार्तिरयं पुराणं सेदरमीमन्ति ।

सर्वेपारविनिभूनीं देवीलोके महीयते ॥ 82 ॥

O king! I have described this wonderful Purāna narrative, destructive of sins, productive of virtue. He who daily listens to this Bhāgavatam equal alike to Veda, becomes freed from all sorts of sins and goes to the region of the Highest Goddess and passes his time in the midst of the Highest Glory. There is no doubt in this.

सूत उवाच

एतनया श्रुतं व्यासात्कध्यानं सविस्तरम् ।

पुर्णा पड़पं नृते शीमद्धागवताशिभम् ॥ 83 ॥

इति श्रीदैवीभागवते महापुराणे चतुर्विकचे

पत्रविरोधःप्रायः 11 25 11

अधाधिकैकैसुविश्युपगविष्णभग (1418।) शिरः।

चौड्गुरुषैककन्योरयं कांकिते व्यासपिंनिः : 11

स्मागतोयं चतुर्वः स्कमः : 11

Sūta said: “O Rṣis! This Śrimadbhāgavatam, called otherwise the Fifth Purānam was recited, in detail, in days of yore by Vyāsa. Whatsoever I heard from him, I have now told exactly the same to you.”

Note: The best mantra is the whole hearted devotion to one's Guru, and devotion and surrender of one's Self to the Supreme Mother, doing works without attachment to the fruits thereof. This will lead to dispassion and Renunciation. To one who is faithful in this, all the other mantras will be duly revealed and all his desires will be found to be true and fulfilled.

Here ends the Twenty fifth Chapter in the Fourth

Book of Srimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā

Purānam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi

Veda Vyāsa on the Devi's Highest Supremacy.

Here ends as well as the Fourth Book

***